

===== BOOK: maui.txt =====


    Legends of Maui, A Demi-God of Polynesia, by W. D. Westervelt, [1910], at sacred-texts.com

  

LEGENDS

 

- OF -

 

MA-UI - A DEMI GOD

 

OF

 

POLYNESIA

 

AND OF

 

HIS MOTHER HINA.

 

BY

 

W. D. WESTERVELT.

HONOLULU

THE HAWAIIAN GAZETTE CO., LTD.

1910

Scanned, Proofed and Formatted by John Bruno Hare at sacred-texts.com, November, 1999. This text is in the public domain in the US because it was published prior to 1923.

     Legends of Maui, A Demi-God of Polynesia, by W. D. Westervelt, [1910], at sacred-texts.com

  

CONTENTS

  CHAPTER     PAGE 
  I.  Maui's Home  3 
  II.  Maui the Fisherman  12 
  III.  Maui Lifting the Sky  31 
  IV.  Maui Snaring the Sun  40 
  V.  Maui Finding Fire  56 
  VI.  Maui the Skillful  78 
  VII  Maui and Tuna  91 
  VIII.  Maui and His Brother-in-Law  101 
  IX.  Maui's Kite-Flying  112 
  X.  Oahu Legends of Maui  119 
  XI.  Maui Seeking Immortality  128 
  XII.  Hina of Hilo  139 
  XIII.  Hina and the Wailuku River  146 
  XIV.  The Ghosts of the Hilo Hills  155 
  XV.  Hina, the Woman in the Moon  165 
  

 

     Legends of Maui, A Demi-God of Polynesia, by W. D. Westervelt, [1910], at sacred-texts.com

  

HELPS TO PRONUNCIATION

There are three simple rules which practically control Hawaiian pronunciation: (1) Give each vowel the German sound. (2) Pronounce each vowel. (3) Never allow a consonant to close a syllable.

Interchangeable consonants are many. The following are the most common: h=s; l=r; k=t; n=ng; v=w.

     Legends of Maui, A Demi-God of Polynesia, by W. D. Westervelt, [1910], at sacred-texts.com

  

PREFACE

Maui is a demi god whose name should probably be pronounced Ma-u-i, i. e., Ma-oo-e. The meaning of the word is by no means clear. It may mean "to live," "to subsist." It may refer to beauty and strength, or it may have the idea of "the left hand" or "turning aside." The word is recognized as belonging to remote Polynesian antiquity.

MacDonald, a writer of the New Hebrides Islands, gives the derivation of the name Maui primarily from, the Arabic word "Mohyi," which means "causing to: live" or "life," applied sometimes to the gods and sometimes to chiefs as "preservers and sustainers" of their followers.

The Maui story probably contains a larger number of unique and ancient myths than that of any other legendary character in the mythology of any nation.

There are three centers for these legends, New Zealand in the south, Hawaii in the north, and the Tahitian group including the Hervey Islands in the east. In each of these groups of islands, separated by thousands of miles, there are the same legends, told in almost the same way, and with very little variation in names. The intermediate groups of islands of even as great importance as Tonga, Fiji or Samoa, possess the same legends in more or less of a fragmentary condition, as if the three centers had been settled first when the Polynesians were driven away from the Asiatic coasts by their enemies, the Malays. From these centers voyagers sailing away in search of adventures would carry fragments rather than complete legends. This is exactly what has been done and there are as a result a large number of hints of wonderful deeds. The really long legends as told about the demi god Ma-u-i and his mother Hina number about twenty.

It is remarkable that these legends have kept their individuality. The Polynesians are not a very clannish people. For some centuries they have not been in the habit of frequently visiting each other. They have had no written language, and picture writing of any kind is exceedingly rare throughout Polynesia and yet in physical traits, national customs, domestic habits, and language, as well as in traditions and myths, the different inhabitants of the islands of Polynesia are as near of kin as the cousins of the United States and Great Britain.

The Maui legends form one of the strongest links in the mythological chain of evidence which binds the scattered inhabitants of the Pacific into one nation. An incomplete list aids in making clear the fact that groups of islands hundreds and even thousands of miles apart have been peopled centuries past by the same organic race. Either complete or fragmentary Maui legends are found in the single islands and island groups of Aneityum, Bowditch or Fakaofa, Efate, Fiji, Fotuna, Gilbert, Hawaii, Hervey, Huahine, Mangaia, Manihiki, Marquesas, Marshall, Nauru, New Hebrides, New Zealand, Samoa, Savage, Tahiti or Society, Tauna, Tokelau and Tonga.

S. Percy Smith of New Zealand in his book Hawaiki mentions a legend according to which Maui made a voyage after overcoming a sea monster, visiting the Tongas, the Tahitian group, Vai-i or Hawaii, and the Paumotu Islands. Then Maui went on to U-peru, which Mr. Smith says "may be Peru." It was said that Maui named some of the islands of the Hawaiian group, calling the island Maui "Maui-ui in remembrance of his efforts in lifting up the heavens," Hawaii was named Vai-i, and Lanai was called Ngangai-as if Maui had found the three most southerly islands of the group.

The Maui legends possess remarkable antiquity. Of course, it is impossible to give any definite historical date, but there can scarcely be any question of their origin among the ancestors of the Polynesians before they scattered over the Pacific ocean. They belong to the prehistoric Polynesians. The New Zealanders claim Maui as an ancestor of their most ancient tribes and sometimes class him among the most ancient of their gods, calling him "creator of land" and "creator of man." Tregear, in a paper before the New Zealand Institute, said that Maui was sometimes thought to be "the sun himself," "the solar fire," "the sun god," while his mother Hina was called "the moon goddess." The noted greenstone god of the Maoris of New Zealand, Potiki, may well be considered a representation of Maui-Tiki-Tiki, who was sometimes called Maui-po-tiki.

Whether these legends came to the people in their sojourn in India before they migrated to the Straits of Sunda is not certain; but it may well be assumed that these stories had taken firm root in the memories of the priests who transmitted the most important traditions from generation to generation, and that this must have been done before they were driven away from the Asiatic coasts by the Malays.

Several hints of Hindoo connection is found in the Maui legends. The Polynesians not only ascribed human attributes to all animal life with which they were acquainted, but also carried the idea of an alligator or dragon with them, wherever they went, as in the mo-o of the story Tuna-roa.

The Polynesians also had the idea of a double soul inhabiting the body. This is carried out in the ghost legends more fully than in the Maui stories, and yet "the spirit separate from the spirit which never forsakes man" according to Polynesian ideas, was a part of the Maui birth legends. This spirit, which can be separated or charmed away from the body by incantations was called the "hau," When Maui's father performed the religious ceremonies over him which would protect him and cause him to be successful, he forgot a part of his incantation to the "hau," therefore Maui lost his protection from death when he sought immortality for himself and all mankind.

How much these things aid in proving a Hindoo or rather Indian origin for the Polynesians is uncertain, but at least they are of interest along the lines of race origin.

The Maui group of legends is preminently peculiar. They are not only different from the myths of other nations, but they are unique in the character of the actions recorded. Maui's deeds rank in a higher class than most of the mighty efforts of the demi gods of other nations and races, and are usually of more utility. Hercules accomplished nothing to compare with "lifting the sky," "snaring the sun," "fishing for islands," "finding fire in his grandmother's finger-nails," "learning from birds how to make fire by rubbing dry sticks," or "getting a magic bone" from the jaw of an ancestor who was half dead, that is dead on one side and therefore could well afford to let the bone on that side go for the benefit of a descendant. The Maui legends are full of helpful imaginations, which are distinctly Polynesian.

The phrase "Maui of the Malo" is used among the Hawaiians in connection with the name Maui a Kalana, "Maui the son of Akalana." It may be well to note the origin of the name. It was said that Hina usually sent her retainers to gather sea moss for her, but one morning she went down to the sea by herself. There she found a beautiful red malo, which she wrapped around her as a pa-u or skirt. When she showed it to Akalana, her husband, he spoke of it as a gift of the gods, thinking that it meant the gift of Maria or spiritual power to their child when he should be born. In this way the Hawaiians explain the superior talent and miraculous ability of Maui which placed him above his brothers.

These stories were originally printed as magazine articles, chiefly in the Paradise of the Pacific, Honolulu; therefore there are sometimes repetitions which it seemed best to leave, even when reprinted in the present form.

     Legends of Maui, A Demi-God of Polynesia, by W. D. Westervelt, [1910], at sacred-texts.com

  

I.

 

MAUI'S HOME

	 
		"Akalana was the man;
		 Hira-a-ke-ahi was the wife;
		 Maui First was born;
		 Then Maui-waena;
		 Maui Kiikii was born;
		 Then Maui of the malo.""
		
		--Queen Liliuokalani's Family Chant.
		
		 FOUR BROTHERS, each bearing the name of Maui, belong to Hawaiian legend. They accomplished little as a family, except on special occasions when the youngest of the household awakened his brothers by some unexpected trick which drew them into unwonted action. The legends of Hawaii, Tonga, Tahiti, New Zealand and the Hervey group make this youngest Maui "the discoverer of fire" or "the ensnarer of the sun" or "the fisherman who pulls up islands" or "the man endowed with magic," or "Maui with spirit power." The legends vary somewhat, of course, but not as much as might be expected when the thousands of miles between various groups of islands are taken into consideration.

Maui was one of the Polynesian demi-gods. His parents belonged to the family of supernatural beings. He himself was possessed of supernatural powers and was supposed to make use of all manner of enchantments. In New Zealand antiquity a Maui was said to have assisted other gods in the creation of man. Nevertheless Maui was very human. He lived in thatched houses, had wives and children, and was scolded by the women for not properly supporting his household.

The time of his sojourn among men is very indefinite. In Hawaiian genealogies Maui and his brothers were placed among the descendants of Ulu and "the sons of Kii," and Maui was one of the ancestors of Kamehameha, the first king of the united Hawaiian Islands. This would place him in the seventh or eighth century of the Christian Era. But it is more probable that Maui belongs to the mist-land of time. His mischievous pranks with the various gods would make him another Mercury living in any age from the creation to the beginning of the Christian era.

The Hervey Island legends state that Maui's father was "the supporter of the heavens" and his mother "the guardian of the road to the invisible world."

In the Hawaiian chant, Akalana was the name of his father. In other groups this was the name by which his mother was known. Kanaloa, the god, is sometimes known as the father of Maui. In Hawaii Hina was his mother. Elsewhere Ina, or Hina, was the grandmother, from whom he secured fire.

The Hervey Island legends say that four mighty ones lived in the old world from which their ancestors came. This old world bore the name Ava-iki, which is the same as Hawa-ii, or Hawaii. The four gods were Mauike, Ra, Ru, and Bua-Taranga.

It is interesting to trace the connection of these four names with Polynesian mythology. Mauike is the same as the demi-god of New Zealand, Mafuike. On other islands the name is spelled Mauika, Mafuika, Mafuia, Mafuie, and Mahuika. Ra, the sun god of Egypt, is the same as Ra in New Zealand and La (sun) in Hawaii. Ru, the supporter of the heavens, is probably the Ku of Hawaii, and the Tu of New Zealand and other islands, one of the greatest of the gods worshiped by the ancient Hawaiians. The fourth mighty one from Ava-ika was a woman, Bua-taranga, who guarded the path to the underworld. Talanga in Samoa, and Akalana in Hawaii were the same as Taranga. Pua-kalana (the Kalana flower) would probably be the same in Hawaiian as Bua-taranga in the language of the Society Islands.

Ru, the supporter of the Heavens, married Buataranga, the guardian of the lower world. Their one child was Maui. The legends of Raro-Toaga state that Maui's father and mother were the children of Tangaroa (Kanaloa in Hawaiian), the great god worshiped throughout Polynesia. There were three Maui brothers and one sister, Ina-ika (Ina, the fish).

The New Zealand legends relate the incidents of the babyhood of Maui.

Maui was prematurely born, and his mother, not, caring to be troubled with him, cut off a lock of her hair, tied it around him and cast him into the sea. In this way the name came to him, Maui-Tiki-Tiki, or "Maui formed in the topknot." The waters bore him safely. The jelly fish enwrapped and mothered him. The god of the seas cared for and protected him. He was carried to the god's house and hung up in the roof that he inight feel the warm air of the fire, and be cherished into life. When he was old enough, he came to his relations while they were all gathered in the great House of Assembly, dancing and making merry. Little Maui crept in and sat down behind his brothers. Soon his mother called the children and found a strange child, who proved that he was her son, and was taken in as one of the family. Some of the brothers were jealous, but the eldest addressed the others as follows:

"Never mind; let him be our dear brother. In the days of peace remember the proverb, 'When you are on friendly terms, settle your disputes in a friendly way; when you are at war, you must redress your injuries by violence.' It is better for us, brothers, to be kind to other people. These are the ways by which men gain influence-by laboring for abundance of food to feed others, by collecting property to give to others, and by similar means by which you promote the good of others."

Thus, according to the New Zealand story related by Sir George Grey, Maui was received in his home.

Maui's home was placed by some of the Hawaiian myths at Kauiki, a foothill of the great extinct crater Haleakala, on the Island of Maui. It was here he lived when the sky was raised to its present position. Here was located the famous fort around which many battles were fought during the years immediately preceding the coming of Captain Cook. This fort was held by warriors of the Island of Hawaii a number of years. It was from this home that Maui was supposed to have journeyed when he climbed Mt. Haleakala to ensnare the sun.

And yet most of the Hawaiian legends place Maui's home by the rugged black lava beds of the Wailuku river near Hilo on the island Hawaii. Here he lived when he found the way to make fire by rubbing sticks together, and when he killed Kuna, the great eel, and performed other feats of valor. He was supposed to cultivate the land on the north side of the river. His mother, usually known as Hina, had her home in a lava cave under the beautiful Rainbow Falls, one of the fine scenic attractions of Hilo. An ancient demigod, wishing to destroy this home, threw a great mass of lava across the stream below the falls. The rising water was fast filling the cave.

Hina called loudly to her powerful son Maui. He came quickly and found that a large and strong ridge of lava lay across the stream. One end rested against a small hill. Maui struck the rock on the other side of the hill and thus broke a new pathway for the river. The water swiftly flowed away and the cave remained as the home of the Maui family.

According to the King Kalakaua family legend, translated by Queen Liliuokalani, Maui and his brothers also made this place their home. Here he aroused the anger of two uncles, his mother's brothers, who were called "Tall Post" and "Short Post," because they guarded the entrance to a cave in which the Maui family probably had its home.

"They fought hard with Maui, and were thrown, and red water flowed freely from Maui's forehead. This was the first shower by Maui." Perhaps some family discipline followed this knocking down of door posts, for it is said:

	 
		"They fetched the sacred Awa bush,
		 Then came the second shower by Maui;
		 The third shower was when the elbow of Awa was broken;
		 The fourth shower came with the sacred bamboo."
		
		 Maui's mother, so says a New Zealand legend, had her home in the under-world as well as with her children. Maui determined to find the hidden dwelling place. His mother would meet the children in the evening and lie down to sleep with them and then disappear with the first appearance of dawn. Maui remained awake one night, and when all were asleep, arose quietly and stopped up every crevice by which a ray of light could enter. The morning came and the sun mounted up-far up in the sky. At last his mother leaped up and tore away the things which shut out the light.

"Oh, dear; oh, dear! She saw the sun high in the heavens; so she hurried away, crying at the thought of having been so badly treated by her own children."

Maui watched her as she pulled up a tuft of grass and disappeared in the earth, pulling the grass back to its place.

Thus Maui found the path to the under-world. Soon he transformed himself into a pigeon and flew down, through the cave, until he saw a party of people under a sacred tree, like those growing in the ancient first Hawaii. He flew to the tree and threw down berries upon the people. They threw back stones. At last he permitted a stone from his father to strike him, and he fell to the ground. "They ran to catch him but lo! the pigeon had turned into a man."

Then his father "took him to the water to be baptized" (possibly a modern addition to the legend). Prayers were offered and ceremonies passed through. But the prayers were incomplete and Maui's father knew that the gods would be angry and cause Maui's death, and all because in the hurried baptism a part of the prayers had been left unsaid. Then Maui returned to the upper world and lived again with his brothers.

Maui commenced his mischievous life early, for Hervey Islanders say that one day the children were playing a game dearly loved by Polynesians- hide-and-seek. Here a sister enters into the game and hides little Maui under a pile of dry sticks. His brothers could not find him, and the sister told them where to look. The sticks were carefully handled, but the child could not be found. He had shrunk himself so small that he was like an insect under some sticks and leaves. Thus early he began to use enchantments.

Maui's home, at the best, was only a sorry affair. Gods and demigods lived in caves and small grass houses. The thatch rapidly rotted and required continual renewal. In a very short time the heavy rains beat through the decaying roof. The home was without windows or doors, save as low openings in the ends or sides allowed entrance to those willing to crawl through. Off on one side would be the rude shelter, in the shadow of which Hina pounded the bark of certain trees into wood pulp and then into strips of thin, soft wood-paper, which bore the name of "Tapa cloth." This cloth Hina prepared for the clothing of Maui and his brothers. Tapa cloth was often treated to a coat of cocoa-nut, or candle-nut oil, making it somewhat waterproof and also more durable.

Here Maui lived on edible roots and fruits and raw fish, knowing little about cooked food, for the art of fire making was not yet known. In later years Maui was supposed to live on the eastern end of the island Maui, and also in another home on the large island Hawaii, on which he discovered how to make fire by rubbing dry sticks together. Maui was the Polynesian Mercury. As a little fellow he was endowed with peculiar powers, permitting him to become invisible or to change his human form into that of an animal. He was ready to take anything from any one by craft or force. Nevertheless, like the thefts of Mercury, his pranks usually benefited mankind.

It is a little curious that around the different homes of Maui, there is so little record of temples and priests and altars. He lived too far back for priestly customs. His story is the rude, mythical survival of the days when of church and civil government there was none and worship of the gods was practically unknown, but every man was a law unto himself, and also to the other man, and quick retaliation followed any injury received.

     Legends of Maui, A Demi-God of Polynesia, by W. D. Westervelt, [1910], at sacred-texts.com

  

II.

 

MAUI THE FISHERMAN

	 
		"Oh the great fish hook of Maui!
		 Manai-i-ka-lani 'Made fast to the heavens'--its name;
		 An earth-twisted cord ties the hook.
		 Engulfed from the lofty Kauiki.
		 Its bait the red billed Alae,
		 The bird made sacred to Hina.
		 It sinks far down to Hawaii,
		 Struggling and painfully dying.
		 Caught is the land under the water,
		 Floated up, up to the surface,
		 But Hina hid a wing of the bird
		 And broke the land under the water.
		 Below, was the bait snatched away
		 And eaten at once -by the fishes,
		 The Ulua of the deep muddy places."
		
		--Chant of Kualii, about A. D. 1700.
		
		 ONE of Maui's homes was near Kauiki, a place well known throughout the Hawaiian Islands because of its strategic importance. For many years it was the site of a fort around which fierce battles were fought by the natives of the island Maui, repelling the invasions of their neighbors from Hawaii.

Haleakala (the House of the Sun), the mountain from which Maui the demi-god snared the sun, looks down ten thousand feet upon the Kauiki headland. Across the channel from Haleakala rises Mauna Kea, "The White Mountain"-the snow-capped-which almost all the year round rears its white head in majesty among the clouds.

In the snowy breakers of the surf which washes the beach below these mountains, are broken coral reefs-the fishing grounds of the Hawaiians. Here near Kauiki, according to some Hawaiian legends, Maui's mother Hina had her grass house and made and dried her kapa cloth. Even to the present day it is one of the few places in the islands where the kapa is still pounded into sheets from the bark of the hibiscus and kindred trees.

Here is a small bay partially reef-protected, over which year after year the moist clouds float and by day and by night crown the waters with rainbows-the legendary sign of the home of the deified ones. Here when the tide is out the natives wade and swim, as they have done for centuries, from coral block to coral block, shunning the deep resting places of their dread enemy, the shark, sometimes esteemed divine. Out on the edge of the outermost reef they seek the shellfish which cling to the coral, or spear the large fish which have been left in the beautiful little lakes of the reef. Coral land is a region of the sea coast abounding in miniature lakes and rugged valleys and steep mountains. Clear waters with every motion of the tide surge in and out through sheltered caves and submarine tunnels, according to an ancient Hawaiian song-

	 
		"Never quiet, never failing, never sleeping,
		 Never very noisy is the sea of the sacred caves."
		
		 Sea mosses of many hues are the forests which drape the hillsides of coral land and reflect the colored rays of light which pierce the ceaselessly moving waves. Down in the beautiful little lakes, under overhanging coral cliffs, darting in and out through the fringes of seaweed, the purple mullet and royal red fish flash before the eyes of the fisherman. Sometimes the many-tinted glorious fish of paradise reveal their beauties, and then again a school of black and gold citizens of the reef follow the tidal waves around projecting crags and through the hidden tunnels from lake to lake, while above the fisherman follows spearing or snaring as best he can. Maui's brothers were better fishermen than he. They sought the deep sea beyond the reef and the larger fish. They made hooks of bone or of mother of pearl, with a straight, slender, sharp-pointed piece leaning backward at a sharp angle. This was usually a consecrated bit of bone or mother of pearl, and was supposed to have peculiar power to hold fast any fish which had taken the bait.

These bones were usually taken from the body of some one who while living had been noted for great power or high rank. This sharp piece was tightly tied to the larger bone or shell, which formed the shank of the hook. The sacred barb of Maui's hook was a part of the magic bone he had secured from his ancestors in the under-world-the bone with which he struck the sun while lassooing him and compelling him to move more slowly through the heavens.

"Earth-twisted"-fibres of vines-twisted while growing, was the cord used by Maui in tying the parts of his magic hook together.

Long and strong were the fish lines made from the olona fibre, holding the great fish caught from the depths of the ocean. The fibres of the olona vine were among the longest and strongest threads found in the Hawaiian Islands.

Such a hook could easily be cast loose by the struggling fish, if the least opportunity were given. Therefore it was absolutely necessary to keep the line taut, and pull strongly and steadily, to land the fish in the canoe.

Maui did not use his magic hook for a long time. He seemed to understand that it would not answer ordinary needs. Possibly the idea of making the supernatural hook did not occur to him until he had exhausted his lower wit and magic upon his brothers.

It is said that Maui was not a very good fisherman. Sometimes his end of the canoe contained fish which his brothers had thought were on their hooks until they were landed in the canoe.

Many times they laughed at him for his poor success, and he retaliated with his mischievous tricks.

"E!" he would cry, when one of his brothers began to pull in, while the other brothers swiftly paddled the canoe forward. "E!" See we both have caught great fish at the same moment. Be careful now. Your line is loose. Look out! Look out!"

All the time he would be pulling his own line in as rapidly as possible. Onward rushed the canoe. Each fisherman shouting to encourage the others. Soon the lines by the tricky manipulation of Maul would be crossed. Then as the great fish was brought near the side of the boat Maui the little, the mischievous one, would slip his hook toward the head of the fish and flip it over into the canoe-causing his brother's line to slacken for a moment. Then his mournful cry rang out: "Oh, my brother, your fish is gone. Why did you not pull more steadily? It was a fine fish, and now it is down deep in the waters." Then Maui held up his splendid catch (from his brother's hook) and received somewhat suspicious congratulations. But what could they do, Maui was the smart one of the family.

Their father and mother were both members of the household of the gods. The father was "the supporter of the heavens" and the mother was the guardian of the way to the invisible world," but pitifully small and very few were the gifts bestowed upon their children. Maui's brothers knew nothing beyond the average home life of the ordinary Hawaiian, and Maui alone was endowed with the power to work miracles. Nevertheless the student of Polynesian legends learns that Maui is more widely known than almost all the demi-gods of all nations as a discoverer of benefits for his fellows, and these physical rather than spiritual. After many fishing excursions Maui's brothers seemed to have wit enough to understand his tricks, and thenceforth they refused to take him in their canoe when they paddled out to the deep-sea fishing grounds. Then those who depended upon Maui to supply their daily needs murmured against his poor success. His mother scolded him and his brothers ridiculed him.

In some of the Polynesian legends it is said that his wives and children complained because of his laziness and at last goaded him into a new effort.

The ex-Queen Liliuokalani, in a translation of what is called "the family chant," says that Maui's mother sent him to his father for a hook with which to supply her need.

	 
		"Go hence to your father,
		 'Tis there you find line and hook.
		 This is the hook-'Made fast to the heavens-'
		 'Manaia-ka-lani'--'tis called.
		 When the hook catches land
		 It brings the old seas together.
		 Bring hither the large Alae,
		 The bird of Hina.
		
		 When Maui had obtained his hook, he tried to go fishing with his brothers. He leaped on the end of their canoe as they pushed out into deep water. They were angry and cried out: "This boat is too small for another Maui." So they threw him off and made him swim back to the beach. When they returned from their day's work, they brought back only a shark. Maui told them if he had been with them better fish would have been upon their hooks--the Ulua, for instance, or, possibly, the Pimoe-the king of fish. At last they let him go far out outside the harbor of Kipahula to a place opposite Ka Iwi o Pele, "The bone of Pele," a peculiar piece of lava lying near the beach at Hana on the eastern side of the island Maui. There they fished, but only sharks were caught. The brothers ridiculed Maui, saying: "Where are the Ulua, and where is Pimoe?"

Then Maui threw his magic hook into the sea, baited with one of the Alae birds, sacred to his mother Hina. He used the incantation, "When I let go my hook with divine power, then I get the great Ulua."

The bottom of the sea began to move. Great waves arose, trying to carry the canoe away. The fish pulled the canoe two days, drawing the line to its fullest extent. When the slack began to come in the line, because of the tired fish, Maui called for the brothers to pull hard against the coming fish. Soon land rose out of the water. Maui told them not to look back or the fish would be lost. One brother did look back-the line slacked, snapped, and broke, and the land lay behind them in islands.

One of the Hawaiian legends also says that while the brothers were paddling in full strength, Maui saw a calabash floating in the water. He lifted it into the canoe, and behold! his beautiful sister Hina of the sea. The brothers looked, and the separated islands lay behind them, free from the hook, while Cocoanut Island--the dainty spot of beauty in Hilo harbor--was drawn up-a little edge of lava-in later years the home of a cocoanut grove.

The better, the more complete, legend comes from New Zealand, which makes Maui so mischievous that his brothers refuse his companionship-and therefore, thrown on his own resources, he studies how to make a hook which shall catch something worth while. In this legend Maui is represented as making his own hook and then pleading with his brothers to let him go with them once more. But they hardened their hearts against him, and refused again and again.

Maui possessed the power of changing himself into different forms. At one time while playing with his brothers he had concealed himself for them to find. They heard his voice in a corner of the house-but could not find him. Then under the mats on the floor, but again they could not find him. There was only an insect creeping on the floor. Suddenly they saw their little brother where the insect had been. Then they knew he had been tricky with them. So in these fishing days he resolved to go back to his old ways and cheat his brothers into carrying him with them to the great fishing grounds.

Sir George Gray says that the New Zealand Maui went out to the canoe and concealed himself as an insect in the bottom of the boat so that when the early morning light crept over the waters and his brothers pushed the canoe into the surf they could not see him. They rejoiced that Maui did not appear, and paddled away over the waters.

They fished all day and all night and on the morning of the next day, out from among the fish in the bottom of the boat came their troublesome brother.

They had caught many fine fish and were satisfied, so thought to paddle homeward, but their younger brother plead with them to go out, far out, to the deeper seas and permit him to cast his hook. He said he wanted larger and better fish than any they had captured.

So they paddled to their outermost fishing grounds -but this did not satisfy Maui-

	 
		"Farther out on the waters,
		 O! my brothers,
		 I seek the great fish of the sea."
		
		 It was evidently easier to work for him than to argue with him-therefore far out in the sea they went. The home land disappeared from view; they could see only the outstretching waste of waters. Maui urged them out still farther. Then he drew his magic hook from under his malo or loin-cloth. The brothers wondered what he would do for bait. The New Zealand legend says that he struck his nose a mighty blow until the blood gushed forth. When this blood became clotted, he fastened it upon his hook and let it down into the deep sea.

Down it went to the very bottom and caught the under world. It was a mighty fish-but the brothers paddled with all their might and main and Maui pulled in the line. It was hard rowing against the power which held the hook down in the sea depths-but the brothers became enthusiastic over Maui's large fish, and were generous in their strenuous endeavors. Every muscle was strained and every paddle held strongly against the sea that not an inch should be lost. There was no sudden leaping and darting to and fro, no "give" to the line; no "tremble" as when a great fish would shake itself in impotent wrath when held captive by a hook. It was simply a struggle of tense muscle against an immensely heavy dead weight. To the brothers there came slowly the feeling that Maui was in one of his strange moods and that something beyond their former experiences with their tricky brother was coming to pass.

At last one of the brothers glanced backward. With a scream of intense terror he dropped his paddle. The others also looked. Then each caught his paddle and with frantic exertion tried to force their canoe onward. Deep down in the heavy waters they pushed their paddles. Out of the great seas the black, ragged head of a large island was rising like a fish-it seemed to be chasing them, through the boiling surf. In a little while the water became shallow around them, and their canoe finally rested on a black beach.

Maui for some reason left his brothers, charging them not to attempt to cut up this great fish. But the unwise brothers thought they would fill the canoe with part of this strange thing which they had caught. They began to cut up the back and put huge slices into their canoe. But the great fish--the island--shook under the blows and with mighty earthquake shocks tossed the boat of the brothers, and their canoe was destroyed. As they were struggling in the waters, the great fish devoured them. The island came up more and more from the waters--but the deep gashes made by Maui's brothers did not heal--they became the mountains and valleys stretching from sea to sea.

White of New Zealand says that Maui went down into the underworld to meet his great ancestress, who was one side dead and one side alive. From the dead side he took the jaw bone, made a magic hook, and went fishing. When he let the hook down into the sea, he called:

	 
		"Take my bait. O Depths!
		 Confused you are. O Depths!
		 And coming upward."
		
		 Thus he pulled up Ao-tea-roa--one of the large islands of New Zealand. On it were houses, with people around them. Fires were burning. Maui walked over the island, saw with wonder the strange men and the mysterious fire. He took fire in his hands and was burned. He leaped into the sea, dived deep, came up with the other large island on his shoulders. This island he set on fire and left it always burning, It is said that the name for New Zealand given to Captain Cook was Te ika o Maui, "The fish of Maui." Some New Zealand natives say that he fished up the island on which dwelt "Great Hina of the Night," who finally destroyed Maui while he was seeking immortality.

One legend says that Maui fished up apparently from New Zealand the large island of the Tongas. He used this chant:

	 
		O Tonga-nui!
		 why art Thou
		 Sulkily biting, biting below!
		 Beneath the earth
		 The power is felt,
		 The foam is seen,
		 Coming.
		 O thou loved grandchild
		 Of Tangaro a-meha. "
		
		 This is an excellent poetical description of the great fish delaying the quick hard bite. Then the island comes to the surface and Maui, the beloved grandchild of the Polynesian god Kanaloa, is praised.

It was part of one of the legends that Maui changed himself into a bird and from the heavens let down a line with which he drew up land, but the line broke, leaving islands rather than a mainland. About two hundred lesser gods went to the new islands in a large canoe. The greater gods punished them by making them mortal.

Turner, in his book on Samoa, says there were three Mauis, all brothers. They went out fishing from Rarotonga. One of the brothers begged the "goddess of the deep rocks" to let his hooks catch land. Then the island Manahiki was drawn up. A great wave washed two of the Mauis away. The other Maui found a great house in which eight hundred gods lived. Here he made his home until a chief from Rarotonga drove him away. He fled into the sky, but as he leaped he separated the land into two islands.

Other legends of Samoa say that Tangaroa, the great god, rolled stones from heaven. One became the island Savaii, the other became Upolu. A god is sometimes represented as passing over the ocean with a bag of sand. Wherever he dropped a little sand islands sprang up.

Payton, the earnest and honored missionary of the New Hebrides Islands, evidently did not know the name Mauitikitiki, so he spells the name of the fisherman Ma-tshi-ktshi-ki, and gives the myth of the fishing up of the various islands. The natives said that Maui left footprints on the coral reefs of each island where he stood straining and lifting in his endeavors to pull up each other island. He threw his line around a large island intending to draw it up and unite it with the one on which he stood, but his line broke. Then he became angry and divided into two parts the island on which he stood. This same Maui is recorded by Mr. Payton as being in a flood which put out one volcano-Maui seized another, sailed across to a neighboring island and piled it upon the top of the volcano there, so the fire was placed out of reach of the flood.

In the Hervey Group of the Tahitian or Society Islands the same story prevails and the natives point out the place where the hook caught and a print was made by the foot in the coral reef. But they add some very mythical details. Maui's magic fish hook is thrown into the skies, where it continuously hangs, the curved tail of the constellation which we call Scorpio. Then one of the gods becoming angry with Maui seized him and threw him also among the stars. There he stays looking down upon his people. He has become a fixed part of the scorpion itself.

The Hawaiian myths sometimes represent Maui as trying to draw the islands together while fishing them out of the sea. When they had pulled up the island of Kauai they looked back and were frightened. They evidently tried to rush away from the new monster and thus broke the line. Maui tore a side out of the small crater Kaula when trying to draw it to one of the other islands. Three aumakuas, three fishes supposed to be spirit-gods, guarded Kaula and defeated his purpose. At Hawaii Cocoanut Island broke off because Maui pulled too hard. Another place near Hilo on the large island of Hawaii where the hook was said to have caught is in the Wailuku river below Rainbow Falls.

Maui went out from his home at Kauiki, fishing with his brothers. After they had caught some fine fish the brothers desired to return, but Maui persuaded them to go out farther. Then when they became tired and determined to go back, he made the seas stretch out and the shores recede until they could see no land. Then drawing the magic hook, he baited it with the Alae or sacred mud hen belonging to his Mother Hina. Queen Liliuokalani's family chant has the following reference to this myth:

	 
		"Maui longed for fish for Hina-akeahi (Hina of the fire, his mother),
		 Go hence to your father,
		 There you will find line and hook.
		 Manaiakalani is the book.
		 Where the islands are caught,
		 The ancient seas are connected.
		 The great bird Alae is taken,
		 The sister bird,
		 Of that one of the hidden fire of Maui."
		
		 Maui evidently had no scruples against using anything which would help him carry out his schemes.

He indiscriminately robbed his friends and the gods alike.

Down in the deep sea sank the hook with its struggling bait, until it was seized by "the land under the water."

But Hina the mother saw the struggle of her sacred bird and hastened to the rescue. She caught a wing of the bird, but could not pull the Alae from the sacred hook. The wing was torn off. Then the fish gathered around the bait and tore it in pieces. If the bait could have been kept entire, then the land would have come up in a continent rather than as an island. Then the Hawaiian group would have been unbroken. But the bait broke-and the islands came as fragments from the under world.

Maui's hook and canoe are frequently mentioned in the legends. The Hawaiians have a long rock in the Wailuku river at Hilo which they call Maui's canoe. Different names were given to Maui's canoe by the Maoris of New Zealand. "Vine of Heaven," "Prepare for the North," "Land of the Receding Sea." His fish hook bore the name "Plume of Beauty."

On the southern end of Hawke's Bay, New Zealand, there is a curved ledge of rocks extending out from, the coast. This is still called by the Maoris "Maui's fish-hook," as if the magic hook had been so firmly caught in the jaws of the island that Maui could not disentangle it, but had been compelled to cut it off from his line.

There is a large stone on the sea coast of North Kohala on the island of Hawaii which the Hawaiians point out as the place where Maui's magic hook caught the island and pulled it through the sea.

In the Tonga Islands, a place known as Hounga is pointed out by the natives as the spot where the magic hook caught in the rocks. The hook itself was said to have been in the possession of a chief-family for many generations.

Another group of Hawaiian legends, very incomplete, probably referring to Maui, but ascribed to other names, relates that a fisherman caught a large block of coral. He took it to his priest. After sacrificing, and consulting the gods, the priest advised the fisherman to throw the coral back into the sea with incantations. While so doing this block became Hawaii-loa. The fishing continued and blocks of coral were caught and thrown back into the sea until all the islands appeared. Hints of this legend cling to other island groups as well as to the Hawaiian Islands. Fornander credits a fisherman from foreign lands as thus bringing forth the Hawaiian Islands from the deep seas. The reference occurs in part of a chant known as that of a friend of Paao--the priest who is supposed to have come from, Samoa to Hawaii in the eleventh century. This priest calls for his companions:

	 
		"Here are the canoes. Get aboard.
		 Come along, and dwell on Hawaii with the green back.
		 A land which was found in the ocean,
		 A land thrown up from the sea--
		 From the very depths of Kanaloa,
		 The white coral, in the watery caves,
		 That was caught on the hook of the fisherman."
		
		 The god Kanaloa is sometimes known as a ruler of the under-world, whose land was caught by Maui's hook and brought up in islands. Thus in the legends the thought has been perpetuated that some one of the ancestors of the Polynesians made voyages and discovered islands.

In the time of Umi, King of Hawaii, there is the following record of an immense bone fish-hook, which was called the "fish-hook of Maui:"

"In the night of Mukti (the last night of the month), a priest and his servants took a man, killed him, and fastened his body to the hook, which bore the name Manai-a-ka-lani, and dragged it to the heiau (temple) as a 'fish,' and placed it on the altar."

This hook was kept until the time of Kamehameha I. From time to time he tried to break it, and pulled until he perspired.

Peapea, a brother of Kaahumanu, took the hook and broke it. He was afraid that Kamehameha would kill him. Kaahumanu, however, soothed the King, and he passed the matter over. The broken bone was probably thrown away.

     Legends of Maui, A Demi-God of Polynesia, by W. D. Westervelt, [1910], at sacred-texts.com

  

III.

 

MAUI LIFTING THE SKY.

MAUI'S home was for a long time enveloped by darkness. The heavens had fallen down, or, rather, had not been separated from the earth.

According to some legends, the skies pressed so closely and so heavily upon the earth that when the plants began to grow, all the leaves were necessarily flat. According to other legends, the plants had to push up the clouds a little, and thus caused the leaves to flatten out into larger surface, so that they could better drive the skies back and hold them in place. Thus the leaves became flat at first, and have so remained through all the days of mankind. The plants lifted the sky inch by inch until men were able to crawl about between the heavens and the earth, and thus pass from place to place and visit one another.

After a long time, according to the Hawaiian legends, a man, supposed to be Maui, came to a woman and said: "Give me a drink from your gourd calabash, and I will push the heavens higher." The woman handed the gourd to him. When he had taken a deep draught, he braced himself against the clouds and lifted them to the height of the trees. Again he hoisted the sky and carried it to the tops of the mountains; then with great exertion he thrust it upwards once more, and pressed it to the place it now occupies. Nevertheless dark clouds many times hang low along the eastern slope of Maui's great mountain-Haleakala-and descend in heavy rains upon the hill Kauwiki; but they dare not stay, lest Maui the strong come and hurl them so far away that they cannot come back again.

A man who had been watching the process of lifting the sky ridiculed Maui for attempting such a difficult task. When the clouds rested on the tops of the mountains, Maui turned to punish his critic. The man had fled to the other side of the island, Maui rapidly pursued and finally caught him on the sea coast, not many miles north of the town now known as Lahaina. After a brief struggle the man was changed, according to the story, into a great black rock, which can be seen by any traveler who desires to localize the legends of Hawaii.

In Samoa Tiitii, the latter part of the full name of Mauikiikii, is used as the name of the one who braced his feet against the rocks and pushed the sky up. The foot-prints, some six feet long, are said to be shown by the natives.

Another Samoan story is almost like the raw Hawaiian legend. The heavens had fallen, people crawled, but the leaves pushed up a little; but the sky was uneven. Men tried to walk, but hit their heads, and in this confined space it was very hot. A woman rewarded a man who lifted the sky to its proper place by giving him a drink of water from her cocoanut shell.

A number of small groups of islands in the Pacific have legends of their skies being lifted, but they attribute the labor to the great eels and serpents of the sea.

One of the Ellice group, Niu Island, says that as the serpent began to lift the sky the people clapped their hands and shouted "Lift up!" "High!" "Higher!" But the body of the serpent finally broke into pieces which became islands, and the blood sprinkled its drops on the sky and became stars.

One of the Samoan legends says that a plant called daiga, which had one large umbrella-like leaf, pushed up the sky and gave it its shape.

The Vatupu, or Tracey Islanders, said at one time the sky and rocks were united. Then steam or clouds of smoke rose from the rocks, and, pouring out in volumes, forced the sky away from the earth. Man appeared in these clouds of steam or smoke. Perspiration burst forth as this man forced his way through the heated atmosphere. From this perspiration woman was formed. Then were born three sons, two of whom pushed up the sky. One, in the north, pushed as far as his arms would reach. The one in the south was short and climbed a hill, pushing as he went up, until the sky was in its proper place.

The Gilbert Islanders say the sky was pushed up by men with long poles.

The ancient New Zealanders understood incantations by which they could draw up or discover. They found a land where the sky and the earth were united. They prayed over their stone axe and cut the sky and land apart. "Hau-hau-tu" was the name of the great stone axe by which the sinews of the great heaven above were severed, and Langi (sky) was separated from, Papa (earth).

The New Zealand Maoris were accustomed to say that at first the sky rested close upon the earth and therefore there was utter darkness for ages. Then the six sons of heaven and earth, born during this period of darkness, felt the need of light and discussed the necessity of separating their parents-the sky from the earth-and decided to attempt the work.

Rongo (Hawaiian god Lono) the "father of food plants," attempted to lift the sky, but could not tear it from the earth. Then Tangaroa (Kanaloa), the "father of fish and reptiles," failed. Haumia Tiki-tiki (Maui Kiikii), the "father of wild food plants," could not raise the clouds. Then Tu (Hawaiian Ku), the "father of fierce men," struggled in vain, But Tane (Hawaiian Kane), the "father of giant forests," pushed and lifted until he thrust the sky far up above him. Then they discovered their descendants-the multitude of human beings who had been living on the earth concealed and crushed by the clouds. Afterwards the last son, Tawhiri (father of storms), was angry and waged war against his brothers. He hid in the sheltered hollows of the great skies. There he begot his vast brood of winds and storms with which he finally drove all his brothers and their descendants into hiding places on land and sea. The New Zealanders mention the names of the canoes in which their ancestors fled from the old home Hawaiki.

Tu (father of fierce men) and his descendants, however, conquered wind and storm and have ever since held supremacy.

The New Zealand legends also say that heaven and earth have never lost their love for each other. "The warm sighs of earth ever ascend from the wooded mountains and valleys, and men call them mists. The sky also lets fall frequent tears which men term dew drops."

The Manihiki islanders say that Maui desired to separate the sky from the earth. His father, Ru, was the supporter of the heavens. Maui persuaded him to assist in lifting the burden. Maui went to the north and crept into a place, where, lying prostrate under the sky, he could brace himself against it and push with great power. in the same way Ru went to the south and braced himself against the southern skies. Then they made the signal, and both pressed "with their backs against the solid blue mass." It gave way before the great strength of the father and son. Then they lifted again, bracing themselves with hands and knees against the earth. They crowded it and bent it upward. They were able to stand with the sky resting on their shoulders. They heaved against the bending mass, and it receded rapidly. They quickly put the palms of their hands under it; then the tips of their fingers, and it retreated farther and farther. At last, "drawing themselves out to gigantic proportions, they pushed the entire heavens up to the very lofty position which they have ever since occupied."

But Maui and Ru had not worked perfectly together; therefore the sky was twisted and its surface was very irregular. They determined to smooth the sky before they finished their task, so they took large stone adzes and chipped off the rough protuberances and ridges, until by and by the great arch was cut out and smoothed off. They then took finer tools and chipped and polished until the sky became the beautifully finished blue dome which now bends around the earth.

The Hervey island myth, as related by W. W. Gill, states that Ru, the father of Maui, came from Avaiki (Hawa-iki), the underworld or abode of the spirits of the dead. He found men crowded down by the sky, which was a mass of solid blue stone. He was very sorry when he saw the condition of the inhabitants of the earth, and planned to raise the sky a little. So he planted stakes of different kinds of trees. These were strong enough to hold the sky so far above the earth "that men could stand erect and walk about without inconvenience." This was celebrated in one of the Hervey Island songs:

"Force up the heavens,
 O, Ru!
 And let the space be clear."

For this helpful deed Ru received the name "The supporter of the heavens." He was rather proud of his achievement and was gratified because of the praise received. So he came sometimes and looked at the stakes and the beautiful blue sky resting on them. Maui, the son, came along and ridiculed his father for thinking so much of his work. Maui is not represented, in the legends, as possessing a great deal of love and reverence for his relatives provided his affection interfered with his mischief; so it was not at all strange that he laughed at his father. Ru became angry and said to Maui: "Who told youngsters to talk? Take care of yourself, or I will hurl you out of existence."

Maui dared him to try it. Ru quickly seized him and "threw him to a great height." But Maui changed himself to a bird and sank back to earth unharmed.

Then he changed himself back into the form of a man, and, making himself very large, ran and thrust his head between the old man's legs. He pried and lifted until Ru and the sky around him began to give. Another lift and he hurled them both to such a height that the sky could not come back.

Ru himself was entangled among the stars. His head and shoulders stuck fast, and he could not free himself. How he struggled, until the skies shook, while Maui went away. Maui was proud of his achievement in having moved the sky so far away. In this self-rejoicing he quickly forgot his father.

Ru died after a time. "His body rotted away and his bones, of vast proportions, came tumbling down from time to time, and were shivered on the earth into countless fragments. These shattered bones of Ru are scattered over every hill and valley of one of the islands, to the very edge of the sea."

Thus the natives of the Hervey Islands account for the many pieces of porous lava and the small pieces of pumice stone found occasionally in their islands. The "bones" were very light and greatly resembled fragments of real bone. If the fragments were large enough they were sometimes taken and worshiped as gods. One of these pieces, of extraordinary size, was given to Mr. Gill when the natives were bringing in a large collection of idols. "This one was known as 'The Light Stone,' and was worshiped as the god of the wind and the waves. Upon occasions of a hurricane, incantations and offerings of food would be made to it."

Thus, according to different Polynesian legends, Maui raised the sky and made the earth inhabitable for his fellow-men.

     Legends of Maui, A Demi-God of Polynesia, by W. D. Westervelt, [1910], at sacred-texts.com

  

IV.

 

MAUI SNARING THE SUN.

	 
		"Maui became restless and fought the sun
		 With a noose that he laid.
		 And winter won the sun,
		 And summer was won by Maui."
		
		
			 
				--Queen Liliuokalani's family chant.
				
				   A VERY unique legend is found among the widely-scattered Polynesians. The story of Maui's "Snaring the Sun" was told among the Maoris of New Zealand, the Kanakas of the Hervey and Society Islands, and the ancient natives of Hawaii. The Samoans tell the same story without mentioning the name of Maui. They say that the snare was cast by a child of the sun itself.

The Polynesian stories of the origin of the sun are worthy of note before the le end of the change from short to long days is given.

The Tongan Islanders, according to W. W. Gill, tell the story of the origin of the sun and moon. They say that Vatea (Wakea) and their ancestor Tongaiti quarreled concerning a child--each claiming it as his own. In the struggle the child was cut in two. Vatea squeezed and rolled the part he secured into a ball and threw it away, far up into the heavens, where it became the sun. It shone brightly as it rolled along the heavens, and sank down to Avaiki (Hawaii), the nether world. But the ball came back again and once more rolled across the sky. Tonga-iti had let his half of the child fall on the ground and lie there, until made envious by the beautiful ball Vatea made.

At last he took the flesh which lay on the ground and made it into a ball. As the sun sank he threw his ball up into the darkness, and it rolled along the heavens, but the blood had drained out of the flesh while it lay upon the ground, therefore it could not become so red and burning as the sun, and had not life to move so swiftly. It was as white as a dead body, because its blood was all gone; and it could not make the darkness flee away as the sun had done. Thus day and night and the sun and moon always remain with the earth.

The legends of the Society Islands say that a demon in the west became angry with the sun and in his rage ate it up, causing night. In the same way a demon from the east would devour the moon, but for some reason these angry ones could not destroy their captives and were compelled to open their mouths and let the bright balls come forth once more. In some places a sacrifice of some one of distinction was needed to placate the wrath of the devourers and free the balls of light in times of eclipse.

The moon, pale and dead in appearance, moved slowly; while the sun, full of life and strength, moved quickly. Thus days were very short and nights were very long. Mankind suffered from the fierceness of the heat of the sun and also from its prolonged absence. Day and night were alike a burden to men. The darkness was so great and lasted so long that fruits would not ripen.

After Maui had succeeded in throwing the heavens into their place, and fastening them so that they could not fall, he learned that he had opened a way for the sun-god to come up from the lower world and rapidly run across the blue vault. This made two troubles for men-the heat of the sun was very great and the journey too quickly over. Maui planned to capture the sun and punish him for thinking so little about the welfare of mankind.

As Rev. A. O. Forbes, a missionary among the Hawaiians, relates, Maui's mother was troubled very much by the heedless haste of the sun. She had many kapa-cloths to make, for this was the only kind of clothing known in Hawaii, except sometimes a woven mat or a long grass fringe worn as a skirt. This native cloth was made by pounding the fine bark of certain trees with wooden mallets until the fibres were beaten and ground into a wood pulp. Then she pounded the pulp into thin sheets from which the best sleeping mats and clothes could be fashioned. These kapa cloths had to be thoroughly dried, but the days were so short that by the time she had spread out the kapa the sun had heedlessly rushed across the sky and gone down into the under-world, and all the cloth had to be gathered up again and cared for until another day should come. There were other troubles. "The food could not be prepared and cooked in one day. Even an incantation to the gods could not be chanted through ere they were overtaken by darkness."

This was very discouraging and caused great suffering, as well as much unnecessary trouble and labor. Many complaints were made against the thoughtless sun.

Maui pitied his mother and determined to make the sun go slower that the days might be long enough to satisfy the needs of men. Therefore, he went over to the northwest of the island on which he lived. This was Mt. Iao, an extinct volcano, in which lies one of the most beautiful and picturesque valleys of the Hawaiian Islands. He climbed the ridges until he could see the course of the sun as it passed over the island. He saw that the sun came up the eastern side of Mt. Haleakala. He crossed over the plain between the two mountains and climbed to the top of Mt. Haleakala. There he watched the burning sun as it came up from Koolau and passed directly over the top of the mountain. The summit of Haleakala is a great extinct crater twenty miles in circumference, and nearly twenty-five hundred feet in depth. There are two tremendous gaps or chasms in the side of the crater wall, through which in days gone by the massive bowl poured forth its flowing lava. One of these was the Koolau, or eastern gap, in which Maui probably planned to catch the sun.

Mt. Hale-a-ka-la of the Hawaiian Islands means House-of-the-sun. "La," or "Ra," is the name of the sun throughout parts of Polynesia. Ra was the sun-god of ancient Egypt. Thus the antiquities of Polynesia and Egypt touch each other, and today no man knows the full reason thereof.

The Hawaiian legend says Maui was taunted by a man who ridiculed the idea that he could snare the sun, saying, "You will never catch the sun. You are only an idle nobody."

Maui replied, "When I conquer my enemy and my desire is attained, I will be your death."

After studying the path of the sun, Maui returned to his mother and told her that he would go and cut off the legs of the sun so that he could not run so fast.

His mother said: "Are you strong enough for this work?" He said, 'Yes." Then she gave him fifteen strands of well-twisted fiber and told him to go to his grandmother, who lived in the great crater of Haleakala, for the rest of the things in his conflict with the sun. She said: "You must climb the mountain to the place where a large wiliwili tree is standing. There you will find the place where the sun stops to eat cooked bananas prepared by your grandmother.

Stay there until a rooster crows three times; then watch your grandmother go out to make a fire and put on food. You had better take her bananas. She will look for them and find you and ask who you are. Tell her you belong to Hina."

When she had taught him all these things, he went tip the mountain to Kaupo to the place Hina had directed. There was a large wiliwili tree. Here he waited for the rooster to crow. The name of that rooster was Kalauhele-moa. When the rooster had crowed three times, the grandmother came out with a bunch of bananas to cook for the sun. She took off the upper part of the bunch and laid it down. Maui immediately snatched it away. In a moment she turned to pick it up, but could not find it. She was angry and cried out: "Where are the bananas of the sun?" Then she took off another part of the bunch, and Maui stole that. Thus he did until all the bunch had been taken away. She was almost blind and could not detect him by sight, so she sniffed all around her until she detected the smell of a man. She asked--"Who are you? To whom do you belong?" Maui replied: "I belong to Hina." "Why have you come?" Maui told her, "I have come to kill the sun. He goes so fast that he never dries the tapa Hina has beaten out."

The old woman gave a magic stone for a battle axe and one more rope. She taught him how to catch the sun, saying: "Make a place to hide here by this large wiliwili tree. When the first leg of the sun comes up, catch it with your first rope, and so on until you have used all your ropes. Fasten them to the tree, then take the stone axe to strike the body of the sun."

Maui dug a hole among the roots of the tree and concealed himself. Soon the first ray of light-the first leg of the sun-came up along the mountain side. Maui threw his rope and caught it. One by one the legs of the sun came over the edge of the crater's rim and were caught. Only one long leg was still hanging down the side of the mountain. It was hard for the sun to move that leg. It shook and trembled and tried hard to come up. At last it crept over the edge and was caught by Maui with the rope given by his grandmother.

When the sun saw that his sixteen long legs were held fast in the ropes, he began to go back down the mountain side into the sea. Then Maui tied the ropes fast to the tree and pulled until the body of the sun came up again. Brave Maui caught his magic stone club or axe, and began to strike and wound the sun, until he cried: "Give me my life." Maui said: "If you live, you may be a traitor. Perhaps I had better kill you." But the sun begged for life. After they had conversed a while, they agreed that there should be a regular motion in the journey of the sun. There should be longer days, and. yet half the time he might go quickly as in the winter time, but the other half he must move slowly as in summer. Thus men dwelling on the earth should be blessed.

Another legend says that he made a lasso and climbed to the summit of Mt. Haleakala. He made ready his lasso, so that when the sun came lip the mountain side and rose above him he could cast the noose and catch the sun, but he only snared one of the sun's larger rays and broke it off. Again and again he threw the lasso until he had broken off all the strong rays of the sun.

Then he shouted exultantly, "Thou art my captive; I will kill thee for going so swiftly."

Then the sun said, "Let me live and thou shalt see me go more slowly hereafter. Behold, hast thou not broken off all my strong legs and left me only the weak ones?"

So the agreement was made, and Maui permitted the sun to pursue his course, and from that day he went more slowly.

Maui returned from his conflict with the sun and sought for Moemoe, the man who had ridiculed him. Maui chased this man around the island from one side to the other until they had passed through Lahaina (one of the first mission stations in 1828). There on the seashore near the large black rock of the legend of Maui lifting the sky he found Moemoe. Then they left the seashore and the contest raged up hill and down until Maui slew the man and "changed the body into a long rock, which is there to this day, by the side of the road going past Black Rock."

Before the battle with the sun occurred Maui went down into the underworld, according to the New Zealand tradition, and remained a long time with his relatives. In some way he learned that there was an enchanted jawbone in the possession of some one of his ancestors, so he waited and waited, hoping that at last he might discover it.

After a time he noticed that presents of food were being sent away to some person whom he had not met.

One day he asked the messengers, "Who is it you are taking that present of food to?"

The people answered, "It is for Muri, your ancestress."

Then he asked for the food, saying, "I will carry it to her myself."

But he took the food away and hid it. "And this he did for many days," and the presents failed to reach the old woman.

By and by she suspected mischief, for it did not seem as if her friends would neglect her so long a time, so she thought she would catch the tricky one and eat him. She depended upon her sense of smell to detect the one who had troubled her. As Sir George Grey tells the story: "When Maui came along the path carrying the present of food, the old chiefess sniffed and sniffed until she was sure that she smelt some one coming. She was very much exasperated, and her stomach began to distend itself that she might be ready to devour this one when he came near.

Then she turned toward the south and sniffed. and not a scent of anything reached her. Then she turned to the north, and to the cast, but could not detect the odor of a human being. She made one more trial and turned toward the west. Ah! then came the scent of a man to her plainly and she called out, 'I know, from the smell wafted to me by the breeze, that somebody is close to me.'"

Maui made known his presence and the old woman knew that he was a descendant of hers, and her stomach began immediately to shrink and contract itself again.

Then she asked, "Art thou Maui?"

He answered, "Even so," and told her that he wanted "the jaw-bone by which great enchantments could be wrought."

Then Muri, the old chiefess, gave him the magic bone and he returned to his brothers, who were still living on the earth.

Then Maui said: "Let us now catch the sun in a noose that we may compel him to move more slowly in order that mankind may have long days to labor in and procure subsistence for themselves."

They replied, "No man can approach it on account of the fierceness of the heat."

According to the Society Island legend, his mother advised him to have nothing to do with the sun, who was a divine living creature, "in form like a man, possessed of fearful energy," shaking his golden locks both morning and evening in the eyes of men. Many persons had tried to regulate the movements of the sun, but had failed completely.

But Maui encouraged his mother and his brothers by asking them to remember his power to protect himself by the use of enchantments.

The Hawaiian legend says that Maui himself gathered cocoanut fibre in great quantity and manufactured it into strong ropes. But the legends of other islands say that he had the aid of his brothers, and while working learned many useful lessons. While winding and twisting they discovered how to make square ropes and flat ropes as well as the ordinary round rope. In the Society Islands, it is said, Maui and his brothers made six strong ropes of great length. These he called aeiariki (royal nooses).

The New Zealand legend says that when Maui and his brothers had finished making all the ropes required they took provisions and other things needed and journeyed toward the east to find the place where the sun should rise. Maui carried with him the magic jaw-bone which he had secured from Muri, his ancestress, in the under-world.

They traveled all night and concealed themselves by day so that the sun should not see them and become too suspicious and watchful. In this way they journeyed, until "at length they had gone very far to the eastward and had come to the very edge of the place out of which the sun rises. There they set to work and built on each side a long, high wall of clay, with hilts of boughs of trees at each end to hide themselves in."

Here they laid a large noose made from their ropes and Maui concealed himself on one side of this place along which the sun must come, while his brothers hid on the other side.

Maui seized his magic enchanted jaw-bone as the weapon with which to fight the sun, and ordered his brothers to pull hard on the noose and not to be frightened or moved to set the sun free.

"At last the sun came rising up out of his place like a fire spreading far and wide over the mountains and forests.

He rises up.

His head passes through the noose.

The ropes are pulled tight.

Then the monster began to struggle and roll himself about, while the snare jerked backwards and forwards as he struggled. Ah! was not he held fast in the ropes of his enemies.

Then forth rushed that bold hero Maui with his enchanted weapon. The sun screamed aloud and roared. Maui struck him fiercely with many blows. They held him for a long time. At last they let him go, and then weak from wounds the sun crept very slowly and feebly along his course."

In this way the days were made longer so that men could perform their daily tasks and fruits and food plants could have time to grow.

The legend of the Hervey group of islands says that Maui made six snares and placed them at intervals along the path over which the sun must pass. The sun in the form of a man climbed up from Avaiki (Hawaiki). Maui pulled the first noose, but it slipped down the rising sun until it caught and was pulled tight around his feet.

Maui ran quickly to pull the ropes of the second snare, but that also slipped down, down, until it was tightened around the knees. Then Maui hastened to the third snare, while the sun was trying to rush along on his journey. The third snare caught around the hips. The fourth snare fastened itself around the waist. The fifth slipped under the arms, and yet the sun sped along as if but little inconvenienced by Maui's efforts.

Then Maui caught the last noose and threw it around the neck of the sun, and fastened the rope to a spur of rock. The sun struggled until nearly strangled to death and then gave up, promising Maui that he would go as slowly as was desired. Maui left the snares fastened to the sun to keep him in constant fear.

"These ropes may still be seen hanging from the sun at dawn and stretching into the skies when he descends into the ocean at night. By the assistance of these ropes he is gently let down into Ava-iki in the evening, and also raised up out of shadow-land in the morning."

Another legend from the Society Islands is related by Mr. Gill:

Maui tried many snares before he could catch the sun. The sun was the Hercules, or the Samson, of the heavens. He broke the strong cords of cocoanut fibre which Maui made and placed around the opening by which the sun climbed out from the under-world. Maui made stronger ropes, but still the sun broke them every one.

Then Maui thought of his sister's hair, the sister Inaika, whom he cruelly treated in later years. Her hair was long and beautiful. He cut off some of it and made a strong rope. With this he lassoed or rather snared the sun, and caught him around the throat. The sun quickly promised to be more thoughtful of the needs of men and go at a more reasonable pace across the sky.

A story from the American Indians is told in Hawaii's Young People, which is very similar to the Polynesian legends.

An Indian boy became very angry with the sun for getting so warm and making his clothes shrink with the heat. He told his sister to make a snare. The girl took sinews from a large deer, but they shriveled under the heat. She took her own long hair and made snares, but they were burned in a moment. Then she tried the fibres of various plants and was successful. Her brother took the fibre cord and drew it through his lips. It stretched and became a strong red cord. He pulled and it became very long. He went to the place of sunrise, fixed his snare, and caught the sun. When the sun had been sufficiently punished, the animals of the earth studied the problem of setting the sun free. At last a mouse as large as a mountain ran and gnawed the red cord. It broke and the sun moved on, but the poor mouse had been burned and shriveled into the small mouse of the present day.

A Samoan legend says that a woman living for a tinie with the sun bore a child who had the name "Child of the Sun." She wanted gifts for the child's marriage, so she took a long vine, climbed a tree, made the vine into a noose, lassoed the sun, and made him give her a basket of blessings.

In Fiji, the natives tie the grasses growing on a hilltop over which they are passing, when traveling from place to place. They do this to make a snare to catch the sun if he should try to go down before they reach the end of their day's journey.

This legend is a misty memory of some time when the Polynesian people were in contact with the short days of the extreme north or south. It is a very remarkable exposition of a fact of nature perpetuated many centuries in lands absolutely free from such natural phenomena.

     Legends of Maui, A Demi-God of Polynesia, by W. D. Westervelt, [1910], at sacred-texts.com

  

V.

 

MAUI FINDING FIRE.

	 
		"Grant, oh grant me thy hidden fire,
		 O Banyan Tree.
		 Perform an incantation,
		 Utter a prayer
		 To the Banyan Tree.
		 Kindle a fire in the dust
		 Of the Banyan Tree."
		
		
			 
				-Translation of ancient Polynesian chant.
				
				   AMONG students of mythology certain characters in the legends of the various nations are known as "culture heroes." Mankind has from time to time learned exceedingly useful lessons and has also usually ascribed the new knowledge to some noted person in the national mythology. These mythical benefactors who have brought these practical benefits to men are placed among the "hero gods." They have been teachers or "culture heroes" to mankind.

Probably the fire finders of the different nations are among the best remembered of all these benefactors. This would naturally be the case, for no greater good has touched man's physical life than the discovery of methods of making fire.

Prometheus, the classical fire finder, is most widely known in literature. But of all the helpful gods of mythology, Maui, the mischievous Polynesian, is beyond question the hero of the largest numbers of nations scattered over the widest extent of territory. Prometheus belonged to Rome, but Maui belonged to the length and breadth of the Pacific Ocean. Theft or trickery, the use of deceit of some kind, is almost inseparably connected with fire finding all over the world. Prometheus stole fire from, Jupiter and gave it to men together with the genius to make use of it in the arts and sciences. He found the rolling chariot of the sun, secretly filled his hollow staff with fire, carried it to earth, put a part in the breast of man to create enthusiasm or animation, and saved the remainder for the comfort of mankind to be used with the artist skill of Minerva and Vulcan. In Brittany the golden or fire-crested wren steals fire and is red-marked while so doing. The animals of the North American Indians are represented as stealing fire sometimes from the cuttle fish and sometimes from one another. Some swiftly-flying bird or fleet-footed coyote would carry the stolen fire to the home of the tribe.

The possession of fire meant to the ancients all that wealth means family of today. It meant the possession of comfort. The gods were naturally determined to keep this wealth in their own hands. For any one to make a sharp deal and cheat a god of fire out of a part of this valuable property or to make a courageous raid upon the fire guardian and steal the treasure, was easily sufficient to make that one a "culture hero." As a matter of fact a prehistoric family without fire would go to any length in order to get it. The fire finders would naturally be the hero-gods and stealing fire would be an exploit rather than a crime.

It is worth noting that in many myths not only was fire stolen, but birds marked by red or black spots among their feathers were associated with the theft. It would naturally be supposed that the Hawaiians living in a volcanic country with ever-flowing fountains of lava, would connect their fire myths with some volcano when relating the story of the origin of fire. But like the rest of the Polynesians, they found fire in trees rather than in rivers of melted rock. They must have brought their fire legends and fire customs with them when they came to the islands of active volcanoes.

Flint rocks as fire producers are not found in the Hawaiian myths, nor in the stories from the island groups related to the Hawaiians. Indians might see the fleeing buffalo strike fire from the stones under his hard hoofs. The Tartars might have a god to teach them "the secret of the stone's edge and the iron's hardness." The Peruvians could very easily form a legend of their mythical father Guamansuri finding a way to make fire after he had seen the sling stones, thrown at his enemies, bring forth sparks of fire from the rocks against which they struck. The thunder and the lightning of later years were the sparks and the crash of stones hurled among the cloud mountains by the mighty gods.

In Australia the story is told of an old man and his daughter who lived in great darkness. After a time the father found the doorway of light through which the sun passed on his journey. He opened the door and a flood of sunshine covered the earth. His daughter looked around her home and saw numbers of serpents. She seized a staff and began to kill them. She wielded it so vigorously that it became hot in her bands. At last it broke, but the pieces rubbed against each other and flashed into sparks and flames. Thus it was learned that fire was buried in wood.

Flints were known in Europe and Asia and America, but the Polynesian looked to the banyan and kindred trees for the hidden sparks of fire. The natives of De Peyster's Island say that their ancestors learned how to make fire by seeing smoke rise from crossed branches rubbing together while trees were shaken by fierce winds.

In studying the Maui myths of the Pacific it is necessary to remember that Polynesians use "t" and "k" without distinguishing them apart, and also as in the Hawaiian Islands an apostrophe (') is often used in place of "t" or "k". Therefore the Maui Ki-i-k-i'i of Hawaii becomes the demi-god Tiki-tiki of the Gilbert Islands-or the Ti'i-ti'i of Samoa or the Tiki of New Zealand-or other islands of the great ocean. We must also remember that in the Hawaiian legends Kalana is Maui's father. This in other groups becomes Talanga or Kalanga or Karanga. Kanaloa, the great god of most of the different Polynesians, is also sometimes called the Father of Maui. It is not strange that some of the exploits usually ascribed to Maui should be in some places transferred to his father under one name or the other. On one or two groups Mafuia, an ancestress of Maui, is mentioned as finding the fire. The usual legend makes Maui the one who takes fire away from Mafuia. The story of fire finding in Polynesia sifts itself to Maui under one of his widely-accepted names, or to his father or to his ancestress-with but very few exceptions. This fact is important as showing in a very marked manner the race relationship of a vast number of the islanders of the Pacific world. From the Marshall Islands, in the west, to the Society Islands of the east; from the Hawaiian Islands in the north to the New Zealand group in the south, the footsteps of the fire finder can be traced.

The Hawaiian story of fire finding is one of the least marvelous of all the legends. Hina, Maui's mother, wanted fish. One morning early Maui saw that the great storm waves of the sea had died down and the fishing grounds could be easily reached. He awakened his brothers and with them hastened to the beach. This was at Kaupo on the island of Maui. Out into the gray shadows of the dawn they paddled.

When they were far from shore they began to fish. But Maui, looking landward, saw a fire on the mountain side.

"Behold," he cried. "There is a fire burning. Whose can this fire be?"

"Whose, indeed?" his brothers replied.

"Let us hasten to the shore and cook our food," said one.

They decided that they had better catch some fish to cook before they returned. Thus, in the morning, before the hot sun drove the fish deep down to the dark recesses of the sea, they fished until a bountiful supply lay in the bottom of the canoe.

When they came to land, Maui leaped out and ran up the mountain side to get the fire. For a long, long time they had been without fire. The great volcano Haleakala above then, had become extinct-and they had lost the coals they had tried to keep alive. They had eaten fruits and uncooked roots and the shell fish broken from the reef-and sometimes the great raw fish from the far-out ocean. But now they hoped to gain living fire and cooked food.

But when Maui rushed up toward the cloudy pillar of smoke he saw a family of birds scratching the fire out. Their work was finished and they flew away just as he reached the place.

Maui and his brothers watched for fire day after day-but the birds, the curly-tailed Alae (or the mudhens) made no fire. Finally the brothers went fishing once more--but when they looked toward the mountain, again they saw flames and smoke. Thus it happened to them again and again.

Maui proposed to his brothers that they go fishing leaving him to watch the birds. But the Alae counted the fishermen and refused to build a fire for the hidden one who was watching them. They said among themselves, "Three are in the boat and we know not where the other one is, we will make no fire today."

So the experiment failed again and again. If one or two remained or if all waited on the land there would be no fire--but the dawn which saw the four brothers in the boat, saw also the fire on the land.

Finally Maui rolled some kapa cloth together and stuck it up in one end of the canoe so that it would look like a man. He then concealed himself near the haunt of the mud-hens, while his brothers went out fishing. The birds counted the figures in the boat and then started to build a heap of wood for the fire.

Maui was impatient--and just as the old Alae began to select sticks with which to make the flames he leaped swiftly out and caught her and held her prisoner. He forgot for a moment that he wanted the secret of fire making. In his anger against the wise bird his first impulse was to taunt her and then kill her for hiding the secret of fire.

But the Alae cried out: "If you are the death of me-my secret will perish also-and you cannot have fire."

Maui then promised to spare her life if she would tell him what to do.

Then came the contest of wits. The bird told the demi-god to rub the stalks of water plants together. He guarded the bird and tried the plants. Water instead of fire ran out of the twisted stems. Then she told him to rub reeds together-but they bent and broke and could make no fire. He twisted her neck until she was half dead-then she cried out: "I have hidden the fire in a green stick."

Maui worked hard, but not a spark of fire appeared. Again he caught his prisoner by the head and wrung her neck, and she named a kind of dry wood. Maui rubbed the sticks together, but they only became warm. The neck twisting process was resumed and repeated again and again, until the mud-hen was almost dead-and Maui had tried tree after tree. At last Maui found fire. Then as the flames rose he said: "There is one more thing to rub." He took a fire stick and rubbed the top of the head of his prisoner until the feathers fell off and the raw flesh appeared. Thus the Hawaiian mud-hen and her descendants have ever since had bald heads, and the Hawaiians have had the secret of fire making.

Another Hawaiian legend places the scene of Maui's contest with the mud-hens a little inland of the town of Hilo on the Island of Hawaii. There are three small extinct craters very near each other known as The Halae Hills. One, the southern or Puna side of the hills, is a place called Pohaku-nui. Here dwelt two brother birds of the Alae family. They were gods. One had the power of fire making. Here at Pohaku-nui they were accustomed to kindle a fire and bake their dearly loved food-baked bananas. Here Maui planned to learn the secret of fire. The birds had kindled the fire and the bananas were almost done, when the elder Alae called to the younger: "Be quick, here comes the swift son of Hina."

The birds scratched out the fire, caught the bananas and fled. Maui told his mother he would follow them until he learned the secret of fire. His mother encouraged him because he was very strong and very swift. So he followed the birds from place to place as they fled from him, finding new spots on which to make their fires. At last they came to the island Oahu. There he saw a great fire and a multitude of birds gathered around it, chattering loudly and trying to hasten the baking of the bananas. Their incantation was this: "Let us cook quick." "Let us cook quick." "The swift child of Hina will come."

Maui's mother Hina had taught him how to know the fire-maker. "If you go up to the fire, you will find many birds. Only one is the guardian. This is the small, young Alae. His name is Alae-iki: Only this one knows how to make fire." So whenever Maui came near to the fire-makers he always sought for the little Alae. Sometimes he made mistakes and soirietimes almost captured the one he desired. At Waianae he leaped suddenly among the birds. They scattered the fire, and the younger bird tried to snatch his banana from the coals and flee, but Maui seized him and began to twist his neck. The bird cried out, warning Maui not to kill him or he would lose the secret of fire altogether. Maui was told that the fire was made from a banana stump. He saw the bananas roasting and thought this was reasonable. So, according to directions, he began to rub together pieces of the banana. The bird hoped for an unguarded moment when be might escape, but Maui was very watchful and was also very angry when he found that rubbing only resulted in squeezing out juice. Then he twisted the neck of the bird and was told to rub the stem of the taro plant. This also was so green that it only produced water. Then he was so angry that he nearly rubbed the head of the bird off-and the bird, fearing for its life, told the truth and taught Maui how to find the wood in which fire dwelt.

They learned to draw out the sparks secreted in different kinds of trees. The sweet sandalwood was one of these fire trees. Its Hawaiian name is "Ili-ahi"--the "ili" (bark) and "ahi" (fire), the bark in which fire is concealed.

A legend of the Society Islands is somewhat similar. Ina (Hina) promised to aid Maui in finding fire for the islanders. She sent him into the under-world to find Tangaroa (Kanaloa). This god Tangaroa held fire in his possession--Maui was to know him by his tattooed face. Down the dark path through the long eaves Maui trod swiftly until he found the god. Maui asked him for fire to take up to men. The god gave him a lighted stick and sent him away. But Maui put the fire out and went back again after fire. This he did several times, until the wearied giver decided to teach the intruder the art of fire making. He called a white duck to aid him. Then, taking two sticks of dry wood, he gave the under one to the bird and rapidly moved the upper stick across the under until fire came, Maui seized the upper stick, after it had been charred in the flame, and burned the head of the bird back of each eye. Thus were made the black spots which mark the head of the white duck. Then arose a quarrel between Tangaroa and Maui--but Maui struck down the god, and, thinking he had killed him, carried away the art of making fire. His father and mother made inquiries about their relative-Maui hastened back to the fire fountain and made the spirit return to the body-then, coming back to Ina, he bade her good bye and carried the fire sticks to the upper-world. The Hawaiians, and probably others among the Polynesians, felt that any state of unconsciousness was a form of death in which the spirit left the body, but was called back by prayers and incantations. Therefore, when Maui restored the god to consciousness, he was supposed to have made the spirit released by death return into the body and bring it back to life.

In the Samoan legends as related by G. Turner, the name Ti'iti'i is used. This is the same as the second name found in Maui Ki'i-ki'i. The Samoan legend of Ti'iti'i is almost identical with the New Zealand fire myth of Maui, and is very similar to the story coming from the Hervey Islands from Savage Island and also from the Tokelau and other island groups. The Samoan story says that the home of Mafuie the earthquake god was in the land of perpetual fire. Maui's or Ti'iti'i's father Talanga (Kalana) was also a resident of the under-world and a great friend of the earthquake god.

Ti'iti'i watched his father as he left his home in the upper-world. Talanga approached a perpendicular wall of rock, said some prayer or incantation-and passed through a door which immediately closed after him. (This is a very near approach to the "open sesame" of the Arabian Nights stories.)

Ti'iti'i went to the rock, but could not find the way through. He determined to conceal himself the next time so near that he could hear his father's words.

After some days he was able to catch all the words uttered by his father as he knocked on the stone door-

	 
		"O rock! divide.
		 I am Talanga,
		 I come to work
		 On my land
		 Given by Mafuie."
		
		 Ti'iti'i went to the perpendicular wall and imitating his father's voice called for a rock to open. Down through a cave he passed until he found his father working in the under-world.

The astonished father, learning how his son came, bade him keep very quiet and work lest he arouse the anger of Mafuie. So for a time the boy labored obediently by his father's side.

In a little while the boy saw smoke and asked what it was. The father told him that it was the smoke from the fire of Mafuie, and explained what fire would do.

The boy determined to get some fire-he went to the place from which the smoke arose and there found the god, and asked him for fire. Mafuie gave him fire to carry to his father. The boy quickly had an oven prepared and the fire placed in it to cook some of the taro they had been cultivating. Just as everything was ready an earthquake god came up and blew the fire out and scattered the stones of the oven.

Then Ti'iti'i was angry and began to talk to Mafuie. The god attacked the boy, intending to punish him severely for daring to rebel against the destruction of the fire.

What a battle there was for a time in the underworld! At last Ti'iti'i seized one of the arms of Mafuie and broke it off. He caught the other arm and began to twist and bend it.

Mafuie begged the boy to spare him. His right arm was gone. How could he govern the earthquakes if his left arm were torn off also? It was his duty to hold Samoa level and not permit too many earthquakes. It would be hard to do that even with one arm-but it would be impossible if both arms were gone.

Ti'iti'i listened to the plea and demanded a reward if he should spare the left arm. Alafuie offered Ti'iti'i one hundred wives. The boy did not want them.

Then the god offered to teach him the secret of fire finding to take to the upper-world.

The boy agreed to accept the fire secret, and thus learned that the gods in making the earth had concealed fire in various trees for men to discover in their own good time, and that this fire could be brought out by rubbing pieces of wood together.

The people of Samoa have not had much faith in Mafuie's plea that he needed his left arm in order to keep Samoa level. They say that Mafuie has a long stick or handle to the world under the islands-and when he is angry or wishes to frighten them he moves this handle and easily shakes the islands. When an earthquake comes, they give thanks to Ti'iti'i for breaking off one arm-because if the god had two arms they believe he would shake them unmercifully.

One legend of the Hervey Islands says that Maui and his brothers had been living on uncooked food-but learned that their mother sometimes had delicious food which had been cooked. They learned also that fire was needed in order to cook their food. Then Alatii wanted fire and watched his mother.

Maui's mother was the guardian of the way to the invisible world. When she desired to pass from her home to the other world, she would open a black rock and pass inside. Thus she went to Hawaiki, the under-world. Maui planned to follow her, but first studied the forms of birds that he might assume the body of the strongest and most enduring. After a time he took the shape of a pigeon and, flying to the black rock, passed through the door and flew down the long dark passage-way.

After a time he found the god of fire living in a bunch of banyan sticks. He changed himself into the form of a man and demanded the secret of fire.

The fire god agreed to give Maui fire if he would permit himself to be tossed into the sky by the god's strong arms.

Maui agreed on condition that he should have the right to toss the fire god afterwards.

The fire-god felt certain that there would be only one exercise of strength-he felt that he had everything in his own hands-so readily agreed to the tossing contest. It was his intention to throw his opponent so high that when he fell, if he ever did fall, there would be no antagonist uncrushed.

He seized Maui in his strong arms and, swinging him back and forth, flung him upward-but the moment Maui left his hands he changed himself into a feather and floated softly to the ground.

Then the boy ran swiftly to the god and seized him by the legs and lifted him up. Then he began to increase in size and strength until he had lifted the fire god very high. Suddenly he tossed the god upward and caught him as he fell--again and again--until the bruised and dizzy god cried enough, and agreed to give the victor whatever he demanded.

Maui asked for the secret of fire producing. The god taught him how to rub the dry sticks of certain kinds of trees together, and, by friction, produce fire, and especially how fire could be produced by rubbing fire sticks in the fine dust of the banyan tree.

A Society Island legend says Maui borrowed a sacred red pigeon, belonging to one of the gods, and, changing himself into a dragon fly, rode this pigeon through a black rock into Avaiki (Hawaiki), the fire-land of the under-world. He found the god of fire, Mau-ika, living in a house built from a banyan tree. Mau-ika taught Maui the kinds of wood into which when fire went out on the earth a fire goddess had thrown sparks in order to preserve fire. Among these were the "au" (Hawaiian hau), or "the lemon hibiscus"--the "argenta," the "fig" and the "banyan." She taught him also how to make fire by swift motion when rubbing the sticks of these trees. She also gave him coals for his present need.

But Maui was viciously mischievous and set the banyan house on fire, then mounted his pigeon and fled toward the upper-world. But the flames hastened after him and burst out through the rock doors into the sunlit land above-as if it were a volcanic eruption.

The Tokelau Islanders say that Talanga (Kalana) known in other groups of islands as the father of Maui, desired fire in order to secure warmth and cooked food. He went down, down, very far down in the caves of the earth. In the lower world he found Mafuika--an old blind woman, who was the guardian of fire. He told her he wanted fire to take back to men. She refused either to give fire or to teach how to make it. Talanga threatened to kill her, and finally persuaded her to teach how to make fire in any place he might dwell-and the proper trees to use, the fire-yielding trees. She also taught him how to cook food-and also the kind of fish he should cook, and the kinds which should be eaten raw. Thus mankind learned about food as well as fire.

The Savage Island legend adds the element of danger to Maui's mischievous theft of fire. The lad followed his father one day and saw him pull up a bunch of reeds and go down into the fire-land beneath. Maui hastened down to see what his father was doing.

Soon he saw his oportunity to steal the secret of fire. Then he caught some fire and started for the upperworld.

His father caught a glimpse of the young thief and tried to stop him.

Maui ran up the passage through the black cave--bushes and trees bordered his road.

The father hastened after his son and was almost ready to lay hands upon him, when Maui set fire to the bushes. The flames spread rapidly, catching the underbrush and the trees on all sides and burst out in the face of the pursuer. Destruction threatened the under-world, but Maui sped along his way. Then he saw that the fire was chasing him. Bush after bush leaped into flame and hurled sparks and smoke and burning air after him. Choked and smoke-surrounded, he broke through the door of the cavern and found the fresh air of the world. But the flames followed him and swept out in great power upon the upperworld a mighty volcanic eruption.

The New Zealand legends picture Maui as putting out, in one night, all the fires of his people. This was serious mischief, and Maui's mother decided that he should go to the under-world and see his ancestress, Mahuika, the guardian of fire, and get new fire to repair the injury he had wrought. She warned him against attempting to play tricks upon the inhabitants of the lower regions.

Maui gladly hastened down the cave-path to the house of Mahuika, and asked for fire for the upperworld. In some way he pleased her so that she pulled off a finger nail in which fire was burning and gave it to him. As soon as he had gone back to a place where there was water, he put the fire out and returned to Mahuika, asking another gift, which he destroyed. This he did for both hands and feet until only one nail remained. Maui wanted this. Then Mahuika became angry and threw the last finger nail on the ground. Fire poured out and laid hold of everything. Maui ran up the path to the upper-world, but the fire was swifter-footed. Then Maui changed himself into an eagle and flew high up into the air, but the fire and smoke still followed him. Then he saw water and dashed into it, but it was too hot. Around him the forests were blazing, the earth burning and the sea boiling. Maui, about to perish, called on the gods for rain. Then floods of water fell and the fire was checked. The great rain fell on Mahuika and she fled, almost drowned. Her stores of fire were destroyed, quenched by the storm. But in order to save fire for the use of men, as she fled she threw sparks into different kinds of trees where the rain could not reach them, so that when fire was needed it might be brought into the world again by rubbing together the fire sticks.

The Chatham Islanders give the following incantation, which they said was used by Maui against the fierce flood of fire which was pursuing him:

	 
		"To the roaring thunder;
		 To the great rain-the long rain;
		 To the drizzling rain-the small rain;
		 To the rain pattering on the leaves.
		 These are the storms-the storms
		 Cause them to fall;
		 To pour in torrents."
		
		 The legend of Savage Island places Maui in the role of fire-maker. He has stolen fire in the underworld. His father tries to catch him, but Maui sets fire to the bushes by the path until a great conflagration is raging which pursues him to the upper-world.

Some legends make Maui the fire-teacher as well as the fire-finder. He teaches men how to use hardwood sticks in the fine dry dust on the bark of certain trees, or how to use the fine fibre of the palm tree to catch sparks.

In Tahiti the fire god lived in the "Hale-a-o-a," or House of the Banyan. Sometimes human sacrifices were placed upon the sacred branches of this tree of the fire god.

In the Bowditch or Fakaofa Islands the goddess of fire when conquered taught not only the method of making fire by friction but also what fish were to be cooked and what were to be eaten raw.

Thus some of the myths of Maui, the mischievous, finding fire are told by the side of the inrolling surf, while natives of many islands, around their poi bowls, rest in the shade of the far-reaching boughs and thick foliage of the banyan and other fire producing trees.

     Legends of Maui, A Demi-God of Polynesia, by W. D. Westervelt, [1910], at sacred-texts.com

  

VI.

 

MAUI THE SKILLFUL.

ACCORDING to the New Zealand legends there were six Mauis-the Hawaiians counted four. They were a band of brothers. The older five were known as "the forgetful Mauis." The tricky and quick-witted youngest member of the family was called Maui te atamai-"Maui the skillful."

He was curiously accounted for in the New Zealand under-world. When he went down through the long cave to his ancestor's home to find fire, he was soon talked about. "Perhaps this is the man about whom so much is said in the upper-world." His ancestress from whom be obtained fire recognized him as the man called "the deceitful Maui." Even his parents told him once, "We know you are a tricky fellow-more so than any other man." One of the New Zealand fire legends while recording his flight to the under-world and his appearance as a bird, says: "The men tried to spear him, and to catch him in nets. At last they cried out, 'Maybe you are the man whose fame is great in the upper-world.' At once he leaped to the ground and appeared in the form of a man."

He was not famous for inventions, but he was always ready to improve upon anything which was already in existence. He could take the sun in hand and make it do better work. He could tie the moon so that it had to swim back around the island to the place in the ocean from which it might rise again, and go slowly through the night.

His brothers invented a slender, straight and smooth spear with which to kill birds. He saw the fluttering, struggling birds twist themselves off the smooth point and escape. He made a good light bird spear and put notches in it and kept most of the birds stuck. His brothers finally examined his spear and learned the reason for its superiority. In the same way they learned how to spear fish. They could strike and wound and sometimes kill--but they could not with their smooth spears draw the fish from the waters of the coral caves. But Maui the youngest made barbs, so that the fish could not easily shake themselves loose. The others soon made their spears like his.

The brothers were said to have invented baskets in which to trap eels, but many eels escaped. Maui improved the basket by secretly making an inside partition as well as a cover, and the eels were securely trapped. It took the brothers a long time to learn the real difference between their baskets and his. One of the family made a basket like his and caught many eels. Then Maui became angry and chanted a curse over him and bewildered him, then changed him into a dog.

The Manahiki Islanders have the legend that Maui made the moon, but could not get good light from it. He tried experiments and found that the sun was quite an improvernent. The sun's example stimulated the moon to shine brighter.

Once Maui became interested in tattooing and tried to make a dog look better by placing dark lines around the mouth. The legends say that one of the sacred birds saw the pattern and then marked the sky with the red lines sometimes seen at sunrise and sunset. An Hawaiian legend says that Maui tattooed his arm with a sacred name and thus that arm was strong enough to hold the sun when he lassoed it. There is a New Zealand legend in which Maui is made one of three gods who first created man and then woman from one of the man's ribs.

The Hawaiians dwelling in Hilo have many stories of Maui. They say that his home was on the northern bank of the Wailuku River. He had a strong staff made from, an ohia tree (the native apple tree). With this he punched holes through the lava, making natural bridges and boiling pools, and new channels for its sometimes obstructed waters, so that the people could go up or down the river more easily. Near one of the natural bridges is a figure of the moon carved in the rocks, referred by some of the natives to Maui.

Maui is said to have taught his brothers the different kinds of fish nets and the use of the strong fibre of the olona, which was much better than cocoanut threads.

The New Zealand stories relate the spear-throwing contests of Maui and his brothers. As children, however, they were not allowed the use of wooden spears. They took the stems of long, heavy reeds and threw them at each other, but Maui's reeds were charmed into stronger and harder fibre so that he broke his mother's house and made her recognize him as one of her children. He had been taken away as soon as he was born by the gods to whom he was related. When he found his way back home his mother paid no attention to him. Thus by a spear thrust he won a horne.

The brothers all made fish hooks, but Maui the youngest made two kinds of hooks-one like his brothers' and one with a sharp barb. His brothers' hooks were smooth so that it was difficult to keep the fish from floundering and shaking themselves off, but they noticed that the fish were held by Maui's hook better than by theirs. Maui was not inclined to devote himself to hard work, and lived on his brothers as much as possible--but when driven out by his wife or his mother he would catch more fish than the other fishermen. They tried to examine his hooks, but he always changed his hooks so that they could not see any difference between his and theirs. At such times they called him the mischievous one and tried to leave him behind while they went fishing. They were, however, always ready to give him credit for his improvements. They dealt generously with him when they learned what he had really accom, plished. When they caught him with his barbed hook they forgot the past and called him "ke atamai"--the skillful.

The idea that fish hooks made from the jawbones of human beings were better than others, seemed to have arisen at first from the angle formed in the lower jawbone. Later these human fish hooks were considered sacred and therefore possessed of magic powers. The greater sanctity and power belonged to the bones which bore more especial relation to the owner. Therefore Maui's "magic hook," with which he fished up islands, was made from the jawbone of his ancestress Malmika. It is also said that in order to have powerful hooks for every-day fishing he killed two of his children. Their right eyes he threw tip into the sky to become stars. One became the morning and the other the evening star.

The idea that the death of any members of the family must not stand in the way of obtaining magical power, has prevailed throughout Polynesia. From this angle in the jawbone Maui must have conceived the idea of making a hook with a piece of bone or shell which should be fastened to the large bone at a very sharp angle, thus making a kind of barb. Hooks like this have been made for ages among the Polynesians.

Maui and his brothers went fishing for eels with bait strung on the flexible rib of a cocoanut leaf. The stupid brothers did not fasten the ends of the string. Therefore the eels easily slipped the bait off and escaped. But Maui made the ends of his string fast, and captured many eels.

The little things which others did not think about were the foundation of Maui's fame. Upon these little things he built his courage to snare the sun and seek fire for mankind.

In a New Zealand legend, quoted by Edward Tregear, Maui is called Maui-maka-walu, or "Maui with eyes eight." This eight-eyed Maui would be allied to the Hindoo deities who with their eight eyes face the four quarters of the world-thus possessing both insight into the affairs of men and foresight into the future.

Fornander, the Hawaiian ethnologist, says: "In Hawaiian mythology, Kamapuaa, the demigod opponent of the goddess Pele, is described as having eight eyes and eight feet; and in the legends Maka-walu, 'eight-eyed,' is a frequent epithet of gods and chiefs." He notes this coincidence with the appearance of some of the principal Hindoo deities as having some bearing upon the origin of the Polynesians. It may be that a comparative study of the legends of other islands of the Pacific by some student will open up other new and important facts.

In Tahiti, on the island Raiatea, a high priest or prophet lived in the long, long ago. He was known as Maui the prophet of Tahiti. He was probably not Maui the demigod. Nevertheless he was represented as possessing very strange prophetical powers.

According to the historian Ellis, who previous to 1830 spent eight years in the Society and Hawaiian Islands, this prophet Maui clearly prophesied the coming of an outriggerless canoe from some foreign land. An outrigger is a log which so balances a canoe that it can ride safely through the treacherous surf.

The chiefs and prophets charged him with stating the impossible.

He took his wooden calabash and placed it in a pool of water as an illustration of the way such a boat should float.

Then with the floating bowl before him he uttered the second prophecy, that boats without line to tie the sails to the masts, or the masts to the ships, should also come to Tahiti.

When English ships under Captain Wallis and Captain Cook, in the latter part of the eighteenth century, visited these islands, the natives cried out, "O the canoes of Maui--the outriggerless canoes."

Passenger steamships, and the men-of-war from the great nations, have taught the Tahitians that boats without sails and masts can cross the great ocean, and again they have recurred to the words of the prophet Maui, and have exclaimed, "O the boats without sails and masts." This rather remarkable prophecy could easily have occurred to Maui as he saw a wooden calabash floating over rough waters.

Maui's improvement upon nature's plan in regard to certain birds is also given in the legends as a proof of his supernatural powers.

White relates the story as follows: "Maui requested some birds to go and fetch water for him. The first one would not obey, so he threw it into the water. He requested another bird to go-and it refused, so he threw it into the fire, and its feathers were burnt. But the next bird obeyed, but could not carry the water, and he rewarded it by making the feathers of the fore part of its head white. Then he asked another bird to go, and it filled its ears with water and brought it to Maui, who drank, and then pulled the bird's legs and made them long in payment for its act of kindness."

Diffenbach says: "Maui, the Adam of New Zealand, left the cat's cradle to the New Zealanders as an inheritance." The name "Whai" was given to the game. It exhibited the various steps of creation according to Maori mythology. Every change in the cradle shows some act in creation. Its various stages were called "houses." Diffenbach says again: "In this game of Maui they are great proficients. It is a game like that called cat's cradle in Europe. It is intimately connected with their ancient traditions and in the different figures which the cord is made to assume whilst held on both hands, the outline of their different varieties of houses, canoes or figures of men and women are imagined to be represented." One writer connects this game with witchcraft, and says it was brought from the under-world. Some parts of the puzzle show the adventures of Maui, especially his attempt to win immortality for men.

In New Zealand it was said Maui found a large, fine-grained stone block, broke it in pieces, and from the fragments learned how to fashion stone implements.

White also tells the New Zealand legend of Maui and the winds.

"Maui caught and held all the winds save the west wind. He put each wind into a cave, so that it might not blow. He sought in vain for the west wind, but could not find from whence it came. If he had found the cave in which it stayed he would have closed the entrance to that cave with rocks. When the west wind blows lightly it is because Maui has got near to it, and has nearly caught it, and it has gone into its home, the cave, to escape him. When the winds of the south, east, and north blow furiously it is because the rocks have been removed by the stupid people who could not learn the lessons taught by Maui. At other times Maui allows these winds to blow in hurricanes to punish that people, and also that he may ride on these furious winds in search of the west wind."

In the Hawaiian legends Maui is represented as greatly interested in making and flying kites. His favorite place for the sport was by the boiling pools of the Wailuku river near Hilo. He had the winds under his control and would call for them to push his kites in the direction he wished. His incantation calling up the winds is given in this Maui proverb-

	 
		"Strong wind come,
		 Soft wind come."
		
		 White in his "Ancient History of the Maoris," relates some of Maui's experiences with the people whom he found on the islands brought up from the under-world. On one island he found a sand house with eight hundred gods living in it. Apparently Maui discovered islands with inhabitants, and was reported to have fished them up out of the depths of the ocean. Fishing was sailing over the ocean until distant lands were drawn near or "fished up."

Maui walked over the islands and found men living on them and fires burning near their homes. He evidently did not know much about fire, for he took it in his hands. He was badly burned and rushed into the sea. Down he dived under the cooling waters and came up with one of the New Zealand islands on his shoulders. But his hands were still burning, so wherever he held the island it was set on fire.

These fires are still burning in the secret recesses of the volcanoes, and sometimes burst out in flowing lava. Then Maui paid attention to the people whom he had fished up. He tried to teach them, but they did not learn as he thought they should. He quickly became angry and said, "It is a waste of light for the sun to shine on such stupid people." So he tried to hold his hands between them and the sun, but the rays of the sun were too many and too strong; there fore, he could not shut them out. Then he tried the moon and managed to make it dark a part of the time each month. In this way he made a little trouble for the stupid people.

There are other hints in the legends concerning Maui's desire to be revenged upon any one who incurred his displeasure. It was said that Maui for a time lived in the heavens above the earth. Here he had a foster brother Maru. The two were cultivating the fields. Maru sent a snowstorm over Maui's field. (It would seem as if this might be a Polynesian memory of a cold land where their ancestors knew the cold winter, or a lesson learned from the snow-caps of high mountains.) At any rate, the snow blighted Maui's crops. Maui retaliated by praying for rain to destroy Maru's fields. But Maru managed to save a part of his crops. Other legends make Maui the aggressor. At the last, however, Maui became very angry. The foster parents tried to soothe the two men by saying, "Live in peace with each other and do not destroy each other's food." But Maui was implacable and lay in wait for his foster brother, who was in the habit of carrying fruit and grass as an offering to the gods of a temple situated on the summit of a hill. Here Maui killed Maru and then went away to the earth.

This legend is told by three or four different, tribes of New Zealand and is very similar to the Hebrew story of Cain and Abel. At this late day it is difficult to say definitely whether or not it owes its origin to the early touch of Christianity upon New Zealand when white men first began to live with the natives. It is somewhat similar to stories found in the Tonga Islands and also in the Hawaiian group, where a son of the first gods, or rather of the first men, kills a brother. In each case there is the shadow of the Biblical idea. It seems safe to infer that such legends are not entirely drawn from contact with Christian civilization. The natives claim that these stories are very ancient, and that their fathers knew them before the white men sailed on the Pacific.

     Legends of Maui, A Demi-God of Polynesia, by W. D. Westervelt, [1910], at sacred-texts.com

  

VII.

 

MAUI AND TUNA.

WHEN Maui returned from the voyages in which he discovered or "fished up" from the ocean depths new islands, he gave deep thought to the things he had found. As the islands appeared to come out of the water he saw they were inhabited. There were houses and stages for drying and preserving food. He was greeted by barking dogs. Fires were burning, food cooking and people working. He evidently had gone so far away from home that a strange people was found. The legend which speaks of the death of his brothers, "eaten" by the great fish drawn up from the floor of the sea, may very easily mean that the new people killed and ate the brothers.

Maui apparently learned some new lessons, for on his return he quickly established a home of his own, and determined to live after the fashion of the families in the new islands.

Maui sought Hina-a-te-lepo, "daughter of the swamp," and secured her as his wife. The New Zealand tribes tell legends which vary in different localities about this woman Hina. She sometimes bore the name Rau-kura--"The red plume."

She cared for his thatched house as any other Polynesian woman was in the habit of doing. She attempted the hurried task of cooking his food before he snared the sun and gave her sufficient daylight for her labors.

They lived near the bank of a river from which Hina was in the habit of bringing water for the household needs.

One day she went down to the stream with her calabash. She was entwined with wreaths of leaves and flowers, as was the custom among Polynesian women. While she was standing on the bank, Tuna-roa, "the long eel," saw her. He swam up to the bank and suddenly struck her and knocked her into the water and covered her with slime from the blow given by his tail.

Hina escaped and returned to her home, saying nothing to Maui about the trouble. But the next day, while getting water, she was again overthrown and befouled by the slime of Tuna-roa.

Then Hina became angry and reported the trouble to Maui.

Maui decided to punish the long eel and started out to find his hiding place. Somie of the New Zealand legends as collected by White, state that Tuna-roa was a very smooth skinned chief, who lived on the opposite bank of the stream, and, seeing Hina, had insulted her.

When Maui saw this chief, he caught two pieces of wood over which he was accustomed to slide his canoe into the sea. These he carried to the stream and laid them from bank to bank as a bridge over which he might entice Tuna-roa to cross.

Maui took his stone axe, Ma-Tori-Tori, "the severer," and concealed himself near the bank of the river.

When "the long eel" had crossed the stream, Maui rushed out and killed him with a mighty blow of the stone axe, cutting the head from the body.

Other legends say that Maui found Tuna-roa living as an eel in a deep water hole, in a swamp on the seacoast of Tata-a, part of the island Ao-tea-roa. Other stories located Tuna-roa in the river near Maui's home.

Maui saw that he could not get at his enemy without letting off the water which protected him.

Therefore into the forest went Maui, and with sacred ceremonies, selected trees from the wood of which he prepared tools and weapons.

Meanwhile, in addition to the insult given to Hina, Tuna-roa had caught and devoured two of Maui's children, which made Maui more determined to kill him.

Maui made the narrow spade (named by the Maoris of New Zealand the "ko," and by the Hawaiians "o-o") and the sharp spears, with which to pierce either the earth or his enemy. These spears and spades were consecrated to the work of preparing a ditch by which to draw off the water protecting "the long eel."

The work of trench-making was accomplished with many incantations and prayers. The ditch was named "The sacred digging," and was tabooed to all other purposes except that of catching Tuna-roa.

Across this ditch Maui stretched a strong net, and then began a new series of chants and ceremonies to bring down an abundance of rain. Soon the flood came and the overflowing waters rushed down the sacred ditch. The walls of the deep pool gave way and "the long eel" was carried down the trench into the waiting net. Then there was commotion. Tuna-roa was struggling for freedom.

Maui saw him and hastened to grasp his stone axe, "the severer." Hurrying to the net, he struck Tuna-roa a terrible blow, and cut off the head. With a few more blows, he cut the body in pieces. The head and tail were carried out into the sea. The head became fish and the tail became the great conger-eel. Other parts of the body became sea monsters. But some parts which fell in fresh water became the common eels. From the hairs of the head came certain vines and creepers among the plants.

After the death of Tuna-roa the offspring of Maui were in no danger of being killed and soon multiplied into a large family.

Another New Zealand legend related by White says that Maui built a sliding place of logs, over which Tuna-roa must pass when coming from the river.

Maui also made a screen behind which he could secrete himself while watching for Tuna-roa.

He commanded Hina to come down to the river and wait on the bank to attract Tuna-roa. Soon the long eel was seen in the water swimming near to Hina. Hina went to a place back of the logs which Maui had laid down.

Tuna-roa came towards her, and began to slide down the skids.

Maui sprang out from his hiding place and killed Tuna-roa with his axe, and cut him in pieces.

The tail became the conger-eel. Parts of his body became fresh-water eels. Some of the blood fell upon birds and always after marked them with red spots. Some of the blood was thrown into certain trees, making this wood always red. The muscles became vines and creepers.

From this time the children of Maui caught and ate the eels of both salt and fresh water. Eel traps were made, and Maui taught the people the proper chants or incantations to use when catching eels.

This legend of Maui and the long eel was found by White in a number of forms among the different tribes of New Zealand, but does not seem to have had currency in many other island groups.

In Turner's "Samoa" a legend is related which was probably derived from the Maui stories and yet differs in its romantic results. The Samoans say that among their ancient ones dwelt a woman named Sina. Sina among the Polynesians is the same as Hina--the "h" is softened into "s". She captured a small eel and kept it as a pet. It grew large and strong and finally attacked and bit her. She fled, but the eel followed her everywhere. Her father came to her assistance and raised high mountains between the eel and herself.

But the eel passed over the barrier and pursued her. Her mother raised a new series of mountains. But again the eel surmounted the difficulties and attempted to seize Sina. She broke away from him and ran on and on. Finally she wearily passed through a village. The people asked her to stay and eat with them, but she said they could only help her by delivering her from the pursuing eel. The inhabitants of that village were afraid of the eel and refused to fight for her. So she ran on to another place. Here the chief offered her a drink of water and promised to kill the eel for her. He prepared awa, a stupefying drink, and put poison in it. When the eel came along the chief asked him to drink. He took the awa and prepared to follow Sina. When he came to the place where she was the pains of death had already seized him. While dying he begged her to bury his head by her home. This she did, and in time a plant new to the islands sprang up. It became a tree, and finally produced a cocoanut, whose two eyes could continually look into the face of Sina.

Tuna, in the legends of Fiji, was a demon of the sea. He lived in a deep sea cave, into which he sometimes shut himself behind closed doors of coral. When he was hungry, he swam through the ocean shadows, always watching the restless surface. When a canoe passed above him, he would throw himself swiftly through the waters, upset the canoe, and seize some of the boatmen and devour them. He was greatly feared by all the fishermen of the Fijian coasts.

Roko-a mo-o or dragon god-in his journey among the islands, stopped at a village by the sea and asked for a canoe and boatmen. The people said: "We have nothing but a very old canoe out there by the water." He went to it and found it in a very bad condition. He put it in the water, and decided that he could use it. Then he asked two men to go with him and paddle, but they refused because of fear, and explained this fear by telling the story of the water demon, who continually sought the destruction of this canoe, and also their own death. Roko encouraged them to take him to wage battle with Tuna, telling them he would destroy the monster. They paddled until they were directly over Tuna's cave. Roko told them to go off to one side and wait and watch, saying: "I am going down to see this Tuna. If you see red blood boil up through the water, you may be sure that Tuna has been killed. If the blood is black, then you will know that he has the victory and I am dead."

Roko leaped into the water and went down-down to the door of the cave. The coral doors were closed. He grasped them in his strong hands and tore them open, breaking them in pieces. Inside he found cave after cave of coral, and broke his way through until at last he awoke Tuna. The angry demon cried: "Who is that?" Roko answered: "It is I, Roko, alone. Who are you?"

Tuna aroused himself and demanded Roko's business and who guided him to that place. Roko replied: "No one has guided me. I go from place to place, thinking that there is no one else in the world."

Tuna shook himself angrily. "Do you think I am nothing? This day is your last."

Roko replied: "Perhaps so. If the sky falls, I shall die."

Tuna leaped upon Roko and bit him. Then came the mighty battle of the coral caves. Roko broke Tuna into several pieces--and the red blood poured in boiling bubbles upward through the clear ocean waters, and the boatmen cried: "The blood is red the blood is red--Tuna is dead by the hand of Roko."

Roko lived for a time in Fiji, where his descendants still find their home. The people use this chant to aid them in difficulties:

	 
		My load is a red one.
		 It points in front to Kawa (Roko's home).
		 Behind, it points to Dolomo--(a village on another island)."
		
		 In the Hawaiian legends, Hina was Maui's mother rather than his wife, and Kuna (Tuna) was a mo-o, a dragon or gigantic lizard possessing miraculous powers.

Hina's home was in the large cave under the beautiful Rainbow Falls near the city of Hilo. Above the falls the bed of the river is along the channel of an ancient lava flow. Sometimes the water pours in a torrent over the rugged lava, sometimes it passes through underground passages as well as along the black river bed, and sometimes it thrusts itself into boiling pools.

Maui lived on the northern side of the river, but a chief named Kuna-moo-a dragon-lived in the boiling pools. He attacked Hina and threw a dam across the river below Rainbow Falls, intending to drown Hina in her cave. The great ledge of rock filled the river bed high up the bank on the Hilo side of the river. Hina called on Maui for aid. Maui came quickly and with mighty blows cut out a new channel for the river--the path it follows to this day. The waters sank and Hina remained unharmed in her cave.

The place where Kuna dwelt was called Wai-kuna -the Kuna water. The river in which Hina and Kuna dwelt bears the name Wailuku--"the destructive water." Maui went above Kuna's home and poured hot water into the river. This part of the myth could easily have arisen from a lava outburst on the side of the volcano above the river. The hot water swept in a flood over Kuna's home. Kuna jumped from the boiling pools over a series of small falls near his home into the river below. Here the hot water again scalded him and in pain he leaped from the river to the bank, where Maui killed him by beating him with a club. His body was washed down the river over the falls under which Hina dwelt, into the ocean.

The story of Kuna or Tuna is a legend with a foundation in the enmity between two chiefs of the long ago, and also in a desire to explain the origin of the family of eels and the invention of nets and traps.

     Legends of Maui, A Demi-God of Polynesia, by W. D. Westervelt, [1910], at sacred-texts.com

  

VIII.

 

MAUI AND HIS BROTHER-IN-LAW.

THE "Stories of Maui's Brother-in-Law," and of "Maui seeking Immortality," are not found in Hawaiian mythology. We depend upon Sir George Grey and John White for the New Zealand myths in which both of these legends occur.

Maui's sister Hina-uri married Ira-waru, who was willing to work with his skillful brother-in-law. They hunted in the forests and speared birds. They fished and farmed together. They passed through many experiences similar to those Maui's own brothers had suffered before the brother-in-law took their place as Maui's companion. They made spears together-but Maui made notched barbs for his spear ends-and slipped them off when Ira-waru came near. So for a long time the proceeds of bird hunting fell to Maui. But after a time the brother-in-law learned the secret as the brothers had before, and Maui was looked up to by his fellow hunter as the skillful one. Sometimes Ira-waru was able to see at once Maui's plan and adopt it. He discovered Maui's method of making the punga or eel baskets for catching eels.

The two hunters went to the forest to find a certain creeping vine with which to weave their eel snares. Ira-waru made a basket with a hole, by which the eels could enter, but they could turn around and go out the same way. So he very seldom caught an eel. But Maui made his basket with a long funnelshaped door, by which the eels could easily slide into the snare but could scarcely escape. He made a door in the side which he fastened tight until he wished to pour the eels out.

Ira-waru immediately made a basket like Maui. Then Maui became angry and uttered incantations over Ira-waru. The man dropped on the ground and became a dog. Maui returned home and met his sister, who charged him with sorcery concerning her husband.

Maui did not deny the exercise of his power, but taught his sister a chant and sent her out to the level country. There she uttered her chant and a strange dog with long hair came to her, barking and leaping around her. Then she knew what Maui had done. "Thus Ira-waru became the first of the long-haired dogs whose flesh has been tabooed to women."

The Tahu and Han tribes of New Zealand tell a different story. They say that Maui went to visit Ira-waru. Together they set out on a journey. After a time they rested by the wayside and became sleepy. Maui asked Ira-waru to cleanse his head. This gave him the restful, soothing touch which aided sleep. Then Maui proposed that Ira-waru sleep. Taking the head in his hands, Maui put his brother-in-law to sleep. Then by incantations he made the sleep very deep and prolonged. Meanwhile he pulled the ears and arms and limbs until they were properly lengthened. He drew out the under jaw until it had the form of a dog's mouth. He stretched the end of the backbone into a tail, and then wakened Ira-waru and drove him back when he tried to follow the path to the settlement.

Hina-uri went out and called her husband. He came to her, leaping and barking. She decided that this was her husband, and in her agony reproached Maui and wandered away.

The Rua-nui story-tellers of New Zealand say that Maui's anger was aroused against Ira-waru because he ate all the bait when they went fishing, and they could catch no fish after paddling out to the fishing grounds. When they carne to land, Maui told Irawarn to lie down in the sand as a roller over which to drag the canoe up the beach. When he was lying helpless under the canoe, Maui changed him into a dog.

The Arawa legends make the cause of Maui's anger the success of Ira-waru while fishing. Ira-waru had many fish while Maui had captured but few. The story is told thus: "Ira-waru hooked a fish and in pulling it in his line became entangled with that of Maui. Maui felt the jerking and began to pull in his line. Soon they pulled their lines close up to the canoe, one to the bow, the other to the stern, where each was sitting. Maui said: 'Let me pull the lines to me, as the fish is on my hook.' His brother-in-law said: 'Not so; the fish is on mine.' But Maui said: 'Let me pull my line in.' Ira-waru did so and saw that the fish was on his hook. Then he said: 'Untwist your lines and let mine go, that I may pull the fish in.' Maui said: I will do so, but let me have time.' He took the fish off Ira-waru's hook and saw that there was a barb on the hook. He said to Ira-waru: 'Perhaps we ought to return to land! When they were dragging the canoe on shore, Maui said to Ira-waru: 'Get between the canoe and outrigger and drag.' Irawaru did so and Maui leaped on the outrigger and weighed it heavily down and crushed Ira-waru prostrate on the beach. Maui trod on him and pulled his backbone long like a tail and changed him into a dog."

Maui is said to have tattooed the muzzle of the dog with a beautiful pattern which the birds (kahui-zara, a flock of tern) used in marking the sky. From this also came the red glow which sometimes flushes the face of man.

Another Arawa version of the legend was that Mau and Ira-waru were journeying together. Ira-waru wa gluttonous and ate the best food. At last Maui determined to punish his companion. By incantation lengthened the way until Ira-waru became faint an weary. Maui had provided himself with a little food and therefore was enabled to endure the long way. While Ira-waru slept Maui trod on his backbone and lengthened it and changed the arms and limbs into the legs of a dog. When Hina-uri saw the state of her husband she went into the thatched house by which Ira-waru had so often stood watching the hollow log in which she dried the fish and preserved the birds speared in the mountains. She bound her girdle and hala-leaf apron around her and went down to the sea to drown herself, that her body might be eaten by the monsters of the sea. When she came to the shell-covered beach, she sat down and sang her death song--

	 
		"I weep, I call to the steep billows of the sea
		 And to him, the great, the ocean god;
		 To monsters, all now hidden,
		 To come and bury me,
		 Who now am wrapped in mourning.
		 Let the waves wear their mourning, too,
		 And sleep as sleeps the dead."
		
		
			 
				-Ancient Maui Chant of New Zealand.
				
				   Then Hina-uri threw herself into the sea and was borne on the waves many moons, at last drifting to shore, to be found by two fishermen. They carried the body off to the fire and warmed it back to life. They brushed off the sea moss and sea weeds and rubbed her until she awoke.

Soon they told their chief, Tini-rau, what a beautiful woman they had found in the sea. He came and took her away to make her one of his wives. But the other wives were jealous and drove Hina-uri away from the chief's houses.

Another New Zealand legend says that Hina came to the sea and called for a little fish to aid her in going away from the island. It tried to carry her, but was too weak. Hina struck it with her open hand. It had striped sides forever after. She tried a larger fish, but fell off before they had gone far from shore. Her blow gave this fish its beautiful blue spots. Another received black spots. Another she stamped her foot upon, making it flat. At last a shark carried her far away. She was very thirsty, and broke a cocoanut on the shark's head, making a bump, which has been handed down for generations. The shark carried her to the home of the two who rescued her and gave her new strength.

Meanwhile Rupe or Maui-mua, a brother of Hinauri and Maui, grieved for his sister. He sought for her throughout the land and then launched his canoe upon the blue waters surrounding Ao-tea-roa (The Great White Land; the ancient native New Zealand) and searched the coasts. He only learned that his sister had, as the natives said, "leaped into the waters and been carried away into the heavens."

Rupe's heart filled with the desire to find and protect the frenzied sister who had probably taken a canoe and floated away, out of the horizon, seen from New Zealand coasts, into new horizons. During the Viking age of the Pacific, when many chiefs sailed long distances, visiting the most remote islands of Polynesia, they frequently spoke of breaking through from the home land into new heavens-or of climbing up the path of the sun on the waters into a new heaven. This was their poetical way of passing from horizon to horizon. The horizon around their particular island surrounded their complete world. Outside, somewhere, were other worlds and other heavens. Rupe's voyage was an idyll of the Pacific. It was one more story to be added to the prose poems of consecrated travel. It was a brother feeling through the mysteries of unknown lands for a sister, as dear to him as an Evangeline has been to other men.

From the mist-land of the Polynesian race comes this story of the trickery of Maui the learned, and the faithfulness of his older brother Maui-mua or Rupe-one of the "five forgetful Mauis." Rupe hoisted mat-sails over his canoe and thus made the winds serve him. He paddled the canoe onward through the hotlis when calms rested on glassy waves.

Thus he passed out of sight of Ao-tea-roa, away from his brothers, and out of the reach of all tricks and incantations of Maui, the mischievous. He sailed until a new island rose out of the sea to greet him. Here in a "new heaven" he found friends to care for him and prepare him for his longer journey. His restless anxiety for his sister urged him onward until days lengthened into months and months into years. He passed from the horizons of newly-discovered islands, into the horizons of circling skies around islands of which he had never heard before. Sometimes he found relatives, but more frequently his welcome came from those who could trace no historical touch in their genealogies.

Here and there, apparently, he found traces of a woman whose description answered that of his sister Hina-uri. At last he looked through the heavens upon a new world, and saw his sister in great trouble.

According to some legends the jealous wives of the great chief, Tini-rau, attack Hina, who was known among them as Hina-te-ngaru-moana, "Hina, the daughter of the ocean." Tini-rau and Hina lived away from the village of the chief until their little boy was born. When they needed food, the chief said, "Let us go to my settlement and we shall have food provided."

But Hina chanted:

	 
		"Let it down, let it down,
		 Descend, oh! descend-"
		
		 and sufficient food fell before them. After a time their frail clothing wore out, and the cold chilled them, then Hina again uttered the incantation and clothing was provided for their need.

But the jealous wives, two in number, finally heard where Hina and the chief were living, and started to see them.

Tini-rau said to Hina, "Here come my other wives--be careful how you act before them."

She replied, "If they come in anger it will be evil."

She armed herself with an obsidian or volcanic-glass knife, and waited their coming.

They tried to throw enchantments around her to, kill her. Then one of them made a blow at her with a weapon, but she turned it aside and killed her enemy with the obsidian knife.

Then the other wife made an attack, and again the obsidian knife brought death. She ripped open the stomachs of the jealous ones and showed the chief fish lines and sinkers and other property which they had eaten in the past and which Tini-rau had never been able to trace.

Another legend says that the two women came to kill Hina when they heard of the birth of her boy. For a time she was greatly terrified. Then she saw that they were coming from different directions. She attacked the nearest one with a stone and killed her. The body burst open, and was seen to be full of green stone. Then she killed the second wife in the same way, and found more green stones. "Thus, according to the legends, originated the greenstone" from which the choicest and most valuable stone tools have since been made. For a time the chief and Hina lived happily together. Then he began to neglect her and abuse her, until she cried aloud for her brother--

	 
		"O Rupe! come down.
		 Take me and my child."
		
		 Rupe assumed the form of a bird and flew down to this world in which he had found his sister. He chanted as he came down-

	 
		"It is Rupe, yes Rupe,
		 The elder brother;
		 And I am here."
		
		 He folded the mother and her boy under his wings and flew away with them. Sir George Gray relates a legend in which Maui-mua or Rupe is recorded as having carried his sister and her child to one of the new lands, found in his long voyage, where dwelt an aged relative, of chief rank, with his retainers.

Some legends say that Tini-rau tried to catch Rupe, who was compelled to drop the child in order to escape with the mother. Tini-rau caught the child and carefully cared for him until he grew to be a strong young lad.

Then he wanted to find his mother and bring her back to his father. How this was done, how Rupe took his sister back to the old chief, and how civil wars arose are not all these told in the legends of the Maoris. Thus the tricks of Maui the mischievous brought trouble for a time, but were finally overshadowed by happy homes in neighboring lands for his suffering sister and her descendants.

     Legends of Maui, A Demi-God of Polynesia, by W. D. Westervelt, [1910], at sacred-texts.com

  

IX.

 

MAUI'S KITE FLYING.

MAUI the demi-god was sometimes the Hercules of Polynesia. His exploits were fully as marvelous as those of the hero of classic mythology. He snared the sun. He pulled up islands from the ocean depths. He lifted the sky into its present position and smoothed its arched surface with his stone adze. These stories belong to all Polynesia.

There are numerous less important local myths, some of them peculiar to New Zealand, some to the Society Islands and some to the Hawaiian group.

One of the old native Hawaiians says that in the long, long ago the birds were flying around the homes of the ancient people. The flutter of their wings could be heard and the leaves and branches moved when the motion of the wings ceased and the wanderers through the air found resting places. Then came sweet music from the trees and the people marvelled. Only one of all mankind could see the winged warblers. Maui, the demi-god, had clear vision. The swift-flying wings covered with red or gold he saw. The throats tinted many colors and reflecting the sunlight with diamond sparks of varied hues he watched while they trembled with the melody of sweet bird songs. All others heard but did not see. They were blind and yet had open vision.

Sometimes the iiwi (a small red bird) fluttered in the air and uttered its shrill, happy song, and Maui saw and heard. But the bird at that time was without color in the eyes of the ancient people and only the clear voice was heard, while no speck of bird life flecked the clear sky overhead.

At one time a god from one of the other islands came to visit Maui. Each boasted of and described the beauties and merits of his island. While they were conversing, Maui called for his friends the birds. They gathered around the house and fluttered among the leaves of the surrounding trees. Soon their sweet voices filled the air on all sides. All the people wondered and worshiped, thinking they heard the fairy or menchune people. It was said that Maui had painted the bodies of his invisible songsters and for a long time had kept the delight of their flashing colors to himself. But when the visitor had rejoiced in the mysterious harmonies, Maui decided to take away whatever veil shut out the sight of these things beautiful, that his bird friends might be known and honored ever after. So he made the birds reveal themselves perched in the trees or flying in the air. The clear eyes of the god first recognized the new revelation, then all the people became dumb before the sweet singers adorned in all their brilliant tropical plumage.

The beautiful red birds, iiwi and akakani, and the birds of glorious yellow feathers, the oo and the mamo, were a joy to both eye and ear and found high places in Hawaiian legend and story, and all gave their most beautiful feathers for the cloaks and helmets of the chiefs.

The Maoris of New Zealand say that Maui could at will change himself into a bird and with his feathered friends find a home in leafy shelters. In bird form he visited the gods of the under-world. His capricious soul was sensitive to the touch of all that mysterious life of nature.

With the birds as companions and the winds as his servants Maui must soon have turned his inventive mind to kite making.

The Hawaiian myths are perhaps the only ones of the Pacific Ocean which give to any of the gods the pleasure and excitement of kite flying. Maui, after repeated experiments, made a large kite for himself. It was much larger than any house of his time or generation. He twisted a long line from the strong fibers of the native plant known as the olona. He endowed both kite and string with marvelous powers and launched the kite up toward the clouds. It rose very slowly. The winds were not lifting it into the sky.

Maui remembered that an old priest lived in Waipio valley, the largest and finest valley of the large island, Hawaii, on which he made his home.

This priest had a covered calabash in which he compelled the winds to hide when he did not wish them to play on land and sea. The priest's name was Kaleiioku, and his calabash was known as ipu-makania ka maumau, "the calabash of the perpetual winds." Maui called for the priest who had charge of the winds to open his calabash and let them come up to Hilo and blow along the Wailuku river. The natives say that the place where Maui stood was marked by the pressure of his feet in the lava rocks of the river bank as he braced himself to hold the kite against the increasing force of the winds which pushed it towards the sky. Then the enthusiasm of kite flying filled his youthful soul and he cried aloud, screaming his challenge along the coast of the sea toward Waipio--

	 
		"O winds, winds of Waipio,
		 In the calabash of Kaleiioku.
		 Come from the ipu-makard,
		 O wind, the wind of Hilo,
		 Come quickly, come with power."
		
		 Then the priest lifted the cover of the calabash of the winds and let the strong winds of Hilo escape. Along the sea coast they rushed until as they entered Hilo Bay they heard the voice of Maui calling-

	 
		"O winds, winds of Hilo,
		 Hasten and come to me."
		
		 With a tumultuous rush the strong winds turned toward the mountains. They forced their way along the gorges and palisades of the Wailuku river. They leaped into the heavens, making a fierce attack upon the monster which Maui had sent into the sky. The kite struggled as it was pushed upward by the hands of the fierce winds, but Maui rejoiced. His heart was uplifted by the joy of the conflict in which his strength to hold was pitted against the power of the winds to tear away. And again he shouted toward the sea-

	 
		"O winds, the winds of Hilo,
		 Come to the mountains, come."
		
		 The winds which had been stirring up storms on the face of the waters came inland. They dashed against Maui. They climbed the heights of the skies until they fell with full violence against their mighty foe hanging in the heavens.

The kite had been made of the strongest kapa (paper cloth) which Maui's mother could prepare. It was not torn, although it was bent backward to its utmost limit. Then the strain came on the strong cord of olona fibre. The line was stretched and strained as the kite was pushed back. Then Maui called again and again for stronger winds to come. The cord was drawn out until the kite was far above the mountains. At last it broke and the kite was tossed over the craters of the volcanoes to the land of the district of Ka-u on the other side of the island.

Then Maui was angry and hastily leaped over the mountains, which are nearly fourteen thousand feet in altitude. In a half dozen strides he had crossed the fifty or sixty miles from his home to the place where the kite lay. He could pass over many miles with a single step. His name was Maui-Mama, "Maui the Swift." When Maui returned with his kite he was more careful in calling the winds to aid him in his sport.

The people watched their wise neighbor and soon learned that the kite could be a great blessing to them. When it was soaring in the sky there was always dry and pleasant weather. It was a day for great rejoicing. They could spread out their kapa cloth to dry as long as the kite was in the sky. They could carry out their necessary work without fear of the rain. Therefore when any one saw the kite beginning to float along the mountain side he would call out joyfully, "E! Maui's kite is in the heavens." Maui would send his kite into the blue sky and then tie the line to the great black stones in the bed of the Wailuku river.

Maui soon learned the power of his kite when blown upon by a fierce wind. With his accustomed skill he planned to make use of his strong servant, and therefore took the kite with him on his journeys to the other islands, using it to aid in making swift voyages. With the wind in the right direction, the kite could pull his double canoe very easily and quickly to its destination.

Time passed, and even the demi-god died. The fish hook with which he drew the Hawaiian Islands up from the depths of the sea was allowed to lie on the lava by the Wailuku river until it became a part of the stone. The double canoe was carried far inland and then permitted to petrify by the river side. The two stones which represent the double canoe now bear the name "Waa-Kauhi," and the kite has fallen from the sky far up on the mountain side, where it still rests, a flat plot of rich land between Mauna Kea and Mauna Loa.

     Legends of Maui, A Demi-God of Polynesia, by W. D. Westervelt, [1910], at sacred-texts.com

  

X.

 

THE OAHU LEGENDS OF MAUI.

SEVERAL Maui legends have been located on the island of Oahu. They were given by Mr. Kaaia to Mr. T. G. Thrum, the publisher of what is well known in the Hawaiian Islands as "Thrum's Annual." He has kindly furnished them for added interest to the present volume. The legends have a distinctly local flavor confined entirely to Oahu. It has seemed best to reserve them for a chapter by themselves although they are chiefly variations of stories already told.

MAUI AND THE TWO GODS.

This history of Maui and his grandmother Hina begins with their arrival from foreign lands. They dwelt in Kane-ana (Kane's cave), Waianae, Oahu. This is an "ana," or cave, at Puu-o-hulu. Hina had wonderful skill in making all kinds of tapa according to the custom of the women of ancient Hawaii.

Maui went to the Koolau side and rested at Kaha-luu, a diving place in Koolaupoko. In that place there is a noted hill called Ma-eli-eli. This is the story of that hill. Maui threw up a pile of dirt and concealed rubbish under it. The two gods, Kane and Kanaloa, came along and asked Maui what he was doing. He said, "What you see. You two dig on that side to the foot of the pali, (precipice) and I will go down at Kaha-luu. If you two dig through first, you may kill me. If I get through first I will kill you," They agreed, and began to dig and throw up the dirt. Then Maui dug three times and tossed up some of the hills of that place. Kane and Kanaloa saw that Maui was digging very fast, so they put forth very great strength and threw the dirt into a hill. Meanwhile Maui ran away to the other side of the island. Thus by the aid of the gods the hill Ala-eli-eli was thrown up and received its name "eli," meaning "dig." "Ma-eli-eli" meant "the place of digging."

HOW THEY FOUND FIRE.

It was said that Maui and Hina had no fire. They where often cold and had no cooked food. Maui saw flames rising in a distant place and ran to see how they were made. When he came to that place the fire was out and some birds flew away. One of them was Ka-Alae-huapi, "the stingy Alae"--a small duck, the Hawaiian mud hen. Maui watched again and saw fire. When he went up the birds saw him coming and scattered the fire, carrying the ashes into the water; but he leaped and caught the little Alae. "Ali!" he said, "I will kill you, because you do not let me have fire." The bird replied, "If you kill me you cannot find fire." Maui said, "Where is fire?" The Alae said, "Go up on the high land where beautiful plants with large leaves are standing; rub their branches." Maui set the bird free and went inland from Halawa and found dry land taro. He began to rub the stalks, but only juice came out like water. He had no red fire. He was very angry and said, "If that lying Alae is caught again by me I will be its death."

After a while he saw the fire burning and ran swiftly. The birds saw him and cried, "The cooking is over. Here comes the swift grandchild of Hina." They scattered the fire; threw the ashes away and flew into the water. But again Maui caught the Alae and began to kill it, saying: "You gave me a plant full of water from which to get fire." The bird said, "If I die you can never find fire. I will give you the secret of fire. Take a branch of that dry tree and rub." Maui held the bird fast in one hand while he rubbed with the other until smoke and fire came out. Then he took the fire stick and rubbed the head of the bird, making a place where red and white feathers have grown ever since.

He returned to Hina and taught her how to make fire, using the two fire sticks and how to twist coconut fibre to catch the fire when it had been kindled in wood. But the Alae was not forgotten. It was called huapi, "stingy," because it selfishly kept the knowledge of fire making to itself.

MAUI CATCHING THE SUN.

Maui watched Hina making tapa. The wet tapa was spread on a long tapa board, and Hina began at one end to pound it into shape; pounding from one end to another. He noticed that sunset came by the time she had pounded to the middle of the board. The sun hurried so fast that she could only begin her work before the day was past.

He went to the hill Hele-a-ka-la, which means "journey of the sun." He thought he would catch the sun and make it miove slowly. He went up the hill and waited. When the sun began to rise, Maui made himself long, stretching up toward the sky. Soon the shining legs of the sun came up the hillside. He saw Maui and began to run swiftly, but Maui reached out and caught one of the legs, saying: "O sun, I will kill you. You are a mischief maker. You make trouble for Hina by going so fast." Then he broke the shining leg of the sun. The sufferer said, "I will change my way and go slowly-six months slow and six months faster." Thus arose the saying, "Long shall be the daily journey of the sun and he shall give light for all the people's toil." Hina learned that she could pound until she was tired while the farmers could plant and take care of their fields. Thus also this hill received its name Hele-a-ka-la. This is one of the hills of Waianae near the precipice of the hill Puu-o-hulu.

UNITING THE ISLANDS.

Maui suggested to Hina that he had better try to draw the islands together, uniting them in one land. Hina told Maui to go and see Alae-nui-a-Hina, who would tell him what to do. The Alae told him they must go to Ponaha-ke-one (a fishing place outside of Pearl Harbor) and find Ka-uniho-kahi, "the one toothed," who held the land under the sea.

Maui went back to Hina. She told him to ask his brothers to go fishing with him. They consented and pushed out into the sea. Soon Maui saw a bailing dish floating by the canoe and picked it up. It was named Hina-a-ke-ka, "Hina who fell off." They paddled to Ponaha-ke-one. When they stopped they saw, a beautiful young wornan in the boat. Then they anchored and again looked in the boat, but the young woman was gone. They saw the bailing dish and, threw it into the sea.

Maui-mua threw his hook and caught a large fish, which was seen to be a shark as they drew it to the surface. At once they cut the line. So also Mauihope and Maui-waena. At last Maui threw his hook Manai-i-ka-lani into the sea. It went down, down into the depths. Maui cried, "Hina-a-ke-ka has my hook in her hand. By her it will be made fast." Hina went down with the hook until she met Ka-uniho-kahi. She asked him to open his mouth, then threw the hook far inside and made it fast. Then she pulled the line so that Maui should know that the fish was caught. Maui fastened the line to the outrigger of the canoe and asked his brothers to paddle with all diligence, and not look back. Long, long, they paddled and were very tired. Then Maui took a paddle and dipped deep in the sea. The boat moved more swiftly through the sea. The brothers looked back and cried, "There is plenty of land behind us." The charm was broken. The hook came out of "the one toothed," and the raised islands sank back into their place. The native say, "The islands are now united to America. Perhaps Maui has been at work."

MAUI AND PEA-PEA THE EIGHT-EYED.

Maui had been fishing and had caught a great fish upon which he was feasting. He looked inland and saw his wife, Kumu-lama, seized and carried away by Pea-pea-maka-walu, "Pea-pea the eight-eyed." This is a legend derived from the myths of many islands in which Lupe or Rupe (pigeon) changed himself into a bird and flew after his sister Hina who had been carried on the back of a shark to distant islands. Sometimes as a man and sometimes as a bird he prosecuted his search until Hina was found.

Maui pursued Pea-pea, but could not catch him. He carried Maui's wife over the sea to a far away island. Maui was greatly troubled but his grandmother sent him inland to find an old man who would tell him what to do. Maui went inland and looking down toward Waipahu saw this man Ku-olo-kele. He was hump-backed. Maui threw a large stone and hit the "hill on the back" knocked it off and made the back straight. The old man lifted up the stone and threw it to Waipahu, where it lies to this day. Then he and Maui talked together. He told Maui to go and catch birds and gather ti leaves and fibers of the ie-ie vine, and fill his house. These things Maui secured and brought to him. He told Maui to go home and return after three days.

Ku-olo-kele took the ti leaves and the ie-ie threads and made the body of a great bird which he covered with bird feathers. He fastened all together with the ie-ie. This was done in the first day. The second day he placed food inside and tried his bird and it flew all right. "Thus," as the Hawaiians say, "the first flying ship was made in the time of Maui." This is a modern version of Rupe changing himself into a bird.

On the third day Maui came and saw the wonderful bird body thoroughly prepared for his journey. Maui went inside. Ku-olo-kele said, "When you reach that land, look for a village. If the people are not there look to the beach. If there are many people, your wife and Pea-pea the eight-eyed will be there. Do not go near, but fly out over the sea. The people will say, 'O, the strange bird;' but Pea-pea will say, 'This is my bird. It is tabu.' You can then come to the people."

Maui pulled the ie-ie ropes fastened to the wings and made them move. Thus he flew away into the sky. Two days was his journey before he came to that strange island, Moana-liha-i-ka-wao-kele. It was a beautiful land. He flew inland to a village, but there were no people; according to the ancient chant:

	 
		"The houses of Lima-loa stand,
		 But there are no people;
		 They are at Mana."
		
		 The people were by the sea. Maui flew over them. He saw his wife, but he passed on flying out over the sea, skimming like a sea bird down to the water and rising gracefully up to the sky. Pea-pea called out, "This is my bird. It is tabu." Maui heard and came to the beach. He was caught and placed in a tabu box. The servants carried him, up to the village and put him in the chief's sleeping house, when Pea-pea and his people returned to their homes.

In the night Pea-pea and Maui's wife lay down to sleep. Maui watched Pea-pea, hoping that he would soon sleep. Then he would kill him. Maui waited. One eye was closed, seven eyes were opened. Then four eyes closed, leaving three. The night was almost past and dawn was near. Then Maui called to Hina with his spirit voice, "O Hina, keep it dark." Hina made the gray dawn dark in the three eyes and two closed in sleep. The last eye was weary, and it also slept. Then Maui went out of the bird body and cut off the head of Pea-pea and put it inside the bird. He broke the roof of the house until a large opening was made. He took his wife, Kumu-lama, and flew away to the island of Oahu. The winds blew hard against the flying bird. Rain fell in torrents around it, but those inside had no trouble.

"Thus Maui returned with his wife to his home in Oahu. The story is pau (finished)."

     Legends of Maui, A Demi-God of Polynesia, by W. D. Westervelt, [1910], at sacred-texts.com

  

XI.

 

MAUI SEEKING IMMORTALITY.

	 
		Climb up, climb up,
		 To the highest surface of heaven,
		 To all the sides of heaven.
		
		Climb then to thy ancestor,
		 The sacred bird in the sky,
		 To thy ancestor Rehua
		
		
			 
				In the heavens.
				
				 -New Zealand kite incantation.
		
		 THE story of Maui seeking immortality for the human race is one of the finest myths in the world. For pure imagination and pathos it is difficult to find any tale from Grecian or Latin literature to compare with it. In Greek and Roman fables gods suffered for other gods, and yet none were surrounded with such absolutely mythical experiences as those through which the demi-god Maui of the Pacific Ocean passed when he entered the gates of death with the hope of winning immortality for mankind. The really remarkable group of legends which cluster around Maui is well concluded by the story of his unselfish and heroic battle with death.

The different islands of the Pacific have their Hades, or abode of dead. It is, with very few exceptions, down in the interior of the earth. Sometimes the tunnels left by currents of melted lava are the passages into the home of departed spirits. In Samoa there are two circular holes among the rocks at the west end of the island Savaii. These are the entrances to the under-world for chiefs and people. The spirits of those who die on the other islands leap into the sea and swim around the land from island to island until they reach Savaii. Then they plunge down into their heaven or their hades.

The Tongans had a spirit island for the home of the dead. They said that some natives once sailed far away in a canoe and found this island. It was covered with all manner of beautiful fruits, among which rare birds sported. They landed, but the trees were shadows. They grasped but could not hold them. The fruits and the birds were shadows. The men ate, but swallowed nothing substantial. It was shadow-land. They walked through all the delights their eyes looked upon, but found no substance. They returned home, but ever seemed to listen to spirits calling them back to the island. In a short time all the voyagers were dead.

There is no escape from death. The natives of New Zealand say: "Man may have descendants, but the daughters of the night strangle his offspring"; and again: "Men make heroes, but death carries them away."

There are very few legends among the Polynesians concerning the death of Maui. And these are usually fragmentary, except among the Maoris of New Zealand.

The Hawaiian legend of the death of Maui is to the effect that he offended some of the greater gods living in Waipio valley on the Island of Hawaii. Kanaloa, one of the four greatest gods of Hawaii, seized him and dashed him against the rocks. His blood burst from, the body and colored the earth red in the upper part of the valley. The Hawaiians in another legend say that Maui was chasing a boy and girl in Honolii gulch, Hawaii. The girl climbed a breadfruit tree. Maui changed himself into an eel and stretched himself along the side of the trunk of the tree. The tree stretched itself upward and Maui failed to reach the girl. A priest came along and struck the eel and killed it, and so Maui died. This is evidently a changed form of the legend of Maui and the long eel. Another Hawaiian fragment approaches very near to the beautiful New Zealand myth. The Hawaiians said that Maui attempted to tear a mountain apart. He wrenched a great hole in the side. Then the elepaio bird sang and the charm was broken. The cleft in the mountain could not be enlarged. If the story could be completed it would not be strange if the death of Maui came with this failure to open the path through the mountain.

The Hervey Islands say that after Maui fished up the islands his hook was thrown into the heavens and became the curved tail of the constellation of stars which we know as "The Scorpion." Then the people became angry with Maui and threw him up into the sky and his body is still thought to be hanging among the stars of the scorpion.

The Samoans, according to Turner, say that Maui went fishing and tried to catch the land under the seas and pull it to the surface. Finally an island appeared, but the people living on it were angry with Maui and drove him away into the heavens.

As he leaped from the island it separated into two parts. Thus the Samoans account for the origin of two of their islands and also for the passing away of Maui from the earth.

The natives of New Zealand have many myths concerning the death of Maui. Each tribe tells the story with such variations as would be expected when the fact is noted that these tribes have preserved their individuality through many generations. The substance of the myth, however, is the same.

In Maui's last days he longed for the victory over death. His innate love of life led him to face the possibility of escaping and overcoming the relentless enemy of mankind and thus bestow the boon of deathlessness upon his fellow-men. He had been successful over and over again in his contests with both gods and men. When man was created, he stood erect, but, according to an Hawaiian myth, had jointless arms and limbs. A web of skin connected and fastened tightly the arms to the body and the legs to each other. "Maui was angry at this motionless statue and took him and broke his legs at ankle, knee and hip and then, tearing them and the arms from the body, destroyed the web. Then he broke the arms at the elbow and shoulder. Then man could move from place to place, but he had neither fingers or toes." Here comes the most ancient Polynesian statement of the theory of evolution: "Hunger impelled man to seek his food in the mountains, where his toes were cut out by the brambles in climbing, and his fingers were also formed by the sharp splinters of the bamboo while searching with his arms for food in the ground."

It was not strange that Maui should feel self-confident when considering the struggle for immortality as a gift to be bestowed upon mankind. And yet his father warned him that his time of failure would surely come.

White, who has collected many of the myths and legends of New Zealand, states that after Maui had ill-treated Mahu-ika, his grandmother, the goddess and guardian of fire in the under-world, his father and mother tried to teach him to do differently. But he refused to listen. Then the father said:

"You heard our instructions, but please yourself and persist for life or death."

Maui replied: "What do I care? Do you think I shall cease? Rather I will persist forever and ever."

Then his father said: "There is one so powerful that no tricks can be of any avail."

Maui asked: "By what shall I be overcome?" The answer was that one of his ancestors, Hine-nui-te-po (Great Hine of the night), the guardian of life, would overcome him.

When Maui fished islands out of the deep seas, it was said that Hine made her home on the outer edge of one of the outermost islands. There the glow of the setting sun lighted the thatch of her house and covered it with glorious colors. There Great Hine herself stood flashing and sparkling on the edge of the horizon.

Maui, in these last days of his life, looked toward the west and said: "Let us investigate this matter and learn whether life or death shall follow."

The father replied: "There is evil hanging over you. When I chanted the invocation of your childhood, when you were made sacred and guarded by charms, I forgot a part of the ceremony. And for this you are to die."

Then Maui said, "Will this be by Hine-nui-te-po? What is she like?"

The father said that the flashing eyes they could see in the distance were dark as greenstone, the teeth were as sharp as volcanic glass, her mouth was large like a fish, and her hair was floating in the air like sea-weed.

One of the legends of New Zealand says that Maui and his brothers went toward the west, to the edge of the horizon, where they saw the goddess of the night. Light was flashing from her body. Here they found a great pit-the home of night. Maui entered the pit-telling his brothers not to laugh. He passed through and turning about started to return. The brothers laughed and the walls of night closed in around him and held him till he died.

The longer legend tells how Maui after his conversation with his father, remembered his conflict with the moon. He had tied her so that she could not escape, but was compelled to bathe in the waters of life and return night after night lest men should be in darkness when evening came.

Maui said to the goddess of the moon: "Let death be short. As the moon dies and returns with strength, so let men die and revive again."

But she replied: "Let death be very long, that man may sigh and sorrow. When man dies, let him go into darkness, become like earth, that those he leaves behind may weep and wail and mourn." according

Maui did not lay aside his purpose, but according to the New Zealand story, "did not wish men to die but to live forever. Death appeared degrading and an insult to the dignity of man. Man ought to die like the moon, which dips in the life-giving waters of Kane and is renewed again, or like the sun, which daily sinks into the pit of night and with renewed strength rises in the morning."

Maui sought the home of Hine-nui-te-po-the guardian of life. He heard her order her attendants to watch for any one approaching and capture all who came walking upright as a man. He crept past the attendants on hands and feet, found the place of life, stole some of the food of the goddess and returned home. He showed the food to his brothers and persuaded them to go with him into the darkness of the night of death. On the way he changed them into the form of birds. In the evening they came to the house of the goddess on the island long before fished up from the seas.

Maui warned the birds to refrain from making any noise -while he made the supreme effort of his life. He was about to enter upon his struggle for immortality. He said to the birds: "If I go into the stomach of this woman, do not laugh until I have gone through her, and come out again at her month; then you can laugh at me."

His friends said: "You will be killed." Maui replied: "If you laugh at me when I have only entered her stomach I shall be killed, but if I have passed through her and come out of her mouth I shall escape and Hine-nui-te-po will die."

His friends called out to him: "Go then. The decision is with you."

Hine was sleeping soundly. The flashes of lightning had all ceased. The sunlight had almost passed away and the house lay in quiet gloom. Maui came near to the sleeping goddess. Her large, fish-like mouth was open wide. He put off his clothing and prepared to pass through the ordeal of going to the hidden source of life, to tear it out of the body of its guardian and carry it back with him, to mankind. He stood in all the glory of savage manhood. His body was splendidly marked by the tattoo-bones, and now well oiled shone and sparkled in the last rays of the setting sun.

He leaped through the mouth of the enchanted one and entered her stomach, weapon in band, to take out her heart, the vital principle which he knew had its home somewhere within her being. He found immortality on the other side of death. He turned to come back again into life when suddenly a little bird (the Pata-tai) laughed in a clear, shrill tone, and Great Hine, through whose mouth Maui was passing, awoke. Her sharp, obsidian teeth closed with a snap upon Maui, cutting his body in the center. Thus Maui entered the gates of death, but was unable to return, and death has ever since been victor over rebellious men. The natives have the saying:

"If Maui had not died, he could have restored to life all who had gone before him, and thus succeeded in destroying death."

Maui's brothers took the dismembered body and buried it in a cave called Te-ana-i-hana, "The cave dug out," possibly a prepared burial place.

Maui's wife made war upon the spirits, the gods, and killed as many as she could to avenge her husband's death. One of the old native poets of New Zealand, in chanting the story to Mr. White, said: "But though Maui was killed, his offspring survived. Some of these are at Hawa-i-i-ki and some at Aotearoa (New Zealand), but the greater part of them remained at Hawa-i-ki. This history was handed down by the generations of our ancestors of ancient times, and we continue to rehearse it to our children, with our incantations and genealogies, and all other matters relating to our race."

	 
		"But death is nothing new,
		 Death is, and has been ever since old Maui died.
		 Then Pata-tai laughed loud
		 And woke the goblin-god,
		 Who severed him in two, and shut him in,
		 So dusk of eve came on."
		
		
			 
				--Maori death chant, New Zealand.
				
				   
     Legends of Maui, A Demi-God of Polynesia, by W. D. Westervelt, [1910], at sacred-texts.com

  

XII.

 

HINA OF HILO.

HINA is not an uncommon name in Hawaiian genealogies. It is usually accompanied by some adjective which explains or identifies the person to whom the name is given. In Hawaii the name Hina is feminine. This is also true throughout all Polynesia except in a few cases where Hina is reckoned as a man with supernatural attributes. Even in these cases it is apparent that the legend has been changed from its original form as it has been carried to small islands by comparatively ignorant people when moving away from their former homes.

Hina is a Polynesian goddess whose story is very interesting-one worthy of study when comparing the legends of the island groups of the Pacific. The Hina of Hilo is the same as the goddess of that name most widely known throughout Polynesia-and yet her legends are located by the ancient Hawaiians in Hilo, as if that place were her only home. The legends are so old that the Hawaiians have forgotten their origin in other lands. The stories were brought with the immigrants who settled on the Hilo coast. Thus the stories found their final location with the families who brought them. There are three Hawaiian Hinas practically distinct from each other, although a supernatural element is connected with each one. Hina who was stolen from Hawaii by a chief of the Island of Molokai was an historical character, although surrounded by mythical stories. Another Hina, who was the wife of Kuula, the fish god, was pre-eminently a local deity, having no real connection with the legends of the other islands of the Pacific, although sometimes the stories told concerning her have not been kept entirely distinct from the legends of the Hina of Hilo.

The Hilo Hina was the true legendary character closely connected with all Polynesia. The stories about her are of value not simply as legends, but as traditions closely uniting the Hawaiian Islands with the island groups thousands of miles distant. The Wailuku river, which flows through the town of Hilo, has its own peculiar and weird beauty. For miles it is a series of waterfalls and rapids. It follows the course of an ancient lava flow, sometimes forcing its way under bridges of lava, thus forming what are called boiling pots, and sometimes pouring in massive sheets over the edges of precipices which never disintegrate. By the side of this river Hina's son,Maui had his lands. In the very bed of the river, in a cave under one of the largest falls, Hina made her own home, concealed from the world by the silver veil of falling water and lulled to sleep by the continual roar of the flood falling into the deep pool below. By the side of this river, the legends say, she pounded her tapa and prepared her food. Here were the small, graceful mamake and the coarser wauke trees, from which the bark was stripped with which she made tapa cloth. Branches were cut or broken from these and other trees whose bark was fit for the purpose. These branches were well soaked until the bark was removed easily. Then the outer bark was scraped off, leaving only the pliable inner bark. The days were very short and there was no time for rest while making tapa cloth. Therefore, as soon as the morning light reddened the clouds, Hina would take her calabash filled with water to pour upon the bark, and her little bundle of round clubs (the hohoa) and her four-sided mallets (the i-e-kuku) and hasten to the sacred spot where, with chants and incantations, the tapa was made.

The bark was well soaked in the water all the days of the process of tapa making. Hina took small bundles of the wet inner bark and laid them on the kua or heavy tapa board, pounding them together into a pulpy mass with her round clubs. Then using the four-sided mallets, she beat this pulp into thin sheets. Beautiful tapa, soft as silk, was made by adding pulpy mass to pulpy mass and beating it day after day until the fibres were lost and a sheet of close-woven bark cloth was formed. Although Hina was a goddess and had a family possessing miraculous power, it never entered the mind of the Hawaiian legend tellers to endow her with case in producing wonderful results. The legends of the Southern Pacific Islands show more imagination. They say that Ina (Hina) was such a wonderful artist in making beautiful tapas that she was placed in the skies, where she beat out glistening fine tapas, the white and glorious clouds. When she stretches these clouds sheets out to dry, she places stones along the edges, so that the fierce winds of the heavens shall not blow them away. When she throws these stones aside, the skies reverberate with thunder. When she rolls her cloud sheets of tapa together, the folds glisten with flashes of light and lightning leaps from sheet to sheet.

The Hina of Hilo was grieved as she toiled because after she had pounded the sheets out so thin that they were ready to be dried, she found it almost impossible to secure the necessary aid of the sun in the drying process. She would rise as soon as she could see and hasten to spread out the tapa made the day before. But the sun always hurried so fast that the sheets could not dry. He leaped from the ocean waters in the earth, rushed across the heavens and plunged into the dark waters again on the other side of the island before she could even turn her tapas so that they might dry evenly. This legend of very short days is strange because of its place not only among the myths of Hawaii but also because it belongs to practically all the tropical islands of the Pacific Ocean. In Tahiti the legends said that the sun rushed across the sky very rapidly. The days were too short for fruits to ripen or for work to be finished. In Samoa the "mats" made by Sina had no time to dry. The ancestors of the Polynesians sometime somewhere must have been in the region of short days and long nights. Hina found that her incantations had no influence with the sun. She could not prevail upon him to go slower and give her more time for the completion of her task. Then she called on her powerful son, Maui-ki-i-ki-i, for aid.

Some of the legends of the Island Maui say that Hina dwelt by the sea coast of that island near the high hill Kauwiki at the foot of the great mountain Haleakala, House of the Sun, and that there, facing the southern skies under the most favorable conditions for making tapa, she found the days too short for the tapa to dry. At the present time the Hawaiians point out a long, narrow stone not far from the surf and almost below the caves in which the great queen Kaahumanu spent the earliest days of her childhood.

This stone is said to be the kua or tapa board on which Hina pounded the bark for her cloth. Other legends of that same island locate Hina's home on the northeast coast near Pohakuloa.

The Hilo legends, however, do not deem it necessary that Hina and Maui should have their home across the wide channel which divides the Island Hawaii from the Island Maui in order to wage war successfully with the inconsiderate sun. Hina remained in her home by the Wailuku river, sometimes resting in her cave under Rainbow Falls, and sometimes working on the river bank, trusting her powerful son Maui to make the swiftly-passing lord of day go more slowly.

Maui possessed many supernatural powers. He could assume the form of birds or insects. He could call on the winds to do his will, or he could, if he wished, traverse miles with a single stride. It is interesting to note that the Hilo legends differ as to the way in which Ma-ui the man passed over to Mau-i the island. One legend says that he crossed the channel, miles wide, with a single step. Another says that he launched his canoe and with a breath the god of the winds placed him on the opposite coast, while another story says that Maui assumed the form of a white chicken, which flew over the waters to Haleakala. Here he took ropes made from the fibre of trees and vines and lassoed the sun while it climbed the side of the mountain and entered the great crater which hollows out the summit. The sun came through a large gap in the eastern side of the crater, rushing along as rapidly as possible. Then Maui threw his lassoes one after the other over the sun's legs (the rays of light), holding him fast and breaking off some of them. With a magic club Maui struck the face of the sun again and again. At last, wounded and weary, and also limping on its broken legs, the sun promised Maui to go slowly forevermore.

"La" among the Polynesians, like the word "Ra" among the Egyptians, means "sun" or "day" or "sun-god"--and the mountain where the son of Hina won his victory over the monster of the heavens has long borne the name Hale-a-ka-la, or House of the Sun.

Hina of Hilo soon realized the wonderful deed which Maui had done. She spread out her fine tapas with songs of joy and cheerily performed the task which filled the hours of the day. The comfort of sunshine and cooling winds came with great power into Hina's life, bringing to her renewed joy and beauty.

     Legends of Maui, A Demi-God of Polynesia, by W. D. Westervelt, [1910], at sacred-texts.com

  

XIII.

 

HINA AND THE WAILUKU RIVER.

HERE are two rivers of rushing, tumbling rapids and waterfalls in the Hawaiian Islands, both bearing the name of Wailuku. One is on the Island of Maui, flowing out of a deep gorge in the side of the extinct volcano Iao. Yosemite-like precipices surround this majestically-walled crater. The name Iao means "asking for clouds." The head of the crater-valley is almost always covered with great masses of heavy rain clouds. Out of the crater the massed waters rush in a swift-flowing stream, of only four or five miles, emptying into Kahului harbor. The other Wailuku river is on the Island of Hawaii. The snows melt on the summits of the two great mountains, Mauna Kea and Mauna Loa. The water seeps through the porous lava from the eastern slope of Mauna Loa and the southern slope of Mauna Kea, meeting where the lava flows of centuries from each mountain have piled up against each other. Through the fragments of these volcanic battles the waters creep down the mountain side toward the sea.

At one place, a number of miles above the city of Hilo, the waters were heard gurgling and splashing far below the surface. Water was needed for the sugar plantations, which modern energy has established all along the eastern coast of the large island. A tunnel was cut into the lava, the underground stream was tapped-and an abundant supply of water secured and sluiced down to the large plantations below. The head waters of the Wailuku river gathered from the melting snow of the mountains found these channels, which centered at last in the bed of a very ancient and very interesting lava flow. Sometimes breaking forth in a large, turbulent flood, the stream forces its way over and around the huge blocks of lava which mark the course of the eruption of long ago. Sometimes it courses in a tunnel left by the flowing lava and comes up from below in a series of boiling pools. Then again it falls in majestic sheets over high walls of worn precipices. Several large falls and some very picturesque smaller cascades interspersed with rapids and natural bridges give to, this river a beauty peculiarly its own. The most weird of all the rough places through which the Wailuku river flows is that known as the basin of Rainbow Falls near Hilo. Here Hina, the moon goddess of the Polynesians, lived in a great open cave, over which the falls hung their misty, rainbow-tinted veil. Her son Maui, the mighty demi-god of Polynesia, supposed by some writers to be the sun-god of the Polynesians, had extensive lands along the northern bank of the river. Here among his cultivated fields he had his home, from which he went forth to accomplish the wonders attributed to him in the legends of the Hawaiians.

Below the cave in which Hina dwelt the river fought its way through a narrow gorge and then, in a series of many sinall falls, descended to the little bay, where its waters mingled with the surf of the salt sea. Far above the cave, in the bed of the river, dwelt Kuna. The district through which that portion of the river runs bears to this day the name "Wai-kuna" or "Kuna's river." When the writer was talking with the natives concerning this part of the old legend, they said "Kuna is not a Hawaiian word. It means something like a snake or a dragon, something we do not have in these islands." This, they thought, made the connection with the Hina legend valueless until they were shown that Tuna (or kuna) was the New Zealand name of a reptile which attacked Hina and struck her with his tail like a crocodile, for which Maui killed him. When this was understood, the Hawaiians were greatly interested to give the remainder of this legend and compare it with the New Zealand story. In New Zealand there are several statements concerning Tuna's dwelling place. He is sometimes represented as coming from a pool to attack Hina and sometimes from a distant stream, and sometimes from the river by which Hina dwelt. The Hawaiians told of the annoyances which Hina endured from Kuna while he lived above her home in the Wailuku. He would stop up the river and fill it with dirt as when the freshets brought down the debris of the storms from the mountain sides. He would throw logs and rolling stones into the stream that they might be carried over the falls and drive Hina from her cave. He had sought Hina in many ways and had been repulsed again and again until at last hatred took the place of all more kindly feelings and he determined to destroy the divine chiefess.

Hina was frequently left with but little protection, and yet from her home in the cave feared nothing that Kuna could do. Precipices guarded the cave on either side, and any approach of an enemy through the falling water could be easily thwarted. So her chants rang out through the river valley even while floods swirled around her, and Kuna's missiles were falling over the rocky bed of the stream toward her. Kuna became very angry and, tittering great curses and calling upon all his magic forces to aid him, caught a great stone and at night hurled it into the gorge of the river below Hina's home, filling the river bed from bank to bank. "Ah, Hina! Now is the danger, for the river rises. The water cannot flow away. Awake! Awake!"

Hina is not aware of this evil which is so near. The water rises and rises, higher and higher. "Auwe! Auwe! Alas, alas, Hina must perish!" The water entered the opening of the cave and began to creep along the floor. Hina cannot fly, except into the very arms of her great enemy, who is waiting to destroy her. Then Hina called for Maui. Again and again her voice went out from the cave. It pierced through the storms and the clouds which attended Kuna's attack upon her. It swept along the side of the great mountain. It crossed the channel between the islands of Hawaii and Maui. Its anguish smote the side of the great mountain Haleakala, where Maui had been throwing his lassoes around the sun and compelling him, to go more slowly. When Maui heard Hina's cry for help echoing from cliff to cliff and through the ravines, he leaped at once to rush to her assistance.

Some say that Hina, the goddess, had a cloud servant, the "ao-opua," the "warning cloud," which rose swiftly above the falls when Hina cried for aid and then, assuming a peculiar shape, stood high above the hills that Maui might see it. Down the mountain he leaped to his magic canoe. Pushing it into the sea with two mighty strokes of his paddle lie crossed the sea to the mouth of the Wailuku river. Here even to the present day lies a long double rock, surrounded by the waters of the bay, which the natives call Ka waa o Maui, "The canoe of Maui." It represents to Hawaiian thought the magic canoe with which Maui always sailed over the ocean more swiftly than any winds could carry him. Leaving his canoe, Maui seized the magic club with which he had conquered the sun after lassoing him, and rushed along the dry bed of the river to the place of danger. Swinging the club swiftly around his head, lie struck the dam holding back the water of the rapidly-rising river.

"Ah! Nothing can withstand the magic club. The bank around one end of the dam gives way. The imprisoned waters leap into the new channel. Safe is Hina the goddess."

Kuna heard the crash of the club against the stones of the river bank and fled up the river to his home in the hidden caves by the pools in the river bed. Maui rushed up the river to punish Kuna-mo-o for the trouble he had caused Hina. When he came to the place where the dragon was hidden under deep waters, he took his magic spear and thrust it through the dirt and lava rocks along one side of the river, making a long hole, through which the waters rushed, revealing Kuna-mo-o's hiding place. This place of the spear thrust is known among the Hawaiians as Ka puka a Maui, "the door made by Maui." It is also known as "The natural bridge of the Wailuku river."

Kuna-mo-o fled to his different hiding places, but Maui broke up the river bed and drove the dragon out from every one, following him from place to place as he fled down the river. Apparently this is a legendary account of earthquakes. At last Kuna-mo-o found what seemed to be a safe hiding place in a series of deep pools, but Maui poured a lava flow into the river. He threw red-hot burning stones into the water until the pools were boiling and the steam was rising in clouds. Kuna uttered incantation after incantation, but the water scalded and burned him. Dragon as he was, his hard, tough skin was of no avail. The pain was becoming unbearable. With cries to his gods he leaped from the pools and fled down the river. The waters of the pools are no longer scalding, but they have never lost the tumbling, tossing, foaming, boiling swirl which Maui gave to them when he threw into them the red-hot stones with which he hoped to destroy Kuna, and they are known today as "The Boiling Pots."

Some versions of the legend say that Maui poured boiling water in the river and sent it in swift pursuit of Kuna, driving him froin point to point and scalding his life out of him. Others say that Maui chased the dragon, striking him again and again with his consecrated weapons, following Kuna down from falls to falls until he came to the place where Hina dwelt. Then, feeling that there was little use in flight, Kuna battled with Maui. His struggles were of no avail. He was forced over the falls into the stream below. Hina and her women encouraged Maui by their chants and strengthened him by the most powerful incantations with which they were acquainted. Great was their joy when they beheld Kuna's ponderous body hurled over the falls. Eagerly they watched the dragon as the swift waters swept him against the dam with which he had hoped to destroy Hina; and when the whirling waves caught him and dashed him through the new channel made by Maui's magic club, they rejoiced and sang the praise of the mighty warrior who had saved them. Maui had rushed along the bank of the river with tremendous strides overtaking the dragon as he was rolled over and over among the small waterfalls near the mouth of the river. Here Matii again attacked Kuna, at last beating the life out of his body. "Moo-Kuna" was the name given by the Hawaiians to the dragon. "Moo" means anything in lizard shape, but Kuna was unlike any lizard known in the Hawaiian Islands. Moo Kuna is the name sometimes given to a long black stone lying like an island in the waters between the small falls of the river. As one who calls attention to this legendary black stone says: "As if he were not dead enough already, every big freshet in the stream beats him and pounds him and drowns him over and over as he would have drowned Hina." A New Zealand legend relates a conflict of incantations, somewhat like the filling in of the Wailuku river by Kuna, and the cleaving of a new channel by Maui with the different use of means. In New Zealand the river is closed by the use of powerful incantations and charms and reopened by the use of those more powerful.

In the Hervey Islands, Tuna, the god of eels, loved Ina (Hina) and finally died for her, giving his head to be buried. From, this head sprang two cocoanut trees, bearing fruit marked with Tuna's eyes and mouth.

In Samoa the battle was between an owl and a serpent. The owl conquered by calling in the aid of a friend.

This story of Hina apparently goes far back in the traditions of Polynesians, even to their ancient home in Hawaiki, from which it was taken by one branch of the family to New Zealand and by another to the Hawaiian Islands and other groups in the Pacific Ocean. The dragon may even be a remembrance of the days when the Polynesians were supposed to dwell by the banks of the River Ganges in India, when crocodiles were dangerous enemies and heroes saved families from their destructive depredations.

     Legends of Maui, A Demi-God of Polynesia, by W. D. Westervelt, [1910], at sacred-texts.com

  

XIV.

 

GHOSTS OF THE HILO HILLS.

THE legends about Hina and her famous son Maui and her less widely known daughters are common property among the natives of the beautiful little city of Hilo. One of these legends of more than ordinary interest finds its location in the three small hills back of Hilo toward the mountains.

These hills are small craters connected with some ancient lava flow of unusual violence. The eruption must have started far up on the slopes of Mauna Loa. As it sped down toward the sea it met some obstruction which, although overwhelmed, checked the flow and caused a great mass of cinders and ashes to be thrown out until a large hill with a hollow crater was built up, covering many acres of ground.

Soon the lava found another vent and then another obstruction and a second and then a third hill were formed nearer the sea. These hills or extinct craters bear the names Halai, Opeapea and Puu Honu. They are not far from the Wailuku river, famous for its picturesque waterfalls and also for the legends which are told along its banks. Here Maui had his lands overlooking the steep bluffs. Here in a cave under the Rainbow Falls was the home of Hina, the mother of Maui, according to the Hawaiian stories. Other parts of the Pacific sometimes make Hina Maui's wife, and sometimes a goddess from whom he descended. In the South Sea legends Hina was thought to have married the moon. Her home was in the skies, where she wove beautiful tapa cloths (the clouds), which were bright and glistening, so that when she rolled them up flashes of light (cloud lightning) could be seen on the earth. She laid heavy stones on the corners of these tapas, but sometimes the stones rolled off and made the thunder. Hina of the Rainbow Falls was a famous tapa maker whose tapa was the cause of Maui's conflict with the sun.

Hina had several daughters, four of whose names are given: Hina Ke Ahi, Hina Ke Kai, Hina Mahuia, and Hina Kuluua. Each name marked the peculiar "mana" or divine gift which Hina, the mother, had bestowed upon her daughters.

Hina Ke Ahi meant the Hina who had control of fire. This name is sometimes given to Hina the mother. Hina Ke Kai was the daughter who had power over the sea. She was said to have been in a canoe with her brother Maui when he fished up Cocoanut Island, his line breaking before he could pull it up to the mainland and make it fast. Hina Kuluua was the mistress over the forces of rain. The winds and the storms were supposed to obey her will. Hina Mahuia is peculiarly a name connected with the legends of the other island groups of the Pacific. Mahuia or Mafuie was a god or goddess of fire all through Polynesia.

The legend of the Hilo hills pertains especially to Hina Ke Ahi and Hina Kuluua. Hina the mother gave the hill Halai to Hina Ke Ahi and the hill Puu Honu to Hina Kuluua for their families and dependents.

The hills were of rich soil and there was much rain. Therefore, for a long time, the two daughters had plenty of food for themselves and their people, but at last the days were like fire and the sky had no rain in it. The taro planted on the hillsides died. The bananas and sugar cane and sweet potatoes withered and the fruit on the trees was blasted. The people were faint because of hunger, and the shadow of death was over the land. Hina Ke Ahi pitied her suffering friends and determined to provide food for them. Slowly her people labored at her command. Over they went to the banks of the river course, which was only the bed of an ancient lava stream, over which no water was flowing; the famished laborers toiled, gathering and carrying back whatever wood they could find, then up the mountain side to the great koa and ohia forests, gathering their burdens of fuel according to the wishes of their chiefess.

Their sorcerers planted charms along the way and uttered incantations to ward off the danger of failure. The priests offered sacrifices and prayers for the safe and successful return of the burden-bearers. After many days the great quantity of wood desired by the goddess was piled up by the side of the Halai Hill.

Then came the days of digging out the hill and making a great imu or cooking oven and preparing it with stones and wood. Large quantities of wood were thrown into the place. Stones best fitted for retaining heat were gathered and the fires kindled. When the stones were hot, Hina Ke Ahi directed the people to arrange the imu in its proper order for cooking the materials for a great feast. A place was made for sweet potatoes, another for taro, another for pigs and another for dogs. All the form of preparing the food for cooking was passed through, but no real food was laid on the stones. Then Hina told them to make a place in the imu for a human sacrifice. Probably out of every imu of the long ago a small part of the food was offered to the gods, and there may have been a special place in the imu for that part of the food to be cooked. At any rate Hina had this oven so built that the people understood that a remarkable sacrifice would be offered in it to the gods, who for some reason had sent the famine upon the people.

Human sacrifices were frequently offered by the Hawaiians even after the days of the coming of Captain Cook. A dead body was supposed to be acceptable to the gods when a chief's house was built, when a chief's new canoe was to be made or when temple walls were to be erected or victories celebrated. The bodies of the people belonged to the will of the chief. Therefore it was in quiet despair that the workmen obeyed Hina Ke Ahi and prepared the place for sacrifice. It might mean their own holocaust as an offering to the gods. At last Hina Ke Ahi bade the laborers cease their work and stand by the side of the oven ready to cover it with the dirt which had been thrown out and piled up by the side. The people stood by, not knowing upon whom, the blow might fall.

But Hina Ke Ahi was "Hina the kind," and although she stood before them robed in royal majesty and power, still her face was full of pity and love. Her voice melted the hearts of her retainers as she bade them carefully follow her directions.

"O my people. Where are you? Will you obey and do as I command? This imu is my imu. I shall lie down on its bed of burning stones. I shall sleep under its cover. But deeply cover ine or I may perish. Quickly throw the dirt over in), body. Fear not the fire. Watch for three days. A woman will stand by the imu. Obey her will."

Hina Ke Ahi was very beautiful, and her eyes flashed light like fire as she stepped into the great pit and lay down on the burning stones. A great smoke arose and gathered over the imu. The men toiled rapidly, placing the imu mats over their chiefess and throwing the dirt back into the oven until it was all thoroughly covered and the smoke was quenched.

Then they waited for the strange, mysterious thing which must follow the sacrifice of this divine chiefess.

Halai hill trembled and earthquakes shook the land round about. The great heat of the fire in the imu withered the little life which was still left from the famine. Meanwhile Hina Ke Ahi was carrying out her plan for securing aid for her people. She could not be injured by the heat for she was a goddess of fire. The waves of heat raged around her as she sank down through the stones of the imu into the underground paths which belonged to the spirit world. The legend says that Hina made her appearance in the form of a gushing stream of water which would always supply the want of her adherents. The second day passed. Hina was still journeying underground, but this time she came to the surface as a pool named Moe Waa (canoe sleep) much nearer the sea. The third day came and Hina caused a great spring of sweet water to burst forth from the sea shore in the very path of the ocean surf. This received the name Auauwai. Here Hina washed away all traces of her journey through the depths. This was the last of the series of earthquakes and the appearance of new water springs. The people waited, feeling that some more wonderful event must follow the remarkable experiences of the three days. Soon a woman stood by the imu, who commanded the laborers to dig away the dirt and remove the mats. When this was done, the hungry people found a very great abundance of food, enough to supply their want until the food plants should have time to ripen and the days of the famine should be over.

The joy of the people was great when they knew that their chiefess had escaped death and would still dwell among them in comfort. Many were the songs sung and stories told about the great famine and the success of the goddess of fire.

The second sister, Hina Kuluua, the goddess of rain, was always very jealous of her beautiful sister Hina Ke Ahi, and many times sent rain to put out fires which her sister tried to kindle. Hina Ke Ahi could not stand the rain and so fled with her people to a home by the seaside.

Hina Kuluua (or Hina Kuliua as she was sometimes known among the Hawaiians) could control rain and storms, but for some reason failed to provide a food supply for her people, and the famine wrought havoc among them. She thought of the stories told and songs sung about her sister and wished for the same honor for herself. She commanded her people to make a great imu for her in the hill Pun Honu. She knew that a strange power belonged to her and yet, blinded by jealousy, forgot that rain and fire could not work together. She planned to furnish a great supply of food for her people in the same way in which her sister had worked.

The oven was dug. Stones and wood were collected and the same ghostly array of potatoes, taro, pig and dog prepared as had been done before by her sister.

The kahunas or priests knew'that Hina Kuluua was going out of her province in trying to do as her sister had done, but there was no use in attempting to change her plans. jealousy is self-willed and obstinate and no amount of reasoning from her dependents could have any influence over her.

The ordinary incantations were observed, and Hina Kulutia gave the same directions as those her sister had given. The imu was to be well heated. The make-believe food was to be put in and a place left for her body. It was the goddess of rain making ready to lie down on a bed prepared for the goddess of fire. When all was ready, she lay down on the heated stones and the oven mats were thrown over her and the ghostly provisions. Then the covering of dirt was thrown back upon the mats and heated stones, filling the pit which had been dug. The goddess of rain was left to prepare a feast for her people as the goddess of fire had done for herfollowers.

Some of the legends have introduced the demi-god Maui into this story. The natives say that Maui came to "burn" or "cook the rain" and that he made the oven very hot, but that the goddess of rain escaped and hung over the hill in the form of a cloud. At least this is what the people saw-not a cloud of smoke over the imu, but a rain cloud. They waited and watched for such evidences of underground labor as attended the passage of Hina Ke Ahi through the earth from the hill to the sea, but the only strange appearance was the dark rain cloud. They waited three days and looked for their chiefess to come in the form of a woman. They waited another day and still another and no signs or wonders were rnanifest. Meanwhile Maui, changing himself into a white bird, flew up into the sky to catch the ghost of the goddess of rain which had escaped from the burning oven. Having caught this spirit, he rolled it in some kapa cloth which lie kept for food to be placed in an oven and carried it to a place in the forest on the mountain side where again the attempt was made to "burn the rain," but a great drop escaped and sped upward into the sky. Again Maui can ht the ghost of the goddess and carried it to a pali or precipice below the great volcano Kilauea, where he again tried to destroy it in the heat of a great lava oven, but this time the spirit escaped and found a safe refuge among kukui trees on the mountain side, from which she sometimes rises in clouds which the natives say are the sure sign of rain.

Whether this Maui legend has any real connection with the two Hinas and the famine we do not surely know. The legend ordinarily told among the Hawaiians says that after five days had passed the retainers decided on their own responsibility to open the imu. No woman had appeared to give them directions. Nothing but a mysterious rain cloud over the hill. In doubt and fear, the dirt was thrown off and the mats removed. Nothing was found but the ashes of Hina Kuluua. There was no food for her followers and the goddess had lost all power of appearing as a chiefess. Her bitter and thoughtless jealousy brought destruction upon herself and her people. The ghosts of Hina Ke Ahi and Hina Kuluua sometimes draw near to the old hills in the form of the fire of flowing lava or clouds of rain while the old men and women tell the story of the Hinas, the sisters of Maui, who were laid upon the burning stones of the imus of a famine.

    Legends of Maui, A Demi-God of Polynesia, by W. D. Westervelt, [1910], at sacred-texts.com

  

XV.

 

HINA, THE WOMAN IN THE MOON.

THE Wailuku river has by its banks far up the mountain side some of the most ancient of the various interesting picture rocks of the Hawaiian Islands. The origin of the Hawaiian picture writing is a problem still unsolved, but the picture rocks of the Wailuku river are called "na kii o Maui," "the Maui pictures." Their antiquity is beyond question.

The most prominent figure cut in these rocks is that of the crescent moon. The Hawaiian legends do not attempt any direct explanation of the meaning of this picture writing. The traditions of the Polynesians both concerning Hina and Matti look to Hina as the moon goddess of their ancestors, and in some measure the Hawaiian stories confirm the traditions of the other island groups of the Pacific.

Fornander, in his history of the Polynesian race, gives the Hawaiian story of Hina's ascent to the moon, but applies it to a Hina the wife of a chief called Aikanaka rather than to the Hina of Hilo, the wife of Akalana, the father of Maui. However, Fornander evidently found some difficulty in determining the status of the one to whom he refers the legend, for he calls her "the mysterious wife of Aikanaka." In some of the Hawaiian legends Hina, the mother of Maui, lived on the southeast coast of the Island Maui at the foot of a hill famous in Hawaiian story as Kauiki. Fornander says that this "mysterious wife" of Aikanaka bore her children Puna and Huna, the latter a noted sea-rover among the Polynesians, at the foot of this hill Kauiki. It can very easily be supposed that a legend of the Ilina connected with the demi-god Maui might be given during the course of centuries to the other Hina, the mother of Huna. The application of the legend would make no difference to anyone were it not for the fact that the story of Hina and her ascent to the moon has been handed down in different forms among the traditions of Samoa, New Zealand, Tonga, Hervey Islands, Fate Islands, Nauru and other Pacific island groups. The Polynesian name of the moon, Mahina or Masina, is derived from Hina, the goddess mother of Matii. It is even possible to trace the name back to "Sin," the moon god of the Assyrians.

The moon goddess of Ponape was Ina-inaram. (Hawaiian Hina-malamalama), "Hina giving light."

In the Paumotan Islands an eclipse of the sun is called Higa-higa-hana (Hina-hiua-hana), "The act (hana) of Hina-the moon."

In New Zealand moonless nights were called "Dark Hina."

In Tahiti it is said there was war among the gods. They cursed the stars. Hina saved them, although they lost a little light. Then they cursed the sea, but Hina preserved the tides. They cursed the rivers, but Hina saved the springs-the moving waters inland, like the tides in the ocean.

The Hawaiians say that Hina and her maidens pounded out the softest, finest kapa cloth on the long, thick kapa board at the foot of Kauiki. Incessantly the restless sea dashed its spray over the picturesque groups of splintered lava rocks which form the Kauiki headland. Here above the reach of the surf still lies the long, black stone into which the legends say Hina's kapa board was changed. Here Hina took the leaves of the hala tree and, after the manner of the Hawaiian women of the ages past, braided mats for the household to sleep upon, and from the nuts of the kukui trees fashioned the torches which were burned around the homes of those of high chief rank.

At last she became weary of her work among mortals. Her family had become more and more troublesome. It was said that her sons were unruly and her husband lazy and shiftless. She looked into the heavens and determined to flee up the pathway of her rainbow through the clouds.

The Sun was very bright and Hina said, "I will go to the Sun." So she left her home very early in the morning and climbed up, higher, higher, until the heat of the rays of the sun beat strongly upon her and weakened her so that she could scarcely crawl along her beautiful path. Up a little higher and the clouds no longer gave her even the least shadow. The heat from the sun was so great that she began to feel the fire shriveling and torturing her. Quickly she slipped down into the storms around her rainbow and then back to earth. As the day passed her strength came back, and when the full moon rose through the shadows of the night she said, "I will climb to the moon and there find rest."

But when Hina began to go upward her husband saw her and called to her: "Do not go into the heavens." She answered him: `My mind is fixed; I will go to my new husband, the moon." And she climbed up higher and higher. Her husband ran toward her. She was almost out of reach, but he leaped and caught her foot. This did not deter Hina from her purpose. She shook off her husband, but as he fell he broke her leg so that the lower part came off in his hands. Hina went up through the stars, crying out the strongest incantations she could use. The powers of the night aided her. The mysterious hands of darkness lifted her, until she stood at the door of the moon. She had packed her calabash with her most priceless possessions and had carried it with her even when injured by her cruel husband. With her calabash she limped into the moon and found her abiding home. When the moon is full, the Hawaiians of the long ago, aye and even today, look into the quiet, silvery light and see the goddess in her celestial home, her calabash by her side.

The natives call her now Lono-moku, "the crippled Lono." From this watch tower in the heavens she pointed out to Kahai, one of her descendents, the way to rise up into the skies. The ancient chant thus describes his ascent:

	 
		"The rainbow is the path of Kahai.
		 Kahai rose. Kahai bestirred himself.
		 Kahai passed on the floating cloud of Kane.
		 Perplexed were the eyes of Alihi.
		 Kahai passed on on the glancing light.
		 The glancing light on men and canoes.
		 Above was Hanaiakamalama." (Hina).
		
		 Thus under the care of his ancestress Hina, Kahai, the great sea-rover, made his ascent in quest of adventures among the immortals.

In the Tongan Islands the legends say that Hina remains in the moon watching over the "fire-walkers" as their great protecting goddess.

The Hervey Island traditions say that the Moon (Marama) had often seen Hina and admired her, and at last had come down and caught her up to live with himself. The moonlight in its glory is called Inamotea, "the brightness of Ina."

The story as told on Atiu Island (one of the Society group) is that Hina took her human husband with her to the moon, where they dwelt happily for a time, but as he grew old she prepared a rainbow, down which he descended to the earth to die, leaving Hina forevermore as "the woman in the moon." The Savage Islanders worshiped the spirits of their ancestors, saying that many of them went up to the land of Sina, the always bright land in the skies. To the natives of Niue Island, Hina has been the goddess ruling over all tapa making. They say that her home is "Motu a Hina," "the island of Hina," the home of the dead in the skies.

The Samoans said that the Moon received Hina and a child, and also her tapa board and mallet and material for the manufacture of tapa cloth. Therefore, when the moon is shining in full splendor, they shade their eyes and look for the goddess and the tools with which she fashions the tapa clouds in the heavens.

The New Zealand legend says that the woman went after water in the night. As she passed down the path to the spring the bright light of the full moon made the way easy for her quick footsteps, but when she had filled her calabash and started homeward, suddenly the bright light was hidden by a passing cloud and she stumbled against a stone in the path and fell to the ground, spilling the water she was carrying. Then she became very angry and cursed the moon heartily. Then the moon became angry and swiftly swept down upon her from the skies, grasping her and lifting her up. In her terrible fight she caught a small tree with one hand and her calabash with the other. But oh! the strong moon pulled her up with the tree and the calabash and there in the full m,oon they can all be traced when the nights are clear.

Pleasant or Nauru Island, in which a missionary from Central Union Church, Honolulu, is laboring, tells the story of Gigu, a beautiful young woman, who has many of the experiences of Hina. She opened the eyes of the Mother of the Moon as Hina, in some of the Polynesian legends, is represented to have opened the eyes of one of the great goddesses, and in reward is married to Maraman, the Moon, with whom she lives ever after, and in whose embrace she can always be seen when the moon is full. Gigu is Hina under another and more guttural form of speech. Maraman is the same as Malama, one of the Polynesian names for the moon.

  


===== BOOK: mba.txt =====


    
Myths of Babylonia and Assyria, by Donald A. MacKenzie, [1915], at sacred-texts.com

  

MYTHS OF BABYLONIA AND ASSYRIA

  

By DONALD A. MACKENZIE

  

With Historical Narrative & Comparative Notes.

  

Illustrations in Colour and Monochrome.

  

THE GRESHAM PUBLISHING COMPANY

  

34 SOUTHAMPTON ST. STRAND LONDON

  

[1915]

Click to enlarge
Cover

Click to enlarge
Frontispiece: THE TEMPTATION OF EA-BANI
 From the Painting by E. Wallcousins.

Click to enlarge
Title Page

  Scanned, proofed, and formatted at sacred-texts.com, November 2005, by John Bruno Hare. This text is in the public domain in the United States because it was published prior to 1923.

     
Myths of Babylonia and Assyria, by Donald A. MacKenzie, [1915], at sacred-texts.com

[p. v]

  

PREFACE

This volume deals with the myths and legends of Babylonia and Assyria, and as these reflect the civilization in which they developed, a historical narrative has been provided, beginning with the early Sumerian Age and concluding with the periods of the Persian and Grecian Empires. Over thirty centuries of human progress are thus passed under review.

During this vast interval of time the cultural influences emanating from the Tigro-Euphrates valley reached far-distant shores along the intersecting avenues of trade, and in consequence of the periodic and widespread migrations of peoples who had acquired directly or indirectly the leavening elements of Mesopotamian civilization. Even at the present day traces survive in Europe of the early cultural impress of the East; our "Signs of the Zodiac", for instance, as well as the system of measuring time and space by using 60 as a basic numeral for calculation, are inheritances from ancient Babylonia.

As in the Nile Valley, however, it is impossible to trace in Mesopotamia the initiatory stages of prehistoric culture based on the agricultural mode of life. What is generally called the "Dawn of History" is really the beginning of a later age of progress; it is necessary to account for the degree of civilization attained at the earliest period of which we have knowledge by postulating

[p. vi]

a remoter age of culture of much longer duration than that which separates the "Dawn" from the age in which we now live. Although Sumerian (early Babylonian) civilization presents distinctively local features which justify the application of the term "indigenous" in the broad sense, it is found, like that of Egypt, to be possessed of certain elements which suggest exceedingly remote influences and connections at present obscure. Of special interest in this regard is Professor Budge's mature and well-deliberated conclusion that "both the Sumerians and early Egyptians derived their primeval gods from some common but exceedingly ancient source". The prehistoric burial customs of these separate peoples are also remarkably similar and they resemble closely in turn those of the Neolithic Europeans. The cumulative effect of such evidence forces us to regard as not wholly satisfactory and conclusive the hypothesis of cultural influence. A remote racial connection is possible, and is certainly worthy of consideration when so high an authority as Professor Frazer, author of The Golden Bough, is found prepared to admit that the widespread "homogeneity of beliefs" may have been due to "homogeneity of race". It is shown ([*Chapter 1]) that certain ethnologists have accumulated data which establish a racial kinship between the Neolithic Europeans, the proto-Egyptians, the Sumerians, the southern Persians, and the Aryo-Indians.

Throughout this volume comparative notes have been compiled in dealing with Mesopotamian beliefs with purpose to assist the reader towards the study of linking myths and legends. Interesting parallels have been gleaned from various religious literatures in Europe, Egypt, India, and elsewhere. It will be found that certain relics of Babylonian intellectual life, which have a distinctive geographical significance, were shared by

[p. vii]

peoples in other cultural areas where they were similarly overlaid with local colour. Modes of thought were the products of modes of life and were influenced in their development by human experiences. The influence of environment on the growth of culture has long been recognized, but consideration must also be given to the choice of environment by peoples who had adopted distinctive habits of life. Racial units migrated from cultural areas to districts suitable for colonization and carried with them a heritage of immemorial beliefs and customs which were regarded as being quite as indispensable for their welfare as their implements and domesticated animals.

When consideration is given in this connection to the conservative element in primitive religion, it is not surprising to find that the growth of religious myths was not so spontaneous in early civilizations of the highest order as has hitherto been assumed. It seems clear that in each great local mythology we have to deal, in the first place, not with symbolized ideas so much as symbolized folk beliefs of remote antiquity and, to a certain degree, of common inheritance. It may not be found possible to arrive at a conclusive solution of the most widespread, and therefore the most ancient folk myths, such as, for instance, the Dragon Myth, or the myth of the culture hero. Nor, perhaps, is it necessary that we should concern ourselves greatly regarding the origin of the idea of the dragon, which in one country symbolized fiery drought and in another overwhelming river floods.

The student will find footing on surer ground by following the process which exalts the dragon of the folk tale into the symbol of evil and primordial chaos. The Babylonian Creation Myth, for instance, can be shown to be a localized and glorified legend in which the hero and

[p. viii]

his tribe are displaced by the war god and his fellow deities whose welfare depends on his prowess. Merodach kills the dragon, Tiamat, as the heroes of Eur-Asian folk stories kill grisly hags, by casting his weapon down her throat.

He severed her inward parts, he pierced her heart,
 He overcame her and cut off her life;
 He cast down her body and stood upon it . . .
 And with merciless club he smashed her skull.
 He cut through the channels of her blood,
 And he made the north wind to bear it away into secret places.

[paragraph continues] Afterwards

He divided the flesh of the Ku-pu and devised a cunning plan.

Mr. L. W. King, from whose scholarly Seven Tablets of Creation these lines are quoted, notes that "Ku-pu" is a word of uncertain meaning. Jensen suggests "trunk, body". Apparently Merodach obtained special know-ledge after dividing, and perhaps eating, the "Ku-pu". His "cunning plan" is set forth in detail: he cut up the dragon's body:

He split her up like a flat fish into two halves.

He formed the heavens with one half and the earth with the other, and then set the universe in order. His power and wisdom as the Demiurge were derived from the fierce and powerful Great Mother, Tiamat.

In other dragon stories the heroes devise their plans after eating the dragon's heart. According to Philostratus, [*1] Apollonius of Tyana was worthy of being remembered for two things--his bravery in travelling among fierce robber tribes, not then subject to Rome, and his

[p. ix]

wisdom in learning the language of birds and other animals as the Arabs do. This accomplishment the Arabs acquired, Philostratus explains, by eating the hearts of dragons. The "animals" who utter magic words are, of course, the Fates. Siegfried of the Nibelungenlied, after slaying the Regin dragon, makes himself invulnerable by bathing in its blood. He obtains wisdom by eating the heart: as soon as he tastes it he can understand the language of birds, and the birds reveal to him that Mimer is waiting to slay him. Sigurd similarly makes his plans after eating the heart of the Fafner dragon. In Scottish legend Finn-mac-Coul obtains the power to divine secrets by partaking of a small portion of the seventh salmon associated with the "well dragon", and Michael Scott and other folk heroes become great physicians after tasting the juices of the middle part of the body of the white snake. The hero of an Egyptian folk tale slays a "death-less snake" by cutting it in two parts and putting sand between the parts. He then obtains from the box, of which it is the guardian, the book of spells; when he reads a page of the spells he knows what the birds of the sky, the fish of the deep, and the beasts of the hill say; the book gives him power to enchant "the heaven and the earth, the abyss, the mountains and the sea". [*1]

Magic and religion were never separated in Babylonia; not only the priests but also the gods performed magical ceremonies. Ea, Merodach's father, overcame Apsu, the husband of the dragon Tiamat, by means of spells: he was "the great magician of the gods". Merodach's division of the "Ku-pu" was evidently an act of contagious magic; by eating or otherwise disposing of the vital part of the fierce and wise mother dragon, he became endowed with her attributes, and was able to proceed

[p. x]

with the work of creation. Primitive peoples in our own day, like the Abipones of Paraguay, eat the flesh of fierce and cunning animals so that their strength, courage, and wisdom may be increased.

The direct influence exercised by cultural contact, on the other hand, may be traced when myths with an alien geographical setting are found among peoples whose experiences could never have given them origin. In India, where the dragon symbolizes drought and the western river deities are female, the Manu fish and flood legend resembles closely the Babylonian, and seems to throw light upon it. Indeed, the Manu myth appears to have been derived from the lost flood story in which Ea figured prominently in fish form as the Preserver. The Babylonian Ea cult and the Indian Varuna cult had apparently much in common, as is shown.

Throughout this volume special attention has been paid to the various peoples who were in immediate contact with, and were influenced by, Mesopotamian civilization. The histories are traced in outline of the Kingdoms of Elam, Urartu (Ancient Armenia), Mitanni, and the Hittites, while the story of the rise and decline of the Hebrew civilization, as narrated in the Bible and referred to in Mesopotamian inscriptions, is related from the earliest times until the captivity in the Neo-Babylonian period and the restoration during the age of the Persian Empire. The struggles waged between the great Powers for the control of trade routes, and the periodic migrations of pastoral warrior folks who determined the fate of empires, are also dealt with, so that light may be thrown on the various processes and influences associated with the developments of local religions and mythologies. Special chapters, with comparative notes, are devoted to the Ishtar-Tammuz myths, the Semiramis legends, Ashur

[p. xi]

and his symbols, and the origin and growth of astrology and astronomy.

The ethnic disturbances which occurred at various well-defined periods in the Tigro-Euphrates valley were not always favourable to the advancement of knowledge and the growth of culture. The invaders who absorbed Sumerian civilization may have secured more settled conditions by welding together political units, but seem to have exercised a retrogressive influence on the growth of local culture. "Babylonian religion", writes Dr. Langdon, "appears to have reached its highest level in the Sumerian period, or at least not later than 2000 B.C. From that period onward to the first century B.C. popular religion maintained with great difficulty the sacred standards of the past." Although it has been customary to characterize Mesopotamian civilization as Semitic, modern research tends to show that the indigenous inhabitants, who were non-Semitic, were its originators. Like the proto-Egyptians, the early Cretans, and the Pelasgians in southern Europe and Asia Minor, they invariably achieved the intellectual conquest of their conquerors, as in the earliest times they had won victories over the antagonistic forces of nature. If the modern view is accepted that these ancient agriculturists of the goddess cult were of common racial origin, it is to the most representative communities of the widespread Mediterranean race that the credit belongs of laying the foundations of the brilliant civilizations of the ancient world in southern Europe, and Egypt, and the valley of the Tigris and Euphrates.

Footnotes

^viii:1 Life of Apollonius of Tyana, i, 20.

^ix:1 Egyptian Tales (Second Series), W. M. Flinders Petrie, pp. 98 et seq.

     
Myths of Babylonia and Assyria, by Donald A. MacKenzie, [1915], at sacred-texts.com

[p. xiii]

CONTENTS

          CHAP.

        

       Page

     
       

       INTRODUCTION

       <page xxi>

     
      I.

       THE RACES AND   EARLY CIVILIZATION OF BABYLONIA

       <page 1>

     
      II.

       THE LAND OF   RIVERS AND THE GOD OF THE DEEP

       <page 21>

     
      III.

       RIVAL PANTHEONS   AND REPRESENTATIVE DEITIES

       <page 40>

     
      IV.

       DEMONS,   FAIRIES, AND GHOSTS

       <page 59>

     
      V.

       MYTHS OF TAMMUZ   AND ISHTAR

       <page 81>

     
      VI.

       WARS OF THE   CITY STATES OF SUMER AND AKKAD

       <page 109>

     
      VII.

       CREATION   LEGEND: MERODACH THE DRAGON SLAYER

       <page 138>

     
      VIII.

       DEIFIED HEROES:   ETANA AND GILGAMESH

       <page 163>

     
      IX.

       DELUGE LEGEND,   THE ISLAND OF THE BLESSED, AND HADES

       <page 190>

     
      X.

       BUILDINGS AND   LAWS AND CUSTOMS OF BABYLON

       <page 217>

     
      XI.

       THE GOLDEN AGE   OF BABYLONIA

       <page 240>

     
      XII.

       RISE OF THE   HITTITES, MITANNIANS, KASSITES, HYKSOS, AND ASSYRIANS

       <page 260>

     
      XIII.

       ASTROLOGY AND   ASTRONOMY

       <page 287>

     
      XIV.

       ASHUR THE   NATIONAL GOD OF ASSYRIA

       <page 326>

     
      XV.

       CONFLICTS FOR   TRADE AND SUPREMACY

       <page 356>

     
      XVI.

       RACE MOVEMENTS   THAT SHATTERED EMPIRES

       <page 376>

     
       

       [p. xiv]

        

     
      CHAP.

        

       Page

     
      XVII.

       THE HEBREWS IN   ASSYRIAN HISTORY

       <page 394>

     
      XVIII.

       THE AGE OF   SEMIRAMIS

       <page 417>

     
      XIX.

       ASSYRIA'S AGE   OF SPLENDOUR

       <page 444>

     
      XX.

       THE LAST DAYS   OF ASSYRIA AND BABYLONIA

       <page 477>

     
       

       INDEX

       <page 501>

     
    

     
Myths of Babylonia and Assyria, by Donald A. MacKenzie, [1915], at sacred-texts.com

[p. xv]

  

PLATES IN COLOUR

           

       Page

     
      THE TEMPTATION   OF EA-BANI (p. 173)
    From the painting by E. Wallcousins

       Frontispiece

     
      ISHTAR IN HADES   facing 
    From the painting by E. Wallcousins

       96

     
      MERODACH SETS   FORTH TO ATTACK TIAMAT
    From the painting by E. Wallcousins

       144

     
      THE SLAYING OF   THE BULL OF ISHTAR
    From the painting by E. Wallcousins

       176

     
      THE BABYLONIAN   DELUGE
    From the painting by E. Wallcousins

       192

     
      NEBUCHADNEZZAR   IN THE HANGING GARDENS 
    From the painting by E. Wallcousins

       220

     
      THE BABYLONIAN   MARRIAGE MARKET
    From the painting by Edwin Long, R.A., in the Royal
    Holloway College. By permission of the Trustees

       224

     
      THE SHEPHERD   FINDS THE BABE SEMIRAMIS
    From the painting by E. Wallcousins

       424

     
    

     
Myths of Babylonia and Assyria, by Donald A. MacKenzie, [1915], at sacred-texts.com

[p. xvii]

  

PLATES IN MONOCHROME

           

       PAGE

     
      EXAMPLES OF   RACIAL TYPES facing
    From a drawing by E. Wallcousins

       2

     
      STATUE OF A   ROYAL PERSONAGE OR OFFICIAL OF NON-SEMITIC ORIGIN

       12

     
      WORSHIP OF THE   MOON GOD (CYLINDER-SEAL)

       50

     
      WINGED   MAN-HEADED LION
    From N.W. Palace of Nimroud

       62

     
      TWO FIGURES OF   DEMONS

       72

     
      WINGED HUMAN-HEADED   COW(?)
    From Kouyunjik (Nineveh)

       100

     
      CYLINDER-SEAL   IMPRESSIONS SHOWING MYTHOLOGICAL FIGURES AND DEITIES

       106

     
      PLAQUE OF   UR-NINA

       116

     
      SILVER VASE   DEDICATED TO THE GOD NIN-GIRSU BY ENTEMENA

       120

     
      STELE OF NARAM   SIN

       128

     
      GUDEA
    From the statue in the Louvre, Paris

       130

     
      [p. xviii]

        

     
       

       PAGE

     
      "THE SEVEN   TABLETS OF CREATION" facing
    From the library of Ashur-bani-pal at Kouyunjik (Nineveh)

       138

     
      SLIPPER-SHAPED   COFFIN, MADE OF GLAZED EARTHENWARE

       214

     
      STELE OF   HAMMURABI, WITH "CODE OF LAWS"

       222

     
      HAMMURABI   RECEIVING THE "CODE OF LAWS" FROM THE SUN GOD

       248

     
      THE HORSE IN   WARFARE (ASHUR-NATSIR-PAL AND ARMY ADVANCING
    Marble slab from N.W. Palace of Nimroud

       270

     
      LETTER FROM   TUSHRATTA, KING OF MITANNI, TO AMENHOTEP III, KING OF EGYPT

       280

     
      THE GOD NINIP   AND ANOTHER DEITY

       302

     
      SYMBOLS OF   DEITIES AS ASTRONOMICAL SIGNS
    From sculptured stone in the British Museum

       306

     
      ASHUR SYMBOLS

       334

     
      WINGED DEITIES   KNEELING BESIDE A SACRED TREE
    Marble slab from N.W. Palace of Nimroud

       340

     
      EAGLE-HEADED   WINGED DEITY (ASHUR)

       344

     
      ASSYRIAN KING   HUNTING LIONS

       384

     
      TYRIAN GALLEY   PUTTING OUT TO SEA
    Marble slab from Kouyunjik (Nineveh)

       388

     
      STATUE OF   ASHUR-NATSIR-PAL
    From S.W. Palace of Nimroud

       396

     
      [p. xix]

        

     
       

       PAGE

     
      DETAILS FROM   SECOND SIDE OF BLACK OBELISK OF SHALMANESER III facing

       410

     
      STATUE OF NEBO,   DEDICATED BY ADAD-NIRARI IV AND THE QUEEN SAMMU-RAMMAT

       422

     
      TIGLATH-PILESER   IV IN HIS CHARIOT

       446

     
      COLOSSAL WINGED   AND HUMAN-HEADED BULL AND MYTHOLOGICAL BEING
    From doorway in Palace of Sargon at Khorsabad

       456

     
      ASSAULT ON THE   CITY OF . . .ALAMMU (JERUSALEM) BY THE ASSYRIANS UNDER SENNACHERIB
    Marble slab from Kouyunjik (Nineveh)

       468

     
      ASHUR-BANI-PAL   RECLINING IN A BOWER
    Marble slab from Kouyunjik (Nineveh)

       486

     
      PERSIANS   BRINGING CHARIOTS, RINGS, AND WREATHS
    Bas-relief from Persepolis

       494

     
      MAP OF   BABYLONIA AND ASSYRIA

       xx

     
    

     
Myths of Babylonia and Assyria, by Donald A. MacKenzie, [1915], at sacred-texts.com

[p. xx]

Click to enlarge
Map of Babylonia and Assyria (175 Kb)

A High Resolution image of this map is also available:

High resolution Map of Babylonia and Assyria (405 Kb)

 

     
Myths of Babylonia and Assyria, by Donald A. MacKenzie, [1915], at sacred-texts.com

[p. xxi]

  

INTRODUCTION

Ancient Babylonia has made stronger appeal to the imagination of Christendom than even Ancient Egypt, because of its association with the captivity of the Hebrews, whose sorrows are enshrined in the familiar psalm:

By the rivers of Babylon, there we sat down;
 Yea, we wept, when we remembered Zion.
 We hanged our harps upon the willows. . . .

[paragraph continues] In sacred literature proud Babylon became the city of the anti-Christ, the symbol of wickedness and cruelty and human vanity. Early Christians who suffered persecution compared their worldly state to that of the oppressed and disconsolate Hebrews, and, like them, they sighed for Jerusalem--the new Jerusalem. When St. John the Divine had visions of the ultimate triumph of Christianity, he referred to its enemies--the unbelievers and persecutors--as the citizens of the earthly Babylon, the doom of which he pronounced in stately and memorable phrases:

Babylon the great is fallen, is fallen,
 And is become the habitation of devils,
 And the hold of every foul spirit,
 And a cage of every unclean and hateful bird . . . [p. xxii]
 For her sins have reached unto heaven
 And God hath remembered her iniquities . . .
 The merchants of the earth shall weep and mourn over her,
 For no man buyeth their merchandise any more.

"At the noise of the taking of Babylon", cried Jeremiah, referring to the original Babylon, "the earth is moved, and the cry is heard among the nations. . . . It shall be no more inhabited forever; neither shall it be dwelt in from generation to generation." The Christian Saint rendered more profound the brooding silence of the desolated city of his vision by voicing memories of its beauty and gaiety and bustling trade:

The voice of harpers, and musicians, and of pipers and trumpeters shall be heard no more at all in thee;
 And no craftsman, of whatsoever craft he be, shall be found any more in thee;
 And the light of a candle shall shine no more at all in thee;
 And the voice of the bridegroom and of the bride shall be heard no more at all in thee:
 For thy merchants were the great men of the earth;
 For by thy sorceries were all nations deceived.
 And in her was found the blood of prophets, and of saints,
 And of all that were slain upon the earth. [*1]

[paragraph continues] So for nearly two thousand years has the haunting memory of the once-powerful city pervaded Christian literature, while its broken walls and ruined temples and palaces lay buried deep in desert sand. The history of the ancient land of which it was the capital survived in but meagre and fragmentary form, mingled with accumulated myths and legends. A slim volume contained all that could be derived from references in the Old Testament and the compilations of classical writers.

[p. xxiii]

It is only within the past half-century that the wonderful story of early Eastern civilization has been gradually pieced together by excavators and linguists, who have thrust open the door of the past and probed the hidden secrets of long ages. We now know more about "the land of Babel" than did not only the Greeks and Romans, but even the Hebrew writers who foretold its destruction. Glimpses are being afforded us of its life and manners and customs for some thirty centuries before the captives of Judah uttered lamentations on the banks of its reedy canals. The sites of some of the ancient cities of Babylonia and Assyria were identified by European officials and travellers in the East early in the nineteenth century, and a few relics found their way to Europe. But before Sir A. H. Layard set to work as an excavator in the "forties", "a case scarcely three feet square", as he himself wrote, "enclosed all that remained not only of the great city of Nineveh, but of Babylon itself". [*1]

Layard, the distinguished pioneer Assyriologist, was an Englishman of Huguenot descent, who was born in Paris. Through his mother he inherited a strain of Spanish blood. During his early boyhood he resided in Italy, and his education, which began there, was continued in schools in France, Switzerland, and England. He was a man of scholarly habits and fearless and independent character, a charming writer, and an accomplished fine-art critic; withal he was a great traveller, a strenuous politician, and an able diplomatist. In 1845, while sojourning in the East, he undertook the exploration of ancient Assyrian cities. He first set to work at Kalkhi, the Biblical Calah. Three years previously M. P. C. Botta, the French consul at Mosul, had begun to investigate the Nineveh mounds; but these he abandoned

[p. xxiv]

for a mound near Khorsabad which proved to be the site of the city erected by "Sargon the Later", who is referred to by Isaiah. The relics discovered by Botta and his successor, Victor Place, are preserved in the Louvre.

At Kalkhi and Nineveh Layard uncovered the palaces of some of the most famous Assyrian Emperors, including the Biblical Shalmaneser and Esarhaddon, and obtained the colossi, bas reliefs, and other treasures of antiquity which formed the nucleus of the British Museum's unrivalled Assyrian collection. He also conducted diggings at Babylon and Niffer (Nippur). His work was continued by his assistant, Hormuzd Rassam, a native Christian of Mosul, near Nineveh. Rassam studied for a time at Oxford.

The discoveries made by Layard and Botta stimulated others to follow their example. In the "fifties" Mr. W. K. Loftus engaged in excavations at Larsa and Erech, where important discoveries were made of ancient buildings, ornaments, tablets, sarcophagus graves, and pot burials, while Mr. J. E. Taylor operated at Ur, the seat of the moon cult and the birthplace of Abraham, and at Eridu, which is generally regarded as the cradle of early Babylonian (Sumerian) civilization.

In 1854 Sir Henry Rawlinson superintended diggings at Birs Nimrud (Borsippa, near Babylon), and excavated relics of the Biblical Nebuchadrezzar. This notable archaeologist began his career in the East as an officer in the Bombay army. He distinguished himself as a political agent and diplomatist. While resident at Baghdad, he devoted his leisure time to cuneiform studies. One of his remarkable feats was the copying of the famous trilingual rock inscription of Darius the Great on a mountain cliff at Behistun, in Persian Kurdistan. This work was carried out at great personal risk, for the cliff

[p. xxv]

is 1700 feet high and the sculptures and inscriptions are situated about 300 feet from the ground.

Darius was the first monarch of his line to make use of the Persian cuneiform script, which in this case he utilized in conjunction with the older and more complicated Assyro-Babylonian alphabetic and syllabic characters to record a portion of the history of his reign. Rawlinson's translation of the famous inscription was an important contribution towards the decipherment of the cuneiform writings of Assyria and Babylonia.

Twelve years of brilliant Mesopotamian discovery concluded in 1854, and further excavations had to be suspended until the "seventies" on account of the unsettled political conditions of the ancient land and the difficulties experienced in dealing with Turkish officials. During the interval, however, archaeologists and philologists were kept fully engaged studying the large amount of material which had been accumulated. Sir Henry Rawlinson began the issue of his monumental work The Cuneiform Inscriptions of Western Asia on behalf of the British Museum.

Goodspeed refers to the early archaeological work as the "Heroic Period" of research, and says that the "Modern Scientific Period" began with Mr. George Smith's expedition to Nineveh in 1873.

George Smith, like Henry Schliemann, the pioneer investigator of pre-Hellenic culture, was a self-educated man of humble origin. He was born at Chelsea in 1840. At fourteen he was apprenticed to an engraver. He was a youth of studious habits and great originality, and interested himself intensely in the discoveries which had been made by Layard and other explorers. At the British Museum, which he visited regularly to pore over the Assyrian inscriptions, he attracted the attention of Sir

[p. xxvi]

[paragraph continues] Henry Rawlinson. So greatly impressed was Sir Henry by the young man's enthusiasm and remarkable intelligence that he allowed him the use of his private room and provided casts and squeezes of inscriptions to assist him in his studies. Smith made rapid progress. His earliest discovery was the date of the payment of tribute by Jehu, King of Israel, to the Assyrian Emperor Shalmaneser. Sir Henry availed himself of the young investigator's assistance in producing the third volume of The Cuneiform Inscriptions.

In 1867 Smith received an appointment in the Assyriology Department of the British Museum, and a few years later became famous throughout Christendom as the translator of fragments of the Babylonian Deluge Legend from tablets sent to London by Rassam. Sir Edwin Arnold, the poet and Orientalist, was at the time editor of the Daily Telegraph, and performed a memorable service to modern scholarship by dispatching Smith, on behalf of his paper, to Nineveh to search for other fragments of the Ancient Babylonian epic. Rassam had obtained the tablets from the great library of the cultured Emperor Ashur-bani-pal, "the great and noble Asnapper" of the Bible, [*1] who took delight, as he himself recorded, in

The wisdom of Ea, [*2] the art of song, the treasures of science.

This royal patron of learning included in his library collection, copies and translations of tablets from Babylonia. Some of these were then over 2000 years old. The Babylonian literary relics were, indeed, of as great antiquity to Ashur-bani-pal as that monarch's relics are to us.

The Emperor invoked Nebo, god of wisdom and learning, to bless his "books", praying:

[p. xxvii]

Forever, O Nebo, King of all heaven and earth,
 Look gladly upon this Library
 Of Ashur-bani-pal, his (thy) shepherd, reverencer of thy divinity. [*1]

[paragraph continues] Mr. George Smith's expedition to Nineveh in 1873 was exceedingly fruitful of results. More tablets were discovered and translated. In the following year he returned to the ancient Assyrian city on behalf of the British Museum, and added further by his scholarly achievements to his own reputation and the world's knowledge of antiquity. His last expedition was made early in 1876; on his homeward journey he was stricken down with fever, and on 19th August he died at Aleppo in his thirty-sixth year. So was a brilliant career brought to an untimely end.

Rassam was engaged to continue Smith's great work, and between 1877 and 1882 made many notable discoveries in Assyria and Babylonia, including the bronze doors of a Shalmaneser temple, the sun temple at Sippar; the palace of the Biblical Nebuchadrezzar, which was famous for its "hanging gardens"; a cylinder of Nabonidus, King of Babylon; and about fifty thousand tablets.

M. de Sarzec, the French consul at Bassorah, began in 1877 excavations at the ancient Sumerian city of Lagash (Shirpula), and continued them until 1900. He found thousands of tablets, many bas reliefs, votive statuettes, which worshippers apparently pinned on sacred shrines, the famous silver vase of King Entemena, statues of King Gudea, and various other treasures which are now in the Louvre.

The pioneer work achieved by British and French excavators stimulated interest all over the world. An

[p. xxviii]

expedition was sent out from the United States by the University of Pennsylvania, and began to operate at Nippur in 18 88. The Germans, who have displayed great activity in the domain of philological research, are at present represented by an exploring party which is conducting the systematic exploration of the ruins of Babylon. Even the Turkish Government has encouraged research work, and its excavators have accumulated a fine collection of antiquities at Constantinople. Among the archaeologists and linguists of various nationalities who are devoting themselves to the study of ancient Assyrian and Babylonian records and literature, and gradually unfolding the story of ancient Eastern civilization, those of our own country occupy a prominent position. One of the most interesting discoveries of recent years has been new fragments of the Creation Legend by L. W. King of the British Museum, whose scholarly work, The Seven Tablets of Creation, is the standard work on the subject.

The archaeological work conducted in Persia, Asia Minor, Palestine, Cyprus, Crete, the Aegean, and Egypt has thrown, and is throwing, much light on the relations between the various civilizations of antiquity. In addition to the Hittite discoveries, with which the name of Professor Sayce will ever be associated as a pioneer, we now hear much of the hitherto unknown civilizations of Mitanni and Urartu (ancient Armenia), which contributed to the shaping of ancient history. The Biblical narratives of the rise and decline of the Hebrew kingdoms have also been greatly elucidated.

In this volume, which deals mainly with the intellectual life of the Mesopotamian peoples, a historical narrative has been provided as an appropriate setting for the myths and legends. In this connection the reader must be reminded that the chronology of the early

[p. xxix]

period is still uncertain. The approximate dates which are given, however, are those now generally adopted by most European and American authorities. Early Babylonian history of the Sumerian period begins some time prior to 3000 B.C.; Sargon of Akkad flourished about 2650 B.C., and Hammurabi not long before or after 2000 B.C. The inflated system of dating which places Mena of Egypt as far back as 5500 B.C. and Sargon at about 3800 B.C. has been abandoned by the majority of prominent archaeologists, the exceptions including Professor Flinders Petrie. Recent discoveries appear to support the new chronological system. "There is a growing conviction", writes Mr. Hawes, "that Cretan evidence, especially in the eastern part of the island, favours the minimum (Berlin) system of Egyptian chronology, according to which the Sixth (Egyptian) Dynasty began at c. 2540 B.C. and the Twelfth at c. 2000 B.C. [*1] Petrie dates the beginning of the Twelfth Dynasty at c. 3400 B.C.

To students of comparative folklore and mythology the myths and legends of Babylonia present many features of engrossing interest. They are of great antiquity, yet not a few seem curiously familiar. We must not conclude, however, that because a European legend may bear resemblances to one translated from a cuneiform tablet it is necessarily of Babylonian origin. Certain beliefs, and the myths which were based upon them, are older than even the civilization of the Tigro-Euphrates valley. They belong, it would appear, to a stock of common inheritance from an uncertain cultural centre of immense antiquity. The problem involved has been referred to by Professor Frazer in the Golden Bough. Commenting on the similarities presented by certain ancient festivals in various countries, he suggests that

[p. xxx]

they may be due to "a remarkable homogeneity of civilization throughout Southern Europe and Western Asia in prehistoric times. How far", he adds, "such homogeneity of civilization may be taken as evidence of homogeneity of race is a question for the ethnologist." [*1]

In [*Chapter I] the reader is introduced to the ethnological problem, and it is shown that the results of modern research tend to establish a remote racial connection between the Sumerians of Babylonia, the prehistoric Egyptians, and the Neolithic (Late Stone Age) inhabitants of Europe, as well as the southern Persians and the "Aryans" of India.

Comparative notes are provided in dealing with the customs, religious beliefs, and myths and legends of the Mesopotamian peoples to assist the student towards the elucidation and partial restoration of certain literary fragments from the cuneiform tablets. Of special interest in this connection are the resemblances between some of the Indian and Babylonian myths. The writer has drawn upon that "great storehouse" of ancient legends, the voluminous Indian epic, the Mahabharata, and it is shown that there are undoubted links between the Garuda eagle myths and those of the Sumerian Zu bird and the Etana eagle, while similar stories remain attached to the memories of "Sargon of Akkad" and the Indian hero Karna, and of Semiramis (who was Queen Sammu-ramat of Assyria) and Shakuntala. The Indian god Varuna and the Sumerian Ea are also found to have much in common, and it seems undoubted that the Manu fish and flood myth is a direct Babylonian inheritance, like the Yuga (Ages of the Universe) doctrine and the system of calculation associated with it. It is of interest to note, too, that a portion of the Gilgamesh epic survives in the

[p. xxxi]

[paragraph continues] Ramyana story of the monkey god Hanuman's search for the lost princess Sita; other relics of similar character suggest that both the Gilgamesh and Hanuman narratives are derived in part from a very ancient myth. Gilgamesh also figures in Indian mythology as Yama, the first man, who explored the way to the Paradise called "The Land of Ancestors", and over which he subsequently presided as a god. Other Babylonian myths link with those found in Egypt, Greece, Scandinavia, Iceland, and the British Isles and Ireland. The Sargon myth, for instance, resembles closely the myth of Scyld (Sceaf), the patriarch, in the Beowulf epic, and both appear to be variations of the Tammuz-Adonis story. Tammuz also resembles in one of his phases the Celtic hero Diarmid, who was slain by the "green boar" of the Earth Mother, as was Adonis by the boar form of Ares, the Greek war god.

In approaching the study of these linking myths it would be as rash to conclude that all resemblances are due to homogeneity of race as to assume that folklore and mythology are devoid of ethnological elements. Due consideration must be given to the widespread influence exercised by cultural contact. We must recognize also that the human mind has ever shown a tendency to arrive quite independently at similar conclusions, when confronted by similar problems, in various parts of the world.

But while many remarkable resemblances may be detected between the beliefs and myths and customs of widely separated peoples, it cannot be overlooked that pronounced and striking differences remain to be accounted for. Human experiences varied in localities because all sections of humanity were not confronted in ancient times by the same problems in their everyday lives. Some peoples, for instance, experienced no great difficulties regarding the food supply, which might be

[p. xxxii]

provided for them by nature in lavish abundance; others were compelled to wage a fierce and constant conflict against hostile forces in inhospitable environments with purpose to secure adequate sustenance and their meed of enjoyment. Various habits of life had to be adopted in various parts of the world, and these produced various habits of thought. Consequently, we find that behind all systems of primitive religion lies the formative background of natural phenomena. A mythology reflects the geography, the fauna and flora, and the climatic conditions of the area in which it took definite and permanent shape.

In Babylonia, as elsewhere, we expect, therefore, to find a mythology which has strictly local characteristics--one which mirrors river and valley scenery, the habits of life of the people, and also the various stages of progress in the civilization from its earliest beginnings. Traces of primitive thought--survivals from remotest antiquity--should also remain in evidence. As a matter of fact Babylonian mythology fulfils our expectations in this regard to the highest degree.

Herodotus said that Egypt was the gift of the Nile: similarly Babylonia may be regarded as the gift of the Tigris and Euphrates--those great shifting and flooding rivers which for long ages had been carrying down from the Armenian Highlands vast quantities of mud to thrust back the waters of the Persian Gulf and form a country capable of being utilized for human habitation. The most typical Babylonian deity was Ea, the god of the fertilizing and creative waters.

He was depicted clad in the skin of a fish, as gods in other geographical areas were depicted wearing the skins of animals which were regarded as ancestors, or hostile demons that had to be propitiated. Originally Ea appears to have been a fish--the incarnation of the spirit of; or

[p. xxxiii]

life principle in, the Euphrates River. His centre of worship was at Eridu, an ancient seaport, where apparently the prehistoric Babylonians (the Sumerians) first began to utilize the dried-up beds of shifting streams to irrigate the soil. One of the several creation myths is reminiscent of those early experiences which produced early local beliefs:

O thou River, who didst create all things,
 When the great gods dug thee out,
 They set prosperity upon thy banks,
 Within thee Ea, the king of the Deep, created his dwelling. [*1]

[paragraph continues] The Sumerians observed that the land was brought into existence by means of the obstructing reeds, which caused mud to accumulate. When their minds began to be exercised regarding the origin of life, they conceived that the first human beings were created by a similar process:

Marduk (son of Ea) laid a reed upon the face of the waters,
 He formed dust and poured it out beside the reed . . .
 He formed mankind. [*2]

[paragraph continues] Ea acquired in time, as the divine artisan, various attributes which reflected the gradual growth of civilization: he was reputed to have taught the people how to form canals, control the rivers, cultivate the fields, build their houses, and so on.

But although Ea became a beneficent deity, as a result of the growth of civilization, he had also a demoniac form, and had to be propitiated. The worshippers of the fish god retained ancient modes of thought and perpetuated ancient superstitious practices.

The earliest settlers in the Tigro-Euphrates valley were agriculturists, like their congeners, the proto-Egyptians

[p. xxxiv]

and the Neolithic Europeans. Before they broke away from the its area of characterization they had acquired the elements of culture, and adopted habits of thought which were based on the agricultural mode of life. Like other agricultural communities they were worshippers of the "World Mother", the Creatrix, who was the giver of all good things, the "Preserver" and also the "Destroyer"--the goddess whose moods were reflected by natural phenomena, and whose lovers were the spirits of the seasons.

In the alluvial valley which they rendered fit for habitation the Sumerians came into contact with peoples of different habits of life and different habits of thought. These were the nomadic pastoralists from the northern steppe lands, who had developed in isolation theories regarding the origin of the Universe which reflected their particular experiences and the natural phenomena of their area of characterization. The most representative people of this class were the "Hatti" of Asia Minor, who were of Alpine or Armenoid stock. In early times the nomads were broken up into small tribal units, like Abraham and his followers, and depended for their food supply on the prowess of the males. Their chief deity was the sky and mountain god, who was the "World Father", the creator, and the wielder of the thunder hammer, who waged war against the demons of storm or drought, and ensured the food supply of his worshippers.

The fusion in Babylonia of the peoples of the god and goddess cults was in progress before the dawn of history, as was the case in Egypt and also in southern Europe. In consequence independent Pantheons came into existence in the various city States in the Tigro-Euphrates valley. These were mainly a reflection of city politics: the deities of each influential section had to

[p. xxxv]

receive recognition. But among the great masses of the people ancient customs associated with agriculture continued in practice, and, as Babylonia depended for its prosperity on its harvests, the force of public opinion tended, it would appear, to perpetuate the religious beliefs of the earliest settlers, despite the efforts made by conquerors to exalt the deities they introduced.

Babylonian religion was of twofold character. It embraced temple worship and private worship. The religion of the temple was the religion of the ruling class, and especially of the king, who was the guardian of the people. Domestic religion was conducted in homes, in reed huts, or in public places, and conserved the crudest superstitions surviving from the earliest times. The great "burnings" and the human sacrifices in Babylonia, referred to in the Bible, were, no doubt, connected with agricultural religion of the private order, as was also the ceremony of baking and offering cakes to the Queen of Heaven, condemned by Jeremiah, which obtained in the streets of Jerusalem and other cities. Domestic religion required no temples. There were no temples in Crete: the world was the "house" of the deity, who had seasonal haunts on hilltops, in groves, in caves, &c. In Egypt Herodotus witnessed festivals and processions which are not referred to in official inscriptions, although they were evidently practised from the earliest times.

Agricultural religion in Egypt was concentrated in the cult of Osiris and Isis, and influenced all local theologies. In Babylonia these deities were represented by Tammuz and Ishtar. Ishtar, like Isis, absorbed many other local goddesses.

According to the beliefs of the ancient agriculturists the goddess was eternal and undecaying. She was the Great Mother of the Universe and the source of the food

[p. xxxvi]

supply. Her son, the corn god, became, as the Egyptians put it, "Husband of his Mother". Each year he was born anew and rapidly attained to manhood; then he was slain by a fierce rival who symbolized the season of pestilence-bringing and parching sun heat, or the rainy season, or wild beasts of prey. Or it might be that he was slain by his son, as Cronos was by Zeus and Dyaus by Indra. The new year slew the old year.

The social customs of the people, which had a religious basis, were formed in accordance with the doings of the deities; they sorrowed or made glad in sympathy with the spirits of nature. Worshippers also suggested by their ceremonies how the deities should act at various seasons, and thus exercised, as they believed, a magical control over them.

In Babylonia the agricultural myth regarding the Mother goddess and the young god had many variations. In one form Tammuz, like Adonis, was loved by two goddesses--the twin phases of nature--the Queen of Heaven and the Queen of Hades. It was decreed that Tammuz should spend part of the year with one goddess and part of the year with the other. Tammuz was also a Patriarch, who reigned for a long period over the land and had human offspring. After death his spirit appeared at certain times and seasons as a planet, star, or constellation. He was the ghost of the elder god, and he was also the younger god who was born each year.

In the Gilgamesh epic we appear to have a form of the patriarch legend--the story of the "culture hero" and teacher who discovered the path which led to the land of ancestral spirits. The heroic Patriarch in Egypt was Apuatu, "the opener of the ways", the earliest form of Osiris; in India he was Yama, the first man, "who searched and found out the path for many".

[p. xxxvii]

The King as Patriarch was regarded during life as an incarnation of the culture god: after death he merged in the god. "Sargon of Akkad" posed as an incarnation of the ancient agricultural Patriarch: he professed to be a man of miraculous birth who was loved by the goddess Ishtar, and was supposed to have inaugurated a New Age of the Universe.

The myth regarding the father who was superseded by his son may account for the existence in Babylonian city pantheons of elder and younger gods who symbolized the passive and active forces of nature.

Considering the persistent and cumulative influence exercised by agricultural religion it is not surprising to find, as has been indicated, that most of the Babylonian gods had Tammuz traits, as most of the Egyptian gods had Osirian traits. Although local or imported deities were developed and conventionalized in rival Babylonian cities, they still retained traces of primitive conceptions. They existed in all their forms--as the younger god who displaced the elder god and became the elder god, and as the elder god who conciliated the younger god and made him his active agent; and as the god who was identified at various seasons with different heavenly bodies and natural phenomena. Merodach, the god of Babylon, who was exalted as chief of the National pantheon in the Hammurabi Age, was, like Tammuz, a son, and therefore a form of Ea, a demon slayer, a war god, a god of fertility, a corn spirit, a Patriarch, and world ruler and guardian, and, like Tammuz, he had solar, lunar, astral, and atmospheric attributes. The complex characters of Merodach and Tammuz were not due solely to the monotheistic tendency: the oldest deities were of mystical character, they represented the "Self Power" of Naturalism as well as the spirit groups of Animism.

[p. xxxviii]

The theorizing priests, who speculated regarding the 1 mysteries of life and death and the origin of all things, had to address the people through the medium of popular beliefs. They utilized floating myths for this purpose. As there were in early times various centres of culture which had rival pantheons, the adapted myths varied greatly. In the different forms in which they survive to us they reflect, not only aspects of local beliefs, but also grades of culture at different periods. We must not expect, however, to find that the latest form of a myth was the highest and most profound. The history of Babylonian religion is divided into periods of growth and periods of decadence. The influence of domestic religion was invariably opposed to the new and high doctrines which emanated from the priesthood, and in times of political upheaval tended to submerge them in the debris of immemorial beliefs and customs. The retrogressive tendencies of the masses were invariably reinforced by the periodic invasions of aliens who had no respect for official deities and temple creeds.

We must avoid insisting too strongly on the application of the evolution theory to the religious phenomena of a country like Babylonia.

The epochs in the intellectual life of an ancient people are not comparable to geological epochs, for instance, because the forces at work were directed by human wills, whether in the interests of progress or otherwise. The battle of creeds has ever been a battle of minds. It should be recognized, therefore, that the human element bulks as prominently in the drama of Babylon's religious history as does the prince of Denmark in the play of Hamlet. We are not concerned with the plot alone. The characters must also receive attention. Their aspirations and triumphs, their prejudices and blunders, were the

[p. xxxix]

billowy forces which shaped the shoreland of the story and made history.

Various aspects of Babylonian life and culture are dealt with throughout this volume, and it is shown that the growth of science and art was stimulated by unwholesome and crude superstitions. Many rank weeds flourished beside the brightest blossoms of the human intellect that wooed the sun in that fertile valley of rivers. As in Egypt, civilization made progress when wealth was accumulated in sufficient abundance to permit of a leisured class devoting time to study and research. The endowed priests, who performed temple ceremonies, were the teachers of the people and the patrons of culture. We may think little of their religious beliefs, regarding which after all we have only a superficial knowledge, for we have yet discovered little more than the fragments of the shell which held the pearl, the faded petals that were once a rose, but we must recognize that they provided inspiration for the artists and sculptors whose achievements compel our wonder and admiration, moved statesmen to inaugurate and administer humanitarian laws, and exalted Right above Might.

These civilizations of the old world, among which the Mesopotamian and the Nilotic were the earliest, were built on no unsound foundations. They made possible "the glory that was Greece and the grandeur that was Rome", and it is only within recent years that we have begun to realize how incalculable is the debt which the modern world owes to them.

Footnotes

^xxii:1 Revelation, xviii. The Babylon of the Apocalypse is generally believed to symbolize or be a mystic designation of Rome.

^xxiii:1 Nineveh and Its Remains, vol. i, p. 17.

^xxvi:1 Ezra, iv, 10.

^xxvi:2 The culture god.

^xxvii:1 Langdon's Sumerian and Babylonian Psalms, p. 179.

^xxix:1 Crete the Forerunner of Greece, p. 18.

^xxx:1 The Scapegoat vol., p. 409 (3rd edition).

^xxxiii:1 The Seven Tablets of Creation, L. W. King, p. 129.

^xxxiii:2 Ibid. pp. 133-4.

     
Myths of Babylonia and Assyria, by Donald A. MacKenzie, [1915], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 1] [ch-01]

  

MYTHS OF BABYLONIA AND ASSYRIA

  

CHAPTER I

  

The Races and Early Civilization of Babylonia

Prehistoric Babylonia--The Confederacies of Sumer and Akkad--Sumerian Racial Affinities--Theories of Mongolian and Ural-Altaic Origins--Evidence of Russian Turkestan--Beginnings of Agriculture--Remarkable Proofs from Prehistoric Egyptian Graves--Sumerians and the Mediterranean Race--Present-day Types in Western Asia--The Evidence of Crania--Origin of the Akkadians--The Semitic Blend--Races in Ancient Palestine--Southward Drift of Armenoid Peoples--The Rephaims of the Bible--Akkadians attain Political Supremacy in Northern Babylonia--Influence of Sumerian Culture--Beginnings of Civilization--Progress in the Neolithic Age--Position of Women in Early Communities--Their Legal Status in Ancient Babylonia--Influence in Social and Religious Life--The "Woman's Language"--Goddess who inspired Poets.

BEFORE the dawn of the historical period Ancient Babylonia was divided into a number of independent city states similar to those which existed in pre-Dynastic Egypt. Ultimately these were grouped into loose confederacies. The northern cities were embraced in the territory known as Akkad, and the southern in the land of Sumer, or Shumer. This division had a racial as well as a geographical significance. The Akkadians were

[p. 2]

[paragraph continues] "late corners" who had achieved political ascendency in the north when the area they occupied was called Uri, or Kiuri, and Sumer was known as Kengi. They were a people of Semitic speech with pronounced Semitic affinities. From the earliest times the sculptors depicted them with abundant locks, long full beards, and the prominent distinctive noses and full lips, which we usually associate with the characteristic Jewish type, and also attired in long, flounced robes, suspended from their left shoulders, and reaching down to their ankles. In contrast, the Sumerians had clean-shaven faces and scalps, and noses of Egyptian and Grecian rather than Semitic type, while they wore short, pleated kilts, and went about with the upper part of their bodies quite bare like the Egyptian noblemen of the Old Kingdom period. They spoke a non-Semitic language, and were the oldest inhabitants of Babylonia of whom we have any knowledge. Sumerian civilization was rooted in the agricultural mode of life, and appears to have been well developed before the Semites became numerous and influential in the land. Cities had been built chiefly of sun-dried and fire-baked bricks; distinctive pottery was manufactured with much skill; the people were governed by humanitarian laws, which formed the nucleus of the Hammurabi code, and had in use a system of cuneiform writing which was still in process of development from earlier pictorial characters. The distinctive feature of their agricultural methods was the engineering skill which was displayed in extending the cultivatable area by the construction of irrigating canals and ditches. There are also indications that they possessed some knowledge of navigation and traded on the Persian Gulf. According to one of their own traditions Eridu, originally a seaport, was their racial cradle. The Semitic Akkadians adopted the distinctive culture of

 

Click to enlarge
EXAMPLES OF RACIAL TYPES
 From a drawing by E. Wallcousins

 

[p. 3]

these Sumerians after settlement, and exercised an influence on its subsequent growth.

Much controversy has been waged regarding the original home of the Sumerians and the particular racial type which they represented. One theory connects them with the lank-haired and beardless Mongolians, and it is asserted on the evidence afforded by early sculptural reliefs that they were similarly oblique-eyed. As they also spoke an agglutinative language, it is suggested that they were descended from the same parent stock as the Chinese in an ancient Parthian homeland. If, however, the oblique eye was not the result of faulty and primitive art, it is evident that the Mongolian type, which is invariably found to be remarkably persistent in racial blends, did not survive in the Tigris and Euphrates valleys, for in the finer and more exact sculpture work of the later Sumerian period the eyes of the ruling classes are found to be similar to those of the Ancient Egyptians and southern Europeans. Other facial characteristics suggest that a Mongolian racial connection is highly improbable; the prominent Sumerian nose, for instance, is quite unlike the Chinese, which is diminutive. Nor can far-reaching conclusions be drawn from the scanty linguistic evidence at our disposal. Although the languages of the Sumerians and long-headed Chinese are of the agglutinative variety, so are those also which are spoken by the broad-headed Turks and Magyars of Hungary, the broad-headed and long-headed, dark and fair Finns, and the brunet and short-statured Basques with pear-shaped faces, who are regarded as a variation of the Mediterranean race with distinctive characteristics developed in isolation. Languages afford no sure indication of racial origins or affinities.

Another theory connects the Sumerians with the

[p. 4]

broad-headed peoples of the Western Asian plains and plateaus, who are vaguely grouped as Ural-Altaic stock and are represented by the present-day Turks and the dark variety of Finns. It is assumed that they migrated southward in remote times in consequence of tribal pressure caused by changing climatic conditions, and abandoned a purely pastoral for an agricultural life. The late Sumerian sculpture work again presents difficulties in this connection, for the faces and bulging occiputs suggest rather a long-headed than a broad-headed type, and the theory no longer obtains that new habits of life alter skull forms which are usually associated with other distinctive traits in the structure of skeletons. These broad-headed nomadic peoples of the Steppes are allied to Tatar stock, and distinguished from the pure Mongols by their abundance of wavy hair and beard. The fact that the Sumerians shaved their scalps and faces is highly suggestive in this connection. From the earliest times it has been the habit of most peoples to emphasize their racial characteristics so as to be able, one may suggest, to distinguish readily a friend from a foeman. At any rate this fact is generally recognized by ethnologists. The Basques, for instance, shave their pointed chins and sometimes grow short side whiskers to increase the distinctive pear-shape which is given to their faces by their prominent temples. In contrast, their neighbours, the Andalusians, grow chin whiskers to broaden their already rounded chins, and to distinguish them markedly from the Basques. [*1] Another example of similar character is afforded in Asia Minor, where the skulls of the children of long-headed Kurds are narrowed, and those of the children of broad-headed Armenians made flatter behind as a result of systematic pressure applied by using cradle

[p. 5]

boards. In this way these rival peoples accentuate their contrasting head forms, which at times may, no doubt, show a tendency towards variation as a result of the crossment of types. When it is found, therefore, that the Sumerians, like the Ancient Egyptians, were in the habit of shaving, their ethnic affinities should be looked for among a naturally glabrous rather than a heavily-bearded people.

A Central Asiatic source for Sumerian culture has also been urged of late with much circumstantial detail. It breaks quite fresh and interesting ground. Recent scientific expeditions in Russian and Chinese Turkestan have accumulated important archaeological data which clearly establish that vast areas of desert country were at a remote period most verdurous and fruitful, and thickly populated by organized and apparently progressive communities. From these ancient centres of civilization wholesale migrations must have been impelled from time to time in consequence of the gradual encroachment of wind-distributed sand and the increasing shortage of water. At Anau in Russian Turkestan, where excavations were conducted by the Pumpelly expedition, abundant traces were found of an archaic and forgotten civilization reaching back to the Late Stone Age. The pottery is decorated with geometric designs, and resembles somewhat other Neolithic specimens found as far apart as Susa, the capital of ancient Elam, on the borders of Babylonia, Boghaz Koi in Asia Minor, the seat of Hittite administration, round the Black Sea to the north, and at points in the southern regions of the Balkan Peninsula. It is suggested that these various finds are scattered evidences of early racial drifts from the Central Asian areas which were gradually being rendered uninhabitable. Among the Copper Age artifacts at Anau are clay votive

[p. 6]

statuettes resembling those which were used in Sumeria for religious purposes. These, however, cannot be held to prove a racial connection, but they are important in so far as they afford evidence of early trade relations in a hitherto unsuspected direction, and the long distances over which cultural influence extended before the dawn of history. Further we cannot go. No inscriptions have yet been discovered to render articulate this mysterious Central Asian civilization, or to suggest the original source of early Sumerian picture writing. Nor is it possible to confirm Mr. Pumpelly's view that from the Anau district the Sumerians and Egyptians first obtained barley and wheat, and some of their domesticated animals. If, as Professor Elliot Smith believes, copper was first used by the Ancient Egyptians, it may be, on the other hand, that a knowledge of this metal reached Anau through Sumeria, and that the elements of the earlier culture were derived from the same quarter by an indirect route. The evidence obtainable in Egypt is of interest in this connection. Large quantities of food have been taken from the stomachs and intestines of sun-dried bodies which have lain in their pre-Dynastic graves for over sixty centuries. This material has been carefully examined, and has yielded, among other things, husks of barley and millet, and fragments of mammalian bones, including those, no doubt, of the domesticated sheep and goats and cattle painted on the pottery. [*1] It is therefore apparent that at an extremely remote period a knowledge of agriculture extended throughout Egypt, and we have no reason for supposing that it was not shared by the contemporary inhabitants of Sumer.

The various theories which have been propounded regarding the outside source of Sumerian culture are

[p. 7]

based on the assumption that it commenced abruptly and full grown. Its rude beginnings cannot be traced on the banks of the Tigris and Euphrates, but although no specimens of the earliest form of picture writing have been recovered from the ruins of Sumerian and Akkadian cities, neither have any been found elsewhere. The possibility remains, therefore, that early Babylonian culture was indigenous. "A great deal of ingenuity has been displayed by many scholars", says Professor Elliot Smith, "with the object of bringing these Sumerians from somewhere else as immigrants into Sumer; but no reasons have been advanced to show that they had not been settled at the head of the Persian Gulf for long generations before they first appeared on the stage of history. The argument that no early remains have been found is futile, not only because such a country as Sumer is no more favourable to the preservation of such evidence than is the Delta of the Nile, but also upon the more general grounds that negative statements of this sort cannot be assigned a positive evidence for an immigration." [*1] This distinguished ethnologist is frankly of opinion that the Sumerians were the congeners of the pre-Dynastic Egyptians of the Mediterranean or Brown race, the eastern branch of which reaches to India and the western to the British Isles and Ireland. In the same ancient family are included the Arabs, whose physical characteristics distinguish them from the Semites of Jewish type.

Some light may be thrown on the Sumerian problem by giving consideration to the present-day racial complexion of Western Asia. The importance of evidence of this character has been emphasized elsewhere. In Egypt, for instance, Dr. C. S. Myers has ascertained that the modern peasants have skull forms which are identical

[p. 8]

with those of their pre-Dynastic ancestors. Mr. Hawes has also demonstrated that the ancient inhabitants of Crete are still represented on that famous island. But even more remarkable is the fact that the distinctive racial type which occupied the Palaeolithic caves of the Dordogne valley in France continues to survive in their vicinity after an interval of over twenty thousand years. [*1] It is note-worthy, therefore, to find that in south-western Asia at the present day one particular racial type predominates over all others. Professor Ripley, who summarizes a considerable mass of data in this connection, refers to it as the "Iranian", and says: "It includes the Persians and Kurds, possibly the Ossetes in the Caucasus, and farther to the east a large number of Asiatic tribes, from the Afghans to the Hindus. These peoples are all primarily long-headed and dark brunets. They incline to slenderness of habit, although varying in stature according to circumstances. In them we recognize at once undoubted congeners of our Mediterranean race in Europe. The area of their extension runs off into Africa, through the Egyptians, who are clearly of the same race. Not only the modern peoples, but the Ancient Egyptians and the Phoenicians also have been traced to the same source. By far the largest portion of this part of Western Asia is inhabited by this eastern branch of the Mediterranean race." The broad-headed type "occurs sporadically among a few ethnic remnants in Syria and Mesopotamia". [*2]

The exhaustive study of thousands of ancient crania in London and Cambridge collections has shown that Mediterranean peoples, having alien traits, the result of early admixture, were distributed between Egypt and the Punjab. [*3] Where blending took place, the early type,

[p. 9]

apparently, continued to predominate; and it appears to be reasserting itself in our own time in Western Asia, as elsewhere. It seems doubtful, therefore, that the ancient Sumerians differed racially from the pre-Dynastic inhabitants of Egypt and the Pelasgians and Iberians of Europe. Indeed, the statuettes from Tello, the site of the Sumerian city of Lagash, display distinctively Mediterranean skull forms and faces. Some of the plump figures of the later period suggest, however, "the particular alien strain" which in Egypt and elsewhere "is always associated with a tendency to the development of fat", in contrast to "the lean and sinewy appearance of most representatives of the Brown race". [*1] This change may be accounted for by the presence of the Semites in northern Babylonia.

Whence, then, came these invading Semitic Akkadians of Jewish type? It is generally agreed that they were closely associated with one of the early outpourings of nomadic peoples from Arabia, a country which is favourable for the production of a larger population than it is able to maintain permanently, especially when its natural resources are restricted by a succession of abnormally dry years. In tracing the Akkadians from Arabia, however, we are confronted at the outset with the difficulty that its prehistoric, and many of its present-day, inhabitants are not of the characteristic Semitic type. On the Ancient Egyptian pottery and monuments the Arabs are depicted as men who closely resembled the representatives of the Mediterranean race in the Nile valley and elsewhere. They shaved neither scalps nor faces as did the historic Sumerians and Egyptians, but grew the slight moustache and chin-tuft beard like the Libyans on the north and the majority of the men whose bodies

[p. 10]

have been preserved in pre-Dynastic graves in the Nile valley. "If", writes Professor Elliot Smith, "the generally accepted view is true, that Arabia was the original home of the Semites, the Arab must have undergone a profound change in his physical characters after he left his homeland and before he reached Babylonia." This authority is of opinion that the Arabians first migrated into Palestine and northern Syria, where they mingled with the southward-migrating Armenoid peoples from Asia Minor." This blend of Arabs, kinsmen of the proto-Egyptians and Armenoids, would then form the big-nosed, long-bearded Semites, so familiar not only on the ancient Babylonian and Egyptian monuments, but also in the modern Jews." [*1] Such a view is in accord with Dr. Hugo Winckler's contention that the flow of Arabian migrations was northwards towards Syria ere it swept through Mesopotamia. It can scarcely be supposed that these invasions of settled districts did not result in the fusion and crossment of racial types and the production of a sub-variety with medium skull form and marked facial characteristics.

Of special interest in this connection is the evidence afforded by Palestine and Egypt. The former country has ever been subject to periodic ethnic disturbances and changes. Its racial history has a remote beginning in the Pleistocene Age. Palaeolithic flints of Chellean and other primitive types have been found in large numbers, and a valuable collection of these is being preserved in a French museum at Jerusalem. In a northern cave fragments of rude pottery, belonging to an early period in the Late Stone Age, have been discovered in association with the bones of the woolly rhinoceros. To a later period belong the series of Gezer cave dwellings, which, according to Professor Macalister, the well-known Palestinian

[p. 11]

authority, "were occupied by a non-Semitic people of low stature, with thick skulls and showing evidence of the great muscular strength that is essential to savage life". [*1] These people are generally supposed to be representatives of the Mediterranean race, which Sergi has found to have been widely distributed throughout Syria and a part of Asia Minor. [*2] An interesting problem, however, is raised by the fact that, in one of the caves, there are evidences that the dead were cremated. This was not a Mediterranean custom, nor does it appear to have prevailed outside the Gezer area. If, however, it does not indicate that the kinsmen of the Ancient Egyptians came into contact with the remnants of an earlier people, it may be that the dead of a later people were burned there. The possibility that unidentified types may have contributed to the Semitic blend, however, remains. The Mediterraneans mingled in Northern Syria and Asia Minor with the broad-headed Armenoid peoples who are represented in Europe by the Alpine race. With them they ultimately formed the great Hittite confederacy. These Armenoids were moving southwards at the very dawn of Egyptian history, and nothing is known of their conquests and settlements. Their pioneers, who were probably traders, appear to have begun to enter the Delta region before the close of the Late Stone Age. [*3] The earliest outpourings of migrating Arabians may have been in progress about the same time. This early southward drift of Armenoids might account for the presence in southern Palestine, early in the Copper Age, of the tall race referred to in the Bible as the Rephaim or Anakim, "whose power was broken only by the Hebrew

[p. 12]

invaders". [*1] Joshua drove them out of Hebron, [*2] in the neighbourhood of which Abraham had purchased a burial cave from Ephron, the Hittite. [*3] Apparently a system of land laws prevailed in Palestine at this early period. It is of special interest for us to note that in Abraham's day and afterwards, the landed proprietors in the country of the Rephaim were identified with the aliens from Asia Minor--the tall variety in the Hittite confederacy.

Little doubt need remain that the Arabians during their sojourn in Palestine and Syria met with distinctive types, and if not with pure Armenoids, at any rate with peoples having Armenoid traits. The consequent multiplication of tribes, and the gradual pressure exercised by the constant stream of immigrants from Arabia and Asia Minor, must have kept this part of Western Asia in a constant state of unrest. Fresh migrations of the surplus stock were evidently propelled towards Egypt in one direction, and the valleys of the Tigris and Euphrates in another. The Semites of Akkad were probably the conquerors of the more highly civilized Sumerians, who must have previously occupied that area. It is possible that they owed their success to the possession of superior weapons. Professor Elliot Smith suggests in this connection that the Arabians had become familiar with the use of copper as a result of contact with the Egyptians in Sinai. There is no evidence, however, that the Sumerians were attacked before they had begun to make metal weapons. It is more probable that the invading nomads had superior military organization and considerable experience in waging war against detached tribal units. They may have also found some of the northern Sumerian city states at war with one another and taken

 

Click to enlarge
STATUE OF A ROYAL PERSONAGE OR OFFICIAL OF NON-SEMITIC ORIGIN
 (British Museum)
 Photo. Mansell

 

[p. 13]

advantage of their unpreparedness to resist a common enemy The rough Dorians who overran Greece and the fierce Goths who shattered the power of Rome were similarly in a lower state of civilization than the peoples whom they subdued.

The Sumerians, however, ultimately achieved an intellectual conquest of their conquerors. Although the leaders of invasion may have formed military aristocracies in the cities which they occupied, it was necessary for the great majority of the nomads to engage their activities in new directions after settlement. The Semitic Akkadians, therefore, adopted Sumerian habits of life which were best suited for the needs of the country, and they consequently came under the spell of Sumerian modes of thought. This is shown by the fact that the native speech of ancient Sumer continued long after the dawn of history to be the language of Babylonian religion and culture, like Latin in Europe during the Middle Ages. For centuries the mingling peoples must have been bi-lingual, as are many of the inhabitants of Ireland, Wales, and the Scottish Highlands in the present age, but ultimately the language of the Semites became the prevailing speech in Sumer and Akkad. This change was the direct result of the conquests and the political supremacy achieved by the northern people. A considerable period elapsed, however, ere this consummation was reached and Ancient Babylonia became completely Semitized. No doubt its brilliant historical civilization owed much of its vigour and stability to the organizing genius of the Semites, but the basis on which it was established had been laid by the ingenious and imaginative Sumerians who first made the desert to blossom like the rose.

The culture of Sumer was a product of the Late Stone Age, which should not be regarded as necessarily

[p. 14]

an age of barbarism. During its vast periods there were great discoveries and great inventions in various parts of Asia, Africa, and Europe. The Neoliths made pottery and bricks; we know that they invented the art of spinning, for spindle-whorls are found even in the Gezer caves to which we have referred, while in Egypt the pre-Dynastic dead were sometimes wrapped in finely woven linen: their deftly chipped flint implements are eloquent of artistic and mechanical skill, and undoubted mathematical ability must be credited to the makers of smoothly polished stone hammers which are so perfectly balanced that they revolve on a centre of gravity. In Egypt and Babylonia the soil was tilled and its fertility increased by irrigation. Wherever man waged a struggle with Nature he made rapid progress, and consequently we find that the earliest great civilizations were rooted in the little fields of the Neolithic farmers. Their mode of life necessitated a knowledge of Nature's laws; they had to take note of the seasons and measure time. So Egypt gave us the Calendar, and Babylonia the system of dividing the week into seven days, and the day into twelve double hours.

The agricultural life permitted large communities to live in river valleys, and these had to be governed by codes of laws; settled communities required peace and order for their progress and prosperity. All great civilizations have evolved from the habits and experiences of settled communities. Law and religion were closely associated, and the evidence afforded by the remains of stone circles and temples suggests that in the organization and division of labour the influence of religious teachers was pre-eminent. Early rulers, indeed, were priest-kings--incarnations of the deity who owned the land and measured out the span of human life.

[p. 15]

We need not assume that Neolithic man led an idyllic existence; his triumphs were achieved by slow and gradual steps; his legal codes were, no doubt, written in blood and his institutions welded in the fires of adversity. But, disciplined by laws, which fostered humanitarian ideals, Neolithic man, especially of the Mediterranean race, had reached a comparatively high state of civilization long ages before the earliest traces of his activities can be obtained. When this type of mankind is portrayed in Ancient Sumeria, Ancient Egypt, and Ancient Crete we find that the faces are refined and intellectual and often quite modern in aspect. The skulls show that in the Late Stone Age the human brain was fully developed and that the racial types were fixed. In every country in Europe we still find the direct descendants of the ancient Mediterranean race, as well as the descendants of the less highly cultured conquerors who swept westward out of Asia at the dawn of the Bronze Age; and everywhere there are evidences of crossment of types in varying degrees. Even the influence of Neolithic intellectual life still remains. The comparative study of mythology and folk beliefs reveals that we have inherited certain modes of thought from our remote ancestors, who were the congeners of the Ancient Sumerians and the Ancient Egyptians. In this connection it is of interest, therefore, to refer to the social ideals of the early peoples who met and mingled on the southern plains of the Tigris and Euphrates, and especially the position occupied by women, which is engaging so much attention at the present day.

It would appear that among the Semites and other nomadic peoples woman was regarded as the helpmate rather than the companion and equal of man. The birth of a son was hailed with joy; it was "miserable to have

[p. 16]

a daughter", as a Hindu sage reflected; in various countries it was the custom to expose female children after birth and leave them to die. A wife had no rights other than those accorded to her by her husband, who exercised over her the power of life and death. Sons inherited family possessions; the daughters had no share allotted to them, and could be sold by fathers and brothers. Among the peoples who observed "male right", social life was reflected in the conception of controlling male deities, accompanied by shadowy goddesses who were often little else than figures of speech.

The Ancient Sumerians, on the other hand, like the Mediterranean peoples of Egypt and Crete, reverenced and exalted motherhood in social and religious life. Women were accorded a legal status and marriage laws were promulgated by the State. Wives could possess private property in their own right, as did the Babylonian Sarah, wife of Abraham, who owned the Egyptian slave Hagar. [*1] A woman received from her parents a marriage dowry, and in the event of separation from her husband she could claim its full value. Some spinsters, or wives, were accustomed to enter into business partnerships with men or members of their own sex, and could sue and be sued in courts of law. Brothers and sisters were joint heirs of the family estate. Daughters might possess property over which their fathers exercised no control: they could also enter into legal agreements with their parents in business matters, when they had attained to years of discretion. Young women who took vows of celibacy and lived in religious institutions could yet make business investments, as surviving records show. There is only one instance of a Sumerian woman ascending the throne, like Queen Hatshepsut of Egypt. Women, therefore,

[p. 17]

were not rigidly excluded from official life. Dungi II, an early Sumerian king, appointed two of his daughters as rulers of conquered cities in Syria and Elam. Similarly Shishak, the Egyptian Pharaoh, handed over the city of Gezer, which he had subdued, to his daughter, Solomon's wife. [*1] In the religious life of ancient Sumeria the female population exercised an undoubted influence, and in certain temples there were priestesses. The oldest hymns give indication of the respect shown to women by making reference to mixed assemblies as "females and males", just as present-day orators address themselves to "ladies and gentlemen". In the later Semitic adaptations of these productions, it is significant to note, this conventional reference was altered to "male and female". If influences, however, were at work to restrict the position of women they did not meet with much success, because when Hammurabi codified existing laws, the ancient rights of women received marked recognition.

There were two dialects in ancient Sumeria, and the invocatory hymns were composed in what was known as "the women's language". It must not be inferred, however, that the ladies of Sumeria had established a speech which differed from that used by men. The reference would appear to be to a softer and homelier dialect, perhaps the oldest of the two, in which poetic emotion found fullest and most beautiful expression. In these ancient days, as in our own, the ideal of womanhood was the poet's chief source of inspiration, and among the hymns the highest reach of poetic art was attained in the invocation of Ishtar, the Babylonian Venus. The following hymn is addressed to that deity in her Valkyrie-like character as a goddess of war, but her more feminine traits are not obscured:--

[p. 18]

  

Hymn to Ishtar

To thee I cry, O lady of the gods,
 Lady of ladies, goddess without peer,
 Ishtar who shapes the lives of all mankind,
 Thou stately world queen, sovran of the sky,
 And lady ruler of the host of heaven--
 Illustrious is thy name . . . O light divine,
 Gleaming in lofty splendour o'er the earth--
 Heroic daughter of the moon, oh! hear;
 Thou dost control our weapons and award
 In battles fierce the victory at will
 O crown'd majestic Fate. Ishtar most high,
 Who art exalted over all the gods,
 Thou bringest lamentation; thou dost urge
 With hostile hearts our brethren to the fray;
 The gift of strength is thine for thou art strong;
 Thy will is urgent, brooking no delay;
 Thy hand is violent, thou queen of war
 Girded with battle and enrobed with fear . . .
 Thou sovran wielder of the wand of Doom,
 The heavens and earth are under thy control.

Adored art thou in every sacred place,
 In temples, holy dwellings, and in shrines,
 Where is thy name not lauded? where thy will
 Unheeded, and thine images not made?
 Where are thy temples not upreared? O, where
 Art thou not mighty, peerless, and supreme?

Anu and Bel and Ea have thee raised
 To rank supreme, in majesty and pow'r,
 They have established thee above the gods
 And all the host of heaven . . . O stately queen,
 At thought of thee the world is filled with fear,
 The gods in heaven quake, and on the earth
 All spirits pause, and all mankind bow down
 With reverence for thy name . . . O Lady Judge, [p. 19]
 Thy ways are just and holy; thou dost gaze
 On sinners with compassion, and each morn
 Leadest the wayward to the rightful path.

Now linger not, but come! O goddess fair,
 O shepherdess of all, thou drawest nigh
 With feet unwearied . . . Thou dost break the bonds
 Of these thy handmaids . . . When thou stoopest o'er
 The dying with compassion, lo! they live;
 And when the sick behold thee they are healed.

Hear me, thy servant! hearken to my pray'r,
 For I am full of sorrow and I sigh
 In sore distress; weeping, on thee I wait.
 Be merciful, my lady, pity take
 And answer, "'T is enough and be appeased".

How long must my heart sorrow and make moan
 And restless be? How long must my dark home
 Be filled with mourning and my soul with grief?
 O lioness of heaven, bring me peace
 And rest and comfort. Hearken to my pray'r!
 Is anger pity? May thine eyes look down
 With tenderness and blessings, and behold
 Thy servant. Oh! have mercy; hear my cry
 And unbewitch me from the evil spells,
 That I may see thy glory . . . Oh! how long
 Shall these my foes pursue me, working ill,
 And robbing me of joy? . . . Oh! how long
 Shall demons compass me about and cause
 Affliction without end? . . . I thee adore--
 The gift of strength is thine and thou art strong--
 The weakly are made strong, yet I am weak . . .
 O hear me! I am glutted with my grief--
 This flood of grief by evil winds distressed;
 My heart hath fled me like a bird on wings,
 And like the dove I moan. Tears from mine eyes
 Are falling as the rain from heaven falls,
 And I am destitute and full of woe.

     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     . [p. 20]

What have I done that thou hast turned from me?
 Have I neglected homage to my god
 And thee my goddess? O deliver me
 And all my sins forgive, that I may share
 Thy love and be watched over in thy fold;
 And may thy fold be wide, thy pen secure.

     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .

How long wilt thou be angry? Hear my cry,
 And turn again to prosper all my ways--
 O may thy wrath be crumbled and withdrawn
 As by a crumbling stream. Then smite my foes,
 And take away their power to work me ill,
 That I may crush them. Hearken to my pray'r!
 And bless me so that all who me behold
 May laud thee and may magnify thy name,
 While I exalt thy power over all
 Ishtar is highest! Ishtar is the queen!
 Ishtar the peerless daughter of the moon!

 

Footnotes

^4:1 The Races of Europe, W. Z. Ripley, p. 203.

^6:1 The Ancient Egyptians, by Elliot Smith, p. 41 et seq.

^7:1 The Ancient Egyptians, p. 140.

^8:1 Crete the Forerunner of Greece, C. H. and H. B. Hawes, 1911, p. 23 et seq.

^8:2 The Races of Europe, W. Z. Ripley, p. 443 et seq.

^8:3 The Ancient Egyptians, pp. 144-5.

^9:1 The Ancient Egyptians, p. 114.

^10:1 The Ancient Egyptians, p. 136.

^11:1 A History of Palestine, R. A. S. Macalister, pp. 8-16.

^11:2 The Mediterranean Race (1901 trans.), G. Sergi, p. 146 et seq.

^11:3 The Ancient Egyptians, p. 130.

^12:1 A History of Civilization in Palestine, p. 20 et seq.

^12:2 Joshua, xi. 21.

^12:3 Genesis, xxiii.

^16:1 Genesis, xvi. 8, 9.

^17:1 1 Kings, xvi. 16.

     
Myths of Babylonia and Assyria, by Donald A. MacKenzie, [1915], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 21] [ch-02]

  

CHAPTER II

  

The Land of Rivers and the God of the Deep

Fertility of Ancient Babylonia--Rivers, Canals, Seasons, and Climate--Early Trade and Foreign Influences--Local Religious Cults--Ea, God of the Deep, identical with Oannes of Berosus--Origin as a Sacred Fish--Compared with Brahma and Vishnu--Flood Legends in Babylonia and India--Fish Deities in Babylonia and Egypt--Fish God as a Corn God--The River as Creator--Ea an Artisan God, and links with Egypt and India--Ea as the Hebrew Jah--Ea and Varuna are Water and Sky Gods--The Babylonian Dagan and Dagon of the Philistines--Deities of Water and Harvest in Phoenicia, Greece, Rome, Scotland, Scandinavia, Ireland, and Egypt--Ea's Spouse Damkina--Demons of Ocean in Babylonia and India--Anu, God of the Sky--Enlil, Storm and War God of Nippur, like Adad, Odin, &c.--Early Gods of Babylonia and Egypt of common origin--Ea's City as Cradle of Sumerian Civilization.

ANCIENT Babylonia was for over four thousand years the garden of Western Asia. In the days of Hezekiah and Isaiah, when it had come under the sway of the younger civilization of Assyria on the north, it was "a land of corn and wine, a land of bread and vineyards, a land of oil olive and of honey". [*1] Herodotus found it still flourishing and extremely fertile. "This territory", he wrote, "is of all that we know the best by far for producing grain; it is so good that it returns as much as two hundredfold for the average, and, when it bears at its best, it produces three hundredfold. The blades of the wheat and barley there grow to be full four fingers broad;

[p. 22]

and from millet and sesame seed, how large a tree grows, I know myself, but shall not record, being well aware that even what has already been said relating to the crops produced has been enough to cause disbelief in those who have not visited Babylonia." [*1] To-day great tracts of undulating moorland, which aforetime yielded two and three crops a year, are in summer partly barren wastes and partly jungle and reedy swamp. Bedouins camp beside sandy heaps which were once populous and thriving cities, and here and there the shrunken remnants of a people once great and influential eke out precarious livings under the oppression of Turkish tax-gatherers who are scarcely less considerate than the plundering nomads of the desert.

This historic country is bounded on the east by Persia and on the west by the Arabian desert. In shape somewhat resembling a fish, it lies between the two great rivers, the Tigris and the Euphrates, too miles wide at its broadest part, and narrowing to 35 miles towards the "tail" in the latitude of Baghdad; the "head" converges to a point above Basra, where the rivers meet and form the Shatt-el-Arab, which pours into the Persian Gulf after meeting the Karun and drawing away the main volume of that double-mouthed river. The distance from Baghdad to Basra is about 300 miles, and the area traversed by the Shatt-el-Arab is slowly extending at the rate of a mile every thirty years or so, as a result of the steady accumulation of silt and mud carried down by the Tigris and Euphrates. When Sumeria was beginning to flourish, these two rivers had separate outlets, and Eridu, the seat of the cult of the sea god Ea, which now lies 125 miles inland, was a seaport at the head of the Persian Gulf. A day's journey separated the river mouths when

[p. 23]

[paragraph continues] Alexander the Great broke the power of the Persian Empire.

In the days of Babylonia's prosperity the Euphrates was hailed as "the soul of the land" and the Tigris as "the bestower of blessings". Skilful engineers had solved the problem of water distribution by irrigating sun-parched areas and preventing the excessive flooding of those districts which are now rendered impassable swamps when the rivers overflow. A network of canals was constructed throughout the country, which restricted the destructive tendencies of the Tigris and Euphrates and developed to a high degree their potentialities as fertilizing agencies. The greatest of these canals appear to have been anciently river beds. One, which is called Shatt en Nil to the north, and Shatt el Kar to the south, curved eastward from Babylon, and sweeping past Nippur, flowed like the letter S towards Larsa and then rejoined the river. It is believed to mark the course followed in the early Sumerian period by the Euphrates river, which has moved steadily westward many miles beyond the sites of ancient cities that were erected on its banks. Another important canal, the Shatt el Hai, crossed the plain from the Tigris to its sister river, which lies lower at this point, and does not run so fast. Where the artificial canals were constructed on higher levels than the streams which fed them, the water was raised by contrivances known as "shaddufs"; the buckets or skin bags were roped to a weighted beam, with the aid of which they were swung up by workmen and emptied into the canals. It is possible that this toilsome mode of irrigation was substituted in favourable parts by the primitive water wheels which are used in our own day by the inhabitants of the country who cultivate strips of land along the river banks.

In Babylonia there are two seasons--the rainy and

[p. 24]

the dry. Rain falls from November till March, and the plain is carpeted in spring by patches of vivid green verdure and brilliant wild flowers. Then the period of drought ensues; the sun rapidly burns up all vegetation, and everywhere the eye is wearied by long stretches of brown and yellow desert. Occasional sandstorms darken the heavens, sweeping over sterile wastes and piling up the shapeless mounds which mark the sites of ancient cities. Meanwhile the rivers are increasing in volume, being fed by the melting snows at their mountain sources far to the north. The swift Tigris, which is 1146 miles long, begins to rise early in March and reaches its highest level in May; before the end of June it again subsides. More sluggish in movement, the Euphrates, which is 1780 miles long, shows signs of rising a fortnight later than the Tigris, and is in flood for a more extended period; it does not shrink to its lowest level until early in September. By controlling the flow of these mighty rivers, preventing disastrous floods, and storing and distributing surplus water, the ancient Babylonians developed to the full the natural resources of their country, and made it--what it may once again become--one of the fairest and most habitable areas in the world. Nature conferred upon them bountiful rewards for their labour; trade and industries flourished, and the cities increased in splendour and strength. Then as now the heat was great during the long summer, but remarkably dry and unvarying, while the air was ever wonderfully transparent under cloudless skies of vivid blue. The nights were cool and of great beauty, whether in brilliant moonlight or when ponds and canals were jewelled by the lustrous displays of clear and numerous stars which glorified that homeland of the earliest astronomers.

Babylonia is a treeless country, and timber had to be

[p. 25]

imported from the earliest times. The date palm was probably introduced by man, as were certainly the vine and the fig tree, which were widely cultivated, especially in the north. Stone, suitable for building, was very scarce, and limestone, alabaster, marble, and basalt had to be taken from northern Mesopotamia, where the mountains also yield copper and lead and iron. Except Eridu, where ancient workers quarried sandstone from its sea-shaped ridge, all the cities were built of brick, an excellent clay being found in abundance. When brick walls were cemented with bitumen they were given great stability. This resinous substance is found in the north and south. It bubbles up through crevices of rocks on river banks and forms small ponds. Two famous springs at modern Hit, on the Euphrates, have been drawn upon from time immemorial. "From one", writes a traveller, "flows hot water black with bitumen, while the other discharges intermittently bitumen, or, after a rainstorm, bitumen and cold water. . . . Where rocks crop out in the plain above Hit, they are full of seams of bitumen." [*1] Present-day Arabs call it "kiyara", and export it for coating boats and roofs; they also use it as an antiseptic, and apply it to cure the skin diseases from which camels suffer.

Sumeria had many surplus products, including corn and figs, pottery, fine wool and woven garments, to offer in exchange for what it most required from other countries. It must, therefore, have had a brisk and flourishing foreign trade at an exceedingly remote period. No doubt numerous alien merchants were attracted to its cities, and it may be that they induced or encouraged Semitic and other raiders to overthrow governments and form military aristocracies, so that they themselves might obtain necessary concessions and achieve a degree of

[p. 26]

political ascendancy. It does not follow, however, that the peasant class was greatly affected by periodic revolutions of this kind, which brought little more to them than a change of rulers. The needs of the country necessitated the continuance of agricultural methods and the rigid observance of existing land laws; indeed, these constituted the basis of Sumerian prosperity. Conquerors have ever sought reward not merely in spoil, but also the services of the conquered. In northern Babylonia the invaders apparently found it necessary to conciliate and secure the continued allegiance of the tillers of the soil. Law and religion being closely associated, they had to adapt their gods to suit the requirements of existing social and political organizations. A deity of pastoral nomads had to receive attributes which would give him an agricultural significance; one of rural character had to be changed to respond to the various calls of city life. Besides, local gods could not be ignored on account of their popularity. As a result, imported beliefs and religious customs must have been fused and absorbed according to their bearing on modes of life in various localities. It is probable that the complex character of certain deities was due to the process of adjustment to which they were subjected in new environments.

The petty kingdoms of Sumeria appear to have been tribal in origin. Each city was presided over by a deity who was the nominal owner of the surrounding arable land, farms were rented or purchased from the priesthood, and pasture was held in common. As in Egypt, where we find, for instance, the artisan god Ptah supreme at Memphis, the sun god Ra at Heliopolis, and the cat goddess Bast at Bubastis, the various local Sumerian and Akkadian deities had distinctive characteristics, and similarly showed a tendency to absorb the attributes of their

[p. 27]

rivals. The chief deity of a state was the central figure in a pantheon, which had its political aspect and influenced the growth of local theology. Cities, however, did not, as a rule, bear the names of deities, which suggests that several were founded when Sumerian religion was in its early animistic stages, and gods and goddesses were not sharply defined from the various spirit groups.

A distinctive and characteristic Sumerian god was Ea, who was supreme at the ancient sea-deserted port of Eridu. He is identified with the Oannes of Berosus, [*1] who referred to the deity as "a creature endowed with reason, with a body like that of a fish, with feet below like those of a man, with a fish's tail". This description recalls the familiar figures of Egyptian gods and priests attired in the skins of the sacred animals from whom their powers were derived, and the fairy lore about swan maids and men, and the seals and other animals who could divest themselves of their "skin coverings" and appear in human shape. Originally Ea may have been a sacred fish. The Indian creative gods Brahma and Vishnu had fish forms. In Sanskrit literature Manu, the eponymous "first man", is instructed by the fish to build a ship in which to save himself when the world would be purged by the rising waters. Ea befriended in similar manner the Babylonian Noah, called Pir-napishtim, advising him to build a vessel so as to be prepared for the approaching Deluge. Indeed the Indian legend appears to throw light on the original Sumerian conception of Ea. It relates that when the fish was small and in danger of being swallowed by other fish in a stream it appealed to Manu for protection. The

[p. 28]

sage at once lifted up the fish and placed it in a jar of water. It gradually increased in bulk, and he transferred it next to a tank and then to the river Ganges. In time the fish complained to Manu that the river was too small for it, so he carried it to the sea. For these services the god in fish form instructed Manu regarding the approaching flood, and afterwards piloted his ship through the weltering waters until it rested on a mountain top. [*1]

If this Indian myth is of Babylonian origin, as appears probable, it may be that the spirit of the river Euphrates, "the soul of the land", was identified with a migrating fish. The growth of the fish suggests the growth of the river rising in flood. In Celtic folk tales high tides and valley floods are accounted for by the presence of a "great beast" in sea, loch, or river. In a class of legends, "specially connected with the worship of Atargatis", wrote Professor Robertson Smith, "the divine life of the waters resides in the sacred fish that inhabit them. Atargatis and her son, according to a legend common to Hierapolis and Ascalon, plunged into the waters--in the first case the Euphrates, in the second the sacred pool at the temple near the town--and were changed into fishes". The idea is that "where a god dies, that is, ceases to exist in human form, his life passes into the waters where he is buried; and this again is merely a theory to bring the divine water or the divine fish into harmony with anthropomorphic ideas. The same thing was sometimes effected in another way by saying that the anthropomorphic deity was born from the water, as Aphrodite sprang from sea foam, or as Atargatis, in another form of the Euphrates legend, . . . was born of an egg which the sacred fishes found in the Euphrates and pushed ashore." [*2]

As "Shar Apsi", Ea was the "King of the Watery

[p. 29]

[paragraph continues] Deep". The reference, however, according to Jastrow, "is not to the salt ocean, but the sweet waters flowing under the earth which feed the streams, and through streams and canals irrigate the fields". [*1] As Babylonia was fertilized by its rivers, Ea, the fish god, was a fertilizing deity. In Egypt the "Mother of Mendes" is depicted carrying a fish upon her head; she links with Isis and Hathor; her husband is Ba-neb-Tettu, a form of Ptah, Osiris, and Ra, and as a god of fertility he is symbolized by the ram. Another Egyptian fish deity was the god Rem, whose name signifies "to weep"; he wept fertilizing tears, and corn was sown and reaped amidst lamentations. He may be identical with Remi, who was a phase of Sebek, the crocodile god, a developed attribute of Nu, the vague primitive Egyptian deity who symbolized the primordial deep. The connection between a fish god and a corn god is not necessarily remote when we consider that in Babylonia and Egypt the harvest was the gift of the rivers.

The Euphrates, indeed, was hailed as a creator of all that grew on its banks.

O thou River who didst create all things,
 When the great gods dug thee out,
 They set prosperity upon thy banks,
 Within thee Ea, the King of the Deep, created his dwelling . . .
 Thou judgest the cause of mankind!
 O River, thou art mighty! O River, thou art supreme!
 O River, thou art righteous! [*2]

In serving Ea, the embodiment or the water spirit, by leading him, as the Indian Manu led the Creator and "Preserver" in fish form, from river to water pot, water pot to pond or canal, and then again to river and ocean,

[p. 30]

the Babylonians became expert engineers and experienced agriculturists, the makers of bricks, the builders of cities, the framers of laws. Indeed, their civilization was a growth of Ea worship. Ea was their instructor. Berosus states that, as Oannes, he lived in the Persian Gulf, and every day came ashore to instruct the inhabitants of Eridu how to make canals, to grow crops, to work metals, to make pottery and bricks, and to build temples; he was the artisan god--Nun-ura, "god of the potter"; Kuski-banda, "god of goldsmiths", &c.--the divine patron of the arts and crafts. "Ea knoweth everything", chanted the hymn maker. He taught the people how to form and use alphabetic signs and instructed them in mathematics: he gave them their code of laws. Like the Egyptian artisan god Ptah, and the linking deity Khnumu, Ea was the "potter or moulder of gods and man". Ptah moulded the first man on his potter's wheel: he also moulded the sun and moon; he shaped the universe and hammered out the copper sky. Ea built the world "as an architect builds a house". [*1] Similarly the Vedic Indra, who wielded a hammer like Ptah, fashioned the universe after the simple manner in which the Aryans made their wooden dwellings. [*2]

Like Ptah, Ea also developed from an artisan god into a sublime Creator in the highest sense, not merely as a producer of crops. His word became the creative force; he named those things he desired to be, and they came into existence. "Who but Ea creates things", exclaimed a priestly poet. This change from artisan god to creator (Nudimmud) may have been due to the tendency of early religious cults to attach to their chief god the attributes of rivals exalted at other centres.

[p. 31]

Ea, whose name is also rendered Aa, was identified with Ya, Ya'u, or Au, the Jah of the Hebrews. "In Ya-Daganu, 'Jah is Dagon'", writes Professor Pinches, "we have the elements reversed, showing a wish to identify Jah with Dagon, rather than Dagon with Jah; whilst another interesting name, Au-Aa, shows an identification of Jah with Aa, two names which have every appearance of being etymologically connected." Jah's name "is one of the words for 'god' in the Assyro-Babylonian language". [*1]

Ea was "Enki", "lord of the world", or "lord of what is beneath"; Amma-ana-ki, "lord of heaven and earth"; Sa-kalama, "ruler of the land", as well as Engur, "god of the abyss", Naqbu, "the deep", and Lugal-ida, "king of the river". As rain fell from "the waters above the firmament", the god of waters was also a sky and earth god.

The Indian Varuna was similarly a sky as well as an ocean god before the theorizing and systematizing Brahmanic teachers relegated him to a permanent abode at the bottom of the sea. It may be that Ea-Oannes and Varuna were of common origin.

Another Babylonian deity, named Dagan, is believed to be identical with Ea. His worship was certainly of great antiquity. "Hammurabi", writes Professor Pinches, "seems to speak of the Euphrates as being 'the boundary of Dagan', whom he calls his creator. In later inscriptions the form Daguna, which approaches nearer to the West Semitic form (Dagon of the Philistines), is found in a few personal names. [*2]

It is possible that the Philistine deity Dagon was a

[p. 32]

specialized form of ancient Ea, who was either imported from Babylonia or was a sea god of more than one branch of the Mediterranean race. The authorities are at variance regarding the form and attributes of Dagan. Our know-ledge regarding him is derived mainly from the Bible. He was a national rather than a city god. There are references to a Beth-dagon [*1], "house or city of Dagon"; he had also a temple at Gaza, and Samson destroyed it by pulling down the two middle pillars which were its main support. [*2] A third temple was situated in Ashdod. When the captured ark of the Israelites was placed in it the image of Dagon "fell on his face", with the result that "the head of Dagon and both the palms of his hands were cut off upon the threshold; only the stump of Dagon was left". [*3] A further reference to "the threshold of Dagon" suggests that the god had feet like Ea-Oannes. Those who hold that Dagon had a fish form derive his name from the Semitic "dag = a fish", and suggest that after the idol fell only the fishy part (dago) was left. On the other hand, it was argued that Dagon was a corn god, and that the resemblance between the words Dagan and Dagon are accidental. Professor Sayce makes reference in this connection to a crystal seal from Phoenicia in the Ashmolean Museum, Oxford, bearing an inscription which he reads as Baal-dagon. Near the name is an ear of corn, and other symbols, such as the winged solar disc, a gazelle, and several stars, but there is no fish. It may be, of course, that Baal-dagon represents a fusion of deities. As we have seen in the case of Ea-Oannes and the deities of Mendes, a fish god may also be a corn god, a land animal god and a god of ocean and the sky. The offering of golden mice representing "your mice that mar the

[p. 33]

land", [*1] made by the Philistines, suggests that Dagon was the fertilizing harvest god, among other things, whose usefulness had been impaired, as they believed, by the mistake committed of placing the ark of Israel in the temple at Ashdod. The Philistines came from Crete, and if their Dagon was imported from that island, he may have had some connection with Poseidon, whose worship extended throughout Greece. This god of the sea, who is somewhat like the Roman Neptune, carried a lightning trident and caused earthquakes. He was a brother of Zeus, the sky and atmosphere deity, and had bull and horse forms. As a horse he pursued Demeter, the earth and corn goddess, and, like Ea, he instructed mankind, but especially in the art of training horses. In his train were the Tritons, half men, half fishes, and the water fairies, the Nereids. Bulls, boars, and rams were offered to this sea god of fertility. Amphitrite was his spouse.

An obscure god Shony, the Oannes of the Scottish Hebrides, received oblations from those who depended for their agricultural prosperity on his gifts of fertilizing seaweed. He is referred to in Martin's Western Isles, and is not yet forgotten. The Eddie sea god Njord of Noatun was the father of Frey, the harvest god. Dagda, the Irish corn god, had for wife Boann, the goddess of the river Boyne. Osiris and Isis of Egypt were associated with the Nile. The connection between agriculture and the water supply was too obvious to escape the early symbolists, and many other proofs of this than those referred to could be given.

Ea's "faithful spouse" was the goddess Damkina, who was also called Nin-ki, "lady of the earth". "May Ea make thee glad", chanted the priests. "May Damkina, queen of the deep, illumine thee with her countenance;

[p. 34]

may Merodach (Marduk), the mighty overseer of the Igigi (heavenly spirits), exalt thy head." Merodach was their son: in time he became the Bel, or "Lord", of the Babylonian pantheon.

Like the Indian Varuna, the sea god, Ea-Oannes had control over the spirits and demons of the deep. The "ferryman" who kept watch over the river of death was called Arad-Ea, "servant of Ea". There are also references to sea maidens, the Babylonian mermaids, or Nereids. We have a glimpse of sea giants, which resemble the Indian Danavas and Daityas of ocean, in the chant:

Seven are they, seven are they,
 In the ocean deep seven are they,
 Battening in heaven seven are they,
 Bred in the depths of ocean. . . .
 Of these seven the first is the south wind,
 The second a dragon with mouth agape. . . . [*1]

[paragraph continues] A suggestion of the Vedic Vritra and his horde of monsters.

These seven demons were also "the messengers of Anu", who, although specialized as a sky god in more than one pantheon, appears to have been closely associated with Ea in the earliest Sumerian period. His name, signifying "the high one", is derived from "ana", "heaven"; he was the city god of Erech (Uruk). It is possible that he was developed as an atmospheric god with solar and lunar attributes. The seven demons, who were his messengers, recall the stormy Maruts, the followers of Indra. They are referred to as

Forcing their way with baneful windstorms,
 Mighty destroyers, the deluge of the storm god,
 Stalking at the right hand of the storm god. [*2]

[p. 35]

When we deal with a deity in his most archaic form it is difficult to distinguish him from a demon. Even the beneficent Ea is associated with monsters and furies. "Evil spirits", according to a Babylonian chant, were "the bitter venom of the gods". Those attached to a deity as "attendants" appear to represent the original animistic group from which he evolved. In each district the character of the deity was shaped to accord with local conditions.

At Nippur, which was situated on the vague and shifting boundary line between Sumer and Akkad, the chief god was Enlil, whose name is translated "lord of mist", "lord of might", and "lord of demons" by various authorities. He was a storm god and a war god, and "lord of heaven and earth", like Ea and Anu. An atmospheric deity, he shares the attributes of the Indian Indra, the thunder and rain god, and Vayu, the wind god; he also resembles the Semitic Adad or Rim-man, who links with the Hittite Tarku. All these are deities of tempest and the mountains--Wild Huntsmen in the Raging Host. The name of Enlil's temple at Nippur has been translated as "mountain house", or "like a mountain", and the theory obtained for a time that the god must therefore have been imported by a people from the hills. But as the ideogram for "mountain" and "land" was used in the earliest times, as King shows, with reference to foreign countries, [*1] it is more probable that Enlil was exalted as a world god who had dominion over not only Sumer and Akkad, but also the territories occupied by the rivals and enemies of the early Babylonians.

Enlil is known as the "older Bel" (lord), to distinguish him from Bel Merodach of Babylon. He was

[p. 36]

the chief figure in a triad in which he figured as earth god, with Anu as god of the sky and Ea as god of the deep. This classification suggests that Nippur had either risen in political importance and dominated the cities of Erech and Eridu, or that its priests were influential at the court of a ruler who was the overlord of several city states.

Associated with Bel Enlil was Beltis, later known as "Beltu--the lady". She appears to be identical with the other great goddesses, Ishtar, Nana, Zer-panitum, &c., a "Great Mother", or consort of an early god with whom she was equal in power and dignity.

In the later systematized theology of the Babylonians we seem to trace the fragments of a primitive mythology which was vague in outline, for the deities were not sharply defined, and existed in groups. Enneads were formed in Egypt by placing a local god at the head of a group of eight elder deities. The sun god Ra was the chief figure of the earliest pantheon of this character at Heliopolis, while at Hermopolis the leader was the lunar god Thoth. Professor Budge is of opinion that "both the Sumerians and the early Egyptians derived their primeval gods from some common but exceedingly ancient source", for he finds in the Babylonian and Nile valleys that there is a resemblance between two early groups which "seems to be too close to be accidental". [*1]

The Egyptian group comprises four pairs of vague gods and goddesses--Nu and his consort Nut, Hehu and his consort Hehut, Kekui and his consort Kekuit, and Kerh and his consort Kerhet. "Man always has fashioned", he says, "and probably always will fashion, his god or gods in his own image, and he has always, having reached a certain stage in development, given to his gods wives

[p. 37]

and offspring; but the nature of the position taken by the wives of the gods depends upon the nature of the position of women in the households of those who write the legends and the traditions of the gods. The gods of the oldest company in Egypt were, the writer believes, invented by people in whose households women held a high position, and among whom they possessed more power than is usually the case with Oriental peoples." [*1]

We cannot say definitely what these various deities represent. Nu was the spirit of the primordial deep, and Nut of the waters above the heavens, the mother of moon and sun and the stars. The others were phases of light and darkness and the forces of nature in activity and repose.

Nu is represented in Babylonian mythology by Apsu-Rishtu, and Nut by Mummu-Tiamat or Tiawath; the next pair is Lachmu and Lachamu, and the third, Anshar and Kishar. The fourth pair is missing, but the names of Anu and Ea (as Nudimmud) are mentioned in the first tablet of the Creation series, and the name of a third is lost. Professor Budge thinks that the Assyrian editors substituted the ancient triad of Anu, Ea, and Enlil for the pair which would correspond to those found in Egypt. Originally the wives of Anu and Ea may have made up the group of eight primitive deities.

There can be little doubt but that Ea, as he survives to us, is of later characterization than the first pair of primitive deities who symbolized the deep. The attributes of this beneficent god reflect the progress, and the social and moral ideals of a people well advanced in civilization. He rewarded mankind for the services they rendered to him; he was their leader and instructor; he achieved for them the victories over the destructive forces

[p. 38]

of nature. In brief, he was the dragon slayer, a distinction, by the way, which was attached in later times to his son Merodach, the Babylonian god, although Ea was still credited with the victory over the dragon's husband.

When Ea was one of the pre-Babylonian group--the triad of Bel-Enlil, Anu, and Ea--he resembled the Indian Vishnu, the Preserver, while Bel-Enlil resembled Shiva, the Destroyer, and Anu, the father, supreme Brahma, the Creator and Father of All, the difference in exact adjustment being due, perhaps, to Sumerian political conditions.

Ea, as we have seen, symbolized the beneficence of the waters; their destructive force was represented by Tiamat or Tiawath, the dragon, and Apsu, her husband, the arch-enemy of the gods. We shall find these elder demons figuring in the Babylonian Creation myth, which receives treatment in a later chapter.

The ancient Sumerian city of Eridu, which means "on the seashore", was invested with great sanctity from the earliest times, and Ea, the "great magician of the gods", was invoked by workers of spells, the priestly magicians of historic Babylonia. Excavations have shown that Eridu was protected by a retaining wall of sandstone, of which material many of its houses were made. In its temple tower, built of brick, was a marble stairway, and evidences have been forthcoming that in the later Sumerian period the structure was lavishly adorned. It is referred to in the fragments of early literature which have survived as "the splendid house, shady as the forest", that "none may enter". The mythological spell exercised by Eridu in later times suggests that the civilization of Sumeria owed much to the worshippers of Ea. At the sacred city the first man was created: there the souls

[p. 39]

of the dead passed towards the great Deep. Its proximity to the sea--Ea was Nin-bubu, "god of the sailor"--may have brought it into contact with other peoples and other early civilizations. Like the early Egyptians, the early Sumerians may have been in touch with Punt (Somali-land), which some regard as the cradle of the Mediterranean race. The Egyptians obtained from that sacred land incense-bearing trees which had magical potency. In a fragmentary Babylonian charm there is a reference to a sacred tree or bush at Eridu. Professor Sayce has suggested that it is the Biblical "Tree of Life" in the Garden of Eden. His translations of certain vital words, however, is sharply questioned by Mr. R. Campbell Thompson of the British Museum, who does not accept the theory. [*1] It may be that Ea's sacred bush or tree is a survival of tree and water worship.

If Eridu was not the "cradle" of the Sumerian race, it was possibly the cradle of Sumerian civilization. Here, amidst the shifting rivers in early times, the agriculturists may have learned to control and distribute the water supply by utilizing dried-up beds of streams to irrigate the land. Whatever successes they achieved were credited to Ea, their instructor and patron; he was Nadimmud, "god of everything".

Footnotes

^21:1 2 Kings, xviii, 32.

^22:1 Herodotus, i, 193.

^25:1 Peter's Nippur, i, p. 160.

^27:1 A Babylonian priest of Bel Merodach. In the third century B.C. he composed in Greek a history of his native land, which has perished. Extracts from it are given by Eusebius, Josephus, Apollodorus, and others.

^28:1 Indian Myth and Legend, pp. 140, 141.

^28:2 The Religion of the Semites, pp. 159, 160.

^29:1 Religion of Babylonia and Assyria, M. Jastrow, p. 88.

^29:2 The Seven Tablets of Creation, L. W. King, vol. i, p. 129.

^30:1 Religious Belief in Babylonia and Assyria, M. Jastrow, p. 88.

^30:2 Cosmology of the Rigveda, Wallis, and Indian Myth and Legend, p. 10.

^31:1 The Old Testament in the Light of the Historical Records and Legends of Assyria and Babylonia, T. G. Pinches, pp. 59-61.

^31:2 The Religion of Babylonia and Assyria, T. G. Pinches, pp. 91, 92.

^32:1 Joshua, xv, 41; xix, 27.

^32:2 Judges, xvi, 1.

^32:3 1 Sam., v, 1-9.

^33:1 1 Sam., vi, 5.

^34:1 The Devils and Evil Spirits of Babylonia, R. Campbell Thompson, London, 1903, vol. i, p. xlii.

^34:2 The Devils and Evil Spirits of Babylonia, R. C. Thompson, vol. i, p. xliii.

^35:1 A History of Sumer and Akkad, L. W. King, p. 54.

^36:1 The Gods of the Egyptians, E. Wallis Budge, vol. i, p. 290.

^37:1 The Gods of the Egyptians, vol. i, p. 287.

^39:1 The Devils and Evil Spirits of Babylonia, vol. i, Intro. See also Sayce's The Religion of Ancient Egypt and Babylonia (Gifford Lectures, 1902), p. 385, and Pinches' The Old Testament in the Light of Historical Records, &c., p. 71.

     
Myths of Babylonia and Assyria, by Donald A. MacKenzie, [1915], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 40] [ch-03]

  

CHAPTER III

  

Rival Pantheons and Representative Deities

Why Different Gods were Supreme at Different Centres--Theories regarding Origin of Life--Vital Principle in Water--Creative Tears of Weeping Deities--Significance of widespread Spitting Customs--Divine Water in Blood and Divine Blood in Water--Liver as the Seat of Life--Inspiration derived by Drinking Mead, Blood, &c.--Life Principle in Breath--Babylonian Ghosts as "Evil Wind Gusts"--Fire Deities--Fire and Water in Magical Ceremonies--Moon Gods of Ur and Harran--Moon Goddess and Babylonian "Jack and Jill"--Antiquity of Sun Worship--Tammuz and Ishtar--Solar Gods of War, Pestilence, and Death--Shamash as the "Great Judge"--His Mitra Name--Aryan Mitra or Mithra and linking Babylonian Deities--Varuna and Shamash Hymns compared--The Female Origin of Life--Goddesses of Maternity--The Babylonian Thor--Deities of Good and Evil.

IN dealing with the city cults of Sumer and Akkad, consideration must be given to the problems involved by the rival mythological systems. Pantheons not only varied in detail, but were presided over by different supreme gods. One city's chief deity might be regarded as a secondary deity at another centre. Although Ea, for instance, was given first place at Eridu, and was so pronouncedly Sumerian in character, the moon god Nannar remained supreme at Ur, while the sun god, whose Semitic name was Shamash, presided at Larsa and Sippar. Other deities were similarly exalted in other states.

As has been indicated, a mythological system must have been strongly influenced by city politics. To hold

[p. 41]

a community in sway, it was necessary to recognize officially the various gods worshipped by different sections, so as to secure the constant allegiance of all classes to their rulers. Alien deities were therefore associated with local and tribal deities, those of the nomads with those of the agriculturists, those of the unlettered folks with those of the learned people. Reference has been made to the introduction of strange deities by conquerors. But these were not always imposed upon a community by violent means. Indications are not awanting that the worshippers of alien gods were sometimes welcomed and encouraged to settle in certain states. When they came as military allies to assist a city folk against a fierce enemy, they were naturally much admired and praised, honoured by the women and the bards, and rewarded by the rulers.

In the epic of Gilgamesh, the Babylonian Hercules, we meet with Ea-bani, a Goliath of the wilds, who is entreated to come to the aid of the besieged city of Erech when it seemed that its deities were unable to help the people against their enemies.

The gods of walled-round Erech
 To flies had turned and buzzed in the streets;
 The winged bulls of walled-round Erech
 Were turned to mice and departed through the holes.

Ea-bani was attracted to Erech by the gift of a fair woman for wife. The poet who lauded him no doubt mirrored public opinion. We can see the slim, shaven Sumerians gazing with wonder and admiration on their rough heroic ally.

All his body was covered with hair,
 His locks were like a woman's,
 Thick as corn grew his abundant hair. [p. 42]
 He was a stranger to the people and in that land.
 Clad in a garment like Gira, the god,
 He had eaten grass with the gazelles,
 He had drunk water with savage beasts.
 His delight was to be among water dwellers.

Like the giant Alban, the eponymous ancestor of a people who invaded prehistoric Britain, Ea-bani appears to have represented in Babylonian folk legends a certain type of foreign settlers in the land. No doubt the city dwellers, who were impressed by the prowess of the hairy and powerful warriors, were also ready to acknowledge the greatness of their war gods, and to admit them into the pantheon. The fusion of beliefs which followed must have stimulated thought and been productive of speculative ideas. "Nowhere", remarks Professor Jastrow, "does a high form of culture arise without the commingling of diverse ethnic elements."

We must also take into account the influence exercised by leaders of thought like En-we-dur-an-ki, the famous high priest of Sippar, whose piety did much to increase the reputation of the cult of Shamesh, the sun god. The teachings and example of Buddha, for instance, revolutionized Brahmanic religion in India.

A mythology was an attempt to solve the riddle of the Universe, and to adjust the relations of mankind with the various forces represented by the deities. The priests systematized existing folk beliefs and established an official religion. To secure the prosperity of the State, it was considered necessary to render homage unto whom homage was due at various seasons and under various circumstances.

The religious attitude of a particular community, therefore, must have been largely dependent on its needs and experiences. The food supply was a first consideration.

[p. 43]

[paragraph continues] At Eridu, as we have seen, it was assured by devotion to Ea and obedience to his commands as an instructor. Elsewhere it might happen, however, that Ea's gifts were restricted or withheld by an obstructing force--the raging storm god, or the parching, pestilence-bringing deity of the sun. It was necessary, therefore, for the people to win the favour of the god or goddess who seemed most powerful, and was accordingly considered to be the greatest in a. particular district. A rain god presided over the destinies of one community, and a god of disease and death over another; a third exalted the war god, no doubt because raids were frequent and the city owed its strength and prosperity to its battles and conquests. The reputation won by a particular god throughout Babylonia would depend greatly on the achievements of his worshippers and the progress of the city civilization over which he presided. Bel-Enlil's fame as a war deity was probably due to the political supremacy of his city of Nippur; and there was probably good reason for attributing to the sun god a pronounced administrative and legal character; he may have controlled the destinies of exceedingly well organized communities in which law and order and authority were held in high esteem.

In accounting for the rise of distinctive and rival city deities, we should also consider the influence of divergent conceptions regarding the origin of life in mingled communities. Each foreign element in a community had its own intellectual life and immemorial tribal traditions, which reflected ancient habits of life and perpetuated the doctrines of eponymous ancestors. Among the agricultural classes, the folk religion which entered so intimately into their customs and labours must have remained essentially Babylonish in character. In cities,

[p. 44]

however, where official religions were formulated, foreign ideas were more apt to be imposed, especially when embraced by influential teachers. It is not surprising, therefore, to find that in Babylonia, as in Egypt, there were differences of opinion regarding the origin of life and the particular natural element which represented the vital principle.

One section of the people, who were represented by the worshippers of Ea, appear to have believed that the essence of life was contained in water. The god of Eridu was the source of the "water of life". He fertilized parched and sunburnt wastes through rivers and irrigating canals, and conferred upon man the sustaining "food of life". When life came to an end--

Food of death will be offered thee . . .
 Water of death will be offered thee . . .

Offerings of water and food were made to the dead so that the ghosts might be nourished and prevented from troubling the living. Even the gods required water and food; they were immortal because they had drunk ambrosia and eaten from the plant of life. When the goddess Ishtar was in the Underworld, the land of the dead, the servant of Ea exclaimed

"Hail! lady, may the well give me of its waters, so that I may drink."

The goddess of the dead commanded her servant to "sprinkle the lady Ishtar with the water of life and bid her depart". The sacred water might also be found at a confluence of rivers. Ea bade his son, Merodach, to "draw water from the mouth of two streams", and "on this water to put his pure spell".

The worship of rivers and wells which prevailed in

[p. 45]

many countries was connected with the belief that the principle of life was in moisture. In India, water was vitalized by the intoxicating juice of the Soma plant, which inspired priests to utter prophecies and filled their hearts with religious fervour. Drinking customs had originally a religious significance. It was believed in India that the sap of plants was influenced by the moon, the source of vitalizing moisture and the hiding-place of the mead of the gods. The Teutonic gods also drank this mead, and poets were inspired by it. Similar beliefs obtained among various peoples. Moon and water worship were therefore closely associated; the blood of animals and the sap of plants were vitalized by the water of life and under control of the moon.

The body moisture of gods and demons had vitalizing properties. When the Indian creator, Prajapati, wept at the beginning, "that (the tears) which fell into the water became the air. That which he wiped away, upwards, became the sky." [*1] The ancient Egyptians believed that all men were born from the eyes of Horus except negroes, who came from other parts of his body. [*2] The creative tears of Ra, the sun god, fell as shining rays upon the earth. When this god grew old saliva dripped from his mouth, and Isis mixed the vitalizing moisture with dust, and thus made the serpent which bit and paralysed the great solar deity. [*3]

Other Egyptian deities, including Osiris and Isis, wept creative tears. Those which fell from the eyes of the evil gods produced poisonous plants and various baneful animals. Orion, the Greek giant, sprang from the body moisture of deities. The weeping ceremonies in connection

[p. 46]

with agricultural rites were no doubt believed to be of magical potency; they encouraged the god to weep creative tears.

Ea, the god of the deep, was also "lord of life" (Enti), "king of the river" (Lugal-ida), and god of creation (Nudimmud). His aid was invoked by means or magical formulae. As the "great magician of the gods" he uttered charms himself, and was the patron of all magicians. One spell runs as follows:

I am the sorcerer priest of Ea . . .
 To revive the . . . sick man
 The great lord Ea hath sent me;
 He hath added his pure spell to mine,
 He hath added his pure voice to mine,
 He hath added his pure spittle to mine.
                       R. C. Thompson's Translation.

Saliva, like tears, had creative and therefore curative qualities; it also expelled and injured demons and brought good luck. Spitting ceremonies are referred to in the religious literature of Ancient Egypt. When the Eye of Ra was blinded by Set, Thoth spat in it to restore vision. The sun god Turn, who was linked with Ra as Ra-Tum, spat on the ground, and his saliva became the gods Shu and Tefnut. In the Underworld the devil serpent Apep was spat upon to curse it, as was also its waxen image which the priests fashioned. [*1]

Several African tribes spit to make compacts, declare friendship, and to curse.

Park, the explorer, refers in his Travels to his carriers spitting on a flat stone to ensure a good journey. Arabian holy men and descendants of Mohammed spit to cure diseases. Mohammed spat in the mouth of his grandson Hasen soon after birth. Theocritus, Sophocles,

[p. 47]

and Plutarch testify to the ancient Grecian customs of spitting to cure and to curse, and also to bless when children were named. Pliny has expressed belief in the efficacy of the fasting spittle for curing disease, and referred to the custom of spitting to avert witchcraft. In England, Scotland, and Ireland spitting customs are not yet obsolete. North of England boys used to talk of "spitting their sauls" (souls). When the Newcastle colliers held their earliest strikes they made compacts by spitting on a stone. There are still "spitting stones" in the north of Scotland. When bargains are made in rural districts, hands are spat upon before they are shaken. The first money taken each day by fishwives and other dealers is spat upon to ensure increased drawings. Brand, who refers to various spitting customs, quotes Scot's Discovery of Witchcraft regarding the saliva cure for king's evil, which is still, by the way, practised in the Hebrides. Like Pliny, Scot recommended ceremonial spitting as a charm against witchcraft. [*1] In China spitting to expel demons is a common practice. We still call a hasty person a "spitfire", and a calumniator a "spit-poison".

The life principle in trees, &c., as we have seen, was believed to have been derived from the tears of deities. In India sap was called the "blood of trees", and references to "bleeding trees" are still widespread and common. "Among the ancients", wrote Professor Robertson Smith, "blood is generally conceived as the principle or vehicle of life, and so the account often given of sacred waters is that the blood of the deity flows in them. Thus as Milton writes:

Smooth Adonis from his native rock
 Ran purple to the sea, supposed with blood
 Of Thammuz yearly wounded.--Paradise Lost, i, 450.

[p. 48]

[paragraph continues] The ruddy colour which the swollen river derived from the soil at a certain season was ascribed to the blood of the god, who received his death wound in Lebanon at that time of the year, and lay buried beside the sacred source." [*1]

In Babylonia the river was regarded as the source of the life blood and the seat of the soul. No doubt this theory was based on the fact that the human liver contains about a sixth of the blood in the body, the largest proportion required by any single organ. Jeremiah makes "Mother Jerusalem" exclaim: "My liver is poured upon the earth for the destruction of the daughter of my people", meaning that her life is spent with grief.

Inspiration was derived by drinking blood as well as by drinking intoxicating liquors--the mead of the gods. Indian magicians who drink the blood of the goat sacrificed to the goddess Kali, are believed to be temporarily possessed by her spirit, and thus enabled to prophesy. [*2] Malayan exorcists still expel demons while they suck the blood from a decapitated fowl. [*3]

Similar customs were prevalent in Ancient Greece. A woman who drank the blood of a sacrificed lamb or bull uttered prophetic sayings. [*4]

But while most Babylonians appear to have believed that the life principle was in blood, some were apparently of opinion that it was in breath--the air of life. A man died when he ceased to breathe; his spirit, therefore, it was argued, was identical with the atmosphere--the moving wind--and was accordingly derived from the atmospheric or wind god. When, in the Gilgamesh epic, the hero invokes the dead Ea-bani, the ghost rises

[p. 49]

up like a "breath of wind". A Babylonian charm runs:

The gods which seize on men
   Came forth from the grave;
 The evil wind gusts
   Have come forth from the grave,
 To demand payment of rites and the pouring out of libations
   They have come forth from the grave;
 All that is evil in their hosts, like a whirlwind,
   Hath come forth from the grave. [*1]

The Hebrew "nephesh ruach" and "neshamah" (in Arabic "ruh" and "nefs") pass from meaning "breath" to "spirit" [*2] In Egypt the god Khnumu was "Kneph" in his character as an atmospheric deity. The ascendancy of storm and wind gods in some Babylonian cities may have been due to the belief that they were the source of the "air of life". It is possible that this conception was popularized by the Semites. Inspiration was perhaps derived from these deities by burning incense, which, if we follow evidence obtained elsewhere, induced a prophetic trance. The gods were also invoked by incense. In the Flood legend the Babylonian Noah burned incense. "The gods smelled a sweet savour and gathered like flies over the sacrificer." In Egypt devotees who inhaled the breath of the Apis bull were enabled to prophesy.

In addition to water and atmospheric deities Babylonia had also its fire gods, Girru, Gish Bar, Gibil, and Nusku. Their origin is obscure. It is doubtful if their worshippers, like those of the Indian Agni, believed that fire, the "vital spark", was the principle of life which was manifested by bodily heat. The Aryan fire worshippers cremated their dead so that the spirits might be

[p. 50]

transferred by fire to Paradise. This practice, however, did not obtain among the fire worshippers of Persia, nor, as was once believed, in Sumer or Akkad either. Fire was, however, used in Babylonia for magical purposes. It destroyed demons, and put to flight the spirits of disease. Possibly the fire-purification ceremonies resembled those which were practised by the Canaanites, and are referred to in the Bible. Ahaz "made his son to pass through the fire, according to the abominations of the heathen". [*1] Ezekiel declared that "when ye offer your gifts, when ye make your sons to pass through the fire, ye pollute yourselves with all your idols". [*2] In Leviticus it is laid down: "Thou shalt not let any of thy seed pass through the fire to Moloch". [*3] It may be that in Babylonia the fire-cleansing ceremony resembled that which obtained at Beltane (May Day) in Scotland, Germany, and other countries. Human sacrifices might also have been offered up as burnt offerings. Abraham, who came from the Sumerian city of Ur, was prepared to sacrifice Isaac, Sarah's first-born. The fire gods of Babylonia never achieved the ascendancy of the Indian Agni; they appear to have resembled him mainly in so far as he was connected with the sun. Nusku, like Agni, was also the "messenger of the gods". When Merodach or Babylon was exalted as chief god of the pantheon his messages were carried to Ea by Nusku. He may have therefore symbolized the sun rays, for Merodach had solar attributes. It is possible that the belief obtained among even the water worshippers of Eridu that the sun and moon, which rose from the primordial deep, had their origin in the everlasting fire in Ea's domain at the bottom of the sea. In the Indian god Varuna's ocean home an "Asura fire" (demon fire)

 

Click to enlarge
WORSHIP OF THE MOON GOD.
 Cylinder-Seal of Khashkhamer, Patesi of Ishkun-Sin (in North Babylonia), and vassal of Ur-Engur, King of Ur. (c. 2400 B.C.)
 Photo. Mansell.

 

[p. 51]

burned constantly; it was "bound and confined", but could not be extinguished. Fed by water, this fire, it was believed, would burst forth at the last day and consume the universe. [*1] A similar belief can be traced in Teutonic mythology. The Babylonian incantation cult appealed to many gods, but "the most important share in the rites", says Jastrow, "are taken by fire and water--suggesting, therefore, that the god of water--more particularly Ea--and the god of fire . . . are the chief deities on which the ritual itself hinges". In some temples there was a bit rimki, a "house of washing", and a bit nuri, a "house of light". [*2]

It is possible, of course, that fire was regarded as the vital principle by some city cults, which were influenced by imported ideas. If so, the belief never became prevalent. The most enduring influence in Babylonian religion was the early Sumerian; and as Sumerian modes of thought were the outcome of habits of life necessitated by the character of the country, they were bound, sooner or later, to leave a deep impress on the minds of foreign peoples who settled in the Garden of Western Asia. It is not surprising, therefore, to find that imported deities assumed Babylonian characteristics, and were identified or associated with Babylonian gods in the later imperial pantheon.

Moon worship appears to have been as ancient as water worship, with which, as we have seen, it was closely associated. It was widely prevalent throughout Babylonia. The chief seat of the lunar deity, Nannar or Sin, was the ancient city of Ur, from which Abraham migrated to Harran, where the "Baal" (the lord) was also a moon god. Ur was situated in Sumer, in the south, between

[p. 52]

the west bank of the Euphrates and the low hills bordering the Arabian desert, and not far distant from sea.. washed Eridu. No doubt, like that city, it had its origin at an exceedingly remote period. At any rate, the excavations conducted there have afforded proof that it flourished in the prehistoric period.

As in Arabia, Egypt, and throughout ancient Europe and elsewhere, the moon god of Sumeria was regarded as the "friend of man". He controlled nature as a fertilizing agency; he caused grass, trees, and crops to grow; he increased flocks and herds, and gave human offspring. At Ur he was exalted above Ea as "the lord and prince of the gods, supreme in heaven, the Father of all"; he was also called "great Anu", an indication that Anu, the sky god, had at one time a lunar character. The moon god was believed to be the father of the sun god: he was the "great steer with mighty horns and perfect limbs".

His name Sin is believed to be a corruption of "Zu-ena", which signifies "knowledge lord". [*1] Like the lunar Osiris of Egypt, he was apparently an instructor of mankind; the moon measured time and controlled the seasons; seeds were sown at a certain phase of the moon, and crops were ripened by the harvest moon. The mountains of Sinai and the desert of Sin are called after this deity.

As Nannar, which Jastrow considers to be a variation of "Nannar", the "light producer", the moon god scattered darkness and reduced the terrors of night. His spirit inhabited the lunar stone, so that moon and stone worship were closely associated; it also entered trees and crops, so that moon worship linked with earth worship, as both linked with water worship.

[p. 53]

The consort of Nannar was Nin-Uruwa, "the lady of Ur", who was also called Nin-gala. She links with Ishtar as Nin, as Isis of Egypt linked with other mother deities. The twin children of the moon were Mashu and Mashtu, a brother and sister, like the lunar girl and boy of Teutonic mythology immortalized in nursery rhymes as Jack and Jill.

Sun worship was of great antiquity in Babylonia, but appears to have been seasonal in its earliest phases. No doubt the sky god Anu had his solar as well as his lunar attributes, which he shared with Ea. The spring sun was personified as Tammuz, the youthful shepherd, who was loved by the earth goddess Ishtar and her rival Eresh-ki-gal, goddess of death, the Babylonian Persephone. During the winter Tammuz dwelt in Hades, and at the beginning of spring Ishtar descended to search for him among the shades. [*1] But the burning summer sun was symbolized as a destroyer, a slayer of men, and therefore a war god. As Ninip or Nirig, the son of Enlil, who was made in the likeness of Anu, he waged war against the earth spirits, and was furiously hostile towards the deities of alien peoples, as befitted a god of battle. Even his father feared him, and when he was advancing towards Nippur, sent out Nusku, messenger of the gods, to soothe the raging deity with soft words. Ninip was symbolized as a wild bull, was connected with stone worship, like the Indian destroying god Shiva, and was similarly a deity of Fate. He had much in common with Nin-Girsu, a god of Lagash, who was in turn regarded as a form of Tammuz.

Nergal, another solar deity, brought disease and pestilence, and, according to Jensen, all misfortunes due to excessive heat. He was the king of death, husband of

[p. 54]

[paragraph continues] Eresh-ki-gal, queen of Hades. As a war god he thirsted for human blood, and was depicted as a mighty lion, He was the chief deity of the city of Cuthah, which, Jastrow suggests, was situated beside a burial place of great repute, like the Egyptian Abydos.

The two great cities of the sun in ancient Babylonia were the Akkadian Sippar and the Sumerian Larsa. In these the sun god, Shamash or Babbar, was the patron deity. He was a god of Destiny, the lord of the living and the dead, and was exalted as the great Judge, the lawgiver, who upheld justice; he was the enemy of wrong, he loved righteousness and hated sin, he inspired his worshippers with rectitude and punished evildoers. The sun god also illumined the world, and his rays penetrated every quarter: he saw all things, and read the thoughts of men; nothing could be concealed from Shamash. One of his names was Mitra, like the god who was linked with Varuna in the Indian Rigveda. These twin deities, Mitra and Varuna, measured out the span of human life. They were the source of all heavenly gifts: they regulated sun and moon, the winds and waters, and the seasons. [*1]

These did the gods establish in royal power over themselves, because they were wise and the children of wisdom, and because they excelled in power.--Prof. Arnold's trans. of Rigvedic Hymn.

Mitra and Varuna were protectors of hearth and home, and they chastised sinners. "In a striking passage of the Mahabharata," says Professor Moulton, "one in which Indian thought comes nearest to the conception of conscience, a kingly wrongdoer is reminded that the sun sees secret sin." [*2]

In Persian mythology Mitra, as Mithra, is the patron

[p. 55]

of Truth, and "the Mediator" between heaven and earth. [*1] This god was also worshipped by the military aristocracy of Mitanni, which held sway for a period over Assyria. In Roman times the worship of Mithra spread into Europe from Persia. Mithraic sculptures depict the deity as a corn god slaying the harvest bull; on one of the monuments "cornstalks instead of blood are seen issuing from the wound inflicted with the knife". [*2] The Assyrian word "metru" signifies rain. [*1] As a sky god Mitra may have been associated, like Varuna, with the waters above the firmament. Rain would therefore be gifted by him as a fertilizing deity. In the Babylonian Flood legend it is the sun god Shamash who "appointed the time" when the heavens were to "rain destruction" in the night, and commanded Pir-napishtim, "Enter into the midst of thy ship and shut thy door". The solar deity thus appears as a form of Anu, god of the sky and upper atmosphere, who controls the seasons and the various forces of nature. Other rival chiefs of city pantheons, whether lunar, atmospheric, earth, or water deities, were similarly regarded as the supreme deities who ruled the Universe, and decreed when man should receive benefits or suffer from their acts of vengeance.

It is possible that the close resemblances between Mithra and Mitra of the Aryan-speaking peoples of India and the Iranian plateau, and the sun god of the Babylonians--the Semitic Shamash, the Sumerian Utu--were due to early contact and cultural influence through the medium of Elam. As a solar and corn god, the Persian Mithra links with Tammuz, as a sky and atmospheric deity with Anu, and as a god of truth, righteousness, and law with Shamash. We seem to trace in the

[p. 56]

sublime Vedic hymns addressed by the Indian Aryans to Mitra and Varuna the impress of Babylonian religious thought:

Whate'er exists within this earth, and all within the sky,
 Yea, all that is beyond, King Varuna perceives. . . .
                                             Rigveda, iv, 16. [*1]

O Varuna, whatever the offence may be
 That we as men commit against the heavenly folk,
 When through our want of thought we violate thy laws,
 Chastise us not, O god, for that iniquity.
                                                                  Rigveda, vii, 89. [*2]

Shamash was similarly exalted in Babylonian hymns:

The progeny of those who deal unjustly will not prosper.
 What their mouth utters in thy presence
 Thou wilt destroy, what issues from their mouth thou wilt dissipate.
 Thou knowest their transgressions, the plan of the wicked thou rejectest.
 All, whoever they be, are in thy care. . . .
 He who takes no bribe, who cares for the oppressed,
 Is favoured by Shamash,--his life shall be prolonged. [*3]

The worshippers of Varuna and Mitra in the Punjab did not cremate their dead like those who exalted the rival fire god Agni. The grave was the "house of clay", as in Babylonia. Mitra, who was identical with Yama, ruled over departed souls in the "Land of the Pitris" (Fathers), which was reached by crossing the mountains and the rushing stream of death. [*4] As we have seen, the Babylonian solar god Nergal was also the lord of the dead.

As Ma-banda-anna, "the boat of the sky", Shamash links with the Egyptian sun god Ra, whose barque sailed

[p. 57]

over the heavens by day and through the underworld of darkness and death during the night. The consort of Shamash was Aa, and his attendants were Kittu and Mesharu, "Truth" and "Righteousness".

Like the Hittites, the Babylonians had also a sun goddess: her name was Nin-sun, which Jastrow renders "the annihilating lady". At Erech she had a shrine in the temple of the sky god Anu.

We can trace in Babylonia, as in Egypt, the early belief that life in the Universe had a female origin. Nin-sun links with Ishtar, whose Sumerian name is Nana. Ishtar appears to be identical with the Egyptian Hathor, who, as Sekhet, slaughtered the enemies of the sun god Ra. She was similarly the goddess of maternity, and is depicted in this character, like Isis and other goddesses of similar character, suckling a babe. Another Babylonian lady of the gods was Ama, Mama, or Mami, "the creatress of the seed of mankind", and was "probably so called as the 'mother' of all things". [*1]

A characteristic atmospheric deity was Ramman, the Rimmon of the Bible, the Semitic Addu, Adad, Hadad, or Dadu. He was not a presiding deity in any pantheon, but was identified with Enlil at Nippur. As a hammer god, he was imported by the Semites from the hills. He was a wind and thunder deity, a rain bringer, a corn god, and a god of battle like Thor, Jupiter, Tarku, Indra, and others, who were all sons of the sky.

In this brief review of the representative deities of early Babylonia, it will be seen that most gods link with Anu, Ea, and Enlil, whose attributes they symbolized in various forms. The prominence accorded to an individual deity depended on local conditions, experiences, and influences. Ceremonial practices no doubt varied

[p. 58]

here and there, but although one section might exalt Ea and another Shamash, the religious faith of the people as a whole did not differ to any marked extent; they served the gods according to their lights, so that life might be prolonged and made prosperous, for the land of death and "no return" was regarded as a place of gloom and misery.

When the Babylonians appear before us in the early stages of the historical period they had reached that stage of development set forth so vividly in the Orations of Isocrates: "Those of the gods who are the source to us of good things have the title of Olympians; those whose department is that of calamities and punishments have harsher titles: to the first class both private persons and states erect altars and temples; the second is not worshipped either with prayers or burnt sacrifices, but in their case we perform ceremonies of riddance". [*1]

The Sumerians, like the Ancient Egyptians, developed their deities, who reflected the growth of culture, from vague spirit groups, which, like ghosts, were hostile to mankind. Those spirits who could be propitiated were exalted as benevolent deities; those who could not be bargained with were regarded as evil gods and goddesses. A better understanding of the character of Babylonian deities will therefore be obtained by passing the demons and evil spirits under review.

Footnotes

^45:1 Indian Myth and Legend, p. 100.

^45:2 Maspero's Dawn of Civilization, p. 156 et seq.

^45:3 Egyptian Myth and Legend, p. 1 et seq. The saliva of the frail and elderly was injurious.

^46:1 Osiris and the Egyptian Resurrection, E. Wallis Budge, vol. ii, p. 203 et seq.

^47:1 Brana's Popular Antiquities, vol. iii, pp. 259-263 (1889 ed.).

^48:1 The Religion of the Semites, pp. 158, 159.

^48:2 Castes and Tribes of Southern India, E. Thurston, iv, 187.

^48:3 Omens and Superstitions of Southern India, E. Thurston (1912), pp. 245, 246.

^48:4 Pausanias, 24, 1.

^49:1 Devils and Evil Spirits of Babylonia, R. C. Thompson, vol. ii, tablet Y.

^49:2 Animism, E. Clodd, p. 37.

^50:1 2 Kings, xvi, 3.

^50:2 Ezekiel, xx, 31.

^50:3 Leviticus, xviii, 21.

^51:1 Indian Myth and Legend, p. 65.

^51:2 Religious Belief in Babylonia and Assyria, M. .Jastrow, pp. 312, 313.

^52:1 The Religion of Babylonia and Assyria, T. G. Pinches, p. 81.

^53:1 In early times two goddesses searched for Tammuz at different periods.

^54:1 Indian Myth and Legend, p. 30.

^54:2 Early Religious Poetry of Persia, p. 35.

^55:1 Early Religious Poetry of Persia, p. 37.

^55:2 The Golden Bough (Spirits of the Corn and Wild, vol. ii, p. 10), 3rd edition.

^56:1 Indian Wisdom, Sir Monier Monier-Williams.

^56:2 A History of Sanskrit Literature, Professor Macdonell.

^56:3 Religious Belief and Practice in Babylonia and Assyria, M. Jastrow, pp. 112.

^56:4 Indian Myth and Legend, pp. xxxii, and 38 et seq.

^57:1 The Religion of Babylonia and Assyria, T. G. Pinches, p. 94.

^58:1 The Religion of Ancient Greece, J. E. Harrison, p. 46, and Isoc. Orat., v, 117.

     
Myths of Babylonia and Assyria, by Donald A. MacKenzie, [1915], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 59] [ch-04]

  

CHAPTER IV

  

Demons, Fairies, and Ghosts

Spirits in Everything and Everywhere--The Bringers of Luck and Misfortune--Germ Theory Anticipated--Early Gods indistinguishable from Demons--Repulsive form of Ea--Spirit Groups as Attendants of Deities--Egyptian, Indian, Greek, and Germanic parallels--Elder Gods as Evil Gods--Animal Demons--The Babylonian "Will-o'-the-Wisp"--"Foreign Devils"--Elves and Fairies--Demon Lovers--"Adam's first wife, Lilith"--Children Charmed against Evil Spirits--The Demon of Nightmare--Ghosts as Enemies of the Living--The Vengeful Dead Mother in Babylonia, India, Europe, and Mexico--Burial Contrast--Calling Back the Dead--Fate of Childless Ghosts--Religious Need for Offspring--Hags and Giants and Composite Monsters--Tempest Fiends--Legend of Adapa and the Storm Demon--Wind Hags of Ancient Britain--Tyrolese Storm Maidens--Zu Bird Legend and Indian Garuda Myth--Legend of the Eagle and the Serpent--The Snake Mother Goddess--Demons and the Moon God--Plague Deities--Classification of Spirits, and Egyptian, Arabian, and Scottish parallels--Traces of Progress from Animism to Monotheism.

THE memorable sermon preached by Paul to the Athenians when he stood "in the midst of Mars' hill", could have been addressed with equal appropriateness to the ancient Sumerians and Akkadians. "I perceive", he declared, "that in all things ye are too superstitious. . . . God that made the world and all things therein, seeing that he is Lord of heaven and earth, dwelleth not in temples made with hands; neither is worshipped with men's hands as though he needed any thing, seeing he giveth to all life, and breath, and all things . . . for in him we live, and move, and have our being; as certain also of your own poets have said, For we are also his offspring. Forasmuch then as we are the offspring of

[p. 60]

[paragraph continues] God, we ought not to think that the Godhead is like unto gold, or silver, or stone, graven by art and man's device." [*1]

Babylonian temples were houses of the gods in the literal sense; the gods were supposed to dwell in them, their spirits having entered into the graven images or blocks of stone. It is probable that like the Ancient Egyptians they believed a god had as many spirits as he had attributes. The gods, as we have said, appear to have evolved from early spirit groups. All the world swarmed with spirits, which inhabited stones and trees, mountains and deserts, rivers and ocean, the air, the sky, the stars, and the sun and moon. The spirits controlled Nature: they brought light and darkness, sunshine and storm, summer and winter; they were manifested in the thunderstorm, the sandstorm, the glare of sunset, and the wraiths of mist rising from the steaming marshes. They controlled also the lives of men and women. The good spirits were the source of luck. The bad spirits caused misfortunes, and were ever seeking to work evil against the Babylonian. Darkness was peopled by demons and ghosts of the dead. The spirits of disease were ever lying in wait to clutch him with cruel invisible hands.

Some modern writers, who are too prone to regard ancient peoples from a twentieth-century point of view, express grave doubts as to whether "intelligent Babylonians "really believed that spirits came down in the rain and entered the soil to rise up before men's eyes as stalks of barley or wheat. There is no reason for supposing that they thought otherwise. The early folks based their theories on the accumulated knowledge of their age. They knew nothing regarding the composition

[p. 61]

of water or the atmosphere, of the cause of thunder and lightning, or of the chemical changes effected in soils by the action of bacteria. They attributed all natural phenomena to the operations of spirits or gods. In believing that certain demons caused certain diseases, they may be said to have achieved distinct. progress, for they anticipated the germ theory. They made discoveries, too, which have been approved and elaborated in later times when they lit sacred fires, bathed in sacred waters, and used oils and herbs to charm away spirits of pestilence. Indeed, many folk cures, which were originally associated with magical ceremonies, are still practised in our own day. They were found to be effective by early observers, although they were unable to explain why and how cures were accomplished, like modern scientific investigators.

In peopling the Universe with spirits, the Babylonians, like other ancient folks, betrayed that tendency to symbolize everything which has ever appealed to the human mind. Our painters and poets and sculptors are greatest when they symbolize their ideals and ideas and impressions, and by so doing make us respond to their moods. Their "beauty and their terror are sublime". But what may seem poetic to us, was invariably a grim reality to the Babylonians. The statue or picture was not merely a work of art but a manifestation of the god or demon. As has been said, they believed that the spirit of the god inhabited the idol; the frown of the brazen image was the frown of the wicked demon. They entertained as much dread of the winged and human-headed bulls guarding the entrance to the royal palace as do some of the Arab workmen who, in our own day, assist excavators to rescue them from sandy mounds in which they have been hidden for long centuries

[p. 62]

When an idol was carried away from a city by an invading army, it was believed that the god himself had been taken prisoner, and was therefore unable any longer to help his people.

In the early stages of Sumerian culture, the gods and goddesses who formed groups were indistinguishable from demons. They were vaguely defined, and had changing shapes. When attempts were made to depict them they were represented in many varying forms. Some were winged bulls or lions with human heads; others had even more remarkable composite forms. The "dragon of Babylon", for instance, which was portrayed on walls of temples, had a serpent's head, a body covered with scales, the fore legs of a lion, hind legs of an eagle, and a long wriggling serpentine tail. Ea had several monster forms. The following description of one of these is repulsive enough:--

The head is the head of a serpent,
 From his nostrils mucus trickles,
 His mouth is beslavered with water;
 The ears are like those of a basilisk,
 His horns are twisted into three curls,
 He wears a veil in his head band,
 The body is a suh-fish full of stars,
 The base of his feet are claws,
 The sole of his foot has no heel,
 His name is Sassu-wunnu,
 A sea monster, a form of Ea.
                              R. C. Thompson's Translation. [*1]

Even after the gods were given beneficent attributes;, to reflect the growth of culture, and were humanized, they still retained many of their savage characteristics. Bel Enlil and his fierce son, Nergal, were destroyers

 

Click to enlarge
WINGED MAN-HEADED LION
 In Marble. From N.W. Palace of Nimroud; now in the British Museum.
 Photo. Mansell

 

[p. 63]

of mankind; the storm god desolated the land; the sky god deluged it with rain; the sea raged furiously, ever hungering for human victims; the burning sun struck down its victims; and the floods played havoc with the dykes and houses of human beings. In Egypt the sun god Ra was similarly a "producer of calamity", the composite monster god Sokar was "the lord of fear". [*1] Osiris in prehistoric times had been "a dangerous god", and some of the Pharaohs sought protection against him in the charms inscribed in their tombs. [*2] The Indian Shiva, "the Destroyer", in the old religious poems has also primitive attributes of like character.

The Sumerian gods never lost their connection with the early spirit groups. These continued to be represented by their attendants, who executed a deity's stern and vengeful decrees. In one of the Babylonian charms the demons are referred to as "the spleen of the gods"--the symbols of their wrathful emotions and vengeful desires. Bel Enlil, the air and earth god, was served by the demons of disease, "the beloved sons of Bel", which issued from the Underworld to attack mankind. Nergal, the sulky and ill-tempered lord of death and destruction, who never lost his demoniac character, swept over the land, followed by the spirits of pestilence, sunstroke, weariness, and destruction. Anu, the sky god, had "spawned" at creation the demons of cold and rain and darkness. Even Ea and his consort, Damkina, were served by groups of devils and giants, which preyed upon mankind in bleak and desolate places when night fell. In the ocean home of Ea were bred the "seven evil spirits" of tempest--the gaping dragon, the leopard which preyed upon children, the great Beast, the terrible serpent, &c.

[p. 64]

In Indian mythology Indra was similarly followed by the stormy Maruts, and fierce Rudra by the tempestuous Rudras. In Teutonic mythology Odin is the "Wild Huntsman in the Raging Host". In Greek mythology the ocean furies attend upon fickle Poseidon. Other examples of this kind could be multiplied.

As we have seen ([*Chapter II]) the earliest group of Babylonian deities consisted probably of four pairs of gods and goddesses as in Egypt. The first pair was Apsu-Rishtu and Tiamat, who personified the primordial deep. Now the elder deities in most mythologies--the "grandsires" and "grandmothers" and "fathers" and "mothers"--are ever the most powerful and most vengeful. They appear to represent primitive "layers" of savage thought. The Greek Cronos devours even his own children, and, as the late Andrew Lang has shown, there are many parallels to this myth among primitive peoples in various parts of the world.

Lang regarded the Greek survival as an example of "the conservatism of the religious instinct". [*1] The grand-mother of the Teutonic deity Tyr was a fierce giantess with nine hundred heads; his father was an enemy of the gods. In Scotland the hag-mother of winter and storm and darkness is the enemy of growth and all life, and she raises storms to stop the grass growing, to slay young animals, and prevent the union of her son with his fair bride. Similarly the Babylonian chaos spirits, Apsu and Tiamat, the father and mother of the gods, resolve to destroy their offspring, because they begin to set the Universe in order. Tiamat, the female dragon, is more powerful than her husband Apsu, who is slain by his son Ea. She summons to her aid the gods of evil, and creates also a brood of monsters--serpents,

[p. 65]

dragons, vipers, fish men, raging hounds, &c.--so as to bring about universal and enduring confusion and evil. Not until she is destroyed can the beneficent gods establish law and order and make the earth habitable and beautiful.

But although Tiamat was slain, the everlasting battle between the forces of good and evil was ever waged in the Babylonian world. Certain evil spirits were let loose at certain periods, and they strove to accomplish the destruction of mankind and his works. These invisible enemies were either charmed away by performing magical ceremonies, or by invoking the gods to thwart them and bind them.

Other spirits inhabited the bodies of animals and were ever hovering near. The ghosts of the dead and male and female demons were birds, like the birds of Fate which sang to Siegfried. When the owl raised its melancholy voice in the darkness the listener heard the spirit of a departed mother crying for her child. Ghosts and evil spirits wandered through the streets in darkness; they haunted empty houses; they fluttered through the evening air as bats; they hastened, moaning dismally, across barren wastes searching for food or lay in wait for travellers; they came as roaring lions and howling jackals, hungering for human flesh. The "shedu" was a destructive bull which might slay man wantonly or as a protector of temples. Of like character was the "lamassu", depicted as a winged bull with human head, the protector of palaces; the "alu" was a bull-like demon of tempest, and there were also many composite, distorted, or formless monsters which were vaguely termed "seizers" or "overthrowers", the Semitic "labashu" and "ach-chazu", the Sumerian "dimmea" and "dimme-kur". A dialectic form of "gallu" or devil

[p. 66]

was "mulla". Professor Pinches thinks it not improbable that "mulla" may be connected with the word "mula", meaning "star", and suggests that it referred to a "will-o'-the-wisp". [*1] In these islands, according to an old rhyme,

Some call him Robin Good-fellow,
   Hob-goblin, or mad Crisp,
 And some againe doe tearme him oft
   By name of Will the Wisp.

[paragraph continues] Other names are "Kitty", "Peg", and "Jack with a lantern". "Poor Robin" sang:

I should indeed as soon expect
 That Peg-a-lantern would direct
 Me straightway home on misty night
 As wand'ring stars, quite out of sight.

In Shakespeare's Tempest [*2] a sailor exclaims: "Your fairy, which, you say, is a harmless fairy, has done little better than played the Jack with us". Dr. Johnson commented that the reference was to "Jack with a lantern". Milton wrote also of the "wandering fire",

Which oft, they say, some evil spirit attends,
 Hovering and blazing with delusive light,
 Misleads th' amaz'd night wand'rer from his way
 To bogs and mires, and oft through pond or pool;
 There swallowed up and lost from succour far. [*3]

[paragraph continues] "When we stick in the mire", sang Drayton, "he doth with laughter leave us." These fires were also "fallen stars", "death fires", and "fire drakes":

So have I seen a fire drake glide along
 Before a dying man, to point his grave,
 And in it stick and hide. [*4]

[p. 67]

Pliny referred to the wandering lights as stars. [*1] The Sumerian "mulla" was undoubtedly an evil spirit. In some countries the "fire drake" is a bird with gleaming breast: in Babylonia it assumed the form of a bull, and may have had some connection with the bull of Ishtar. Like the Indian "Dasyu" and "Dasa", [*2] Gallu was applied in the sense of "foreign devil" to human and superhuman adversaries of certain monarchs. Some of the supernatural beings resemble our elves and fairies and the Indian Rakshasas. Occasionally they appear in comely human guise; at other times they are vaguely monstrous. The best known of this class is Lilith, who, according to Hebrew tradition, preserved in the Talmud, was the demon lover of Adam. She has been immortalized by Dante Gabriel Rossetti:

Of Adam's first wife Lilith, it is told
 (The witch he loved before the gift of Eve)
 That, ere the snake's, her sweet tongue could deceive,
 And her enchanted hair was the first gold.
 And still she sits, young while the earth is old,
 And, subtly of herself contemplative,
 Draws men to watch the bright web she can weave,
 Till heart and body and life are in its hold.
 The rose and poppy are her flowers; for where
 Is he not found, O Lilith, whom shed scent
 And soft shed kisses and soft sleep shall snare?
 Lo! as that youth's eyes burned at thine, so went
 Thy spell through him, and left his straight neck bent
 And round his heart one strangling golden hair.

Lilith is the Babylonian Lilithu, a feminine form of Lilu, the Sumerian Lila. She resembles Surpanakha of the Ramayana, who made love to Rama and Lakshmana, and the sister of the demon Hidimva, who became

[p. 68]

enamoured of Bhima, one of the heroes of the Mahabharata, [*1] and the various fairy lovers of Europe who lured men to eternal imprisonment inside mountains, or vanished for ever when they were completely under their influence, leaving them demented. The elfin Lilu similarly wooed young women, like the Germanic Laurin of the "Wonderful Rose Garden", [*2] who carried away the fair lady Kunhild to his underground dwelling amidst the Tyrolese mountains, or left them haunting the place of their meetings, searching for him in vain:

A savage place! as holy and enchanted
 As ere beneath the waning moon was haunted
 By woman wailing for her demon lover . . .
 His flashing eyes, his floating hair!
 Weave a circle round him thrice,
 And close your eyes with holy dread,
 For he on honey dew hath fed
 And drunk the milk of Paradise.
                                Coleridge's Kubla Khan.

Another materializing spirit of this class was Ardat Lili, who appears to have wedded human beings like the swan maidens, the mermaids, and Nereids of the European folk tales, and the goddess Ganga, who for a time was the wife of King Shantanu of the Mahabharata. [*3]

The Labartu, to whom we have referred, was a female who haunted mountains and marshes; like the fairies and hags of Europe, she stole or afflicted children, who accordingly had to wear charms round their necks for protection. Seven of these supernatural beings were reputed to be daughters of Anu, the sky god.

The Alu, a storm deity, was also a spirit which caused nightmare. It endeavoured to smother sleepers like the

[p. 69]

[paragraph continues] Scandinavian hag Mara, and similarly deprived them of power to move. In Babylonia this evil spirit might also cause sleeplessness or death by hovering near a bed. In shape it might be as horrible and repulsive as the Egyptian ghosts which caused children to die from fright or by sucking out the breath of life.

As most representatives of the spirit world were enemies of the living, so were the ghosts of dead men and women. Death chilled all human affections; it turned love to hate; the deeper the love had been, the deeper became the enmity fostered by the ghost. Certain ghosts might also be regarded as particularly virulent and hostile if they happened to have left the body of one who was ceremonially impure. The most terrible ghost in Babylonia was that of a woman who had died in childbed. She was pitied and dreaded; her grief had demented her; she was doomed to wail in the darkness; her impurity clung to her like poison. No spirit was more prone to work evil against mankind, and her hostility was accompanied by the most tragic sorrow. In Northern India the Hindus, like the ancient Babylonians, regard as a fearsome demon the ghost of a woman who died while pregnant, or on the day of the child's birth. [*1] A similar belief prevailed in Mexico. In Europe there are many folk tales of dead mothers who return to avenge themselves on the cruel fathers of neglected children.

A sharp contrast is presented by the Mongolian Buriats, whose outlook on the spirit world is less gloomy than was that of the ancient Babylonians. According to Mr. Jeremiah Curtin, this interesting people are wont to perform a ceremony with purpose to entice the ghost to return to the dead body--a proceeding which is

[p. 70]

dreaded in the Scottish Highlands. [*1] The Buriats address the ghost, saying: "You shall sleep well. Come back to your natural ashes. Take pity on your friends. It is necessary to live a real life. Do not wander along the mountains. Do not be like bad spirits. Return to your peaceful home. . . . Come back and work for your children. How can you leave the little ones?" If it is a mother, these words have great effect; sometimes the spirit moans and sobs, and the Buriats tell that there have been instances of it returning to the body. [*2] In his Arabia Deserta [*3] Doughty relates that Arab women and children mock the cries of the owl. One explained to him: "It is a wailful woman seeking her lost child; she has become this forlorn bird". So do immemorial beliefs survive to our own day.

The Babylonian ghosts of unmarried men and women and of those without offspring were also disconsolate night wanderers. Others who suffered similar fates were the ghosts of men who died in battle far from home and were left unburied, the ghosts of travellers who perished in the desert and were not covered over, the ghosts of drowned men which rose from the water, the ghosts of prisoners starved to death or executed, the ghosts of people who died violent deaths before their appointed time. The dead required to be cared for, to have libations poured out, to be fed, so that they might not prowl

[p. 71]

through the streets or enter houses searching for scraps of food and pure water. The duty of giving offerings to the dead was imposed apparently on near relatives. As in India, it would appear that the eldest son performed the funeral ceremony: a dreadful fate therefore awaited the spirit of the dead Babylonian man or woman without offspring. In Sanskrit literature there is a reference to a priest who was not allowed to enter Paradise, although he had performed rigid penances, because he had no children. [*1]

There were hags and giants of mountain and desert, of river and ocean. Demons might possess the pig, the goat, the horse, the lion, or the ibis, the raven, or the hawk. The seven spirits of tempest, fire, and destruction rose from the depths of ocean, and there were hosts of demons which could not be overcome or baffled by man without the assistance of the gods to whom they were hostile. Many were sexless; having no offspring, they were devoid of mercy and compassion. They penetrated everywhere:

The high enclosures, the broad enclosures, like a flood they pass through,
 From house to house they dash along.
 No door can shut them out;
 No bolt can turn them back.
 Through the door, like a snake, they glide,
 Through the hinge, like the wind, they storm,
 Tearing the wife from the embrace of the man,
 Driving the freedman from his family home. [*2]

[paragraph continues] These furies did not confine their unwelcomed attentions to mankind alone:

They hunt the doves from their cotes,
 And drive the birds from their nests, [p. 72]
 And chase the marten from its hole. . . .
 Through the gloomy street by night they roam,
 Smiting sheepfold and cattle pen,
 Shutting up the land as with door and bolt.
                            R. C. Thompson's Translation.

The Babylonian poet, like Burns, was filled with pity for the animals which suffered in the storm:

List'ning the doors an' winnocks rattle,
 I thought me o' the ourie cattle,
 Or silly sheep, wha bide this brattle
      O' winter war. . . .
 Ilk happing bird, wee, helpless thing!
 That in the merry months o' spring
 Delighted me to hear thee sing,
      What comes o' thee?
 Whare wilt thou cow'r thy chittering wing,
      And close thy e'e?

According to Babylonian belief, "the great storms directed from heaven" were caused by demons. Mankind heard them "loudly roaring above, gibbering below". [*1] The south wind was raised by Shutu, a plumed storm demon resembling Hraesvelgur of the Icelandic Eddas:

Corpse-swallower sits at the end of heaven,
    A Jotun in eagle form;
 From his wings, they say, comes the wind which fares
    Over all the dwellers of earth. [*2]

The northern story of Thor's fishing, when he hooked and wounded the Midgard serpent, is recalled by the Babylonian legend of Adapa, son of the god Ea. This hero was engaged catching fish, when Shutu, the south wind, upset his boat. In his wrath Adapa immediately attacked the storm demon and shattered her pinions. Anu, the sky god, was moved to anger against Ea's son

 

Click to enlarge
TWO FIGURES OF DEMONS
 The upper head is that of Shutu, the demon of the south-west wind, whose wings were broken by Adapa, son of Ea
 (British Museum)
 Photo. Mansell

 

[p. 73]

and summoned him to the Celestial Court. Adapa, however, appeared in garments of mourning and was forgiven.

Anu offered him the water of life and the bread of life which would have made him immortal, but Ea's son refused to eat or drink, believing, as his father had warned him, that the sky god desired him to partake of the bread of death and to drink of the water of death.

Another terrible atmospheric demon was the south-west wind, which caused destructive storms and floods, and claimed many human victims like the Icelandic "corpse swallower". She was depicted with lidless staring eyes, broad flat nose, mouth gaping horribly, and showing tusk-like teeth, and with high cheek bones, heavy eyebrows, and low bulging forehead.

In Scotland the hag of the south-west wind is similarly a bloodthirsty and fearsome demon. She is most virulent in the springtime. At Cromarty she is quaintly called "Gentle Annie" by the fisher folks, who repeat the saying: "When Gentle Annie is skyawlan (yelling) roond the heel of Ness (a promontory) wi' a white feather on her hat (the foam of big billows) they (the spirits) will be harrying (robbing) the crook"--that is, the pot which hangs from the crook is empty during the spring storms, which prevent fishermen going to sea. In England the wind hag is Black Annis, who dwells in a Leicestershire hill cave. She may be identical with the Irish hag Anu, associated with the "Paps of Anu". According to Gaelic lore, this wind demon of spring is the "Cailleach" (old wife). She gives her name In the Highland calendar to the stormy period of late spring; she raises gale after gale to prevent the coming of summer. Angerboda, the Icelandic hag, is also a storm demon, but represents the east wind. A Tyrolese folk

[p. 74]

tale tells of three magic maidens who dwelt on Jochgrimm mountain, where they "brewed the winds". Their demon lovers were Ecke, "he who causes fear"; Vasolt, "he who causes dismay"; and the scornful Dietrich in his mythical character of Donar or Thunor (Thor), the thunderer.

Another Sumerian storm demon was the Zu bird, which is represented among the stars by Pegasus and Taurus. A legend relates that this "worker of evil, who raised the head of evil", once aspired to rule the gods, and stole from Bel, "the lord" of deities, the Tablets of Destiny, which gave him his power over the Universe as controller of the fates of all. The Zu bird escaped with the Tablets and found shelter on its mountain top in Arabia. Anu called on Ramman, the thunderer, to attack the Zu bird, but he was afraid; other gods appear to have shrunk from the conflict. How the rebel was overcome is not certain, because the legend survives in fragmentary form. There is a reference, however, to the moon god setting out towards the mountain in Arabia with purpose to outwit the Zu bird and recover the lost Tablets. How he fared it is impossible to ascertain. In another legend--that of Etana--the mother serpent, addressing the sun god, Shamash, says:

Thy net is like unto the broad earth;
 Thy snare is like unto the distant heaven!
 Who hath ever escaped from thy net?
 Even Zu, the worker of evil, who raised the head of evil [did not escape]!
                              L. W. King's Translation.

In Indian mythology, Garuda, half giant, half eagle, robs the Amrita (ambrosia) of the gods which gives them their power and renders them immortal. It had assumed a golden body, bright as the sun. Indra, the thunderer,

[p. 75]

flung his bolt in vain; he could not wound Garuda, and only displaced a single feather. Afterwards, however, he stole the moon goblet containing the Amrita, which Garuda had delivered to his enemies, the serpents, to free his mother from bondage. This Indian eagle giant became the vehicle of the god Vishnu, and, according to the Mahabharata, "mocked the wind with his fleetness".

It would appear that the Babylonian Zu bird symbolized the summer sandstorms from the Arabian desert. Thunder is associated with the rainy season, and it may have been assumed, therefore, that the thunder god was powerless against the sandstorm demon, who was chased, however, by the moon, and finally overcome by the triumphant sun when it broke through the darkening sand drift and brightened heaven and earth, "netting" the rebellious demon who desired to establish the rule of evil over gods and mankind.

In the "Legend of Etana" the Eagle, another demon which links with the Indian Garuda, slayer of serpents, devours the brood of the Mother Serpent. For this offence against divine law, Shamash, the sun god, pronounces the Eagle's doom. He instructs the Mother Serpent to slay a wild ox and conceal herself in its entrails. The Eagle comes to feed on the carcass, unheeding the warning of one of his children, who says, "The serpent lies in this wild ox":

He swooped down and stood upon the wild ox,
 The Eagle . . . examined the flesh;
 He looked about carefully before and behind him;
 He again examined the flesh;
 He looked about carefully before and behind him,
 Then, moving swiftly, he made for the hidden parts.
 'When he entered into the midst,
 The serpent seized him by his wing.

[p. 76]

[paragraph continues] In vain the Eagle appealed for mercy to the Mother Serpent, who was compelled to execute the decree of Shamash; she tore off the Eagle's pinions, wings, and claws, and threw him into a pit where he perished from hunger and thirst. [*1] This myth may refer to the ravages of a winged demon of disease who was thwarted by the sacrifice of an ox. The Mother Serpent appears to be identical with an ancient goddess of maternity resembling the Egyptian Bast, the serpent mother of Bubastis. According to Sumerian belief, Nintu, "a form of the goddess Ma", was half a serpent. On her head there is a horn; she is "girt about the loins"; her left arm holds "a babe suckling her breast":

From her head to her loins
 The body is that of a naked woman;
 From the loins to the sole of the foot
 Scales like those of a snake are visible.
                      R. C. Thompson's Translation.

The close association of gods and demons is illustrated in an obscure myth which may refer to an eclipse of the moon or a night storm at the beginning of the rainy season. The demons go to war against the high gods, and are assisted by Adad (Ramman) the thunderer, Shamash the sun, and Ishtar. They desire to wreck the heavens, the home of Anu:

They clustered angrily round the crescent of the moon god,
 And won over to their aid Shamash, the mighty, and Adad, the warrior,
 And Ishtar, who with Anu, the King,
 Hath founded a shining dwelling.

The moon god Sin, "the seed of mankind", was darkened by the demons who raged, "rushing loose over

[p. 77]

the land" like to the wind. Bel called upon his messenger, whom he sent to Ea in the ocean depths, saying: "My son Sin . . . hath been grievously bedimmed". Ea lamented, and dispatched his son Merodach to net the demons by magic, using "a two-coloured cord from the hair of a virgin kid and from the wool of a virgin lamb." [*1]

As in India, where Shitala, the Bengali goddess of smallpox, for instance, is worshipped when the dreaded disease she controls becomes epidemic, so in Babylonia the people sought to secure immunity from attack by worshipping spirits of disease. A tablet relates that Ura, a plague demon, once resolved to destroy all life, but ultimately consented to spare those who praised his name and exalted him in recognition of his bravery and power. This could be accomplished by reciting a formula. Indian serpent worshippers believe that their devotions "destroy all danger proceeding from snakes". [*2]

Like the Ancient Egyptians, the Babylonians also had their kindly spirits who brought luck and the various enjoyments of life. A good "labartu" might attend on a human being like a household fairy of India or Europe: a friendly "shedu" could protect a household against the attacks of fierce demons and human enemies. Even the spirits of Fate who served Anu, god of the sky, and that "Nom" of the Underworld, Eresh-ki-gal, queen of Hades, might sometimes be propitious: if the deities were successfully invoked they could cause the Fates to smite spirits of disease and bringers of ill luck. Damu, a friendly fairy goddess, was well loved, because she inspired pleasant dreams, relieved the sufferings of the

[p. 78]

afflicted, and restored to good health those patients whom she selected to favour.

In the Egyptian Book of the Dead the kindly spirits are overshadowed by the evil ones, because the various magical spells which were put on record were directed against those supernatural beings who were enemies of mankind. Similarly in Babylonia the fragments of this class of literature which survive deal mainly with wicked and vengeful demons. It appears probable, however, that the highly emotional Sumerians and Akkadians were on occasion quite as cheerful a people as the inhabitants of ancient Egypt. Although they were surrounded by bloodthirsty furies who desired to shorten their days, and their nights were filled with vague lowering phantoms which inspired fear, they no doubt shared, in their charm-protected houses, a comfortable feeling of security after performing magical ceremonies, and were happy enough when they gathered round flickering lights to listen to ancient song and story and gossip about crops and traders, the members of the royal house, and the family affairs of their acquaintances.

The Babylonian spirit world, it will be seen, was of complex character. Its inhabitants were numberless, but often vaguely defined, and one class of demons linked with another. Like the European fairies of folk belief; the Babylonian spirits were extremely hostile and irresistible at certain seasonal periods; and they were fickle and perverse and difficult to please even when inclined to be friendly. They were also similarly manifested from time to time in various forms. Sometimes they were comely and beautiful; at other times they were apparitions of horror. The Jinn of present-day Arabians are of like character; these may be giants, cloudy shapes, comely women, serpents or cats, goats or pigs.

[p. 79]

Some of the composite monsters of Babylonia may suggest the vague and exaggerated recollections of terror-stricken people who have had glimpses of unfamiliar wild beasts in the dusk or amidst reedy marshes. But they cannot be wholly accounted for in this way. While animals were often identified with supernatural beings, and foreigners were called "devils", it would be misleading to assert that the spirit world reflects confused folk memories of human and bestial enemies. Even when a demon was given concrete human form it remained essentially non-human: no ordinary weapon could inflict an injury, and it was never controlled by natural laws. The spirits of disease and tempest and darkness were creations of fancy: they symbolized moods; they were the causes which explained effects. A sculptor or storyteller who desired to convey an impression of a spirit of storm or pestilence created monstrous forms to inspire terror. Sudden and unexpected visits of fierce and devastating demons were accounted for by asserting that they had wings like eagles, were nimble-footed as gazelles, cunning and watchful as serpents; that they had claws to clutch, horns to gore, and powerful fore legs like a lion to smite down victims. Withal they drank blood like ravens and devoured corpses like hyaenas. Monsters were all the more repulsive when they were partly human. The human-headed snake or the snake-headed man and the man with the horns of a wild bull and the legs of a goat were horrible in the extreme. Evil spirits might sometimes achieve success by practising deception. They might appear as beautiful girls or handsome men and seize unsuspecting victims in deathly embrace or leave them demented and full of grief, or come as birds and suddenly assume awesome shapes.

Fairies and elves, and other half-human demons, are

[p. 80]

sometimes regarded as degenerate gods. It will be seen, however, that while certain spirits developed into deities, others remained something between these two classes of supernatural beings: they might attend upon gods and goddesses, or operate independently now against mankind and now against deities even. The "namtaru", for instance, was a spirit of fate, the son of Bel-Enlil and Eresh-ki -gal, queen of Hades. "Apparently", writes Professor Pinches, "he executed the instructions given him concerning the fate of men, and could also have power over certain of the gods." [*1] To this middle class belong the evil gods who rebelled against the beneficent deities. According to Hebridean folk belief, the fallen angels are divided into three classes--the fairies, the "nimble men" (aurora borealis), and the "blue men of the Minch". In Beowulf the "brood of Cain" includes "monsters and elves and sea-devils--giants also, who long time fought with God, for which he gave them their reward". [*2] Similarly the Babylonian spirit groups are liable to division and subdivision. The various classes may be regarded as relics of the various stages of development from crude animism to sublime monotheism: in the fragmentary legends we trace the floating material from which great mythologies have been framed.

Footnotes

^60:1 The Acts, xvii, 22-31.

^62:1 Devils and Evil Spirits of Babylonia, vol. ii, p. 149 et seq.

^63:1 Egyptian Myth and Legend, xxxix, n.

^63:2 Development of Religion and Thought in Ancient Egypt, J. H. Breasted, pp. 38, 74.

^64:1 Custom and Myth, p.45 et seq.

^66:1 The Religion of Babylonia and Assyria, p. 108.

^66:2 Act iv, scene 1.

^66:3 Paradise Lost, book ix.

^66:4 Chapman's Caesar and Pompey.

^67:1 Natural History, 2nd book.

^67:2 Indian Myth and Legend, 70, n.

^68:1 Indian Myth and Legend, pp. 202-5, 400, 401.

^68:2 Teutonic Myth and Legend, p. 424 et seq.

^68:3 Indian Myth and Legend, p. 164 et seq.

^69:1 Popular Religion and Folk Lore of Northern India, W. Crooke, vol. p. 254.

^70:1 When a person, young or old, is dying, near relatives must not call out their names in case the soul may come back from the spirit world. A similar belief still lingers, especially among women, in the Lowlands. The writer was once present in a room when a child was supposed to be dying. Suddenly the mother called out the child's name in agonized voice. It revived soon afterwards. Two old women who had attempted to prevent "the calling" shook their heads and remarked: "She has done it! The child will never do any good in this world after being called back." In England and Ireland, as well as in Scotland, the belief also prevails in certain localities that if a dying person is "called back" the soul will tarry for another twenty-four hours, during which the individual will suffer great agony.

^70:2 A Journey in Southern Siberia, Jeremiah Curtin, pp. 103, 104.

^70:3 Vol. i, p. 305.

^71:1 Adi Parva section of Mahabharata, Roy's trans., p. 635.

^71:2 Jastrow's Aspects of Religious Belief in Babylonia, &c., p. 312.

^72:1 R. C. Thompson's trans.

^72:2 The Elder or Poetic Edda, Olive Bray, part i, p. 53.

^76:1 Babylonian Religion, L. W. King, pp. 186-8.

^77:1 The Devils and Evil Spirits of Babylonia, R. Campbell Thompson, vol. i, p. 53 et seq.

^77:2 Omens and Superstitions of Southern India, E. Thurston, p. 124.

^80:1 The Religion of Babylonia and Assyria, p. 110.

^80:2 Beowulf, Clark Hall, p. 14.

     
Myths of Babylonia and Assyria, by Donald A. MacKenzie, [1915], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 81]

  

CHAPTER V

  

Myths of Tammuz and Ishtar

Forms of Tammuz--The Weeping Ceremony--Tammuz the Patriarch and the Dying God--Common Origin of Tammuz and other Deities from an Archaic God--The Mediterranean Racial Myth--Animal Forms of Gods of Fertility--Two Legends of the Death of Tammuz--Attis, Adonis, and Diarmid Slain by a Boar--Laments for Tammuz--His Soul in Underworld and the Deep--Myth of the Child God of Ocean--Sargon Myth Version--The Germanic Scyld of the Sheaf--Tammuz Links with Frey, Heimdal, Agni, &c.--Assyrian Legend of "Descent of Ishtar"--Sumerian Version--The Sister Belit-sheri and the Mother Ishtar--The Egyptian Isis and Nepthys--Goddesses as Mothers, Sisters, and Wives--Great Mothers of Babylonia--Immortal Goddesses and Dying Gods--The Various Indras--Celtic Goddess with Seven Periods of Youth--Lovers of Germanic and Classic Goddesses--The Lovers of Ishtar--Racial Significance of Goddess Cult--The Great Fathers and their Worshippers--Process of Racial and Religious Fusion--Ishtar and Tiamat--Mother Worship in Palestine--Women among Goddess Worshippers.

AMONG the gods of Babylonia none achieved wider and more enduring fame than Tammuz, who was loved by Ishtar, the amorous Queen of Heaven--the beautiful youth who died and was mourned for and came to life again. He does not figure by his popular name in any of the city pantheons, but from the earliest times of which we have knowledge until the passing of Babylonian civilization, he played a prominent part in the religious life of the people

Tammuz, like Osiris of Egypt, was an agricultural deity, and as the Babylonian harvest was the gift of the rivers, it is probable that one of his several forms was Dumu-zi-abzu, "Tammuz of the Abyss". He was also

[p. 82]

[paragraph continues] "the child", "the heroic lord", "the sentinel", "the healer", and the patriarch who reigned over the early Babylonians for a considerable period. "Tammuz of the Abyss" was one of the members of the family of Ea, god of the Deep, whose other sons, in addition to Merodach, were Nira, an obscure deity; Ki-gulla, "world destroyer", Burnunta-sa, "broad ear", and Bara and Baragulla, probably "revealers" or "oracles". In addition there was a daughter, Khi-dimme-azaga, "child of the renowned spirit". She may have been identical with Belit-sheri, who is referred to in the Sumerian hymns as the sister of Tammuz. This family group was probably formed by symbolizing the attributes of Ea and his spouse Damkina. Tammuz, in his character as a patriarch, may have been regarded as a hostage from the gods: the human form of Ea, who instructed mankind, like King Osiris, how to grow corn and cultivate fruit trees. As the youth who perished annually, he was the corn spirit. He is referred to in the Bible by his Babylonian name.

When Ezekiel detailed the various idolatrous practices of the Israelites, which included the worship of the sun and "every form of creeping things and abominable beasts"--a suggestion of the composite monsters of Babylonia--he was brought "to the door of the gate of the Lord's house, which was towards the north; and, behold, there sat women weeping for Tammuz". [*1]

The weeping ceremony was connected with agricultural rites. Corn deities were weeping deities, they shed fertilizing tears; and the sowers simulated the sorrow of divine mourners when they cast seed in the soil "to die", so that it might spring up as corn. This ancient custom, like many others, contributed to the poetic

[p. 83]

imagery of the Bible. "They that sow in tears", David sang, "shall reap in joy. He that goeth forth and weepeth, bearing precious seed, shall doubtless come again with rejoicing, bringing his sheaves with him." [*1] In Egypt the priestesses who acted the parts of Isis and Nepthys, mourned for the slain corn god Osiris.

Gods and men before the face of the gods are weeping for thee at the same time, when they behold me! . . .
 All thy sister goddesses are at thy side and behind thy couch,
 Calling upon thee with weeping--yet thou are prostrate upon thy bed! . . .
 Live before us, desiring to behold thee. [*2]

It was believed to be essential that human beings should share the universal sorrow caused by the death of a god. If they remained unsympathetic, the deities would punish them as enemies. Worshippers of nature gods, therefore, based their ceremonial practices on natural phenomena. "The dread of the worshippers that the neglect of the usual ritual would be followed by disaster, is particularly intelligible", writes Professor Robertson Smith, "if they regarded the necessary operations of agriculture as involving the violent extinction of a particle of divine life." [*3] By observing their ritual, the worshippers won the sympathy and co-operation of deities, or exercised a magical control over nature.

The Babylonian myth of Tammuz, the dying god, bears a close resemblance to the Greek myth of Adonis. It also links with the myth of Osiris. According to Professor Sayce, Tammuz is identical with "Daonus or Daos, the shepherd of Pantibibla", referred to by Berosus as the ruler of one of the mythical ages of Babylonia. We

[p. 84]

have therefore to deal with Tammuz in his twofold character as a patriarch and a god of fertility.

The Adonis version of the myth may be summarized briefly. Ere the god was born, his mother, who was pursued by her angry sire, as the river goddesses of the folk tales are pursued by the well demons, transformed herself into a tree. Adonis sprang from the trunk of this tree, and Aphrodite, having placed the child in a chest, committed him to the care of Persephone, queen of Hades, who resembles the Babylonian Eresh-ki-gal. Persephone desired to retain the young god, and Aphrodite (Ishtar) appealed to Zeus (Anu), who decreed that Adonis should spend part of the year with one goddess and part of the year with the other.

It is suggested that the myth of Adonis was derived in post-Homeric times by the Greeks indirectly from Babylonia through the Western Semites, the Semitic title "Adon", meaning "lord", having been mistaken for a proper name. This theory, however, cannot be accepted without qualifications. It does not explain the existence of either the Phrygian myth of Attis, which was developed differently from the Tammuz myth, or the Celtic story of "Diarmid and the boar", which belongs to the archaeological "Hunting Period". There are traces in Greek mythology of pre-Hellenic myths about dying harvest deities, like Hyakinthos and Erigone, for instance, who appear to have been mourned for. There is every possibility, therefore, that the Tammuz ritual may have been attached to a harvest god of the pre-Hellenic Greeks, who received at the same time the new name of Adonis. Osiris of Egypt resembles Tammuz, but his Mesopotamian origin has not been proved. It would appear probable that Tammuz, Attis, Osiris, and the deities represented by Adonis and Diarmid were all developed

[p. 85]

from an archaic god of fertility and vegetation, the central figure of a myth which was not only as ancient as the knowledge and practice of agriculture, but had existence even in the "Hunting Period". Traces of the Tammuz-Osiris story in various forms are found all over the area occupied by the Mediterranean or Brown race from Sumeria to the British Isles. Apparently the original myth was connected with tree and water worship and the worship of animals. Adonis sprang from a tree; the body of Osiris was concealed in a tree which grew round the sea-drifted chest in which he was concealed. Diarmid concealed himself in a tree when pursued by Finn. The blood of Tammuz, Osiris, and Adonis reddened the swollen rivers which fertilized the soil. Various animals were associated with the harvest god, who appears to have been manifested from time to time in different forms, for his spirit pervaded all nature. In Egypt the soul of Osiris entered the Apis bull or the ram of Mendes.

Tammuz in the hymns is called "the pre-eminent steer of heaven", and a popular sacrifice was "a white kid of the god Tammuz", which, however, might be substituted by a sucking pig. Osiris had also associations with swine, and the Egyptians, according to Herodotus, sacrificed a pig to him annually. When Set at full moon hunted the boar in the Delta marshes, he probably hunted the boar form of Osiris, whose human body had been recovered from the sacred tree by Isis. As the soul of Bata, the hero of the Egyptian folk tale, [*1] migrated from the blossom to the bull, and the bull to the tree, so apparently did the soul of Osiris pass from incarnation to incarnation. Set, the demon slayer of the harvest god, had also a boar form; he was the black pig who devoured the waning moon and blinded the Eye of Ra.

[p. 86]

In his character as a long-lived patriarch, Tammuz the King Daonus or Daos of Berosus, reigned in Babylonia for 36,000 years. When he died, he departed to Hades or the Abyss. Osiris, after reigning over the Egyptians, became Judge of the Dead.

Tammuz of the Sumerian hymns, however, is the Adonis-like god who lived on earth for a part of the year as the shepherd and agriculturist so dearly beloved by the goddess Ishtar. Then he died so that he might depart to the realm of Eresh-ki-gal (Persephone), queen of Hades. According to one account, his death was caused by the fickle Ishtar. When that goddess wooed Gilgamesh, the Babylonian Hercules, he upbraided her, saying:

On Tammuz, the spouse of thy youth,
 Thou didst lay affliction every year.
                                King's Translation.

References in the Sumerian hymns suggest that there also existed a form of the legend which gave an account of the slaying of the young god by someone else than Ishtar. The slayer may have been a Set-like demon--perhaps Nin-shach, who appears to have symbolized the destroying influence of the sun. He was a war deity, and his name, Professor Pinches says, "is conjectured to mean 'lord of the wild boar'". There is no direct evidence, however, to connect Tammuz's slayer with the boar which killed Adonis. Ishtar's innocence is emphasized by the fact that she mourned for her youthful lover, crying:

Oh hero, my lord, ah me! I will say;
 Food I eat not . . . water I drink not . . .
 Because of the exalted one of the nether world, him of the radiant face, yea radiant,
 Of the exalted one of the nether world, him of the dove-like voice, yea dove-like. [*1]

[p. 87]

The Phrygian Attis met his death, according to one legend, by self-mutilation under a sacred tree. Another account sets forth, however, that he was slain by a boar. The Greek Adonis was similarly killed by a boar. This animal was a form of Ares (Mars), god of war and tempest, who also loved Aphrodite (Ishtar). The Celtic Diarmid, in his character as a love god, with lunar attributes, was slain by "the green boar", which appears to have been one of the animals of a ferocious Hag, an earth and air "mother" with various names. In one of the many Fingalian stories the animal is

. . . That venomous boar, and he so fierce,
 That Grey Eyebrows had with her herd of swine. [*1]

[paragraph continues] Diarmid had eloped with the wife of Finn-mac-Coul (Fingal), who, like Ares, plotted to bring about his rival's death, and accordingly set the young hero to hunt the boar. As a thunder god Finn carried a hammer with which he smote his shield; the blows were heard in Lochlann (Scandinavia). Diarmid, like Tammuz, the "god of the tender voice and shining eyes", had much beauty. When he expired, Finn cried:

No maiden will raise her eye
 Since the mould has gone over thy visage fair . . .
 Blue without rashness in thine eye!
 Passion and beauty behind thy curls! . . .
 Oh, yesternight it was green the hillock,
 Red is it this day with Diarmid's blood. [*2]

Tammuz died with the dying vegetation, and Diarmid expired when the hills apparently were assuming their purple tints. [*3] The month of Tammuz wailings was from

[p. 88]

[paragraph continues] 20th June till 20th July, when the heat and dryness brought forth the demons of pestilence. The mourners chanted:

He has gone, he has gone to the bosom of the earth,
 And the dead are numerous in the land . . .
 Men are filled with sorrow: they stagger by day in gloom .
 In the month of thy year which brings not peace hast thou gone.
 Thou hast gone on a journey that makes an end of thy people.

The following extract contains a reference to the slaying of the god:

The holy one of Ishtar, in the middle of the year the fields languish . . .
 The shepherd, the wise one, the man of sorrows, why have they slain? . . .
 In his temple, in his inhabited domain,
 The child, lord of knowledge, abides no more . . .
 In the meadows, verily, verily, the soul of life perishes.

There is wailing for Tammuz "at the sacred cedar, where the mother bore thee", a reference which connects the god, like Adonis and Osiris, with tree worship:

The wailing is for the herbs: the first lament is, "they are not produced".
 The wailing is for the grain, ears are not produced.
 The wailing is for the habitations, for the flocks which bring forth no more.
 The wailing is for the perishing wedded ones; for the perishing children; the dark-headed people create no more.

[paragraph continues] The wailing is also for the shrunken river, the parched meadows, the fishpools, the cane brakes, the forests, the

[p. 89]

plains, the gardens, and the palace, which all suffer because the god of fertility has departed. The mourner cries:

How long shall the springing of verdure be restrained?
 How long shall the putting forth of leaves be held back?

Whither went Tammuz? His destination has already been referred to as "the bosom of the earth", and in the Assyrian version of the "Descent of Ishtar" he dwells in "the house of darkness" among the dead, "where dust is their nourishment and their food mud", and "the light is never seen"--the gloomy Babylonian Hades. In one of the Sumerian hymns, however, it is stated that Tammuz "upon the flood was cast out". The reference may be to the submarine "house of Ea", or the Blessed Island to which the Babylonian Noah was carried. In this Hades bloomed the nether "garden of Adonis".

The following extract refers to the garden of Damu (Tammuz) [*1]:--

Damu his youth therein slumbers .
 Among the garden flowers he slumbers; among the garden flowers he is cast away .
 Among the tamarisks he slumbers, with woe he causes us to be satiated.

Although Tammuz of the hymns was slain, he returned again from Hades. Apparently he came back as a child. He is wailed for as "child, Lord Gishzida", as well as "my hero Damu". In his lunar character the Egyptian Osiris appeared each month as "the child surpassingly beautiful"; the Osiris bull was also a child of the moon; "it was begotten", says Plutarch, "by a ray of generative light falling from the moon". When the bull of Attis was sacrificed his worshippers were drenched

[p. 90]

with its blood, and were afterwards ceremonially fed with milk, as they were supposed to have "renewed their youth" and become children. The ancient Greek god Eros (Cupid) was represented as a wanton boy or handsome youth. Another god of fertility, the Irish Angus, who resembles Eros, is called "the ever young"; he slumbers like Tammuz and awakes in the Spring.

Apparently it was believed that the child god, Tammuz, returned from the earlier Sumerian Paradise of the Deep, and grew into full manhood in a comparatively brief period, like Vyasa and other super-men of Indian mythology. A couplet from a Tammuz hymn says tersely:

In his infancy in a sunken boat he lay.
 In his manhood in the submerged grain he lay. [*1]

The "boat" may be the "chest" in which Adonis was concealed by Aphrodite when she confided him to the care of Persephone, queen of Hades, who desired to retain the young god, but was compelled by Zeus to send him back to the goddess of love and vegetation. The fact that Ishtar descended to Hades in quest of Tammuz may perhaps explain the symbolic references in hymns to mother goddesses being in sunken boats also when their powers were in abeyance, as were those of the god for part of each year. It is possible, too, that the boat had a lunar and a solar significance. Khonsu, the Egyptian moon god, for instance, was associated with the Spring sun, being a deity of fertility and therefore a corn spirit; he was a form of Osiris, the Patriarch, who sojourned on earth to teach mankind how to grow corn and cultivate fruit trees. In the Egyptian legend Osiris received the corn seeds from Isis, which suggests that among Great-Mother-worshipping

[p. 91]

peoples, it was believed that agricultural civilization had a female origin. The same myths may have been attached to corn gods and corn goddesses, associated with water, sun, moon, and stars.

That there existed in Babylonia at an extremely remote period an agricultural myth regarding a Patriarch of divine origin who was rescued from a boat in his childhood, is suggested by the legend which was attached to the memory, of the usurper King Sargon of Akkad. It runs as follows:

"I am Sargon, the mighty King of Akkad. My mother was a vestal (priestess), my father an alien, whose brother inhabited the mountain. . . . When my mother had conceived me, she bare me in a hidden place. She laid me in a vessel of rushes, stopped the door thereof with pitch, and cast me adrift on the river. . . . The river floated me to Akki, the water drawer, who, in drawing water, drew me forth. Akki, the water drawer, educated me as his son, and made me his gardener. As a gardener, I was beloved by the goddess Ishtar."

It is unlikely that this story was invented by Sargon. Like the many variants of it found in other countries, it was probably founded on a form of the Tammuz-Adonis myth. Indeed, a new myth would not have suited Sargon's purpose so well as the adaptation of an old one, which was more likely to make popular appeal when connected with his name. The references to the goddess Ishtar, and Sargon's early life as a gardener, suggest that the king desired to be remembered as an agricultural Patriarch, if not of divine, at any rate of semi-divine origin.

What appears to be an early form of the widespread Tammuz myth is the Teutonic legend regarding the mysterious child who came over the sea to inaugurate a new era of civilization and instruct the people how to

[p. 92]

grow corn and become great warriors. The Northern peoples, as archaeological evidence suggests, derived their knowledge of agriculture, and therefore their agricultural myths, from the Neolithic representatives of the Mediterranean race with whom they came into contact. There can be no doubt but that the Teutonic legend refers to the introduction of agriculture. The child is called "Scef" or "Sceaf", which signifies "Sheaf", or "Scyld, the son of Sceaf". Scyld is the patriarch of the Scyldings, the Danes, a people of mixed origin. In the Anglo-Saxon Beowulf poem, the reference is to "Scyld", but Ethelweard, William of Malmesbury, and others adhered to "Sceaf" as the name of the Patriarch of the Western Saxons.

The legend runs that one day a boat was seen approaching the shore; it was not propelled by oars or sail. In it lay a child fast asleep, his head pillowed upon a sheaf of grain. He was surrounded by armour, treasure, and various implements, including the fire-borer. The child was reared by the people who found him, and he became a great instructor and warrior and ruled over the tribe as king. In Beowulf Scyld is the father of the elder Beowulf, whose grandson Hrothgar built the famous Hall. The poem opens with a reference to the patriarch "Scyld of the Sheaf". When he died, his body, according to the request he had made, was laid in a ship which was set adrift:

Upon his breast lay many treasures which were to travel with him into the power of the flood. Certainly they (the mourners) furnished him with no less of gifts, of tribal treasures, than those had done who, in his early days, started him over the sea alone, child as he was. Moreover, they set besides a gold-embroidered standard high above his head, and let the flood bear him--gave him to the sea. Their soul was sad, their spirit sorrowful. Who

[p. 93]

received that load, men, chiefs of council, heroes under heaven, cannot for certain tell. [*1]

Sceaf or Scyld is identical with Yngve, the patriarch of the Ynglings; with Frey, the harvest and boar god, son of Njord, [*2] the sea god; and with Hermod, referred to as follows in the Eddic "Lay of Hyndla":

To some grants he wealth, to his children war fame,
 Word skill to many and wisdom to men,
 Fair winds to sea-farers, song craft to skalds,
 And might of manhood to many a warrior.

Tammuz is similarly "the heroic lord of the land", the "wise one", the "lord of knowledge", and "the sovereign, lord of invocation".

Heimdal, watchman of the Teutonic gods, also dwelt for a time among men as "Rig", and had human offspring, his son Thrall being the ancestor of the Thralls, his son Churl of churls, and Jarl of noblemen.

Tammuz, like Heimdal, is also a guardian. He watches the flocks and herds, whom he apparently guards against the Gallu demons as Heimdal guards the world and the heavens against attacks by giants and monsters. The flocks of Tammuz, Professor Pinches suggests, "recall the flocks of the Greek sun god Helios. These were the clouds illuminated by the sun, which were likened to sheep--indeed, one of the early Sumerian expressions for 'fleece' was 'sheep of the sky'. The name of Tammuz in Sumerian is Dumu-zi, or in its rare fullest form, Dumu-zida, meaning 'true or faithful son'. There is probably some legend attached to this which is at present unknown." [*3]

[p. 94]

So the Sumerian hymn-chanters lamented:

Like an herdsman the sentinel place of sheep and cattle he (Tammuz) has forsaken . . .
 From his home, from his inhabited domain, the son, he of wisdom, pre-eminent steer of heaven,
 The hero unto the nether herding place has taken his way. [*1]

Agni, the Aryo-Indian god, who, as the sky sentinel, has points of resemblance to Heimdal, also links with Tammuz, especially in his Mitra character:

Agni has been established among the tribes of men, the son of the waters, Mitra acting in the right way. Rigveda, iii, 5, 3.

Agni, who has been looked and longed for in Heaven, who has been looked for on earth--he who has been looked for has entered all herbs. Rigveda, i, 98. [*2]

Tammuz, like the Egyptian lunar and solar god Khonsu, is "the healer", and Agni "drives away all disease". Tammuz is the god "of sonorous voice"; Agni "roars like a bull"; and Heimdal blows a horn when the giants and demons threaten to attack the citadel of the gods. As the spring sun god, Tammuz is "a youthful warrior", says Jastrow, "triumphing over the storms of winter". [*3] The storms, of course, were symbolized as demons. Tammuz, "the heroic lord", was therefore a demon slayer like Heimdal and Agni. Each of these gods appear to have been developed in isolation from an archaic spring god of fertility and corn whose attributes were symbolized. In Teutonic mythology, for instance, Heimdal was the warrior form of the patriarch Scef, while Frey was the deified agriculturist who came over the deep as a child. In Saxo's mythical history of Denmark,

[p. 95]

[paragraph continues] Frey as Frode is taken prisoner by a storm giant, Beli, "the howler", and is loved by his hag sister in the Teutonic Hades, as Tammuz is loved by Eresh-ki-gal, spouse of the storm god Nergal, in the Babylonian Hades. Frode returns to earth, like Tammuz, in due season.

It is evident that there were various versions of the Tammuz myth in Ancient Babylonia. In one the goddess Ishtar visited Hades to search for the lover of her youth. A part of this form of the legend survives in the famous Assyrian hymn known as "The Descent of Ishtar". It was first translated by the late Mr. George Smith, of the British Museum. A box containing inscribed tablets had been sent from Assyria to London, and Mr. Smith, with characteristic patience and skill, arranged and deciphered them, giving to the world a fragment of ancient literature infused with much sublimity and imaginative power. Ishtar is depicted descending to dismal Hades, where the souls of the dead exist in bird forms:

I spread like a bird my hands.
 I descend, I descend to the house of darkness, the dwelling of the god Irkalla:
 To the house out of which there is no exit,
 To the road from which there is no return:
 To the house from whose entrance the light is taken,
 The place where dust is their nourishment and their food mud.
 Its chiefs also are like birds covered with feathers;
 The light is never seen, in darkness they dwell. . . .

[paragraph continues] When the goddess reaches the gate of Hades she cries to the porter:

Keeper of the waters, open thy gate,
 Open thy gate that I may enter.
 If thou openest not the gate that I may enter
 I will strike the door, the bolts I will shatter, [p. 96]
 I will strike the threshold and will pass through the doors;
 I will raise up the dead to devour the living, 
 Above the living the dead shall exceed in numbers.

[paragraph continues] The porter answers that he must first consult the Queen of Hades, here called Allatu, to whom he accordingly announces the arrival of the Queen of Heaven. Allatu's heart is filled with anger, and makes reference to those whom Ishtar caused to perish:

Let me weep over the strong who have left their wives,
 Let me weep over the handmaidens who have lost the embraces of their husbands,
 Over the only son let me mourn, who ere his days are come is taken away.

[paragraph continues] Then she issues abruptly the stern decree:

Go, keeper, open the gate to her,
 Bewitch her according to the ancient rules;

that is, "Deal with her as you deal with others who come here".

As Ishtar enters through the various gates she is stripped of her ornaments and clothing. At the first gate her crown was taken off, at the second her ear-rings, at the third her necklace of precious stones, at the fourth the ornaments of her breast, at the fifth her gemmed waist-girdle, [*1] at the sixth the bracelets of her hands and feet, and at the seventh the covering robe of her body. Ishtar asks at each gate why she is thus dealt with, and the porter answers, "Such is the command of Allatu."

After descending for a prolonged period the Queen of Heaven at length stands naked before the Queen of Hades. Ishtar is proud and arrogant, and Allatu, desiring to punish her rival whom she cannot humble,

 

Click to enlarge
ISHTAR IN HADES
 From the Painting by E. Wallcousins.

 

[p. 97]

commands the plague demon, Namtar, to strike her with disease in all parts of her body. The effect of Ishtar's fate was disastrous upon earth: growth and fertility came to an end.

Meanwhile Pap-sukal, messenger of the gods, hastened to Shamash, the sun deity, to relate what had occurred. The sun god immediately consulted his lunar father, Sin, and Ea, god of the deep. Ea then created a man lion, named Nadushu-namir, to rescue Ishtar, giving him power to pass through the seven gates of Hades. When this being delivered his message

Allatu . . . struck her breast; she bit her thumb,
 She turned again: a request she asked not.

[paragraph continues] In her anger she cursed the rescuer of the Queen of Heaven.

May I imprison thee in the great prison,
 May the garbage of the foundations of the city be thy food,
 May the drains of the city be thy drink,
 May the darkness of the dungeon be thy dwelling,
 May the stake be thy seat,
 May hunger and thirst strike thy offspring.

She was compelled, however, to obey the high gods, and addressed Namtar, saying:

Unto Ishtar give the waters of life and bring her before me.

[paragraph continues] Thereafter the Queen of Heaven was conducted through the various gates, and at each she received her robe and the ornaments which were taken from her on entering. Namtar says:

Since thou hast not paid a ransom for thy deliverance to her (Allatu), so to her again turn back,
 For Tammuz the husband of thy youth.
 The glistening waters (of life) pour over him .
 In splendid clothing dress him, with a ring of crystal adorn him.

[p. 98]

Ishtar mourns for "the wound of Tammuz", smiting her breast, and she did not ask for "the precious eye-stones, her amulets", which were apparently to ransom Tammuz. The poem concludes with Ishtar's wail:

O my only brother (Tammuz) thou dost not lament for me.
 In the day that Tammuz adorned me, with a ring of crystal,
 With a bracelet of emeralds, together with himself, he adorned me, [*1]
 With himself he adorned me; may men mourners and women mourners
 On a bier place him, and assemble the wake. [*2]

A Sumerian hymn to Tammuz throws light on this narrative. It sets forth that Ishtar descended to Hades to entreat him to be glad and to resume care of his flocks, but Tammuz refused or was unable to return.

His spouse unto her abode he sent back.

[paragraph continues] She then instituted the wailing ceremony:

The amorous Queen of Heaven sits as one in darkness. [*3]

Mr. Langdon also translates a hymn (Tammuz III) which appears to contain the narrative on which the Assyrian version was founded. The goddess who descends to Hades, however, is not Ishtar, but the "sister", Belit-sheri. She is accompanied by various demons--the "gallu-demon", the "slayer", &c.--and holds a conversation with Tammuz which, however, is "unintelligible and badly broken". Apparently, however, he promises to return to earth.

. . . I will go up, as for me I will depart with thee . . .
 . . . I will return, unto my mother let us go back.

[p. 99]

Probably two goddesses originally lamented for Tammuz, as the Egyptian sisters, Isis and Nepthys, lamented for Osiris, their brother. Ishtar is referred to as "my mother". Isis figures alternately in the Egyptian chants as mother, wife, sister, and daughter of Osiris. She cries, "Come thou to thy wife in peace; her heart fluttereth for thy love", . . . "I am thy wife, made as thou art, the elder sister, soul of her brother". . . . "Come thou to us as a babe". . . . "Lo, thou art as the Bull of the two goddesses--come thou, child growing in peace, our lord!" . . "Lo! the Bull, begotten of the two cows, Isis and Nepthys". . . . "Come thou to the two widowed goddesses". . . . "Oh child, lord, first maker of the body". . . . "Father Osiris." [*1]

As Ishtar and Belit-sheri weep for Tammuz, so do

Isis and Nepthys weep for Osiris.

Calling upon thee with weeping--yet thou art prostrate upon thy bed!
 Gods and men . . . are weeping for thee at the same time, when they behold me (Isis).
 Lo! I invoke thee with wailing that reacheth high as heaven.

[paragraph continues] Isis is also identified with Hathor (Ishtar) the Cow. . . . "The cow weepeth for thee with her voice." [*2]

There is another phase, however, to the character of the mother goddess which explains the references to the desertion and slaying of Tammuz by Ishtar. "She is", says Jastrow, "the goddess of the human instinct, or passion which accompanies human love. Gilgamesh . . . reproaches her with abandoning the objects of her passion after a brief period of union." At Ishtar's temple "public maidens accepted temporary partners, assigned to them by

[p. 100]

[paragraph continues] Ishtar". [*1] The worship of all mother goddesses in ancient times was accompanied by revolting unmoral rites which are referred to in condemnatory terms in various passages in the Old Testament, especially in connection with the worship of Ashtoreth, who was identical with Ishtar and the Egyptian Hathor.

Ishtar in the process of time overshadowed all the other female deities of Babylonia, as did Isis in Egypt. Her name, indeed, which is Semitic, became in the plural, Ishtarate, a designation for goddesses in general. But although she was referred to as the daughter of the sky, Anu, or the daughter of the moon, Sin or Nannar, she still retained traces of her ancient character. Originally she was a great mother goddess, who was worshipped by those who believed that life and the universe had a female origin in contrast to those who believed in the theory of male origin. Ishtar is identical with Nina, the fish goddess, a creature who gave her name to the Sumerian city of Nina and the Assyrian city of Nineveh. Other forms of the Creatrix included Mama, or Mami, or Ama, "mother", Aruru, Bau, Gula, and Zer-panitum. These were all "Preservers" and healers. At the same time they were "Destroyers", like Nin-sun and the Queen of Hades, Eresh-ki-gal or Allatu. They were accompanied by shadowy male forms ere they became wives of strongly individualized gods, or by child gods, their sons, who might be regarded as "brothers" or "husbands of their mothers", to use the paradoxical Egyptian term. Similarly Great Father deities had vaguely defined wives. The "Semitic" Baal, "the lord", was accompanied by a female reflection of himself--Beltu, "the lady". Shamash, the sun god, had for wife the shadowy Aa.

 

Click to enlarge
WINGED HUMAN-HEADED COW (?)
 From Kouyunjik (Nineveh): now in the British Museum.
 Photo. Mansell.

 

[p. 101]

As has been shown, Ishtar is referred to in a Tammuz hymn as the mother of the child god of fertility. In an Egyptian hymn the sky goddess Nut, "the mother" of Osiris, is stated to have "built up life from her own body." [*1] Sri or Lakshmi, the Indian goddess, who became the wife of Vishnu, as the mother goddess Saraswati, a tribal deity, became the wife of Brahma, was, according to a Purana commentator, "the mother of the world . . . eternal and undecaying". [*2]

The gods, on the other hand, might die annually: the goddesses alone were immortal. Indra was supposed to perish of old age, but his wife, Indrani, remained ever young. There were fourteen Indras in every "day of Brahma", a reference apparently to the ancient conception of Indra among the Great-Mother-worshipping sections of the Aryo-Indians. [*3] In the Mahabharata the god Shiva, as Mahadeva, commands Indra on "one of the peaks of Himavat", where they met, to lift up a stone and join the Indras who had been before him. "And Indra on removing that stone beheld a cave on the breast of that king of mountains in which were four others resembling himself." Indra exclaimed in his grief, "Shall I be even like these?" These five Indras, like the "Seven Sleepers", awaited the time when they would be called forth. They were ultimately reborn as the five Pandava warriors. [*4]

The ferocious, black-faced Scottish mother goddess, Cailleach Bheur, who appears to be identical with Mala Lith, "Grey Eyebrows" of Fingalian story, and the English "Black Annis", figures in Irish song and legend as "The Old Woman of Beare". This "old woman" (Cailleach) "had", says Professor Kuno Meyer, "seven

[p. 102]

periods of youth one after another, so that every man who had lived with her came to die of old age, and her grandsons and great-grandsons were tribes and races". When old age at length came upon her she sang her "swan song", from which the following lines are extracted:

Ebb tide to me as of the sea!
 Old age causes me reproach . . .
 It is riches
 Ye love, it is not men:
 In the time when we lived
 It was men we loved . . .
 My arms when they are seen
 Are bony and thin:
 Once they would fondle,
 They would be round glorious kings . . .
 I must take my garment even in the sun:
 The time is at hand that shall renew me. [*1]

Freyja, the Germanic mother goddess, whose car was drawn by cats, had similarly many lovers. In the Icelandic poem "Lokasenna", Loki taunts her, saying:

Silence, Freyja! Full well I know thee,
   And faultless art thou not found;
 Of the gods and elves who here are gathered
   Each one hast thou made thy mate.

Idun, the keeper of the apples of immortal youth, which prevent the gods growing old, is similarly addressed:

Silence, Idun! I swear, of all women
   Thou the most wanton art;
 Who couldst fling those fair-washed arms of thine
   About thy brother's slayer.

[p. 103]

Frigg, wife of Odin, is satirized as well:

Silence, Frigg! Earth's spouse for a husband,
     And hast ever yearned after men! [*1]

The goddesses of classic mythology had similar reputations. Aphrodite (Venus) had many divine and mortal lovers. She links closely with Astarte and Ashtoreth (Ishtar), and reference has already been made to her relations with Adonis (Tammuz). These love deities were all as cruel as they were wayward. When Ishtar wooed the Babylonian hero, Gilgamesh, he spurned her advances, as has been indicated, saying:

On Tammuz, the spouse of thy youth,
 Thou didst lay affliction every year.
 Thou didst love the brilliant Allalu bird
 But thou didst smite him and break his wing;
 He stands in the woods and cries "O my wing".

[paragraph continues] He likewise charged her with deceiving the lion and the horse, making reference to obscure myths:

Thou didst also love a shepherd of the flock,
 Who continually poured out for thee the libation,
 And daily slaughtered kids for thee;
 But thou didst smite him and didst change him into a leopard,
 So that his own sheep boy hunted him,
 And his own hounds tore him to pieces. [*2]

These goddesses were ever prone to afflict human beings who might offend them or of whom they wearied. Demeter (Ceres) changed Ascalaphus into an owl and Stellio into a lizard. Rhea (Ops) resembled

     The tow'red Cybele,
 Mother of a hundred gods,

[p. 104]

the wanton who loved Attis (Adonis). Artemis (Diana) slew her lover Orion, changed Actaeon into a stag, which was torn to pieces by his own dogs, and caused numerous deaths by sending a boar to ravage the fields of Oeneus, king of Calydon. Human sacrifices were frequently offered to the bloodthirsty "mothers". The most famous victim of Artemis was the daughter of Agamemnon, "divinely tall and most divinely fair". [*1] Agamemnon had slain a sacred stag, and the goddess punished him by sending a calm when the war fleet was about to sail for Troy, with the result that his daughter had to be sacrificed. Artemis thus sold breezes like the northern wind hags and witches.

It used to be customary to account for the similarities manifested by the various mother goddesses by assuming that there was constant cultural contact between separate nationalities, and, as a result, a not inconsiderable amount of "religious borrowing". Greece was supposed to have received its great goddesses from the western Semites, who had come under the spell of Babylonian religion. Archaeological evidence, however, tends to disprove this theory. "The most recent researches into Mesopotamian history", writes Dr. Farnell, "establish with certainty the conclusion that there was no direct political contact possible between the powers in the valley of the Euphrates and the western shores of the Aegean in the second millennium B.C. In fact, between the nascent Hellas and the great world of Mesopotamia there were powerful and possibly independent strata of cultures interposing." [*2]

The real connection appears to be the racial one. Among the Mediterranean Neolithic tribes of Sumeria, Arabia, and Europe, the goddess cult appears to have

[p. 105]

been influential. Mother worship was the predominant characteristic of their religious systems, so that the Greek goddesses were probably of pre-Hellenic origin, the Celtic of Iberian, the Egyptian of proto-Egyptian, and the Babylonian of Sumerian. The northern hillmen, on the other hand, who may be identified with the "Aryans" of the philologists, were father worshippers. The Vedic Aryo-Indians worshipped father gods, [*1] as did also the Germanic peoples and certain tribes in the "Hittite confederacy". Earth spirits were males, like the Teutonic elves, the Aryo-Indian Ribhus, and the Burkans, "masters", of the present-day Buriats, a Mongolian people. When the father-worshipping peoples invaded the dominions of the mother-worshipping peoples, they introduced their strongly individualized gods, but they did not displace the mother goddesses. "The Aryan Hellenes", says Dr. Farnell, "were able to plant their Zeus and Poseidon on the high hill of Athens, but not to overthrow the supremacy of Athena in the central shrine and in the aboriginal soul of the Athenian people." [*2] As in Egypt, the beliefs of the father worshippers, represented by the self-created Ptah, were fused with the beliefs of the mother worshippers, who adored Isis, Mut, Neith, and others. In Babylonia this process of racial and religious fusion was well advanced before the dawn of history. Ea, who had already assumed manifold forms, may have originally been the son or child lover of Damkina, "Lady of the Deep", as was Tammuz of Ishtar. As the fish, Ea was the offspring of the mother river.

The mother worshippers recognized male as well as female deities, but regarded the great goddess as the First Cause. Although the primeval spirits were grouped in

[p. 106]

four pairs in Egypt, and apparently in Babylonia also, the female in the first pair was more strongly individualized than the male. The Egyptian Nu is vaguer than his consort Nut, and the Babylonian Apsu than his consort Tiamat. Indeed, in the narrative of the Creation Tablets of Babylon, which will receive full treatment in a later chapter, Tiamat, the great mother, is the controlling spirit. She is more powerful and ferocious than Apsu, and lives longer. After Apsu's death she elevates one of her brood, named Kingu, to be her consort, a fact which suggests that in the Ishtar-Tammuz myth survives the influence of exceedingly ancient modes of thought. Like Tiamat, Ishtar is also a great battle heroine, and in this capacity she was addressed as "the lady of majestic rank exalted over all gods". This was no idle flattery on the part of worshippers, but a memory of her ancient supremacy.

Reference has been made to the introduction of Tammuz worship into Jerusalem. Ishtar, as Queen of Heaven, was also adored by the backsliding Israelites as a deity of battle and harvest. When Jeremiah censured the people for burning incense and serving gods "whom they knew not", he said, "neither they, ye, nor your fathers", they made answer: "Since we left off to burn incense to the queen of heaven, and to pour out drink offerings unto her, we have wanted all things, and have been consumed by the sword and the famine". The women took a leading part in these practices, but refused to accept all the blame, saying, "When we burned incense to the queen of heaven, and poured out drink offerings unto her, did we make our cakes and pour out drink offerings unto her without our men?" [*1] That the husbands, and the children even, assisted at the ceremony is made evident in another reference to goddess worship:

 

Click to enlarge
Female figure in adoration before a goddess

Click to enlarge
The winged Ishtar above the rising sun god, the river god, and other deities

Click to enlarge
Gilgamesh in conflict with bulls

(see page <page 176>)

CYLINDER-SEAL IMPRESSIONS
 (British Museum)

 

[p. 107]

[paragraph continues] "The children gather wood, and the fathers kindle the fire, and the women knead the dough, to make cakes to the queen of heaven". [*1]

Jastrow suggests that the women of Israel wept for Tammuz, offered cakes to the mother goddess, &c., because "in all religious bodies . . . women represent the conservative element; among them religious customs continue in practice after they have been abandoned by men". [*2] The evidence of Jeremiah, however, shows that the men certainly co-operated at the archaic ceremonials. In lighting the fires with the "vital spark", they apparently acted in imitation of the god of fertility. The women, on the other hand, represented the reproductive harvest goddess in providing the food supply. In recognition of her gift, they rewarded the goddess by offering her the cakes prepared from the newly ground wheat and barley--the "first fruits of the harvest". As the corn god came as a child, the children began the ceremony by gathering the wood for the sacred fire. When the women mourned for Tammuz, they did so evidently because the death of the god was lamented by the goddess Ishtar. It would appear, therefore, that the suggestion regarding the "conservative element" should really apply to the immemorial practices of folk religion. These differed from the refined ceremonies of the official cult in Babylonia, where there were suitable temples and organized bands of priests and priestesses. But the official cult received no recognition in Palestine; the cakes intended for a goddess were not offered up in the temple of Abraham's God, but "in the streets of Jerusalem" and those of other cities. [*3]

[p. 108]

The obvious deduction seems to be that in ancient times women everywhere played a prominent part in the ceremonial folk worship of the Great Mother goddess, while the men took the lesser part of the god whom she had brought into being and afterwards received as "husband of his mother". This may account for the high social status of women among goddess worshippers, like the representatives of the Mediterranean race, whose early religion was not confined to temples, but closely associated with the acts of everyday life.

Footnotes

^82:1 Ezekiel, viii.

^83:1 Psalms, cxxvi.

^83:2 The Burden of Isis, J. T. Dennis (Wisdom of the East series), pp. 21, 22.

^83:3 Religion of the Semites, pp. 412, 414.

^85:1 Egyptian Myth and Legend, pp. 45 et seq.

^86:1 Langdon's Sumerian and Babylonian Psalms, pp. 319-321.

^87:1 Campbell's West Highland Tales, vol. iii, p. 74..

^87:2 West Highland Tales, vol. iii, pp. 85, 86.

^87:3 If Finn and his band were really militiamen--the original Fenians--as is believed in Ireland, they may have had attached to their memories the legends of archaic Iberian [p. 88] deities who differed from the Celtic Danann deities. Theodoric the Goth, as Dietrich von Bern, was identified, for instance, with Donar or Thunor (Thor), the thunder god, In Scotland Finn and his followers are all giants. Diarmid is the patriarch of the Campbell clan, the MacDiarmids being "sons of Diarmid".

^89:1 Isaiah condemns a magical custom connected with the worship of Tammuz in the garden, Isaiah, xvii, g, II. This "Garden of Adonis" is dealt with in the [*next chapter].

^90:1 Quotations are from Sumerian and Babylonian Psalms, translated by Stephen Langdon, Ph.D. (Paris and London, 1909), pp. 299-341.

^93:1 Beowulf, translated by J. R. Clark Hall (London, 1911), pp. 9-11.

^93:2 For Frey's connection with the Ynglings see Morris and Magnusson's Heimskringla (Saga Library, vol. iii), pp. 23-71.

^93:3 The Religion of Babylonia and Assyria, p. 72.

^94:1 Langdon's Sumerian and Babylonian Psalms, pp. 325, 339.

^94:2 Professor Oldenberg's translation.

^94:3 Osiris is also invoked to "remove storms and rain and give fecundity in the night-time". As a spring sun god he slays demons; as a lunar god he brings fertility.

^96:1 Like the love-compelling girdle of Aphrodite.

^98:1 A wedding bracelet of crystal is worn by Hindu women; they break it when the husband dies.

^98:2 Quotations from the translation in The Chaldean Account of Genesis, by George Smith.

^98:3 Langdon's Sumerian and Babylonian Psalms, p. 32q et seq.

^99:1 The Burden of Isis, translated by J. T. Dennis (Wisdom of the East series), pp. 24, 31, 32, 39, 45, 46, 49.

^99:2 The Burden of Isis, pp. 22, 46.

^100:1 Aspects of Religious Belief and Practice in Babylonia and Assyria, p. 137, and Herodotus, book i, 199.

^101:1 The Burden of Isis, p. 47.

^101:2 Original Sanskrit Texts, J. Muir, London, 1890, vol. i, p. 67.

^101:3 Original Sanskrit Texts, vol. i, p. 44.

^101:4 Adi Parva section of Mahabharata (Roy's translation), pp. 553, 555.

^102:1 Ancient Irish Poetry, Kuno Meyer (London, 1911), pp. 88-90.

^103:1 Translations from The Elder Edda, by O. Bray (part i), London, 1908.

^103:2 Babylonian Religion, L. W. King, pp. 160, 161.

^104:1 Tennyson's A Dream of Fair Women.

^104:2 Greece and Babylon, L. R. Farnell (Edinburgh, 1911), p. 35.

^105:1 The goddesses did not become prominent until the "late invasion" of the post-Vedic Aryans.

^105:2 Greece and Babylon, p. 96.

^106:1 Jeremiah, xliv.

^107:1 Jeremiah, vii, 18.

^107:2 Aspects of Religious Belief and Practice in Babylonia and Assyria, pp. 348, 349.

^107:3 Jeremiah, vii, 17.

     
Myths of Babylonia and Assyria, by Donald A. MacKenzie, [1915], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 109] [ch-06]

  

CHAPTER VI

  

Wars of the City States of Sumer and Akkad

Civilization well advanced--The Patesi--Prominent City States--Surroundings of Babylonia--The Elamites--Biblical References to Susa--The Sumerian Temperament--Fragmentary Records--City States of Kish and Opis--A Shopkeeper who became a Queen--Goddess Worship--Tammuz as Nin-Girsu--Great Dynasty of Lagash--Ur-Nina and his Descendants--A Napoleonic Conqueror--Golden Age of Sumerian Art--The First Reformer in History--His Rise and Fall--The Dynasty of Erech--Sargon of Akkad--The Royal Gardener--Sargon Myth in India--A Great Empire--The King who Purchased Land--Naram Sin the Conqueror--Disastrous Foreign Raid--Lagash again Prominent--Gudea the Temple Builder--Dynasty of Ur--Dynasty of Isin--Another Gardener becomes King--Rise of Babylon--Humanized Deities--Why Sumerian Gods wore Beards.

WHEN the curtain rises to reveal the drama of Babylonian civilization we find that we have missed the first act and its many fascinating scenes. Sumerians and Akkadians come and go, but it is not always possible to distinguish between them. Although most Semites are recognizable by their flowing beards, prominent noses, and long robes, some have so closely imitated the Sumerians as to suffer almost complete loss of identity. It is noticeable that in the north the Akkadians are more Semitic than their contemporaries in the south, but it is difficult at times to say whether a city is controlled by the descendants of the indigenous people or those of later settlers. Dynasties rise and fall, and, as in Egypt at times, the progress of the fragmentary narrative is interrupted by a sudden change

[p. 110]

of scene ere we have properly grasped a situation and realized its significance.

What we know for certain is that civilization is well advanced. Both in the north and the south there are many organized and independent city states, and not unfrequently these wage war one against another. Occasionally ambitious rulers tower among their fellows, conduct vigorous military campaigns, and become overlords of wide districts. As a rule, a subjugated monarch who has perforce to acknowledge the suzerainty of a powerful king is allowed to remain in a state of semi-independence on condition that he pays a heavy annual tribute of grain. His own laws continue in force, and the city deities remain supreme, although recognition may also be given to the deities of his conqueror. He styles himself a Patesi--a "priest king", or more literally, "servant of the chief deity". But as an independent monarch may also be a pious Patesi, it does not always follow when a ruler is referred to by that title he is necessarily less powerful than his neighbours.

When the historical narrative begins Akkad included the cities of Babylon, Cutha, Kish, Akkad, and Sippar, and north of Babylonia proper is Semitic Opis. Among the cities of Sumer were Eridu, Ur, Lagash, Larsa, Erech, Shuruppak, and probably Nippur, which was situated on the "border". On the north Assyria was yet "in the making", and shrouded in obscurity. A vague but vast area above Hit on the Euphrates, and extending to the Syrian coast, was known as the "land of the Amorites". The fish-shaped Babylonian valley lying between the rivers, where walled towns were surrounded by green fields and numerous canals flashed in the sunshine, was bounded on the west by the bleak wastes of the Arabian desert, where during the dry season "the rocks branded

[p. 111]

the body" and occasional sandstorms swept in blinding folds towards the "plain of Shinar" (Sumer) like demon hosts who sought to destroy the world. To the east the skyline was fretted by the Persian Highlands, and amidst the southern mountains dwelt the fierce Elamites, the hereditary enemies of the Sumerians, although a people apparently of the same origin. Like the Nubians and the Libyans, who kept watchful eyes on Egypt, the Elamites seemed ever to be hovering on the eastern frontier of Sumeria, longing for an opportunity to raid and plunder.

The capital of the Elamites was the city of Susa, where excavations have revealed traces of an independent civilization which reaches back to an early period in the Late Stone Age. Susa is referred to in the Old Testament--"The words of Nehemiah . . . I was in Shushan the palace". [*1] An Assyrian plan of the city shows it occupying a strategic position at a bend of the Shawur river, which afforded protection against Sumerian attacks from the west, while a canal curved round its northern and eastern sides, so that Susa was completely surrounded by water. Fortifications had been erected on the river and canal banks, and between these and the high city walls were thick clumps of trees. That the kings of Elam imitated the splendours of Babylonian courts in the later days of Esther and Haman and Mordecai, is made evident by the Biblical references to the gorgeous palace, which had "white, green, and blue hangings, fastened with cords of fine linen and purple to silver rings and pillars of marble; the beds were of gold and silver, upon a pavement of red, and blue, and white, and black marble". [*2] Beyond Elam were the plains, plateaus, and grassy steppes occupied by the Medes and other

[p. 112]

peoples of Aryan speech. Cultural influences came and went like spring winds between the various ancient communities.

For ten long centuries Sumer and Akkad flourished and prospered ere we meet with the great Hammurabi, whose name has now become almost as familiar as that of Julius Caesar. But our knowledge of the leading historical events of this vast period is exceedingly fragmentary. The Sumerians were not like the later Assyrians or their Egyptian contemporaries--a people with a passion for history. When inscriptions were composed and cut on stone, or impressed upon clay tablets and bricks, the kings selected as a general rule to record pious deeds rather than to celebrate their victories and conquests. Indeed, the average monarch had a temperament resembling that of Keats, who declared:

                              The silver flow
 Of Hero's tears, the swoon of Imogen,
 Fair Pastorella in the bandits' den,
 Are things to brood on with more ardency
 Than the death day of empires.

The Sumerian king was emotionally religious as the great English poet was emotionally poetical. The tears of Ishtar for Tammuz, and the afflictions endured by the goddess imprisoned in Hades, to which she had descended for love of her slain husband, seemed to have concerned the royal recorder to a greater degree than the memories of political upheavals and the social changes which passed over the land, like the seasons which alternately brought greenness and gold, barrenness and flood.

City chronicles, as a rule, are but indices of obscure events, to which meagre references were sometimes also made on mace heads, vases, tablets, stelae, and sculptured

[p. 113]

monoliths. Consequently, present-day excavators and students have often reason to be grateful that the habit likewise obtained of inscribing on bricks in buildings and the stone sockets of doors the names of kings and others. These records render obscure periods faintly articulate, and are indispensable for comparative purposes. Historical clues are also obtained from lists of year names. Each city king named a year in celebration of a great event--his own succession to the throne, the erection of a new temple or of a city wall, or, mayhap, the defeat of an invading army from a rival state. Sometimes, too, a monarch gave the name of his father in an official inscription, or happily mentioned several ancestors. Another may be found to have made an illuminating statement regarding a predecessor, who centuries previously erected the particular temple that he himself has piously restored. A reckoning of this kind, however, cannot always be regarded as absolutely correct. It must be compared with and tested by other records, for in these ancient days calculations were not unfrequently based on doubtful inscriptions, or mere oral traditions, perhaps. Nor can implicit trust be placed on every reference to historical events, for the memoried deeds of great rulers were not always unassociated with persistent and cumulative myths. It must be recognized, therefore, that even portions of the data which had of late been sifted and systematized by Oriental scholars in Europe, may yet have to be subjected to revision. Many interesting and important discoveries, which will throw fresh light on this fascinating early period, remain to be made in that ancient and deserted land, which still lies under the curse of the Hebrew prophet, who exclaimed: "Babylon, the glory of kingdoms, the beauty of the Chaldees' excellency, shall be as when God overthrew Sodom and

[p. 114]

[paragraph continues] Gomorrah. It shall never be inhabited; neither shall the Arabian pitch tent there; neither shall the shepherds make their fold there. But wild beasts of the desert shall lie there; and their houses shall be full of doleful creatures; and owls shall dwell there, and satyrs shall dance there. And the wild beasts of the islands shall cry in their desolate houses and dragons in their pleasant palaces." [*1]

The curtain rises, as has been indicated, after civilization had been well advanced. To begin with, our interests abide with Akkad, and during a period dated approximately between 3000 B.C. and 2800 B.C., when Egypt was already a united kingdom, and the Cretans were at the dawn of the first early Minoan period, and beginning to use bronze. In Kish Sumerian and Akkadian elements had apparently blended, and the city was the centre of a powerful and independent government. After years have fluttered past dimly, and with them the shadow-shapes of vigorous rulers, it is found that Kish came under the sway of the pronouncedly Semitic city of Opis, which was situated "farthest north" and on the western bank of the river Tigris. A century elapsed ere Kish again threw off the oppressor's yoke and renewed the strength of its youth.

The city of Kish was one of the many ancient centres of goddess worship. The Great Mother appears to have been the Sumerian Bau, whose chief seat was at Lagash. If tradition is to be relied upon, Kish owed its existence to that notable lady, Queen Azag-Bau. Although floating legends gathered round her memory as they have often gathered round the memories of famous men, like Sargon of Akkad, Alexander the Great, and Theodoric the Goth, who became Emperor of Rome, it is probable

[p. 115]

that the queen was a prominent historical personage. She was reputed to have been of humble origin, and to have first achieved popularity and influence as the keeper of a wine shop. Although no reference survives to indicate that she was believed to be of miraculous birth, the Chronicle of Kish gravely credits her with a prolonged and apparently prosperous reign of a hundred years. Her son, who succeeded her, sat on the throne for a quarter of a century. These calculations are certainly remarkable. If the Queen Azag-Bau founded Kish when she was only twenty, and gave birth to the future ruler in her fiftieth year, he must have been an elderly gentleman of seventy when he began to reign. When it is found, further, that the dynasty in which mother and son flourished was supposed to have lasted for 586 years, divided between eight rulers, one of whom reigned for only three years, two for six, and two for eleven, it becomes evident that the historian of Kish cannot be absolutely relied upon in detail. It seems evident that the memory of this lady of forceful character, who flourished about thirteen hundred years before the rise of Queen Hatshepsut of Egypt, has overshadowed the doubtful annals of ancient Kish at a period when Sumerian and Semite were striving in the various states to achieve political ascendancy.

Meanwhile the purely Sumerian city of Lagash had similarly grown powerful and aggressive. For a time it acknowledged the suzerainty of Kish, but ultimately it threw off the oppressor's yoke and asserted its independence. The cumulative efforts of a succession of energetic rulers elevated Lagash to the position of a metropolis in Ancient Babylonia.

The goddess Bau, "the mother of Lagash", was worshipped in conjunction with other deities, including the god Nin-Girsu, an agricultural deity, and therefore

[p. 116]

a deity of war, who had solar attributes. One of the titles of Nin-Girsu was En-Mersi, which, according to Assyrian evidence, was another name of Tammuz, the spring god who slew the storm and winter demons, and made the land fertile so that man might have food. Nin-Girsu was, it would seem, a developed form of Tammuz, like the Scandinavian Frey, god of harvest, or Heimdal, the celestial warrior. Bau was one of the several goddesses whose attributes were absorbed by the Semitic Ishtar. She was a "Great Mother", a creatrix, the source of all human and bestial life, and, of course, a harvest goddess. She was identified with Gula, "the great one", who cured diseases and prolonged life. Evidently the religion of Lagash was based on the popular worship of the "Queen of Heaven", and her son, the dying god who became "husband of his mother".

The first great and outstanding ruler of Lagash was Ur-Nina, who appears to have owed his power to the successful military operations of his predecessors. It is uncertain whether or not he himself engaged in any great war. His records are silent in that connection, but, judging from what we know of him, it may be taken for granted that he was able and fully prepared to give a good account of himself in battle. He certainly took steps to make secure his position, for he caused a strong wall to be erected round Lagash. His inscriptions are eloquent of his piety, which took practical shape, for he repaired and built temples, dedicated offerings to deities, and increased the wealth of religious bodies and the prosperity of the State by cutting canals and developing agriculture. In addition to serving local deities, he also gave practical recognition to Ea at Eridu and Enlil at Nippur. He, however, overlooked Anu at Erech, a fact which suggests that he held sway over Eridu and

 

Click to enlarge
PLAQUE OF UR-NINA
 In Limestone. From the original in the Louvre, Paris.

(See pages <page 117>, <page 118>)

 

[p. 117]

[paragraph continues] Nippur, but had to recognize Erech as an independent city state.

Among the deities of Lagash, Ur-Nina favoured most the goddess Nina, whose name he bore. As she was a water deity, and perhaps identical with Belit-sheri, sister of "Tammuz of the Abyss" and daughter of Ea, one of the canals was dedicated to her. She was also honoured with a new temple, in which was probably placed her great statue, constructed by special order of her royal worshipper. Like the Egyptian goddess, the "Mother of Mendes", Nina received offerings of fish, not only as a patroness of fishermen, but also as a corn spirit and a goddess of maternity. She was in time identified with Ishtar.

A famous limestone plaque, which is preserved in the Louvre, Paris, depicts on its upper half the pious King Ur-Nina engaged in the ceremony of laying the foundations of a temple dedicated either to the goddess Nina or to the god Nin-Girsu. His face and scalp are clean shaven, and he has a prominent nose and firm mouth, eloquent of decision. The folds of neck and jaw suggest Bismarckian traits. He is bare to the waist, and wears a pleated kilt, with three flounces, which reaches almost to his ankles. On his long head he has poised deftly a woven basket containing the clay with which he is to make the first brick. In front of him stand five figures. The foremost is honoured by being sculptured larger than the others, except the prominent monarch. Apparently this is a royal princess, for her head is unshaven, and her shoulder dress or long hair drops over one of her arms. Her name is Lida, and the conspicuous part she took in the ceremony suggests that she was the representative of the goddess Nina. She is accompanied by her brothers, and at least one official, Anita, the cup-bearer, or high

[p. 118]

priest. The concluding part of this ceremony, or another ceremonial act, is illustrated on the lower part of the plaque. Ur-Nina is seated on his throne, not, as would seem at first sight, raising the wine cup to his lips and toasting to the success of the work, but pouring out a libation upon the ground. The princess is not present; the place of honour next to the king is taken by the crown prince. Possibly in this case it is the god Nin-Girsu who is being honoured. Three male figures, perhaps royal sons, accompany the prominent crown prince. The cup-bearer is in attendance behind the throne.

The inscription on this plaque, which is pierced in the centre so as to be nailed to a sacred shrine, refers to the temples erected by Ur-Nina, including those of Nina and Nin-Girsu.

After Ur-Nina's prosperous reign came to a close, his son Akurgal ascended the throne. He had trouble with Umma, a powerful city, which lay to the north-west of Lagash, between the Shatt-el-Kai and Shatt-el-Hai canals. An army of raiders invaded his territory and had to be driven back.

The next king, whose name was Eannatum, had Napoleonic characteristics. He was a military genius with great ambitions, and was successful in establishing by conquest a small but brilliant empire. Like his grandfather, he strengthened the fortifications of Lagash; then he engaged in a series of successful campaigns. Umma had been causing anxiety in Lagash, but Eannatum stormed and captured that rival city, appropriated one of its fertile plains, and imposed an annual tribute to be paid in kind. An army of Elamites swept down from the hills, but Ur-Nina's grandson inflicted upon these bold foreigners a crushing defeat and pursued them over the frontier. Several cities were afterwards forced to

[p. 119]

come under the sway of triumphant Lagash, including Erech and Ur, and as his suzerainty was already acknowledged at Eridu, Eannatum's power in Sumeria became as supreme as it was firmly established.

Evidently Zuzu, king of the northern city of Opis, considered that the occasion was opportune to overcome the powerful Sumerian conqueror, and at the same time establish Semitic rule over the subdued and war-wasted cities. He marched south with a large army, but the tireless and ever-watchful Eannatum hastened to the fray, scattered the forces of Opis, and captured the foolhardy Zuzu.

Eannatum's activities, however, were not confined to battlefields. At Lagash he carried out great improvements in the interests of agriculture; he constructed a large reservoir and developed the canal system. He also extended and repaired existing temples in his native city and at Erech. Being a patron of the arts, he encouraged sculpture work, and the finest Sumerian examples belong to his reign.

Eannatum was succeeded by his brother, Enannatum I. Apparently the new monarch did not share the military qualities of his royal predecessor, for there were signs of unrest in the loose confederacy of states. Indeed, Umma revolted. From that city an army marched forth and took forcible possession of the plain which Eannatum had appropriated, removing and breaking the landmarks, and otherwise challenging the supremacy of the sovran state. A Lagash force defeated the men of Umma, but appears to have done little more than hold in check their aggressive tendencies.

No sooner had Entemena, the next king, ascended the throne than the flame of revolt burst forth again. The Patesi of Umma, was evidently determined to free, once

[p. 120]

and for all, his native state from the yoke of Lagash. But he had gravely miscalculated the strength of the vigorous young ruler. Entemena inflicted upon the rebels a crushing defeat, and following up his success, entered the walled city and captured and slew the patesi. Then he took steps to stamp out the embers of revolt in Umma by appointing as its governor one of his own officials, named Ili, who was duly installed with great ceremony. Other military successes followed, including the sacking of Opis and Kish, which assured the supremacy of Lagash for many years. Entemena, with characteristic vigour, engaged himself during periods of peace in strengthening his city fortifications and in continuing the work of improving and developing the irrigation system. He lived in the golden age of Sumerian art, and to his reign belongs the exquisite silver vase of Lagash, which was taken from the Tello mound, and is now in the Louvre. This votive offering was placed by the king in the temple of Nin-Girsu. It is exquisitely shaped, and has a base of copper. The symbolic decorations include the lion-headed eagle, which was probably a form of the spring god of war and fertility, the lion, beloved by the Mother goddess, and deer and ibexes, which recall the mountain herds of Astarte. In the dedicatory inscription the king is referred to as a patesi, and the fact that the name of the high priest, Dudu, is given may be taken as an indication of the growing power of an aggressive priesthood. After a brilliant reign of twenty-nine years the king died, and was succeeded by his son, Enannatum II, who was the last ruler of Ur-Nina's line. An obscure period ensued. Apparently there had been a city revolt, which may have given the enemies of Lagash the desired opportunity to gather strength for the coming conflict. There is a reference to

 

Click to enlarge
SILVER VASE DEDICATED TO THE GOD NIN-GIRSU BY ENTEMENA

The finest example extant of Sumerian metal work. (See page <page 120>)

Reproduced by permission from "Decouvertes en Chaldee" (E. Leroux, Paris)

 

[p. 121]

an Elamite raid which, although repulsed, may be regarded as proof of disturbed political conditions.

One or two priests sat on the throne of Lagash in brief succession, and then arose to power the famous Urukagina, the first reformer in history. He began to rule as patesi, but afterwards styled himself king. What appears certain is that he was the leader of a great social upheaval, which received the support of a section of the priesthood, for he recorded that his elevation was due to the intercession of the god Nin-Girsu. Other deities, who were sons and daughters of Nin-Girsu and Nina, had been given recognition by his predecessors, and it is possible that the orthodox section of Lagash, and especially the agricultural classes, supported the new ruler in sweeping away innovations to which they were hostile.

Like Khufu and his descendants, the Pyramid kings of Egypt's fourth dynasty, the vigorous and efficient monarchs of the Ur-Nina dynasty of Lagash were apparently remembered and execrated as tyrants and oppressors of the people. To maintain many endowed temples and a standing army the traders and agriculturists had been heavily taxed. Each successive monarch who undertook public works on a large scale for the purpose of extending and developing the area under cultivation, appears to have done so mainly to increase the revenue of the exchequer, so as to conserve the strength of the city and secure its pre-eminence as a metropolis. A leisured class had come into existence, with the result that culture was fostered and civilization advanced. Lagash seems to have been intensely modern in character prior to 2800 B.C., but with the passing of the old order of things there arose grave social problems which never appear to have been seriously dealt with. All indications

[p. 122]

of social unrest were, it would appear, severely repressed by the iron-gloved monarchs of Ur-Nina's dynasty.

The people as a whole groaned under an ever-increasing burden of taxation. Sumeria was overrun by an army of officials who were notoriously corrupt; they do not appear to have been held in check, as in Egypt, by royal auditors. "In the domain of Nin-Girsu", one of Urukagina's tablets sets forth, "there were tax gatherers down to the sea." They not only attended to the needs of the exchequer, but enriched themselves by sheer robbery, while the priests followed their example by doubling their fees and appropriating temple offerings to their own use. The splendid organization of Lagash was crippled by the dishonesty of those who should have been its main support.

Reforms were necessary and perhaps overdue, but, unfortunately for Lagash, Urukagina's zeal for the people's cause amounted to fanaticism. Instead of gradually re-adjusting the machinery of government so as to secure equality of treatment without impairing its efficiency as a defensive force in these perilous times, he inaugurated sweeping and revolutionary social changes of far-reaching character regardless of consequences. Taxes and temple fees were cut down, and the number of officials reduced to a minimum. Society was thoroughly disorganized. The army, which was recruited mainly from the leisured and official classes, went practically out of existence, so that traders and agriculturists obtained relief from taxation at the expense of their material security.

Urukagina's motives were undoubtedly above reproach, and he showed an example to all who occupied positions of trust by living an upright life and denying himself luxuries. He was disinterestedly pious, and built and restored templed and acted as the steward of his god

[p. 123]

with desire to promote the welfare and comfort of all true worshippers. His laws were similar to those which over two centuries afterwards were codified by Hammurabi, and like that monarch he was professedly the guardian of the weak and the helper of the needy; he sought to establish justice and liberty in the kingdom. But his social Arcadia vanished like a dream because he failed to recognize that Right must be supported by Might.

In bringing about his sudden social revolution, Urukagina had at the same time unwittingly let loose the forces of disorder. Discontented and unemployed officials, and many representatives of the despoiled leisured and military classes of Lagash, no doubt sought refuge elsewhere, and fostered the spirit of revolt which ever smouldered in subject states. At any rate, Umma, remembering the oppressions of other days, was not slow to recognize that the iron hand of Lagash had become unnerved. The zealous and iconoclastic reformer had reigned but seven years when he was called upon to defend his people against the invader. He appears to have been utterly unprepared to do so. The victorious forces of Umma swept against the stately city of Lagash and shattered its power in a single day. Echoes of the great disaster which ensued rise from a pious tablet inscription left by a priest, who was convinced that the conquerors would be called to account for the sins they had committed against the great god Nin-Girsu. He lamented the butchery and robbery which had taken place. We gather from his composition that blood was shed by the raiders of Umma even in the sacred precincts of temples, that statues were shattered, that silver and precious stones were carried away, that granaries were plundered and standing crops destroyed, and that many buildings were set on fire. Amidst these horrors of savagery and vengeance,

[p. 124]

the now tragic figure of the great reformer suddenly vanishes from before our eyes. Perhaps he perished in a burning temple; perhaps he found a nameless grave with the thousands of his subjects whose bodies had lain scattered about the blood-stained streets. With Urukagina the glory of Lagash departed. Although the city was rebuilt in time, and was even made more stately than before, it never again became the metropolis of Sumeria.

The vengeful destroyer of Lagash was Lugal-zaggisi, Patesi of Umma, a masterful figure in early Sumerian history. We gather from the tablet of the unknown scribe, who regarded him as a sinner against the god Nin-Girsu, that his city goddess was named Nidaba. He appears also to have been a worshipper of Enlil of Nippur, to whose influence he credited his military successes. But Enlil was not his highest god, he was the interceder who carried the prayers of Lugal-zaggisi to the beloved father, Anu, god of the sky. No doubt Nin-Girsu represented a school of theology which was associated with unpleasant memories in Umma. The sacking and burning of the temples of Lagash suggests as much.

Having broken the power of Lagash, Lugal-zaggisi directed his attention to the rival city of Kish, where Semitic influence was predominating. When Nanizak, the last monarch of the line of the famous Queen Azag-Bau, had sat upon the throne for but three years, he perished by the sword of the Umma conqueror. Nippur likewise came under his sway, and he also subdued the southern cities.

Lugal-zaggisi chose for his capital ancient Erech, the city of Anu, and of his daughter, the goddess Nana, who afterwards was identified with Ishtar. Anu's spouse was Anatu, and the pair subsequently became abstract deities, like Anshar and Kishar, their parents, who figure in the

[p. 125]

[paragraph continues] Babylonian Creation story. Nana was worshipped as the goddess of vegetation, and her relation to Anu was similar to that of Belit-sheri to Ea at Eridu. Anu and Ea were originally identical, but it would appear that the one was differentiated as the god of the waters above the heaven and the other as god of the waters beneath the earth, both being forms of Anshar. Elsewhere the chief god of the spring sun or the moon, the lover of the goddess, became pre-eminent, displacing the elder god, like Nin-Girsu at Lagash. At Sippar the sun god, Babbar, whose Semitic name was Shamash, was exalted as the chief deity, while the moon god remained supreme at Ur. This specializing process, which was due to local theorizing and the influence of alien settlers, has been dealt with in a previous chapter.

In referring to himself as the favoured ruler of various city deities, Lugal-zaggisi appears as a ruler of all Sumeria. How far his empire extended it is impossible to determine with certainty. He appears to have overrun Akkad, and even penetrated to the Syrian coast, for in one inscription it is stated that he "made straight his path from the Lower Sea (the Persian Gulf) over the Euphrates and Tigris to the Upper Sea (the Mediterranean)". The allegiance of certain states, however, depended on the strength of the central power. One of his successors found it necessary to attack Kish, which was ever waiting for an opportunity to regain its independence.

According to the Chronicle of Kish, the next ruler of Sumer and Akkad after Lugal-zaggisi was the famous Sargon I. It would appear that he was an adventurer or usurper, and that he owed his throne indirectly to Lugal-zaggisi, who had dethroned the ruler of Akkad. Later traditions, which have been partly confirmed by contemporary inscriptions, agree that Sargon was of humble

[p. 126]

birth. In the previous chapter reference was made to the Tammuz-like myth attached to his memory. His mother was a vestal virgin dedicated to the sun god, Shamash, and his father an unknown stranger from the mountains--a suggestion of immediate Semitic affinities. Perhaps Sargon owed his rise to power to the assistance received by bands of settlers from the land of the Amorites, which Lugal-zaggisi had invaded.

According to the legend, Sargon's birth was concealed. He was placed in a vessel which was committed to the river. Brought up by a commoner, he lived in obscurity until the Semitic goddess, Ishtar, gave him her aid.

A similar myth was attached in India to the memory of Karna, the Hector of that great Sanskrit epic the Mahabharata. Karna's mother, the Princess Pritha, who afterwards became a queen, was loved by the sun god, Surya. When in secret she gave birth to her son she placed him in an ark of wickerwork, which was set adrift on a stream. Ultimately it reached the Ganges, and it was borne by that river to the country of Anga, where the child was rescued by a woman and afterwards reared by her and her husband, a charioteer. In time Karna became a great warrior, and was crowned King of Anga by the Kaurava warriors. [*1]

Before he became king, Sargon of Akkad, the Sharrukin of the texts, was, according to tradition, a gardener and watchman attached to the temple of the war god Zamama of Kish. This deity was subsequently identified with Merodach, son of Ea; Ninip, son of Enlil; and Nin-Girsu of Lagash. He was therefore one of the many developed forms of Tammuz--a solar, corn, and military deity, and an interceder for mankind. The goddess of Kish appears to have been a form of Bau, as is

[p. 127]

testified by the name of Queen Azag-Bau, the legendary founder of the city.

Unfortunately our knowledge of Sargon's reign is of meagre character. It is undoubted that he was a distinguished general and able ruler. He built up an empire which included Sumer and Akkad, and also Amurru, "the western land", or "land of the Amorites". The Elamites gave him an opportunity to extend his conquests eastward. They appear to have attacked Opis, but he drove them back, and on more than one occasion penetrated their country, over the western part of which, known as Anshan, he ultimately imposed his rule. Thither went many Semitic settlers who had absorbed the culture of Sumeria.

During Sargon's reign Akkad attained to a splendour which surpassed that of Babylon. In an omen text the monarch is lauded as the "highly exalted one without a peer". Tradition relates that when he was an old man all the Babylonian states rose in revolt against him and besieged Akkad. But the old warrior led forth his army against the combined forces and achieved a shattering victory.

Manishtusu, who succeeded Sargon I, had similarly to subdue a great confederacy of thirty-two city states, and must therefore have been a distinguished general. But he is best known as the monarch who purchased several large estates adjoining subject cities, his aim having been probably to settle on these Semitic allies who would be less liable to rebel against him than the workers they displaced. For the latter, however, he found employment elsewhere. These transactions, which were recorded on a monument subsequently carried off with other spoils by the Elamites and discovered at Susa, show that at this early period (about 2600 B.C.) even a

[p. 128]

conquering monarch considered it advisable to observe existing land laws. Urumush, [*1] the next ruler, also achieved successes in Elam and elsewhere, but his life was cut short by a palace revolution.

The prominent figure of Naram Sin, a later king of Akkad, bulks largely in history and tradition. According to the Chronicle of Kish, he was a son of Sargon. Whether he was or not, it is certain that he inherited the military and administrative genius of that famous ex-gardener. The arts flourished during his reign. One of the memorable products of the period was an exquisitely sculptured monument celebrating one of Naram Sin's victories, which was discovered at Susa. It is one of the most wonderful examples of Babylonian stone work which has come to light.

A successful campaign had been waged against a mountain people. The stele shows the warrior king leading his army up a steep incline and round the base of a great peak surmounted by stars. His enemies flee in confusion before him. One lies on the ground clutching a spear which has penetrated his throat, two are falling over a cliff, while others apparently sue for mercy. Trees have been depicted to show that part of the conquered territory is wooded. Naram Sin is armed with battleaxe and bow, and his helmet is decorated with horns. The whole composition is spirited and finely grouped; and the military bearing of the disciplined troops contrasts sharply with the despairing attitudes of the fleeing remnants of the defending army.

During this period the Semitized mountaineers to the north-east of Babylonia became the most aggressive opponents of the city states. The two most prominent were the Gutium, or men of Kutu, and the Lulubu.

 

Click to enlarge
STELE OF NARAM SIN
 (Louvre, Paris)

 

[p. 129]

Naram Sin's great empire included the whole of Sumer and Akkad, Amurru and northern Palestine, and part of Elam, and the district to the north. He also penetrated Arabia, probably by way of the Persian Gulf, and caused diorite to be quarried there. One of his steles, which is now in the Imperial Ottoman Museum at Constantinople, depicts him as a fully bearded man with Semitic characteristics. During his lifetime he was deified--a clear indication of the introduction of foreign ideas, for the Sumerians were not worshippers of kings and ancestors.

Naram Sin was the last great king of his line. Soon after his death the power of Akkad went to pieces, and the Sumerian city of Erech again became the centre of empire. Its triumph, however, was shortlived. After a quarter of a century had elapsed, Akkad and Sumer were overswept by the fierce Gutium from the north-eastern mountains. They sacked and burned many cities, including Babylon, where the memory of the horrors perpetrated by these invaders endured until the Grecian Age. An obscure period, like the Egyptian Hyksos Age, ensued, but it was of comparatively brief duration.

When the mists cleared away, the city Lagash once more came to the front, having evidently successfully withstood the onslaughts of the Gutium, but it never recovered the place of eminence it occupied under the brilliant Ur-Nina dynasty. It is manifest that it must have enjoyed under the various overlords, during the interval, a considerable degree of independence, for its individuality remained unimpaired. Of all its energetic and capable patesis, the most celebrated was Gudea, who reigned sometime before 2400 B.C. In contrast to the Semitic Naram Sin, he was beardless and pronouncedly Sumerian in aspect. His favoured deity, the city god

[p. 130]

[paragraph continues] Nin-Girsu, again became prominent, having triumphed over his jealous rivals after remaining in obscurity for three or four centuries. Trade flourished, and the arts were fostered. Gudea had himself depicted, in one of the most characteristic sculptures of his age, as an architect, seated reverently with folded hands with a temple plan lying on his knees, and his head uplifted as if watching the builders engaged in materializing the dream of his life. The temple in which his interests were centred was erected in honour of Nin-Girsu. Its ruins suggest that it was of elaborate structure and great beauty. Like Solomon in later days, Gudea procured material for his temple from many distant parts--cedar from Lebanon, marble from Amurru, diorite from Arabia, copper from Elam, and so forth. Apparently the King of Lagash was strong enough or wealthy enough to command respect over a wide area.

Another city which also rose into prominence, amidst the shattered Sumerian states, was Ur, the centre of moon worship. After Gudea's death, its kings exercised sway over Lagash and Nippur, and, farther south, over Erech and Larsa as well. This dynasty endured for nearly a hundred and twenty years, during which Ur flourished like Thebes in Egypt. Its monarchs styled themselves as "Kings of the Four Regions". The worship of Nannar (Sin) became officially recognized at Nippur, the seat of Enlil, during the reign of King Dungi of Ur; while at Erech, the high priest of Anu, the sky god, became the high priest of the moon god. Apparently matriarchal ideas, associated with lunar worship, again came into prominence, for the king appointed two of his daughters to be rulers of conquered states in Elam and Syria. In the latter half of his reign, Dungi, the conqueror, was installed as high priest at Eridu. It

 

Click to enlarge
STATUE OF GUDEA
 (Louvre, Paris)
 Photo. Mansell

 

[p. 131]

would thus appear that there was a renascence of early Sumerian religious ideas. Ea, the god of the deep, had long been overshadowed, but a few years before Dungi's death a temple was erected to him at Nippur, where he was worshipped as Dagan. Until the very close of his reign, which lasted for fifty-eight years, this great monarch of tireless activity waged wars of conquest, built temples and palaces, and developed the natural resources of Sumer and Akkad. Among his many reforms was the introduction of standards of weights, which received divine sanction from the moon god, who, as in Egypt, was the measurer and regulator of human transactions and human life.

To this age also belongs many of the Sumerian business and legal records, which were ultimately carried off to Susa, where they have been recovered by French excavators.

About half a century after Dungi's death the Dynasty of Ur came to an end, its last king having been captured by an Elamite force.

At some time subsequent to this period, Abraham migrated from Ur to the northern city of Harran, where the moon god was also the chief city deity--the Baal, or "lord". It is believed by certain Egyptologists that Abraham sojourned in Egypt during its Twelfth Dynasty, which, according to the Berlin system of minimum dating, extended from about 2000 B.C. till 1780 B.C. The Hebrew patriarch may therefore have been a contemporary of Hammurabi's, who is identified with Amraphel, king of Shinar (Sumer) in the Bible. [*1]

But after the decline of Ur's ascendancy, and long before Babylon's great monarch came to the throne, the centre of power in Sumeria was shifted to Isin, where

[p. 132]

sixteen kings flourished for two and a quarter centuries. Among the royal names, recognition was given to Ea and Dagan, Sin, Enlil, and Ishtar, indicating that Sumerian religion in its Semitized corm was receiving general recognition. The sun god was identical with Ninip and Nin-Girsu, a god of fertility, harvest, and war, but now more fully developed and resembling Babbar, "the shining one", the solar deity of Akkadian Sippar, whose Semitic name was Shamash. As Shamash was ultimately developed as the god of justice and righteousness, it would appear that his ascendancy occurred during the period when well-governed communities systematized their religious beliefs to reflect social conditions.

The first great monarch of the Isin dynasty was Ishbi-Urra, who reigned for thirty-two years. Like his successors, he called himself "King of Sumer and Akkad", and it appears that his sway extended to the city of Sippar, where solar worship prevailed. Traces of him have also been found at Eridu, Ur, Erech, and Nippur, so that he must have given recognition to Ea, Sin, Anu, and Enlil. In this period the early national pantheon may have taken shape, Bel Enlil being the chief deity. Enlil was afterwards displaced by Merodach of Babylon.

Before 2200 B.C. there occurred a break in the supremacy of Isin. Gungunu, King of Ur, combined with Larsa, whose sun temple he restored, and declared himself ruler of Sumer and Akkad. But Isin again gathered strength under Ur-Ninip, who was not related to his predecessor. Perhaps he came from Nippur, where the god Ninip was worshipped as the son of Bel Enlil.

According to a Babylonian document, a royal grand-son of Ur-Ninip's, having no direct heir, selected as his successor his gardener, Enlil-bani. He placed the crown on the head of this obscure individual, abdicated in his

[p. 133]

favour, and then died a mysterious death within his palace.

It is highly probable that Enlil-bani, whose name signifies "Enlil is my creator", was a usurper like Sargon of Akkad, and he may have similarly circulated a myth regarding his miraculous origin to justify his sudden rise to power. The truth appears to be that he came to the throne as the leader of a palace revolution at a time of great unrest. But he was not allowed to remain in undisputed possession. A rival named Sin-ikisha, evidently a moon worshipper and perhaps connected with Ur, displaced the usurper, and proclaimed himself king. After a brief reign of six months he was overthrown, however, by Enlil-bani, who piously credited his triumph over his enemy to the chief god of Nippur, whose name he bore. Although he took steps to secure his position by strengthening the fortifications of Isin, and reigned for about a quarter of a century, he was not succeeded by his heir, if he had one. King Zambia, who was no relation, followed him, but his reign lasted for only three years. The names of the next two kings are unknown. Then came Sin-magir, who was succeeded by Damik-ilishu, the last King of Isin.

Towards the close of Damik-ilishu's reign of twenty-four years he came under the suzerainty of Larsa, whose ruler was Rim Sin. Then Isin was captured by Sin-muballit, King of Babylon, the father of the great Hammurabi. Rim Sin was an Elamite.

Afterwards the old order of things passed away. Babylon became the metropolis, the names of Sumer and Akkad dropped out of use, and the whole country between the rivers was called Babylonia. [*1] The various systems of

[p. 134]

law which obtained in the different states were then codified by Hammurabi, who appointed governors in all the cities which came under his sway to displace the patesis and kings. A new national pantheon of representative character was also formed, over which Merodach (Marduk), the city god of Babylon, presided. How this younger deity was supposed to rise to power is related in the Babylonian legend of Creation, which is dealt with in the [*next chapter]. [*1] In framing this myth from the fragments of older myths, divine sanction was given to the supremacy achieved by Merodach's city. The allegiance of future generations was thus secured, not only by the strong arm of the law, but also by the combined influence of the reorganized priesthoods at the various centres of administration.

An interesting problem, which should be referred to here, arises in connection with the sculptured representations of deities before and after the rise of Akkad as a great Power. It is found, although the Sumerians shaved their scalps and faces at the dawn of the historical age, that they worshipped gods who had long hair and also beards, which were sometimes square and sometimes pointed.

At what period the Sumerian deities were given human shape it is impossible to determine. As has been shown ([*Chapters II] and [*III]) all the chief gods and goddesses had animal forms and composite monster forms before they became anthropomorphic deities. Ea had evidently a fish shape ere he was clad in the skin of a fish, as an Egyptian god was simply a bull before he was depicted in human shape wearing a bull's skin. The archaic Sumerian animal and composite monster gods of animistic

[p. 135]

and totemic origin survived after the anthropomorphic period as mythical figures, which were used for decorative or magical purposes and as symbols. A form of divine headdress was a cap enclosed in horns, between which appeared the soaring lion-headed eagle, which symbolized Nin-Girsu. This god had also lion and antelope forms, which probably figured in lost myths--perhaps they were like the animals loved by Ishtar and referred to in the Gilgamesh epic. Similarly the winged bull was associated with the moon god Nannar, or Sin, of Ur, who was "a horned steer". On various cylinder seals appear groups of composite monsters and rearing wild beasts, which were evidently representations of gods and demons in conflict.

Suggestive data for comparative study is afforded in this connection by ancient Egypt. Sokar, the primitive Memphite deity, retained until the end his animal and composite monster forms. Other gods were depicted with human bodies and the heads of birds, serpents, and crocodiles, thus forming links between the archaic demoniac and the later anthropomorphic deities. A Sumerian example is the deified Ea-bani, who, like Pan, has the legs and hoofs of a goat.

The earliest representations of Sumerian humanized deities appear on reliefs from Tello, the site of Lagash. These examples of archaic gods, however, are not bearded in Semitic fashion. On the contrary, their lips and cheeks are shaved, while an exaggerated chin tuft is retained. The explanation suggested is that the Sumerians gave their deities human shape before they themselves were clean shaven, and that the retention of the characteristic facial hair growth of the Mediterranean Race is another example of the conservatism of the religious instinct. In Egypt the clean-shaven Pharaohs, who represented gods, wore false chin-tuft beards; even Queen

[p. 136]

[paragraph continues] Hatshepsut considered it necessary to assume a beard on state occasions. Ptah-Osiris retained his archaic beard until the Ptolemaic period.

It seems highly probable that in similarly depicting their gods with beards, the early Sumerians were not influenced by the practices of any alien people or peoples. Not until the period of Gudea, the Patesi of Lagash, did they give their gods heavy moustaches, side whiskers, and flowing beards of Semitic type. It may be, however, that by then they had completely forgotten the significance of an ancient custom. Possibly, too, the sculptors of Lagash were working under the influence of the Akkadian school of art, which had produced the exquisite stele of victory for Naram-Sin, and consequently adopted the conventional Semitic treatment of bearded figures. At any rate, they were more likely to study and follow the artistic triumphs of Akkad than the crude productions of the archaic period. Besides, they lived in an age when Semitic kings were deified and the Semitic overlords had attained to great distinction and influence.

The Semitic folks were not so highly thought of in the early Sumerian period. It is not likely that the agricultural people regarded as models of gods the plunderers who descended from the hills, and, after achieving successes, returned home with their spoils. More probably they regarded them as "foreign devils". Other Semites, however, who came as traders, bringing wood, stone, and especially copper, and formed communities in cities, may well have influenced Sumerian religious thought. The god Ramman, for instance, who was given recognition all through Babylonia, was a god of hill folks as far north as Asia Minor and throughout Syria. He may have been introduced by settlers who adopted Sumerian

[p. 137]

habits of life and shaved scalp and face. But although the old cities could never have existed in a complete state of isolation from the outer world, it is unlikely that their inhabitants modelled their deities on those worshipped by groups of aliens. A severe strain is imposed on our credulity if we are expected to believe that it was due to the teachings and example of uncultured nomads that the highly civilized Sumerians developed their gods from composite monsters to anthropomorphic deities. Such a supposition, at any rate, is not supported by the evidence of Ancient Egypt.

Footnotes

^111:1 Nehemiah, i, 1

^111:2 Esther, i, 6.

^114:1 Isaiah, iii, 19-22.

^126:1 Indian Myth and Legend, pp. 173-175 and 192-194.

^128:1 Or Rimush.

^131:1 Genesis, xiv.

^133:1 That is, the equivalent of Babylonia. During the Kassite period the name was Karduniash.

^134:1 The narrative follows The Seven Tablets of Creation and other fragments, while the account given by Berosus is also drawn upon.

     
Myths of Babylonia and Assyria, by Donald A. MacKenzie, [1915], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 138] [ch-07]

  

CHAPTER VII

  

Creation Legend: Merodach the Dragon Slayer

Elder Spirits of the Primordial Deep--Apsu and the Tiamat Dragon--Plot to Destroy the Beneficent Gods--Ea overcomes Apsu and Mummu--The Vengeful Preparations of the Dragon--Anshar's Appeal to Merodach--The Festival of the High Gods--Merodach exalted as Ruler of the Universe--Dragon slain and Host taken captive--Merodach rearranges the Pantheon-. Creation of Man--Merodach as Asari--The Babylonian Osiris--The Chief Purpose of Mankind--Tiamat as Source of Good and Evil--The Dragon as the Serpent or Worm--Folk Tale aspect of Creation Myth--British Neolithic Legends--German and Egyptian Contracts--Biblical references to Dragons--The Father and Son theme--Merodach and Tammuz--Monotheistic Tendency--Bi-sexual Deities.

IN the beginning the whole universe was a sea. Heaven on high had not been named, nor the earth beneath. Their begetter was Apsu, the father of the primordial Deep, and their mother was Tiamat, the spirit of Chaos. No plain was yet formed, no marsh could be seen; the gods had no existence, nor had their fates been determined. Then there was a movement in the waters, and the deities issued forth. The first who had being were the god Lachmu and the goddess Lachamu. Long ages went past. Then were created the god Anshar and the goddess Kishar. When the days of these deities had increased and extended, they were followed by Anu, god of the sky, whose consort was Anatu; and Ea, most wise and all-powerful, who was without an equal. Now Ea, god of the deep, was also Enki, "lord of earth", and

 

Click to enlarge
''THE SEVEN TABLETS OF CREATION''
 From the Library of Ashur-bani-pal at Kouyunjik (Nineveh): now in the British Museum.

 

[p. 139]

his eternal spouse, Damkina, was Gashan-ki, "lady of earth". The son of Ea and Damkina was Bel, the lord, who in time created mankind. [*1] Thus were the high gods established in power and in glory.

Now Apsu and Tiamat remained amidst confusion in the deeps of chaos. They were troubled because their offspring, the high gods, aspired to control the universe and set it in order. [*2] Apsu was still powerful and fierce, and Tiamat snarled and raised tempests, smiting herself. Their purpose was to work evil amidst eternal confusion.

Then Apsu called upon Mummu, his counsellor, the son who shared his desires, and said, "O Mummu, thou who art pleasing unto me, let us go forth together unto Tiamat and speak with her."

So the two went forth and prostrated themselves before the Chaos Mother to consult with her as to what should be done to prevent the accomplishment of the purpose of the high gods.

Apsu opened his mouth and spake, saying, "O Tiamat, thou gleaming one, the purpose of the gods troubles me. I cannot rest by day nor can I repose by night. I will thwart them and destroy their purpose. I will bring sorrow and mourning so that we may lie down undisturbed by them."

Tiamat heard these words and snarled. She raised angry and roaring tempests; in her furious grief she uttered a curse, and then spake to Apsu, saying, "What shall we do so that their purpose may be thwarted and we may lie down undisturbed again?"

Mummu, the counsellor, addressing Apsu, made answer, and said, "Although the gods are powerful, thou

[p. 140]

canst overcome them; although their purpose is strong, thou canst thwart it. Then thou shalt have rest by day and peace by night to lie down."

The face of Apsu grew bright when he heard these words spoken by Mummu, yet he trembled to think of the purpose of the high gods, to whom he was hostile. With Tiamat he lamented because the gods had changed all things; the plans of the gods filled their hearts with dread; they sorrowed and spake with Mummu, plotting evil.

Then Ea, who knoweth all, drew near; he beheld the evil ones conspiring and muttering together. He uttered a pure incantation and accomplished the downfall of Apsu and Mummu, who were taken captive. [*1]

Kingu, who shared the desires of Tiamat, spake unto her words of counsel, saying, "Apsu and Mummu have been overcome and we cannot repose. Thou shalt be their Avenger, O Tempestuous One."

Tiamat heard the words of this bright and evil god, and made answer, saying, "On my strength thou canst trust. So let war be waged."

Then were the hosts of chaos and the deep gathered together. By day and by night they plotted against the high gods, raging furiously, making ready for battle, fuming and storming and taking no rest.

Mother Chuber, [*2] the creator of all, provided irresistible weapons. She also brought into being eleven kinds of fierce monsters--giant serpents, sharp of tooth with unsparing fangs, whose bodies were filled with poison instead of blood; snarling dragons, clad with terror, and of such lofty stature that whoever saw them was overwhelmed with fear, nor could any escape their attack when they

[p. 141]

lifted themselves up; vipers and pythons, and the Lachamu, hurricane monsters, raging hounds, scorpion men, tempest furies, fish men, and mountain rams. These she armed with fierce weapons and they had no fear of war.

Then Tiamat, whose commands are unchangeable and mighty, exalted Kingu, who had come to her aid, above all the evil gods; she made him the leader to direct the army in battle, to go in front, to open the attack. Robing Kingu in splendour, she seated him on high and spoke, saying:

"I have established thy command over all the gods. Thou shalt rule over them. Be mighty, thou my chosen husband, and let thy name be exalted over all the spirits of heaven and spirits of earth."

Unto Kingu did Tiamat deliver the tablets of fate; she laid them in his bosom, and said, "Thy commands cannot be changed; thy words shall remain firm."

Thus was Kingu exalted; he was vested with the divine power of Anu to decree the fate of the gods, saying, "Let thy mouth open to thwart the fire god; be mighty in battle nor brook resistance."

Then had Ea knowledge of Tiamat's doings, how she had gathered her forces together, and how she had prepared to work evil against the high gods with purpose to avenge Apsu. The wise god was stricken with grief, and he moaned for many days. Thereafter he went and stood before his father, Anshar, and spake, saying, "Our mother, Tiamat, hath turned against us in her wrath. She hath gathered the gods about her, and those thou didst create are with her also."

When Anshar heard all that Ea revealed regarding the preparations made by Tiamat, he smote his loins and clenched his teeth, and was ill at ease. In sorrow and anger he spoke and said, "Thou didst go forth aforetime

[p. 142]

to battle; thou didst bind Mummu and smite Apsu. Now Kingu is exalted, and there is none who can oppose Tiamat." [*1]

Anshar called his son, Anu, before him, and spoke, saying: "O mighty one without fear, whose attack is irresistible, go now before Tiamat and speak so that her anger may subside and her heart be made merciful. But if she will not hearken unto thee, speak thou for me, so that she may be reconciled."

Anu was obedient to the commands of Anshar. He departed, and descended by the path of Tiamat until he beheld her fuming and snarling, but he feared to approach her, and turned back.

Then Ea was sent forth, but he was stricken with terror and turned back also. [*2]

Anshar then called upon Merodach, son of Ea, and addressed him, saying, "My son, who softeneth my heart, thou shalt go forth to battle and none shall stand against thee."

The heart of Merodach was made glad at these words. He stood before Anshar, who kissed him, because that he banished fear. Merodach spake, saying: "O lord of the gods, withdraw not thy words; let me go forth to do as is thy desire. What man hath challenged thee to battle?"

Anshar made answer and said: "No man hath challenged me. It is Tiamat, the woman, who hath resolved to wage war against us. But fear not and make merry, for thou shalt bruise the head of Tiamat. O wise god, thou shalt overcome her with thy pure incantation. Tarry not but hasten forth; she cannot wound thee; thou shalt come back again."

[p. 143]

The words of Anshar delighted the heart of Merodach, who spake, saying: "O lord of the gods, O fate of the high gods, if I, the avenger, am to subdue Tiamat and save all, then proclaim my greatness among the gods. Let all the high gods gather together joyfully in Upshukinaku (the Council Hall), so that my words like thine may remain unchanged, and what I do may never be altered. Instead of thee I will decree the fates of the gods."

Then Anshar called unto his counsellor, Gaga, and addressing him, said: "O thou who dost share my desires, thou who dost understand the purpose of my heart, go unto Lachmu and Lachamu and summon all the high gods to come before me to eat bread and drink wine. Repeat to them all I tell you of Tiamat's preparations for war, of my commands to Anu and Ea, who turned back, fearing the dragon, of my choice of Merodach to be our avenger, and his desire to be equipped with my power to decree fate, so that he may be made strong to combat against our enemy."

As Anshar commanded so did Gaga do. He went unto Lachmu and Lachamu and prostrated himself humbly before them. Then he rose and delivered the message of Anshar, their son, adding: "Hasten and speedily decide for Merodach your fate. Permit him to depart to meet your powerful foe."

When Lachmu and Lachamu heard all that Gaga revealed unto them they uttered lamentations, while the Igigi (heavenly spirits) sorrowed bitterly, and said: "What change hath happened that Tiamat hath become hostile to her own offspring? We cannot understand her deeds."

All the high gods then arose and went unto Anshar. They filled his council chamber and kissed one another.

[p. 144]

[paragraph continues] Then they sat down to eat bread and drink sesame wine. And when they were made drunk and were merry and at their ease, they decreed the fate for Merodach.

In the chamber of Anshar they honoured the Avenger. He was exalted as a prince over them all, and they said: "Among the high gods thou art the highest; thy command is the command of Anu. Henceforth thou wilt have power to raise up and to cast down. None of the gods will dispute thy authority. O Merodach, our avenger, we give thee sovereignty over the entire Universe. Thy weapon will ever be irresistible. Smite down the gods who have raised revolt, but spare the lives of those who repose their trust in thee."

Then the gods laid down a garment before Merodach, saying: "Open thy mouth and speak words of command, so that the garment may be destroyed; speak again and it will be brought back."

Merodach spake with his mouth and the garment vanished; he spake again and the garment was reproduced.

All the gods rejoiced, and they prostrated themselves and cried out, "Merodach is King!"

Thereafter they gave him the sceptre and the throne and the insignia of royalty, and also an irresistible weapon [*1] with which to overcome his enemies, saying: "Now, O Merodach, hasten and slay Tiamat. Let the winds carry her blood to hidden places."

So was the fate of Merodach decreed by the gods; so was a path of prosperity and peace prepared for him. He made ready for battle; he strung his bow and hung his quiver; he slung a dart over his shoulder, and he grasped a club in his right hand; before him he set lightning, and with flaming fire he filled his body. Anu gave unto him

 

Click to enlarge
MERODACH SETS FORTH TO ATTACK TIAMAT
 From the Painting by E. Wallcousins.

 

[p. 145]

a great net with which to snare his enemies and prevent their escape. Then Merodach created seven winds--the wind of evil, the uncontrollable wind, the sandstorm, and the whirlwind, the fourfold wind, the sevenfold wind, and the wind that has no equal--and they went after him. Next he seized his mighty weapon, the thunderstone, and leapt into his storm chariot, to which were yoked four rushing and destructive steeds of rapid flight, with foam-flecked mouths and teeth full of venom, trained for battle, to overthrow enemies and trample them underfoot. A light burned on the head of Merodach, and he was clad in a robe of terror. He drove forth, and the gods, his fathers, followed after him: the high gods clustered around and followed him, hastening to battle.

Merodach drove on, and at length he drew nigh to the secret lair of Tiamat, and he beheld her muttering with Kingu, her consort. For a moment he faltered, and when the gods who followed him beheld this, their eyes were troubled.

Tiamat snarled nor turned her head. She uttered curses, and said: "O Merodach, I fear not thy advance as chief of the gods. My allies are assembled here, and are more powerful than thou art."

Merodach uplifted his arm, grasping the dreaded thunderstone, and spake unto Tiamat, the rebellious one, saying: "Thou hast exalted thyself, and with wrathful heart hath prepared for war against the high gods and their fathers, whom thou dost hate in thy heart of evil. Unto Kingu thou hast given the power of Anu to decree fate, because thou art hostile to what is good and loveth what is sinful. Gather thy forces together, and arm thyself and come forth to battle."

When Tiamat heard these mighty words she raved and cried aloud like one who is possessed; all her limbs

[p. 146]

shook, and she muttered a spell. The gods seized their weapons.

Tiamat and Merodach advanced to combat against one another. They made ready for battle. The lord of the high gods spread out the net which Anu had given him. He snared the dragon and she could not escape. Tiamat opened her mouth which was seven miles wide, and Merodach called upon the evil wind to smite her; he caused the wind to keep her mouth agape so that she could not close it. All the tempests and the hurricanes entered in, filling her body, and her heart grew weak; she gasped, overpowered. Then the lord of the high gods seized his dart and cast it through the lower part of her body; it tore her inward parts and severed her heart. So was Tiamat slain.

Merodach overturned the body of the dead dragon and stood upon it. All the evil gods who had followed her were stricken with terror and broke into flight. But they were unable to escape. Merodach caught them in his great net, and they stumbled and fell uttering cries of distress, and the whole world resounded with their wailing and lamentations. The lord of the high gods broke the weapons of the evil gods and put them in bondage. Then he fell upon the monsters which Tiamat had created; he subdued them, divested them of their powers, and trampled them under his feet. Kingu he seized with the others. From this god great Merodach took the tablets of fate, and impressing upon them his own seal, placed them in his bosom.

So were the enemies of the high gods overthrown by the Avenger. Ansar's commands were fulfilled and the desires of Ea fully accomplished.

Merodach strengthened the bonds which he had laid upon the evil gods and then returned to Tiamat. He

[p. 147]

leapt upon the dragon's body; he clove her skull with his great club; he opened the channels of her blood which streamed forth, and caused the north to carry her blood to hidden places. The high gods, his fathers, clustered around; they raised shouts of triumph and made merry. Then they brought gifts and offerings to the great Avenger.

Merodach rested a while, gazing upon the dead body of the dragon. He divided the flesh of Ku-pu, [*1] and devised a cunning plan.

Then the lord of the high gods split the body of the dragon like that of a mashde fish into two halves. With one half he enveloped the firmament; he fixed it there and set a watchman to prevent the waters falling down. [*2] With the other half he made the earth. [*3] Then he made the abode of Ea in the deep, and the abode of Anu in high heaven. The abode of Enlil was in the air.

Merodach set all the great gods in their several stations. He also created their images, the stars of the Zodiac, and fixed them all. He measured the year and divided it into months; for twelve months he made three stars each. After he had given starry images of the gods separate control of each day of the year, he founded the station of Nibiru (Jupiter), his own star, to determine the limits of all stars, so that none might err or go astray. He placed beside his own the stations of Enlil and Ea, and on each side he opened mighty

[p. 148]

gates, fixing bolts on the left and on the right. He set the zenith in the centre.

Merodach decreed that the moon god should rule the night and measure the days, and each month he was given a crown. Its various phases the great lord determined, and he commanded that on the evening of its fullest brilliancy it should stand opposite the sun. [*1]

He placed his bow in heaven (as a constellation) and his net also.

We have now reached the sixth tablet, which begins with a reference to words spoken to Merodach by the gods. Apparently Ea had conceived in his heart that mankind should be created. The lord of the gods read his thoughts and said: "I will shed my blood and fashion bone . . . I will create man to dwell on the earth so that the gods may be worshipped and shrines erected for them. I will change the pathways of the gods . . .".

The rest of the text is fragmentary, and many lines are missing. Berosus states, however, that Belus (Bel Merodach) severed his head from his shoulders. His blood flowed forth, and the gods mixed it with earth and formed the first man and various animals.

In another version of the creation of man, it is related that Merodach "laid a reed upon the face of the waters; he formed dust, and poured it out beside the reed. . . . That he might cause the gods to dwell in the habitation of their heart's desire, he formed mankind." The goddess Aruru, a deity of Sippar, and one of the forms of "the lady of the gods", is associated with Merodach as the creatrix of the seed of mankind. "The beasts of the field and living creatures in the field he formed."

[p. 149]

[paragraph continues] He also created the Tigris and Euphrates rivers, grass, reeds, herbs and trees, lands, marshes and swamps, cows, goats, &c. [*1]

In the seventh tablet Merodach is praised by the gods--the Igigi (spirits of heaven). As he has absorbed all their attributes, he is addressed by his fifty-one names; henceforth each deity is a form of Merodach. Bel Enlil, for instance, is Merodach of lordship and domination; Sin, the moon god, is Merodach as ruler of night; Shamash is Merodach as god of law and holiness; Nergal is Merodach of war; and so on. The tendency to monotheism appears to have been most marked among the priestly theorists of Babylon.

Merodach is hailed to begin with as Asari, the introducer of agriculture and horticulture, the creator of grain and plants. He also directs the decrees of Anu, Bel, and Ea; but having rescued the gods from destruction at the hands of Kingu and Tiamat, he was greater than his "fathers", the elder gods. He set the Universe in order, and created all things anew. He is therefore Tutu, "the creator", a merciful and beneficent god. The following are renderings of lines 25 to 32:

Tutu: Aga-azaga (the glorious crown) may he make the crowns glorious--
 The lord of the glorious incantation bringing the dead to life;
 He who had mercy on the gods who had been overpowered;
 Made heavy the yoke which he had laid on the gods who were his enemies,
 (And) to redeem(?) them created mankind.
 "The merciful one", "he with whom is salvation",
 May his word be established, and not forgotten,
 In the mouth of the black-headed ones whom his hands have made.
                                              Pinches' Translation. [*2]

[p. 150]

Tutu as Aga-azag may mankind fourthly magnify!
 "The Lord of the Pure Incantation", "the Quickener of the Dead",
 "Who had mercy upon the captive gods",
 "Who removed the yoke from upon the gods his enemies",
 "For their forgiveness did he create mankind",
 "The Merciful One, with whom it is to bestow life!"
 May his deeds endure, may they never be forgotten
 In the mouth of mankind whom his hands have made.
                                               King's Translation. [*1]

Apparently the Babylonian doctrine set forth that mankind was created not only to worship the gods, but also to bring about the redemption of the fallen gods who followed Tiamat.

Those rebel angels (ili, gods) He prohibited return;
 He stopped their service; He removed them unto the gods (ili) who were His enemies.
 In their room he created mankind. [*2]

Tiamat, the chaos dragon, is the Great Mother. She has a dual character. As the origin of good she is the creatrix of the gods. Her beneficent form survived as the Sumerian goddess Bau, who was obviously identical with the Phoenician Baau, mother of the first man. Another name of Bau was Ma, and Nintu, "a form of the goddess Ma", was half a woman and half a serpent, and was depicted with "a babe suckling her breast" ([*Chapter IV]). The Egyptian goddesses Neheb-kau and Uazit were serpents, and the goddesses Isis and Nepthys had also serpent forms. The serpent was a symbol of fertility, and as a mother was a protector. Vishnu, the Preserver of the Hindu Trinity, sleeps on the world-serpent's body. Serpent charms are protective and fertility charms.

[p. 151]

As the origin of evil Tiamat personified the deep and tempests. In this character she was the enemy of order and good, and strove to destroy the world.

                                I have seen
 The ambitious ocean swell and rage and foam
 To be exalted with the threatening clouds. [*1]

Tiamat was the dragon of the sea, and therefore the serpent or leviathan. The word "dragon" is derived from the Greek "drakon", the serpent known as "the seeing one" or "looking one", whose glance was the lightning. The Anglo-Saxon "fire drake" ("draca", Latin "draco") is identical with the "flying dragon".

In various countries the serpent or worm is a destroyer which swallows the dead. "The worm shall eat them like wool", exclaimed Isaiah in symbolic language. [*2] It lies in the ocean which surrounds the world in Egyptian, Babylonian, Greek, Teutonic, Indian, and other mythologies. The Irish call it "moruach", and give it a mermaid form like the Babylonian Nintu. In a Scottish Gaelic poem Tiamat figures as "The Yellow Muilearteach", who is slain by Finn-mac-Coul, assisted by his warrior band.

There was seen coming on the top of the waves
 The crooked, clamouring, shivering brave . . .
 Her face was blue black of the lustre of coal,
 And her bone-tufted tooth was like rusted bone. [*3]

The serpent figures in folk tales. When Alexander the Great, according to Ethiopic legend, was lowered in a glass cage to the depths of the ocean, he saw a great monster going past, and sat for two days "watching for its tail and hinder parts to appear". [*4] An

[p. 152]

[paragraph continues] Argyllshire Highlander had a similar experience. He went to fish one morning on a rock. "He was not long there when he saw the head of an eel pass. He continued fishing for an hour and the eel was still passing. He went home, worked in the field all day, and having returned to the same rock in the evening, the eel was still passing, and about dusk he saw her tail disappearing." [*1] Tiamat's sea-brood is referred to in the Anglo-Saxon epic Beowulf as "pickers". The hero "slew by night sea monsters on the waves" (line 422).

The well dragon--the French "draco"--also recalls the Babylonian water monsters. There was a "dragon well" near Jerusalem. [*2] From China to Ireland rivers are dragons, or goddesses who flee from the well dragons. The demon of the Rhone is called the "drac". Floods are also referred to as dragons, and the Hydra, or water serpent, slain by Hercules, belongs to this category. Water was the source of evil as well as good. To the Sumerians, the ocean especially was the abode of monsters. They looked upon it as did Shakespeare's Ferdinand, when, leaping into the sea, he cried: "Hell is empty and all the devils are here". [*3]

There can be little doubt but that in this Babylonian story of Creation we have a glorified variation of the wide-spread Dragon myth. Unfortunately, however, no trace can be obtained of the pre-existing Sumerian oral version which the theorizing priests infused with such sublime symbolism. No doubt it enjoyed as great popularity as the immemorial legend of Perseus and Andromeda, which the sages of Greece attempted to rationalize, and parts of which the poets made use of and developed as these appealed to their imaginations.

[p. 153]

The lost Sumerian story may be summarized as follows: There existed in the savage wilds, or the ocean, a family of monsters antagonistic to a group of warriors represented in the Creation legend by the gods. Ea, the heroic king, sets forth to combat with the enemies of man, and slays the monster father, Apsu, and his son, Mummu. But the most powerful demon remains to be dealt with. This is the mother Tiamat, who burns to avenge the deaths of her kindred. To wage war against her the hero makes elaborate preparations, and equips himself with special weapons. The queen of monsters cannot be overcome by ordinary means, for she has great cunning, and is less vulnerable than were her husband and son. Although Ea may work spells against her, she is able to thwart him by working counter spells. Only a hand-to-hand combat can decide the fray. Being strongly protected by her scaly hide, she must be wounded either on the under part of her body or through her mouth by a weapon which will pierce her liver, the seat of life. It will be noted in this connection that Merodach achieved success by causing the winds which followed him to distend the monster's jaws, so that he might be able to inflict the fatal blow and prevent her at the same time from uttering spells to weaken him.

This type of story, in which the mother monster is greater and more powerful than her husband or son, is exceedingly common in Scottish folklore. In the legend which relates the adventures of "Finn in the Kingdom of Big Men", the hero goes forth at night to protect his allies against the attacks of devastating sea monsters. Standing on the beach, "he saw the sea advancing in fiery kilns and as a darting serpent. . . . A huge monster came up, and looking down below where he (Finn) was, exclaimed, 'What little speck do I see here?'

[p. 154]

[paragraph continues] Finn, aided by his fairy dog, slew the water monster. On the following night a bigger monster, "the father", came ashore, and he also was slain. But the most powerful enemy had yet to be dealt with. "The next night a Big Hag came ashore, and the tooth in the front of her mouth would make a distaff. 'You killed my husband and son,' she said." Finn acknowledged that he did, and they began to fight. After a prolonged struggle, in which Finn was almost overcome, the Hag fell and her head was cut off. [*1]

The story of "Finlay the Changeling" has similar features. The hero slew first a giant and then the giant's father. Thereafter the Hag came against him and exclaimed, "Although with cunning and deceitfulness you killed my husband last night and my son on the night before last, I shall certainly kill you to-night." A fierce wrestling match ensued on the bare rock. The Hag was ultimately thrown down. She then offered various treasures to ransom her life, including "a gold sword in my cave", regarding which she says, "never was it drawn to man or to beast whom it did not overcome". [*2] In other Scottish stories of like character the hero climbs a tree, and says something to induce the hag to open her mouth, so that he may plunge his weapon down her throat.

The Grendel story in Beowulf, [*3] the Anglo-Saxon epic, is of like character. A male water monster preys nightly upon the warriors who sleep in the great hall of King Hrothgar. Beowulf comes over the sea, as did Finn to the "Kingdom of Big Men", to slay Grendel. He wrestles with this man-eater and mortally wounds him. Great rejoicings ensue, but they have to be brought to an abrupt conclusion, because the mother of Grendel has

[p. 155]

meanwhile resolved "to go a sorry journey and avenge the death of her son".

The narrative sets forth that she enters the Hall in the darkness of night. "Quickly she grasped one of the nobles tight, and then she went towards the fen", towards her submarine cave. Beowulf follows in due course, and, fully armoured, dives through the waters and ultimately enters the monster's lair. In the combat the "water wife" proves to be a more terrible opponent than was her son. Indeed, Beowulf was unable to slay her until he possessed himself of a gigantic sword, "adorned with treasure", which was hanging in the cave. With this magic weapon he slays the mother monster, whose poisonous blood afterwards melts the "damasked blade". Like Finn, he subsequently returns with the head of one of the monsters.

An interesting point about this story is that it does not appear in any form in the North German cycle of Romance. Indeed, the poet who included in his epic the fiery dragon story, which links the hero Beowulf with Sigurd and Siegfried, appears to be doubtful about the mother monster's greatness, as if dealing with unfamiliar material, for he says: "The terror (caused by Grendel's mother) was less by just so much as woman's strength, woman's war terror, is (measured) by fighting men". [*1] Yet, in the narrative which follows the Amazon is proved to be the stronger monster of the two. Traces of the mother monster survive in English folklore, especially in the traditions about the mythical "Long Meg of Westminster", referred to by Ben Jonson in his masque of the "Fortunate Isles":

Westminster Meg,
 With her long leg, [p. 156]
 As long as a crane;
 And feet like a plane,
 With a pair of heels
 As broad as two wheels.

[paragraph continues] Meg has various graves. One is supposed to be marked by a huge stone in the south side of the cloisters of Westminster Abbey; it probably marks the trench in which some plague victims--regarded, perhaps, as victims of Meg--were interred. Meg was also reputed to have been petrified, like certain Greek and Irish giants and giantesses. At Little Salkeld, near Penrith, a stone circle is referred to as "Long Meg and her Daughters". Like "Long Tom", the famous giant, "Mons Meg" gave her name to big guns in early times, all hags and giants having been famous in floating folk tales as throwers of granite boulders, balls of hard clay, quoits, and other gigantic missiles.

The stories about Grendel's mother and Long Meg are similar to those still repeated in the Scottish Highlands. These contrast sharply with characteristic Germanic legends, in which the giant is greater than the giantess, and the dragon is a male, like Fafner, who is slain by Sigurd, and Regin whom Siegfried overcomes. It is probable, therefore, that the British stories of female monsters who were more powerful than their husbands and sons, are of Neolithic and Iberian origin--immemorial relics of the intellectual life of the western branch of the Mediterranean race.

In Egypt the dragon survives in the highly developed mythology of the sun cult of Heliopolis, and, as sun worship is believed to have been imported, and the sun deity is a male, it is not surprising to find that the night demon, Apep, was a personification of Set. This god, who is identical with Sutekh, a Syrian and Asia Minor deity, was

[p. 157]

apparently worshipped by a tribe which was overcome in the course of early tribal struggles in pre-dynastic times. Being an old and discredited god, he became by a familiar process the demon of the conquerors. In the eighteenth dynasty, however, his ancient glory was revived, for the Sutekh of Rameses II figures as the "dragon slayer". [*1] It is in accordance with Mediterranean modes of thought, however, to find that in Egypt there is a great celestial battle heroine. This is the goddess Hathor-Sekhet, the "Eye of Ra". [*2] Similarly in India, the post-Vedic goddess Kali is a destroyer, while as Durga she is a guardian of heroes. [*3] Kali, Durga, and Hathor-Sekhet link with the classical goddesses of war, and also with the Babylonian Ishtar, who, as has been shown, retained the outstanding characteristics of Tiamat, the fierce old "Great Mother" of primitive Sumerian folk religion.

It is possible that in the Babylonian dragon myth the original hero was Ea. As much may be inferred from the symbolic references in the Bible to Jah's victory over the monster of the deep: "Art thou not it that hath cut Rahab and wounded the dragon?" [*4] "Thou brakest the heads of the dragons in the waters; thou brakest the heads of leviathan in pieces, and gayest him to be meat to the people inhabiting the wilderness"; [*5] "He divideth the sea with his power, and by his understanding he smiteth through the proud (Rahab). By his spirit he hath garnished the heavens: his hand hath formed (or pierced) the crooked serpent"; [*6] "Thou hast broken Rahab in pieces as one that is slain: thou hast scattered thine enemies with thy strong arm"; [*7] "In that day the

[p. 158]

[paragraph continues] Lord with his sore and great and strong sword shall punish leviathan the piercing (or stiff) serpent, even leviathan that crooked serpent; and he shall slay the dragon that is in the sea". [*1]

In the Babylonian Creation legend Ea is supplanted as dragon slayer by his son Merodach. Similarly Ninip took the place of his father, Enlil, as the champion of the gods. "In other words," writes Dr. Langdon, "later theology evolved the notion of the son of the earth god, who acquires the attributes of the father, and becomes the god of war. It is he who stood forth against the rebellious monsters of darkness, who would wrest the dominion of the world from the gods who held their conclave on the mountain. The gods offer him the Tablets of Fate; the right to utter decrees is given unto him." This development is "of extreme importance for studying the growth of the idea of father and son, as creative and active principles of the world". [*2] In Indian mythology Indra similarly takes the place of his bolt-throwing father Dyaus, the sky god, who so closely resembles Zeus. Andrew Lang has shown that this myth is of widespread character. [*3] Were the Babylonian theorists guided by the folk-lore clue?

Now Merodach, as the son of Ea whom he consulted and received spells from, was a brother of "Tammuz of the Abyss". It seems that in the great god of Babylon we should recognize one of the many forms of the primeval corn spirit and patriarch--the shepherd youth who was beloved by Ishtar. As the deity of the spring sun, Tammuz slew the winter demons of rain and tempest, so that he was an appropriate spouse for the goddess of harvest and war. Merodach may have been a development of Tammuz in his character as a demon slayer.

[p. 159]

When he was raised to the position of Bel, "the Lord", by the Babylonian conquerors, Merodach supplanted the older Bel--Enlil of Nippur. Now Enlil, who had absorbed all the attributes of rival deities, and become a world god, was the

Lord of the harvest lands . . . lord of the grain fields,

being "lord of the anunnaki", or "earth spirits". As agriculturists in early times went to war so as to secure prisoners who could be sacrificed to feed the corn spirit, Enlil was a god of war and was adored as such:

The haughty, the hostile land thou dost humiliate . . . .
 With thee who ventureth to make war?

[paragraph continues] He was also "the bull of goring horns . . . Enlil the bull", the god of fertility as well as of battle. [*1]

Asari, one of Merodach's names, links him with Osiris, the Egyptian Tammuz, who was supplanted by his son Horus. As the dragon slayer, he recalls, among others, Perseus, the Grecian hero, of whom it was prophesied that he would slay his grandfather. Perseus, like Tammuz and Osiris, was enclosed in a chest which was cast into the sea, to be rescued, however, by a fisher-man on the island of Seriphos. This hero afterwards slew Medusa, one of the three terrible sisters, the Gorgons--a demon group which links with Tiamat. In time, Perseus returned home, and while an athletic contest was in progress, he killed his grandfather with a quoit. There is no evidence, however, to show that the displacement of Enlil by Merodach had any legendary sanction of like character. The god of Babylon absorbed all other deities, apparently for political purposes, and in accordance with the tendency of the thought of the times,

[p. 160]

when raised to supreme rank in the national pantheon; and he was depicted fighting the winged dragon, flapping his own storm wings, and carrying the thunder weapon associated with Ramman.

Merodach's spouse Zer-panitum was significantly called "the lady of the Abyss", a title which connects her with Damkina, the mother, and Belit-sheri, the sister of Tammuz. Damkina was also a sky goddess like Ishtar.

Zer-panitum was no pale reflection of her Celestial husband, but a goddess of sharply defined character with independent powers. Apparently she was identical with Aruru, creatrix of the seed of mankind, who was associated with Merodach when the first man and the first woman were brought into being. Originally she was one of the mothers in the primitive spirit group, and so identical with Ishtar and the other prominent goddesses.

As all goddesses became forms of Ishtar, so did all gods become forms of Merodach. Sin was "Merodach as illuminator of night", Nergal was Merodach of war", Addu (Ramman) was "Merodach of rain", and so on. A colophon which contains a text in which these identifications are detailed, appears to be "a copy", says Professor Pinches, "of an old inscription", which, he thinks, "may go back as far as 2000 B.C. This is the period at which the name Yaum-ilu, 'Jah is god', is found, together with references to ilu as the name for the one great god, and is also, roughly, the date of Abraham, who, it may be noted, was a Babylonian of Ur of the Chaldees." [*1]

In one of the hymns Merodach is addressed as follows:

[p. 161]

Who shall escape from before thy power?
 Thy will is an eternal mystery!
 Thou makest it plain in heaven
 And in the earth.
 Command the sea
 And the sea obeyeth thee.
 Command the tempest
 And the tempest becometh a calm.
 Command the winding course
 Of the Euphrates,
 And the will of Merodach
 Shall arrest the floods.
 Lord, thou art holy!
 Who is like unto thee?
 Merodach thou art honoured
 Among the gods that bear a name.

The monotheistic tendency, which was a marked feature of Merodach worship, had previously become pronounced in the worship of Bel Enlil of Nippur. Although it did not affect the religion of the masses, it serves to show that among the ancient scholars and thinkers of Babylonia religious thought had, at an early period, risen far above the crude polytheism of those who bargained with their deities and propitiated them with offerings and extravagant flattery, or exercised over them a magical influence by the performance of seasonal ceremonies, like the backsliders in Jerusalem, censured so severely by Jeremiah, who baked cakes to reward the Queen of Heaven for an abundant harvest, and wept with her for the slain Tammuz when he departed to Hades.

Perhaps it was due to the monotheistic tendency, if not to the fusion of father-worshipping and mother-worshipping peoples, that bi-sexual deities were conceived of. Nannar, the moon god, was sometimes addressed as

[p. 162]

father and mother in one, and Ishtar as a god as well as a goddess. In Egypt Isis is referred to in a temple chant as "the woman who was made a male by her father Osiris", and the Nile god Hapi was depicted as a man with female breasts.

Footnotes

^139:1 The elder Bel was Enlil of Nippur and the younger Merodach of Babylon. According to Damascius the elder Bel came into existence before Ea, who as Enki shared his attributes.

^139:2 This is the inference drawn from fragmentary texts.

^140:1 A large portion of the narrative is awanting here.

^140:2 A title of Tiamat; pron. ch guttural,

^142:1 There is another gap here which interrupts the narrative.

^142:2 This may refer to Ea's first visit when he overcame Kingu, but did not attack Tiamat.

^144:1 The lightning trident or thunderstone.

^147:1 The authorities are not agreed as to the meaning of "Ku-pu". Jensen suggests "trunk, body". In European dragon stories the heroes of the Siegfried order roast and eat the dragon's heart. Then they are inspired with the dragon's wisdom and cunning. Sigurd and Siegfried immediately acquire the language of birds. The birds are the "Fates", and direct the heroes what next they should do. Apparently Merodach's "cunning plan" was inspired after he had eaten a part of the body of Tiamat.

^147:2 The waters above the firmament.

^147:3 According to Berosus.

^148:1 This portion is fragmentary and seems to indicate that the Babylonians had made considerable progress in the science of astronomy. It is suggested that they knew that the moon derived its light from the sun.

^149:1 The Seven Tablets of Creation, L. W. King, pp. 134, 135.

^149:2 The Religion of Babylonia and Assyria, T. G. Pinches, p. 43.

^150:1 The Seven Tablets of Creation, L. W. King, vol. i, pp. 98, 99.

^150:2 Trans. Soc. Bib. Arch., iv, 251-2.

^151:1 Shakespeare's Julius Caesar, i, 3, 8.

^151:2 Isaiah, li, 8.

^151:3 Campbell's West Highland Tales, pp. 136 et seq.

^151:4 The Life and Exploits of Alexander the Great, E. A. Wallis Budge, pp. 284, 285.

^152:1 Campbell's West Highland Tales.

^152:2 Nehemiah, ii, 13.

^152:3 The Tempest, i, 2, 212,

^154:1 Waifs and Strays of Celtic Tradition, vol. iv, p. 176 et seq.

^154:2 From unpublished folk tale.

^154:3 Beowulf, translated by Clark Hall, London, 1911, p. 18 et seq.

^155:1 Beowulf; translated by Clark Hall, London, 1911, p. 69, lines 1280-1287.

^157:1 Egyptian Myth and Legend, pp. 260, 261.

^157:2 Egyptian Myth and Legend, pp. 8, 9.

^157:3 Indian Myth and Legend, pp. xli, 149, 150.

^157:4 Isaiah, li, 9.

^157:5 Psalms, lxxiv, 13, 14. It will be noted that the Semitic dragon, like the Egyptian, is a male.

^157:6 Job, xxvi, 12, 13.

^157:7 Psalms, lxxxix, 10.

^158:1 Isaiah, xxvii, 1.

^158:2 Sumerian and Babylonian Psalms, p. 204.

^158:3 Custom and Myth, pp. 45 et seq.

^159:1 Translation by Dr. Langdon, pp. 199 et seq.

^160:1 The Religion of Babylonia and Assyria, T. G. Pinches, pp. 118, 119.

     
Myths of Babylonia and Assyria, by Donald A. MacKenzie, [1915], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 163] [ch-08]

  

CHAPTER VIII

  

Deified Heroes: Etana and Gilgamesh

God and Heroes and the "Seven Sleepers"--Quests of Etana, Gilgamesh, Hercules, &c.--The Plant of Birth--Eagle carries Etana to Heaven--Indian Parallel--Flights of Nimrod, Alexander the Great, and a Gaelic Hero--Eagle as a God--Indian Eagle identified with Gods of Creation, Fire, Fertility, and Death--Eagle carries Roman Emperor's Soul to Heaven--Fire and Agricultural Ceremonies--Nimrod of the Koran and John Barleycorn--Gilgamesh and the Eagle--Sargon-Tammuz Garden Myth--Ea-bani compared to Pan, Bast, and Nebuchadnezzar--Exploits of Gilgamesh and Ea-bani--Ishtar's Vengeance--Gilgamesh journeys to Otherworld--Song of Sea Maiden and "Lay of the Harper"--Babylonian Noah and the Plant of Life--Teutonic Parallels--Alexander the Great as Gilgamesh--Water of Life in the Koran--The Indian Gilgamesh and Hercules--The Mountain Tunnel in various Mythologies--Widespread Cultural Influences.

ONE of the oldest forms of folk stories relates to the wanderings of a hero in distant regions. He may set forth in search of a fair lady who has been taken captive, or to obtain a magic herb or stone to relieve a sufferer, to cure diseases, and to prolong life. Invariably he is a slayer of dragons and other monsters. A friendly spirit, or a group of spirits, may assist the hero, who acts according to the advice given him by a "wise woman", a magician, or a god. The spirits are usually wild beasts or birds--the "fates" of immemorial folk belief--and they may either carry the hero on their backs, instruct him from time to time, or come to his aid when called upon.

When a great national hero appealed by reason of his achievements to the imagination of a people, all the

[p. 164]

floating legends of antiquity were attached to his memory, and he became identified with gods and giants and knight-errants "old in story". In Scotland, for instance, the boulder-throwing giant of Eildon hills bears the name of Wallace, the Edinburgh giant of Arthur's Seat is called after an ancient Celtic king, [*1] and Thomas the Rhymer takes the place, in an Inverness fairy mound called Tom-na-hurich, of Finn (Fingal) as chief of the "Seven Sleepers". Similarly Napoleon sleeps in France and Skobeleff in Russia, as do also other heroes elsewhere. In Germany the myths of Thunor (Thor) were mingled with hazy traditions of Theodoric the Goth (Dietrich), while in Greece, Egypt, and Arabia, Alexander the Great absorbed a mass of legendary matter of great antiquity, and displaced in the memories of the people the heroes of other Ages, as those heroes had previously displaced the humanized spirits of fertility and growth who alternately battled fiercely against the demons of spring, made love, gorged and drank deep and went to sleep--the sleep of winter. Certain folk tales, and the folk beliefs on which they were based, seem to have been of hoary antiquity before the close of the Late Stone Age.

There are two great heroes of Babylonian fame who link with Perseus and Hercules, Sigurd and Siegfried, Dietrich and Finn-mac-Coul. These are Etana and Gilgamesh, two legendary kings who resemble Tammuz the Patriarch referred to by Berosus, a form of Tammuz the Sleeper of the Sumerian psalms. One journeys to the Nether World to obtain the Plant of Birth and the other to obtain the Plant of Life. The floating legends with which they were associated were utilized

[p. 165]

and developed by the priests, when engaged in the process of systematizing and symbolizing religious beliefs, with purpose to unfold the secrets of creation and the Otherworld.

Etana secures the assistance of a giant eagle who is an enemy of serpents like the Indian Garuda, half giant, half eagle. As Vishnu, the Indian god, rides on the back of Garuda, so does Etana ride on the back of the Babylonian Eagle. In one fragmentary legend which was preserved in the tablet-library of Ashur-banipal, the Assyrian monarch, Etana obtained the assistance of the Eagle to go in quest of the Plant of Birth. His wife was about to become a mother, and was accordingly in need of magical aid. A similar belief caused birth girdles of straw or serpent skins, and eagle stones found in eagles' nests, to be used in ancient Britain and elsewhere throughout Europe apparently from the earliest times. [*1]

On this or another occasion Etana desired to ascend to highest heaven. He asked the Eagle to assist him, and the bird assented, saying: "Be glad, my friend. Let me bear thee to the highest heaven. Lay thy breast on mine and thine arms on my wings, and let my body be as thy body." Etana did as the great bird requested him, and together they ascended towards the firmament. After a flight which extended over two hours, the Eagle asked Etana to gaze downwards. He did so, and beheld the ocean surrounding the earth, and the earth seemed like a mountainous island. The Eagle resumed its flight, and when another two hours had elapsed, it again asked Etana to look downwards. Then the hero saw that the sea resembled a girdle which clasped the land. Two hours later Etana found that he had been raised to a height

[p. 166]

from which the sea appeared to be no larger than a pond. By this time he had reached the heaven of Anu, Bel, and Ea, and found there rest and shelter.

Here the text becomes fragmentary. Further on it is gathered from the narrative that Etana is being carried still higher by the Eagle towards the heaven of Ishtar, "Queen of Heaven", the supreme mother goddess. Three times, at intervals of two hours, the Eagle asks Etana to look downwards towards the shrinking earth. Then some disaster happens, for further onwards the broken tablet narrates that the Eagle is falling. Down and down eagle and man fall together until they strike the earth, and the Eagle's body is shattered.

The Indian Garuda eagle [*1] never met with such a fate, but on one occasion Vishnu overpowered it with his right arm, which was heavier than the whole universe, and caused many feathers to fall off. In the story of Rama's wanderings, however, as told in the Ramyana and the Mahabharata, there are interesting references in this connection to Garuda's two "sons". One was mortally wounded by Ravana, the demon king of Ceylon. The other bird related to Rama, who found it disabled: "Once upon a time we two (brothers), with the desire of out-stripping each other, flew towards the sun. My wings were burnt, but those of my brother were not. . . . I fell down on the top of this great mountain, where I still am." [*2]

Another version of the Etana story survives among the Arabian Moslems. In the "Al Fatihat" chapter of the Koran it is related that a Babylonian king held a dispute with Abraham "concerning his Lord". Commentators

[p. 167]

identify the monarch with Nimrod, who afterwards caused the Hebrew patriarch to be cast into a fire from which he had miraculous deliverance. Nimrod then built a tower so as to ascend to heaven "to see Abraham's god", and make war against Him, but the tower was overthrown. He, however, persisted in his design. The narrative states that he was "carried to heaven in a chest borne by four monstrous birds; but after wandering for some time through the air, he fell down on a mountain with such a force that he made it shake". A reference in the Koran to "contrivances . . . which make mountains tremble" is believed to allude to Nimrod's vain attempt. [*1]

Alexander the Great was also reputed to have ascended on the back of an eagle. Among the myths attached to his memory in the Ethiopic "history" is one which explains how "he knew and comprehended the length and breadth of the earth", and how he obtained knowledge regarding the seas and mountains he would have to cross. "He made himself small and flew through the air on an eagle, and he arrived in the heights of the heavens and he explored them." Another Alexandrian version of the Etana myth resembles the Arabic legend of Nimrod. "In the Country of Darkness" Alexander fed and tamed great birds which were larger than eagles. Then he ordered four of his soldiers to mount them. The men were carried to the "Country of the Living", and when they returned they told Alexander "all that had happened and all that they had seen". [*2]

In a Gaelic story a hero is carried off by a Cromhineach, "a vast bird like an eagle". He tells that it "sprang to the clouds with me, and I was a while that I

[p. 168]

did not know which was heaven or earth for me". The hero died, but, curiously enough, remained conscious of what was happening. Apparently exhausted, the eagle flew to an island in the midst of the ocean. It laid the hero on the sunny side. The hero proceeds: "Sleep came upon herself (the eagle) and she slept. The sun was enlivening me pretty well though I was dead." Afterwards the eagle bathed in a healing well, and as it splashed in the water, drops fell on the hero and he came to life. "I grew stronger and more active", he adds, "than I had ever been before." [*1]

The eagle figures in various mythologies, and appears to have been at one time worshipped as the god or goddess of fertility, and storm and lightning, as the bringer of children, and the deity who carried souls to Hades. It was also the symbol of royalty, because the earthly ruler represented the controlling deity. Nin-Girsu, the god of Lagash, who was identified with Tammuz, was depicted as a lion-headed eagle. Zeus, the Greek sky and air god, was attended by an eagle, and may, at one time, have been simply an eagle. In Egypt the place of the eagle is taken by Nekhebit, the vulture goddess whom the Greeks identified with "Eileithyia, the goddess of birth; she was usually represented as a vulture hovering over the king". [*2]

The double-headed eagle of the Hittites, which figures in the royal arms of Germany and Russia, appears to have symbolized the deity of whom the king was an incarnation or son. In Indian mythology Garuda, the eagle giant, which destroyed serpents like the Babylonian Etana eagle, issued from its egg like a flame of fire; its eyes flashed the lightning and its voice was the thunder. This bird is identified in a hymn with Agni, god of fire, who

[p. 169]

has the attributes of Tammuz and Mithra, with Brahma, the creator, with Indra, god of thunder and fertility, and with Yama, god of the dead, who carries off souls to Hades. It is also called "the steed-necked incarnation of Vishnu", the "Preserver" of the Hindu trinity who rode on its back. The hymn referred to lauds Garuda as "the bird of life, the presiding spirit of the animate and inanimate universe . . . destroyer of all, creator of all". It burns all "as the sun in his anger burneth all creatures". [*1]

Birds were not only fates, from whose movements in flight omens were drawn, but also spirits of fertility. When the childless Indian sage Mandapala of the Mahabharata was refused admittance to heaven until a son was born to him, he "pondered deeply" and "came to know that of all creatures birds alone were blest with fecundity"; so he became a bird.

It is of interest, therefore, to find the Etana eagle figuring as a symbol of royalty at Rome. The deified Roman Emperor's waxen image was burned on a pyre after his death, and an eagle was let loose from the great pile to carry his soul to heaven. [*2] This custom was probably a relic of seasonal fire worship, which may have been introduced into Northern and Western Syria and Asia Minor by the mysterious Mitanni rulers, if it was not an archaic Babylonian custom [*3] associated with fire-and-water magical ceremonies, represented in the British Isles by May-Day and Midsummer fire-and-water festivals. Sandan, the mythical founder of Tarsus, was honoured

[p. 170]

each year at that city by burning a great bonfire, and he was identified with Hercules. Probably he was a form of Moloch and Melkarth. [*1] Doves were burned to Adonis. The burning of straw figures, representing gods of fertility, on May-Day bonfires may have been a fertility rite, and perhaps explains the use of straw birth-girdles.

According to the commentators of the Koran, Nimrod, the Babylonian king, who cast victims in his annual bon-fires at Cuthah, died on the eighth day of the Tammuz month, which, according to the Syrian calendar, fell on 13th July. [*2] It is related that gnats entered Nimrod's brain, causing the membrane to grow larger. He suffered great pain, and to relieve it had his head beaten with a mallet. Although he lived for several hundred years, like other agricultural patriarchs, including the Tammuz of Berosus, it is possible that he was ultimately sacrificed and burned. The beating of Nimrod recalls the beating of the corn spirit of the agricultural legend utilized by Burns in his ballad of "John Barleycorn", which gives a jocular account of widespread ancient customs that are not yet quite extinct even in Scotland: [*3]

They laid him down upon his back
   And cudgelled him full sore;
 They hung him up before a storm
   And turned him o'er and o'er.

They filled up a darksome pit
   With water to the brim,
 They heaved in John Barleycorn--
   There let him sink or swim. [p. 171]

They wasted o'er a scorching flame
   The marrow of his bones,
 But the miller used him worst of all,
   For he crushed him between two stones. 

Hercules, after performing many mythical exploits, had himself burned alive on the pyre which he built upon Mount Oeta, and was borne to Olympus amidst peals of thunder.

Gilgamesh, the Babylonian Hercules, who links with Etana, Nimrod, and Sandan, is associated with the eagle, which in India, as has been shown, was identified with the gods of fertility, fire, and death. According to a legend related by Aelian, [*1] "the guards of the citadel of Babylon threw down to the ground a child who had been conceived and brought forth in secret, and who afterwards became known as Gilgamos". This appears to be another version of the Sargon-Tammuz myth, and may also refer to the sacrifice of children to Melkarth and Moloch, who were burned or slain "in the valleys under the clifts of the rocks" [*2] to ensure fertility and feed the corn god. Gilgamesh, however, did not perish. "A keen-eyed eagle saw the child falling, and before it touched the ground the bird flew under it and received it on its back, and carried it away to a garden and laid it down gently." Here we have, it would appear, Tammuz among the flowers, and Sargon, the gardener, in the "Garden of Adonis". Mimic Adonis gardens were cultivated by women. Corn, &c., was forced in pots and baskets, and thrown, with an image of the god, into streams. "Ignorant people", writes Professor Frazer, "suppose that by mimicking the effect which they desire to produce they actually help to produce it: thus by sprinkling water they

[p. 172]

make rain, by lighting a fire they make sunshine, and so on." [*1] Evidently Gilgamesh was a heroic form of the god Tammuz, the slayer of the demons of winter and storm, who passed one part of the year in the world and another in Hades ([*Chapter VI]).

Like Hercules, Gilgamesh figured chiefly in legendary narrative as a mighty hero. He was apparently of great antiquity, so that it is impossible to identify him with any forerunner of Sargon of Akkad, or Alexander the Great. His exploits were depicted on cylinder seals of the Sumerian period, and he is shown wrestling with a lion as Hercules wrestled with the monstrous lion in the valley of Nemea. The story of his adventures was narrated on twelve clay tablets, which were preserved in the library of Ashur-banipal, the Assyrian emperor. In the first tablet, which is badly mutilated, Gilgamesh is referred to as the man who beheld the world, and had great wisdom because he peered into the mysteries. He travelled to distant places, and was informed regarding the flood and the primitive race which the gods destroyed; he also obtained the plant of life, which his enemy, the earth-lion, in the form of a serpent or well demon, afterwards carried away.

Gilgamesh was associated with Erech, where he reigned as "the lord". There Ishtar had a great temple, but her worldly wealth had decreased. The fortifications of the city were crumbling, and for three years the Elamites besieged it. The gods had turned to flies and the winged bulls had become like mice. Men wailed like wild beasts and maidens moaned like doves. Ultimately the people prayed to the goddess Aruru to create a liberator. Bel, Shamash, and Ishtar also came to their aid.

[p. 173]

Aruru heard the cries of her worshippers. She dipped her hands in water and then formed a warrior with clay. He was named Ea-bani, which signifies "Ea is my creator". It is possible, therefore, that an ancient myth of Eridu forms the basis of the narrative.

Ea-bani is depicted on the cylinder seals as a hairy man-monster resembling the god Pan. He ate grass with the gazelles and drank water with wild beasts, and he is compared to the corn god, which suggests that he was an early form of Tammuz, and of character somewhat resembling the Egyptian Bast, the half-bestial god of fertility. A hunter was sent out from Erech to search for the man-monster, and found him beside a stream in a savage place drinking with his associates, the wild animals. The description of Ea-bani recalls that of Nebuchadnezzar when he was stricken with madness.

He was driven from men, and did eat grass as oxen, and his body was wet with the dew of heaven, till his hairs were grown like eagles' feathers, and his nails like birds' claws." [*1]

The hunter had no desire to combat with Ea-bani, so he had him lured from the wilds by a beautiful woman. Love broke the spell which kept Ea-bani in his savage state, and the wild beasts fled from him. Then the temptress pleaded with him to go with her to Erech, where Anu and Ishtar had their temples, and the mighty Gilgamesh lived in his palace. Ea-bani, deserted by his bestial companions, felt lonely and desired human friend-ship. So he consented to accompany his bride. Having heard of Gilgamesh from the hunter, he proposed to test his strength in single combat, but Shamash, god of the sun, warned Ea-bani that he was the protector of Gilgamesh,

[p. 174]

who had been endowed with great knowledge by Bel and Anu and Ea. Gilgamesh was also counselled in a vision of night to receive Ea-bani as an ally.

Ea-bani was not attracted by city life and desired to return to the wilds, but Shamash prevailed upon him to remain as the friend of Gilgamesh, promising that he would be greatly honoured and exalted to high rank.

The two heroes became close friends, and when the narrative becomes clear again, they are found to be setting forth to wage war against Chumbaba, [*1] the King of Elam. Their journey was long and perilous. In time they entered a thick forest, and wondered greatly at the numerous and lofty cedars. They saw the great road which the king had caused to be made, the high mountain, and the temple of the god. Beautiful were the trees about the mountain, and there were many shady retreats that were fragrant and alluring.

At this point the narrative breaks off; for the tablet is mutilated. When it is resumed a reference is made to "the head of Chumbaba", who has apparently been slain by the heroes. Erech was thus freed from the oppression of its fierce enemy.

Gilgamesh and Ea-bani appear to have become prosperous and happy. But in the hour of triumph a shadow falls. Gilgamesh is robed in royal splendour and wears his dazzling crown. He is admired by all men, but suddenly it becomes known that the goddess Ishtar has been stricken with love for him. She "loved him with that love which was his doom". Those who are loved by celestials or demons become, in folk tales, melancholy wanderers and "night wailers". The "wretched wight" in Keats' "La Belle Dame Sans Merci" is a typical example.

[p. 175]

O what can ail thee, knight-at-arms,
   Alone and palely loitering?
 The sedge is withered from the lake
   And no birds sing.

  .     .     .     .     .

I met a lady in the meads,
   Full beautiful--a faery's child;
 Her hair was long, her foot was light,
   And her eyes were wild.

  .     .     .     .     .

She found me roots of relish sweet,
   And honey wild and manna dew;
 And sure in language strange she said,
   "I love thee true".

Having kissed her lover to sleep, the fairy woman vanished. The "knight" then saw in a dream the ghosts of knights and warriors, her previous victims, who warned him of his fate.

I saw their starved lips in the gloam,
   With horrid warning gaped wide;
 And I awoke and found me here
   On the cold hill's side.

The goddess Ishtar appeared as "La Belle Dame Sans Merci" before Gilgamesh and addressed him tenderly, saying: "Come, O Gilgamesh, and be my consort. Gift thy strength unto me. Be thou my husband and I will be thy bride. Thou shalt have a chariot of gold and lapis lazuli with golden wheels and gem-adorned. Thy steeds shall be fair and white and powerful. Into my dwelling thou shalt come amidst the fragrant cedars. Every king and every prince will bow down before thee, O Gilgamesh, to kiss thy feet, and all people will become subject unto thee."

Gilgamesh feared the fate which would attend him as

[p. 176]

the lover of Ishtar, and made answer saying: "To what husband hast thou ever remained faithful? Each year Tammuz, the lover of thy youth, is caused by thee to weep. Thou didst love the Allala bird and then broke his wings, and he moans in the woods crying, 'O my wings!' Thou didst love the lion and then snared him. Thou didst love the horse, and then laid harness on him and made him gallop half a hundred miles so that he suffered great distress, and thou didst oppress his mother Silili. Thou didst love a shepherd who sacrificed kids unto thee, and then thou didst smite him so that he became a jackal (or leopard); his own herd boy drove him away and his dogs rent him in pieces. Thou didst love Ishullanu, the gardener of Anu, who made offerings unto thee, and then smote him so that he was unable to move. Alas! if thou wouldst love me, my fate would be like unto the fates of those on whom thou hast laid affliction."

Ishtar's heart was filled with wrath when she heard the words which Gilgamesh had spoken, and she prevailed upon her father Anu to create a fierce bull which she sent against the lord of Erech.

This monster, however, was slain by Gilgamesh [*1] and Ea-bani, but their triumph was shortlived. Ishtar cursed Gilgamesh. Ea-bani then defied her and threatened to deal with her as he had dealt with the bull, with the result that he was cursed by the goddess also.

Gilgamesh dedicated the horns of the bull to Shamash and returned with his friend to Erech, where they were received with great rejoicings. A festival was held, and afterwards the heroes lay down to sleep. Then Ea-bani dreamt a dream of ill omen. He met his death soon afterwards, apparently in a battle, and Gilgamesh lamented

 

Click to enlarge
THE SLAYING OF THE BULL OF ISHTAR
 From the Painting by E. Wallcousins.

 

[p. 177]

over him. From the surviving fragments of the narrative it would appear that Gilgamesh resolved to undertake a journey, for he had been stricken by disease. He wept and cried out, "Oh! let me not die like Ea-bani, for death is fearful. I will seek the aid of mine ancestor, Pir-napishtim"--the Babylonian Noah, who was believed to be dwelling on an island which corresponds to the Greek "Island of the Blessed". The Babylonian island lay in the ocean of the Nether World.

It seems that Gilgamesh not only hoped to obtain the Water of Life and the Plant of Life to cure his own disease, but also to restore to life his dead friend, Ea-bani, whom he loved.

Gilgamesh set out on his journey and in time reached a mountain chasm. Gazing on the rugged heights, he beheld fierce lions and his heart trembled. Then he cried upon the moon god, who took pity upon him, and under divine protection the hero pressed onward. He crossed the rocky range and then found himself confronted by the tremendous mountain of Mashi--"Sunset hill", which divided the land of the living from the western land of the dead. The mountain peak rose to heaven, and its foundations were in Aralu, the Underworld. [*1] A dark tunnel pierced it and could be entered through a door, but the door was shut and on either side were two monsters of horrible aspect--the gigantic "scorpion man" and his wife, whose heads reached to the clouds. When Gilgamesh beheld them he swooned with terror. But they did him no harm, perceiving that he was a son of a god and had a body like a god.

When Gilgamesh revived, he realized that the monsters

[p. 178]

regarded him with eyes of sympathy. Addressing the scorpion giant, he told that he desired to visit his ancestor, Pir-napishtim, who sat in the council of the gods and had divine attributes. The giant warned him of the dangers which he would encounter, saying that the mountain passage was twelve miles long and beamless and black. Gilgamesh, however, resolved to encounter any peril, for he was no longer afraid, and he was allowed to go forward. So he entered through the monster-guarded mountain door and plunged into thick unbroken darkness. For twice twelve hours he groped blindly onward, until he saw a ray of light. Quickening his steps, he then escaped from the dreadful tunnel and once more rejoiced in the rays of the sun. He found himself in an enchanted garden, and in the midst of it he saw a divine and beautiful tree towards which he hastened. On its gleaming branches hung clusters of precious stones and its leaves were of lapis lazuli. His eyes were dazzled, but he did not linger there. Passing many other wonderful trees, he came to a shoreland, and he knew that he was drawing nigh to the Sea of Death. The country which he entered was ruled over by the sea lady whose name was Sabitu. When she saw the pilgrim drawing nigh, she entered her palace and shut the door.

Gilgamesh called out requesting that he should be allowed to enter, and mingled his entreaties with threats to break open the door. In the end Sabitu appeared and spoke, saying:

Gilgamesh, whither hurriest thou?
 The life that thou seekest thou wilt not find.
 When the gods created man
 They fixed death for mankind.
 Life they took in their own hand.
 Thou, O Gilgamesh, let thy belly be filled! [p. 179]
 Day and night be merry,
 Daily celebrate a feast,
 Day and night dance and make merry!
 Clean be thy clothes,
 Thy head be washed, bathe in water!
 Look joyfully on the child that grasps thy hand,
 Be happy with the wife in thine arms! [*1]

[paragraph continues] This is the philosophy of the Egyptian "Lay of the Harper". The following quotations are from two separate versions:

How rests this just prince!
 The goodly destiny befalls,
 The bodies pass away
 Since the time of the god,
 And generations come into their places.

.      .      .      .      .      .

(Make) it pleasant for thee to follow thy desire
 While thou livest.
 Put myrrh upon thy head,
 And garments on thee of fine linen. . . .
 Celebrate the glad day,
 Be not weary therein. . . .
 Thy sister (wife) who dwells in thy heart.
 She sits at thy side.
 Put song and music before thee,
 Behind thee all evil things,
 And remember thou (only) joy. [*2]

Jastrow contrasts the Babylonian poem with the following quotation from Ecclesiastes:--

Go thy way, eat thy bread with joy, and drink thy wine with a merry heart. . . . Let thy garments be always white; and

[p. 180]

let thy head lack no ointment. Live joyfully with the wife whom thou lovest all the days of the life of thy vanity, which he [God] hath given thee under the sun, all the days of thy vanity: for that is thy portion in this life, and in thy labour which thou takest under the sun. [*1]

"The pious Hebrew mind", Jastrow adds, "found the corrective to this view of life in the conception of a stern but just God, acting according to self-imposed standards of right and wrong, whose rule extends beyond the grave." The final words of the Preacher are, "Fear God and keep his commandments". [*2]

Gilgamesh did not accept the counsel of the fatalistic sea lady. He asked her how he could reach Pir-napishtim, his ancestor, saying he was prepared to cross the Sea of Death: if he could not cross it he would die of grief.

Sabitu answered him, saying: "O Gilgamesh, no mortal is ferried over this great sea. Who can pass over it save Shamash alone? The way is full of peril. O Gilgamesh, how canst thou battle against the billows of death?"

At length, however, the sea lady revealed to the pilgrim that he might obtain the aid of the sailor, Arad Ea, who served his ancestor Pir-napishtim.

Gilgamesh soon found where Arad Ea dwelt, and after a time prevailed upon him to act as ferryman. Arad Ea required a helm for his boat, and Gilgamesh hastened to fashion one from a tree. When it was fixed on, the boat was launched and the voyage began. Terrible experiences were passed through as they crossed the Sea of Death, but at length they drew nigh to the "Island of the Blessed" on which dwelt Pir-napishtim and his wife. Wearied by his exertions and wasted by disease, Gilgamesh sat resting in the boat. He did not go ashore.

[p. 181]

Pir-napishtim had perceived the vessel crossing the Sea of Death and marvelled greatly.

The story is unfortunately interrupted again, but it appears that Gilgamesh poured into the ears of his ancestor the tale of his sufferings, adding that he feared death and desired to escape his fate.

Pir-napishtim made answer, reminding the pilgrim that all men must die. Men built houses, sealed contracts, disputed one with another, and sowed seeds in the earth, but as long as they did so and the rivers rose in flood, so long would their fate endure. Nor could any man tell when his hour would come. The god of destiny measured out the span of life: he fixed the day of death, but never revealed his secrets.

Gilgamesh then asked Pir-napishtim how it chanced that he was still alive. "Thou hast suffered no change," he said, "thou art even as I am. Harden not thy heart against me, but reveal how thou hast obtained divine life in the company of the gods."

Pir-napishtim thereupon related to his descendant the story of the deluge, which is dealt with fully in the next chapter. The gods had resolved to destroy the world, and Ea in a dream revealed unto Pir-napishtim how he could escape. He built a ship which was tossed about on the waters, and when the world had been destroyed, Bel discovered him and transported him to that island in the midst of the Sea of Death.

Gilgamesh sat in the boat listening to the words of his ancestor. When the narrative was ended, Pir-napishtim spoke sympathetically and said: "Who among the gods will restore thee to health, O Gilgamesh? Thou hast knowledge of my life, and thou shalt be given the life thou dost strive after. Take heed, therefore, to what I say unto thee. For six days and seven nights thou

[p. 182]

shalt not lie down, but remain sitting like one in the midst of grief." [*1]

Gilgamesh sat in the ship, and sleep enveloped him like to a black storm cloud.

Pir-napishtim spoke to his wife and said: "Behold the hero who desireth to have life. Sleep envelops him like to a black storm cloud."

To that lone man his wife made answer: "Lay thine hand upon him so that he may have perfect health and be enabled to return to his own land. Give him power to pass through the mighty door by which he entered."

Then Pir-napishtim addressed his wife, saying: "His sufferings make me sad. Prepare thou for him the magic food, and place it near his head."

On the day when Gilgamesh lay down, the food was prepared by seven magic processes, and the woman ad-ministered it while yet he slept. Then Pir-napishtim touched him, and he awoke full of life.

Gilgamesh spake unto Pir-napishtim and said: "I was suddenly overcome by sleep. . . . But thou didst awaken me by touching me, even thou. . . . Lo! I am bewitched. What hast thou done unto thy servant?"

Then Pir-napishtim told Gilgamesh that he had been given to eat of the magic food. Afterwards he caused Arad Ea to carry Gilgamesh to a fountain of healing, where his disease-stricken body was cleansed. The blemished skin fell from him, and he was made whole.

Thereafter Gilgamesh prepared to return to his own land. Ere he bade farewell, however, Pir-napishtim revealed unto him the secret of a magic plant which had power to renew life and give youth and strength unto those who were old.

[p. 183]

Arad Ea conducted the hero to the island where the plant grew, and when Gilgamesh found it he rejoiced, and said that he would carry it to Erech, his own city, where he would partake of it and restore his youth.

So Gilgamesh and Arad Ea went on their way together, nor paused until they came to a well of pure water. The hero stooped down to draw water. [*1] But while he was thus engaged that demon, the Earth Lion, crept forth as a serpent, and, seizing the magic plant of life, carried it away. Stricken with terror, Gilgamesh uttered a curse. Then he sat down and wept bitterly, and the tears streamed over his face. To Arad Ea he spake, saying: "Why has my health been restored to me? Why should I rejoice because that I live? The benefit which I should have derived for myself has now fallen to the Earth Lion."

The two travellers then resumed their journey, performing religious acts from time to time; chanting dirges and holding feasts for the dead, and at length Gilgamesh returned to Erech. He found that the city walls were crumbling, and he spake regarding the ceremonies which had been performed while yet he was in a far-distant country.

During the days which followed Gilgamesh sorrowed for his lost friend Ea-bani, whose spirit was in the Underworld, the captive of the spirits of death. "Thou canst not draw thy bow now," he cried, "nor raise the battle shout. Thou canst not kiss the woman thou hast loved; thou canst not kiss the child thou hast loved, nor canst thou smite those whom thou hast hated."

In vain Gilgamesh appealed to his mother goddess to restore Ea-bani to him. Then he turned to the gods, and

[p. 184]

[paragraph continues] Ea heard him. Thereafter Nergal, god of death, caused the grave to yawn, and the spirit of Ea-bani arose like a wind gust.

Gilgamesh, still dreading death, spoke to the ghost of his friend, saying: "Tell me, my friend, O tell me regarding the land in which thou dost dwell."

Ea-bani made answer sorrowfully: "Alas! I cannot tell thee, my friend. If I were to tell thee all, thou wouldst sit down and weep."

Said Gilgamesh: "Let me sit down and weep, but tell me regarding the land of spirits."

The text is mutilated here, but it can be gathered that Ea-bani described the land where ill-doers were punished, where the young were like the old, where the worm devoured, and dust covered all. But the state of the warrior who had been given burial was better than that of the man who had not been buried, and had no one to lament or care for him. "He who hath been slain in battle," the ghost said, "reposeth on a couch drinking pure water--one slain in battle as thou hast seen and I have seen. His head is supported by his parents: beside him sits his wife. His spirit doth not haunt the earth. But the spirit of that man whose corpse has been left unburied and uncared for, rests not, but prowls through the streets eating scraps of food, the leavings of the feast, and drinking the dregs of vessels."

So ends the story of Gilgamesh in the form which survives to us.

The journey of Gilgamesh to the Island of the Blessed recalls the journeys made by Odin, Hermod, Svipdag, Hotherus and others to the Germanic Hela. When Hermod went to search for Balder, as the Prose Edda relates, he rode through thick darkness for nine days and nine nights ere he crossed the mountains. As Gilgamesh

[p. 185]

met Sabitu, Hermod met Modgudur, "the maiden who kept the bridge "over the river Gjoll. Svipdag, according to a Norse poem, was guided like the Babylonian hero by the moon god, Gevar, who instructed him what way he should take to find the irresistible sword. Saxo's Hother, who is instructed by "King Gewar", crosses dismal mountains "beset with extraordinary cold". [*1] Thorkill crosses a stormy ocean to the region of perpetual darkness, where the ghosts of the dead are confined in loathsome and dusty caves. At the main entrance "the door posts were begrimed with the soot of ages". [*2] In the Elder Edda Svipdag is charmed against the perils he will be confronted by as he fares "o'er seas mightier than men do know", or is overtaken by night "wandering on the misty way". [*3] When Odin "downward rode into Misty Hel" he sang spells at a "witch's grave", and the ghost rose up to answer his questions regarding Balder. "Tell me tidings of Hel", he addressed her, as Gilgamesh addressed the ghost of Ea-bani.

In the mythical histories of Alexander the Great, the hero searches for the Water of Life, and is confronted by a great mountain called Musas (Mashti). A demon stops him and says: "O king, thou art not able to march through this mountain, for in it dwelleth a mighty god who is like unto a monster serpent, and he preventeth everyone who would go unto him." In another part of the narrative Alexander and his army arrive at a place of darkness "where the blackness is not like the darkness of night, but is like unto the mists and clouds which descend at the break of day". A servant uses a shining jewel stone, which Adam had brought from Paradise, to guide him, and found the well. He drank

[p. 186]

of the "waters of life" and bathed in them, with the result that he was strengthened and felt neither hunger nor thirst. When he came out of the well "all the flesh of his body became bluish-green and his garments likewise bluish-green". Apparently he assumed the colour of supernatural beings. Rama of India was blue, and certain of his monkey allies were green, like the fairies of England and Scotland. This fortunate man kept his secret. His name was Matun, but he was afterwards nicknamed "'El-Khidr', that is to say, 'Green'". What explanation he offered for his sudden change of appearance has not been recorded. [*1] It is related that when Matun reached the Well of Life a dried fish which he dipped in the water was restored to life and swam away. In the Koran a similar story is told regarding Moses and Joshua, who travelled "for a long space of time" to a place where two seas met. "They forgot their fish which they had taken with them, and the fish took its way freely to the sea." The Arabian commentators explain that Moses once agreed to the suggestion that he was the wisest of men. In a dream he was directed to visit Al Khedr, who was "more knowing than he", and to take a fish with him in a basket. On the seashore Moses fell asleep, and the fish, which had been roasted, leapt out of the basket into the sea. Another version sets forth that Joshua, "making the ablution at the fountain of life", some of the water happened to be sprinkled on the fish, which immediately leapt up. [*2]

The Well of Life is found in Fingalian legends. When Diarmid was mortally wounded by the boar, he called upon Finn to carry water to him from the well:

[p. 187]

Give me a draught from thy palms, O Finn,
 Son of my king for my succour,
 For my life and my dwelling.
          Campbell's West Highland Tales, vol. iii, 80.

The quest of the plant, flower, or fruit of life is referred to in many folk tales. In the Mahabharata, Bhima, the Indian Gilgamesh or Hercules, journeys to north-eastern Celestial regions to find the lake of the god Kuvera (Kubera), on which grow the "most beautiful and unearthly lotuses", which restore health and give strength to the weary. As Gilgamesh meets with Pir-napishtim, who relates the story of the Deluge which destroyed the "elder race", Bhima meets with Hanuman, who informs him regarding the Ages of the Universe and the races which were periodically destroyed by deluges. When Bhima reaches the lotus lake he fights with demons. To heal his wounds and recover strength he plunges into the lake. "As he drank of the waters, like unto nectar, his energy and strength were again fully restored." [*1]

Hercules similarly sets out to search for the golden apples which grow in

           those Hesperian gardens famed of old,
 Fortunate fields, and groves and flowery vales.

As Bhima slew Yakshas which guarded the lotuses, Hercules slew Ladon, the guardian of the apples. Other heroes kill treasure-protecting dragons of various kinds.

There is a remarkable resemblance between the Babylonian account of Gilgamesh's journey through the mountain tunnel to the garden and seashore, and the Indian story of the demigod Hanuman passing through the long

[p. 188]

cavern to the shoreland palace of the female ascetic, when he was engaged searching for Sita, the wife of Rama, who had been carried away by Ravana, the demon king of Ceylon. In the version of the latter narrative which is given in the Mahabharata, Hanuman says: "I bring thee good news, O Rama; for Janaka's daughter hath been seen by me. Having searched the southern region with all its hills, forests, and mines for some time, we became very weary. At length we beheld a great cavern. And having beheld it, we entered that cavern which extended over many yojanas. It was dark and deep, and overgrown with trees and infested by worms. And having gone a great way through it, we came upon sunshine and beheld a beautiful palace. It was the abode of the Daitya (sea demon) Maya. And there we beheld a female ascetic named Parbhavati engaged in ascetic austerities. And she gave us food and drink of various kinds. And having refreshed ourselves therewith and regained our strength, we proceeded along the way shown by her. At last we came out of the cavern and beheld the briny sea, and on its shores, the Sahya, the Malaya, and the great Dardura mountains. And ascending the mountains of Malaya, we beheld before us the vast ocean (or, "the abode of Varuna"). And beholding it, we felt sorely grieved in mind. . . . We despaired of returning with our lives. . . . We then sat together, resolved to die there of starvation."

Hanuman and his friends, having had, so far, experiences similar to those of Gilgamesh, next discovered the eagle giant which had burned its wings when endeavouring to soar to the sun. This great bird, which resembles the Etana eagle, expressed the opinion that Sita was in Lanka (Ceylon), whither she must have been carried by Ravana. But no one dared to cross the dangerous ocean. Hanuman

[p. 189]

at length, however, obtained the assistance of Vayu, the wind god, his divine father, and leapt over the sea, slaying monsters as he went. He discovered where the fair lady was concealed by the king of demons. [*1]

The dark tunnel is met with in many British stories of daring heroes who set out to explore it, but never return. In the Scottish versions the adventurers are invariably pipers who are accompanied by dogs. The sound of the pipes is heard for a time; then the music ceases suddenly, and shortly afterwards the dog returns without a hair upon its body. It has evidently been in conflict with demons.

The tunnel may run from a castle to the seashore, from a cave on one side of a hill to a cave on the other, or from a seashore cave to a distant island.

It is possible that these widespread tunnel stories had origin among the cave dwellers of the Palaeolithic Age, who believed that deep caverns were the doors of the underground retreats of dragons and giants and other supernatural enemies of mankind.

In Babylonia, as elsewhere, the priests utilized the floating material from which all mythologies were framed, and impressed upon it the stamp of their doctrines. The symbolized stories were afterwards distributed far and wide, as were those attached to the memory of Alexander the Great at a later period. Thus in many countries may be found at the present day different versions of immemorial folk tales, which represent various stages of culture, and direct and indirect contact at different periods with civilizations that have stirred the ocean of human thought, and sent their ideas rippling in widening circles to far-distant shores.

Footnotes

^164:1 It is suggested that Arthur is derived from the Celtic word for "bear". If so, the bear may have been the "totem" of the Arthur tribe represented by the Scottish clan of MacArthurs.

^165:1 See "Lady in the Straw" beliefs in Brand's Popular Antiquities, vol. ii, 66 et seq. (1899 ed.).

^166:1 Like the Etana "mother eagle" Garuda was a slayer of serpents ([*Chapter III]).

^166:2 Yana Parva section of the Mahabharata (Roy's trans.), p. 818 et seq., and Indian Myth and Legend, p. 413.

^167:1 The Koran (with notes from approved commentators), trans. by George Sale, p. 246, n.

^167:2 The Life and Exploits of Alexander the Great, E. Wallis Budge (London, 1896), pp. 277-8, 474-5.

^168:1 Campbell's West Highland Tales, vol. iii, pp. 251-4 (1892 ed.).

^168:2 Religion of the Ancient Egyptians, A. Wiedemann, p. 14.

^169:1 Adi Parva section of the Mahabharata (Hymn to Garuda), Roy's trans., p. 88, 89.

^169:2 Herodian, iv, 2.

^169:3 The image made by Nebuchadnezzar is of interest in this connection. He decreed that "whoso falleth not down and worshippeth" should be burned in the "fiery furnace". The Hebrews, Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego, were accordingly thrown into the fire, but were delivered by God. Daniel, iii, 1-30.

^170:1 The Assyrian and Phoenician Hercules is discussed by Raoul Rochette in Memoires de l'Academie des Inscriptions et Belles Lettres (Paris, 1848), pp. 178 et seq.

^170:2 G. Sale's Koran, p. 246, n.

^170:3 In the Eddic poem "Lokasenna" the god Byggvir (Barley) is addressed by Loki, "Silence, Barleycorn!" The Elder Edda, translation by Olive Bray, pp. 262, 263.

^171:1 De Nat. Animal., xii, 21, ed. Didot, p. 210, quoted by Professor Budge in The Life and Exploits of Alexander the Great, p. 278, n.

^171:2 Isaiah, lvii, 4 and 5.

^172:1 The Golden Bough (Adonis, Attis, Osiris vol.), "The Gardens of Adonis", pp. 194 et seq. (3rd ed.).

^173:1 Daniel, iv, 33. It is possible that Nebuchadnezzar, as the human representative of the god of corn and fertility, imitated the god by living a time in the wilds like Ea-bani.

^174:1 Pronounce ch guttural.

^176:1 On a cylinder seal the heroes each wrestle with a bull.

^177:1 Alexander the Great in the course of his mythical travels reached a mountain at the world-end. "Its peak reached to the first heaven and its base to the seventh earth."--Budge.

^179:1 Jastrow's trans., Aspects of Religious Belief and Practice in Babylonia and Assyria, p. 374.

^179:2 Development of Religion and Thought in Ancient Egypt (1912), J. H. Breasted, pp. 183-5.

^180:1 Ecclesiastes, ix, 7-9.

^180:2 Ibid., xii, 13.

^182:1 Perhaps brooding and undergoing penance like an Indian Rishi with purpose to obtain spiritual power.

^183:1 Probably to perform the ceremony or pouring out a libation.

^185:1 Saxo, iii, 71.

^185:2 Ibid., viii, 291.

^185:3 The Elder Edda, O. Bray, pp. 157 et seq. See also Teutonic Myth and Legend.

^186:1 The Life and Exploits of Alexander the Great, E. Wallis Budge, pp. xl et seq., 167 et seq.

^186:2 The Koran, trans. by G. Sale, pp. 222, 223 (chap. xviii).

^187:1 Yana Parva section of the Mahabharata (Roy's trans.), pp. 435-60, and Indian Myth and Legend, pp. 105-9.

^189:1 Yana Parva section of the Mahabharata (Roy's translation), pp. 832, 833.

     
Myths of Babylonia and Assyria, by Donald A. MacKenzie, [1915], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 190] [ch-09]

  

CHAPTER IX

  

Deluge Legend, the Island of the Blessed, and Hades

Babylonian Story of the Flood--The Two Immortals on the Island of the Blessed--Deluge Legends in the Old and New Worlds--How Babylonian Culture reached India--Theory of Cosmic Periods--Gilgamesh resembles the Indian Yama and Persian Yimeh--Links with Varuna and Mitra--The Great Winter in Persian and Teutonic Mythologies--Babylonian Hades compared with the Egyptian, Greek, Indian, Teutonic, and Celtic Otherworlds--Legend of Nergal and the Queen of Death--Underworld originally the Grave--Why Weapons, &c., were Buried with the Dead--Japanese and Roman Beliefs--Palaeolithic Burial Customs--"Our Graves are our Houses"--Importance of Babylonian Funerary Ceremonies--Doctrine of Eternal Bliss in Egypt and India--Why Suppressed in Babylonia--Heavy Burial Fees--Various Burial Customs.

THE story of the Deluge which was related to Gilgamesh by Pir-napishtim runs as follows:

"Hear me, O Gilgamesh, and I will make revelation regarding the hidden doings of the high gods. As thou knowest, the city of Shurippak is situated upon the bank of the Euphrates. The gods were within it: there they assembled together in council. Anu, the father, was there, and Bel the counsellor and warrior, Ninip the messenger, and Ennugi the governor. Ea, the wise lord, sat also with them. In their hearts the gods agreed together to send a great deluge.

"Thereafter Ea made known the purpose of the divine rulers in the hut of reeds, saying: [*1] 'O hut of

[p. 191]

reeds, hear; O wall, understand . . . O man of Shurippak, son of Umbara Tutu, tear down thy house and build a ship; leave all thou dost possess and save thy life, and preserve in the ship the living seed of every kind. The ship that thou wilt build must be of goodly proportions in length and height. It must be floated on the great deep.'

"I heard the command of Ea and understood, and I made answer, saying, 'O wise lord, as thou hast said so will I do, for thy counsel is most excellent. But how shall I give reason for my doings to the young men and the elders?'

"Ea opened his mouth and said unto me, his servant: 'What thou shalt say unto them is this . . It hath been revealed unto me that Bel doth hate me, therefore I cannot remain any longer in his domain, this city of Shurippak, so I must depart unto the domain of Ea and dwell with him . . . Unto you will Bel send abundance of rain, so that you may obtain birds and fishes in plenty and have a rich harvest. But Shamash hath appointed a time for Ramman to pour down destruction from the heavens.'" [*1]

Ea then gave instructions to Pir-napishtim how to build the ship in which he should find refuge. So far as can be gathered from the fragmentary text, it appears that this vessel was to have a deck house six stories high, with nine apartments in each story. According to another account, Ea drew a plan of the great ship upon the sand.

Pir-napishtim set to work and made a flat-bottomed vessel, which was 120 cubits wide and 120 cubits in height. He smeared it with bitumen inside and pitch outside; and on the seventh day it was ready. Then

[p. 192]

he carried out Ea's further instructions. Continuing his narrative to Gilgamesh, he said:

"I gathered together all that I possessed, my silver and gold and seeds of every kind, and my goods also. These I placed in the ship. Then I caused to go aboard all my family and house servants, the animals of the field and the beasts of the field and the workers--every one of them I sent up.

"The god Shamash appointed the time, saying: 'I will cause the Night Lord to send much rain and bring destruction. Then enter thou the ship and shut thy door.'

"At the appointed time the Night Lord sent at eventime much rain. I saw the beginning of the deluge and I was afraid to look up. I entered the ship and shut the door. I appointed Buzur-Kurgala, the sailor, to be captain, and put under his command the great vessel and all that it contained.

"At the dawn of day I saw rising athwart the heavens a dark cloud, and in the midst of it Ramman thundered. Nebo and Merodach went in front, speeding like emissaries over hills and plains. The cables of the ship were let loose.

"Then Ninip, the tempest god, came nigh, and the storm broke in fury before him. All the earth spirits leapt up with flaming torches and the whole land was aflare. The thunder god swept over the heavens, blotting out the sunlight and bringing thick darkness. Rain poured down the whole day long, and the earth was covered with water; the rivers were swollen; the land was in confusion; men stumbled about in the darkness, battling with the elements. Brothers were unable to see brothers; no man could recognize his friends. . . . The spirits above looked down and beheld the rising

 

Click to enlarge
THE BABYLONIAN DELUGE
 From the Painting by E. Wallcousins.

 

[p. 193]

flood and were afraid: they fled away, and in the heaven of Anu they crouched like to hounds in the protecting enclosures.

"In time Ishtar, the lady of the gods, cried out distressfully, saying: 'The elder race hath perished and turned to clay because that I have consented to evil counsel in the assembly of the gods. Alas! I have allowed my people to be destroyed. I gave being to man, but where is he? Like the offspring of fish he cumbers the deep.'

"The earth spirits were weeping with Ishtar: they sat down cowering with tightened lips and spake not; they mourned in silence.

"Six days and six nights went past, and the tempest raged over the waters which gradually covered the land. But when the seventh day came, the wind fell, the whirling waters grew peaceful, and the sea retreated. The storm was over and the rain of destruction had ceased. I looked forth. I called aloud over the waters. But all mankind had perished and turned to clay. Where fields had been I saw marshes only.

"Then I opened wide the window of the ship, and the sunlight suffused my countenance. I was dazzled and sank down weeping and the tears streamed over my face. Everywhere I looked I saw water.

"At length, land began to appear. The ship drifted towards the country of Nitsir, and then it was held fast by the mountain of Nitsir. Six days went past and the ship remained stedfast. On the seventh day I sent forth a dove, and she flew away and searched this way and that, but found no resting place, so she returned. I then sent forth a swallow, and she returned likewise. Next I sent forth a raven, and she flew away. She saw that the waters were shrinking, and gorged and croaked and waded, but

[p. 194]

did not come back. Then I brought forth all the animals into the air of heaven.

"An offering I made on the mountain. I poured out a libation. I set up incense vessels seven by seven on heaped-up reeds and used cedar wood with incense. The gods smelt the sweet savour, and they clustered like flies about the sacrificer.

"Thereafter Ishtar (Sirtu) drew nigh. Lifting up the jewels, which the god Anu had fashioned for her according to her desire, she spake, saying: 'Oh! these gods! I vow by the lapis lazuli gems upon my neck that I will never forget! I will remember these days for ever and ever. Let all the gods come hither to the offering, save Bel (Enlil) alone, because that he ignored my counsel, and sent a great deluge which destroyed my people.'

"But Bel Enlil came also, and when he beheld the ship he paused. His heart was filled with wrath against the gods and the spirits of heaven. Angrily he spake and said: 'Hath one escaped? It was decreed that no human being should survive the deluge.'

"Ninip, son of Bel, spoke, saying: 'Who hath done this save Ea alone? He knoweth all things.'

"Ea, god of the deep, opened his mouth and said unto the warrior Bel: 'Thou art the lord of the gods, O warrior. But thou wouldst not hearken to my counsel and caused the deluge to be. Now punish the sinner for his sins and the evil doer for his evil deed, but be merciful and do not destroy all mankind. May there never again be a flood. Let the lion come and men will decrease. May there never again be a flood. Let the leopard come and men will decrease. May there never again be a flood. Let famine come upon the land; let Ura, god of pestilence, come and snatch off mankind. . . . I did not reveal the secret purpose of the mighty gods,

[p. 195]

but I caused Atra-chasis (Pir-napishtim) to dream a dream in which he had knowledge of what the gods had decreed.'

"Having pondered a time over these words, Bel entered the ship alone. He grasped my hand land led me forth, even me, and he led forth my wife also, and caused her to kneel down beside me. Then he stood between us and gave his blessing. He spoke, saying: 'In time past Pir-napishtim was a man. Henceforth Pir-napishtim and his wife will be like unto deities, even us. Let them dwell apart beyond the river mouths.'

"Thereafter Bel carried me hither beyond the mouths of rivers."

.        .        .        .        .        .

Flood myths are found in many mythologies both in the Old World and the New.

The violent and deceitful men of the mythical Bronze Age of Greece were destroyed by a flood. It is related that Zeus said on one occasion to Hermes: "I will send a great rain, such as hath not been since the making of the world, and the whole race of men shall perish. I am weary of their iniquity."

For receiving with hospitable warmth these two gods in human guise, Deucalion, an old man, and his wife Pyrrha were spared, however. Zeus instructed his host to build an ark of oak, and store it well with food. When this was done, the couple entered the vessel and shut the door. Then Zeus "broke up all the fountains of the deep, and opened the well springs of heaven, and it rained for forty days and forty nights continually". The Bronze folk perished: not even those who fled to the hilltops could escape. The ark rested on Parnassus, and when the waters ebbed the old couple descended the mountain and took up their abode in a cave. [*1]

[p. 196]

In Indian mythology the world is destroyed by a flood at the end of each Age of the Universe. There are four ages: the Krita or Perfect Age, the Treta Age, the Dwapara Age, and the Kali or Wicked Age. These correspond closely to the Greek and Celtic ages. [*1] There are also references in Sanskrit literature to the destruction of the world because too many human beings lived upon it. "When the increase of population had been so frightful," a sage related, "the Earth, oppressed with the excessive burden, sank down for a hundred Yojanas. Suffering pain in all her limbs, and being deprived of her senses by excessive pressure, the Earth in distress sought the protection of Narayana, the foremost of the gods." [*2]

Manu's account of the flood has been already referred to ([*Chapter II]). The god in fish shape informed him: "The time is ripe for purging the world. . . . Build a strong and massive ark, and furnish it with a long rope. . . ." When the waters rose the horned fish towed the ark over the roaring sea, until it grounded on the highest peak of the Himavat, which is still called Naubandha (the harbour). Manu was accompanied by seven rishis. [*3]

In the Celtic (Irish) account of the flood, Cessair, granddaughter of Noah, was refused a chamber for herself in the ark, and fled to the western borders of the world as advised by her idol. [*4] Her fleet consisted of three ships, but two foundered before Ireland was reached. The survivors in addition to Cessair were, her father Bith, two other men, Fintan and Ladru, and fifty women. All of these perished on the hills except Fintan, who slept on the crest of a great billow, and lived to see Partholon, the giant, arriving from Greece.

[p. 197]

There is a deluge also in Egyptian mythology. When Ra, the sun god, grew old as an earthly king, men began to mutter words against him. He called the gods together and said: "I will not slay them (his subjects) until I have heard what ye say concerning them." Nu, his father, who was the god of primeval waters, advised the wholesale destruction of mankind.

Said Ra: "Behold men flee unto the hills; their heart is full of fear because of that which they said."

The goddess Hathor-Sekhet, the Eye of Ra, then went forth and slew mankind on the hills. Thereafter Ra, desiring to protect the remnant of humanity, caused a great offering to be made to the goddess, consisting of corn beer mixed with herbs and human blood. This drink was poured out during the night. "And the goddess came in the morning; she found the fields inundated, she rejoiced thereat, she drank thereof; her heart was rejoiced, she went about drunken and took no more cognizance of men." [*1]

It is obvious that the Egyptian myth refers to the annual inundation of the Nile, the "human blood" in the "beer" being the blood of the slain corn god, or of his earthly representative. It is probable that the flood legends of North and South America similarly reflected local phenomena, although the possibility that they were of Asiatic origin, like the American Mongoloid tribes, cannot be overlooked. Whether or not Mexican civilization, which was flourishing about the time of the battle of Hastings, received any cultural stimulus from Asia is a question regarding which it would be unsafe to dogmatize, owing to the meagre character of the available data.

The Mexican deluge was caused by the "water sun", which suddenly discharged the moisture it had been

[p. 198]

drawing from the earth in the form of vapour through long ages. All life was destroyed.

A flood legend among the Nahua tribes resembles closely the Babylonian story as told by Pir-napishtim. The god Titlacahuan instructed a man named Nata to make a boat by hollowing out a cypress tree, so as to escape the coming deluge with his wife Nena. This pair escaped destruction. They offered up a fish sacrifice in the boat and enraged the deity who visited them, displaying as much indignation as did Bel when he discovered that Pir-napishtim had survived the great disaster. Nata and Nena had been instructed to take with them one ear of maize only, which suggests that they were harvest spirits.

In Brazil, Monan, the chief god, sent a great fire to burn up the world and its wicked inhabitants. To extinguish the flames a magician caused so much rain to fall that the earth was flooded.

The Californian Indians had a flood legend, and believed that the early race was diminutive; and the Athapascan Indians of the north-west professed to be descendants of a family who escaped the deluge. Indeed, deluge myths were widespread in the "New World".

The American belief that the first beings who were created were unable to live on earth was shared by the Babylonians. According to Berosus the first creation was a failure, because the animals could not bear the light and they all died. [*1] Here we meet with the germs of the Doctrine of the World's Ages, which reached its highest development in Indian, Greek, and Celtic (Irish) mythologies.

The Biblical account of the flood is familiar to readers. "It forms", says Professor Pinches, "a good subject for

[p. 199]

comparison with the Babylonian account, with which it agrees so closely in all the main points, and from which it differs so much in many essential details." [*1]

The drift of Babylonian culture was not only directed westward towards the coast of Palestine, and from thence to Greece during the Phoenician period, but also eastward through Elam to the Iranian plateau and India. Reference has already been made to the resemblances between early Vedic and Sumerian mythologies. When the "new songs" of the Aryan invaders of India were being composed, the sky and ocean god, Varuna, who resembles Ea-Oannes, and Mitra, who links with Shamash, were already declining in splendour. Other cultural influences were at work. Certain of the Aryan tribes, for instance, buried their dead in Varuna's "house of clay", while a growing proportion cremated their dead and worshipped Agni, the fire god. At the close of the Vedic period there were fresh invasions into middle India, and the "late comers" introduced new beliefs, including the doctrines of the Transmigration of Souls and of the Ages of the Universe. Goddesses also rose into prominence, and the Vedic gods became minor deities, and subject to Brahma, Vishnu, and Shiva. These "late comers" had undoubtedly been influenced by Babylonian ideas before they entered India. In their Doctrine of the World's Ages or Yugas, for instance, we are forcibly reminded of the Euphratean ideas regarding space and time. Mr. Robert Brown, junr., who is an authority in this connection, shows that the system by which the "Day of Brahma" was calculated in India resembles closely an

[p. 200]

astronomical system which obtained in Babylonia, where apparently the theory of cosmic periods had origin. [*1]

The various alien peoples, however, who came under the spell of Babylonian modes of thought did not remain in a state of intellectual bondage. Thought was stimulated rather than arrested by religious borrowing, and the development of ideas regarding the mysteries of life and death proceeded apace in areas over which the ritualistic and restraining priesthood of Babylonia exercised no sway. As much may be inferred from the contrasting conceptions of the Patriarchs of Vedic and Sumerian mythologies. Pir-napishtim, the Babylonian Noah, and the semi-divine Gilgamesh appear to be represented in Vedic mythology by Yama, god of the dead. Yama was "the first man", and, like Gilgamesh, he set out on a journey over mountains and across water to discover Paradise. He is lauded in the Vedic hymns as the explorer of "the path" or "way" to the "Land of the Pitris" (Fathers), the Paradise to which the Indian uncremated dead walked on foot. Yama never lost his original character. He is a traveller in the Epics as in the Vedas. [*2]

Him who along the mighty heights departed,
 Him who searched and spied the path for many,
 Son of Vivasvat, gatherer of the people,
 Yama, the King, with sacrifices worship.
                                          Rigveda, x, 14, 1. [*3]

To Yama, mighty King, be gifts and homage paid,
 He was the first of men that died, the first to brave
 Death's rapid rushing stream, the first to point the road
 To heaven, and welcome others to that bright abode.
                             Sir M. Monier Williams' Translation. [*4]

Yama and his sister Yami were the first human pair.

[p. 201]

[paragraph continues] They are identical with the Persian Celestial twins, Yima and Yimeh. Yima resembles Mitra (Mithra); Varuna, the twin brother of Mitra, in fact, carries the noose associated with the god of death. [*1]

The Indian Yama, who was also called Pitripati, "lord of the fathers", takes Mitra's place in the Paradise of Ancestors beside Varuna, god of the sky and the deep. He sits below a tree, playing on a flute and drinking the Soma drink which gives immortality. When the descendants of Yama reached Paradise they assumed shining forms "refined and from all taint set free". [*2]

In Persian mythology "Yima", says Professor Moulton, "reigns over a community which may well have been composed of his own descendants, for he lived yet longer than Adam. To render them immortal, he gives them to eat forbidden food, being deceived by the Daevas (demons). What was this forbidden food? May we connect it with another legend whereby, at the Regeneration, Mithra is to make men immortal by giving them to eat the fat of the Ur-Kuh, the primeval cow from whose slain body, according to the Aryan legends adopted by Mithraism, mankind was first created?"

Yima is punished for "presumptuously grasping at immortality for himself and mankind, on the suggestion of an evil power, instead of waiting Ahura's good time". Professor Moulton wonders if this story, which he endeavours to reconstruct, "owed anything to Babylon?"

Yima, like the Babylonian Pir-napishtim, is also a revealer of the secrets of creation. He was appointed to be "Guardian, Overseer, Watcher over my Creation" by Ahura, the supreme god. Three hundred years went past

[p. 202]

Then the earth became abounding,
 Full of flocks and full of cattle,
 Full of men, of birds, dogs likewise,
 Full of fires all bright and blazing,
 Nor did men, flocks, herds of cattle,
 Longer find them places in it.
                               Jackson's Translation.

[paragraph continues] The earth was thereafter cloven with a golden arrow. Yima then built a refuge in which mankind and the domesticated animals might find shelter during a terrible winter. "The picture", says Professor Moulton, "strongly tempts us to recognize the influence of the Babylonian Flood Legend." [*1] The "Fimbul winter" of Germanic mythology is also recalled. Odin asks in one of the Icelandic Eddic poems:

What beings shall live when the long dread winter
    Comes o'er the people of earth? [*2]

In another Eddic poem, the Voluspa, the Vala tells of a Sword Age, an Axe Age, a Wind Age, and a Wolf Age which is to come "ere the world sinks". After the battle of the gods and demons,

The sun is darkened, earth sinks in the sea.

[paragraph continues] In time, however, a new world appears.

I see uprising a second time
 Earth from the Ocean, green anew;
 The waters fall, on high the eagle
 Flies o'er the fell and catches fish.

[paragraph continues] When the surviving gods return, they will talk, according to the Vala (prophetess), of "the great world serpent" (Tiamat). The fields will be sown and "Balder will

[p. 203]

come" [*1]--apparently as Tammuz came. The association of Balder with corn suggests that, like Nata of the Nahua tribes, he was a harvest spirit, among other things.

Leaving, meantime, the many problems which arise from consideration of the Deluge legends and their connection with primitive agricultural myths, the attention of readers may be directed to the Babylonian conception of the Otherworld.

Pir-napishtim, who escaped destruction at the Flood, resides in an Island Paradise, which resembles the Greek "Islands of the Blessed", and the Irish "Tir nan og" or "Land of the Young", situated in the western ocean, and identical with the British [*2]

                            island-valley of Avilion,
 Where falls not hail, or rain, or any snow,
 Nor ever wind blows loudly, but it lies
 Deep meadow'd, happy, fair with orchard lawns
 And bowery hollows crowned with summer sea. [*3]

Only two human beings were permitted to reside on the Babylonian island paradise, however. These were Pir-napishtim and his wife. Apparently Gilgamesh could not join them there. His gods did not transport heroes and other favoured individuals to a happy isle or isles like those of the Greeks and Celts and Aryo-Indians. There was no Heaven for the Babylonian dead. All mankind were doomed to enter the gloomy Hades of the Underworld, "the land of darkness and the shadow of death; a land of darkness, as darkness itself; and of the shadow of death, without any order, and where the light is darkness", as Job exclaimed in the hour of despair, lamenting his fate. [*4]

[p. 204]

This gloomy habitation of the dead resembles the Greek Hades, the Teutonic Nifelhel, and the Indian "Put". No detailed description of it has been found. The references, however, in the "Descent of Ishtar" and the Gilgamesh epic suggest that it resembled the hidden regions of the Egyptians, in which souls were tortured by demons who stabbed them, plunged them in pools of fire, and thrust them into cold outer darkness where they gnashed their teeth, or into places of horror swarming with poisonous reptiles.

Ishtar was similarly tortured by the plague demon, Namtar, when she boldly entered the Babylonian Underworld to search for Tammuz. Other sufferings were, no doubt, in store for her, resembling those, perhaps, with which the giant maid in the Eddic poem "Skirnismal" was threatened when she refused to marry Frey, the god of fertility and harvest:

Trolls shall torment thee from morn till eve
   In the realms of the Jotun race,
 Each day to the dwellings of Frost giants must thou
   Creep helpless, creep hopeless of love;
 Thou shalt weeping have in the stead of joy,
   And sore burden bear with tears. . . .
 May madness and shrieking, bondage and yearning
   Burden thee with bondage and tears. [*1]

In like manner, too, the inhabitants of the Indian Hell suffered endless and complicated tortures. [*2]

The Persephone of the Babylonian Underworld was Eresh-ki-gal, who was also called Allatu. A myth, which was found among the Egyptian Tel-el-Amarna "Letters", sets forth that on one occasion the Babylonian gods held a feast. All the deities attended it, except Eresh-ki-gal.

[p. 205]

[paragraph continues] She was unable to leave her gloomy Underworld, and sent her messenger, the plague demon Namtar, to obtain her share. The various deities honoured Namtar, except Nergal, by standing up to receive him. When Eresh-ki-gal was informed of this slight she became very angry, and demanded that Nergal should be delivered up to her so that he might be put to death. The storm god at once hastened to the Underworld, accompanied by his own group of fierce demons, whom he placed as guardians at the various doors so as to prevent the escape of Eresh-ki-gal. Then he went boldly towards the goddess, clutched her by the hair, and dragged her from her throne. After a brief struggle, she found herself over-powered. Nergal made ready to cut off her head, but she cried for mercy and said: "Do not kill me, my brother! Let me speak to thee."

This appeal indicated that she desired to ransom her life--like the hags in the European folk tales--so Nergal unloosed his hold.

Then Eresh-ki-gal continued: "Be thou my husband and I will be thy wife. On thee I confer sovereignty over the wide earth, giving thee the tablet of wisdom. Thou shalt be my lord and I will be thy lady."

Nergal accepted these terms by kissing the goddess. Affectionately drying her tears, he spoke, saying: "Thou shalt now have from me what thou hast demanded during these past months."

In other words, Nergal promises to honour her as she desired, after becoming her husband and equal.

In the "Descent of Ishtar" the Babylonian Underworld is called Cuthah. This city had a famous cemetery, like Abydos in Egypt, where many pious and orthodox worshippers sought sepulture. The local god was Nergal, who symbolized the destructive power of the sun and the

[p. 206]

sand storm; he was a gloomy, vengeful deity, attended by the spirits of tempest, weariness, pestilence, and disease, and was propitiated because he was dreaded.

In Nether Cuthah, as Ea-bani informed Gilgamesh, the worm devoured the dead amidst the dust and thick darkness.

It is evident that this Underworld was modelled on the grave. In early times men believed that the spirits of the dead hovered in or about the place of sepulture. They were therefore provided with "houses" to protect them, in the same manner as the living were protected in their houses above the ground.

The enemies of the human ghosts were the earth spirits. Weapons were laid beside the dead in their graves so that they might wage war against demons when necessary. The corpse was also charmed, against attack, by the magical and protecting ornaments which were worn by the living--necklaces, armlets, ear-rings, &c. Even face paint was provided, probably as a charm against the evil eye and other subtle influences.

So long as corpses were left in their graves, the spirits of the dead were, it would appear, believed to be safe. But they required food and refreshment. Food vessels and drinking urns were therefore included in the funerary furniture, and the dead were given food offerings at regular intervals. Once a year the living held feasts in the burial ground, and invited the ghosts to share in the repast. This custom was observed in Babylonia, and is not yet obsolete in Egypt; Moslems and Coptic Christians alike hold annual all-night feasts in their cemeteries.

The Japanese "Land of Yomi" is similarly an underworld, or great grave, where ghosts mingle with the demons of disease and destruction. Souls reach it by "the pass of Yomi". The Mikado, however, may be

[p. 207]

privileged to ascend to heaven and join the gods in the "Eternal Land".

Among the ancient Romans the primitive belief survived that the spirit of the dead "just sank into the earth where it rested, and returned from time to time to the upper world through certain openings in the ground (mundi), whose solemn uncovering was one of the regular observances of the festal calendar". [*1]

According to Babylonian belief, the dead who were not properly buried roamed through the streets searching for food, eating refuse and drinking impure water.

Prior to the period of ceremonial burials, the dead were interred in the houses in which they had lived--a custom which has made it possible for present-day scientists to accumulate much valuable data regarding primitive races and their habits of life. The Palaeolithic cave-dwellers of Europe were buried in their caves. These were then deserted and became the haunts of wild animals. After a long interval a deserted cave was occupied by strangers. In certain characteristic caves the various layers containing human remains represent distinct periods of the vast Pleistocene Age.

When Mediterranean man moved northward through Europe, he utilized some of these caves, and constructed in them well-built graves for his dead, digging down through older layers. In thus making a "house" within a "house", he has provided us with a link between an old custom and a new. Apparently he was influenced by local practices and beliefs, for he met and mingled in certain localities with the men of the Late Palaeolithic Age.

The primitive house-burial rite is referred to in the Ethiopic version of the life of Alexander the Great. The

[p. 208]

[paragraph continues] "Two-horned", as the hero was called, conversed with Brahmans when he reached India. He spoke to one of them, "saying: 'Have ye no tombs wherein to bury any man among ye who may die?' And an interpreter made answer to him, saying: 'Man and woman and child grow up, and arrive at maturity, and become old, and when any one of them dieth we bury him in the place wherein he lived; thus our graves are our houses. And our God knoweth that we desire this more than the lust for food and meat which all men have: this is our life and manner of living in the darkness of our tombs.'" When Alexander desired to make a gift to these Brahmans, and asked them what they desired most, their answer was, "Give us immortality". [*1]

In the Gilgamesh epic the only ray of hope which relieves the gloomy closing passages is Ea-bani's suggestion that the sufferings endured by the dead may be alleviated by the performance of strict burial rites. Commenting on this point Professor Jastrow says: "A proper burial with an affectionate care of the corpse ensures at least a quiet repose.

Such a one rests on a couch and drinks pure water;
 But he whose shade has no rest in the earth, as I have seen and you will see,
 His shade has no rest in the earth
 Whose shade no one cares for . . .
 What is left over in the pot, remains of rood
 That are thrown in the street, he eats." [*2]
                                                 Gilgamesh Epic.

[p. 209]

By disseminating the belief that the dead must be buried with much ceremony, the priests secured great power over the people, and extracted large fees.

In Egypt, on the other hand, the teachers of the sun cult sold charms and received rewards to perform ceremonies so that chosen worshippers might enter the sun-barque of Ra; while the Osirian priests promised the just and righteous that they would reach an agricultural Paradise where they could live and work as on earth, but receive a greater return for their labour, the harvests of the Otherworld being of unequalled abundance.

In the sacred books of India a number of Paradises are referred to. No human beings, however, entered the Paradise of Varuna, who resembles the Sumerian Ea-Oannes. The souls of the dead found rest and enjoyment in the Paradise of Yama, while "those kings that yield up their lives, without turning their backs on the field of battle, attain", as the sage told a hero, "to the mansion of Indra", which recalls the Valhal of Odin. It will thus be seen that belief in immortality was a tenet of the Indian cults of Indra and Yama.

It is possible that the Gilgamesh epic in one of its forms concluded when the hero reached the island of Pir-napishtim, like the Indian Yama who "searched and spied the path for many". The Indian "Land of the Pitris" (Ancestors), over which Yama presided, may be compared to the Egyptian heaven of Osiris. It contains, we are told, "all kinds of enjoyable articles", and also "sweet, juicy, agreeable and delicious edibles . . . floral wreaths of the most delicious fragrance, and trees that yield fruits that are desired of them". Thither go "all sinners among human beings, as also (those) that have died during the winter solstice" [*1]--a suggestion that this

[p. 210]

[paragraph continues] Paradise was not unconnected with the Tammuz-like deity who took up his abode in the spirit land during the barren season.

The view may be urged that in the Gilgamesh epic we have a development of the Tammuz legend in its heroic form. Like Ishtar, when she descended to Hades, the King of Erech could not return to earth until he had been sprinkled by the water of life. No doubt, an incident of this character occurred also in the original Tammuz legend. The life of the god had to be renewed before he could return. Did he slumber, like one of the Seven Sleepers, in Ea's house, and not awake again until he arrived as a child in his crescent moon boat--"the sunken boat" of the hymns--like Scef, who came over the waves to the land of the Scyldings?

It seems remarkable that the doctrine of Eternal Bliss, which obtained in Egypt on the one hand and in India on the other, should never have been developed among the Babylonians. Of course, our knowledge in this connection is derived from the orthodox religious texts. Perhaps the great thinkers, whose influence can be traced in the tendencies towards monotheism which became marked at various periods, believed in a Heaven for the just and good. If they did, their teachings must have been suppressed by the mercenary priests. It was extremely profitable for these priests to perpetuate the belief that the spirits of the dead were consigned to a gloomy Hades, where the degree of suffering which they endured depended on the manner in which their bodies were disposed or upon earth. An orthodox funeral ceremony was costly at all times. This is made evident by the inscriptions which record the social reforms of Urukagina, the ill-fated patesi of Lagash. When he came to the throne he cut down the burial fees by more than a half. "In

[p. 211]

the case of an ordinary burial," writes Mr. King, "when a corpse was laid in a grave, it had been the custom for the presiding priest to demand as a fee for himself seven urns of wine or strong drink, four hundred and twenty loaves of bread, one hundred and twenty measures of corn, a garment, a kid, a bed, and a seat." The reformer reduced the perquisites to "three urns of wine, eighty loaves of bread, a bed, and a kid, while the fee of his (the priest's) assistant was cut down from sixty to thirty measures of corn". [*1]

The conservative element in Babylonian religion is reflected by the burial customs. These did not change greatly after the Neolithic period. Prehistoric Sumerian graves resemble closely those of pre-Dynastic Egypt. The bodies of the dead were laid on their sides in crouching posture, with a "beaker", or "drinking cup" urn, beside the right hand. Other vessels were placed near the head. In this connection it may be noted that the magic food prepared for Gilgamesh by Pir-napishtim's wife, when he lay asleep, was also placed near his head.

The corpse was always decked with various ornaments, including rings, necklaces, and armlets. As has been indicated, these were worn by the living as charms, and, no doubt, they served the same purpose for the dead. This charm-wearing custom was condemned by the Hebrew teachers. On one occasion Jacob commanded his household to "put away the strange gods which were in their hand, and all the ear-rings which were in their ears; and Jacob buried them under the oak which was by Shechem". [*2] To Jacob, personal ornaments had quite evidently an idolatrous significance.

"A very typical class of grave furniture", writes Mr.

[p. 212]

[paragraph continues] King, "consisted of palettes, or colour dishes, made of alabaster, often of graceful shape, and sometimes standing on four feet. . . . There is no doubt as to their use, for colour still remains in many of them, generally black and yellow, but sometimes a light rose and light green." Palettes for face paint have also been found in many early Egyptian graves.

The gods had their faces painted like the living and the dead and were similarly adorned with charms. In the course of the daily service in the Egyptian temples an important ceremony was "dressing the god with white, green, bright-red, and dark-red sashes, and supplying two kinds of ointment and black and green eye paint". [*1] In the word-picture of the Aryo-Indian Varuna's heaven in the Mahabharata the deity is depicted "attired in celestial robes and decked with celestial ornaments and jewels". His attendants, the Adityas, appear "adorned with celestial garlands and perfumed with celestial scents and besmeared with paste of celestial fragrance". [*2] Apparently the "paste", like the face paint of the Babylonians and Egyptians, had protective qualities. The Picts of Scotland may have similarly painted themselves to charm their bodies against magical influences and the weapons of their enemies. A painted man was probably regarded as one who was likely to have good luck, being guarded against bad luck.

Weapons and implements were also laid in the Sumerian graves, indicating a belief that the spirits of the dead could not only protect themselves against their enemies but also provide themselves with food. The funerary gifts of fish-hooks suggests that spirits were expected to catch fish and thus obtain clean food, instead

[p. 213]

of returning to disturb the living as they searched for the remnants of the feast, like the Scottish Gunna,

            perched alone
 On a chilly old grey stone,
 Nibbling, nibbling at a bone
    That we'll maybe throw away.

Some bodies which were laid in Sumerian graves were wrapped up in reed matting, a custom which suggests that the reeds afforded protection or imparted magical powers. Magical ceremonies were performed in Babylonian reed huts. As we have seen, Ea revealed the "purpose" of the gods, when they resolved to send a flood, by addressing the reed hut in which Pir-napishtim lay asleep. Possibly it was believed that the dead might also have visions in their dreams which would reveal the "purpose" of demons who were preparing to attack them. In Syria it was customary to wrap the dead in a sheep skin. [*1] As priests and gods were clad in the skins of animals from which their powers were derived, it is probable that the dead were similarly supposed to receive inspiration in their skin coverings. The Highland seer was wrapped in a bull's skin and left all night beside a stream so as to obtain knowledge of the future. This was a form of the Taghairm ceremony, which is referred to by Scott in his "Lady of the Lake". [*2] The belief in the magical influence of sacred clothing gave origin to the priestly robes. When David desired to ascertain what Saul intended to do he said, "Bring hither the ephod".

[p. 214]

Then he came to know that his enemy had resolved to attack Keilah. [*1] Elisha became a prophet when he received Elijah's mantle. [*2]

Sometimes the bodies of the Sumerians were placed in sarcophagi of clay. The earlier type was of "bath-tub" shape, round and flat-bottomed, with a rounded lid, while the later was the "slipper-shaped coffin", which was ornamented with charms. There is a close resemblance between the "bath-tub" coffins of Sumeria and the Egyptian pottery coffins of oval shape found in Third and Fourth Dynasty tombs in rock chambers near Nuerat. Certain designs on wooden coffins, and tombs as early as the First Dynasty, have direct analogies in Babylonia. [*3]

No great tombs were erected in Sumeria. The coffins were usually laid in brick vaults below dwellings, or below temples, or in trenches outside the city walls. On the "stele of victory", which belongs to the period of Eannatum, patesi of Lagash, the dead bodies on the battlefield are piled up in pairs quite naked, and earth is being heaped over them; this is a specimen of mound burial.

According to Herodotus the Babylonians "buried their dead in honey, and had funeral lamentations like the Egyptians". [*4] The custom of preserving the body in this manner does not appear to have been an ancient one, and may have resulted from cultural contact with the Nile valley during the late Assyrian period. So long as the bones were undisturbed, the spirit was supposed to be assured of rest in the Underworld. This archaic belief was widespread, and finds an echo in the quaint lines over Shakespeare's grave in Stratford church:

 

Click to enlarge
SLIPPER-SHAPED COFFIN MADE OF GLAZED EARTHENWARE
 (British Museum)
 Photo. Mansell

 

[p. 215]

Good friend, for Jesus' sake forbeare
 To dig the dust enclosed heare;
 Blest be the man that spares these stones,
 And curst be he that moves my bones.

In Babylonia the return of the spirits of the dead was greatly dreaded. Ishtar once uttered the terrible threat: "I will cause the dead to rise; they will then eat and live. The dead will be more numerous than the living." When a foreign country was invaded, it was a common custom to break open the tombs and scatter the bones they contained. Probably it was believed, when such acts of vandalism were committed, that the offended spirits would plague their kinsfolk. Ghosts always haunted the homes they once lived in, and were as malignant as demons. It is significant to find in this connection that the bodies of enemies who were slain in battle were not given decent burial, but mutilated and left for birds and beasts of prey to devour.

The demons that plagued the dead might also attack the living. A fragmentary narrative, which used to be referred to as the "Cuthean Legend of Creation", [*1] and has been shown by Mr. L. W. King to have no connection with the struggle between Merodach and the dragon, [*2] deals with a war waged by an ancient king against a horde of evil spirits, led by "the lord of heights, lord of the Anunaki (earth spirits)". Some of the supernatural warriors had bodies like birds; others had "raven faces", and all had been "suckled by Tiamat".

For three years the king sent out great armies to attack the demons, but "none returned alive". Then he decided to go forth himself to save his country from destruction. So he prepared for the conflict, and took

[p. 216]

the precaution of performing elaborate and therefore costly religious rites so as to secure the co-operation of the gods. His expedition was successful, for he routed the supernatural army. On his return home, he recorded his great victory on tablets which were placed in the shrine of Nergal at Cuthah.

This myth may be an echo of Nergal's raid against Eresh-ki-gal. Or, being associated with Cuthah, it may have been composed to encourage burial in that city's sacred cemetery, which had been cleared by the famous old king of the evil demons which tormented the dead and made seasonal attacks against the living.

Footnotes

^190:1 Ea addresses the hut in which his human favourite, Pir-napishtim, slept. His message was conveyed to this man in a dream.

^191:1 The second sentence of Ea's speech is conjectural, as the lines are mutilated.

^195:1 The Muses' Pageant, W. M. L. Hutchinson, pp. 5 et seq.

^196:1 Indian Myth and Legend, pp. 107 et seq.

^196:2 Vana Parva section of the Mahabharata (Roy's trans.), p. 425.

^196:3 Indian Myth and Legend, p. 141.

^196:4 Book of Leinster, and Keating's History of Ireland, p. 150 (1811 ed.).

^197:1 Religion of the Ancient Egyptians, H. Wiedemann, pp. 58 et seq.

^198:1 Pinches' The Religion of Babylonia and Assyria, p. 42.

^199:1 The problems involved are discussed from different points of view by Mr. L. W. King in Babylonian Religion (Books on Egypt and Chaldaea, vol. iv), Professor Pinches in The Old Testament in the Light of the Historical Records and Legends of Assyria and Babylonia, and other vols.

^200:1 Primitive Constellations, vol. i, pp. 334-5.

^200:2 Indian Myth and Legend, chap. iii.

^200:3 Professor Macdonell's translation.

^200:4 Indian Wisdom.

^201:1 "Varuna, the deity bearing the noose as his weapon", Sabha Parva section of the Mahabharata (Roy's trans.), p. 29.

^201:2 Indian Myth and Legend, pp. 38-42.

^202:1 Early Religious Poetry of Persia, J. H. Moulton, pp. 41 et seq. and 154 et seq.

^202:2 The Elder Edda, O. Bray, p. 55.

^203:1 The Elder Edda, O. Bray, pp. 291 et seq.

^203:2 Celtic Myth and Legend, pp. 133 et seq.

^203:3 Tennyson's The Passing of Arthur.

^203:4 Job, x, 1-22.

^204:1 The Elder Edda, O. Bray, pp. 150-1.

^204:2 Indian Myth and Legend, p. 326.

^207:1 The Religion of Ancient Rome, Cyril Bailey, p. 50.

^208:1 The Life and Exploits of Alexander the Great (Ethiopic version of the Pseudo Callisthenes), pp. 133-4. The conversation possibly never took place, but it is of interest in so far as it reflects beliefs which were familiar to the author of this ancient work. His Brahmans evidently believed that immortality was denied to ordinary men, and reserved only for the king, who was the representative of the deity, of course.

^208:2 Aspects of Religious Belief and Practice in Babylonia and Assyria, Morris Jastrow, pp. 358-9.

^209:1 The Mahabharata (Sabha Parva section), Roy 's translation, pp. 25-7.

^211:1 A History of Sumer and Akkad, L. W. King, pp. 181-2.

^211:2 Genesis, xxxv, 2-4.

^212:1 The Religion of Ancient Egypt, W. M. Flinders Petrie, p. 72.

^212:2 Sabha Parva section of the Mahabharata (Roy's trans.), p. 29.

^213:1 Egyptian Myth and Legend, p. 214.

^213:2 Canto iv:--

              Last eventide
 Brian an augury hath tried. . . .
 The Taghairm called; by which afar
 Our sires foresaw the events of war.
 Duncraggan's milk-white bull they slew. . .

^214:1 1 Samuel, xxiii, 9-11.

^214:2 1 Kings, xix, 19 and 2 Kings, ii, 13-15.

^214:3 The Burial Customs of Ancient Egypt, John Garstang, pp. 28, 29 (London, 1907).

^214:4 Herod., book i, 198.

^215:1 Records of the Past (old series), xi, pp. 109 et seq., and (new series), vol. i, pp. 149 et seq.

^215:2 L. W. King's The Seven Tablets of Creation.

     
Myths of Babylonia and Assyria, by Donald A. MacKenzie, [1915], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 217] [ch-10]

  

CHAPTER X

  

Buildings and Laws and Customs of Babylon

Decline and Fall of Sumerian Kingdoms--Elamites and Semites strive for Supremacy--Babylon's Walls, Gates, Streets, and Canals--The Hanging Gardens--Merodach's Great Temple--The Legal Code of Hammurabi--The Marriage Market--Position of Women--Marriage brought Freedom--Vestal Virgins--Breach of Promise and Divorce--Rights of Children--Female Publicans--The Land Laws--Doctors legislated out of Existence--Folk Cures--Spirits of Disease expelled by Magical Charms--The Legend of the Worm--"Touch Iron"--Curative Water--Magical Origin of Poetry and Music.

THE rise of Babylon inaugurated a new era in the history of Western Asia. Coincidentally the political power of the Sumerians came to an end. It had been paralysed by the Elamites, who, towards the close of the Dynasty of Isin, successfully overran the southern district and endeavoured to extend their sway over the whole valley. Two Elamite kings, Warad-Sin and his brother Rim-Sin, struggled with the rulers of Babylon for supremacy, and for a time it appeared as if the intruders from the East were to establish themselves permanently as a military aristocracy over Sumer and Akkad. But the Semites were strongly reinforced by new settlers of the same blended stock who swarmed from the land of the Arno-rites. Once again Arabia was pouring into Syria vast hordes of its surplus population, with the result that ethnic disturbances were constant and widespread. This migration is termed the Canaanitic or Amorite: it flowed into Mesopotamia and across Assyria, while it supplied

[p. 218]

the "driving power" which secured the ascendancy of the Hammurabi Dynasty at Babylon. Indeed, the ruling family which came into prominence there is believed to have been of Canaanitic origin.

Once Babylon became the metropolis it retained its pre-eminence until the end. Many political changes took place during its long and chequered history, but no rival city in the south ever attained to its splendour and greatness. Whether its throne was occupied by Amorite or Kassite, Assyrian or Chaldean, it was invariably found to be the most effective centre of administration for the lower Tigro-Euphrates valley. Some of the Kassite monarchs, however, showed a preference for Nippur.

Of its early history little is known. It was over-shadowed in turn by Kish and Umma, Lagash and Erech, and may have been little better than a great village when Akkad rose into prominence. Sargon I, the royal gardener, appears to have interested himself in its development, for it was recorded that he cleared its trenches and strengthened its fortifications. The city occupied a strategic position, and probably assumed importance on that account as well as a trading and industrial centre. Considerable wealth had accumulated at Babylon when the Dynasty of Ur reached the zenith of its power. It is recorded that King Dungi plundered its famous "Temple of the High Head", E-sagila, which some identify with the Tower of Babel, so as to secure treasure for Ea's temple at Eridu, which he specially favoured. His vandalistic raid, like that of the Gutium, or men of Kutu, was remembered for long centuries afterwards, and the city god was invoked at the time to cut short his days.

No doubt, Hammurabi's Babylon closely resembled the later city so vividly described by Greek writers, although it was probably not of such great dimensions.

[p. 219]

[paragraph continues] According to Herodotus, it occupied an exact square on the broad plain, and had a circumference of sixty of our miles. "While such is its size," the historian wrote, "in magnificence there is no other city that approaches to it." Its walls were eighty-seven feet thick and three hundred and fifty feet high, and each side of the square was fifteen miles in length. The whole city was surrounded by a deep, broad canal or moat, and the river Euphrates ran through it.

"Here", continued Herodotus, "I may not omit to tell the use to which the mould dug out of the great moat was turned, nor the manner in which the wall was wrought. As fast as they dug the moat the soil which they got from the cutting was made into bricks, and when a sufficient number were completed they baked the bricks in kilns. Then they set to building, and began with bricking the borders of the moat, after which they proceeded to construct the wall itself; using throughout for their cement hot bitumen, and interposing a layer of wattled reeds at every thirtieth course of the bricks. On the top, along the edges of the wall, they constructed buildings of a single chamber facing one another, leaving between them room for a four-horse chariot to turn. In the circuit of the wall are a hundred gates, all of brass, with brazen lintels and side posts." [*1] These were the gates referred to by Isaiah when God called Cyrus:

I will loose the loins of kings, to open before him the two leaved gates; and the gates shall not be shut: I will go before thee, and make the crooked places straight; I will break in pieces the gates of brass, and cut in sunder the bars of iron. [*2]

The outer wall was the main defence of the city, but there was also an inner wall less thick but not much

[p. 220]

inferior in strength. In addition, a fortress stood in each division of the city. The king's palace and the temple of Bel Merodach were surrounded by walls.

All the main streets were perfectly straight, and each crossed the city from gate to gate, a distance of fifteen miles, half of them being interrupted by the river, which had to be ferried. As there were twenty-five gates on each side of the outer wall, the great thoroughfares numbered fifty in all, and there were six hundred and seventy-six squares, each over two miles in circumference. From Herodotus we gather that the houses were three or four stories high, suggesting that the tenement system was not unknown, and according to Q. Curtius, nearly half of the area occupied by the city was taken up by gardens within the squares.

In Greek times Babylon was famous for the hanging or terraced gardens of the "new palace", which had been erected by Nebuchadnezzar II. These occupied a square which was more than a quarter of a mile in circumference. Great stone terraces, resting on arches, rose up like a giant stairway to a height of about three hundred and fifty feet, and the whole structure was strengthened by a surrounding wall over twenty feet in thickness. So deep were the layers of mould on each terrace that fruit trees were grown amidst the plants of luxuriant foliage and the brilliant Asian flowers. Water for irrigating the gardens was raised from the river by a mechanical contrivance to a great cistern situated on the highest terrace, and it was prevented from leaking out of the soil by layers of reeds and bitumen and sheets of lead. Spacious apartments, luxuriously furnished and decorated, were constructed in the spaces between the arches and were festooned by flowering creepers. A broad stairway ascended from terrace to terrace.

 

Click to enlarge
NEBUCHADNEZZAR IN THE HANGING GARDENS
 From the Painting by E. Wallcousins.

 

[p. 221]

The old palace stood in a square nearly four miles in circumference, and was strongly protected by three walls, which were decorated by sculptures in low relief, representing battle scenes and scenes of the chase and royal ceremonies. Winged bulls with human heads guarded the main entrance.

Another architectural feature of the city was E-sagila, the temple of Bel Merodach, known to the Greeks as "Jupiter-Belus". The high wall which enclosed it had gates of solid brass. "In the middle of the precinct", wrote Herodotus, "there was a tower of solid masonry, a furlong in length and breadth, upon which was raised a second tower, and on that a third, and so on up to eight. The ascent to the top is on the outside, by a path which winds round all the towers. When one is about halfway up, one finds a resting-place and seats, where persons are wont to sit some time on their way to the summit. On the topmost tower there is a spacious temple, and inside the temple stands a couch of unusual size, richly adorned, with a golden table by its side. There is no statue of any kind set up in the place, nor is the chamber occupied of nights by anyone but a single native woman, who, as the Chaldaeans, the priests of this god, affirm, is chosen for himself by the deity out of all the women of the land."

A woman who was the "wife of Amon" also slept in that god's temple at Thebes in Egypt. A similar custom was observed in Lycia.

"Below, in the same precinct," continued Herodotus, "there is a second temple, in which is a sitting figure of Jupiter, all of gold. Before the figure stands a large golden table, and the throne whereon it sits, and the base on which the throne is placed, are likewise of pure gold. . . . Outside the temple are two altars, one of solid gold, on which it is only lawful to offer sucklings;

[p. 222]

the other, a common altar, but of great size, on which the full-grown animals are sacrificed. It is also on the great altar that the Chaldaeans burn the frankincense, which is offered to the amount of a thousand talents' weight, every year, at the festival of the god. In the time of Cyrus there was likewise in this temple a figure of a man, twelve cubits high, entirely of solid gold. . . . Besides the ornaments which I have mentioned, there are a large number of private offerings in this holy precinct." [*1]

The city wall and river gates were closed every night, and when Babylon was besieged the people were able to feed themselves. The gardens and small farms were irrigated by canals, and canals also controlled the flow of the river Euphrates. A great dam had been formed above the town to store the surplus water during inundation and increase the supply when the river sank to its lowest.

In Hammurabi's time the river was crossed by ferry boats, but long ere the Greeks visited the city a great bridge had been constructed. So completely did the fierce Sennacherib destroy the city, that most of the existing ruins date from the period of Nebuchadnezzar II. [*2]

Our knowledge of the social life of Babylon and the territory under its control is derived chiefly from the Hammurabi Code of laws, of which an almost complete copy was discovered at Susa, towards the end of 1901, by the De Morgan expedition. The laws were inscribed on a stele of black diorite 7 ft. 3 in. high, with a circumference at the base of 6 ft. 2 in. and at the top of 5 ft. 4 in. This important relic of an ancient law-abiding people had been broken in three pieces, but when these

 

Click to enlarge
STELE OF HAMMURABI, WITH ''CODE OF LAWS''
 (Louvre, Paris)
 Photo. Giraudon

 

[p. 223]

were joined together it was found that the text was not much impaired. On one side are twenty-eight columns and on the other sixteen. Originally there were in all nearly 4000 lines of inscriptions, but five columns, comprising about 300 lines, had been erased to give space, it is conjectured, for the name of the invader who carried the stele away, but unfortunately the record was never made.

On the upper part of the stele, which is now one of the treasures of the Louvre, Paris, King Hammurabi salutes, with his right hand reverently upraised, the sun god Shamash, seated on his throne, at the summit of E-sagila, by whom he is being presented with the stylus with which to inscribe the legal code. Both figures are heavily bearded, but have shaven lips and chins. The god wears a conical headdress and a flounced robe suspended from his left shoulder, while the king has assumed a round dome-shaped hat and a flowing garment which almost sweeps the ground.

It is gathered from the Code that there were three chief social grades--the aristocracy, which included land-owners, high officials and administrators; the freemen, who might be wealthy merchants or small landholders; and the slaves. The fines imposed for a given offence upon wealthy men were much heavier than those imposed upon the poor. Lawsuits were heard in courts. Witnesses were required to tell the truth, "affirming before the god what they knew", and perjurers were severely dealt with; a man who gave false evidence in connection with a capital charge was put to death. A strict watch was also kept over the judges, and if one was found to have willingly convicted a prisoner on insufficient evidence he was fined and degraded.

Theft was regarded as a heinous crime, and was invariably

[p. 224]

punished by death. Thieves included those who made purchases from minors or slaves without the sanction of elders or trustees. Sometimes the accused was given the alternative of paying a fine, which might exceed by ten or even thirty fold the value of the article or animal he had appropriated. It was imperative that lost property should be restored. If the owner of an article of which he had been wrongfully deprived found it in possession of a man who declared that he had purchased it from another, evidence was taken in court. When it happened that the seller was proved to have been the thief, the capital penalty was imposed. On the other hand, the alleged purchaser was dealt with in like manner if he failed to prove his case. Compensation for property stolen by a brigand was paid by the temple, and the heirs of a man slain by a brigand within the city had to be compensated by the local authority.

Of special interest are the laws which relate to the position of women. In this connection reference may first he made to the marriage-by-auction custom, which Herodotus described as follows: "Once a year in each village the maidens of age to marry were collected all together into one place, while the men stood round them in a circle. Then a herald called up the damsels one by one, and offered them for sale. He began with the most beautiful. When she was sold for no small sum of money, he offered for sale the one who came next to her in beauty. All of them were sold to be wives. The richest of the Babylonians who wished to wed bid against each other for the loveliest maidens, while the humbler wife-seekers, who were indifferent about beauty, took the more homely damsels with marriage portions. For the custom was that when the herald had gone through the whole number of the beautiful

 

Click to enlarge
THE BABYLONIAN MARRIAGE MARKET
 From The Painting by Edwin Long, R.A., in the Royal Holloway College.

 

[p. 225]

damsels, he should then call up the ugliest--a cripple, if there chanced to be one--and offer her to the men, asking who would agree to take her with the smallest marriage portion. And the man who offered to take the smallest sum had her assigned to him. The marriage portions were furnished by the money paid for, the beautiful damsels, and thus the fairer maidens portioned out the uglier. No one was allowed to give his daughter in marriage to the man of his choice, nor might anyone carry away the damsel whom he had purchased without finding bail really and truly to make her his wife; if, however, it turned out that they did not agree, the money might be paid back. All who liked might come, even from distant villages, and bid for the women." [*1]

This custom is mentioned by other writers, but it is impossible to ascertain at what period it became prevalent in Babylonia and by whom it was introduced. Herodotus understood that it obtained also in "the Illyrian tribe of the Eneti", which was reputed to have entered Italy with Antenor after the fall of Troy, and has been identified with the Venetians of later times. But the ethnic clue thus afforded is exceedingly vague. There is no direct reference to the custom in the Hammurabi Code, which reveals a curious blending of the principles of "Father right" and "Mother right". A girl was subject to her father's will; he could dispose of her as he thought best, and she always remained a member of his family; after marriage she was known as the daughter of so and so rather than the wife of so and so. But marriage brought her freedom and the rights of citizenship. The power vested in her father was never transferred to her husband.

A father had the right to select a suitable spouse for

[p. 226]

his daughter, and she could not marry without his consent. That this law did not prevent "love matches" is made evident by the fact that provision was made in the Code for the marriage of a free woman with a male slave, part of whose estate in the event of his wife's death could be claimed by his master.

When a betrothal was arranged, the father fixed the "bride price", which was paid over before the contract could be concluded, and he also provided a dowry. The amount of the "bride price" might, however, be refunded to the young couple to give them a start in life. If, during the interval between betrothal and marriage, the man "looked upon another woman", and said to his father-in-law, "I will not marry your daughter", he forfeited the "bride price" for breach of promise of marriage.

A girl might also obtain a limited degree of freedom by taking vows of celibacy and becoming one of the vestal virgins, or nuns, who were attached to the temple of the sun god. She did not, however, live a life of entire seclusion. If she received her due proportion of her father's estate, she could make business investments within certain limits. She was not, for instance, allowed to own a wineshop, and if she even entered one she was burned at the stake. Once she took these vows she had to observe them until the end of her days. If she married, as she might do to obtain the legal status of a married woman and enjoy the privileges of that position, she denied her husband conjugal rites, but provided him with a concubine who might bear him children, as Sarah did to Abraham. These nuns must not be confused with the unmoral women who were associated with the temples of Ishtar and other love goddesses of shady repute.

The freedom secured by a married woman had its

[p. 227]

legal limitations. If she became a widow, for instance, she could not remarry without the consent of a judge, to whom she was expected to show good cause for the step she proposed to take. Punishments for breaches of the marriage law were severe. Adultery was a capital crime; the guilty parties were bound together and thrown into the river. If it happened, however, that the wife of a prisoner went to reside with another man on account of poverty, she was acquitted and allowed to return to her husband after his release. In cases where no plea of poverty could be urged the erring women were drowned. The wife of a soldier who had been taken prisoner by an enemy was entitled to a third part of her husband's estate if her son was a minor, the remainder was held in trust. The husband could enter into possession of all his property again if he happened to return home.

Divorce was easily obtained. A husband might send his wife away either because she was childless or because he fell in love with another woman. Incompatibility of temperament was also recognized as sufficient reason for separation. A woman might hate her husband and wish to leave him. "If", the Code sets forth, "she is careful and is without blame, and is neglected by her husband who has deserted her", she can claim release from the marriage contract. But if she is found to have another lover, and is guilty of neglecting her duties, she is liable to be put to death.

A married woman possessed her own property. Indeed, the value of her marriage dowry was always vested in her. When, therefore, she divorced her husband, or was divorced by him, she was entitled to have her dowry refunded and to return to her father's house. Apparently she could claim maintenance from her father.

[p. 228]

A woman could have only one husband, but a man could have more than one wife. He might marry a secondary wife, or concubine, because he was without offspring, but "the concubine", the Code lays down, "shall not rank with the wife". Another reason for second marriage recognized by law was a wife's state of health. In such circumstances a man could not divorce his sickly wife. He had to support her in his house as long as she lived.

Children were the heirs of their parents, but if a man during his lifetime gifted his property to his wife, and confirmed it on "a sealed tablet", the children could have no claim, and the widow was entitled to leave her estate to those of her children she preferred; but she could not will any portion of it to her brothers. In ordinary cases the children of a first marriage shared equally the estate of a father with those of a second marriage. If a slave bore children to her employer, their right to inheritance depended on whether or not the father had recognized them as his offspring during his lifetime. A father might legally disown his son if the young man was guilty of criminal practices.

The legal rights of a vestal virgin were set forth in detail. If she had received no dowry from her father when she took vows of celibacy, she could claim after his death one-third of the portion of a son. She could will her estate to anyone she favoured, but if she died intestate her brothers were her heirs. When, however, her estate consisted of fields or gardens allotted to her by her father, she could not disinherit her legal heirs. The fields or gardens might be worked during her lifetime by her brothers if they paid rent, or she might employ a manager on the "share system".

Vestal virgins and married women were protected

[p. 229]

against the slanderer. Any man who "pointed the finger" against them unjustifiably was charged with the offence before a judge, who could sentence him to have his forehead branded. It was not difficult, therefore, in ancient Babylonia to discover the men who made malicious and unfounded statements regarding an innocent woman. Assaults on women were punished according to the victim's rank; even slaves were protected.

Women appear to have monopolized the drink traffic. At any rate, there is no reference to male wine sellers. A female publican had to conduct her business honestly, and was bound to accept a legal tender. If she refused corn and demanded silver, when the value of the silver by "grand weight" was below the price of corn, she was prosecuted and punished by being thrown into the water. Perhaps she was simply ducked. As much may be inferred from the fact that when she was found guilty of allowing rebels to meet in her house, she was put to death.

The land laws were strict and exacting. A tenant could be penalized for not cultivating his holding properly. The rent paid was a proportion of the crop, but the proportion could be fixed according to the average yield of a district, so that a careless or inefficient tenant had to bear the brunt of his neglect or want of skill. The punishment for allowing a field to lie fallow was to make a man hoe and sow it and then hand it over to his landlord, and this applied even to a man who leased unreclaimed land which he had contracted to cultivate. Damage done to fields by floods after the rent was paid was borne by the cultivator; but if it occurred before the corn was reaped the landlord's share was calculated in proportion to the amount of the yield which was recovered. Allowance was also made for poor harvests, when the

[p. 230]

shortage was not due to the neglect of the tenant, but to other causes, and no interest was paid for borrowed money even if the farm suffered from the depredations of the tempest god; the moneylender had to share risks with borrowers. Tenants who neglected their dykes, however, were not exempted from their legal liabilities, and their whole estates could be sold to reimburse their creditors.

The industrious were protected against the careless. Men who were negligent about controlling the water supply, and caused floods by opening irrigation ditches which damaged the crops of their neighbours, had to pay for the losses sustained, the damages being estimated according to the average yield of a district. A tenant who allowed his sheep to stray on to a neighbour's pasture had to pay a heavy fine in corn at the harvest season, much in excess of the value of the grass cropped by his sheep. Gardeners were similarly subject to strict laws. All business contracts had to be conducted according to the provisions of the Code, and in every case it was necessary that a proper record should be made on clay tablets. As a rule a dishonest tenant or trader had to pay sixfold the value of the sum under dispute if the judge decided in court against his claim.

The law of an eye for an eye and a tooth for a tooth was strictly observed in Babylonia. A freeman who destroyed an eye of a freeman had one of his own destroyed; if he broke a bone, he had a bone broken. Fines were imposed, however, when a slave was injured. For striking a gentleman, a commoner received sixty lashes, and the son who smote his father had his hands cut off. A slave might have his ears cut off for assaulting his master's son.

Doctors must have found their profession an extremely

[p. 231]

risky one. No allowance was made for what is nowadays known as a "professional error". A doctor's hands were cut off if he opened a wound with a metal knife and his patient afterwards died, or if a man lost his eye as the result of an operation. A slave who died under a doctor's hands had to be replaced by a slave, and if a slave lost his eye, the doctor had to pay half the man's market value to the owner. Professional fees were fixed according to a patient's rank. Gentlemen had to pay five shekels of silver to a doctor who set a bone or restored diseased flesh, commoners three shekels, and masters for their slaves two shekels. There was also a scale of fees for treating domesticated animals, and it was not overgenerous. An unfortunate surgeon who undertook to treat an ox or ass suffering from a severe wound had to pay a quarter of its price to its owner if it happened to die. A shrewd farmer who was threatened with the loss of an animal must have been extremely anxious to engage the services of a surgeon.

It is not surprising, after reviewing this part of the Hammurabi Code, to find Herodotus stating bluntly that the Babylonians had no physicians. "When a man is ill", he wrote, "they lay him in the public square, and the passers-by come up to him, and if they have ever had his disease themselves, or have known anyone who has suffered from it, they give him advice, recommending him to do whatever they found good in their own case, or in the case known to them; and no one is allowed to pass the sick man in silence without asking him what his ailment is." One might imagine that Hammurabi had legislated the medical profession out of existence, were it not that letters have been found in the Assyrian library of Ashur-banipal which indicate that skilled physicians were held in high repute. It is improbable, however,

[p. 232]

that they were numerous. The risks they ran in Babylonia may account for their ultimate disappearance in that country.

No doubt patients received some benefit from exposure in the streets in the sunlight and fresh air, and perhaps, too, from some of the old wives' remedies which were gratuitously prescribed by passers-by. In Egypt, where certain of the folk cures were recorded on papyri, quite effective treatment was occasionally given, although the "medicines" were exceedingly repugnant as a rule; ammonia, for instance, was taken with the organic substances found in farmyards. Elsewhere some wonderful instances of excellent folk cures have come to light, especially among isolated peoples, who have received them interwoven in their immemorial traditions. A medical man who has investigated this interesting subject in the Scottish Highlands has shown that "the simple observation of the people was the starting-point of our fuller knowledge, however complete we may esteem it to be". For dropsy and heart troubles, foxglove, broom tops, and juniper berries, which have reputations "as old as the hills", are "the most reliable medicines in our scientific armoury at the present time". These discoveries of the ancient folks have been "merely elaborated in later days". Ancient cures for indigestion are still in use. "Tar water, which was a remedy for chest troubles, especially for those of a consumptive nature, has endless imitations in our day"; it was also "the favourite remedy for skin diseases". No doubt the present inhabitants of Babylonia, who utilize bitumen as a germicide, are perpetuating an ancient folk custom.

This medical man who is being quoted adds: "The whole matter may be summed up, that we owe infinitely more to the simple nature study of our people in the

[p. 233]

great affair of health than we owe to all the later science." [*1]

Herodotus, commenting on the custom of patients taking a census of folk cures in the streets, said it was one of the wisest institutions of the Babylonian people. It is to be regretted that he did not enter into details regarding the remedies which were in greatest favour in his day. His data would have been useful for comparative purposes.

So far as can be gathered from the clay tablets, faith cures were not unknown, and there was a good deal of quackery. If surgery declined, as a result of the severe restrictions which hampered progress in an honourable profession, magic flourished like tropical fungi. Indeed, the worker of spells was held in high repute, and his operations were in most cases allowed free play. There are only two paragraphs in the Hammurabi Code which deal with magical practices. It is set forth that if one man cursed another and the curse could not be justified, the perpetrator of it must suffer the death penalty. Provision was also made for discovering whether a spell had been legally imposed or not. The victim was expected to plunge himself in a holy river. If the river carried him away it was held as proved that he deserved his punishment, and "the layer of the spell" was given possession of the victim's house. A man who could swim was deemed to be innocent; he claimed the residence of "the layer of the spell", who was promptly put to death. With this interesting glimpse of ancient superstition the famous Code opens, and then strikes a modern note by detailing the punishments for perjury and the unjust administration of law in the courts.

[p. 234]

The poor sufferers who gathered at street corners in Babylon to make mute appeal for cures believed that they were possessed by evil spirits. Germs of disease were depicted by lively imaginations as invisible demons, who derived nourishment from the human body. When a patient was wasted with disease, growing thinner and weaker and more bloodless day by day, it was believed that a merciless vampire was sucking his veins and devouring his flesh. It had therefore to be expelled by performing a magical ceremony and repeating a magical formula. The demon was either driven or enticed away.

A magician had to decide in the first place what particular demon was working evil. He then compelled its attention and obedience by detailing its attributes and methods of attack, and perhaps by naming it. Thereafter he suggested how it should next act by releasing a raven, so that it might soar towards the clouds like that bird, or by offering up a sacrifice which it received for nourishment and as compensation. Another popular method was to fashion a waxen figure of the patient and prevail upon the disease demon to enter it. The figure was then carried away to be thrown in the river or burned in a fire.

Occasionally a quite effective cure was included in the ceremony. As much is suggested by the magical treatment of toothache. First of all the magician identified the toothache demon as "the worm". Then he recited its history, which is as follows: After Anu created the heavens, the heavens created the earth, the earth created the rivers, the rivers created the canals, the canals created the marshes, and last of all the marshes created "the worm".

This display of knowledge compelled the worm to listen, and no doubt the patient was able to indicate to

[p. 235]

what degree it gave evidence of its agitated mind. The magician continued:

Came the worm and wept before Shamash,
 Before Ea came her tears:
 "What wilt thou give me for my food,
 What wilt thou give me to devour?"

One of the deities answered: "I will give thee dried bones and scented . . . wood"; but the hungry worm protested:

"Nay, what are these dried bones of thine to me?
 Let me drink among the teeth;
 And set me on the gums
 That I may devour the blood of the teeth,
 And of their gums destroy their strength--
 Then shall I hold the bolt of the door."

The magician provided food for "the worm", and the following is his recipe: "Mix beer, the plant sa-kil-bir, and oil together; put it on the tooth and repeat Incantation." No doubt this mixture soothed the pain, and the sufferer must have smiled gladly when the magician finished his incantation by exclaiming:

"So must thou say this, O Worm!
 May Ea smite thee with the might of his fist." [*1]

Headaches were no doubt much relieved when damp cloths were wrapped round a patient's head and scented wood was burned beside him, while the magician, in whom so much faith was reposed, droned out a mystical incantation. The curative water was drawn from the confluence of two streams and was sprinkled with much ceremony. In like manner the evil-eye curers, who still

[p. 236]

operate in isolated districts in these islands, draw water from under bridges "over which the dead and the living pass", [*1] and mutter charms and lustrate victims.

Headaches were much dreaded by the Babylonians. They were usually the first symptoms of fevers, and the demons who caused them were supposed to be blood-thirsty and exceedingly awesome. According to the charms, these invisible enemies of man were of the brood of Nergal. No house could be protected against them. They entered through keyholes and chinks of doors and windows; they crept like serpents and stank like mice; they had lolling tongues like hungry dogs.

Magicians baffled the demons by providing a charm. If a patient "touched iron"--meteoric iron, which was the "metal of heaven"--relief could be obtained. Or, perhaps, the sacred water would dispel the evil one; as the drops trickled from the patient's face, so would the fever spirit trickle away. When a pig was offered up in sacrifice as a substitute for a patient, the wicked spirit was commanded to depart and allow a kindly spirit to take its place--an indication that the Babylonians, like the Germanic peoples, believed that they were guarded by spirits who brought good luck.

The numerous incantations which were inscribed on clay tablets and treasured in libraries, do not throw much light on the progress of medical knowledge, for the genuine folk cures were regarded as of secondary importance, and were not as a rule recorded. But these metrical compositions are of special interest, in so far as they indicate how poetry originated and achieved wide-spread popularity among ancient peoples. Like the religious dance, the earliest poems were used for magical purposes. They were composed in the first place by men

[p. 237]

and women who were supposed to be inspired in the literal sense; that is, possessed by spirits. Primitive man associated "spirit" with "breath", which was the "air of life", and identical with wind. The poetical magician drew in a "spirit", and thus received inspiration, as he stood on some sacred spot on the mountain summit, amidst forest solitudes, beside a whispering stream, or on the sounding shore. As Burns has sung:

The muse, nae poet ever fand her,
 Till by himsel' he learn'd to wander,
 Adown some trottin' burn's meander,
              An' no think lang:
 O sweet to stray, an' pensive ponder
              A heart-felt sang!

[paragraph continues] Or, perhaps, the bard received inspiration by drinking magic water from the fountain called Hippocrene, or the skaldic mead which dripped from the moon.

The ancient poet did not sing for the mere love of singing: he knew nothing about "Art for Art's sake". His object in singing appears to have been intensely practical. The world was inhabited by countless hordes of spirits, which were believed to be ever exercising themselves to influence mankind. The spirits caused suffering; they slew victims; they brought misfortune; they were also the source of good or "luck". Man regarded spirits emotionally; he conjured them with emotion; he warded off their attacks with emotion; and his emotions were given rhythmical expression by means of metrical magical charms.

Poetic imagery had originally a magical significance; if the ocean was compared to a dragon, it was because it was supposed to be inhabited by a storm-causing dragon; the wind whispered because a spirit whispered in it.

[p. 238]

[paragraph continues] Love lyrics were charms to compel the love god to wound or possess a maiden's heart--to fill it, as an Indian charm sets forth, with "the yearning of the Apsaras (fairies)"; satires conjured up evil spirits to injure a victim; and heroic narratives chanted at graves were statements made to the god of battle, so that he might award the mighty dead by transporting him to the Valhal of Odin or Swarga of Indra.

Similarly, music had magical origin as an imitation of the voices of spirits--of the piping birds who were "Fates", of the wind high and low, of the thunder roll, of the bellowing sea. So the god Pan piped on his reed bird-like notes, Indra blew his thunder horn, Thor used his hammer like a drumstick, Neptune imitated on his "wreathed horn" the voice of the deep, the Celtic oak god Dagda twanged his windy wooden harp, and Angus, the Celtic god of spring and love, came through budding forest ways with a silvern harp which had strings of gold, echoing the tuneful birds, the purling streams, the whispering winds, and the rustling of scented fir and blossoming thorn.

Modern-day poets and singers, who voice their moods and cast the spell of their moods over readers and audiences, are the representatives of ancient magicians who believed that moods were caused by the spirits which possessed them--the rhythmical wind spirits, those harpers of the forest and songsters of ocean.

The following quotations from Mr. R. C. Thompson's translations of Babylonian charms will serve to illustrate their poetic qualities:

     Fever like frost hath come upon the land.

Fever hath blown upon the man as the wind blast,
 It hath smitten the man and humbled his pride. [p. 239]
 Headache lieth like the stars of heaven in the desert and hath no praise;
 Pain in the head and shivering like a scudding cloud turn unto the form of man.

     Headache whose course like the dread windstorm none knoweth.
      Headache roareth over the desert, blowing like the wind,
      Flashing like lightning, it is loosed above and below,
      It cutteth off him, who feareth not his god, like a reed . . .
      From amid mountains it hath descended upon the land.

          Headache . . . a rushing hag-demon,
           Granting no rest, nor giving kindly sleep . . .
           Whose shape is as the whirlwind.
           Its appearance is as the darkening heavens,
           And its face as the deep shadow of the forest.

     Sickness . . . breaking the fingers as a rope of wind . . .
      Flashing like a heavenly star, it cometh like the dew.

These early poets had no canons of Art, and there were no critics to disturb their meditations. Many singers had to sing and die ere a critic could find much to say. In ancient times, therefore, poets had their Golden Age--they were a law unto themselves. Even the "minors" were influential members of society.

Footnotes

^219:1 Herodotus, book i, 179 (Rawlinson's translation).

^219:2 Isaiah, xlv, I, 2.

^222:1 Herodotus, book i, 181-3 (Rawlinson's translation).

^222:2 History of Sumer and Akkad, L. W. King, p. 37.

^225:1 Herodotus, book i, 196 (Rawlinson's translation).

^233:1 Home Life of the Highlanders (Dr. Cameron Gillies on Medical Knowledge), pp. 85 et seq. Glasgow, 1911.

^235:1 Translations by R. C. Thompson in The Devils and Spirits of Babylon, vol. i, pp. lxiii et seq.

^236:1 Bridges which lead to graveyards.

     
Myths of Babylonia and Assyria, by Donald A. MacKenzie, [1915], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 240] [ch-11]

  

CHAPTER XI

  

The Golden Age of Babylonia

Rise of the Sun God--Amorites and Elamites struggle for Ascendancy--The Conquering Ancestors of Hammurabi--Sumerian Cities Destroyed--Widespread Race Movements--Phoenician Migration from Persian Gulf--Wanderings of Abraham and Lot--Biblical References to Hittites and Amorites--Battles of Four Kings with Five--Amraphel, Arioch, and Tidal--Hammurabi's Brilliant Reign--Elamite Power Stamped Out--Babylon's Great General and Statesman--The Growth of Commerce, Agriculture, and Education--An Ancient School--Business and Private Correspondence--A Love Letter--Postal System--Hammurabi's Successors--The Earliest Kassites--The Sealand Dynasty--Hittite Raid on Babylon and Hyksos Invasion of Egypt.

SUN worship came into prominence in its most fully developed form during the obscure period which followed the decline of the Dynasty of Isin. This was probably due to the changed political conditions which brought about the ascendancy for a time of Larsa, the seat of the Sumerian sun cult, and of Sippar, the seat of the Akkadian sun cult. Larsa was selected as the capital of the Elamite conquerors, while their rivals, the Amorites, appear to have first established their power at Sippar.

Babbar, the sun god of Sippar, whose Semitic name was Shamash, must have been credited with the early successes of the Amorites, who became domiciled under his care, and it was possibly on that account that the ruling family subsequently devoted so much attention to his worship in Merodach's city of Babylon, where a sun temple was erected, and Shamash received devout recognition

[p. 241]

as an abstract deity of righteousness and law, who reflected the ideals of well organized and firmly governed communities.

The first Amoritic king was Sumu-abum, but little is known regarding him except that he reigned at Sippar. He was succeeded by Sumu-la-ilu, a deified monarch, who moved from Sippar to Babylon, the great wall of which he either repaired or entirely reconstructed in his fifth year. With these two monarchs began the brilliant Hammurabi, or First Dynasty of Babylonia, which endured for three centuries. Except Sumu-abum, who seems to stand alone, all its kings belonged to the same family, and son succeeded father in unbroken succession.

Sumu-la-ilu was evidently a great general and conqueror of the type of Thothmes III of Egypt. His empire, it is believed, included the rising city states of Assyria, and extended southward as far as ancient Lagash.

Of special interest on religious as well as political grounds was his association with Kish. That city had become the stronghold of a rival family of Amoritic kings, some of whom were powerful enough to assert their independence. They formed the Third Dynasty of Kish. The local god was Zamama, the Tammuz-like deity, who, like Nin-Girsu of Lagash, was subsequently identified with Merodach of Babylon. But prominence was also given to the moon god Nannar, to whom a temple had been erected, a fact which suggests that sun worship was not more pronounced among the Semites than the Arabians, and may not, indeed, have been of Semitic origin at all. Perhaps the lunar temple was a relic of the influential Dynasty of Ur.

Sumu-la-ilu attacked and captured Kish, but did not slay Bunutakhtunila, its king, who became his vassal. Under the overlordship of Sumu-la-ilu, the next ruler of

[p. 242]

[paragraph continues] Kish, whose name was Immerum, gave prominence to the public worship of Shamash. Politics and religion went evidently hand in hand.

Sumu-la-ilu strengthened the defences of Sippar, restored the wall and temple of Cuthah, and promoted the worship of Merodach and his consort Zerpanitum at Babylon. He was undoubtedly one of the forceful personalities of his dynasty. His son, Zabium, had a short but successful reign, and appears to have continued the policy of his father in consolidating the power of Babylon and securing the allegiance of subject cities. He enlarged Merodach's temple, E-sagila, restored the Kish temple of Zamama, and placed a golden image of himself in the temple of the sun god at Sippar. Apil-Sin, his son, surrounded Babylon with a new wall, erected a temple to Ishtar, and presented a throne of gold and silver to Shamash in that city, while he also strengthened Borsippa, renewed Nergal's temple at Cuthah, and dug canals.

The next monarch was Sin-muballit, son of Apil-Sin and father of Hammurabi. He engaged himself in extending and strengthening the area controlled by Babylon by building city fortifications and improving the irrigation system. It is recorded that he honoured Shamash with the gift of a shrine and a golden altar adorned with jewels. Like Sumu-la-ilu, he was a great battle lord, and was specially concerned in challenging the supremacy of Elam in Sumeria and in the western land of the Amorites.

For a brief period a great conqueror, named Rim-Anum, had established an empire which extended from Kish to Larsa, but little is known regarding him. Then several kings flourished at Larsa who claimed to have ruled over Ur. The first monarch with an Elamite name who became connected with Larsa was Kudur-Mabug,

[p. 243]

son of Shimti-Shilkhak, the father of Warad-Sin and Rim-Sin.

It was from one of these Elamite monarchs that Sin-muballit captured Isin, and probably the Elamites were also the leaders of the army of Ur which he had routed before that event took place. He was not successful, however, in driving the Elamites from the land, and possibly he arranged with them a treaty of peace or perhaps of alliance.

Much controversy has been waged over the historical problems connected with this disturbed age. The records are exceedingly scanty, because the kings were not in the habit of commemorating battles which proved disastrous to them, and their fragmentary references to successes are not sufficient to indicate what permanent results accrued from their various campaigns. All we know for certain is that for a considerable period, extending perhaps over a century, a tremendous and disastrous struggle was waged at intervals, which desolated middle Babylonia. At least five great cities were destroyed by fire, as is testified by the evidence accumulated by excavators. These were Lagash, Umma, Shurruppak, Kisurra, and Adab. The ancient metropolis of Lagash, whose glory had been revived by Gudea and his kinsmen, fell soon after the rise of Larsa, and lay in ruins until the second century B.C., when, during the Seleucid Period, it was again occupied for a time. From its mound at Tello, and the buried ruins of the other cities, most of the relics of ancient Sumerian civilization have been recovered.

It was probably during one of the intervals of this stormy period that the rival kings in Babylonia joined forces against a common enemy and invaded the Western Land. Probably there was much unrest there. Great ethnic disturbances were in progress which were changing

[p. 244]

the political complexion of Western Asia. In addition to the outpourings of Arabian peoples into Palestine and Syria, which propelled other tribes to invade Mesopotamia, northern Babylonia, and Assyria, there was also much unrest all over the wide area to north and west of Elam. Indeed, the Elamite migration into southern Babylonia may not have been unconnected with the southward drift of roving bands from Media and the Iranian plateau.

It is believed that these migrations were primarily due to changing climatic conditions, a prolonged "Dry Cycle" having caused a shortage of herbage, with the result that pastoral peoples were compelled to go farther and farther afield in quest of "fresh woods and pastures new". Innumerable currents and cross currents were set in motion once these race movements swept towards settled districts either to flood them with human waves, or surround them like islands in the midst of tempest-lashed seas, fretting the frontiers with restless fury, and ever groping for an inlet through which to flow with irresistible force.

The Elamite occupation of Southern Babylonia appears to have propelled migrations of not inconsiderable numbers of its inhabitants. No doubt the various sections moved towards districts which were suitable for their habits of life. Agriculturists, for instance, must have shown preference for those areas which were capable of agricultural development, while pastoral folks sought grassy steppes and valleys, and seafarers the shores of alien seas.

Northern Babylonia and Assyria probably attracted the tillers of the soil. But the movements of seafarers must have followed a different route. It is possible that about this time the Phoenicians began to migrate towards the "Upper Sea". According to their own traditions their racial cradle was on the northern shore of the Persian

[p. 245]

[paragraph continues] Gulf. So far as we know, they first made their appearance on the Mediterranean coast about 2000 B.C., where they subsequently entered into competition as sea traders with the mariners of ancient Crete. Apparently the pastoral nomads pressed northward through Mesopotamia and towards Canaan. As much is suggested by the Biblical narrative which deals with the wanderings of Terah, Abraham, and Lot. Taking with them their "flocks and herds and tents", and accompanied by wives, and families, and servants, they migrated, it is stated, from the Sumerian city of Ur northwards to Haran "and dwelt there". After Terah's death the tribe wandered through Canaan and kept moving southward, unable, it would seem, to settle permanently in any particular district. At length "there was a famine in the land"--an interesting reference to the "Dry Cycle"--and the wanderers found it necessary to take refuge for a time in Egypt. There they appear to have prospered. Indeed, so greatly did their flocks and herds increase that when they returned to Canaan they found that "the land was not able to bear them", although the conditions had improved somewhat during the interval. "There was", as a result, "strife between the herdmen of Abram's cattle and the herdmen of Lot's cattle."

It is evident that the area which these pastoral flocks were allowed to occupy must have been strictly circumscribed, for more than once it is stated significantly that "the Canaanite and the Perizzite dwelled in the land". The two kinsmen found it necessary, therefore, to part company. Lot elected to go towards Sodom in the plain of Jordan, and Abraham then moved towards the plain of Mamre, the Amorite, in the Hebron district. [*1] With Mamre, and his brothers, Eshcol and Aner, the

[p. 246]

[paragraph continues] Hebrew patriarch formed a confederacy for mutual protection. [*1]

Other tribes which were in Palestine at this period included the Horites, the Rephaims, the Zuzims, the Zamzummims, and the Emims. These were probably representatives of the older stocks. Like the Amorites, the Hittites or "children of Heth" were evidently "late corners", and conquerors. When Abraham purchased the burial cave at Hebron, the landowner with whom he had to deal was one Ephron, son of Zohar, the Hittite. [*2] This illuminating statement agrees with what we know regarding Hittite expansion about 2000 B.C. The "Hatti" or "Khatti" had constituted military aristocracies throughout Syria and extended their influence by forming alliances. Many of their settlers were owners of estates, and traders who intermarried with the indigenous peoples and the Arabian invaders. As has been indicated ([*Chapter 1]), the large-nosed Armenoid section of the Hittite confederacy appear to have contributed to the racial blend known vaguely as the Semitic. Probably the particular group of Amorites with whom Abraham became associated had those pronounced Armenoid traits which can still be traced in representatives of the Hebrew people. Of special interest in this connection is Ezekiel's declaration regarding the ethnics of Jerusalem: "Thy birth and thy nativity", he said, "is of the land of Canaan; thy father was an Amorite, and thy mother an Hittite." [*3]

It was during Abraham's residence in Hebron that the Western Land was raided by a confederacy of Babylonian and Elamite battle lords. The Biblical narrative which deals with this episode is of particular interest and has long engaged the attention of European scholars:

"And it came to pass in the days of Amraphel

[p. 247]

[paragraph continues] (Hammurabi) king of Shinar (Sumer), Arioch (Eri-aku or Warad-Sin) king of Ellasar (Larsa), Chedor-laomer (Kudur-Mabug) king of Elam, and Tidal (Tudhula) king of nations; that these made war with Bera king of Sodom, and with Birsha king of Gomorrah, Shinab king of Admah, and Shemeber king of Zeboiim, and the king of Bela, which is Zoar. All these joined together in the vale of Siddim, which is the salt sea. Twelve years they served Chedor-laomer, and in the thirteenth year they rebelled." [*1] Apparently the Elamites had conquered part of Syria after entering southern Babylonia.

Chedor-laomer and his allies routed the Rephaims, the Zuzims, the Emims, the Horites and others, and having sacked Sodom and Gomorrah, carried away Lot and "his goods". On hearing of this disaster, Abraham collected a force of three hundred and eighteen men, all of whom were no doubt accustomed to guerrilla warfare, and delivered a night attack on the tail of the victorious army which was withdrawing through the area afterwards allotted to the Hebrew tribe of Dan. The surprise was complete; Abraham "smote" the enemy and "pursued them unto Hobah, which is on the left hand of Damascus. And he brought back all the goods, and also brought again his brother Lot, and his goods, and the women also, and the people." [*2]

The identification of Hammurabi with Amraphel is now generally accepted. At first the guttural "h", which gives the English rendering "Khammurabi", presented a serious difficulty, but in time the form "Ammurapi" which appears on a tablet became known, and the conclusion was reached that the softer "h" sound was used and not the guttural. The "l" in the Biblical Amraphel

[p. 248]

has suggested "Ammurapi-ilu", "Hammurabi, the god", but it has been argued, on the other hand, that the change may have been due to western habitual phonetic conditions, or perhaps the slight alteration of an alphabetical sign. Chedor-laomer, identified with Kudur-Mabug, may have had several local names. One of his sons, either Warad-Sin or Rim-Sin, but probably the former, had his name Semitized as Eri-Aku, and this variant appears in inscriptions. "Tidal, king of nations", has not been identified. The suggestion that he was "King of the Gutium" remains in the realm of suggestion. Two late tablets have fragmentary inscriptions which read like legends with some historical basis. One mentions Kudur-lahmal (?Chedor-laomer) and the other gives the form "Kudur-lahgumal", and calls him "King of the land of Elam". Eri-Eaku (?Eri-aku) and Tudhula (?Tidal) are also mentioned. Attacks had been delivered on Babylon, and the city and its great temple E-sagila were flooded. It is asserted that the Elamites "exercised sovereignty in Babylon" for a period. These interesting tablets have been published by Professor Pinches.

The fact that the four leaders of the expedition to Canaan are all referred to as "kings" in the Biblical narrative need not present any difficulty. Princes and other subject rulers who governed under an overlord might be and, as a matter of fact, were referred to as kings. "I am a king, son of a king", an unidentified monarch recorded on one of the two tablets just referred to. Kudur-Mabug, King of Elam, during his lifetime called his son Warad-Sin (Eri-Aku = Arioch) "King of Larsa". It is of interest to note, too, in connection with the Biblical narrative regarding the invasion of Syria and Palestine, that he styled himself "overseer of the Amurru (Amorites)".

 

Click to enlarge
HAMMURABI RECEIVING THE ''CODE OF LAWS'' FROM THE SUN GOD
 (Louvre, Paris)
 Photo. Giraudon

 

[p. 249]

No traces have yet been found in Palestine of its conquest by the Elamites, nor have the excavators been able to substantiate the claim of Lugal-zaggizi of a previous age to have extended his empire to the shores of the Mediterranean. Any relics which these and other eastern conquerors may have left were possibly destroyed by the Egyptians and Hittites.

When Hammurabi came to the throne he had apparently to recognize the overlordship of the Elamite king or his royal son at Larsa. Although Sin-muballit had captured Isin, it was retaken, probably after the death of the Babylonian war-lord, by Rim-Sin, who succeeded his brother Warad-Sin, and for a time held sway in Lagash, Nippur, and Erech, as well as Larsa.

It was not until the thirty-first year of his reign that Hammurabi achieved ascendancy over his powerful rival. Having repulsed an Elamite raid, which was probably intended to destroy the growing power of Babylon, he "smote down Rim-Sin", whose power he reduced almost to vanishing point. For about twenty years afterwards that subdued monarch lived in comparative obscurity; then he led a force of allies against Hammurabi's son and successor, Samsu-iluna, who defeated him and put him to death, capturing, in the course of his campaign, the revolting cities of Emutbalum, Erech, and Isin. So was the last smouldering ember of Elamite power stamped out in Babylonia.

Hammurabi, statesman and general, is one of the great personalities of the ancient world. No more celebrated monarch ever held sway in Western Asia. He was proud of his military achievements, but preferred to be remembered as a servant of the gods, a just ruler, a father of his people, and "the shepherd that gives peace". In the epilogue to his code of laws he refers to "the burden

[p. 250]

of royalty", and declares that he "cut off the enemy" and "lorded it over the conquered" so that his subjects might have security. Indeed, his anxiety for their welfare was the most pronounced feature of his character. "I carried all the people of Sumer and Akkad in my bosom", he declared in his epilogue. "By my protection, I guided in peace its brothers. By my wisdom I provided for them." He set up his stele, on which the legal code was inscribed, so "that the great should not oppress the weak" and "to counsel the widow and orphan", and "to succour the injured . . . The king that is gentle, king of the city, exalted am I." [*1]

Hammurabi was no mere framer of laws but a practical administrator as well. He acted as supreme judge, and his subjects could appeal to him as the Romans could to Caesar. Nor was any case too trivial for his attention. The humblest man was assured that justice would be done if his grievance were laid before the king. Hammurabi was no respecter of persons, and treated alike all his subjects high and low. He punished corrupt judges, protected citizens against unjust governors, reviewed the transactions of moneylenders with determination to curb extortionate demands, and kept a watchful eye on the operations of taxgatherers.

There can be little doubt but that he won the hearts of his subjects, who enjoyed the blessings of just administration under a well-ordained political system. He must also have endeared himself to them as an exemplary exponent of religious tolerance. He respected the various deities in whom the various groups of people reposed their faith, restored despoiled temples, and reendowed them with characteristic generosity. By so doing he not only

[p. 251]

afforded the pious full freedom and opportunity to perform their religious ordinances, but also promoted the material welfare of his subjects, for the temples were centres of culture and the priests were the teachers of the young. Excavators have discovered at Sippar traces of a school which dates from the Hammurabi Dynasty. Pupils learned to read and write, and received instruction in arithmetic and mensuration. They copied historical tablets, practised the art of composition, and studied geography.

Although there were many professional scribes, a not inconsiderable proportion of the people of both sexes were able to write private and business letters. Sons wrote from a distance to their fathers when in need of money then as now, and with the same air of undeserved martyrdom and subdued but confident appeal. One son indited a long complaint regarding the quality of the food he was given in his lodgings. Lovers appealed to forgetful ladies, showing great concern regarding their health. "Inform me how it fares with thee," one wrote four thousand years ago. "I went up to Babylon so that I might meet thee, but did not, and was much depressed. Let me know why thou didst go away so that I may be made glad. And do come hither. Ever have care of thy health, remembering me." Even begging-letter writers were not unknown. An ancient representative of this class once wrote to his employer from prison. He expressed astonishment that he had been arrested, and, having protested his innocence, he made touching appeal for little luxuries which were denied to him, adding that the last consignment which had been forwarded had never reached him.

Letters were often sent by messengers who were named, but there also appears to have been some sort of postal system. Letter carriers, however, could not

[p. 252]

have performed their duties without the assistance of beasts of burden. Papyri were not used as in Egypt. Nor was ink required. Babylonian letters were shapely little bricks resembling cushions. The angular alphabetical characters, bristling with thorn-like projections, were impressed with a wedge-shaped stylus on tablets of soft clay which were afterwards carefully baked in an oven. Then the letters were placed in baked clay envelopes, sealed and addressed, or wrapped in pieces of sacking transfixed by seals. If the ancient people had a festive season which was regarded, like the European Yuletide or the Indian Durga fortnight, as an occasion suitable for the general exchange of expressions of good-will, the Babylonian streets and highways must have been greatly congested by the postal traffic, while muscular postmen worked overtime distributing the contents of heavy and bulky letter sacks. Door to door deliveries would certainly have presented difficulties. Wood being dear, everyone could not afford doors, and some houses were entered by stairways leading to the flat and partly open roofs.

King Hammurabi had to deal daily with a voluminous correspondence. He received reports from governors in all parts of his realm, legal documents containing appeals, and private communications from relatives and others. He paid minute attention to details, and was probably one of the busiest men in Babylonia. Every day while at home, after worshipping Merodach at E-sagila, he dictated letters to his scribes, gave audiences to officials, heard legal appeals and issued interlocutors, and dealt with the reports regarding his private estates. He looks a typical man of affairs in sculptured representations--shrewd, resolute, and unassuming, feeling "the burden of royalty", but ever ready and well qualified to discharge

[p. 253]

his duties with thoroughness and insight. His grasp of detail was equalled only by his power to conceive of great enterprises which appealed to his imagination. It was a work of genius on his part to weld together that great empire of miscellaneous states extending from southern Babylonia to Assyria, and from the borders of Elam to the Mediterranean coast, by a universal legal Code which secured tranquillity and equal rights to all, promoted business, and set before his subjects the ideals of right thinking and right living.

Hammurabi recognized that conquest was of little avail unless followed by the establishment of a just and well-arranged political system, and the inauguration of practical measures to secure the domestic, industrial, and commercial welfare of the people as a whole. He engaged himself greatly, therefore, in developing the natural resources of each particular district. The network of irrigating canals was extended in the homeland so that agriculture might prosper: these canals also promoted trade, for they were utilized for travelling by boat and for the distribution of commodities. As a result of his activities Babylon became not only the administrative, but also the commercial centre of his Empire--the London of Western Asia--and it enjoyed a spell of prosperity which was never surpassed in subsequent times. Yet it never lost its pre-eminent position despite the attempts of rival states, jealous of its glory and influence, to suspend its activities. It had been too firmly established during the Hammurabi Age, which was the Golden Age of Babylonia, as the heartlike distributor and controller of business life through a vast network of veins and arteries, to be displaced by any other Mesopotamian city to pleasure even a mighty monarch. For two thousand years, from the time of Hammurabi until the dawn of the

[p. 254]

[paragraph continues] Christian era, the city of Babylon remained amidst many political changes the metropolis of Western Asiatic commerce and culture, and none was more eloquent in its praises than the scholarly pilgrim from Greece who wondered at its magnificence and reverenced its antiquities.

Hammurabi's reign was long as it was prosperous. There is no general agreement as to when he ascended the throne--some say in 2123 B.C., others hold that it was after 2000 B.C.--but it is certain that he presided over the destinies of Babylon for the long period of forty-three years.

There are interesting references to the military successes of his reign in the prologue to the legal Code. It is related that when he "avenged Larsa", the seat of Rim-Sin, he restored there the temple of the sun god. Other temples were built up at various ancient centres, so that these cultural organizations might contribute to the welfare of the localities over which they held sway. At Nippur he thus honoured Enlil, at Eridu the god Ea, at Ur the god Sin, at Erech the god Anu and the goddess Nana (Ishtar), at Kish the god Zamama and the goddess Ma-ma, at Cuthah the god Nergal, at Lagash the god Nin-Girsu, while at Adab and Akkad, "celebrated for its wide squares", and other centres he carried out religious and public works. In Assyria he restored the colossus of Ashur, which had evidently been carried away by a conqueror, and he developed the canal system of Nineveh.

Apparently Lagash and Adab had not been completely deserted during his reign, although their ruins have not yielded evidence that they flourished after their fall during the long struggle with the aggressive and plundering Elamites.

Hammurabi referred to himself in the Prologue as "a king who commanded obedience in all the four

[p. 255]

quarters". He was the sort of benevolent despot whom Carlyle on one occasion clamoured vainly for--not an Oriental despot in the commonly accepted sense of the term. As a German writer puts it, his despotism was a form of Patriarchal Absolutism. "When Marduk (Merodach)", as the great king recorded, "brought me to direct all people, and commissioned me to give judgment, I laid down justice and right in the provinces, I made all flesh to prosper." [*1] That was the keynote of his long life; he regarded himself as the earthly representative of the Ruler of all--Merodach, "the lord god of right", who carried out the decrees of Anu, the sky god of Destiny.

The next king, Samsu-iluna, reigned nearly as long as his illustrious father, and similarly lived a strenuous and pious life. Soon after he came to the throne the forces of disorder were let loose, but, as has been stated, he crushed and slew his most formidable opponent, Rim-Sin, the Elamite king, who had gathered together an army of allies. During his reign a Kassite invasion was repulsed. The earliest Kassites, a people of uncertain racial affinities, began to settle in the land during Hammurabi's lifetime. Some writers connect them with the Hittites, and others with the Iranians, vaguely termed as Indo-European or Indo-Germanic folk. Ethnologists as a rule regard them as identical with the Cossaei, whom the Greeks found settled between Babylon and Media, east of the Tigris and north of Elam. The Hittites came south as raiders about a century later. It is possible that the invading Kassites had overrun Elam and composed part of Rim-Sin's army. After settled conditions were secured many of them remained in Babylonia, where they engaged like

[p. 256]

their pioneers in agricultural pursuits. No doubt they were welcomed in that capacity, for owing to the continuous spread of culture and the development of commerce, rural labour had become scarce and dear. Farmers had a long-standing complaint, "The harvest truly is plenteous, but the labourers are few". [*1] "Despite the existence of slaves, who were for the most part domestic servants, there was", writes Mr. Johns, "considerable demand for free labour in ancient Babylonia. This is clear from the large number of contracts relating to hire which have come down to us. . . . As a rule, the man was hired for the harvest and was free directly after. But there are many examples in which the term of service was different--one month, half a year, or a whole year. . . . Harvest labour was probably far dearer than any other, because of its importance, the skill and exertion demanded, and the fact that so many were seeking for it at once." When a farm worker was engaged he received a shekel for "earnest money" or arles, and was penalized for non-appearance or late arrival. [*2]

So great was the political upheaval caused by Rim-Sin and his allies and imitators in southern Babylonia, that it was not until the seventeenth year of his reign that Samsu-iluna had recaptured Erech and Ur and restored their walls. Among other cities which had to be chastised was ancient Akkad, where a rival monarch endeavoured to establish himself. Several years were afterwards spent in building new fortifications, setting up memorials in temples, and cutting and clearing canals. On more than one occasion during the latter part of his reign he had to deal with aggressive bands of Amorites.

The greatest danger to the Empire, however, was threatened by a new kingdom which had been formed in

[p. 257]

[paragraph continues] Bit-Jakin, a part of Sealand which was afterwards controlled by the mysterious Chaldeans. Here may have collected evicted and rebel bands of Elamites and Sumerians and various "gentlemen of fortune" who were opposed to the Hammurabi regime. After the fall of Rim-Sin it became powerful under a king called Ilu-ma-ilu. Samsu-iluna conducted at least two campaigns against his rival, but without much success. Indeed, he was in the end compelled to retreat with considerable loss owing to the difficult character of that marshy country.

Abeshu, the next Babylonian king, endeavoured to shatter the cause of the Sealanders, and made it possible for himself to strike at them by damming up the Tigris canal. He achieved a victory, but the wily Ilu-ma-ilu eluded him, and after a reign of sixty years was succeeded by his son, Kiannib. The Sealand Dynasty, of which little is known, lasted for over three and a half centuries, and certain of its later monarchs were able to extend their sway over part of Babylonia, but its power was strictly circumscribed so long as Hammurabi's descendants held sway.

During Abeshu's reign of twenty-eight years, of which but scanty records survive, he appears to have proved an able statesman and general. He founded a new city called Lukhaia, and appears to have repulsed a Kassite raid.

His son, Ammiditana, who succeeded him, apparently inherited a prosperous and well-organized Empire, for during the first fifteen years of his reign he attended chiefly to the adornment of temples and other pious undertakings. He was a patron of the arts with archaeological leanings, and displayed traits which suggest that he inclined, like Sumu-la-ilu, to ancestor worship. Entemena, the pious patesi of Lagash, whose memory is

[p. 258]

associated with the famous silver vase decorated with the lion-headed eagle form of Nin-Girsu, had been raised to the dignity of a god, and Ammiditana caused his statue to be erected so that offerings might be made to it. He set up several images of himself also, and celebrated the centenary of the accession to the throne of his grandfather, Samsu-iluna, "the warrior lord", by unveiling his statue with much ceremony at Kish. About the middle of his reign he put down a Sumerian rising, and towards its close had to capture a city which is believed to be Isin, but the reference is too obscure to indicate what political significance attached to this incident. His son, Ammizaduga, reigned for over twenty years quite peacefully so far as is known, and was succeeded by Samsuditana, whose rule extended over a quarter of a century. Like Ammiditana, these two monarchs set up images of themselves as well as of the gods, so that they might be worshipped, no doubt. They also promoted the interests of agriculture and commerce, and incidentally increased the revenue from taxation by paying much attention to the canals and extending the cultivatable areas.

But the days of the brilliant Hammurabi Dynasty were drawing to a close. It endured for about a century longer than the Twelfth Dynasty of Egypt, which came to an end, according to the Berlin calculations, in 1788 B.C. Apparently some of the Hammurabi and Amenemhet kings were contemporaries, but there is no evidence that they came into direct touch with one another. It was not until at about two centuries after Hammurabi's day that Egypt first invaded Syria, with which, however, it had for a long period previously conducted a brisk trade. Evidently the influence of the Hittites and their Amoritic allies predominated between Mesopotamia and the Delta

[p. 259]

frontier of Egypt, and it is significant to find in this connection that the "Khatti" or "Hatti" were referred to for the first time in Egypt during the Twelfth Dynasty, and in Babylonia during the Hammurabi Dynasty, sometime shortly before or after 2000 B.C. About 1800 B.C. a Hittite raid resulted in overthrow of the last king of the Hammurabi family at Babylon. The Hyksos invasion of Egypt took place after 1788 B.C.

Footnotes

^245:1 Genesis, xii and xiii.

^246:1 Genesis, xiv, 13.

^246:2 Ibid., xxiii.

^246:3 Ezekiel, xvi, 3.

^247:1 Genesis, xiv, 1-4.

^247:2 Ibid., 5-24.

^250:1 Babylonian and Assyrian Laws, Contracts, and Letters, C. H. W. Johns, pp. 392 et seq.

^255:1 Translation by Johns in Babylonian and Assyrian Laws, Contracts, and Letters, pp. 390 et seq.

^256:1 Matthew, ix, 37.

^256:2 Johns's Babylonian and Assyrian Laws, &c., pp. 371-2.

     
Myths of Babylonia and Assyria, by Donald A. MacKenzie, [1915], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 260] [ch-12]

  

CHAPTER XII

  

Rise of the Hittites, Mitannians, Kassites, Hyksos, and Assyrians

The War God of Mountaineers--Antiquity of Hittite Civilization--Prehistoric Movements of "Broad Heads"--Evidence of Babylon and Egypt--Hittites and Mongolians--Biblical References to Hittites in Canaan--Jacob's Mother and her Daughters-in-law--Great Father and Great Mother Cults--History in Mythology--The Kingdom of Mitanni--Its Aryan Aristocracy--The Hyksos Problem--The Horse in Warfare--Hittites and Mitannians--Kassites and Mitannians--Hyksos Empire in Asia--Kassites overthrow Sealand Dynasty--Egyptian Campaigns in Syria--Assyria in the Making--Ethnics of Genesis--Nimrod as Merodach--Early Conquerors of Assyria--Mitannian Overlords--Tell-el-Amarna Letters--Fall of Mitanni--Rise of Hittite and Assyrian Empires--Egypt in Eclipse--Assyrian and Babylonian Rivalries.

WHEN the Hammurabi Dynasty, like the Twelfth Dynasty of Egypt, is found to be suffering languid decline, the gaps in the dulled historical records are filled with the echoes of the thunder god, whose hammer beating resounds among the northern mountains. As this deity comes each year in Western Asia when vegetation has withered and after fruits have dropped from trees, bringing tempests and black rainclouds to issue in a new season of growth and fresh activity, so he descended from the hills in the second millennium before the Christian era as the battle lord of invaders and the stormy herald of a new age which was to dawn upon the ancient world.

He was the war god of the Hittites as well as of the

[p. 261]

northern Amorites, the Mitannians, and the Kassites; and he led the Aryans from the Iranian steppes towards the verdurous valley of the Punjab. His worshippers engraved his image with grateful hands on the beetling cliffs of Cappadocian chasms in Asia Minor, where his sway was steadfast and pre-eminent for long centuries. In one locality he appears mounted on a bull wearing a fringed and belted tunic with short sleeves, a conical helmet, and upturned shoes, while he grasps in one hand the lightning symbol, and in the other a triangular bow resting on his right shoulder. In another locality he is the bringer of grapes and barley sheaves. But his most familiar form is the bearded and thick-set mountaineer, armed with a ponderous thunder hammer, a flashing trident, and a long two-edged sword with a hemispherical knob on the hilt, which dangles from his belt, while an antelope or goat wearing a pointed tiara prances beside him. This deity is identical with bluff, impetuous Thor of northern Europe, Indra of the Himalayas, Tarku of Phrygia, and Teshup or Teshub of Armenia and northern Mesopotamia, Sandan, the Hercules of Cilicia, Adad or Hadad of Amurru and Assyria, and Ramman, who at an early period penetrated Akkad and Sumer in various forms. His Hittite name is uncertain, but in the time of Rameses II he was identified with Sutekh (Set). He passed into southern Europe as Zeus, and became "the lord" of the deities of the Aegean and Crete.

The Hittites who entered Babylon about 1800 B.C., and overthrew the last king of the Hammurabi Dynasty, may have been plundering raiders, like the European Gauls of a later age, or a well-organized force of a strong, consolidated power, which endured for a period of uncertain duration. They were probably the latter, for although they carried off Merodach and Zerpanitum, these

[p. 262]

idols were not thrust into the melting pot, but retained apparently for political reasons.

These early Hittites are "a people of the mist". More than once in ancient history casual reference is made to them; but on most of these occasions they soon vanish suddenly behind their northern mountains. The explanation appears to be that at various periods great leaders arose who were able to weld together the various tribes, and make their presence felt in Western Asia. But when once the organization broke down, either on account of internal rivalries or the influence of an outside power, they lapsed back again into a state of political insignificance in the affairs of the ancient world. It is possible that about 1800 B.C. the Hittite confederacy was controlled by an ambitious king who had dreams of a great empire, and was accordingly pursuing a career of conquest.

Judging from what we know of the northern worshippers of the hammer god in later times, it would appear that when they were referred to as the Hatti or Khatti, the tribe of that name was the dominating power in Asia Minor and north Syria. The Hatti are usually identified with the broad-headed mountaineers of Alpine or Armenoid type--the ancestors of the modern Armenians. Their ancient capital was at Boghaz-Kai, the site of Pteria, which was destroyed, according to the Greeks, by Croesus, the last King of Lydia, in the sixth century B.C. It was strongly situated in an excellent pastoral district on the high, breezy plateau of Cappadocia, surrounded by high mountains, and approached through narrow river gorges, which in winter were blocked with snow.

Hittite civilization was of great antiquity. Excavations which have been conducted at an undisturbed artificial

[p. 263]

mound at Sakje-Geuzi have revealed evidences of a continuous culture which began to flourish before 3000 B.C. [*1] In one of the lower layers occurred that particular type of Neolithic yellow-painted pottery, with black geometric designs, which resembles other specimens of painted fabrics found in Turkestan by the Pumpelly expedition; in Susa, the capital of Elam, and its vicinity, by De Morgan; in the Balkan peninsula by Schliemann; in a First Dynasty tomb at Abydos in Egypt by Petrie; and in the late Neolithic and early Bronze Age (Minoan) strata of Crete by Evans. It may be that these interesting relics were connected with the prehistoric drift westward of the broad-headed pastoral peoples who ultimately formed the Hittite military aristocracy.

According to Professor Elliot Smith, broad-headed aliens from Asia Minor first reached Egypt at the dawn of history. There they blended with the indigenous tribes of the Mediterranean or Brown Race. A mesocephalic skull then became common. It is referred to as the Giza type, and has been traced by Professor Elliot Smith from Egypt to the Punjab, but not farther into India. [*2]

During the early dynasties this skull with alien traits was confined chiefly to the Delta region and the vicinity of Memphis, the city of the pyramid builders. It is not improbable that the Memphite god Ptah may have been introduced into Egypt by the invading broad heads. This deity is a world artisan like Indra, and is similarly associated with dwarfish artisans; he hammers out the copper sky, and therefore links with the various thunder gods--Tarku, Teshup, Adad, Ramman, &c., of the Asian mountaineers. Thunderstorms were of too rare occurrence in Egypt to be connected with the food supply,

[p. 264]

which has always depended on the river Nile. Ptah's purely Egyptian characteristics appear to have been acquired after fusion with Osiris-Seb, the Nilotic gods of inundation, earth, and vegetation. The ancient god Set (Sutekh), who became a demon, and was ultimately re-exalted as a great deity during the Nineteenth Dynasty, may also have had some connection with the prehistoric Hatti.

Professor Elliot Smith, who has found alien traits in the mummies of the Rameses kings, is convinced that the broad-headed folks who entered Europe by way of Asia Minor, and Egypt through the Delta, at the close of the Neolithic Age, represent "two streams of the same Asiatic folk". [*1] The opinion of such an authority cannot be lightly set aside.

The earliest Egyptian reference to the Kheta, as the Hittites were called, was made in the reign of the first Amenemhet of the Twelfth Dynasty, who began to reign about 2000 B.C. Some authorities, including Maspero, [*2] are of opinion that the allusion to the Hatti which is found in the Babylonian Book of Omens belongs to the earlier age of Sargon of Akkad and Naram-Sin, but Sayce favours the age of Hammurabi. Others would connect the Gutium, or men of Kutu, with the Kheta or Hatti. Sayce has expressed the opinion that the Biblical Tidal, identified with Tudkhul or Tudhula, "king of nations", the ally of Arioch, Amraphel, and Chedor-laomer, was a Hittite king, the "nations" being the confederacy of Asia Minor tribes controlled by the Hatti. "In the fragments of the Babylonian story of Chedor-laomer published by Dr. Pinches", says Professor Sayce, "the name of Tidcal is written Tudkhul, and he is described as King of the Umman Manda, or Nations of the North,

[p. 265]

of which the Hebrew Goyyim is a literal translation. Now the name is Hittite. In the account of the campaign of Rameses II against the Hittites it appears as Tidcal, and one of the Hittite kings of Boghaz-Koi bears the same name, which is written as Dud-khaliya in cuneiform. [*1]

One of the racial types among the Hittites wore pigtails. These head adornments appear on figures in certain Cappadocian sculptures and on Hittite warriors in the pictorial records of a north Syrian campaign of Rameses II at Thebes. It is suggestive, therefore, to find that on the stele of Naram-Sin of Akkad, the mountaineers who are conquered by that battle lord wear pig-tails also. Their split robes are unlike the short fringed tunics of the Hittite gods, but resemble the long split mantles worn over their tunics by high dignitaries like King Tarku-dimme, who figures on a famous silver boss of an ancient Hittite dagger. Naram-Sin inherited the Empire of Sargon of Akkad, which extended to the Mediterranean Sea. If his enemies were not natives of Cappadocia, they may have been the congeners of the Hittite pigtailed type in another wooded and mountainous country.

It has been suggested that these wearers of pigtails were Mongolians. But although high cheek bones and oblique eyes occurred in ancient times, and still occur, in parts of Asia Minor, suggesting occasional Mongolian admixture with Ural-Altaic broad heads, the Hittite pig-tailed warriors must not be confused with the true small-nosed Mongols of north-eastern Asia. The Egyptian sculptors depicted them with long and prominent noses, which emphasize their strong Armenoid affinities.

Other tribes in the Hittite confederacy included the

[p. 266]

representatives of the earliest settlers from North Africa of Mediterranean racial stock. These have been identified with the Canaanites, and especially the agriculturists among them, for the Palestinian Hittites are also referred to as Canaanites in the Bible, and in one particular connection under circumstances which afford an interesting glimpse of domestic life in those far-off times. When Esau, Isaac's eldest son, was forty years of age, "he took to wife Judith the daughter of Beeri the Hittite, and Bashemath the daughter of Elon the Hittite" [*1]. Apparently the Hittite ladies considered themselves to be of higher caste than the indigenous peoples and the settlers from other countries, for when Ezekiel declared that the mother of Jerusalem was a Hittite he said: "Thou art thy mother's daughter, that lotheth her husband and her children." [*2] Esau's marriage was "a grief of mind unto Isaac and to Rebekah". [*1] The Hebrew mother seems to have entertained fears that her favourite son Jacob would fall a victim to the allurements of other representatives of the same stock as her superior and troublesome daughters-in-law, for she said to Isaac: "I am weary of my life because of the daughters of Heth; if Jacob take a wife of the daughters of Heth, such as these which are of the daughters of the land, what good shall my life do me?" [*3] Isaac sent for Jacob, "and charged him, and said unto him, Thou shalt not take a wife of the daughters of Canaan. Arise, go to Padan-aram, to the house of Bethuel, thy mother's father; and take thee a wife from thence of the daughters of Laban, thy mother's brother." [*4] From these quotations two obvious deductions may be drawn: the Hebrews regarded the Hittites "of the land" as one with the Canaanites, the stocks having probably

[p. 267]

been so well fused, and the worried Rebekah had the choosing of Jacob's wife or wives from among her own relations in Mesopotamia who were of Sumerian stock and kindred of Abraham. [*1] It is not surprising to find traces of Sumerian pride among the descendants of the evicted citizens of ancient Ur, especially when brought into association with the pretentious Hittites.

Evidence of racial blending in Asia Minor is also afforded by Hittite mythology. In the fertile agricultural valleys and round the shores of that great Eur-Asian "land bridge" the indigenous stock was also of the Mediterranean race, as Sergi and other ethnologists have demonstrated. The Great Mother goddess was worshipped from the earliest times, and she bore various local names. At Comana in Pontus she was known to the Greeks as Ma, a name which may have been as old as that of the Sumerian Mama (the creatrix), or Mamitum (goddess of destiny); in Armenia she was Anaitis; in Cilicia she was Ate ('Atheh of Tarsus); while in Phrygia she was best known as Cybele, mother of Attis, who links with Ishtar as mother and wife of Tammuz, Aphrodite as mother and wife of Adonis, and Isis as mother and wife of Osiris. The Great Mother was in Phoenicia called Astarte; she was a form of Ishtar, and identical with the Biblical Ashtoreth. In the Syrian city of Hierapolis she bore the name of Atargatis, which Meyer, with whom Frazer agrees, considers to be the Greek rendering of the Aramaic 'Athar-'Atheh--the god 'Athar and the goddess 'Atheh. Like the "bearded Aphrodite", Atargatis may have been regarded as a bisexual deity. Some of the specialized mother goddesses, whose outstanding attributes reflected the history and politics of the states they represented, were imported into Egypt--the land of

[p. 268]

ancient mother deities--during the Empire period, by the half-foreign Rameses kings; these included the voluptuous Kadesh and the warlike Anthat. In every district colonized by the early representatives of the Mediterranean race, the goddess cult came into prominence, and the gods and the people were reputed to be descendants of the great Creatrix. This rule obtained as far distant as Ireland, where the Danann folk and the Danann gods were the children of the goddess Danu.

Among the Hatti proper--that is, the broad-headed military aristocracy--the chief deity of the pantheon was the Great Father, the creator, "the lord of Heaven", the Baal. As Sutekh, Tarku, Adad, or Ramman, he was the god of thunder, rain, fertility, and war, and he ultimately acquired solar attributes. A famous rock sculpture at Boghaz-Koi depicts a mythological scene which is believed to represent the Spring marriage of the Great Father and the Great Mother, suggesting a local fusion of beliefs which resulted from the union of tribes of the god cult with tribes of the goddess cult. So long as the Hatti tribe remained the predominant partner in the Hittite confederacy, the supremacy was assured of the Great Father who symbolized their sway. But when, in the process of time, the power of the Hatti declined, their chief god "fell . . . from his predominant place in the religion of the interior", writes Dr. Garstang. "But the Great Mother lived on, being the goddess of the land." [*1]

In addition to the Hittite confederacy of Asia Minor and North Syria, another great power arose in northern Mesopotamia. This was the Mitanni Kingdom. Little is known regarding it, except what is derived from indirect sources. Winckler believes that it was first established

[p. 269]

by early "waves" of Hatti people who migrated from the east.

The Hittite connection is based chiefly on the following evidence. One of the gods of the Mitanni rulers was Teshup, who is identical with Tarku, the Thor of Asia Minor. The raiders who in 1800 B.C. entered Babylon, set fire to E-sagila, and carried off Merodach and his consort Zerpanitum, were called the Hatti. The images of these deities were afterwards obtained from Khani (Mitanni).

At a later period, when we come to know more about Mitanni from the letters of one of its kings to two Egyptian Pharaohs, and the Winckler tablets from Boghaz-Koi, it is found that its military aristocracy spoke an Indo-European language, as is shown by the names of their kings--Saushatar, Artatama, Sutarna, Artashshumara, Tushratta, and Mattiuza. They worshipped the following deities:

Mi-it-ra, Uru-w-na, In-da-ra, and Na-sa-at-ti-ia--

[paragraph continues] Mitra, Varuna, Indra, and Nasatyau (the "Twin Aswins" = Castor and Pollux)--whose names have been deciphered by Winckler. These gods were also imported into India by the Vedic Aryans. The Mitanni tribe (the military aristocracy probably) was called "Kharri", and some philologists are of opinion that it is identical with "Arya", which was "the normal designation in Vedic literature from the Rigveda onwards of an Aryan of the three upper classes". [*1] Mitanni signifies "the river lands", and the descendants of its inhabitants, who lived in Cappadocia, were called by the Greeks "Mattienoi". "They are possibly", says Dr. Haddon, "the ancestors

[p. 270]

of the modern Kurds", [*1] a conspicuously long-headed people, proverbial, like the ancient Aryo-Indians and the Gauls, for their hospitality and their raiding propensities.

It would appear that the Mitannian invasion of northern Mesopotamia and the Aryan invasion of India represented two streams of diverging migrations from a common cultural centre, and that the separate groups of wanderers mingled with other stocks with whom they came into contact. Tribes of Aryan speech were associated with the Kassite invaders of Babylon, who took possession of northern Babylonia soon after the disastrous Hittite raid. It is believed that they came from the east through the highlands of Elam.

For a period, the dating of which is uncertain, the Mitannians were overlords of part of Assyria, including Nineveh and even Asshur, as well as the district called "Musri" by the Assyrians, and part of Cappadocia. They also occupied the cities of Harran and Kadesh. Probably they owed their great military successes to their cavalry. The horse became common in Babylon during the Kassite Dynasty, which followed the Hammurabi, and was there called "the ass of the east", a name which suggests whence the Kassites and Mitannians came.

The westward movement of the Mitannians in the second millennium B.C. may have been in progress prior to the Kassite conquest of Babylon and the Hyksos invasion of Egypt. Their relations in Mesopotamia and Syria with the Hittites and the Amorites are obscure. Perhaps they were for a time the overlords of the Hittites. At any rate it is of interest to note that when Thothmes III struck at the last Hyksos stronghold during his long Syrian campaign of about twenty years' duration, his

 

Click to enlarge
THE HORSE IN WARFARE
 Marble slab showing Ashur-natsir-pal and army advancing against a besieged tow. A battering ram is being drawn on a six-wheeled carriage.
 From N.W. Palace of Nimroud: now in the British Museum.
 Photo. Mansell

 

[p. 271]

operations were directly against Kadesh on the Orontes, which was then held by his fierce enemies the Mitannians of Naharina. [*1]

During the Hyksos Age the horse was introduced into Egypt. Indeed the Hyksos conquest was probably due to the use of the horse, which was domesticated, as the Pumpelly expedition has ascertained, at a remote period in Turkestan, whence it may have been obtained by the horse-sacrificing Aryo-Indians and the horse-sacrificing ancestors of the Siberian Buriats.

If the Mitanni rulers were not overlords of the Hittites about 1800 B.C., the two peoples may have been military allies of the Kassites. Some writers suggest, indeed, that the Kassites came from Mitanni. Another view is that the Mitannians were the Aryan allies of the Kassites who entered Babylon from the Elamite highlands, and that they afterwards conquered Mesopotamia and part of Cappadocia prior to the Hyksos conquest of Egypt. A third solution of the problem is that the Aryan rulers of the Mitannian Hittites were the overlords of northern Babylonia, which they included in their Mesopotamian empire for a century before the Kassites achieved political supremacy in the Tigro-Euphrates valley, and that they were also the leaders of the Hyksos invasion of Egypt, which they accomplished with the assistance of their Hittite and Amoritic allies.

The first Kassite king of Babylonia of whom we have knowledge was Gandash. He adopted the old Akkadian title, "king of the four quarters", as well as the title "king of Sumer and Akkad", first used by the rulers of the Dynasty of Ur. Nippur appears to have been selected by Gandash as his capital, which suggests that his war and storm god, Shuqamuna, was identified with Bel Enlil, who

[p. 272]

as a "world giant" has much in common with the northern hammer gods. After reigning for sixteen years, Gandash was succeeded by his son, Agum the Great, who sat on the throne for twenty-two years. The great-grandson of Agum the Great was Agum II, and not until his reign were the statues of Merodach and his consort Zerpanitum brought back to the city of Babylon. This monarch recorded that, in response to the oracle of Shamash, the sun god, he sent to the distant land of Khani (Mitanni) for the great deity and his consort. Babylon would therefore appear to have been deprived of Merodach for about two centuries. The Hittite-Mitanni raid is dated about 1800 B.C., and the rise of Gandash, the Kassite, about 1700 B.C. At least a century elapsed between the reigns of Gandash and Agum II. These calculations do not coincide, it will be noted, with the statement in a Babylonian hymn, that Merodach remained in the land of the Hatti for twenty-four years, which, however, may be either a priestly fiction or a reference to a later conquest. The period which followed the fall of the Hammurabi Dynasty of Babylonia is as obscure as the Hyksos Age of Egypt.

Agum II, the Kassite king, does not state whether or not he waged war against Mitanni to recover Babylon's god Merodach. If, however, he was an ally of the Mitanni ruler, the transference of the deity may have been an ordinary diplomatic transaction. The possibility may also be suggested that the Hittites of Mitanni were not displaced by the Aryan military aristocracy until after the Kassites were firmly established in northern Babylonia between 1700 B.C. and i 600 B.C. This may account for the statements that Merodach was carried off by the Hatti and returned from the land of Khani.

The evidence afforded by Egypt is suggestive in this

[p. 273]

connection. There was a second Hyksos Dynasty in that country. The later rulers became "Egyptianized" as the Kassites became "Babylonianized", but they were all referred to by the exclusive and sullen Egyptians as "barbarians" and "Asiatics". They recognized the sun god of Heliopolis, but were also concerned in promoting the worship of Sutekh, a deity of sky and thunder, with solar attributes, whom Rameses II identified with the "Baal" of the Hittites. The Mitannians, as has been stated, recognized a Baal called Teshup, who was identical with Tarku of the Western Hittites and with their own tribal Indra also. One of the Hyksos kings, named Ian or Khian, the Ianias of Manetho, was either an overlord or the ally of an overlord, who swayed a great empire in Asia. His name has been deciphered on relics found as far apart as Knossos in Crete and Baghdad on the Tigris, which at the time was situated within the area of Kassite control. Apparently peaceful conditions prevailed during his reign over a wide extent of Asia and trade was brisk between far-distant centres of civilization. The very term Hyksos is suggestive in this connection. According to Breasted it signifies "rulers of countries", which compares with the Biblical "Tidal king of nations", whom Sayce, as has been indicated, regards as a Hittite monarch. When the Hittite hieroglyphics have been read and Mesopotamia thoroughly explored, light may be thrown on the relations of the Mitannians, the Hittites, the Hyksos, and the Kassites between 1800 B.C. and 1500 B.C. It is evident that a fascinating volume of ancient history has yet to be written.

The Kassites formed the military aristocracy of Babylonia, which was called Karduniash, for nearly six centuries. Agum II was the first of their kings who became thoroughly Babylonianized, and although he still gave

[p. 274]

recognition to Shuqamuna, the Kassite god of battle, he re-exalted Merodach, whose statue he had taken back from "Khani", and decorated E-sagila with gifts of gold, jewels, rare woods, frescoes, and pictorial tiles; he also re-endowed the priesthood. During the reign of his successor, Burnaburiash I, the Dynasty of Sealand came to an end.

Little is known regarding the relations between Elam and Babylonia during the Kassite period. If the Kassite invaders crossed the Tigris soon after the raid of the Mitannian Hittites they must have previously overrun a great part of Elam, but strongly situated Susa may have for a time withstood their attacks. At first the Kassites held northern Babylonia only, while the ancient Sumerian area was dominated by the Sealand power, which had gradually regained strength during the closing years of the Hammurabi Dynasty. No doubt many northern Babylonian refugees reinforced its army.

The Elamites, or perhaps the Kassites of Elam, appear to have made frequent attacks on southern Babylonia. At length Ea-gamil, king of Sealand, invaded Elam with purpose, no doubt, to shatter the power of his restless enemies. He was either met there, however, by an army from Babylon, or his country was invaded during his absence. Prince Ulamburiash, son of Burnaburiash I, defeated Ea-gamil and brought to an end the Sealand Dynasty which had been founded by Ilu-ma-ilu, the contemporary and enemy of Samsu-la-ilu, son of Hammurabi. Ulamburiash is referred to on a mace-head which was discovered at Babylon as "king of Sealand", and he probably succeeded his father at the capital. The whole of Babylonia thus came under Kassite sway.

Agum III, a grandson of Ulamburiash, found it necessary, however, to invade Sealand, which must

[p. 275]

therefore have revolted. It was probably a centre of discontent during the whole period of Kassite ascendancy.

After a long obscure interval we reach the period when the Hyksos power was broken in Egypt, that is, after 1580 B.C. The great Western Asiatic kingdoms at the time were the Hittite, the Mitannian, the Assyrian, and the Babylonian (Kassite). Between 1557 B.C. and 1501 B.C. Thothmes I of Egypt was asserting his sway over part of Syria. Many years elapsed, however, before Thothmes III, who died in 1447 B.C., established firmly, after waging a long war of conquest, the supremacy of Egypt between the Euphrates and the Mediterranean coast as far north as the borders of Asia Minor.

"At this period", as Professor Flinders Petrie emphasizes, "the civilization of Syria was equal or superior to that of Egypt." Not only was there in the cities "luxury beyond that of the Egyptians", but also "technical work which could teach them". The Syrian soldiers had suits of scale armour, which afterwards were manufactured in Egypt, and they had chariots adorned with gold and silver and highly decorated, which were greatly prized by the Egyptians when they captured them, and reserved for royalty. "In the rich wealth of gold and silver vases", obtained from captured cities by the Nilotic warriors, "we see also", adds Petrie, "the sign of a people who were their (the Egyptians') equals, if not their superiors in taste and skill." [*1] It is not to be wondered at, therefore, when the Pharaohs received tribute from Syria that they preferred it to be carried into Egypt by skilled workmen. "The keenness with which the Egyptians record all the beautiful and luxurious products of the Syrians shows that the workmen would

[p. 276]

probably be more in demand than other kinds of slave tribute." [*1]

One of the monarchs with whom Thothmes III corresponded was the king of Assyria. The enemies of Egypt in northern Mesopotamia were the Hittites and Mitannians, and their allies, and these were also the enemies of Assyria. But to enable us to deal with the new situation which was created by Egypt in Mesopotamia, it is necessary in the first place to trace the rise of Assyria, which was destined to become for a period the dominating power in Western Asia, and ultimately in the Nile valley also.

The Assyrian group of cities grew up on the banks of the Tigris to the north of Babylonia, the mother country. The following Biblical references regarding the origins of the two states are of special interest:--

Now these are the generations of the sons of Noah: Shem, Ham, and Japheth. . . . The sons of Ham: Cush, and Mizraim, and Phut, and Canaan. . . . And Cush begat Nimrod; he began to be a mighty one in the earth. He was a mighty hunter before the Lord; wherefore it is said, Even as Nimrod the mighty hunter before the Lord. And the beginning of his kingdom was Babel, and Erech, and Accad, and Calneh, in the land of Shinar. Out of that land went forth Asshur and builded Nineveh, and the city Rehoboth, and Calah, and Resen between Nineveh and Calah: the same is a great city.

The children of Shem: Elam and Asshur . . . (Genesis, x, 1-22).

The land of Assyria . . . and the land of Nimrod in the entrances thereof (Micah, v, 6).

It will be observed that the Sumero-Babylonians are Cushites or Hamites, and therefore regarded as racially akin to the proto-Egyptians of the Mediterranean race--an interesting confirmation of recent ethnological conclusions.

[p. 277]

Nimrod, the king of Babel (Babylon), in Shinar (Sumer), was, it would appear, a deified monarch who became ultimately identified with the national god of Babylonia. Professor Pinches has shown [*1] that his name is a rendering of that of Merodach. In Sumerian Merodach was called Amaruduk or Amarudu, and in the Assyro-Babylonian language Marduk. By a process familiar to philologists the suffix "uk" was dropped and the rendering became Marad. The Hebrews added "ni" ="ni-marad", assimilating the name "to a certain extent to the 'niphal forms' of the Hebrew verbs and making a change", says Pinches, "in conformity with the genius of the Hebrew language".

Asshur, who went out of Nimrod's country to build Nineveh, was a son of Shem--a Semite, and so far as is known it was after the Semites achieved political supremacy in Akkad that the Assyrian colonies were formed. Asshur may have been a subject ruler who was deified and became the god of the city of Asshur, which probably gave its name to Assyria.

According to Herodotus, Nineveh was founded by King Ninus and Queen Semiramis. This lady was reputed to be the daughter of Derceto, the fish goddess, whom Pliny identified with Atargatis. Semiramis was actually an Assyrian queen of revered memory. She was deified and took the place of a goddess, apparently Nina, the prototype of Derceto. This Nina, perhaps a form of Damkina, wife of Ea, was the great mother of the Sumerian city of Nina, and there, and also at Lagash, received offerings of fish. She was one of the many goddesses of maternity absorbed by Ishtar. The Greek Ninus is regarded as a male form of her name; like

[p. 278]

[paragraph continues] Atargatis, she may have become a bisexual deity, if she was not always accompanied by a shadowy male form. Nineveh (Ninua) was probably founded or conquered by colonists from Nina or Lagash, and called after the fish goddess.

All the deities of Assyria were imported from Babylonia except, as some hold, Ashur, the national god. [*1] The theory that Ashur was identical with the Aryo-Indian Asura and the Persian Ahura is not generally accepted. One theory is that he was an eponymous hero who became the city god of Asshur, although the early form of his name, Ashir, presents a difficulty in this connection. Asshur was the first capital of Assyria. Its city god may have become the national god on that account.

At an early period, perhaps a thousand years before Thothmes III battled with the Mitannians in northern Syria, an early wave of one of the peoples of Aryan speech may have occupied the Assyrian cities. Mr. Johns points out in this connection that the names of Ushpia, Kikia, and Adasi, who, according to Assyrian records, were early rulers in Asshur, "are neither Semitic nor Sumerian". An ancient name of the goddess of Nineveh was Shaushka, which compares with Shaushkash, the consort of Teshup, the Hittite-Mitanni hammer god. As many of the Mitannian names "are", according to Mr. Johns, "really Elamitic", he suggests an ethnic connection between the early conquerors of Assyria and the people of Elam. [*2] Were the pre-Semitic Elamites originally speakers of an agglutinative language, like the Sumerians and present-day Basques, who were conquered in prehistoric times by a people of Aryan speech?

[p. 279]

The possibility is urged by Mr. Johns's suggestion that Assyria may have been dominated in pre-Semitic times by the congeners of the Aryan military aristocracy of Mitanni. As has been shown, it was Semitized by the Amoritic migration which, about 2000 B.C., brought into prominence the Hammurabi Dynasty of Babylon.

A long list of kings with Semitic names held sway in the Assyrian cities during and after the Hammurabi Age. But not until well on in the Kassite period did any of them attain prominence in Western Asia. Then Ashur-bel-nish-eshu, King of Asshur, was strong enough to deal on equal terms with the Kassite ruler Kara-indash I, with whom he arranged a boundary treaty. He was a contemporary of Thothmes III of Egypt.

After Thothmes III had secured the predominance of Egypt in Syria and Palestine he recognized Assyria as an independent power, and supplied its king with Egyptian gold to assist him, no doubt, in strengthening his territory against their common enemy. Gifts were also sent from Assyria to Egypt to fan the flame of cordial relations.

The situation was full of peril for Saushatar, king of Mitanni. Deprived by Egypt of tribute-paying cities in Syria, his exchequer must have been sadly depleted. A standing army had to be maintained, for although Egypt made no attempt to encroach further on his territory, the Hittites were ever hovering on his north-western frontier, ready when opportunity offered to win back Cappadocia. Eastward, Assyria was threatening to become a dangerous rival. He had himself to pay tribute to Egypt, and Egypt was subsidizing his enemy. It was imperative on his part, therefore, to take action without delay. The power of Assyria had to be crippled; its revenues were required for the Mitannian exchequer. So

[p. 280]

[paragraph continues] Saushatar raided Assyria during the closing years of the reign of Thothmes III, or soon after his successor, Amenhotep II, ascended the Egyptian throne.

Nothing is known from contemporary records regarding this campaign; but it can be gathered from the references

of a later period that the city of Asshur was captured and plundered; its king, Ashur-nadin-akhe, ceased corresponding and exchanging gifts with Egypt. That Nineveh also fell is made clear by the fact that a descendant of Saushatar (Tushratta) was able to send to a descendant of Thothmes III at Thebes (Amenhotep III) the image of Ishtar (Shaushka) of Nineveh. Apparently five successive Mitannian kings were overlords of Assyria during a period which cannot be estimated at much less than a hundred years.

Our knowledge regarding these events is derived chiefly from the Tell-el-Amarna letters, and the tablets found by Professor Hugo Winckler at Boghaz-Koi in Cappadocia, Asia Minor.

The Tell-el-Amarna letters were discovered among the ruins of the palace of the famous Egyptian Pharaoh, Akhenaton, of the Eighteenth Dynasty, who died about 1358 B.C. During the winter of 1887-8 an Egyptian woman was excavating soil for her garden, when she happened upon the cellar of Akhenaton's foreign office in which the official correspondence had been stored. The "letters" were baked clay tablets inscribed with cuneiform alphabetical signs in the Babylonian-Assyrian language, which, like French in modern times, was the language of international diplomacy for many centuries in Western Asia after the Hyksos period.

The Egyptian natives, ever so eager to sell antiquities so as to make a fortune and retire for life, offered some specimens of the tablets for sale. One or two were sent

 

Click to enlarge
LETTER FROM TUSHRATTA, KING OF MITANNI, TO AMENHOTEP III, KING OF EGYPT

One of the Tell-el-Amarna tablets, now in the British Museum. (See pages <page 280>-282)

Photo. Mansell

 

[p. 281]

to Paris, where they were promptly declared to be forgeries, with the result that for a time the inscribed bricks were not a marketable commodity. Ere their value was discovered, the natives had packed them into sacks, with the result that many were damaged and some completely destroyed. At length, however, the majority of them reached the British Museum and the Berlin Museum, while others drifted into the museums at Cairo, St. Petersburg, and Paris. When they were deciphered, Mitanni was discovered, and a flood of light thrown on the internal affairs of Egypt and its relations with various kingdoms in Asia, while glimpses were also afforded of the life and manners of the times.

The letters covered the reigns of Amenhotep III, the great-grandson of Thothmes III, and of his son Akhenaton, "the dreamer king", and included communications from the kings of Babylonia, Assyria, Mitanni, Cyprus, the Hittites, and the princes of Phoenicia and Canaan. The copies of two letters from Amenhotep III to Kallima-Sin, King of Babylonia, had also been preserved. One deals with statements made by Babylonian ambassadors, whom the Pharaoh stigmatizes as liars. Kallima-Sin had sent his daughter to the royal harem of Egypt, and desired to know if she was alive and well. He also asked for "much gold" to enable him to carry on the work of extending his temple. When twenty minas of gold was sent to him, he complained in due course that the quantity received was not only short but that the gold was not pure; it had been melted in the furnace, and less than five minas came out. In return he sent to Akhenaton two minas of enamel, and some jewels for his daughter, who was in the Egyptian royal harem.

Ashur-uballit, king of Ashur, once wrote intimating to Akhenaton that he was gifting him horses and chariots

[p. 282]

and a jewel seal. He asked for gold to assist in building his palace. "In your country", he added, "gold is as plentiful as dust." He also made an illuminating statement to the effect that no ambassador had gone from Assyria to Egypt since the days of his ancestor Ashur-nadin-akhe. It would therefore appear that Ashur-uballit had freed part of Assyria from the yoke of Mitanni.

The contemporary king of Mitanni was Tushratta. He corresponded both with his cousin Amenhotep III and his son-in-law Akhenaton. In his correspondence with Amenhotep III Tushratta tells that his kingdom had been invaded by the Hittites, but his god Teshup had delivered them into his hand, and he destroyed them; "not one of them", he declared, "returned to his own country". Out of the booty captured he sent Amenhotep several chariots and horses, and a boy and a girl. To his sister Gilu-khipa, who was one of the Egyptian Pharaoh's wives, he gifted golden ornaments and a jar of oil. In another letter Tushratta asked for a large quantity of gold "without measure". He complained that he did not receive enough on previous occasions, and hinted that some of the Egyptian gold looked as if it were alloyed with copper. Like the Assyrian king, he hinted that gold was as plentiful as dust in Egypt. His own presents to the Pharaoh included precious stones, gold ornaments, chariots and horses, and women (probably slaves). This may have been tribute. It was during the third Amenhotep's illness that Tushratta forwarded the Nineveh image of Ishtar to Egypt, and he made reference to its having been previously sent thither by his father, Sutarna.

When Akhenaton came to the throne Tushratta wrote to him, desiring to continue the friendship which had existed for two or three generations between the kings of Mitanni and Egypt, and made complimentary references

[p. 283]

to "the distinguished Queen Tiy", Akhenaton's mother, who evidently exercised considerable influence in shaping Egypt's foreign policy. In the course of his long correspondence with the Pharaohs, Tushratta made those statements regarding his ancestors which have provided so much important data for modern historians of his kingdom.

During the early part of the Tell-el-Amarna period, Mitanni was the most powerful kingdom in Western Asia. It was chiefly on that account that the daughters of its rulers were selected to be the wives and mothers of great Egyptian Pharaohs. But its numerous enemies were ever plotting to accomplish its downfall. Among these the foremost and most dangerous were the Hittites and the Assyrians.

The ascendancy of the Hittites was achieved in northern Syria with dramatic suddenness. There arose in Asia Minor a great conqueror, named Subbi-luliuma, the successor of Hattusil I, who established a strong Hittite empire which endured for about two centuries. His capital was at Boghaz-Koi. Sweeping through Cappadocia, at the head of a finely organized army, remarkable for its mobility, he attacked the buffer states which owed allegiance to Mitanni and Egypt. City after city fell before him, until at length he invaded Mitanni; but it is uncertain whether or not Tushratta met him in battle. Large numbers of the Mitannians were, however, evicted and transferred to the land of the Hittites, where the Greeks subsequently found them, and where they are believed to be represented by the modern Kurds, the hereditary enemies of the Armenians.

In the confusion which ensued, Tushratta was murdered by Sutarna II, who was recognized by Subbi-luliuma. The crown prince, Mattiuza, fled to Babylon,

[p. 284]

where he found protection, but was unable to receive any assistance. Ultimately, when the Hittite emperor had secured his sway over northern Syria, he deposed Sutarna II and set Mattiuza as his vassal on the throne of the shrunken Mitanni kingdom.

Meanwhile the Egyptian empire in Asia had gone to pieces. When Akhenaton, the dreamer king, died in his palace at Tell-el-Amarna, the Khabiri were conquering the Canaanite cities which had paid him tribute, and the Hittite ruler was the acknowledged overlord of the Amorites.

The star of Assyria was also in the ascendant. Its king, Ashur-uballit, who had corresponded with Akhenaton, was, like the Hittite king, Subbi-luliuma, a distinguished statesman and general, and similarly laid the foundations of a great empire. Before or after Subbi-luliuma invaded Tushratta's domains, he drove the Mitannians out of Nineveh, and afterwards overcame the Shubari tribes of Mitanni on the north-west, with the result that he added a wide extent of territory to his growing empire.

He had previously thrust southward the Assyro-Babylonian frontier. In fact, he had become so formidable an opponent of Babylonia that his daughter had been accepted as the wife of Karakhardash, the Kassite king of that country. In time his grandson, Kadashman-Kharbe, ascended the Babylonian throne. This young monarch co-operated with his grandfather in suppressing the Suti, who infested the trade routes towards the west, and plundered the caravans of merchants and the messengers of great monarchs with persistent impunity.

A reference to these bandits appears in one of the Tell-el-Amarna letters. Writing to Akhenaton, Ashur-uballit said: "The lands (of Assyria and Egypt) are

[p. 285]

remote, therefore let our messengers come and go. That your messengers were late in reaching you, (the reason is that) if the Suti had waylaid them, they would have been dead men. For if I had sent them, the Suti would have sent bands to waylay them; therefore I have retained them. My messengers (however), may they not (for this reason) be delayed." [*1]

Ashur-uballit's grandson extended his Babylonian frontier into Amurru, where he dug wells and erected forts to protect traders. The Kassite aristocracy, however, appear to have entertained towards him a strong dislike, perhaps because he was so closely associated with their hereditary enemies the Assyrians. He had not reigned for long when the embers of rebellion burst into flame and he was murdered in his palace. The Kassites then selected as their king a man of humble origin, named Nazibugash, who was afterwards referred to as "the son of nobody". Ashur-uballit deemed the occasion a fitting one to interfere in the affairs of Babylonia. He suddenly appeared at the capital with a strong army, overawed the Kassites, and seized and slew Nazibugash. Then he set on the throne his great grandson the infant Kurigalzu II, who lived to reign for fifty-five years.

Ashur-uballit appears to have died soon after this event. He was succeeded by his son Bel-nirari, who carried on the policy of strengthening and extending the Assyrian empire. For many years he maintained excellent relations with his kinsman Kurigalzu II, but ultimately they came into conflict apparently over disputed territory. A sanguinary battle was fought, in which the Babylonians suffered heavily and were put to rout. A treaty of peace was afterwards arranged, which secured for the Assyrians a further extension of their frontier "from

[p. 286]

the borders of Mitanni as far as Babylonia". The struggle of the future was to be for the possession of Mesopotamia, so as to secure control over the trade routes.

Thus Assyria rose from a petty state in a comparatively brief period to become the rival of Babylonia, at a time when Egypt at the beginning of its Nineteenth Dynasty was endeavouring to win back its lost empire in Syria, and the Hittite empire was being consolidated in the north.

Footnotes

^263:1 The Land of the Hittites, John Garstang, pp. 312 et seq. and 315 et seq.

^263:2 The Ancient Egyptians, pp. 106 et seq.

^264:1 The Ancient Egyptians, p. 130.

^264:2 Struggle of the Nations (1896), p. 19.

^265:1 Note contributed to The Land of the Hittites, J. Garstang, p. 324.

^266:1 Genesis, xxvi, 34, 35.

^266:2 Ezekiel, xvi, 45.

^266:3 Genesis, xxvii, 46.

^266:4 Genesis, xxviii, 1, 2.

^267:1 Genesis, xxiv.

^268:1 The Syrian Goddess, John Garstang (London, 1913), pp. 17-8.

^269:1 Vedic Index of Names and Subjects, Macdonald & Keith, vol. i, pp. 64-5 (London, 1912).

^270:1 The Wanderings of Peoples, p. 21.

^271:1 Breasted's History of Egypt, pp. 219-20.

^275:1 A History of Egypt, W. M. Flinders Petrie, vol. ii, p. 146 et seq. (1904 ed.).

^276:1 A History of Egypt, W. M. Flinders Petrie, vol. ii, p. 147 (1904 ed.).

^277:1 The Old Testament in the Light of the Historical Records and Legends of Assyria and Babylonia, pp. 126 et seq.

^278:1 His connection with Anu is discussed in [*chapter xiv].

^278:2 Ancient Assyria, C. H. W. Johns, p. 11 (London, 1912).

^285:1 The Tell-el-Amarna Letters, Hugo Winckler, p. 31.

     
Myths of Babylonia and Assyria, by Donald A. MacKenzie, [1915], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 287] [ch-13]

  

CHAPTER XIII

  

Astrology and Astronomy

Culture and Superstition--Primitive Star Myths--Naturalism, Totemism, and Animism--Stars as Ghosts of Men, Giants, and Wild Animals--Gods as Constellations and Planets--Babylonian and Egyptian Mysticism--Osiris, Tammuz, and Merodach--Ishtar and Isis as Bisexual Deities--The Babylonian Planetary Deities--Planets as Forms of Tammuz and Ghosts of Gods--The Signs of the Zodiac--The "Four Quarters"--Cosmic Periods in Babylonia, India, Greece, and Ireland--Babylonian System of Calculation--Traced in Indian Yuga System--Astrology--Beliefs of the Masses--Rise of Astronomy--Conflicting Views of Authorities--Greece and Babylonia--Eclipses Foretold--The Dial of Ahaz--Omens of Heaven and Air--Biblical References to Constellations--The Past in the Present.

THE empire builders of old who enriched themselves with the spoils of war and the tribute of subject States, not only satisfied personal ambition and afforded protection for industrious traders and workers, but also incidentally promoted culture and endowed research. When a conqueror returned to his capital laden with treasure, he made generous gifts to the temples. He believed that his successes were rewards for his piety, that his battles were won for him by his god or goddess of war. It was necessary, therefore, that he should continue to find favour in the eyes of the deity who had been proved to be more powerful than the god of his enemies. Besides, he had to make provision during his absence on long campaigns, or while absorbed in administrative work, for the constant performance of religious rites, so that the various deities of water, earth, weather, and corn might be

[p. 288]

sustained or propitiated with sacrificial offerings, or held in magical control by the performance of ceremonial rites. Consequently an endowed priesthood became a necessity in all powerful and well-organized states.

Thus came into existence in Babylonia, as elsewhere, as a result of the accumulation of wealth, a leisured official class, whose duties tended to promote intellectual activity, although they were primarily directed to perpetuate gross superstitious practices. Culture was really a by-product of temple activities; it flowed forth like pure gold from furnaces of thought which were walled up by the crude ores of magic and immemorial tradition.

No doubt in ancient Babylonia, as in Europe during the Middle Ages, the men of refinement and intellect among the upper classes were attracted to the temples, while the more robust types preferred the outdoor life, and especially the life of the soldier. [*1] The permanent triumphs of Babylonian civilization were achieved either by the priests, or in consequence of the influence they exercised. They were the grammarians and the scribes, the mathematicians and the philosophers of that ancient country, the teachers of the young, and the patrons of the arts and crafts. It was because the temples were centres of intellectual activity that the Sumerian language remained the language of culture for long centuries after it ceased to be the everyday speech of the people.

Reference has already been made to the growth of art, and the probability that all the arts had their origin in magical practices, and to the growth of popular education necessitated by the centralization of business in the

[p. 289]

temples. It remains with us to deal now with priestly contributions to the more abstruse sciences. In India the ritualists among the Brahmans, who concerned themselves greatly regarding the exact construction and measurements of altars, gave the world algebra; the pyramid builders of Egypt, who erected vast tombs to protect royal mummies, had perforce to lay the groundwork of the science of geometry; and the Babylonian priests who elaborated the study of astrology became great astronomers because they found it necessary to observe and record accurately the movements of the heavenly bodies.

From the earliest times of which we have knowledge, the religious beliefs of the Sumerians had vague stellar associations. But it does not follow that their myths were star myths to begin with. A people who called constellations "the ram", "the bull", "the lion", or "the scorpion", did not do so because astral groups suggested the forms of animals, but rather because the animals had an earlier connection with their religious life.

At the same time it should be recognized that the mystery of the stars must ever have haunted the minds of primitive men. Night with all its terrors appealed more strongly to their imaginations than refulgent day when they felt more secure; they were concerned most regarding what they feared most. Brooding in darkness regarding their fate, they evidently associated the stars with the forces which influenced their lives--the ghosts of ancestors, of totems, the spirits that brought food or famine and controlled the seasons. As children see images in a fire, so they saw human life reflected in the starry sky. To the simple minds of early folks the great moon seemed to be the parent of the numerous twinkling and moving orbs. In Babylon, indeed, the moon was regarded as the father not only of the stars but of the sun

[p. 290]

also; there, as elsewhere, lunar worship was older than solar worship.

Primitive beliefs regarding the stars were of similar character in various parts of the world. But the importance which they assumed in local mythologies depended in the first place on local phenomena. On the northern Eur-Asian steppes, for instance, where stars vanished during summer's blue nights, and were often obscured by clouds in winter, they did not impress men's minds so persistently and deeply as in Babylonia, where for the greater part of the year they gleamed in darkness through a dry transparent atmosphere with awesome intensity. The development of an elaborate system of astral myths, besides, was only possible in a country where the people had attained to a high degree of civilization, and men enjoyed leisure and security to make observations and compile records. It is not surprising, therefore, to find that Babylonia was the cradle of astronomy. But before this science had destroyed the theory which it was fostered to prove, it lay smothered for long ages in the debris of immemorial beliefs. It is necessary, therefore, in dealing with Babylonian astral myths to endeavour to approach within reasonable distance of the point of view, or points of view, of the people who framed them.

Babylonian religious thought was of highly complex character. Its progress was ever hampered by blended traditions. The earliest settlers in the Tigro-Euphrates valley no doubt imported many crude beliefs which they had inherited from their Palaeolithic ancestors--the modes of thought which were the moulds of new theories arising from new experiences. When consideration is given to the existing religious beliefs of various peoples throughout the world, in low stages of culture, it is found that the highly developed creeds of Babylonia,

[p. 291]

[paragraph continues] Egypt, and other countries where civilization flourished were never divested wholly of their primitive traits.

Among savage peoples two grades of religious ideas have been identified, and classified as Naturalism and Animism. In the plane of Naturalism the belief obtains that a vague impersonal force, which may have more than one manifestation and is yet manifested in everything, controls the world and the lives of human beings. An illustration of this stage of religious consciousness is afforded by Mr. Risley, who, in dealing with the religion of the jungle dwellers of Chota Nagpur, India, says that "in most cases the indefinite something which they fear and attempt to propitiate is not a person at all in any sense of the word; if one must state the case in positive terms, I should say that the idea which lies at the root of their religion is that of a power rather than many powers". [*1]

Traces of Naturalism appear to have survived in Sumeria in the belief that "the spiritual, the Zi, was that which manifested life. . . . The test of the manifestation of life was movement." [*2] All things that moved, it was conceived in the plane of Naturalism, possessed "self power"; the river was a living thing, as was also the fountain; a stone that fell from a hill fell of its own accord; a tree groaned because the wind caused it to suffer pain. This idea that inanimate objects had conscious existence survived in the religion of the Aryo-Indians. In the Nala story of the Indian epic, the Mahabharata, the disconsolate wife Damayanti addresses a mountain when searching for her lost husband:

This, the monarch of all mountains, ask I of the king of men;
 "O all-honoured Prince of Mountains, with thy heavenward soaring peaks . . . [p. 292]
 Hast thou seen the kingly Nala in this dark and awful wood?. . .
 Why repliest thou not, O Mountain?"

She similarly addresses the Asoka tree:

"Hast thou seen Nishadha's monarch, hast thou seen my only love? . . .
 That I may depart ungrieving, fair Asoka, answer me. . . ."
 Many a tree she stood and gazed on. . . . [*1]

[paragraph continues] It will be recognized that when primitive men gave names to mountains, rivers, or the ocean, these possessed for them a deeper significance than they do for us at the present day. The earliest peoples of Indo-European speech who called the sky "dyeus", and those of Sumerian speech who called it "ana", regarded it not as the sky "and nothing more", but as something which had conscious existence and "self power". Our remote ancestors resembled, in this respect, those imaginative children who hold conversations with articles of furniture, and administer punishment to stones which, they believe, have tripped them up voluntarily and with desire to commit an offence.

In this early stage of development the widespread totemic beliefs appear to have had origin. Families or tribes believed that they were descended from mountains, trees, or wild animals.

Aesop's fable about the mountain which gave birth to a mouse may be a relic of Totemism; so also may be the mountain symbols on the standards of Egyptian ships which appear on pre-dynastic pottery; the black dwarfs of Teutonic mythology were earth children. [*2]

[p. 293]

Adonis sprang from a tree; his mother may have, according to primitive belief, been simply a tree; Dagda, the patriarchal Irish corn god, was an oak; indeed, the idea of a "world tree", which occurs in Sumerian, Vedic-Indian, Teutonic, and other mythologies, was probably a product of Totemism.

Wild animals were considered to be other forms of human beings who could marry princes and princesses as they do in so many fairy tales. Damayanti addressed the tiger, as well as the mountain and tree, saying:

                   I approach him without fear.
 "Of the beasts art thou the monarch, all this forest thy domain; . . .
 Thou, O king of beasts, console me, if my Nala thou hast seen." [*1]

[paragraph continues] A tribal totem exercised sway over a tribal district. In Egypt, as Herodotus recorded, the crocodile was worshipped in one district and hunted down in another. Tribes fought against tribes when totemic animals were slain. The Babylonian and Indian myths about the conflicts between eagles and serpents may have originated as records of battles between eagle clans and serpent clans. Totemic animals were tabooed. The Set pig of Egypt and the devil pig of Ireland, Scotland, and Wales were not eaten except sacrificially. Families were supposed to be descended from swans and were named Swans, or from seals and were named Seals, like the Gaelic "Mac Codrums", whose surname signifies "son of the seal"; the nickname of the Campbells, "sons of the pig", may refer to their totemic boar's head crest, which commemorated the slaying, perhaps the sacrificial slaying, of the boar by their ancestor Diarmid. Mr. Garstang, in The Syrian Goddess, thinks it possible that the boar which killed

[p. 294]

[paragraph continues] Adonis was of totemic origin. So may have been the fish form of the Sumerian god Ea. When an animal totem was sacrificed once a year, and eaten sacrificially so that the strength of the clan might be maintained, the priest who wrapped himself in its skin was supposed to have transmitted to him certain magical powers; he became identified with the totem and prophesied and gave instruction as the totem. Ea was depicted clad in the fish's skin.

Animism, the other early stage of human development, also produced distinctive modes of thought. Men conceived that the world swarmed with spirits, that a spirit groaned in the wind-shaken tree, that the howling wind was an invisible spirit, that there were spirits in fountains, rivers, valleys, hills, and in ocean, and in all animals; and that a hostile spirit might possess an individual and change his nature. The sun and the moon were the abodes of spirits, or the vessels in which great spirits sailed over the sea of the sky; the stars were all spirits, the "host of heaven". These spirits existed in groups of seven, or groups of three, and the multiple of three, or in pairs, or operated as single individuals.

Although certain spirits might confer gifts upon mankind, they were at certain seasons and in certain localities hostile and vengeful, like the grass-green fairies in winter, or the earth-black elves when their gold was sought for in forbidden and secret places. These spirits were the artisans of creation and vegetation, like the Egyptian Khnumu and the Indian Rhibus; they fashioned the grass blades and the stalks of corn, but at times of seasonal change they might ride on their tempest steeds, or issue forth from flooding rivers and lakes. Man was greatly concerned about striking

[p. 295]

bargains with them to secure their services, and about propitiating them, or warding off their attacks with protective charms, and by performing "ceremonies of riddance". The ghosts of the dead, being spirits, were similarly propitious or harmful on occasion; as emissaries of Fate they could injure the living.

Ancestor worship, the worship of ghosts, had origin in the stage of Animism. But ancestor worship was not developed in Babylonia as in China, for instance, although traces of it survived in the worship of stars as ghosts, in the deification of kings, and the worship of patriarchs, who might be exalted as gods or identified with a supreme god. The Egyptian Pharaoh Unas became the sun god and the constellation of Orion by devouring his predecessors. [*1] He ate his god as a tribe ate its animal totem; he became the "bull of heaven".

There were star totems as well as mountain totems. A St. Andrew's cross sign, on one of the Egyptian ship standards referred to, may represent a star. The Babylonian goddess Ishtar was symbolized as a star, and she was the "world mother". Many primitive currents of thought shaped the fretted rocks of ancient mythologies.

In various countries all round the globe the belief prevailed that the stars were ghosts of the mighty dead--of giants, kings, or princes, or princesses, or of pious people whom the gods loved, or of animals which were worshipped. A few instances may be selected at random. When the Teutonic gods slew the giant Thjasse, he appeared in the heavens as Sirius. In India the ghosts of the "seven Rishis", who were semi-divine Patriarchs, formed the constellation of the Great Bear, which in Vedic times was called the "seven bears". The wives of the seven Rishis were the stars of the Pleiades. In Greece

[p. 296]

the Pleiades were the ghosts of the seven daughters of Atlas and Pleione, and in Australia they were and are a queen and six handmaidens. In these countries, as elsewhere, stories were told to account for the "lost Pleiad", a fact which suggests that primitive men were more constant observers of the heavenly bodies than might otherwise be supposed. The Arcadians believed that they were descended, as Hesiod recorded, from a princess who was transformed by Zeus into a bear; in this form Artemis slew her and she became the "Great Bear" of the sky. The Egyptian Isis was the star Sirius, whose rising coincided with the beginning of the Nile inundation. Her first tear for the dead Osiris fell into the river on "the night of the drop". The flood which ensued brought the food supply. Thus the star was not only the Great Mother of all, but the sustainer of all.

The brightest stars were regarded as being the greatest and most influential. In Babylonia all the planets were identified with great deities. Jupiter, for instance, was Merodach, and one of the astral forms of Ishtar was Venus. Merodach was also connected with "the fish of Ea" (Pisces), so that it is not improbable that Ea worship had stellar associations. Constellations were given recognition before the planets were identified.

A strange blending of primitive beliefs occurred when the deities were given astral forms. As has been shown ([*Chapter III]) gods were supposed to die annually. The Egyptian priests pointed out to Herodotus the grave of Osiris and also his star. There are "giants' graves" also in those countries in which the gods were simply ferocious giants. A god might assume various forms; he might take the form of an insect, like Indra, and hide in a plant, or become a mouse, or a serpent, like the gods of Erech in the Gilgamesh epic. The further theory that a god

[p. 297]

could exist in various forms at one and the same time suggests that it had its origin among a people who accepted the idea of a personal god while yet in the stage of Naturalism. In Egypt Osiris, for instance, was the moon, which came as a beautiful child each month and was devoured as the wasting "old moon" by the demon Set; he was the young god who was slain in his prime each year; he was at once the father, husband, and son of Isis; he was the Patriarch who reigned over men and became the Judge of the Dead; he was the earth spirit, he was the bisexual Nile spirit, he was the spring sun; he was the Apis bull of Memphis, and the ram of Mendes; he was the reigning Pharaoh. In his fusion with Ra, who was threefold--Khepera, Ra, and Tum--he died each day as an old man; he appeared in heaven at night as the constellation Orion, which was his ghost, or was, perhaps, rather the Sumerian Zi, the spiritual essence of life. Osiris, who resembled Tammuz, a god of many forms also, was addressed as follows in one of the Isis chants:

There proceedeth from thee the strong Orion in heaven at evening, at the resting of every day!
 Lo it is I (Isis), at the approach of the Sothis (Sirius) period, who doth watch for him (the child Osiris),
 Nor will I leave off watching for him; for that which proceedeth from thee (the living Osiris) is revered.
 An emanation from thee causeth life to gods and men, reptiles and animals, and they live by means thereof.
 Come thou to us from thy chamber, in the day when thy soul begetteth emanations,--
 The day when offerings upon offerings are made to thy spirit, which causeth the gods and men likewise to live. [*1]

This extract emphasizes how unsafe it is to confine certain deities within narrow limits by terming them simply

[p. 298]

[paragraph continues] "solar gods", "lunar gods", "astral gods", or "earth gods". One deity may have been simultaneously a sun god and moon god, an air god and an earth god, one who was dead and also alive, unborn and also old. The priests of Babylonia and Egypt were less accustomed to concrete and logical definitions than their critics and expositors of the twentieth century. Simple explanations of ancient beliefs are often by reason of their very simplicity highly improbable. Recognition must ever be given to the puzzling complexity of religious thought in Babylonia and Egypt, and to the possibility that even to the priests the doctrines of a particular cult, which embraced the accumulated ideas of centuries, were invariably confusing and vague, and full of inconsistencies; they were mystical in the sense that the understanding could not grasp them although it permitted their acceptance. A god, for instance, might be addressed at once in the singular and plural, perhaps because he had developed from an animistic group of spirits, or, perhaps, for reasons we cannot discover. This is shown clearly by the following pregnant extract from a Babylonian tablet: "Powerful, O Sevenfold, one are ye". Mr. L. W. King, the translator, comments upon it as follows: "There is no doubt that the name was applied to a group of gods who were so closely connected that, though addressed in the plural, they could in the same sentence be regarded as forming a single personality". [*1]

Like the Egyptian Osiris, the Babylonian Merodach was a highly complex deity. He was the son of Ea, god of the deep; he died to give origin to human life when he commanded that his head should be cut off so that the first human beings might be fashioned by mixing his blood with the earth; he was the wind god, who gave

[p. 299]

[paragraph continues] "the air of life"; he was the deity of thunder and the sky; he was the sun of spring in his Tammuz character; he was the daily sun, and the planets Jupiter and Mercury as well as Sharru (Regulus); he had various astral associations at various seasons. Ishtar, the goddess, was Iku (Capella), the water channel star, in January--February, and Merodach was Iku in May--June. This strange system of identifying the chief deity with different stars at different periods, or simultaneously, must not be confused with the monotheistic identification of him with other gods. Merodach changed his forms with Ishtar, and had similarly many forms. This goddess, for instance, was, even when connected with one particular heavenly body, liable to change. According to a tablet fragment she was, as the planet Venus, "a female at sunset and a male at sunrise" [*1]--that is, a bisexual deity like Nannar of Ur, the father and mother deity combined, and Isis of Egypt. Nannar is addressed in a famous hymn:

Father Nannar, Lord, God Sin, ruler among the gods. . . .
 Mother body which produceth all things. . . .
 Merciful, gracious Father, in whose hand the life of the whole land is contained.

One of the Isis chants of Egypt sets forth, addressing Osiris:

There cometh unto thee Isis, lady of the horizon, who hath begotten herself alone in the image of the gods . . .
 She hath taken vengeance before Horus, the woman who was made a male by her father Osiris. [*2]

Merodach, like Osiris-Sokar, was a "lord of many existences", and likewise "the mysterious one, he who is unknown to mankind". [*3] It was impossible for the human mind "a greater than itself to know".

[p. 300]

Evidence has not yet been forthcoming to enable us to determine the period at which the chief Babylonian deities were identified with the planets, but it is clear that Merodach's ascendancy in astral form could not have occurred prior to the rise of that city god of Babylon as chief of the pantheon by displacing Enlil. At the same time it must be recognized that long before the Hammurabi age the star-gazers of the Tigro-Euphrates valley must have been acquainted with the movements of the chief planets and stars, and, no doubt, they connected them with seasonal changes as in Egypt, where Isis was identified with Sirius long before the Ptolemaic age, when Babylonian astronomy was imported. Horus was identified not only with the sun but also with Saturn, Jupiter, and Mars. [*1] Even the primitive Australians, as has been indicated, have their star myths; they refer to the stars Castor and Pollux as two young men, like the ancient Greeks, while the African Bushmen assert that these stars are two girls. It would be a mistake, however, to assume that the prehistoric Sumerians were exact astronomers. Probably they were, like the Aryo-Indians of the Vedic period, "not very accurate observers". [*2]

It is of special interest to find that the stars were grouped by the Babylonians at the earliest period in companies of seven. The importance of this magical number is emphasized by the group of seven demons which rose from the deep to rage over the land (<page 71>). Perhaps the sanctity of Seven was suggested by Orion, the Bears, and the Pleiad, one of which constellations may have been the "Sevenfold" deity addressed as "one". At any rate arbitrary groupings of other stars into companies of seven took place, for references are made to

[p. 301]

the seven Tikshi, the seven Lumashi, and the seven Mashi, which are older than the signs of the Zodiac; so far as can be ascertained these groups were selected from various constellations. When the five planets were identified, they were associated with the sun and moon and connected with the chief gods of the Hammurabi pantheon. A bilingual list in the British Museum arranges the sevenfold planetary group in the following order:--

The moon, Sin.
 The sun, Shamash.
 Jupiter, Merodach.
 Venus, Ishtar.
 Saturn, Ninip (Nirig).
 Mercury, Nebo.
 Mars, Nergal.

[paragraph continues] An ancient name of the moon was Aa, A, or Ai, which recalls the Egyptian Aah or Ah. The Sumerian moon was Aku, "the measurer", like Thoth of Egypt, who in his lunar character as a Fate measured out the lives of men, and was a god of architects, mathematicians, and scribes. The moon was the parent of the sun or its spouse; and might be male, or female, or both as a bi-sexual deity.

As the "bull of light" Jupiter had solar associations; he was also the shepherd of the stars, a title shared by Tammuz as Orion; Nin-Girsu, a developed form of Tammuz, was identified with both Orion and Jupiter.

Ishtar's identification with Venus is of special interest. When that planet was at its brightest phase, its rays were referred to as "the beard" of the goddess; she was the "bearded Aphrodite"--a bisexual deity evidently. The astrologers regarded the bright Venus as lucky and the rayless Venus as unlucky.

[p. 302]

Saturn was Nirig, who is best known as Ninip, a deity who was displaced by Enlil, the elder Bel, and afterwards regarded as his son. His story has not been recovered, but from the references made to it there is little doubt that it was a version of the widespread myth about the elder deity who was slain by his son, as Saturn was by Jupiter and Dyaus by Indra. It may have resembled the lost Egyptian myth which explained the existence of the two Horuses--Horus the elder, and Horus, the posthumous son of Osiris. At any rate, it is of interest to find in this connection that in Egypt the planet Saturn was Her-Ka, "Horus the Bull". Ninip was also identified with the bull. Both deities were also connected with the spring sun, like Tammuz, and were terrible slayers of their enemies. Ninip raged through Babylonia like a storm flood, and Horus swept down the Nile, slaying the followers of Set. As the divine sower of seed, Ninip may have developed from Tammuz as Horus did from Osiris. Each were at once the father and the son, different forms of the same deity at various seasons of the year. The elder god was displaced by the son (spring), and when the son grew old his son slew him in turn. As the planet Saturn, Ninip was the ghost of the elder god, and as the son of Bel he was the solar war god of spring, the great wild bull, the god of fertility. He was also as Ber "lord of the wild boar", an animal associated with Rimmon. [*1]

Nebo (Nabu), who was identified with Mercury, was a god of Borsippa. He was a messenger and "announcer" of the gods, as the Egyptian Horus in his connection with Jupiter was Her-ap-sheta, "Horus the opener of that which is secret". [*2] Nebo's original character is obscure.

 

Click to enlarge
THE GOD NINIP AND ANOTHER DEITY
 Marble slab from Kenyan jib (Nineveh): now in the British Museum.
 Photo Mansell

 

[p. 303]

[paragraph continues] He appears to have been a highly developed deity of a people well advanced in civilization when he was exalted as the divine patron of Borsippa. Although Hammurabi ignored him, he was subsequently invoked with Merodach, and had probably much in common with Merodach. Indeed, Merodach was also identified with the planet Mercury. Like the Greek Hermes, Nebo was a messenger of the gods and an instructor of mankind. Jastrow regards him as "a counterpart of Ea", and says: "Like Ea, he is the embodiment and source of wisdom. The art of writing--and therefore of all literature--is more particularly associated with him. A common form of his name designates him as the 'god of the stylus'." [*1] He appears also to have been a developed form of Tammuz, who was an incarnation of Ea. Professor Pinches shows that one of his names, Mermer, was also a non-Semitic name of Ramman. [*2] Tammuz resembled Ramman in his character as a spring god of war. It would seem that Merodach as Jupiter displaced at Babylon Nebo as Saturn, the elder god, as Bel Enlil displaced the elder Ninip at Nippur.

The god of Mars was Nergal, the patron deity of Cuthah, [*3] who descended into the Underworld and forced into submission Eresh-ki-gal (Persephone), with whom he was afterwards associated. His "name", says Professor Pinches, "is supposed to mean 'lord of the great habitation', which would be a parallel to that of his spouse, Eresh-ki-gal". [*4] At Erech he symbolized the destroying influence of the sun, and was accompanied by the demons of pestilence. Mars was a planet of evil, plague, and death; its animal form was the wolf. In Egypt it was

[p. 304]

called Herdesher, "the Red Horus", and in Greece it was associated with Ares (the Roman Mars), the war god, who assumed his boar form to slay Adonis (Tammuz).

Nergal was also a fire god like the Aryo-Indian Agni, who, as has been shown, links with Tammuz as a demon slayer and a god of fertility. It may be that Nergal was a specialized form of Tammuz, who, in a version of the myth, was reputed to have entered the Underworld as a conqueror when claimed by Eresh-ki-gal, and to have become, like Osiris, the lord of the dead. If so, Nergal was at once the slayer and the slain.

The various Babylonian deities who were identified with the planets had their characters sharply defined as members of an organized pantheon. But before this development took place certain of the prominent heavenly bodies, perhaps all the planets, were evidently regarded as manifestations of one deity, the primeval Tammuz, who was a form of Ea, or of the twin deities Ea and Anu. Tammuz may have been the "sevenfold one" of the hymns. At a still earlier period the stars were manifestations of the Power whom the jungle dwellers of Chota Nagpur attempt to propitiate--the "world soul" of the cultured Brahmans of the post-Vedic Indian Age. As much is suggested by the resemblances which the conventionalized planetary deities bear to Tammuz, whose attributes they symbolized, and by the Egyptian conception that the sun, Jupiter, Saturn, and Mars were manifestations of Horus. Tammuz and Horus may have been personifications of the Power or World Soul vaguely recognized in the stage of Naturalism.

The influence of animistic modes of thought may be traced in the idea that the planets and stars were the ghosts of gods who were superseded by their sons. These sons were identical with their fathers; they became, as

[p. 305]

in Egypt, "husbands of their mothers". This idea was perpetuated in the Aryo-Indian Laws of Manu, in which it is set forth that "the husband, after conception by his wife, becomes an embryo and is born again of her". [*1] The deities died every year, but death was simply change. Yet they remained in the separate forms they assumed in their progress round "the wide circle of necessity". Horus was remembered as various planets--as the falcon, as the elder sun god, and as the son of Osiris; and Tammuz was the spring sun, the child, youth, warrior, the deity of fertility, and the lord of death (Orion-Nergal), and, as has been suggested, all the planets.

The stars were also the ghosts of deities who died daily. When the sun perished as an old man at evening, it rose in the heavens as Orion, or went out and in among the stars as the shepherd of the flock, Jupiter, the planet of Merodach in Babylonia, and Attis in Asia Minor. The flock was the group of heavenly spirits invisible by day, the "host of heaven"--manifestations or ghosts of the emissaries of the controlling power or powers.

The planets presided over various months of the year. Sin (the moon) was associated with the third month; it also controlled the calendar; Ninip (Saturn) was associated with the fourth month, Ishtar (Venus) with the sixth, Shamash (the sun) with the seventh, Merodach (Jupiter) with the eighth, Nergal (Mars) with the ninth, and a messenger of the gods, probably Nebo (Mercury), with the tenth.

Each month was also controlled by a zodiacal constellation. In the Creation myth of Babylon it is stated that when Merodach engaged in the work of setting the Universe in order he "set all the great gods in their

[p. 306]

several stations", and "also created their images, the stars of the Zodiac, [*1] and fixed them all" (<page 147>).

Our signs of the Zodiac are of Babylonian origin. They were passed on to the Greeks by the Phoenicians and Hittites. "There was a time", says Professor Sayce, "when the Hittites were profoundly affected by Babylonian civilization, religion, and art. . . ." They "carried the time-worn civilizations of Babylonia and Egypt to the furthest boundary of Egypt, and there handed them over to the West in the grey dawn of European history. . . . Greek traditions affirmed that the rulers of Mykenae had come from Lydia, bringing with them the civilization and treasures of Asia Minor. The tradition has been confirmed by modern research. While certain elements belonging to the prehistoric culture of Greece, as revealed at Mykenae and elsewhere, were derived from Egypt and Phoenicia, there are others which point to Asia Minor as their source. And the culture of Asia Minor was Hittite." [*2]

The early Babylonian astronomers did not know, of course, that the earth revolved round the sun. They believed that the sun travelled across the heavens flying like a bird or sailing like a boat. [*3] In studying its movements they observed that it always travelled from west to east along a broad path, swinging from side to side of it in the course of the year. This path is the Zodiac--the celestial "circle of necessity". The middle

 

Click to enlarge
SYMBOLS OF DEITIES AS ASTRONOMICAL SIGNS
 Sculptured on a stone recording privileges granted to Ritti-Marduk by Nebuchadnezzar I
 (British Museum)

 

[p. 307]

line of the sun's path is the Ecliptic. The Babylonian scientists divided the Ecliptic into twelve equal parts, and grouped in each part the stars which formed their constellations; these are also called "Signs of the Zodiac". Each month had thus its sign or constellation.

The names borne at the present day by the signs of the Zodiac are easily remembered even by children, who are encouraged to repeat the following familiar lines:

The Ram, the Bull, the heavenly Twins,
 And next the Crab, the Lion shines.
      The Virgin and the Scales;
 The Scorpion, Archer, and Sea goat,
 The man that holds the water pot,
      And Fish with glitt'ring [*1] tails.

The table on <page 308> shows that our signs are derived from ancient Babylonia.

The celestial regions were also divided into three or more parts. Three "fields" were allotted to the ancient triad formed by Ea, Anu, and Bel. The zodiacal "path" ran through these "fields". Ea's field was in the west, and was associated with Amurru, the land of the Amorites; Anu's field was in the south, and was associated with Elam; and Bel's central "field" was associated with the land of Akkad. When the rulers of Akkad called themselves "kings of the four quarters", the reference was to the countries associated with the three divine fields and to Gutium [*2] (east = our north-east). Was Gutium associated with demons, as in Scandinavia the north-east was associated with the giants against whom Thor waged war?

The Babylonian Creation myth states that Merodach, having fixed the stars of the Zodiac, made three stars for

[p. 308]

          Constellations.

       Date of Sun's Entry
   (Babylonian Month in brackets).

       Babylonian Equivalent.

     
      Aries (the Ram).

       20th March
   (Nisan = March-April).

       The Labourer or   Messenger.

     
      Taurus (the   Bull).

       20th April
   (Iyyar = April-May).

       A divine figure   and the "bull of heaven".

     
      Gemini (the   Twins).

       21st May
   (Sivan = May-June).

       The Faithful   Shepherd and Twins side by side, or head to head and feet to feet.

     
      Cancer (the   Crab).

       21st June
   (Tammuz = June-July).

       Crab or   Scorpion.

     
      Leo (the Lion).

       22nd July
   (Ab = July-August).

       The big dog   (Lion).

     
      Virgo (the   Virgin).

       23rd August
   (Elul = August-Sept.).

       Ishtar, the   Virgin's ear of corn.

     
      Libra (the   Balance).

       23rd September
   (Tisri = Sept.-Oct.).

       The Balance.

     
      Scorpio (the   Scorpion).

       23rd October
   (Marcheswan = Oct.-Nov.).

       Scorpion of   darkness.

     
      Sagittarius   (the Archer).

       22nd November
   (Chisleu = Nov.-Dec.).

       Man or   man-horse with bow, or an arrow symbol.

     
      Capricornus   (the Goat).

       21st December
   (Tebet = Dec.-Jan.).

       Ea's goat-fish.

     
      Aquarius (the   Water Carrier).

       19th January
   (Sebat = Jan.-Feb.).

       God with water   urn.

     
      Pisces (the   Fishes).

       18th February
   (Adar = Feb.-March).

       Fish tails in   canal.

     
    

each month (<page 147>). Mr. Robert Brown, jun., who has dealt as exhaustively with the astronomical problems of Babylonia as the available data permitted him, is of opinion that the leading stars of three constellations are referred

[p. 309]

to, viz.: (1) the central or zodiacal constellations, (2) the northern constellations, and (3) the southern constellations. We have thus a scheme of thirty-six constellations. The "twelve zodiacal stars were flanked on either side by twelve non-zodiacal stars". Mr. Brown quotes Diodorus, who gave a resume of Babylonian astronomico-astrology, in this connection. He said that "the five planets were called 'Interpreters'; and in subjection to these were marshalled 'Thirty Stars', which were styled 'Divinities of the Council'. . . The chiefs of the Divinities are twelve in number, to each of whom they assign a month and one of the twelve signs of the Zodiac." Through these twelve signs sun, moon, and planets run their courses. "And with the zodiacal circle they mark out twenty-four stars, half of which they say are arranged in the north and half in the south." [*1] Mr. Brown shows that the thirty stars referred to "constituted the original Euphratean Lunar Zodiac, the parent of the seven ancient lunar zodiacs which have come down to us, namely, the Persian, Sogdian, Khorasmian, Chinese, Indian, Arab, and Coptic schemes".

The three constellations associated with each month had each a symbolic significance: they reflected the characters of their months. At the height of the rainy season, for instance, the month of Ramman, the thunder god, was presided over by the zodiacal constellation of the water urn, the northern constellation "Fish of the Canal", and the southern "the Horse". In India the black horse was sacrificed at rain-getting and fertility ceremonies. The months of growth, pestilence, and scorching sun heat were in turn symbolized. The "Great Bear" was the "chariot" = "Charles's Wain", and the "Milky Way" the "river of the high cloud", the Celestial Euphrates, as in Egypt it was the Celestial Nile.

[p. 310]

Of special interest among the many problems presented by Babylonian astronomical lore is the theory of Cosmic periods or Ages of the Universe. In the Indian, Greek, and Irish mythologies there are four Ages--the Silvern (white), Golden (yellow), the Bronze (red), and the Iron (black). As has been already indicated, Mr. R. Brown, jun., shows that "the Indian system of Yugas, or ages of the world, presents many features which forcibly remind us of the Euphratean scheme". The Babylonians had ten antediluvian kings, who were reputed to have reigned for vast periods, the total of which amounted to 120 saroi, or 432,000 years. These figures at once recall the Indian Maha-yuga of 4,320,000 years = 432,000 X 10. Apparently the Babylonian and Indian systems of calculation were of common origin. In both countries the measurements of time and space were arrived at by utilizing the numerals 10 and 6.

When primitive man began to count he adopted a method which comes naturally to every schoolboy; he utilized his fingers. Twice five gave him ten, and from ten he progressed to twenty, and then on to a hundred and beyond. In making measurements his hands, arms, and feet were at his service. We are still measuring by feet and yards (standardized strides) in this country, while those who engage in the immemorial art of knitting, and, in doing so, repeat designs found on neolithic pottery, continue to measure in finger breadths, finger lengths, and hand breadths as did the ancient folks who called an arm length a cubit. Nor has the span been forgotten, especially by boys in their games with marbles; the space from the end of the thumb to the end of the little finger when the hand is extended must have been an important measurement from the earliest times.

As he made progress in calculations, the primitive

[p. 311]

[paragraph continues] Babylonian appears to have been struck by other details in his anatomy besides his sets of five fingers and five toes. He observed, for instance, that his fingers were divided into three parts and his thumb into two parts only; [*1] four fingers multiplied by three gave him twelve, and multiplying 12 by 3 he reached 36. Apparently the figure 6 attracted him. His body was divided into 6 parts--2 arms, 2 legs, the head, and the trunk; his 2 ears, 2 eyes, and mouth, and nose also gave him 6. The basal 6, multiplied by his la fingers, gave him 60, and 60 x 2 (for his 2 hands) gave him 120. In Babylonian arithmetic 6 and 60 are important numbers, and it is not surprising to find that in the system of numerals the signs for 1 and 10 combined represent 60.

In fixing the length of a mythical period his first great calculation of 120 came naturally to the Babylonian, and when he undertook to measure the Zodiac he equated time and space by fixing on 120 degrees. His first zodiac was the Sumerian lunar zodiac, which contained thirty moon chambers associated with the "Thirty Stars" of the tablets, and referred to by Diodorus as "Divinities of the Council". The chiefs of the Thirty numbered twelve. In this system the year began in the winter solstice. Mr. Hewitt has shown that the chief annual

[p. 312]

festival of the Indian Dravidians begins with the first full moon after the winter festival, and Mr. Brown emphasizes the fact that the list of Tamil (Dravidian) lunar and solar months are named like the Babylonian constellations. [*1] "Lunar chronology", wrote Professor Max Muller, "seems everywhere to have preceded solar chronology." [*2] The later Semitic Babylonian system had twelve solar chambers and the thirty-six constellations.

Each degree was divided into sixty minutes, and each minute into sixty seconds. The hours of the day and night each numbered twelve.

Multiplying 6 by 10 (pur), the Babylonian arrived at 60 (soss); 60 x 10 gave him 600 (ner), and 600 x 6, 3600 (sar), while 3600 x 10 gave him 36,000, and 36,000 x 12, 432,000 years, or 120 saroi, which is equal to the "sar" multiplied by the "soss" x 2. "Pur" signifies "heap"--the ten fingers closed after being counted; and "ner" signifies "foot". Mr. George Bertin suggests that when 6 x 10 fingers gave 60 this number was multiplied by the ten toes, with the result that 600 was afterwards associated with the feet (ner). The Babylonian sign for 10 resembles the impression of two feet with heels closed and toes apart. This suggests a primitive record of the first round of finger counting.

In India this Babylonian system of calculation was developed during the Brahmanical period. The four Yugas or Ages, representing the four fingers used by the primitive mathematicians, totalled 12,000 divine years, a period which was called a Maha-yuga; it equalled the Babylonian 120 saroi, multiplied by 100. Ten times a hundred of these periods gave a "Day of Brahma". Each day of the gods, it was explained by the

[p. 313]

[paragraph continues] Brahmans, was a year to mortals. Multiplied by 360 days, 12,000 divine years equalled 4,320,000 human years. This Maha-yuga, multiplied by 1000, gave the "Day of Brahma" as 4,320,000,000 human years.

The shortest Indian Yuga is the Babylonian 120 saroi multiplied by 10 = 1200 divine years for the Kali Yuga; twice that number gives the Dvapara Yuga of 2400 divine years; then the Treta Yuga is 2400 + 1200 = 3600 divine years, and Krita Yuga 3600 + 1200=4800 divine years.

The influence of Babylonia is apparent in these calculations. During the Vedic period "Yuga" usually signified a "generation", and there are no certain references to the four Ages as such. The names "Kali", "Dvapara", "Treta", and "Krita" "occur as the designations of throws of dice". [*1] It was after the arrival of the "late corners", the post-Vedic Aryans, that the Yuga system was developed in India. [*2]

In Indian Myth and Legend [*3] it is shown that the Indian and Irish Ages have the same colour sequence: (1) White or Silvern, (2) Red or Bronze, (3) Yellow or Golden, and (4) Black or Iron. The Greek order is: (1) Golden, (2) Silvern, (3) Bronze, and (4) Iron.

The Babylonians coloured the seven planets as follows: the moon, silvern; the sun, golden; Mars, red; Saturn, black; Jupiter, orange; Venus, yellow; and Mercury, blue.

As the ten antediluvian kings who reigned for 120 saroi had an astral significance, their long reigns corresponding "with the distances separating certain of the principal stars in or near the ecliptic", [*4] it seems highly

[p. 314]

probable that the planets were similarly connected with mythical ages which were equated with the "four quarters" of the celestial regions and the four regions of the earth, which in Gaelic story are called "the four red divisions of the world".

Three of the planets may have been heralds of change. Venus, as "Dilbat", was the "Proclaimer", and both Jupiter and Mercury were called "Face voices of light", and "Heroes of the rising sun" among other names. Jupiter may have been the herald of the "Golden Age" as a morning star. This planet was also associated with bronze, as "Kakkub Urud", "the star of bronze", while Mars was "Kakkub Aban Kha-urud", "the star of the bronze fish stone". Mercury, the lapis lazuli planet, may have been connected with the black Saturn, the ghost of the dead sun, the demoniac elder god; in Egypt lapis lazuli was the hair colour of Ra when he grew old, and Egyptologists translate it as black. [*1] The rare and regular appearances of Mercury may have suggested the planet's connection with a recurring Age. Venus as an evening star might be regarded as the herald of the lunar or silver age; she was propitious as a bearded deity and interchanged with Merodach as a seasonal herald.

Connecting Jupiter with the sun as a propitious planet, and with Mars as a destroying planet, Venus with the moon, and Mercury with Saturn, we have left four colour schemes which suggest the Golden, Silvern, Bronze, and Iron Ages. The Greek order of mythical ages may have had a solar significance, beginning as it does with the "golden" period. On the other hand the Indian and Irish systems begin with the Silvern or white lunar period.

[p. 315]

[paragraph continues] In India the White Age (Treta Yuga) was the age of perfect men, and in Greece the Golden Age was the age of men who lived like gods. Thus the first ages in both cases were "Perfect" Ages. The Bronze Age of Greece was the age of notorious fighters and takers of life; in Babylonia the bronze planet Mars was the symbol of the destroying Nergal, god of war and pestilence, while Jupiter was also a destroyer as Merodach, the slayer of Tiamat. In India the Black Age is the age of wickedness. The Babylonian Saturn, as we have seen, is black, and its god, Ninip, was the destroying boar, which recalls the black boar of the Egyptian demon (or elder god) Set. The Greek Cronos was a destroyer even of his own children. All the elder gods had demoniac traits like the ghosts of human beings.

As the Babylonian lunar zodiac was imported into India before solar worship and the solar zodiac were developed, so too may have been the germs of the Yuga doctrine, which appears to have a long history. Greece, on the other hand, came under the influence of Babylon at a much later period. In Egypt Ra, the sun god, was an antediluvian king, and he was followed by Osiris. Osiris was slain by Set, who was depicted sometimes red and sometimes black. There was also a Horus Age.

The Irish system of ages suggests an early cultural drift into Europe, through Asia Minor, and along the uplands occupied by the representatives of the Alpine or Armenoid peoples who have been traced from Hindu Kush to Brittany. The culture of Gaul resembles that of India in certain particulars; both the Gauls and the post-Vedic Aryans, for instance, believed in the doctrine of Transmigration of Souls, and practised "suttee". After the Roman occupation of Gaul, Ireland appears to have been the refuge of Gaulish scholars, who imported

[p. 316]

their beliefs and traditions and laid the foundations of that brilliant culture which shed lustre on the Green Isle in late Pagan and early Christian times.

The part played by the Mitanni people of Aryan speech in distributing Asiatic culture throughout Europe may have been considerable, but we know little or nothing regarding their movements and influence, nor has sufficient evidence been forthcoming to connect them with the cremating invaders of the Bronze Age, who penetrated as far as northern Scotland and Scandinavia. On the other hand it is certain that the Hittites adopted the planetary system of Babylonia and passed it on to Europeans, including the Greeks. The five planets Ninip, Merodach, Nergal, Ishtar, and Nebo were called by the Greeks after their gods Kronos, Zeus, Ares, Aphrodite, and Hermes, and by the Romans Saturnus, Jupiter, Mars, Venus, and Mercurius. It must be recognized, however, that these equations were somewhat arbitrary. Ninip resembled Kronos and Saturnus as a father, but he was also at the same time a son; he was the Egyptian Horus the elder and Horus the younger in one. Merodach was similarly of complex character--a combination of Ea, Aim, Enlil, and Tammuz, who acquired, when exalted by the Amoritic Dynasty of Babylon, the attributes of the thunder god Adad-Ramman in the form of Amurru, "lord of the mountains". During the Hammurabi Age Amurru was significantly popular in personal names. It is as Amurru-Ramman that Merodach bears comparison with Zeus. He also links with Hercules. Too much must not be made, therefore, of the Greek and Roman identifications of alien deities with their own. Mulla, the Gaulish mule god, may have resembled Mars somewhat, but it is a "far cry" from Mars-Mulla to Mars-Nergal, as it is also from the Gaulish Moccus, the boar, called

[p. 317]

[paragraph continues] "Mercury", to Nebo, the god of culture, who was the "Mercury" of the Tigro-Euphrates valley. Similarly the differences between "Jupiter-Amon" of Egypt and "Jupiter-Merodach" of Babylon were more pronounced than the resemblances.

The basal idea in Babylonian astrology appears to be the recognition of the astral bodies as spirits or fates, who exercised an influence over the gods, the world, and mankind. These were worshipped in groups when they were yet nameless. The group addressed, "Powerful, O sevenfold, one are ye", may have been a constellation consisting of seven stars. [*1] The worship of stars and planets, which were identified and named, "seems never to have spread", says Professor Sayce, "beyond the learned classes, and to have remained to the last an artificial system. The mass of the people worshipped the stars as a whole, but it was only as a whole and not individually." [*2] The masses perpetuated ancient animistic beliefs, like the pre-Hellenic inhabitants of Greece. "The Pelasgians, as I was informed at Dodona," wrote Herodotus, "formerly offered all things indiscriminately to the gods. They distinguished them by no name or surname, for they were hitherto unacquainted with either; but they called them gods, which by its etymology means disposers, from observing the orderly disposition and distribution of the various parts of the universe." [*3] The oldest deities are those which bore no individual names. They were simply "Fates" or groups called "Sevenfold". The crude giant gods of Scotland are "Fomhairean" (Fomorians), and do not have individual names as in Ireland. Families and tribes were controlled by the Fates or nameless gods,

[p. 318]

which might appear as beasts or birds, or be heard knocking or screaming.

In the Babylonian astral hymns, the star spirits are associated with the gods, and are revealers of the decrees of Fate. "Ye brilliant stars . . . ye bright ones . . . to destroy evil did Anu create you. . . . At thy command mankind was named (created)! Give thou the Word, and with thee let the great gods stand! Give thou my judgment, make my decision!" [*1]

The Indian evidence shows that the constellations, and especially the bright stars, were identified before the planets. Indeed, in Vedic literature there is no certain reference to a single planet, although constellations are named. It seems highly probable that before the Babylonian gods were associated with the astral bodies, the belief obtained that the stars exercised an influence over human lives. In one of the Indian "Forest Books", for instance, reference is made to a man who was "born under the Nakshatra Rohini". [*2] "Nakshatras" are stars in the Rigveda and later, and "lunar mansions" in Brahmanical compositions. [*3] "Rohini, 'ruddy', is the name of a conspicuously reddish star, a Tauri or Aldebaran, and denotes the group of the Hyades." [*4] This reference may be dated before 600 B.C., perhaps 800 B.C.

From Greece comes the evidence of Plutarch regarding the principles of Babylonian astrology. "Respecting the planets, which they call the birth-ruling divinities, the Chaldeans", he wrote, "lay down that two (Venus and Jupiter) are propitious, and two (Mars and Saturn) malign, and three (Sun, Moon, and Mercury) of a middle nature, and one common." "That is," Mr. Brown comments,

[p. 319]

[paragraph continues] "an astrologer would say, these three are propitious with the good, and may be malign with the bad." [*1]

Jastrow's views in this connection seem highly controversial. He holds that Babylonian astrology dealt simply with national affairs, and had no concern with "the conditions under which the individual was born"; it did not predict "the fate in store for him". He believes that the Greeks transformed Babylonian astrology and infused it with the spirit of individualism which is a characteristic of their religion, and that they were the first to give astrology a personal significance.

Jastrow also perpetuates the idea that astronomy began with the Greeks. "Several centuries before the days of Alexander the Great," he says, "the Greeks had begun to cultivate the study of the heavens, not for purposes of divination, but prompted by a scientific spirit as an intellectual discipline that might help them to solve the mysteries of the universe." It is possible, however, to overrate the "scientific spirit" of the Greeks, who, like the Japanese in our own day, were accomplished borrowers from other civilizations. That astronomy had humble beginnings in Greece as elsewhere is highly probable. The late Mr. Andrew Lang wrote in this connection: "The very oddest example of the survival of the notion that the stars are men and women is found in the Pax of Aristophanes. Trygaeus in that comedy has just made an expedition to heaven. A slave meets him, and asks him: 'Is not the story true, then, that we become stars when we die?' The answer is, 'Certainly'; and Trygaeus points out the star into which Ion of Chios has just been metamorphosed." Mr. Lang added: "Aristophanes is making fun of some popular Greek superstition". The Eskimos, Persians, Aryo-Indians,

[p. 320]

[paragraph continues] Germans, New Zealanders, and others had a similar superstition. [*1]

Jastrow goes on to say that the Greeks "imparted their scientific view of the Universe to the East. They became the teachers of the East in astronomy as in medicine and other sciences, and the credit of having discovered the law of the precession of the equinoxes belongs to Hipparchus, the Greek astronomer, who announced this important theory about the year 130 B.C." [*2] Undoubtedly the Greeks contributed to the advancement of the science of astronomy, with which, as other authorities believe, they became acquainted after it had become well developed as a science by the Assyrians and Babylonians.

"In return for improved methods of astronomical calculation which," Jastrow says, "it may be assumed (the italics are ours), contact with Greek science gave to the Babylonian astronomers, the Greeks accepted from the Babylonians the names of the constellations of the ecliptic." [*3] This is a grudging admission; they evidently accepted more than the mere names.

Jastrow's hypothesis is certainly interesting, especially as he is an Oriental linguist of high repute. But it is not generally accepted. The sudden advance made by the Tigro-Euphratean astronomers when Assyria was at the height of its glory, may have been due to the discoveries made by great native scientists, the Newtons and the Herschels of past ages, who had studied the data accumulated by generations of astrologers, the earliest recorders of the movements of the heavenly bodies. It is hard to believe that the Greeks made much progress

[p. 321]

as scientists before they had identified the planets, and become familiar with the Babylonian constellations through the medium of the Hittites or the Phoenicians. What is known for certain is that long centuries before the Greek science was heard of, there were scientists in Babylonia. During the Sumerian period "the forms and relations of geometry", says Professor Goodspeed, "were employed for purposes of augury. The heavens were mapped out, and the courses of the heavenly bodies traced to determine the bearing of their movements upon human destinies." [*1]

Several centuries before Hipparchus was born, the Assyrian kings had in their palaces official astronomers who were able to foretell, with varying degrees of accuracy, when eclipses would take place. Instructions were sent to various observatories, in the king's name, to send in reports of forthcoming eclipses. A translation of one of these official documents sent from the observatory of Babylon to Nineveh, has been published by Professor Harper. The following are extracts from it: "As for the eclipse of the moon about which the king my lord has written to me, a watch was kept for it in the cities of Akkad, Borsippa, and Nippur. We observed it ourselves in the city of Akkad. . . . And whereas the king my lord ordered me to observe also the eclipse of the sun, I watched to see whether it took place or not, and what passed before my eyes I now report to the king my lord. It was an eclipse of the moon that took place. . . . It was total over Syria, and the shadow fell on the land of the Amorites, the land of the Hittites, and in part on the land of the Chaldees." Professor Sayce comments: "We gather from this letter that there were no less than three observatories in Northern Babylonia: one at Akkad,

[p. 322]

near Sippara; one at Nippur, now Niffer; and one at Borsippa, within sight of Babylon. As Borsippa possessed a university, it was natural that one of the three observatories should be established there." [*1]

It is evident that before the astronomers at Nineveh could foretell eclipses, they had achieved considerable progress as scientists. The data at their disposal probably covered nearly two thousand years. Mr. Brown, junior, calculates that the signs of the Zodiac were fixed in the year 2084 B.C. [*2] These star groups do not now occupy the positions in which they were observed by the early astronomers, because the revolving earth is rocking like a top, with the result that the pole does not always keep pointing at the same spot in the heavens. Each year the meeting-place of the imaginary lines of the ecliptic and equator is moving westward at the rate of about fifty seconds. In time--ages hence--the pole will circle round to the point it spun at when the constellations were named by the Babylonians. It is by calculating the period occupied by this world-curve that the date 2084 B.C. has been arrived at.

As a result of the world-rocking process, the present-day "signs of the Zodiac" do not correspond with the constellations. In March, for instance, when the sun crosses the equator it enters the sign of the Ram (Aries), but does not reach the constellation till the 20th, as the comparative table shows on <page 308>.

When "the ecliptic was marked off into the twelve regions" and the signs of the Zodiac were designated, "the year of three hundred sixty-five and one-fourth days was known", says Goodspeed, "though the common year was reckoned according to twelve months of thirty

[p. 323]

days each, [*1] and equated with the solar year by intercalating a month at the proper times. . . . The month was divided into weeks of seven days. . . . The clepsydra and the sundial were Babylonian inventions for measuring time." [*2]

The sundial of Ahaz was probably of Babylonian design. When the shadow went "ten degrees backward" (2 Kings, xx, 11) ambassadors were sent from Babylon "to enquire of the wonder that was done in the land" (2 Chron., xxxii, 31). It was believed that the king's illness was connected with the incident. According to astronomical calculation there was a partial eclipse of the sun which was visible at Jerusalem on 11th January, 689 B.C., about 11.30 a.m. When the upper part of the solar disc was obscured, the shadow on the dial was strangely affected.

The Babylonian astrologers in their official documents were more concerned regarding international omens than those which affected individuals. They made observations not only of the stars, but also the moon, which, as has been shown, was one of their planets, and took note of the clouds and the wind likewise.

As portions of the heavens were assigned to various countries, so was the moon divided into four quarters for the same purpose--the upper part for the north, Gutium, the lower for the south, Akkad or Babylonia, the eastern part for Elam, and the western for Amurru. The crescent was also divided in like manner; looking southward the astrologers assigned the right horn to the west and the left to the east. In addition, certain days and certain months were connected with the different regions. Lunar astrology was therefore of complicated character. When

[p. 324]

the moon was dim at the particular phase which was connected with Amurru, it was believed that the fortunes of that region were in decline, and if it happened to shine brightly in the Babylonian phase the time was considered auspicious to wage war in the west. Great importance was attached to eclipses, which were fortunately recorded, with the result that the ancient astronomers were ultimately enabled to forecast them.

The destinies of the various states in the four quarters were similarly influenced by the planets. When Venus, for instance, rose brightly in the field of Anu, it was a "prosperor" for Elam; if it were dim it foretold misfortune. Much importance was also attached to the positions occupied by the constellations when the planets were propitious or otherwise; no king would venture forth on an expedition under a "yoke of inauspicious stars".

Biblical references to the stars make mention of well-known Babylonian constellations:

Canst thou bind the sweet influences of Pleiades, or loose the bands of Orion? Canst thou bring forth Mazzaroth (?the Zodiac) in his season? or canst thou guide Arcturus with his sons? Knowest thou the ordinances of heaven? canst thou set the dominion thereof in the earth? Job, xxxviii, 31-33.

Which maketh Arcturus, Orion, and Pleiades, and the chambers of the south. Job, ix, 9.

Seek him that maketh the seven stars and Orion, and turneth the shadow of death into the morning, and maketh the day dark with night. Amos, v, 8.

The so-called science of astrology, which had origin in ancient Babylonia and spread eastward and west, is not yet extinct, and has its believers even in our own country at the present day, although they are not nearly so numerous as when Shakespeare made Malvolio read:

[p. 325]

In my stars I am above thee; but be not afraid of greatness: some are born great, some achieve greatness, and some have greatness thrust upon 'em. Thy Fates open their hands. . . . [*1]

or when Byron wrote:

Ye stars! which are the poetry of heaven!
 If in your bright leaves we would read the fate
 Of men and empires--'t is to be forgiven
 That in our aspirations to be great,
 Our destinies o'erleap their mortal state
 And claim a kindred with you. . . . [*2]

Our grave astronomers are no longer astrologers, but they still call certain constellations by the names given them in Babylonia. Every time we look at our watches we are reminded of the ancient mathematicians who counted on their fingers and multiplied 10 by 6, to give us minutes and seconds, and divided the day and the night into twelve hours by multiplying six by the two leaden feet of Time. The past lives in the present.

Footnotes

^288:1 "It may be worth while to note again", says Beddoe, "how often finely developed skulls are discovered in the graveyards of old monasteries, and how likely seems Galton's conjecture, that progress was arrested in the Middle Ages, because the celibacy of the clergy brought about the extinction of the best strains of blood." The Anthropological History of Europe, p. 161 (1912).

^291:1 Census of India, vol. i, part i, pp. 352 et seq.

^291:2 Hibbert Lectures, Professor Sayce, p. 328.

^292:1 The Story of Nala, Monier Williams, pp. 68-9 and 77.

^292:2 "In Ymer's flesh (the earth) the dwarfs were engendered and began to move and live. . . . The dwarfs had been bred in the mould of the earth, just as worms are in a dead body." The Prose Edda.

"The gods . . . took counsel whom they should make the lord of dwarfs out of [p. 293] Ymer's blood (the sea) and his swarthy limbs (the earth)." The Elder Edda (Voluspa, stanza 9).

^293:1 The Story of Nala, Monier Williams, p. 67.

^295:1 Egyptian Myth and Legend, pp. 168 et seq.

^297:1 The Burden of Isis, Dennis, p. 24.

^298:1 Babylonian Magic and Sorcery, p. 117.

^299:1 Babylonian and Assyrian Religion, T. G. Pinches, p. 100.

^299:2 The Burden of Isis, J. T. Dennis, p. 49.

^299:3 Ibid., p. 52.

^300:1 Religion of the Ancient Egyptians, A. Wiedemann, p. 30.

^300:2 Vedic Index, Macdonell & Keith, vol. i, pp. 423 et seq.

^302:1 Religion of the Ancient Babylonians, Sayce, p. 153, n. 6.

^302:2 Religion of the Ancient Egyptians, A. Wiedemann, p. 30.

^303:1 Aspects of Religious Belief and Practice in Babylonia and Assyria, p. 95.

^303:2 Babylonian and Assyrian Religion, pp. 63 and 83.

^303:3 When the King of Assyria transported the Babylonians, &c., to Samaria "the men of Cuth made Nergal", 2 Kings, xvii, 30.

^303:4 Babylonian and Assyrian Religion, p. 80.

^305:1 Indian Myth and Legend, p. 13.

^306:1 Derived from the Greek zoon, an animal.

^306:2 The Hittites, pp. 116, 119, 120, 272.

^306:3 "The sun . . . is as a bridegroom coming out of his chamber, and rejoiceth as a strong man to run a race." (Psalm xix, . et seq.) The marriage of the sun bridegroom with the moon bride appears to occur in Hittite mythology. In Aryo-Indian Vedic mythology the bride of the sun (Surya) is Ushas, the Dawn. The sun maiden also married the moon god. The Vedic gods ran a race and Indra and Agni were the winners. The sun was "of the nature of Agni". Indian Myth and Legend, pp. 14, 36, 37.

^307:1 Or golden.

^307:2 The later reference is to Assyria. There was no Assyrian kingdom when these early beliefs were developed.

^309:1 Primitive Constellations, R. Brown, jun., vol. ii, p. 1 et seq.

^311:1 In India "finger counting" (Kaur guna) is associated with prayer or the repeating of mantras. The counting is performed by the thumb, which, when the hand is drawn up, touches the upper part of the third finger. The two upper "chambers" of the third finger are counted, then the two upper "chambers" of the little finger; the thumb then touches the tip of each finger from the little finger to the first; when it comes down into the upper chamber of the first finger 9 is counted. By a similar process each round of 9 on the right hand is recorded by the left up to 12; 12 X 9 = 108 repetitions of a mantra. The upper "chambers" of the fingers are the "best" or "highest" (uttama), the lower (adhama) chambers are not utilized in the prayer-counting process. When Hindus sit cross-legged at prayers, with closed eyes, the right hand is raised from the elbow in front of the body, and the thumb moves each time a mantra is repeated; the left hand lies palm upward on the left knee, and the thumb moves each time nine mantras have been counted.

^312:1 Primitive Constellations, R. Brown, jun., vol. ii, p. 61; and Early History of Northern India, J. F. Hewitt, pp. 551-2.

^312:2 Rigveda-Samhita, vol. iv (1892), p. 67.

^313:1 Vedic Index, Macdonell & Keith, vol. ii, pp. 192 et seq.

^313:2 Indian Myth and Legend.

^313:3 Pp. 107 et seq.

^313:4 Primitive Constellations, R. Brown, jun., vol. i, 1. 333. A table is given showing how 120 saroi equals 360 degrees, each king being identified with a star.

^314:1 "Behold, his majesty the god Ra is grown old; his bones are become silver, his limbs gold, and his hair pure lapis lazuli." Religion of the Ancient Egyptians, A. Wiedemann, p. 58. Ra became a destroyer after completing his reign as an earthly king.

^317:1 As Nin-Girsu, Tammuz was associated with "sevenfold" Orion.

^317:2 Babylonian and Assyrian Life, pp. 61, 62.

^317:3 Herodotus (ii, 52) as quoted in Egypt and Scythia (London, 1886), p. 49.

^318:1 Babylonian Magic and Sorcery, L. W. King (London, 1896), pp. 43 and 115.

^318:2 Vedic Index, Macdonell & Keith, vol. ii, p. 229.

^318:3 Ibid., vol. i, pp. 409, 410.

^318:4 Ibid., vol. i, p. 415.

^319:1 Primitive Constellations, vol. i, p. 343.

^320:1 Custom and Myth, pp. 133 et seq.

^320:2 Dr. Alfred Jeremias gives very forcible reasons for believing that the ancient Babylonians were acquainted with the precession of the equinoxes. Das Alter der Babylonischen Astronomie (Hinrichs, Leipzig, 1908), pp. 47 et seq.

^320:3 Aspects of Religious Belief and Practice in Babylonia and Assyria, pp. 207 et seq.

^321:1 A History of the Babylonians and Assyrians, p. 93.

^322:1 Babylonians and Assyrians: Life and Customs, pp. 219, 220.

^322:2 Primitive Constellations, vol. ii, pp. 147 et seq.

^323:1 The Aryo-Indians had a lunar year of 360 days (Vedic Index, ii, 158).

^323:2 A History of the Babylonians and Assyrians, p. 94.

^325:1 Twelfth Night, act ii, scene 5.

^325:2 Childe Harold, canto iii, v, 88.

     
Myths of Babylonia and Assyria, by Donald A. MacKenzie, [1915], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 326] [ch-14]

  

CHAPTER XIV

  

Ashur the National God of Assyria

Derivation of Ashur--Ashur as Anshar and Anu--Animal forms of Sky God--Anshar as Star God on the Celestial Mount--Isaiah's Parable--Symbols of World God and World Hill--Dance of the Constellations and Dance of Satyrs--Goat Gods and Bull Gods--Symbols of Gods as "High Heads"--The Winged Disc--Human Figure as Soul of the Sun--Ashur as Hercules and Gilgamesh--Gods differentiated by Cults--Fertility Gods as War Gods--Ashur's Tree and Animal forms--Ashur as Nisroch--Lightning Symbol in Disc--Ezekiel's Reference to Life Wheel--Indian Wheel and Discus--Wheels of Shamash and Ahura-Mazda--Hittite Winged Disc--Solar Wheel causes Seasonal Changes--Bonfires to stimulate Solar Deity--Burning of Gods and Kings--Magical Ring and other Symbols of Scotland--Ashur's Wheel of Life and Eagle Wings--King and Ashur--Ashur associated with Lunar, Fire, and Star Gods--The Osirian Clue--Hittite and Persian Influences.

THE rise of Assyria brings into prominence the national god Ashur, who had been the city god of Asshur, the ancient capital. When first met with, he is found to be a complex and mystical deity, and the problem of his origin is consequently rendered exceedingly difficult. Philologists are not agreed as to the derivation of his name, and present as varied views as they do when dealing with the name of Osiris. Some give Ashur a geographical significance, urging that its original form was Aushar, "water field"; others prefer the renderings "Holy", "the Beneficent One", or "the Merciful One"; while not a few regard Ashur as simply a dialectic form of the name of Anshar, the god who, in the Assyrian version, or copy, of the Babylonian Creation myth, is chief of the "host of heaven", and the father of Anu, Ea, and Enlil.

[p. 327]

If Ashur is to be regarded as an abstract solar deity, who was developed from a descriptive place name, it follows that he had a history, like Anu or Ea, rooted in Naturalism or Animism. We cannot assume that his strictly local character was produced by modes of thought which did not obtain elsewhere. The colonists who settled at Asshur no doubt imported beliefs from some cultural area; they must have either given recognition to a god, or group of gods, or regarded the trees, hills, rivers, sun, moon, and stars, and the animals as manifestations of the "self power" of the Universe, before they undertook the work of draining and cultivating the "water field" and erecting permanent homes. Those who settled at Nineveh, for instance, believed that they were protected by the goddess Nina, the patron deity of the Sumerian city of Nina. As this goddess was also worshipped at Lagash, and was one of the many forms of the Great Mother, it would appear that in ancient times deities had a tribal rather than a geographical significance.

If the view is accepted that Ashur is Anshar, it can be urged that he was imported from Sumeria. "Out of that land (Shinar)", according to the Biblical reference, "went forth Asshur, and builded Nineveh." [*1] Asshur, or Ashur (identical, Delitzsch and Jastrow believe, with Ashir), [*2] may have been an eponymous hero--a deified king like Etana, or Gilgamesh, who was regarded as an incarnation of an ancient god. As Anshar was an astral or early form of Anu, the Sumerian city of origin may have been Erech,

[p. 328]

where the worship of the mother goddess was also given prominence.

Damascius rendered Anshar's name as "Assoros", a fact usually cited to establish Ashur's connection with that deity. This writer stated that the Babylonians passed over "Sige, [*1] the mother, that has begotten heaven and earth", and made two--Apason (Apsu), the husband, and Tauthe (Tiawath or Tiamat), whose son was Moymis (Mummu). From these another progeny came forth--Lache and Lachos (Lachmu and Lachamu). These were followed by the progeny Kissare and Assoros (Kishar and Anshar), "from which were produced Anos (Anu), Illillos (Enlil) and Aos (Ea). And of Aos and Dauke (Dawkina or Damkina) was born Belos (Bel Merodach), whom they say is the Demiurge" [*2] (the world artisan who carried out the decrees of a higher being).

Lachmu and Lachamu, like the second pair of the ancient group of Egyptian deities, probably symbolized darkness as a reproducing and sustaining power. Anshar was apparently an impersonation of the night sky, as his son Anu was of the day sky. It may have been believed that the soul of Anshar was in the moon as Nannar (Sin), or in a star, or that the moon and the stars were manifestations of him, and that the soul of Anu was in the sun or the firmament, or that the sun, firmament, and the wind were forms of this "self power".

If Ashur combined the attributes of Anshar and Anu, his early mystical character may be accounted for. Like the Indian Brahma, he may have been in his highest form an impersonation, or symbol, of the "self power" or "world soul" of developed Naturalism--the "creator", "preserver", and "destroyer" in one, a god of water, earth,

[p. 329]

air, and sky, of sun, moon, and stars, fire and lightning, a god of the grove, whose essence was in the fig, or the fir cone, as it was in all animals. The Egyptian god Amon of Thebes, who was associated with water, earth, air, sky, sun and moon, had a ram form, and was "the hidden one", was developed from one of the elder eight gods; in the Pyramid Texts he and his consort are the fourth pair. When Amon was fused with the specialized sun god Ra, he was placed at the head of the Ennead as the Creator. "We have traces", says Jastrow, "of an Assyrian myth of Creation in which the sphere of creator is given to Ashur." [*1]

Before a single act of creation was conceived of, however, the early peoples recognized the eternity of matter, which was permeated by the "self power" of which the elder deities were vague phases. These were too vague, indeed, to be worshipped individually. The forms of the "self power" which were propitiated were trees, rivers, hills, or animals. As indicated in the previous chapter, a tribe worshipped an animal or natural object which dominated its environment. The animal might be the source of the food supply, or might have to be propitiated to ensure the food supply. Consequently they identified the self power of the Universe with the particular animal with which they were most concerned. One section identified the spirit of the heavens with the bull and another with the goat. In India Dyaus was a bull, and his spouse, the earth mother, Prithivi, was a cow. The Egyptian sky goddess Hathor was a cow, and other goddesses were identified with the hippopotamus, the serpent, the cat, or the vulture. Ra, the sun god, was identified in turn with the cat, the ass, the bull, the ram, and the crocodile, the various animal forms of the local deities he had absorbed. The eagle in

[p. 330]

[paragraph continues] Babylonia and India, and the vulture, falcon, and mysterious Phoenix in Egypt, were identified with the sun, fire, wind, and lightning. The animals associated with the god Ashur were the bull, the eagle, and the lion. He either absorbed the attributes of other gods, or symbolized the "Self Power" of which the animals were manifestations.

The earliest germ of the Creation myth was the idea that night was the parent of day, and water of the earth. Out of darkness and death came light and life. Life was also motion. When the primordial waters became troubled, life began to be. Out of the confusion came order and organization. This process involved the idea of a stable and controlling power, and the succession of i a group of deities--passive deities and active deities. When the Babylonian astrologers assisted in developing the Creation myth, they appear to have identified with the stable and controlling spirit of the night heaven that steadfast orb the Polar Star. Anshar, like Shakespeare's Caesar, seemed to say:

I am constant as the northern star,
 Of whose true-fixed and resting quality
 There is no fellow in the firmament.
 The skies are painted with unnumbered sparks;
 They are all fire, and every one doth shine;
 But there's but one in all doth hold his place. [*1]

[paragraph continues] Associated with the Polar Star was the constellation Ursa Minor, "the Little Bear", called by the Babylonian astronomers, "the Lesser Chariot". There were chariots before horses were introduced. A patesi of Lagash had a chariot which was drawn by asses.

The seemingly steadfast Polar Star was called "Ilu Sar", "the god Shar", or Anshar, "star of the height ",

[p. 331]

or "Shar the most high". It seemed to be situated at the summit of the vault of heaven. The god Shar, therefore, stood upon the Celestial mountain, the Babylonian Olympus. He was the ghost of the elder god, who in Babylonia was displaced by the younger god, Merodach, as Mercury, the morning star, or as the sun, the planet of day; and in Assyria by Ashur, as the sun, or Regulus, or Arcturus, or Orion. Yet father and son were identical. They were phases of the One, the "self power".

A deified reigning king was an incarnation of the god; after death he merged in the god, as did the Egyptian Unas. The eponymous hero Asshur may have similarly merged in the universal Ashur, who, like Horus, an incarnation of Osiris, had many phases or forms.

Isaiah appears to have been familiar with the Tigro-Euphratean myths about the divinity of kings and the displacement of the elder god by the younger god, of whom the ruling monarch was an incarnation, and with the idea that the summit of the Celestial mountain was crowned by the "north star", the symbol of Anshar. "Thou shalt take up this parable", he exclaimed, making use of Babylonian symbolism, "against the king of Babylon and say, How hath the oppressor ceased! the golden city ceased! . . . How art thou fallen from heaven, O Lucifer, son of the morning! how art thou cut down to the ground, which didst weaken the nations! For thou hast said in thine heart, I will ascend unto heaven, I will exalt my throne above the stars of God; I will sit also upon the mount of the congregation, in the sides of the north; I will ascend above the heights of the clouds; I will be like the most High." [*1] The king is identified with Lucifer as the deity of fire and the morning star; he is the younger god who aspired to occupy the

[p. 332]

mountain throne of his father, the god Shar--the Polar or North Star.

It is possible that the Babylonian idea of a Celestial mountain gave origin to the belief that the earth was a mountain surrounded by the outer ocean, beheld by Etana when he flew towards heaven on the eagle's back. In India this hill is Mount Meru, the "world spine", which "sustains the earth"; it is surmounted by Indra's Valhal, or "the great city of Brahma". In Teutonic mythology the heavens revolve round the Polar Star, which is called "Veraldar nagli", [*1] the "world spike"; while the earth is sustained by the "world tree". The "ded" amulet of Egypt symbolized the backbone of Osiris as a world god: "ded" means "firm", "established"; [*2] while at burial ceremonies the coffin was set up on end, inside the tomb, "on a small sandhill intended to represent the Mountain of the West--the realm of the dead". [*3] The Babylonian temple towers were apparently symbols of the "world hill". At Babylon, the Du-azaga, "holy mound", was Merodach's temple E-sagila, "the Temple of the High Head". E-kur, rendered "the house or temple of the Mountain", was the temple of Bel Enlil at Nippur. At Erech, the temple of the goddess Ishtar was E-anna, which connects her, as Nina or Ninni, with Anu, derived from "ana", "heaven". Ishtar was "Queen of heaven".

Now Polaris, situated at the summit of the celestial mountain, was identified with the sacred goat, "the highest of the flock of night". [*4] Ursa Minor (the "Little Bear" constellation) may have been "the goat with six heads",

[p. 333]

referred to by Professor Sayce. [*1] The six astral goats or goat-men were supposed to be dancing round the chief goat-man or Satyr (Anshar). Even in the dialogues of Plato the immemorial belief was perpetuated that the constellations were "moving as in a dance". Dancing began as a magical or religious practice, and the earliest astronomers saw their dancing customs reflected in the heavens by the constellations, whose movements were rhythmical. No doubt, Isaiah had in mind the belief of the Babylonians regarding the dance of their goat-gods when he foretold: "Their houses shall be full of doleful creatures; and owls (ghosts) shall dwell there, and satyrs shall dance there". [*2] In other words, there would be no people left to perform religious dances beside the "desolate houses"; the stars only would be seen dancing round Polaris.

Tammuz, like Anshar, as sentinel of the night heaven, was a goat, as was also Nin-Girsu of Lagash. A Sumerian reference to "a white kid of En Mersi (Nin-Girsu)" was translated into Semitic, "a white kid of Tammuz". The goat was also associated with Merodach. Babylonians, having prayed to that god to take away their diseases or their sins, released a goat, which was driven into the desert. The present Polar Star, which was not, of course, the Polar star of the earliest astronomers, the world having rocked westward, is called in Arabic Al-Jedy, "the kid". In India, the goat was connected with Agni and Varuna; it was slain at funeral ceremonies to inform the gods that a soul was about to enter heaven. Ea, the Sumerian lord of water, earth, and heaven, was symbolized as a "goat fish". Thor, the

[p. 334]

[paragraph continues] Teutonic fertility and thunder god, had a chariot drawn by goats. It is of interest to note that the sacred Sumerian goat bore on its forehead the same triangular symbol as the Apis bull of Egypt.

Ashur was not a "goat of heaven", but a "bull of heaven", like the Sumerian Nannar (Sin), the moon god of Ur, Ninip of Saturn, and Bel Enlil. As the bull, however, he was, like Anshar, the ruling animal of the heavens; and like Anshar he had associated with him "six divinities of council".

Other deities who were similarly exalted as "high heads" at various centres and at various periods, included Anu, Bel Enlil, and Ea, Merodach, Nergal, and Shamash. A symbol of the first three was a turban on a seat, or altar, which may have represented the "world mountain". Ea, as "the world spine", was symbolized as a column, with ram's head, standing on a throne, beside which crouched a "goat fish". Merodach's column terminated in a lance head, and the head of a lion crowned that of Nergal. These columns were probably connected with pillar worship, and therefore with tree worship, the pillar being the trunk of the "world tree". The symbol of the sun god Shamash was a disc, from which flowed streams of water; his rays apparently were "fertilizing tears", like the rays of the Egyptian sun god Ra. Horus, the Egyptian falcon god, was symbolized as the winged solar disc.

It is necessary to accumulate these details regarding other deities and their symbols before dealing with Ashur. The symbols of Ashur must be studied, because they are one of the sources of our knowledge regarding the god's origin and character. These include (1) a winged disc with horns, enclosing four circles revolving round a middle circle; rippling rays fall down from either

 

Click to enlarge
ASHUR SYMBOLS

[paragraph continues] The two symbols with feather-robed archers, shown on the left, are described on page <page 335>. The winged disk on the right appears on a Babylonian "boundary stone" which dates from the reign of Marduk-balatsu-ikbi. (See pages <page 415>, <page 416>.)
 Photos. Mansell

 

[p. 335]

side of the disc; (2) a circle or wheel, suspended from wings, and enclosing a warrior drawing his bow to discharge an arrow; and (3) the same circle; the warrior's bow, however, is carried in his left hand, while the right hand is uplifted as if to bless his worshippers. These symbols are taken from seal cylinders.

An Assyrian standard, which probably represented the "world column", has the disc mounted on a bull's head with horns. The upper part of the disc is occupied by a warrior, whose head, part of his bow, and the point of his arrow protrude from the circle. The rippling water rays are V-shaped, and two bulls, treading river-like rays, occupy the divisions thus formed. There are also two heads--a lion's and a man's--with gaping mouths, which may symbolize tempests, the destroying power of the sun, or the sources of the Tigris and Euphrates.

Jastrow regards the winged disc as "the purer and more genuine symbol of Ashur as a solar deity". He calls it "a sun disc with protruding rays", and says: "To this symbol the warrior with the bow and arrow was added--a despiritualization that reflects the martial spirit of the Assyrian empire". [*1]

The sun symbol on the sun boat of Ra encloses similarly a human figure, which was apparently regarded as the soul of the sun: the life of the god was in the "sun egg". In an Indian prose treatise it is set forth: "Now that man in yonder orb (the sun) and that man in the right eye truly are no other than Death (the soul). His feet have stuck fast in the heart, and having pulled them out he comes forth; and when he comes forth then that man dies; whence they say of him who has passed

[p. 336]

away, 'he has been cut off (his life or life string has been severed)'." [*1] The human figure did not indicate a process of "despiritualization" either in Egypt or in India. The Horus "winged disc" was besides a symbol of destruction and battle, as well as of light and fertility. Horus assumed that form in one legend to destroy Set and his followers. [*2] But, of course, the same symbols may not have conveyed the same ideas to all peoples. As Blake put it:

What to others a trifle appears
 Fills me full of smiles and tears. . . .
 With my inward Eye, 't is an old Man grey,
 With my outward, a Thistle across my way.

[paragraph continues] Indeed, it is possible that the winged disc meant one thing to an Assyrian priest, and another thing to a man not gifted with what Blake called "double vision".

What seems certain, however, is that the archer was as truly solar as the "wings" or "rays". In Babylonia and Assyria the sun was, among other things, a destroyer from the earliest times. It is not surprising, therefore, to find that Ashur, like Merodach, resembled, in one of his phases, Hercules, or rather his prototype Gilgamesh. One of Gilgamesh's mythical feats was the slaying of three demon birds. These may be identical with the birds of prey which Hercules, in performing his sixth labour, hunted out of Stymphalus. [*3] In the Greek Hipparcho-Ptolemy star list Hercules was the constellation of the "Kneeler", and in Babylonian-Assyrian astronomy he was (as Gilgamesh or Merodach) "Sarru", "the king". The astral "Arrow" (constellation of Sagitta)

[p. 337]

was pointed against the constellations of the "Eagle", "Vulture", and "Swan". In Phoenician astronomy the Vulture was "Zither" (Lyra), a weapon with which Hercules (identified with Melkarth) slew Linos, the musician. Hercules used a solar arrow, which he received from Apollo. In various mythologies the arrow is associated with the sun, the moon, and the atmospheric deities, and is a symbol of lightning, rain, and fertility, as well as of famine, disease, war, and death. The green-faced goddess Neith of Libya, compared by the Greeks to Minerva, carries in one hand two arrows and a bow. [*1] If we knew as little of Athena (Minerva), who was armed with a lance, a breastplate made of the skin of a goat, a shield, and helmet, as we do of Ashur, it might be held that she was simply a goddess of war. The archer in the sun disc of the Assyrian standard probably represented Ashur as the god of the people--a deity closely akin to Merodach, with pronounced Tammuz traits, and therefore linking with other local deities like Ninip, Nergal, and Shamash, and partaking also like these of the attributes of the elder gods Anu, Bel Enlil, and Ea.

All the other deities worshipped by the Assyrians were of Babylonian origin. Ashur appears to have differed from them just as one local Babylonian deity differed from another. He reflected Assyrian experiences and aspirations, but it is difficult to decide whether the sublime spiritual aspect of his character was due to the beliefs of alien peoples, by whom the early Assyrians were influenced, or to the teachings of advanced Babylonian thinkers, whose doctrines found readier acceptance in a "new country" than among the conservative ritualists

[p. 338]

of ancient Sumerian and Akkadian cities. New cults were formed from time to time in Babylonia, and when they achieved political power they gave a distinctive character to the religion of their city states. Others which did not find political support and remained in obscurity at home, may have yet extended their influence far and wide. Buddhism, for instance, originated in India, but now flourishes in other countries, to which it was introduced by missionaries. In the homeland it was submerged by the revival of Brahmanism, from which it sprung, and which it was intended permanently to displace. An instance of an advanced cult suddenly achieving prominence as a result of political influence is afforded by Egypt, where the fully developed Aton religion was embraced and established as a national religion by Akhenaton, the so-called "dreamer". That migrations were sometimes propelled by cults, which sought new areas in which to exercise religious freedom and propagate their beliefs, is suggested by the invasion of India at the close of the Vedic period by the "later comers", who laid the foundations of Brahmanism. They established themselves in Madhyadesa, "the Middle Country", "the land where the Brahmanas and the later Samhitas were produced". From this centre went forth missionaries, who accomplished the Brahmanization of the rest of India. [*1]

It may be, therefore, that the cult of Ashur was influenced in its development by the doctrines of advanced teachers from Babylonia, and that Persian Mithraism was also the product of missionary efforts extended from that great and ancient cultural area. Mitra, as has been stated, was one of the names of the Babylonian sun god, who was also a god of fertility. But Ashur could not have been to

[p. 339]

begin with merely a battle and solar deity. As the god of a city state he must have been worshipped by agriculturists, artisans, and traders; he must have been recognized as a deity of fertility, culture, commerce, and law. Even as a national god he must have made wider appeal than to the cultured and ruling classes. Bel Enlil of Nippur was a "world god" and war god, but still remained a local corn god.

Assyria's greatness was reflected by Ashur, but he also reflected the origin and growth of that greatness. The civilization of which he was a product had an agricultural basis. It began with the development of the natural resources of Assyria, as was recognized by the Hebrew prophet, who said: "Behold, the Assyrian was a cedar in Lebanon with fair branches. . . . The waters made him great, the deep set him up on high with her rivers running round about his plants, and sent out her little rivers unto all the trees of the field. Therefore his height was exalted above all the trees of the field, and his boughs were multiplied, and his branches became long because of the multitude of waters when he shot forth. All the fowls of heaven made their nests in his boughs, and under his branches did all the beasts of the field bring forth their young, and under his shadow dwelt all great nations. Thus was he fair in his greatness, in the length of his branches; for his root was by great waters. The cedars in the garden of God could not hide him: the fir trees were not like his boughs, and the chestnut trees were not like his branches; nor any tree in the garden of God was like unto him in his beauty." [*1]

Asshur, the ancient capital, was famous for its merchants. It is referred to in the Bible as one of the cities which traded with Tyre "in all sorts of things, in blue

[p. 340]

clothes, and broidered work, and in chests of rich apparel, bound with cords, and made of cedar". [*1]

As a military power, Assyria's name was dreaded. "Behold," Isaiah said, addressing King Hezekiah, "thou hast heard what the kings of Assyria have done to all lands by destroying them utterly." [*2] The same prophet, when foretelling how Israel would suffer, exclaimed: "O Assyrian, the rod of mine anger, and the staff in their hand is mine indignation. I will send him against an hypocritical nation, and against the people of my wrath will I give him a charge, to take the spoil, and to take the prey, and to tread them down like the mire of the streets." [*3]

We expect to find Ashur reflected in these three phases of Assyrian civilization. If we recognize him in the first place as a god of fertility, his other attributes are at once included. A god of fertility is a corn god and a water god. The river as a river was a "creator" (<page 29>), and Ashur was therefore closely associated with the "watery place", with the canals or "rivers running round about his plants". The rippling water-rays, or fertilizing tears, appear on the solar discs. As a corn god, he was a god of war. Tammuz's first act was to slay the demons of winter and storm, as Indra's in India was to slay the demons of drought, and Thor's in Scandinavia was to exterminate the frost giants. The corn god had to be fed with human sacrifices, and the people therefore waged war against foreigners to obtain victims. As the god made a contract with his people, he was a deity of commerce; he provided them with food and they in turn fed him with offerings.

In Ezekiel's comparison of Assyria to a mighty tree, there is no doubt a mythological reference. The Hebrew

 

Click to enlarge
WINGED DEITIES KNEELING BESIDE A SACRED TREE
 Marble Slab from N.W. Palace of Nimrod: now in British Museum.
 Photo. Manell

 

[p. 341]

prophets invariably utilized for their poetic imagery the characteristic beliefs of the peoples to whom they made direct reference. The "owls", "satyrs", and "dragons" of Babylon, mentioned by Isaiah, were taken from Babylonian mythology, as has been indicated. When, therefore, Assyria is compared to a cedar, which is greater than fir or chestnut, and it is stated that there are nesting birds in the branches, and under them reproducing beasts of the field, and that the greatness of the tree is due to "the multitude of waters", the conclusion is suggested that Assyrian religion, which Ashur's symbols reflect, included the worship of trees, birds, beasts, and water. The symbol of the Assyrian tree--probably the "world tree" of its religion--appears to be "the rod of mine anger . . . the staff in their hand"; that is, the battle standard which was a symbol of Ashur. Tammuz and Osiris were tree gods as well as corn gods.

Now, as Ashur was evidently a complex deity, it is futile to attempt to read his symbols without giving consideration to the remnants of Assyrian mythology which are found in the ruins of the ancient cities. These either reflect the attributes of Ashur, or constitute the material from which he evolved.

As Layard pointed out many years ago, the Assyrians had a sacred tree which became conventionalized. It was "an elegant device, in which curved branches, springing from a kind of scroll work, terminated in flowers of graceful form. As one of the figures last described [*1] was turned, as if in act of adoration, towards this device, it was evidently a sacred emblem; and I recognized in it the holy tree, or tree of life, so universally adored at the remotest period in the East, and which was preserved in the religious systems of the Persians to the final overthrow

[p. 342]

of their Empire. . . . The flowers were formed by seven petals." [*1]

This tree looks like a pillar, and is thrice crossed by conventionalized bull's horns tipped with ring symbols which may be stars, the highest pair of horns having a larger ring between them, but only partly shown as if it were a crescent. The tree with its many "sevenfold" designs may have been a symbol of the "Sevenfold-one-are-ye" deity. This is evidently the Assyrian tree which was called "the rod" or "staff".

What mythical animals did this tree shelter? Layard found that "the four creatures continually introduced on the sculptured walls", were "a man, a lion, an ox, and an eagle". [*2]

In Sumeria the gods were given human form, but before this stage was reached the bull symbolized Nannar (Sin), the moon god, Ninip (Saturn, the old sun), and Enlil, while Nergal was a lion, as a tribal sun god. The eagle is represented by the Zu bird, which symbolized the storm and a phase of the sun, and was also a deity of fertility. On the silver vase of Lagash the lion and eagle were combined as the lion-headed eagle, a form of Nin-Girsu (Tammuz), and it was associated with wild goats, stags, lions, and bulls. On a mace head dedicated to Nin-Girsu, a lion slays a bull as the Zu bird slays serpents in the folk tale, suggesting the wars of totemic deities, according to one "school", and the battle of the sun with the storm clouds according to another. Whatever the explanation may be of one animal deity of fertility slaying another, it seems certain that the conflict was associated with the idea of sacrifice to procure the food supply.

In Assyria the various primitive gods were combined as a winged bull, a winged bull with human head (the

[p. 343]

king's), a winged lion with human head, a winged man, a deity with lion's head, human body, and eagle's legs with claws, and also as a deity with eagle's head and feather headdress, a human body, wings, and feather-fringed robe, carrying in one hand a metal basket on which two winged men adored the holy tree, and in the other a fir cone. [*1]

Layard suggested that the latter deity, with eagle's head, was Nisroch, "the word Nisr signifying, in all Semitic languages, an eagle". [*2] This deity is referred to in the Bible: "Sennacherib, king of Assyria, . . . was worshipping in the house of Nisroch, his god". [*3] Professor Pinches is certain that Nisroch is Ashur, but considers that the "ni" was attached to "Ashur" (Ashuraku or Ashurachu), as it was to "Marad" (Merodach) to give the reading Ni-Marad = Nimrod. The names of heathen deities were thus made "unrecognizable, and in all probability ridiculous as well. . . . Pious and orthodox lips could pronounce them without fear of defilement." [*4] At the same time the "Nisr" theory is probable: it may represent another phase of this process. The names of heathen gods were not all treated in like manner by the Hebrew teachers. Abed-nebo, for instance, became Abed-nego (Daniel, i, 7), as Professor Pinches shows.

Seeing that the eagle received prominence in the mythologies of Sumeria and Assyria, as a deity of fertility with solar and atmospheric attributes, it is highly probable that the Ashur symbol, like the Egyptian Horus solar disk, is a winged symbol of life, fertility, and destruction. The idea that it represents the sun in eclipse, with protruding

[p. 344]

rays, seems rather far-fetched, because eclipses were disasters and indications of divine wrath; [*1] it certainly does not explain why the "rays" should only stretch out sideways, like wings, and downward like a tail, why the "rays" should be double, like the double wings of cherubs, bulls, &c., and divided into sections suggesting feathers, or why the disk is surmounted by conventionalized horns, tipped with star-like ring symbols, identical with those depicted in the holy tree. What particular connection the five small rings within the disk were supposed to have with the eclipse of the sun is difficult to discover.

In one of the other symbols in which appears a feather-robed archer, it is significant to find that the arrow he is about to discharge has a head shaped like a trident; it is evidently a lightning symbol.

When Ezekiel prophesied to the Israelitish captives at Tel-abib, "by the river of Chebar" in Chaldea (Kheber, near Nippur), he appears to have utilized Assyrian symbolism. Probably he came into contact in Babylonia with fugitive priests from Assyrian cities.

This great prophet makes interesting references to "four living creatures", with "four faces"--the face of a man, the face of a lion, the face of an ox, and the face of an eagle; "they had the hands of a man under their wings, . . . their wings were joined one to another; . . . their wings were stretched upward: two wings of every one were joined one to another. . . . Their appearance was like burning coals of fire and like the appearance of lamps. . . . The living creatures ran and returned as the appearance of a flash of lightning." [*2]

Elsewhere, referring to the sisters, Aholah and Aholibah, who had been in Egypt and had adopted unmoral ways of

 

Click to enlarge
EAGLE-HEADED WINGED DEITY (ASHUR)
 Marble Slab, British Museum.
 Photo. Mansell

 

[p. 345]

life, Ezekiel tells that when Aholibah "doted upon the Assyrians" she "saw men pourtrayed upon the wall, the images of the Chaldeans pourtrayed with vermilion, girded with girdles upon their loins". [*1] Traces of the red colour on the walls of Assyrian temples and palaces have been observed by excavators. The winged gods "like burning coals" were probably painted in vermilion.

Ezekiel makes reference to "ring" and "wheel" symbols. In his vision he saw "one wheel upon the earth by the living creatures, with his four faces. The appearance of the wheels and their work was like unto the colour of beryl; and they four had one likeness; and their appearance and their work was as it were a wheel in the middle of a wheel. . . . As for their rings, they were so high that they were dreadful; and their rings were full of eyes round about them four. And when the living creatures went, the wheels went by them; and when the living creatures were lifted up from the earth, the wheels were lifted up. Whithersoever the spirit was to go, they went, thither was their spirit to go; and the wheels were lifted up over against them; for the spirit of the living creature was in the wheels. [*2] . . . And the likeness of the firmament upon the heads of the living creature was as the colour of terrible crystal, stretched forth over their heads above. . . . And when they went I heard the noise of their wings, like the noise of great waters, as the voice of the Almighty, the voice of speech, as the noise of an host; when they stood they let down their wings. . . ." [*3]

Another description of the cherubs states: "Their whole body, and their backs, and their hands, and their wings, and the wheels, were full of eyes (? stars) round

[p. 346]

about, even the wheels that they four had. As for the wheels, it was cried unto them in my hearing, O wheel!"--or, according to a marginal rendering, "they were called in my hearing, wheel, or Gilgal," i.e. move round. . . . "And the cherubims were lifted up." [*1]

It would appear that the wheel (or hoop, a variant rendering) was a symbol of life, and that the Assyrian feather-robed figure which it enclosed was a god, not of war only, but also of fertility. His trident-headed arrow resembles, as has been suggested, a lightning symbol. Ezekiel's references are suggestive in this connection. When the cherubs "ran and returned" they had "the appearance of a flash of lightning", and "the noise of their wings" resembled "the noise of great waters". Their bodies were "like burning coals of fire". Fertility gods were associated with fire, lightning, and water. Agni of India, Sandan of Asia Minor, and Melkarth of Phoenicia were highly developed fire gods of fertility. The fire cult was also represented in Sumeria (pp. <page 49>-51).

In the Indian epic, the Mahabharata, the revolving ring or wheel protects the Soma [*2] (ambrosia) of the gods, on which their existence depends. The eagle giant Garuda sets forth to steal it. The gods, fully armed, gather round to protect the life-giving drink. Garuda approaches "darkening the worlds by the dust raised by the hurricane of his wings". The celestials, "overwhelmed by that dust", swoon away. Garuda afterwards assumes a fiery shape, then looks "like masses of black clouds", and in the end its body becomes golden and bright "as the rays of the sun". The Soma is protected by fire, which the bird quenches after "drinking in many rivers" with the numerous mouths it has assumed. Then Garuda finds that right above the Soma is "a wheel of steel, keen

[p. 347]

edged, and sharp as a razor, revolving incessantly. That fierce instrument, of the lustre of the blazing sun and of terrible form, was devised by the gods for cutting to pieces all robbers of the Soma." Garuda passes "through the spokes of the wheel", and has then to contend against "two great snakes of the lustre of blazing fire, of tongues bright as the lightning flash, of great energy, of mouth emitting fire, of blazing eyes". He slays the snakes. . . . The gods afterwards recover the stolen Soma.

Garuda becomes the vehicle of the god Vishnu, who carries the discus, another fiery wheel which revolves and returns to the thrower like lightning. "And he (Vishnu) made the bird sit on the flagstaff of his car, saying: 'Even thus thou shalt stay above me'." [*1]

The Persian god Ahura Mazda hovers above the king in sculptured representations of that high dignitary, enclosed in a winged wheel, or disk, like Ashur, grasping a ring in one hand, the other being lifted up as if blessing those who adore him.

Shamash, the Babylonian sun god; Ishtar, the goddess of heaven; and other Babylonian deities carried rings as the Egyptian gods carried the ankh, the symbol of life. Shamash was also depicted sitting on his throne in a pillar-supported pavilion, in front of which is a sun wheel. The spokes of the wheel are formed by a star symbol and threefold rippling "water rays".

In Hittite inscriptions there are interesting winged emblems; "the central portion" of one "seems to be composed of two crescents underneath a disk (which is also divided like a crescent). Above the emblem there appear the symbol of sanctity (the divided oval) and the hieroglyph which Professor Sayce interprets as the name of the god Sandes." In another instance "the centre of

[p. 348]

the winged emblem may be seen to be a rosette, with a curious spreading object below. Above, two dots follow the name of Sandes, and a human arm bent 'in adoration' is by the side. . . ." Professor Garstang is here dealing with sacred places "on rocky points or hilltops, bearing out the suggestion of the sculptures near Boghaz-Keui [*1], in which there may be reasonably suspected the surviving traces of mountain cults, or cults of mountain deities, underlying the newer religious symbolism". Who the deity is it is impossible to say, but "he was identified at some time or other with Sandes". [*2] It would appear, too, that the god may have been "called by a name which was that used also by the priest". Perhaps the priest king was believed to be an incarnation of the deity.

Sandes or Sandan was identical with Sandon of Tarsus, "the prototype of Attis", [*3] who links with the Babylonian Tammuz. Sandon's animal symbol was the lion, and he carried the "double axe" symbol of the god of fertility and thunder. As Professor Frazer has shown in The Golden Bough, he links with Hercules and Melkarth. [*4]

All the younger gods, who displaced the elder gods as one year displaces another, were deities of fertility, battle, lightning, fire, and the sun; it is possible, therefore, that Ashur was like Merodach, son of Ea, god of the deep, a form of Tammuz in origin. His spirit was in the solar wheel which revolved at times of seasonal change. In Scotland it was believed that on the morning of May Day (Beltaine) the rising sun revolved three times. The younger god was a spring sun god and fire god. Great

[p. 349]

bonfires were lit to strengthen him, or as a ceremony of riddance; the old year was burned out. Indeed the god himself might be burned (that is, the old god), so that he might renew his youth. Melkarth was burned at Tyre. Hercules burned himself on a mountain top, and his soul ascended to heaven as an eagle.

These fiery rites were evidently not unknown in Babylonia and Assyria. When, according to Biblical narrative, Nebuchadnezzar "made an image of gold" which he set up "in the plain of Dura, in the province of Babylon", he commanded: "O people, nations, and languages . . . at the time ye hear the sound of the cornet, flute, harp, sackbut, psaltery, dulcimer, and all kinds of musick . . . fall down and worship the golden image". Certain Jews who had been "set over the affairs of the province of Babylonia", namely, "Shadrach, Meshach, and Abed-nego", refused to adore the idol. They were punished by being thrown into "a burning fiery furnace", which was heated "seven times more than it was wont to be heated". They came forth uninjured. [*1]

In the Koran it is related that Abraham destroyed the images of Chaldean gods; he "brake them all in pieces except the biggest of them; that they might lay the blame on that". [*2] According to the commentators the Chaldaeans were at the time "abroad in the fields, celebrating a great festival". To punish the offender Nimrod had a great pyre erected at Cuthah. "Then they bound Abraham, and putting him into an engine, shot him into the midst of the fire, from which he was preserved by the angel Gabriel, who was sent to his assistance." Eastern Christians were wont to set apart in the Syrian calendar the

[p. 350]

[paragraph continues] 25th of January to commemorate Abraham's escape from Nimrod's pyre. [*1]

It is evident that the Babylonian fire ceremony was observed in the spring season, and that human beings were sacrificed to the sun god. A mock king may have been burned to perpetuate the ancient sacrifice of real kings, who were incarnations of the god.

Isaiah makes reference to the sacrificial burning of kings in Assyria: "For through the voice of the Lord shall the Assyrian be beaten down, which smote with a rod. And in every place where the grounded staff shall pass, which the Lord shall lay upon him, it shall be with tabrets and harps: and in battles of shaking will he fight with it. For Tophet is ordained of old; yea, for the king it is prepared: he hath made it deep and large: the pile thereof is fire and much wood: the breath of the Lord, like a stream of brimstone, doth kindle it." [*2] When Nineveh was about to fall, and with it the Assyrian Empire, the legendary king, Sardanapalus, who was reputed to have founded Tarsus, burned himself, with his wives, concubines, and eunuchs, on a pyre in his palace. Zimri, who reigned over Israel for seven days, "burnt the king's house over him with fire" [*3]. Saul, another fallen king, was burned after death, and his bones were buried "under the oak in Jabesh". [*4] In Europe the oak was associated with gods of fertility and lightning, including Jupiter and Thor. The ceremony of burning Saul is of special interest. Asa, the orthodox king of Judah, was, after death, "laid in the bed which was filled with sweet odours and divers kinds of spices prepared by the apothecaries' art: and they made a very great burning for him" (2 Chronicles,

[p. 351]

xvi, 14). Jehoram, the heretic king of Judah, who "walked in the way of the kings of Israel", died of "an incurable disease. And his people made no burning for him, like the burning of his fathers" (2 Chronicles, xxi, 18, 19).

The conclusion suggested by the comparative study of the beliefs of neighbouring peoples, and the evidence afforded by Assyrian sculptures, is that Ashur was a highly developed form of the god of fertility, who was sustained, or aided in his conflicts with demons, by the fires and sacrifices of his worshippers.

It is possible to read too much into his symbols. These are not more complicated and vague than are the symbols on the standing stones of Scotland--the crescent with the "broken" arrow; the trident with the double rings, or wheels, connected by two crescents; the circle with the dot in its centre; the triangle with the dot; the large disk with two small rings on either side crossed by double straight lines; the so-called "mirror", and so on. Highly developed symbolism may not indicate a process of spiritualization so much, perhaps, as the persistence of magical beliefs and practices. There is really no direct evidence to support the theory that the Assyrian winged disk, or disk "with protruding rays", was of more spiritual character than the wheel which encloses the feather-robed archer with his trident-shaped arrow.

The various symbols may have represented phases of the god. When the spring fires were lit, and the god "renewed his life like the eagle", his symbol was possibly the solar wheel or disk with eagle's wings, which became regarded as a symbol of life. The god brought life and light to the world; he caused the crops to grow; he gave increase; he sustained his worshippers. But he was also the god who slew the demons of darkness and storm.

[p. 352]

[paragraph continues] The Hittite winged disk was Sandes or Sandon, the god of lightning, who stood on the back of a bull. As the lightning god was a war god, it was in keeping with his character to find him represented in Assyria as "Ashur the archer" with the bow and lightning arrow. On the disk of the Assyrian standard the lion and the bull appear with "the archer" as symbols of the war god Ashur, but they were also symbols of Ashur the god of fertility.

The life or spirit of the god was in the ring or wheel, as the life of the Egyptian and Indian gods, and of the giants of folk tales, was in "the egg". The "dot within the circle", a widespread symbol, may have represented the seed within "the egg" of more than one mythology, or the thorn within the egg of more than one legendary story. It may be that in Assyria, as in India, the crude beliefs and symbols of the masses were spiritualized by the speculative thinkers in the priesthood, but no literary evidence has survived to justify us in placing the Assyrian teachers on the same level as the Brahmans who composed the Upanishads.

Temples were erected to Ashur, but he might be worshipped anywhere, like the Queen of Heaven, who received offerings in the streets of Jerusalem, for "he needed no temple", as Professor Pinches says. Whether this was because he was a highly developed deity or a product of folk religion it is difficult to decide. One important fact is that the ruling king of Assyria was more closely connected with the worship of Ashur than the king of Babylonia was with the worship of Merodach. This may be because the Assyrian king was regarded as an incarnation of his god, like the Egyptian Pharaoh. Ashur accompanied the monarch on his campaigns: he was their conquering war god. Where the king was, there was Ashur also. No images were made of him,

[p. 353]

but his symbols were carried aloft, as were the symbols of Indian gods in the great war of the Mahabharata epic.

It would appear that Ashur was sometimes worshipped in the temples of other gods. In an interesting inscription he is associated with the moon god Nannar (Sin) of Haran. Esarhaddon, the Assyrian king, is believed to have been crowned in that city. "The writer", says Professor Pinches, "is apparently addressing Assur-bani-apli, 'the great and noble Asnapper':

"When the father of my king my lord went to Egypt, he was crowned (?) in the ganni of Harrah, the temple (lit. 'Bethel') of cedar. The god Sin remained over the (sacred) standard, two crowns upon his head, (and) the god Nusku stood beside him. The father of the king my lord entered, (and) he (the priest of Sin) placed (the crown?) upon his head, (saying) thus: 'Thou shalt go and capture the lands in the midst'. (He we)nt, he captured the land of Egypt. The rest of the lands not submitting (?) to Assur (Ashur) and Sin, the king, the lord of kings, shall capture (them)." [*1]

Ashur and Sin are here linked as equals. Associated with them is Nusku, the messenger of the gods, who was given prominence in Assyria. The kings frequently invoked him. As the son of Ea he acted as the messenger between Merodach and the god of the deep. He was also a son of Bel Enlil, and like Anu was guardian or chief of the Igigi, the "host of heaven". Professor Pinches suggests that he may have been either identical with the Sumerian fire god Gibil, or a brother of the fire god, and an impersonation of the light of fire and sun. In Haran he accompanied the moon god, and may, therefore, have symbolized the light of the moon also. Professor

[p. 354]

[paragraph continues] Pinches adds that in one inscription "he is identified with Nirig or En-reshtu" (Nin-Girsu = Tammuz). [*1]The Babylonians and Assyrians associated fire and light with moisture and fertility.

The astral phase of the character of Ashur is highly probable. As has been indicated, the Greek rendering of Anshar as "Assoros", is suggestive in this connection. Jastrow, however, points out that the use of the characters Anshar for Ashur did not obtain until the eighth century B.C. "Linguistically", he says, "the change of Ashir to Ashur can be accounted for, but not the transformation of An-shar to Ashur or Ashir; so that we must assume the 'etymology' of Ashur, proposed by some learned scribe, to be the nature of a play upon the name." [*2] On the other hand, it is possible that what appears arbitrary to us may have been justified in ancient Assyria on perfectly reasonable, or at any rate traditional, grounds. Professor Pinches points out that as a sun god, and "at the same time not Shamash", Ashur resembled Merodach. "His identification with Merodach, if that was ever accepted, may have been due to the likeness of the word to Asari, one of the deities' names." [*3] As Asari, Merodach has been compared to the Egyptian Osiris, who, as the Nile god, was Asar-Hapi. Osiris resembles Tammuz and was similarly a corn deity and a ruler of the living and the dead, associated with sun, moon, stars, water, and vegetation. We may consistently connect Ashur with Aushar, "water field", Anshar, "god of the height", or "most high", and with the eponymous King Asshur who went out on the land of Nimrod and "builded Nineveh", if we regard him as of common origin with Tammuz, Osiris,

[p. 355]

and Attis--a developed and localized form of the ancient deity of fertility and corn.

Ashur had a spouse who is referred to as Ashuritu, or Beltu, "the lady". Her name, however, is not given, but it is possible that she was identified with the Ishtar of Nineveh. In the historical texts Ashur, as the royal god, stands alone. Like the Hittite Great Father, he was perhaps regarded as the origin of life. Indeed, it may have been due to the influence of the northern hillmen in the early Assyrian period, that Ashur was developed as a father god--a Baal. When the Hittite inscriptions are read, more light may be thrown on the Ashur problem. Another possible source of cultural influence is Persia. The supreme god Ahura-Mazda (Ormuzd) was, as has been indicated, represented, like Ashur, hovering over the king's head, enclosed in a winged disk or wheel, and the sacred tree figured in Persian mythology. The early Assyrian kings had non-Semitic and non-Sumerian names. It seems reasonable to assume that the religious culture of the ethnic elements they represented must have contributed to the development of the city god of Asshur.

Footnotes

^327:1 Genesis, x, 11.

^327:2 "A number of tablets have been found in Cappadocia of the time of the Second Dynasty of Ur which show marked affinities with Assyria. The divine name Ashir, as in early Assyrian texts, the institution of eponyms and many personal names which occur in Assyria, are so characteristic that we must assume kinship of peoples. But whether they witness to a settlement in Cappadocia from Assyria, or vice versa, is not yet clear." Ancient Assyria, C. H. W. Johns (Cambridge, 1912), pp. 12-13.

^328:1 Sumerian Ziku, apparently derived from Zi, the spiritual essence of life, the "self power" of the Universe.

^328:2 Peri Archon, cxxv.

^329:1 Religion of Babylonia and Assyria, p. 197 et seq.

^330:1 Julius Caesar, act iii, scene 1.

^331:1 Isaiah, xiv, 4-14.

^332:1 Eddubrott, ii.

^332:2 Religion of the Ancient Egyptians, A. Wiedemann, pp. 289-90.

^332:3 Ibid., p. 236. Atlas was also believed to be in the west.

^332:4 Primitive Constellations, vol. ii, p. 184.

^333:1 Cuneiform Inscriptions of Western Asia, xxx, 11.

^333:2 Isaiah, xiii, 21. For "Satyrs" the Revised Version gives the alternative translation, "or he-goats".

^335:1 Aspects of Religious Belief and Practice in Babylonia and Assyria, p. 120, plate 18 and note.

^336:1 Satapatha Brahmana, translated by Professor Eggeling, part iv, 1897, p. 371. (Sacred Books of the East.)

^336:2 Egyptian Myth and Legend, pp. 165 et seq.

^336:3 Classic Myth and Legend, p. 105. The birds were called "Stymphalides".

^337:1 The so-called "shuttle" of Neith may be a thunderbolt. Scotland's archaic thunder deity is a goddess. The bow and arrows suggest a lightning goddess who was a deity of war because she was a deity of fertility.

^338:1 Vedic Index, Macdonell & Keith, vol. ii, pp. 125-6, and vol. i, 168-9.

^339:1 Ezekiel, xxxi, 3-8.

^340:1 Ezekiel, xxvii, 23, 24.

^340:2 Isaiah, xxxvii, 11.

^340:3 Ibid., x, 5, 6.

^341:1 A winged human figure, carrying in one hand a basket and in another a fir cone.

^342:1 Layard's Nineveh (1856), p. 44.

^342:2 Ibid., p. 309.

^343:1 The fir cone was offered to Attis and Mithra. Its association with Ashur suggests that the great Assyrian deity resembled the gods of corn and trees and fertility.

^343:2 Nineveh, p. 47.

^343:3 Isaiah, xxxvii, 37-8.

^343:4 The Old Testament in the Light of the Historical Records and Legends of Assyria and Babylonia, pp. 129-30.

^344:1 An eclipse of the sun in Assyria on June 15, 763 B.C., was followed by an outbreak of civil war.

^344:2 Ezekiel, i, 4-14

^345:1 Ezekiel, xxiii, 1-15.

^345:2 As the soul of the Egyptian god was in the sun disk or sun egg.

^345:3 Ezekiel, i, 15-28.

^346:1 Ezekiel, x, 11-5.

^346:2 Also called "Amrita".

^347:1 The Mahabharata (Adi Parva), Sections xxxiii-iv.

^348:1 Another way of spelling the Turkish name which signifies "village of the pass". The deep "gh" guttural is not usually attempted by English speakers. A common rendering is "Bog-haz' Kay-ee", a slight "oo" sound being given to the "a" in "Kay"; the "z" sound is hard and hissing.

^348:2 The Land of the Hittites, J. Garstang, pp. 178 et seq.

^348:3 Ibid., p. 173.

^348:4 Adonis, Attis, Osiris, chaps. v and vi.

^349:1 Daniel, iii, 1-26.

^349:2 The story that Abraham hung an axe round the neck of Baal after destroying the other idols is of Jewish origin.

^350:1 The Koran, George Sale, pp. 245-6.

^350:2 Isaiah, xxx, 31-3. See also for Tophet customs 2 Kings, xxiii, 10; Jeremiah, vii, 31, 32 and xix, 5-12.

^350:3 2 Kings, xvi, 18.

^350:4 1 Samuel, xxxi, 12, 13 and 1 Chronicles, x, 11, 12.

^353:1 The Old Testament in the Light of the Historical Records and Legends of Assyria and Babylonia, pp. 201-2.

^354:1 Babylonian and Assyrian Religion, pp. 57-8,

^354:2 Aspects of Religious Belief and Practice in Babylonia and Assyria, p.121.

^354:3 Babylonian and Assyrian Religion, p. 86.

     
Myths of Babylonia and Assyria, by Donald A. MacKenzie, [1915], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 356] [ch-15]

  

CHAPTER XV

  

Conflicts for Trade and Supremacy

Modern Babylonia--History repeating itself--Babylonian Trade Route in Mesopotamia--Egyptian Supremacy in Syria--Mitanni and Babylonia--Bandits who plundered Caravans--Arabian Desert Trade Route opened--Assyrian and Elamite Struggles with Babylonia--Rapid Extension of Assyrian Empire--Hittites control Western Trade Routes--Egypt's Nineteenth Dynasty Conquests--Campaigns of Rameses II--Egyptians and Hittites become Allies--Babylonian Fears of Assyria--Shalmaneser's Triumphs--Assyria Supreme in Mesopotamia--Conquest of Babylonia--Fall of a Great King--Civil War in Assyria--Its Empire goes to pieces--Babylonian Wars with Elam--Revival of Babylonian Power--Invasions of Assyrians and Elamites--End of the Kassite Dynasty--Babylonia contrasted with Assyria.

IT is possible that during the present century Babylonia may once again become one of the great wheat-producing countries of the world. A scheme of land reclamation has already been inaugurated by the construction of a great dam to control the distribution of the waters of the Euphrates, and, if it is energetically promoted on a generous scale in the years to come, the ancient canals, which are used at present as caravan roads, may yet be utilized to make the whole country as fertile and prosperous as it was in ancient days. When that happy consummation is reached, new cities may grow up and flourish beside the ruins of the old centres of Babylonian culture.

With the revival of agriculture will come the revival of commerce. Ancient trade routes will then be re-opened, and the slow-travelling caravans supplanted by

[p. 357]

speedy trains. A beginning has already been made in this direction. The first modern commercial highway which is crossing the threshold of Babylonia's new Age is the German railway through Asia Minor, North Syria, and Mesopotamia to Baghdad. [*1] It brings the land of Hammurabi into close touch with Europe, and will solve problems which engaged the attention of many rival monarchs for long centuries before the world knew aught of "the glory that was Greece and the grandeur that was Rome".

These sudden and dramatic changes are causing history to repeat itself. Once again the great World Powers are evincing much concern regarding their respective "spheres of influence" in Western Asia, and pressing together around the ancient land of Babylon. On the east, where the aggressive Elamites and Kassites were followed by the triumphant Persians and Medes, Russia and Britain have asserted themselves as protectors of Persian territory, and the influence of Britain is supreme in the Persian Gulf. Turkey controls the land of the Hittites, while Russia looms like a giant across the Armenian highlands; Turkey is also the governing power in Syria and Mesopotamia, which are being crossed by Germany's Baghdad railway. France is constructing railways in Syria, and will control the ancient "way of the Philistines". Britain occupies Cyprus on the Mediterranean coast, and presides over the destinies of the ancient land of Egypt, which, during the brilliant Eighteenth Dynasty, extended its sphere of influence to the borders of Asia Minor. Once again, after the lapse of many centuries, international

[p. 358]

politics is being strongly influenced by the problems connected with the development of trade in Babylonia and its vicinity.

The history of the ancient rival States, which is being pieced together by modern excavators, is, in view of present-day political developments, invested with special interest to us. We have seen Assyria rising into prominence. It began to be a great Power when Egypt was supreme in the "Western Land" (the land of the Amorites) as far north as the frontiers of Cappadocia. Under the Kassite regime Babylonia's political influence had declined in Mesopotamia, but its cultural influence remained, for its language and script continued in use among traders and diplomatists.

At the beginning of the Pharaoh Akhenaton period, the supreme power in Mesopotamia was Mitanni. As the ally of Egypt it constituted a buffer state on the borders of North Syria, which prevented the southern expansion from Asia Minor of the Hittite confederacy and the western expansion of aggressive Assyria, while it also held in check the ambitions of Babylonia, which still claimed the "land of the Amorites". So long as Mitanni was maintained as a powerful kingdom the Syrian possessions of Egypt were easily held in control, and the Egyptian merchants enjoyed preferential treatment compared with those of Babylonia. But when Mitanni was overcome, and its territories were divided between the Assyrians and the Hittites, the North Syrian Empire of Egypt went to pieces. A great struggle then ensued between the nations of western Asia for political supremacy in the "land of the Amorites".

Babylonia had been seriously handicapped by losing control of its western caravan road. Prior to the Kassite period its influence was supreme in Mesopotamia and

[p. 359]

middle Syria; from the days of Sargon of Akkad and of Naram-Sin until the close of the Hammurabi Age its merchants had naught to fear from bandits or petty kings between the banks of the Euphrates and the Mediterranean coast. The city of Babylon had grown rich and powerful as the commercial metropolis of Western Asia.

Separated from the Delta frontier by the broad and perilous wastes of the Arabian desert, Babylonia traded with Egypt by an indirect route. Its caravan road ran northward along the west bank of the Euphrates towards Haran, and then southward through Palestine. This was a long detour, but it was the only possible way.

During the early Kassite Age the caravans from Babylon had to pass through the area controlled by Mitanni, which was therefore able to impose heavy duties and fill its coffers with Babylonian gold. Nor did the situation improve when the influence of Mitanni suffered decline in southern Mesopotamia. Indeed the difficulties under which traders operated were then still further increased, for the caravan roads were infested by plundering bands of "Suti", to whom references are made in the Tell-el-Amarna letters. These bandits defied all the great powers, and became so powerful that even the messengers sent from one king to another were liable to be robbed and murdered without discrimination. When war broke out between powerful States they harried live stock and sacked towns in those areas which were left unprotected.

The "Suti" were Arabians of Aramaean stock. What is known as the "Third Semitic Migration" was in progress during this period. The nomads gave trouble to Babylonia and Assyria, and, penetrating Mesopotamia and Syria, sapped the power of Mitanni, until it was unable to resist the onslaughts of the Assyrians and the Hittites.

The Aramaean tribes are referred to, at various periods

[p. 360]

and by various peoples, not only as the "Suti", but also as the "Achlame", the "Arimi", and the "Khabiri". Ultimately they were designated simply as "Syrians", and under that name became the hereditary enemies of the Hebrews, although Jacob was regarded as being of their stock: "A Syrian ready to perish", runs a Biblical reference, "was my father (ancestor), and he went down into Egypt and sojourned there with a few, and became there a nation, great, mighty, and populous". [*1]

An heroic attempt was made by one of the Kassite kings of Babylonia to afford protection to traders by stamping out brigandage between Arabia and Mesopotamia, and opening up a new and direct caravan road to Egypt across the Arabian desert. The monarch in question was Kadashman-Kharbe, the grandson of Ashur-uballit of Assyria. As we have seen, he combined forces with his distinguished and powerful kinsman, and laid a heavy hand on the "Suti". Then he dug wells and erected a chain of fortifications, like "block-houses", so that caravans might come and go without interruption, and merchants be freed from the imposts of petty kings whose territory they had to penetrate when travelling by the Haran route.

This bold scheme, however, was foredoomed to failure. It was shown scant favour by the Babylonian Kassites. No record survives to indicate the character of the agreement between Kadashman-Kharbe and Ashur-uballit, but there can be little doubt that it involved the abandonment by Babylonia of its historic claim upon Mesopotamia, or part of it, and the recognition of an Assyrian sphere of influence in that region. It was probably on account of his pronounced pro-Assyrian tendencies that the Kassites murdered Kadashman-Kharbe,

[p. 361]

and set the pretender, known as "the son of nobody", on the throne for a brief period.

Kadashman-Kharbe's immediate successors recognized in Assyria a dangerous and unscrupulous rival, and resumed the struggle for the possession of Mesopotamia. The trade route across the Arabian desert had to be abandoned. Probably it required too great a force to keep it open. Then almost every fresh conquest achieved by Assyria involved it in war with Babylonia, which appears to have been ever waiting for a suitable opportunity to cripple its northern rival.

But Assyria was not the only power which Babylonia had to guard itself against. On its eastern frontier Elam was also panting for expansion. Its chief caravan roads ran from Susa through Assyria towards Asia Minor, and through Babylonia towards the Phoenician coast. It was probably because its commerce was hampered by the growth of Assyrian power in the north, as Servia's commerce in our own day has been hampered by Austria, that it cherished dreams of conquering Babylonia. In fact, as Kassite influence suffered decline, one of the great problems of international politics was whether Elam or Assyria would enter into possession of the ancient lands of Sumer and Akkad.

Ashur-uballit's vigorous policy of Assyrian expansion was continued, as has been shown, by his son Bel-nirari. His grandson, Arik-den-ilu, conducted several successful campaigns, and penetrated westward as far as Haran, thus crossing the Babylonian caravan road. He captured great herds of cattle and flocks of sheep, which were transported to Asshur, and on one occasion carried away 250,000 prisoners.

Meanwhile Babylonia waged war with Elam. It is related that Khur-batila, King of Elam, sent a challenge

[p. 362]

to Kurigalzu III, a descendant of Kadashman-Kharbe, saying: "Come hither; I will fight with thee". The Babylonian monarch accepted the challenge, invaded the territory of his rival, and won a great victory. Deserted by his troops, the Elamite king was taken prisoner, and did not secure release until he had ceded a portion of his territory and consented to pay annual tribute to Babylonia.

Flushed with his success, the Kassite king invaded Assyria when Adad-nirari I died and his son Arik-den-ilu came to the throne. He found, however, that the Assyrians were more powerful than the Elamites, and suffered defeat. His son, Na'zi-mar-ut'tash [*1], also made an unsuccessful attempt to curb the growing power of the northern Power.

These recurring conflicts were intimately associated with the Mesopotamian question. Assyria was gradually expanding westward and shattering the dreams of the Babylonian statesmen and traders who hoped to recover control of the caravan routes and restore the prestige of their nation in the west.

Like his father, Adad-nirari I of Assyria had attacked the Aramaean "Suti" who were settling about Haran. He also acquired a further portion of the ancient kingdom of Mitanni, with the result that he exercised sway over part of northern Mesopotamia. After defeating Na'zi-mar-ut'tash, he fixed the boundaries of the Assyrian and Babylonian spheres of influence much to the advantage of his own country.

At home Adad-nirari conducted a vigorous policy. He developed the resources of the city state of Asshur by constructing a great dam and quay wall, while he contributed to the prosperity of the priesthood and the

[p. 363]

growth of Assyrian culture by extending the temple of the god Ashur. Ere he died, he assumed the proud title of "Shar Kishshate", "king of the world", which was also used by his son Shalmaneser I. His reign extended over a period of thirty years and terminated about 1300 B.C.

Soon after Shalmaneser came to the throne his country suffered greatly from an earthquake, which threw down Ishtar's temple at Nineveh and Ashur's temple at Asshur. Fire broke out in the latter building and destroyed it completely.

These disasters did not dismay the young monarch. Indeed, they appear to have stimulated him to set out on a career of conquest, to secure treasure and slaves, so as to carry out the work of reconstructing the temples without delay. He became as great a builder, and as tireless a campaigner as Thothmes III of Egypt, and under his guidance Assyria became the most powerful nation in Western Asia. Ere he died his armies were so greatly dreaded that the Egyptians and Assyrians drew their long struggle for supremacy in Syria to a close, and formed an alliance for mutual protection against their common enemy.

It is necessary at this point to review briefly the history of Palestine and north Syria after the period of Hittite expansion under King Subbi-luliuma and the decline of Egyptian power under Akhenaton. The western part of Mitanni and the most of northern Syria had been colonized by the Hittites. [*1] Farther south, their allies, the Amorites, formed a buffer State on the borders of Egypt's limited sphere of influence in southern Palestine, and of Babylonia's sphere in southern Mesopotamia. Mitanni

[p. 364]

was governed by a subject king who was expected to prevent the acquisition by Assyria of territory in the north-west.

Subbi-luliuma was succeeded on the Hittite throne by his son, King Mursil, who was known to the Egyptians as "Meraser", or "Maurasar". The greater part of this monarch's reign appears to have been peaceful and prosperous. His allies protected his frontiers, and he was able to devote himself to the work of consolidating his empire in Asia Minor and North Syria. He erected a great palace at Boghaz Koi, and appears to have had dreams of imitating the splendours of the royal Courts of Egypt, Assyria, and Babylon.

At this period the Hittite Empire was approaching the zenith of its power. It controlled the caravan roads of Babylonia and Egypt, and its rulers appear not only to have had intimate diplomatic relations with both these countries, but even to have concerned themselves regarding their internal affairs. When Rameses I came to the Egyptian throne, at the beginning of the Nineteenth Dynasty, he sealed an agreement with the Hittites, and at a later date the Hittite ambassador at Babylon, who represented Hattusil II, the second son of King Mursil, actually intervened in a dispute regarding the selection of a successor to the throne.

The closing years of King Mursil's reign were disturbed by the military conquests of Egypt, which had renewed its strength under Rameses I. Seti I, the son of Rameses I, and the third Pharaoh of the powerful Nineteenth Dynasty, took advantage of the inactivity of the Hittite ruler by invading southern Syria. He had first to grapple with the Amorites, whom he successfully defeated. Then he pressed northward as far as Tunip, and won a decisive victory over a Hittite army, which

[p. 365]

secured to Egypt for a period the control of Palestine as far north as Phoenicia.

When Mursil died he was succeeded on the Hittite throne by his son Mutallu, whom the Egyptians referred to as "Metella" or "Mautinel". He was a vigorous and aggressive monarch, and appears to have lost no time in compelling the Amorites to throw off their allegiance to Egypt and recognize him as their overlord. As a result, when Rameses II ascended the Egyptian throne he had to undertake the task of winning back the Asiatic possessions of his father.

The preliminary operations conducted by Rameses on the Palestinian coast were attended with much success. Then, in his fifth year, he marched northward with a great army, with purpose, it would appear, to emulate the achievements of Thothmes III and win fame as a mighty conqueror. But he underestimated the strength of his rival and narrowly escaped disaster. Advancing impetuously, with but two of his four divisions, he suddenly found himself surrounded by the army of the wily Hittite, King Mutallu, in the vicinity of the city of Kadesh, on the Orontes. His first division remained intact, but his second was put to flight by an intervening force of the enemy. From this perilous position Rameses extricated himself by leading a daring charge against the Hittite lines on the river bank, which proved successful. Thrown into confusion, his enemies sought refuge in the city, but the Pharaoh refrained from attacking them there.

Although Rameses boasted on his return home of having achieved a great victory, there is nothing more certain than that this campaign proved a dismal failure. He was unable to win back for Egypt the northern territories which had acknowledged the suzerainty of Egypt during the Eighteenth Dynasty. Subsequently he was

[p. 366]

kept fully engaged in maintaining his prestige in northern Palestine and the vicinity of Phoenicia. Then his Asiatic military operations, which extended altogether over a period of about twenty years, were brought to a close in a dramatic and unexpected manner. The Hittite king Mutallu had died in battle, or by the hand of an assassin, and was succeeded by his brother Hattusil II (Khetasar), who sealed a treaty of peace with the great Rameses.

An Egyptian copy of this interesting document can still be read on the walls of a Theban temple, but it is lacking in certain details which interest present-day historians. No reference, for instance, is made to the boundaries of the Egyptian Empire in Syria, so that it is impossible to estimate the degree of success which attended the campaigns of Rameses. An interesting light, however, is thrown on the purport of the treaty by a tablet letter which has been discovered by Professor Hugo Winckler at Boghaz Koi. It is a copy of a communication addressed by Hattusil II to the King of Babylonia, who had made an enquiry regarding it. "I will inform my brother," wrote the Hittite monarch; the King of Egypt and I have made an alliance, and made ourselves brothers. Brothers we are and will [unite against] a common foe, and with friends in common." [*1] The common foe could have been no other than Assyria, and the Hittite king's letter appears to convey a hint to Kadashman-turgu of Babylon that he should make common cause with Rameses II and Hattusil.

Shalmaneser I of Assyria was pursuing a determined policy of western and northern expansion. He struck boldly at the eastern Hittite States and conquered Malatia, where he secured great treasure for the god Ashur. He even founded colonies within the Hittite sphere of influence

[p. 367]

on the borders of Armenia. Shalmaneser's second campaign was conducted against the portion of ancient Mitanni which was under Hittite control. The vassal king, Sattuari, apparently a descendant of Tushratta's, endeavoured to resist the Assyrians with the aid of Hittites and Aramaeans, but his army of allies was put to flight. The victorious Shalmaneser was afterwards able to penetrate as far westward as Carchemish on the Euphrates.

Having thus secured the whole of Mitanni, the Assyrian conqueror attacked the Aramaean hordes which were keeping the territory round Haran in a continuous state of unrest, and forced them to recognize him as their overlord.

Shalmaneser thus, it would appear, gained control of northern Mesopotamia and consequently of the Babylonian caravan route to Haran. As a result Hittite prestige must have suffered decline in Babylon. For a generation the Hittites had had the Babylonian merchants at their mercy, and apparently compelled them to pay heavy duties. Winckler has found among the Boghaz Koi tablets several letters from the king of Babylon, who made complaints regarding robberies committed by Amoritic bandits, and requested that they should be punished and kept in control. Such a communication is a clear indication that he was entitled, in lieu of payment, to have an existing agreement fulfilled.

Shalmaneser found that Asshur, the ancient capital, was unsuitable for the administration of his extended empire, so he built a great city at Kalkhi (Nimrud), the Biblical Calah, which was strategically situated amidst fertile meadows on the angle of land formed by the Tigris and the Upper Zab. Thither to a new palace he transferred his brilliant Court.

[p. 368]

He was succeeded by his son, Tukulti-Ninip I, who was the most powerful of the Assyrian monarchs of the Old Empire. He made great conquests in the north and east, extended and strengthened Assyrian influence in Mesopotamia, and penetrated into Hittite territory, bringing into subjection no fewer than forty kings, whom he compelled to pay annual tribute. It was inevitable that he should be drawn into conflict with the Babylonian king, who was plotting with the Hittites against him. One of the tablet letters found by Winckler at Boghaz Koi is of special interest in this connection. Hattusil advises the young monarch of Babylonia to "go and plunder the land of the foe". Apparently he sought to be freed from the harassing attention of the Assyrian conqueror by prevailing on his Babylonian royal friend to act as a "cat's paw".

It is uncertain whether or not Kashtiliash II of Babylonia invaded Assyria with purpose to cripple his rival. At any rate war broke out between the two countries, and Tukulti-Ninip proved irresistible in battle. He marched into Babylonia, and not only defeated Kashtiliash, but captured him and carried him off to Asshur, where he was presented in chains to the god Ashur.

The city of Babylon was captured, its wall was demolished, and many of its inhabitants were put to the sword. Tukulti-Ninip was evidently waging a war of conquest, for he pillaged E-sagila, "the temple of the high head", and removed the golden statue of the god Merodach to Assyria, where it remained for about sixteen years. He subdued the whole of Babylonia as far south as the Persian Gulf; and ruled it through viceroys.

Tukulti-Ninip, however, was not a popular emperor even in his own country. He offended national susceptibilities by showing preference for Babylonia, and founding

[p. 369]

a new city which has not been located. There he built a great palace and a temple for Ashur and his pantheon. He called the city after himself, Kar-Tukulti-Ninip [*1].

Seven years after the conquest of Babylonia revolts broke out against the emperor in Assyria and Babylonia, and he was murdered in his palace, which had been besieged and captured by an army headed by his own son, Ashur-natsir-pal I, who succeeded him. The Babylonian nobles meantime drove the Assyrian garrisons from their cities, and set on the throne the Kassite prince Adad-shum-utsur.

Thus in a brief space went to pieces the old Assyrian Empire, which, at the close of Tukulti-Ninip's thirty years' reign, embraced the whole Tigro-Euphrates valley from the borders of Armenia to the Persian Gulf. An obscure century followed, during which Assyria was raided by its enemies and broken up into petty States.

The Elamites were not slow to take advantage of the state of anarchy which prevailed in Babylonia during the closing years of Assyrian rule. They overran a part of ancient Sumer, and captured Nippur, where they slew a large number of inhabitants and captured many prisoners. On a subsequent occasion they pillaged Isin. When, however, the Babylonian king had cleared his country of the Assyrians, he attacked the Elamites and drove them across the frontier.

Nothing is known regarding the reign of the parricide Ashur-natsir-pal I of Assyria. He was succeeded by Ninip-Tukulti-Ashur and Adad-shum-lishir, who either reigned concurrently or were father and son. After a brief period these were displaced by another two rulers, Ashur-nirari III and Nabu-dan.

It is not clear why Ninip-Tukulti-Ashur was deposed.

[p. 370]

[paragraph continues] Perhaps he was an ally of Adad-shum-utsur, the Babylonian king, and was unpopular on that account. He journeyed to Babylon on one occasion, carrying with him the statue of Merodach, but did not return. Perhaps he fled from the rebels. At any rate Adad-shum-utsur was asked to send him back, by an Assyrian dignitary who was probably Ashur-nirari III. The king of Babylon refused this request, nor would he give official recognition to the new ruler or rulers.

Soon afterwards another usurper, Bel-kudur-utsur, led an Assyrian army against the Babylonians, but was slain in battle. He was succeeded by Ninip-apil-esharia, who led his forces back to Asshur, followed by Adad-shumutsur. The city was besieged but not captured by the Babylonian army.

Under Adad-shum-utsur, who reigned for thirty years, Babylonia recovered much of its ancient splendour. It held Elam in check and laid a heavy hand on Assyria, which had been paralysed by civil war. Once again it possessed Mesopotamia and controlled its caravan road to Haran and Phoenicia, and apparently its relations with the Hittites and Syrians were of a cordial character. The next king, Meli-shipak, assumed the Assyrian title "Shar Kishshati", "king of the world", and had a prosperous reign of fifteen years. He was succeeded by Marduk-aplu-iddin I, who presided over the destinies of Babylonia for about thirteen years. Thereafter the glory of the Kassite Dynasty passed away. King Zamama-shum-iddin followed with a twelvemonth's reign, during which his kingdom was successfully invaded from the north by the Assyrians under King Ashur-dan I, and from the east by the Elamites under a king whose name has not been traced. Several towns were captured and pillaged, and rich booty was carried off to Asshur and Susa.

[p. 371]

Bel-shum-iddin succeeded Zamama-shum-iddin, but three years afterwards he was deposed by a king of Isin. So ended the Kassite Dynasty of Babylonia, which had endured for a period of 576 years and nine months.

Babylonia was called Karduniash during the Kassite Dynasty. This name was originally applied to the district at the river mouths, where the alien rulers appear to have first achieved ascendancy. Apparently they were strongly supported by the non-Semitic elements in the population, and represented a popular revolt against the political supremacy of the city of Babylon and its god Merodach. It is significant to find in this connection that the early Kassite kings showed a preference for Nippur as their capital and promoted the worship of Enlil, the elder Bel, who was probably identified with their own god of fertility and battle. Their sun god, Sachi, appears to have been merged in Shamash. In time, however, the kings followed the example of Hammurabi by exalting Merodach.

The Kassite language added to the "Babel of tongues" among the common people, but was never used in inscriptions. At an early period the alien rulers became thoroughly Babylonianized, and as they held sway for nearly six centuries it cannot be assumed that they were unpopular. They allowed their mountain homeland, or earliest area of settlement in the east, to be seized and governed by Assyria, and probably maintained as slight a connection with it after settlement in Babylonia as did the Saxons of England with their Continental area of origin.

Although Babylonia was not so great a world power under the Kassites as it had been during the Hammurabi Dynasty, it prospered greatly as an industrial, agricultural, and trading country. The Babylonian language was used throughout western Asia as the language of diplomacy and commerce, and the city of Babylon was the most

[p. 372]

important commercial metropolis of the ancient world.

Its merchants traded directly and indirectly with far-distant countries. They imported cobalt--which was used for colouring glass a vivid blue--from China, and may have occasionally met Chinese traders who came westward with their caravans, while a brisk trade in marble and limestone was conducted with and through Elam. Egypt was the chief source of the gold supply, which was obtained from the Nubian mines; and in exchange for this precious metal the Babylonians supplied the Nilotic merchants with lapis-lazuli from Bactria, enamel, and their own wonderful coloured glass, which was not unlike the later Venetian, as well as chariots and horses. The Kassites were great horse breeders, and the battle steeds from the Babylonian province of Namar were everywhere in great demand. They also promoted the cattle trade. Cattle rearing was confined chiefly to the marshy districts at the head of the Persian Gulf, and the extensive steppes on the borders of the Arabian desert, so well known to Abraham and his ancestors, which provided excellent grazing. Agriculture also flourished; as in Egypt it constituted the basis of national and commercial prosperity.

It is evident that great wealth accumulated in Karduniash during the Kassite period. When the images of Merodach and Zerpanitum were taken back to Babylon, from Assyria, they were clad, as has been recorded, in garments embroidered with gold and sparkling with gems, while E-sagila was redecorated on a lavish scale with price-less works of art.

Assyria presented a sharp contrast to Babylonia, the mother land, from which its culture was derived. As a separate kingdom it had to develop along different lines. In fact, it was unable to exist as a world power without the enforced co-operation of neighbouring States. Babylonia,

[p. 373]

on the other hand, could have flourished in comparative isolation, like Egypt during the Old Kingdom period, because it was able to feed itself and maintain a large population so long as its rich alluvial plain was irrigated during its dry season, which extended over about eight months in the year.

The region north of Baghdad was of different geographical formation to the southern plain, and therefore less suitable for the birth and growth of a great independent civilization. Assyria embraced a chalk plateau of the later Mesozoic period, with tertiary deposits, and had an extremely limited area suitable for agricultural pursuits. Its original inhabitants were nomadic pastoral and hunting tribes, and there appears to be little doubt that agriculture was introduced along the banks of the Tigris by colonists from Babylonia, who formed city States which owed allegiance to the kings of Sumer and Akkad.

After the Hammurabi period Assyria rose into prominence as a predatory power, which depended for its stability upon those productive countries which it was able to conquer and hold in sway. It never had a numerous peasantry, and such as it had ultimately vanished, for the kings pursued the short-sighted policy of colonizing districts on the borders of their empire with their loyal subjects, and settling aliens in the heart of the homeland, where they were controlled by the military. In this manner they built up an artificial empire, which suffered at critical periods in its history because it lacked the great driving and sustaining force of a population welded together by immemorial native traditions and the love of country which is the essence of true patriotism. National sentiment was chiefly confined to the military aristocracy and the priests; the enslaved and uncultured masses of

[p. 374]

aliens were concerned mainly with their daily duties, and no doubt included communities, like the Israelites in captivity, who longed to return to their native lands.

Assyria had to maintain a standing army, which grew from an alliance of brigands who first enslaved the native population, and ultimately extended their sway over neighbouring States. The successes of the army made Assyria powerful. Conquering kings accumulated rich booty by pillaging alien cities, and grew more and more wealthy as they were able to impose annual tribute on those States which came under their sway. They even regarded Babylonia with avaricious eyes. It was to achieve the conquest of the fertile and prosperous mother State that the early Assyrian emperors conducted military operations in the north-west and laid hands on Mesopotamia. There was no surer way of strangling it than by securing control of its trade routes. What the command of the sea is to Great Britain at the present day, the command of the caravan roads was to ancient Babylonia.

Babylonia suffered less than Assyria by defeat in battle; its natural resources gave it great recuperative powers, and the native population was ever so intensely patriotic that centuries of alien sway could not obliterate their national aspirations. A conqueror of Babylon had to become a Babylonian. The Amorites and Kassites had in turn to adopt the modes of life and modes of thought of the native population. Like the Egyptians, the Babylonians ever achieved the intellectual conquest of their conquerors.

The Assyrian Empire, on the other hand, collapsed like a house of cards when its army of mercenaries suffered a succession of disasters. The kings, as we have indicated, depended on the tribute of subject States to pay

[p. 375]

their soldiers and maintain the priesthood; they were faced with national bankruptcy when their vassals successfully revolted against them.

The history of Assyria as a world power is divided into three periods: (1) the Old Empire; (2) the Middle Empire; (3) the New or Last Empire.

We have followed the rise and growth of the Old Empire from the days of Ashur-uballit until the reign of Tukulti-Ninip, when it flourished in great splendour and suddenly went to pieces. Thereafter, until the second period of the Old Empire, Assyria comprised but a few city States which had agricultural resources and were trading centres. Of these the most enterprising was Asshur. When a ruler of Asshur was able, by conserving his revenues, to command sufficient capital with purpose to raise a strong army of mercenaries as a business speculation, he set forth to build up a new empire on the ruins of the old. In its early stages, of course, this process was slow and difficult. It necessitated the adoption of a military career by native Assyrians, who officered the troops, and these troops had to be trained and disciplined by engaging in brigandage, which also brought them rich rewards for their services. Babylonia became powerful by developing the arts of peace; Assyria became powerful by developing the science of warfare.

Footnotes

^357:1 At Carchemish a railway bridge spans the mile-wide river ferry which Assyria's soldiers were wont to cross with the aid of skin floats. The engineers have found it possible to utilize a Hittite river wall about 3000 years old--the oldest engineering structure in the world. The ferry was on the old trade route.

^360:1 Deuteronomy, xxvi, 5.

^362:1 Pr. u as oo.

^363:1 The chief cities of North Syria were prior to this period Hittite. This expansion did not change the civilization but extended the area of occupation and control.

^366:1 Garstang's The Land of the Hittites, p. 349.

^369:1 "Burgh of Tukulti-Ninip."

     
Myths of Babylonia and Assyria, by Donald A. MacKenzie, [1915], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 376] [ch-16]

  

CHAPTER XVI

  

Race Movements that Shattered Empires

The Third Semitic Migration--Achaean Conquest of Greece--Fall of Crete--Tribes of Raiders--European Settlers in Asia Minor--The Muski overthrow the Hittites--Sea Raids on Egypt--The Homeric Age--Israelites and Philistines in Palestine--Culture of Philistines--Nebuchadrezzar I of Babylonia--Wars against Elamites and Hittites--Conquests in Mesopotamia and Syria--Assyrians and Babylonians at War--Tiglath-pileser I of Assyria--His Sweeping Conquests--Muski Power broken--Big-game Hunting in Mesopotamia--Slaying of a Sea Monster--Decline of Assyria and Babylonia--Revival of Hittite Civilization--An Important Period in History--Philistines as Overlords of Hebrews--Kingdom of David and Saul--Solomon's Relations with Egypt and Phoenicia--Sea Trade with India--Aramaean Conquests--The Chaldaeans--Egyptian King plunders Judah and Israel--Historical Importance of Race Movements.

GREAT changes were taking place in the ancient world during the period in which Assyria rose into prominence and suddenly suffered decline. These were primarily due to widespread migrations of pastoral peoples from the steppe lands of Asia and Europe, and the resulting displacement of settled tribes. The military operations of the great Powers were also a disturbing factor, for they not only propelled fresh movements beyond their spheres of influence, but caused the petty States to combine against a common enemy and foster ambitions to achieve conquests on a large scale.

Towards the close of the Eighteenth Dynasty of Egypt, of which Amenhotep III and Akhenaton were the last great kings, two well-defined migrations were in

[p. 377]

progress. The Aramaean folk-waves had already begun to pour in increasing volume into Syria from Arabia, and in Europe the pastoral fighting folk from the mountains were establishing themselves along the south-eastern coast and crossing the Hellespont to overrun the land of the Hittites. These race movements were destined to exercise considerable influence in shaping the history of the ancient world.

The Aramaean, or Third Semitic migration, in time swamped various decaying States. Despite the successive efforts of the great Powers to hold it in check, it ultimately submerged the whole of Syria and part of Mesopotamia. Aramaean speech then came into common use among the mingled peoples over a wide area, and was not displaced until the time of the Fourth Semitic or Moslem migration from Arabia, which began in the seventh century of the Christian era, and swept northward through Syria to Asia Minor, eastward across Mesopotamia into Persia and India, and westward through Egypt along the north African coast to Morocco, and then into Spain.

When Syria was sustaining the first shocks of Aramaean invasion, the last wave of Achaeans, "the tamers of horses" and "shepherds of the people", had achieved the conquest of Greece, and contributed to the overthrow of the dynasty of King Minos of Crete. Professor Ridgeway identifies this stock, which had been filtering southward for several centuries, with the tall, fair-haired, and grey-eyed "Keltoi" (Celts), [*1] who, Dr. Haddon believes, were representatives of "the mixed peoples of northern and Alpine descent". [*2] Mr. Hawes, following Professor Sergi, holds, on the other hand, that the Achaeans were

[p. 378]

[paragraph continues] "fair in comparison with the native (Pelasgian-Mediterranean) stock, but not necessarily blonde". [*1] The earliest Achaeans were rude, uncultured barbarians, but the last wave came from some unknown centre of civilization, and probably used iron as well as bronze weapons.

The old Cretans were known to the Egyptians as the "Keftiu", and traded on the Mediterranean and the Black Sea. It is significant to find, however, that no mention is made of them in the inscriptions of the Pharaohs after the reign of Amenhotep III. In their place appear the Shardana, the Mykenaean people who gave their name to Sardinia, the Danauna, believed to be identical with the Danaoi of Homer, the Akhaivasha, perhaps the Achaeans, and the Tursha and Shakalsha, who may have been of the same stock as the piratical Lycians.

When Rameses II fought his famous battle at Kadesh the Hittite king included among his allies the Aramaeans from Arabia, and other mercenaries like the Dardanui and Masa, who represented the Thraco-Phrygian peoples who had overrun the Balkans, occupied Thrace and Macedonia, and crossed into Asia Minor. In time the Hittite confederacy was broken up by the migrating Europeans, and their dominant tribe, the Muski [*2]--the Moschoi of the Greeks and the Meshech of the Old Testament--came into conflict with the Assyrians. The Muski were fore-runners of the Phrygians, and were probably of allied stock.

Pharaoh Meneptah, the son of Rameses II, did not benefit much by the alliance with the Hittites, to whom he had to send a supply of grain during a time of famine. He found it necessary, indeed, to invade Syria, where their influence had declined, and had to beat back from the Delta region the piratical invaders of the same tribes

[p. 379]

as were securing a footing in Asia Minor. In Syria Meneptah fought with the Israelites, who apparently had begun their conquest of Canaan during his reign.

Before the Kassite Dynasty had come to an end, Rameses III of Egypt (1198--1167 B.C.) freed his country from the perils of a great invasion of Europeans by land and sea. He scattered a fleet on the Delta coast, and then arrested the progress of a strong force which was pressing southward through Phoenicia towards the Egyptian frontier. These events occurred at the beginning of the Homeric Age, and were followed by the siege of Troy, which, according to the Greeks, began about 1194 B.C.

The land raiders who were thwarted by Rameses III were the Philistines, a people from Crete. [*1] When the prestige of Egypt suffered decline they overran the coast-line of Canaan, and that country was then called Palestine, "the land of the Philistines", while the Egyptian overland trade route to Phoenicia became known as "the way of the Philistines". Their conflicts with the Hebrews are familiar to readers of the Old Testament. "The only contributions the Hebrews made to the culture of the country", writes Professor Macalister, "were their simple desert customs and their religious organization. On the other hand, the Philistines, sprung from one of the great homes of art of the ancient world, had brought with them the artistic instincts of their race: decayed no doubt, but still superior to anything they met with in the land itself. Tombs to be ascribed to them, found in Gezer, contained beautiful jewellery and ornaments. The Philistines, in fact, were the only cultured or artistic race who ever occupied the soil of Palestine, at least until the time when the influence of classical Greece asserted itself too strongly

[p. 380]

to be withstood. Whatsoever things raised life in the country above the dull animal existence of fellahin were due to this people. . . . The peasantry of the modern villages . . . still tell of the great days of old when it (Palestine) was inhabited by the mighty race of the 'Fenish'." [*1]

When the Kassite Dynasty of Babylonia was extinguished, about 1140 B.C., the Amorites were being displaced in Palestine by the Philistines and the Israelitish tribes; the Aramaeans were extending their conquests in Syria and Mesopotamia; the Muski were the overlords of the Hittites; Assyrian power was being revived at the beginning of the second period of the Old Empire; and Egypt was governed by a weakly king, Rameses VIII, a puppet in the hands of the priesthood, who was unable to protect the rich tombs of the Eighteenth Dynasty Pharaohs against the bands of professional robbers who were plundering them.

A new dynasty--the Dynasty of Pashe--had arisen at the ancient Sumerian city of Isin. Its early kings were contemporary with some of the last Kassite monarchs, and they engaged in conflicts with the Elamites, who were encroaching steadily upon Babylonian territory, and were ultimately able to seize the province of Namar, famous for its horses, which was situated to the east of Akkad. The Assyrians, under Ashur-dan I, were not only reconquering lost territory, but invading Babylonia and carrying off rich plunder. Ashur-dan inflicted a crushing defeat upon the second-last Kassite ruler.

There years later Nebuchadrezzar I, of the Dynasty of Pashe, seized the Babylonian throne. He was the most powerful and distinguished monarch of his line--an accomplished general and a wise statesman. His name

[p. 381]

signifies: "May the god Nebo protect my boundary". His first duty was to drive the Elamites from the land, and win back from them the statue of Merodach which they had carried off from E-sagila. At first he suffered a reverse, but although the season was midsummer, and the heat overpowering, he persisted in his campaign. The Elamites were forced to retreat, and following up their main force he inflicted upon them a shattering defeat on the banks of the Ula, a tributary of the Tigris. He then invaded Elam and returned with rich booty. The province of Namar was recovered, and its governor, Ritti Merodach, who was Nebuchadrezzar's battle companion, was restored to his family possessions and exempted from taxation. A second raid to Elam resulted in the recovery of the statue of Merodach. The Kassite and Lullume mountaineers also received attention, and were taught to respect the power of the new monarch.

Having freed his country from the yoke of the Elamites, and driven the Assyrians over the frontier, Nebuchadrezzar came into conflict with the Hittites, who appear to have overrun Mesopotamia. Probably the invaders were operating in conjunction with the Muski, who were extending their sway over part of northern Assyria. They were not content with securing control of the trade route, but endeavoured also to establish themselves permanently in Babylon, the commercial metropolis, which they besieged and captured. This happened in the third year of Nebuchadrezzar, when he was still reigning at Isin. Assembling a strong force, he hastened northward and defeated the Hittites, and apparently followed up his victory. Probably it was at this time that he conquered the "West Land" (the land of the Amorites) and penetrated to the Mediterranean coast. Egyptian power had been long extinguished in that region.

[p. 382]

The possession of Mesopotamia was a signal triumph for Babylonia. As was inevitable, however, it brought Nebuchadrezzar into conflict some years later with the Assyrian king, Ashur-resh-ishi I, grandson of Ashur-dan, and father of the famous Tiglath-pileser I. The northern monarch had engaged himself in subduing the Lullume and Akhlami hill tribes in the south-east, whose territory had been conquered by Nebuchadrezzar. Thereafter he crossed the Babylonian frontier. Nebuchadrezzar drove him back and then laid siege to the border fortress of Zanki, but the Assyrian king conducted a sudden and successful reconnaissance in force which rendered perilous the position of the attacking force. By setting fire to his siege train the Babylonian war lord was able, however, to retreat in good order.

Some time later Nebuchadrezzar dispatched another army northward, but it suffered a serious defeat, and its general, Karashtu, fell into the hands of the enemy.

Nebuchadrezzar reigned less than twenty years, and appears to have secured the allegiance of the nobility by restoring the feudal system which had been abolished by the Kassites. He boasted that he was "the sun of his country, who restored ancient landmarks and boundaries", and promoted the worship of Ishtar, the ancient goddess of the people. By restoring the image of Merodach he secured the support of Babylon, to which city he transferred his Court.

Nebuchadrezzar was succeeded by his son Ellil-nadin-apil, who reigned a few years; but little or nothing is known regarding him. His grandson, Marduk-nadin-akhe, came into conflict with Tiglath-pileser I of Assyria, and suffered serious reverses, from the effects of which his country did not recover for over a century.

Tiglath-pileser I, in one of his inscriptions, recorded

[p. 383]

significantly: "The feet of the enemy I kept from my country". When he came to the throne, northern Assyria was menaced by the Muski and their allies, the Hittites and the Shubari of old Mitanni. The Kashiari hill tribes to the north of Nineveh, whom Shalmaneser I subdued, had half a century before thrown off the yoke of Assyria, and their kings were apparently vassals of the Muski.

Tiglath-pileser first invaded Mitanni, where he routed a combined force of Shubari hillmen and Hittites. Thereafter a great army of the Muski and their allies pressed southward with purpose to deal a shattering blow against the Assyrian power. The very existence of Assyria as a separate power was threatened by this movement. Tiglath-pileser, however, was equal to the occasion. He surprised the invaders among the Kashiari mountains and inflicted a crushing defeat, slaying about 14,000 and capturing 6000 prisoners, who were transported to Asshur. In fact, he wiped the invading army out of existence and possessed himself of all its baggage. Thereafter he captured several cities, and extended his empire beyond the Kashiari hills and into the heart of Mitanni.

His second campaign was also directed towards the Mitanni district, which had been invaded during his absence by a force of Hittites, about 4000 strong. The invaders submitted to him as soon as he drew near, and he added them to his standing army.

Subsequent operations towards the north restored the pre-eminence of Assyria in the Nairi country, on the shores of Lake Van, in Armenia, where Tiglath-pileser captured no fewer than twenty-three petty kings. These he liberated after they had taken the oath of allegiance and consented to pay annual tribute.

In his fourth year the conqueror learned that the Aramaeans were crossing the Euphrates and possessing

[p. 384]

themselves of Mitanni, which he had cleared of the Hittites. By a series of forced marches he caught them unawares, scattered them in confusion, and entered Carchemish, which he pillaged. Thereafter his army crossed the Euphrates in boats of skin, and plundered and destroyed six cities round the base of the mountain of Bishru.

While operating in this district, Tiglath-pileser engaged in big-game hunting. He recorded: "Ten powerful bull elephants in the land of Haran and on the banks of the Khabour I killed; four elephants alive I took. Their skins, their teeth, with the living elephants, I brought to my city of Asshur." [*1] He also claimed to have slain 920 lions, as well as a number of wild oxen, apparently including in his record the "bags" of his officers and men. A later king credited him with having penetrated to the Phoenician coast, where he put to sea and slew a sea monster called the "nakhiru". While at Arvad, the narrative continues, the King of Egypt, who is not named, sent him a hippopotamus (pagutu). This story, however, is of doubtful authenticity. About this time the prestige of Egypt was at so low an ebb that its messengers were subjected to indignities by the Phoenician kings.

The conquests of Tiglath-pileser once more raised the Mesopotamian question in Babylonia, whose sphere of influence in that region had been invaded. Marduk-nadin-akhe, the grandson of Nebuchadrezzar I, "arrayed his chariots" against Tiglath-pileser, and in the first conflict achieved some success, but subsequently he was defeated in the land of Akkad. The Assyrian army afterwards captured several cities, including Babylon and Sippar.

Thus once again the Assyrian Empire came into being

 

Click to enlarge
ASSYRIAN KING HUNTING LIONS
 Photo. Mansell.

 

[p. 385]

as the predominant world Power, extending from the land of the Hittites into the heart of Babylonia. Its cities were enriched by the immense quantities of booty captured by its warrior king, while the coffers of state were glutted with the tribute of subject States. Fortifications were renewed, temples were built, and great gifts were lavished on the priesthood. Artists and artisans were kept fully employed restoring the faded splendours of the Old Empire, and everywhere thousands of slaves laboured to make the neglected land prosperous as of old. Canals were repaired and reopened; the earthworks and quay wall of Ashur were strengthened, and its great wall was entirely rebuilt, faced with a rampart of earth, and protected once again by a deep moat. The royal palace was enlarged and redecorated.

Meanwhile Babylonia was wasted by civil war and invasions. It was entered more than once by the Aramaeans, who pillaged several cities in the north and the south. Then the throne was seized by Adad-aplu-iddina, the grandson of "a nobody", who reigned for about ten years. He was given recognition, however, by the Assyrian king, Ashur-bel-kala, son of Tiglath-pileser I, who married his daughter, and apparently restored to him Sippar and Babylon after receiving a handsome dowry. Ashur-bel-kala died without issue, and was succeeded by his brother, Shamshi-Adad.

An obscure period followed. In Babylonia there were two weak dynasties in less than half a century, and thereafter an Elamite Dynasty which lasted about six years. An Eighth Dynasty ensued, and lasted between fifty and sixty years. The records of its early kings are exceedingly meagre and their order uncertain. During the reign of Nabu-mukin-apli, who was perhaps the fourth monarch, the Aramaeans constantly raided the land and hovered

[p. 386]

about Babylon. The names of two or three kings who succeeded Nabu-mukin-apli are unknown.

A century and a half after Tiglath-pileser I conquered the north Syrian possessions of the Hittites, the Old Assyrian Empire reached the close of its second and last period. It had suffered gradual decline, under a series of inert and luxury-loving kings, until it was unable to withstand the gradual encroachment on every side of the restless hill tribes, who were ever ready to revolt when the authority of Ashur was not asserted at the point of the sword.

After 950 B.C. the Hittites of North Syria, having shaken off the last semblance of Assyrian authority, revived their power, and enjoyed a full century of independence and prosperity. In Cappadocia their kinsmen had freed themselves at an earlier period from the yoke of the Muski, who had suffered so severely at the hands of Tiglath-pileser I. The Hittite buildings and rock sculptures of this period testify to the enduring character of the ancient civilization of the "Hatti". Until the hieroglyphics can be read, however, we must wait patiently for the detailed story of the pre-Phrygian period, which was of great historical importance, because the tide of cultural influence was then flowing at its greatest volume from the old to the new world, where Greece was emerging in virgin splendour out of the ruins of the ancient Mykenaean and Cretan civilizations.

It is possible that the conquest of a considerable part of Palestine by the Philistines was not unconnected with the revival of Hittite power in the north. They may have moved southward as the allies of the Cilician State which was rising into prominence. For a period they were the overlords of the Hebrews, who had been displacing the older inhabitants of the "Promised Land",

[p. 387]

and appear to have been armed with weapons of iron. In fact, as is indicated by a passage in the Book of Samuel, they had made a "corner" in that metal and restricted its use among their vassals. "Now", the Biblical narrative sets forth, "there was no smith found throughout all the land of Israel; for the Philistines said, Lest the Hebrews make them swords and spears; but all the Israelites went down to the Philistines, to sharpen every man his share, and his coulter, and his axe, and his mattock". [*1] "We are inclined", says Professor Macalister, "to picture the West as a thing of yesterday, new fangled with its inventions and its progressive civilization, and the East as an embodiment of hoary and unchanging traditions. But when West first met East on the shores of the Holy Land, it was the former which represented the magnificent traditions of the past, and the latter which looked forward to the future. The Philistines were of the remnant of the dying glories of Crete; the Hebrews had no past to speak of, but were entering on the heritage they regarded as theirs, by right of a recently ratified divine covenant." [*2]

Saul was the leader of a revolt against the Philistines in northern Palestine, and became the ruler of the kingdom of Israel. Then David, having liberated Judah from the yoke of the Philistines, succeeded Saul as ruler of Israel, and selected Jerusalem as his capital. He also conquered Edom and Moab, but was unsuccessful in his attempt to subjugate Ammon. The Philistines were then confined to a restricted area on the seacoast, where they fused with the Semites and ultimately suffered loss of identity. Under the famous Solomon the united kingdom of the Hebrews reached its highest splendour and importance among the nations.

If the Philistines received the support of the Hittites,

[p. 388]

the Hebrews were strengthened by an alliance with Egypt. For a period of two and a half centuries no Egyptian army had crossed the Delta frontier into Syria. The ancient land of the Pharaohs had been overshadowed meantime by a cloud of anarchy, and piratical and robber bands settled freely on its coast line. At length a Libyan general named Sheshonk (Shishak) seized the throne from the Tanite Dynasty. He was the Pharaoh with whom Solomon "made affinity", [*1] and from whom he received the city of Gezer, which an Egyptian army had captured. [*2] Solomon had previously married a daughter of Sheshonk's.

Phoenicia was also flourishing. Freed from Egyptian, Hittite, and Assyrian interference, Tyre and Sidon attained to a high degree of power as independent city States. During the reigns of David and Solomon, Tyre was the predominant Phoenician power. Its kings, Abibaal and his son Hiram, had become "Kings of the Sidonians", and are believed to have extended their sway over part of Cyprus. The relations between the Hebrews and the Phoenicians were of a cordial character, indeed the two powers became allies.

And Hiram king of Tyre sent his servants unto Solomon; for he had heard that they had anointed him king in the room of his father: for Hiram was ever a lover of David. And Solomon sent to Hiram, saying, Thou knowest how that David my father could not build an house unto the name of the Lord his God for the wars which were about him on every side, until the Lord put them under the soles of his feet. But now the Lord my God hath given me rest on every side, so that there is neither adversary nor evil occurrent. And, behold, I purpose to build an house unto the name of the Lord my God, as the Lord spake unto David my father, saying, Thy son, whom I will set upon thy throne in thy room, he shall build an house unto my name. Now therefore command

 

Click to enlarge
TYRIAN GALLEY PUTTING OUT TO SEA
 Marble slab from Kouyunjik (Nineveh): now in the British Museum.
 Photo. Mansell

 

[p. 389]

thou that they hew me cedar trees out of Lebanon; and my servants shall be with thy servants: and unto thee will I give hire for thy servants according to all that thou shalt appoint: for thou knowest that there is not among us any that can skill to hew timber like unto the Sidonians.

And it came to pass, when Hiram heard the words of Solomon, that he rejoiced greatly, and said, Blessed be the Lord this day, which hath given unto David a wise son over this great people.

And Hiram sent to Solomon, saying, I have considered the things which thou sentest to me for: and I will do all thy desire concerning timber of cedar, and concerning timber of fir. My servants shall bring them down from Lebanon unto the sea: and I will convey them by sea in floats unto the place that thou shalt appoint me, and will cause them to be discharged there, and thou shalt receive them: and thou shalt accomplish my desire, in giving food for my household. So Hiram gave Solomon cedar trees and fir trees according to all his desire.

And Solomon gave Hiram twenty thousand measures of wheat for food to his household, and twenty measures of pure oil: thus gave Solomon to Hiram year by year. And the Lord gave Solomon wisdom, as he promised him: and there was peace between Hiram and Solomon; and they two made a league together. [*1]

Hiram also sent skilled workers to Jerusalem to assist in the work of building the temple and Solomon's palace, including his famous namesake, "a widow's son of the (Hebrew) tribe of Naphtali", who, like his father, "a man of Tyre", had "understanding and cunning to work all works in brass". [*2]

Solomon must have cultivated good relations with the Chaldaeans, for he had a fleet of trading ships on the Persian Gulf which was manned by Phoenician sailors. "Once in three years", the narrative runs, "came the navy of Tharshish, bringing gold, and silver, ivory, and apes, and peacocks." [*3] Apparently he traded with India, the land of peacocks, during the Brahmanical period, when

[p. 390]

the Sanskrit name "Samudra", which formerly signified the "collected waters" of the broadening Indus, was applied to the Indian Ocean. [*1]

The Aramaeans of the Third Semitic migration were not slow to take advantage of the weakness of Assyria and Babylon. They overran the whole of Syria, and entered into the possession of Mesopotamia, thus acquiring full control of the trade routes towards the west. From time to time they ravaged Babylonia from the north to the south. Large numbers of them acquired permanent settlement in that country, like the Amorites of the Second Semitic migration in the pre-Hammurabi Age.

In Syria the Aramaeans established several petty States, and were beginning to grow powerful at Damascus, an important trading centre, which assumed considerable political importance after the collapse of Assyria's Old Empire.

At this period, too, the Chaldaeans came into prominence in Babylonia. Their kingdom of Chaldaea (Kaldu, which signifies Sealand) embraces a wide stretch of the coast land at the head of the Persian Gulf between Arabia and Elam. As we have seen, an important dynasty flourished in this region in the time of Hammurabi. Although more than one king of Babylon recorded that he had extinguished the Sealand Power, it continued to exist all through the Kassite period. It is possible that this obscure kingdom embraced diverse ethnic elements, and that it was controlled in turn by military aristocracies of Sumerians, Elamites, Kassites, and Arabians. After the downfall of the Kassites it had become thoroughly Semitized, perhaps as a result of the Aramaean migration, which may have found one of its outlets around the head

[p. 391]

of the Persian Gulf. The ancient Sumerian city of Ur, which dominated a considerable area of steppe land to the west of the Euphrates, was included in the Sealand kingdom, and was consequently referred to in after-time as "Ur of the Chaldees".

When Solomon reigned over Judah and Israel, Babylonia was broken up into a number of petty States, as in early Sumerian times. The feudal revival of Nebuchadrezzar I had weakened the central power, with the result that the nominal high kings were less able to resist the inroads of invaders. Military aristocracies of Aramaeans, Elamites, and Chaldaeans held sway in various parts of the valley, and struggled for supremacy.

When Assyria began to assert itself again, it laid claim on Babylonia, ostensibly as the protector of its independence, and the Chaldaeans for a time made common cause with the Elamites against it. The future, however, lay with the Chaldaeans, who, like the Kassites, became the liberators of the ancient inhabitants. When Assyria was finally extinguished as a world power they revived the ancient glory of Babylonia, and supplanted the Sumerians as the scholars and teachers of Western Asia. The Chaldaeans became famous in Syria, and even in Greece, as "the wise men from the east", and were renowned as astrologers.

The prestige of the Hebrew kingdom suffered sharp and serious decline after Solomon's death. Pharaoh Sheshonk fostered the elements of revolt which ultimately separated Israel from Judah, and, when a favourable opportunity arose, invaded Palestine and Syria and re-established Egypt's suzerainty over part of the area which had been swayed by Rameses II, replenishing his exhausted treasury with rich booty and the tribute he imposed. Phoenicia was able, however, to maintain its

[p. 392]

independence, but before the Assyrians moved westward again, Sidon had shaken off the yoke of Tyre and become an independent State.

It will be seen from the events outlined in this chapter how greatly the history of the ancient world was affected by the periodic migrations of pastoral folks from the steppe lands. These human tides were irresistible. The direction of their flow might be diverted for a time, but they ultimately overcame every obstacle by sheer persistency and overpowering volume. Great emperors in Assyria and Egypt endeavoured to protect their countries from the "Bedouin peril" by strengthening their frontiers and extending their spheres of influence, but the dammed-up floods of humanity only gathered strength in the interval for the struggle which might be postponed but could not be averted.

These migrations, as has been indicated, were due to natural causes. They were propelled by climatic changes which caused a shortage of the food supply, and by the rapid increase of population under peaceful conditions. Once a migration began to flow, it set in motion many currents and cross currents, but all these converged towards the districts which offered the most attractions to mankind. Prosperous and well-governed States were ever in peril of invasion by barbarous peoples. The fruits of civilization tempted them; the reward of conquest was quickly obtained in Babylon and Egypt with their flourishing farms and prosperous cities. Waste land was reclaimed then as now by colonists from centres of civilization; the migrating pastoral folks lacked the initiative and experience necessary to establish new communities in undeveloped districts. Highly civilized men sowed the harvest and the barbarians reaped it.

It must not be concluded, however, that the migrations

[p. 393]

were historical disasters, or that they retarded the general advancement of the human race. In time the barbarians became civilized and fused with the peoples whom they conquered. They introduced, too, into communities which had grown stagnant and weakly, a fresh and invigorating atmosphere that acted as a stimulant in every sphere of human activity. The Kassite, for instance, was a unifying and therefore a strengthening influence in Babylonia. He shook off the manacles of the past which bound the Sumerian and the Akkadian alike to traditional lines of policy based on unforgotten ancient rivalries. His concern was chiefly with the future. The nomads with their experience of desert wandering promoted trade, and the revival of trade inaugurated new eras of prosperity in ancient centres of culture, and brought them into closer touch than ever before with one another. The rise of Greece was due to the blending of the Achaeans and other pastoral fighting folks with the indigenous Pelasgians. Into the early States which fostered the elements of ancient Mykenaean civilization, poured the cultural influences of the East through Asia Minor and Phoenicia and from the Egyptian coast. The conquerors from the steppes meanwhile contributed their genius for organization, their simple and frugal habits of life, and their sterling virtues; they left a deep impress on the moral, physical, and intellectual life of Greece.

Footnotes

^377:1 Article "Celts" in Encyclopaedia Britannica, eleventh ed.

^377:2 The Wanderings of Peoples, p.41.

^378:1 Crete, the Forerunner of Greece, p. 146.

^378:2 Pr. Moosh'kee.

^379:1 "Have I not brought up Israel out of the land of Egypt and the Philistines from Caphtor (Crete)?" Amos, viii, 7.

^380:1 A History of Civilization in Palestine, p. 58.

^384:1 Pinches' translation.

^387:1 Samuel, xiii, 19.

^387:2 A History of Civilisation in Palestine, p. 54.

^388:1 1 Kings, iii, i.

^388:2 Ibid., ix, 16.

^389:1 1 Kings, v, 1-12.

^389:2 Ibid., vii, 14 et seq.

^389:3 Ibid., x, 22-3.

^390:1 Indian Myth and Legend, pp. 83-4.

     
Myths of Babylonia and Assyria, by Donald A. MacKenzie, [1915], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 394] [ch-17]

  

CHAPTER XVII

  

The Hebrews in Assyrian History

Revival of Assyrian Power--The Syro-Cappadocian Hittites--The Aramaean State of Damascus--Reign of Terror in Mesopotamia--Barbarities of Ashur-natsir-pal III--Babylonia and Chaldaea subdued--Glimpse of the Kalkhi Valley--The Hebrew Kingdoms of Judah and Israel--Rival Monarchs and their Wars--How Judah became subject to Damascus--Ahab and the Phoenician Jezebel--Persecution of Elijah and other Prophets--Israelites fight against Assyrians--Shalmaneser as Overlord of Babylonia--Revolts of Jehu in Israel and Hazael in Damascus--Shalmaneser defeats Hazael--Jehu sends Tribute to Shalmaneser--Baal Worship Supplanted by Golden Calf Worship in Israel--Queen Athaliah of Judah--Crowning of the Boy King Joash--Damascus supreme in Syria and Palestine--Civil War in Assyria--Triumphs of Shamshi-Adad VII--Babylonia becomes an Assyrian Province.

IN one of the Scottish versions of the Seven Sleepers legend a shepherd enters a cave, in which the great heroes of other days lie wrapped in magic slumber, and blows two blasts on the horn which hangs suspended from the roof. The sleepers open their eyes and raise themselves on their elbows. Then the shepherd hears a warning voice which comes and goes like the wind, saying: "If the horn is blown once again, the world will be upset altogether". Terrified by the Voice and the ferocious appearance of the heroes, the shepherd retreats hurriedly, locking the door behind him; he casts the key into the sea. The story proceeds: "If anyone should find the key and open the door, and blow but a single blast on the horn, Finn and all the Feans would come forth. And that would be a great day in Alban." [*1]

[p. 395]

After the lapse of an obscure century the national heroes of Assyria were awakened as if from sleep by the repeated blasts from the horn of the triumphant thunder god amidst the northern and western mountains--Adad or Rimmon of Syria, Teshup of Armenia, Tarku of the western Hittites. The great kings who came forth to "upset the world" bore the familiar names, Ashur-natsir-pal, Shalmaneser, Shamash-Adad, Ashur-dan, Adad-nirari, and Ashur-nirari. They revived and increased the ancient glory of Assyria during its Middle Empire period.

The Syro-Cappadocian Hittites had grown once again powerful and prosperous, but no great leader like Subbi-luliuma arose to weld the various States into an Empire, so as to ensure the protection of the mingled peoples from the operations of the aggressive and ambitious war-lords of Assyria. One kingdom had its capital at Hamath and another at Carchemish on the Euphrates. The kingdom of Tabal flourished in Cilicia (Khilakku); it included several city States like Tarsus, Tiana, and Comana (Kammanu). Farther west was the dominion of the Thraco-Phrygian Muski. The tribes round the shores of Lake Van had asserted themselves and extended their sphere of influence. The State of Urartu was of growing importance, and the Nairi tribes had spread round the south-eastern shores of Lake Van. The northern frontier of Assyria was continually menaced by groups of independent hill States which would have been irresistible had they operated together against a common enemy, but were liable to be extinguished when attacked in detail.

A number of Aramaean kingdoms had come into existence in Mesopotamia and throughout Syria. The most influential of these was the State of Damascus, the king of which was the overlord of the Hebrew

[p. 396]

kingdoms of Israel and Judah when Ashur-natsir-pal III ascended the Assyrian throne about 885 B.C. Groups of the Aramaeans had acquired a high degree of culture and become traders and artisans. Large numbers had filtered, as well, not only into Babylonia but also Assyria and the north Syrian area of Hittite control. Accustomed for generations to desert warfare, they were fearless warriors. Their armies had great mobility, being composed mostly of mounted infantry, and were not easily overpowered by the Assyrian forces of footmen and charioteers. Indeed, it was not until cavalry was included in the standing army of Assyria that operations against the Aramaeans were attended with permanent success.

Ashur-natsir-pal III [*1] was preceded by two vigorous Assyrian rulers, Adad-nirari III (911-890 B.C.) and Tukulti-Ninip II (890-885 B.C.). The former had raided North Syria and apparently penetrated as far as the Mediterranean coast. In consequence he came into conflict with Babylonia, but he ultimately formed an alliance with that kingdom. His son, Tukulti-Ninip, operated in southern Mesopotamia, and apparently captured Sippar. In the north he had to drive back invading bands of the Muski. Although, like his father, he carried out great works at Asshur, he appears to have transferred his Court to Nineveh, a sure indication that Assyria was once again becoming powerful in northern Mesopotamia and the regions towards Armenia.

Ashur-natsir-pal III, son of Tukulti-Ninip II, inaugurated a veritable reign of terror in Mesopotamia and northern Syria. His methods of dealing with revolting tribes were of a most savage character. Chiefs were skinned alive, and when he sacked their cities, not only fighting-men but women and children were either

 

Click to enlarge
STATUE OF ASHUR-NATSIR-PAL, WITH INSCRIPTIONS
 From S.W. Palace of Nimroud: now in British Museum.
 Photo. Mansell

 

[p. 397]

slaughtered or burned at the stake. It is not surprising to find therefore that, on more than one occasion, the kings of petty States made submission to him without resistance as soon as he invaded their domains.

In his first year he overran the mountainous district between Lake Van and the upper sources of the Tigris. Bubu, the rebel son of the governor of Nishtun, who had been taken prisoner, was transported to Arbela, where he was skinned alive. Like his father, Ashur-natsir-pal fought against the Muski, whose power was declining. Then he turned southward from the borders of Asia Minor and dealt with a rebellion in northern Mesopotamia.

An Aramaean pretender named Akhiababa had established himself at Suru in the region to the east of the Euphrates, enclosed by its tributaries the Khabar and the Balikh. He had come from the neighbouring Aramaean State of Bit-Adini, and was preparing, it would appear, to form a powerful confederacy against the Assyrians.

When Ashur-natsir-pal approached Suru, a part of its population welcomed him. He entered the city, seized the pretender and many of his followers. These he disposed of with characteristic barbarity. Some were skinned alive and some impaled on stakes, while others were enclosed in a pillar which the king had erected to remind the Aramaeans of his determination to brook no opposition. Akhiababa the pretender was sent to Nineveh with a few supporters; and when they had been flayed their skins were nailed upon the city walls.

Another revolt broke out in the Kirkhi district between the upper reaches of the Tigris and the south-western shores of Lake Van. It was promoted by the Nairi tribes, and even supported by some Assyrian officials. Terrible reprisals were meted out to the rebels.

[p. 398]

[paragraph continues] When the city of Kinabu was captured, no fewer than 3000 prisoners were burned alive, the unfaithful governor being flayed. The city of Damdamusa was set on fire. Then Tela was attacked. Ashur-natsir-pal's own account of the operations runs as follows:--

The city (of Tello) was very strong; three walls surrounded it. The inhabitants trusted to their strong walls and numerous soldiers; they did not come down or embrace my feet. With battle and slaughter I assaulted and took the city. Three thousand warriors I slew in battle. Their booty and possessions, cattle, sheep, I carried away; many captives I burned with fire. Many of their soldiers I took alive; of some I cut off hands and limbs; of others the noses, ears, and arms; of many soldiers I put out the eyes. I reared a column of the living and a column of heads. I hung on high their heads on trees in the vicinity of their city. Their boys and girls I burned up in flames. I devastated the city, dug it up, in fire burned it; I annihilated it. [*1]

The Assyrian war-lord afterwards forced several Nairi kings to acknowledge him as their overlord. He was so greatly feared by the Syro-Cappadocian Hittites that when he approached their territory they sent him tribute, yielding without a struggle.

For several years the great conqueror engaged himself in thus subduing rebellious tribes and extending his territory. His military headquarters were at Kalkhi, to which city the Court had been transferred. Thither he drafted thousands of prisoners, the great majority of whom he incorporated in the Assyrian army. Assyrian colonies were established in various districts for strategical purposes, and officials supplanted the petty kings in certain of the northern city States.

The Aramaeans of Mesopotamia gave much trouble to Ashur-natsir-pal. Although he had laid a heavy hand

[p. 399]

on Suru, the southern tribes, the Sukhi, stirred up revolts in Mesopotamia as the allies of the Babylonians. On one occasion Ashur-natsir-pal swept southward through this region, and attacked a combined force of Sukhi Aramaeans and Babylonians. The Babylonians were commanded by Zabdanu, brother of Nabu-aplu-iddin, king of Babylonia, who was evidently anxious to regain control of the western trade route. The Assyrian war-lord, however, proved to be too powerful a rival. He achieved so complete a victory that he captured the Babylonian general and 3000 of his followers. The people of Kashshi (Babylonia) and Kaldu (Chaldaea) were "stricken with terror", and had to agree to pay increased tribute.

Ashur-natsir-pal reigned for about a quarter of a century, but his wars occupied less than half of that period. Having accumulated great booty, he engaged himself; as soon as peace was secured throughout his empire, in rebuilding the city of Kalkhi, where he erected a great palace and made records of his achievements. He also extended and redecorated the royal palace at Nineveh, and devoted much attention to the temples.

Tribute poured in from the subject States. The mountain and valley tribes in the north furnished in abundance wine and corn, sheep and cattle and horses, and from the Aramaeans of Mesopotamia and the Syro-Cappadocian Hittites came much silver and gold, copper and lead, jewels and ivory, as well as richly decorated furniture, armour and weapons. Artists and artisans were also provided by the vassals of Assyria. There are traces of Phoenician influence in the art of this period.

Ashur-natsir-pal's great palace at Kalkhi was excavated by Layard, who has given a vivid description of the verdant plain on which the ancient city was situated, as it appeared in spring. "Its pasture lands, known as the 'Jaif', are

[p. 400]

renowned", he wrote, "for their rich and luxuriant herbage. In times of quiet, the studs of the Pasha and of the Turkish authorities, with the horses of the cavalry and of the inhabitants of Mosul, are sent here to graze. . . . Flowers of every hue enamelled the meadows; not thinly scattered over the grass as in northern climes, but in such thick and gathering clusters that the whole plain seemed a patchwork of many colours. The dogs, as they returned from hunting, issued from the long grass dyed red, yellow, or blue, according to the flowers through which they had last forced their way. . . . In the evening, after the labour of the day, I often sat at the door of my tent, giving myself up to the full enjoyment of that calm and repose which are imparted to the senses by such scenes as these. . . . As the sun went down behind the low hills which separate the river from the desert--even their rocky sides had struggled to emulate the verdant clothing of the plain--its receding rays were gradually withdrawn, like a transparent veil of light from the landscape. Over the pure cloudless sky was the glow of the last light. In the distance and beyond the Zab, Keshaf, another venerable ruin, rose indistinctly into the evening mist. Still more distant, and still more indistinct, was a solitary hill overlooking the ancient city of Arbela. The Kurdish mountains, whose snowy summits cherished the dying sunbeams, yet struggled with the twilight. The bleating of sheep and lowing of cattle, at first faint, became louder as the flocks returned from their pastures and wandered amongst the tents. Girls hurried over the greensward to seek their fathers' cattle, or crouched down to milk those which had returned alone to their well-remembered folds. Some were coming from the river bearing the replenished pitcher on their heads or shoulders; others, no less graceful in their form, and erect in their

[p. 401]

carriage, were carrying the heavy loads of long grass which they had cut in the meadows." [*1]

Across the meadows so beautiful in March the great armies of Ashur-natsir-pal returned with the booty of great campaigns--horses and cattle and sheep, bales of embroidered cloth, ivory and jewels, silver and gold, the products of many countries; while thousands of prisoners were assembled there to rear stately buildings which ultimately fell into decay and were buried by drifting sands.

Layard excavated the emperor's palace and dispatched to London, among other treasures of antiquity, the sublime winged human-headed lions which guarded the entrance, and many bas reliefs.

The Assyrian sculptures of this period lack the technical skill, the delicacy and imagination of Sumerian and Akkadian art, but they are full of energy, dignified and massive, and strong and lifelike. They reflect the spirit of Assyria's greatness, which, however, had a materialistic basis. Assyrian art found expression in delineating the outward form rather than in striving to create a "thing of beauty" which is "a joy for ever".

When Ashur-natsir-pal died, he was succeeded by his son Shalmaneser III (860-825 B.C.), whose military activities extended over his whole reign. No fewer than thirty-two expeditions were recorded on his famous black obelisk.

As Shalmaneser was the first Assyrian king who came into direct touch with the Hebrews, it will be of interest here to review the history of the divided kingdoms of Israel and Judah, as recorded in the Bible, because of the light it throws on international politics and the situation which confronted Shalmaneser in Mesopotamia and Syria in the early part of his reign.

After Solomon died, the kingdom of his son Rehoboam

[p. 402]

was restricted to Judah, Benjamin, Moab, and Edom. The "ten tribes" of Israel had revolted and were ruled over by Jeroboam, whose capital was at Tirzah. [*1] "There were wars between Rehoboam and Jeroboam continually." [*2]

The religious organization which had united the Hebrews under David and Solomon was thus broken up. Jeroboam established the religion of the Canaanites and made "gods and molten images". He was condemned for his idolatry by the prophet Ahijah, who declared, "The Lord shall smite Israel, as a reed is shaken in the water; and he shall root up Israel out of this good land, which he gave to their fathers, and shall scatter them beyond the river, because they have made their groves, provoking the Lord to anger. And he shall give Israel up because of the sins of Jeroboam, who did sin, and who made Israel to sin." [*3]

In Judah Rehoboam similarly "did evil in the sight of the Lord"; his subjects "also built them high places and images and groves, on every high hill, and under every green tree". [*4] After the raid of the Egyptian Pharaoh Shishak (Sheshonk) Rehoboam repented, however. "And when he humbled himself, the wrath of the Lord turned from him, that he would not destroy him altogether: and also in Judah things went well." [*5]

Rehoboam was succeeded by his son Abijah, who shattered the power of Jeroboam, defeating that monarch in battle after he was surrounded as Rameses II had been by the Hittite army. "The children of Israel fled before Judah: and God delivered them into their hand. And Abijah and his people slew them with a great slaughter: so there fell down slain in Israel five hundred thousand

[p. 403]

chosen men. Thus the children of Israel were brought under at that time, and the children of Judah prevailed, because they relied upon the Lord God of their fathers. And Abijah pursued after Jeroboam, and took cities from him, Bethel with the towns thereof, and Jeshanah with the towns thereof, and Ephraim with the towns thereof. Neither did Jeroboam recover strength again in the days of Abijah, and the Lord struck him and he died." [*1]

Ere Jeroboam died, however, "Abijah slept with his fathers, and they buried him in the city of David: and Asa his son reigned in his stead. In his days the land was quiet ten years. And Asa did that which was good and right in the eyes of the Lord his God. For he took away the altars of the strange gods, and the high places, and brake down the images, and cut down the groves. And commanded Judah to seek the Lord God of their fathers and to do the law and the commandment. Also he took away out of all the cities of Judah the high places and the images: and the kingdom was quiet before him. And he built fenced cities in Judah: for the land had rest, and he had no war in those years; because the Lord had given him rest." [*2]

Jeroboam died in the second year of Asa's reign, and was succeeded by his son Nadab, who "did evil in the sight of the Lord, and walked in the way of his father, and in his sin wherewith he made Israel to sin". [*3] Nadab waged war against the Philistines, and was besieging Gibbethon when Baasha revolted and slew him. Thus ended the First Dynasty of the Kingdom of Israel.

Baasha was declared king, and proceeded to operate against Judah. Having successfully waged war against Asa, he proceeded to fortify Ramah, a few miles to the

[p. 404]

north of Jerusalem, "that he might not suffer any to go out or come in to Asa king of Judah". [*1]

Now Israel was at this time one of the allies of the powerful Aramaean State of Damascus, which had resisted the advance of the Assyrian armies during the reign of Ashur-natsir-pal I, and apparently supported the rebellions of the northern Mesopotamian kings. Judah was nominally subject to Egypt, which, however, was weakened by internal troubles, and therefore unable either to assert its authority in Judah or help its king to resist the advance of the Israelites.

In the hour of peril Judah sought the aid of the king of Damascus. "Asa took all the silver and the gold that were left in the treasures of the house of the Lord, and the treasures of the king's house, and delivered them into the hand of his servants: and King Asa sent them to Ben-hadad, the son of Tabrimon, the son of Hezion, king of Syria, that dwelt at Damascus, saying, There is a league between me and thee, and between my father and thy father: behold, I have sent unto thee a present of silver and gold: come and break thy league with Baasha king of Israel, that he may depart from me". [*2]

Ben-hadad accepted the invitation readily. He waged war against Israel, and Baasha was compelled to abandon the building of the fortifications at Ramah. "Then king Asa made a proclamation throughout all Judah; none was exempted: and they took away the stones of Ramah, and the timber thereof, wherewith Baasha had builded; and king Asa built with them Geba of Benjamin, and Mizpah." [*3]

Judah and Israel thus became subject to Damascus, and had to recognize the king of that city as arbiter in all their disputes.

After reigning about twenty-four years, Baasha of

[p. 405]

[paragraph continues] Israel died in 886 B.C. and was succeeded by his son Elah, who came to the throne "in the twenty and sixth year of Asa". He had ruled a little over a year when he was murdered by "his servant Zimri, captain of half his chariots", while he was "drinking himself drunk in the house of Arza steward of his house in Tirzah". [*1] Thus ended the Second Dynasty of the Kingdom of Israel.

Zimri's revolt was shortlived. He reigned only "seven days in Tirzah". The army was "encamped against Gibbethon, which belonged to the Philistines. And the people that were encamped heard say, Zimri hath conspired and hath also slain the king; wherefore all Israel made Omri, the captain of the host, king over Israel that day in the camp. And Omri went up from Gibbethon and all Israel with him, and they besieged Tirzah. And it came to pass when Zimri saw that the city was taken, that he went into the palace of the king's house, and burnt the king's house over him with fire, and died." [*2]

Omri's claim to the throne was disputed by a rival named Tibni. "But the people that followed Omri prevailed against the people that followed Tibni, son of Ginath: so Tibni died, and Omri reigned." [*3]

Omri was the builder of Samaria, whither his Court was transferred from Tirzah towards the close of his six years reign. He was followed by his son Ahab, who ascended the throne "in the thirty and eighth year of Asa king of Judah . . . And Ahab . . . did evil in the sight of the Lord above all that were before him." So notorious indeed were father and son that the prophet Micah declared to the backsliders of his day, "For the statutes of Omri are kept, and all the works of the house of Ahab, and ye walk in their counsel; that I should

[p. 406]

make thee a desolation, and the inhabitants thereof an hissing: therefore ye shall bear the reproach of my people". [*1]

Ahab was evidently an ally of Sidon as well as a vassal of Damascus, for he married the notorious princess Jezebel, the daughter of the king of that city State. He also became a worshipper of the Phoenician god Baal, to whom a temple had been erected in Samaria. "And Ahab made a grove; and Ahab did more to provoke the Lord God of Israel to anger than all the kings of Israel that were before him." [*2] Obadiah, who "feared the Lord greatly", was the governor of Ahab's house, but the outspoken prophet Elijah, whose arch enemy was the notorious Queen Jezebel, was an outcast like the hundred prophets concealed by Obadiah in two mountain caves. [*3]

Ahab became so powerful a king that Ben-hadad II of Damascus picked a quarrel with him, and marched against Samaria. It was on this occasion that Ahab sent the famous message to Ben-hadad: "Let not him that girdeth on his harness (armour) boast himself as he that putteth it off". The Israelites issued forth from Samaria and scattered the attacking force. "And Israel pursued them: and Ben-hadad the king of Syria escaped on a horse with the horseman. And the king of Israel went out, and smote the horses and chariots, and slew the Syrians with a great slaughter." Ben-hadad was made to believe afterwards by his counsellors that he owed his defeat to the fact that the gods of Israel were "gods of the hills; therefore they are stronger than we". They added: "Let us fight against them in the plain, and surely we shall be stronger than they". In the following year Ben-hadad fought against the Israelites

[p. 407]

at Aphek, but was again defeated. He then found it necessary to make "a covenant" with Ahab. [*1]

In 854 B.C. Shalmaneser III of Assyria was engaged in military operations against the Aramaean Syrians. Two years previously he had broken the power of Akhuni, king of Bit-Adini in northern Mesopotamia, the leader of a strong confederacy of petty States. Thereafter the Assyrian monarch turned towards the south-west and attacked the Hittite State of Hamath and the Aramaean State of Damascus. The various rival kingdoms of Syria united against him, and an army of 70,000 allies attempted to thwart his progress at Qarqar on the Orontes. Although Shalmaneser claimed a victory on this occasion, it was of no great advantage to him, for he was unable to follow it up. Among the Syrian allies were Bir-idri (Ben-hadad II) of Damascus, and Ahab of Israel ("Akhabbu of the land of the Sir'ilites"). The latter had a force of 10,000 men under his command.

Four years after Ahab began to reign, Asa died at Jerusalem and his son Jehoshaphat was proclaimed king of Judah. "And he walked in all the ways of Asa his father; he turned not aside from it, doing that which was right in the eyes of the Lord: nevertheless the high places were not taken away; for the people offered and burnt incense yet in the high places." [*2]

There is no record of any wars between Israel and Judah during this period, but it is evident that the two kingdoms had been drawn together and that Israel was the predominating power. Jehoshaphat "joined affinity with Ahab", and some years afterwards visited Samaria, where he was hospitably entertained. [*3] The two monarchs plotted together. Apparently Israel and Judah desired

[p. 408]

to throw off the yoke of Damascus, which was being kept constantly on the defence by Assyria. It is recorded in the Bible that they joined forces and set out on an expedition to attack Ramoth in Gilead, which Israel claimed, and take it "out of the hand of the king of Syria". [*1] In the battle which ensued (in 853 B.C.) Ahab was mortally wounded, "and about the time of the sun going down he died". He was succeeded by his son Ahaziah, who acknowledged the suzerainty of Damascus. After a reign of two years Ahaziah was succeeded by Joram.

Jehoshaphat did not again come into conflict with Damascus. He devoted himself to the development of his kingdom, and attempted to revive the sea trade on the Persian gulf which had flourished under Solomon. "He made ships of Tharshish to go to Ophir for gold; but they went not; for the ships were broken (wrecked) at Ezion-geber." Ahaziah offered him sailors--probably Phoenicians--but they were refused. [*2] Apparently Jehoshaphat had close trading relations with the Chaldaeans, who were encroaching on the territory of the king of Babylon, and menacing the power of that monarch. Jehoram succeeded Jehoshaphat and reigned eight years.

After repulsing the Syrian allies at Qarqar on the Orontes in 854 B.C., Shalmaneser III of Assyria found it necessary to invade Babylonia. Soon after he came to the throne he had formed an alliance with Nabu-aplu-iddin of that kingdom, and was thus able to operate in the north-west without fear of complications with the rival claimant of Mesopotamia. When Nabu-aplu-iddin died, his two sons Marduk-zakir-shum and Marduk-bel-usate were rivals for the throne. The former, the rightful heir, appealed for help to Shalmaneser, and that

[p. 409]

monarch at once hastened to assert his authority in the southern kingdom. In 851 B.C. Marduk-bel-usate, who was supported by an Aramaean army, was defeated and put to death.

Marduk-zakir-shum afterwards reigned over Babylonia as the vassal of Assyria, and Shalmaneser, his over-lord, made offerings to the gods at Babylon, Borsippa, and Cuthah. The Chaldaeans were afterwards subdued, and compelled to pay annual tribute.

In the following year Shalmaneser had to lead an expedition into northern Mesopotamia and suppress a fresh revolt in that troubled region. But the western allies soon gathered strength again, and in 846 B.C. he found it necessary to return with a great army, but was not successful in achieving any permanent success, although he put his enemies to flight. The various western kingdoms, including Damascus, Israel, and Tyre and Sidon, remained unconquered, and continued to conspire against him.

The resisting power of the Syrian allies, however, was being greatly weakened by internal revolts, which may have been stirred up by Assyrian emissaries. Edom threw off the yoke of Judah and became independent. Jehoram, who had married Athaliah, a royal princess of Israel, was dead. His son Ahaziah, who succeeded him, joined forces with his cousin and overlord, King Joram of Israel, to assist him in capturing Ramoth-gilead from the king of Damascus. Joram took possession of the city, but was wounded, and returned to Jezreel to be healed. [*1] He was the last king of the Omri Dynasty of Israel. The prophet Elisha sent a messenger to Jehu, a military leader, who was at Ramoth-gilead, with a box of oil and the ominous message, "Thus saith the Lord,

[p. 410]

[paragraph continues] I have anointed thee king over Israel. And thou shalt smite the house of Ahab thy master, that I may avenge the blood of my servants the prophets, and the blood of all the servants of the Lord, at the hand of Jezebel . . . And the dogs shall eat Jezebel in the portion of Jezreel, and there shall be none to bury her."

Jehu "conspired against Joram", and then, accompanied by an escort, "rode in a chariot and went to Jezreel", so that he might be the first to announce the revolt to the king whom he was to depose.

The watchman on the tower of Jezreel saw Jehu and his company approaching and informed Joram, who twice sent out a messenger to enquire, "Is it peace?" Neither messenger returned, and the watchman informed the wounded monarch of Israel, "He came even unto them, and cometh not again; and the driving is like the driving of Jehu the son of Nimshi; for he driveth furiously".

King Joram went out himself to meet the famous charioteer, but turned to flee when he discovered that he came as an enemy. Then Jehu drew his bow and shot Joram through the heart. Ahaziah endeavoured to conceal himself in Samaria, but was slain also. Jezebel was thrown down from a window of the royal harem and trodden under foot by the horsemen of Jehu; her body was devoured by dogs. [*1]

The Syrian king against whom Joram fought at Ramoth-gilead was Hazael. He had murdered Ben-hadad II as he lay on a bed of sickness by smothering him with a thick cloth soaked in water. Then he had himself proclaimed the ruler of the Aramaean State of Damascus. The prophet Elisha had previously wept before him, saying, cc I know the evil that thou wilt do

 

Click to enlarge
DETAILS FROM SECOND SIDE OF BLACK OBELISK OF SHALMANESER III
 (1) Tribute bearers of Jehu, King of Israel. (2) Tributary Animals. (3) Tribute bearers with shawls and bags
 (British Museum)

 

[p. 411]

unto the children of Israel; their strongholds wilt thou set on fire, and their young men wilt thou slay with the sword, and wilt dash their children and rip up their women with child". [*1]

The time seemed ripe for Assyrian conquest. In 843 B.C. Shalmaneser III crossed the Euphrates into Syria for the sixteenth time. His first objective was Aleppo, where he was welcomed. He made offerings there to Hadad, the local Thor, and then suddenly marched southward. Hazael went out to oppose the advancing Assyrians, and came into conflict with them in the vicinity of Mount Hermon. "I fought with him", Shalmaneser recorded, "and accomplished his defeat; I slew with the sword 1600 of his warriors and captured 1121 chariots and 470 horses. He fled to save his life."

Hazael took refuge within the walls of Damascus, which the Assyrians besieged, but failed, however, to capture. Shalmaneser's soldiers meanwhile wasted and burned cities without number, and carried away great booty. "In those days", Shalmaneser recorded, "I received tribute from the Tyrians and Sidonians and from Yaua (Jehu) son (successor) of Khumri (Omri)." The following is a translation from a bas relief by Professor Pinches of a passage detailing Jehu's tribute:

The tribute of Yaua, son of Khumri: silver, gold, a golden cup, golden vases, golden vessels, golden buckets, lead, a staff for the hand of the king (and) sceptres, I received. [*2]

The scholarly translator adds, "It is noteworthy that the Assyrian form of the name, Yaua, shows that the unpronounced aleph at the end was at that time sounded,

[p. 412]

so that the Hebrews must have called him Yahua (Jehua)".

Shalmaneser did not again attack Damascus. His sphere of influence was therefore confined to North Syria. He found it more profitable, indeed, to extend his territories into Asia Minor. For several years he engaged himself in securing control of the north-western caravan road, and did not rest until he had subdued Cilicia and overrun the Hittite kingdoms of Tabal and Malatia.

Hazael of Damascus avenged himself meanwhile on his unfaithful allies who had so readily acknowledged the shadowy suzerainty of Assyria. "In those days the Lord began to cut Israel short: and Hazael smote them in all the coasts of Israel; from Jordan eastward, all the land of Gilead, the Gadites, and the Reubenites, and the Manassites, from Aroer, which is by the river Arnon, even Gilead and Bashan." [*1] Israel thus came completely under the sway of Damascus.

Jehu appears to have cherished the ambition of uniting Israel and Judah under one crown. His revolt received the support of the orthodox Hebrews, and he began well by inaugurating reforms in the northern kingdom with purpose apparently to re-establish the worship of David's God. He persecuted the prophets of Baal, but soon became a backslider, for although he stamped out the Phoenician religion he began to worship "the golden calves that were in Bethel and that were in Dan. . . . He departed not from the sins of Jeroboam, which made Israel to sin." [*2] Apparently he found it necessary to secure the support of the idolators of the ancient cult of the "Queen of Heaven".

The crown of Judah had been seized by the Israelitish

[p. 413]

[paragraph continues] Queen mother Athaliah after the death of her son Ahaziah at the hands of Jehu. [*1] She endeavoured to destroy "all the seed royal of the house of Judah". But another woman thwarted the completion of her monstrous design. This was Jehoshabeath, sister of Ahaziah and wife of the priest Jehoiada, who concealed the young prince Joash "and put him and his nurse in a bed-chamber", in "the house of God". There Joash was strictly guarded for six years. [*2]

In time Jehoiada stirred up a revolt against the Baal-worshipping queen of Judah. Having secured the support of the captains of the royal guard and a portion of the army, he brought out from the temple the seven years old prince Joash, "the king's son, and put upon him the crown, and gave him the testimony, and made him king. And Jehoiada and his sons anointed him, and said, God save the king.

"Now when Athaliah heard the noise of the people running and praising the king, she came to the people into the house of the Lord: and she looked, and, behold the king stood at his pillar at the entering in, and the princes and the trumpets by the king: and all the people of the land rejoiced, and sounded with trumpets, also the singers with instruments of musick, and such as taught to sing praise. Then Athaliah rent her clothes, and said, Treason, Treason.

"Then Jehoiada the priest brought out the captains of hundreds that were set over the host, and said unto them, Have her forth of the ranges: and whoso followeth her, let him be slain by the sword. For the priest said, Slay her not in the house of the Lord. So they laid hands on her; and when she was come to the entering of the horse gate by the king's house, they slew her there.

[p. 414]

"And Jehoiada made a covenant between him, and between all the people, and between the king, that they should be the Lord's people. Then all the people went to the house of Baal, and brake it down, and brake his altars and his images in pieces, and slew Mattan the priest of Baal before the altars." [*1]

When Jehu of Israel died, he was succeeded by Jehoahaz. "The Lord was kindled against Israel, and he delivered them into the hand of Ben-hadad the son of Hazael all their days." Then Jehoahaz repented. He "besought the Lord, and the Lord hearkened unto him: for he saw the oppression of Israel, because the king of Syria oppressed them. And the Lord gave Israel a saviour, so that they went out from under the hands of the Syrians." [*2] The "saviour", as will be shown, was Assyria. Not only Israel, but Judah, under King Joash, Edom, the Philistines and the Ammonites were compelled to acknowledge the suzerainty of Damascus.

Shalmaneser III swayed an extensive and powerful empire, and kept his generals continually employed suppressing revolts on his frontiers. After he subdued the Hittites, Kati, king of Tabal, sent him his daughter, who was received into the royal harem. Tribes of the Medes came under his power: the Nairi and Urartian tribes continued battling with his soldiers on his northern borders like the frontier tribes of India against the British troops. The kingdom of Urartu was growing more and more powerful.

In 829 B.C. the great empire was suddenly shaken to its foundations by the outbreak of civil war. The party of rebellion was led by Shalmaneser's son Ashur-danin-apli, who evidently desired to supplant the crown prince Shamshi-Adad. He was a popular hero and received

[p. 415]

the support of most of the important Assyrian cities, including Nineveh, Asshur, Arbela, Imgurbel, and Durbalat, as well as some of the dependencies. Shalmaneser retained Kalkhi and the provinces of northern Mesopotamia, and it appears that the greater part of the army also remained loyal to him.

After four years of civil war Shalmaneser died. His chosen heir, Shamshi-Adad VII, had to continue the struggle for the throne for two more years.

When at length the new king had stamped out the last embers of revolt within the kingdom, he had to undertake the reconquest of those provinces which in the interval had thrown off their allegiance to Assyria. Urartu in the north had grown more aggressive, the Syrians were openly defiant, the Medes were conducting bold raids, and the Babylonians were plotting with the Chaldaeans, Elamites, and Aramaeans to oppose the new ruler. Shamshi-Adad, however, proved to be as great a general as his father. He subdued the Medes and the Nairi tribes, burned many cities and collected enormous tribute, while thousands of prisoners were taken and forced to serve the conqueror.

Having established his power in the north, Shamshi-Adad then turned attention to Babylonia. On his way southward he subdued many villages. He fell upon the first strong force of Babylonian allies at Dur-papsukal in Akkad, and achieved a great victory, killing 13,000 and taking 3000 captives. Then the Babylonian king, Marduk-balatsu-ikbi, advanced to meet him with his mixed force of Babylonians, Chaldaeans, Elamites, and Aramaeans, but was defeated in a fierce battle on the banks of the Daban canal. The Babylonian camp was captured, and the prisoners taken by the Assyrians included 5000 foot-men, 200 horsemen, and 100 chariots

[p. 416]

Shamshi-Adad conducted in all five campaigns in Babylonia and Chaldaea, which he completely subdued, penetrating as far as the shores of the Persian Gulf. In the end he took prisoner the new king, Bau-akh-iddina, the successor of Marduk-balatsu-ikbi, and transported him to Assyria, and offered up sacrifices as the overlord of the ancient land at Babylon, Borsippa, and Cuthah. For over half a century after this disaster Babylonia was a province of Assyria. During that period, however, the influence which it exercised over the Assyrian Court was so great that it contributed to the downfall of the royal line of the Second Empire.

Footnotes

^394:1 Finn and His Warrior Band, pp. 245 et seq. (London, 1911).

^396:1 Also rendered Ashur-na'sir-pal.

^398:1 A History of the Babylonians and Assyrians, G. S. Goodspeed, p. 197.

^401:1 Discoveries at Nineveh, Sir A. H. Layard (London, 1856), pp. 55, 56.

^402:1 "Thou art beautiful, O my love, as Tirzah, comely as Jerusalem." Solomon's Song, vi, 4.

^402:2 2 Chronicles, xii, 15.

^402:3 1 Kings, xiv, 1-20.

^402:4 Ibid., 21-3.

^402:5 2 Chronicles, xii, 1-12.

^403:1 2 Chronicles, xiii, 1-20.

^403:2 Ibid., xiv, 1-6.

^403:3 1 Kings, xv, 25-6.

^404:1 1 Kings, xv, 16-7. 

^404:2 Ibid., 18-9.

^404:3 Ibid., 20-2.

^405:1 1 Kings, xvi, 9-10.

^405:2 Ibid., 15-8.

^405:3 Ibid., 21-2.

^406:1 Micah, vi, 16.

^406:2 1 Kings, xvi, 29-33.

^406:3 Ibid., xviii, 1-4.

^407:1 1 Kings, xx.

^407:2 Ibid., xxii, 43.

^407:3 2 Chronicles, xviii, 1-2.

^408:1 1 Kings, xxii and 2 Chronicles, xviii.

^408:2 1 Kings, xxii, 48-9.

^409:1 1 Kings, viii.

^410:1 2 Kings, ix and 2 Chronicles, xxii.

^411:1 2 Kings, viii, 1-15.

^411:2 The Old Testament in the Light of the Historical Records and Legends of Assyria and Babylonia, pp. 337 et seq.

^412:1 2 Kings, x, 32-3.

^412:2 Ibid., 1-31.

^413:1 2 Kings, xi, 1-3.

^413:2 2 Chronicles, xxii, 10-12.

^414:1 2 Chronicles, xxiii, 1-17.

^414:2 2 Kings, xiii, 1-5.

     
Myths of Babylonia and Assyria, by Donald A. MacKenzie, [1915], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 417]

  

CHAPTER XVIII

  

The Age of Semiramis

Queen Sammu-rammat the original of Semiramis--"Mother-right" among "Mother Worshippers"--Sammu-rammat compared to Queen Tiy--Popularity of Goddess Cults--Temple Worship and Domestic Worship--Babylonian Cultural Influence in Assyria--Ethical Tendency in Shamash Worship--The Nebo Religious Revolt--Aton Revolt in Egypt--The Royal Assyrian Library--Fish Goddess of Babylonia in Assyria--The Semiramis and Shakuntala Stories--The Mock King and Queen--Dove Goddesses of Assyria, Phoenicia, and Cyprus--Ishtar's Dove Form--St. Valentine's Day beliefs--Sacred Doves of Cretans, Hittites, and Egyptians--Pigeon Lore in Great Britain and Ireland--Deities associated with various Animals--The Totemic Theory--Common Element in Ancient Goddess Cults--Influence of Agricultural Beliefs--Nebo a form of Ea--His Spouse Tashmit a Love Goddess and Interceder--Traditions of Famous Mother Deities--Adad-nirari IV the "Saviour" of Israel--Expansion of the Urartian Empire--Its Famous Kings--Decline and Fall of Assyria's Middle Empire Dynasty.

ONE of the most interesting figures in Mesopotamian history came into prominence during the Assyrian Middle Empire period. This was the famous Sammu-rammat, the Babylonian wife of an Assyrian ruler. Like Sargon of Akkad, Alexander the Great, and Dietrich von Bern, she made, by reason of her achievements and influence, a deep impression on the popular imagination, and as these monarchs became identified in tradition with gods of war and fertility, she had attached to her memory the myths associated with the mother goddess of love and battle who presided over the destinies of mankind. In her character as the legendary Semiramis of Greek literature, the Assyrian queen was reputed to have been the

[p. 418]

daughter of Derceto, the dove and fish goddess of Askalon, and to have departed from earth in bird form.

It is not quite certain whether Sammu-rammat was the wife of Shamshi-Adad VII or of his son, Adad-nirari IV. Before the former monarch reduced Babylonia to the status of an Assyrian province, he had signed a treaty of peace with its king, and it is suggested that it was confirmed by a matrimonial alliance. This treaty was repudiated by King Bau-akh-iddina, who was transported with his palace treasures to Assyria.

As Sammu-rammat was evidently a royal princess of Babylonia, it seems probable that her marriage was arranged with purpose to legitimatize the succession of the Assyrian overlords to the Babylonian throne. The principle of "mother right" was ever popular in those countries where the worship of the Great Mother was perpetuated if not in official at any rate in domestic religion. Not a few Egyptian Pharaohs reigned as husbands or as sons of royal ladies. Succession by the female line was also observed among the Hittites. When Hattusil II gave his daughter in marriage to Putakhi, king of the Amorites, he inserted a clause in the treaty of alliance "to the effect that the sovereignty over the Amorite should belong to the son and descendants of his daughter for evermore". [*1]

As queen or queen-mother, Sammu-rammat occupied as prominent a position in Assyria as did Queen Tiy of Egypt during the lifetime of her husband, Amenhotep III, and the early part of the reign of her son, Amenhotep IV (Akhenaton). The Tell-el-Amarna letters testify to Tiy's influence in the Egyptian "Foreign Office", and we know that at home she was joint ruler with her husband and took part with him in public ceremonials. During their reign a temple was erected to the mother goddess Mut,

[p. 419]

and beside it was formed a great lake on which sailed the "barque of Aton" in connection with mysterious religious ceremonials. After Akhenaton's religious revolt was inaugurated, the worship of Mut was discontinued and Tiy went into retirement. In Akhenaton's time the vulture symbol of the goddess Mut did not appear above the sculptured figures of royalty.

What connection the god Aton had with Mut during the period of the Tiy regime remains obscure. There is no evidence that Aton was first exalted as the son of the Great Mother goddess, although this is not improbable.

Queen Sammu-rammat of Assyria, like Tiy of Egypt, is associated with social and religious innovations. She was the first, and, indeed, the only Assyrian royal lady, to be referred to on equal terms with her royal husband in official inscriptions. In a dedication to the god Nebo, that deity is reputed to be the protector of "the life of Adad-nirari, king of the land of Ashur, his lord, and the life of Sammu-rammat, she of the palace, his lady". [*1]

During the reign of Adad-nirari IV the Assyrian Court radiated Babylonian culture and traditions. The king not only recorded his descent from the first Shalmaneser, but also claimed to be a descendant of Bel-kap-kapu, an earlier, but, to us, unknown, Babylonian monarch than "Sulili", i.e. Sumu-la-ilu, the great-great-grandfather of Hammurabi. Bel-kap-kapu was reputed to have been an over-lord of Assyria.

Apparently Adad-nirari desired to be regarded as the legitimate heir to the thrones of Assyria and Babylonia. His claim upon the latter country must have had a substantial basis. It is not too much to assume that he was a son of a princess of its ancient royal family. Sammu-rammat

[p. 420]

may therefore have been his mother. She could have been called his "wife" in the mythological sense, the king having become "husband of his mother". If such was the case, the royal pair probably posed as the high priest and high priestess of the ancient goddess cult--the incarnations of the Great Mother and the son who displaced his sire.

The worship of the Great Mother was the popular religion of the indigenous peoples of western Asia, including parts of Asia Minor, Egypt, and southern and western Europe. It appears to have been closely associated with agricultural rites practised among representative communities of the Mediterranean race. In Babylonia and Assyria the peoples of the goddess cult fused with the peoples of the god cult, but the prominence maintained by Ishtar, who absorbed many of the old mother deities, testifies to the persistence of immemorial habits of thought and antique religious ceremonials among the descendants of the earliest settlers in the Tigro-Euphrates valley. Merodach's spouse Zerpanitum was not a shadowy deity but a goddess who exercised as much influence as her divine husband. As Aruru she took part with him in the creation of mankind. In Asia Minor the mother goddess was overshadowed by the father god during the period of Hatti predominance, but her worship was revived after the early people along the coast and in the agricultural valleys were freed from the yoke of the father-god worshippers.

It must be recognized, in this connection, that an official religion was not always a full reflection of popular beliefs. In all the great civilizations of antiquity it was invariably a compromise between the beliefs of the military aristocracy and the masses of mingled peoples over whom they held sway. Temple worship had therefore a political

[p. 421]

aspect; it was intended, among other things, to strengthen the position of the ruling classes. But ancient deities could still be worshipped, and were worshipped, in homes and fields, in groves and on mountain tops, as the case might be. Jeremiah has testified to the persistence of the folk practices in connection with the worship of the mother goddess among the inhabitants of Palestine. Sacrificial fires were lit and cakes were baked and offered to the "Queen of Heaven" in the streets of Jerusalem and other cities. In Babylonia and Egypt domestic religious practices were never completely supplanted by temple ceremonies in which rulers took a prominent part. It was always possible, therefore, for usurpers to make popular appeal by reviving ancient and persistent forms of worship. As we have seen, Jehu of Israel, after stamping out Phoenician Baal worship, secured a strong following by giving official recognition to the cult of the golden calf.

It is not possible to set forth in detail, or with intimate knowledge, the various innovations which Sammu-rammat introduced, or with which she was credited, during the reigns of Adad-nirari IV (810-782 B.C.) and his father. No discovery has been made of documents like the Tell-el-Amarna "letters", which would shed light on the social and political life of this interesting period. But evidence is not awanting that Assyria was being suffused with Babylonian culture. Royal inscriptions record the triumphs of the army, but suppress the details of barbarities such as those which sully the annals of Ashur-natsir-pal, who had boys and girls burned on pyres and the heroes of small nations flayed alive. An ethical tendency becomes apparent in the exaltation of the Babylonian Shamash as an abstract deity who loved law and order, inspired the king with wisdom and ordained the

[p. 422]

destinies of mankind. He is invoked on equal terms with Ashur.

The prominence given to Nebo, the god of Borsippa, during the reign of Adad-nirari IV is highly significant. He appears in his later character as a god of culture and wisdom, the patron of scribes and artists, and the wise counsellor of the deities. He symbolized the intellectual life of the southern kingdom, which was more closely associated with religious ethics than that of war-loving Assyria.

A great temple was erected to Nebo at Kalkhi, and four statues of him were placed within it, two of which are now in the British Museum. On one of these was cut the inscription, from which we have quoted, lauding the exalted and wise deity and invoking him to protect Adad-nirari and the lady of the palace, Sammu-rammat, and closing with the exhortation, "Whoso cometh in after time, let him trust in Nebo and trust in no other god".

The priests of Ashur in the city of Asshur must have been as deeply stirred by this religious revolt at Kalkhi as were the priests of Amon when Akhenaton turned his back on Thebes and the national god to worship Aton in his new capital at Tell-el-Amarna.

It would appear that this sudden stream of Babylonian culture had begun to flow into Assyria as early as the reign of Shalmaneser III, and it may be that it was on account of that monarch's pro-Babylonian tendencies that his nobles and priests revolted against him. Shalmaneser established at Kalkhi a royal library which was stocked with the literature of the southern kingdom. During the reign of Adad-nirari IV this collection was greatly increased, and subsequent additions were made to it by his successors, and especially Ashur-nirari IV, the last monarch of the Middle Empire. The inscriptions of

 

Click to enlarge
STATUE OF NEBO
 Dedicated by Adad-nirari IV, and the Queen, Sammu-rammat
 (British Museum)
 Photo. Mansell

 

[p. 423]

Shamshi-Adad, son of Shalmaneser III, have literary qualities which distinguish them from those of his predecessors, and may be accounted for by the influence exercised by Babylonian scholars who migrated northward.

To the reign of Adad-nirari belongs also that important compilation the "Synchronistic History of Assyria and Babylonia", which deals with the relations of the two kingdoms and refers to contemporary events and rulers.

The legends of Semiramis indicate that Sammu-rammat was associated like Queen Tiy with the revival of mother worship. As we have said, she went down to tradition as the daughter of the fish goddess, Derceto. Pliny identified that deity with Atargatis of Hierapolis. [*1]

In Babylonia the fish goddess was Nina, a developed form of Damkina, spouse of Ea of Eridu. In the inscription on the Nebo statue, that god is referred to as the "son of Nudimmud" (Ea). Nina was the goddess who gave her name to Nineveh, and it is possible that Nebo may have been regarded as her son during the Semiramis period.

The story of Semiramis's birth is evidently of great antiquity. It seems to survive throughout Europe in the nursery tale of the "Babes in the Wood". A striking Indian parallel is afforded by the legend of Shakuntala, which may be first referred to for the purpose of comparative study. Shakuntala was the daughter of the rishi, Viswamitra, and Menaka, the Apsara (celestial fairy). Menaka gave birth to her child beside the sacred river Malini. "And she cast the new-born infant on the bank of that river and went away. And beholding the new-born infant lying in that forest destitute of human beings but abounding with lions and tigers, a number of vultures sat around to protect it from harm." A sage discovered

[p. 424]

the child and adopted her. "Because", he said, "she was surrounded by Shakuntas (birds), therefore hath she been named by me Shakuntala (bird protected)." [*1]

Semiramis was similarly deserted at birth by her Celestial mother. She was protected by doves, and her Assyrian name, Sammu-rammat, is believed to be derived from "Summat"--"dove", and to signify "the dove goddess loveth her". Simmas, the chief of royal shepherds, found the child and adopted her. She was of great beauty like Shakuntala, the maiden of "perfect symmetry", "sweet smiles", and "faultless features", with whom King Dushyanta fell in love and married in Gandharva fashion. [*2]

Semiramis became the wife of Onnes, governor of Nineveh, and one of the generals of its alleged founder, King Ninus. She accompanied her husband to Bactria on a military campaign, and is said to have instructed the king how that city should be taken. Ninus fell in love with Semiramis, and Onnes, who refused to give her up, went and hanged himself. The fair courtesan then became the wife of the king.

The story proceeds that Semiramis exercised so great an influence over the impressionable King Ninus, that she persuaded him to proclaim her Queen of Assyria for five days. She then ascended the throne decked in royal robes. On the first day she gave a great banquet, and on the second thrust Ninus into prison, or had him put to death. In this manner she secured the empire for herself. She reigned for over forty years.

Professor Frazer inclines to the view that the legend is a reminiscence of the custom of appointing a mock king and queen to whom the kingdom was yielded up for five

 

Click to enlarge
THE SHEPHERD FINDS THE BABE SEMIRAMIS
 From the Painting by E. Wallcousins

 

[p. 425]

days. Semiramis played the part of the mother goddess, and the priestly king died a violent death in the character of her divine lover. "The mounds of Semiramis which were pointed out all over Western Asia were said to have been the graves of her lovers whom she buried alive. . . . This tradition is one of the surest indications of the identity of the mythical Semiramis with the Babylonian goddess Ishtar or Astarte." [*1] As we have seen, Ishtar and other mother goddesses had many lovers whom they deserted like La Belle Dame sans Merci (pp. <page 174>-5).

As Queen of Assyria, Semiramis was said to have cut roads through mountainous districts and erected many buildings. According to one version of the legend she founded the city of Babylon. Herodotus, however, says in this connection: "Semiramis held the throne for five generations before the later princess (Nitocris). . . . She raised certain embankments, well worthy of inspection, in the plain near Babylon, to control the river (Euphrates), which, till then, used to overflow and flood the whole country round about." [*2] Lucian, who associates the famous queen with "mighty works in Asia", states that she was reputed by some to be the builder of the ancient temple of Aphrodite in the Libanus, although others credited it to Cinyras, or Deukalion. [*3] Several Median places bear her name, and according to ancient Armenian tradition she was the founder of Van, which was formerly called "Shamiramagerd". Strabo tells that unidentified mountains in Western Asia were named after Semiramis. [*4] Indeed, many of the great works in the Tigro-Euphrates valley, not excepting the famous inscription of Darius, were credited to the legendary queen of Babylonia and

[p. 426]

[paragraph continues] Assyria. [*1] She was the rival in tradition of the famous Sesostris of Egypt as a ruler, builder, and conqueror.

All the military expeditions of Semiramis were attended with success, except her invasion of India. She was supposed to have been defeated in the Punjab. After suffering this disaster she died, or abdicated the throne in favour of her son Ninyas. The most archaic form of the legend appears to be that she was turned into a dove and took flight to heaven in that form. After her death she was worshipped as a dove goddess like "Our Lady of Trees and Doves" in Cyprus, whose shrine at old Paphos was founded, Herodotus says, by Phoenician colonists from Askalon. [*2] Fish and doves were sacred to Derceto (Attar), [*3] who had a mermaid form. "I have beheld", says Lucian, "the image of Derceto in Phoenicia. A marvellous spectacle it is. One half is a woman, but the part which extends from thighs to feet terminates with the tail of a fish." [*4]

Derceto was supposed to have been a woman who threw herself in despair into a lake. After death she was adored as a goddess and her worshippers abstained from eating fish, except sacrificially. A golden image of a fish was suspended in her temple. Atargatis, who was identical with Derceto, was reputed in another form of the legend to have been born of an egg which the sacred fishes found in the Euphrates and thrust ashore (<page 28>). The Greek Aphrodite was born of the froth of the sea and floated in a sea-shell. According to Hesiod,

                     The wafting waves
 First bore her to Cythera the divine:
 To wave-encircled Cyprus came she then,
 And forth emerged, a goddess, in the charms [p. 427]
 Of awful beauty. Where her delicate feet
 Had pressed the sands, green herbage flowering sprang.
 Her Aphrodite gods and mortals name,
 The foam-born goddess; and her name is known
 As Cytherea with the blooming wreath,
 For that she touched Cythera's flowery coast;
 And Cypris, for that on the Cyprian shore
 She rose, amid the multitude of waves. Elton's translation.

The animals sacred to Aphrodite included the sparrow, the dove, the swan, the swallow, and the wryneck. [*1] She presided over the month of April, and the myrtle, rose, poppy, and apple were sacred to her.

Some writers connect Semiramis, in her character as a dove goddess, with Media and the old Persian mother goddess Anaitis, and regard as arbitrary her identification with the fish goddess Derceto or Atargatis. The dove was certainly not a popular bird in the religious art of Babylonia and Assyria, but in one of the hymns translated by Professor Pinches Ishtar says, "Like a lonely dove I rest". In another the worshipper tries to touch Ishtar's heart by crying, "Like the dove I moan". A Sumerian psalmist makes a goddess (Gula, who presided over Larak, a part of Isin) lament over the city after it was captured by the enemy:

My temple E-aste, temple of Larak,
 Larak the city which Bel Enlil gave, [p. 428]
 Beneath are turned to strangeness, above are turned to strangeness,
 With wailings on the lyre my dwelling-place is surrendered to the stranger,
 The dove cots they wickedly seized, the doves they entrapped . . .
 The ravens he (Enlil) caused to fly. [*1]

Apparently there were temple and household doves in Babylonia. The Egyptians had their household dove-cots in ancient as in modern times. Lane makes reference to the large pigeon houses in many villages. They are of archaic pattern, "with the walls slightly inclining inwards (like many of the ancient Egyptian buildings)", and are "constructed upon the roofs of the huts with crude brick, pottery, and mud. . . . Each pair of pigeons occupies a separate (earthen) pot." [*2] It may be that the dove bulked more prominently in domestic than in official religion, and had a special seasonal significance. Ishtar appears to have had a dove form. In the Gilgamesh epic she is said to have loved the "brilliant Allalu bird" (the "bright-coloured wood pigeon", according to Sayce), and to have afterwards wounded it by breaking its wings. [*3] She also loved the lion and the horse, and must therefore have assumed the forms of these animals. The goddess Bau, "she whose city is destroyed", laments in a Sumerian psalm:

Like a dove to its dwelling-place, how long to my dwelling-place will they pursue me,
 To my sanctuary . . . the sacred place they pursue me . . .
 My resting place, the brick walls of my city Isin, thou art destroyed;
 My sanctuary, shrine of my temple Galmah, thou art destroyed.
                                             Langdon's translation.

[p. 429]

[paragraph continues] Here the goddess appears to be identified with the doves which rest on the walls and make their nests in the shrine. The Sumerian poets did not adorn their poems with meaningless picturesque imagery; their images were stern facts; they had a magical or religious significance like the imagery of magical incantations; the worshipper invoked the deity by naming his or her various attributes, forms, &c.

Of special interest are the references in Sumerian psalms to the ravens as well as the doves of goddesses. Throughout Asia and Europe ravens are birds of ill omen. In Scotland there still linger curious folk beliefs regarding the appearance of ravens and doves after death. Michael Scott, the great magician, when on his deathbed told his friends to place his body on a hillock. "Three ravens and three doves would be seen flying towards it. If the ravens were first the body was to be burned, but if the doves were first it was to receive Christian burial. The ravens were foremost, but in their hurry flew beyond their mark. So the devil, who had long been preparing a bed for Michael, was disappointed." [*1]

In Indian mythology Purusha, the chaos giant, first divided himself. "Hence were husband and wife produced." This couple then assumed various animal forms and thus "created every living pair whatsoever down to the ants". [*2] Goddesses and fairies in the folk tales of many countries sometimes assume bird forms. The "Fates" appear to Damayanti in the Nala story as swans which carry love messages. [*3]

According to Aryo-Indian belief, birds were "blessed with fecundity". The Babylonian Etana eagle and the Egyptian vulture, as has been indicated, were deities of

[p. 430]

fertility. Throughout Europe birds, which were "Fates", mated, according to popular belief, on St. Valentine's Day in February, when lots were drawn for wives by rural folks. Another form of the old custom is referred to by the poet Gay:

Last Valentine, the day when birds of kind
 Their paramours with mutual chirpings find,
 I early rose . . .
 Thee first I spied, and the first swain we see,
 In spite of fortune, shall our true love be.

The dove appears to have been a sacred bird in various areas occupied by tribes of the Mediterranean race. Models of a shrine found in two royal graves at Mycenae are surmounted by a pair of doves, suggesting twin goddesses like Isis and Nepthys of Egypt and Ishtar and Belitsheri of Babylonia. Doves and snakes were associated with the mother goddess of Crete, "typifying", according to one view, "her connection with air and earth. Although her character was distinctly beneficent and pacific, yet as Lady of the Wild Creatures she had a more fearful aspect, one that was often depicted on carved gems, where lions are her companions." [*1] Discussing the attributes and symbols of this mother goddess, Professor Burrows says: "As the serpent, coming from the crevices of the earth, shows the possession of the tree or pillar from the underworld, so the dove, with which this goddess is also associated, shows its possession from the world of the sky". [*2] Professor Robertson Smith has demonstrated that the dove was of great sanctity among the Semites. [*3] It figures in Hittite sculptures and was probably connected with the goddess cult in Asia

[p. 431]

[paragraph continues] Minor. Although Egypt had no dove goddess, the bird was addressed by lovers--

I hear thy voice, O turtle dove--
   he dawn is all aglow
 Weary am I with love, with love,
   Oh, whither shall I go? [*1]

[paragraph continues] Pigeons, as indicated, are in Egypt still regarded as sacred birds, and a few years ago British soldiers created a riot by shooting them. Doves were connected with the ancient Greek oracle at Dodona. In many countries the dove is closely associated with love, and also symbolizes innocence, gentleness, and holiness.

The pigeon was anciently, it would appear, a sacred bird in these islands, and Brand has recorded curious folk beliefs connected with it. In some districts the idea prevailed that no person could die on a bed which contained pigeon feathers: "If anybody be sick and lye a dying, if they lye upon pigeon feathers they will be languishing and never die, but be in pain and torment," wrote a correspondent. A similar superstition about the feathers of different varieties of wild fowl [*2] obtained in other districts. Brand traced this interesting traditional belief in Yorkshire, Lancashire, Derbyshire, and some of the Welsh and Irish counties. [*3] It still lingers in parts of the Scottish Highlands. In the old ballad of "The Bloody Gardener" the white dove appears to a young man as the soul of his lady love who was murdered by his mother. He first saw the bird perched on his breast and then "sitting on a myrtle tree". [*4]

The dove was not only a symbol of Semiramis, but

[p. 432]

also of her mother Derceto, the Phoenician fish goddess. The connection between bird and fish may have been given an astral significance. In "Poor Robin's Almanack" for 1757 a St. Valentine rhyme begins:

This month bright Phoebus enters Pisces,
 The maids will have good store of kisses,
 For always when the sun comes there,
 Valentine's day is drawing near,
 And both the men and maids incline
 To choose them each a Valentine.

As we have seen, the example was set by the mating birds. The "Almanack" poet no doubt versified an old astrological belief: when the spring sun entered the sign of the Fishes, the love goddess in bird form returned to earth.

Advocates of the Totemic theory, on the other hand, may hold that the association of doves with snake goddesses and fish goddesses of fertility was due to the fusion of tribes who had various animal totems. "The Pelew Islanders believed", says Professor Frazer, "that the souls of their forefathers lived in certain species of animals, which accordingly they held sacred and would not injure. For this reason one man would not kill snakes, another would not harm pigeons, and so on; but everyone was quite ready to kill and eat the sacred animals of his neighbours." [*1] That the Egyptians had similar customs is suggested by what Herodotus tells us regarding their sacred animals: "Those who live near Thebes and the lake Moeris hold the crocodile in religious veneration. . . . Those who live in or near Elephantine, so far from considering these beasts as sacred, make them an article of food. . . . The hippopotamus is esteemed sacred in the

[p. 433]

district of Papremis, but in no other part of Egypt. . . . They roast and boil . . . birds and fishes . . . excepting those which are preserved for sacred purposes." [*1] Totemic animals controlled the destinies of tribes and families. "Grose tells us", says Brand, "that, besides general notices of death, many families have particular warnings or notices: some by the appearance of a bird, and others by the figure of a tall woman, dressed all in white. . . . Pennant says that many of the great families in Scotland had their demon or genius, who gave them monitions of future events." [*2] Members of tribes which venerated the pigeon therefore invoked it like the Egyptian love poet and drew omens from its notes, or saw one appearing as the soul of the dead like the lover in the ballad of "The Bloody Gardener". They refrained also from killing the pigeon except sacrificially, and suffered agonies on a death-bed which contained pigeon feathers, the "taboo" having been broken.

Some such explanation is necessary to account for the specialization of certain goddesses as fish, snake, cat, or bird deities. Aphrodite, who like Ishtar absorbed the attributes of several goddesses of fertility and fate, had attached to her the various animal symbols which were prominent in districts or among tribes brought into close contact, while the poppy, rose, myrtle, &c., which were used as love charms, or for making love potions, were also consecrated to her. Anthropomorphic deities were decorated with the symbols and flowers of folk religion.

From the comparative evidence accumulated here, it will be seen that the theory of the mythical Semiramis's Median or Persian origin is somewhat narrow. It is possible that the dove was venerated in Cyprus, as it certainly was in Crete, long centuries before Assyrian and

[p. 434]

[paragraph continues] Babylonian influence filtered westward through Phoenician and Hittite channels. In another connection Sir Arthur Evans shows that the resemblance between Cretan and early Semitic beliefs "points rather to some remote common element, the nature of which is at present obscure, than to any definite borrowing by one side or another". [*1]

From the evidence afforded by the Semiramis legends and the inscriptions of the latter half of the Assyrian Middle Empire period, it may be inferred that a renascence of "mother worship" was favoured by the social and political changes which were taking place. In the first place the influence of Babylon must have been strongly felt in this connection. The fact that Adad-nirari found it necessary to win the support of the Babylonians by proclaiming his descent from one of their ancient royal families, suggests that he was not only concerned about the attitude assumed by the scholars of the southern kingdom, but also that of the masses of old Sumerian and Akkadian stocks who continued to bake cakes to the Queen of Heaven so as to ensure good harvests. In the second place it is not improbable that even in Assyria the introduction of Nebo and his spouse made widespread appeal. That country had become largely peopled by an alien population; many of these aliens came from districts where "mother worship" prevailed, and had no traditional respect for Ashur, while they regarded with hostility the military aristocracy who conquered and ruled in the name of that dreaded deity. Perhaps, too, the influence of the Aramaeans, who in Babylonia wrecked the temples of the sun god, tended to revive the ancient religion of the Mediterranean race. Jehu's religious revolt in Israel, which established once again the cult of Ashtoreth, occurred after he came under

[p. 435]

the sway of Damascus, and may have not been unconnected with the political ascendancy elsewhere of the goddess cult.

Nebo, whom Adad-nirari exalted at Kalkhi, was more than a local god of Borsippa. "The most satisfactory view", says Jastrow, "is to regard him as a counterpart of Ea. Like Ea, he is the embodiment and source of wisdom. . . . The study of the heavens formed part of the wisdom which is traced back to Nebo, and the temple school at Borsippa became one of the chief centres for the astrological, and, subsequently, for the astronomical lore of Babylonia. . . . Like Nebo, Ea is also associated with the irrigation of the fields and with their consequent fertility. A hymn praises him as the one who fills the canals and the dikes, who protects the fields and brings the crops to maturity." Nebo links with Merodach (Marduk), who is sometimes referred to as his father. Jastrow assumes that the close partnership between Nebo and Merodach "had as a consequence a transfer of some of the father Marduk's attributes as a solar deity to Nebo, [*1] his son, just as Ea passed his traits on to his son, Marduk". [*2]

As the "recorder" or "scribe" among the gods, Nebo resembles the Egyptian god Thoth, who links with Khonsu, the lunar and spring sun god of love and fertility, and with Osiris. In Borsippa he had, like Merodach in Babylon, pronounced Tammuz traits. Nebo, in fact, appears to be the Tammuz of the new age, the son of the ancient goddess, who became "Husband of his Mother". If Nebo had no connection with Great Mother worship, it is unlikely that his statue would have

[p. 436]

borne an inscription referring to King Adad-nirari and Queen Sammu-rammat on equal terms. The Assyrian spouse of Nebo was called Tashmit. This "goddess of supplication and love" had a lunar significance. A prayer addressed to her in association with Nannar (Sin) and Ishtar, proceeds:

In the evil of the eclipse of the moon which ... has taken place,
 In the evil of the powers, of the portents, evil and not good, which are in my palace and my land,
 (I) have turned towards thee! . . .
 Before Nabu (Nebo) thy spouse, thy lord, the prince, the first-born of E-sagila, intercede for me!
 May he hearken to my cry at the word of thy mouth; may he remove my sighing, may he learn my supplication!

Damkina is similarly addressed in another prayer:

O Damkina, mighty queen of all the gods,
 O wife of Ea, valiant art thou,
 O Ir-nina, mighty queen of all the gods . . .
 Thou that dwellest in the Abyss, O lady of heaven and earth! . . .
 In the evil of the eclipse of the moon, etc.

Bau is also prayed in a similar connection as "mighty lady that dwellest in the bright heavens", i.e. "Queen of heaven". [*1]

Tashmit, whose name signifies "Obedience", according to Jastrow, or "Hearing", according to Sayce, carried the prayers of worshippers to Nebo, her spouse. As Isis interceded with Osiris, she interceded with Nebo, on behalf of mankind. But this did not signify that she was the least influential of the divine pair. A goddess played many parts: she was at once mother, daughter, and wife of the god; the servant of one god or the "mighty queen of all the gods". The Great Mother

[p. 437]

was, as has been indicated, regarded as the eternal and undecaying one; the gods passed away, son succeeding father; she alone remained. Thus, too, did Semiramis survive in the popular memory, as the queen-goddess of widespread legends, after kings and gods had been forgotten. To her was ascribed all the mighty works of other days in the lands where the indigenous peoples first worshipped the Great Mother as Damkina, Nina, Bau, Ishtar, or Tashmit, because the goddess was anciently believed to be the First Cause, the creatrix, the mighty one who invested the ruling god with the powers he possessed--the god who held sway because he was her husband, as did Nergal as the husband of Eresh-ki-gal, queen of Hades.

The multiplication of well-defined goddesses was partly due to the tendency to symbolize the attributes of the Great Mother, and partly due to the development of the great "Lady" in a particular district where she reflected local phenomena and where the political influence achieved by her worshippers emphasized her greatness. Legends regarding a famous goddess were in time attached to other goddesses, and in Aphrodite and Derceto we appear to have mother deities who absorbed the traditions of more than one local "lady" of river and plain, forest and mountain. Semiramis, on the other hand, survived as a link between the old world and the new, between the country from which emanated the stream of ancient culture and the regions which received it. As the high priestess of the cult, she became identified with the goddess whose bird name she bore, as Gilgamesh and Etana became identified with the primitive culture-hero or patriarch of the ancient Sumerians, and Sargon became identified with Tammuz. No doubt the fame of Semiramis was specially emphasized because of her close association, as Queen

[p. 438]

[paragraph continues] Sammu-rammat, with the religious innovations which disturbed the land of the god Ashur during the Middle Empire period.

Adad-nirari IV, the son or husband of Sammu-rammat, was a vigorous and successful campaigner. He was the Assyrian king who became the "saviour" of Israel. Although it is not possible to give a detailed account of his various expeditions, we find from the list of these which survives in the Eponym Chronicle that he included in the Assyrian Empire a larger extent of territory than any of his predecessors. In the north-east he overcame the Median and other tribes, and acquired a large portion of the Iranian plateau; he compelled Edom to pay tribute, and established his hold in Babylonia by restricting the power of the Chaldaeans in Sealand. In the north he swayed--at least, so he claimed--the wide domains of the Nairi people. He also confirmed his supremacy over the Hittites.

The Aramaean state of Damascus, which had with-stood the attack of the great Shalmaneser and afterwards oppressed, as we have seen, the kingdoms of Israel and Judah, was completely overpowered by Adad-nirari. The old king, Hazael, died when Assyria's power was being strengthened and increased along his frontiers. He was succeeded by his son Mari, who is believed to be identical with the Biblical Ben-Hadad III. [*1]

Shortly after this new monarch came to the throne, Adad-nirari IV led a great army against him. The Syrian ruler appears to have been taken by surprise; probably his kingdom was suffering from the three defeats which had been previously administered by the revolting Israelites. [*2] At any rate Mari was unable to gather together an army of allies to resist the Assyrian advance, and took

[p. 439]

refuge behind the walls of Damascus. This strongly fortified city was closely invested, and Mari had at length to submit and acknowledge Adad-nirari as his overlord. The price of peace included 23,000 talents of silver, 20 of gold, 3000 of copper, and 5000 of iron, as well as ivory ornaments and furniture, embroidered materials, and other goods "to a countless amount." Thus "the Lord gave Israel a saviour, so that they went out from under the hand of the Syrians: and the children of Israel dwelt in their tents, as beforetime". This significant reference to the conquest of Damascus by the Assyrian king is followed by another which throws light on the religious phenomena of the period: "Nevertheless they departed not from the sins of the house of Jeroboam, who made Israel sin, but walked therein: and there remained the grove also in Samaria". [*1] Ashtoreth and her golden calf continued to be venerated, and doves were sacrificed to the local Adonis.

It is not certain whether Adad-nirari penetrated farther than Damascus. Possibly all the states which owed allegiance to the king of that city became at once the willing vassals of Assyria, their protector. The tribute received by Adad-nirari from Tyre, Sidon, the land of Omri (Israel), Edom, and Palastu (Philistia) may have been gifted as a formal acknowledgment of his suzerainty and with purpose to bring them directly under Assyrian control, so that Damascus might be prevented from taking vengeance against them.

Meagre details survive regarding the reign of the next king, Shalmaneser IV (781-772 B.C.). These are, however, supplemented by the Urartian inscriptions. Although Adad-nirari boasted that he had subdued the kingdom of Urartu in the north, he appears to have

[p. 440]

done no more than limit its southern expansion for a time.

The Urarti were, like the Mitanni, a military aristocracy [*1] who welded together by conquest the tribes of the eastern and northern Highlands which several Assyrian monarchs included in their Empire. They acquired the elements of Assyrian culture, and used the Assyrian script for their own language. Their god was named Khaldis, and they called their nation Khaldia. During the reign of Ashur-natsir-pal their area of control was confined to the banks of the river Araxes, but it was gradually extended under a succession of vigorous kings towards the south-west until they became supreme round the shores of Lake Van. Three of their early kings were Lutipris, Sharduris I, and Arame.

During the reign of Shamshi-Adad the Assyrians came into conflict with the Urarti, who were governed at the time by "Ushpina of Nairi" (Ishpuinis, son of Sharduris II). The Urartian kingdom had extended rapidly and bordered on Assyrian territory. To the west were the tribes known as the Mannai, the northern enemies of the Medes, a people of Indo-European speech.

When Adad-nirari IV waged war against the Urarti, their king was Menuas, the son of Ishpuinis. Menuas was a great war-lord, and was able to measure his strength against Assyria on equal terms. He had nearly doubled by conquest the area controlled by his predecessors. Adad-nirari endeavoured to drive his rival northward, but all along the Assyrian frontier from the Euphrates to the Lower Zab, Menuas forced the outposts of Adad-nirari to retreat southward. The Assyrians, in short, were unable to hold their own.

[p. 441]

Having extended his kingdom towards the south, Menuas invaded Hittite territory, subdued Malatia and compelled its king to pay tribute. He also conquered the Mannai and other tribes. Towards the north and north-west he added a considerable area to his kingdom, which became as large as Assyria.

Menuas's capital was the city of Turushpa or Dhuspas (Van), which was called Khaldinas [*1] after the national god. For a century it was the seat of Urartian administration. The buildings erected there by Menuas and his successors became associated in after-time with the traditions of Semiramis, who, as Queen Sammu-rammat of Assyria, was a contemporary of the great Urartian conqueror. Similarly a sculptured representation of the Hittite god was referred to by Herodotus as a memorial of the Egyptian king Sesostris.

The strongest fortification at Dhuspas was the citadel, which was erected on a rocky promontory jutting into Lake Van. A small garrison could there resist a prolonged siege. The water supply of the city was assured by the construction of subterranean aqueducts. Menuas erected a magnificent palace, which rivalled that of the Assyrian monarch at Kalkhi, and furnished it with the rich booty brought back from victorious campaigns. He was a lover of trees and planted many, and he laid out gardens which bloomed with brilliant Asian flowers. The palace commanded a noble prospect of hill and valley scenery on the south-western shore of beautiful Lake Van.

Menuas was succeeded by his son Argistis, who ascended the throne during the lifetime of Adad-nirari of Assyria. During the early part of his reign he conducted military expeditions to the north beyond the river

[p. 442]

[paragraph continues] Araxes. He afterwards came into conflict with Assyria, and acquired more territory on its northern frontier. He also subdued the Mannai, who had risen in revolt.

For three years (781-778 B.C.) the general of Shalmaneser IV waged war constantly with Urartu, and again in 776 B.C. and 774 B.C. attempts were made to prevent the southern expansion of that Power. On more than one occasion the Assyrians were defeated and compelled to retreat.

Assyria suffered serious loss of prestige on account of its inability to hold in check its northern rival. Damascus rose in revolt and had to be subdued, and northern Syria was greatly disturbed. Hadrach was visited in the last year of the king's reign.

Ashur-dan III (771-763 B.C.) occupied the Assyrian throne during a period of great unrest. He was unable to attack Urartu. His army had to operate instead on his eastern and southern frontiers. A great plague broke out in 765 B.C., the year in which Hadrach had again to be dealt with. On June 15, 763 B.C., there was a total eclipse of the sun, and that dread event was followed by a revolt at Asshur which was no doubt of priestly origin. The king's son Adad-nirari was involved in it, but it is not certain whether or not he displaced his father for a time. In 758 B.C. Ashur-dan again showed signs of activity by endeavouring to suppress the revolts which during the period of civil war had broken out in Syria.

Adad-nirari V came to the throne in 763 B.C. He had to deal with revolts in Asshur in other cities. Indeed for the greater part of his reign he seems to have been kept fully engaged endeavouring to establish his authority within the Assyrian borders. The Syrian provinces regained their independence.

During the first four years of his successor Ashur-nirari IV (753-746 B.C.)

[p. 443]

the army never left Assyria. Namri was visited in 749-748 B.C., but it is not certain whether he fought against the Urartians, or the Aramaeans who had become active during this period of Assyrian decline. In 746 B.C. a revolt broke out in the city of Kalkhi and the king had to leave it. Soon afterwards he died--perhaps he was assassinated--and none of his sons came to the throne. A year previously Nabu-natsir, known to the Greeks as Nabonassar, was crowned king of Babylonia.

Ashur-nirari IV appears to have been a monarch of somewhat like character to the famous Akhenaton of Egypt--an idealist for whom war had no attractions. He kept his army at home while his foreign possessions rose in revolt one after another. Apparently he had dreams of guarding Assyria against attack by means of treaties of peace. He arranged one with a Mesopotamian king, Mati-ilu of Agusi, who pledged himself not to go to war without the consent of his Assyrian overlord, and it is possible that there were other documents of like character which have not survived to us. During his leisure hours the king engaged himself in studious pursuits and made additions to the royal library. In the end his disappointed soldiers found a worthy leader in one of its generals who seized the throne and assumed the royal name of Tiglath-pileser.

Ashur-nirari IV was the last king of the Middle Empire of Assyria. He may have been a man of high character and refinement and worthy of our esteem, although an unsuitable ruler for a predatory State.

Footnotes

^418:1 The Land of the Hittites, J. Garstang, p. 354.

^419:1 The Old Testament in the Light of the Historical Records and Legends of Assyria and Babylonia, T. G. Pinches, p. 343.

^423:1 Nat. Hist., v, 19 and Strabo, xvi, 1-27.

^424:1 The Mahabharata: Adi Parva, sections lxxi and lxxii (Roy's translation, pp. 213-216), and Indian Myth and Legend, pp. 157 et seq.

^424:2 That is, without ceremony but with consent.

^425:1 The Golden Bough (The Scapegoat), pp. 369 et seq. (3rd edition). Perhaps the mythic Semiramis and legends connected were in existence long before the historic Sammu-rammat, though the two got mixed up.

^425:2 Herodotus, i, 184.

^425:3 De dea Syria, 9-14.

^425:4 Strabo, xvi, 1, 2.

^426:1 Diodorus Siculus, ii, 3.

^426:2 Herodotus, 105.

^426:3 Diodorus Siculus, ii, 4.

^426:4 De dea Syria, 14.

^427:1 This little bird allied to the woodpecker twists its neck strangely when alarmed. It may have symbolized the coquettishness of fair maidens. As love goddesses were "Fates", however, the wryneck may have been connected with the belief that the perpetrator of a murder, or a death spell, could be detected when he approached his victim's corpse. If there was no wound to "bleed afresh", the "death thraw" (the contortions of death) might indicate who the criminal was. In a Scottish ballad regarding a lady, who was murdered by her lover, the verse occurs:

'T was in the middle o' the night
 The cock began to craw;
 And at the middle o' the night
 The corpse began to thraw.

^428:1 Langdon's Sumerian and Babylonian Psalms, pp. 133, 135.

^428:2 Introduction to Lane's Manners and Customs of the Modern Egyptians.

^428:3 Tammuz is referred to in a Sumerian psalm as "him of the dovelike voice, yea, dovelike". He may have had a dove form. Angus, the Celtic god of spring, love, and fertility, had a swan form; he also had his seasonal period of sleep like Tammuz.

^429:1 Campbell's Superstitions of the Scottish Highlands, p. 288.

^429:2 Indian Myth and Legend, p. 95.

^429:3 Ibid., pp. 329-30.

^430:1 Crete, the Forerunner of Greece, C. H. and H. B. Hawes, p. 139.

^430:2 The Discoveries in Crete, pp. 137-8.

^430:3 Religion of the Semites, p. 294.

^431:1 Egyptian Myth and Legend, p. 59.

^431:2 Including the goose, one of the forms of the harvest goddess.

^431:3 Brand's Popular Antiquities, vol. ii, 230-1 and vol. iii, 232 (1899 ed.).

^431:4 Ibid., vol. iii, 217. The myrtle was used for love charms.

^432:1 The Golden Bough (Spirits of the Corn and of the Wild), vol. ii, p. 293 (3rd ed.).

^433:1 Herodotus, ii, 69, 71, and 77.

^433:2 Brand's Popular Antiquities, vol. iii, p. 227.

^434:1 Cited by Professor Burrows in The Discoveries in Crete, p. 134.

^435:1 Like the Egyptian Horus, Nebo had many phases: he was connected with the sun and moon, the planet Mercury, water and crops; he was young and yet old--a mystical god.

^435:2 Aspects of Religious Belief and Practice in Babylonia and Assyria, pp. 94 et seq.

^436:1 Babylonian Magic and Sorcery, L. W. King, pp. 6-7 and 26-7.

^438:1 2 Kings, xiii, 3.

^438:2 2 Kings, xiii, 14-25.

^439:1 2 Kings, xiii, 5, 6.

^440:1 The masses of the Urartian folk appear to have been of Hatti stock--"broad heads", like their descendants, the modern Armenians.

^441:1 It is uncertain whether this city or Kullani in north Syria is the Biblical Calno. Isaiah, x, 9.

     
Myths of Babylonia and Assyria, by Donald A. MacKenzie, [1915], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 444] [ch-19]

  

CHAPTER XIX

  

Assyria's Age of Splendour

Tiglath-pileser IV, the Biblical Pul--Babylonian Campaign--Urartian Ambitions in North Syria--Battle of Two Kings and Flight of Sharduris--Conquest of Syro-Cappadocian States--Hebrew History from Jehu to Menahem--Israel subject to Assyria--Urartu's Power broken--Ahaz 's Appeal to Assyria--Damascus and Israel subdued--Babylonia united to Assyria--Shalmaneser and Hoshea--Sargon deports the "Lost Ten Tribes"--Merodach Baladan King of Babylonia--Egyptian Army of Allies routed--Ahaz and Isaiah--Frontier Campaigns--Merodach Baladan overthrown--Sennacherib and the Hittite States--Merodach Baladan's second and brief Reign--Hezekiah and Sennacherib--Destruction of Assyrian Army--Sack of Babylon--Esarhaddon--A Second Semiramis--Raids of Elamites, Cimmerians, Scythians, and Medes--Sack of Sidon--Manasseh and Isaiah's Fate--Esarhaddon conquers Lower Egypt--Revolt of Assyrian Nobles--Ashurbanipal.

WE now enter upon the last and most brilliant phase of Assyrian civilization--the period of the Third or New Empire during which flourished Tiglath-pileser IV, the mighty conqueror; the Shalmaneser of the Bible; "Sargon the Later", who transported the "lost ten tribes" of Israel; Sennacherib, the destroyer of Babylon, and Esarhaddon, who made Lower Egypt an Assyrian province. We also meet with notable figures of Biblical fame, in-chiding Ahaz, Hezekiah, Isaiah, and the idolatrous Manasseh.

Tiglath-pileser IV, who deposed Ashur-nirari IV, was known to the Babylonians as Pulu, which, some think, was a term of contempt signifying "wild animal". In the Bible he is referred to as Pul, Tiglath-pilneser, and

[p. 445]

[paragraph continues] Tiglath-pileser. [*1] He came to the Assyrian throne towards the end of April in 745 B.C. and reigned until 727 B.C. We know nothing regarding his origin, but it seems clear that he was not of royal descent. He appears to have been a popular leader of the revolt against Ashur-nirari, who, like certain of his predecessors, had pronounced pro-Babylonian tendencies. It is significant to note in this connection that the new king was an unswerving adherent of the cult of Ashur, by the adherents of which he was probably strongly supported.

Tiglath-pileser combined in equal measure those qualities of generalship and statesmanship which were necessary for the reorganization of the Assyrian state and the revival of its military prestige. At the beginning of his reign there was much social discontent and suffering. The national exchequer had been exhausted by the loss of tribute from revolting provinces, trade was paralysed, and the industries were in a languishing condition. Plundering bands of Aramaeans were menacing the western frontiers and had overrun part of northern Babylonia. New political confederacies in Syria kept the north-west regions in a constant state of unrest, and the now powerful Urartian kingdom was threatening the Syro-Cappadocian states as if its rulers had dreams of building up a great world empire on the ruins of that of Assyria.

Tiglath-pileser first paid attention to Babylonia, and extinguished the resistance of the Aramaeans in Akkad. He appears to have been welcomed by Nabonassar, who became his vassal, and he offered sacrifices in the cities of Babylon, Sippar, Cuthah, and Nippur. Sippar had been occupied by Aramaeans, as on a previous occasion when they destroyed the temple of the sun god Shamash which was restored by Nabu-aplu-iddina of Babylon.

[p. 446]

Tiglath-pileser did not overrun Chaldaea, but he destroyed its capital, Sarrabanu, and impaled King Nabu-ushabshi. He proclaimed himself "King of Sumer and Akkad" and "King of the Four Quarters". The frontier states of Elam and Media were visited and subdued.

Having disposed of the Aramaeans and other raiders, the Assyrian monarch had next to deal with his most powerful rival, Urartu. Argistis I had been succeeded by Sharduris III, who had formed an alliance with the north Mesopotamian king, Mati-ilu of Agusi, on whom Ashur-nirari had reposed his faith. Ere long Sharduris pressed southward from Malatia and compelled the north Syrian Hittite states, including Carchemish, to acknowledge his suzerainty. A struggle then ensued between Urartu and Assyria for the possession of the Syro-Cappadocian states.

At this time the reputation of Tiglath-pileser hung in the balance. If he failed in his attack on Urartu, his prestige would vanish at home and abroad and Sharduris might, after establishing himself in northern Syria, invade Assyria and compel its allegiance.

Two courses lay before Tiglath-pileser. He could either cross the mountains and invade Urartu, or strike at his rival in north Syria, where the influence of Assyria had been completely extinguished. The latter appeared to him to be the most feasible and judicious procedure, for if he succeeded in expelling the invaders he would at the same time compel the allegiance of the rebellious Hittite states.

In the spring of 743 B.C. Tiglath-pileser led his army across the Euphrates and reached Arpad without meeting with any resistance. The city appears to have opened its gates to him although it was in the kingdom of Mati-ilu, who acknowledged Urartian sway. Its foreign garrison

 

Click to enlarge
TIGLATH-PILESER IV IN HIS CHARIOT
 Photo. Mansell

 

[p. 447]

was slaughtered. Well might Sharduris exclaim, in the words of the prophet, "Where is the king of Arpad? where are the gods of Arpad?" [*1]

Leaving Arpad, Tiglath-pileser advanced to meet Sharduris, who was apparently hastening southward to attack the Assyrians in the rear. Tiglath-pileser, however, crossed the Euphrates and, moving northward, delivered an unexpected attack on the Urartian army in Qummukh. A fierce battle ensued, and one of its dramatic incidents was a single combat between the rival kings. The tide of battle flowed in Assyria's favour, and when evening was falling the chariots and cavalry of Urartu were thrown into confusion. An attempt was made to capture King Sharduris, who leapt from his chariot and made hasty escape on horseback, hotly pursued in the gathering darkness by an Assyrian contingent of cavalry. Not until "the bridge of the Euphrates" was reached was the exciting night chase abandoned.

Tiglath-pileser had achieved an overwhelming victory against an army superior to his own in numbers. Over 70,000 of the enemy were slain or taken captive, while the Urartian camp with its stores and horses and followers fell into the hands of the triumphant Assyrians. Tiglath-pileser burned the royal tent and throne as an offering to Ashur, and carried Sharduris's bed to the temple of the goddess of Nineveh, whither he returned to prepare a new plan of campaign against his northern rival.

Despite the blow dealt against Urartu, Assyria did not immediately regain possession of north Syria. The shifty Mati-ilu either cherished the hope that Sharduris would recover strength and again invade north Syria, or that he might himself establish an empire in that region. Tiglath-pileser had therefore to march westward again.

[p. 448]

[paragraph continues] For three years he conducted vigorous campaigns in "the western land", where he met with vigorous resistance. In 740 B.C. Arpad was captured and Mati-ilu deposed and probably put to death. Two years later Kullani and Hamath fell, and the districts which they controlled were included in the Assyrian empire and governed by Crown officials.

Once again the Hebrews came into contact with Assyria. The Dynasty of Jehu had come to an end by this time. Its fall may not have been unconnected with the trend of events in Assyria during the closing years of the Middle Empire.

Supported by Assyria, the kings of Israel had become powerful and haughty. Jehoash, the grandson of Jehu, had achieved successes in conflict with Damascus. In Judah the unstable Amaziah, son of Joash, was strong enough to lay a heavy hand on Edom, and flushed with triumph then resolved to readjust his relations with his overlord, the king of Israel. Accordingly he sent a communication to Jehoash which contained some proposal regarding their political relations, concluding with the offer or challenge, "Come, let us look one another in the face". A contemptuous answer was returned.

Jehoash the king of Israel sent to Amaziah king of Judah, saying, The thistle that was in Lebanon sent to the cedar that was in Lebanon, saying, Give thy daughter to my son to wife: and there passed by a wild beast that was in Lebanon, and trode down the thistle. Thou hast indeed smitten Edom, and thine heart hath lifted thee up: glory of this, and tarry at home, for why shouldest thou meddle to thy hurt, that thou shouldest fall, even thou, and Judah with thee?

But Amaziah would not hear. Therefore Jehoash king of Israel went up; and he and Amaziah king of Judah looked one another in the face at Beth-shemesh [city of Shamash, the sun god], which belongeth to Judah. And Judah was put to the worse before Israel; and they fled every man to their tents.

[p. 449]

Jehoash afterwards destroyed a large portion of the wall of Jerusalem and plundered the temple and palace, returning home to Samaria with rich booty and hostages. [*1] Judah thus remained a vassal state of Israel's.

Jeroboam, son of Jehoash, had a long and prosperous reign. About 773 B.C. he appears to have co-operated with Assyria and conquered Damascus and Hamath. His son Zachariah, the last king of the Jehu Dynasty of Israel, came to the throne in 740 B.C. towards the close of the reign of Azariah, son of Amaziah, king of Judah. Six months afterwards he was assassinated by Shallum. This usurper held sway at Samaria for only a month. "For Menahem the son of Gadi went up from Tirzah, and came to Samaria, and smote Shallum the son of Jabesh in Samaria, and slew him, and reigned in his stead." [*2]

Tiglath-pileser was operating successfully in middle Syria when he had dealings with, among others, "Menihimme (Menahem) of the city of the Samarians", who paid tribute. No resistance was possible on the part of Menahem, the usurper, who was probably ready to welcome the Assyrian conqueror, so that, by arranging an alliance, he might secure his own position. The Biblical reference is as follows: "And Pul the king of Assyria came against the land: and Menahem gave Pul a thousand talents of silver, that his hand might be with him to confirm the kingdom in his hand. And Menahem exacted the money of Israel, even of all the mighty men of wealth, of each man fifty shekels of silver, to give to the king of Assyria. So the king of Assyria turned back, and stayed not there in the land." [*3] Rezin of Damascus, Hiram of Tyre, and Zabibi, queen of the Arabians, also sent gifts to Tiglath-pileser at this time (738 B.C.). Aramaean revolts on the borders of Elam were suppressed by

[p. 450]

[paragraph continues] Assyrian governors, and large numbers of the inhabitants were transported to various places in Syria.

Tiglath-pileser next operated against the Median and other hill tribes in the north-east. In 735 B.C. he invaded Urartu, the great Armenian state which had threatened the supremacy of Assyria in north Syria and Cappadocia. King Sharduris was unable to protect his frontier or hamper the progress of the advancing army, which penetrated to his capital. Dhuspas was soon captured, but Sharduris took refuge in his rocky citadel which he and his predecessors had laboured to render impregnable. There he was able to defy the might of Assyria, for the fortress could he approached on the western side alone by a narrow path between high walls and towers, so that only a small force could find room to operate against the numerous garrison.

Tiglath-pileser had to content himself by devastating the city on the plain and the neighbouring villages. He overthrew buildings, destroyed orchards, and transported to Nineveh those of the inhabitants he had not put to the sword, with all the live stock he could lay hands on. Thus was Urartu crippled and humiliated: it never regained its former prestige among the northern states.

In the following year Tiglath-pileser returned to Syria. The circumstances which made this expedition necessary are of special interest on account of its Biblical associations. Menahem, king of Israel, had died, and was succeeded by his son Pekahiah. "But Pekah the son of Remaliah, a captain of his, conspired against him and smote him in Samaria, in the palace of the king's house, . . . and he killed him, and reigned in his room." [*1] When Pekah was on the throne, Ahaz began to reign over Judah.

Judah had taken advantage of the disturbed conditions

[p. 451]

in Israel to assert its independence. The walls of Jerusalem were repaired by Jotham, father of Ahaz, and a tunnel constructed to supply it with water. Isaiah refers to this tunnel: "Go forth and meet Ahaz . . . at the end of the conduit of the upper pool in the highway of the fuller's field" (Isaiah, vii, 3).

Pekah had to deal with a powerful party in Israel which favoured the re-establishment of David's kingdom in Palestine. Their most prominent leader was the prophet Amos, whose eloquent exhortations were couched in no uncertain terms. He condemned Israel for its idolatries, and cried:

For thus saith the Lord unto the house of Israel, Seek ye me and ye shall live. . . . Have ye offered unto me sacrifices and offerings in the wilderness forty years, O house of Israel? But ye have borne the tabernacle of your Moloch and Chiun your images, the star of your god, which ye made to yourselves. [*1]

Pekah sought to extinguish the orthodox party's movement by subduing Judah. So he plotted with Rezin, king of Damascus. Amos prophesied,

Thus saith the Lord. . . . I will send a fire into the house of Hazael, which will devour the palaces of Ben-hadad. I will break also the bar of Damascus . . . and the people of Syria shall go into captivity unto Kir. . . . The remnant of the Philistines shall perish.

Tyre, Edom, and Ammon would also be punished. [*2]

Judah was completely isolated by the allies who acknowledged the suzerainty of Damascus. Soon after Ahaz came to the throne he found himself hemmed in on every side by adversaries who desired to accomplish his fall. "At that time Rezin, king of Syria, and Pekah . . . came up to Jerusalem to war: and they besieged

[p. 452]

[paragraph continues] Ahaz, but could not overcome him." [*1] Judah, however, was overrun; the city of Elath was captured and restored to Edom, while the Philistines were liberated from the control of Jerusalem.

Isaiah visited Ahaz and said,

Take heed, and be quiet; fear not, neither be faint-hearted for the two tails of these smoking firebrands, for the fierce anger of Rezin with Syria, and of the son of Remaliah. Because Syria, Ephraim, and the son of Remaliah, have taken evil counsel against thee, saying, Let us go up against Judah, and vex it, and let us make a breach therein for us, and set a king in the midst of it, even the son of Tabeal: Thus saith the Lord God, It shall not stand, neither shall it come to pass. [*2]

The unstable Ahaz had sought assistance from the Baal, and "made his son to pass through the fire, according to the abominations of the heathen". [*3] Then he resolved to purchase the sympathy of one of the great Powers. There was no hope of assistance from "the fly that is in the uttermost part of the rivers of Egypt", for the Ethiopian Pharaohs had not yet conquered the Delta region, so he turned to "the bee that is in the land of Assyria". [*4] Assyria was the last resource of the king of Judah.

So Ahaz sent messengers to Tiglath-pileser king of Assyria, saying, I am thy servant and thy son: come up and save me out of the hand of Syria and out of the hand of the king of Israel, which rise up against me. And Ahaz took the silver and gold that was found in the house of the Lord, and in the treasures of the king's house, and sent it for a present to the king of Assyria.

And the king of Assyria hearkened unto him: for the king of Assyria went up against Damascus, and took it, and carried the people of it captive to Kir [*5] and slew Rezin. [*6]

[p. 453]

Tiglath-pileser recorded that Rezin took refuge in his city like "a mouse". Israel was also dealt with.

In the days of Pekah king of Israel came Tiglath-pileser king of Assyria, and took Ijon and Abel-beth-maachah, and Janoah and Kedesh, and Hazor, and Gilead, and Galilee, all the land of Naphtali, and carried them captive to Assyria. And Hoshea the son of Elah made a conspiracy against Pekah the son of Remaliah, and smote him, and slew him, and reigned in his stead. [*1]

Tiglath-pileser recorded: "They overthrew Paqaha (Pekah), their king, and placed Ausi'a (Hoshea) over them". He swept through Israel "like a hurricane". The Philistines and the Arabians of the desert were also subdued. Tribute was sent to the Assyrian monarch by Phoenicia, Moab, Ammon, and Edom. It was a proud day for Ahaz when he paid a visit to Tiglath-pileser at Damascus. [*2] An Assyrian governor was appointed to rule over Syria and its subject states.

Babylon next claimed the attention of Tiglath-pileser. Nabonassar had died and was succeeded by his son Nabu-nadin-zeri, who, after reigning for two years, was slain in a rebellion. The throne was then seized by Nabu-shum-ukin, but in less than two months this usurper was assassinated and the Chaldaeans had one of their chiefs, Ukinzer, proclaimed king (732 B.C.).

When the Assyrian king returned from Syria in 731 B.C. he invaded Babylonia. He was met with a stubborn resistance. Ukinzer took refuge in his capital, Shapia, which held out successfully, although the surrounding country was ravaged and despoiled. Two years afterwards Tiglath-pileser returned, captured Shapia, and restored peace throughout Babylonia. He was welcomed in Babylon, which opened its gates to him, and he had himself

[p. 454]

proclaimed king of Sumer and Akkad. The Chaldaeans paid tribute.

Tiglath-pileser had now reached the height of his ambition. He had not only extended his empire in the west from Cappadocia to the river of Egypt, crippled Urartu and pacified his eastern frontier, but brought Assyria into close union with Babylonia, the mother land, the home of culture and the land of the ancient gods. He did not live long, however, to enjoy his final triumph, for he died a little over twelve months after he "took the hands of Bel (Merodach)" at Babylon.

He was succeeded by Shalmaneser V (727-722 B.C.), who may have been his son, but this is not quite certain. Little is known regarding his brief reign. In 725 B.C. he led an expedition to Syria and Phoenicia. Several of the vassal peoples had revolted when they heard of the death of Tiglath-pileser. These included the Phoenicians, the Philistines, and the Israelites who were intriguing with either Egypt or Mutsri.

Apparently Hoshea, king of Israel, pretended when the Assyrians entered his country that he remained friendly. Shalmaneser, however, was well informed, and made Hoshea a prisoner. Samaria closed its gates against him although their king had been dispatched to Assyria.

The Biblical account of the campaign is as follows: "Against him (Hoshea) came up Shalmaneser king of Assyria; and Hoshea became his servant, and gave him presents. And the king of Assyria found conspiracy in Hoshea: for he had sent messengers to So king of Egypt, [*1] and brought no present to the king of Assyria,

[p. 455]

as he had done year by year; therefore the king of Assyria shut him up and bound him in prison.

"Then the king of Assyria came up throughout all the land, and went up to Samaria, and besieged it three years." [*1]

Shalmaneser died before Samaria was captured, and may have been assassinated. The next Assyrian monarch, Sargon II (722-705 B.C.), was not related to either of his two predecessors. He is referred to by Isaiah, [*2] and is the Arkeanos of Ptolemy. He was the Assyrian monarch who deported the "Lost Ten Tribes".

"In the ninth year of Hoshea" (and the first of Sargon) "the king of Assyria took Samaria, and carried Israel away into Assyria, and placed them in Halah and in Habor by the river of Gozan, and in the cities of the Medes." [*3] In all, according to Sargon's record, "27,290 people dwelling in the midst of it (Samaria) I carried off".

They (the Israelites) left all the commandments of the Lord their God, and made them molten images, even two calves, and made a grove, and worshipped all the host of heaven (the stars), and served Baal. And they caused their sons and their daughters to pass through the fire, and used divination and enchantments, and sold themselves to do evil in the sight of the Lord, to provoke him to anger. Therefore the Lord was very angry with Israel, and removed them out of his sight: there was none left but the tribe of Judah only.

And the king of Assyria brought men from Babylon, and from Cuthah, and from Ava, and from Hamath, and from Sepharvaim, and placed them in the cities of Samaria instead of the children of Israel: and they possessed Samaria, and dwelt in the cities thereof. . . . And the men of Babylon made Succoth-benoth, and the men of Cuth (Cuthah) made Nergal, and the men of Hamath made

[p. 456]

Ashima, and the Avites made Nibhaz and Tartak, and the Sepharites burnt their children in fire to Adram-melech and Anam-melech, the gods of Sepharvaim.

A number of the new settlers were slain by lions, and the king of Assyria ordered that a Samaritan priest should be sent to "teach them the manner of the God of the land". This man was evidently an orthodox Hebrew, for he taught them "how they should fear the Lord. . . . So they feared the Lord", but also "served their own gods . . . their graven images". [*1]

There is no evidence to suggest that the "Ten Lost Tribes", "regarding whom so many nonsensical theories have been formed", were not ultimately absorbed by the peoples among whom they settled between Mesopotamia and the Median Highlands. [*2] The various sections must have soon lost touch with one another. They were not united like the Jews (the people of Judah), who were transported to Babylonia a century and a half later, by a common religious bond, for although a few remained faithful to Abraham's God, the majority of the Israelites worshipped either the Baal or the Queen of Heaven.

The Assyrian policy of transporting the rebellious inhabitants of one part of their empire to another was intended to break their national spirit and compel them to become good and faithful subjects amongst the aliens, who must have disliked them. "The colonists," says Professor Maspero, "exposed to the same hatred as the original Assyrian conquerors, soon forgot to look upon the latter as the oppressors of all, and, allowing their present grudge to efface the memory of past injuries, did

 

Click to enlarge
COLOSSAL WINGED AND HUMAN-HEADED BULL AND MYTHOLOGICAL BEING
 From doorway in Palace of Sargon at Khorsabad: now in British Museum.
 Photo. Mansell

 

[p. 457]

not hesitate to make common cause with them. In time of peace the (Assyrian) governor did his best to protect them against molestation on the part of the natives, and in return for this they rallied round him whenever the latter threatened to get out of hand, and helped him to stifle the revolt, or hold it in check until the arrival of reinforcements. Thanks to their help, the empire was consolidated and maintained without too many violent outbreaks in regions far removed from the capital, and beyond the immediate reach of the sovereign." [*1]

While Sargon was absent in the west, a revolt broke out in Babylonia. A Chaldaean king, Merodach Baladan III, had allied himself with the Elamites, and occupied Babylon. A battle was fought at Dur-ilu and the Elamites retreated. Although Sargon swept triumphantly through the land, he had to leave his rival, the tyrannous Chaldaean, in possession of the capital, and he reigned there for over eleven years.

Trouble was brewing in Syria. It was apparently fostered by an Egyptian king--probably Bocchoris of Sais, the sole Pharaoh so far as can be ascertained of the Twenty-fourth Dynasty, who had allied himself with the local dynasts of Lower Egypt and apparently sought to extend his sway into Asia, the Ethiopians being supreme in Upper Egypt. An alliance had been formed to cast off the yoke of Assyria. The city states involved Arpad, Simirra, Damascus, Samaria, and Gaza. Hanno of Gaza had fled to Egypt after Tiglath-pileser came to the relief of Judah and broke up the league of conspirators by capturing Damascus, and punishing Samaria, Gaza, and other cities. His return in Sargon's reign was evidently connected with the new rising in which he took part. The throne of Hamath had been seized by an adventurer,

[p. 458]

named Ilu-bi'di, a smith. The Philistines of Ashdod and the Arabians being strongly pro-Egyptian in tendency, were willing sympathizers and helpers against the hated Assyrians.

Sargon appeared in the west with a strong army before the allies had matured their plans. He met the smith king of Hamath in battle at Qarqar, and, having defeated him, had him skinned alive. Then he marched southward. At Rapiki (Raphia) he routed an army of allies. Shabi (? So), the Tartan (commander-in-chief) of Pi'ru [*1] (Pharaoh), King of Mutsri (an Arabian state confused, perhaps, with Misraim = Egypt), escaped "like to a shepherd whose sheep have been taken". Piru and other two southern kings, Samsi and Itamara, afterwards paid tribute to Sargon. Hanno of Gaza was transported to Asshur.

In 715 B.C. Sargon, according to his records, appeared with his army in Arabia, and received gifts in token of homage from Piru of Mutsri, Samsi of Aribi, and Itamara of Saba.

Four years later a revolt broke out in Ashdod which was, it would appear, directly due to the influence of Shabaka, the Ethiopian Pharaoh, who had deposed Bocchoris of Sais. Another league was about to be formed against Assyria. King Azuri of Ashdod had been deposed because of his Egyptian sympathies by the Assyrian governor, and his brother Akhimiti was placed on the throne. The citizens, however, overthrew Akhimiti, and an adventurer from Cyprus was proclaimed king (711 B.C.).

It would appear that advances were made by the anti-Assyrians

[p. 459]

to Ahaz of Judah. That monarch was placed in a difficult position. He knew that if the allies succeeded in stamping out Assyrian authority in Syria and Palestine they would certainly depose him, but if on the other hand he joined them and Assyria triumphed, its emperor would show him small mercy. As Babylon defied Sargon and received the active support of Elam, and there were rumours of risings in the north, it must have seemed to the western kings as if the Assyrian empire was likely once again to go to pieces.

Fortunately for Ahaz he had a wise counsellor at this time in the great statesman and prophet, the scholarly Isaiah. The Lord spake by Isaiah saying, "Go and loose the sackcloth from off thy loins, and put off thy shoe from thy foot. And he did so, walking naked and barefoot. And the Lord said, Like as my servant Isaiah hath walked naked and barefoot three years for a sign and wonder upon Egypt and upon Ethiopia; so shall the king of Assyria lead away the Egyptians prisoners. . . . And they (the allies) shall be afraid and ashamed of Ethiopia their expectation, and of Egypt their glory." [*1]

Isaiah warned Ahaz against joining the league, "in the year that Tartan [*2] came unto Ashdod (when Sargon the king of Assyria sent him)". The Tartan "fought against Ashdod and took it". [*3] According to Sargon's record the Pretender of Ashdod fled to Arabia, where he was seized by an Arabian chief and delivered up to Assyria. The pro-Egyptian party in Palestine went under a cloud for a period thereafter.

Before Sargon could deal with Merodach Baladan of Babylon, he found it necessary to pursue the arduous task of breaking up a powerful league which had been formed against him in the north. The Syro-Cappadocian Hittite

[p. 460]

states, including Tabal in Asia Minor and Carchemish in north Syria, were combining for the last time against Assyria, supported by Mita (Midas), king of the Muski-Phrygians, and Rusas, son of Sharduris III, king of Urartu.

Urartu had recovered somewhat from the disasters which it had suffered at the hands of Tiglath-pileser, and was winning back portions of its lost territory on the north-east frontier of Assyria. A buffer state had been formed in that area by Tiglath-pileser, who had assisted the king of the Mannai to weld together the hill tribes-men between Lake Van and Lake Urmia into an organized nation. Iranzu, its ruler, remained faithful to Assyria and consequently became involved in war with Rusas of Urartu, who either captured or won over several cities of the Mannai. Iranzu was succeeded by his son Aza, and this king was so pronounced a pro-Assyrian that his pro-Urartian subjects assassinated him and set on the throne Bagdatti of Umildish.

Soon after Sargon began his operations in the north he captured Bagdatti and had him skinned alive. The flag of revolt, however, was kept flying by his brother, Ullusunu, but ere long this ambitious man found it prudent to submit to Sargon on condition that he would retain the throne as a faithful Assyrian vassal. His sudden change of policy appears to have been due to the steady advance of the Median tribes into the territory of the Mannai. Sargon conducted a vigorous and successful campaign against the raiders, and extended Ullusunu's area of control.

The way was now clear to Urartu. In 714 B.C. Sargon attacked the revolting king of Zikirtu, who was supported by an army led by Rusas, his overlord. A fierce battle was fought in which the Assyrians achieved

[p. 461]

a great victory. King Rusas fled, and when he found that the Assyrians pressed home their triumph by laying waste the country before them, he committed suicide, according to the Assyrian records, although those of Urartu indicate that he subsequently took part in the struggle against Sargon. The Armenian peoples were compelled to acknowledge the suzerainty of Assyria, and the conqueror received gifts from various tribes between Lake Van and the Caspian Sea, and along the frontiers from Lake Van towards the south-east as far as the borders of Elam.

Rusas of Urartu was succeeded by Argistes II, who reigned over a shrunken kingdom. He intrigued with neighbouring states against Assyria, but was closely watched. Ere long he found himself caught between two fires. During his reign the notorious Cimmerians and Scythians displayed much activity in the north and raided his territory.

The pressure of fresh infusions of Thraco-Phrygian tribes into western Asia Minor had stirred Midas of the Muski to co-operate with the Urartian power in an attempt to stamp out Assyrian influence in Cilicia, Cappadocia, and north Syria. A revolt in Tabal in 718 B.C. was extinguished by Sargon, but in the following year evidences were forthcoming of a more serious and wide-spread rising. Pisiris, king of Carchemish, threw off the Assyrian yoke. Before, however, his allies could hasten to his assistance he was overcome by the vigilant Sargon, who deported a large proportion of the city's inhabitants and incorporated it in an Assyrian province. Tabal revolted in 713 B.C. and was similarly dealt with. In 712 B.C. Milid had to be overcome. The inhabitants were transported, and "Suti" Aramaean peoples settled in their homes. The king of Commagene, having

[p. 462]

remained faithful, received large extensions of territory. Finally in 709 B.C. Midas of the Muski-Phrygians was compelled to acknowledge the suzerainty of Assyria. The northern confederacy was thus completely worsted and broken up. Tribute was paid by many peoples, including the rulers of Cyprus.

Sargon was now able to deal with Babylonia, which for about twelve years had been ruled by Merodach Baladan, who oppressed the people and set at defiance ancient laws by seizing private estates and transferring them to his Chaldaean kinsmen. He still received the active support of Elam.

Sargon's first move was to interpose his army between those of the Babylonians and Elamites. Pushing southward, he subdued the Aramaeans on the eastern banks of the Tigris, and drove the Elamites into the mountains. Then he invaded middle Babylonia from the east. Merodach Baladan hastily evacuated Babylon, and, moving southward, succeeded in evading Sargon's army. Finding Elam was unable to help him, he took refuge in the Chaldaean capital, Bit Jakin, in southern Babylonia.

Sargon was visited by the priests of Babylon and Borsippa, and hailed as the saviour of the ancient kingdom. He was afterwards proclaimed king at E-sagila, where he "took the hands of Bel". Then having expelled the Aramaeans from Sippar, he hastened southward, attacked Bit Jakin and captured it. Merodach Baladan escaped into Elam. The whole of Chaldaea was subdued.

Thus "Sargon the Later" entered at length into full possession of the empire of Sargon of Akkad. In Babylonia he posed as an incarnation of his ancient namesake, and had similarly Messianic pretensions which were no doubt inspired by the Babylonian priesthood. Under him Assyria attained its highest degree of splendour.

[p. 463]

[paragraph continues] He recorded proudly not only his great conquests but also his works of public utility: he restored ancient cities, irrigated vast tracts of country, fostered trade, and promoted the industries. Like the pious Pharaohs of Egypt he boasted that he fed the hungry and protected the weak against the strong.

Sargon found time during his strenuous career as a conqueror to lay out and build a new city, called Dur-Sharrukin, "the burgh of Sargon", to the north of Nineveh. It was completed before he undertook the Babylonian campaign. The new palace was occupied in 708 B.C. Previous to that period he had resided principally at Kalkhi, in the restored palace of Ashur-natsir-pal III.

He was a worshipper of many gods. Although he claimed to have restored the supremacy of Asshur "which had come to an end", he not only adored Ashur but also revived the ancient triad of Anu, Bel, and Ea, and fostered the growth of the immemorial "mother-cult" of Ishtar. Before he died he appointed one of his sons, Sennacherib, viceroy of the northern portion of the empire. He was either assassinated at a military review or in some frontier war. As much is suggested by the following entry in an eponym list.

Eponymy of Upahhir-belu, prefect of the city of Amedu . . .
 According to the oracle of the Kulummite(s) . . .
 A soldier (entered) the camp of the king of Assyria (and killed him?), month Ab, day 12th, Sennacherib (sat on the throne). [*1]

The fact that Sennacherib lamented his father's sins suggests that the old king had in some manner offended

[p. 464]

the priesthood. Perhaps, like some of the Middle Empire monarchs, he succumbed to the influence of Babylon during the closing years of his life. It is stated that "he was not buried in his house", which suggests that the customary religious rites were denied him, and that his lost soul was supposed to be a wanderer which had to eat offal and drink impure water like the ghost of a pauper or a criminal.

The task which lay before Sennacherib (705-680 B.C.) was to maintain the unity of the great empire of his distinguished father. He waged minor wars against the Kassite and Illipi tribes on the Elamite border, and the Muski and Hittite tribes in Cappadocia and Cilicia. The Kassites, however, were no longer of any importance, and the Hittite power had been extinguished, for ere the states could recover from the blows dealt by the Assyrians the Cimmerian hordes ravaged their territory. Urartu was also overrun by the fierce barbarians from the north. It was one of these last visits of the Assyrians to Tabal of the Hittites and the land of the Muski (Meshech) which the Hebrew prophet referred to in after-time when he exclaimed:

Asshur is there and all her company: his graves are about him: all of them slain, fallen by the sword. . . . There is Meshech, Tubal, and all her multitude: her graves are round about him: all of them uncircumcised, slain by the sword, though they caused their terror in the land of the living. . . . (Ezekiel, xxxii.)

[paragraph continues] Sennacherib found that Ionians had settled in Cilicia, and he deported large numbers of them to Nineveh. The metal and ivory work at Nineveh show traces of Greek influence after this period.

A great conspiracy was fomented in several states against Sennacherib when the intelligence of Sargon's

[p. 465]

death was bruited abroad. Egypt was concerned in it. Taharka (the Biblical Tirhakah [*1]), the last Pharaoh of the Ethiopian Dynasty, had dreams of re-establishing Egyptian supremacy in Palestine and Syria, and leagued himself with Luli, king of Tyre, Hezekiah, king of Judah, and others. Merodach Baladan, the Chaldaean king, whom Sargon had deposed, supported by Elamites and Aramaeans, was also a party to the conspiracy. "At that time Merodach Baladan, the son of Baladan, king of Babylon, sent letters and a present to Hezekiah . . . And Hezekiah was glad of them." [*2]

Merodach Baladan again seized the throne of Babylon. Sargon's son, who had been appointed governor, was murdered and a pretender sat on the throne for a brief period, but Merodach Baladan thrust him aside and reigned for nine months, during which period he busied himself by encouraging the kings of Judah and Tyre to revolt. Sennacherib invaded Babylonia with a strong army, deposed Merodach Baladan, routed the Chaldaeans and Aramaeans, and appointed as vassal king Bel-ibni, a native prince, who remained faithful to Assyria for about three years.

In 707 B.C. Sennacherib appeared in the west. When he approached Tyre, Luli, the king, fled to Cyprus. The city was not captured, but much of its territory was ceded to the king of Sidon. Askalon was afterwards reduced. At Eltekeh Sennacherib came into conflict with an army of allies, including Ethiopian, Egyptian, and Arabian Mutsri forces, which he routed. Then he captured a number of cities in Judah and transported 200,150 people. He was unable, however, to enter Jerusalem, in which Hezekiah was compelled to remain "like a bird in a cage". It appears that Hezekiah "bought off" the Assyrians on

[p. 466]

this occasion with gifts of gold and silver and jewels, costly furniture, musicians, and female slaves.

In 689 B.C. Sennacherib found it necessary to penetrate Arabia. Apparently another conspiracy was brewing, for Hezekiah again revolted. On his return from the south--according to Berosus he had been in Egypt--the Assyrian king marched against the king of Judah.

And when Hezekiah saw that Sennacherib was come, and that he was purposed to fight against Jerusalem, he took counsel with the princes and his mighty men to stop the waters of the fountains which were without the city: and they did help him. . . . Why should the kings of Assyria come and find much water?

Sennacherib sent messengers to Jerusalem to attempt to stir up the people against Hezekiah. C1 He wrote also letters to rail on the Lord God of Israel, and to speak against him, saying, As the gods of the nations of other lands have not delivered their people out of mine hand, so shall not the God of Hezekiah deliver his people out of mine hand." [*1]

Hezekiah sent his servants to Isaiah, who was in Jerusalem at the time, and the prophet said to them:

Thus shall ye say to your master. Thus saith the Lord, Be not afraid of the words which thou hast heard, with which the servants of the king of Assyria have blasphemed me. Behold, I will send a blast upon him, and he shall hear a rumour, and shall return to his own land; and I will cause him to fall by the sword in his own land. [*2]

According to Berosus, the Babylonian priestly historian, the camp of Sennacherib was visited in the night by swarms of field mice which ate up the quivers and bows and the (leather) handles of shields. Next morning the army fled.

[p. 467]

The Biblical account of the disaster is as follows:

And it came to pass that night, that the angel of the Lord went out, and smote the camp of the Assyrians an hundred and four score and five thousand: and when they arose early in the morning, behold, they were all dead corpses. So Sennacherib king of Assyria departed, and went and returned and dwelt at Nineveh. [*1]

A pestilence may have broken out in the camp, the infection, perhaps, having been carried by field mice. Byron's imagination was stirred by the vision of the broken army of Assyria.

The Assyrian came down like a wolf on the fold,
 And his cohorts were gleaming with purple and gold;
 And the sheen of their spears was like stars of the sea,
 When the blue wave rolls nightly on deep Galilee.

Like the leaves of the forest when summer is green,
 That host with their banners at sunset were seen;
 Like the leaves of the forest when autumn hath blown,
 That host on the morrow lay withered and strown.

For the Angel of Death spread his wings on the blast,
 And breathed on the face of the foe as he passed;
 And the eyes of the sleepers waxed deadly and chill,
 And their hearts but once heaved--and forever grew still!

And there lay the steed with his nostril all wide,
 But through it there rolled not the breath of his pride;
 And the foam of his gasping lay white on the turf,
 And cold as the spray of the rock-beating surf.

And there lay the rider distorted and pale,
 With the dew on his brow, and the rust on his mail;
 And the tents were all silent--the banners alone--
 The lances uplifted--the trumpet unblown.

And the widows of Asshur are loud in their wail,
 And the idols are broke in the temple of Baal; [p. 468]
 And the might of the Gentile, unsmote by the sword,
 Hath melted like snow in the glance of the Lord.

Before this disaster occurred Sennacherib had to invade Babylonia again, for the vassal king, Bel-ibni, had allied himself with the Chaldaeans and raised the standard of revolt. The city of Babylon was besieged and captured, and its unfaithful king deported with a number of nobles to Assyria. Old Merodach Baladan was concerned in the plot and took refuge on the Elamite coast, where the Chaldaeans had formed a colony. He died soon afterwards.

Sennacherib operated in southern Babylonia and invaded Elam. But ere he could return to Assyria he was opposed by a strong army of allies, including Babylonians, Chaldaeans, Aramaeans, Elamites, and Persians, led by Samunu, son of Merodach Baladan. A desperate battle was fought. Although Sennacherib claimed a victory, he was unable to follow it up. This was in 692 B.C. A Chaldaean named Mushezib-Merodach seized the Babylonian throne.

In 691 B.C. Sennacherib again struck a blow for Babylonia, but was unable to depose Mushezib-Merodach. His opportunity came, however, in 689 B.C. Elam had been crippled by raids of the men of Parsua (Persia), and was unable to co-operate with the Chaldaean king of Babylon. Sennacherib captured the great commercial metropolis, took Mushezib-Merodach prisoner, and dispatched him to Nineveh. Then he wreaked his vengeance on Babylon. For several days the Assyrian soldiers looted the houses and temples, and slaughtered the inhabitants without mercy. E-sagila was robbed of its treasures, images of deities were either broken in pieces or sent to Nineveh: the statue of Bel-Merodach was dispatched to

 

Click to enlarge
ASSAULT ON THE CITY OF . . .ALAMMU (? JERUSALEM) BY THE ASSYRIANS UNDER SENNACHERIB
 The besieging archers are protected by wicker screens
 Marble Slab from Kouyunjik (Nineveh): now in British Museum.
 Photo. Mansell

 

[p. 469]

[paragraph continues] Asshur so that he might take his place among the gods who were vassals of Ashur. "The city and its houses," Sennacherib recorded, "from foundation to roof; I destroyed them, I demolished them, I burned them with fire; walls, gateways, sacred chapels, and the towers of earth and tiles, I laid them low and cast them into the Arakhtu." [*1]

"So thorough was Sennacherib's destruction of the city in 689 B.C.," writes Mr. King, "that after several years of work, Dr. Koldewey concluded that all traces of earlier buildings had been destroyed on that occasion. More recently some remains of earlier strata have been recognized, and contract-tablets have been found which date from the period of the First Dynasty. Moreover, a number of earlier pot-burials have been unearthed, but a careful examination of the greater part of the ruins has added little to our knowledge of this most famous city before the Neo-Babylonian period." [*2]

It is possible that Sennacherib desired to supplant Babylon as a commercial metropolis by Nineveh. He extended and fortified that city, surrounding it with two walls protected by moats. According to Diodorus, the walls were a hundred feet high and about fifty feet wide. Excavators have found that at the gates they were about a hundred feet in breadth. The water supply of the city was ensured by the construction of dams and canals, and strong quays were erected to prevent flooding. Sennacherib repaired a lofty platform which was isolated by a canal, and erected upon it his great palace. On another platform he had an arsenal built.

Sennacherib's palace was the most magnificent building of its kind ever erected by an Assyrian emperor. It was

[p. 470]

lavishly decorated, and its bas-reliefs display native art at its highest pitch of excellence. The literary remains of the time also give indication of the growth of culture: the inscriptions are distinguished by their prose style. It is evident that men of culture and refinement were numerous in Assyria. The royal library of Kalkhi received many additions during the reign of the destroyer of Babylon.

Like his father, Sennacherib died a violent death. According to the Babylonian Chronicle he was slain in a revolt by his son "on the twentieth day of Tebet" (680 B.C.). The revolt continued from the "20th of Tebet" (early in January) until the 2nd day of Adar (the middle of February). On the 18th of Adar, Esarhaddon, son of Sennacherib, was proclaimed king.

Berosus states that Sennacherib was murdered by two of his sons, but Esarhaddon was not one of the conspirators. The Biblical reference is as follows: "Sennacherib . . . dwelt at Nineveh. And it came to pass, as he was worshipping in the house of Nisroch (?Ashur) his god, that Adrammelech and Sharezer (Ashur-shar-etir) his sons smote him with the sword: and they escaped into the land of Armenia (Urartu). And Esarhaddon his son reigned in his stead." Ashur-shar-etir appears to have been the claimant to the throne.

Esarhaddon (680-668 B.C.) was a man of different type from his father. He adopted towards vassal states a policy of conciliation, and did much to secure peace within the empire by his magnanimous treatment of rebel kings who had been intimidated by their neighbours and forced to entwine themselves in the meshes of intrigue. His wars were directed mainly to secure the protection of outlying provinces against aggressive raiders.

The monarch was strongly influenced by his mother, Naki'a, a Babylonian princess who appears to have been

[p. 471]

as distinguished a lady as the famous Sammu-rammat. Indeed, it is possible that traditions regarding her contributed to the Semiramis legends. But it was not only due to her that Esarhaddon espoused the cause of the pro-Babylonian party. He appears to be identical with the Axerdes of Berosus, who ruled over the southern kingdom for eight years. Apparently he had been appointed governor by Sennacherib after the destruction of Babylon, and it may be that during his term of office in Babylonia he was attracted by its ethical ideals, and developed those traits of character which distinguished him from his father and grandfather. He married a Babylonian princess, and one of his sons, Shamash-shum-ukin, was born in a Babylonian palace, probably at Sippar. He was a worshipper of the mother goddess Ishtar of Nineveh and Ishtar of Arbela, and of Shamash, as well as of the national god Ashur.

As soon as Esarhaddon came to the throne he undertook the restoration of Babylon, to which many of the inhabitants were drifting back. In three years the city resumed its pre-eminent position as a trading and industrial centre. Withal, he won the hearts of the natives by expelling Chaldaeans from the private estates which they had seized during the Merodach-Baladan regime, and restoring them to the rightful heirs.

A Chaldaean revolt was inevitable. Two of Merodach Baladan's sons gave trouble in the south, but were routed in battle. One fled to Elam, where he was assassinated; the other sued for peace, and was accepted by the diplomatic Esarhaddon as a vassal king.

Egypt was intriguing in the west. Its Ethiopian king, Taharka (the Biblical Tirhakah) had stirred up Hezekiah to revolt during Sennacherib's reign. An Assyrian ambassador who had visited Jerusalem "heard

[p. 472]

say concerning Tirhakah. . . . He sent messengers to Hezekiah saying . . . Let not thy God, in whom thou trustest, deceive thee saying, Jerusalem shall not be given into the hand of the king of Assyria. Behold, thou hast heard what the kings of Assyria have done to all lands by destroying them utterly; and shalt thou be delivered? Have the gods of the nations delivered them which my fathers have destroyed, as Gozan, and Haran, and Rezeph, and the children of Eden which were in Telassar? Where is the king of Hamath, and the king of Arphad, and the king of the city of Sepharvaim, Hena, and Ivah?" [*1] Sidon was a party to the pro-Egyptian league which had been formed in Palestine and Syria.

Early in his reign Esarhaddon conducted military operations in the west, and during his absence the queen-mother Naki'a held the reins of government. The Elamites regarded this innovation as a sign of weakness, and invaded Babylon. Sippar was plundered, and its gods carried away. The Assyrian governors, however, ultimately repulsed the Elamite king, who was deposed soon after he returned home. His son, who succeeded him, restored the stolen gods, and cultivated good relations with Esarhaddon. There was great unrest in Elam at this period: it suffered greatly from the inroads of Median and Persian pastoral fighting folk.

In the north the Cimmerians and Scythians, who were constantly warring against Urartu, and against each other, had spread themselves westward and east. Esarhaddon drove Cimmerian invaders out of Cappadocia, and they swamped Phrygia.

The Scythian peril on the north-east frontier was, however, of more pronounced character. The fierce mountaineers had allied themselves with Median tribes

[p. 473]

and overrun the buffer State of the Mannai. Both Urartu and Assyria were sufferers from the brigandage of these allies. Esarhaddon's generals, however, were able to deal with the situation, and one of the notable results of the pacification of the north-eastern area was the conclusion of an alliance with Urartu.

The most serious situation with which the emperor had to deal was in the west. The King of Sidon, who had been so greatly favoured by Sennacherib, had espoused the Egyptian cause. He allied himself with the King of Cilicia, who, however, was unable to help him much. Sidon was besieged and captured; the royal allies escaped, but a few years later were caught and beheaded. The famous seaport was destroyed, and its vast treasures deported to Assyria (about 676 B.C.). Esarhaddon replaced it by a new city called Kar-Esarhaddon, which formed the nucleus of the new Sidon.

It is believed that Judah and other disaffected States were dealt with about this time. Manasseh had succeeded Hezekiah at Jerusalem when but a boy of twelve years. He appears to have come under the influence of heathen teachers.

For he built up again the high places which Hezekiah his father had destroyed; and he reared up altars for Baal, and made a grove, as did Ahab king of Israel; and worshipped all the host of heaven, and served them. . . . And he built altars for all the host of heaven in the two courts of the house of the Lord. And he made his son pass through the fire, and observed times, and used enchantments, and dealt with familiar spirits and wizards: he wrought much wickedness in the sight of the Lord, to provoke him to anger. And he set a graven image of the grove that he had made in the house, of which the Lord said to David, and to Solomon his son, In this house, and in Jerusalem, which I have chosen out of all tribes of Israel, will I put my name for ever. [*1]

[p. 474]

Isaiah ceased to prophesy after Manasseh came to the throne. According to Rabbinic traditions he was seized by his enemies and enclosed in the hollow trunk of a tree, which was sawn through. Other orthodox teachers appear to have been slain also. "Manasseh shed innocent blood very much, till he had filled Jerusalem from one end to another." [*1] It is possible that there is a reference to Isaiah's fate in an early Christian lament regarding the persecutions of the faithful: "Others had trial of cruel mockings and scourgings, yea, moreover of bonds and imprisonment: they were stoned, they were sawn asunder, were tempted, were slain with the sword". [*2] There is no Assyrian evidence regarding the captivity of Manasseh. "Wherefore the Lord brought upon them (the people of Judah) the captains of the host of the king of Assyria, which took Manasseh among the thorns, and bound him with fetters, and carried him to Babylon. And when he was in affliction, he besought the Lord his God, and humbled himself greatly before the God of his fathers, and prayed unto him: and he was intreated of him, and heard his supplication, and brought him again to Jerusalem into his kingdom." [*3] It was, however, in keeping with the policy of Esarhaddon to deal in this manner with an erring vassal. The Assyrian records include Manasseh of Judah (Menase of the city of Yaudu) with the kings of Edom, Moab, Ammon, Tyre, Ashdod, Gaza, Byblos, &c., and "twenty-two kings of Khatti" as payers of tribute to Esarhaddon, their overlord. Hazael of Arabia was conciliated by having restored to him his gods which Sennacherib had carried away.

Egypt continued to intrigue against Assyria, and Esarhaddon

[p. 475]

resolved to deal effectively with Taharka, the last Ethiopian Pharaoh. In 674 B.C. he invaded Egypt, but suffered a reverse and had to retreat. Tyre revolted soon afterwards (673 B.C.).

Esarhaddon, however, made elaborate preparations for his next campaign. In 671 B.C. he went westward with a much more powerful army. A detachment advanced to Tyre and invested it. The main force meanwhile pushed on, crossed the Delta frontier, and swept victoriously as far south as Memphis, where Taharka suffered a crushing defeat. That great Egyptian metropolis was then occupied and plundered by the soldiers of Esarhaddon. Lower Egypt became an Assyrian province; the various petty kings, including Necho of Sais, had set over them Assyrian governors. Tyre was also captured.

When he returned home Esarhaddon erected at the Syro-Cappadocian city of Singirli [*1] a statue of victory, which is now in the Berlin museum. On this memorial the Assyrian "King of the kings of Egypt" is depicted as a giant. With one hand he pours out an oblation to a god; in the other he grasps his sceptre and two cords attached to rings, which pierce the lips of dwarfish figures representing the Pharaoh Taharka of Egypt and the unfaithful King of Tyre.

In 668 B.C. Taharka, who had fled to Napata in Ethiopia, returned to Upper Egypt, and began to stir up revolts. Esarhaddon planned out another expedition, so that he might shatter the last vestige of power possessed by his rival. But before he left home he found it necessary to set his kingdom in order.

During his absence from home the old Assyrian party, who disliked the emperor because of Babylonian sympathies, had been intriguing regarding the succession to

[p. 476]

the throne. According to the Babylonian Chronicle, "the king remained in Assyria" during 669 B.C., "and he slew with the sword many noble men". Ashur-bani-pal was evidently concerned in the conspiracy, and it is significant to find that he pleaded on behalf of certain of the conspirators. The crown prince Sinidinabal was dead: perhaps he had been assassinated.

At the feast of the goddess Gula (identical with Bau, consort of Ninip), towards the end of April in 668 B.C., Esarhaddon divided his empire between two of his sons. Ashur-bani-pal was selected to be King of Assyria, and Shamash-shum-ukin to be King of Babylon and the vassal of Ashur-banipal. Other sons received important priestly appointments.

Soon after these arrangements were completed Esarhaddon, who was suffering from bad health, set out for Egypt. He died towards the end of October, and the early incidents of his campaign were included in the records of Ashur-bani-pal's reign. Taharka was defeated at Memphis, and retreated southward to Thebes.

So passed away the man who has been eulogized as "the noblest and most sympathetic figure among the Assyrian kings". There was certainly much which was attractive in his character. He inaugurated many social reforms, and appears to have held in check his overbearing nobles. Trade flourished during his reign. He did not undertake the erection of a new city, like his father, but won the gratitude of the priesthood by his activities as a builder and restorer of temples. He founded a new "house of Ashur" at Nineveh, and reconstructed several temples in Babylonia. His son Ashur-bani-pal was the last great Assyrian ruler.

Footnotes

^445:1 2 Kings, xv, 19 and 29; 2 Chronicles, xxviii, 20.

^447:1 2 Kings, xviii, 34 and xix, 13.

^449:1 2 Kings, xiv, 1-14.

^449:2 2 Kings, xv, 1-14.

^449:3 2 Kings, xv, 19, 20.

^450:1 2 Kings, xv, 25.

^451:1 Amos, v.

^451:2 Amos, i.

^452:1 2 Kings, xvi, 5.

^452:2 Isaiah, vii, 3-7.

^452:3 2 Kings, xv, 3.

^452:4 Isaiah, vii, s 8.

^452:5 Kir was probably on the borders of Elam.

^452:6 2 Kings, xvi, 7-9.

^453:1 2 Kings, xv, 29, 30.

^453:2 2 Kings, xvi, 10.

^454:1 In the Hebrew text this monarch is called Sua, Seveh, and So, says Maspero. The Assyrian texts refer to him as Sebek, Shibahi, Shabe, &c. He has been identified with Pharaoh Shabaka of the Twenty-fifth Egyptian Dynasty; that monarch may have been a petty king before he founded his Dynasty. Another theory is that he was Seve, [p. 455] king of Mutsri, and still another that he was a petty king of an Egyptian state in the Delta and not Shabaka.

^455:1 2 Kings, xvii, 3-5.

^455:2 Isaiah, xx, 1.

^455:3 2 Kings, xvii, 6.

^456:1 2 Kings, xvii, 16-41.

^456:2 The people carried away would not be the whole of the inhabitants--only, one would suppose, the more important personages, enough to make up the number 27,290 given above.

^457:1 Passing of the Empires, pp. 200-1.

^458:1 Those who, like Breasted, identify "Piru of Mutsri" with "Pharaoh of Egypt" adopt the view that Bocchoris of Sais paid tribute to Sargon. Piru, however, is subsequently referred to with two Arabian kings as tribute payers to Sargon apparently after Lower Egypt had come under the sway of Shabaka, the first king of the Ethiopian or Twenty-fifth Dynasty.

^459:1 Isaiah, xx, 2-5.

^459:2 Commander-in-chief.

^459:3 Isaiah, xx, 1.

^463:1 The Old Testament in the Light of the Historical Records and Legends of Assyria and Babylonia, T. G. Pinches, p. 392.

^465:1 Isaiah, xxxvii, 9.

^465:2 Isaiah, xxxix, 1, 2.

^466:1 2 Chronicles, xxxii, 9-17.

^466:2 2 Kings, xix, 6, 7.

^467:1 2 Kings, xix, 35, 36.

^469:1 Smith-Sayce, History of Sennacherib, pp. 132-5.

^469:2 A History of Sumer and Akkad, p. 37.

^472:1 Isaiah, xxxvii, 8-13.

^473:1 2 Kings, xxi, 3-7.

^474:1 2 Kings, xxi, 16.

^474:2 Hebrews, xi, 36, 37.

^474:3 2 Chronicles, xxxiii, 11-3. It may be that Manasseh was taken to Babylon during Ashur-bani-pal's reign. See [*next chapter].

^475:1 Pronounce g as in gem.

     
Myths of Babylonia and Assyria, by Donald A. MacKenzie, [1915], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 477] [ch-20]

  

CHAPTER XX

  

The Last Days of Assyria and Babylonia

Doom of Nineveh and Babylon--Babylonian Monotheism--Ashur-banipal and his Brother, King of Babylon--Ceremony of "Taking the Hands of Bel"--Merodach restored to E-sagila--Assyrian Invasion of Egypt and Sack of Thebes--Lydia's Appeal to Assyria--Elam subdued--Revolt of Babylon--Death of Babylonian King--Sack of Susa--Psamtik of Egypt--Cimmerians crushed--Ashur-bani-pal's Literary Activities--The Sardanapalus Legend--Last Kings of Assyria--Fall of Nineveh--The New Babylonian Empire--Necho of Egypt expelled from Syria--King Jehoaikin of Judah deposed--Zedekiah's Revolt and Punishment--Fall of Jerusalem and Hebrew Captivity--Jeremiah laments over Jerusalem--Babylonia's Last Independent King--Rise of Cyrus the Conqueror--The Persian Patriarch and Eagle Legend--Cyrus conquers Lydia--Fall of Babylon--Jews return to Judah--Babylon from Cyrus to Alexander the Great.

 

THE burden of Nineveh . . . The Lord is slow to anger, and great in power, and will not at all acquit the wicked: the Lord hath his way in the whirlwind and in the storm, and the clouds are the dust of his feet. He rebuketh the sea, and maketh it dry, and drieth up all the rivers: Bashan languisheth, and Carmel, and the flower of Lebanon languisheth. . . . He that dasheth in pieces is come up before thy face. . . . The gates of the rivers shall be opened, and the palace shall be dissolved. And Huzzab shall be led away captive, she shall be brought up, and her maids shall lead her as with the voice of doves, tabering upon their breasts. . . . Draw thee waters for the siege, fortify thy strong holds: go into clay, and tread the morter, make strong the brick-kiln. There shall the fire devour thee; the sword shall cut thee off. . . . Thy shepherds slumber, O king of Assyria: thy nobles shall dwell in the dust: thy people is scattered upon the mountains, and no man gathereth them. There is no healing of thy bruise; thy wound is grievous: all that hear the bruit of thee shall clap the hands

[p. 478]

over thee: for upon whom hath not thy wickedness passed continually? [*1]

The doom of Babylon was also foretold:

Bel boweth down, Nebo stoopeth. . . . Come down, and sit in the dust, O virgin daughter of Babylon, sit on the ground: there is no throne, O daughter of the Chaldeans. . . . Stand now with thine enchantments, and with the multitude of thy sorceries, wherein thou hast laboured from thy youth; if so be thou shalt be able to profit, if so be thou mayest prevail. Thou art wearied in the multitude of thy counsels. Let now the astrologers, the star-gazers, the monthly prognosticators, stand up, and save thee from these things that shall come upon thee. Behold, they shall be as stubble; the fire shall burn them. . . . Thus shall they be unto thee with whom thou hast laboured, even thy merchants, from thy youth: they shall wander every one to his quarter; none shall save thee. [*2]

Against a gloomy background, dark and ominous as a thundercloud, we have revealed in the last century of Mesopotamian glory the splendour of Assyria and the beauty of Babylon. The ancient civilizations ripened quickly before the end came. Kings still revelled in pomp and luxury. Cities resounded with "the noise of a whip, and the noise of the rattling of the wheels, and of the pransing horses, and of the jumping chariots. The horseman lifteth up both the bright sword and the glittering spear. . . . The valiant men are in scarlet." [*3] But the minds of cultured men were more deeply occupied than ever with the mysteries of life and creation. In the libraries, the temples, and observatories, philosophers and scientists were shattering the unsubstantial fabric of immemorial superstition; they attained to higher conceptions of the duties and responsibilities of mankind; they

[p. 479]

conceived of divine love and divine guidance; they discovered, like Wordsworth, that the soul has--

               An obscure sense
 Of possible sublimity, whereto
 With growing faculties she doth aspire.

One of the last kings of Babylon, Nebuchadrezzar, recorded a prayer which reveals the loftiness of religious thought and feeling attained by men to whom graven images were no longer worthy of adoration and reverence--men whose god was not made by human hands--

O eternal prince! Lord of all being!
 As for the king whom thou lovest, and
 Whose name thou hast proclaimed
 As was pleasing to thee,
 Do thou lead aright his life,
 Guide him in a straight path.
 I am the prince, obedient to thee,
 The creature of thy hand;
 Thou hast created me, and
 With dominion over all people
 Thou hast entrusted me.
 According to thy grace, O Lord,
 Which thou dost bestow on
 All people,
 Cause me to love thy supreme dominion,
 And create in my heart
 The worship of thy godhead
 And grant whatever is pleasing to thee,
 Because thou hast fashioned my life. [*1]

[paragraph continues] The "star-gazers" had become scientists, and foretold eclipses: in every sphere of intellectual activity great men were sifting out truth from the debris of superstition. It seemed as if Babylon and Assyria were about to cross

[p. 480]

the threshold of a new age, when their doom was sounded and their power was shattered for ever. Nineveh perished with dramatic suddenness: Babylon died of "senile decay".

When, in 668 B.C., intelligence reached Nineveh that Esarhaddon had passed away, on the march through Egypt, the arrangements which he had made for the succession were carried out smoothly and quickly. Naki'a, the queen mother, was acting as regent, and completed her lifework by issuing a proclamation exhorting all loyal subjects and vassals to obey the new rulers, her grandsons, Ashur-bani-pal, Emperor of Assyria, and Shamash-shum-ukin, King of Babylon. Peace prevailed in the capital, and there was little or no friction throughout the provinces: new rulers were appointed to administer the States of Arvad and Ammon, but there were no changes elsewhere.

Babylon welcomed its new king--a Babylonian by birth and the son of a Babylonian princess. The ancient kingdom rejoiced that it was no longer to be ruled as a province; its ancient dignities and privileges were being partially restored. But one great and deep-seated grievance remained. The god Merodach was still a captive in the temple of Ashur. No king could reign aright if Merodach were not restored to E-sagila. Indeed he could not be regarded as the lord of the land until he had "taken the hands of Bel".

The ceremony of taking the god's hands was an act of homage. When it was consummated the king became the steward or vassal of Merodach, and every day he appeared before the divine one to receive instructions and worship him. The welfare of the whole kingdom depended on the manner in which the king acted towards the god. If Merodach was satisfied with the king he sent blessings to the land; if he was angry he sent calamities.

[p. 481]

[paragraph continues] A pious and faithful monarch was therefore the protector of the people.

This close association of the king with the god gave the priests great influence in Babylon. They were the power behind the throne. The destinies of the royal house were placed in their hands; they could strengthen the position of a royal monarch, or cause him to be deposed if he did not satisfy their demands. A king who reigned over Babylon without the priestly party on his side occupied an insecure position. Nor could he secure the co-operation of the priests unless the image of the god was placed in the temple. Where king was, there Merodach had to he also.

Shamash-shum-ukin pleaded with his royal brother and overlord to restore Bel Merodach to Babylon. Ashur-bani-pal hesitated for a time; he was unwilling to occupy a less dignified position, as the representative of Ashur, than his distinguished predecessor, in his relation to the southern kingdom. At length, however, he was prevailed upon to consult the oracle of Shamash, the solar lawgiver, the revealer of destiny. The god was accordingly asked if Shamash-shum-ukin could "take the hands of Bel" in Ashur's temple, and then proceed to Babylon as his representative. In response, the priests of Shamash informed the emperor that Bel Merodach could not exercise sway as sovereign lord so long as he remained a prisoner in a city which was not his own.

Ashur-bani-pal accepted the verdict, and then visited Ashur's temple to plead with Bel Merodach to return to Babylon. "Let thy thoughts", he cried, "dwell in Babylon, which in thy wrath thou didst bring to naught. Let thy face be turned towards E-sagila, thy lofty and divine temple. Return to the city thou hast deserted for a house unworthy of thee. O Merodach! lord of the

[p. 482]

gods, issue thou the command to return again to Babylon."

Thus did Ashur-bani-pal make pious and dignified submission to the will of the priests. A favourable response was, of course, received from Merodach when addressed by the emperor, and the god's image was carried back to E-sagila, accompanied by a strong force. Ashur-bani-pal and Shamash-shum-ukin led the procession of priests and soldiers, and elaborate ceremonials were ob-served at each city they passed, the local gods being carried forth to do homage to Merodach.

Babylon welcomed the deity who was thus restored to his temple after the lapse of about a quarter of a century, and the priests celebrated with unconcealed satisfaction and pride the ceremony at which Shamash-shum-ukin "took the hands of Bel". The public rejoicings were conducted on an elaborate scale. Babylon believed that a new era of prosperity had been inaugurated, and the priests and nobles looked forward to the day when the kingdom would once again become free and independent and powerful.

Ashur-bani-pal (668-626 B.C.) made arrangements to complete his father's designs regarding Egypt. His Tartan continued the campaign, and Taharka, as has been stated, was driven from Memphis. The beaten Pharaoh returned to Ethiopia and did not again attempt to expel the Assyrians. He died in 666 B.C. It was found that some of the petty kings of Lower Egypt had been intriguing with Taharka, and their cities were severely dealt with. Necho of Sais had to be arrested, among others, but was pardoned after he appeared before Ashur-bani-pal, and sent back to Egypt as the Assyrian governor.

Tanutamon, a son of Pharaoh Shabaka, succeeded Taharka, and in 663 B.C. marched northward from Thebes

[p. 483]

with a strong army. He captured Memphis. It is believed Necho was slain, and Herodotus relates that his son Psamtik took refuge in Syria. In 661 B.C. Ashur-bani-pal's army swept through Lower Egypt and expelled the Ethiopians. Tanutamon fled southward, but on this occasion the Assyrians followed up their success, and besieged and captured Thebes, which they sacked. Its nobles were slain or taken captive. According to the prophet Nahum, who refers to Thebes as No (Nu-Amon = city of Amon), "her young children also were dashed in pieces at the top of all the streets: and they (the Assyrians) cast lots for her honourable men, and all her great men were bound in chains". [*1] Thebes never again recovered its prestige. Its treasures were transported to Nineveh. The Ethiopian supremacy in Egypt was finally extinguished, and Psamtik, son of Necho, who was appointed the Pharaoh, began to reign as the vassal of Assyria.

When the kings on the seacoasts of Palestine and Asia Minor found that they could no longer look to Egypt for help, they resigned themselves to the inevitable, and ceased to intrigue against Assyria. Gifts were sent to Ashur-bani-pal by the kings of Arvad, Tyre, Tarsus, and Tabal. The Arvad ruler, however, was displaced, and his son set on his throne. But the most extraordinary development was the visit to Nineveh of emissaries from Gyges, king of Lydia, who figures in the legends of Greece. This monarch had been harassed by the Cimmerians after they accomplished the fall of Midas of Phrygia in 676 B.C., and he sought the help of Ashur-bani-pal. It is not known whether the Assyrians operated against the Cimmerians in Tabal, but, as Gyges did not send tribute, it would appear that he held his own with

[p. 484]

the aid of mercenaries from the State of Caria in south-western Asia Minor. The Greeks of Cilicia, and the Achaeans and Phoenicians of Cyprus remained faithful to Assyria.

Elam gave trouble in 665 B.C. by raiding Akkad, but the Assyrian army repulsed the invaders at Dur-ilu and pushed on to Susa. The Elamites received a crushing defeat in a battle on the banks of the River Ula. King Teumman was slain, and a son of the King of Urtagu was placed on his throne. Elam thus came under Assyrian sway.

The most surprising and sensational conspiracy against Ashur-bani-pal was fomented by his brother Shamash-shum-ukin of Babylon, after the two had co-operated peacefully for fifteen years. No doubt the priestly party at E-sagila were deeply concerned in the movement, and the king may have been strongly influenced by the fact that Babylonia was at the time suffering from severe depression caused by a series of poor harvests. Merodach, according to the priests, was angry; it was probably argued that he was punishing the people because they had not thrown off the yoke of Assyria.

The temple treasures of Babylon were freely drawn upon to purchase the allegiance of allies. Ere Ashur-bani-pal had any knowledge of the conspiracy his brother had won over several governors in Babylonia, the Chaldaeans, Aramaeans and Elamites, and many petty kings in Palestine and Syria: even Egypt and Libya were prepared to help him. When, however, the faithful governor of Ur was approached, he communicated with his superior at Erech, who promptly informed Ashur-bani-pal of the great conspiracy. The intelligence reached Nineveh like a bolt from the blue. The emperor's heart was filled with sorrow and anguish. In after-time he lamented in

[p. 485]

an inscription that his "faithless brother" forgot the favours he had shown him. "Outwardly with his lips he spoke friendly things, while inwardly his heart plotted murder."

In 652 B.C. Shamash-shum-ukin precipitated the crisis by forbidding Ashur-bani-pal to make offerings to the gods in the cities of Babylonia. He thus declared his independence.

War broke out simultaneously. Ur and Erech were besieged and captured by the Chaldaeans, and an Elamite army marched to the aid of the King of Babylon, but it was withdrawn before long on account of the unsettled political conditions at home. The Assyrian armies swept through Babylonia, and the Chaldaeans in the south were completely subjugated before Babylon was captured. That great commercial metropolis was closely besieged for three years, and was starved into submission. When the Assyrians were entering the city gates a sensational happening occurred. Shamash-shum-ukin, the rebel king, shut himself up in his palace and set fire to it, and perished there amidst the flames with his wife and children, his slaves and all his treasures. Ashur-bani-pal was in 647 B.C. proclaimed King Kandalanu [*1] of Babylon, and reigned over it until his death in 626 B.C.

Elam was severely dealt with. That unhappy country was terribly devastated by Assyrian troops, who besieged and captured Susa, which was pillaged and wrecked. It was recorded afterwards as a great triumph of this campaign that the statue of Nana of Erech, which had been carried off by Elamites 1635 years previously, was recovered and restored to the ancient Sumerian city. Elam's power of resistance was finally extinguished, and the country fell a ready prey to the Medes and Persians, who

[p. 486]

soon entered into possession of it. Thus, by destroying a buffer State, Ashur-bani-pal strengthened the hands of the people who were destined twenty years after his death to destroy the Empire of Assyria.

The western allies of Babylon were also dealt with, and it may be that at this time Manasseh of Judah was taken to Babylon (2 Chronicles, xxxiii, 11), where, however, he was forgiven. The Medes and the Mannai in the north-west were visited and subdued, and a new alliance was formed with the dying State of Urartu.

Psamtik of Egypt had thrown off the yoke of Assyria, and with the assistance of Carian mercenaries received from his ally, Gyges, king of Lydia, extended his sway southward. He made peace with Ethiopia by marrying a princess of its royal line. Gyges must have weakened his army by thus assisting Psamtik, for he was severely defeated and slain by the Cimmerians. His son, Ardys, appealed to Assyria for help. Ashur-bani-pal dispatched an army to Cilicia. The joint operations of Assyria and Lydia resulted in the extinction of the kingdom of the Cimmerians about 645 B.C.

The records of Ashur-bani-pal cease after 640 B.C., so that we are unable to follow the events of his reign during its last fourteen years. Apparently peace prevailed everywhere. The great monarch, who was a pronounced adherent of the goddess cults, appears to have given himself up to a life of indulgence and inactivity. Under the name Sardanapalus he went down to tradition as a sensual Oriental monarch who lived in great pomp and luxury, and perished in his burning palace when the Medes revolted against him. It is evident, however, that the memory of more than one monarch contributed to the Sardanapalus legend, for Ashur-bani-pal had lain nearly twenty years in his grave before the siege of Nineveh took place.

 

Click to enlarge
ASHUR-BANI-PAL RECLINING IN A BOWER
 Marble Slab from Kouyunjik (Nineveh); now in British Museum.
 Photo. Mansell

 

[p. 487]

In the Bible he is referred to as "the great and noble Asnapper", and he appears to have been the emperor who settled the Babylonian, Elamite, and other colonists "in the cities of Samaria". [*1]

He erected at Nineveh a magnificent palace, which was decorated on a lavish scale. The sculptures are the finest productions of Assyrian art, and embrace a wide variety of subjects--battle scenes, hunting scenes, and elaborate Court and temple ceremonies. Realism is combined with a delicacy of touch and a degree of originality which raises the artistic productions of the period to the front rank among the artistic triumphs of antiquity.

Ashur-bani-pal boasted of the thorough education which he had received from the tutors of his illustrious father, Esarhaddon. In his palace he kept a magnificent library. It contained thousands of clay tablets on which were inscribed and translated the classics of Babylonia. To the scholarly zeal of this cultured monarch is due the preservation of the Babylonian story of creation, the Gilgamesh and Etana legends, and other literary and religious products of remote antiquity. Most of the literary tablets in the British Museum were taken from Ashur-bani-pal's library.

There are no Assyrian records of the reigns of Ashur-bani-pal's two sons, Ashur-etil-ilani--who erected a small palace and reconstructed the temple to Nebo at Kalkhi--and Sin-shar-ishkun, who is supposed to have perished in Nineveh. Apparently Ashur-etil-ilani reigned for at least six years, and was succeeded by his brother.

A year after Ashur-bani-pal died, Nabopolassar, who was probably a Chaldaean, was proclaimed king at Babylon. According to Babylonian legend he was an Assyrian general

[p. 488]

who had been sent southward with an army to oppose the advance of invaders from the sea. Nabopolassar's sway at first was confined to Babylon and Borsippa, but he strengthened himself by forming an offensive and defensive alliance with the Median king, whose daughter he had married to his son Nebuchadrezzar. He strengthened the fortifications of Babylon, rebuilt the temple of Merodach, which had been destroyed by Ashur-bani-pal, and waged war successfully against the Assyrians and their allies in Mesopotamia.

About 606 B.C. Nineveh fell, and Sin-shar-ishkun may have burned himself there in his palace, like his uncle, Shamash-shum-ukin of Babylon, and the legendary Sardanapalus. It is not certain, however, whether the Scythians or the Medes were the successful besiegers of the great Assyrian capital. "Woe to the bloody city! it is all full of lies and robbery", Nahum had cried. ". . . The gates of the rivers shall be opened, and the palace shall be dissolved. . . . Take ye the spoil of silver, take the spoil of gold. . . . Behold, I am against thee, saith the Lord of hosts." [*1]

According to Herodotus, an army of Medes under Cyaxares had defeated the Assyrians and were besieging Nineveh when the Scythians overran Media. Cyaxares raised the siege and went against them, but was defeated. Then the Scythians swept across Assyria and Mesopotamia, and penetrated to the Delta frontier of Egypt. Psamtik ransomed his kingdom with handsome gifts. At length, however, Cyaxares had the Scythian leaders slain at a banquet, and then besieged and captured Nineveh.

Assyria was completely overthrown. Those of its nobles and priests who escaped the sword no doubt

[p. 489]

escaped to Babylonia. Some may have found refuge also in Palestine and Egypt.

Necho, the second Pharaoh of the Twenty-sixth Egyptian Dynasty, did not hesitate to take advantage of Assyria's fall. In 609 B.C. he proceeded to recover the long-lost Asiatic possessions of Egypt, and operated with an army and fleet. Gaza and Askalon were captured. Josiah, the grandson of Manasseh, was King of Judah. "In his days Pharaoh-nechoh king of Egypt went up against the king of Assyria to the river Euphrates: and king Josiah went against him; and he (Necho) slew him at Megiddo." [*1] His son, Jehoahaz, succeeded him, but was deposed three months later by Necho, who placed another son of Josiah, named Eliakim, on the throne, "and turned his name to Jehoiakim". [*2] The people were heavily taxed to pay tribute to the Pharaoh.

When Necho pushed northward towards the Euphrates he was met by a Babylonian army under command of Prince Nebuchadrezzar. [*3] The Egyptians were routed at Carchemish in 60s B.C. (Jeremiah, xvi, 2).

In 604 B.C. Nabopolassar died, and the famous Nebuchadrezzar II ascended the throne of Babylon. He lived to be one of its greatest kings, and reigned for over forty years. It was he who built the city described by Herodotus (pp. <page 219> et seq.), and constructed its outer wall, which enclosed so large an area that no army could invest it. Merodach's temple was decorated with greater magnificence than ever before. The great palace and hanging gardens were erected by this mighty monarch, who no doubt attracted to the city large numbers of the skilled artisans who had fled from Nineveh. He also restored temples at other cities, and made generous gifts to the

[p. 490]

priests. Captives were drafted into Babylonia from various lands, and employed cleaning out the canals and as farm labourers.

The trade and industries of Babylon flourished greatly, and Nebuchadrezzar's soldiers took speedy vengeance on roving bands which infested the caravan roads. "The king of Egypt", after his crushing defeat at Carchemish, "came not again any more out of his land: for the king of Babylon had taken from the river of Egypt unto the river Euphrates all that pertained to the king of Egypt." [*1] Jehoiakim of Judah remained faithful to Necho until he was made a prisoner by Nebuchadrezzar, who "bound him in fetters to carry him to Babylon". [*2] He was afterwards sent back to Jerusalem. "And Jehoiakim became his (Nebuchadrezzar's) servant three years: then he turned and rebelled against him." [*3]

Bands of Chaldaeans, Syrians, Moabites, and Ammonites were harassing the frontiers of Judah, and it seemed to the king as if the Babylonian power had collapsed. Nebuchadrezzar hastened westward and scattered the raiders before him. Jehoiakim died, and his son Jehoiachan, a youth of eighteen years, succeeded him. Nebuchadrezzar laid siege to Jerusalem, and the young king submitted to him and was carried off to Babylon, with "all the princes, and all the mighty men of valour, even ten thousand captives, and all the craftsmen and smiths: none remained save the poorest sort of the people of the land". [*4] Nebuchadrezzar had need of warriors and work-men.

Zedekiah was placed on the throne of Judah as an Assyrian vassal. He remained faithful for a few years, but at length began to conspire with Tyre and Sidon,

[p. 491]

[paragraph continues] Moab, Edom, and Ammon in favour of Egyptian suzerainty. Pharaoh Hophra (Apries), the fourth king of the Twenty-sixth Dynasty, took active steps to assist the conspirators, and "Zedekiah rebelled against the king of Babylon". [*1]

Nebuchadrezzar led a strong army through Mesopotamia, and divided it at Riblah, on the Orontes River. One part of it descended upon Judah and captured Lachish and Azekah. Jerusalem was able to hold out for about eighteen months. Then "the famine was sore in the city, so that there was no bread for the people of the land. Then the city was broken up, and all the men of war fled, and went forth out of the city by night by way of the gate between the two walls, which was by the king's garden." Zedekiah attempted to escape, but was captured and carried before Nebuchadrezzar, who was at Riblah, in the land of Hamath.

And the king of Babylon slew the sons of Zedekiah before his eyes. . . . Then he put out the eyes of Zedekiah; and the king of Babylon bound him in chains and carried him to Babylon and put him in prison till the day of his death. [*2]

[paragraph continues] The majority of the Jews were deported to Babylonia, where they were employed as farm labourers. Some rose to occupy important official positions. A remnant escaped to Egypt with Jeremiah.

Jerusalem was plundered and desolated. The Assyrians "burned the house of the Lord and the king's house, and all the houses of Jerusalem", and "brake down all the walls of Jerusalem round about". Jeremiah lamented:

How doth the city sit solitary, that was full of people! how is she become as a widow! she that was great among the nations, and

[p. 492]

princess among the provinces, how is she become tributary! She weepeth sore in the night, and her tears are on her cheeks: among all her lovers she hath none to comfort her: all her friends have dealt treacherously with her, they are become her enemies.

Judah is gone into captivity because of affliction, and because of great servitude: she dwelleth among the heathen, she findeth no rest: all her persecutors overtook her between the straits. . . .

Jerusalem remembered in the days of her affliction and of her miseries all her pleasant things that she had in the days of old. . . . [*1]

Tyre was besieged, but was not captured. Its king, however, arranged terms of peace with Nebuchadrezzar.

Amel-Marduk, the "Evil Merodach" of the Bible, the next king of Babylon, reigned for a little over two years. He released Jehoiachin from prison, and allowed him to live in the royal palace. [*2] Berosus relates that Amel-Marduk lived a dissipated life, and was slain by his brother-in-law, Nergal-shar-utsur, who reigned two years (559-6 B.C.). Labashi-Marduk, son of Nergal-shar-utsur, followed with a reign of nine months. He was deposed by the priests. Then a Babylonian prince named Nabuna'id (Nabonidus) was set on the throne. He was the last independent king of Babylonia. His son Belshazzar appears to have acted as regent during the latter part of the reign.

Nabonidus engaged himself actively during his reign (556-540 B.C.) in restoring temples. He entirely reconstructed the house of Shamash, the sun god, at Sippar, and, towards the end of his reign, the house of Sin, the moon god, at Haran. The latter building had been destroyed by the Medes.

The religious innovations of Nabonidus made him exceedingly unpopular throughout Babylonia, for he carried away the gods of Ur, Erech, Larsa, and Eridu,

[p. 493]

and had them placed in E-sagila. Merodach and his priests were displeased: the prestige of the great god was threatened by the policy adopted by Nabonidus. As an inscription composed after the fall of Babylon sets forth, Merodach "gazed over the surrounding lands . . . looking for a righteous prince, one after his own heart, who should take his hands. . . . He called by name Cyrus."

Cyrus was a petty king of the shrunken Elamite province of Anshan, which had been conquered by the Persians. He claimed to be an Achaemenian--that is a descendant of the semi-mythical Akhamanish (the Achaemenes of the Greeks), a Persian patriarch who resembled the Aryo-Indian Manu and the Germanic Mannus. Akhamanish was reputed to have been fed and protected in childhood by an eagle--the sacred eagle which cast its shadow on born rulers. Probably this eagle was remotely Totemic, and the Achaemenians were descendants of an ancient eagle tribe. Gilgamesh was protected by an eagle, as we have seen, as the Aryo-Indian Shakuntala was by vultures and Semiramis by doves. The legends regarding the birth and boyhood of Cyrus resemble those related regarding Sargon of Akkad and the Indian Karna and Krishna.

Cyrus acknowledged as his overlord Astyages, king of the Medes. He revolted against Astyages, whom he defeated and took prisoner. Thereafter he was proclaimed King of the Medes and Persians, who were kindred peoples of Indo-European speech. The father of Astyages was Cyaxares, the ally of Nabopolassar of Babylon. When this powerful king captured Nineveh he entered into possession of the northern part of the Assyrian Empire, which extended westward into Asia Minor to the frontier of the Lydian kingdom; he also possessed himself of Urartu

[p. 494]

[paragraph continues] (Armenia). Lydia had, after the collapse of the Cimmerian power, absorbed Phrygia, and its ambitious king, Alyattes, waged war against the Medes. At length, owing to the good offices of Nebuchadrezzar of Babylon and Syennesis of Cilicia, the Medes and Lydians made peace in 585 B.C. Astyages then married a daughter of the Lydian ruler.

When Cyrus overthrew Cyaxares, king of the Medes, Croesus, king of Lydia, formed an alliance against him with Amasis, king of Egypt, and Nabonidus, king of Babylon. The latter was at first friendly to Cyrus, who had attacked Cyaxares when he was advancing on Babylon to dispute Nabonidus's claim to the throne, and perhaps to win it for a descendant of Nebuchadrezzar, his father's ally. It was after the fall of the Median Dynasty that Nabonidus undertook the restoration of the moon god's temple at Haran.

Cyrus advanced westward against Croesus of Lydia before that monarch could receive assistance from the intriguing but pleasure-loving Amasis of Egypt; he defeated and overthrew him, and seized his kingdom (547--546 B.C.). Then, having established himself as supreme ruler in Asia Minor, he began to operate against Babylonia. In 539 B.C. Belshazzar was defeated near Opis. Sippar fell soon afterwards. Cyrus's general, Gobryas, then advanced upon Babylon, where Belshazzar deemed himself safe. One night, in the month of Tammuz--

Belshazzar the king made a great feast to a thousand of his lords, and drank wine before the thousand. Belshazzar, whiles he tasted the wine, commanded to bring the golden and silver vessels which his father Nebuchadnezzar had taken out of the temple which was in Jerusalem; that the king, and his princes, his wives, and his concubines, might drink therein. . . . They drank wine, and praised the gods of gold, and of silver, of brass, of iron, of

 

Click to enlarge
PERSIANS BRINGING CHARIOTS, RINGS, AND WREATHS
 Bas-relief from Persepolis: now in the British Museum.
 Photo. Mansell

 

[p. 495]

wood, and of stone. . . . In that night was Belshazzar the king of the Chaldeans slain. [*1]

On the 16th of Tammuz the investing army under Gobryas entered Babylon, the gates having been opened by friends within the city. Some think that the Jews favoured the cause of Cyrus. It is quite as possible, however, that the priests of Merodach had a secret understanding with the great Achaemenian, the "King of kings".

A few days afterwards Cyrus arrived at Babylon. Belshazzar had been slain, but Nabonidus still lived, and he was deported to Carmania. Perfect order prevailed throughout the city, which was firmly policed by the Persian soldiers, and there was no looting. Cyrus was welcomed as a deliverer by the priesthood. He "took the hands" of Bel Merodach at E-sagila, and was proclaimed "King of the world, King of Babylon, King of Sumer and Akkad, and King of the Four Quarters".

Cyrus appointed his son Cambyses as governor of Babylon. Although a worshipper of Ahura-Mazda and Mithra, Cambyses appears to have conciliated the priesthood. When he became king, and swept through Egypt, he was remembered as the madman who in a fit of passion slew a sacred Apis bull. It is possible, however, that he performed what he considered to be a pious act: he may have sacrificed the bull to Mithra.

The Jews also welcomed Cyrus. They yearned for their native land.

By the rivers of Babylon, there we sat down, yea, we wept, when we remembered Zion. We hanged our harps upon the willows in the midst thereof. For there they that carried us away captive required of us a song; and they that wasted us required of us mirth, saying, Sing us one of the songs of Zion. How shall we sing the Lord's song in a strange land? If I forget thee, O

[p. 496]

[paragraph continues] Jerusalem, let my right hand forget her cunning. If I do not remember thee, let my tongue cleave to the roof of my mouth; if I prefer not Jerusalem above my chief joy. [*1]

Cyrus heard with compassion the cry of the captives.

Now in the first year of Cyrus king of Persia, that the word of the Lord by the mouth of Jeremiah might be fulfilled, the Lord stirred up the spirit of Cyrus king of Persia, that he made a proclamation throughout all his kingdom, and put it also in writing, saying, Thus saith Cyrus king of Persia, The Lord God of heaven hath given me all kingdoms of the earth; and he hath charged me to build him an house at Jerusalem, which is in Judah. Who is there among you of all his people? his God be with him, and let him go up to Jerusalem, which is in Judah, and build the house of the Lord God of Israel (he is the God) which is in Jerusalem. [*2]

In 538 B.C. the first party of Jews who were set free saw through tears the hills of home, and hastened their steps to reach Mount Zion. Fifty years later Ezra led back another party of the faithful. The work of restoring Jerusalem was undertaken by Nehemiah in 445 B.C.

The trade of Babylon flourished under the Persians, and the influence of its culture spread far and wide. Persian religion was infused with new doctrines, and their deities were given stellar attributes. Ahura-Mazda became identified with Bel Merodach, as, perhaps, he had previously been with Ashur, and the goddess Anahita absorbed the attributes of Nina, Ishtar, Zerpanitum, and other Babylonian "mother deities".

Another "Semiramis" came into prominence. This was the wife and sister of Cambyses. After Cambyses died she married Darius I, who, like Cyrus, claimed to be an Achaemenian. He had to overthrow a pretender, but submitted to the demands of the orthodox Persian

[p. 497]

party to purify the Ahura-Mazda religion of its Babylonian innovations. Frequent revolts in Babylon had afterwards to be suppressed. The Merodach priesthood apparently suffered loss of prestige at Court. According to Herodotus, Darius plotted to carry away from E-sagila a great statue of Bel "twelve cubits high and entirely of solid gold". He, however, was afraid "to lay his hands upon it". Xerxes, son of Darius (485-465 B.C.), punished Babylon for revolting, when intelligence reached them of his disasters in Greece, by pillaging and partly destroying the temple. "He killed the priest who forbade him to move the statue, and took it away." [*1] The city lost its vassal king, and was put under the control of a governor. It, however, regained some of its ancient glory after the burning of Susa palace, for the later Persian monarchs resided in it. Darius II died at Babylon, and Artaxerxes II promoted in the city the worship of Anaitis.

When Darius III, the last Persian emperor, was overthrown by Alexander the Great in 331 B.C., Babylon welcomed the Macedonian conqueror as it had welcomed Cyrus. Alexander was impressed by the wisdom and accomplishments of the astrologers and priests, who had become known as "Chaldaeans", and added Bel Merodach to his extraordinary pantheon, which already included Amon of Egypt, Melkarth, and Jehovah. Impressed by the antiquity and magnificence of Babylon, he resolved to make it the capital of his world-wide empire, and there he received ambassadors from countries as far east as India and as far west as Gaul.

The canals of Babylonia were surveyed, and building operations on a vast scale planned out. No fewer than ten thousand men were engaged working for two months reconstructing and decorating the temple of Merodach,

[p. 498]

which towered to a height of 607 feet. It looked as if Babylon were about to rise to a position of splendour unequalled in its history, when Alexander fell sick, after attending a banquet, and died on an evening of golden splendour sometime in June of 323 B.C.

One can imagine the feelings of the Babylonian priests and astrologers as they spent the last few nights of the emperor's life reading "the omens of the air"--taking note of wind and shadow, moon and stars and planets, seeking for a sign, but unable to discover one favourable. Their hopes of Babylonian glory were suspended in the balance, and they perished completely when the young emperor passed away in the thirty-third year of his life. For four days and four nights the citizens mourned in silence for Alexander and for Babylon.

The ancient city fell into decay under the empire of the Seleucidae. Seleucus I had been governor of Babylon, and after the break-up of Alexander's empire he returned to the ancient metropolis as a conqueror. "None of the persons who succeeded Alexander", Strabo wrote, "attended to the undertaking at Babylon"--the reconstruction of Merodach's temple. "Other works were neglected, and the city was dilapidated partly by the Persians and partly by time and through the indifference of the Greeks, particularly after Seleucus Nicator fortified Seleukeia on the Tigris." [*1]

Seleucus drafted to the city which bore his name the great bulk of the inhabitants of Babylon. The remnant which was left behind continued to worship Merodach and other gods after the walls had crumbled and the great temple began to tumble down. Babylon died slowly, but at length the words of the Hebrew prophet were fulfilled:

[p. 499]

The cormorant and the bittern shall possess it; the owl also and the raven shall dwell in it. . . . They shall call the nobles thereof to the kingdom, but none shall be there, and all her princes shall be nothing. And thorns shall come up in her palaces, nettles and brambles in the fortresses thereof: and it shall be an habitation of dragons, and a court for owls. The wild beasts of the desert shall also meet with the wild beasts of the island, and the satyr shall cry to his fellow: the screech owl also shall rest there, and find for herself a place of rest. [*1]

 

 

 

 

Footnotes

^478:1 Nahum, i, ii, and iii.

^478:2 Isaiah, xivi, 1; xlvii, 1-15.

^478:3 Nahum, iii, 2, 3; ii, 3.

^479:1 Goodspeed's A History of the Babylonians and Assyrians, p. 348.

^483:1 Nahum, iii, 8-11.

^485:1 Ptolemy's Kineladanus.

^487:1 Ezra, iv, 10.

^488:1 Nahum, iii and ii.

^489:1 2 Kings, xxiii, 29.

^489:2 Ibid., 33-5.

^489:3 Nebuchadrezzar is more correct than Nebuchadnezzar.

^490:1 2 Kings, xxiv, 7.

^490:2 2 Chronicles, xxxvi, 6.

^490:3 2 Kings, xxiv, 1.

^490:4 2 Kings, xxiv, 8-15.

^491:1 Jeremiah, lii, 3.

^491:2 Jeremiah, lii, 4-11.

^492:1 The Lamentations of Jeremiah, i, 1-7.

^492:2 Jeremiah, lii, 31-4.

^495:1 Daniel, v, 1 et seq.

^496:1 Psalms, cxxxvii, 1-6.

^496:2 Ezra, i, 1-3.

^497:1 Herodotus, i, 183; Strabo, xvi, 1, 5; and Arrian, vii, 17.

^498:1 Strabo, xvi, 1-5.

^499:1 Isaiah, xxxiv, 11-4.

     
Myths of Babylonia and Assyria, by Donald A. MacKenzie, [1915], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 500] [p. 501]

  

INDEX

Vowel Sounds:--a, as in palm; a, as in late; a almost like u in fur; e, like a in fate; e, as in he; i, as e in me; i, as in sigh; o, as in shore; u, as in pull; u, as in sun; y, as in dye.

A, Aa, Ai, Sumerian names of moon, <page 301>; Ea as, <page 31>.

Aa, the goddess, consort of Shamash, <page 57>, <page 100>.

Aah, Egyptian name of moon, <page 301>.

Abijah (a-bi'jah), King of Judah, <page 402>, <page 403>.

Abraham, <page 12>; the Isaac sacrifice, <page 50>; period of migration from Ur, <page 131>, <page 245>; association of with Amorites, <page 246>; conflict with Amraphel (Hammurabi) and his allies, <page 246>, <page 247>; Babylonian monotheism in age of, <page 160>; Nimrod and in Koran, <page 166>, <page 167>, <page 349>, <page 350>.

Achaeans (a-ke'ans), the Celts and, <page 377>; in Crete and Egypt, <page 378>; Pelasgians and, <page 393>; the Cyprian and Assyria, <page 484>.

Achaemenian (a-ke-men'ian), Cyrus called an, <page 493>; Darius I claims to be an, <page 496>. See Akhamanish.

Adad (ad'ad), deities that link with, <page 35>, <page 57>, <page 261>, <page 395>; in demon war, <page 76>.

Adad-nirari I (ad'ad-ni-ra'ri), of Assyria, <page 362>, <page 363>.

Adad-nirari III, <page 396>.

Adad-nirari IV, King of Assyria, Babylonian influence in court of, <page 419>; as "husband of his mother", <page 420>; innovations of, <page 421>; Kalkhi library, <page 422>; "synchronistic history", <page 423>; Nebo worship, <page 435>,<page 436>; as "saviour" of Israel, <page 438>, <page 439>; Urartu problem, <page 439>, <page 440>.

Adad-nirari V, <page 442>.

Adad-shum-utsur (ad'ad-shum-u'tsur), King of Babylonia, as overlord of Assyria. <page 270>.

Adam, "first wife" of a demon, <page 67>; the shining jewel of, <page 185>.

Adapa (a'da-pa), the Babylonian Thor, <page 72>, <page 73>.

Addu (ad'du), as form of Merodach, <page 160>.

Adonis (a-do'nis), Tammuz and myth of, <page 83>, <page 84>; antiquity of myth of, <page 84>; blood of in river, <page 85>; the boat or chest of, <page 90>, <page 103>; "the Garden of", <page 171>, <page 172>; slain by boar, <page 294>, <page 304>.

Afghans, skull forms of, <page 8>.

Ages, the mythical, Tammuz as ruler of one of the, <page 83>, <page 84>; Greek flood legend and, <page 195>, <page 196>; the Indian and Celtic, <page 196>; in American myths, <page 198>; Babylonian and Indian links, <page 199>; in Persian and Germanic mythologies, <page 202>, <page 203>; various systems compared, <page 310> et seq.

Agni (ag'nee), Indian fire and fertility god, <page 49>; Nusku and, <page 50>; links with Tammuz, <page 94>; eagle as, <page 168>, <page 169>; Nergal and, <page 304>; the goat and, <page 333>; Melkarth and, <page 346>.

Agriculture, mother worship and, <page xxix>, <page xxx>; cults of Osiris-Isis and Tammuz- Ishtar, xxxi; early Sumerians and, <page 2>; in Turkestan and Egypt, <page 6>; early civilizations and, <page 14>; Herodotus on Babylonian, <page 21>, <page 22>; irrigation and river floods, <page 23>, <page 24>, <page 26>; deities and water supply, <page 33>; Tammuz-Adonis myth, <page 85>; weeping ceremonies, <page 82> et seq.; Nimrod myth, <page 170>; demand for harvesters in Babylonia, <page 256>.

Agum (a'gum), Kassite kings named, <page 272> et seq.

Agum the Great, Kassite king, recovers

[p. 502]

from Mitanni Merodach and his spouse, <page 272>.

Ahab, King of Israel, <page 405>-<page 407>, <page 408>, <page 473>. Ahaz, King of Judah, fire ceremony practised by, <page 50>; sundial of and eclipse record, <page 323>, <page 450>; relations with Assyria, <page 452>, <page 453>, <page 459>.

Ahaziah (a-ha-zi'ah), King of Israel, <page 408>-<page 410>.

Ahur'a Maz'da, eagle and ring symbol of, <page 347>; Ashur and, <page 355>; Cambyses and, <page 495>; identified with Merodach, <page 496>; reform of cult of, <page 497>.

Air of Life, Breath and spirit as, <page 48>, <page 49>.

Akhamanish (a-kha-man'ish), the Persian Patriarch, <page 493>; Germanic Mannus and Indian Manu and, <page 493>; eagle and, <page 493>.

Akhenaton (a-khen-a'ton), foreign correspondence of, <page 280> et seq.; Assyrian King's relations with, <page 285>; Aton cult of, <page 338>, <page 422>; attitude of to mother worship, <page 418>, <page 419>.

Akkad (ak'kad). Its racial and geographical significance, <page 1>; early name of Uri or Kiuri, <page 2>; early history of; <page 109> et seq.

Akkad, City of, Sargon of, <page 125> et seq.; Naram-Sin and, <page 128>, <page 129>; in Hammurabi Age, <page 256>; observatory at, <page 321>. Also rendered Agade.

Akkadians, characteristics of, <page 2>; culture of Sumerian, <page 2>, <page 3>, <page 13>; the conquerors of Sumerians, <page 12>.

Aku, moon as the "measurer" <page 301>.

Akurgal (a-kur'gal), King of Lagash, son of Ur-Nina, <page 118>.

Alban, the British ancestral giant, <page 42>.

Aleppo (a-lep'po), Hadad worshipped at, <page 411>.

Alexander the Great, Southern Babylonia in age of, <page 22>, <page 23>; his vision of Tiamat, <page 151>; myths of, <page 164>; the eagle and, <page 167>; Gilgamesh and, <page 172>; water of life, <page 185>, <page 186>; Brahmans and, <page 207>, <page 208>; welcomed in Babylon, <page 497>; Pantheon of, <page 497>; death of, <page 498>.

Algebra, Brahmans formulated, <page 289>.

Allatu (al'la-tu). See Eresh-ki-gal.

Alu (a'lu), the, tempest and nightmare demon, <page 65>, <page 68>, <page 69>.

Alyat'tes, King of Lydia, war against Medes, <page 494>; Median marriage alliance, <page 494>.

A'ma, the mother goddess, <page 57>, <page 100>.

Amaziah, King of Judah, <page 448>, <page 449>.

Amel-marduk (a'mel-mar'duk), "Evil Merodach", King of Babylon, <page 492>.

Amenhotep III (a-men-ho'tep) of Egypt, <page 280>; Tushratta's appeals to, <page 282>.

Amon, wife of, <page 221>; the "world soul" belief and, <page 329>.

Amorites, Land of. See Amurru.

Amorites, Sargon of Akkad and, <page 125>-<page 127>; in pre-Hammurabi Age, <page 217>; Sun cult favoured by in Babylon, <page 240>; Moon cult of in Kish, <page 241>; blend of in Jerusalem, <page 246>; raids of, <page 256>; as allies of Hittites, <page 284>, <page 363>, <page 364>; Philistines and, <page 380>; "mother right" amongst, <page 418>.

Amphitrite, the sea goddess, <page 33>. Amraphel (am'ra-phel), the Biblical, identified with Hammurabi, <page 131>, <page 246>, <page 247>.

Amurru (am'ur-ru), land of Amorites, <page 127>; Sargon and Naram Sin in, <page 127>-<page 129>; Gudea of Lagash trades with, <page 130>; Elamite overlordship of, <page 248>.

Amurru, the god called, Merodach and Adad-Ramman and, <page 316>.

Anahita (ana-hi'ta), Persian goddess, identified with Nina-Ishtar, <page 496>.

An'akim, "sons of Anak", the Hittites and, <page 11>, <page 12>.

Anatu (an-a'tu), consort of Anu, <page 138>. Anau, Turkestan, civilization of and the Sumerian, <page 5>; votive statuettes found at, <page 5>.

Ancestral totems, annual sacrifice of, <page 294>; in Babylonia and China, <page 295>.

Andromeda (an-drom'e-da), legend of, <page 152>.

Angus, the Irish love god, <page 90>, <page 238>.

Animal forms of gods, <page 134>, <page 135>.

Animism, <page xxxiii>; spirit groups and gods, <page 35>, <page 294> et seq.; fairies and elves relics of, <page 79>, <page 80>; stars and planets as ghosts, <page 295>, <page 304>; star worship, <page 317>; Pelasgian gods as Fates, <page 317>.

"Annie, Gentle", the Scottish wind hag, <page 73>.

Annis, Black, Leicester wind hag, <page 73>, <page 101>.

An'shan, Province of, Sargon of Akkad conquers, <page 127>; Cyrus, King of, <page 493>

An'shar, the god, in group of elder deities, <page 37>; Anu becomes like, <page 124>; in Creation legend, <page 138> et seq.; Ashur a form of, <page 326>, <page 354>; as "Assoros", <page 328>; as night sky god, <page 328>; identified

[p. 503]

with Polar star, <page 330>, <page 331>; as astral Satyr (goat-man), <page 333>; Tammuz and, <page 333>; his six divinities of council, <page 334>.

Anthat (anth'at), goddesses that link with, <page 268>.

Anthropomorphic gods, the Sumerian, <page 134>-<page 136>.

Anu (a'nu), god of the sky, demons as messengers of, <page 34>, <page 77>; in early triad, <page 35>, <page 36>; among early gods, <page 37>; Brahma and, <page 38>; links with Mithra, <page 55>; other gods and, <page 53>, <page 57>; as father of demons, <page 63>; solar and lunar attributes of, <page 53>, <page 55>; wind spirits and, <page 72>, <page 73>, <page 74>; in demon war, <page 76>; as father of Isis, <page 100>; Ur-Nina and, <page 116>; as father of Enlil, <page 124>; as form of Anshar, <page 125>, <page 328>; high priest of and moon god, <page 130>; during Isin Dynasty, <page 132>; in Creation legend, <page 138> et seq.; Merodach directs decrees of, <page 149>; Etana and eagle in heaven of, <page 166>; in Gilgamesh legend, <page 173> et seq.; in Deluge legend, <page 190> et seq.; planetary gods and, <page 304>; zodiacal "field of", <page 307>; the star spirits and, <page 318>; as Anos, <page 328>; as the "high head", <page 334>; Sargon II and, <page 463>.

An'zan. See Anshan.

Apep (a'pep), the Egyptian serpent demon, <page 46>, <page 156>.

Aphrodite (af-ro-di'te), boar lover of slays Adonis, <page 87>; lovers of, <page 103>; the "bearded" form of, <page 267>, <page 301>; birds and plants sacred to, <page 427>; as a fate, <page 427>, <page 433>; legends attached to, <page 437>.

Apil-Sin (a'pil-sin), King, grandfather of Hammurabi, <page 242>.

Apis bull (a-pis), inspiration from breath of, <page 49>; Cambyses sacrifices to Mithra, <page 495>.

Apsu-Rishtu (ap'su-rish'tu), god of the deep, like Egyptian Nu, <page 37>, <page 64>; as enemy of the gods, <page 38>; Tiamat and, <page 106>; in Creation legend, <page 138> et seq.; reference to by Damascius, <page 328>.

Apuatu (a-pu'a-tu) (Osiris) as the Patriarch, <page xxxii>.

Arabia, moon worship in, <page 52>; owl a mother ghost in, <page 70>; in Zu bird myth, <page 74>, <page 75>; invaded by Naram Sin, <page 129>; Etana myth in, <page 166>, <page 167>; water of life myth, <page 186>; Sargon <page 11> and kings of, <page 458>; Sennacherib in, <page 466>.

Arabians, the, of Mediterranean race, <page 7>; Semites of Jewish type and, <page 7>, <page 10>; prehistoric migrations of, <page 11>, <page 12>.

Arad Ea (ar-ad-e'a), "ferryman" of Hades water, <page 34>; Gilgamesh crosses sea of death with, <page 180> et seq.

Aramae'ans, migrations of, <page 359>; called "Suti", "Achlame", "Arimi" "Khabiri", and "Syrians", <page 360>; Assyria and the, <page 367>; as allies of Hittites, <page 377>, <page 378>; state of Damascus founded by, <page 390>; Ashur-natsir-pal III and, <page 398>, <page 399>; "mother worship" and, <page 434>; as opponents of sun worship, <page 445>; settled in Asia Minor, <page 461>.

Archer, the Astral, Ashur, Gilgamesh, and Hercules as, <page 336>, <page 337>; robed with feathers, <page 344>; Ashur and San-dan as, <page 352>.

Ardat Lili (ar'dat li-li), a demon lover, <page 68>.

Ardys, King of Lydia, Assyria helps, <page 486>.

Ares, Greek war god, as boar slayer of Adonis, <page 87>, <page 304>.

Argistis I (ar'gist-is), King of Urartu, campaigns of, <page 441>, <page 442>, or, Argistes.

Argistis II of Urartu, raids of Cimmerians and Scythians, <page 461>.

Arioch (a'ri-ok), the Biblical, Warad-Sin as, <page 247>, <page 248>.

Arithmetic, finger counting in Babylonia and India, <page 310>; development of, <page 312>. Ark, in flood legend, <page 191> et seq.

Arles money, Babylonian farm labourers received, <page 256>.

Armenia, Thunder god of, <page 261>, <page 395>; goddess Anaitis in, <page 267>. See Urartu.

Armenians, the use of cradle board by, <page 4>, <page 5>; ancestors of, <page 283>.

Armenoid Race, the, in Semitic blend, <page 10>; in Asia Minor, Syria, and Europe, <page 11>, <page 262>; traces of in prehistoric Egypt, <page 11>, <page 263>, <page 264>; in Palestine, <page 12>; culture of, <page 315>.

Arnold, Edwin, <page xxii>.

Arpad (ar'pad) in reign of Tiglath-pileser IV, <page 446>, <page 447>.

Arrow, a symbol of lightning and fertility, <page 337>; Ashur's and the goddess Neith's, <page 337> n. See Archer, the Astral.

Art, magical origin of, <page 288>.

Artaxerxes, <page 497>.

Artemis (ar'te-mis), the goddess, lovers slain by, <page 104>; as wind hag, <page 104>; the "Great Bear" myth and, <page 296>.

Artisan gods, Ea, Ptah, Khnumu, and Indra as, <page 30>.

[p. 504]

Aruru (ar'u-ru), the mother goddess, <page 100>, <page 160>, <page 420>; assists Merodach to create mankind, <page 148>; in Gilgamesh legend, <page 172> et seq.

Aryans (a'ri-ans), Mitannians as, <page 269>, <page 270>; Kassites and, <page 270>.

Asa, King of Judah, burning at grave of, <page 350>; images destroyed by, <page 403>; appeal for aid to Damascus, <page 404>; death of, <page 407>.

Asari (a-sa'ri), Merodach as, and Osiris, <page 159>.

Ash'dod, Cyprian King of, <page 458>, <page 459>.

Ashtoreth (ash-to'reth), Ishtar and, <page 100>; lovers of, <page 103>; goddesses that link with, <page 267>; worship of at Samaria, <page 439>; also rendered Ash'ta-roth.

Ashur (a'shur), Asura theory, <page 278>; as Aushar, "water field", the "Holy One", and Anshar, <page 326>; the Biblical patriarch, <page 327>; "Ashir" and Cappadocia, <page 327>; Brahma and, <page 328>; as Creator, <page 329>; bull, eagle, and lion identified with, <page 330>; connected with sun, Regulus, Arcturus, and Orion, <page 331>; King and, <page 331>; Isaiah's parable, <page 331>; as bull of heaven, <page 334>; winged disk or "wheel" of, <page 334>, <page 335>; standard of as "world spine", <page 335>; the archer in "wheel", <page 335>; despiritualization theory, <page 335>, <page 336>; the solar archer as Merodach, Hercules, and Gilgamesh, <page 336>; the arrow of, <page 337>; Babylonian deities and, <page 337>; Babylonian and Persian influences, <page 338>; as god of fertility, &c., <page 339>; Assyrian civilization reflected by, <page 340>; as corn god and war god, <page 340>; the Biblical Nisroch, <page 341>; the eagle and, <page 343>; Ezekiel's references to life wheel, <page 344> et seq.; fire cult and, <page 346>; Indian wheel symbol, <page 346>, <page 347>; Persian wheel or disk, <page 347>; wheels of Shamash and Ishtar, <page 347>; the Egyptian Ankh, <page 347>; Hittite winged disk, <page 347>, <page 348>; Sandan and, <page 347>, <page 348>; Attis and, <page 348>; son of Ea like Merodach, <page 348>; aided by fires and sacrifices, <page 351>; disk a symbol of life, fertility, &c., <page 351>; the lightning arrow, <page 352>; temples of and worship of, <page 352>; close association of with kings, <page 352>, <page 353>; association of with moon god, <page 353>; astral phase of, <page 354>; Jastrow's view, <page 354>; Pinches on Merodach and Osiris links, <page 354>; as patriarch, corn god, &c., <page 354>, <page 355>; spouse of, <page 355>; a Baal, <page 355>; earthquake destroys temple of, <page 363>; Shalmaneser I obtains treasure for, <page 366>; Esarhaddon builds temple to, <page 476>; Sennacherib murdered in temple of, <page 470>;  Mazda and, <page 496>. See Asshur, the Biblical Patriarch.

Ashur-bani-pal (ashur-ban'i-pal), discovery of library of, <page xxii>, <page xxiii>; doctors and, <page 231>, <page 232>; worship of Ashur and Sin, <page 353>; Merodach restored to Babylon by, <page 48>r, <page 482>; Egyptian campaign, <page 482>; sack of Thebes, <page 483>; emissaries from Gyges of Lydia visit, <page 483>; Shamash-shum-ukin's revolt against, <page 484>; suicide of Shamash-shum-ukin, <page 485>; Lydia aided by, <page 486>; Sardanapalus legend, <page 486>; the Biblical "Asnapper", <page 487>; palace of, <page 487>.

A'shur-dan' I, of Assyria, <page 370>.

Ashur-dan III, reign of, <page 442>.

Ashur-danin-apli (a'shur-dan-in'apli), revolt of in Assyria, <page 414>, <page 415>.

Ashur-elit-ilani (a'shur-e'lit-il-a ni), King of Assyria, <page 487>, <page 488>.

Ashur-natsir-pal I (a'shur-na'tsir-pal) of Assyria, <page 369>.

Ashur-natsir-pal III, his "reign of terror", <page 396>; conquests and atrocities of, <page 397>, <page 398>; Babylonians over-awed by, <page 399>; death of, <page 401>.

Ashur-nirari IV (a'shur-ni-ra'ri), last king of Assyria's "Middle Empire", <page 442>, <page 443>.

Ashur-uballit (a'shur-u-bal-lit), King of Assyria, Egypt and, <page 28>,, <page 282>, <page 285>; conquests of, <page 284>; grandson of as King of Babylon, <page 284>; Arabian desert trade route, <page 360>.

Asia Minor, hill god of, <page 136>; prehistoric alien pottery in, <page 263>.

Ass, the sun god as, <page 329>; in Lagash chariot, <page 330>.

"Ass of the East", horse called in Babylonia, <page 270>.

As'shur, City of, Ashur the god of, <page 277>; Mitanni king plunders, <page 280>; imported beliefs in, <page 327>; Biblical reference to, <page 339>; development of god of, <page 355>; Merodach's statue deported to, <page 469>.

As'shur, the Biblical Patriarch of Assyria, <page 276>, <page 277>, <page 327>. See Ashur.

Assyria, excavations in, <page xix> et seq.; Amorite migration to, <page 217>; Hammurabi kings as overlords of, <page 419>; Thothmes III corresponds with

[p. 505]

king of, <page 276>; Biblical reference to rise of, <page 276>, <page 277>; Aryan names of early kings of, <page 278>; Mitanni kings as overlords of, <page 279>, <page 280>; Semitized by Amorites, <page 279>; in Tell-el-Amarna letters, <page 281>, <page 282>; rise of after fall of Mitanni, <page 284>; struggles with Babylonia for Mesopotamia, <page 284>-<page 286>; <page 361> et seq.; the national god, Ashur, <page 326> et seq.; Isaiah's reference to, <page 340>; Egyptians and Hittites allied against, <page 366>, <page 368>; Old Empire Kings, <page 366> et seq.; Babylonia controls, <page 370>; character of, <page 372>-<page 375>; periods of history of, <page 375>; at close of Kassite period, <page 380>; end of Old Empire, <page 386>; Second Empire of, <page 391> et seq.; sculpture of and Sumerian, <page 401>; mother worship in, <page 420> et seq.; Urartu's struggle with, <page 440>-<page 442>; end of Second Empire, <page 443>; Third Empire, <page 444> et seq.; Egypt becomes a province of, <page 475> et seq.; last king of, <page 487>; fall of Nineveh, <page 488>; Cyaxares rules over, <page 493>.

Astarte (as-tar'te), lovers of, <page 103>; animals of on Lagash vase, <page 120>; goddesses that link with, <page 267>; Semiramis and, <page 425>.

Astrology, basal idea in Babylonian, <page 317>; Babylonian and Grecian, <page 318> et seq.; literary references to, <page 325>.

Astrology and astronomy, <page 287> et seq. See Stars, Planets, and Constellations.

Astronomers, eclipses foretold by in late Assyrian period, <page 321>, <page 322>.

Astronomy, Merodach fixes stars, &c., in Creation legend, <page 147>, <page 148>; discovery that moon is lit by sun, <page 148> n.; Mythical Ages and, <page 310> et seq.; theory of Greek origin of, <page 319> et seq.; precession of the equinoxes, <page 320>, <page 320> n.; Assyro-Babylonian observatories, <page 320>-<page 322>; Hittites pass Babylonian discoveries to Europe, <page 316>; in late Assyrian and neo-Babylonian period, <page 479>, <page 480>.

Astyages (as-ty'a-jez), King of the Medes, Cyrus displaces, <page 493>; wife of a Lydian princess, <page 494>.

Asura fire (a-shoo'ra), in the sea, <page 50>, <page 51>.

Atargatis (at-ar-ga'tis), the goddess, legend of origin of, <page 28>; as a bi-sexual deity, <page 267>; Derceto and, <page 277>, <page 426>, <page 427>; Nina and, <page 277>, <page 278>.

Ate (a'te), mother goddess of Cilicia, <page 267>.

Athaliah (ath-a-li'ah), Queen, of Judah, <page 409>; reign of, <page 413>; Joash crowned, <page 413>; soldiers slay, <page 413>, <page 414>.

Athena (athe'na), indigenous goddess of Athens, <page 105>; goat and, <page 337>.

Athens, imported gods in, <page 105>.

Atmospheric deities, Enlil, Indra, Ram-man, &c., as, <page 35>; "air of life" from, <page 48>, <page 49>.

Aton, Akhenaton's god, the goddess Mut and, <page 419>, <page 422>.

Attis (at'tis), the Phrygian god, Tammuz and, <page 84>; death of, <page 87>; as lover of Cybele, <page 103>, <page 104>; deities that link with, <page 267>; as Jupiter, <page 305>; Ashur and, <page 354>-<page 355>; symbols of, <page 348>.

Au-Aa, Jah as Ea, <page 31>.

Australia, star myths in, <page 296>, <page 300>.

Axe, the double, symbol of god, <page 348>.

Azag-Bau (a'zag ba'u), legendary queen of Kish, <page 114>; humble origin of, <page 115>.

Azariah (az-a-ri'ah), King of Judah, <page 449>.

 

Baal, the moon god as, <page 51>; shadowy spouse of, <page 100>; Ashur as, <page 355>; worship of the Phoenician in Israel, <page 406>.

Baal-dag'on, the god, symbols of, <page 32>.

Ba'asha, King of Israel, <page 403>; Damascus aids Judah against, <page 404>, <page 405>.

Ba'a-u, the Phoenician mother goddess, <page 150>.

Babbar (bab'bar), sun god, <page 125>; Nin Girsu and, <page 132>; of Sippar, <page 240>. See Shamash.

Babylon, in early Christian literature, xvii; German excavations at, xxiv; Isaiah foretells doom of, <page 113>, <page 114>, <page 478>; sack of by Gutium, <page 129>; political rise of, <page 217> et seq.; early history of, <page 218>; Greek descriptions of late city of, <page 219> et seq.; "hanging gardens" of, <page 220>; date of existing ruins of, <page 222>; marriage market of, <page 224>, <page 225>; sun worship in, <page 240>; the London of Western Asia, <page 253>; return of Merodach from Mitanni to, <page 272>; observatory at, <page 321>; destruction of by Sennacherib, <page 468>, <page 469>; restored by Esarhaddon, <page 471>; Ashur-bani-pal restores Merodach to, <page 481>, <page 482>; Shamash-sum-ukin's revolt in, <page 484>, <page 485>; Belshazzar's feast in, <page 494>, <page 495>; under the Persians, <page 496>; Xerxes pillages Merodach's temple in, <page 497>; Alexander the Great in, <page 497>, <page 498>;

[p. 506]

under empire of Seleucidae, <page 498>; slow death of, <page 498>, <page 499>.

Babylonia, excavations in, <page xix> et seq.; religion of, <page xxviii>, <page xxxi>; debt of modern world to, <page xxxv>; early divisions of, <page 1> et seq.; harvests of, <page 21>, <page 22>; the two seasons of, <page 23>, <page 24>; rise of empire of; <page 133>; Amorite migration into, <page 217>; Golden Age of, <page 253>; Hittite invasion of, <page 259>; Tell-el-Amarna letters and, <page 281>; early struggles with Assyria, <page 284>-<page 286>; star myths of, <page 290> et seq.; ancestor worship in, <page 295>; beginning of arithmetic in, <page 310> et seq.; Kassites and Mesopotamia, <page 358>, <page 359>, <page 361> et seq.; Arabian desert route, <page 360>; influence of Hittites in, <page 364>, <page 366>, <page 368>; Assyria controlled by, <page 370>; Kassite dynasty ends, <page 370>-<page 371>; compared with Assyria, <page 371>-<page 375>; Tiglath-pileser I and, <page 385>; Ashur-natsir-pal III overawes, <page 399>; Shamshi-Adad VII subdues, <page 414>, <page 415>; Tiglath-pileser IV, the "Pulu" of, <page 444>-<page 446>; Esarhaddon and, <page 471>-<page 476>; Neo-Babylonian Age, <page 478> et seq.; Alexander the Great and, <page 497>.

Baghdad railway, following ancient trade route, <page 357>, <page 357> n.

Balder, the Germanic god, Gilgamesh and, <page 184>; new age of, <page 202>, <page 203>.

Ba-neb-tet'tu, Egyptian god, <page 29>.

Barley, husks of in Egyptian pre-Dynastic bodies, <page 6>.

Barleycorn, John, Nimrod and Icelandic god Barleycorn and, <page 170>, <page 171>.

Barque of Ra, sun as and the Babylonian "boat", <page 56>, <page 57>.

Basques, the, language of and the Sumerian, <page 3>; shaving customs of, <page 4>.

Bast, the Egyptian serpent mother, <page 76>.

Ba'ta, the Egyptian tale of, <page 85>.

Bats, ghosts as, <page 65>.

Battle, the Everlasting, <page 65>.

Bau (ba'u), mother goddess, <page 100>; Gula and Ishtar and, <page 116>; in Kish, <page 114>, <page 126>, <page 127>; associated with Nin-Girsu, <page 115>, <page 116>; Tiamat and, <page 150>; doves and, <page 428>; creatrix and, <page 437>.

Bear, as a clan totem, <page 164>.

Bearded gods, the Sumerian, <page 135>, <page 136>, <page 137>; Egyptian customs, <page 136>.

"Beare, the Old Woman of", as the eternal goddess, <page 101>, <page 102>.

Behistun, rock inscription at, <page xx>.

Bel, the, Merodach as, <page 34>; Enlil as the "elder", <page 35>; demons as "beloved sons" of, <page 63>; Zu bird strives to he, <page 74>; in demon war, <page 77>; as son of Ea, <page 139>; decapitated to create mankind, <page 148>; Etana visits heaven of, <page 166>; in Gilgamesh legend, <page 172>; in flood legend, <page 190> et seq.; Zodiacal "field" of; <page 307>; Sargon II and the "elder", <page 463>.

Bel'-Kap-Ka'pu, King of Babylonia, as overlord of Assyria, <page 419>.

Bel-nirari (bel'-ni-ra'ri), King of Assyria, <page 285>, <page 286>.

Bel-shum-id'din, last Kassite king, <page 371>.

Beli (ba'le), "the Howler", enemy of Germanic corn god, <page 95>.

Belit-sheri (bel-it-she'ri), sister of Tammuz, in Hades, <page 98>, <page 117>.

Belshaz'zar, King of Babylon, over-throw of, <page 494>, <page 495>.

Beltane Day, fire ceremony of, <page 50>.

Beltu (bal'tu), the goddess, <page 36>, <page 100>.

Ben-ha'dad I, King of Damascus, as overlord of Judah and Israel, <page 404>. Ben-hadad II, Ahab defeats twice, <page 406>, <page 407>; murder of by Hazael, <page 410>. Ben-hadad III, Assyrians overcome, <page 438>, <page 439>.

Beowulf (ba-o-wulf), brood of Cain in, <page 80>; Scyld myth, <page 92>, <page 93>; sea monsters, <page 152>; mother-monster in like Sumerian and Scottish, <page 154>, <page 155>.

Ber, "lord of the wild boar", Ninip as, <page 302>.

Bero'sus, <page 27>, <page 30>, <page 83>, <page 148>, <page 164>, <page 170>, <page 198>, <page 466>, <page 470>, <page 492>.

Bhima (bhee'ma), the Indian, like Gilgamesh and Hercules, <page 187>.

Birds, as ghosts and fates, <page 65>; owl as mother's ghost, <page 70>; demons enter the, <page 71>; Sumerian Zu bird and Indian Garuda, <page 74>, <page 75>, <page 168>, <page 169>; in Germanic legends, <page 147> n.; as symbols of fertility, <page 169>; birth eagle, <page 168>, <page 169>, <page 171>; imitation of and musical culture, <page 238>; associated with goddesses, <page 423> et seq.; fairies as, <page 429>. See Doves, Eagle, Raven, Swan, Vulture, Wry-neck.

Birth, magical aid for, <page 165>; straw girdles, serpent skins, eagle stones, and magi-cal plant, <page 165>.

Bi-sexual deities, Nannar, moon god; Ishtar, Isis, and Hapi as, <page 161>, Nina and Atargatis as, <page 277>, <page 278>;

[p. 507]

[paragraph continues] Merodach and Ishtar change forms, <page 299>; Venus both male and female, <page 299>; mother body of moon father, <page 299>; Isis as a male, <page 299>.

Bitumen, Mesopotamian wells of, <page 25>. Blake, W., double vision, <page 336>.

Blood, as vehicle of life, <page 45>, <page 47>, <page 48>; inspiration from, <page 48>; corn stalks as, <page 55>; sap of trees as, <page 47>.

Boann (bo'an), Irish river and corn goddess, <page 33>.

Boar, offered to sea god, <page 33>; demon Set as, <page 85>; Babylonian Ninshach as, <page 86>; Adonis slayer as, <page 86>, <page 87>; Attis slain by, <page 87>; Diarmid slain by, <page 87>; the Irish "green boar", <page 87>; the Totemic theory, <page 293>, <page 294>; Ninip-Ber as lord of the wild, <page 302>; Nergal as, <page 304>; Ares as, <page 304>; Ninip and Set as, <page 315>; the Gaulish boar god and Mercury, <page 316>, <page 317>.

Boghaz-Koi (bog-haz'-keui), prehistoric pottery at, <page 5>; Hittite capital, <page 262>; mythological sculptures near, <page 268>; Winckler cuneiform tablets from, <page 280>, <page 367>.

Bones, why taken from graves, <page 214>; Shakespeare's curse, <page 215>.

Borsippa (bor'sip-pa), observatory at, <page 321>.

Botta, P. C., excavations of, <page xix>, <page xx>.

Bracelet, the wedding, Ishtar's, <page 98>; the Hindu, <page 98> n.

Brahma, the Indian god, like Ea, <page 27>; Anu and, <page 38>; wife of, <page 101>; eagle as, <page 169>; Ashur and, <page 328>.

Brahmans, algebra formulated by, <page 289>; Assyrian teachers and, <page 352>.

Breath of Apis bull, inspiration from, <page 49>.

Britain, the ancestral giant of, <page 42>; Tammuz myth in, <page 85>; birth girdles in, <page 165>; "Island of the Blessed" of, <page 203>; in Egypt and Persia, <page 357>.

Brood of Tiamat, in Creation legend, <page 141>.

Brown, Robert, on Babylonian culture in India, <page 199>, <page 200>, <page 308>, <page 309>, <page 310>, <page 318>, <page 322>.

Brown Race, the. See Mediterranean Race.

Buddha (bud'ha), Babylonian teachers like, <page 42>.

Budge, E. Wallis, on oldest companies of Babylonian and Egyptian gods, <page 36>, <page 37>.

Bull, offered to sea god, <page 33>; Ninip as the, <page 53>, <page 302>, <page 334>; of Mithra, <page 55>; the winged, <page 41>, <page 65>; Osiris as, <page 85>, <page 89>, <page 99>; Tammuz as, <page 85>; Attis and the, <page 89>; Enlil as, <page 159>; of Ishtar in Gilgamesh myth, <page 176>; seers wrapped in skin of, <page 213>; Horus as, <page 301>, <page 302>; as sky god, <page 329>; Ashur as, <page 334>; the lunar, <page 135>, <page 334>.

Burial customs, cremation ceremony, <page 49>, <page 50>, <page 350>; "house of clay", <page 56>; "houses" and charms for dead, <page 206>, <page 207>, <page 212>; Palaeolithic and Neolithic, <page 207>; the Egyptian, <page 209>; religious need for ceremonies, <page 208>, <page 209>; Sumerian like early Egyptian, <page 211>, <page 214>; priestly fees, <page 210>, <page 211>; food, fish-hooks and weapons in graves, <page 212>; why dead were clothed, <page 213>; honey in coffins, <page 214>; disturbance of bones, <page 214>, <page 215>; burnings at Hebrew graves, <page 350>, <page 351>.

Buriats, the, "calling back" of ghosts by, <page 69>, <page 70>; earth and air elves of, <page 105>.

Burkans (boor'kans), "the masters", spirits or elves of Siberians, <page 105>.

Burnaburiash I (bur'na-bur'i-ash), Kassite king, <page 274>.

Burns, Robert, <page 72>; the John Barleycorn myth, <page 170>.

Burrows, Professor, Cretan snake and dove goddess, <page 430>.

Byron, star lore, <page 325>.

 

Cailleach (kal'yak), the Gaelic, a wind hag, <page 73>; as eternal goddess, <page 101>.

Calah (ka'lah), the Biblical. See Kalkhi.

Calendar, the early Egyptian, <page 14>; the Babylonian, <page 305>.

Cambyses (kam-bi'sez), as King of Babylon, <page 495>; sacrifice of Apis bull to Mithra by, <page 495>; wife of a Semiramis, <page 496>.

Canaan, Abraham arrives in, <page 245>; tribes in, <page 245>, <page 246>; Elamite conquest of, <page 247>, <page 248>, <page 249>; first reference to Israelites in, <page 379>.

Canaanites, Hittites identified with, <page 266>.

Canals of Ancient Babylonia, <page 22>, <page 23>.

Cappadocia, Cimmerians in, <page 472>.

Captivity, the Hebrew, Chebar river (Kheber canal) at Nippur, <page 344>.

Carchemish (kar'ke-mish), German railway bridge and Hittite wall at, <page 357> n.; Hittite city state of, <page 395>; revolt of,

[p. 508]

[paragraph continues] <page 461>; Nebuchadrezzar defeats Pharaoh Necho at, <page 489>.

Caria (kar'i-a), assists Lydia against Cimmerians, <page 484>; mercenaries from in Egypt, <page 486>.

Cat, sun god as, <page 329>.

Caucasus, the, skull forms in, <page 8>.

Cave dwellers, the Palestinian, <page 10>.

Celtic goddesses, of Iberian origin, <page 105>.

Celtic water demon myths, <page 28>.

Celts, Achaeans and, <page 377>.

Ceres (se-rez), <page 103>.

Chaldae'ans, Babylonian priests called, <page 222>, <page 497>; in Hammurabi Age, <page 257>; history of, <page 390>; Aramaeans and, <page 390>; Judah's relations with, <page 408>; Merodach Baladan King of, <page 457> et seq.; revolt of against Esarhaddon, <page 471>; revolt of against Ashur-bani-pal, <page 484>; Nabo-polassar King of Babylon, <page 487>.

Charms, the burial, <page 206>; ornaments as, <page 211>; the metrical and poetic development, <page 237>--<page 9>.

Chedor-laomer (ched'or-la'o-mer), the Biblical, <page 247>, <page 248>.

Chellean (shel'le-an) flints, in Palestine, <page 10>.

Cherubs, the four-faced, <page 344>.

Child god, Tammuz and Osiris as the, <page 89>, <page 90>; Sargon of Akkad as, <page 91>; Germanic Scyld or Sceaf as, <page 92>, <page 93>.

Children, stolen by hags and fairies, <page 68>; in mother worship, <page 107>, <page 108>.

China, spitting customs in, <page 47>; dragons of, <page 152>; ancestor worship in, <page 295>.

Chinese, language of and the Sumerian, <page 3>.

Chronology, inflated dating and Berlin system, <page xxiv>, <page xxv>.

Cilicia, thunder god of, <page 261>; Ate, goddess of, <page 267>; Hittite Kingdom of, <page 395>; Ionians in, <page 464>; in anti-Assyrian league, <page 473>; Ashur-bani-pal expels Cimmerians from, <page 484>, <page 486>.

Cimmerians, raids of in Asia Minor, <page 461>, <page 464>; Esarhaddon and, <page 472>; Gyges of Lydia and, <page 483>, <page 484>, <page 486>; Lydians break power of, <page 486>.

Clans, Totemic names and symbols of, <page 293>.

Clepsydra, a Babylonian invention, <page 323>.

Clothing, magical significance of, <page 212>; the reed mats and sheepskins in graves, <page 213>; the bull skin, <page 213>; the ephod and prophet's mantle, <page 213>, <page 214>.

Comana (ko-ma'na), Hittite city of, <page 395>.

Constellations, the Zu bird, <page 74>; why animal forms were adopted, <page 289>; the "Great Bear" in various mythologies, <page 295>, <page 296>, <page 309>; the Pleiades, <page 296>, <page 297>; Pisces as "fish of Ea", <page 296>; the "sevenfold one", <page 298>, <page 300>: Merodach's forms, <page 299>; Castor and Pollux myths in Australia, Africa, and Greece, <page 300>; Tammuz and Orion, <page 301>; months controlled by, <page 305>; signs of Zodiac, <page 305>; Babylonian and modern signs, <page 308>; the central, northern, and southern, <page 309>; "Fish of the Canal" and "the Horse", <page 309>; the "Milky Way", <page 309>; identified before planets, <page 318>; Biblical and literary references to, <page 324>, <page 325>; the "Arrow", "Eagle", "Vulture", "Swan", and "Lyra", <page 336>, <page 337>.

Copper, Age of in Palestine, <page 11>; first use of, <page 12>; in Northern Mesopotamia, <page 25>; Gudea of Lagash takes from Elam, <page 130>.

Corn child god, Tammuz and Osiris as, <page 89>, <page 90>; Sargon as, <page 91>; the Germanic Scyld or Scef, <page 92>, <page 93>, <page 94>; Frey and Heimdal as, <page 94>.

Corn Deities, as river and fish gods and goddesses, <page 29>, <page 32>, <page 33>.

Corn god, moon god as, <page 52>; Mithra as, <page 55>; the thunder god as, <page 57>, <page 340>; Tammuz and Osiris as, <page 81> et seq.; Khonsu as, go; Frey and Agni as, <page 94>; fed with sacrificed children, <page 171>.

Corn goddess, Isis as, <page 90>; fish goddess as, <page 117>.

Cow goddesses, Isis, Nepthys, and Hathor as, <page 99>, <page 329>.

Creation, local character of Babylonian conception, xxix; of mankind at Eridu, <page 38>; legend of, <page 134>, <page 138> et seq.; night as parent of day, <page 330>.

Creative tears, <page 45> et seq.

Creator gods, Ea and Ptah as, <page 30>; eagle god as, <page 169>.

Creatress, the goddess Mania as, <page 57>; Aruru as, <page 100>, <page 148>; forms of, <page 437>.

Cremation, traces of in Gezer caves, <page 11>; the ceremony of, <page 49>; not Persian or Sumerian, <page 50>; in European Bronze Age, <page 316>; Saul burned, <page 350>; Sardanapalus legend, <page 350>.

Crete, chronology of, <page xv>, <page 114>; no temples, <page xxxi>; women's s high social status in, <page 16>; Dagon's connection with, <page 33>; prehistoric pottery in, <page 263>

[p. 509]

[paragraph continues] Hyksos trade with, <page 273>; Achaeans invade, <page 376>, <page 377>; Philistine raiders from, <page 379>; dove and snake sacred in, <page 430>; dove goddess not Babylonian, <page 433>, <page 434>.

Crocodile god of Egypt, <page 29>; sun god as, <page 329>.

Croesus of Lydia, Cyrus defeats, <page 494>.

Cromarty, the south-west wind hag or, <page 73>.

Cronos, as the Destroyer, <page 64>; Ninip and Set and, <page 315>.

Cuneiform writing, earliest use of, <page 7>.

Cushites, Biblical reference to, <page 276>.

Cuthah (ku'thah), Nergal, god of, <page 54>; annual fires at, <page 170>; the Underworld city of, <page 205>; demon legend of, <page 215>, <page 216>; men of in Samaria, <page 455>, <page 456>.

"Cuthean Legend of Creation", <page 215>, <page 216>.

Cyaxares (sy-ax'ar-es), Median King, Nineveh captured by, <page 488>; ally of Nabopolassar, <page 493>.

Cybele (ky-be'le), Attis lover of, <page 103>, <page 104>, <page 267>.

Cyprus, dove goddess not Babylonian, <page 433>, <page 434>; dove goddess of, <page 426>, <page 427>, <page 433>, <page 434>; Ashur-bani-pal and, <page 484>.

Cyrus, Merodach calls, <page 493>; the Patriarch of, <page 493>; the eagle tribe of, <page 493>; Astyages defeated by, <page 493>; Egypto-Lydian alliance against, <page 494>; Nabonidus and, <page 494>; Croesus of Lydia overthrown by, <page 494>; fall of Babylon, <page 494>, <page 495>; the King of Babylonia, <page 495>; welcomed by Jews, <page 495>; rebuilding of Jerusalem temple, <page 496>.

     
Myths of Babylonia and Assyria, by Donald A. MacKenzie, [1915], at sacred-texts.com

Dadu (da'du), Ramman as, <page 57>.

Dagan (dag'an), the Babylonian, identical with Ea, <page 31>; Nippur temple of, <page 131>; under Isin Dynasty, <page 132>.

Dagda (dag'da), the Irish corn god, <page 33>, <page 238>.

Dagon (dag'on), Jah and Ea as, <page 31>; Dagan and, <page 31>, <page 32>; as a fish and corn deity, <page 32>; Baal-dagon and, <page 32>; offering of mice to, <page 32>, <page 33>.

Daguna (dag'u-na), Dagon and Dagan and, <page 31>.

Daityas (dait'yas), the Indian, like Babylonian demons, <page 34>.

Damascius, on Babylonian deities, <page 328>.

Damascus, Aramaean state of, <page 390>; Israel and Judah subject to, <page 395>, <page 396>; Asa's appeal to, <page 404>; conflict with Assyria, <page 407>; Judah and Israel allied against, <page 408>; murder of Ben-hadad II, <page 410>; Palestine subject to, <page 414>; Israel overcomes, <page 449>; conquered by Adad-nirari IV, <page 438>, <page 439>.

Damik-ilishu (dam-ik-il-i'shu), last king of Isin Dynasty, <page 133>.

Damkina (dam'ki-na), wife of Ea, <page 33>, <page 34>; demon attendants of, <page 63>; as mother of Ea, <page 105>; as mother of Enlil, <page 139>; Zerpanitum and, <page 160>; association of with moon, <page 436>; creatrix and, <page 437>.

Damu (da'mu), the fairy goddess of dreams, <page 77>, <page 78>.

Danavas (dan'avas), the Indian, like Babylonian demons, <page 34>.

Dancing, the constellations, <page 333>.

Danes, harvest god as patriarch of, <page 92>.

Daniel, Nebuchadrezzar's "fiery furnace", <page 349>.

Danu (da-nu), the Irish goddess, <page 268>.

Daonus or Daos, the shepherd, Tammuz as, <page 83>, <page 86>.

Darius I, claims to be Achaemenian, <page 496>; plots against Merodach cult, <page 497>.

Darius II, death of at Babylon, <page 497>.

Darius III, Alexander the Great overthrows, <page 497>.

Dasa (da'sa), the Indian, as "foreign devil", <page 67>.

Dasyu (dash'yoo), the Indian, as "foreign devil", <page 67>.

Date palm, in Babylonia, <page 25>.

David, the ephod used by, <page 213>, <page 214>, <page 388>.

Dead, the, Nergal lord of, <page 56>; ghosts of searching for food, <page 70>, <page 71>; Osiris lord of, <page 86>; charms, weapons, and food for, <page 206>; "houses" of, <page 206>-<page 208>; spirits of as warriors and fishermen, <page 212>.

Death, eagle of, <page 168>; the Roman, <page 169>; Hercules and, <page 170>.

Death, the sea of, in Gilgamesh epic, <page 178> et seq.

Death, the stream of, <page 56>.

Deer, associated with Lagash goddess, <page 120>.

Deities, the local, <page 43>, <page 44>; food and water required by, <page 44>; the mead of, <page 45>; early groups of in Egypt and Sumeria, <page 105>, <page 106>; made drunk at banquet, <page 144>.

Deluge Legend, Smith translates, xxii. . See Flood Legends.

[p. 510]

Demeter (de-me'ter), the goddess, Poseidon as lover of, <page 33>, <page 103>.

Demons, the Babylonian Ocean, <page 34>; gods as, <page 35>, <page 62>, <page 135>; Enlil lord of, <page 35>, <page 63>; Tiamat and Apsu as, <page 37>, <page 38>, <page 64>; Tiamat's brood, <page 140>, <page 141>, <page 214>, <page 215>; "ceremonies of riddance", <page 58>; as sources of misfortune, <page 60>; in images, <page 61>; the winged bull, &c., <page 65>; the "will-o'-the-wisp", <page 66>, <page 67>; Anu as father of, <page 63>, <page 68>; as lovers, <page 67>, <page 68>; Adam's first wife Lilith, <page 67>; ghosts as, <page 69>, <page 215>; penetrate everywhere, <page 71>, <page 72>; as pigs, horses, goats, &c., <page 71>; Set pig of Egypt, <page 85>; as wind hags, <page 72>, <page 73>; the Zu bird, <page 74>; Indian eagle, <page 166>; association of with gods, <page 76>; the serpent mother one of the, <page 74>-<page 76>; the Jinn, <page 78>; as composite monsters, <page 79>; the Teutonic Beli, <page 95>; in mythology and folk lore, <page 151> et seq.; the Gorgons, <page 159>; King of Cuthah's battle against, <page 214>, <page 215>; disease germs as, <page 234>.

De Morgan, pottery finds by, <page 263>.

Derceto (der-ke'to), fish goddess, Semiramis and, <page 277>, <page 418>, <page 423>; mermaid form of, <page 426>; Atargatis legend, <page 426>, <page 427>; dove symbol of, <page 432>; legends attached to, <page 437>.

De Sarzec, M., <page xxiii>.

"Descent of Ishtar", poem, <page 95> et seq.

Destroyer, the, "World Mother" as, <page xxx>, <page 100>; Ninip as, <page 53>; goddess Nin-sun as, <page 57>; Enlil and Nergal as, <page 62>, <page 63>, <page 303>; Egyptian and Indian deities as, <page 63>, <page 85>, <page 157>, <page 336>; Cronos as, <page 64>; "Shedu" bull as, <page 65>; Set boar as, <page 85>; Babylonian boar god as, <page 86>; eagle as, <page 168>, <page 169>; "winged disk" as, <page 336>; sun as, <page 336>; Thor, Ashur, Tammuz, and Indra each as, <page 340>.

Diarmid, the Celtic, Tammuz-Adonis and, <page 84>, <page 87>; water of life myth, <page 186>, <page 187>; Totemic boar and, <page 293>.

Dietrich (det'rech: 'ch' as in loch) as the thunder god, <page 74>, <page 164>.

Diodo'rus, on Babylonian star lore, <page 309>.

Disease, Nergal the god of, <page 53>, <page 54>; goddess of, <page 77>; demons of, <page 60>, <page 63>, <page 77>.

Divorce, in Babylonia, <page 227>.

Doctors, laws regarding, <page 230>, <page 231>; Herodotus on, <page 231>; Assyrian king and, <page 231>, <page 232>.

Doves, goddesses and, <page 418>; Semiramis protected after birth by, <page 424>; goddess of Cyprus and, <page 426>; Aphrodite and, <page 427>; Ishtar and Gula and, <page 427>, <page 428>; associated with temples and homes, <page 428>; in Gilgamesh epic, <page 428>; deities identified with, <page 429>; ravens and, <page 429>; sacred at Mycenae, <page 430>; snakes and in Crete, <page 430>; sacred among Semites and Hittites, <page 430>; Egyptian lovers and, <page 431>; pigeon lore in England, Ireland, and Scotland, <page 431>; fish and, <page 432>; Totemic theory, <page 432> et seq.; antiquity of veneration of, <page 433>, <page 434>; sacrificed in Israel, <page 439>; the Persian eagle legend and, <page 493>.

Dragon, the, of Babylon, <page 62>; in group of seven spirits, <page 63>; Tiamat as the female, <page 38>, <page 64>; Tiamat as ocean, <page 15>, as "fire drake", "worm", &c., <page 151>; "Ku-pu" of Tiamat, <page 147>; heart of, <page 147> n.; liver vulnerable part of, <page 153>; the male, <page 156> (see Apsu); Biblical references to, <page 114>, <page 157>, <page 158>; Eur-Asian variations of myth of, <page 151>, <page 152>; well of at Jerusalem, <page 152>; the Egyptian, <page 156>; Sutekh as slayer of, <page 157>; Merodach as slayer of (see Merodach).

Drake, the Fire, the Babylonian, <page 66>, <page 67>; dragon as, <page 151>.

Dreams, the fairy goddess of, <page 77>, <page 78>.

Drink traffic, women monopolized in Babylonia, <page 229>.

Drinking customs, religious aspect of, <page 45>; inspiration from blood, <page 48>; the gods drunk at Anshar's banquet, <page 144>.

Dungi (dun'gi), King of Ur, <page 130>; daughters of as rulers, <page 130>; an Ea worshipper, <page 131>.

Dyaus (rhymes with "mouse"), displaced by Indra, <page 302>.

Dying gods, the eternal goddess and the, <page 101> et seq.; death a change of form, <page 305>.

 

Ea (a'a), god of the deep, Ashurbanipal and, <page xxii>, <page xxiii>; a typical Babylonian god, <page xxviii>, <page xxix>, <page 27>; Oannes and, <page 27>, <page 30>; as world artisan like Ptah and Indra, <page 30>; connection of with sea and Euphrates, <page 28>, <page 29>, <page 39>; as sea-demon, <page 62>; names of, <page 30>, <page 39>, as fish and corn god, <page 32>; Dagon, Poseidon, Neptune, Frey, Shony, &c., and, <page 31>, <page 33>; Dagon and Dagan, <page 31>; Ea as Dagan at Nippur, <page 131>; as Ya, or Jah, of Hebrews, <page 31>; fish of, <page 294>; Indian Varuna and, <page 31>, <page 34>, <page 209>; wife of as earth lady, <page 33>;

[p. 511]

wife of as mother, <page 105>; Anu and, <page 34>; Enlil and, <page 35>; demons of, <page 35>, <page 63>; in early triad, <page 36>, <page 37>, <page 463>; Indian Vishnu and, <page 38>; as dragon slayer, <page 38>, <page 140>, <page 153>, <page 157>; Adapa, son of, a demon slayer, <page 72>, <page 73>; in demon war, <page 77>; as "great magician", <page 38>, <page 46>; moon god and, <page 40>, <page 50>, <page 51>, <page 53>; solar attributes of, <page 50>, <page 51>, <page 53>; food supply and, <page 43>; beliefs connected with, <page 44>; Nusku as messenger of, <page 50>; Nebo a form of, <page 303>, <page 435>; gods that link with, <page 57>, <page 58>; as form of Anshar, <page 125>; family of including Merodach and Tammuz, <page 72>, <page 73>, <page 82>; daughter of, <page 117>; Merodach supplants, <page 158>; Enlil as son of, <page 139>; Ashur as son of, <page 348>; planetary gods and, <page 304>; worshipped at Lagash, <page 116>; earliest form of, <page 134>; under Isin Dynasty, <page 132>; in Creation legend, <page 138> et seq.; astral "field" of, <page 147>, <page 307>; constellations and, <page 296>; Merodach directs decrees of, <page 149>; Etana and eagle visit heaven of, <page 166>; in flood legend, <page 190> et seq.; as Aos, <page 328>; the goat and, <page 333>; as "high head", <page 334>; Sargon II and, <page 463>.

Ea-bani (a'a-ba'ni), <page 41>, <page 42>; ghost of as "wind gust", <page 48>, <page 49>; goat demi-god, <page 135>; lured from the wilds, <page 173>; as ally of Gilgamesh, <page 174>; Ishtar's wooing, <page 174>, <page 175>; slaying of Ishtar's bull, <page 176>; death of, <page 176>, <page 177>; ghost of invoked by Gilgamesh, <page 183>, <page 184>.

Eagle, the, Sumerian Zu bird and Indian Garuda eagle, <page 74>, <page 75>, <page 165>, <page 166>, <page 168>, <page 169>, <page 330>, <page 346>, <page 347>; the lion headed as Nin-Girsu (Tammuz), <page 120>, <page 135>; in Etana myth, <page 165>; in Nimrod myth, <page 166>, <page 167>; in Alexander the Great legend, <page 167>; in Scottish folk tale, <page 167>, <page 168>; as soul carrier, <page 168>; Roman Emperor's soul and, <page 169>; Hercules and, <page 170>, <page 349>; Gilgamesh protected at birth by, <page 171>; Persian patriarch protected at birth by, <page 493>; the Totemic theory, <page 293>, <page 493>; wheel of life and, <page 346>, <page 347>; Ashur and Horus and, <page 343>; wings of on Ashur disk, <page 351>, <page 352>.

Eagle stone, as a birth charm, <page 165>.

Eagle tribe, the ancient, <page 493>.

Eannatum (a'an-na'tum), King of Lagash, a great conqueror, <page 118>, <page 119>; rules Ur and Erech, <page 119>; works of, <page 119>; mound burial in period of, <page 214>.

Earth children, elves and dwarfs as, <page 292>, <page 292> n.

Earth spirits, males among father worshippers, <page 105>; the Egyptian, Teutonic, Aryan, and Siberian, <page 105>; elves and fairies as, <page 294>, <page 295>.

Earth worship, moon and stone worship and, <page 52>.

Ecclesiastes, "Lay of the Harper", "Song of the Sea Lady" and, <page 179>, <page 180>.

Ecke (eck-a), Tyrolese storm demon, <page 74>.

Eclipse foretold by Assyrian and Babylonian astronomers, <page 321>, <page 322>; the Ahaz sundial record, <page 323>; Babylonian records of, <page 324>; in reign of Ashur-dan III, <page 442>.

Ecliptic, when divided, <page 322>.

Edinburgh, the giant Arthur of, <page 164>.

Edom, Judah and, <page 402>, <page 409>, <page 448>; tribute from to Assyria, <page 439>.

Education, in Hammurabi Age, <page 251>.

Egg, the, goddess Atargatis born of, <page 28>, <page 426>; thorn as life in, <page 352>.

Egypt, agricultural festivals in, <page xxxi>; debt of modern world to, <page xxxv>; prehistoric agriculture in, <page 6>; Mediterranean race in, <page 7>; early shaving customs, <page 5>, <page 9>, <page 10>; theory copper first used in, <page 12>; social status of women in, <page 16>; early gods of and Sumerian, <page 26>, <page 36>, <page 37>; creative tears of deities of; <page 45>; lunar worship in, <page 52>; god and goddess cults in, <page 105>; Great Mother Nut of, <page 166>; at dawn of Sumerian history, <page 114>; bearded deities of, <page 136>; dragon of, <page 156>; "Lay of Harper" and Sumerian "Song of Sea Lady", <page 178>, <page 179>; flood legend of, <page 197>; feast of dead in, <page 206>; burial customs and Sumerian, <page 209>-<page 214>; Hyksos invasion and Hittite raid on Babylon, <page 259>; culture debt of to Syria, <page 275>; prehistoric Armenoid invasion of, <page 11>, <page 263>; prehistoric black foreign pottery, <page 263>; Totemism in, <page 292>-<page 295>, <page 432>-<page 433>; Syrian empire of lost, <page 284>; fairies and elves of, <page 294>; Pharaoh displaces gods in, <page 295>; doctrine of mythical ages in, <page 315>; the phoenix, <page 330>; the "man in the sun", <page 336>: Neith as a thunder goddess, <page 337>, <page 337> n.; Ankh symbol, <page 347>; influence of Hittites in, <page 364>; wars with Hittites, <page 365>, <page 366>; Cretans and sea raiders,

[p. 512]

[paragraph continues] <page 378>; Hebrews and, <page 388>; "mother right" in, <page 418>; sacred pigeons in, <page 428>; fosters revolt against Sargon II, <page 457>; Pharaoh and Piru of Mutsri, <page 458> and n.; Sennacherib defeats army of, <page 465>; intrigues against Assyria, <page 465>, <page 471>; as Assyrian province, <page 475>; Ashur-bani-pal and, <page 482>, <page 484>; Assyrian yoke shaken off, <page 486>; Scythians on frontier of, <page 488>; after Assyria's fall, <page 489>; Hophra plots against Nebuchadnezzar II, <page 491>.

El'ah, King of Israel, <page 405>.

Elam, prehistoric pottery of, <page 5>, <page 263>; copper from, <page 130>; British influence in, <page 357>; caravan routes of, <page 361>.

Elamites, relations with early Sumerians, <page 111>; defeated by Eannatum of Lagash, <page 118>; raid on Lagash by, <page 121>; Sargon of Akkad defeats, <page 127>; Ur dynasty overthrown by, <page 131>; in Hammurabi Age, <page 217>; conquests of Warad-Sin and Rim-Sin, <page 217>; King Sin-muballit's struggle with, <page 242>, <page 243>; Medes and, <page 244>; King of and Abraham, <page 247>; in Syria, <page 247>; driven from Babylonia, <page 249>; in Kassite period, <page 274>, <page 370>, <page 380>, <page 381>; connection of with early Assyria, <page 278>; struggle for trade expansion, <page 361> et seq.; Babylonian raid, <page 369>; during Solomon period, <page 391>; Esarhaddon and, <page 472>; Ashur-bani-pal subdues, <page 484>, <page 485>.

Elisha, call of Jehu, <page 409>, <page 410>; call of Hazael, <page 410>, <page 411>.

Elves, the Babylonian, <page 67>; as lovers, <page 68>; origin of conception of, <page 79>, <page 80>, <page 292>; like Indian Ribhus and Siberian "masters" <page 105>; the European, Egyptian, and Indian, <page 294>; human bargains with, <page 294>, <page 295>.

Enannatum I (en-an-na'tum) of Lagash, defeats Umma force, <page 119>.

Enannatum II, King of Lagash, last of Ur-Nina's line, <page 120>.

England, the ancestral giant of, <page 42>; spitting customs in, <page 47>; return of dead dreaded in, <page 70>, <page 70> n.; Black Annis, the wind hag, <page 73>, <page 101>; fairies and elves of, <page 80>, <page 186>; the "fire drake" of, <page 151>; "Long Meg" a hag of, <page 156>; "Long Tom" a giant of, <page 156>; pigeon lore in, <page 431>.

Enki (an'ki), "lord of the world", Ea as, <page 31>. See Ea.

En'lil, god of Nippur and elder Bel, lord of demons, <page 35>; spouse of, <page 36>; in early group of deities, <page 37>; like Indian Shiva, <page 38>; deities that link with, <page 35>, <page 57>, <page 271>, <page 272>; as destroyer, <page 62>, <page 63>; "fates" as sons of, <page 80>; Ur Nina worshipped, <page 116>; as son of Ann, <page 124>; as son of Ea, <page 139>; Ninip as son and father of, <page 53>, <page 158>, <page 302>; during Isis Dynasty, <page 132>; astral "field" of, <page 147>; Merodach directs decrees of, <page 149>; as corn god, <page 159>; monotheism of cult of, <page 161>; temple of as "world house", <page 35>, <page 332>; as bull and "high head", <page 334>; Etana in heaven of, <page 166>; also rendered Ellil. See Bel.

Enlil-bani (en'lil-ba'ni), King of Isin, a usurper like Sargon, <page 133>.

En-Mersi (en-mer'si), a form of Tammuz, <page 116>.

Enneads, the Babylonian and Egyptian, <page 36>.

Entemena (en-te'men-a), King of Lagash, Umma subdued by, <page 119>, <page 120>; famous silver vase of, <page 120>; worshipped as a god, <page 257>, <page 258>.

Ephod, the, used by David, <page 213>, <page 214>.

Ephron the Hittite, <page 12>.

Equinoxes, precession of, where law of discovered: Greece or Babylonia? <page 320>, <page 320> n., <page 322>.

Erech, Ann god of, <page 34>; gods of become flies and mice, <page 41>; destroying sun goddess of, <page 57>; Ur-Nina and, <page 116>; under Lagash, <page 119>; an ancient capital, <page 124>, <page 125>; rise of after Akkad, <page 129>; moon god at, <page 130>; in Gilgamesh epic, <page 172> et seq.; in revolt against Ashur-bani-pal, <page 484>; Nabonidus and, <page 492>.

Eresh-ki-gal (eresh-ki'gal), goddess of death, <page 53>; Nergal husband and conqueror of, <page 53>, <page 54>, <page 204>, <page 205>, <page 303>; as a Norn, <page 77>; "Fates" as sons of, So; as wife of Enlil, <page 80>; Germanic hag like, <page 95>; punishment of Ishtar by, <page 96>, <page 97>; as destroyer, <page 100>.

Eridu (e'ri-du), once a seaport, <page 22>, <page 25>, <page 38>; Ea the god of, <page 27>; sanctity of, <page 38>, <page 39>.

Eros, Greek love god, <page 90>.

E-sagila (e-sag'i-la), Merodach's temple, <page 221>; Hammurabi and, <page 252>; in Kassite Age, <page 274>; as symbol of world hill, <page 332>; sacked by Sennacherib, <page 468>; gods of Ur, Erech, Larsa, and Eridu

[p. 513]

in, <page 492>, <page 493>; Xerxes pillages, <page 497>; Alexander the Great repairs, <page 497>; decay of, <page 498>.

Esarhaddon (e'sar-had'don), character of, <page 470>; Babylonian wife of, <page 471>; Egypto-Syrian league against, <page 471>, <page 472>; Queen Nakia regent of, <page 472>; alliance with Urartu, <page 473>; sack of Sidon, <page 473>; Manasseh's revolt, <page 474>; invasion of Egypt, <page 475>; revolt in Assyria, <page 476>; successors chosen by, <page 476>; death of, <page 476>.

Esau, Hittite wives of; <page 266>.

Etana (e-ta'na), Zu bird myth and, <page 74>-<page 76>; quest of the "Plant of Birth", <page 164>, <page 165>; flight with eagle to heavens, <page 165>, <page 166>.

Eternal goddess, the, husbands of die annually, <page 101> et seq.

Ethnology, folk beliefs and, <page xxvi>.

Euphrates, the river, <page 22>; as "the soul of the land", <page 23>; rise and fall of, <page 24>; as the creator, <page 29>.

Europe, lunar worship in, <page 52>; Armenoid invasion of, <page 264>.

Evans, Sir Arthur, pottery finds by, <page 263>.

Evil eye, the, <page 235>, <page 236>.

"Evil Merodach", King of Babylon, <page 492>.

Evolution, in Babylonian religion, <page xxxiv>.

Ezekiel, on fire-worshipping ceremony, <page 50>; Tammuz weeping, <page 82>; on ethnics of Jerusalem, <page 246>; on Hittite characteristics, <page 266>; Assyria the cedar, <page 340>, <page 341>; the wheel of life symbol, <page 344> et seq.

Ezra, return of Jewish captives with, <page 496>.

 

Face paint, for the dead, <page 206>; why used for dead, living, and gods, <page 212>.

Fafner dragon, <page 156>.

Fairies, the Babylonian, <page 67>; origin of, <page 79>, <page 80>; green like other spirits, <page 186>; the European, Egyptian, and Indian, <page 294>; human bargains with, <page 294>, <page 295>; birds as, <page 429>.

Farm labourers, scarcity of in Babylonia, <page 256>.

Farnell, Dr., on pre-Hellenic religion, <page 104>; on racial gods in Greece, <page 105>.

Fates, the birds as, <page 65>,<page 147> n., <page 427> n.,<page 430>; as servants of Anu, <page 77>; moon as chief of the, <page 301>; oldest deities as, <page 317>; on St. Valentine's Day, <page 430>; Aphrodite and Ishtar as, <page 433>.

Father, the Great, Anu as, <page 38>; Ramman-Hadad as, <page 57>; Apsu, the chaos demon as, <page 64>; Osiris as, <page 99>; shadowy spouse of, Too; nomadic people and, <page 105>; worshipped by Hatti, <page xxx>, <page 268>, <page 420>.

Father and son conflict; younger god displaces elder, Ninip and Enlil, Merodach and Ea, Indra and Dyaus myths, <page 158>; Osiris and Horus, <page 159>; in astral myths, <page 302>, <page 303>, <page 304>, <page 305>, <page 348>.

Feast of Dead, <page 206>.

Fig tree, in Babylonia, <page 25>:

Finger counting, in Babylonia and India, <page 311> et seq.

Finn-mac-Coul (finn'mac-cool), as hero and god, <page 87>, <page 87> n., <page 88> n.; as mother monster slayer, <page 153>, <page 154>; Beowulf and, <page 155>; as a "sleeper", <page 164>, <page 394>; water of life myth, <page 186>, <page 187>.

Finns, language of and the Sumerians, <page 3>; of Ural-Altaic stock, <page 4>.

Fire, as vital principle, <page 50>, <page 51>; fire and water ceremonies, <page 50>, <page 51>; the ever-lasting fire in the sea, <page 50>, <page 51>; the Babylonian "Will-o'-the-wisp", <page 66>; Eagle and, <page 169>; the May Day, <page 348>; ceremony of riddance, <page 349>; Babylonian burnings, <page 348>; Nimrod's pyre, <page 349>, <page 350>; Tophet, <page 350>; royal burnings in Israel and Judah, <page 350>, <page 351>.

Fire drake, the Babylonian, <page 66>, <page 151>.

Fire gods, the Babylonian and Indian, <page 49>.

First born, sacrifice of, <page 50>.

Fish deities, Sumerian Ea and Indian Brahma and Vishnu as, <page 27>, <page 28>; in Eur-Asian legends, <page 28>; Sumerian and Egyptian, <page 29>; connection of with corn, <page 29>, <page 32>; goddess of Lagash, <page 117>; Western Asian fish goddesses, <page 277>, <page 418>, <page 423>, <page 426>; dove symbol of, <page 431>, <page 432>; Totemism and, <page 294>.

Flies, gods turn to, <page 41>.

Flood legend, the Babylonian, <page 24>, <page 55>, <page 190> et seq.; the Greek, <page 195>; the Indian, <page xxvi>, <page 196>; the Irish, <page 196>; the Egyptian, <page 197>; the American, <page 197>, <page 198>; the Biblical, <page 198>, <page 199>.

Folk cures, the ancient, <page 6>,, <page 231>, <page 232>-<page 234>.

Folk lore, mythology and, <page xxv>, <page xxxiv>, <page 42>, <page 151> et seq., <page 189>; ethnology in, <page xxvi>.

Food of death, <page 44>.

Food of the gods, <page 44>.

[p. 514]

Food supply, religion and the, <page 42>, <page 43>.

"Foreign devils", the Babylonian and Indian, <page 67>.

Four quarters, the, in astronomy, <page 307>; lunar divisions, <page 323>.

Fowl, inspiration from blood of, <page 48>.

France, skull forms in Dordogne valley, <page 8>; Syrian railways of, <page 357>.

Frazer, Professor, xxv; "homogeneity of beliefs", xxvi; Adonis garden, <page 171>, <page 172>; Hercules and Melkarth, <page 348>; on Semiramis legend, <page 424>, <page 425>.

Frey (fri), the Germanic patriarch and corn god, <page 33>, <page 93>, <page 94>; links with Tammuz myth, <page 95>, <page 116>, <page 204>.

Freyja (fri'ya), the Germanic eternal goddess, <page 102>; lovers of, <page 102>.

Frigg, Germanic goddess, lovers of, <page 103>.

Frode (fro'de). See Frey.

 

Gabriel, Abraham rescued from Nimrod's pyre by, <page 349>, <page 350>.

Gaga (ga'ga), messenger of Anshar, <page 143>.

Gallu (gal'lu), as "foreign devil", <page 65>-<page 67>.

Gandash (gan'dash), Kassite king, <page 271>.

Ganga (gang'a), the Indian goddess, as king's lover, <page 68>.

"Garden of Adonis", <page 171>, <page 172>.

Gardens, the Hanging, of Babylon, <page 220>.

Garstang, Professor, on fall of Hatti and god cult, <page 268>; on Totemic Adonis boar, <page 293>, <page 294>; Hittite Sandan disk, <page 348>.

Garuda (gar-ood'a), Indian eagle god, Zu bird and, xxvi; myth of, <page 74>, <page 75>; Etana eagle and, <page 165>; sons of, <page 166>; identified with Agni, Brahma, Indra, Yama, &c., t<page 68>, <page 169>; wheel of life and, <page 346>, <page 347>.

Gauls, Hittite raiders like the, <page 261>; gods of and the Babylonian, <page 316>, <page 317>. Germ theory, anticipated by Babylonians, <page 61>, <page 234>.

Germany, double-headed eagle of, <page 168>; the Baghdad railway, <page 357>.

Gezer cave dwellings, <page 10>; cremation practised in, <page 11>.

Ghosts, "wind gusts" as, <page 48>, <page 49>; associated with demons, <page 60>, <page 215>, <page 216>; as birds, <page 65>; as death bringers, <page 69>, <page 295>; the terrible mothers, <page 69>; where dreaded and where invoked, <page 69>, <page 70>; Babylonian "night prowlers", <page 70>; food required by, <page 70>, <page 212>, <page 213>; Ishtar's threat to raise, <page 215>; King of Cuthah and, <page 215>, <page 216>; as "Fates" and enemies of the living, <page 295>; worship of, <page 295>; Orion and Jupiter as, <page 305>.

Giants, the British Alban, <page 42>; the Babylonian, <page 71>; graves of, <page 296>.

Gibil (gi'bil), fire god, Nusku and, <page 353>.

Gilgamesh (gil'ga-mesh), the Babylonian Hercules, <page 41>; revelation of ghost to, <page 48>, <page 49>, <page 183>, <page 184>; quest of, <page 164>; birth legend of, <page 171>; eagle rescues, <page 171>; lord of Erech, <page 172>; coming of Ea-bani, <page 173>; Ishtar's fatal love of, <page 174>; "La Belle Dame Sans Merci", <page 174>, <page 175>; Ishtar spurned by, <page 99>, <page 176>; Ishtar's bull slain, <page 176>; death of Ea-bani, <page 176>; quest of Water of Life and Plant of Life, <page 177>; the mountain tunnel and Sea of Death, <page 178>; song of the Sea Lady, <page 178>, <page 179>; reaches Pir-napishtim's island, <page 180>; ancestor's revelation to and magic food, <page 182>; plant of life, <page 183>; Earth Lion robs, <page 183>; Germanic gods and heroes and, <page 184>, <page 185>; flood legend revealed to, <page 190> et seq.; Tammuz and, <page 210>; Ashur and, <page 336>; Persian eagle and, <page 493>.

Gillies, Dr. Cameron, on Scottish folk cures, <page 232>, <page 233>.

Gira (gi'ra), the god, <page 42>.

Girru (gir'ru), the fire god, <page 49>.

Gish Bar, the fire god, <page 49>.

Goat, inspiration from blood of, <page 48>; demons enter the, <page 71>; on Lagash vase, <page 120>; the six-headed, <page 332>; the satyr or astral goat man, <page 333>; the white kid of Tammuz, <page 85>, <page 333>; the Arabic "kid" star, <page 333>; associated with Anshar, Agni, Varuna, Ea, and Thor, <page 329>, <page 333>, <page 334>; forehead symbol of like Apis symbol, <page 334>; Minerva's shield has skin of, <page 337>.

Goblin, the Babylonian, <page 66>.

God, the Dead, grave of Osiris, <page 296>; also alive and in various forms, <page 297>. God cult, fusion of with goddess cult, <page 105>.

Goddesses, at once mothers, wives, and daughters of gods, <page 99>, <page 101>, <page 436>; husbands of die annually, <page 101> et seq.; lovers of various, <page 102>; of Mediterranean racial tribes, <page 105>; Ishtar as "La Belle Dame Sans Merci", <page 174>-<page 176>; the Semiramis legend, <page 417> et seq.

Gods, Babylonian and Egyptian groups, <page 36>, <page 37>; the younger and elder, <page 149>; why Sumerian were bearded, <page 135>-<page 137>.

[p. 515]

Goodspeed, Professor, on early astronomy, <page 321>, <page 322>.

Gorgons, the, Tiamat and, <page 159>.

Graves, charms and weapons in, <page 206>; as houses of dead, <page 206>, <page 208>; of gods and giants, <page 296>.

Great Mother, the, forms of, <page 36>; Hittite and Sumerian forms, <page 267>; Anaitis, Ate, Cybele, Ishtar, Isis, Astarte, Ashtoreth, and Atargatis, <page 267>; Kadesh, Anthat, and Danu, <page 268>.

Greece, spitting customs in, <page 46>, <page 47>; blood drinking in, <page 48>; wanton goddesses of, <page 104>; imported gods in, <page 105>; dragon myths of, <page 151>, <page 152>; eagle connected with birth and death in, <page 168>; flood legend of, <page 195>, <page 196>; "Island of Blessed", <page 203>; star myths of, <page 300>; Babylonian culture reached through Hittites, <page 306>; doctrine of world's ages, <page 310> et seq.; pre-Hellenic beliefs in, <page 84>, <page 104>, <page 317>; astrology in, <page 318> et seq.; astronomy in, <page 316>, <page 319> et seq.; in pre-Phrygian period, <page 386>; fusion of races in, <page 393>.

Greeks of Cilicia, Ashur-bani-pal and, <page 484>. See Ionians.

Green, a supernatural colour, <page 186>.

"Grey Eyebrows", a Gaelic hag, <page 87>; myth of, <page 101>.

Gudea (gu'de-a), King of Lagash, sculptures, buildings, and trade of, <page xxiii>, <page 129>, <page 130>; bearded gods of, <page 136>.

Gula (goo'la), mother goddess, <page 100>; Bau and, <page 116>; feast of, <page 476>.

Gungunu (gun'gun-u), King of Ur, <page 132>.

Guns, called after giants "Long Meg" and "Long Tom", <page 156>.

Gutium (gu'tium), northern mountaineers, <page 128>, <page 129>, <page 264>; demons and, <page 307>.

Gyges (gy'jes), King of Lydia, emissaries of visit Nineveh, <page 483>, <page 486>.

     
Myths of Babylonia and Assyria, by Donald A. MacKenzie, [1915], at sacred-texts.com

Hadad, Ramman as, <page 57>, <page 261>, <page 411>.

Haddon, Dr., Achaean racial affinities, <page 377>.

Hades, Ishtar receives water of life in, <page 44>; Tammuz spends winter in, <page 53>, <page 98>; Indian "land of fathers", <page 56>; land of no return, <page 58>; descent of Ishtar to, <page 95> et seq.; "Island of the Blessed", <page 180> et seq.; Babylonian conception of, <page 203>; the Celtic, <page 203>; the Greek, Germanic, Indian, and Egyptian, <page 204>; the grave as, <page 206>; the Japanese, <page 206>; the Roman, <page 207>; Babylonian king and queen of. See Nergal and Eresh-ki-gal.

Hags, of storm, marsh and mountain as primitive goddesses: the Scottish, <page 64>, <page 87>; the Babylonian, <page 68>, <page 71>, <page 72>, <page 73>, <page 185>; the Germanic, <page 72>, <page 73>, <page 95>. See Annie, Annis, Beowulf, Mothers, and Tiamat.

Hair, evidence from early graves and sculptures, <page 4>, <page 9>, <page 10>.

Hamath, Hittite city of, <page 395>; Israel overcomes, <page 449>; Ilu-bi-di, the smith king of, <page 457>, <page 458>.

Hamites, Biblical reference to, <page 276>.

Hammurabi (ham'mu-ra'bi), Dagan as creator of, <page 31>; Sin-muballit father of, <page 133>; pantheon of, <page 134>, <page 254>; the Biblical Amraphel, <page 131>, <page 246>, <page 247>; "Khammurabi" and "Ammurapi" forms of, <page 247>, <page 248>; Rim Sin, the Elamite, and, <page 249>; character of, <page 249>-<page 255>; god Nebo ignored by, <page 303>; legal code of, <page 2>, <page 222>, <page 223> et seq.

Hammurabi Dynasty, the, Amorites and, <page 217>, <page 218>; early Amorite kings of Sippar, <page 241>, <page 242>; schools and correspondence during, <page 252>; Kassites first appear during, <page 255>; Sealand Dynasty in, <page 257>; late kings of, <page 257>, <page 258>; Hittite raid at close of, <page 258>-<page 260>; Assyria during, <page 279>, <page 419>; astronomy in, <page 300>.

Hanuman (han'u-man), the Indian monkey god, Bhima and, <page 187>; like Gilgamesh, <page 188>, <page 189>.

Hapi (hapi), Nile god, a bi-sexual deity, <page 161>.

Haran, Abraham's migration from Ur to, <page 131>, <page 245>; Ashur and Sin worshipped at, <page 353>; Nabonidus's temple to Sin at, <page 494>.

Harper, Professor, <page 321>.

Harvest deities, fish forms of, <page 29>, <page 32>; river and ocean gods as, <page 33>; the pre-Hellenic, <page 84>; the Egyptian, <page 85>.

Harvest moon, the, crops ripened by, <page 52>.

Hathor (hat'hor), the fish goddess and, <page 29>; Ishtar and, <page 57>, <page 99>.

Hathor-Sekhet, the destroyer, <page 157>, <page 197>.

Hatshepsut (hat-shep'soot), Queen of Egypt, <page 16>; Sumerian queen earlier than, <page 115>.

Hatti (hat'ti), dominant tribe of Hittites, <page 246>; of Armenoid race, <page 262>; as Great

[p. 516]

[paragraph continues] Father worshippers, <page 260>; Mitannians and, <page 269>.

Hattusil I (hat-too'sil), King of Hittites, <page 283>.

Hattusil II, Hittite king, Egyptian treaty, <page 366>; influence of in Babylonia, <page 364>, <page 368>; marriage treaty with Amorite king, <page 418>.

Hawes, Mr., on Cretan chronology, <page xxv>; Cretan racial types, <page 8>.

Hawk, demons enter the, <page 71>.

Hazael (haz'a-el), King of Damascus, <page 410>; Shalmaneser III defeats, <page 411>; Israel oppressed by, <page 412>.

Heaven, Queen of, Hebrews offer cakes to, <page 106>; women prominent in worship of, <page 106>, <page 107>.

Hebrews, in Canaan, <page 379>; Philistines as overlords of, <page 379>, <page 380>, <page 386>, <page 387>; as allies of Egypt and Tyre, <page 388>; under David and Solomon, <page 388>, <page 389>; Pharaoh Sheshonk plunders, <page 391>; kingdoms of Judah and Israel, <page 401> et seq.; in late Assyrian period, <page 448> et seq. See Israel and Judah.

Heimdal (him'dal), as patriarch and world guardian, <page 93>; Tammuz and Agni like, <page 94>; Nin-Girsu of Lagash like, <page 116>.

Hercules, Gilgamesh and, <page 41>, <page 164>, <page 172>; as dragon slayer, <page 152>; eagle as soul of, <page 170>, <page 349>; burning of, <page 171>; of Cilicia and deities that link with, <page 261>; Merodach and, <page 316>; Ashur and, <page 336>; astral arrow of, <page 337>; Melkarth and, <page 348>.

Hermes (her'mez), Nebo as, <page 303>.

Hermod (her'mod), the Germanic Patriarch, <page 93>; Gilgamesh and, <page 184>.

Herodotus, on Babylonian harvests, <page 21>, <page 22>; on Babylonian burial customs, <page 214>; description of Babylon, <page 219> et seq.; on Babylonian marriage market, <page 224>, <page 225>; on doctors and folk cures, <page 231>, <page 232>; on origin of Nineveh, <page 277>; on Egyptian Totemism, <page 293>, <page 432>; on pre-Hellenic beliefs, <page 317>; on Semiramis legend, <page 425>; on fall of Assyria, <page 488>.

Heth, children of, Hittites as, <page 246>.

Hezekiah (hez-e-ki'ah), <page 21>, <page 340>; Merodach-Balad conspiracy, <page 465>; destruction of Assyrian army, <page 466>, <page 467>; Esarhaddon and, <page 471>, <page 472>.

Hierap'olis, Atargatis goddess of, <page 267>.

"High Heads", symbols and "world spine", <page 332>; Anshar, Anu, Enlil, Ea, Merodach, Nergal, and Shamash as, <page 334>.

Hindus, Mediterranean race represented among, <page 8>.

Hipparchus, the Greek astronomer, discoveries of, <page 320>, <page 321>.

Hiram, King of Tyre, as Solomon's ally, <page 388>, <page 389>.

Hit, the bitumen wells of, <page 25>.

Hittites, the father worshippers among, <page xxx>, <page 420>; racial types in confederacy of, <page 11>, <page 12>, <page 246>, <page 265>, <page 266>; double-headed eagle of, <page 168>; in ethnics of Jerusalem, <page 246>; Hebrews, dealings with, <page 246>, <page 266>, <page 267>; earliest references to in Egypt and Babylonia, <page 258>, <page 259>, <page 264>; prehistoric culture of, <page 263>; thunder god of and linking deities, <page 261>, <page 268>; Merodach carried off by, <page 261>; fusion of god and goddess cults by, <page 267>, <page 268>; relations with Mitannians and Kassites, <page 270>-<page 272>, <page 282>, <page 358>; Subbi-luliuma, the conqueror, <page 283>; conquest of Mitanni, <page 284>; Babylonian culture passed to Greece by, <page 306>, <page 316>; the winged disk of, <page 347>, <page 348>; Ashur cult and, <page 355>; Syria after expansion of, <page 363>; King Mursil, <page 364>; influence of in Egypt and Babylonia, <page 364>; wars of Seti I and Rameses II against, <page 364>, <page 365>; alliance with Egypt, <page 366>; early struggle with Assyria, <page 367>, <page 368>; Muski as overlords of, <page 380>; Nebuchadrezzar I defeats, <page 381>; late period of Empire of, <page 386>; city-states of Hamath and Carchemish, <page 395>; Shalmaneser III and, <page 414>; "mother right among", <page 418>; connection of with Urartu, <page 440> n.; combination against Sargon II, <page 459>, <page 460>; Biblical reference to Tabal and Meshech, <page 464>.

Horse, sea god as a, <page 33>; demons enter the, <page 71>; domesticated in Turkestan, <page 271>; introduction of to Babylonia and Egypt, <page 270>, <page 271>; sacrificed by Aryo-Indian and Buriats, <page 271>, <page 309>; constellation of, <page 309>.

Horus (ho'rus), god of Egypt, creative tears of, <page 45>; as the sun, Saturn, Jupiter, and Mars, <page 300>, <page 304>; the "elder" and "younger", <page 302>; as the "opener", <page 304>; "world soul" conception and, <page 304>; has many forms like Tammuz, <page 305>; Ninip and, <page 316>;

[p. 517]

[paragraph continues] "winged disk" of, <page 336>; the eagle and, <page 343>.

Hoshea (ho-she'a), King of Israel, <page 453>, <page 454>.

Host of heaven, <page 305>.

Hotherus (hoth'erus), Gilgamesh and, <page 184>, <page 185>.

"House of Clay", the grave called, <page 56>; <page 206>-<page 208>.

Hraesvelgur (hra'svel-gur), Icelandic wind demon, <page 72>.

Human sacrifices, the May Day, <page 50>. "Husband of his mother", <page xxxii>; in Sumerian, Indian, and Egyptian mythologies, <page 106>, <page 304>, <page 305>; Kingu becomes lover of Tiamat, <page 106>; sun as offspring and spouse of the moon, <page 301>; Adad-nirari IV as, <page 420>. See Father and son conflict.

Hydra, as Dragon, <page 152>.

Hyksos (hik'sos), Egypt invaded by, <page 259>; Mitannians and, <page 270>; horse introduced into Egypt by, <page 271>; theories regarding, <page 271>; trading relations of with Crete and Persia, <page 273>; period of expulsion of, <page 275>.

 

Iberians, the, Sumerians and Egyptians congeners of, <page 9>; goddesses of, <page 105>; folk tales of, <page 156>.

Ibis, demons enter the, <page 71>.

Iceland, wind hag of, <page 73>; Barleycorn a god of, <page 170> n.

Idols, spirit of god or demon in, <page 61>; gods of taken prisoners, <page 62>.

Idun (ee'doon),Germanic goddess, lovers of, <page 102>.

Igigi (i'gig-i), spirits of heaven, <page 34>, <page 149>.

Ilu-bi'di, smith king of Hamath, <page 457>, <page 458>.

Immortality, quest of Gilgamesh, <page 177>; Song of the Sea Lady, <page 178>, <page 179>; Lay of the Harper, <page 179>; Pir-napishtim and Gilgamesh, <page 181> et seq.; Ea-bani's revelation, <page 183>-<page 184>; no Babylonian Paradise, <page 203>, <page 210>, <page 211>; Brahmans ask Alexander the Great for, <page 208>; Egyptian Ra and Osirian doctrines, <page 209>.

India, Sumerian myths in, <page xxvi>, <page xxvii>; Mediterranean race in, <page 7>; Brahma-Vishnu and Ea, <page 27>; Babylonian flood myth in, <page 27>, <page 28>, <page 196>; demons of and the Babylonian, <page 34>; mother ghost in, <page 69>; Garuda eagle and Sumerian Zu bird, <page 74>, <page 75>, <page 165>-<page 169>, <page 330>; wedding bracelet of and Ishtar's, <page 98>, <page 98> n.; eternal "mothers" and "dying gods" in, <page 101>; Ribhus the "elves" of, <page 105>; fairies of, <page 294>; Gilgamesh myth in, <page 187>-<page 189>; Babylonian culture in, <page 199>, <page 200>, <page 313>; face paint of gods in, <page 211>; jungle-dwellers' conception of "Self Power", <page 291>, <page 304>; star myths of, <page 296>; early astronomers of, <page 300>; lunar zodiac of, <page 309>; constellations identified before planets in, <page 318>; horse sacrifice in, <page 309>; sun and moon marriages in, <page 306>; doctrine of World's Ages in, <page 310> et seq.; "finger counting" at prayer in, <page 311> n.; deities connected with goat in, <page 333>; "man in the eye" belief, <page 335>, <page 336>; cult of "late invaders" of, <page 338>; fire cult in, <page 346>; Solomon's trade with, <page 389>, <page 390>; Jehoshaphat's fleet, <page 408>; swans as love messengers in, <page 429>.

"Indo-Europeans", Mitannians as, <page 269>, <page 270>.

Indra (ind'ra), god of India, a world artisan like Ea and Ptah, <page 30>; Anu's messengers like Maruts of, <page 34>; Enlil and, <page 35>; Ramman, Hadad, Thor, &c., and, <page 57>, <page 261>, <page 340>; in Garuda myth, <page 74>, <page 75>; dies annually like Tammuz, <page 101>; various forms of, <page 101>; as slayer of father, <page 158>, <page 302>; eagle as, <page 169>; Paradise of like Odin's, <page 209>; thunder horn of, <page 238>.

Insects, gods as, <page 296>.

Inspiration, derived from sacred juice, <page 45>; from drinking blood, <page 48>; from incense and breath of Apis bull, <page 49>. Inundation, the Babylonian, <page 24>. Inverness, the "sleeper" and fairy mound of, <page 164>.

Ionians, deported from Cilicia to Nineveh, <page 464>.

Iranian sun god, Sumerians and, <page 55>, <page 56>.

Ireland, the corn god and river goddess of, <page 33>, <page 238>; spitting customs in, <page 47>; "calling back" of souls in, <page 70>, <page 70> n.; Anu a wind hag, <page 73>; Tammuz-Diarmid myth in, <page 85>, <page 87>; Angus, the love god of, <page 90>, <page 238>, <page 428> n.; the eternal goddess of, <page 101>, <page 102>, <page 268>; the "moruach" (worm) of, <page 151>; flood legend of, <page 196>; the Hades of, <page 203>; pig as devil in, <page 293>; doctrine of world's ages in, <page 310> et seq.; origin of culture of, <page 315>, <page 316>; giant gods of, <page 317>; pigeon lore in, <page 431>.

[p. 518]

Iron, in northern Mesopotamia, <page 25>; used in folk cures, <page 236>.

Irrigation, in early Sumeria, <page 23>, <page 39>.

Isaac, forbids Jacob to marry a Hittite, <page 266>.

Isaiah, <page 2>,; doom of Babylonia, <page 113>, <page 499>; "Worm" of, the dragon, <page 151>; use of Babylonian symbolism by, <page 331>, <page 341>; "satyrs" referred to by, <page 333>; on Assyria the Destroyer, <page 340>; on Tophet, <page 350>; reference to Jerusalem's water supply, <page 451>; warns Ahaz, <page 459>; destruction of Sennacherib's army, <page 466>; tradition of murder of, <page 474>.

Ishbi-Urra (ish'bi-oor'ra), King of Isin, <page 132>.

Ishtar (ish'tar), Isis cult and, <page xxxi>; hymn to, <page 18>-<page 20>; Beltu and, <page 36>; water of life given to, <page 44>; as earth goddess, <page 53>; identical with Hathor, <page 57>; in demon war, <page 76>; as "Queen of Heaven", <page 81>, <page 106>, <page 107>; lamentation of for Tammuz, <page 86>, <page 88>, <page 98>; in Sargon of Akkad myth, <page 91>; descent of to Hades poem, <page 95> et seq.; magical ornaments of, <page 96>; punishment of, <page 96>, <page 97>; rescue of, <page 98>; Belit-sheri associated with, <page 98>; as love goddess, <page 99>; temple women of, <page 99>, <page 106>, <page 107>; absorbs other goddesses, <page 100>, <page 117>, <page 277>, <page 496>; as daughter of Ann and Nannar, <page 100>; as mother of Tammuz, <page 100>; the lovers of, <page 103>, <page 126>, <page 174>-<page 176>; like Tiamat, <page 106>; under Isin Dynasty, <page 132>; links with Indian and Egyptian goddesses, <page 157>; Damkina and, <page 160>; as a bi-sexual deity, <page 161>; in Etana legend, <page 166>; in Gilgamesh legend, <page 172>-<page 177>; in flood legend, <page 193>, <page 194>; Frey's bride and, <page 204>; threat to raise dead, <page 213>; fish goddesses and, <page 117>, <page 277>; Nineveh image of sent to Egypt, <page 280>; star of, <page 295>; changes star forms with Merodach, <page 299>; month of, <page 305>; wheel symbol of, <page 347>; Nineveh temple of destroyed, <page 363>; worshipped by Nebuchadrezzar I, <page 382>; cult of in Assyria, <page 420>; Semiramis and, <page 425>; as a Fate, <page 433>; moon god and, <page 436>; Creatrix and, <page 437>; worshipped by Sargon II, <page 463>; worshipped by Esarhaddon, <page 471>; Persian goddess and, <page 496>.

Ishtarate (ish-tar-a'te), "Ishtars", goddesses in general called, too.

Isin, Dynasty of, <page 131>; early kings of, <page 132> et seq.; last kings of, <page 133>; sun worship and, <page 240>; Dynasty of Pashe, <page 380>.

Isis (i'sis), goddess of Egypt, Ishtar cult and, <page xxxi>; fish goddess and, <page 29>; as Nile goddess, <page 33>; creative tears of, <page 45>; mourning of for Osiris, <page 83>, <page 99>; as daughter, wife, sister, and mother of Osiris, <page 99>; as corn goddess, <page 90>; as serpent goddess, <page 150>; as bi-sexual deity, <page 161>; male form of, <page 299>; the star of, <page 296>, <page 300>; address of to different forms of Osiris, <page 297>.

"Island of the Blessed", in Gilgamesh epic, <page 180> et seq.; the Greek and Celtic, <page 203>.

Israel, first Egyptian reference to, <page 379>; subject to Damascus, <page 396>; separation of from Judah, <page 401> et seq.; Abijah's victory over, <page 402>, <page 403>; first conflict with Assyria, <page 407>; tribute to Shalmaneser III, <page 411>, <page 412>; Assyria as "saviour" of, <page 414>, <page 438>, <page 439>; goddess cult in, <page 421>; Aramaeans and mother worship in, <page 434>; war with Judah, <page 448>; Tiglath-pileser harries, <page 453>; the lost ten tribes, <page 455>, <page 456>.

 

"Jack and Jill", the Sumerian lunar, <page 53>.

"Jack with a Lantern", the Babylonian, <page 66>.

Jacob, personal ornaments as charms to, <page 211>; marriage of, <page 266>.

Jah, the Hebrew, Ea as, <page 31>; Dagon as, <page 31>; as dragon slayer, <page 157>; monotheism, <page 160>.

Japan, the Hades of, <page 206>.

Jastrow, Professor, on Ea, <page 29>, <page 30>, <page 435>; on culture and racial fusion, <page 42>; on fire and water ceremonies, <page 51>; on moon names, <page 52>; on female conservatism, <page 107>, <page 179>, <page 180>; on burial customs, <page 208>; on Nebo, <page 303>, <page 435>; on Greek and Babylonian astrology and astronomy, <page 319> et seq.; on Anshar, Ashir, and Ashur, <page 354>.

Jehoahaz (je-ho'a-haz), King of Judah, <page 414>; Necho deposes, <page 489>.

Jehoash (je-ho'ash), King of Israel, <page 448>, <page 449>.

Jehoiachin (je-hoi'a-chin), King of Judah, carried to Babylon, <page 490>.

Jehoiakim (je-hoi'a-kim), King of Judah, <page 489>, <page 490>, <page 492>.

Jehoram (je-ho'ram), King of Judah, no burning at grave of, <page 350>.

[p. 519]

Jehoshaphat (je-hosh'a-phat), King of Judah, <page 407>; navy of wrecked, <page 408>.

Jehu (je'hu), King of Israel, Elisha calls, <page 409>, <page 410>; tribute to Shalmaneser III, <page 411>, <page 412>; mother worship in reign of, <page 421>, <page 434>.

Jeremiah, liver as seat of life, <page 48>; on mother worship, <page 106>, <page 107>, <page 421>; Pharaoh Necho, <page 489>.

Jeremias, Dr. Alfred, on precession of equinoxes, <page 320> n.

Jeroboam (jer-o-bo'am), revolt of, <page 402>; Abijah defeats, <page 402>, <page 403>; an ally of Assyria, <page 449>.

Jerusalem, the "new", <page xvii>; Palaeolithic collection at, <page 10>; "dragon well" at, <page 152>; "father" of Amorite, "mother" of Hittite, <page 246>; eclipse record from, <page 323>; "Queen of Heaven" worshipped in, <page 421>; wall of destroyed by Jehoash, <page 449>; new wall and water supply of, <page 451>; siege of by Sennacherib, <page 465>, <page 466>; Assyrian ambassador visits, <page 471>, <page 472>; sack of by Nebuchadrezzar II, <page 490>, <page 491>; Cyrus and rebuilding of, <page 496>; return of captives to, <page 496>.

Jewellery, the magic, Ishtar's, <page 96>, <page 98>.

Jewish type, Akkadians of, <page 1>, <page 2>; Arabs not of, <page 9>; the racial blend which produced, <page 10> et seq.

Jews, Cyrus welcomed in Babylon by, <page 495>; return of to Jerusalem, <page 496>.

Jezebel (jez'e-bel), Queen, <page 406>; murder of, <page 410>.

Jinn, the Arabian, <page 78>.

Joash (jo'ash), King of Judah, concealment of in childhood, <page 413>; coronation of, <page 413>, <page 414>.

Johns, Mr., on Aryans in early Assyria, <page 278>, <page 279>.

Joram (jo'ram), King of Israel, <page 408>, <page 409>; Jehu murders, <page 410>.

Josiah (jo-si'ah), King of Judah, Necho and, <page 489>.

Jotham (jo'tham), King of Judah, <page 451>.

Judah, subject to Damascus, <page 396>; separation of from Israel, <page 401> at seq.; Edom revolts against, <page 409>; defeated by Israel, <page 448>; Damascus and Israel plot against, <page 451>; Ahaz appeals to Assyria, <page 452>; Sennacherib deports prisoners from, <page 463>; in Esarhaddon's reign, <page 474>; Pharaoh Necho in, <page 489>; the Captivity, <page 491>; return of captives, <page 496>.

Jupiter, the planet, Ramman and Hadad as, <page 57>; Merodach creates, <page 147>; Merodach as, <page 296>; Horus as, <page 300>, <page 302>; associated with sun and moon, <page 301>; as ghost of sun, <page 305>; as "bull of light", <page 301>; Nin- Girsu (Tammuz) as, <page 301>; month of, <page 305>; Attis as, <page 305>; as "face voice of light" and "star of bronze", <page 314>, <page 315>; in astrology, <page 318>.

Jupiter-Amon, <page 317>.

Jupiter-Belus, Merodach as, <page 221>, <page 317>.

 

Kadashman-Kharbe (kad-ash'man-khar'be), King of Babylon, grandson of Ashur-uballit, <page 284>, <page 285>; opens Arabian desert trade route, <page 360>; murder of, <page 361>.

Kadesh (ka'desh), goddesses that link with, <page 268>.

Kali (ka'lee), the Indian goddess, goat sacrificed to, <page 48>.

Kalkhi (kal'khi), excavations at, <page xix>, <page xx>; capital of Shalmaneser I, <page 367>; head-quarters of Ashur-natsir-pal III, <page 398>; description of, <page 399>, <page 400>; library at, <page 422>, <page 470>; religious revolt at, <page 422>; Sargon II and, <page 463>; temple to Nebo at, <page 487>.

Karduniash (kar-doon'i-ash), Babylonia called, <page 273>.

Karna (kar'na), Indian hero: like Sargon of Akkad, <page 126>.

Kassites, Nippur as capital of, <page 218>; in Hammurabi Age, <page 255>; as agriculturists, <page 256>; Aryans associated with, <page 270>; Mitannians, Hyksos and, <page 270>, <page 271>, <page 272>, <page 273>; Babylonia consolidated by, <page 274>, <page 393>; early Assyrian kings and, <page 279>; in Tell-el-Amarna letters, <page 281>; and Mesopotamian question, <page 358>; Arabian desert trade route, <page 360>; dynasty of ends, <page 370>, <page 371>; Sennacherib and the mountain, <page 464>.

Keats, John, <page 112>; "La Belle Dame Sans Merci" and Ishtar, <page 174>. 

Kengi (ken'gi), early name of Sumer, <page 2>.

Khammurabi (kham-mu-ra'bi), <page 247>. See Hammurabi.

Khani (kha'ni). See Mitanni.

Kharri (khar'ri), Mitannians called; perhaps "Arya", <page 269>.

Khatti. See Hatti and Hittites.

Kheta. See Hittites.

Khnumu (knoo'moo), the Egyptian god, Ea compared to, <page 30>.

[p. 520]

Khonsu (kon'soo), Tammuz a healer like, <page 90>, <page 94>.

Kid, sacrificed to Tammuz, <page 85>, <page 333>; star called by Arabs, <page 333>.

King, L. W., Creation tablets, <page xxiv>, <page 29>; <page 211>; on "Cuthean Legend of Creation", <page 215>, <page 216>; on seven gods as one, <page 298>; on Sennacherib's sack of Babylon, <page 469>.

Kings, worship of, in Hammurabi Age, <page 242>, <page 257>, <page 258>; burning of, <page 350>, <page 351>; Ashur's association with, <page 352>.

Kingu (kin'goo), in Creation Legend, as son and lover of Tiamat, <page 106>; stirs Tiamat to avenge Apsu, <page 140>; exalted by Tiamat, <page 140>; overcome by Merodach, <page 145>, <page 146>.

Kish, early dynasty of, <page 114>; legendary queen of, <page 114>, <page 115>; Entemena's sack of, <page 120>; Sargon and, <page 125>, <page 126>; goddess of, <page 126>, <page 127>; kings and gods of, <page 241>.

Kishar (ke'shar), the god, in group of elder deities, <page 37>, <page 138>.

Kneph, the Egyptian air god, <page 49>.

Koran (ko'ran), Etana eagle myth in, <page 166>, <page 167>; Nimrod agricultural myth in, <page 170>; water of life legend in, <page 186>; Abraham and Nimrod's pyre, <page 349>.

Kudur Mabug (ku'dur mab'ug), Elamite King of Sumer, <page 242>, <page 243>; the Biblical Chedor-laomer, <page 247>, <page 248>.

Kuiri (ku'i-ri), early name of Akkad, <page 2>.

Kurds (koords), the, use of cradle board by, <page 4>, <page 5>; of Mediterranean race, <page 8>;

Mitannians as ancestors of, <page 270>, <page 283>.

Kurigalzu II (ku'ri-gal'zu), King of Babylonia, <page 285>.

Kurigalzu III, Kassite king, wars with Elam and Assyria, <page 362>.

Kuta and Kutha. See Cuthah.

Kutu (ku'tu), the men of, <page 128>, <page 264>. See Gutium.

 

Labartu (la-bar'tu), the, a mountain hag, <page 68>; as a luck spirit, <page 77>.

Labashi-Marduk (la'ba-shi-mar'duk), King of Babylonia, <page 492>.

"La Belle Dame Sans Merci", Ishtar as, <page 174>, <page 175>.

Lachamu (lach-a'mu), goddess, in Creation legend, <page 37>, <page 138>, <page 143>.

Lachmu (lach'mu), god, in Creation legend, <page 37>, <page 138>, <page 143>.

Lagash (la'gash), city of, early rulers of, <page 115> et seq.; deities of, <page 116>-<page 118>; relations with Umma, <page 118>-<page 120>; site of at Tello, <page 120>; revolution in, <page 120>; Urukagina, the reformer of, <page 121>-<page 124>; sack of, <page 124>; Gudea, King of, <page 129>; sculptures, buildings, and trade of, <page 130>; bearded god of, <page 135>, <page 136>; burning of in Hammurabi Age, <page 243>. Also Shir-pur'la.

Lakshmi (laksh'mee), the Indian eternal mother, <page 101>.

Lamassu (la'mas-su), the winged bull, <page 65>.

Lamb, the sacrificed, inspiration from blood of, <page 48>.

Land laws, in early Sumeria, <page 26>; of Babylonia, <page 229>, <page 230>.

Lang, Andrew, on Cronos, <page 64>; on father and son myth, <page 158>; on Greek star lore, <page 319>.

Langdon, Dr., Sumerian psalms, <page 98> et seq.; on Ninip and Enlil, <page 158>; on doves and goddesses, <page 428>.

Language, race and, <page 3>; Sumerians-, Chinese, Turks, Magyars, Finns, and Basques compared, <page 3>.

Larsa (lar'sa), sun god chief deity of, <page 40>; revolt against Isin, <page 132>; Rim-Sin, king of, <page 133>; rise of sun cult of, <page 240>; Elamite kings of, <page 242>; the Biblical Ellasar, <page 247>; Nabonidus and, <page 492>.

Laurin (law'reen), the Germanic elfin lover, <page 68>.

Law courts, in Hammurabi Age, <page 223>.

Layard, Sir A. H., discoveries of, <page xix> et seq.; Ashur symbols, <page 343>; description of Kalkhi, <page 399>-<page 401>.

"Lay of the Harper", the Sumerian "Song of the Sea Lady" and, <page 178>, <page 179>.

Lead, in northern Mesopotamia, <page 25>.

Lebanon, Gudea of Lagash gets timber from, <page 130>.

Leicestershire wind hag, <page 73>.

Library, Shalmaneser III founded at Kalkhi, <page 422>.

Libyans, the, shaving customs of, <page 9>.

Life, the water of, <page 44>, <page 45>; the plant of, <page 44>; blood and sap and, <page 45>; liver as seat of, <page 48>; habits of and modes of thought, <page 51>.

Light on head, Merodach's, <page 145>.

Li'la or Li'lu, the demon, <page 67>.

Li'lith, "Adam's first wife", <page 67>; Indian Surpanaka like, <page 67>.

Linen, manufactured in prehistoric Egypt, <page 14>.

[p. 521]

Lion god, Nergal as the, <page 54>.

Lions, associated with mother goddess, <page 120>.

Liver, the, as seat of life, <page 48>; dragon's vulnerable part, <page 153>.

Loftus, W. K., <page xx>.

Loki, the Germanic god, taunts goddesses regarding lovers, <page 102>, <page 103>; god Barleycorn and, <page 170>.

"Long Meg", the English giantess, <page 155>, <page 156>; "Long Tom" and, <page 156>. "Long Tom", the giant, guns called, <page 156>.

Love charms and love lyrics, <page 238>.

Love goddess, Ishtar as, <page 99>, <page 175>, <page 176>; the inconstancy of, <page 99> et seq., <page 102>, <page 103>, <page 104>.

Lovers, the demon, <page 67>, <page 68>.

Lucian (loosh'yan), Semiramis legend, <page 425>.

Lucifer, Babylonian king as, <page 331>.

Luck, spitting to secure, <page 46> et seq.; spirits of, <page 77>.

Lugal-zaggisi (lu'gal-zag'gi-si), King of Umma, sack of Lagash by, <page 123>, <page 124>; gods of, <page 124>; Kish captured by, <page 124>; Erech capital of empire of, <page 124>, <page 125>; supposed invasion of Syria by, <page 125>.

Lulubu (lul'u-bu), mountaineers, <page 128>.

Lunar chronology, solar chronology preceded by, <page 312>; "Four Quarters", <page 323>, <page 324>.

Lunar zodiac, the original, <page 309>.

Lycia, god had wife in, <page 221>.

Lydia, emissaries from to Ashurbanipal, <page 483>; helps Egypt against Assyria, <page 486>; alliance with Egypt against Cyrus, <page 494>.

     
Myths of Babylonia and Assyria, by Donald A. MacKenzie, [1915], at sacred-texts.com

Ma, the goddess, serpent form of, <page 76>; Tiamat and, <page 150>; goddess of Comana, <page 267>.

Magic and poetry, <page 236> et seq.

Magician, the great, Ea as, <page 38>.

Magyars, language of and the Sumerian, <page 3>.

Mahabharata, the (maha'bha"rata), <page 67>, <page 68>; the various Indras in, <page 10>t; Karna myth in, <page 126>; eagle myth, <page 166>; Bhima like Gilgamesh in, <page 187>; Naturalism and Totemism in, <page 291>, <page 292>, <page 293>; the "wheel of life" in, <page 346>-<page 347>; the Shakuntala legend in, <page 423>, <page 424>.

Mama (ma'ma), the mother goddess, <page 57>, <page 267>; as Creatrix, <page 100>.

Man, creation of, <page 38>; Ea desired, <page 148>; Merodach sheds blood for, <page 148>; Berosus legend, <page 148>, <page 149>, <page 150>.

Man bull, the winged, <page 65>.

Manasseh, King of Judah, idolatries of, <page 473>; legend of Isaiah's end, <page 474>; captivity of, <page 474>; Ashur-bani-pal and, <page 486>.

Manishtusu (man-ish-tu'su), successor of Sargon I, empire of, <page 127>.

Mannai (man'nai), state of, <page 473>, <page 486>.

Manu (man'oo), the Indian patriarch, like Babylonian Noah, <page 27>; the fish and flood myth, <page 27>, <page 28>, <page 196>.

Mara (ma'ra), the European demon of nightmare, <page 69>.

Marduk (mar'duk). See Merodach.

Marduk-balatsu-ikbi (mar'duk-bal'atsu-ik-bi), King of Babylonia, defeat of by Shamshi-Adad VII, <page 415>, <page 416>.

Marduk-bel-usate (mar'duk-bel-u-sa'te), revolt of in Babylonia, <page 408>, <page 409>.

Marduk-zakir-shum (mar'duk-za-kir'-shum), King of Babylonia, <page 408>; a vassal of Assyria, <page 409>.

Mari (ma'ri), king of Damascus, as the Biblical Ben Hadad III, <page 438>, <page 439>.

Marriage contracts, in Hammurabi code, <page 225> et seq.

Marriage market of Babylon, the, <page 224>, <page 225>.

Marriage of deities, the Hittite, <page 268>. Mars, Horus as, <page 300>, <page 304>; month of, <page 305>; as "bronze fish stone", <page 314>; the Gaulish mule god as, <page 316>; in astrology, <page 318>.

Mars, Nergal, wolf planet of pestilence, as, <page 301>, <page 303>, <page 316>.

Mars, the planet, boar slayer of Adonis as, <page 87>; in sun and moon group, <page 301>.

Maruts (mar'oots), the Indian, like Anu's demons, <page 34>, <page 64>.

Mashi (mashi), the mountain of, in Gilgamesh epic, <page 177>, <page 178>.

Maspero, Professor, on antiquity of Hittites, <page 264>; on Assyrian colonists, <page 456>.

"Masters, the", Burial earth and air spirits, <page 105>.

Mati-ilu (ma'ti-i'lu), of Agusi, relations of with Assyria and Urartu, <page 443>, <page 446>, <page 447>; overthrow of by Tiglath-pileser IV.

Mattiuza (mat-ti-u'za), King of Mitanni, flight of, <page 283>; as Hittite vassal, <page 284>.

May Day, fire ceremonies of, <page 50>.

[p. 522]

Mead, of the gods, <page 45>; blood as, <page 48>; eagle steals, <page 74>.

Measurer, the, moon as, <page 52>.

Medes, III; in Hammurabi Age, <page 244>; Sargon II and, <page 460>; Ashur-bani-pal and, <page 486>; and fall of Nineveh, <page 488>; Scythians and, <page 472>, <page 488>; alliance of with Lydia, <page 494>; Cyrus as King of, <page 493>.

Mediterranean Race, the, Basques a variation of, <page 3>; Sumerians and proto-Egyptians of, <page 7>, <page 8>; Cretans of, <page 8>; Ripley traces in Asia, <page 8>, <page 9>, <page 11>; in Africa and Europe, <page 9>; "cradle" of, <page 39>; Tammuz-Adonis myth and, <page 85>; mother worship and status of women in, <page 104>, <page 105>, <page 108>, <page 420> et seq.; in Hittite confederacy, <page 266>; the Biblical Cushites and Hamites and, <page 276>.

Medusa, Tiamat and, <page 159>.

Meg, Long. See Long Meg.

Melkarth (mel'karth), children sacrificed to, <page 171>; Hercules and, <page 348>; burning of, <page 349>.

Memphis (mem'phis), Assyrians fight Ethiopians at, <page 475>, <page 483>.

Men, in worship of mother goddess, <page 107>, <page 108>.

Menahem (men'a-hem), King of Israel, pays tribute to Assyria, <page 449>.

Meneptah (men-e'ta or men'e-ta), King of Egypt, relations of with Hittites, <page 378>; sea raiders defeated by, <page 378>, <page 379>.

Menuas (men'u-as), King of Urartu, <page 440>; conquests of, <page 441>.

Mercury, the planet; in sun and moon group, <page 301>; Nebo as, <page 301>, <page 302>; month of, <page 305>; the "face voice of light", <page 314>; "lapis lazuli" star, <page 314>; the Gaulish boar god as, <page 316>, <page 317>; in astrology, <page 318>.

Mermaids, the Babylonian, <page 34>.

Mermer (mer'mer), a name of Nebo and Ramman, <page 303>.

Merodach (mer'o-dach), the god: creation of mankind, <page xxix>, <page 148>; Damkina and, <page 34>; Enlil as older Bel than, <page 35>; Ea and, <page 38>; water of life belief, <page 44>; Nusku as messenger of, <page 50>; in demon war, <page 77>; brothers and sister of, <page 82>; Zamama of Kish and, <page 126>; rise of, <page 134>; Anshar's appeal to in Creation legend, <page 142>; the avenger, <page 143>; proclaimed king of the gods, <page 144>; weapons and steeds of, <page 145>; Tiamat slain, and brood of captured by, <page 146>; eats "Ku-pu" of Tiamat, <page 147>, <page 147> n., <page 153>; forms earth and sky, <page 147>, <page 328>; creates stars of Zodiac, <page 147>; lunar and solar decrees of, <page 148>; other deities and, <page 34>, <page 35>, <page 38>, <page 149>, <page 158>, <page 159>, <page 298>, <page 299>, <page 303>, <page 316>, <page 336>, <page 337>, <page 348>, <page 354>, <page 420>; hymn to, <page 149>, <page 150>, <page 161>; as Tammuz, <page 158>; Osiris and, <page 159>, <page 298>, <page 354>; Perseus and, <page 159>; Nimrod and, <page 167>, <page 277>, <page 343>; temple of, <page 221>; Hammurabi Age kings and, <page 241>-<page 242>, <page 252>; Hittites carry off image of, <page 261>, <page 262>, <page 269>, <page 272>; Kassites and, <page 272>, <page 274>, <page 372>; complex character of, <page 298>, <page 299>; stars of, <page 296>, <page 299>, <page 300>, <page 305>; Jupiter form of as sun ghost, <page 305>; Nebo and, <page 303>, <page 435>; month of, <page 305>; goddesses and, <page 221>, <page 299>, <page 316>, <page 420>; world hill and, <page 332>; as "high head", <page 334>; Ashur and, <page 336>, <page 337>, <page 348>, <page 354>; image at Asshur, <page 468>, <page 469>; restoration of, <page 481>, <page 482>; ceremony of "taking hands" of, <page 480>, <page 481>; Cyrus and, <page 493>, <page 495>; Ahura Mazda and, <page 496>; Darius I and, <page 497>; Xerxes pillages temple of, <page 497>; Alexander the Great and, <page 497>; late worship of, <page 498>.

Merodach Baladan (mer'o-dach bal'ad-an), King of Babylon, <page 457>; second reign of, <page 465>; death of, <page 468>; sons of and Esarhaddon, <page 471>.

Mesopotamia, present-day racial types in, <page 8>; Assyria and Babylonia struggle to control, <page 286>, <page 381>, <page 382>, <page 384>; under Kassites, <page 358>, <page 360>, <page 361>; atrocities of Ashur-natsir-pal III in, <page 397>.

Messenger of gods, Sumerian Nusku and India Agni as, <page 50>; Papsukel as, <page 97>; Gaga as, <page 143>.

Metals, the northern Mesopotamia, <page 25>.

Mexico, the terrible mother ghost of, <page 69>.

Meyer, Professor Kuno, <page 101>, <page 102>.

Micah, the prophet, <page 405>, <page 406>.

Mice, the golden, Dagon offering of, <page 32>, <page 33>; gods as, <page 41>; as destroyers of Sennacherib's army, <page 466>.

Midas (mi'das), King of Phrygia, Sargon II and, <page 460>, <page 462>.

Migrations, earliest from Arabia and Asia Minor, <page 10>, <page 11>, <page 12>; the Canaanitic or Amorite, <page 217>; Median and Iranian, <page 244>; the Phoenician, <page 244>, <page 245>; of Abraham and Lot, <page 245>, <page 246>; of Hittites to Palestine, <page 246>; prehistoric

[p. 523]

pottery evidence of, <page 263>; cults and, <page 338>; Aramaean, <page 359>, <page 360>, <page 376>-<page 378>; Achaean, <page 376>-<page 378>; the Moslem, <page 377>; the "Bedouin peril", <page 392>; effects of on old empires, <page 393>.

Milky Way, the, <page 309>.

Millet, husks of in Egyptian pre-Dynastic bodies, <page 6>.

Minerva, Neith and, <page 337>.

Mitanni (mi-tan'ni), Mitra, Indra, &c., gods of, <page 55>, <page 269>; rise of kingdom of, <page 268>; Kurds descendants of people of, <page 270>; Egypt and, <page 270>, <page 271>, <page 279>, <page 282>, <page 358>, <page 359>; Kassites and Hyksos and, <page 270>, <page 271>, <page 273>; Assyria subject to, <page 270>, <page 279>; Merodach's image in, <page 272>; in Tell-el-Amarna letters, <page 281>; conquered by Hittites, <page 283>, <page 284>; cultural influence of, <page 316>; Assyria occupies, <page 367>.

Mithra (mith'ra), the Persian god; attributes of, <page 54>, <page 55>; Sumerian gods and, <page 55>, <page 56>; eagle as, <page 168>, <page 169>; Ashur and, <page 338>; Cambyses sacrifices Apis bull to, <page 495>.

Mitra (mit'ra), Aryo-Indian god, Sham-ash and, <page 54>; association of with rain, <page 55>; Sumerians and, <page 55>, <page 56>; identified with Yama, <page 56>, <page 201>; links with Agni and Tammuz, <page 94>; in Mitanni, <page 55>, <page 269>.

Moab, Judah and, <page 402>.

Mohammed, spitting custom of, <page 46>.

Moisture of life, gods and, <page 45>.

Moloch, the god, fire ceremony and, <page 50>; children sacrificed to, <page 171>.

Money, spat on to ensure increase, <page 47>.

Mongolians, the, Sumerians unlike, <page 3>, <page 4>; elves of, <page 105>; Hittites and, <page 265>, <page 266>.

Monotheism, in Creation legend, <page 149>; Babylonia, <page 160>, <page 161>.

Mons Meg, <page 156>.

Moon, the, water worship and worship of, <page 45>, <page 51>; Nannar (Sin), god of, <page 40>; origin of in sea fire, <page 50>, <page 51>; as source of fertility and growth, <page 52>; consort and family of, <page 53>; Mitra and Varuna as regulators of, <page 54>; goblet of, <page 75>; in demon war, <page 76>; devoured by pig demon, <page 85>; god of as father of Isis, <page 100>; bi-sexual deity of, <page 161>, <page 299>, <page 301>; as a planet, <page 30>,; forms of god of, <page 297>, <page 298>; Venus and, <page 314>; in astrology, <page 318>; the "four quarters of", <page 323>, <page 324>. See Nannar and Sin.

Moon goddess, the, <page 53>.

Moses, in Koran water of life story, <page 186>.

Mother, the Great, agriculturists and, xxx; as source of food supply, xxxii; destroying goddesses as, <page 57>; Tiamat as, <page 64>, <page 106>, <page 140>, <page 157>; the serpent as, <page 74>-<page 76>; the Gaelic Hag as, <page 87>; Ishtar as, <page 100>, <page 157>; Nut of Egypt as, <page 100>, <page 106>; the Aryo-Indian Sri-Lakshmi as, <page 101>; lovers of die yearly, <page 101> et seq.; human sacrifices to, <page 104>; worship of in Jerusalem, <page 106>; women as offerers to, <page 106>-<page 108>; Kish queen and, <page 114>; Lagash form of, <page 116>; lions, deer, and wild goats of, <page 120>; at creation of mankind, <page 148>; as star Sirius, <page 296>; Semiramis legend and, <page 436>, <page 437>. See Mother Worship.

Mother demons, in Sumerian and Anglo-Scottish folk tales, <page 153>; Neolithic origin of, <page 156>.

Mother ghost, the terrible, in Western Asia, India, and Mexico, <page 69>; Buriats plead with, <page 69>, <page 70>.

"Mother of Mendes", the, Egyptian fish and corn deity, <page 29>; Nina and, <page 117>.

"Mother right", Hittites and, <page 418>; Darius I succeeds through, <page 496>.

Mother worship, in Mediterranean racial areas, <page 104>, <page 105>; in Semiramis Age, <page 417> et seq.; Queen Tiy and, <page 434>; goddesses as mother, wife, and daughter of god, <page 436>; Sargon <page 11> and, <page 463>; Esarhaddon and, <page 471>; Ashur-bani-pal and, <page 486>; Artaxerxes promotes, <page 497>.

Mothers, the twin, Isis and Nepthys as, <page 99>.

Moulton, Professor, on Indian conception of conscience, <page 54>; on Mithraism, <page 201>.

Mountain gods, Enlil and the, <page 35>.

"Mountain of the West", Olympus as, <page 332>; temples as symbols of, <page 332>. Mountains, as totems, <page 291>, <page 292>.

Mouse, god as a, <page 296>.

Mulla, Gaulish mule god, as Mars, <page 316>.

Mulla (mul'la), the "Will-o'-the-wisp", <page 66> et seq.

Muller, Max, on lunar chronology, <page 312>.

Mummu (mum'mu), plots with Apsu and Tiamat, <page 139>, <page 140>; overcome by Ea, <page 140>, <page 142>.

Mummu-Tiamat, or Tiawath. See Tiamat.

[p. 524]

Mursil (mur'sil), King of Hittites, <page 364>; conquests of Egypt, <page 364>.

Music, magical origin of, <page 238>.

Muski (moosh'kee), overlords of Hittites, <page 380>; Hittites freed from yoke of, <page 386>; Thraco-Phrygian kingdom of, <page 395>; Assyrians fight with, <page 397>; the Biblical Meshech, <page 464>.

Mut, Egyptian cult of, <page 105>, <page 418>; Aton and, <page 419>.

Mutallu (mu'tal'lu), Hittite king, wars of with Rameses II, <page 365>, <page 366>. Mysticism, the "lord of many existences" <page 297>, <page 299>; Osiris as father, husband, son, &c., <page 297>; Babylonian and Egyptian, <page 297>, <page 298>; forms of Horus, <page 300>, <page 304>; "world soul" conception, <page 304>; father and son gods identical, <page 304>, <page 305>; Anshar and Anu and "self power", <page 328>; Ashur and Brahma, <page 328>.

 

Nabonidus (na-bo'nid-us), King of Babylonia, religious innovations of, <page 492>, <page 493>; relations with Cyrus, <page 494>, <page 495>.

Nabo-pol-as'sar, King of Babylon, <page 487>; alliance of with Medes, <page 488>; fall of Nineveh, <page 488>; Cyaxares the ally of, <page 493>.

Nabu (na'bu). See Nebo.

Nabu-aplu-iddin (na'bu-ap-lu-id'din), King of Babylon, <page 408>.

Nabu-na'id, King of Babylonia. See Nabonidus.

Nadab (na'dab), King of Israel, <page 403>.

Nahum, the doom of Nineveh, <page 477>, <page 478>, <page 488>.

Naki'a, queen mother of Esarhaddon, <page 470>; reigns in absence of Esarhaddon, <page 472>; coronation of Ashur-bani-pal, <page 480>.

Namtar (nam'tar), demon of disease, smites Ishtar in Hades, <page 97>.

Nana (na'na), goddess of Erech, <page 124>, <page 125>; statue of <page 163><page 5> years in Elam, <page 485>.

Nannar (nan'nar), moon god, origin of name of, <page 52>; consort and children of, <page 53>; as father of Isis, <page 100>; as a bi-sexual deity, <page 161>, <page 299>; cult of in Kish, <page 241>; as bull of heaven, <page 334>; Ishtar and, <page 436>. See Moon and Sin.

Naram-Sin (na'ram-sin), King of Akkad, famous stele of, <page 128>; great empire of, <page 129>; pigtails worn by enemies of, <page 265>.

Naturalism, <page xxxiii>; the conception of "self power", <page 291>; Sumerian and Indian beliefs, <page 291>, <page 292>, <page 304>, <page 328>, <page 329>; Totemism and, <page 293> et seq.; various co-existing forms of deities, <page 297>.

Navigation, Sumerians and, <page 2>.

Nebo (na'bo) protector of Ashur-bani-pal's library, <page xxii>, <page xxiii>, <page 303>; as Mercury, the messenger, <page 302> Merodach and Ea and, <page 303>, <page 435>, <page 436>; as Mermer-Ramman, <page 303>; month of, <page 305>; Semiramis inscription, <page 419>, <page 422>; mother worship and, <page 434>; spouse of, <page 436>; small Kalkhi temple of, <page 487>.

Nebuchadrezzar I (ne-bu-chad-rez'zar) of Babylonia, <page 380>; conquests of, <page 381>; power of, <page 382>.

Nebuchadrezzar II, Hanging Gardens of, <page 220>, <page 489>; fiery furnace of, <page 349>; monotheistic hymn of, <page 479>; Egyptians routed by, <page 489>; King of Judah captured by, <page 490>; takes Jews captive, <page 491>, <page 492>.

Necho, the Pharaoh, Asiatic campaigns of, <page 489>; rout of by Nebuchadrezzar, <page 489>, <page 490>.

Necho of Sais, Assyrian governor in Egypt, <page 475>; Ashur-bani-pal and, <page 482>; slain by Ethiopians, <page 483>.

Neheb-Kau (ne'heb-ka'u), Egyptian serpent goddess, <page 150>.

Nehemiah in the Susan palace, <page 111>; restoration of Jews, <page 496>.

Neith, Egyptian cult of, <page 101>; her arrows of fertility, <page 337>; "shuttle" of a thunderbolt, <page 337> n.

Neolithic Age. Sec Stone Age, the Late.

Neolithic folk tales, <page 156>.

Nepthys (nep'thys) mourning for Osiris, <page 83>; laments with Isis for Osiris, <page 99>; as joint mother of Osiris, <page 99>; as serpent goddess, <page 150>.

Neptune, connection of with Ea, Dagon, &c., <page 33>; the horn of, <page 238>.

Nereids (ne're-ids), the, <page 33>; the Babylonian, <page 34>; as demon lovers, <page 68>.

Nergal (ner'gal), solar god of disease, <page 53>; as King of Hades, <page 53>, <page 54>; Yama and, <page 56>; as Destroyer, <page 62>, <page 63>, <page 303>; like Teutonic Beli, <page 95>; as form of Merodach, <page 160>; conflict with Eresh-ki-gal, <page 205>; as planet Mars, <page 303>; Horus and Ares and, <page 304>; like Agni, <page 304>; Osiris and Tammuz and, <page 304>; month of, <page 305> as "high head", <page 334>; worship of in Samaria, <page 455>.

[p. 525]

Nergal-shar-utsur (u'tsur), King of Babylonia, <page 492>.

Nidaba (ni'da-ba), goddess of Lugal-zaggisi, <page 124>.

Nightmare, Babylonian demon of, <page 68>, <page 69>.

Nimrod, eagle myth regarding, <page 167>; agricultural myth of, <page 170>; John Barleycorn and, <page 170>, <page 170> n.; the Biblical "mighty hunter", <page 276>; as Ni-Marad (Merodach), <page 277>, <page 343>; the fires of, <page 350>; Asshur and, <page 354>.

Nimrud. See Kalkhi.

Nina (ni'na), the fish goddess, Ishtar as, <page 100>; at Lagash, <page 117>, <page 118>, <page 327>; Derceto and Atargatis and, <page 277>; goddess of Nineveh, <page 327>, <page 423>; creatrix and, <page 437>; Persian Anahita and, <page 496>.

Nineveh, excavations at, <page xix>; called after Nina, fish goddess, <page 100>, <page 423>; King Ninus and, <page 424>; Biblical reference to origin of, <page 276>, <page 277>; Semiramis legend of origin of, <page 277>; plundered by King of Mitanni, <page 280>; observatory at, <page 321>; Ashur and, <page 354>; palace of Ashur-natsir-pal III at, <page 399> Ionians deported from Cilicia to, <page 464> as Babylon's rival, <page 469> Esarhaddon's Ashur temple at, <page 476>; Nahum's prophecy, <page 477>, <page 478>; Ashur-bani-pal's palace and library at, <page 487>; fall of, <page 488>; Scythian legend, <page 488>.

Nin-Girsu (nin-gir'su), the god of Lagash, Ninip and Tammuz and, <page 53>, <page 115>, <page 116>, <page 333>; Ur-Nina and, <page 117>, <page 118>; Urukagina, the reformer, and, <page 121> et seq.; famous silver vase from temple of, <page 120>; lion-headed eagle of, <page 120>; Gudea's temple to, <page 130>; Shamash and Babbar and, <page 132>; development of, <page 135>; eagle of, <page 168>; Merodach and Zamama and, <page 126>, <page 241>.

Ninip (nin'ip, or Nin'ib), as Nirig and destroying sun, <page 53>; Zamama identified with, <page 126>; during Isin Dynasty, <page 132>; in flood legend, <page 190> et seq.; father and son myth, <page 158>, <page 302>; as bull god and boar god, <page 302>, <page 334>; month of, <page 305>; the boar and, <page 315>; as Kronos and Saturn, as elder and younger Horus, <page 316>.

Nin'-shach, Babylonian boar god, <page 86>.

Nin'-sun, as destroying goddess, <page 57>, <page 100>.

Nin'tu, the Babylonian serpent mother, <page 76>; Tiamat and, <page 150>.

Ninus, king, legendary founder of Nineveh, <page 277>, <page 424>; Semiramis and, <page 424>, <page 425>.

Nin'yas, son of Semiramis, <page 426>.

Nippur (nip'pur), Enlil god of, <page 35>; Ninip the Destroyer advances against, <page 53>; Ramman, Hadad or Dadu and, <page 57>; Ur-Nina and, <page 116>, <page 117>; Lugal-zaggisi and, <page 124>; Ur moon god at, <page 130>; Ea's temple at, <page 131>; Isin kings from, <page 132>, <page 133>; Kassites showed preference for, <page 218>; observatory at, <page 321>; Kheber (Chebar) canal near, <page 344>.

Nirig (ni'rig), as Ninip and destroying sun, <page 53>. See Ninip.

Nisroch, the Biblical, Ashur as, <page 343>, <page 470>.

Njord (nyerd), the Eddic sea god, <page 33>.

Noah, the Babylonian, <page 27>.

Nu, the Egyptian god, the crocodile as, <page 29>; Sumerian form of, <page 36>, <page 37>; vaguer than Nut, <page 106>.

Nudimmud (nu'dim-mud). See Ea.

Nusk'u, the god, as fire deity, <page 49>, <page 50>, <page 51>; as messenger of gods, <page 50>, <page 53>; connection of with sea fire, <page 50>, <page 51>; association of with sun and moon gods, <page 50>, <page 353>; identified with Nirig and Tammuz, <page 354>.

Nut (noo'it), the Egyptian goddess, <page 36>; Tiamat as, <page 37>; as mother of Osiris, <page 101>; Nu vaguer than, <page 106>.

 

Oak, Saul buried under, <page 350>; association of with thunder gods, <page 350>.

Oannes (o-an'nes), as Ea, <page 27>, <page 30>.

Odin (o'din), <page 64>; lovers of wife of, <page 103>; Gilgamesh and, <page 184>, <page 185> the mythical Ages and, <page 202>; Paradise of like Indra's, <page 209>.

Olympus, the Babylonian, <page 332>.

Omri, King of Israel, <page 405>.

Opener, the, Horus as, <page 302>. See  and Patriarch.

Opis, Kish swayed by, <page 114>; King of captured by Eannatum of Lagash, <page 119>; Entemena's sack of, <page 120>.

Ops, <page 103>.

Ori'on, the Constellation, as form of Osiris, <page 297>; Nin-Girsu and Tammuz as, <page 301>; as form of the sun, <page 305>.

Orion, the Greek giant, origin of, <page 45>.

Osiris (o-si'ris), Tammuz cult and cult of, <page xxxi>, <page 81>. Yama and Gilgamesh and, <page xxxii>; as god of the Nile, <page 33>;

[p. 526]

creative tears of, <page 45>; as a "dangerous god", <page 63>; as patriarch, <page 52>, <page 82>, <page 83>, <page 84>, <page 86>, <page 90>; weeping for, <page 83>, twin goddesses mourn for, <page 99>; Adonis myth, <page 83>, <page 84>; origin of, <page 84>; blood of in Nile, <page 85>; swine associated with, <page 85>; as the lunar babe, <page 89>; as child, husband, brother, and father of Isis, &c., <page 99>, <page 297>; as son with two mothers, <page 99>; Nut as mother of, <page 101>; Paradise of, <page 209>; fusion of Ptah with Seb and, <page 264>; Isis star and, <page 296>; the grave of, <page 296>; makes Isis a male, <page 299>; Nergal and, <page 304>; in star lore, <page 315>; backbone symbol of world mountain, <page 332>; Merodach and Ashur and, <page 354>.

Osiris-Sokar, Merodach like, <page 299>.

Owl, as ghost of sorrowful mother, <page 65>; Arabian belief regarding, <page 70>; reference to in Isaiah, <page 114>.

Ox, the wild, in eagle and serpent myth, <page 75>, <page 76>.

 

Palaeolithic Age, skull forms of in France, <page 8>; Palestine in, <page 10>.

Palestine, early races in, <page 10>; Palaeolithic finds in, <page 10>; cave dwellers of, <page 10>, <page 11>; in empire of Naram Sin, <page 129>; Abraham's wanderings in, <page 245>; tribes he found in, <page 245>, <page 246>; Elamites in, <page 247>, <page 248>, <page 249>; Necho's campaigns in, <page 489>.

Pan, Ea-bani and, <page 135>; the pipes of, <page 238>.

Pantheon, the National, during Isin Dynasty, <page 132>.

Pap-sukal (pap-su'kal), messenger of gods, rescues Ishtar from Hades, <page 97>.

Paradise, childless ghosts excluded from, <page 71>; the Indian, Germanic, and Egyptian, <page 209>; Babylonian beliefs, <page 210>. See Hades.

Patesi (pa'te-si), priest king, <page 1>. Patriarch, the, Apuatu as, <page xxxii>; Sargon of Akkad as, <page xxxiii>, <page 91>; Yama as, <page xxxii>, <page 56>, <page 200>; Osiris and Tammuz as, xxxii, <page 82>, <page 86>, <page 90>, <page 297>; Scyld or Sceaf as, <page 92>; Yngve, Frey, Hermod, and Heimdal as, <page 93>; the mythical "sleepers" and, <page 164>; Nimrod as, <page 170>, <page 277>, <page 354>; Gilgamesh as, <page xxxii>, <page 200>; Mitra as, <page 201>; the Biblical Asshur, <page 276>, <page 327>, <page 354>; King Ninus of Nineveh and, <page 424>, <page 425>; the Persian and Cyrus, <page 493>.

Paul, Mars' hill sermon of, <page 59>, <page 60>.

Pekah, King of Israel, <page 450>, <page 451>; Assyrian king overthrows, <page 453>.

Pelasgians, the, Sumerian kinship with, <page 9>; Achaeans and, <page 393>.

Pennsylvania, University of, expedition of, <page xxiv>.

Penrith, "Long Meg's" stone circle near, <page 156>.

Persephone (per-sef'on-e), the Babylonian, <page 53>; as lover of Adonis, <page 90>.

Perseus, legend of, <page 152>; the Babylonian, <page 159>, <page 164>.

Persia, fire worship in, <page 50>; Yama of India and Gilgamesh, and Yima of, <page 200>, <page 201>; the mythical Ages of, <page 202>; eagle symbol of great god of, <page 347>, <page 493>; Ashur cult and, <page 355>; Britain and Russia in, <page 357>; Cyrus King of, <page 493>; religion of and Babylonian influence, <page 496>.

Persian Gulf, early Sumerians traded on, <page 2>; Eridu once a port on, <page 22>.

Petrie, Professor Flinders, dating of, <page xv>, <page 212>; alien pottery in Egypt found by, <page 263>; on Egypt's culture debt to Syria, <page 275>.

Pharaoh, "Piru" theory, <page 458>, <page 458> n.

Philistines, the, their god Dagon, <page 32>, <page 33>; "way of" an ancient trade route, <page 357>; invasion of Palestine by, <page 379>; as overlords of Hebrews, <page 379>, <page 380>; Hittites and, <page 386>; civilization of, <page 387>, <page 403>, <page 405>; as vassals of Damascus, <page 414>; tribute from to Assyria, <page 439>.

Phoenicians, Baau, mother goddess of, <page 150>; traditional racial cradle of, <page 244>; appearance of on Mediterranean coast, <page 245>; Melkarth, god of, <page 346>; as allies of Hebrews, <page 388>.

Phrygia, thunder god of, <page 261>; Cybele and Attis of, <page 267>; Muski and, <page 395>; King Midas of, <page 460>; Cimmerians overrun, <page 472>; Lydia absorbs, <page 494>.

Picts, why they painted themselves, <page 212>.

Pig, demon in, <page 71>; sacrificed to Tammuz, <page 85>; associated with Osiris, <page 85>; sacrifice of to cure disease, <page 236>; totemic significance of, <page 293>; as the devil in Egypt and Britain, <page 293>; Ninip as boar god, <page 302>.

Pigeons. See Doves.

Pillar worship, "world tree" and "world spine", <page 334>.

Pinches, Professor, on Ea, Ya or Jah, and Dagan, <page 31>; on Babylonian "Will-o'-the-wisp", <page 66>; on Babylonian

[p. 527]

boar god, <page 86>; on flocks of Tammuz, <page 93>; on Creation hymn, <page 149>, <page 150>; on Babylonian monotheism, <page 160>; on names of Hammurabi, Tidal, &c., <page 248>; on Merodach as Nimrod, <page 277>; on Nebo and Ramman, <page 303>; on Ashur worship, <page 352>, <page 353>; on Nusku and Tammuz, <page 353>, <page 354>; on Ashur, Merodach, and Osiris, <page 354>; on the sacred doves, <page 427>.

Pir-na-pish'tim, the Babylonian Noah, <page 27>; sun god and, <page 55>; Gilgamesh's journey to island of, <page 177>, <page 178>, <page 180>; revelation of, <page 181>, <page 182>; the flood legend of, <page 190> et seq.; the Indian Yama and, <page 200>; the Persian Yima and, <page 201>.

Planets, deities identified with, <page 296>; Merodach as Jupiter and Mercury, <page 299>; Venus female at sunset and male at sunrise, <page 299>; when gods were first associated with, <page 300>; Horus identified with three, <page 300>; the seven included sun and moon, <page 301>; Jupiter as "bull of light", <page 301>; the "bearded Aphrodite" and Ishtar, <page 301>; Ninip (Nirig) and Horus as Saturn, <page 302>; Nebo and Merodach as Mercury, <page 303>; Nergal and Horus as Mars, <page 303>, <page 304>; in doctrine of mythical Ages, <page 313> et seq.; the Babylonian and Greek, <page 316>; in astrology, <page 318>.

Plant of Birth, Etana's quest for, <page 164>.

Plant of Life, Gilgamesh's quest for, <page 164>, <page 177>.

Plato, the dance of the stars, <page 333>.

Pleiades (pli'a-dez), the. See Constellations.

Pleistocene (plist'o-sen) Age, the, Palestinian races of, <page 10>.

Pliny, on the "Will-o'-the-wisp", <page 67>.

Plutarch, the Osirian bull myth, <page 89>; on Babylonian astrology, <page 318>.

Poetry, magical origin of, <page 236> et seq.

Poets, inspired by sacred mead, <page 45>.

Polar star, as "world spike", <page 332>; Lucifer as, <page 331>, <page 332>.

Pork, tabooed by races, <page 293>.

Poseidon (po-si'don), <page 64>, <page 105>.

Postal arrangements, in Hammurabi Age, <page 251>.

Pottery, linking specimens of in Turkestan, Elam, Asia Minor, and Southern Europe, <page 5>, <page 263>.

Prajapati (praja'pati), the Indian god, creative tears of, <page 45>.

Preservers, the, mother goddesses as, <page 100>.

Priests, En-we-dur-an-ki of Sippar, <page 42>; the sorcerer's spell, <page 46>; Dudu of Lagash, <page 120>; as rulers of Lagash, <page 121>; and burial ceremonies, <page 208>, <page 209>; fees of cut down by reformer, <page 210>, <page 211>; as patrons of culture, <page 287>, <page 288>, <page 289>.

Pritha (preet'ha), mother of Indian Karna, <page 126>.

Prophecy, blood-drinking ceremony and, <page 48>; breath of Apis bull and, <page 49>.

Prophets, clothing of, <page 213>, <page 214>.

Psamtik (sam'tik), Pharaoh of Egypt under Assyrians, <page 483>; throws off Assyrian yoke, <page 486>.

Ptah (ta), the Egyptian god, Ea compared to, <page 30>; cult of and mother worshippers, <page 105>; deities that link with, <page 263>, <page 264>.

Pul, Assyrian king called in Bible, <page 444>.

Pumpelly expedition, Turkestan discoveries of, <page 5>, <page 6>, <page 263>.

Punt, the land of, as "cradle" of Mediterranean race, <page 39>.

Purusha (pur-ush'a), the Indian chaos giant, <page 429>.

 

Quarters, the four. See Four quarters.

Queen of Heaven, the, Ishtar as, <page 81>; descent of to Hades, <page 95> et seq.; Bau-Gula as, <page 116>; Etana and eagle legend and, <page 166>; Ashur worshipped like, <page 352>; Jehu worshipped, <page 412>, <page 421>.

Queen of Kish, the legendary Azag-Bau, <page 114>; humble origin of, <page 115>.

 

Ra (ra or ra), the Egyptian god, as chief of nine gods, <page 36>; creative tears of, <page 45>, <page 334>; creative saliva of, <page 46>; the "Eye" of blinded and cured, <page 46>; as a destroyer, <page 63>; in flood legend, <page 197>; Paradise of, <page 209>; Osiris and, <page 297>; as old man, <page 314>; as cat, ass, bull, ram, and crocodile, <page 329>.

Races, languages and, <page 3>; the Sumerian problem, <page 3>; shaving customs of, <page 4>; the Semitic blend, <page 10>; culture promoted by fusion of, <page 42>; god and goddess cults and, <page 105>. See Armenoids, Mongolians, Mediterranean Race, Semites, Sumerians.

Rain gods, Enlil, Ramman, Indra, &c., as, <page 35>, <page 57>; Mitra and Varuna as, <page 55>.

[p. 528]

Rainy season in Babylonia, <page 24>.

Ram, sun god as, <page 329>; Osiris as, <page 85>.

Rama, the Indian demi-god, demon lover of, <page 67>; colour of, <page 186>.

Ramayana (raam-ay'an-a), the, <page 67>; eagle myth in, <page 166>.

Rameses I (ram'e-sez or ra-me'ses), Hittites and, <page 364>.

Rameses II, of Egypt, wars of in Syria, <page 365>; the Hittite treaty, <page 366>; Hittites aided by Aramaeans against, <page 378>.

Rameses III, sea raiders scattered by, <page 379>; Philistines and, <page 379>.

Ramman (ram'man), the atmospheric and thunder god, <page 57>; in Zu bird myth, <page 74>; in demon war, <page 76>; a hill god, <page 136>; Merodach and, <page 159>, <page 160>; in flood legend, <page 192> et seq.; deities that link with, <page 261>; called Mermer like Nebo, <page 303>; month of, <page 309>.

Rams, offered to sea god, <page 33>.

Rassam, Hormuzd, <page x>, <page xxiii>.

Ravens, demons enter the, <page 71>; in folk cures, <page 234>; as unlucky birds, <page 429>.

Rawlinson, Sir Henry, <page xx>, <page xxi>.

Rebekah, Hittite daughters-in-law of, <page 266>, <page 267>.

Reed hut, Ea revelation to Pir-napishtim in, <page 190>, <page 191>; and reeds in graves, <page 213>.

Reformer, the first historic, Urukagina of Lagash, <page 121> et seq.

Rehoboam (re-ho-bo'am), subject to Egypt, <page 402>.

Rem, the Egyptian god of fish and corn, <page 29>.

Rephaim (reph'a-im), the, Hittites and, II, <page 12>.

Rezin, King of Damascus, <page 449>; Pekah plots with, <page 451>; Tiglath-pileser IV and, <page 453>.

Rhea, <page 103>.

Rhone, the river, dragon of, <page 152>.

Ribhus (rib'hus), the elves of India, <page 105>.

Ridgeway, Professor, on the Achaeans, <page 377>.

Rim-Anum (rim-an'um), revolt of in Hammurabi Age, <page 242>.

Rimmon (rim'mon), Enlil, Tarku, &c., as, <page 35>, <page 57>, <page 395>.

Rim-Sin, struggle of with Babylon, <page 217>; Hammurabi reduces power of, <page 249>; put to death by Samsu-iluna, <page 249>, <page 256>.

Rim'ush. See Urumush.

Ripley, Professor W. Z., on Mediterranean racial types in Asia, <page 8>.

Risley, Mr., on Naturalism in India, <page 291>.

Rivers, worship of, <page 44>; life principle in, <page 48>; created by Merodach, <page 149>,

Robin Goodfellow, the Babylonian, <page 66>.

Roman burial customs, <page 207>.

Rome, the death eagle of, <page 169>.

Rose Garden, the Wonderful, <page 68>.

Rossetti, Dante Gabriel, the Lilith sonnet, <page 67>.

Rudra (rood'ra), the Indian god, <page 64>.

Rusas (ru'sas), King of Urartu, Sargon II routs, <page 460>, <page 461>.

Russia, the double-headed eagle of, <page 168>; Persian and Armenian questions, <page 357>.

Russian Turkestan, early civilization of and the Sumerian, <page 5>.

    
Myths of Babylonia and Assyria, by Donald A. MacKenzie, [1915], at sacred-texts.com

Saliva, Isis serpent formed from, <page 45>; magical qualities of, <page 46>.

Samaria, building of, <page 405>; murder of Jezebel in, <page 410>; Assyrians capture, <page 455>; "ten tribes" deported, <page 455>; Babylonians settled in, <page 456>.

Sammu-rammat (sam'mu-ram-mat), Queen of Assyria, as Semiramis, <page 417>, <page 437>, <page 438>; a Babylonian, <page 418>; high status of, <page 419>; relation to Adad-nirari IV, <page 419>, <page 420>; innovations of, <page 421>; mother worship and, <page 423>, <page 436>; Queen Nakia like, <page 470>, <page 471>.

Samsu-iluna (sam-su-il-u'na), King, son of Hammurabi, slays Rim-Sin, <page 249>; Kassites appear in reign of, <page 255>; Erech and Ur restored by, <page 256>.

Sandan (san'dan), the god, <page 261>; Agni and Melkarth and, <page 346>; winged disk of, <page 348>. Also rendered Sandes.

Sandstorms, the Babylonian, <page 24>.

Sap of plants, vitalized by water of life, <page 45>.

Sarah, Abraham's wife, <page 16>.

Saraswati (sa-ras'wa-tee), wife of Brahma, <page 101>.

Sardanapalus (sar-dan-a-pa'lus), palace burning of, <page 350>; Ashur-bani-pal and, <page 486>, <page 487>, <page 488>.

Sargon of Akkad, as Patriarch, <page xxxiii>; the Patriarch-Tammuz myth of, <page 91>, <page 437>; humble origin of, <page 125>; legend of like Indian Karna story, <page 126>; empire of, <page 127>; Enlil-bani of Isin like, <page 133>; Gilgamesh legend and, <page 171>, <page 172>; Sargon II an incarnation of, <page 462>.

Sargon II, King of Assyria, excavations

[p. 529]

at city of, <page xx>; "Lost Ten Tribes" deported by, <page 455>; Merodach Baladan revolt, <page 457>; Syrian revolts against, <page 458>, <page 459>; tribute from Piru of Mutsri, <page 458>; Piru and Pharaoh, <page 458> n.; Isaiah warns Ahaz regarding, <page 459>; Hittites and, <page 460>; Urartu crippled by, <page 460>, <page 461>; Merodach Baladan ejected by, <page 462>; Messianic pretensions of, <page 462>; Dur-Sharrukin built by, <page 463>; deities worshipped by, <page 463>; assassination of, <page 463>, <page 464>.

Saturn, the planet, Horus as, <page 300>, <page 302>; in sun and moon group, <page 301>; Ninip (Nirig) as, <page 301>; as ghost of elder god, <page 302>; month of, <page 305>; the "black", <page 314>, <page 315>; in astrology, <page 318>.

Satyrs, the dance of at Babylon, <page 114>, <page 333>.

Saul, the ephod ceremony, <page 213>, <page 214>; cremation of, <page 350>.

Saushatar (sa-u-sha'tar), King of Mitanni, Assyria subdued by, <page 279>, <page 280>.

Sayce, Professor, on Dagon-Dagan problem, <page 32>; on Daonus and Tammuz, <page 83>; on Hittite chronology, <page 264>; on star worship, <page 317>; on the goat god, <page 332>, <page 333>; Hittite winged disk, <page 347>, <page 348>, <page 428>.

Sceaf or Scef, "the sheaf", Tammuz and the Germanic myth of, <page 91>, <page 92>, <page 93>, <page 210>.

Schliemann, pottery finds by, <page 263>.

Schools, in Hammurabi Age, <page 251>.

Scorpion man and wife, in Gilgamesh epic, <page 177>, <page 178>.

Scotland, the sea god of, <page 33>; spitting customs in, <page 47>; the "Great Mother" in, a demon, <page 64>; return of dead dreaded in, <page 70>; "calling back" belief in, <page 70> n.; south-west wind a hag like Babylonian, <page 73>; fairies and elves of, <page 80>, <page 186>; Tammuz-Diarmid myth of, <page 85>; Diarmid a love god of, <page 87>; the eternal goddess of, <page 101>; "the Yellow Muilearteach" of, <page 151>; slain by Finn as Merodach slays Tiamat, <page 151>; great eel story of, <page 152>; mother-monster Sumerian lore in, <page 153>; giant lore of, <page 164>, <page 317>; Etana-like eagle myth of, <page 167>, <page 168>; John Barleycorn, the Icelandic god Barleycorn and Nimrod, <page 170>, <page 170> n., <page 171>; water of life myths of, <page 186>, <page 187>; dark tunnel stories of, <page 189>; Pictish customs in, <page 212>; the Gunna, <page 213>; seers and bull skin ceremony, <page 213>; folk cures in, <page 232>, <page 233>; pig as the devil in, <page 293>; May day solar belief in, <page 348>; the "seven sleepers" in, <page 394>; "death thraw" belief, <page 427> n.; doves and ravens, <page 429>; pigeon lore in, <page 431>.

Scott, Sir Walter, the Taghairm ceremony, <page 213>.

Scyld. See Sceaf.

Scythians, raids of in Western Asia, <page 461>; Esarhaddon and, <page 472>; fall of Nineveh, <page 488>.

Sea demon, Ea as a, <page 62>.

Sea fire, <page 50>, <page 51>.

Sea giants, the Babylonian, <page 34>.

Sea goddess, Ea's spouse as, and earth lady, <page 34>.

Sea gods, Ea, Dagon, Poseidon, Neptune, Shony, and Njord as, <page 33>.

"Sea Lady", the, Sabitu, in Gilgamesh epic, <page 178>, <page 179>; Germanic hag and, <page 184>, <page 185>; the Indian Maya like, <page 188>.

Sea of Death, in Gilgamesh epic, <page 178> et seq.

Sealand, Dynasty of in Hammurabi Age, <page 257>; in Kassite Age, <page 274>, <page 275>.

Seasonal changes, evil spirits cause, <page 65>.

Seasons, the, of Babylonia, <page 23>, <page 24>.

Sebek (seb'ek), Egyptian crocodile god, as a weeping deity, <page 29>.

Sekhet (se'khet), the Egyptian goddess, Ishtar and, <page 57>.

Seleucid Period, Lagash occupied in, <page 243>.

Seleucus I, <page 498>.

Seleukeia, rival city to Babylon, <page 498>.

"Self power", xxxiii; conception of in stage of Naturalism, <page 291>; the "world soul" conception, <page 304>; Anu a form of, <page 328>; the "world soul", <page 328>; gods as phases of, <page 329>; stars as phases of, <page 331>.

Semiramis (sem-ir'a-mis), Queen, as founder of Nineveh, <page 277>; Queen Sammu-rammat as, <page 417>; mother worship and, <page 423>, <page 434>; birth legend like Shakuntala's, <page 423>, <page 424>; as representative of mother goddess, <page 425>; buildings and mounds of, <page 425>, <page 426>; Persian connection, <page 427>, <page 433>; dove symbol of, <page 431>, <page 432>; origin of legend of, <page 437>, <page 438>; Urartu and, <page 441>; Queen Nakia and, <page 471>; wife of Cambyses like, <page 496>. See Sammu-rammat.

Semites, Akkadians were, <page 2>; the racial

[p. 530]

blend of, <page 9> et seq.; influence of on Sumerian gods, <page 135>, <page 136>, <page 137>.

Sennacherib (sen-nak'er-ib ), King of Assyria, <page 463>; wars of in Elam and Asia Minor, <page 464>; Ionians deported to Nineveh by, <page 464>; Merodach Baladan's second reign, <page 465>; army of destroyed by "angel of the Lord", <page 466>, <page 467>; death of Merodach Baladan, <page 468>; destruction of Babylon by, <page 468>, <page 469>; murder of, <page 470>; Nakia, Babylonian wife of, <page 471>.

Sergi, Professor, on Syrian and Asia Minor races, <page 11>, <page 267>.

Serpent, Isis makes from saliva of Ra, <page 45>; in group of seven spirits, <page 63>; the world, <page 150>; dragon as, <page 157>, <page 158>; totemic theory, <page 293>, <page 296>; in Crete, <page 430>.

Serpent charms, as fertility and birth charms, <page 150>, <page 165>.

Serpent worship, <page 77>.

Serpents, the mother of, in Zu bird myth, <page 74>, <page 75>; the Babylonian and Egyptian, <page 74>-<page 76>, <page 150>.

Sesostris (se-sos'tris), Hittite god identified with, <page 441>; Semiramis and, <page 426>. Set, as boar demon, <page 46>, <page 85>, <page 293>; as the dragon, <page 156>; as thunder god, <page 261>.

Seti I (set'ee), of Egypt, struggle of with Hittites, <page 364>.

Seven, the demons in groups of, <page 34>. "Sevenfold One", <page 298>; constellations as, <page 300> et seq.; Tammuz as, <page 304>, <page 317>.

"Seven sleepers", the, <page 394>.

Seven spirits, the, dragon, &c., in, <page 63>; the daughters of Anu, <page 68>; the sexless, <page 71>.

Shabaka (sha'ba-ka), King of Egypt, the Biblical So and, <page 454> n.

Shakespeare, "Jack" the fairy, <page 66>; Tiamat-like imagery in, <page 151>; "sea devils", <page 152>; grave inscription of, <page 214>, <page 215>; astrology references, <page 324>, <page 325>.

Shakuntala (sha-koon'ta-lah), birth legend of like Semiramis's, <page 423>, <page 424>; Persian eagle legend and, <page 493>.

Shallum (shal'lum), revolt of at Samaria, <page 449>.

Shalmaneser I (shal-man-e'-ser), of Assyria, a great conqueror, <page 363>; western and northern expansion, <page 366>; Kalkhi capital of, <page 367>.

Shalmaneser III, referred to in Bible, <page 401>; attacks on Aramaeans and Hittites, <page 407>; Ahab of Israel fights against, <page 407>; authority of in Babylonia, <page 408>, <page 409>; defeat of Hazael of Damascus, <page 411>; tribute from Jehu of Israel, <page 411>, <page 412>; conquests of, <page 414>; revolt of son against, <page 414>; death of, <page 415>; Babylonian culture, <page 422>; library of at Kalkhi, <page 422>.

Shalmaneser IV, of Assyria, reign of, <page 439>; Urartu wars of, <page 442>. Shalmaneser V, imprisons Hoshea of Israel, <page 454>, <page 455>.

Shamash (sham'ash), Semitic name of sun god, <page 40>; Babbar Sumerian name of, <page 54>, <page 240>; Mitra and Varuna and, <page 54>; as god of destiny, <page 55>; Mithra and, <page 55>. <page 56>; sun as "boat of the sky", <page 56>, <page 57>; consort and attendants of, <page 57>, <page 100>; local importance of, <page 58>; in eagle and serpent myths, <page 75>, <page 76>; in demon war, <page 76>; development of, <page 132>; in Gilgamesh legend, <page 172> et seq.; as an abstract deity, <page 240>, <page 241>; oracle of pleads for Merodach, <page 272>; month of, <page 305>; as the "high head", <page 334>; "water sun" of, <page 334>; the wheel symbol of, <page 347>; Aramaeans destroy temple of, <page 445>; worshipped by Esarhaddon, <page 471>; oracle of and Ashur-bani-pal, <page 481>; Nabonidus and, <page 492>.

Shamash-shum-ukin (sham'ash-shumu'kin), King of Babylon, <page 471>, <page 476>, <page 480>; restoration of Merodach, <page 480>, <page 481>; revolt of against Ashur-bani-pal, <page 484>; burns himself in palace, <page 485>.

Shamshi-Adad VII (sham'shi-ad'ad), King of Assyria, <page 414>; civil war, <page 415>; conquests of, <page 415>, <page 416>; culture in reign of, <page 423>; rise of Urartu, <page 440>.

Shar, the god. See Anshar.

Shar Apsi, "King of the Deep", Ea as, <page 28>, <page 29>.

"Shar Kishshate", "King of the World", Assyrian title, <page 363>, <page 370>.

Sharduris III (shar'du-ris), of Urartu, routed by Tiglath-pileser IV, <page 446>, <page 447>.

Shaving customs, significance of, <page 4>; of Arabians and Libyans, &c., <page 9>; why Sumerian gods were bearded, <page 135>-<page 137>.

Shedu (sha'du), the destroying bull, <page 65>; as household fairy, <page 77>.

Sheep, skin of in graves, <page 213>.

Shepherd, the divine, Tammuz as, <page 53>.

Sheshonk (shish'ak), Pharaoh of Egypt, alliance with Solomon, <page 388>; Hebrews spoiled by, <page 391>, <page 402>.

[p. 531]

Shinar, the Biblical, <page 111>, <page 247>; Amraphel (Hammurabi) of, <page 131>.

Shishak. See Sheshonk.

Shiva, the Indian god, Bel Enlil like, <page 38>; the Sumerian Ninip like, <page 53>; Osiris and Ra like, <page 63>; in "dying Indra" myth, <page 10>l.

Shony (shon'ee), sea god of Scottish Hebrides, <page 33>.

Shu, the Egyptian god, created from saliva, <page 46>.

Shubari (shu-ba'ri) tribes, <page 284>.

Shurippak' or Shurruppak', city of, in flood legend, <page 190>, <page 191>, <page 243>.

Shushan. See Susa.

Siberia, elves of, <page 105>; "calling back" of ghosts in, <page 69>, <page 70>.

Sidon, conspiracy against Nebuchadrezzar II, <page 491>; tribute of to Adad-nirari IV, <page 439>; Tyre and, <page 388>, <page 392>; Israel an ally of, <page 406>; in league against Esarhaddon, <page 472>; destruction of, <page 473>.

Siegfried (seeg'freed), "birds of Fate" sang to, <page 65>; the "Regin" dragon, <page 156>, <page 164>.

Signs of the Zodiac. See Zodiac.

Sigurd (see'goord), link with Merodach as dragon slayer, <page 147> n.; the "Fafner" dragon, <page 156>, <page 164>.

Sin, desert of, called after moon god, <page 52>.

Sin, the moon god, <page 51>, <page 52>; consort and children of, <page 53>; Shamash, Mitra, and Varuna chastise, <page 54>, <page 55>; in demon war, <page 76>, <page 77>; as father of Isis, <page 100>; as form of Merodach, <page 160>; month of, <page 305>; Ashur worshipped with, <page 353>; Nabonidus as worshipper of, <page 494>. See Moon and Nannar.

Sinai, mountains of, called after moon god, <page 52>.

Sin-iksha (sin-ik'sha), King of Isin, <page 133>.

Sin-magir (sin-ma'gir), King of Isin, <page 133>.

Sin-muballit (sin-mu-bal'lit), King, father of Hammurabi, <page 132>, <page 242>; struggle of with Elamites, <page 243>.

Sin-shar-ish'kun, last King of Assyria, <page 487>.

Sippar (sip'par), sun god chief deity of, <page 40>; a famous priestly teacher of, <page 42>; goddess of assists Merodach to create mankind, <page 148>; rise of sun cult of, <page 240>; first Amoritic king of, <page 241>; Esarhaddon plunders, <page 472>.

Sirius, the star, Teutonic giant as, <page 295>; goddess Isis as, <page 296>.

Skull forms, language and, <page 3>; of Mongolian, Ural-Altaic, and Mediterranean peoples, <page 3>, <page 4>; Kurdish and Armenian treatment, <page 4>, <page 5>; of early Egyptians and Sumerians, <page 7> et seq.; Palaeolithic still survive, <page 8>; persistence of, <page 8>; broad heads in Western Asia, Egypt, and India, <page 8>, <page 9>; the Semitic, <page 10>.

Sky, conception of "Self Power" of, <page 292>; god of, <page 31>; goddesses of, <page 36>, <page 37>. Sleeper, the divine, Angus, the Irish, and Tammuz, <page 90>.

Sleepers, the seven, the Indras as, <page 101>; Thomas the Rhymer, Finn, Napoleon, and Skobeleff as, <page 164>; as spirits of fertility, <page 164>; Tammuz and, <page 210>.

Smith, Professor Elliot, on Sumerian origins, <page 7>; on origin of Semites, <page 10>; on conquest by Akkadians of Sumerians, <page 12>; on first use of copper, <page 12>; on early Egyptian invasion of "broad heads", <page 263>, <page 264>.

Smith, George, career and discoveries of, <page xxi>-<page xxiii>; "Descent of Ishtar", <page 95> et seq.

Smith, Professor Robertson, on Atargatis legend, <page 28>; on life-blood beliefs, <page 47>; on agricultural weeping ceremony, <page 83>.

Snakes, doves and, Cretan goddess and, <page 430>.

So, King of Egypt, Shabaka and other kings and, <page 454>, <page 454> n.

Sokar, a composite monster god, <page 135>.

Sokar (sok'ar), Egyptian lord of fear, <page 63>.

Solomon, King, ally of Egypt and Tyre, <page 388>, <page 389>; sea trade of with India, <page 389>, <page 390>; Babylonia during period of, <page 391>; Judah and Israel separated after death of, <page 401>, <page 402>.

Soma (so'ma), source of inspiration, <page 45>.

Song of the Sea Lady, in Gilgamesh epic, <page 178>, <page 179>.

"Soul of the land", river Euphrates as the, <page 23>.

Souls, carried to Hades by eagle, <page 168>.

Spells on water, <page 44>; layers of punished, <page 233>.

Spinning, in Late Stone Age, <page 14>.

Spirits, "air" and "breath" as, <page 48>, <page 49>; gods evolved from, <page 60>; the good and evil, <page 58>, <page 63>, <page 77>, <page 78>, <page 236>; the Gorgons, <page 159>; periodic liberation of,

[p. 532]

[paragraph continues] <page 65>; the "calling back" belief, <page 69>, <page 70>; penetrate everywhere, <page 72>; of luck and fate, <page 77>, <page 236>; elves, Ribhus, and Burkans as, <page 105>.

Spitting customs, in Asia, Africa, and Europe, <page 46>, <page 47>.

Spring sun, the, Tammuz as god of, <page 53>.

Sri, the Indian eternal mother, <page 101>.

Stars, the, great beauty of in Babylonia, <page 24>; "Will-o'-the-wisps" as, <page 67>; Zu bird and, <page 74>; Merodach fixes Signs of the Zodiac, <page 147>; the "stations" of Enlil and Ea, <page 147>; animals and myths of the, <page 289>; in various local mythologies, <page 290>; the "host of heaven", <page 294>; as totems, <page 295>; as ghosts, <page 295>, <page 304>; in mythologies of Teutons, Aryo-Indians, Greeks, Egyptians, &c., <page 295>, <page 296>, <page 319>, <page 320>; star of Osiris, <page 296>; Ishtar myths, <page 295>, <page 299>; Merodach as Regulus and Capella, <page 299>; bi-sexual deities and the, <page 299>; early association of Isis with, <page 300>; three for each month, <page 307>, <page 308>, <page 309>; the "divinities of council", <page 309>; the doctrine of mythical Ages and, <page 310> et seq.; popular worship of, <page 317>; as "birth-ruling divinities", <page 318>; spirits of associated with gods, <page 318>; in Indian Vedas and "Forest Books", <page 318>; Biblical references to, <page 324>; literary references to, <page 325>; Anshar as the Pole star, <page 330>; Isaiah and Polar star myth, <page 331>; Polar star as "the kid", <page 333>; in Ashur ring symbol, <page 344>.

Steer, moon god as the, <page 52>, <page 135>.

Stone Age, the Late, pottery of in Turkestan, Elam, Asia Minor, and Europe, <page 5>; origin of agriculture in, <page 6>; in Palestine, <page 10>; racial blending in Egypt in, <page 11>; civilization in, <page 13> et seq.; refined faces of men of, <page 15>.

Stone worship, moon worship and, <page 52>; Ninip the bull god and, <page 53>.

Storm demons, the Babylonian Shutu and Adapa legend, <page 72>, <page 73>; the European, <page 72>, <page 73>. See Wind hags.

Strabo, on Babylonian works of Alexander, <page 498>; on Semiramis legend, <page 425>.

Straw girdle, a birth charm, <page 165>.

Subbi-luliuma (sub'bi-lu-li-u'ma), Hittite king, conquests of, <page 283>, <page 363>.

Sumer, or Sumeria (shoo'mer and sum-a'ri-a), its racial and geographical significance, <page 1>; early name of Kengi, <page 2>; agriculture in at earliest period, <page 6>; culture of indigenous, <page 6>, <page 7>; women's high social status in, <page 16>, <page 17>; Eridu a seaport of, <page 22>; surplus products and trade of, <page 25>; gods of like Egyptian, <page 26>, <page 36>, <page 37>; modes of thought and habits of life in, <page 51>; the Great Mother Tiamat of, <page 106>; early history of, <page 109> et seq.; principal cities of, <page 110>; the "plain of Shinar", <page 111>; why gods of were bearded, <page 135>, <page 136>, <page 137>; burial customs of like early Egyptian, <page 211>, <page 214>; cities of destroyed in Hammurabi Age, <page 243>; the Biblical Shinar is, <page 247>; stars in primitive religion of, <page 289>; Naturalism and the Zi, <page 291>; sculpture of compared with Assyrian, <page 401>.

Sumerian goddesses, racial origin of, <page 105>.

Sumerians, characteristics of, <page 2>; Akkadians adopted culture of, <page 2>, <page 3>; unlike the Chinese, <page 3>; Mongolian affinities of doubtful, <page 3>; language of agglutinative like those of Chinese, Turks, Magyars, Finns, and Basques, <page 3>; Ural-Altaic racial theory, <page 4>; shaving customs of, <page 5>; of Mediterranean or Brown Race, <page 7>; congeners of prehistoric Europeans, <page 9>; Arabs and Egyptians and, <page 9>, <page 10>; conquered by Akkadians, <page 12>; survival of culture and language of, <page 13>; in early Copper Age, <page 12>, <page 13>; pious records of kings of, <page 112>; how history of is being restored, <page 113>; the earliest dates, <page 114>; end of political power of, <page 217>; as early astronomers, <page 300>.

Sums-abum (su'mu-a'bum), early Amoritic king, <page 241>.

Sumu-la-ilu (su-mu'la-i'lu), early King of Hammurabi Age, <page 241>; capture of Kish by, <page 241>, <page 242>; Assyrian king claims descent from, <page 419>.

Sun, origin of in sea fire, <page 50>, <page 51>; seasonal worship of, <page 53>, <page 240>; Mitra and Varuna as regulators of, <page 54>; as "boat of the sky", <page 56>; as a planet, <page 301>; as bridegroom, <page 306>, <page 306> n.; in astrology, <page 318>; the "man in" the, <page 335>, <page 336>.

Sun, god of, Ninip, Nirig, and Nergal as, <page 53>, <page 54>, <page 303>; Babbar as, <page 54>; as Judge of living and dead, <page 54>; as seer of secret sin, <page 54>, <page 55>; links between Shamash, Mitra, and Varuna, <page 54>, <page 55>;

[p. 533]

[paragraph continues] Ninip and Nin-Girsu, and Babbar and Shamash, <page 132>; Tammuz as, <page 158>; forms of, <page 297>, <page 298>; Horus as the, <page 300>; as offspring and spouse of moon, <page 301>; Orion as a manifestation of, <page 305>; animals identified with, <page 329>, <page 330>; symbols of, <page 335>, <page 336>.

Sundial, a Babylonian invention, <page 323>; of Ahaz, <page 323>.

Sun god, Shamash as, <page 40>; centres of, <page 40>. See Shamash.

Sun goddess, the Babylonian and Hittite, <page 57>.

Surpanakha (sur-pa'nak-ha), the Indian demon, like Lilith, <page 67>.

Susa, prehistoric pottery of, <page 5>; capital of Elam, <page 111>; Hammurabi Code discovered at, <page 222>; burning of Persian palace at, <page 497>.

Sutarna II (su-tar'na), King of Mitanni, <page 283>; deposed by rival, <page 284>.

Sutekh (sut'ekh), as tribal god, <page 156>; as dragon slayer, <page 157>; Hittite thunder and fertility god and, <page 261>.

Suti (su'ti), the, Aramaean robbers, <page 285>, <page 359>, <page 360>; settled in Asia Minor, <page 461>.

Svip'dag, Gilgamesh and, <page 184>, <page 185>. Swan, Irish love god as, <page 428> n.; love messenger in India, <page 429>.

Swan maidens, as lovers, <page 68>.

Swine, offerings of to sea god, <page 33>; demons enter, <page 71>; sacrificed to Tammuz, <page 85>; associated with Osiris, <page 85>; Gaelic Hag's herd of, <page 87>; sacrifice of to cure disease, <page 236>; Ninip as boar god, <page 302>.

Symbolism, forehead symbol of Apis bull and Sumerian goat, <page 334>; "high heads": Anshar, Anu, Enlil, Ea, Merodach, Nergal, and Shamash, <page 334>; symbols of "high heads", <page 334>; the "world spine" and "world tree", <page 334>; the "water sun" of Shamash, <page 334>; Ashur's winged disks or "wheels", <page 334> et seq.; "man in the sun" in Assyria, Egypt, and India, <page 335>, <page 336>; Blake's "double vision", <page 336>; the arrow symbol, <page 337>; "shuttle" of Neith a thunder-bolt, <page 337> n.; Assyria the cedar, <page 340>, <page 341>; Isaiah and Ezekiel use Babylonian and Assyrian, <page 341>; the eagle, <page 343>, <page 344>; Ezekiel's wheels and four-faced cherubs, <page 344> et seq.; wheels or disks of Hittites, Indians, &c., <page 347>, <page 348>; the double axe, <page 348>; the Ashur arrow, <page 351>, <page 352>; the "dot within the circle" and egg thorn, <page 352>.

Syria, broad heads in, <page 8>; early races in, <page 11>; supposed invasion of by Lugal-zaggisi, <page 125>; Sargon of Akkad's empire in, <page 127>; hill god of, <page 136>; sheepskin burials in, <page 213>; culture of higher than Egypt at end of Hyksos Age, <page 275>.

 

Tabal (ta-bal'), Hittite Cilician kingdom of, <page 395>; Shalmaneser III subdues king of, <page 414>; Sargon II conquers, <page 460>, <page 461>; Biblical reference to, <page 464>; tribute from to Ashur-bani-pal, <page 483>.

Tablets of Destiny, the, Zu bird steals, <page 74>; Tiamat gives to Kingu in Creation legend, <page 141>, <page 145>; Merodach takes from Kingu, <page 146>; Ninip receives, <page 158>.

Taharka (ta-har'ka), King of Egypt, in anti-Assyrian revolt, <page 465>; intrigues against Esarhaddon, <page 471>; Esarhaddon's invasion of Egypt, <page 475>; flight of, <page 475>, <page 476>; death of, <page 482>.

Tammuz, Osiris and, xxxi, <page 81>; variations of myths of; xxxii; blood of in river, <page 47>, <page 48>; as the shepherd and spring sun, <page 53>; spends winter in Hades, <page 53>; links with Mithra, <page 55>, <page 94>; son of Ea, <page 82>; Belit-sheri, sister of; <page 98>; Ishtar, mother and lover of, <page 10>l; worship of among Hebrews, <page 82>, <page 106>, <page 107>; as "the man of sorrows", <page 88>; "the true and faithful son", <page 93>; as the patriarch, <page 82>; Sargon of Akkad myth and, <page 91>; links with Adonis, Attis, Diarmid, and pre-Hellenic deities, <page 83>, <page 84>; blood of in river, <page 85>; kid and sucking pig of, <page 85>; as "steer of heaven", <page 85>; Nin-shach, boar god, as slayer of, <page 86>; Ishtar laments for, <page 86>; month of wailings for, <page 87>-<page 89>; why Ishtar deserted, <page 99>, <page 103>; as the love god, <page 87>; dies with vegetation, &c., <page 87>, <page 88>; sacred cedar of; <page 88>; in gloomy Hades, <page 89>; return of like Frode (Frey), <page 95>; as the slumbering corn child, <page 89>, <page 90>, <page 91>; Teutonic Scyld or Sceaf and, <page 92>, <page 93>; Frey, Hermod, and Heimdal like, <page 93>; as world guardian and demon-slayer like Heimdal and Agni, <page 94>; as the healer like Khonsu, <page 94>; Ishtar visits Hades for, <page 96>, <page 97>, <page 98>; refusal to leave Hades, <page 98>; like Kingu in Tiamat myth, <page 106>;

[p. 534]

[paragraph continues] Nin-Girsu, or En-Mersi, of Lagash a form of, <page 116>, <page 120>; Nina and Belitsheri and, <page 117>; Sargon myth like Indian Karna story, <page 126>, <page 437>; Zamama, Merodach, Ninip and, <page 53>, <page 126>, <page 158>, <page 241>, <page 302>, <page 305>; as elder god, <page 159>; Etana and Gilgamesh and, <page 164>; as patriarch and sleeper, <page 164>; eagle of, <page 120>, <page 168>; Nimrod myth, <page 170>; John Barleycorn and, <page 170>; Gilgamesh and, <page 171>, <page 172>, <page 210>; in Gilgamesh epic, <page 176>; Nebo and, <page 303>, <page 435>; Adonis slain by boar god of war, <page 304>; planetary deities and, <page 301>, <page 304>; forms of like Horus, <page 305>; astral links with Merodach and Attis, <page 305>; Ashur and, <page 337>, <page 340>, <page 348>; identified with Nusku, &c., <page 354>; as Anshar, En Mersi, and Nin-Girsu, <page 333>; doves and, <page 428> n.

Tanutamon (ta-nut'amon), Ethiopian king, Assyrians expelled from Memphis by, <page 482>, <page 483>; defeat of, <page 483>.

Tarku (tar'ku), Asia Minor thunder god, <page 35>, <page 57>, <page 261>, <page 395>.

Tarsus, Hittite city of, <page 395>.

Tashmit (tash'mit), spouse of Nebo, <page 436>; creatrix and, <page 437>.

Taylor, J. E., <page xx>.

Tears, agricultural weeping ceremonies, <page 82> et seq.

Tears of deities, the fertilizing, <page 29>; the creative, <page 45>, <page 46>.

Tefnut (tef'nut), the Egyptian goddess, created from saliva, <page 46>.

Tell-el-Amarna letters, historical evidence from, <page 280> et seq.; Assyrian king's letter, <page 284>, <page 285>.

Tello (tello'), Lagash site, <page 120>; archaic forms of gods, <page 135>; mound of, Lagash site, <page 243>.

Temples, the houses of gods, <page 60>.

Teshub or Teshup (tesh'ub), thunder god of Armenia, <page 261>; as a Mitannian god, <page 269><page 1> in Tell-el-Amarna letters, <page 282>, <page 395>.

Teutonic sea-fire belief, <page 51>.

Thebes, sack of by Assyrians, <page 483>.

Theodoric (toyd'rik or the-od'o-rik), the Goth, myths of, <page 164>.

Thomas the Rhymer, as a "sleeper", <page 164>.

Thompson, R. Campbell, <page 34>, <page 39>, <page 72>, <page 76>, <page 234>, <page 235>, <page 238>, <page 239>.

Thor, Ramman and Dadu or Hadad as, <page 57>; Dietrich as, <page 74>, <page 164>; the hammer of, <page 238>; deities that link with, <page 261>; the goat and, <page 333>, <page 334>; Ashur, Tammuz, and Indra and, <page 340>.

Thorkill (thor'kill), the Germanic, Gilgamesh and, <page 185>.

Thoth (thoth or ta-hoo'tee), the Egyptian god, as chief of Ennead, <page 36>; curative saliva of, <page 46>; Sumerian moon god like, <page 301>.

Thothmes III (thoth'mes), of Egypt, wars against Mitanni, <page 275>; correspondence of with Assyrian king, <page 276>, <page 279>.

Thunder god, Ramman, Hadad or Dadu, and Enlil as, <page 35>, <page 57>; Indra as, <page 35>; Dietrich as Thor, <page 74>; in Babylonian Zu and Indian Garuda myths, <page 74>, <page 75>, <page 169>; in demon war, <page 76>; Merodach as, <page 144>; Hercules as, <page 171>; horn and hammer of, <page 238>; the Hittite, <page 260>; the Amorite, Mitannian, Kassite, and Aryan, <page 261>; Ptah of Egypt a, <page 263>, <page 264>.

Thunder goddess, the Egyptian Neith a, <page 337> n.

Thunderstone, weapon of Merodach and Ramman, <page 144>, <page 159>, <page 160>.

Tiamat (ti'a-mat), like Egyptian Nut, <page 37>; in group of early deities, <page 64>; the "brood" of, <page 64>, <page 65>; as Great Mother, <page 106>; in Creation legend, <page 138>; plots with Apsu and Mummu, <page 139>; as Avenger of Apsu, <page 140>; exalts Kingu, <page 141>; Anu and Ea fears, <page 142>; Merodach goes against, <page 144>; slaying of, <page 146>; Merodach divides "Ku-pu" of, <page 147>; the dragon's heart, <page 147> n.; body of forms sky and earth, <page 147>; followers of "fallen gods", <page 150>; as origin of good and evil, <page 150>; beneficent forms of, <page 150>; as the dragon of the deep, <page 151>; Gaelic sea monster and, <page 151>; Alexander the Great sees, <page 151>; the Scottish "eel" and, <page 151>; "brood of" in Beowulf, <page 151>; vulnerable part of, <page 153>; Ishtar and, <page 157>; the Gorgons and, <page 159>; in Germanic legend, <page 202>; grave demons and, <page 215>; reference to by Damascius, <page 328>. (Also rendered "Tiawath". )

Tiana (ti-an'i), Hittite city of, <page 395>.

Tibni, revolt of in Israel, <page 405>.

Tidal (ti'dal), Saga on Hittite connections of, <page 264>, <page 265>; Tudhula of the Hittites as, <page 247>, <page 248>.

Tiglath-pileser I (tig'lath pi-le'sur), of Assyria, <page 382>; conquests of, <page 383>, <page 384>'

Tiglath-pileser IV, the Biblical "Pul", <page 444>; Babylonian campaign of, <page 445>, <page 446>; Sharduris of Urartu defeated by, <page 446>, <page 447>; Israel, Damascus, and Tyre pay tribute to, <page 449>; destruction of Urarti capital, <page 450>; appeal of Ahaz to, <page 451>, <page 452>; Israel punished by, <page 453>; Babylon welcomes, <page 453>; triumphs of, <page 454>.

Tigris, the river, <page 22>; as "the bestower of blessings", <page 23>; rise and fall and length of, <page 24>.

Tiy, Queen, in Tell-el-Amarna letters, <page 283>; Semiramis like, <page 418>; Aton and Mut worship, <page 419>; mother worship and, <page 423>.

Toothache, Babylonian cure of, <page 234>, <page 235>.

Totems, the bear, <page 164>; mountains, trees, and animals as, <page 292>, <page 293>; surnames and, <page 293>; the fish of Ea and, <page 294>; eating the in Egypt, <page 295>; doves, snakes, crocodiles, &c., as, <page 432>, <page 433>; Persian eagle, <page 493>.

Trade routes, Babylonia and Assyria struggle for, <page 286>; the ancient, <page 356>; Baghdad and other railways following, <page 357>; ancient Powers struggled to control, <page 358>; Babylon's route to Egypt, <page 359>; Arabian desert route opened, <page 360>; route abandoned, <page 361>; Elam's caravan roads, <page 361>; struggle for Mesopotamia, <page 361> et seq.; Babylon's trade with China, Egypt, &c., <page 371>, <page 372>.

Transmigration of souls, <page 315>.

"Tree of Life", Professor Sayce on the Babylonian, <page 39>.

Tree worship, Tammuz, Adonis and Osiris and, <page 88>; Ashur and, <page 339>; Ezekiel on Assyria's tree, <page 340>, <page 341>.

Trees, in Babylonia, <page 24>, <page 25>; sap as the "blood" of, <page 47>; as totems, <page 291>, <page 293>.

Trident, the lightning, weapon of Merodach, <page 144>.

Tritons, the, <page 33>.

Tudhula (tud'hu-la), a Hittite king, identified with Biblical Tidal, <page 247>, <page 248>; forms of name of, <page 264>, <page 265>.

Tukulti-Ninip I (tu-kul'ti-nin'ip), of Assyria, <page 368>, <page 369>.

Tukulti-Ninip III, <page 396>.

Tunnel, the dark, in Gilgamesh epic, <page 178>; Germanic land of darkness, <page 185>; in Alexander the Great myth, <page 185>, <page 186>; in Indian legends, <page 187>, <page 188>; in Scottish folk tales, <page 189>.

Turkestan, early civilization of and the Sumerian, <page 5>; did agriculture originate in? <page 6>; prehistoric painted pottery in, <page 263>.

Turkey, great Powers and, <page 357>; language of and Sumerian, <page 3>.

Turks, of Ural-Altaic stock, <page 4>.

Tushratta (tush'rat-ta), King of Mitanni, <page 280>; correspondence of with Egyptian kings, <page 282> et seq.; murder of, <page 283>.

Twin goddesses, Ishtar and Belitsheri, <page 98>, <page 99>; Isis and Nepthys, <page 99>.

Tyr, the Germanic god, mother of a demon, <page 64>.

Tyre, relations with Sidon and Hebrews, <page 388>, <page 389>, <page 392>; tribute of to Adad-nirari IV, <page 439>; gifts from to Tiglath-pileser IV, <page 449>; King Luli and Assyria, <page 465>; Esarhaddon and, <page 474>, <page 475>; tribute from to Ashur-bani-pal, <page 483>; conspiracy against Nebuchadrezzar II, <page 491>, <page 492>.

Tyrol, the demon lover of, <page 68>; wind hags of, <page 74>.

 

Uazit (oo'az-it), Egyptian serpent goddess, <page 150>.

Umma (oom'ma), city of, Lagash and, <page 118>; captured by Eannatum, <page 118>; crushing defeat of by Entemena, <page 119>, <page 120>; king of destroys Lagash, <page 123>, <page 124>.

Ur, Nannar, moon god of, <page 40>; the moon god Baal of, <page 51>; antiquity of, <page 52>; Lagash king sways, <page 119>; empire of, <page 130>; moon god of supreme, <page 130>; Abraham migrates from, <page 131>, <page 245>; revolt of with Larsa against Isin, <page 132>; moon god of in Kish, <page 241>; under Elamite kings of Larsa in Hammurabi Age, <page 242>; Abraham's migration from, <page 245>; Chaldaeans and, <page 391>; revolt against Ashur-bani-pal, <page 484>; Nabonidus and, <page 492>.

Ura (oo'ra), god of disease, <page 77>.

Ural-Altaic stock, Turks and Finns of, Sumerians and, <page 4>.

Urartu (ur-ar'tu), combines with Phrygians and Hittites against Sargon II, <page 460>; as vassal state of Assyria, <page 461>; rise of kingdom of, <page 395>; god and culture of, <page 440>; Adad-nirari and, <page 440>; ethnics of, <page 440> n.; capital of,

[p. 535]

[paragraph continues] <page 441>; Sharduris of routed by Tiglath-pileser IV, <page 446>, <page 447>, <page 450>; alliance with Hittites against Sargon II, <page 460>; as vassal state of Assyria, <page 461>; Cimmerians and Scythians raid, <page 461>, <page 464>; Sennacherib's murderers escape to, <page 470>; in Esarhaddon's reign, <page 472>; Assyrian alliance with, <page 473>, <page 486>; Cyaxares king of, <page 493>.

Uri (ur'i), early name of Akkad, <page 2>.

Ur-Nina (ur-ni'na), King of Lagash, <page 116>; gods worshipped by, <page 116>, <page 117>; famous plague of, <page 117>, <page 118>.

Ur-Ninip (ur-nin'ip), King of Isin, <page 132>; mysterious death of, <page 133>.

Uruk (ur'uk). See Erech.

Urukagina (ur-u-kag'in-a), King of Lagash, first reformer in history, <page 121>; taxes and temple fees reduced by, <page 122>, <page 210>, <page 211>; fall of, <page 123>, <page 124>.

Urumush (ur'u-mush), Akkadian emperor, <page 127>.

Utu (u'tu), Sumerian name of sun god, <page 55>.

 

Valentine, St., mating day of, <page 430>.

Varuna, the Indian god, links with Ea-Oannes, <page 31>, <page 34>; sea fire of, <page 50>, <page 51>; Shamash the sun god and, <page 54>; association of with rain, <page 55>; Sumerian links with, <page 55>, <page 56>; worshippers of buried dead, <page 56>; no human beings in Paradise of, <page 209>; attire of deities in Paradise of, <page 212>; the goat and, <page 333>.

Vas'olt, Tyrolese storm demon, <page 74>.

Vayu (va'yu), Indian wind god, <page 35>.

Vedas (vay'das), astronomy of the, <page 318>.

Venus, the goddess, <page 17>, <page 296>; lovers of, <page 102>.

Venus, the planet, Ishtar as, <page 296>; female at sunset and male at sunrise, <page 299>; in sun and moon group, <page 301>; rays of as beard, <page 301>; as the "Proclaimer", <page 314>; connection of with moon, <page 314>; in astrology, <page 318>, <page 324>.

Vestal virgins, <page 228>, <page 229>.

Vishnu (vish'noo), the Indian god, like Ea, <page 27>; Ea like, <page 38>; eagle giant as vehicle of, <page 75>; Sri or Lakshmi wife of, <page 101>; sleep of on world serpent, <page 150>; eagle and, <page 169>, <page 347>.

"Vital spark", the, fire as, <page 49>.

Voice, the pure, in Sumerian spell, <page 46>.

Vulture, as deity of fertility, <page 429>, <page 430>; the Persian eagle legend and, <page 493>; goddess of Egypt, <page 168>; as protectors of Shakuntala, <page 423>, <page 424>.

 

Wales, pig as the devil in, <page 293>.

Warad Sin, struggle of with Babylon, <page 217>; the Biblical Arioch, <page 247>, <page 248>.

Warka. See Erech.

Water, control and distribution of in Babylonia, <page 23>, <page 24>; corn deities and, <page 33>; essence of life in, <page 44>, <page 45>, <page 51>.

Water gods and demons, <page 27> et seq.

Water of Life, Gilgamesh's quest of, <page 177> et seq.; in Alexander the Great myth, <page 186>; in Koran legend, <page 186>; in Gaelic legends, <page 186>, <page 187>; in Indian legends, <page 187>, <page 210>.

Waxen figures, in folk cures, <page 234>.

Weapons in graves, <page 212>.

Weaving, in Late Stone Age, <page 14>.

Weeping ceremonies, the agricultural, <page 82> et seq.; the Egyptian god Rem, <page 29>.

Wells, worship of, <page 44>.

Westminster Abbey, Long Meg and, <page 156>.

Wheel of Life, the, Ashur, <page 334> et seq.; Ezekiel's references to, <page 344> et seq.; in Babylonian, Indian, Persian, and Hittite mythologies, <page 346>-<page 348>; in Indian mythology, <page 346>, <page 347>; the sun and the, <page 348>; "dot within the circle" and egg thorn, <page 352>; Ahura Mazda's, <page 355>.

Wife of Merodach, <page 221>; Amon's wife, <page 221>.

Wild Huntsmen, the, Asiatic gods as, <page 35>, <page 64>.

"Will-o'-the-wisp", the Babylonian and European, <page 66>, <page 67>.

Winckler, Dr. Hugo, Semitic migrations, <page 10>; on Mitannian origins, <page 268>, <page 269>; Boghaz-Koi tablets found by, <page 280>, <page 367>.

Wind, the south-west, demon of in Babylonia and Europe, <page 72>, <page 73>.

Wind gods, Vayu, Enlil, Ramman, &c., as, <page 35>.

Wind hags, Babylonia Shutu, Scottish Annie, English Annis, Irish Anu, <page 73>; Icelandic Angerboda, <page 73>; Tyrolese "wind brewers", <page 74>; Artemis as one of the, <page 104>.

Winds, the seven, as servants of Merodach, <page 145>.

Wine seller who became queen, <page 114>, <page 115>; the female, <page 229>.

Wolf, Nergal-Mars as the, <page 303>. Women, as rulers in Egypt and Babylonia, <page 16>, <page 17>; treatment of in early times, <page 15>; Nomads oppressors of, <page 16>; exalted by Mediterranean peoples, <page 16>; Sumerian laws regarding, <page 16>, <page 17>; the Sumerian language of, <page 17>; in goddess worship, <page 106>-<page 108>; social status of, <page 108>; position of in Hammurabi Code, <page 224> et seq.; the marriage market, <page 224>, <page 225>; drink traffic monopolized by, <page 229>.

World hill, in Babylonian, Indian, and Egyptian mythologies, <page 332>.

World serpent, in Eur-Asian Mythologies, <page 151>.

World Soul, the Brahmanic, <page 304>, <page 328>, <page 329>.

"World spike", star called, <page 332>.

"World spine", the, <page 332>; the "world tree" and, <page 334>; Ashur standard as, <page 335>.

World tree, symbol of "world spine", <page 334>

Worm, the, dragon as, <page 151>; the legend of the, <page 234>, <page 235>.

Wryneck, goddess and the, <page 427> n.

 

Xerxes, Merodach's temple pillaged by, <page 497>.

 

Ya, the Hebrew, Ea as, <page 31>.

Yama (ya'ma), Osiris and Gilgamesh and, <page xxxii>; Mitra and, <page 56>; eagle as, <page 169>; Gilgamesh and, <page 200>; the Paradise of, <page 209>.

Yng've, the Germanic patriarch, <page 93>.

Yugas, the Indian doctrine of, Babylonian origin of, <page 310> et seq.

 

Zabium (za'bi-um), king in Hammurabi Age, <page 242>.

Zachariah, King of Israel, <page 449>.

Zamama (za-ma'ma), god of Kish, Tammuz traits of, <page 126>; identified with Merodach, <page 241>.

Zambia (zam'bi-a), King of Isin, <page 133>. Zedekiah, King of Judah, conspiracy against Babylonia, <page 490>; punishment of, <page 491>; the captivity, <page 491>.

Zerpanitum (zar-pa nit-um), mother goddess, <page 100>; as "Lady of the Abyss", <page 160>; as Aruru, <page 160>; Persian goddess and, <page 496>.

Zeus (to rhyme with mouse), the god, as sea-god's brother, <page 33>; in Adonis myth, <page 90>; an imported god, <page 105>; in father and son myth, <page 158>; eagle of, <page 168>; deities that link with, <page 261>; the "Great Bear" myth and, <page 296>.

Zi (zee), the Sumerian manifestation of life, <page 291>; "Sige the mother" as Ziku, <page 328> n.

Zimri, revolt of in Israel, <page 405>.

Zodiac, Signs of the, <page 147>, <page 301>, <page 305>; Babylonian origin of, <page 306>; Hittites, Phoenicians, and Greeks and, <page 306>; stars of as "Divinities of Council", <page 309>; division of, <page 307>; the fields of Ea, Anu, and Bel, <page 307>; three stars for each month, <page 307>-<page 309>; the lunar in various countries, <page 309>; when signs of were fixed, <page 322>.

Zu bird, Garuda eagle and, <page xxvi>; myth of, <page 74>.

Zuzu (zu'zu), King of Opis, captured by Eannatum of Lagash, <page 119>.

 

    


===== BOOK: mbh.txt =====


    
The Myth of the Birth of the Hero, by Otto Rank, [1914], at sacred-texts.com

  

THE MYTH OF THE BIRTH OF THE HERO

  

A Psychological Interpretation of Mythology

  

(Translation of Der Mythus von der Geburt des Helden: Versuch einer Psychologischen Mythendeutung. Leipzig, Deuticke, 1909)

  

by Otto Rank

  

Translated from the German by Drs. F. Robbins and Smith Ely Jelliffe

  

Nervous and Mental Disease Monograph Series No. 18.

  

The Journal of Nervous and Mental Disease Publishing Company, New York

  

[1914]

Scanned, proofed, and formatted at sacred-texts.com, October 2006, by John Bruno Hare. This text is in the public domain in the United States because both the translation and the original were published prior to 1923.

     
The Myth of the Birth of the Hero, by Otto Rank, [1914], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 3]

  

I. Introduction

THE prominent civilized nations--the Babylonians and Egyptians, the Hebrews and Hindus, the Persians, the Greeks and the Romans, as well as the Teutons and others--all began at an early stage to glorify their national heroes--mythical princes and kings, founders of religions, dynasties, empires, or cities--in a number of poetic tales and legends. The history of the birth and of the early life of these personalities came to be especially invested with fantastic features, which in different nations--even though widely separated by space and entirely independent of each other--present a baffling similarity or, in part, a literal correspondence. Many investigators have long been impressed with this fact, and one of the chief problems of mythological research still consists in the elucidation of the reason for the extensive analogies in the fundamental outlines of mythical tales, which are rendered still more puzzling by the unanimity in certain details and their reappearance in most of the mythical groupings.

The mythological theories, aiming at the explanation of these remarkable phenomena, are, in a general way, as follows: [*1]

[p. 4]

1. The "Idea of the People," propounded by Adolf Bastian. [*1] This theory assumes the existence of elemental ideas, so that the unanimity of the myths is a necessary sequence of the uniform disposition of the human mind and the manner of its manifestation, which within certain limits is identical at all times and in all places. This interpretation was urgently advocated by Adolf Bauer as accounting for the wide distribution of the hero myths. [*2]

2. The explanation by original community, first applied by Theodor Benfey to the widely distributed parallel forms of folklore and fairy tales [*3]. Originating in a favorable locality (India), these tales were first accepted by the primarily related (Indo-Germanic) peoples, then continued to grow while retaining the common primary traits, and ultimately radiated over the entire earth. This mode of explanation was first adapted to the wide distribution of the hero myths by Rudolf Schubert. [*4]

3. The modern theory of migration, or borrowing, according to which individual myths originate from definite peoples (especially the Babylonians) and are accepted by other peoples through oral tradition (commerce and traffic) or through literary influences. [*5]

The modern theory of migration and borrowing can be readily shown to be merely a modification of Benfey's theory, necessitated by newly discovered and irreconcilable material. This profound and extensive research of modern investigations has shown that India, rather than Babylonia, may be regarded as the first home of the myths. Moreover, the tales presumably did not radiate from a single point, but traveled over and across the entire inhabited globe. This brings into prominence the idea of the interdependence of mythological structures, an idea which was generalized by Braun as the basic law of the nature of the human

[p. 5]

mind: Nothing new is ever discovered as long as it is possible to copy. [*1] The theory of elemental ideas, so strenuously advocated by Bauer over a quarter of a century ago, is unconditionally declined by the most recent investigators (Winckler, [*2] Stucken), who maintain the migration theory.

There is really no such sharp contrast between the various theories or their advocates, for the concept of elemental ideas does not interfere with the claims of primary common possession or of migration. Furthermore, the ultimate problem is not whence and how the material reached a certain people; the question is: Where did it come from to begin with? All these theories would explain only the variability and distribution of the myths, but not their origin. Even Schubert, the most inveterate opponent of Bauer's view, acknowledges this truth, by stating that all these manifold sagas date back to a single very ancient prototype. But he is unable to tell us anything of the origin of this prototype. Bauer likewise inclines to this mediating view; he points out repeatedly that in spite of the multiple origin of independent tales, it is necessary to concede a most extensive and ramified borrowing, as well as an original community of the concepts in related peoples. [*3] The same conciliatory attitude is maintained by Lessmann in a recent publication (1908), in which he rejects the assumption of elemental ideas, but admits that primary relationship and borrowing do not exclude each other. [*4] As pointed out by Wundt, however, it must be kept in mind that the appropriation of mythological contents always represents at the same time an independent mythological construction; because only that can be retained permanently which corresponds to the borrower's stage of mythological ideation. The faint recollections of preceding narratives would hardly suffice for the refiguration of the same material, without

[p. 6]

the persistent presence of the underlying motifs; but precisely for this reason, such motifs may produce new contents that agree in their fundamental themes, even in the absence of similar associations. [*1]

Leaving aside for the present the inquiry as to the mode of distribution of these myths, the origin of the hero myth in general is now to be investigated, fully anticipating that migration (or borrowing) will prove to be directly and fairly positively demonstrable in a number of the cases. When this is not feasible, other viewpoints will have to be conceded, at least for the present, rather than bar the way to further progress by the somewhat unscientific attitude of Hugo Winckler, who says: When human beings and products, exactly corresponding to each other, are found at remote parts of the earth, we must conclude that they have wandered thither; whether we have knowledge of the how or when makes no difference in the assumption of the fact itself. [*2] Even granting the migration of all myths, the origin of the first myth would still have to be explained. [*3]

Investigations along these lines will necessarily help to provide a deeper insight into the contents of the tales. Nearly all authors who have hitherto been engaged in the interpretation of the birth myths of heroes find in them a personification of the processes of nature, following the dominant mode of natural mythological interpretation.

[p. 7]

[paragraph continues] The newborn hero is the young sun rising from the waters, first confronted by lowering clouds, but finally triumphing over all obstacles. [*1] The taking into consideration of all natural (chiefly atmospheric) phenomena--as was done by the first representatives of this method of myth interpretation [*2]--and the regarding of the legends, in a more restricted sense, as astral myths (Stucken, Winckler, and others) are approaches not so essentially distinct as the followers of each individual direction believe to be the case. Nor does it seem a basic improvement when the purely solar interpretation, as advocated especially by Frobenius, [*3] was no longer accepted and the view was advanced that all myths were originally lunar. Husing holds this theory in his discussion of the myth of Cyrus the Great; Siecke also claims this view as the only legitimate, obvious interpretation of the birth myths of the heroes; and it is a concept that is beginning to gain popularity. [*4]

The interpretation of the myths themselves will be taken up in detail later on, and we shall refrain here from all detailed critical comments on the above mode of explanation. Although significant, and undoubtedly in part correct, the astral theory is not altogether satisfactory and fails to afford an insight into the motives of myth formation. The objection may be raised that the tracing to astronomical processes does not fully represent the content of these myths, and that much clearer and simpler relations might be established through another mode of interpretation. The much abused theory of elemental ideas indicates a practically

[p. 8]

neglected aspect of mythological research. At the beginning, as well as at the end of his contribution, Bauer points out how much more natural and probable it would be to seek the reason for the general unanimity of these myths in the very general traits of the human psyche, rather than in primary community or migration. This assumption appears to be more justifiable, since such general movements of the human mind are also expressed in still other forms and in other domains, where they can be demonstrated as universal.

Concerning the character of these general movements of the human mind, the psychological study of the essence of these myths might help to reveal the source from which has flowed uniformly, at all times and in all places, an identical mythological content. Such a derivation of an essential constituent, from a common human source, has already been successfully attempted with one of these legendary motifs. Freud, in his Interpretation of Dreams, reveals the connection of the Oedipus fable--where Oedipus is told by the oracle that he will kill his father and marry his mother, as he unwittingly does later--with two typical dreams experienced by many now living: the dream of the father's death, and the dream of sexual intercourse with the mother. Of King Oedipus he says:

His fate moves us only because it might have been our own, because the oracle laid upon us before our birth the very curse which rested upon him. It may be that we were all destined to direct our first sexual impulses toward our mothers, and our first impulses of hatred and resistance toward our fathers; our dreams convince us that we were. King Oedipus, who slew his father Laius and wedded his mother Jocasta, is

[p. 9]

nothing more or less than a wish-fulfillment--the fulfillment of the wish of our childhood. [*1]

The manifestation of the intimate relationship between dream and myth--not only in regard to the content but also as to the form and motor forces of this and many other, more particularly pathological, psyche structures--entirely justifies the interpretation of the myth as a dream of the masses of the people, which I have recently shown elsewhere. At the same time, the transference of the method, and in part also of the results, of Freud's technique of dream interpretation to the myths would seem to be justifiable, as was defended by Abraham, and illustrated in an example, in his paper on "Dreams and Myths." In the circle of myths that follow, the intimate relations between dream and myth find further confirmation, with frequent opportunity for reasoning from analogy.

The hostile attitude of the most modern mythological tendency (chiefly represented by the Society for Comparative Mythological Research) against all attempts at establishing a relation between dream and myth is for the most part the outcome of the restriction of the parallelization to the so-called nightmares (Alptraume), as attempted in Laistner's notable book, and also of ignorance of the relevant teachings of Freud. [*2] The latter not only help us to understand the dreams themselves but also show their symbolism and close relationship with all psychic phenomena in general, especially with daydreams or fantasies, with artistic creativeness, and with certain disturbances of the normal psychic function. A common share in all

[p. 10]

these productions belongs to a single psychic function: the human imagination. It is to this imaginative faculty--of humanity at large rather than of the individual--that the modern myth theory is obliged to concede a high rank, perhaps the first, as the ultimate source of all myths. The interpretation of the myths in the astral sense--or more accurately speaking, as "almanac tales"--gives rise to the query: In view of a creative imagination in humanity, should we seek (with Lessmann) for the first germ of the origin of such tales precisely in the processes of the heavens, or on the contrary, should we conclude that ready-made tales of an entirely different (but presumably psychic) origin were only subsequently transferred to the heavenly bodies? [*1] Ehrenreich makes a more positive admission: The mythologic evolution certainly begins on terrestrial soil, in so far as experiences must first be gathered in the immediate surroundings before they can be projected into the heavenly universe. [*2] And Wundt tells us that the theory of the evolution of mythology according to which it first originates in the heavens, whence at a later date it descends to earth, is contradictory both to the history of the myth (which is unaware of such a migration) and to the psychology of myth formation (which must repudiate such a translocation as internally impossible). [*3] We are also convinced that the myths, [*4] originally at least, are structures of the human faculty of imagination, which were at some time projected for certain reasons upon the heavens, and may be secondarily transferred to the heavenly bodies, with their baffling phenomena. The significance

[p. 11]

of the unmistakable traces--the fixed figures, and so forth--that have been imprinted upon the myth by this transference must by no means be underrated, although the origin of these figures was possibly psychic in character; they were subsequently made the basis of the almanac and firmament calculations precisely on account of this significance.

In a general way, it would seem as if the investigators who apply an exclusively "natural" scheme of interpretation have been unable, in any sense--in their endeavor to discover the original sense of the myths--to get away entirely from a psychological process such as must be assumed similarly for the creators of the myths. [*1] The motive is identical, and led to the same course for myth-creators and for myth-interpreters. It is most naively uttered by one of the founders and champions of comparative myth investigation and of the natural mythological mode of interpretation; Max Muller points out in his Essays that this procedure not only invests meaningless legends with a significance and beauty of their own but also helps to remove some of the most revolting features of classical mythology, as well as to elucidate their true meaning. [*2] This readily understandable revulsion naturally prevents the mythologist from assuming that such motifs--incest with mother, sister, or daughter; murder of father, grandfather, or brother--could be based on universal fantasies, which according to Freud's teachings have their source in the infantile psyche, with its peculiar interpretation of the external world and its denizens. This revulsion is, therefore, only the reaction of the dimly sensed painful recognition of the actuality of these relations; and this reaction impels the myth interpreters, for their own subconscious rehabilitation, and that of all mankind, to credit these motifs with an entirely different meaning from their original significance. The same internal repudiation prevents the myth-creating people from believing in the possibility of such revolting thoughts, and this defense probably was

[p. 12]

the first reason for projecting these relations onto the firmament. The psychological pacifying through such a rehabilitation, by projection upon external and remote objects, can still be realized--to a certain degree, at least--by a glance at one of these interpretations, for instance that of the objectionable Oedipus fable, as given by Goldhizer, a representative of the natural school of myth interpreters: Oedipus (who kills his father, marries his mother, and dies old and blind) is the solar hero who murders his procreator, the darkness; he shares his couch with his mother, the gloaming, from whose lap, the dawn, he has been born; he dies, blinded, as the setting sun. [*1]

It is understandable that some such interpretation is more soothing to the mind than the revelation of the fact that incest and murder impulses against their nearest relatives are found in the fantasies of most people, as remnants of infantile ideation. But this is not a scientific argument, and revulsion of this kind--although it may not always be equally conscious--is altogether out of place in view of existing facts. One must either become reconciled to these indecencies, provided they are felt to be such, or one must abandon the study of psychological phenomena. It is evident that human beings, even in the earliest times, and with a most naive imagination, never saw incest and parricide in the firmament on high, [*2] but it is far more probable that these ideas are derived from another source, presumably human. In what way they came to reach the sky, and what modifications or additions they received in the process, are questions of a secondary character that cannot

[p. 13]

be settled until the psychic origin of the myths in general has been established.

At any rate, besides the astral conception, the claims of the part played by the psychic life must be credited with the same rights for myth formation, and this argument will be amply vindicated by the results of our method of interpretation. With this object in view, we shall first take up in the following pages the legendary material on which such a psychological interpretation is to be attempted on a large scale for the first time.

Footnotes

^3:1 A short and fairly complete review of the general theories of mythology, and of the principal advocates of each, is to be found in Wilhelm Wundt: Volkerpsychologie (Leipzig, 1905-9), Vol. II, Part I, p. 527.

^4:1 Das Bestandige in den Menschenrassen and die Spielweise ihrer Veranderlichkeit (Berlin, 1868).

^4:2 "Die Kyros Sage and Verwandtes," Sitzungsberichte der Wiener Akademie, No. 100 (1882), P. 495.

^4:3 Pantschatantra (1859).

^4:4 Herodots Darstellung der Cyrussage (Breslau, 1890).

^4:5 Compare E. Stricken: Astral Mythen (Leipzig, 1896-1907), especially Part V, "Moses"; and H. Lessmann: "Die Kyrossage in Europe," Wissen. beit. z. Jahresbericht d. stadt. Realschule zu Charlottenburg (1906).

^5:1 Naturgeschichte der Sage, 2 vols. (Munich, 1864-5), tracing all religious ideas, legends, and systems back to their common family tree and primary root.

^5:2 Some of the important writings by Winckler will be mentioned in the course of this article.

^5:3 Zeitschrift fur der Oesterr. Gymnasium (1891), pp. 161 ff. Schubert's reply is also found here, pp. 594 ff.

^5:4 "Object and Aim of Mythological Research," Mytholog. Bibliot. (Leipzig), Vol. I, No. 4.

^6:1 Wundt, op. cit., Part III.

^6:2 "Die babylonische Geisteskultur in ihren Beziehungen zur Kulturentwicklung der Menschheit," Wissenschaft and Bildung, Vol. XV (1907), p. 47.

^6:3 Of course no time will be wasted here on the futile question as to what the first legend may have been; in all probability this never existed, any more than "the first human couple."

^7:1 Brodbeck: Zoroaster (Leipzig, 1893), p. 138.

^7:2 As an especially discouraging example of this mode of procedure may be mentioned a contribution by the well-known natural mythologist Schwartz, which touches on this circle of myths, and is entitled: Der Ursprung der Stamm and Grundungssage Roms unter dem Reflex indogermanischer Mythen (Jena, 1898).

^7:3 Leo Frobenius: Das Zeitalter des Sonnengotten (Berlin, 1904).

^7:4 G. Husing: Contributions to the Kyros Myth (Berlin, 1906). Siecke, "Hermes als Mondgott," Mytholog. Bibliot., Vol. II, No. 1 (1908), P. 48. Compare, for example, Paul Koch: Sagen der Bibel and ihre Ubereinstimmung mit der Mythologie der Indogermanen (Berlin, 1907). Compare also the partly lunar, partly solar, but at any rate entirely one-sided conception of the hero myth in Gustav Friedrich: Grundlage, Entstehung and genaue Einzeldeutung der bekanntesten germanischen Marchen, Mythen and Sagen (Leipzig, 1909), p. 118.

^9:1 The fable of Shakespeare's Hamlet also permits of a similar interpretation, according to Freud. It will be seen later on how mythological investigators bring the Hamlet legend from entirely different viewpoints into the correlation of the circle of myths.

^9:2 Laistner: The Riddle of the Sphinx (1889). Compare Lessmann, "Object and Aim . . . ," loc. cit. Ehrenreich alone (General Psychology, p. 149) admits the extraordinary significance of dream-life for the myth-fiction of all times. Wundt does so likewise, for individual mythological motifs.

^10:1 Stucken (op. cit., p. 432) says in this sense: The myth transmitted by the ancestors was transferred to natural processes and interpreted in a naturalistic way, not vice versa. "Interpretation of nature is a motive in itself" (p. 636 n.). In a very similar way, Eduard Meyer (Geschichte des Altertums, 1884-1902, Vol. V. p. 48) has written: "In many cases, the natural symbolism, sought in the myths, is only apparently present or has been secondarily introduced, as often in the Vedas and in the Egyptian myths; it is a primary attempt at interpretation, like the myth-interpretations that arose among the Greeks as early as the fifth century."

^10:2 Op. cit., p. 104.

^10:3 Op. cit., p. 282.

^10:4 For fairy tales, in this as well as in other essential features, Thimme advocates the same point of view as is here claimed for the myths. Compare Adolf Thimme: Das Marchen, Vol. II of Handbucher zur Volkskunde (Leipzig, 1909).

^11:1 Of this myth interpretation, Wundt (op. cit., p. 352) has well said that it really should have accompanied the original myth formation.

^11:2 Vol. II, p. 143, in the German translation (Leipzig, 1869).

^12:1 See Ignaz Goldhizer: Der Mythus bei den Hebraern and seine geschichtliche Entwickelung (Leipzig, 1876), p. 125. According to the writings of Siecke (loc. cit., p. 39), the incest myths lose all unusual features through being referred to the moon and its relation to the sun. His explanation is quite simple: the daughter (the new moon) is the repetition of the mother (the old moon); with her the father (the sun) (also the brother, the son) becomes reunited.

^12:2 Is it to be believed? In an article entitled "Urreligion der Indogermanen" (Berlin, 1897), where Siecke points out that the incest myths are descriptive narrations of the seen but inconceivable process of nature, he objects to the assumption by Oldenburg (Religion der Veda, p. 5) of a primeval tendency of myths to the incest motif, with the remark that in the days of yore the theme was thrust upon the narrator, without an inclination of his own, through the forcefulness of the witnessed facts.

     
The Myth of the Birth of the Hero, by Otto Rank, [1914], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 14]

  

II. The Circle of Myths

FROM the mass of chiefly biographic hero myths, we have selected those that are best known and some that are especially characteristic. [*1] These myths will be given in abbreviated form, as far as relevant for this investigation, with statements concerning the sources. Attention will be called to the most important and constantly recurring motifs by the use of italic type.

  

SARGON

Probably the oldest transmitted hero myth in our possession is derived from the period of the foundation of Babylonia (about 2800 B.C.) and concerns the birth history of its founder, Sargon the First. [*2] The literal translation

[p. 15]

of the report--according to the mode of rendering, it appears to be an original inscription by King Sargon himself--is as follows:

Sargon, the mighty king, King of Agade, am I. My mother was a vestal, my father I knew not, while my father's brother dwelt in the mountains. In my city Azuripani, which is situated on the bank of the Euphrates, my mother, the vestal, bore me. In a hidden place she brought me forth. She laid me in a vessel made of reeds, closed my door with pitch, and dropped me down into the river, which did not drown me. The river carried me to Akki, the water carrier. Akki the water carrier lifted me up in the kindness of his heart, Akki the water carrier raised me as his own son, Akki the water carrier made of me his gardener. In my work as a gardener I was beloved by Ishtar, I became the king, and for forty-five years I held kingly sway. 

Footnotes

^14:1 Attention has been drawn to the great variability and wide distribution of the birth myths of the hero by the writings of Bauer, Schubert, and others referred to in the preceding pages. The comprehensive contents of the myths and their fine ramifications have been especially discussed by Husing, Lessmann, and other representatives of the modern trend.

^14:2 Innumerable fairy tales, stories, and poems of all times, up to the most recent dramatic and novelistic literature, show very distinct individual main motifs of this myth. The exposure-romance appears in the late Greek pastorals--Heliodorus' Aethiopica, Eustathius' Ismenias and Ismene, and Longus' story of the two exposed children, Daphnis and Chloe. The more recent Italian pastorals are likewise very frequently based upon the exposure of children, who are raised as shepherds by [p. 15] their foster parents, but are later recognized by the true parents, through identifying marks received at the time of their exposure. To the same set belong the family history in Grimmelshausen's Limplizissimus (1665), in Jean Paul's Titan (1800), as well as certain forms of the Robinson stories and Cavalier romances (compare Wurzbach's Introduction to Hesse's edition of Don Quixote).

     
The Myth of the Birth of the Hero, by Otto Rank, [1914], at sacred-texts.com

  

MOSES

The biblical birth history of Moses, which is told in the second chapter of Exodus, presents the greatest similarity to the Sargon legend, even an almost literal correspondence of individual traits. [*2] Already the first chapter (22) relates that Pharaoh commanded his people to throw into

[p. 16]

the river all sons that were born to Hebrews, while the daughters were permitted to live; the reason for this order is given as fear of the overfertility of the Israelites. The second chapter continues as follows:

And there went a man of the house of Levi, and took to wife a daughter of Levi. [*1] And the woman conceived, and bare a son: and when she saw him that he was a goodly child, she hid him three months. And when she could not longer hide him, she took for him an ark of bulrushes, and daubed it with slime and with pitch, and put the child therein; and she laid it in the flags by the river's brink. And his sister stood afar off, to wit what would be done to him. And the daughter of Pharaoh came down to wash herself at the river; and her maidens walked along by the river's side; and when she saw the ark among the flags, she sent her maid to fetch it. And when she had opened it, she saw the child and, behold, the babe wept. And she had compassion on him and said, this is one of the Hebrews' children. Then said his sister to Pharaoh's daughter, Shall I go and call to thee a nurse of the Hebrew women, that she may nurse the child for thee? And Pharaoh's daughter said to her, Go. And the maid went and called the child's mother. And Pharaoh's daughter said unto her, Take this child away, and nurse it for me, and I will give thee thy wages. And the woman took the child, and nursed it. And the child grew, and she brought him unto Pharaoh's daughter, and he became her son. And she called his name Moses: [*2] and she said, Because I drew him out of the water.

[p. 17]

This account is ornamented by rabbinical mythology with an account of the events preceding Moses' birth. In the sixtieth year after Joseph's death, the reigning Pharaoh saw in a dream an old man who held a pair of scales; all the inhabitants of Egypt lay on one side, with only a suckling Iamb on the other, but nevertheless this outweighed all the Egyptians. The startled king at once consulted the wise men and astrologers, who declared the dream to mean that a son would be born to the Israelites who would destroy all Egypt. The king was frightened, and at once ordered the death of all newborn children of the Israelites in the entire country. On account of this tyrannical order, the Levite Amram, who lived in Goshen, decided to separate from his wife Jochebed, so as not to foredoom to certain death the children conceived through him. But this resolution was opposed later on by his daughter Miriam, who foretold with prophetic assurance that precisely the child suggested in the king's dream would come forth from her mother's womb, and would become the liberator of his people. [*1]

Amram therefore rejoined his wife, from whom he had been separated for three years. At the end of three months, she conceived, and later on bore a boy at whose birth the entire house was illuminated by an extraordinary luminous radiance, suggesting the truth of the prophecy. [*2]

Similar accounts are given of the birth of the ancestor of the Hebrew nation, Abraham. He was a son of Terah--Nimrod's captain--and Amtelai. Prior to his birth, it was revealed to King Nimrod from the stars that the coming child would overthrow the thrones of powerful princes and take possession of their lands. King Nimrod planned to have the child killed immediately after its birth. But when the boy was requested from Terah, he said, "Truly a son was born to me, but he has died." He then delivered a strange child, concealing his own son in a cave underneath the ground, where God permitted him to suck milk from a finger of the right hand. In this cave, Abraham is

[p. 18]

said to have remained until the third (according to others the tenth) year of his life. 

In the next generation, in the story of Isaac, the same mythological motifs appear. Prior to his birth, King Abimelech is warned by a dream not to touch Sarah, as this would cause woe to betide him. After a long period of barrenness, she finally bears her son, who (in later life, in this report) after having been destined to be sacrificed by his own father, Abraham, is ultimately rescued by God. But Abraham casts out his elder son Ishmael, with Hagar, the boy's mother. 

Footnotes

^15:1 The various translations of the partly mutilated text differ only in unessential details. Compare Hommel: History of Babylonia and Assyria (Berlin, 1885), p. 302, where the sources of the tradition are likewise found; and A. Jeremias: The Old Testament in the Light of the Ancient Orient, ad ed. (Leipzig, 1906), p. 410.

^15:2 On account of these resemblances, a dependence of the Exodus tale from the Sargon legend has often been assumed, but apparently not enough attention has been paid to certain fundamental distinctions, which will be taken up in detail in the interpretation.

^16:1 The parents of Moses were originally nameless, as were all persons in this, the oldest account. Their names were only conferred upon them by the priesthood. Chapter 6.20, says: "And Amram took him Jochebed his father's sister to wife; and she bare him Aaron and Moses"; Numbers 26.58 adds: ". . . and Miriam their sister." Also compare Winckler: History of Israel, Vol. II; and Jeremias, op. cit., p. 408.

^16:2 The name, according to Winckler ("Die babylonische Geisteskultur . . ." loc. cit., p. 119), means "The Water-Drawer" (see also Winckler: Ancient Oriental Studies, Vol. III, pp. 468 ff.)--which would still further approach the Moses legend to the Sargon legend, for the name Akki signifies "I have drawn water."

^17:1 Schemot Rabba 2.4 says concerning Exodus 1.22 that Pharaoh was told by the astrologers of a woman who was pregnant with the Redeemer of Israel.

^17:2 After Bergel: Mythology of the Hebrews (Leipzig, 1882).

     
The Myth of the Birth of the Hero, by Otto Rank, [1914], at sacred-texts.com

  

KARNA

A close relationship with the Sargon legend is also shown in certain features of the ancient Hindu epic Mahabharata, in its account of the birth of the hero Karna. [*3] The contents of the legend are briefly rendered by Lassen. [*4]

The princess Pritha, also known as Kunti, bore as a virgin the boy Karna, whose father was the sun-god Surya. The young Karna was born with the golden ear ornaments of his father and with an unbreakable coat of mail. The mother in her distress concealed and exposed the boy. In the adaptation of the myth by A. Holtzmann, verse 1458 reads: "Then my nurse and I made a large basket of rushes, placed a lid thereon, and lined it with wax; into this basket I laid the boy and carried him down to the river Acva." Floating on the waves, the basket reaches the river

[p. 19]

[paragraph continues] Ganges and travels as far as the city of Campa. "There was passing along the bank of the river, the charioteer, the noble friend of Dhritarashtra, and with him was Radha, his beautiful and pious spouse. She was wrapt in deep sorrow, because no son had been given to her. On the river she saw the basket, which the waves carried close to her on the shore; she showed it to Azirath, who went and drew it forth from the waves." The two take care of the boy and raise him as their own child.

Kunti later on marries King Pandu, who is forced to refrain from conjugal intercourse by the curse that he is to die in the arms of his spouse. But Kunti bears three sons, again through divine conception, one of the children being born in the cave of a wolf. One day Pandu dies in the embrace of his second wife. The sons grow up, and at a tournament which they arrange, Karna appears to measure his strength against the best fighter, Arjuna, the son of Kunti. Arjuna scoffingly refuses to fight the charioteer's son. In order to make him a worthy opponent, one of those present anoints him as king. Meanwhile Kunti has recognized Karna as her son, by the divine mark, and prays him to desist from the contest with his brother, revealing to him the secret of his birth. But he considers her revelation as a fantastic tale, and insists implacably upon satisfaction. He falls in the combat, struck by Arjuna's arrow. [*1]

A striking resemblance to the entire structure of the Karna legend is presented by the birth history of Ion, the ancestor of the Ionians. The following account is based on a relatively late tradition. [*2]

Apollo, in the grotto of the rock of the Athenian Acropolis, procreated a son with Creusa, the daughter of Erechtheus. In this grotto the boy was also born, and exposed; the mother leaves the child behind in a woven basket, in the hope that Apollo will not leave his son to

[p. 20]

perish. At Apollo's request, Hermes carries the child the same night to Delphi, where the priestess finds him on the threshold of the temple in the morning. She brings the boy up, and when he has grown into a youth makes him a servant of the temple. Erechtheus later gave his daughter Creusa in marriage to Xuthus. As the marriage long remained childless, they addressed the Delphian oracle, praying to be blessed with progeny. The god reveals to Xuthus that the first to meet him on leaving the sanctuary is his son. He hastens outside and meets the youth, whom he joyfully greets as his own son, giving him the name Ion, which means "walker." Creusa refuses to accept the youth as her son; her attempt to poison him fails, and the infuriated people turn against her. Ion is about to attack her, but Apollo, who does not wish the son to kill his own mother, enlightens the mind of the priestess so that she understands the connection. By means of the basket in which the newborn child had lain, Creusa recognizes him as her son, and reveals to him the secret of his birth.

Footnotes

^18:1 Compare Beer: The Life of Abraham (Leipzig, 1859), according to the interpretation of Jewish traditions; also August Wunsche: From Israel's Temples of Learning (Leipzig, 1907).

^18:2 See chapters 20 and 21 of Genesis, and also Bergel, op. cit.

^18:3 The Hindu birth legend of the mythical king Vikramaditya must also be mentioned in this connection. Here again occur the barren marriage of the parents, the miraculous conception, ill-omened warnings, the exposure of the boy in the forest, his nourishment with honey, finally the acknowledgment by the father. See Julg: Mongolische Marche (Innsbruck, 1868), PP. 73 ff.

^18:4 Indische Alterumskunde (Karlsruhe, 1846).

^19:1 Compare the detailed account in Lefmann: History of Ancient India (Berlin, 1890), pp. 181 ff.

^19:2 See Roscher, concerning the Ion of Euripides. Where no other source is stated, all Greek and Roman myths are taken from the Ausfuhrliches Lexikon der griechischen and romischen Mythologie, edited by W. H. Roscher, which also contains a list of all sources.

     
The Myth of the Birth of the Hero, by Otto Rank, [1914], at sacred-texts.com

  

OEDIPUS

The parents of Oedipus, King Laius and his queen, Jocasta, lived for a long time in childless wedlock. Laius, who longs for an heir, asks the Delphic Apollo for advice. The oracle answers that he may have a son if he so desires; but fate has ordained that his own son will kill him. Fearing the fulfillment of the oracle, Laius refrains from conjugal relations, but being intoxicated one day he nevertheless procreates a son, whom he causes to be exposed in the river Cithaeron, barely three days after his birth. In order to be quite sure that the child will perish, Laius orders his ankles to be pierced. According to the account of Sophocles, which is not the oldest, however, the shepherd who has been intrusted with the exposure, surrenders the boy to a shepherd of King Polybus, of Corinth, at whose court he is brought up, according to the universal statement. Others say that the boy was exposed in a box on the sea, and was

[p. 21]

taken from the water by Periboa, the wife of King Polybus, as she was rinsing her clothes by the shore. [*1] Polybus brought him up as his own son.

Oedipus, on hearing accidentally that he is a foundling, asks the Delphian oracle about his true parents, but receives only the prophecy that he will kill his father and marry his mother. In the belief that this prophecy refers to his foster parents, he flees from Corinth to Thebes, but on the way unwittingly kills his father Laius. By solving a riddle, he frees the city from the plague of the Sphinx, a man-devouring monster, and in reward is given the hand of Jocasta, his mother, as well as the throne of his father. The revelation of these horrors and the subsequent misfortune of Oedipus were a favorite subject for spectacular display among the Greek tragedians.

An entire series of Christian legends have been elaborated on the pattern of the Oedipus myth, and the summarized contents of the Judas legend may serve as a paradigm of this group. Before his birth, his mother, Cyboread, is warned by a dream that she will bear a wicked son, to the ruin of all his people. The parents expose the boy in a box on the sea. The waves cast the child ashore on the Isle of Scariot, where the childless queen finds him, and brings him up as her son. Later on, the royal couple have a son of their own, and the foundling, who feels himself slighted, kills his foster brother. As a fugitive from the country, he takes service at the court of Pilate, who makes a confidant of him and places him above his entire household. In a fight, Judas kills a neighbor, without knowing that he is his father. The widow of the murdered man--his own mother--then becomes his wife. After the revelation of these horrors, he repents and seeks

[p. 22]

the Saviour, who receives him among his apostles. His betrayal of Jesus is known from the Gospels.

The legend of St. Gregory on the Stone--the subject of the narrative of Hartmann von Aue--represents a more complicated type of this mythological cycle. Gregory, the child of the incestuous union of royal lovers, is exposed by his mother in a box on the sea, saved and raised by fishermen, and is then educated in a convent for the church. But he prefers the life of a knight, is victorious in combats, and in reward is given the hand of the princess, his mother. After the discovery of the incest, Gregory does penance for seventeen years on a rock in the midst of the sea, and he is finally made the Pope, at the command of God. [*1]

A very similar legend is the Persian epic of King Darab, told by the poet Firdausi. [*2] The last Kiranian Behmen nominated as his successor his daughter and simultaneous wife Humai; his son Sasan was grieved and withdrew into solitude. A short time after the death of her husband, Humai gave birth to a son, whom she resolved to expose. He was placed in a box, which was put into the Euphrates and drifted downstream, until it was stopped by a stone that had been placed in the water by a tanner. The box with the child was found by him, and he carried the boy to his wife, who had recently lost her own child. The couple agreed to raise the foundling. As the boy grew up, he soon became so strong that the other children were unable to resist him. He did not care for the work of his foster father, but learned to be a warrior. His foster mother was forced by him to reveal the secret of his origin, and he joined the army that Humai was then sending out to fight the king of Rim. Her attention being called to him by his bravery, Humai readily recognized him as her son, and named him her successor.

Footnotes

^21:1 According to Bethe (Thebanische Heldenlieder), the exposure on the waters was the original rendering. According to other versions, the boy is found and raised by horseherds; according to a later myth, by a countryman, Melibios.

^22:1 Cholevicas: History of German Poetry According to the Antique Elements.

^22:2 Firdausi: Shah Namah ("The Book of Kings"), as rendered by F. Spiegel: Eranische Alterumskunde, Vol. II, p. 584.

     
The Myth of the Birth of the Hero, by Otto Rank, [1914], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 23]

  

PARIS

The famed Greek legend of the birth of Paris relates that King Priam of Troy had with his wife Hecuba a son, named Hector. When Hecuba was about to bear another child, she dreamed that she brought forth a burning log of wood, which set fire to the entire city. Priam asked the advice of Aisakos, who was his son with his first wife, Arisbe, and an expert in the interpretation of dreams. Aisakos declared that the child would bring trouble upon the city, and advised that it be exposed. Priam gave the little boy to a slave, Agelaos, who carried him to the top of Mount Ida. The child was nursed during five days by a she-bear. When Agelaos found that he was still alive, he picked him up, and carried him home to raise him. He named the boy Paris; but after the child had grown into a strong and handsome youth, he was called Alexander, because he fought the robbers and protected the flocks. Before long he discovered his parents. How this came about is told by Hyginus, according to whose report the infant is found by shepherds. One day messengers, sent by Priam, come to these herders to fetch a bull which is to serve as the prize for the victor in some commemorative games. They selected a bull that Paris valued so highly that he followed the men who led the beast away, assisted in the combats, and won the prize. This aroused the anger of his brother Deiphobus, who threatened him with his sword, but his sister Cassandra recognized him as her brother, and Priam joyfully received him as his son. The misfortune which Paris later brought to his family and his native city, through the abduction of Helen, is well known from Homer's Iliad, as well as from countless earlier and later poems.

A certain resemblance with the story of the birth of Paris is presented by the poem of Zal, in Firdausi's Persian hero myths. [*1] The first son is born to Sam, king of Sistan, by one of his consorts. Because he had white hair, his 

[p. 24]

mother concealed the birth. But the nurse reveals the birth of his son to the king. Sam is disappointed, and commands that the child be exposed. The servants carry it to the top of Mount Elburz, where it is raised by the Seemurgh, a powerful bird. The full-grown youth is seen by a traveling caravan, whose members speak of him as "whose nurse a bird is sufficient." King Sam once sees his son in a dream, and sallies forth to seek the exposed child. He is unable to reach the summit of the elevated rock where he finally espies the youth. But the Seemurgh bears his son down to him; he receives him joyfully and nominates him as his successor.

Footnotes

^23:1 Ibid., translated by Schack.

     
The Myth of the Birth of the Hero, by Otto Rank, [1914], at sacred-texts.com

  

TELEPHUS

Aleos, King of Tegea, was informed by the oracle that his sons would perish through a descendant of his daughter. He therefore made his daughter Auge a priestess of the goddess Athena, and threatened her with death should she mate with a man. But when Hercules dwelt as a guest in the sanctuary of Athena, on his expedition against Augeas, he saw the maiden, and while intoxicated, he raped her. When Aleos became aware of her pregnancy, he delivered her to Nauplius, a rough sailor, with the command to throw her into the sea. But on the way she gave birth to Telephus on Mount Parthenios, and Nauplius, unmindful of the orders he had received, carried both her and the child to Mysia, where he delivered them to King Teuthras.

According to another version, Auge secretly brought forth as a priestess, but kept the child hidden in the temple. When Aleos discovered the sacrilege, he caused the child to be exposed in the Parthenian mountains. Nauplius was instructed to sell the mother in foreign lands, or to

[p. 25]

kill her. She was delivered by him into the hands of Teuthras 

According to the current tradition, Auge exposes the newborn child and escapes to Mysia, where the childless King Teuthras adopts her as his daughter. The boy, however, is nursed by a doe, and is found by shepherds who take him to King Corythos. The king brings him up as his son. When Telephus has grown into a youth, he betakes himself to Mysia, on the advice of the oracle, to seek his mother. He frees Teuthras, who is in danger from his enemies, and in reward receives the hand of the supposed daughter of the king, namely his own mother Auge. But she refuses to submit to Telephus, and when he in his ire is about to pierce the disobedient one with his sword, she calls on her lover Hercules in her distress, and Telephus thus recognizes his mother. After the death of Teuthras he becomes King of Mysia.

     
The Myth of the Birth of the Hero, by Otto Rank, [1914], at sacred-texts.com

  

PERSEUS

Acrisius, the king of Argos, had already reached an advanced age without having male progeny. As he desired a son, he consulted the Delphian oracle, but this warned him against male descendants, and informed him that his daughter Danae would bear a son through whose hand he would perish. In order to prevent this, he had his daughter locked up in an iron tower, which he caused to be carefully guarded. But Zeus penetrated through the roof, in the guise of a golden shower, and Danae became the mother of a boy. [*2] One day Acrisius heard the voice of young Perseus in his daughter's room, and in this way learned that she had given birth to a child. He killed the nurse, but carried his daughter with her son to the domestic

[p. 26]

altar of Zeus, to have an oath taken on the true father's name. But he refuses to believe his daughter's statement that Zeus is the father, and he encloses her with the child in a box, which is cast into the sea.  The box is carried by the waves to the coast of Seriphos, where Dictys, a fisherman, usually called a brother of King Polydectes, saves mother and child by drawing them out of the sea with his nets. Dictys leads the two into his house and keeps them as his relations. Polydectes, however, becomes enamored of the beautiful mother, and as Perseus was in his way, he tried to remove him by sending him forth to fetch the head of the Gorgon Medusa. But against the king's anticipations Perseus accomplishes this difficult task, and a number of heroic deeds besides. Later, in throwing the discs during a contest, he accidentally kills his grandfather, as foretold by the oracle. He becomes the king of Argos, then of Tiryns, and the builder of Mycenae. 

Footnotes

^25:1 In the version of Euripides, Aleos caused the mother and the child to be thrown into the sea in a box, but through the protection of Athena this box was carried to the end of the Mysian river Kaikos. There it was found by Teuthras who made Auge his wife and took her child into his house as his foster son.

^25:2 Later authors, including Pindar, state that Danae was impregnated, not by Zeus, but by the brother of her father.

     
The Myth of the Birth of the Hero, by Otto Rank, [1914], at sacred-texts.com

  

GILGAMESH

Aelian, who lived about 200 A.D., relates in his "Animal Stories" the history of a boy who was saved by an eagle: 

Animals have a characteristic fondness for man. An eagle is known to have nourished a child. I shall tell the entire story, in proof of my assertion. When Senechoros reigned over the Babylonians, the Chaldean fortunetellers foretold that the son of the king's daughter would take the kingdom from his grandfather; this verdict was a prophecy of the Chaldeans. The king was afraid of this prophecy, and humorously speaking, he became a second Acrisius for his daughter, over whom he watched with the greatest severity. But his daughter, fate being wiser than the Babylonian,

[p. 27]

conceived secretly from an inconspicuous man. For fear of the king, the guardians threw the child down from the acropolis, where the royal daughter was imprisoned. The eagle, with his keen eyes, saw the boy's fall, and before the child struck the earth, he caught it on his back, bore it into a garden, and set it down with great care. When the overseer of the place saw the beautiful boy, he was pleased with him and raised him. The boy received the name Gilgamesh, and became the king of Babylonia. If anyone regards this as a fable, I have nothing to say, although I have investigated the matter to the best of my ability. Also of Achaemenes, the Persian, from whom the nobility of the Persians is derived, I learn that he was the pupil of an eagle. 

Footnotes

^26:1 Simonides of Ceos speaks of a casement strong as ore, in which Danae is said to have been exposed. Geibel: Klassisches Liederbuch, p. 52.

^26:2 According to Husing, the Perseus myth in several versions is also demonstrable in Japan. Compare also Sydney Hartland: Legend of Perseus, 3 vols. (London, 1894-6).

     
The Myth of the Birth of the Hero, by Otto Rank, [1914], at sacred-texts.com

  

CYRUS

The myth of Cyrus the Great, which the majority of investigators place in the center of this entire mythical circle--without entirely sufficient grounds, it would appear--has been transmitted to us in several versions. According to the report of Herodotus (about 450 B.C.), who states that among four renderings known to him, he selected the least "glorifying" version, [*2] the story of the birth and youth of Cyrus is as follows:

Royal sway over the Medes was held, after Cyaxares, by his son Astyages, who had a daughter named Mandane. Once he saw, in a dream, so much water passing from her as to fill an entire city and inundate all Asia. He related his dream to the dream interpreters among the magicians, and was in great

[p. 28]

fear after they had explained it all to him. When Mandane had grown up, he gave her in marriage, not to a Mede, his equal in birth, but to a Persian, by name of Cambyses. This man came of a good family and led a quiet life. The king considered him of lower rank than a middle-class Mede. After Mandane had become the wife of Cambyses, Astyages saw another dream-vision in the first year. He dreamed that a vine grew from his daughter's lap, and this vine overshadowed all Asia. After he had again related this vision to the dream interpreters, he sent for his daughter, who was with child, and after her arrival from Persia, he watched her, because he meant to kill her offspring. For the dream interpreters among the magicians had prophesied to him that his daughter's son would become king in his place. In order to avert this fate, he waited until Cyrus was born, and then sent for Harpagos, who was his relative and his greatest confidant among the Medes, and whom he had placed over all his affairs. Him he addressed as follows: "My dear Harpagos, I shall charge thee with an errand which thou must conscientiously perform. But do not deceive me, and let no other man attend to it, for all might not go well with thee. Take this boy, whom Mandane has brought forth, carry him home, and kill him. Afterwards thou canst bury him, how and in whatsoever manner thou desirest." But Harpagos made answer: "Great King, never hast thou found thy servant disobedient, and also in future I shall beware not to sin before thee. If such is thy will, it behooves me to carry it out faithfully." When Harpagos had thus spoken, and the little boy with all his ornaments had been delivered into his hands, for death, he went home weeping. On his arrival he told his wife all that Astyages had said to him. But she inquired, "What art thou about to do?" He made reply: "I shall not obey Astyages, even if he raved and stormed ten times worse than he is doing. I shall not do as he wills, and consent to such a murder. I have a number of reasons: in the first place, the boy is

[p. 29]

my blood relative; then, Astyages is old, and he has no male heir. Should he die, and the kingdom go to his daughter, whose son he bids me kill at present, would I not run the greatest danger? But the boy must die, for the sake of my safety. However, one of Astyages' men is to be his murderer, not one of mine."

Having thus spoken, he at once despatched a messenger to one of the king's cattle herders, by name Mithradates, who, as he happened to know, was keeping his herd in a very suitable mountain pasturage, full of wild animals. The herder's wife was also a slave of Astyages', by name Cyno in Greek, or Spako ("a bitch") in the Median language. When the herder hurriedly arrived, on the command of Harpagos, the latter said to him: "Astyages bids thee take this boy and expose him in the wildest mountains, that he may perish as promptly as may be, and the King has ordered me to say to thee: If thou doest not kill the boy, but let him live, in whatever way, thou art to die a most disgraceful death. And I am charged to see to it that the boy is really exposed." When the herder had listened to this, he took the boy, went home, and arrived in his cottage. His wife was with child, and was in labor the entire day, and it happened that she was just bringing forth, when the herder had gone to the city. They were greatly worried about each other. But when he had returned and the woman saw him again so unexpectedly, she asked in the first place why Harpagos had sent for him so hurriedly. But he said: "My dear wife, would that I had never seen what I have seen and heard in the city, and what has happened to our masters. The house of Harpagos was full of cries and laments. This startled me, but I entered, and soon after I had entered, I saw a small boy lying before me, who struggled and cried and was dressed in fine garments and gold. When Harpagos saw me, he bid me quickly take the boy, and expose him in the wildest spot of the mountains. He said Astyages had ordered this, and added awful threats if I failed to do so. I took the child and went away with it, thinking

[p. 30]

that it belonged to one of the servants, for it did not occur to me whence it had come. But on the way, I learned the entire story from the servant who led me from the city, and placed the boy in my hands. He is the son of Mandane, daughter of Astyages, and Cambyses, the son of Cyrus; and Astyages has ordered his death. Behold, here is the boy."

Having thus spoken, the herder uncovered the child and showed it to her, and when the woman saw that he was a fine strong child, she wept, and fell at her husband's feet, and implored him not to expose it. But he said he could not do otherwise, for Harpagos would send servants to see if this had been done; he would have to die a disgraceful death unless he did so. Then she said again: "If I have failed to move thee, do as follows, so that they may see an exposed child: I have brought forth a dead child; take it and expose it, but the son of the daughter of Astyages we will raise as our own child. In this way, thou wilt not be found a disobedient servant, nor will we fare ill ourselves. Our stillborn child will be given a kingly burial, and the living child's life will be preserved." The herder did as his wife had begged and advised him to do. He placed his own dead boy in a basket, dressed him in all the finery of the other, and exposed him on the most desert mountain. Three days later he announced to Harpagos that he was now enabled to show the boy's cadaver. Harpagos sent his most faithful body guardians, and ordered the burial of the cattle herder's son. The other boy, however, who was known later on as Cyrus, was brought up by the herder's wife. They did not call him Cyrus, but gave him another name.

When the boy was twelve years old the truth was revealed, through the following accident. He was playing on the road, with other boys of his own age, in the village where the cattle were kept. The boys played "King," and elected the supposed son of the cattle herder. [*1] But he commanded some to build

[p. 31]

houses, others to carry lances; one he made the king's watchman, the other was charged with the bearing of messages; briefly, each received his appointed task. One of the boy's playmates, however, was the son of Artembares, a respected man among the Medes, and when he did not do as Cyrus ordained, the latter made the other boys seize him. The boys obeyed, and Cyrus chastised him with severe blows. After they let him go, he became furiously angry, as if he had been treated improperly. He ran into the city and complained to his father of what Cyrus had done to him. He did not mention the name of Cyrus for he was not yet called so, but said the cattle herder's son. Artembares went wrathfully with his son to Astyages, complained of the disgraceful treatment, and spoke thus: "Great king, we suffer such outrageous treatment from thy servant, the herder's son," and he showed him his own son's shoulders. When Astyages heard and saw this, he wished to vindicate the boy for the sake of Artembares, and he sent for the cattle herder with his son. When both were present, Astyages looked at Cyrus and said: "Thou, a lowly man's son, hast had the effrontery to treat so disgracefully the son of a man whom I greatly honor!" But he made answer: "Lord, he has only received his due. For the boys in the village, he being among them, were at play, and made me their king, believing me to be the best adapted thereto. And the other boys did as they were told, but he was disobedient, and did not mind me at all. For this he has received his reward. If I have deserved punishment, here I am at your service." When the boy spoke in this way, Astyages knew

[p. 32]

him at once. For the features of the face appeared to him as his own, and the answer was that of a highborn youth; furthermore, it seemed to him that the time of the exposure agreed with the boy's age. This smote his heart, and he remained speechless for a while. Hardly had he regained control over himself, when he spoke to get rid of Artembares, so as to be able to question the cattle herder without witnesses. "My dear Artembares," he said, "I shall take care that neither thou nor thy son shall have cause for complaint." Thus he dismissed Artembares. Cyrus, however, was led into the palace by the servants, on the command of Astyages, and the cattle herder bad to stay behind. When he was all alone with him, Astyages questioned him whence he had obtained the boy, and who had given the child into his hands. But the herder said that he was his own son, and that the woman who had borne him was living with him. Astyages remarked that he was very unwise, to look out for most cruel tortures, and he beckoned the sword-bearers to take hold of him. As he was being led to torture, the herder confessed the whole story, from beginning to end, the entire truth, finally beginning to beg and implore forgiveness and pardon. Meanwhile Astyages was not so incensed against the herder, who had revealed to him the truth, as against Harpagos; he ordered the sword-bearers to summon him, and when Harpagos stood before him, Astyages asked him as follows: "My dear Harpagos, in what fashion hast thou taken the life of my daughter's son, whom I once delivered over to thee?" Seeing the cattle herder standing near, Harpagos did not resort to untruthfulness, for fear that he would be refuted at once, and so he proceeded to tell the truth. Astyages concealed the anger which he had aroused in him, and first told him what he had learned from the herder; then he mentioned that the boy was still living, and that everything had turned out all right. He said that he had greatly regretted what he had done to the child, and that his daughter's reproaches had pierced

[p. 33]

his soul. "But as everything has ended so well, send thy son to greet the newcomer, and then come to eat with me, for I am ready to prepare A feast in honor of the Gods who have brought all this about."

When Harpagos heard this, he prostrated himself on the ground before the king, and praised himself for his error having turned out well, and for being invited to the king's table, in commemoration of a happy event. So he went home, and when he arrived there, he at once sent off his only son, a boy of about thirteen years, telling him to go to Astyages, and to do as he was bid. Then Harpagos joyfully told his wife what had befallen him. But Astyages butchered the son of Harpagos when he came, cut him to pieces, and roasted the flesh in part; another portion of the flesh was cooked, and when everything was prepared he kept it in readiness. When the hour of the meal had come, Harpagos and the other guests arrived. A table with sheep's meat was arranged in front of Astyages and the others, but Harpagos was served with his own son's flesh, without the head, and without the chop-pings of hands and feet, but with everything else. These parts were kept hidden in a basket. When Harpagos seemed to have taken his fill, Astyages asked him if the meat had tasted good to him, and when Harpagos answered that he had enjoyed it, the servants, who had been ordered to do so, brought in his own son's covered head, with the hands and feet, stepped up to Harpagos, and told him to uncover and take what he desired. Harpagos did so, uncovered the basket, and saw the remnants of his son. When he saw this, he did not give way to his horror, but controlled himself. Astyages then asked him if he knew of what game he had eaten; and he replied that he knew it very well, and that whatever the king did was well done. Thus he spoke, took the flesh that remained, and went home with it, where he probably meant to bury it together.

This was the revenge of Astyages upon Harpagos. Concerning Cyrus, he took counsel, and summoned

[p. 34]

the same magicians who had explained his dream, then he asked them how they had at one time interpreted his vision in a dream. But they said that the boy must become a king, if he remained alive, and did not die prematurely. Astyages made reply: "The boy is alive, and is here, and as he was staying in the country, the boys of the village elected him for their king. But he did everything like the real kings, for he ordained to himself as the master, sword-bearers, gatekeepers, messengers, and everything. How do you mean to interpret this?" The magicians made reply: "If the boy is alive, and has been made king without the help of anyone, thou canst be at ease so far as he is concerned, and be of good cheer, for he will not again be made a king. Already several prophecies of ours have applied to insignificant trifles, and what rests upon dreams is apt to be vain." Astyages made reply: "Ye sorcerers, I am entirely of your opinion that the dream has been fulfilled when the boy was king in name, and that I have nothing more to fear from him. Yet counsel me carefully as to what is safest for my house and for yourselves." Then the magicians said: "Send the boy away, that he may get out of thy sight, send him to the land of the Persians, to his parents." When Astyages had heard this, he was greatly pleased. He sent for Cyrus, and said to him: "My son, I have wronged thee greatly, misled by a deceitful dream, but thy good fortune has saved thee. Now go cheerfully to the land of the Persians; I shall give thee safe conduct. There wilt thou find a very different father, and a very different mother than the herders, Mithradates and his wife." Thus spake Astyages, and Cyrus was sent away. When he arrived in the house of Cambyses, his parents received him with great joy when they learned who he was, for they believed him to have perished at that time, and they desired to know how he had been preserved. He told them that he had believed himself to be the son of the cattle herder, but had learned everything on the way from the companions whom Astyages had

[p. 35]

sent with him. He related that the cattle herder's wife had saved him, and praised her throughout. The "bitch" (Spako) played the principal part in his conversation. The parents took hold of this name, so that the preservation of the child might appear still more wonderful, and thus was laid the foundation of the myth that the exposed Cyrus was nursed by a bitch.

Later on, Cyrus, on the instigation of Harpagos, stirred up the Persians against the Medes. War was declared, and Cyrus, at the head of the Persians, conquered the Medes in battle. Astyages was taken prisoner alive, but Cyrus did not harm him, and kept him with him until his end. Herodotus' report concludes with the words: "But from that time on the Persians and Cyrus reigned over Asia. Thus was Cyrus born and raised, and made a king."

The report of Pompeius Trogus is preserved only in the extract by Justin, according to whom Astyages had a daughter but no male heir. [*1] This version continues:

In his dream he saw a vine grow forth from her lap, the sprouts of which overshadowed all Asia. The dream interpreters declared that the vision signified the magnitude of his grandson, whom his daughter was to bear; but also his own loss of his dominions. In order to banish this dread, Astyages gave his daughter in marriage neither to a prominent man nor to a Mede, so that his grandson's mind might not be uplifted by the paternal estate besides the maternal; but he married her to Cambyses, a middle-class man from the then unknown people of the Persians. But this was not enough to banish the fears of Astyages, and he summoned his pregnant daughter, in order to have her infant destroyed before his eyes. When a boy had been born, he gave him to Harpagos, his friend and confidant, to kill him. For fear that the daughter of Astyages would take revenge upon him for the death of her boy, when she came to reign

[p. 36]

after her father's death, he delivered the boy to the king's herder for exposure. At the same time that Cyrus was born, a son happened to be born also to the herder. When his wife learned that the king's child had been exposed, she urgently prayed for it to be brought to her, that she might look at it. Moved by her entreaties, the herder returned to the woods. There he found a bitch standing beside the child, giving it her teats, and keeping the beasts and birds away from it. At this aspect he was filled with the same compassion as the bitch; so that he picked up the boy and carried him home, the bitch following him in great distress. When his wife took the boy in her arms, he smiled at her as if he already knew her; and as he was very strong, and ingratiated himself with her by his pleasant smile, she voluntarily begged the herder to [expose her own child instead and] [*1] permit her to raise the boy; be it that she was interested in his welfare, or that she placed her hopes on him.

Thus the two boys had to exchange fates; one was raised in place of the herder's child, while the other was exposed instead of the grandson of the king. The remainder of this apparently more primitive report agrees essentially with the account of Herodotus.

An altogether different version of the Cyrus myth is extant in the report of Ctesias, a contemporary of Herodotus. The original of his narrative, which comprised more than an entire book in his Persian history, has been lost; but a surviving fragment of Nicholas of Damascus summarizes the Ctesian account. [*2] Astyages is said to have been the worthiest king of the Medes, after Abakes. Under his rule occurred the great transmutation through which the rulership passed from the Medes to the Persians, in the following manner:

The Medes had a law that a poor man who went to a

[p. 37]

rich man for his support, and surrendered himself to him, had to be fed and clothed and kept like a slave by the rich man, or in case the latter refused to do so, the poor man was at liberty to go elsewhere. In this way a boy by name of Cyrus, a Mard by birth, came to the king's servant who was at the head of the palace sweepers. Cyrus was the son of Atradates, whose poverty made him live as a robber, and whose wife, Argoste, Cyrus' mother, made her living by tending the goats. Cyrus surrendered himself for the sake of his daily bread, and helped to clean the palace. As he was diligent, the foreman gave him better clothing and advanced him from the outside sweepers to those who cleaned the interior of the king's palace, placing him under their superintendent. This man was severe, however, and often whipped Cyrus. The boy left him and went to the lamplighter, who liked Cyrus and moved him closer to the king, by placing him among the royal torchbearers. As Cyrus distinguished himself also in his new position, he came to Artembares, who was at the head of the cupbearers and himself presented the cup to the king. Artembares gladly accepted Cyrus, and bade him pour the wine for the guests at the king's table. Not long afterwards, Astyages noticed the dexterity and nimbleness of Cyrus' service, and his graceful presentation of the wine cup, so that he asked of Artembares whence this youth had come who was so skillful a cupbearer.

"O Lord," spake he, "this boy is thy slave, of Persian parentage, from the tribe of the Mards, who has surrendered himself to me to make a living." Artembares was old, and once on being attacked by a fever, he prayed the king to let him stay at home until he had recovered. "In my stead, the youth whom thou hast praised will pour the wine, and if he should please thee, the king, as a cupbearer, I who am a eunuch, will adopt him as my son." Astyages consented, but the other confided in many ways in Cyrus as in a son. Cyrus thus stood at the king's side, and poured his wine by day and by night, showing great ability and cleverness. Astyages conferred upon him

[p. 38]

the income of Artembares, as if he had been his son, adding many presents, and Cyrus became a great man whose name was heard everywhere.

Astyages had a very noble and beautiful daughter, [*1] whom he gave to the Mede Spitamas, adding all Media as her dowry. Then Cyrus sent for his father and mother, in the land of the Medes, and they rejoiced in the good fortune of their son, and his mother told him the dream which she had at the time that she was bearing him, while asleep in the sanctuary as she was tending the goats. So much water passed away from her that it became as a large stream, inundating all Asia, and flowing as far as the sea. When the father heard this, he ordered the dream to be placed before the Chaldeans in Babylon. Cyrus summoned the wisest among them, and communicated the dream to him. He declared that the dream foretold great good fortune to Cyrus, and the highest dignity in Asia; but Astyages must not learn of it, "for else he would disgracefully kill thee, as well as myself the interpreter," said the Babylonian. They swore to each other to tell no one of this great and incomparable vision. Cyrus later on rose to still higher dignities, created his father a Satrap of Persia, and raised his mother to the highest rank and possessions among the Persian women. But when the Babylonian was killed soon afterwards by Oebares, the confidant of Cyrus, his wife betrayed the fateful dream to the king, when she learned of Cyrus' expedition to Persia, which he had undertaken in preparation of the revolt. The king sent his horsemen after Cyrus, with the command to deliver him dead or alive. But Cyrus escaped them by a ruse. Finally a combat took place, terminating in the defeat of the Medes. Cyrus also conquered Egbatana, and here the daughter of Astyages and her husband Spitamas, with their two sons, were taken prisoners. But Astyages himself could not be found,

[p. 39]

for Amytis and Spitamas had concealed him in the palace, under the rafters of the roof. Cyrus then ordered that Amytis, her husband, and the children should be tortured until they revealed the hiding place of Astyages, but he came out voluntarily, that his relatives might not be tortured on his account. Cyrus commanded the execution of Spitamas, because he had lied in affirming to be in ignorance of Astyages' hiding place; but Amytis became the wife of Cyrus. He removed the fetters of Astyages, with which Oebares had bound him, honored him as a father, and made him a Satrap of the Barkanians.

A great similarity to Herodotus' version of the Cyrus myth is found in the early history of the Persian royal hero, Kaikhosrav, as related by Firdausi in the Shah Namah. This myth is most extensively rendered by Spiegel. [*1] During the warfare of King Kaikaus, of Bactria and Iran, against King Afrasiab, of Turan, Kaikaus fell out with his son, Siavaksh, who applied to Afrasiab for protection and assistance. He was kindly received by Afrasiab, who gave him his daughter Feringis to wife, on the persuasion of his vizier, Piran, although he had received the prophecy that the son to be born of this union would bring great misfortune upon him. Garsevaz, the king's brother, and a near relative of Siavaksh, calumniates the son-in-law, and Afrasiab leads an army against him. Before the birth of his son, Siavaksh is warned by a dream, which foretold destruction and death to himself, but royalty to his offspring. He therefore flies from Afrasiab, but is taken prisoner and killed, on the command of the Shah. His wife, who is pregnant, is saved by Piran from the hands of the murderers. On condition of announcing at once the delivery of Feringis to the king, Piran is granted permission to keep her in his house. The shade of the murdered Siavaksh once comes to him in a dream and tells him that an avenger has been born; Piran actually finds in the room of Feringis a newborn boy, whom he names Kaikhosrav. Afrasiab no longer insisted upon the killing of the boy, but he ordered

[p. 40]

[paragraph continues] Piran to surrender the child with a nurse to the herders, who were to raise him in ignorance of his origin. But his royal descent is promptly revealed in his courage and his demeanor; and as Piran takes the boy back into his home, Afrasiab becomes distrustful, and orders the boy to be led before him. Instructed by Piran, Kaikhosrav plays the fool, [*1] and reassured as to his harmlessness, the Shah dismisses him to his mother, Feringis. Finally, Kaikhosrav is crowned as king by his grandfather, Kaikaus. After prolonged, complicated, and tedious combats, Afrasiab is at last taken prisoner, with divine assistance. Kaikhosrav strikes his head off, and also causes Garsevaz to be decapitated.

A certain resemblance to the preceding saga, although more remote, is presented by the myth of Feridun, as told by Firdausi. [*2] Zohak, the king of Iran, once sees in a dream three men of royal tribe. Two of them are bent with age, but between them is a younger man who holds a club,

[p. 41]

with a bull's head, in his right hand; this man steps up to him, and fells him with his club to the ground. The dream interpreters declared to the king that the young hero who will dethrone him is Feridun, a scion of the tribe of Dschemschid. Zohak at once sets out to look for the tracks of his dreaded enemy. Feridun is the son of Abtin, a grandson of Dschemschid. His father hides from the pursuit of the tyrant, but he is seized and killed. Feridun himself, a boy of tender age, is saved by his mother, Firanek, who escapes with him and entrusts him to the care of the guardian of a distant forest. Here he is suckled by a cow. For three years he remains hidden in this place, but then his mother no longer believes him safe, and she carries him to a hermit on Mount Elburz. Soon afterwards Zohak comes to the forest and kills the guardian as well as the cow.

When Feridun was sixteen years old, he came down from Mount Elburz, learned of his origin through his mother, and swore to avenge the death of his father and of his nurse. On the expedition against Zohak he is accompanied by his two older brothers, Purmaje and Kayanuseh. He orders a club to be forged for his use, and ornaments it with the bull's head, in memory of his foster mother, the cow. With this club he smites Zohak, as foretold by the dream.

Footnotes

^27:1 Claudius Aelianus: Historia Animalium, translated by F. Jacobs (Stuttgart, r841), Vol. XII, p. 21. The same book tells of Ptolemy I, the son of Lagus and Arsinoe, that an eagle protected the exposed boy with his wings against the sunshine, the rain, and birds of prey.

^27:2 F. E. Lange: Herodots Geschichten (Reclam edition), Vol. I, pp. 95, 107 ff. Compare also Duncker: History of Antiquity (Leipzig, 1880), p. 256, n. 5.

^30:1 The same "playing king" is found in the Hindu myth of Chandragupta,[p. 31] the founder of the Maurya dynasty, whom his mother exposed after his birth, in a vessel at the gate of a cowshed, where a herder found him and raised him. Later on he came to a hunter, where he as cowherd played "king" with the other boys, and as king ordered that the hands and feet of the great criminals be chopped off. (The mutilation motif occurs also in the Cyrus saga, and is generally widely distributed.) At his command, the separated limbs returned to their proper position. Kanakja, who once looked on as they were at play, admired the boy, and bought him from the hunter for one thousand karshapana; at home he discovered that the boy was a Maurya. (After Lassen, op. cit., Vol. II, p. 196, n. 1.)

^35:1 Justin (Marcus Junianus Justines): Extract from Pompeius Trogus' Philippian History, Vol. I, pp. 4-7. Demon's Persian tales (written in the first half of the fourth century before Christ) are presumably the sources of Trogus' narrative.

^36:1 The words in parentheses are said to be lacking in certain manuscripts.

^36:2 Nicol. Damasc. Frag. 66, Ctes.; Frag. Pers., II, 5.

^38:1 This daughter's name is Amatyis (not Mandane) in the version of Ctesias.

^39:1 Cp. cit., Vol. I, pp. 581 ff.

^40:1 On the basis of this motif of simulated dementia and certain other corresponding features, Jiriczek ("Hamlet in Iran," in the Zeitschrift des Vereins fur Volkskunde, Vol. X [1900], p. 353) has represented the Hamlet saga as a variation of the Persian myth of Kaikhosrav. This idea was followed up by H. Lessmann ("Die Kyrossage . . . ," loc. cit.), who shows that the Hamlet saga strikingly agrees in certain items--for example, in the simulated folly--with the sagas of Brutus and of Tell. (Compare also the protestations of Moses.) In another connection, the deeper roots of these relations have been more extensively discussed, especially with reference to the Tell saga. (See Inzestmotiv, Chapter vii.)

Attention is also directed to the story of David, as it is told in the books of Samuel. Here again, the royal scion, David, is made a shepherd, who gradually rises in the social scale up to the royal throne. He likewise is given the king's (Saul's) daughter in marriage, and the king seeks his life, but David is always saved by miraculous means from the greatest perils. He also evades persecution by simulating dementia and playing the fool. The relationship between the Hamlet saga and the David saga has already been pointed out by Jiriczek and Lessmann. The biblical character of this entire mythological cycle is also emphasized by Jiriczek, who finds in the tale of Siavaksh's death certain features from the Passion of the Saviour.

^40:2 Translated by Schack (op. cit.). The name Zohak here is a mutilation of the original Zend Avesta expression Ashi-dahaka (Azis-dahaka), meaning "pernicious serpent." (See "The Myth of Feridun in India and Iran," by Dr. R. Roth, in the Zeitschrift der Deutschen Morgenlandischen Gesellschaft, Vol. II., p. 216.) To the Persian Feridun corresponds the Hindu Trita, whose Avestian double is Thraetaona. The last-named form is the most predominantly authenticated; from it was formed, by transition of the aspirated sounds, first Phrenduna, then Fredun or Afredun; Feridun is a more recent corruption. Compare Spiegel, op. cit., Vol. I, pp. 537 ff.

     
The Myth of the Birth of the Hero, by Otto Rank, [1914], at sacred-texts.com

  

TRISTAN

The theme of the Feridun story is pursued in the Tristan saga, as related in the epic poem by Gottfried von Strassburg. This is especially evident in the prologue of the Tristan saga, which is repeated later on in the adventures of the hero himself (duplication) . Riwalin, king in the land of the Parmenians, in an expedition to the court of Mark, king of Cornwall and England, had become acquainted with the latter's beautiful sister, Blancheflure, and his heart was aflame with love for her. While assisting Mark in a , Riwalin was mortally wounded and

[p. 42]

was carried to Tintajole. Blancheflure, disguised as a beggar maid, hastened to his sickbed, and her devoted love saved the king's life. She fled with her lover to his native land (obstacles) and was there proclaimed as his consort. But Morgan attacked Riwalin's country, for the sake of Blancheflure, whom the king entrusted to his faithful retainer Rual, because she was carrying a child. Rual placed the queen for safekeeping in the castle of Kaneel. Here she gave birth to a son and died, while her husband fell in the battle against Morgan. In order to protect the king's offspring from Morgan's pursuits, Rual spread the rumor that the infant had been born dead. The boy was named Tristan, because he had been conceived and born in sorrow. Under the care of his foster parents, Tristan grew up, equally straight in body and mind, until his fourteenth year, when he was kidnapped by Norwegian merchants, who then put him ashore in Cornwall because they feared the wrath of the gods. Here the boy was found by the soldiers of King Mark, who was so well pleased with the brave and handsome youth that he promptly made him his master of the chase (career), and held him in great affection. Meanwhile, faithful Rual had set forth to seek his abducted foster son, whom he found at last in Cornwall, where Rual had come begging his way. Rual revealed Tristan's descent to the king, who was delighted to see in him the son of his beloved sister, and raised him to the rank of knight. In order to avenge his father, Tristan proceeded with Rual to Parmenia, vanquished Morgan, the usurper, and gave the country to Rual as liege, while he himself returned to his uncle Mark. [*1]

The actual Tristan saga goes on with a repetition of the principal themes. In the service of Mark, Tristan kills Morald, the bridegroom of Isolde, and being wounded unto death, he is saved by Isolde. He asks her hand in marriage on behalf of his uncle Mark. When he fulfills the condition of killing a dragon, she accompanies him reluctantly to Cornwall, to which they travel by ship. On the journey they partake unwittingly of the disastrous love potion

[p. 43]

which binds them together in frenzied passion; they betray King Mark. On the wedding night, Isolde's faithful maid, Brangane, represents the queen, and sacrifices her virginity to the king. Next follows the banishment of Tristan, his several attempts to regain his beloved, although he had meanwhile married another Isolde--"Isolde the White Hand," of Brittany, who resembled his love, "Isolde the Fair." At last he is again wounded unto death, and Isolde arrives too late to save him. [*1]

A plainer version of the Tristan saga--in the sense of the characteristic features of the myth of the birth of the hero--is found in the fairy tale "The True Bride," quoted by Riklin from Rittershaus. [*2] A royal pair have no children. The king having threatened to kill his wife unless she bears a child by the time of his return from his sea voyage, she is brought to him during his journey, by his zealous maid-servant, as the fairest of three promenading ladies, and he takes her into his tent without recognizing her. [*3] She returns home without having been discovered, gives birth to a daughter, Isol, and dies. Isol later on finds, in a box by the seaside, a most beautiful little boy, whose name is Tristram, and she raises him to become engaged to him. The subsequent story, which contains the motif of the true bride, is noteworthy for present purposes only in so far as here again occurs the draught of oblivion, and two Isoldes. The king's second wife gives a potion to Tristram, which causes him to forget the fair Isol entirely, so that he wishes to marry the black Isota. Ultimately he discovers the deception, however, and becomes united with Isol.

Footnotes

^42:1 After Chop: Erlauterungen zu Wagner's Tristan (Reclam edition).

^43:1 Compare Immermann: Tristan and Isolde, Ein Gedicht in Romanzen (Dusseldorf, 1841). Like the epic of Gottfried von Strassburg, his version begins with the preliminary history of the loves of Tristan's parents, King Riwalin Kannlengres of Parmenia and Mark's beautiful sister Blancheflur. The maiden never reveals her love, which is not sanctioned by her brother, but she visits the king, who is wounded unto death, in his chamber, and dying he procreates Tristan, "the son of the most daring and doleful love." Grown up as a foundling in the care of Rual and his wife, Florete, the winsome youth Tristan introduces himself to Mark in a stag hunt, as an expert huntsman, is recognized as his nephew by a ring, the king's gift to his beloved sister, and becomes his favorite.

^43:2 Wunscherfullung and Symbolik im Marchen, p. 56; from the Rittershaus collection of fairy tales (XXVII, p. 113). See translation by W. A. White, M.D., Psychoanalytic Review, Vol. I, No. 1.

^43:3 Compare the substitution of the bride, through Brangane.

     
The Myth of the Birth of the Hero, by Otto Rank, [1914], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 44]

  

ROMULUS

The original version of the story of Romulus and Remus--as told by the most ancient Roman annalist Quintus Fabius Pictor--is rendered as follows by Mommsen: [*1]

The twins borne by Ilia, the daughter of the preceding king Numitor, from the embrace of the war-god Mars were condemned by King Amulius, the present ruler of Alba, to be cast into the river. The king's servants took the children and carried them from Alba as far as the Tiber on the Palatine Hill; but when they tried to descend the hill to the river, to carry out the command, they found that the river had risen, and they were unable to reach its bed. The tub with the children was therefore thrust by them into the shallow water at the shore. It floated for a while; but the water promptly receded, and knocking against a stone, the tub capsized, and the screaming infants were upset into the river mud. They were heard by a she-wolf who had just brought forth and had her udders full of milk; she came and gave her teats to the boys, to nurse them, and as they were drinking she licked them clean with her tongue. Above them flew a woodpecker, which guarded the children, and also carried food to them. The father was providing for his sons: for the wolf and the woodpecker are animals consecrated to father Mars. This was seen by one of the royal herdsmen, who was driving his pigs back to the pasture from which the water had receded. Startled by the spectacle, he summoned his mates, who found the she-wolf attending like a mother to the children, and the children treated her as their mother. The men made a loud noise to scare the animal away; but the

[p. 45]

wolf was not afraid; she left the children, but not from fear; slowly, without heeding the herdsmen, she disappeared into the wilderness of the forest, at the holy site of Faunus, where the water gushes from a gully of the mountain. Meanwhile the men picked up the boys and carried them to the chief swineherd of the king, Faustulus, for they believed that the gods did not wish the children to perish. But the wife of Faustulus had just given birth to a dead child, and was full of sorrow. Her husband gave her the twins, and she nursed them; the couple raised the children, and named them Romulus and Remus.

After Rome had been founded, later on, King Romulus built himself a house not far from the place where his tub had stood. The gully in which the she-wolf had disappeared has been known since that time as the Wolf's Gully, the Lupercal. The image in ore of the she-wolf with the twins was subsequently erected at this spot, [*1] and the she-wolf herself, the Lupa, was worshipped by the Romans as a divinity.

The Romulus saga later on underwent manifold transmutations, mutilations, additions, and interpretations. [*2] It is best known in the form transmitted by Livy (I, 3 ff.), where we learn something about the antecedents and subsequent fate of the twins:

King Proca bequeaths the royal dignity to his firstborn son, Numitor. But his younger brother, Amulius, pushes him from the throne, and becomes king himself. So that no scion from Numitor's family may arise, as the avenger, he kills the male descendants of his brother. Rhea Silvia, the daughter, he elects as a vestal, and thus deprives her of the hope of progeny, through perpetual virginity as enjoined upon her under the semblance of a most honorable distinction. But the vestal maiden was overcome by violence, and

[p. 46]

having brought forth twins, she named Mars as the father of her illegitimate offspring, be it from conviction, or because a god appeared more creditable to her as the perpetrator of the crime.

The narrative of the exposure in the Tiber goes on to relate that the floating tub, in which the boys had been exposed, was left on dry land by the receding waters, and that a thirsty wolf, attracted from the neighboring mountains by the children's cries, offered them her teats. The boys are said to have been found by the chief royal herder, supposedly named Faustulus, who took them to the homestead of his wife, Larentia, where they were raised. Some believe that Larentia was called Lupa ("she-wolf") by the herders because she offered her body, and that this was the origin of the wonderful saga.

Grown to manhood, the youths Romulus and Remus protect the herds against the attacks of wild animals and robbers. One day Remus is taken prisoner by the robbers, who accuse him of having stolen Numitor's flocks. But Numitor, to whom he is surrendered for punishment, was touched by his tender age, and when he learned of the twin brothers, he suspected that they might be his exposed grandsons. While he was anxiously pondering the resemblance with the features of his daughter, and the boy's age as corresponding to the time of the exposure, Faustulus arrived with Romulus, and a conspiracy was hatched when the descent of the boys had been learned from the herders. The youths armed themselves for vengeance, while Numitor took up weapons to defend his claim to the throne he had usurped. After Amulius had been assassinated, Numitor was reinstituted as the ruler, and the youths resolved to found a city in the region where they had been exposed and brought up. A furious dispute arose upon the question of which brother was to be the ruler of the newly erected city, for neither twin was favored by the right of primogeniture, and the outcome of the bird oracle was equally doubtful. The saga relates that Remus jumped over the new wall, to deride his twin, and Romulus became so much enraged that he slew his brother. Romulus then

[p. 47]

usurped the sole mastery, and the city was named Rome after him.

The Roman tale of Romulus and Remus has a close counterpart in the Greek myth of a city foundation by the twin brothers Amphion and Zethus, who were the first to found the site of Thebes of the Seven Gates. The enormous rocks which Zethus brought from the mountains were joined by the music drawn from Amphion's lyre strings to form the walls which became so famous later on. Amphion and Zethus passed as the children of Zeus and Antiope, daughter of King Nykteus. She escaped by flight from the punishment of her father, who died of grief; on his deathbed he implored his brother and successor on the throne, Lycus, to punish the wrongdoing of Antiope. Meantime she had married Epopeus, the king of Sicyon, who was killed by Lycus. Antiope was led away by him in fetters. She gave birth to twin sons in the Cithaeron, where she left them. A shepherd raised the boys and called them Amphion and Zethus. Later on, Antiope succeeded in escaping from the torments of Lycus and his wife, Dirce. She accidentally sought shelter in the Cithaeron, with the twin brothers, now grown up. The shepherd reveals to the youths the fact that Antiope is their mother. Thereupon they cruelly kill Dirce, and deprive Lycus of the rulership.

The remaining twin sagas, [*1] which are extremely numerous, cannot be discussed in detail in this connection. Possibly they represent a complication of the birth myth by another very ancient and widely distributed myth complex, that of the hostile brothers, the detailed discussion of which belongs elsewhere. The apparently late and secondary character of the twin type in the birth myths justifies the separation of this part of mythology from the present theme. As regards the Romulus saga, Mommsen considers it highly probable that it originally told only of Romulus, while the figure of Remus was added subsequently, and somewhat disjointedly, when it became desirable

[p. 48]

to invest the consulate with a solemnity founded on old tradition. 

Footnotes

^44:1 Theodor Mommsen: "Die echte and die falsche Acca Larentia"; in Festgaben fur G. Homeyer (Berlin, 1891), pp. 93 ff; and Romische Forschungen (Berlin, 1879), Vol. II, pp. 1 ff. Mommsen reconstructs the lost narrative of Fabius from the preserved reports of Dionysius (I, 79-831) and of Plutarch (Romulus).

^45:1 The Capitoline She-Wolf is considered the work of very ancient Etruscan artists; it was erected at the Lupercal in the year 296 B.C., according to Livy (X, 231).

^45:2 All these renderings were compiled by Schwegler, in his Roman History, Vol. I, pp. 384 ff.

^47:1 Some Greek twin sagas are quoted by Schubert (op. cit. pp. 13 ff.) in their essential content. Concerning the extensive distribution of this legendary form, compare the somewhat confused book of J. H. Becker: The Twin Saga as the Key to the Interpretation of Ancient Tradition (Leipzig, 1891).

     
The Myth of the Birth of the Hero, by Otto Rank, [1914], at sacred-texts.com

  

HERCULES [*2]

After the loss of his numerous sons, Electryon betroths his daughter, Alcmene, to Amphitryon, the son of his brother, Alcaeus. However, Amphitryon, through an unfortunate accident, causes the death of Electryon, and escapes to Thebes with his affianced bride. He has not enjoyed her love, for she has solemnly pledged him not to touch her until he has avenged her brothers on the Thebans. An expedition is therefore started by him, from Thebes, and he conquers the king of the hostile people, Pterelaos, with all the islands. As he is returning to Thebes, Zeus in the form of Amphitryon betakes himself to Alcmene, to whom he presents a golden goblet as evidence of victory. [*3] He rests with the beauteous maiden during three nights, according to the later poets, holding back the sun one day. In the same night, Amphitryon arrives, exultant in his victory and aflame with love. In the fullness of time, the fruit of the divine and the human embrace is brought forth, and Zeus announces to the gods his son, as the most powerful ruler of the future. [*4] But his jealous spouse, Hera, knows how to obtain from him the pernicious oath that the first-born grandson of Perseus is to be the ruler of all the other descendants of Perseus. Hera hurries to Mycenae,

[p. 49]

to deliver the wife of Perseus' third son, Sthenelos, of the seven-months child, Eurystheus. At the same time she hinders and endangers the confinement of Alcmene, through all sorts of wicked sorcery, precisely as at the birth of the god of light, Apollo. Alcmene finally gives birth to Hercules and Iphicles, the latter in no way the former's equal in courage or in strength, but destined to become the father of his faithful friend, Iolaos. [*1] In this way Eurystheus became the king in Mycenae, in the land of the Argolians, in conformity with the oath of Zeus, and the later-born Hercules was his subject.

The old legend related the raising of Hercules on the strength-giving waters of the Fountain of Dirce, the nourishment of all Theban children. Later on, however, another version arose. Fearing the jealousy of Hera, Alcmene exposed the child she had borne in a place that for a long time after was known as the Field of Hercules. About this time, Athena arrived, in company with Hera. She marveled at the beautiful form of the child, and persuaded Hera to put him to her breast. But the boy took the breast with far greater strength than his age seemed to warrant; Hera felt pains and angrily flung the child to the ground. Athena, however, carried him to the neighboring city and took him to Queen Alcmene, whose maternity was unknown to her, as a poor foundling, whom she begged her to raise for the sake of charity. This peculiar accident is truly remarkable! The child's own mother allows him to perish, disregarding the duty of maternal love, and the stepmother, who is filled with natural hatred against the child, saves her enemy without knowing it. [*2] Hercules had drawn only a few drops from Hera's breast,

[p. 50]

but the divine milk was sufficient to endow him with immortality. An attempt on Hera's part to kill the boy, asleep in his cradle, by means of two serpents, proved a failure, for the child awakened and crushed the beasts with a single pressure of his hands. As a boy, Hercules one day killed his tutor, Linos, being incensed over an unjust chastisement. Amphitryon, fearing the wildness of the youth, sent him to tend his ox-herds in the mountains, with the herders, among whom he is said by some to have been raised entirely, like Amphion and Zethus, Cyrus, and Romulus. Here he lives from the hunt, in the freedom of nature. 

The myth of Hercules suggests in certain features the Hindu saga of the hero Krishna, who like many heroes escapes a general infanticide, and is then brought up by a herder's wife, Iasodha. A wicked she-demon appears, who has been sent by King Kansa to kill the boy. She takes the post of wet nurse in the home, but is recognized by Krishna, who bites her so severely in suckling--like Hera, when nursing Hercules, whom she also means to destroy--that she dies.

Footnotes

^48:1 Mommsen: Die Remus Legende (Berlin, 1881).

^48:2 After Preller: Greek Mythology (Leipzig, 1854), Vol. II, pp. 120 ff.

^48:3 The same transformation of the divine procreator into the form of the human father is found in the birth history of the Egyptian queen, Hatshepsut (about 1500 B.C.), who believed that the god Amen, in the form of her father, Thothmes I, cohabited with her mother, Aahames. (See Budge: A History of Egypt.) Later on she married her brother, Thothmes II, after whose dishonorable death she endeavored to eradicate his memory, and herself assumed the rulership, in masculine fashion. (See The Deuteronium, edited by Schrader.)

^48:4 A similar mingling of the divine and human posterity is related in the myth of Theseus, whose mother, Aethra, the beloved of Poseidon, was visited in one night by this god and by the childless King Aegeus of Athens, who had been brought under the influence of wine. The boy was raised in secret and in ignorance of his father. (See Roscher, op. cit., article "Aegeus.")

^49:1 Alcmene bore Hercules as the son of Zeus, and Iphicles as the offspring of Amphitryon. According to Apollodorus, they were twin children, born at the same time; according to others, Iphicles was conceived and born one night later than Hercules. (See Roscher, op. cit., articles "Amphitryon" and "Alcmene.") The shadowy character of the twin brother, and his loose connection with the entire myth, is again evident. In a similar way, Telephus, the son of Auge, was exposed together with Parthenopaeus, the son of Atalanta, nursed by a doe, and taken by herders to King Corythos. The external subsequent insertion of the partner is here again quite obvious.

^49:2 After Diodorus Siculus, Book IV, p. 9 of Wurm's German translation (Stuttgart, 1831).

     
The Myth of the Birth of the Hero, by Otto Rank, [1914], at sacred-texts.com

  

JESUS

The Gospel according to Luke (1:26-35) relates the prophecy of the birth of Jesus, as follows:

And in the sixth month the angel Gabriel sent from God unto a city of Galilee, named Nazareth, to a virgin espoused to a man whose name was Joseph, of the house of David; and the virgin's name was Mary. And the angel came in unto her, and said, Hail! thou that art highly favored, the Lord is with thee: blessed art thou among women. And when she saw him, she was troubled at his saying, and cast in her mind what manner of salutation this should be. And the angel said unto her, Fear not, Mary: for thou hast found favour

[p. 51]

with God. And, behold, thou shalt conceive in thy womb, and bring forth a son, and shalt call his name JESUS. He shall be great and shall be called the Son of the Highest: and the Lord God shalt give unto him the throne of his father David. And he shall reign over the house of Jacob for ever; and of his kingdom there shall be no end. Then said Mary unto the angel, How shall this be, seeing I know not a man? And the angel answered and said unto her, The Holy Ghost shall come upon thee, and the power of the Highest shall overshadow thee: therefore also that holy thing which shall be born of thee shall be called the Son of God.

This report is supplemented by the Gospel according to Matthew (1:18-25), in the narrative of the birth and childhood of Jesus: [*1]

Now the birth of Jesus Christ was on this wise: when as his mother Mary was espoused to Joseph, before they came together, she was found with child of the Holy Ghost. Then Joseph, her husband, being a just man, and not willing to make her a publick example, was minded to put her away privily. But, while he thought on these things, behold, the angel of the Lord appeared unto him in a dream, saying, Joseph, thou son of David, fear not to take unto thee Mary thy wife: for that which is conceived in her is of the Holy Ghost. And she shall bring forth a son, and thou shall call his name JESUS: for he shall save his people from their sins. Now all this was done that it might be fulfilled which was spoken of the Lord by

[p. 52]

the prophet, saying, Behold, a virgin shall be with child, and shall bring forth a son, and they shall call his name Emmanuel, which being interpreted is, God with us. Then Joseph being raised from sleep did as the angel of the Lord had bidden him and took unto him his wife: And knew her not till she had brought forth her firstborn son: and he called his name JESUS.

Here we interpolate the detailed account of the birth of Jesus, from Gospel of Luke (2:4-20):

And Joseph also went up from Galilee, out of the city of Nazareth, into Judaea, unto the city of David, which is called Bethlehem; (because he was of the house and lineage of David:) to be taxed with Mary his espoused wife, being great with child. And so it was, that, while they were there, the days were accomplished that she should be delivered. And she brought forth her firstborn son, and wrapped him in swaddling clothes, and laid him in a manger; [*1] because there was no room for them in the inn. And there were in the same country shepherds abiding in the field, keeping watch over their flocks by night. And, lo, the angel of the Lord came upon them, and the glory of the Lord shone round about them, and they were sore afraid. And the angel said unto them, Fear not; for, behold, I bring you good tidings of great joy, which shall be to all people. For unto you is born this day in the city of David a Saviour, which is Christ the Lord. And this shall be a sign unto you; Ye shall find the babe wrapped in swaddling clothes, lying in a manger. And suddenly there was with the angel a multitude of the heavenly host praising God, and saying, Glory to God in the Highest, and on earth peace, good will toward men. And it came to pass, as the angels were gone away from them into heaven,

[p. 53]

the shepherds said one to another, Let us now go even unto Bethlehem, and see this thing which has come to pass, which the Lord has made known unto us. And they came with haste, and found Mary, and Joseph, and the babe lying in a manger. And when they had seen it, they made known abroad the saying which was told them concerning this child. And all they that heard wondered at those things which were told them by the shepherds. But Mary kept all these things, and pondered them in her heart. And the shepherds returned, glorifying and praising God for all the things which they had heard and seen, as it was told unto them.

We now continue the account after Matthew, in the second chapter:

Now when Jesus was born in Bethlehem of Judea in the days of Herod the king, behold, there came wise men from the east to Jerusalem, Saying, Where is he that is born King of the Jews? for we have seen his star in the east, and are come to worship him. When Herod the king had heard these things, he was troubled, and all Jerusalem with him. And when he had gathered all the chief priests and scribes of the people together, he demanded of them where Christ should be born. And they said unto him, In Bethlehem of Judea: for thus it is written by the prophet, And thou Bethlehem, in the land of Juda, art not the least among the princes of Juda, for out of thee shall come a Governor, that shall rule my people Israel.

Then Herod, when he had privily called the wise men, enquired of them diligently what time the star appeared. And he sent them to Bethlehem, and said, Go and search diligently for the young child; and when ye have found him, bring me word again, that I may come and worship him also. When they had heard the king, they departed; and, lo, the star, which they saw in the east, went before them, till it came and stood over where the young child was. When they saw the star, they rejoiced with exceeding great joy.

[p. 54]

And when they were come into the house, they saw the young child with Mary his mother, and fell down, and worshipped him: and when they had opened their treasures, they presented unto him gifts; gold, and frankincense, and myrrh. And being warned of God in a dream, that they should not return to Herod, they departed into their own country another way. And when they were departed, behold, the angel of the Lord appeareth to Joseph in a dream, saying, Arise, and take the young child and his mother, and flee into Egypt, and be thou there until I bring thee word: for Herod will seek the young child to destroy him. When he arose, he took the young child and his mother by night, and departed into Egypt: and was there until the death of Herod: that it might be fulfilled which was spoken of the Lord by the prophet, saying, Out of Egypt have I called my son.

Then Herod, when he saw that he was mocked of the wise men, was exceeding wroth, and sent forth, and slew all the children that were in Bethlehem, and in all the coasts thereof, from two years old and under, according to the time which he had diligently enquired of the wise men. . . .

But when Herod was dead, behold, an angel of the Lord appeareth in a dream to Joseph in Egypt, Saying, Arise, and take the young child and his. mother, and go into the land of Israel: for they are dead which sought the young child's life. And he arose, and took the young child and his mother, and came into the land of Israel. But when he heard Archelaus did reign in Judaea in the room of his father Herod, he was afraid to go thither: notwithstanding, being warned of God in a dream, he turned aside into the parts of Galilee: And he came and dwelt in a city called Nazareth: that it might be fulfilled which was spoken by the prophets, He shall be called a Nazarene. [*1]

[p. 55]

Similar birth legends to those of Jesus have also been transmitted of other founders of religions, such as Zoroaster, who is said to have lived about the year 1000 B.C. His mother, Dughda, dreams, in the sixth month of her pregnancy, that the wicked and the good spirits are fighting for the embryonic Zoroaster; a monster tears the future Zoroaster from the mother's womb; but a light god fights the monster with his horn of light, re-encloses the embryo in the mother's womb, blows upon Dughda, and she becomes pregnant again. On awakening, she hurries in her fear to a wise dream-interpreter, who is unable to explain the wonderful dream before the end of three days. He then declares that the child she is carrying is destined to become a man of great importance; the dark cloud and the mountain of light signify that she and her son will at first have to undergo numerous trials, through tyrants and other enemies, but at last they will overcome all perils. Dughda at once returns to her home and informs Pourushacpa, her husband, of everything that has happened. Immediately after his birth, the boy was seen to laugh; this was the first miracle through which he drew attention to himself. The magicians announce the birth of the child as a portent of disaster to the prince of the realm, Duransarun, who betakes himself without delay to the dwelling of Pourushacpa, in order to stab the child. But his hand falls paralyzed, and he must leave with his errand undone; this was the second miracle. Soon after, the wicked demons steal the child from his mother and carry him into the desert, in order to kill him; but Dughda finds the unharmed child, calmly sleeping. This is the third miracle. Later on, Zoroaster was to be trampled upon, in a narrow passageway,

[p. 56]

by a herd of oxen, by command of the king.  But the largest of the cattle took the child between his feet and preserved it from harm. This was the fourth miracle. The fifth is merely a repetition of the preceding: what the cattle had refused to do, was to be accomplished by horses. But again the child was protected by a horse from the hoofs of the other horses. Duransurun thereupon had the cubs in a wolf's den killed during the absence of the old wolves, and Zoroaster was laid down in their place. But a god closed the jaws of the furious wolves, so that they could not harm the child. Two divine cows arrived instead and presented their udders to the child, giving it to drink. This was the sixth miracle through which Zoroaster's life was preserved. 

Related themes are also encountered in the history of Buddha (sixth century before Christ), such as the long sterility of the parents, the dream, the birth of the boy under the open sky, the death of the mother and her substitution by a foster mother, the announcing of the birth to the ruler of the realm, and later on the losing of the boy in the temple. 

Footnotes

^50:1 After Preller, op. cit., Vol. II, p. 123.

^51:1 For the formal demonstration of the entire identity with the other hero myths of the birth story and early history of Jesus, the author has presumed to rearrange the corresponding paragraphs from the different versions in the Gospels, irrespective of the traditional sequence and the originality of the individual parts. The age, origin, and genuineness of these parts are briefly summarized and discussed in W. Soltan: Birth History of Jesus Christ (Leipzig, 1902). The transmitted versions of the several Gospels--which according to Usener: "The Birth and Childhood of Christ," in Lectures and Essays (Leipzig, 1907), contradict and even exclude each other--have been placed, or left, in juxtaposition, precisely for the reason that the apparently contradictory elements in these birth myths are to be elucidated in the present research, no matter if these contradictions be encountered within a single uniform saga, or in its different versions (as, for example, in the Cyrus myth).

^52:1 Concerning the birth of Jesus in a cave, and the furnishing of the birthplace with the typical animals (ox and ass), compare Jeremias: Babylonisches im Neuen Testament (Leipzig, 1905), p. 56; and Preuschen, "Jesu Geburt in einer Hohle," Zeitschrift fur die Neutest. Wissenschaften, 1902, p. 359.

^54:1 According to recent investigations, the birth history of Christ is said have the greatest resemblance with the royal Egyptian myth, over five thousand years old, which relates the birth of Amenophis III. Here again recurs the divine prophecy of the birth of a son, to the waiting queen; [p. 55] her fertilization by the breath of heavenly fire; the divine cows, which nurse the newborn child; the homage of the kings; and so forth. In this connection, compare A. Malvert: Wissenschaft und Religion (Frankfort, 1904), pp. 49 ff.; also the suggestion of Professor Idleib of Bonn (Feuilleton of Frankfurter Zeitung, November 8, 1908).

     
The Myth of the Birth of the Hero, by Otto Rank, [1914], at sacred-texts.com

  

SIEGFRIED

The old Norse Thidreksaga, as recorded about the year 1250 by an Icelander, according to oral traditions and ancient songs, relates the history of the birth and youth of Siegfried. [*4] King Sigmund of Tarlungaland, on his return

[p. 57]

from an expedition, banishes his wife Sisibe, the daughter of King Nidung of Hispania, who is accused by Count Hartvin, whose advances she has spurned, of having had illicit relations with a menial. The king's counselors advise him to mutilate the innocent queen, instead of killing her, and Hartvin is ordered to cut out her tongue in the forest, so as to bring it to the king as a pledge. His companion, Count Hermann, opposes the execution of the cruel command, and proposes to present the tongue of a dog to the king. While the two men are engaged in a violent quarrel, Sisibe gives birth to a remarkably beautiful boy; she then took a glass vessel, and after having wrapped the boy in linens, she placed him in the glass vessel, which she carefully closed again and placed beside her. Count Hartvin was conquered in the fight, and in falling kicked the glass vessel, so that it fell into the river. When the queen saw this she swooned, and died soon afterwards. Hermann went home, told the king everything, and was banished from the country. The glass vessel meantime drifted downstream to the sea, and it was not long before the tide turned. Then the vessel floated onto a rocky cliff, and the water ran off so that the place where the vessel was was perfectly dry. The boy inside had grown somewhat, and when the vessel struck the rock, it broke, and the child began to cry. The boy's wailing was heard by a doe, which seized him with her lips, and carried him to her litter, where she nursed him together with her young. After the child had lived twelve months in the den of the doe, he had grown to the height and strength of other boys four years of age. One day he ran into the forest, where dwelt the wise and skillful smith Mimir, who had lived for nine years in childless wedlock. He saw the boy, who was followed by the faithful doe, took him to his home, and resolved to bring him up as his own son. He gave him the name of Siegfried. In Mimir's home, Siegfried soon attained an enormous stature and strength, but his wilfulness

[p. 58]

caused Mimir to get rid of him. He sent the youth into the forest, where it had been arranged that the dragon Begin, Mimir's brother, was to kill him. But Siegfried conquers the dragon, and kills Mimir. He then proceeds to Brunhild, who names his parents to him.

Similar to the early history of Siegfried is an Austrasian saga that tells of the birth and youth of Wolfdietrich. [*1] His mother is likewise accused of unfaithfulness, and of intercourse with the devil, by a vassal whom she has repulsed, and who speaks evil of her to the returning king, Hugdietrich of Constantinople. [*2]

The king surrenders the child to the faithful Berchtung, who is to kill it, but exposes it instead in the forest, near the water, in the hope that it will fall in of its own accord and thus find its death. But the frolicking child remains unhurt, and even the wild animals--lions, bears, and wolves, which come at night to the water--do not harm it. The astonished Berchtung resolves to save the boy, and he surrenders him to a gamekeeper who, together with his wife, raises him and names him Wolfdietrich. [*3]

Three later hero epics may also be quoted in this connection: First, there is the thirteenth-century French saga of Horn, the son of Aluf, who, after having been exposed on the sea, finally reaches the court of King Hunlaf; after numerous adventures, he wins the king's daughter, Rimhilt, for his wife. Secondly, a detail suggestive of Siegfried appears in the saga of the skillful smith Wieland, who, after avenging his foully murdered father, floats down the river Weser, artfully enclosed in the trunk of a tree, and loaded

[p. 59]

with the tools and treasures of his teachers. Finally, the King Arthur legend contains the commingling of divine and human paternity, the exposure, and the early life with a lowly man.

Footnotes

^56:1 Very similar traits are found in the Celtic saga of Habis, as transmitted by Justin. Born as the illegitimate son of a king's daughter, Habis is persecuted in all sorts of ways by his royal grandfather, Gargoris, but is always saved by divine providence, until he is finally recognized by his grandfather and assumes royal sway. As in the Zoroaster legend, there occurs an entire series of the most varied methods of persecution. He is at first exposed, but nursed by wild animals; then he was to be trampled upon by a herd in a narrow path; then he was cast before hungry beasts, but they again nursed him; and finally he is thrown into the sea, but is gently lapped ashore and nursed by a doe, near which he grows up.

^56:2 Compare Spiegel, op. cit., Vol. I., pp. 688 ff.; also Brodbeck, op. cit.

^56:3 As in the history of Jesus; compare Luke 2:41-49.

^56:4 Compare August Rassmann: Die deutsche Heldensage and ihre Heimat (Hanover, 1857-8), Vol. II, pp. 7; for the sources, see Jiriczek: Die deutsche Heldensage, and Piper's introduction to the volume Die Nibelungen, in Kurschner's German National Literature.

^58:1 Compare: Deutsches Heldenbuch, Vol. I, Part III (Berlin, 1871), edited by Amelung and Jaenicke, which also contains a second version of the Wolfdietrich saga.

^58:2 The motive of calumniation of the wife by a rejected suitor, in combination with the exposure and nursing by an animal (doe), forms the nucleus of the story of Genovefa and her son Schmerzenreich, as told, for example, by the Grimm brothers: Deutsche Sagen (Berlin, 1818), Vol. II, pp. 280 ff. Here again the faithless calumniator proposes to drown the countess and her child. For literary and historical orientation, compare L. Zacher: Die Historie von der Pfalzgrafin Genovefa (Koenigsberg, 1860); and B. Seuffert: Die Legende von der Pfalzgrafin Genovefa (Wurzburg, 1877). Similar legends of wives suspected of infidelity and punished by exposure are discussed in Chapter xi of my Inzestmotiv.

^58:3 The same accentuation of the animal motif is found in the saga of Schalu, the Hindu wolf-child. Compare , op. cit.

     
The Myth of the Birth of the Hero, by Otto Rank, [1914], at sacred-texts.com

  

LOHENGRIN

The widely distributed group of sagas that have been woven around the mythical Knight with the Swan (the old French Chevalier au cigne) can be traced back to very ancient Celtic traditions. The following is the version which has been made familiar by Wagner's dramatization of this theme--the story of Lohengrin, the Knight with the Swan, as transmitted by the medieval German epic (modernized by Junghaus) and briefly rendered by the Grimm brothers under the title "Lohengrin in Brabant." [*1]

The Duke of Brabant and Limburg died, without leaving other heirs than a young daughter, Els, or Elsa by name; her he recommended on his deathbed to one of his retainers, Friedrich von Telramund. Friedrich, the intrepid warrior, became emboldened to demand the youthful duchess' hand and lands, under the false claim that she had promised to marry him. She steadfastly refused to do so. Friedrich complained to Emperor Henry I ("the Fowler"), and the verdict was that she must defend herself against him, through some hero, in a so-called divine judgment, in which God would accord the victory to the innocent, and defeat the guilty. As none were ready to take her part, the young duchess prayed ardently to God to save her; and far away in distant Montsalvatsch, in the Council of the Grail, the sound of the bell was heard, showing that there was someone in

[p. 60]

urgent need of help. The Grail therefore resolved to despatch as a rescuer, Lohengrin, the son of Parsifal. Just as he was about to place his foot in the stirrup a swan came floating down the water drawing a skiff behind him. As soon as Lohengrin set eyes upon the swan, he exclaimed: "Take the steed back to the manger; I shall follow this bird wherever he may lead me." Having faith in God's omnipotence, he took no food with him in the skiff. After they had been afloat five days, the swan dipped his bill in the water, caught a fish, ate one half of it, and gave the other half to the prince to eat. Thus the knight was fed by the swan.

Meanwhile Elsa had summoned her chieftains and retainers to a meeting in Antwerp. Precisely on the day of the assembly, a swan was sighted swimming upstream (river Scheldt) and drawing behind him a skiff, in which Lohengrin lay asleep on his shield. The swan promptly came to land at the shore, and the prince was joyfully welcomed. Hardly had his helmet, shield, and sword been taken from the skiff, when the swan at once swam away again. Lohengrin heard of the wrong which had been done to the duchess and willingly consented to become her champion. Elsa then summoned all her relatives and subjects. A place was prepared in Mainz for Lohengrin and Friedrich to fight in the emperor's presence. The hero of the Grail defeated Friedrich, who confessed having lied to the duchess, and was executed with the axe. Elsa was awarded to Lohengrin, they having long been lovers; but he secretly insisted upon her avoiding all questions as to his ancestry, or whence he had come, saying that otherwise he would have to leave her instantaneously and she would never see him again.

For some time, the couple lived in peace and happiness. Lohengrin was a wise and mighty ruler over his land, and also served his emperor well in his expeditions against the Huns and the heathen. But it came to pass that one day in throwing the javelin he unhorsed the Duke of Cleve, so that the latter broke an arm. The Duchess of Cleve was angry, and spoke

[p. 61]

out amongst the women, saying, "Lohengrin may be brave enough, and he seems to be a good Christian; what a pity that his nobility is not of much account for no one knows whence he has come floating to this land." These words pierced the heart of the Duchess of Brabant, and she changed color with emotion. At night, when her spouse was holding her in his arms, she wept, and he said, "What is the matter, Elsa, my own?" She made answer, "The Duchess of Cleve has caused me sore pain." Lohengrin was silent and asked no more. The second night, the same came to pass. But in the third night, Elsa could no longer retain herself, and she spoke: "Lord, do not chide me! I wish to know, for our children's sake, whence you were born; for my heart tells me that you are of high rank." When the day broke, Lohengrin declared in public whence he had come, that Parsifal was his father, and God had sent him from the Grail. He then asked for his two children, which the duchess had borne him, kissed them, told them to take good care of his horn and sword, which he would leave behind, and said: "Now, I must be gone." To the duchess he left a little ring which his mother had given him. Then the swan, his friend, carne swimming swiftly, with the skiff behind him; the prince stepped in and crossed the water, back to the service of the Grail. Elsa sank down in a faint. The empress resolved to keep the younger boy Lohengrin, for his father's sake, and to bring him up as her own child. But the widow wept and mourned the rest of her life for her beloved spouse, who never came back to her. [*1]

On inverting the Lohengrin saga in such a way that the end is placed first--on the basis of the rearrangement, or even transmutation of motifs, not uncommonly found in

[p. 62]

myths--we find the type of saga with which we have now become familiar: The infant Lohengrin, who is identical with his father of the same name, floats in a vessel upon the sea and is carried ashore by a swan. The empress adopts him as her son, and he becomes a valorous hero. Having married a noble maiden of the land, he forbids her to inquire as to his origin. When the command is broken he is obliged to reveal his miraculous descent and divine mission, after which the swan carries him back in his skiff to the Grail.

Other versions of the saga of the Knight with the Swan have retained this original arrangement of the motifs, although they appear commingled with elements of fairy tales. The saga of the Knight with the Swan, as related in the Flemish People's Book, [*1] contains in the beginning the history of the birth of seven children, [*2] borne by Beatrix, the wife of King Oriant of Flanders. Matabruna, the wicked mother of the absent king, orders that the children be killed and the queen be given seven puppy dogs in their stead. But the servant contents himself with the exposure of the children, who are found by a hermit named Helias, and are nourished by a goat until they are grown. Beatrix is thrown into a dungeon. Later on, Matabruna learns that the children have been saved; her repeated command to kill them causes her hunter to bring her as a sign of apparent obedience the silver neck chains which the children already wore at the time of their birth. One of the boys--named Helias, after his foster father--alone keeps his chain, and is thereby saved from the fate of his brothers, who are transformed into swans as soon as their chains are removed. Matabruna volunteers to prove the relations of the queen with the dog, and upon her instigation, Beatrix

[p. 63]

is to be killed, unless a champion arises to defend her. In her need, she prays to God, who sends her son Helias as a rescuer. The brothers are also saved by means of the other chains, except one, whose chain has already been melted down. King Oriant now transfers the rulership to his son Helias, who causes the wicked Matabruna to be burned. One day, Helias sees his brother, the swan, drawing a skiff on the lake surrounding the castle. This he regards as a heavenly sign; he arms himself and mounts the skiff. The swan takes him through rivers and lakes to the place where God has ordained him to go. Next follows the liberation of an innocently accused duchess, in analogy with the Lohengrin saga; and his marriage to her daughter Clarissa, who is forbidden to ask about her husband's ancestry. In the seventh year of their marriage she disobeys and puts the question, after which Helias returns home in the swan's skiff. Finally, his lost brother swan is likewise released.

The characteristic features of the Lohengrin saga--the disappearance of the divine hero in the same mysterious fashion in which he has arrived; the transference of mythical motifs from the life of the older hero to a younger one bearing the same name (a universal process in myth formation)--are likewise embodied in the Anglo-Lombard saga of Sceaf, who reappears in the Prelude to the Anglo-Saxon Beowulf, the oldest Teutonic epic. Here, he is called Scyld the Scefung (meaning "son of Sceaf") and his origin as a foundling is referred to. The older legend tells that he received his name because as a very young boy he was cast ashore, as a stranger, asleep in a boat on a sheaf of grain (Anglo-Saxon: sceaf) . The waves of the sea carried him to the coast of the country he was destined to defend. The inhabitants welcomed his arrival as a miracle, raised him, and later on made him their king, considering him a divine emissary. [*1] What was told of the father now is

[p. 64]

transferred in the Beowulf epic to his son, also called Scyld. [*1] His body is exposed, as he had ordered before his death, surrounded by kingly splendor, upon a ship without a crew, which is sent out into the sea. Thus he vanished in the same mysterious manner in which his father arrived ashore, this trait being accounted for, in analogy with the Lohengrin saga, by the mythical identity of father and son.

Footnotes

^59:1 Junghaus: Lohengrin (Reclam edition); Grimm brothers, op. cit., Vol. II, p. 306.

^61:1 The Grimm brothers (op. cit., Vol. II., pp. 306 ff.) quote six further versions of the saga of the Knight with the Swan. Certain fairy tales of the Grimm brothers--such as "The Six Swans" (No. 49), "The Twelve Brothers" (No. 9), and the "Seven Ravens" (No. 25), with their parallels and variations, mentioned in the third volume of Kinder- and Hausmarchen--also belong to the same mythological cycle. Further material from this cycle may be found in H. Leo: Beowulf (Halle, 1839), and in Gorre: Introduction to Lohengrin (Heidelberg, 1813).

^62:1 Grimm: Deutsche Sagen, Vol. I., p. 29.

^62:2 The ancient Lombard tale of the exposure of King Lamissio, related by Paulus Diaconus (L, 15), gives a similar incident. A public woman had thrown her seven newborn infants into a fishpond. King Agelmund passed by and looked curiously at the children, turning them around with his spear. But when one of the children took hold of the spear, the king considered this as a good augury; he ordered this boy to be taken out of the pond, and to be given to a wet nurse. As he had taken him from the pond, which in his language is called lama, he named the boy Lamissio. He grew up into a stalwart champion, and after Agelmund's death, became king of the Lombards.

^63:1 Compare Grimm: Deutsche Sagen, Vol. I, p. 306; Vol. III, p. 391; and Leo, op. cit., p. 24.

^64:1 Scaf is the High German Schaffing ("barrel"), which leads Leo (op cit.) to assume, in connection with Scyld's being called Scefing, that he had no father Sceaf or Schaf at all, but was himself the boy cast ashore by the waves, and was named the "son of the barrel" (Schaffing). The name Beowulf itself, explained by Grimm as Bienen-Wolf ("bee-wolf"), seems to mean originally, according to H. von Wolzogen (translator into German of the Reclam edition of Beowulf), Barwelf, namely Jungbar ("bear cub" or "bear whelp"), which is suggestive of the saga of the origin of the Guelphs (Grimm: Deutsche Sagen, Vol. II, p. 233), where the boys are to be thrown into the water as "whelps."

    
The Myth of the Birth of the Hero, by Otto Rank, [1914], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 65]

  

III. The Interpretation of the Myths

A CURSORY review of these variegated hero myths forcibly brings out a series of uniformly common features, with a typical groundwork, from which a standard saga, as it were, may be constructed. This schedule corresponds approximately to the ideal human skeleton that is constantly seen, with minor deviations, on transillumination of figures that outwardly differ from one another. The individual traits of the several myths, and especially the apparently crude variations from the prototype, can be entirely elucidated only by myth interpretation.

The standard saga itself may be formulated according to the following outline: The hero is the child of most distinguished parents, usually the son of a king. His origin is preceded by difficulties, such as continence, or prolonged barrenness, or secret intercourse of the parents due to external prohibition or obstacles. During or before the pregnancy, there is a prophecy, in the form of a dream or oracle, cautioning against his birth, and usually threatening danger to the father (or his representative). As a rule, he is surrendered to the water, in a box. He is then saved by animals, or by lowly people (shepherds), and is suckled by a female animal or by an humble woman. After he has grown up, he finds his distinguished parents, in a highly versatile fashion. He takes his revenge on his father, on the one hand, and is acknowledged, on the other. Finally he achieves rank and honors. [*1]

Since the normal relations of the hero toward his father and his mother regularly appear impaired in all these

[p. 66]

myths, as shown by the outline, there is reason to assume that something in the nature of the hero must account for such a disturbance, and motives of this kind are not very difficult to discover. It is readily understood--and may be noted in the modern imitations of the heroic age--that for the hero, who is exposed to envy, jealousy, and calumny to a much higher degree than all others, the descent from his parents often becomes the source of the greatest distress and embarrassment. The old saying that "A prophet is not without honour, save in his own country and in his father's house," has no other meaning but that he whose parents, brothers and sisters, or playmates, are known to us, is not so readily conceded to be a prophet. There seems to be a certain necessity for the prophet to deny his parents; the well-known Meyerbeer opera is based upon the avowal that the prophetic hero is allowed, in favor of his mission, to abandon and repudiate even his tenderly loving mother.

A number of difficulties arise, however, as we proceed to a deeper inquiry into the motives which oblige the hero to sever his family relations. Numerous investigators have emphasized that the understanding of myth formation requires our going back to their ultimate source, namely the individual faculty of imagination. [*1] The fact has also been pointed out that this imaginative faculty is found in its active and unchecked exuberance only in childhood. Therefore, the imaginative life of the child should first be studied, in order to facilitate the understanding of the far more complex and also more handicapped mythological and artistic imagination in general.

Meanwhile, the investigation of the juvenile faculty of imagination has hardly commenced, instead of being sufficiently advanced to permit the utilization of the findings for the explanation of the more complicated psychic activities. The reason for this imperfect understanding of the psychic life of the child is traceable to the lack of a suitable instrument, as well as of a reliable avenue, leading into the intricacies of this very delicate and rather inaccessible domain. These juvenile emotions can by no means be

[p. 67]

studied in the normal human adult, and it may actually be charged, in view of certain psychic disturbances, that the normal psychic integrity of normal subjects consists precisely in their having overcome and forgotten their childish vagaries and imaginations; so that the way has become blocked. In children, on the other hand, empirical observation (which as a rule must remain merely superficial) fails in the investigation of psychic processes because we are not as yet enabled to trace all manifestations correctly to their motive forces; so that we are lacking the instrument. There is a certain class of persons, the so-called psycho-neurotics, shown by the teachings of Freud to have remained children, in a sense, although otherwise appearing grown-up. These psychoneurotics may be said not to have given up their juvenile psychic life, which on the contrary, in the course of maturity has become strengthened and fixed, instead of modified. In psychoneurotics, the emotions of the child are preserved and exaggerated, thus becoming capable of pathological effects, in which these humble emotions appear broadened and enormously magnified. The fancies of neurotics are, as it were, the uniformly exaggerated reproductions of the childish imaginings. This would point the way to a solution of the problem. Unfortunately, however, access is still much more difficult to establish in these cases than to the child mind. There is only one known instrument which makes this road practicable, namely the psychoanalytic method, which has been developed through the work of Freud. Constant handling of this instrument will clear the observer's vision to such a degree that he will be enabled to discover the identical motive forces, only in delicately shaded manifestations, also in the psychic life of those who do not become neurotics later on.

Professor Freud had the kindness to place at the author's disposal his valuable experience with the psychology of the neuroses; and on this material are based the following comments on the imaginative faculty of the child as well as of the neurotic.

The detachment of the growing individual from the authority of the parents is one of the most necessary, but also

[p. 68]

one of the most painful achievements of evolution. It is absolutely necessary for this detachment to take place, and it may be assumed that all normal grown individuals have accomplished it to a certain extent. Social progress is essentially based upon this opposition between the two generations. On the other hand, there exists a class of neurotics whose condition indicates that they have failed to solve this very problem. For the young child, the parents are, in the first place, the sole authority and the source of all faith. To resemble them, i.e., the progenitor of the same sex--to grow up like father or mother--this is the most intense and portentous wish of the child's early years. Progressive intellectual development naturally brings it about that the child gradually becomes acquainted with the category to which the parents belong. Other parents become known to the child, who compares these with his own, and thereby becomes justified in doubting the incomparability and uniqueness with which he had invested them. Trifling occurrences in the life of the child, which induce a mood of dissatisfaction, lead up to a criticism of the parents; and the gathering conviction that other parents are preferable in certain ways is utilized for this attitude of the child toward the parents.

From the psychology of the neurosis, we have learned that very intense emotions of sexual rivalry are also involved in this connection. The causative factor evidently is the feeling of being neglected. Opportunities arise only too frequently when the child is neglected, or at least feels himself neglected, when he misses the entire love of the parents, or at least regrets having to share this with the other children of the family. The feeling that one's own inclinations are not entirely reciprocated seeks its relief in the idea--often consciously remembered from very early years--of being a stepchild, or an adopted child. Many persons who have not become neurotics very frequently remember occasions of this kind, when the hostile behavior of the parents was interpreted and reciprocated by them in this fashion, usually under the influence of storybooks. The influence of sex is already evident, in so far as the boy shows a far greater tendency to harbor hostile feelings

[p. 69]

against his father than his mother, with a much stronger inclination to emancipate himself from the father than from the mother. The imaginative faculty of girls is possibly much less active in this respect.

These consciously remembered psychic emotions of the years of childhood supply the factor which permits the interpretation of the myth. What is not often consciously remembered, but can almost invariably be demonstrated through psychoanalysis, is the next stage in the development of this incipient alienation from the parents, which may be designated by the term "family romance of neurotics." The essence of neurosis, and of all higher mental qualifications, comprises a special activity of the imagination that is primarily manifested in the play of the child, and which from about the period preceding puberty takes hold of the theme of the family relations. A characteristic example of this special imaginative faculty is represented by the familiar daydreams, [*1] which are continued until long after puberty. Accurate observation of these daydreams shows that they serve for the fulfillment of wishes, for the righting of life, and that they have two essential objects, one erotic, the other of an ambitious nature (usually with the erotic factor concealed therein). About the time in question, the child's imagination is engaged upon the task of getting rid of the parents, who are now despised and are as a rule to be supplanted by others of a higher social rank. The child utilizes an accidental coincidence of actual happenings (meetings with the lord of the manor or the proprietor of the estate, in the country; with the reigning prince, in the city; in the United States, with some great statesman or millionaire). Accidental occurrences of this kind arouse the child's envy, and this finds its expression in fancy fabrics which replace the two parents by others of a higher rank. The technical elaboration of these two imaginings, which of course by this time have become conscious, depends upon the child's adroitness and also upon the material at his disposal. It is likewise a factor

[p. 70]

whether these fancies are elaborated with more or less claim to plausibility. This stage is reached at a time when the child is still lacking all knowledge of the sexual conditions of descent.

With the added knowledge of the manifold sexual relations of father and mother--with the child's realization of the fact that the father is always uncertain, whereas the mother is very certain--the family romance undergoes a peculiar restriction: it is satisfied with ennobling the father, while the descent from the mother is no longer questioned, but accepted as an unalterable fact. This second (or sexual) stage of the family romance is moreover supported by another motive, which did not exist in the first (or asexual) stage. Knowledge of sexual matters gives rise to the tendency to picture erotic situations and relations, impelled by the pleasurable emotion of placing the mother, or the subject of the greatest sexual curiosity, in the situation of secret unfaithfulness and clandestine love affairs. In this way the primary or asexual fantasies are raised to the standard of the improved later understanding.

The motive of revenge and retaliation, which was originally to the front, is again evident. These neurotic children are mostly those who were punished by the parents to break them of bad sexual habits, and they take their revenge upon their parents by their imaginings. The younger children of a family are particularly inclined to deprive their predecessors of their advantage by fables of this kind (exactly as in the intrigues of history). Frequently they do not hesitate in crediting the mother with as many love affairs as there are rivals. An interesting variation of this family romance restores the legitimacy of the plotting hero himself, while the other children are disposed of in this way as illegitimate. The family romance may be governed besides by a special interest, all sorts of inclinations being met by its adaptability and variegated character. The little romancer gets rid in this fashion, for example, of the kinship of a sister who may have attracted him sexually.

Those who turn aside with horror from this corruption of the child mind, or perhaps actually contest the possibility

[p. 71]

of such matters, should note that all these apparently hostile imaginings have not such a very bad significance after all, and that the original affection of the child for his parents is still preserved under their thin disguise. The faithlessness and ingratitude on the part of the child are only apparent, for on investigating in detail the most common of these romantic fancies--the substitution of both parents, or of the father alone, by more exalted personages--the discovery will be made that these new and highborn parents: are invested throughout with the qualities which are derived from real memories of the true lowly parents, so that the child does not actually remove his father but exalts him. The entire endeavor to replace the real father by a more distinguished one is merely the expression of the child's longing for the vanished happy time, when his father still appeared to be the strongest and greatest man, and the mother seemed the dearest and most beautiful woman. The child turns away from the father, as he now knows him, to the father in whom he believed in his earlier years, his imagination being in truth only the expression of regret for this happy time having passed away. Thus the overvaluation of the earliest years of childhood again claims its own in these fancies. [*1] An interesting contribution to this subject is furnished by the study of dreams. Dream-interpretation teaches that even in later years, in the dreams of the emperor or the empress, these princely persons stand for the father and the mother. [*2] Thus the infantile overvaluation of the parents is still preserved in the dream of the normal adult.

As we proceed to fit the above features into our scheme, we feel justified in analogizing the ego of the child with the hero of the myth, in view of the unanimous tendency of family romances and hero myths; keeping in mind that the myth throughout reveals an endeavor to get rid of the parents, and that the same wish arises in the fantasies of the individual child at the time when he is trying to

[p. 72]

establish his personal independence. The ego of the child behaves in this respect like the hero of the myth, and as a matter of fact, the hero should always be interpreted merely as a collective ego, which is equipped with all the excellences. In a similar manner, the hero in personal poetic fiction usually represents the poet himself, or at least one side of his character.

Summarizing the essentials of the hero myth, we find the descent from noble parents, the exposure in a river, and in a box, and the raising by lowly parents; followed in the further evolution of the story by the hero's return to his first parents, with or without punishment meted out to them. It is very evident that the two parent-couples of the myth correspond to the real and the imaginary parent-couple of the romantic fantasy. Closer inspection reveals the psychological identity of the humble and the noble parents, precisely as in the infantile and neurotic fantasies.

In conformity with the overvaluation of the parents in early childhood, the myth begins with the noble parents, exactly like the romantic fantasy, whereas in reality adults soon adapt themselves to the actual conditions. Thus the fantasy of the family romance is simply realized in the myth, with a bold reversal to the actual conditions. The hostility of the father, and the resulting exposure, accentuate the motive which has caused the ego to indulge in the entire fiction. The fictitious romance is the excuse, as it were, for the hostile feelings which the child harbors against his father, and which in this fiction are projected against the father. The exposure in the myth, therefore, is equivalent to the repudiation or nonrecognition in the romantic fantasy. The child simply gets rid of the father in the neurotic romance, while in the myth the father endeavors to lose the child. Rescue and revenge are the natural terminations, as demanded by the essence of the fantasy.

In order to establish the full value of this parallelization, as just sketched in its general outlines, it must enable us to interpret certain constantly recurring details of the myth which seem to require a special explanation. This demand would seem to acquire special importance in view of the

[p. 73]

fact that no satisfactory explanation of these details is forthcoming in the writings of even the most enthusiastic astral mythologists or natural philosophers. Such details are represented by the regular occurrence of dreams (or oracles) and by the mode of exposure in a box and in the water. These motifs do not at first glance seem to permit a psychological derivation. Fortunately the study of dream-symbolisms permits the elucidation of these elements of the hero myth. The utilization of the same material in the dreams of healthy persons and neurotics [*1] indicates that the exposure in the water signifies no more and no less than the symbolic expression of birth, The children come out of the water. [*2] The basket, box, or receptacle simply means the container, the womb; [*3] so that the exposure directly signifies

[p. 74]

the process of birth, although it is represented by its opposite.

Those who object to this representation by opposites should remember how often the dream works with the same mechanism. [*1] A confirmation of this interpretation of the exposure, as taken from the common human symbolism, is furnished by the material itself, in the dream by the grandfather (or still more convincingly by the mother herself) [*2] in the Ctesian version of Cyrus before his birth; in this dream, so much water flows from the lap of the expectant mother as to  all Asia, like an enormous ocean. [*3] It is remarkable that in both cases the Chaldeans correctly interpreted these water dreams as birth dreams. In all probability,

[p. 75]

these dreams themselves are constructed out of the knowledge of a very ancient and universally understood symbolism, with a dim foresight of the relations and connections which are appreciated and presented in Freud's teachings. There he says, in referring to a dream in which the dreamer hurls herself into the dark water of a lake: Dreams of this sort are birth dreams, and their interpretation is accomplished by reversing the fact as communicated in the manifest dream; namely, instead of hurling oneself into the water, it means emerging from the water, i.e., to be born. [*1] The justice of this interpretation, which renders the water dream equivalent to the exposure, is again confirmed by the fact that precisely in the Cyrus saga, which contains the water dream, the theme of the exposure in the water is lacking, while only the basket, which does not occur in the dream, plays a part in the exposure.

In this interpretation of the exposure as the birth, we must not let ourselves be disturbed by the discrepancy between the succession of the individual elements of the symbolized materialization and the real birth process. This chronological rearrangement or even reversal has been explained by Freud as due to the general manner in which recollections are elaborated into fantasies; the same material reappears in the fantasies, but in an entirely novel arrangement, and no attention whatsoever is paid to the natural sequence of the acts. [*2]

Besides this chronological reversal, the reversal of the contents requires special explanation. The first reason for the representation of the birth by its opposite--the life-threatening exposure in the water--is the accentuation of the parental hostility toward the future hero. [*3] The creative

[p. 76]

influence of this tendency to represent the parents as the first and most powerful opponents of the hero will be appreciated when it is kept in mind that the entire family romance in general owes its origin to the feeling of being neglected--namely, the assumed hostility of the parents. In the myth, this hostility goes so far that the parents refuse to let the child be born, which is precisely the reason of the hero's lament; moreover, the myth plainly reveals the desire to enforce his materialization even against the will of the parents. The vital peril, thus concealed in the representation of birth through exposure, actually exists in the process of birth itself. The overcoming of all these obstacles also expresses the idea that the future hero has actually overcome the greatest difficulties by virtue of his birth, for he has victoriously thwarted all attempts to prevent it. [*1] Or another interpretation may be admitted, according to which the youthful hero, foreseeing his destiny to taste more than his share of the bitterness of life, deplores in a pessimistic mood the inimical act which has called him to earth. He accuses the parents, as it were, for having exposed him to the struggle of life, for having allowed him to be born. [*2] The refusal to let the son be born, which belongs especially to the father, is frequently concealed by the contrast motif, the wish for a child (as in Oedipus, Perseus, and others), while the hostile attitude toward the future successor on the throne and in the kingdom is projected to the outside--it is attributed to an oracular verdict, which is thereby revealed as the substitute of the ominous dream, or better, as the equivalent of its interpretation.

[p. 77]

From another point of view, however, the family romance shows that the fantasies of the child, although apparently estranging the parents, have nothing else to say concerning them besides their confirmation as the real parents. The exposure myth, translated with the assistance of symbolism, likewise contains nothing but the assurance: this is my mother, who has borne me at the command of the father. But on account of the tendency of the myth, and the resulting transference of the hostile attitude from the child to the parents, this assurance of the real parentage can only be expressed as the repudiation of such parentage.

On closer inspection, it is noteworthy in the first place that the hostile attitude of the hero toward his parents concerns especially the father. Usually, as in the myth of Oedipus, Paris, and others, the royal father receives a prophecy of some disaster, threatening him through the expected son; then it is the father who causes the exposure of the boy and who pursues and menaces him in all sorts of ways after his unlooked-for rescue, but finally succumbs to his son, according to the prophecy. In order to understand this trait, which at first may appear somewhat startling, it is not necessary to explore the heavens for some process into which this trait might be laboriously fitted. Looking with open eyes and unprejudiced minds at the relations between parents and children, or between brothers, as these exist in reality, [*1] a certain tension is frequently, if not regularly revealed between father and son, or still more distinctly a competition between brothers. Although this tension may not be obvious and permanent, it is lurking in the sphere of the unconscious, as it were, with periodic eruptions. Erotic factors are especially apt to be involved, and as a rule the deepest, generally unconscious root of the dislike of the son for the father, or of two brothers for each other, is related to be competition for the tender devotion and love of the mother. The Oedipus myth shows plainly, only in grosser dimensions, the accuracy of this interpretation, for the parricide is here followed by

[p. 78]

the incest with the mother. This erotic relation with the mother, which predominates in other mythological cycles, is relegated to the background in the myths of the birth of the hero, while the opposition against the father is more strongly accentuated. [*1]

The fact that this infantile rebellion against the father is apparently provoked in the birth myths by the hostile behavior of the father, is due to a reversal of the relation, known as projection, which is brought about by very peculiar characteristics of the myth-forming psychic activity. The projection mechanism--which also bore its part in the reinterpretation of the birth act, as well as certain other characteristics of myth formation, to be discussed presently--necessitates the uniform characterization of the myth as a paranoid structure, in view of its resemblance to peculiar processes in the mechanism of certain psychic disturbances. Intimately connected with the paranoid character is the property of separating or dissociating what is fused in the imagination. This process, as illustrated by the two parent-couples, provides the foundation for the myth formation, and together with the projection mechanism supplies the key to the understanding of an entire series of otherwise inexplicable configurations of the myth. As the motor power for this projection of the hero's hostile attitude onto

[p. 79]

the father, there stands revealed the wish for its justification, arising from the troublesome realization of these feelings against the father. The displacement process that begins with the projection of the troublesome sensation is still further continued, however, and with the assistance of the mechanism of separation or dissociation, it has found a different expression of its gradual progress in very characteristic forms of the hero myth. In the original psychologic setting, the father is still identical with the king, the tyrannical persecutor. The first attenuation of this relation is manifested in those myths in which the separation of the tyrannical persecutor from the real father is already attempted, but not yet entirely accomplished, the former being still related to the hero, usually as his grandfather, for example in the Cyrus myth with all its versions, and in the majority of all hero myths in general. In the separation of the father's part from that of the king, this type signifies the first return step of the descent fantasy toward the actual conditions, and accordingly the hero's father appears in this type mostly as a lowly man (see Cyrus, Gilgamesh, and others) . The hero thus arrives again at an approach toward his parents, the establishment of a certain kinship, which finds its expression in the fact that not only the hero himself, but also his father and his mother represent objects of the tyrant's persecution. The hero in this way acquires a more intimate connection with the mother--they are often exposed together (Perseus, Telephus, Feridun)--who is nearer to him on account of the erotic relation; while the renouncement of his hatred against the father here attains the expression of its most forcible reaction, [*1] for the hero henceforth appears, as in the Hamlet saga, not as the persecutor of his father (or grandfather) but as the avenger of the persecuted father. This involves a deeper relation of the Hamlet saga with the Persian story of Kaikhosrav, where the hero likewise appears as the avenger of his murdered father (compare Feridun and others).

[p. 80]

The person of the grandfather himself, who in certain sagas appears replaced by other relatives (the uncle, in the Hamlet saga), also possesses a deeper meaning. [*1] The myth complex of the incest with the mother--and the related revolt against the father--is here combined with the second great complex, which has for its contents the erotic relations between father and daughter. Under this heading belongs, besides other widely ramified groups of sagas, [*2] the story which is told in countless versions of a newborn boy, of whom it is prophesied that he is to become the son-in-law and heir of a certain ruler or potentate, and who finally does so in spite of all persecutions (exposure and so forth) on the part of the latter. [*3] The father who refuses to give his daughter to any of her suitors, or who attaches to the winning of the daughter certain conditions difficult of fulfillment, does this because he really begrudges her to all others, for when all is told he wishes to possess her himself. He locks her up in some inaccessible spot, so as to safeguard her virginity (Perseus, Gilgamesh, Telephus, Romulus), and when his command is disobeyed he pursues the daughter and her offspring with insatiable hatred. However, the unconscious sexual motives of his hostile attitude, which is later on avenged by his grandson, render it evident that again the hero kills in him simply the man who is trying to rob him of the love of his mother; namely, the father.

Another attempt at a reversal to a more original type consists in the following theme: The return to the lowly father, which has been brought about through the separation of the father's role from that of the king, is again nullified through the lowly father's secondary elevation to the rank of a god, as in Perseus and the other sons of virgin mothers (Karna, Ion, Romulus, Jesus) . The secondary character of this godly paternity is especially evident in those myths where the virgin who has been impregnated by

[p. 81]

divine conception later on marries a mortal (Jesus, Karna, Ion), who then appears as the real father, while the god as the father represents merely the most exalted childish idea of the magnitude, power, and perfection of the father. [*1] At the same time, these myths strictly insist upon the motif of the virginity of the mother, which elsewhere is merely hinted at. The first impetus is perhaps supplied by the transcendental tendency, necessitated through the introduction of the god. At the same time, the birth from the virgin is the most abrupt repudiation of the father, the consummation of the entire myth, as illustrated by the Sargon legend, which does not admit any father besides the vestal mother.

The last stage of this progressive attenuation of the hostile relation to the father is represented by that form of the myth in which the person of the royal persecutor not only appears entirely detached from that of the father, but has even lost the remotest kinship with the hero's family, which he opposes in the most hostile manner, as its enemy (in Feridun, Abraham, King Herod against Jesus, and others) . Although of his original threefold character as the father, the king, and the persecutor, he retains only the part of the royal persecutor or the tyrant, the entire plan of the myth conveys the impression that nothing had been changed--as if the designation "father" had been simply replaced by the term "tyrant." This interpretation of the father as a "tyrant," which is typical of the infantile ideation, [*2] will be found later on to possess the greatest importance for the interpretation of certain abnormal constellations of this complex.

The prototype of this identification of the king with the father, which regularly recurs also in the dreams of adults,

[p. 82]

presumably is the origin of royalty from the patriarchate in the family, which is still attested by the use of identical words for king and father, in the Indo-Germanic languages (compare the German Landesvater, "father of his country," = king). [*1] The reversal of the family romance to actual conditions is almost entirely accomplished in this type of myth. The lowly parents are acknowledged with a frankness which seems to be directly contradictory to the tendency of the entire myth.

Precisely this revelation of the real conditions, which hitherto had to be left to the interpretation, enables us to prove the accuracy of the latter from the material itself. The biblical legend of Moses has been selected as especially well adapted to this purpose.

Briefly summarizing the outcome of the previous interpretation-mechanism, to make matters plainer, we find the two parent-couples to be identical, after their splitting into the personalities of the father and the tyrannical persecutor has been connected--the highborn parents are the echo, as it were, of the exaggerated notions the child originally harbored concerning his parents. The Moses legend actually shows the parents of the hero divested of all prominent attributes; they are simple people, devotedly attached to the child, and incapable of harming him. Meanwhile, the assertion of tender feelings for the child is a confirmation, here as well as everywhere, of the bodily parentage (compare the overseer in the Gilgamesh legend, the charioteer in the story of Karna, the fisherman in the Perseus myth, etc.) . The amicable utilization of the exposure motif, which occurs in this type of myth, is referable to such a relationship. The child is surrendered in a basket to the water, but not with the object of killing him (as, for example, the hostile exposure of Oedipus and many other heroes), but for the purpose of saving him (compare also Abraham's early history, page <page 17>). The danger-fraught warning to the exalted father becomes a hopeful prophecy for the lowly father--compare, in the birth story of Jesus, the oracle for Herod and Joseph's dream)--entirely corresponding

[p. 83]

to the expectations placed by most parents in the career of their offspring.

Retaining from the original tendency of, the romance the fact that Pharaoh's daughter drew the child from the water, i.e., gave it birth, the outcome is the familiar theme (grandfather type) of the king whose daughter is to bear a son, but who, on being warned by the ill-omened interpretation of a dream, resolves to kill his forthcoming grandson. The handmaiden of his daughter (who in the biblical story draws the box from the water at the behest of the princess) is charged by the king with the exposure of the newborn child in a box, in the waters of the river Nile, that it may perish (the exposure motif, from the viewpoint of the highborn parents, here appearing in its original disastrous significance). The box with the child is then found by lowly people, and the poor woman raises the child (as his wet nurse); when he is grown up, he is recognized by the princess as her son. Just as in the prototype, the fantasy concludes with the recognition by the highborn parents.

If the Moses legend were placed before us in this more original form, as we have reconstructed it from the existing material, [*1] the sum of this interpretation-mechanism would be approximately what is told in the myth as it is actually transmitted--namely, that his true mother was not a princess, but the poor woman who was introduced as his nurse, her husband being his father.

This interpretation is offered as the tradition, in the reconverted myth; and the fact that this tracing of the progressive mutation furnishes the familiar type of hero myth, is the proof of the correctness of our interpretation.

It has thus been our good fortune to show the full accuracy of our interpretative technique through the material itself, and it is now time to demonstrate the tenability of the general viewpoint upon which this entire technique is

[p. 84]

founded. Hitherto, the results of our interpretation have created the appearance that the entire myth formation started from the hero himself, that is, from the youthful hero. At the start we took this attitude in analogizing the hero of the myth with the ego of the child. Now we find ourselves confronted with the obligation to harmonize these assumptions and conclusions with the other conceptions of myth formation, which they seem to contradict directly.

The myths are certainly not constructed by the hero, least of all by the child hero, but they have long been known to be the product of a people of adults. The impetus is evidently supplied by the popular amazement at the apparition of the hero, whose extraordinary life history the people can only imagine as ushered in by a wonderful infancy. This extraordinary childhood of the hero, however, is constructed by the individual myth-makers--to whom the indefinite idea of the folk-mind must be ultimately traced--from the consciousness of their own infancy. In investing the hero with their own infantile history, they identify themselves with him, as it were, claiming to have been similar heroes in their own personality. The true hero of the romance is, therefore, the ego, which finds itself in the hero, by reverting to the time when the ego was itself a hero, through its first heroic act, i.e., the revolt against the father. The ego can only find its own heroism in the days of infancy, and it is therefore obliged to invest the hero with its own revolt, crediting him with the features which made the ego a hero. This object is achieved with infantile motives and materials, in reverting to the infantile romance and transferring it to the hero. Myths are, therefore, created by adults, by means of retrograde childhood fantasies, [*1] the hero being credited with the myth-maker's personal infantile history. Meanwhile, the tendency of this entire process is the excuse of the individual units

[p. 85]

of the people for their own infantile revolt against the father.

Besides the excuse of the hero for his rebellion, the myth therefore contains also the excuse of the individual for his revolt against the father. This revolt has burdened him since his childhood, as he has failed to become a hero. He is now enabled to excuse himself by emphasizing that the father has given him grounds for his hostility. The affectionate feeling for the father is also manifested in the same fiction, as has been shown above. These myths have therefore sprung from two opposite motives, both of which are subordinate to the motive of vindication of the individual through the hero: on the one hand the motive of affection and gratitude toward the parents; and on the other hand, the motive of the revolt against the father. It is not stated outright in these myths, however, that the conflict with the father arises from the sexual rivalry for the mother, but is apparently suggested that this conflict dates back primarily to the concealment of the sexual processes (at childbirth), which in this way became an enigma for the child. This enigma finds its temporary and symbolical solution in the infantile sexual theory of the basket and the water. [*1]

The profound participation of the incest motif in myth formation is discussed in the author's special investigation of the Lohengrin saga, which belongs to the myth of the birth of the hero. The cyclic character of the Lohengrin saga is referred by him to the fantasy of being one's own son, as revealed by Freud. [*2] This accounts for the identity of father and son, in certain myths, and for the repetition of their careers; it explains the fact that the hero is sometimes not exposed until he has reached maturity, and also the intimate connection between birth and death in the exposure motif. [*3] Jung, who regards the typical fate of the hero as the portrayal of the human libido and its typical

[p. 86]

vicissitudes, has made this theme the pivot of his interpretation, as the fantasy of being born again, to which the incest motif is subordinated. Not only the birth of the hero, which takes place under peculiar symbolic circumstances, but also the motif of the two mothers of the hero, are explained by Jung through the birth of the hero taking place under the mysterious ceremonials of a rebirth from the mother consort. [*1]

Having thus outlined the contents of the birth myth of the hero it still remains for us to point out certain complications within the birth myth itself, which have been explained on the basis of its paranoid character, as "splits" of the personality of the royal father and persecutor. In some myths, however, and especially in the fairy tales that belong to this group, [*2] the multiplication of mythical personages--and with them, of course, the multiplication of motifs, or even of entire stories--are carried so far that sometimes the original features are altogether overgrown by these addenda. The multiplication is so variegated and; so exuberantly developed that the mechanism of the analysis no longer does it justice. Moreover, the new personalities here do not show the same independence, as it were, as the new personalities created by splitting, but they rather present the characteristics of a copy, a duplicate, or a "double," which is the proper mythological term. An apparently very complicated example, namely, Herodotus' version of the Cyrus saga, illustrates that there doubles are not inserted purely for ornamentation, or to give a semblance of historical veracity, but that they are insolubly connected with myth formation and its tendency. Also, in the Cyrus legend, as in the other myths, a confrontation

[p. 87]

occurs. The royal grandfather, Astyages, and his daughter, with her husband, are confronted by the cattle herder and his wife. A checkered gathering of other personalities which move around them, are readily grouped at sight: Between the highborn parent-couple and their child stand the administrator Harpagos with his wife and his son, and the noble Artembares with his legitimate offspring. Our trained sense for the peculiarities of myth structure recognizes at once the doubles of the parents in the intermediate parent-couples and all the participants are seen to be identical personalities of the parents and their child; this interpretation being suggested by certain features of the myth itself. Harpagos receives the child from the king, to expose it; he therefore acts precisely like the royal father and remains true to his fictitious paternal part in his reluctance to kill the child himself--because it is related to him--but he delivers it instead to the herder Mithradates, who is thus again identified with Harpagos. The noble Artembares, whose son Cyrus causes to be whipped, is also identified with Harpagos; for when Artembares with his whipped boy stands before the king, to demand retribution, Harpagos at once is likewise seen standing before the king, to defend himself, and he also is obliged to present his son to the king. Thus Artembares himself plays an episodal part as the hero's father, and this is fully confirmed by the Ctesian version, which tells us that the nobleman who adopted the herder's son, Cyrus, as his own son, was named Artembares.

Even more distinct than the identity of the different fathers is that of their children, which of course serves to confirm the identity of the fathers. In the first place, and this would seem to be conclusive, the children are all of the same age--not only the son of the princess, and the child of the herder, who are born at the same time; but Herodotus specially emphasizes that Cyrus played the game of "Kings" (in which he caused the son of Artembares to be whipped) with boys of the same age as Cyrus. He also points out, perhaps intentionally, that the son of Harpagos, destined to become the playmate of Cyrus, whom the king had recognized, was likewise apparently of the same age as

[p. 88]

[paragraph continues] Cyrus. Furthermore, the remains of this boy are placed before his father, Harpagos, in a basket; it was also a basket in which the newborn Cyrus was to have been exposed, and this actually happened to his substitute, the herder's son, whose identity with Cyrus is obvious and tangible in the version of Justin given on page <page 36>. In this report, Cyrus is actually exchanged with the living child of the herders; but this paradoxical parental feeling is reconciled by the consciousness that in reality nothing at all has been altered by this exchange. It appears more intelligible, of course, that the herder's wife should wish to raise the living child of the king, instead of her own stillborn boy, as in the Herodotus version (page <page 30>); but here the identity of the boys is again evident, for just as the herder's son suffered death instead of Cyrus in the past, twelve years later the son of Harpagos (also in a basket) is killed directly for Cyrus, whom Harpagos had allowed to live. [*1]

The impression is thereby conveyed that all the multiplications of Cyrus, after having been created for a certain purpose, are again removed, as disturbing elements, once this purpose has been fulfilled. This purpose is undoubtedly the exalting tendency that is inherent in the family romance. The hero, in the various duplications of himself and his parents, ascends the social scale from the herder Mithradates, by way of the noble Artembares (who is high in the king's favor), and of the first administrator, Harpagos (who is personally related to the king)--until he has himself become a prince; so his career is shown in the Ctesian version, where Cyrus advances from the herder's son to the king's administrator. [*2] In this way, he constantly

[p. 89]

removes, as it were, the last traces of his ascent, the lower Cyrus being discarded after absolving the different stages of his career. [*1]

This complicated myth with its promiscuous array of personages is thus simplified and reduced to three actors--the hero and his parents. Entirely similar conditions prevail in regard to the "cast" of many other myths. For example, the duplication may concern the daughter, as in the Moses myth, in which the princess-mother (in order to establish the identity of the two families) [*2] appears among the poor people as the daughter Miriam, who is merely a split of the mother, the latter appearing divided into the princess and the poor woman. In case the duplication concerns the father, his doubles appear as a rule in the part of relatives, more particularly as his brothers, as for example in the Hamlet saga, in distinction from the foreign personages created by the analysis. In a similar way, the grandfather, who is taking the place of the father, may also appear complemented by a brother, who is the hero's granduncle, and as such his opponent, as in the myths of Romulus, Perseus, and others. Other duplications, in apparently

[p. 90]

complicated mythological structures--as for example in Kaikhosrav, Feridun, and others--are easily recognized when envisaged from this angle.

The duplication of the fathers (or the grandfathers) by a brother may be continued in the next generation, and concern the hero himself, thus leading to the brother myths, which can only be hinted at in connection with the present theme. The prototypes of the boy (who in the Cyrus saga vanish into thin air after they have served their purpose, the exaltation of the hero's descent), if they were to assume a vitality of their own, would come to confront the hero as competitors with equal rights, namely, as his brothers. The original sequence is probably better preserved through the interpretation of the hero's strange doubles as shadowy brothers who, like the twin brother, must die for the hero's sake. Not only the father (who is in the way of the maturing son) is removed, but also the interfering competitor (the brother), in a naive realization of the childish fantasies, for the simple reason that the hero does not want a family.

The complications of the hero legends with other myth cycles include (besides the myth of the hostile brothers, which has already been disposed of) also the actual incest myth, such as forms the nucleus of the Oedipus saga. The mother, and her relation to the hero, appear relegated to the background in the myth of the birth of the hero. But there is another conspicuous motif: the lowly mother is so often represented by an animal. This motif of the helpful animals [*1] belongs in part to a series of foreign elements, the explanation of which would far exceed the scope of this essay. [*2]

The animal motif may be fitted into the sequence of

I[p. 91]

our interpretation, on the basis of the following reflections. Much as the projection onto the father justifies the hostile attitude on the part of the son, so the lowering of the mother into an animal is likewise meant to vindicate the ingratitude of the son who denies her. As the persecuting king is detached from the father, so the exclusive role of wet nurse assigned to the mother--in this substitution by an animal--goes back to the separation of the mother into the parts of the child-bearer and the suckler. This cleavage is again subservient to the exalting tendency, in so far as the childbearing part is reserved for the highborn mother, whereas the lowly woman, who cannot be eradicated from the early history, must content herself with the function of nurse. Animals are especially appropriate substitutes, because the sexual processes are here plainly evident also to the child, while the concealment of these processes is presumably the root of the childish revolt against the parents. The exposure in the box and in the water asexualizes the birth process, as it were, in a childlike fashion; the children are fished out of the water by the stork, who takes them to the parents in a basket. [*1] The animal fable improves upon this idea, by emphasizing the similarity between human birth and animal birth.

This introduction of the motif may possibly be interpreted from the parodistic point of view if we assume that the child accepts the story of the stork from his parents, feigning ignorance, but adding superciliously: If an animal

[p. 92]

has brought me, it may also have nursed me. [*1]

When all is said and done, however, and when the cleavage is followed back, the separation of the childbearer from the suckler--which really endeavors to remove the bodily mother entirely, by means of her substitution through an animal or a strange nurse--does not express anything beyond the fact: The woman who has suckled me is my mother. This statement is found directly symbolized in the Moses legend, the retrogressive character of which we have already studied; for precisely the woman who is his own mother is chosen to be his nurse (similarly also in the myth of Hercules, and the Egyptian-Phoenician Osiris-Adonis myth--where Osiris, encased in a chest, floats down the river and is finally found under the name Adonis, by Isis, who is installed by Queen Astarte as the nurse of her own son). [*2]

Only a brief reference can here be made to other motifs which seem to be more loosely related to the entire myth. Such themes include that of playing the fool, which is suggested in animal fables as the universal childish attitude toward grownups. They include, furthermore, the physical defects of certain heroes (Zal, Oedipus, Hephaestus), which are meant perhaps to serve for the vindication of individual imperfections, in such a way that the reproaches of the father for possible defects or shortcomings are incorporated into the myth, with the appropriate accentuation--the hero being endowed with the same weakness which burdens the self-respect of the individual.

This explanation of the psychological significance of the myth of the birth of the hero would not be complete without emphasizing its relations to certain mental diseases. Even readers without psychiatric training--or these perhaps more than any others--must have been struck with

[p. 93]

these relations. As a matter of fact, the hero myths are equivalent in many essential features to the delusional ideas of certain psychotic individuals who suffer from delusions of persecution and grandeur--the so-called paranoiacs. Their system of delusions is constructed very much like the hero myth, and therefore indicates the same psychogenic themes as the neurotic family romance, which is analyzable, whereas the system of delusions is inaccessible even for psychoanalytical approaches. For example, the paranoiac is apt to claim that the people whose name he bears are not his real parents, but that he is actually the son of a princely personage; he was to be removed for some mysterious reason, and was therefore surrendered to his "parents" as a foster child. His enemies, however, wish to maintain the fiction that he is of lowly descent, in order to suppress his legitimate claims to the crown or to enormous riches. [*1] Cases of this kind often occupy alienists or tribunals. [*2]

[p. 94]

This intimate relationship between the hero myth and the delusional structure of paranoiacs has already been definitely established through the characterization of the myth as a paranoid structure, which is here confirmed by its contents. The remarkable fact that paranoiacs will frankly reveal their entire romance has ceased to be puzzling, since the profound investigations of Freud have shown that the contents of hysterical fantasies, which can often be made conscious through analysis, are identical up to the minutest details with the complaints of persecuted paranoiacs; moreover, the identical contents are also encountered as a reality in the arrangements of perverts for the gratification of their desires. [*1]

The egotistical character of the entire system is distinctly revealed by the paranoiac, for whom the exaltation of the parents, as brought about by him, is merely the means for his own exaltation. As a rule the pivot for his entire system is simply the culmination of the family romance, in the apodictic statement: I am the emperor (or god). Reasoning in the symbolism of dreams and myths--which is also the symbolism of all fancies, including the "morbid" power of imagination--all he accomplishes thereby is to put himself in the place of the father, just as the hero terminates his revolt against the father. This can be done in both instances, because the conflict with the father--which dates back to the concealment of the sexual processes, as suggested by the latest discoveries--is nullified at the instant when the grown boy himself becomes a father. The persistence with which the paranoiac puts himself in the father's place, i.e., becomes a father himself, appears like an illustration to the common answers of little boys to a scolding or a putting off of their inquisitive curiosity: You just wait until I am a papa myself, and I'll know all about it!

Besides the paranoiac, his equally asocial counterpart must also be emphasized. In the expression of the identical

[p. 95]

fantasy contents, the hysterical individual, who has suppressed them, is offset by the pervert, who realizes them; and just so the diseased and passive paranoiac--who needs his delusion for the correction of the actuality, which to him is intolerable--is offset by the active criminal, who endeavors to change the actuality according to his mind. In this special sense, this type is represented by the anarchist. The hero himself, as shown by his detachment from the parents, begins his career in opposition to the older generation; he is at once a rebel, a renovator, and a revolutionary. However, every revolutionary is originally a disobedient son, a rebel against the father. [*1] (Compare the suggestion of Freud, in connection with the interpretation of a "revolutionary dream.") [*2]

But whereas the paranoiac, in conformity with his passive character, has to suffer persecutions and wrongs which ultimately proceed from the father--and which he endeavors to escape by putting himself in the place of the father or the emperor--the anarchist complies more faithfully with the heroic character, by promptly himself becoming the persecutor of kings, and finally killing the king, precisely like the hero. The remarkable similarity between the career of certain anarchistic criminals and the family romance of hero and child has been elsewhere illustrated by the author, through special instances. [*3] The truly heroic element then consists only in the real justice or even necessity of the act, which is therefore generally endorsed and admired; [*4] while the morbid trait, also in criminal

[p. 96]

cases, is the pathologic transference of the hatred from the father to the real king, or several kings, when more general and still more distorted.

As the hero is commended for the same deed, without asking for its psychic motivation, so the anarchist might claim indulgence from the severest penalties, for the reason that he has killed an entirely different person from the one he really intended to destroy, in spite of an apparently excellent (perhaps political) motivation of his act. [*1]

For the present let us stop at the narrow boundary line where the contents of innocent infantile imaginings, suppressed and unconscious neurotic fantasies, poetical myth structures, and certain forms of mental disease and crime lie close together, although far apart as to their causes and dynamic forces. We resist the temptation to follow one of these divergent paths that lead to altogether different realms, but which are as yet unblazed trails in the wilderness.

 

Footnotes

^65:1 The possibility of further specification of separate items of this outline will be seen from the compilation given by Lessmann at the conclusion of his "Die Kyrossage in Europe" (loc. cit.).

^66:1 See also Wundt, who interprets the hero psychologically as a projection of human desires and aspirations (op. cit., p. 48).

^69:1 Compare Freud: "Hysterical Fancies, and their Relation to Bisexuality," with references to the literature on this subject. This contribution is contained in the second series of Sammlung kleiner Schriften zur Neurosenlehre (Vienna and Leipzig, 1909).

^71:1 For the idealizing of the parents by the children, compare Maeder's comments (Jahrbuch fur Psychoanalyse, I (1909), p. 152, and Zentralblatt fur Psychoanalyse, I, p. 51) on Varendonk's essay, "Les ideals d'enfant."

^71:2 Interpretation of Dreams.

^73:1 Compare the "birth dreams" in Freud's Interpretation of Dreams, also the examples quoted by the author in Die Lohengrin Saga (Vienna, 1911), pp. 27 ff.

^73:2 In fairy tales, which are adapted to infantile ideation, and especially to the infantile sexual theories (compare Freud in the December, 1908, number of Sexuelle Probleme), the birth of man is frequently represented as a lifting of the child from a well or a lake (Thimme, op. cit. p. 157). The story of "Dame Holle's Pond" (Grimm: Deutsche Sagen, Vol. I, p. 7) relates that the newborn children come from her well, whence she brings them forth. The same interpretation is apparently expressed in certain national rites; for example, when a Celt had reason to doubt his paternity, be placed the newborn child on a large shield and put it adrift in the nearest river. If the waves carried it ashore, it was considered as legitimate, but if the child drowned, this was proof of the contrary, and the mother was also put to death (see Franz Helbing: History of Feminine Infidelity). Additional ethnological material from folklore has been compiled by the author in Die Lohengrin Saga, pp. 20 ff.

^73:3 The "box" in certain myths is represented by the cave, which also distinctly symbolizes the womb; aside from statements in Abraham, Ion, and others, a noteworthy case is that of Zeus, who is born in a cave on Mount Ida and nourished by the goat Amalthea, his mother concealing him for fear of her husband, the Titan Cronus. According to Homer's Iliad (XVIII, 396 ff.), Hephaestus is also cast into the water by his mother, on account of his lameness, and remains hidden for nine years in a cave surrounded by water. By exchanging the reversal, the birth (the fall into the water) is here plainly represented as the termination of the nine months of the intra-uterine life. More common than the cave birth is the exposure in a box, which is likewise told in the Babylonian Marduk-Tammuz myth, as well as in the Egyptian-Phoenician Osiris-Adonis myth (compare Winckler: Die Weltanschauung des alten Orients, Ex Oriente Lux, Vol. I., p. 43; and Jeremias, Die Babylonisches . . . , p. 41). Bacchus, according to Pausanius (III, 24), is also removed from the persecution of the king through exposure in a chest on the Nile, and is saved at the age of three months by a king's daughter, which is remarkably suggestive of the Moses legend A similar story is told of Tennes, the son of Cycnus (Siecke: "Hermes . . ." loc. cit., p. 48) and of many others.

The occurrence of the same symbolic representation among the aborigines [p. 74] is illustrated by the following examples: Stucken (op. cit.) relates the New Zealand tale of the Polynesian Fire (and Seed) Robber, Mani-tiki-tiki, who is exposed directly after his birth, his mother throwing him into the sea, wrapped in an apron (chest, box). A similar story is reported by Frobenius (op. cit., p. 379) from the Betsimisaraka of Madagascar, where the child is exposed on the water, is found and raised by a rich, childless woman, but finally resolves to discover his actual parents. According to a report of Bab (Zeitschrift fur Ethnologie, 1906, p. 281), the wife of the Raja Besurjay was presented with a child floating on a bubble of water-foam (from Singapore).

^74:1 Compare Freud: Interpretation of Dreams.

^74:2 Abraham (op. cit. pp. 22-3) contains the analysis of a very similar although more complicated birth dream, corresponding to the actual conditions: the dreamer, a young pregnant woman awaiting her delivery, not without fear, dreamed of the birth of her son, and the water appeared directly as the amniotic fluid.

^74:3 This fantasy of an enormous water is extremely suggestive of the large and widespread group of the flood myths, which actually seem to be no more than the universal expression of the exposure myth. The hero is here represented by humanity at large. The wrathful father is the god; the destruction and the rescue of humanity follow each other in immediate succession. In this parallelization, it is of interest to note that the ark, or pitched house, in which Noah floats upon the water is designated in the Old Testament by the same word (tebah) as the receptacle in which the infant Moses is exposed (Jeremias: The Old Testament . . ., p. 250). For the motif of the great flood, compare Jeremias, p. 226, and Lessmann, at the close of his treatise, "Die Kyrossage .," loc. cit., where the flood is described as a possible digression of the exposure in the water. A transition instance is illustrated by the flood saga told by Bader, in his Baden folk legends: When the Sunken Valley was inundated once upon a time by a cloudburst, a little boy was seen floating upon the waters in a cradle, and was miraculously saved by a cat (Gustav Friedrich, op. cit., p. 265).

TRANSLATORS' NOTE: The author has endeavored to explain the psychological relations of the exposure myth, the flood legend, and the devouring myth in his article on the "Overlying Symbols in Dream Awakening, and Their Recurrence in Mythical Ideation"--"Die Symbolschichtung in Wecktraum and ihre Wiederkehr im mythischen Denken," Jahrbuch fur Psychoanalyse, V (1912).

^75:1 Interpretation of Dreams. Compare the same reversal of the meanings in Winckler's interpretation of the etymology of the name of Moses, on page 16, footnote 7.

^75:2 The same conditions remain in the formation of dreams and in the transformation of hysterical fantasies into seizures. See p. 238 (and the annotation on that page) of Freud's Traumdeutung (the German edition of Interpretation of Dreams); see also his "Allgemeines uber den hysterischen Anfall"("General Remarks on Hysterical Seizures") in Sammlung kleiner Schriften . , 2d series, pp. 146 ff.

^75:3 According to a pointed remark of Jung's, this reversal in its further mythical sublimation permits the approximation of the hero's life to the solar cycle. Carl G. Jung: "Wandlungen und Symbole der Libido," Jahrbuch fur Psychoanalyse, V (1912), p. 253.

^76:1 The second item of the schedule here enters into consideration: the voluntary continence or prolonged separation of the parents, which naturally induces the miraculous conception and virgin birth of the mother. The abortion fantasies, which are especially distinct in the Zoroaster legend, also belong under this heading.

^76:2 The comparison of birth with a shipwreck, by the Roman poet Lucretius, seems to be in perfect harmony with this symbolism: "Behold the infant: Like a shipwrecked sailor, cast ashore by the fury of the billows, the poor child lies naked on the ground, bereft of all means for existence, after Nature has dragged him in pain from the mother's womb. With plaintive wailing he filleth the place of his birth, and he is right, for many evils await him in life" (De Natura Rerum, V, 222-7). Similarly, the first version of Schiller's Robbers, in speaking of Nature, says: "She endowed us with the spirit of invention, when she exposed us naked and helpless on the shore of the great Ocean, the World. Let him swim who may, and let the clumsy perish!"

^77:1 Compare the representation of this relation and its psychic consequences, in Freud's Interpretation of Dreams.

^78:1 Some myths convey the impression that the love relation with the mother had been removed, as being too objectionable to the consciousness of certain periods or peoples. Traces of this suppression are still evident in a comparison of different myths or different versions of the same myth. For example, in the version of Herodotus, Cyrus is a son of the daughter of Astyages; but according to the report of Ctesias, he makes the daughter of Astyages, whom he conquers, his wife, and kills her husband (who in the rendering of Herodotus is his father). See Husing, op. cit. Also a comparison of the saga of Darab with the very similar legend of St. Gregory serves to show that in the Darab story the incest with the mother which otherwise precedes the recognition of the son is simply omitted; here, on the contrary, the recognition prevents the incest. This attenuation may be studied in the nascent state, as it were, in the myth of Telephus, where the hero is married to his mother but recognizes her before the consummation of the incest. The fairy-tale-like setting of the Tristan legend, which makes Isolde draw the little Tristan from the water (i.e., give him birth), thereby suggests the fundamental incest theme, which is likewise manifested in the adultery with the wife of the uncle.

TRANSLATORS' NOTE: The reader is referred to Inzestmotiv, in which the incest theme, which is here merely mentioned, is discussed in detail, picking up the many threads which lead to this theme, but which have been dropped at the present time.

^79:1 The mechanism of this defense is discussed in Freud's "Hamlet Analysis," in his Interpretation of Dreams. Ernest Jones has also discussed this in an article (1911) in the American Journal of Psychology.

^80:1 I regard to further meanings of the grandfather, see Freud's "Analysis of a Phobia in a Five-Year-Old Boy," Jahrbuch fur Psychoanalyse, I (1909); also the contributions of Jones, Abraham, and Ferenczi in the March, 1913, issue of Internationale Zeitschrift fur artzliche Psychoanalyse.

^80:2 See Chapter xi, Inzestmotiv.

^80:3 Detailed literary references concerning the wide distribution of this story are found in R. Kohler: Kleiner Schriften, Vol. II, p. 357.

^81:1 A similar identification of the father with God ("Heavenly Father," etc.) occurs, according to Freud, with the same regularity in the fantasies of normal and pathological psychic activity as the identification of the emperor with the father. It is also noteworthy in this connection that almost all peoples derive their origin from their god (Abraham, op. cit.).

^81:2 An amusing example of unconscious humor in children recently appeared in the daily press: A politician had explained to his little son that a tyrant is a man who forces others to do what he commands, without heeding their wishes in the matter. "Well," said the child, "then you and Mama are also tyrants!"

^82:1 See Max Muller, op. cit., pp. 20 ff. Concerning the various psychological contingencies of this setting, compare pp. 83 ff. of Inzestmotiv.

^83:1 Compare Eduard Meyer: "Die Mosessagen and die Lewiten," in Sitzungsberichte der koniglich preussischen Akademie der Wissenschaften, XXXI (1905), p. 640: "Presumably Moses was originally the son of the tyrant's daughter (who is now his foster mother), and probably of divine origin." The subsequent elaboration into the present form is probably referable to national motives.

^84:1 This idea, which is derived from the knowledge of the neurotic fantasy and symptom construction, was applied by Professor Freud to the interpretation of the romantic and mythical work of poetic imagination, in a lecture entitled "Der Dichter and das Phantasieren" ("Poets and Imaginings"), reprinted in Sammlung kleiner Schriften . . ., 2d series.

^85:1 Per ethno-psychologic parallels and other infantile sexual theories which throw some light upon the supplementary myth of the hero's procreation, compare the author's treatise in Zentralblatt fur Psychoanalyse, II (1911), pp. 392-425.

^85:2 Rank: Die Lohengrin Saga.

^85:3 Concerning the water as the "water of death," compare especially ibid., Chapter iv.

^86:1 Loc. cit., p. 356.

^86:2 The fairy tales, which have been left out of consideration in the context, precisely on account of these complications, include especially: "The Devil with the Three Golden Hairs" (Grimm, No. 29), and the very similar "Saga of Emperor Henry III" (Grimm, Deutsche Sagen, Vol. II, p. 177); "Water-Peter," with numerous variations (Grimm, Vol. III, p. 103); "Fundevogel," No. 51; "The Three Birdies" (No. 96); "The King of the Golden Mountain" (No. 92), with its parallels; as well as some foreign fairy tales, which are quoted by Bauer, at the end of his article (loc. cit.). Compare also, in Hahn: Greek and Albanese Fairy Tales (Leipzig, 1864), the review of the exposure stories and myths, especially No. 20 and No. 69.

^88:1 A connection is here supplied with the theme of the twins, in which we seem to recognize the two boys born at the same time--one of which dies for the sake of the other, be it directly after birth, or later--and whose parents appear divided in our myths into two or more parent-couples. Concerning the probable significance of this shadowy twin brother as the afterbirth, compare the author's discussion in his Inzestmotiv (pp. 459 ff).

^88:2 The early history of Sigurd, as it is related in the Volsungasaga (compare Rassmann, op. cit., Vol. I, p. 99), closely resembles the Ctesian version of the Cyrus saga, giving us the tradition of another hero's wonderful career, together with its rational rearrangement. For particulars, see Bauer, loc. cit., p. 554. Also the biblical history of Joseph (Exodus 37-50)--with the exposure, the animal sacrifice, the dreams, the sketchy brethren, and the fabulous career of this hero--seems to belong to this type of myth.

^89:1 In order to avoid misunderstandings, it appears necessary to emphasize at this point the historical nucleus of certain hero myths. Cyrus, as is shown by the inscriptions which have been discovered (compare Duncker, op. cit., p. 289; and Bauer, loc. cit., p. 498) was descended from an old hereditary royal house. It could not be the object of the myth to elevate the descent of Cyrus, nor must the above interpretation be regarded as an attempt to establish a lowly descent. Similar conditions prevail in the case of Sargon, whose royal father is also known (compare Jeremias: The Old Testament . . . , p. 410 n.). Nevertheless a historian writes about Sargon as follows (Ungnad: "Die Anfange der Staatenbildung in Babylonien," Deutsche Rundschau, July 1905): "He was evidently of noble descent, or no such saga could have been woven about his birth and his youth." It would be a gross error to consider our interpretation as an argument in this sense. Again, the apparent contradiction which might be held up against our explanation, under another mode of interpretation, becomes the proof of its correctness, through the reflection that it is not the hero but the average man who makes the myth and wishes to vindicate himself in it. The people imagine the hero in this manner, investing him with their own infantile fantasies, irrespective of their actual compatibility or incompatibility with historical facts. This also serves to explain the transference of the typical motifs, be it to several generations of the same hero-family, or be it to historical personalities in general (concerning Caesar, Augustus and others, compare Usener, Rhein. Mus., LV, p. 271).

^89:2 This identification of the families is carried through to the minutest detail in certain myths, as for example in the Oedipus myth, where one royal couple is offset by another, and where even the herdsman who receives the infant for exposure has his exact counterpart in the herdsman to whom he entrusts the rescue of the boy.

^90:1 Compare Gubernatis: Zoological Mythology (London, 1872); and Hartmann: Die Tiere in der indogermanischen Mythologie (Leipzig, 1874). Concerning the significance of animals in exposure myths, see also the contributions by Bauer (loc. cit., pp. 574 ff.); Goldziher (op. cit., p. 274); and Liebrecht: Zur Volkskunde, Romulus and die Welfen (Heilbronn, 1879).

^90:2 Compare Freud's article on the infantile recurrence of totemism, in Imago, Vol. II (1913). Concerning the totemistic foundation of the Roman she-wolf, see Jones's writings on nightmares (Alptraume). The woodpecker of the Romulus saga was discussed by Jung (loc. cit., pp. 382 ff.).

^91:1 The stork is known also in mythology as the bringer of children. Siecke (Liebesgeschichten des Himmels, p. 26) points out the swan as the player of this part in certain regions and countries. The rescue and further protection of the hero by a bird is not uncommon; compare Gilgamesh, Zal, and Cycnus (who is exposed by his mother near the sea and is nourished by a swan, while his son Tennes floats in a chest upon the water). The interpretation of the leading motif of the Lohengrin saga also enters into present consideration. Its most important motifs belong to this mythical cycle: Lohengrin floats in a skiff upon the water, and is brought ashore by a swan. No one may ask whence he has come; the sexual mystery of the origin of man must not be revealed, but it is replaced by the suggestion of the stork fable; the children are fished from the water by the swan and are taken to the parents in a box. Corresponding to the prohibition of all inquiries in the Lohengrin saga, we find in other myths (for example, the Oedipus myth), a command to investigate, or a riddle that must be solved. For the psychological significance of the stork fable, compare Freud: Infantile Sexual Theories. Concerning the hero myth, see also the author's Die Lohengrin Saga.

^92:1 Compare Freud: "Analysis of a Phobia in a Five-Year-Old Boy," loc. cit.

^92:2 Usener (Stoff des griechischen Epos, p, 53) says that the controversy between the earlier and the later Greek sagas concerning the mother of a divinity is usually reconciled by the formula that the mother of the general Greek saga is recognized as such, while the mother of the local tradition is lowered to the rank of a nurse. Thero may therefore be unhesitatingly regarded as the mother, not merely the nurse, of the god Ares.

^93:1 Abraham, loc. cit., p. 40; Riklin, op. cit., p. 74.

^93:2 Brief mention is made of a case concerning a Frau von Hervay, because of a few subtle psychological comments upon the same by A. Berger (Feuilleton der Neue Freie Presse, Nov. 6, 1904), which in part touch upon our interpretation of the hero myth. Berger writes as follows: "I am convinced that she seriously believes herself to be the illegitimate daughter of an aristocratic Russian lady. The desire to belong through birth to more distinguished and brilliant circles than her own surroundings probably dates back to her early years; and her wish to be a princess gave rise to the delusion that she was not the daughter of her parents, but the child of a noblewomen who had concealed her illegitimate offspring from the world by letting her grow up as the daughter of a sleight-of-hand man. Having once become entangled in these fancies, it was natural for her to interpret any harsh word that offended her, or any accidental ambiguous remark that she happened to hear, but especially her reluctance to be the daughter of this couple, as a confirmation of her romantic delusion. She therefore made it the task of her life to regain the social position of which she felt herself to have been defrauded. Her biography manifests the strenuous insistence upon this idea, with a tragic outcome."

The female type of the family romance, as it confronts us in this case from the asocial side, has also been transmitted as a hero myth in isolated instances. The story goes of the later Queen Semiramis (in Diodorus, II, 4) that her mother, the goddess Derceto, being ashamed of her, exposed the child in a barren and rocky land, where she was fed by doves and found by shepherds, who gave the infant to the overseer of the royal flocks, the childless Simnas, who raised her as his own daughter. He named her Semiramis, which meant "dove" in the ancient Syrian language. Her further career and autocratic rulership, thanks to her masculine energy, is a matter of "history."

Other exposure myths are told of Atalanta, Cybele, and Aerope (see Roscher, op. cit.).

^94:1 Freud: Three Contributions to the Theory of Sex; also Psychopathologie des Altagslebens; and Hysterische Phantasien and ihre Beziehung zur Bisexualitat.

^95:1 This is especially evident in the myths of the Greek gods, where the son (Cronus, Zeus) must first remove the father, before he can enter upon his rulership. The form of the removal, namely through castration--obviously the strongest expression of the revolt against the father--is at the same time the proof of its sexual provenance. Concerning the revenge character of this castration, as well as the infantile significance of the entire complex, compare Freud: "Infantile Sexual Theories," and "Analysis of a Phobia in a Five-Year-Old Boy (loc. cit.).

^95:2 Freud:  (German edition of Interpretation of Dreams), 2d edition, p. 153.

^95:3 "Belege zur Bettungsphantasie," Zentralblatt fur Psychoanalyse, I (1911), p. 331; also "Die Rolle des Familienromans in der Psychologie des Attentaters," Internationale Zeitschrift fur artzliche Psychoanalyse, I (191,3).

^95:4 Compare the contrast between Tell and Parricida, in Schiller's Wilhelm Tell, which is discussed in detail in the author's Inzestmotiv.

^96:1 Compare in this connection the unsuccessful homicidal attempt of Tatjana Leontiew, and its subtle psychological illumination, in Wittels: Die sexuelle Not (Vienna and Leipzig, 1909).

    


===== BOOK: mcm.txt =====


    
Musings of a Chinese Mystic, by Lionel Giles, [1906], at sacred-texts.com

THE WISDOM OF THE EAST SERIES
 EDITED BY
 L. CRANMER-BYNG
 Dr. S. A. KAPADIA

MUSINGS OF A CHINESE MYSTIC

[]

FIRST EDITION June 1906

Reprinted, December 1911

[]

  

WISDOM OF THE EAST

  

MUSINGS OF A CHINESE MYSTIC

SELECTIONS FROM THE PHILOSOPHY

  

OF CHUANG TZU.

  

WITH AN INTRODUCTION BY

  

LIONEL GILES, M.A. (OXON.)

  

ASSISTANT AT THE BRITISH MUSEUM

  

LONDON

  

JOHN MURRAY, ALBEMARLE STREET

  

[1906]

Scanned, proofed and formatted by John Bruno Hare at sacred-texts.com, February 2008. This text is in the public domain because it was published prior to 1923.

Click to enlarge
Front Cover and Spine

Click to enlarge
Title Page

Click to enlarge
Verso (facing Title Page)

     
Musings of a Chinese Mystic, by Lionel Giles, [1906], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 5]

  

CONTENTS

           

       PAGE

     
      NOTE

       <page 7>

     
      INTRODUCTION

       <page 11>

     
      THE DOCTRINE OF RELATIVITY

       <page 37>

     
      THE IDENTITY OF CONTRARIES

       <page 42>

     
      ILLUSIONS

       <page 48>

     
      THE MYSTERIOUS IMMANENCE OF TAO

       <page 51>

     
      THE HIDDEN SPRING

       <page 60>

     
      NON-INTERFERENCE WITH NATURE

       <page 66>

     
      PASSIVE VIRTUE

       <page 69>

     
      SELF-ADAPTATION TO EXTERNALS

       <page 77>

     
      IMMORTALITY OF THE SOUL

       <page 82>

     
      THE SAGE, OR PERFECT MAN

       <page 86>

     
      RANDOM GLEANINGS

       <page 93>

     
      PERSONAL ANECDOTES

       <page 109>

     
   
     
Musings of a Chinese Mystic, by Lionel Giles, [1906], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 6] [p. 7]

  

NOTE

THE extracts in this volume are drawn, with one or two very slight modifications, from the translation by Professor H. A. Giles (Quaritch, 1889).

     
Musings of a Chinese Mystic, by Lionel Giles, [1906], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 8]

  

EDITORIAL NOTE

THE object of the Editors of this series is a very definite one. They desire above all things that, in their humble way, these books shall be the ambassadors of good-will and understanding between East and West--the old world of Thought and the new of Action. In this endeavour, and in their own sphere, they are but followers of the highest example in the land. They are confident that a deeper knowledge of the great ideals and lofty philosophy of Oriental thought may help to a revival of that true spirit of Charity which neither despises nor fears the nation of another creed and colour.

L. CRANMER-BYNG.
 S. A. KAPADIA.

NORTHBROOK SOCIETY,
     21, CROMWELL ROAD,
         KENSINGTON, S.W.

[p. 9] [p. 10]

     
Musings of a Chinese Mystic, by Lionel Giles, [1906], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 11]

  

MUSINGS OF A CHINESE MYSTIC

  

INTRODUCTION

ALTHOUGH Chinese history can show no authentic contemporary record prior to the Chou dynasty, some eleven hundred years before Christ, there is no doubt that a high pitch of civilisation was attained at a much earlier period. Thus Lao Tzu was in no sense the first humanising instructor of a semi-barbaric race. On the contrary, his was a reactionary influence, for the cry he raised was directed against the multiplication of laws and restrictions, the growth of luxury, and the other evils which attend rapid material progress. That his lifetime should have coincided with a remarkable extension of the very principles he combated with such energy is one of the ironies of fate. Before he was in his grave another great man had arisen who laid unexampled stress on the minute regulation of ceremonies

[p. 12]

and ritual, and succeeded in investing the rules of outward conduct with an importance they had never hitherto possessed.

If Lao Tzu then had revolted against the growing artificiality of life in his day, a return to nature must have seemed doubly imperative to his disciple Chuang Tzu who flourished more than a couple of centuries later, when the bugbear of civilisation had steadily advanced. With chagrin he saw that Lao Tzu's teaching had never obtained any firm hold on the masses, still less on the rulers of China, whereas the star of Confucius was unmistakably in the ascendant. Within his own recollection the propagation of Confucian ethics had received a powerful impetus from Mencius, the second of China's orthodox sages. Now Chuang Tzu was imbued to the core with the principles of pure Taoism, as handed down by Lao He might more fitly be dubbed "the Tao-saturated man" than Spinoza "the God-intoxicated." Tao in its various phases pervaded his inmost being and was reflected in all his thought. He was therefore eminently qualified to revive his Master's ringing protest against the materialistic tendencies of the time.

Chuang Tzu's worldly position was not high. We learn from Ssu-ma Ch'ien that he held a petty official post in a small provincial town. But his literary and philosophical talent must soon have brought him into repute, for we find him

[p. 13]

in frequent contact with the leading scholars of the age, against whom he is said to have defended his tenets with success. It does not appear, however, that he gained promotion in the public service, which is doubtless to be attributed to his own lack of ambition and shrinking from an active career, as we have his personal account of a deputation which vainly tried to induce him to accept the post of Prime Minister in the Ch'u State. Official routine must have proved in the highest degree distasteful to this finely tempered poetic spirit, as it has to many a chafing genius since. Bold in fancy yet retiring by disposition, prone to melancholy yet full of eager enthusiasm, a natural sceptic yet inspired with boundless belief in his doctrine, he was a man full of contradictions, but none the less fitted to make a breach in the cast-iron traditions of Confucianism, if not to draw others after him in the same track. Of his mental development there remains no record. His convictions, as they stand revealed in his great philosophical work, are already mature, if somewhat lacking in consistency; he comes before the public as a keen adherent of the school of Lao Tzu giving eloquent and impassioned utterance to the ideas which had germinated in the brain of his Master. Chuang indeed, supplies the prime deficiency of Lao Tzu; he has the gift of language which enables him to clothe in rich apparel the great

[p. 14]

thoughts that had hitherto found their only expression in bare disconnected sayings. These scraps of concise wisdom, which are gathered together in the patchwork treatise known as the Tao Te Ching, seem to have formed the kernel of his doctrine, and he proceeded to develop them in a hundred different directions. It would be unjust, however, to infer from this that there is nothing in Chuang Tzu which cannot be traced back to the older sage, or that he was incapable of original thought of distinct and independent value. On the contrary, his mental grasp of elusive metaphysical problems was hardly if at all inferior to that of Lao Tzu himself, and certainly never equalled by any subsequent Chinese thinker. His writings also have that stimulating suggestiveness which stamps the product of all great minds. After reading and re-reading Chuang one feels there are latent depths still unplumbed. Moreover, he gives free rein to his own particular fancies and predilections. There are sides of Lao teaching at which he hardly glances, or which he passes over entirely, while in other directions he allows his brilliant imagination to carry him far out of sight of his fountain-head. If the analogy be not too heavily pressed, we may say that he was to the Founder of Taoism what St. Paul was to the Founder of Christianity.

As with Lao Tao forms the centre and

[p. 15]

pivot of Chuang Tzu's whole system; and this imparts real unity to his work, which in other respects appears undeniably straggling and illcompacted. But Tao as conceived by Chuang Tzu is not quite the same thing as the Tao of which Lao Tzu spoke with such wondering awe. The difference will be better understood after a brief sketch of the gradual development in the meaning of the word. The first meaning of Tao is "road" or "way," and in very early times it was used by a figure of speech for the "way" or method of doing a thing. Thus it came to denote a rule of right conduct, moral action, or the principle underlying it. There also grew up in common speech a natural antithesis between the Way of Heaven (T'ien Tao) and the Way of man, the former expression signifying the highest standard of wisdom and moral excellence, as opposed to the blind groping after truth here below. Finally the "T'ien" was dropped, and Tao then stood alone for the great unseen principle of Good dominating and permeating the Universe. The transition is visible in Lao Tzu, who was probably the first to employ the term in its transcendental sense, but who also retains the older expression T'ien Tao. In one of his sayings T'ien Tao is practically equivalent to Tao the First Cause, and must therefore be translated not the Way but the Tao of Heaven. This brings us to the next stage, of which Chuang

[p. 16]

[paragraph continues] Tzu is the representative. In his writings Tao never seems to mean "way." But he introduces a new element of perplexity by speaking of T'ien and Tao as though they were two co-existent yet perfectly distinct cosmic principles. He also uses the combination T'ien Tao, and it is here that the clue to the difficulty must be sought. The Tao of Heaven is evidently an attribute rather than a thing in itself, and it is T'ien which has now become the First Cause. It is a less impersonal conception, however, than Lao Tzu's transcendental Tao, and in fact closely approximates to our own term "God." [*1] What, then, is Chuang Tzu's Tao? Though by no means always clear and consistent on the subject, he seems to regard it as the "Virtue" or manifestation of the divine First Principle. It is what he somewhere calls "the happiness of God,"--which to the Taoist of course means a state of profound and passionless tranquillity, a "sacred everlasting calm." Now Lao Tzu speaks of Tao as having existed before Heaven and Earth: "Heaven," he says, "takes its law from Tao; but the law of Tao is its own spontaneity." With him, therefore, Tao is the antecedent of T'ien, being what modern philosophers term the Unconditioned or the Absolute. As to his T'ien, the ambiguity which lurks therein makes it doubtful whether he had any definite

[p. 17]

conception of it at all. He simply appears to have accepted the already existing Chinese cosmogony, oblivious or careless of its incompatibility with his own novel conception of Tao. Chuang Tzu to some extent removes this ambiguity by reverting to the older usage. He deposes Tao from its premier position as the Absolute, and puts T'ien in its place. Tao becomes a mystic moral principle not unlike Lao Tzu's Te, or "Virtue," and the latter term when used at all has lost most of its technical significance. Thus broadly stated, some such explanation will prove helpful to the reader, though he may still be baffled by a passage like the following: "A man looks upon God [*1] as upon his father, and loves Him in like measure. Shall he, then, not love that which is greater than God?" The truth is that neither consistency of thought nor exact terminology can be looked for in Chinese philosophy as a whole, and least of all, perhaps, in such an abstract system as that of early Taoism .

Leaving this somewhat barren discussion as to the relative position of Tao and T'ien, we now come to what was undoubtedly Chuang greatest achievement in the region of pure thought. As in so many other cases, the germ is provided by Lao Tzu who has the saying "The recognition of beauty as such implies the

[p. 18]

idea of ugliness, and the recognition of good implies the idea of evil." Following up this hint, Chuang Tzu is led to insist on the ultimate relativity of all human perceptions. Even space and time are relative. Sense-knowledge is gained by looking at things from only one point of view, and is therefore utterly illusory and untrustworthy. Hence, it appears that the most fundamental distinctions of our thought are unreal and crumble away when exposed to the "light of Nature." Contraries no longer stand in sharp antagonism, but are in some sense actually identical with each other, because there is a real and all-embracing Unity behind them. There is nothing which is not objective, nothing which is not subjective; which is as much as to say, that subjective is also objective, and objective also subjective. When he pauses here to ask whether it be possible to say that subjective and objective really exist at all, he seems to be touching the fringe of scepticism pure and simple. But the point is not pressed; he is an idealist at heart, and will not seriously question the existence of a permanent Reality underlying the flow of phenomena. True wisdom then consists in withdrawing from one's own individual standpoint and entering into "subjective relation with all things." He who can achieve this will "reject all distinctions of this and that," because he is able to descry an ultimate Unity

[p. 19]

in which they are merged, a mysterious One which "blends, transcends them all."

Still keeping Lao Tzu in sight, our author draws further curious inferences from this doctrine of relativity. Virtue implies vice, and therefore will indirectly be productive of it. In any case, to aim at being virtuous is only an ignorant and one-sided way of regarding the principles of the universe. Rather let us transcend the artificial distinctions of right and wrong, and take Tao itself as our model, keeping our minds in a state of perfect balance, absolutely passive and quiescent, making no effort in any direction. The ideal then is something which is neither good nor bad, pleasure nor pain, wisdom nor folly; it simply consists in following nature, or taking the line of least resistance. The attainment of this state, and the spiritual blessings accruing therefrom, constitute the main theme of Chuang Tzu's discourse. His whole duty of man is thus summed up and put into a nutshell; "Resolve your mental energy into abstraction, your physical energy into inaction. Allow yourself to fall in with the natural order of phenomena, without admitting the element of self."

This elimination of self is in truth the substitution of the ampler atmosphere of Tao for one's own narrow individuality. But Tao is not only inert and unchanging, it is also profoundly

[p. 20]

unconscious--a strange attribute, which at once fixes a gulf between it and our idea of a personal God. And accordingly, since Tao is the grand model for mankind, Chuang Tzu would have us strive to attain so far as may be to a like unconsciousness. But absolute and unbroken unconsciousness during this life being an impossibility, he advocates, not universal suicide, which would plainly violate the order of nature, but a state of mental abstraction which shall involve at least a total absence of self-consciousness. In order to explain his thought more clearly, he gives a number of vivid illustrations from life, such as the parable of Prince Hui's cook, who devoted himself to Tao and worked with his mind and not with his eye. [*1] He shows that the highest pitch of manual dexterity is attained only by those whose art has become their second nature, who have grown so familiar with their work that all their movements seem to come instinctively and of themselves, who, in other words, have reached the stage at which they are really "unconscious" of any effort. This application of Tao in the humble sphere of the handicraftsman serves to point the way towards the higher regions of abstract contemplation, where it will find its fullest scope. The same idea is carried into the domain of ethics. As we have seen, Chuang Tzu would have men neither moral nor

[p. 21]

immoral, but simply non-moral. And to this end every taint of self-consciousness must be purged away, the mind must be freed from its own criteria, and all one's trust must be placed in natural intuition. Any attempt to impose fixed standards of morality on the peoples of the earth is to be condemned, because it leaves no room for that spontaneous and unforced accord with nature which is the very salt of human action. Thus, were it feasible, Chuang Tzu would transport mankind back into the golden age which existed before the distinction between right and wrong arose. When the artificial barrier between contraries was set up, the world had already, in his eyes, lost its primitive goodness. For the mere fact of being able to call one's conduct good implies a lapse into the uncertain sea of relativity, and consequent deviation from the heavenly pattern. Herein lies the explanation of the paradox, on which he is constantly harping, that wisdom, charity, duty to one's neighbour and so on, are opposed to Tao.

It is small wonder that China has hesitated to adopt a system which logically leads to such extreme conclusions. Nevertheless, we must not too hastily write Chuang Tzu off as an unpractical dreamer. Remote though his speculations seem from the world of reality, they rest on a substratum of truth. In order to set forth his views with more startling effect, he certainly

[p. 22]

laid undue stress on the mystical side of Lao Tzu's philosophy, to the exclusion of much that was better worth handling. That he himself, however, was not altogether blind to the untenability of an extreme position may be gathered from a remark which he casually lets fall: "While there should be no action, there should be also no inaction." This is a pregnant saying, which shows how Chuang Tzu may have modified his stubborn attitude to meet the necessities of actual life. What he means is that any hard-and-fast, predetermined line of conduct is to be avoided, abstinence from action just as much as action itself. . The great thing is that nothing be done of set purpose when it seems to violate the natural order of events. On the other hand, if a certain course of action presents itself as the most obvious and natural to adopt, it would not be in accordance with Tao to shrink from it. This is known as the doctrine of inaction, but it would be more correctly named the doctrine of spontaneity.

There is another noteworthy element in Chuang Tzu's system which does much to smooth away the difficulty of reconciling theory and practice. This is what he calls the doctrine of non-angularity and self-adaptation to externals. It is really a corollary to the grand principle of getting outside one's personality--a process which extends the mental horizon and creates sympathy with the

[p. 23]

minds of others. Some such wholesome corrective was necessary to prevent the Taoist code from drifting into mere quixotry. Here again Lao Tzu may have supplied the seed which was to ripen in the pages of his disciple. "What the world reverences cannot be treated with disrespect," is the dictum of the older sage. But Chuang Tzu went beyond this negative precept. He saw well enough that unless a man is prepared to run his head against a stone wall, he must, in the modern cant phrase, adjust himself to his environment. Without abating a jot of his inmost convictions, he must "swim with the tide, so as not to offend others." Outwardly he may adapt himself, if inwardly he keeps up to his own standard. There must be no raging and tearing propaganda, but infinite patience and tact. Gentle moral suasion and personal example are the only methods that Chuang Tzu will countenance; and even with these he urges caution: "If you are always offending others by your superiority, you will probably come to grief." Above all, he abhors the clumsy stupidity which would go on forcing its stock remedies down the people's throat irrespective of place or season. Thus even Confucius is blamed for trying to revive the dead ashes of the past and "make the customs of Chou succeed in Lu." This, he says, is like "pushing a boat on land, great trouble and no result, except certain injury

[p. 24]

to oneself." There must be no blind and rigid adherence to custom and tradition, no unreasoning worship of antiquity. "Dress up a monkey in the robes of Chou Kung, [*1] and it will not be happy until they are torn to shreds. And the difference between past and present," he adds bitterly, "is much the same as the difference between Chou Kung and a monkey." The rebuke conveyed in these remarks is not wholly unmerited. Chuang Tzu, while hardly yielding to Confucius himself in his ardent admiration of the olden time, never fell into the mistake of supposing that the world can stand still, though he feared it might sometimes go backward. He believed that to be the wisest statecraft, which could take account of changed conditions and suit its measures to the age. Plainly the inactivity he preached, hard though it be to fathom and harder still to compass, was something very different from stagnation. It was a lesson China needed; well for her in these latter days if she had taken it more to heart!

The comparative neglect of Chuang Tzu among the literati of the Middle Kingdom is no doubt chiefly due to his cavalier treatment of Confucius, of which we have just had a sample. Most of the writers who mention him speak of

[p. 25]

his hostile attitude towards the head of the orthodox school. As a matter of fact, this hostility has been a little exaggerated. For one thing, Chuang Tzu's attitude is by no means consistent; the tone adopted towards Confucius passes through every variety of shade. In the first seven chapters, which form the nucleus of Chuang Tzu's work, he is assigned a very prominent position, acting for the most part as the mouth-piece of the author's own views, which he is made to expound with an air of authority. In only one passage is he treated with disrespect, though in another it is implied that he was a prophet unsuited to his age. In chapter vi we may even discern a rough attempt at reconciling the two extremes of mystic Taoism and matter-of-fact Confucianism. It seems that all may not aspire to the more intimate communion with Tao, though Tao is the environment of all. For Confucius here resigns himself to the will of Heaven, which has ordained that he, like the bulk of mankind, shall travel within the ordinary "rule of life," with its limited outlook, its prejudices, forms, and ceremonies; but he frankly recognises the superior blessedness of the favoured few who can transcend it. In some of the later chapters (the genuineness of which is not always unimpeachable) the Master is more severely handled. Especially does he appear to disadvantage, as might naturally be expected, in

[p. 26]

his alleged interviews with Lao Tzu. [*1] But in other places again he is represented as an earnest inquirer after truth, or even cited as an acknowledged authority. He quotes words which now stand in the Tao Te Ching, and generally behaves more like a disciple of Lao Tzu than as the head of a rival system. In chapter xxii, by a strange piece of inadvertence, he is actually made to disparage the Confucianists with their scholastic quibbles. But it is in the last of the genuine chapters, entitled Lieh Tzu, that the acme of inconsistency is reached. Here Confucius is attacked as "a man of outward show and specious words. He mistakes the branch for the root." If entrusted with the welfare of the State, "it will only be by mistake that he will succeed." Yet this tirade is immediately followed by a characteristic harangue in the Taoist vein, delivered by no other than the much-maligned sage himself. It is hard, indeed, to imagine the central figure of the Analects speaking in this strain:--"There is nothing more fatal than intentional virtue, when the mind looks outwards. For by thus looking outwards, the power of introspection is destroyed. . . . What is it to aim at virtue? Why, a man who aims at virtue practises what he approves and condemns what he does not practise."

[p. 27]

[paragraph continues] Misrepresentation is carried to such lengths that sayings are put into his mouth which are the exact opposite of what he really uttered. And it is unlikely that Chuang Tzu had much scruple in thus harnessing the great Teacher to his own doctrines. He was doubtless fully alive to the advantage of borrowing and, as it were, absorbing the unparalleled prestige of so great a man; besides which, the sheer audacity of the scheme must have attracted him; and he carried it out with what the Confucianists are justified in regarding as the utmost effrontery. Yet it would be too much to say that this curious form of homage was wholly insincere. There are signs that Chuang Tzu was impressed, almost in spite of himself, by the pure personal character of the man whose whole view of life he distrusted, but whose message was so deeply printed in the hearts of his countrymen. He could not escape the common influence; the very frequency with which he brings Confucius upon the stage, whether as prophet or target for abuse, tells of a certain involuntary fascination.

The state of doubt in which we are left with regard to our author's real estimate of Confucius may serve to call attention to the peculiar ironical quality of his mind, which pleasantly tempers his dogmatism and, indeed, often saves him from a sharp descent into the ridiculous. It would almost seem as if, true to the Taoist

[p. 28]

precept, he were endeavouring to break through the restraining bonds of his individual self, and to contemplate his own judgments from the outside. Needless to say, there is a fount of deep, almost fierce, earnestness in the man as well. But he never loses a certain delicacy of touch which lends peculiar aptness to the sobriquet of "butterfly," bestowed on him in allusion to his famous dream. [*1] To these qualities must be added, in order to complete a faint sketch of this unique figure in Chinese literature, a recurrent strain of pervasive melancholy, a mournful brooding over "the doubtful doom of humankind." Take, for instance, these few lines picturing the mental faculties in their inevitable decline: "Then, as under autumn and winter's blight, comes gradual decay; a passing away, like the flow of water, never to return. Finally, the block, when all is choked up like an old drain,--the failing mind which shall not see light again." Just as the form of Chuang Tzu's work hovers on the borderland of poetry and prose, so the content is poetic rather than strictly philosophic, by reason of the lightness and grace with which he skims over subjects bristling with difficulty. Lucidity and precision of thought are sometimes sacrificed to imagination and beauty of style. He seldom attempts passages of sustained reasoning, but prefers to rely on flashes of literary

[p. 29]

inspiration. He is said to have shone in his verbal conflicts with Hui Tzu, but the specimens of his dialectic that have been preserved are, perhaps, more subtle than convincing. The episode of the minnows under the bridge [*1] only proves that in arguing with a sophist he could himself descend to sophistry naked and unabashed.

A noteworthy feature of Chuang Tzu's method is the wealth of illustration which he lavishes upon his favourite topics. In a hundred various ways he contrives to point the moral which is never far from his thoughts. Realising as fully as Herbert Spencer after him, the necessity of constant iteration in order to force alien conceptions on unwilling minds, he returns again and again to the cardinal points of his system, and skilfully arrays his arguments in an endless stream of episode and anecdote. These anecdotes are usually thrown into the form of dialogue--not the compact and closely-reasoned dialogue of Plato, but detached conversations between real or imaginary persons, sometimes easy in tone, sometimes declamatory, and here and there rising to fine heights of rhetoric. It may be objected to this method that it hinders the proper development of thought by destroying its continuity, and is therefore more suited to a merely popular work than to that of a really original

[p. 30]

thinker; on the other side it can only be urged that it lends dramatic colouring and relieves the tedium inseparable from a long philosophical treatise. The objection, on the whole, has much force, and yet it is equally true that the alternative method would have robbed Chuang Tzu's work of more than half its charm; its immortality is after all due less to the matter, much of which to modern notions is somewhat crude, than to the exquisite form. And certainly, as a means of fixing a principle in the mind, a single anecdote told by Chuang Tzu is worth reams of dry disquisition.

Though the difficulty of his text and the abstruseness of his theme have been a bar to very wide-spread popularity, Chuang Tzu has never lost favour with the select band of scholars. From time to time, when Taoism happened to be in fashion, he also enjoyed considerable vogue at Court. His book, like the Tao Te Ching, formed the subject of lectures and examinations, and several Emperors are said to have studied and written upon it. In 713 A.D., it was specially decreed that those members of the public service should be singled out for promotion who were able to understand Chuang Tzu. That he was always considered a hard nut to crack is sufficiently shown by the flood of commentaries and other works devoted to his elucidation. Nevertheless, we are told as usual of a marvellous boy--

[p. 31]

one of the infant prodigies in whom Chinese annals are so rich--who at twelve years of age understood the meaning of both Lao Tzu and Chuang Tzu. The philosopher's works, in Kuo Hsiang's standard edition, were printed for the first time in the year 1005 A.D., and the reigning Emperor presented each of his Ministers with a copy.

Until we come to Lin Hsi-chung at the beginning of the present dynasty, native criticism cannot be said to have thrown any very dazzling light on our author. An early writer, who may possibly have seen him in the flesh, complains that "he hides himself in the clouds and has no knowledge of men." Another pronounces him "reckless, one who submitted to no law." From a third we learn that "in his desire to free himself from the trammels of objective existences, he lost himself in the quicksands of metaphysics." Sometimes he is damned with the faintest of praise: "In his teachings propriety plays no part, neither are they founded on eternal principles; nevertheless, they wear the semblance of wisdom and have their good points." On the other hand, rabid Confucianists insisted that "his book was expressly intended to cast a slur on their Master, in order to make people accept his own heterodox teaching; and, consequently, nothing would satisfy them but that his writings should be burnt and his disciples cut off. As

[p. 32]

to the rights and wrongs of his system, they were not even worth discussing."

From kindred poetic souls he has obtained more generous recognition. The great Po Chu-i, of the Tang dynasty, with whom he appears to have been a special favourite, was inspired by the perusal of his works to write three short poems, one of which contains the following stanzas [*1]:

PEACEFUL OLD AGE

Chuang Tzu said: "Tao gives me this toil in manhood, this repose in old age, this rest in death."

Swiftly and soon the golden sun goes down,
 The blue sky wells afar into the night;
 Tao is the changeful world's environment,
 Happy are they that in its laws delight.

Tao gives me toil--youth's passion to achieve,
 And leisure in life's autumn and decay:
 I follow Tao,--the seasons are my friends
 Opposing it, misfortune comes my way.

    .        .        .        .        .

Within my breast no sorrows can abide,
 I feel the great world's spirit through me thrill
 And as a cloud I drift before the wind,
 Or with the random swallow take my will.

[p. 33]

As underneath the mulberry tree I dream,
 The water-clock drips on, and dawn appears:
 A new day shines o'er wrinkles and white hair,
 The symbols of the fulness of my years.

    .        .        .        .        .

If I depart, I cast no look behind;
 If still alive, I still am free from care.
 Since life and death in cycles come and go,
 Of little moment are the days to spare.

Thus strong in faith I wait and long to be
 One with the pulsings of Eternity.

The Brahmanistic influence which these lines betray is faithfully reflected from Chuang Tzu. There are critics who would trace the same influence further back still, and regard the speculations of Lao Tzu himself as borrowed directly from India. But in the absence of any trustworthy evidence of communication between the two countries at that early date, the final verdict on this theory cannot yet be pronounced. With Chuang Tzu the case is somewhat different. The intervening period had seen the rise of Gautama and the spreading of a new and powerful religion which embodied in itself all the more essential parts of the Brahmanistic creed. By Chuang Tzu's time Buddhism had probably penetrated far and wide throughout Asia. It was not officially introduced into China until much later, but it seems only reasonable to suppose that driblets must have filtered through here and there.

[p. 34]

[paragraph continues] Certainly we find in the Chinese philosopher such striking points of similarity to Brahmanism as can hardly be explained as mere coincidences of thought. He believes, for instance, that every human being has a soul, which is an emanation from the great impersonal Soul of the universe. In contradistinction to the mind, which is only the scene or background of our ever-changing sensations and emotions, and dies with the body, the soul is in its nature immortal, and after passing through a series of different states in conditioned being, finally reunites with the divine essence whence it sprang. How to hasten the attainment of this goal of supreme bliss--that is the question which lies at the root of Chuang Tzu's philosophy. And his answer points to the abstract contemplation of Tao as the only means of destroying attachment to existence for its own sake, and thus loosening the soul from its bodily fetters. So far he resembles the Buddhist. But when he comes to touch on the contemplative life, we find him diverging from the recognised Buddhist ideal in one or two notable particulars. To him the highest form of virtue does not mean the mortification of animal instincts. Rather would he like these to have free and natural scope. Nor does it consist in living the life of a hermit. For "the perfect man can transcend the limits of the human and yet not withdraw from the world."

[p. 35]

[paragraph continues] "Those," he says, "who would benefit mankind from deep forests or lofty mountains are simply unequal to the strain upon their higher natures." Again, his hatred of outward show leads him to condemn anything approaching ritualism or asceticism, which he perceives truly enough to be symptoms of decay in the moral fibre. The only form of fasting he will recommend is the "fasting of the heart."

But divested thus of every shred of materialistic grossness, and converted into a purely spiritual creed, Taoism soon became altogether too shadowy and impalpable to stand alone against its formidable rival. It had to await the infusion of much-needed Buddhistic elements before it could re-assert itself as a national religion. This decline it was Chuang Tzu's fate to hasten rather than to arrest. His capital error lay in neglecting to develop those grand and simple moral truths with which Lao Tzu had leavened his abstruser speculations. The virtues of humility, gentleness and forgiveness of injury, which the earlier Taoist gospel held in such high esteem, are by him either passed over in silence or subordinated to the all-engrossing mystic purpose. Thus it was that the glowing promise of a singularly exalted moral code died away in later hands to the dust and ashes of a spurious metaphysic. No doubt, as a thorough-going exponent of his own principles, Chuang Tzu cared but little

[p. 36]

for outward and visible results. He was in no sense a propagandist; the kingdom of the mind was his real province. Yet the fact remains that the intellectual elevation and refinement of his system placed it beyond the grasp of all except a few; unlike Confucius, he made little or no provision for the struggling mass of mankind which could not be expected to rise to the higher planes of abstract thought.

This, however, is a criticism which leaves Chuang Tzu's literary position unaffected; and it is literature, after all, which claims the immortal part of his name and fame. For he of all the ancients wielded the most perfect mastery over Chinese prose style, and was the first to show to what heights of eloquence and beauty his native language could attain. And in these respects, great as the achievements are of which later Chinese literature can boast, he has never been surpassed. Indeed, his master-hand sounded chords that have vibrated since to no other touch. Finally, what effect may his writings be expected to produce on the modern Western mind? It is certain that to many, even through the necessarily imperfect medium of a translation, he already makes a powerful appeal; and it may at least be safely predicted that a far greater number of readers will be attracted by his originality and grace than repelled by the rather fantastic vagaries of his mysticism.

Footnotes

^16:1 It is translated thus in the accompanying extracts.

^17:1 T'ien.

^20:1 See <page 52>.

^24:1 A great jurist and social reformer of the twelfth century B.C., brother of the first sovereign of the Chou dynasty.

^26:1 Lao Tzu himself does not escape entirely. See the curious episode on <page 82> of the present volume.

^28:1 See <page 50>.

^29:1 See <page 110>.

^32:1 My friend Mr. L. Cranmer-Byng has kindly added the wings of his verse to my literal prose translation. All three poems will be found at the end of the section on Chuang in the great T'u Shu encyclopaedia.

     
Musings of a Chinese Mystic, by Lionel Giles, [1906], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 37]

  

THE DOCTRINE OF RELATIVITY

IN the northern ocean there is a fish, called the Leviathan, many thousand li [*1] in size. This Leviathan changes into a bird, called the Rukh, whose back is many thousand li in breadth. With a mighty effort it rises, and its wings obscure the sky like clouds. At the equinox, this bird prepares to start for the southern ocean, the Celestial Lake. And in the Record of Marvels we read that when the rukh flies southwards, the water is smitten for a space of three thousand li around, while the bird itself mounts upon a typhoon to a height of ninety thousand li, for a flight of six months' duration. Just so are the motes in a sunbeam blown aloft by God. For whether the blue of the sky is its real colour, or only the result of distance without end, the effect to the bird looking down would be just the same as to the motes. . . . A cicada laughed, and said to a young dove, "Now, when I fly with all my might, 'tis as much as I can do to get from tree to tree. And sometimes I do not reach,

[p. 38]

but fall to the ground midway. What, then, can be the use of going up ninety thousand li in order to start for the south?" . . . Those two little creatures,--what should they know? Small knowledge has not the compass of great knowledge any more than a short year has the length of a long year. How can we tell that this is so? The mushroom of a morning knows not the alternation of day and night. The chrysalis knows not the alternation of spring and autumn. Theirs are short years. But in the State of Ch'u there is a tortoise whose spring and autumn are each of five hundred years' duration. And in former days there was a large tree which had a spring and autumn each of eight thousand years' duration. Yet P'eng Tsu [*1] is still, alas! an object of envy to all.

.        .        .        .        .

There is nothing under the canopy of heaven greater than the tip of an autumn spikelet. A vast mountain is a small thing. Neither is there any age greater than that of a child cut off in infancy. P'eng Tsu himself died young. The universe and I came into being together; and I, and everything therein, are One.

.        .        .        .        .

It was the time of autumn floods. Every stream poured into the river, which swelled in its

[p. 39]

turbid course. The banks receded so far from each other that it was impossible to tell a cow from a horse.

Then the Spirit of the River laughed for joy that all the beauty of the earth was gathered to himself. Down with the stream he journeyed east until he reached the ocean. There, looking eastwards and seeing no limit to its waves, his countenance changed. And as he gazed over the expanse, he sighed and said to the Spirit of the Ocean, "A vulgar proverb says that he who has heard but part of the truth thinks no one equal to himself. And such a one am I.

"When formerly I heard people detracting from the learning of Confucius or underrating the heroism of Poh I, I did not believe. But now that I have looked upon your inexhaustibility--alas for me had I not reached your abode, I should have been for ever a laughing-stock to those of comprehensive enlightenment!"

To which the Spirit of the Ocean replied: "You cannot speak of ocean to a well-frog,--the creature of a narrower sphere. You cannot speak of ice to a summer insect,--the creature of a season. You cannot speak of Tao to a pedagogue: his scope is too restricted. But now that you have emerged from your narrow sphere and have seen the great ocean, you know your own insignificance, and I can speak to you of great principles. . .

[p. 40]

"The Four Seas--are they not to the universe but like puddles in a marsh? The Middle Kingdom--is it not to the surrounding ocean like a tare-seed in a granary? Of all the myriad created things, man is but one. And of all those who inhabit the land, live on the fruit of the earth, and move about in cart and boat, an individual man is but one. Is not he, as compared with all creation, but as the tip of a hair upon a horse's skin?

"Dimensions are limitless; time is endless. Conditions are not invariable; terms are not final. Thus, the wise man looks into space, and does not regard the small as too little, nor the great as too much; for he knows that there is no limit to dimension. He looks back into the past, and does not grieve over what is far off, nor rejoice over what is near; for he knows that time is without end. He investigates fulness and decay, and does not rejoice if he succeeds, nor lament if he fails; for he knows that conditions are not invariable. He who clearly apprehends the scheme of existence does not rejoice over life, nor repine at death; for he knows that terms are not final.

"What man knows is not to be compared with what he does not know. The span of his existence is not to be compared with the span of his non-existence. With the small, to strive to exhaust the great necessarily lands him in confusion,

[p. 41]

and he does not attain his object. How then should one be able to say that the tip of a hair is the ne plus ultra of smallness, or that the universe is the ne plus ultra of greatness?"

.        .        .        .        .

Those who would have right without its correlative, wrong; or good government without its correlative, misrule,--they do not apprehend the great principles of the universe nor the conditions to which all creation is subject. One might as well talk of the existence of heaven without that of earth, or of the negative principle without the positive, which is clearly absurd.

.        .        .        .        .

If you adopt, as absolute, a standard of evenness which is so only relatively, your results will not be absolutely even. If you adopt, as absolute, a criterion of right which is so only relatively, your results will not be absolutely right. Those who trust to their senses become slaves to objective existences. Those alone who are guided by their intuitions find the true standard. So far are the senses less reliable than the intuitions. Yet fools trust to their senses to know what is good for mankind, with alas 1 but external results.

Footnotes

^37:1 The li is about one-third of an English mile.

^38:1 The Methuselah of China.

     
Musings of a Chinese Mystic, by Lionel Giles, [1906], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 42]

  

THE IDENTITY OF CONTRARIES

TZu CH'I of Nan-kuo sat leaning on a table. Looking up to heaven, he sighed and became absent, as though soul and body had parted. Yen Che'ng Tzu Yu, who was standing by him, exclaimed "What are you thinking about that your body should become thus like dry wood, your mind like dead ashes? Surely the man now leaning on the table is not he who was here just now."

"My friend," replied Tzu Ch'i, "your question is apposite. To-day I have buried myself. . . . Do you understand? . . . Ah! perhaps you only know the music of Man, and not that of Earth. Or even if you have heard the music of Earth, you have not heard the music of Heaven."

"Pray explain," said Tzu Yu.

"The breath of the universe," continued Tzu Ch'i, "is called wind. At times, it is inactive. But when active, every aperture resounds to the blast. Have you never listened to its growing roar? Caves and dells of hill and forest, hollows in huge trees of many a span in girth,--these

[p. 43]

are like nostrils, like mouths, like ears, like beam-sockets, like goblets, like mortars, like ditches, like bogs. And the wind goes rushing through them, sniffing, snoring, singing, soughing, puffing, purling, whistling, whirring, now shrilly treble, now deeply bass, now soft, now loud; until, with a lull, silence reigns supreme. Have you never witnessed among the trees such a disturbance as this?"

"Well, then," inquired Tzu Yu, "since the music of Earth consists of nothing more than holes, and the music of Man of pipes and flutes, of what consists the music of Heaven?"

"The effect of the wind upon these various apertures," replied Tzu Ch'i, "is not uniform. But what is it that gives to each the individuality, to all the potentiality, of sound? . . . Joy and anger, sorrow and happiness, caution and remorse, come upon us by turns, with ever-changing mood. They come like music from hollowness, like mushrooms from damp. Daily and nightly they alternate within us, but we cannot tell whence they spring. Can we then hope in a moment to lay our finger upon their very cause?

"But for these emotions, I should not be. But for me, they would have no scope. So far we can go; but we do not know what it is that brings them into play. 'Twould seem to be a soul; but the clue to its existence is wanting. That such a power operates is credible enough,

[p. 44]

though we cannot see its form. It has functions without form.

"Take the human body with all its manifold divisions. Which part of it does a man love best? Does he not cherish all equally, or has he a preference? Do not all equally serve him? And do these servitors then govern themselves, or are they subdivided into rulers and subjects? Surely there is some soul which sways them all.

"But whether or not we ascertain what are the functions of this soul, it matters but little to the soul itself. For, coming into existence with this mortal coil of mine, with the exhaustion of this mortal coil its mandate will also be exhausted. To be harassed by the wear and tear of life, and to pass rapidly through it without possibility of arresting one's course,--is not this pitiful indeed? To labour without ceasing, and then, without living to enjoy the fruit, worn out, to depart, suddenly, one knows not whither,--is not that a just cause for grief?

"What advantage is there in what men call not dying? The body decomposes, and the mind goes with it. This is our real cause for sorrow. Can the world be so dull as not to see this? Or is it I alone who am dull, and others not so? . . . There is nothing which is not objective: there is nothing which is not subjective. But it is impossible to start from the objective. Only from subjective knowledge is

[p. 45]

it possible to proceed to objective knowledge. Hence it has been said, 'The objective emanates from the subjective; the subjective is consequent upon the objective. This is the Alternation Theory.' Nevertheless, when one is born, the other dies. When one is possible, the other is impossible. When one is affirmative, the other is negative. Which being the case, the true sage rejects all distinctions of this and that. He takes his refuge in God, and places himself in subjective relation with all things.

"And inasmuch as the subjective is also objective, and the objective also subjective, and as the contraries under each are indistinguishably blended, does it not become impossible for us to say whether subjective and objective really exist at all?

"When subjective and objective are both without their correlates, that is the very axis of Tao. And when that axis passes through the centre at which all Infinities converge, positive and negative alike blend into an infinite One. . . Therefore it is that, viewed from the standpoint of Tao, a beam and a pillar are identical. So are ugliness and beauty, greatness, wickedness, perverseness, and strangeness. Separation is the same as construction: construction is the same as destruction. Nothing is subject either to construction or to destruction, for these conditions are brought together into One.

[p. 46]

"Only the truly intelligent understand this principle of the identity of all things. They do not view things as apprehended by themselves, subjectively; but transfer themselves into the position of the things viewed. And viewing them thus they are able to comprehend them, nay, to master them; and he who can master them is near. [*1] So it is that to place oneself in subjective relation with externals, without consciousness of their objectivity,--this is Tao. But to wear out one's intellect in an obstinate adherence to the individuality of things, not recognising the fact that all things are One,--this is called Three in the Morning."

"What is Three in the Morning?" asked Tzu Yu.

"A keeper of monkeys," replied Tzu Chi, "said with regard to their rations of chestnuts, that each monkey was to have three in the morning and four at night. But at this the monkeys were very angry, so the keeper said they might have four in the morning and three at night, with which arrangement they were all well pleased. The actual number of the chestnuts remained the same, but there was an adaptation to the likes and dislikes of those concerned. Such is the principle of putting oneself into subjective relation with externals.

"Wherefore the true sage, while regarding

[p. 47]

contraries as identical, adapts himself to the laws of Heaven. This is called following two courses at once.

"The knowledge of the men of old had a limit. It extended back to a period when matter did not exist. That was the extreme point to which their knowledge reached. The second period was that of matter, but of matter unconditioned. The third epoch saw matter conditioned, but contraries were still unknown. When these appeared, Tao began to decline. And with the decline of Tao, individual bias arose."

Footnotes

^46:1 Sc., to the great goal of Tao.

     
Musings of a Chinese Mystic, by Lionel Giles, [1906], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 48]

  

ILLUSIONS

HOW do I know that love of life is not a delusion after all? How do I know but that he who dreads to die is as a child who has lost the way and cannot find his home?

The lady Li Chi was the daughter of Ai Feng. When the Duke of Chin first got her, she wept until the bosom of her dress was drenched with tears. But when she came to the royal residence, and lived with the Duke, and ate rich food, she repented of having wept. How then do I know but that the dead repent of having previously clung to life?

Those who dream of the banquet wake to lamentation and sorrow. Those who dream of lamentation and sorrow wake to join the hunt. While they dream, they do not know that they dream. Some will even interpret the very dream they are dreaming; and only when they awake do they know it was a dream. By and by comes the Great Awakening, and then we find out that this life is really a great dream. Fools think they are awake now, and flatter themselves

[p. 49]

they know if they are really princes or peasants. Confucius and you are both dreams; and I who say you are dreams,--I am but a dream myself. This is a paradox. To-morrow a sage may arise to explain it; but that tomorrow will not be until ten thousand generations have gone by.

Granting that you and I argue. If you beat me, and not I you, are you necessarily right and I wrong? Or if I beat you and not you me, am I necessarily right and you wrong? Or are we both partly right and partly wrong? Or are we both wholly right or wholly wrong? You and I cannot know this, and consequently the world will be in ignorance of the truth.

Who shall I employ as arbiter between us? If I employ some one who takes your view, he will side with you. How can such a one arbitrate between us? If I employ some one who takes my view, he will side with me. How can such a one arbitrate between us? And if I employ some one who either differs from or agrees with both of us, he will be equally unable to decide between us. Since then you, and I, and man, cannot decide, must we not depend upon Another? Such dependence is as though it were not dependence. We are embraced in the obliterating unity of God.

.        .        .        .        .

Once upon a time, I, Chuang dreamt

[p. 50]

[paragraph continues] I was a butterfly, fluttering hither and thither, to all intents and purposes a butterfly. I was conscious only of following my fancies as a butterfly, and was unconscious of my individuality as a man. Suddenly I awaked, and there I lay, myself again. Now I do not know whether I was then a man dreaming I was a butterfly, or whether I am now a butterfly dreaming I am a man. Between a man and a butterfly there is necessarily a barrier. The transition is called metempsychosis.

     
Musings of a Chinese Mystic, by Lionel Giles, [1906], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 51]

  

THE MYSTERIOUS IMMANENCE OF TAO

THE Penumbra said to the Umbra, "At one moment you move: at another you are at rest. At one moment you sit down: at another you get up. Why this instability of purpose?"

"I depend," replied the Umbra, "upon something which causes me to do as I do; and that something depends in turn upon something else which causes it to do as it does. My dependence is like that of a snake's scales or of a cicada's wings. How can I tell why I do one thing, or why I do not do another?"

.        .        .        .        .

Prince Hui's cook was cutting up a bullock. Every blow of his hand, every heave of his shoulders, every tread of his foot, every thrust of his knee, every whshh of rent flesh, every chhk of the chopper, was in perfect harmony,--rhythmical like the dance of the Mulberry Grove, simultaneous like the chords of the Ching Shou.

"Well done!" cried the Prince; "yours is skill indeed."

"Sire," replied the cook, "I have always

[p. 52]

devoted myself to Tao. It is better than skill. When I first began to cut up bullocks, I saw before me simply whole bullocks. After three years' practice, I saw no more whole animals. And now I work with my mind and not with my eye. When my senses bid me stop, but my mind urges me on, I fall back upon eternal principles. I follow such openings or cavities as there may be, according to the natural constitution of the animal. I do not attempt to cut through joints: still less through large bones.

"A good cook changes his chopper once a year,--because he cuts. An ordinary cook, once a month,--because he hacks. But I have had this chopper nineteen years, and although I have cut up many thousand bullocks, its edge is as if fresh from the whetstone. For at the joints there are always interstices, and the edge of a chopper being without thickness, it remains only to insert that which is without thickness into such an interstice. [*1] By these means the interstice will be enlarged, and the blade will find plenty of room. It is thus that I have kept my chopper for nineteen years as though fresh from the whetstone.

"Nevertheless, when I come upon a hard part where the blade meets with a difficulty, I

[p. 53]

am all caution. I fix my eye on it. I stay my hand, and gently apply my blade, until with a hwah the part yields like earth crumbling to the ground. Then I take out my chopper, and stand up, and look around, and pause, until with an air of triumph I wipe my chopper and put it carefully away."

"Bravo!" cried the Prince. "From the words of this cook I have learnt how to take care of my life."

.        .        .        .        .

In the State of Cheng there was a wonderful magician named Chi Han. He knew all about birth and death, gain and loss, misfortune and happiness, long life and short life--predicting events to a day with supernatural accuracy. The people of Cheng used to flee at his approach; but Lieh Tzu went to see him, and became so infatuated that on his return he said to Hu Tzu, [*1] "I used to look upon your Tao as perfect. Now I know something more perfect still."

"So far," replied Hu Tzu, "I have only taught you the ornamentals, not the essentials, of Tao; and yet you think you know all about it. Without cocks in your poultry-yard, what sort of eggs do the hens lay? [*2] If you go about trying to

[p. 54]

force Tao down people's throats, you will be simply exposing yourself. Bring your friend with you, and let me show myself to him."

So next day Lieh Tzu went with Chi Han to see Hu Tzu, and when they came out Chi Han said: "Alas! your teacher is doomed. He cannot live. I hardly give him ten days. I am astonished at him. He is but wet ashes."

Lieh Tzu went in and wept bitterly, and told Hu Tzu; but the latter said: "I showed myself to him just now as the earth shows us its outward form, motionless and still, while production is all the time going on. I merely prevented him from seeing my pent-up energy within. Bring him again."

Next day the interview took place as before; but as they were leaving Chi Han said to Lieh Tzu: "It is lucky for your teacher that he met me. He is better. He will recover. I saw he had recuperative power."

Lieh Tzu went in and told Hu Tzu; whereupon the latter replied: "I showed myself to him just now as heaven shows itself in all its dispassionate grandeur, letting a little energy run out of my heels. He was thus able to detect that I had some. Bring him here again."

Next day a third interview took place, and as they were leaving, Chi Han said to Lieh Tzu: "Your teacher is never one day like another; I can tell nothing from his physiognomy. Get him

[p. 55]

to be regular, and I will then examine him again."

This being repeated to Hu Tzu as before, the latter said: "I showed myself to him just now in a state of harmonious equilibrium. Where the whale disports itself,--is the abyss. Where water is at rest,--is the abyss. Where water is in motion,--is the abyss. The abyss has nine names. These are three of them." [*1]

Next day the two went once more to see Hu Tzu; but Chi Han was unable to stand still, and in his confusion turned and fled.

"Pursue him!" cried Hu Tzu; whereupon Lieh Tzu ran after him, but could not overtake him; so he returned and told Hu Tzu that the fugitive had disappeared.

"I showed myself to him just now," said Hu Tzu, "as Tao appeared before time was. I was to him as a great blank, existing of itself. He knew not who I was. His face fell. He became confused. And so he fled."

Upon this Lieh Tzu stood convinced that he had not yet acquired any real knowledge, and at once set to work in earnest, passing three years without leaving the house. He helped his wife to cook the family dinner, and fed his pigs just like human beings. He discarded the artificial and reverted to the natural. He became merely

[p. 56]

a shape. Amidst confusion he was unconfounded. And so he continued to the end.

.        .        .        .        .

Books are what the world values as representing Tao. But books are only words, and the valuable part of words is the thought therein contained. That thought has a certain bias which cannot be conveyed in words, yet the world values words as being the essence of books. But though the world values them, they are not of value; as that sense in which the world values them is not the sense in which they are valuable. . . .

Duke Huan was one day reading in his hall, when a wheelwright who was working below flung down his hammer and chisel, and mounting the steps said: "What words may your Highness be studying?"

"I am studying the words of the Sages," replied the Duke.

"Are the Sages alive?" asked the wheelwright.

"No," answered the Duke; "they are dead."

"Then the words your Highness is studying," rejoined the wheelwright, "are only the dregs of the ancients."

"What do you mean, sirrah!" cried the Duke, "by interfering with what I read? Explain yourself, or you shall die."

"Let me take an illustration," said the wheelwright, "from my own trade. In making a

[p. 57]

wheel, if you work too slowly, you can't make it firm; if you work too fast, the spokes won't fit in. You must go neither too slowly nor too fast. There must be co-ordination of mind and hand. Words cannot explain what it is, but there is some mysterious art herein. I cannot teach it to my son; nor can he learn it from me. Consequently, though seventy years of age, I am still making wheels in my old age. If the ancients, together with what they could not impart, are dead and gone, then what your Highness is studying must be the dregs."

.        .        .        .        .

A drunken man who falls out of a cart, though he may suffer, does not die. His bones are the same as other people's; but he meets his accident in a different way. His spirit is in a condition of security. He is not conscious of riding in the cart; neither is he conscious of falling out of it. Ideas of life, death, fear, etc., cannot penetrate his breast; and so he does not suffer from contact with objective existences. And if such security is to be got from wine, how much more is it to be got from God? It is in God that the Sage seeks his refuge, and so he is free from harm.

.        .        .        .        .

Lieh Yu K'ou instructed Po Hun Wu Jen in archery. Drawing the bow to its full, he placed a cup of water on his elbow and began to let

[p. 58]

fly. Hardly was one arrow out of sight ere another was on the string, the archer standing all the time like a statue.

"But this is shooting under ordinary conditions," cried Po Hun Wu Jen; "it is not shooting under extraordinary conditions. Now I will ascend a high mountain with you, and stand on the edge of a precipice a thousand feet in height, and see how you can shoot then."

Thereupon Wu Jen went with Lieh Tzu up a high mountain, and stood on the edge of a precipice a thousand feet in height, approaching it backwards until one-fifth of his feet overhung the chasm, when he beckoned to Lieh Tzu to come on. But the latter had fallen prostrate on the ground, with the sweat pouring down to his heels.

"The perfect man," said Wu Jen, "soars up to the blue sky, or dives down to the yellow springs, [*1] or flies to some extreme point of the compass, without change of countenance. But you are terrified, and your eyes are dazed. Your internal economy is defective."

.        .        .        .        .

A disciple said to Lu Chu: "Master, I have attained to your Tao. I can do without fire in winter. I can make ice in summer."

"You merely avail yourself of latent heat and

[p. 59]

latent cold," replied Lu Chu. "That is not what I call Tao. I will demonstrate to you what my Tao is."

Thereupon he tuned two lutes, and placed one in the hall and the other in the adjoining room. And when he struck the kung note on one, the kung note on the other sounded; when he struck the chio note on one, the chio note on the other sounded. This because they were both tuned to the same pitch.

But if he changed the interval of one string, so that it no longer kept its place in the octave, and then struck it, the result was that all the twenty-five strings jangled together. There was sound as before, but the influence of the key-note was gone.

Footnotes

^52:1 An allusion to the saying of Lao Tzu: "That which has no substance enters where there is no crevice."

^53:1 His tutor.

^53:2 The hens here stand for the letter of the doctrine; the cocks, for its spirit; and the eggs, for a real knowledge of it.

^55:1 I.e., three phases of Tao.

^58:1 The infernal regions.

     
Musings of a Chinese Mystic, by Lionel Giles, [1906], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 60]

  

THE HIDDEN SPRING

TAO has its laws and its evidences. It is devoid both of action and of form. It may be transmitted, but cannot be received. It may be obtained, but cannot be seen. Before heaven and earth were, Tao was. It has existed without change from all time. Spiritual beings drew their spirituality therefrom, while the universe became what we can see it now. To Tao, the zenith is not high, nor the nadir low; no point in time is long ago, nor by lapse of ages has it grown old.

Hsi Wei [*1] obtained Tao, and so set the universe in order. Fu Hsi [*2] obtained it, and was able to establish eternal principles. The Great Bear obtained it, and has never erred from its course. The sun and moon obtained it, and have never ceased to revolve.

.        .        .        .        .

Chuang Tzu said: "O my exemplar! Thou who destroyest all things, and dost not account

[p. 61]

it cruelty; thou who benefitest all time, and dost not account it charity; thou who art older than antiquity and dost not account it age; thou who supportest the universe, shaping the many forms therein, and dost not account it skill; this is the happiness of God!"

.        .        .        .        .

Life follows upon death. Death is the beginning of life. Who knows when the end is reached? The life of man results from convergence of the vital fluid. Its convergence is life; its dispersion, death. If, then, life and death are but consecutive states, what need have I to complain?

Therefore all things are One. What we love is animation. What we hate is corruption. But corruption in its turn becomes animation, and animation once more becomes corruption.

.        .        .        .        .

The universe is very beautiful, yet it says nothing. The four seasons abide by a fixed law, yet they are not heard. All creation is based upon absolute principles, yet nothing speaks.

And the true Sage, taking his stand upon the beauty of the universe, pierces the principles of created things. Hence the saying that the perfect man does nothing, the true Sage performs nothing, beyond gazing at the universe.

For man's intellect, however keen, face to face

[p. 62]

with the countless evolutions of things, their death and birth, their squareness and roundness,--can never reach the root. There creation is, and there it has ever been.

The six cardinal points, reaching into infinity, are ever included in Tao. An autumn spikelet, in all its minuteness, must carry Tao within itself. There is nothing on earth which does not rise and fall, but it never perishes altogether. The Yin and the Yang, [*1] and the four seasons, keep to their proper order. Apparently destroyed, yet really existing; the material gone, the immaterial left,--such is the law of creation, which passeth all understanding. This is called the root, whence a glimpse may be obtained of God.

.        .        .        .        .

A man's knowledge is limited; but it is upon what he does not know that he depends to extend his knowledge to the apprehension of God.

Knowledge of the great One, of the great Negative, of the great Nomenclature, of the great Uniformity, of the great Space, of the great Truth, of the great Law,--this is perfection. The great One is omnipresent. The great Negative is omnipotent. The great Nomenclature is all-inclusive. The great Uniformity is all-assimilative.

[p. 63]

[paragraph continues] The great Space is all-receptive. The great Truth is all-exacting. The great Law is all-binding.

The ultimate end is God. He is manifested in the laws of nature. He is the hidden spring. At the beginning, he was. This, however, is inexplicable. It is unknowable. But from the unknowable we reach the known.

Investigation must not be limited, nor must it be unlimited. In this undefinedness there is an actuality. Time does not change it. It cannot suffer diminution. May we not, then, call it our great Guide?

Why not bring our doubting hearts to investigation thereof? And then, using certainty to dispel doubt, revert to a state without doubt, in which doubt is doubly dead?

.        .        .        .        .

"Chi Chen," said Shao Chih, "taught Chance; Chieh Tzu taught Predestination. In the speculations of these two schools, on which side did right lie?"

"The cock crows," replied T'ai Kung Tiao, "and the dog barks. So much we know. But the wisest of us could not say why one crows and the other barks, nor guess why they crow or bark at all.

"Let me explain. The infinitely small is inappreciable; the infinitely great is immeasurable. Chance and Predestination must refer to

[p. 64]

the conditioned. Consequently, both are wrong.

"Predestination involves a real existence. Chance implies an absolute absence of any principle. To have a name and the embodiment thereof,--this is to have a material existence. To have no name and no embodiment,--of this one can speak and think; but the more one speaks the farther off one gets.

"The unborn creature cannot be kept from life. The dead cannot be tracked. From birth to death is but a span; yet the secret cannot be known. Chance and Predestination are but a priori solutions.

"When I seek for a beginning, I find only time infinite. When I look forward to an end, I see only time infinite. Infinity of time past and to come implies no beginning and is in accordance with the laws of material existences. Predestination and Chance give us a beginning, but one which is compatible only with the existence of matter.

"Tao cannot be existent. If it were existent, it could not be non-existent. The very name of Tao is only adopted for convenience' sake. Predestination and Chance are limited to material existences. How can they bear upon the infinite?

"Were language adequate, it would take but a day fully to set forth Tao. Not being adequate, it takes that time to explain material existences.

[p. 65]

[paragraph continues] Tao is something beyond material existences. It cannot be conveyed either by words or by silence. In that state which is neither speech nor silence, its transcendental nature may be apprehended."

.        .        .        .        .

All things spring from germs. Under many diverse forms these things are ever being reproduced. Round and round, like a wheel, no part of which is more the starting-point than any other. This is called heavenly equilibrium. And he who holds the scales is God.

.        .        .        .        .

Life has its distinctions; but in death we are all made equal. That death should have an origin, but that life should have no origin,--can this be so? What determines its presence in one place, its absence in another? Heaven has its fixed order. Earth has yielded up its secrets to man. But where to seek whence am I?

Not knowing the hereafter, how can we deny the operation of Destiny? Not knowing what preceded birth, how can we assert the operation of Destiny? When things turn out as they ought, who shall say that the agency is not ? When things turn out otherwise, who shall say that it is?

Footnotes

^60:1 A mythical personage.

^60:2 The first in the received list of Chinese monarchs.

^62:1 The positive and negative principles of Chinese cosmogony.

     
Musings of a Chinese Mystic, by Lionel Giles, [1906], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 66]

  

NON-INTERFERENCE WITH NATURE

HORSES have hoofs to carry them over frost and snow; hair, to protect them from wind and cold. They eat grass and drink water, and fling up their heels over the champaign. Such is the real nature of horses. Palatial dwellings are of no use to them.

One day Po Lo appeared, saying: "I understand the management of horses."

So he branded them, and clipped them, and pared their hoofs, and put halters on them, tying them up by the head and shackling them by the feet, and disposing them in stables, with the result that two or three in every ten died. Then he kept them hungry and thirsty, trotting them and galloping them, and grooming, and trimming, with the misery of the tasselled bridle before and the fear of the knotted whip behind, until more than half of them were dead.

The potter says: "I can do what I will with clay. If I want it round, I use compasses; if rectangular, a square."

[p. 67]

The carpenter says: "I can do what I will with wood. If I want it curved, I use an arc; if straight, a line."

But on what grounds can we think that the natures of clay and wood desire this application of compasses and square, of arc and line? Nevertheless, every age extols Po Lo for his skill in managing horses, and potters and carpenters for their skill with clay and wood. Those who govern the empire make the same mistake.

Now I regard government of the empire from quite a different point of view.

The people have certain natural instincts:--to weave and clothe themselves, to till and feed. themselves. These are common to all humanity, and all are agreed thereon. Such instincts are called "Heaven-sent."

And so in the days when natural instincts prevailed, men moved quietly and gazed steadily. At that time, there were no roads over mountains, nor boats, nor bridges over water. All things were produced, each for its own proper sphere. Birds and beasts multiplied; trees and shrubs grew up. The former might be led by the hand; you could climb up and peep into the raven's nest. For then man dwelt with birds and beasts, and all creation was one. There were no distinctions of good and bad men. Being all equally without knowledge, their virtue could not go astray. Being all equally without evil desires

[p. 68]

they were in a state of natural integrity, the perfection of human existence.

But when Sages appeared, tripping up people over charity and fettering them with duty to their neighbour, doubt found its way into the world. And then, with their gushing over music and fussing over ceremony, the empire became divided against itself.

     
Musings of a Chinese Mystic, by Lionel Giles, [1906], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 69]

  

PASSIVE VIRTUE

YEN HUI [*1] went to take leave of Confucius.

"Whither are you bound?" asked the master.

"I am going to the State of Wei," was the reply.

"And what do you propose to do there?" continued Confucius.

"I hear," answered Yen Hui, "that the Prince of Wei is of mature age, but of an unmanageable disposition. He behaves as if the State were of no account, and will not see his own faults. Consequently, the people perish; and their corpses lie about like so much undergrowth in a marsh. They are at extremities. And I have heard you, sir, say that if a State is well governed it may be neglected; but that if it is badly governed, then we should visit it. The science of medicine embraces many various diseases. I would test my knowledge in this sense, that perchance I may do some good to that State."

"Alas!" cried Confucius, "you will only succeed in bringing evil upon yourself. For Tao

[p. 70]

must not be distributed. If it is, it will lose its unity. If it loses its unity, it will be uncertain; and so cause mental disturbance,--from which there is no escape.

"The Sages of old first got Tao for themselves, and then got it for others. Before you possess this yourself, what leisure have you to attend to the doings of wicked men? Besides, do you know what Virtue results in, and where Wisdom ends? Virtue results in a desire for fame; wisdom ends in contentions. In the struggle for fame men crush one another, while their wisdom but provokes rivalry. Both are baleful instruments, and may not be incautiously used. . . . But of course you have a scheme. Tell it to me."

"Gravity of demeanour," replied Yen Hui, "and dispassionateness; energy and singleness of purpose,--will this do?"

"Alas!" said Confucius, "that will not do. If you make a show of being perfect and obtrude yourself, the Prince's mood will be doubtful. Ordinarily, he is not opposed, and so he has come to take actual pleasure in trampling upon the feelings of others. And if he has thus failed in the practice of routine virtues, do you expect that he will take readily to higher ones? You may insist, but without result. Outwardly you will be right, but inwardly wrong. How then will you make him mend his ways? . . Your

[p. 71]

firmness will secure you from harm; but that is all. You will not influence him to such an extent that he shall seem to follow the dictates of his own heart."

"Then," said Yen Hui, "I am without resource, and venture to ask for a method."

Confucius said: "Fast! . . . Let me explain. You have here a method, but it is difficult to practise. Those which are easy are not from God."

"Well," replied Yen Hui, "my family is poor, and for many months we have tasted neither wine nor flesh. Is not that fasting?"

"The fasting of religious observance it is," answered Confucius, "but not the fasting of the heart."

"And may I ask," said Yen Hui, "in what consists the fasting of the heart?"

"Cultivate unity," replied Confucius. "You hear not with the ears, but with the mind; not with the mind, but with your soul. But let hearing stop with the ears. Let the working of the mind stop with itself. Then the soul will be a negative existence, passively responsive to externals. In such a negative existence, only Tao can abide. And that negative state is the fasting of the heart."

"Then," said Yen Hui, "the reason I could not get the use of this method is my own individuality. If I could get the use of it, my

[p. 72]

individuality would have gone. Is this what you mean by the negative state?"

"Exactly so," replied the Master. "Let me tell you. If you can enter this man's domain without offending his amour propre, cheerful if he hears you, passive if he does not; without science, without drugs, simply living there in a state of complete indifference,--you will be near success. . . . Look at that window. Through it an empty room becomes bright with scenery; but the landscape stops outside. . . . In this sense, you may use your ears and eyes to communicate within, but shut out all wisdom from the mind. . . . This is the method for regenerating all creation."

.        .        .        .        .

Duke Ai of the Lu State said to Confucius: "In the Wei State there is a leper named Ai T'ai T'o. The men who live with him like him and make no effort to get rid of him. Of the women who have seen him, many have said to their parents, Rather than be another man's wife, I would be his concubine.

"He never preaches at people, but puts himself into sympathy with them, He wields no power by which he may protect men's bodies. He has at his disposal no appointments by which to gratify their hearts. He is loathsome to a degree. He sympathises, but does not instruct.

[p. 73]

[paragraph continues] His knowledge is limited to his own state. Yet males and females alike all congregate around him.

"So thinking that he must be different from ordinary men, I sent for him, and saw that he was indeed loathsome to a degree. Yet we had not been many months together ere my attention was fixed upon his conduct. A year had not elapsed ere I trusted him thoroughly; and as my State wanted a Prime Minister, I offered the post to him. He accepted it sullenly, as if he would much rather have declined. Perhaps he did not think me good enough for him! At any rate, he took it; but in a very short time he left me and went away. I grieved for him as for a lost friend, and as though there were none left with whom I could rejoice. What manner of man is this?"

"When I was on a mission to the Ch'u State," replied Confucius, "I saw a litter of young pigs sucking their dead mother. After a while they looked at her, and then they all left the body and went off. For their mother did not look at them any more, nor did she any more seem to be of their kind. What they loved was their mother; not the body which contained her, but that which made the body what it was. . . .

"Now Ai T'ai T'o says nothing, and is trusted. He does nothing, and is sought after. He causes a man to offer him the government of his own

[p. 74]

[paragraph continues] State, and the only fear is lest he should decline. Truly his talents are perfect, and his virtue without outward form!"

"What do you mean by his talents being perfect?" asked the Duke.

"Life and Death," replied Confucius, "existence and non-existence, success and nonsuccess, poverty and wealth, virtue and vice, good and evil report, hunger and thirst, warmth and cold,--these all revolve upon the changing wheel of Destiny. Day and night they follow one upon the other, and no man can say where each one begins. Therefore they cannot be allowed to disturb the harmony of the organism, nor enter into the soul's domain. Swim however with the tide, so as not to offend others. Do this day by day without break, and live in peace with mankind. Thus you will be ready for all contingencies, and may be said to have your talents perfect."

"And virtue without outward form; what is that?"

"In a water-level," said Confucius, "the water is in a most perfect state of repose. Let that be your model. The water remains quietly within, and does not overflow. It is from the cultivation of such harmony that virtue results. And if virtue takes no outward form, man will not be able to keep aloof from it."

.        .        .        .        .

[p. 75]

"Tell me," said Lao Tzu, "in what consist charity and duty to one's neighbour?"

"They consist," answered Confucius, "in a capacity for rejoicing in all things; in universal love, without the element of self. These are the characteristics of charity and duty to one's neighbour."

"What stuff!" cried Lao "Does not universal love contradict itself? Is not your elimination of self a positive manifestation of self? Sir, if you would cause the empire not to lose its source of nourishment,--there is the universe, its regularity is unceasing; there are the sun and moon, their brightness is unceasing; there are the stars, their groupings never change; there are birds and beasts, they flock together without varying; there are trees and shrubs, they grow upwards without exception. Be like these; follow Tao; and you will be perfect. Why then these vain struggles after charity and duty to one's neighbour, as though beating a drum in search of a fugitive? Alas! sir, you have brought much confusion into the mind of man."

.        .        .        .        .

Suppose a boat is crossing a river, and another empty boat is about to collide with it. Even an irritable man would not lose his temper. But supposing there was some one in the second

[p. 76]

boat. Then the occupant of the first would shout to him to keep clear. And if the other did not hear the first time, nor even when called to three times, bad language would inevitably follow. In the first case there was no anger, in the second there was; because in the first case the boat was empty, and in the second it was occupied. And so it is with man. If he could only roam empty through life, who would be able to injure him?

Footnotes

^69:1 The Master's favourite disciple.

     
Musings of a Chinese Mystic, by Lionel Giles, [1906], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 77]

  

SELF-ADAPTATION TO EXTERNALS

YEN HO was about to become tutor to the eldest son of Prince Ling of the Wei State. Accordingly he observed to Chu Po Yu: "Here is a man whose disposition is naturally of a low order. To let him take his own unprincipled way is to endanger the State. Tot try to restrain him is to endanger one's personal safety. He has just wit enough to see faults in others, but not to see his own. I am consequently at a loss what to do."

"A good question, indeed," replied Chu Po Yu; "you must be careful, and begin by self- reformation. Outwardly you may adapt yourself, but inwardly you must keep up to your own standard. In this there are two points to be guarded against. You must not let the outward adaptation penetrate within, nor the inward standard manifest itself without. In the former case, you will fall, you will be obliterated, you will collapse, you will lie prostrate. In the latter case you will be a sound, a name, a bogie, an uncanny thing. If he would play the child, do

[p. 78]

you play the child too. If he cast aside all sense of decorum, do you do so too. As far as he goes, do you go also. Thus you will reach him without offending him.

"Don't you know the story of the praying-mantis? In its rage it stretched out its arms to prevent a chariot from passing, unaware that this was beyond its strength, so admirable was its energy! Be cautious. If you are always offending others by your superiority, you will probably come to grief.

"Do you not know that those who keep tigers do not venture to give them live animals as food, for fear of exciting their fury when killing the prey? Also, that whole animals are not given, for fear of exciting the tiger's fury when rending them? The periods of hunger and repletion are carefully watched in order to prevent such outbursts. The tiger is of a different species from man; but the latter too is manageable if properly treated, unmanageable if excited to fury.

"Those who are fond of horses surround them with various conveniences. Sometimes mosquitoes or flies trouble them; and then, unexpectedly to the animal, a groom will brush them off, the result being that the horse breaks his bridle, and hurts his head and chest. The intention is good, but there is a want of real care for the horse. Against this you must be on your guard."

.        .        .        .        .

[p. 79]

For travelling by water there is nothing like a boat. For travelling by land there is nothing like a cart. This because a boat moves readily in water; but were you to try to push it on land you would never succeed in making it go. Now ancient and modern times may be likened unto water and land; Chou and Lu to the boat and the cart. To try to make the customs of Chou succeed in Lu, is like pushing a boat on land: great trouble and no result, except certain injury to oneself. . . .

Dress up a monkey in the robes of Chou Kung, and it will not be happy until they are torn to shreds. And the difference between past and present is much the same as the difference between Chou Kung and a monkey.

.        .        .        .        .

When Hsi Shih [*1] was distressed in mind, she knitted her brows. An ugly woman of the village, seeing how beautiful she looked, went home, and having worked herself into a fit frame of mind, knitted her brows. The result was that the rich people of the place barred up their doors and would not come out, while the poor people took their wives and children and departed elsewhere. That woman saw the beauty of knitted brows, but she did not see wherein the beauty of knitted brows lay.

.        .        .        .        .

[p. 80]

Kuan Chung being at the point of death, Duke Huan went to see him.

"You are venerable Sir," said the Duke, "really ill. You had better say to whom, in the event of your getting worse, I am to entrust the administration of the State."

"Whom does your Highness wish to choose?" inquired Kuan Chung.

"Will Pao Yu do?" asked the Duke.

"He will not," said Kuan Chung. "He is pure, incorruptible, and good. With those who are not like himself he will not associate. And if he has once heard of a man's wrong-doing, he never forgets it. If you employ him in the administration of the empire, he will get to loggerheads with his prince and to sixes and sevens with the people. It would not be long before he and your Highness fell out."

"Whom then can we have?" asked the Duke.

"There is no alternative," replied Kuan Chung; "it must be Hsi P'eng. He is a man who forgets the authority of those above him, and makes those below him forget his. Ashamed that he is not the peer of the Yellow Emperor, he grieves over those who are not the peers of himself.

"To share one's virtue with others is called true wisdom. To share one's wealth with others is reckoned meritorious. To exhibit superior

[p. 81]

merit is not the way to win men's hearts. To exhibit inferior merit is the way. There are things in the State he does not hear; there are things in the family he does not see. There is no alternative; it must be Hsi P'eng."

.        .        .        .        .

To glorify the past and to condemn the present has always been the way of the scholar. Yet if Hsi Wei Shih [*1] and individuals of that class were caused to re-appear in the present day, which of them but would accommodate himself to the age?

Footnotes

^79:1 A famous beauty of old.

^81:1 A patriarch.

     
Musings of a Chinese Mystic, by Lionel Giles, [1906], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 82]

  

IMMORTALITY OF THE SOUL

WHEN Lao Tzu died, Ch'in Shih went to mourn. He uttered three yells and departed.

A disciple asked him, saying: "Were you not our Master's friend?"

"I was," replied Ch'in Shih.

"And if so, do you consider that a sufficient expression of grief at his loss?" added the disciple.

"I do," said Ch'in Shih. "I had believed him to be the man of all men, but now I know that he was not. When I went in to mourn, I found old persons weeping as if for their children, young ones wailing as if for their mothers. And for him to have gained the attachment of those people in this way, he too must have uttered words which should not have been spoken, and dropped tears which should not have been shed, thus violating eternal principles, increasing the sum of human emotion, and forgetting the source from which his own life was received. The ancients called such emotions the trammels of mortality. The Master came, because it was his

[p. 83]

time to be born; he went, because it was his time to die. For those who accept the phenomenon of birth and death in this sense, lamentation and sorrow have no place. The ancients spoke of death as of God cutting down a man suspended in the air. The fuel is consumed, but the fire may be transmitted, and we know not that it comes to an end.

.        .        .        .        .

To have attained to the human form must be always a source of joy. And then, to undergo countless transitions, with only the infinite to look forward to,--what incomparable bliss is that! Therefore it is that the truly wise rejoice in that which can never be lost, but endures alway.

.        .        .        .        .

A son must go whithersoever his parents bid him. Nature is no other than a man's parents. If she bid me die quickly, and I demur, then I am an unfilial son. She can do me no wrong. Tao gives me this form, this toil in manhood, this repose in old age, this rest in death. And surely that which is such a kind arbiter of my life is the best arbiter of my death.

Suppose that the boiling metal in a smelting-pot were to bubble up and say: "Make of me an Excalibur"; I think the caster would reject that metal as uncanny. And if a sinner like

[p. 84]

myself were to say to God: "Make of me a man, make of me a man"; I think he too would reject me as uncanny. The universe is the smelting-pot, and God is the caster. I shall go whithersoever I am sent, to wake unconscious of the past, as a man wakes from a dreamless sleep.

.        .        .        .        .

Chuang Tzu one day saw an empty skull, bleached, but still preserving its shape. Striking it with his riding-whip, he said: "Wert thou once some ambitious citizen whose inordinate yearnings brought him to this pass?--some statesman who plunged his country into ruin and perished in the fray?--some wretch who left behind him a legacy of shame?--some beggar who died in the pangs of hunger and cold? Or didst thou reach this state by the natural course of old age?"

When he had finished speaking, he took the skull and, placing it under his head as a pillow, went to sleep. In the night he dreamt that the skull appeared to him and said: "You speak well, sir; but all you say has reference to the life of mortals, and to mortal troubles. In death there are none of these. Would you like to hear about death?"

Chuang Tzu having replied in the affirmative, the skull began: "In death there is no sovereign above, and no subject below. The workings of the four seasons are unknown. Our existences

[p. 85]

are bounded only by eternity. The happiness of a king among men cannot exceed that which we enjoy."

Chuang Tzu, however, was not convinced, and said: "Were I to prevail upon God to allow your body to be born again, and your bones and flesh to be renewed, so that you could return to your parents, to your wife, and to the friends of your youth,--would you be willing?"

At this the skull opened its eyes wide and knitted its brows and said: "How should I cast aside happiness greater than that of a king, and mingle once again in the toils and troubles of mortality?"

     
Musings of a Chinese Mystic, by Lionel Giles, [1906], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 86]

  

THE SAGE, OR PERFECT MAN

THE perfect man ignores self; the divine man ignores action; the true Sage ignores reputation.

.        .        .        .        .

The perfect man is a spiritual being. Were the ocean itself scorched up, he would not feel hot. Were the Milky Way frozen hard, he would not feel cold. Were the mountains to be riven with thunder, and the great deep to be thrown up by storm, he would not tremble.

.        .        .        .        .

How does the Sage seat himself by the sun and moon, and hold the universe in his grasp? He blends everything into one harmonious whole, rejecting the confusion of this and that. Rank and precedence, which the vulgar prize, the Sage stolidly ignores. The revolutions of ten thousand years leave his unity unscathed. The universe itself may pass away, but he will flourish still.

.        .        .        .        .

With the truly wise, wisdom is a curse, sincerity like glue, virtue only a means to acquire, and

[p. 87]

skill nothing more than a commercial capacity. For the truly wise make no plans, and therefore require no wisdom. They do not separate, and therefore require no glue. They want nothing, and therefore need no virtue. They sell nothing, and therefore are not in want of a commercial capacity. These four qualifications are bestowed upon them by God and serve as heavenly food to them. And those who thus feed upon the divine have little need for the human. They wear the forms of men, without human passions. Because they wear the forms of men, they associate with men. Because they have not human passions, positives and negatives find in them no place. Infinitesimal, indeed, is that which makes them man; infinitely great is that which makes them divine!

Hui Tzu said to Chuang Tzu: "Are there, then, men who have no passions?"

Chuang Tzu replied: "Certainly."

"But if a man has no passions," argued Hui Tzu, "what is it that makes him a man?"

"Tao," replied Chuang Tzu, "gives him his expression, and God gives him his form. How should he not be a man?"

"If, then, he is a man," said Hui Tzu, "how can he be without passions?"

"What you mean by passions," answered Chuang Tzu, "is not what I mean. By a man without passions I mean one who does not

[p. 88]

permit good and evil to disturb his internal economy, but rather falls in with whatever happens, as a matter of course, and does not add to the sum of his mortality."

.        .        .        .        .

He who knows what God is, and who knows what Man is, has attained. Knowing what God is, he knows that he himself proceeded therefrom. Knowing what Man is, he rests in the knowledge of the known, waiting for the knowledge of the unknown. Working out one's allotted span, and not perishing in mid career,--this is the fulness of knowledge.

Herein, however, there is a flaw. Knowledge is dependent upon fulfilment. And as this fulfilment is uncertain, how can it be known that my divine is not really human, my human really divine? We must have pure men, and then only can we have pure knowledge.

But what is a pure man?--The pure men of old acted without calculation, not seeking to secure results. They laid no plans. Therefore, failing, they had no cause for regret; succeeding, no cause for congratulation. And thus they could scale heights without fear; enter water without becoming wet; fire, without feeling hot. So far had their wisdom advanced towards Tao.

The pure men of old slept without dreams, and waked without anxiety. They ate without discrimination, breathing deep breaths. For pure

[p. 89]

men draw breath from their uttermost depths; the vulgar only from their throats. Out of the crooked, words are retched up like vomit. If men's passions are deep, their divinity is shallow.

The pure men of old did not know what it was to love life nor to hate death. They did not rejoice in birth, nor strive to put off dissolution. Quickly come and quickly go;--no more. They did not forget whence it was they had sprung, neither did they seek to hasten their return thither. Cheerfully they played their allotted parts, waiting patiently for the end. This is what is called not to lead the heart astray from Tao, nor to let the human seek to supplement the divine. And this is what is meant by a pure man.

.        .        .        .        .

The pure men of old did their duty to their neighbours, but did not associate with them. They behaved as though wanting in themselves, but without flattering others. Naturally rectangular, they were not uncompromisingly hard. They manifested their independence without going to extremes. They appeared to smile as if pleased, when the expression was only a natural response. Their outward semblance derived its fascination from the store of goodness within. They seemed to be of the world around them, while proudly treading beyond its limits. They seemed to desire silence, while in truth they had

[p. 90]

dispensed with language. They saw in penal laws a trunk [*1]; in social ceremonies, wings [*2]; in wisdom, a useful accessory; in morality, a guide. For them penal laws meant a merciful administration; social ceremonies, a passport through the world; wisdom, an excuse for doing what they could not help; and morality, walking like others upon the path. And thus all men praised them for the worthy lives they led.

.        .        .        .        .

The repose of the Sage is not what the world calls repose. His repose is the result of his mental attitude. All creation could not disturb his equilibrium: hence his repose. When water is still, it is like a mirror, reflecting the beard and the eyebrows. It gives the accuracy of the water-level, and the philosopher makes it his model. And if water thus derives lucidity from stillness, how much more the faculties of the mind! The mind of the Sage, being in repose, becomes the mirror of the universe, the speculum of all creation.

.        .        .        .        .

The truly great man, although he does not injure others, does not credit himself with charity and mercy. He seeks not gain, but does not despise his followers who do. He struggles not

[p. 91]

for wealth, but does not take credit for letting it alone. He asks help from no man, but takes no credit for his self-reliance, neither does he despise those who seek preferment through friends. He acts differently from the vulgar crowd, but takes no credit for his exceptionality; nor, because others act with the majority, does he despise them as hypocrites. The ranks and emoluments of the world are to him no cause for joy; its punishments and shame no cause for disgrace. He knows that positive and negative cannot be distinguished, that great and small cannot be defined.

.        .        .        .        .

The true Sage ignores God. He ignores man. He ignores a beginning. He ignores matter. He moves in harmony with his generation and suffers not. He takes things as they come and is not overwhelmed. How are we to become like him?

.        .        .        .        .

The true Sage is a passive agent. If he succeeds, he simply feels that he was provided by no effort of his own with the energy necessary to success.

.        .        .        .        .

External punishments are inflicted by metal and wood. Internal punishments are inflicted by anxiety and remorse. Fools who incur

[p. 92]

external punishment are treated with metal or wood. Those who incur internal punishment are devoured by the conflict of emotions. It is only the pure and perfect man who can succeed in avoiding both.

Footnotes

^90:1 A natural basis of government.

^90:2 To aid man's progress through life.

     
Musings of a Chinese Mystic, by Lionel Giles, [1906], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 93]

  

RANDOM GLEANINGS

TAKE no heed of time, nor of right and wrong; but, passing into the realm of the Infinite, take your final rest therein.

.        .        .        .        .

Our life has a limit, but knowledge is without limit.

.        .        .        .        .

To serve one's prince without reference to the act, but only to the service, is the perfection of a subject's loyalty.

.        .        .        .        .

In trials of skill, at first all is friendliness; but at last it is all antagonism.

.        .        .        .        .

Tzu Ch'i of Nan-po was travelling on the Shang mountain when he saw a large tree which astonished him very much. A thousand chariot teams could have found shelter under its shade.

"What tree is this?" cried Tzu Ch'i. "Surely it must have unusually fine timber." Then, looking up, he saw that its branches were too crooked for rafters; while, as to the trunk, he saw

[p. 94]

that its irregular grain made it valueless for coffins. He tasted a leaf, but it took the skin off his lips; and its odour was so strong that it would make a man as it were drunk for three days together.

"Ah!" said Tzu Ch'i. "This tree is good for nothing, and that is how it has attained this size. A wise man might well follow its example."

.        .        .        .        .

A man does not seek to see himself in running water, but in still water. For only what is itself still can instil stillness into others.

.        .        .        .        .

Is Confucius a Sage, or is he not? How is it he has so many disciples? He aims at being a subtle dialectician, not knowing that such a reputation is regarded by real Sages as the fetters of a criminal.

.        .        .        .        .

He who delights in man is himself not a perfect man. His affection is not true charity. Depending upon opportunity, he has not true worth. He who is not conversant with both good and evil is not a superior man. He who disregards his reputation is not what a man should be. He who is not absolutely oblivious of his own existence can never be a ruler of men.

.        .        .        .        .

When the pond dries up, and the fishes are left

[p. 95]

upon dry ground, to moisten them with the breath, or to damp them with spittle, is not to be compared with leaving them, in the first instance, in their native rivers and lakes. And better than praising Yao [*1] and blaming Chieh [*2] would be leaving them both and attending to the development of Tao.

.        .        .        .        .

Fishes are born in water. Man is born in Tao. If fishes get ponds to live in, they thrive. If man gets Tao to live in, he may live his life in peace.

.        .        .        .        .

"May I ask," said Tzu Kung, "about divine men?"

"Divine men," replied Confucius, "are divine to man, but ordinary to God. Hence the saying that the meanest being in heaven would be the best on earth; and the best on earth, the meanest in heaven."

.        .        .        .        .

The goodness of a wise ruler covers the whole empire, yet he himself seems to know it not. It influences all creation, yet none is conscious

[p. 96]

thereof. It appears under countless forms, bringing joy to all things. It is based upon the baseless, and travels through the realms of Nowhere.

.        .        .        .        .

By inaction one can become the centre of thought, the focus of responsibility, the arbiter of wisdom. Full allowance must be made for others, while remaining unmoved oneself. There must be a thorough compliance with divine principles, without any manifestation thereof. All of which may be summed up in the one word passivity. For the perfect man employs his mind as a mirror. It grasps nothing: it refuses nothing. It receives, but does not keep. And thus he can triumph over matter, without injury to himself.

.        .        .        .        .

Every addition to or deviation from nature belongs not to the ultimate perfection of all. He who would attain to such perfection never loses sight of the natural conditions of his existence. With him the joined is not united, nor the separated apart, nor the long in excess, nor the short wanting. For just as a duck's legs, though short, cannot be lengthened without pain to the duck, and a crane's legs, though long, cannot be shortened without misery to the crane, so that which is long in man's moral nature cannot be cut

[p. 97]

off, nor that which is short be lengthened. All sorrow is thus avoided.

.        .        .        .        .

What I mean by perfection is not what is meant by charity and duty to one's neighbour. It is found in the cultivation of Tao. And those whom I regard as cultivators of Tao are not those who cultivate charity and duty to one's neighbour. They are those who yield to the natural conditions of things. What I call perfection of hearing is not hearing others, but oneself. What I call perfection of vision is not seeing others, but oneself. For a man who sees not himself, but others, takes not possession of himself, but of others, thus taking what others should take and not what he himself should take. Instead of being himself, he in fact becomes some one else.

.        .        .        .        .

Ts'ui Chu asked Lao saying: "If the empire is not to be governed, how are men's hearts to be kept in order?"

"Be careful," replied Lao "not to interfere with the natural goodness of the heart of man. Man's heart may be forced down or stirred up. In each case the issue is fatal."

.        .        .        .        .

The men of this world all rejoice in others

[p. 98]

being like themselves, and object to others not being like themselves.

.        .        .        .        .

If metal and stone were without Tao, they would not be capable of emitting sound. And just as they possess the property of sound, but will not emit sound unless struck, so surely is the same principle applicable to all creation.

.        .        .        .        .

In the Golden Age good men were not appreciated; ability was not conspicuous. Rulers were mere beacons, while the people were free as the wild deer. They were upright without being conscious of duty to their neighbours. They loved one another without being conscious of charity. They were true without being conscious of loyalty. They were honest without being  of good faith. They acted freely in all things without recognising obligations to any one. Thus their deeds left no trace; their affairs were not handed down to posterity.

.        .        .        .        .

A man who knows that he is a fool is not a great fool.

.        .        .        .        .

Appeal to arms is the lowest form of virtue. Rewards and punishments are the lowest form of education. Ceremonies and laws are the lowest form of government. Music and fine clothes are

[p. 99]

the lowest form of happiness. Weeping and mourning are the lowest form of grief. These five should follow the movements of the mind. The ancients indeed cultivated the study of accidentals, but they did not allow it to precede that of essentials.

.        .        .        .        .

It is easy to be respectfully filial, but difficult to be affectionately filial. But even that is easier than to become unconscious of one's natural obligations, which is in turn easier than to cause others to be unconscious of the operations thereof. Similarly, this is easier than to become altogether unconscious of the world, which again is easier than to cause the world to be unconscious of one's influence upon it.

.        .        .        .        .

Charity and duty to one's neighbour are as caravanserais established by wise rulers of old; you may stop there one night, but not for long, or you will incur reproach.

.        .        .        .        .

Both small and great things must equally possess form. The mind cannot picture to itself a thing without form, nor conceive a form of unlimited dimensions. The greatness of anything may be a topic of discussion, or the smallness of anything may be mentally realised. But that

[p. 100]

which can be neither a topic of discussion nor realised mentally, can be neither great nor small.

.        .        .        .        .

The life of man passes by like a galloping horse, changing at every turn, at every hour. What should he do, or what should he not do, other than let his decomposition go on?

.        .        .        .        .

As to what the world does and the way in which people are happy now, I know not whether such happiness be real happiness or not. The happiness of ordinary persons seems to me to consist in slavishly following the majority, as if they could not help it. Yet they all say they are happy. But I cannot say that this is happiness or that it is not happiness. Is there, then, after all, such a thing as happiness?

I make true pleasure to consist in inaction, which the world regards as great pain. Thus it has been said, Perfect happiness is the absence of happiness."

.        .        .        .        .

A man who plays for counters will play well. If he stakes his girdle, [*1] he will be nervous; if yellow gold, he will lose his wits. His skill is the same in each case, but he is distracted by the value of his stake. And every one who attaches

[p. 101]

importance to the external, becomes internally without resource.

.        .        .        .        .

The Grand Augur, in his ceremonial robes, approached the shambles and thus addressed the pigs: "How can you object to die? I shall fatten you for three months. I shall discipline myself for ten days and fast for three. I shall strew fine grass, and place you bodily upon a carved sacrificial dish. Does not this satisfy you?"

Then, speaking from the pigs' point of view, he continued: "It is better, perhaps, after all, to live on bran and escape the shambles. . . ."

"But then," added he, speaking from his own point of view, "to enjoy honour when alive one would readily die on a war-shield or in the headsman's basket."

So he rejected the pigs' point of view and adopted his own point of view. In what sense, then, was he different from the pigs?

.        .        .        .        .

When Yang Tzu went to the Sung State, he passed a night at an inn. The innkeeper had: two concubines--one beautiful, the other ugly. The latter he loved; the former he hated. Yang Tzu asked how this was; whereupon one of the inn servants said: "The beautiful one is so conscious of her beauty that one does not think

[p. 102]

her beautiful. The ugly one is so conscious of her ugliness that one does not think her ugly."

"Note this, my disciples!" cried Yang

"Be virtuous, but without being consciously so; and wherever you go, you will be beloved."

.        .        .        .        .

Shun asked Ch'eng, saying: "Can one get Tao so as to have it for one's own?"

"Your very body," replied Ch'eng, "is not your own. How should Tao be?"

"If my body," said Shun, "is not my own, pray whose is it?"

"It is the delegated image of God," replied Ch'eng. "Your life is not your own. It is the delegated harmony of God. Your individuality is not your own. It is the delegated adaptability of God. Your posterity is not your own. It is the delegated exuviae of God. You move, but know not how. You are at rest, but know not why. You taste, but know not the cause. These are the operation of God's laws. How then should you get Tao so as to have it for your own?"

.        .        .        .        .

Man passes through this sublunary life as a sunbeam passes a crack--here one moment, gone the next.

.        .        .        .        .

Mountain forests and loamy fields swell my

[p. 103]

heart with joy. But ere the joy be passed, sorrow is upon me again. Joy and sorrow come and go, and over them I have no control.

Alas! the life of man is but as a stoppage at an inn. He knows that which comes within the range of his experience. Otherwise, he knows not. He knows that he can do what he can do, and that he cannot do what he cannot do. But there is always that which he does not know and that which he cannot do; and to struggle that it shall not be so--is not this a cause for grief?

The best language is that which is not spoken, the best form of action is that which is without deeds.

Spread out your knowledge, and it will be found to be shallow.

.        .        .        .        .

As to Yao and Shun, what claim have they to praise? Their fine distinctions simply amounted to knocking a hole in a wall in order to stop it up with brambles; to combing each individual hair; to counting the grains for a rice pudding! How in the name of goodness did they profit their generation?

.        .        .        .        .

Let knowledge stop at the unknowable. That is perfection.

.        .        .        .        .

[p. 104]

There is no weapon so deadly as man's will. Excalibur is second to it. There is no bandit so powerful as Nature. In the whole universe there is no escape from it. Yet it is not Nature which does the injury. It is man's own heart.

.        .        .        .        .

Birth is not a beginning; death is not an end.

.        .        .        .        .

Discard the stimuli of purpose. Free the mind from disturbances. Get rid of entanglements to virtue. Pierce the obstructions to Tao.

.        .        .        .        .

A one-legged man discards ornament, his exterior not being open to commendation. Condemned criminals will go up to great heights without fear, for they no longer regard life and death from their former point of view. And those who pay no attention to their moral clothing and condition become oblivious of their own personality; and by thus becoming oblivious of their personality, they proceed to be the people of God.

Wherefore, if men revere them, they rejoice not. If men insult them, they are not angered. But only those who have passed into the eternal harmony of God are capable of this.

If your anger is external, not internal, it will be anger proceeding from not-anger. If your actions are external, not internal, they will be

[p. 105]

actions proceeding from inaction. If you would attain peace, level down your emotional nature. If you desire spirituality, cultivate adaptation of the intelligence. If you would have your actions in accordance with what is right, allow yourself to fall in with the dictates of necessity. For necessity is the Tao of the Sage.

.        .        .        .        .

If schemers have nothing to give them anxiety, they are not happy. If dialecticians have not their premisses and conclusions, they are not happy. If critics have none on whom to vent their spleen, they are not happy. Such men are the slaves of objective existences.

.        .        .        .        .

A dog is not considered a good dog because he is a good barker. A man is not considered a good man because he is a good talker.

.        .        .        .        .

The rulers of old set off all success to the credit of their people, attributing all failure to themselves.

.        .        .        .        .

When Chu Po Yu reached his sixtieth year, he changed his opinions. What he had previously regarded as right, he now came to regard as wrong. But who shall say whether the right

[p. 106]

of to-day may not be as wrong as the wrong of the previous fifty-nine years?

.        .        .        .        .

Shao Chih asked T'ai Kung Tiao, saying: "What is meant by society?"

"Society," replied T'ai Kung Tiao, "is an agreement of a certain number of families and individuals to abide by certain customs. Discordant elements unite to form a harmonious whole. Take away this unity, and each has a separate individuality.

"Point at any one of the many parts of a horse, and that is not a horse, although there is the horse before you. It is the combination of all which makes the horse.

"Similarly, a mountain is high because of its individual particles. A river is large because of its individual drops. And he is a just man who regards all parts from the point of view of the whole. Thus, in regard to the views of others, he holds his own opinion, but not obstinately. In regard to his own views, while conscious of their truth, he does not despise the opinions of others."

.        .        .        .        .

Wood rubbed with wood produces fire. Metal exposed to fire will liquefy. If the Positive and Negative principles operate inharmoniously, heaven and earth are greatly disturbed. Thunder

[p. 107]

crashes, and with rain comes lightning, scorching up the tall locust-trees. . . . So in the struggle between peace and unrest, the friction between good and evil, much fire is evolved which consumes the inner harmony of man. But the mind is unable to resist fire. It is destroyed, and with it Tao comes to an end.

.        .        .        .        .

Get rid of small wisdom, and great wisdom will shine upon you. Put away goodness and you will be naturally good. A child does not learn to speak because taught by professors of the art, but because it lives among people who can themselves speak.

.        .        .        .        .

Man has for himself a spacious domain. His mind may roam to heaven. If there is no room in the house, the wife and her mother-in-law run against one another. If the mind cannot roam to heaven, the faculties will be in a state of antagonism.

.        .        .        .        .

The raison d'etre of a fish-trap is the fish. When the fish is caught, the trap may be ignored. The raison d'etre of a rabbit-snare is the rabbit. When the rabbit is caught, the snare may be ignored. The raison d'etre of language is an idea to be expressed. When the idea is expressed, the language may be ignored, But where shall I

[p. 108]

find a man to ignore language, with whom I may be able to converse?

.        .        .        .        .

Alas! man's knowledge reaches to the hair on a hair, but not to eternal peace.

.        .        .        .        .

The heart of man is more dangerous than mountains and rivers, more difficult to understand than Heaven itself. Heaven has its periods of spring, summer, autumn, winter, daytime and night. Man has an impenetrable exterior, and his motives are inscrutable. Thus some men appear to be retiring when they are really forward. Others have abilities, yet appear to be worthless. Others are compliant, yet gain their ends. Others take a firm stand, yet yield the point. Others go slow, yet advance quickly.

Footnotes

^95:1 A legendary Emperor, whose reign, with that of his successor Shun, may be regarded as the Golden Age of China.

^95:2 The last sovereign of the Hsia dynasty, and a typical tyrant.

^100:1 In which he keeps his loose cash.

     
Musings of a Chinese Mystic, by Lionel Giles, [1906], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 109]

  

PERSONAL ANECDOTES

CHUANG TZu was fishing in the P'u when the prince of Ch'u sent two high officials to ask him to take charge of the administration of the Ch'u State.

Chuang Tzu went on fishing and, without turning his head, said "I have heard that in Ch'u there is a sacred tortoise which has been dead now some three thousand years, and that the prince keeps this tortoise carefully enclosed in a chest on the altar of his ancestral temple. Now would this tortoise rather be dead and have its remains venerated, or be alive and wagging its tail in the mud?"

"It would rather be alive," replied the two officials, "and wagging its tail in the mud."

"Begone!" cried Chuang Tzu. "I too will wag my tail in the mud."

.        .        .        .        .

Hui Tzu was prime minister in the Liang State. Chuang Tzu went thither to visit him.

Some one remarked: "Chuang Tzu has come. He wants to be minister in your place,"

[p. 110]

Thereupon Hui Tzu was afraid, and searched all over the State for three days and three nights to find him.

Then Chuang Tzu went to see Hui Tzu and said: "In the south there is a bird. It is a kind of Do you know it? It started from the south sea to fly to the north sea. Except on the wu-t'ung tree, it would not alight. It would eat nothing but the fruit of the bamboo, drink nothing but the purest spring water. An owl which had got the rotten carcass of a rat, looked up as the phoenix flew by, and screeched. Are you not screeching at me over your kingdom of Liang?"

.        .        .        .        .

Chuang Tzu and Hui Tzu had strolled on to the bridge over the Hao, when the former observed: "See how the minnows are darting about! That is the pleasure of fishes."

"You not being a fish yourself," said Hui Tzu, "how can you possibly know in what consists the pleasure of fishes?"

"And you not being I," retorted Chuang Tzu, "how can you know that I do not know?"

"If I, not being you, cannot know what you know," urged Hui Tzu, "it follows that you, not being a fish, cannot know in what consists the pleasure of fishes."

"Let us go back," said Chuang Tzu, "to your

[p. 111]

original question. You asked me how I knew in what consists the pleasure of fishes. Your very question shows that you knew I knew. [*1] I knew it from my own feelings on this bridge."

.        .        .        .        .

When Chuang Tzu's wife died, Hui Tzu went to condole. He found the widower sitting on the ground, singing, with his legs spread out at a right angle, and beating time on a bowl.

"To live with your wife," exclaimed Hui Tzu, "and see your eldest son grow up to be a man, and then not to shed a tear over her corpse,--this would be bad enough. But to drum on a bowl, and sing; surely this is going too far."

"Not at all," replied Chuang Tzu. "When she died, I could not help being affected by her death. Soon, however, I remembered that she had already existed in a previous state before birth, without form, or even substance; that while in that unconditioned condition, substance was added to spirit; that this substance then assumed form; and that the next stage was birth. And now, by virtue of a further change, she is dead, passing from one phase to another like the sequence of spring, summer, autumn and winter. And while she is thus lying asleep in Eternity, for me to go about weeping and wailing

[p. 112]

would be to proclaim myself ignorant of these natural laws. Therefore I refrain."

.        .        .        .        .

When Chuang Tzu was about to die, his disciples expressed a wish to give him a splendid funeral. But Chuang Tzu said: "With Heaven and Earth for my coffin and shell; with the sun, moon, and stars, as my burial regalia; and with all creation to escort me to the grave,--are not my funeral paraphernalia ready to hand?"

"We fear," argued the disciples, "lest the carrion kite should eat the body of our Master;" to which Chuang Tzu replied: "Above ground I shall be food for kites; below I shall be food for mole-crickets and ants. Why rob one to feed the other?"

_______________________
 Printed by Hazell, Watson & Viney, Ld., London and Aylesbury.

Footnotes

^111:1 For you asked me how I knew.

    
Musings of a Chinese Mystic, by Lionel Giles, [1906], at sacred-texts.com

[]

[The following advertisements appeared at the end of the original volume. They are included as documentation, not as an advertisement.--JBH.]

  

THE WISDOM OF THE EAST SERIES

  

Edited by CRANMER-BYNG and Dr. S. A. KAPADIA

  

THE SERIES AND ITS PURPOSE

THE object of the Editors of this Series is a very definite one. They desire above all things that, in their humble way, these books shall be the ambassadors of good-will and understanding between East and West--the old world of Thought and the new of Action. In this endeavour, and in their own sphere, they are but followers of the highest example in the land. They are confident that a deeper knowledge of the great ideals and lofty philosophy of Oriental thought may help to a revival of that true spirit of Charity which neither despises nor fears the nations of another creed and colour.

______________

  

NEW VOLUMES

  

in the Press

TAOIST TEACHINGS. From the Mystical Philosophy of Leih Tzu. Translated by LIONEL GILES, M.A. 2/- net.

______________

  

INDIAN

THE HEART OF INDIA. Sketches in the History of Hindu Religion and Morals. By L. D. BARNETT, M.A., LITT.D. Professor of Sanskrit at University College, London. 2/- net.

BRAHMA-KNOWLEDGE: An Outline of the Philosophy of the Vedanta. As set forth by the Upanishads and by Sankara. By L. D. BARNETT, M.A., LITT.D. Professor of Sanskrit at University College, London. 3/- net.

[Continued over

[]

THE PATH OF LIGHT. Rendered for the first time into English from the Bodhi-charyavatara of S'anti-Deva. A Manual of Maha-Yana Buddhism. By L. D. Barnett, M.A., Litt.D. 2/- net.

LEGENDS OF INDIAN BUDDHISM. Translated from "L'Introduction a l'Histoire du Buddhisme Indien" of Eugene Burnouf, with an Introduction by WINIFRED STEPHENS. 2/- net.

THE WAY OF THE BUDDHA. Selections from the Buddhist texts, together with the original Pali, with Introduction by HERBERT BAYNES, M.R.A.S. 2/- net.

  

IRANIAN (Persian, Pelevi, Zend, etc.)

THE RUBA'IYAT OF HAFIZ. Translated with Introduction by SYED ABDUL MAJID, LL.D. Rendered into English Verse by L. CRANMER-BYNG. 1/- net.

THE SPLENDOUR OF GOD. Being Extracts from the Sacred Writings of the Bahais. With Introduction by ERIC HAMMOND. 2/- net.

THE TEACHINGS OF ZOROASTER, and the Philosophy of the Parsi Religion. Translated with Introduction by Dr. S. A. KAPADIA, Lecturer, University College, London. 2/- net.

THE PERSIAN MYSTICS.

I. Jalalu'd-din Rumi. By F. HADLAND DAVIS. 2/- net.

II. Jami. By F. HADLAND DAVIS. 2/- net.

THE BUSTAN OF SA'DI. From the Persian. Translated with Introduction by A. HART EDWARDS. 2/- net.

SA'DI'S SCROLL OF WISDOM. By SHAIKH SA'DI. With Introduction by Sir ARTHUR N. WOLLASTON, K.C.I.E. /- net.
     With Persian Script added. 2/- net.

THE ROSE GARDEN OF SA'DI. Selected and Rendered from the Persian with Introduction by L. CRANMER-BYNG. 1/- net.

  

ARABIC

THE ALCHEMY OF HAPPINESS. By AL GHAZZALI. Rendered into English by CLAUD FIELD. 2/- net.

 

 

 

 

    


===== BOOK: md.txt =====


    
Morals and Dogma, by Albert Pike, [1871], at sacred-texts.com

[p. i]

  

MORALS AND DOGMA

  

OF THE

  

ANCIENT AND ACCEPTED SCOTTISH RITE

  

OF

  

FREEMASONRY

 

 

  

PREPARED FOR THE

 

  

SUPREME COUNCIL OF THE THIRTY-THIRD DEGREE

  

FOR THE

  

SOUTHERN JURISDICTION OF THE UNITED STATES

  

AND

  

PUBLISHED BY ITS AUTHORITY.

CHARLESTON

A Q.E.D. M Q.E.D. 5632

  

[1871]

Scanned at sacred-texts.com, January-February 2005. Proofed by John Bruno Hare. This text is in the public domain in the US because it was published prior to 1923.

Click to enlarge

Click to enlarge
Title Page

Click to enlarge
Front Cover

Click to enlarge
Spine

[p. ii]

Click to enlarge
Verso

Entered according to Act of Congress, in the year 1871, by

ALBERT PIKE,

In the Office of the Librarian of Congress, at Washington.

Entered according to Act of Congress, in the year 1906, by

THE SUPREME COUNCIL OF THE SOUTHERN

JURISDICTION, A. A. S. R., U. S. A.,

In the Office of the Librarian of Congress, at Washington.

     
Morals and Dogma, by Albert Pike, [1871], at sacred-texts.com

[p. iii]

  

PREFACE.

THE following work has been prepared by authority of the Supreme Council of the Thirty-third Degree, for the Southern Jurisdiction of the United States, by the Grand Commander, and is now published by its direction. It contains the Lectures of the Ancient and Accepted Scottish Rite in that jurisdiction, and is specially intended to be read and studied by the Brethren of that obedience, in connection with the Rituals of the Degrees. It is hoped and expected that each will furnish himself with a copy, and make himself familiar with it; for which purpose, as the cost of the work consists entirely in the printing and binding, it will be furnished at a price as moderate as possible. No individual will receive pecuniary profit from it, except the agents for its sale.

It has been copyrighted, to prevent its republication elsewhere, and the copyright, like those of all the other works prepared for the Supreme Council, has been assigned to Trustees for that Body. Whatever profits may accrue from it will be devoted to purposes of charity.

The Brethren of the Rite in the United States and Canada will be afforded the opportunity to purchase it, nor is it forbidden that other Masons shall; but they will not be solicited to do so.

In preparing this work, the Grand Commander has been about equally Author and Compiler; since he has extracted quite half its contents from the works of the best writers and most philosophic or eloquent thinkers. Perhaps it would have been better and more acceptable if he had extracted more and written less.

Still, perhaps half of it is his own; and, in incorporating here

[p. iv]

the thoughts and words of others, he has continually changed and added to the language, often intermingling, in the same sentences, his own words with theirs. It not being intended for the world at large, he has felt at liberty to make, from all accessible sources, a Compendium of the Morals and Dogma of the Rite, to re-mould sentences, change and add to words and phrases, combine them with his own, and use them as if they were his own, to be dealt with at his pleasure and so availed of as to make the whole most valuable for the purposes intended. He claims, therefore, little of the merit of authorship, and has not cared to distinguish his own from that which he has taken from other sources, being quite willing that every portion of the book, in turn, may be regarded as borrowed from some old and better writer.

The teachings of these Readings are not sacramental, so far as they go beyond the realm of Morality into those of other domains of Thought and Truth. The Ancient and Accepted Scottish Rite uses the word "Dogma" in its true sense, of doctrine, or teaching; and is not dogmatic in the odious sense of that term. Every one is entirely free to reject and dissent from whatsoever herein may seem to him to be untrue or unsound. It is only required of him that he shall weigh what is taught, and give it fair hearing and unprejudiced judgment. Of course, the ancient theosophic and philosophic speculations are not embodied as part of the doctrines of the Rite; but because it is of interest and profit to know what the Ancient Intellect thought upon these subjects, and because nothing so conclusively proves the radical difference between our human and the animal nature, as the capacity of the human mind to entertain such speculations in regard to itself and the Deity. But as to these opinions themselves, we may say, in the words of the learned Canonist, Ludovicus Gomez: "Opiniones secundum varietatem temporum senescant et intermoriantur, aliaeque diversae vel prioribus contrariae renascantur et deinde pubescant."

[p. v]

Titles of Degrees as herein given have in some instances been changed. Correct titles are as follows:

1  degrees--Apprentice.
 2 degrees--Fellow-craft.
 3  degrees--Master.
 4 degrees--Secret Master.
 5 degrees--Perfect Master.
 6 degrees--Intimate Secretary.
 7 degrees--Provost and Judge.
 8 degrees--Intendant of the Building.
 9 degrees--Elu of the Nine.
 10 degrees--Elu of the Fifteen.
 11 degrees--Elu of the Twelve.
 12 degrees--Master Architect.
 13 degrees--Royal Arch of Solomon.
 14 degrees--Perfect Elu.
 15  degrees--Knight of the East.
 16 degrees--Prince of Jerusalem.
 17 degrees--Knight of the East and West.
 18 degrees--Knight Rose Croix.
 19 degrees--Pontiff.
 20 degrees--Master of the Symbolic Lodge.
 21 degrees--Noachite or Prussian Knight.
 22 degrees--Knight of the Royal Axe or Prince of Libanus.
 23 degrees--Chief of the Tabernacle.
 24 degrees--Prince of the Tabernacle.
 25  degrees--Knight of the Brazen Serpent.
 26 degrees--Prince of Mercy.
 27 degrees--Knight Commander of the Temple.
 28 degrees--Knight of the Sun or Prince Adept.
 29 degrees--Scottish Knight of St. Andrew.
 30 degrees--Knight Kadosh.
 31 degrees--Inspector Inquisitor.
 32 degrees--Master of the Royal Secret.

 

     
Morals and Dogma, by Albert Pike, [1871], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 1]

  

MORALS AND DOGMA.

  

I.

  

APPRENTICE.

 

  

THE TWELVE-INCH RULE AND THE COMMON GAVEL.

FORCE, unregulated or ill-regulated, is not only wasted in the void, like that of gunpowder burned in the open air, and steam unconfined by science; but, striking in the dark, and its blows meeting only the air, they recoil and bruise itself. It is destruction and ruin. It is the volcano, the earthquake, the cyclone;--not growth and progress. It is Polyphemus blinded, striking at random, and falling headlong among the sharp rocks by the impetus of his own blows.

The blind Force of the people is a Force that must be economized, and also managed, as the blind Force of steam, lifting the ponderous iron arms and turning the large wheels, is made to bore and rifle the cannon and to weave the most delicate lace. It must be regulated by Intellect. Intellect is to the people and the people's Force, what the slender needle of the compass is to the ship--its soul, always counselling the huge mass of wood and iron, and always pointing to the north. To attack the citadels built up on all sides against the human race by superstitions, despotisms, and prejudices,

[p. 2]

the Force must have a brain and a law. Then its deeds of daring produce permanent results, and there is real progress. Then there are sublime conquests. Thought is a force, and philosophy should be an energy, finding its aim and its effects in the amelioration of mankind. The two great motors are Truth and Love. When all these Forces are combined, and guided by the Intellect, and regulated by the RULE of Right, and Justice, and of combined and systematic movement and effort, the great revolution prepared for by the ages will begin to march. The POWER of the Deity Himself is in equilibrium with His WISDOM. Hence the only results are HARMONY.

It is because Force is ill regulated, that revolutions prove fail-tires. Therefore it is that so often insurrections, coming from those high mountains that domineer over the moral horizon, Justice, Wisdom, Reason, Right, built of the purest snow of the ideal after a long fall from rock to rock, after having reflected the sky in their transparency, and been swollen by a hundred affluents, in the majestic path of triumph, suddenly lose themselves in quagmires, like a California river in the sands.

The onward march of the human race requires that the heights around it should blaze with noble and enduring lessons of courage. Deeds of daring dazzle history, and form one class of the guiding lights of man. They are the stars and coruscations from that great sea of electricity, the Force inherent in the people. To strive, to brave all risks, to perish, to persevere, to be true to one's self, to grapple body to body with destiny, to surprise defeat by the little terror it inspires, now to confront unrighteous power, now to defy intoxicated triumph--these are the examples that the nations need and the light that electrifies them.

There are immense Forces in the great caverns of evil beneath society; in the hideous degradation, squalor, wretchedness and destitution, vices and crimes that reek and simmer in the darkness in that populace below the people, of great cities. There disinterestedness vanishes, every one howls, searches, gropes, and gnaws for himself. Ideas are ignored, and of progress there is no thought. This populace has two mothers, both of them stepmothers--Ignorance and Misery. Want is their only guide--for the appetite alone they crave satisfaction. Yet even these may be employed. The lowly sand we trample upon, cast into the furnace, melted, purified by fire, may become resplendent crystal.

[p. 3]

[paragraph continues] They have the brute force of the HAMMER, but their blows help on the great cause, when struck within the lines traced by the RULE held by wisdom and discretion.

Yet it is this very Force of the people, this Titanic power of the giants, that builds the fortifications of tyrants, and is embodied in their armies. Hence the possibility of such tyrannies as those of which it has been said, that "Rome smells worse under Vitellius than under Sulla. Under Claudius and under Domitian there is a deformity of baseness corresponding to the ugliness of the tyranny. The foulness of the slaves is a direct result of the atrocious baseness of the despot. A miasma exhales from these crouching consciences that reflect the master; the public authorities are unclean, hearts are collapsed, consciences shrunken, souls puny. This is so under Caracalla, it is so under Commodus, it is so under Heliogabalus, while from the Roman senate, under Caesar, there comes only the rank odor peculiar to the eagle's eyrie."

It is the force of the people that sustains all these despotisms, the basest as well as the best. That force acts through armies; and these oftener enslave than liberate. Despotism there applies the RULE. Force is the MACE of steel at the saddle-bow of the knight or of the bishop in armor. Passive obedience by force supports thrones and oligarchies, Spanish kings, and Venetian senates. Might, in an army wielded by tyranny, is the enormous sum total of utter weakness; and so Humanity wages war against Humanity, in despite of Humanity. So a people willingly submits to despot-ism, and its workmen submit to be despised, and its soldiers to be whipped; therefore it is that battles lost by a nation are often progress attained. Less glory is more liberty. When the drum is silent, reason sometimes speaks.

Tyrants use the force of the people to chain and subjugate--that is, enyoke the people. Then they plough with them as men do with oxen yoked. Thus the spirit of liberty and innovation is reduced by bayonets, and principles are struck dumb by cannon-shot; while the monks mingle with the troopers, and the Church militant and jubilant, Catholic or Puritan, sings Te Deums for victories over rebellion.

The military power, not subordinate to the civil power, again the HAMMER or MACE of FORCE, independent of the RULE, is an armed tyranny, born full-grown, as Athene sprung from the brain of Zeus. It spawns a dynasty, and begins with Caesar to rot into

[p. 4]

[paragraph continues] Vitellius and Commodus. At the present day it inclines to begin where formerly dynasties ended.

Constantly the people put forth immense strength, only to end in immense weakness. The force of the people is exhausted in indefinitely prolonging things long since dead; in governing mankind by embalming old dead tyrannies of Faith; restoring dilapidated dogmas; regilding faded, worm-eaten shrines; whitening and rouging ancient and barren superstitions; saving society by multiplying parasites; perpetuating superannuated institutions; enforcing the worship of symbols as the actual means of salvation; and tying the dead corpse of the Past, mouth to mouth, with the living Present. Therefore it is that it is one of the fatalities of Humanity to be condemned to eternal struggles with phantoms, with superstitions, bigotries, hypocrisies, prejudices, the formulas of error, and the pleas of tyranny. Despotisms, seen in the past, become respectable, as the mountain, bristling with volcanic rock, rugged and horrid, seen through the haze of distance is blue and smooth and beautiful. The sight of a single dungeon of tyranny is worth more, to dispel illusions, and create a holy hatred of despotism, and to direct FORCE aright, than the most eloquent volumes. The French should have preserved the Bastile as a perpetual lesson; Italy should not destroy the dungeons of the Inquisition. The Force of the people maintained the Power that built its gloomy cells, and placed the living in their granite sepulchres.

The FORCE of the people cannot, by its unrestrained and fitful action, maintain and continue in action and existence a free Government once created. That Force must be limited, restrained, conveyed by distribution into different channels, and by roundabout courses, to outlets, whence it is to issue as the law, action, and decision of the State; as the wise old Egyptian kings conveyed in different canals, by sub-division, the swelling waters of the Nile, and compelled them to fertilize and not devastate the land. There must be the jus et norma, the law and Rule, or Gauge, of constitution and law, within which the public force must act. Make a breach in either, and the great steam-hammer, with its swift and ponderous blows, crushes all the machinery to atoms, and, at last, wrenching itself away, lies inert and dead amid the ruin it has wrought.

The FORCE of the people, or the popular will, in action and

[p. 5]

exerted, symbolized by the GAVEL, regulated and guided by and acting within the limits of LAW and ORDER, symbolized by the TWENTY-FOUR-INCH RULE, has for its fruit LIBERTY, EQUALITY, and FRATERNITY,--liberty regulated by law; equality of rights in the eye of the law; brotherhood with its duties and obligations as well as its benefits.

You will hear shortly of the Rough ASHLAR and the Perfect ASHLAR, as part of the jewels of the Lodge. The rough Ashlar is said to be "a stone, as taken from the quarry, in its rude and natural state." The perfect Ashlar is said to be "a stone made ready by the hands of the workmen, to be adjusted by the working-tools of the Fellow-Craft." We shall not repeat the explanations of these symbols given by the York Rite. You may read them in its printed monitors. They are declared to allude to the self-improvement of the individual craftsman,--a continuation of the same superficial interpretation.

The rough Ashlar is the PEOPLE, as a mass, rude and unorganized. The perfect Ashlar, or cubical stone, symbol of perfection, is the STATE, the rulers deriving their powers from the con-sent of the governed; the constitution and laws speaking the will of the people; the government harmonious, symmetrical, efficient,--its powers properly distributed and duly adjusted in equilibrium.

If we delineate a cube on a plane surface thus:

we have visible three faces, and nine external lines, drawn between seven points. The complete cube has three more faces, making six; three more lines, making twelve; and one more point, making eight. As the number 12 includes the sacred numbers, 3, 5, 7, and 3 times 3, or 9, and is produced by adding the sacred number 3 to 9; while its own two figures, 1, 2, the unit or monad, and duad, added together, make the same sacred number 3; it was called the perfect number; and the cube became the symbol of perfection.

Produced by FORCE, acting by RULE; hammered in accordance

[p. 6]

with lines measured by the Gauge, out of the rough Ashlar, it is an appropriate symbol of the Force of the people, expressed as the constitution and law of the State; and of the State itself the three visible faces represent the three departments,--the Executive, which executes the laws; the Legislative, which makes the laws; the Judiciary, which interprets the laws, applies and enforces them, between man and man, between the State and the citizens. The three invisible faces, are Liberty, Equality, and Fraternity,--the threefold soul of the State--its vitality, spirit, and intellect.

*      *      *      *      *      *

Though Masonry neither usurps the place of, nor apes religion, prayer is an essential part of our ceremonies. It is the aspiration of the soul toward the Absolute and Infinite Intelligence, which is the One Supreme Deity, most feebly and misunderstandingly characterized as an "ARCHITECT." Certain faculties of man are directed toward the Unknown--thought, meditation, prayer. The unknown is an ocean, of which conscience is the compass. Thought, meditation, prayer, are the great mysterious pointings of the needle. It is a spiritual magnetism that thus connects the human soul with the Deity. These majestic irradiations of the soul pierce through the shadow toward the light.

It is but a shallow scoff to say that prayer is absurd, because it is not possible for us, by means of it, to persuade God to change His plans. He produces foreknown and foreintended effects, by the instrumentality of the forces of nature, all of which are His forces. Our own are part of these. Our free agency and our will are forces. We do not absurdly cease to make efforts to attain wealth or happiness, prolong life, and continue health, because we cannot by any effort change what is predestined. If the effort also is predestined, it is not the less our effort, made of our free will. So, likewise, we pray. Will is a force. Thought is a force. Prayer is a force. Why should it not be of the law of God, that prayer, like Faith and Love, should have its effects? Man is not to be comprehended as a starting-point, or progress as a goal, without those two great forces, Faith and Love. Prayer is sublime. Orisons that beg and clamor are pitiful. To deny the efficacy of prayer, is to deny that of Faith, Love, and Effort. Yet the effects produced, when our hand, moved by our will, launches a pebble into the ocean, never cease; and every uttered word is registered for eternity upon the invisible air.

[p. 7]

Every Lodge is a Temple, and as a whole, and in its details symbolic. The Universe itself supplied man with the model for the first temples reared to the Divinity. The arrangement of the Temple of Solomon, the symbolic ornaments which formed its chief decorations, and the dress of the High-Priest, all had reference to the order of the Universe, as then understood. The Temple contained many emblems of the seasons--the sun, the moon, the planets, the constellations Ursa Major and Minor, the zodiac, the elements, and the other parts of the world. It is the Master of this Lodge, of the Universe, Hermes, of whom Khu_ru_m is the representative, that is one of the lights of the Lodge.

For further instruction as to the symbolism of the heavenly bodies, and of the sacred numbers, and of the temple and its details, you must wait patiently until you advance in Masonry, in the mean time exercising your intellect in studying them for yourself. To study and seek to interpret correctly the symbols of the Universe, is the work of the sage and philosopher. It is to de-cipher the writing of God, and penetrate into His thoughts.

This is what is asked and answered in our catechism, in regard to the Lodge.

*      *      *      *      *      *

A "Lodge" is defined to be "an assemblage of Freemasons, duly congregated, having the sacred writings, square, and compass, and a charter, or warrant of constitution, authorizing them to work." The room or place in which they meet, representing some part of King Solomon's Temple, is also called the Lodge; and it is that we are now considering.

It is said to be supported by three great columns, WISDOM, FORCE or STRENGTH, and BEAUTY, represented by the Master, the Senior Warden, and the Junior Warden; and these are said to be the columns that support the Lodge, "because Wisdom, Strength, and Beauty, are the perfections of everything, and nothing can endure without them." "Because," the York Rite says, "it is necessary that there should be Wisdom to conceive, Strength to support, and Beauty to adorn, all great and important undertakings." "Know ye not," says the Apostle Paul, "that ye are the temple of God, and that the Spirit of God dwelleth in you? If any man desecrate the temple of God, him shall God destroy, for the temple of God is holy, which temple ye are."

The Wisdom and Power of the Deity are in equilibrium. The

[p. 8]

laws of nature and the moral laws are not the mere despotic man-dates of His Omnipotent will; for, then they might be changed by Him, and order become disorder, and good and right become evil and wrong; honesty and loyalty, vices; and fraud, ingratitude, and vice, virtues. Omnipotent power, infinite, and existing alone, would necessarily not be constrained to consistency. Its decrees and laws could not be immutable. The laws of God are not obligatory on us because they are the enactments of His POWER, or the expression of His WILL; but because they express His infinite WISDOM. They are not right because they are His laws, but His laws because they are right. From the equilibrium of infinite wisdom and infinite force, results perfect harmony, in physics and in the moral universe. Wisdom, Power, and Harmony constitute one Masonic triad. They have other and profounder meanings, that may at some time be unveiled to you.

As to the ordinary and commonplace explanation, it may be added, that the wisdom of the Architect is displayed in combining, as only a skillful Architect can do, and as God has done everywhere,--for example, in the tree, the human frame, the egg, the cells of the honeycomb--strength, with grace, beauty, symmetry, proportion, lightness, ornamentation. That, too, is the perfection of the orator and poet--to combine force, strength, energy, with grace of style, musical cadences, the beauty of figures, the play and irradiation of imagination and fancy; and so, in a State, the warlike and industrial force of the people, and their Titanic strength, must be combined with the beauty of the arts, the sciences, and the intellect, if the State would scale the heights of excellence, and the people be really free. Harmony in this, as in all the Divine, the material, and the human, is the result of equilibrium, of the sympathy and opposite action of contraries; a single Wisdom above them holding the beam of the scales. To reconcile the moral law, human responsibility, free-will, with the absolute power of God; and the existence of evil with His absolute wisdom, and goodness, and mercy,--these are the great enigmas of the Sphynx.

 

You entered the Lodge between two columns. They represent the two which stood in the porch of the Temple, on each side of the great eastern gateway. These pillars, of bronze, four fingers breadth in thickness, were, according to the most authentic

[p. 9]

account--that in the First and that in the Second Book of Kings, confirmed in Jeremiah--eighteen cubits high, with a capital five cubits high. The shaft of each was four cubits in diameter. A cubit is one foot and 707/1000. That is, the shaft of each was a little over thirty feet eight inches in height, the capital of each a little over eight feet six inches in height, and the diameter of the shaft six feet ten inches. The capitals were enriched by pomegranates of bronze, covered by bronze net-work, and ornamented with wreaths of bronze; and appear to have imitated the shape of the seed-vessel of the lotus or Egyptian lily, a sacred symbol to the Hindus and Egyptians. The pillar or column on the right, or in the south, was named, as the Hebrew word is rendered in our translation of the Bible, JACHIN: and that on the left BOAZ. Our translators say that the first word means, "He shall establish;" and the second, "in it is strength."

These columns were imitations, by Khu_ru_m, the Tyrian artist, of the great columns consecrated to the Winds and Fire, at the entrance to the famous Temple of Malkarth, in the city of Tyre. It is customary, in Lodges of the York Rite, to see a celestial globe on one, and a terrestrial globe on the other; but these are not warranted, if the object be to imitate the original two columns of the Temple. The symbolic meaning of these columns we shall leave for the present unexplained, only adding that Entered Apprentices keep their working-tools in the column JACHIN; and giving you the etymology and literal meaning of the two names.

The word Jachin, in Hebrew, is w ?Yk?Yn, It was probably pronounced Ya-kayan, and meant, as a verbal noun, He that strengthens; and thence, firm, stable, upright.

The word Boaz is w ?B?O?Z, Baaz. w ?O?Z means Strong, Strength, Power, Might, Refuge, Source of Strength, a Fort. The w ?B prefixed means "with" or "in," and gives the word the force of the Latin gerund, roborando--Strengthening.

The former word also means he will establish, or plant in an erect position--from the verb w k?Wn, Ku_n, he stood erect. It probably meant Active and Vivifying Energy and Force; and Boaz, Stability, Permanence, in the passive sense.

The Dimensions of the Lodge, our Brethren of the York Rite say, "are unlimited, and its covering no less than the canopy of Heaven." "To this object," they say, "the mason's mind is continually

[p. 10]

directed, and thither he hopes at last to arrive by the aid of the theological ladder which Jacob in his vision saw ascending from earth to Heaven; the three principal rounds of which are denominated Faith, Hope, and Charity; and which admonish us to have Faith in God, Hope in Immortality, and Charity to all mankind." Accordingly a ladder, sometimes with nine rounds, is seen on the chart, resting at the bottom on the earth, its top in the clouds, the stars shining above it; and this is deemed to represent that mystic ladder, which Jacob saw in his dream, set up on the earth, and the top of it reaching to Heaven, with the angels of God ascending and descending on it. The addition of the three principal rounds to the symbolism, is wholly modern and incongruous.

The ancients counted seven planets, thus arranged: the Moon, Mercury, Venus, the Sun, Mars, Jupiter, and Saturn. There were seven heavens and seven spheres of these planets; on all the monuments of Mithras are seven altars or pyres, consecrated to the seven planets, as were the seven lamps of the golden candelabrum in the Temple. That these represented the planets, we are assured by Clemens of Alexandria, in his Stromata, and by Philo Judaeus.

To return to its source in the Infinite, the human soul, the ancients held, had to ascend, as it had descended, through the seven spheres. The Ladder by which it reascends, has, according to Marsilius Ficinus, in his Commentary on the Ennead of Plotinus, seven degrees or steps; and in the Mysteries of Mithras, carried to Rome under the Emperors, the ladder, with its seven rounds, was a symbol referring to this ascent through the spheres of the seven planets. Jacob saw the Spirits of God ascending and descending on it; and above it the Deity Himself. The Mithraic Mysteries were celebrated in caves, where gates were marked at the four equinoctial and solstitial points of the zodiac; and the seven planetary spheres were represented, which souls needs must traverse in descending from the heaven of the fixed stars to the elements that envelop the earth; and seven gates were marked, one for each planet, through which they pass, in descending or returning.

We learn this from Celsus, in Origen, who says that the symbolic image of this passage among the stars, used in the Mithraic Mysteries, was a ladder reaching from earth to Heaven, divided

[p. 11]

into seven steps or stages, to each of which was a gate, and at the summit an eighth one, that of the fixed stars. The symbol was the same as that of the seven stages of Borsippa, the Pyramid of vitrified brick, near Babylon, built of seven stages, and each of a different color. In the Mithraic ceremonies, the candidate went through seven stages of initiation, passing through many fearful trials--and of these the high ladder with seven rounds or steps was the symbol.

You see the Lodge, its details and ornaments, by its Lights. You have already heard what these Lights, the greater and lesser, are said to be, and how they are spoken of by our Brethren of the York Rite.

The Holy Bible, Square, and Compasses, are not only styled the Great Lights in Masonry, but they are also technically called the Furniture of the Lodge; and, as you have seen, it is held that there is no Lodge without them. This has sometimes been made a pretext for excluding Jews from our Lodges, because they cannot regard the New Testament as a holy book. The Bible is an indispensable part of the furniture of a Christian Lodge, only because it is the sacred book of the Christian religion. The Hebrew Pentateuch in a Hebrew Lodge, and the Koran in a Mohammedan one, belong on the Altar; and one of these, and the Square and Compass, properly understood, are the Great Lights by which a Mason must walk and work.

The obligation of the candidate is always to be taken on the sacred book or books of his religion, that he may deem it more solemn and binding; and therefore it was that you were asked of what religion you were. We have no other concern with your religious creed.

The Square is a right angle, formed by two right lines. It is adapted only to a plane surface, and belongs only to geometry, earth-measurement, that trigonometry which deals only with planes, and with the earth, which the ancients supposed to be a plane. The Compass describes circles, and deals with spherical trigonometry, the science of the spheres and heavens. The former, therefore, is an emblem of what concerns the earth and the body; the latter of what concerns the heavens and the soul. Yet the Compass is also used in plane trigonometry, as in erecting perpendiculars; and, therefore, you are reminded that, although in this Degree both points of the Compass are under the Square, and

[p. 12]

you are now dealing only with the moral and political meaning of the symbols, and not with their philosophical and spiritual meanings, still the divine ever mingles with the human; with the earthly the spiritual intermixes; and there is something spiritual in the commonest duties of life. The nations are not bodies-politic alone, but also souls-politic; and woe to that people which, seeking the material only, forgets that it has a soul. Then we have a race, petrified in dogma, which presupposes the absence of a soul and the presence only of memory and instinct, or demoralized by lucre. Such a nature can never lead civilization. Genuflexion before the idol or the dollar atrophies the muscle which walks and the will which moves. Hieratic or mercantile absorption diminishes the radiance of a people, lowers its horizon by lowering its level, and deprives it of that understanding of the universal aim, at the same time human and divine, which makes the missionary nations. A free people, forgetting that it has a soul to be cared for, devotes all its energies to its material advancement. If it makes war, it is to subserve its commercial interests. The citizens copy after the State, and regard wealth, pomp, and luxury as the great goods of life. Such a nation creates wealth rapidly, and distributes it badly. Thence the two extremes, of monstrous opulence and monstrous misery; all the enjoyment to a few, all the privations to the rest, that is to say, to the people; Privilege, Exception, Monopoly, Feudality, springing up from Labor itself: a false and dangerous situation, which, making Labor a blinded and chained Cyclops, in the mine, at the forge, in the workshop, at the loom, in the field, over poisonous fumes, in miasmatic cells, in unventilated factories, founds public power upon private misery, and plants the greatness of the State in the suffering of the individual. It is a greatness ill constituted, in which all the material elements are combined, and into which no moral element enters. If a people, like a star, has the right of eclipse, the light ought to return. The eclipse should not degenerate into night.

The three lesser, or the Sublime Lights, you have heard, are the Sun, the Moon, and the Master of the Lodge; and you have heard what our Brethren of the York Rite say in regard to them, and why they hold them to be Lights of the Lodge. But the Sun and Moon do in no sense light the Lodge, unless it be symbolically, and then the lights are not they, but those things of which they are the symbols. Of what they are the symbols the Mason in that

[p. 13]

[paragraph continues] Rite is not told. Nor does the Moon in any sense rule the night with regularity.

The Sun is the ancient symbol of the life-giving and generative power of the Deity. To the ancients, light was the cause of life; and God was the source from which all light flowed; the essence of Light, the Invisible Fire, developed as flame manifested as light and splendor. The Sun was His manifestation and visible image; and the Sabaeans worshipping the Light--God, seemed to worship the Sun, in whom they saw the manifestation of the Deity.

The Moon was the symbol of the passive capacity of nature to produce, the female, of which the life-giving power and energy was the male. It was the symbol of Isis, Astarte, and Artemis, or Diana. The "Master of Life" was the Supreme Deity, above both, and manifested through both; Zeus, the Son of Saturn, become King of the Gods; Horus, son of Osiris and Isis, become the Master of Life; Dionusos or Bacchus, like Mithras, become the author of Light and Life and Truth.

*      *      *      *      *      *

The Master of Light and Life, the Sun and the Moon, are symbolized in every Lodge by the Master and Wardens: and this makes it the duty of the Master to dispense light to the Brethren, by himself, and through the Wardens, who are his ministers.

"Thy sun," says ISAIAH to Jerusalem, "shall no more go down, neither shall thy moon withdraw itself; for the LORD shall be thine everlasting light, and the days of thy mourning shall be ended. Thy people also shall be all righteous; they shall inherit the land forever." Such is the type of a free people.

Our northern ancestors worshipped this tri-une Deity; ODIN, the Almighty FATHER; FREA, his wife, emblem of universal matter; and THOR, his son, the mediator. But above all these was the Supreme God, "the author of everything that existeth, the Eternal, the Ancient, the Living and Awful Being, the Searcher into concealed things, the Being that never changeth." In the Temple of Eleusis (a sanctuary lighted only by a window in the roof, and representing the Universe), the images of the Sun, Moon, and Mercury, were represented.

"The Sun and Moon," says the learned Bro Q.E.D. DELAUNAY, "represent the two grand principles of all generations, the active and passive, the male and the female. The Sun represents the

[p. 14]

actual light. He pours upon the Moon his fecundating rays; both shed their light upon their offspring, the Blazing Star, or HORUS, and the three form the great Equilateral Triangle, in the centre of which is the omnific letter of the Kabalah, by which creation is said to have been effected."

The ORNAMENTS of a Lodge are said to be "the Mosaic Pavement, the Indented Tessel, and the Blazing Star." The Mosaic Pavement, chequered in squares or lozenges, is said to represent the ground-floor of King Solomon's Temple; and the Indented Tessel "that beautiful tesselated border which surrounded it." The Blazing Star in the centre is said to be "an emblem of Divine Providence, and commemorative of the star which appeared to guide the wise men of the East to the place of our Saviour's nativity." But "there was no stone seen" within the Temple. The walls were covered with planks of cedar, and the floor was covered with planks of fir. There is no evidence that there was such a pavement or floor in the Temple, or such a bordering. In England, anciently, the Tracing-Board was surrounded with an indented border; and it is only in America that such a border is put around the Mosaic pavement. The tesserae, indeed, are the squares or lozenges of the pavement. In England, also, "the indented or denticulated border" is called "tesselated," because it has four "tassels," said to represent Temperance, Fortitude, Prudence, and Justice. It was termed the Indented Trassel; but this is a misuse of words. It is a tesserated pavement, with an indented border round it.

The pavement, alternately black and white, symbolizes, whether so intended or not, the Good and Evil Principles of the Egyptian and Persian creed. It is the warfare of Michael and Satan, of the Gods and Titans, of Balder and Lok; between light and shadow, which is darkness; Day and Night; Freedom and Despotism; Religious Liberty and the Arbitrary Dogmas of a Church that thinks for its votaries, and whose Pontiff claims to be infallible, and the decretals of its Councils to constitute a gospel.

The edges of this pavement, if in lozenges, will necessarily be indented or denticulated, toothed like a saw; and to complete and finish it a bordering is necessary. It is completed by tassels as ornaments at the corners. If these and the bordering have any symbolic meaning, it is fanciful and arbitrary.

To find in the BLAZING STAR of five points an allusion to the

[p. 15]

[paragraph continues] Divine Providence, is also fanciful; and to make it commemorative of the Star that is said to have guided the Magi, is to give it a meaning comparatively modern. Originally it represented SIRIUS, or the Dog-star, the forerunner of the inundation of the Nile; the God ANUBIS, companion of Isis in her search for the body of OSIRIS, her brother and husband. Then it became the image of HORUS, the son of OSIRIS, himself symbolized also by the Sun, the author of the Seasons, and the God of Time; Son of Isis, who was the universal nature, himself the primitive matter, inexhaustible source of Life, spark of uncreated fire, universal seed of all beings. It was HERMES, also, the Master of Learning, whose name in Greek is that of the God Mercury. It became the sacred and potent sign or character of the Magi, the PENTALPHA, and is the significant emblem of Liberty and Freedom, blazing with a steady radiance amid the weltering elements of good and evil of Revolutions, and promising serene skies and fertile seasons to the nations, after the storms of change and tumult.

In the East of the Lodge, over the Master, inclosed in a triangle, is the Hebrew letter YO_D [w ?Y or ]. In the English and American Lodges the Letter G Q.E.D. is substituted for this, as the initial of the word GOD, with as little reason as if the letter D., initial of DIEU, were used in French Lodges instead of the proper letter. YO_D is, in the Kabalah, the symbol of Unity, of the Supreme Deity, the first letter of the Holy Name; and also a symbol of the Great Kabalistic Triads. To understand its mystic meanings, you must open the pages of the Sohar and Siphra de Zeniutha, and other kabalistic books, and ponder deeply on their meaning. It must suffice to say, that it is the Creative Energy of the Deity, is represented as a point, and that point in the centre of the Circle of immensity. It is to us in this Degree, the symbol of that unmanifested Deity, the Absolute, who has no name.

Our French Brethren place this letter YO_D in the centre of the Blazing Star. And in the old Lectures, our ancient English Brethren said, "The Blazing Star or Glory in the centre refers us to that grand luminary, the Sun, which enlightens the earth, and by its genial influence dispenses blessings to mankind." They called it also in the same lectures, an emblem of PRUDENCE. The word Prudentia means, in its original and fullest signification, Foresight; and, accordingly, the Blazing Star has been regarded as an emblem of Omniscience, or the All-seeing Eye, which to the

[p. 16]

Egyptian Initiates was the emblem of Osiris, the Creator. With the YO_D in the centre, it has the kabalistic meaning of the Divine Energy, manifested as Light, creating the Universe.

 

The Jewels of the Lodge are said to be six in number. Three are called "Movable," and three "Immovable." The SQUARE, the LEVEL, and the PLUMB were anciently and properly called the Movable Jewels, because they pass from one Brother to another. It is a modern innovation to call them immovable, because they must always be present in the Lodge. The immovable jewels are the ROUGH ASHLAR, the PERFECT ASHLAR or CUBICAL STONE, or, in some Rituals, the DOUBLE CUBE, and the TRACING-BOARD, or TRESTLE-BOARD.

Of these jewels our Brethren of the York Rite say: "The Square inculcates Morality; the Level, Equality; and the Plumb, Rectitude of Conduct." Their explanation of the immovable Jewels may be read in their monitors.

*      *      *      *      *      *

Our Brethren of the York Rite say that "there is represented in every well-governed Lodge, a certain point, within a circle; the point representing an individual Brother; the Circle, the boundary line of his conduct, beyond which he is never to suffer his prejudices or passions to betray him."

This is not to interpret the symbols of Masonry. It is said by some, with a nearer approach to interpretation, that the point within the circle represents God in the centre of the Universe. It is a common Egyptian sign for the Sun and Osiris, and is still used as the astronomical sign of the great luminary. In the Kabalah the point is YO_D, the Creative Energy of God, irradiating with light the circular space which God, the universal Light, left vacant, wherein to create the worlds, by withdrawing His substance of Light back on all sides from one point.

Our Brethren add that, "this circle is embordered by two perpendicular parallel lines, representing Saint John the Baptist and Saint John the Evangelist, and upon the top rest the Holy Scriptures" (an open book). "In going round this circle," they say, "we necessarily touch upon these two lines as well as upon the Holy Scriptures; and while a Mason keeps himself circumscribed within their precepts, it is impossible that he should materially err."

[p. 17]

It would be a waste of time to comment upon this. Some writers have imagined that the parallel lines represent the Tropics of Cancer and Capricorn, which the Sun alternately touches upon at the Summer and Winter solstices. But the tropics are not perpendicular lines, and the idea is merely fanciful. If the parallel lines ever belonged to the ancient symbol, they had some more recondite and more fruitful meaning. They probably had the same meaning as the twin columns Jachin and Boaz. That meaning is not for the Apprentice. The adept may find it in the Kabalah. The JUSTICE and MERCY of God are in equilibrium, and the result is HARMONY, because a Single and Perfect Wisdom presides over both.

The Holy Scriptures are an entirely modern addition to the symbol, like the terrestrial and celestial globes on the columns of the portico. Thus the ancient symbol has been denaturalized by incongruous additions, like that of Isis weeping over the broken column containing the remains of Osiris at Byblos.

*      *      *      *      *      *

Masonry has its decalogue, which is a law to its Initiates. These are its Ten Commandments:

        I.

       earth Q.E.D. God is the Eternal, Omnipotent, Immutable WISDOM and Supreme INTELLIGENCE   and Exhaustless LOVE.
   Thou shalt adore, revere, and love Him!
   Thou shalt honor Him by practising the virtues!

     
      II.

       ###9675### Q.E.D. Thy religion shall be, to do good because it is a pleasure   to thee, and not merely because it is a duty.
   That thou mayest become the friend of the wise man, thou shalt obey his   precepts!
   Thy soul is immortal! Thou shalt do nothing to degrade it!

     
      III.

       earth Q.E.D. Thou shalt unceasingly war against vice!
   Thou shalt not do unto others that which thou wouldst not wish them to do   unto thee!
   Thou shalt be submissive to thy fortunes, and keep burning the light of   wisdom!

     
      IV.

       ###9675### Q.E.D. Thou shalt honor thy parents!
   Thou shalt pay respect and homage to the aged!
   Thou shalt instruct the young!
   Thou shalt protect and defend infancy and innocence!

     
      V.

       earth Q.E.D. Thou shalt cherish thy wife and thy children!
   Thou shalt love thy country, and obey its laws! [p. 18]

     
      VI.

       ###9675### Q.E.D. Thy friend shall be to thee a second self!
   Misfortune shall not estrange thee from him!
   Thou shalt do for his memory whatever thou wouldst do for him, if he were   living!

     
      VII.

       earth Q.E.D. Thou shalt avoid and flee from insincere friendships!
   Thou shalt in everything refrain from excess.
   Thou shalt fear to be the cause of a stain on thy memory!

     
      VIII.

       ###9675### Q.E.D. Thou shalt allow no passions to become thy master!
   Thou shalt make the passions of others profitable lessons to thyself!
   Thou shalt be indulgent to error!

     
      IX.

       earth Q.E.D. Thou shalt hear much: Thou shalt speak little: Thou shalt act   well!
   Thou shalt forget injuries!
   Thou shalt render good for evil!
   Thou shalt not misuse either thy strength or thy superiority!

     
      X.

       ###9675### Q.E.D. Thou shalt study to know men; that thereby thou mayest learn   to know thyself!
   Thou shalt ever seek after virtue!
   Thou shalt be just!
   Thou shalt avoid idleness!

     
 But the great commandment of Masonry is this: "A new commandment give I unto you: that ye love one another! He that saith he is in the light, and hateth his brother, remaineth still in the darkness."

Such are the moral duties of a Mason. But it is also the duty of Masonry to assist in elevating the moral and intellectual level of society; in coining knowledge, bringing ideas into circulation, and causing the mind of youth to grow; and in putting, gradually, by the teachings of axioms and the promulgation of positive laws, the human race in harmony with its destinies.

To this duty and work the Initiate is apprenticed. He must not imagine that he can effect nothing, and, therefore, despairing, become inert. It is in this, as in a man's daily life. Many great deeds are done in the small struggles of life. There is, we are told, a determined though unseen bravery, which defends itself, foot to foot, in the darkness, against the fatal invasion of necessity and of baseness. There are noble and mysterious triumphs, which no eye sees, which no renown rewards, which no flourish of trumpets salutes. Life, misfortune, isolation, abandonment, poverty, are

[p. 19]

battle-fields, which have their heroes,--heroes obscure, but sometimes greater than those who become illustrious. The Mason should struggle in the same manner, and with the same bravery, against those invasions of necessity and baseness, which come to nations as well as to men. He should meet them, too, foot to foot, even in the darkness, and protest against the national wrongs and follies; against usurpation and the first inroads of that hydra, Tyranny. There is no more sovereign eloquence than the truth in indignation. It is more difficult for a people to keep than to gain their freedom. The Protests of Truth are always needed. Continually, the right must protest against the fact. There is, in fact, Eternity in the Right. The Mason should be the Priest and Soldier of that Right. If his country should be robbed of her liberties, he should still not despair. The protest of the Right against the Fact persists forever. The robbery of a people never becomes prescriptive. Reclamation of its rights is barred by no length of time. Warsaw can no more be Tartar than Venice can be Teutonic. A people may endure military usurpation, and subjugated States kneel to States and wear the yoke, while under the stress of necessity; but when the necessity disappears, if the people is fit to be free, the submerged country will float to the surface and reappear, and Tyranny be adjudged by History to have murdered its victims.

Whatever occurs, we should have Faith in the Justice and over-ruling Wisdom of God, and Hope for the Future, and Loving-kindness for those who are in error. God makes visible to men His will in events; an obscure text, written in a mysterious language. Men make their translations of it forthwith, hasty, incorrect, full of faults, omissions, and misreadings. We see so short a way along the arc of the great circle! Few minds comprehend the Divine tongue. The most sagacious, the most calm, the most profound, decipher the hieroglyphs slowly; and when they arrive with their text, perhaps the need has long gone by; there are already twenty translations in the public square--the most incorrect being, as of course, the most accepted and popular. From each translation, a party is born; and from each misreading, a faction. Each party believes or pretends that it has the only true text, and each faction believes or pretends that it alone possesses the light. Moreover, factions are blind men, who aim straight, errors are excellent projectiles, striking skillfully, and with all the violence that springs from false reasoning, wherever a want of

[p. 20]

logic in those who defend the right, like a defect in a cuirass, makes them vulnerable.

Therefore it is that we shall often be discomfited in combating error before the people. Antaeus long resisted Hercules; and the heads of the Hydra grew as fast as they were cut off. It is absurd to say that Error, wounded, writhes in pain, and dies amid her worshippers. Truth conquers slowly. There is a wondrous vitality in Error. Truth, indeed, for the most part, shoots over the heads of the masses; or if an error is prostrated for a moment, it is up again in a moment, and as vigorous as ever. It will not die when the brains are out, and the most stupid and irrational errors are the longest-lived.

Nevertheless, Masonry, which is Morality and Philosophy, must not cease to do its duty. We never know at what moment success awaits our efforts--generally when most unexpected--nor with what effect our efforts are or are not to be attended. Succeed or fail, Masonry must not bow to error, or succumb under discouragement. There were at Rome a few Carthaginian soldiers, taken prisoners, who refused to bow to Flaminius, and had a little of Hannibal's magnanimity. Masons should possess an equal greatness of soul. Masonry should be an energy; finding its aim and effect in the amelioration of mankind. Socrates should enter into Adam, and produce Marcus Aurelius, in other words, bring forth from the man of enjoyments, the man of wisdom. Masonry should not be a mere watch-tower, built upon mystery, from which to gaze at ease upon the world, with no other result than to be a convenience for the curious. To hold the full cup of thought to the thirsty lips of men; to give to all the true ideas of Deity; to harmonize conscience and science, are the province of Philosophy. Morality is Faith in full bloom. Contemplation should lead to action, and the absolute be practical; the ideal be made air and food and drink to the human mind. Wisdom is a sacred communion. It is only on that condition that it ceases to be a sterile love of Science, and becomes the one and supreme method by which to unite Humanity and arouse it to concerted action. Then Philosophy becomes Religion.

And Masonry, like History and Philosophy, has eternal duties--eternal, and, at the same time, simple--to oppose Caiaphas as Bishop, Draco or Jefferies as Judge, Trimalcion as Legislator, and Tiberius as Emperor. These are the symbols of the tyranny that

[p. 21]

degrades and crushes, and the corruption that defiles and infests. in the works published for the use of the Craft we are told that the three great tenets of a Mason's profession, are Brotherly Love, Relief, and Truth. And it is true that a Brotherly affection and kindness should govern us in all our intercourse and relations with our brethren; and a generous and liberal philanthropy actuate us in regard to all men. To relieve the distressed is peculiarly the duty of Masons--a sacred duty, not to be omitted, neglected, or coldly or inefficiently complied with. It is also most true, that Truth is a Divine attribute and the foundation of every virtue. To be true, and to seek to find and learn the Truth, are the great objects of every good Mason.

As the Ancients did, Masonry styles Temperance, Fortitude, Prudence, and Justice, the four cardinal virtues. They are as necessary to nations as to individuals. The people that would be Free and Independent, must possess Sagacity, Forethought, Fore-sight, and careful Circumspection, all which are included in the meaning of the word Prudence. It must be temperate in asserting its rights, temperate in its councils, economical in its expenses; it must be bold, brave, courageous, patient under reverses, undismayed by disasters, hopeful amid calamities, like Rome when she sold the field at which Hannibal had his camp. No Cannae or Pharsalia or Pavia or Agincourt or Waterloo must discourage her. Let her Senate sit in their seats until the Gauls pluck them by the beard. She must, above all things, be just, not truckling to the strong and warring on or plundering the weak; she must act on the square with all nations, and the feeblest tribes; always keeping her faith, honest in her legislation, upright in all her dealings. Whenever such a Republic exists, it will be immortal: for rashness, injustice, intemperance and luxury in prosperity, and despair and disorder in adversity, are the causes of the decay and dilapidation of nations.

     
Morals and Dogma, by Albert Pike, [1871], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 22]

  

II.

  

THE FELLOW-CRAFT.

IN the Ancient Orient, all religion was more or less a mystery and there was no divorce from it of philosophy. The popular theology, taking the multitude of allegories and symbols for realities, degenerated into a worship of the celestial luminaries, of imaginary Deities with human feelings, passions, appetites, and lusts, of idols, stones, animals, reptiles. The Onion was sacred to the Egyptians, because its different layers were a symbol of the concentric heavenly spheres. Of course the popular religion could not satisfy the deeper longings and thoughts, the loftier aspirations of the Spirit, or the logic of reason. The first, therefore, was taught to the initiated in the Mysteries. There, also, it was taught by symbols. The vagueness of symbolism, capable of many interpretations, reached what the palpable and conventional creed could not. Its indefiniteness acknowledged the abstruseness of the subject: it treated that mysterious subject mystically: it endeavored to illustrate what it could not explain; to excite an appropriate feeling, if it could not develop an adequate idea; and to make the image a mere subordinate conveyance for the conception, which itself never became obvious or familiar.

Thus the knowledge now imparted by books and letters, was of old conveyed by symbols; and the priests invented or perpetuated a display of rites and exhibitions, which were not only more attractive to the eye than words, but often more suggestive and more pregnant with meaning to the mind.

Masonry, successor of the Mysteries, still follows the ancient manner of teaching. Her ceremonies are like the ancient mystic shows,--not the reading of an essay, but the opening of a problem, requiring research, and constituting philosophy the arch-expounder. Her symbols are the instruction she gives. The lectures are endeavors, often partial and one-sided, to interpret these symbols. He who would become an accomplished Mason must not be content merely to hear, or even to understand, the lectures; he

[p. 23]

must, aided by them, and they having, as it were, marked out the way for him, study, interpret, and develop these symbols for himself.

*      *      *      *      *      *

Though Masonry is identical with the ancient Mysteries, it is so only in this qualified sense: that it presents but an imperfect image of their brilliancy, the ruins only of their grandeur, and a system that has experienced progressive alterations, the fruits of social events, political circumstances, and the ambitious imbecility of its improvers. After leaving Egypt, the Mysteries were modified by the habits of the different nations among whom they were introduced, and especially by the religious systems of the countries into which they were transplanted. To maintain the established government, laws, and religion, was the obligation of the Initiate everywhere; and everywhere they were the heritage of the priests, who were nowhere willing to make the common people co-proprietors with themselves of philosophical truth.

Masonry is not the Coliseum in ruins. It is rather a Roman palace of the middle ages, disfigured by modern architectural improvements, yet built on a Cyclopaean foundation laid by the Etruscans, and with many a stone of the superstructure taken from dwellings and temples of the age of Hadrian and Antoninus.

Christianity taught the doctrine of FRATERNITY; but repudiated that of political EQUALITY, by continually inculcating obedience to Caesar, and to those lawfully in authority. Masonry was the first apostle of EQUALITY. In the Monastery there is fraternity and equality, but no liberty. Masonry added that also, and claimed for man the three-fold heritage, LIBERTY, EQUALITY, and FRATERNITY.

It was but a development of the original purpose of the Mysteries, which was to teach men to know and practice their duties to themselves and their fellows, the great practical end of all philosophy and all knowledge.

Truths are the springs from which duties flow; and it is but a few hundred years since a new Truth began to be distinctly seen; that MAN IS SUPREME OVER INSTITUTIONS, AND NOT THEY OVER HIM. Man has natural empire over all institutions. They are for him, according to his development; not he for them. This seems to us a very simple statement, one to which all men, everywhere, ought to assent. But once it was a great new Truth,---not

[p. 24]

revealed until governments had been in existence for at least five thousand years. Once revealed, it imposed new duties on men. Man owed it to himself to be free. He owed it to his country to seek to give her freedom, or maintain her in that possession. It made Tyranny and Usurpation the enemies of the Human Race. It created a general outlawry of Despots and Despotisms, temporal and spiritual. The sphere of Duty was immensely enlarged. Patriotism had, henceforth, a new and wider meaning. Free Government, Free Thought, Free Conscience, Free Speech! All these came to be inalienable rights, which those who had parted with them or been robbed of them, or whose ancestors had lost them, had the right summarily to retake. Unfortunately, as Truths always become perverted into falsehoods, and are falsehoods when misapplied, this Truth became the Gospel of Anarchy, soon after it was first preached.

Masonry early comprehended this Truth, and recognized its own enlarged duties. Its symbols then came to have a wider meaning; but it also assumed the mask of Stone-masonry, and borrowed its working-tools, and so was supplied with new and apt symbols. It aided in bringing about the French Revolution, disappeared with the Girondists, was born again with the restoration of order, and sustained Napoleon, because, though Emperor, he acknowledged the right of the people to select its rulers, and was at the head of a nation refusing to receive back its old kings. He pleaded, with sabre, musket, and cannon, the great cause of the People against Royalty, the right of the French people even to make a Corsican General their Emperor, if it pleased them.

Masonry felt that this Truth had the Omnipotence of God on its side; and that neither Pope nor Potentate could overcome it. It was a truth dropped into the world's wide treasury, and forming a part of the heritage which each generation receives, enlarges, and holds in trust, and of necessity bequeaths to mankind; the personal estate of man, entailed of nature to the end of time. And Masonry early recognized it as true, that to set forth and develop a truth, or any human excellence of gift or growth, is to make greater the spiritual glory of the race; that whosoever aids the march of a Truth, and makes the thought a thing, writes in the same line with MOSES, and with Him who died upon the cross, and has an intellectual sympathy with the Deity Himself.

The best gift we can bestow on man is manhood. It is that

[p. 25]

which Masonry is ordained of God to bestow on its votaries: not sectarianism and religious dogma; not a rudimental morality, that may be found in the writings of Confucius, Zoroaster, Seneca, and the Rabbis, in the Proverbs and Ecclesiastes; not a little and cheap common-school knowledge; but manhood and science and philosophy.

Not that Philosophy or Science is in opposition to Religion. For Philosophy is but that knowledge of God and the Soul, which is derived from observation of the manifested action of God and the Soul, and from a wise analogy. It is the intellectual guide which the religious sentiment needs. The true religious philosophy of an imperfect being, is not a system of creed, but, as SOCRATES thought, an infinite search or approximation. Philosophy is that intellectual and moral progress, which the religious sentiment inspires and ennobles.

As to Science, it could not walk alone, while religion was stationary. It consists of those matured inferences from experience which all other experience confirms. It realizes and unites all that was truly valuable in both the old schemes of mediation,--one heroic, or the system of action and effort; and the mystical theory of spiritual, contemplative communion. "Listen to me," says GALEN, "as to the voice of the Eleusinian Hierophant, and believe that the study of Nature is a mystery no less important than theirs, nor less adapted to display the wisdom and power of the Great Creator. Their lessons and demonstrations were obscure, but ours are clear and unmistakable."

We deem that to be the best knowledge we can obtain of the Soul of another man, which is furnished by his actions and his life-long conduct. Evidence to the contrary, supplied by what another man informs us that this Soul has said to his, would weigh little against the former. The first Scriptures for the human race were written by God on the Earth and Heavens. The reading of these Scriptures is Science. Familiarity with the grass and trees, the insects and the infusoria, teaches us deeper lessons of love and faith than we can glean from the writings of FE_NE_LON and AUGUSTINE. The great Bible of God is ever open before mankind.

Knowledge is convertible into power, and axioms into rules of utility and duty. But knowledge itself is not Power. Wisdom is Power; and her Prime Minister is JUSTICE, which is the perfected law of TRUTH. The purpose, therefore, of Education and Science

[p. 26]

is to make a man wise. If knowledge does not make him so, it is wasted, like water poured on the sands. To know the formulas of Masonry, is of as little value, by itself, as to know so many words and sentences in some barbarous African or Australasian dialect. To know even the meaning of the symbols, is but little, unless that adds to our wisdom, and also to our charity, which is to justice like one hemisphere of the brain to the other.

Do not lose sight, then, of the true object of your studies in Masonry. It is to add to your estate of wisdom, and not merely to your knowledge. A man may spend a lifetime in studying a single specialty of knowledge,--botany, conchology, or entomology, for instance,--in committing to memory names derived from the Greek, and classifying and reclassifying; and yet be no wiser than when he began. It is the great truths as to all that most concerns a man, as to his rights, interests, and duties, that Masonry seeks to teach her Initiates.

The wiser a man becomes, the less will he be inclined to submit tamely to the imposition of fetters or a yoke, on his conscience or his person. For, by increase of wisdom he not only better knows his rights, but the more highly values them, and is more conscious of his worth and dignity. His pride then urges him to assert his independence. He becomes better able to assert it also; and better able to assist others or his country, when they or she stake all, even existence, upon the same assertion. But mere knowledge makes no one independent, nor fits him to be free. It often only makes him a more useful slave. Liberty is a curse to the ignorant and brutal.

Political science has for its object to ascertain in what manner and by means of what institutions political and personal freedom may be secured and perpetuated: not license, or the mere right of every man to vote, but entire and absolute freedom of thought and opinion, alike free of the despotism of monarch and mob and prelate; freedom of action within the limits of the general law enacted for all; the Courts of Justice, with impartial Judges and juries, open to all alike; weakness and poverty equally potent in those Courts as power and wealth; the avenues to office and honor open alike to all the worthy; the military powers, in war or peace, in strict subordination to the civil power; arbitrary arrests for acts not known to the law as crimes, impossible; Romish Inquisitions, Star-Chambers, Military Commissions, unknown; the

[p. 27]

means of instruction within reach of the children of all; the right of Free Speech; and accountability of all public officers, civil and military.

If Masonry needed to be justified for imposing political as well as moral duties on its Initiates, it would be enough to point to the sad history of the world. It would not even need that she should turn back the pages of history to the chapters written by Tacitus: that she should recite the incredible horrors of despotism under Caligula and Domitian, Caracalla and Commodus, Vitellius and Maximin. She need only point to the centuries of calamity through which the gay French nation passed; to the long oppression of the feudal ages, of the selfish Bourbon kings; to those times when the peasants were robbed and slaughtered by their own lords and princes, like sheep; when the lord claimed the first-fruits of the peasant's marriage-bed; when the captured city was given up to merciless rape and massacre; when the State-prisons groaned with innocent victims, and the Church blessed the banners of pitiless murderers, and sang Te Deums for the crowning mercy of the Eve of St. Bartholomew.

We might turn over the pages, to a later chapter,--that of the reign of the Fifteenth Louis, when young girls, hardly more than children, were kidnapped to serve his lusts; when lettres de cachet filled the Bastile with persons accused of no crime, with husbands who were in the way of the pleasures of lascivious wives and of villains wearing orders of nobility; when the people were ground between the upper and the nether millstone of taxes, customs, and excises; and when Me Pope's Nuncio and the Cardinal de la Roche-Ayman, devoutly kneeling, one on each side of Madame du Barry, the king's abandoned prostitute, put the slippers on her naked feet, as she rose from the adulterous bed. Then, indeed, suffering and toil were the two forms of man, and the people were but beasts of burden.

The true Mason is he who labors strenuously to help his Order effect its great purposes. Not that the Order can effect them by itself; but that it, too, can help. It also is one of God's instruments. It is a Force and a Power; and shame upon it, if it did not exert itself, and, if need be, sacrifice its children in the cause of humanity, as Abraham was ready to offer up Isaac on the altar of sacrifice. It will not forget that noble allegory of Curtius leaping, all in armor, into the great yawning gulf that opened to

[p. 28]

swallow Rome. It will TRY. It shall not be its fault if the day never comes when man will no longer have to fear a conquest, an invasion, a usurpation, a rivalry of nations with the armed hand, an interruption of civilization depending on a marriage-royal, or a birth in the hereditary tyrannies; a partition of the peoples by a Congress, a dismemberment by the downfall of a dynasty, a combat of two religions, meeting head to head, like two goats of darkness on the bridge of the Infinite: When they will no longer have to fear famine, spoliation, prostitution from distress, misery from lack of work, and all the brigandages of chance in the forest of events: when nations will gravitate about the Truth, like stars about the light, each in its own orbit, without clashing or collision; and everywhere Freedom, cinctured with stars, crowned with the celestial splendors, and with wisdom and justice on either hand, will reign supreme.

In your studies as a Fellow-Craft you must be guided by REASON, LOVE and FAITH.

We do not now discuss the differences between Reason and Faith, and undertake to define the domain of each. But it is necessary to say, that even in the ordinary affairs of life we are governed far more by what we believe than by what we know; by FAITH and ANALOGY, than by REASON. The "Age of Reason" of the French Revolution taught, we know, what a folly it is to enthrone Reason by itself as supreme. Reason is at fault when it deals with the Infinite. There we must revere and believe. Notwithstanding the calamities of the virtuous, the miseries of the deserving, the prosperity of tyrants and the murder of martyrs, we must believe there is a wise, just, merciful, and loving God, an Intelligence and a Providence, supreme over all, and caring for the minutest things and events. A Faith is a necessity to man. Woe to him who believes nothing!

We believe that the soul of another is of a certain nature and possesses certain qualities, that he is generous and honest, or penurious and knavish, that she is virtuous and amiable, or vicious and ill-tempered, from the countenance alone, from little more than a glimpse of it, without the means of knowing. We venture our fortune on the signature of a man on the other side of the world, whom we never saw, upon the belief that he is honest and trustworthy. We believe that occurrences have taken place, upon the assertion of others. We believe that one will acts upon

[p. 29]

another, and in the reality of a multitude of other phenomena that Reason cannot explain.

But we ought not to believe what Reason authoritatively denies, that at which the sense of right revolts, that which is absurd or self-contradictory, or at issue with experience or science, or that which degrades the character of the Deity, and would make Him revengeful, malignant, cruel, or unjust.

A man's Faith is as much his own as his Reason is. His Freedom consists as much in his faith being free as in his will being uncontrolled by power. All the Priests and Augurs of Rome or Greece had not the right to require Cicero or Socrates to believe in the absurd mythology of the vulgar. All the Imaums of Mohammedanism have not the right to require a Pagan to believe that Gabriel dictated the Koran to the Prophet. All the Brahmins that ever lived, if assembled in one conclave like the Cardinals, could not gain a right to compel a single human being to believe in the Hindu Cosmogony. No man or body of men can be infallible, and authorized to decide what other men shall believe, as to any tenet of faith. Except to those who first receive it, every religion and the truth of all inspired writings depend on human testimony and internal evidences, to be judged of by Reason and the wise analogies of Faith. Each man must necessarily have the right to judge of their truth for himself; because no one man can have any higher or better right to judge than another of equal information and intelligence.

Domitian claimed to be the Lord God; and statues and images of him, in silver and gold, were found throughout the known world. He claimed to be regarded as the God of all men; and, according to Suetonius, began his letters thus: "Our Lord and God commands that it should be done so and so;" and formally decreed that no one should address him otherwise, either in writing or by word of mouth. Palfurius Sura, the philosopher, who was his chief delator, accusing those who refused to recognize his divinity, however much he may have believed in that divinity, had not the right to demand that a single Christian in Rome or the provinces should do the same.

Reason is far from being the only guide, in morals or in political science. Love or loving-kindness must keep it company, to exclude fanaticism, intolerance, and persecution, to all of which a morality too ascetic, and extreme political principles, invariably

[p. 30]

lead. We must also have faith in ourselves, and in our fellows and the people, or we shall be easily discouraged by reverses, and our ardor cooled by obstacles. We must not listen to Reason alone. Force comes more from Faith and Love: and it is by the aid of these that man scales the loftiest heights of morality, or becomes the Saviour and Redeemer of a People. Reason must hold the helm; but these supply the motive power. They are the wings of the soul. Enthusiasm is generally unreasoning; and without it, and Love and Faith, there would have been no RIENZI, or TELL, or SYDNEY, or any other of the great patriots whose names are immortal. If the Deity had been merely and only All-wise and All-mighty, He would never have created the Universe.

*      *      *      *      *      *

It is GENIUS that gets Power; and its prime lieutenants are FORCE and WISDOM. The unruliest of men bend before the leader that has the sense to see and the will to do. It is Genius that rules with God-like Power; that unveils, with its counsellors, the hidden human mysteries, cuts asunder with its word the huge knots, and builds up with its word the crumbled ruins. At its glance fall down the senseless idols, whose altars have been on all the high places and in all the sacred groves. Dishonesty and imbecility stand abashed before it. Its single Yea or Nay revokes the wrongs of ages, and is heard among the future generations. Its power is immense, because its wisdom is immense. Genius is the Sun of the political sphere. Force and Wisdom, its ministers, are the orbs that carry its light into darkness, and answer it with their solid reflecting Truth.

Development is symbolized by the use of the Mallet and Chisel; the development of the energies and intellect, of the individual and the people. Genius may place itself at the head of an unintellectual, uneducated, unenergetic nation; but in a free country, to cultivate the intellect of those who elect, is the only mode of securing intellect and genius for rulers. The world is seldom ruled by the great spirits, except after dissolution and new birth In periods of transition and convulsion, the Long Parliaments, the Robespierres and Marats, and the semi-respectabilities of intellect, too often hold the reins of power. The Cromwells and Napoleons come later. After Marius and Sulla and Cicero the rhetorician, CAeSAR. The great intellect is often too sharp for the granite of this life. Legislators may be very ordinary men; for legislation

[p. 31]

is very ordinary work; it is but the final issue of a million minds.

The power of the purse or the sword, compared to that of the spirit, is poor and contemptible. As to lands, you may have agrarian laws, and equal partition. But a man's intellect is all his own, held direct from God, an inalienable fief. It is the most potent of weapons in the hands of a paladin. If the people comprehend Force in the physical sense, how much more do they reverence the intellectual! Ask Hildebrand, or Luther, or Loyola. They fall prostrate before it, as before an idol. The mastery of mind over mind is the only conquest worth having. The other injures both, and dissolves at a breath; rude as it is, the great cable falls down and snaps at last. But this dimly resembles the dominion of the Creator. It does not need a subject like that of Peter the Hermit. If the stream be but bright and strong, it will sweep like a spring-tide to the popular heart. Not in word only, but in intellectual act lies the fascination. It is the homage to the Invisible. This power, knotted with Love, is the golden chain let down into the well of Truth, or the invisible chain that binds the ranks of mankind together.

Influence of man over man is a law of nature, whether it be by a great estate in land or in intellect. It may mean slavery, a deference to the eminent human judgment. Society hangs spiritually together, like the revolving spheres above. The free country, in which intellect and genius govern, will endure. Where they serve, and other influences govern, the national life is short. All the nations that have tried to govern themselves by their smallest, by the incapables, or merely respectables, have come to nought. Constitutions and Laws, without Genius and Intellect to govern, will not prevent decay. In that case they have the dry-rot and the life dies out of them by degrees.

To give a nation the franchise of the Intellect is the only sure mode of perpetuating freedom. This will compel exertion and generous care for the people from those on the higher seats, and honorable and intelligent allegiance from those below. Then political public life will protect all men from self-abasement in sensual pursuits, from vulgar acts and low greed, by giving the noble ambition of just imperial rule. To elevate the people by teaching loving-kindness and wisdom, with power to him who teaches best: and so to develop the free State from the rough ashlar: this

[p. 32]

is the great labor in which Masonry desires to lend a helping hand.

All of us should labor in building up the great monument of a nation, the Holy House of the Temple. The cardinal virtues must not be partitioned among men, becoming the exclusive property of some, like the common crafts. ALL are apprenticed to the partners, Duty and Honor.

Masonry is a march and a struggle toward the Light. For the individual as well as the nation, Light is Virtue, Manliness, Intelligence, Liberty. Tyranny over the soul or body, is darkness. The freest people, like the freest man, is always in danger of re-lapsing into servitude. Wars are almost always fatal to Republics. They create tyrants, and consolidate their power. They spring, for the most part, from evil counsels. When the small and the base are intrusted with power, legislation and administration become but two parallel series of errors and blunders, ending in war, calamity, and the necessity for a tyrant. When the nation feels its feet sliding backward, as if it walked on the ice, the time has come for a supreme effort. The magnificent tyrants of the past are but the types of those of the future. Men and nations will always sell themselves into slavery, to gratify their passions and obtain revenge. The tyrant's plea, necessity, is always available; and the tyrant once in power, the necessity of providing for his safety makes him savage. Religion is a power, and he must control that. Independent, its sanctuaries might rebel. Then it becomes unlawful for the people to worship God in their own way, and the old spiritual despotisms revive. Men must believe as Power wills, or die; and even if they may believe as they will, all they have, lands, houses, body, and soul, are stamped with the royal brand. "I am the State," said Louis the Fourteenth to his peasants; "the very shirts on your backs are mine, and I can take them if I will."

And dynasties so established endure, like that of the Caesars of Rome, of the Caesars of Constantinople, of the Caliphs, the Stuarts, the Spaniards, the Goths, the Valois, until the race wears out, and ends with lunatics and idiots, who still rule. There is no concord among men, to end the horrible bondage. The State falls inwardly, as well as by the outward blows of the incoherent elements. The furious human passions, the sleeping human indolence, the stolid human ignorance, the rivalry of human castes, are as good for the kings as the swords of the Paladins. The worshippers

[p. 33]

have all bowed so long to the old idol, that they cannot go into the streets and choose another Grand Llama. And so the effete State floats on down the puddled stream of Time, until the tempest or the tidal sea discovers that the worm has consumed its strength, and it crumbles into oblivion.

*      *      *      *      *      *

Civil and religious Freedom must go hand in hand; and Persecution matures them both. A people content with the thoughts made for them by the priests of a church will be content with Royalty by Divine Right,--the Church and the Throne mutually sustaining each other. They will smother schism and reap infidelity and indifference; and while the battle for freedom goes on around them, they will only sink the more apathetically into servitude and a deep trance, perhaps occasionally interrupted by furious fits of frenzy, followed by helpless exhaustion.

Despotism is not difficult in any land that has only known one master from its childhood; but there is no harder problem than to perfect and perpetuate free government by the people themselves; for it is not one king that is needed: all must be kings. It is easy to set up Masaniello, that in a few days he may fall lower than before. But free government grows slowly, like the individual human faculties; and like the forest-trees, from the inner heart outward. Liberty is not only the common birth-right, but it is lost as well by non-user as by mis-user. It depends far more on the universal effort than any other human property. It has no single shrine or holy well of pilgrimage for the nation; for its waters should burst out freely from the whole soil.

The free popular power is one that is only known in its strength in the hour of adversity: for all its trials, sacrifices and expectations are its own. It is trained to think for itself, and also to act for itself. When the enslaved people prostrate themselves in the dust before the hurricane, like the alarmed beasts of the field, the free people stand erect before it, in all the strength of unity, in self-reliance, in mutual reliance, with effrontery against all but the visible hand of God. It is neither cast down by calamity nor elated by success.

This vast power of endurance, of forbearance, of patience, and of performance, is only acquired by continual exercise of all the functions, like the healthful physical human vigor, like the individual moral vigor.

[p. 34]

And the maxim is no less true than old, that eternal vigilance is the price of liberty. It is curious to observe the universal pretext by which the tyrants of all times take away the national liberties. It is stated in the statutes of Edward II., that the justices and the sheriff should no longer be elected by the people, on account of the riots and dissensions which had arisen. The same reason was given long before for the suppression of popular election of the bishops; and there is a witness to this untruth in the yet older times, when Rome lost her freedom, and her indignant citizens declared that tumultuous liberty is better than disgraceful tranquillity.

*      *      *      *      *      *

With the Compasses and Scale, we can trace all the figures used in the mathematics of planes, or in what are called GEOMETRY and TRIGONOMETRY, two words that are themselves deficient in meaning. GEOMETRY, which the letter G. in most Lodges is said to signify, means measurement of land or the earth--or Surveying; and TRIGONOMETRY, the measurement of triangles, or figures with three sides or angles. The latter is by far the most appropriate name for the science intended to be expressed by the word "Geometry." Neither is of a meaning sufficiently wide: for although the vast surveys of great spaces of the earth's surface, and of coasts, by which shipwreck and calamity to mariners are avoided, are effected by means of triangulation;--though it was by the same method that the French astronomers measured a degree of latitude and so established a scale of measures on an immutable basis; though it is by means of the immense triangle that has for its base a line drawn in imagination between the place of the earth now and its place six months hence in space, and for its apex a planet or star, that the distance of Jupiter or Sirius from the earth is ascertained; and though there is a triangle still more vast, its base extending either way from us, with and past the horizon into immensity, and its apex infinitely distant above us; to which corresponds a similar infinite triangle below--what is above equalling what is below, immensity equalling immensity;--yet the Science of Numbers, to which Pythagoras attached so much importance, and whose mysteries are found everywhere in the ancient religions, and most of all in the Kabalah and in the Bible, is not sufficiently expressed by either the word "Geometry" or the word "Trigonometry." For that science includes these, with Arithmetic, and also with Algebra, Logarithms, the Integral and Differential

[p. 35]

[paragraph continues] Calculus; and by means of it are worked out the great problems of Astronomy or the Laws of the Stars.

*      *      *      *      *      *

Virtue is but heroic bravery, to do the thing thought to be true, in spite of all enemies of flesh or spirit, in despite of all temptations or menaces. Man is accountable for the uprightness of his doctrine, but not for the rightness of it. Devout enthusiasm is far easier than a good action. The end of thought is action; the sole purpose of Religion is an Ethic. Theory, in political science, is worthless, except for the purpose of being realized in practice.

In every credo, religious or political as in the soul of man, there are two regions, the Dialectic and the Ethic; and it is only when the two are harmoniously blended, that a perfect discipline is evolved. There are men who dialectically are Christians, as there are a multitude who dialectically are Masons, and yet who are ethically Infidels, as these are ethically of the Profane, in the strictest sense:--intellectual believers, but practical atheists:--men who will write you "Evidences," in perfect faith in their logic, but cannot carry out the Christian or Masonic doctrine, owing to the strength, or weakness, of the flesh. On the other hand, there are many dialectical skeptics, but ethical believers, as there are many Masons who have never undergone initiation; and as ethics are the end and purpose of religion, so are ethical believers the most worthy. He who does right is better than he who thinks right.

But you must not act upon the hypothesis that all men are hypocrites, whose conduct does not square with their sentiments. No vice is more rare, for no task is more difficult, than systematic hypocrisy. When the Demagogue becomes a Usurper it does not follow that he was all the time a hypocrite. Shallow men only so judge of others.

The truth is, that creed has, in general, very little influence on the conduct; in religion, on that of the individual; in politics, on that of party. As a general thing, the Mahometan, in the Orient, is far more honest and trustworthy than the Christian. A Gospel of Love in the mouth, is an Avatar of Persecution in the heart. Men who believe in eternal damnation and a literal sea of fire and brimstone, incur the certainty of it, according to their creed, on the slightest temptation of appetite or passion. Predestination insists on the necessity of good works. In Masonry, at the least flow of passion, one speaks ill of another behind his back: and so

[p. 36]

far from the "Brotherhood" of Blue Masonry being real, and the solemn pledges contained in the use of the word "Brother" being complied with, extraordinary pains are taken to show that Masonry is a sort of abstraction, which scorns to interfere in worldly matters. The rule may be regarded as universal, that, where there is a choice to be made, a Mason will give his vote and influence, in politics and business, to the less qualified profane in preference to the better qualified Mason. One will take an oath to oppose any unlawful usurpation of power, and then become the ready and even eager instrument of a usurper. Another will call one "Brother," and then play toward him the part of Judas Iscariot, or strike him, as Joab did Abner, under the fifth rib, with a lie whose authorship is not to be traced. Masonry does not change human nature, and cannot make honest men out of born knaves.

While you are still engaged in preparation, and in accumulating principles for future use, do not forget the words of the Apostle James: "For if any be a hearer of the word, and not a doer, he is like unto a man beholding his natural face in a glass, for he beholdeth himself, and goeth away, and straightway forgetteth what manner of man he was; but whoso looketh into the perfect law of liberty, and continueth, he being not a forgetful hearer, but a doer of the work, this man shall be blessed in his work. If any man among you seem to be religious, and bridleth not his tongue, but deceiveth his own heart, this man's religion is vain. . . . Faith, if it hath not works, is dead, being an abstraction. A man is justified by works, and not by faith only. . . . The devils believe,--and tremble. . . . As the body without the heart is dead, so is faith without works."

*      *      *      *      *      *

In political science, also, free governments are erected and free constitutions framed, upon some simple and intelligible theory. Upon whatever theory they are based, no sound conclusion is to be reached except by carrying the theory out without flinching, both in argument on constitutional questions and in practice. Shrink from the true theory through timidity, or wander from it through want of the logical faculty, or transgress against it through passion or on the plea of necessity or expediency, and you have denial or invasion of rights, laws that offend against first principles, usurpation of illegal powers, or abnegation and abdication of legitimate authority.

[p. 37]

Do not forget, either, that as the showy, superficial, impudent and self-conceited will almost always be preferred, even in utmost stress of danger and calamity of the State, to the man of solid learning, large intellect, and catholic sympathies, because he is nearer the common popular and legislative level, so the highest truth is not acceptable to the mass of mankind.

When SOLON was asked if he had given his countrymen the best laws, he answered, "The best they are capable of receiving." This is one of the profoundest utterances on record; and yet like all great truths, so simple as to be rarely comprehended. It contains the whole philosophy of History. It utters a truth which, had it been recognized, would have saved men an immensity of vain, idle disputes, and have led them into the clearer paths of knowledge in the Past. It means this,--that all truths are Truths of Period, and not truths for eternity; that whatever great fact has had strength and vitality enough to make itself real, whether of religion, morals, government, or of whatever else, and to find place in this world, has been a truth for the time, and as good as men were capable of receiving.

So, too, with great men. The intellect and capacity of a people has a single measure,--that of the great men whom Providence gives it, and whom it receives. There have always been men too great for their time or their people. Every people makes such men only its idols, as it is capable of comprehending.

To impose ideal truth or law upon an incapable and merely real man, must ever be a vain and empty speculation. The laws of sympathy govern in this as they do in regard to men who are put at the head. We do not know, as yet, what qualifications the sheep insist on in a leader. With men who are too high intellectually, the mass have as little sympathy as they have with the stars. When BURKE, the wisest statesman England ever had, rose to speak, the House of Commons was depopulated as upon an agreed signal. There is as little sympathy between the mass and the highest TRUTHS. The highest truth, being incomprehensible to the man of realities, as the highest man is, and largely above his level, will be a great unreality and falsehood to an unintellectual man. The profoundest doctrines of Christianity and Philosophy would be mere jargon and babble to a Potawatomie Indian. The popular explanations of the symbols of Masonry are fitting for the multitude that have swarmed into the Temples,--being fully up to the level

[p. 38]

of their capacity. Catholicism was a vital truth in its earliest ages, but it became obsolete, and Protestantism arose, flourished, and deteriorated. The doctrines of ZOROASTER were the best which the ancient Persians were fitted to receive; those of CONFUCIUS were fitted for the Chinese; those of MOHAMMED for the idolatrous Arabs of his age. Each was Truth for the time. Each was a GOSPEL, preached by a REFORMER; and if any men are so little fortunate as to remain content therewith, when others have attained a higher truth, it is their misfortune and not their fault. They are to be pitied for it, and not persecuted.

Do not expect easily to convince men of the truth, or to lead them to think aright. The subtle human intellect can weave its mists over even the clearest vision. Remember that it is eccentric enough to ask unanimity from a jury; but to ask it from any large number of men on any point of political faith is amazing. You can hardly get two men in any Congress or Convention to agree;--nay, you can rarely get one to agree with himself. The political church which chances to be supreme anywhere has an indefinite number of tongues. How then can we expect men to agree as to matters beyond the cognizance of the senses? How can we compass the Infinite and the Invisible with any chain of evidence? Ask the small sea-waves what they murmur among the pebbles! How many of those words that come from the invisible shore are lost, like the birds, in the long passage? How vainly do we strain the eyes across the long Infinite! We must be content, as the children are, with the pebbles that have been stranded, since it is forbidden us to explore the hidden depths.

The Yellow-Craft is especially taught by this not to become wise in his own conceit. Pride in unsound theories is worse than ignorance. Humility becomes a Mason. Take some quiet, sober moment of life, and add together the two ideas of Pride and Man; behold him, creature of a span, stalking through infinite space in all the grandeur of littleness! Perched on a speck of the Universe, every wind of Heaven strikes into his blood the coldness of death; his soul floats away from his body like the melody from the string. Day and night, like dust on the wheel, he is rolled along the heavens, through a labyrinth of worlds, and all the creations of God are flaming on every side, further than even his imagination can reach. Is this a creature to make for himself a crown of glory, to deny his own flesh, to mock at his fellow, sprung with him from that dust

[p. 39]

to which both will soon return? Does the proud man not err? Does he not suffer? Does he not die? When he reasons, is he never stopped short by difficulties? When he acts, does he never succumb to the temptations of pleasure? When he lives, is he free from pain? Do the diseases not claim him as their prey? When he dies, can he escape the common grave? Pride is not the heritage of man. Humility should dwell with frailty, and atone for ignorance, error and imperfection.

Neither should the Mason be over-anxious for office and honor, however certainly he may feel that he has the capacity to serve the State. He should neither seek nor spurn honors. It is good to enjoy the blessings of fortune; it is better to submit without a pang to their loss. The greatest deeds are not done in the glare of light, and before the eyes of the populace. He whom God has gifted with a love of retirement possesses, as it were, an additional sense; and among the vast and noble scenes of nature, we find the balm for the wounds we have received among the pitiful shifts of policy; for the attachment to solitude is the surest preservative from the ills of life.

But Resignation is the more noble in proportion as it is the less passive. Retirement is only a morbid selfishness, if it prohibit exertions for others; as it is only dignified and noble, when it is the shade whence the oracles issue that are to instruct mankind; and retirement of this nature is the sole seclusion which a good and wise man will covet or command. The very philosophy which makes such a man covet the quiet, will make him eschew the inutility of the hermitage. Very little praiseworthy would LORD BOLINGBROKE have seemed among his haymakers and ploughmen, if among haymakers and ploughmen he had looked with an indifferent eye upon a profligate minister and a venal Parliament. Very little interest would have attached to his beans and vetches, if beans and vetches had caused him to forget that if he was happier on a farm he could be more useful in a Senate, and made him forego, in the sphere of a bailiff, all care for re-entering that of a legislator.

Remember, also, that there is an education which quickens the Intellect, and leaves the heart hollower or harder than before. There are ethical lessons in the laws of the heavenly bodies, in the properties of earthly elements, in geography, chemistry, geology, and all the material sciences. Things are symbols of Truths.

[p. 40]

[paragraph continues] Properties are symbols of Truths. Science, not teaching moral and spiritual truths, is dead and dry, of little more real value than to commit to the memory a long row of unconnected dates, or of the names of bugs or butterflies.

Christianity, it is said, begins from the burning of the false gods by the people themselves. Education begins with the burning of our intellectual and moral idols: our prejudices, notions, conceits, our worthless or ignoble purposes. Especially it is necessary to shake off the love of worldly gain. With Freedom comes the longing for worldly advancement. In that race men are ever falling, rising, running, and falling again. The lust for wealth and the abject dread of poverty delve the furrows on many a noble brow. The gambler grows old as he watches the chances. Lawful hazard drives Youth away before its time; and this Youth draws heavy bills of exchange on Age. Men live, like the engines, at high pressure, a hundred years in a hundred months; the ledger becomes the Bible, and the day-book the Book of the Morning Prayer.

Hence flow overreachings and sharp practice, heartless traffic in which the capitalist buys profit with the lives of the laborers, speculations that coin a nation's agonies into wealth, and all the other devilish enginery of Mammon. This, and greed for office, are the two columns at the entrance to the Temple of Moloch. It is doubtful whether the latter, blossoming in falsehood, trickery, and fraud, is not even more pernicious than the former. At all events they are twins, and fitly mated; and as either gains control of the unfortunate subject, his soul withers away and decays, and at last dies out. The souls of half the human race leave them long before they die. The two greeds are twin plagues of the leprosy, and make the man unclean; and whenever they break out they spread until "they cover all the skin of him that hath the plague, from his head even to his foot." Even the raw flesh of the heart becomes unclean with it.

*      *      *      *      *      *

Alexander of Macedon has left a saying behind him which has survived his conquests: "Nothing is nobler than work." Work only can keep even kings respectable. And when a king is a king indeed, it is an honorable office to give tone to the manners and morals of a nation; to set the example of virtuous conduct, and restore in spirit the old schools of chivalry, in which the young

[p. 41]

manhood may be nurtured to real greatness. Work and wages will go together in men's minds, in the most royal institutions. We must ever come to the idea of real work. The rest that follows labor should be sweeter than the rest which follows rest.

Let no Fellow-Craft imagine that the work of the lowly and uninfluential is not worth the doing. There is no legal limit to the possible influences of a good deed or a wise word or a generous effort. Nothing is really small. Whoever is open to the deep penetration of nature knows this. Although, indeed, no absolute satisfaction may be vouchsafed to philosophy, any more in circumscribing the cause than in limiting the effect, the man of thought and contemplation falls into unfathomable ecstacies in view of all the decompositions of forces resulting in unity. All works for all. Destruction is not annihilation, but regeneration.

Algebra applies to the clouds; the radiance of the star benefits the rose; no thinker would dare to say that the perfume of the hawthorn is useless to the constellations. Who, then, can calculate the path of the molecule? How do we know that the creations of worlds are not determined by the fall of grains of sand? Who, then, understands the reciprocal flow and ebb of the infinitely great and the infinitely small; the echoing of causes in the abysses of beginning, and the avalanches of creation? A flesh-worm is of account; the small is great; the great is small; all is in equilibrium in necessity. There are marvellous relations between beings and things; in this inexhaustible Whole, from sun to grub, there is no scorn: all need each other. Light does not carry terrestrial perfumes into the azure depths, without knowing what it does with them; night distributes the stellar essence to the sleeping plants. Every bird which flies has the thread of the Infinite in its claw. Germination includes the hatching of a meteor, and the tap of a swallow's bill, breaking the egg; and it leads forward the birth of an earth-worm and the advent of a Socrates. Where the telescope ends the microscope begins. Which of them the grander view? A bit of mould is a Pleiad of flowers--a nebula is an ant-hill of stars.

There is the same and a still more wonderful interpenetration between the things of the intellect and the things of matter. Elements and principles are mingled, combined, espoused, multiplied one by another, to such a degree as to bring the material world and the moral world into the same light. Phenomena are perpetually

[p. 42]

folded back upon themselves. In the vast cosmical changes the universal life comes and goes in unknown quantities, enveloping all in the invisible mystery of the emanations, losing no dream from no single sleep, sowing an animalcule here, crumbling a star there, oscillating and winding in curves; making a force of Light, and an element of Thought; disseminated and indivisible, dissolving all save that point without length, breadth, or thickness, The MYSELF; reducing everything to the Soul-atom; making everything blossom into God; entangling all activities, from the highest to the lowest, in the obscurity of a dizzying mechanism; hanging the flight of an insect upon the movement of the earth; subordinating, perhaps, if only by the identity of the law, the eccentric evolutions of the comet in the firmament, to the whirlings of the infusoria in the drop of water. A mechanism made of mind, the first motor of which is the gnat, and its last wheel the zodiac.

A peasant-boy, guiding Blucher by the right one of two roads, the other being impassable for artillery, enables him to reach Waterloo in time to save Wellington from a defeat that would have been a rout; and so enables the kings to imprison Napoleon on a barren rock in mid-ocean. An unfaithful smith, by the slovenly shoeing of a horse, causes his lameness, and, he stumbling, the career of his world-conquering rider ends, and the destinies of empires are changed. A generous officer permits an imprisoned monarch to end his game of chess before leading him to the block; and meanwhile the usurper dies, and the prisoner reascends the throne. An unskillful workman repairs the compass, or malice or stupidity disarranges it, the ship mistakes her course, the waves swallow a Caesar, and a new chapter is written in the history of a world. What we call accident is but the adamantine chain of indissoluble connection between all created things. The locust, hatched in the Arabian sands, the small worm that destroys the cotton-boll, one making famine in the Orient, the other closing the mills and starving the workmen and their children in the Occident, with riots and massacres, are as much the ministers of God as the earthquake; and the fate of nations depends more on them than on the intellect of its kings and legislators. A civil war in America will end in shaking the world; and that war may be caused by the vote of some ignorant prize-fighter or crazed fanatic in a city or in a Congress, or of some stupid boor in an obscure country parish. The

[p. 43]

electricity of universal sympathy, of action and reaction, pervades everything, the planets and the motes in the sunbeam. FAUST, with his types, or LUTHER, with his sermons, worked greater results than Alexander or Hannibal. A single thought sometimes suffices to overturn a dynasty. A silly song did more to unseat James the Second than the acquittal of the Bishops. Voltaire, Condorcet, and Rousseau uttered words that will ring, in change and revolutions, throughout all the ages.

Remember, that though life is short, Thought and the influences of what we do or say are immortal; and that no calculus has yet pretended to ascertain the law of proportion between cause and effect. The hammer of an English blacksmith, smiting down an insolent official, led to a rebellion which came near being a revolution. The word well spoken, the deed fitly done, even by the feeblest or humblest, cannot help but have their effect. More or less, the effect is inevitable and eternal. The echoes of the greatest deeds may die away like the echoes of a cry among the cliffs, and what has been done seem to the human judgment to have been without result. The unconsidered act of the poorest of men may fire the train that leads to the subterranean mine, and an empire be rent by the explosion.

The power of a free people is often at the disposal of a single and seemingly an unimportant individual;--a terrible and truthful power; for such a people feel with one heart, and therefore can lift up their myriad arms for a single blow. And, again, there is no graduated scale for the measurement of the influences of different intellects upon the popular mind. Peter the Hermit held no office, yet what a work he wrought!

*      *      *      *      *      *

From the political point of view there is but a single principle,--the sovereignty of man over himself. This sovereignty of one's self over one's self is called LIBERTY. Where two or several of these sovereignties associate, the State begins. But in this association there is no abdication. Each sovereignty parts with a certain portion of itself to form the common right. That portion is the same for all. There is equal contribution by all to the joint sovereignty. This identity of concession which each makes to all, is EQUALITY. The common right is nothing more or less than the protection of all, pouring its rays on each. This protection of each by all, is FRATERNITY.

[p. 44]

Liberty is the summit, Equality the base. Equality is not all vegetation on a level, a society of big spears of grass and stunted oaks, a neighborhood of jealousies, emasculating each other. It is, civilly, all aptitudes having equal opportunity; politically, all votes having equal weight; religiously, all consciences having equal rights.

Equality has an organ;--gratuitous and obligatory instruction. We must begin with the right to the alphabet. The primary school obligatory upon all; the higher school offered to all. Such is the law. From the same school for all springs equal society. Instruction! Light! all comes from Light, and all returns to it.

We must learn the thoughts of the common people, if we would be wise and do any good work. We must look at men, not so much for what Fortune has given to them with her blind old eyes, as for the gifts Nature has brought in her lap, and for the use that has been made of them. We profess to be equal in a Church and in the Lodge: we shall be equal in the sight of God when He judges the earth. We may well sit on the pavement together here, in communion and conference, for the few brief moments that constitute life.

A Democratic Government undoubtedly has its defects, because it is made and administered by men, and not by the Wise Gods. It cannot be concise and sharp, like the despotic. When its ire is aroused it develops its latent strength, and the sturdiest rebel trembles. But its habitual domestic rule is tolerant, patient, and indecisive. Men are brought together, first to differ, and then to agree. Affirmation, negation, discussion, solution: these are the means of attaining truth. Often the enemy will be at the gates before the babble of the disturbers is drowned in the chorus of consent. In the Legislative office deliberation will often defeat decision. Liberty can play the fool like the Tyrants.

Refined society requires greater minuteness of regulation; and the steps of all advancing States are more and more to be picked among the old rubbish and the new materials. The difficulty lies in discovering the right path through the chaos of confusion. The adjustment of mutual rights and wrongs is also more difficult in democracies. We do not see and estimate the relative importance of objects so easily and clearly from the level or the waving land as from the elevation of a lone peak, towering above the plain; for each looks through his own mist.

[p. 45]

Abject dependence on constituents, also, is too common. It is as miserable a thing as abject dependence on a minister or the favorite of a Tyrant. It is rare to find a man who can speak out the simple truth that is in him, honestly and frankly, without fear, favor, or affection, either to Emperor or People.

Moreover, in assemblies of men, faith in each other is almost always wanting, unless a terrible pressure of calamity or danger from without produces cohesion. Hence the constructive power of such assemblies is, generally deficient. The chief triumphs of modern days, in Europe, have been in pulling down and obliterating; not in building up. But Repeal is not Reform. Time must bring with him the Restorer and Rebuilder.

Speech, also, is grossly abused in Republics; and if the use of speech be glorious, its abuse is the most villainous of vices. Rhetoric, Plato says, is the art of ruling the minds of men. But in democracies it is too common to hide thought in words, to overlay it, to babble nonsense. The gleams and glitter of intellectual soap-and-water bubbles are mistaken for the rainbow-glories of genius. The worthless pyrites is continually mistaken for gold. Even intellect condescends to intellectual jugglery, balancing thoughts as a juggler balances pipes on his chin. In all Congresses we have the inexhaustible flow of babble, and Faction's clamorous knavery in discussion, until the divine power of speech, that privilege of man and great gift of God, is no better than the screech of parrots or the mimicry of monkeys. The mere talker, however fluent, is barren of deeds in the day of trial.

There are men voluble as women, and as well skilled in fencing with the tongue: prodigies of speech, misers in deeds. Too much talking, like too much thinking, destroys the power of action. In human nature, the thought is only made perfect by deed. Silence is the mother of both. The trumpeter is not the bravest of the brave. Steel and not brass wins the day. The great doer of great deeds is mostly slow and slovenly of speech. There are some men born and bred to betray. Patriotism is their trade, and their capital is speech. But no noble spirit can plead like Paul and be false to itself as Judas.

Imposture too commonly rules in republics; they seem to be ever in their minority; their guardians are self-appointed; and the unjust thrive better than the just. The Despot, like the night-lion roaring, drowns all the clamor of tongues at once, and

[p. 46]

speech, the birthright of the free man, becomes the bauble of the enslaved.

It is quite true that republics only occasionally, and as it were accidentally, select their wisest, or even the less incapable among the incapables, to govern them and legislate for them. If genius, armed with learning and knowledge, will grasp the reins, the people will reverence it; if it only modestly offers itself for office, it will be smitten on the face, even when, in the straits of distress and the agonies of calamity, it is indispensable to the salvation of the State. Put it upon the track with the showy and superficial, the conceited, the ignorant, and impudent, the trickster and charlatan, and the result shall not be a moment doubtful. The verdicts of Legislatures and the People are like the verdicts of juries,--sometimes right by accident.

Offices, it is true, are showered, like the rains of Heaven, upon the just and the unjust. The Roman Augurs that used to laugh in each other's faces at the simplicity of the vulgar, were also tickled with their own guile; but no Augur is needed to lead the people astray. They readily deceive themselves. Let a Republic begin as it may, it will not be out of its minority before imbecility will be promoted to high places; and shallow pretence, getting itself puffed into notice, will invade all the sanctuaries. The most unscrupulous partisanship will prevail, even in respect to judicial trusts; and the most unjust appointments constantly be made, although every improper promotion not merely confers one undeserved favor, but may make a hundred honest cheeks smart with injustice.

The country is stabbed in the front when those are brought into the stalled seats who should slink into the dim gallery. Every stamp of Honor, ill-clutched, is stolen from the Treasury of Merit.

Yet the entrance into the public service, and the promotion in it, affect both the rights of individuals and those of the nation. Injustice in bestowing or withholding office ought to be so intolerable in democratic communities that the least trace of it should be like the scent of Treason. It is not universally true that all citizens of equal character have an equal claim to knock at the door of every public office and demand admittance. When any man presents himself for service he has a right to aspire to the highest body at once, if he can show his fitness for such a beginning,--that

[p. 47]

he is fitter than the rest who offer themselves for the same post. The entry into it can only justly be made through the door of merit. And whenever any one aspires to and attains such high post, especially if by unfair and disreputable and indecent means, and is afterward found to be a signal failure, he should at once be beheaded. He is the worst among the public enemies.

When a man sufficiently reveals himself, all others should be proud to give him due precedence. When the power of promotion is abused in the grand passages of life whether by People, Legislature, or Executive, the unjust decision recoils on the judge at once. That is not only a gross, but a willful shortness of sight, that cannot discover the deserving. If one will look hard, long, and honestly, he will not fail to discern merit, genius, and qualification; and the eyes and voice of the Press and Public should condemn and denounce injustice wherever she rears her horrid head.

"The tools to the workmen!" no other principle will save a Republic from destruction, either by civil war or the dry-rot. They tend to decay, do all we can to prevent it, like human bodies. If. they try the experiment of governing themselves by their smallest, they slide downward to the unavoidable abyss with tenfold velocity; and there never has been a Republic that has not followed that fatal course.

But however palpable and gross the inherent defects of democratic governments, and fatal as the results finally and inevitably are, we need only glance at the reigns of Tiberius, Nero, and Caligula, of Heliogabalus and Caracalla, of Domitian and Corn-modus, to recognize that the difference between freedom and despotism is as wide as that between Heaven and Hell. The cruelty, baseness, and insanity of tyrants are incredible. Let him who complains of the fickle humors and inconstancy of a free people, read Pliny's character of Domitian. If the great man in a Republic cannot win office without descending to low arts and whining beggary and the judicious use of sneaking lies, let him remain in retirement, and use the pen. Tacitus and Juvenal held no office. Let History and Satire punish the pretender as they crucify the despot. The revenges of the intellect are terrible and just.

Let Masonry use the pen and the printing-press in the free State against the Demagogue; in the Despotism against the Tyrant. History offers examples and encouragement. All history, for four thousand years, being filled with violated rights and the

[p. 48]

sufferings of the people, each period of history brings with it such protest as is possible to it. Under the Caesars there was no insurrection, but there was a Juvenal. The arousing of indignation replaces the Gracchi. Under the Caesars there is the exile of Syene; there is also the author of the Annals. As the Neros reign darkly they should be pictured so. Work with the graver only would be pale; into the grooves should be poured a concentrated prose that bites.

Despots are an aid to thinkers. Speech enchained is speech terrible. The writer doubles and triples his style, when silence is imposed by a master upon the people. There springs from this silence a certain mysterious fullness, which filters and freezes into brass fn the thoughts. Compression in the history produces conciseness in the historian. The granitic solidity of some celebrated prose is only a condensation produced by the Tyrant. Tyranny constrains the writer to shortenings of diameter which are in-creases of strength. The Ciceronian period, hardly sufficient upon Verres, would lose its edge upon Caligula.

The Demagogue is the predecessor of the Despot. One springs from the other's loins. He who will basely fawn on those who have office to bestow, will betray like Iscariot, and prove a miser-able and pitiable failure. Let the new Junius lash such men as they deserve, and History make them immortal in infamy; since their influences culminate in ruin. The Republic that employs and honors the shallow, the superficial, the base,

"                             who crouch
 Unto the offal of an office promised,"

at last weeps tears of blood for its fatal error. Of such supreme folly, the sure fruit is damnation. Let the nobility of every great heart, condensed into justice and truth, strike such creatures like a thunderbolt! If you can do no more, you can at least condemn by your vote, and ostracise by denunciation.

It is true that, as the Czars are absolute, they have it in their power to select the best for the public service. It is true that the beginner of a dynasty generally does so; and that when monarchies are in their prime, pretence and shallowness do not thrive and prosper and get power, as they do in Republics. All do not gabble in the Parliament of a Kingdom, as in the Congress of a Democracy. The incapables do not go undetected there, all their lives.

[p. 49]

But dynasties speedily decay and run out. At last they dwindle down into imbecility; and the dull or flippant Members of Congresses are at least the intellectual peers of the vast majority of kings. The great man, the Julius Caesar, the Charlemagne, Cromwell, Napoleon, reigns of right. He is the wisest and the strongest. The incapables and imbeciles succeed and are usurpers; and fear makes them cruel. After Julius came Caracalla and Galba; after Charlemagne, the lunatic Charles the Sixth. So the Saracenic dynasty dwindled out; the Capets, the Stuarts, the Bourbons; the last of these producing Bomba, the ape of Domitian.

*      *      *      *      *      *

Man is by nature cruel, like the tigers. The barbarian, and the tool of the tyrant, and the civilized fanatic, enjoy the sufferings of others, as the children enjoy the contortions of maimed flies. Absolute Power, once in fear for the safety of its tenure, cannot but be cruel.

As to ability, dynasties invariably cease to possess any after a few lives. They become mere shams, governed by ministers, favorites, or courtesans, like those old Etruscan kings, slumbering for long ages in their golden royal robes, dissolving forever at the first breath of day. Let him who complains of the short-comings of democracy ask himself if he would prefer a Du Barry or a Pompadour, governing in the name of a Louis the Fifteenth, a Caligula making his horse a consul, a Domitian, "that most savage monster," who sometimes drank the blood of relatives, sometimes employing himself with slaughtering the most distinguished citizens before whose gates fear and terror kept watch; a tyrant of frightful aspect, pride on his forehead, fire in his eye, constantly seeking darkness and secrecy, and only emerging from his solitude to make solitude. After all, in a free government, the Laws and the Constitution are above the Incapables, the Courts correct their legislation, and posterity is the Grand Inquest that passes judgment on them. What is the exclusion of worth and intellect and knowledge from civil office compared with trials before Jeffries, tortures in the dark caverns of the Inquisition, Alva-butcheries in the Netherlands, the Eve of Saint Bartholomew, and the Sicilian Vespers?

*      *      *      *      *      *

The Abbe Barruel in his Memoirs for the History of Jacobinism, declares that Masonry in France gave, as its secret, the

[p. 50]

words Equality and Liberty, leaving it for every honest and religious Mason to explain them as would best suit his principles; but retained the privilege of unveiling in the higher Degrees the meaning of those words, as interpreted by the French Revolution. And he also excepts English Masons from his anathemas, because in England a Mason is a peaceable subject of the civil authorities, no matter where he resides, engaging in no plots or conspiracies against even the worst government. England, he says, disgusted with an Equality and a Liberty, the consequences of which she had felt in the struggles of her Lollards, Anabaptists, and Presbyterians, had "purged her Masonry" from all explanations tending to overturn empires; but there still remained adepts whom disorganizing principles bound to the Ancient Mysteries.

Because true Masonry, unemasculated, bore the banners of Freedom and Equal Rights, and was in rebellion against temporal and spiritual tyranny, its Lodges were proscribed in 1735, by an edict of the States of Holland. In 1737, Louis XV. forbade them in France. In 1738, Pope Clement XII. issued against them his famous Bull of Excommunication, which was renewed by Benedict XIV.; and in 1743 the Council of Berne also proscribed them. The title of the Bull of Clement is, "The Condemnation of the Society of Conventicles de Liberi Muratori, or of the Freemasons, under the penalty of ipso facto excommunication, the absolution from which is reserved to the Pope alone, except at the point of death." And by it all bishops, ordinaries, and inquisitors were empowered to punish Freemasons, "as vehemently suspected of heresy," and to call in, if necessary, the help of the secular arm; that is, to cause the civil authority to put them to death.

*      *      *      *      *      *

Also, false and slavish political theories end in brutalizing the State. For example, adopt the theory that offices and employments in it are to be given as rewards for services rendered to party, and they soon become the prey and spoil of faction, the booty of the victory of faction;--and leprosy is in the flesh of the State. The body of the commonwealth becomes a mass of corruption, like a living carcass rotten with syphilis. All unsound theories in the end develop themselves in one foul and loathsome disease or other of the body politic. The State, like the man, must use constant effort to stay in the paths of virtue and manliness. The

[p. 51]

habit of electioneering and begging for office culminates in bribery with office, and corruption in office.

A chosen man has a visible trust from God, as plainly as if the commission were engrossed by the notary. A nation cannot renounce the executorship of the Divine decrees. As little can Masonry. It must labor to do its duty knowingly and wisely. We must remember that, in free States, as well as in despotisms, Injustice, the spouse of Oppression, is the fruitful parent of Deceit, Distrust, Hatred, Conspiracy, Treason, and Unfaithfulness. Even in assailing Tyranny we must have Truth and Reason as our chief weapons. We must march into that fight like the old Puritans, or into the battle with the abuses that spring up in free government, with the flaming sword in one hand, and the Oracles of God in the other.

The citizen who cannot accomplish well the smaller purposes of public life, cannot compass the larger. The vast power of endurance, forbearance, patience, and performance, of a free people, is acquired only by continual exercise of all the functions, like the healthful physical human vigor. If the individual citizens have it not, the State must equally be without it. It is of the essence of a free government, that the people should not only be concerned in making the laws, but also in their execution. No man ought to be more ready to obey and administer the law than he who has helped to make it. The business of government is carried on for the benefit of all, and every co-partner should give counsel and co-operation.

Remember also, as another shoal on which States are wrecked, that free States always tend toward the depositing of the citizens in strata, the creation of castes, the perpetuation of the jus divinum to office in families. The more democratic the State, the more sure this result. For, as free States advance in power, there is a strong tendency toward centralization, not from deliberate evil intention, but from the course of events and the indolence of human nature. The executive powers swell and enlarge to inordinate dimensions; and the Executive is always aggressive with respect to the nation. Offices of all kinds are multiplied to reward partisans; the brute force of the sewerage and lower strata of the mob obtains large representation, first in the lower offices, and at last in Senates; and Bureaucracy raises its bald head, bristling with pens, girded with spectacles, and bunched with ribbon. The art

[p. 52]

of Government becomes like a Craft, and its guilds tend to become exclusive, as those of the Middle Ages.

Political science may be much improved as a subject of speculation; but it should never be divorced from the actual national necessity. The science of governing men must always be practical, rather than philosophical. There is not the same amount of positive or universal truth here as in the abstract sciences; what is true in one country may be very false in another; what is untrue to-day may become true in another generation, and the truth of to-day be reversed by the judgment of to-morrow. To distinguish the casual from the enduring, to separate the unsuitable from the suitable, and to make progress even possible, are the proper ends of policy. But without actual knowledge and experience, and communion of labor, the dreams of the political doctors may be no better than those of the doctors of divinity. The reign of such a caste, with its mysteries, its myrmidons, and its corrupting influence, may be as fatal as that of the despots. Thirty tyrants are thirty times worse than one.

Moreover, there is a strong temptation for the governing people to become as much slothful and sluggards as the weakest of absolute kings. Only give them the power to get rid, when caprice prompts them, of the great and wise men, and elect the little, and as to all the rest they will relapse into indolence and indifference. The central power, creation of the people, organized and cunning if not enlightened, is the perpetual tribunal set up by them for the redress of wrong and the rule of justice. It soon supplies itself with all the requisite machinery, and is ready and apt for all kinds of interference. The people may be a child all its life. The central power may not be able to suggest the best scientific solution of a problem; but it has the easiest means of carrying an idea into effect. If the purpose to be attained is a large one, it requires a large comprehension; it is proper for the action of the central power. If it be a small one, it may be thwarted by disagreement. The central power must step in as an arbitrator and prevent this. The people may be too averse to change, too slothful in their own business, unjust to a minority or a majority. The central power must take the reins when the people drop them.

France became centralized in its government more by the apathy and ignorance of its people than by the tyranny of its kings. When the inmost parish-life is given up to the direct guardianship

[p. 53]

of the State, and the repair of the belfry of a country church requires a written order from the central power, a people is in its dotage. Men are thus nurtured in imbecility, from the dawn of social life. When the central government feeds part of the people it prepares all to be slaves. When it directs parish and county affairs, they are slaves already. The next step is to regulate labor and its wages.

Nevertheless, whatever follies the free people may commit, even to the putting of the powers of legislation in the hands of the little competent and less honest, despair not of the final result. The terrible teacher, EXPERIENCE, writing his lessons on hearts desolated with calamity and wrung by agony, will make them wiser in time. Pretence and grimace and sordid beggary for votes will some day cease to avail. Have FAITH, and struggle on, against all evil influences and discouragements! FAITH is the Saviour and Redeemer of nations. When Christianity had grown weak, profitless, and powerless, the Arab Restorer and Iconoclast came, like a cleansing hurricane. When the battle of Damascus was about to be fought, the Christian bishop, at the early dawn, in his robes, at the head of his clergy, with the Cross once so triumphant raised in the air, came down to the gates of the city, and laid open before the army the Testament of Christ. The Christian general, THOMAS, laid his hand on the book, and said, "Oh God! IF our faith be true, aid us, and deliver us not into the hands of its enemies!" But KHALED, "the Sword of God," who had marched from victory to victory, exclaimed to his wearied soldiers, "Let no man sleep! There will be rest enough in the bowers of Paradise; sweet will be the repose never more to be followed by labor." The faith of the Arab had become stronger than that of the Christian, and he conquered.

The Sword is also, in the Bible, an emblem of SPEECH, or of the utterance of thought. Thus, in that vision or apocalypse of the sublime exile of Patmos, a protest in the name of the ideal, overwhelming the real world, a tremendous satire uttered in the name of Religion and Liberty, and with its fiery reverberations smiting the throne of the Caesars, a sharp two-edged sword comes out of the mouth of the Semblance of the Son of Man, encircled by the seven golden candlesticks, and holding in his right hand seven stars. "The Lord," says Isaiah, "hath made my mouth like a sharp sword." "I have slain them," says Hosea, "by the words

[p. 54]

of my mouth." "The word of God," says the writer of the apostolic letter to the Hebrews, "is quick and powerful, and sharper than any two-edged sword, piercing even to the dividing asunder of soul and spirit." "The sword of the Spirit, which is the Word of God," says Paul, writing to the Christians at Ephesus. "I will fight against them with the sword of my mouth," it is said in the Apocalypse, to the angel of the church at Pergamos.

*      *      *      *      *      *

The spoken discourse may roll on strongly as the great tidal wave; but, like the wave, it dies at last feebly on the sands. It is heard by few, remembered by still fewer, and fades away, like an echo in the mountains, leaving no token of power. It is nothing to the living and coming generations of men. It was the written human speech, that gave power and permanence to human thought. It is this that makes the whole human history but one individual life.

To write on the rock is to write on a solid parchment; but it requires a pilgrimage to see it. There is but one copy, and Time wears even that. To write on skins or papyrus was to give, as it were, but one tardy edition, and the rich only could procure it. The Chinese stereotyped not only the unchanging wisdom of old sages, but also the passing events. The process tended to suffocate thought, and to hinder progress; for there is continual wandering in the wisest minds, and Truth writes her last words, not on clean tablets, but on the scrawl that Error has made and often mended.

Printing made the movable letters prolific. Thenceforth the orator spoke almost visibly to listening nations; and the author wrote, like the Pope, his oecumenic decrees, urbi et orbi, and ordered them to be posted up in all the market-places; remaining, if he chose, impervious to human sight. The doom of tyrannies was thenceforth sealed. Satire and invective became potent as armies. The unseen hands of the Juniuses could launch the thunderbolts, and make the ministers tremble. One whisper from this giant fills the earth as easily as Demosthenes filled the Agora. It will soon be heard at the antipodes as easily as in the next street. It travels with the lightning under the oceans. It makes the mass one man, speaks to it in the same common language, and elicits a sure and single response. Speech passes into thought, and thence promptly into act. A nation becomes truly one, with one large heart and a single throbbing pulse. Men are invisibly present

[p. 55]

to each other, as if already spiritual beings; and the thinker who sits in an Alpine solitude, unknown to or forgotten by all the world, among the silent herds and hills, may flash his words to all the cities and over all the seas.

Select the thinkers to be Legislators; and avoid the gabblers. Wisdom is rarely loquacious. Weight and depth of thought are unfavorable to volubility. The shallow and superficial are generally voluble and often pass for eloquent. More words, less thought,--is the general rule. The man who endeavors to say something worth remembering in every sentence, becomes fastidious, and condenses like Tacitus. The vulgar love a more diffuse stream. The ornamentation that does not cover strength is the gewgaws of babble.

Neither is dialectic subtlety valuable to public men. The Christian faith has it, had it formerly more than now; a subtlety that might have entangled Plato, and which has rivalled in a fruitless fashion the mystic lore of Jewish Rabbis and Indian Sages. It is not this which converts the heathen. It is a vain task to balance the great thoughts of the earth, like hollow straws, on the finger-tips of disputation. It is not this kind of warfare which makes the Cross triumphant in the hearts of the unbelievers; but the actual power that lives in the Faith.

So there is a political scholasticism that is merely useless. The dexterities of subtle logic rarely stir the hearts of the people, or convince them. The true apostle of Liberty, Fraternity and Equality makes it a matter of life and death. His combats are like those of Bossuet,--combats to the death. The true apostolic fire is like the lightning: it flashes conviction into the soul. The true word is verily a two-edged sword. Matters of government and political science can be fairly dealt with only by sound reason, and the logic of common sense: not the common sense of the ignorant, but of the wise. The acutest thinkers rarely succeed in be-coming leaders of men. A watchword or a catchword is more potent with the people than logic, especially if this be the least metaphysical. When a political prophet arises, to stir the dreaming, stagnant nation, and hold back its feet from the irretrievable descent, to heave the land as with an earthquake, and shake the silly-shallow idols from their seats, his words will come straight from God's own mouth, and be thundered into the conscience. He will reason, teach, warn, and rule. The real "Sword of the Spirit"

[p. 56]

is keener than the brightest blade of Damascus. Such men rule a land, in the strength of justice, with wisdom and with power. Still, the men of dialectic subtlety often rule well, because in practice they forget their finely-spun theories, and use the trenchant logic of common sense. But when the great heart and large intellect are left to the rust in private life, and small attorneys, brawlers in politics, and those who in the cities would be only the clerks of notaries, or practitioners in the disreputable courts, are made national Legislators, the country is in her dotage, even if the beard has not yet grown upon her chin.

In a free country, human speech must needs be free; and the State must listen to the maunderings of folly, and the screechings of its geese, and the brayings of its asses, as well as to the golden oracles of its wise and great men. Even the despotic old kings allowed their wise fools to say what they liked. The true alchemist will extract the lessons of wisdom from the babblings of folly. He will hear what a man has to say on any given subject, even if the speaker end only in proving himself prince of fools. Even a fool will sometimes hit the mark. There is some truth in all men who are not compelled to suppress their souls and speak other men's thoughts. The finger even of the idiot may point to the great highway.

A people, as well as the sages, must learn to forget. If it neither learns the new nor forgets the old, it is fated, even if it has been royal for thirty generations. To unlearn is to learn; and also it is sometimes needful to learn again the forgotten. The antics of fools make the current follies more palpable, as fashions are shown to be absurd by caricatures, which so lead to their extirpation. The buffoon and the zany are useful in their places. The ingenious artificer and craftsman, like Solomon, searches the earth for his materials, and transforms the misshapen matter into glorious workmanship. The world is conquered by the head even more than by the hands. Nor will any assembly talk forever. After a time, when it has listened long enough, it quietly puts the silly, the shallow, and the superficial to one side,--it thinks, and sets to work.

The human thought, especially in popular assemblies, runs in the most singularly crooked channels, harder to trace and follow than the blind currents of the ocean. No notion is so absurd that it may not find a place there. The master-workman must train

[p. 57]

these notions and vagaries with his two-handed hammer. They twist out of the way of the sword-thrusts; and are invulnerable all over, even in the heel, against logic. The martel or mace, the battle-axe, the great double-edged two-handed sword must deal with follies; the rapier is no better against them than a wand, unless it be the rapier of ridicule.

The SWORD is also the symbol of war and of the soldier. Wars, like thunder-storms, are often necessary to purify the stagnant atmosphere. War is not a demon, without remorse or reward. It restores the brotherhood in letters of fire. When men are seated in their pleasant places, sunken in ease and indolence, with Pretence and Incapacity and Littleness usurping all the high places of State, war is the baptism of blood and fire, by which alone they can be renovated. It is the hurricane that brings the elemental equilibrium, the concord of Power and Wisdom. So long as these continue obstinately divorced, it will continue to chasten.

In the mutual appeal of nations to God, there is the acknowledgment of His might. It lights the beacons of Faith and Freedom, and heats the furnace through which the earnest and loyal pass to immortal glory. There is in war the doom of defeat, the quenchless sense of Duty, the stirring sense of Honor, the measureless solemn sacrifice of devotedness, and the incense of success. Even in the flame and smoke of battle, the Mason discovers his brother, and fulfills the sacred obligations of Fraternity.

Two, or the Duad, is the symbol of Antagonism; of Good and Evil, Light and Darkness. It is Cain and Abel, Eve and Lilith, Jachin and Boaz, Ormuzd and Ahriman, Osiris and Typhon.

THREE, or the Triad, is most significantly expressed by the equilateral and the right-angled triangles. There are three principal colors or rays in the rainbow, which by intermixture make seven. The three are the blue, the yellow, and the red. The Trinity of the Deity, in one mode or other, has been an article in all creeds. He creates, preserves, and destroys. He is the generative power, the productive capacity, and the result. The immaterial man, according to the Kabalah, is composed of vitality, or life, the breath of life; of soul or mind, and spirit. Salt, sulphur, and mercury are the great symbols of the alchemists. To them man was body, soul, and spirit.

FOUR is expressed by the square, or four-sided right-angled

[p. 58]

figure. Out of the symbolic Garden of Eden flowed a river, dividing into four streams,--PISON, which flows around the land of gold, or light; GIHON, which flows around the land of Ethiopia or Darkness; HIDDEKEL, running eastward to Assyria; and the EUPHRATES. Zechariah saw four chariots coming out from between two mountains of bronze, in the first of which were red horses; in the second, black; in the third, white; and in the fourth, grizzled: "and these were the four winds of the heavens, that go forth from standing before the Lord of all the earth." Ezekiel saw the four living creatures, each with four faces and four wings, the faces of a man and a lion, an ox and an eagle; and the four wheels going upon their four sides; and Saint John beheld the four beasts, full of eyes before and behind, the LION, the young Ox, the MAN, and the flying EAGLE. Four was the signature of the Earth. Therefore, in the 148th Psalm, of those who must praise the Lord on the land, there are four times four, and four in particular of living creatures. Visible nature is described as the four quarters of the world, and the four corners of the earth. "There are four," says the old Jewish saying, "which take the first place in this world: man, among the creatures; the eagle among birds; the ox among cattle; and the lion among wild beasts." Daniel saw four great beasts come up from the sea.

FIVE is the Duad added to the Triad. It is expressed by the five-pointed or blazing star, the mysterious Pentalpha of Pythagoras. It is indissolubly connected with the number seven. Christ fed His disciples and the multitude with five loaves and two fishes, and of the fragments there remained twelve, that is, five and seven, baskets full. Again He fed them with seven loaves and a few little fishes, and there remained seven baskets full. The five apparently small planets, Mercury, Venus, Mars, Jupiter, and Saturn, with the two greater ones, the Sun and Moon, constituted the seven celestial spheres.

SEVEN was the peculiarly sacred number. There were seven planets and spheres presided over by seven archangels. There were seven colors in the rainbow; and the Phoenician Deity was called the HEPTAKIS or God of seven rays; seven days of the week; and seven and five made the number of months, tribes, and apostles. Zechariah saw a golden candlestick, with seven lamps and seven pipes to the lamps, and an olive-tree on each side. Since

[p. 59]

he says, "the seven eyes of the Lord shall rejoice, and shall see the plummet in the hand of Zerubbabel." John, in the Apocalypse, writes seven epistles to the seven churches. In the seven epistles there are twelve promises. What is said of the churches in praise or blame, is completed in the number three. The refrain, "who has ears to hear," etc., has ten words, divided by three and seven, and the seven by three and four; and the seven epistles are also so divided. In the seals, trumpets, and vials, also, of this symbolic vision, the seven are divided by four and three. He who sends his message to Ephesus, "holds the seven stars in his right hand, and walks amid the seven golden lamps."

In six days, or periods, God created the Universe, and paused on the seventh day. Of clean beasts, Noah was directed to take by sevens into the ark; and of fowls by sevens; because in seven days the rain was to commence. On the seventeenth day of the month, the rain began; on the seventeenth day of the seventh month, the ark rested on Ararat. When the dove returned, Noah waited seven days before he sent her forth again; and again seven, after she returned with the olive-leaf. Enoch was the seventh patriarch, Adam included, and Lamech lived 777 years.

There were seven lamps in the great candlestick of the Tabernacle and Temple, representing the seven planets. Seven times Moses sprinkled the anointing oil upon the altar. The days of consecration of Aaron and his sons were seven in number. A woman was unclean seven days after child-birth; one infected with leprosy was shut up seven days; seven times the leper was sprinkled with the blood of a slain bird; and seven days afterwards he must remain abroad out of his tent. Seven times, in purifying the leper, the priest was to sprinkle the consecrated oil; and seven times to sprinkle with the blood of the sacrificed bird the house to be purified. Seven times the blood of the slain bullock was sprinkled on the mercy-seat; and seven times on the altar. The seventh year was a Sabbath of rest; and at the end of seven times seven years came the great year of jubilee. Seven days the people ate unleavened bread, in the month of Abib. Seven weeks were counted from the time of first putting the sickle to the wheat. The Feast of the Tabernacles lasted seven days.

Israel was in the hand of Midian seven years before Gideon delivered them. The bullock sacrificed by him was seven years old. Samson told Delilah to bind him with seven green withes; and

[p. 60]

she wove the seven locks of his head, and afterwards shaved them off. Balaam told Barak to build for him seven altars. Jacob served seven years for Leah and seven for Rachel. Job had seven sons and three daughters, making the perfect number ten. He had also seven thousand sheep and three thousand camels. His friends sat down with him seven days and seven nights. His friends were ordered to sacrifice seven bullocks and seven rams; and again, at the end, he had seven sons and three daughters, and twice seven thousand sheep, and lived an hundred and forty, or twice seven times ten years. Pharaoh saw in his dream seven fat and seven lean kine, seven good ears and seven blasted ears of wheat; and there were seven years of plenty, and seven of famine. Jericho fell, when seven priests, with seven trumpets, made the circuit of the city on seven successive days; once each day for six days, and seven times on the seventh. "The seven eyes of the Lord," says Zechariah, "run to and fro through the whole earth." Solomon was seven years in building the Temple. Seven angels, in the Apocalypse, pour out seven plagues, from seven vials of wrath. The scarlet-colored beast, on which the woman sits in the wilderness, has seven heads and ten horns. So also has the beast that rises up out of the sea. Seven thunders uttered their voices. Seven angels sounded seven trumpets. Seven lamps of fire, the seven spirits of God, burned before the throne; and the Lamb that was slain had seven horns and seven eyes.

 

EIGHT is the first cube, that of two. NINE is the square of three, and represented by the triple triangle.

TEN includes all the other numbers. It is especially seven and three; and is called the number of perfection. Pythagoras represented it by the TETRACTYS, which had many mystic meanings. This symbol is sometimes composed of dots or points, sometimes of commas or yo_ds, and in the Kabalah, of the letters of the name of Deity. It is thus arranged:

[p. 61]

The Patriarchs from Adam to Noah, inclusive, are ten in number, and the same number is that of the Commandments.

TWELVE is the number of the lines of equal length that form a cube. It is the number of the months, the tribes, and the apostles; of the oxen under the Brazen Sea, of the stones on the breast-plate of the high priest.

*      *      *      *      *      *

 

 

 

 

 

 

*      *      *      *      *      *

 

     
Morals and Dogma, by Albert Pike, [1871], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 62]

  

III.

  

THE MASTER.

*      *      *      *      *      *

To understand literally the symbols and allegories of Oriental books as to ante-historical matters, is willfully to close our eyes against the Light. To translate the symbols into the trivial and commonplace, is the blundering of mediocrity.

All religious expression is symbolism; since we can describe only what we see, and the true objects of religion are THE SEEN. The earliest instruments of education were symbols; and they and all other religious forms differed and still differ according to external circumstances and imagery, and according to differences of knowledge and mental cultivation. All language is symbolic, so far as it is applied to mental and spiritual phenomena and action. All words have, primarily, a material sense, however they may afterward get, for the ignorant, a spiritual non-sense. "To retract," for example, is to draw back, and when applied to a statement, is symbolic, as much so as a picture of an arm drawn back, to express the same thing, would be. The very word "spirit" means "breath," from the Latin verb spiro, breathe.

To present a visible symbol to the eye of another is not necessarily to inform him of the meaning which that symbol has to you. Hence the philosopher soon superadded to the symbols explanations addressed to the ear, susceptible of more precision, but less effective and impressive than the painted or sculptured forms which he endeavored to explain. Out of these explanations grew by degrees a variety of narrations, whose true object and meaning were gradually forgotten, or lost in contradictions and incongruities. And when these were abandoned, and Philosophy resorted to definitions and formulas, its language was but a more complicated symbolism, attempting in the dark to grapple with and picture ideas impossible to be expressed. For as with the visible symbol, so with the word: to utter it to you does not inform you of the exact meaning which it has to me; and thus religion and philosophy became to a great extent disputes as to the meaning

[p. 63]

of words. The most abstract expression for DEITY, which language can supply, is but a sign or symbol for an object beyond our comprehension, and not more truthful and adequate than the images of OSIRIS and VISHNU, or their names, except as being less sensuous and explicit. We avoid sensuousness only by resorting to simple negation. We come at last to define spirit by saying that it is not matter. Spirit is--spirit.

A single example of the symbolism of words will indicate to you one branch of Masonic study. We find in the English Rite this phrase: "I will always hail, ever conceal, and never reveal;" and in the Catechism, these:

Q Q.E.D. "I hail."

A Q.E.D. "I conceal;"

and ignorance, misunderstanding the word "hail," has interpolated the phrase, "From whence do you hail!'"

But the word is really "hele," from the Anglo-Saxon verb elan, helan, to cover, hide, or conceal. And this word is rendered by the Latin verb tegere, to cover or roof over. "That ye fro me no thynge woll hele," says Gower. "They hele fro me no priuyte," says the Romaunt of the Rose. "To heal a house," is a common phrase in Sussex; and in the west of England, he that covers a house with slates is called a Healer. Wherefore, to "heal" means the same thing as to "tile,"--itself symbolic, as meaning, primarily, to cover a house with tiles,--and means to cover, hide, or conceal. Thus language too is symbolism, and words are as much misunderstood and misused as more material symbols are.

Symbolism tended continually to become more complicated; and all the powers of Heaven were reproduced on earth, until a web of fiction and allegory was woven, partly by art and partly by the ignorance of error, which the wit of man, with his limited means of explanation, will never unravel. Even the Hebrew Theism became involved in symbolism and image-worship, borrowed probably from an older creed and remote regions of Asia,--the worship of the Great Semitic Nature-God AL or ELS and its symbolical representations of JEHOVAH Himself were not even confined to poetical or illustrative language. The priests were monotheists: the people idolaters.

There are dangers inseparable from symbolism, which afford an impressive lesson in regard to the similar risks attendant on the use of language. The imagination, called in to assist the reason,

[p. 64]

usurps its place or leaves its ally helplessly entangled in its web. Names which stand for things are confounded with them; the means are mistaken for the end; the instrument of interpretation for the object; and thus symbols come to usurp an independent character as truths and persons. Though perhaps a necessary path, they were a dangerous one by which to approach the Deity; in which many, says PLUTARCH, "mistaking the sign for the thing signified, fell into a ridiculous superstition; while others, in avoiding one extreme, plunged into the no less hideous gulf of irreligion and impiety."

It is through the Mysteries, CICERO says, that we have learned the first principles of life; wherefore the term "initiation" is used with good reason; and they not only teach us to live more happily and agreeably, but they soften the pains of death by the hope of a better life hereafter.

The Mysteries were a Sacred Drama, exhibiting some legend significant of nature's changes, of the visible Universe in which the Divinity is revealed, and whose import was in many respects as open to the Pagan as to the Christian. Nature is the great Teacher of man; for it is the Revelation of God. It neither dogmatizes nor attempts to tyrannize by compelling to a particular creed or special interpretation. It presents its symbols to us, and adds nothing by way of explanation. It is the text without the commentary; and, as we well know, it is chiefly the commentary and gloss that lead to error and heresy and persecution. The earliest instructors of mankind not only adopted the lessons of Nature, but as far as possible adhered to her method of imparting them. In the Mysteries, beyond the current traditions or sacred and enigmatic recitals of the Temples, few explanations were given to the spectators, who were left, as in the school of nature, to make inferences for themselves. No other method could have suited every degree of cultivation and capacity. To employ nature's universal symbolism instead of the technicalities of language, rewards the humblest inquirer, and discloses its secrets to every one in proportion to his preparatory training and his power to comprehend them. If their philosophical meaning was above the comprehension of some, their moral and political meanings are within the reach of all.

These mystic shows and performances were not the reading of a lecture, but the opening of a problem. Requiring research, they were calculated to arouse the dormant intellect. They implied no

[p. 65]

hostility to Philosophy, because Philosophy is the great expounder of symbolism; although its ancient interpretations were often ill-founded and incorrect. The alteration from symbol to dogma is fatal to beauty of expression, and leads to intolerance and assumed infallibility.

*      *      *      *      *      *

If, in teaching the great doctrine of the divine nature. of the Soul, and in striving to explain its longings after immortality, and in proving its superiority over the souls of the animals, which have no aspirations Heavenward, the ancients struggled in vain to express the nature of the soul, by comparing it to FIRE and LIGHT, it will be well for us to consider whether, with all our boasted knowledge, we have any better or clearer idea of its nature, and whether we have not despairingly taken refuge in having none at all. And if they erred as to its original place of abode, and understood literally the mode and path of its descent, these were but the accessories of the great Truth, and probably, to the Initiates, mere allegories, designed to make the idea more palpable and impressive to the mind.

They are at least no more fit to be smiled at by the self-conceit of a vain ignorance, the wealth of whose knowledge consists solely in words, than the bosom of Abraham, as a home for the spirits of the just dead; the gulf of actual fire, for the eternal torture of spirits; and the City of the New Jerusalem, with its walls of jasper and its edifices of pure gold like clear glass, its foundations of precious stones, and its gates each of a single pearl. "I knew a man," says PAUL, "caught up to the third Heaven; . . . . that he was caught up into Paradise, and heard ineffable words, which it is not possible for a man to utter." And nowhere is the antagonism and conflict between the spirit and body more frequently and forcibly insisted on than in the writings of this apostle, nowhere the Divine nature of the soul more strongly asserted. "With the mind," he says, "I serve the law of God; but with the flesh the law of sin. . . .As many as are led by the Spirit of God, are the sons of GOD.... The earnest expectation of the created waits for the manifestation of the sons of God. . . . The created shall be delivered from the bondage of corruption, of the flesh liable to decay, into the glorious liberty of the children of God."

*      *      *      *      *      *

Two forms of government are favorable to the prevalence of

[p. 66]

falsehood and deceit. Under a Despotism, men are false, treacherous, and deceitful through fear, like slaves dreading the lash. Under a Democracy they are so as a means of attaining popularity and office, and because of the greed for wealth. Experience will probably prove that these odious and detestable vices will grow most rankly and spread most rapidly in a Republic. When office and wealth become the gods of a people, and the most unworthy and unfit most aspire to the former, and fraud becomes the highway to the latter, the land will reek with falsehood and sweat lies and chicane. When the offices are open to all, merit and stern integrity and the dignity of unsullied honor will attain them only rarely and by accident. To be able to serve the country well, will cease to be a reason why the great and wise and learned should be selected to render service. Other qualifications, less honorable, will be more available. To adapt one's opinions to the popular humor; to defend, apologize for, and justify the popular follies; to advocate the expedient and the plausible; to caress, cajole, and flatter the elector; to beg like a spaniel for his vote, even if he be a negro three removes from barbarism; to profess friendship for a competitor and stab him by innuendo; to set on foot that which at third hand shall become a lie, being cousin-german to it when uttered, and yet capable of being explained away,--who is there that has not seen these low arts and base appliances put into practice, and becoming general, until success cannot be surely had by any more honorable means?--the result being a State ruled and ruined by ignorant and shallow mediocrity, pert self-conceit, the greenness of unripe intellect, vain of a school-boy's smattering of knowledge.

The faithless and the false in public and in political life, will be faithless and false in private. The jockey in politics, like the jockey on the race-course, is rotten from skin to core. Everywhere he will see first to his own interests, and whoso leans on him will be pierced with a broken reed. His ambition is ignoble, like himself; and therefore he will seek to attain office by ignoble means, as he will seek to attain any other coveted object,--land, money, or reputation.

At length, office and honor are divorced. The place that the small and shallow, the knave or the trickster, is deemed competent and fit to fill, ceases to be worthy the ambition of the great and capable; or if not, these shrink from a contest, the weapons to be used wherein are unfit for a gentleman to handle. Then the habits

[p. 67]

of unprincipled advocates in law courts are naturalized in Senates, and pettifoggers wrangle there, when the fate of the nation and the lives of millions are at stake. States are even begotten by villainy and brought forth by fraud, and rascalities are justified by legislators claiming to be honorable. Then contested elections are decided by perjured votes or party considerations; and all the practices of the worst times of corruption are revived and exaggerated in Republics.

It is strange that reverence for truth, that manliness and genuine loyalty, and scorn of littleness and unfair advantage, and genuine faith and godliness and large-heartedness should diminish, among statesmen and people, as civilization advances, and freedom becomes more general, and universal suffrage implies universal worth and fitness! In the age of Elizabeth, without universal suffrage, or Societies for the Diffusion of Useful Knowledge, or popular lecturers, or Lycaea, the statesman, the merchant, the burgher, the sailor, were all alike heroic, fearing God only, and man not at all. Let but a hundred or two years elapse, and in a Monarchy or Republic of the same race, nothing is less heroic than the merchant, the shrewd speculator, the office-seeker, fearing man only, and God not at all. Reverence for greatness dies out, and is succeeded by base envy of greatness. Every man is in the way of many, either in the path to popularity or wealth. There is a general feeling of satisfaction when a great statesman is displaced, or a general, who has been for his brief hour the popular idol, is unfortunate and sinks from his high estate. It becomes a misfortune, if not a crime, to be above the popular level.

We should naturally suppose that a nation in distress would take counsel with the wisest of its sons. But, on the contrary, great men seem never so scarce as when they are most needed, and small men never so bold to insist on infesting place, as when mediocrity and incapable pretence and sophomoric greenness, and showy and sprightly incompetency are most dangerous. When France was in the extremity of revolutionary agony, she was governed by an assembly of provincial pettifoggers, and Robespierre, Marat, and Couthon ruled in the place of Mirabeau, Vergniaud, and Carnot. England was governed by the Rump Parliament, after she had beheaded her king. Cromwell extinguished one body, and Napoleon the other.

Fraud, falsehood, trickery, and deceit in national affairs are the

[p. 68]

signs of decadence in States and precede convulsions or paralysis. To bully the weak and crouch to the strong, is the policy of nations governed by small mediocrity. The tricks of the canvass for office are re-enacted in Senates. The Executive becomes the dispenser of patronage, chiefly to the most unworthy; and men are bribed with offices instead of money, to the greater ruin of the Commonwealth. The Divine in human nature disappears, and interest, greed, and selfishness takes it place. That is a sad and true allegory which represents the companions of Ulysses changed by the enchantments of Circe into swine.

*      *      *      *      *      *

"Ye cannot," said the Great Teacher, "serve God and Mammon." When the thirst for wealth becomes general, it will be sought for as well dishonestly as honestly; by frauds and overreachings, by the knaveries of trade, the heartlessness of greedy speculation, by gambling in stocks and commodities that soon demoralizes a whole community. Men will speculate upon the needs of their neighbors and the distresses of their country. Bubbles that, bursting, impoverish multitudes, will be blown up by cunning knavery, with stupid credulity as its assistants and instrument. Huge bankruptcies, that startle a country like the earth-quakes, and are more fatal, fraudulent assignments, engulfment of the savings of the poor, expansions and collapses of the currency, the crash of banks, the depreciation of Government securities, prey on the savings of self-denial, and trouble with their depredations the first nourishment of infancy and the last sands of life, and fill with inmates the churchyards and lunatic asylums. But the sharper and speculator thrives and fattens. If his country is fighting by a levy en masse for her very existence, he aids her by depreciating her paper, so that he may accumulate fabulous amounts with little outlay. If his neighbor is distressed, he buys his property for a song. If he administers upon an estate, it turns out insolvent, and the orphans are paupers. If his bank explodes, he is found to have taken care of himself in time. Society worships its paper-and-credit kings, as the old Hindus and Egyptians worshipped their worthless idols, and often the most obsequiously when in actual solid wealth they are the veriest paupers. No wonder men think there ought to be another world, in which the injustices of this may be atoned for, when they see the friends of ruined families begging the wealthy sharpers to give alms to prevent

[p. 69]

the orphaned victims from starving, until they may find ways of supporting themselves.

*      *      *      *      *      *

States are chiefly avaricious of commerce and of territory. The latter leads to the violation of treaties, encroachments upon feeble neighbors, and rapacity toward their wards whose lands are coveted. Republics are, in this, as rapacious and unprincipled as Despots, never learning from history that inordinate expansion by rapine and fraud has its inevitable consequences in dismemberment or subjugation. When a Republic begins to plunder its neighbors, the words of doom are already written on its walls. There is a judgment already pronounced of God upon whatever is unrighteous in the conduct of national affairs. When civil war tears the vitals of a Republic, let it look back and see if it has not been guilty of injustices; and if it has, let it humble itself in the dust!

When a nation becomes possessed with a spirit of commercial greed, beyond those just and fair limits set by a due regard to a moderate and reasonable degree of general and individual prosperity, it is a nation possessed by the devil of commercial avarice, a passion as ignoble and demoralizing as avarice in the individual; and as this sordid passion is baser and more unscrupulous than ambition, so it is more hateful, and at last makes the infected nation to be regarded as the enemy of the human race. To grasp at the lion's share of commerce, has always at last proven the ruin of States, because it invariably leads to injustices that make a State detestable; to a selfishness and crooked policy that forbid other nations to be the friends of a State that cares only for itself.

Commercial avarice in India was the parent of more atrocities and greater rapacity, and cost more human lives, than the nobler ambition for extended empire of Consular Rome. The nation that grasps at the commerce of the world cannot but become selfish, calculating, dead to the noblest impulses and sympathies which ought to actuate States. It will submit to insults that wound its honor, rather than endanger its commercial interests by war; while, to subserve those interests, it will wage unjust war, on false or frivolous pretexts, its free people cheerfully allying themselves with despots to crush a commercial rival that has dared to exile its kings and elect its own ruler.

Thus the cold calculations of a sordid self-interest, in nations

[p. 70]

commercially avaricious, always at last displace the sentiments and lofty impulses of Honor and Generosity by which they rose to greatness; which made Elizabeth and Cromwell alike the protectors of Protestants beyond the four seas of England, against crowned Tyranny and mitred Persecution; and, if they had lasted, would have forbidden alliances with Czars and Autocrats and Bourbons to re-enthrone the Tyrannies of Incapacity, and arm the Inquisition anew with its instruments of torture. The soul of the avaricious nation petrifies, like the soul of the individual who makes gold his god. The Despot will occasionally act upon noble and generous impulses, and help the weak against the strong, the right against the wrong. But commercial avarice is essentially egotistic, grasping, faithless, overreaching, crafty, cold, ungenerous, selfish, and calculating, controlled by considerations of self-interest alone. Heartless and merciless, it has no sentiments of pity, sympathy, or honor, to make it pause in its remorseless career; and it crushes down all that is of impediment in its way, as its keels of commerce crush under them the murmuring and unheeded waves.

A war for a great principle ennobles a nation. A war for commercial supremacy, upon some shallow pretext, is despicable, and more than aught else demonstrates to what immeasurable depths of baseness men and nations can descend. Commercial greed values the lives of men no more than it values the lives of ants. The slave-trade is as acceptable to a people enthralled by that greed, as the trade in ivory or spices, if the profits are as large. It will by-and-by endeavor to compound with God and quiet its own conscience, by compelling those to whom it sold the slaves it bought or stole, to set them free, and slaughtering them by hecatombs if they refuse to obey the edicts of its philanthropy.

Justice in no wise consists in meting out to another that exact measure of reward or punishment which we think and decree his merit, or what we call his crime, which is more often merely his error, deserves. The justice of the father is not incompatible with forgiveness by him of the errors and offences of his child. The Infinite Justice of God does not consist in meting out exact measures of punishment for human frailties and sins. We are too apt to erect our own little and narrow notions of what is right and just into the law of justice, and to insist that God shall adopt that as His law; to measure off something with our own little

[p. 71]

tape-line, and call it God's love of justice. Continually we seek to ennoble our own ignoble love of revenge and retaliation, by misnaming it justice.

Nor does justice consist in strictly governing our conduct toward other men by the rigid rules of legal right. If there were a community anywhere, in which all stood upon the strictness of this rule, there should be written over its gates, as a warning to the unfortunates desiring admission to that inhospitable realm, the words which DANTE says are written over the great gate of Hell: "LET THOSE WHO ENTER HERE LEAVE HOPE BEHIND!" It is not just to pay the laborer in field or factory or workshop his current wages and no more, the lowest market-value of his labor, for so long only as we need that labor and he is able to work; for when sickness or old age overtakes him, that is to leave him and his family to starve; and God will curse with calamity the people in which the children of the laborer out of work eat the boiled grass of the field, and mothers strangle their children, that they may buy food for themselves with the charitable pittance given for burial expenses. The rules of what is ordinarily termed "Justice," may be punctiliously observed among the fallen spirits that are the aristocracy of Hell.

*      *      *      *      *      *

Justice, divorced from sympathy, is selfish indifference, not in the least more laudable than misanthropic isolation. There is sympathy even among the hair-like oscillatorias, a tribe of simple plants, armies of which may be discovered, with the aid of the microscope, in the tiniest bit of scum from a stagnant pool. For these will place themselves, as if it were by agreement, in separate companies, on the side of a vessel containing them, and seem marching upward in rows; and when a swarm grows weary of its situation, and has a mind to change its quarters, each army holds on its way without confusion or intermixture, proceeding with great regularity and order, as if under the directions of wise leaders. The ants and bees give each other mutual assistance, beyond what is required by that which human creatures are apt to regard as the strict law of justice.

Surely we need but reflect a little, to be convinced that the individual man is but a fraction of the unit of society, and that he is indissolubly connected with the rest of his race. Not only the actions, but the will and thoughts of other men make or mar his

[p. 72]

fortunes, control his destinies, are unto him life or death, dishonor or honor. The epidemics, physical and moral, contagious and infectious, public opinion, popular delusions, enthusiasms, and the other great electric phenomena and currents, moral and intellectual, prove the universal sympathy. The vote of a single and obscure man, the utterance of self-will, ignorance, conceit, or spite, deciding an election and placing Folly or Incapacity or Baseness in a Senate, involves the country in war, sweeps away our fortunes, slaughters our sons, renders the labors of a life unavailing, and pushes on, helpless, with all our intellect to resist, into the grave.

These considerations ought to teach us that justice to others and to ourselves is the same; that we cannot define our duties by mathematical lines ruled by the square, but must fill with them the great circle traced by the compasses; that the circle of humanity is the limit, and we are but the point in its centre, the drops in the great Atlantic, the atom or particle, bound by a mysterious law of attraction which we term sympathy to every other atom in the mass; that the physical and moral welfare of others cannot be indifferent to us; that we have a direct and immediate interest in the public morality and popular intelligence, in the well-being and physical comfort of the people at large. The ignorance of the people, their pauperism and destitution, and consequent degradation, their brutalization and demoralization, are all diseases; and we cannot rise high enough above the people, nor shut ourselves up from them enough, to escape the miasmatic contagion and the great magnetic currents.

Justice is peculiarly indispensable to nations. The unjust State is doomed of God to calamity and ruin. This is the teaching of the Eternal Wisdom and of history. "Righteousness exalteth a nation; but wrong is a reproach to nations." "The Throne is established by Righteousness. Let the lips of the Ruler pronounce the sentence that is Divine; and his mouth do no wrong in judgment!" The nation that adds province to province by fraud and violence, that encroaches on the weak and plunders its wards, and violates its treaties and the obligation of its contracts, and for the law of honor and fair-dealing substitutes the exigencies of greed and the base precepts of policy and craft and the ignoble tenets of expediency, is predestined to destruction; for here, as with the individual, the consequences of wrong are inevitable and eternal.

A sentence is written against all that is unjust, written by God

[p. 73]

in the nature of man and in the nature of the Universe, because it is in the nature of the Infinite God. No wrong is really successful. The gain of injustice is a loss; its pleasure, suffering. Iniquity often seems to prosper, but its success is its defeat and shame. If its consequences pass by the doer, they fall upon and crush his children. It is a philosophical, physical, and moral truth, in the form of a threat, that God visits the iniquity of the fathers upon the children, to the third and fourth generation of those who violate His laws. After a long while, the day of reckoning always comes, to nation as to individual; and always the knave deceives himself, and proves a failure.

Hypocrisy is the homage that vice and wrong pay to virtue and justice. It is .Satan attempting to clothe himself in the angelic vesture of light. It is equally detestable in morals, politics, and religion; in the man and in the nation. To do injustice under the pretence of equity and fairness; to reprove vice in public and commit it in private; to pretend to charitable opinion and censoriously condemn; to profess the principles of Masonic beneficence, and close the ear to the wail of distress and the cry of suffering; to eulogize the intelligence of the people, and plot to deceive and be-tray them by means of their ignorance and simplicity; to prate of purity, and peculate; of honor, and basely abandon a sinking cause; of disinterestedness, and sell one's vote for place and power, are hypocrisies as common as they are infamous and disgraceful. To steal the livery of the Court of God to serve the Devil withal; to pretend to believe in a God of mercy and a Redeemer of love, and persecute those of a different faith; to devour widows' houses, and for a pretence make long prayers; to preach continence, and wallow in lust; to inculcate humility, and in pride surpass Lucifer; to pay tithe, and omit the weightier matters of the law, judgment, mercy and faith; to strain at a gnat, and swallow a camel; to make clean the outside of the cup and platter, keeping them full within of extortion and excess; to appear outwardly righteous unto men, but within be full of hypocrisy and iniquity, is indeed to be like unto whited sepulchres, which appear beautiful outward, but are within full of bones of the dead and of all uncleanness.

The Republic cloaks its ambition with the pretence of a desire and duty to "extend the area of freedom," and claims it as its "manifest destiny" to annex other Republics or the States or Provinces of others to itself, by open violence, or under obsolete,

[p. 74]

empty, and fraudulent titles. The Empire founded by a successful soldier, claims its ancient or natural boundaries, and makes necessity and its safety the plea for open robbery. The great Merchant Nation, gaining foothold in the Orient, finds a continual necessity for extending its dominion by arms, and subjugates India. The great Royalties and Despotisms, without a plea, partition among themselves a Kingdom, dismember Poland, and prepare to wrangle over the dominions of the Crescent. To maintain the balance of power is a plea for the obliteration of States. Carthage, Genoa, and Venice, commercial Cities only, must acquire territory by force or fraud, and become States. Alexander marches to the Indus; Tamerlane seeks universal empire; the Saracens conquer Spain and threaten Vienna.

The thirst for power is never satisfied. It is insatiable. Neither men nor nations ever have power enough. When Rome was the mistress of the world, the Emperors caused themselves to be worshipped as gods. The Church of Rome claimed despotism over the soul, and over the whole life from the cradle to the grave. It gave and sold absolutions for past and future sins. It claimed to be infallible in matters of faith. It decimated Europe to purge it of heretics. It decimated America to convert the Mexicans and Peruvians. It gave and took away thrones; and by excommunication and interdict closed the gates of Paradise against Nations, Spain, haughty with its dominion over the Indies, endeavored to crush out Protestantism in the Netherlands, while Philip the Second married the Queen of England, and the pair sought to win that kingdom back to its allegiance to the Papal throne. After-ward Spain attempted to conquer it with her "invincible" Armada. Napoleon set his relatives and captains on thrones, and parcelled among them half of Europe. The Czar rules over an empire more gigantic than Rome. The history of all is or will be the same,--acquisition, dismemberment, ruin. There is a judgment of God against all that is unjust.

To seek to subjugate the will of others and take the soul captive, because it is the exercise of the highest power, seems to be the highest object of human ambition. It is at the bottom of all proselyting and propagandism, from that of Mesmer to that of the Church of Rome and the French Republic. That was the apostolate alike of Joshua and of Mahomet. Masonry alone preaches Toleration, the right of man to abide by his own faith, the right

[p. 75]

of all States to govern themselves. It rebukes alike the monarch who seeks to extend his dominions by conquest, the Church that claims the right to repress heresy by fire and steel, and the confederation of States that insist on maintaining a union by force and restoring brotherhood by slaughter and subjugation.

It is natural, when we are wronged, to desire revenge; and to persuade ourselves that we desire it less for our own satisfaction than to prevent a repetition of the wrong, to which the doer would be encouraged by immunity coupled with the profit of the wrong. To submit to be cheated is to encourage the cheater to continue; and we are quite apt to regard ourselves as God's chosen instruments to inflict His vengeance, and for Him and in His stead to discourage wrong by making it fruitless and its punishment sure. Revenge has been said to be "a kind of wild justice;" but it is always taken in anger, and therefore is unworthy of a great soul, which ought not to suffer its equanimity to be disturbed by ingratitude or villainy. The injuries done us by the base are as much unworthy of our angry notice as those done us by the insects and the beasts; and when we crush the adder, or slay the wolf or hyena, we should do it without being moved to anger, and with no more feeling of revenge than we have in rooting up a noxious weed.

And if it be not in human nature not to take revenge by way of punishment, let the Mason truly consider that in doing so he is God's agent, and so let his revenge be measured by justice and tempered by mercy. The law of God is, that the consequences of wrong and cruelty and crime shall be their punishment; and the injured and the wronged and the indignant are as much His instruments to enforce that law, as the diseases and public detestation, and the verdict of history and the execration of posterity are. No one will say that the Inquisitor who has racked and burned the innocent; the Spaniard who hewed Indian infants, living, into pieces with his sword, and fed the mangled limbs to his blood-hounds; the military tyrant who has shot men without trial, the knave who has robbed or betrayed his State, the fraudulent banker or bankrupt who has beggared orphans, the public officer who has violated his oath, the judge who has sold injustice, the legislator who has enabled Incapacity to work the ruin of the State, ought not to be punished. Let them be so; and let the injured or the sympathizing be the instruments of God's just vengeance; but always out of a higher feeling than mere personal revenge.

[p. 76]

Remember that every moral characteristic of man finds its prototype among creatures of lower intelligence; that the cruel foulness of the hyena, the savage rapacity of the wolf, the merciless rage of the tiger, the crafty treachery of the panther, are found among mankind, and ought to excite no other emotion, when found in the man, than when found in the beast. Why should the true man be angry with the geese that hiss, the peacocks that strut, the asses that bray, and the apes that imitate and chatter, although they wear the human form? Always, also, it remains true, that it is more noble to forgive than to take revenge; and that, in general, we ought too much to despise those who wrong us, to feel the emotion of anger, or to desire revenge.

At the sphere of the Sun, you are in the region of LIGHT. *    *    *    * The Hebrew word for gold, ZAHAB, also means Light, of which the Sun is to the Earth the great source. So, in the great Oriental allegory of the Hebrews, the River PISON compasses the land of Gold or Light; and the River GIHON the land of Ethiopia or Darkness.

What light is, we no more know than the ancients did. According to the modern hypothesis, it is not composed of luminous particles shot out from the sun with immense velocity; but that body only impresses, on the ether which fills all space, a powerful vibratory movement that extends, in the form of luminous waves, beyond the most distant planets, supplying them with light and heat. To the ancients, it was an outflowing from the Deity. To us, as to them, it is the apt symbol of truth and knowledge. To us, also, the upward journey of the soul through the Spheres is symbolical; but we are as little informed as they whence the soul comes, where it has its origin, and whither it goes after death. They endeavored to have some belief and faith, some creed, upon those points. At the present day, men are satisfied to think nothing in regard to all that, and only to believe that the soul is a something separate from the body and out-living it, but whether existing before it, neither to inquire nor care. No one asks whether it emanates from the Deity, or is created out of nothing, or is generated like the body, and the issue of the souls of the father and the mother. Let us not smile, therefore, at the ideas of the ancients, until we have a better belief; but accept their symbols as meaning that the soul is of a Divine nature, originating in a sphere nearer the Deity, and returning to that when freed from the enthrallment

[p. 77]

of the body; and that it can only return there when purified of all the sordidness and sin which have, as it were, become part of its substance, by its connection with the body.

It is not strange that, thousands of years ago, men worshipped the Sun, and that to-day that worship continues among the Parsees. Originally they looked beyond the orb to the invisible God, of whom the Sun's light, seemingly identical with generation and life, was the manifestation and outflowing. Long before the Chaldaean shepherds watched it on their plains, it came up regularly, as it now does, in the morning, like a god, and again sank, like a king retiring, in the west, to return again in due time in the same array of majesty. We worship Immutability. It was that steadfast, immutable character of the Sun that the men of Baalbec worshipped. His light-giving and life-giving powers were secondary attributes. The one grand idea that compelled worship was the characteristic of God which they saw reflected in his light, and fancied they saw in its originality the changelessness of Deity. He had seen thrones crumble, earthquakes shake the world and hurl down mountains. Beyond Olympus, beyond the Pillars of Hercules, he had gone daily to his abode, and had come daily again in the morning to behold the temples they built to his worship. They personified him as BRAHMA, AMUN, OSIRIS, BEL, ADONIS, MALKARTH, MITHRAS, and APOLLO; and the nations that did so grew old and died. Moss grew on the capitals of the great columns of his temples, and he shone on the moss. Grain by grain the dust of his temples crumbled and fell, and was borne off on. the wind, and still he shone on crumbling column and architrave. The roof fell crashing on the pavement, and he shone in on the Holy of Holies with unchanging rays. It was not strange that men worshipped the Sun.

There is a water-plant, on whose broad leaves the drops of water roll about without uniting, like drops of mercury. So arguments on points of faith, in politics or religion, roll over the surface of the mind. An argument that convinces one mind has no effect on another. Few intellects, or souls that are the negations of intellect, have any logical power or capacity. There is a singular obliquity in the human mind that makes the false logic more effective than the true with nine-tenths of those who are regarded as men of intellect. Even among the judges, not one in ten can argue logically. Each mind sees the truth, distorted through its own

[p. 78]

medium. Truth, to most men, is like matter in the spheroidal state. Like a drop of cold water on the surface of a red-hot metal plate, it dances, trembles, and spins, and never comes into contact with it; and the mind may be plunged into truth, as the hand moistened with sulphurous acid may into melted metal, and be not even warmed by the immersion.

*      *      *      *      *      *

The word Khairu_m or Khu_ru_m is a compound one. Gesenius renders Khu_ru_m by the word noble or free-born: Khu_r meaning white, noble. It also means the opening of a window, the socket of the eye. Khri also means white, or an opening; and Khris, the orb of the Sun, in Job viii. 13 and x. 7. Krishna is the Hindu Sun-God. Khur, the Parsi word, is the literal name of the Sun.

From Kur or Khur, the Sun, comes Khora, a name of Lower Egypt. The Sun, Bryant says in his Mythology, was called Kur; and Plutarch says that the Persians called the Sun Ku_ros. Kurios, Lord, in Greek, like Adonai, Lord, in Phoenician and Hebrew, was applied to the Sun. Many places were sacred to the Sun, and called Kura, Kuria, Kuropolis, Kurene, Kureschata, Kuresta, and Corusia in Scythia.

The Egyptian Deity called by the Greeks "Horus," was Her-Ra, or Har-oeris, Hor or Har, the Sun. Hari is a Hindu name of the Sun. Ari-al, Ar-es, Ar, Aryaman, Areimonios, the AR meaning Fire or Flame, are of the same kindred. Hermes or Har-mes, (Aram, Remus, Haram, Harameias), was Kadmos, the Divine Light or Wisdom. Mar-kuri, says Movers, is Mar, the Sun.

In the Hebrew, AOOR, is Light, Fire, or the Sun. Cyrus, said Ctesias, was so named from Kuros, the Sun. Kuris, Hesychius says, was Adonis. Apollo, the Sun-god, was called Kurraios, from Kurra, a city in Phocis. The people of Kurene, originally Ethiopians or Cuthites, worshipped the Sun under the title of Achoor and Acho_r.

We know, through a precise testimony in the ancient annals of Tsu_r, that the principal festivity of Mal-karth, the incarnation of the Sun at the Winter Solstice, held at Tsu_r, was called his rebirth or his awakening, and that it was celebrated by means of a pyre, on which the god was supposed to regain, through the aid of fire, a new life. This festival was celebrated in the month Peritius (Barith), the second day of which corresponded to the 25th of December. KHUR-UM, King of Tyre, Movers says, first performed

[p. 79]

this ceremony. These facts we learn from Josephus, Servius on the Aeneid, and the Dionysiacs of Nonnus; and through a coincidence that cannot be fortuitous, the same day was at Rome the Dies Natalis Solis Invicti, the festal day of the invincible Sun. Under this title, HERCULES, HAR-acles, was worshipped at Tsu_r. Thus, while the temple was being erected, the death and resurrection of a Sun-God was annually represented at Tsu_r, by Solomon's ally, at the winter solstice, by the pyre of MAL-KARTH, the Tsu_rian Haracles.

AROERIS or HAR-oeris, the elder HORUS, is from the same old root that in the Hebrew has the form Au_r, or, with the definite article prefixed, Hau_r, Light, or the Light, splendor, flame, the Sun and. his rays. The hieroglyphic of the younger HORUS was the point in a circle; of the Elder, a pair of eyes; and the festival of the thirtieth day of the month Epiphi, when the sun and moon were supposed to be in the same right line with the earth, was called "The birth-day of the eyes of Horus."

In a papyrus published by Champollion, this god is styled "Haroeri, Lord of the Solar Spirits, the beneficent eye of the Sun." Plutarch calls him "Har-pocrates;" but there is no trace of the latter part of the name in the hieroglyphic legends. He is the son of OSIRIS and Isis; and is represented sitting on a throne supported by lions; the same word, in Egyptian, meaning Lion and Sun. So Solomon made a great throne of ivory, plated with gold, with six steps, at each arm of which was a lion, and one on each side to each step, making seven on each side.

Again, the Hebrew word w ?X?Y, Khi, means "living;" and w ?R?Am, ram "was, or shall be, raised or lifted up." The latter is the same as w ?R?Wm, w ?A?R?Wm, w ?X?Rm ro_o_m, aro_o_m, haru_m, whence Aram, for Syria, or Aramaea, High-land. Khairu_m, therefore, would mean "was raised up to life, or living."

So, in Arabic, hrm, an unused root, meant, "was high," "made great," "exalted;" and Hirm means an ox, the symbol of the Sun in Taurus, at the Vernal Equinox.

KHURUM, therefore, improperly called Hiram, is KHUR-OM, the same as Her-ra, Her-mes, and Her-acles, the "Heracles Tyrius Invictus," the personification of Light and the Son, the Mediator, Redeemer, and Saviour. From the Egyptian word Ra came the Coptic Ou_ro, and the Hebrew Au_r, Light. Har-oeri, is Hor or Har, the chief or master. Hor is also heat; and hora, season or

[p. 80]

hour; and hence in several African dialects, as names of the Sun, Airo, Ayero, eer, uiro, ghurrah, and the like. The royal name rendered Pharaoh, was PHRA, that is, Pai-ra, the Sun.

The legend of the contest between Hor-ra and Set, or Set-nu-bi, the same as Bar or Bal, is older than that of the strife between Osiris and Typhon; as old, at least, as the nineteenth dynasty. It is called in the Book of the Dead, "The day of the battle between Horus and Set." The later myth connects itself with Phoenicia and Syria. The body of OSIRIS went ashore at Gebal or Byblos, sixty miles above Tsu_r. You will not fail to notice that in the name of each murderer of Khu_ru_m, that of the Evil God Bal is found.

*      *      *      *      *      *

Har-oeri was the god of TIME, as well as of Life. The Egyptian legend was that the King of Byblos cut down the tamarisk-tree containing the body of OSIRIS, and made of it a column for his palace. Isis, employed in the palace, obtained possession of the column, took the body out of it, and carried it away. Apuleius describes her as "a beautiful female, over whose divine neck her long thick hair hung in graceful ringlets;" and in the procession female attendants, with ivory combs, seemed to dress and ornament the royal hair of the goddess. The palm-tree, and the lamp in the shape of a boat, appeared in the procession. If the symbol we are speaking of is not a mere modern invention, it is to these things it alludes.

The identity of the legends is also confirmed by this hieroglyphic picture, copied from an ancient Egyptian monument, which may also enlighten you as to the Lion's grip and the Master's gavel.

[p. 81]

w ?A?B, in the ancient Phoenician character, , and in the Samaritan, , A B, (the two letters representing the numbers 1, 2, or Unity and Duality, means Father, and is a primitive noun, common to all the Semitic languages.

It also means an Ancestor, Originator, Inventor, Head, Chief or Ruler, Manager, Overseer, Master, Priest, Prophet.

w ?A?B?Y is simply Father, when it is in construction, that is, when it precedes another word, and in English the preposition "of" is interposed, as w ?A?B?Y-w ?A?L, Abi-Al, the Father of Al.

Also, the final Yo_d means "my"; so that w ?A?B?Y by itself means "My father." w ?D?W?Y?D ?A?B?Y, David my father, 2 Chron. ii. 3.

w ?W (Vav) final is the possessive pronoun "his"; and w ?A?B?Y?W, Abiu (which we read "Abif") means "of my father's." Its full meaning, as connected with the name of Khu_ru_m, no doubt is, "formerly one of my father's servants," or "slaves."

The name of the Phoenician artificer is, in Samuel and Kings, w ?X?Y?Rm and w ?X?Y?R?Wm--[2 Sam. v. 11; 1 Kings v. 15; 1 Kings vii. 40]. In Chronicles it is w ?H?W?Rm, with the addition of w ?A?B?Y. [2 Chron. ii. 12]; and of w ?A?B?Y?W [2 Chron. iv. 16].

It is merely absurd 'to add the word "Abif," or "Abiff," as part of the name of the artificer. And it is almost as absurd to add the word "Abi," which was a title and not part of the name. Joseph says [Gen. xlv. 8], "God has constituted me 'Ab l'Paraah, as Father to Paraah, i.e., Vizier or Prime Minister." So Haman was called the Second Father of Artaxerxes; and when King Khu_ru_m used the phrase "Khu_ru_m Abi," he meant that the artificer he sent Schlomoh was the principal or chief workman in his line at Tsu_r.

A medal copied by Montfaucon exhibits a female nursing a child, with ears of wheat in her hand, and the legend (Iao). She is seated on clouds, a star at her head, and three ears of wheat rising from an altar before her.

HORUS was the mediator, who was buried three days, was regenerated, and triumphed over the evil principle.

The word HERI, in Sanscrit, means Shepherd, as well as Saviour. CRISHNA is called Heri, as JESUS called Himself the Good Shepherd.

w ?X?W?R, Khu_r, means an aperture of a window, a cave, or the eye. Also it means white. In Syriac, 

w ?X?R also means an opening, and noble, free-born, high-born.

[p. 82]

[paragraph continues] w ?X?Rm, KHURM means consecrated, devoted; in Aethiopic, . It is the name of a city, [Josh. xix. 38]; and of a man, [Ezr. ii. 32, x. 31; Neh. iii. 11].

w ?X?Y?R?H, Khirah, means nobility, a noble race.

Buddha is declared to comprehend in his own person the essence of the Hindu Trimurti; and hence the tri-literal mono-syllable Om or Aum is applied to him as being essentially the same as Brahma-Vishnu-Siva. He is the same as Hermes, Thoth, Taut, and Teutates. One of his names is Heri-maya or Hermaya, which are evidently the same name as Hermes and Khirm or Khu_rm. Heri, in Sanscrit, means Lord.

A learned Brother places over the two symbolic pillars, from right to left, the two words  and  w ?Y?H?W and BAL: followed by the hieroglyphic equivalent,  of the Sun-God, Amun-ra. Is it an accidental coincidence, that in the name of each murderer are the two names of the Good and Evil Deities of the Hebrews; for Yu-bel is but Yehu-Bal or Yeho-Bal? and that the three final syllables of the names, a, o, um, make A Q.E.D.U Q.E.D.M Q.E.D. the sacred word of the Hindoos, meaning the Triune-God, Life-giving, Life-preserving, Life-destroying: represented by the mystic character ?

The genuine Acacia, also, is the thorny tamarisk, the same tree which grew up around the body of Osiris. It was a sacred tree among the Arabs, who made of it the idol Al-Uzza, which Mohammed destroyed. It is abundant as a bush in the Desert of Thur: and of it the "crown of thorns" was composed, which was set on the forehead of Jesus of Nazareth. It is a fit type of immortality on account of its tenacity of life; for it has been known, when planted as a door-post, to take root again and shoot out budding boughs over the threshold.

*      *      *      *      *      *

Every commonwealth must have its periods of trial and transition, especially if it engages in war. It is certain at some time to be wholly governed by agitators appealing to all the baser elements of the popular nature; by moneyed corporations; by those enriched by the depreciation of government securities or paper; by small attorneys, schemers, money-jobbers, speculators and adventurers--an ignoble oligarchy, enriched by the distresses of the State, and fattened on the miseries of the people. Then all the deceitful visions of equality and the rights of man end; and the

[p. 83]

wronged and plundered State can regain a real liberty only by passing through "great varieties of untried being," purified in its transmigration by fire and blood.

In a Republic, it soon comes to pass that parties gather round the negative and positive poles of some opinion or notion, and that the intolerant spirit of a triumphant majority will allow no deviation from the standard of orthodoxy which it has set up for itself. Freedom of opinion will be professed and pretended to, but every one will exercise it at the peril of being banished fro n political communion with those who hold the reins and prescribe the policy to be pursued. Slavishness to party and obsequiousness to the popular whims go hand in hand. Political independence only occurs in a fossil state; and men's opinions grow out of the acts they have been constrained to do or sanction. Flattery, either of individual or people, corrupts both the receiver and the giver; and adulation is not of more service to the people than to kings. A Caesar, securely seated in power, cares less for it than a free democracy; nor will his appetite for it grow to exorbitance, as that of a people will, until it becomes insatiate. The effect of liberty to individuals is, that they may do what they please; to a people, it is to a great extent the same. If accessible to flattery, as this is always interested, and resorted to on low and base motives, and for evil purposes, either individual or people is sure, in doing what it pleases, to do what in honor and conscience should have been left undone. One ought not even to risk congratulations, which may soon be turned into complaints; and as both individuals and peoples are prone to make a bad use of power, to flatter them, which is a sure way to mislead them, well deserves to be called a crime.

The first principle in a Republic ought to be, "that no man or set of men is entitled to exclusive or separate emoluments or privileges from the community, but in consideration of public services; which not being descendible, neither ought the offices of magistrate, legislature, nor judge, to be hereditary." It is a volume of Truth and Wisdom, a lesson for the study of nations, embodied in a single sentence, and expressed in language which every man can understand. If a deluge of despotism were to overthrow the world, and destroy all institutions under which freedom is protected, so that they should no longer be remembered among men, this sentence, preserved, would be sufficient

[p. 84]

to rekindle the fires of liberty and revive the race of free men.

But, to preserve liberty, another must be added: "that a free State does not confer office as a reward, especially for questionable services, unless she seeks her own ruin; but all officers are employed by her, in consideration solely of their will and ability to render service in the future; and therefore that the best and most competent are always to be preferred."

For, if there is to be any other rule, that of hereditary succession is perhaps as good as any. By no other rule is it possible to preserve the liberties of the State. By no other to intrust the power of making the laws to those only who have that keen instinctive sense of injustice and wrong which enables them to detect baseness and corruption in their most secret hiding-places, and that moral courage and generous manliness and gallant independence that make them fearless in dragging out the perpetrators to the light of day, and calling down upon them the scorn and indignation of the world. The flatterers of the people are never such men. On the contrary, a time always comes to a Republic, when it is not content, like Tiberius, with a single Sejanus, but must have a host; and when those most prominent in the lead of affairs are men without reputation, statesmanship, ability, or information, the mere hacks of party, owing their places to trickery and want of qualification, with none of the qualities of head or heart that make great and wise men, and, at the same time, filled with all the narrow conceptions and bitter intolerance of political bigotry. These die; and the world is none the wiser for what they have said and done. Their names sink in the bottomless pit of oblivion; but their acts of folly or knavery curse the body politic and at last prove its ruin.

Politicians, in a free State, are generally hollow, heartless, and selfish. Their own aggrandisement is the end of their patriotism; and they always look with secret satisfaction on the disappointment or fall of one whose loftier genius and superior talents over-shadow their own self-importance, or whose integrity and incorruptible honor are in the way of their selfish ends. The influence of the small aspirants is always against the great man. His accession to power may be almost for a lifetime. One of themselves will be more easily displaced, and each hopes to succeed him; and so it at length comes to pass that men impudently

[p. 85]

aspire to and actually win the highest stations, who are unfit for the lowest clerkships; and incapacity and mediocrity become the surest passports to office.

The consequence is, that those who feel themselves competent and qualified to serve the people, refuse with  to enter into the struggle for office, where the wicked and jesuitical doctrine that all is fair in politics is an excuse for every species of low villainy; and those who seek even the highest places of the State do not rely upon the power of a magnanimous spirit, on the sympathizing impulses of a great soul, to stir and move the people to generous, noble, and heroic resolves, and to wise and manly action; but, like spaniels erect on their hind legs, with fore-paws obsequiously suppliant, fawn, flatter, and actually beg for votes. Rather than descend to this, they stand contemptuously aloof, disdainfully refusing to court the people, and acting on the maxim, that "mankind has no title to demand that we shall serve them in spite of themselves."

*      *      *      *      *      *

It is lamentable to see a country split into factions, each following this or that great or brazen-fronted leader with a blind, unreasoning, unquestioning hero-worship; it is contemptible to see it divided into parties, whose sole end is the spoils of victory, and their chiefs the low, the base, the venal and the small. Such a country is in the last stages of decay, and near its end, no matter how prosperous it may seem to be. It wrangles over the volcano and the earthquake. But it is certain that no government can be conducted by the men of the people, and for the people, without a rigid adherence to those principles which our reason commends as fixed and sound. These must be the tests of parties, men, and measures. Once determined, they must be inexorable in their application, and all must either come up to the standard or declare against it. Men may betray: principles never can. Oppression is one invariable consequence of misplaced confidence in treacherous man, it is never the result of the working or application of a sound, just, well-tried principle. Compromises which bring fundamental principles into doubt, in order to unite in one party men of antagonistic creeds, are frauds, and end in ruin, the just and natural consequence of fraud. Whenever you have settled upon your theory and creed, sanction no departure from it in practice, on any ground of expediency. It is the Master's word.

[p. 86]

[paragraph continues] Yield it up neither to flattery nor force! Let no defeat or persecution rob you of it! Believe that he who once blundered in statesmanship will blunder again; that such blunders are as fatal as crimes; and that political near-sightedness does not improve by age. There are always more impostors than seers among public men, more false prophets than true ones, more prophets of Baal than of Jehovah; and Jerusalem is always in danger from the Assyrians.

Sallust said that after a State has been corrupted by luxury and idleness, it may by its mere greatness bear up under the burden of its vices. But even while he wrote, Rome, of which he spoke, had played out her masquerade of freedom. Other causes than luxury and sloth destroy Republics. If small, their larger neighbors extinguish them by absorption. If of great extent, the cohesive force is too feeble to hold them together, and they fall to pieces by their own weight. The paltry ambition of small men disintegrates them. The want of wisdom in their councils creates exasperating issues. Usurpation of power plays its part, incapacity seconds corruption, the storm rises, and the fragments of the incoherent raft strew the sandy shores, reading to mankind another lesson for it to disregard.

*      *      *      *      *      *

The Forty-seventh Proposition is older than Pythagoras. It is this: "In every right-angled triangle, the sum of the squares of the base and perpendicular is equal to the square of the hypothenuse."

[p. 87]

The square of a number is the product of that number, multi-plied by itself. Thus, 4 is the square of 2, and 9 of 3.

        The   first ten numbers are:

       1,   2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10;

     
      their   squares are

       1,   4, 9, 16, 25, 36, 49, 64, 81, 100;

     
      and

       3,   5, 7, 9, 11, 13, 15, 17, 19

     
 are the differences between each square and that which precedes it; giving us the sacred numbers, 3, 5, 7, and 9.

Of these numbers, the square of 3 and 4, added together, gives the square of 5; and those of 6 and 8, the square of 10; and if a right-angled triangle be formed, the base measuring 3 or 6 parts, and the perpendicular 4 or 8 parts, the hypothenuse will be 5 or 10 parts; and if a square is erected on each side, these squares being subdivided into squares each side of which is one part in length, there will be as many of these in the square erected on the hypothenuse as in the other two squares together.

Now the Egyptians arranged their deities in Triads--the FATHER or the Spirit or Active Principle or Generative Power; the MOTHER, or Matter, or the Passive Principle, or the Conceptive Power; and the SON, Issue or Product, the Universe, proceeding from the two principles. These were OSIRIS, ISIS, and HORUS. In the same way, PLATO gives us Thought the Father; Primitive Matter the Mother; and Kosmos the World, the Son, the Universe animated by a soul. Triads of the same kind are found in the Kabalah.

PLUTARCH says, in his book De Iside et Osiride, "But the better and diviner nature consists of three, that which exists within the Intellect only, and Matter, and that which proceeds from these, which the Greeks call Kosmos; of which three, Plato is wont to call the Intelligible, the 'Idea, Exemplar, and Father'; Matter, 'the Mother, the Nurse, and the place and receptacle of generation'; and the issue of these two, 'the Offspring and Genesis,'" the Kosmos, "a word signifying equally Beauty and Order, or the Universe itself." You will not fail to notice that Beauty is symbolized by the Junior Warden in the South. Plutarch continues to say that the Egyptians compared the universal nature to what they called the most beautiful and perfect triangle, as Plato does, in that nuptial diagram, as it is termed, which he has introduced into his Commonwealth. Then he adds that this triangle is right-angled, and its sides respectively as 3, 4, and 5; and he says, "We must suppose that the perpendicular is designed by them

[p. 88]

to represent the masculine nature, the base the feminine, and that the hypothenuse is to be looked upon as the offspring of both; and accordingly the first of them will aptly enough represent OSIRIS, or the prime cause; the second, ISIS, or the receptive capacity; the last, HORUS, or the common effect of the other two. For 3 is the first number which is composed of even and odd; and 4 is a square whose side is equal to the even number 2; but 5, being generated, as it were, out of the preceding numbers, 2 and 3, may be said to have an equal relation to both of them, as to its common parents."

*      *      *      *      *      *

The clasped hands is another symbol which was used by PYTHAGORAS. It represented the number 10, the sacred number in which all the preceding numbers were contained; the number expressed by the mysterious TETRACTYS, a figure borrowed by him and the Hebrew priests alike from the Egyptian sacred science, and which ought to be replaced among the symbols of the Master's Degree, where it of right belongs. The Hebrews formed it thus, with the letters of the Divine name:

The Tetractys thus leads you, not only to the study of the Pythagorean philosophy as to numbers, but also to the Kabalah, and will aid you in discovering the True Word, and understanding what was meant by "The Music of the Spheres." Modern science strikingly confirms the ideas of Pythagoras in regard to the properties of numbers, and that they govern in the Universe. Long before his time, nature had extracted her cube-roots and her squares.

*      *      *      *      *      *

All the FORCES at man's disposal or under man's control, or subject to man's influence, are his working tools. The friendship and sympathy that knit heart to heart are a force like the attraction

[p. 89]

of cohesion, by which the sandy particles became the solid rock. If this law of attraction or cohesion were taken away, the material worlds and suns would dissolve in an instant into thin invisible vapor. If the ties of friendship, affection, and love were annulled, mankind would become a raging multitude of wild and savage beasts of prey. The sand hardens into rock under the immense superincumbent pressure of the ocean, aided sometimes by the irresistible energy of fire; and when the pressure of calamity and danger is upon an order or a country, the members or the citizens ought to be the more closely united by the cohesion of sympathy and inter-dependence.

Morality is a force. It is the magnetic attraction of the heart toward Truth and Virtue. The needle, imbued with this mystic property, and pointing unerringly to the north, carries the mariner safely over the trackless ocean, through storm and darkness, until his glad eyes behold the beneficent beacons that welcome him to safe and hospitable harbor. Then the hearts of those who love him are gladdened, and his home made happy; and this gladness and happiness are due to the silent, unostentatious, unerring monitor that was the sailor's guide over the weltering waters. But if drifted too far northward, he finds the needle no longer true, but pointing elsewhere than to the north, what a feeling of helplessness falls upon the dismayed mariner, what utter loss of energy and courage! It is as if the great axioms of morality were to fail and be no longer true, leaving the human soul to drift helplessly, eyeless like Prometheus, at the mercy of the uncertain, faithless currents of the deep.

Honor and Duty are the pole-stars of a Mason, the Dioscuri, by never losing sight of which he may avoid disastrous shipwreck. These Palinurus watched, until, overcome by sleep, and the vessel no longer guided truly, he fell into and was swallowed up by the insatiable sea. So the Mason who loses sight of these, and is no longer governed by their beneficent and potential force, is lost, and sinking out of sight, will disappear unhonored and unwept.

The force of electricity, analogous to that of sympathy, and by means of which great thoughts or base suggestions, the utterances of noble or ignoble natures, flash instantaneously over the nerves of nations; the force of growth, fit type of immortality, lying dormant three thousand years in the wheat-grains buried with

[p. 90]

their mummies by the old Egyptians; the forces of expansion and contraction, developed in the earthquake and the tornado, and giving birth to the wonderful achievements of steam, have their parallelisms in the moral world, in individuals, and nations. Growth is a necessity for nations as for men. Its cessation is the beginning of decay. In the nation as well as the plant it is mysterious, and it is irresistible. The earthquakes that rend nations asunder, overturn thrones, and engulf monarchies and republics, have been long prepared for, like the volcanic eruption. Revolutions have long roots in the past. The force exerted is in direct proportion to the previous restraint and compression. The true statesman ought to see in progress the causes that are in due time to produce them; and he who does not is but a blind leader of the blind.

The great changes in nations, like the geological changes of the earth, are slowly and continuously wrought. The waters, falling from Heaven as rain and dews, slowly disintegrate the granite mountains; abrade the plains, leaving hills and ridges of denudation as their monuments; scoop out the valleys, fill up the seas, narrow the rivers, and after the lapse of thousands on thousands of silent centuries, prepare the great alluvia for the growth of that plant, the snowy envelope of whose seeds is to employ the looms of the world, and the abundance or penury of whose crops shall determine whether the weavers and spinners of other realms shall have work to do or starve.

So Public Opinion is an immense force; and its currents are as inconstant and incomprehensible as those of the atmosphere. Nevertheless, in free governments, it is omnipotent; and the business of the statesman is to find the means to shape, control, and direct it. According as that is done, it is beneficial and conservative, or destructive and ruinous. The Public Opinion of the civilized world is International Law; and it is so great a force, though with no certain and fixed boundaries, that it can even constrain the victorious despot to be generous, and aid an oppressed people in its struggle for independence.

Habit is a great force; it is second nature, even in trees. It is as strong in nations as in men. So also are Prejudices, which are given to men and nations as the passions are,--as forces, valuable, if properly and skillfully availed of; destructive, if unskillfully handled.

[p. 91]

Above all, the Love of Country, State Pride, the Love of Home, are forces of immense power. Encourage them all. Insist upon them in your public men. Permanency of home is necessary to patriotism. A migratory race will have little love of country. State pride is a mere theory and chimera, where men remove from State to State with indifference, like the Arabs, who camp here to-day and there to-morrow.

If you have Eloquence, it is a mighty force. See that you use it for good purposes--to teach, exhort, ennoble the people, and not to mislead and corrupt them. Corrupt and venal orators are the assassins of the public liberties and of public morals.

The Will is a force; its limits as yet unknown. It is in the power of the will that we chiefly see the spiritual and divine in man. There is a seeming identity between his will that moves other men, and the Creative Will whose action seems so incomprehensible. It is the men of will and action, not the men of pure intellect, that govern the world.

Finally, the three greatest moral forces are FAITH, which is the only true WISDOM, and the very foundation of all government; HOPE, which is STRENGTH, and insures success; and CHARITY, which is BEAUTY, and alone makes animated, united effort possible. These forces are within the reach of all men; and an association of men, actuated by them, ought to exercise an immense power in the world. If Masonry does not, it is because she has ceased to possess them.

Wisdom in the man or statesman, in king or priest, largely consists in the due appreciation of these forces; and upon the general non-appreciation of some of them the fate of nations often depends. What hecatombs of lives often hang upon the not weighing or not sufficiently weighing the force of an idea, such as, for example, the reverence for a flag, or the blind attachment to a form or constitution of government!

What errors in political economy and statesmanship are committed in consequence of the over-estimation or under-estimation of particular values, or the non-estimation of some among them! Everything, it is asserted, is the product of human labor; but the gold or the diamond which one accidentally finds without labor is not so. What is the value of the labor bestowed by the husbandman upon his crops, compared with the value of the sunshine and rain, without with his labor avails nothing? Commerce

[p. 92]

carried on by the labor of man, adds to the value of the products of the field, the mine, or the workshop, by their transportation to different markets; but how much of this increase is due to the rivers down which these products float, to the winds that urge the keels of commerce over the ocean!

Who can estimate the value of morality and manliness in a State, of moral worth and intellectual knowledge? These are the sunshine and rain of the State. The winds, with their change-able, fickle, fluctuating currents, are apt emblems of the fickle humors of the populace, its passions, its heroic impulses, its enthusiasms. Woe to the statesman who does not estimate these as values!

Even music and song are sometimes found to have an incalculable value. Every nation has some song of a proven value, more easily counted in lives than dollars. The Marseillaise was worth to revolutionary France, who shall say how many thousand men?

Peace also is a great element of prosperity and wealth; a value not to be calculated. Social intercourse and association of men in beneficent Orders have a value not to be estimated in coin. The illustrious examples of the Past of a nation, the memories and immortal thoughts of her great and wise thinkers, statesmen, and heroes, are the invaluable legacy of that Past to the Present and Future. And all these have not only the values of the loftier and more excellent and priceless kind, but also an actual money-value, since it is only when co-operating with or aided or enabled by these, that human labor creates wealth. They are of the chief elements of material wealth, as they are of national manliness, heroism, glory, prosperity, and immortal renown.

*      *      *      *      *      *

Providence has appointed the three great disciplines of War, the Monarchy and the Priesthood, all that the CAMP, the PALACE, and the TEMPLE may symbolize, to train the multitudes forward to intelligent and premeditated combinations for all the great purposes of society. The result will at length be free governments among men, when virtue and intelligence become qualities of the multitudes; but for ignorance such governments are impossible. Man advances only by degrees. The removal of one pressing calamity gives courage to attempt the removal of the remaining evils, rendering men more sensitive to them, or perhaps sensitive for the first time. Serfs that writhe under the whip are not disquieted about their political rights; manumitted from personal slavery, they become

[p. 93]

sensitive to political oppression. Liberated from arbitrary power, and governed by the law alone, they begin to scrutinize the law itself, and desire to be governed, not only by law, but by what they deem the best law. And when the civil or temporal despot-ism has been set aside, and the municipal law has been moulded on the principles of an enlightened jurisprudence, they may wake to the discovery that they are living under some priestly or ecclesiastical despotism, and become desirous of working a reformation there also.

It is quite true that the advance of humanity is slow, and that it often pauses and retrogrades. In the kingdoms of the earth we do not see despotisms retiring and yielding the ground to self-governing communities. We do not see the churches and priesthoods of Christendom relinquishing their old task of governing men by imaginary terrors. Nowhere do we see a populace that could be safely manumitted from such a government. We do not see the great religious teachers aiming to discover truth for themselves and for others; but still ruling the world, and contented and compelled to rule the world, by whatever dogma is already accredited; themselves as much bound down by this necessity to govern, as the populace by their need of government. Poverty in all its most hideous forms still exists in the great cities; and the cancer of pauperism has its roots in the hearts of kingdoms. Men there take no measure of their wants and their own power to supply them, but live and multiply like the beasts of the field,--Providence having apparently ceased to care for them. Intelligence never visits these, or it makes its appearance as some new development of villainy. War has not ceased; still there are battles and sieges. Homes are still unhappy, and tears and anger and spite make hells where there should be heavens. So much the more necessity for Masonry! So much wider the field of its labors! So much the more need for it to begin to be true to itself, to revive from its asphyxia, to repent of its apostasy to its true creed!

Undoubtedly, labor and death and the sexual passion are essential and permanent conditions of human existence, and render perfection and a millennium on earth impossible. Always,--it is the decree of Fate!--the vast majority of men must toil to live, and cannot find time to cultivate the intelligence. Man, knowing he is to die, will not sacrifice the present enjoyment for a greater one in the future. The love of woman cannot die out; and it has a

[p. 94]

terrible and uncontrollable fate, increased by the refinements of civilization. Woman is the veritable syren or goddess of the young. But society can be improved; and free government is possible for States; and freedom of thought and conscience is no longer wholly utopian. Already we see that Emperors prefer to be elected by universal suffrage; that States are conveyed to Empires by vote; and that Empires are administered with something of the spirit of a Republic, being little else than democracies with a single head, ruling through one man, one representative, instead of an assembly of representatives. And if Priesthoods still govern, they now come before the laity to prove, by stress of argument, that they ought to govern. They are obliged to evoke the very reason which they are bent on supplanting.

Accordingly, men become daily more free, because the freedom of the man lies in his reason. He can reflect upon his own future conduct, and summon up its consequences; he can take wide views of human life, and lay down rules for constant guidance. Thus he is relieved of the tyranny of sense and passion, and enabled at any time to live according to the whole light of the knowledge that is within him, instead of being driven, like a dry leaf on the wings of the wind, by every present impulse. Herein lies the freedom of the man as regarded in connection with the necessity imposed by the omnipotence and fore-knowledge of God. So much light, so much liberty. When emperor and church appeal to reason there is naturally universal suffrage.

Therefore no one need lose courage, nor believe that labor in the cause of Progress will be labor wasted. There is no waste in nature, either of Matter, Force, Act, or Thought. A Thought is as much the end of life as an Action; and a single Thought sometimes works greater results than a Revolution, even Revolutions themselves. Still there should not be divorce between Thought and Action. The true Thought is that in which life culminates. But all wise and true Thought produces Action. It is generative, like the light; and light and the deep shadow of the passing cloud are the gifts of the prophets of the race. Knowledge, laboriously acquired, and inducing habits of sound Thought,--the reflective character,--must necessarily be rare. The multitude of laborers cannot acquire it. Most men attain to a very low standard of it. It is incompatible with the ordinary and indispensable avocations of life. A whole world of error as well as of labor, go to make

[p. 95]

one reflective man. In the most advanced nation of Europe there are more ignorant than wise, more poor than rich, more automatic laborers, the mere creatures of habit, than reasoning and reflective men. The proportion is at least a thousand to one. Unanimity of opinion is so obtained. It only exists among the multitude who do not think, and the political or spiritual priesthood who think for that multitude, who think how to guide and govern them. When men begin to reflect, they begin to differ. The great problem is to find guides who will not seek to be tyrants. This is needed even more in respect to the heart than the head. Now, every man earns his special share of the produce of human labor, by an incessant scramble, by trickery and deceit. Useful knowledge, honorably acquired, is too often used after a fashion not honest or reasonable, so that the studies of youth are far more noble than the practices of manhood. The labor of the farmer in his fields, the generous returns of the earth, the benignant and favoring skies, tend to make him earnest, provident, and grateful; the education of the market-place makes him querulous, crafty, envious, and an intolerable niggard.

Masonry seeks to be this beneficent, unambitious, disinterested guide; and it is the very condition of all great structures that the sound of the hammer and the clink of the trowel should be always heard in some part of the building. With faith in man, hope for the future of humanity, loving-kindness for our fellows, Masonry and the Mason must always work and teach. Let each do that for which he is best fitted. The teacher also is a workman. Praiseworthy as the active navigator is, who comes and goes and makes one clime partake of the treasures of the other, and one to share the treasures of all, he who keeps the beacon-light upon the hill is also at his post.

Masonry has already helped cast down some idols from their pedestals, and grind to impalpable dust some of the links of the chains that held men's souls in bondage. That there has been progress needs no other demonstration than that you may now reason with men, and urge upon them, without danger of the rack or stake, that no doctrines can be apprehended as truths if they contradict each other, or contradict other truths given us by God. Long before the Reformation, a monk, who had found his way to heresy without the help of Martin Luther, not venturing to breathe aloud into any living ear his anti-papal and treasonable

[p. 96]

doctrines, wrote them on parchment, and sealing up the perilous record, hid it in the massive walls of his monastery. There was no friend or brother to whom he could intrust his secret or pour forth his soul. It was some consolation to imagine that in a future age some one might find the parchment, and the seed be found not to have been sown in vain. What if the truth should have to lie dormant as long before germinating as the wheat in the Egyptian mummy? Speak it, nevertheless, again and again, and let it take its chance!

The rose of Jericho grows in the sandy deserts of Arabia and on the Syrian housetops. Scarcely six inches high, it loses its leaves after the flowering season, and dries up into the form of a ball. Then it is uprooted by the winds, and carried, blown, or tossed across the desert, into the sea. There, feeling the contact of the water, it unfolds itself, expands its branches, and expels its seeds from their seed-vessels. These, when saturated with water, are carried by the tide and laid on the seashore. Many are lost, as many individual lives of men are useless. But many are thrown back again from the seashore into the desert, where, by the virtue of the sea-water that they have imbibed, the roots and leaves sprout and they grow into fruitful plants, which will, in their turns, like their ancestors, be whirled into the sea. God will not be less careful to provide for the germination of the truths you may boldly utter forth. "Cast," He has said, "thy bread upon the waters, and after many days it shall return to thee again."

Initiation does not change: we find it again and again, and always the same, through all the ages. The last disciples of Pascalis Martinez are still the children of Orpheus; but they adore the realizer of the antique philosophy, the Incarnate Word of the Christians.

Pythagoras, the great divulger of the philosophy of numbers, visited all the sanctuaries of the world. He went into Judaea, where he procured himself to be circumcised, that he might be admitted to the secrets of the Kabalah, which the prophets Ezekiel and Daniel, not without some reservations, communicated to him. Then, not without some difficulty, he succeeded in being admitted to the Egyptian initiation, upon the recommendation of King Amasis. The power of his genius supplied the deficiencies of the imperfect communications of the Hierophants, and he himself became a Master and a Revealer,

[p. 97]

Pythagoras defined God: a Living and Absolute Verity clothed with Light.

He said that the Word was Number manifested by Form.

He made all descend from the Tetractys, that is to say, from the Quaternary.

God, he said again, is the Supreme Music, the nature of which is Harmony.

Pythagoras gave the magistrates of Crotona this great religious, political and social precept:

"There is no evil that is not preferable to Anarchy."

Pythagoras said, "Even as there are three divine notions and three intelligible regions, so there is a triple word, for the Hierarchical Order always manifests itself by threes. There are the word simple, the word hieroglyphical, and the word symbolic: in other terms, there are the word that expresses, the word that conceals, and the word that signifies; the whole hieratic intelligence is in the perfect knowledge of these three degrees."

Pythagoras enveloped doctrine with symbols, but carefully eschewed personifications and images, which, he thought, sooner or later produced idolatry.

The Holy Kabalah, or tradition of the children of Seth, was carried from Chaldaea by Abraham, taught to the Egyptian priesthood by Joseph, recovered and purified by Moses, concealed under symbols in the Bible, revealed by the Saviour to Saint John, and contained, entire, under hieratic figures analogous to those of all antiquity, in the Apocalypse of that Apostle.

The Kabalists consider God as the Intelligent, Animated, Living Infinite. He is not, for them, either the aggregate of existences, or existence in the abstract, or a being philosophically definable. He is in all, distinct from all, and greater than all. His name even is ineffable; and yet this name only expresses the human ideal of His divinity. What God is in Himself, it is not given to man to comprehend.

God is the absolute of Faith; but the absolute of Reason is BEING, w ?Y?H?W?H. "I am that I am," is a wretched translation.

Being, Existence, is by itself, and because it Is. The reason of Being, is Being itself. We may inquire, "Why does something exist?" that is, "Why does such or such a thing exist?" But we cannot, without being absurd, ask, "Why Is Being?" That would be to suppose Being before Being. If Being had a

[p. 98]

cause, that cause would necessarily Be; that is, the cause and effect would be identical.

Reason and science demonstrate to us that the modes of Existence and Being balance each other in equilibrium according to harmonious and hierarchic laws. But a hierarchy is synthetized, in ascending, and becomes ever more and more monarchial. Yet the reason cannot pause at a single chief, without being alarmed. at the abysses which it seems to leave above this Supreme Mon-arch. Therefore it is silent, and gives place to the Faith it adores.

What is certain, even for science and the reason, is, that the idea of God is the grandest, the most holy, and the most useful of all the aspirations of man; that upon this belief morality reposes, with its eternal sanction. This belief, then, is in humanity, the most real of the phenomena of being; and if it were false, nature would affirm the absurd; nothingness would give form to life, and God would at the same time be and not be.

It is to this philosophic and incontestable reality, which is termed The Idea of God, that the Kabalists give a name. In this name all others are contained. Its cyphers contain all the numbers; and the hieroglyphics of its letters express all the laws and all the things of nature.

BEING IS BEING: the reason of Being is in Being: in the Be-ginning is the Word, and the Word in logic formulated Speech, the spoken Reason; the Word is in God, and is God Himself, manifested to the Intelligence. Here is what is above all the philosophies. This we must believe, under the penalty of never truly knowing anything, and relapsing into the absurd skepticism of Pyrrho. The Priesthood, custodian of Faith, wholly rests upon this basis of knowledge, and it is in its teachings we must recognize the Divine Principle of the Eternal Word.

Light is not Spirit, as the Indian Hierophants believed it to be; but only the instrument of the Spirit. It is not the body of the Protoplastes, as the Theurgists of the school of Alexandria taught, but the first physical manifestation of the Divine afflatus. God eternally creates it, and man, in the image of God, modifies and seems to multiply it.

The high magic is styled "The Sacerdotal Art," and "The Royal Art." In Egypt, Greece, and Rome, it could not but share the greatnesses and decadences of the Priesthood and of Royalty. Every philosophy hostile to the national worship and to its mysteries,

[p. 99]

was of necessity hostile to the great political powers, which lose their grandeur, if they cease, in the eyes of the multitudes, to be the images of the Divine Power. Every Crown is shattered, when it clashes against the Tiara.

Plato, writing to Dionysius the Younger, in regard to the nature of the First Principle, says: "I must write to you in enigmas, so that if my letter be intercepted by land or sea, he who shall read it may in no degree comprehend it." And then he says, "All things surround their King; they are, on account of Him, and He alone is the cause of good things, Second for the Seconds and Third for the Thirds."

There is in these few words a complete summary of the Theology of the Sephiroth. "The King" is AINSOPH, Being Supreme and Absolute. From this centre, which is everywhere, all things ray forth; but we especially conceive of it in three manners and in three different spheres. In the Divine world (AZILUTH), which is that of the First Cause, and wherein the whole Eternity of Things in the beginning existed as Unity, to be afterward, during Eternity uttered forth, clothed with form, and the attributes that constitute them matter, the First Principle is Single and First, and yet not the VERY Illimitable Deity, incomprehensible, undefinable; but Himself in so far as manifested by the Creative Thought. To compare littleness with infinity,--Arkwright, as inventor of the spinning-jenny, and not the man Arkwright otherwise and beyond that. All we can know of the Very God is, compared to His Wholeness, only as an infinitesimal fraction of a unit, compared with an infinity of Units.

In the World of Creation, which is that of Second Causes [the Kabalistic World BRIAH], the Autocracy of the First Principle is complete, but we conceive of it only as the Cause of the Second Causes. Here it is manifested by the Binary, and is the Creative Principle passive. Finally: in the third world, YEZIRAH, or of Formation, it is revealed in the perfect Form, the Form of Forms, the World, the Supreme Beauty and Excellence, the Created Perfection. Thus the Principle is at once the First, the Second, and the Third, since it is All in All, the Centre and Cause of all. It is not the genius of Plato that we here admire. We recognize only the exact knowledge of the Initiate.

The great Apostle Saint John did not borrow from the philosophy of Plato the opening of his Gospel. Plato, on the contrary,

[p. 100]

drank at the same springs with Saint John and Philo; and John in the opening verses of his paraphrase, states the first principles of a dogma common to many schools, but in language especially belonging to Philo, whom it is evident he had read. The philosophy of Plato, the greatest of human Revealers, could yearn toward the Word made man; the Gospel alone could give him to the world.

Doubt, in presence of Being and its harmonies; skepticism, in the face of the eternal mathematics and the immutable laws of Life which make the Divinity present and visible everywhere, as the Human is known and visible by its utterances of word and act,--is this not the most foolish of superstitions, and the most inexcusable as well as the most dangerous of all credulities? Thought, we know, is not a result or consequence of the organization of matter, of the chemical or other action or reaction of its particles, like effervescence and gaseous explosions. On the contrary, the fact that Thought is manifested and realized in act human or act divine, proves the existence of an Entity, or Unity, that thinks. And the Universe is the Infinite Utterance of one of an infinite number of Infinite Thoughts, which cannot but emanate from an Infinite and Thinking Source. The cause is always equal, at least, to the effect; and matter cannot think, nor could it cause itself, or exist without cause, nor could nothing produce either forces or things; for in void nothingness no Forces can inhere. Admit a self-existent Force, and its Intelligence, or an Intelligent cause of it is admitted, and at once GOD IS.

The Hebrew allegory of the Fall of Man, which is but a special variation of a universal legend, symbolizes one of the grandest and most universal allegories of science.

Moral Evil is Falsehood in actions; as Falsehood is Crime in words.

Injustice is the essence of Falsehood; and every false word is an injustice.

Injustice is the death of the Moral Being, as Falsehood is the poison of the Intelligence.

The perception of the Light is the dawn of the Eternal Life, in Being. The Word of God, which creates the Light, seems to be uttered by every Intelligence that can take cognizance of Forms and will look. "Let the Light BE! The Light, in fact, exists, in its condition of splendor, for those eyes alone that gaze at it; and the Soul, amorous of the spectacle of the beauties of the Universe,

[p. 101]

and applying its attention to that luminous writing of the Infinite Book, which is called "The Visible," seems to utter, as God did on the dawn of the first day, that sublime and creative word, "BE! LIGHT!"

It is not beyond the tomb, but in life itself, that we are to seek for the mysteries of death. Salvation or reprobation begins here below, and the terrestrial world too has its Heaven and its Hell. Always, even here below, virtue is rewarded; always, even here below, vice is punished; and that which makes us sometimes believe in the impunity of evil-doers is that riches, those instruments of good and of evil, seem sometimes to be given them at hazard. But woe to unjust men, when they possess the key of gold! It opens, for them, only the gate of the tomb and of Hell.

All the true Initiates have recognized the usefulness of toil and sorrow. "Sorrow," says a German poet, "is the dog of that unknown shepherd who guides the flock of men." To learn to suffer, to learn to die, is the discipline of Eternity, the immortal Novitiate.

The allegorical picture of Cebes, in which the Divine Comedy of Dante was sketched in Plato's time, the description whereof has been preserved for us, and which many painters of the middle age have reproduced by this description, is a monument at once philosophical and magical. It is a most complete moral synthesis, and at the same time the most audacious demonstration ever given of the Grand Arcanum, of that secret whose revelation would overturn Earth and Heaven. Let no one expect us to give them its explanation! He who passes behind the veil that hides this mystery, understands that it is in its very nature inexplicable, and that it is death to those who win it by surprise, as well as to him who reveals it.

This secret is the Royalty of the Sages, the Crown of the Initiate whom we see redescend victorious from the summit of Trials, in the fine allegory of Cebes. The Grand Arcanum makes him master of gold and the light, which are at bottom the same thing, he has solved the problem of the quadrature of the circle, he directs the perpetual movement, and he possesses the philosophical stone. Here the Adepts will understand us. There is neither interruption in the toil of nature, nor gap in her work. The Harmonies of Heaven correspond to those of Earth, and the Eternal Life accomplishes its evolutions in accordance with the same laws

[p. 102]

as the life of a dog. "God has arranged all things by weight, number, and measure," says the Bible; and this luminous doctrine was also that of Plato.

Humanity has never really had but one religion and one worship. This universal light has had its uncertain mirages, its deceitful reflections, and its shadows; but always, after the nights of Error, we see it reappear, one and pure like the Sun.

The magnificences of worship are the life of religion, and if Christ wishes poor ministers, His Sovereign Divinity does not wish paltry altars. Some Protestants have not comprehended that worship is a teaching, and that we must not create in the imagination of the multitude a mean or miserable God. Those oratories that resemble poorly-furnished offices or inns, and those worthy ministers clad like notaries or lawyer's clerks, do they not necessarily cause religion to be regarded as a mere puritanic formality, and God as a Justice of the Peace?

We scoff at the Augurs. It is so easy to scoff, and so difficult well to comprehend. Did the Deity leave the whole world without Light for two score centuries, to illuminate only a little corner of Palestine and a brutal, ignorant, and ungrateful people? Why always calumniate God and the Sanctuary? Were there never any others than rogues among the priests? Could no honest and sincere men be found among the Hierophants of Ceres or Diana, of Dionusos or Apollo, of Hermes or Mithras? Were these, then, all deceived, like the rest? Who, then, constantly deceived them, without betraying themselves, during a series of centuries?--for the cheats are not immortal! Arago said, that outside of the pure mathematics, he who utters the word "impossible," is wanting in prudence and good sense.

The true name of Satan, the Kabalists say, is that of Yahveh reversed; for Satan is not a black god, but the negation of God. The Devil is the personification of Atheism or Idolatry.

For the Initiates, this is not a Person, but a Force, created for good, but which may serve for evil. It is the instrument of Liberty or Free Will. They represent this Force, which presides over the physical generation, under the mythologic and horned form of the God PAN; thence came the he-goat of the Sabbat, brother of the Ancient Serpent, and the Light-bearer or Phosphor, of which the poets have made the false Lucifer of the legend.

Gold, to the eyes of the Initiates, is Light condensed. They

[p. 103]

style the sacred numbers of the Kabalah "golden numbers," and the moral teachings of Pythagoras his "golden verses." For the same reason, a mysterious book of Apuleius, in which an ass figures largely, was called "The Golden Ass."

The Pagans accused the Christians of worshipping an ass, and they did not invent this reproach, but it came from the Samaritan Jews, who, figuring the data of the Kabalah in regard to the Divinity by Egyptian symbols, also represented the Intelligence by the figure of the Magical Star adored under the name of Remphan, Science under the emblem of Anubis, whose name they changed to Nibbas, and the vulgar faith or credulity under the figure of Thartac, a god represented with a book, a cloak, and the head of an ass. According to the Samaritan Doctors, Christianity was the reign of Thartac, blind Faith and vulgar credulity erected into a universal oracle, and preferred to Intelligence and Science.

Synesius, Bishop of Ptolemais, a great Kabalist, but of doubtful orthodoxy, wrote:

"The people will always mock at things easy to be misunderstood; it must needs have impostures."

"A Spirit," he said, "that loves wisdom and contemplates the Truth close at hand, is forced to disguise it, to induce the multitudes to accept it. . . . Fictions are necessary to the people, and the Truth becomes deadly to those who are not strong enough to contemplate it in all its brilliance. If the sacerdotal laws allowed the reservation of judgments and the allegory of words, I would accept the proposed dignity on condition that I might be a philosopher at home, and abroad a narrator of apologues and parables 

In fact, what can there be in common between the vile multitude and sublime wisdom? The truth must be kept secret, and the masses need a teaching proportioned to their imperfect reason."

Moral disorders produce physical ugliness, and in some sort realize those frightful faces which tradition assigns to the demons.

The first Druids were the true children of the Magi, and their initiation came from Egypt and Chaldaea, that is to say, from the pure sources of the primitive Kabalah. They adored the Trinity under the names of Isis or Hesus, the Supreme Harmony; of Belen or Bel, which in Assyrian means Lord, a name corresponding to that of ADONAI; and of Camul or Camael, a name that in the Kabalah personifies the Divine Justice. Below this triangle of Light they supposed a divine reflection, also composed of three personified

[p. 104]

rays: first, Teutates or Teuth, the same as the Thoth of the Egyptians, the Word, or the Intelligence formulated; then Force and Beauty, whose names varied like their emblems. Finally, they completed the sacred Septenary by a mysterious image that represented the progress of the dogma and its future realizations. This was a young girl veiled, holding a child in her arms; and they dedicated this image to "The Virgin who will become a mother;--Virgini pariturae."

Hertha or Wertha, the young Isis of Gaul, Queen of Heaven, the Virgin who was to bear a child, held the spindle of the Fates, filled with wool half white and half black; because she presides over all forms and all symbols, and weaves the garment of the Ideas.

One of the most mysterious pantacles of the Kabalah, contained in the Enchiridion of Leo III., represents an equilateral triangle reversed, inscribed in a double circle. On the triangle are written, in such manner as to form the prophetic Tau, the two Hebrew words so often found appended to the Ineffable Name, w ?A?L?Hm and w ?C?B?A?W?Th, ALOHAYIM, or the Powers, and TSABAOTH, or the starry Armies and their guiding spirits; words also which symbolize the Equilibrium of the Forces of Nature and the Harmony of Numbers. To the three sides of the triangle belong the three great Names w ?Y?H?W?H, w ?A?Dn?Y, and w ?A?G?L?A, IAHAVEH, ADONAI, and AGLA. Above the first is written in Latin, Formatio, above the second Reformatio, and above the third, Transformatio. So Creation is ascribed to the FATHER, Redemption or Reformation to the SON, and Sanctification or Transformation to the HOLY SPIRIT, answering unto the mathematical laws of Action, Reaction, and Equilibrium. IAHAVEH is also, in effect, the Genesis or Formation of dogma, by the elementary signification of the four letters of the Sacred Tetragram; ADONAI is the realization of this dogma in the Human Form, in the Visible LORD, who is the Son of God or the perfect Man; and AGLA (formed of the initials of the four words Ath Gebur Laulaim Adonai) expresses the synthesis of the whole dogma and the totality of the Kabalistic science, clearly indicating by the hieroglyphics of which this admirable name is formed the Triple Secret of the Great Work.

Masonry, like all the Religions, all the Mysteries, Hermeticism and Alchemy, conceals its secrets from all except the Adepts and Sages, or the Elect, and uses false explanations and misinterpretations of its symbols to mislead those who deserve only to be misled;

[p. 105]

to conceal the Truth, which it calls Light, from them, and to draw them away from it. Truth is not for those who are unworthy or unable to receive it, or would pervert it. So God Himself incapacitates many men, by color-blindness, to distinguish colors, and leads the masses away from the highest Truth, giving them the power to attain only so much of it as it is profitable to them to know. Every age has had a religion suited to its capacity.

The Teachers, even of Christianity, are, in general, the most ignorant of the true meaning of that which they teach. There is no book of which so little is known as the Bible. To most who read it, it is as incomprehensible as the Sohar.

So Masonry jealously conceals its secrets, and intentionally leads conceited interpreters astray. There is no sight under the sun more pitiful and ludicrous at once, than the spectacle of the Prestons and the Webbs, not to mention the later incarnations of Dullness and Commonplace, undertaking to "explain" the old symbols of Masonry, and adding to and "improving" them, or inventing new ones.

To the Circle inclosing the central point, and itself traced between two parallel lines, a figure purely Kabalistic, these persons have added the superimposed Bible, and even reared on that the ladder with three or nine rounds, and then given a vapid interpretation of the whole, so profoundly absurd as actually to excite admiration.

     
Morals and Dogma, by Albert Pike, [1871], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 106]

  

IV.

  

SECRET MASTER.

MASONRY is a succession of allegories, the mere vehicles of great lessons in morality and philosophy. You will more fully appreciate its spirit, its object, its purposes, as you advance in the different Degrees, which you will find to constitute a great, complete, and harmonious system.

If you have been disappointed in the first three Degrees, as you have received them, and if it has seemed to you that the performance has not come up to the promise, that the lessons of morality are not new, and the scientific instruction is but rudimentary, and the symbols are imperfectly explained, remember that the ceremonies and lessons of those Degrees have been for ages more and more accommodating themselves, by curtailment and sinking into commonplace, to the often limited memory and capacity of the Master and Instructor, and to the intellect and needs of the Pupil and Initiate; that they have come to us from an age when symbols were used, not to reveal but to conceal; when the commonest learning was confined to a select few, and the simplest principles of morality seemed newly discovered truths; and that these antique and simple Degrees now stand like the broken columns of a roofless Druidic temple, in their rude and mutilated greatness; in many parts, also, corrupted by time, and disfigured by modern additions and absurd interpretations. They are but the entrance to the great Masonic Temple, the triple columns of the portico.

You have taken the first step over its threshold, the first step toward the inner sanctuary and heart of the temple. You are in the path that leads up the slope of the mountain of Truth; and

[p. 107]

it depends upon your secrecy, obedience, and fidelity, whether you will advance or remain stationary.

Imagine not that you will become indeed a Mason by learning what is commonly called the "work," or even by becoming familiar with our traditions. Masonry has a history, a literature, a philosophy. Its allegories and traditions will teach you much; but much is to be sought elsewhere. The streams of learning that now flow full and broad must be followed to their heads in the springs that well up in the remote past, and you will there find the origin and meaning of Masonry.

A few rudimentary lessons in architecture, a few universally admitted maxims of morality, a few unimportant traditions, whose real meaning is unknown or misunderstood, will no longer satisfy the earnest inquirer after Masonic truth. Let whoso is content with these, seek to climb no higher. He who desires to understand the harmonious and beautiful proportions of Freemasonry must read, study, reflect, digest, and discriminate. The true Mason is an ardent seeker after knowledge; and he knows that both books and the antique symbols of Masonry are vessels which come down to us full-freighted with the intellectual riches of the Past; and that in the lading of these argosies is much that sheds light on the history of Masonry, and proves its claim to be acknowledged the benefactor of mankind, born in the very cradle of the race.

Knowledge is the most genuine and real of human treasures; for it is Light, as Ignorance is Darkness. It is the development of the human soul, and its acquisition the growth of the soul, which at the birth of man knows nothing, and therefore, in one sense, may be said to be nothing. It is the seed, which has in it the power to grow, to acquire, and by acquiring to be developed, as the seed is developed into the shoot, the plant, the tree. "We need not pause at the common argument that by learning man excelleth man, in that wherein man excelleth beasts; that by learning man ascendeth to the heavens and their motions, where in body he cannot come, and the like. Let us rather regard the dignity and excellency of knowledge and learning in that whereunto man's nature doth most aspire, which is immortality or continuance. For to this tendeth generation, and raising of Houses and Families; to this buildings, foundations, and monuments; to this tendeth the desire of memory, fame, and celebration, and in effect the strength of all other human desires." That our influences shall

[p. 108]

survive us, and be living forces when we are in our graves; and not merely that our names shall be remembered; but rather that our works shall be read, our acts spoken of, our names recollected and. mentioned when we are dead, as evidences that those influences live and rule, sway and control some portion of mankind and of the world,--this is the aspiration of the human soul. "We see then how far the monuments of genius and learning are more durable than monuments of power or of the hands. For have not the verses of Homer continued twenty-five hundred years or more, without the loss of a syllable or letter, during which time infinite palaces, temples, castles, cities, have decayed and been demolished? It is not possible to have the true pictures or statues of Cyrus, Alexander, Caesar, no, nor of the Kings or great personages of much later years; for the originals cannot last, and the copies cannot but lose of the life and truth. But the images of men's genius and knowledge remain in books, exempted from the wrong of time, and capable of perpetual renovation. Neither are they fitly to be called images, because they generate still, and cast their seeds in the minds of others, provoking and causing infinite actions and opinions in succeeding ages; so that if the invention of the ship was thought so noble, which carrieth riches and commodities from place to place, and consociateth the most remote regions in participation of their fruits, how much more are letters to be magnified, which, as ships, pass through the vast seas of time, and make ages so distant to participate of the wisdom, illumination, and inventions, the one of the other."

To learn, to attain knowledge, to be wise, is a necessity for every truly noble soul; to teach, to communicate that knowledge, to share that wisdom with others, and not churlishly to lock up his exchequer, and place a sentinel at the door to drive away the needy, is equally an impulse of a noble nature, and the worthiest work of man.

"There was a little city," says the Preacher, the son of David, "and few men within it; and there came a great King against it and besieged it, and built great bulwarks against it. Now there was found in it a poor wise man, and he by his wisdom delivered the city; yet no man remembered that same poor man. Then, said I, wisdom is better than strength: nevertheless, the poor man's wisdom is despised, and his words are not heard." If it should chance to you, my brother, to do mankind good service, and be

[p. 109]

rewarded with indifference and forgetfulness only, still be not discouraged, but remember the further advice of the wise King. "In the morning sow the seed, and in the evening withhold not thy hand; for thou knowest not which shall prosper, this or that, or whether both shall be alike good." Sow you the seed, whoever reaps. Learn, that you may be enabled to do good; and do so because it is right, finding in the act itself ample. reward and recompense.

To attain the truth, and to serve our fellows, our country, and mankind--this is the noblest destiny of man. Hereafter and all your life it is to be your object. If you desire to ascend to that destiny, advance! If you have other and less noble objects, and are contented with a lower flight, halt here! let others scale the heights, and Masonry fulfill her mission.

If you will advance, gird up your loins for the struggle! for the way is long and toilsome. Pleasure, all smiles, will beckon you on the one hand, and Indolence will invite you to sleep among the flowers, upon the other. Prepare, by secrecy, obedience, and fidelity, to resist the allurements of both!

Secrecy is indispensable in a Mason of whatever Degree. It is the first and almost the only lesson taught to the Entered Apprentice. The obligations which we have each assumed toward every Mason that lives, requiring of us the performance of the most serious and onerous duties toward those personally unknown to us until they demand our aid,--duties that must be performed, even at the risk of life, or our solemn oaths be broken and violated, and we be branded as false Masons and faithless men, teach us how profound a folly it would he to betray our secrets to those who, bound to us by no tie of common obligation, might, by obtaining them, call on us in their extremity, when the urgency of the occasion should allow us no time for inquiry, and the peremptory mandate of our obligation compel us to do a brother's duty to a base impostor.

The secrets of our brother, when communicated to us, must be sacred, if they be such as the law of our country warrants us to keep. We are required to keep none other, when the law that we are called on to obey is indeed a law, by having emanated from the only source of power, the People. Edicts which emanate from the mere arbitrary will of a despotic power, contrary to the law of God or the Great Law of Nature, destructive of the inherent rights

[p. 110]

of man, violative of the right of free thought, free speech, free conscience, it is lawful to rebel against and strive to abrogate.

For obedience to the Law does not mean submission to tyranny; nor that, by a profligate sacrifice of every noble feeling, we should offer to despotism the homage of adulation. As every new victim falls, we may lift our voice in still louder flattery. We may fall at the proud feet, we may beg, as a boon, the honor of kissing that bloody hand which has been lifted against the helpless. We may do more: we may bring the altar and the sacrifice, and implore the God not to ascend too soon to Heaven. This we may do, for this we have the sad remembrance that beings of a human form and soul have done. But this is all we can do. We can constrain our tongues to be false, our features to bend themselves to the semblance of that passionate adoration which we wish to express, our knees to fall prostrate; but our heart we cannot constrain. There virtue must still have a voice which is not to be drowned by hymns and acclamations; there the crimes which we laud as virtues, are crimes still, and he whom we have made a God is the most contemptible of mankind; if, indeed, we do not feel, perhaps, that we are ourselves still more contemptible.

But that law which is the fair expression of the will and judgment of the people, is the enactment of the whole and of every individual. Consistent with the law of God and the great law of nature, consistent with pure and abstract right as tempered by necessity and the general interest, as contra-distinguished from the private interest of individuals, it is obligatory upon all, because it is the work of all, the will of all, the solemn judgment of all, from which there is no appeal.

In this Degree, my brother, you are especially to learn the duty of obedience to that law. There is one true and original law, conformable to reason and to nature, diffused over all, invariable, eternal, which calls to the fulfillment of duty, and to abstinence from injustice, and calls with that irresistible voice which is felt in all its authority wherever it is heard. This law cannot be abrogated or diminished, or its sanctions affected, by any law of man. A whole senate, a whole people, cannot dissent from its paramount obligation. It requires no commentator to render it distinctly intelligible: nor is it one thing at Rome, another at Athens; one thing now, and another in the ages to come; but in all times and in all nations, it is, and has been, and will be, one

[p. 111]

and everlasting;--one as that God, its great Author and Promulgator, who is the Common Sovereign of all mankind, is Himself One. No man can disobey it without flying, as it were, from his own bosom, and repudiating his nature; and in this very act he will inflict on himself the severest of retributions, even though he escape what is regarded as punishment.

It is our duty to obey the laws of our country, and to be careful that prejudice or passion, fancy or affection, error and illusion, be not mistaken for conscience. Nothing is more usual than to pretend conscience in all the actions of man which are public and cannot be concealed. The disobedient refuse to submit to the laws, and they also in many cases pretend conscience; and so disobedience and rebellion become conscience, in which there is neither knowledge nor revelation, nor truth nor charity, nor reason nor religion. Conscience is tied to laws. Right or sure conscience is right reason reduced to practice, and conducting moral actions, while perverse conscience is seated in the fancy or affections--a heap of irregular principles and irregular defects--and is the same in conscience as deformity is in the body, or peevishness in the affections. It is not enough that the conscience be taught by nature; but it must be taught by God, conducted by reason, made operative by discourse, assisted by choice, instructed by laws and sober principles; and then it is right, and it may be sure. All the general measures of justice, are the laws of God, and therefore they constitute the general rules of government for the conscience; but necessity also hath a large voice in the arrangement of human affairs, and the disposal of human relations, and the dispositions of human laws; and these general measures, like a great river into little streams, are deduced into little rivulets and particularities, by the laws and customs, by the sentences and agreements of men, and by the absolute despotism of necessity, that will not allow perfect and abstract justice and equity to be the sole rule of civil government in an imperfect world; and that must needs be law which is for the greatest good of the greatest number.

When thou vowest a vow unto God, defer not to pay it. It is better thou shouldest not vow than thou shouldest vow and not pay. Be not rash with thy mouth, and let not thine heart be hasty to utter anything before God: for God is in Heaven, and thou art upon earth; therefore let thy words be few. Weigh well

[p. 112]

what it is you promise; but once the promise and pledge are given remember that he who is false to his obligation will be false to his family, his friends, his country, and his God.

Fides servanda est: Faith plighted is ever to be kept, was a maxim and an axiom even among pagans. The virtuous Roman said, either let not that which seems expedient be base, or if it be base, let it not seem expedient. What is there which that so-called expediency can bring, so valuable as that which it takes away, if it deprives you of the name of a good man and robs you of your integrity and honor? In all ages, he who violates his plighted word has been held unspeakably base. The word of a Mason, like the word of a knight in the times of chivalry, once given must be sacred; and the judgment of his brothers, upon him who violates his pledge, should be stern as the judgments of the Roman Censors against him who violated his oath. Good faith is revered among Masons as it was among the Romans, who placed its statue in the capitol, next to that of Jupiter Maximus Optimus; and we, like them, hold that calamity should always be chosen rather than baseness; and with the knights of old, that one should always die rather than be dishonored.

Be faithful, therefore, to the promises you make, to the pledges you give, and to the vows that you assume, since to break either is base and dishonorable.

Be faithful to your family, and perform all the duties of a good father, a good son, a good husband, and a good brother.

Be faithful to your friends; for true friendship is of a nature not only to survive through all the vicissitudes of life, but to continue through an endless duration; not only to stand the shock of conflicting opinions, and the roar of a revolution that shakes the world, but to last when the heavens are no more, and to spring fresh from the ruins of the universe.

Be faithful to your country, and prefer its dignity and honor to any degree of popularity and honor for yourself; consulting its interest rather than your own, and rather than the pleasure and gratification of the people, which are often at variance with their welfare.

Be faithful to Masonry, which is to be faithful to the best interests of mankind. Labor, by precept and example, to elevate the standard of Masonic character, to enlarge its sphere of influence, to popularize its teachings, and to make all men know it for the

[p. 113]

[paragraph continues] Great Apostle of Peace, Harmony, and Good-will on earth among men; of Liberty, Equality, and Fraternity.

Masonry is useful to all men: to the learned, because it affords them the opportunity of exercising their talents upon subjects eminently worthy of their attention; to the illiterate, because it offers them important instruction; to the young, because it presents them with salutary precepts and good examples, and accustoms them to reflect on the proper mode of living; to the man of the world, whom it furnishes with noble and useful recreation; to the traveller, whom it enables to find friends and brothers in countries where else he would be isolated and solitary; to the worthy man in misfortune, to whom it gives assistance; to the afflicted, on whom it lavishes consolation; to the charitable man, whom it enables to do more good, by uniting with those who are charitable like himself; and to all who have souls capable of appreciating its importance, and of enjoying the charms of a friendship founded on the same principles of religion, morality, and philanthropy.

A Freemason, therefore, should be a man of honor and of conscience, preferring his duty to everything beside, even to his life; independent in his opinions, and of good morals; submissive to the laws, devoted to humanity, to his country, to his family; kind and indulgent to his brethren, friend of all virtuous men, and ready to assist his fellows by all means in his power.

Thus will you be faithful to yourself, to your fellows, and to God, and thus will you do honor to the name and rank of SECRET MASTER; which, like other Masonic honors, degrades if it is not deserved.

     
Morals and Dogma, by Albert Pike, [1871], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 114]

  

V.

  

PERFECT MASTER.

THE Master Khu_ru_m was an industrious and an honest man. What he was employed to do he did diligently, and he did it well and faithfully. He received no wages that were not his due. Industry and honesty are the virtues peculiarly inculcated in this Degree. They are common and homely virtues; but not for that beneath our notice. As the bees do not love or respect the drones, so Masonry neither loves nor respects the idle and those who live by their wits; and least of all those parasitic acari that live upon themselves. For those who are indolent are likely to become dissipated and vicious; and perfect honesty, which ought to be the common qualification of all, is more rare than diamonds. To do earnestly and steadily, and to do faithfully and honestly that which we have to do--perhaps this wants but little, when looked at from every point of view, of including the whole body of the moral law; and even in their commonest and homeliest application, these virtues belong to the character of a Perfect Master.

Idleness is the burial of a living man. For an idle person is so useless to any purposes of God and man, that he is like one who is dead, unconcerned in the changes and necessities of the world; and he only lives to spend his time, and eat the fruits of the earth. Like a vermin or a wolf, when his time comes, he dies and perishes, and in the meantime is nought. He neither ploughs nor carries burdens: all that he does is either unprofitable or mischievous.

It is a vast work that any man may do, if he never be idle: and it is a huge way that a man may go in virtue, if he never go out of his way by a vicious habit or a great crime: and he who perpetually

[p. 115]

reads good books, if his parts be answerable, will have a huge stock of knowledge.

St. Ambrose, and from his example, St. Augustine, divided every day into these tertias of employment: eight hours they spent in the necessities of nature and recreation: eight hours in charity, in doing assistance to others, dispatching their business, reconciling their enmities, reproving their vices, correcting their errors, instructing their ignorance, and in transacting the affairs of their dioceses; and the other eight hours they spent in study and prayer.

We think, at the age of twenty, that life is much too long for that which we have to learn and do; and that there is an almost fabulous distance between our age and that of our grandfather. But when, at the age of sixty, if we are fortunate enough to reach it, or unfortunate enough, as the case may be, and according as we have profitably invested or wasted our time, we halt, and look back along the way we have come, and cast up and endeavor to balance our accounts with time and opportunity, we find that we have made life much too short, and thrown away a huge portion of our time. Then we, in our mind, deduct from the sum total of our years the hours that we have needlessly passed in sleep; the working-hours each day, during which the surface of the mind's sluggish pool has not been stirred or ruffled by a single thought; the days that we have gladly got rid of, to attain some real or fancied object that lay beyond, in the way between us and which stood irksomely the intervening days; the hours worse than wasted in follies and dissipation, or misspent in useless and unprofitable studies; and we acknowledge, with a sigh, that we could have learned and done, in half a score of years well spent, more than we have done in all our forty years of manhood.

To learn and to do!--this is the soul's work here below. The soul grows as truly as an oak grows. As the tree takes the carbon of the air, the dew, the rain, and the light, and the food that the earth supplies to its roots, and by its mysterious chemistry trans-mutes them into sap and fibre, into wood and leaf, and flower and fruit, and color and perfume, so the soul imbibes knowledge and by a divine alchemy changes what it learns into its own substance, and grows from within outwardly with an inherent force and power like those that lie hidden in the grain of wheat.

The soul hath its senses, like the body, that may be cultivated,

[p. 116]

enlarged, refined, as itself grows in stature and proportion; and he who cannot appreciate a fine painting or statue, a noble poem, a sweet harmony, a heroic thought, or a disinterested action, or to whom the wisdom of philosophy is but foolishness and babble, and the loftiest truths of less importance than the price of stocks or cotton, or the elevation of baseness to office, merely lives on the level of commonplace, and fitly prides himself upon that inferiority of the soul's senses, which is the inferiority and imperfect development of the soul itself.

To sleep little, and to study much; to say little, and to hear and think much; to learn, that we may be able to do, and then to do, earnestly and vigorously, whatever may be required of us by duty, and by the good of our fellows, our country, and mankind,--these are the duties of every Mason who desires to imitate the Master Khu_ru_m.

The duty of a Mason as an honest man is plain and easy. It requires of us honesty in contracts, sincerity in affirming, simplicity in bargaining, and faithfulness in performing. Lie not at all, neither in a little thing nor in a great, neither in the substance nor in the circumstance, neither in word nor deed: that is, pretend not what is false; cover not what is true; and let the measure of your affirmation or denial be the understanding of your con-tractor; for he who deceives the buyer or the seller by speaking what is true, in a sense not intended or understood by the other, is a liar and a thief. A Perfect Master must avoid that which deceives, equally with that which is false.

Let your prices be according to that measure of good and evil which is established in the fame and common accounts of the wisest and most merciful men, skilled in that manufacture or commodity; and the gain such, which, without scandal, is allowed to persons in all the same circumstances.

In intercourse with others, do not do all which thou mayest lawfully do; but keep something within thy power; and, because there is a latitude of gain in buying and selling, take not thou the utmost penny that is lawful, or which thou thinkest so; for although it be lawful, yet it is not safe; and he who gains all that he can gain lawfully, this year, will possibly be tempted, next year, to gain something unlawfully.

Let no man, for his own poverty, become more oppressing and cruel in his bargain; but quietly, modestly, diligently, and patiently

[p. 117]

recommend his estate to God, and follow his interest, and leave the success to Him.

Detain not the wages of the hireling; for every degree of detention of it beyond the time, is injustice and uncharitableness, and grinds his face till tears and blood come out; but pay him exactly according to covenant, or according to his needs.

Religiously keep all promises and covenants, though made to your disadvantage, though afterward you perceive you might have done better; and let not any precedent act of yours be altered by any after-accident. Let nothing make you break your promise, unless it be unlawful or impossible; that is, either out of your nature or out of your civil power, yourself being under the power of another; or that it be intolerably inconvenient to yourself, and of no advantage to another; or that you have leave expressed or reasonably presumed.

Let no man take wages or fees for a work that he cannot do, or cannot with probability undertake; or in some sense profitably, and with ease, or with advantage manage. Let no man appropriate to his own use, what God, by a special mercy, or the Republic, hath made common; for that is against both Justice and Charity.

That any man should be the worse for us, and for our direct act, and by our intention, is against the rule of equity, of justice, and of charity. We then do not that to others, which we would have done to ourselves; for we grow richer upon the ruins of their fortune.

It is not honest to receive anything from another without returning him an equivalent therefor. The gamester who wins the money of another is dishonest. There should be no such thing as bets and gaming among Masons: for no honest man should desire that for nothing which belongs to another. The merchant who sells an inferior article for a sound price, the speculator who makes the distresses and needs of others fill his exchequer are neither fair nor honest, but base, ignoble, unfit for immortality.

It should be the earnest desire of every Perfect Master so to live and deal and act, that when it comes to him to die, he may be able to say, and his conscience to adjudge, that no man on earth is poorer, because he is richer; that what he hath he has honestly earned, and no man can go before God, and claim that by the rules of equity administered in His great chancery, this house in which we die, this land we devise to our heirs, this money that

[p. 118]

enriches those who survive to bear our name, is his and not ours, and we in that forum are only his trustees. For it is most certain that God is just, and will sternly enforce every such trust; and that to all whom we despoil, to all whom we defraud, to all from whom we take or win anything whatever, without fair consideration and equivalent, He will decree a full and adequate compensation.

Be careful, then, that thou receive no wages, here or elsewhere, that are not thy due! For if thou dost, thou wrongst some one, by taking that which in God's chancery belongs to him; and whether that which thou takest thus be wealth, or rank, or influence, or reputation or affection, thou wilt surely be held to make full satisfaction.

 

     
Morals and Dogma, by Albert Pike, [1871], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 119]

  

VI.

  

INTIMATE SECRETARY.

  

[Confidential Secretary.]

You are especially taught in this Degree to be zealous and faithful; to be disinterested and benevolent; and to act the peace-maker, in case of dissensions, disputes, and quarrels among the brethren.

Duty is the moral magnetism which controls and guides the true Mason's course over the tumultuous seas of life. Whether the stars of honor, reputation, and reward do or do not shine, in the light of day or in the darkness of the night of trouble and adversity, in calm or storm, that unerring magnet still shows him the true course to steer, and indicates with certainty where-away lies the port which not to reach involves shipwreck and dishonor. He follows its silent bidding, as the mariner, when land is for many days not in sight, and the ocean without path or landmark spreads out all around him, follows the bidding of the needle, never doubting that it points truly to the north. To perform that duty, whether the performance be rewarded or unrewarded, is his sole care. And it doth not matter, though of this performance there may be no witnesses, and though what he does will be forever unknown to all mankind.

A little consideration will teach us that Fame has other limits than mountains and oceans; and that he who places happiness in the frequent repetition of his name, may spend his life in propagating it, without any danger of weeping for new worlds, or necessity of passing the Atlantic sea.

If, therefore, he who imagines the world to be filled with his actions

[p. 120]

and praises, shall subduct from the number of his encomiasts all those who are placed below the flight of fame, and who hear in the valley of life no voice but that of necessity; all those who imagine themselves too important to regard him, and consider the mention of his name as a usurpation of their time; all who are too much or too little pleased with themselves to attend to anything external; all who are attracted by pleasure, or chained down by pain to unvaried ideas; all who are withheld from attending his triumph by different pursuits; and all who slumber in universal negligence; he will find his renown straitened by nearer bounds than the rocks of Caucasus; and perceive that no man can be venerable or formidable, but to a small part of his fellow-creatures. And therefore, that we may not languish in our endeavors after excellence, it is necessary that, as Africanus counsels his descendants, we raise our eyes to higher prospects, and contemplate our future and eternal state, without giving up our hearts to the praise of crowds, or fixing our hopes on such rewards as human power can bestow.

We are not born for ourselves alone; and our country claims her share, and our friends their share of us. As all that the earth produces is created for the use of man, so men are created for the sake of men, that they may mutually do good to one another. In this we ought to take nature for our guide, and throw into the public stock the offices of general utility, by a reciprocation of duties; sometimes by receiving, sometimes by giving, and sometimes to cement human society by arts, by industry, and by our resources.

Suffer others to be praised in thy presence, and entertain their good and glory with delight; but at no hand disparage them, or lessen the report, or make an objection; and think not the advancement of thy brother is a lessening of thy worth. Upbraid no man's weakness to him to discomfit him, neither report it to disparage him, neither delight to remember it to lessen him, or to set thyself above him; nor ever praise thyself or dispraise any man else, unless some sufficient worthy end do hallow it.

Remember that we usually disparage others upon slight grounds and little instances; and if a man be highly commended, we think him sufficiently lessened, if we can but charge one sin of folly or inferiority in his account. We should either be more severe to ourselves, or less so to others, and consider that whatsoever good any one can think or say of us, we can tell him of many unworthy and

[p. 121]

foolish and perhaps worse actions of ours, any one of which, done by another, would be enough, with us, to destroy his reputation.

If we think the people wise and sagacious, and just and appreciative, when they praise and make idols of us, let us not call them unlearned and ignorant, and ill and stupid judges, when our neighbor is cried up by public fame and popular noises.

Every man hath in his own life sins enough, in his own mind trouble enough, in his own fortunes evil enough, and in performance of his offices failings more than enough, to entertain his own inquiry; so that curiosity after the affairs of others cannot be without envy and an ill mind. The generous man will be solicitous and inquisitive into the beauty and order of a well-governed family, and after the virtues of an excellent person; but anything for which men keep locks and bars, or that blushes to see the light, or that is either shameful in manner or private in nature, this thing will not be his care and business.

It should be objection sufficient to exclude any man from the society of Masons, that he is not disinterested and generous, both in his acts, and in his opinions of men, and his constructions of their conduct. He who is selfish and grasping, or censorious and ungenerous, will not long remain within the strict limits of honesty and truth, but will shortly commit injustice. He who loves himself too much must needs love others too little; and he who habitually gives harsh judgment will not long delay to give unjust judgment.

The generous man is not careful to return no more than he receives; but prefers that the balances upon the ledgers of benefits shall be in his favor. He who hath received pay in full for all the benefits and favors that he has conferred, is like a spendthrift who has consumed his whole estate, and laments over an empty exchequer. He who requites my favors with ingratitude adds to, instead of diminishing, my wealth; and he who cannot return a favor is equally poor, whether his inability arises from poverty of spirit, sordidness of soul, or pecuniary indigence.

If he is wealthy who hath large sums invested, and the mass of whose fortune consists in obligations that bind other men to pay him money, he is still more so to whom many owe large returns of kindnesses and favors. Beyond a moderate sum each year, the wealthy man merely invests his means: and that which he never 

[p. 122]

uses is still like favors unreturned and kindnesses unreciprocated, an actual and real portion of his fortune.

Generosity and a liberal spirit make men to be humane and genial, open-hearted, frank, and sincere, earnest to do good, easy and contented, and well-wishers of mankind. They protect the feeble against the strong, and the defenceless against rapacity and craft. They succor and comfort the poor, and are the guardians, under God, of his innocent and helpless wards. They value friends more than riches or fame, and gratitude more than money or power. They are noble by God's patent, and their escutcheons and quarterings are to be found in heaven's great book of heraldry. Nor can any man any more be a Mason than he can be a gentle-man, unless he is generous, liberal, and disinterested. To be liberal, but only of that which is our own; to be generous, but only when we have first been just; to give, when to give deprives us of a luxury or a comfort, this is Masonry indeed.

He who is worldly, covetous, or sensual must change before he can be a good Mason. If we are governed by inclination and not by duty; if we are unkind, severe, censorious, or injurious, in the relations or intercourse of life; if we are unfaithful parents or undutiful children; if we are harsh masters or faithless servants; if we are treacherous friends or bad neighbors or bitter competitors or corrupt unprincipled politicians or overreaching dealers in business, we are wandering at a great distance from the true Masonic light.

Masons must be kind and affectionate one to another. Frequenting the same temples, kneeling at the same altars, they should feel that respect and that kindness for each other, which their common relation and common approach to one God should inspire. There needs to be much more of the spirit of the ancient fellow-ship among us; more tenderness for each other's faults, more forgiveness, more solicitude for each other's improvement and good fortune; somewhat of brotherly feeling, that it be not shame to use the word "brother."

Nothing should be allowed to interfere with that kindness and affection: neither the spirit of business, absorbing, eager, and overreaching, ungenerous and hard in its dealings, keen and bitter in its competitions, low and sordid in its purposes; nor that of ambition, selfish, mercenary, restless, circumventing, living only in the opinion of others, envious of the good fortune of others,

[p. 123]

miserably vain of its own success, unjust, unscrupulous, and slanderous.

He that does me a favor, hath bound me to make him a return of thankfulness. The obligation comes not by covenant, nor by his own express intention; but by the nature of the thing; and is a duty springing up within the spirit of the obliged person, to whom it is more natural to love his friend, and to do good for good, than to return evil for evil; because a man may forgive an injury, but he must never forget. a good turn. He that refuses to do good to them whom he is bound to love, or to love that which did him good, is unnatural and monstrous in his affections, and thinks all the world born to minister to him; with a greediness worse than that of the sea, which, although it receives all rivers into itself, yet it furnishes the clouds and springs with a return of all they need . Our duty to those who are our benefactors is, to esteem and love their persons, to make them proportionable returns of service, or duty, or profit, according as we can, or as they need, or as opportunity presents itself; and according to the greatness of their kindnesses.

The generous man cannot but regret to see dissensions and disputes among his brethren. Only the base and ungenerous delight in discord. It is the poorest occupation of humanity to labor to make men think worse of each other, as the press, and too commonly the pulpit, changing places with the hustings and the tribune, do. The duty of the Mason is to endeavor to make man think better of his neighbor; to quiet, instead of aggravating difficulties; to bring together those who are severed or estranged; to keep friends from becoming foes, and to persuade foes to become friends. To do this, he must needs control his own passions, and be not rash and hasty, nor swift to take offence, nor easy to be angered.

For anger is a professed enemy to counsel. It is a direct storm, in which no man can be heard to speak or call from without; for if you counsel gently, you are disregarded; if you urge it and be vehement, you provoke it more. It is neither manly nor ingenuous. It makes marriage to be a necessary and unavoidable trouble; friendships and societies and familiarities, to be intolerable. It multiplies the evils of drunkenness, and makes the levities of wine to run into madness. It makes innocent jesting to be the beginning of tragedies. It terns friendship into hatred; it makes a

[p. 124]

man lose himself, and his reason and his argument, in disputation. It turns the desires of knowledge into an itch of wrangling. It adds insolency to power. It turns justice into cruelty, and judgment into oppression. It changes discipline into tediousness and hatred of liberal institution. It makes a prosperous man to be envied, and the unfortunate to be unpitied.

See, therefore, that first controlling your own temper, and governing your own passions, you fit yourself to keep peace and harmony among other men, and especially the brethren. Above all remember that Masonry is the realm of peace, and that "among Masons there must be no dissension, but only that noble emulation, which can best work and best agree." Wherever there is strife and hatred among the brethren, there is no Masonry; for Masonry is Peace, and Brotherly Love, and Concord.

Masonry is the great Peace Society of the world. Wherever it exists, it struggles to prevent international difficulties and disputes; and to bind Republics, Kingdoms, and Empires together in one great band of peace and amity. It would not so often struggle in vain, if Masons knew their power and valued their oaths.

Who can sum up the horrors and woes accumulated in a single war? Masonry is not dazzled with all its pomp and circumstance, all its glitter and glory. War conies with its bloody hand into our very dwellings. It takes from ten thousand homes those who lived there in peace and comfort, held by the tender ties of family and kindred. It drags them away, to die untended, of fever or exposure, in infectious climes; or to be hacked, torn, and mangled in the fierce fight; to fall on the gory field, to rise no more, or to be borne away, in awful agony, to noisome and horrid hospitals. The groans of the battle-field are echoed in sighs of bereavement from thousands of desolated hearths. There is a skeleton in every house, a vacant chair at every table. Returning, the soldier brings worse sorrow to his home, by the infection which he has caught, of camp-vices. The country is demoralized. The national mind is brought down, from the noble interchange of kind offices with another people, to wrath and revenge, and base pride, and the habit of measuring brute strength against brute strength, in battle. Treasures are expended, that would suffice to build ten thousand churches, hospitals, and universities, or rib and tie together a continent with rails of iron. If that treasure were sunk in the sea, it

[p. 125]

would be calamity enough; but it is put to worse use; for it is expended in cutting into the veins and arteries of human life, until the earth is deluged with a sea of blood.

Such are the lessons of this Degree. You have vowed to make them the rule, the law, and the guide of your life and conduct. If you do so, you will be entitled, because fitted, to advance in Masonry. If you do not, you have already gone too far.

 

     
Morals and Dogma, by Albert Pike, [1871], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 126]

  

VII.

  

PROVOST AND JUDGE.

THE lesson which this Degree inculcates is JUSTICE, in decision and judgment, and in our intercourse and dealing with other men.

In a country where trial by jury is known, every intelligent man is liable to be called on to act as a judge, either of fact alone, or of fact and law mingled; and to assume the heavy responsibilities which belong to that character.

Those who are invested with the power of judgment should judge the causes of all persons uprightly and impartially, without any personal consideration of the power of the mighty, or the bribe of the rich, or the needs of the poor. That is the cardinal rule, which no one will dispute; though many fail to observe it. But they must do more. They must divest themselves of prejudice and preconception. They must hear patiently, remember accurately, and weigh carefully the facts and the arguments offered before them. They must not leap hastily to conclusions, nor form opinions before they have heard all. They must not presume crime or fraud. They must neither be ruled by stubborn pride of opinion, nor be too facile and yielding to the views and arguments of others. In deducing the motive from the proven act, they must not assign to the act either the best or the worst motives, but those which they would think it just and fair for the world to assign to it, if they themselves had done if; nor must they endeavor to make many little circumstances, that weigh nothing separately, weigh much together, to prove their own acuteness and sagacity. These are sound rules for every juror, also, to observe.

[p. 127]

In our intercourse with others, there are two kinds of injustice: the first, of those who offer an injury; the second, of those who have it in their power to avert an injury from those to whom it is offered, and yet do it not. So active injustice may be done in two ways--by force and by fraud,--of which force is lion-like, and fraud fox-like,--both utterly repugnant to social duty, but fraud the more detestable.

Every wrong done by one man to another, whether it affect his person, his property, his happiness, or his reputation, is an offense against the law of justice. The field of this Degree is therefore a wide and vast one; and Masonry seeks for the most impressive mode of enforcing the law of justice, and the most effectual means of preventing wrong and injustice.

To this end it teaches this great and momentous truth: that wrong and injustice once done cannot be undone; but are eternal in their consequences; once committed, are numbered with the irrevocable Past; that the wrong that is done contains its own retributive penalty as surely and as naturally as the acorn contains the oak. Its consequences are its punishment; it needs no other, and can have no heavier; they are involved in its commission, and cannot be separated from it. A wrong done to another is an injury done to our own Nature, an offence against our own souls, a disfiguring of the image of the Beautiful and Good. Punishment is not the execution of a sentence, but the occurrence of an effect. It is ordained to follow guilt, not by the decree of God as a judge, but by a law enacted by Him as the Creator and Legislator of the Universe. It is not an arbitrary and artificial annexation, but an ordinary and logical consequence; and therefore must be borne by the wrong-doer, and through him may flow on to others. It is the decision of the infinite justice of God, in the form of law.

There can be no interference with, or remittance of, or protection from, the natural effects of our wrongful acts. God will not interpose between the cause and its consequence; and in that sense there can be no forgiveness of sins. The act which has debased our soul may be repented of, may be turned from; but the injury is done. The debasement may be redeemed by after-efforts, the stain obliterated by bitterer struggles and severer sufferings; but the efforts and the endurance which might have raised the soul to the loftiest heights are now exhausted in merely regaining what

[p. 128]

it has lost. There must always be a wide difference between him who only ceases to do evil, and him who has always done well.

He will certainly be a far more scrupulous watcher over his conduct, and far more careful of his deeds, who believes that those deeds will inevitably bear their natural consequences, exempt from after intervention, than he who believes that penitence and par-don will at any time unlink the chain of sequences. Surely we shall do less wrong and injustice, if the conviction is fixed and embedded in our souls that everything done is done irrevocably, that even the Omnipotence of God cannot uncommit a deed, cannot make that undone which has been done; that every act of ours must bear its allotted fruit, according to the everlasting laws,--must remain forever ineffaceably inscribed on the tablets of Universal Nature.

If you have wronged another, you may grieve, repent, and resolutely determine against any such weakness in future. You may, so far as it is possible, make reparation. It is well. The injured party may forgive you, according to the meaning of human language; but the deed is done; and all the powers of Nature, were they to conspire in your behalf, could not make it undone; the consequences to the body, the consequences to the soul, though no man may perceive them, are there, are written in the annals of the Past, and must reverbrate throughout all time.

Repentance for a wrong done, bears, like every other act, its own fruit, the fruit of purifying the heart and amending the Future, but not of effacing the Past. The commission of the wrong is an irrevocable act; but it does not incapacitate the soul to do right for the future. Its consequences cannot be expunged; but its course need not be pursued. Wrong and evil perpetrated, though ineffaceable, call for no despair, but for efforts more energetic than before. Repentance is still as valid as ever; but it is valid to secure the Future, not to obliterate the Past.

Even the pulsations of the air, once set in motion by the human voice, cease not to exist with the sounds to which they gave rise. Their quickly-attenuated force soon becomes inaudible to human ears. But the waves of air thus raised perambulate the surface of earth and ocean, and in less than twenty hours, every atom of the atmosphere takes up the altered movement due to that infinitesimal portion of primitive motion which has been conveyed to it

[p. 129]

through countless channels, and which must continue to influence its path throughout its future existence. The air is one vast library, on whose pages is forever written all that man has ever said or even whispered. There, in their mutable, but unerring characters, mixed with the earliest, as well as the latest signs of mortality, stand forever recorded, vows unredeemed, promises unfulfilled; perpetuating, in the movements of each particle, all in unison, the testimony of man's changeful will. God reads that book, though we cannot.

So earth, air, and ocean are the eternal witnesses of the acts that we have done. No motion impressed by natural causes or by human agency is ever obliterated. The track of every keel which has ever disturbed the surface of the ocean remains forever registered in the future movements of all succeeding particles which may occupy its place. Every criminal is by the laws of the Almighty irrevocably chained to the testimony of his crime; for every atom of his mortal frame, through whatever changes its particles may migrate, will still retain, adhering to it through every combination, some movement derived from that very muscular effort by which the crime itself was perpetrated.

What if our faculties should be so enhanced in a future life as to enable us to perceive and trace the ineffaceable consequences of our idle words and evil deeds, and render our remorse and grief as eternal as those consequences themselves? No more fearful punishment to a superior intelligence can be conceived, than to see still in action, with the consciousness that it must continue in action forever, a cause of wrong put in motion by itself ages before.

Masonry, by its teachings, endeavors to restrain men from the commission of injustice and acts of wrong and outrage. Though it does not endeavor to usurp the place of religion, still its code of morals proceeds upon other principles than the municipal law; and it condemns and punishes offences which neither that law punishes nor public opinion condemns. In the Masonic law, to cheat and overreach in trade, at the bar, in politics, are deemed no more venial than theft; nor a deliberate lie than perjury; nor slander than robbery; nor seduction than murder.

Especially it condemns those wrongs of which the doer induces another to partake. He may repent; he may, after agonizing struggles, regain the path of virtue; his spirit may reachieve its

[p. 130]

purity through much anguish, after many strifes; but the weaker fellow-creature whom he led astray, whom he made a sharer in his guilt, but whom he cannot make a sharer in his repentance and amendment, whose downward course (the first step of which he taught) he cannot check, but is compelled to witness,--what forgiveness of sins can avail him there? There is his perpetual, his inevitable punishment, which no repentance can alleviate, and no mercy can remit.

Let us be just, also, in judging of other men's motives. We know but little of the real merits or demerits of any fellow-creature. We can rarely say with certainty that this man is more guilty than that, or even that this man is very good or very wicked. Often the basest men leave behind them excellent reputations. There is scarcely one of us who has not, at some time in his life, been on the edge of the commission of a crime. Every one of us can look back, and shuddering see the time when our feet stood upon the slippery crags that overhung the abyss of guilt; and when, if temptation had been a little more urgent, or a little longer continued, if penury had pressed us a little harder, or a little more wine had further disturbed our intellect, dethroned our judgment, and aroused our passions, our feet would have slipped, and we should have fallen, never to rise again.

We may be able to say--"This man has lied, has pilfered, has forged, has embezzled moneys intrusted to him; and that man has gone through life with clean hands." But we cannot say that the former has not struggled long, though unsuccessfully, against temptations under which the second would have succumbed without an effort. We can say which has the cleanest hands before man; but not which has the cleanest soul before God. We may be able to say, this man has committed adultery, and that man has been ever chaste; but we cannot tell but that the innocence of one may have been due to the coldness of his heart, to the absence of a motive, to the presence of a fear, to the slight degree of the temptation; nor but that the fall of the other may have been preceded by the most vehement self-contest, caused by the most over-mastering frenzy, and atoned for by the most hallowing repentance. Generosity as well as niggardliness may be a mere yielding to native temperament; and in the eye of Heaven, a long life of beneficence in one man may have cost less effort, and may indicate less virtue and less sacrifice of interest, than a few rare

[p. 131]

hidden acts of kindness wrung by duty out of the reluctant and unsympathizing nature of the other. There may be more real merit, more self-sacrificing effort, more of the noblest elements of moral grandeur, in a life of failure, sin, and shame, than in a career, to our eyes, of stainless integrity.

When we condemn or pity the fallen, how do we know that, tempted like him, we should not have fallen like him, as soon, and perhaps with less resistance? How can we know what we should do if we were out of employment, famine crouching, gaunt, and hungry, on our fireless hearth, and our children wailing for bread? We fall not because we are not enough tempted! He that hath fallen may be at heart as honest as we. How do we know that our daughter, sister, wife, could resist the abandonment, the desolation, the distress, the temptation, that sacrificed the virtue of their poor abandoned sister of shame? Perhaps they also have not fallen, because they have not been sorely tempted! Wisely are we directed to pray that we may not be exposed to temptation.

Human justice must be ever uncertain. How many judicial murders have been committed through ignorance of the phenomena of insanity! How many men hung for murder who were no more murderers at heart than the jury that tried and the judge that sentenced them! It may well be doubted whether the ad-ministration of human laws, in every country, is not one gigantic mass of injustice and wrong. God seeth not as man seeth; and the most abandoned criminal, black as he is before the world, may yet have continued to keep some little light burning in a corner of his soul, which would long since have gone out in that of those who walk proudly in the sunshine of immaculate fame, if they had been tried and tempted like the poor outcast.

We do not know even the outside life of men. We are not competent to pronounce even on their deeds. We do not know half the acts of wickedness or virtue, even of our most immediate fellows. We cannot say, with certainty, even of our nearest friend, that he has not committed a particular sin, and broken a particular commandment. Let each man ask his own heart! Of how many of our best and of our worst acts and qualities are our most intimate associates utterly unconscious! How many virtues does not the world give us credit for, that we do not possess; or vices condemn us for, of which we are not the slaves! It is but a small portion of our evil deeds and thoughts that ever comes to light;

[p. 132]

and of our few redeeming goodnesses, the largest portion is known to God alone.

We shall, therefore, be just in judging of other men, only when we are charitable; and we should assume the prerogative of judging others only when the duty is forced upon us; since we are so almost certain to err, and the consequences of error are so serious. No man need covet the office of judge; for in assuming it he assumes the gravest and most oppressive responsibility. Yet you have assumed it; we all assume it; for man is ever ready to judge, and ever ready to condemn his neighbor, while upon the same state of case he acquits himself. See, therefore, that you exercise your office cautiously and charitably, lest, in passing judgment upon the criminal, you commit a greater wrong than that for which you condemn him, and the consequences of which must be eternal.

The faults and crimes and follies of other men are not unimportant to us; but form a part of our moral discipline. War and bloodshed at a distance, and frauds which do not affect our pecuniary interest, yet touch us in our feelings, and concern our moral welfare. They have much to do with all thoughtful hearts. The public eye may look unconcernedly on the miserable victim of vice, and that shattered wreck of a man may move the multitude to laughter or to scorn. But to the Mason, it is the form of sacred humanity that is before him; it is an erring fellow-being; a desolate, forlorn, forsaken soul; and his thoughts, enfolding the poor wretch, will be far deeper than those of indifference, ridicule, or contempt. All human offences, the whole system of dishonesty, evasion, circumventing, forbidden indulgence, and intriguing ambition, in which men are struggling with each other, will be looked upon by a thoughtful Mason, not merely as a scene of mean toils and strifes, but as the solemn conflicts of immortal minds, for ends vast and momentous as their own being. It is a sad and unworthy strife, and may well be viewed with indignation; but that indignation must melt into pity. For the stakes for which these gamesters play are not those which they imagine, not those which are in sight. For example, this man plays for a petty office, and gains it; but the real stake he gains is sycophancy, uncharitableness, slander, and deceit.

Good men are too proud of their goodness. They are respectable; dishonor comes not near them; their countenance has weight and influence; their robes are unstained; the poisonous breath of

[p. 133]

calumny has never been breathed upon their fair name. How easy it is for them to look down with scorn upon the poor degraded offender; to pass him by with a lofty step; to draw up the folds of their garment around them, that they may not be soiled by his touch! Yet the Great Master of Virtue did not so; but descended to familiar intercourse with publicans and sinners, with the Samaritan woman, with the outcasts and the Pariahs of the Hebrew world.

Many men think themselves better, in proportion as they can detect sin in others! When they go over the catalogue of their neighbor's unhappy derelictions of temper or conduct, they often, amidst much apparent concern, feel a secret exultation, that destroys all their own pretensions to wisdom and moderation, and even to virtue. Many even take actual pleasure in the sins of others; and this is the case with every one whose thoughts are often employed in agreeable comparisons of his own virtues with his neighbors' faults.

The power of gentleness is too little seen in the world; the subduing influences of pity, the might of love, the control of mildness over passion, the commanding majesty of that perfect character which mingles grave displeasure with grief and pity for the offender. So it is that a Mason should treat his brethren who go astray. Not with bitterness; nor yet with good-natured easiness, nor with worldly indifference, nor with the philosophic coldness, nor with a laxity of conscience, that accounts everything well, that passes under the seal of public opinion; but with charity, with pitying loving-kindness.

The human heart will not bow willingly to what is infirm and wrong in human nature. If it yields to us, it must yield to what is divine in us. The wickedness of my neighbor cannot submit to my wickedness; his sensuality, for instance, to my anger against his vices. My faults are not the instruments that are to arrest his faults. And therefore impatient reformers, and denouncing preachers, and hasty reprovers, and angry parents, and irritable relatives generally fail, in their several departments, to reclaim the erring.

A moral offence is sickness, pain, loss, dishonor, in the immortal part of man. It is guilt, and misery added to guilt. It is itself calamity; and brings upon itself, in addition, the calamity of God's disapproval, the abhorrence of all virtuous men, and the soul's own

[p. 134]

abhorrence. Deal faithfully, but patiently and tenderly, with this evil! It is no matter for petty provocation, nor for personal strife, nor for selfish irritation.

Speak kindly to your erring brother! God pities him: Christ has died for him: Providence waits for him: Heaven's mercy yearns toward him; and Heaven's spirits are ready to welcome him back with joy. Let your voice be in unison with all those powers that God is using for his recovery!

If one defrauds you, and exults at it, he is the most to be pitied of human beings. He has done himself a far deeper injury than he has done you. It is he, and not you, whom God regards with mingled displeasure and compassion; and His judgment should be your law. Among all the benedictions of the Holy Mount there is not one for this man; but for the merciful, the peace-makers, and the persecuted they are poured out freely.

We are all men of like passions, propensities, and exposures. There are elements in us all, which might have been perverted, through the successive processes of moral deterioration, to the worst of crimes. The wretch whom the execration of the thronging crowd pursues to the scaffold, is not worse than any one of that multitude might have become under similar circumstances. He is to be condemned indeed, but also deeply to be pitied.

It does not become the frail and sinful to be vindictive toward even the worst criminals. We owe much to the good Providence of God, ordaining for us a lot more favorable to virtue. We all had that within us, that might have been pushed to the same excess: Perhaps we should have fallen as he did, with less temptation. Perhaps we have done acts, that, in proportion to the temptation or provocation, were less excusable than his great crime. Silent pity and sorrow for the victim should mingle with our detestation of the guilt. Even the pirate who murders in cold blood on the high seas, is such a man as you or I might have been. Orphanage in childhood, or base and dissolute and abandoned parents; an unfriended youth; evil companions; ignorance and want of moral cultivation; the temptations of sinful pleasure or grinding poverty; familiarity with vice; a scorned and blighted name; seared and crushed affections; desperate fortunes; these are steps that might have led any one among us to unfurl upon the high seas the bloody flag of universal defiance; to wage war with our kind; to live the life and die the death of the reckless and remorseless freebooter.

[p. 135]

[paragraph continues] Many affecting relationships of humanity plead with us to pity him. His head once rested on a mother's bosom. He was once the object of sisterly love and domestic endearment. Perhaps his hand, since often red with blood, once clasped another little loving hand at the altar. Pity him then; his blighted hopes and his crushed heart! It is proper that frail and erring creatures like us should do so; should feel the crime, but feel it as weak, tempted, and rescued creatures should. It may be that when God weighs men's crimes, He will take into consideration the temptations and the adverse circumstances that led to them, and the opportunities for moral culture of the offender; and it may be that our own offences will weigh heavier than we think, and the murderer's lighter than according to man's judgment.

On all accounts, therefore, let the true Mason never forget the solemn injunction, necessary to be observed at almost every moment of a busy life: "JUDGE NOT, LEST YE YOURSELVES BE JUDGED: FOR WHATSOEVER JUDGMENT YE MEASURE UNTO OTHERS, THE SAME SHALL IN TURN BE MEASURED UNTO YOU." Such is the lesson taught the Provost and Judge.

 

     
Morals and Dogma, by Albert Pike, [1871], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 136]

  

VIII.

  

INTENDANT OF THE BUILDING.

IN this Degree you have been taught the important lesson, that none are entitled to advance in the Ancient and Accepted Scottish Rite, who have not by study and application made themselves familiar with Masonic learning and jurisprudence. The Degrees of this Rite are not for those who are content with the mere work and ceremonies, and do not seek to explore the mines of wisdom that lie buried beneath the surface. You still advance toward the Light, toward that star, blazing in the distance, which is an emblem of the Divine Truth, given by God to the first men, and preserved amid all the vicissitudes of ages in the traditions and teachings of Masonry. How far you will advance, depends upon yourself alone. Here, as everywhere in the world, Darkness struggles with Light, and clouds and shadows intervene between you and the Truth.

When you shall have become imbued with the morality of Masonry, with which you yet are, and for some time will be exclusively occupied,--when you shall have learned to practice all the virtues which it inculcates; when they become familiar to you as your Household Gods; then will you be prepared to receive its lofty philosophical instruction, and to scale the heights upon whose summit Light and Truth sit enthroned. Step by step men must advance toward Perfection; and each Masonic Degree is meant to be one of those steps. Each is a development of a particular duty; and in the present you are taught charity and benevolence;

[p. 137]

to be to your brethren an example of virtue; to correct your own faults; and to endeavor to correct those of your brethren.

Here, as in all the Degrees, you meet with the emblems and the names of Deity, the true knowledge of whose character and attributes it has ever been a chief object of Masonry to perpetuate. To appreciate His infinite greatness and goodness, to rely implicitly upon His Providence, to revere and venerate Him as the Supreme Architect, Creator, and Legislator of the universe, is the first of Masonic duties.

The Battery of this Degree, and the five circuits which you made around the Lodge, allude to the five points of fellowship, and are intended to recall them vividly to your mind. To go upon a brother's errand or to his relief, even barefoot and upon flinty ground; to remember him in your supplications to the Deity; to clasp him to your heart, and protect him against malice and evil-speaking; to uphold him when about to stumble and fall; and to give him prudent, honest, and friendly counsel, are duties plainly written upon the pages of God's great code of law, and first among the ordinances of Masonry.

The first sign of the Degree is expressive of the diffidence and humility with which we inquire into the nature and attributes of the Deity; the second, of the profound awe and reverence with which we contemplate His glories; and the third, of the sorrow with which we reflect upon our insufficient observance of our duties, and our imperfect compliance with His statutes.

The distinguishing property of man is to search for and follow after truth. Therefore, when relaxed from our necessary cares and concerns, we then covet to see, to hear, and to learn somewhat; and we esteem knowledge of things, either obscure or wonderful, to be the indispensable means of living happily. Truth, Simplicity, and Candor are most agreeable to the nature of mankind. Whatever is virtuous consists either in Sagacity, and the perception of Truth; or in the preservation of Human Society, by giving to every man his due, and observing the faith of contracts; or in the greatness and firmness of an elevated and unsubdued mind; or in observing order and regularity in all our words and in all our actions; in which consist Moderation and Temperance.

Masonry has in all times religiously preserved that enlightened faith from which flow sublime Devotedness, the sentiment of Fraternity fruitful of good works, the spirit of indulgence and peace,

[p. 138]

of sweet hopes and effectual consolations; and inflexibility in the accomplishment of the most painful and arduous duties. It has always propagated it with ardor and perseverance; and therefore it labors at the present day more zealously than ever. Scarcely a Masonic discourse is pronounced, that does not demonstrate the necessity and advantages of this faith, and especially recall the two constitutive principles of religion, that make all religion,--love of God, and love of neighbor. Masons carry these principles into the bosoms of their families and of society. While the Sectarians of former times enfeebled the religious spirit, Masonry, forming one great People over the whole globe, and march under the great banner of Charity and Benevolence, preserves feeling, strengthens it, extends it in its purity and simplicity, as it has always existed in the depths of the human heart, as it existed even under the dominion of the most ancient forms of worship, but where gross and debasing superstitions forbade its recognition.

A Masonic Lodge should resemble a bee-hive, in which all the members work together with ardor for the common good. Masonry is not made for cold souls and narrow minds, that do not comprehend its lofty mission and sublime apostolate. Here the anathema against lukewarm souls applies. To comfort misfortune, to popularize knowledge, to teach whatever is true and pure in religion and philosophy, to accustom men to respect order and the proprieties of life, to point out the way to genuine happiness, to prepare for that fortunate period, when all the factions of the Human Family, united by the bonds of Toleration and Fraternity, shall be but one household,--these are labors that may well excite zeal and even enthusiasm.

We do not now enlarge upon or elaborate these ideas. We but utter them to you briefly, as hints, upon which you may at your leisure reflect. Hereafter, if you continue to advance, they will be unfolded, explained, and developed.

Masonry utters no impracticable and extravagant precepts, certain, because they are so, to be disregarded. It asks of its initiates nothing that it is not possible and even easy for them to perform. Its teachings are eminently practical; and its statutes can be obeyed by every just, upright, and honest man, no matter what his faith or creed. Its object is to attain the greatest practical good, without seeking to make men perfect. It does not meddle with the domain of religion, nor inquire into the mysteries of regeneration.

[p. 139]

[paragraph continues] It teaches those truths that are written by the finger of God upon the heart of man, those views of duty which have been wrought out by the meditations of the studious, confirmed by the allegiance of the good and wise, and stamped as sterling by the response they find in every uncorrupted mind. It does not dogmatize, nor vainly imagine dogmatic certainty to be attainable.

Masonry does not occupy itself with crying down this world, with its splendid beauty, its thrilling interests, its glorious works, its noble and holy affections; nor exhort us to detach our hearts from this earthly life, as empty, fleeting, and unworthy, and fix them upon Heaven, as the only sphere deserving the love of the loving or the meditation of the wise. It teaches that man has high duties to perform, and a high destiny to fulfill, on this earth; that this world is not merely the portal to another; and that this life, though not our only one, is an integral one, and the particular one with which we are here meant to be concerned; that the Present is our scene of action, and the Future for speculation and for trust; that man was sent upon the earth to live in it, to enjoy it, to study it, to love it, to embellish it, to make the most of it. It is his country, on which he should lavish his affections and his efforts. It is here his influences are to operate. It is his house, and not a tent; his home, and not merely a school. He is sent into this world, not to be constantly hankering after, dreaming of, preparing for another; but to do his duty and fulfill his destiny on this earth; to do all that lies in his power to improve it, to render it a scene of elevated happiness to himself, to those around him, to those who are to come after him. His life here is part of his immortality; and this world, also, is among the stars.

And thus, Masonry teaches us, will man best prepare for that Future which he hopes for. The Unseen cannot hold a higher place in our affections than the Seen and the Familiar. The law of our being is Love of Life, and its interests and adornments; love of the world in which our lot is cast, engrossment with the interests and affections of earth. Not a low or sensual love; not love of wealth, of fame, of ease, of power, of splendor. Not low worldliness; but the love of Earth as the garden on which the Creator has lavished such miracles of beauty; as the habitation of humanity, the arena of its conflicts, the scene of its illimitable progress, the dwelling-place of the wise, the good, the active, the loving, and the dear; the place of opportunity for the development

[p. 140]

by means of sin and suffering and sorrow, of the noblest passions, the loftiest virtues, and the tenderest sympathies.

They take very unprofitable pains, who endeavor to persuade men that they are obliged wholly to despise this world, and all that is in it, even whilst they themselves live here. God hath not taken all that pains in forming and framing and furnishing and adorning the world, that they who were made by Him to live in it should despise it. It will be enough, if they do not love it too immoderately. It is useless to attempt to extinguish all those affections and passions which are and always will be inseparable from human nature. As long as he world lasts, and honor and virtue and industry have reputation in the world, there will be ambition and emulation and appetite in the best and most accomplished men in it; and if there were not, more barbarity and vice and wickedness would cover every nation of the world, than it now suffers under.

Those only who feel a deep interest in, and affection for, this world, will work resolutely for its amelioration. Those who under-value this life, naturally become querulous and discontented, and lose their interest in the welfare of their fellows. To serve them, and so to do our duty as Masons, we must feel that the object is worth the exertion; and be content with this world in which God has placed us, until He permits us to remove to a better one. He is here with us, and does not deem this an unworthy world.

It  a serious thing to defame and belie a whole world; to speak of it as the abode of a poor, toiling, drudging, ignorant, contemptible race. You would not so discredit your family, your friendly circle, your village, your city, your country. The world is not a wretched and a worthless one; nor is it a misfortune, but a thing to be thankful for, to be a man. If life is worthless, so also is immortality.

In society itself, in that living mechanism of human relation-ships that spreads itself over the world, there is a finer essence within, that as truly moves it, as any power, heavy or expansive, moves the sounding manufactory or the swift-flying car. The man-machine hurries to and fro upon the earth, stretches out its hands on every side, to toil, to barter, to unnumbered labors and enterprises; and almost always the motive, that which moves it, is something that takes hold of the comforts, affections, and hopes of social existence. True, the mechanism often works with difficulty,

[p. 141]

drags heavily, grates and screams with harsh collision. True, the essence of finer motive, becoming intermixed with baser and coarser ingredients, often clogs, obstructs, jars, and deranges the free and noble action of social life. But he is neither grateful nor wise, who looks cynically on all this, and loses the fine sense of social good in its perversions. That I can be a friend, that I can have a friend, though it were but one in the world; that fact, that wondrous good fortune, we may set against all the sufferings of our social nature. That there is such a place on earth as a home, that resort and sanctuary of in-walled and shielded joy, we may set against all the surrounding desolations of life. That one can be a true, social man, can speak his true thoughts, amidst all the janglings of controversy and the warring of opinions; that fact from within, outweighs all facts from without.

In the visible aspect and action of society, often repulsive and annoying, we are apt to lose the due sense of its invisible blessings. As in Nature it is not the coarse and palpable, not soils and rains, nor even fields and flowers, that are so beautiful, as the invisible spirit of wisdom and beauty that pervades it; so in society, it is the invisible, and therefore unobserved, that is most beautiful.

What nerves the arm of toil? If man minded himself alone, he would fling down the spade and axe, and rush to the desert; or roam through the world as a wilderness, and make that world a desert. His home, which he sees not, perhaps, but once or twice in a day, is the invisible bond of the world. It is the good, strong, and noble faith that men have in each other, which gives the loftiest character to business, trade, and commerce. Fraud occurs in the rush of business; but it is the exception. Honesty is the rule; and all the frauds in the world cannot tear the great bond of human confidence. If they could, commerce would furl its sails on every sea, and all the cities of the world would crumble into ruins. The bare character of a man on the other side of the world, whom you never saw, whom you never will see, you hold good for a bond of thousands. The most striking feature of the political state is not governments, nor constitutions, nor laws, nor enactments, nor the judicial power, nor the police; but the universal will of the people to be governed by the common weal. Take off that restraint, and no government on earth could stand for an hour.

Of the many teachings of Masonry, one of the most valuable is,

[p. 142]

that we should not depreciate this life. It does not hold, that when we reflect on the destiny that awaits man on earth, we ought to bedew his cradle with our tears; but, like the Hebrews, it hails the birth of a child with joy, and holds that his birthday should be a festival.

It has no sympathy with those who profess to have proved this life, and found it little worth; who have deliberately made up their minds that it is far more miserable than happy; because its employments are tedious, and their schemes often baffled, their friendships broken, or their friends dead, its pleasures palled, and its honors faded, and its paths beaten, familiar, and dull.

Masonry deems it no mark of great piety toward God to disparage, if not despise, the state that He has ordained for us. It does not absurdly set up the claims of another world, not in comparison merely, but in competition, with the claims of this. It looks upon both as parts of one system. It holds that a man may make the best of this world and of another at the same time. It does not teach its initiates to think better of other works and dispensations of God, by thinking meanly of these. It does not look upon life as so much time lost; nor regard its employments as trifles unworthy of immortal beings; nor tell its followers to fold their arms, as if in disdain of their state and species; but it looks soberly and cheerfully upon the world, as a theatre of worthy action, of exalted usefulness, and of rational and innocent enjoyment.

It holds that, with all its evils, life is a blessing. To deny that is to destroy the basis of all religion, natural and revealed. The very foundation of all religion is laid on the firm belief that God is good; and if this life is an evil and a curse, no such belief can be rationally entertained. To level our satire at humanity and human existence, as mean and contemptible; to look on this world as the habitation of a miserable race, fit only for mockery and scorn; to consider this earth as a dungeon or a prison, which has no blessing to offer but escape from it, is to extinguish the primal light of faith and hope and happiness, to destroy the basis of religion, and Truth's foundation in the goodness of God. If it indeed be so, then it matters not what else is true or not true; speculation is vain and faith is vain; and all that belongs to man's highest being is buried in the ruins of misanthropy, melancholy, and despair.

[p. 143]

Our love of life; the tenacity with which, in sorrow and suffering, we cling to it; our attachment to our home, to the spot that gave us birth, to any place, however rude, unsightly, or barren, on which the history of our years has been written, all show how dear are the ties of kindred and society. Misery makes a greater impression upon us than happiness; because the former is not the habit of our minds. It is a strange, unusual guest, and we are more conscious of its presence. Happiness lives with us, and we forget it. It does not excite us, nor disturb the order and course of our thoughts. A great agony is an epoch in our life. We re-member our afflictions, as we do the storm and earthquake, because they are out of the common course of things. They are like disastrous events, recorded because extraordinary; and with whole and unnoticed periods of prosperity between. We mark and signalize the times of calamity; but many happy days and unnoted periods of enjoyment pass, that are unrecorded either in the book of memory, or in the scanty annals of our thanksgiving. We are little disposed and less able to call up from the dim remembrances of our past years, the peaceful moments, the easy sensations, the bright thoughts, the quiet reveries, the throngs of kind affections in which life flowed on, bearing us almost unconsciously upon its bosom, because it bore us calmly and gently.

Life is not only good; but it has been glorious in the experience of millions. The glory of all human virtue clothes it. The splendors of devotedness, beneficence, and heroism are upon it; the crown of a thousand martyrdoms is upon its brow. The brightness of the soul shines through this visible and sometimes darkened life; through all its surrounding cares and labors. The humblest life may feel its connection with its Infinite Source. There is something mighty in the frail inner man; something of immortality in this momentary and transient being. The mind stretches away, on every side, into infinity. Its thoughts flash abroad, far into the boundless, the immeasurable, the infinite; far into the great, dark, teeming future; and become powers and influences in other ages. To know its wonderful Author, to bring down wisdom from the Eternal Stars, to bear upward its homage, gratitude, and love, to the Ruler of all worlds, to be immortal in our influences projected far into the slow-approaching Future, makes life most worthy and most glorious.

Life is the wonderful creation of God. It is light, sprung from

[p. 144]

void darkness; power, waked from inertness and impotence; being created from nothing; and the contrast may well enkindle wonder and delight. It is a rill from the infinite, overflowing goodness; and from the moment when it first gushes up into the light, to that when it mingles with the ocean of Eternity, that Goodness attends it and ministers to it. It is a great and glorious gift. There is gladness in its infant voices; joy in the buoyant step of its youth; deep satisfaction in its strong maturity; and peace in its quiet age. There is good for the good; virtue for the faithful; and victory for the valiant. There is, even in this humble life, an infinity for those whose desires are boundless. There are blessings upon its birth; there is hope in its death; and eternity in its prospect. Thus earth, which binds many in chains, is to the Mason both the starting-place and goal of immortality. Many it buries in the rubbish of dull cares and wearying vanities; but to the Mason it is the lofty mount of meditation, where Heaven, and Infinity and Eternity are spread before him and around him. To the lofty-minded, the pure, and the virtuous, this life is the beginning of Heaven, and a part of immortality.

God hath appointed one remedy for all the evils in the world; and that is a contented spirit. We may be reconciled to poverty and a low fortune, if we suffer contentedness and equanimity to make the proportions. No man is poor who doth not think himself so; but if, in a full fortune, with impatience he desires more, he proclaims his wants and his beggarly condition. This virtue of contentedness was the sum of all the old moral philosophy, and is of most universal use in the whole course of our lives, and the only instrument to ease the burdens of the world and the enmities of sad chances. It is the great reasonableness of complying with the Divine Providence, which governs all the world, and hath so ordered us in the administration of His great family. It is fit that God should dispense His gifts as He pleases; and if we murmur here, we may, at the next melancholy, be troubled that He did not make us to be angels or stars.

We ourselves make our fortunes good or bad; and when God lets loose a Tyrant upon us, or a sickness, or scorn, or a lessened fortune, if we fear to die, or know not how to be patient, or are proud, or covetous, then the calamity sits heavy on us. But if we know how to manage a noble principle, and fear not death so much as a dishonest action, and think impatience a worse evil than a

[p. 145]

fever, and pride to be the greatest disgrace as well as the greatest folly, and poverty far preferable to the torments of avarice, we may still bear an even mind and smile at the reverses of fortune and the ill-nature of Fate.

If thou hast lost thy land, do not also lose thy constancy; and if thou must die sooner than others, or than thou didst expect, yet do not die impatiently. For no chance is evil to him who is content, and to a man nothing is miserable unless it be unreasonable. No man can make another man to be his slave, unless that other hath first enslaved himself to life and death, to pleasure or pain, to hope or fear; command these passions, and you are freer than the Parthian Kings.

When an enemy reproaches us, let us look on him as an impartial relator of our faults; for he will tell us truer than our fondest friend will, and we may forgive his anger, whilst we make use of the plainness of his declamation. The ox, when he is weary, treads truest; and if there be nothing else in abuse, but that it makes us to walk warily, and tread sure for fear of our enemies, that is better than to be flattered into pride and carelessness.

If thou fallest from thy employment in public, take sanctuary in an honest retirement, being indifferent to thy gain abroad, or thy safety at home. When the north wind blows hard, and it rains sadly, we do not sit down in it and cry; but defend ourselves against it with a warm garment, or a good fire and a dry roof. So when the storm of a sad mischance beats upon our spirits, we may turn it into something that is good, if we resolve to make it so; and with equanimity and patience may shelter ourselves from its inclement pitiless pelting. If it develop our patience, and give occasion for heroic endurance, it hath done us good enough to recompense us sufficiently for all the temporal affliction; for so a wise man shall overrule his stars; and have a greater influence upon his own content, than all the constellations and planets of the firmament.

Compare not thy condition with the few above thee, but to secure thy content, look upon those thousands with whom thou wouldst not, for any interest, change thy fortune and condition. A soldier must not think himself unprosperous, if he be not successful as Alexander or Wellington; nor any man deem himself unfortunate that he hath not the wealth of Rothschild; but rather let the former rejoice that he is not lessened like the many generals

[p. 146]

who went down horse and man before Napoleon, and the latter that he is not the beggar who, bareheaded in the bleak winter wind holds out his tattered hat for charity. There may be many who are richer and more fortunate; but many thousands who are very miserable, compared to thee.

After the worst assaults of Fortune, there, will be something left to us,--a merry countenance, a cheerful spirit, and a good conscience, the Providence of God, our hopes of Heaven, our charity for those who have injured us; perhaps a loving wife, and many friends to pity, and some to relieve us; and light and air, and all the beauties of Nature; we can read, discourse, and meditate; and having still these blessings, we should be much in love with sorrow and peevishness to lose them all, and prefer to sit down on our little handful of thorns.

Enjoy the blessings of this day, if God sends them, and the evils of it bear patiently and calmly; for this clay only is ours: we are dead to yesterday, and we are not yet born to the morrow. When our fortunes are violently changed, our spirits are unchanged, if they always stood in the suburbs and expectation of sorrows and reverses. The blessings of immunity. safeguard, liberty, and integrity deserve the thanksgiving of a whole life. We are quit from a thousand calamities, every one of which, if it were upon us, would make us insensible of our present sorrow, and glad to receive it in exchange for that other greater affliction.

Measure your desires by your fortune and condition, not your fortunes by your desires: be governed by your needs, not by your fancy; by nature, not by evil customs and ambitious principles. It is no evil to be poor, but to be vicious and impatient. Is that beast better, that hath two or three mountains to graze on, than the little bee that feeds on dew or manna, and lives upon what falls every morning from the store-houses of Heaven, clouds and Providence?

There are some instances of fortune and a fair condition that cannot stand with some others; but if you desire this, you must lose that, and unless you be content with one, you lose the comfort of both. If you covet learning, you must have leisure and a retired life; if honors of State and political distinctions, you must "Be ever abroad in public, and get experience, and do all men's business, and keep all company, and have no leisure at all. If you will be rich, you must be frugal; if you will be popular, you must

[p. 147]

be bountiful; if a philosopher, you must despise riches. If you would be famous as Epaminondas, accept also his poverty, for it added lustre to his person, and envy to his fortune, and his virtue without it could not have been so excellent. If you would have the reputation of a martyr, you must needs accept his persecution; if of a benefactor of the world, the world's injustice; if truly great, you must expect to see the mob prefer lesser men to yourself.

God esteems it one of His glories, that He brings good out of evil; and therefore it were but reason we should trust Him to govern His own world as He pleases; and that we should patiently wait until the change cometh, or the reason is discovered.

A Mason's contentedness must by no means be a mere contented selfishness, like his who, comfortable himself, is indifferent to the discomfort of others. There will always be in this world wrongs to forgive, suffering to alleviate, sorrow asking for sympathy, necessities and destitution to relieve, and ample occasion for the exercise of active charity and beneficence. And he who sits unconcerned amidst it all, perhaps enjoying his own comforts and luxuries the more, by contrasting them with the hungry and ragged destitution and shivering misery of his fellows, is not contented, but selfish and unfeeling.

It is the saddest of all sights upon this earth, that of a man lazy and luxurious, or hard and penurious, to whom want appeals in vain, and suffering cries in an unknown tongue. The man whose hasty anger hurries him into violence and crime is not half so unworthy to live. He is the faithless steward, that embezzles what God has given him in trust for the impoverished and suffering among his brethren. The true Mason must be and must have a right to be content with himself; and he can be so only when he lives not for himself alone, but for others also, who need his assistance and have a claim upon his sympathy.

"Charity is the great channel," it has been well said, "through which God passes all His mercy upon mankind. For we receive absolution of our sins in proportion to our forgiving our brother. This is the rule of our hopes and the measure of our desire in this world; and on the day of death and judgment, the great sentence upon mankind shall be transacted according to our alms, which is the other part of charity. God himself is love; and every degree of charity that dwells in us is the participation of the Divine nature."

[p. 148]

These principles Masonry reduces to practice. By them it expects you to be hereafter guided and governed. It especially inculcates them upon him who employs the labor of others, forbidding him to discharge them, when to want employment is to starve; or to contract for the labor of man or woman at so low a price that by over-exertion they must sell him their blood and life at the same time with the labor of their hands.

These Degrees are also intended to teach more than morals. The symbols and ceremonies of Masonry have more than one meaning. They rather conceal than disclose the Truth. They hint it only, at least; and their varied meanings are only to be discovered by reflection and study. Truth is not only symbolized by Light, but as the ray of light is separable into rays of different colors, so is truth separable into kinds. It is the province of Masonry to teach all truths--not moral truth alone, but political and philosophical, and even religious truth, so far as concerns the great and essential principles of each. The sphynx was a symbol. To whom has it disclosed its inmost meaning? Who knows the symbolic meaning of the pyramids?

You will hereafter learn who are the chief foes of human liberty symbolized by the assassins of the Master Khu_ru_m; and in their fate you may see foreshadowed that which we earnestly hope will hereafter overtake those enemies of humanity, against whom Masonry has struggled so long.

 

     
Morals and Dogma, by Albert Pike, [1871], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 149]

  

IX.

  

ELECT OF THE NINE. [Elu of the Nine.]

ORIGINALLY created to reward fidelity, obedience, and devotion, this Degree was consecrated to bravery, devotedness, and patriot-ism; and your obligation has made known to you the duties which you have assumed. They are summed up in the simple mandate, "Protect the oppressed against the oppressor; and devote yourself to the honor and interests of your Country."

Masonry is not "speculative," nor theoretical, but experimental; not sentimental, but practical. It requires self-renunciation and self-control. It wears a stern face toward men's vices, and interferes with many of our pursuits and our fancied pleasures. It penetrates beyond the region of vague sentiment; beyond the regions where moralizers and philosophers have woven their fine theories and elaborated their beautiful maxims, to the very depths of the heart, rebuking our littlenesses and meannesses, arraigning our prejudices and passions, and warring against the armies of our vices.

It wars against the passions that spring out of the bosom of a world of fine sentiments, a world of admirable sayings and foul practices, of good maxims and bad deeds; whose darker passions are not only restrained by custom and ceremony, but hidden even from itself by a veil of beautiful sentiments. This terrible solecism has existed in all ages. Romish sentimentalism has often covered infidelity and vice; Protestant straightness often lauds spirituality and faith, and neglects homely truth, candor, and generosity; and ultra-liberal Rationalistic refinement sometimes soars

[p. 150]

to heaven in its dreams, and wallows in the mire of earth in its deeds.

There may be a world of Masonic sentiment; and yet a world of little or no Masonry. In many minds there is a vague and general sentiment of Masonic charity, generosity, and disinterestedness, but no practical, active virtue, nor habitual kindness, self-sacrifice, or liberality. Masonry plays about them like the cold though brilliant lights that flush and eddy over Northern skies. There are occasional flashes of generous and manly feeling, transitory splendors, and momentary gleams of just and noble thought, and transient coruscations, that light the Heaven of their imagination; but there is no vital warmth in the heart; and it remains as cold and sterile as the Arctic or Antarctic regions. They do nothing; they gain no victories over themselves; they make no progress; they are still in the Northeast corner of the Lodge, as when they first stood there as Apprentices; and they do not cultivate Masonry, with a cultivation, determined, resolute, and regular, like their cultivation of their estate, profession, or knowledge. Their Masonry takes its chance in general and inefficient sentiment, mournfully barren of results; in words and formulas and fine professions.

Most men have sentiments, but not principles. The former are temporary sensations, the latter permanent and controlling impressions of goodness and virtue. The former are general and involuntary, and do not rise to the character of virtue. Every one feels them. They flash up spontaneously in every heart. The latter are rules of action, and shape and control our conduct; and it is these that Masonry insists upon.

We approve the right; but pursue the wrong. It is the old story of human deficiency. No one abets or praises injustice, fraud, oppression, covetousness, revenge, envy, or slander; and yet how many who condemn these things, are themselves guilty of them. It is no rare thing for him whose indignation is kindled at a tale of wicked injustice, cruel oppression, base slander, or misery inflicted by unbridled indulgence; whose anger flames in behalf of the injured and ruined victims of wrong; to be in some relation unjust, or oppressive, or envious, or self-indulgent, or a careless talker of others. How wonderfully indignant the penurious man often is, at the avarice or want of public spirit of another!

A great Preacher well said, "Therefore thou art inexcusable. O

[p. 151]

[paragraph continues] Man, whosoever thou art, that judgest; for wherein thou judgest another, thou condemnest thyself: for thou that judgest, doest the same things." It is amazing to see how men can talk of virtue and honor, whose life denies both. It is curious to see with what a marvellous facility many bad men quote Scripture. It seems to comfort their evil consciences, to use good words; and to gloze over bad deeds with holy texts, wrested to their purpose. Often, the more a man talks about Charity and Toleration, the less he has of either; the more he talks about Virtue, the smaller stock he has of it. The mouth speaks out of the abundance of the heart; but often the very reverse of what the man practises. And the vicious and sensual often express, and in a sense feel, strong disgust at vice and sensuality. Hypocrisy is not so common as is imagined.

Here, in the Lodge, virtue and vice are matters of reflection and feeling only. There is little opportunity here, for the practice of either; and Masons yield to the argument here, with facility and readiness; because nothing is to follow. It is easy, and safe, here, to feel upon these matters. But to-morrow, when they breathe the atmosphere of worldly gains and competitions, and the passions are again stirred at the opportunities of unlawful pleasure, all their fine emotions about virtue, all their generous abhorrence of selfishness and sensuality, melt away like a morning cloud.

For the time, their emotions and sentiments are sincere and real. Men may be really, in a certain way, interested in Masonry, while fatally deficient in virtue. It is not always hypocrisy. Men pray most fervently and sincerely, and yet are constantly guilty of acts so bad and base, so ungenerous and unrighteous, that the crimes that crowd the dockets of our courts are scarcely worse.

A man may be a good sort of man in general, and yet a very bad man in particular: good in the Lodge and bad in the world; good in public, and bad in his family; good at home, and bad on a journey or in a strange city. Many a man earnestly desires to be a good Mason. He says so, and is sincere. But if you require him to resist a certain passion, to sacrifice a certain indulgence, to control his appetite at a particular feast, or to keep his temper in a dispute, you will find that he does not wish to be a good Mason, in that particular case; or, wishing, is not able to resist his worse impulses.

The duties of life are more than life. The law imposeth it upon

[p. 152]

every citizen, that he prefer the urgent service of his country before the safety of his life. If a man be commanded, saith a great writer, to bring ordnance or munition to relieve any of the King's towns that are distressed, then he cannot for any danger of tempest justify the throwing of them overboard; for there it holdeth which was spoken by the Roman, when the same necessity of weather was alleged to hold him from embarking: "Necesse est ut eam, non ut vivam:" it needs that I go: it is not necessary I should live.

How ungratefully he slinks away, who dies, and does nothing to reflect a glory to Heaven! How barren a tree he is, who lives, and spreads, and cumbers the ground, yet leaves not one seed, not one good work to generate another after him! All cannot leave alike; yet all may leave something, answering their proportions and their kinds. Those are dead and withered grains of corn, out of which there will not one ear spring. He will hardly find the way to Heaven, who desires to go thither alone.

Industry is never wholly unfruitful. If it bring not joy with the incoming profit, it will yet banish mischief from thy busied gates. There is a kind of good angel waiting upon Diligence that ever carries a laurel in his hand to crown her. How unworthy was that man of the world who never did aught, but only lived and died! That we have liberty to do anything, we should account it a gift from the favoring Heavens; that we have minds sometimes inclining us to use that liberty well, is a great bounty of the Deity.

Masonry is action, and not inertness. It requires its Initiates to WORK, actively and earnestly, for the benefit of their brethren, their country, and mankind. It is the patron of the oppressed, as it is the comforter and consoler of the unfortunate and wretched. It seems to it a worthier honor to be the instrument of advancement and reform, than to enjoy all that rank and office and lofty titles can bestow. It is the advocate of the common people in those things which concern the best interests of mankind. It hates insolent power and impudent usurpation. It pities the poor, the sorrowing, the disconsolate; it endeavors to raise and improve the ignorant, the sunken, and the degraded.

Its fidelity to its mission will be accurately evidenced, by the extent of the efforts it employs, and the means it sets on foot, to improve the people at large and to better their condition; chiefest

[p. 153]

of which, within its reach, is to aid in the education of the children of the poor. An intelligent people, informed of its rights, will soon come to know its power, and cannot long be oppressed; but if there be not a sound and virtuous populace, the elaborate ornaments at the top of the pyramid of society will be a wretched compensation for the want of solidity at the base. It is never safe for a nation to repose on the lap of ignorance: and if there ever was a time when public tranquillity was insured by the absence of knowledge, that season is past. Unthinking stupidity cannot sleep, without being appalled by phantoms and shaken by terrors. The improvement of the mass of the people is the grand security for popular liberty; in the neglect of which, the politeness, refinement, and knowledge accumulated in the higher orders and wealthier classes will some day perish like dry grass in the hot fire of popular fury.

It is not the mission of Masonry to engage in plots and conspiracies against the civil government. It is not the fanatical propagandist of any creed or theory; nor does it proclaim itself the enemy of kings. It is the apostle of liberty, equality, and fraternity; but it is no more the high-priest of republicanism than of constitutional monarchy. It contracts no entangling alliances with any sect of theorists, dreamers, or philosophers. It does not know those as its Initiates who assail the civil order and all lawful authority, at the same time that they propose to deprive the dying of the consolations of religion. It sits apart from all sects and creeds, in its own calm and simple dignity, the same under every government. It is still that which it was in the cradle of the human race, when no human foot had trodden the soil of Assyria and Egypt, and no colonies had crossed the Himalayas into Southern India, Media, or Etruria.

It gives no countenance to anarchy and licentiousness; and no illusion of glory, or extravagant emulation of the ancients inflames it with an unnatural thirst for ideal and Utopian liberty. It teaches that in rectitude of life and sobriety of habits is the only sure guarantee for the continuance of political freedom; and it is chiefly the soldier of the sanctity of the laws and the rights of conscience.

It recognizes it as a truth, that necessity, as well as abstract right and ideal justice, must have its part in the making of laws, the administration of affairs, and the regulation of relations in

[p. 154]

society. It sees, indeed, that necessity rules in all the affairs of man. It knows that where any man, or any number or race of men, are so imbecile of intellect, so degraded, so incapable of self-control, so inferior in the scale of humanity, as to be unfit to be intrusted with the highest prerogatives of citizenship, the great law of necessity; for the peace and safety of the community and country, requires them to remain under the control of those of larger intellect and superior wisdom. It trusts and believes that God will, in his own good time, work out his own great and wise purposes; and it is willing to wait, where it does not see its own way clear to some certain good.

It hopes and longs for the day when all the races of men, even the lowest, will be elevated, and become fitted for political freedom; when, like all other evils that afflict the earth, pauperism, and bondage or abject dependence, shall cease and disappear. But it does not preach revolution to those who are fond of kings, nor rebellion that can end only in disaster and defeat, or in substituting one tyrant for another, or a multitude of despots for one.

Wherever a people is fit to be free and to govern itself, and generously strives to be so, there go all its sympathies. It detests the tyrant, the lawless oppressor, the military usurper, and him who abuses a lawful power. It frowns upon cruelty, and a wanton disregard of the rights of humanity. It abhors the selfish employer, and exerts its influence to lighten the burdens which want and dependence impose upon the workman, and to foster that humanity and kindness which man owes to even the poorest and most unfortunate brother.

It can never be employed, in any country under Heaven, to teach a toleration for cruelty, to weaken moral hatred for guilt, or to deprave and brutalize the human mind. The dread of punishment will never make a Mason an accomplice in so corrupting his countrymen, and a teacher of depravity and barbarity. If anywhere, as has heretofore happened, a tyrant should send a satirist on his tyranny to be convicted and punished as a libeller, in a court of justice, a Mason, if a juror in such a case, though in sight of the scaffold streaming with the blood of the innocent, and within hearing of the clash of the bayonets meant to overawe the court, would rescue the intrepid satirist from the tyrant's fangs, and send his officers out from the court with defeat and disgrace.

[p. 155]

Even if all law and liberty were trampled under the feet of Jacobinical demagogues or a military banditti, and great crimes were perpetrated with a high hand against all who were deservedly the objects of public veneration; if the people, overthrowing law, roared like a sea around the courts of justice, and demanded the blood of those who, during the temporary fit of insanity and drunken delirium, had chanced to become odious to it, for true words manfully spoken, or unpopular acts bravely done, the Masonic juror, unawed alike by the single or the many-headed tyrant, would consult the dictates of duty alone, and stand with a noble firmness between the human tigers and their coveted prey.

The Mason would much rather pass his life hidden in the recesses of the deepest obscurity, feeding his mind even with the visions and imaginations of good deeds and noble actions, than to be placed on the most splendid throne of the universe, tantalized with a denial of the practice of all which can make the greatest situation any other than the greatest curse. And if he has been enabled to lend the slightest step to any great and laudable de-signs; if he has had any share in any measure giving quiet to private property and to private conscience, making lighter the yoke of poverty and dependence, or relieving deserving men from oppression; if he has aided in securing to his countrymen that best possession, peace; if lie has joined in reconciling the different sections of his own country to each other, and the people to the government of their own creating; and in teaching the citizen to look for his protection to the laws of his country, and for his comfort to the good-will of his countrymen; if he has thus taken his part with the best of mete in the best of their actions, he may well shut the book, even if he might wish to read a page or two more. It is enough for his measure. He has not lived in vain.

Masonry teaches that all power is delegated for the good, and not for the injury of the People; and that, when it is perverted from the original purpose, the compact is broken, and the right ought to be resumed; that resistance to power usurped is not merely a duty which man owes to himself and to his neighbor, but a duty which he owes to his God, in asserting and maintaining the rank which He gave him in the creation. This principle neither the rudeness of ignorance can stifle nor the enervation of refinement extinguish. It makes it base for a man to suffer when he

[p. 156]

ought to act; and, tending to preserve to him the original destinations of Providence, spurns at the arrogant assumptions of Tyrants and vindicates the independent quality of the race of which we are a part.

The wise and well-informed Mason will not fail to be the votary of Liberty and Justice. He will be ready to exert himself in their defence, wherever they exist. It cannot be a matter of indifference to him when his own liberty and that of other men, with whose merits and capacities he is acquainted, are involved in the event of the struggle to be made; but his attachment will be to the cause, as the cause of man; and not merely to the country. Wherever there is a people that understands the value of political justice, and is prepared to assert it, that is his country; wherever he can most contribute to the diffusion of these principles and the real happiness of mankind, that is his country. Nor does he de-sire for any country any other benefit than justice.

The true Mason identifies the honor of his country with his own. Nothing more conduces to the beauty and glory of one's country than the preservation against all enemies of its civil and religious liberty. The world will never willingly let die the names of those patriots who in her different ages have received upon their own breasts the blows aimed by insolent enemies at the bosom of their country.

But also it conduces, and in no small measure, to the beauty and glory of one's country, that justice should always be administered there to all alike, and neither denied, sold, nor delayed to any one; that the interest of the poor should be looked to, and none starve or be houseless, or clamor in vain for work; that the child and the feeble woman should not be overworked, or even the apprentice or slave be stinted of food or overtasked or mercilessly scourged; and that God's great laws of mercy, humanity, and compassion should be everywhere enforced, not only by the statutes, but also by the power of public opinion. And he who labors, often against reproach and obloquy, and oftener against indifference and apathy, to bring about that fortunate condition of things when that great code of divine law shall be everywhere and punctually obeyed, is no less a patriot than he who bares his bosom to the hostile steel in the ranks of his country's soldiery.

For fortitude is not only seen resplendent on the field of battle and amid the clash of arms, but he displays its energy under

[p. 157]

every difficulty and against every assailant. He who wars against cruelty, oppression, and hoary abuses, fights for his country's honor, which these things soil; and her honor is as important as her existence. Often, indeed, the warfare against those abuses which disgrace one's country is quite as hazardous and more discouraging than that against her enemies in the field; and merits equal, if not greater reward.

For those Greeks and Romans who are the objects of our admiration employed hardly any other virtue in the extirpation of tyrants, than that love of liberty, which made them prompt in seizing the sword, and gave them strength to use it. With facility they accomplish the undertaking, amid the general shout of praise and joy; nor did they engage in the attempt so much as an enterprise of perilous and doubtful issue, as a contest the most glorious in which virtue could be signalized; which infallibly led to present recompense; which bound their brows with wreaths of laurel, and consigned their memories to immortal fame.

But he who assails hoary abuses, regarded perhaps with a superstitious reverence, and around which old laws stand as ramparts and bastions to defend them; who denounces acts of cruelty and outrage on humanity which make every perpetrator thereof his personal enemy, and perhaps make him looked upon with suspicion by the people among whom he lives, as the assailant of an established order of things of which he assails only the abuses, and of laws of which he attacks only the violations,--he can scarcely look for present recompense, nor that his living brows will be wreathed with laurel. And if, contending against a dark array of long-received opinions, superstitions, obloquy, and fears, which most men dread more than they do an army terrible with banners, the Mason overcomes, and emerges from the contest victorious; or if he does not conquer, but is borne down and swept away by the mighty current of prejudice, passion, and interest; in either case, the loftiness of spirit which he displays merits for him more than a mediocrity of fame.

He has already lived too long who has survived the ruin of his country; and he who can enjoy life after such an event deserves not to have lived at all. Nor does he any more deserve to live who looks contentedly upon abuses that disgrace, and cruelties that dishonor, and scenes of misery and destitution and brutalization that disfigure his country; or sordid meanness and ignoble revenges

[p. 158]

that make her a by-word and a scoff among all generous nations; and does not endeavor to remedy or prevent either.

Not often is a country at war; nor can every one be allowed the privilege of offering his heart to the enemy's bullets. But in these patriotic labors of peace, in preventing, remedying, and reforming evils, oppressions, wrongs, cruelties, and outrages, every Mason can unite; and every one can effect something, and share the honor and glory of the result.

For the cardinal names in the history of the human mind are few and easily to be counted up; but thousands and tens of thousands spend their days in the preparations which are to speed the predestined change, in gathering and amassing the materials which are to kindle and give light and warmth, when the fire from heaven shall have descended on them. Numberless are the sutlers and pioneers, the engineers and artisans, who attend the march of intellect. Many move forward in detachments, and level the way over which the chariot is to pass, and cut down the obstacles that would impede its progress; and these too have their reward. If they labor diligently and faithfully in their calling, not only will they enjoy that calm contentment which diligence in the lowliest task never fails to win; not only will the sweat of their brows be sweet, and the sweetener of the rest that follows; but, when the victory is at last achieved, they will come in for a share in the glory; even as the meanest soldier who fought at Marathon or at King's Mountain became a sharer in the glory of those saving days; and within his own household circle, the approbation of which approaches the nearest to that of an approving conscience, was looked upon as the representative of all his brother-heroes; and could tell such tales as made the tear glisten on the cheek of his wife, and lit up his boy's eyes with an unwonted sparkling eagerness. Or, if he fell in the fight, and his place by the fireside and at the table at home was thereafter vacant, that place was sacred; and he was often talked of there in the long winter evenings; and his family was deemed fortunate in the neighborhood, because it had had a hero in it, who had fallen in defence of his country.

Remember that life's length is not measured by its hours and days, but by that which we have done therein for our country and kind. A useless life is short, if it last a century; but that of Alexander was long as the life of the oak, though he died at

[p. 159]

thirty-five. We may do much in a few years, and we may do nothing in a lifetime. If we but eat and drink and sleep, and let everything go on around us as it pleases; or if we live but to amass wealth or gain office or wear titles, we might as well not have lived at all; nor have we any right to expect immortality.

Forget not, therefore, to what you have devoted yourself in this Degree: defend weakness against strength, the friendless against the great, the oppressed against the oppressor! Be ever vigilant and watchful of the interests and honor of your country! and may the Grand Architect of the Universe give you that strength and wisdom which shall enable you well and faithfully to perform these high duties!

 

     
Morals and Dogma, by Albert Pike, [1871], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 160]

  

X.

  

ILLUSTRIOUS ELECT OF THE FIFTEEN.

  

[Elu of the Fifteen.]

THIS Degree is devoted to the same objects as those of the Elu of Nine; and also to the cause of Toleration and Liberality against Fanaticism and Persecution, political and religious; and to that of Education, Instruction, and Enlightenment against Error, Barbarism, and Ignorance. To these objects you have irrevocably and forever devoted your hand, your heart, and your intellect; and whenever in your presence a Chapter of this Degree is opened, you will be most solemnly reminded of your vows here taken at the altar.

Toleration, holding that every other man has the same right to his opinion and faith that we have to ours; and liberality, holding that as no human being can with certainty say, in the clash and conflict of hostile faiths and creeds, what is truth, or that he is surely in possession of it, so every one should feel that it is quite possible that another equally honest and sincere with himself, and yet holding the contrary opinion, may himself be in possession of the truth, and that whatever one firmly and conscientiously believes, is truth, to him--these are the mortal enemies of that fanaticism which persecutes for opinion's sake, and initiates crusades against whatever it, in its imaginary holiness, deems to be contrary to the law of God or verity of dogma. And education, instruction, and enlightenment are the most certain means by which fanaticism and intolerance can be rendered powerless.

No true Mason scoffs at honest convictions and an ardent zeal in the cause of what one believes to be truth and justice. But he

[p. 161]

does absolutely deny the right of any man to assume the prerogative of Deity, and condemn another's faith and opinions as deserving to be punished because heretical. Nor does he approve the course of those who endanger the peace and quiet of great nations, and the best interest of their own race by indulging in a chimerical and visionary philanthropy--a luxury which chiefly consists in drawing their robes around them to avoid contact with their fellows, and proclaiming themselves holier than they.

For he knows that such follies are often more calamitous than the ambition of kings; and that intolerance and bigotry have been infinitely greater curses to mankind than ignorance and error. Better any error than persecution! Better any opinion than the thumb-screw, the rack, and the stake! And he knows also how unspeakably absurd it is, for a creature to whom himself and everything around him are mysteries, to torture and slay others, because they cannot think as he does in regard to the profoundest of those mysteries, to understand which is utterly beyond the comprehension of either the persecutor or the persecuted.

Masonry is not a religion. He who makes of it a religious belief, falsifies and denaturalizes it. The Brahmin, the Jew, the Mahometan, the Catholic, the Protestant, each professing his peculiar religion, sanctioned by the laws, by time, and by climate, must needs retain it, and cannot have two religions; for the social and sacred laws adapted to the usages, manners, and prejudices of particular countries, are the work of men.

But Masonry teaches, and has preserved in their purity, the cardinal tenets of the old primitive faith, which underlie and are the foundation of all religions. All that ever existed have had a basis of truth; and all have overlaid that truth with errors. The primitive truths taught by the Redeemer were sooner corrupted, and intermingled and alloyed with fictions than when taught to the first of our race. Masonry is the universal morality which is suitable to the inhabitants of every clime, to the man of every creed. It has taught no doctrines, except those truths that tend directly to the well-being of man; and those who have attempted to direct it toward useless vengeance, political ends, and Jesuitism, have merely perverted it to purposes foreign to its pure spirit and real nature.

Mankind outgrows the sacrifices and the mythologies of the childhood of the world. Yet it is easy for human indolence to

[p. 162]

linger near these helps, and refuse to pass further on. So the unadventurous Nomad in the Tartarian wild keeps his flock in the same close-cropped circle where they first learned to browse, while the progressive man roves ever forth "to fresh fields and pastures new."

The latter is the true Mason; and the best and indeed the only good Mason is he who with the power of business does the work of life; the upright mechanic, merchant, or farmer, the man with the power of thought, of justice, or of love, he whose whole life is one great act of performance of Masonic duty. The natural use of the strength of a strong man or the wisdom of a wise one, is to do the work of a strong man or a wise one. The natural work of Masonry is practical life; the use of all the faculties in their proper spheres, and for their natural function. Love of Truth, justice, and generosity as attributes of God, must appear in a life marked by these qualities; that is the only effectual ordinance of Masonry. A profession of one's convictions, joining the Order, assuming the obligations, assisting at the ceremonies, are of the same value in science as in Masonry; the natural form of Masonry is goodness, morality, living a true, just, affectionate, self-faithful life, from the motive of a good man. It is loyal obedience to God's law.

The good Mason does the good thing which comes in his way, and because it comes in his way; from a love of duty, and not merely because a law, enacted by man or God, commands his will to do it. He is true to his mind, his conscience, heart, and soul, and feels small temptation to do to others what he would not wish to receive from them. He will deny himself for the sake of his brother near at hand. His desire attracts in the line of his duty, both being in conjunction. Not in vain does the poor or the op-pressed look up to him. You find such men in all Christian sects, Protestant and Catholic, in all the great religious parties of the civilized world, among Buddhists, Mahometans, and Jews. They are kind fathers, generous citizens, unimpeachable in their business, beautiful in their daily lives. You see their Masonry in their work and in their play. It appears in all the forms of their activity, individual, domestic, social, ecclesiastical, or political. True Masonry within must be morality without. It must become eminent morality, which is philanthropy. The true Mason loves not only his kindred and his country, but all mankind; not only

[p. 163]

the good, but also the evil, among his brethren. He has more goodness than the channels of his daily life will hold. It runs over the banks, to water and to feed a thousand thirsty plants. Not content with the duty that lies along his track, he goes out to seek it; not only willing, he has a salient longing to do good, to spread his truth, his justice, his generosity, his Masonry over all the world. His daily life is a profession of his Masonry, published in perpetual good-will to men. He can not be a persecutor.

Not more naturally does the beaver build or the mocking-bird sing his own wild, gushing melody, than the true Mason lives in this beautiful outward life. So from the perennial spring swells forth the stream, to quicken the meadow with new access of green, and perfect beauty bursting into bloom. Thus Masonry does the work it was meant to do. The Mason does not sigh and weep, and make grimaces. He lives right on. If his life is, as whose is not, marked with errors, and with sins, he ploughs over the barren spot with his remorse, sows with new seed, and the old desert blossoms like a rose. He is not confined to set forms of thought, of action, or of feeling. He accepts what his mind regards as true, what his conscience decides is right, what his heart deems generous and noble; and all else he puts far from him. Though the ancient and the honorable of the Earth bid him bow down to them, his stubborn knees bend only at the bidding of his manly soul. His Masonry is his freedom before God, not his bondage unto men. His mind acts after the universal law of the intellect, his conscience according to the universal moral law, his affections and his soul after the universal law of each, and so he is strong with the strength of God, in this four-fold way communicating with Him.

The old theologies, the philosophies of religion of ancient times, will not suffice us now. The duties of life are to be done; we are to do them, consciously obedient to the law of God, not atheistically, loving only our selfish gain. There are sins of trade to be corrected. Everywhere morality and philanthropy are needed. There are errors to be made way with, and their place supplied with new truths, radiant with the glories of Heaven. There are great wrongs and evils, in Church and State, in domestic, social, and public life, to be righted and outgrown. Masonry cannot in our age forsake the broad way of life. She must journey on in the open street, appear in the crowded square, and teach men by her deeds, her life more eloquent than any lips.

[p. 164]

This Degree is chiefly devoted to TOLERATION; and it inculcates in the strongest manner that great leading idea of the Ancient Art, that a belief in the one True God, and a moral and virtuous life, constitute the only religious requisites needed to enable a man to be a Mason.

Masonry has ever the most vivid remembrance of the terrible and artificial torments that were used to put down new forms of religion or extinguish the old. It sees with the eye of memory the ruthless extermination of all the people of all sexes and ages, because it was their misfortune not to know the God of the Hebrews, or to worship Him under the wrong name, by the savage troops of Moses and Joshua. It sees the thumb-screws and the racks, the whip, the gallows, and the stake, the victims of Diocletian and Alva, the miserable Covenanters, the Non-Conformists, Servetus burned, and the unoffending Quaker hung. It sees Cranmer hold his arm, now no longer erring, in the flame until the hand drops off in the consuming heat. It sees the persecutions of Peter and Paul, the martyrdom of Stephen, the trials of Ignatius, Polycarp, Justin, and Irenaeus; and then in turn the sufferings of the wretched Pagans under the Christian Emperors, as of the Papists in Ireland and under Elizabeth and the bloated Henry. The Roman Virgin naked before the hungry lions; young Margaret Graham tied to a stake at low-water mark, and there left to drown, singing hymns to God until the savage waters broke over her head; and all that in all ages have suffered by hunger and nakedness, peril and prison, the rack, the stake, and the sword,--it sees them all, and shudders at the long roll of human atrocities. And it sees also the oppression still practised in the name of religion--men shot in a Christian jail in Christian Italy for reading the Christian Bible; in almost every Christian State, laws forbidding freedom of speech on matters relating to Christianity; and the gallows reaching its arm over the pulpit.

The fires of Moloch in Syria, the harsh mutilations in the name of Astarte, Cybele, Jehovah; the barbarities of imperial Pagan Torturers; the still grosser torments which Roman-Gothic Christians in Italy and Spain heaped on their brother-men; the fiendish cruelties to which Switzerland, France, the Netherlands, England, Scotland, Ireland, America, have been witnesses, are none too powerful to warn man of the unspeakable evils which follow from mistakes and errors in the matter of religion, and especially from

[p. 165]

investing the God of Love with the cruel and vindictive passions of erring humanity, and making blood to have a sweet savor in his nostrils, and groans of agony to be delicious to his ears.

Man never had the right to usurp the unexercised prerogative of God, and condemn and punish another for his belief. Born in a Protestant land, we are of that faith. If we had opened our eyes to the light under the shadows of St. Peter's at Rome, we should have been devout Catholics; born in the Jewish quarter of Aleppo, we should have contemned Christ as an imposter; in Constantinople, we should have cried "Allah il Allah, God is great and Mahomet is his prophet!" Birth, place, and education give us our faith. Few believe in any religion because they have examined the evidences of its authenticity, and made up a formal judgment, upon weighing the testimony. Not one man in ten thousand knows anything about the proofs of his faith. We believe what we are taught; and those are most fanatical who know least of the evidences on which their creed is based. Facts and testimony are not, except in very rare instances, the ground-work of faith. It is an imperative law of God's Economy, unyielding and inflexible as Himself, that man shall accept without question the belief of those among whom he is born and reared; the faith so made a part of his nature resists all evidence to the contrary; and he will disbelieve even the evidence of his own senses, rather than yield up the religious belief which has grown up in him, flesh of his flesh and bone of his bone.

What is truth to me is not truth to another. The same arguments and evidences that convince one mind make no impression on another. This difference is in men at their birth. No man is entitled positively to assert that he is right, where other men, equally intelligent and equally well-informed, hold directly the opposite opinion. Each thinks it impossible for the other to be sincere, and each, as to that, is equally in error. "What is truth?" was a profound question, the most suggestive one ever put to man. Many beliefs of former and present times seem incomprehensible. They startle us with a new glimpse into the human soul, that mysterious thing, more mysterious the more we note its workings. Here is a man superior to myself in intellect and learning; and yet he sincerely believes what seems to me too absurd to merit confutation; and I cannot conceive, and sincerely do not believe,

[p. 166]

that he is both sane and honest. And yet he is both. His reason is as perfect as mine, and he is as honest as I.

The fancies of a lunatic are realities, to him. Our dreams are realities while they last, and, in the Past, no more unreal than what we have acted in our waking hours. No man can say that he hath as sure possession of the truth as of a chattel. When men entertain opinions diametrically opposed to each other, and each is honest, who shall decide which hath the Truth; and how can either say with certainty that he hath it? We know not what is the truth. That we ourselves believe and feel absolutely certain that our own belief is true, is in reality not the slightest proof of the fact, seem it never so certain and incapable of doubt to us. No man is responsible for the rightness of his faith; but only for the uprightness of it.

Therefore no man hath or ever had a right to persecute another for his belief; for there cannot be two antagonistic rights; and if one can persecute another, because he himself is satisfied that the belief of that other is erroneous, the other has, for the same reason, equally as certain a right to persecute him.

The truth comes to us tinged and colored with our prejudices and our preconceptions, which are as old as ourselves, and strong with a divine force. It comes to us as the image of a rod comes to us through the water, bent and distorted. An argument sinks into and convinces the mind of one man, while from that of another it rebounds like a ball of ivory dropped on marble. It is no merit in a man to have a particular faith, excellent and sound and philosophic as it may be, when he imbibed it with his mother's milk. It is no more a merit than his prejudices and his passions.

The sincere Moslem has as much right to persecute us, as we to persecute him; and therefore Masonry wisely requires no more than a belief in One Great All-Powerful Deity, the Father and Preserver of the Universe. Therefore it is she teaches her votaries that toleration is one of the chief duties of every good Mason, a component part of that charity without which we are mere hollow images of true Masons, mere sounding brass and tinkling cymbals.

No evil hath so afflicted the world as intolerance of religious opinion. The human beings it has slain in various ways, if once and together brought to life, would make a nation of people; left to live and increase, would have doubled the population of the civilized portion of the globe; among which civilized portion it

[p. 167]

chiefly is that religious wars are waged. The treasure and the human labor thus lost would have made the earth a garden, in which, but for his evil passions, man might now be as happy as in Eden.

No man truly obeys the Masonic law who merely tolerates those whose religious opinions are opposed to his own. Every man's opinions are his own private property, and the rights of all men to maintain each his own are perfectly equal. Merely to tolerate, to bear with an opposing opinion, is to assume it to be heretical; and assert the right to persecute, if we would; and claim our toleration of it as a merit. The Mason's creed goes further than that. No man, it holds, has any right in any way to interfere with the religious belief of another. It holds that each man is absolutely sovereign as to his own belief, and that belief is a matter absolutely foreign to all who do not entertain the same belief; and that, if there were any right of persecution at all, it would in all cases be a mutual right; because one party has the same right as the other to sit as judge in his own case; and God is she only magistrate that can rightfully decide between them. To that great Judge, Masonry refers the matter; and opening wide its portals, it invites to enter there and live in peace and harmony, the Protestant, the Catholic, the Jew. the Moslem; every man who will lead a truly virtuous and moral life, love his brethren, minister to the sick and distressed, and believe in the ONE, All-Powerful, All-Wise, everywhere-Present GOD, Architect, Creator, and Preserver of all things, by whose universal law of Harmony ever rolls on this universe, the great, vast, infinite circle of successive Death and Life:--to whose INEFFABLE NAME let all true Masons pay profoundest homage! for whose thousand blessings poured upon us, let us feel the sincerest gratitude, now, henceforth, and forever!

We may well be tolerant of each other's creed; for in every faith there are excellent moral precepts. Far in the South of Asia, Zoroaster taught this doctrine: "On commencing a journey, the Faithful should turn his thoughts toward Ormuzd, and confess him, in the purity of his heart, to be King of the World; he should love him, do him homage, and serve him. He must be upright and charitable, despise the pleasures of the body, and avoid pride and haughtiness, and vice in all its forms, and especially falsehood, one of the basest sins of which man can be guilty. He

[p. 168]

must forget injuries and not avenge himself. He must honor the memory of his parents and relatives. At night, before retiring to sleep, he should rigorously examine his conscience, and repent of the faults which weakness or ill-fortune had caused him to commit." He was required to pray for strength to persevere in the Good, and to obtain forgiveness for his errors. It was his duty to confess his faults to a Magus, or to a layman renowned for his virtues, or to the Sun. Fasting and maceration were prohibited; and, on the contrary, it was his duty suitably to nourish the body and to maintain its vigor, that his soul might be strong to resist the Genius of Darkness; that he might more attentively read the Divine Word, and have more courage to perform noble deeds.

And in the North of Europe the Druids taught devotion to friends, indulgence for reciprocal wrongs, love of deserved praise, prudence, humanity, hospitality, respect for old age, disregard of the future, temperance, contempt of death, and a chivalrous deference to woman. Listen to these maxims from the Hava Maal, or Sublime Book of Odin:

"If thou hast a friend, visit him often; the path will grow over with grass, and the trees soon cover it, if thou dost not constantly walk upon it. He is a faithful friend, who, having but two loaves, gives his friend one. Be never first to break with thy friend; sorrow wrings the heart of him who has no one save himself with whom to take counsel. There is no virtuous man who has not some vice, no bad man who has not some virtue. Happy he who obtains the praise and good-will of men; for all that depends on the will of another is hazardous and uncertain. Riches flit away in the twinkling of an eye; they are the most inconstant of friends; flocks and herds perish, parents die, friends are not immortal, thou thyself diest; I know but one thing that cloth not die, the judgment that is passed upon the dead. Be humane toward those whom thou meetest on the road. If the guest that cometh to thy house is a-cold, give him fire; the man who has journeyed over the mountains needs food and dry garments. Mock not at the aged; for words full of sense come often from the wrinkles of age. Be moderately wise, and not over-prudent. Let no one seek to know his destiny, if he would sleep tranquilly. There is no malady more cruel than to be discontented with our lot. The glutton eats his own death; and the wise man laughs at the fool's greediness. Nothing is more injurious to the young than

[p. 169]

excessive drinking; the more one drinks the more he loses his reason; the bird of forgetfulness sings before those who intoxicate themselves, and wiles away their souls. Man devoid of sense believes he will live always if he avoids war; but, if the lances spare him, old age will give him no quarter. Better live well than live long. When a man lights a fire in his house, death comes before it goes out."

And thus said the Indian books: "Honor thy father and mother. Never forget the benefits thou hast received. Learn while thou art young. Be submissive to the laws of thy country. Seek the company of virtuous men. Speak not of God but with respect. Live on good terms with thy fellow-citizens. Remain in thy proper place. Speak ill of no one. Mock at the bodily infirmities of none. Pursue not unrelentingly a conquered enemy. Strive to acquire a good reputation. Take counsel with wise men. The more one learns, the more he acquires the faculty of learning. Knowledge is the most permanent wealth. As well be dumb as ignorant. The true use of knowledge is to distinguish good from evil. Be not a subject of shame to thy parents. What one learns in youth endures like the engraving upon a rock. He is wise who knows himself. Let thy books be thy best friends. When thou attainest an hundred years, cease to learn. Wisdom is solidly planted, even on the shifting ocean. Deceive no one, not even thine enemy. Wisdom is a treasure that everywhere commands its value. Speak mildly, even to the poor. It is sweeter to forgive than to take vengeance. Gaming and quarrels lead to misery. There is no true merit without the practice of virtue. To honor our mother is the most fitting homage we can pay the Divinity. There is no tranquil sleep without a clear conscience. He badly understands his interest who breaks his word."

Twenty-four centuries ago these were the Chinese Ethics:

"The Philosopher [Confucius] said, 'SAN! my doctrine is simple, and easy to be understood.' THSENG-TSEU replied, 'that is certain.' The Philosopher having gone out, the disciples asked what their master had meant to say. THSENG-TSEU responded, 'The doctrine of our Master consists solely in being upright of heart, and loving our neighbor as we love ourself.'"

About a century later, the Hebrew law said, "If any man hate his neighbor . . . then shall ye do unto him, as he had thought to

[p. 170]

do unto his brother ... Better is a neighbor that is near, than a brother afar off ... Thou shalt love thy neighbor as thyself."

In the same fifth century before Christ, SOCRATES the Grecian said, "Thou shalt love thy neighbor as thyself."

Three generations earlier, ZOROASTER had said to the Persians: "Offer up thy grateful prayers to the Lord, the most just and pure Ormuzd, the supreme and adorable Cod, who thus declared to his Prophet Zerdusht: 'Hold it not meet to do unto others what thou wouldst not desire done unto thyself; do that unto the people, which, when done to thyself, is not disagreeable unto thee.'"

The same doctrine had been long taught in the schools of Babylon, Alexandria, and Jerusalem. A Pagan declared to the Pharisee HILLEL, that he was ready to embrace the Jewish religion, if he could make known to him in a few words a summary of the whole law of Moses. "That which thou likest not done to thyself," said Hillel, "do it not unto thy neighbor. Therein is all the law: the rest is nothing but the commentary upon it."

"Nothing is more natural," said CONFUCIUS, "nothing more simple, than the principles of that morality which I endeavor, by salutary maxims, to inculcate in you . . . It is humanity; which is to say, that universal charity among all of our species, without distinction. It is uprightness; that is, that rectitude of spirit and of heart, which makes one seek for truth in everything, and desire it, without deceiving one's self or others. It is, finally, sincerity or good faith; which is to say, that frankness, that openness of heart, tempered by self-reliance, which excludes all feints and all disguising, as much in speech as in action."

To diffuse useful information, to further intellectual refinement, sure forerunner of moral improvement, to hasten the coming of the great day, when the dawn of general knowledge shall chase away the lazy, lingering mists of ignorance and error, even from the base of the great social pyramid, is indeed a high calling, in which the most splendid talents and consummate virtue may well press onward, eager to bear a part. From the Masonic ranks ought to go forth those whose genius and not their ancestry ennoble them, to open to all ranks the temple of science, and by their own example to make the humblest men emulous to climb steps no longer inaccessible, and enter the unfolded gates burning in the sun.

The highest intellectual cultivation is perfectly compatible with

[p. 171]

the daily cares and toils of working-men. A keen relish for the most sublime truths of science belongs alike to every class of mankind. And, as philosophy was taught in the sacred groves of Athens, and under the Portico, and in the old Temples of Egypt and India, so in our Lodges ought Knowledge to be dispensed, the Sciences taught, and the Lectures become like the teachings of Socrates and Plato, of Agassiz and Cousin.

Real knowledge never permitted either turbulence or unbelief; but its progress is the forerunner of liberality and enlightened toleration. Whoso dreads these may well tremble; for he may be well assured that their day is at length come, and must put to speedy flight the evil spirits of tyranny and persecution, which haunted the long night now gone down the sky. And it is to be hoped that the time will soon arrive, when, as men will no longer suffer themselves to be led blindfolded in ignorance, so will they no more yield to the vile principle of judging and treating their fellow-creatures, not according to the intrinsic merit of their actions, but according to the accidental and involuntary coincidence of their opinions.

Whenever we come to treat with entire respect those who conscientiously differ from ourselves, the only practical effect of a difference will be, to make us enlighten the ignorance on one side or the other, from which it springs, by instructing them, if it be theirs; ourselves, if it be our own; to the end that the only kind of unanimity may be produced which is desirable among rational beings,--the agreement proceeding from full conviction after the freest discussion.

The Elu of Fifteen ought therefore to take the lead of his fellow-citizen, not in frivolous amusements, not in the degrading pursuits of the ambitious vulgar; but in the truly noble task of enlightening the mass of his countrymen, and of leaving his own name encircled, not with barbaric splendor, or attached to courtly gewgaws, but illustrated by the honors most worthy of our rational nature; coupled with the diffusion of knowledge, and gratefully pronounced by a few, at least, whom his wise beneficence has rescued from ignorance and vice.

We say to him, in the words of the great Roman: "Men in no respect so nearly approach to the Deity, as when they confer benefits on men. To serve and do good to as many as possible, there is nothing greater in your fortune than that you should be able,

[p. 172]

and nothing finer in your nature, than that you should be desirous to do this." This is the true mark for the aim of every man and Mason who either prizes the enjoyment of pure happiness, or sets a right value upon a high and unsullied renown. And if the benefactors of mankind, when they rest from their noble labors, shall be permitted to enjoy hereafter, as an appropriate reward of their virtue, the privilege of looking down upon the blessings with which their exertions and charities, and perhaps their toils and sufferings have clothed the scene of their former existence, it will not, in a state of exalted purity and wisdom, be the founders of mighty dynasties, the conquerors of new empires, the Caesars, Alexanders, and Tamerlanes; nor the mere Kings and Counsellors, Presidents and Senators, who have lived for their party chiefly, and for their country only incidentally, often sacrificing to their own aggrandizement or that of their faction the good of their fellow-creatures;--it will not be they who will be gratified by contemplating the monuments of their inglorious fame; but those will enjoy that delight and march in that triumph, who can trace the remote effects of their enlightened benevolence in the improved condition of their species, and exult in the reflection, that the change which they at last, perhaps after many years, survey, with eyes that age and sorrow can make dim no more,--of Knowledge become Power,--Virtue sharing that Empire,--Superstition dethroned, and Tyranny exiled, is, if even only in some small and very slight degree, yet still in some degree, the fruit, precious if costly, and though late repaid yet long enduring, of their own self-denial and strenuous exertion, of their own mite of charity and aid to education wisely bestowed, and of the hard-ships and hazards which they encountered here below.

Masonry requires of its Initiates and votaries nothing that is impracticable. It does not demand that they should undertake to climb to those lofty and sublime peaks of a theoretical and imaginary unpractical virtue, high and cold and remote as the eternal snows that wrap the shoulders of Chimborazo, and at least as in-accessible as they. It asks that alone to be done which is easy to be done. It overtasks no one's strength, and asks no one to go beyond his means and capacities. It does not expect one whose business or profession yields him little more than the wants of himself and his family require, and whose time is necessarily occupied by his daily vocations, to abandon or neglect the business

[p. 173]

by which he and his children live, and devote himself and his means to the diffusion of knowledge among men. It does not expect him to publish books for the people, or to lecture, to the ruin of his private affairs, or to found academies and colleges, build up libraries, and entitle himself to statues.

But it does require and expect every man of us to do something, within and according to his means; and there is no Mason who cannot do some thing, if not alone, then by combination and association.

If a Lodge cannot aid in founding a school or an academy it can still do something. It can educate one boy or girl, at least, the child of some poor or departed brother. And it should never be forgotten, that in the poorest unregarded child that seems abandoned to ignorance and vice may slumber the virtues of a Socrates, the intellect of a Bacon or a Bossuet, the genius of a Shakespeare, the capacity to benefit mankind of a Washington; and that in rescuing him from the mire in which he is plunged, and giving him the means of education and development, the Lodge that does it may be the direct and immediate means of conferring upon the world as great a boon as that given it by John Faust the boy of Mentz; may perpetuate the liberties of a country and change the destinies of nations, and write a new chapter in the history of the world.

For we never know the importance of the act we do. The daughter of Pharaoh little thought what she was doing for the human race, and the vast unimaginable consequences that depended on her charitable act, when she drew the little child of a Hebrew woman from among the rushes that grew along the bank of the Nile, and determined to rear it as if it were her own.

How often has an act of charity, costing the doer little, given to the world a great painter, a great musician, a great inventor! How often has such an act developed the ragged boy into the benefactor of his race! On what small and apparently unimportant circumstances have turned and hinged the fates of the world's great conquerors. There is no law that limits the returns that shall be reaped from a single good deed. The widow's mite may not only be as acceptable to God, but may produce as great results as the rich man's costly offering. The poorest boy, helped by benevolence, may come to lead armies, to control senates, to decide on peace and war, to dictate to cabinets; and his magnificent

[p. 174]

thoughts and noble words may be law many years hereafter to millions of men yet unborn.

But the opportunity to effect a great good does not often occur to any one. It is worse than folly for one to lie idle and inert, and expect the accident to befall him, by which his influences shall live forever. He can expect that to happen, only in consequence of one or many or all of a long series of acts. He can expect to benefit the world only as men attain other results; by continuance, by persistence, by a steady and uniform habit of laboring for the enlightenment of the world, to the extent of his means and capacity.

For it is, in all instances, by steady labor, by giving enough of application to our work, and having enough of time for the doing of it, by regular pains-taking, and the plying of constant assiduities, and not by any process of legerdemain, that we secure the strength and the staple of real excellence. It was thus that Demosthenes, clause after clause, and sentence after sentence, elaborated to the uttermost his immortal orations. It was thus that Newton pioneered his way, by the steps of an ascending geometry, to the mechanism of the Heavens, and Le Verrier added a planet to our Solar System.

It is a most erroneous opinion that those who have left the most stupendous monuments of intellect behind them, were not differently exercised from the rest of the species, but only differently gifted; that they signalized themselves only by their talent, and hardly ever by their industry; for it is in truth to the most strenuous application of those commonplace faculties which are diffused among all, that they are indebted for the glories which now encircle their remembrance and their name.

We must not imagine it to be a vulgarizing of genius, that it should be lighted up in any other way than by a direct inspiration from Heaven; nor overlook the steadfastness of purpose, the devotion to some single but great object, the unweariedness of labor that is given, not in convulsive and preternatural throes, but by little and little as the strength of the mind may bear it; the accumulation of many small efforts, instead of a few grand and gigantic, but perhaps irregular movements, on the part of energies that are marvellous; by which former alone the great results are brought out that write their enduring records on the face of the earth and in the history of nations and of man.

[p. 175]

We must not overlook these elements, to which genius owes the best and proudest of her achievements; nor imagine that qualities so generally possessed as patience and pains-taking, and resolute industry, have no share in upholding a distinction so illustrious as that of the benefactor of his kind.

We must not forget that great results are most ordinarily produced by an aggregate of many contributions and exertions; as it is the invisible particles of vapor, each separate and distinct from the other, that, rising from the oceans and their bays and gulfs, from lakes and rivers, and wide morasses and overflowed plains, float away as clouds, and distill upon the earth in dews, and fall in showers and rain and snows upon the broad plains and rude mountains, and make the great navigable streams that are the arteries along which flows the life-blood of a country.

And so Masonry can do much, if each Mason be content to do his share, and if their united efforts are directed by wise counsels to a common purpose. "It is for God and for Omnipotency to do mighty things in a moment; but by degrees to grow to greatness is the course that He hath left for man."

If Masonry will but be true to her mission, and Masons to their promises and obligations--if, re-entering vigorously upon a career of beneficence, she and they will but pursue it earnestly and unfalteringly, remembering that our contributions to the cause of charity and education then deserve the greatest credit when it costs us something, the curtailing of a comfort or the relinquishment of a luxury, to make them--if we will but give aid to what were once Masonry's great schemes for human improvement, not fitfully and spasmodically, but regularly and incessantly, as the vapors rise and the springs run, and as the sun rises and the stars come up into the heavens, then we may be sure that great results will be attained and a great work done. And then it will most surely be seen that Masonry is not effete or impotent, nor degenerated nor drooping to a fatal decay.

 

     
Morals and Dogma, by Albert Pike, [1871], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 176]

  

XI.

  

SUBLIME ELECT OF THE TWELVE;

  

OR

  

PRINCE AMETH.

  

[Elu of the Twelve.]

THE duties of a Prince Ameth are, to be earnest, true, reliable, and sincere; to protect the people against illegal impositions and exactions; to contend for their political rights, and to see, as far as he may or can, that those bear the burdens who reap the benefits of the Government.

You are to be true unto all men.

You are to be frank and sincere in all things.

You are to be earnest in doing whatever it is your duty to do.

And no man must repent that he has relied upon your resolve, your profession, or your word.

The great distinguishing characteristic of a Mason is sympathy with his kind. He recognizes in the human race one great family, all connected with himself by those invisible links, and that mighty net-work of circumstance, forged and woven by God.

Feeling that sympathy, it is his first Masonic duty to serve his fellow-man. At his first entrance into the Order, he ceases to be isolated, and becomes one of a great brotherhood, assuming new duties toward every Mason that lives, as every Mason at the same moment assumes them toward him.

Nor are those duties on his part confined to Masons alone. He assumes many in regard to his country, and especially toward the great, suffering masses of the common people; for they too are his brethren, and God hears them, inarticulate as the moanings of their misery are. By all proper means, of persuasion and influence,

[p. 177]

and otherwise, if the occasion and emergency require, he is bound to defend them against oppression, and tyrannical and illegal exactions.

He labors equally to defend and to improve the people. He does not flatter them to mislead them, nor fawn upon them to rule them, nor conceal his opinions to humor them, nor tell them that they can never err, and that their voice is the voice of God. He knows that the safety of every free government, and its continuance and perpetuity depend upon the virtue and intelligence of the common people; and that, unless their liberty is of such a kind as arms can neither procure nor take away; unless it is the fruit of manly courage, of justice, temperance, and generous virtue--unless, being such, it has taken deep root in the minds and hearts of the people at large, there will not long be wanting those who will snatch from them by treachery what they have acquired by arms or institutions.

He knows that if, after being released from the toils of war, the people neglect the arts of peace; if their peace and liberty be a state of warfare; if war be their only virtue, and the summit of their praise, they will soon find peace the most adverse to their interests. It will be only a more distressing war; and that which they imagined liberty will be the worst of slavery. For, unless by the means of knowledge and morality, not frothy and loquacious, but genuine, unadulterated, and sincere, they clear the horizon of the mind from those mists of error and passion which arise from ignorance and vice, they will always have those who will bend their necks to the yoke as if they were brutes; who, notwithstanding all their triumphs, will put them up to the highest bidder, as if they were mere booty made in war; and find an exuberant source of wealth and power, in the people's ignorance, prejudice, and passions.

The people that does not subjugate the propensity of the wealthy to avarice, ambition, and sensuality, expel luxury from them and their families, keep down pauperism, diffuse knowledge among the poor, and labor to raise the abject from the mire of vice and low indulgence, and to keep the industrious from starving in sight of luxurious festivals, will find that it has cherished, in that avarice, ambition, sensuality, selfishness, and luxury of the one class, and that degradation, misery, drunkenness, ignorance, and brutalization of the other, more stubborn and intractable despots at home

[p. 178]

than it ever encountered in the field; and even its very bowels will be continually teeming with the intolerable progeny of tyrants.

These are the first enemies to be subdued; this constitutes the campaign of Peace; these are triumphs, difficult indeed, but bloodless; and far more honorable than those trophies which are purchased only by slaughter and rapine; and if not victors in this service, it is in vain to have been victorious over the despotic enemy in the field.

For if any people thinks that it is a grander; a more beneficial, or a wiser policy, to invent subtle expedients by stamps and imposts, for increasing the revenue and draining the life-blood of an impoverished people; to multiply its naval and military force; to rival in craft the ambassadors of foreign states; to plot the swallowing up of foreign territory; to make crafty treaties and alliances; to rule prostrate states and abject provinces by fear and force; than to administer unpolluted justice to the people, to relieve the condition and raise the estate of the toiling masses, redress the injured and succor the distressed and conciliate the discontented, and speedily restore to every one his own; then that people is involved in a cloud of error, and will too late perceive, when the illusion of these mighty benefits has vanished, that in neglecting these, which it thought inferior considerations, it has only been precipitating its own ruin and despair.

Unfortunately, every age presents its own special problem, most difficult and often impossible to solve; and that which this age offers, and forces upon the consideration of all thinking men, is this--how, in a populous and wealthy country, blessed with free institutions and a constitutional government, are the great masses of the manual-labor class to be enabled to have steady work at fair wages, to be kept from starvation, and their children from vice and debauchery, and to be furnished with that degree, not of mere reading and writing, but of knowledge, that shall fit them intelligently to do the duties and exercise the privileges of freemen; even to be intrusted with the dangerous right of suffrage?

For though we do not know why God, being infinitely merciful as well as wise, has so ordered it, it seems to be unquestionably his law, that even in civilized and Christian countries, the large mass of the population shall be fortunate, if, during their whole life, from infancy to old age, in health and sickness, they have enough of the commonest and coarsest food to keep themselves and their

[p. 179]

children from the continual gnawing of hunger--enough of the commonest and coarsest clothing to protect themselves and their little ones from indecent exposure and the bitter cold; and if they have over their heads the rudest shelter.

And He seems to have enacted this law--which no human community has yet found the means to abrogate--that when a country becomes populous, capital shall concentrate in the hands of a limited number of persons, and labor become more and more at its mercy, until mere manual labor, that of the weaver and iron-worker, and other artisans, eventually ceases to be worth more than a bare subsistence, and often, in great cities and vast extents of country, not even that, and goes or crawls about in rags, begging, and starving for want of work.

While every ox and horse can find work, and is worth being fed, it is not always so with man. To be employed, to have a chance to work at anything like fair wages, becomes the great engrossing object of a man's life. The capitalist can live without employing the laborer, and discharges him whenever that labor ceases to be profitable. At the moment when the weather is most inclement, provisions dearest, and rents highest, he turns him off to starve. if the day-laborer is taken sick, his wages stop. When old, he has no pension to retire upon. His children cannot be sent to school; for before their bones are hardened they must get to work lest they starve. The man, strong and able-bodied, works for a shilling or two a day, and the woman shivering over her little pan of coals, when the mercury drops far below zero, after her hungry children have wailed themselves to sleep, sews by the dim light of her lonely candle, for a bare pittance, selling her life to him who bargained only for the work of her needle.

Fathers and mothers slay their children, to have the burial-fees, that with the price of one child's life they may continue life in those that survive. Little girls with bare feet sweep the street-crossings, when the winter wind pinches them, and beg piteously for pennies of those who wear warm furs. Children grow up in squalid misery and brutal ignorance; want compels virgin and wife to prostitute themselves; women starve and freeze, and lean up against the walls of workhouses, like bundles of foul rags, all night long, and night after night, when the cold rain falls, and there chances to be no room for them within; and hundreds of families are crowded into a single building, rife with horrors and teeming

[p. 180]

with foul air and pestilence; where men, women and children huddle together in their filth; all ages and all colors sleeping in-discriminately together; while, in a great, free, Republican State, in the full vigor of its youth and strength, one person in every seventeen is a pauper receiving charity.

How to deal with this apparently inevitable evil and mortal disease is by far the most important of all social problems. What is to be done with pauperism and over-supply of labor? How is the life of any country to last, when brutality and drunken semi-barbarism vote, and hold offices in their gift, and by fit representatives of themselves control a government? How, if not wisdom and authority, but turbulence and low vice are to exalt to senatorships miscreants reeking with the odors and pollution of the hell, the prize-ring, the brothel, and the stock-exchange, where gambling is legalized and rascality is laudable?

Masonry will do all in its power, by direct exertion and co-operation, to improve and inform as well as to protect the people; to better their physical condition, relieve their miseries, supply their wants, and minister to their necessities. Let every Mason in this good work do all that may be in his power.

For it is true now, as it always was and always will be, that to be free is the same thing as to be pious, to be wise, to be temperate and just, to be frugal and abstinent, and to be magnanimous and brave; and to be the opposite of all these is the same as to be a slave. And it usually happens, by the appointment, and, as it were, retributive justice of the Deity, that that people which cannot govern themselves, and moderate their passions, but crouch under the slavery of their lusts and vices, are delivered up to the sway of those whom they abhor, and made to submit to an involuntary servitude.

And it is also sanctioned by the dictates of justice and by the constitution of Nature, that he who, from the imbecility or derangement of his intellect, is incapable of governing himself, should, like a minor, be committed to the government of another.

Above all things let us never forget that mankind constitutes one great brotherhood; all born to encounter suffering and sorrow, and therefore bound to sympathize with each other.

For no tower of Pride was ever yet high enough to lift its possessor above the trials and fears and frailities of humanity. No human hand ever built the wall, nor ever shall, that will keep out

[p. 181]

affliction, pain, and infirmity. Sickness and sorrow, trouble and death, are dispensations that level everything. They know none, high nor low. The chief wants of life, the great and grave necessities of the human soul, give exemption to none. They make all poor, all weak. They put supplication in the mouth of every human being, as truly as in that of the meanest beggar.

But the principle of misery is not an evil principle. We err, and the consequences teach us wisdom. All elements, all the laws of things around us, minister to this end; and through the paths of painful error and mistake, it is the design of Providence to lead us to truth and happiness. If erring only taught us to err; if mistakes confirmed us in imprudence; if the miseries caused by vicious indulgence had a natural tendency to make us more abject slaves of vice, then suffering would be wholly evil. But, on the contrary, all tends and is designed to produce amendment and improvement. Suffering is the discipline of virtue; of that which is infinitely better than happiness, and yet embraces in itself all essential happiness. It nourishes, invigorates, and perfects it. Virtue is the prize of the severely-contested race and hard-fought battle; and it is worth all the fatigue and wounds of the conflict. Man should go forth with a brave and strong heart, to battle with calamity. He is to master it, and not let it become his master. He is not to forsake the post of trial and of peril; but to stand firmly in his lot, until the great word of Providence shall bid him fly, or bid him sink. With resolution and courage the Mason is to do the work which it is appointed for him to do, looking through the dark cloud of human calamity, to the end that rises high and bright before him. The lot of sorrow is great and sublime. None suffer forever, nor for nought, nor without purpose. It is the ordinance of God's wisdom, and of His Infinite Love, to procure for us infinite happiness and glory.

Virtue is the truest liberty; nor is he free who stoops to passions; nor he in bondage who serves a noble master. Examples are the best and most lasting lectures; virtue the best example. He that hath done good deeds and set good precedents, in sincerity, is happy. Time shall not outlive his worth. He lives truly after death, whose good deeds are his pillars of remembrance; and no day but adds some grains to his heap of glory. Good works are seeds, that after sowing return us a continual harvest; and the memory of noble actions is more enduring than monuments of marble.

[p. 182]

Life is a school. The world is neither prison nor penitentiary, nor a palace of ease, nor an amphitheatre for games and spectacles; but a place of instruction, and discipline. Life is given for moral and spiritual training; and the entire course of the great school of life is an education for virtue, happiness, and a future existence. The periods of Life are its terms; all human conditions, its forms; all human employments, its lessons. Families are the primary departments of this moral education; the various circles of society, its advanced stages; Kingdoms and Republics, its universities.

Riches and Poverty, Gayeties and Sorrows, Marriages and Funerals, the ties of life bound or broken, fit and fortunate, or untoward and painful, are all lessons. Events are not blindly and carelessly flung together. Providence does not school one man, and screen another from the fiery trial of its lessons. It has neither rich favorites nor poor victims. One event happeneth to all. One end and one design concern and urge all men.

The prosperous man has been at school. Perhaps he has thought that it was a great thing, and he a great personage; but he has been merely a pupil. He thought, perhaps, that he was Master, and had nothing to do, but to direct and command; but there was ever a Master above him, the Master of Life. He looks not at our splendid state, or our many pretensions, nor at the aids and appliances of our learning; but at our learning itself. He puts the poor and the rich upon the same form; and knows no difference between them, but their progress.

If from prosperity we have learned moderation, temperance, candor, modesty, gratitude to God, and generosity to man, then we are entitled to be honored and rewarded. If we have learned selfishness, self-indulgence, wrong-doing, and vice, to forget and overlook our less fortunate brother, and to scoff at the providence of God, then we are unworthy and dishonored, though we have been nursed in affluence, or taken our degrees from the lineage of an hundred noble descents; as truly so, in the eye of Heaven, and of all right-thinking men, as though we lay, victims of beggary and disease, in the hospital, by the hedge, or on the dung-hill. The most ordinary human equity looks not at the school, but at the scholar; and the equity of Heaven will not look beneath that mark.

The poor man also is at school. Let him take care that he

[p. 183]

learn, rather than complain. Let him hold to his integrity, his candor, and his kindness of heart. Let him beware of envy, and of bondage, and keep his self-respect. The body's toil is nothing. Let him beware of the mind's drudgery and degradation. While he betters his condition if he can, let him be more anxious to better his soul. Let him be willing, while poor, and even if always poor, to learn poverty's great lessons, fortitude, cheerfulness, contentment, and implicit confidence in God's Providence. With these, and patience, calmness, self-command, disinterestedness, and affectionate kindness, the humble dwelling may be hallowed, and made more dear and noble than the loftiest palace. Let him, above all things, see that he lose not his independence. Let him not cast himself, a creature poorer than the poor, an indolent, helpless, despised beggar, on the kindness of others. Every man should choose to have God for his Master, rather than man; and escape not from this school, either by dishonesty or alms-taking, lest he fall into that state, worse than disgrace, where he can have no  for himself.

The ties of Society teach us to love one another. That is a miserable society, where the absence of affectionate kindness is sought to be supplied by punctilious decorum, graceful urbanity, and polished insincerity; where ambition, jealousy, and distrust rule, in place of simplicity, confidence, and kindness.

So, too, the social state teaches modesty and gentleness; and from neglect, and notice unworthily bestowed on others, and injustice, and the world's failure to appreciate us, we learn patience and quietness, to be superior to society's opinion, not cynical and bitter, but gentle, candid, and affectionate still.

Death is the great Teacher, stern, cold, inexorable, irresistible; whom the collected might of the world cannot stay or ward off. The breath, that parting from the lips of King or beggar, scarcely stirs the hushed air, cannot be bought. or brought back for a moment, with the wealth of Empires. What a lesson is this, teaching our frailty and feebleness, and an Infinite Power beyond us! It is a fearful lesson, that never becomes familiar. It walks through the earth in dread mystery, and lays it hands upon all. It is a universal lesson, that is read everywhere and by all men. Its message comes every year and every day. The past years are crowded with its sad and solemn mementoes; and death's finger races its handwriting upon the walls of every human habitation.

[p. 184]

It teaches us Duty; to act our part well; to fulfill the work assigned us. When one is dying, and after he is dead, there is but one question: Has he lived well? There is no evil in death but that which life makes.

There are hard lessons in the school of God's Providence; and yet the school of life is carefully adjusted, in all its arrangements and tasks, to man's powers and passions. There is no extravagance in its teachings; nor is anything done for the sake of present effect. The whole course of human life is a conflict with difficulties; and, if rightly conducted, a progress in improvement. It is never too late for man to learn. Not part only, but the whole, of life is a school. There never comes a time, even amidst the decays of age, when it is fit to lay aside the eagerness of acquisition, or the cheerfulness of endeavor. Man walks, all through the course of life, in patience and strife, and sometimes in darkness; for, from patience is to come perfection; from strife, triumph is to issue; from the cloud of darkness the lightning is to flash that shall open the way to eternity.

Let the Mason be faithful in the school of life, and to all its lessons! Let him not learn nothing, nor care not whether he learns or not. Let not the years pass over him, witnesses of only his sloth and indifference; or see him zealous to acquire everything but virtue. Nor let him labor only for himself; nor forget that the humblest man that lives is his brother, and hath a claim on his sympathies and kind offices; and that beneath the rough garments which labor wears may beat hearts as noble as throb under the stars of princes.

God, who counts by souls, not stations,
    Loves and pities you and me;
 For to Him all vain distinctions
    Are as pebbles on the sea.

Nor are the other duties inculcated in this Degree of less importance. Truth, a Mason is early told, is a Divine attribute and the foundation of every virtue; and frankness, reliability, sincerity, straightforwardness, plain-dealing, are but different modes in which Truth develops itself. The dead, the absent, the innocent, and those that trust him, no Mason will deceive willingly. To all these he owes a nobler justice, in that they are the most certain trials of human Equity. Only the most abandoned of men, said

[p. 185]

[paragraph continues] Cicero, will deceive him, who would have remained uninjured if he had not trusted. All the noble deeds that have beat their marches through succeeding ages have proceeded from men of truth and genuine courage. The man who is always true is both virtuous and wise; and thus possesses the greatest guards of safety: for the law has not power to strike the virtuous; nor can fortune subvert the wise.

The bases of Masonry being morality and virtue, it is by studying one and practising the other, that the conduct of a Mason becomes irreproachable. The good of Humanity being its principal object, disinterestedness is one of the first virtues that it requires of its members; for that is the source of justice and beneficence.

To pity the misfortunes of others; to be humble, but without meanness; to be proud, but without arrogance; to abjure every sentiment of hatred and revenge; to show himself magnanimous and liberal, without ostentation and without profusion; to be the enemy of vice; to pay homage to wisdom and virtue; to respect innocence; to be constant and patient in adversity, and modest in prosperity; to avoid every irregularity that stains the soul and distempers the body--it is by following these precepts that a Mason will become a good citizen, a faithful husband, a tender father, an obedient son, and a true brother; will honor friendship, and fulfill with ardor the duties which virtue and the social relations impose upon him.

It is because Masonry imposes upon us these duties that it is properly and significantly styled work; and he who imagines that he becomes a Mason by merely taking the first two or three Degrees, and that he may, having leisurely stepped upon that small elevation, thenceforward worthily wear the honors of Masonry, without labor or exertion, or self-denial or sacrifice, and that there is nothing to be done in Masonry, is strangely deceived.

Is it true that nothing remains to be done in Masonry?

Does one Brother no longer proceed by law against another Brother of his Lodge, in regard to matters that could be easily settled within the Masonic family circle?

Has the duel, that hideous heritage of barbarism, interdicted among Brethren by our fundamental laws, and denounced by the municipal code, yet disappeared from the soil we inhabit? Do Masons of high rank religiously refrain from it; or do they not,

[p. 186]

bowing to a corrupt public opinion, submit to its arbitrament, despite the scandal which it occasions to the Order, and in violation of the feeble restraint of their oath?

Do Masons no longer form uncharitable opinions of their Brethren, enter harsh judgments against them, and judge themselves by one rule and their Brethren by another?

Has Masonry any well-regulated system of charity? Has it done that which it should have done for the cause of education? Where are its schools, its academies, its colleges, its hospitals, and infirmaries?

Are political controversies now conducted with no violence and bitterness?

Do Masons refrain from defaming and denouncing their Brethren who differ with them in religious or political opinions?

What grand social problems or useful projects engage our attention at our communications? Where in our Lodges are lectures habitually delivered for the real instruction of the Brethren? Do not our sessions pass in the discussion of minor matters of business, the settlement of points of order and questions of mere administration, and the admission and advancement of Candidates, whom after their admission we take no pains to instruct?

In what Lodge are our ceremonies explained and elucidated; corrupted as they are by time, until their true features can scarcely be distinguished; and where are those great primitive truths of revelation taught, which Masonry has preserved to the world?

We have high dignities and sounding titles. Do their possessors qualify themselves to enlighten the world in respect to the aims and objects of Masonry? Descendants of those Initiates who governed empires, does your influence enter into practical life and operate efficiently in behalf of well-regulated and constitutional liberty?

Your debates should be but friendly conversations. You need concord, union, and peace. Why then do you retain among you men who excite rivalries and jealousies; why permit great and violent controversy and ambitious pretensions? How do your own words and acts agree? If your Masonry is a nullity, how can you exercise any influence on others?

Continually you praise each other, and utter elaborate and high-wrought

[p. 187]

eulogies upon the Order. Everywhere you assume that you are what you should be, and nowhere do you look upon yourselves as you are. Is it true that all our actions are so many acts of homage to virtue? Explore the recesses of your hearts; let us examine ourselves with an impartial eye, and make answer to our own questioning! Can we bear to ourselves the consoling testimony that we always rigidly perform our duties; that we even half perform them?

Let us away with this odious self-flattery! Let us be men, if we cannot be sages! The laws of Masonry, above others excellent, cannot wholly change men's natures. They enlighten them, they point out the true way; but they can lead them in it, only by repressing the fire of their passions, and subjugating their selfishness. Alas, these conquer, and Masonry is forgotten!

After praising each other all our lives, there are always excellent Brethren, who, over our coffins, shower unlimited eulogies. Every one of us who dies, however useless his life, has been a model of all the virtues, a very child of the celestial light. In Egypt, among our old Masters, where Masonry was more cultivated than vanity, no one could gain admittance to the sacred asylum of the tomb until he had passed under the most solemn judgment. A grave tribunal sat in judgment upon all, even the kings. They said to the dead. "Whoever thou art, give account to thy country of thy actions! What hast thou done with thy time and life? The law interrogates thee, thy country hears thee, Truth sits in judgment on thee!" Princes came there to be judged, escorted only by their virtues and their vices. A public accuser recounted, the history of the dead man's life, and threw the blaze of the torch of truth .on all his actions. If it were adjudged that he had led an evil life, his memory was condemned in the presence of the nation, and his body was denied the honors of sepulture. What a lesson the old Masonry taught to the sons of the people!

Is it true that Masonry is effete; that the acacia, withered, affords no shade; that Masonry no longer marches in the advance-guard of Truth? No. Is freedom yet universal? Have ignorance and prejudice disappeared from the earth? Are there no longer enmities among men? Do cupidity and falsehood no longer exist? Do toleration and harmony prevail among religious and political sects? There are works yet left for Masonry to accomplish, greater than the twelve labors of Hercules; to advance ever

[p. 188]

resolutely and steadily; to enlighten the minds of the people, to reconstruct society, to reform the laws, and to improve the public morals. The eternity in front of it is as infinite as the one behind. And Masonry cannot cease to labor in the cause of social progress, without ceasing to be true to itself, without ceasing to be Masonry.

 

     
Morals and Dogma, by Albert Pike, [1871], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 189]

  

XII.

  

GRAND MASTER ARCHITECT.

  

[Master Architect.]

THE great duties that are inculcated by the lessons taught by the working-instruments of a Grand Master Architect, demanding so much of us, and taking for granted the capacity to perform them faithfully and fully, bring us at once to reflect upon the dignity of human nature, and the vast powers and capacities of the human soul; and to that theme we invite your attention in this Degree. Let us begin to rise from earth toward the Stars.

Evermore the human soul struggles toward the light, toward God, and the Infinite. It is especially so in its afflictions. Words go but a little way into the depths of sorrow. The thoughts that writhe there in silence, that go into the stillness of Infinitude and Eternity, have no emblems. Thoughts enough come there, such as no tongue ever uttered. They do not so much want human sympathy, as higher help. There is a loneliness in deep sorrow which the Deity alone can relieve. Alone, the mind wrestles with the great problem of calamity, and seeks the solution from the Infinite Providence of Heaven, and thus is led directly to God.

There are many things in us of which we are not distinctly conscious: To waken that slumbering consciousness into life, and so to lead the soul up to the Light, is one office of every great ministration to human nature, whether its vehicle be the pen, the pencil, or the tongue. We are unconscious of the intensity and awfulness of the life within us. Health and sickness, joy and sorrow, success and disappointment, life and death, love and loss, are

[p. 190]

familiar words upon our lips; and we do not know to what depths they point within us.

We seem never to know what any thing means or is worth until we have lost it. Many an organ, nerve, and fibre in our bodily frame performs its silent part for years, and we are quite unconscious of its value. It is not until it is injured that we discover that value, and find how essential it was to our happiness and comfort. We never know the full significance of the words, "property," "ease," and "health;" the wealth of meaning in the fond epithets, "parent," "child," "beloved," and "friend," until the thing or the person is taken away; until, in place of the bright, visible being, comes the awful and desolate shadow, where nothing is: where we stretch out our hands in vain, and strain our eyes upon dark and dismal vacuity. Yet, in that vacuity, we do not lose the object that we loved. It becomes only the more real to us. Our blessings not only brighten when they depart, but are fixed in enduring reality; and love and friendship receive their everlasting seal under the cold impress of death.

A dim consciousness of infinite mystery and grandeur lies beneath all the commonplace of life. There is an awfulness and' a majesty around us, in all our little worldliness. The rude peasant from the Apennines, asleep at the foot of a pillar in a majestic Roman church, seems not to hear or see, but to dream only of the herd he feeds or the ground he tills in the mountains. But the choral symphonies fall softly upon his ear, and the gilded arches are dimly seen through his half-slumbering eyelids.

So the soul, however given up to the occupations of daily life, cannot quite lose the sense of where it is, and of what is above it and around it. The scene of its actual engagements may be small; the path of its steps, beaten and familiar; the objects it handles, easily spanned, and quite worn out with daily uses. So it may be, and amidst such things that we all live. So we live our little life; but Heaven is above us and all around and close to us; and Eternity is before us and behind us; and suns and stars are silent witnesses and watchers over us. We are enfolded by Infinity. Infinite Powers and Infinite spaces lie all around us. The dread arch of Mystery spreads over us, and no voice ever pierced it. Eternity is enthroned amid Heaven's myriad starry heights; and no utterance or word ever came from those far-off and silent spaces. Above, is that awful majesty; around us, everywhere, it stretches

[p. 191]

off into infinity; and beneath it is this little struggle of life, this poor day's conflict, this busy ant-hill of Time.

But from that ant-hill, not only the talk of the streets, the sounds of music and revelling, the stir and tread of a multitude, the shout of joy and the shriek of agony go up into the silent and all-surrounding Infinitude; but also, amidst the stir and noise of visible life, from the inmost bosom of the visible man, there goes up an imploring call, a beseeching cry, an asking, unuttered, and unutterable, for revelation, wailingly and in almost speechless agony praying the dread arch of mystery to break, and the stars that roll above the waves of mortal trouble, to speak; the enthroned majesty of those awful heights to find a voice; the mysterious and reserved heavens to come near; and all to tell us what they alone know; to give us information of the loved and lost; to make known to us what we are, and whither we are going.

Man is encompassed with a dome of incomprehensible wonders. In him and about him is that which should fill his life with majesty and sacredness. Something of sublimity and sanctity has thus flashed down from heaven into the heart of every one that lives. There is no being so base and abandoned but hath some traits of that sacredness left upon him; something, so much perhaps in discordance with his general repute, that he hides it from all around him; some sanctuary in his soul, where no one may enter; some sacred inclosure, where the memory of a child is, or the image of a venerated parent, or the remembrance of a pure love, or the echo of some word of kindness once spoken to him; an echo that will never die away.

Life is no negative, or superficial or worldly existence. Our steps are evermore haunted with thoughts, far beyond their own range, which some have regarded as the reminiscences of a pre-existent state. So it is with us all, in the beaten and worn track of this worldly pilgrimage. There is more here, than the world we live in. It is not all of life to live. An unseen and infinite presence is here; a sense of something greater than we possess; a seeking, through all the void wastes of life, for a good beyond it; a crying out of the heart for interpretation; a memory, of the dead, touching continually some vibrating thread in this great tissue of mystery.

We all not only have better intimations, but are capable of better

[p. 192]

things than we know. The pressure of some great emergency would develop in us powers, beyond the worldly bias of our spirits; and Heaven so deals with us, from time to time, as to call forth those better things, There is hardly a family in the world so selfish, but that, if one in it were doomed to die--one, to be selected by the others,--it would be utterly impossible for its members, parents and children, to choose out that victim; but that each would say, "I will die; but I cannot choose." And in how many, if that dire extremity had come, would not one and another step forth, freed from the vile meshes of ordinary selfishness, and say, like the Roman father and son, "Let the blow fall on me!" There are greater and better things in us all, than the world takes account of, or than we take note of; if we would but find them out. And it is one part of our Masonic culture to find these traits of power and sublime devotion, to revive these faded impressions of generosity and self-sacrifice, the almost squandered bequests of God's love and kindness to our souls; and to induce us to yield ourselves to their guidance and control.

Upon all conditions of men presses down one impartial law, To all situations, to all fortunes, high or low, the mind gives their character. They are, in effect, not what they are in themselves, but what they are to the feeling of their possessors. The King may be mean, degraded, miserable; the slave of ambition, fear, voluptuousness, and every low passion. The Peasant may be the real Monarch, the moral master of his fate, a free and lofty being, more than a Prince in happiness, more than a King in honor.

Man is no bubble upon the sea of his fortunes, helpless and irresponsible upon the tide of events. Out of the same circumstances, different men bring totally different results. The same difficulty, distress, poverty, or misfortune, that breaks down one man, builds up another and makes him strong. It is the very attribute and glory of a man, that he can bend the circumstances of his condition to the intellectual and moral purposes of his nature, and it is the power and mastery of his will that chiefly distinguish him from the brute.

The faculty of moral will, developed in the child, is a new element of his nature. It is a new power brought upon the scene, and a ruling power, delegated from Heaven. Never was a human being sunk so low that he had not, by God's gift, the power to rise, Because God commands him to rise, it is certain that he can rise,

[p. 193]

[paragraph continues] Every man has the power, and should use it, to make all situations, trials, and temptations instruments to promote his virtue and happiness; and is so far from being the creature of circumstances, that he creates and controls them, making them to be all that they are, of evil or of good, to him as a moral being.

Life is what we make it, and the world is what we make it. The eyes of the cheerful and of the melancholy man are fixed upon the same creation; but very different are the aspects which it bears to them. To the one, it is all beauty and gladness; the waves of ocean roll in light, and the mountains are covered with day. Life, to him, flashes, rejoicing, upon every flower and every tree that trembles in the breeze. There is more to him, everywhere, than the eye sees; a presence of profound joy on hill and valley, and bright, dancing water. The other idly or mournfully gazes at the same scene, and everything wears a dull, dim, and sickly aspect. The murmuring of the brooks is a discord to him, the great roar of the sea has an angry and threatening emphasis, the solemn music of the pines sings the requiem of his departed happiness; the cheerful light shines garishly upon his eyes and offends him. The great train of the seasons passes before him like a funeral procession; and he sighs, and turns impatiently away. The eye makes that which it looks upon; the ear makes its own melodies and discords; the world without reflects the world within.

Let the Mason never forget that life and the world are what we make them by our social character; by our adaptation, or want of adaptation to the social conditions, relationships, and pursuits of the world. To the selfish, the cold, and the insensible, to the haughty and presuming, to the proud, who demand more than they are likely to receive, to the jealous, ever afraid they shall not receive enough, to those who are unreasonably sensitive about the good or ill opinions of others, to all violators of the social laws, the rude, the violent, the dishonest, and the sensual,--to all these, the social condition, from its very nature, will present annoyances, disappointments, and pains, appropriate to their several characters. The benevolent affections will not revolve around selfishness; the cold-hearted must expect to meet coldness; the proud, haughtiness; the passionate, anger; and the violent, rudeness. Those who forget the rights of others, must not be surprised if their own are forgotten; and those who stoop to the lowest embraces of sense must not wonder, if others are not concerned to

[p. 194]

find their prostrate honor, and lift it up to the remembrance and respect of the world.

To the gentle, many will be gentle; to the kind, many will be kind. A good man will find that there is goodness in the world; an honest man will find that there is honesty in the world; and a man of principle will find principle and integrity in the minds of others.

There are no blessings which the mind may not convert into the bitterest of evils; and no trials which it may not transform into the noblest and divinest blessings. There are no temptations from which assailed virtue may not gain strength, instead of falling before them, vanquished and subdued. It is true that temptations have a great power, and virtue often falls; but the might of these temptations lies not in themselves, but in the feebleness of our own virtue, and the weakness of our own hearts. We rely too much on the strength of our ramparts and bastions, and allow the enemy to make his approaches, by trench and parallel, at his leisure. The offer of dishonest gain and guilty pleasure makes the honest man more honest, and the pure man more pure. They raise his virtue to the height of towering indignation. The fair occasion, the safe opportunity, the tempting chance become the defeat and disgrace of the tempter. The honest and upright man does not wait until temptation has made its approaches and mounted its batteries on the last parallel.

But to the impure, the dishonest, the false-hearted, the corrupt, and the sensual, occasions come every day, and in every scene, and through every avenue of thought and imagination. He is prepared to capitulate before the first approach is commenced; and sends out the white flag when the enemy's advance comes in sight of his walls. He makes occasions; or, if opportunities come not, evil thoughts come, and he throws wide open the gates of his heart and welcomes those bad visitors, and entertains them with a lavish hospitality.

The business of the world absorbs, corrupts, and degrades one mind, while in another it feeds and nurses the noblest independence, integrity, and generosity. Pleasure is a poison to some, and a healthful refreshment to others. To one, the world is a great harmony, like a noble strain of music with infinite modulations; to another, it is a huge factory, the clash and clang of whose machinery jars upon his ears and frets him to madness. Life is substantially

[p. 195]

the same thing to all who partake of its lot. Yet some rise to virtue and glory; while others, undergoing the same discipline, and enjoying the same privileges, sink to shame and perdition.

Thorough, faithful, and honest endeavor to improve, is always successful, and the highest happiness. To sigh sentimentally over human misfortune, is fit only for the mind's childhood; and the mind's misery is chiefly its own fault; appointed, under the good Providence of God, as the punisher and corrector of its fault. In the long run, the mind will be happy, just in proportion to its fidelity and wisdom. When it is miserable, it has planted the thorns in its own path; it grasps them, and cries out in loud complaint; and that complaint is but the louder confession that the thorns which grew there, it planted.

A certain kind and degree of spirituality enter into the largest part of even the most ordinary life. You can carry on no business, without some faith in man. You cannot even dig in the ground, without a reliance on the unseen result. You cannot think or reason or even step, without confiding in the inward, spiritual principles of your nature. All the affections and bonds, and hopes and interests of life centre in the spiritual; and you know that if that central bond were broken, the world would rush to chaos.

Believe that there is a God; that He is our father; that He has a paternal interest in our welfare and improvement; that He has given us powers, by means of which we may escape from sin and ruin; that He has destined us to a future life of endless progress toward perfection and a knowledge of Himself--believe this, as every Mason should, and you can live calmly, endure patiently, labor resolutely, deny yourselves cheerfully, hope steadfastly, and be conquerors in the great struggle of life. Take away any one of these principles, and what remains for us? Say that there is no God; or no way opened for hope and reformation and triumph, no heaven to come, no rest for the weary, no home in the bosom of God for the afflicted and disconsolate soul; or that God is but an ugly blind Chance that stabs in the dark; or a somewhat that is, when attempted to be defined, a nowhat, emotionless, passionless, the Supreme Apathy to which all things, good and evil, are alike indifferent; or a jealous God who revengefully visits the sins of the fathers on the children, and when the fathers have eaten

[p. 196]

sour grapes, sets the children's teeth on edge; an arbitrary supreme Will, that has made it right to be virtuous, and wrong to lie and steal, because IT pleased to make it so rather than other-wise, retaining the power to reverse the law; or a fickle, vacillating, inconstant Deity, or a cruel, bloodthirsty, savage Hebrew or Puritanic one; and we are but the sport of chance and the victims of despair; hapless wanderers upon the face of a desolate, forsaken, or accursed and hated earth; surrounded by darkness, struggling with obstacles, toiling for barren results and empty purposes, distracted with doubts, and misled by false gleams of light; wanderers with no way, no prospect, no home; doomed and deserted mariners on a dark and stormy sea, without compass or course, to whom no stars appear; tossing helmless upon the weltering, angry waves, with no blessed haven in the distance whose guiding-star invites us to its welcome rest.

The religious faith thus taught by Masonry is indispensable to the attainment of the great ends of life; and must therefore have been designed to be a part of it. We are made for this faith; and there must be something, somewhere, for us to believe in. We cannot grow healthfully, nor live happily, without it. It is therefore true. If we could cut off from any soul all the principles taught by Masonry, the faith in a God, in immortality, in virtue, in essential rectitude, that soul would sink into sin, misery, darkness, and ruin. If we could cut off all sense of these truths, the man would sink at once to the grade of the animal.

No man can suffer and be patient, can struggle and conquer, can improve and be happy, otherwise than as the swine are, without conscience, without hope, without a reliance on a just, wise, and beneficent God. We must, of necessity, embrace the great truths taught by Masonry, and live by them, to live happily. "I put my trust in God," is the protest of Masonry against the belief in a cruel, angry, and revengeful God, to be feared and not reverenced by His creatures.

Society, in its great relations, is as much the creation of Heaven as is the system of the Universe. If that bond of gravitation that holds all worlds and systems together, were suddenly severed, the universe would fly into wild and boundless chaos. And if we were to sever all the moral bonds that hold society together; if we could cut off from it every conviction of Truth and Integrity, of an authority above it, and of a conscience within it, it would immediately

[p. 197]

rush to disorder and frightful anarchy and ruin. The religion we teach is therefore as really a principle of things, and as certain and true, as gravitation.

Faith in moral principles, in virtue, and in God, is as necessary for the guidance of a man, as instinct is for the guidance of an animal. And therefore this faith, as a principle of man's nature, has a mission as truly authentic in God's Providence, as the principle of instinct. The pleasures of the soul, too, must depend on certain principles. They must recognize a soul, its properties and responsibilities, a conscience, and the sense of an authority above us; and these are the principles of faith. No man can suffer and be patient, can struggle and conquer, can improve and be happy, without conscience, without hope, without a reliance on a just, wise, and beneficent God. We must of necessity embrace the great truths taught by Masonry, and live by them, to live happily. Everything in the universe has fixed and certain laws and principles for its action; the star in its orbit, the animal in its activity, the physical man in his functions. And he has likewise fixed and certain laws and principles as a spiritual being. His soul does not die for want of aliment or guidance. For the rational soul there is ample provision. From the lofty pine, rocked in the darkening tempest, the cry of the young raven is heard; and it would be most strange if there were no answer for the cry and call of the soul, tortured by want and sorrow and agony. The total rejection of all moral and religious belief would strike out a principle from human nature, as essential to it as gravitation to the stars, instinct to animal life, the circulation of the blood to the human body.

God has ordained that life shall be a social state. We are members of a civil community. The life of that community depends upon its moral condition. Public spirit, intelligence, uprightness, temperance, kindness, domestic purity, will make it a happy community, and give it prosperity and continuance. Widespread selfishness, dishonesty, intemperance, libertinism, corruption, and crime, will make it miserable, and bring about dissolution and speedy ruin. A whole people lives one life; one mighty heart heaves in its bosom; it is one great pulse of existence that throbs there. One stream of life flows there, with ten thousand intermingled branches and channels, through all the homes of human love. One sound as of many waters, a rapturous jubilee or a

[p. 198]

mournful sighing, comes up from the congregated dwellings of a whole nation.

The Public is no vague abstraction; nor should that which is done against that Public, against public interest, law, or virtue, press but lightly on the conscience. It is but a vast expansion of individual life; an ocean of tears, an atmosphere of sighs, or a great whole of joy and gladness. It suffers with the suffering of millions; it rejoices with the joy of millions. What a vast crime does he commit,--private man or public man, agent or contractor, legislator or magistrate, secretary or president,--who dares, with indignity and wrong, to strike the bosom of the Public Welfare, to encourage venality and corruption, and shameful sale of the elective franchise, or of office; to sow dissension, and to weaken the bonds of amity that bind a Nation together! What a huge iniquity, he who, with vices like the daggers of a parricide, dares to pierce that mighty heart, in which the ocean of existence is flowing!

What an unequalled interest lies in the virtue of every one whom we love! In his virtue, nowhere but in his virtue, is garnered up the incomparable treasure. What care we for brother or friend, compared with what we care for his honor, his fidelity, his reputation, his kindness? How venerable is the rectitude of a parent! How sacred his reputation! No blight that can fall upon a child, is like a parent's dishonor. Heathen or Christian, every, parent would have his child do well; and pours out upon him all the fullness of parental love, in the one desire that he may do well; that he may be worthy of his cares, and his freely bestowed pains; that he may walk in the way of honor and happiness. In that way he cannot walk one step without virtue. Such is life, in its relationships. A thousand ties embrace it, like the fine nerves of a delicate organization; like the strings of an instrument capable of sweet melodies, but easily put out of tune or broken, by rudeness, anger, and selfish indulgence.

If life could, by any process, be made insensible to pain and pleasure; if the human heart were hard as adamant, then avarice, ambition, and sensuality might channel out their paths in it, and make it their beaten way; and none would wonder or protest. If we could be patient under the load of a mere worldly life; if we could bear that burden as the beasts bear it; then, like beasts, we might bend all our thoughts to the earth; and no call from the

[p. 199]

great Heavens above us would startle us from our plodding and earthly course.

But we art not insensible brutes, who can refuse the call of reason and conscience. The soul is capable of remorse. When the great dispensations of life press down upon us, we weep, and suffer and sorrow. And sorrow and agony desire other companion-ships than worldliness and irreligion. We are not willing to bear those burdens of the heart, fear, anxiety, disappointment, and trouble, without any object or use. We are not willing to suffer, to be sick and afflicted, to have our days and months lost to comfort and joy, and overshadowed with calamity and grief, without advantage or compensation; to barter away the dearest treasures, the very sufferings, of the heart; to sell the life-blood from failing frame and fading cheek, our tears of bitterness and groans of anguish, for nothing. Human nature, frail, feeling, sensitive, and sorrowing, cannot bear to suffer for nought.

Everywhere, human life is a great and solemn dispensation. Man, suffering, enjoying, loving, hating, hoping, and fearing, chained to the earth and yet exploring the far recesses of the universe, has the power to commune with God and His angels. Around this great action of existence the curtains of Time are drawn; but there are openings through them which give us glimpses of eternity. God looks down upon this scene of human probation. The wise and the good in all ages have interposed for it, with their teachings and their blood. Everything that exists around us, every movement in nature, every counsel of Providence, every interposition of God, centres upon one point--the fidelity of man. And even if the ghosts of the departed and remembered could come at midnight through the barred doors of our dwellings, and the shrouded dead should glide through the aisles of our churches and sit in our Masonic Temples, their teachings would be no more eloquent and impressive than the dread realities of life; than those memories of misspent years, those ghosts of departed opportunities, that, pointing to our conscience and eternity, cry continually in our ears, "Work while the day lasts! for the night of death cometh, in which no man can work."

There are no tokens of public mourning for the calamity of the soul. Men weep when the body dies; and when it is borne to its last rest, they follow it with sad and mournful procession. But

[p. 200]

for the dying soul there is no open lamentation; for the lost soul there are no obsequies.

And yet the mind and soul of man have a value which nothing else has. They are worth a care which nothing else is worth; and to the single, solitary individual, they ought to possess an interest which nothing else possesses. The stored treasures of the heart, the unfathomable mines that are in the soul to be wrought, the broad and boundless realms of Thought, the freighted argosy of man's hopes and best affections, are brighter than gold and dearer than treasure.

And yet the mind is in reality little known or considered. It is all which man permanently is, his inward being, his divine energy, his immortal thought, his boundless capacity, his infinite aspiration; and nevertheless, few value it for what it is worth. Few see a brother-mind in others, through the rags with which poverty has clothed it, beneath the crushing burdens of life, amidst the close pressure of worldly troubles, wants and sorrows. Few acknowledge and cheer it in that humble blot, and feel that the nobility of earth, and the commencing glory of Heaven are there.

Men do not feel the worth of their own souls. They are proud of their mental powers; but the intrinsic, inner, infinite worth of their own minds they do not perceive. The poor man, admitted to a palace, feels, lofty and immortal being as he is, like a mere ordinary thing amid the splendors that surround him. He sees the carriage of wealth roll by him, and forgets the intrinsic and eternal dignity of his own mind in a poor and degrading envy, and feels as an humbler creature, because others are above him, not in mind, but in mensuration. Men respect themselves, according as they are more wealthy, higher in rank or office, loftier in the world's opinion, able to command more votes, more the favorites of the people or of Power.

The difference among men is not so much in their nature and intrinsic power, as in the faculty of communication. Some have the capacity of uttering and embodying in words their thoughts. All men, more or less, feel those thoughts. The glory of genius and the rapture of virtue, when rightly revealed, are diffused and shared among unnumbered minds. When eloquence and poetry speak; when those glorious arts, statuary, painting, and music, take audible or visible shape; when patriotism, charity, and virtue

[p. 201]

speak with a thrilling potency, the hearts of thousands glow with a kindred joy and ecstasy. If it were not so, there would be no eloquence; for eloquence is that to which other hearts respond; it is the faculty and power of making other hearts respond. No one is so low or degraded, as not sometimes to be touched with the beauty of goodness. No heart is made of materials so common, or even base, as not sometimes to respond, through every chord of it, to the call of honor, patriotism, generosity, and virtue. The poor African Slave will die for the master or mistress, or in defence of the children, whom he loves. The poor, lost, scorned, abandoned, outcast woman will, without expectation of reward, nurse those who are dying on every hand, utter strangers to her, with a contagious and horrid pestilence. The pickpocket will scale burning walls to rescue child or woman, unknown to him, from the ravenous flames.

Most glorious is this capacity! A power to commune with God and His Angels; a reflection of the Uncreated Light; a mirror that can collect and concentrate upon itself all the moral splendors of the Universe. It is the soul alone that gives any value to the things of this world; and it is only by raising the soul to its just elevation above all other things, that we can look rightly upon the purposes of this earth. No sceptre nor throne, nor structure of ages, nor broad empire, can compare with the wonders and grandeurs of a single thought. That alone, of all things that have been made, comprehends the Maker of all. That alone is the key which unlocks all the treasures of the Universe; the power that reigns over Space, Time, and Eternity. That, under God, is the Sovereign Dispenser to man of all the blessings and glories that lie within the compass of possession, or the range of possibility. Virtue, Heaven, and Immortality exist not, nor ever will exist for us except as they exist and will exist, in the perception, feeling, and thought of the glorious mind.

My Brother, in the hope that you have listened to and understood the Instruction and Lecture of this Degree, and that you feel the dignity of your own nature and the vast capacities of your own soul for good or evil, I proceed briefly to communicate to you the remaining instruction of this Degree.

The Hebrew word, in the old Hebrew and Samaritan character, suspended in the East, over the five columns, is ADONAI, one of the names of God, usually translated Lord; and which the Hebrews,

[p. 202]

in reading, always substitute for the True Name, which is for them ineffable.

The five columns, in the five different orders of architecture, are emblematical to us of the five principal divisions of the Ancient and Accepted Scottish Rite:

1.--The Tuscan, of the three blue Degrees, or the primitive Masonry.

2.--The Doric, of the ineffable Degrees, from the fourth to the fourteenth, inclusive.

3.--The Ionic, of the fifteenth and sixteenth, or second temple Degrees.

4.--The Corinthian, of the seventeenth and eighteenth Degrees, or those of the new law.

5.--The Composite, of the philosophical and chivalric Degrees intermingled, from the nineteenth to the thirty-second, inclusive.

The North Star, always fixed and immutable for us, represents the point in the centre of the circle, or the Deity in the centre of the Universe. It is the especial symbol of duty and of faith. To it, and the seven that continually revolve around it, mystical meanings are attached, which you will learn hereafter, if you should be permitted to advance, when you are made acquainted with the philosophical doctrines of the Hebrews.

The Morning Star, rising in the East, Jupiter, called by the Hebrews Tsado_c or Tsydyk, Just, is an emblem to us of the ever-approaching dawn of perfection and Masonic light.

The three great lights of the Lodge are symbols to us of the Power, Wisdom, and Beneficence of the Deity. They are also symbols of the first three Sephiroth, or Emanations of the Deity, according to the Kabalah, Kether, the omnipotent divine will; Chochmah, the divine intellectual power to generate thought, and Binah, the divine intellectual capacity to produce it--the two latter, usually translated Wisdom and Understanding, being the active and the passive, the positive and the negative, which we do not yet endeavor to explain to you. They are the columns Jachin and Boaz, that stand at the entrance to the Masonic Temple.

In another aspect of this Degree, the Chief of the Architects [w ?R?B ?Bn?Ym, Rab Banaim,] symbolizes the constitutional executive head and chief of a free government; and the Degree teaches us that no free government can long endure, when the people cease

[p. 203]

to select for their magistrates the best and the wisest of their statesmen; when, passing these by, they permit factions or sordid interests to select for them the small, the low, the ignoble, and the obscure, and into such hands commit the country's destinies. There is, after all, a "divine right" to govern; and it is vested in the ablest, wisest, best, of every nation. "Counsel is mine, and sound wisdom: I am understanding: I am power: by me kings do reign, and princes decree justice; by me princes rule, and nobles, even all the magistrates of the earth."

For the present, my Brother, let this suffice. We welcome you among us, to this peaceful retreat of virtue, to a participation in our privileges, to a share in our joys and our sorrows.

 

     
Morals and Dogma, by Albert Pike, [1871], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 204]

  

XIII.

  

ROYAL ARCH OF SOLOMON.

WHETHER the legend and history of this Degree are historically true, or but an allegory, containing in itself a deeper truth and a profounder meaning, we shall not now debate. If it be but a legendary myth, you must find out for yourself what it means. It is certain that the word which the Hebrews are not now permitted to pronounce was in common use by Abraham, Lot, Isaac, Jacob, Laban, Rebecca, and even among tribes foreign to the Hebrews, before the time of Moses; and that it recurs a hundred times in the lyrical effusions of David and other Hebrew poets.

We know that for many centuries the Hebrews have been forbidden to pronounce the Sacred Name; that wherever it occurs, they have for ages read the word Adonai instead; and that under it, when the masoretic points, which represent the vowels, came to be used, they placed those which belonged to the latter word. The possession of the true pronunciation was deemed to confer on him who had it extraordinary and supernatural powers; and the Word itself, worn upon the person, was regarded as an amulet, a protection against personal danger, sickness, and evil spirits. We know that all this was a vain superstition, natural to a rude people, necessarily disappearing as the intellect of man became enlightened; and wholly unworthy of a Mason.

It is noticeable that this notion of the sanctity of the Divine Name or Creative Word was common to all the ancient nations. The Sacred Word HOM was supposed by the ancient Persians (who were among the earliest emigrants from Northern India) to

[p. 205]

be pregnant with a mysterious power; and they taught that by its utterance the world was created. In India it was forbidden to pronounce the word AUM or OM, the Sacred Name of the One Deity, manifested as Brahma, Vishna, and Seeva.

These superstitious notions in regard to the efficacy of the Word, and the prohibition against pronouncing it, could, being errors, have formed no part of the pure primitive religion, or of the esoteric doctrine taught by Moses, and the full knowledge of which was confined to the Initiates; unless the whole was but an ingenious invention for the concealment of some other Name or truth, the interpretation and meaning whereof was made known only to the select few. If so, the common notions in regard to the Word grew up in the minds of the people, like other errors and fables among all the ancient nations, out of original truths and symbols and allegories misunderstood. So it has always been that allegories, intended as vehicles of truth, to be understood by the sages, have become or bred errors, by being literally accepted.

It is true, that before the masoretic points were invented (which was after the beginning of the Christian era), the pronunciation of a word in the Hebrew language could not be known from the characters in which it was written. It was, therefore, possible for that of the name of the Deity to have been forgotten and lost. It is certain that its true pronunciation is not that represented by the word Jehovah; and therefore that that is not the true name of Deity, nor the Ineffable Word.

The ancient symbols and allegories always had more than one interpretation. They always had a double meaning, and sometimes more than two, one serving as the envelope of the other. Thus the pronunciation of the word was a symbol; and that pronunciation and the word itself were lost, when the knowledge of the true nature and attributes of God faded out of the minds of the Jewish people. That is one interpretation--true, but not the inner and profoundest one.

Men were figuratively said to forget the name of God, when they lost that knowledge, and worshipped the heathen deities, and burned incense to them on the high places, and passed their children through the fire to Moloch.

Thus the attempts of the ancient Israelites and of the Initiates to ascertain the True Name of the Deity, and its pronunciation, and the loss of the True Word, are an allegory, in which are represented

[p. 206]

the general ignorance of the true nature and attributes of God, the proneness of the people of Judah and Israel to worship other deities, and the low and erroneous and dishonoring notions of the Grand Architect of the Universe, which all shared except a few favored persons; for even Solomon built altars and sacrificed to Astarat, the goddess of the Tsidunim, and Malcu_m, the Aamu_nite god, and built high places for Kamu_s, the Moabite deity, and Malec the god of the Beni-Aamu_n. The true nature of God was unknown to them, like His name; and they worshipped the calves of Jeroboam, as in the desert they did that made for them by Aaru_n.

The mass of the Hebrews did not believe in the existence of one only God until a late period in their history. Their early and popular ideas of the Deity were singularly low and unworthy. Even while Moses was receiving the law upon Mount Sinai, they forced Aaron to make them an image of the Egyptian god Apis, and fell down and adored it. They were ever ready to return to the worship of the gods of the Mitzraim; and soon after the death of Joshua they became devout worshippers of the false gods of all the surrounding nations. "Ye have borne," Amos, the prophet, said to them, speaking of their forty years' journeying in the desert, under Moses, "the tabernacle of your Malec and Kaiu_n your idols, the star of your god, which ye made to yourselves."

Among them, as among other nations, the conceptions of God formed by individuals varied according to their intellectual and spiritual capacities; poor and imperfect, and investing God with the commonest and  attributes of humanity, among the ignorant and coarse; pure and lofty among the virtuous and richly gifted. These conceptions gradually improved and became purified and ennobled, as the nation advanced in civilization--being lowest in the historical books, amended in the prophetic writings, and reaching their highest elevation among the poets.

Among all the ancient nations there was one faith and one idea of Deity for the enlightened, intelligent, and educated, and another for the common people. To this rule the Hebrews were no exception. Yehovah, to the mass of the people, was like the gods of the nations around them, except that he was the peculiar God, first of the family of Abraham, of that of Isaac, and of that of Jacob, and afterward the National God; and, as they believed, more powerful than the other gods of the same nature worshipped

[p. 207]

by their neighbors--"Who among the Baalim is like unto thee, O Yehovah?"--expressed their whole creed.

The Deity of the early Hebrews talked to Adam and Eve in the garden of delight, as he walked in it in the cool of the day; he conversed with Kayin; he sat and ate with Abraham in his tent; that patriarch required a visible token, before he would believe in his positive promise; he permitted Abraham to expostulate with him, and to induce him to change his first determination in regard to Sodom; he wrestled with Jacob; he showed Moses his person, though not his face; he dictated the minutest police regulations and the dimensions of the tabernacle and its furniture, to the Israelites; he insisted on and delighted in sacrifices and burnt-offerings; he was angry, jealous, and revengeful, as well as wavering and irresolute; he allowed Moses to reason him out of his fixed resolution utterly to destroy his people; he commanded the performance of the most shocking and hideous acts of cruelty and barbarity. He hardened the heart of Pharaoh; he repented of the evil that he had said he would do unto the people of Nineveh; and he did it not, to the disgust and anger of Jonah.

Such were the popular notions of the Deity; and either the priests had none better, or took little trouble to correct these notions; or the popular intellect was not enough enlarged to enable them to entertain any higher conceptions of the Almighty.

But such were not the ideas of the intellectual and enlightened few among the Hebrews. It is certain that they possessed a knowledge of the true nature and attributes of God; as the same class of men did among the other nations--Zoroaster, Menu, Confucius, Socrates, and Plato. But their doctrines on this subject were esoteric; they did not communicate them to the people at large, but only to a favored few; and as they were communicated in Egypt and India, in Persia and Phoenicia, in Greece and Samothrace, in the greater mysteries, to the Initiates.

The communication of this knowledge and other secrets, some of which are perhaps lost, constituted, under other names, what we now call Masonry, or Free or Frank-Masonry. That knowledge was, in one sense, the Lost Word, which was made known to the Grand Elect, Perfect, and Sublime Masons. It would be folly to pretend that the forms of Masonry were the same in those ages as they are now. The present name of the Order, and its titles, and the names of the Degrees now in use, were not then known.

[p. 208]

[paragraph continues] Even Blue Masonry cannot trace back its authentic history, with its present Degrees, further than the year 1700, if so far. But, by whatever name it was known in this or the other country, Masonry existed as it now exists, the same in spirit and at heart, not only when Solomon builded the temple, but centuries before--before even the first colonies emigrated into Southern India, Persia, and Egypt, from the cradle of the human race.

The Supreme, Self-existent, Eternal, All-wise, All-powerful, Infinitely Good, Pitying, Beneficent, and Merciful Creator and Preserver of the Universe was the same, by whatever name he was called, to the intellectual and enlightened men of all nations. The name was nothing, if not a symbol and representative hieroglyph of his nature and attributes. The name AL represented his remoteness above men, his inaccessibility; BAL and BALA, his might; ALOHIM, his various potencies; IHUH, existence and the generation of things. None of his names, among the Orientals, were the symbols of a divinely infinite love and tenderness, and all-embracing mercy. As MOLOCH or MALEK he was but an omnipotent monarch, a tremendous and irresponsible Will; as ADONAI, only an arbitrary LORD and Master; as AL Shadai, potent and a DESTROYER.

To communicate true and correct ideas in respect of the Deity was one chief object of the mysteries. In them, Khu_ru_m the King, and Khu_ru_m the Master, obtained their knowledge of him and his attributes; and in them that knowledge was taught to Moses and Pythagoras.

Wherefore nothing forbids you to consider the whole legend of this Degree, like that of the Master's, an allegory, representing the perpetuation of the knowledge of the True God in the sanctuaries of initiation. By the subterranean vaults you may understand the places of initiation, which in the ancient ceremonies were generally under ground. The Temple of Solomon presented a symbolic image of the Universe; and resembled, in its arrangements and furniture, all the temples of the ancient nations that practised the mysteries. The system of numbers was intimately connected with their religions and worship, and has come down to us in Masonry; though the esoteric meaning with which the numbers used by us are pregnant is unknown to the vast majority of those who use them. Those numbers were especially employed that had a reference to the Deity, represented his attributes, or figured in the

[p. 209]

frame-work of the world, in time and space, and formed more or less the bases of that frame-work. These were universally regarded as sacred, being the expression of order and intelligence, the utterances of Divinity Himself.

The Holy of Holies of the Temple formed a cube; in which, drawn on a plane surface, there are 4+3+2=9 lines visible, and three sides or faces. It corresponded with the number four, by which the ancients presented Nature, it being the number of substances or corporeal forms, and of the elements, the cardinal points and seasons, and the secondary colors. The number three everywhere represented the Supreme Being. Hence the name of the Deity, engraven upon the triangular plate, and that sunken into the cube of agate, taught the ancient Mason, and teaches us, that the true knowledge of God, of His nature and His attributes, is written by Him upon the leaves of the great Book of Universal Nature, and may be read there by all who are endowed with the requisite amount of intellect and intelligence. This knowledge of God, so written there, and of which Masonry has in all ages been the interpreter, is the Master Mason's Word.

Within the Temple, all the arrangements were mystically and symbolically connected with the same system. The vault or ceiling, starred like the firmament, was supported by twelve columns, representing the twelve months of the year. The border that ran around the columns represented the zodiac, and one of the twelve celestial signs was appropriated to each column. The brazen sea was supported by twelve oxen, three looking to each cardinal point of the compass.

And so in our day every Masonic Lodge represents the Universe. Each extends, we are told, from the rising to the setting sun, from the South to the North, from the surface of the Earth to the Heavens, and from the same to the centre of the globe. In it are represented the sun, moon, and stars; three great torches in the East, West, and South, forming a triangle, give it light; and, like the Delta or Triangle suspended in the East, and inclosing the Ineffable Name, indicate, by the mathematical equality of the angles and sides, the beautiful and harmonious proportions which govern in the aggregate and details of the Universe; while those sides and angles represent, by their number, three, the Trinity of Power, Wisdom, and Harmony, which presided at the building of this marvellous work, These three great lights also represent the

[p. 210]

great mystery of the three principles, of creation, dissolution or destruction, and reproduction or regeneration, consecrated by all creeds in their numerous Trinities.

The luminous pedestal, lighted by the perpetual flame within, is a symbol of that light of Reason, given by God to man, by which he is enabled to read in the Book of Nature the record of the thought, the revelation of the attributes of the Deity.

The three Masters, Adoniram, Joabert, and Stolkin, are types of the True Mason, who seeks for knowledge from pure motives, and that he may be the better enabled to serve and benefit his fellow-men; while the discontented and presumptuous Masters who were buried in the ruins of the arches represent those who strive to acquire it for unholy purposes, to gain power over their fellows, to gratify their pride, their vanity, or their ambition.

The Lion that guarded the Ark and held in his mouth the key wherewith to open it, figuratively represents Solomon, the Lion of the Tribe of Judah, who preserved and communicated the key to the true knowledge of God, of His laws, and of the profound mysteries of the moral and physical Universe.

ENOCH [w ?X?Wnk Khano_c], we are told, walked with God three hundred years, after reaching the age of sixty-five--"walked with God, and he was no more, for God had taken him." His name signified in the Hebrew, INITIATE or INITIATOR. The legend of the columns, of granite and brass or bronze, erected by him, is probably symbolical. That of bronze, which survived the flood, is supposed to symbolize the mysteries, of which Masonry is the legitimate successor--from the earliest times the custodian and depository of the great philosophical and religious truths, unknown to the world at large, and handed down from age to age by an unbroken current of tradition, embodied in symbols, emblems, and allegories.

The legend of this Degree is thus, partially, interpreted. It is of little importance whether it is in anywise historical. For its value consists in the lessons which it inculcates, and the duties which it prescribes to those who receive it. The parables and allegories of the Scriptures are not less valuable than history. Nay, they are more so, because ancient history is little instructive, and truths are concealed in and symbolized by the legend and the myth.

There are profounder meanings concealed in the symbols of this .Degree, connected with the philosophical system of the Hebrew

[p. 211]

[paragraph continues] Kabalists, which you will learn hereafter, if you should be so fortunate as to advance. They are unfolded in the higher Degrees. The lion [w ?A?R?Y, w ?A?R?Y?H, Arai, Araiah, which also means the altar] still holds in his mouth the key of the enigma of the sphynx.

But there is one application of this Degree, that you are now entitled to know; and which, remembering that Khu_ru_m, the Master, is the symbol of human freedom, you would probably discover for yourself.

It is not enough for a people to gain its liberty. It must secure it. It must not intrust it to the keeping, or hold it at the pleasure, of any one man. The keystone of the Royal Arch of the great Temple of Liberty is a fundamental law, charter, or constitution; the expression of the fixed habits of thought of the people, embodied in a written instrument, or the result of the slow accretions and the consolidation of centuries; the same in war as in peace; that cannot be hastily changed, nor be violated with impunity, but is sacred, like the Ark of the Covenant of God, which none could touch and live.

A permanent constitution, rooted in the affections, expressing the will and judgment, and built upon the instincts and settled habits of thought of the people, with an independent judiciary, an elective legislature of two branches, an executive responsible to the people, and the right of trial by jury, will guarantee the liberties of a people, if it be virtuous and temperate, without luxury, and without the lust of conquest and dominion, and the follies of visionary theories of impossible perfection.

Masonry teaches its Initiates that the pursuits and occupations of this life, its activity, care, and ingenuity, the predestined developments of the nature given us by God, tend to promote His great design, in making the world; and are not at war with the great purpose of life. It teaches that everything is beautiful in its time, in its place, in its appointed office; that everything which man is put to do, if rightly and faithfully done, naturally helps to work out his salvation; that if he obeys the genuine principles of his calling, he will be a good man: and that it is only by neglect and non-performance of the task set for him by Heaven, by wandering into idle dissipation, or by violating their beneficent and lofty spirit, that he becomes a bad man. The appointed action of life is the great training of Providence; and if man yields himself

[p. 212]

to it, he will need neither churches nor ordinances, except for the expression of his religious homage and gratitude.

For there is a religion of toil. It is not all drudgery, a mere stretching of the limbs and straining of the sinews to tasks. It has a meaning and an intent. A living heart pours life-blood into the toiling arm; and warm affections inspire and mingle with man's labors. They are the home affections. Labor toils a-field, or plies its task in cities, or urges the keels of commerce over wide oceans; but home is its centre; and thither it ever goes with its earnings, with the means of support and comfort for others; offerings sacred to the thought of every true man, as a sacrifice at a golden shrine. Many faults there are amidst the toils of life; many harsh and hasty words are uttered; but still the toils go on, weary and hard and exasperating as they often are. For in that home is age or sickness, or helpless infancy, or gentle childhood, or feeble woman, that must not want. If man had no other than mere selfish impulses, the scene of labor which we behold around us would not exist.

The advocate who fairly and honestly presents his case, with a feeling of true self-respect, honor, and conscience, to help the tribunal on towards the right conclusion, with a conviction that God's justice reigns there, is acting a religious part, leading that day a religious life; or else right and justice are no part of religion. Whether, during all that day, he has once appealed, in form or in terms, to his conscience, or not; whether he has once spoken of religion and God, or not; if there has been the inward purpose, the conscious intent and desire, that sacred justice should triumph, he has that day led a good and religious life, and made a most essential contribution to that religion of life and of society, the cause of equity between man and man, and of truth and right action in the world.

Books, to be of religious tendency in the Masonic sense, need not be books of sermons, of pious exercises, or of prayers. What-ever inculcates pure, noble, and patriotic sentiments, or touches the heart with the beauty of virtue, and the excellence of an up-right life, accords with the religion of Masonry, and is the Gospel of literature and art. That Gospel is preached from many a book and painting, from many a poem and fiction, and review and newspaper; and it is a painful error and miserable narrowness, not to recognize these wide-spread agencies of Heaven's providing; not

[p. 213]

to see and welcome these many-handed coadjutors, to the great and good cause. The oracles of God do not speak from the pulpit alone.

There is also a religion of society. In business, there is much more than sale, exchange, price, payment; for there is the sacred faith of man in man. When we repose perfect confidence in the integrity of another; when we feel that he will not swerve from the right, frank, straightforward, conscientious course, for any temptation; his integrity and conscientiousness are the image of God to us; and when we believe in it, it is as great and generous an act, as when we believe in the rectitude of the Deity.

In gay assemblies for amusement, the good affections of life gush and mingle. If they did not, these gathering-places would be as dreary and repulsive as the caves and dens of outlaws and robbers. When friends meet, and hands are warmly pressed, and the eye kindles and the countenance is suffused with gladness, there is a religion between their hearts; and each loves and worships the True and Good that is in the other. It is not policy, or self-interest, or selfishness that spreads such a charm around that meeting, but the halo of bright and beautiful affection.

The same splendor of kindly liking, and affectionate regard, shines like the soft overarching sky, over all the world; over all places where men meet, and walk or toil together; not over lovers' bowers and marriage-altars alone, not over the homes of purity and tenderness alone; but over all tilled fields, and busy workshops, and dusty highways, and paved streets. There is not a worn stone upon the sidewalks, but has been the altar of such offerings of mutual kindness; nor a wooden pillar or iron railing against which hearts beating with affection have not leaned. How many soever other elements there are in the stream of life flowing through these channels, that is surely here and everywhere; honest, heartfelt, disinterested, inexpressible affection.

Every Masonic Lodge is a temple of religion; and its teachings are instruction in religion. For here are inculcated disinterestedness, affection, toleration, devotedness, patriotism, truth, a generous sympathy with those who suffer and mourn, pity for the fallen, mercy for the erring, relief for those in want, Faith, Hope, and .Charity. Here we meet as brethren, to learn to know and love each other. Here we greet each other gladly, are lenient to each other's faults, regardful of each other's feelings, ready to relieve

[p. 214]

each other's wants. This is the true religion revealed to the ancient patriarchs; which Masonry has taught for many centuries, and which it will continue to teach as long as time endures. If unworthy passions, or selfish, bitter, or revengeful feelings, contempt, dislike, hatred, enter here, they are intruders and not welcome, strangers uninvited, and not guests.

Certainly there are many evils and bad passions, and much hate and contempt and unkindness everywhere in the world. We cannot refuse to see the evil that is in life. But all is not evil. We still see God in the world. There is good amidst the evil. The hand of mercy leads wealth to the hovels of poverty and sorrow. Truth and simplicity live amid many wiles and sophistries. There are good hearts underneath gay robes, and under tattered garments also.

Love clasps the hand of love, amid all the envyings and distractions of showy competition; fidelity, pity, and sympathy hold the long night-watch by the bedside of the suffering neighbor, amidst the surrounding poverty and squalid misery. Devoted men go from city to city to nurse those smitten down by the terrible pestilence that renews at intervals its mysterious marches. Women well-born and delicately nurtured nursed the wounded soldiers in hospitals, before it became fashionable to do so; and even poor lost women, whom God alone loves and pities, tend the plague-stricken with a patient and generous heroism. Masonry and its kindred Orders teach men to love each other, feed the hungry, clothe the naked, comfort the sick, and bury the friendless dead. Everywhere God finds and blesses the kindly office, the pitying thought, and the loving heart.

There is an element of good in all men's lawful pursuits and a divine spirit breathing in all their lawful affections. The ground on which they tread is holy ground. There is a natural religion of life, answering, with however many a broken tone, to the religion of nature. There is a beauty and glory in Humanity, in man, answering, with however many a mingling shade, to the loveliness of soft landscapes, and swelling hills, and the wondrous glory of the starry heavens.

Men may be virtuous, self-improving, and religious in their employments. Precisely for that, those employments were made. All their social relations, friendship, love, the ties of family, were made to be holy, They may be religious, not by a kind of protest

[p. 215]

and resistance against their several vocations; but by conformity to their true spirit. Those vocations do not exclude religion; but demand it, for their own perfection. They may be religious laborers, whether in field or factory; religious physicians, lawyers, sculptors, poets, painters, and musicians. They may be religions in all the toils and in all the amusements of life. Their life may be a religion; the broad earth its altar; its incense the very breath of life; its fires ever kindled by the brightness of Heaven.

Bound up with our poor, frail life, is the mighty thought that spurns the narrow span of all visible existence. Ever the soul reaches outward, and asks for freedom. It looks forth from the narrow and grated windows of sense, upon the wide immeasurable creation; it knows that around it and beyond it lie outstretched the infinite and everlasting paths.

Everything within us and without us ought to stir our minds to admiration and wonder. We are a mystery encompassed with mysteries. The connection of mind with matter is a mystery; the wonderful telegraphic communication between the brain and every part of the body, the power and action of the will. Every familiar step is more than a story in a land of enchantment. The power of movement is as mysterious as the power of thought. Memory, and dreams that are the indistinct echoes of dead memories are alike inexplicable. Universal harmony springs from infinite complication. The momentum of every step we take in our dwelling contributes in part to the order of the Universe. We are connected by ties of thought, and even of matter and its forces, with the whole boundless Universe and all the past and coming generations of men.

The humblest object beneath our eye as completely defies our scrutiny as the economy of the most distant star. Every leaf and every blade of grass holds within itself secrets which no human penetration will ever fathom. No man can tell what is its principle of life. No man can know what his power of secretion is. Both are inscrutable mysteries. Wherever we place our hand we lay it upon the locked bosom of mystery. Step where we will, we tread upon wonders. The sea-sands, the clods of the field, the water-worn pebbles on the hills, the rude masses of rock, are traced over and over, in every direction, with a hand-writing older and more significant and sublime than all the ancient ruins, and all the overthrown and buried cities that past generations

[p. 216]

have left upon the earth; for it is the handwriting of the Almighty.

A Mason's great business with life is to read the book of its teaching; to find that life is not the doing of drudgeries, but the hearing of oracles. The old mythology is but a leaf in that book; for it peopled the world with spiritual natures; and science, many-leaved, still spreads before us the same tale of wonder.

We shall be just as happy hereafter, as we are pure and up-right, and no more, just as happy as our character prepares us to be, and no more. Our moral, like our mental character, is not formed in a moment; it is the habit of our minds; the result of many thoughts and feelings and efforts, bound together by many natural and strong ties. The great law of Retribution is, that all coming experience is to be affected by every present feeling; every future moment of being must answer for every present moment; one moment, sacrificed to vice, or lost to improvement, is forever sacrificed and lost; an hour's delay to enter the right path, is to put us back so far, in the everlasting pursuit of happiness; and every sin, even of the best men, is to be thus answered for, if not according to the full measure of its ill-desert, yet according to a rule of unbending rectitude and impartiality.

The law of retribution presses upon every man, whether he thinks of it or not. It pursues him through all the courses of life, with a step that never falters nor tires, and with an eye that never sleeps. If it were not so, God's government would not be impartial; there would be no discrimination; no moral dominion; no light shed upon the mysteries of Providence.

Whatsoever a man soweth, that, and not something else, shall he reap. That which we are doing, good or evil, grave or gay, that which we do to-day and shall do to-morrow; each thought, each feeling, each action, each event; every passing hour, every breathing moment; all are contributing to form the character, according to which we are to be judged. Every particle of influence that goes to form that aggregate,--our character,--will, in that future scrutiny, be sifted out from the mass; and, particle by particle, with ages perhaps intervening, fall a distinct contribution to the sum of our joys or woes. Thus every idle word and idle hour will give answer in the judgment.

Let us take care, therefore, what we sow. An evil temptation comes upon us; the opportunity of unrighteous gain, or of unhallowed

[p. 217]

indulgence, either in the sphere of business or pleasure, of society or solitude. We yield; and plant a seed of bitterness and sorrow. To-morrow it will threaten discovery. Agitated and alarmed, we cover the sin, and bury it deep in falsehood and hypocrisy. In the bosom where it lies concealed, in the fertile soil of kindred vices, that sin dies not, but thrives and grows; and other and still other germs of evil gather around the accursed root; until, from that single seed of corruption, there springs up in the soul all that is horrible in habitual lying, knavery, or vice. Loathingly, often, we take each downward step; but a frightful power urges us onward; and the hell of debt, disease, ignominy, or remorse gathers its shadows around our steps even on earth; and are yet but the beginnings of sorrows. The evil deed may be done in a single moment; but conscience never dies, memory never sleeps; guilt never can become innocence; and remorse can never whisper peace.

Beware, thou who art tempted to evil! Beware what thou layest up for the future! Beware what thou layest up in the archives of eternity! Wrong not thy neighbor! lest the thought of him thou injurest, and who suffers by thy act, be to thee a pang which years will not deprive of its bitterness! Break not into the house of innocence, to rifle it of its treasure; lest when many years have passed over thee, the moan of its distress may not have died away from thine ear! Build not the desolate throne of ambition in thy heart; nor be busy with devices, and circumventings, and selfish schemings; lest desolation and loneliness be on thy path, as it stretches into the long futurity! Live not a useless, an impious, or an injurious life! for bound up with that life is the immutable principle of an endless retribution, and elements of God's creating, which will never spend their force, but continue ever to unfold with the ages of eternity. Be not deceived! God has formed thy nature, thus to answer to the future. His law can never be abrogated, nor His justice eluded; and forever and ever it will be true, that "Whatsoever a man soweth, that also he shall reap."

 

     
Morals and Dogma, by Albert Pike, [1871], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 218]

  

XIV.

  

GRAND ELECT, PERFECT, AND SUBLIME MASON.

  

[Perfect Elu.]

IT is for each individual Mason to discover the secret of Masonry, by reflection upon its symbols and a wise consideration and analysis of what is said and done in the work. Masonry does not inculcate her truths. She states them, once and briefly; or hints them, perhaps, darkly; or interposes a cloud between them and eyes that would be dazzled by them. "Seek, and ye shall find," knowledge and the truth.

The practical object of Masonry is the physical and moral amelioration and the intellectual and spiritual improvement of individuals and society. Neither can be effected, except by the dissemination of truth. It is falsehood in doctrines and fallacy in principles, to which most of the miseries of men and the misfortunes of nations are owing. Public opinion is rarely right on any point; and there are and always will be important truths to be substituted in that opinion in the place of many errors and absurd and injurious prejudices. There are few truths that public opinion has not at some time hated and persecuted as heresies; and few errors that have not at some time seemed to it truths radiant from the immediate presence of God. There are moral maladies, also, of man and society, the treatment of which requires not only boldness, but also, and more, prudence and discretion; since they are more the fruit of false and pernicious doctrines, moral, political, and religious, than of vicious inclinations.

Much of the Masonic secret manifests itself, without speech

[p. 219]

revealing it, to him who even partially comprehends all the Degrees in proportion as he receives them; and particularly to those who advance to the highest Degrees of the Ancient and Accepted Scottish Rite. That Rite raises a corner of the veil, even in the Degree of Apprentice; for it there declares that Masonry is a worship.

Masonry labors to improve the social order by enlightening men's minds, warming their hearts with the love of the good, inspiring them with the great principle of human fraternity, and requiring of its disciples that their language and actions shall con-form to that principle, that they shall enlighten each other, control their passions, abhor vice, and pity the vicious man as one afflicted with a deplorable malady.

It is the universal, eternal, immutable religion, such as God planted it in the heart of universal humanity. No creed has ever been long-lived that was not built on this foundation. It is the base, and they are the superstructure. "Pure religion and undefiled before God and the Father is this, to visit the fatherless and widows in their affliction, and to keep himself unspotted from the world." "Is not this the fast that I have chosen? to loose the bands of wickedness, to undo the heavy burdens, and to let the oppressed go free, and that ye break every yoke?" The ministers of this religion are all Masons who comprehend it and are devoted to it; its sacrifices to God are good works, the sacrifices of the base and disorderly passions, the offering up of self-interest on the altar of humanity, and perpetual efforts to attain to all the moral perfection of which man is capable.

To make honor and duty the steady beacon-lights that shall guide your life-vessel over the stormy seas of time; to do that which it is right to do, not because it will insure you success, or bring with it a reward, or gain the applause of men, or be "the best policy," more prudent or more advisable; but because it is right, and therefore ought to be done; to war incessantly against error, intolerance, ignorance, and vice, and yet to pity those who err, to be tolerant even of intolerance, to teach the ignorant, and to labor to reclaim the vicious, are some of the duties of a Mason.

A good Mason is one that can look upon death, and see its face with the same countenance with which he hears its story; that can endure all the labors of his life with his soul supporting his body, that can equally despise riches when he hath them and

[p. 220]

when he hath them not; that is, not sadder if they are in his neighbor's exchequer, nor more lifted up if they shine around about his own walls; one that is not moved with good fortune coming to him, nor going from him; that can look upon another man's lands with equanimity and pleasure, as if they were his own; and yet look upon his own, and use them too, just as if they were another man's; that neither spends his goods prodigally and foolishly, nor yet keeps them avariciously and like a miser; that weighs not benefits by weight and number, but by the mind and circumstances of him who confers them; that never thinks his charity expensive, if a worthy person be the receiver; that does nothing for opinion's sake, but everything for conscience, being as careful of his thoughts as of his acting in markets and theatres, and in as much awe of himself as of a whole assembly; that is, bountiful and cheerful to his friends, and charitable and apt to forgive his enemies; that loves his country, consults its honor, and obeys its laws, and desires and endeavors nothing more than that he may do his duty and honor God. And such a Mason may reckon his life to be the life of a man, and compute his months, not by the course of the sun, but by the zodiac and circle of his virtues.

The whole world is but one republic, of which each nation is a family, and every individual a child. Masonry, not in anywise derogating from the differing duties which the diversity of states requires, tends to create a new people, which, composed of men of many nations and tongues, shall all be bound together by the bonds of science, morality, and virtue.

Essentially philanthropic, philosophical, and progressive, it has for the basis of its dogma a firm belief in the existence of God and his providence, and of the immortality of the soul; for its object, the dissemination of moral, political, philosophical, and religious truth, and the practice of all the virtues. In every age, its device has been, "Liberty, Equality, Fraternity," with constitutional government, law, order, discipline, and subordination to legitimate authority--government and not anarchy.

But it is neither a political party nor a religious sect. It embraces all parties and all sects, to form from among them all a vast fraternal association. It recognizes the dignity of human nature, and man's right to such freedom as he is fitted for; and it knows nothing that should place one man below another, except

[p. 221]

ignorance, debasement, and crime, and the necessity of subordination to lawful will and authority.

It is philanthropic; for it recognizes the great truth that all men are of the same origin, have common interests, and should co-operate together to the same end.

Therefore it teaches its members to love one another, to give to each other mutual assistance and support in all the circumstances of life, to share each other's pains and sorrows, as well as their joys and pleasures; to guard the reputations, respect the opinions, and be perfectly tolerant of the errors, of each other, in matters of faith and beliefs.

It is philosophical, because it teaches the great Truths concerning the nature and existence of one Supreme Deity, and the existence and immortality of the soul. It revives the Academy of Plato, and the wise teachings of Socrates. It reiterates the maxims of Pythagoras, Confucius, and Zoroaster, and reverentially enforces the sublime lessons of Him who died upon the Cross.

The ancients thought that universal humanity acted under the influence of two opposing Principles, the Good and the Evil: of which the Good urged men toward Truth, Independence, and Devotedness; and the Evil toward Falsehood, Servility, and Selfishness. Masonry represents the Good Principle and constantly wars against the evil one. It is the Hercules, the Osiris, the Apollo, the Mithras, and the Ormuzd, at everlasting and deadly feud with the demons of ignorance, brutality, baseness, falsehood, slavishness of soul, intolerance, superstition, tyranny, meanness, the insolence of wealth, and bigotry.

When despotism and superstition, twin-powers of evil and darkness, reigned everywhere and seemed invincible and immortal, it invented, to avoid persecution, the mysteries, that is to say, the allegory, the symbol, and the emblem, and transmitted its doctrines by the secret mode of initiation. Now, retaining its ancient symbols, and in part its ancient ceremonies, it displays in every civilized country its banner, on which in letters of living light its great principles are written; and it smiles at the puny efforts of kings and popes to crush it out by excommunication and interdiction.

Man's views in regard to God, will contain only so much positive truth as file human mind is capable of receiving; whether that truth is attained by the exercise of reason, or communicated

[p. 222]

by revelation. It must necessarily be both limited and alloyed, to bring it within the competence of finite human intelligence. Being finite, we can form no correct or adequate idea of the Infinite; being material, we can form no clear conception of the Spiritual. We do believe in and know the infinity of Space and Time, and the spirituality of the Soul; but the idea of that infinity and spirituality eludes us. Even Omnipotence cannot infuse infinite conceptions into finite minds; nor can God, without first entirely changing the conditions of our being, pour a complete and full knowledge of His own nature and attributes into the narrow capacity of a 'human soul. Human intelligence could not grasp it, nor human language express it. The visible is, necessarily, the measure of the invisible.

The consciousness of the individual reveals itself alone. His knowledge cannot pass beyond the limits of his own being. His conceptions of other things and other beings are only his conceptions. They are not those things or beings themselves. The living principle of a living Universe must be INFINITE; while all our ideas and conceptions are finite, and applicable only to finite beings.

The Deity is thus not an object of knowledge, but of faith; not to be approached by the understanding, but by the moral sense; not to be conceived, but to be felt. All attempts to embrace the Infinite in the conception of the Finite are, and must be only accommodations to the frailty of man. Shrouded from human comprehension in an obscurity from which a chastened imagination is awed back, and Thought retreats in conscious weakness, the Divine Nature is a theme on which man is little entitled to dogmatize. Here the philosophic Intellect becomes most painfully aware of its own insufficiency.

And yet it is here that man most dogmatizes, classifies and describes God's attributes, makes out his map of God's nature, and his inventory of God's qualities, feelings, impulses, and passions; and then hangs and burns his brother, who, as dogmatically as he, makes out a different map and inventory. The common understanding has no humility. Its God is an incarnate Divinity. Imperfection imposes its own limitations on the Illimitable, and clothes the Inconceivable Spirit of the Universe in forms that come within the grasp of the senses and the intellect, and are derived from that infinite and imperfect nature which is but God's creation.

[p. 223]

We are all of us, though not all equally, mistaken. The cherished dogmas of each of us are not, as we fondly suppose, the pure truth of God; but simply our own special form of error, our guesses at truth, the refracted and fragmentary rays of light that have fallen upon our own minds. Our little systems have their day, and cease to be; they are but broken lights of God; and He is more than they. Perfect truth is not attainable anywhere. We style this Degree that of Perfection; and yet what it teaches is imperfect and defective. Yet we are not to relax in the pursuit of truth, nor contentedly acquiesce in error. It is our duty always to press forward in the search; for though absolute truth is unattainable, yet the amount of error in our views is capable of progressive and perpetual diminution; and thus Masonry is a continual struggle toward the light.

All errors are not equally innocuous. That which is most injurious is to entertain unworthy conceptions of the nature and attributes of God; and it is this that Masonry symbolizes by ignorance of the True Word. The true word of a Mason is, not the entire, perfect, absolute truth in regard to God; but the highest and noblest conception of Him that our minds are capable of forming; and this word is Ineffable, because one man cannot communicate to another his own conception of Deity; since every man's conception of God must be proportioned to his mental cultivation, and intellectual powers, and moral excellence. God is, as man conceives Him, the reflected image of man himself.

For every man's conception of God must vary with his mental cultivation and mental powers. If any one contents himself with any lower image than his intellect is capable of grasping, then he contents himself with that which is false to him, as well as false in fact. If lower than he can reach, he must needs feel it to be false. And if we, of the nineteenth century after Christ, adopt the conceptions of the nineteenth century before Him; if our conceptions of God are those of the ignorant, narrow-minded, and vindictive Israelite; then we think worse of God, and have a lower, meaner, and more limited view of His nature, than the faculties which He has bestowed are capable of grasping. The highest view we can form is nearest to the truth. If we acquiesce in any lower one, we acquiesce in an untruth. We feel that it is an affront and an indignity to Him, to conceive of Him as cruel, short-sighted, capricious, and unjust; as a jealous, an angry, a vindictive Being.

[p. 224]

[paragraph continues] When we examine our conceptions of His character, if we can conceive of a loftier, nobler, higher, more beneficent, glorious, and magnificent character, then this latter is to us the true conception of Deity; for nothing can be imagined more excellent than He.

Religion, to obtain currency and influence with the great mass of mankind, must needs be alloyed with such an amount of error as to place it far below the standard attainable by the higher human capacities. A religion as pure as the loftiest and most cultivated human reason could discern, would not be comprehended by, or effective over, the less educated portion of mankind. What is Truth to the philosopher, would not be Truth, nor have the effect of Truth, to the peasant. The religion of the many must necessarily be more incorrect than that of the refined and reflective few, not so much in its essence as in its forms, not so much in the spiritual idea which lies latent at the bottom of it, as in the symbols and dogmas in which that idea is embodied. The truest religion would, in many points, not be comprehended by the ignorant, nor consolatory to them, nor guiding and supporting for them. The doctrines of the Bible are often not clothed in the language of strict truth, but in that which was fittest to convey to a rude and ignorant people the practical essentials of the doctrine. A perfectly pure faith, free from all extraneous admixtures, a system of noble theism and lofty morality, would find too little preparation for it in the common mind and heart, to admit of prompt reception by the masses of mankind; and Truth might not have reached us, if it had not borrowed the wings of Error.

The Mason regards God as a Moral Governor, as well as an Original Creator; as a God at hand, and not merely one afar off in the distance of infinite space, and in the remoteness of Past or Future Eternity. He conceives of Him as taking a watchful and presiding interest in the affairs of the world, and as influencing the hearts and actions of men.

To him, God is the great Source of the World of Life and Matter; and man, with his wonderful corporeal and mental frame, His direct work. He believes that God has made men with different intellectual capacities; and enabled some, by superior intellectual power, to see and originate truths which are hidden from the mass of men. He believes that when it is His will that mankind should make some great step forward, or achieve some pregnant discovery, He calls into being some intellect of more than ordinary

[p. 225]

magnitude and power, to give birth to new ideas, and grander conceptions of the Truths vital to Humanity.

We hold that God has so ordered matters in this beautiful and harmonious, but mysteriously-governed Universe, that one great mind after another will arise, from time to time, as such are needed, to reveal to men the truths that are wanted, and the amount of truth than can be borne. He so arranges, that nature and the course of events shall send men into the world, endowed with that higher mental and moral organization, in which grand truths, and sublime gleams of spiritual light will spontaneously and inevitably arise. These speak to men by inspiration.

Whatever Hiram really was, he is the type, perhaps an imaginary type, to us, of humanity in its highest phase; an exemplar of what man may and should become, in the course of ages, in his progress toward the realization of his destiny; an individual gifted with a glorious intellect, a noble soul, a fine organization, and a perfectly balanced moral being; an earnest of what humanity may be, and what we believe it will hereafter be in God's good time; the possibility of the race made real.

The Mason believes that God has arranged this glorious but perplexing world with a purpose, and on a plan. He holds that every man sent upon this earth, and especially every man of superior capacity, has a duty to perform, a mission to fulfill, a baptism to be baptized with; that every great and good man possesses some portion of God's truth, which he must proclaim to the world, and which must bear fruit in his own bosom. In a true and simple sense, he believes all the pure, wise, and intellectual to be inspired, and to be so for the instruction, advancement, and elevation of mankind. That kind of inspiration, like God's omnipresence, is not limited to the few writers claimed by Jews, Christians, or Moslems, but is co-extensive with the race. It is the consequence of a faithful use of our faculties. Each man is its subject, God is its source, and Truth its only test. It differs in degrees, as the intellectual endowments, the moral wealth of the soul, and the degree of cultivation of those endowments and faculties differ. It is limited to no sect, age, or nation. It is wide as the world and common as God. It was not given to a few men, in the infancy of mankind, to monopolize inspiration, and bar God out of the soul. We are not born in the dotage and decay of the world. The stars are beautiful as in their prime; the most ancient Heavens

[p. 226]

are fresh and strong. God is still everywhere in nature. Wherever a heart beats with love, wherever Faith and Reason utter their oracles, there is God, as formerly in the hearts of seers and prophets. No soil on earth is so holy as the good man's heart; nothing is so full of God. This inspiration is not given to the learned alone, not alone to the great and wise, but to every faithful child of God. Certain as the open eye drinks in the light, do the pure in heart see God; and he who lives truly, feels Him as a presence within the soul. The conscience is the very voice of Deity.

Masonry, around whose altars the Christian, the Hebrew, the Moslem, the Brahmin, the followers of Confucius and Zoroaster, can assemble as brethren and unite in prayer to the one God who is above all the Baalim, must needs leave it to each of its Initiates to look for the foundation of his faith and hope to the written scriptures of his own religion. For itself it finds those truths definite enough, which are written by the finger of God upon the heart of man and on the pages of the book of nature. Views of religion and duty, wrought out by the meditations of the studious, confirmed by the allegiance of the good and wise, stamped as sterling by the response they find in every uncorrupted mind, commend themselves to Masons of every creed, and may well be accepted by all.

The Mason does not pretend to dogmatic certainty, nor vainly imagine such certainty attainable. He considers that if there were no written revelation, he could safely rest the hopes that animate him and the principles that guide him, on the deductions of reason and the convictions of instinct and consciousness. He can find a sure foundation for his religious belief, in these deductions of the intellect and convictions of the heart. For reason proves to him the existence and attributes of God; and those spiritual instincts which he feels are the voice of God in his soul, infuse into his mind a sense of his relation to God, a conviction of the beneficence of his Creator and Preserver, and a hope of future existence; and his reason and conscience alike unerringly point to virtue as the highest good, and the destined aim and purpose of man's life.

He studies the wonders of the Heavens, the frame-work and revolutions of the Earth, the mysterious beauties and adaptations of animal existence, the moral and material constitution of the human creature, so fearfully and wonderfully made; and is satisfied

[p. 227]

that God IS; and that a Wise and Good Being is the author of the starry Heavens above him, and of the moral world within him; and his mind finds an adequate foundation for its hopes, its worship, its principles of action, in the far-stretching Universe, in the glorious firmament, in the deep, full soul, bursting with unutterable thoughts.

These are truths which every reflecting mind will unhesitatingly receive, as not to be surpassed, nor capable of improvement; and fitted, if obeyed, to make earth indeed a Paradise, and man only a little lower than the angels. The worthlessness of ceremonial observances, and the necessity of active virtue; the enforcement of purity of heart as the security for purity of life, and of the government of the thoughts, as the originators and forerunners of action; universal philanthropy, requiring us to love all men, and to do unto others that and that only which we should think it right, just, and generous for them to do unto us; forgiveness of injuries; the necessity of self-sacrifice in the discharge of duty; humility; genuine sincerity, and being that which we seem to be; all these sublime precepts need no miracle, no voice from the clouds, to recommend them to our allegiance, or to assure us of y their divine origin. They command obedience by virtue of their inherent rectitude and beauty; and have been, and are, and will be the law in every age and every country of the world. God revealed them to man in the beginning.

To the Mason, God is our Father in Heaven, to be Whose especial children is the sufficient reward of the peacemakers, to see Whose face the highest hope of the pure in heart; Who is ever at hand to strengthen His true worshippers; to Whom our most fervent love is due, our most humble and patient submission; Whose most acceptable worship is a pure and pitying heart and a beneficent life; in Whose constant presence we live and act, to Whose merciful disposal we are resigned by that death which, we hope and believe, is but the entrance to a better life; and Whose wise decrees forbid a man to lap his soul in an elysium of mere indolent content.

As to our feelings toward Him and our conduct toward man, Masonry teaches little about which men can differ, and little from which they can dissent. He is our Father; and we are all brethren. This much lies open to the most ignorant and busy, as fully as to those who have most leisure and are most learned. This needs no Priest to teach it, and no authority to indorse it; and if

[p. 228]

every man did that only which is consistent with it, it would exile barbarity, cruelty, intolerance, uncharitableness, perfidy, treachery, revenge, selfishness, and all their kindred vices and bad passions beyond the confines of the world.

The true Mason, sincerely holding that a Supreme God created and governs this world, believes also that He governs it by laws, which, though wise, just, and beneficent, are yet steady, unwavering, inexorable. He believes that his agonies and sorrows are ordained for his chastening, his strengthening, his elaboration and development; because they are the necessary results of the operation of laws, the best that could be devised for the happiness and purification of the species, and to give occasion and opportunity for the practice of all the virtues, from the homeliest and most common, to the noblest and most sublime; or perhaps not even that, but the best adapted to work out the vast, awful, glorious, eternal designs of the Great Spirit of the Universe. He believes that the ordained operations of nature, which have brought misery to him, have, from the very unswerving tranquility of their career, showered blessings and sunshine upon many another path; that the unrelenting chariot of Time, which has crushed or maimed him in its allotted course, is pressing onward to the accomplishment of those serene and mighty purposes, to have contributed to which, even as a victim, is an honor and a recompense. He takes this view of Time and Nature and God, and yet bears his lot without murmur or distrust; because it is a portion of a system, the best possible, because ordained by God. He does not believe that God loses sight of him, while superintending the march of the great harmonies of the Universe; nor that it was not foreseen, when the Universe was created, its laws enacted, and the long succession of its operations pre-ordained, that in the great march of those events, he would suffer pain and undergo calamity. He believes that his individual good entered into God's consideration, a, well as the great cardinal results to which the course of all things is tending.

Thus believing, he has attained an eminence in virtue, the highest, amid passive excellence, which humanity can reach. He finds his reward and his support in the reflection that he is an unreluctant and self-sacrificing co-operator with the Creator of the Universe; and in the noble consciousness of being worthy and capable of so sublime a conception, yet so sad a destiny. He is then truly

[p. 229]

entitled to be called a Grand Elect, Perfect, and Sublime Mason. He is content to fall early in the battle, if his body may but form a stepping-stone for the future conquests of humanity.

It cannot be that God, Who, we are certain, is perfectly good, can choose us to suffer pain, unless either we are ourselves to receive from it an antidote to what is evil in ourselves, or else as such pain is a necessary part in the scheme of the Universe, which as a whole is good. In either case, the Mason receives it with submission. He would not suffer unless it was ordered so. What-ever his creed, if he believes that God is, and that He cares for His creatures, he cannot doubt that; nor that it would not have been so ordered, unless it was either better for himself, or for some other persons, or for some things. To complain and lament is to murmur against God's will, and worse than unbelief.

The Mason, whose mind is cast in a nobler mould than those of the ignorant and unreflecting, and is instinct with a diviner life,--who loves truth more than rest, and the peace of Heaven rather than the peace of Eden,--to whom a loftier being brings severer cares,--who knows that man does not live by pleasure or content alone, but by the presence of the power of God,--must cast behind him the hope of any other repose or tranquillity, than that which is the last reward of long agonies of thought; he must relinquish all prospect of any Heaven save that of which trouble is the avenue and portal; he must gird up his loins, and trim his lamp, for a work that must be done, and must not be negligently done. If he does not like to live in the furnished lodgings of tradition, he must build his own house, his own system of faith and thought, for himself,

The hope of success, and not the hope of reward, should be our stimulating and sustaining power. Our object, and not ourselves, should be our inspiring thought. Selfishness is a sin, when temporary, and for time. Spun out to eternity, it does not become celestial prudence. We should toil and die, not for Heaven or Bliss, but for Duty.

In the more frequent cases, where we have to join our efforts to those of thousands of others, to contribute to the carrying forward of a great cause; merely to till the ground or sow the seed for a very distant harvest, or to prepare the way for the future advent of some great amendment; the amount which each one contributes to the achievement of ultimate success, the portion of the

[p. 230]

price which justice should assign to each as his especial production, can never be accurately ascertained. Perhaps few of those who have ever labored, in the patience of secrecy and silence, to bring about some political or social change, which they felt convinced would ultimately prove of vast service to humanity, lived to see the change effected, or the anticipated good flow from it. Fewer still of them were able to pronounce what appreciable weight their several efforts contributed to the achievement of the change desired. Many will doubt, whether, in truth, these exertions have any influence whatever; and, discouraged, cease all active effort.

Not to be thus discouraged, the Mason must labor to elevate and purify his motives, as well as sedulously cherish the conviction, assuredly a true one, that in this world there is no such thing as effort thrown away; that in all labor there is profit; that all sincere exertion, in a righteous and unselfish cause, is necessarily followed, in spite of all appearance to the contrary, by an appropriate and proportionate success; that no bread cast upon the waters can be wholly lost; that no seed planted in the ground can fail to quicken in due time and measure; and that, however we may, in moments of despondency, be apt to doubt, not only whether our cause will triumph, but whether, if it does, we shall have contributed to its triumph,--there is One, Who has not only seen every exertion we have made, but Who can assign the exact degree in which each soldier has assisted to gain the great victory over social evil. No good work is done wholly in vain,

The Grand Elect, Perfect, and Sublime Mason will in nowise deserve that honorable title, if he has not that strength, that will, that self-sustaining energy; that Faith, that feeds upon no earthly hope, nor ever thinks of victory, but, content in its own consummation, combats because it ought to combat, rejoicing fights, and still rejoicing falls.

The Augean Stables of the World, the accumulated uncleanness and misery of centuries, require a mighty river to cleanse them thoroughly away; every drop we contribute aids to swell that river and augment its force, in a degree appreciable by God, though not by man; and he whose zeal is deep and earnest, will not be over-anxious that his individual drops should be distinguishable amid the mighty mass of cleansing and fertilizing

[p. 231]

waters; far less that, for the sake of distinction, it should flow in ineffective singleness away.

The true Mason will not be careful that his name should be inscribed upon the mite which he casts into the treasury of God. It suffices him to know that if he has labored, with purity of purpose, in any good cause, he must have contributed to its success; that the degree in which he has contributed is a matter of infinitely small concern; and still more, that the consciousness of having so contributed, however obscurely and unnoticed, is his sufficient, even if it be his sole, reward. Let every Grand Elect, Perfect, and Sublime Mason cherish this faith. It is a duty. It is the brilliant and never-dying light that shines within and through the symbolic pedestal of alabaster, on which reposes the perfect cube of agate, symbol of duty, inscribed with the divine name of God. He who industriously sows and reaps is a good laborer, and worthy of his hire. But he who sows that which shall be reaped by others, by those who will know not of and care not for the sower, is a laborer of a nobler order, and, worthy of a more excellent reward.

The Mason does not exhort others to an ascetic undervaluing of this life, as an insignificant and unworthy portion of existence; for that demands feelings which are unnatural, and which, therefore, if attained, must be morbid, and if merely professed, insincere; and teaches us to look rather to a future life for the compensation of social evils, than to this life for their cure; and so does injury to the cause of virtue and to that of social progress. Life is real, and is earnest, and it is full of duties to be performed. It is the beginning of our immortality. Those only who feel a deep interest and affection for this world will work resolutely for its amelioration; those whose affections are transferred to Heaven, easily acquiesce in the miseries of earth, deeming them hopeless, befitting, and ordained; and console themselves with the idea of the amends which are one day to be theirs. It is a sad truth, that those most decidedly given to spiritual contemplation, and to making religion rule in their hearts, are often most apathetic toward all improvement of this world's systems, and in many cases virtual conservatives of evil, and hostile to political and social reform, as diverting men's energies from eternity.

The Mason does not war with his own instincts, macerate the body into weakness and disorder, and disparage what he sees to be

[p. 232]

beautiful, knows to be wonderful, and feels to be unspeakably dear and fascinating. He does not put aside the nature which God has given him, to struggle after one which He has not bestowed. He knows that man is sent into the world, not a spiritual, but a composite being, made up of body and mind, the body having, as is fit and needful in a material world, its full, rightful, and allotted share. His life is guided by a full recognition of this fact. He does not deny it in bold words, and admit it in weaknesses and inevitable failings. He believes that his spirituality will come in the next stage of his being, when he puts on the spiritual body; that his body will be dropped at death; and that, until then, God meant it to be commanded and controlled, but not neglected, despised, or ignored by the soul, under pain of, heavy consequences.

Yet the Mason is not indifferent as to the fate of the soul, after its present life, as to its continued and eternal being, and the character of the scenes in which that being will be fully developed. These are to him topics of the profoundest interest, and the most ennobling and refining contemplation. They occupy much of his leisure; and as he becomes familiar with the sorrows and calamities of this life, as his hopes are disappointed and his visions of happiness here fade away; when life has wearied him in its race of hours; when the is harassed and toil-worn, and the burden of his years weighs heavy on him, the balance of attraction gradually inclines in favor of another life; and he clings to his lofty speculations with a tenacity of interest which needs no in-junction, and will listen to no prohibition. They are the consoling privilege of the aspiring, the wayworn, the weary, and the bereaved.

To him the contemplation of the Future lets in light upon the Present, and develops the higher portions of his nature. He endeavors rightly to adjust the respective claims of Heaven and earth upon his time and thought, so as to give the proper proportions thereof to performing the duties and entering into the interests of this world, and to preparation for a better; to the cultivation and purification of his own character, and to the public service of his fellow-men.

The Mason does not dogmatize, but entertaining and uttering his own convictions, he leaves every one else free to do the same; and only hopes that the time will cone, even if after the lapse of

[p. 233]

ages, when all men shall form one great family of brethren, and one law alone, the law of love, shall govern God's whole Universe.

Believe as you may, my brother; if the Universe is not, to you, without a God, and if man is not like the beast that perishes, but hath an immortal soul, we welcome you among us, to wear, as we wear, with humility, and conscious of your demerits and short-comings, the title of Grand Elect, Perfect, and Sublime Mason.

It was not without a secret meaning, that twelve was the number of the Apostles of Christ, and seventy-two that of his Disciples: that John addressed his rebukes and menaces to the Seven churches, the number of the Archangels and the Planets. At Babylon were the Seven Stages of Bersippa, a pyramid of Seven stories, and at Ecbatana Seven concentric inclosures, each of a different color. Thebes also had Seven gates, and the same number is repeated again and again in the account of the flood. The Sephiroth, or Emanations, ten in number, three in one class, and seven in the other, repeat the mystic numbers of Pythagoras. Seven Amschaspands or planetary spirits were invoked with Ormuzd: Seven inferior Rishis of Hindustan were saved with the head of their family in an ark: and Seven ancient personages alone returned with the British just man, Hu, from the dale of the grievous waters. There were Seven Heliadae, whose father Hellas, or the Sun, once crossed the sea in a golden cup; Seven Titans, children of the older Titan, Kronos or Saturn; Seven Corybantes; and Seven Cabiri, sons of Sydyk; Seven primeval Celestial spirits of the Japanese, and Seven Karfesters who escaped from the deluge and began to be the parents of a new race, on the summit of Mount Albordi. Seven Cyclopes, also, built the walls of Tiryus.

Celsus, as quoted by Origen, tells us that the Persians represented by symbols the two-fold motion of the stars, fixed and planetary, and the passage of the Soul through their successive spheres. They erected in their holy caves, in which the mystic rites of the Mithriac initiations were practised, what he denominates a high ladder, on the Seven steps of which were Seven gates or portals, according to the number of the Seven principal heavenly bodies. Through these the aspirants passed, until they reached the summit of the whole; and this passage was styled a transmigration through the spheres.

[p. 234]

Jacob saw in his dream a ladder planted or set on the earth, and its top reaching to Heaven, and the Malaki Alohim ascending and descending on it, and above it stood INUH, declaring Himself to be Ihuh-Alhi Abraham. The word translated ladder, is w ?S?Lm Salam, from w ?S?L?L, Salal, raised, elevated, reared up, exalted, piled up into a heap, Aggeravit. w ?S?L?L?H Salalah, means a heap, rampart, or other accumulation of earth or stone, artificially made; and w ?S?L?O, Salaa or Salo, is a rock or cliff or boulder, and the name of the city of Petra. There is no ancient Hebrew word to designate a pyramid.

The symbolic mountain Meru was ascended by Seven steps or stages; and all the pyramids and artificial tumuli and hillocks thrown up in fiat countries were imitations of this fabulous and mystic mountain, for purposes of worship. These were the "High Places" so often mentioned in the Hebrew books, on which the idolaters sacrificed to foreign gods.

The pyramids were sometimes square, and sometimes round. The sacred Babylonian tower [w m?G?D?L, Magdol], dedicated to the great Father Bal, was an artificial hill, of pyramidal shape, and Seven stages, built of brick, and each stage of a different color, representing the Seven planetary spheres by the appropriate color of each planet. Meru itself was said to be a single mountain, terminating in three peaks, and thus a symbol of the Trimurti. The great Pagoda at Tanjore was of six stories, surmounted by a temple as the seventh, and on this three spires or towers. An ancient pagoda at Deogur was surmounted by a tower, sustaining the mystic egg and a trident. Herodotus tells us that the Temple of Bal at Babylon was a tower composed of Seven towers, resting on an eighth that served as basis, and successively diminishing in size from the bottom to the top; and Strabo tells us it was a pyramid.

Faber thinks that the Mithriac ladder was really a pyramid with Seven stages, each provided with a narrow door or aperture, through each of which doors the aspirant passed, to reach the summit, and then descended through similar doors on the opposite side of the pyramid; the ascent and descent of the Soul being thus represented.

Each Mithriac cave and all the most ancient temples were intended to symbolize the Universe, which itself was habitually called the Temple and habitation of Deity. Every temple was

[p. 235]

the world in miniature; and so the whole world was one grand temple. The most ancient temples were roofless; and therefore the Persians, Celts, and Scythians strongly disliked artificial covered edifices. Cicero says that Xerxes burned the Grecian temples, on the express ground that the whole world was the Magnificent Temple and Habitation of the Supreme Deity. Macrobius says that the entire Universe was judiciously deemed by many the Temple of God. Plato pronounced the real Temple of the Deity to be the world; and Heraclitus declared that the Universe, variegated with animals and plants and stars was the only genuine Temple of the Divinity.

How completely the Temple of Solomon was symbolic, is manifest, not only from the continual reproduction in it of the sacred numbers and of astrological symbols in the historical descriptions of it; but also, and yet more, from the details of the imaginary reconstructed edifice, seen by Ezekiel in his vision. The Apocalypse completes the demonstration, and shows the kabalistic meanings of the whole. The Symbola Architectonica are found on the most ancient edifices; and these mathematical figures and instruments, adopted by the Templars, and identical with those on the gnostic seals and abraxae, connect their dogma with the Chaldaic, Syriac, and Egyptian Oriental philosophy. The secret Pythagorean doctrines of numbers were preserved by the monks of Thibet, by the Hierophants of Egypt and Eleusis, at Jerusalem, and in the circular Chapters of the Druids; and they are especially consecrated in that mysterious book, the Apocalypse of Saint John.

All temples were surrounded by pillars, recording the number of the constellations, the signs of the zodiac, or the cycles of the planets; and each one was a microcosm or symbol of the Universe, having for roof or ceiling the starred vault of Heaven.

All temples were originally open at the top, having for roof the sky. Twelve pillars described the belt of the zodiac. Whatever the number of the pillars, they were mystical everywhere. At Abury, the Druidic temple reproduced all the cycles by its columns. Around the temples of Chilminar in Persia, of Baalbec, and of Tukhti Schlomoh in Tartary, on the frontier of China, stood forty pillars. On each side of the temple at Paestum were fourteen, recording the Egyptian cycle of the dark and light sides

[p. 236]

of the moon, as described by Plutarch; the whole thirty-eight that surrounded them recording the two meteoric cycles so often found in the Druidic temples.

The theatre built by Scaurus, in Greece, was surrounded by 360 columns; the Temple at Mecca, and that at Iona in Scotland, by 360 stones.

 

     
Morals and Dogma, by Albert Pike, [1871], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 237]

  

MORALS AND DOGMA

  

CHAPTER OF ROSE CROIX

  

XV.

  

KNIGHT OF THE EAST OR OF THE SWORD.

  

[Knight of the East, of the Sword, or of the Eagle.]

THIS Degree, like all others in Masonry, is symbolical. Based upon historical truth and authentic tradition, it is still an allegory. The leading lesson of this Degree is Fidelity to obligation, and Constancy and Perseverance under difficulties and discouragement.

Masonry is engaged in her crusade, against ignorance, intolerance, fanaticism, superstition, uncharitableness, and error. She does not sail with the trade-winds, upon a smooth sea, with a steady free breeze, fair for a welcoming harbor; but meets and must overcome many opposing currents, baffling winds, and dead calms.

The chief obstacles to her success are the apathy and faithlessness of her own selfish children, and the supine indifference of the world. In the roar and crush and hurry of life and business, and the tumult and uproar of politics, the quiet voice of Masonry is unheard and unheeded. The first lesson which one learns, who engages in any great work of reform or beneficence, is, that men are essentially careless, lukewarm, and indifferent as to everything that does not concern their own personal and immediate

[p. 238]

welfare. It is to single men, and not to the united efforts of many, that all the great works of man, struggling toward perfection, are owing. The enthusiast, who imagines that he can inspire with his own enthusiasm the multitude that eddies around him, or even the few who have associated themselves with him as co-workers, is grievously mistaken; and most often the conviction of his own mistake is followed by discouragement and disgust. To do all, to pay all, and to suffer all, and then, when despite all obstacles and hindrances, success is accomplished, and a great work done, to see those who opposed or looked coldly on it, claim and reap all the praise and reward, is the common and almost universal lot of the benefactor of his kind.

He who endeavors to serve, to benefit, and improve the world, is like a swimmer, who struggles against a rapid current, in a river lashed into angry waves by the winds. Often they roar over his head, often they beat him back and baffle him. Most men yield to the stress of the current, and float with it to the shore, or are swept over the rapids; and only here and there the stout, strong heart and vigorous arms struggle on toward ultimate success.

It is the motionless and stationary that most frets and impedes the current of progress; the solid rock or stupid dead tree, rested firmly on the bottom; and around which the river whirls and eddies: the Masons that doubt and hesitate and are discouraged; that disbelieve in the capability of man to improve; that are not disposed to toil and labor for the interest and well-being of general humanity; that expect others to do all, even of that which they do not oppose or ridicule; while they sit, applauding and doing nothing, or perhaps prognosticating failure.

There were many such at the rebuilding of the Temple. There were prophets of evil and misfortune--the lukewarm and the in-different and the apathetic; those who stood by and sneered; and those who thought they did God service enough if they now and then faintly applauded. There were ravens croaking ill omen, and murmurers who preached the folly and futility of the attempt. The world is made up of such; and they were as abundant then as they are now.

But gloomy and discouraging as was the prospect, with lukewarmness within and bitter opposition without, our ancient brethren persevered. Let us leave them engaged in the good work, and whenever to us, as to them, success is uncertain, remote, and

[p. 239]

contingent, let us still remember that the only question for us to ask, as true men and Masons, is, what does duty require; and not what will be the result and our reward if we do our duty. Work on, with the Sword in one hand, and the Trowel in the other!

Masonry teaches that God is a Paternal Being, and has an interest in his creatures, such as is expressed in the title Father; an interest unknown to all the systems of Paganism, untaught in all the theories of philosophy; an interest not only in the glorious beings of other spheres, the Sons of Light, the dwellers in Heavenly worlds, but in us, poor, ignorant, and unworthy; that He has pity for the erring, pardon for the guilty, love for the pure, knowledge for the humble, and promises of immortal life for those who trust in and obey Him.

Without a belief in Him, life is miserable, the world is dark, the Universe disrobed of its splendors, the intellectual tie to nature broken, the charm of existence dissolved, the great hope of being lost; and the mind, like a star struck from its sphere, wanders through the infinite desert of its conceptions, without attraction, tendency, destiny, or end.

Masonry teaches, that, of all the events and actions, that take place in the universe of worlds and the eternal succession of ages, there is not one, even the minutest, which God did not forever foresee, with all the distinctness of immediate vision, combining all, so that man's free will should be His instrument, like all the other forces of, nature.

It teaches that the soul of man is formed by Him for a purpose; that, built up in its proportions, and fashioned in every part, by infinite skill, an emanation from His spirit, its nature, necessity, and design are virtue. It is so formed, so moulded, so fashioned, so exactly balanced, so exquisitely proportioned in every part, that sin introduced into it is misery; that vicious thoughts fall upon it like drops of poison; and guilty desires, breathing on its delicate fibres, make plague-spots there, deadly as those of pestilence upon the body. It is made for virtue, and not for vice; for purity, as its end, rest, and happiness. Not more vainly would we attempt to make the mountain sink to the level of the valley, the waves of the angry sea turn back from its shores and cease to thunder upon the beach, the stars to halt in their swift courses, than to change any one law of our own nature. And one of those laws, uttered by God's voice, and speaking through every nerve

[p. 240]

and fibre, every force and element, of the moral constitution He has given us, is that we must be upright and virtuous; that if tempted we must resist; that we must govern our unruly passions, and hold in hand our sensual appetites. And this is not the dictate of an arbitrary will, nor of some stern and impracticable law; but it is part of the great firm law of harmony that binds the Universe together: not the mere enactment of arbitrary will; but the dictate of Infinite Wisdom.

We know that God is good, and that what He does is right. This known, the works of creation, the changes of life, the destinies of eternity, are all spread before us, as the dispensations and counsels of infinite love. This known, we then know that the love of God is working to issues, like itself, beyond all thought and imagination good and glorious; and that the only reason why we do not understand it, is that it is too glorious for us to understand. God's love takes care for all, and nothing is neglected. It watches over all, provides for all, makes wise adaptations for all; for age, for infancy, for maturity, for childhood; in every scene of this or another world; for want, weakness, joy, sorrow, and even for sin. All is good and well and right; and shall be so forever. Through the eternal ages the light of God's beneficence shall shine hereafter, disclosing all, consummating all, rewarding all that deserve reward. Then we shall see, what now we can only believe. The cloud will be lifted up, the gate of mystery be passed, and the full light shine forever; the light of which that of the Lodge is a symbol. Then that which caused us trial shall yield us triumph; and that which made our heart ache shall fill us with gladness; and we shall then feel that there, as here, the only true happiness is to learn, to advance, and to improve; which could not happen unless we had commenced with error, ignorance, and imperfection. We must pass through the darkness, to reach the light.

     
Morals and Dogma, by Albert Pike, [1871], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 241]

  

XVI.

  

PRINCE OF JERUSALEM.

WE no longer expect to rebuild the Temple at Jerusalem. To us it has become but a symbol. To us the whole world is God's Temple, as is every upright heart. To establish all over the world the New Law and Reign of Love, Peace, Charity, and Toleration, is to build that Temple, most acceptable to God, in erecting which Masonry is now engaged. No longer needing to repair to Jerusalem to worship, nor to offer up sacrifices and shed blood to propitiate the Deity, man may make the woods and mountains his Churches and Temples, and worship God with a devout gratitude, and with works of charity and beneficence to his fellow-men. Wherever the humble and contrite heart silently offers up its adoration, under the overarching trees, in the open, level meadows, on the hill-side, in the glen, or in the city's swarming streets; there is God's House and the New Jerusalem.

The Princes of Jerusalem no longer sit as magistrates to judge between the people; nor is their number limited to five. But their duties still remain substantially the same, and their insignia and symbols retain their old significance. Justice and Equity are still their characteristics. To reconcile disputes and heal dissensions, to restore amity and peace, to soothe dislikes and soften prejudices, are their peculiar duties; and they know that the peacemakers are blessed.

Their emblems have been already explained. They are part of the language of Masonry; the same now as it was when Moses learned it from the Egyptian Hierophants.

Still we observe the spirit of the Divine law, as thus enunciated to our ancient brethren, when the Temple was rebuilt, and the book of the law again opened:

"Execute true judgment; and show mercy and compassion every man to his brother. Oppress not the widow nor the fatherless, the stranger nor the poor; and let none of you imagine evil against his brother in his heart. Speak ye every man the truth

[p. 242]

to his neighbor; execute the judgment of Truth and Peace in your gates; and love no false oath; for all these I hate, saith the Lord.

"Let those who have power rule in righteousness, and Princes in judgment. And let him that is a judge be as an hiding-place from the wind, and a covert from the tempest; as rivers of water in a dry place; as the shadow of a great rock in a weary land. Then the vile person shall no more be called liberal; nor the churl bountiful; and the work of justice shall be peace; and the effect of justice, quiet and security; and wisdom and knowledge shall be the stability of the times. Walk ye righteously and speak uprightly; despise the gains of oppression, shake from your hands the contamination of bribes; stop not your ears against the cries of the oppressed, nor shut your eyes that you may not see the crimes of the great; and you shall dwell on high, and your place of defence be like munitions of rocks."

Forget not these precepts of the old Law; and especially do not forget, as you advance, that every Mason, however humble, is your brother, and the laboring man your peer! Remember always that all Masonry is work, and that the trowel is an emblem of the Degrees in this Council. Labor, when rightly understood, is both noble and ennobling, and intended to develop man's moral and spiritual nature, and not to be deemed a disgrace or a misfortune.

Everything around us is, in its bearings and influences, moral. The serene and bright morning, when we recover our conscious existence from the embraces of sleep; when, from that image of Death God calls us to a new life, and again gives us existence, and His mercies visit us in every bright ray and glad thought, and call for gratitude and content; the silence of that early dawn, the hushed silence, as it were, of expectation; the holy eventide, its cooling breeze, its lengthening shadows, its falling shades, its still and sober hour; the sultry noontide and the stern and solemn midnight; and Spring-time, and chastening Autumn; and Summer, that unbars our gates, and carries us forth amidst the ever-renewed wonders of the world; and Winter, that gathers us around the evening hearth:--all these, as they pass, touch by turns the springs of the spiritual life in us, and are conducting that life to good or evil. The idle watch-hand often points to something within us; and the shadow of the gnomon on the dial often falls upon the conscience.

[p. 243]

A life of labor is not a state of inferiority or degradation. The Almighty has not cast man's lot beneath the quiet shades, and amid glad groves and lovely hills, with no task to perform; with nothing to do but to rise up and eat, and to lie clown and rest. He has ordained that Work shall be done, in all the dwellings of life, in every productive field, in every busy city, and on every wave of every ocean. And this He has done, because it has pleased Him to give man a nature destined to higher ends than indolent repose and irresponsible profitless indulgence; and because, for developing the energies of such a nature, work was the necessary and proper element. We might as well ask why He could not make two and two be six, as why He could not develop these energies without the instrumentality of work. They are equally impossibilities.

This, Masonry teaches, as a great Truth; a great moral land-mark, that ought to guide the course of all mankind. It teaches its toiling children that the scene of their daily life is all spiritual, that the very implements of their toil, the fabrics they weave, the merchandise they barter, are designed for spiritual ends; that so believing, their daily lot may be to them a sphere for the noblest improvement. That which we do in our intervals of relaxation, our church-going, and our book-reading, are especially designed to prepare our minds for the action of Life. We are to hear and read and meditate, that we may act well; and the action of Life is itself the great field for spiritual improvement. There is no task of industry or business, in field or forest, on the wharf or the ship's deck, in the office or the exchange, but has spiritual ends. There is no care or cross of our daily labor, but was especially ordained to nurture in us patience, calmness, resolution, perseverance, gentleness, disinterestedness, magnanimity. Nor is there any tool or implement of toil, but is a part of the great spiritual instrumentality.

All the relations of life, those of parent, child, brother, sister, friend, associate, lover and beloved, husband, wife, are moral, throughout every living tie and thrilling nerve that bind them together. They cannot subsist a day nor an hour without putting the mind to a trial of its truth, fidelity, forbearance, and disinterestedness.

A great city is one extended scene of moral action. There is no blow struck in it but has a purpose, ultimately good or bad,

[p. 244]

and therefore moral. There is no action performed, but has a motive; and motives are the special jurisdiction of morality. Equipages, houses, and furniture are symbols of what is moral, and they in a thousand ways minister to right or wrong feeling. Everything that belongs to us, ministering to our comfort or luxury, awakens in us emotions of pride or gratitude, of selfishness or vanity; thoughts of self-indulgence, or merciful remembrances of the needy and the destitute.

Everything acts upon and influences us. God's great law of sympathy and harmony is potent and inflexible as His law of gravitation. A sentence embodying a noble thought stirs our blood; a noise made by a child frets and exasperates us, and influences our actions.

A world of spiritual objects, influences, and relations lies around us all. We all vaguely deem it to be so; but he only lives a charmed life, like that of genius and poetic inspiration, who communes with the spiritual scene around him, hears the voice of the spirit in every sound, sees its signs in every passing form of things, and feels its impulse in all action, passion, and being. Very near to us lies the mines of wisdom; unsuspected they lie all around us. There is a secret In the simplest things, a wonder in the plainest, a charm in the dullest.

We are all naturally seekers of wonders. We travel far to see the majesty of old ruins, the venerable forms of the hoary mountains, great water-falls, and galleries of art. And yet the world-wonder is all around us; the wonder of setting suns, and evening stars, of the magic spring-time, the blossoming of the trees, the strange transformations of the moth; the wonder of the Infinite Divinity and of His boundless revelation. There is no splendor beyond that which sets its morning throne in the golden East; no. dome sublime as that of Heaven; no beauty so fair as that of the verdant, blossoming earth; no place, however invested with the sanctities of old time, like that home which is hushed and folded within the embrace of the humblest wall and roof.

And all these are but the symbols of things far greater and higher. All is but the clothing of the spirit. In this vesture of time is wrapped the immortal nature: in this show of circumstance and form stands revealed the stupendous reality. Let man but be, as he is, a living soul, communing with himself and with

[p. 245]

[paragraph continues] God, and his vision becomes eternity; his abode, infinity; his home, the bosom of all-embracing love.

The great problem of Humanity is wrought out in the humblest abodes; no more than this is done in the highest. A human heart throbs beneath the beggar's gabardine; and that and no more stirs with its beating the Prince's mantle. The beauty of Love, the charm of friendship, the sacredness of Sorrow, the heroism of Patience, the noble Self-sacrifice, these and their like, alone, make life to be life indeed, and are its grandeur and its power. They are the priceless treasures and glory of humanity; and they are not things of condition. All places and all scenes are alike clothed with the grandeur and charm of virtues such as these.

The million occasions will come to us all, in the ordinary paths of our life, in our homes, and by our firesides, wherein we may act as nobly, as if, all our life long, we led armies, sat in senates, or visited beds of sickness and pain. Varying every hour, the million occasions will come in which we may restrain our passions, subdue our hearts to gentleness and patience, resign our own interest for another's advantage, speak words of kindness and wisdom, raise the fallen, cheer the fainting and sick in spirit, and soften and assuage the weariness and bitterness of their mortal lot. To every Mason there will be opportunity enough for these. They cannot be written on his tomb; but they will be written deep in the hearts of men, of friends, of children, of kindred all around him, in the book of the great account, and, in their eternal influences, on the great pages of the Universe.

To such a destiny, at least, my Brethren, let us all aspire! These laws of Masonry let us all strive to obey! And so may our hearts become true temples of the Living God! And may He encourage our zeal, sustain our hopes, and assure us of success!

 

     
Morals and Dogma, by Albert Pike, [1871], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 246]

  

XVII.

  

KNIGHT OF THE EAST AND WEST.

THIS is the first of the Philosophical Degrees of the Ancient and Accepted Scottish Rite; and the beginning of a course of instruction which will fully unveil to you the heart and inner mysteries of Masonry. Do not despair because you have often seemed on the point of attaining the inmost light, and have as often been disappointed. In all time, truth has been hidden under symbols, and often under a succession of allegories: where veil after veil had to be penetrated before the true Light was reached, and the essential truth stood revealed. The Human Light is but an imperfect reflection of a ray of the Infinite and Divine.

We are about to approach those ancient Religions which once

[p. 247]

ruled the minds of men, and whose ruins encumber the plains of the great Past, as the broken columns of Palmyra and Tadmor lie bleaching on the sands of the desert. They rise before us, those old, strange, mysterious creeds and faiths, shrouded in the mists of antiquity, and stalk dimly and undefined along the line which divides Time from Eternity; and forms of strange, wild, startling beauty mingled in the vast throngs of figures with shapes monstrous, grotesque, and hideous.

The religion taught by Moses, which, like the laws of Egypt, enunciated the principle of exclusion, borrowed, at every period of its existence, from all the creeds with which it came in contact. While, by the studies of the learned and wise, it enriched itself with the most admirable principles of the religions of Egypt and Asia, it was changed, in the wanderings of the People, by everything that was most impure or seductive in the pagan manners and superstitions. It was one thing in the times of Moses and Aaron, another in those of David and Solomon, and still another in those of Daniel and Philo.

At the time when John the Baptist made his appearance in the desert, near the shores of the Dead Sea, all the old philosophical and religious systems were approximating toward each other. A general lassitude inclined the minds of all toward the quietude of that amalgamation of doctrines for which the expeditions of Alexander and the more peaceful occurrences that followed, with the establishment in Asia and Africa of many Grecian dynasties and a great number of Grecian colonies, had prepared the way. After the intermingling of different nations, which resulted from the wars of Alexander in three-quarters of the globe, the doctrines of Greece, of Egypt, of Persia, and of India, met and intermingled everywhere. All the barriers that had formerly kept the nations apart, were thrown down; and while the People of the West readily connected their faith with those of the East, those of the Orient hastened to learn the traditions of Rome and the legends of Athens. While the Philosophers of Greece, all (except the disciples of Epicurus) more or less Platonists, seized  upon the beliefs and doctrines of the East,--the Jews and Egyptians, before then the most exclusive of all peoples, yielded to that eclecticism which prevailed among their masters, the Greeks and Romans.

Under the same influences of toleration, even those who embraced Christianity, mingled together the old and the new, Christianity

[p. 248]

and Philosophy, the Apostolic teachings and the traditions of Mythology. The man of intellect, devotee of one system, rarely displaces it with another in all its purity. The people take such a creed as is offered them. Accordingly, the distinction between the esoteric and the exoteric doctrine, immemorial in other creeds, easily gained a foothold among many of the Christians; and it was held by a vast number, even during the preaching of Paul, that the writings of the Apostles were incomplete; that they contained only the germs of another doctrine, which must receive from the hands of philosophy, not only the systematic arrangement which was wanting, but all the development which lay concealed therein. The writings of the Apostles, they said, in addressing themselves to mankind in general, enunciated only the articles of the vulgar faith; but transmitted the mysteries of knowledge to superior minds, to the Elect,--mysteries handed down from generation to generation in esoteric traditions; and to this science of the mysteries they gave the name of Gnusis; [Gnosis].

The Gnostics derived their leading doctrines and ideas from Plato and Philo, the Zend-avesta and the Kabalah, and the Sacred books of India and Egypt; and thus introduced into the bosom of Christianity the cosmological and theosophical speculations, which had formed the larger portion of the ancient religions of the Orient, joined to those of the Egyptian, Greek, and Jewish doctrines, which the Neo-Platonists had equally adopted in the Occident.

Emanation from the Deity of all spiritual beings, progressive degeneration of these beings from emanation to emanation, redemption and return of all to the purity of the Creator; and, after the re-establishment of the primitive harmony of all, a fortunate and truly divine condition of all, in the bosom of God; such were the fundamental teachings of Gnosticism. The genius of the Orient, with its contemplations, irradiations, and intuitions, dictated its doctrines. Its language corresponded to its origin. Full of imagery, it had all the magnificence, the inconsistencies, and the mobility of the figurative style.

Behold, it said, the light, which emanates from an immense centre of Light, that spreads everywhere its benevolent rays; so do the spirits of Light emanate from the Divine Light. Behold, all the springs which nourish, embellish, fertilize, and purify the Earth: they emanate from one and the same ocean; so from the

[p. 249]

bosom of the Divinity emanate so many streams, which form and fill the universe of intelligences. Behold numbers, which all emanate from one primitive number, all resemble it, all are composed of its essence, and still vary infinitely; and utterances, decomposable into so many syllables and elements, all contained in the primitive Word, and still infinitely various; so the world of Intelligences emanated from a Primary Intelligence, and they all resemble it, and yet display an infinite variety of existences.

It revived and combined the old doctrines of the Orient and the Occident; and it found in many passages of the Gospels and the Pastoral letters, a warrant for doing so. Christ himself spoke in parables and allegories, John borrowed the enigmatical language of the Platonists, and Paul often indulged in incomprehensible rhapsodies, the meaning of which could have been clear to the Initiates alone.

It is admitted that the cradle of Gnosticism is probably to be looked for in Syria, and even in Palestine. Most of its expounders wrote in that corrupted form of the Greek used by the Hellenistic Jews, and in the Septuagint and the New Testament; and there was a striking analogy between their doctrines and those of the Judeo-Egyptian Philo, of Alexandria; itself the seat of three schools, at once philosophic and religious--the Greek, the Egyptian, and the Jewish.

Pythagoras and Plato, the most mystical of the Grecian Philosophers (the latter heir to the doctrines of the former), and who had travelled, the latter in Egypt, and the former in Phoenicia, India, and Persia, also taught the esoteric doctrine and the distinction between the initiated and the profane. The dominant doctrines of Platonism were found in Gnosticism. Emanation of Intelligences from the bosom of the Deity; the going astray in error and the sufferings of spirits, so long as they are remote from God, and imprisoned in matter; vain and long-continued efforts to arrive at the knowledge of the Truth, and re-enter into their primitive union with the Supreme Being; alliance of a pure and divine soul with an irrational soul, the seat of evil desires; angels or demons who dwell in and govern the planets, having but an imperfect knowledge of the ideas that presided at the creation; regeneration of all beings by their return to the kosmos noetos, [kosmos noe_tos], the world of Intelligences, and its Chief, the Supreme Being; sole possible mode of re-establishing that primitive

[p. 250]

harmony of the creation, of which the music of the spheres of Pythagoras was the image; these were the analogies of the two systems; and we discover in them some of the ideas that form a part of Masonry; in which, in the present mutilated condition of the symbolic Degrees, they are disguised and overlaid with fiction and absurdity, or present themselves as casual hints that are passed by wholly unnoticed.

The distinction between the esoteric and exoteric doctrines (a distinction purely Masonic), was always and from the very earliest times preserved among the Greeks. It remounted to the fabulous times of Orpheus; and the mysteries of Theosophy were found in all their traditions and myths. And after the time of Alexander, they resorted for instruction, dogmas, and mysteries, to all the schools, to those of Egypt and Asia, as well as those of Ancient Thrace, Sicily, Etruria, and Attica.

The Jewish-Greek School of Alexandria is known only by two of its Chiefs, Aristobulus and Philo, both Jews of Alexandria in Egypt. Belonging to Asia by its origin, to Egypt by its residence, to Greece by its language and studies, it strove to show that all truths embedded in the philosophies of other countries were trans-planted thither from Palestine. Aristobulus declared that all the facts and details of the Jewish Scriptures were so many allegories, concealing the most profound meanings, and that Plato had borrowed from them all his finest ideas. Philo, who lived a century after him, following the same theory, endeavored to show that the Hebrew writings, by their system of allegories, were the true source of all religious and philosophical doctrines. According to him, the literal meaning is for the vulgar alone. Whoever has meditated on philosophy, purified himself by virtue, and raised himself by contemplation, to God and the intellectual world, and received their inspiration, pierces the gross envelope of the letter, discovers a wholly different order of things, and is initiated into mysteries, of which the elementary or literal instruction offers but an imperfect image. A historical fact, a figure, a word, a letter, a number, a rite, a custom, the parable or vision of a prophet, veils the most profound truths; and he who has the key of science will interpret all according to the light he possesses.

Again we see the symbolism of Masonry, and the search of the Candidate for light. "Let men of narrow minds withdraw," he says, "with closed ears. We transmit the divine mysteries to

[p. 251]

those who have received the sacred initiation, to those who practise true piety, and who are not enslaved by the empty trappings of words or the preconceived opinions of the pagans."

To Philo, the Supreme Being was the Primitive Light, or the Archetype of Light, Source whence the rays emanate that illuminate Souls. He was also the Soul of the Universe, and as such acted in all its parts. He Himself fills and limits His whole Being. His Powers and Virtues fill and penetrate all. These Powers [Dynameis, dunameis] are Spirits distinct from God, the "Ideas" of Plato personified. He is without beginning, and lives in the prototype of Time [aiun, aion].

His image is THE WORD [Logos], a form more brilliant than fire; that not being the pure light. This LOGOS dwells in God; for the Supreme Being makes to Himself within His Intelligence the types or ideas of everything that is to become reality in this World. The Logos is the vehicle by which God acts on the Universe, and may be compared to the speech of man.

The LOGOS being the World of Ideas [kosmos noetos], by means whereof God has created visible things, He is the most ancient God, in comparison with the World, which is the youngest production. The LOGOS, Chief of Intelligence, of which He is the general representative, is named Archangel, type and representative of all spirits, even those of mortals. He is also styled the man-type and primitive man, Adam Kadmon.

God only is Wise. The wisdom of man is but the reflection and image of that of God. He is the Father, and His WISDOM the mother of creation: for He united Himself with WISDOM [Sofia, Sophia], and communicated to it the germ of creation, and it brought forth the material world. He created the ideal world only, and caused the material world to be made real after its type, by His LOGOS, which is His speech, and at the same time the Idea of Ideas, the Intellectual World. The Intellectual City was but the Thought of the Architect, who meditated the creation, according to that plan of the Material City.

The Word is not only the Creator, but occupies the place of the Supreme Being. Through Him all the Powers and Attributes of God act. On the other side, as first representative of the Human Family, He is the Protector of men and their Shepherd.

God gives to man the Soul or Intelligence, which exists before the body, and which he unites with the body. The reasoning

[p. 252]

[paragraph continues] Principle comes from God through the Word, and communes with God and with the Word; but there is also in man an irrational Principle, that of the inclinations and passions which produce disorder, emanating from inferior spirits who fill the air as ministers of God. The body, taken from the Earth, and the irrational Principle that animates it concurrently with the rational Principle, are hated by God, while the rational soul which He has given it, is, as it were, captive in this prison, this coffin, that encompasses it. The present condition of man is not his primitive condition, when he was the image of the Logos. He has fallen from his first estate. But he may raise himself again, by following the directions of WISDOM [Sofia] and of the Angels which God has commissioned to aid him in freeing himself from the bonds of the body, and combating Evil, the existence whereof God has permitted, to furnish him the means of exercising his liberty. The souls that are purified, not by the Law but by light, rise to the Heavenly regions, to enjoy there a perfect felicity. Those that persevere in evil go from body to body, the seats of passions and evil desires. The familiar lineaments of these doctrines will be recognized by all who read the Epistles of St. Paul, who wrote after Philo, the latter living till the reign of Caligula, and being the contemporary of Christ.

And the Mason is familiar with these doctrines of Philo: that the Supreme Being is a centre of Light whose rays or emanations pervade the Universe; for that is the Light for which all Masonic journeys are a search, and of which the sun and moon in our Lodges are only emblems: that Light and Darkness, chief enemies from the beginning of Time, dispute with each other the empire of the world; which we symbolize by the candidate wandering in darkness and being brought to light: that the world was created, not by the Supreme Being, but by a secondary agent, who is but His WORD [the Logos], and by types which are but his ideas, aided by an INTELLIGENCE, or WISDOM [Sofia], which gives one of His Attributes; in which we see the occult meaning of the necessity of recovering "the Word"; and of our two columns of STRENGTH and WISDOM, which are also the two parallel lines that bound the circle representing the Universe: that the visible world is the image of the invisible world; that the essence of the Human Soul is the image of God, and it existed before the body; that the object of its terrestrial life is to disengage itself of its body or its

[p. 253]

sepulchre; and that it will ascend to the Heavenly regions whenever it shall be purified; in which we see the meaning, now almost forgotten in our Lodges, of the mode of preparation of the candidate for apprenticeship, and his tests and purifications in the first Degree, according to the Ancient and Accepted Scottish Rite.

Philo incorporated in his eclecticism neither Egyptian nor Oriental elements. But there were other Jewish Teachers in Alexandria who did both. The Jews of Egypt were slightly jealous of, and a little hostile to, those of Palestine, particularly after the erection of the sanctuary at Leontopolis by the High-Priest Onias; and therefore they admired and magnified those sages, who, like Jeremiah, had resided in Egypt. "The wisdom of Solomon" was written at Alexandria, and, in the time of St. Jerome, was attributed to Philo; but it contains principles at variance with his. It personifies Wisdom, and draws between its children and the Profane, the same line of demarcation that Egypt had long before taught to the Jews. That distinction existed at the beginning of the Mosaic creed. Moshah himself was an Initiate in the mysteries of Egypt, as he was compelled to be, as the adopted son of the daughter of Pharaoh, Thouoris, daughter of Sesostris-Ramses; who, as her tomb and monuments show, was, in the right of her infant husband, Regent of Lower Egypt or the Delta at the time of the Hebrew Prophet's birth, reigning at Heliopolis. She was also, as the reliefs on her tomb show, a Priestess of HATHOR and NEITH, the two great primeval goddesses. As her adopted son, living in her Palace and presence forty years, and during that time scarcely acquainted with his brethren the Jews, the law of Egypt compelled his initiation: and we find in many of his enactments the intention of preserving, between the common people and the Initiates, the line of separation which he found in Egypt. Moshah and Aharun his brother, the whole series of High-Priests, the Council of the 70 Elders, Salomoh and the entire succession of Prophets, were in possession of a higher science; and of that science Masonry is, at least, the lineal descendant. It was familiarly known as THE KNOWLEDGE OF THE WORD.

AMUN, at first the God of Lower Egypt only, where Moshah was reared [a word that in Hebrew means Truth], was the Supreme God. He was styled "the Celestial Lord, who sheds Light on hidden things." He was the source of that divine life, of which the crux ansata is the symbol; and the source of all power, He

[p. 254]

united all the attributes that the Ancient Oriental Theosophy assigned to the Supreme Being. He was the pleruma (Pleroma), or "Fullness of things," for He comprehended in Himself everything; and the LIGHT; for he was the Sun-God. He was unchangeable in the midst of everything phenomenal in his worlds. He created nothing; but everything emanated from Him; and of Him all the other Gods were but manifestations.

The Ram was His living symbol; which you see reproduced in this Degree, lying on the book with seven seals on the tracing-board. He caused the creation of the world by the Primitive Thought [Ennoia, Ennoia], or Spirit [Pneyma, Pneuma], that issued from him by means of his Voice or the WORD; and which Thought or Spirit was personified as the Goddess NEITH. She, too, was a divinity of Light, and mother of the Sun; and the Feast of Lamps was celebrated in her honor at Sais. The Creative Power, another manifestation of Deity, proceeding to the creation conceived of in her, the Divine Intelligence, produced with its Word the Universe, symbolized by an egg issuing from the mouth of KNEPH; from which egg came PHTHA, image of the Supreme Intelligence as realized in the world, and the type of that manifested in man; the principal agent, also, of Nature, or the creative and productive Fire. PURE or RE, the Sun, or Celestial Light, whose symbol was sun, the point within a circle, was the son of PHTHA; and TIPHE, his wife, or the celestial firmament, with the seven celestial bodies, animated by spirits of genii that govern them, was represented on many of the monuments, clad in blue or yellow, her garments sprinkled with stars, and accompanied by the sun, moon, and five planets; and she was the type of Wisdom, and they of the Seven Planetary Spirits of the Gnostics, that with her presided over and governed the Sublunary world.

In this Degree, unknown for a hundred years to those who have practised it, these emblems reproduced refer to these old doctrines. The lamb, the yellow hangings strewed with stars, the seven columns, candlesticks, and seals all recall them to us.

The Lion was the symbol of ATHOM-RE, the Great God of Upper Egypt; the Hawk, of RA or PHRE; the Eagle, of MENDES; the Bull, of APIS; and three of these are seen under the platform on which our altar stands.

The first HERMES was the INTELLIGENCE or WORD of God. Moved with compassion for a race living without law, and wishing

[p. 255]

to teach them that they sprang from His bosom, and to point out to them the way that they should go [the books which the first Hermes, the same with Enoch, had written on the mysteries of divine science, in the sacred characters, being unknown to those who lived after the flood], God sent to man OSIRIS and Isis, accompanied by THOTH, the incarnation or terrestrial repetition of the first HERMES; who taught men the arts, science, and the ceremonies of religion; and then ascended to Heaven or the Moon. OSIRIS was the Principle of Good. TYPHON, like AHRIMAN, was the principle and source of all that is evil in the moral and physical order. Like the Satan of Gnosticism, he was confounded with Matter.

From Egypt or Persia the new Platonists borrowed the idea, and the Gnostics received it from them, that man, in his terrestrial career, is successively under the influence of the Moon, of Mercury, of Venus, of the Sun, of Mars, of Jupiter, and of Saturn, until he finally reaches the Elysian Fields; an idea again symbolized in the Seven Seals.

The Jews of Syria and Judea were the direct precursors of Gnosticism; and in their doctrines were ample oriental elements. These Jews had had with the Orient, at two different periods, intimate relations, familiarizing them with the doctrines of Asia, and especially of Chaldea and Persia;--their forced residence in Central Asia under the Assyrians and Persians; and their voluntary dispersion over the whole East, when subjects of the Seleucidae and the Romans. Living near two-thirds of a century, and many of them long afterward, in Mesopotamia, the cradle of their race; speaking the same language, and their children reared with those of the Chaldeans, Assyrians, Medes, and Persians, and receiving from them their names (as the case of Danayal, who was called Baeltasatsar, proves), they necessarily adopted many of the doctrines of their conquerors. Their descendants, as Azra and Nahamaiah show us, hardly desired to leave Persia, when they were allowed to do so. They had a special jurisdiction, and governors and judges taken from their own people; many of them held high office, and their children were educated with those of the highest nobles. Danayal was the friend and minister of the King, and the Chief of the College of the Magi at Babylon; if we may believe the book which bears his name, and trust to the incidents related in its highly figurative and imaginative style. Mordecai,

[p. 256]

too, occupied a high station, no less than that of Prime Minister, and Esther or Astar, his cousin, was the Monarch's wife.

The Magi of Babylon were expounders of figurative writings, interpreters of nature, and of dreams,--astronomers and divines; and from their influences arose among the Jews, after their rescue from captivity, a number of sects, and a new exposition, the mystical interpretation, with all its wild fancies and infinite caprices. The Aions of the Gnostics, the Ideas of Plato, the Angels of the Jews, and the Demons of the Greeks, all correspond to the Ferouers of Zoroaster.

A great number of Jewish families remained permanently in their new country; and one of the most celebrated of their schools was at Babylon. They were soon familiarized with the doctrine of Zoroaster, which itself was more ancient than Kuros. From the system of the Zend-Avesta they borrowed, and subsequently gave large development to, everything that could be reconciled with their own faith; and these additions to the old doctrine were soon spread, by the constant intercourse of commerce, into Syria and Palestine.

In the Zend-Avesta, God is Illimitable Time. No origin can be assigned to Him: He is so entirely enveloped in His glory, His nature and attributes are so inaccessible to human Intelligence, that He can be only the object of a silent Veneration. Creation took place by emanation from Him. The first emanation was the primitive Light, and from that the King of Light, ORMUZD. By the "WORD," Ormuzd created the world pure. He is its preserver and judge; a Being Holy and Heavenly; Intelligence and Knowledge; the First-born of Time without limits; and invested with all the Powers of the Supreme Being.

Still he is, strictly speaking, the Fourth Being. He had a Ferouer, a pre-existing Soul [in the language of Plato, a type or ideal]; and it is said of Him, that He existed from the beginning, in the primitive Light. But, that Light being but an element, and His Ferouer a type, he is, in ordinary language, the First-born of ZEROUANE-AKHERENE. Behold, again, "THE WORD" of Masonry; the Man, on the Tracing-Board of this Degree; the LIGHT toward which all Masons travel.

He created after his own image, six Genii called Amshaspands, who surround his Throne, are his organs of communication with inferior spirits and men, transmit to Him their prayers, solicit for

[p. 257]

them His favors, and serve them as models of purity and perfection. Thus we have the Demiourgos of Gnosticism, and the six Genii that assist him. These are the Hebrew Archangels of the Planets.

The names of these Amshaspands are Bahman, Ardibehest, Schariver, Sapandomad, Khordad, and Amerdad.

The fourth, the Holy SAPANDOMAD, created the first man and woman.

Then ORMUZD created 28 Izeds, of whom MITHRAS is the chief. They watch, with Ormuzd and the Amshaspands, over the happiness, purity, and preservation of the world, which is under their government; and they are also models for mankind and interpreters of men's prayers. With Mithras and Ormuzd, they make a pleroma [or complete number] of 30, corresponding to the thirty Aions of the Gnostics, and to the ogdoade, dodecade, and decade of the Egyptians. Mithras was the Sun-God, invoked with, and soon confounded with him, becoming the object of a special worship, and eclipsing Ormuzd himself.

The third order of pure spirits is more numerous. They are the Ferouers, the THOUGHTS of Ormuzd, or the IDEAS which he conceived before proceeding to the creation of things. They too are superior to men. They protect them during their life on earth; they will purify them from evil at their resurrection. They are their tutelary genii, from the fall to the complete regeneration.

AHRIMAN, second-born of the Primitive Light, emanated from it, pure like ORMUZD; but, proud and ambitious, yielded to jealousy of the First-born. For his hatred and pride, the Eternal condemned him to dwell, for 12,000 years, in that part of space where no ray of light reaches; the black empire of darkness. In that period the struggle between Light and Darkness, Good and Evil, will be terminated.

AHRIMAN scorned to submit, and took the field against ORMUZD. To the good spirits created by his Brother, he opposed an innumerable army of Evil Ones. To the seven Amshaspands he opposed seven Archdevs, attached to the seven Planets; to the Izeds and Ferouers an equal number of Devs, which brought upon the world all moral and physical evils. Hence Poverty, Maladies, Impurity, Envy, Chagrin, Drunkenness, Falsehood, Calumny, and their horrible array.

The image of Ahriman was the Dragon, confounded by the

[p. 258]

[paragraph continues] Jews with Satan and the Serpent-Tempter. After a reign of 3000 years, Ormuzd had created the Material World, in six periods, calling successively into existence the Light, Water, Earth, plants, animals, and Man. But Ahriman concurred in creating the earth and water; for darkness was already an element, and Ormuzd could not exclude its Master. So also the two concurred in producing Man. Ormuzd produced, by his Will and Word, a Being that was the type and source of universal life for everything that exists under Heaven. He placed in man a pure principle, or Life, proceeding from the Supreme Being. But Ahriman destroyed that pure principle, in the form wherewith it was clothed; and when Ormuzd had made, of its recovered and purified essence, the first man and woman, Ahriman seduced and tempted them with wine and fruits; the woman yielding first.

Often, during the three latter periods of 3000 years each, Ahriman and Darkness are, and are to be, triumphant. But the pure souls are assisted by the Good Spirits; the Triumph of Good is decreed by the Supreme Being, and the period of that triumph will infallibly arrive. When the world shall be most afflicted with the evils poured out upon it by the spirits of perdition, three Prophets will come to bring relief to mortals. SOSIOSCH, the principal of the Three, will regenerate the earth, and restore to it its primitive beauty, strength, and purity. He will judge the good and the wicked. After the universal resurrection of the good, he will conduct them to a home of everlasting happiness. Ahriman, his evil demons, and all wicked men, will also be purified in a torrent of melted metal. The law of Ormuzd will reign everywhere; all men will be happy; all, enjoying unalterable bliss, will sing with Sosiosch the praises of the Supreme Being.

These doctrines, the details of which were sparingly borrowed by the Pharisaic Jews, were much more fully adopted by the Gnostics; who taught the restoration of all things, their return to their original pure condition, the happiness of those to be saved, and their admission to the feast of Heavenly Wisdom.

The doctrines of Zoroaster came originally from Bactria, an Indian Province of Persia. Naturally, therefore, it would include Hindu or Buddhist elements, as it did. The fundamental idea of Buddhism was, matter subjugating the intelligence, and intelligence freeing itself from that slavery. Perhaps something came to Gnosticism from China. "Before the chaos which preceded

[p. 259]

the birth of Heaven and Earth," says Lao-Tseu, "a single Being existed, immense and silent, immovable and ever active--the mother of the Universe. I know not its name: but I designate it by the word Reason. Man has his type and model in the Earth; Earth in Heaven; Heaven in Reason; and Reason in Itself." Here again are the Ferouers, the Ideas, the Aions the REASON or INTELLIGENCE [Ennoia], SILENCE [Sige], WORD [Logos], and WISDOM [Sofia] of the Gnostics.

The dominant system among the Jews after their captivity was that of the Pharoschim or Pharisees. Whether their name was derived from that of the Parsees, or followers of Zoroaster, or from some other source, it is certain that they had borrowed much of their doctrine from the Persians. Like them they claimed to have the exclusive and mysterious knowledge, unknown to the mass. Like them they taught that a constant war was waged between the Empire of Good and that of Evil. Like them they attributed the sin and fall of man to the demons and their chief; and like them they admitted a special protection of the righteous by inferior beings, agents of Jehovah. All their doctrines on these subjects were at bottom those of the Holy Books; but singularly developed; and the Orient was evidently the source from which those developments came.

They styled themselves Interpreters; a name indicating their claim to the exclusive possession of the true meaning of the Holy Writings, by virtue of the oral tradition which Moses had received on Mount Sinai, and which successive generations of Initiates had transmitted, as they claimed, unaltered, unto them. Their very costume, their belief in the influences of the stars, and in the immortality and transmigration of souls, their system of angels and their astronomy, were all foreign.

Sadduceeism arose merely from an opposition essentially Jewish, to these foreign teachings, and that mixture of doctrines, adopted by the Pharisees, and which constituted the popular creed.

We come at last to the Essenes and Therapeuts, with whom this Degree is particularly concerned. That intermingling of oriental and occidental rites, of Persian and Pythagorean opinions, which we have pointed out in the doctrines of Philo, is unmistakable in the creeds of these two sects.

They were less distinguished by metaphysical speculations than by simple meditations and moral practices. But the latter always

[p. 260]

partook of the Zoroastrian principle, that it was necessary to free the soul from the trammels and influences of matter; which led to a system of abstinence and maceration entirely opposed to the ancient , favorable as they were to physical pleasures.

In general, the life and manners of these mystical associations, as Philo and Josephus describe them, and particularly their prayers at sunrise, seem the image of what the Zend-Avesta prescribes to the faithful adorer or Ormuzd; and some of their observances cannot otherwise be explained.

The Therapeuts resided in Egypt, in the neighborhood of Alexandria; and the Essenes in Palestine, in the vicinity of the Dead Sea. But there was nevertheless a striking coincidence in their ideas, readily explained by attributing it to a foreign influence. The Jews of Egypt, under the influence of the School of Alexandria, endeavored in general to make their doctrines harmonize with the traditions of Greece; and thence came, in the doctrines of the Therapeuts, as stated by Philo, the many analogies between the Pythagorean and Orphic ideas, on one side, and those of Judaism on the other: while the Jews of Palestine, having less communication with Greece, or contemning its teachings, rather imbibed the Oriental doctrines, which they drank in at the source and with which their relations with Persia made them familiar. This attachment was particularly shown in the Kabalah, which belonged rather to Palestine than to Egypt, though extensively known in the latter; and furnished the Gnostics with some of their most striking theories.

It is a significant fact, that while Christ spoke often of the Pharisees and Sadducees, He never once mentioned the Essenes, between whose doctrines and His there was so great a resemblance, and, in many points, so perfect an identity. Indeed, they are not named, nor even distinctly alluded to, anywhere in the New Testament.

John, the son of a Priest who ministered in the Temple at Jerusalem, and whose mother was of the family of Aharun, was in the deserts until the day of his showing unto Israel. He drank neither wine nor strong drink. Clad in hair-cloth, and with a girdle of leather, and feeding upon such food as the desert afforded, he preached, in the country about Jordan, the baptism of repentance, for the remission of sins; that is, the necessity of repentance proven by reformation. He taught the people charity and

[p. 261]

liberality; the publicans, justice, equity, and fair dealing; the soldiery, peace, truth, and contentment; to do violence to none, accuse none falsely, and be content with their pay. He inculcated the necessity of a virtuous life, and the folly of trusting to their descent from Abraham.

He denounced both Pharisees and Sadducees as a generation of vipers, threatened with the anger of God. He baptized those who confessed their sins. He preached in the desert; and therefore in the country where the Essenes lived, professing the same doctrines. He was imprisoned before Christ began to preach. Matthew mentions him without preface or explanation; as if, apparently, his history was too well known to need any. "In those days," he says, "came John the Baptist, preaching in the wilderness of Judea." His disciples frequently fasted; for we find them with the Pharisees coming to Jesus to inquire why His Disciples did not fast as often as they; and He did not denounce them, as His habit was to denounce the Pharisees; but answered them kindly and gently.

From his prison, John sent two of his disciples to inquire of Christ: "Art thou he that is to come, or do we look for another?" Christ referred them to his miracles as an answer; and declared to the people that John was a prophet, and more than a prophet, and that no greater man had ever been born; but that the humblest Christian was his superior. He declared him to be Elias, who was to come.

John had denounced to Herod his marriage with his brother's wife as unlawful; and for this he was imprisoned, and finally executed to gratify her. His disciples buried him; and Herod and others thought he had risen from the dead and appeared again in the person of Christ. The people all regarded John as a prophet; and Christ silenced the Priests and Elders by asking them whether he was inspired. They feared to excite the anger of the people by saying that he was not. Christ declared that he came "in the way of righteousness"; and that the lower classes believed him, though the Priests and Pharisees did not.

Thus John, who was often consulted by Herod, and to whom that monarch showed great deference, and was often governed by his advice; whose doctrine prevailed very extensively among the people and the publicans, taught some creed older than Christianity. That is plain: and it is equally plain, that the very large

[p. 262]

body of the Jews that adopted his doctrines, were neither Pharisees nor Sadducees, but the humble, common people. They must, therefore, have been Essenes. It is plain, too, that Christ applied for baptism as a sacred rite, well known and long practiced. It was becoming to him, he said, to fulfill all righteousness.

In the 18th chapter of the Acts of the Apostles we read thus: "And a certain Jew, named Apollos, born at Alexandria, an eloquent man, and mighty in the Scriptures, came to Ephesus. This man was instructed in the way of the Lord, and, being fervent in spirit, he spake and taught diligently the things of the Lord, knowing only the baptism of John; and he began to speak boldly in the synagogue; whom, when Aquilla and Priscilla had heard, they took him unto them, and expounded unto him the way of God more perfectly."

Translating this from the symbolic and figurative language into the true ordinary sense of the Greek text, it reads thus: "And a certain Jew, named Apollos, an Alexandrian by birth, an eloquent man, and of extensive learning, came to Ephesus. He had learned in the mysteries the true doctrine in regard to God; and, being a zealous enthusiast, he spoke and taught diligently the truths in regard to the Deity, having received no other baptism than that of John." He knew nothing in regard to Christianity; for he had resided in Alexandria, and had just then come to Ephesus; being, probably, a disciple of Philo, and a Therapeut.

"That, in all times," says St. Augustine, "is the Christian religion, which to know and follow is the most sure and certain health, called according to that name, but not according to the thing itself, of which it is the name; for the thing itself, which is now called the Christian religion, really was known to the Ancients, nor was wanting at any time from the beginning of the human race, until the time when Christ came in the flesh; from whence the true religion, which had previously existed, began to be called Christian; and this in our days is the Christian religion, not as having been wanting in former times, but as having, in later times, received this name." The disciples were first called "Christians," at Antioch, when Barnabas and Paul began to preach there.

The Wandering or Itinerant Jews or Exorcists, who assumed to employ the Sacred Name in exorcising evil spirits, were no doubt Therapeutae or Essenes,

[p. 263]

"And it came to pass," we read in the 19th chapter of the Acts, verses 1 to 4, "that while Apollos was at Corinth, Paul, having passed through the upper parts of Asia Minor, came to Ephesus; and finding certain disciples, he said to them, 'Have ye received the Holy Ghost since ye became Believers?' And they said unto him, 'We have not so much as heard that there is any Holy Ghost.' And he said to them, 'In what, then, were you baptized?' And they said 'In John's baptism.' Then said Paul, 'John indeed baptized with the baptism of repentance, saying to the people that they should believe in Him who was to come after him, that is, in Jesus Christ. When they heard this, they were baptized in the name of the Lord Jesus."

This faith, taught by John, and so nearly Christianity, could have been nothing but the doctrine of the Essenes; and there can be no doubt that John belonged to that sect. The place where he preached, his macerations and frugal diet, the doctrines he taught, all prove it conclusively. There was no other sect to which he could have belonged; certainly none so numerous as his, except the Essenes.

We find, from the two letters written by Paul to the brethren at Corinth, that City of Luxury and Corruption, that there were contentions among them. Rival sects had already, about the 57th year of our era, reared their banners there, as followers, some of Paul, some of Apollos, and some of Cephas. Some of them denied the resurrection. Paul urged them to adhere to the doctrines taught by himself, and had sent Timothy to them to bring them afresh to their recollection.

According to Paul, Christ was to come again. He was to put an end to all other Principalities and Powers, and finally to Death, and then be Himself once more merged in God; who should then be all in all.

The forms and ceremonies of the Essenes were symbolical. They had, according to Philo the Jew, four Degrees; the members being divided into two Orders, the Practici and Therapeutici; the latter being the contemplative and medical Brethren; and the former the active, practical, business men. They were Jews by birth; and had a greater affection for each other than the members of any other sect. Their brotherly love was intense. They fulfilled the Christian law, "Love one another." They despised riches. No one was to be found among them, having more than

[p. 264]

another. The possessions of one were intermingled with those of the others; so that they all had but one patrimony, and were brethren. Their piety toward God was extraordinary. Before sunrise they never spake a word about profane matters; but put up certain prayers which they had received from their forefathers. At dawn of day, and before it was light, their prayers and hymns ascended to Heaven. They were eminently faithful and true, and the Ministers of Peace. They had mysterious ceremonies, and initiations into their mysteries; and the Candidate promised that he would ever practise fidelity to all men, and especially to those in authority, "because no one obtains the government without God's assistance."

Whatever they said, was firmer than an oath; but they avoided swearing, and esteemed it worse than perjury. They were simple in their diet and mode of living, bore torture with fortitude, and despised death. They cultivated the science of medicine and were very skillful. They deemed it a good omen to dress in white robes. They had their own courts, and passed righteous judgments. They kept the Sabbath more rigorously than the Jews.

Their chief towns were Engaddi, near the Dead Sea, and Hebron. Engaddi was about 30 miles southeast from Jerusalem, and Hebron about 20 miles south of that city. Josephus and Eusebius speak of them as an ancient sect; and they were no doubt the first among the Jews to embrace Christianity: with whose faith and doctrine their own tenets had so many points of resemblance, and were indeed in a great measure the same. Pliny regarded them as a very ancient people.

In their devotions they turned toward the rising sun; as the Jews generally did toward the Temple. But they were no idolaters; for they observed the law of Moses with scrupulous fidelity. They held all things in common, and despised riches, their wants being supplied by the administration of Curators or Stewards. The Tetractys, composed of round dots instead of jods, was revered among them. This being a Pythagorean symbol, evidently shows their connection with the school of Pythagoras; but their peculiar tenets more resemble those of Confucius and Zoroaster; and probably were adopted while they were prisoners in Persia; which explains their turning toward the Sun in prayer.

Their demeanor was sober and chaste. They submitted to the superintendence of governors whom they appointed over themselves.

[p. 265]

[paragraph continues] The whole of their time was spent in labor, meditation, and prayer; and they were most sedulously attentive to every call of justice and humanity, and every moral duty. They believed in the unity of God. They supposed the souls of men to have fallen, by a disastrous fate, from the regions of purity and light, into the bodies which they occupy; during their continuance in which they considered them confined as in a prison. Therefore they did not believe in the resurrection of the body; but in that of the soul only. They believed in a future state of rewards and punishments; and they disregarded the ceremonies or external forms enjoined in the law of Moses to be observed in the worship of God; holding that the words of that lawgiver were to be understood in a mysterious and recondite sense, and not according to their literal meaning. They offered no sacrifices, except at home; and by meditation they endeavored, as far as possible, to isolate the soul from the body, and carry it back to God.

Eusebius broadly admits "that the ancient Therapeutae were Christians; and that their ancient writings were our Gospels and Epistles."

The ESSENES were of the Eclectic Sect of Philosophers, and held PLATO in the highest esteem; they believed that true philosophy, the greatest and most salutary gift of God to mortals, was scattered, in various portions, through all the different Sects; and that it was, consequently, the duty of every wise man to gather it from the several quarters where it lay dispersed, and to employ it, thus reunited, in destroying the dominion of impiety and vice.

The great festivals of the Solstices were observed in a distinguished manner by the Essenes; as would naturally be supposed, from the fact that they reverenced the Sun, not as a god, but as a symbol of light and fire; the fountain of which, the Orientals supposed God to be. They lived in continence and abstinence, and had establishments similar to the monasteries of the early Christians.

The writings of the Essenes were full of mysticism, parables, enigmas, and allegories. They believed in the esoteric and exoteric meanings of the Scriptures; and, as we have already said, they had a warrant for That in the Scriptures themselves. They found it in the Old Testament, as the Gnostics found it in the New. The Christian writers, and even Christ himself, recognized it as a

[p. 266]

truth, that all Scripture had an inner and an outer meaning. Thus we find it said as follows, in one of the Gospels:

"Unto you it is given to know the mystery of the Kingdom of God; but unto men that are without, all these things are done in parables; that seeing, they may see and not perceive, and hearing they may hear and not understand. . . . And the disciples came and said unto him, 'Why speakest Thou the truth in parables?'--He answered and said unto them, 'Because it is given unto you to know the mysteries of the Kingdom of Heaven, but to them it is not given.'"

Paul, in the 4th chapter of his Epistle to the Galatians, speaking of the simplest facts of the Old Testament, asserts that they are an allegory. In the 3d chapter of the second letter to the Corinthians, he declares himself a minister of the New Testament, appointed by God; "Not of the letter, but of the spirit; for the letter killeth." Origen and St. Gregory held that the Gospels were not to be taken in their literal sense; and Athanasius admonishes us that "Should we understand sacred writ according to the letter, we should fall into the most enormous blasphemies."

Eusebius said, "Those who preside over the Holy Scriptures, philosophize over them, and expound their literal sense by allegory."

The sources of our knowledge of the Kabalistic doctrines, are the books of Jezirah and Sohar, the former drawn up in the second century, and the latter a little later; but containing materials much older than themselves. In their most characteristic elements, they go back to the time of the exile. In them, as in the teachings of Zoroaster, everything that exists emanated from a source of infinite LIGHT. Before everything, existed THE ANCIENT OF DAYS, the KING OF LIGHT; a title often given to the Creator in the Zend-Avesta and the code of the Sabaeans. With the idea so expressed is connected the pantheism of India. THE KING OR LIGHT, THE ANCIENT, is ALL THAT IS. He is not only the real cause of all Existences; he is Infinite [AINSOPH]. He is HIMSELF: there is nothing in Him that We can call Thou.

In the Indian doctrine, not only is the Supreme Being the real cause of all, but he is the only real Existence: all the rest is illusion. In the Kabalah, as in the Persian and Gnostic doctrines, He is the Supreme Being unknown to all, the "Unknown Father." The world is his revelation, and subsists only in Him. His attributes

[p. 267]

are reproduced there, with different modifications, and in different degrees, so that the Universe is His Holy Splendor: it is but His Mantle; but it must be revered in silence. All beings have emanated from the Supreme Being: The nearer a being is to Him, the more perfect it is; the more remote in the scale, the less its purity.

A ray of Light, shot from the Deity, is the cause and principle of all that exists. It is at once Father and Mother of All, in the sublimest sense. It penetrates everything; and without it nothing can exist an instant. From this double FORCE, designated by the two parts of the word I Q.E.D.H Q.E.D.U Q.E.D.H Q.E.D. emanated the FIRST-BORN of God, the Universal FORM, in which are contained all beings; the Persian and Platonic Archetype of things, united with the Infinite by the primitive ray of Light.

This First-Born is the Creative Agent, Conservator, and animating Principle of the Universe. It is THE LIGHT of LIGHT. It possesses the three Primitive Forces of the Divinity, LIGHT, SPIRIT, and LIFE [Fus, Pneyma, and Zun]. As it has received what it gives, Light and Life, it is equally considered as the generative and conceptive Principle, the Primitive Man, ADAM KADMON. As such, it has revealed itself in ten emanations or Sephiroth, which are not ten different beings, nor even beings at all; but sources of life, vessels of Omnipotence, and types of Creation. They are Sovereignty or Will, Wisdom, Intelligence, Benignity, Severity, Beauty, Victory, Glory, Permanency, and Empire. These are attributes of God; and this idea, that God reveals Himself by His attributes, and that the human mind cannot perceive or discern God Himself, in his works, but only his mode of manifesting Himself, is a profound Truth. We know of the Invisible only what the Visible reveals.

Wisdom was called NOUS and LOGOS [and Nous Logos], INTELLECT or the WORD. Intelligence, source of the oil of anointing, responds to the Holy Ghost of the Christian Faith.

Beauty is represented by green and yellow. Victory is YAHOVAH-TSABAOTH, the column on the right hand, the column Jachin: Glory is the column Boaz, on the left hand. And thus our symbols appear again in the Kabalah. And again the LIGHT, the object of our labors, appears as the creative power of Deity. The circle, also, was the special symbol of the first Sephirah, Kether, or the Crown,

[p. 268]

We do not further follow the Kabalah in its four Worlds of Spirits, Aziluth, Briah, Yezirah, and Asiah, or of emanation, creation, formation, and fabrication, one inferior to and one emerging from the other, the superior always enveloping the inferior; its doctrine that, in all that exists, there is nothing purely material; that all comes from God, and in all He proceeds by irradiation; that everything subsists by the Divine ray that penetrates creation; and all is united by the Spirit of God, which is the life of life; so that all is God; the Existences that inhabit the four worlds, inferior to each other in proportion to their distance from the Great King of Light: the contest between the good and evil Angels and Principles, to endure until the Eternal Himself cones to end it and re-establish the primitive harmony; the four distinct parts of the Soul of Man; and the migrations of impure souls, until they are sufficiently purified to share with the Spirits of Light the contemplation of the Supreme Being whose Splendor fills the Universe.

The WORD was also found in the Phoenician Creed. As in all those of Asia, a WORD of God, written in starry characters, by the planetary Divinities, and communicated by the Demi-Gods, as a profound mystery, to the higher classes of the human race, to be communicated by them to mankind, created the world. The faith of the Phoenicians was an emanation from that ancient worship of the Stars, which in the creed of Zoroaster alone, is connected with a faith in one God. Light and Fire are the most important agents in the Phoenician faith. There is a race of children of the Light. They adored the Heaven with its Lights, deeming it the Supreme God.

Everything emanates from a Single Principle, and a Primitive Love, which is the Moving Power of All and governs all. Light, by its union with Spirit, whereof it is but the vehicle or symbol, is the Life of everything, and penetrates everything. It should therefore be respected and honored everywhere; for everywhere it governs and controls.

The Chaldaic and Jerusalem Paraphrasts endeavored to render the phrase, DEBAR-YAHOVAH [w ?D?B?R ?Y?H?W?H], the Word of God, a , wherever they met with it. The phrase, "And God created man," is, in the Jerusalem Targum, "And the Word of IHUH created man."

So, in xxviii. Gen. 20, 21, where Jacob says: "If God [w ?Y?H?Y?H ?A?L?H?Ym 

[p. 269]

[paragraph continues] IHIH ALHIM] will be with me . . . then shall IHUH be my ALHIM [w ?W?H?Y?H ?Y?H?W?H ?L?Y ?L?A?L?H?Ym, UHIH IHUH LI LALHIM]; and this stone shall be God's House [w ?Y?H?Y?H ?B?Y?Th ?A?L?H?Ym, IHUH BITH ALHIM]: Onkelos paraphrases it, "If the word of IHUH will be my help . . . . then the word of IHUH shall be my God."

So, in iii. Gen. 8, for "The Voice of the Lord God" [w ?Y?H?W?H ?A?L?H?Ym IHUH ALHIM], we have, "The Voice of the Word of IHUH."

In ix. Wisdom, 1, "O God of my Fathers and Lord of Mercy! who has made all things with thy word. en logoy soy."

And in xviii. Wisdom, 15, "Thine Almighty Word [Logos] leaped down from Heaven."

Philo speaks of the Word as being the same with God. So in several places he calls it "deuteros Theios Logos" the Second Divinity; "eikun toy Theou," the Image of God: the Divine Word that made all things: "the yparxos" substitute, of God; and the like.

Thus, when John commenced to preach, had been for ages agitated, by the Priests and Philosophers of the East and West, the great questions concerning the eternity or creation of matter: immediate or intermediate creation of the Universe by the Supreme God; the origin, object, and final extinction of evil; the relations between the intellectual and material worlds, and between God and man; and the creation, fall, redemption, and restoration to his first estate, of man.

The Jewish doctrine, differing in this from all the other Oriental creeds, and even from the Alohay_istic legend with which the book of Genesis commences, attributed the creation to the immediate action of the Supreme Being. The Theosophists of the other Eastern Peoples interposed more than one intermediary between God and the world. To place between them but a single Being, to suppose for the production of the world but a single intermediary, was, in their eyes, to lower the Supreme Majesty. The interval between God, who is perfect Purity, and matter, which is base and foul, was too great for them to clear it at a single step. Even in the Occident, neither Plato nor Philo could thus impoverish the Intellectual World.

Thus, Cerinthus of Ephesus, with most of the Gnostics, Philo, the Kabalah, the Zend-Avesta, the Puranas, and all the Orient, deemed the distance and antipathy between the Supreme Being and the material world too great, to attribute to the former the creation of the latter. Below, and emanating from, or created

[p. 270]

by, the Ancient of Days, the Central Light, the Beginning, or First Principle [Arxe], one, two, or more Principles, Existences, or Intellectual Beings were imagined, to some one or more of whom [without any immediate creative act on the part of the Great Immovable, Silent Deity], the immediate creation of the material and mental universe was due.

We have already spoken of many of the speculations on this point. To some, the world was created by the LOGOS or WORD, first manifestation of, or emanation from, the Deity. To others, the beginning of creation was by the emanation of a ray of LIGHT, creating the principle of Light and Life. The Primitive THOUGHT, creating the inferior Deities, a succession of INTELLIGENCES, the Iynges of Zoroaster, his Amshaspands, Izeds, and Ferouers, the Ideas of Plato, the Aions of the Gnostics, the Angels of the Jews, the Nous, the Demiourgos, the DIVINE REASON, the Powers or Forces of Philo, and the Alohayim, Forces or Superior Gods of the ancient legend with which Genesis begins; to these and other intermediaries the creation was owing. No restraints were laid on the Fancy and the Imagination. The veriest Abstractions became Existences and Realities. The attributes of God, personified, became Powers, Spirits, Intelligences.

God was the Light of Light, Divine Fire, the Abstract Intellectuality, the Root or Germ of the Universe. Simon Magus, founder of the Gnostic faith, and many of the early Judaizing Christians, admitted that the manifestations of the Supreme Being, as FATHER, or JEHOVAH, SON or CHRIST, and HOLY SPIRIT, were only so many different modes of Existence, or Forces [dynameis] of the same God. To others they were, as were the multitude of Subordinate Intelligences, real and distinct beings.

The Oriental imagination revelled in the creation of these Inferior Intelligences, Powers of Good and Evil, and Angels. We have spoken of those imagined by the Persians and the Kabalists. In the Talmud, every star, every country, every town, and almost every tongue has a Prince of Heaven as its Protector. JEHUEL is the guardian of fire, and MICHAEL, of water. Seven spirits assist each; those of fire being Seraphiel, Gabriel, Nitriel, Tammael, Tchimschiel, Hadarniel, and Sarniel. These seven are represented by the square columns of this Degree, while the columns JACHIN and BOAZ represent the angels of fire and water. But the columns are not representatives of these alone.

[p. 271]

To Basilides, God was without name, uncreated, at first containing and concealing in Himself the Plenitude of His Perfections; and when these are by Him displayed and manifested, there result as many particular Existences, all analogous to Him, and still and always Him. To the Essenes and the Gnostics, the East and the West both devised this faith; that the Ideas, Conceptions, or Manifestations of the Deity were so many Creations, so many Beings, all God, nothing without Him, but more than what we now understand by the word ideas. They emanated from and were again merged in God. They had a kind of middle existence between our modern ideas, and the intelligences or ideas, elevated to the rank of genii, of the Oriental mythology.

These personified attributes of Deity, in the theory of Basilides, were the Prutogonos or First-born, Nous [Nous or Mind]: from it emanates Logos [Logos, or THE WORD] from it Fronesis: [Phronesis, Intellect]: from it Sofia [Sophia, Wisdom]: from it Dunamis [Dunamis, Power]: and from it Dikaiosune [Dikaiosune, Righteousness]: to which latter the Jews gave the name of Eirene [Eirene, Peace, or Calm], the essential characteristics of Divinity, and harmonious effect of all His perfections. The whole number of successive emanations was 365, expressed by the Gnostics, in Greek letters, by the mystic word ABRAXAS [Abraxas]; designating God as manifested, or the aggregate of his manifestations; but not the Supreme and Secret God Himself. These three hundred and sixty-five Intelligences compose altogether the Fullness or Plenitude [Pleruma] of the Divine Emanations.

With the Ophites, a sect of the Gnostics, there were seven inferior spirits [inferior to Ialdabaoth, the Demiourgos or Actual Creator]: Michael, Suriel, Raphael, Gabriel, Thauthabaoth, Erataoth, and Athaniel, the genii of the stars called the Bull, the Dog, the Lion, the Bear, the Serpent, the Eagle, and the Ass that formerly figured in the constellation Cancer, and symbolized respectively by those animals; as Ialdabaoth, Iao, Adonai, Eloi, Orai, and Astaphai were the genii of Saturn, the Moon, the Sun, Jupiter, Venus, and Mercury.

The WORD appears in all these creeds. It is the Ormuzd of Zoroaster, the Ainsoph of the Kabalah, the Nous of Platonism and Philonism, and the Sophia or Demiourgos of the Gnostics.

And all these creeds, while admitting these different manifestations of the Supreme Being, held that His identity was immutable

[p. 272]

and permanent. That was Plato's distinction between the Being always the same [to on] and the perpetual flow of things incessantly changing, the Genesis.

The belief in dualism in some shape, was universal. Those who held that everything emanated from God, aspired to God, and re-entered into God, believed that, among those emanations were two adverse Principles, of Light and Darkness, Good and Evil. This prevailed in Central Asia and in Syria; while in Egypt it assumed the form of Greek speculation. In the former, a second Intellectual Principle was admitted, active in its Empire of Darkness, audacious against the Empire of Light. So the Persians and Sabeans understood it. In Egypt, this second Principle was Matter, as the word was used by the Platonic School, with its sad attributes, Vacuity, Darkness, and Death. In their theory, matter could be animated only by the low communication of a principle of divine life. It resists the influences that would spiritualize it. That resisting Power is Satan, the rebellious Matter, Matter that does not partake of God.

To many there were two Principles; the Unknown Father, or Supreme and Eternal God, living in the centre of the Light, happy in the perfect purity of His being; the other, eternal Matter, that inert, shapeless, darksome mass, which they considered as the source of all evils, the mother and dwelling-place of Satan.

To Philo and the Platonists, there was a Soul of the world, creating visible things, and active in them, as agent of the Supreme Intelligence; realizing therein the ideas communicated to Him by that Intelligence, and which sometimes excel His conceptions, but which He executes without comprehending them.

The Apocalypse or Revelations, by whomever written, belongs to the Orient and to extreme antiquity. It reproduces what is far older than itself. It paints, with the strongest colors that the Oriental genius ever employed, the closing scenes of the great struggle of Light, and Truth, and Good, against Darkness, Error, and Evil; personified in that between the New Religion on one side, and Paganism and Judaism on the other. It is a particular application of the ancient myth of Ormuzd and his Genii against Ahriman and his Devs; and it celebrates the final triumph of Truth against the combined powers of men and demons. The ideas and imagery are borrowed from every quarter; and allusions are found in it to the doctrines of all ages. We are continually reminded

[p. 273]

of the Zend-Avesta, the Jewish Codes, Philo, and the Gnosis. The Seven Spirits surrounding the Throne of the Eternal, at the opening of the Grand Drama, and acting so important a part throughout, everywhere the first instruments of the Divine Will and Vengeance, are the Seven Amshaspands of Parsism; as the Twenty-four Ancients, offering to the Supreme Being the first supplications and the first homage, remind us of the Mysterious Chiefs of Judaism, foreshadow the Eons of Gnosticism, and re-produce the twenty-four Good Spirits created by Ormuzd and inclosed in an egg.

The Christ of the Apocalypse, First-born of Creation and of the Resurrection, is invested with the characteristics of the Ormuzd and Sosiosch of the Zend-Avesta, the Ainsoph of the Kabalah and the Carpistes [Karpiotes] of the Gnostics. The idea that the true Initiates and Faithful become Kings and Priests, is at once Persian, Jewish, Christian, and Gnostic. And the definition of the Supreme Being, that He is at once Alpha and Omega, the beginning and the end--He that was, and is, and is to come, i.e., Time illimitable, is Zoroaster's definition of Zerouane-Akherene.

The depths of Satan which no man can measure; his triumph for a time by fraud and violence; his being chained by an angel; his reprobation and his precipitation into a sea of metal; his names of the Serpent and the Dragon; the whole conflict of the Good Spirits or celestial armies against the bad; are so many ideas and designations found alike in the Zend-Avesta, the Kabalah, and the Gnosis.

We even find in the Apocalypse that singular Persian idea, which regards some of the lower animals as so many Devs or vehicles of Devs.

The guardianship of the earth by a good angel, the renewing of the earth and heavens, and the final triumph of pure and holy men, are the same victory of Good over Evil, for which the whole Orient looked.

The gold, and white raiments of the twenty-four Elders are, as in the Persian faith, the signs of a lofty perfection and divine purity.

Thus the Human mind labored and struggled and tortured itself for ages, to explain to itself what it felt, without confessing it, to be inexplicable. A vast crowd of indistinct abstractions, hovering

[p. 274]

in the imagination, a train of words embodying no tangible meaning, an inextricable labyrinth of subtleties, was the result.

But one grand idea ever emerged and stood prominent and unchangeable over the weltering chaos of confusion. God is great, and good, and wise. Evil and pain and sorrow are temporary, and for wise and beneficent purposes. They must be consistent with God's goodness, purity, and infinite perfection; and there must be a mode of explaining them, if we could but find it out; as, in all ways we will endeavor to do. Ultimately, Good will prevail, and Evil be overthrown. God alone can do this, and He will do it, by an Emanation from Himself, assuming the Human form and redeeming the world.

Behold the object, the end, the result, of the great speculations and logomachies of antiquity; the ultimate annihilation of evil, and restoration of Man to his first estate, by a Redeemer, a Masayah, a Christos, the incarnate Word, Reason, or Power of Deity.

This Redeemer is the Word or Logos, the Ormuzd of Zoroaster, the Ainsoph of the Kabalah, the Nous of Platonism and Philonism; He that was in the Beginning with God, and was God, and by Whom everything was made. That He was looked for by all the People of the East is abundantly shown by the Gospel of John and the Letters of Paul; wherein scarcely anything seemed necessary to be said in proof that such a Redeemer was to come; but all the energies of the writers are devoted to showing that Jesus was that Christos whom all the nations were expecting; the "Word," the Masayah, the Anointed or Consecrated One.

In this Degree the great contest between good and evil, in anticipation of the appearance and advent of the Word or Redeemer is symbolized; and the mysterious esoteric teachings of the Essenes and the Cabalists. Of the practices of the former we gain but glimpses in the ancient writers; but we know that, as their doctrines were taught by John the Baptist, they greatly resembled those of greater purity and more nearly perfect, taught by Jesus; and that not only Palestine was full of John's disciples, so that the Priests and Pharisees did not dare to deny John's inspiration; but his doctrine had extended to Asia Minor, and had made converts in luxurious Ephesus, as it also had in Alexandria in Egypt; and that they readily embraced the Christian faith, of which they had before not even heard.

These old controversies have died away, and the old faiths have

[p. 275]

faded into oblivion. But Masonry still survives, vigorous and strong, as when philosophy was taught in the schools of Alexandria and under the Portico; teaching the same old truths as the Essenes taught by the shores of the Dead Sea, and as John the Baptist preached in the Desert;. truths imperishable as the Deity, and undeniable as Light. Those truths were gathered by the Essenes from the doctrines of the Orient and the Occident, from the Zend-Avesta and the Vedas, from Plato and Pythagoras, from India, Persia, Phoenicia, and Syria, from Greece and Egypt, and from the Holy Books of the Jews. Hence we are called Knights of the East and West, because their doctrines came from both. And these doctrines, the wheat sifted from the chaff, the Truth separated from Error, Masonry has garnered up in her heart of hearts, and through the fires of persecution, and the storms of calamity, has brought them and delivered them unto us. That God is One, immutable, unchangeable, infinitely just and good; that Light will finally overcome Darkness,--Good conquer Evil, and Truth be victor over Error;--these, rejecting all the wild and useless speculations of the Zend-Avesta, the Kabalah, the Gnostics, and the Schools, are the religion and Philosophy of Masonry.

Those speculations and fancies it is useful to study; that knowing in what worthless and unfruitful investigations the mind may engage, you may the more value and appreciate the plain, simple, sublime, universally-acknowledged truths, which have in all ages been the Light by which Masons have been guided on their way; the Wisdom and Strength that like imperishable columns have sustained and will continue to sustain its glorious and magnificent Temple.

 

     
Morals and Dogma, by Albert Pike, [1871], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 276]

  

XVIII. KNIGHT ROSE CROIX.

  

[Prince Rose Croix.]

EACH of us makes such applications to his own faith and creed, of the symbols and ceremonies of this Degree, as seems to him proper. With these special interpretations we have here nothing to do. Like the legend of the Master Khu_ru_m, in which some see figured the condemnation and sufferings of Christ; others those of the unfortunate Grand Master of the Templars; others those of the first Charles, King of England; and others still the annual descent of the Sun at the winter Solstice to the regions of darkness, the basis of many an ancient legend; so the ceremonies of this Degree receive different explanations; each interpreting them for himself, and being offended at the interpretation of no other.

In no other way could Masonry possess its character of Universality; that character which has ever been peculiar to it from its origin; and which enables two Kings, worshippers of different Deities, to sit together as Masters, while the walls of the first temple arose; and the men of Gebal, bowing down to the Phoenician Gods, to work by the side of the Hebrews to whom those Gods were abomination; and to sit with them in the same Lodge as brethren.

[p. 277]

You have already learned that these ceremonies have one general significance, to every one, of every faith, who believes in God, and the soul's immortality.

The primitive men met in no Temples made with human hands. "God," said Stephen, the first Martyr, "dwelleth not in Temples made with hands." In the open air, under the overarching mysterious sky, in the great World-Temple, they uttered their vows and thanksgivings, and adored the God of Light; of that Light that was to them the type of Good, as darkness was the type of Evil.

All antiquity solved the enigma of the existence of Evil, by supposing the existence of a Principle of Evil, of Demons, fallen Angels, an Ahriman, a Typhon, a Siva, a Lok, or a Satan, that, first falling themselves, and plunged in misery and darkness, tempted man to his fall, and brought sin into the world. All believed in a future life, to be attained by purification and trials; in a state or successive states of reward and punishment; and in a Mediator or Redeemer, by whom the Evil Principle was to be overcome, and the Supreme Deity reconciled to His creatures. The belief was general, that He was to be born of a Virgin, and suffer a painful death. The Indians called him Chrishna; the Chinese, Kioun-tse; the Persians, Sosiosch; the Chaldeans, Dhouvanai; the Egyptians, Har-Oeri; Plato, Love; and the Scandinavians, Balder.

Chrishna, the Hindoo Redeemer, was cradled and educated among Shepherds. A Tyrant, at the time of his birth, ordered all the male children to be slain. He performed miracles, say his legends, even raising the dead. He washed the feet of the Brahmins, and was meek and lowly of spirit. He was born of a Virgin; descended to Hell, rose again, ascended to Heaven, charged his disciples to teach his doctrines, and gave them the gift of miracles.

The first Masonic Legislator whose memory is preserved to us by history, was Buddha, who, about a thousand years before the Christian era, reformed the religion of Manous. He called to the Priesthood all men, without distinction of caste, who felt themselves inspired by God to instruct men. Those who so associated themselves formed a Society of Prophets under the name of Samaneans. They recognized the existence of a single uncreated God, in whose bosom everything grows, is developed and transformed.

[p. 278]

[paragraph continues] The worship of this God reposed upon the obedience of all the beings He created. His feasts were those of the Solstices. The doctrines of Buddha pervaded India, China, and Japan. The Priests of Brahma, professing a dark and bloody creed, brutalized by Superstition, united together against Buddhism, and with the aid of Despotism, exterminated its followers. But their blood fertilized the new doctrine, which produced a new Society under the name of Gymnosophists; and a large number, fleeing to Ireland, planted their doctrines there, and there erected the round towers, some of which still stand, solid and unshaken as at first, visible monuments of the remotest ages.

The Phoenician Cosmogony, like all others in Asia, was the Word of God, written in astral characters, by the planetary Divinities, and communicated by the Demi-gods, as a profound mystery, to the brighter intelligences of Humanity, to be propagated by them among men. Their doctrines resembled the Ancient Sabeism, and being the faith of Hiram the King and his namesake the Artist, are of interest to all Masons. With them, the First Principle was half material, half spiritual, a dark air, animated and impregnated by the spirit; and a disordered chaos, covered with thick darkness. From this came the WORD, and thence creation and generation; and thence a race of men, children of light, who adored Heaven and its Stars as the Supreme Being; and whose different gods were but incarnations of the Sun, the Moon, the Stars, and the Ether. Chrysor was the great igneous power of Nature, and Baal and Malakarth representations of the Sun and Moon, the latter word, in Hebrew, meaning Queen.

Man had fallen, but not by the tempting of the serpent. For, with the Phoenicians, the serpent was deemed to partake of the Divine Nature, and was sacred, as he was in Egypt. He was deemed to be immortal, unless slain by violence, becoming young again in his old age, by entering into and consuming himself. Hence the Serpent in a circle, holding his tail in his mouth, was an emblem of eternity. With the head of a hawk he was of a Divine Nature, and a symbol of the sun. Hence one Sect of the Gnostics took him for their good genius, and hence the brazen serpent reared by Moses in the Desert, on which the Israelites looked and lived.

"Before the chaos, that preceded the birth of Heaven and Earth," said the Chinese Lao-Tseu, "a single Being existed, immense

[p. 279]

and silent, immutable and always acting; the mother of the Universe. I know not the name of that Being, but I designate it by the word Reason. Man has his model in the earth, the earth in Heaven, Heaven in Reason, and Reason in itself."

"I am," says Isis, "Nature; parent of all things, the sovereign of the Elements, the primitive progeny of Time, the most exalted of the Deities, the first of the Heavenly Gods and Goddesses, the Queen of the Shades, the uniform countenance; who dispose with my rod the numerous lights of Heaven, the salubrious breezes of the sea, and the mournful silence of the dead; whose single Divinity the whole world venerates in many forms, with various rites and by many names. The Egyptians, skilled in ancient lore, worship me with proper ceremonies, and call me by my true name, Isis the Queen."

'The Hindu Vedas thus define the Deity:

"He who surpasses speech, and through whose power speech is expressed, know thou that He is Brahma; and not these perish-able things that man adores.

"He whom Intelligence cannot comprehend, and He alone, say the sages, through whose Power the nature of Intelligence can be understood, know thou that He is Brahma; and not these perish-able things that man adores.

"He who cannot be seen by the organ of sight, and through whose power the organ of seeing sees, know thou that He is Brahma; and not these perishable things that man adores.

"He who cannot be heard by the organ of hearing, and through whose power the organ of hearing hears, know thou that He is Brahma; and not these perishable things that man adores.

"He who cannot be perceived by the organ of smelling, and through whose power the organ of smelling smells, know thou that He is Brahma; and not these perishable things that man adores."

"When God resolved to create the human race," said Arius, "He made a Being that He called The WORD, The Son, Wisdom, to the end that this Being might give existence to men." This WORD is the Ormuzd of Zoroaster, the Ainsoph of the Kabalah, the Nous of Plato and Philo, the Wisdom or Demiourgos of the Gnostics.

That is the True Word, the knowledge of which our ancient brethren sought as the priceless reward of their labors on the Holy Temple: the Word of Life, the Divine Reason, "in whom

[p. 280]

was Life, and that Life the Light of men"; "which long shone in darkness, and the darkness comprehended it not;" the Infinite Reason that is the Soul of Nature, immortal, of which the Word of this Degree reminds us; and to believe wherein and revere it, is the peculiar duty of every Mason.

"In the beginning," says the extract from some older work, with which John commences his Gospel, "was the Word, and the Word was near to God, and the Word was God. All things were made by Him, and without Him was not anything made that was made. In Him was Life, and the life was the Light of man; and the light shineth in darkness, and the darkness did not contain it."

It is an old tradition that this passage was from an older work. And Philostorgius and Nicephorus state, that when the Emperor Julian undertook to rebuild the Temple, a stone was taken up, that covered the mouth of a deep square cave, into which one of the laborers, being let down by a rope, found in the centre of the floor a cubical pillar, on which lay a roll or book, wrapped in a fine linen cloth, in which, in capital letters, was the foregoing passage.

However this may have been, it is plain that John's Gospel is a polemic against the Gnostics; and, stating at the outset the current doctrine in regard to the creation by the Word, he then addresses himself to show and urge that this Word was Jesus Christ.

And the first sentence, fully-rendered into our language, would read thus: "When the process of emanation, of creation or evolution of existences inferior to the Supreme God began, the Word came into existence and was: and this word was [tros ton Theon] near to God; i.e. the immediate or first emanation from God: and it was God Himself, developed or manifested in that particular mode, and in action. And by that Word everything that is was created."--And thus Tertullian says that God made the World out of nothing, by means of His Word, Wisdom, or Power.

To Philo the Jew, as to the Gnostics, the Supreme Being was the Primitive Light, or Archetype of Light,--Source whence the rays emanate that illuminate Souls. He is the Soul of the World, and as such acts everywhere. He himself fills and bounds his whole existence, and his forces fill and penetrate everything. His Image is the WORD [LOGOS], a form more brilliant than fire, which is not pure light. This WORD dwells in God; for it is within His Intelligence that the Supreme Being frames for Himself the

[p. 281]

[paragraph continues] Types of Ideas of all that is to assume reality in the Universe. The WORD is the Vehicle by which God acts on the Universe; the World of Ideas by means whereof God has created visible things; the more Ancient God, as compared with the Material World; Chief and General Representative of all Intelligences; the Arch-angel, type and representative of all spirits, even those of Mortals; the type of Man; the primitive man himself. These ideas are borrowed from Plato. And this WORD is not only the Creator ["by Him was everything made that was made"], but acts in the place of God; and through him act all the Powers and Attributes of God. And also, as first representative of the human race, he is the protector of Men and their Shepherd, the "Ben H'Adam," or Son of Man.

The actual condition of Man is not his primitive condition, that in which he was the image of the Word. His unruly passions have caused him to fall from his original lofty estate. But he may rise again, by following the teachings of Heavenly Wisdom, and the Angels whom God commissions to aid him in escaping from the entanglements of the body; and by fighting bravely against Evil, the existence of which God has allowed solely to furnish him with the means of exercising his free will.

The Supreme Being of the Egyptians was Amu_n, a secret and concealed God, the Unknown Father of the Gnostics, the Source of Divine Life, and of all force, the Plenitude of all, comprehending all things in Himself, the original Light. He creates nothing; but everything emanates from Him: and all other Gods are but his manifestations. From Him, by the utterance of a Word, emanated Neith, the Divine Mother of all things, the Primitive THOUGHT, the FORCE that puts everything in movement, the SPIRIT everywhere extended, the Deity of Light and Mother of the Sun.

Of this Supreme Being, Osiris was the image, Source of all Good in the moral and physical world, and constant foe of Typhon, the Genius of Evil, the Satan of Gnosticism, brute matter, deemed to be always at feud with the spirit that flowed from the Deity; and over whom Har-Geri, the Redeemer, Son of Isis and Osiris, is finally to prevail.

In the Zend-Avesta of the Persians the Supreme Being is Time without limit, ZERUANE AKHERENE.--No origin could be assigned to Him; for He was enveloped in His own Glory, and

[p. 282]

His Nature and Attributes were so inaccessible to human Intelligence, that He was but the object of a silent veneration. The commencement of Creation was by emanation from Him. The first emanation was the Primitive Light, and from this Light emerged Ormuzd, the King of Light, who, by the WORD, created the World in its purity, is its Preserver and Judge, a Holy and Sacred Being, Intelligence and Knowledge, Himself Time without limit, and wielding all the powers of the Supreme Being.

In this Persian faith, as taught many centuries before our era, and embodied in the Zend-Avesta, there was in man a pure Principle, proceeding from the Supreme Being, produced by the Will and Word of Ormuzd. To that was united an impure principle, proceeding from a foreign influence, that of Ahriman, the Dragon, or principle of Evil. Tempted by Ahriman, the first man and woman had fallen; and for twelve thousand years there was to be war between Ormuzd and the Good Spirits created by him, and Ahriman and the Evil ones whom he had called into existence.

But pure souls are assisted by the Good Spirits, the Triumph of the Good Principle is determined upon in the decrees of the Supreme Being, and the period of that triumph will infallibly arrive. At the moment when the earth shall be most afflicted with the evils brought upon it by the Spirits of perdition, three Prophets will appear to bring assistance to mortals. Sosiosch, Chief of the Three, will regenerate the world, and restore to it its primitive Beauty, Strength, and Purity. He will judge the good and the wicked. After the universal resurrection of the Good, the pure Spirits will conduct them to an abode of eternal happiness. Ahriman, his evil Demons, and all the world, will be purified in a torrent of liquid burning metal. The Law of Ormuzd will rule everywhere: all men will be happy: all, enjoying an unalterable bliss, will unite with Sosiosch in singing the praises of the Supreme Being.

These doctrines, with some modifications, were adopted by the Kabalists and afterward by the Gnostics.

Apollonius of Tyana says: "We shall render the most appropriate worship to the Deity, when to that God whom we call the First, who is One, and separate from all, and after whom we recognize the others, we present no offerings whatever, kindle to Him no fire, dedicate to Him no sensible thing; for he needs nothing, even of all that natures more exalted than ours could give. The

[p. 283]

earth produces no plant, the air nourishes no animal, there is in short nothing, which would not be impure in his sight. In ad-dressing ourselves to Him, we must use only the higher word, that, I mean, which is not expressed by the mouth, the silent inner word of the spirit From the most Glorious of all Beings, we must seek for blessings, by that which is most glorious in ourselves; and that is the spirit, which needs no organ."

Strabo says: "This one Supreme Essence is that which embraces us all, the water and the land, that which we call the Heavens, the World, the Nature of things. This Highest Being should be worshipped, without any visible image, in sacred groves. In such retreats the devout should lay themselves down to sleep, and expect signs from God in dreams."

Aristotle says: "It has been handed down in a mythical form, from the earliest times to posterity, that there are Gods, and that The Divine compasses entire nature. All besides this has been added, after the mythical style, for the purpose of persuading the multitude, and for the interest of the laws and the advantage of the State. Thus men have given to the Gods human forms, and have even represented them under the figure of other beings, in the train of which fictions followed many more of the same sort. But if, from all this, we separate the original principle, and consider it alone, namely, that the first Essences are Gods, we shall find that this has been divinely said; and since it is probable that philosophy and the arts have been several times, so far as that is possible, found and lost, such doctrines may have been preserved to our times as the remains of ancient wisdom."

Porphyry says: "By images addressed to sense, the ancients represented God and his powers--by the visible they typified the invisible for those who had learned to read, in these types, as in a book, a treatise on the Gods. We need not wonder if the ignorant consider the images to be nothing more than wood or stone; for just so, they who are ignorant of writing see nothing in monuments but stone, nothing in tablets but wood, and in books but a tissue of papyrus."

Apollonius of Tyana held, that birth and death are only in appearance; that which separates itself from the one substance (the one Divine essence), and is caught up by matter, seems to be born; that, again, which releases itself from the bonds of matter, and is reunited with the one Divine Essence, seems to die. There is, at

[p. 284]

most, an alteration between becoming visible and becoming invisible. In all there is, properly speaking, but the one essence, which alone acts and suffers, by becoming all things to all; the Eternal God, whom men wrong, when they deprive Him of what properly can be attributed to Him only, and transfer it to other names and persons.

The New Platonists substituted the idea of the Absolute, for the Supreme Essence itself;--as the first, simplest principle, anterior to all existence; of which nothing determinate can be predicated; to which no consciousness, no self-contemplation can be ascribed; inasmuch as to do so, would immediately imply a quality, a distinction of subject and object. This Supreme Entity can be known only by an intellectual intuition of the Spirit, transcending itself, and emancipating itself from its own limits.

This mere logical tendency, by means of which men thought to arrive at the conception of such an absolute, the on, was united with a certain mysticism, which, by a transcendent state of feeling, communicated, as it were, to this abstraction what the mind would receive as a reality. The absorption of the Spirit into that superexistence (to epekeina teis oysias), so as to be entirely identified with it, or such a revelation of the latter to the spirit raised above itself, was regarded as the highest end which the spiritual life could reach.

The New Platonists' idea of God, was that of One Simple Original Essence, exalted above all plurality and all becoming; the only true Being; unchangeable, eternal [Eis un eni tui nun to aei pepleruke kai monon esti to kata touton ontus un.]: from whom all Existence in its several gradations has emanated--the world of Gods, as nearest akin to Himself, being first, and at the head of all. In these Gods, that perfection, which in the Supreme Essence was inclosed and unevolved, is expanded and becomes knowable. They serve to exhibit in different forms the image of that Supreme Essence, to which no soul can rise, except by the loftiest flight of contemplation; and after it has rid itself from all that pertains to sense--from all manifoldness. They are the mediators between man (amazed and stupefied by manifoldness) and the Supreme Unity.

Philo says: "He who disbelieves the miraculous, simply as the miraculous, neither knows God, nor has he ever sought after Him; for otherwise he would have understood, by looking at that truly

[p. 285]

great and awe-inspiring sight, the miracle of the Universe, that these miracles (in God's providential guidance of His people) are but child's play for the Divine Power. But the truly miraculous has become despised through familiarity. The universal, on the contrary, although in itself insignificant, yet, through our love of novelty, transports us with amazement."

In opposition to the anthropopathism of the Jewish Scriptures, the Alexandrian Jews endeavored to purify the idea of God from all admixture of the Human. By the exclusion of every human passion, it was sublimated to a something devoid of all attributes, and wholly transcendental; and the mere Being [on], the Good, in and by itself, the Absolute of Platonism, was substituted for the personal Deity [w ?Y?H?W?H] of the Old Testament. By soaring upward, beyond all created existence, the mind, disengaging itself from the Sensible, attains to the intellectual intuition of this Absolute Being; of whom, however, it can predicate nothing but existence, and sets aside all other determinations as not answering to the exalted nature of the Supreme Essence.

Thus Philo makes a distinction between those who are in the proper sense Sons of God, having by means of contemplation raised themselves to the highest Being, or attained to a knowledge of Him, in His immediate self-manifestation, and those who know God only in his mediate revelation through his operation--such as He declares Himself in creation--in the revelation still veiled in the letter of Scripture--those, in short, who attach themselves simply to the Logos, and consider this to be the Supreme God; who are the sons of the Logos, rather than of the True Being, on.

"God," says Pythagoras, "is neither the object of sense, nor subject to passion, but invisible, only intelligible, and supremely intelligent. In His body He is like the light, and in His soul He resembles truth. He is the universal spirit that pervades and diffuseth itself over all nature. All beings receive their life from Him. There is but one only God, who is not, as some are apt to imagine, seated above the world, beyond the orb of the Universe; but being Himself all in all, He sees all the beings that fill His immensity; the only Principle, the Light of Heaven, the Father of all. He produces everything; He orders and disposes everything; He is the REASON, the LIFE, and the MOTION of all being."

"I am the LIGHT of the world; he that followeth Me shall not walk in DARKNESS, but shall have the LIGHT of LIFE." So said

[p. 286]

the Founder of the Christian Religion, as His words are reported by John the Apostle.

God, say the sacred writings of the Jews, appeared to Moses in a FLAME OF FIRE, in the midst of a bush, which was not consumed. He descended upon Mount Sinai, as the smoke of a furnace; He went before the children of Israel, by day, in a pillar of cloud, and, by night, in a pillar of fire, to give them light. "Call you on the name of your Gods," said Elijah the Prophet to the Priests of Baal, "and I will call upon the name of ADONAI; and the God that answereth by fire, let him be God."

According to the Kabalah, as according to the doctrines of Zoroaster, everything that exists has emanated from a source of infinite light. Before all things, existed the Primitive Being, THE ANCIENT OF DAYS, the Ancient King of Light; a title the more remarkable, because it is frequently given to the Creator in the Zend-Avesta, and in the Code of the Sabeans, and occurs in the Jewish Scriptures.

The world was His Revelation, God revealed; and subsisted only in Him. His attributes were there reproduced with various modifications and in different degrees; so that the Universe was His Holy Splendor, His Mantle. He was to be adored in silence; and perfection consisted in a nearer approach to Him.

Before the creation of worlds, the PRIMITIVE LIGHT filled all space, so that there was no void. When the Supreme Being, existing in this Light, resolved to display His perfections, or manifest them in worlds, He withdrew within Himself, formed around Him a void space, and shot forth His first emanation, a ray of light; the cause and principle of everything that exists, uniting both the generative and conceptive power, which penetrates everything, and without which nothing could subsist for an instant.

Man fell, seduced by the Evil Spirits most remote from the Great King of Light; those of the fourth world of spirits, Asiah, whose chief was Belial. They wage incessant war against the pure Intelligences of the other worlds, who, like the Amshaspands. Izeds, and Ferouers of the Persians are the tutelary guardians of man. In the beginning, all was unison and harmony; full of the same divine light and perfect purity. The Seven Kings of Evil fell, and the Universe was troubled. Then the Creator took from the Seven Kings the principles of Good and of Light, and divided them among the four worlds of Spirits, giving to the first three

[p. 287]

the Pure Intelligences, united in love and harmony, while to the fourth were vouchsafed only some feeble glimmerings of light.

When the strife between these and the good angels shall have continued the appointed time, and these Spirits enveloped in darkness shall long and in vain have endeavored to absorb the Divine light and life, then will the Eternal Himself come to correct them. He will deliver them from the gross envelopes of matter that hold them captive, will re-animate and strengthen the ray of light or spiritual nature which they have preserved, and re-establish throughout the Universe that primitive Harmony which was its bliss.

Marcion, the Gnostic, said, "The Soul of the True Christian, adopted as a child by the Supreme Being, to whom it has long been a stranger, receives from Him the Spirit and Divine life. It is led and confirmed, by this gift, in a pure and holy life, like that of God; and if it so completes its earthly career, in charity, chastity, and sanctity, it will one day be disengaged from its material envelope, as the ripe grain is detached from the straw, and as the young bird escapes from its shell. Like the angels, it will share in the bliss of the Good and Perfect Father, re-clothed in an aerial body or organ, and made like unto the Angels in Heaven."

You see, my brother, what is the meaning of Masonic "Light." You see why the EAST of the Lodge, where the initial letter of the Name of the Deity overhangs the Master, is the place of Light. Light, as contradistinguished from darkness, is Good, as contradistinguished from Evil: and it is that Light, the true knowledge of Deity, the Eternal Good, for which Masons in all ages have sought. Still Masonry marches steadily onward toward that Light that shines in the great distance, the Light of that day when Evil, overcome and vanquished, shall fade away and disappear forever, and Life and Light be the one law of the Universe, and its eternal Harmony.

The Degree of Rose ###10016### teaches three things;--the unity, immutability and goodness of God; the immortality of the Soul; and the ultimate defeat and extinction of evil and wrong and sorrow, by a Redeemer or Messiah, yet to come, if he has not already appeared.

It replaces the three pillars of the old Temple, with three that have already been explained to you,--Faith [in God, mankind, and man's self], Hope [in the victory over evil, the advancement of

[p. 288]

[paragraph continues] Humanity, and a hereafter], and Charity [relieving the wants. and tolerant of the errors and faults of others]. To be trustful, to be hopeful, to be indulgent; these, in an age of selfishness, of it opinion of human nature, of harsh and bitter judgment, are the most important Masonic Virtues, and the true supports of every Masonic Temple. And they are the old pillars of the Temple under different names. For he only is wise who judges others charitably; he only is strong who is hopeful; and there is no beauty like a firm faith in God, our fellows and ourself.

The second apartment, clothed in mourning, the columns of the Temple shattered and prostrate, and the brethren bowed down in the deepest dejection, represents the world under the tyranny of the Principle of Evil; where virtue is persecuted and vice rewarded; where the righteous starve for bread, and the wicked live sumptuously and dress in purple and fine linen; where insolent ignorance rules, and learning and genius serve; where King and Priest trample on liberty and the rights of conscience; where freedom hides in caves and mountains, and sycophancy and servility fawn and thrive; where the cry of the widow and the orphan starving for want of food, and shivering with cold, rises ever to Heaven, from a million miserable hovels; where men, willing to labor, and starving, they and their children and the wives of their bosoms, beg plaintively for work, when the pampered capitalist stops his mills; where the law punishes her who, starving, steals a loaf, and lets the seducer go free; where the success of a party justifies murder, and violence and rapine go unpunished; and where he who with many years' cheating and grinding the faces of the poor grows rich, receives office and honor in life, and after death brave funeral and a splendid mausoleum:--this world, where, since its making, war has never ceased, nor man paused in the sad task of torturing and murdering his brother; and of which ambition, avarice, envy, hatred, lust, and the rest of Ahriman's and Typhon's army make a Pandemonium: this world, sunk in sin, reeking with baseness, clamorous with sorrow and misery. If any see in it also a type of the sorrow of the Craft for the death of Hiram, the grief of the Jews at the fall of Jerusalem, the misery of the Templars at the ruin of their order and the death of De Molay, or the world's agony and pangs of woe at the death of the Redeemer, it is the right of each to do so.

The third apartment represents the consequences of sin and

[p. 289]

vice, and the hell made of the human heart, by its fiery passions. If any see in it also a type of the Hades of the Greeks, the Gehenna of the Hebrews, the Tartarus of the Romans, or the Hell of the Christians, or only of the agonies of remorse and the tortures of an upbraiding conscience, it is the right of each to do so.

The fourth apartment represents the Universe, freed from the insolent dominion and tyranny of the Principle of Evil, and brilliant with the true Light that flows from the Supreme Deity; when sin and wrong, and pain and sorrow, remorse and misery shall be no more forever; when the great plans of Infinite Eternal Wisdom shall be fully developed; and all God's creatures, seeing that all apparent evil and individual suffering and wrong were but the drops that went to swell the great river of infinite goodness, shall know that vast as is the power of Deity, His goodness and beneficence are infinite as His power. If any see in it a type of the peculiar mysteries of any faith or creed, or an allusion to any past occurrences, it is their right to do so. Let each apply its symbols as he pleases. To all of us they typify the universal rule of Masonry,--of its three chief virtues, Faith, Hope and Charity; of brotherly love and universal benevolence. We labor here to no other end. These symbols need no other interpretation.

The obligations of our Ancient Brethren of the Rose ###10016### were to fulfill all the duties of friendship, cheerfulness, charity, peace, liberality, temperance and chastity: and scrupulously to avoid impurity, haughtiness, hatred, anger, and every other kind of vice. They took their philosophy from the old Theology of the Egyptians, as Moses and Solomon had done, and borrowed its hieroglyphics and the ciphers of the Hebrews. Their principal rules were, to exercise the profession of medicine charitably and without fee, to advance the cause of virtue, enlarge the sciences, and induce men to live as in the primitive times of the world.

When this Degree had its origin, it is not important to inquire; nor with what different rites it has been practised in different countries and at various times. It is of very high antiquity. Its ceremonies differ with the degrees of latitude and longitude, and it receives variant interpretations. If we were to examine all the different ceremonials, their emblems, and their formulas, we should see that all that belongs to the primitive and essential elements of the order, is respected in every sanctuary. All alike practise virtue, that it may produce fruit. All labor, like us, for the extirpation

[p. 290]

of vice, the purification of man, the development of the arts and sciences, and the relief of humanity.

None admit an adept to their lofty philosophical knowledge, and mysterious sciences, until he has been purified at the altar of the symbolic Degrees. Of what importance are differences of opinion as to the age and genealogy of the Degree, or variance in the practice, ceremonial and liturgy, or the shade of color of the banner under which each tribe of Israel marched, if all revere the Holy Arch of the symbolic Degrees, first and unalterable source of Free-Masonry; if all revere our conservative principles, and are with us in the great purposes of our organization?

If, anywhere, brethren of a particular religious belief have been excluded from this Degree, it merely shows how gravely the purposes and plan of Masonry may be misunderstood. For whenever the door of any Degree is closed against him who believes in one God and the soul's immortality, on account of the other tenets of his faith, that Degree is Masonry no longer. No Mason has the right to interpret the symbols of this Degree for another, or to refuse him its mysteries, if he will not take them with the explanation and commentary superadded.

Listen, my brother, to our explanation of the symbols of the Degree, and then give them such further interpretation as you think fit.

The Cross has been a sacred symbol from the earliest Antiquity. It is found upon all the enduring monuments of the world, in Egypt, in Assyria, in Hindostan, in Persia, and on the Buddhist towers of Ireland. Buddha was said to have died upon it. The Druids cut an oak into its shape and held it sacred, and built their temples in that form. Pointing to the four quarters of the world, it was the symbol of universal nature. It was on a cruciform tree, that Chrishna was said to have expired, pierced with arrows. It was revered in Mexico.

But its peculiar meaning in this Degree, is that given to it by the Ancient Egyptians. Thoth or Phtha is represented on the oldest monuments carrying in his hand the Crux Ansata, or Ankh, [a Tau cross, with a ring or circle over it]. He is so seen on the double tablet of Shufu and Noh Shufu, builders of the greatest of the Pyramids, at Wady Meghara, in the peninsula of Sinai. It was the hieroglyphic for life, and with a triangle prefixed meant life-giving. To us therefore it is the symbol of Life--of that life

[p. 291]

that emanated from the Deity, and of that Eternal Life for which we all hope; through our faith in God's infinite goodness.

The ROSE, was anciently sacred to Aurora and the Sun. It is a symbol of Dawn, of the resurrection of Light and the renewal of life, and therefore of the dawn of the first day, and more particularly of the resurrection: and the Cross and Rose together are therefore hieroglyphically to be read, the Dawn of Eternal Life which all Nations have hoped for by the advent of a Redeemer.

The Pelican feeding her young is an emblem of the large and bountiful beneficence of Nature, of the Redeemer of fallen man, and of that humanity and charity that ought to distinguish a Knight of this Degree.

The Eagle was the living Symbol of the Egyptian God Mendes or Menthra, whom Sesostris-Ramses made one with Amun-Re, the God of Thebes and Upper Egypt, and the representative of the Sun, the word RE meaning Sun or King.

The Compass surmounted with a crown signifies that notwithstanding the high rank attained in Masonry by a Knight of the Rose Croix, equity and impartiality are invariably to govern his conduct.

To the word INRI, inscribed on the Crux Ansata over the Master's Seat, many meanings have been assigned. The Christian Initiate reverentially sees in it the initials of the inscription upon the cross on which Christ suffered--Jesus Nazarenus Rex Iudaeorum. The sages of Antiquity connected it with one of the greatest secrets of Nature, that of universal regeneration. They interpreted it thus, Igne Natura renovator integra; [entire nature is renovated by fire]: The Alchemical or Hermetic Masons framed for it this aphorism, Igne nitrum roris invenitur. And the Jesuits are charged with having applied to it this odious axiom, Justum necare reges impios. The four letters are the initials of the Hebrew words that represent the four elements--Iammim, the seas or water; Nour, fire; Rouach, the air, and Iebeschah, the dry earth. How we read it, I need not repeat to you.

The Cross, *, was the Sign of the Creative Wisdom or Logos, the Son of God. Plato says, "He expressed him upon the Universe in the figure of the letter X. The next Power to the Supreme God was decussated or figured in the shape of a Cross on the Universe." Mithras signed his soldiers on the forehead with a

[p. 292]

Cross.  is the mark of 600, the mysterious cycle of the Incarnations.

We constantly see the Tau and the Resh united thus . These two letters, in the old Samaritan, as found in Arius, stand, the first for 400, the second for 200=600. This is the Staff of Osiris, also, and his monogram, and was adopted by the Christians as a Sign. On a medal of Constantius is this inscription, "In hoc signo victor eris ."An inscription in the Duomo at Milan reads, " et  Christi * Nomina * Sancta * Tenei."

The Egyptians used as a Sign of their God Canobus, a  or a  indifferently. The Vaishnavas of India have also the same Sacred Tau, which they also mark with Crosses, thus , and with triangles, thus, . The vestments of the priests of Horns were covered with these Crosses . So was the dress of the Lama of Thibet. The Sectarian marks of the Jains are  The distinctive badge of the Sect of Xac Japonicus is . It is the Sign of Fo, identical with the Cross of Christ.

On the ruins of Mandore, in India, among other mystic emblems, are the mystic triangle, and the interlaced triangle, , This is also found on ancient coins and medals, excavated from the ruins of Oojein and other ancient cities of India.

You entered here amid gloom and into shadow, and are clad in the apparel of sorrow. Lament, with us, the sad condition of the Human race, in this vale of tears! the calamities of men and the agonies of nations! the darkness of the bewildered soul, oppressed by doubt and apprehension!

There is no human soul that is not sad at times. There is no thoughtful soul that does not at times despair. There is perhaps none, of all that think at all of anything beyond the needs and interests of the body, that is not at times startled and terrified by the awful questions which, feeling as though it were a guilty thing for doing so, it whispers to itself in its inmost depths. Some Demon seems to torture it with doubts, and to crush it with despair, asking whether, after all, it is certain that its convictions are true, and its faith well founded: whether it is indeed sure that a God of Infinite Love and Beneficence rules the Universe, or only some great remorseless Fate and iron Necessity, hid in impenetrable gloom, and to which men and their sufferings and sorrows, their hopes and joys, their ambitions and deeds, are of no more interest or importance than the motes that dance in the sunshine; or a

[p. 293]

[paragraph continues] Being that amuses Himself with the incredible vanity and folly, the writhings and contortions of the insignificant insects that compose Humanity, and idly imagine that they resemble the Omnipotent. "What are we," the Tempter asks, "but puppets in a show-box? O Omnipotent destiny, pull our strings gently! Dance us mercifully off our miserable little stage!"

"Is it not," the Demon whispers, "merely the inordinate vanity of man that causes him now to pretend to himself that he is like unto God in intellect, sympathies and passions, as it was that which, at the beginning, made him believe that he was, in his bodily shape and organs, the very image of the Deity? Is not his God merely his own shadow, projected in gigantic outlines upon the clouds? Does he not create for himself a God out of himself, by merely adding indefinite extension to his own faculties, powers, and passions?"

"Who," the Voice that will not be always silent whispers, "has ever thoroughly satisfied himself with his own arguments in respect to his own nature? Who ever demonstrated to himself, with a conclusiveness that elevated the belief to certainty, that he was an immortal spirit, dwelling only temporarily in the house and envelope of the body, and to live on forever after that shall have decayed? Who ever has demonstrated or ever can demonstrate that the intellect of Man differs from that of the wiser animals, otherwise than in degree? Who has ever done more than to utter nonsense and incoherencies in regard to the difference between the instincts of the dog and the reason of Man? The horse, the dog, the elephant, are as conscious of their identity as we are. They think, dream, remember, argue with themselves, devise, plan, and reason. What is the intellect and intelligence of the man but the intellect of the animal in a higher degree or larger quantity?" In the real explanation of a single thought of a dog, all metaphysics will be condensed.

And with still more terrible significance, the Voice asks, in what respect the masses of men, the vast swarms of the human race, have proven themselves either wiser or better than the animals in whose eyes a higher intelligence shines than in their dull, unintellectual orbs; in what respect they have proven themselves worthy of or suited for an immortal life. Would that be a prize of any value to the vast majority? Do they show, here upon earth, any capacity to improve, any fitness for a state of existence in which

[p. 294]

they could not crouch to power, like hounds dreading the lash, or tyrannize over defenceless weakness; in which they could not hate, and persecute, and torture, and exterminate; in which they could not trade, and speculate, and over-reach, and entrap the unwary and cheat the confiding and gamble and thrive, and sniff with self-righteousness at the short-comings of others, and thank God that they were not like other men? What, to immense numbers of men, would be the value of a Heaven where they could not lie and libel, and ply base avocations for profitable returns?

Sadly we look around us, and read the gloomy and dreary records of the old dead and rotten ages. More than eighteen centuries have staggered away into the spectral realm of the Past, since Christ, teaching the Religion of Love, was crucified, that it might become a Religion of Hate; and His Doctrines are not yet even nominally accepted as true by a fourth of mankind. Since His death, what incalculable swarms of human beings have lived and died in total unbelief of all that we deem essential to Salvation! What multitudinous myriads of souls, since the darkness of idolatrous superstition settled down, thick and impenetrable, upon the earth, have flocked up toward the eternal Throne of God, to receive His judgment?

The Religion of Love proved to be, for seventeen long centuries, as much the Religion of Elate, and infinitely more the Religion of Persecution, than Mahometanism, its unconquerable rival. Heresies grew up before the Apostles died; and God hated the Nicolaitans, while John, at Patmos, proclaimed His coming wrath. Sects wrangled, and each, as it gained the power, persecuted the other, until the soil of the whole Christian world was watered with the blood, and fattened on the flesh, and whitened with the bones, of martyrs, and human ingenuity, was taxed to its utmost to invent new modes by which tortures and agonies could be pro-longed and made more exquisite.

"By what right," whispers the Voice, '"does this savage, merciless, persecuting animal, to which the sufferings and writhings of others of its wretched kind furnish the most pleasurable sensations, and the mass of which care only to eat, sleep, be clothed, and wallow in sensual pleasures, and the best of which wrangle, hate, envy, and, with few exceptions, regard their own interests alone,--with what right does it endeavor to delude itself into the conviction that it is not an animal, as the wolf, the hyena, and the tiger

[p. 295]

are, but a somewhat nobler, a spirit destined to be immortal, a spark of the essential Light, Fire and Reason, which are God? What other immortality than one of selfishness could this creature enjoy? Of what other is it capable? Must not immortality commence here and is not life a part of it? How shall death change the base nature of the base soul? Why have not those other animals that only faintly imitate the wanton, savage, human cruelty and thirst for blood, the same right as man has, to expect a resurrection and an Eternity of existence, or a Heaven of Love?

The world improves. Man ceases to persecute,--when the persecuted become too numerous and strong, longer to submit to it. That source of pleasure closed, men exercise the ingenuities of their cruelty on the animals and other living things below them. To deprive other creatures of the life which God gave them, and this not only that we may eat their flesh for food, but out of mere savage wantonness, is the agreeable employment and amusement of man, who prides himself on being the Lord of Creation, and a little lower than the Angels. If he can no longer use the rack, the gibbet, the pincers, and the stake, he can hate, and slander, and delight in the thought that he will, hereafter, luxuriously enjoying the sensual beatitudes of Heaven, see with pleasure the writhing agonies of those justly damned for daring to hold opinions contrary to his own, upon subjects totally beyond the comprehension both of them and him.

Where the armies of the despots cease to slay and ravage, the armies of "Freedom" take their place, and, the black and white commingled, slaughter and burn and ravish. Each age re-enacts the crimes as well as the follies of its predecessors, and still war licenses outrage and turns fruitful lands into deserts, and God is thanked in the Churches for bloody butcheries, and the remorseless devastators, even when swollen by plunder, are crowned with laurels and receive ovations.

Of the whole of mankind, not one in ten thousand has any aspirations beyond the daily needs of the gross animal life. In this age and in all others, all men except a few, in most countries, are born to be mere beasts of burden, co-laborers with the horse and the ox. Profoundly ignorant, even in "civilized" lands, they think and reason like the animals by the side of which they toil. For them, God, Soul, Spirit, immortality, are mere words, without any real meaning. The God of nineteen-twentieths of the Christian

[p. 296]

world is only Bel, Moloch, Zeus, or at best Osiris, Mithras, or Adonai, under another name, worshipped with the old Pagan ceremonies and ritualistic formulas. it is the Statue of Olympian Jove, worshipped as the Father, in the Christian Church that was a Pagan Temple; it is the Statue of Venus, become the Virgin Mary. For the most part, men do not in their hearts believe that God is either just or merciful. They fear and shrink from His lightnings and dread his wrath. For the most part, they only think they believe that there is another life, a judgment, and a punishment for sin. Yet they will none the less persecute as Infidels and Atheists those who do not believe what they themselves imagine they believe, and which yet they do not believe, because it is incomprehensible to them in their ignorance and want of intellect. To the vast majority of mankind, God is but the reflected image, in infinite space, of the earthly Tyrant on his Throne, only more powerful, more inscrutable, and more implacable. To curse Humanity, the Despot need only be, what the popular mind has, in every age, imagined God.

In the great cities, the lower strata of the populace are equally without faith and without hope. The others have, for the most part, a mere blind faith, imposed by education and circumstances, and not as productive of moral excellence or even common honesty as Mohammedanism. "Your property will be safe here," said the Moslem; "There are no Christians here." The philosophical and scientific world becomes daily more and more unbelieving. Faith and Reason are not opposites, in equilibrium; but antagonistic and hostile to each other; the result being the darkness and despair of scepticism, avowed, or half-veiled as rationalism.

Over more than three-fourths of the habitable globe, humanity still kneels, like the camels, to take upon itself the burthens to be tamely borne for its tyrants. If a Republic occasionally rises like a Star, it hastens with all speed to set in blood. The kings need not make war upon it, to crush it out of their way. It is only necessary to let it alone, and it soon lays violent hands upon itself. And when a people long enslaved shake off its fetters, it may well be incredulously asked,

        Shall the braggart shout
 For some blind glimpse of Freedom, link itself,
 Through madness, hated by the wise, to law,
         System and Empire?

[p. 297]

Everywhere in the world labor is, in some shape, the slave of capital; generally, a slave to be fed only so long as he can work; or, rather, only so long as his work is profitable to the owner of the human chattel. There are famines in Ireland, strikes and starvation in England, pauperism and tenement-dens in New York, misery, squalor, ignorance, destitution, the brutality of vice and the insensibility to shame, of despairing beggary, in all the human cesspools and sewers everywhere. Here, a sewing-woman famishes and freezes; there, mothers murder their children, that those spared may live upon the bread purchased with the burial allowances of the dead starveling; and at the next door young girls prostitute themselves for food.

Moreover, the Voice says, this besotted race is not satisfied with seeing its multitudes swept away by the great epidemics whose causes are unknown, and of the justice or wisdom of which the human mind cannot conceive. It must also be ever at war. There has not been a moment since men divided into Tribes, when all the world was at peace. Always men have been engaged in murdering each other somewhere. Always the armies have lived by the toil of the husbandman, and war has exhausted the resources, wasted the energies, and ended the prosperity of Nations. Now it loads unborn posterity with crushing debt, mortgages all estates, and brings upon States the shame and infamy of dishonest repudiation.

At times, the baleful fires of war light up half a Continent at once; as when all the Thrones unite to compel a people to receive again a hated and detestable dynasty, or States deny States the right to dissolve an irksome union and create for themselves a separate government. Then again the flames flicker and die away, and the fire smoulders in its ashes, to break out again, after a time, with renewed and a more concentrated fury. At times, the storm, revolving, howls over small areas only; at times its lights are seen, like the old beacon-fires on the hills, belting the whole globe. No sea, but hears the roar of cannon; no river, but runs red with blood; no plain, but shakes, trampled by the hoofs of charging squadrons; no field, but is fertilized by the blood of the dead; and everywhere man slays, the vulture gorges, and the wolf howls in the ear of the dying soldier. No city is not tortured by shot and shell; and no people fail to enact the horrid blasphemy of thanking a God of Love for victories and carnage. Te

[p. 298]

[paragraph continues] Deums are still sung for the Eve of St. Bartholomew and the Sicilian Vespers. Man's ingenuity is racked, and all his inventive powers are tasked, to fabricate the infernal enginery of destruction, by which human bodies may be the more expeditiously and effectually crushed, shattered, torn, and mangled; and yet hypocritical Humanity, drunk with blood and drenched with gore, shrieks to Heaven at a single murder, perpetrated to gratify a revenge not more unchristian, or to satisfy a cupidity not more ignoble, than those which are the promptings of the Devil in the souls of Nations.

When we have fondly dreamed of Utopia and the Millennium, when we have begun almost to believe that man is not, after all, a tiger half tamed, and that the smell of blood will not wake the savage within him, we are of a sudden startled from the delusive dream, to find the thin mask of civilization rent in twain and thrown contemptuously away. We lie down to sleep, like the peasant on the lava-slopes of Vesuvius. The mountain has been so long inert, that we believe its fires extinguished. Round us hang the clustering grapes, and the green leaves of the olive tremble in the soft night-air over us. Above us shine the peaceful, patient stars. The crash of a new eruption wakes us, the roar of the subterranean thunders, the stabs of the volcanic lightning into the shrouded bosom of the sky; and we see, aghast, the tortured Titan hurling up its fires among the pale stars, its great tree of smoke and cloud, the red torrents pouring down its sides. The roar and the shriekings of Civil War are all around us: the land is a pandemonium: man is again a Savage. The great armies roll along their hideous waves, and leave behind them smoking and depopulated deserts. The pillager is in every house, plucking even the morsel of bread from the lips of the starving child. Gray hairs are dabbled in blood, and innocent girlhood shrieks in vain to Lust for mercy. Laws, Courts, Constitutions, Christianity, Mercy, Pity, disappear. God seems to have abdicated, and Moloch to reign in His stead; while Press and Pulpit alike exult at universal murder, and urge the extermination of the Conquered, by the sword and the flaming torch; and to plunder and murder entitles the human beasts of prey to the thanks of Christian Senates.

Commercial greed deadens the nerves of sympathy of Nations, and makes them deaf to the demands of honor, the impulses of generosity, the appeals of those who suffer under injustice. Elsewhere, the universal pursuit of wealth dethrones God and pays

[p. 299]

divine honors to Mammon and Baalzebub. Selfishness rules supreme: to win wealth becomes the whole business of life. The villanies of legalized gaming and speculation become epidemic; treachery is but evidence of shrewdness; office becomes the prey of successful faction; the Country, like Actaeon, is torn by its own hounds, and the villains it has carefully educated to their trade, most greedily plunder it, when it is in extremis.

By what right, the Voice demands, does a creature always engaged in the work of mutual robbery and slaughter, and who makes his own interest his God, claim to be of a nature superior to the savage beasts of which he is the prototype?

Then the shadows of a horrible doubt fall upon the soul that would fain love, trust and believe; a darkness, of which this that surrounded you was a symbol. It doubts the truth of Revelation, its own spirituality, the very existence of a beneficent God. It asks itself if it is not idle to hope for any great progress of Humanity toward perfection, and whether, when it advances in one respect, it does not retrogress in some other, by way of compensation: whether advance in civilization is not increase of selfishness: whether freedom does not necessarily lead to license and anarchy: whether the destitution and debasement of the masses does not inevitably follow increase of population and commercial and manufacturing prosperity. It asks itself whether man is not the sport of a blind, merciless Fate: whether all philosophies are not delusions, and all religions the fantastic creations of human vanity and self-conceit; and, above all, whether, when Reason is abandoned as a guide, the faith of Buddhist and Brahmin has not the same claims to sovereignty and implicit, unreasoning credence, as any other.

He asks himself whether it is not, after all, the evident and palpable injustices of this life, the success and prosperity of the Bad, the calamities, oppressions, and miseries of the Good, that are the bases of all beliefs in a future state of existence? Doubting man's capacity for indefinite progress here, he doubts the possibility of it anywhere; and if he does not doubt whether God exists, and is just and beneficent, he at least cannot silence the constantly recurring whisper, that the miseries and calamities of men, their lives and deaths, their pains and sorrows, their extermination by war and epidemics, are phenomena of no higher dignity, significance, and importance, in the eye of God, than what things of the same nature occur to other organisms of matter; and that the fish of

[p. 300]

the ancient seas, destroyed by myriads to make room for other species, the contorted shapes in which they are found as fossils testifying to their agonies; the coral insects, the animals and birds and vermin slain by man, have as much right as he to clamor at the injustice of the dispensations of God, and to demand an immortality of life in a new universe, as compensation for their pains and sufferings and untimely death in this world.

This is not a picture painted by the imagination. Many a thoughtful mind has so doubted and despaired. How many of us can say that our own faith is so well grounded and complete that we never hear those painful whisperings within the soul? Thrice blessed are they who never doubt, who ruminate in patient contentment like the kine, or doze under the opiate of a blind faith; on whose souls never rests that Awful Shadow which is the absence of the Divine Light.

To explain to themselves the existence of Evil and Suffering, the Ancient Persians imagined that there were two Principles or Deities in the Universe, the one of Good and the other of Evil, constantly in conflict with each other in struggle for the mastery, and alternately overcoming and overcome. Over both, for the SAGES, was the One Supreme; and for them Light was in the end to prevail over Darkness, the Good over the Evil, and even Ahriman and his Demons to part with their wicked and vicious natures and share the universal Salvation. It did not occur to them that the existence of the Evil Principle, by the consent of the Omnipotent Supreme, presented the same difficulty, and left the existence of Evil as unexplained as before. The human mind is always content, if it can remove a difficulty a step further off. It cannot believe that the world rests on nothing, but is devoutly content when taught that it is borne on the back of an immense elephant, who himself stands on the back of a tortoise. Given the tortoise, Faith is always satisfied; and it has been a great source of happiness to multitudes that they could believe in a Devil who could relieve God of the odium of being the Author of Sin.

But not to all is Faith sufficient to overcome this great difficulty. They say, with the Suppliant, "Lord! I believe!"--but like him they are constrained to add, "Help Thou my unbelief!"--Reason must, for these, co-operate and coincide with Faith, or they remain still in the darkness of doubt,--most miserable of all conditions of the human mind.

[p. 301]

Those, only, who care for nothing beyond the interests and pursuits of this life, are uninterested in these great Problems. The animals, also, do not consider them. It is the characteristic of an immortal Soul, that it should seek to satisfy itself of its immortality, and to understand this great enigma, the Universe. If the Hottentot and the Papuan are not troubled and tortured by these doubts and speculations, they are not, for that, to be regarded as either wise or fortunate. The swine, also, are indifferent to the great riddles of the Universe, and are happy in being wholly unaware that it is the vast Revelation and Manifestation, in Time and Space, of a Single Thought of the Infinite God.

Exalt and magnify Faith as we will, and say that it begins where Reason ends, it must, after all, have a foundation, either in Reason, Analogy, the Consciousness, or human testimony. The worshipper of Brahma also has implicit Faith in what seems to us palpably false and absurd. His faith rests neither in Reason, Analogy, or the Consciousness, but on the testimony of his Spiritual teachers, and of the Holy Books. The Moslem also believes, on the positive testimony of the Prophet; and the Mormon also can say, "I believe this, because it is impossible." No faith, however absurd or degrading, has ever wanted these foundations, testimony, and the books. Miracles, proven by unimpeachable testimony have been used as a foundation for Faith, in every age; and the modern miracles are better authenticated, a hundred times, than the ancient ones.

So that, after all, Faith must flow out from some source within us, when the evidence of that which we are to believe is not presented to our senses, or it will in no case be the assurance of the truth of what is believed.

The Consciousness, or inhering and innate conviction, or the instinct divinely implanted, of the verity of things, is the highest possible evidence, if not the only real proof, of the verity of certain things, but only of truths of a limited class.

What we call the Reason, that is, our imperfect human reason, not only may, but assuredly will, lead us away from the Truth in regard to things invisible and especially those of the Infinite, if we determine to believe nothing but that which it can demonstrate. or not to believe that which it can by its processes of logic prove to be contradictory, unreasonable, or absurd. Its tape-line cannot measure the arcs of Infinity. For example, to the Human reason,

[p. 302]

an Infinite Justice and an Infinite Mercy or Love, in the same Being, are inconsistent and impossible. One, it can demonstrate, necessarily excludes the other. So it can demonstrate that as the Creation had a beginning, it necessarily follows that an Eternity had elapsed before the Deity began to create, during which He was inactive.

When we gaze, of a moonless clear night, on the Heavens glittering with stars, and know that each fixed star of all the myriads is a Sun, and each probably possessing its retinue of worlds, all peopled with living beings, we sensibly feel our own unimportance in the scale of Creation, and at once reflect that much of what has in different ages been religious faith, could never have been believed, if the nature, size, and distance of those Suns, and of our own Sun, Moon, and Planets, had been known to the Ancients as they are to us.

To them, all the lights of the firmament were created only to give light to the earth, as its lamps or candles hung above it. The earth was supposed to be the only inhabited portion of the Universe. The world and the Universe were synonymous terms. Of the immense size and distance of the heavenly bodies, men had no conception. The Sages had, in Chaldaea, Egypt, India, China, and in Persia, and therefore the sages always had, an esoteric creed, taught only in the mysteries and unknown to the vulgar. No Sage, in either country, or in Greece or Rome, believed the popular creed. To them the Gods and the Idols of the Gods were symbols, and symbols of great and mysterious truths.

The Vulgar imagined the attention of the Gods to be continually centred upon the earth and man. The Grecian Divinities inhabited Olympus, an insignificant mountain of the Earth. There was the Court of Zeus, to which Neptune came from the Sea, and Pluto and Persephone from the glooms of Tartarus in the unfathomable depths of the Earth's bosom. God came down from Heaven and on Sinai dictated laws for the Hebrews to His servant Moses. The Stars were the guardians of mortals whose fates and fortunes were to be read in their movements, conjunctions, and oppositions. The Moon was the Bride and Sister of the Sun, at the same distance above the Earth, and, like the Sun, made for the service of mankind alone.

If, with the great telescope of Lord Rosse, we examine the vast nebula of Hercules, Orion, and Andromeda, and find them resolvable

[p. 303]

into Stars more numerous than the sands on the seashore; if we reflect that each of these Stars is a Sun, like and even many times larger than ours,--each, beyond a doubt, with its retinue of worlds swarming with life;--if we go further in imagination, and endeavor to conceive of all the infinities of space, filled with similar suns and worlds, we seem at once to shrink into an incredible insignificance.

The Universe, which is the uttered Word of God, is infinite in extent. There is no empty space beyond creation on any side. The Universe, which is the Thought of God pronounced, never was not, since God never was inert; nor WAS, without thinking and creating. The forms of creation change, the suns and worlds live and die like the leaves and the insects, but the Universe itself is infinite and eternal, because God Is, Was, and Will forever Be, and never did not think and create.

Reason is fain to admit that a Supreme Intelligence, infinitely powerful and wise, must have created this boundless Universe; but it also tells us that we are as unimportant in it as the zoophytes and entozoa, or as the invisible particles of animated life that float upon the air or swarm in the water-drop.

The foundations of our faith, resting upon the imagined interest of God in our race, an interest easily supposable when man believed himself the only intelligent created being, and therefore eminently worthy the especial care and watchful anxiety of a God who had only this earth to look after, and its house-keeping alone to superintend, and who was content to create, in all the infinite Universe, only one single being, possessing a soul, and not a mere animal, are rudely shaken as the Universe broadens and expands for us; and the darkness of doubt and distrust settles heavy upon the Soul.

The modes in which it is ordinarily endeavored to satisfy our doubts, only increase them. To demonstrate the necessity for a cause of the creation, is equally to demonstrate the necessity of a cause for that cause. The argument from plan and design only removes the difficulty a step further off. We rest the world on the elephant, and the elephant on the tortoise, and the tortoise on--nothing.

To tell us that the animals possess instinct only and that Reason belongs to us alone, in no way tends to satisfy us of the radical difference between us and them. For if the mental phenomena

[p. 304]

exhibited by animals that think, dream, remember, argue from cause to effect, plan, devise, combine, and communicate their thoughts to each other, so as to act rationally in concert, if their love, hate, and revenge, can be conceived of as results of the organization of matter, like color and perfume, the resort to the hypothesis of an immaterial Soul to explain phenomena of the same kind, only more perfect, manifested by the human being, is supremely absurd. That organized matter can think or even feel, at all, is the great insoluble mystery. "Instinct" is but a word without a meaning, or else it means inspiration. It is either the animal itself, or God in the animal, that thinks, remembers, and reasons; and instinct, according to the common acceptation of the term, would be the greatest and most wonderful of mysteries,--no less a thing than the direct, immediate, and continual promptings of the Deity,--for the animals are not machines, or automata moved by springs, and the ape is but a dumb Australian.

Must we always remain in this darkness of uncertainty, of doubt? Is there no mode of escaping from the labyrinth except by means of a blind faith, which explains nothing, and in many creeds, ancient and modern, sets Reason at defiance, and leads to the belief either in a God without a Universe, a Universe without a God, or a Universe which is itself a God?

We read in the Hebrew Chronicles that Schlomoh the wise King caused to be placed in front of the entrance to the Temple two huge columns of bronze, one of which was called YAKAYIN and the other BAHAZ; and these words are rendered in our version Strength and Establishment. The Masonry of the Blue Lodges gives no explanation of these symbolic columns; nor do the Hebrew Books advise us that they were symbolic. If not so intended as symbols, they were subsequently understood to be such.

But as we are certain that everything within the Temple was symbolic, and that the whole structure was intended to represent the Universe, we may reasonably conclude that the columns of the portico also had a symbolic signification. It would be tedious to repeat all the interpretations which fancy or dullness has found for them.

The key to their true meaning is not undiscoverable. The perfect and eternal distinction of the two primitive terms of the creative syllogism, in order to attain to the demonstration of their

[p. 305]

harmony by the analogy of contraries, is the second grand principle of that occult philosophy veiled under the name "Kabalah," and indicated by all the sacred hieroglyphs of the Ancient Sanctuaries, and of the rites, so little understood by the mass of the Initiates, of the Ancient and Modern Free-Masonry.

The Sohar declares that everything in the Universe proceeds by the mystery of "the Balance," that is, of Equilibrium. Of the Sephiroth, or Divine Emanations, Wisdom and Understanding, Severity and Benignity, or Justice and Mercy, and Victory and Glory, constitute pairs.

Wisdom, or the Intellectual Generative Energy, and Understanding, or the Capacity to be impregnated by the Active Energy and produce intellection or thought, are represented symbolically in the Kabalah as male and female. So also are Justice and Mercy. Strength is the intellectual Energy or Activity; Establishment or Stability is the intellectual Capacity to produce, a passivity. They are the POWER of generation and the CAPACITY of production. By WISDOM, it is said, God creates, and by UNDERSTANDING establishes. These are the two Columns of the Temple, contraries like the Man and Woman, like Reason and Faith, Omnipotence and Liberty, Infinite Justice and Infinite Mercy, Absolute Power or Strength to do even what is most unjust and unwise, and Absolute Wisdom that makes it impossible to do it; Right and Duty. They were the columns of the intellectual and moral world, the monumental hieroglyph of the antinomy necessary to the grand law of creation.

There must be for every Force a Resistance to support it, to every light a shadow, for every Royalty a Realm to govern, for every affirmative a negative.

For the Kabalists, Light represents the Active Principle, and Darkness or Shadow is analogous to the Passive Principle. Therefore it was that they made of the Sun and Moon emblems of the two Divine Sexes and the two creative forces; therefore, that they ascribed to woman the Temptation and the first sin, and then the first labor, the maternal labor of the redemption, because it is from the bosom of the darkness itself that we see the Light born again. The Void attracts the Full; and so it is that the abyss of poverty and misery, the Seeming Evil, the seeming empty nothingness of life, the temporary rebellion of the creatures, eternally attracts the overflowing ocean of being, of riches, of pity, and of

[p. 306]

love. Christ completed the Atonement on the Cross by descending into Hell.

Justice and Mercy are contraries. If each be infinite, their co-existence seems impossible, and being equal, one cannot even annihilate the other and reign alone. The mysteries of the Divine Nature are beyond our finite comprehension; but so indeed are the mysteries of our own finite nature; and it is certain that in all nature harmony and movement are the result of the equilibrium of opposing or contrary forces.

The analogy of contraries gives the solution of the most interesting and most difficult problem of modern philosophy,--the definite and permanent accord of Reason and Faith, of Authority and Liberty of examination, of Science and Belief, of Perfection in God and Imperfection in Man. If science or knowledge is the Sun, Belief is the Man; it is a reflection of the day in the night. Faith is the veiled Isis, the Supplement of Reason, in the shadows which precede or follow Reason. It emanates from the Reason, but can never confound it nor be confounded with it. The encroachments of Reason upon Faith, or of Faith on Reason, are eclipses of the Sun or Moon; when they occur, they make useless both the Source of Light and its reflection, at once.

Science perishes by systems that are nothing but beliefs; and Faith succumbs to reasoning. For the two Columns of the Temple to uphold the edifice, they must remain separated and be parallel to each other. As soon as it is attempted by violence to bring them together, as Samson did, they are overturned, and the whole edifice falls upon the head of the rash blind man or the revolutionist whore personal or national resentments have in advance devoted to death.

Harmony is the result of an alternating preponderance of forces. Whenever this is wanting in government, government is a failure, because it is either Despotism or Anarchy. All theoretical governments, however plausible the theory, end in one or the other. Governments that are to endure are not made in the closet of Locke or Shaftesbury, or in a Congress or a Convention. In a Republic, forces that seem contraries, that indeed are contraries, alone give movement and life. The Spheres are held in their orbits and made to revolve harmoniously and unerringly, by the concurrence, which seems to be the opposition, of two contrary forces. If the centripetal force should overcome the centrifugal,

[p. 307]

and the equilibrium of forces cease, the rush of the Spheres to the Central Sun would annihilate the system. Instead of consolidation, the whole would be shattered into fragments.

Man is a free agent, though Omnipotence is above and all around him. To be free to do good, he must be free to do evil. The Light necessitates. the Shadow. A State is free like an individual in any government worthy of the name. The State is less potent than the Deity, and therefore the freedom of the individual citizen is consistent with its Sovereignty. These are opposites, but not antagonistic. So, in a union of States, the freedom of the States is consistent with the Supremacy of the Nation. When either obtains the permanent mastery over the other, and they cease to be in equilibrio, the encroachment continues with a velocity that is accelerated like that of a falling body, until the feebler is annihilated, and then, there being no resistance to support the stronger, it rushes into ruin.

So, when the equipoise of Reason and Faith, in the individual or the Nation, and the alternating preponderance cease, the result is, according as one or the other is permanent victor, Atheism or Superstition, disbelief or blind credulity; and the Priests either of Unfaith or of Faith become despotic.

"Whomsoever God loveth, him he chasteneth," is an expression that formulates a whole dogma. The trials of life are the blessings of life, to the individual or the Nation, if either has a Soul that is truly worthy of salvation. "Light and darkness," said ZOROASTER, "are the world's eternal ways." The Light and the Shadow are everywhere and always in proportion; the Light being the reason of being of the Shadow. It is by trials only, by the agonies of sorrow and the sharp discipline of adversities, that men and Nations attain initiation. The agonies of the garden of Gethsemane and those of the Cross on Calvary preceded the Resurrection and were the means of Redemption. It is with prosperity that God afflicts Humanity.

The Degree of Rose ###10016### is devoted to and symbolizes the final triumph of truth over falsehood, of liberty over slavery, of light over darkness, of life over death, and of good over evil. The great truth it inculcates is, that notwithstanding the existence of Evil, God is infinitely wise, just, and good: that though the affairs of the world proceed by no rule of right and wrong known to us in the narrowness of our views, yet all is right, for it is the work of

[p. 308]

[paragraph continues] God; and all evils, all miseries, all misfortunes, are but as drops in the vast current that is sweeping onward, guided by Him, to a great and magnificent result: that, at the appointed time, He will redeem and regenerate the world, and the Principle, the Power, and the existence of Evil will then cease; that this will be brought about by such means and instruments as He chooses to employ; whether by the merits of a Redeemer that has already appeared, or a Messiah that is yet waited for, by an incarnation of Himself, or by an inspired prophet, it does not belong to us as Masons to decide. Let each judge and believe for himself.

In the mean time, we labor to hasten the coming of that day. The morals of antiquity, of the law of Moses and of Christianity, are ours. We recognize every teacher of Morality, every Reformer, as a brother in this great work. The Eagle is to us the symbol of Liberty, the Compasses of Equality, the Pelican of Humanity, and our order of Fraternity. Laboring for these, with Faith, Hope, and Charity as our armor, we will wait with patience for the final triumph of Good and the complete manifestation of the Word of God.

No one Mason has the right to measure for another, within the walls of a Masonic Temple, the degree of veneration which he shall feel for any Reformer, or the Founder of any Religion. We teach a belief in no particular creed, as we teach unbelief in none. Whatever higher attributes the Founder of the Christian Faith may, in our belief, have had or not have had, none can deny that He taught and practised a pure and elevated morality, even at the risk and to the ultimate loss of His life. He was not only the benefactor of a disinherited people, but a model for mankind. Devotedly He loved the children of Israel. To them He came, and to them alone He preached that Gospel which His disciples afterward carried among foreigners. He would fain have freed the chosen People from their spiritual bondage of ignorance and degradation. As a lover of all mankind, laying down His life for the emancipation of His Brethren, He should be to all, to Christian, to Jew, and to Mahometan, an object of gratitude and veneration.

The Roman world felt the pangs of approaching dissolution. Paganism, its Temples shattered by Socrates and Cicero, had spoken its last word. The God of the Hebrews was unknown beyond the limits of Palestine. The old religions had failed to give happiness and peace to the world. The babbling and wrangling

[p. 309]

philosophers had confounded all men's ideas, until they doubted of everything and had faith in nothing: neither in God nor in his goodness and mercy, nor in the virtue of man, nor in themselves. Mankind was divided into two great classes, the master and the slave; the powerful and the abject, the high and the low, the tyrants and the mob; and even the former were satiated with the servility of the latter, sunken by lassitude and despair to the lowest depths of degradation.

When, lo, a voice, in the inconsiderable Roman Province of Judea proclaims a new Gospel--a new "God's Word," to crushed, suffering, bleeding humanity. Liberty of Thought, Equality of all men in the eye of God, universal Fraternity! a new doctrine, a new religion; the old Primitive Truth uttered once again!

Man is once more taught to look upward to his God. No longer to a God hid in impenetrable mystery, and infinitely remote from human sympathy, emerging only at intervals from the darkness to smite and crush humanity: but a God, good, kind, beneficent, and merciful: a rather, loving the creatures He has made, with a love  and exhaustless; Who feels for us, and sympathizes with us, and sends us pain and want and disaster only that they may serve to develop in us the virtues and excellences that befit us to live with Him hereafter.

Jesus of Nazareth, the "Son of man," is the expounder of the new Law of Love. He calls to Him the humble, the poor, the Pariahs of the world. The first sentence that He pronounces blesses the world, and announces the new gospel: "Blessed are they that mourn for they shall be comforted." He pours the oil of consolation and peace upon every crushed and bleeding heart. Every sufferer is His proselyte. He shares their sorrows, and sympathizes with all their afflictions.

He raises up the sinner and the Samaritan woman, and teaches them to hope for forgiveness. He pardons the woman taken in adultery. He selects his disciples not among the Pharisees or the Philosophers, but among the low and humble, even of the fishermen of Galilee. He heals the sick and feeds the poor. He lives among the destitute and the friendless. "Suffer little children," He said, "to come unto me; for of such is the kingdom of Heaven! Blessed are the humble-minded, for theirs is the kingdom of Heaven; the meek, for they shall inherit the Earth; the merciful, for they shall obtain mercy; the pure in heart, for they shall see

[p. 310]

[paragraph continues] God; the peace-maker, for they shall be called the children of God! First be reconciled to they brother, and then come and offer thy gift at the altar. Give to him that asketh thee, and from him that would borrow of thee turn not away! Love your enemies; bless them that curse you; do good to them that hate you; and pray for them which despitefully use you and persecute you! All things whatsoever ye would that men should do to you, do ye also unto them; for this is the law and the Prophets! He that taketh not his cross, and followeth after Me, is not worthy of Me. A new commandment I give unto you, that ye love one another: as I have loved you, that ye also love one another: by this shall all know that ye are My disciples. Greater love hath no man than this, that a man lay down his life for his friend."

The Gospel of Love He sealed with His life. The cruelty of the Jewish Priesthood, the ignorant ferocity of the mob, and the Roman indifference to barbarian blood, nailed Him to the cross, and He expired uttering blessings upon humanity.

Dying thus, He bequeathed His teachings to man as an inestimable inheritance. Perverted and corrupted, they have served as a basis for many creeds, and been even made the warrant for in-tolerance and persecution. We here teach them in their purity. They are our Masonry; for to them good men of all creeds can subscribe.

That God is good and merciful, and loves and sympathizes with the creatures He has made; that His finger is visible in all the movements of the moral, intellectual, and material universe; that we are His children, the objects of His paternal care and regard; that all men are our brothers, whose wants we are to supply, their errors to pardon, their opinions to tolerate, their injuries to forgive; that man has an immortal soul, a free will, a right to freedom of thought and action; that all men are equal in God's sight; that we best serve God by humility, meekness, gentleness, kindness, and the other virtues which the lowly can practise as well as the lofty; this is "the new Law," the "WORD," for which the world had waited and pined so long; and every true Knight of the Rose ###10016### will revere the memory of Him who taught it, and look indulgently even on those who assign to Him a character far above his own conceptions or belief, even to the extent of deeming Him Divine.

Hear Philo, the Greek Jew. "The contemplative soul, unequally

[p. 311]

guided, sometimes toward abundance and sometimes toward barrenness, though ever advancing, is illuminated by the primitive ideas, the rays that emanate from the Divine Intelligence, whenever it ascends toward the Sublime Treasures. When, on the contrary, it descends, and is barren, it falls within the domain of those Intelligences that are termed Angels. . . for, when the soul is deprived of the light of God, which leads it to the knowledge of things, it no longer enjoys more than a feeble and secondary light, which gives it, not the understanding of things, but that of words only, as in this baser world. . . ."

". . . Let the narrow-souled withdraw, having their ears sealed up! We communicate the divine mysteries to those only who have received the sacred initiation, to those who practise true piety, and who are not enslaved by the empty pomp of words, or the doctrines of the pagans. . . .

". . . O, ye Initiates, ye whose ears are purified, receive this in your souls, as a mystery never to be lost! Reveal it to no Profane! Keep and contain it within yourselves, as an incorruptible treasure, not like gold or silver, but more precious than everything besides; for it is the knowledge of the Great Cause, of Nature, and of that which is born of both. And if you meet an Initiate, be-siege him with your prayers, that he conceal from you no new mysteries that he may know, and rest not until you have obtained them! For me, although I was initiated in the Great Mysteries by Moses, the Friend of God, yet, having seen Jeremiah, I recognized him not only as an Initiate, but as a Hierophant; and I follow his school."

We, like him, recognize all Initiates as our Brothers. We belong to no one creed or school. In all religions there is a basis of Truth; in all there is pure Morality. All that teach the cardinal tenets of Masonry we respect; all teachers and reformers of mankind we admire and revere.

Masonry also has her mission to perform. With her traditions .reaching back to the earliest times, and her symbols dating further back than even the monumental history of Egypt extends, she invites all men of all religions to enlist under her banners and to war against evil, ignorance, and wrong. You are now her knight, and to her service your sword is consecrated. May you prove a worthy soldier in a worthy cause!

     
Morals and Dogma, by Albert Pike, [1871], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 312]

  

MORALS AND DOGMA.

  

COUNCIL OF KADOSH.

  

XIX.

  

GRAND PONTIFF.

THE true Mason labors for the benefit of those who are to come after him, and for the advancement and improvement of his race. That is a poor ambition which contents itself within the limits of a single life. All men who deserve to live, desire to survive their funerals, and to live afterward in the good that they have done mankind, rather than in the fading characters written in men's memories. Most men desire to leave some work behind them that may outlast their own day and brief generation. That is an instinctive impulse, given by God, and often found in the rudest human heart; the surest proof of the soul's immortality, and of the fundamental difference between man and the wisest brutes. To plant the trees that, after we are dead, shall shelter our children, is as natural as to love the shade of those our fathers planted. The rudest unlettered husbandman, painfully conscious of his own inferiority, the poorest widowed mother, giving her life-blood to those who pay only for the work of her needle, will toil and stint themselves to educate their child, that he may take a higher station in the world than they;--and of such are the world's greatest benefactors.

In his influences that survive him, man becomes immortal, before the general resurrection. The Spartan mother, who, giving her son his shield, said, "WITH IT, OR UPON IT!" afterward shared the government of Lacedaemon with the legislation of Lycurgus; for she too made a law, that lived after her; and she inspired the Spartan soldiery that afterward demolished the walls of Athens, and aided Alexander to conquer the Orient. The widow who gave Marion the fiery arrows to burn her own house, that it might no longer shelter the enemies of her infant country, the house where she had lain upon her husband's bosom, and where her children had been born, legislated more effectually for her State than Locke or Shaftesbury, or than many a Legislature has done, since that State won its freedom.

It was of slight importance to the Kings of Egypt and the

[p. 313]

[paragraph continues] Monarchs of Assyria and Phoenicia, that the son of a Jewish woman, a foundling, adopted by the daughter of Sesostris Ramses, slew an Egyptian that oppressed a Hebrew slave, and fled into the desert, to remain there forty years. But Moses, who might other-wise have become Regent of Lower Egypt, known to us only by a tablet on a tomb or monument, became the deliverer of the Jews, and led them forth from Egypt to the frontiers of Palestine, and made for them a law, out of which grew the Christian faith; and so has shaped the destinies of the world. He and the old Roman lawyers, with Alfred of England, the Saxon Thanes and Norman Barons, the old judges and chancellors, and the makers of the canons, lost in the mists and shadows of the Past, these are our legislators; and we obey the laws that they enacted.

Napoleon died upon the barren rock of his exile. His bones, borne to France by the son of a King, rest in the Hopital des Invalides, in the great city on the Seine. His Thoughts still govern France. He, and not the People, dethroned the Bourbon, and drove the last King of the House of Orleans into exile. He, in his coffin, and not the People, voted the crown to the Third Napoleon; and he, and not the Generals of France and England, led their united forces against the grim Northern Despotism.

Mahomet announced to the Arabian idolaters the new creed, "There is but one God, and Mahomet, like Moses and Christ, is His Apostle." For many years unaided, then with the help of his family and a few friends, then with many disciples, and last of all with an army, he taught and preached the Koran. The religion of the wild Arabian enthusiast converting the fiery Tribes of the Great Desert, spread over Asia, built up the Saracenic dynasties, conquered Persia and India, the Greek Empire, Northern Africa, and Spain, and dashed the surges of its fierce soldiery against the battlements of Northern Christendom. The law of Mahomet still governs a fourth of the human race; and Turk and Arab, Moor and Persian and Hindu, still obey the Prophet, and pray with their faces turned toward Mecca; and he, and not the living, rules and reigns in the fairest portions of the Orient.

Confucius still enacts the law for China; and the thoughts and ideas of Peter the Great govern Russia. Plato and the other great Sages of Antiquity still reign as the Kings of Philosophy, and have dominion over the human intellect. The great Statesmen of the Past still preside in the Councils of Nations. Burke still

[p. 314]

lingers in the House of Commons; and Berryer's sonorous tones will long ring in the Legislative Chambers of France. The influences of Webster and Calhoun, conflicting, rent asunder the American States, and the doctrine of each is the law and the oracle speaking from the Holy of Holies for his own State and all consociated with it: a faith preached and proclaimed by each at the cannon's mouth and consecrated by rivers of blood.

It has been well said, that when Tamerlane had builded his pyramid of fifty thousand human skulls, and wheeled away with his vast armies from the gates of Damascus, to find new conquests, and build other pyramids, a little boy was playing in the streets of Mentz, son of a poor artisan, whose apparent importance in the scale of beings was, compared with that of Tamerlane, as that of a grain of sand to the giant bulk of the earth; but Tamerlane and all his shaggy legions, that swept over the East like a hurricane, have passed away, and become shadows; while printing, the wonderful invention of John Faust, the boy of Mentz, has exerted a greater influence on man's destinies and overturned more thrones and dynasties than all the victories of all the blood-stained conquerors from Nimrod to Napoleon.

Long ages ago, the Temple built by Solomon and our Ancient Brethren sank into ruin, when the Assyrian Armies sacked Jerusalem. The Holy City is a mass of hovels cowering under the dominion of the Crescent; and the Holy Land is a desert. The Kings of Egypt and Assyria, who were contemporaries of Solomon, are forgotten, and their histories mere fables. The Ancient Orient is a shattered wreck, bleaching on the shores of Time. The Wolf and the Jackal howl among the ruins of Thebes and of Tyre, and the sculptured images of the Temples and Palaces of Babylon and Nineveh are dug from their ruins and carried into strange lands. But the quiet and peaceful Order, of which the Son of a poor Phoenician Widow was one of the Grand Masters, with the Kings of Israel and Tyre, has continued to increase in stature and influence, defying the angry waves of time and the storms of persecution. Age has not weakened its wide foundations, nor shattered its columns, nor marred the beauty of its harmonious proportions. Where rude barbarians, in the time of Solomon, peopled inhospitable howling wildernesses, in France and Britain, and in that New World, not known to Jew or Gentile, until the glories of the Orient had faded, that Order has builded

[p. 315]

new Temples, and teaches to its millions of Initiates those lessons of peace, good-will, and toleration, of reliance on God and confidence in man, which it learned when Hebrew and Giblemite worked side by side on the slopes of Lebanon, and the Servant of Jehovah and the Phoenician Worshipper of Bel sat with the humble artisan in Council at Jerusalem.

It is the Dead that govern. The Living only obey. And if the Soul sees, after death, what passes on this earth, and watches over the welfare of those it loves, then must its greatest happiness consist in seeing the current of its beneficent influences widening out from age to age, as rivulets widen into rivers, and aiding to shape the destinies of individuals, families, States, the World; and its bitterest punishment, in seeing its evil influences causing mischief and misery, and cursing and afflicting men, long after the frame it dwelt in has become dust, and when both name and memory are forgotten.

We know not who among the Dead control our destinies. The universal human race is linked and bound together by those influences and sympathies, which in the truest sense do make men's fates. Humanity is the unit, of which the man is but a fraction. What other men in the Past have done, said, thought, makes the great iron network of circumstance that environs and controls us all. We take our faith on trust. We think and believe as the Old Lords of Thought command us; and Reason is powerless before Authority.

We would make or annul a particular contract; but the Thoughts of the dead Judges of England, living when their ashes have been cold for centuries, stand between us and that which we would do, and utterly forbid it. We would settle our estate in a particular way; but the prohibition of the English Parliament, its uttered Thought when the first or second Edward reigned, comes echoing down the long avenues of time, and tells us we shall not exercise the power .of disposition as we wish. We would gain a particular advantage of another; and the thought of the old Roman lawyer who died before Justinian, or that of Rome's great orator Cicero, annihilates the act, or makes the intention ineffectual. This act, Moses forbids; that, Alfred. We would sell our land; but certain marks on a perishable paper tell us that our father or remote ancestor ordered otherwise; and the arm of the dead, emerging from the grave, with peremptory gesture prohibits

[p. 316]

the alienation. About to sin or err, the thought or wish of our dead mother, told us when we were children, by words that died upon the air in the utterance, and many a long year were forgotten, flashes on our memory, and holds us back with a power that is resistless.

Thus we obey the dead; and thus shall the living, when we are dead, for weal or woe, obey us. The Thoughts of the Past are the Laws of the Present and the Future. That which we say and do, if its effects last not beyond our lives, is unimportant. That which shall live when we are dead, as part of the great body of law enacted by the dead, is the only act worth doing, the only Thought worth speaking. The desire to do something that shall benefit the world, when neither praise nor obloquy will reach us where we sleep soundly in the grave, is the noblest ambition entertained by man.

It is the ambition of a true and genuine Mason. Knowing the slow processes by which the Deity brings about great results, he does not expect to reap as well as sow, in a single lifetime. It is the inflexible fate and noblest destiny, with rare exceptions, of the great and good, to work, and let others reap the harvest of their labors. He who does good, only to be repaid in kind, or in thanks and gratitude, or in reputation and the world's praise, is like him who loans his money, that he may, after certain months, receive it back with interest. To be repaid for eminent services with slander, obloquy, or ridicule, or at best with stupid indifference or cold ingratitude, as it is common, so it is no misfortune, except to those who lack the wit to see or sense to appreciate the service, or the nobility of soul to thank and reward with eulogy, the benefactor of his kind. His influences live, and the great Future will obey; whether it recognize or disown the lawgiver. .

Miltiades was fortunate that he was exiled; and Aristides that he was ostracized, because men wearied of hearing him called "The Just." Not the Redeemer was unfortunate; but those only who repaid Him for the inestimable gift He offered them, and for a life passed in toiling for their good, by nailing Him upon the cross, as though He had been a slave or malefactor. The persecutor dies and rots, and Posterity utters his name with execration: but his victim's memory he has unintentionally made glorious and immortal.

If not for slander and persecution, the Mason who would benefit

[p. 317]

his race must look for apathy and cold indifference in those whose good he seeks, in those who ought to seek the good of others. Except when the sluggish depths of the Human Mind are broken up and tossed as with a storm, when at the appointed time a great Reformer comes, and a new Faith springs up and grows with supernatural energy, the progress of Truth is slower than the growth of oaks; and he who plants need not expect to gather. The Redeemer, at His death, had twelve disciples, and one betrayed and one deserted and denied Him. It is enough for us to know that the fruit will come in its due season. When, or who shall gather it, it does not in the least concern us to know. It is our business to plant the seed. It is God's right to give the fruit to whom He pleases; and if not to us, then is our action by so much the more noble.

To sow, that others may reap; to work and plant for those who are to occupy the earth when we are dead; to project our influences far into the future, and live beyond our time; to rule as the Kings of Thought, over men who are yet unborn; to bless with the glorious gifts of Truth and Light and Liberty those who will neither know the name of the giver, nor care in what grave his unregarded ashes repose, is the true office of a Mason and the proudest destiny of a man.

All the great and beneficent operations of Nature are produced by slow and often imperceptible degrees. The work of destruction and devastation only is violent and rapid. The Volcano and the Earthquake, the Tornado and the Avalanche, leap suddenly into full life and fearful energy, and smite with an unexpected blow. Vesuvius buried Pompeii and Herculaneum in a night; and Lisbon fell prostrate before God in a breath, when the earth rocked and shuddered; the Alpine village vanishes and is erased at one bound of the avalanche; and the ancient forests fall like grass before the mower, when the tornado leaps upon them. Pestilence slays its thousands in a day; and the storm in a night strews the sand with shattered navies.

The Gourd of the Prophet Jonah grew up, and was withered, in a night. But many years ago, before the Norman Conqueror stamped his mailed foot on the neck of prostrate Saxon England, some wandering barbarian, of the continent then unknown to the world, in mere idleness, with hand or foot, covered an acorn with a little earth, and passed on regardless, on his journey to the dim

[p. 318]

[paragraph continues] Past. He died and was forgotten; but the acorn lay there still, the mighty force within it acting in the darkness. A tender shoot stole gently up; and fed by the light and air and frequent dews, put forth its little leaves, and lived, because the elk or buffalo chanced not to place his foot upon and crush it. The years marched onward, and the shoot became a sapling, and its green leaves went and came with Spring and Autumn. And still the years came and passed away again, and William, the Norman Bastard, parcelled England out among his Barons, and still the sapling grew, and the dews fed its leaves, and the birds builded their nests among its small limbs for many generations. And still the years came and went, and the Indian hunter slept in the shade of the sapling, and Richard Lion-Heart fought at Acre and Ascalon, and John's bold Barons wrested from him the Great Charter; and to! the sapling had become a tree; and still it grew, and thrust its great arms wider abroad, and lifted its head still higher toward the Heavens; strong-rooted, and defiant of the storms that roared and eddied through its branches; and when Columbus ploughed with his keels the unknown Western Atlantic, and Cortez and Pizarro bathed the cross in blood; and the Puritan, the Huguenot, the Cavalier, and the follower of Penn sought a refuge and a resting-place beyond the ocean, the Great Oak still stood, firm-rooted, vigorous, stately, haughtily domineering over all the forest, heedless of all the centuries that had hurried past since the wild Indian planted the little acorn in the forest;--a stout and hale old tree, with wide circumference shading many a rood of ground; and fit to furnish timbers for a ship, to carry the thunders of the Great Republic's guns around the world. And yet, if one had sat and watched it every instant, from the moment when the feeble shoot first pushed its way to the light until the eagles built among its branches, he would never have seen the tree or sapling grow.

Many long centuries ago, before the Chaldaean Shepherds watched the Stars, or Shufu built the Pyramids, one could have sailed in a seventy-four where now a thousand islands gem the surface of the Indian Ocean; and the deep-sea lead would nowhere have found any bottom. But below these waves were myriads upon myriads, beyond the power of Arithmetic to number, of minute existences, each a perfect living creature, made by the Almighty Creator, and fashioned by Him for the work it had to do. There they toiled beneath the waters, each doing its allotted work,

[p. 319]

and wholly ignorant of the result which God intended. They lived and died, incalculable in numbers and almost infinite in the succession of their generations, each adding his mite to the gigantic work that went on there under God's direction. Thus hath He chosen to create great Continents and Islands; and still the coral-insects live and work, as when they made the rocks that underlie the valley of the Ohio.

Thus God hath chosen to create. Where now is firm land, once chafed and thundered the great primeval ocean. For ages upon ages the minute shields of infinite myriads of infusoria, and the stony stems of encrinites sunk into its depths, and there, under the vast pressure of its waters, hardened into limestone. Raised slowly from the Profound by His hand, its quarries underlie the soil of all the continents, hundreds of feet in thickness; and we, of these remains of the countless dead, build tombs and palaces, as the Egyptians, whom we call ancient, built their pyramids.

On all the broad lakes and oceans the Great Sun looks earnestly and lovingly, and the invisible vapors rise ever up to meet him. No eye but God's beholds them as they rise. There, in the upper atmosphere, they are condensed to mist, and gather into clouds, and float and swim around in the ambient air. They sail with its currents, and hover over the ocean, and roll in huge masses round the stony shoulders of great mountains. Condensed still more by change of temperature, they drop upon the thirsty earth in gentle showers, or pour upon it in heavy rains, or storm against its bosom at the angry Equinoctial. The shower, the rain, and the storm pass away, the clouds vanish, and the bright stars again shine clearly upon the glad earth. The rain-drops sink into the ground, and gather in subterranean reservoirs, and run in subterranean channels, and bubble up in springs and fountains; and from the mountain-sides and heads of valleys the silver threads of water begin their long journey to the ocean. Uniting, they widen into brooks and rivulets, then into streams and rivers; and, at last, a Nile, a Ganges, a Danube, an Amazon, or a Mississippi rolls between its banks, mighty, majestic, and resistless, creating vast alluvial valleys to be the granaries of the world, ploughed by the thousand keels of commerce and serving as great highways, and as the impassable boundaries of rival nations; ever returning to the ocean the drops that rose from it in vapor, and descended in rain and snow and hail upon the level plains and lofty mountains;

[p. 320]

and causing him to recoil for many a mile before the head-long rush of their great tide.

So it is with the aggregate of Human endeavor. As the invisible particles of vapor combine and coalesce to form the mists and clouds that fall in rain on thirsty continents, and bless the great green forests and wide grassy prairies, the waving meadows and the fields by which men live; as the infinite myriads of drops that the glad earth drinks are gathered into springs and rivulets and rivers, to aid in levelling the mountains and elevating the plains, and to feed the large lakes and restless oceans; so all Human Thought, and Speech and Action, all that is done and said and thought and suffered upon the Earth combine together, and flow onward in one broad resistless current toward those great results to which they are determined by the will of God.

We build slowly and destroy swiftly. Our Ancient Brethren who built the Temples at Jerusalem, with many myriad blows felled, hewed, and squared the cedars, and quarried the stones, and carved the intricate ornaments, which were to be the Temples. Stone after stone, by the combined effort and long toil of Apprentice, Fellow-Craft, and Master, the walls arose; slowly the roof was framed and fashioned; and many years elapsed before, at length, the Houses stood finished, all fit and ready for the Worship of God, gorgeous in the sunny splendors of the atmosphere of Palestine. So they were built. A single motion of the arm of a rude, barbarous Assyrian Spearman, or drunken Roman or Gothic Legionary of Titus, moved by a senseless impulse of the brutal will, flung in the blazing brand; and, with no further human agency, a few short hours sufficed to consume and melt each Temple to a smoking mass of black unsightly ruin.

Be patient, therefore, my Brother, and wait!

The issues are with God: To do,
   Of right belongs to us.

Therefore faint not, nor be weary in well-doing! Be not discouraged at men's apathy, nor disgusted with their follies, nor tired of their indifference! Care not for returns and results; but see only what there is to do, and do it, leaving the results to God! Soldier of the Cross! Sworn Knight of Justice, Truth, and Toleration! Good Knight and True! be patient and work!

The Apocalypse, that sublime Kabalistic and prophetic Summary

[p. 321]

of all the occult figures, divides its images into three Septenaries, after each of which there is silence in Heaven. There are Seven Seals to be opened, that is to say, Seven mysteries to know, and Seven difficulties to overcome, Seven trumpets to sound, and Seven cups to empty.

The Apocalypse is, to those who receive the nineteenth Degree, the Apotheosis of that Sublime Faith which aspires to God alone, and despises all the pomps and works of Lucifer. LUCIFER, the Light-bearer! Strange and mysterious name to give to the Spirit of Darkness! Lucifer, the Son of the Morning! Is it he who bears the Light, and with its splendors intolerable blinds feeble, sensual, or selfish Souls? Doubt it not! for traditions are full of Divine Revelations and Inspirations: and Inspiration is not of one Age nor of one Creed. Plato and Philo, also, were inspired.

The Apocalypse, indeed, is a book as obscure as the Sohar.

It is written hieroglyphically with numbers and images; and the Apostle often appeals to the intelligence of the Initiated. "Let him who hath knowledge, understand! let him who understands, calculate!" he often says, after an allegory or the mention of a number. Saint John, the favorite Apostle, and the Depositary of all the Secrets of the Saviour, therefore did not write to be understood by the multitude.

The Sephar Yezirah, the Sohar, and the Apocalypse are the completest embodiments of Occultism. They contain more meanings than words; their expressions are figurative as poetry and exact as numbers. The Apocalypse sums up, completes, and surpasses all the Science of Abraham and of Solomon. The visions of Ezekiel, by the river Chebar, and of the new Symbolic Temple, are equally mysterious expressions, veiled by figures of the enigmatic dogmas of the Kabalah, and their symbols are as little understood by the Commentators, as those of Free Masonry.

The Septenary is the Crown of the Numbers, because it unites the Triangle of the Idea to the Square of the Form.

The more the great Hierophants were at pains to conceal their absolute Science, the more they sought to add grandeur to and multiply its symbols. The huge pyramids, with their triangular sides of elevation and square bases, represented their Metaphysics, founded upon the knowledge of Nature. That knowledge of Nature had for its symbolic key the gigantic form of that huge Sphinx, which has hollowed its deep bed in the sand, while keeping

[p. 322]

watch at the feet of the Pyramids. The Seven grand monuments called the Wonders of the World, were the magnificent Commentaries on the Seven lines that composed the Pyramids, and on the Seven mystic gates of Thebes.

The Septenary philosophy of Initiation among the Ancients may be summed up thus:

Three Absolute Principles which are but One Principle: four elementary forms which are but one; all forming a Single Whole, compounded of the Idea and the Form.

The three Principles were these:

1 degrees. BEING IS BEING.

In Philosophy, identity of the Idea and of Being or Verity; in Religion, the first Principle, THE FATHER.

2 degrees. BEING IS REAL.

In Philosophy, identity of Knowing and of Being or Reality; in Religion, the Logos of Plato, the Demiourgos, the WORD.

3 degrees. BEING IS LOGIC.

In Philosophy, identity of the Reason and Reality; in Religion, Providence, the Divine Action that makes real the Good, that which in Christianity we call THE HOLY SPIRIT.

The union of all the Seven colors is the White, the analogous symbol of the GOOD: the absence of all is the Black, the analogous symbol of the EVIL. There are three primary colors, Red, Yellow, and Blue; and four secondary, Orange, Green, Indigo, and Violet; and all these God displays to man in the rainbow; and they have their analogies also in the moral and intellectual world. The same number, Seven, continually reappears in the Apocalypse, compounded of three and four; and these numbers relate to the last Seven of the Sephiroth, three answering to BENIGNITY or MERCY, SEVERITY or JUSTICE, and BEAUTY or HARMONY; and four to Netzach, Ho_d, Yeso_d, and Malakoth, VICTORY, GLORY, STABILITY, and DOMINATION. The same numbers also represent the first three Sephiroth, KETHER, KHOKMAH, and BAINAH, or Will, Wisdom, and Understanding, which, with DAATH or Intellection or Thought, are also four, DAATH not being regarded as a Sephirah, not as the Deity acting, or as a potency, energy, or attribute, but as the Divine Action.

The Sephiroth are commonly figured in the Kabalah as constituting a human form, the ADAM KADMON or MACROCOSM. Thus arranged, the universal law of Equipoise is three times exemplified.

[p. 323]

[paragraph continues] From that of the Divine Intellectual, Active, Masculine ENERGY, and the Passive CAPACITY to produce Thought, the action of THINKING results. From that of BENIGNITY and SEVERITY, HARMONY flows; and from that of VICTORY or an Infinite overcoming, and GLORY, which, being Infinite, would seem to forbid the existence of obstacles or opposition, results STABILITY or PERMANENCE, which is the perfect DOMINION of the Infinite WILL.

The last nine Sephiroth are included in, at the same time that they have flowed forth from, the first of all, KETHER, or the CROWN. Each also, in succession flowed from, and yet still remains included in, the one preceding it. The Will of God includes His Wisdom, and His Wisdom is His Will specially developed and acting. This Wisdom is the Logos that creates, mistaken and personified by Simon Magus and the succeeding Gnostics. By means of its utterance, the letter YO_D, it creates the worlds, first in the Divine Intellect as an Idea, which invested with form became the fabricated World, the Universe of material reality. YO_D and HE, two letters of the Ineffable Name of the Manifested Deity, represent the Male and the Female, the Active and the Passive in Equilibrium, and the VAV completes the Trinity and the Triliteral Name w ?Y?H?W, the Divine Triangle, which with the repetition of the He becomes the Tetragrammaton.

Thus the ten Sephiroth contain all the Sacred Numbers, three, five, seven, and nine, and the perfect Number Ten, and correspond with the Tetractys of Pythagoras.

BEING Is BEING, w ?A?H?Y?H ?A?Sh?R ?A?H?Y?H, Ahayah Asar Ahayah. This is the Principle, the "BEGINNING."

In the Beginning was, that is to say, IS, WAS, and WILL BE, the WORD, that is to say, the REASON that Speaks.

En arxei en O Logos!

The Word is the reason of belief, and in it also is the expression of the Faith which makes. Science a living thing. The Word,. Logos, is the Source of Logic. Jesus is the Word Incarnate. The accord of the Reason with Faith, of Knowledge with Belief, of Authority, with Liberty, has become in modern times the veritable enigma of the Sphinx.

It is WISDOM that, in the Kabalistic Books of the Proverbs and Ecclesiasticus, is the Creative Agent of God. Elsewhere in the Hebrew writings it is w ?D?B?R ?Y?H?W?H, Debar Iahavah, the Word of God.

[p. 324]

[paragraph continues] It is by His uttered Word that God reveals Himself to us; not alone in the visible and invisible but intellectual creation, but also in our convictions, consciousness, and instincts. Hence it is that certain beliefs are universal. The conviction of all men that God is good led to a belief in a Devil, the fallen Lucifer or Light-bearer, Shaitan the Adversary, Ahriman and Tupho_n, as an attempt to explain the existence of Evil, and make it consistent with the Infinite Power, Wisdom, and Benevolence of God.

Nothing surpasses and nothing equals, as a Summary of all the doctrines of the Old World, those brief words engraven by HERMES on a Stone, and known under the name of "The Tablet of Emerald:" the Unity of Being and the Unity of the Harmonies, ascending and descending, the progressive and proportional scale of the Word; the immutable law of the Equilibrium, and the proportioned progress of the universal analogies; the relation of the Idea to the Word, giving the measure of the relation between the Creator and the Created, the necessary mathematics of the Infinite, proved by the measures of a single corner of the Finite;--all this is expressed by this single proposition of the Great Egyptian Hierophant:

"What is Superior is as that which is Inferior, and what is Below is as that which is Above, to form the Marvels of the Unity."

 

     
Morals and Dogma, by Albert Pike, [1871], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 325]

  

XX.

  

GRAND MASTER OF ALL SYMBOLIC LODGES.

THE true Mason is a practical Philosopher, who, under religious emblems, in all ages adopted by wisdom, builds upon plans traced by nature and reason the moral edifice of knowledge. He ought to find, in the symmetrical relation of all the parts of this rational edifice, the principle and rule of all his duties, the source of all his pleasures. He improves his moral nature, becomes a better man, and finds in the reunion of virtuous men, assembled with pure views, the means of multiplying his acts of beneficence. Masonry and Philosophy, without being one and the same thing, have the same object, and propose to themselves the same end, the worship of the Grand Architect of the Universe, acquaintance and familiarity with the wonders of nature, and the happiness of humanity attained by the constant practice of all the virtues.

As Grand Master of all Symbolic Lodges, it is your especial duty to aid in restoring Masonry to its primitive purity. You have become an instructor. Masonry long wandered in error. Instead of improving, it degenerated from its primitive simplicity, and retrograded toward a system, distorted by stupidity and ignorance, which, unable to construct a beautiful machine, made a complicated one. Less than two hundred years ago, its organization was simple, and altogether moral, its emblems, allegories, and ceremonies easy to be understood, and their purpose and object readily to be seen. It was then confined to a very small number of Degrees. Its constitutions were like those of a Society of Essenes, written in the first century of our era. There could be seen the primitive Christianity, organized into Masonry, the school of Pythagoras without incongruities or absurdities; a Masonry simple and significant, in which it was not necessary to torture the mind to discover reasonable interpretations; a Masonry at once religious and philosophical, worthy of a good citizen and an enlightened philanthropist.

Innovators and inventors overturned that primitive simplicity.

[p. 326]

[paragraph continues] Ignorance engaged in the work of making Degrees, and trifles and gewgaws and pretended mysteries, absurd or hideous, usurped the place of Masonic Truth. The picture of a horrid vengeance, the poniard and the bloody head, appeared in the peaceful Temple of Masonry, without sufficient explanation of their symbolic meaning: Oaths out of all proportion with their object, shocked the candidate, and then became ridiculous, and were wholly disregarded. Acolytes were exposed to tests, and compelled to perform acts, which, if real, would have been abominable; but being mere chimeras, were preposterous, and excited contempt and laughter only. Eight hundred Degrees of one kind and another were invented: Infidelity and even Jesuitry were taught under the mask of Masonry. The rituals even of the respectable Degrees, copied and mutilated by ignorant men, became nonsensical and trivial; and the words so corrupted that it has hitherto been found impossible to recover many of them at all. Candidates were made to degrade themselves, and to submit to insults not tolerable to a man of spirit and honor.

Hence it was that, practically, the largest portion of the Degrees claimed by the Ancient and Accepted Scottish Rite, and before it by the Rite of Perfection, fell into disuse, were merely communicated, and their rituals became jejune and insignificant. These Rites resembled those old palaces and baronial castles, the different parts of which, built at different periods remote from one another, upon plans and according to tastes that greatly varied, formed a discordant and incongruous whole. Judaism and chivalry, superstition and philosophy, philanthropy and insane hatred and longing for vengeance, a pure morality and unjust and illegal revenge, were found strangely mated and standing hand in hand within the Temples of Peace and Concord; and the whole system was one grotesque commingling of incongruous things, of contrasts and contradictions, of shocking and fantastic extravagances, of parts repugnant to good taste, and fine conceptions overlaid and disfigured by absurdities engendered by ignorance, fanaticism, and a senseless mysticism.

An empty and sterile pomp, impossible indeed to be carried out, and to which no meaning whatever was attached, with far-fetched explanations that were either so many stupid platitudes or themselves needed an interpreter; lofty titles, arbitrarily assumed, and to which the inventors had not condescended to attach any explanation

[p. 327]

that should acquit them of the folly of assuming temporal rank, power, and titles of nobility, made the world laugh, and the Initiate feel ashamed.

Some of these titles we retain; but they have with us meanings entirely consistent with that Spirit of Equality which is the foundation and peremptory law of its being of all Masonry. The Knight, with us, is he who devotes his hand, his heart, his brain, to the Science of Masonry, and professes himself the Sworn Soldier of Truth: the Prince is he who aims to be Chief, [Princeps], first, leader, among his equals, in virtue and good deeds: the Sovereign is he who, one of an order whose members are all Sovereigns, is Supreme only because the law and constitutions are so, which he administers, and by which he, like every other brother, is governed. The titles, Puissant, Potent, Wise, and Venerable, indicate that power of Virtue, Intelligence, and Wisdom, which those ought to strive to attain who are placed in high office by the suffrages of their brethren: and all our other titles and designations have an esoteric meaning, consistent with modesty and equality, and which those who receive them should fully understand. As Master of a Lodge it is your duty to instruct your Brethren that they are all so many constant lessons, teaching the lofty qualifications which are required of those who claim them, and not merely idle gewgaws worn in ridiculous imitation of the times when the Nobles and Priests were masters and the people slaves: and that, in all true Masonry, the Knight, the Pontiff, the Prince, and the Sovereign are but the first among their equals: and the cordon, the clothing, and the jewel but symbols and emblems of the virtues required of all good Masons.

The Mason kneels, no longer to present his petition for admittance or to receive the answer, no longer to a man as his superior, who is but his brother, but to his God; to whom he appeals for the rectitude of his intentions, and whose aid he asks to enable him to keep his vows. No one is degraded by bending his knee to God at the altar, or to receive the honor of Knighthood as Bayard and Du Guesclin knelt. To kneel for other purposes, Masonry does not require. God gave to man a head to be borne erect, a port upright and majestic. We assemble in our Temples to cherish and inculcate sentiments that conform to that loftiness of bearing which the just and upright man is entitled to maintain, and we do not require those who desire to be admitted among us, ignominiously

[p. 328]

to bow the head. We respect man, because we respect ourselves that he may conceive a lofty idea of his dignity as a human being free and independent. If modesty is a virtue, humility and obsequiousness to man are base: for there is a noble pride which is the most real and solid basis of virtue. Man should humble himself before the Infinite God; but not before his erring and imperfect brother.

As Master of a Lodge, you will therefore be exceedingly careful that no Candidate, in any Degree, be. required to submit to any degradation whatever; as has been too much the custom in some of the Degrees: and take it as a certain and inflexible rule, to which there is no exception, that real Masonry requires of no man anything to which a Knight and Gentleman cannot honorably, and without feeling outraged or humiliated submit.

The Supreme Council for the Southern Jurisdiction of the United States at length undertook the indispensable and long-delayed task of revising and reforming the work and rituals of the thirty Degrees under its jurisdiction. Retaining the essentials of the Degrees and all the means by which the members recognize one another, it has sought out and developed the leading idea of each Degree, rejected the puerilities and absurdities with which many of them were disfigured, and made of them a connected system of moral, religious, and philosophical instruction. Sectarian of no creed, it has yet thought it not improper to use the old allegories, based on occurrences detailed in the Hebrew and Christian books, and drawn from the Ancient Mysteries of Egypt, Persia, Greece, India, the Druids and the Essenes, as vehicles to communicate the Great Masonic Truths; as it has used the legends of the Crusades, and the ceremonies of the orders of Knighthood.

It no longer inculcates a criminal and wicked vengeance. It has not allowed Masonry to play the assassin: to avenge the death either of Hiram, of Charles the 1st, or of Jaques De Molay and the Templars. The Ancient and Accepted Scottish Rite of Masonry has now become, what Masonry at first was meant to be, a Teacher of Great Truths, inspired by an upright and enlightened reason, a firm and constant wisdom, and an affectionate and liberal philanthropy.

It is no longer a system, over the composition and arrangement of the different parts of which, want of reflection, chance, ignorance, and perhaps motives still more ignoble presided; a system

[p. 329]

unsuited to our habits, our manners, our ideas, or the world-wide philanthropy and universal toleration of Masonry; or to bodies small in number, whose revenues should be devoted to the relief of the unfortunate, and not to empty show; no longer a heterogeneous aggregate of Degrees, shocking by its anachronisms and contradictions, powerless to disseminate light, information, and moral and philosophical ideas.

As Master, you will teach those who are under you, and to whom you will owe your office, that the decorations of many of the Degrees are to be dispensed with, whenever the expense would interfere with the duties of charity, relief, and benevolence; and to be indulged in only by wealthy bodies that will thereby do no wrong to those entitled to their assistance. The essentials of all the Degrees may be procured at slight expense; and it is at the option of every Brother to procure or not to procure, as he pleases, the dress, decorations, and jewels of any Degree other than the 14th, 18th, 30th, and 32d.

We teach the truth of none of the legends we recite. They are to us but parables and allegories, involving and enveloping Masonic instruction; and vehicles of useful and interesting information. They represent the different phases of the human mind, its efforts and struggles to comprehend nature, God, the government of the Universe, the permitted existence of sorrow and evil. To teach us wisdom, and the folly of endeavoring to explain to ourselves that which we are not capable of understanding, we reproduce the speculations of the Philosophers, the Kabalists, the Mystagogues and the Gnostics. Every one being at liberty to apply our symbols and emblems as he thinks most consistent with truth and reason and with his own faith, we give them such an interpretation only as may be accepted by all. Our Degrees may be conferred in France or Turkey, at Pekin, Ispahan, Rome, or Geneva, in the city of Penn or in Catholic Louisiana, upon the subject of an absolute government or the citizen of a Free State, upon Sectarian or Theist. To honor the Deity, to regard all men as our Brethren, as children, equally dear to Him, of the Supreme Creator of the Universe, and to make himself useful to society and himself by his labor, are its teachings to its Initiates in all the Degrees.

Preacher of Liberty, Fraternity, and Equality, it desires them to be attained by making men fit to receive them, and by the moral power of an intelligent and enlightened People. It lays no plots

[p. 330]

and conspiracies. It hatches no premature revolutions; it encourages no people to revolt against the constituted authorities; but recognizing the great truth that freedom follows fitness for freedom as the corollary follows the axiom, it strives to prepare men to govern themselves.

Where domestic slavery exists, it teaches the master humanity and the alleviation of the condition of his slave, and moderate correction and gentle discipline; as it teaches them to the master of the apprentice: and as it teaches to the employers of other men, in mines, manufactories, and workshops, consideration and humanity for those who depend upon their labor for their bread, and to whom want of employment is starvation, and overwork is fever, consumption, and death.

As Master of a Lodge, you are to inculcate these duties on your brethren. Teach the employed to be honest, punctual, and faithful as well as respectful and obedient to all proper orders: but also teach the employer that every man or woman who desires to work, has a right to have work to do; and that they, and those who from sickness or feebleness, loss of limb or of bodily vigor, old age or infancy, are not able to work, have a right to be fed, clothed, and sheltered from the inclement elements: that he commits an awful sin against Masonry and in the sight of God, if he closes his workshops or factories, or ceases to work his mines, when they do not yield him what he regards as sufficient profit, and so dismisses his workmen and workwomen to starve; or when he reduces the wages of man or woman to so low a standard that they and their families cannot be clothed and fed and comfortably housed; or by overwork must give him their blood and life in exchange for the pittance of their wages: and that his duty as a Mason and Brother peremptorily requires him to continue to employ those who else will be pinched with hunger and cold, or resort to theft and vice: and to pay them fair wages, though it may reduce or annul his profits or even eat into his capital; for God hath but loaned him his wealth, and made him His almoner and agent to invest it.

Except as mere symbols of the moral virtues and intellectual qualities, the tools and implements of Masonry belong exclusively to the first three Degrees. They also, however, serve to remind the Mason who has advanced further, that his new rank is based upon the humble labors of the symbolic Degrees, as they are improperly termed, inasmuch as all the Degrees are symbolic.

[p. 331]

Thus the Initiates are inspired with a just idea of Masonry, to-wit, that it is essentially WORK; both teaching and practising LABOR; and that it is altogether emblematic. Three kinds of work are necessary to the preservation and protection of man and society: manual labor, specially belonging to the three blue Degrees; labor in arms, symbolized by the Knightly or chivalric Degrees; and intellectual labor, belonging particularly to the Philosophical Degrees.

We have preserved and multiplied such emblems as have a true and profound meaning. We reject many of the old and senseless explanations. We have not reduced Masonry to a cold metaphysics that exiles everything belonging to the domain of the imagination. The ignorant, and those half-wise in reality, but over-wise in their own conceit, may assail our symbols with sarcasms; but they are nevertheless ingenious veils that cover the Truth, respected by all who know the means by which the heart of man is reached and his feelings enlisted. The Great Moralists often had recourse to allegories, in order to instruct men without repelling them. But we have been careful not to allow our emblems to be too obscure, so as to require farfetched and forced interpretations. In our days, and in the enlightened land in which we live, we do not need to wrap ourselves in veils so strange and impenetrable, as to prevent or hinder instruction instead of furthering it; or to induce the suspicion that we have concealed meanings which we communicate only to the most reliable adepts, because they are contrary to good order or the well-being of society.

The Duties of the Class of Instructors, that is, the Masons of the Degrees from the 4th to the 8th, inclusive, are, particularly, to perfect the younger Masons in the words, signs and tokens and other work of the Degrees they have received; to explain to them the meaning of the different emblems, and to expound the moral instruction which they convey. And upon their report of proficiency alone can their pupils be allowed to advance and receive an increase of wages.

The Directors of the Work, or those of the 9th, 10th, and 11th Degrees are to report to the Chapters upon the regularity, activity and proper direction of the work of bodies in the lower Degrees, and what is needed to be enacted for their prosperity and usefulness. In the Symbolic Lodges, they are particularly charged to stimulate the zeal of the workmen, to induce them to engage in

[p. 332]

new labors and enterprises for the good of Masonry, their country and mankind, and to give them fraternal advice when they fall short of their duty; or, in cases that require it, to invoke against them the rigor of Masonic law.

The Architects, or those of the 12th, 13th, and 14th, should be selected from none but Brothers well instructed in the preceding Degrees; zealous, and capable of discoursing upon that Masonry; illustrating it, and discussing the simple questions of moral philosophy. And one of them, at every communication, should be prepared with a lecture, communicating useful knowledge or giving good advice to the Brethren.

The Knights, of the 15th and 16th Degrees, wear the sword. They are bound to prevent and repair, as far as may be in their power, all injustice, both in the world and in Masonry; to protect the weak and to bring oppressors to justice. Their works and lectures must be in this spirit. They should inquire whether Masonry fulfills, as far as it ought and can, its principal purpose, which is to succor the unfortunate. That it may do so, they should prepare propositions to be offered in the Blue Lodges calculated to attain that end, to put an end to abuses, and to prevent or correct negligence. Those in the Lodges who have attained the rank of Knights, are most fit to be appointed Almoners, and charged to ascertain and make known who need and are entitled to the charity of the Order.

In the higher Degrees those only should be received who have sufficient reading and information to discuss the great questions of philosophy. From them the Orators of the Lodges should be selected, as well as those of the Councils and Chapters. They are charged to suggest such measures as are necessary to make Masonry entirely faithful to the spirit of its institution, both as to its charitable purposes, and the diffusion of light and knowledge; such as are needed to correct abuses that have crept in, and offences against the rules and general spirit of the Order; and such as will tend to make it, as it was meant to be, the great Teacher of Mankind.

As Master of a Lodge, Council, or Chapter, it will be your duty to impress upon the minds of your Brethren these views of the general plan and separate parts of the Ancient and Accepted Scottish Rite; of its spirit and design; its harmony and regularity; of the duties of the officers and members; and of the particular lessons intended to be taught by each Degree.

[p. 333]

Especially you are not to allow any assembly of the body over which you may preside, to close, without recalling to the minds of the Brethren the Masonic virtues and duties which are represented upon the Tracing Board of this Degree. That is an imperative duty. Forget not that, more than three thousand years ago, ZOROASTER said: "Be good, be kind, be humane, and charitable; love your fellows; console the afflicted; pardon those who have done you wrong." Nor that more than two thousand three hundred years ago CONFUCIUS repeated, also quoting the language of those who had lived before himself: "Love thy neighbor as thyself: Do not to others what thou wouldst not wish should be done to thyself: Forgive injuries. Forgive your enemy, be reconciled to him, give him assistance, invoke God in his behalf!"

Let not the morality of your Lodge be inferior to that of the Persian or the Chinese Philosopher.

Urge upon your Brethren the teaching and the unostentatious practice of the morality of the Lodge, without regard to times, places, religions, or peoples.

Urge them to love one another, to be devoted to one another, to be faithful to the country, the government, and the laws: for to serve the country is to pay a dear and sacred debt:

To respect all forms of worship, to tolerate all political and religious opinions; not to blame, and still less to condemn the religion of others: not to seek to make converts; but to be content if they have the religion of Socrates; a veneration for the Creator, the religion of good works, and grateful acknowledgment of God's blessings:

To fraternize with all men; to assist all who are unfortunate; and to cheerfully postpone their own interests to that of the Order:

To make it the constant rule of their lives, to think well, to speak well, and to act well:

To place the sage above the soldier, the noble, or the prince: and take the wise and good as their models:

To see that their professions and practice, their teachings and conduct, do always agree:

To make this also their motto: Do that which thou oughtest to do; let the result be what it will.

Such, my Brother, are some of the duties of that office which you have sought to be qualified to exercise. May you perform them well; and in so doing gain honor for yourself, and advance the great cause of Masonry, Humanity, and Progress.

     
Morals and Dogma, by Albert Pike, [1871], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 334]

  

XXI.

  

NOACHITE, OR PRUSSIAN KNIGHT.

You are especially charged in this Degree to be modest and humble, and not vain-glorious nor filled with self-conceit. Be not wiser in your own opinion than the Deity, nor find fault with His works, nor endeavor to improve upon what He has done. Be modest also in your intercourse with your fellows, and slow to entertain evil thoughts of them, and reluctant to ascribe to them evil intentions. A thousand presses, flooding the country with their evanescent leaves, are busily and incessantly engaged in maligning the motives and conduct of men and parties, and in making one man think worse of another; while, alas, scarcely one is found that ever, even accidentally, labors to make man think better of his fellow.

Slander and calumny were never so insolently licentious in any country as they are this day in ours. The most retiring disposition, the most unobtrusive demeanor, is no shield against their poisoned arrows. The most eminent public service only makes their vituperation and invective more eager and more unscrupulous, when he who has done such service presents himself as a candidate for the people's suffrages.

The evil is wide-spread and universal. No man, no woman, no household, is sacred or safe from this new Inquisition. No act is so pure or so praiseworthy, that the unscrupulous vender of lies who lives by pandering to a corrupt and morbid public appetite will not proclaim it as a crime. No motive is so innocent or so laudable, that he will not hold it up as villainy. Journalism pries into the interior of private houses, gloats over the details of domestic tragedies of sin and shame, and deliberately invents and industriously circulates the most unmitigated and baseless falsehoods, to coin money for those who pursue it as a trade, or to effect a temporary result in the wars of faction.

We need not enlarge upon these evils. They are apparent to all and lamented over by all, and it is the duty of a Mason to do all

[p. 335]

in his power to lessen, if not to remove them. With the errors and even sins of other men, that do not personally affect us or ours, and need not our condemnation to be odious, we have nothing to do; and the journalist has no patent that makes him the Censor of Morals. There is no obligation resting on us to trumpet forth our disapproval of every wrongful or injudicious or improper act that every other man commits. One would be ashamed to stand on the street corners and retail them orally for pennies.

One ought, in truth, to write or speak against no other one in this world. Each man in it has enough to do, to watch and keep guard over himself. Each of us is sick enough in this great Lazaretto: and journalism and polemical writing constantly re-mind us of a scene once witnessed in a little hospital; where it was horrible to hear how the patients mockingly reproached each other with their disorders and infirmities: how one, who was wasted by consumption, jeered at another who was bloated by dropsy: how one laughed at another's cancer of the face; and this one again at his neighbor's lock-jaw or squint; until at last the delirious fever-patient sprang out of his bed, and tore away the coverings from the wounded bodies of his companions, and nothing was to be seen but hideous misery and mutilation. Such is the revolting work in which journalism and political partisanship, and half the world outside of Masonry, are engaged.

Very generally, the censure bestowed upon men's acts, by those who have appointed and commissioned themselves Keepers of the Public Morals, is undeserved. Often it is not only undeserved, but praise is deserved instead of censure, and, when the latter is not undeserved, it is always extravagant, and therefore unjust.

A Mason will wonder what spirit they are endowed withal, that can basely libel at a man, even, that is fallen. If they had any nobility of soul, they would with him condole his disasters, and drop some tears in pity of his folly and wretchedness: and if they were merely human and not brutal, Nature did grievous wrong to human bodies, to curse them with souls so cruel as to strive to add to a wretchedness already intolerable. When a Mason hears of any man that hath fallen into public disgrace, he should have a mind to commiserate his mishap, and not to make him more disconsolate. To envenom a name by libels, that already is openly tainted, is to add stripes with an iron rod to one that is flayed with

[p. 336]

whipping; and to every well-tempered mind will seem most in-human and unmanly.

Even the man who does wrong and commits errors often has a quiet home, a fireside of his own, a gentle, loving wife and innocent children, who perhaps do not know of his past errors and lapses--past and long repented of; or if they do, they love him the better, because, being mortal, he hath erred, and being in the image of God, he hath repented. That every blow at this husband and father lacerates the pure and tender bosoms of that wife and those daughters, is a consideration that doth not stay the hand of the brutal journalist and partisan: but he strikes home at these shrinking, quivering, innocent, tender bosoms; and then goes out upon the great arteries of cities, where the current of life pulsates, and holds his head erect, and calls on his fellows to laud him and admire him, for the chivalric act he hath done, in striking his dagger through one heart into another tender and trusting one.

If you seek for high and strained carriages, you shall, for the most part, meet with them in low men. Arrogance is a weed that ever grows on a dunghill. It is from the rankness of that soil that she hath her height and spreadings. To be modest and unaffected with our superiors is duty; with our equals, courtesy; with our inferiors, nobleness. There is no arrogance so great as the proclaiming of other men's errors and faults, by those who understand nothing but the dregs of actions, and who make it their business to besmear deserving fames. Public reproof is like striking a deer in the herd: it not only wounds him, to the loss of blood, but betrays him to the hound, his enemy.

The occupation of the spy hath ever been held' dishonorable, and it is none the less so, now that with rare exceptions editors and partisans have become perpetual spies upon the actions of other men. Their malice makes them nimble-eyed, apt to note a fault and publish it, and, with a strained construction, to deprave even those things in which the doer's intents were honest. Like the crocodile, they slime the way of others, to make them fall; and when that has happened, they feed their insulting envy on the life-blood of the prostrate. They set the vices of other men on high, for the gaze of the world, and place their virtues under-ground, that none may note them. If they cannot wound upon proofs, they will do it upon likelihoods: and if not upon them, they

[p. 337]

manufacture lies, as God created the world, out of nothing; and so corrupt the fair tempter of men's reputations; knowing that the multitude will believe them, because affirmations are apter to win belief, than negatives to uncredit them; and that a lie travels faster than an eagle flies, while the contradiction limps after it at a snail's pace, and, halting, never overtakes it. Nay, it is contrary to the morality of journalism, to allow a lie to be contradicted in the place that spawned it. And even if that great favor is conceded, a slander once raised will scarce ever die, or fail of finding many that will allow it both a harbor and trust.

This is, beyond any other, the age of falsehood. Once, to be suspected of equivocation was enough to soil a gentleman's escutcheon; but now it has become a strange merit in a partisan or statesman, always and scrupulously to tell the truth. Lies are part of the regular ammunition of all campaigns and controversies, valued according as they are profitable and effective; and are stored up and have a; market price, like saltpetre and sulphur; being even more deadly than they.

If men weighed the imperfections of humanity, they would breathe less condemnation. Ignorance gives disparagement a louder tongue than knowledge does. Wise men had rather know, than tell. Frequent dispraises are but the faults of uncharitable wit: and it is from where there is no judgment, that the heaviest judgment comes; for self-examination would make all judgments charitable. If we even do know vices in men, we can scarce show ourselves in a nobler virtue than in the charity of concealing them: if that be not a flattery persuading to continuance. And it is the basest office man can fall into, to make his tongue the defamer of the worthy man..

There is but one rule for the Mason in this matter. If there be virtues, and he is called upon to speak of him who owns them, let him tell them forth impartially. And if there be vices mixed with them, let him be content the world shall know them by some other tongue than his. For if the evil-doer deserve no pity, his wife, his parents, or his children, or other innocent persons who love him may; and the bravo's trade, practised by him who stabs the defenceless for a price paid by individual or party, is really no more respectable now than it was a hundred years ago, in Venice. Where we want experience, Charity bids us think the best, and leave what we know not to the Searcher of Hearts; for mistakes,

[p. 338]

suspicions, and envy often injure a clear fame; and there is least danger in a charitable construction.

And, finally, the Mason should be humble and modest toward the Grand Architect of the Universe, and not impugn His Wisdom, nor set up his own imperfect sense of Right against His Providence and dispensations, nor attempt too rashly to explore the Mysteries of God's Infinite Essence and inscrutable plans, and of that Great Nature which we are not made capable to understand.

Let him steer far away from all those vain philosophies, which endeavor to account for all that is, without admitting that there is a God, separate and apart from the Universe which is his work: which erect Universal Nature into a God, and worship it alone: which annihilate Spirit, and believe no testimony except that of the bodily senses: which, by logical formulas and dextrous collocation of words, make the actual, living, guiding, and protecting God fade into the dim mistiness of a mere abstraction and unreality, itself a mere logical formula.

Nor let him have any alliance with those theorists who chide the delays of Providence and busy themselves to hasten the slow march which it has imposed upon events: who neglect the practical, to struggle after impossibilities: who are wiser than Heaven; know the aims and purposes of the Deity, and can see a short and more direct means of attaining them, than it pleases Him to employ: who would have no discords in the great harmony of the Universe of things; but equal distribution of property, no subjection of one man to the will of another, no compulsory labor, and still no starvation, nor destitution, nor pauperism.

Let him not spend his life, as they do, in building a new Tower of Babel; in attempting to change that which is fixed by an in-flexible law of God's enactment: but let him, yielding to the Superior Wisdom of Providence, content to believe that the march of events is rightly ordered by an Infinite Wisdom, and leads, though we cannot see it, to a great and perfect result,--let him be satisfied to follow the path pointed out by that Providence, and to labor for the good of the human race in that mode in which God has chosen to enact that that good shall be effected: and above all, let him build no Tower of Babel, under the belief that by ascending he will mount so high that God will disappear or be superseded by a great monstrous aggregate of material forces, or mere glittering, logical formula; but, evermore, standing humbly

[p. 339]

and reverently upon the earth and looking with awe and confidence toward Heaven, let him be satisfied that there is a real God; a person, and not a formula; a Father and a protector, who loves, and sympathizes, and compassionates; and that the eternal ways by which He rules the world are infinitely wise, no matter how far they may be above the feeble comprehension and limited vision of man.

 

     
Morals and Dogma, by Albert Pike, [1871], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 340]

  

XXII.

  

KNIGHT OF THE ROYAL AXE OR PRINCE OF LIBANUS.

SYMPATHY with the great laboring classes, respect for labor itself, and resolution to do some good work in our day and generation, these are the lessons of this Degree, and they are purely Masonic. Masonry has made a working-man and his associates the Heroes of her principal legend, and himself the companion of Kings. The idea is as simple and true as it is sublime. From first to last, Masonry is work. It venerates the Grand Architect of the Universe. It commemorates the building of a Temple. Its principal emblems are the working tools of Masons and Artisans. It preserves the name of the first worker in brass and iron as one of its pass-words. When the Brethren meet together, they are at labor. The Master is the overseer who sets the craft to work and gives them proper instruction. Masonry is the apotheosis of WORK.

It is the hands of brave, forgotten men that have made this great, populous, cultivated world a world for us. It is all work, and forgotten work. The real conquerors, creators, and eternal proprietors of every great and civilized land are all the heroic souls that ever were in it, each in his degree: all the men that ever felled a forest-tree or drained a marsh, or contrived a wise scheme, or did or said a true or valiant thing therein. Genuine work alone, done faithfully, is eternal, even as the Almighty Founder and World-builder Himself. All work is noble: a life of ease is not for any man, nor for any God. The Almighty Maker is not like one who, in old immemorial ages, having made his machine of a Universe, sits ever since, and sees it go. Out of that belief comes Atheism. The faith in an Invisible, , Directing Deity, present everywhere in all that we see, and work, and suffer, is the essence of all faith whatsoever.

The life of all Gods figures itself to us as a Sublime Earnestness,--of

[p. 341]

[paragraph continues] Infinite battle against Infinite labor Our highest religion is named the Worship of Sorrow. For the Son of Man there is no noble crown, well-worn, or even ill-worn, but is a crown of thorns. Man's highest destiny is not to be happy, to love pleasant things and find them. His only true unhappiness should be that he cannot work, and get his destiny as a man fulfilled. The day passes swiftly over, our life passes swiftly over, and the night cometh, wherein no man can work. That night once come, our happiness and unhappiness are vanished, and become as things that never were. But our work is not abolished, and has not vanished. It remains, or the want of it remains, for endless Times and Eternities.

Whatsoever of morality and intelligence; what of , perseverance, faithfulness, of method, insight, ingenuity, energy; in a word, whatsoever of STRENGTH a man has in him, will lie written in the WORK he does. To work is to try himself against Nature and her unerring, everlasting laws: and they will return true verdict as to him. The noblest Epic is a mighty Empire slowly built together, a mighty series of heroic deeds, a mighty conquest over chaos. Deeds are greater than words. They have a life, mute, but undeniable; and grow. They people the vacuity of Time, and make it green and worthy.

Labor is the truest emblem of God, the Architect and Eternal Maker; noble Labor, which is yet to be the King of this Earth, and sit on the highest Throne. Men without duties to do, are like trees planted on precipices; from the roots of which all the earth has crumbled. Nature owns no man who is not also a Martyr. She scorns the man who sits screened from all work, from want, danger, hardship, the victory over which is work; and has all his work and battling done by other men; and yet there are men who pride themselves that they and theirs have done no work time out of mind. So neither have the swine.

The chief of men is he who stands in the van of men, fronting the peril which frightens back all others, and if not vanquished would devour them. Hercules was worshipped for twelve labors. The Czar of Russia became a toiling shipwright, and worked with his axe in the docks of Saardam; and something came of that. Cromwell worked, and Napoleon; and effected somewhat.

There is a perennial nobleness and even sacredness in work. Be he never so benighted and forgetful of his high calling, there is

[p. 342]

always hope in a man who actually and earnestly works: in Idleness alone is there perpetual Despair. Man perfects himself by working. Jungles are cleared away. Fair seed-fields rise instead, and stately cities; and withal, the man himself first ceases to be a foul unwholesome jungle and desert thereby. Even in the meanest sort of labor, the whole soul of man is composed into a kind of real harmony, the moment he begins to work. Doubt, Desire, Sorrow, Remorse, Indignation, and even Despair shrink murmuring far off into their caves, whenever the man bends himself resolutely against his task. Labor is life. From the inmost heart of the worker rises his God-given Force, the Sacred Celestial Life-essence, breathed into him by Almighty God; and awakens him to all nobleness, as soon as work fitly begins. By it man learns Patience, Courage, Perseverance, Openness to light, readiness to own himself mistaken, resolution to do better and improve. Only by labor will man continually learn the virtues. There is no Religion in stagnation and inaction; but only in activity and exertion. There was the deepest truth in that saying of the old monks, "laborare est orare." "He prayeth best who loveth best all things both great and small;" and can man love except by working earnestly to benefit that being whom he loves?

"Work; and therein have well-being," is the oldest of Gospels; unpreached, inarticulate, but ineradicable, and enduring forever. To make Disorder, wherever found, an eternal enemy; to attack and subdue him, and make order of him, the subject not of Chaos, but of Intelligence and Divinity, and of ourselves; to attack ignorance, stupidity and brute-mindedness, wherever found, to smite it wisely and unweariedly, to rest not while we live and it lives, in the name of God, this is our duty as Masons; commanded us by the Highest God. Even He, with his unspoken voice, more awful than the thunders of Sinai, or the syllabled speech of the Hurricane, speaks to us. The Unborn Ages; the old Graves, with their long-moldering dust speak to us. The deep Death-Kingdoms, the Stars in their never-resting course, all Space and all Time, silently and continually admonish us that we too must work while it is called to-day. Labor, wide as the Earth, has its summit in Heaven. To toil, whether with the sweat of the brow, or of the brain or heart, is worship,--the noblest thing yet discovered beneath the Stars. Let the weary cease to think that labor is a curse and doom pronounced by Deity, Without it there could be no true

[p. 343]

excellence in human nature. Without it, and pain, and sorrow, where would be the human virtues? Where Patience, Perseverance, Submission, Energy, Endurance, Fortitude, Bravery, Disinterestedness, Self-Sacrifice, the noblest excellencies of the Soul?

Let him who toils complain not, nor feel humiliated! Let him look up, and see his fellow-workmen there, in God's Eternity; they alone surviving there. Even in the weak human memory they long survive, as Saints, as Heroes, and as Gods: they alone survive, and people the unmeasured solitudes of Time.

To the primeval man, whatsoever good came, descended on him (as in mere fact, it ever does) direct from God; whatsoever duty lay visible for him, this a Supreme God had prescribed. For the primeval man, in whom dwelt Thought, this Universe was all a Temple, life everywhere a Worship.

Duty is with us ever; and evermore forbids us to be idle. To work with the hands or brain, according to our requirements and our capacities, to do that which lies before us to do, is more honorable than rank and title. Ploughers, spinners and builders, inventors, and men of science, poets, advocates, and writers, all stand upon one common level, and form one grand, innumerable host, marching ever onward since the beginning of the world: each entitled to our sympathy and respect, each a man and our brother.

It was well to give the earth to man as a dark mass, whereon to labor. It was well to provide rude and unsightly materials in the ore-bed and the forest, for him to fashion into splendor and beauty. It was well, not because of that splendor and beauty; but because the act creating them is better than the things themselves; because exertion is nobler than enjoyment; because the laborer is greater and more worthy of honor than the idler. Masonry stands up for the nobility of labor. It is Heaven's great ordinance for human improvement. It has been broken down for ages; and Masonry desires to build it up again. It has been broken down, because men toil only because they must, submitting to it as, in some sort, a degrading necessity; and desiring nothing so much on earth as to escape from it. They fulfill the great law of labor in the letter, but break it in the spirit,: they fulfill it with the muscles, but break it with the mind.

Masonry teaches that every idler ought to hasten to some field of labor, manual or mental, as a chosen and coveted theatre of improvement; but he is not impelled to do so, under the teachings

[p. 344]

of an imperfect civilization. On the contrary, he sits down, folds his hands, and blesses and glorifies himself in his idleness. It is time that this opprobrium of toil were done away. To be ashamed of toil; of the dingy workshop and dusty labor-field; of the hard hand, stained with service more honorable than that of war; of the soiled and weather-stained garments, on which Mother Nature has stamped, midst sun and rain, midst fire and steam, her own heraldic honors; to be ashamed of these tokens and titles, and envious of the flaunting robes of imbecile idleness and vanity, is treason to Nature, impiety to Heaven, a breach of Heaven's great Ordinance. TOIL, of brain, heart, or hand, is the only true man-hood and genuine nobility.

Labor is a more beneficent ministration than man's ignorance comprehends, or his complainings will admit. Even when its end is hidden from him, it is not mere blind drudgery. It is all a training, a discipline, a development of energies, a nurse of virtues, a school of improvement. From the poor boy who gathers a few sticks for his mother's hearth, to the strong man who fells the oak or guides the ship or the steam-car, every human toiler, with every weary step and every urgent task, is obeying a wisdom far above his own wisdom, and fulfilling a design far beyond his own design.

The great law of human industry is this: that industry, working either with the hand or the mind, the application of our powers to some task, to the achievement of some result, lies at the foundation of all human improvement. We are not sent into the world like animals, to crop the spontaneous herbage of the field, and then to lie down in indolent repose: but we are sent to dig the soil and plough the sea; to do the business of cities and the work of manufactories. The world is the great and appointed school of industry. In an artificial state of society, mankind is divided into the idle and the laboring classes; but such was not the design of Providence.

Labor is man's great function, his peculiar distinction and his privilege. From being an animal, that eats and drinks and sleeps only, to become a worker, and with the hand of ingenuity to pour his own thoughts into the moulds of Nature, fashioning them into forms of grace and fabrics of convenience, and converting them to purposes of improvement and happiness, is the greatest possible step in privilege.

The Earth and the Atmosphere are man's laboratory. With

[p. 345]

spade and plough, with mining-shafts and furnaces and forges, with fire and steam; midst the noise and whirl of swift and bright machinery, and abroad in the silent fields, man was made to be ever working, ever experimenting. And while he and all his dwellings of care and toil are borne onward with the circling skies, and the splendors of Heaven are around him, and their infinite depths image and invite his thought, still in all the worlds of philosophy, in the universe of intellect, man must be a worker. He is nothing, he can be nothing, can achieve nothing, fulfill nothing, without working. Without it, he can gain neither lofty improvement nor tolerable happiness. The idle must hunt down the hours as their prey. To them Time is an enemy, clothed with armor; and they must kill him, or themselves die. It never yet did answer, and it never will answer, for any man to do nothing, to be exempt from all care and effort, to lounge, to walk, to ride, and to feast alone. No man can live in that way. God made a law against it: which no human power can annul, no human ingenuity evade.

The idea that a property is to be acquired in the course of ten or twenty years, which shall suffice for the rest of life; that by some prosperous traffic or grand speculation, all the labor of a whole life is to be accomplished in a brief portion of it; that by dexterous management, a large part of the term of human existence is to be exonerated from the cares of industry and self-denial, is founded upon a grave mistake, upon a misconception of the true nature and design of business, and of the conditions of human well-being. The desire of accumulation for the sake of securing a life of ease and gratification, of escaping from exertion and self-denial, is wholly wrong, though very common.

It is better for the Mason to live while he lives, and enjoy life as it passes: to live richer and die poorer. It is best of all for him to banish from the mind that empty dream of future indolence and indulgence; to address himself to the business of life, as the school of his earthly education; to settle it with himself now that independence, if he gains it, is not to give him exemption from employment. It is best for him to know, that, in order to be a happy man, he must always be a laborer, with the mind or the body, or with both: and that the reasonable exertion of his powers, bodily and mental, is not to be regarded as mere drudgery, but as a good discipline, a wise ordination, a training in this primary school of our being, for nobler endeavors, and spheres of higher activity hereafter.

[p. 346]

There are reasons why a Mason may lawfully and even earnestly desire a fortune. If he can fill some fine palace, itself a work of art, with the productions of lofty genius; if he can be the friend and helper of humble worth; if he can seek it out, where failing health or adverse fortune presses it hard, and soften or stay the bitter hours that are hastening it to madness or to the grave; if he can stand between the oppressor and his prey, and bid the fetter and the dungeon give up their victim; if he can build up great institutions of learning, and academies of art; if he can open fountains of knowledge for the people, and conduct its streams in the right channels; if he can do better for the poor than to bestow alms upon them--even to think of them, and devise plans for their elevation in knowledge and virtue, instead of forever opening the old reservoirs and resources for their improvidence; if he has sufficient heart and soul to do all this, or part of it; if wealth would be to him the handmaid of exertion, facilitating effort, and giving success to endeavor; then may he lawfully, and yet warily and modestly, desire it. But if it is to do nothing for him, but to minister ease and indulgence, and to place his children in the same bad school, then there is no reason why he should desire it.

What is there glorious in the world, that is not the product of labor, either of the body or of the mind? What is history, but its record? What are the treasures of genius and art, but its work? What are cultivated fields, but its toil? The busy marts, the rising cities, the enriched empires of the world are but the great treasure-houses of labor. The pyramids of Egypt, the castles and towers and temples of Europe, the buried cities of Italy and Mexico, the canals and railroads of Christendom, are but tracks, all round the world, of the mighty footsteps of labor. Without it antiquity would not have been. Without it, there would be no memory of the past, and no hope for the future.

Even utter indolence reposes on treasures that labor at some time gained and gathered. He that does nothing, and yet does not starve, has still his significance; for he is a standing proof that somebody has at some time worked. But not to such does Masonry do honor. It honors the Worker, the Toiler; him who produces and not alone consumes; him who puts forth his hand to add to the treasury of human comforts, and not alone to take away. It honors him who goes forth amid the struggling elements to fight his battle, and who shrinks not, with cowardly effeminacy, behind

[p. 347]

pillows of ease. It honors the strong muscle, and the manly nerve, and the resolute and brave heart, the sweating brow, and the toiling brain. It honors the great and beautiful offices of humanity, manhood's toil and woman's task; paternal industry and maternal watching and weariness; wisdom teaching and patience learning; the brow of care that presides over the State, and many-handed labor that toils in workshop, field, and study, beneath its mild and beneficent sway.

God has not made a world of rich men; but rather a world of poor men; or of men, at least, who must toil for a subsistence. That is, then, the best condition for man, and the grand sphere of human improvement. If the whole world could acquire wealth, (and one man is as much entitled to it as another, when he is born); if the present generation could lay up a complete provision for the next, as some men desire to do for their children; the world would be destroyed at a single blow. All industry would cease with the necessity for it; all improvement would stop with the demand for exertion; the dissipation of fortunes, the mischiefs of which are now countervailed by the healthful tone of society, would breed universal disease, and break out into universal license; and the world would sink, rotten as Herod, into the grave of its own loathsome vices.

Almost all the noblest things that have been achieved in the world, have been achieved by poor men; poor scholars, poor professional men, poor artisans and artists, poor philosophers, poets, and men of genius. A certain staidness and sobriety, a certain moderation and restraint, a certain pressure of circumstances, are good for man. His body was not made for luxuries. It sickens, sinks, and dies under them. His mind was not made for indulgence. It grows weak, effeminate, and dwarfish, under that condition. And he who pampers his body with luxuries and his mind with indulgence, bequeaths the consequences to the minds and bodies of his descendants, without the wealth which was their cause. For wealth, without a law of entail to help it, has always lacked the energy even to keep its own treasures. They drop from its imbecile hand. The third generation almost inevitably goes down the rolling wheel of fortune, and there learns the energy necessary to rise again, if it rises at all; heir, as it is, to the bodily diseases, and mental weaknesses, and the soul's vices of its ancestors, and not heir to their wealth. And yet we are, almost all of

[p. 348]

us, anxious to put our children, or to insure that our grandchildren shall be put, on this road to indulgence, luxury, vice, degradation, and ruin; this heirship of hereditary disease, soul malady, and mental leprosy.

If wealth were employed in promoting mental culture at home and works of philanthropy abroad; if it were multiplying studies of art, and building up institutions of learning around us; if it were in every way raising the intellectual character of the world, there could scarcely be too much of it. But if the utmost aim, effort, and ambition of wealth be, to procure rich furniture, and provide costly entertainments, and build luxurious houses, and minister to vanity, extravagance, and ostentation, there could scarcely be too little of it. To a certain extent it may laudably be the minister of elegancies and luxuries, and the servitor of hospitality and physical enjoyment: but just in proportion as its tendencies, divested of all higher aims and tastes, are running that way, they are running to peril and evil.

Nor does that peril attach to individuals and families alone. It stands, a fearful beacon, in the experience of Cities, Republics, and Empires. The lessons of past times, on this subject, are emphatic and solemn. The history of wealth has always been a history of corruption and downfall. The people never existed that could stand the trial. Boundless profusion is too little likely to spread for any people the theatre of manly energy, rigid self-denial, and lofty virtue. You do not look for the bone and sinew and strength of a country, its loftiest talents and virtues, its martyrs to patriotism or religion, its men to meet the days of peril and disaster, among the children of ease, indulgence, and luxury.

In the great march of the races of men over the earth, we have always seen opulence and luxury sinking before poverty and toil and hardy nurture. That is the law which .has presided over the great processions of empire. Sidon and Tyre, whose merchants possessed the wealth of princes; Babylon and Palmyra, the seats of Asiatic luxury; Rome, laden with the spoils of a world, overwhelmed by her own vices more than by the hosts of her enemies; all these, and many more, are examples of the destructive tendencies of immense and unnatural accumulation: and men must become more generous and benevolent, not more selfish and effeminate, as they become more rich, or the history of modern wealth will follow in the sad train of all past examples.

[p. 349]

All men desire distinction, and feel the need of some ennobling object in life. Those persons are usually most happy and satisfied in their pursuits, who have the loftiest ends in view. Artists, mechanicians, and inventors, all who seek to find principles or develop beauty in their work, seem most to enjoy it. The farmer who labors for the beautifying and scientific cultivation of his estate, is more happy in his labors than one who tills his own land for a mere subsistence. This is one of the signal testimonies which all human employments give to the high demands of our nature. To gather wealth never gives such satisfaction as to bring the humblest piece of machinery to perfection: at least, when wealth is sought for display and ostentation, or mere luxury, and ease, and pleasure; and not for ends of philanthropy, the relief of kindred, or the payment of just debts, or as a means to attain some other great and noble object.

With the pursuits of multitudes is connected a painful conviction that they neither supply a sufficient object, nor confer any satisfactory honor. Why work, if the world is soon not to know that such a being ever existed; and when one can perpetuate his name neither on canvas nor on marble, nor in books, nor by lofty eloquence, nor statesmanship?

The answer is, that every man has a work to do in himself, greater and sublimer than any work of genius; and works upon a nobler material than wood or marble--upon his own soul and intellect, and may so attain the highest nobleness and grandeur known on earth or in Heaven; may so be the greatest of artists, and of authors, and his life, which is far more than speech, may be eloquent.

The great author or artist only portrays what every man should be. He conceives, what we should do. He conceives, and represents moral beauty, magnanimity, fortitude, love, devotion, forgiveness, the soul's greatness. He portrays virtues, commended to our admiration and imitation. To embody these portraitures in our lives is the practical realization of those great ideals of art. The magnanimity of Heroes, celebrated on the historic or poetic page; the constancy and faith of Truth's martyrs; the beauty of love and piety glowing on the canvas; the delineations of Truth and Right, that flash from the lips of the Eloquent, are, in their essence only that which every man may feel and practise in the daily walks of life. The work of virtue is nobler than any work of genius; for it is a nobler thing to be a hero than to describe one,

[p. 350]

to endure martyrdom than to paint it, to do right than to plead for it. Action is greater than writing. A good man is a nobler object of contemplation than a great author. There are but two things worth living for: to do what is worthy of being written; and to write what is worthy of being read; and the greater of these is the doing.

Every man has to do the noblest thing that any man can do or describe. There is a wide field for the courage, cheerfulness, energy, and dignity of human existence. Let therefore no Mason deem his life doomed to mediocrity or meanness, to vanity or unprofitable toil, or to any ends less than immortal. No one can truly say that the grand prizes of life are for others, and he can do nothing. No matter how magnificent and noble an act the author can describe or the artist paint, it will be still nobler for you to go and do that which one describes, or be the model which the other draws.

The loftiest action that ever was described is not more magnanimous than that which we may find occasion to do, in the daily walks of life; in temptation, in distress, in bereavement, in the solemn approach to death. In the great Providence of God, in the great ordinances of our being, there is opened to every man a sphere for the noblest action. It is not even in extraordinary situations, where all eyes are upon us, where all our energy is aroused, and all our vigilance is awake, that the highest efforts of virtue are usually demanded of us; but rather in silence and seclusion, amidst our occupations and our homes; in wearing sickness, that makes no complaint; in sorely-tried honesty, that asks no praise; in simple disinterestedness, hiding the hand that resigns its advantage to another.

Masonry seeks to ennoble common life. Its work is to go down into the obscure and unsearched records of daily conduct and feeling; and to portray, not the ordinary virtue of an extraordinary life; but the more extraordinary virtue of ordinary life. What is done and borne in the shades of privacy, in the hard and beaten path of daily care and toil, full of uncelebrated sacrifices; in the suffering, and sometimes insulted suffering, that wears to the world a cheerful brow; in the long strife of the spirit, resisting pain, penury, and neglect, carried on in the inmost depths of the heart;--what is done, and borne, and wrought, and won there, is a higher glory, and shall inherit a brighter crown.

On the volume of Masonic life one bright word is written, from

[p. 351]

which on every side blazes an ineffable splendor. That word is DUTY.

To aid in securing to all labor permanent employment and its just reward: to help to hasten the coming of that time when no one shall stiffer from hunger or destitution, because, though willing and able to work, he can find no employment, or because he has been overtaken by sickness in the midst of his labor, are part of your duties as a Knight of the Royal Axe. And if we can succeed in making some small nook of God's creation a little more fruitful and cheerful, a little better and more worthy of Him,--or in making some one or two human hearts a little wiser, and more manful and hopeful and happy, we shall have done work, worthy of Masons, and acceptable to our Father in Heaven.

 

     
Morals and Dogma, by Albert Pike, [1871], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 352]

  

XXIII.

  

CHIEF OF THE TABERNACLE.

AMONG most of the Ancient Nations there was, in addition to their public worship, a private one styled the Mysteries; to which those only were admitted who had been prepared by certain ceremonies called initiations.

The most widely disseminated of the ancient worships were those of Isis, Orpheus, Dionusos, Ceres and Mithras. Many barbarous nations received the knowledge of the Mysteries in honor of these divinities from the Egyptians, before they arrived in Greece; and even in the British Isles the Druids celebrated those of Dionusos, learned by them from the Egyptians.

The Mysteries of Eleusis, celebrated at Athens in honor of Ceres, swallowed up, as it were, all the others. All the neighboring nations neglected their own, to celebrate those of Eleusis; and in a little while all Greece and Asia Minor were filled with the Initiates. They spread into the Roman Empire, and even beyond its limits, "those holy and august Eleusinian Mysteries," said Cicero, "in which the people of the remotest lands are initiated." Zosimus says that they embraced the whole human race; and Aristides termed them the common temple of the whole world.

There were, in the Eleusinian feasts, two sorts of Mysteries, the great, and the little. The latter were a kind of preparation for the former; and everybody was admitted to them. Ordinarily there was a novitiate of three, and sometimes of four years.

Clemens of Alexandria says that what was taught in the great Mysteries concerned the Universe, and was the completion and perfection of all instruction; wherein things were seen as they were, and nature and her works were made known.

The ancients said that the Initiates would be more happy after death than other mortals; and that, while the souls of the Profane on leaving their bodies, would be plunged in the mire, and remain buried in darkness, those of the Initiates would fly to the Fortunate Isles, the abode of the Gods.

[p. 353]

Plato said that the object of the Mysteries was to re-establish the soul in its primitive purity, and in that state of perfection which it had lost. Epictetus said, "whatever is met with therein has been instituted by our Masters, for the instruction of man and the correction of morals."

Proclus held that initiation elevated the soul, from a material, sensual, and purely human life, to a communion and celestial intercourse with the Gods; and that a variety of things, forms, and species were shown Initiates, representing the first generation of the Gods.

Purity of morals and elevation of soul were required of the Initiates. Candidates were required to be of spotless reputation and irreproachable virtue. Nero, after murdering his mother, did not dare to be present at the celebration of the Mysteries: and Antony presented himself to be initiated, as the most infallible mode of proving his innocence of the death of Avidius Cassius.

The Initiates were regarded as the only fortunate men. "It is upon us alone," says Aristophanes, "shineth the beneficent day-star. We alone receive pleasure from the influence of his rays; we, who are initiated, and who practise toward citizen and stranger every possible act of justice and piety." And it is therefore not surprising that, in time, initiation came to be considered as necessary as baptism afterward was to the Christians; and that not to have been admitted to the Mysteries was held a dishonor.

"It seems to me," says the great orator, philosopher, and moralist, Cicero, "that Athens, among many excellent inventions, divine and very useful to the human family, has produced none comparable to the Mysteries, which for a wild and ferocious life have substituted humanity and urbanity of manners. It is with good reason they use the term initiation; for it is through them that we in reality have learned the first principles of life; and they not only teach us to live in a manner more consoling and agreeable, but they soften the pains of death by the hope of a better life hereafter."

Where the Mysteries originated is not known. It is supposed that they came from India, by the way of Chaldaea, into Egypt, and thence were carried into Greece. Wherever they arose, they were practised among all the ancient nations; and, as was usual, the Thracians, Cretans, and Athenians each claimed the honor of

[p. 354]

invention, and each insisted that they had borrowed nothing from any other people.

In Egypt and the East, all religion, even in its most poetical forms, was more or less a mystery; and the chief reason why, in Greece, a distinct name and office were assigned to the Mysteries, was because the superficial popular theology left a want unsatisfied, which religion in a wider sense alone could supply. They were practical acknowledgments of the insufficiency of the popular religion to satisfy the deeper thoughts and aspirations of the mind. The vagueness of symbolism might perhaps reach what a more palpable and conventional creed could not. The former, by its indefiniteness, acknowledged the abstruseness of its subject; it treated a mysterious subject mystically; it endeavored to illustrate what it could not explain; to excite an appropriate feeling, if it could not develop an adequate idea; and made the image a mere subordinate conveyance for the conception, which itself never became too obvious or familiar.

The instruction now conveyed by books and letters was of old conveyed by symbols; and the priest had to invent or to perpetuate a display of rites and exhibitions, which were not only more attractive to the eye than words, but often to the mind more suggestive and pregnant with meaning.

Afterward, the institution became rather moral and political, than religious. The civil magistrates shaped the ceremonies to political ends in Egypt; the sages who carried them from that country to Asia, Greece, and the North of Europe, were all kings or legislators. The chief magistrate presided at those of Eleusis, represented by an officer styled King: and the Priest played but a subordinate part.

The Powers revered in the Mysteries were all in reality Nature-Gods; none of whom could be consistently addressed as mere heroes, because their nature was confessedly super-heroic. The Mysteries, only in fact a more solemn expression of the religion of the ancient poetry, taught that doctrine of the Theocracia or Divine Oneness, which even poetry does not entirely conceal. They were not in any open hostility with the popular religion,. but only a more solemn exhibition of its symbols; or rather a part of itself in a more impressive form. The essence of all Mysteries, as of all polytheism, consists in this, that the conception of an unapproachable Being, single, eternal, and unchanging, and, that

[p. 355]

of a God of Nature, whose manifold power is immediately revealed to the senses in the incessant round of movement, life, and death, fell asunder in the treatment, and were separately symbolized. They offered a perpetual problem to excite curiosity, and contributed to satisfy the all-pervading religious sentiment, which if it obtain no nourishment among the simple and intelligible, finds compensating excitement in a reverential contemplation of the obscure.

Nature is as free from dogmatism as from tyranny; and the earliest instructors of mankind not only adopted her lessons, but as far as possible adhered to her method of imparting them. They attempted to reach the understanding through the eye; and the greater part of all religious teaching was conveyed through this ancient and most impressive mode of "exhibition" or demonstration. The Mysteries were a sacred drama, exhibiting some legend significant of Nature's change, of the visible Universe in which the divinity is revealed, and whose import was in many respects as open to the Pagan, as to the Christian. Beyond the current traditions or sacred recitals of the temple, few explanations were given to the spectators, who were left, as in the school of nature, to make inferences for themselves.

The method of indirect suggestion, by allegory or symbol, is a more efficacious instrument of instruction than plain didactic language; since we are habitually indifferent to that which is acquired without effort: "The initiated are few, though many bear the thyrsus." And it would have been impossible to provide a lesson suited to every degree of cultivation and capacity, unless it were one framed after Nature's example, or rather a representation of Nature herself, employing her universal symbolism instead of technicalities of language, inviting endless research, yet rewarding the humblest inquirer, and disclosing its secrets to every one in proportion to his preparatory training and power to comprehend them.

Even if destitute of any formal or official enunciation of those important truths, which even in a cultivated age it was often found inexpedient to assert except under a veil of allegory, and which moreover lose their dignity and value in proportion as they are learned mechanically as dogmas, the shows of the Mysteries certainly contained suggestions if not lessons, which in the opinion not of one competent witness only, but of many, were adapted to elevate the character of the spectators. enabling them to augur

[p. 356]

something of the purposes of existence, as well as of the means of improving it, to live better and to die happier.

Unlike the religion of books or creeds, these mystic shows and performances were not the reading of a lecture, but the opening of a problem, implying neither exemption from research, nor hostility to philosophy: for, on the contrary, philosophy is the great Mystagogue or Arch-Expounder of symbolism: though the interpretations by the Grecian Philosophy of the old myths and symbols were in many instances as ill-founded, as in others they are correct.

No better means could be devised to rouse a dormant intellect, than those impressive exhibitions, which addressed it through the imagination: which, instead of condemning it to a prescribed routine of creed, invited it to seek, compare, and judge. The alteration from symbol to dogma is as fatal to beauty of expression, as that from faith to dogma is to truth and wholesomeness of thought.

The first philosophy often reverted to the natural mode of teaching; and Socrates, in particular, is said to have eschewed dogmas, endeavoring, like the Mysteries, rather to awaken and develop in the minds of his hearers the ideas with which they were already endowed or pregnant, than to fill them with ready-made adventitious opinions.

So Masonry still follows the ancient manner of teaching. Her symbols are the instruction she gives; and the lectures are but often partial and insufficient one-sided endeavors to interpret those symbols. He who would become an accomplished Mason, must not be content merely to hear or even to understand the lectures, but must, aided by them, and they having as it were marked out the way for him, study, interpret, and develop the symbols for himself.

The earliest speculation endeavored to express far more than it could distinctly comprehend; and the vague impressions of the mind found in the mysterious analogies of phenomena their most apt and energetic representations. The Mysteries, like the symbols of Masonry, were but an image of the eloquent analogies of Nature; both those and these revealing no new secret to such as were or are unprepared, or incapable of interpreting their significance.

Everywhere in the old Mysteries, and in all the symbolisms and ceremonial of the Hierophant was found the same mythical personage, who, like Hermes, or Zoroaster, unites Human Attributes

[p. 357]

with Divine, and is himself the God whose worship he introduced, teaching rude men the commencements of civilization through the influence of song, and connecting with the symbol of his death, emblematic of that of Nature, the most essential consolations of religion.

The Mysteries embraced the three great doctrines of Ancient Theosophy. They treated of God, Man, and Nature. Dionusos, whose Mysteries Orpheus is said to have founded, was the God of Nature, or of the moisture which is the life of Nature, who prepares in darkness the return of life and vegetation, or who is himself the Light and Change evolving their varieties. He was theologically one with Hermes, Prometheus, and Poseidon. In the Egean Islands he is Butes, Dardanus, Himeros, or Imbros. In Crete he appears as Iasius or Zeus, whose worship remaining unveiled by the usual forms of mystery, betrayed to profane curiosity the symbols, which, if irreverently contemplated, were sure to be misunderstood. In Asia he is the long-stoled Bassareus coalescing with the Sabazius of the Phrygian Corybantes: the same with the mystic Iacchus, nursling or son of Ceres, and with the dismembered Zagreus, son of Persephone.

In symbolical forms the Mysteries exhibited THE ONE, of which THE MANIFOLD is an infinite illustration, containing a moral lesson, calculated to guide the soul through life, and to cheer it in death. The story of Dionusos was profoundly significant. He was not only creator of the world, but guardian, liberator, and Savior of the soul. God of the many-colored mantle, he was the resulting manifestation personified, the all in the many, the varied year, life passing into innumerable forms.

The spiritual regeneration of man was typified in the Mysteries by the second birth of Dionusos as offspring of the Highest; and the agents and symbols of that regeneration were the elements that affected Nature's periodical purification--the air, indicated by the mystic fan or winnow; the fire, signified by the torch; and the baptismal water, for water is not only cleanser of all things, but the genesis or source of all.

These notions, clothed in ritual, suggested the soul's reformation and training, the moral purity formally proclaimed at Eleusis. He only was invited to approach, who was "of clean hands and ingenuous speech, free from all pollution, and with a clear conscience." "Happy the man," say the initiated in Euripides and

[p. 358]

[paragraph continues] Aristophanes, "who purifies his life, and who reverently consecrates his soul in the thia^sos of the God. Let him take heed to his lips that he utter no profane word; let him be just and kind to the stranger, and to his neighbor; let him give way to no vicious excess, lest he make dull and heavy the organs of the spirit. Far from the mystic dance of the thia^sos be the impure, the evil speaker, the seditious citizen, the selfish hunter after gain, the traitor; all those, in short, whose practices are more akin to the riot of Titans than to the regulated life of the Orphici, or the Curetan order of the Priests of Idaean Zeus."

The votary, elevated beyond the sphere of his ordinary faculties, and unable to account for the agitation which overpowered him, seemed to become divine in proportion as he ceased to be human; to be a daemon or god. Already, in imagination, the initiated were numbered among the beatified. They alone enjoyed the true life, the Sun's true lustre, while they hymned their God beneath the mystic groves of a mimic Elysium, and were really renovated or regenerated under the genial influence of their dances.

"They whom Proserpina guides in her mysteries," it was said, "who imbibed her instruction and spiritual nourishment, rest from their labors and know strife no more. Happy they who witness and comprehend these sacred ceremonies! They are made to know the meaning of the riddle of existence by observing its aim and termination as appointed by Zeus; they partake a benefit more valuable and enduring than the grain bestowed by Ceres; for they are exalted in the scale of intellectual existence, and obtain sweet hopes to console them at their death."

No doubt the ceremonies of initiation were originally few and simple. As the great truths of the primitive revelation faded out of the memories of the masses of the People, and wickedness became rife upon the earth, it became necessary to discriminate, to require longer probation and satisfactory tests of the candidates, and by spreading around what at first were rather schools of instruction than mysteries, the veil of secrecy, and the pomp of ceremony, to heighten the opinion of their value and importance.

Whatever pictures later and especially Christian writers may draw of the Mysteries, they must, not only originally, but for many ages, have continued pure; and the doctrines of natural religion and morals there taught, have been of the highest importance;

[p. 359]

because both the most virtuous as well as the most learned and philosophic of the ancients speak of them in the loftiest terms. That they ultimately became degraded from their high estate, and corrupted, we know.

The rites of initiation became progressively more complicated. Signs and tokens were invented by which the Children of Light could with facility make themselves known to each other. Different Degrees were invented, as the number of Initiates enlarged, in order that there might be in the inner apartment of the Temple a favored few, to whom alone the more valuable secrets were entrusted, and who could wield effectually the influence and power of the Order.

Originally the Mysteries were meant to be the beginning of a new life of reason and virtue. The initiated or esoteric companions were taught the doctrine of the One Supreme God, the theory of death and eternity, the hidden mysteries of Nature, the prospect of the ultimate restoration of the soul to that state of perfection from which it had fallen, its immortality, and the states of reward and punishment after death. The uninitiated were deemed Profane, unworthy of public employment or private confidence, sometimes proscribed as Atheists, and certain of ever-lasting punishment beyond the grave.

All persons were initiated into the lesser Mysteries; but few attained the greater, in which the true spirit of them, and most of their secret doctrines were hidden. The veil of secrecy was impenetrable, sealed by oaths and penalties the most tremendous and appalling. It was by initiation only, that a knowledge of the Hieroglyphics could be obtained, with which the walls, columns, and ceilings of the Temples were decorated, and which, believed to have been communicated to the Priests by revelation from the celestial deities, the youth of all ranks were laudably ambitious of deciphering.

The ceremonies were performed at dead of night, generally in apartments under-ground, but sometimes in the centre of a vast pyramid, with every appliance that could alarm and excite the candidate. Innumerable ceremonies, wild and romantic, dreadful and appalling, had by degrees been added to the few expressive symbols of primitive observances, under which there were instances in which the terrified aspirant actually expired with fear. The pyramids were probably used for the purposes of initiation,

[p. 360]

as were caverns, pagodas, and labyrinths; for the ceremonies required many apartments and cells, long passages and wells. In Egypt a principal place for the Mysteries was the island of Philae on the Nile, where a magnificent Temple of Osiris stood, and his relics were said to be preserved.

With their natural proclivities, the Priesthood, that select and exclusive class, in Egypt, India, Phoenicia, Judea and Greece, as well as in Britain and Rome, and wherever else the Mysteries were known, made use of them to build wider and higher the fabric of their own power. The purity of no religion continues long. Rank and dignities succeed to the primitive simplicity. Unprincipled, vain, insolent, corrupt, and venal men put on God's livery to serve the Devil withal; and luxury, vice, intolerance, and pride depose frugality, virtue, gentleness, and humility, and change the altar where they should be servants, to a throne on which they reign.

But the Kings, Philosophers, and Statesmen, the wise and great and good who were admitted to the Mysteries, long postponed their ultimate self-destruction, and restrained the natural tendencies of the Priesthood. And accordingly Zosimus thought that the neglect of the Mysteries after Diocletian abdicated, was the chief cause of the decline of the Roman Empire; and in the year 364, the Proconsul of Greece would not close the Mysteries, notwithstanding a law of the Emperor Valentinian, lest the people should be driven to desperation, if prevented from performing them; upon which, as they believed, the welfare of mankind wholly depended. They were practised in Athens until the 8th century, in Greece and Rome for several centuries after Christ; and in Wales and Scotland down to the 12th century.

The inhabitants of India originally practised the Patriarchal religion. Even the later worship of Vishnu was cheerful and social; accompanied with the festive song, the sprightly dance, and the resounding cymbal, with libations of milk and honey, garlands, and perfumes from aromatic woods and gums.

There perhaps the Mysteries commenced; and in them, under allegories, were taught the primitive truths. We cannot, within the limits of this lecture, detail the ceremonies of initiation; and shall use general language, except where something from those old Mysteries still remains in Masonry.

The Initiate was invested with a cord of three threads, so twined

[p. 361]

as to make three times three, and called zennar. Hence comes our cable-tow. It was an emblem of their tri-une Deity, the remembrance of whom we also preserve in the three chief officers of our Lodges, presiding in the three quarters of that Universe which our Lodges represent; in our three greater and three lesser lights, our three movable and three immovable jewels, and the three pillars that support our Lodges.

The Indian Mysteries were celebrated in subterranean caverns and grottos hewn in the solid rock; and the Initiates adored the Deity, symbolized by the solar fire. The candidate, long wandering in darkness, truly wanted Light, and the worship taught him was the worship of God, the Source of Light. The vast Temple of Elephanta, perhaps the oldest in the world, hewn out of the rock, and 135 feet square, was used for initiations; as were the still vaster caverns of Salsette, with their 300 apartments.

The periods of initiation were regulated by the increase and decrease of the moon. The Mysteries were divided into four steps or Degrees. The candidate might receive the first at eight years of age, when he was invested with the zennar. Each Degree dispensed something of perfection. "Let the wretched man," says the Hitopadesa, "practise virtue, whenever he enjoys one of the three or four religious Degrees; let him be even-minded with all created things, and that disposition will be the source of virtue."

After various ceremonies, chiefly relating to the unity and trinity of the Godhead, the candidate was clothed in a linen garment without a seam, and remained under the care of a Brahmin until he was twenty years of age, constantly studying and practising the most rigid virtue. Then he underwent the severest probation for the second Degree, in which he was sanctified by the sign of the cross, which, pointing to the four quarters of the compass, was honored as a striking symbol of the Universe by many nations of antiquity, and was imitated by the Indians in the shape of their temples.

Then he was admitted to the Holy Cavern, blazing with light, where, in costly robes, sat, in the East, West, and South, the three chief Hierophants, representing the Indian tri-une Deity. The ceremonies there commenced with an anthem to the Great God of Nature; and then followed this apostrophe: "O mighty Being! greater than Brahma! we bow down before Thee as the

[p. 362]

primal Creator! Eternal God of Gods! The World's Mansion! Thou art the Incorruptible Being, distinct from all things transient! Thou art before all Gods, the Ancient Absolute Existence, and the Supreme Supporter of the Universe! Thou art the Supreme Mansion; and by Thee, O Infinite Form, the Universe was spread abroad."

The candidate, thus taught the first great primitive truth, was called upon to make a formal declaration, that he would be tract-able and obedient to his superiors; that he would keep his body pure; govern his tongue, and observe a passive obedience in receiving the doctrines and traditions of the Order; and the firmest secrecy in maintaining inviolable its hidden and abstruse mysteries. Then he was sprinkled with water (whence our baptism); certain words, now unknown, were whispered in his ear; and he was divested of his shoes, and made to go three times around the cavern. Hence our three circuits; hence we were neither barefoot nor shod: and the words were the Pass-words of that Indian Degree.

The Gymnosophist Priests came from the banks of the Euphrates into Ethiopia, and brought with them their sciences and their doctrines. Their principal College was at Meroe, and their Mysteries were celebrated in the Temple of Amun, renowned for his oracle. Ethiopia was then a powerful State, which preceded Egypt in civilization, and had a theocratic government. Above the King was the Priest, who could put him to death in the name of the Deity. Egypt was then composed of the Thebaid only. Middle Egypt and the Delta were a gulf of the Mediterranean. The Nile by degrees formed an immense marsh, which, afterward drained by the labor of man, formed Lower Egypt; and was for many centuries governed by the Ethiopian Sacerdotal Caste, of Arabic origin; afterward displaced by a dynasty of warriors. The magnificent ruins of Axoum, with its obelisks and , temples, vast tombs and pyramids, around ancient Meroe, are far older than the pyramids near Memphis.

The Priests, taught by Hermes, embodied in books the occult and hermetic sciences, with their own discoveries and the revelations of the Sibyls. They studied particularly the most abstract sciences, discovered the famous geometrical theorems which Pythagoras afterward learned from them, calculated eclipses, and regulated, nineteen centuries before Caesar, the Julian year. They

[p. 363]

descended to practical investigations as to the necessities of life, and made known their discoveries to the people; they cultivated the fine arts, and inspired the people with that enthusiasm which produced the avenues of Thebes, the Labyrinth, the Temples of Karnac, Denderah, Edfou, and Philae, the monolithic obelisks, and the great Lake Moeris, the fertilizer of the country.

The wisdom of the Egyptian Initiates, the high sciences and lofty morality which they taught, and their immense knowledge, excited the emulation of the most eminent men, whatever their rank and fortune; and led them, despite the complicated and terrible trials to be undergone, to seek admission into the Mysteries of Osiris and Isis.

From Egypt, the Mysteries went to Phoenicia, and were celebrated at Tyre. Osiris changed his name, and become Adoni or Dionusos, still the representative of the Sun; and afterward these Mysteries were introduced successively into Assyria, Babylon, Persia, Greece, Sicily, and Italy. In Greece and Sicily, Osiris took the name of Bacchus, and Isis that of Ceres, Cybele, Rhea and Venus.

Bar Hebraeus says: "Enoch was the first who invented books and different sorts of writing. The ancient Greeks declare that Enoch is the same as Mercury Trismegistus [Hermes], and that he taught the sons of men the art of building cities, and enacted some admirable laws. . . He discovered the knowledge of the Zodiac, and the course of the Planets; and he pointed out to the sons of men, that they should worship God, that they should fast, that they should pray, that they should give alms, votive offerings, and tenths. He reprobated abominable foods and drunkenness, and appointed festivals for sacrifices to the Sun, at each of the Zodiacal Signs."

Manetho extracted his history from certain pillars which he discovered in Egypt, whereon inscriptions had been made by Thoth, or the first Mercury [or Hermes], in the sacred letters and dialect: but which were after the flood translated from that dialect into the Greek tongue, and laid up in the private recesses of the Egyptian Temples. These pillars were found in subterranean caverns, near Thebes and beyond the Nile, not far from the sounding statue of Memnon, in a place called Syringes; which are described to be certain winding apartments underground; made, it is said, by those who were skilled in ancient rites; who, foreseeing the coming of the Deluge, and fearing lest the memory of their ceremonies

[p. 364]

should be obliterated, built and contrived vaults, dug with vast labor, in several places.

From the bosom of Egypt sprang a man of consummate wisdom, initiated in the secret knowledge of India, of Persia, and of Ethiopia, named Thoth or Phtha by his compatriots, Taut by the Phoenicians, Hermes Trismegistus by the Greeks, and Adris by the Rabbins. Nature seemed to have chosen him for her favorite, and to have lavished on him all the qualities necessary to enable him to study her and to know her thoroughly. The Deity had, so to say, infused into him the sciences and the arts, in order that he might instruct the whole world.

He invented many things necessary for the uses of life, and gave them suitable names; he taught men how to write down their thoughts and arrange their speech; he instituted the ceremonies to be observed in the worship of each of the Gods; he observed the course of the stars; he invented music, the different bodily exercises, arithmetic, medicine, the art of working in metals, the lyre with three strings; he regulated the three tones of the voice, the sharp, taken from autumn, the grave from winter, and the middle from spring, there being then but three seasons. It was he who taught the Greeks the mode of interpreting terms and things, whence they gave him the name of Ermes [Hermes], which signifies Interpreter.

In Egypt he instituted hieroglyphics: he selected a certain number of persons whom he judged fitted to be the depositaries of his secrets, of such only as were capable of attaining the throne and the first offices in the Mysteries; he united them in a body, created them Priests of the Living God, instructed them in the sciences and arts, and explained to them the symbols by which they were veiled. Egypt, 1500 years before the time of Moses, revered in the Mysteries ONE SUPREME GOD, called the ONLY UNCREATED. Under Him it paid homage to seven principal deities. It is to Hermes, who lived at that period, that we must attribute the concealment or veiling [velation] of the Indian worship, which Moses unveiled or revealed, changing nothing of the laws of Hermes, except the plurality of his mystic Gods.

The Egyptian Priests related that Hermes, dying, said: "Hitherto I have lived an exile from my true country: now I return thither. Do not weep for me: I return to that celestial country whither each goes in his turn. There is God. This life is but a

[p. 365]

death." This is precisely the creed of the old Buddhists of Samaneans, who believed that from time to time God sent Buddhas on earth, to reform men, to wean them from their vices, and lead them back into the paths of virtue.

Among the sciences taught by Hermes, there were secrets which he communicated to the Initiates only upon condition that they should bind themselves, by a terrible oath, never to divulge them, except to those who, after long trial, should be found worthy to succeed them. The Kings even prohibited the revelation of them on pain of death. This secret was styled the Sacerdotal Art, and included alchemy, astrology, magism [magic], the science of spirits, etc. He gave them the key to the Hieroglyphics of all these secret sciences, which were regarded as sacred, and kept concealed in the most secret places of the Temple.

The great secrecy observed by the initiated Priests, for many years, and the lofty sciences which they professed, caused them to be honored and respected throughout all Egypt, which was regarded by other nations as the college, the sanctuary, of the sciences and arts. The mystery which surrounded them strongly excited curiosity. Orpheus metamorphosed himself, so to say, into an Egyptian. He was initiated into Theology and Physics. And he so completely made the ideas and reasonings of his teachers his own, that his Hymns rather bespeak an Egyptian Priest than a Grecian Poet: and the was the first who carried into Greece the Egyptian fables.

Pythagoras, ever thirsty for learning, consented even to be circumcised, in order to become one of the Initiates: and the occult sciences were revealed to him in the innermost part of the sanctuary.

The Initiates in a particular science, having been instructed by fables, enigmas, allegories, and hieroglyphics, wrote mysteriously whenever in their works they touched the subject of the Mysteries, and continued to conceal science under a veil of fictions.

When the destruction by Cambyses of many cities, and the ruin of nearly all Egypt, in the year 528 before our era, dispersed most of the Priests into Greece and elsewhere, they bore with them their sciences, which they continued to teach enigmatically, that is to say, ever enveloped in the obscurities of fables and hieroglyphics; to the end that the vulgar herd, seeing, might see nothing, and hearing, might comprehend nothing. All the writers

[p. 366]

drew from this source: but these Mysteries, concealed under so many unexplained envelopes, ended in giving birth to a swarm of absurdities, which, from Greece, spread over the whole earth.

In the Grecian Mysteries, as established by Pythagoras, there were three Degrees. A preparation of five years' abstinence and silence was required. If the candidate was found to be passionate or intemperate, contentious, or ambitious of worldly honors and distinctions, he was rejected.

In his lectures, Pythagoras taught the mathematics, as a medium whereby to prove the existence of God from observation and by means of reason; grammar, rhetoric, and logic, to cultivate and improve that reason, arithmetic, because he conceived that the ultimate benefit of man consisted in the science of numbers, and geometry, music, and astronomy, because he conceived that man is indebted to them for a knowledge of what is really good and useful.

He taught the true method of obtaining a knowledge of the Divine laws of purifying the soul from its imperfections, of searching for truth, and of practising virtue; thus imitating the perfections of God. He thought his system vain, if it did not contribute to expel vice and introduce virtue into the mind. He taught that the two most excellent things were, to speak the truth, and to render benefits to one another. Particularly he inculcated Silence, Temperance, Fortitude, Prudence, and Justice. He taught the immortality of the soul, the Omnipotence of God, and the necessity of personal holiness to qualify a man for admission into the Society of the Gods.

Thus we owe the particular mode of instruction in the Degree of Fellow-Craft to Pythagoras; and that Degree is but an imperfect reproduction of his lectures. From him, too, we have many of our explanations of the symbols. He arranged his assemblies due East and West, because he held that Motion began in the East and proceeded to the West. Our Lodges are said to be due East and West, because the Master represents the rising Sun, and of course must be in the East. The pyramids, too, were built precisely by the four cardinal points. And our expression, that our Lodges extend upward to the Heavens, comes from the Persian and Druidic custom of having to their Temples no roofs but the sky.

Plato developed and spiritualized the philosophy of Pythagoras.

[p. 367]

[paragraph continues] Even Eusebius the Christian admits, that he reached to the vestibule of Truth, and stood upon its threshold.

The Druidical ceremonies undoubtedly came from India; and the Druids were originally Buddhists. The word Druidh, like the word Magi, signifies wise or learned men; and they were at once philosophers, magistrates, and divines.

There was a surprising uniformity in the Temples, Priests, doctrines, and worship of the Persian Magi and British Druids. The Gods of Britain were the same as the Cabiri of Samothrace. Osiris and Isis appeared in their Mysteries, under the names of Hu and Ceridwen; and like those of the primitive Persians, their Temples were enclosures of huge unhewn stones, some of which still remain, and are regarded by the common people with fear and veneration. They were generally either circular or oval. Some were in the shape of a circle to which a vast serpent was attached. The circle was an Eastern symbol of the Universe, governed by an Omnipotent Deity whose centre is everywhere, and his circumference nowhere: and the egg was an universal symbol of the world. Some of the Temples were winged, and some in the shape of a cross; the winged ones referring to Kneph, the winged Serpent-Deity of Egypt; whence the name of Navestock, where one of them stood. Temples in the shape of a cross were also found in Ireland and Scotland. The length of one of these vast structures, in the shape of a serpent, was nearly three miles.

The grand periods for initiation into the Druidical Mysteries, were quarterly; at the equinoxes and solstices. In the remote times when they originated, these were the times corresponding with the 13th of February, 1st of May, 19th of August, and 1st of November. The time of annual celebration was May-Eve, and the ceremonial preparations commenced at midnight, on the 29th of April. When the initiations were over, on May-Eve, fires were kindled on all the cairns and cromlechs in the island, which burned all night to introduce the sports of May-day. The festival was in honor of the Sun. The initiations were performed at midnight; and there were three Degrees.

The Gothic Mysteries were carried Northward from the East, by Odin; who, being a great warrior, modelled and varied them to suit his purposes and the genius of his people. He placed over their celebration twelve Hierophants, who were alike Priests, Counsellors of State, and Judges from whose decision there was no appeal.

[p. 368]

He held the numbers three and nine in peculiar veneration, and was probably himself the Indian Buddha. Every thrice-three months, thrice-three victims were sacrificed to the tri-une God.

The Goths had three great festivals; the most magnificent of which commenced at the winter solstice, and was celebrated in honor of Thor, the Prince of the Power of the Air. That being the longest night in the year, and the one after which the Sun comes Northward, it was commemorative of the Creation; and they termed it mother-night, as the one in which the creation of the world and light from the primitive darkness took place. This was the Yule, Juul, or Yeol feast, which afterward became Christmas. At this feast the initiations were celebrated. Thor was the Sun, the Egyptian Osiris and Kneph, the Phoenician Bel or Baal. The initiations were had in huge intricate caverns, terminating, as all the Mithriac caverns did, in a spacious vault, where the candidate was brought to light.

Joseph was undoubtedly initiated. After he had interpreted Pharaoh's dream, that Monarch made him his Prime Minister, let him ride in his second chariot, while they proclaimed before him, ABRECH! [*1] and set him over the land of Egypt. In addition to this, the King gave him a new name, Tsapanat-Paanakh, and married him to Asanat, daughter of Potai Parang, a Priest of An or Hieropolis, where was the Temple of Athom-Re, the Great God of Egypt; thus completely naturalizing him. He could not have contracted this marriage, nor have exercised that high dignity, without being first initiated in the Mysteries. When his Brethren came to Egypt the second time, the Egyptians of his court could not eat with them, as that would have been abomination, though they ate with Joseph; who was therefore regarded not as a foreigner, but as one of themselves: and when he sent and brought his brethren back, and charged them with taking his cup, he said, "Know ye not that a man like me practises divination?" thus assuming the Egyptian of high rank initiated into the Mysteries, and as such conversant with the occult sciences.

So also must Moses have been initiated: for he was not only brought up in the court of the King, as the adopted son of the King's daughter, until he was forty years of age; but he was instructed in all the learning of the Egyptians, and married afterward

[p. 369]

the daughter of Yethru_, a Priest of An likewise. Strabo and Diodorus both assert that he was himself a Priest of Heliopolis. Before he went into the Desert, there were intimate relations between him and the Priesthood; and he had successfully commanded, Josephus informs us, an army sent by the King against the Ethiopians. Simplicius asserts that Moses received from the Egyptians, in the Mysteries, the doctrines which he taught to the Hebrews: and Clemens of Alexandria and Philo say that he was a Theologian and Prophet, and interpreter of the Sacred Laws. Manetho, cited by Josephus, says he was a Priest of Heliopolis, and that his true and original (Egyptian) name was Asersaph or Osarsiph.

And in the institution of the Hebrew Priesthood, in the powers and privileges, as well as the immunities and sanctity which he conferred upon them, he closely imitated the Egyptian institutions; making public the worship of that Deity whom the Egyptian Initiates worshipped in private; and strenuously endeavoring to keep the people from relapsing into their old mixture of Chaldaic and Egyptian superstition and idol-worship, as they were ever ready and inclined to do; even Aharu_n, upon their first clamorous discontent, restoring the worship of Apis; as an image of which Egyptian God he made the golden calf.

The Egyptian Priests taught in their great Mysteries, that there was one God, Supreme and Unapproachable, who had conceived the Universe by His Intelligence, before He created it by His Power and Will. They were no Materialists nor Pantheists; but taught that Matter was not eternal or co-existent with the great First Cause, but created by Him.

The early Christians, taught by the founder of their Religion, but in greater perfection, those primitive truths that from the Egyptians had passed to the Jews, and been preserved among the latter by the Essenes, received also the institution of the Mysteries; adopting as their object the building of the symbolic Temple, preserving the old Scriptures of the Jews as their sacred book, and as the fundamental law, which furnished the new veil of initiation with the Hebraic words and formulas, that, corrupted and disfigured by time and ignorance, appear in many of our Degrees.

Such, my Brother, is the doctrine of the first Degree of, the Mysteries, or that of Chief of the Tabernacle, to which you have

[p. 370]

now been admitted, and the moral lesson of which is, devotion to the service of God, and disinterested zeal and constant endeavor for the welfare of men. You have here received only hints of the true objects and purposes of the Mysteries. Hereafter, if you are permitted to advance, you will arrive at a more complete understanding of them and of the sublime doctrines which they teach. Be content, therefore, with that which you have seer and heard, and await patiently the advent of the greater light.

Footnotes

^368:1 An Egyptian word, meaning, "Bow down."

     
Morals and Dogma, by Albert Pike, [1871], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 371]

  

XXIV.

  

PRINCE OF THE TABERNACLE.

SYMBOLS were the almost universal language of ancient theology. They were the most obvious method of instruction; for, like nature herself, they addressed the understanding through the eye; and the most ancient expressions denoting communication of religious knowledge, signify ocular exhibition. The first teachers of mankind borrowed this method of instruction; and it comprised an endless store of pregnant hieroglyphics. These lessons of the olden time were the riddles of the Sphynx, tempting the curious by their quaintness, but involving the personal risk of the adventurous interpreter. "The Gods themselves," it was said, "disclose their intentions to the wise, but to fools their teaching is unintelligible;" and the King of the Delphic Oracle was said not to declare, nor on the other hand to conceal; but emphatically to "intimate or signify."

The Ancient Sages, both barbarian and Greek, involved their meaning in similar indirections and enigmas; their lessons were conveyed either in visible symbols, or in those "parables and dark sayings of old," which the Israelites considered it a sacred duty to hand down unchanged to successive generations. The explanatory tokens employed by man, whether emblematical objects or actions, symbol's or mystic ceremonies, were like the mystic signs and portents either in dreams or by the wayside, supposed to be significant of the intentions of the Gods; both required the aid of anxious thought and skillful interpretation. It was only by a correct appreciation of analogous problems of nature, that the will of Heaven could be understood by the Diviner, or the lessons of Wisdom become manifest to the Sage.

The Mysteries were a series of symbols; and what was spoken there consisted wholly of accessory explanations of the act or image; sacred commentaries, explanatory of established symbols; with little of those independent traditions embodying physical or moral speculation, in which the elements or planets were the

[p. 372]

actors, and the creation and revolutions of the world were intermingled with recollections of ancient events: and yet with so much of that also, that nature became her own expositor through the medium of an arbitrary symbolical instruction; and the ancient views of the relation between the human and divine received dramatic forms.

There has ever been an intimate alliance between the two systems, the symbolic and the philosophical, in the allegories of the monuments of all ages, in the symbolic writings of the priests of all nations, in the rituals of all secret and mysterious societies; there has been a constant series, an invariable uniformity of principles, which come from an aggregate, vast, imposing, and true, composed of parts that fit harmoniously only there.

Symbolical instruction is recommended by the constant and uniform usage of antiquity; and it has retained its influence throughout all ages, as a system of mysterious communication. The Deity, in his revelations to man, adopted the use of material images for the purpose of enforcing sublime truths; and Christ taught by symbols and parables. The mysterious knowledge of the Druids was embodied in signs and symbols. Taliesin, describing his initiation, says: "The secrets were imparted to me by the old Giantess (Ceridwen, or Isis), without the use of audible language." And again he says, "I am a silent proficient."

Initiation was a school, in which were taught the truths of primitive revelation, the existence and attributes of one God, the immortality of the Soul, rewards and punishments in a future life, the phenomena of Nature, the arts, the sciences, morality, legislation, philosophy, and philanthropy, and what we now style psychology and metaphysics, with animal magnetism, and the other occult sciences.

All the ideas of the Priests of Hindostan, Persia, Syria, Arabia, Chaldaea, Phoenicia, were known to the Egyptian Priests. The rational Indian philosophy, after penetrating Persia and Chaldaea, gave birth to the Egyptian Mysteries. We find that the use of Hieroglyphics was preceded in Egypt by that of the easily understood symbols and figures, from the mineral, animal, and vegetable kingdoms, used by the Indians, Persians, and Chaldaeans to express their thoughts; and this primitive philosophy was the basis of the modern philosophy of Pythagoras and Plato.

[p. 373]

All the philosophers and legislators that made Antiquity illustrious, were pupils of the initiation; and all the beneficent modifications in the religions of the different people instructed by them were owing to their institution and extension of the Mysteries. In the chaos of popular superstitions, those Mysteries alone kept man from lapsing into absolute brutishness. Zoroaster and Confucius drew their doctrines from the Mysteries. Clemens of Alexandria, speaking of the Great Mysteries, says: "Here ends all instruction. Nature and all things are seen and known." Had moral truths alone been taught the Initiate, the Mysteries could never have deserved nor received the magnificent eulogiums of the most enlightened men of Antiquity,--of Pindar, Plutarch, Isocrates, Diodorus, Plato, Euripides, Socrates, Aristophanes, Cicero, Epictetus, Marcus Aurelius, and others;--philosophers hostile to the Sacerdotal Spirit, or historians devoted to the investigation of Truth. No: all the sciences were taught there; and those oral or written traditions briefly communicated, which reached back to the first age of the world.

Socrates said, in the Phaedo of Plato: "It well appears that those who established the Mysteries, or secret assemblies of the initiated, were no contemptible personages, but men of great genius, who in the early ages strove to teach us, under enigmas, that he who shall go to the invisible regions without being purified, will be precipitated into the abyss; while he who arrives there, purged of the stains of this world, and accomplished in virtue, will be admitted to the dwelling-place of the Deity. . . The initiated are certain to attain the company of the Gods."

Pretextatus, Proconsul of Achaia, a man endowed with all the virtues, said, in the 4th century, that to deprive the Greeks of those Sacred Mysteries which bound together the whole human race, would make life insupportable.

Initiation was considered to be a mystical death; a descent into the infernal regions, where every pollution, and the stains and imperfections of a corrupt and evil life were purged away by fire and water; and the perfect Epopt was then said to be regenerated, new-born, restored to a renovated existence of life, light, and purity; and placed under the Divine Protection.

A new language was adapted to these celebrations, and also a language of hieroglyphics, unknown to any but those who had received the highest Degree. And to them ultimately were confined the learning, the morality, and the political power of every people

[p. 374]

among which the Mysteries were practised. So effectually was the knowledge of the hieroglyphics of the highest Degree hidden from all but a favored few, that in process of time their meaning was entirely lost, and none could interpret them. If the same hieroglyphics were employed in the higher as in the lower Degrees, they had a different and more abstruse and figurative meaning. It was pretended, in later times, that the sacred hieroglyphics and language were the same that were used by the Celestial Deities. Everything that could heighten the mystery of initiation was added, until the very name of the ceremony possessed a strange charm, and yet conjured up the wildest fears. The greatest rapture came to be expressed by the word that signified to pass through the Mysteries.

The Priesthood possessed one third of Egypt. They gained much of their influence by means of the Mysteries, and spared no means to impress the people with a full sense of their importance. They represented them as the beginning of a new life of reason and virtue: the initiated, or esoteric companions were said to entertain the most agreeable anticipations respecting death and eternity, to comprehend all the hidden mysteries of Nature, to have their souls restored to the original perfection from which man had fallen; and at their death to be borne to the celestial mansions of the Gods. The doctrines of a future state of rewards and punishments formed a prominent feature in the Mysteries; and they were also believed to assure much temporal happiness and good-fortune, and afford absolute security against the most imminent dangers by land and sea. Public odium was cast on those who refused to be initiated. They were considered profane, unworthy of public employment or private confidence; and held to be doomed to eternal punishment as impious. To betray the secrets of the Mysteries, to wear on the stage the dress of an Initiate, or to hold the Mysteries up to derision, was to incur death at the hands of public vengeance.

It is certain that up to the time of Cicero, the Mysteries still retained much of their original character of sanctity and purity. And at a later day, as we know, Nero, after committing a horrible crime, did not dare, even in Greece, to aid in the celebration of the Mysteries; nor at a still later day was Constantine, the Christian Emperor, allowed to do so, after his murder of his relatives.

Everywhere, and in all their forms, the Mysteries were

[p. 375]

funereal; and celebrated the mystical death and restoration to life of some divine or heroic personage: and the details of the legend and the mode of the death varied in the different Countries where the Mysteries were practised.

Their explanation belongs both to astronomy and mythology; and the Legend of the Master's Degree is but another form of that of the Mysteries, reaching back, in one shape or other, to the remotest antiquity.

Whether Egypt originated the legend, or borrowed it from India or Chaldaea, it is now impossible to know. But the Hebrews received the Mysteries from the Egyptians; and of course were familiar with their legend,--known as it was to those Egyptian Initiates, Joseph and Moses. It was the fable (or rather the truth clothed in allegory and figures) of OSIRIS, the Sun, Source of Light and Principle of Good, and TYPHON, the Principle of Darkness and Evil. In all the histories of the Gods and Heroes lay couched and hidden astronomical details and the history of the operations of visible Nature; and those in their turn were also symbols of higher and profounder truths. None but rude uncultivated intellects could long consider the Sun and Stars and the Powers of Nature as Divine, or as fit objects of Human Worship; and they will consider them so while the world lasts; and ever remain ignorant of the great Spiritual Truths of which these are the hieroglyphics and expressions.

A brief summary of the Egyptian legend will serve to show the leading idea on which the Mysteries among the Hebrews were based.

Osiris, said to have been an ancient King of Egypt, was the Sun; and Isis, his wife, the Moon: and his history recounts, in poetical and figurative style, the annual journey of the Great Luminary of Heaven through the different Signs of the Zodiac.

In the absence of Osiris, Typhon, his brother, filled with envy and malice, sought to usurp his throne; but his plans were frustrated by Isis. Then he resolved to kill Osiris. This he did, by persuading him to enter a coffin or sarcophagus, which he then flung into the Nile. After a long search, Isis found the body, and concealed it in the depths of a forest; but Typhon, finding it there, cut it into fourteen pieces, and scattered them hither and thither. After tedious search, Isis found thirteen pieces, the fishes having eaten the other (the privates), which she replaced of wood, and

[p. 376]

buried the body at Philae; where a temple of surpassing magnificence was erected in honor of Osiris.

Isis, aided by her son Orus, Horus or Har-oeri, warred against Typhon, slew him, reigned gloriously, and at her death was re-united to her husband, in the same tomb.

Typhon was represented as born of the earth; the upper part of his body covered with feathers, in stature reaching the clouds, his arms and legs covered with scales, serpents darting from him on every side, and fire flashing from his mouth. Horus, who aided in slaying him, became the God of the Sun, answering to the Grecian Apollo; and Typhon is but the anagram of Python, the great serpent slain by Apollo.

The word Typhon, like Eve, signifies a serpent, and life. [*1] By its form the serpent symbolizes life, which circulates through all nature. When, toward the end of autumn, the Woman (Virgo), in the constellations seems (upon the Chaldaean sphere) to crush with her heel the head of the serpent, this figure foretells the coming of winter, during which life seems to retire from all beings, and no longer to circulate through nature. This is why Typhon signifies also a serpent, the symbol of winter, which, in the Catholic Temples, is represented surrounding the Terrestrial Globe, which surmounts the heavenly cross, emblem of redemption. If the word Typhon is derived from Tupoul, it signifies a tree which produces apples (mala, evils), the Jewish origin of the fall of man. Typhon means also one who supplants, and signifies the human passions, which expel from our hearts the lessons of wisdom. In the Egyptian Fable, Isis wrote the sacred word for the instruction of men, and Typhon effaced it as fast as she wrote it. In morals, his name signifies Pride, Ignorance, and Falsehood.

When Isis first found the body, where it had floated ashore near Byblos, a shrub of erica or tamarisk near it had, by the virtue of the body, shot up into a tree around it, and protected it; and hence our sprig of acacia. Isis was also aided in her search by Anubis, in the shape of a dog. He was Sirius or the Dog-Star, the friend and counsellor of Osiris, and the inventor of language, grammar, astronomy, surveying, arithmetic, music, and medical science; the first maker of laws; and who taught the worship of the Gods, and the building of Temples.

[p. 377]

In the Mysteries, the nailing up of the body of Osiris in the chest or ark was termed the aphanism, or disappearance [of the Sun at the Winter Solstice, below the Tropic of Capricorn], and the recovery of the different parts of his body by Isis, the Euresis, or finding. The candidate went through a ceremony representing this, in all the Mysteries everywhere. The main facts in the fable were the same in all countries; and the prominent Deities were everywhere a male and a female.

In Egypt they were Osiris and Isis: in India, Mahadeva and Bhavani: in Phoenicia, Thammuz (or Adonis) and Astarte: in Phrygia, Atys and Cybele: in Persia, Mithras and Asis: in Samothrace and Greece, Dionusos or Sabazeus and Rhea: in Britain, Hu and Ceridwen: and in Scandinavia, Woden and Frea: and in every instance these Divinities represented the Sun and the Moon.

The mysteries of Osiris, Isis, and Horus, seem to have been the model of all other ceremonies of initiation subsequently established among the different peoples of the world. Those of Atys and Cybele, celebrated in Phrygia; those of Ceres and Proserpine, at Eleusis and many other places in Greece, were but copies of them. This we learn from Plutarch, Diodorus Siculus, Lactantius, and other writers; and in the absence of direct testimony should necessarily infer it from the similarity of the adventures of these Deities; for the ancients held that the Ceres of the Greeks was the same as the Isis of the Egyptians; and Dionusos or Bacchus as Osiris.

In the legend of Osiris and Isis, as given by Plutarch, are many details and circumstances other than those that we have briefly mentioned; and all of which we need not repeat here. Osiris married his sister Isis; and labored publicly with her to ameliorate the lot of men. He taught them agriculture, while Isis invented laws. He built temples to the Gods, and established their worship. Both were the patrons of artists and their useful inventions; and introduced the use of iron for defensive weapons and implements of agriculture, and of gold to adorn the temples of the Gods. He went forth with an army to conquer men to civilization, teaching the people whom he overcame to plant the vine and sow grain for food.

Typhon, his brother, slew him when the sun was in the sign of the Scorpion, that is to say, at the Autumnal Equinox. They had

[p. 378]

been rival claimants, says Synesius, for the throne of Egypt, as Light and Darkness contend ever for the empire of the world. Plutarch adds, that at the time when Osiris was slain, the moon was at its full; and therefore it was in the sign opposite the Scorpion, that is, the Bull, the sign of the Vernal Equinox.

Plutarch assures us that it was to represent these events and details that Isis established the Mysteries, in which they were re-produced by images, symbols, and a religious ceremonial, whereby they were imitated: and in which lessons of piety were given, and consolations under the misfortunes that afflict us here below. Those who instituted these Mysteries meant to strengthen religion and console men in their sorrows by the lofty hopes found in a religious faith, whose principles were represented to them covered by a pompous ceremonial, and under the sacred veil of allegory.

Diodorus speaks of the famous columns erected near Nysa, in Arabia, where, it was said, were two of the tombs of Osiris and Isis. On one was this inscription: "I am Isis, Queen of this country. I was instructed by Mercury. No one can destroy the laws which I have established. I am the eldest daughter of Saturn, most ancient of the Gods. I am the wife and sister of Osiris the King. I first made known to mortals the use of wheat. I am the mother of Orus the King. In my honor was the city of Bubaste built. Rejoice, O Egypt, rejoice, land that gave me birth!" . . . And on the other was this: "I am Osiris the King, who led my armies into all parts of the world, to the most thickly inhabited countries of India, the North, the Danube, and the Ocean. I am the eldest son of Saturn: I was born of the brilliant and magnificent egg, and my substance is of the same nature as that which composes light. There is no place in the Universe where I have not appeared, to bestow my benefits and make known my discoveries." The rest was illegible.

To aid her in the search for the body of Osiris, and to nurse her infant child Horus, Isis sought out and took with her Anubis, son of Osiris, and his sister Nephte. He, as we have said, was Sirius, the brightest star in the Heavens. After finding him, she went to Byblos, and seated herself near a fountain, where she had learned that the sacred chest had stopped which contained the body of Osiris. There she sat, sad and silent, shedding a torrent of tears. Thither came the women of the Court of Queen Astarte, and she spoke to them, and dressed their hair, pouring upon it deliciously

[p. 379]

perfumed ambrosia. This known to the Queen, Isis was engaged as nurse for her child, in the palace, one of the columns of which was made of the erica or tamarisk, that had grown up over the chest containing Osiris, cut down by the King, and unknown to him, still enclosing the chest: which column Isis afterward demanded, and from it extracted the chest and the body, which, the latter wrapped in thin drapery and perfumed, she carried away with her.

Blue Masonry, ignorant of its import, still retains among its emblems one of a woman weeping over a broken column, holding in her hand a branch of acacia, myrtle, or tamarisk, while Time, we are told, stands behind her combing out the ringlets of her hair. We need not repeat the vapid and trivial explanation there given, of this representation of Isis, weeping at Byblos, over the column torn from the palace of the King, that contained the body of Osiris, while Horus, the God of Time, pours ambrosia on her hair.

Nothing of this recital was historical; but the whole was an allegory or sacred fable, containing a meaning known only to those who were initiated into the Mysteries. All the incidents were astronomical, with a meaning still deeper lying behind that explanation, and so hidden by a double veil. The Mysteries, in which these incidents were represented and explained, were like those of Eleusis in their object, of which Pausanias, who was initiated, says that the Greeks, from the remotest antiquity, regarded them as the best calculated of all things to lead men to piety: and Aristotle says they were the most valuable of all religious institutions, and thus were called mysteries par excellence; and the Temple of Eleusis was regarded as, in some sort, the common sanctuary of the whole earth, where religion had brought together all that was most imposing and most august.

The object of all the Mysteries was to inspire men with piety, and to console them in the miseries of life. That consolation, so afforded, was the hope of a happier future, and of passing, after death, to a state of eternal felicity.

Cicero says that the Initiates not only received lessons which made life more agreeable, but drew from the ceremonies happy hopes for the moment of death. Socrates says that those who were so fortunate as to be admitted to the Mysteries, possessed, when dying, the most glorious hopes for eternity. Aristides says

[p. 380]

that they not only procure the Initiates consolations' in the present life, and means of deliverance from the great weight of their evils, but also the precious advantage of passing after death to a happier state.

Isis was the Goddess of Sais; and the famous Feast of Lights was celebrated there in her honor.' There were celebrated the Mysteries, in which were represented the death and subsequent restoration to life of the God Osiris, in a secret ceremony and scenic representation of his sufferings, called the Mysteries of Night.

The Kings of Egypt often exercised the functions of the Priest-hood; and they were initiated into the sacred science as soon as they attained the throne. So at Athens, the First Magistrate, or Archon-King, superintended the Mysteries. This was an image of the union that existed between the Priesthood and Royalty, in those early times when legislators and kings sought in religion a potent political instrument.

Herodotus says, speaking of the reasons why animals were deified in Egypt: "If I were to explain these reasons, I should be led to the disclosure of those holy matters which I particularly wish to avoid, and which, but from necessity, I should not have discussed at all." So he says, "The Egyptians have at Sais the tomb of a certain personage, whom I do not think myself permitted to specify. It is behind the Temple of Minerva." [The latter, so called by the Greeks, was really Isis, whose was the often-cited enigmatical inscription, "I am what was and is and is to come. No mortal hath yet unveiled me."] So again he says: "Upon this lake are represented by night the accidents which happened to him whom I dare not name. The Egyptians call them their Mysteries. Concerning these, at the same time that I confess myself sufficiently informed, I feel myself compelled to be silent. Of the ceremonies also in honor of Ceres, I may not venture to speak, further than the obligations of religion will allow me."

It is easy to see what was the great object of initiation and the Mysteries; whose first and greatest fruit was, as all the ancients testify, to civilize savage hordes, to soften their ferocious manners, to introduce among them social intercourse, and lead them into a way of life more worthy of men. Cicero considers the establishment of the Eleusinian Mysteries to be the greatest of all the benefits conferred by Athens on other commonwealths; their effects

[p. 381]

having been, he says, to civilize men, soften their savage and ferocious manners, and teach them the true principles of morals, which initiate man into the only kind of life worthy of him. The same philosophic orator, in a passage where he apostrophizes Ceres and Proserpine, says that mankind owes these Goddesses the first elements of moral life, as well as the first means of sustenance of physical life; knowledge of the laws, regulation of morals, and those examples of civilization which have improved the manners of men and cities.

Bacchus in Euripides says to Pentheus, that leis new institution (the Dionysiac Mysteries) deserved to be known, and that one of its great advantages was, that it proscribed all impurity: that these were the Mysteries of Wisdom, of which it would be imprudent to speak to persons not initiated: that they were established among the Barbarians, who in that showed greater wisdom than the Greeks, who had not yet received them.

This double object, political and religious,--one teaching our duty to men, and the other what we owe to the Gods; or rather, respect for the Gods calculated to maintain that which we owe the laws, is found in that well-known verse of Virgil, borrowed by him from the ceremonies of initiation: "Teach me to respect justice and the Gods." This great lesson, which the Hierophant impressed on the Initiates, after they had witnessed a representation of the Infernal regions, the Poet places after his description of the different punishments suffered by the wicked in Tartarus, and immediately after the description of that of Sisyphus.

Pausanias, likewise, at the close of the representation of the punishments of Sisyphus and the daughters of Danaus, in the Temple at Delphi, makes this reflection; that the crime or impiety which in them had chiefly merited this punishment, was the contempt which they had shown for the Mysteries of Eleusis. From this reflection of Pausanias, who was an Initiate, it is easy to see that the Priests of Eleusis, who taught the dogma of punishment in Tartarus, included among the great crimes deserving these punishments, contempt for and disregard of the Holy Mysteries; whose object was to lead men to piety, and thereby to respect for justice and the laws, chief object of their institution, if not the only one, and to which the needs and interest of religion itself were subordinate; since the latter was but a means to lead more surely to the former; for the whole force of religious opinions

[p. 382]

being in the hands of the legislators to be wielded, they were sure of being better obeyed.

The Mysteries were not merely simple lustrations and the observation of some arbitrary formulas and ceremonies; nor a means of reminding men of the ancient condition of the race prior to civilization: but they led men to piety by instruction in morals and as to a future life; which at a very early day, if not originally, formed the chief portion of the ceremonial.

Symbols were used in the ceremonies, which referred to agriculture, as Masonry has preserved the ear of wheat in a symbol and in one of her words; but their principal reference was to astronomical phenomena. Much was no doubt said as to the condition of brutality and degradation in which man was sunk before the institution of the Mysteries; but the allusion was rather meta-physical, to the ignorance of the uninitiated, than to the wild life of the earliest men.

The great object of the Mysteries of Isis, and in general of all the Mysteries, was a great and truly politic one. It was to ameliorate our race, to perfect its manners and morals, and to restrain society by stronger bonds than those that human laws impose. They were the invention of that ancient science and wisdom which exhausted all its resources to make legislation perfect; and of that philosophy which has ever sought to secure the happiness of man, by purifying his soul from the passions which can trouble it, and as a necessary consequence introduce social disorder. And that they were the work of genius is evident from their employment of all the sciences, a profound knowledge of the human heart, and the means of subduing it.

It is a still greater mistake to imagine that they were the inventions of charlatanism, and means of deception. They may in the lapse of time have degenerated into imposture and schools of false ideas; but they were not so at the beginning; or else the wisest and best men of antiquity have uttered the most willful falsehoods. In process of time the very allegories of the Mysteries themselves, Tartarus and its punishments, Minos and the other judges of the dead, came to be misunderstood, and to be false because they were so; while at first they were true, because they were recognized as merely the arbitrary forms in which truths were enveloped.

The object of the Mysteries was to procure for man a real felicity on earth by the means of virtue; and to that end he was

[p. 383]

taught that his soul was immortal; and that error, sin, and vice must needs, by an inflexible law, produce their consequences. The rude representation of physical torture in Tartarus was but an image of the certain, unavoidable, eternal consequences that flow by the law of God's enactment from the sin committed and the vice indulged in. The poets and mystagogues labored to propagate these doctrines of the soul's immortality and the certain punishment of sin and vice, and to accredit them with the people, by teaching them the former in their poems, and the latter in the sanctuaries; and they clothed them with the charms, the one of poetry, and the other of spectacles and magic illusions.

They painted, aided by all the resources of art, the virtuous man's happy life after death, and the horrors of the frightful prisons destined to punish the vicious. In the shades of the sanctuaries, these delights and horrors were exhibited as spectacles, and the Initiates witnessed religious dramas, under the name of initiation and mysteries. Curiosity was excited by secrecy, by the difficulty experienced in obtaining admission, and by the tests to be undergone. The candidate was amused by the variety of the scenery, the pomp of the decorations, the appliances of machinery. Respect was inspired by the gravity and dignity of the actors and the majesty of the ceremonial; and fear and hope, sadness and delight, were in turns excited.

The Hierophants, men of intellect, and well understanding the disposition of the people and the art of controlling them, used every appliance to attain that object, and give importance and impressiveness to their ceremonies. As they covered those ceremonies with the veil of Secrecy, so they preferred that Night should cover them with its wings. Obscurity adds to impressiveness, and assists illusion; and they used it to produce an effect upon the astonished Initiate. The ceremonies were conducted in caverns dimly lighted: thick groves were planted around the Temples, to produce that gloom that impresses the mind with a religious awe.

The very word mystery, according to Demetrius Phalereus, was a metaphorical expression that denoted the secret awe which darkness and gloom inspired. The night was almost always the time fixed for their celebration; and they were ordinarily termed nocturnal ceremonies. Initiations into the Mysteries of Samothrace took place at night; as did those of Isis, of which Apuleius speaks.

[p. 384]

[paragraph continues] Euripides makes Bacchus say, that his Mysteries were celebrated at night, because there is in night something august and imposing.

Nothing excites men's curiosity so much as Mystery, concealing things which they desire to know: and nothing so much increases curiosity as obstacles that interpose to prevent them from indulging in the gratification of their desires. Of this the Legislators and Hierophants took advantage, to attract the people to their sanctuaries, and to induce them to seek to obtain lessons from which they would perhaps have turned away with indifference, if they had been pressed upon them. In this spirit of mystery they professed to imitate the Deity, who hides Himself from our senses, and conceals from us the springs by which He moves the Universe. They admitted that they concealed the highest truths under the veil of allegory, the more to excite the curiosity of men, and to urge them to investigation. The secrecy in which they buried their Mysteries, had that end. Those to whom they were confided, bound themselves, by the most fearful oaths, never to reveal them. They were not allowed even to speak of these important secrets with any others than the initiated; and the penalty of death was pronounced against any one indiscreet enough to reveal them, or found in the Temple without being an Initiate; and any one who had betrayed those secrets, was avoided by all, as excommunicated.

Aristotle was accused of impiety, by the Hierophant Eurymedon, for having sacrificed to the manes of his wife, according to the rite used in the worship of Ceres. He was compelled to flee to Chalcis; and to purge his memory from this stain, he directed, by his will, the erection of a Statue to that Goddess. Socrates, dying, sacrificed to Esculapius, to exculpate himself from the suspicion of Atheism. A price was set on the head of Diagoras, because he had divulged the Secret of the Mysteries. Andocides was accused of the same crime, as was Alcibiades, and both were cited to answer the charge before the inquisition at Athens, where the People were the Judges. Aeschylus the Tragedian was accused of having represented the Mysteries on the stage; and was acquitted only on proving that he had never been initiated.

Seneca, comparing Philosophy to initiation, says that the most sacred ceremonies could be known to the adepts alone: but that many of their precepts were known even to the Profane. Such

[p. 385]

was the case with the doctrine of a future life, and a state of rewards and punishments beyond the grave. The ancient legislators clothed this doctrine, in the pomp of a mysterious ceremony, in mystic words and magical representations, to impress upon the mind the truths they taught, by the strong influence of such scenic displays upon the senses and imagination.

In the same way they taught the origin of the soul, its fall to the earth past the spheres and through the elements, and its final return to the place of its origin, when, during the continuance of its union with earthly matter, the sacred fire, which formed its essence, had contracted no stains, and its brightness had not been marred by foreign particles, which, denaturalizing it, weighed it down and delayed its return. These metaphysical ideas, with difficulty comprehended by the mass of the Initiates, were represented by figures, by symbols, and by allegorical analogies; no idea being so abstract that men do not seek to give it expression by, and translate it into, sensible images.

The attraction of Secrecy was enhanced by the difficulty of obtaining admission. Obstacles and suspense redoubled curiosity. Those who aspired to the initiation of the Sun and in the Mysteries of Mithras in Persia, underwent many trials. They commenced by easy tests and arrived by degrees at those that were most cruel, in which the life of the candidate was often endangered. Gregory Nazianzen terms them tortures and mystic punishments. No one can be initiated, says Suidas, until after he has proven, by the most terrible trials, that he possesses a virtuous soul, exempt from the sway of every passion, and at it were impassible. There were twelve principal tests; and some make the number larger.

The trials of the Eleusinian initiations were not so terrible; but they were severe; and the suspense, above all, in which the aspirant was kept for several years [the memory of which is retained in Masonry by the ages of those of the different Degrees], or the interval between admission to the inferior and initiation in the great Mysteries, was a species of torture to the curiosity which it was desired to excite. Thus the Egyptian Priests tried Pythagoras before admitting him to know the secrets of the sacred science. He succeeded, by his incredible patience and the courage with which he surmounted all obstacles, in obtaining admission to their society and receiving their lessons. Among the Jews the Essenes

[p. 386]

admitted none among them, until they had passed the tests or several Degrees.

By initiation, those who before were fellow-citizens only, became brothers, connected by a closer bond than before, by means of a religious fraternity, which, bringing men nearer together, united them more strongly: and the weak and the poor could more readily appeal for assistance to the powerful and the wealthy, with whom religious association gave them a closer fellowship.

The Initiate was regarded as the favorite of the Gods. For him alone Heaven opened its treasures. Fortunate during life, he could, by virtue and the favor of Heaven, promise himself after death an eternal felicity.

The Priests of the Island of Samothrace promised favorable winds and prosperous voyages to those who were initiated. It was promised them that the CABIRI, and Castor and Pollux, the DIOSCURI, should appear to them when the storm raged, and give them calms and smooth seas: and the Scholiast of Aristophanes says that those initiated in the Mysteries there were just men, who were privileged to escape from great evils and tempests.

The Initiate in the Mysteries of Orpheus, after he was purified, was considered as released from the empire of evil, and transferred to a condition of life which gave him the happiest hopes. "I have emerged from evil," he was made to say, "and have attained good." Those initiated in the Mysteries of Eleusis believed that the Sun blazed with a pure splendor for them alone. And, as we see in the case of Pericles, they flattered themselves that Ceres and Proserpine inspired them and gave them wisdom and counsel.

Initiation dissipated errors and banished misfortune: and after having filled the heart of man with joy during life, it gave him the most blissful hopes at the moment of death. We owe it to the Goddesses of Eleusis, says Socrates, that we do not lead the wild life of the earliest men: and to them are due the flattering hopes which initiation gives us for the moment of death and for all eternity. The benefit which we reap from these august ceremonies, says Aristides, is not only present joy, a deliverance and enfranchisement from the old ills; but also the sweet hope which we have in death of passing to a more fortunate state. And Theon says that participation of the Mysteries is the finest of all things, and the source of the greatest blessings. The happiness promised there was not limited to this mortal life; but it extended

[p. 387]

beyond the grave. There a new life was to commence, during which the Initiate was to enjoy a bliss without alloy and without limit. The Corybantes promised eternal life to the Initiates of the Mysteries of Cybele and Atys.

Apuleius represents Lucius, while still in the form of an ass, as addressing his prayers to Isis, whom he speaks of as the same as Ceres, Venus, Diana, and Proserpine, and as illuminating the walls of many cities simultaneously with her feminine lustre, and substituting her quivering light for the bright rays of the Sun. She appears to him in his vision as a beautiful female, "over whose divine neck her long thick hair hung in graceful ringlets." Addressing him, she says, "The parent of Universal nature attends thy call. The mistress of the Elements, initiative germ of generations, Supreme of Deities, Queen of departed spirits, first inhabitant of Heaven, and uniform type of all the Gods and Goddesses, propitiated by thy prayers, is with thee. She governs with her nod the luminous heights of the firmament, the salubrious breezes of the ocean; the silent deplorable depths of the shades below; one Sole  under many forms, worshipped by the different nations of the Earth under many titles, and with various religious rites."

Directing him how to proceed, at her festival, to re-obtain his human shape, she says: "Throughout the entire course of the remainder of thy life, until the very last breath has vanished from thy lips, thou art devoted to my service. . . . Under my protection will thy life be happy and glorious: and when, thy days being spent, thou shalt descend to the shades below, and inhabit the Elysian fields, there also, even in the subterranean hemisphere, shalt thou pay frequent worship to me, thy propitious patron: and yet further: if through sedulous obedience, religious devotion to my ministry, and inviolable chastity, thou shalt prove thyself a worthy object of divine favor, then shalt thou feel the influence of the power that I alone possess. The number of thy days shall be prolonged beyond the ordinary decrees of fate."

In the procession of the festival, Lucius saw the image of the Goddess, on either side of which were female attendants, that, "with ivory combs in their hands, made believe, by the motion of their arms and the twisting of their fingers, to comb and ornament the Goddess' royal hair." Afterward, clad in linen robes, came the initiated, "The hair of the women was moistened by

[p. 388]

perfume, and enveloped in a transparent covering; but the men, terrestrial stars, as it were, of the great religion, were thoroughly shaven, and their bald heads shone exceedingly."

Afterward came the Priests, in robes of white linen. The first bore a lamp in the form of a boat, emitting flame from an orifice in the middle: the second, a small altar: the third, a golden palm-tree: and the fourth displayed the figure of a left hand, the palm open and expanded, "representing thereby a symbol of equity and fair-dealing, of which the left hand, as slower than the right hand, and more void of skill and craft, is therefore an appropriate emblem."

After Lucius had, by the grace of Isis, recovered his human form, the Priest said to him, "Calamity hath no hold on those whom our Goddess hath chosen for her service, and whom her majesty hath vindicated." And the people declared that he was fortunate to be "thus after a manner born again, and at once betrothed to the service of the Holy Ministry."

When he urged the Chief Priest to initiate him, he was answered that there was not "a single one among the initiated, of a mind so depraved, or so bent on his own destruction, as, without receiving a special command from Isis, to dare to undertake her minis-try rashly and sacrilegiously, and thereby commit an act certain to bring upon himself a dreadful injury." "For," continued the Chief Priest, "the gates of the shades below, and the care of our life being in the hands of the Goddess,--the ceremony of initiation into the Mysteries is, as it were, to suffer death, with the precarious chance of resuscitation. Wherefore the Goddess, in the wisdom of her Divinity, hath been accustomed to select as persons to whom the secrets of her religion can with propriety be entrusted, those who, standing as it were on the utmost limit of the course of life they have completed, may through her Providence be in a manner born again, and commence the career of a new existence."

When he was finally to be initiated, he was conducted to the nearest baths, and after having bathed, the Priest first solicited forgiveness of the Gods, and then sprinkled him all over with the clearest and purest water, and conducted him back to the Temple; "where," says Apuleius, "after giving me some instruction, that mortal tongue is not permitted to reveal, he bade me for the succeeding ten days restrain my appetite, eat no animal food, and drink no wine."

[p. 389]

These ten days elapsed, the Priest led him into the inmost recesses of the Sanctuary. "And here, studious reader," he continues, "peradventure thou wilt be sufficiently anxious to know all that was said and done, which, were it lawful to divulge, I would tell thee; and, wert thou permitted to hear, thou shouldst know. Nevertheless, although the disclosure would affix the penalty of rash curiosity to my tongue as well as thy ears, yet will I, for fear thou shouldst be too long tormented with religious longing, and suffer the pain of protracted suspense, tell the truth notwithstanding. Listen then to what I shall relate. I approached the abode of death; with my foot I pressed the threshold of Proserpine's Palace. I was transported through the elements, and conducted back again. At midnight I saw the bright light of the sun shining. I stood in the presence of the Gods, the Gods of Heaven and of the Shades below; ay, stood near and worshipped. And now have I told thee such things that, hearing, thou necessarily canst not understand; and being beyond the comprehension of the Profane, I can enunciate without committing a crime."

After night had passed, and the morning had dawned, the usual ceremonies were at an end. Then he was consecrated by twelve stoles being put upon him, clothed, crowned with palm-leaves, and exhibited to the people. The remainder of that day was celebrated as his birthday and passed in festivities; and on the third day afterward, the same religious ceremonies were repeated, including a religious breakfast, "followed by a final consummation of ceremonies."

A year afterward, he was warned to prepare for initiation into the Mysteries of "the Great God, Supreme Parent of all the other Gods, the invincible OSIRIS." "For," says Apuleius, "although there is a strict connexion between the religions of both Deities, AND EVEN THE ESSENCE OF BOTH DIVINITIES IS IDENTICAL, the ceremonies of the respective initiations are considerably different."

Compare with this hint the following language of the prayer of Lucius, addressed to Isis; and we may judge what doctrines were taught in the Mysteries, in regard to the Deity: "O Holy and Perpetual Preserver of the Human Race! ever ready to cherish mortals by Thy munificence, and to afford Thy sweet maternal affection to the wretched under misfortune; Whose bounty is never at rest, neither by day nor by night, nor throughout the very minutest particle of duration; Thou who stretchest forth Thy

[p. 390]

health-bearing right hand over the land and over the sea for the protection of mankind, to disperse the storms of life, to unravel the inextricable entanglement of the web of fate, to mitigate the tempests of fortune, and restrain the malignant influences of the stars,--the Gods in Heaven adore Thee, the Gods in the shades below do Thee homage, the stars obey Thee, the Divinities rejoice in Thee, the elements and the revolving seasons serve Thee! At Thy nod the winds breathe, clouds gather, seeds grow, buds germinate; in obedience to Thee the Earth revolves AND THE SUN GIVES US LIGHT. IT IS THOU WHO GOVERNEST THE UNIVERSE AND TREADEST TARTARUS UNDER THY FEET."

Then he was initiated into the nocturnal Mysteries of Osiris and Serapis: and afterward into those of Ceres at Rome: but of the ceremonies in these initiations, Apuleius says nothing.

Under the Archonship of Euclid, bastards and slaves were excluded from initiation; and the same exclusion obtained against the Materialists or Epicureans who denied Providence and consequently the utility of initiation. By a natural progress, it came at length to be considered that the gates of Elysium would open only for the Initiates, whose souls had been purified and regenerated in the sanctuaries. But it was never held, on the other hand, that initiation alone sufficed. We learn from Plato, that it was also necessary for the soul to be purified from every stain: and that the purification necessary was such as gave virtue, truth, wisdom, strength, justice, and temperance.

Entrance to the Temples was forbidden to all who had committed homicide, even if it were involuntary. So it is stated by both Isocrates and Theon. Magicians and Charlatans who made trickery a trade, and impostors pretending to be possessed by evil spirits, were excluded from the sanctuaries. Every impious person and criminal was rejected; and Lampridius states that before the celebration of the Mysteries, public notice was given, that none need apply to enter but those against whom their consciences uttered no reproach, and who were certain of their own innocence.

It was required of the Initiate that his heart and hands should be free from any stain. Porphyry says that man's soul, at death, should be enfranchised from all the passions, from hate, envy, and the others; and, in a word, be as pure as it is required to be in the Mysteries. Of course it is not surprising that parricides and perjurers,

[p. 391]

and others who had committed crimes against God or man, could not be admitted. In the Mysteries of Mithras, a lecture was repeated to the Initiate on the subject of Justice. And the great moral lesson of the Mysteries, to which all their mystic ceremonial tended, expressed in a single line by Virgil, was to practise Justice and revere the Deity;--thus recalling men to justice, by connecting it with the justice of the Gods, who require it and punish its infraction. The Initiate could aspire to the favors of the Gods, only because and while he respected the rights of society and those of humanity. "The sun," says the chorus of Initiates in Aristophanes, "burns with a pure light for us alone, who, admitted to the Mysteries, observe the laws of piety in our intercourse with strangers and our fellow-citizens." The rewards of initiation were attached to the practice of the social virtues. It was not enough to be initiated merely. It was necessary to be faithful to the laws of initiation, which imposed on men duties in regard to their kind. Bacchus allowed none to participate in his Mysteries, but men who conformed to the rules of piety and justice. Sensibility, above all, and compassion for the misfortunes of others, were precious virtues, which initiation strove to encourage. "Nature," says Juvenal, "has created us compassionate, since it has endowed us with tears. Sensibility is the most admirable of our senses. What man is truly worthy of the torch of the Mysteries; who such as the Priest of Ceres requires him to be, if he regards the misfortunes of others as wholly foreign to himself?"

All who had not used their endeavors to defeat a conspiracy; and those who had on the contrary fomented one; those citizens who had betrayed their country, who had surrendered an advantageous post or place, or the vessels of the State, to the enemy; all who had supplied the enemy with money; and in general, all who had come short of their duties as honest men and good citizens, were excluded from the Mysteries of Eleusis. To be admitted there, one must have lived equitably, and with sufficient good fortune not to be regarded as hated by the Gods.

Thus the Society of the Initiates was, in its principle, and according to the true purpose of its institution, a society of virtuous men, who labored to free their souls from the tyranny of the passions, and to develop the germ of all the social virtues. And this was the meaning of the idea, afterward misunderstood, that

[p. 392]

entry into Elysium was only allowed to the Initiates: because entrance to the sanctuaries was allowed to the virtuous only, and Elysium was created for virtuous souls alone.

The precise nature and details of the doctrines as to a future life, and rewards and punishments there, developed in the Mysteries, is in a measure uncertain. Little direct information in regard to it has come down to us. No doubt, in the ceremonies, there was a scenic representation of Tartarus and the judgment of the dead, resembling that which we find in Virgil: but there is as little doubt that these representations were explained to be allegorical. It is not our purpose here to repeat the descriptions given of Elysium and Tartarus. That would be aside from our object. We are only concerned with the great fact that the Mysteries taught the doctrine of the soul's immortality, and that, in some shape, suffering, pain, remorse, and agony, ever follow sin as its consequences.

Human ceremonies are indeed but imperfect symbols; and the alternate baptisms in fire and water intended to purify us into immortality, are ever in this world interrupted at the moment of their anticipated completion. Life is a mirror which reflects only to deceive, a tissue perpetually interrupted and broken, an urn forever fed, yet never full.

All initiation is but introductory to the great change of death. Baptism, anointing, embalming, obsequies by burial or fire, are preparatory symbols, like the initiation of Hercules before descending to the Shades, pointing out the mental change which ought to precede the renewal of existence. Death is the true initiation, to which sleep is the introductory or minor mystery. It is the final rite which united the Egyptian with his God, and which opens the same promise to all who are duly prepared for it.

The body was deemed a prison for the soul; but the latter was not condemned to eternal banishment and imprisonment. The Father of the Worlds permits its chains to be broken, and has provided in the course of Nature the means of its escape. It was a doctrine of immemorial antiquity, shared alike by Egyptians, Pythagoreans, the Orphici, and by that characteristic Bacchic Sage, "the Preceptor of the Soul," Silenus, that death is far better than life; that the real death belongs to those who on earth are immersed in the Lethe of its passions and fascinations, and that the true life commences only when the soul is emancipated for its return.

[p. 393]

And in this sense, as presiding over life and death, Dionusos is in the highest sense the LIBERATOR: since, like Osiris, he frees the soul, and guides it in its migrations beyond the grave, preserving it from the risk of again falling under the slavery of matter or of some inferior animal form, the purgatory of Metempsychosis; and exalting and perfecting its nature through the purifying discipline of his Mysteries. "The great consummation of all philosophy," said Socrates, professedly quoting from traditional and mystic sources, "is Death: He who pursues philosophy aright, is studying how to die."

All soul is part of the Universal Soul, whose totality is Dionusos; and it is therefore he who, as Spirit of Spirits, leads back the vagrant spirit to its home, and accompanies it through the purifying processes, both real and symbolical, of its earthly transit. He is therefore emphatically the Mystes or Hierophant, the great Spiritual Mediator of Greek religion.

The human soul is itself daimonios a God within the mind, capable through its own power of rivalling the canonization of the Hero, of making itself immortal by the practice of the good, and the contemplation of the beautiful and true. The removal to the Happy Islands could only be understood mythically; everything earthly must die; Man, like Oedipus, is wounded from his birth, his real elysium can exist only beyond the grave. Dionusos died and descended to the shades. His passion was the great Secret of the Mysteries; as Death is the Grand Mystery of existence. His death, typical of Nature's Death, or of her periodical decay and restoration, was one of the many symbols of the palingenesia or second birth of man.

Man descended from the elemental Forces or Titans [Elohim], who fed on the body of the Pantheistic Deity creating the Universe by self-sacrifice, commemorates in sacramental observance this mysterious passion; and while partaking of the raw flesh of the victim, seems to be invigorated by a fresh draught from the fountain of universal life, to receive a new pledge of regenerated existence. Death is the inseparable antecedent of life; the seed dies in order to produce the plant, and earth itself is rent asunder and dies at the birth of Dionusos. Hence the significancy of the phallus, or of its inoffensive substitute, the obelisk, rising as an emblem of resurrection by the tomb of buried Deity at Lerna or at Sais.

[p. 394]

Dionusos-Orpheus descended to the Shades to recover the lost Virgin of the Zodiac, to bring back his mother to the sky as Thyone; or what has the same meaning, to consummate his eventful marriage with Persephone, thereby securing, like the nuptials of his father with Semele or Danae, the perpetuity of Nature. His under-earth office is the depression of the year, the wintry aspect in the alternations of bull and serpent, whose united series makes up the continuity of Time, and in which, physically speaking, the stern and dark are ever the parents of the beautiful and bright.

It was this aspect, sombre for the moment, but bright by anticipation, which was contemplated in the Mysteries: the human sufferer was consoled by witnessing the severer trials of the Gods; and the vicissitudes of life and death, expressed by apposite symbols, such as the sacrifice or submersion of the Bull, the extinction and re-illumination of the torch, excited corresponding emotions of alternate grief and joy, that play of passion which was present at the origin of Nature, and which accompanies all her changes.

The greater Eleusiniae were celebrated in the month Boedromion, when the seed was buried in the ground, and when the year, verging to its decline, disposes the mind to serious reflection. The first days of the ceremonial were passed in sorrow and anxious silence, in fasting and expiatory or lustral offices. On a sudden, the scene was changed: sorrow and lamentation were discarded, the glad name of Iacchus passed from mouth to mouth, the image of the God, crowned with myrtle and bearing a lighted torch, was borne in joyful procession from the Ceramicus to Eleusis, where, during the ensuing night, the initiation was completed by an imposing revelation. The first scene was in the pronaos, or outer court of the sacred enclosure, where amidst utter darkness, or while the meditating God, the star illuminating the Nocturnal Mystery, alone carried an unextinguished torch, the candidates were overawed with terrific sounds and noises, while they painfully groped their way, as in the gloomy cavern of the soul's sublunar migration; a scene justly compared to the passage of the Valley of the Shadow of Death. For by the immutable law exemplified in the trials of Psyche, man must pass through the terrors of the under-world, before he can reach the height of Heaven. At length the gates of the adytum were thrown open, a supernatural light streamed from the illuminated statue

[p. 395]

of the Goddess, and enchanting sights and sounds, mingled with songs and dances, exalted the communicant to a rapture of supreme felicity, realizing, as far as sensuous imagery could depict, the anticipated reunion with the Gods.

In the dearth of direct evidence as to the detail of the ceremonies enacted, or of the meanings connected with them, their tendency must be inferred from the characteristics of the contemplated deities with their accessory symbols and mythi, or from direct testimony as to the value of the Mysteries generally.

The ordinary phenomena of vegetation, the death of the seed in giving birth to the plant, connecting the sublimest hopes with the plainest occurrences, was the simple yet beautiful formula assumed by the great mystery in almost all religions, from the Zend-Avesta to the Gospel. As Proserpina, the divine power is as the seed decaying and destroyed; as Artemis, she is the principle of its destruction; but Artemis Proserpina is also Core_ Soteria, the Saviour, who leads the Spirits of Hercules and Hyacinthus to Heaven.

Many other emblems were employed in the Mysteries,--as the dove, the myrtle-wreath, and others, all significant of life rising out of death, and of the equivocal condition of dying yet immortal man.

The horrors and punishments of Tartarus, as described in the Phaedo and the Aeneid, with all the ceremonies of the judgments of Minos, Eacus, and Rhadamanthus, were represented, sometimes more and sometimes less fully, in the Mysteries; in order to impress upon the minds of the Initiates this great lesson,--that we should be ever. prepared to appear before the Supreme Judge, with a heart pure and spotless; as Socrates teaches in the Gorgias. For the soul stained with crimes, he says, to descend to the Shades, is the bitterest ill. To adhere to Justice and Wisdom, Plato holds, is our duty, that we may some day take that lofty road that leads toward the heavens, and avoid most of the evils to which the soul is exposed in its subterranean journey of a thousand years. And so in the Phaedo, Socrates teaches that we should seek here below to free our soul of its passions, in order to be ready to enter our appearance, whenever Destiny summons us to the Shades.

Thus the Mysteries inculcated a great moral truth, veiled with a fable of huge proportions and the appliances of an impressive spectacle, to which, exhibited in the sanctuaries, art and natural

[p. 396]

magic lent all they had that was imposing. They sought to strengthen men against the horrors of death and the fearful idea of utter annihilation. Death, says the author of the dialogue, entitled Axiochus, included in the works of Plato, is but a passage to a happier state; but one must have lived well, to attain that most fortunate result. So that the doctrine of the immortality of the soul was consoling to the virtuous and religious man alone; while to all others it came with menaces and despair, surrounding them with terrors and alarms that disturbed their repose during all their life.

For the material horrors of Tartarus, allegorical to the Initiate, were real to the mass of the Profane; nor in latter times, did, perhaps many Initiates read rightly the allegory. The triple-walled prison, which the condemned soul first met, round which swelled and surged the fiery waves of Phlegethon, wherein rolled roaring, huge, blazing rocks; the great gate with columns of adamant, which none save the Gods could crush; Tisiphone, their warder, with her bloody robes; the lash resounding on the mangled bodies of the miserable unfortunates, their plaintive groans, mingled in horrid harmony with the clashings of their chains; the Furies, lashing the guilty with their snakes; the awful abyss where Hydra howls with its hundred heads, greedy to devour; Tityus, prostrate, and his entrails fed upon by the cruel vulture; Sisyphus, ever rolling his rock; Ixion on his wheel; Tantalus tortured by eternal thirst and hunger, in the midst of water and with  fruits touching his head; the daughters of Danaus at their eternal, fruitless task; beasts biting and venomous reptiles stinging; and devouring flame eternally consuming bodies ever renewed in endless agony; all these sternly impressed upon the people the terrible consequences of sin and vice, and urged them to pursue the paths of honesty and virtue.

And if, in the ceremonies of the Mysteries, these material horrors were explained to the Initiates as mere symbols of the unimaginable torture, remorse, and agony that would rend the immaterial soul and rack the immortal spirit, they were feeble and insufficient in the same mode and measure only, as all material images and symbols fall short of that which is beyond the cognizance of our senses: and the grave Hierophant, the imagery, the paintings, the dramatic horrors, the funeral sacrifices, the august mysteries, the solemn silence of the sanctuaries, were none the

[p. 397]

less impressive, because they were known to be but symbols, that with material shows and images made the imagination to be the teacher of the intellect.

So, too, it was represented, that except for the gravest sins there was an opportunity for expiation; and the tests of water, air, and fire were represented; by means of which, during the march of many years, the soul could be purified, and rise toward the ethereal regions; that ascent being more or less tedious and laborious, according as each soul was more or less clogged by the gross impediments of its sins and vices. Herein was shadowed forth, (how distinctly taught the Initiates we know not), the doctrine that pain and sorrow, misfortune and remorse, are the inevitable consequences that flow from sin and vice, as effect flows from cause; that by each sin and every act of vice the soul drops back and loses ground in its advance toward perfection: and that the ground so lost is and will be in reality never so recovered as that the sin shall be as if it never had been committed; but that throughout all the eternity of its existence, each soul shall be conscious that every act of vice or baseness it did on earth has made the distance greater between itself and ultimate perfection.

We see this truth glimmering in the doctrine, taught in the Mysteries, that though slight and ordinary offences could be expiated by penances, repentance, acts of beneficence, and prayers, grave crimes were mortal sins, beyond the reach of all such remedies. Eleusis closed her gates against Nero: and the Pagan Priests told Constantine that among all their modes of expiation there was none so potent as could wash from his soul the dark spots left by the murder of his wife, and his multiplied perjuries and assassinations.

The object of the ancient initiations being to ameliorate mankind and to perfect the intellectual part of man, the nature of the human soul, its origin, its destination, its relations to the body and to universal nature, all formed part of the mystic science; and to them in part the lessons given to the Initiate were directed. For it was believed that initiation tended to his perfection, and to preventing the divine part within him, overloaded with matter gross and earthy, from being plunged into gloom, and impeded in its return to the Deity. The soul, with them, was not a mere conception or abstraction; but a reality including in itself life and thought; or, rather, of whose essence it was to live and think,

[p. 398]

[paragraph continues] It was material; but not brute, inert, inactive, lifeless, motionless, formless, lightless matter. It was held to be active, reasoning, thinking; its natural home in the highest regions of the Universe, whence it descended to illuminate, give form and movement to, vivify, animate, and carry with itself the baser matter; and whither it unceasingly tends to reascend, when and as soon as it can free itself from its connection with that matter. From that substance, divine, infinitely delicate and active, essentially luminous, the souls of men were formed, and by it alone, uniting with and organizing their bodies, men lived.

This was the doctrine of Pythagoras, who learned it when he received the Egyptian Mysteries: and it was the doctrine of all who, by means of the ceremonial of initiation, thought to purify the soul. Virgil makes the spirit of Anchises teach it to Aeneas: and all the expiations and lustrations used in the Mysteries were but symbols of those intellectual ones by which the soul was to be purged of its vice-spots and stains, and freed of the incumbrance of its earthly prison, so that it might rise unimpeded to the source from which it came.

Hence sprung the doctrine of the transmigration of souls; which Pythagoras taught as an allegory, and those who came after him received literally. Plato, like him, drew his doctrines from the East and the Mysteries, and undertook to translate the language of the symbols used there, into that of Philosophy; and to prove by argument and philosophical deduction, what, felt by the consciousness, the Mysteries taught by symbols as an indisputable fact,--the immortality of the soul. Cicero did the same; and followed the Mysteries in teaching that the Gods were but mortal men, who for their great virtues and signal services had deserved that their souls should, after death, be raised to that lofty rank.

It being taught in the Mysteries, either by way of allegory, the meaning of which was not made known except to a select few, or, perhaps only at a later day, as an actual reality, that the souls of the vicious dead passed into the bodies of those animals to whose nature their vices had most affinity, it was also taught that the soul could avoid these transmigrations, often successive and numerous, by the practice of virtue, which would acquit it of them, free it from the circle of successive generations, and restore it at once to its source. Hence nothing was so ardently prayed for by the Initiates, says Proclus, as this happy fortune, which,

[p. 399]

delivering them from the empire of Evil, would restore them to their true life, and conduct them to the place of final rest. To this doctrine probably referred those figures of animals and monsters which were exhibited to the Initiate, before allowing him to see the sacred light for which he sighed.

Plato says, that souls will not reach the term of their ills, until the revolutions of the world have restored them to their primitive condition, and purified them from the stains which they have contracted by the contagion of fire, earth, and air. And he held that they could not be allowed to enter Heaven, until they had distinguished themselves by the practice of virtue in some one of three several bodies. The Manicheans allowed five: Pindar, the same number as Plato; as did the Jews.

And Cicero says, that the ancient soothsayers, and the interpreters of the will of the Gods, in their religious ceremonies and initiations, taught that we expiate here below the crimes committed in a prior life; and for that are born. It was taught in these Mysteries, that the soul passes through several states, and that the pains and sorrows of this life are an expiation of prior faults.

This doctrine of transmigration of souls obtained, as Porphyry informs us, among the Persians and Magi. It was held in the East and the West, and that from the remotest antiquity. Herodotus found it among the Egyptians, who made the term of the circle of migrations from one human body, through animals, fishes, and birds, to another human body, three thousand years. Empedocles even held that souls went into plants. Of these, the laurel was the noblest, as of animals the lion; both being consecrated to the Sun, to which, it was held in the Orient, virtuous souls were to return. The Curds, the Chinese, the Kabbalists, all held the same doctrine. So Origen held, and the Bishop Synesius, the latter of whom had been initiated, and who thus prayed to God: "O Father, grant that my soul, reunited to the light, may not be plunged again into the defilements of earth!" So the Gnostics held; and even the Disciples of Christ inquired if the man who was born blind, was not so punished for some sin that he had committed before his birth.

Virgil, in the celebrated allegory in which he develops the doctrines taught in the Mysteries, enunciated the doctrine, held by most of the ancient philosophers, of the pre-existence of souls, in the eternal fire from which they emanate; that fire which animates

[p. 400]

the stars, and circulates in every part of Nature: and the purifications of the soul, by fire, water, and air, of which he speaks, and which three modes were employed in the Mysteries of Bacchus, were symbols of the passage of the soul into different bodies.

The relations of the human soul with the rest of nature were a chief object of the science of the Mysteries. The man was there brought face to face with entire nature. The world, and the spherical envelope that surrounds it, were represented by a mystic egg, by the side of the image of the Sun-God whose Mysteries were celebrated. The famous Orphic egg was consecrated to Bacchus in his Mysteries. It was, says Plutarch, an image of the Universe, which engenders everything, and contains everything in its bosom. "Consult," says Macrobius, "the Initiates of the Mysteries of Bacchus, who honor with special veneration the sacred egg." The rounded and almost spherical form of its shell, he says, which encloses it on every side, and confines within itself the principles of life, is a symbolic image of the world; and the world is the universal principle of all things.

This symbol was borrowed from the Egyptians, who also consecrated the egg to Osiris, germ of Light, himself born, says Diodorus, from that famous egg. In Thebes, in Upper Egypt, he was represented as emitting it from his mouth, and causing to issue from it the first principle of heat and light, or the Fire-God, Vulcan, or Phtha. We find this egg even in Japan, between the horns of the famous Mithriac Bull, whose attributes Osiris, Apis, and Bacchus all borrowed.

Orpheus, author of the Grecian Mysteries, which he carried from Egypt to Greece, consecrated this symbol: and taught that matter, uncreated and informous, existed from all eternity, unorganized, as chaos; containing in itself the Principles of all Existences confused and intermingled, light with darkness, the dry with the humid, heat with cold; from which, it after long ages taking the shape of an immense egg, issued the purest matter, or first substance, and the residue was divided into the four elements, from which proceeded heaven and earth and all things else. This grand Cosmogonic idea he taught in the Mysteries; and thus the Hierophant explained the meaning of the mystic egg, seen by the Initiates in the Sanctuary.

Thus entire Nature, in her primitive organization, was presented

[p. 401]

to him whom it was wished to instruct in her secrets and initiate in her mysteries; and Clemens of Alexandria might well say that initiation was a real physiology.

So Phanes, the Light-God, in the Mysteries of the New Orphics, emerged from the egg of chaos: and the Persians had the great egg of Ormuzd. And Sanchoniathon tells us that in the Phoenician theology, the matter of chaos took the form of an egg; and he adds: "Such are the lessons which the Son of Thabion, first Hierophant of the Phoenicians, turned into allegories, in which physics and astronomy intermingled, and which he taught to the other Hierophants, whose duty it was to preside at orgies and initiations; and who, seeking to excite the astonishment and admiration of mortals, faithfully transmitted these things to their successors and the Initiates."

In the Mysteries was also taught the division of the Universal Cause into an Active and a Passive cause; of which two, Osiris and Isis,--the heavens and the earth were symbols. These two First Causes, into which it was held that the great Universal First Cause at the beginning of things divided itself, were the two great Divinities, whose worship was, according to Varro, inculcated upon the Initiates at Samothrace. "As is taught," he says, "in the initiation into the Mysteries at Samothrace, Heaven and Earth are regarded as the two first Divinities. They are the potent Gods worshipped in that Island, and whose names are consecrated in the books of our Augurs. One of them is male and the other female; and they bear the same relation to each other as the soul does to the body, humidity to dryness." The Curetes, in Crete, had builded an altar to heaven and to Earth; whose Mysteries they celebrated at Gnossus, in a cypress grove.

These two Divinities, the Active and Passive Principles of the Universe, were commonly symbolized by the generative parts of man and woman; to which, in remote ages, no idea of indecency was attached; the Phallus and Cteis, emblems of generation and production, and which, as such, appeared in the Mysteries. The Indian Lingam was the union of both, as were the boat and mast and the point within a circle: all of which expressed the same philosophical idea as to the Union of the two great Causes of Nature, which concur, one actively and the other passively, in the generation of all beings: which were symbolized by what we now term Gemini, the Twins, at that remote period when the Sun was

[p. 402]

in that Sign at the Vernal Equinox, and when they were Male and Female; and of which the Phallus was perhaps taken from the generative organ of the Bull, when about twenty-five hundred years before our era he opened that equinox, and became to the Ancient World the symbol of the creative and generative Power.

The Initiates at Eleusis commenced, Proclus says, by invoking the two great causes of nature, the Heavens and the Earth, on which in succession they fixed their eyes, addressing to each a prayer. And they deemed it their duty to do so, he adds, because they saw in them the Father and Mother of all generations. The concourse of these two agents of the Universe was termed in theological language a marriage. Tertullian, accusing the Valentinians of having borrowed these symbols from the Mysteries of Eleusis, yet admits that in those Mysteries they were explained in a manner consistent with decency, as representing the powers of nature. He was too little of a philosopher to comprehend the sublime esoteric meaning of these emblems, which will, if you advance, in other Degrees be unfolded to you.

The Christian Fathers contented themselves with reviling and ridiculing the use of these emblems. But as they in the earlier times created no indecent ideas, and were worn alike by the most innocent youths and virtuous women, it will be far wiser for us to seek to penetrate their meaning. Not only the Egyptians, says Diodorus Siculus, but every other people that consecrate this symbol (the Phallus), deem that they thereby do honor to the Active Force of the universal generation of all living things. For the same reason, as we learn from the geographer Ptolemy, it was revered among the Assyrians and Persians. Proclus remarks that in the distribution of the Zodiac among the twelve great Divinities, by ancient astrology, six signs were assigned to the male and six to the female principle.

There is another division of nature, which has in all ages struck all men, and which was not forgotten in the Mysteries; that of Light and Darkness, Day and Night, Good and Evil; which mingle with, and clash against, and pursue or are pursued by each other throughout the Universe. The Great Symbolic Egg distinctly reminded the Initiates of this great division of the world. Plutarch, treating of the dogma of a Providence, and of that of the two principles of Light and Darkness, which he regarded as the basis of the Ancient Theology, of the Orgies and the Mysteries,

[p. 403]

as well among the Greeks as the Barbarians,--a doctrine whose origin, according to him, is lost in the night of time,--cites, in support of his opinion, the famous Mystic Egg of the disciples of Zoroaster and the Initiates in the Mysteries of Mithras.

To the Initiates in the Mysteries of Eleusis was exhibited the spectacle of these two principles, in the successive scenes of Darkness and Light which passed before their eyes. To the profoundest darkness, accompanied with illusions and horrid phantoms, succeeded the most brilliant light, whose splendor blazed round the statue of the Goddess. The candidate, says Dion Chrysostomus, passed into a mysterious temple, of astonishing magnitude and beauty, where were exhibited to him many mystic scenes; where his ears were stunned with many voices; and where Darkness and Light successively passed before him. And Themistius in like manner describes the Initiate, when about to enter into that part of the sanctuary tenanted by the Goddess, as filled with fear and religious awe, wavering, uncertain in what direction to advance through the profound darkness that envelopes him. But when the Hierophant has opened the entrance to the inmost sanctuary, and removed the robe that hides the Goddess, he exhibits her to the Initiate, resplendent with divine light. The thick shadow and gloomy atmosphere which had environed the candidate vanish; he is filled with a vivid and glowing enthusiasm, that lifts his soul out of the profound dejection in which it was plunged; and the purest light succeeds to the thickest darkness.

In a fragment of the same writer, preserved by Stobaeus, we learn that the Initiate, up to the moment when his initiation is to be consummated, is alarmed by every kind of sight: that astonishment and terror take his soul captive; he trembles; cold sweat flows from his body; until the moment when the Light is shown him,--a most astounding Light,--the brilliant scene of Elysium, where he sees charming meadows overarched by a clear sky, and festivals celebrated by dances; where he hears harmonious voices, and the majestic chants of the Hierophants; and views the sacred spectacles. Then, absolutely free, and enfranchised from the dominion of all ills, he mingles with the crowd of Initiates, and, crowned with flowers, celebrates with them the holy orgies, in the brilliant realms of ether, and the dwelling-place of Ormuzd.

In the Mysteries of Isis, the candidate first passed through the

[p. 404]

dark valley of the shadow of death; then into a place representing the elements or sublunary world, where the two principles clash and contend; and was finally admitted to a luminous region, where the sun, with his most brilliant light, put to rout the shades of night. Then he himself put on the costume of the Sun-God, or the Visible Source of Ethereal Light, in whose Mysteries he was initiated; and passed from the empire of darkness to that of light. After having set his feet on the threshold of the palace of Pluto, he ascended to the Empyrean, to the bosom of the Eternal Principle of Light of the Universe, from which all souls and intelligences emanate.

Plutarch admits that this theory of two Principles was the basis of all the Mysteries, and consecrated in the religious ceremonies and Mysteries of Greece. Osiris and Typhon, Ormuzd and Ahriman, Bacchus and the Titans and Giants, all represented these principles. Phanes, the luminous God that issued from the Sacred Egg, and Night, bore the sceptres in the Mysteries of the New Bacchus. Night and Day were two of the eight Gods adored in the Mysteries of Osiris. The sojourn of Proserpine and also of Adonis, during six months of each year in the upper world, abode of light, and six months in the lower or abode of darkness, allegorically represented the same division of the Universe.

The connection of the different initiations with the Equinoxes which separate the Empire of the Nights from that of the Days, and fix the moment when one of these principles begins to prevail over the other, shows that the Mysteries referred to the continual contest between the two principles of light and darkness, each alternately victor and vanquished. The very object proposed by them shows that their basis was the theory of the two principles and their relations with the soul. "We celebrate the august Mysteries of Ceres and Proserpine," says the Emperor Julian, "at the Autumnal Equinox, to obtain of the Gods that the soul may not experience the malignant action of the Power of Darkness that is then about to have sway and rule in Nature." Sallust the Philosopher makes almost the same remark as to the relations of the soul with the periodical march of light and darkness, during an annual revolution; and assures us that the mysterious festivals of Greece related to the same. And in all the explanations given by Macrobius of the Sacred Fables in regard to the Sun, adored under the names of Osiris, Horus, Adonis, Atys, Bacchus, etc., we

[p. 405]

invariably see that they refer to the theory of the two Principles, Light and Darkness, and the triumphs gained by one over the other. In April was celebrated the first triumph obtained by the light of day over the length of the nights; and the ceremonies of mourning and rejoicing had, Macrobius says, as their object, the vicissitudes of the annual administration of the world.

This brings us naturally to the tragic portion of these religious scenes, and to the allegorical history of the different adventures of the Principle, Light, victor and vanquished by turns, in the combats waged with Darkness during each annual period. Here we reach the most mysterious part of the ancient initiations, and that most interesting to the Mason who laments the death of his Grand Master Khir-Om. Over it Herodotus throws the august veil of mystery and silence. Speaking of the Temple of Minerva, or of that Isis who was styled the Mother of the Sun-God, and whose Mysteries were termed Isiac, at Sais, he speaks of a Tomb in the Temple, in the rear of the Chapel and against the wall; and says, "It is the tomb of a man, whose name respect requires me to conceal. Within the Temple were great obelisks of stone [phalli], and a circular lake paved with stones and revetted with a parapet. It seemed to me as large as that at Delos" [where the Mysteries of Apollo were celebrated]. "In this lake the Egyptians celebrate, during the night, what they style the Mysteries, in which are represented the sufferings of the God of whom I have spoken above." This God was Osiris, put to death by Typhon, and who descended to the Shades and was restored to life; of which he had spoken before.

We are reminded, by this passage, of the Tomb of Khir-Om, his death, and his rising from the grave, symbolical of restoration of life; and also of the brazen Sea in the Temple at Jerusalem. Herodotus adds: "I impose upon myself a profound silence in regard to these Mysteries, with most of which I am acquainted. As little will I speak of the initiations of Ceres, known among the Greeks as Thesmophoria. What I shall say will not violate the respect which I owe to religion."

Athenagoras quotes this passage to show that not only the Statue but the Tomb of Osiris was exhibited in Egypt, and a tragic representation of his sufferings; and remarks that the Egyptians had mourning ceremonies in honor of their Gods, whose deaths they lamented; and to whom they afterward, sacrificed as having passed to a state of immortality.

[p. 406]

It is, however, not difficult, combining the different rays of light that emanate from the different Sanctuaries, to learn the genius and the object of these secret ceremonies. We have hints, and not details.

We know that the Egyptians worshipped the Sun, under the name of Osiris. The misfortunes and tragical death of this God were an allegory relating to the Sun. Typhon, like Ahriman, represented Darkness. The sufferings and death of Osiris in the Mysteries of the Night were a mystic image of the phenomena of Nature, and the conflict of the two great Principles which share the empire of Nature, and most influenced our souls. The Sun is neither born, dies, nor is raised to life: and the recital of these events was but an allegory, veiling a higher truth.

Horus, son of Isis, and the same as Apollo or the Sun, also died and was restored again to life and to his mother; and the priests of Isis celebrated these great events by mourning and joyous festival succeeding each other.

In the Mysteries of Phoenicia, established in honor of Thammuz or Adoni, also the Sun, the spectacle of his death and resurrection was exhibited to the Initiates. As we learn from Meursius and Plutarch, a figure was exhibited representing the corpse of a young man. Flowers were strewed upon his body, the women mourned for him; a tomb was erected to him. And these feasts, as we learn from Plutarch and Ovid, passed into Greece.

In the Mysteries of Mithras, the Sun-God, in Asia Minor, Armenia and Persia, the death of that God was lamented, and his resurrection was celebrated with the most enthusiastic expressions of joy. A corpse, we learn from Julian Firmicus, was shown the Initiates, representing Mithras dead; and afterward his resurrection was announced; and they were then invited to rejoice that the dead God was restored to life, and had by means of his sufferings secured their salvation. Three months before, his birth had been celebrated, under the emblem of an infant, born on the 25th of December, or the eighth day before the Kalends of January.

In Greece, in the Mysteries of the same God, honored under the name of Bakchos, a representation was given of his death, slain by the Titans; of his descent into hell, his subsequent resurrection, and his return toward his Principle or the pure abode whence he had descended to unite himself with matter. In the islands

[p. 407]

of Chios and Tenedos, his death was represented by the sacrifice of a man, actually immolated.

The mutilation and sufferings of the same Sun-God, honored in Phrygia under the name of Atys, caused the tragic scenes that were, as we learn from Diodorus Siculus, represented annually in the Mysteries of Cybele, mother of the Gods. An image was borne there, representing the corpse of a young man, over whose tomb tears were shed, and to whom funeral honors were paid.

At Samothrace, in the Mysteries of the Cabiri or great Gods, a representation was given of the death of one of them. This name was given to the Sun, because the Ancient Astronomers gave the name of Gods Cabiri and of Samothrace to the two Gods in the Constellation Gemini; whom others term Apollo and Hercules, two names of the Sun. Athenion says that the young Cabirus so slain was the same as the Dionusos or Bakchos of the Greeks. The Pelasgi, ancient inhabitants of Greece, and who settled Samothrace, celebrated these Mysteries, whose origin is unknown: and they worshipped Castor and Pollux as patrons of navigation.

The tomb of Apollo was at Delphi, where his body was laid, after Python, the Polar Serpent that annually heralds the coming of autumn, cold, darkness, and winter, had slain him, and over whom the God triumphs, on the 25th of March, on his return to the lamb of the Vernal Equinox.

In Crete, Jupiter Ammon, or the Sun in Aries, painted with the attributes of that equinoctial sign, the Ram or Lamb;--that Ammon who, Martianus Copella says, is the same as Osiris, Adoni, Adonis, Atys, and the other Sun-Gods,--had also a tomb, and a religious initiation; one of the principal ceremonies of which consisted in clothing the Initiate with the skin of a white lamb. And in this we see the origin of the apron of white sheep-skin, used in Masonry.

All these deaths and resurrections, these funeral emblems, these anniversaries of mourning and joy, these cenotaphs raised in different places to the Sun-God, honored under different names, had but a single object, the allegorical narration of the events which happened here below to the Light of Nature, that sacred fire from which our souls were deemed to emanate, warring with Matter and the dark Principle resident therein, ever at variance with the Principle of Good and Light poured upon itself by the Supreme Divinity. All these Mysteries, says Clemens of Alexandria, displaying

[p. 408]

to us murders and tombs alone, all these religious tragedies, had a common basis, variously ornamented: and that basis was the fictitious death and resurrection of the Sun, Soul of the World, principle of life and movement in the Sublunary World, and source of our intelligences, which are but a portion of the Eternal Light blazing in that Star, their chief centre.

It was in the Sun that Souls, it was said, were purified: and to it they repaired. It was one of the gates of the soul, through which the theologians, says Porphyry, say that it re-ascends toward the home of Light and the Good. Wherefore, in the Mysteries of Eleusis, the Dadoukos (the first officer after the Hierophant, who represented the Grand Demiourgos or Maker of the Universe), who was posted in the interior of the Temple, and there received the candidates, represented the Sun.

It was also held that the vicissitudes experienced by the Father of Light had an influence on the destiny of souls; which, of the same substance as he, shared his fortunes. This we learn from the Emperor Julian and Sallust the Philosopher. They are afflicted when he suffers: they rejoice when he triumphs over the Power of Darkness which opposes his sway and hinders the happiness of Souls, to whom nothing is so terrible as darkness. The fruit of the sufferings of the God, father of light and Souls, slain by the Chief of the Powers of Darkness, and again restored to life, was received in the Mysteries. "His death works your Salvation;" said the High Priest of Mithras. That was the great secret of this religious tragedy, and its expected fruit;--the resurrection of a God, who, repossessing Himself of His dominion over Darkness, should associate with Him in His triumph those virtuous Souls that by their purity were worthy to share His glory; and that strove not against the divine force that drew them to Him, when He had thus conquered.

To the Initiate were also displayed the spectacles of the chief agents of the Universal Cause, and of the distribution of the world, in the detail of its parts arranged in most regular order. The Universe itself supplied man with the model of the first Temple reared to the Divinity. The arrangement of the Temple of Solomon, the symbolic ornaments which formed its chief decorations, and the dress of the High Priest,--all, as Clemens of Alexandria, Josephus and Philo state, had reference to the order of the world. Clemens informs us that the Temple contained many emblems

[p. 409]

of the Seasons, the Sun, the Moon, the planets, the constellations Ursa Major and Minor, the zodiac, the elements, and the other parts of the world.

Josephus, in his description of the High Priest's Vestments, protesting against the charge of impiety brought against the Hebrews by other nations, for contemning the Heathen Divinities, declares it false, because, in the construction of the Tabernacle, in the vestments of the Sacrificers, and in the Sacred vessels, the whole World was in some sort represented. Of the three parts, he says, into which the Temple was divided, two represent Earth and Sea, open to all men, and the third, Heaven, God's dwelling-place, reserved for Him alone. The twelve loaves of Shew-bread signify the twelve months of the year. The Candlestick represented the twelve signs through which the Seven Planets run their courses; and the seven lights, those planets; the veils, of four colors, the four elements; the tunic of the High Priest, the earth; the Hyacinth, nearly blue, the Heavens; the ephod, of four colors, the whole of nature; the gold, Light; the breast-plate, in the middle, this earth in the centre of the world; the two Sardonyxes, used as clasps, the Sun and Moon; and the twelve precious stones of the breast-plate arranged by threes, like the Seasons, the twelve months, and the twelve signs of the zodiac. Even the loaves were arranged in two groups of six, like the zodiacal signs above and below the Equator. Clemens, the learned Bishop of Alexandria, and Philo, adopt all these explanations.

Hermes calls the Zodiac, the  Tent,--Tabernaculum. In the Royal Arch Degree of the American Rite, the Tabernacle has four veils, of different colors, to each of which belongs a banner. The colors of the four are White, Blue, Crimson, and Purple, and the banners bear the images of the Bull, the Lion, the Man, and the Eagle, the Constellations answering 2500 years before our era to the Equinoctial and Solstitial points: to which belong four stars, Aldebaran, Regulus, Fomalhaut, and Antares. At each of these veils there are three words: and to each division of the Zodiac, belonging to each of these Stars, are three Signs. The four signs, Taurus, Leo, Scorpio, and Aquarius, were termed the fixed signs, and are appropriately assigned to the four veils.

So the Cherubim, according to Clemens and Philo, represented the two hemispheres their wings, the rapid course of the firmament, and of time which revolves in the Zodiac. "For the Heavens

[p. 410]

fly;" says Philo, speaking of the wings of the Cherubim: which were winged representations of the Lion, the Bull, the Eagle, and the Man; of two of which, the human-headed, winged bulls and lions, so many have been found at Nimroud; adopted as beneficent symbols, when the Sun entered Taurus at the Vernal Equinox and Leo at the Summer Solstice: and when, also, he entered Scorpio, for which, on account of its malignant influences, , the eagle was substituted, at the autumnal equinox; and Aquarius (the water-bearer) at the Winter Solstice.

So, Clemens says, the candlestick with seven branches represented the seven planets, like which the seven branches were arranged and regulated, preserving that musical proportion and system of harmony of which the sun was the centre and connection. They were arranged, says Philo, by threes, like the planets above and those below the sun; between which two groups was the branch that represented him, the mediator or moderator of the celestial harmony. He is, in fact, the fourth in the musical scale, as Philo remarks, and Martianus Capella in his hymn to the Sun.

Near the candlestick were other emblems representing the heavens, earth, and the vegetative matter out of whose bosom the vapors arise. The whole temple was an abridged image of the world. There were candlesticks with four branches, symbols of the elements and the seasons; with twelve, symbols of the signs; and even with three hundred and sixty, the number of days in the year, without the supplementary days. Imitating the famous Temple of Tyre, where were the great columns consecrated to the winds and fire, the Tyrian artist placed two columns of bronze at the entrance of the porch of the temple. The hemispherical brazen sea, supported by four groups of bulls, of three each, looking to the four cardinal points of the compass, represented the bull of the Vernal Equinox, and at Tyre were consecrated to Astarte; to whom Hiram, Josephus says, had builded a temple, and who wore on her head a helmet bearing the image of a bull. And the throne of Solomon, with bulls adorning its arms, and supported on lions, like those of Horus in Egypt and of the Sun at Tyre; likewise referred to the Vernal Equinox and Summer Solstice.

Those who in Thrace adored the sun, under the name of Saba-Zeus, the Grecian Bakchos, builded to him, says Macrobius, a temple on Mount Zelmisso, its round form representing the world and the sun. A circular aperture in the roof admitted the light,

[p. 411]

and introduced the image of the sun into the body of the sanctuary, where he seemed to blaze as in the heights of Heaven, and to dissipate the darkness within that temple which was a representative symbol of the world. There the passion, death, and resurrection of Bakchos were represented.

So the Temple of Eleusis was lighted by a window in the roof. The sanctuary so lighted, Dion compares to the Universe, from which he says it differed in size alone; and in it the great lights of nature played a great part and were mystically represented. The images of the Sun, Moon, and Mercury were represented there, (the latter the same as Anubis who accompanied Isis); and they are still the three lights of a Masonic Lodge; except that for Mercury, the Master of the Lodge has been absurdly substituted.

Eusebius names as the principal Ministers in the Mysteries of Eleusis, first, the Hierophant, clothed with the attributes of the Grand Architect (Demiourgos) of the Universe. After him came the Dadoukos, or torch-bearer, representative of the Sun: then the altar-bearer, representing the Moon: and last, the Hieroceryx, bearing the caduceus, and representing Mercury. It was not permissible to reveal the different emblems and the mysterious pageantry of initiation to the Profane; and therefore we do not know the attributes, emblems, and ornaments of these and other officers; of which Apuleius and Pausanias dared not speak.

We know only that everything recounted there was marvellous; everything done there tended to astonish the Initiate: and that eyes and ears were equally astounded. The Hierophant, of lofty height, and noble features, with long hair, of a great age, grave and dignified, with a voice sweet and sonorous, sat upon a throne, clad in a long trailing robe; as the Motive-God of Nature was held to be enveloped in His work and hidden under a veil which no mortal can raise. Even His name was concealed, like that of the Demiourgos, whose name was ineffable.

The Dadoukos also wore a long robe, his hair long, and a bandeau on his forehead. Callias, when holding that office, fighting on the great day of Marathon, clothed with the insignia of his office, was taken by the Barbarians to be a King. The Dadoukos led the procession of the Initiates, and was charged with the purifications.

We do not know the functions of the Epibomos or assistant at the altar, who represented the moon. That planet was one of the

[p. 412]

two homes of souls, and one of the two great gates by which they descended and reascended. Mercury was charged with the conducting of souls through the two great gates; and in going from the sun to the moon they passed immediately by him. He admitted or rejected them as they were more or less pure, and therefore the Hieroceryx or Sacred Herald, who represented Mercury, was charged with the duty of excluding the Profane from the Mysteries.

The same officers are found in the procession of Initiates of Isis, described by Apuleius. All clad in robes of white linen, drawn tight across the breast, .and close-fitting down to the very feet, came, first, one bearing a lamp in the shape of a boat; second, one carrying an altar; and third, one carrying a golden palm-tree and the caduceus. These are the same as the three officers at Eleusis, after the Hierophant. Then .one carrying an open hand, and pouring milk on the ground from a golden vessel in the shape of a woman's breast. The hand was that of justice: and the milk alluded to the Galaxy or Milky Way, along which souls descended and remounted. Two others followed, one bearing a winnowing fan, and the other a water-vase; symbols of the purification of souls by air and water; and the third purification, by earth, was represented by an image of the animal that cultivates it, the cow or ox, borne by another officer.

Then followed a chest or ark, magnificently ornamented, containing an image of the organs of generation of Osiris, or perhaps of both sexes; emblems of the original generating and producing Powers. When Typhon, said the Egyptian fable, cut up the body of Osiris into pieces, he flung his genitals into the Nile, where a fish devoured them. Atys mutilated himself, as his Priests afterward did in imitation of him; and Adonis was in that part of his body wounded by the boar: all of which represented the loss by the Sun of his vivifying and generative power, when he reached the Autumnal Equinox (the Scorpion that on old monuments bites those parts of the Vernal Bull), and descended toward the region of darkness and Winter.

Then, says Apuleius, came "one who carried in his bosom an object that rejoiced the heart of the bearer, a venerable effigy of the Supreme Deity, neither bearing resemblance to man, cattle, bird, beast, or any living creature: an exquisite invention, venerable from the novel originality of the fashioning; a wonderful,

[p. 413]

ineffable symbol of religious mysteries, to be looked upon in profound silence. Such as it was, its figure was that of a small urn of burnished gold, hollowed very artistically, rounded at the bottom, and covered all over the outside with the wonderful hieroglyphics of the Egyptians. The spout was not elevated, but extended laterally, projecting like a long rivulet; while on the opposite side was the handle, which, with similar lateral extension, bore on its summit an asp, curling its body into folds, and stretching upward, its wrinkled, scaly, swollen throat."

The salient basilisk, or royal ensign of the Pharaohs, often occurs on the monuments--a serpent in folds, with his head raised erect above the folds. The basilisk was the Phoenix of the serpent-tribe; and the vase or urn was probably the vessel, shaped like a cucumber, with a projecting spout, out of which, on the monuments of Egypt, the priests are represented pouring streams of the  or Tau Cross, and of sceptres, over the kings.

In the Mysteries of Mithras, a sacred cave, representing the whole arrangement of the world, was used for the reception of the Initiates. Zoroaster, says Eubulus, first introduced this custom of consecrating caves. They were also consecrated, in Crete, to Jupiter; in Arcadia, to the Moon and Pan; and in the Island of Naxos, to Bacchus. The Persians, in the cave where the Mysteries of Mithras were celebrated, fixed the seat of that God, Father of Generation, or Demiourgos, near the equinoctial point of Spring, with the Northern portion of the world on his right, and the Southern on his left.

Mithras, says Porphyry, presided over the Equinoxes, seated on a Bull, the symbolical animal of the Demiourgos, and bearing a sword. The equinoxes were the gates through which souls passed to and fro, between the hemisphere of light and that or darkness. The milky way was also represented, passing near each of these gates: and it was, in the old theology, termed the pathway of souls. It is, according to Pythagoras, vast troops of souls that form that luminous belt.

The route followed by souls, according to Porphyry, or rather their progressive march in the world, lying through the fixed stars and planets, the Mithriac cave not only displayed the zodiacal and other constellations, and marked gates at the four equinoctial and solstitial points of the zodiac, whereat souls enter into and escape from the world of generations; and through which they

[p. 414]

pass to and fro between the realms of light and darkness; but it represented the seven planetary spheres which they needs must traverse, in descending from the heaven of the fixed stars to the elements that envelop the earth; and seven gates were marked, one for each planet, through which they pass, in descending or returning.

We learn this from Celsus, in Origen; who says that the symbolical image of this passage among the Stars, used in the Mithriac Mysteries, was a ladder, reaching from earth to Heaven, divided into seven steps or stages, to each of which was a gate, and at the summit an eighth, that of the fixed stars. The first gate, says Celsus, was that of Saturn, and of lead, by the heavy nature whereof his dull slow progress was symbolized. The second, of tin, was that of Venus, symbolizing her soft splendor and easy flexibility. The third, of brass, was that of Jupiter, emblem of his solidity and dry nature. The fourth, of iron, was that of Mercury, expressing his indefatigable activity and sagacity. The fifth, of copper, was that of Mars, expressive of his inequalities and variable nature. The sixth, of silver, was that of the Moon: and the seventh, of gold, that of the Sun. This order is not the real order of these Planets; but a mysterious one, like that of the days of the Week consecrated to them, commencing with Saturday, and retrograding to Sunday. It was dictated, Celsus says, by certain harmonic relations, those of the fourth.

Thus there was an intimate connection between the Sacred Science of the Mysteries, and ancient astronomy and physics; and the grand spectacle of the Sanctuaries was that of the order of the Known Universe, or the spectacle of Nature itself, surrounding the soul of the Initiate, as it surrounded it when it first descended through the planetary gates, and by the equinoctal and solstitial doors, along the Milky Way, to be for the first time immured in its prison-house of matter. But the Mysteries also represented to the candidate, by sensible symbols, the invisible forces which move this visible Universe, and the virtues, qualities, and powers attached to matter, and which maintain the marvellous order observed therein. Of this Porphyry informs us.

The world, according to the philosophers of antiquity, was not a purely material and mechanical machine. A great Soul, diffused everywhere, vivified all the members of the immense body of the Universe; and an Intelligence, equally great, directed all its movements,

[p. 415]

and maintained the eternal harmony that resulted therefrom. Thus the Unity of the Universe, represented by the symbolic egg, contained in itself two units, the Soul and the Intelligence, which pervaded all its parts: and they were to the Universe, considered as an animated and intelligent being, what intelligence and the soul of life are to the individuality of man.

The doctrine of the Unity of God, in this sense, was taught by Orpheus. Of this his hymn or palinode is a proof; fragments of which are quoted by many of the Fathers, as Justin, Tatian, Clemens of Alexandria, Cyril, and Theodoret, and the whole by Eusebius, quoting from Aristobulus. The doctrine of the LOGOS (word) or the NOOS (intellect), his incarnation, death, resurrection or transfiguration; of his union with matter, his division in the visible world, which he pervades, his return to the original Unity, and the whole theory relative to the origin of the soul and its destiny, were taught in the Mysteries, of which they were the great object.

The Emperor Julian explains the Mysteries of Atys and Cybele by the same metaphysical principles, respecting the demiurgical Intelligence, its descent into matter, and its return to its origin: and extends this explanation to those of Ceres. And so likewise does Sallust the Philosopher, who admits in God a secondary intelligent Force, which descends into the generative matter to organize it. These mystical ideas naturally formed a part of the sacred doctrine and of the ceremonies of initiation, the object of which, Sallust remarks, was to unite man with the World and the Deity; and the final term of perfection whereof was, according to Clemens, the contemplation of nature, of real beings, and of causes. The definition of  is correct. The Mysteries were practised as a means of perfecting the soul, of making it to know its own dignity, of reminding it of its noble origin and immortality, and consequently of its relations with the Universe and the Deity.

What was meant by real beings, was invisible beings, genii, the faculties or powers of nature; everything not a part of the visible world, which was called, by way of opposition, apparent existence. The theory of Genii, or Powers of Nature, and its Forces, personified, made part of the Sacred Science of initiation, and of that religious spectacle of different beings exhibited in the Sanctuary. It resulted from that belief in the providence and superintendence of the Gods, which was one of the primary bases of initiation. The

[p. 416]

administration of the Universe by Subaltern Genii, to whom it is confided, and by whom good and evil are dispensed in the world, was a consequence of this dogma, taught in the Mysteries of Mithras, where was shown that famous egg, shared between Ormuzd and Ahriman, each of whom commissioned twenty-four Genii to dispense the good and evil found therein; they being under twelve Superior Gods, six on the side of Light and Good, and six on that of Darkness and Evil.

This doctrine of the Genii, depositaries of the Universal Providence, was intimately connected with the Ancient Mysteries, and adopted in the sacrifices and initiations both of Greeks and Barbarians. Plutarch says that the Gods, by means of Genii, who are intermediates between them and men, draw near to mortals in the ceremonies of initiation, at which the Gods charge them to assist, and to distribute punishment and blessing. Thus not the Deity, but His ministers, or a Principle and Power of Evil, were deemed the authors of vice and sin and suffering: and thus the Genii or angels differed in character like men, some being good and some evil; some Celestial Gods, Archangels, Angels, and some Infernal Gods, Demons and fallen Angels.

At the head of the latter was their Chief, Typhon, Ahriman, or Shaitan, the Evil Principle; who, having wrought disorder in nature, brought troubles on men by land and sea, and caused the greatest ills, is at last punished for his crimes. It was these events and incidents, says Plutarch, which Isis desired to represent in the ceremonial of the Mysteries, established by her in memory of her sorrows and wanderings, whereof she exhibited an image and representation in her Sanctuaries, where also were afforded encouragements to piety and consolation in misfortune. The dogma of a Providence, he says, administering the Universe by means of intermediary Powers, who maintain the connection of man with the Divinity, was consecrated in the Mysteries of the Egyptians, Phrygians, and Thracians, of the Magi and the Disciples of Zoroaster; as is plain by their initiations, in which mournful and funereal ceremonies mingled. It was an essential part of the lessons given the Initiates, to teach them the relations of their own souls with Universal Nature, the greatest lessons of all, meant to dignify man in his own eyes, and teach him his place in the Universe of things.

Thus the whole system of the Universe was displayed in all its

[p. 417]

parts to the eyes of the Initiate; and the symbolic cave which represented it was adorned and clothed with all the attributes of that Universe. To this world so organized, endowed with a double force, active and passive, divided between light and darkness, moved by a living and intelligent Force, governed by Genii or Angels who preside over its different parts, and whose nature and character are more lofty or low in proportion as they possess a greater or less portion of dark matter,--to this world descends the soul, emanation of the ethereal fire, and exiled from the luminous region above the world. It enters into this dark matter, wherein the hostile Principles, each seconded by his troops of Genii, are ever in conflict, there to submit to one or more organizations in the body which is its prison, until it shall at last return to its place of origin, its true native country, from which during this life it is an exile.

But one thing remained,--to represent its return, through the constellations and planetary spheres, to its original home. The celestial fire, the philosophers said, soul of the world and of fire, an universal principle, circulating above the Heavens, in a region infinitely pure and wholly luminous, itself pure, simple, and unmixed, is above the world by its specific lightness. If any part of it (say a human soul) descends, it acts against its nature in doing so, urged by an inconsiderate desire of the intelligence, a perfidious love for matter which causes it to descend, to know what passes here below, where good and evil are in conflict. The Soul, a simple substance, when unconnected with matter, a ray or particle of the Divine Fire, whose home is in Heaven, ever turns toward that home, while united with the body, and struggles to return thither.

Teaching this, the Mysteries strove to recall man to his divine origin, and point out to him the means of returning thither. The great science acquired in the Mysteries was knowledge of man's self, of the nobleness of his origin, the grandeur of his destiny, and his superiority over the animals, which can never acquire this knowledge, and whom he resembles so long as he does not reflect upon his existence and sound the depths of his own nature.

By doing and suffering, by virtue and piety and good deeds, the soul was enabled at length to free itself from the body, and ascend along the path of the Milky Way, by the gate of Capricorn and by the seven spheres, to the place whence by many gradations and

[p. 418]

successive lapses and enthralments it had descended. And thus the theory of the spheres, and of the signs and intelligences which preside there, and the whole system of astronomy, were connected with that of the soul and its destiny; and so were taught in the Mysteries, in which were developed the great principles of physics and metaphysics as to the origin of the soul, its condition here below, its destination, and its future fate.

The Greeks fix the date of the establishment of the Mysteries of Eleusis at the year 1423 B. C., during the reign of Erechtheus at Athens. According to some authors, they were instituted by Ceres herself; and according to others, by that Monarch, who brought them from Egypt, where, according to Diodorus of Sicily, he was born. Another tradition was, that Orpheus introduced them into Greece, together with the Dionisiac ceremonies, copying the latter from the Mysteries of Osiris, and the former from those of Isis.

Nor was it at Athens only, that the worship and Mysteries of Isis, metamorphosed into Ceres, were established. The Boeotians worshipped the Great or Cabiric Ceres, in the recesses of a sacred grove, into which none but Initiates could enter; and the ceremonies there observed, and the sacred traditions of their Mysteries, were connected with those of the Cabiri in Samothrace.

So in Argos, Phocis, Arcadia, Achaia, Messenia, Corinth, and many other parts of Greece, the Mysteries were practised, revealing everywhere their Egyptian origin and everywhere having the same general features; but those of Eleusis, in Attica, Pausanius informs us, had been regarded by the Greeks, from the earliest times, as being as far superior to all the others, as the Gods are to .mere Heroes.

Similar to these were the Mysteries of Bona Dea, the Good Goddess, whose name, say Cicero and Plutarch, it was not permitted to any man to know, celebrated at Rome from the earliest times of that city. It was these Mysteries, practised by women alone, the secrecy of which was impiously violated by Clodius. They were held at the Kalends of May; and, according to Plutarch, much of the ceremonial greatly resembled that of the Mysteries of Bakchos.

The Mysteries of Venus and Adonis belonged principally to Syria and Phoenicia, whence they passed into Greece and Sicily. Venus or Astarte was the Great Female Deity of the Phoenicians, as Hercules, Melkarth or Adoni was their Chief God. Adoni, called by the Greeks Adonis, was the lover of Venus. Slain by a

[p. 419]

wound in the thigh inflicted by a wild boar in the chase, the flower called anemone sprang from his blood. Venus received the corpse and obtained from Jupiter the boon that her lover should thereafter pass six months of each year with her, and the other six in the Shades with Proserpine; an allegorical description of the alternate residence of the Sun in the two hemispheres. In these Mysteries his death was represented and mourned, and after this maceration and mourning were concluded, his resurrection and ascent to Heaven were announced.

Ezekiel speaks of the festivals of Adonis under the name of those of Thammuz, an Assyrian Deity, whom every year the women mourned, seated at the doors of their dwellings. These Mysteries, like the others, were celebrated in the Spring, at the Vernal Equinox, when he was restored to life; at which time, when they were instituted, the Sun (ADON, Lord, or Master) was in the Sign Taurus, the domicile of Venus. He was represented with horns, and the hymn of Orpheus in his honor styles him "the two-horned God;" as in Argos Bakchos was represented with the feet of a bull.

Plutarch says that Adonis and Bakchos were regarded as one and the same Deity; and that this opinion was founded on the great similarity in very many respects between the Mysteries of these two Gods.

The Mysteries of Bakchos were known as the Sabazian, Orphic, and Dionysiac Festivals. They went back to the remotest antiquity among the Greeks, and were attributed by some to Bakchos himself, and by others to Orpheus. The resemblance in ceremonial between the observances established in honor of Osiris in Egypt, and those in honor of Bakchos in Greece, the mythological traditions of the two Gods, and the symbols used in the festivals of each, amply prove their identity. Neither the name of Bakchos, nor the word orgies applied to his feasts, nor the sacred words used in his Mysteries, are Greek, but of foreign origin. Bakchos was an Oriental Deity, worshipped in the East, and his orgies celebrated there, long before the Greeks adopted them. In the earliest times he was worshipped in India, Arabia, and Bactria.

He was honored in Greece with public festivals, and in simple or complicated Mysteries, varying in ceremonial in various places, as was natural, because his worship had come thither from different countries and at different periods. The people who celebrated

[p. 420]

the complicated Mysteries were ignorant of the meaning of many words which they used, and of many emblems which they revered. In the Sabazian Feasts, for example [from Saba-Zeus, an oriental name of this Deity], the words EVOI, SABOT, were used, which are in nowise Greek; and a serpent of gold was thrown into the bosom of the Initiate, in allusion to the fable that Jupiter had, in the form of a serpent, had connection with Proserpina, and begotten Bakchos, the bull; whence the enigmatical saying, repeated to the Initiates, that a bull engendered a dragon or serpent, and the serpent in turn engendered the bull, who became Bakchos: the meaning of which was, that the bull [Taurus, which then opened the Vernal Equinox, and the Sun in which Sign, figuratively represented by the Sign itself, was Bakchos, Dionusos, Saba-Zeus, Osiris, etc.], and the Serpent, another constellation, occupied such relative positions in the Heavens, that when one rose the other set, and vice versa.

The serpent was a familiar symbol in the Mysteries of Bakchos. The Initiates grasped them with their hands, as Orphiucus does on the celestial globe, and the Orpheo-telestes, or purifier of candidates did the same, crying, as Demosthenes taunted Aeschines with doing in public at the head of the women whom his mother was to imitate, EVOI, SABOI, HYES ATTE, ATTE, HYES!

The Initiates in these Mysteries had preserved the ritual and ceremonies that accorded with the simplicity of the earliest ages, and the manners of the first men. The rules of Pythagoras were followed there. Like the Egyptians, who held wool unclean, they buried no Initiate in woolen garments. They abstained from bloody sacrifices; and lived on fruits or vegetables or inanimate things. They imitated the life of the contemplative Sects of the Orient; thus approximating to the tranquility of the first ashen, who lived exempt from trouble and crimes in the bosom of a profound peace. One of the most precious advantages promised by their initiation was, to put a man in communion with the Gods, by purifying his soul of all the passions that interfere with that enjoyment, and dim the rays of divine light that are communicated to every soul capable of receiving them, and that imitate their purity. One of the degrees of initiation was the state of inspiration to which the adepts were claimed to attain. The Initiates in the Mysteries of the Lamb, at Pepuza, in Phrygia, professed to be inspired, and prophesied; and it was claimed that the soul, by,

[p. 421]

means of these religious ceremonies, purified of all stain, could see the Gods in this life, and certainly, in all cases, after death.

The sacred gates of the Temple, where the ceremonies of initiation were performed, were opened but once in each year, and no stranger was ever allowed to enter it. Night threw her veil over these august Mysteries, which could be revealed to no one. There the sufferings of Bakchos were represented, who, like Osiris, died, descended to hell and rose to life again; and raw flesh was distributed to the Initiates, which each ate, in memory of the death of the Deity, torn in pieces by the Titans.

These Mysteries also were celebrated at the Vernal Equinox; and the emblem of generation, to express the active energy and generative power of the Divinity, was a principal symbol. The Initiates wore garlands and crowns of myrtle and laurel.

In these Mysteries, the aspirant was kept in terror and darkness to perform the three days and nights; and was then made Afayismos, or ceremony representing the death of Bakchos, the same mythological personage with Osiris. This was effected by confining him in a close cell, that he might seriously reflect, in solitude and darkness, on the business he was engaged in: and his mind be prepared for the reception of the sublime and mysterious truths of primitive revelation and philosophy. This was a symbolic death; the deliverance from it, regeneration; after which he was called difyes or twin-born. While confined in the cell, the pursuit of Typhon after the mangled body of Osiris, and the search of Rhea or Isis for the same, were enacted in his hearing; the initiated crying aloud the names of that Deity derived from the Sanscrit. Then it was announced that the body was found; and the aspirant was liberated amid shouts of joy and exultation.

Then he passed through a representation of Hell and Elysium. "Then," said an ancient writer, "they are entertained with hymns and dances, with the sublime doctrines of sacred knowledge, and with wonderful and holy visions. And now become perfect and initiated, they are FREE, and no longer under restraint; but, crowned and triumphant, they walk up and down the regions of the blessed, converse with pure and holy men, and celebrate the sacred Mysteries at pleasure." They were taught the nature and objects of the Mysteries, and the means of making themselves known, and received the name of Epopts; were fully instructed in the nature and attributes of the Divinity, and the doctrine of a

[p. 422]

future state; and made acquainted with the unity and attributes of the Grand Architect of the Universe, and the true meaning of the fables in regard to the Gods of Paganism: the great Truth being often proclaimed, that "Zeus is the primitive Source of all things; there is ONE God; ONE power, and ONE rule over all." And after full explanation of the many symbols and emblems that surrounded them, they were dismissed with the barbarous words Kogx and Ompax, corruptions of the Sanscrit words, Kansha Aom Pakscha; meaning, object of our wishes, God, Silence, or Worship the Deity in Silence.

Among the emblems used was the rod of Bakchos; which once, it was said, he cast on the ground, and it became a serpent; and at another time he struck the rivers Orontes and Hydaspes with it, and the waters receded and he passed over dry-shod. Water was obtained, during the ceremonies, by striking a rock with it. The Bakchae crowned their heads with serpents, carried them in vases and baskets, and at the Eyresis or finding, of the body of Osiris, cast one, alive, into the aspirant's bosom.

The Mysteries of Atys in Phrygia, and those of Cybele his mistress, like their worship, much resembled those of Adonis and Bakchos, Osiris and Isis. Their Asiatic origin is universally admitted, and was with great plausibility claimed by Phrygia, which contested the palm of antiquity with Egypt. They, more than any other people, mingled allegory with their religious worship, and were great inventors of fables; and their sacred traditions as to Cybele and Atys, whom all admit to be Phrygian Gods, were very various. In all, as we learn from Julius Firmicus, they represented by allegory the phenomena of nature, and the succession of physical facts, under the veil of a marvellous history.

Their feasts occurred at the equinoxes, commencing with lamentation, mourning, groans, and pitiful cries for the death of Atys; and ending with rejoicings at his restoration to life.

We shall not recite the different versions of the legend of Atys and Cybele, given by Julius Firmicus, Diodorus, Arnobius, Lactantius, Servius, Saint Augustine, and Pausanias. It is enough to say that it is in substance this: that Cybele, a Phrygian Princess, who invented musical instruments and dances, was enamored of Atys, a youth; that either he in a fit of frenzy mutilated himself or was mutilated by her in a paroxysm of jealousy; that he died,

[p. 423]

and afterward, like Adonis, was restored to life. It is the Phoenician fiction as to the Sun-God, expressed in other terms, under other forms, and with other names.

Cybele was worshipped in Syria, under the name of Rhea. Lucian says that the Lydian Atys there established her worship and built her temple. The name of Rhea is also found in the ancient cosmogony of the Phoenicians by Sanchoniathon. It was Atys the Lydian, says Lucian, who, having been mutilated, first established the Mysteries of Rhea, and taught the Phrygians, the Lydians, and the people of Samothrace to celebrate them. Rhea, like Cybele, was represented drawn by lions, bearing a drum, and crowned with flowers. According to Varro, Cybele represented the earth. She partook of the characteristics of Minerva, Venus, the Moon, Diana, Nemesis, and the Furies; was clad in precious stones; and her High Priest wore a robe of purple and a tiara of gold.

The Grand Feast of the Syrian Goddess, like that of the Mother of the Gods at Rome, was celebrated at the Vernal Equinox. Precisely at that equinox the Mysteries of Atys were celebrated, in which the Initiates were taught to expect the rewards of a future life, and the flight of Atys from the jealous fury of Cybele was described, his concealment in the mountains and in a cave, and his self-mutilation in a fit of delirium; in which act his priests imitated him. The feast of the passion of Atys continued three days; the first of which was passed in mourning and tears; to which afterward clamorous rejoicings succeeded; by which, Macrobius says, the Sun was adored under the name of Atys. The ceremonies were all allegorical, some of which, according to the Emperor Julian, could be explained, but more remained covered with the veil of mystery. Thus it is that symbols outlast their explanations, as many have done in Masonry, and ignorance and rashness substitute new ones.

In another legend, given by Pausanias, Atys dies, wounded like Adonis by a wild boar in the organs of generation; a mutilation with which all the legends ended. The pine-tree under which he was said to have died, was sacred to him; and was found upon many monuments, with a bull and a ram near it; one the sign of exaltation of the Sun, and the other of that of the Moon.

The worship of the Sun under the name of Mithras belonged to Persia, whence that name came, as did the erudite symbols of that

[p. 424]

worship. The Persians, adorers of Fire, regarded the Sun as the most brilliant abode of the fecundating energy of that element, which gives life to the earth, and circulates in every part of the Universe, of which it is, as it were, the soul. This worship passed from Persia into Armenia, Cappadocia, and Cilicia, long before it was known at Rome. The Mysteries of Mithras flourished more than any others in the imperial city. The worship of Mithras commenced to prevail there under Trajan. Hadrian prohibited these Mysteries, on account of the cruel scenes represented in their ceremonial: for human victims were immolated therein, and the events of futurity looked for in their palpitating entrails. They reappeared in greater splendor than ever under Commodus, who with ins own hand sacrificed a victim to Mithras: and they were still more practised under Constantine and his successors, when the Priests of Mithras were found everywhere in the Roman Empire, and the monuments of his worship appeared even in Britain.

Caves were consecrated to Mithras, in which were collected a multitude of astronomical emblems; and cruel tests were required of the Initiates.

The Persians built no temples; but worshipped upon the summits of hills, in enclosures of unhewn stones. They abominated images, and made the Sun and Fire emblems of the Deity. The Jews borrowed this from them, and represented God as appearing to Abraham in a flame of fire, and to Moses as a fire at Horeb and on Sinai.

With the Persians, Mithras, typified in the Sun, was the invisible Deity, the Parent of the Universe, the Mediator. In Zoroaster's cave of initiation, the Sun and Planets were represented over-head, in gems and gold, as also was the Zodiac. The Sun appeared emerging from the back of Taurus. Three great pillars, Eternity, Fecundity, and Authority, supported the roof; and the whole was an emblem of the Universe.

Zoroaster, like Moses, claimed to have conversed face to face, as man with man, with the Deity; and to have received from Him a system of pure worship, to be communicated only to the virtuous, and those who would devote themselves to the study of Philosophy. His fame spread over the world, and pupils came to him from every country. Even Pythagoras was his scholar.

After his novitiate, the candidate entered the cavern of initiation, and was received on the point of a sword presented to his

[p. 425]

naked left breast, by which he was slightly wounded. Being crowned with olive, anointed with balsam of benzoin, and other-wise prepared, he was purified with fire and water, and went through seven stages of initiation. The symbol of these stages was a high ladder with seven rounds or steps. In them, he went through many fearful trials, in which darkness displayed a principal part. He saw a representation of the wicked in Hades; and finally emerged from darkness into light. Received in a place representing Elysium, in the brilliant assembly of the initiated, where the Archimagus presided, robed in blue, he assumed the obligations of secrecy, and was entrusted with the Sacred Words, of which the Ineffable Name of God was the chief.

Then all the incidents of his initiation were explained to him: he was taught that these ceremonies brought him nearer the Deity; and that he should adore the consecrated Fire, the gift of that Deity and His visible residence. He was taught the sacred characters known only to the initiated; and instructed in regard to the creation of the world, and the true philosophical meaning of the vulgar mythology; and especially of the legend of Ormuzd and Ahriman, and the symbolic meaning of the six Amshaspands created by the former: Bahman, the Lord of Light; Ardibehest, the Genius of Fire; Shariver, the Lord of Splendor and Metals; Stapandomad, the Source of Fruitfulness; Khordad, the Genius of Water and Time; and Amerdad, the protector of the Vegetable World, and the prime cause of growth. And finally he was taught the true nature of the Supreme Being, Creator of Ormuzd and Ahriman, the Absolute First Cause, styled ZERUANE AKHERENE.

In the Mithriac initiation were several Degrees. The first, Tertullian says, was that of Soldier of Mithras. The ceremony of reception consisted in presenting the candidate a crown, supported by a sword. It was placed near his head, and he repelled it, saying, "Mithras is my crown." Then he was declared the soldier of Mithras, and had the right to call the other Initiates fellow-soldiers or companions in arms. Hence the title Companions in the Royal Arch Degree of the American Rite.

Then he passed, Porphyry says, through the Degree of the Lion,--the constellation Leo, domicile of the Sun and symbol of Mithras, found on his monuments, These ceremonies were termed at Rome Leontic and Heliac; and Coracia or Hiero-Coracia, of the Raven, a bird consecrated to the Sun, and a sign placed in the

[p. 426]

Heavens below the Lion, with the Hydra, and also appearing on the Mithriac monuments.

Thence he passed to a higher Degree, where the Initiates were called Perses and children of the Sun. Above them were the Fathers, whose chief or Patriarch was styled Father of Fathers, or Pater Patratus. The Initiates also bore the title of Eagles and Hawks, birds consecrated to the Sun in Egypt, the former sacred to the God Mendes, and the latter the emblem of the Sun and Royalty.

The little island of Samothrace was long the depositary of certain august Mysteries, and many went thither from all parts of Greece to be initiated. It was said to have been settled by the ancient Pelasgi, early Asiatic colonists in Greece. The Gods adored in the Mysteries of this island were termed CABIRI, an oriental word, from Cabar, great. Varro calls the Gods of Samothrace, Potent Gods. In Arabic, Venus is called Cabar. Varro says that the Great Deities whose Mysteries were practised there, were Heaven and Earth. These were but symbols of the Active and Passive Powers or Principles of universal generation. The two Twins, Castor and Pollux, or the Dioscuri, were also called the Gods of Samothrace; and the Scholiast of Apollonius, citing Mnaseas, gives the names of Ceres, Proserpine, Pluto, and Mercury, as the four Cabiric Divinities worshipped at Samothrace, as Axieros, Axiocersa, Axiocersus, and Casmillus. Mercury was, there as everywhere, the minister and messenger of the Gods; and the young servitors of the altars and the children employed in the Temples were called Mercuries or Casmilli, as they were in Tuscany, by the Etrusci and Pelasgi, who worshipped the Great Gods.

Tarquin the Etruscan was an Initiate of the Mysteries of Samothrace; and Etruria had its Cabiri as Samothrace had. For the worship of the Cabiri spread from that island into Etruria, Phrygia, and Asia Minor: and it probably came from Phoenicia into Samothrace: for the Cabiri are mentioned by Sanchoniathon; and the word Cabar belongs to the Hebrew, Phoenician, and Arabic languages.

The Dioscuri, tutelary Deities of Navigation, with Venus, were invoked in the Mysteries of Samothrace. The constellation Auriga, or Phaeton, was also honored there with imposing ceremonies. Upon the Argonautic expedition, Orpheus, an Initiate of these

[p. 427]

[paragraph continues] Mysteries, a storm arising, counselled his companions to put into Samothrace. They did so, the storm ceased, and they were initiated into the Mysteries there, and sailed again with the assurance of a fortunate voyage, under the auspices of the Dioscuri, patrons of sailors and navigation.

But much more than that was promised the Initiates. The Hierophants of Samothrace made something infinitely greater to be the object of their initiations; to wit, the consecration of men to the Deity, by pledging them to virtue; and the assurance of those rewards which the justice of the Gods reserves for Initiates after death. This, above all else, made these ceremonies august, and inspired everywhere so great .a respect for them, and so great a desire to be admitted to them. That originally caused the island to be styled Sacred. It was respected by all nations. The Romans, when masters of the world, left it its liberty and laws. It was an asylum for the unfortunate, and a sanctuary inviolable. There men were absolved of the crime of homicide, if not committed in a temple.

Children of tender age were initiated there, and invested with the sacred-robe, the purple cincture, and the crown of olive, and seated upon a throne, like other Initiates. In the ceremonies was represented the death of the youngest of the Cabiri, slain by his brothers, who fled into Etruria, carrying with them the chest or ark that contained his genitals: and there the Phallus and the sacred ark were adored. Herodotus says that the Samothracian Initiates understood the object and origin of this reverence paid the Phallus, and why it was exhibited in the Mysteries. Clemens of Alexandria says that the Cabiri taught the Tuscans to revere it. It was consecrated at Heliopolis in Syria, where the Mysteries of a Divinity having many points of resemblance with Atys and Cybele were represented. The Pelasgi connected it with Mercury; and it appears on the monuments of Mithras; always and everywhere a symbol of the life-giving power of the Sun at the Vernal Equinox.

In the Indian Mysteries, as the candidate made his three circuits, he paused each time he reached the South, and said, "I copy the example of the Sun, and follow his beneficent course." Blue Masonry has retained the Circuits, but has utterly lost the explanation; which is, that in the Mysteries the candidate invariably represented the Sun, descending Southward toward the reign of

[p. 428]

the Evil Principle, Ahriman, Siba, or Typhon (darkness and winter); there figuratively to be slain, and after a few days to rise again from the dead, and commence to ascend to the Northward.

Then the death of Sita was bewailed; or that of Cama, slain by Iswara, and committed to the waves on a chest, like Osiris and Bacchus; during which the candidate was terrified by phantoms and horrid noises.

Then he was made to personify Vishnu, and perform his avatars, or labors. In the first two he was taught in allegories the legend of the Deluge: in the first he took three steps at right angles, representing the three huge steps taken by Vishnu in that avatar; and hence the three steps in the Master's Degree ending at right angles.

The nine avatars finished, he was taught the necessity of faith, as superior to sacrifices, acts of charity, or mortifications of the flesh. Then he was admonished against five crimes, and took a solemn obligation never to commit them. He was then introduced into a representation of Paradise; the Company of the Members of the Order, magnificently arrayed, and the Altar with a fire blazing upon it, as an emblem of the Deity.

Then a new name was given him, and he was invested in a white robe and tiara, and received the signs, tokens, and lectures. A cross was marked on his forehead, and an inverted level, or the Tau Cross, on his breast. He received the sacred cord, and divers amulets or talismans; and was then invested with the sacred Word or Sublime Name, known only to the initiated, the Triliteral A. U. M.

Then the multitude of emblems was explained to the candidate; the arcana of science hidden under them, and the different virtues of which the mythological figures were mere personifications. And he thus learned the meaning of those symbols, which, to the uninitiated, were but a maze of unintelligible figures.

The third Degree was a life of seclusion, after the Initiate's children were capable of providing for themselves; passed in the forest, in the practice of prayers and ablutions, and living only on vegetables. He was then said to be born again.

The fourth was absolute renunciation of the world, self-contemplation and self-torture; by which Perfection was thought to be attained, and the soul merged in the Deity.

In the second Degree, the Initiate was taught the Unity of the

[p. 429]

[paragraph continues] Godhead, the happiness of the patriarchs, the destruction by the Deluge, the depravity of the heart, and the necessity of a mediator, the instability of life, the final destruction of all created things, and the restoration of the world in a more perfect form. They inculcated the Eternity of the Soul, explained the meaning of the doctrine of the Metempsychosis, and held the doctrine of a state of future rewards and punishments: and they also earnestly urged that sins could only be atoned for by repentance, reformation, and voluntary penance; and not by mere ceremonies and sacrifices.

The Mysteries among the Chinese and Japanese came from India, and were founded on the same principles and with similar rites. The word given to the new Initiate was O-MI-TO-FO, in which we recognize the original name A. U. M., coupled at a much later time with that of Fo, the Indian Buddha, to show that he was the Great Deity Himself.

The equilateral triangle was one of their symbols; and so was the mystical Y; both alluding to the Triune God, and the latter being the ineffable name of the Deity. A ring supported by two serpents was emblematical of the world, protected by the power and wisdom of the Creator; and that is the origin of the two parallel 'lines (into which time has changed the two serpents), that support the circle in our Lodges.

Among the Japanese, the term of probation for the highest Degree was twenty years.

The main features of the Druidical Mysteries resembled those of the Orient.

The ceremonies commenced with a hymn to the sun. The candidates were arranged in ranks of threes, fives, and sevens, according to their qualifications; and conducted nine times around the Sanctuary, from East to West. The candidate underwent many trials, one of which had direct reference to the legend of Osiris. He was placed in a boat, and sent out to sea alone, having to rely on his own skill and presence of mind to reach the opposite shore in safety. The death of Hu was represented in his hearing, with every external mark of sorrow, while he was in utter darkness. He met with many obstacles, had to prove his courage, and expose his life against armed enemies; represented various animals, and at last, attaining the permanent light, he was instructed by the Arch-Druid in regard to the Mysteries, and in the morality of the

[p. 430]

[paragraph continues] Order, incited to act bravely in war, taught the great truths of the immortality of the soul and a future state, solemnly enjoined not to neglect the worship of the Deity, nor the practice of rigid morality; and to avoid sloth, contention, and folly.

The aspirant attained only the exoteric knowledge in the first two Degrees. The third was attained only by a few, and they persons of rank and consequence, and after long purification, and study of all the arts and sciences known to the Druids, in solitude, for nine months. This was the symbolical death and burial of these Mysteries.

The dangerous voyage upon the actual open sea, in a small boat covered with a skin, on the evening of the 29th of April, was the last trial, and closing scene, of initiation. If he declined this trial, he was dismissed with contempt. If he made it and succeeded, he was termed thrice-born, was eligible to all the dignities of the State, and received complete instruction in the philosophical and religious doctrines of the Druids.

The Greeks also styled the Epoptes, Trigonos, thrice-born; and in India perfection was assigned to the Yogee who had accomplished many births.

The general features of the initiations among the Goths were the same as in all the Mysteries. A long probation, of fasting and mortification, circular processions, representing the march of the celestial bodies, many fearful tests and trials, a descent into the infernal regions, the killing of the God Balder by the Evil Principle, Lok, the placing of his body in a boat and sending it abroad upon the waters; and, in short, the Eastern Legend, under different names, and with some variations.

The Egyptian Anubis appeared there, as the dog guarding the gates of death. The candidate was immured in the representation of a tomb; and when released, goes in search of the body of Balder, and finds him, at length, restored to life, and seated upon a throne. He was obligated upon a naked sword (as is still the custom in the Rit Moderne), and sealed his obligation by drinking mead out of a human skull.

Then all the ancient primitive truths were made known to him, so far as they had survived the assaults of time: and he was informed as to the generation of the Gods, the creation of the world, the deluge, and the resurrection, of which that of Balder was a type.

He was marked with the sign of the cross, and a ring was given

[p. 431]

to him as a symbol of the Divine Protection; and also as an emblem of Perfection; from which comes the custom of giving a ring to the Aspirant in the 14th Degree.

The point within a Circle, and the Cube, emblem of Odin, were explained to him; and lastly, the nature of the Supreme God, "the author of everything that existeth, the Eternal, the Ancient, the Living and Awful Being, the Searcher into concealed things, the Being that never changeth;" with whom Odin the Conqueror was by the vulgar confounded: and the Triune God of the Indians was reproduced, as ODIN, the Almighty FATHER, FREA, (Rhea or Phre), his wife (emblem of universal matter), and Thor his son (the Mediator). Here we recognize Osiris, Isis, and Hor or Horus. Around the head of Thor, as if to show his eastern origin, twelve stars were arranged in a circle.

He was also taught the ultimate destruction of the world, and the rising of a new one, in which the brave and virtuous shall en-joy everlasting happiness and delight: as the means of securing which happy fortune, he was taught to practise the strictest morality and virtue.

The Initiate was prepared to receive the great lessons of all the Mysteries, by long trials, or by abstinence and chastity. For many days he was required to fast and be continent, and to drink liquids calculated to diminish his passions and keep him chaste.

Ablutions were also required, symbolical of the purity necessary to enable the soul to escape from its bondage in matter. Sacred baths and preparatory baptisms were used, lustrations, immersions, lustral sprinklings, and purifications of every kind. At Athens they bathed in the Ilissus, which thence became a sacred river; and before entering the Temple of Eleusis, all were required to wash their hands in a vase of lustral water placed near the entrance. Clean hands and a pure heart were required of the candidates. Apuleius bathed seven times in the sea, symbolical of the Seven Spheres through which the Soul must reascend: and the Hindus must bathe in the sacred river Ganges.

Clemens of Alexandria cites a passage of Menander, who speaks of a purification by sprinkling three times with salt and water. Sulphur, resin, and the laurel also served for purification, as did air, earth, water, and fire. The Initiates at Heliopolis, in Syria, says Lucian, sacrificed the sacred lamb, symbol of Aries, then the sign of the Vernal Equinox; ate his flesh, as the Israelites did at

[p. 432]

the Passover; and then touched his head and feet to theirs, and knelt upon the fleece. Then they bathed in warm water, drank of the same, and slept upon the ground.

There was a distinction between the lesser and greater Mysteries. One must have been for some years admitted to the former, before he could receive the latter, which were but a preparation for them, the Vestibule of the Temple, of which those of Eleusis were the Sanctuary. There, in the lesser Mysteries, they were prepared to receive the holy truths taught in the greater. The Initiates in the lesser were called simply Mystes, or Initiates; but those in the greater, Epoptes, or Seers. An ancient poet says that the former were an imperfect shadow of the latter, as sleep is of Death. After admission to the former, the Initiate was taught lessons of morality, and the rudiments of the sacred science, the most sublime and secret part of which was reserved for the Epopt, who saw the Truth in its nakedness, while the Mystes only viewed it through a veil and under emblems fitter to excite than to satisfy his curiosity.

Before communicating the first secrets and primary dogmas of initiation, the priests required the candidate to take a fearful oath never to divulge the secrets. Then he made his vows, prayers, and sacrifices to the Gods. The skins of the victims consecrated to Jupiter were spread on the ground, and he was made to set his feet upon them. He was then taught some enigmatic formulas, as answers to questions, by which to make himself known. He was then enthroned, invested with a purple cincture, and crowned with flowers, or branches of palm or olive.

We do not certainly know the time that was required to elapse between the admission to the Lesser and Greater Mysteries of Eleusis. Most writers fix it at five years. It was a singular mark of favor when Demetrius was made Mystes and Epopt in one and the same ceremony. When at length admitted to the Degree of Perfection, the Initiate was brought face to face with entire nature, and learned that the soul was the whole of man; that earth was but his place of exile; that Heaven was his native country; that for the soul to be born is really to die; and that death was for it the return to a new life. Then he entered the sanctuary; but he did not receive the whole instruction at once. It continued through several years. There were, as it were, many apartments, through which he advanced by degrees, and between which thick veils intervened.

[p. 433]

[paragraph continues] There were Statues and Paintings, says Proclus, in the inmost sanctuary, showing the forms assumed by the Gods. Finally the last veil fell, the sacred covering dropped from the image of the Goddess, and she stood revealed in all her splendor, surrounded by a divine light, which, filling the whole sanctuary, dazzled the eyes and penetrated the soul of the Initiate. Thus is symbolized the final revelation of the true doctrine as to the nature of Deity and of the soul, and of the relations of each to matter.

This was preceded by frightful scenes, alternations of fear and joy, of light and darkness; by glittering lightning and the crash of thunder, and apparitions of spectres, or magical illusions, impressing at once the eyes and ears. This Claudian describes, in his poem on the rape of Proserpine, where he alludes to what passed in her Mysteries. "The temple is shaken," he cries; "fiercely gleams the lightning, by which the Deity announces his presence. Earth trembles; and a terrible noise is heard in the midst of these terrors. The Temple of the Son of Cecrops resounds with long-continued roars; Eleusis uplifts her sacred torches; the serpents of Triptolemus are heard to hiss; and fearful Hecate appears afar."

The celebration of the Greek Mysteries continued, according to the better opinion, for nine days.

On the first the Initiates met. It was the day of the full moon, of the month Boedromion; when the moon was full at the end of the sign Aries, near the Pleiades and the place of her exaltation in Taurus.

The second day there was a procession to the sea, for purification by bathing.

The third was occupied with offerings, expiatory sacrifices, and other religious rites, such as fasting, mourning, continence, etc. A mullet was immolated, and offerings of grain and living animals made.

On the fourth they carried in procession the mystic wreath of flowers, representing that which Proserpine dropped when seized by Pluto, and the Crown of Ariadne in the Heavens. It was borne on a triumphal car drawn by oxen; and women followed bearing mystic chests or boxes, wrapped with purple cloths, containing grains of sesame, pyramidal biscuits, salt, pomegranates and the mysterious serpent, and perhaps the mystic phallus.

On the fifth was the superb procession of torches, commemorative

[p. 434]

of the search for Proserpine by Ceres; the Initiates marching by trios, and each bearing a torch; while at the head of the procession marched the Dadoukos.

The sixth was consecrated to Iakchos, the young Light-God, son of Ceres, reared in the sanctuaries and bearing the torch of the Sun-God. The chorus in Aristophanes terms him the luminous star that lights the nocturnal 'initiation. He was brought from the sanctuary, his head crowned with myrtle, and borne from the gate of the Ceramicus to Eleusis, along the sacred way, amid dances, sacred songs, every mark of joy, and mystic cries of Iakchos.

On the seventh there were gymnastic exercises and combats, the victors in which were crowned and rewarded.

On the eighth was the feast of Aesculapius.

On the ninth the famous libation was made for the souls of the departed. The Priests, according to Athenaeus, filled two vases, placed one in the East and one in the West, toward the gates of day and night, and overturned them, pronouncing a formula of mysterious prayers. Thus they invoked Light and Darkness, the two great principles of nature.

During all these days no one could be arrested, nor any suit brought, on pain of death, or at least a heavy fine: and no one was allowed, by the display of unusual wealth or magnificence, to endeavor to rival this sacred pomp. Everything was for religion.

Such were the Mysteries; and such the Old Thought, as in scattered and widely separated fragments it has come down to us. The human mind still speculates upon the great mysteries of nature, and still finds its ideas anticipated by the ancients, whose profoundest thoughts are to be looked for, not in their philosophies, but in their symbols, by which they endeavored to express the great ideas that vainly struggled for utterance in words, as they viewed the great circle of phenomena,--Birth, Life, Death, or Decomposition, and New Life out of Death and Rottenness,--to them the greatest of mysteries. Remember, while you study their symbols, that they had a profounder sense of these wonders than we have. To them the transformations of the worm were a greater wonder than the stars; and hence the poor dumb scarabaeus or beetle was sacred to them. Thus their faiths are condensed into symbols or expanded into allegories, which they understood, but were not always able to explain in language; for there are thoughts and ideas which no language ever spoken by man has words to express.

Footnotes

^376:1 w ?Cp?On?Y Tsapanai, in Hebrew, means a serpent.

     
Morals and Dogma, by Albert Pike, [1871], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 435]

  

XXV.

  

KNIGHT OF THE BRAZEN SERPENT.

THIS Degree is both philosophical and moral. While it teaches the necessity of reformation as well as repentance, as a means of obtaining mercy and forgiveness, it is also devoted to an explanation of the symbols of Masonry; and especially to those which are connected with that ancient and universal legend, of which that of Khir-Om Abi is but a variation; that legend which, representing a murder or a death, and a restoration to life, by a drama in which figure Osiris, Isis and Horus, Atys and Cybele, Adonis and Venus, the Cabiri, Dionusos, and many another representative of the active and passive Powers of Nature, taught the Initiates in the Mysteries that the rule of Evil and Darkness is but temporary, and that that of Light and Good will be eternal.

Maimonides says: "In the days of Enos, the son of Seth, men fell into grievous errors, and even Enos himself partook of their infatuation. Their language was, that since God has placed on high the heavenly bodies, and used them as His ministers, it was evidently His will that they should receive from man the same

[p. 436]

veneration as the servants of a great prince justly claim from the subject multitude. Impressed with this notion, they began to build temples to the Stars, to sacrifice to them, and to worship them, in the vain expectation that they should thus please the Creator of all things. At first, indeed, they did not suppose the Stars to be the only Deities, but adored in conjunction with them the Lord God Omnipotent. In process of time, however, that great and venerable Name was totally forgotten, and the whole human race retained no other religion than the idolatrous worship of the Host of Heaven."

The first learning in the world consisted chiefly in symbols. The wisdom of the Chaldaeans, Phoenicians, Egyptians, Jews; of Zoroaster, Sanchoniathon, Pherecydes, Syrus, Pythagoras, Socrates, Plato, of all the ancients, that is come to our hand, is symbolic. It was the mode, says Serranus on Plato's Symposium, of the Ancient Philosophers, to represent truth by certain symbols and hidden images.

"All that can be said concerning the Gods," says Strabo, "must be by the exposition of old opinions and fables; it being the custom of the ancients to wrap up in enigma and allegory their thoughts and discourses concerning Nature; which are therefore not easily explained."

As you learned in the 24th Degree, my Brother, the ancient Philosophers regarded the soul of man as having had its origin in Heaven. That was, Macrobius says, a settled opinion among them all; and they held it to be the only true wisdom, for the soul, while united with the body, to look ever toward its source, and strive to return to the place whence it came. Among the fixed stars it dwelt, until, seduced by the desire of animating a body, it descended to be imprisoned in matter. Thenceforward it has no other resource than recollection, and is ever attracted toward its birth-place and home. The means of return are to be sought for in itself. To re-ascend to its source, it must do and suffer in the body.

Thus the Mysteries taught the great doctrine of the divine nature and longings after immortality of the soul, of the nobility of its origin, the grandeur of its destiny, its superiority over the animals who have no aspirations heavenward. If they struggled in vain to express its nature, by comparing it to Fire and Light,--if they erred as to its original place of abode, and the mode of its

[p. 437]

descent, and the path which, descending and ascending, it pursued among the stars and spheres, these were the accessories of the Great Truth, and mere allegories designed to make the idea more impressive, and, as it were, tangible, to the human mind.

Let us, in order to understand this old Thought, first follow the soul in its descent. The sphere or Heaven of the fixed stars was that Holy Region, and those Elysian Fields, that were the native domicile of souls, and the place to which they re-ascended, when they had recovered their primitive purity and simplicity. From that luminous region the soul set forth, when it journeyed toward the body; a destination which it did not reach until it had undergone three degradations, designated by the name of Deaths; and until it had passed through the several spheres and the elements. All souls remained in possession of Heaven and of happiness, so long as they were wise enough to avoid the contagion of the body, and to keep themselves from any contact with matter. But those who, from that lofty abode, where they were lapped in eternal light, have looked longingly toward the body, and toward that which we here below call life, but which is to the soul a real death; and who have conceived for it a secret desire,--those souls, victims of their concupiscence, are attracted by degrees toward the inferior regions of the world, by the mere weight of thought and of that terrestrial desire. The soul, perfectly incorporeal, does not at once invest itself with the gross envelope of the body, but little by little, by successive and insensible alterations, and in proportion as it removes further and further from the simple and perfect substance in which it dwelt at first. It first surrounds itself with a body composed of the substance of the stars; and afterward, as it descends through the several spheres, with ethereal matter more and more gross, thus by degrees descending to an earthly body; and its number of degradations or deaths being the same as that of the spheres which it traverses.

The Galaxy, Macrobius says, crosses the Zodiac in two opposite points, Cancer and Capricorn, the tropical points in the sun's course, ordinarily called the Gates of the Sun. These two tropics, before his time, corresponded with those constellations, but in his day with Gemini and Sagittarius, in consequence of the precession of the equinoxes; but the signs of the Zodiac remained unchanged; and the Milky Way crossed at the signs Cancer and Capricorn, though not at those constellations.

[p. 438]

Through these gates souls were supposed to descend to earth and re-ascend to Heaven. One, Macrobius says, in his dream of Scipio, was styled the Gate of Men; and the other, the Gate of the Gods. Cancer was the former, because souls descended by it to the earth; and Capricorn the latter, because by it they re-ascended to their seats of immortality, and became Gods. From the. Milky Way, according to Pythagoras, diverged the route to the dominions of Pluto. Until they left the Galaxy, they were not deemed to have commenced to descend toward the terrestrial bodies. From that they departed, and to that they returned. Until they reached the sign Cancer, they had not left it, and were still Gods. When they reached Leo, they commenced their apprenticeship for their future condition; and when they were at Aquarius, the sign opposite Leo, they were furthest removed from human life.

The soul, descending from the celestial limits, where the Zodiac and Galaxy unite, loses its spherical shape, the shape of all Divine Nature, and is lengthened into a cone, as a point is lengthened into a line; and then, an indivisible monad before, it divides itself and becomes a dead--that is, unity becomes division, disturbance, and conflict. Then it begins to experience the disorder which reigns in matter, to which it unites itself, becoming, as it were, intoxicated by draughts of grosser matter: of which inebriation the cup of Bakchos, between Cancer and Leo, is a symbol. It is for them the cup of forgetfulness. They assemble, says Plato, in the fields of oblivion, to drink there the water of the river Ameles, which causes men to forget everything. This fiction is also found in Virgil. "If souls," says Macrobius, "carried with them into the bodies they occupy all the knowledge which they had acquired of divine things, during their sojourn in the Heavens, men would not differ in opinion as to the Deity; but some of them forget more, and some less, of that which they had learned."

We smile at these notions of the ancients; but we must learn to look through these material images and allegories, to the ideas, struggling for utterance, the great speechless thoughts which they envelop: and it is well for us to consider whether we ourselves have yet found out any better way of representing to ourselves the soul's origin and its advent into this body, so entirely foreign to it; if, indeed, we have ever thought about it at all; or have not ceased to think, in despair.

[p. 439]

The highest and purest portion of matter, which nourishes and constitutes divine existences, is what the poets term nectar, the beverage of the Gods. The lower, more disturbed and grosser portion, is what intoxicates souls. The ancients symbolized it as the River Lethe, dark stream of oblivion. How  we explain the soul's forgetfulness of its antecedents, or reconcile that utter absence of remembrance of its former condition, with its essential immortality? In truth, we for the most part dread and shrink from any attempt at explanation of it to ourselves.

Dragged down by the heaviness produced by this inebriating draught, the soul falls along the zodiac and the milky way to the lower spheres, and in its descent not only takes, in each sphere, a new envelope of the material composing the luminous bodies of the planets, but receives there the different faculties which it is to exercise while it inhabits the body.

In Saturn, it acquires the power of reasoning and intelligence, or what is termed the logical and contemplative faculty. From Jupiter it receives the power of action. Mars gives it valor, enterprise, and impetuosity. From the Sun it receives the senses and imagination, which produce sensation, perception, and thought. Venus inspires it with desires. Mercury gives it the faculty of expressing and enunciating what it thinks and feels. And, on entering the sphere of the Moon, it acquires the force of generation and growth. This lunary sphere, lowest and basest to divine bodies, is first and highest to terrestrial bodies. And the lunary body there assumed by the soul, while, as it were, the sediment of celestial matter, is also the first substance of animal matter.

The celestial bodies, Heaven, the Stars, and the other Divine elements, ever aspire to rise. The soul reaching the region which mortality inhabits, tends toward terrestrial bodies, and is deemed to die. Let no one, says Macrobius, be surprised that we so frequently speak of the death of this soul, which yet we call immortal. It is neither annulled nor destroyed by such death: but merely enfeebled for a time; and does not thereby forfeit its prerogative of immortality; for afterward, freed from the body, when it has been purified from the vice-stains contracted during that connection, it is re-established in all its privileges, and returns to the luminous abode of its immortality.

On its return, it restores to each sphere through which it ascends, the passions and earthly faculties received from them: to

[p. 440]

the Moon, the faculty of increase and diminution of the body; to Mercury, fraud, the architect of evils; to Venus, the seductive love of pleasure; to the Sun, the passion for greatness and empire; to Mars, audacity and temerity; to Jupiter, avarice; and to Saturn, falsehood and deceit: and at last, relieved of all, it enters naked and pure into the eighth sphere or highest Heaven.

All this agrees with the doctrine of Plato, that the soul cannot re-enter into Heaven, until the revolutions of the Universe shall have restored it to its primitive condition, and purified it from the effects of its contact with the four elements.

This opinion of the pre-existence of souls, as pure and celestial substances, before their union with our bodies, to put on and animate which they descend from Heaven, is one of great antiquity. A modern Rabbi, Manasseh Ben Israel, says it was always the belief of the Hebrews. It was that of most philosophers who admitted the immortality of the soul: and therefore it was taught in the Mysteries; for, as Lactantius says, they could not see how it was possible that the soul should exist after the body, if it had not existed before it, and if its nature was not independent of that of the body. The same doctrine was adopted by the most learned of the Greek Fathers, and by many of the Latins: and it would probably prevail largely at the present day, if men troubled themselves to think upon this subject at all, and to inquire whether the soul's immortality involved its prior existence.

Some philosophers held that the soul was incarcerated in the body, by way of punishment for sins committed by it in a prior state. How they reconciled this with the same soul's unconsciousness of any such prior state, or of sin committed there, does not appear. Others held that God, of his mere will, sent the soul to inhabit the body. The Kabalists united the two opinions. They held that there are four worlds, Aziluth, Briarth, Jezirath, and Aziath; the world of emanation, that of creation, that of forms, and the material world; one above and more perfect than the other, in that order, both as regards their own nature and that of the beings who inhabit them. All souls are originally in the world Aziluth, the Supreme Heaven, abode of God, and of pure and immortal spirits. Those who descend from it without fault of their own, by God's order, are gifted with a divine fire, which preserves them from the contagion of matter, and restores them to Heaven so soon as their mission is ended. Those who descend through,

[p. 441]

their own fault, go from world to world, insensibly losing their love of Divine things, and their self-contemplation; until they reach the world Aziath, falling by their own weight. This is a pure Platonism, clothed with the images and words peculiar to the Kabalists. It was the doctrine of the Essenes, who, says Porphyry, "believe that souls descend from the most subtile ether, attracted to bodies by the seductions of matter." It was in substance the doctrine of Origen; and it came from the Chaldaeans, who largely studied the theory of the Heavens, the spheres, and the influences of the signs and constellations.

The Gnostics made souls ascend and descend through eight Heavens, in each of which were certain Powers that opposed their return, and often drove them back to earth, when not sufficiently purified. The last of these Powers, nearest the luminous abode of souls, was a serpent or dragon.

In the ancient doctrine, certain Genii were charged with the duty of conducting souls to the bodies destined to receive them, and of withdrawing them from those bodies. According to Plutarch, these were the functions of Proserpine and Mercury. In Plato, a familiar Genius accompanies man at his birth, follows and watches him all his life, and at death conducts him to the tribunal of the Great Judge. These Genii are the media of communication between man and the Gods; and the soul is ever in their presence. This doctrine is taught in the oracles of Zoroaster: and these Genii were the Intelligences that resided in the planets.

Thus the secret science and mysterious emblems of initiation were connected with the Heavens, the Spheres, and the Constellations: and this connection must be studied by whomsoever would understand the ancient mind, and be enabled to interpret the allegories, and explore the meaning of the symbols, in which the old sages endeavored to delineate the ideas that struggled within them for utterance, and could be but insufficiently and inadequately expressed by language, whose words are images of those things alone that can be grasped by and are within the empire of the senses.

It is not possible for us thoroughly to appreciate the feelings with which the ancients regarded the Heavenly bodies, and the ideas to which their observation of the Heavens gave rise, because we cannot put ourselves in their places, look at the stars with their eyes in the world's youth, and divest ourselves .of the knowledge

[p. 442]

which even the commonest of us have, that makes us regard the Stars and Planets and all the Universe of Suns and Worlds, as a mere inanimate machine and aggregate of senseless orbs, no more astonishing, except in degree, than a clock or an orrery. We wonder and are amazed at the Power and Wisdom (to most men it seems only a kind of Infinite Ingenuity) of the MAKER: they wondered at the Work, and endowed it with Life and Force and mysterious Powers and mighty Influences.

Memphis, in Egypt, was in Latitude 29 degrees 5" North, and in Longitude 30 degrees 18' East. Thebes, in Upper Egypt, in Latitude 25 degrees 45' North, and Longitude 32 degrees 43' East. Babylon was in Latitude 32 degrees 30' North, and Longitude 44 degrees 23' East: while Saba, the ancient Sabaean capital of Ethiopia, was about in Latitude 15 degrees North.

Through Egypt ran the great River Nile, coming from beyond Ethiopia, its source in regions wholly unknown, in the abodes of heat and fire, and its course from South to North. Its inundations had formed the alluvial lands of Upper and Lower Egypt, which they continued to raise higher and higher, and to fertilize by their deposits. At first, as in all newly-settled countries, those inundations, occurring annually and always at the same period of the year, were calamities: until, by means of levees and drains and artificial lakes for irrigation, they became blessings, and were looked for with joyful anticipation, as they had before been awaited with terror. Upon the deposit left by the Sacred River, as it withdrew into its banks, the husbandman sowed his seed; and the rich soil and the genial sun insured him an abundant harvest.

Babylon lay on the Euphrates, which ran from Southeast to Northwest, blessing, as all rivers in the Orient do, the arid country through which it flowed; but its rapid and uncertain overflows bringing terror and disaster.

To the ancients, as yet inventors of no astronomical instruments, and looking at the Heavens with the eyes of children, this earth was a level plain of unknown extent. About its boundaries there was speculation, but no knowledge. The inequalities of its surface were the irregularities of a plane. That it was a globe, or that anything lived on its under surface, or on what it rested, they had no idea. Every twenty-four hours the sun came up from beyond the Eastern rim of the world, and travelled across the sky, over the earth, always South of, but sometimes nearer and sometimes further from the point overhead; and sunk below the

[p. 443]

world's Western rim. With him went light, and after him followed darkness.

And every twenty-four hours appeared in the Heavens another body, visible chiefly at night, but sometimes even when the sun shone, which likewise, as if following the sun at a greater or less distance, travelled across the sky; sometimes as a thin crescent, and thence increasing to a full orb resplendent with silver light; and sometimes more and sometimes less to the Southward of the point overhead, within the same limits as the Sun.

Man, enveloped by the thick darkness of profoundest night, when everything around him has disappeared, and he seems alone with himself and the black shades that surround him, feels his existence a blank and nothingness, except so far as memory recalls to him the glories and splendors of light. Everything is dead to him, and he, as it were, to Nature. How crushing and overwhelming the thought, the fear, the dread, that perhaps that darkness may be eternal, and that day may possibly never return; if it ever occurs to his mind, while the solid gloom closes up against him like a wall! What then can restore him to like, to energy, to activity, to fellowship and communion with the great world which God has spread around him, and which perhaps in the darkness may be passing away? LIGHT restores him to himself and to nature which seemed lost to him. Naturally, therefore, the primitive men regarded light as the principle of their real existence, without which life would be but one continued weariness and despair. This necessity for light, and its actual creative energy, were felt by all men: and nothing was more alarming to them than its absence. It became their first Divinity, a single ray of which, flashing into the dark tumultuous bosom of chaos, caused man and all the Universe to emerge from it. So all the poets sung who imagined Cosmogonies; such was the first dogma of Orpheus, Moses, and the Theologians. Light was Ormuzd, adored by the Persians, and Darkness Ahriman, origin of all evils: Light was the life of the Universe, the friend of man, the substance of the Gods and of the Soul.

The sky was to them a great, solid, concave arch; a hemisphere of unknown material, at an unknown distance above the flat level earth; and along it journeyed in their courses the Sun, the Moon, the Planets, and the Stars.

The Sun was to them a great globe of fire, of unknown dimensions,

[p. 444]

at an unknown distance. The Moon was a mass of softer light; the stars and planets lucent bodies, armed with unknown and supernatural influences.

It could not fail to be soon observed, that at regular intervals the days and nights were equal; and that two of these intervals measured the same space of time as elapsed between the successive inundations, and between the returns of spring-time and harvest. Nor could it fail to be perceived that the changes of the moon occurred regularly; the same number of days always elapsing between the first appearance of her silver crescent in the West at evening and that of her full orb rising in the East at the same hour; and the same again, between that and the new appearance of the crescent in the West.

It was also soon observed that the Sun crossed the Heavens in a different line each day, the days being longest and the nights shortest when the line of his passage was furthest North, and the days shortest and nights longest when that line was furthest South: that his progress North and South was perfectly regular, marking four periods that were always the same,--those when the days and nights were equal, or the Vernal and Autumnal Equinoxes; that when the days were longest, or the Summer Solstice; and that when they were shortest, or the Winter Solstice.

With the Vernal Equinox, or about the 25th of March of our Calendar, they found that there unerringly came soft winds, the return of warmth, caused by the Sun turning back to the Northward from the middle ground of his course, the vegetation of the new year, and the impulse to amatory action on the part of the animal creation. Then the Bull and the Ram, animals most valuable to the agriculturist, and symbols themselves of vigorous generative power, recovered their vigor, the birds mated and budded their nests, the seeds germinated, the grass grew, and the trees put forth leaves. With the Summer Solstice, when the Sun reached the extreme northern limit of his course, came great heat, and burning winds, and lassitude and exhaustion; then vegetation withered, man longed for the cool breezes of Spring and Autumn, and the cool water of the wintry Nile or Euphrates, and the Lion sought for that element far from his home in the desert.

With the Autumnal Equinox came ripe harvests, and fruits of the tree and vine, and falling leaves, and cold evenings presaging wintry frosts; and the Principle and Powers of Darkness, prevailing

[p. 445]

over those of Light, drove the Sun further to the South, so that the nights grew longer than the days. And at the Winter Solstice the earth, was wrinkled with frost, the trees were leafless, and the Sun reaching the most Southern point in his career, seemed to hesitate whether to continue descending, to leave the world to darkness and despair, or to turn upon his steps and retrace his course to the Northward, bringing back seed-time and Spring, and green leaves and flowers, and all the delights of love.

Thus, naturally and necessarily, time was divided, first into days, and then into moons or months, and years; and with these divisions and the movements of the Heavenly bodies that marked them, were associated and connected all men's physical enjoyments and privations. Wholly agricultural, and in their frail habitations greatly at the mercy of the elements and the changing seasons, the primitive people of the Orient were most deeply interested in the recurrence of the periodical phenomena presented by the two great luminaries of Heaven, on whose regularity all their prosperity depended.

And the attentive observer soon noticed that the smaller lights of Heaven were, apparently, even more regular than the Sun and Moon, and foretold with unerring certainty, by their risings and settings, the periods of recurrence of the different phenomena and seasons on which the physical well-being of all men depended. They soon felt the necessity of distinguishing the individual stars, or groups of stars, and giving them names, that they might understand each other, when referring to and designating them. Necessity produced designations at once natural and artificial. Observing that, in the circle of the year, the renewal and periodical appearance of the productions of the earth were constantly associated, not only with the courses of the Sun, but also with the rising and setting of certain Stars, and with their position relatively to the Sun, the centre to which they referred the whole starry host, the mind naturally connected the celestial and terrestrial objects that were in fact connected: and they commenced by giving to particular Stars or groups of Stars the names of those terrestrial objects which seemed connected with them; and for those which still remained unnamed by this nomenclature, they, to complete a system, assumed arbitrary and fanciful names.

Thus the Ethiopian of Thebes or Saba styled those Stars under

[p. 446]

which the Nile commenced to overflow, Stars of Inundation, or that poured out water (AQUARIUS).

Those Stars among which the Sun was, when he had reached the Northern Tropic and began to retreat Southward, were termed, from his retrograde motion, the Crab (CANCER).

As he approached, in Autumn, the middle point between the Northern and Southern extremes of his journeying, the days and nights became equal; and the Stars among which he was then found were called Stars of the Balance (LIBRA).

Those stars among which the Sun was, when the Lion, driven from the Desert by thirst, came to slake it at the Nile, were called Stars of the Lion (LEO).

Those among which the Sun was at harvest, were called those of the Gleaning Virgin, holding a Sheaf of Wheat (VIRGO).

Those among which he was found in February, when the Ewes brought forth their young, were called Stars of the Lamb (Arms).

Those in March, when it was time to plough, were called Stars of the Ox (TAURUS).

Those under which hot and burning winds came from the desert, venomous like poisonous reptiles, were called Stars of the Scorpion (SCORPIO).

Observing that the annual return of the rising of the Nile was always accompanied by the appearance of a beautiful Star, which at that period showed itself in the direction of the sources of that river, and seemed to warn the husbandman to be careful not to be surprised by the inundation, the Ethiopian compared this act of that Star to that of the Animal which by barking gives warning of danger, and styled it the Dog (SIRIUS).

Thus commencing, and as astronomy came to be more studied, imaginary figures were traced all over the Heavens, to which the different Stars were assigned. Chief among them were those that lay along the path which the Sun travelled as he climbed toward the North and descended to the South: lying within certain limits and extending to an equal distance on each side of the line of equal nights and days. This belt, curving like a Serpent, was termed the Zodiac, and divided into twelve Signs.

At the Vernal Equinox, 2455 years before our Era, the Sun was entering the sign and constellation Taurus, or the Bull; having passed through, since he commenced, at the Winter Solstice, to ascend Northward, the Signs Aquarius, Pisces and Aries; on

[p. 447]

entering the first of which he reached the lowest limit of his journey Southward.

From TAURUS, he passed through Gemini and Cancer, and reached LEO when he arrived at the terminus of his journey Northward. Thence, through Leo, Virgo, and Libra, he entered SCORPIO at the Autumnal Equinox, and journeyed Southward through Scorpia, Sagittarius, and Capricornus to AQUARIUS, the terminus of his journey South.

The path by which he journeyed through these signs became the Ecliptic; and that which passes through the two equinoxes, the Equator.

They knew nothing of the immutable laws of nature; and whenever the Sun commenced to tend Southward, they feared lest he might continue to do so, and by degrees disappear forever, leaving the earth to be ruled forever by darkness, storm, and cold.

Hence they rejoiced when he commenced to re-ascend after the Winter Solstice, struggling against the malign influences of Aquarius and Pisces, and amicably received by the Lamb. And when at the Vernal Equinox he entered Taurus, they still more rejoiced at the assurance that the days would again be longer than the nights, that the season of seed-time had come, and the Summer and harvest would follow.

And they lamented when, after the Autumnal Equinox, the malign influence of the venomous Scorpion, and vindictive Archer, and the filthy and ill-omened He-Goat dragged him down toward the Winter Solstice.

Arriving there, they said he had been slain, and had gone to the realm of darkness. Remaining there three days, he rose again, and again ascended Northward in the heavens, to redeem the earth from the gloom and darkness of Winter, which soon became emblematical of sin, and evil, and suffering; as the Spring, Summer, and Autumn became emblems of happiness and immortality.

Soon they personified the Sun, and worshipped him under the name of OSIRIS, and transmuted the legend of his descent among the Winter Signs, into 'a fable of his death, his descent into the infernal regions, and his resurrection.

The Moon became Isis, the wife of Osiris; and Winter, as well as the desert or the ocean into which the Sun descended, became TYPHON, the Spirit or Principle of Evil, warring against and destroying Osiris.

[p. 448]

From the journey of the Sun through the twelve signs came the legend of the twelve labors of Hercules, and the incarnations of Vishnu and Buddha. Hence came the legend of the murder of Khu_ru_m, representative of the Sun, by the three Fellow-crafts, symbols of the three Winter signs, Capricornus, Aquarius, and Pisces, who assailed him at the three gates of Heaven and slew him at the Winter Solstice. Hence the search for him by the nine Fellow-crafts, the other nine signs, his finding, burial, and resurrection.

The celestial Taurus, opening the new year, was the Creative Bull of the Hindus and Japanese, breaking with his horn the egg out of which the world is born. Hence the bull Arts was worshipped by the Egyptians, and reproduced as a golden calf by Aaron in the desert. Hence the cow was sacred to the Hindus. Hence, from the sacred and beneficent signs of Taurus and Leo, the human-headed winged lions and bulls in the palaces at Kouyounjik and Nimroud, like which were the Cherubim set by Solomon in his Temple: and hence the twelve brazen or bronze oxen, on which the laver of brass was supported.

The Celestial Vulture or Eagle, rising and setting with the Scorpion, was substituted in its place, in many cases, on account of the malign influences of the latter: and thus the four great periods of the year were marked by the Bull, the Lion, the Man (Aquarius) and the Eagle; which were upon the respective standards of Ephraim, Judah, Reuben, and Dan; and still appear on the shield of American Royal Arch Masonry.

Afterward the Ram or Lamb became an object of adoration, when, in his turn, he opened the equinox, to deliver the world from the wintry reign of darkness and evil.

Around the central and simple idea of the annual death and resurrection of the Sun a multitude of circumstantial details soon clustered. Some were derived from other astronomical phenomena; while many were merely poetical ornaments and inventions.

Besides the Sun and Moon, those ancients also saw a beautiful Star, shining with a soft, silvery light, always following the Sun at no great distance when he set, or preceding him when he rose. Another of a red and angry color, and still another more kingly and brilliant than all, early attracted their attention, by their free movements among the fixed hosts of Heaven: and the latter by his unusual brilliancy, and the regularity with which he rose and set. These were Venus, Mars, and Jupiter. Mercury and Saturn

[p. 449]

could scarcely have been noticed in the world's infancy, or until astronomy began to assume the proportions of a science.

In the projection of the celestial sphere by the astronomical priests, the zodiac and constellations, arranged in a circle, presented their halves in diametrical opposition; and the hemisphere of Winter was said to be adverse, opposed, contrary, to that of Summer. Over the angels of the latter ruled a king (OSIRIS or ORMUZD), enlightened, intelligent, creative, and beneficent. Over the fallen angels or evil genii of the former, the demons or Devs of the subterranean empire of darkness and sorrow, and its stars, ruled also a chief. In Egypt the Scorpion first ruled, the sign next the Balance, and long the chief of the Winter signs; and then the Polar Bear or Ass, called Typhon, that is, deluge, on account of the rains which inundated the earth while that constellation domineered. In Persia, at a later day, it was the serpent, which, personified as Ahriman, was the Evil Principle of the religion of Zoroaster.

The Sun does not arrive at the same moment in each year at the equinoctial point on the equator. The explanation of his anticipating that point belongs to the science of astronomy; and to that we refer you for it. The consequence is, what is termed the precession of the equinoxes, by means of which the Sun is constantly changing his place in the zodiac, at each vernal equinox; so that now, the signs retaining the names which they had 300 years before Christ, they and the constellations do not correspond; the Sun being now in the constellation Pisces, when he is in the sign Aries.

The annual amount of precession is 50 seconds and a little over [50" 1.]. The period of a complete Revolution of the Equinoxes, 25,856 years. The precession amounts to 30 degrees or a sign, in 2155.6 years. So that, as the sun now enters Pisces at the Vernal Equinox, he entered Aries at that period, 300 years B. C., and Taurus 2455 B. C. And the division of the Ecliptic, now called Taurus, lies in the Constellation Aries; while the sign Gemini is in the Constellation Taurus. Four thousand six hundred and ten years before Christ, the sun entered Gemini at the Vernal Equinox.

At the two periods, 2455 and 300 years before Christ, and now, the entrances of the sun at the Equinoxes and Solstices into the signs, were and are as follows:--

[p. 450]

B. C. 2455.

          Vern.   Equinox,

       he   entered

       Taurus

       from   Aries.

     
      Summer   Solstice

        

       Leo

       from   Cancer.

     
      Autumnal   Equinox

        

       Scorpio

       from   Libra.

     
      Winter   Solstice

        

       Aquarius

       from   Capricornus.

     
   B. C. 300.

          Vern.   Eq.

        

       Aries

       from   Pisces.

     
      Summer   Sols.

        

       Cancer

       from   Gemini.

     
      Autumn   Eq.

        

       Libra

       from   Virgo.

     
      Winter   Sols.

        

       Capricornus

       from   Sagittarius.

     
   1872.

          Vern.   Eq.

        

       Pisces

       from   Aquarius.

     
      Sum.   Sols.

        

       Gemini

       from   Taurus.

     
      Aut.   Eq.

        

       Virgo

       from   Leo.

     
      Winter   Sols.

        

       Sagittarius

       from   Scorpio.

     
   From confounding signs with causes came the worship of the sun and stars. "If," says Job, "I beheld the sun when it shined, or the moon progressive in brightness; and my heart hath been secretly enticed, or my mouth hath kissed my hand, this were an iniquity to be punished by the Judge; for I should have denied the God that is above."

Perhaps we are not, on the whole, much wiser than those simple men of the old time. For what do we know of effect and cause, except that one thing regularly or habitually follows another?

So, because the heliacal rising of Sirius preceded the rising of the Nile, it was deemed to cause it; and other stars were in like manner held to cause extreme heat, bitter cold, and watery storm.

A religious reverence for the zodiacal Bull [TAURUS] appears, from a very early period, to have been pretty general, perhaps it was universal, throughout Asia; from that chain or region of Caucasus to which it gave name; and which is still known under the appellation of Mount Taurus, to the Southern extremities of the Indian Peninsula; extending itself also into Europe, and through the Eastern parts of Africa.

This evidently originated during those remote ages of the world, when the colure of the vernal equinox passed across the stars in the head of the sign Taurus [among which was Aldebaran]; a

[p. 451]

period when, as the most ancient monuments of all the oriental nations attest, the light of arts and letters first shone forth.

The Arabian word AL-DE-BARAN, means the foremost, or leading, star: and it could only have been so named, when it did precede, or lead, all others. The year then opened with the sun in Taurus; and the multitude of ancient sculptures, both in Assyria and Egypt, wherein the bull appears with lunette or crescent horns, and the disk of the sun between them, are direct allusions to the important festival of the first new moon of the year: and there was everywhere an annual celebration of the festival of the first new moon, when the year opened with Sol and Luna in Taurus.

David sings: "Blow the trumpet in the New Moon; in the time appointed; on our solemn feast-day: for this is a statute unto Israel, and a law of the God of Jacob. This he ordained to Joseph, for a testimony, when he came out of the land of Egypt."

The reverence paid to Taurus continued long after, by the precession of the Equinoxes, the colure of the vernal equinox had come to pass through Aries. The Chinese still have a temple, called "The Palace of the horned Bull"; and the same symbol is worshipped in Japan and all over Hindostan. The Cimbrians carried a brazen bull with them, as the image of their God, when they overran Spain and Gaul; and the representation of the Creation, by the Deity in the shape of a bull, breaking the shell of an egg with his horns, meant Taurus, opening the year, and bursting the symbolical shell of the annually-recurring orb of the new year.

Theophilus says that the Osiris of Egypt was supposed to be dead or absent fifty days in each year. Landseer thinks that this was because the Sabaean priests were accustomed to see, in the lower latitudes of Egypt and Ethiopia, the first or chief stars of the Husbandman [BOOTES] sink achronically beneath the Western horizon; and then to begin their lamentations, or hold forth the signal for others to weep: and when his prolific virtues were supposed to be transferred to the vernal sun, bacchanalian revelry became devotion.

Before the colure of the Vernal Equinox had passed into Aries, and after it had left Aldebaran and the Hyades, the Pleiades were, for seven or eight centuries, the leading stars of the Sabaean year. And thus we see, on the monuments, the disk and crescent, symbols

[p. 452]

of the sun and moon in conjunction, appear successively,--first on the head, and then on the neck and back of the Zodiacal Bull, and more recently on the forehead of the Ram.

The diagrammatical character or symbol, still in use to denote Taurus, taurus, is this very crescent and disk: a symbol that has come down to us from those remote ages when this memorable conjunction in Taurus, by marking the commencement, at once of the Sabaean year and of the cycle of the Chaldaean Saros, so pre-eminently distinguished that sign as to become its characteristic symbol. On a bronze bull from China, the crescent is attached to the back of the Bull, by means of a cloud, and a curved groove is provided for the occasional introduction of the disk of the sun, when solar and lunar time were coincident and conjunctive, at the commencement of the year, and of the lunar cycle. When that was made, the year did not open with the stars in the head of the Bull, but when the colure of the vernal equinox passed across the middle or later degrees of the asterism Taurus, and the Pleiades were, in China, as in Canaan, the leading stars of the year.

The crescent and disk combined always represent the conjunctive Sun and Moon; and when placed on the head of the Zodiacal Bull, the commencement of the cycle termed SAROS by the Chaldaeans, and Metonic by the Greeks; and supposed to be alluded to in Job, by the phrase, "Mazzaroth in his season"; that is to say, when the first new Moon and new Sun of the year were coincident, which happened once in eighteen years and a fraction.

On the sarcophagus of Alexander, the same symbol appears on the head of a Rain, which, in the time of that monarch, was the leading sign. So too in the sculptured temples of the Upper Nile, the crescent and disk appear, not on the head of Taurus, but on the forehead of the Ram or the Ram-headed God, whom the Grecian Mythologists called Jupiter Ammon, really the Sun in Aries.

If we now look for a moment at the individual stars which composed and were near to the respective constellations, we may find something that will connect itself with the symbols of the Ancient Mysteries and of Masonry.

It is to be noticed that when the Sun is in a particular constellation, no part of that constellation will be seen, except just before sunrise and just after sunset; and then only the edge of it: but the constellations opposite to it will be visible. When the Sun is in Taurus, for example, that is, when Taurus sets with the Sun,

[p. 453]

[paragraph continues] Scorpio rises as he sets, and continues visible throughout the night. And if Taurus rises and sets with the Sun to-day, he will, six months hence, rise at sunset and set at sunrise; for the stars thus gain on the Sun two hours a month.

Going back to the time when, watched by the Chaldaean shepherds, and the husbandmen of Ethiopia and Egypt,

"The milk-white Bull with golden horns
 "Led on the new-born year,"

we see in the neck of TAURUS, the Pleiades, and in his face the Hyades, "which Grecia from their showering names," and of whom the brilliant Aldebaran is the chief; while to the southwestward is that most splendid of all the constellations, Orion, with Betelgueux in his right shoulder, Bellatrix in his left shoulder, Rigel on the left foot, and in his belt the three stars known as the Three Kings, and now as the Yard and Ell. Orion, ran the legend, persecuted the Pleiades; and to save them from his fury, Jupiter placed them in the Heavens, where he still pursues them, but in vain. They, with Arcturus and the Bands of Orion, are mentioned in the Book of Job. They are usually called the Seven Stars, and it is said there were seven, before the fall of Troy; though now only six are visible.

The Pleiades were so named from a Greek word signifying to sail. In all ages they have been observed for signs and seasons. Virgil says that the sailors gave names to "the Pleiades, Hyades, and the Northern Car: Pleiadas, Hyadas, Claramque Lycaonis Arcton." And Palinurus, he says,

Arcturum, pluviasque Hyadas, Geminosque Triones,
 Armatumque auro circumspicit Oriona,--

studied Arcturus and the rainy Hyades and the Twin Triones, and Orion cinctured with gold.

Taurus was the prince and leader of the celestial host for more than two thousand years; and when his head set with the Sun about the last of May, the Scorpion was seen to rise in the South-east.

The Pleiades were sometimes called Vergiliae, or the Virgins of Spring; because the Sun entered this cluster of stars in the season of blossoms. Their Syrian name was Succoth, or Succothbeneth, derived from a Chaldaean word signifying to speculate or observe.

The Hyades are five stars in the form of a V, 11 degrees southeast of

[p. 454]

the Pleiades. The Greeks counted them as seven. When the Vernal Equinox was in Taurus, Aldebaran led up the starry host; and as he rose in the East, Aries was about 27 degrees high.

When he was close upon the meridian, the Heavens presented their most magnificent appearance. Capella was a little further from the meridian, to the north; and Orion still further from it to the southward. Procyon, Sirius, Castor and Pollux had climbed about halfway from the horizon to the meridian. Regulus had just risen upon the ecliptic. The Virgin still lingered below the horizon. Fomalhaut was halfway to the meridian in the Southwest; and to the Northwest were the brilliant constellations, Perseus, Cepheus, Cassiopeia, and Andromeda; while the Pleiades had just passed the meridian.

ORION is visible to all the habitable world. The equinoctial line passes through the centre of it. When Aldebaran rose in the East, the Three Kings in Orion followed him; and as Taurus set, the Scorpion, by whose sting it was said Orion died, rose in the East.

Orion rises at noon about the 9th of March. His rising was accompanied with great rains and storms, and it became very terrible to mariners.

In Bootes, called by the ancient Greeks Lycaon, from lukos, a wolf, and by the Hebrews, Caleb Anubach, the Barking Dog, is the Great Star ARCTURUS, which, when Taurus opened the year, corresponded with a season remarkable for its great heat.

Next comes GEMINI, the Twins, two human figures, in the heads of which are the bright Stars CASTOR and POLLUX, the Dioscuri, and the Cabiri of Samothrace, patrons of navigation; while South of Pollux are the brilliant Stars SIRIUS and PROCYON, the greater and lesser Dog: and still further South, Canopus, in the Ship Argo.

Sirius is apparently the largest and brightest Star in the Heavens. When the Vernal Equinox was in Taurus, he rose heliacally, that is, just before the Sun, when, at the Summer Solstice, the Sun entered Leo, about the 21st of June, fifteen days previous to the swelling of the Nile. The heliacal rising of Canopus was also a precursor of the rising of the Nile. Procyon was the forerunner of Sirius, and rose before him.

There are no important Stars in CANCER. In the Zodiacs of Esne and Dendera, and in most of the astrological remains of

[p. 455]

[paragraph continues] Egypt, the sign of this constellation was a beetle (Scarabaeus), which thence became sacred, as an emblem of the gate through which souls descended from Heaven. In the crest of Cancer is a cluster of Stars formerly called Praesepe, the Manger, on each side of which is a small Star, the two of which were called Aselli little asses.

In Leo are the splendid Stars, REGULUS, directly on the ecliptic, and DENEBOLA in the Lion's tail. Southeast of Regulus is the fine Star COR HYDRAe.

The combat of Hercules with the Nemaean lion was his first labor. It was the first sign into which the Sun passed, after falling below the Summer Solstice; from which time he struggled to re-ascend.

The Nile overflowed in this sign. It stands first in the Zodiac of Dendera, and is in all the Indian and Egyptian Zodiacs.

In the left hand of VIRGO (Isis or Ceres) is the beautiful Star SPICA Virginis, a little South of the ecliptic. VINDEMIATRIX, of less magnitude, is in the right arm; and Northwest of Spica, in Bootes (the husbandman, Osiris), is the splendid star ARCTURUS.

The division of the first Decan of the Virgin, Aben Ezra says, represents a beautiful Virgin with flowing hair, sitting in a chair, with two ears of corn in her hand, and suckling an infant. In an Arabian MS. in the Royal Library at Paris, is a picture of the Twelve Signs. That of Virgo is a young girl with an infant by her side. Virgo was Isis; and her representation, carrying a child (Horus) in her arms, exhibited in her temple, was accompanied by this inscription: "I AM ALL THAT IS, THAT WAS, AND THAT SHALL BE; and the fruit which I brought forth is the Sun."

Nine months after the Sun enters Virgo, he reaches the Twins. When Scorpio begins to rise, Orion sets: when Scorpio comes to the meridian, Leo begins to set, Typhon reigns, Osiris is slain, and Isis (the Virgin) his sister and wife, follows him to the tomb, weeping.

The Virgin and Bootes, setting heliacally at the Autumnal Equinox, delivered the world to the wintry constellations, and introduced into it the genius of Evil, represented by Ophiucus, the Serpent.

At the moment of the Winter Solstice, the Virgin rose heliacally (with the Sun), having the Sun (Horus) in her bosom.

[p. 456]

In LIBRA are four Stars of the second and third magnitude, which we shall mention hereafter. They are Zuben-es-Chamali, Zuben-el-Gemabi, Zuben-hak-rabi, and Zuben-el-Gubi. Near the last of these is the brilliant and malign Star, ANTARES in Scorpio.

In SCORPIO, ANTARES, of the 1st magnitude, and remarkably red, was one of the four great Stars, FOMALHAUT, in Cetus, ALDEBARAN in Taurus, REGULUS in Leo, and ANTARES, that formerly answered to the Solstitial and Equinoctial points, and were much noticed by astronomers. This sign was sometimes represented by a Snake, and sometimes by a Crocodile, but generally by a Scorpion, which last is found on the Mithriac Monuments, and on the Zodiac of Dendera. It was considered a sign accursed, and the entrance of the Sun into it commenced the reign of Typhon.

In Sagittarius, Capricornus, and Aquarius there are no Stars of importance.

Near Pisces is the brilliant Star FOMALHAUT. No sign in the Zodiac is considered of more malignant influence than this. It was deemed indicative of Violence and Death. Both the Syrians and Egyptians abstained from eating fish, out of dread and abhor-hence; and when the latter would represent anything as odious, or express hatred by Hieroglyphics, they painted a fish.

In Auriga is the bright Star CAPELLA, which to the Egyptians never set.

And, circling ever round the North Pole are Seven Stars, known as Ursa Major, or the Great Bear, which have been an object of universal observation in all ages of the world. They were venerated alike by the Priests of Bel, the Magi of Persia, the Shepherds of Chaldea, and the Phoenician navigators, as well as by the astronomers of Egypt. Two of them, MERAK and DUBHE, always point to the North Pole.

The Phoenicians and Egyptians, says Eusebius, were the first who ascribed divinity to the Sun, Moon, and Stars, and regarded them as the sole causes of the production and destruction of all beings. From them vent abroad over all the world all known opinions as to the generation and descent of the Gods. Only the Hebrews looked beyond the visible world to an invisible Creator. All the rest of the world regarded as Gods those luminous bodies that blaze in the firmament, offered them sacrifices, bowed down

[p. 457]

before them, and raised neither their souls nor their worship above the visible heavens.

The Chaldaeans, Canaanites, and Syrians, among whom Abraham lived, did the same. The Canaanites consecrated horses and chariots to the Sun. The inhabitants of Emesa in Phoenicia adored him under the name of Elagabalus; and the Sun, as Hercules, was the great Deity of the Tyrians. The Syrians worshipped, with fear and dread, the Stars of the Constellation Pisces, and consecrated images of them in their temples. The Sun as Adonis was worshipped in Byblos and about Mount Libanus. There was a magnificent Temple of the Sun at Palmyra, which was pillaged by the soldiers of Aurelian, who rebuilt it and dedicated it anew. The Pleiades, under the name of Succoth-Beneth, were worshipped by the Babylonian colonists who settled in the country of the Samaritans. Saturn, under the name of Remphan, was worshipped among the Copts. The planet Jupiter was worshipped as Bel or Baal; Mars as Malec, Melech, or Moloch; Venus as Ashtaroth or Astarte, and Mercury as Nebo, among the Syrians, Assyrians, Phoenicians, and Canaanites.

Sanchoniathon says that the earliest Phoenicians adored the Sun, whom they deemed sole Lord of the Heavens; and honored him, under the name of BEEL-SAMIN, signifying King of Heaven. They raised columns to the elements, fire, and air or wind, and worshipped them; and Sabaeism, or the worship of the Stars, flourished everywhere in Babylonia. The Arabs, under a sky always clear and serene, adored the Sun, Moon, and Stars. Abulfaragius so informs us, and that each of the twelve Arab Tribes invoked a particular Star as its Patron. The Tribe Hamyar was consecrated to the Sun, the Tribe Cennah to the Moon; the Tribe Misa was under the protection of the beautiful Star in Taurus, Aldebaran; the Tribe Tai under that of Canopus; the Tribe Kais, of Sirius; the Tribes Lachamus and Idamus, of Jupiter; the Tribe Asad, of Mercury; and so on.

The Saracens, in the time of Heraclius, worshipped Venus, whom they called CABAR, or The Great; and they swore by the Sun, Moon, and Stars. Shahristan, an Arabic author, says that the Arabs and Indians before his time had temples dedicated to the seven Planets. Abulfaragius says that the seven great primitive nations, from whom all others descended, the Persians, Chaldaeans, Greeks, Egyptians, Turks, Indians, and Chinese, all originally were Sabaeists, and worshipped the Stars. They all, he says, like the Chaldaeans, prayed, turning toward the North Pole.

[p. 458]

three times a day, at Sunrise, Noon, and Sunset, bowing themselves three times before the Sun. They invoked the Stars and the Intelligences which inhabited them, offered them sacrifices, and called the fixed stars and planets gods. Philo says that the Chaldaeans regarded the stars as sovereign arbiters of the order of the world, and did not look beyond the visible causes to any invisible and intellectual being. They regarded NATURE as the great divinity, that exercised its powers through the action of its parts, the Sun, Moon, Planets, and Fixed Stars, the successive revolutions of the seasons, and the combined action of Heaven and Earth. The great feast of the Sabaeans was when the Sun reached the Vernal Equinox: and they had five other feasts, at the times when the five minor planets entered the signs in which they had their exaltation.

Diodorus Siculus informs us that the Egyptians recognized two great Divinities, primary and eternal, the Sun and Moon, which they thought governed the world, and from which everything receives its nourishment and growth: that on them depended all the great work of generation, and the perfection of all effects produced in nature. We know that the two great Divinities of Egypt were Osiris and Isis, the greatest agents of nature; according to some, the Sun and Moon, and according to others, Heaven and Earth, or the active and passive principles of generation.

And we learn from Porphyry that Chaeremon, a learned priest of Egypt, and many other learned men of that nation, said that the Egyptians recognized as gods the stars composing the zodiac, and all those that by their rising or setting marked its divisions; the subdivisions of the signs into decans, the horoscope and the stars that presided therein, and which were called Potent Chiefs of Heaven: that considering the Sun as the Great God, Architect, and Ruler of the World, they explained not only the fable of Osiris and Isis, but generally all their sacred legends, by the stars, by their appearance and disappearance, by their ascension, by the phases of the moon, and the increase and diminution of her light; by the march of the sun, the division of time and the heavens into two parts, one assigned to darkness and the other to light; by the Nile and, in fine, by the whole round of physical causes.

Lucian tells us that the bull Apis, sacred to the Egyptians, was the image of the celestial Bull, or Taurus; and that Jupiter Ammon, horned like a ram, was an image of the constellation Aries. Arid Clemens of Alexandria assures us that the four principal

[p. 459]

sacred animals, carried in their processions, were emblems of the four signs or cardinal points which fixed the seasons at the equinoxes and solstices, and divided into four parts the yearly march of the sun. They worshipped fire also, and water, and the Nile, which river they styled Father, Preserver of Egypt, sacred emanation from the Great God Osiris; and in their hymns in which they called it the god crowned with millet (which grain, represented by the pschent, was part of the head-dress of their kings), bringing with him abundance. The other elements were also revered by them: and the Great Gods, whose names are found inscribed on an ancient column, are the Air, Heaven, the Earth, the Sun, the Moon, Night, and Day. And, in fine, as Eusebius says, they regarded the Universe as a great Deity, composed of a great number of gods, the different parts of itself.

The same worship of the Heavenly Host extended into every part of Europe, into Asia Minor, and among the Turks, Scythians, and Tartars. The ancient Persians adored the Sun as Mithras, and also the Moon, Venus, Fire, Earth, Air, and Water; and, having no statues or altars, they sacrificed on high places to the Heavens and to the Sun. On seven ancient pyrea they burned incense to the Seven Planets, and considered the elements to be divinities. In the Zend-Avesta we find invocations addressed to Mithras, the stars, the elements, trees, mountains, and every part of nature. The Celestial Bull is invoked there, to which the Moon unites herself; and the four great stars, Taschter, Satevis, Haftorang, and Venant, the great Star Rapitan, and the other constellations which watch over the different portions of the earth.

The Magi, like a multitude of ancient nations, worshipped fire, above all the other elements and powers of nature. In India, the Ganges and the Indus were worshipped, and the Sun was the Great Divinity. They worshipped the Moon also, and kept up the sacred fire. In Ceylon, the Sun, Moon, and other planets were worshipped: in Sumatra, the Sun, called Iri, and the Moon, called Handa. And the Chinese built Temples to Heaven, the Earth, and genii of the air, of the water, of the mountains, and of the stars, to the sea-dragon, and to the planet Mars.

The celebrated Labyrinth was built in honor of the Sun; and its twelve palaces, like the twelve superb columns of the Temple at Hieropolis, covered with symbols relating to the twelve signs and the occult qualities of the elements, were consecrated to the twelve gods or tutelary genii of the signs of the Zodiac. The

[p. 460]

figure of the pyramid and that of the obelisk, resembling the shape of a flame, caused these monuments to be consecrated to the Sun and to Fire. And Timaeus of Locria says: "The equilateral triangle enters into the composition of the pyramid, which has four equal faces and equal angles, and which in this is like fire, the most subtle and mobile of the elements." They and the obelisks were erected in honor of the Sun, termed in an inscription upon one of the latter, translated by the Egyptian Hermapion, and to be found in Ammianus Marcellinus, "Apollo the strong, Son of God, He who made the world, true Lord of the diadems, who possesses Egypt and fills it with His glory."

The two most famous divisions of the Heavens, by seven, which is that of the planets, and by twelve, which is that of the signs, are found on the religious monuments of all the people of the ancient world. The twelve Great Gods of Egypt are met with everywhere. They were adopted by the Greeks and Romans; and the latter assigned one of them to each sign of the Zodiac. Their images were seen at Athens, where an altar was erected to each; and they were painted on the porticos. The People of the North had their twelve Azes, or Senate of twelve great gods, of whom Odin was chief. The Japanese had the same number, and like the Egyptians divided them into classes, seven, who were the most ancient, and five, afterward added: both of which numbers are well known and consecrated in Masonry.

There is no more striking proof of the universal adoration paid the stars and constellations, than the arrangement of the Hebrew camp in the Desert, and the allegory in regard to the twelve Tribes of Israel, ascribed in the Hebrew legends to Jacob. The Hebrew camp was a quadrilateral, in sixteen divisions, of which the central four were occupied by images of the four elements. The four divisions at the four angles of the quadrilateral exhibited the four signs that the astrologers called fixed, and which they regard as subject to the influence of the four great Royal Stars, Regulus in Leo, Aldebaran in Taurus, Antares in Scorpio, and Fomalhaut in the mouth of Pisces, on which falls the water poured out by Aquarius; of which constellations the Scorpion was represented in the Hebrew blazonry by the Celestial Vulture or Eagle, that rises at the same time with it and is its paranatellon. The other signs were arranged on the four faces of the , and in the parallel and interior divisions.

[p. 461]

There is an astonishing coincidence between the characteristics assigned by Jacob to his sons, and those of the signs of the Zodiac, or the planets that have their domicile in those signs.

Reuben is compared to running water, unstable, and that cannot excel; and he answers to Aquarius, his ensign being a man. The water poured out by Aquarius flows toward the South Pole, and it is the first of the four Royal Signs, ascending from the Winter Solstice.

The Lion (Leo) is the device of Judah; and Jacob compares him to that animal, whose constellation in the Heavens is the domicile of the Sun; the Lion of the Tribe of Judah; by whose grip, when that of apprentice and that of fellow-craft,--of Aquarius at the Winter Solstice and of Cancer at the Vernal Equinox,--had not succeeded in raising him, Khu_ru_m was lifted out of the grave.

Ephraim, on whose ensign appears the Celestial Bull, Jacob compares to the ox. Dan, bearing as his device a Scorpion, he compares to the Cerastes or horned Serpent, synonymous in astrological language with the vulture or pouncing eagle; and which bird was often substituted on the flag of Dan, in place of the venomous scorpion, on account of the terror which that reptile inspired, as the symbol of Typhon and his malign influences; wherefore the Eagle, as its paranatellon, that is, rising and setting at the same time with it, was naturally used in its stead. Hence the four famous figures in the sacred pictures of the Jews and Christians, and in Royal Arch Masonry, of the Lion, the Ox, the Man, and the Eagle, the four creatures of the Apocalypse, copied there from Ezekiel, in whose reveries and rhapsodies they are seen revolving around blazing circles.

The Ram, domicile of Mars, chief of the Celestial Soldiery and of the twelve Signs, is the device of Gad, whom Jacob characterizes as a warrior, chief of his army.

Cancer, in which are the stars termed Aselli, or little asses, is the device of the flag of Issachar, whom Jacob compares to an ass.

Capricorn, of old represented with the tail of a fish, and called by astronomers the Son of Neptune, is the device of Zebulon, of whom Jacob says that he dwells on the shore of the sea.

Sagittarius, chasing the Celestial Wolf, is the emblem of Benjamin, whom Jacob compares to a hunter: and in that constellation the Romans placed the domicile of Diana the huntress. Virgo,

[p. 462]

the domicile of Mercury, is borne on the flag of Naphtali, whose eloquence and agility Jacob magnifies, both of which are attributes of the Courier of the Gods. And of Simeon and Levi he speaks as united, as are the two fishes that make the Constellation Pisces, which is their armorial emblem.

Plato, in his Republic, followed the divisions of the Zodiac and the planets. So also did Lycurgus at Sparta, and Cecrops in the Athenian Commonwealth. Chun, the Chinese legislator, divided China into twelve Tcheou, and specially designated twelve mountains. The Etruscans divided themselves into twelve Cantons. Romulus appointed twelve Lictors. There were twelve tribes of Ishmael and twelve disciples of the Hebrew Reformer. The New Jerusalem of the Apocalypse has twelve gates.

The Souciet, a Chinese book, speaks of a palace composed of four buildings, whose gates looked toward the four corners of the world. That on the East was dedicated to the new moons of the months of Spring; that on the West to those of Autumn; that on the South to those of Summer; and that on the North to those of Winter: and in this palace the Emperor and his grandees sacrificed a lamb, the animal that represented the Sun at the Vernal Equinox.

Among the Greeks, the march of the Choruses in their theatres represented the movements of the Heavens and the planets, and the Strophe and Anti-Strophe imitated, Aristoxenes says, the movements of the Stars. The number five was sacred among the Chinese, as that of the planets other than the Sun and Moon. Astrology consecrated the numbers twelve, seven, thirty, and three hundred and sixty; and everywhere seven, the number of the planets, was as sacred as twelve, that of the signs, the months, the oriental cycles, and the sections of the horizon. We shall speak more at large hereafter, in another Degree, as to these and other numbers, to which the ancients ascribed mysterious powers.

The Signs of the Zodiac and the Stars appeared on many of the ancient coins and medals. On the public seal of the Locrians, Ozoles was Hesperus, or the planet Venus. On the medals of Antioch on the Orontes was the ram and crescent; and the Ram was the special Deity of Syria, assigned to it in the division of the earth among the twelve signs. On the Cretan coins was the Equinoctial Bull; and he also appeared on those of the Mamertins and of Athens. Sagittarius appeared on those of the Persians. In

[p. 463]

[paragraph continues] India the twelve signs appeared upon the ancient coins. The Scorpion was engraved on the medals of the Kings of Comagena, and Capricorn on those of Zeugma, Anazorba, and other cities. On the medals of Antoninus are found nearly all the signs of the Zodiac.

Astrology was practised among all the ancient nations. In Egypt, the book of Astrology was borne reverentially in the religious processions; in which the few sacred animals were also carried, as emblems of the equinoxes and solstices. The same science flourished among the Chaldaeans, and over the whole of Asia and Africa. When Alexander invaded India, the astrologers of the Oxydraces came to him to disclose the secrets of their science of Heaven and the Stars. The Brahmins whom Apollonius consulted, taught him the secrets of Astronomy, with the ceremonies and prayers whereby to appease the gods and learn the future from the stars. In China, astrology taught the mode of governing the State and families. In Arabia it was deemed the mother of the sciences; and old libraries are full of Arabic books on this pretended science. It flourished at Rome. Constantine had his horoscope drawn by the astrologer Valens. It was a science in the middle ages, and even to this day is neither forgotten nor unpractised. Catherine de Medici was fond of it. Louis XIV. consulted his horoscope, and the learned Casini commenced his career as an astrologer.

The ancient Sabaeans established feasts in honor of each planet, on the day, for each, when it entered its place of exaltation, or reached the particular degree in the particular sign of the zodiac in which astrology had fixed the place of its exaltation; that is, the place in the Heavens where its influence was supposed to be greatest, and where it acted on Nature with the greatest energy. The place of exaltation of the Sun was in Aries, because, reaching that point, he awakens all Nature, and warms into life all the germs of vegetation; and therefore his most solemn feast among all nations, for many years before our Era, was fixed at the time of his entrance into that sign. In Egypt, it was called the Feast of Fire and Light. It was the Passover, when the Paschal Lamb was slain and eaten, among the Jews, and Neurouz among the Persians. The Romans preferred the place of domicile to that of exaltation; and celebrated the feasts of the planets under the signs that were their houses. The Chaldaeans, whom, and not the Egyptians, the Sabaeans followed in this, preferred the places of exaltation.

[p. 464]

Saturn, from the length of time required for his apparent revolution, was considered the most remote, and the Moon the nearest planet. After the Moon came Mercury and Venus, then the Sun, and then Mars, Jupiter, and Saturn.

So the risings and settings of the Fixed Stars, and their conjunctions with the Sun, and their first appearance as they emerged from his rays, fixed the epochs for the feasts instituted in their honor; and the Sacred Calendars of the ancients were regulated accordingly.

In the Roman games of the circus, celebrated in honor of the Sun and of entire Nature, the Sun, Moon, Planets, Zodiac, Elements, and the most apparent parts and potent agents of Nature were personified and represented, and the courses of the Sun in the Heavens were imitated in the Hippodrome; his chariot being drawn by four horses of different colors, representing the four elements and seasons. The courses were from East to West, like the circuits round the Lodge, and seven in number, to correspond with the number of planets. The movements of the Seven Stars that revolve around the pole were also represented, as were those of Capella, which by its heliacal rising at the moment when the Sun reached the Pleiades, in Taurus, announced the commencement of the annual revolution of the Sun.

The intersection of the Zodiac by the colures at the Equinoctial and Solstitial points, fixed four periods, each of which has, by one or more nations, and in some cases by the same nation at different periods, been taken for the commencement of the year. Some adopted the Vernal Equinox, because then day began to prevail over night, and light gained a victory over darkness. Sometimes the Summer Solstice was preferred; because then day attained its maximum of duration, and the acme of its glory and perfection. In Egypt, another reason was, that then the Nile began to over-flow, at the heliacal rising of Sirius. Some preferred the Autumnal Equinox, because then the harvests were gathered, and the hopes of a new crop were deposited in the bosom of the earth. And some preferred the Winter Solstice, because then, the shortest day having arrived, their length commenced to increase, and Light began the career destined to end in victory at the Vernal Equinox.

The Sun was figuratively said to die and be born again at the Winter Solstice; the games of the Circus, in honor of the invincible God-Sun, were then celebrated, and the Roman year, established

[p. 465]

or reformed by Numa, commenced. Many peoples of Italy commenced their year, Macrobius says, at that time; and represented by the four ages of man the gradual succession of periodical increase and diminution of day, and the light of the Sun; likening him to an infant born at the Winter Solstice, a young man at the Vernal Equinox, a robust man at the Summer Solstice, and an old man at the Autumnal Equinox.

This idea was borrowed from the Egyptians, who adored the Sun at the Winter Solstice, under the figure of an infant.

The image of the Sign in which each of the four seasons commenced, became the form under which was figured the Sun of that particular season. The Lion's skin was worn by Hercules; the horns of the Bull adorned the forehead of Bacchus; and the autumnal serpent wound its long folds round the Statue of Serapis, 2500 years before our era; when those Signs corresponded with the commencement of the Seasons. When other constellations replaced them at those points, by means of the precession of the Equinoxes, those attributes were changed. Then the Ram furnished the horns for the head of the Sun, under the name of Jupiter Ammon. He was no longer born exposed to the waters of Aquarius, like Bacchus, nor enclosed in an urn like the God Canopus; but in the Stables of Augeas or the Celestial Goat. He then completed his triumph, mounted on an ass, in the constellation Cancer, which then occupied the Solstitial point of Summer.

Other attributes the images of the Sun borrowed from the constellations which, by their rising and setting, fixed the points of departure of the year, and the commencements of its four principal divisions.

First the Bull and afterward the Ram (called by the Persians the Lamb), was regarded as the regenerator of Nature, through his union with the Sun. Each, in his turn, was an emblem of the Sun overcoming the winter darkness, and repairing the disorders of Nature, which every year was regenerated under these Signs, after the Scorpion and Serpent of Autumn had brought upon it barrenness, disaster, and darkness. Mithras was represented sitting on a Bull; and that animal was an image of Osiris: while the Greek Bacchus armed his front with its horns, and was pictured with its tail and feet.

The Constellations also became noteworthy to the husbandman, which by their rising or setting, at morning or evening, indicated

[p. 466]

the coming of this period of renewed fruitfulness and new life. Capella, or the kid Amalthea, whose horn is called that of abundance, and whose place is over the equinoctial point, or Taurus; and the Pleiades, that long indicated the Seasons, and gave rise to a multitude of poetic fables, were the most observed and most celebrated in antiquity.

The original Roman year commenced at the Vernal Equinox. July was formerly called Quintilis, the 5th month, and August Sextilis, the 6th, as September is still the 7th month, October the 8th, and so on. The Persians commenced their year at the same time, and celebrated their great feast of Neurouz when the Sun entered Aries and the Constellation Perseus rose,--Perseus, who first brought down to earth the heavenly fire consecrated in their temples: and all the ceremonies then practised reminded men of the renovation of Nature and the triumph of Ormuzd, the Light-God, over the powers of Darkness and Ahriman their Chief.

The Legislator of the Jews fixed the commencement of their year in the month Nisan, at the Vernal Equinox, at which season the Israelites marched out of Egypt and were relieved of their long bondage; in commemoration of which Exodus, they ate the Paschal Lamb at that Equinox. And when Bacchus and his army had long marched in burning deserts, they were led by a Lamb or Ram into beautiful meadows, and to the Springs that watered the Temple of Jupiter Ammon. For, to the Arabs and Ethiopians, whose great Divinity Bacchus was, nothing was so perfect a type of Elysium as a Country abounding in springs and rivulets.

Orion, on the same meridian with the Stars of Taurus, died of the sting of the celestial Scorpion, that rises when he sets; as dies the Bull of Mithras in Autumn: and in the Stars that correspond with the Autumnal Equinox we find those malevolent genii that ever war against the Principle of good, and that take from the Sun and the Heavens the fruit-producing power that they communicate to the earth.

With the Vernal Equinox, dear to the sailor as to the husbandman, came the Stars that, with the Sun, open navigation, and rule the stormy Seas. Then the Twins plunge into the solar fires, or disappear at setting, going down with the Sun into the bosom of the waters. And these tutelary Divinities of mariners, the Dioscuri or Chief Cabiri of Samothrace, sailed with Jason to possess themselves of the golden-fleeced ram, or Aries, whose rising in the

[p. 467]

morning announced the Sun's entry into Taurus, when the Serpent-bearer Jason rose in the evening, and, in aspect with the Dioscuri, was deemed their brother. And Orion, son of Neptune, and most potent controller of the tempest-tortured ocean, announcing sometimes calm and sometimes tempest, rose after Taurus, rejoicing in the forehead of the new year.

The Summer Solstice was not less an important point in the Sun's march than the Vernal Equinox, especially to the Egyptians, to whom it not only marked the end and term of the increasing length of the days and of the domination of light, and the maximum of the Sun's elevation; but also the annual recurrence of that phenomenon peculiar to Egypt, the rising of the Nile, which, ever accompanying the Sun in his course, seemed to rise and fall as the days grew longer and shorter, being lowest at the Winter Solstice, and highest at that of Summer. Thus the Sun seemed to regulate its swelling; and the time of his arrival at the solstitial point being that of the first rising of the Nile, was selected by the Egyptians as the beginning of a year which they called the Year of God, and of the Sothiac Period, or the period of Sothis, the Dog-Star, who, rising in the morning, fixed that epoch, so important to the people of Egypt. This year was also called the Heliac, that is the Solar year, and the Canicular year; and it consisted of three hundred and sixty-five days, without intercalation; so that at the end of four years, or of four times three hundred and sixty-five days, making 1460 days, it needed to add a day, to make four complete revolutions of the Sun. To correct this, some Nations made every fourth year consist, as we do now, of 366 days: but the Egyptians preferred to add nothing to the year of 365 days, which, at the end of 120 years, or of 30 times 4 years, was short 30 days or a month; that is to say, it required a month more to complete the 120 revolutions of the Sun, though so many were counted, that is, so many years. Of course the commencement of the 121st year would not correspond with the Summer Solstice, but would precede it by a month: so that, when the Sun arrived at the Solstitial point whence he at first set out, and whereto he must needs return, to make in reality 120 years, or 120 complete revolutions, the first month of the 121st year would have ended.

Thus, if the commencement of the year went back 30 days every 120 years, this commencement of the year, continuing to

[p. 468]

recede, would, at the end of 12 times 120 years, or of 1460 years, get back to the Solstitial point, or primitive point of departure of the period. The Sun would then have made but 1459 revolutions, though 1460 were counted; to make up which, a year more would need to be added. So that the Sun would not have made his 1460 revolutions until the end of 1461 years of 365 days each,--each revolution being in reality not 365 days exactly, but 365 1/4.

This period of 1461 years, each of 365 days, bringing back the commencement of the Solar year to the Solstitial point, at the rising of Sirius, after 1460 complete Solar revolutions, was called in Egypt the Sothiac period, the point of departure whereof was the Summer Solstice, first occupied by the Lion and afterward by Cancer, under which sign is Sirius, which opened the period. It was, says Porphyry, at this Solstitial New Moon, accompanied by the rising of Seth or the Dog-Star, that the beginning of the year was fixed, and that of the generation of all things, or, as it were, the natal hour of the world.

Not Sirius alone determined the period of the rising of the Nile. Aquarius, his urn, and the stream flowing from it, in opposition to the sign of the Summer Solstice then occupied by the Sun, opened in the evening the march of Night, and received the full Moon in his cup. Above him and with him rose the feet of Pegasus, struck wherewith the waters flow forth that the Muses drink. The Lion and the Dog, indicating, were supposed to cause the inundation, and so were worshipped. While the Sun passed through Leo, the waters doubled their depth; and the sacred fountains poured their streams through the heads of lions. Hydra, rising between Sirius and Leo, extended under three signs. Its head rose with Cancer, and its tail with the feet of the Virgin and the beginning of Libra; and the inundation continued while the Sun passed along its whole extent.

The successive contest of light and darkness for the possession of the lunar disk, each being by turns victor and vanquished, exactly resembled what passed upon the earth by the action of the Sun and his journeys from one Solstice to the other. The lunary revolution presented the same periods of light and darkness as the year, and was the object of the sane religious fictions. Above the Moon, Pliny said, everything is pure, and filled with eternal light. There ends the cone of shadow which the earth projects, and which produces night; there ends the sojourn of night and

[p. 469]

darkness; to it the air extends; but there we enter the pure substance.

The Egyptians assigned to the Moon the demiurgic or creative force of Osiris, who united himself to her in the spring, when the Sun communicated to her the principles of generation which she afterward disseminated in the air and all the elements. The Persians considered the Moon to have been impregnated by the Celestial Bull, first of the signs of spring. In all ages, the Moon has been supposed to have great influence upon vegetation, and the birth and growth of animals; and the belief is as widely entertained now as ever, and that influence regarded as a mysterious and inexplicable one. Not the astrologers alone, but Naturalists like Pliny, Philosophers like Plutarch and Cicero, Theologians like the Egyptian Priests, and Metaphysicians like Proclus, believed firmly in these lunar influences.

"The Egyptians," says Diodorus Siculus, "acknowledged two great gods, the Sun and Moon, or Osiris and Isis, who govern the world and regulate its administration by the dispensation of the seasons. . . . Such is the nature of these two great Divinities, that they impress an active and fecundating force, by which the generation of beings in effected; the Sun, by heat and that spiritual principle that forms the breath of the winds; the Moon by humidity and dryness; and both by the forces of the air which they share in common. By this beneficial influence everything is born, grows, and vegetates. Wherefore this whole huge body, in which nature resides, is maintained by the combined action of the Sun and Moon, and their five qualities, the principles spiritual, fiery, dry, humid, and airy."

So five primitive powers, elements, or elementary qualities, are united with the Sun and Moon in the Indian theology: air, spirit, fire, water, and earth: and the same five elements are recognized by the Chinese. The Phoenicians, like the Egyptians, regarded the Sun and Moon and Stars as sole causes of generation and destruction here below.

The Moon, like the Sun, changed continually the track in which she crossed the Heavens, moving ever to and fro between the upper and lower limits of the Zodiac; and her different places, phases, and aspects there, and her relations with the Sun and the constellations, have been a fruitful source of mythological fables.

All the planets had what astrology termed their houses, in the

[p. 470]

[paragraph continues] Zodiac. The House of the Sun was in Leo, and that of the Moon in Cancer. Each other planet had two signs; Mercury had Gemini and Virgo; Venus, Taurus and Libra; Mars, Aries and Scorpio; Jupiter, Pisces and Sagittarius; and Saturn, Aquarius and Capricornus. From this distribution of the signs also came many mythological emblems and fables; as also many came from the places of exaltation of the planets. Diana of Ephesus, the Moon, wore the image of a crab on her bosom, because in that sign was the Moon's domicile; and lions bore up the throne of Horns, the Egyptian Apollo, the Sun personified, for a like reason: while the Egyptians consecrated the tauriform scarabaeus to the Moon, because she had her place of exaltation in Taurus; and for the same reason Mercury is said to have presented Isis with a helmet like a bull's head.

A further division of the Zodiac was of each sign into three parts of 10 degrees each, called Decans, or, in the whole Zodiac, 36 parts, among which the seven planets were apportioned anew, each planet having an equal number of Decans, except the first, which, opening and closing the series of planets five times repeated, necessarily had one Decan more than the others. This subdivision was not invented until after Aries opened the Vernal Equinox; and accordingly Mars, having his house in Aries, opens the series of decans and closes it; the planets following each other, five times in succession, in the following order, Mars, the Sun, Venus, Mercury, the Moon, Saturn, Jupiter, Mars, etc.; so that to each sign are assigned three planets, each occupying 10 degrees. To each Decan a God or Genius was assigned, making thirty-six in all, one of whom, the Chaldaeans said, came down upon earth every ten days, remained so many days, and re-ascended to Heaven. This division is found on the Indian sphere, the Persian, and that Barbaric one which Aben Ezra describes. Each genius of the Decans had a name and special characteristics. They concur and aid in the effects produced by the Sun, Moon, and other planets charged with the administration of the world: and the doctrine in regard to them, secret and august as it was held, was considered of the gravest importance; and its principles, Firmicus says, were not entrusted by the ancients, inspired as they were by the Deity, to any but the Initiates, and to them only with great reserve, and a kind of fear, and when cautiously enveloped with an obscure veil, that they might not come to be known by the profane,

[p. 471]

With these Decans were connected the paranatellons or those stars outside of the Zodiac, that rise and set at the same moment with the several divisions of 10 degrees of each sign. As there were anciently only forty-eight celestial figures or constellations, of which twelve were in the Zodiac, it follows that there were, outside of the Zodiac, thirty-six other asterisms, paranatellons of the several thirty-six Decans. For example, as when Capricorn set, Sirius and Procyon, or Canis Major and Canis Minor, rose, they were the Paranatellons of Capricorn, though at a great distance from it in the heavens. The rising of Cancer was known from the setting of Corona Borealis and the rising of the Great and Little Dog, its three paranatellons.

The risings and settings of the Stars are always spoken of as connected with the Sun. In that connection there are three kinds of them, cosmical, achronical, and heliacal, important to be distinguished by all who would understand this ancient learning.

When any Star rises or sets with the same degree of the same sign of the Zodiac that the Sun occupies at the time, it rises and sets simultaneously with the Sun, and this is termed rising or setting cosmically; but a star that so rises and sets can never be seen, on account of the light that precedes, and is left behind by the Sun. It is therefore necessary, in order to know his place in the Zodiac, to observe stars that rise just before or set just after him.

A Star that is in the East when night commences, and in the West when it ends, is said to rise and set achronically. A Star so rising or setting was in opposition to the Sun, rising at the end of evening twilight, and setting at the beginning of morning twilight, and this happened to each Star but once a year, because the Sun moves from West to East, with reference to the Stars, one degree a day.

When a Star rises as night ends in the morning, or sets as night commences in the evening, it is said to rise or set heliacally, because the Sun (Helios) seems to touch it with his luminous atmosphere. A Star thus reappears after a disappearance, often, of several months, and thenceforward it rises an hour earlier each day, gradually emerging from the Sun's rays, until at the end of three months it precedes the Sun six hours, and rises at midnight. A Star sets heliacally, when no longer remaining visible above the western horizon after sunset, the day arrives when they cease to

[p. 472]

be seen setting in the West. They so remain invisible, until the Sun passes so far to the Eastward as not to eclipse them with his light; and then they reappear, but in the East, about an hour and a half before sunrise: and this is their heliacal rising. In this interval, the cosmical rising and setting take place.

Besides the relations of the constellations and their paranatellons with the houses and places of exaltation of the Planets, and with their places in the respective Signs and Decans, the Stars were supposed to produce different effects according as they rose or set, and according as they did so either cosmically, achronically, or heliacally; and also according to the different seasons of the year in which 'these phenomena occurred; and these differences were carefully marked on the old Calendars; and many things in the ancient allegories are referable to them.

Another and most important division of the Stars was into good and bad, beneficent and malevolent. With the Persians, the former, of the Zodiacal Constellations, were from Aries to Virgo, inclusive; and the latter from Libra to Pisces, inclusive. Hence the good Angels and Genii, and the bad Angels, Devs, Evil Genii, Devils, Fallen Angels, Titans, and Giants of the Mythology. The other thirty-six Constellations were equally divided, eighteen on each side, or, with those of the Zodiac, twenty-four.

Thus the symbolic Egg, that issued from the mouth of the invisible Egyptian God KNEPH; known in the Grecian Mysteries as the Orphic Egg; from which issued the God CHUMONG of the Coresians, and the Egyptian OSIRIS, and PHANES, God and Principle of Light; from which, broken by the Sacred Bull of the Japanese, the world emerged; and which the Greeks placed at the feet of BACCHUS TAURI-CORNUS; the Magian Egg of ORMUZD, from which came the Amshaspands and Devs; was divided into two halves, and equally apportioned between the Good and Evil Constellations and Angels. Those of Spring, as for example Aries and Taurus, Auriga and Capella, were the beneficent stars; and those of Autumn, as the Balance, Scorpio, the Serpent of Ophiucus, and the Dragon of the Hesperides, were types and subjects of the Evil Principle, and regarded as malevolent causes of the ill effects experienced in Autumn and Winter. Thus are explained the mysteries of the journeyings of the human soul through the spheres, when it descends to the earth by the Sign of the Serpent, and returns to the Empire of light by that of the Lamb or Bull.

[p. 473]

The creative action of Heaven was manifested, and all its demiurgic energy developed, most of all at the Vernal Equinox, to which refer all the fables that typify the victory of Light over Darkness, by the triumphs of Jupiter, Osiris, Ormuzd, and Apollo. Always the triumphant god takes the form of the Bull, the Ram, or the Lamb. Then Jupiter wrests from Typhon his thunderbolts, of which that malignant Deity had possessed himself during the Winter. Then the God of Light overwhelms his foe, pictured as a huge Serpent. Then Winter ends; the Sun, seated on the Bull and accompanied by Orion, blazes in the Heavens. All nature rejoices at the victory; and Order and Harmony are everywhere re-established, in place of the dire confusion that reigned while gloomy Typhon domineered, and Ahriman prevailed against Ormuzd.

The universal Soul of the World, motive power of Heaven and of the Spheres, it was held, exercises its creative energy chiefly through the medium of the Sun, during his revolution along the signs of the Zodiac, with which signs unite the paranatellons that modify their influence, and concur in furnishing the symbolic attributes of the Great Luminary that regulates Nature and is the depository of her greatest powers. The action of this Universal Soul of the World is displayed in the movements of the Spheres, and above all in that of the Sun, in the successions of the risings and settings of the Stars, and in their periodical returns. By these are explainable all the metamorphoses of that Soul, personified as Jupiter, as Bacchus, as Vishnu, or as Buddha, and all the various attributes ascribed to it; and also the worship of those animals that were consecrated in the ancient Temples, representatives on earth of the Celestial Signs, and supposed to receive by transmission from them the rays and emanations which in them flow from the Universal Soul.

All the old Adorers of Nature, the Theologians, Astrologers. and Poets, as well as the most distinguished Philosophers, supposed that the Stars were so many animated and intelligent beings, or eternal bodies, active causes of effect here below, animated by a living principle, and directed by an intelligence that was itself but an emanation from and a part of the life and universal intelligence of the world: and we find in the hierarchical order and distribution of their eternal and divine Intelligences, known by the names of Gods, Angels, and Genii, the same distributions and

[p. 474]

the same divisions as those by which the ancients divided the visible Universe and distributed its parts. And the famous divisions by seven and by twelve, appertaining to the planets and the signs of the zodiac, is everywhere found in the hierarchical order of the Gods, and Angels, and the other Ministers that are the depositaries of that Divine Force which moves and rules the world.

These, and the other Intelligences assigned to the other Stars, have absolute dominion over all parts of Nature; over the elements, the animal and vegetable kingdoms, over man and all his actions, over his virtues and vices, and over good and evil, which divide between them his life. The passions of his soul and the maladies of his body,--these and the entire man are dependent on the heavens and the genii that there inhabit, who preside at his birth, control his fortunes during life, and receive his soul or active and intelligent part when it is to be re-united to the pure life of the lofty Stars. And all through the great body of the world are disseminated portions of the universal Soul, impressing movement on everything that seems to move of itself, giving life to the plants and trees, directing by a regular and settled plan the organization and development of their germs, imparting constant mobility to the running waters and maintaining their eternal motion, impelling the winds and changing their direction or stilling them, calming and arousing the ocean, unchaining the storms, pouring out the fires of volcanoes, or with earthquakes shaking the roots of huge mountains and the foundations of vast continents; by means of a force that, belonging to Nature, is a mystery to man.

And these invisible Intelligences, like the stars, are marshalled in two great divisions, under the banners of the two Principles of Good and Evil, Light and Darkness; under Ormuzd and Ahriman, Osiris and Typhon. The Evil Principle was the motive power of brute matter; and it, personified as Ahriman and Typhon, had its hosts and armies of Devs and Genii, Fallen Angels and Malevolent Spirits, who waged continual wage with the Good Principle, the Principle of Empyreal Light and Splendor, Osiris, Ormuzd, Jupiter or Dionusos, with 'his bright hosts of Amshaspands, Izeds, Angels, and Archangels; a warfare that goes on from birth until death, in the soul of every man that lives.

We have heretofore, in the 24th Degree, recited the principal incidents in the legend of Osiris and Isis, and it remains but to point

[p. 475]

out the astronomical phenomena which it has converted into mythological facts.

The Sun, at the Vernal Equinox, was the fruit-compelling star that by his warmth provoked generation and poured upon the sublunary world all the blessings of Heaven; the beneficent god, tutelary genius of universal vegetation, that communicates to the dull earth new activity, and stirs her great heart, long chilled by Winter and his frosts, until from her bosom burst all the greenness and perfume of spring, making her rejoice in leafy forests and grassy lawns and flower-enamelled meadows, and the promise of abundant crops of grain and fruits and purple grapes in their due season.

He was then called Osiris, Husband of Isis, God of Cultivation and Benefactor of Men, pouring on them and on the earth the choicest blessings within the gift of the Divinity. Opposed to him was Typhon, his antagonist in the Egyptian mythology, as Ahriman was the foe of Ormuzd, the Good Principle, in the theology of the Persians.

The first inhabitants of Egypt and Ethiopia, as Diodorus Siculus informs us, saw in the Heavens two first eternal causes of things, or great Divinities, one the Sun, whom they called Osiris, and the other the Moon, whom they called Isis; and these they considered the causes of all the generations of earth. This idea, we learn from Eusebius, was the same as that of the Phoenicians. On these two great Divinities the administration of the world depended. All sublunary bodies received from them their nourishment and increase, during the annual revolution which they controlled, and the different seasons into which it was divided.

To Osiris and Isis, it was held, were owing civilization, the discovery of agriculture, laws, arts of all kinds, religious worship, temples, the invention of letters, astronomy, the gymnastic arts, and music; and thus they were the universal benefactors. Osiris travelled to civilize the countries which he passed through, and communicate to them his valuable discoveries. He built cities, and taught men to cultivate the earth. Wheat and wine were his first presents to men. Europe, Asia, and Africa partook of the blessings which he communicated, and the most remote regions of India remembered him, and claimed him as one of their great gods.

You have learned how Typhon, his brother, slew him. His body was cut into pieces, all of which were collected by Isis, except his

[p. 476]

organs of generation, which had been thrown into and devoured in the waters of the river that every year fertilized Egypt. The other portions were buried by Isis, and over them she erected a tomb. Thereafter she remained single, loading her subjects with blessings. She cured the sick, restored sight to the blind, made the paralytic whole, and even raised the dead. From her Horus or Apollo learned divination and the science of medicine.

Thus the Egyptians pictured the beneficent action of the two luminaries that, from the bosom of the elements, produced all animals and men, and all bodies that are born, grow, and die in the eternal circle of generation and destruction here below.

When the Celestial Bull opened the new year at the Vernal Equinox, Osiris, united with the Moon, communicated to her the seeds of fruitfulness which she poured upon the air, and therewith impregnated the generative principles which gave activity to universal vegetation. Apis, represented by a bull, was the living and sensible image of the Sun or Osiris, when in union with Isis or the Moon at the Vernal Equinox, concurring with her in provoking everything that lives to generation. This conjunction of the Sun with the Moon at the Vernal Equinox, in the constellation Taurus, required the Bull Apis to have on his shoulder a mark resembling the Crescent Moon. And the fecundating influence of these two luminaries was expressed by images that would now be deemed gross and indecent, but which then were not misunderstood.

Everything good in Nature comes from Osiris,--order, harmony, and the favorable temperature of the seasons and celestial periods. From Typhon come the stormy passions and irregular impulses that agitate the brute and material part of man; maladies of the body, and violent shocks that injure the health and derange the system; inclement weather, derangement of the seasons, and eclipses. Osiris and Typhon were the Ormuzd and Ahriman of the Persians; principles of good and evil, of light and darkness, ever at war in the administration of the Universe.

Osiris was the image of generative power. This was expressed by his symbolic statues, and by the sign into which he entered at the Vernal Equinox. He especially dispensed the humid principle of Nature, generative element of all things; and the Nile and all moisture were regarded as emanations from him, without which there could be no vegetation.

That Osiris and Isis were the Sun and Moon, is attested by

[p. 477]

many ancient writers; by Diogenes Laertius, Plutarch, Lucian, Suidas, Macrobius, Martianus Capella, and others. His power was symbolized by an Eye over a Sceptre. The Sun was termed by the Greeks the Eye of Jupiter, and the Eye of the World; and his is the All-Seeing Eye in our Lodges. The oracle of Claros styled him King of the Stars and of the Eternal Fire, that en-genders the year and the seasons, dispenses rain and winds, and brings about daybreak and night. And Osiris was invoked as the God that resides in the Sun and is enveloped by his rays, the invisible and eternal force that modifies the sublunary world by means of the Sun.

Osiris was the same God known as Bacchus, Dionusos, and Serapis. Serapis is the author of the regularity and harmony of the world. Bacchus, jointly with Ceres (identified by Herodotus with Isis) presides over the distribution of all our blessings; and from the two emanates everything beautiful and good in Nature. One furnishes the germ and principle of every good; the other receives and preserves it as a deposit; and the latter is the function of the Moon in the theology of the Persians. In each theology, Persian and Egyptian, the Moon acts directly on the earth; but she is fecundated, in one by the Celestial Bull and in the other by Osiris, with whom she is united at the Vernal Equinox, in the sign Taurus, the place of her exaltation or greatest influence on the earth. The force of Osiris, says Plutarch, is exercised through the Moon. She is the passive cause relatively to him, and the active cause relatively to the earth, to which she transmits the germs of fruitfulness received from him.

In Egypt the earliest movement in the waters of the Nile began to appear at the Vernal Equinox, when the new Moon occurred at the entrance of the Sun into the constellation Taurus; and thus the Nile was held to receive its fertilizing power from the combined action of the equinoctial Sun and the new Moon, meeting in Taurus. Osiris was often confounded with the Nile, and Isis with the earth; and Osiris was deemed to act on the earth, and to transmit to it his emanations, through both the Moon and the Nile; whence the fable that his generative organs were thrown into that river. Typhon, on the other hand, was the principle of aridity and barrenness; and by his mutilation of Osiris was meant that drought which caused the Nile to retire within his bed and shrink up in Autumn.

[p. 478]

Elsewhere than in Egypt, Osiris was the symbol of the refreshing rains that descend to fertilize the earth; and Typhon the burning winds of Autumn; the stormy rains that rot the flowers, the plants, and leaves; the short, cold days; and everything injurious in Nature, and that produces corruption and destruction.

In short, Typhon is the principle of corruption, of darkness, of the lower world from which come earthquakes, tumultuous corn-motions of the air, burning heat, lightning, and fiery meteors, and plague and pestilence. Such too was the Ahriman of the Persians; and this revolt of the Evil Principle against the Principle of Good and Light, has been represented in every cosmogony, under many varying forms. Osiris, on the contrary, by the intermediation of Isis, fills the material world with happiness, purity, and order, by which the harmony of Nature is maintained. It was said that he died at the Autumnal Equinox, when Taurus or the Pleiades rose in the evening, and that he rose to life again in the Spring, when vegetation was inspired with new activity.

Of course the two signs of Taurus and Scorpio will figure most largely in the mythological history of Osiris, for they marked the two equinoxes, 2500 years before our Era; and next to them the other constellations, near the equinoxes, that fixed the limits of the duration of the fertilizing action of the Sun; and it is also to be remarked that Venus, the Goddess of Generation, has her domicile in Taurus, as the Moon has there her place of exaltation.

When the Sun was in Scorpio, Osiris lost his life, and that fruitfulness which, under the form of the Bull, he had communicated, through the Moon, to the Earth. Typhon, his hands and feet horrid with serpents, and whose habitat in the Egyptian planisphere was under Scorpio, confined him in a chest and flung him into the Nile, under the 17th degree of Scorpio. Under that sign he lost his life and virility; and he recovered them in the Spring, when he had connection with the Moon. When he entered Scorpio, his light diminished, Night reassumed her dominion, the Nile shrunk within its banks, and the earth lost her verdure and the trees their leaves. Therefore it is that on the Mithriac Monuments, the Scorpion bites the testicles of the Equinoctial Bull, on which sits Mithras, the Sun of Spring and God of Generation; and that, on the same monuments, we see two trees, one covered with young leaves, and at its foot a little bull and a torch burning; and the

[p. 479]

other loaded with fruit, and at its foot a Scorpion, and a torch reversed and extinguished.

Ormuzd or Osiris, the beneficent Principle that gives the world light, was personified by the Sun, apparent source of light. Darkness, personified by Typhon or Ahriman, was his natural enemy. The Sages of Egypt described the necessary and eternal rivalry or opposition of these principles, ever pursuing one the other, and one dethroning the other in every annual revolution, and at a particular period, one in the Spring under the Bull, and the other in Autumn under the Scorpion, by the legendary history of Osiris and Typhon, detailed to us by Diodorus and Synesius; in which history were also personified the Stars and constellations Orion, Capella, the Twins, the Wolf, Sirius, and Hercules, whose risings and settings noted the advent of one or the other equinox.

Plutarch gives us the positions in the Heavens of the Sun and Moon, at the moment when Osiris was murdered by Typhon. The Sun, he says, was in the Sign of the Scorpion, which he then entered at the Autumnal Equinox. The Moon was full, the adds; and consequently, as it rose at sunset, it occupied Taurus, which, opposite to Scorpio, rose as it and the Sun sank together, so that she was then found alone in the sign Taurus, where, six months before, she had been in union or conjunction with Osiris, the Sun, receiving from him those germs of universal fertilization which he communicated to her. It was the sign through which Osiris first ascended into his empire of light and good. It rose with the Sun on the day of the Vernal Equinox; it remained six months in the luminous hemisphere, ever preceding the Sun and above the horizon during the day; until in Autumn, the Sun arriving at Scorpio, Taurus was in complete opposition with him, rose when he set, and completed its entire course above the horizon during the night; presiding, by rising in the evening, over the commencement of the long nights. Hence in the sad ceremonies commemorating the death of Osiris, there was borne in procession a golden bull covered with black crape, image of the darkness into which the familiar sign of Osiris was entering, and which was to spread over the Northern regions, while the Sun, prolonging the nights, was to be absent, and each to remain under the dominion of Typhon, Principle of Evil and Darkness.

Setting out from the sign Taurus, Isis, as the Moon, went seeking for Osiris through all the superior signs, in each of which she

[p. 480]

became full in the successive months from the Autumnal to the Vernal Equinox, without finding him in either. Let us follow her in her allegorical wanderings.

Osiris was slain by Typhon his rival, with whom conspired a Queen of Ethiopia, by whom, says Plutarch, were designated the winds. The paranatellons of Scorpio, the sign occupied by the Sun when Osiris was slain, were the Serpents, reptiles which sup-plied the attributes of the Evil Genii and of Typhon, who himself bore the form of a serpent in the Egyptian planisphere. And in the division of Scorpio is also found Cassiopeia, Queen of Ethiopia, whose setting brings stormy winds.

Osiris descended to the shades or infernal regions. There he took the name of Serapis, identical with Pluto, and assumed his nature. He was then in conjunction with Serpentarius, identical with Aesculapius, whose form he took in his passage to the lower signs, where he takes the names of Pluto and Ades.

Then Isis wept for the death of Osiris, and the golden bull covered with crape was carried in procession. Nature mourned the impending loss of her Summer glories, and the advent of the empire of night, the withdrawing of the waters, made fruitful by the Bull in Spring, the cessation of the winds that brought rains to swell the Nile, the shortening of the days, and the despoiling of the earth. Then Taurus, directly opposite the Sun, entered into the cone of shadow which the earth projects, by which the Moon is eclipsed at full, and with which, making night, the Bull rises and descends as if covered with a veil, while he remains above our horizon.

The body of Osiris, enclosed in a chest or coffin, was cast into the Nile. Pan and the Satyrs, near Chemmis, first discovered his death, announced it by their cries, and everywhere created sorrow and alarm. Taurus, with the full Moon, then entered into the cone of shadow, and under him was the Celestial River, most properly called the Nile, and below, Perseus, the God of Chemmis, and Auriga, leading a she-goat, himself identical with Pan, whose wife Aiga the she-goat was styled.

Then Isis went in search of the body. She first met certain children who had seen it, received from them their information, and gave them in return the gift of divination. The second full Moon occurred in Gemini, the Twins, who presided over the oracles of Didymus, and one of whom was Apollo, the God of Divination,

[p. 481]

She learned that Osiris had, through mistake, had connection with her sister Nephte, which she discovered by a crown of leaves of the melilot, which he had left behind him. Of this connection a child was born, whom Isis, aided by her dogs, sought for, found, reared, and attached to herself, by the name of Anubis, her faithful guardian. The third full Moon occurs in Cancer, domicile of the Moon. The paranatellons of that sign are, the crown of Ariadne or Proserpine, made of leaves of the melilot, Procyon and Canis Major, one star of which was called the Star of Isis, while Sirius himself was honored in Egypt under the name of Anubis.

Isis repaired to Byblos, and seated herself near a fountain, where she was found by the women of the Court of a King. She was induced to visit his Court, and became the nurse of his son. The fourth full Moon was in Leo, domicile of the Sun, or of Adonis, King of Byblos. The paranatellons of this sign are the flowing water of Aquarius, and Cepheus, King of Ethiopia, called Regulus, or simply The King. Behind him rise Cassiopeia his wife, Queen of Ethiopia, Andromeda his daughter, and Perseus his son-in-law, all paranatellons in part of this sign, and in part of Virgo.

Isis suckled the child, not at her breast, but with the end of her finger, at night. She burned all the mortal parts of its body, and then, taking the shape of a swallow, she flew to the great column of the palace, made of the tamarisk-tree that grew up round the coffin containing the body of Osiris, and within which it was still enclosed. The fifth full Moon occurred in Virgo, the true image of Isis, and which Eratosthenes calls by that name. It pictured a woman suckling an infant, the son of Isis, born near the Winter Solstice. This sign has for paranatellons the mast of the Celestial Ship, and the swallow-tailed fish or swallow above it, and a portion of Perseus, son-in-law of the King of Ethiopia.

Isis, having recovered the sacred coffer, sailed from Byblos in a vessel with the eldest son of the King, toward Boutos, where Anubis was, having charge of her son Horus; and in the morning dried up a river, whence arose a strong wind. Landing, she hid the coffer in a forest. Typhon, hunting a wild boar by moonlight, discovered it, recognized the body of his rival, and cut it into fourteen pieces, the number of days between the full and new Moon, and in every one of which days the Moon loses a portion of the light that at the commencement filled her whole disk. The sixth full Moon occurred in Libra, over the divisions separating which

[p. 482]

from Virgo are the Celestial Ship, Perseus, son of the King of Ethiopia and Bootes, said to have nursed Horus. The river of Orion that sets in the morning is also a paranatellon of Libra, as are Ursa Major, the Great Bear or Wild Boar of Erymanthus, and the Dragon of the North Pole, or the celebrated Python from which the attributes of Typhon were borrowed. All these surround the full Moon of Libra, last of the Superior Signs, and the one that precedes the new Moon of Spring, about to be reproduced in Taurus, and there be once more in conjunction with the Sun.

Isis collects the scattered fragments of the body of Osiris, buries them, and consecrates the phallus, carried in pomp at the Pamylia, or feasts of the Vernal Equinox, at which time the congress of Osiris and the Moon was celebrated. Then Osiris had returned from the shades, to aid Horus his son and Isis his wife against the forces of Typhon. He thus reappeared, say some, under the form of a wolf, or, others say, under that of a horse. The Moon, fourteen days after she is full in Libra, arrives at Taurus and unites herself to the Sun, whose fires she thereafter for fourteen days continues to accumulate on her disk from new Moon to full. Then she unites with herself all the months in that superior portion of the world where light always reigns, with harmony and order, and she borrows from him the force which is to destroy the germs of evil that Typhon had, during the winter, planted everywhere in nature. This passage of the Sun into Taurus, whose attributes he assumes on his return from the lower hemisphere or the shades, is marked by the rising in the evening of the Wolf and the Centaur, and by the heliacal setting of Orion, called the Star of Horns, and which thenceforward is in conjunction with the Sun of Spring, in his triumph over the darkness or Typhon.

Isis, during the absence of Osiris, and after she had hidden the coffer in the place where Typhon found it, had rejoined that malignant enemy; indignant at which, Horns her son deprived her of her ancient diadem, when she rejoined Osiris as he was about to attack Typhon: but Mercury gave her in its place a helmet shaped like the head of a bull. Then Horus, as a mighty warrior, such as Orion was described, fought with and defeated Typhon; who, in the shape of the Serpent or Dragon of the Pole, had assailed his father. So, in Ovid, Apollo destroys the same Python, when Io, fascinated by Jupiter, is metamorphosed into a cow, and placed in the sign of the Celestial Bull, where she becomes Isis. The equinoctial

[p. 483]

year ends at the moment when the Sun and Moon, at the Vernal Equinox, are united with Orion, the Star of Horus, placed in the Heavens under Taurus. The new Moon becomes young again in Taurus, and shows herself as a crescent, for the first time, in the next sign, Gemini, the domicile of Mercury. Then Orion, in conjunction with the Sun, with whom he rises, precipitates the Scorpion, his rival, into the shades of night, causing him to set whenever he himself reappears on the eastern horizon, with the Sun. Day lengthens and the germs of evil are by degrees eradicated: and Horus (from Aur, Light) reigns triumphant, symbolizing, by his succession to the characteristics of Osiris, the eternal renewal of the Sun's youth and creative vigor at the Vernal Equinox.

Such are the coincidences of astronomical phenomena with the legend of Osiris and Isis; sufficing to show the origin of the legend, overloaded as it became at length with all the ornamentation natural to the poetical and figurative genius of the Orient.

Not only into this legend, but into those of all the ancient nations, enter the Bull, the Lamb, the Lion, and the Scorpion or the Serpent; and traces of the worship of the Sun yet linger in all religions. Everywhere, even in our Order, survive the equinoctial and solstitial feasts. Our ceilings still glitter with the greater and lesser luminaries of the Heavens, and our lights, in their number and arrangement, have astronomical references. In all churches and chapels, as in all Pagan temples and pagodas, the altar is in the East; and the ivy over the east windows of old churches is the Hedera Helix of Bacchus. Even the cross had an astronomical origin; and our Lodges are full of the ancient symbols.

The learned author of the Sabaean Researches, Landseer, advances another theory in regard to the legend of Osiris; in which he makes the constellation Bootes play a leading part. He observes that, as none of the stars were visible at the same time with the Sun, his actual place in the Zodiac, at any given time, could only be ascertained by the Sabaean astronomers by their observations of the stars, and of their heliacal and achronical risings and settings. There were many solar festivals among the Sabaeans, and part of them agricultural ones; and the concomitant signs of those festivals were the risings and settings of the stars of the Husbandman, Bear-driver, or Hunter, BOOTES. His stars were,

[p. 484]

among the Hierophants, the established nocturnal indices or signs of the Sun's place in the ecliptic at different seasons of the year, and the festivals were named, one, that of the Aphanism or disappearance; another, that of the Zetesis, or search, etc., of Osiris or Adonis, that is, of Bootes.

The returns of certain stars, as connected with their concomitant seasons of spring (or seed-time) and harvest, seemed to the ancients, who had not yet discovered that gradual change, resulting from the apparent movement of the stars in longitude, which has been termed the precession of the equinoxes, to be eternal and immutable; and those periodical returns were to the initiated, even more than to the vulgar, celestial oracles, announcing the approach of those important changes, upon which the prosperity, and even the very existence of man must ever depend; and the oldest of the Sabaean constellations seem to have been, an astronomical Priest, a King, a Queen, a Husbandman, and a Warrior; and these more frequently recur on the Sabaean cylinders than any other constellations whatever. The King was Cepheus or Chepheus of Ethiopia: the Husbandman, Osiris, Bacchus, Sabazeus, Noah or Bootes. To the latter sign, the Egyptians were nationally, traditionally and habitually grateful; for they conceived that from Osiris all the greatest of terrestrial enjoyments were derived. The stars of the Husbandman were the signal for those successive agricultural labors on which the annual produce of the soil depended; and they came in consequence to be considered and hailed, in Egypt and Ethiopia, as the genial stars of terrestrial productiveness; to which the oblations, prayers, and vows of the pious Sabaean were regularly offered up.

Landseer says that the stars in Bootes, reckoning down to those of the 5th magnitude inclusive, are twenty-six, which, seeming achronically to disappear in succession, produced the fable of the cutting of Osiris into twenty-six pieces by Typhon. There are more stars than this in the constellation; but no more that the ancient votaries of Osiris, even in the clear atmosphere of the Sabaean climates, could observe without telescopes.

Plutarch says Osiris was cut into fourteen pieces: Diodorus, into twenty-six; in regard to which, and to the whole legend, Landseer's ideas, varying from those commonly entertained, are as follows:

Typhon, Landseer thinks, was the ocean, which the ancients

[p. 485]

fabled or believed surrounded the Earth, and into which all the stars in their turn appear successively to sink; [perhaps it was DARKNESS personified, which the ancients called TYPHON. He was hunting by moonlight, says the old legend, when he met with Osiris].

The ancient Saba must have been near latitude 15 degrees north. Axoum is nearly in 14 degrees, and the Western Saba or Meroe is to the north of that. Forty-eight centuries ago, Aldebaran, the leading star of the year, had, at the Vernal Equinox, attained at daylight in the morning, an elevation of about 14 degrees, sufficient for him to have ceased to be combust, that is, to have emerged from the Sun's rays, so as to be visible. The ancients allowed twelve days for a star of the first magnitude to emerge from the solar rays; and there is less twilight, the further South we go.

At the same period, too, Cynosura was not the pole-star, but Alpha Draconis was; and the stars rose and set with very different degrees of obliquity from those of their present risings and settings. By having a globe constructed with circumvolving poles, capable of any adjustment with regard to the colures, Mr. Landseer ascertained that, at that remote period, in lat. 15 degrees north, the 26 stars in Bootes, or 27, including Arcturus, did not set anchronically in succession; but several set simultaneously in couples, and six by threes simultaneously; so that, in all, there were but fourteen separate settings or disappearances, corresponding with the fourteen pieces into which Osiris was cut, according to Plutarch. Kappa, Iota, and Theta, in the uplifted western hand, disappeared together, and last of all. They really skirted the horizon; but were invisible in that low latitude, for the three or four days mentioned in some of the versions; while the Zetesis or search was proceeding, and the women of Phoenicia and Jerusalem sat weeping for the Wonder, Thammuz; after which they immediately reappeared, below and to the eastward of a Draconis.

And, on the very morning after the achronical departure of the last star of the Husbandman, Aldebaran rose heliacally, and became visible in the East in the morning before day.

And precisely at the moment of the heliacal rising of Arcturus, also rose Spica Virginis. One is near the middle of the Husbandman, and the other near that of the Virgin; and Arcturus may have been the part of Osiris which Isis did not recover with the other pieces of the body.

[p. 486]

At Dedan and Saba it was thirty-six days, from the beginning of the aphanism, i.e., the disappearances of these stars, to the heliacal rising of Aldebaran. During these days, or forty at Medina, or a few more at Babylon and Byblos, the stars of the Husbandman successively sank out of sight, during the crepusculum or short-lived morning twilight of those Southern climes. They disappear during the glancings of the dawn, the special season of ancient sidereal observation.

Thus the forty days of mourning for Osiris were measured out by the period of the departure of his Stars. When the last had sunken out of sight, the vernal season was ushered in; and the Sun arose with the splendid Aldebaran, the Tauric leader of the Hosts of Heaven; and the whole East rejoiced and kept holiday.

With the exception of the Stars x, i and d, Bootes did not begin to reappear in the Eastern quarter of the Heavens till after the lapse of about four months. Then the Stars of Taurus had declined Westward, and Virgo was rising heliacally. In that latitude, also, the Stars of Ursa Major [termed anciently the Ark of Osiris] set; and Benetnasch, the last of them, returned to the Eastern horizon, with those in the head of Leo, a little before the Summer Solstice. In about a month, followed the Stars of the Husbandman; the chief of them, Ras, Mirach, and Arcturus, being very nearly simultaneous in their heliacal rising.

Thus the Stars of Bootes rose in the East immediately after Vindemiatrix, and as if under the genial influence of its rays; he had his annual career of prosperity; he revelled orientally for a quarter of a year, and attained his meridian altitude with Virgo; and then, as the Stars of the Water-Urn rose, and Aquarius began to pour forth his annual deluge, he declined Westward, preceded by the Ark of Osiris. In the East, he was the sign of that happiness in which Nature, the great Goddess of passive production, rejoiced. Now, in the West, as he declines toward the Northwestern horizon, his generative vigor gradually abates; the Solar year grows old; and as his Stars descend beneath the Western Wave, Osiris dies, and the world mourns.

The Ancient Astronomers saw all the great Symbols of Masonry in the Stars. Sirius still glitters in our Lodges as the Blazing Star, (l'Etoile Flamboyante). The Sun is still symbolized by the point within a Circle; and, with the Moon and Mercury or Anubis, in the three Great Lights of the Lodge. Not only to these, but

[p. 487]

to the figures and numbers exhibited by the Stars, were ascribed peculiar and divine powers. The veneration paid to numbers had its source there. The three Kings in Orion are in a straight line, and equidistant from each other, the two extreme Stars being 3 degrees apart, and each of the three distant from the one nearest it 1 degrees 30'. And as the number three is peculiar to apprentices, so the straight line is the first principle of Geometry, having length but no breadth, and being but the extension of a point, and an emblem of Unity, and thus of Good, as the divided or broken line is of Duality or Evil. Near these Stars are the Hyades, five in number, appropriate to the Fellow-Craft; and close to them the Pleiades, of the master's number, seven; and thus these three sacred numbers, consecrated in Masonry as they were in the Pythagorean philosophy, always appear together in the Heavens, when the Bull, emblem of fertility and production, glitters among the Stars, and Aldebaran leads the Hosts of Heaven (Tsbauth).

Algenib in Perseus and Almaach and Algol in Andromeda form a right-angled triangle, illustrate the 47th problem, and display the Grand Master's square upon the skies. Denebola in Leo, Arcturus in Bootes, and Spica in Virgo form an equilateral triangle, universal emblem of Perfection, and the Deity with His Trinity of Infinite Attributes, Wisdom, Power, and Harmony; and that other, the generative, preserving, and destroying Powers. The Three Kings form, with Rigel in Orion, two triangles included in one: and Capella and Menkalina in Auriga, with Bellatrix and Betelgueux in Orion, form two isosceles triangles with b Tauri, that is equidistant from each pair; while the first four make a right-angled parallelogram,--the oblong square so often mentioned in our Degrees.

Julius Firmicus, in his description of the Mysteries, says, "But in those funerals and lamentations which are annually celebrated in honor of Osiris, their defenders pretend a physical reason. They call the seeds of fruit, Osiris; the Earth, Isis; the natural heat, Typhon: and because the fruits are ripened by the natural heat, and collected for the life of man, and are separated from their marriage to the earth, and are sown again when Winter approaches, this they would have to be the death of Osiris: but when the fruits, by the genial fostering of the earth, begin again to be generated by a new procreation, this is the finding of Osiris."

No doubt the decay of vegetation and the falling of the leaves,

[p. 488]

emblems of dissolution and evidences of the action of that Power that changes Life into Death, in order to bring Life again out of Death, were regarded as signs of that Death that seemed coming upon all Nature; as the springing of leaves and buds and flowers in the spring was a sign of restoration to life: but these were all secondary, and referred to the Sun as first cause. It was his figurative death that was mourned, and not theirs; and that with that death, as with his return to life, many of the stars were connected.

We have already alluded to the relations which the twelve signs of the Zodiac bear to the legend of the Master's Degree. Some other coincidences may have sufficient interest to warrant mention.

Khir-Om was assailed at the East, West, and South Gates of the Temple. The two equinoxes were called, we have seen, by all the Ancients, the Gates of Heaven, and the Syrians and Egyptians considered the Fish (the Constellation near Aquarius, and one of the Stars whereof is Fomalhaut) to be indicative of violence and death.

Khir-Om lay several days in the grave; and, at the Winter Solstice, for five or six days, the length of the days did not perceptibly increase. Then, the Sun commencing again to climb Northward, as Osiris was said to arise from the dead, so Khir-Om was raised, by the powerful attraction of the Lion (Leo), who waited for him at the Summer Solstice, and drew him to himself.

The names of the three assassins may have been adopted from three Stars that we have already named. We search in vain in the Hebrew or Arabic for the names Jubelo, Jubela, and Jubelum. They embody an utter absurdity, and are capable of no explanation in those languages. Nor are the names Gibs, Gravelot, Hobhen, and the like, in the Ancient and Accepted Rite, any more plausible, or better referable to any ancient language. But when, by the precession of the Equinoxes, the Sun was in Libra at the Autumnal Equinox, he met in that sign, where the reign of Typhon commenced, three Stars forming a triangle, Zuben-es Chamali in the West, Zuben-Hak-Rabi in the East, and Zuben-El-Gubi in the South, the latter immediately below the Tropic of Capricorn, and so within the realm of Darkness. From these names, those of the murderers have perhaps been corrupted. In Zuben-Hak-Rabi we may see the original of Jubelum Akirop; and in Zuben-El-Gubi, that of Jubelo Gibs: and time and ignorance may even have transmuted the words Es Chamali into one as little like them as Gravelot.

[p. 489]

Isis, the Moon personified, sorrowing sought for her husband. Nine or twelve Fellow-Crafts (the Rites vary as to the number), in white aprons, were sent to search for Khir-Om, in the Legend of the Master's Degree; or, in this Rite, the Nine Knights Elu. Along the path that the Moon travels are nine conspicuous Stars, by which nautical men determine their longitude at Sea;--Arietis, Aldebaran, Pollux, Regulus, Spica Virginis, Antares, Altair, Fomalhaut, and Markab. These might well be said to accompany Isis in her search.

In the York Rite, twelve Fellow-Crafts were sent to search for the body of Khir-Om and the murderers. Their number corresponds with that of the Pleiades and Hyades in Taurus, among which Stars the Sun was found when Light began to prevail over Darkness, and the Mysteries were held. These Stars, we have shown, received early and particular attention from the astronomers and poets. The Pleiades were the Stars of the ocean to the benighted mariner; the. Virgins of Spring, heralding the season of blossoms.

As six Pleiades only are now visible, the number twelve may have been obtained by them, with Aldebaran, and five far more brilliant Stars than any other of the Hyades, in the same region of the Heavens, and which were always spoken of in connection with the Pleiades;--the Three Kings in the belt of Orion, and Bellatrix and Betelgueux on his shoulders; brightest of the flashing starry hosts.

"Canst thou," asks Job, "bind the sweet influences of the Pleiades or loose the bands of Orion?" And in the book of Amos we find these Stars connected with the victory of Light over Darkness: "Seek Him," says that Seer, "that maketh the Seven Stars (the familiar name of the Pleiades), and Orion, AND TURNETH THE SHADOW OF DEATH INTO MORNING."

An old legend in Masonry says that a dog led the Nine this to the cavern where Abiram was hid. Bootes was anciently called Caleb Anubach, a Barking Dog; and was personified in Anubis, who bore the head of a dog, and aided Isis in her search. Arcturus, one of his Stars, fiery red, as if fervent and zealous, is also connected by Job with the Pleiades and Orion. When Taurus opened the year, Arcturus rose after the Sun, at the time of the Winter Solstice, and seemed searching him through the darkness, until, sixty days afterward, he rose at the same hour, Orion then

[p. 490]

also, at the Winter Solstice, rose at noon, and at night seemed to be in search of the Sun.

So, referring again to the time when the Sun entered the Autumnal Equinox, there are nine remarkable Stars that come to the meridian nearly at the same time, rising as Libra sets, and so seeming to chase that Constellation. They are Capella and Menkalina in the Charioteer, Aldebaran in Taurus, Bellatrix, Betelgueux, the Three Kings, and Rigel in Orion. Aldebaran passes the meridian first, indicating his right to .his peculiar title of Leader. Nowhere in the heavens are there, near the same meridian, so many splendid Stars. And close behind them, but further South, follows Sirius, the Dog-Star, who showed the nine Elus the way to the murderer's cave.

Besides the division of the signs into the ascending and descending series (referring to the upward and downward progress of the soul), the latter from Cancer to Capricorn, and the former from Capricorn to Cancer, there was another division of them not less important; that of the six superior and six inferior signs; the former, 2455 years before our era, from Taurus to Scorpio, and 300 years before our era, from Aries to Libra; and the latter, 2455 years B. C. from Scorpio to Taurus, and 300 years B. C. from Libra to Aries; of which we have already spoken, as the two Hemispheres, or Kingdoms of Good and Evil, Light and Darkness; of Ormuzd and Ahriman among the Persians, and Osiris and Typhon among the Egyptians.

With the Persians, the first six Genii, created by Ormuzd, presided over the first six signs, Aries, Taurus, Gemini, Cancer, Leo, and Virgo: and the six evil Genii, or Devs, created by Ahriman, over the six others, Libra, Scorpio, Sagittarius, Capricornus, Aquarius, and Pisces. The soul was fortunate and happy under the Empire of the first six; and began to be sensible of evil, when it passed under the Balance or Libra, the seventh sign. Thus the soul entered the realm of Evil and Darkness when it passed into the Constellations that belong to and succeed the Autumnal Equinox; and it re-entered the realm of Good and Light, when it arrived, returning, at those of the Vernal Equinox. It lost its felicity by means of the Balance, and regained it by means of the Lamb. This is a necessary consequence of the premises; and it is confirmed by the authorities and by emblems still extant.

Sallust the Philosopher, speaking of the Feasts of Rejoicing

[p. 491]

celebrated at the Vernal Equinox, and those of Mourning, in memory of the rape of Proserpine, at the Autumnal Equinox, says that the former were celebrated, because then is effected, as it were, the return of the soul toward the Gods; that the time when the principle of Light recovered its superiority over that of Darkness, or day over night, was the most favorable one for souls that tend to re-ascend to their Principle; and that when Darkness and the Night again become victors, was most favorable to the descent of souls toward the infernal regions.

For that reason, the old astrologers, as Firmicus states, fixed the locality of the river Styx in the 8th degree of the Balance. And he thinks that by Styx was allegorically meant the earth.

The Emperor Julian gives the same explanation, but more fully developed. He states, as a reason why the august Mysteries of Ceres and Proserpine were celebrated at the Autumnal Equinox, that at that period of the year men feared lest the impious and dark power of the Evil Principle, then commencing to conquer, should do harm to their souls. They were a precaution and means of safety, thought to be necessary at the moment when the God of Light was passing into the opposite or adverse region of the world; while at the Vernal Equinox there was less to be feared, because then that God, present in one portion of the world, recalled souls to Him, he says, and showed Himself to be their Saviour. He had a little before developed that theological idea, of the attractive force which the Sun exercises over souls, drawing them to him and raising them to his luminous sphere. He attributes this effect to him at the feasts of Atys, dead and restored to life, or the feasts of Rejoicing, which at the end of three days succeeded the mourning for that death; and he inquires why those Mysteries were celebrated at the Vernal Equinox. The reason, he says, is evident. As the sun, arriving at the equinoctial point of Spring, drawing nearer to us, increases the length of the days, that period seems most appropriate for those ceremonies. For, besides that there is a great affinity between the substance of Light and the nature of the Gods, the Sun has that occult force of attraction, by which he draws matter toward himself, by means of his warmth, making plants to shoot and grow, etc.; and why can he not, by the same divine and pure action of his rays, attract and draw to him fortunate souls? Then, as light is analogous to the Divine Nature, and favorable to souls. struggling to return to

[p. 492]

their First Principle, and as that light so increases at the Vernal Equinox, that the days prevail in duration over the nights, and as the Sun has an attractive force, besides the visible energy of his rays, it follows that souls are attracted toward the solar light. He does not further pursue the explanation; because, he says, it belongs to a mysterious doctrine, beyond the reach of the vulgar and known only to those who understand the mode of action of Deity, like the Chaldaean author whom he cites, who had treated of the Mysteries of Light, or the God with seven rays.

Souls, the Ancients held, having emanated from the Principle of Light, partaking of its destiny here below, cannot be indifferent to nor unaffected by these revolutions of the Great Luminary, alternately victor and overcome during every Solar revolution.

This will be found to be confirmed by an examination of some of the Symbols used in the Mysteries. One of the most famous of these was THE SERPENT, the peculiar Symbol also of this Degree. The Cosmogony of the Hebrews and that of the Gnostics designated this reptile as the author of the fate of Souls. It was consecrated in the Mysteries of Bacchus and in those of Eleusis. Pluto overcame the virtue of Proserpine under the form of a serpent; and, like the Egyptian God Serapis, was always pictured seated on a serpent, or with that reptile entwined about him. It is found on the Mithriac Monuments, and supplied with attributes of Typhon to the Egyptians. The sacred basilisc, in coil, with head and neck erect, was the royal ensign of the Pharaohs. Two of them were entwined around and hung suspended from the winged Globe on the Egyptian . On a tablet in one of the Tombs at Thebes, a God with a spear pierces a serpent's head. On a tablet from the Temple of Osiris at Philae is a tree, with a man on one side, and a woman on the other, and in front of the woman an erect basilisc, with horns on its head and a disk between the horns. The head of Medusa was encircled by winged snakes, which, the head removed, left the Hierogram or Sacred Cypher of the Ophites or Serpent-worshippers. And the Serpent, in connection with the Globe or circle, is found upon the monuments of all the Ancient Nations.

Over Libra, the sign through which souls were said to descend or fall, is found, on the Celestial Globe, the Serpent, grasped by Serpentarius, the Serpent-bearer. The head of the reptile is under Corona Borealis, the Northern Crown, called by Ovid, Libera, or

[p. 493]

[paragraph continues] Proserpine; and the two Constellations rise, with the Balance, after the Virgin (or Isis), whose feet rest on the eastern horizon at Sunrise on the day of the equinox. As the Serpent extends over both signs, Libra and Scorpio, it has been the gate through which souls descend, during the whole time that those two signs in succession marked the Autumnal Equinox. To this alluded the Serpent, which, in the Mysteries of Bacchus Saba-Zeus, was flung into the bosom of the Initiate.

And hence came the enigmatical expression, the Serpent engenders the Bull, and the Bull the Serpent; alluding to the two ad-verse constellations, answering to the two equinoxes, one of which rose as the other set, and which were at the two points of the heavens through which souls passed, ascending and descending. By the Serpent of Autumn, souls fell; and they were regenerated again by the Bull on which Mithras sate, and whose attributes Bacchus-Zagreus and the Egyptian Osiris assumed, in their Mysteries, wherein were represented the fall and regeneration of souls, by the Bull slain and restored to life.

Afterward the regenerating Sun assumed the attributes of Aries or the Lamb; and in the Mysteries of Ammon, souls were regenerated by passing through that sign, after having fallen through the Serpent.

The Serpent-bearer, or Ophicus, was Aesculapius, God of Healing. In the Mysteries of Eleusis, that Constellation was placed in the eighth Heaven: and on the eighth day of those Mysteries, the feast of Aesculapius was celebrated. It was also termed Epidaurus, or the feast of the Serpent of Epidaurus. The Serpent was sacred to Aesculapius; and was connected in various ways with the mythological adventures of Ceres.

So the libations to Souls, by pouring wine on the ground, and looking toward the two gates of Heaven, those of day and night, referred to the ascent and descent of Souls.

Ceres and the Serpent, Jupiter Ammon and the Bull, all figured in the Mysteries of Bacchus. Suppose Aries, or Jupiter Ammon occupied by the Sun setting in the West;--Virgo (Ceres) will be on the Eastern horizon, and in her train the Crown, or Proserpine. Suppose Taurus setting;--then the Serpent is in the East; and reciprocally; so that Jupiter Ammon, or the Sun of Aries, causes the Crown to rise after the Virgin, in the train of which comes the Serpent. Place reciprocally the Sun at the other equinox,

[p. 494]

with the balance in the West, in conjunction with the Serpent under the Crown; and we shall see the Bull and the Pleiades rise in the East. Thus are explained all the fables as to the generation of the Bull by the Serpent and of the Serpent by the Bull, the biting of the testicles of the Bull by the Scorpion, on the Mithriac Monuments; and that Jupiter made Ceres with child by tossing into her bosom the testicles of a Ram.

In the Mysteries of the bull-horned Bacchus, the officers held serpents in their hands, raised them above their heads, and cried aloud "Eva!" the generic oriental name of the serpent, and the particular name of the constellation in which the Persians placed Eve and the serpent. The Arabians call it Hevan, Ophiucus himself, Hawa, and the brilliant star in his head, Ras-al-Hawa. The use of this word Eva or Evoe caused Clemens of Alexandria to say that the priests in the Mysteries invoked Eve, by whom evil was brought into the world.

The mystic winnowing-fan, encircled by serpents, was used in the feasts of Bacchus. In the Isiac Mysteries a basilisc twined round the handle of the mystic vase. The Ophites fed a serpent in a mysterious ark, from which they took him when they celebrated the Mysteries, and allowed him to glide among the sacred bread. The Romans kept serpents in the Temples of Bona Dea and Aesculapius. In the Mysteries of Apollo, the pursuit of Latona by the serpent Python was represented. In the Egyptian Mysteries, the dragon Typhon pursued Isis.

According to Sanchoniathon, TAAUT, the interpreter of Heaven to men, attributed something divine to the nature of the dragon and serpents, in which die Phoenicians and Egyptians followed him. They have more vitality, more spiritual force, than any other creature; of a fiery nature, shown by the rapidity of their motions, without the limbs of other animals. They assume many shapes and attitudes, and dart with extraordinary quickness and force. When they have reached old age, they throw off that age and are young again, and increase in size and strength, for a certain period of years.

The Egyptian Priests fed the sacred serpents in the temple at Thebes. Taaut himself had in his writings discussed these mysteries in regard to the serpent. Sanchoniathon said in another work, that the serpent was immortal, and re-entered into himself; which, according to some ancient theosophists, particularly those

[p. 495]

of India, was an attribute of the Deity. And he also said that the serpent never died, unless by a violent death.

The Phoenicians called the serpent Agathodemon [the good spirit]; and Kneph was the Serpent-God of the Egyptians.

The Egyptians, Sanchoniathon said, represented the serpent with the head of a hawk, on account of the swift flight of that bird: and the chief Hierophant, the sacred interpreter, gave very mysterious explanations of that symbol; saying that such a serpent was a very divine creature, and that, opening his eyes, he lighted with their rays the whole of first-born space: when he closes them, it is darkness again. In reality, the hawk-headed serpent, genius of light, or good genius, was the symbol of the Sun.

In the hieroglyphic characters, a snake was the letter T or DJ. It occurs many times on the Rosetta stone. The horned serpent was the hieroglyphic for a God.

According to Eusebius, the Egyptians represented the world by a blue circle, sprinkled with flames, within which was extended a serpent with the head of a hawk. Proclus says they represented the four quarters of the world by a cross, and the soul of the world, or Kneph, by a serpent surrounding it in the form of a circle.

We read in Anaxagoras, that Orpheus said, that the water, and the vessel that produced it, were the primitive principles of things, and together gave existence to an animated being, which was a serpent, with two heads, one of a lion and the other of a bull, between which was the figure of a God whose name was Hercules or Kronos: that from Hercules came the egg of the world, which produced Heaven and earth, by dividing itself into two hemispheres: and that the God Phanes, which issued from that egg, was in the shape of a serpent.

The Egyptian Goddess Ken, represented standing naked on a lion, held two serpents in her hand. She is the same as the Astarte or Ashtaroth of the Assyrians. Hera, worshipped in the Great Temple at Babylon, held in her right hand a serpent by the head; and near Khea, also worshipped there, were two large silver serpents.

In a sculpture from Kouyunjik, two serpents attached to poles are near a fire-altar, at which two eunuchs are standing. Upon it is the sacred fire, and a bearded figure leads a wild goat to the sacrifice.

[p. 496]

The serpent of the Temple of Epidaurus was sacred to Aesculapius, the God of Medicine, and 462 years after the building of the city, was taken to Rome after a pestilence.

The Phoenicians represented the God Nomu (Kneph or Amun-Kneph) by a serpent. In Egypt, a Sun supported by two asps was the emblem of Horhat the good genius; and the serpent with the winged globe was placed over the doors and windows of the Temples as a tutelary God. Antipater of Sidon calls Amun "the renowned Serpent," and the Cerastes is often found embalmed in the Thebaid.

On ancient Tyrian coins and Indian medals, a serpent was represented, coiled round the trunk of a tree. Python, the Serpent Deity, was esteemed oracular; and the tripod at Delphi was a triple-headed serpent of gold.

The portals of all the Egyptian Temples are decorated with the hierogram of the Circle and the Serpent. It is also found upon the Temple of Naki-Rustan in Persia; on the triumphal arch at Pechin, in China; over the gates of the great Temple of Chaundi Teeva, in Java; upon the walls of Athens; and in the Temple of Minerva at Tegea. The Mexican hierogram was formed by the intersecting of two great Serpents, which described the circle with their bodies, and had each a human head in its mouth.

All the Buddhists crosses in Ireland had serpents carved upon them. Wreaths of snakes are on the columns of the ancient Hindu Temple at Burwah-Sangor.

Among the Egyptians, it was a symbol of Divine Wisdom, when extended at length; and, with its tail in its mouth, of Eternity.

In the ritual of Zoroaster, the Serpent was a symbol of the Universe. In China, the ring between two Serpents was the symbol of the world governed by the power and wisdom of the Creator. The Bacchanals carried serpents in their hands or round their heads.

The Serpent entwined round an Egg, was a symbol common to the Indians, the Egyptians, and the Druids. It referred to the creation of the Universe. A Serpent with an egg in his mouth was a symbol of the Universe containing within itself the germ of all things that the Sun develops.

The property possessed by the Serpent, of casting its skin, and apparently renewing its youth, made it an emblem of eternity and immortality. The Syrian women still employ it as a charm against

[p. 497]

barrenness, as did the devotees of Mithras and Saba-Zeus. The Earth-born civilizers of the early world, Fohi, Cecrops, and Erechtheus, were half-man, half-serpent. The snake was the guardian of the Athenian Acropolis. NAKHUSTAN, the brazen serpent of the wilderness, became naturalized among the Hebrews as a token of healing power. "Be ye," said Christ, "wise as serpents, and harmless as doves."

The Serpent was as often a symbol of malevolence and enmity. It appears among the emblems of Siva-Roudra, the power of desolation and death: it is the bane of Aepytus, Idom, Archemorus, and Philoctetes: it gnaws the roots of the tree of life in the Eddas, and bites the heel of unfortunate Eurydice. In Hebrew writers it is generally a type of evil; and is particularly so in the Indian and Persian Mythologies. When the Sea is churned by Mount Mandar rotating within the coils of the Cosmical Serpent Vasouki, to produce the Amrita or water of immortality, the serpent vomits a hideous poison, which spreads through and infects the Universe, but which Vishnu renders harmless by swallowing it. Ahriman in serpent-form invades the realm of Ormuzd; and the Bull, emblem of life, is wounded by him and dies. It was therefore a religious obligation with every devout follower of Zoroaster to exterminate reptiles, and other impure animals, especially serpents. The moral and astronomical significance of the Serpent were connected. It became a maxim of the Zend-Avesta, that Ahriman, the Principle of Evil, made the Great Serpent of Winter, who assaulted the creation of Ormuzd.

A serpent-ring was a well-known symbol of time: and to express dramatically how time preys upon itself, the Egyptian priests fed vipers in a subterranean chamber, as it were in the sun's Winter abode on the fat of bulls, or the year's plenteousness. The dragon of Winter pursues Ammon, the golden ram, to Mount Casius. The Virgin of the zodiac is bitten in the heel by Serpens, who, with Scorpio, rises immediately behind her; and as honey, the emblem of purity and salvation, was thought to be an antidote to the serpent's bite, so the bees of Aristaeus, the emblems of nature's abundance, are destroyed through the agency of the serpent, and regenerated within the entrails of the Vernal Bull.

The Sun-God is finally victorious. Chrishna crushes the head of the serpent Calyia; Apollo destroys Python, and Hercules that Lernaean monster whose poison festered in the foot of Philoctetes,

[p. 498]

of Mopsus, of Chiron, or of Sagittarius. The infant Hercules destroys the pernicious snakes detested of the gods, and ever, like St. George of England and Michael the Archangel, wars against hydras and dragons.

The eclipses of the sun and moon were believed by the orientals to be caused by the assaults of a daemon in dragon-form; and they endeavored to scare away the intruder by shouts and menaces. This was the original Leviathan or Crooked Serpent of old, transfixed in the olden time by the power of Jehovah, and suspended as a glittering trophy in the sky; yet also the Power of Darkness supposed to be ever in pursuit of the Sun and Moon. When it finally overtakes them, it will entwine them in its folds, and prevent their shining. In the last Indian Avatara, as in the Eddas, a serpent vomiting flames is expected to destroy the world, The serpent presides over the close of the year, where it guards the approach to the golden fleece of Aries, and the three apples or seasons of the Hesperides; presenting a formidable obstacle to the career of the Sun-God. The Great Destroyer of snakes is occasionally married to them; Hercules with the northern dragon begets the three ancestors of Scythia; for the Sun seems at one time to rise victorious from the contest with darkness, and at another to sink into its embraces. The northern constellation Draco, whose sinuosities wind like a river through the wintry bear, was made the astronomical cincture of the Universe, as the serpent encircles the mundane egg in Egyptian hieroglyphics.

The Persian Ahriman was called "The old serpent, the liar from the beginning, the Prince of Darkness, and the rover up and down." The Dragon was a well-known symbol of the waters and of great rivers; and it was natural that by the pastoral Asiatic Tribes, the powerful nations of the alluvial plains in their neighborhood who adored the dragon or Fish, should themselves be symbolized under the form of dragons; and overcome by the superior might of the Hebrew God, as monstrous Leviathans maimed and destroyed by him. Ophioneus, in the old Greek Theology, warred against Kronos, and was overcome and cast into his proper element, the sea. There he is installed as the Sea-God Oannes or Dragon, the Leviathan of the watery half of creation, the dragon who vomited a flood of water after the persecuted woman of the Apocalypse, the monster who threatened to devour Hesione and Andromeda, and who for a time became the grave of Hercules and

[p. 499]

[paragraph continues] Jonah; and he corresponds with the obscure name of Rahab, whom Jehovah is said in Job to have transfixed and overcome.

In the Spring, the year or Sun-God appears as Mithras or Europa mounted on the Bull; but in the opposite half of the Zodiac he rides the emblem of the waters, the winged horse of Nestor or Poseidon: and the Serpent, rising heliacally at the Autumnal Equinox, besetting with poisonous influence the cold constellation Sagittarius, is explained as the reptile in the path who "bites the horse's heels, so that his rider falls backward." The same serpent, the Oannes Aphrenos or Musaros of Syncellus, was the Midgard Serpent which Odin sunk beneath the sea, but which grew to such a size as to encircle the whole earth.

For these Asiatic symbols of the contest of the Sun-God with the Dragon of darkness and Winter were imported not only into the Zodiac, but into the more homely circle of European legend; and both Thor and Odin fight with dragons, as Apollo did with Python, the great scaly snake, Achilles with the Scamander, and Bellerophon with the Chimaera. In the apocryphal book of Esther, dragons herald "a day of darkness and obscurity"; and St. George of England, a problematic Cappadocian Prince, was originally only a varying form of Mithras. Jehovah is said to have "cut Rahab and wounded the dragon." The latter is not only the type of earthly desolation, the dragon of the deep waters, but also the leader of the banded conspirators of the sky, of the rebellious stars, which, according to Enoch, "came not at the right time"; and his tail drew a third part of the Host of Heaven, and cast them to the earth. Jehovah "divided the sea by his strength, and broke the heads of the Dragons in the waters." And according to the Jewish and Persian belief, the Dragon would, in the latter days, the Winter of time, enjoy a short period of licensed impunity, which would be a season of the greatest suffering to the people of the earth; but he would finally be bound or destroyed in the great battle of Messiah; or, as it seems intimated by the Rabbinical figure of being eaten by the faithful, be, like Ahriman or Vasouki, ultimately absorbed by and united with the Principle of good.

Near the image of Rhea, in the Temple of Bel at Babylon, were two large serpents of silver, says Diodorus, each weighing thirty talents; and in the same temple was an image of Juno, holding in her right hand the head of a serpent. The Greeks called Bel

[p. 500]

[paragraph continues] Beliar; and Hesychius interprets that word to mean a dragon or great serpent. We learn from the book of Bel and the Dragon, that in Babylon was kept a great, live serpent, which the people worshipped.

The Assyrians, the Emperors of Constantinople, the Parthians, Scythians, Saxons, Chinese, and Danes all bore the serpent as a standard, and among the spoils taken by Aurelian from Zenobia were such standards, Persici Dracones. The Persians represented Ormuzd and Ahriman by two serpents, contending for the mundane egg. Mithras is represented with a lion's head and human body, encircled by a serpent. In the Sadder is this precept: "When you kill serpents, you will repeat the Zend-Avesta, and thence you will obtain great merit; for it is the same as if you had killed so many devils."

Serpents encircling rings and globes, and issuing from globes, are common in the Persian, Egyptian, Chinese, and Indian monuments. Vishnu is represented reposing on a coiled serpent, whose folds form a canopy over him. Mahadeva is represented with a snake around his neck, one around his hair, and armlets of serpents on both arms. Bhairava sits on the coils of a serpent, whose head rises above his own. Parvati has snakes about her neck and waist. Vishnu is the Preserving Spirit, Mahadeva is Siva, the Evil Principle, Bhairava is his son, and Parvati his consort. The King of Evil Demons was called in Hindu_ Mythology, Naga, the King of Serpents, in which name we trace the Hebrew Nachash, serpent.

In Cashmere were seven hundred places where carved images of serpents were worshipped; and in Thibet the great Chinese Dragon ornamented the Temples of the Grand Lama. In China, the dragon was the stamp and symbol of royalty, sculptured in all the Temples, blazoned on the furniture of the houses, and interwoven with the vestments of the chief nobility. The Emperor bears it as his armorial device; it is engraved on his sceptre and diadem, and on all the vases of the imperial palace. The Chinese believe that there is a dragon of extraordinary strength and sovereign power, in Heaven, in the air, on the waters, and on the mountains. The God Fohi is said to have had the form of a man, terminating in the tail of a snake, a combination to be more fully explained to you in a subsequent Degree.

The dragon and serpent are the 5th and 6th signs of the Chinese

[p. 501]

[paragraph continues] Zodiac; and the Hindus and Chinese believe that, at every eclipse, the sun or moon is seized by a huge serpent or dragon, the serpent Asootee of the Hindus, which enfolds the globe and the constellation Draco; to which also refers "the War in Heaven, when Michael and his Angels fought against the dragon."

Sanchoniathon says that Taaut was the author of the worship of serpents among the Phoenicians. He "consecrated," he says, "the species of dragons and serpents; and the Phoenicians and Egyptians followed him in this superstition." He was "the first who made an image of Coelus"; that is; who represented the Heavenly Hosts of Stars by visible symbols; and was probably the same as the Egyptian Thoth. On the Tyrian coins of the age of Alexander, serpents are represented in many positions and attitudes, coiled around trees, erect in front of altars, and crushed by the Syrian Hercules.

The seventh letter of the Egyptian alphabet, called Zeuta or Life, was sacred to Thoth, and was expressed by a serpent standing on his tail; and that Deity, the God of healing, like Aesculapius, to whom the serpent was consecrated, leans on a knotted stick around which coils a snake. The Isiac tablet, describing the Mysteries of Isis, is charged with serpents in every part, as her emblems. The Asp was specially dedicated to her, and is seen on the heads of her statues, on the bonnets of her priests, and on the tiaras of the Kings of Egypt. Serapis was sometimes represented with a human head and serpentine tail: and in one engraving two minor Gods are represented with him, one by a serpent with a bull's head, and the other by a serpent with the radiated head of a lion.

On an ancient sacrificial vessel found in Denmark, having several compartments, a serpent is represented attacking a kneeling boy, pursuing him, retreating before him, appealed to beseechingly by him, and conversing with him. We are at once reminded of the Sun at the new year represented by a child sitting on a lotus, and of the relations of the Sun of Spring with the Autumnal Serpent, pursued by and pursuing him, and in conjunction with him. Other figures on this vessel belong to the Zodiac.

The base of the tripod of the Pythian Priestess was a triple-headed serpent of brass, whose body, folded in circles growing wider and wider toward the ground, formed a conical column, while the three heads, disposed triangularly, upheld the tripod 

[p. 502]

of gold. A similar column was placed on a pillar in the Hippodrome at Constantinople, by the founder of that city; one of the heads of which is said to have been broken off by Mahomet the Second, by a blow with his iron mace.

The British God Hu was called "The Dragon--Ruler of the World," and his car was drawn by serpents. His ministers were styled adders. A Druid in a poem of Taliessin says, "I am a Druid, I am an Architect, I am a Prophet, I am a Serpent (Gnadi)." The Car of the Goddess Ceridwen also was drawn by serpents.

In the elegy of Uther Pendragon, this passage occurs in a description of the religious rites of the Druids: "While the Sanctuary is earnestly invoking The Gliding King, before whom the Fair One retreats, upon the evil that covers the huge stones; whilst the Dragon moves round over the places which contain vessels of drink-offering, whilst the drink-offering is in the Golden Horns;" in which we readily discover the mystic and obscure allusion to the Autumnal Serpent pursuing the Sun along the circle of the Zodiac, to the celestial cup or crater, and the Golden horns of Virgil's milk-white Bull; and, a line or two further on, we find the Priest imploring the victorious Beli, the Sun-God of the Babylonians.

With the serpent, in the Ancient Monuments, is very often found associated the Cross. The Serpent upon a Cross was an Egyptian Standard. It occurs repeatedly upon the Grand Stair-case of the Temple of Osiris at Philae; and on the pyramid of Ghizeh are represented two kneeling figures erecting a Cross, on the top of which is a serpent erect. The Crux Ansata was a Cross with a coiled Serpent above it; and it is perhaps the most common of all emblems on the Egyptian Monuments, carried in the hand of almost every figure of a Deity or a Priest. It was, as we learn by the monuments, the form of the iron tether-pins, used for making fast to the ground the cords by which young animals were confined: and as used by shepherds, became a symbol of Royalty to the Shepherd Kings.

A Cross like a Teutonic or Maltese one, formed by four curved lines within a circle, is also common on the Monuments, and represented the Tropics and the Colures.

The Caduceus, borne by Hermes or Mercury, and also by Cybele, Minerva, Anubis, Hercules Ogmius the God of the Celts, and the personified Constellation Virgo, was a winged wand, entwined by

[p. 503]

two serpents. It was originally a simple Cross, symbolizing the equator and equinoctial Colure, and the four elements proceeding from a common centre. This Cross, surmounted by a circle, and that by a crescent, became an emblem of the Supreme Deity--or of the active power of generation and the passive power of production conjoined,--and was appropriated to Thoth or Mercury. It then assumed an improved form, the arms of the Cross being changed into wings, and the circle and crescent being formed by two snakes, springing from the wand, forming a circle by crossing each other, and their heads making the horns of the crescent; in which form it is seen in the hands of Anubis.

The triple Tau, in the centre of a circle and a triangle, typifies the Sacred Name; and represents the Sacred Triad, the Creating, Preserving, and Destroying Powers; as well as the three great lights of Masonry. If to the Masonic point within a Circle, and the two parallel lines, we add the single Tau Cross, we have the Ancient Egyptian Triple Tau.

A column in the form of a cross, with a circle over it, was used by the Egyptians to measure the increase of the inundations of the Nile. The Tau and Triple Tau are found in many Ancient Alphabets.

With the Tau or the Triple Tau may be connected, within two circles, the double cube, or perfection; or the perfect ashlar.

The Crux Ansata is found on the sculptures of Khorsabad; on the ivories from Nimroud, of the same age, carried by an Assyrian Monarch; and on cylinders of the later Assyrian period.

As the single Tau represents the one God, so, no doubt, the Triple Tau, the origin of which cannot be traced, was meant to represent the Trinity of his attributes, the three Masonic pillars, WISDOM, STRENGTH, and HARMONY.

The Prophet Ezekiel, in the 4th verse of the 9th chapter, says: "And the Lord said unto him, 'Go through the midst of the city, through the midst of Jerusalem, and mark the letter TAU upon the foreheads of those that sigh and mourn for all the abominations that be done in the midst thereof." So the Latin Vulgate, and the probably most ancient copies of the Septuagint translate the passage. This Tau was in the form of the cross of this Degree, and it was the emblem of life and salvation. The Samaritan Tau and the Ethiopic Tavvi are the evident prototype of the Greek t; and we learn from Tertullian, Origen, and St. Jerome,

[p. 504]

that the Hebrew Tau was anciently written in the form of a Cross.

In ancient times the mark Tau was set on those who had been acquitted by their judges, as a symbol of innocence. The military commanders placed it on soldiers who escaped unhurt from the field of battle, as a sign of their safety under the Divine Protection.

It was a sacred symbol among the Druids. Divesting a tree of part of its branches, they left it in the shape of a Tau Cross, preserved it carefully, and consecrated it with solemn ceremonies. On the tree they cut deeply the word THAU, by which they meant God. On the right arm of the Cross, they inscribed the word HESULS, on the left BELEN or BELENUS, and on the middle of the trunk THARAMIS. This represented the sacred Triad.

It is certain that the Indians, Egyptians, and Arabians paid veneration to the sign of the Cross, thousands of years before the coming of Christ. Everywhere it was a sacred symbol. The Hindus and the Celtic Druids built many of their Temples in the form of a Cross, as the ruins still remaining clearly show, and particularly the ancient Druidical Temple at Classerniss in the Island of Lewis in Scotland. The Circle is of 12 Stones. On each of the sides, east, west, and south, are three. In the centre was the image of the Deity; and on the north an avenue of twice nineteen stones, and one at the entrance. The Supernal Pagoda at Benares is in the form of a Cross; and the Druidical subterranean grotto at New Grange in Ireland.

The Statue of Osiris at Rome had the same emblem. Isis and Ceres also bore it; and the caverns of initiation were constructed in that shape with a pyramid over the Sacellum.

Crosses were cut in the stones of the Temple of Serapis in Alexandria; and many Tau Crosses are to be seen in the sculptures of Alabastion and Esne, in Egypt. On coins, the symbol of the Egyptian God Kneph was a Cross within a Circle.

The Crux Ansata was the particular emblem of Osiris, and his sceptre ended with that figure. It was also the emblem of Hermes, and was considered a Sublime Hieroglyphic, possessing mysterious powers and virtues, as a wonder-working amulet.

The Sacred Tau occurs in the hands of the mummy-shaped figures between the forelegs of the row of Sphynxes, in the great avenue leading from Luxor to Karnac. By the Tau Cross the

[p. 505]

[paragraph continues] Cabalists expressed the number 10, a perfect number, denoting Heaven, and the Pythagorean Tetractys, or incommunicable name of God. The Taft Cross is also found on the stones in front of the door of the Temple of Amunoth III, at Thebes, who reigned about the time when the Israelites took possession of Canaan: and the Egyptian Priests carried it in all the sacred processions.

Tertullian, who had been initiated, informs us that the Tau was inscribed on the forehead of every person who had been admitted into the Mysteries of Mithras.

As the simple Tau represented Life, so, when the Circle, symbol of Eternity, was added, it represented Eternal Life.

At the Initiation of a King, the Tau, as the emblem of life and key of the Mysteries, was impressed upon his lips.

In the Indian Mysteries, the Tau Cross, under the name of Tiluk, was marked upon the body of the candidate, as a sign that he was set apart for the Sacred Mysteries.

On the upright tablet of the King, discovered at Nimroud, are the names of thirteen Great Gods (among which are YAV and BEL); and the left-hand character of every one is a cross composed of two cuneiform characters.

The Cross appears upon an Ancient Phoenician medal found in the ruins of Citium; on the very ancient Buddhist Obelisk near Ferns in Ross-shire; on the Buddhist Round Towers in Ireland, and upon the splendid obelisk of the same era at Forres in Scot-land.

Upon the facade of a temple at Kalabche in Nubia are three regal figures, each holding a Crux Ansata.

Like the Subterranean Mithriatic Temple at New Grange in Scotland, the Pagodas of Benares and Mathura were in the form of a Cross. Magnificent Buddhist Crosses were erected, and are still standing, at Clonmacnoise, Finglas, and Kilcullen in Ireland. Wherever the monuments of Buddhism are found, in India, Ceylon, or Ireland, we find the Cross: for Buddha or Boudh was represented to have been crucified.

All the planets known to the Ancients were distinguished by the Mystic Cross, in conjunction with the solar or lunar symbols; Saturn by a cross over a crescent, Jupiter by a cross under a crescent, Mars by a cross resting obliquely on a circle, Venus by a cross under a circle, and Mercury by a cross surmounted by a circle and that by a crescent.

[p. 506]

The Solstices, Cancer and Capricorn, the two Gates of Heaven, are the two pillars of Hercules, beyond which he, the Sun, never journeyed: and they still appear in our Lodges, as the two great columns, Jachin and Boaz, and also as the two parallel lines that bound the circle, with a point in the centre, emblem of the Sun, between the two tropics of Cancer and Capricorn.

The Blazing Star in our Lodges, we have already said, represents Sirius, Anubis, or Mercury, Guardian and Guide of Souls. Our Ancient English brethren also considered it an emblem of the Sun. In the old Lectures they said: "The Blazing Star or Glory in the centre refers us to that Grand Luminary the Sun, which enlightens the Earth, and by its genial influence dispenses blessings to mankind." It is also said in those lectures to be an emblem of Prudence. The word Prudentia means, in its original and fullest signification, Foresight: and accordingly the Blazing Star has been regarded as an emblem of Omniscience, or the All-Seeing Eye, which to the Ancients was the Sun.

Even the Dagger of the Elu of Nine is that used in the Mysteries of Mithras; which, with its blade black and hilt white, was an emblem of the two principles of Light and Darkness.

Isis, the same as Ceres, was, as we learn from Eratosthenes, the Constellation Virgo, represented by a woman holding an ear of wheat. The different emblems which accompany her in the description given by Apuleius, a serpent on either side, a golden vase, with a serpent twined round the handle, and the animals that marched in procession, the bear, the ape, and Pegasus, represented the Constellations that, rising with the. Virgin, when on the day of the Vernal Equinox she stood in the Oriental gate of Heaven, brilliant with the rays of the full moon, seemed to march in her train.

The cup, consecrated in the Mysteries both of Isis and Eleusis, was the Constellation Crater or the Cup. The sacred vessel of the Isiac ceremony finds its counterpart in the Heavens. The Olympic robe presented to the Initiate, a magnificent mantle, covered with figures of serpents and animals, and under which were twelve other sacred robes, wherewith he was clothed in the sanctuary, alluded to the starry Heaven and the twelve signs: while the seven preparatory immersions in the sea alluded to the seven spheres, through which the soul plunged, to arrive here below and take up its abode in a body.

[p. 507]

The Celestial Virgin, during the last three centuries that preceded the Christian era, occupied the horoscope or Oriental point, and that gate of Heaven through which the Sun and Moon ascended above the horizon at the two equinoxes. Again it occupied it at midnight, at the Winter Solstice, the precise moment when the year commenced. Thus it was essentially connected with the march of times and seasons, of the Sun, the Moon, and day and night, at the principal epochs of the year. At the equinoxes were celebrated the greater and lesser Mysteries of Ceres. When souls descended past the Balance, at the moment when the Sun occupied that point, the Virgin rose before him; she stood at the gates of day and opened them to him. Her brilliant Star, Spica Virginis, and Arcturus, in Bootes, northwest of it, heralded his coming. When he had returned to the Vernal Equinox, at the moment when souls were generated, again it was the Celestial Virgin that led the march of the signs of night; and in her stars came the beautiful full moon of that month. Night and day were in succession introduced by her, when they began to diminish in length; and souls, before arriving at the gates of Hell, were also led by her. In going through these signs, they passed the Styx in the 8th Degree of Libra. She was the famous Sibyl who initiated Eneas, and opened to him the way to the infernal regions.

This peculiar situation of the Constellation Virgo, has caused it to enter into all the sacred fables in regard to nature, under different names and the most varied forms. It often takes the name of Isis or the Moon, which, when at its full at the Vernal Equinox, was in union with it or beneath its feet. Mercury (or Anubis) having his domicile and exaltation in the sign Virgo, was, in all the sacred fables and Sanctuaries, the inseparable companion of Isis, without whose counsels she did nothing.

This relation between the emblems and mysterious recitals of the initiations, and the Heavenly bodies and order of the world, was still more clear in the Mysteries of Mithras, adored as the Sun in Asia Minor, Cappadocia, Armenia, and Persia, and whose Mysteries went to Rome in the time of Sylla. This is amply proved by the descriptions we have of the Mithriac cave, in which were figured the two movements of the Heavens, that of the fixed Stars and that of the Planets, the Constellations, the eight mystic gates of the spheres, and the symbols of the elements. So on a celebrated monument of that religion, found at Rome, were figured,

[p. 508]

the Serpent or Hydra under Leo, as in the Heavens, the Celestial Dog, the Bull, the Scorpion, the Seven Planets, represented by seven altars, the Sun, Moon, and emblems relating to Light, to Darkness, and to their succession during the year, where each in turn triumphs for six months.

The Mysteries of Atys were celebrated when the Sun entered Aries; and among the emblems was a ram at the foot of a tree which was being cut down.

Thus, if not the whole truth, it is yet a large part of it, that the Heathen Pantheon, in its infinite diversity of names and personifications, was but a multitudinous, though in its origin unconscious allegory, of which physical phenomena, and principally the Heavenly Bodies, were the fundamental types. The glorious images of Divinity which formed Jehovah's Host, were the Divine Dynasty or real theocracy which governed the early world; and the men of the golden age, whose looks held commerce with the skies, and who watched the radiant rulers bringing Winter and Summer to mortals, might be said with poetic truth to live in immediate communication with Heaven, and, like the Hebrew Patriarchs, to see God face to face. Then the Gods introduced their own worship among mankind: then Oannes, Oe or Aquarius rose from the Red Sea to impart science to the Babylonians; then the bright Bull legislated for India and Crete; and the Lights of Heaven, personified as Liber and Ceres, hung the Boeotian hills with vine-yards, and gave the golden sheaf to Eleusis. The children of men were, in a sense, allied or married, to those sons of God who sang the jubilee of creation; and the encircling vault with its countless Stars, which to the excited imagination of the solitary Chaldaean wanderer appeared as animated intelligences, might naturally be compared to a gigantic ladder, on which, in their rising and setting, the Angel luminaries appeared to be ascending and descending between earth and Heaven. The original revelation died out of men's memories; they worshipped the Creature instead of the Creator; and holding all earthly things as connected by eternal links of harmony and sympathy with the heavenly bodies, they united in one view astronomy, astrology, and religion. Long wandering thus in error, they at length ceased to look upon the Stars and .external nature as Gods; and by directing their attention to the microcosm or narrower world of self, they again became acquainted with the True Ruler and Guide of the Universe,

[p. 509]

and used the old fables and superstitions as symbols and allegories, by which to convey and under which to hide the great truths which had faded out of most men's remembrance.

In the Hebrew writings, the term "Heavenly Hosts" includes not only the counsellors and emissaries of Jehovah, but also the celestial luminaries; and the stars, imagined in the East to be animated intelligences, presiding over human weal and woe, are identified with the more distinctly impersonated messengers or angels, who execute the Divine decrees, and whose predominance in Heaven is in mysterious correspondence and relation with the powers and dominions of the earth. In Job, the Morning Stars and the Sons of God are identified; they join in the same chorus of praise to the Almighty; they are both susceptible of joy; they walk in brightness, and are liable to impurity and imperfection in the sight of God. The Elohim originally included not only foreign superstitious forms, but also all that host of Heaven which was revealed in poetry to the shepherds of the desert, now as an encampment of warriors, now as careering in chariots of fire, and now as winged messengers, ascending and descending the vault of Heaven, to communicate the will of God to mankind.

"The Eternal," says the Bereshith Rabba to Genesis, "called forth Abraham and his posterity out of the dominion of the stars; by nature, the Israelite was a servant to the stars, and born under their influence, as are the heathen; but by virtue of the law given on Mount Sinai, he became liberated from this degrading servitude." The Arabs had a similar legend. The Prophet Amos explicitly asserts that the Israelites, in the desert, worshipped, not Jehovah, but Moloch, or a Star-God, equivalent to Saturn. The Gods El or Jehovah were not merely planetary or solar. Their symbolism, like that of every other Deity, was coextensive with nature, and with the mind of man. Yet the astrological character is assigned even to Jehovah. He is described as seated on the pinnacle of the Universe, leading forth the Hosts of Heaven, and telling them unerringly by name and number. His stars are His sons and His eyes, which run through the whole world, keeping watch over men's deeds. The stars and planets were properly the angels. In Pharisaic tradition, as in the phraseology of the New Testament, the Heavenly Host appears as an Angelic Army, divided into regiments and brigades, under the command

[p. 510]

of imaginary chiefs, such as Massaloth, Legion, Kartor Gistra, etc.,--each Gistra being captain of 365,000 myriads of stars. The Seven Spirits which stand before the throne, spoken of by several Jewish writers, and generally presumed to have been immediately derived from the Persian Amshaspands, were ultimately the seven planetary intelligences, the original model of the seven-branched golden candlestick exhibited to Moses on God's mountain. The stars were imagined to have fought in their courses against Sisera. The heavens were spoken of as holding a predominance over earth, as governing it by signs and ordinances, and as containing the elements of that astrological wisdom, more especially cultivated by the Babylonians and Egyptians.

Each nation was supposed by the Hebrews to have its own guardian angel, and its own provincial star. One of the chiefs of the Celestial Powers, at first Jehovah Himself in the character of the Sun, standing in the height of Heaven, overlooking and governing all things, afterward one of the angels or subordinate planetary genii of Babylonian or Persian mythology, was the patron and protector of their own nation, "the Prince that standeth for the children of thy people." The discords of earth were accompanied by a warfare in the sky; and no people underwent the visitation of the Almighty, without a corresponding chastisement being inflicted on its tutelary angel.

The fallen Angels were also fallen Stars; and the first allusion to a feud among the spiritual powers in early Hebrew Mythology, where Rahab and his confederates are defeated, like the Titans in a battle against the Gods, seems to identify the rebellious Spirits as part of the visible Heavens, where the "high ones on high" are punished or chained, as a signal proof of God's power and justice. God, it is said--

"Stirs the sea with His might by His understanding He smote Rahab--His breath clears the face of Heaven--His hand pierced the crooked Serpent. . . . God withdraws not His anger; beneath Him bow the confederates of Rahab."

Rahab always means a sea-monster: probably some such legendary monstrous dragon, as in almost all mythologies is the adversary of Heaven and demon of eclipse, in whose belly, significantly called the belly of Hell, Hercules, like Jonah, passed three days, ultimately escaping with the loss of his hair or rays. Chesil, the rebellious giant Orion, represented in Job as riveted to the sky,

[p. 511]

was compared to Ninus or Nimrod, the mythical founder of Nineveh (City of Fish) the mighty hunter, who slew lions and panthers before the Lord. Rahab's confederates are probably the "High ones on High," the Chesilim or constellations in Isaiah, the Heavenly Host or Heavenly Powers, among whose number were found folly and disobedience.

"I beheld," says Pseudo-Enoch, "seven stars like great blazing mountains, and like Spirits, entreating me. And the angel said, This place, until the consummation of Heaven and Earth, will be the prison of the Stars and of the Host of Heaven. These are the Stars which overstepped God's command before their time arrived; and came not at their proper season; therefore was he offended with them, and bound them, until the time of the consummation of their crimes in the secret year." And again: "These Seven Stars are those which have transgressed the commandment of the Most High God, and which are here bound until the number of the days of their crimes be completed."

The Jewish and early Christian writers looked on the worship of the sun and the elements with comparative indulgence. Justin Martyr and Clemens of Alexandria admit that God had appointed the stars as legitimate objects of heathen worship, in order to preserve throughout the world some tolerable notions of natural religion. It seemed a middle point between Heathenism and Christianity; and to it certain emblems and ordinances of that faith seemed to relate. The advent of Christ was announced by a Star from the East; and His nativity was celebrated on the shortest day of the Julian Calendar, the day when, in the physical commemorations of Persia and Egypt, Mithras or Osiris was newly found. It was then that the acclamations of the Host of Heaven, the unfailing attendants of the Sun, surrounded, as at the spring-dawn of creation, the cradle of His birth-place, and that, in the words of Ignatius, "a star, with light inexpressible, shone forth in the Heavens, to destroy the power of magic and the bonds of wickedness; for God Himself had appeared, in the form of man, for the renewal of eternal life."

But however infinite the variety of objects which helped to develop the notion of Deity, and eventually assumed its place, substituting the worship of the creature for that of the creator; of parts of the body, for that of the soul, of the Universe, still the notion itself was essentially one of unity. The idea of one

[p. 512]

[paragraph continues] God, of a creative, productive, governing unity, resided in the earliest exertion of thought: and this monotheism of the primitive ages, makes every succeeding epoch, unless it be the present, appear only as a stage in the progress of degeneracy and aberration. Everywhere in the old faiths we find the idea of a supreme or presiding Deity. Amun or Osiris presides among the many gods of Egypt; Pan, with the music of his pipe, directs the chorus of the constellations, as Zeus leads the solemn procession of the celestial troops in the astronomical theology of the Pythagoreans. "Amidst an infinite diversity of opinions on all other subjects," says Maximus Tyrius, "the whole world is unanimous in the belief of one only almighty King and Father of all."

There is always a Sovereign Power, a Zeus or Deus, Mahadeva or Adideva, to whom belongs the maintenance of the order of the Universe. Among the thousand gods of India, the doctrine of Divine Unity is never lost sight of; and the ethereal Jove, worshipped by the Persian in an age long before Xenophanes or Anaxagoras, appears as supremely comprehensive and independent of planetary or elemental subdivisions, as the "Vast One" or "Great Soul" of the Vedas.

But the simplicity of belief of the patriarchs did not exclude the employment of symbolical representations. 'Fl mind never rests satisfied with a mere feeling. That feeling ever strives to assume precision and durability as an idea, by some outward delineation of its thought. Even the ideas that are above and beyond the senses, as all ideas of God are, require the aid of the senses for their expression and communication. Hence come the representative forms and symbols which constitute the external investiture of every religion; attempts to express a religious sentiment that is essentially one, and that vainly struggles for adequate external utterance, striving to tell to one man, to paint to him, an idea existing in the mind of another, and essentially incapable of utterance or description, in a language all the words of which have a sensuous meaning. Thus, the idea being perhaps the same in all, its expressions and utterances are infinitely various, and branch into an infinite diversity of creeds and sects.

All religious expression is symbolism; since we can describe only what we see; and the true objects of religion are unseen. The earliest instruments of education were symbols; and they and all other religious forms differed and still differ according to

[p. 513]

external circumstances and imagery, and according to differences of knowledge and mental cultivation. To present a visible symbol to the eye of another is not to inform him of the meaning which that symbol has to you. Hence the philosopher soon super-added to these symbols, explanations addressed to the ear, susceptible of more precision, but less effective, obvious, and impressive than the painted or sculptured forms which he despised. Out of these explanations grew by degrees a variety of narratives, whose true object and meaning were gradually forgotten. And when these were abandoned, and philosophy resorted to definitions and formulas, its language was but a more refined symbolism, grappling with and attempting to picture ideas impossible to be expressed. For the most abstract expression for Deity which language can supply, is but a sign or symbol for an object unknown, and no more truthful and adequate than the terms Osiris and Vishnu, except as being less sensuous and explicit. To say that He is a Spirit, is but to say that He is not matter. What spirit is, we can only define as the Ancients did, by resorting, as if in despair, to some sublimized species of matter, as Light, Fire, or Ether.

No symbol of Deity can be appropriate or durable except in a relative or moral sense. We cannot exalt words that have only a sensuous meaning, above sense. To call Him a Power or a Force, or an Intelligence, is merely to deceive ourselves into the belief that we use words that have a meaning to us, when they have none, or at least no more than the ancient visible symbols had. To call Him Sovereign, Father, Grand Architect of the Universe, Extension, Time, Beginning, Middle, and End, whose face is turned on all sides, the Source of life and death, is but to present other men with symbols by which we vainly endeavor to communicate to them 'the same vague ideas which men in all ages have impotently struggled to express. And it may be doubted whether we have succeeded either in communicating, or in forming in our own minds, any more distinct and definite and true and adequate idea of the Deity, with all our metaphysical conceits and logical subtleties, than the rude ancients did, who endeavored to symbolize and so to express His attributes, by the Fire, the Light, the Sun and Stars, the Lotus and the Scarabaeus; all of them types of what, except by types, more or less sufficient, could not be expressed at all.

The primitive man recognized the Divine Presence under a

[p. 514]

variety of appearances, without losing his faith in this unity and Supremacy. The invisible God, manifested and on one of His many sides visible, did not cease to be God to him. He recognized Him in the evening breeze of Eden, in the whirlwind of Sinai, in the Stone of Beth-El: and identified Him with the fire or thunder or the immovable rock adored in Ancient Arabia. To him the image of the Deity was reflected in all that was pre-eminent in excellence. He saw Jehovah, like Osiris and Bel, in the Sun as well as in the Stars, which were His children, His eyes, "which run through the whole world, and watch over the Sacred Soil of Palestine, from the year's commencement to its close." He was the sacred fire of Mount Sinai, of the burning bush, of the Persians, those Puritans of Paganism.

Naturally it followed that Symbolism soon became more complicated, and all the, powers of Heaven were reproduced on earth, until a web of fiction and allegory was woven, which the wit of man, with his limited means of explanation, will never unravel. Hebrew Theism itself became involved in symbolism and image-worship, to which all religions ever tend. We have already seen what was the symbolism of the Tabernacle, the Temple, and the Ark. The Hebrew establishment tolerated not only the use of emblematic vessels, vestments, and cherubs, of Sacred Pillars and Seraphim, but symbolical representations of Jehovah Himself, not even confined to poetical or illustrative language.

"Among the Adityas," says Chrishna, in the Bagvat Ghita, "I am Vishnu, the radiant Sun among the Stars; among the waters, I am ocean; among the mountains, the Himalaya; and among the mountain-tops, Meru." The Psalms and Isaiah are full of similar attempts to convey to the mind ideas of God, by ascribing to Him sensual proportions. He rides on the clouds, and sits on the wings of the wind. Heaven is His pavilion, and out of His mouth issue lightnings. Men cannot worship a mere abstraction. They require some outward form in which to clothe their conceptions, and invest their sympathies. If they do not shape and carve or paint visible images, they have invisible ones, perhaps quite as inadequate and unfaithful, within their own minds.

The incongruous and monstrous in the Oriental images came from the desire to embody the Infinite, and to convey by multi-plied, because individually inadequate symbols, a notion of the Divine Attributes to the understanding. Perhaps we should find

[p. 515]

that we mentally do the same thing, and make within ourselves images quite as incongruous, if judged of by our own limited conceptions, if we were to undertake to analyze and gain a clear idea of the mass of infinite attributes which we assign to the Deity; and even of His infinite Justice and infinite Mercy and Love.

We may well say, in the language of Maximus Tyrius: "If, in the desire to obtain some faint conception of the Universal Father, the Nameless Lawgiver, men had recourse to words or names, to silver or gold, to animals or plants, to mountain-tops or flowing rivers, every one inscribing the most valued and most beautiful things with the name of Deity, and with the fondness of a lover clinging with rapture to each trivial reminiscence of the Beloved, why should we seek to reduce this universal practice of symbolism, necessary, indeed, since the mind often needs the excitement of the imagination to rouse it into activity, to one monotonous standard of formal propriety? Only let the image duly perform its task, and bring the divine idea with vividness and truth before the mental eye; if this be effected, whether by the art of Phidias, the poetry of Homer, the Egyptian Hieroglyph, or the Persian element, we need not cavil at external differences, or lament the seeming fertility of unfamiliar creeds, so long as the great essential is attained, THAT MEN ARE MADE TO REMEMBER, TO UNDERSTAND, AND TO LOVE."

Certainly, when men regarded Light and Fire as something spiritual, and above all the corruptions and exempt from all the decay of matter; when they looked upon the Sun and Stars and Planets as composed of this finer element, and as themselves great and mysterious Intelligences, infinitely superior to man, living Existences, gifted with mighty powers and wielding vast influences, those elements and bodies conveyed to them, when used as symbols of Deity, a far more adequate idea than they can now do to us, or than we can comprehend, now that Fire and Light are familiar to us as air and water, and the Heavenly Luminaries are lifeless worlds like our own. Perhaps they gave them ideas as adequate as we obtain from the mere words by which we endeavor to symbolize and shadow forth the ineffable mysteries and infinite attributes of God.

There are, it is true, dangers inseparable from symbolism, which countervail its advantages, and afford an impressive lesson in regard to the similar risks attendant on the use of language. The

[p. 516]

imagination, invited to assist the reason, usurps its place, or leaves its ally helplessly entangled in its web. Names which stand for things are confounded with them; the means are mistaken for the end: the instrument of interpretation for the object; and thus symbols come to usurp an independent character as truths and persons. Though perhaps a necessary path, they were a dangerous one by which to approach the Deity; in which "many," says Plutarch, "mistaking the sign for the thing signified, fell into a ridiculous superstition; while others, in avoiding one extreme, plunged into the no less hideous gulf of irreligion and impiety."

All great Reformers have warred against this evil, deeply feeling the intellectual mischief arising out of a degraded idea of the Supreme Being: and have claimed for their own God an existence or personality distinct from the objects of ancient superstition; disowning in His name the symbols and images that had profaned His Temple. But they have not seen that the utmost which can be effected by human effort, is to substitute impressions relatively correct, for others whose falsehood has been detected, and to re-place a gross symbolism by a purer one. Every man, without being aware of it, worships a conception of his own mind; for all symbolism, as well as all language, shares the subjective character of the ideas it represents. The epithets we apply to God only recall either visible or intellectual symbols to the eye or mind. The modes or forms of manifestation of the reverential feeling that constitutes the religious sentiment, are incomplete and progressive; each term and symbol predicates a partial truth, remaining always amenable to improvement or modification, and, in its turn, to be superseded by others more accurate and comprehensive.

Idolatry consists in confounding the symbol with the thing signified, the substitution of a material for a mental object of worship, after a higher spiritualism has become possible; an ill-judged preference of the inferior to the superior symbol, an inadequate and sensual conception of the Deity: and every religion and every conception of God is idolatrous, in so far as it is imperfect, and as it substitutes a feeble and temporary idea in the shrine of that Undiscoverable Being who can be known only in part, and who can therefore be honored, even by the most enlightened among His worshippers, only in proportion to their limited powers of understanding and imagining to themselves His perfections,

[p. 517]

Like the belief in a Deity, the belief in the soul's immortality is rather a natural feeling, an adjunct of self-consciousness, than a dogma belonging to any particular age or country. It gives eternity to man's nature, and reconciles its seeming anomalies and contradictions; it makes him strong in weakness and  in imperfection; and it alone gives an adequate object for his hopes and energies, and value and dignity to his pursuits. It is concurrent with the belief in an infinite, eternal Spirit, since it is chiefly through consciousness of the dignity of the mind within us, that we learn to appreciate its evidences in the Universe.

To fortify, and as far as possible to impart this hope, was the great aim of ancient wisdom, whether expressed in forms of poetry or philosophy; as it was of the Mysteries, and as it is of Masonry. Life rising out of death was the great mystery, which symbolism delighted to represent under a thousand ingenious forms. Nature was ransacked for attestations to the grand truth which seems to transcend all other gifts of imagination, or rather to be their essence and consummation. Such evidences were easily discovered. They were found in the olive and the lotus, in the evergreen myrtle of the Mystae and of the grave of Polydorus, in the deadly but self-renewing serpent, the wonderful moth emerging from the coffin of the worm, the phenomena of germination, the settings and risings of the sun and stars, the darkening and growth of the moon, and in sleep, "the minor mystery of death."

The stories of the birth of Apollo from Latona, and of dead heroes, like Glaucus, resuscitated in caves, were allegories of the natural alternations of life and death in nature, changes that are but expedients to preserve her virginity and purity inviolable in the general sum of her operations, whose aggregate presents only a majestic calm, rebuking alike man's presumption and his despair. The typical death of the Nature-God, Osiris, Atys, Adonis, Hiram, was a profound but consolatory mystery: the heating charms of Orpheus were connected with his destruction; and his bones, those valued pledges of fertility and victory, were, by a beautiful contrivance, often buried within the sacred precincts of his immortal equivalent.

In their doctrines as to the immortality of the soul, the Greek Philosophers merely stated with more precision ideas long before extant independently among themselves, in the form of symbolical suggestion. Egypt and Ethiopia in these matters learned from

[p. 518]

[paragraph continues] India, where, as everywhere else, the origin of the doctrine was as remote and untraceable as the origin of man himself. Its natural expression is found in the language of Chrishna, in the Bagvat Ghita: "I myself never was non-existent, nor thou, nor these princes of the Earth; nor shall we ever hereafter cease to be. . . The soul is not a thing of which a man may say, it hath been, or is about to be, or is to be hereafter; for it is a thing without birth; it is pre-existent, changeless, eternal, and is not to be destroyed with this mortal frame."

According to the dogma of antiquity, the thronging forms of life are a series of purifying migrations, through which the divine principle re-ascends to the unity of its source. Inebriated in the bowl of Dionusos, and dazzled in the mirror of existence, the souls, those fragments or sparks of the Universal Intelligence, forgot their native dignity, and passed into the terrestrial frames they coveted. The most usual type of the spirit's descent was suggested by the sinking of the Sun and Stars from the upper to the lower hemisphere. When it arrived within the portals of the proper empire of Dionusos, the God of this World, the scene of delusion and change, its individuality became clothed in a material form; and as individual bodies were compared to a garment, the world was the investiture of the Universal Spirit. Again, the body was compared to a vase or urn, the soul's recipient; the world being the mighty bowl which received the descending Deity. In another image, ancient as the Grottoes of the Magi and the denunciations of Ezekiel, the world was as a dimly illuminated cavern, where shadows seem realities, and where the soul becomes forgetful of its celestial origin in proportion to its proneness to material fascinations. By another, the period of the Soul's embodiment is as when exhalations are condensed, and the aerial element assumes the grosser form of water.

But if vapor falls in water, it was held, water is again the birth of vapors, which ascend and adorn the Heavens. If our mortal existence be the death of the spirit, our death may be the renewal of its life; as physical bodies are exalted from earth to water, from water to air, from air to fire, so the man may rise into the Hero, the Hero into the God. In the course of Nature, the soul, to re-cover its lost estate, must pass through a series of trials and migrations. The scene of those trials is the Grand Sanctuary of Initiations, the world: their primary agents are the elements; and Dionusos, as Sovereign of Nature, or the sensuous world personified,

[p. 519]

is official Arbiter of the Mysteries, and guide of the soul, which he introduces into the body and dismisses from it. He is the Sun, that liberator of the elements, and his spiritual mediation was suggested by the same imagery which made the Zodiac the supposed path of the spirits in their descent and their return, and Cancer and Capricorn the gates through which they passed.

He was not only Creator of the World, but guardian, liberator, and Saviour of the Soul. Ushered into the world amidst lightning and thunder, he became the Liberator celebrated in the Mysteries of Thebes, delivering earth from Winter's chain, conducting the nightly chorus of the Stars and the celestial revolution of the year. His symbolism was the inexhaustible imagery employed to fill up the stellar devices of the Zodiac: he was the Vernal Bull, the Lion, the Ram, the Autumnal Goat, the Serpent: in short, the varied Deity, the resulting manifestation personified, the all in the many, the varied year, life passing into innumerable forms; essentially inferior to none, yet changing with the seasons, and undergoing their periodical decay.

He mediates and intercedes for man, and reconciles the Universal Unseen Mind with the individualized spirit of which he is emphatically the Perfecter; a consummation which he effects, first through the vicissitudes of the elemental ordeal, the alternate fire of Summer and the showers of Winter, "the trials or test of an immortal Nature"; and secondarily and symbolically through the Mysteries. He holds not only the cup of generation, but also that of wisdom or initiation, whose influence is contrary to that of the former, causing the soul to abhor its material bonds, and to long for its return. The first was the Cup of Forgetfulness; while the second is the Urn of Aquarius, quaffed by the returning spirit, as by the returning Sun at the Winter Solstice, and emblematic of the exchange of  impressions for the recovered recollections of the glorious sights and enjoyments of its pre-existence. Water nourishes and purifies; and the urn from which it flows was thought worthy to be a symbol of Deity, as of the Osiris-Canobus who with living water irrigated the soil of Egypt; and also an emblem of Hope that should cheer the dwellings of the dead.

The second birth of Dionusos, like the rising of Osiris and Atys from the dead, and the raising of Khu_ru_m, is a type of the spiritual regeneration of man. Psyche (the Soul), like Ariadne, had

[p. 520]

two lovers, an earthly and an immortal one. The immortal suitor is Dionusos, the Eros-Phanes of the Orphici, gradually exalted by the progress of thought, out of the symbol of Sensuality into the torch-bearer of the Nuptials of the Gods; the Divine Influence which physically called the world into being, and which, awakening the soul from its Stygian trance, restores it from earth to Heaven.

Thus the scientific theories of the ancients, expounded in the Mysteries, as to the origin of the soul, its descent, its sojourn here below, and its return, were not a mere barren contemplation of the nature of the world, and of the intelligent beings existing there. They were not an idle speculation as to the order of the world, and about the soul, but a study of the means for arriving at the great object proposed, the perfecting of the soul; and, as a necessary consequence, that of morals and society. This Earth, to them, was not the Soul's home, but its place of exile. Heaven was its home, and there was its birth-place. To it, it ought incessantly to turn its eyes. Man was not a terrestrial plant. His roots were in Heaven. The soul had lost its wings, clogged by the viscosity of matter. It would recover them when it extricated itself from matter and commenced its upward flight.

Matter being, in their view, as it was in that of St. Paul, the principle of all the passions that trouble reason, mislead the intelligence, and stain the purity of the soul, the Mysteries taught man how to enfeeble the action of matter on the soul, and to restore to the latter its natural dominion. And lest the stains so contracted should continue after death, lustrations were used, fastings, expiations, macerations, continence, and above all, initiations. Many of these practices were at first merely symbolical,--material signs indicating the moral purity required of the Initiates; but they afterward came to be regarded as actual productive causes of that purity.

The effect of initiation was meant to be the same as that of philosophy, to purify the soul of its passions, to weaken the empire of the body over the divine portion of man, and to give him here below a happiness anticipatory of the felicity to be one day enjoyed by him, and of the future vision by him of the Divine Beings. And therefore Proclus and the other Platonists taught "that the Mysteries and initiations withdrew souls from this mortal and material life, to re-unite them to the gods; and dissipated

[p. 521]

for the adepts the shades of ignorance by the splendors of the Deity." Such were the precious fruits of the last Degree of the Mystic Science,--to see Nature in her springs and sources, and to become familiar with the causes of things and with real existences.

Cicero says that the soul must exercise itself in the practice of the virtues, if it would speedily return to its place of origin. It should, while imprisoned in the body, free itself therefrom by the contemplation of superior beings, and in some sort be divorced from the body and the senses. Those who remain enslaved, subjugated by their passions and violating the sacred laws of religion and society, will re-ascend to Heaven, only after they shall have been purified through a long succession of ages.

The Initiate was required to emancipate himself from his passions, and to free himself from the hindrances of the senses and of matter, in order that he might rise to the contemplation of the Deity, or of that incorporeal and unchanging light in which live and subsist the causes of created natures. "We must," says Porphyry, "flee from everything sensual, that the soul may with ease re-unite itself with God, and live happily with Him." "This is the great work of initiation," says Hierocles;--"to recall the soul to what is truly good and beautiful, and make it familiar therewith, and they its own; to deliver it from the pains and ills it endures here below, enchained in matter as in a dark prison; to facilitate its return to the celestial splendors, and to establish it in the Fortunate Isles, by restoring it to its first estate. Thereby, when the hour of death arrives, the soul, freed of its mortal garmenting, which it leaves behind it as a legacy to earth, will rise buoyantly to its home among the Stars, there to re-take its ancient condition, and approach toward the Divine nature as far as man may do."

Plutarch compares Isis to knowledge, and Typhon to ignorance, obscuring the light of the sacred doctrine whose 'blaze lights the soul of the Initiate. No gift of the gods, he holds, is so precious as the knowledge of the Truth, and that of the Nature of the gods, so far as our limited capacities allow us to rise toward them. The Valentinians termed initiation LIGHT. The Initiate, says Psellus, becomes an Epopt, when admitted to see THE DIVINE LIGHTS. Clemens of Alexandria, imitating the language of an Initiate in the Mysteries of Bacchus, and inviting this Initiate, whom he terms blind like Tiresias, to come to see Christ, Who will

[p. 522]

blaze upon his eyes with greater glory than the Sun, exclaims: "Oh Mysteries most truly holy! Oh pure Light! When the torch of the Dadoukos gleams, Heaven and the Deity are displayed to my eyes! I am initiated, and become holy!" This was the true object of initiation; to be sanctified, and TO SEE, that is, to have just and faithful conceptions of the Deity, the knowledge of Whom was THE LIGHT of the Mysteries. It was promised the Initiate at Samothrace, that he should become pure and just. Clemens says that by baptism, souls are illuminated, and led to the pure light with which mingles no darkness, nor anything material. The Initiate, become an Epopt, was called A SEER. "HAIL, NEW-BORN LIGHT!" the Initiates cried in the Mysteries of Bacchus.

Such was held to be the effect of complete initiation. It lighted up the soul with rays from the Divinity, and became for it, as it were, the eye with which, according to the Pythagoreans, it con-templates the field of Truth; in its mystical abstractions, wherein it rises superior to the body, whose action on it, it annuls for the time, to re-enter into itself, so as entirely to  itself with the view of the Divinity, and the means of coming to resemble Him.

Thus enfeebling the dominion of the senses and the passions over the soul, and as it were freeing the latter from a sordid slavery, and by the steady practice of all the virtues, active and contemplative, our ancient brethren strove to fit themselves to return to the bosom of the Deity. Let not our objects as Masons fall below theirs. We use the symbols which they used; and teach the same great cardinal doctrines that they taught, of the existence of an intellectual God, and the immortality of the soul of man. If the details of their doctrines as to the soul seem to us to verge on absurdity, let us compare them with the common notions of our own day, and be silent. If it seems to us that they regarded the symbol in some cases as the thing symbolized, and worshipped the sign as if it were itself Deity, let us reflect how insufficient are our own ideas of Deity, and how we worship those ideas and images formed and fashioned in our own minds, and not the Deity Himself: and if we are inclined to smile at the importance they attached to lustrations and fasts, let us pause and inquire whether the same weakness of human nature does not exist to-day, causing rites and ceremonies to be regarded as actively efficient for the salvation of souls.

[p. 523]

And let us ever remember the words of an old writer, with which we conclude this lecture: "It is a pleasure to stand on the shore, and to see ships tossed upon the sea: a pleasure to stand in the window of a castle, and see a battle and the adventures thereof: but no pleasure is comparable to the standing on the vantage-ground of TRUTH (a hill not to be commanded, and where the air is always clear and serene), and to see the errors and wanderings, and mists and tempests, in the vale below; so always that this prospect be with pity, and not with swelling or pride. Certainly it is Heaven upon Earth to have a man's mind move in charity, rest in Providence, AND TURN UPON THE POLES OF TRUTH."

 

     
Morals and Dogma, by Albert Pike, [1871], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 524]

  

XXVI.

  

PRINCE OF MERCY, OR SCOTTISH TRINITARIAN.

WHILE you were veiled in darkness, you heard repeated by the Voice of the Great Past its most ancient doctrines. None has the right to object, if the Christian Mason sees foreshadowed in Chrishna and Sosiosch, in Mithras and Osiris, the Divine WORD that, as he believes, became Man, and died upon the cross to redeem a fallen race. Nor can he object if others see reproduced, in the WORD of the beloved Disciple, that was in the beginning with God, and that was God, and by Whom everything was made, only the LOGOS of Plato, and the WORD or Uttered THOUGHT or first Emanation of LIGHT, Or the Perfect REASON of the Great, Silent, Supreme, Uncreated Deity, believed in and adored by all.

We do not undervalue the importance of any Truth. We utter no word that can be deemed irreverent by any one of any faith. We do not tell the Moslem that it is only important for him to believe that there is but one God, and wholly unessential whether Mahomet was His prophet. We do not tell the Hebrew that the Messiah whom he expects was born in Bethlehem nearly two thousand years ago; and that he is a heretic because he will not so believe. And as little do we tell the sincere Christian that Jesus of Nazareth was but a man like us, or His history but the unreal revival of an older legend. To do either is beyond our jurisdiction. Masonry, of no one age, belongs to all time; of no one religion, it finds its great truths in all.

To every Mason, there is a GOD; ONE, Supreme, Infinite in Goodness, Wisdom, Foresight, Justice, and Benevolence; Creator, Disposer, and Preserver of all things. How, or by what intermediates He creates and acts, and in what way He unfolds and manifests Himself, Masonry leaves to creeds and Religions to inquire.

To every Mason, the soul of man is immortal. Whether it

[p. 525]

emanates from and will return to God, and what its continued mode of existence hereafter, each judges for himself. Masonry was not made to settle that.

To every Mason, WISDOM or INTELLIGENCE, FORCE or STRENGTH, and HARMONY, or FITNESS and BEAUTY, are the Trinity of the attributes of God. With the subtleties of Philosophy concerning them Masonry does not meddle, nor decide as to the reality of the supposed Existences which are their Personifications: nor whether the Christian Trinity be such a personification, or a Reality of the gravest import and significance.

To every Mason, the Infinite Justice and Benevolence of God give ample assurance that Evil will ultimately be dethroned, and the Good, the True, and the Beautiful reign triumphant and eternal. It teaches, as it feels and knows, that Evil, and Pain, and Sorrow exist as part of a wise and beneficent plan, all the parts of which work together under God's eye to a result which shall be perfection. Whether the existence of evil is rightly explained in this creed or in that, by Typhon the Great Serpent, by Ahriman and his Armies of Wicked Spirits, by the Giants and Titans that war against Heaven, by the two co-existent Principles of Good and Evil, by Satan's temptation and the fall of Man, by Lok and the Serpent Fenris, it is beyond the domain of Masonry to decide, nor does it need to inquire. Nor is it within its Province to determine how the ultimate triumph of Light and Truth and Good, over Darkness and Error and Evil, is to be achieved; nor whether the Redeemer, looked and longed for by all nations, hath appeared in Judea, or is yet to come.

It reverences all the great reformers. It sees in Moses, the Lawgiver of the Jews, in Confucius and Zoroaster, in Jesus of Nazareth, and in the Arabian Iconoclast, Great Teachers of Morality, and Eminent Reformers, if no more: and allows every brother of the Order to assign to each such higher and even Divine Character as his Creed and Truth require.

Thus Masonry disbelieves no truth, and teaches unbelief in no creed, except so far as such creed may lower its lofty estimate of the Deity, degrade Him to the level of the passions of humanity, deny the high destiny of man, impugn the goodness and benevolence of the Supreme God, strike at those great columns of Masonry, Faith, Hope, and Charity, or inculcate immorality, and disregard of the active duties of the Order.

[p. 526]

Masonry is a worship; but one in which all civilized men can unite; for it does not undertake to explain or dogmatically to settle those great mysteries, that are above the feeble comprehension of our human intellect. It trusts in God, and HOPES; it BELIEVES, like a child, and is humble. It draws no sword to compel others to adopt its belief, or to be happy with its hopes. And it WAITS with patience to understand the mysteries of Nature and Nature's God hereafter.

The greatest mysteries in the Universe are those which are ever going on around us; so trite and common to us that we never note them nor reflect upon them. Wise men tell us of the laws that regulate the motions of the spheres, which, flashing in huge circles and spinning on their axes, are also ever darting with inconceivable rapidity through the infinities of Space; while we atoms sit here, and dream that all was made for us. They tell us learnedly of centripetal and centrifugal forces, gravity and attraction, and all the other sounding terms invented to hide a want of meaning. There are other forces in the Universe than those that are mechanical.

Here are two minute seeds, not much unlike in appearance, and two of larger size. Hand them to the learned Pundit, Chemistry, who tells us how combustion goes on in the lungs, and plants are fed with phosphorus and carbon, and the alkalies and silex. Let her decompose them, analyze them, torture them in all the ways she knows. The net result of each is a little sugar, a little fibrin, a little water--carbon, potassium, sodium, and the like--one cares not to know what.

We hide them in the ground: and the slight rains moisten them, and the Sun shines upon them, and little slender shoots spring up and grow;--and what a miracle is the mere growth!--the force, the power, the capacity by which the little feeble shoot, that a small worm can nip off with a single snap of its mandibles, extracts from the earth and air and water the different elements, so learnedly catalogued, with which it increases in stature, and rises imperceptibly toward the sky.

One grows to be a slender, fragile, feeble stalk, soft of texture, like an ordinary weed; another a strong bush, of woody fibre, armed with thorns, and sturdy enough to bid defiance to the winds: the third a tender tree, subject to be blighted by the frost, and looked down upon by all the forest; while another spreads its

[p. 527]

rugged arms abroad, and cares for neither frost nor ice, nor the snows that for months lie around its roots.

But lo! out of the brown foul earth, and colorless invisible air, and limpid rain-water, the chemistry of the seeds has extracted colors--four different shades of green, that paint the leaves which put forth in the spring upon our plants, our shrubs, and our trees. Later still come the flowers--the vivid colors of the rose, the beautiful brilliance of the carnation, the modest blush of the apple; and the splendid white of the orange. Whence come the colors of the leaves and flowers? By what process of chemistry are they extracted from the carbon, the phosphorus, and the lime? Is it any greater miracle to make something out of nothing?

Pluck the flowers. Inhale the delicious perfumes; each perfect, and all delicious. Whence have they come? By what combination of acids and alkalies could the chemist's laboratory produce them?

And now on two comes the fruit--the ruddy apple and the golden orange. Pluck them--open them! The texture and fabric how totally different! The taste how entirely dissimilar--the perfume of each distinct from its flower and from the other. Whence the taste and this new perfume? The same earth and air and water have been made to furnish a different taste to each fruit, a different perfume not only to each fruit, but to each fruit and its own flower.

Is it any more a problem whence come thought and will and perception and all the phenomena of the mind, than this, whence come the colors, the perfumes, the taste, of the fruit and flower?

And lo! in each fruit new seeds, each gifted with the same wondrous power of reproduction--each with the same wondrous forces wrapped up in it to be again in turn evolved. Forces that had lived three thousand years in the grain of wheat found in the wrappings of an Egyptian mummy; forces of which learning and science and wisdom know no more than they do of the nature and laws of action of God. What can we know of the nature, and how can we understand the powers and mode of operation of the human soul, when the glossy leaves, the pearl-white flower, and the golden fruit of the orange are miracles wholly beyond our comprehension?

We but hide our ignorance in a cloud of words;--and the words too often are mere combinations of sounds without any meaning.

[p. 528]

[paragraph continues] What is the centrifugal force? A tendency to go in a particular direction! What external "force," then, produces that tendency?

What force draws the needle round to the north? What force moves the muscle that raises the arm, when the will determines it shall rise? Whence comes the will itself? Is it spontaneous--a first cause, or an effect? These too are miracles; inexplicable as the creation, or the existence and self-existence of God.

Who will explain to us the passion, the peevishness, the anger, the memory, and affections of the small canary-wren? the consciousness of identity and the dreams of the dog? the reasoning powers of the elephant? the wondrous instincts, passions, government, and civil policy, and modes of communication of ideas of the ant and bee?

Who has yet made us to understand, with all his learned words, how heat comes to us from the Sun, and light from the remote Stars, setting out upon its journey earthward from some, at the time the Chaldaeans commenced to build the Tower of Babel? Or how the image of an external object comes to and fixes itself upon the retina of the eye; and when there, how that mere empty, unsubstantial image becomes transmuted into the wondrous thing that we call SIGHT? Or how the waves of the atmosphere striking upon the tympanum of the ear--those thin, invisible waves--produce the equally wondrous phenomenon of HEARING, and become the roar of the tornado, the crash of the thunder, the mighty voice of the ocean, the chirping of the cricket, the delicate sweet notes and exquisite trills and variations of the wren and mocking-bird, or the magic melody of the instrument of Paganini?

Our senses are mysteries to us, and we are mysteries to ourselves. Philosophy has taught us nothing as to the nature of our sensations, our perceptions, our cognizances, the origin of our thoughts and ideas, but words. By no effort or degree of reflection, never so long continued, can man become conscious of a personal identity in himself, separate and distinct from his body and his brain. We torture ourselves in the effort to gain an idea of ourselves, and weary with the exertion. Who has yet made us understand how, from the contact with a foreign body, the image in the eye, the wave of air impinging on the ear, particular particles entering the nostrils, and coming in contact with the palate, come sensations in the nerves, and from that, perception in the mind, of the animal or the man?

[p. 529]

What do we know of Substance? Men even doubt yet whether it exists. Philosophers tell us that our senses make known to us only the attributes of substance, extension, hardness, color, and the like; but not the thing itself that is extended, solid, black or white; as we know the attributes of the Soul, its thoughts and its perceptions, and not the Soul itself which perceives and thinks.

What a wondrous mystery is there in heat and light, existing, we know not how, within certain limits, narrow in comparison with infinity, beyond which on every side stretch out infinite space and the blackness of unimaginable darkness, and the intensity of inconceivable cold! Think only of the mighty Power required to maintain warmth and light in the central point of such an infinity, to whose darkness that of Midnight, to whose cold that of the last Arctic Island is nothing. And yet GOD is everywhere.

And what a mystery are the effects of heat and cold upon the wondrous fluid that we call water! What a mystery lies hidden in every flake of snow and in every crystal of ice, and in their final transformation into the invisible vapor that rises from the ocean or the land, and floats above the summits of the mountains!

What a multitude of wonders, indeed, has chemistry unveiled to our eyes! Think only that if some single law enacted by God were at once repealed, that of attraction or affinity or cohesion, for example, the whole material world, with its solid granite and adamant, its veins of gold and silver, its trap and porphyry, its huge beds of coal, our own frames and the very ribs and bones of this apparently indestructible earth, would instantaneously dissolve, with all Suns and Stars and Worlds throughout all the Universe of God, into a thin invisible vapor of infinitely minute particles or atoms, diffused throughout infinite space; and with them light and heat would disappear; unless the Deity Himself be, as the Ancient Persians thought, the Eternal Light and the Immortal Fire.

The mysteries of the Great Universe of God! How can we with our limited mental vision expect to grasp and comprehend them! Infinite SPACE, stretching out from us every way, without limit: infinite TIME, without beginning or end; and WE, HERE, and NOW, in the centre of each! An infinity of suns, the nearest of which only diminish in size, viewed with the most powerful telescope: each with its retinue of worlds; infinite numbers of such suns, so remote from us that their light would not reach us, journeying during an infinity of time, while the light that has 

[p. 530]

reached us, from some that we seem to see, has been upon its journey for fifty centuries: our world spinning upon its axis, and rushing ever in its circuit round the sun; and it, the sun, and all our system revolving round some great central point; and that, and suns, stars, and worlds evermore flashing onward with incredible rapidity through illimitable space: and then, in every drop of water that we drink, in every morsel of much of our food, in the air, in the earth, in the sea, incredible multitudes of living creatures, invisible to the naked eye, of a minuteness beyond belief, yet organized, living, feeding, perhaps with consciousness of identity, and memory and instinct.

Such are some of the mysteries of the great Universe of God. And yet we, whose life and that of the world on which we live form but a point in the centre of infinite Time: we, who nourish animalcule within, and on whom vegetables grow without, would fain learn "how God created this Universe, would understand His Powers, His Attributes, His Emanations, His Mode of Existence and of Action; would fain know the plan according to which all events proceed, that plan profound as God Himself; would know the laws by which He controls His Universe; would fain see and talk to Him face to face, as man talks to man: and we try not to believe, because we do not understand.

He commands us to love one another, to love our neighbor as ourself; and we dispute and wrangle, and hate and slay each other, because we cannot be of one opinion as to the Essence of His Nature, as to His Attributes; whether He became man born of a woman, and was crucified; whether the Holy Ghost is of the same substance with the Father, or only of a similar substance; whether a feeble old man is God's Vicegerent; whether some are elected from all eternity to be saved, and others to be condemned and punished; whether punishment of the wicked after death is to be eternal; whether this doctrine or the other be heresy or truth;--drenching the world with blood, depopulating realms, and turning fertile lands into deserts; until, for religious war, persecution, and bloodshed, the Earth for many a century has rolled round the Sun, a charnel-house, steaming and reeking with human gore, the blood of brother slain by brother for opinion's sake, that has soaked into and polluted all her veins, and made her a horror to her sisters of the Universe.

And if men were all Masons, and obeyed with all their heart

[p. 531]

her mild and gentle teachings, that world would be a paradise; while intolerance and persecution make of it a hell. For this is the Masonic Creed: BELIEVE, in God's Infinite Benevolence, Wisdom, and Justice: HOPE, for the final triumph of Good over Evil, and for Perfect Harmony as the final result of all the concords and discords of the Universe: and be CHARITABLE as God is, toward the unfaith, the errors, the follies, and the faults of men: for all make one great brotherhood.

  

INSTRUCTION.

Sen Q.E.D. W Q.E.D. Brother Junior Warden, are you a Prince of Mercy?

Jun Q.E.D. W Q.E.D. I have seen the Delta and the Holy NAMES upon it, and am an AMETH like yourself, in the TRIPLE COVENANT, of which we bear the mark.

Qu Q.E.D. What is the first Word upon the Delta?

Ans Q.E.D. The Ineffable Name of Deity, the true mystery of which is known to the Ameth alone.

Qu Q.E.D. What do the three sides of the Delta denote to us?

Ans Q.E.D. To us, and to all Masons, the three Great Attributes or Developments of the Essence of the Deity; WISDOM, or the Reflective and Designing Power, in which, when there was naught but God, the Plan and Idea of the Universe was shaped and formed: FORCE, or the Executing and Creating Power, which instantaneously acting, realized the Type and Idea framed by Wisdom; and the Universe, and all Stars and Worlds, and Light and Life, and Men and Angels and all living creatures WERE; and HARMONY, or the Preserving Power, Order, and Beauty, maintaining the Universe in its State, and constituting the law of Harmony, Motion, Proportion, and Progression:--WISDOM, which thought the plan; STRENGTH, which created: HARMONY, which upholds and preserves:--the Masonic Trinity, three Powers and one Essence: the three columns which support the Universe, Physical, Intellectual, and Spiritual, of which every Masonic Lodge is a type and symbol:--while to the Christian Mason, they represent the Three that bear record in Heaven, the FATHER, the WORD, and the HOLY SPIRIT, which three are ONE.

Qu Q.E.D. What do the three Greek letters upon the Delta, I Q.E.D. E Q.E.D. S Q.E.D. [Iota, Eta, and Sigma] represent?

Ans Q.E.D. Three of the Names of the Supreme Deity among the Syrians, Phoenicians. and Hebrews . . . IHUH [YHWH]; Self-Existence 

[p. 532]

[paragraph continues] . . . AL [w ?A?L]: the Nature-God, or Soul of the Universe. . . SHADAI [w ?Sh?D?Y] Supreme Power. Also three of the Six Chief At-tributes of God, among the Kabbalists:--WISDOM [IEH], the Intellect, (Nous) of the Egyptians, the Word (Logos) of the Platonists, and the Wisdom (Sofia) of the Gnostics: . . MAGNIFICENCE [AL], the Symbol of which was the Lion's Head: . . and VICTORY and GLORY [Tsabaoth], which are the two columns JACHIN and BOAZ, that stand in the Portico of the Temple of Masonry. To the Christian Mason they are the first three letters of the name of the Son of God, Who died upon the cross to redeem mankind.

Qu Q.E.D. What is the first of the THREE COVENANTS, of which we bear the mark?

Ans Q.E.D. That which God made with Noah; when He said, "I will not again curse the earth any more for man's sake, neither will I smite any more everything living as I have done. While the Earth remaineth, seed-time and harvest, and cold and heat, and Winter and Summer, and day and night shall not cease. I will establish My covenant with you, and with your seed after you, and with every living creature. All mankind shall no more be cut off by the waters of a flood, nor shall there any more be a flood to destroy the earth. This is the token of My covenant: I do set My bow in the cloud, and it shall be for a token of a covenant between Me and the earth: an everlasting covenant between Me and every living creature on the earth."

Qu Q.E.D. What is the second of the Three Covenants?

Ans Q.E.D. That which God made with Abraham; when He said, "I am the Absolute Uncreated God. I will make My covenant between Me and thee, and thou shalt be the Father of Many Nations, and Kings shall come from thy loins. I will establish My covenant between Me and thee, and thy descendants after thee, to the remotest generations, for an everlasting covenant; and I will be thy God and their God, and will give thee the land of Canaan for an everlasting possession."

Qu Q.E.D. What is the third Covenant?

Ans Q.E.D. That which God made with all men by His prophets; when He said: "I will gather all nations and tongues, and they shall come and see My Glory. I will create new Heavens and a new earth; and the former shall not be remembered, nor come into mind. The Sun shall no more shine by day, nor the Moon by night; but the Lord shall be an everlasting light and splendor.

[p. 533]

[paragraph continues] His Spirit and His Word shall remain with men forever. The heavens shall vanish away like vapor, and the earth shall wax old like a garment, and they that dwell therein shall die; but my salvation shall be forever, and my righteousness shall not end; and there shall be Light among the Gentiles, and salvation unto the ends of the earth. The redeemed of the Lord shall return, and everlasting joy be on their heads, and sorrow and mourning shall flee away."

Qu Q.E.D. What is the symbol of the Triple Covenant?

Ans Q.E.D. The Triple Triangle.

Qu Q.E.D. Of what else is it the symbol to us?

Ans Q.E.D. Of the Trinity of Attributes of the Deity; and of the triple essence of Man, the Principle of Life, the Intellectual Power, and the Soul or Immortal Emanation from the Deity.

Qu Q.E.D. What is the first great Truth of the Sacred Mysteries?

Ans Q.E.D. No man hath seen God at any time. He is One, Eternal, All-Powerful, All-Wise, Infinitely Just, Merciful, Benevolent, and Compassionate, Creator and Preserver of all things, the Source of Light and Life, coextensive with Time and Space; Who thought, and with the Thought created the Universe and all living things, and the souls of men: THAT IS:--the PERMANENT; while everything beside is a perpetual genesis.

Qu Q.E.D. What is the second great Truth of the Sacred Mysteries?

Ans Q.E.D. The Soul of Man is Immortal; not the result of organization, nor an aggregate of modes of action of matter, nor a succession of phenomena and perceptions; but an EXISTENCE, one and identical, a living spirit, a spark of the Great Central Light, that hath entered info and dwells in the body; to be separated therefrom at death, and return to God who gave it: that doth not disperse nor vanish at death, like breath or a smoke, nor can be annihilated; but still exists and possesses activity and intelligence, even as it existed in God, before it was enveloped in the body.

Qu Q.E.D. What is the third great Truth in Masonry?

Ans Q.E.D. The impulse which directs to right conduct, and deters from crime, is not only older than the ages of nations and cities, but coeval with that Divine Being Who sees and rules both Heaven and earth. Nor did Tarquin less violate that Eternal Law, though in his reign there might have been no written law at Rome against such violence; for the principle that impels us to right conduct, and warns us against guilt, springs out of the nature of things. It did not begin to be law when it was first written, nor

[p. 534]

was it originated; but it is coeval with the Divine Intelligence itself. The consequence of virtue is not to be made the end thereof; and laudable performances must have deeper roots, motives, and instigations, to give them the stamp of virtues.

Qu Q.E.D. What is the fourth great Truth in Masonry?

Ans Q.E.D. The moral truths are as absolute as the metaphysical truths. Even the Deity cannot make it that there should be effects without a cause, or phenomena without substance. As little could He make it to be sinful and evil to respect our pledged word, to love truth, to moderate our passions. The principles of Morality are axioms, like the principles of Geometry. The moral laws are the necessary relations that flow from the nature of things, and they are not created by, but have existed eternally in God. Their continued existence does not depend upon the exercise of His WILL. Truth and Justice are of His ESSENCE. Not because we are feeble and God omnipotent, is it our duty to obey His law. We may be forced, but are not under obligation, to obey the stronger. God is the principle of Morality, but not by His mere will, which, abstracted from all other of His attributes, would be neither just nor unjust. Good is the expression of His will, in so far as that will is itself the expression of eternal, absolute, uncreated justice, which is in God, which His will did not create; but which it executes and promulgates, as our will proclaims and promulgates and executes the idea of the good which is in us. He has given us the law of Truth and Justice; but He has not arbitrarily instituted that law. Justice is inherent in His will, because it is contained in His intelligence and wisdom, in His very nature and most intimate essence.

Qu Q.E.D. What is the fifth great Truth in Masonry?

Ans Q.E.D. There is an essential distinction between Good and Evil, what is just and what is unjust; and to this distinction is attached, for every intelligent and free creature, the absolute obligation of conforming to what is good and just. Man is an intelligent and free being,--free, because he is conscious that it is his duty, and because it is made his duty, to obey the dictates of truth and justice, and therefore he must necessarily have the power of doing so, which involves the power of not doing so;-capable of comprehending the distinction between good and evil, justice and injustice, and the obligation which accompanies it, and of naturally adhering to that obligation, independently of any contract

[p. 535]

or positive law; capable also of resisting the temptations which urge him toward evil and injustice, and of complying with the sacred law of eternal justice.

That man is not governed by a resistless Fate or inexorable Destiny; but is free to choose between the evil and the good: that Justice and Right, the Good and Beautiful, are of the essence of the Divinity, like His Infinitude; and therefore they are laws to man: that we are conscious of our freedom to act, as we are conscious of our identity, and the continuance and connectedness of our existence; and have the same evidence of one as of the other; and if we can put one in doubt, we have no certainty of either, and everything is unreal: that we can deny our free will and free agency, only upon the ground that they are in the nature of things impossible; which would be to deny the Omnipotence of God.

Qu Q.E.D. What is the sixth great Truth of Masonry?

Ans Q.E.D. The necessity of practising the moral truths, is obligation. The moral truths; necessary in the eye of reason, are obligatory on the will. The moral obligation, like the moral truth that is its foundation, is absolute. As the necessary truths are not more or less necessary, so the obligation is not more or less obligatory. There are degrees of importance among different obligations; but none in the obligation itself. We are not nearly obliged, almost obliged. We are wholly so, or not at all. If there be any place of refuge to which we can escape from the obligation, it ceases to exist. If the obligation is absolute, it is immutable and universal. For if that of to-day may not be that of to-morrow, if what is obligatory on me may not be obligatory on you, the obligation would differ from itself, and be variable and contingent. This fact is the principle of all morality. That every act contrary to right and justice, deserves to be repressed by force, and punished when committed, equally in the absence of any law or contract: that man naturally recognizes the distinction between the merit and demerit of actions, as he does that between justice and injustice, honesty and dishonesty; and feels, without being taught, and in the absence of law or contract, that it is wrong for vice to be rewarded or go unpunished, and for virtue to be punished or left unrewarded: and that, the Deity being infinitely just and good, it must follow as a necessary and inflexible law that punishment shall be the result of Sin, its inevitable and natural effect and corollary, and not a mere arbitrary vengeance.

[p. 536]

Qu Q.E.D. What is the seventh great Truth in Masonry?

Ans Q.E.D. The immutable law of God requires, that besides respecting the absolute rights of others, and being merely just, we should do good, be charitable, and obey the dictates of the generous and noble sentiments of the soul. Charity is a law, because our conscience is not satisfied nor at ease if we have not relieved the suffering, the distressed, and the destitute. It is to give that which he to whom you give has no right to take or demand. To be charitable is obligatory on us. We are the Almoners of God's bounties. But the obligation is not so precise and inflexible as the obligation to be just. Charity knows neither rule nor limit. It goes beyond all obligation. Its beauty consists in its liberty. "He that loveth not, knoweth not God; FOR GOD IS LOVE. If we love one another, God dwelleth in us, and His love is perfected in us. God is love; and he that dwelleth in love, dwelleth in God, and God in him." To be kindly affectioned one to another with brotherly love; to relieve the necessities of the needy, and be generous, liberal, and hospitable; to return to no man evil for evil; to rejoice at the good fortune of others, and sympathize with them in their sorrows and reverses; to live peaceably with all men, and repay injuries with benefits and kindness; these are the sublime dictates of the Moral Law, taught from the infancy of the world, by Masonry.

Qu Q.E.D. What is the eighth great Truth in Masonry?

Ans Q.E.D. That the laws which control and regulate the Universe of God, are those of motion and harmony. We see only the isolated incidents of things, and with our feeble and limited capacity and vision cannot discern their connection, nor the mighty chords that make the apparent discord perfect harmony. Evil is merely apparent, and all is in reality good and perfect. For pain and sorrow, persecution and hardships, affliction and destitution, sickness and death are but the means, by which alone the noblest virtues could be developed. Without them, and without sin and error, and wrong and outrage, as there can be no effect without an adequate cause, there could be neither patience under suffering and distress; nor prudence in difficulty; nor temperance to avoid excess; nor courage to meet danger; nor truth, when to speak the truth is hazardous; nor love, when it is met with ingratitude; nor charity for the needy and destitute; nor forbearance and forgiveness of injuries; nor toleration of erroneous opinions; nor charitable judgment and construction of men's motives and

[p. 537]

actions; nor patriotism, nor heroism, nor honor, nor self-denial, nor generosity. These and most other virtues and excellencies would have no existence, and even their names be unknown; and the poor virtues that still existed, would scarce deserve the name; for life would be one fiat, dead, low level, above which none of the lofty elements of human nature would emerge; and man would lie lapped in contented indolence and idleness, a mere worthless negative, instead of the brave, strong soldier against the grim legions of Evil and rude Difficulty.

Qu Q.E.D. What is the ninth great Truth in Masonry?

Ans Q.E.D. The great leading doctrine of this Degree;--that the JUSTICE, the WISDOM, and the MERCY of God are alike infinite, alike perfect, and yet do not in the least jar nor conflict one with the other; but form a Great Perfect Trinity of Attributes, three and yet one: that, the principle of merit and demerit being absolute, and every good action deserving to be rewarded, and every bad one to be punished, and God being as just as He is good; and yet the cases constantly recurring in this world, in which crime and cruelty, oppression, tyranny, and injustice are prosperous, happy, fortunate, and self-contented, and rule and reign, and enjoy all the blessings of God's beneficence, while the virtuous and good are unfortunate, miserable, destitute, pining away in dungeons, perishing with cold, and famishing with hunger, slaves of oppression, and instruments and victims of the miscreants that govern; so that this world, if there were no existence beyond it, would be one great theatre of wrong and injustice, proving God wholly disregardful of His own necessary law of merit and demerit;--it follows that there must be another life in which these apparent wrongs shall be repaired: That all the powers of man's soul tend to infinity; and his indomitable instinct of immortality, and the universal hope of another life, testified by all creeds, all poetry, all traditions, establish its certainty; for man is not an orphan; but hath a Father near at hand: and the day must come when Light and Truth, and the Just and Good shall be victorious, and Darkness, Error, Wrong, and Evil be annihilated, and known no more forever: That the Universe is one great Harmony, in which, according to the faith of all nations, deep-rooted in all hearts in the primitive ages, Light will ultimately prevail over Darkness, and the Good Principle over the Evil: and the myriad souls that have emanated from the Divinity, purified and ennobled by the struggle

[p. 538]

here below, will again return to perfect bliss in the bosom of God, to offend against Whose laws will then be no longer possible.

Qu Q.E.D. What, then, is the one great lesson taught to us, as Masons, in this Degree?

Ans Q.E.D. That to that state and realm of Light and Truth and Perfection, which is absolutely certain, all the good men on earth are tending; and if there is a law from whose operation none are exempt, which inevitably conveys their bodies to darkness and to dust, there is another not less certain nor less powerful, which conducts their spirits to that state of Happiness and Splendor and Perfection, the bosom of their Father and their God. The wheels of Nature are not made to roll backward. Everything presses on to Eternity. From the birth of Time an impetuous current has set in, which bears all the sons of men toward that interminable ocean. Meanwhile, Heaven is attracting to itself whatever is congenial to its nature, is enriching itself by the spoils of the Earth, and collecting within its capacious bosom whatever is pure, permanent, and divine, leaving nothing for the last fire to consume but the gross matter that creates concupiscence; while everything fit for that good fortune shall be gathered and selected from the ruins of the world, to adorn that Eternal City.

Let every Mason then obey the voice that calls him thither. Let us seek the things that are above, and be not content with a world that must shortly perish, and which we must speedily quit, while we neglect to prepare for that in which we are invited to dwell forever. While everything within us and around us reminds us of the approach of death, and concurs to teach us that this is not our rest, let us hasten our preparations for another world, and earnestly implore that help and strength from our Father, which alone can put an end to that fatal war which our desires have too long waged with our destiny. When these move in the same direction, and that which God's will renders unavoidable shall become our choice, all things will be ours; life will be divested of its vanity, and death disarmed of its 'terrors.

Qu Q.E.D. What are the symbols of the purification necessary to make us perfect Masons?

Ans Q.E.D. Lavation with pure water, or baptism; because to cleanse the body is emblematical of purifying the soul; and because it conduces to the bodily health, and virtue is the health of the soul, as sin and vice are its malady and sickness:--unction, or anointing

[p. 539]

with oil; because thereby we are set apart and dedicated to the service and priesthood of the Beautiful, the True, and the Good:--and robes of white, emblems of candor, purity, and truth.

Qu Q.E.D. What is to us the chief symbol of man's ultimate redemption and regeneration?

Ans Q.E.D.The fraternal supper, of bread which nourishes, and of wine which refreshes and exhilarates, symbolical of the time which is to come, when all mankind shall be one great harmonious brotherhood; and teaching us these great lessons: that as matter changes ever, but no single atom is annihilated, it is not rational to suppose that the far nobler soul does not continue to exist beyond the grave: that many thousands who have died before us might claim to be joint owners with ourselves of the particles that compose our mortal bodies; for matter ever forms new combinations; and the bodies of the ancient dead, the patriarchs before and since the flood, the kings and common people of all ages, resolved into their constituent elements, are carried upon the wind over all continents, and continually enter into and form part of the habitations of new souls, creating new bonds of sympathy and brotherhood between each man that lives and all his race. And thus, in the bread we eat, and in the wine we drink to-night may enter into and form part of us the identical particles of matter that once formed parts of the material bodies called Moses, Confucius, Plato, Socrates, or Jesus of Nazareth. In the truest sense, we eat and drink the bodies of the dead; and cannot say that there is a single atom of our blood or body, the ownership of which some other soul might not dispute with us. It teaches us also the infinite beneficence of God who sends us seed-time and harvest, each in its season, and makes His showers to fall and His sun to shine alike upon the evil and the good: bestowing upon us unsolicited His innumerable blessings, and asking no return. For there are no angels stationed upon the watch-towers of creation to call the world to prayer and sacrifice; but He bestows His benefits in silence, like a kind friend who comes at night, and, leaving his gifts at the door, to be found by us in the morning, goes quietly away and asks no thanks, nor ceases his kind offices for our ingratitude. And thus the bread and wine teach us that our Mortal Body is no more WE than the house in which we live, or the garments that we wear; but the Soul is I, the ONE, identical, unchangeable, immortal emanation from the , to

[p. 540]

return to God and be forever happy, in His good time; as our mortal bodies, dissolving, return to the elements from which they came, their particles coming and going ever in perpetual genesis. To our Jewish Brethren, this supper is symbolical of the Passover: to the Christian Mason, of that eaten by Christ and His Disciples, when, celebrating the Passover, He broke bread and gave it to them, saying, "Take! eat! this is My body:" and giving them the cup, He said, "Drink ye all of it! for this is My blood of the New Testament, which is shed for many for the remission of sins;" thus symbolizing the perfect harmony and union between Himself and the faithful; and His death upon the cross for the salvation of man.

The history of Masonry is the history of Philosophy. Masons do not pretend to set themselves up for instructors of the human race: but, though Asia produced and preserved the Mysteries, Masonry has, in Europe and America, given regularity to their doctrines, spirit, and action, and developed the moral advantages which mankind may reap from them. More consistent, and more simple in its mode of procedure, it has put an end to the vast allegorical pantheon of ancient mythologies, and itself become a science.

None can deny that Christ taught a lofty morality. "Love one another: forgive those that despitefully use you and persecute you: be pure of heart, meek, humble, contented: lay not up riches on earth, but in Heaven: submit to the powers lawfully over you: become like these little children, or ye cannot be saved, for of such is the Kingdom of Heaven: forgive the repentant; and cast no stone at the sinner, if you too have sinned: do unto others as ye would have others do unto you:" such, and not abstruse questions of theology, were His simple and sublime teachings.

The early Christians followed in His footsteps. The first preachers of the faith had no thought of domination. Entirely animated by His saying, that he among them should be first, who should serve with the greatest devotion, they were humble, modest, and charitable, and they knew how to communicate this spirit of the inner man to the churches under their direction. These churches were at first but spontaneous meetings of all Christians inhabiting the same locality. A pure and severe morality, mingled with religious enthusiasm, was the characteristic of each, and excited the admiration even of their persecutors. Everything was

[p. 541]

in common among them; their property, their joys, and their sorrows. In the silence of night they met for instruction and to pray together. Their love-feasts, or fraternal repasts, ended these reunions, in which all differences in social position and rank were effaced in the presence of a paternal Divinity. Their sole object was to make men better, by bringing them back to a simple worship, of which universal morality was the basis; and to end those numerous and cruel sacrifices which everywhere inundated with blood the altars of the gods. Thus did Christianity reform the world, and obey the teachings of its founder. It gave to woman her proper rank and influence; it regulated domestic life; and by admitting the slaves to the love-feasts, it by degrees raised them above that oppression under which half of mankind had groaned for ages.

This, in its purity, as taught by Christ Himself, was the true primitive religion, as communicated by God to the Patriarchs. It was no new religion, but the reproduction of the oldest of all; and its true and perfect morality is the morality of Masonry, as is the morality of every creed of antiquity.

In the early days of Christianity, there was an initiation like those of the pagans. Persons were admitted on special conditions only. To arrive at a complete knowledge of the doctrine, they had to pass three degrees of instruction. The initiates were consequently divided into three classes; the first, Auditors, the second, Catechumens, and the third, the Faithful. The Auditors were a sort of novices, who were prepared by certain ceremonies and certain instruction to receive the dogmas of Christianity. A portion of these dogmas was made known to the Catechumens; who, after particular purifications, received baptism, or the initiation of the theogenesis (divine generation); but in the grand mysteries of that religion, the incarnation, nativity, passion, and resurrection of Christ, none were initiated but the Faithful. These doctrines, and the celebration of the Holy Sacraments, particularly the Eucharist, were kept with profound secrecy. These Mysteries were divided into two parts; the first styled the Mass of the Catechumens; the second, the Mass of the Faithful. The celebration of the Mysteries of Mithras was also styled a mass; and the ceremonies used were the same. There were found all the sacraments of the Catholic Church, even the breath of confirmation. The Priest of Mithras promised the Initiates deliverance from sin, by means

[p. 542]

of confession and baptism, and a future life of happiness or misery. He celebrated the Oblation of bread, image of the resurrection. The baptism of newly-born children, extreme unction, confession of sins,--all belonged to the Mithriac rites. The candidate was purified by a species of baptism, a mark was impressed upon his forehead, he offered bread and water, pronouncing certain mysterious words.

During the persecutions in the early ages of Christianity, the Christians took refuge in the vast catacombs which stretched for miles in every direction under the city of Rome, and are supposed to have been of Etruscan origin. There, amid labyrinthine windings, deep caverns, hidden chambers, chapels, and tombs, the persecuted fugitives found refuge, and there they performed the ceremonies of the Mysteries.

The Basilideans, a sect of Christians that arose soon after the time of the Apostles, practised the Mysteries, with the old Egyptian legend. They symbolized Osiris by the Sun, Isis by the Moon, and Typhon by Scorpio; and wore crystals bearing these emblems, as amulets or talismans to protect them from danger; upon which were also a brilliant star and the serpent. They were copied from the talismans of Persia and Arabia, and given to every candidate at his initiation.

Irenaeus tells us that the Simonians, one of the earliest sects of the Gnostics, had a Priesthood of the Mysteries.

Tertullian tells us that the Valentinians, the most celebrated of all the Gnostic schools, imitated, or rather perverted, the Mysteries of Eleusis. Irenaeus informs us, in several curious chapters, of the Mysteries practised by the Marcosians; and Origen gives much information as to the Mysteries of the Ophites; and there is no doubt that all the Gnostic sects had Mysteries and an initiation. They all claimed to possess a secret doctrine, coming to them directly from Jesus Christ, different from that of the Gospels and Epistles, and superior to those communications, which in their eyes, were merely exoteric. This secret doctrine they did not communicate to every one; and among the extensive sect of the Basilideans hardly one in a thousand knew it, as we learn from Irenaeus. We know the name of only the highest class of their Initiates. They were styled Elect or Elus [Eklektoi] Strangers to the World and [xenoi en kosmui]. They had at least three Degrees--the Material, the Intellectual, and the Spiritual,

[p. 543]

and the lesser and greater Mysteries; and the number of those who attained the highest Degree was quite small.

Baptism was one of their most important ceremonies; and the Basilideans celebrated the 10th of January, as the anniversary of the day on which Christ was baptized in Jordan.

They had the ceremony of laying on of hands, by way of purification; and that of the mystic banquet, emblem of that to which they believed the Heavenly Wisdom would one day admit them, in the fullness of things [Pleruma].

Their ceremonies were much more like those of the Christians than those of Greece; but they mingled with them much that was borrowed from the Orient and Egypt: and taught the primitive truths, mixed with a multitude of fantastic errors and fictions.

The discipline of the secret was the concealment (occultatio) of certain tenets and ceremonies. So says Clemens of Alexandria.

To avoid persecution, the early Christians were compelled to use great precaution, and to hold meetings of the Faithful [of the Household of Faith] in private places, under concealment by darkness. They assembled in the night, and they guarded against the intrusion of false brethren and profane persons, spies who might cause their arrest. They conversed together figuratively, and by the use of symbols, lest cowans and eavesdroppers might overhear: and there existed among them a favored class, or Order, who were initiated into certain Mysteries which they were bound by solemn promise not to disclose, or even converse about, except with such as had received them under the same sanction. They were called Brethren, the Faithful, Stewards of the Mysteries, Superintendents, Devotees of the Secret, and ARCHITECTS.

In the Hierarchiae, attributed to St. Dionysius the Areopagite, the first Bishop of Athens, the tradition of the sacrament is said to have been divided into three Degrees, or grades, purification, initiation, and accomplishment or perfection; and it mentions also, as part of the ceremony, the bringing to sight.

The Apostolic Constitutions, attributed to Clemens, Bishop of Rome, describe the early church, and say: "These regulations must on no account be communicated to all sorts of persons, because of the Mysteries contained in them." They speak of the Deacon's duty to keep the doors, that none uninitiated should enter at the oblation. Ostiarii, or doorkeepers, kept guard, and gave notice of the time of prayer and church-assemblies; and also by private

[p. 544]

signal, in times of persecution, gave notice to those within, to en-able them to avoid danger. The Mysteries were open to the Fideles or Faithful only; and no spectators were allowed at the communion.

Tertullian, who died about A. D. 216, says in his Apology: "None are admitted to the religious Mysteries without an oath of secrecy. We appeal to your Thracian and Eleusinian Mysteries; and we are especially bound to this caution, because if we prove faithless, we should not only provoke Heaven, but draw upon our heads the utmost rigor of human displeasure. And should strangers betray us? They know nothing but by report and hearsay. Far hence, ye Profane! is the prohibition from all holy Mysteries."

Clemens, Bishop of Alexandria, born about A. D. 191, says, in his Stromata, that he cannot explain the Mysteries, because he should thereby, according to the old proverb, put a sword into the hands of a child. He frequently compares the Discipline of the Secret with the heathen Mysteries, as to their internal and recondite wisdom.

Whenever the early Christians happened to be in company with strangers, more properly termed the Profane, they never spoke of their sacraments, but indicated to one another what they meant by means of symbols and secret watchwords, disguisedly, and as by direct communication of mind with mind, and by enigmas.

Origen, born A. D. 134 or 135, answering Celsus, who had objected that the Christians had a concealed doctrine said: "Inasmuch as the essential and important doctrines and principles of Christianity are openly taught, it is foolish to object that there are other things that are recondite; for this is common to Christian discipline with that of those philosophers in whose teaching some things were exoteric and some esoteric: and it is enough to say that it was so with some of the disciples of Pythagoras."

The formula which the primitive church pronounced at the moment of celebrating its Mysteries, was this: "Depart, ye Profane! Let the Catechumens, and those who have not been admitted or initiated, go forth."

Archelaus, Bishop of Cascara in Mesopotamia, who, in the year 278, conducted a controversy with the Manichaeans, said: "These Mysteries the church now communicates to him who has passed through the introductory Degree. They are not explained to the Gentiles at all; nor are they taught openly in the hearing of Catechumens; but much that is spoken is in disguised terms, that the

[p. 545]

[paragraph continues] Faithful [Pistoi], who possess the knowledge, may be still more informed, and those who are not acquainted with it, may suffer no disadvantage."

Cyril, Bishop of Jerusalem, was born in the year 315, and died in 386. In his Catechesis he says: "The Lord spake in parables to His hearers in general; but to His disciples He explained in private the parables and allegories which He spoke in public. The splendor of glory is for those who are early enlightened: obscurity and darkness are the portion of the unbelievers and ignorant. Just so the church discovers its Mysteries to those who have advanced beyond the class of Catechumens: we employ obscure terms with others."

St. Basil, the Great Bishop of Caesarea, born in the year 326, and dying in the year 376, says: "We receive the dogmas transmitted to us by writing, and those which have descended to us from the Apostles, beneath the mystery of oral tradition: for several things have been handed to us without writing, lest the vulgar, too familiar with our dogmas, should lose a due respect for them. . . . This is what the uninitiated are not permitted to contemplate; and how should it ever be proper to write and circulate among the people an account of them?"

St. Gregory Nazianzen, Bishop of Constantinople, A. D. 379, says: "You have heard as much of the Mystery as we are allowed to speak openly in the ears of all; the rest will be communicated to you in private; and that you must retain within yourself. . . . Our Mysteries are not to be made known to strangers."

St. Ambrose, Archbishop of Milan, who was born in 340, and died in 393, says in his work De Mysteriis: "All the Mystery should be kept concealed, guarded by faithful silence, lest it should be inconsiderately divulged to the ears of the Profane. . . . . It is not given to all to contemplate the depths of our Mysteries . . . . that they may not be seen by those who ought not to behold them; nor received by those who cannot preserve them." And in another work: "He sins against God, who divulges to the unworthy the Mysteries confided to him. The danger is not merely in violating truth, but in telling truth, if he allow himself to give hints of them to those from whom they ought to be concealed . . . . Beware of casting pearls before swine! . . . . Every Mystery ought to be kept secret; and, as it were, to be covered over by silence, lest it should rashly

[p. 546]

be divulged to the ears of the Profane. Take heed that you do not incautiously reveal the Mysteries!"

St. Augustine, Bishop of Hippo, who was born in 347, and died in 430, says in one of his discourses: "Having dismissed the Catechumens, we have retained you only to be our hearers; because, besides those things which belong to all Christians in common, we are now to discourse to you of sublime Mysteries, which none are qualified to hear, but those who, by the Master's favor, are made partakers of them. . . . . To have taught them openly, would have been to betray them." And he refers to the Ark of the Covenant, and says that it signified a Mystery, or secret of God, shadowed over by the cherubim of glory, and honored by being veiled.

St. Chrysostom and St. Augustine speak of initiation more than fifty times. St. Ambrose writes to those who are initiated; and initiation was not merely baptism, or admission into the church, but it referred to initiation into the Mysteries. To the baptized and initiated the Mysteries of religion were unveiled; they were kept secret from the Catechumens; who were permitted to hear the Scriptures read and the ordinary discourses delivered, in which the Mysteries, reserved for the Faithful, were never treated of. When the services and prayers were ended, the Catechumens and spectators all withdrew.

Chrysostom, Bishop of Constantinople, was born in 354, and died in 417. He says: "I wish to speak openly: but I dare not, on account of those who are not initiated. I shall therefore avail myself of disguised terms, discoursing in a shadowy manner. . . Where the holy Mysteries are celebrated, we drive away all uninitiated persons, and then close the doors." He mentions the acclamations of the initiated; "which," he says, "I here pass over in silence; for it is forbidden to disclose such things to the Profane." Palladius, in his life of Chrysostom, records, as a great outrage, that, a tumult having been excited against him by his enemies, they forced their way into the penetralia, where the uninitiated beheld what was not proper for them to see; and Chrysostom mentions the same circumstance in his epistle to Pope Innocent.

St. Cyril of Alexandria, who was made Bishop in 412, and died in 444, says in his 7th Book against Julian: "These Mysteries are so profound and so exalted, that they can be comprehended by those only who are enlightened. I shall not, therefore, attempt to speak of what is so admirable in them, lest by discovering them to

[p. 547]

the uninitiated, I should offend against the injunction not to give what is holy to the impure, nor cast pearls before such as cannot estimate their worth. . . . I should say much more, if I were not afraid of being heard by those who are uninitiated: because men are apt to deride what they do not understand. And the ignorant, not being aware of the weakness of their minds, condemn what they ought most to venerate."

Theodoret, Bishop of Cyropolis in Syria, was born in 393, and made Bishop in 420. In one of his three Dialogues, called the Immutable, he introduces Orthodoxus, speaking thus: "Answer me, if you please, in mystical or obscure terms: for perhaps there are some persons present who are not initiated into the Mysteries." And in his preface to Ezekiel, tracing up the secret discipline to the commencement of the Christian era, he says: "These Mysteries are so august, that we ought to keep them with the greatest caution."

Minucius Felix, an eminent lawyer of Rome, who lived in 212, and wrote a defence of Christianity, says: "Many of them [the Christians] know each other by tokens and signs (notis et insignibus), and they form a friendship for each other, almost before they become acquainted."

The Latin Word, tessera, originally meant a square piece of wood or stone, used in making tesselated pavements; afterward a tablet on which anything was written, and then a cube or die. Its most general use was to designate a piece of metal or wood, square in shape, on which the watchword of an Army was inscribed; whence tessera came to mean the watchword itself. There was also a tessera hospitalis, which was a piece of wood cut into two parts, as a pledge of friendship. Each party kept one of the parts; and they swore mutual fidelity by Jupiter. To break the tessera was considered a dissolution of the friendship. The early Christians used it as a Mark, the watchword of friendship. With them it was generally in the shape of a fish, and made of bone. On its face was inscribed the word Ixthus, a fish, the initials of which represented the Greek words, Iesous Khristos Theou Yios Suter; Jesus Christ, the Son of God, the Saviour.

St. Augustine (de Fide et Symbolis) says: "This is the faith which in a few words is given to the Novices to be kept by a symbol; these few words are known to all the Faithful; that by believing they may be submissive to God; by being thus submissive, they

[p. 548]

may live rightly; by living rightly, they may purify their hearts and with a pure heart may understand what they believe."

Maximus Taurinus says: "The tessera is a symbol and sign by which to distinguish between the Faithful and the Profane."

There are three Degrees in Blue Masonry; and in addition to the two words of two syllables each, embodying the binary, three, of three syllables each. There were three Grand Masters, the two Kings, and Khir-Om the Artificer. The candidate gains admission by three raps, and three raps call up the Brethren. There are three principal officers of the Lodge, three lights at the Altar, three gates of the Temple, all in the East, West, and South. The three lights represent the Sun, the Moon, and Mercury; Osiris, Isis, and Horus; the Father, the Mother, and the Child; Wisdom, Strength, and Beauty; Hakamah, Binah, and Daath; Gedulah, Geburah, and Tepareth. The candidate makes three circuits of the Lodge: there were three assassins of Khir-Om, and he was slain by three blows while seeking to escape by the three gates of the Temple. The ejaculation at his grave was repeated three times. There are three divisions of the Temple, and three, five, and seven Steps. A Master works with Chalk, Charcoal, and a vessel of Clay; there are three movable and three immovable jewels. The Triangle appears among the Symbols: the two parallel lines enclosing the circle are connected at top, as are the Columns Jachin and Boaz, symbolizing the equilibrium which explains the great Mysteries of Nature.

This continual reproduction of the number three is not accidental, nor without a profound meaning: and we shall find the same repeated in all the Ancient philosophies.

The Egyptian Gods formed Triads, the third member in each proceeding from the other two. Thus we have the Triad of Thebes, Amun, Maut, and Kharso; that of Philae, Osiris, Isis, and Horns; that of Elephantine_ and the Cataracts, Neph, Sate, and Anouke_.

Osiris, Isis, and Horus were the Father, Mother, and Son; the latter being Light, the Soul of the World, the Son, the Protogonos or First-Begotten.

Sometimes this Triad was regarded as SPIRIT, or the active Principle or Generative Power; MATTER, or the PASSIVE Principle or Productive Capacity; and the Universe, which proceeds from the two Principles.

We also find in Egypt this Triad or Trinity; Ammon-Ra, the Creator; Osiris-Ra, the Giver of Fruitfulness; Horus-Ra, the

[p. 549]

[paragraph continues] Queller of Light; symbolized by the Summer, Autumn, and Spring Sun. For the Egyptians had but three Seasons, the three gates of the Temple; and on account of the different effects of the Sun on those three Seasons, the Deity appears in these three forms.

The Phoenician Trinity was Ulomos, Chusoros, and the Egg out of which the Universe proceeded.

The Chaldaean Triad consisted of Bel, [the Persian Zervana Akherana], Oromasdes, and Ahriman; the Good and Evil Principle alike outflowing from the Father, by their equilibrium and alternating preponderance to produce harmony. Each was to rule, in turn, for equal periods, until finally the Evil Principle should itself become good.

The Chaldaean and Persian oracles of Zoroaster give us the Triad, Fire, Light, and Ether.

Orpheus celebrates the Triad of Phanes, Ouranos, and Kronos. Corry says the Orphic Trinity consisted of Metis, Phanes, and Ericapaeus; Will, Light or Love, and Life. Acusilaus makes it consist of Metis, Eros, and Aether: Will, Love, and Ether. Phereycides of Syros, of Fire, Water, and Air or Spirit. In the two former we readily recognize Osiris and Isis, the Sun and the Nile.

The first three of the Persian Amshaspands were BAHMAN, the Lord of LIGHT; Ardibehest, the Lord of FIRE; and Shariver, the Lord of SPLENDOR. These at once lead us back to the Kabala.

Plutarch says: "The better and diviner nature consists of three; the Intelligible (i.e. that which exists within the Intellect only as yet), and Matter; to Noetos and Yle, and that which proceeds from these, which the Greeks call Kosmos: of which Plato calls the Intelligible, the Idea, the Exemplar, the Father: Matter, the Mother, the Nurse, and the receptacle and place of generation: and the issue of these two, the Offspring and Genesis."

The Pythagorean fragments say: "Therefore, before the Heaven was made, there existed Idea and Matter, and God the Demiourgos [workman or active instrument], of the former. He made the world out of matter, perfect, only-begotten, with a soul and intellect, and constituted it a divinity."

Plato gives us Thought, the Father; Primitive Matter, the Mother; and Kosmos, the Son, the issue of the two Principles. Kosmos is the ensouled Universe.

With the later Platonists, the Triad was Potence, Intellect, and Spirit, Philo represents Sanchoniathon's as Fire, Light, and

[p. 550]

[paragraph continues] Flame, the three Sons of Genos; but this is the Alexandrian, not the Phoenician idea.

Aurelius says the Demiourgos or Creator is triple, and the three Intellects are the three Kings: He who exists; He who possesses; He who beholds. The first is that which exists by its essence; the second exists in the first, and contains or possesses in itself the Universal of things; all that afterward becomes: the third beholds this Universal, formed and fashioned intellectually, and so having a separate existence. The Third exists in the Second, and the Second in the First.

The most ancient Trinitarian doctrine on record is that of the Brahmins. The Eternal Supreme Essence, called PARABRAHMA, BRAHM, PARATMA, produced the Universe by self-reflection, and first revealed himself as BRAHMA, the Creating Power, then as VISHNU, the Preserving Power, and lastly as SIVA, the Destroying and Renovating Power; the three Modes in which the Supreme Essence reveals himself in the material Universe; but which soon came to be regarded as three distinct Deities. These three Deities they styled the TRIMURTI, or TRIAD.

The Persians received from the Indians the doctrine of the three principles, and changed it to that of a principle of Life, which was individualized by the Sun, and a principle of Death, which was symbolized by cold and darkness; parallel of the moral world; and in which the continual and alternating struggle between light and darkness, life and death, seemed but a phase of the great struggle between the good and evil principles, embodied in the legend of ORMUZD and AHRIMAN. MITHRAS, a Median reformer, was deified after his death, and invested with the attributes of the Sun; the different astronomical phenomena being figuratively detailed as actual incidents of his life; in the same manner as the history of BUDDHA was invented among the Hindu_s.

The Trinity of the Hindu_s became among the Ethiopians and Abyssinians NEPH-AMON, PHTHA, and NEITH--the God CREATOR, whose emblem was a ram--MATTER, or the primitive mud, symbolized by a globe or an egg, and THOUGHT, or the LIGHT which contains the germ of everything; triple manifestation of one and the same God (ATHOM), considered in three aspects, as the creative power, goodness, and wisdom. Other Deities were speedily invented; and among them OSIRIS, represented by the Sun, Isis, his wife, by the Moon or Earth, TYPHON, his Brother, the Principle

[p. 551]

of Evil and Darkness, who was the son of Osiris and Isis. And the Trinity of OSIRIS, ISIS, and HORUS became subsequently the Chief Gods and objects of worship of the Egyptians.

The ancient Etruscans (a race that emigrated from the Rhaetian Alps into Italy, along whose route evidences of their migration have been discovered, and whose language none have yet succeeded in reading) acknowledged only one Supreme God; but they had images for His different attributes, and temples to these images. Each town had one National Temple, dedicated to the three great attributes of God, STRENGTH, RICHES, and WISDOM, or Tina, Talna, and Minerva. The National Deity was always a Triad under one roof; and it was the same in Egypt, where one Supreme God alone was acknowledged, but was worshipped as a Triad, with different names in each different home. Each city in Etruria might have as many gods and gates and temples as it pleased; but three sacred gates, and one Temple to three Divine Attributes were obligatory, wherever the laws of Tages (or Taunt or Thoth) were received. The only gate that remains in Italy, of the olden time, undestroyed, is the Porta del Circo at Volterra; and it has upon it the three heads of the three National Divinities, one upon the keystone of its magnificent arch, and one above each side-pillar.

The Buddhists hold that the God SAKYA of the Hindu_s, called in Ceylon, GAUTAMA, in India beyond the Ganges, SOMONAKODOM, and in China, CHY-KIA, or FO, constituted a Trinity [TRIRATNA], of BUDDHA, DHARMA, and SANGA,--Intelligence, Law, and Union or Harmony.

The Chinese Sabaeans represented the Supreme Deity as composed of CHANG-TI, the Supreme Sovereign; TIEN, the Heavens; and TAO, the Universal Supreme Reason and Principle of Faith; and that from Chaos, an immense silence, an immeasurable void. without perceptible forms, alone, infinite, immutable, moving in a circle in illimitable space, without change or alteration, when vivified by the Principle of Truth, issued all Beings, under the influence of TAO, Principle of Faith, who produced one, one produced two, two produced three, and three produced all that is.

The Sclavono-Vendes typified the Trinity by the three heads of the God TRIGLAV; and the Pruczi or Prussians by the Tri-une God, PERKOUN, PIKOLLOS, and POTRIMPOS, the Deities of Light 

[p. 552]

and Thunder, of Hell and the Earth, its fruits and animals: and the Scandinavians by ODIN, FREA, and THOR.

In the KABALAH, or the Hebrew traditional philosophy, the Infinite Deity, beyond the reach of the Human Intellect, and without Name, Form, or Limitation, was represented as developing Himself, in order to create, and by self-limitation, in ten emanations or out-flowings, called SEPHIROTH, or rays. The first of these, in the world AZILUTH, that is, within the Deity, was KETHER, or the Crown, by which we understand the Divine Will or Potency. Next came, as a pair, HAKEMAH and BAINAH, ordinarily translated "Wisdom" and "Intelligence," the former termed the FATHER, and the latter the MOTHER. HAKEMAH is the active Power or Energy of Deity, by which He produces within Himself Intellection or Thinking: and BAINAH, the passive Capacity, from which, acted on by the Power, the Intellection flows. This Intellection is called DAATH: and it is the "WORD," of Plato and the Gnostics; the unuttered word, within the Deity. Here is the origin of the Trinity of the Father, the Mother or Holy Spirit, and the Son or Word.

Another Trinity was composed of the fourth Sephirah, GEDULAH or KHASED, Benignity or Mercy, also termed FATHER (Aba); the fifth, GEBURAH, Severity or Strict Justice, also termed the MOTHER (Imma); and the sixth, the SON or Issue of these, TIPHARETH, Beauty or Harmony. "Everything," says the SOHAR, "proceeds according to the Mystery of the Balance"--that is, by the equilibrium of Opposites: and thus from the Infinite Mercy and the Infinite Justice, in equilibrium, flows the perfect Harmony of the Universe. Infinite POWER, which is Lawless, and Infinite WISDOM, in Equilibrium, also produce BEAUTY or HARMONY, as Son, Issue, or Result--the Word, or utterance of the Thought of God. Power and Justice or Severity are the same: Wisdom and Mercy or Benignity are the same;--in the Infinite Divine Nature.

According to Philo of Alexandria, the Supreme Being, Primitive Light or Archetype of Light, uniting with WISDOM [Sofia], the mother of Creation, forms in Himself the types of all things, and acts upon the Universe through the WORD [Logos . . Logos], who dwells in God, and in whom all His powers and attributes develop themselves; a doctrine borrowed by him from Plato.

Simon Magus and his disciples taught that the Supreme Being or Centre of Light produced first of all, three couples of united

[p. 553]

[paragraph continues] Existences, of both sexes, [Syzygias; ... Suzugias], which were the origins of all things: REASON and INVENTIVENESS; SPEECH and THOUGHT; CALCULATION and REFLECTION: [Nous and Epinoia, Fune and Ennoia, Logismos; and Enthumesis; . . . Nous and Epinoia, Pho_ne and Ennoia, Logismos and Enthume_sis]; of which Ennoia or WISDOM was the first produced, and Mother of all that exists.

Other Disciples of Simon, and with them most of the Gnostics, adopting and modifying the doctrine, taught that the Pleruma . . Plero_ma, or PLENITUDE of Superior Intelligences, having the Supreme Being at their head, was composed of eight Eons [Aiunes . . Aio_nes] of different sexes; . . PROFUNDITY and SILENCE; SPIRIT and TRUTH; the WORD and LIFE; MAN and the CHURCH: [Bythos; and Sige; Pneuma and Aletheia; Logos; and Zue; Anthrupos; and Ekklesia . . . . Buthos and Sige_; Pneuma and Aletheia; Logos and Zo_e; Anthro_pos and Ekkle_sia].

Bardesanes, whose doctrines the Syrian Christians long embraced, taught that the unknown Father, happy in the Plenitude of His Life and Perfections, first produced a Companion for Himself [Suzygos . . . Suzugos], whom He placed in the Celestial Paradise and who became, by Him, the Mother of CHRISTOS, Son of the Living God: i.e. (laying aside the allegory), that the Eternal conceived, in the silence of His decrees, the Thought of revealing Himself by a Being who should be His image or His Son: that to the Son succeeded his Sister and Spouse, the Holy Spirit, and they produced four Spirits of the elements, male and female, Maio and Jabseho, Nouro and Rucho; then Seven Mystic Couples of Spirits, and Heaven and Earth, and all that is; then seven spirits governing the planets, twelve governing the Constellations of the Zodiac, and thirty-six Starry Intelligences whom he called Deacons: while the Holy Spirit [Sophia Achamoth], being both the Holy Intelligence and the Soul of the physical world, went from the Plero_ma into that material world and there mourned her degradation, until CHRISTOS, her former spouse, coming to her with his Divine Light and Love, guided her in the way to purification, and she again united herself with him as his primitive Companion.

Basilides, the Christian Gnostic, taught that there were seven emanations from the Supreme Being: The First-born, Thought, the Word, Reflection, Wisdom, Power, and Righteousness [Prutogonos, Noys, Logos, Fronesis, Sofia, Dynamys,

[p. 554]

and Dikaiosune Protogonos, Nous, Logos, Phronesis, Sophia, Dunamis, and Dikarosune_]; from whom emanated other Intelligences in succession, to the number, in all, of three hundred and sixty-five; which were God manifested, and composed the Plenitude of the Divine Emanations, or the God Abraxas; of which the Thought [or Intellect, Noys . . Nous] united itself, by baptism in the river Jordan, with the man Jesus, servant [Diakonos . . . Diakonos] of the human race; but did not suffer with Him; and the disciples of Basilides taught that the Nous, put on the appearance only of humanity, and that Simon of Cyrene was crucified in His stead and ascended into Heaven.

Basilides held that out of the unrevealed God, who is at the head of the world of emanations, and exalted above all conception or designation [O akatonomastos, ar'rhetos] were evolved seven living, self-subsistent, ever-active  powers:

FIRST: THE INTELLECTUAL POWERS.

        1st.   Nous

       Nous

       The   Mind.

     
      2d.   Logos

       Logos

       The   Reason.

     
      3d.   Phronesis

       Fronesis

       The   Thinking Power.

     
      4th.   Sophia

       Sofia

       Wisdom.

     
 SECOND: THE ACTIVE OR OPERATIVE POWER.

        5th.   Dunamis

       Dynamis

       Might,   accomplishing the purposes of Wisdom.

     
 THIRD: THE MORAL ATTRIBUTES.

        6th.   Dikaiosune_

       Dikaiosune

       Holiness   or Moral Perfection.

     
      7th.   Eire_ne_

       Eirene

       Inward   Tranquility.

     
  

These Seven Powers (Dynameis . . Dunameis), with the Primal Ground out of which they were evolved, constituted in his scheme the Prute Ogdoas [Prote Ogdoas], or First Octave, the root of all Existence. From this point, the spiritual life proceeded to evolve out of itself continually many gradations of existence, each lower one being still the impression, the antetype, of the immediate higher one. He supposed there were 365 of these regions or gradations, expressed by the mystical word Abraxas [Abraxas].

The Abraxas is thus interpreted, by the usual method of reckoning Greek letters numerically. . . . a, 1 . . b, 2 . . r, 100 . . a, 1 . . x, 60 . . a, 1 . . s, 200=365:

[p. 555]

which is the whole Emanation-World, as the development of the Supreme Being.

In the system of Basilides, Light, Life, Soul, and Good were opposed to Darkness, Death, Matter, and Evil, throughout the whole course of the Universe.

According to the Gnostic view, God was represented as the immanent, incomprehensible and original source of all perfection; the unfathomable ABYSS (bythos . . buthos), according to Valentinus, exalted above all possibility of designation; of whom, properly speaking, nothing can be predicated; the akatonomastos of Basilides, the un of Philo. From this incomprehensible Essence of God, an immediate transition to finite things is inconceivable. Self-limitation is the first beginning of a communication of life on the part of God--the first passing of the hidden Deity into manifestation; and from this proceeds all further self-developing manifestation of the Divine Essence. From this primal link in the chain of life there are evolved, in the first place, the manifold powers or attributes inherent in the divine Essence, which, until that first self-comprehension, were all hidden in the Abyss of His Essence. Each of these attributes presents the whole divine Essence under one particular aspect; and to each, therefore, in this respect, the title of God may appropriately be applied. These Divine Powers evolving themselves to self-subsistence, become thereupon the germs and principles of all further developments of life. The life contained in them unfolds and individualizes itself more and more, but in such a way that the successive grades of this evolution of life continually sink lower and lower; the spirits become feebler, the further they are removed from the first link in the series.

The first manifestation they termed prute katalepsis eaytou [prote_ katale_psis heautou] or pruton katalepton tou theoy [proton Katale_pton tou Theou]; which was hypostatically represented in a nous or logos, [Nous or Logos].

In the Alexandrian Gnosis, the Platonic notion of the yle [Hule_] predominates. This is the dead, the unsubstantial--the boundary that limits from without the evolution of life in its gradually advancing progression, whereby the Perfect is ever evolving itself into the less Perfect. This yle again, is represented under various images;--at one time as the darkness that exists alongside of the light; at another, as the void [kenuma, kenon. . . . Kenoma, Kenon],

[p. 556]

in opposition to the Fullness, [Pleruma . . . . Ple_roma] of the Divine Life; or as the shadow that accompanies the light; or as the chaos, or the sluggish, stagnant, dark water. This matter, dead in itself, possesses by its own nature no inherent tendency; as life of every sort is foreign to it, itself makes no encroachment on the Divine. As, however, the evolutions of the Divine Life (the essences developing themselves out of the progressive emanation) become feebler, the further they are removed from the first link in the series; and as their connection with the first becomes looser at each successive step, there arises at the last step of the evolution, an imperfect, defective product, which, unable to retain its connection with the chain of Divine Life, sinks from the World of Eons into the material chaos: or, according to the same notion, somewhat differently expressed [according to the Ophites and to Bardesanes], a drop from the fullness of the Divine life bubbles over into the bordering void. Hereupon the dead matter, by commixture with the living principle, which it wanted, first of all receives animation. But, at the same time, also, the divine, the living, becomes corrupted by mingling with the chaotic mass. Existence now multiplies itself. There arises a subordinate, defective life; there is ground for a new world; a creation starts into being, beyond the confines of the world of emanation. But, on the other hand, since the chaotic principle of matter has acquired vitality, there now arises a more distinct and more active opposition to the God-like--a barely negative, blind, ungodly nature-power, which obstinately resists all influence of the Divine; hence, as products of the spirit of the yle, (of the pneuma ylikon . . Pneuma Hulikon), are Satan, malignant spirits, wicked men, in none of whom is there any reason-able or moral principle, or any principle of a rational will; but blind passions alone have the . In them there is the same conflict, as the scheme of Platonism supposes, between the soul under the guidance of Divine reason [the nous. . . Nous], and the soul blindly resisting reason--between the pronoia [pronoia] and the anage [anage_], the Divine Principle and the natural.

The Syrian Gnosis assumed the existence of an active, turbulent kingdom of evil, or of darkness, which, by its encroachments on the kingdom of light, brought about a commixture of the light with the darkness, of the God-like with the ungodlike.

Even among the Platonists, some thought that along with an

[p. 557]

organized, inert matter, the substratum of the corporeal world, there existed from the beginning a blind, lawless motive power, an ungodlike soul, as its original motive and active principle. As the inorganic matter was organized into a corporeal world, by the plastic power of the Deity, so, by the same power, law and reason were communicated to that turbulent, irrational soul. Thus the chaos of the yle was transformed into an organized world, and that blind soul into a rational principle, a mundane soul, animating the Universe. As from the latter proceeds all rational, spiritual life in humanity, so from the former proceeds all that is irrational, all that is under the blind sway of passion and appetite; and all malignant spirits are its progeny.

In one respect all the Gnostics agreed: they all held; that there was a world purely emanating out of the vital development of God, a creation evolved directly out of the Divine Essence, far exalted above any outward creation produced by God's plastic power, and conditioned by pre-existing matter. They agreed in holding that the framer of this lower world was not the Father of that higher world of emanation; but the Demiurge [Demioyrgos], a being of a kindred nature with the Universe framed and governed by him, and far inferior to that higher system and the Father of it.

But some, setting out from ideas which had long prevailed among certain Jews of Alexandria, supposed that the Supreme God created and governed the world by His ministering spirits, by the angels. At the head of these angels stood one who had the direction and control of all; therefore called the Artificer and Governor of the World. This Demiurge they compared with the plastic, animating mundane spirit of Plato and Platonists [the deuteros theos . . Deuteros Theos; the theos genetos; Theos Genetos], who, moreover, according to the Timaeus of Plato, strives to represent the IDEA of the Divine Reason, in that which is becoming (as contradistinguished from that which is) and temporal. This angel is a representative of the Supreme God, on the lower stage of existence: he does not act independently, but merely according to the ideas inspired in him by the Supreme God; just as the plastic, mundane soul of the Platonists creates all things after the pattern of the ideas communicated by the Supreme Reason [Nous. . . . Nous--the o esti zuon . . . . ho esti zo_on--the; paradeigma . . . paradeigma, of the Divine Reason hypostatized].

[p. 558]

[paragraph continues] But these ideas transcend his limited essence; he cannot understand them; he is merely their unconscious organ; and therefore is unable himself to comprehend the whole scope and meaning of the work which he performs. As an organ under the guidance of a higher inspiration, he reveals higher truths than he himself can comprehend. The mass of the Jews, they held, recognized not the angel, by whom, in all the Theophanies of the Old Testament, God revealed Himself; they knew not the Demiurge in his true relation to the hidden Supreme God, who never reveals Himself in the sensible world. They confounded the type and the archetype, the symbol and the idea. They rose no higher than the Demiurge; they took him to be the Supreme God Himself. But the spiritual men among them, on the contrary, clearly perceived, or at least divined, the ideas veiled under Judaism; they rose beyond the Demiurge, to a knowledge of the Supreme God; and are therefore properly His worshippers [therapeytai . . Therapeutai].

Other Gnostics, who had not been followers of the Mosaic religion, but who had, at an earlier period, framed to themselves an oriental Gnosis, regarded the Demiurge as a being absolutely hostile to the Supreme God. He and his angels, notwithstanding their finite nature, wish to establish their independence: they will tolerate no foreign rule within their realm. Whatever of a higher nature descends into their kingdom, they seek to hold imprisoned there, lest it should raise itself above their narrow precincts. Probably, in this system, the kingdom of the Demiurgic Angels corresponded, for the most part, with that of the deceitful Star-Spirits, who seek to rob man of his freedom, to beguile him by various arts of deception, and who exercise a tyrannical sway over the things of this world. Accordingly, in the system of these Sabaeans, the seven Planet-Spirits, and the twelve Star-Spirits of the zodiac, who sprang from an irregular connection between the cheated Fetahil and the Spirit of Darkness, play an important part in everything that is bad. The Demiurge is a limited and limiting being, proud, jealous, and revengeful; and this his character betrays itself in the Old Testament, which, the Gnostics held, came from him. They transferred to the Demiurge himself, whatever in the idea of God, as presented by the Old Testament, appeared to them defective. Against his will and rule the yle was continually rebelling, revolting without control against the dominion which he, the fashioner, would exercise over it,

[p. 559]

casting off the yoke imposed on it, and destroying the work he had begun. The same jealous being, limited in his power, ruling with despotic sway, they imagined they saw in nature. He strives to check the germination of the divine seeds of life which the Supreme God of Holiness and Love, who has no connection whatever with the sensible world, has scattered among men. That perfect God was at most known and worshipped in Mysteries by a few spiritual men.

The Gospel of St. John is in great measure a polemic against the Gnostics, whose different sects, to solve the great problems, the creation of a material world by an immaterial Being, the fall of man, the incarnation, the redemption and restoration of the spirits called men, admitted a long series of intelligences, intervening in a series of spiritual operations; and which they designated by the names, The Beginning, the Word, the Only-Begotten, Life, Light, and Spirit [Ghost]: in Greek, Arke, Logos, Monogenes, Zue, Fusand Pneyma [Arche_, Logos, Monogene_s, Zo_e, Pho_s, and Pneuma]. St. John, at the beginning of his Gospel, avers that it was Jesus Christ who existed in the Beginning; that He was the WORD of God by which everything was made; that He was the Only-Begotten, the Life and the Light, and that He diffuses among men the Holy Spirit [or Ghost], the Divine Life and Light.

So the Ple_roma [Pleruma], Plenitude or Fullness, was a favorite term with the Gnostics, and Truth and Grace were the Gnostic Eons; and the Simonians, Doke_te_s, and other Gnostics held that the Eon Christ Jesus was never really, but only apparently clothed with a human body: but St. John replies that the Word did really become Flesh, and dwelt among us; and that in Him were the Ple_roma and Truth and Grace.

In the doctrine of Valentinus, reared a Christian at Alexandria, God was a perfect Being, an Abyss [Bythos . . Buthos], which no intelligence could sound, because no eye could reach the invisible and ineffable heights on which He dwelt, and no mind could comprehend the duration of His existence; He has always been; He is the Primitive Father and Beginning [the Propaturand Proarxe . . Propato_r and Proarche_]: He will BE always, and does not grow old. The development of His Perfections produced the intellectual world. After having passed infinite ages in repose and silence, He manifested Himself by His Thought, source of all His manifestations, and which received from Him the germ of His

[p. 560]

creations. Being of His Being, His Thought [Ennoia . . Ennoia] is also termed Kharis; [Charis], Grace or Joy, and Sige or Arreton [Sige_ or Arre_ton], Silence or the Ineffable. Its first manifestation was Noys [Nous], the Intelligence, first of the Eons, commencement of all things, first revelation of the Divinity, the Monogenes [Monogene_s], or Only-Begotten: next, Truth [Aletheia . . Ale_theia], his companion. Their manifestations were the Word [Logos. . Logos] and Life [Zue . . Zoe_]; and theirs, Man and the Church [Anthropos and Ekklesia . . Anthro_pos and Ekkle_sia]: and from these, other twelve, six of whom were Hope, Faith, Charity, Intelligence, Happiness, and Wisdom; or, in the Hebrew, Kesten, Kina, Amphe, Ouananim, Thaedes, and Oubina. The harmony of the Eons, struggling to know and be united to the Primitive God, was disturbed, and to redeem and restore them, the Intelligence [Nous] produced Christ and the Holy Spirit His companion; who restored them to their first estate of happiness and harmony; and thereupon they formed the Eon Jesus, born of a Virgin, to whom the Christos united himself in baptism, and who, with his Companion Sophia-Achamoth, saved and redeemed the world.

The Marcosians taught that the Supreme Deity produced by His words the Logos [Logos] or Plenitude of Eons: His first utterance was a syllable of four letters, each of which became a being; His second of four, His third of ten, and His fourth of twelve: thirty in all, which constituted the Pleruma [Ple_roma].

The Valentinians, and others of the Gnostics, distinguished three orders of existences:--1st. The divine germs of life, exalted by their nature above matter, and akin to the Sofia [Sophia], to the mundane soul and to the Ple_roma:--the spiritual natures, fuseis pneymatikai [Phuseis Pneumatikai]: 2d. The natures originating in the life, divided from the former by the mixture of the yle--the psychical natures, fuseis psyxikai [Phuseis Psuchikai]; with which begins a perfectly new order of existence, an image of that higher mind and system, in a subordinate grade; and finally, 3d. The Ungodlike or Hylic Nature, which resists all amelioration, and whose tendency is only to destroy--the nature of blind lust and passion.

The nature of the pneymatikon [pneumatikon], the spiritual, is essential relationship with God (the omousion tui theui . . Homoousion to_ Theo_): hence the life of Unity, the undivided, the

[p. 561]

absolutely simple (oysia enike monoeides . . Ousia henike, monoeides).

The essence of the psyxikoi [psuchikoi] is disruption into multiplicity, manifoldness; which, however, is subordinate to a higher unity, by which it allows itself to be guided, first unconsciously, then consciously.

The essence of the ylikoi [Hulikoi] (of whom Satan is the head), is the direct opposite to all unity; disruption and disunion in itself, without the least sympathy, without any point of coalescence whatever for unity; together with an effort to destroy all unity, to extend its own inherent disunion to everything, and to rend everything asunder. This principle has no power to posit anything; but only to negative: it is unable to create, to produce, to form, but only to destroy, to decompose.

By Marcus, the disciple of Valentinus, the idea of a Logos toy ontos [Logos Tou Ontos], of a WORD, manifesting the hidden Divine Essence, in the Creation, was spun out into the most subtle details--the entire creation being, in his view, a continuous utterance of the Ineffable. The way in which the germs of divine life [the spermata pneymatika . . spermata pneumatika], which lie shut up in the Eons, continually unfold and individualize themselves more and more, is represented as a spontaneous analysis of the several names of the Ineffable, into their several sounds. An echo of the Ple_roma falls down into the yle [Hule_], and becomes the forming of a new but lower creation.

One formula of the pneumatical baptism among the Gnostics ran thus: "In the NAME which is hidden from all the Divinities and Powers" [of the Demiurge], "The Name of Truth" [the Aletheia [Aletheia], self-manifestation of the Buthos], which Jesus of Nazareth has put on in the light-zones of Christ, the living Christ, through the Holy Ghost, for the redemption of the angels,--the Name by which all things attain to Perfection." The candidate then said: "I am established and redeemed; I am redeemed in my soul from this world, and from all that belongs to it, by the name of w ?Y?H?W?H, who has redeemed the Soul of Jesus by the living Christ." The assembly then said: "Peace (or Salvation) to all on whom this name rests!"

The boy Dionusos, torn in pieces, according to the Bacchic Mysteries, by the Titans, was considered by the Manicheans as simply representing the Soul, swallowed up by the powers of darkness,--the

[p. 562]

divine life rent into fragments by matter:--that part of the luminous essence of the primitive man [the prutos anthrupos [Protos Anthropos] of Mani, the praun anthrupos [Prao_n Anthro_pos] of the Valentinians, the Adam Kadmon of the Kabalah; and the Kaiomorts of the Zendavesta], swallowed up by the powers of darkness; the Mundane Soul, mixed with matter--the seed of divine life, which had fallen into matter, and had thence to undergo a process of purification and development.

The Gnusis [Gnosis] of Carpocrates and his son Epiphanes consisted in the knowledge of one Supreme Original being, the highest unity, from whom all existence has emanated, and to whom it strives to return. The finite spirits that rule over the several portions of the Earth, seek to counteract this universal tendency to unity; and from their influence, their laws, and arrangements, proceeds all that checks, disturbs, or limits the original communion, which is the basis of nature, as the outward manifestation of that highest Unity. These spirits, moreover, seek to retain under their dominion the souls which, emanating from the highest Unity, and still partaking of its nature, have lapsed into the corporeal world, and have there been imprisoned in bodies, in order, under their dominion, to be kept within the cycle of migration. From these finite spirits, the popular religions of different nations derive their origin. But the souls which, from a reminiscence of their former condition, soar upward to the contemplation of that higher Unity, reach to such perfect freedom and repose, as nothing afterward can disturb or limit, and rise superior to the popular deities and religions. As examples of this sort, they named Pythagoras, Plato, Aristotle, and Christ. They made no distinction between the latter and the wise and good men of every nation. They taught that any other soul which could soar to the same height of contemplation, might be regarded as equal with Him.

The Ophites commenced their system with a Supreme Being, long unknown to the Human race, and still so the greater number of men; the Bythos [Buthos], or Profundity, Source of Light, and of Adam-Kadmon, the Primitive Man, made by the Demiourgos, but perfected by the Supreme God by the communication to him of the Spirit [Pneuma . . Pneuma]. The first emanation was the Thought of the Supreme Deity [the Ennoia . . Ennoia], the conception of the Universe in the Thought of God.

[p. 563]

[paragraph continues] This Thought, called also Silence (Sige . . Sige), produced the Spirit [Pneyma . . Pneuma], Mother of the Living, and Wisdom of God. Together with this Primitive Existence, Matter existed also (the Waters, Darkness, Abyss, and Chaos), eternal like the Spiritual Principle. Buthos and His Thought, uniting with Wisdom, made her fruitful by the Divine Light, and she produced a perfect and an imperfect being, Christos, and a Second and inferior wisdom, Sophia-Achamoth, who falling into chaos remained entangled there, became enfeebled, and lost all knowledge of the Superior Wisdom that gave her birth. Communicating movement to Chaos, she produced Ialdabaoth, the Demiourgos, Agent of Material Creation, and then ascended toward her first place in the scale of creation. Ialdabaoth produced an angel that was his image, and this a second, and so on in succession to the sixth after the Demiourgos: the seven being reflections one of the other, yet different and inhabiting seven distinct regions. The names of the six thus produced were IAO, SABAOTH, ADONAI, ELOI, ORAL, and ASTAPHAI. Ialdabaoth, to become independent of his mother, and to pass for the Supreme Being, made the world, and man, in his own image; and his mother caused the Spiritual principle to pass from him into man so made; and henceforward the contest between the Demiourgos and his mother, between light and darkness, good and evil, was concentrated in man; and the image of Ialdabaoth, reflected upon matter, became the Serpent-Spirit, Satan, the Evil Intelligence. Eve, created by Ialdabaoth, had by his Sons children that were angels like themselves. The Spiritual light was withdrawn from man by Sophia, and the world surrendered to the influence of evil; until the Spirit, urged by the entreaties of Wisdom, induced the Supreme Being to send Christos to redeem it. Compelled, despite himself, by his Mother, Ialdabaoth caused the man Jesus to be born of a Virgin, and the Celestial Saviour, uniting with his Sister, Wisdom, descended through the regions of the seven angels, appeared in each under the form of its chief, concealed his own, and entered with his sister into the man Jesus at the baptism in Jordan. Ialdabaoth, finding that Jesus was destroying his empire and abolishing his worship, caused the Jews to hate and crucify Him; before which happened, Christos and Wisdom had ascended to the celestial regions. They restored Jesus to life and gave Him an ethereal body, in which He remained eighteen months on earth, and receiving from Wisdom the perfect

[p. 564]

knowledge [Gnusis . . Gnosis], communicated it to a small number of His apostles, and then arose to the intermediate region inhabited by Ialdabaoth, where, unknown to him, He sits at his right hand, taking from him the Souls of Light purified by Christos. When nothing of the Spiritual world shall remain subject to Ialdabaoth, the redemption will be accomplished, and the end of the world, the completion of the return of Light into the Plenitude, will occur.

Tatian adopted the theory of Emanation, of Eons, of the existence of a God too sublime to allow Himself to be known, but displaying Himself by Intelligences emanating from His bosom. The first of these was His spirit [Pneyma . . Pneuma], God Himself, God thinking, God conceiving the Universe. The second was the Word [Logos . . Logos], no longer merely the Thought or Conception, but the Creative Utterance, manifestation of the Divinity, but emanating from the Thought or Spirit; the First-Begotten, author of the visible creation. This was the Trinity, composed of the Father, Spirit, and Word.

The Elxaites adopted the Seven Spirits of the Gnostics; but named them Heaven, Water, Spirit, The Holy Angels of Prayer, Oil, Salt, and the Earth.

The opinion of the Doketes as to the human nature of Jesus Christ, was that most generally received among the Gnostics. They deemed the intelligences of the Superior World too pure and too much the antagonists of matter, to be willing to unite with it: and held that Christ, an Intelligence of the first rank, in appearing upon the earth, did not become confounded with matter, but took upon Himself only the appearance of a body, or at the most used it only as an envelope.

Noetus termed the Son the first Utterance of the Father; the Word, not by Himself, as an Intelligence, and unconnected with the flesh, a real Son; but a Word, and a perfect Only-Begotten; light emanated from the Light; water flowing from its spring; a ray emanated from the Sun.

Paul of Samosata taught that Jesus Christ was the Son of Joseph and Mary; but that the Word, Wisdom, or Intelligence of God, the Noys [Nous] of the Gnostics, had united itself with Him, so that He might be said to be at once the Son of God, and God Himself.

Arius called the Saviour the first of creatures, non-emanated from God, but really created, by the direct will of God, before time

[p. 565]

and the ages. According to the Church, Christ was of the same nature as God; according to some dissenters, of the same nature as man. Arius adopted the theory of a nature analogous to both. When God resolved to create the Human race, He made a Being which He called THE WORD, THE SON, WISDOM [Logos, Yios, Sofia . . Logos, Uios, Sophia], to the end that He might give existence to men. This WORD is the Ormuzd of Zoroaster, the Ensoph of the Kabalah, the Nous [Nous] of Platonism and Philonism, and the Sofia or Demioyrgos [Sophia or Demiourgos] of the Gnostics. He distinguished the Inferior Wisdom, or the daughter, from the Superior Wisdom; the latter being in God, inherent in His nature, and incapable of communication to any creature: the second, by which the Son was made, communicated itself to Him, and therefore He Himself was entitled to be called the Word and the Son.

Manes, founder of the Sect of the Manicheans, who had lived and been distinguished among the Persian Magi, profited by the doctrines of Scythianus, a Kabalist or Judaizing Gnostic of the times of the Apostles; and knowing those of Bardesanes and Harmonius, derived his doctrines from Zoroasterism, Christianity, and Gnosticism. He claimed to be the Parakletos [Parakle_tos] or Comforter, in the Sense of a Teacher, organ of the Deity, but not in that of the Holy Spirit or Holy Ghost: and commenced his Epistola Fundamenti in these words: "Manes, Apostle of Jesus Christ, elect of God the Father; Behold the Words of Salvation, emanating from the living and eternal fountain." The dominant idea of his doctrine was Pantheism, derived by him from its source in the regions of India and on the confines of China: that the cause of all that exists is in God; and at last, God is all in all. All souls are equal--God is in all, in men, animals, and plants. There are two Gods, one of Good and the other of Evil, each independent, eternal, chief of a distinct Empire; necessarily, and of their very natures, hostile to one another. The Evil God, Satan, is the Genius of matter alone. The God of Good is infinitely his Superior, the True God; while the other is but the chief of all that is the Enemy of God, and must in the end succumb to His Power. The Empire of Light alone is eternal and true; and this Empire is a great chain of Emanations, all connected with the Supreme Being which they make manifest; all HIM, under different forms, chosen for one end, the triumph of the Good. In each

[p. 566]

of His members lie hidden thousands of ineffable treasures. Excellent in His Glory, incomprehensible in His Greatness, the Father has joined to Himself those fortunate and glorious Eons [Aiunes . . Aione_s], whose Power and Number it is impossible to determine. This is Spinoza's Infinity of Infinite Attributes of God. Twelve Chief Eons, at the head of all, were the Genii of the twelve Constellations of the Zodiac, and called by Manes, Olamin. Satan, also, Lord of the Empire of Darkness, had an Army of Eons or Demons, emanating from his Essence, and reflecting more or less his image, but divided and inharmonious among themselves. A war among them brought them to the confines of the Realm of Light. Delighted, they sought to conquer it. But the Chief of the Celestial Empire created a Power which he placed on the frontiers of Heaven to protect his Eons, and destroy the Empire of Evil. This was the Mother of Life, the Soul of the World, an Emanation from the Supreme Being, too pure to come in immediate contact with matter. It remained in the highest region; but produced a Son, the first Man [the Kaiomorts, Adam-Kadmon, Prutos Anthrupos [Protos Anthropos,] and Hivil-Zivah; of the Zend-Avesta, the Kabalah, the Gnosis, and Sabeism]; who commenced the contest with the Powers of Evil, but, losing part of his panoply, of his Light, his Son and many souls born of the Light, who were devoured by the darkness, God sent to his assistance the living Spirit, or the Son of the First Man [Yios Anthrupoy . . Uios Anthropou], or Jesus Christ. The Mother of Life, general Principle of Divine Life, and the first Man, Primitive Being that reveals the Divine Life, are too sublime to be connected with the Empire of Darkness. The Son of Man or Soul of the World, enters into the Darkness, becomes its captive, to end by tempering and softening its savage nature. The Divine Spirit, after having brought back the Primitive Man to the Empire of Light, raises above the world that part of the Celestial Soul that remained unaffected by being mingled with the Empire of Darkness. Placed in the region of the Sun and Moon, this pure soul, the Son of Man, the Redeemer or Christ, labors to deliver and attract to Himself that part of the Light or of the Soul of the First Man diffused through matter; which done, the world will cease to exist. To retain the rays of Light still remaining among his Eons, and ever tending to escape and return, by concentrating them, the Prince of Darkness, with their consent, made

[p. 567]

[paragraph continues] Adam, whose soul was of the Divine Light, contributed by the Eons, and his body of matter, so that he belonged to both Empires, that of Light and that of Darkness. To prevent the light from escaping at once, the Demons forbade Adam to eat the fruit of "knowledge of good and evil," by which he would have known the Empire of Light and that of Darkness. He obeyed; an Angel of Light induced him to transgress, and gave him the means of victory; but the Demons created Eve, who seduced him into an act of Sensualism, that enfeebled him, and bound him anew in the bonds of matter. This is repeated in the case of every man that lives.

To deliver the soul, captive in darkness, the Principle of Light, or Genius of the Sun, charged to redeem the Intellectual World, of which he is the type, came to manifest Himself among men. Light appeared in the darkness, but the darkness comprehended it not; according to the words of St. John. The Light could not unite with the darkness. It but put on the appearance of a human body, and took the name of Christ in the Messiah, only to accommodate itself to the language of the Jews. The Light did its work, turning the Jews from the adoration of the Evil Principle, and the Pagans from the worship of Demons. But the Chief of the Empire of Darkness caused Him to be crucified by the Jews. Still He suffered in appearance only, and His death gave to all souls the symbol of their enfranchisement. The person of Jesus having disappeared, there was seen in His place a cross of Light, over which a celestial voice pronounced these words: "The cross of Light is called The Word, Christ, The Gate, Joy, The Bread, The Sun, The Resurrection, Jesus, The Father, The Spirit, Life, Truth, and Grace."

With the Priscillianists there were two principles, one the Divinity, the other, Primitive Matter and Darkness; each eternal. Satan is the son and lord of matter; and the secondary angels and demons, children of matter. Satan created and governs the visible world. But the soul of man emanated from God, and is of the same substance with God. Seduced by the evil spirits, it passes through various bodies, until, purified and reformed, it rises to God and is strengthened by His light. These powers of evil hold mankind in pledge; and to redeem this pledge, the Saviour, Christ the Redeemer, came and died upon the cross of expiation, thus discharging the written obligation. He, like all souls, was of the

[p. 568]

same substance with God, a manifestation of the Divinity, not forming a second person; unborn, like the Divinity, and nothing else than the Divinity under another form.

It is useless to trace these vagaries further; and we stop at the frontiers of the realm of the three hundred and sixty-five thousand emanations of the Mandai_tes from the Primitive Light, Fira or Ferho and Yavar; and return contentedly to the simple and sublime creed of Masonry.

Such were some of the ancient notions concerning the Deity; and taken in connection with what has been detailed in the pre-ceding Degrees, this Lecture affords you a true picture of the ancient speculations. From the beginning until now, those who have undertaken to solve the great mystery of the creation of a material universe by an Immaterial Deity, have interposed between the two, and between God and man, divers manifestations of, or emanations from, or personified attributes or agents of, the Great Supreme God, who is coexistent with Time and coextensive with Space.

The universal belief of the Orient was, that the Supreme Being did not Himself create either, the earth or man. The fragment which commences the Book of Genesis, consisting of the first chapter and the three first verses of the second, assigns the creation or rather the formation or modelling of the world from matter already existing in confusion, not to IHUH, but to the ALHIM, well known as Subordinate Deities, Forces, or Manifestations, among the Phoenicians. The second fragment imputes it to IHUH-ALHIM, [*1] and St. John assigns the creation to the Logos or WORD; and asserts that CHRIST was that WORD, as well as LIGHT and LIFE, other emanations from the Great Primeval Deity, to which other faiths had assigned the work of creation.

An absolute existence, wholly immaterial, in no way within the reach of our senses; a cause, but not an effect, that never was not, but existed during an infinity of eternities, before there was anything else except Time and Space, is wholly beyond the reach of our conceptions. The mind of man has wearied itself in speculations as to His nature, His essence, His attributes; and ended in being no wiser than it began. In the impossibility of conceiving of immateriality, we feel at sea and lost whenever we go beyond the domain of matter. And yet we know that there are Powers,

[p. 569]

[paragraph continues] Forces, Causes, that are themselves not matter. We give them names, but what they really are, and what their essence, we are wholly ignorant.

But, fortunately, it does not follow that we may not believe, or even know, that which we cannot explain to ourselves, or that which is beyond the reach of our comprehension: If we believed only that which our intellect can grasp, measure, comprehend, and have distinct and clear ideas of, we should believe scarce anything. The senses are not the witnesses that bear testimony to us of the loftiest truths.

Our greatest difficulty is, that language is not adequate to express our ideas; because our words refer to things, and are images of what is substantial and material. If we use the word "emanation," our mind involuntarily recurs to something material, flowing out of some other thing that is material; and if we reject this idea of materiality, nothing is left of the emanation but an unreality. The word "thing" itself suggests to us that which is material and within the cognizance and jurisdiction of the senses. If we cut away from it the idea of materiality, it presents itself to us as no thing, but an intangible unreality, which the mind vainly endeavors to grasp. Existence and Being are terms that have the same color of materiality; and when we speak of a Power or Force, the mind immediately images to itself one physical and material thing acting upon another. Eliminate that idea; and the Power or Force, devoid of physical characteristics, seems as unreal as the shadow that dances on a wall, itself a mere absence of light; as spirit is to us merely that which is not matter.

Infinite space and infinite time are the two primary ideas. We formulize them thus: add body to body and sphere to sphere, until the imagination wearies; and still there will remain beyond, a void, empty, unoccupied SPACE, limitless, because it is void. Add event to event in continuous succession, forever and forever, and there will still remain, before and after, a TIME in which there was and will be no event, and also endless because it too is void.

Thus these two ideas of the boundlessness of space and the endlessness of time seem to involve the ideas that matter and events are limited and finite. We cannot conceive of an infinity of worlds or of events; but only of an indefinite number of each; for, as we struggle to conceive of their infinity, the thought ever occurs in despite of all our efforts--there must be space in which

[p. 570]

there are no worlds; there must have been time when there were no events.

We cannot conceive how, if this earth moves millions of millions of miles a million times repeated, it is still in the centre of space; nor how, if we lived millions of millions of ages and centuries, we should still be in the centre of eternity--with still as much space on one side as on the other; with still as much time before us as behind; for that seems to say that the world has not moved nor we lived at all.

Nor can we comprehend how an infinite series of worlds, added together, is no larger than an infinite series of atoms; or an infinite series of centuries no longer than an infinite series of seconds; both being alike infinite, and therefore one series containing no more nor fewer units than the other.

Nor have we the capacity to form in ourselves any idea of that which is immaterial. We use the word, but it conveys to us only the idea of the absence and negation of materiality; which vanishing, Space and Time alone, infinite and boundless, seem to us to be left.

We cannot form any conception of an effect without a cause. We cannot but believe, indeed we know, that, how far soever we may have to run back along the chain of effects and causes, it cannot be infinite; but we must come at last to something which is not an effect, bur the first cause: and yet the fact is literally beyond our comprehension. The mind refuses to grasp the idea of self-existence, of existence without a beginning. As well expect the hair that grows upon our head to understand the nature and immortality of the soul.

It does not need to go so far in search of mysteries; nor have we any right to disbelieve or doubt the existence of a Great First Cause, itself no effect, because we cannot comprehend it; because the words we use do not even express it to us adequately.

We rub a needle for a little while, on a dark, inert mass of iron ore, that had lain idle in the earth for many centuries. Something is thereby communicated to the steel--we term it a virtue, a power, or a quality--and then we balance it upon a pivot; and, lo! drawn by some invisible, mysterious Power, one pole of the needle turns to the North, and there the same Power keeps the same pole for days and years; will keep it there, perhaps, as long as the world lasts, carry the needle where you will, and no matter what seas or

[p. 571]

mountains intervene between it and the North Pole of the world. And this Power, thus acting, and indicating to the mariner his course over the trackless ocean, when the stars shine not for many days, saves vessels from shipwreck, families from distress, and those from sudden death on whose lives the fate of nations and the peace of the world depend. But for it, Napoleon might never have reached the ports of France on his return from Egypt, nor Nelson lived to fight and win at Trafalgar. Men call this Power Magnetism, and then complacently think that they have explained it all; and yet they have but given a new name to an unknown thing, to hide their ignorance. What is this wonderful Power? It is a real, actual, active Power: that we know and see. But what its essence is, or how it acts, we do not know, any more than we know the essence or the mode of action of the Creative Thought and Word of God.

And again, what is that which we term galvanism and electricity,--which, evolved by the action of a little acid on two metals, aided by a magnet, circles the earth in a second, sending from land to land the Thoughts that govern the transactions of individuals and nations? The mind has formed no notion of matter, that will include it; and no name that we can give it, helps us to understand its essence and its being. It is a Power, like Thought and the Will. We know no more.

What is this power of gravitation that makes everything upon the earth tend to the centre? How does it reach out its invisible hands toward the erratic meteor-stones, arrest them in their swift course, and draw them down to the earth's bosom? It is a power. We know no more.

What is that heat which plays so wonderful a part in the world's economy?--that caloric, latent everywhere, within us and without us, produced by combustion, by intense pressure, and by swift motion? Is it substance, matter, spirit, or immaterial, a mere Force or State of Matter?

And what is light? A substance, say the books,--matter, that travels to us from the sun and stars, each ray separable into seven, by the prism, of distinct colors, and with distinct peculiar qualities and actions. And if a substance, what is its essence, and what power is inherent in it, by which it journeys incalculable myriads of miles, and reaches us ten thousand years or more after it leaves the stars?

[p. 572]

All power is equally a mystery. Apply intense cold to a drop of water in the centre of a globe of iron, and the globe is shattered as the water freezes. Confine a little of the same limpid element in a cylinder which Enceladus or Typhon could not have riven asunder, and apply to it intense heat, and the vast power that couched latent in the water shivers the cylinder to atoms. A little shoot from a minute seed, a shoot so soft and tender that the least bruise would kill it, forces its way downward into the hard earth, to the depth of many feet, with an energy wholly incomprehensible. What are these mighty forces, locked up in the small seed and the drop of water?

Nay, what is LIFE itself, with all its wondrous, mighty energies,--that power which maintains the heat within us, and prevents our bodies, that decay so soon without it, from resolution into their original elements--Life, that constant miracle, the nature and essence whereof have eluded all the philosophers; and all their learned dissertations on it are a mere jargon of words?

No wonder the ancient Persians thought that Light and Life were one; both emanations from the Supreme Deity, the archetype of light. No wonder that in their ignorance they worshipped the Sun. God breathed into man the spirit of life; not matter, but an emanation from Himself; not a creature made by Him, nor a distinct existence, but a Power, like His own Thought: and light, to those great-souled ancients, also seemed no creature, and no gross material substance, but a pure emanation from the Deity, immortal and indestructible like Himself.

What, indeed, is REALITY? Our dreams are as real, while they last, as the occurrences of the daytime. We see, hear, feel, act, experience pleasure and suffer pain, as vividly and actually in a dream as when awake. The occurrences and transactions of a year are crowded into the limits of a second: and the dream remembered is as real as the past occurrences of life.

The philosophers tell us that we have no cognizance of substance itself, but only of its attributes: that when we see that which we call a block of marble, our perceptions give us information only of something extended, solid, colored, heavy, and the like; but not of the very thing itself, to which these attributes belong. And vet the attributes do not exist without the substance. They are not substances, but adjectives. There is no such thing or existence as hardness, weight or color, by itself, detached from any

[p. 573]

subject, moving first here, then there, and attaching itself to this and to the other subject. And yet, they say, the attributes are not the subject.

So Thought, Volition, and Perception are not the soul, but its attributes; and we have no cognizance of the soul itself, but only of them, its manifestations. Nor of God; but only of His Wisdom, Power, Magnificence, Truth, and other attributes.

And yet we know that there is matter, a soul within our body, a God that lives in the Universe.

Take, then, the attributes of the soul. I am conscious that I exist and am the same identical person that I was twenty years ago. I am conscious that my body is not I,--that if my arms were lopped away, this person that I call ME, would still remain, complete, entire, identical as before. But I cannot ascertain, by the most intense and long-continued reflection, what I am, nor where within my body I reside, nor whether I am a point, or an expanded substance. I have no power to examine and inspect. I exist, will, think, perceive. That I know, and nothing more. I think a noble and sublime Thought. What is that Thought? It is not Matter, nor Spirit. It is not a Thing; but a Power and Force. I make upon a paper certain conventional marks, that represent that Thought. There is no Power or Virtue in the marks I write, but only in the Thought which they tell to others. I die, but the Thought still lives. It is a Power. It acts on men, excites them to enthusiasm, inspires patriotism, governs their conduct, controls their destinies, disposes of life and death. The words I speak are but a certain succession of particular sounds, that by conventional arrangement communicate to others the Immaterial, Intangible, Eternal Thought. The fact that Thought continues to exist an instant, after it makes its appearance in the soul, proves it immortal: for there is nothing conceivable that can destroy it. The spoken words, being mere sounds, may vanish into thin air, and the written ones, mere marks, be burned, erased, destroyed: but the THOUGHT itself lives still, and must live on forever.

A Human Thought, then, is an actual EXISTENCE, and a FORCE and POWER, capable of acting upon and controlling matter as well as mind. Is not the existence of a God, who is the immaterial soul of the Universe, and whose THOUGHT, embodied or not embodied in His WORD, is an Infinite Power, of Creation and production,

[p. 574]

destruction and preservation, quite as comprehensible as the existence of a Soul, of a Thought separated from the Soul, of the Power of that Thought to mould the fate and influence the Destinies of Humanity?

And yet we know not when that Thought comes, nor what it is. It is not WE. We do not mould it, shape it, fashion it. It is neither our mechanism nor our invention. It appears spontaneously, flashing, as it were, into the soul, making that soul the involuntary instrument of its utterance to the world. It comes to us, and seems a stranger to us, seeking a home.

As little can we explain the mighty power of the human WILL. Volition, like Thought, seems spontaneous, an effect without a cause. Circumstances provoke it, and serve as its occasion, but do not produce it. It springs up in the soul, like Thought, as the waters gush upward in a spring. Is it the manifestation of the soul, merely making apparent what passes within the soul, or an emanation from it, going abroad and acting outwardly, itself a real Existence, as it is an admitted Power? We can but own our ignorance. It is certain that it acts on other souls, controls, directs them, shapes their action, legislates for men and nations: and yet it is not material nor visible; and the laws it writes merely inform one soul of what has passed within another.

God, therefore, is a mystery, only as everything that surrounds us, and as we ourselves, are mysteries. We know that there is and must be a FIRST CAUSE. His attributes, severed from Himself, are unrealities. As color and extension, weight and hardness, do not exist apart from matter as separate existences and substantives, spiritual or immaterial; so the Goodness, Wisdom, Justice, Mercy, and Benevolence of God are not independent existences, personify them as men may, but attributes of the Deity, the adjectives of One Great Substantive. But we know that He must be Good, True, Wise, Just, Benevolent, Merciful: and in all these, and all His other attributes, Perfect and Infinite; because we are conscious that these are laws imposed on us by the very nature of things, necessary, and without which the Universe would be con-fusion and the existence of a God incredible. They are of His essence, and necessary, as His existence is.

He is the Living, Thinking, Intelligent Sour, of the Universe, the PERMANENT, the STATIONARY [Estus . . Estos], of Simon Magus, the ONE that always IS [To On . . TO ON] of Plato, as

[p. 575]

contradistinguished from the perpetual flux and reflux, or Genesis, of things.

And, as the Thought of the Soul, emanating from the Soul, becomes audible and visible in Words, so did THE THOUGHT or GOD, springing up within Himself, immortal as Himself, when once conceived,--immortal before, because in Himself, utter Itself in THE WORD, its manifestation and mode of communication, and thus create the Material, Mental, Spiritual Universe, which, like Him, never began to exist.

This is the real idea of the Ancient Nations: GOD, the Almighty Father, and Source of All; His THOUGHT, conceiving the whole Universe, and willing its creation: His WORD, uttering that THOUGHT, and thus becoming the Creator or Demiourgos, in whom was Life and Light, and that Light the Life of the Universe.

Nor did that Word cease at the single act of Creation; and having set going the great machine, and enacted the laws of its motion and progression, of birth and life, and change and death, cease to exist, or remain thereafter in inert idleness.

FOR THE THOUGHT OF GOD LIVES AND IS IMMORTAL. Embodied in the WORD, is not only created, but it preserves. It conducts and controls the Universe, all spheres, all worlds, all actions of mankind, and of every animate and inanimate creature. It speaks in the soul of every man who lives. The Stars, the Earth, the Trees, the Winds, the universal voice of Nature, tempest, and avalanche, the Sea's roar and the grave voice of the waterfall, the hoarse thunder and the low whisper of the brook, the song of birds, the voice of love, the speech of men, all are the alphabet in which it communicates itself to men, and informs them of the will and law of God, the Soul of the Universe. And thus most truly did "THE WORD BECOME MESH AND DWELL AMONG MEN."

God, the unknown FATHER [Pater Agnustos . . Pater Agno_stos], known to us only by His Attributes; the ABSOLUTE I AM: . . The THOUGHT of God [Ennoia . Ennoia], and the WORD [Logos; . . . . Logos], Manifestation and expression of the Thought; . . . . Behold THE TRUE MASONIC TRINITY; the UNIVERSAL SOUL, the THOUGHT in the Soul, the WORD, or Thought expressed; the THREE IN ONE, of a Trinitarian Ecossais.

Here Masonry pauses, and leaves its Initiates to carry out and develop these great Truths in such manner as to each may seem

[p. 576]

most accordant with reason, philosophy, truth, and his religious faith. It declines to act as Arbiter between them. It looks calmly on, while each multiplies the intermediates between the Deity and Matter, and the personifications of God's manifestations and attributes, to whatever extent his reason, his conviction, or his fancy dictates.

While the Indian tells us that PARABRAHMA, BRAHM, and PARATMA were the first Triune God, revealing Himself as BRAHMA, VISHNU, and SIVA, Creator, Preserver, and Destroyer; . . . .

The Egyptian, of AMUN-RE, NEITH, and PHTHA, Creator, Matter, Thought or Light; the Persian of his Trinity of Three Powers in ORMUZD, Sources of Light, Fire, and Water; the Buddhists of the God SAKYA, a Trinity composed of BUDDHA, DHARMA, and SANGA,--Intelligence, Law, and Union or Harmony; the Chinese Sabeans of their Trinity of Chang-ti, the Supreme Sovereign; Tien, the Heavens; and Tao, the Universal Supreme Reason and Principle of all things; who produced the Unit; that, two; two, three; and three, all that is; . . . .

While the Sclavono-Vend typifies his Trinity by the three heads of the God Triglav; the Ancient Prussian points to his Triune God, Perkoun, Pikollos, and Potrimpos, Deities of Light and Thunder, of Hell and of the Earth; the Ancient Scandinavian to Odin, Frea, and Thor; and the old Etruscans to TINA, TALNA, and MINERVA, Strength, Abundance, and Wisdom; . . . .

While Plato tells us of the Supreme Good, the Reason or Intellect, and the Soul or Spirit; and Philo of the Archetype of Light, Wisdom [Sofia], and the Word [Logos]; the Kabalists, of the Triads of the Sephiroth; . . . .

While the disciples of Simon Magus, and the many sects of the Gnostics, confuse us with their Eons, Emanations, Powers, Wisdom Superior and Inferior, Ialdabaoth, Adam-Kadmon, even to the three hundred and sixty-five thousand emanations of the Maldaites; . . . .

And while the pious Christian believes that the WORD dwelt in the Mortal Body of Jesus of Nazareth, and suffered upon the Cross; and that the HOLY GHOST was poured out upon the Apostles, and now inspires every truly Christian Soul: . . . .

While all these faiths assert their claims to the exclusive possession of the Truth, Masonry inculcates its old doctrine, and no more: . . . . That God is ONE; that His THOUGHT uttered in His

[p. 577]

[paragraph continues] WORD, created the Universe, and preserves it by those Eternal Laws which are the expression of that Thought: that the Soul of Man, breathed into him by God, is immortal as His Thoughts are; that he is free to do evil or to choose good, responsible for his acts and punishable for his sins: that all evil and wrong and suffering are but temporary, the discords of one great Harmony, and that in His good time they will lead by infinite modulations to the great, harmonic final chord and cadence of Truth, Love, Peace, and Happiness, that will ring forever and ever under the Arches of Heaven, among all the Stars and Worlds, and in all souls of men and Angels.

 

Footnotes

^568:1 The Substance, or Very Self, of which the Alohayim are the manifestations.

     
Morals and Dogma, by Albert Pike, [1871], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 578]

  

XXVII.

  

KNIGHT COMMANDER OF THE TEMPLE.

THIS is the first of the really Chivalric Degrees of the Ancient and Accepted Scottish Rite. It occupies this place in the Calendar of the Degrees between the 26th and the last of the Philosophical Degrees, in order, by breaking the continuity of these, to relieve what might otherwise become wearisome; and also to remind you that, while engaged with the speculations and abstractions of philosophy and creeds, the Mason is also to continue engaged in the active duties of this great warfare of life. He is not only a Moralist and Philosopher, but a Soldier, the Successor of those Knights of the Middle Age, who, while they wore the Cross, also wielded the Sword, and were the Soldiers of Honor, Loyalty, and Duty.

Times change, and circumstances; but Virtue and Duty remain the same. The Evils to be warred against but take another shape, and are developed in a different form.

There is the same need now of truth and loyalty as in the days of Frederic Barbarossa.

The characters, religious and military, attention to the sick and wounded in the Hospital, and war against the Infidel in the field, are no longer blended; but the same duties, to be performed in another shape, continue to exist and to environ us all.

The innocent virgin is no longer at the mercy of the brutal Baron or licentious man-at-arms; but purity and innocence still need protectors.

War is no longer the apparently natural State of Society; and for most men it is an empty obligation to assume, that they will not recede before the enemy; but the same high duty and obligation still rest upon all men.

Truth, in act, profession, and opinion, is rarer now than in the days of chivalry. Falsehood has become a current coin, and circulates with a certain degree of respectability; because it has an actual value. It is indeed the great Vice of the Age--it, and its twin-sister, Dishonesty. Men, for political preferment, profess

[p. 579]

whatever principles are expedient and profitable. At the bar, in the pulpit, and in the halls of legislation, men argue against their own convictions, and, with what they term logic, prove to the satisfaction of others that which they do not themselves believe, Insincerity and duplicity are valuable to their possessors, like estates in stocks, that yield a certain revenue: and it is no longer the truth of an opinion or a principle, but the net profit that may be realized from it, which is the measure of its value.

The Press is the great sower of falsehood. To slander a political antagonist, to misrepresent all that he says, and, if that be impossible, to invent for him what he does not say; to put in circulation whatever baseless calumnies against him are necessary to defeat him,--these are habits so common as to have ceased to excite notice or comment, much less surprise or disgust.

There was a time when a Knight would die rather than utter a lie, or break his Knightly word. The Knight Commander of the Temple revives the old Knightly spirit; and devotes himself to the old Knightly worship of Truth. No profession of an opinion not his own, for expediency's sake or profit, Or through fear of the world's disfavor; no slander of even an enemy; no coloring or perversion of the sayings or acts of other men; no insincere speech and argument for any purpose, or under any pretext, must soil his fair escutcheon. Out of the Chapter, as well as in it, he must speak the Truth, and all the Truth, no more and no less; or else speak not at all.

To purity and innocence everywhere, the Knight Commander owes protection, as of old; against bold violence, or those, more guilty than murderers, who by art and treachery seek to slay the soul; and against that want and destitution that drive too many to sell their honor and innocence for food.

In no age of, the world has man had better opportunity than now to display those lofty virtues and that noble heroism that so distinguished the three great military and religious Orders, in their youth, before they became corrupt and vitiated by prosperity and power.

When a fearful epidemic ravages a city, and death is inhaled with the air men breathe; when the living scarcely suffice to bury the dead,--most men flee in abject terror, to return and live, respectable and influential, when the danger has passed away. But the old Knightly spirit of devotion and disinterestedness and contempt

[p. 580]

of death still lives, and is not extinct in the human heart. Everywhere a few are found to stand firmly and unflinchingly at their posts, to front and defy the danger, not for money, or to be honored for it, or to protect their own household; but from mere humanity, and to obey the unerring dictates of duty. They nurse the sick, breathing the pestilential atmosphere of the hospital. They explore the abodes of want and misery. With the gentleness of woman, they soften the pains of the dying, and feed the lamp of life in the convalescent. They perform the last sad offices to the dead; and they seek no other reward than the approval of their own consciences.

These are the true Knights of the present age: these, and the captain who remains at his post on board his shattered ship until the last boat, loaded to the water's edge with passengers and crew, has parted from her side; and then goes calmly down with her into the mysterious depths of the ocean:--the pilot who stands at the wheel while the swift flames eddy round him and scorch away his life:--the fireman who ascends the blazing walls, and plunges amid the flames to save the property or lives of those who have upon him no claim by tie of blood, or friendship, or even of ordinary acquaintance:--these, and others like these:--all men, who, set at the post of duty, stand there manfully; to die, if need be, but not to desert their post: for these, too, are sworn not to recede before the enemy.

To the performance of duties and of acts of heroism like these, you have devoted yourself, my Brother, by becoming a Knight Commander of the Temple. Soldier of the Truth and of Loyalty! Protector of Purity and Innocence! Defier of Plague and Pestilence! Nurser of the Sick and Burier of the Dead! Knight, preferring Death to abandonment of the Post of Duty! Welcome to the bosom of this Order!

 

     
Morals and Dogma, by Albert Pike, [1871], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 581]

  

XXVIII.

  

KNIGHT OF THE SUN, OR PRINCE ADEPT.

GOD is the author of everything that existeth; the Eternal, the Supreme, the Living, and Awful Being; from Whom nothing in the Universe is hidden. Make of Him no idols and visible images; but rather worship Him in the deep solitudes of sequestered forests; for He is invisible, and fills the Universe as its soul, and liveth not in any Temple!

Light and Darkness are the World's Eternal ways. God is the principle of everything that exists, and the Father of all Beings. He is eternal, immovable, and Self-Existent. There are no bounds to His power. At one glance He sees the Past, the Present, and the Future; and the procession of the builders of the Pyramids, with us and our remotest Descendants, is now passing before Him. He reads our thoughts before they are known to ourselves. He rules the movements of the Universe, and all events and revolutions are the creatures of His will. For He is the Infinite Mind and Supreme Intelligence.

In the beginning Man had the WORD, and that WORD was from God: and out of the living power which, in and by that WORD, was communicated to man, came the LIGHT of his existence. Let no man speak the WORD, for by it THE FATHER made light and darkness, the world and living creatures!

[p. 582]

The Chaldean upon his plains worshipped me, and the sea-loving Phoenician. They builded me temples and towers, and burned sacrifices to me upon a thousand altars. Light was divine to them, and they thought me a God. But I am nothing--nothing; and LIGHT is the creature of the unseen GOD that taught the true religion to the Ancient Patriarchs: AWFUL, MYSTERIOUS, THE ABSOLUTE.

Man was created pure; and God gave him TRUTH, as He gave him LIGHT. He has lost the truth and found error. He has wandered far into darkness; and round him Sin and Shame hover evermore. The Soul that is impure, and sinful, and defiled with earthly stains, cannot again unite with God, until, by long trials and many purifications, it is finally delivered from the old calamity; and Light overcomes Darkness and dethrones it, in the Soul.

God is the First; indestructible, eternal, UNCREATED, INDIVISIBLE. Wisdom, Justice, Truth, and Mercy, with Harmony and Love, are of His essence, and Eternity and Infinitude of Extension. He is silent, and consents with MIND, and is known to Souls through MIND alone. In Him were all things originally contained, and from Him all things were evolved. For out of His Divine SILENCE and REST, after an infinitude of time, was unfolded the WORD, or the Divine POWER; and then in turn the Mighty, ever-acting, measureless INTELLECT; and from the WORD were evolved the myriads of suns and systems that make the Universe; and fire, and light, and the electric HARMONY, which is the harmony of spheres and numbers: and from the INTELLECT all Souls and intellects of men.

In the Beginning, the Universe was but ONE SOUL. HE was THE ALL, alone with TIME and SPACE, and Infinite as they.

------ HE HAD THIS THOUGHT: "I Create Worlds:" and lo! the Universe, and the laws of harmony and motion that rule it. the expression of a thought of God; and bird and beast, and every living thing but Man: and light and air, and the mysterious cur-rents, and the dominion of mysterious numbers!

------ HE HAD THIS THOUGHT: "I Create Man, whose Soul shall be my image, and he shall rule." And lo! Man, with senses, instinct, and a reasoning mind!

------ And yet not MAN! but an animal that breathed, and saw, and thought: until an immaterial spark from God's own

[p. 583]

[paragraph continues] Infinite Being penetrated the brain, and became the Soul: and lo, MAN THE IMMORTAL! Thus, threefold, fruit of God's thought, is Man; that sees and hears and feels; that thinks and reasons; that loves and is in harmony with the Universe.

Before the world grew old, the primitive Truth faded out from men's Souls. Then man asked himself, "What am I? and how and whence am I? and whither do I go?" And the Soul, looking inward upon itself, strove to learn whether that "I" were mere matter; its thought and reason and its passions and affections mere results of material combination; or a material Being enveloping an immaterial Spirit: . . and further it strove, by self-examination, to learn whether that Spirit were an individual essence, with a separate immortal existence, or an infinitesimal portion of a Great First Principle, inter-penetrating the Universe and the infinitude of space, and undulating like light and heat: . . and so they wandered further amid the mazes of error; and imagined vain philosophies; wallowing in the sloughs of materialism and sensualism, of beating their wings vainly in the vacuum of abstractions and idealities.

While yet the first oaks still put forth their leaves, man lost the perfect knowledge of the One True God, the Ancient Absolute Existence, the Infinite Mind and Supreme Intelligence; and floated helplessly out upon the shoreless ocean of conjecture. Then the soul vexed itself with seeking to learn whether the material Universe was a mere chance combination of atoms, or the work of Infinite, Uncreated Wisdom: . . whether the Deity was a concentrated, and the Universe an extended immateriality; or whether He was a personal existence, an Omnipotent, Eternal, Supreme Essence, regulating matter at will; or subjecting it to unchangeable laws throughout eternity; and to Whom, Himself Infinite and Eternal, Space and Time are unknown. With their finite limited vision they sought to learn the source and explain the existence of Evil, and Pain, and Sorrow; and so they wandered ever deeper into the darkness, and were lost; and there was for them no longer any God; but only a great, dumb, soulless Universe, full of mere emblems and symbols.

You have heretofore, in some of the Degrees through which you have passed, heard much of the ancient worship of the Sun, the Moon, and the other bright luminaries of Heaven, and of the Elements and Powers of Universal Nature. You have been made, to

[p. 584]

some extent, familiar with their personifications as Heroes suffering or triumphant, or as personal Gods or Goddesses, with human characteristics and passions, and with the multitude of legends and fables that do but allegorically represent their risings and settings, their courses, their conjunctions and oppositions, their domiciles and places of exaltation.

Perhaps you have supposed that we, like many who have written on these subjects, have intended to represent this worship to you as the most ancient and original worship of the first men that lived. To undeceive you, if such was your conclusion, we have caused the Personifications of the Great Luminary of Heaven, under the names by which he was known to the most ancient nations, to proclaim the old primitive truths that were known to the Fathers of our race, before men came to worship the visible manifestations of the Supreme Power and Magnificence and the Supposed Attributes of the Universal Deity in the Elements and in the glittering armies that Night regularly marshals and arrays upon the blue field of the firmament.

We ask now your attention to a still further development of these truths, after we shall have added something to what we have already said in regard to the Chief Luminary of Heaven, in explanation of the names and characteristics of the several imaginary Deities that represented him among the ancient races of men.

ATHOM or ATHOM-RE, was the Chief and Oldest Supreme God of Upper Egypt, worshipped at Thebes; the same as the OM or AUM of the Hindu_s, whose name was unpronounceable, and who, like the BREHM of the latter People, was "The Being that was, and is, and is to come; the Great God, the Great Omnipotent, Omniscient, and Omnipresent One, the Greatest in the Universe, the Lord;" whose emblem was a perfect sphere, showing that He was first, last, midst, and without end; superior to all Nature-Gods, and all personifications of Powers, Elements, and Luminaries; symbolized by Light, the Principle of Life.

AMUN was the Nature-God, or Spirit of Nature, called by that name or AMUN-RE, and worshipped at Memphis in Lower Egypt, and in Libya, as well as in Upper Egypt. He was the Libyan Jupiter, and represented the intelligent and organizing force that develops itself in Nature, when the intellectual types or forms of bodies are revealed to the senses in the world's order, by their

[p. 585]

union with matter, whereby the generation of bodies is effected. He was the same with Kneph, from whose mouth issued the Orphic egg out of which came the Universe.

DIONUSOS was the Nature-God of the Greeks, as AMUN was of the Egyptians. In the popular legend, Dionusos, as well as Hercules, was a Theban Hero, born of a mortal mother. Both were sons of Zeus, both persecuted by Here. But in Hercules the God is subordinate to the Hero; while Dionusos, even in poetry, retains his divine character, and is identical with Iacchus, the presiding genius of the Mysteries. Personification of the Sun in Taurus, as his ox-hoofs showed, the delivered earth from the harsh dominion of Winter, conducted the mighty chorus of the Stars, and the celestial revolution of the year, changed with the seasons, and underwent their periodical decay. He was the Sun as invoked by the Eleans, Pyrigenes, ushered into the world amidst lightning and thunder, the Mighty Hunter of the Zodiac, Zagreus the Golden or ruddy-faced. The Mysteries taught the doctrine of Divine Unity; and that Power Whose Oneness is a seeming mystery, but really a truism, was Dionusos, the God of Nature, or of that moisture, which is the life of Nature, who prepares in darkness, in Hades or Iasion, the return of life and vegetation, or is himself the light and change evolving their varieties. In the Egean Islands he was Butes, Dardanus, Himeros or Imbros; in Crete he appears as Iasius or even Zeus, whose orgiastic worship, remaining unveiled by the usual forms of mystery, betrayed to profane curiosity the symbols which, if irreverently contemplated, were sure to be misunderstood.

He was the same with the dismembered Zagreus, the son of Persephone, an Ancient Subterranean Dionusos, the horned progeny of Zeus in the Constellation of the Serpent, entrusted by his father with the thunderbolt, and encircled with the protecting dance of Curetes. Through the envious artifices of Here, the Titans eluded the vigilance of his guardians and tore him to pieces; but Pallas restored the still palpitating heart to his father, who commanded Apollo to bury the dismembered remains upon Parnassus.

Dionusos, as well as Apollo, was leader of the Muses; the tomb of one accompanied the worship of the other; they were the same, yet different, contrasted, yet only as filling separate parts in the same drama; and the mystic and heroic personifications, the God of Nature and of Art, seem, at some remote period, to have proceeded from a common source. Their separation was one of form

[p. 586]

rather than of substance: and from the time when Hercules obtained initiation from Triptolemus, or Pythagoras received Orphic tenets, the two conceptions were tending to re-combine. It was said that Dionusos or Poseidon had preceded Apollo in the Oracular office; and Dionusos continued to be esteemed in Greek Theology as Healer and Saviour, Author of Life and Immortality. The dispersed Pythagoreans, "Sons of Apollo," immediately betook themselves to the Orphic Service of Dionusos, and there are indications that there was always something Dionysiac in the worship of Apollo.

Dionusos is the Sun, that liberator of the elements; and his spiritual meditation was suggested by the same imagery which made the Zodiac the supposed path of the Spirits in their descent and their return. His second birth, as offspring of the highest, is a type of the spiritual regeneration of man. He, as well as Apollo, was  of the Muses and source of inspiration. His rule prescribed no unnatural mortification: its yoke was easy, and its mirthful choruses, combining the gay with the severe, did but commemorate that golden age when earth enjoyed eternal spring, and when fountains of honey, milk, and wine burst forth out of its bosom at the touch of the thyrsus. He is the "Liberator." Like Osiris, he frees the soul, and guides it in its migrations beyond the grave, preserving it from the risk of again falling under the slavery of matter or of some inferior animal form. All soul is part of the Universal Soul, whose totality is Dionusos; and he leads back the vagrant spirit to its home, and accompanies it through the purifying processes, both real and symbolical, of its earthly transit. He died and descended to the Shades; and his suffering was the great secret of the Mysteries, as death is the grand mystery of existence. He is the immortal suitor of Psyche (the Soul), the Divine influence which physically called the world into being, and which, awakening the soul from its Stygian trance, restores it from earth to Heaven.

Of HERMES, the Mercury of the Greeks, the Thoth of the Egyptians, and the Taaut of the Phoenicians, we have heretofore spoken sufficiently at length. He was the inventor of letters and of Oratory, the winged messenger of the Gods, bearing the Caduceus wreathed with serpents; and in our Council he is represented by the ORATOR.

The Hindu_s called the Sun SURYA; the Persians, MITHRAS;

[p. 587]

the Egyptians, OSIRIS; the Assyrians and Chaldaeans, BEL; the Scythians and Etruscans and the ancient Pelasgi, ARKALEUS or HERCULES; the Phoenicians, ADONAI or ADON; and the Scandinavians, ODIN.

From the name SURYA, given by the Hindu_s to the Sun, the Sect who paid him particular adoration were called Souras. Their painters describe his car as drawn by seven green horses. In the Temple of Visweswara, at Benares, there is an ancient piece of sculpture, well executed in stone, representing him sitting in a car drawn by a horse with twelve heads. His charioteer, by whom he is preceded, is ARUN [from w ?A?W?R, AUR the Crepusculum?], or the Dawn; and among his many titles are twelve that denote his distinct powers in each of the twelve months. Those powers are called Adityas, each of whom has a particular name. Surya is supposed frequently to have descended upon earth, in a human shape, and to have left a race on earth, equally renowned in Indian story with the Heliades of Greece. He is often styled King of the Stars and Planets, and thus reminds us of the Adon-Tsbauth (Lord of the Starry Hosts) of the Hebrew writings.

MITHRAS was the Sun-God of the Persians; and was fabled to have been born in a grotto or cave, at the Winter Solstice. His feasts were celebrated at that period, at the moment when the sun commenced to return Northward, and to increase the length of the days. This was the great Feast of the Magian religion. The Roman Calendar, published in the time of Constantine, at which period his worship began to gain ground in the Occident, fixed his feast-day on the 25th of December. His statues and images were inscribed, Deo-Soli invicto Mithrae--to the invincible Sun-God Mithras. Nomen invictum Sol Mithra. . . . Soli Omnipotenti Mithrae. To him, gold, incense, and myrrh were consecrated. "Thee," says Martianus Capella, in his hymn to the Sun, "the dwellers on the Nile adore as Serapis, and Memphis worships as Osiris; in the sacred rites of Persia thou art Mithras, in Phrygia, Atys, and Libya bows down to thee as Ammon, and Phoenician Byblos as Adonis; and thus the whole world adores thee under different names."

OSIRIS was the son of Helios (Phra), the "divine offspring con-generate with the dawn," and at the same time an incarnation of Kneph or Agathodaemon, the Good Spirit, including all his possible manifestations, either physical or moral. He represented in a familiar form the beneficent aspect of all higher emanations and

[p. 588]

in him was developed the conception of a Being purely good, so that it became necessary to set up another power as his adversary, called Seth, Babys or Typhon, to account for the injurious influences of Nature.

With the phenomena of agriculture, supposed to be the invention of Osiris, the Egyptians connected the highest truths of their religion. The soul of man was as the seed hidden in the ground, and the mortal framework, similarly consigned to its dark resting-place, awaited its restoration to life's unfailing source. Osiris was not only benefactor of the living; he was also Hades, Serapis, and Rhadamanthus, the monarch of the dead. Death, therefore, in Egyptian opinion, was only another name for renovation, since its God is the same power who incessantly renews vitality in Nature. Every corpse duly embalmed was called "Osiris," and in the grave was supposed to be united, or at least brought into approximation, to the Divinity. For when God became incarnate for man's benefit, it was implied that, in analogy with His assumed character, He should submit to all the conditions of visible existence. In death, as in life, Isis and Osiris were patterns and precursors of mankind; their sepulchres stood within the temples of the Superior Gods; yet though their remains might be entombed at Memphis or Abydus, their divinity was unimpeached, and they either shone as luminaries in the heavens, or in the unseen world presided over the futurity of the disembodied spirits whom death had brought nearer to them.

The notion of a dying God, so frequent in Oriental legend, and of which we have already said much in former Degrees, was the natural inference from a literal interpretation of nature-worship; since nature, which in the vicissitudes of the seasons seems to undergo a dissolution, was to the earliest religionists the express image of the Deity, and at a remote period one and the same with the "varied God," whose attributes were seen not only in its vitality, but in its changes. The unseen Mover of the Universe was rashly identified with its obvious fluctuations. The speculative Deity suggested by the drama of nature, was worshipped with imitative and sympathetic rites. A period of mourning about the Autumnal Equinox, and of joy at the return of Spring, was almost universal. Phrygians and Paphlagonians, Boeotians, and even Athenians, were all more or less attached to such observances; the Syrian damsels sat weeping for Thammuz or Adoni, mortally

[p. 589]

wounded by the tooth of Winter, symbolized by the boar, its very general emblem: and these rites, and those of Atys and Osiris, were evidently suggested by the arrest of vegetation, when the Sun, descending from his altitude, seems deprived of his generating power.

Osiris is a being analogous to the Syrian ADONI; and the fable of his history, which we need not here repeat, is a narrative form of the popular religion of Egypt, of which the Sun is the Hero, and the agricultural calendar the moral. The moist valley of the Nile, owing its fertility to the annual inundation, appeared, in contrast with the surrounding desert, like life in the midst of death. The inundation was in evident dependence on the Sun, and Egypt, environed with arid deserts, like a heart within a burning censer, was the female power, dependent on the influences personified in its God. Typhon his brother, the type of darkness, drought, and sterility, threw his body into the Nile; and thus Osiris, the "good," the "Saviour," perished, in the 28th year of his life or reign, and on the 17th day of the month Athor, or the 13th of November. He is also made to die during the heats of the early Summer, when, from March to July, the earth was parched with intolerable heat, vegetation was scorched, and the languid Nile exhausted. From that death he rises when the Solstitial Sun brings the inundation, and Egypt is filled with mirth and acclamation anticipatory of the second harvest. From his Wintry death he rises with the early flowers of Spring, and then the joyful festival of Osiris found was celebrated.

So the pride of Jemsheed, one of the Persian Sun-heroes, or the solar year personified, was abruptly cut off by Zohak, the tyrant of the West. He was sawn asunder by a fish-bone, and immediately the brightness of Iran changed to gloom. Ganymede and Adonis, like Osiris, were hurried off in all their strength and beauty; the premature death of Linus, the burthen of the ancient lament of Greece, was like that of the Persian Siamek, the Bithynian Hylas, and the Egyptian Maneros, Son of Menes or the Eternal. The elegy called Maneros was sung at Egyptian banquets, and an effigy enclosed within a diminutive Sarcophagus was handed round to remind the guests of their brief tenure of existence. The beautiful Memnon, also, perished in his prime; and Enoch, whose early death was lamented at Iconium, lived 365 years, the number of

[p. 590]

days of the solar year; a brief space when compared with the longevity of his patriarchal kindred.

The story of Osiris is reflected in those of Orpheus and Dionusos Zagreus, and perhaps in the legends of Absyrtus and Pelias, of Aeson, Thyestes, Melicertes, Itys, and Pelops. Io is the disconsolate Isis or Niobe: and Rhea mourns her dismembered Lord, Hyperion, and the death of her son Helios, drowned in the Eridanus; and if Apollo and Dionusos are immortal, they had died under other names, as Orpheus, Linus, or Hyacinthus. The sepulchre of Zeus was shown in Crete. Hippolytus was associated in divine honors with Apollo, and after he had been torn to pieces like Osiris, was restored to life by the Paeonian herbs of Diana, and kept darkling in the secret grove of Egeria. Zeus deserted Olympus to visit the Ethiopians; Apollo underwent servitude to Admetus; Theseus, Peirithous, Hercules, and other heroes, descended for a time to Hades; a dying Nature-God was exhibited in the Mysteries, the Attic women fasted, sitting on the ground, during the Thesmophoria, and the Boeotians lamented the descent of Cora-Proserpine to the Shades.

But the death of the Deity, as understood by the Orientals, was not inconsistent with His immortality. The temporary decline of the Sons of Light is but an episode in their endless continuity; and as the day and year are more convenient subdivisions of the Infinite, so the fiery deaths of Phaethon or Hercules are but breaks in the same Phoenix process of perpetual regeneration, by which the spirit of Osiris lives forever in the succession of the Memphian Apis. Every year witnesses the revival of Adonis; and the amber tears shed by the Heliades for the premature death of their brother, are the golden shower full of prolific hope, in which Zeus descends from the brazen vault of Heaven into the bosom of the parched ground.

BAL, representative or personification of the sun, was one of the Great Gods of Syria, Assyria, and Chaldea, and his name is found upon the monuments of Nimroud, and frequently occurs in the Hebrew writings. He was the Great Nature-God of Babylonia, the Power of heat, life, and generation. His symbol was the Sun, and he was figured seated on a bull. All the accessories of his great temple at Babylon, described by Herodotus, are repeated with singular fidelity, but on a smaller scale, in the Hebrew tabernacle and temple. The golden statue alone is wanted to complete

[p. 591]

the resemblance. The word Bal or Baal, like the word Adon, signifies Lord and Master. He was also the Supreme Deity of the Moabites, Amonites, and Carthaginians, and of the Sabeans in general; the Gauls worshipped the Sun under the name of Belin or Belinus: and Bela is found among the Celtic Deities upon the ancient monuments.

The Northern ancestors of the Greeks maintained with hardier habits a more manly style of religious symbolism than the effeminate enthusiasts of the South, and had embodied in their Perseus, HERCULES and MITHRAS, the consummation of the qualities they esteemed and exercised.

Almost every nation will be found to have had a mythical being, whose strength or weakness, virtues or defects, more or less nearly describe the Sun's career through the seasons. There was a Celtic, a Teutonic, a Scythian, an Etruscan, a Lydian Hercules, all whose legends became tributary to those of the Greek hero. The name of Hercules was found by Herodotus to have been long familiar in Egypt and the East, and to have originally belonged to a much higher personage than the comparatively modern hero known in Greece as the Son of Alcmena. The temple of the Hercules of Tyre was reported to have been built 2300 years before the time of Herodotus; and Hercules, whose Greek name has been sometimes supposed to be of Phoenician origin, in the sense of Circuitor, i.e. "rover" and "perambulator" of earth, as well as "Hyperion" of the sky, was the patron and model of those famous navigators who spread his altars from coast to coast through the Mediterranean, to the extremities of the West, where "ARKALEUS" built the City of Gades, and where a perpetual fire burned in his service. He was the lineal descendant of Perseus, the luminous child of darkness, conceived within a subterranean vault of brass; and he a representation of the Persian Mithras, rearing his emblematic lions above the gates of Mycenae, and bringing the sword of Jemsheed to battle against the Gorgons of the West. Mithras is similarly described in the Zend-Avesta as the "mighty hero, the rapid runner, whose piercing eye embraces all, whose arm bears the club for the destruction of the Darood."

Hercules Ingeniculus, who, bending on one knee, uplifts his club and tramples on the Serpent's head, was, like Prometheus and Tantalus, one of the varying aspects of the struggling and declining Sun. The victories of Hercules are but exhibitions of

[p. 592]

[paragraph continues] Solar power which have ever to be repeated. It was in the far North, among the Hyperboreans, that, divested of his Lion's skin, he lay down to sleep, and for a time lost the horses of his chariot. Henceforth that Northern region of gloom, called the "place of the death and revival of Adonis," that Caucasus whose summit was so lofty, that, like the Indian Meru, it seemed to be both the goal and commencement of the Sun's career, became to Greek imaginations the final bourne of all things, the abode of Winter and desolation, the pinnacle of the arch connecting the upper and lower world, and consequently the appropriate place for the banishment .of Prometheus. The daughters of Israel, weeping for Thammuz, mentioned by Ezekiel, sat looking to the North, and waiting for his return from that region. It was while Cybele with the Sun-God was absent among the Hyperboreans, that Phrygia, abandoned by her, suffered the horrors of famine. Delos and Delphi awaited the return of Apollo from the Hyperboreans, and Hercules brought thence to Olympia the olive. To all Masons, the North has immemorially been the place of darkness; and of the great lights of the Lodge, none is in the North.

Mithras, the rock-born hero (Petrogenes), heralded the Sun's return in Spring, as Prometheus, chained in his cavern, betokened the continuance of Winter. The Persian beacon on the mountain-top represented the Rock-born Divinity enshrined in his worthiest temple; and the funeral conflagration of Hercules was the sun dying in glory behind the Western hills. But though the transitory manifestation suffers or dies, the abiding and eternal power liberates and saves. It was an essential attribute of a Titan, that he should arise again after his fall; for the revival of Nature is as certain as its decline, and its alternations are subject to the appointment of a power which controls them both.

"God," says Maximus Tyrius, "did not spare His own Son [Hercules], or exempt Him from the calamities incidental to humanity. The Theban progeny of Jove had his share of pain and trial. By vanquishing earthly difficulties he proved his affinity with Heaven. His life was a continuous struggle. He fainted before Typhon in the desert; and in the commencement of the Autumnal season (cum longae redit hora noctis), descended under the guidance of Minerva to Hades. He died; but first applied for initiation to Eumolpus, in order to foreshadow that state of religious preparation which should precede the momentous change. Even in Hades he

[p. 593]

rescued Theseus and removed the stone of Ascalaphus, reanimated the bloodless spirits, and dragged into the light of day the monster Cerberus, justly reputed invincible because an emblem of Time itself; he burst the chains of the grave (for Busiris is the grave personified), and triumphant at the close as in the dawn of his career, was received after his labors into the repose of the heavenly mansions, living forever with Zeus in the arms of Eternal Youth.

ODIN is said to have borne twelve names among the old Germans, and to have had 114 names besides. He was the Apollo of the Scandinavians, and is represented in the Voluspa as destined to slay the monstrous snake. Then the Sun will be extinguished, the earth be dissolved in the ocean, the stars lose their brightness, and all Nature be destroyed in order that it may be renewed again. From the bosom of the waters a new world will emerge clad in verdure; harvests will be seen to ripen where no seed was sown, and evil will disappear.

The free fancy of the ancients, which wove the web of their myths and legends, was consecrated by faith. It had not, like the modern mind, set apart a petty sanctuary of borrowed beliefs, beyond which all the rest was common and unclean. Imagination, reason, and religion circled round the same symbol; and in all their symbols there was serious meaning, if we could but find it out. They did not devise fictions in the same vapid spirit in which we, cramped by conventionalities, read them. In endeavoring to interpret creations of fancy, fancy as well as reason must guide: and much of modern controversy arises out of heavy misapprehensions off ancient symbolism.

To those ancient peoples, this earth was the centre of the Universe. To them there were no other worlds, peopled with living beings, to divide the care and attention of the Deity. To them the world was a great plain, of unknown, perhaps inconceivable limits, and the Sun, the Moon, and the Stars journeyed above it, to give them light. The worship of the Sun became the basis of all the religions of antiquity. To them light and heat were mysteries; as indeed they still are to us. As the Sun caused the day, and his absence the night; as, when he journeyed Northward, Spring and Summer followed him; and when he again turned to the South, Autumn and inclement Winter, and cold and long dark nights ruled the earth; . . . as his influence produced the leaves and flowers, and ripened the harvests, and brought regular inundation,

[p. 594]

he necessarily became to them the most interesting object of the material Universe. To them he was the innate fire of bodies, the fire of nature. Author of Life, heat, and ignition, he was to them the efficient cause of all generation, for without him there was no movement, no existence, no form. He was to them immense, indivisible, imperishable, and everywhere present. It was their need of light, and of his creative energy, that was felt by all men; and nothing was more fearful to them than his absence. His beneficent influences caused his identification with the Principle of Good; and the BRAHMA of the Hindu_s, the MITHRAS of the Persians, and ATHOM, AMUN, PHTHA, and OSIRIS, of the Egyptians, the BEL of the Chaldaeans, the ADONAI of the Phoenicians, the ADONIS and APOLLO of the Greeks became but personifications of the Sun, the regenerating Principle, image of that fecundity which perpetuates and rejuvenates the world's existence.

So too the struggle between the Good and Evil Principles was personified, as was that between life and death, destruction and re-creation; in allegories and fables which poetically represented the apparent course of the Sun; who, descending toward the Southern Hemisphere, was figuratively said to be conquered and put to death by darkness, or the genius of Evil; but, returning again toward the Northern Hemisphere, he seemed to be victorious, and to arise from the tomb. This death and resurrection were also figurative of the succession of day and night, of death, which is a necessity of life, and of life which is born of death; and everywhere the ancients still saw the combat between the two Principles that ruled the world. Everywhere this contest was embodied in allegories and fictitious histories: into which were ingeniously woven all the astronomical phenomena that accompanied, preceded, or followed the different movements of the Sun, and the changes of Seasons, the approach or withdrawal of inundation. And thus grew into stature and strange proportions the histories of the contests between Typhon and Osiris, Hercules and Juno, the Titans and Jupiter, Ormuzd and Ahriman, the rebellious Angels and the Deity, the Evil Genii and the Good; and the other like fables, found not only in Asia, but in the North of Europe, and even among the Mexicans and Peruvians of the New World; carried thither, in all probability, by those Phoenician voyagers who bore thither civilization and the arts. The Scythians lamented the death of Acmon, the Persians that of Zohak conquered

[p. 595]

by Pheridoun, the Hindus that of Soura-Parama slain by Soupra-Muni, as the Scandinavians did that of Balder, torn to pieces by the blind Hother.

The primitive idea of infinite space existed in the first men, as it exists in us. It and the idea of infinite time are the first two innate ideas. Man cannot conceive how thing can be added to thing, or event follow event, forever. The idea will ever return, that no matter how long bulk is added to bulk, there must be, still beyond, an empty void without limit; in which is nothing. In the same way the idea of time without beginning or end forces itself on him. Time, without events, is also a void, and nothing.

In that empty void space the primitive men knew there was no light nor warmth. They felt, what we know scientifically, that there must be a thick darkness there, and an intensity of cold of which we have no conception. Into that void they thought the Sun, the Planets, and the Stars went down when they set under the Western Horizon. Darkness was to them an enemy, a harm, a vague dread and terror. It was the very embodiment of the evil principle; and out of it they said that he was formed. As the Sun bent Southward toward that void, they shuddered with dread: and when, at the Winter Solstice, he again commenced his Northward march, they rejoiced and feasted; as they did at the Summer Solstice, when most he appeared to smile upon them in his pride of place. These days have been celebrated by all civilized nations ever since. The Christian has made them feast-days of the church, and appropriated them to the two Saints John; and Masonry has done the same.

We, to whom the vast Universe has become but a great machine, not instinct with a great SOUL, but a clockwork of proportions unimaginable, but still infinitely less than infinite; and part at least of which we with our orreries can imitate; we, who have measured the distances and dimensions, and learned the specific gravity and determined the orbits of the moon and the planets; we, who know the distance to the sun, and his size; have measured the orbits of the flashing comets, and the distances of the fixed stars; and know the latter to be suns like our sun, each with his retinue of worlds, and all governed by the same unerring, mechanical laws and outwardly imposed forces, centripetal and centrifugal; we, who with our telescopes have separated the galaxy and the nebula into other stars and groups of stars; discovered

[p. 596]

new planets, by first discovering their disturbing forces upon those already known; and learned that they all, Jupiter, Venus, and the fiery Mars, and Saturn and the others, as well as the bright, mild, and ever-changing Moon, are mere dark, dull, opaque clods like our earth, and not living orbs of brilliant fire and heavenly light; we, who have counted the mountains and chasms in the moon, with glasses that could distinctly reveal to us the temple of Solomon, if it stood there in its old original glory; we, who no longer imagine that the stars control our destinies, and who can calculate the eclipses of the sun and moon, backward and forward, for ten thousand years; we, with our vastly increased conceptions of the powers of the Grand Architect of the Universe, but our wholly material and mechanical view of that Universe itself; we cannot, even in the remotest degree, feel, though we may partially and imperfectly imagine, how those great, primitive, simple-hearted children of Nature felt in regard to the Starry Hosts, there upon the slopes of the Himalayas, on the Chaldaean plains, in the Persian and Median deserts, and upon the banks of that great, strange River, the Nile. To them the Universe was alive--instinct with forces and powers, mysterious and beyond their comprehension. To them it was no machine, no great system of clockwork; but a great live creature, an army of creatures, in sympathy with or inimical to man. To them, all was a mystery and a miracle, and the stars flashing overhead spoke to their hearts almost in an audible language. Jupiter, with his kingly splendors, was the Emperor of the starry legions. Venus looked lovingly on the earth and blessed it; Mars, with his crimson fires, threatened war and misfortune; and Saturn, cold and grave, chilled and repelled them. The ever-changing Moon, faithful companion of the Sun, was a constant miracle and wander; the Sun himself the visible emblem of the creative and generative power. To them the earth was a great plain, over which the sun, the moon, and the planets revolved, its servants, framed to give it light. Of the stars, some were beneficent existences that brought with them Spring-time and fruits and flowers,--some, faithful sentinels, advising them of coming inundation, of the season of storm and of deadly winds; some heralds of evil, which, steadily foretelling, they seemed to cause. To them the eclipses were portents of evil, and their causes hidden in mystery, and supernatural. The regular returns of the stars, the comings of Arcturus, Orion,

[p. 597]

[paragraph continues] Sirius, the Pleiades, and Aldebaran, and the journeyings of the Sun, were voluntary and not mechanical to them. What wonder that astronomy became to them the most important of sciences; that those who learned it became rulers; and that vast edifices, the Pyramids, the tower or temple of Bel, and other like erections everywhere in the East, were builded for astronomical purposes?--and what wonder that, in their great child-like simplicity, they worshipped Light, the Sun, the Planets, and the Stars, and personified them, and eagerly believed in the histories invented for them; in that age when the capacity for belief was infinite; as indeed, if we but reflect, it still is and ever will be?

If we adhered to the literally historic sense, antiquity would be a mere inexplicable, hideous chaos, and all the Sages deranged: and so it would be with Masonry and those who instituted it. But when these allegories are explained, they cease to be absurd fables, or facts purely local; and become lessons of wisdom for entire humanity. No one can doubt, who studies them, that they all came from a common source.

And he greatly errs who imagines that, because the mythological legends and fables of antiquity are referable to and have their foundation in the phenomena of the Heavens, and all the Heathen Gods are but mere names given to the Sun, the Stars, the Planets, the Zodiacal Signs, the Elements, the Powers of Nature, and Universal Nature herself, therefore the first men worshipped the Stars, and whatever things, animate and inanimate, seemed to them to possess and exercise a power or influence, evident or imagined, over human, fortunes and human destiny.

For ever, in all the nations, ascending to the remotest antiquity to which the light of History or the glimmerings of tradition reach, we find, seated above all the gods which represent the luminaries and the elements, and those which personify the innate Powers of universal nature, a still higher Deity, silent, undefined, incomprehensible, the Supreme, one God, from Whom all the rest flow or emanate, or by Him are created. Above the Time-God Horus, the Moon-Goddess or Earth-Goddess Isis, and the Sun-God Osiris, of the Egyptians, was Amun, the Nature-God; and above him, again, the Infinite, Incomprehensible Deity, ATHOM. BREHM, the silent, self-contemplative, one original God, was the Source, to the Hindu_s, of Brahma, Vishnu, and Siva. Above Zeus, or before him, were Kronos and Ouranos. Over the Alohayim was the great

[p. 598]

[paragraph continues] Nature-God AL, and still beyond him, Abstract Existence, IHUH--He that IS, WAS, and SHALL BE. Above all the Persian Deities was the Unlimited Time, ZERUANE-AKHERENE; and over Odin and Thor was the Great Scandinavian Deity ALFADIR.

The worship of Universal Nature as a God was too near akin to the worship of a Universal Soul, to have been the instinctive creed of any savage people or rude race of men. To imagine all nature, with all its apparently independent parts, as forming one consistent whole, and as itself a unit, required an amount of experience and a faculty of generalization not possessed by the rude uncivilized mind, and is but a step below the idea of a universal Soul.

In the beginning man had the WORD; and that WORD was from God; and out of the living POWER communicated to man in and by that WORD, came THE LIGHT of His Existence.

God made man in His own likeness. When, by a long succession of geological changes, He had prepared the earth to be his habitation, He created him, and placed him in that part of Asia which all the old nations agreed in calling the cradle of the human race, and whence afterward the stream of human life flowed forth to India, China, Egypt, Persia, Arabia, and Phoenicia. HE communicated to him a knowledge of the nature of his Creator, and of the pure, primitive, undefiled religion. The peculiar and distinctive excellence and real essence of the primitive man, and his true nature and destiny, consisted in his likeness to God. HE stamped His own image upon man's soul. That image has been, in the breast of every individual man and of mankind in general, greatly altered, impaired, and defaced; but its old, half-obliterated characters are still to be found on all the pages of primitive history; and the impress, not entirely effaced, every reflecting mind may discover in its own interior.

Of the original revelation to mankind, of the primitive WORD of Divine TRUTH, we find clear indications and scattered traces in the sacred traditions of all the primitive Nations; traces which, when separately examined, appear like the broken remnants, the mysterious and hieroglyphic characters, of a mighty edifice that has been destroyed; and its fragments, like those of the old Temples and Palaces of Nimroud, wrought incongruously into edifices many centuries younger. And, although amid the ever-growing degeneracy of mankind, this primeval word of revelation was

[p. 599]

falsified by the admixture of various errors, and overlaid and obscured by numberless and manifold fictions, inextricably confused, and disfigured almost beyond the power of recognition, still a profound inquiry will discover in heathenism many luminous vestiges of primitive Truth.

For the old Heathenism had everywhere a foundation in Truth; and if we could separate that pure intuition into nature and into the simple symbols of nature, that constituted the basis of all Heathenism, from the alloy of error and the additions of fiction, those first hieroglyphic traits of the instinctive science of the first men, would be found to agree with truth and a true knowledge of nature, and to afford an image of a free, pure, comprehensive, and finished philosophy of life.

The struggle, thenceforward to be eternal, between the Divine will and the natural will in the souls of men, commenced immediately after the creation. Cain slew his brother Abel, and went forth to people parts of the earth with an impious race, forgetters and defiers of the true God. The other Descendants of the Common Father of the race intermarried with the daughters of Cain's Descendants: and all nations preserved the remembrance of that division of the human family into the righteous and impious, in their distorted legends of the wars between the Gods, and the Giants and Titans. When, afterward, another similar division occurred, the Descendants of Seth alone preserved the true primitive religion and science, and transmitted them to posterity in the ancient symbolical character, on monuments of stone: and many nations preserved in their legendary traditions the memory of the columns of Enoch and Seth.

Then the world declined from its original happy condition and fortunate estate, into idolatry and barbarism: but all nations retained the memory of that old estate; and the poets, in those early days the only historians, commemorated the succession of the ages of gold, silver, brass, and iron.

In the lapse of those ages, the sacred tradition followed various courses among each of the most ancient nations; and from its original source, as from a common centre, its various streams flowed downward; some diffusing through favored regions of the world fertility and life; but others soon losing themselves, and being dried up in the sterile sands of human error.

After the internal and Divine WORD originally communicated

[p. 600]

by God to man, had become obscured; after man's connection with his Creator had been broken, even outward language necessarily fell into disorder and confusion. The simple and Divine Truth was overlaid with various and sensual fictions, buried under illusive symbols, and at last perverted into horrible phantoms.

For in the progress of idolatry it needs came to pass, that what was originally revered as the symbol of a higher principle, became gradually confounded or identified with the object itself, and was worshipped; until this error led to a more degraded form of idolatry. The early nations received much from the primeval source of sacred tradition; but that haughty pride which seems an inherent part of human nature led each to represent these fragmentary relics of original truth as a possession peculiar to themselves; thus exaggerating their value, and their own importance, as peculiar favorites of the Deity, who had chosen them as the favored people to whom to commit these truths. To make these fragments, as far as possible, their private property, they reproduced them under peculiar forms, wrapped them up in symbols, concealed them in allegories, and invented fables to account for their own special possession of them. So that, instead of preserving in their primitive simplicity and purity these blessings of original revelation, they overlaid them with poetical ornament; and the whole wears a fabulous aspect, until by close and severe examination we discover the truth which the apparent fable contains.

These being the conflicting elements in the breast of man; the old inheritance or original dowry of truth, imparted to him by God in the primitive revelation; and error, or the foundation for error, in his degraded sense and spirit now turned from God to nature, false faiths easily sprung up and grew rank and luxuriant, when the Divine Truth was no longer guarded with jealous care, nor preserved in its pristine purity. This soon happened among most Eastern nations, and especially the Indians, the Chaldaeans, the Arabians, the Persians, and the Egyptians; with whom imagination, and a very deep but still sensual feeling for nature, were very predominant. The Northern firmament, visible to their eyes, possesses by far the largest and most brilliant constellations; and they were more alive to the impressions made by such objects, than are the men of the present day.

With the Chinese, a patriarchal, simple, and secluded people,

[p. 601]

idolatry long made but little progress. They invented writing within three or four generations after the flood; and they long preserved the memory of much of the primitive revelation; less overlaid with fiction than those fragments which other nations have remembered. They were among those who stood nearest to the source of sacred tradition; and many passages in their old writings contain remarkable vestiges of eternal truth, and of the WORD of primitive revelation, the heritage of old thought, which attest to us their original eminence.

But among the other early nations, a wild enthusiasm and a sensual idolatry of nature soon superseded the simple worship of the Almighty God, and set aside or disfigured the pure belief in the Eternal Uncreated Spirit. The great powers and elements of nature, and the vital principle of production and procreation through all generations; then the celestial spirits or heavenly Host, the luminous armies of the Stars, and the great Sun, and mysterious, ever-changing Moon (all of which the whole ancient world regarded not as mere globes of light or bodies of fire, but as animated living substances, potent over man's fate and destinies); next the genii and tutelar spirits, and even the souls of the dead, received divine worship. The animals, representing the starry constellations, first reverenced as symbols merely, came to be worshipped as gods; the heavens, earth, and the operations of nature were personified; and fictitious personages invented to account for the introduction of science and arts, and the fragments of the old religious truths; and the good and bad principles personified, became also objects of worship; while, through all, still shone the silver threads .of the old primitive revelation.

Increasing familiarity with early oriental records seems more and more to confirm the probability that they all originally emanated from one source. The eastern and southern slopes of the Paropismus, or Hindukusch, appear to have been inhabited by kindred Iranian races, similar in habits, language, and religion. The earliest Indian and Persian Deities are for the most part symbols of celestial light, their agency being regarded as an eternal warfare with the powers of Winter, storm, and darkness. The religion of both was originally a worship of outward nature, especially the manifestations of fire and light; the coincidences being too marked to be merely accidental. Deva, God, is derived from the root div, to shine. Indra, like Ormuzd or Ahura-Mazda,

[p. 602]

is the bright firmament; Sura or Surya, the Heavenly, a name of the Sun, recurs in the Zend word Huare, the Sun, whence Khur and Khorshid or Corasch. Uschas and Mitra are Medic as well as Zend Deities and the Amschaspands or "immortal Holy Ones" of the Zend-Avesta may be compared with the seven Rishis or Vedic Star-God, of the constellation of the Bear. Zoroastrianism, like Buddhism, was an innovation in regard to an older religion; and between the Parsee and Brahmin may be found traces of disruption as well as of coincidence. The original Nature-worship, in which were combined the conceptions both of a Universal Presence and perpetuity of action, took different directions of development, according to the difference between the Indian and Persian mind.

The early shepherds of the Punjaub, then called the country of the Seven Rivers, to whose intuitional or inspired wisdom (Veda) we owe what are perhaps the most ancient religious effusions extant in any language, apostrophized as living beings the physical objects of their worship. First in this order of Deities stands Indra, the God of the "blue" or "glittering" firmament, called Devaspiti, Father of the Devas or Elemental Powers, who measured out the circle of the sky, and made fast the foundations of the Earth; the ideal domain of Varouna, "the All-encompasser," is almost equally extensive, including air, water, night, the expanse between Heaven and Earth; Agni, who lives on the fire of the sacrifice, on the domestic hearth, and in the lightnings of the sky, is the great Mediator between God and Man; Uschas, or the Dawn, leads forth the Gods in the morning to make their daily repast in the intoxicating Soma of Nature's offertory, of which the Priest could only compound from simples a symbolical imitation. Then came the various Sun-Gods, Adityas or Solar Attributes, Surya the Heavenly, Savitri the Progenitor, Pashan the Nourisher, Bagha the Felicitous, and Mitra the Friend.

The coming forth of the Eternal Being to the work of creation was represented as a marriage, his first emanation being a universal mother, supposed to have potentially existed with him from Eternity, or, in metaphorical language, to have been "his sister and his spouse." She became eventually promoted to be the Mother of the Indian Trinity, of the Deity under His three Attributes, of Creation, Preservation, and Change or Regeneration.

The most popular forms or manifestations of Vishnu the Pre-server, were his successive avataras or historic impersonations,

[p. 603]

which represented the Deity coming forth out of the incomprehensible mystery of His nature, and revealing Himself at those critical epochs which either in the physical or moral world seemed to mark a new commencement of prosperity and order. Combating the power of Evil in the various departments of Nature, and in successive periods of time, the Divinity, though varying in form, is ever in reality the same, whether seen in useful agricultural or social inventions, in traditional victories over rival creeds, or in physical changes faintly discovered through tradition, or suggested by cosmogonical theory. As Rama, the Epic hero armed with sword, club, and arrows, the prototype of Hercules and Mithras, he wrestles like the Hebrew Patriarch with the Powers of Darkness; as Chrishna-Govinda, the Divine Shepherd, he is the Messenger of Peace, overmastering the world by music and love. Under the human form he never ceases to be the Supreme Being. "The foolish" (he says, in Bhagavad Ghita), "unacquainted with my Supreme Nature, despise me in this human form, while men of great minds, enlightened by the Divine principle within them, acknowledge me as incorruptible and before all things, and serve me with undivided hearts." "I am not recognized by all," he says again, "because concealed by the supernatural power which is in me; yet to me are known all things past, present, and to come; I existed before Vaivaswata and Menou. I am the Most High God, the Creator of the World, the Eternal Poorooscha (Man-World or Genius of the World). And although in my own nature I am exempt from liability to birth or death, and am Lord of all created things, yet as often as in the world virtue is enfeebled, and vice and injustice prevail, so often do I become manifest and am revealed from age to age, to save the just, to destroy the guilty, and to reassure the faltering steps of virtue. He who acknowledgeth me as even so, doth not on quitting this mortal frame enter into another, for he entereth into me; and many who have trusted in me have already entered into me, being purified by the power of wisdom. I help those who walk in my path, even as they serve me."

Brahma, the creating agent,  himself, when, by descending into material forms, he became incorporated with his work; and his mythological history was interwoven with that of the Universe. Thus, although spiritually allied to the Supreme, and Lord of all creatures (Prajapati), he shared the imperfection and

[p. 604]

corruption of an inferior nature, and, steeped in manifold and perishable forms, might be said, like the Greek Uranus, to be mutilated and fallen. He thus combined two characters, formless form, immortal and mortal, being and non-being, motion and rest. As Incarnate Intelligence, or THE WORD, he communicated to man what had been revealed to himself by the Eternal, since he is creation's Soul as well as Body, within which the Divine Word is written in those living letters which it is the prerogative of the self-conscious spirit to interpret.

The fundamental principles of the religion of the Hindi's consisted in the belief in the existence of One Being only, of the immortality of the soul, and of a future state of rewards and punishments. Their precepts of morality inculcate the practice of virtue as necessary for procuring happiness even in this transient life; and their religious doctrines make their felicity in a future state to depend upon it.

Besides their doctrine of the transmigration of souls, their dogmas may be epitomized under the following heads: 1st. The existence of one God, from Whom all things proceed, and to Whom all must return. To him they constantly apply these expressions--The Universal and Eternal Essence; that which has ever been and will ever continue; that which vivifies and pervades all things; He who is everywhere present, and causes the celestial bodies to revolve in the course He has prescribed to them. 2d. A tripartite division of the Good Principle, for the purposes of Creation, Preservation, and Renovation by change and death. 3d. The necessary existence of an Evil Principle, occupied in counteracting the benevolent purposes of the first, in their execution by the Devata or Subordinate Genii, to whom is entrusted the control over the various operations of nature.

And this was part of their doctrine: "One great and incomprehensible Being has alone existed from all Eternity. Everything we behold and we ourselves are portions of Him. The soul, mind or intellect, of gods and men, and of all sentient creatures, are detached portions of the Universal Soul, to which at stated periods they are destined to return. But the mind of finite beings is impressed by one uninterrupted series of illusions, which they consider as real, until again united to the great fountain of truth. Of these illusions, the first and most essential is individuality. By its influence, when detached from its source, the soul becomes

[p. 605]

ignorant of its own nature, origin, and destiny. It considers itself as a separate existence, and no longer a spark of the Divinity, a link of one immeasurable chain, an infinitely small but indispensable portion of one great whole."

Their love of imagery caused them to personify what they conceived to be some of the attributes Of God, perhaps in order to present things in a way better adapted to the comprehensions of the vulgar, than the abstruse idea of an indescribable, invisible God; and hence the invention of a Brahma, a Vishnu, and a Siva or Iswara. These were represented under various forms; but no emblem or visible sign of Brihm or Brehm, the Omnipotent, is to be found. They considered the great mystery of the existence of the Supreme Ruler of the Universe, as beyond human comprehension. Every creature endowed with the faculty of thinking, they held, must be conscious of the existence of a God, a first cause; but the attempt to explain the nature of that Being, or in any way to assimilate it with our own, they considered not only a proof of folly, but of extreme impiety.

The following extracts from their books will serve to show what were the real tenets of their creed:

'By one Supreme Ruler is this Universe pervaded; even every world in the whole circle of nature. . There is one Supreme Spirit, which nothing can shake, more swift than the thought of man. That Supreme Spirit moves at pleasure, but in itself is immovable; it is distant from us, yet near us; it pervades this whole system of worlds; yet it is infinitely beyond it. That man who considers all beings as existing even in the Supreme Spirit, and the Supreme Spirit as pervading all beings, henceforth views no creature with contempt.... All spiritual beings are the same in kind with the Supreme Spirit. . . . The pure enlightened soul assumes a luminous form, with no gross body, with no perforation, with no veins or tendons, unblemished, untainted by sin: itself being a ray from the Infinite Spirit, which knows the Past and the Future, which pervades all, which existed with no cause but itself, which created all things as they are, in ages most remote. That all-pervading Spirit which gives light to the visible Sun, even the same in kind am I, though infinitely distant in degree. Let my soul return to the immortal Spirit of God, and then let my body, which ends in ashes, return to dust! O Spirit, who pervadest fire, lead us in a straight path to the riches of beatitude.

[p. 606]

[paragraph continues] Thou, O God, possessest all the treasures of knowledge! Remove each foul taint from our souls!

"From what root springs mortal man, when felled by the hand of death? Who can make him spring again to birth? God, who is perfect wisdom, perfect happiness. He is the final refuge of the man who has liberally bestowed his wealth, who has been firm in virtue, who knows and adores that Great One. . . . Let us adore the supremacy of that Divine Sun, the Godhead who illuminates all, who re-creates all, from whom all proceed, to whom all must return, whom we invoke to direct our understandings aright, in our progress toward his holy seat. . . . What the Sun and Light are to this visible world, such is truth to the intellectual and visible Universe. . . . Our souls acquire certain knowledge, by meditating on the light of Truth, which emanates from the Being of Beings. . . . That Being, without eyes sees, without ears hears all; he knows whatever can be known, but there is none who knows him; him the wise call the Great, Supreme, Pervading Spirit. . . . Perfect Truth, Perfect Happiness, without equal, immortal; absolute unity, whom neither speech can describe, nor mind comprehend: all-pervading, all-transcending, delighted with his own boundless intelligence, nor limited by space or time; without feet, running swiftly; without hands, grasping all worlds; without eyes, all-surveying; without ears, all-hearing; without an intelligent guide, understanding all; without cause, the first of all causes; all-ruling, all-powerful, the Creator, Preserver, Transformer of all things: such is the Great One; this the Vedas declare.

"May that soul of mine, which mounts aloft in my waking hours as an ethereal spark, and which, even in my slumber, has a like ascent, soaring to a great distance, as an emanation from the Light of Lights, be united by devout meditation with the Spirit supremely blest, and supremely intelligent! . . . May that soul of mine, which was itself the primeval oblation placed within all creatures. . . . which is a ray of perfect wisdom, which is the inextinguishable light fixed within created bodies, without which no good act is performed. . . . in which as an immortal essence may be comprised whatever has passed, is present, or will be hereafter. . . . be united by devout meditation with the Spirit supremely blest and supremely intelligent

"The Being of Beings is the Only God, eternal and everywhere present, Who comprises everything. There is no God but He . . . . The

[p. 607]

[paragraph continues] Supreme Being is invisible, incomprehensible, immovable, without figure or shape. No one has ever seen Him; time never comprised Him; His essence pervades everything; all was derived from Him.

"The duty of a good man, even in the moment of his destruction, consists not only in forgiving, but even in a desire of benefiting his destroyer; as the sandal-tree, in the instant of its overthrow, sheds perfume on the axe which fells it."

The Vedanta and Nyaya philosophers acknowledge a Supreme Eternal Being, and the immortality of the soul: though, like the Greeks, they differ in their ideas of those subjects. They speak of the Supreme Being as an eternal essence that pervades space, and gives life or existence. Of that universal and eternal pervading spirit, the Vedanti suppose four modifications; but as these do not change its nature, and as it would be erroneous to ascribe to each of them a distinct essence, so it is equally erroneous, they say, to imagine that the various modifications by which the All-pervading Being exists, or displays His power, are individual existences. Creation is not considered as the instant production of things, but only as the manifestation of that which exists eternally in the one Universal Being. The Nyaya philosophers believe that spirit and matter are eternal; but they do not suppose that the world in its present form has existed from eternity, but only the primary matter from which it sprang when operated on by the almighty Word of God, the Intelligent Cause and Supreme Being, Who produced the combinations or aggregations which compose the material Universe. Though they believe that soul is an emanation from the Supreme Being, they distinguish it from that Being, in its individual existence. Truth and Intelligence are the eternal attributes of God, not, they say, of the individual soul, which is susceptible Both of knowledge and ignorance, of pleasure and pain; and therefore God and it are distinct. Even when it returns to the Eternal, and attains supreme bliss, it undoubtedly does not cease. Though united to the Supreme Being, it is not absorbed in it, but still retains the abstract nature of definite or visible existence.

"The dissolution of the world," they say, "consists in the destruction of the visible forms and qualities of things; but their material essence remains, and from it new worlds are formed by the creative energy of God; and thus the Universe is dissolved and renewed in endless succession."

[p. 608]

The Jainas, a sect at Mysore and elsewhere, say that the ancient religion of India and of the whole world consisted in the belief in one God, a pure Spirit, indivisible, omniscient and all-powerful; that God, having given to all things their appointed order and course of action, and to man a sufficient portion of reason, or understanding, to guide him in his conduct, leaves him to the operation of free will, without the entire exercise of which he could not be held answerable for his conduct.

Menou, the Hindu_ lawgiver, adored, not the visible, material Sun, but "that divine and incomparably greater light," to use the words of the most venerable text in the Indian Scripture, "which illumines all, delights all, from which all proceed, to which all must return, and which alone can irradiate our intellects." He thus commences his Institutes:

"Be it heard!

"This Universe existed only in the first divine idea yet unexpanded, as if involved in darkness, imperceptible, undefinable, undiscoverable by reason, and undiscovered by revelation, as if it were wholly immersed in sleep:

"Then the Sole Self-existing Power, Himself undiscovered, but making this world discernible, with five elements, and other principles of nature, appeared with undiminished glory, expanding His idea, or dispelling the gloom.

"He Whom the mind alone can perceive, whose essence eludes the eternal organs, who has no visible parts, who exists from Eternity, even He, the soul of all beings, Whom no being can comprehend, shone forth.

"He, having willed to produce various beings from His own divine Substance, first with a thought created the waters.... From that which is [precisely the Hebrew w ?Y?H?W?H], the first cause, not the object of sense, existing everywhere in substance, not existing to our perception, without beginning or end" [the A Q.E.D. and U Q.E.D., or the I Q.E.D.A Q.E.D.U Q.E.D.], "was produced the divine male famed in all worlds under the appellation of Brahma."

Then recapitulating the different things created by Brahma, he adds: "He," meaning Brahma [the Logos, the WORD], "whose powers are incomprehensible, having thus created this Universe, was again absorbed in the Supreme Spirit, changing the time of energy for the time of repose."

The Antareya A'ran'ya, one of the Vedas, gives this primitive

[p. 609]

idea of the creation: "In the beginning, the Universe was but a Soul: nothing else, active or inactive, existed. Then HE had this thought, I will create worlds; and thus HE created these different worlds; air, the light, mortal beings, and the waters.

"HE had this thought: Behold the worlds; I will create guardians for the worlds. So HE took of the water and fashioned a being clothed with the human form. He looked upon him, and of that being so contemplated, the mouth opened like an egg, and speech came forth, and from the speech fire. The nostrils opened, and through them went the breath of respiration, and by it the air was propagated. The eyes opened; from them came a luminous ray, and from it was produced the sun. The ears dilated; from them came hearing, and from hearing space:" . . . and, after the body of man, with the senses, was formed;--"HE, the Universal Soul, thus reflected: How can this body exist without Me? He examined through what extremity He could penetrate it. He said to Himself: If, without Me, the World is articulated, breath exhales, and sight sees; if hearing hears, the skin feels, and the: mind reflects, deglutition swallows, and the generative organ fulfils its functions, what then am I? And separating the suture of the cranium, He penetrated into man."

Behold the great fundamental primitive truths! God, an infinite Eternal Soul or Spirit. Matter, not eternal nor self-existent, but created--created by a thought of God. After matter, and worlds, then man, by a like thought: and finally, after endowing him with the senses and a thinking mind, a portion, a spark, of God Himself penetrates the man, and becomes a living spirit within him.

The Vedas thus detail the creation of the world:

"In the beginning there was a single God, existing of Himself; Who, after having passed an eternity absorbed in the contemplation of His own being, desired to manifest His perfections outwardly of Himself; and created the matter of the world. The four elements being thus produced, but still mingled in confusion, He breathed upon the waters, which swelled up into an immense ball in the shape of an. egg, and, developing themselves, became the vault and orb of Heaven which encircles the earth. Having made the earth and the bodies of animal beings, this God, the essence of movement, gave to them, to animate them, a portion of His own being. Thus, the soul of everything that breathes

[p. 610]

being a fraction of the universal soul, none perishes; but each soul merely changes its mould and form, by passing successively into different bodies. Of all forms, that which most pleases the Divine Being is Man, as nearest approaching His own perfections. When a man, absolutely disengaging himself from his senses, absorbs himself in self-contemplation, he comes to discern the Divinity, and becomes part of Him."

The Ancient Persians in many respects resembled the Hindu_s,--in their language, their poetry, and their poetic legends. Their conquests brought them in contact with China; and they subdued Egypt and Judea. Their views of God and religion more resembled those of the Hebrews than those of any other nation; and indeed the latter people borrowed from them some prominent doctrines, that we are in the habit of regarding as an essential part of the original Hebrew creed.

Of the King of Heaven and Father of Eternal Light, of the pure World of LIGHT, of the Eternal WORD by which all things were created, of the Seven Mighty Spirits that stand next to the Throne of Light and Omnipotence, and of the glory of those Heavenly Hosts that encompass that Throne, of the Origin of Evil, and the Prince of Darkness, Monarch of the rebellious spirits, enemies of all good, they entertained tenets very similar to those of the Hebrews. Toward Egyptian idolatry they felt the strongest abhorrence, and under Cambyses pursued a regular plan for its utter extirpation. Xerxes, when he invaded Greece, destroyed the Temples and erected fire-chapels along the whole course of his march. Their religion was eminently spiritual, and the earthly fire and earthly sacrifice were but the signs and emblems of another devotion and a higher power.

Thus the fundamental doctrine of the ancient religion of India and Persia was at first nothing more than a simple veneration of nature, its pure elements and its primary energies, the sacred fire, and above all, Light, the air, not the lower atmospheric air, but the purer and brighter air of Heaven, the breath that animates and pervades the breath of mortal life. This pure and simple veneration of nature is perhaps the most ancient, and was by far the most generally prevalent in the primitive and patriarchal world. It was not originally a deification of nature, or a denial of the sovereignty of God. Those pure elements and primitive essences of created nature offered to the first men, still in a close communication

[p. 611]

with the Deity, not a likeness of resemblance, nor a mere fanciful image or a poetical figure, but a natural and true symbol of Divine power. Everywhere in the Hebrew writings the pure light or sacred fire is employed as an image of the all-pervading and all-consuming power and omnipresence of the Divinity. His breath was the first source of life; and the faint whisper of the breeze announced to the prophet His immediate presence.

"All things are the progeny of one fire. The Father perfected all things, and delivered them over to the Second Mind, whom all nations of men call the First. Natural works co-exist with the intellectual light of the Father; for it is the Soul which adorns the great Heaven, and which adorns it after the Father. The Soul, being a bright fire, by the power of the Father, remains immortal, and is mistress of life, and fills up the recesses of the world. For the fire which is first beyond, did not shut up his power in matter by works, but by mind, for the framer of the fiery world is the mind of mind, who first sprang from mind, clothing fire with fire. Father-begotten Light! for He alone, having from the Father's power received the essence of intellect, is enabled to understand the mind of the Father; and to instill into all sources and principles the capacity of understanding, and of ever continuing in ceaseless revolving motion." Such was the language of Zoroaster, embodying the old Persian ideas.

And the same ancient sage thus spoke of the Sun and Stars: "The Father made the whole Universe of fire and water and earth, and all-nourishing ether. He fixed a great multitude of moveless stars, that stand still forever, not by compulsion and unwillingly, but without desire to wander, fire acting upon fire. He congregated the seven firmaments of the world, and so surrounded the earth with the convexity of the Heavens; and therein set seven living existences, arranging their apparent disorder in regular orbits, six of them planets, and the Sun, placed in the centre, the seventh;--in that centre from which all lines, diverging which way soever, are equal; and the swift sun himself, revolving around a principal centre, and ever striving to reach the central and all-pervading light, bearing with him the bright Moon."

And yet Zoroaster added: "Measure not the journeyings of the Sun, nor attempt to reduce them to rule; for he is carried by the eternal will of the Father, not for your sake. Do not endeavor to understand the impetuous course of the Moon; for she runs

[p. 612]

evermore under the impulse of necessity; and the progression of the Stars was not generated to serve any purpose of yours."

Ormuzd says to Zoroaster, in the Boundehesch: "I am he who holds the Star-Spangled Heaven in ethereal space; who makes this sphere, which once was buried in darkness, a flood of light. Through me the Earth became a world firm and lasting--the earth on which walks the Lord of the world. I am he who makes the light of Sun, Moon, and Stars pierce the clouds. I make the corn seed, which perishing in the ground sprouts anew. . . . I created plan, whose eye is light, whose life is the breath of his nostrils. I placed within him life's unextinguishable power."

Ormuzd or Ahura-Mazda himself represented the primal light, distinct from the heavenly bodies, yet necessary to their existence, and the source of their splendor. The Amschaspands (Ameschaspenta, "immortal Holy Ones"), each presided over a special department of nature. Earth and Heaven, fire and water, the Sun and Moon, the rivers, trees, and mountains, even the artificial divisions of the day and year were addressed in prayer as tenanted by Divine beings, each separately ruling within his several sphere. Fire, in particular, that "most energetic of immortal powers," the visible representative of the primal light, was invoked as "Son of Ormuzd." The Sun, the Archimagus, that noblest and most powerful agent of divine power, who "steps forth as a Conqueror from the top of the terrible Alborj to rule over the world which he enlightens from the throne of Ormuzd," was worshipped among other symbols by the name of MITHRAS, a beneficent and friendly genius, who, in the hymn addressed to him in the Zend-Avesta, bears the names given him by the Greeks, as the "Invincible" and the "Mediator"; the former, because in his daily strife with darkness he is the most active confederate of Ormuzd; the latter, as being the medium through which Heaven's choicest blessings are communicated to men. He is called "the eye of Ormuzd, the effulgent Nero, pursuing his course triumphantly, fertilizer of deserts, most exalted of the Izeds or Yezatas, the never-sleeping, the protector of the land." "When the dragon foe devastates my provinces," says Ormuzd, "and afflicts them with famine, then is he struck down by the strong arm of Mithras, together with the Devs of Mazanderan. With his lance and his immortal club, the Sleepless Chief hurls down the Devs into the dust, when as Mediator he interposes to guard the City from evil,"

[p. 613]

Ahriman was by some Parsee sects considered older than Ormuzd, as darkness is older than light; he is imagined to have been unknown as a Malevolent Being in the early ages of the world, and the fall of man is attributed in the Boundehesch to an apostate worship of him, from which men were converted by a succession of prophets terminating with Zoroaster.

Mithras is not only light, but intelligence; that luminary which, though born in obscurity, will not only dispel darkness but conquer death. The warfare through which this consummation is to be reached, is mainly carried on through the instrumentality of the "Word," that "ever-living emanation of the Deity, by virtue of which the world exists," and of which the revealed formulas incessantly repeated in the liturgies of the Magi are but the expression. "What shall I do," cried Zoroaster, "O Ormuzd, steeped in brightness, in order to battle with Daroodj-Ahriman, father of the Evil Law; how shall I make men pure and holy?" Ormuzd answered and said: "Invoke, O Zoroaster, the pure law of the Servants of Ormuzd; invoke the Amschaspands who shed abundance throughout the seven Keshwars; invoke the Heaven, Zeruana-Akarana, the birds travailing on high, the swift wind, the Earth; invoke my Spirit, me who am Ahura-Mazda, the purest, strongest, wisest, best of beings; me who have the most majestic body, who through purity am Supreme, whose Soul is the Excellent Word; and ye, all people, invoke me as I have commanded Zoroaster."

Ahura-Mazda himself is the living WORD; he is called "First-born of all things, express image of the Eternal, very light of very light, the Creator, who by power of the Word which he never ceases to pronounce, made in 365 days the Heaven and the Earth." The Word is said in the Yashna to have existed before all, and to be itself a Yazata, a personified object of prayer. It was revealed in Serosch, in Homa, and again, under Gushtasp, was manifested in Zoroaster.

Between life and death, between sunshine and shade, Mithras is the present exemplification of the Primal Unity from which all things arose, and into which, through his mediation, all contrarieties will ultimately be absorbed. His annual sacrifice is the Passover of the Magi, a symbolical atonement or pledge of moral and physical regeneration. He created the world in the beginning; and as at the close of each successive year he sets free the current of life to invigorate a fresh circle of being, so in the

[p. 614]

end of all things he will bring the weary sum of ages as a hecatomb before God, releasing by a final sacrifice the Soul of Nature from her perishable frame, to commence a brighter and purer existence.

Iamblichus (De Mys. viii. 4) says: "The Egyptians are far from ascribing all things to physical causes; life and intellect they distinguish from physical being, both in man and in the Universe. They place intellect and reason first as self-existent, and from these they derive the created world. As Parent of generated things they constitute a Demiurge, and acknowledge a vital force both in the Heavens and before the Heavens. They place Pure Intellect above and beyond the Universe, and another (that is, Mind revealed in the Material World), consisting of one continuous mind pervading the Universe, and apportioned to all its parts and spheres." The Egyptian idea, then, was that of all transcendental philosophy--that of a Deity both immanent and transcendent--spirit passing into its manifestations, but not exhausted by so doing.

The wisdom recorded in the canonical rolls of Hermes quickly attained in this transcendental lore, all that human curiosity can ever discover. Thebes especially is said to have acknowledged a being without beginning or end, called Amun or Amun-Kneph, the  Spirit or Breath of Nature, or perhaps even some still more lofty object of reverential reflection, whom it was forbidden even to name. Such a being would in theory stand at the head of the three orders of Gods mentioned by Herodotus, these being regarded as arbitrary classifications of similar or equal beings, arranged in successive emanations, according to an estimate of their comparative dignity. The Eight Great Gods, or primary class, were probably manifestations of the emanated God in the several parts and powers of the Universe, each potentially comprising the whole Godhead.

In the ancient Hermetic books, as quoted by Iamblichus, occurred the following passage in regard to the Supreme Being:

"Before all the things that actually exist, and before all beginnings, there is one God, prior even to the first God and King, remaining unmoved in the singleness of his own Unity: for neither is anything conceived by intellect inwoven with him, nor anything else; but he is established as the exemplar of the God who is good, who is his own father, self-begotten, and has only one

[p. 615]

[paragraph continues] Parent. For he is something greater and prior to, and the fountain of all things, and the foundation of things conceived by the intellect, which are the first species. And from this ONE, the self-originated God caused himself to shine forth; for which reason he is his own father, and self-originated. For he is both a beginning and God of Gods, a Monad from the One, prior to substance and the beginning of substance; for from him is substantiality and substance, whence also he is called the beginning of things conceived by the intellect. These then are the most ancient beginnings of all things, which Hermes places before the ethereal and empyrean and celestial Gods."

"CHANG-TI, or the Supreme Lord or Being," said the old Chinese creed, "is the principle of everything that exists, and Father of all living. He is eternal, immovable, and independent: His power knows no bounds: His sight equally comprehends the Past, the Present, and the Future, and penetrates even to the inmost recesses of the heart. Heaven and earth are under his government: all events, all revolutions, are the consequences of his dispensation and will. He is pure, holy, and impartial; wickedness offends his sight; but he beholds with an eye of complacency the virtuous actions of men. Severe, yet just, he punishes vice in an exemplary manner, even in Princes and Rulers; and often casts down the guilty, to crown with honor the man who walks after his own heart, and whom he raises from obscurity. Good, merciful, and full of pity, he forgives the wicked upon their repentance: and public calamities and the irregularity of the seasons are but salutary warnings, which his fatherly goodness gives to men, to induce them to reform and amend."

Controlled by reason infinitely more than by the imagination, that people, occupying the extreme East of Asia, did not fall into idolatry until after the time of Confucius, and within two centuries of the birth of Christ; when the religion of BUDDHA or Fo was carried thither from India. Their system was long regulated by the pure worship of God, and the foundation of their moral and political existence laid in a sound, upright reason, conformable to true ideas of the Deity. They had no false gods or images, and their third Emperor Hoam-ti erected a Temple, the first probably ever erected, to the Great Architect of the Universe. And though they offered sacrifices to divers tutelary angels, yet they honored

[p. 616]

them infinitely less than XAM-TI or CHANG-TI, the Sovereign Lord of the World.

Confucius forbade making images or representations of the Deity. He attached no idea of personality to Him; but considered Him as a Power or Principle, pervading all Nature. And the Chinese designated the Divinity by the name of THE, DIVINE REASON.

The Japanese believe in a Supreme Invisible Being, not to be represented by images or worshipped in Temples. They styled him AMIDA or OMITH; and say that he is without beginning or end; that he came on earth, where he remained a thousand years, and became the Redeemer of our fallen race: that he is to judge all men; and the good are to live forever, while the bad are to be condemned to Hell.

"The Chang-ti is represented," said Confucius, "under the general emblem of the visible firmament, as well as under the particular symbols of the Sun, the Moon, and the Earth, because by their means we enjoy the gifts of the Chang-ti. The Sun is the source of life and light: the Moon illuminates the world by night. By observing the course of these luminaries, mankind are enabled to distinguish times and seasons. The Ancients, with the view of connecting the act with its object, when they established the practice of sacrificing to the Chang-ti, fixed the day of the Winter Solstice, because the Sun, after having passed through the twelve places assigned apparently by the Chang-ti as its annual residence, began its career anew, to distribute blessings throughout the Earth."

He said: "The TEEN is the universal principle and prolific source of all things. . . . The Chang-ti is the universal principle of existence."

The Arabians never possessed a poetical, high-wrought, and scientifically arranged system of Polytheism. Their historical traditions had much analogy with those of the Hebrews, and coincided with them in a variety of points. The tradition of a purer faith and the simple Patriarchal worship of the Deity; appear never to have been totally extinguished among them; nor did idolatry gain much foothold until near the time of Mahomet; who, adopting the old primeval faith, taught again the doctrine of one God, adding to it that he was His Prophet.

To the mass of Hebrews, as well as to other nations, seem to

[p. 617]

have come fragments only of the primitive revelation: nor do they seem, until after their captivity among the Persians, to have concerned themselves about metaphysical speculations in regard to the Divine Nature and essence; although it is evident, from the Psalms of David, that a select body among them preserved a knowledge, in regard to the Deity, which was wholly unknown to the mass of the people; and those chosen few were made the medium of transition for certain truths, to later ages.

Among the Greeks, the scholars of the Egyptians, all the higher ideas and severer doctrines on the Divinity, his Sovereign Nature and Infinite Might, the Eternal Wisdom and Providence that conducts and directs all things to their proper end, the Infinite Mind and Supreme Intelligence that created all things, and is raised far above external nature,--all these loftier ideas and nobler doctrines were expounded more or less perfectly by Pythagoras, Anaxagoras, and Socrates, and developed in the most beautiful and luminous manner by Plato, and the philosophers that succeeded him. And even in the popular religion of the Greeks are many things capable of a deeper import and more spiritual signification; though they seem only rare vestiges of ancient truth, vague presentiments, fugitive tones, and momentary flashes, revealing a belief in a Supreme Being, Almighty Creator of the Universe, and Common Father of Mankind.

Much of the primitive Truth was taught to Pythagoras by Zoroaster, who himself received it from the Indians. His disciples rejected the use of Temples, of Altars, and of Statues; and smiled at the folly of those nations who imagined that the Deity sprang from or had any affinity with human nature. The tops of the highest mountains were the places chosen for sacrifices. Hymns and prayers were their principal worship. The Supreme God, who fills the wide circle of Heaven, was the object to Whom they were addressed. Such is the testimony of Herodotus. Light they considered not so much as an object of worship, as rather the most pure and lively emblem of, and first emanation from, the Eternal God; and thought that man required something visible or tangible to exalt his mind to that degree of adoration which is due to the Divine Being.

There was a surprising similarity between the Temples, Priests, doctrines, and worship of the Persian Magi and the British Druids. The latter did not worship idols in the human shape,

[p. 618]

because they held that the Divinity, being invisible, ought to be adored without being seen. They asserted the Unity of the God-head. Their invocations were made to the One All-preserving Power; and they argued that, as this power was not matter, it must necessarily be the Deity; and the secret symbol used to express his name was O. I. W. They believed that the earth had sustained one general destruction by water; and would again be destroyed by fire. They admitted the doctrines of the immortality of the soul, a future state, and a day of judgment, which would be conducted on the principle of man's responsibility. They even retained some idea of the redemption of mankind through the death of a Mediator. They retained a tradition of the Deluge, perverted and localized. But, around these fragments of primitive truth they wove a web of idolatry, worshipped two Subordinate Deities under the names of Hu and CERIDWEN, male and female (doubtless the same as Osiris and Isis), and held the doctrine of transmigration.

The early inhabitants of Scandinavia believed in a God who was "the Author of everything that existeth; the Eternal, the Ancient, the Living and Awful Being, the Searcher into concealed things, the Being that never changeth." Idols and visible representations of the Deity were originally forbidden, and He was directed to be worshipped in the lonely solitude of sequestered forests, where He was said to dwell, invisible, and in perfect silence.

The Druids, like their Eastern ancestors, paid the most sacred regard to the odd numbers, which, traced backward, ended in Unity or Deity, while the even numbers ended in nothing. 3 was particularly reverenced. 19 (7+3+32): 30 (7*3+3*3): and 21 (7*3) were numbers observed in the erection of their temples, constantly appearing in their dimensions, and the number and distances of the huge stones.

They were the sole interpreters of religion. They superintended all sacrifices; for no private person could offer one without their permission. They exercised the power of excommunication; and without their concurrence war could not be declared nor peace made: and they even had the power of inflicting the punishment of death. They professed to possess a knowledge of magic, and practised augury for the public service.

They cultivated many of the liberal sciences, and particularly

[p. 619]

astronomy, the favorite science of the Orient; in which they attained considerable proficiency. They considered day as the off-spring of night, and therefore made their computations by nights instead of days; and we, from them, still use the words fortnight and sen'night. They knew the division of the heavens into constellations; and finally, they practised the strictest morality, having particularly the most sacred regard for that peculiarly Masonic virtue, Truth.

In the Icelandic Prose Edda is the following dialogue:

"Who is the first or eldest of the Gods?

"In our language he is called ALFADIR (All-Father, or the Father of All); but in the old Asgard he had twelve names.

"Where is this God? What is his power? and what hath he done to display his glory?

"He liveth from all ages, he governeth all realms, and swayeth all things both great and small.

"He hath formed Heaven and earth, and the air, and all things thereunto belonging.

"He hath made man and given him a soul which shall live and never perish, though the body shall have mouldered away or have been burnt to ashes. And all that are righteous shall dwell with him in the place called Gimli or Vingolf; but the wicked shall go to Hel and thence to Niflhel which is below, in the ninth world."

Almost every heathen nation, so far as we have any knowledge of their mythology, believed in one Supreme Overruling God, whose name it was not lawful to utter.

"When we ascend," says Muller, to the most distant heights of Greek history, the idea of God as the Supreme Being stands before us as a simple fact. Next to this adoration of One God, the Father of Heaven, the Father of men, we find in Greece a Worship of Nature." The original Zeus was the God or Gods, called by the Greeks the Son of Time, meaning that there was no God before Him, but He was Eternal. "Zeus," says the Orphic line, "is the Beginning, Zeus the Middle; out of Zeus all things have been made." And the Peleides of Dodona said, "Zeus was, Zeus is. Zeus will be; O great Zeus!" Zeus nE, Zeus estin, Zeus essetai. u melale Zeu: and he was Zeus, kudistos, megistos, Zeus, Best and Greatest.

[p. 620]

The Parsees, retaining the old religion taught by Zaradisht, say in their catechism: "We believe in only one God, and do not believe in any beside Him; Who created the Heavens, the Earth, the Angels. . . . Our God has neither face nor form, color nor shape, nor fixed place. There is no other like Him, nor can our mind comprehend Him."

The Tetragrammaton, or some other word covered by it, was forbidden to be pronounced. But that its pronunciation might not be lost among the Levites, the High-Priest uttered it in the Temple once a year, on the 10th day of the Month Tisri, the day of the great feast of expiation. During this ceremony, the people were directed to make a great noise, that the Sacred Word might not be heard by any who had not a right to it; for every other, said the Jews, would be incontinently stricken dead.

The Great Egyptian Initiates, before the time of the Jews, did the same thing in regard to the word Isis; which they regarded as sacred and incommunicable.

Origen says: "There are names which have a natural potency. Such as those which the Sages used among the Egyptians, the Magi in Persia, the Brahmins in India. What is called Magic is not a vain and chimerical act, as the Stoics and Epicureans pretend. The names SABAOTH and ADONAI were not made for created beings; but they belong to a mysterious theology, which goes back to the Creator. From Him comes the virtue of these names, when they are arranged and pronounced according to the rules."

The Hindu_ word AUM represented the three Powers combined in their Deity: Brahma, Vishnu, and Siva; or the Creating, Pre-serving, and Destroying Powers: A, the first; U or O^-O^, the second; and M, the third. This word could not be pronounced, except by the letters: for its pronunciation as one word was said to make Earth tremble, and even the Angels of Heaven to quake for fear.

The word AUM, says the Ramayan, represents "The Being of Beings, One Substance in three forms; without mode, without quality, without passion: Immense, Incomprehensible, Infinite, Indivisible, Immutable, Incorporeal, Irresistible."

An old passage in the Purana says: "All the rites ordained in the Vedas, the sacrifices to the fire, and all other solemn purifications, shall pass away; but that which shall never pass away is

[p. 621]

the word A Q.E.D.O^-O^ Q.E.D. M Q.E.D. for it is the symbol of the Lord of all things."

Herodotus says that the Ancient Pelasgi built no temples and worshipped no idols, and had a sacred name of Deity, which it was not permissible to pronounce.

The Clarian Oracle, which was of unknown antiquity, being asked which of the Deities was named IAU, answered in these remarkable words: "The Initiated are bound to conceal the mysterious secrets. Learn, then, that IAUis the Great God Supreme, that ruleth over all."

The Jews consider the True Name of God to be irrecoverably lost by disuse, and regard its pronunciation as one of the Mysteries that will be revealed at the coming of their Messiah. And they attribute its loss to the illegality of applying the Masoretic points to so sacred a Name, by which a knowledge of the proper vowels is forgotten. It is even said, in the Gemara of Abodah Zara, that God permitted a celebrated Hebrew Scholar to be burned by a Roman Emperor, because he had been heard to pronounce the Sacred Name with points.

The Jews feared that the Heathen would get possession of the Name: and therefore, in their copies of the Scriptures, they wrote it in the Samaritan character, instead of the Hebrew or Chaldaic, that the adversary might not make an improper use of it: for they believed it capable of working miracles; and held that the wonders in Egypt were performed by Moses, in virtue of this name being engraved on his rod: and that any person who knew the true pronunciation would be able to do as much as he did.

Josephus says it was unknown until God communicated it to Moses in the wilderness: and that it was lost through the wickedness of man.

The followers of Mahomet have a tradition that there is a secret name of the Deity which possesses wonderful properties; and that the only method of becoming acquainted with it, is by being initiated into the Mysteries of the Ism Abla.

H Q.E.D.O Q.E.D.M Q.E.D. was the first framer of the new religion among the Persians, and His Name was Ineffable.

AMUN, among the Egyptians, was a name pronounceable by none save the Priests.

The old Germans adored God with  reverence, without daring to name Him, or to worship Him in Temples.

[p. 622]

The Druids expressed the name of Deity by the letters O Q.E.D.I Q.E.D.W Q.E.D.

Among all the nations of primitive antiquity, the doctrine of the immortality of the soul was not a mere probable hypothesis, needing laborious researches and diffuse argumentation to produce conviction of its truth. Nor can we hardly give it the name of Faith; for it was a lively certainty, like the feeling of one's own existence and identity, and of what is actually present; exerting its influence on all sublunary affairs, and the motive of mightier deeds and enterprises than any mere earthly interest could inspire.

Even the doctrine of transmigration of souls, universal among the Ancient Hindu_s and Egyptians, rested on a basis of the old primitive religion, and was connected with a sentiment purely religious. It involved this noble element of truth: That since man had gone astray, and wandered far from God, he must needs make many efforts, and undergo a long and painful pilgrimage, before he could rejoin the Source of all Perfection: and the firm conviction and positive certainty, that nothing defective, impure, or defiled with earthy stains, could enter the pure region of perfect spirits, or be eternally united to God; wherefore the soul had to pass through long trials and many purifications before it could attain that blissful end. And the end and aim of all these systems of philosophy was the final deliverance of the soul from the old calamity, the dreaded fate and frightful lot of being compelled to wander through the dark regions of nature and the various forms of the brute creation, ever changing its terrestrial shape, and its union with God, which they held to be the lofty destiny of the wise and virtuous soul.

Pythagoras gave to the doctrine of the transmigration of souls that meaning which the wise Egyptians gave to it in their Mysteries. He never taught the doctrine in that literal sense in which it was understood by the people. Of that literal doctrine not the least vestige is to be found in such of his symbols as remain, nor in his precepts collected by his disciple Lysias. He held that men always remain, in their essence, such as they were created; and can degrade themselves only by vice, and ennoble themselves only by virtue.

Hierocles, one of his most zealous and celebrated disciples, expressly says that he who believes that the soul of man, after his death, will enter the body of a beast, for his vices, or become a

[p. 623]

plant for his stupidity, is deceived; and is absolutely ignorant of the eternal form of the soul, which can never change; for, always remaining man, it is said to become God or beast, through virtue or vice, though it can become neither one nor the other by nature, but solely by resemblance of its inclinations to theirs.

And Timaeus of Locria, another disciple, says that to alarm men and prevent them from committing crimes, they menaced them with strange humiliations and punishments; even declaring that their souls would pass into new bodies,--that of a coward into the body of a deer; that of a ravisher into the body of a wolf; that of a murderer into the body of some still more ferocious animal; and that of an impure sensualist into the body of a hog.

So, too, the doctrine is explained in the Phaedo. And Lysias days, that after the soul, purified of its crimes, has left the body and returned to Heaven, it is no longer subject to change or death, but enjoys an eternal felicity. According to the Indians, it returned to, and became a part of, the universal soul which animates everything.

The Hindu_s held that Buddha descended on earth to raise all human beings up to the perfect state. He will ultimately succeed, and all, himself included, be merged in Unity.

Vishnu is to judge the world at the last day. It is to be consumed by fire: The Sun and Moon are to lose their light; the Stars to fall; and a New Heaven and Earth to be created.

The legend of the fall of the Spirits, obscured and distorted, is preserved in the Hindu Mythology. And their traditions acknowledged, and they revered, the succession of the first ancestors of mankind, or the Holy Patriarchs of the primitive world, under the name of the Seven Great RISHIS, or Sages of hoary antiquity; though they invested their history with a cloud of fictions.

The Egyptians held that the soul was immortal; and that Osiris was to judge the world.

And thus reads the Persian legend:

"After Ahriman shall have ruled the world until the end of time, SOSIOSCH, the promised Redeemer, will come and annihilate the power of the DEVS (or Evil Spirits), awaken the dead, and sit in final judgment upon spirits and men. After that the comet Gurzsher will be thrown down, and a general conflagration take place, which will consume the whole world. The remains of the

[p. 624]

earth will then sink down into Duzakh, and become for three periods a place of punishment for the wicked. Then, by degrees, all will be pardoned, even Ahriman and the Devs, and admitted to the regions of bliss, and thus there will be a new Heaven and a new earth."

In the doctrines of Lamaism also, we find, obscured, and partly concealed in fiction, fragments of the primitive truth. For, according to that faith, "There is to be a final judgment before ESLIK KHAN: The good are to be admitted to Paradise, the bad to be banished to hell, where there are eight regions burning hot and eight freezing cold."

In the Mysteries, wherever they were practised, was taught that truth of the primitive revelation, the existence of One Great Being, Infinite and pervading the Universe, Who was there worshipped without superstition; and His marvellous nature, essence, and attributes taught to the Initiates; while the vulgar attributed His works to Secondary Gods, personified, and isolated from Him in fabulous independence.

These truths were covered from the common people as with a veil; and the Mysteries were carried into every country, that, without disturbing the popular beliefs, truth, the arts, and the sciences might be known to those who were capable of understanding them, and maintaining the true doctrine incorrupt; which the people, prone to superstition and idolatry, have in no age been able to do; nor, as many strange aberrations and superstitions of the present day prove, any more now than heretofore. For we need but point to the doctrines of so many sects that degrade the Creator to the rank, and assign to Him the passions of humanity, to prove that now, as always, the old truths must be committed to a few, or they will be overlaid with fiction and error, and irretrievably lost.

Though Masonry is identical with the Ancient Mysteries, it is so in this qualified sense; that it presents but an imperfect image of their brilliancy; the ruins only of their grandeur, and a system that has experienced progressive alterations, the fruits of social events and political circumstances. Upon leaving Egypt, the Mysteries were modified by the habits of the different nations among whom they were introduced. Though originally more moral and political than religious, they soon became the heritage, as it were, of the priests, and essentially religious, though in reality

[p. 625]

limiting the sacerdotal power, by teaching the intelligent laity the folly and absurdity of the creeds of the populace. They were therefore necessarily changed by the religious systems of the countries into which they were transplanted. In Greece, they were the Mysteries of Ceres; in Rome, of Bona Dea, the Good Goddess; in Gaul, the School of Mars; in Sicily, the Academy of the Sciences; among the Hebrews, they partook of the rites and ceremonies of a religion which placed all the powers of government, and all the knowledge, in the hands of the Priests and Levites. The pagodas of India, the retreats of the Magi of Persia and Chaldea, and the pyramids of Egypt, were no longer the sources at which men drank in knowledge. Each people, at all informed, had its Mysteries. After a time the Temples of Greece and the School of Pythagoras lost their reputation, and Freemasonry took their place.

Masonry, when properly expounded, is at once the interpretation of the great book of nature, the recital of physical and astronomical phenomena, the purest philosophy, and the place of deposit, where, as in a Treasury, are kept in safety all the great truths of the primitive revelation, that form the basis of all religions. In the modern Degrees three things are to be recognized: The image of primeval times, the tableau of the efficient causes of the Universe, and the book in which are written the morality of all peoples, and the code by which they must govern themselves if they would be prosperous.

The Kabalistic doctrine was long the religion of the Sage and the Savant; because, like Freemasonry, it incessantly tends toward spiritual perfection, and the fusion of the creeds and Nationalities of Mankind. In the eyes of the Kabalist, all men are his brothers; and their relative ignorance is, to him, but a reason for instructing them. There were illustrious Kabalists among the Egyptians and Greeks, whose doctrines the Orthodox Church has accepted; and among the Arabs were many, whose wisdom was not slighted by the Mediaeval Church.

The Sages proudly wore the name of Kabalists. The Kabalah embodied a noble philosophy, pure, not mysterious, but symbolic. It taught the doctrine of the Unity of God, the art of knowing and explaining the essence and operations of the Supreme Being, of spiritual powers and natural forces, and of determining their action by symbolic figures; by the arrangement of the alphabet,

[p. 626]

the combinations of numbers, the inversion of letters in writing and the concealed meanings which they claimed to discover therein. The Kabalah is the key of the occult sciences; and the Gnostics were born of the Kabalists.

The science of numbers represented not only arithmetical qualities, but also all grandeur, all proportion. By it we necessarily arrive at the discovery of the Principle or First Cause of things, called at the present day THE ABSOLUTE.

Or UNITY,--that loftiest term to which all philosophy directs itself; that imperious necessity of the human mind, that pivot round which it is compelled to group the aggregate of its ideas: Unity, this source, this centre of all systematic order, this principle of existence, this central point, unknown in its essence, but manifest in its effects; Unity, that sublime centre to which the chain of causes necessarily ascends, was the august Idea toward which all the ideas of Pythagoras converged. He refused the title of Sage, which means one who knows. He invented, and applied to himself that of Philosopher, signifying one who is fond of or studies things secret and occult. The astronomy which he mysteriously taught, was astrology: his science of numbers was based on Kabalistical principles.

The Ancients, and Pythagoras himself, whose real principles have not been always understood, never meant to ascribe to numbers, that is to say, to abstract signs, any special virtue. But the Sages of Antiquity concurred in recognizing a ONE FIRST CAUSE (material or spiritual) of the existence of the Universe. Thence, UNITY became the symbol of the Supreme Deity. It was made to express, to represent God; but without attributing to the mere, number ONE any divine or supernatural virtue.

The Pythagorean ideas as to particular numbers are partially expressed in the following

  

LECTURE OT THE KABALISTS.

Qu Q.E.D. Why did you seek to be received a Knight of the Kabalah?

Ans Q.E.D. To know, by means of numbers, the admirable harmony which there is between nature and religion.

Qu Q.E.D. How were you announced?

Ans Q.E.D. By twelve raps.

Qu Q.E.D. What do they signify?

[p. 627]

Ans Q.E.D. The twelve bases of our temporal and spiritual happiness.

Qu Q.E.D. What is a Kabalist?

Ans Q.E.D. A man who has learned, by tradition, the Sacerdotal Art and the Royal Art.

Qu Q.E.D. What means the device, Omnia in numeris sita sunt?

Ans Q.E.D. That everything lies veiled in numbers.

Qu Q.E.D. Explain me that.

Ans Q.E.D. I will do so, as far as the number 12. Your sagacity will discern the rest.

Qu Q.E.D. What signifies the unit in the number 10?

Ans Q.E.D. Gob, creating and animating matter, expressed by O, which, alone, is of no value.

Qu Q.E.D. What does the unit mean?

Ans Q.E.D. In the moral order, a Word incarnate in the bosom of a virgin--or religion. . . . In the physical, a spirit embodied in the virgin earth--or nature.

Qu Q.E.D. What do you mean by the number two?

Ans Q.E.D. In the moral order, man and woman. . . . In the physical, the active and the passive.

Qu Q.E.D. What do you mean by the number 3?

Ans Q.E.D. In the moral order, the three theological virtues. . . . In the physical, the three principles of bodies.

Qu Q.E.D. What do you mean by the number 4?

Ans Q.E.D. The four cardinal virtues. . . . The four elementary qualities.

Qu Q.E.D. What do you mean by the number 5?

Ans Q.E.D. The quintessence of religion. . . . The quintessence of matter.

Qu Q.E.D. What do you mean by the number 6?

Ans Q.E.D. The theological cube . . . The physical cube.

Qu Q.E.D. What do you mean by the number 7?

Ans Q.E.D. The seven sacraments . . . The seven planets.

Qu Q.E.D. What do you mean by the number 8?

Ans Q.E.D. The small number of Elus . . . The small number of wise men.

Qu Q.E.D. What do you mean by the number 9?

Ans Q.E.D. The exaltation of religion . . . The exaltation of matter.

Qu Q.E.D. What do you mean by the number 10?

Ans Q.E.D. The ten commandments . . . The ten precepts of nature.

Qu Q.E.D. What do you mean by the number 11?

[p. 628]

Ans Q.E.D. The multiplication of religion . . . The multiplication of nature.

Qu Q.E.D. What do you mean by the number 12?

Ans Q.E.D. The twelve Articles of Faith; the twelve Apostles, foundation of the Holy City, who preached throughout the whole world, for our happiness and spiritual joy . . . The twelve operations of nature: The twelve signs of the Zodiac, foundation of the Primum Mobile, extending it throughout the Universe for our temporal felicity.

[The Rabbi (President of the Sanhedrin) adds: From all that you have said, it results that the unit develops itself in 2, is completed in three internally, and so produces 4 externally; whence, through 6, 7, 8, 9, it arrives at 5, half of the spherical number 10, to ascend, passing through 11, to 12, and to raise itself, by the number 4 times 10, to the number 6 times 12, the final term and summit of our eternal happiness.]

Qu Q.E.D. What is the generative number?

Ans Q.E.D. In the Divinity, it is the unit; in created things, the number 2: Because the Divinity, 1, engenders 2, and in created things 2 engenders 1.

Qu Q.E.D. What is the most majestic number?

Ans Q.E.D. 3, because it denotes the triple divine essence.

Qu Q.E.D. What is the most mysterious number?

Ans Q.E.D. 4, because it contains all the mysteries of nature.

Qu Q.E.D. What is the most occult number?

Ans Q.E.D. 5, because it is inclosed in the centre of the series.

Qu Q.E.D. What is the most salutary number?

Ans Q.E.D. 6, because it contains the source of our spiritual and corporeal happiness.

Qu Q.E.D. What is the most fortunate number?

Ans Q.E.D. 7, because it leads us to the decade, the perfect number.

Qu Q.E.D. Which is the number most to be desired?

Ans Q.E.D. 8, because he who possesses it, is of the number of the plus and Sages.

Qu Q.E.D. Which is the most sublime number?

Ans Q.E.D. 9, because by it religion and nature are exalted.

Qu Q.E.D. Which is the most perfect number?

Ans Q.E.D. 10, because it includes unity, which created everything, and zero, symbol of matter and chaos, whence everything emerged.

[p. 629]

[paragraph continues] In its figures it comprehends the created and uncreated, the commencement and the end, power and force, life and annihilation. By the study of this number, we find the relations of all things; the power of the Creator, the faculties of the creature, the Alpha and Omega of divine knowledge.

Qu Q.E.D. Which is the most multiplying number?

Ans Q.E.D. 11, because with the possession of two units, we arrive at the multiplication of things.

Qu Q.E.D. Which is the most solid number?

Ans Q.E.D. 12, because it is the foundation of our spiritual and temporal happiness.

Qu Q.E.D. Which is the favorite number of religion and nature?

Ans Q.E.D. 4 times 10, because it enables us, rejecting everything impure, eternally to enjoy the number 6 times 12, term and summit of our felicity.

Qu Q.E.D. What is the meaning of the square?

Ans Q.E.D. It is the symbol of the four elements contained in the triangle, or the emblem of the three chemical principles: these things united form absolute unity in the primal matter.

Qu Q.E.D. What is the meaning of the centre of the circumference?

Ans Q.E.D. It signifies the universal spirit, vivifying centre of nature.

Qu Q.E.D. What do you mean by the quadrature of the circle?

Ans Q.E.D. The investigation of the quadrature of the circle indicates the knowledge of the four vulgar elements, which are themselves composed of elementary spirits or chief principles; as the circle, though round, is composed of lines, which escape the sight, and are seen only by the mind.

Qu Q.E.D. What is the profoundest meaning of the figure 3?

Ans Q.E.D. The Father, the Son, and the Holy Spirit. From the action of these three results the triangle within the square; and from the seven angles, the decade or perfect number.

Qu Q.E.D. Which is the most confused figure?

Ans Q.E.D. Zero,--the emblem of chaos, formless mixture of the elements.

Qu Q.E.D. What do the four devices of the Degree signify?

Ans Q.E.D. That we are to hear, see, be silent, and enjoy our happiness.

The unit is the symbol of identity, equality, existence, conservation, and general harmony; the Central Fire, the Point within the Circle.

[p. 630]

Two, or the duad, is the symbol of diversity, inequality, division, separation, and vicissitudes.

The figure 1 signifies the living man [a body standing upright]; man being the only living being possessed of this faculty. Adding to it a head, we have the letter P, the sign of Paternity, Creative

Power; and with a further addition, R, signifying man in motion, going, Iens, Iturus.

The Duad is the origin of contrasts. It is the imperfect condition into which, according to the Pythagoreans, a being falls, when he detaches himself from the Monad, or God. Spiritual beings,

emanating from God, are enveloped in the duad, and therefore receive only illusory impressions.

As formerly the number ONE designated harmony, order, or the Good Principle (the ONE and ONLY GOD, expressed in Latin by Solus, whence the words Sol, Soleil, symbol of this God), the number Two expressed the contrary idea. There commenced the fatal knowledge of good and evil. Everything double, false, opposed to the single and sole reality, was expressed by the Binary number. It expressed also that state of contrariety in which nature exists, where everything is double; night and day, light and darkness, cold and heat, wet and dry, health and sickness, error and truth, one and the other sex, etc. Hence the Romans dedicated the second month in the year to Pluto, the God of Hell, and the second day of that month to the manes of the dead.

The number One, with the Chinese, signified unity, harmony, order, the Good Principle, or God; Two, disorder, duplicity, false-hood. That people, in the earliest ages, based their whole philosophical system on the two primary figures or lines, one straight and unbroken, and the other broken or divided into two; doubling which, by placing one under the other, and trebling by placing three under each other, they made the four symbols and eight Koua; which referred to the natural elements, and the primary principles of all things, and served symbolically or scientifically to express them. Plato terms unity and duality the original elements of nature, and first principles of all existence: and the oldest sacred book of the Chinese says: "The Great First Principle has produced two equations and differences, or primary rules of existence; but the two primary rules or two oppositions, namely YN and YANG, or repose and motion, have produced four signs or

[p. 631]

symbols, and the four symbols have produced the eight KOUA or further combinations."

The interpretation of the Hermetic fables shows, among every ancient people, in their principal gods, first, 1, the Creating Monad, then 3, then 3 times 3, 3 times 9, and 3 times 27. This triple progression has for its foundation the three ages of Nature, the Past, the Present, and the Future; or the three degrees of universal generation. . . Birth, Life, Death... Beginning, middle, end.

The Monad was male, because its action produces no change in itself, but only out of itself. It represented the creative principle.

The Duad, for a contrary reason, was female, ever changing by addition, subtraction, or multiplication. It represents matter capable of form.

The union of the Monad and Duad produces the Triad, signifying the world formed by the creative principle out of matter. Pythagoras represented the world by the right-angled triangle, in which the squares of the two shortest sides are equal, added together, to the square of the longest one; as the world, as formed, is equal to the creative cause, and matter clothed with form.

The ternary is the first of the unequal numbers. The Triad, mysterious number, which plays so great a part in the traditions of Asia and the philosophy of Plato, image of the Supreme Being, includes in itself the properties of the first two numbers. It was, to the Philosophers, the most excellent and favorite number: a mysterious type, revered by all antiquity, and consecrated in the Mysteries; wherefore there are but three essential Degrees among Masons; who venerate, in the triangle, the most august mystery, that of the Sacred Triad, object of their homage and study.

In geometry, a line cannot represent a body absolutely perfect. As little do two lines constitute a figure demonstratively perfect. But three lines form, by their junction, the TRIANGLE, or the first figure regularly perfect; and this is why it has served and still serves to characterize The Eternal; Who, infinitely perfect in His nature, is, as Universal Creator, the first Being, and consequently the first Perfection.

The Quadrangle or Square, perfect as it appears, being but the second perfection, can in no wise represent God; Who is the first. It is to be noted that the name of God in Latin and French (Deus, Dieu), has for its initial the Delta or Greek Triangle. Such is the reason, among ancients and moderns, for the consecration

[p. 632]

of the Triangle, whose three sides are emblems of the three Kingdoms, or Nature, or God. In the centre is the Hebrew JOD (initial of w ?Y?H?W?H), the Animating Spirit of Fire, the generative principle, represented by the letter G., initial of the name of Deity in the languages of the North, and the meaning whereof is Generation.

The first side of the Triangle, offered to the study of the Apprentice, is the mineral kingdom, symbolized by Tub Q.E.D.

The second side, the subject of the meditations of the Fellow Craft, is the vegetable kingdom, symbolized by Schib Q.E.D. (an ear of corn). In this reign begins the Generation of bodies; and this is why the letter G., in its radiance, is presented to the eyes of the adept.

The third side, the study whereof is devoted to the animal kingdom, and completes the instruction of the Master, is symbolized by Mach Q.E.D. (Son of putrefaction).

The figure 3 symbolizes the Earth. It is a figure of the terrestrial bodies. The 2, upper half of 3, symbolizes the vegetable world, the lower half being hidden from our sight.

Three also referred to harmony, friendship, peace, concord, and temperance; and was so highly esteemed among the Pythagoreans that they called it perfect harmony.

Three, four, ten, and twelve were sacred numbers among the Etrurians, as they were among the Jews, Egyptians, and Hindu_s.

The name of Deity, in many Nations, consisted of three letters: among the Greeks, I Q.E.D.A Q.E.D. U Q.E.D.; among the Persians, H Q.E.D.O Q.E.D.M Q.E.D.; among the Hindu_s, AUM; among the Scandinavians, I Q.E.D.O Q.E.D.W Q.E.D.. On the upright Tablet of the King, discovered at Nimroud, no less than five of the thirteen names of the Great Gods consist of three letters each,--ANU, SAN, YAV, BAR, and BEL.

The quaternary is the most perfect number, and the root of other numbers, and of all things. The tetrad expresses the first mathematical power. Four represents also the generative power, from which all combinations are derived. The Initiates considered it the emblem of Movement and the Infinite, representing everything that is neither corporeal nor sensible. Pythagoras communicated it to his disciples as a symbol of the Eternal and Creative Principle, under the name of Quaternary, the Ineffable Name of God, which signifies Source of everything that has received existence; and which, in Hebrew, is composed of four letters.

[p. 633]

In the Quaternary we find the first solid figure, the universal symbol of immortality, the pyramid. The Gnostics claimed that the whole edifice of their science rested on a square whose angles were . . . Sige, Silence: Bythos Profundity: Noos, Intelligence: and Aletheia, Truth. For if the Triangle, figured by the number 3, forms the triangular base of the pyramid, it is unity which forms its point or summit.

Lysias and Timaeus of Locria said that not a single thing could be named, which did not depend on the quaternary as its root.

There is, according to the Pythagoreans, a connection between the gods and numbers, which constitutes the kind of Divination called Arithmomancy. The soul is a number: it is moved of itself: it contains in itself the quaternary number.

Matter being represented by the number 9, or 3 times 3, and the Immortal Spirit having for its essential hieroglyphic the quaternary or the number 4, the Sages said that Man, having gone astray and become entangled in an inextricable labyrinth, in going from four to nine, the only way which he could take to emerge from these deceitful paths, these disastrous detours, and the abyss of evil into which he had plunged, was to retrace his steps, and go from nine to four.

The ingenious and mystical idea which caused the Triangle to be venerated, was applied to the figure 4 (4). It was said that it expressed a living being, I, bearer of the Triangle tri, the emblem of God; i.e., man bearing with himself a Divine principle.

Four was a divine number; it referred to the Deity, and many Ancient Nations gave God a name of four letters; as the Hebrews w ?Y?H?W?H, the Egyptians AMUN, the Persians SURA, the Greeks ThEOS, and the Latins DEUS. This was the Tetragrammaton of the Hebrews, and the Pythagoreans called it Tetractys, and swore their most solemn oath by it. So too ODIN among the Scandinavians, ZEYS among the Greeks, PHTA among the Egyptians, THOTH among the Phoenicians, and AS-UR and NEBO among the Assyrians. The list might be indefinitely extended.

The number 5 was considered as mysterious, because it was compounded of the Binary, Symbol of the False and Double, and the Ternary, so interesting in its results. It thus energetically expresses the state of imperfection, of order and disorder, of happiness and misfortune, of life and death, which we see upon the earth. To the Mysterious Societies it offered the fearful image of

[p. 634]

the Bad Principle, bringing trouble into the inferior order,--in a word, the Binary acting in the Ternary.

Under another aspect it was the emblem of marriage; because it is composed of 2, the first equal number, and of 3, the first unequal number. Wherefore Juno, the Goddess of Marriage, had for her hieroglyphic the number 5.

Moreover, it has one of the properties of the number 9, that of reproducing itself, when multiplied by itself: there being always a 5 on the right hand of the product; a result which led to its use as a symbol of material changes.

The ancients represented the world by the number 5. A reason for it, given by Diodorus, is, that it represents earth, water, air, fire, and ether or spirit. Thence the origin of pente (5) and Pan the Universe, as the whole.

The number 5 designated the universal quintessence, and symbolized, by its form s, the vital essence, the animating spirit, which flows [serpentat] through all nature. In fact, this ingenious figure is the union of the two Greek accents ' ', placed over those vowels which ought to be or ought not to be aspirated. The first sign ' bears the name of potent spirit; and signifies the Superior Spirit, the Spirit of God aspirated (spiratus), respired by man. The second sign ' is styled mild spirit, and represents the secondary spirit, the spirit purely human.

The triple triangle, a figure of five lines uniting in five points, was among the Pythagoreans an emblem of Health.

It is the Pentalpha of Pythagoras, or Pentangle of Solomon; has five lines and five angles; and is, among Masons, the outline or origin of the five-pointed Star, and an emblem of Fellowship.

The number 6 was, in the Ancient Mysteries, a striking emblem of nature; as presenting the six dimensions of all bodies; the six lines which make up their form, viz., the four lines of direction, toward the North, South, East, and West; with the two lines of height and depth, responding to the zenith and nadir. The sages applied the senary to the physical man; while the septenary was, for them, the symbol of his immortal spirit.

The hieroglyphical senary (the double equilateral triangle) is the symbol of Deity.

Six is also an emblem of health, and the symbol of justice; because it is the first perfect number; that is, the first whose aliquot parts (1/2, 1/3, 1/6, or 3, 2, and 1), added together, make itself.

[p. 635]

Ormuzd created six good spirits, and Ahriman six evil ones. These typify the six Summer and the six Winter months.

No number has ever been so universally in repute as the septenary. Its celebrity is due, no doubt, to the planets being seven in number. It belongs also to sacred things. The Pythagoreans regarded it as formed of the numbers 3 and 4; the first whereof was, in their eyes, the image of the three material elements, and the second the principle of everything that is neither corporeal nor sensible. It presented them, from that point of view, the emblem of everything that is perfect.

Considered as composed of 6 and unity, it serves to designate the invisible centre or soul of everything; because no body exists, of which six lines do not constitute the form, nor without a seventh interior point, as the centre and reality of the body, whereof the external dimensions give only the appearance.

The numerous applications of the septenary confirmed the ancient sages in the use of this symbol. Moreover, they exalted the properties of the number 7, as having, in a subordinate manner, the perfection of the unit: for if the unit is untreated, if no number produces it, the seven is also not engendered by any number contained in the interval between 1 and 10. The number 4 occupies an arithmetical middle-ground between the unit and 7, inasmuch as it is as much over 1, as it is under 7, the difference each way being 3.

The number 7, among the Egyptians, symbolized life; and this is why the letter Z of the Greeks was the initial of the verb Zau, I live; and Zeus (Jupiter), Father of Life.

The number 8, or the octary, is composed of the sacred numbers 3 and 5. Of the heavens, of the seven planets, and of the sphere of the fixed stars, or of the eternal unity and the mysterious number 7, is composed the ogdoade, the number 8, the first cube of equal numbers, regarded as sacred in the arithmetical philosophy.

The Gnostic ogdoade had eight stars, which represented the eight Cabiri of Samothrace, the eight Egyptian and Phoenician principles, the eight gods of Xenocrates, the eight angles of the cubic stone.

The number eight symbolizes perfection: and its figure, 8 or ###8734### indicates the perpetual and regular course of the Universe.

It is the first cube (2 * 2 * 2), and signifies friendship, prudence,

[p. 636]

counsel, and justice. It was a symbol of the primeval law which regarded all men as equal.

The novary, or triple ternary. If the number three was celebrated among the ancient sages, that of three times three had no less celebrity; because, according to them, each of the three elements which constitute our bodies is ternary: the water containing earth and fire; the earth containing igneous and aqueous particles; and the fire being tempered by globules of water and terrestrial corpuscles which serve to feed it. No one of the three elements being entirely separated from the others, all material beings composed of these three elements, whereof each is triple, may be designated by the figurative number of three times three, which has become the symbol of all formations of bodies. Hence the name of ninth envelope, given to matter. Every material extension, every circular line, has for representative sign the number nine, among the Pythagoreans; who had observed the property which this number possesses, of reproducing itself incessantly and entire, in every multiplication; thus offering to the mind a very striking emblem of matter which is incessantly composed before our eyes, after having undergone a thousand decompositions.

The number nine was consecrated to the Spheres and the Muses. It is the sign of every circumference; because a circle of 360 degrees is equal to 9, that is to say, 3 + 6 + 0 = 9. Nevertheless, the ancients regarded this number with a sort of terror: they considered it a bad presage; as the symbol of versatility, of change, and the emblem of the frailty of human affairs. Wherefore they avoided all numbers where nine appears, and chiefly 81, the product of 9 multiplied by itself, and the addition whereof, 8 + 1, again presents the number 9.

As the figure of the number 6 was the symbol of the terrestrial globe, animated by a divine spirit, the figure of the number 9 symbolized the earth, under the influence of the Evil Principle; and thence the terror it inspired. Nevertheless, according to the Kabalists, the figure 9 symbolizes the generative egg, or the image of a little globular being, from whose lower side seems to flow its spirit of life.

The Ennead, signifying an aggregate of 9 things or persons, is the first square of unequal numbers.

Every one is aware of the singular properties of the number 9,

[p. 637]

which, multiplied by itself or any other number whatever, gives a result whose final sum is always 9, or always divisible by 9.

Nine, multiplied by each of the ordinary numbers, produces an arithmetical progression, each member whereof, composed of two figures, presents a remarkable fact; for example:

          1

       2

       3

       4

       5

       6

       7

       8

       9

       10

     
      9

       18

       27

       36

       45

       54

       63

       72

       81

       90

     
   The first line of figures gives the regular series, from 1 to 10. The second reproduces this line doubly; first ascending, from the first figure of 18, and then returning from the second figure of 81.

It follows, from the curious fact, that the half of the numbers which compose this progression represents, in inverse order, the figures of the second half:

[p. 638]

The number 10, or the Denary, is the measure of everything; and reduces multiplied numbers to unity. Containing all the numerical and harmonic relations, and all the properties of the numbers which precede it, it concludes the Abacus or Table of Pythagoras. To the Mysterious Societies, this number typified the assemblage of all the wonders of the Universe. They wrote it thus th, that is to say, Unity in the middle of Zero, as the centre of a circle, or symbol of Deity. They saw in this figure everything that should lead to reflection: the centre, the ray, and the circumference, represented to them God, Man, and the Universe.

This number was, among the Sages, a sign of concord, love, and peace. To Masons it is a sign of union and good faith; because it is expressed by joining two hands, or the Master's grip, when the number of fingers gives 10: and it was represented by the Tetractys of Pythagoras.

The number 12, like the number 7, is celebrated in the worship of nature. The two most famous divisions of the heavens, that by 7, which is that of the planets, and that by 12, which is that of the Signs of the Zodiac, are found upon the religious monuments of all the peoples of the Ancient World, even to the remote extremes of the East. Although Pythagoras does not speak of the number 12, it is none the less a sacred number. It is the image of the Zodiac; and consequently that of the Sun, which rules over it.

Such are the ancient ideas in regard to those numbers which so often appear in Masonry; and rightly understood, as the old Sages understood them, they contain many a pregnant lesson.

Before we enter upon the final lesson of Masonic Philosophy, we will delay a few moments to repeat to you the Christian interpretations of the Blue Degrees.

[p. 639]

In the First Degree, they said, there are three symbols to be applied.

1st. Man, after the fall, was left naked and defenceless against the just anger of the Deity. Prone to evil, the human race staggered blindly onward into the thick darkness of unbelief, bound fast by the strong cable-tow of the natural and sinful will. Moral corruption was followed by physical misery. Want and destitution invaded the earth. War and Famine and Pestilence filled up the measure of evil, and over the sharp flints of misfortune and wretchedness man toiled with naked and bleeding feet. This condition of blindness, destitution, misery, and bondage, from which to save the world the Redeemer came, is symbolized by the condition of the candidate, when he is brought up for the first time to the door of the Lodge.

2d. Notwithstanding the death of the Redeemer, man can be saved only by faith, repentance, and reformation. To repent, he must feel the sharp sting of conscience and remorse, like a sword piercing his bosom. His confidence in his guide, whom he is told to follow and fear no danger; his trust in God, which he is caused to profess; and the point of the sword that is pressed against his naked left breast over the heart, are symbolical of the faith, repentance and reformation necessary to bring him to the light of a life in Christ the Crucified.

3d. Having repented and reformed, and bound himself to the service of God by a firm promise and obligation, the light of Christian hope shines down into the darkness of the heart of the humble penitent, and blazes upon his pathway to Heaven. And this is symbolized by the candidate's being brought to light, after he is obligated, by the Worshipful Master, who in that is a symbol of the Redeemer, and so brings him to light, with the help of the brethren, as He taught the Word with the aid of the Apostles.

In the Second Degree there are two symbols:

4th. The Christian assumes new duties toward God and his fellows. Toward God, of love, gratitude, and veneration, and an anxious desire to serve and glorify Him; toward his fellows, of kindness, sympathy, and justice. And this assumption of duty, this entering upon good works, is symbolized by the Fellow-Craft's obligation; by which, bound as an apprentice to secrecy merely, and set in the Northeast corner of the Lodge, he descends

[p. 640]

as a Fellow-Craft into the body of the brethren, and assumes the active duties of a good Mason.

5th. The Christian, reconciled to God, sees the world in a new light. This great Universe is no longer a mere machine, wound up and set going six thousand or sixty millions years ago, and left to run on afterward forever, by virtue of a law of mechanics created at the beginning, without further care or consideration on the part of the Deity; but it has now become to him a great emanation from God, the product of His thought, not a mere dead machine, but a thing of life, over which God watches continually, and every movement of which is immediately produced by His present action, the law of harmony being the essence of the Deity, re-enacted every instant. And this is symbolized by the imperfect instruction given in the Fellow-Craft's Degree, in the sciences, and particularly geometry, connected as the latter is with God Himself in the mind of a Mason, because the same letter, suspended in the East, represents both; and astronomy, or the knowledge of the laws of motion and harmony that govern the spheres, is but a portion of the wider science of geometry. It is so symbolized, because it is here, in the Second Degree, that the candidate first receives an other than moral instruction.

There are also two symbols in the Third Degree, which, with the 3 in the first, and 2 in the second, make the 7.

6th. The candidate, after passing through the first part of the ceremony, imagines himself a Master; and is surprised to be informed that as yet he is not, and that it is uncertain whether he ever will be. He is told of a difficult and dangerous path yet to be travelled, and is advised that upon that journey it depends whether he will become a Master. This is symbolical of that which our Saviour said to Nicodemus, that, notwithstanding his morals might be beyond reproach, he could not enter the Kingdom of Heaven unless he were born again; symbolically dying, and again entering the world regenerate, like a spotless infant.

7th. The murder of Hiram, his burial, and his being raised again by the Master, are symbols, both of the death, burial, and resurrection of the Redeemer; and of the death and burial in sins of the natural man, and his being raised again to a new life, or born again, by the direct action of the Redeemer; after Morality (symbolized by the Entered Apprentice's grip), and Philosophy (symbolized by the grip of the Fellow-Craft), had failed to raise

[p. 641]

him. That of the Lion of the House of Judah is the strong grip, never to be broken, with which Christ, of the royal line of that House, has clasped to Himself the whole human race, and embraces them in His wide arms as closely and affectionately as brethren embrace each other on the five points of fellowship.

As Entered Apprentices and Fellow-Crafts, Masons are taught to imitate the laudable example of those Masons who labored at the building of King Solomon's Temple; and to plant firmly and deep in their hearts those foundation-stones of principle, truth, justice, temperance, fortitude, prudence, and charity, on which to erect that Christian character which all the storms of misfortune and all the powers and temptations of Hell shall not prevail against; those feelings and noble affections which are the most proper homage that can be paid to the Grand Architect and Great Father of the Universe, and which make the heart a living temple builded to Him: when the unruly passions are made to submit to rule and measurement, and their excesses are struck off with the gavel of self-restraint; and when every action and every principle is accurately corrected and adjusted by the square of wisdom, the level of humility, and the plumb of justice.

The two columns, Jachin and Boaz, are the symbols of that profound faith and implicit trust in God and the Redeemer that are the Christian's strength; and of those good works by which alone that faith can be established and made operative and effectual to salvation.

The three pillars that support the Lodge are symbols of a Christian's HOPE; in a future state of happiness; FAITH in the promises and the divine character and mission of the Redeemer; and CHARITABLE JUDGMENT of other men.

The three murderers of Khir-Om symbolize Pontius Pilate, Caiaphas the High-Priest, and Judas Iscariot: and the three blows given him are the betrayal by the last, the refusal of Roman protection by Pilate, and the condemnation by the High-Priest. They also symbolize the blow on the ear, the scourging, and the crown of thorns. The twelve fellow-crafts sent in search of the body are the twelve disciples, in doubt whether to believe that the Redeemer would rise from the dead.

The Master's word, supposed to be lost, symbolizes the Christian faith and religion, supposed to have been crushed and destroyed when the Saviour was crucified, after Iscariot had betrayed Him,

[p. 642]

and Peter deserted Him, and when the other disciples doubted whether He would arise from the dead; but which rose from His tomb and flowed rapidly over the civilized world; and so that which was supposed to be lost was found. It symbolizes also the Saviour Himself; the WORD that was in the beginning--that was with God, and that was God; the Word of life, that was made flesh and dwelt among us, and was supposed to be lost, while He lay in the tomb, for three days, and His disciples "as yet knew not the scripture that He must rise again from the dead," and doubted when they heard of it, and were amazed and frightened and still doubted when He appeared among them.

The bush of acacia placed at the head of the grave of Khir-Om is an emblem of resurrection and immortality.

Such are the explanations of our Christian brethren; entitled, like those of all other Masons, to a respectful 'consideration.

  

CLOSING INSTRUCTION.

There is no pretence to infallibility in Masonry. It is not for us to dictate to any man what he shall believe. We have hitherto, in the instruction of the several Degrees, confined ourselves to laying before you the great thoughts that have found expression in the different ages of the world, leaving you to decide for yourself as to the orthodoxy or heterodoxy of each, and what proportion of truth, if any, each contained. We shall pursue no other course in this closing Philosophical instruction; in which we propose to deal with the highest questions that have ever exercised the human mind, with the existence and the nature of a God, with the existence and the nature of the human soul, and with the relations of the divine and human spirit with the merely material Universe. There can be no questions more important to an intelligent being, none that have for him a more direct and personal interest; and to this last word of Scottish Masonry we invite your serious and attentive consideration. And, as what we shall now say will be but the completion and rounding-off of what we have already said in several of the preceding Degrees, in regard to the Old Thought and the Ancient Philosophies, we hope that you have noted and not forgotten our previous lessons, without which this would seem imperfect and fragmentary.

In its idea of rewarding a faithful and intelligent workman by conferring upon him a knowledge of the True Word, Masonry

[p. 643]

has perpetuated a very great truth, because it involves the proposition that the idea which a man forms of God is always the most important element in his speculative theory of the Universe, and in his particular practical plan of action for the Church, the State, the Community, the Family, and his own individual life. It will ever make a vast difference in the conduct of a people in war or peace, whether they believe the Supreme God to be a cruel Deity, delighting in sacrifice and blood, or a God of Love; and an individual's speculative theory as to the mode and extent of God's government, and as to the nature and reality of his own free-will and consequent responsibility, will needs have great influence in shaping the course of his life and conversation.

We see every day the vast influence of the popular idea of God. All the great historical civilizations of the race have grown out of the national ideas which were formed of God; or have been intimately connected with those ideas. The popular Theology, which at first is only an abstract idea in the heads of philosophers, by and by shows itself in the laws, and in the punishments for crime, in the churches, the ceremonies and the sacraments, the festivals and the fasts, the weddings, the baptisms and the funerals, in the hospitals, the colleges, the schools, and all the social charities, in the relations of husband and wife, parent and child, in the daily work and the daily prayer of every man.

As the world grows in its development, it necessarily outgrows its ancient ideas of God, which were only temporary and pro-visional. A man who has a higher conception of God than those about him, and who denies that their conception is God, is very likely to be called an Atheist by men who are really far less believers in a God than he. Thus the Christians, who said the Heathen idols were no Gods, were accounted Atheists by the People, and accordingly put to death; and Jesus of Nazareth was crucified as an unbelieving blasphemer, by the Jews.

There is a mere formal Atheism, which is a denial of God in terms, but not in reality. A man says, There is no God; that is, no God that is self-originated, or that never originated, but always WAS and HAD BEEN, who is the cause of existence, who is the Mind and the Providence of the Universe; and so the order, beauty, and harmony of the world of matter and mind do not indicate any plan or purpose of Deity. But, he says, NATURE,--meaning by that the whole sum-total of existence,--that is powerful,

[p. 644]

active, wise, and good; Nature is self-originated, or always was and had been, the cause of its own existence, the mind of the Universe and the Providence of itself. There is obviously a plan and purpose whereby order, beauty, and harmony are brought about; but all that is the plan and purpose of nature.

In such cases, the absolute denial of God is only formal and not real. The qualities of God are admitted, and affirmed to be real; and it is a mere change of name to call the possessor of those qualities, Nature, and not God. The real question is, whether such Qualities exist, as we call God; and not, by what particular name we shall designate the Qualities. One man may call the sum total of these Qualities, Nature; another, Heaven; a third, Universe, a fourth, Matter; a fifth, Spirit; a sixth, God, Theos, Zeus, Alfadir, Allah, or what he pleases. All admit the existence of the Being, Power, or ENS, thus diversely named. The name is of the smallest consequence.

Real Atheism is the denial of the existence of any God, of the actuality of all possible ideas of God. It denies that there is any Mind, Intelligence, or ENS, that is the Cause and Providence of the Universe, and of any Thing or any Existence, Soul, Spirit, or Being, that intentionally or intelligently produces the Order, Beauty, and Harmony thereof, and the constant and regular modes of operation therein. It must necessarily deny that there is any law, order, or harmony in existence, or any constant mode of operation in the world; for it is utterly impossible for any human creature to conceive, however much he may pretend to do so, of either of these, except as a consequence of the action of Intelligence; which is, indeed, that otherwise unknown thing, the existence of which these alone prove; otherwise than as the cause of these, not a thing at all; a mere name for the wholly uncognizable cause of these.

The real atheist must deny the existence of the Qualities of God, deny that there is any mind of or in the Universe, any self-conscious Providence, any Providence at all. He must deny that there is any Being or Cause of Finite things, that is self-consciously powerful, wise, just, loving, and faithful to itself and its own nature. He must deny that there is any plan in the Universe or any part of it. He must hold, either that matter is eternal, or that it originated itself, which is absurd, or that it was originated by an Intelligence, or at least by a Cause; and then he admits a. God,

[p. 645]

[paragraph continues] No doubt it is beyond the reach of our faculties to imagine how matter originated,--how it began to be, in space where before was nothing, or God only. But it is equally beyond the reach of our faculties to imagine it eternal and unoriginated. To hold it to be eternal, without thought or will; that the specific forms of it, the seed, the rock, the tree, the man, the solar system, all came with no forethought planning or producing them, by "chance" or "the fortuitous concourse of atoms" of matter that has no thought or will; and that they indicate no mind, no plan, no purpose, no providence, is absurd. It is not to deny the existence of what we understand by mind, plan, purpose, Providence; but to insist that these words shall have some other meaning than that which the human race has ever attached to them: shall mean some unknown thing, for which the human race has no name, because it has of such a thing no possible idea. Either there never was any such thing as a "plan," and the word is nonsense, or the Universe exists in conformity to a plan. The word never meant, and never can mean, any other thing than that which the Universe exhibits. So with the word "purpose;" so with the word "Providence." They mean nothing, or else only what the Universe proves.

It was soon found that the denial of a Conscious Power, the cause of man and of his life, of a Providence, or a Mind and Intelligence arranging man in reference to the world, and the world in reference to man, would not satisfy the instinctive desires of human nature, or account for the facts of material nature. It did not long answer to say, if it ever was said, that the Universe was drifting in the void inane, and neither it, nor any mind within or without it, knew of its whence, its whither, or its whereabouts; that man was drifting in the Universe, knowing little of his whereabouts, nothing of his whence or whither; that there was no Mind, no Providence, no Power, that knew any better; nothing hat guided and directed man in his drifting, or the Universe in the weltering waste of Time. To say to man and woman, "your heroism, your bravery, your self-denial all comes to nothing: your nobleness will do you no good: you will die, and your nobleness will do mankind no service; for there is no plan or order in all these things; everything comes and goes by the fortuitous con-course of atoms;" did not, nor ever will, long satisfy the human mind.

[p. 646]

True, the theory of Atheism has been uttered. It has been said, "Death is the end: this is a world without a God: you are a body without a soul: there is a Here, but no Hereafter for you; an Earth, but no Heaven. Die, and return to your dust. Man is bones, blood, bowels, and brain; mind is matter: there is no soul in the brain, nothing but nerves. We can see all the way to a little star in the nebula of Orion's belt; so distant that it will take light a thousand millions of years to come from it to the earth, journeying at the rate of twelve millions of miles a minute. There is no Heaven this side of that: you see all the way through: there is not a speck of Heaven; and do you think there is any beyond it; and if so, when would you reach it? There is no Providence. Nature is a fortuitous concourse of atoms; thought is a fortuitous function of matter, a fortuitous result of a fortuitous result, a chance-shot from the great wind-gun of the Universe, accidentally loaded, pointed at random, and fired off by chance. Things happen; they are not arranged. There is luck, and there is ill-luck; but there is no Providence. Die you into dust!" Does all this satisfy the human instinct of immortality, that makes us ever long, with unutterable longing, to join ourselves again to our dear ones who have gone away before us, and to mankind, for eternal life? Does it satisfy our mighty hungering and thirst for immortality, our anxious longing to come nearer to, and to know more of, the Eternal Cause of all things?

Men never could be content to believe that there was no mind that thought for man, no conscience to enact eternal laws, no heart to love those whom nothing of earth loves or cares for, no will of the Universe to marshal the nations in the way of wisdom, justice, and love. History is not--thank God! we know it is not,--the fortuitous concourse of events, or Nature that of atoms. We cannot believe that there is no plan nor purpose in Nature, to guide our going out and coming in: that there is a mighty going, but it goes nowhere; that all beauty, wisdom, affection, justice, morality in the world, is an accident, and may end to-morrow.

All over the world there is heroism unrequited, or paid with misery; vice on thrones, corruption in high places, nobleness in poverty or even in chains, the gentle devotion of woman rewarded by brutal neglect or more brutal abuse and violence; everywhere want, misery, over-work, and under-wages. Add to these the Atheist's creed,--a body without a soul, an earth without a

[p. 647]

[paragraph continues] Heaven, a world without a God; and what a Pandemonium would we make of this world!

The intellect of the Atheist would find matter everywhere; but no Causing and Providing Mind: his moral sense would find no Equitable Will, no Beauty of Moral Excellence, no Conscience enacting justice into the unchanging law of right, no spiritual Order or spiritual Providence, but only material Fate and Chance. His affections would find only finite things to love; and to them the dead who were loved and who died yesterday, are like the rainbow that yesterday evening lived a moment and then passed away. His soul, flying through the vast Inane, and feeling the darkness with its wings, seeking the Soul of all, which at once is Reason, Conscience, and the Heart of all that is, would find no God, but a Universe all disorder; no Infinite, no Reason, no Conscience, no Heart, no Soul of things; nothing to reverence, to esteem, to love, to worship, to trust in; but only an Ugly Force, alien and foreign to us, that strikes down those we love, and makes us mere worms on the hot sand of the world. No voice would speak from the Earth to comfort him. It is a cruel mother, that great Earth, that devours her young,--a Force and nothing more. Out of the sky would smile no kind Providence, in all its thousand starry eyes; and in storms a malignant violence, with its lightning-sword, would stab into the darkness, seeking for men to murder.

No man ever was or ever can be content with that. The evidence of .God has been ploughed into Nature so deeply, and so deeply woven into the texture of the human soul, that Atheism has never become a faith, though it has sometimes assumed the shape of theory. Religion is natural to man. Instinctively he turns to God and reverences and relies on Him. In the Mathematics of the Heavens, written in gorgeous diagrams of fire, he sees law, order, beauty, harmony without end: in the ethics of the little nations that inhabit the ant-hills he sees the same; in all Nature, animate and inanimate, he sees the evidences of a Design, a Will, an Intelligence, and a God,--of a God beneficent and loving as well as wise, and merciful and indulgent as well as powerful.

To man, surrounded by the material Universe, and conscious of the influence that his material environments exercised upon his fortunes and his present destiny;--to man, ever confronted with the splendors of the starry heavens, the regular march of the

[p. 648]

seasons, the phenomena of sunrise and moonrise, and all the evidences of intelligence and design that everywhere pressed upon and overwhelmed him, all imaginable questions as to the nature and cause of these phenomena constantly recurred, demanding to be solved, and refusing to be sent away unanswered. And still, after the lapse of ages, press upon the human mind and demand solution, the same great questions--perhaps still demanding it in vain.

Advancing to the period when man had ceased to look upon the separate parts and individual forces of the Universe as gods,--when he had come to look upon it as a whole, this question, among the earliest, occurred to him, and insisted on being answered: "Is this material Universe self-existent, or was it created? Is it eternal, or did it originate?"

And then in succession came crowding on the human mind these other questions:

"Is this material Universe a mere aggregate of fortuitous combinations of matter, or is it the result and work of intelligence, acting upon a plan?

"If there be such an Intelligence, what and where is it? Is the material Universe itself an Intelligent being? Is it like man, a body and a soul? Does Nature act upon itself, or is there a Cause beyond it that acts upon it?

"If there is a personal God, separate from the material Universe, that created all things, Himself uncreated, is He corporeal or incorporeal, material or spiritual, the soul of the Universe or wholly apart from it? and if He be Spirit, what then is spirit?

"Was that Supreme Deity active or quiescent before the creation; and if quiescent during a previous eternity, what necessity of His nature moved Him at last to create a world; or was it a mere whim that had no motive?

"Was matter co-existent with Him, or absolutely created by him out of nothing? Did He create it, or only mould and shape and fashion a chaos already existing, co-existent with Himself?

"Did the Deity directly create matter, or was creation the work of inferior deities, emanations from Himself?

"If He be good and just, whence comes it that, foreknowing everything, He has allowed sorrow and evil to exist; and how to reconcile with His benevolence and wisdom the prosperity of vice and the misfortunes of virtue in this world?"

[p. 649]

And then, as to man himself, recurred these other questions, as they continue to recur to all of us:

"What is it in us that thinks? Is Thought the mere result of material organization; or is there in us a soul that thinks, separate from and resident in the body? If the latter, is it eternal and uncreated; and if not, how created? Is it distinct from God, or an emanation from Him? Is it inherently immortal, or only so by destination, because God has willed it? Is it to return to and be merged in Him, or ever to exist, separately from Him, with its present identity?

"If God has fore-seen and fore-arranged all that occurs, how has man any real free-will, or the least control over circumstances? How can anything be done against the will of Infinite Omnipotence; and if all is done according to that will, how is there any wrong or evil, in what Infinite Wisdom and Infinite Power does not choose to prevent?

"What is the foundation of the moral law? Did God enact it of His own mere pleasure; and if so, can He not, when He pleases, repeal it? Who shalt assure us He will not repeal it, and make right wrong, and virtue vice? Or is the moral law a necessity of His nature; and if so, who enacted it; and does not that assert a power, like the old Necessity, superior to Deity?"

And, close-following after these, came the great question of HEREAFTER, of another Life, of the soul's Destiny; and the thousand other collateral and subordinate questions, as to matter, spirit, futurity, and God, that have produced all the systems of philosophy, all metaphysics, and all theology, since the world began.

What the old philosophic mind thought upon these great questions, we have already, to some extent, developed. With the Emanation-doctrine of the Gnostics and the Orient, we have endeavored to make you familiar. We have brought you face to face with the Kabalists, the Essenes, and Philo the Jew. We have shown that, and how, much of the old mythology was derived from the daily and yearly recurring phenomena of the heavens. We have exhibited to you the ancient notions by which they endeavored to explain to themselves the existence and prevalence of evil; and we have in some degree made known to you their metaphysical ideas as to the nature of the Deity. Much more remains to be done than it is within our power to do.

[p. 650]

[paragraph continues] We stand upon the sounding shore of the great ocean of Time. In front of us stretches out the heaving waste of the illimitable Past; and its waves, as they roll up to our feet along the sparkling slope of the yellow sands, bring to us, now and then, from the depths of that boundless ocean, a shell, a few specimens of algae torn rudely from their stems, a rounded pebble; and that is all; of all the vast treasures of ancient thought that lie buried there, with the mighty anthem of the boundless ocean thundering over them forever and forever.

Let us once more, and for the last time, along the shore of that great ocean, gather a few more relics of the Past, and listen to its mighty voices, as they come, in fragmentary music, in broken and interrupted rhythm, whispering to us from the great bosom of the Past.

Rites, creeds, and legends express, directly or symbolically, some leading idea, according to which the Mysteries of Being are supposed to be explained in Deity. The intricacies of mythical genealogies are a practical acknowledgment of the mysterious nature of the Omnipotent Deity; displaying in their beautiful but ineffectual imagery the first efforts of the mind to communicate with nature: the flowers which fancy strewed before the youthful steps of Psyche, when she first set out in pursuit of the immortal object of her love. Theories and notions, in all their varieties of truth and falsehood, are a machinery more or less efficacious, directed to the same end. Every religion was, in its origin, an embryo philosophy, or an attempt to interpret the unknown by mind; and it was only when philosophy, which is essentially progress, outgrew its first acquisitions, that religion became a thing apart, cherishing as unalterable dogmas the notions which philosophy had abandoned. Separated from philosophy, it became arrogant and fantastical, professing to have already attained what its more authentic representative was ever pursuing in vain; and discovering, through its initiations and Mysteries, all that to its contracted view seemed wanting to restore the well-being of mankind, the means of purification and expiation, remedies for disease, expedients to cure the disorders of the soul, and to propitiate the gods.

Why should we attempt to confine the idea of the Supreme Mind within an arbitrary barrier, or exclude from the limits of veracity any conception of the Deity, which, if imperfect and

[p. 651]

inadequate, may be only a little more so than our own? "The name of God," says Hobbes, "is used not to make us conceive Him, for He is inconceivable, but that we may honor Him." "Believe in God, and adore Him," said the Greek Poet, "but investigate Him not; the inquiry is fruitless, seek not to discover who God is; for, by the desire to know, you offend Him who chooses to remain unknown." "When we attempt," says Philo, "to investigate the essence of the Absolute Being, we fall into an abyss of perplexity; and the only benefit to be derived from such researches is the conviction of their absurdity."

Yet man, though ignorant of the constitution of the dust on which he treads, has ventured, and still ventures, to speculate on the nature of God, and to define dogmatically in creeds the subject least within the compass of his faculties; and even to hate and persecute those who will not accept his views as true.

But though a knowledge of the Divine Essence is impossible, the conceptions formed respecting it are interesting, as indications of intellectual development. The history of religion is the history of the human mind; and the conception formed by it of Deity is always in exact relation to its moral and intellectual attainments. The one is the index and the measure of the other.

The negative notion of God, which consists in abstracting the inferior and finite, is, according to Philo, the only way in which it is possible for man worthily to apprehend the nature of God. After exhausting the varieties of symbolism, we contrast the Divine Greatness with human littleness, and employ expressions apparently affirmative, such as "Infinite," "Almighty," "All-wise," "Omnipotent," "Eternal," and the like; which in reality amount only to denying, in regard to God, those limits which con-fine the faculties of man; and thus we remain content with a name which is a mere conventional sign and confession of our ignorance.

The Hebrew w ?Y?H?W?H and the Greek To ON expressed abstract existence, without outward manifestation or development. Of the same nature are the definitions, "God is a sphere whose centre is everywhere, and whose circumference nowhere;" "God is He who sees all, Himself unseen:" and finally, that of Proclus and Hegel--"the To me on--that which has no outward and positive existence." Most of the so-called ideas or definitions of the "Absolute" are only a collection of negations; from which, as they affirm nothing, nothing is learned.

[p. 652]

God was first recognized in the heavenly bodies and in the elements. When man's consciousness of his own intellectuality was matured, and he became convinced that the internal faculty of thought was something more subtle than even the most subtle elements, he transferred that new conception to the object of his worship, and deified a mental principle instead of a physical one. He in every case makes God after his own image; for do what we will, the highest efforts of human thought can conceive nothing higher than the supremacy of intellect; and so he ever conies back to some familiar type of exalted humanity. He at first deifies nature, and afterward himself.

The eternal aspiration of the religious sentiment in man is to become united with God. In his earliest development, the wish and its fulfillment were simultaneous, through unquestioning belief. In proportion as the conception of Deity was exalted, the notion of His terrestrial presence or proximity was abandoned; and the difficulty of comprehending the Divine Government, together with the glaring superstitious evils arising out of its misinterpretation, endangered the belief in it altogether.

Even the lights of Heaven, which, as "bright potentates of the sky," were formerly the vigilant directors of the economy of earth, now shine dim and distant, and Uriel no more descends upon a sunbeam. But the real change has been in the progressive ascent of man's own faculties, and not in the Divine Nature; as the Stars are no more distant now than when they were supposed to rest on the shoulders of Atlas. And yet a little sense of disappointment and humiliation attended the first awakening of the soul, when reason, looking upward toward the Deity, was impressed with a dizzy sense of having fallen.

But hope revives in despondency; and every nation that ever advanced beyond the most elementary conceptions, felt the necessity of an attempt to fill the chasm, real or imaginary, separating man from God. To do this was the great task of poetry, philosophy, and religion. Hence the personifications of God's attributes, developments, and manifestations, as "Powers," "Intelligences," "Angels," "Emanations;" through which and the oracular faculty in himself, man could place himself in communion with God.

The various ranks and orders of mythical beings imagined by Persians, Indians, Egyptians, or Etrurians, to preside over the various departments of nature, had each his share in a scheme to

[p. 653]

bring man into closer approximation to the Deity; they eventually gave way only before an analogous though less picturesque symbolism; and the Deities and Daemons of Greece and Rome were perpetuated with only a change of names, when their offices were transferred to Saints and Martyrs. The attempts by which reason had sometimes endeavored to span the unknown by a bridge of metaphysics, such as the idealistic systems of Zoroaster, Pythagoras, or Plato, were only a more refined form of the poetical illusions which satisfied the vulgar; and man still looked back with longing to the lost golden age, when his ancestors communed face to face with the Gods; and hoped that, by propitiating Heaven, he might accelerate the renewal of it in the islands of the Far West, under the sceptre of Kronos, or in a centralization of political power at Jerusalem. His eager hope overcame even the terrors of the grave; for the Divine power was as infinite as human expectation, and the Egyptian, duly ensepulchred in the Lybian Catacombs, was supposed to be already on his way to the Fortunate Abodes under the guidance of Hermes, there to obtain a perfect association and reunion with his God.

Remembering what we have already said elsewhere in regard to the old ideas concerning the Deity, and repeating it as little as possible, let us once more put ourselves in communion with the Ancient poetic and philosophic mind, and endeavor to learn of it what it thought, and how it solved the great problems that have ever tortured the human intellect.

The division of the First and Supreme Cause into two parts, one Active and the other Passive, the Universe Agent and Patient, or the hermaphroditic God-World, is one of the most ancient and widespread dogmas of philosophy or natural theology. Almost every ancient people gave it a place in their worship, their mysteries, and their ceremonies.

Ocellus Lucanus, who seems to have lived shortly after Pythagoras opened his School in Italy, five or six hundred years before our era, and in the time of Solon, Thales, and the other Sages who had studied in the Schools of Egypt, not only recognizes the eternity of the Universe, and its divine character as an unproduced and indestructible being, but also the distinction of Active and Passive causes in what he terms the Grand Whole, or the single hermaphroditic Being that comprehends all existences, as well causes as effects; and which is a system regularly ordered, perfect

[p. 654]

and complete, of all Natures. He well apprehended the dividing-line that separates existence eternally the same, from that which eternally changes; the nature of celestial from that of terrestrial bodies, that of causes from that of effects, that which is from that which only BECOMES,--a distinction that naturally struck every thinking man.

We shall not quote his language at full length. The heavenly bodies, he thought, are first and most noble; they move of themselves, and ever revolve, without change of form or essence. Fire, water, earth, and air change incessantly and continually, not place, but form. Then, as in the Universe there are generation and cause of generation,--as generation is where there are change and displacement of parts, and cause where there is stability of nature, evidently it belongs to what is the cause of generation, to move and to act, and to the recipient, to be made and moved. In his view, everything above the Moon was the habitation of the gods; all below, that of Nature and discord; this operates dissolution of things made; that, production of those that are being made. As the world is unproduced and indestructible, as it had no beginning, and will have no end, necessarily the principle that operates generation in another than itself, and that which operates it in itself, have co-existed.

The former is all above the moon, and especially the sun: the latter is the sublunary world. Of these two parts, one active, the other passive--one divine and always the same, the other mortal and ever changing, all that we call the "world" or "universe" is composed.

These accorded with the principles of the Egyptian philosophy, which held that man and the animals had always existed together with the world; that they were its effects, eternal like itself. The chief divisions of nature into active and passive causes, its system of generation and destruction, and the concurrence of the two great principles, Heaven and earth, uniting to form all things, will, according to Ocellus, always continue to exist. "Enough," he concludes, "as to the Universe, the generations and destructions effected in it, the mode in which it now exists, the mode in which it will ever exist, by the eternal qualities of the two principles, one always moving, the other always moved; one always governing, the other always governed."

Such is a brief summary of the doctrine of this philosopher,

[p. 655]

whose work is one of the most ancient that has survived to us. The subject on which he treated occupied in his time all men's minds: the poets sang of cosmogonies and theogonies, and the philosophers wrote treatises on the birth of the world and the elements of its composition. The cosmogony of the Hebrews; attributed to Moses; that of the Phoenicians, ascribed to Sanchoniathon; that of the Greeks, composed by Hesiod; that of the Egyptians, the Atlantes, and the Cretans, preserved by Diodorus Siculus; the fragments of the theology of Orpheus, divided among different writers; the books of the Persians, or their Boundehesh; those of the Hindu_s; the traditions of the Chinese and the people of Macassar; the cosmogonic chants which Virgil puts in the mouth of Iopas at Carthage; and those of the old Silenus, the first book of the Metamorphoses of Ovid; all testify to the antiquity and universality of these fictions as to the origin of the world and its causes.

At the head of the causes of nature, Heaven and earth were placed; and the most apparent parts of each, the sun, the moon, the fixed stars and planets, and, above all, the zodiac, among the active causes of generation; and among the passive, the several elements. These causes were not only classed in the progressive order of their energy, Heaven and earth heading the respective lists, but distinct sexes were in some sort assigned to them, and characteristics analogous to the mode in which they concur in universal generation.

The doctrine of Ocellus was the general doctrine everywhere, it naturally occurring to all to make the same distinction. The Egyptians did so, in selecting those animals in which they recognized these emblematic qualities, in order to symbolize the double sex of the Universe. Their God KNEPH, out of whose mouth issued the Orphic egg, whence the author of the Clementine Recognitions makes a hermaphroditic figure to emerge, uniting in itself the two principles whereof Heaven and the earth are forms, and which enter into the organization of all beings which the heavens and the earth engender by their concourse, furnishes another emblem of the double power, active and passive, which the ancients saw in the Universe, and which they symbolized by the egg. Orpheus, who studied in Egypt, borrowed from the theologians of that country the mysterious forms under which the science of nature was veiled, and carried into Greece the symbolic

[p. 656]

egg, with its division into two parts or causes figured by the hermaphroditic being that issued from it, and whereof Heaven and earth are composed.

The Brahmins of India expressed the same cosmogonic idea by a statue, representative of the Universe, uniting in itself both sexes. The male sex offered an image of the sun, centre of the active principle, and the female sex that of the moon, at the sphere whereof, proceeding downward, the passive portion of nature begins. The Lingam, unto the present day revered in the Indian temples, being but the conjunction of the organs of generation of the two sexes, was an emblem of the same. The Hindu_s have ever had the greatest veneration for this symbol of ever-reproductive nature. The Greeks consecrated the same symbols of universal fruitfulness in their Mysteries; and they were exhibited in the sanctuaries of Eleusis. They appear among the sculptured ornaments of all the Indian temples. Tertullian accuses the Valentinians of having adopted the custom of venerating them; a custom, he says, introduced by Melampus from Egypt into Greece. The Egyptians consecrated the Phallus in the Mysteries of Osiris and Isis, as we learn from Plutarch and Diodorus Siculus; and the latter assures us that these emblems were not consecrated by the Egyptians alone, but by every people. They certainly were so among the Persians and Assyrians; and they were regarded everywhere as symbolic of the generative and productive powers of all animated beings. In those early ages, the works of Nature and all her agents were sacred like herself.

For the union of Nature with herself is a chaste marriage, of which the union of man and woman was a natural image, and their organs were an expressive emblem of the double energy which manifests itself in Heaven and Earth uniting together to produce all beings. "The Heavens," says Plutarch, "seemed to men to fulfill the functions of father, and the Earth of mother. The former impregnated the earth with its fertilizing rains, and the earth, receiving them, became fruitful and brought forth." Heaven, which covers and embraces the earth everywhere, is her potent spouse, uniting himself to her to make her fruitful, without which she would languish in everlasting sterility, buried in the shades of chaos and of night. Their union is their marriage; their productions or parts are their children. The skies are our Father, and Nature the great Mother of us all.

[p. 657]

This idea was not the dogma of a single sect, but the general opinion of all the Sages. "Nature was divided," says Cicero, '"into two parts, one active, and the other that submitted itself to this action, which it received, and which modified it. The former was deemed to be a Force, and the latter the material on which that Force exerted itself." Macrobius repeated almost literally the doctrine of Ocellus. Aristotle termed the earth the fruitful mother, environed on all sides by the air. Above it was Heaven, the dwelling-place of the gods and the divine stars, its substance ether, or a fire incessantly moving in circles, divine and incorruptible, and subject to no change. Below it, nature, and the elements, imitable and acted on, corruptible and mortal.

Synesius said that generations were effected in the portions of the Universe which we inhabit; while the cause of generations resided in the portions above us, whence descend to us the germs of the effects produced here below. Proclus and Simplicius deemed Heaven the Active Cause and Father, relatively to the earth. The former says that the World or the Whole is a single Animal; what is done in it, is done by it; the same World acts, and acts upon itself. He divides it into "Heaven" and "Generation." In the former, he says, are placed and arranged the conservative causes of generation, superintended by the Genii and Gods. The Earth, or Rhea, associated ever with Saturn in production, is mother of the effects of which Heaven is Father; the womb or bosom that receives the fertilizing energy of the God that engenders ages. The great work of generation is operated, he says, primarily by the action of the Sun, and secondarily by that of the Moon, so that the Sun is the primitive source of this energy, as father and chief of the male gods that form his court. He follows the action of the male and female principles through all the portions and divisions of nature, attributing to the former the origin of stability and identity, to the latter, that of diversity and mobility. Heaven is to the earth, he says, as the male to the female. It is the movement of the heavens that, by their revolutions, furnished the seminal incitements and forces, whose emanations received by the earth, make it fruitful, and cause it to produce animals and plants of every kind.

Philo says that Moses recognized this doctrine of two causes, active and passive; but made the former to reside in the Mind or Intelligence external to matter.

[p. 658]

The ancient astrologers divided the twelve signs of the Zodiac into six male and six female, and assigned them to six male and six female Great Gods. Heaven and Earth, or Ouranos and Ghe, were among most ancient nations, the first and most ancient Divinities. We find them in the Phoenician history of Sanchoniathon, and in the Grecian Genealogy of the Gods given by Hesiod. Everywhere they marry, and by their union produce the later Gods. "In the beginning," says Apollodorus, "Ouranos or the Heavens was Lord of all the Universe: he took to wife Ghe or the earth, and had by her many children." They were the first Gods of the Cretans, and under other names, of the Armenians, as we learn from Berosus, and of Panchaia, an island South of Arabia, as we learn from Euhemerus. Orpheus made the Divinity, or the "Great Whole," male and female, because, he said, it could produce nothing, unless it united in itself the productive force of both sexes. He called Heaven PANGENETOR, the Father of all things, most ancient of Beings, beginning and end of all, containing in Himself the incorruptible and unwearying force of Necessity.

The same idea obtained in the rude North of Europe. The Scythians made the earth to be the wife of Jupiter; and the Germans adored her under the name of HERTA. The Celts worshipped the Heavens and the Earth, and said that without the former the latter would be sterile, and that their marriage produced all things. The Scandinavians acknowledged BOR or the Heavens, and gave FURTUR, his son, the Earth as his wife. Olaus Rudbeck adds, that their ancestors were persuaded that Heaven intermarried with the Earth, and thus uniting his forces with hers, produced animals and plants. This marriage of Heaven and Earth produced the AZES, Genii famous in the theology of the North. In the theology of the Phrygians and Lydians, the ASII were born of the marriage of the Supreme God with the Earth, and Firmicus informs us that the Phrygians attributed to the Earth supremacy over the other elements, and considered her the Great Mother of all things.

Virgil sings the impregnation of the joyous earth, by the Ether, its spouse, that descends upon its bosom, fertilizing it with rains. Columella sings the loves of Nature and her marriage with Heaven annually consummated at the sweet Spring-time. He describes the Spirit of Life, the soul that animates the world, fired with the passion of Love, uniting with Nature and itself, itself a part of

[p. 659]

[paragraph continues] Nature, and filling its own bosom with new productions. This union of the Universe with itself, this mutual action of two sexes, he terms "the great Secrets of Nature," the Mysteries of the Union of Heaven with Earth, imaged in the Sacred Mysteries of Atys and Bacchus."

Varro tells us that the great Divinities adored at Samothrace were the Heavens and the Earth, considered as First Causes or Primal Gods, and as male and female agents, one bearing to the other the relations that the Soul and Principle of Movement bear to the body or the matter that receives them. These were the gods revered in the Mysteries of that Island, as they were in the orgies of Phoenicia.

Everywhere the sacred body of Nature was covered with the veil of allegory, which concealed it from the profane, and allowed it to be seen only by the sage who thought it worthy to be the object of his study and investigation. She showed herself to those only who loved her in spirit and in truth, and she abandoned the indifferent and careless to error and to ignorance. "The Sages of Greece," says Pausanias, "never wrote otherwise than in an enigmatical manner, never naturally and directly." "Nature," says Sallust the Philosopher, "should be sung only in a language that imitates the secrecy of her processes and operations. She is herself an enigma. We see only bodies in movement; the forces and springs that move them are hidden from us." The poets inspired by the Divinity, the wisest philosophers, all the theologians, the chiefs of the initiations and Mysteries, even the gods uttering their oracles, have borrowed the figurative language of allegory. "The Egyptians," says Proclus, "preferred that mode of teaching, and spoke of the great secrets of Nature, only in mythological enigmas." The Gymnosophists of India and the Druids of Gaul lent to science the same enigmatic language, and in the same style wrote the Hierophants of Phoenicia.

The division of things into the active and the passive cause leads to that of the two Principles of Light and Darkness, connected with and corresponding with it. For Light comes from the ethereal substance that composes the active cause, and darkness from earth or the gross matter which composes the passive cause. In Hesiod, the Earth, by its union with Tartarus, engenders Typhon. Chief of the Powers or Genii of Darkness. But it unites

[p. 660]

itself with the Ether or Ouranos, when it engenders the Gods of Olympus, or the Stars, children of Starry Ouranos.

Light was the first Divinity worshipped by men. To it they owed the brilliant spectacle of Nature. It seems an emanation from the Creator of all things, making known to our senses the Universe which darkness hides from our eyes, and, as it were, giving it existence. Darkness, as it were, reduces all nature again to nothingness, and almost entirely annihilates man.

Naturally, therefore, two substances of opposite natures were imagined, to each of which the world was in turn subjected, one contributing to its felicity and the other to its misfortune. Light multiplied its enjoyments; Darkness despoiled it of them: the former was its friend, the latter its enemy. To one all good was attributed; to the other all evil; and thus the words "Light" and "Good" became synonymous, and the words "Darkness" and "Evil." It seeming that Good and Evil could not flow from one and the same source, any more than could Light and Darkness, men naturally imagined two Causes or Principles, of different natures and opposite in their effects, one of which shed Light and Good, and the other Darkness and Evil, on the Universe.

This distinction of the two Principles was admitted in all the Theologies, and formed one of the principal bases of all religions. It entered as a primary element into the sacred fables, the cosmogonies and the Mysteries of antiquity. "We are not to suppose," says Plutarch, "that the Principles of the Universe are inanimate bodies, as Democritus and Epicurus thought; nor that a matter devoid of qualities is organized and arranged by a single Reason or Providence, Sovereign over all things, as the Stoics held; for it is not possible that a single Being, good or evil, is the cause of all, inasmuch as God can in nowise be the cause of any evil. The harmony of the Universe is a combination of contraries, like the strings of a lyre, or that of a bow, which alternately is stretched and relaxed." "The good," says Euripides, "is never separated from the Evil. The two must mingle, that all may go well." And this opinion as to the two principles, continues Plutarch, "is that of all antiquity. From the Theologians and Legislators it passed to the Poets and Philosophers. Its author is unknown; but the opinion itself is established by the traditions of the whole human race, and consecrated in the mysteries and sacrifices both of the Greeks and Barbarians, wherein was recognized the dogma of

[p. 661]

opposing principles in nature, which, by their contrariety, produce the mixture of good and evil. We must admit two contrary causes, two opposing powers, which lead, one to the right and the other to the left, and thus control our life, as they do the sublunary world, which is therefore subject to so many changes and irregularities of every kind. For if there can be no effect without a cause, and if the Good cannot be the cause of the Evil, it is absolutely necessary that there should be a cause for the Evil, as there is one for the Good." This doctrine, he adds, has been generally received among most nations, and especially by those who have had the greatest reputation for wisdom. All have admitted two gods, with different occupations, one making the good and the other the evil found in nature. The former has been styled "God," the latter "Demon." The Persians, or Zoroaster, named the former Ormuzd and the latter Ahriman; of whom they said one was of the nature of Light, the other of that of Darkness. The Egyptians called the former Osiris, and the latter Typhon, his eternal enemy.

The Hebrews, at least after their return from the Persian captivity, had their good Deity, and the Devil, a bad and malicious Spirit, ever opposing God, and Chief of the Angels of Darkness, as God was of those of Light. The word "Satan" means, in Hebrew, simply, "The Adversary."

The Chaldaeans, Plutarch says, had their good and evil stars. The Greeks had their Jupiter and Pluto, and their Giants and Titans, to whom were assigned the attributes of the Serpent with which Pluto or Serapis was encircled, and the shape whereof was assumed by Typhon, Ahriman, and the Satan of the Hebrews. Every people had something equivalent to this.

The People of Pegu believe in two Principles, one author of Good and the other of Evil, and strive to propitiate the latter, while they think it needless to worship the former, as he is incapable of doing evil. The people of Java, of the Moluccas, of the Gold Coast, the Hottentots, the people of Teneriffe and Madagascar, and the Savage Tribes of America, all worship and strive to avert the anger and propitiate the good-will of the Evil Spirit.

But among the Greeks, Egyptians, Chaldaeans, Persians, and Assyrians, the doctrine of the two Principles formed a complete and regularly arranged theological system. It was the basis of the religion of the Magi and of Egypt. The author of an ancient

[p. 662]

work, attributed to Origen, says that Pythagoras learned from Zarastha, a Magus at Babylon (the same, perhaps, as Zerdusht or Zoroaster), that there are two principles of all things, whereof one is the father and the other the mother; the former, Light, and the latter, Darkness. Pythagoras thought that the Dependencies on Light were warmth, dryness, lightness, swiftness; and those on Darkness, cold, wet, weight, and slowness; and that the world derived its existence from these two principles, as from the male and the female. According to Porphyry, he conceived two opposing powers, one good, which he termed Unity, the Light, Right, the Equal, the Stable, the Straight; the other evil, which he termed Binary, Darkness, the Left, the Unequal, the Unstable, the Crooked. These ideas he received from the Orientals, for he dwelt twelve years at Babylon, studying with the Magi. Varro says he recognized two Principles of all things,--the Finite and the Infinite, Good and Evil, Life and Death, Day and Night. White he thought was of the nature of the Good Principle, and Black of that of the Evil; that Light and Darkness, Heat and Cold, the Dry and the Wet, mingled in equal proportions; that Summer was the triumph of heat, and Winter of cold; that their equal combination produced Spring and Autumn, the former producing verdure and favorable to health, and the latter, deteriorating everything, giving birth to maladies. He applied the same idea to the rising and setting of the sun; and, like the Magi, held that God or Ormuzd in the body resembled light, and in the soul, truth.

Aristotle, like Plato, admitted a principle of Evil, resident in matter and in its eternal imperfection.

The Persians said that Ormuzd, born of the pure Light, and Ahriman, born of darkness, were ever at war. Ormuzd produced six Gods, Beneficence, Truth, Good Order, Wisdom, Riches, and Virtuous Joy. These were so many emanations from the Good Principle, so many blessings bestowed by it on men. Ahriman, in his turn, produced six Devs, opponents of the six emanations from Ormuzd. Then Ormuzd made himself three times as great as before, ascended as far above the sun as the sun is above the earth, and adorned the heavens with stars, of which he made Sirius the sentinel or advance-guard: that he then created twenty-four other Deities, and placed them in an egg, where Ahriman also placed twenty-four others, created by him, who broke the egg,

[p. 663]

and so intermingled Good and Evil. Theopompus adds that, according to the Magi, for two terms of three thousand years, each of the two Principles is to be by turns victor and the other vanquished; then for three thousand more for each they are to contend with each other, each destroying reciprocally the works of the other; after which Ahriman is to perish, and men, wearing transparent bodies, to enjoy unutterable happiness.

The twelve great Deities of the Persians, the six Amshaspands and six Devs, marshalled, the former under the banner of Light, and the latter under that of Darkness, are the twelve Zodiacal Signs or Months; the six supreme signs, or those of Light, or of Spring and Summer, commencing with Aries, and the six inferior, of Darkness, or of Autumn and Winter, commencing with Libra. Limited Time, as contradistinguished from Time without limits, or Eternity, is Time created and measured by the celestial revolutions. It is comprehended in a period divided into twelve parts, each subdivided into a thousand parts, which the Persians termed years. Thus the circle annually traversed by the Sun was divided into 12,000 parts, or each sign into 3,000: and thus, each year, the Principle of Light and Good triumphed for 3,000 years, that of Evil and Darkness for 3,000, and they mutually destroyed each other's labors for 6,000, or 3,000 for each: so that the Zodiac was equally divided between them. And accordingly Ocellus Lucanus, the Disciple of Pythagoras, held that the principal cause of all sublunary effects resided in the Zodiac, and that from it flowed the good or bad influences of the planets that revolved therein.

The twenty-four good and twenty-four evil Deities, enclosed in the Egg, are the forty-eight constellations of the ancient sphere, equally divided between the realms of Light and Darkness, on the concavity of the celestial sphere which was apportioned among them; and which, enclosing the world and planets, was the mystic and sacred egg of the Magi, the Indians, and the Egyptians,--the egg that issued from the mouth of the God Kneph, that figured as the Orphic Egg in the Mysteries of Greece, that issued from the God Chumong of the Coresians, and from the Egyptian Osiris and the God Phanes of the Modern Orphics, Principle of Light,--the egg crushed by the Sacred Bull of the Japanese, and from which the world emerged; that placed by the Greeks at the feet of Bacchus the bull-horned God, and from which Aristophanes makes Love emerge, who with Night organizes Chaos.

[p. 664]

Thus the Balance, the Scorpion, the Serpent of Ophiucus, and the Dragon of the Hesperides became malevolent Signs and Evil Genii; and entire nature was divided between the two principles, and between the agents or partial causes subordinate to them. Hence Michael and his Archangels, and Satan and his fallen compeers. Hence the wars of Jupiter and the Giants, in which the Gods of Olympus fought on the side of the Light-God, against the dark progeny of earth and Chaos; a war which Proclus regarded as symbolizing the resistance opposed by dark and chaotic matter to the active and beneficent force which gives it organization; an idea which in part appears in the old theory of two Principles, one innate in the active and luminous substance of Heaven, and the other in the inert and dark substance of matter that resists the order and the good that Heaven communicates to it.

Osiris conquers Typhon, and Ormuzd, Ahriman, when, at the Vernal Equinox, the creative action of Heaven and its demiourgic energy is most strongly manifested. Then the principle of Light and Good overcomes that of Darkness and Evil, and the world rejoices, redeemed from cold and wintry darkness by the beneficent Sign into which the Sun then enters triumphant and rejoicing, after his resurrection.

From the doctrine of the two Principles, Active and Passive, grew that of the Universe, animated by a Principle of Eternal Life, and by a Universal Soul, from which every isolated and temporary being received at its birth an emanation, which, at the death of such being, returned to its source. The life of matter as much belonged to nature as did matter itself; and as life is manifested by movement, the sources of life must needs seem to be placed in those luminous and eternal bodies, and above all in the Heaven in which they revolve, and which whirls them along with itself in that rapid course that is swifter than all other movement. And fire and heat have so great an analogy with life, that cold, like absence of movement, seemed the distinctive characteristic of death. Accordingly, the vital fire that blazes in the Sun and produces the heat that vivifies everything, was regarded as the principle of organization and life of all sublunary beings.

According to this doctrine, the Universe is not to be regarded, in its creative and eternal action, merely as an immense machine, moved by powerful springs and forced into a continual movement, which, emanating from the circumference, extends to the centre,

[p. 665]

acts and re-acts in every possible direction, and re-produces in succession all the varied forms which matter receives. So to regard it would be to recognize a cold and purely mechanical action, the energy of which could never produce life.

On the contrary, it was thought, the Universe should be deemed an immense Being, always living, always moved and always moving in an eternal activity inherent in itself, and which, subordinate to no foreign cause, is communicated to all its parts, connects them together, and makes of the world of things a complete and perfect whole. The order and harmony which reign therein seem to belong to and be a part of it, and the design of the various plans of construction of organized beings would seem to be graven in its Supreme Intelligence, source of all the other Intelligences which it communicates together with life to man. Nothing existing out of it, it must be regarded as the principle and term of all things.

Chaeremon had no reason for saying that the Ancient Egyptians, inventors of the sacred fables, and adorers of the Sun and the other luminaries, saw in the Universe only a machine, without life and without intelligence, either in its whole or in its parts; and that their cosmogony was a pure Epicureanism, which required only matter and movement to organize its world and govern it. Such an opinion would necessarily exclude all religious worship. Wherever we suppose a worship, there we must suppose intelligent Deities who receive it, and are sensible to the homage of their adorers; and no other people were so religious as the Egyptians.

On the contrary, with them the immense, immutable, and Eternal Being, termed "God" or "the Universe," had eminently, and in all their plenitude, that life and intelligence which sublunary beings, each an infinitely small and temporary portion of itself, possess in a far inferior degree and infinitely less quantity. It was to them, in some sort, like the Ocean, whence the springs, brooks, and rivers have risen by evaporation, and to the bosom whereof they return by a longer or shorter course, and after a longer or shorter separation from the immense mass of its waters. The machine of the Universe was, in their view, like that of man, moved by a Principle of Life which kept it in eternal activity, and circulated in all its parts. The Universe was a living and animated being, like man and the other animals; or rather they were so only because the Universe was essentially so, and for a few moments communicated to each an infinitely minute portion of

[p. 666]

its eternal life, breathed by it into the inert and gross matter of sublunary bodies. That withdrawn, man or the animal died; and the Universe alone, living and circulating around the wrecks of their bodies, by its eternal movement, organized and animated new bodies, returning to them the eternal fire and subtle substance which vivifies itself, and which, incorporated in its immense mass, was its universal soul.

These were the ancient ideas as to this Great GOD, Father of all the gods, or of the World; of this BEING, Principle of all things, and of which nothing other than itself is Principle,--the Universal cause that was termed God. Soul of the Universe, eternal like it, immense like it, supremely active and potent in its varied operations, penetrating all parts of this vast body, impressing a regular and symmetrical movement on the spheres, making the elements instinct with activity and order, mingling with everything, organizing everything, vivifying and preserving everything,--this was the UNIVERSE-GOD which the ancients adored as Supreme Cause and God of Gods.

Anchises, in the Aeneid, taught Aeneas this doctrine of Pythagoras, learned by him from his Masters, the Egyptians, in regard to the Soul and Intelligence of the Universe, from which our souls and intelligences, as well as our life and that of the animals, emanate, Heaven, Earth, the Sea, the Moon and the Stars, he said, are moved by a principle of internal life which perpetuates their existence; a great intelligent soul, that penetrates every part of the vast body of the Universe, and, mingling with everything, agitates it by an eternal movement. It is the source of life in all living things. The force which animates all, emanates from the eternal fire that burns in Heaven. In the Georgics, Virgil repeats the same doctrine; and that, at the death of every animal, the life that animated it, part of the universal life, returns to its Principle and to the source of life that circulates in the sphere of the Stars.

Servius makes God the active Cause that organizes the elements into bodies, the vivifying breath or spirit, that, spreading through matter or the elements, produces and engenders all things. The elements compose the substance of our bodies: God composes the souls that vivify these bodies. From it come the instincts of animals, from it their life, he says: and when they die, that life returns to and  into the Universal Soul, and their bodies into Universal Matter.

[p. 667]

Timaeus of Locria and Plato his Commentator wrote of the Soul of the World, developing the doctrine of Pythagoras, who thought, says Cicero, that God is the Universal Soul, resident everywhere in nature, and of which our Souls are but emanations. "God is one," says Pythagoras, as cited by Justin Martyr: "He is not, as some think, without the world, but within it, and entire in its entirety. He sees all that becomes, forms all immortal beings, is the author of their powers and performances, the origin of all things, the Light of Heaven, the Father, the Intelligence, the Soul of all beings, the Mover of all spheres."

God, in the view of Pythagoras, was ONE, a single substance, whose continuous parts extended through all the Universe, without separation, difference, or inequality, like the soul in the human body. He denied the doctrine of the spiritualists, who had severed the Divinity from the Universe, making Him exist apart from the Universe, which thus became no more than a material work, on which acted the Abstract Cause, a God, isolated from it. The Ancient Theology did not so separate God from the Universe. This Eusebius attests, in saying that but a small number of wise men, like Moses, had sought for God or the Cause of all, outside of that ALL; while the Philosophers of Egypt and Phoenicia, real authors of all the old Cosmogonies, had placed the Supreme Cause in the Universe itself, and in its parts, so that, in their view, the world and all its parts are in God.

The World or Universe was thus compared to man: the Principle of Life that moves it, to that which moves man; the Soul of the World to that of man. Therefore Pythagoras called man a microcosm, or little world, as possessing in miniature all the qualities found on a great scale in the Universe; by his reason and intelligence partaking of the Divine Nature: and by his faculty of changing aliments into other substances, of growing, and re-producing himself, partaking of elementary Nature. Thus he made the Universe a great intelligent Being, like man--an immense Deity, having in itself, what man has in himself, movement, life, and intelligence, and besides, a perpetuity of existence, which man has not; and, as having in itself perpetuity of movement and life, therefore the Supreme Cause of all.

Everywhere extended, this Universal Soul does not, in the view of Pythagoras, act everywhere equally nor in the same manner. The highest portion of the Universe, being as it were its head,

[p. 668]

seemed to him its principal seat, and there was the guiding power of the rest of the world. In the seven concentric spheres is resident an eternal order, fruit of the intelligence, the Universal Soul that moves, by a constant and regular progression, the immortal bodies that form the harmonious system of the heavens.

Manilius says: "I sing the invisible and potent Soul of Nature; that Divine Substance which, everywhere inherent in Heaven, Earth, and the Waters of the Ocean, forms the bond that holds together and makes one all the parts of the vast body of the Universe. It, balancing all Forces, and harmoniously arranging the varied relations of the many members of the world, maintains in it the life and regular movement that agitate it, as a result of the action of the living breath or single spirit that dwells in all its parts, circulates in all the channels of universal nature, flashes with rapidity to all its points, and gives to animated bodies the configurations appropriate to the organization of each . . . . This eternal Law, this Divine Force, that maintains the harmony of the world, makes use of the Celestial Signs to organize and guide the animated creatures that breathe upon the earth; and gives to each of them the character and habits most appropriate. By the action of this Force Heaven rules the condition of the Earth and of its fields cultivated by the husbandman: it gives us or takes from us vegetation and harvests: it makes the great ocean overpass its limits at the flow, and retire within them again at the ebbing, of the tide."

Thus it is no longer by means of a poetic fiction only that the heavens and the earth become animated and personified, and are deemed living existences, from which other existences proceed. For now they live, with their own life, a life eternal like their bodies, each gifted with a life and perhaps a soul, like those of man, a portion of the universal life and universal soul; and the other bodies that they form, and which they contain in their bosoms, live only through them and with their life, as the embryo lives in the bosom of its mother, in consequence and by means of the life communicated to it, and which the mother ever maintains by the active power of her own life. Such is the universal life of the world, reproduced in all the beings which its superior portion creates in its inferior portion, that is as it were the matrix of the world, or of the beings that the heavens engender in its bosom,

"The soul of the world," says Macrobius, "is nature itself" [as

[p. 669]

the soul of man is man himself], "always acting through the celestial spheres which .it moves, and which but follow the irresistible impulse it impresses on them. The heavens, the sun, great seat of generative power, the signs, the stars, and the planets act only with the activity of the soul of the Universe. From that soul, through them, come all the variations and changes of sublunary nature, of which the heavens and celestial bodies are but the secondary causes. The zodiac, with its signs, is an existence, immortal and divine, organized by the universal soul, and producing, or gathering in itself, all the varied emanations of the different powers that make up the nature of the Divinity."

This doctrine, that gave to the heavens and the spheres living souls, each a portion of the universal soul, was of extreme antiquity. It was held by the old Sabaeans. It was taught by Timaeus, Plato, Speusippus, Iamblichus, Macrobius, Marcus Aurelius, and Pythagoras. When once men had assigned a soul to the Universe, containing in itself the plenitude of the animal life of particular beings, and even of the stars, they soon supposed that soul to be essentially intelligent, and the source of intelligence of all intelligent beings. Then the Universe became to them not only animated but intelligent, and of that intelligence the different parts of nature partook. Each soul was the vehicle, and, as it were, the envelope of the intelligence that attached itself to it, and could repose nowhere else. Without a soul there could be no intelligence; and as there was a universal soul, source of all souls, the universal soul was gifted with a universal intelligence, source of all particular intelligences. So the soul of the world contained in itself the intelligence of the world. All the agents of nature into which the universal soul entered, received also a portion of its intelligence, and the Universe, in its totality and in its parts, was filled with intelligences, that might be regarded as so many emanations from the sovereign and universal intelligence. Wherever the divine soul acted as a cause, there also was intelligence; and thus Heaven, the stars, the elements, and all parts of the Universe, became the seats of so many divine intelligences. Every minutest portion of the great soul became a partial intelligence, and the more it was disengaged from gross matter, the more active and intelligent it was. And all the old adorers of nature, the theologians, astrologers, and poets, and the most distinguished philosophers, supposed that the stars were so many animated and intelligent beings, or

[p. 670]

eternal bodies, active causes of effects here below, whom a principle of life animated, and whom an intelligence directed, which was but an emanation from, and a portion of, the universal life and intelligence of the world.

The Universe itself was regarded as a supremely intelligent being. Such was the doctrine of Timaeus of Locria. The soul of man was part of the intelligent soul of the Universe, and therefore itself intelligent. His opinion was that of many other philosophers. Cleanthes, a disciple of ZENO, regarded the Universe as God, Or as the unproduced and universal cause of all effects produced. He ascribed a soul and intelligence to universal nature, and to this intelligent soul, in his view, divinity belonged. From it the intelligence of man was an emanation, and shared its divinity. Chrysippus, the most subtle of the Stoics, placed in the universal reason that forms the soul and intelligence of nature, that divine force or essence of the Divinity which he assigned to the world moved by the universal soul that pervades its every part.

An interlocutor in Cicero's work, De Natura Deorum, formally argues that the Universe is necessarily intelligent and wise, because man, an infinitely small portion of it, is so. Cicero makes the same argument in his oration for Milo. The physicists came to the same conclusion as the philosophers. They supposed that movement essentially belonged to the soul, and the direction of regular and ordered movements to the intelligence. And, as both movement and order exist in the Universe, therefore, they held, there must be in it a soul and an intelligence that role it, and are not to be distinguished from itself; because the idea of the Universe is but the aggregate of all the particular ideas of all things that exist.

The argument was, that the Heavens, and the Stars which make part of them, are animated, because they possess a portion of the Universal Soul: they are intelligent beings, because that Universal Soul, part whereof they possess, is supremely intelligent; and they share Divinity with Universal Nature, because Divinity resides in the Universal Soul and Intelligence which move and rule the world, and of each of which they hold a share. By this process of logic, the interlocutor in Cicero assigned Divinity to the Stars, as animated beings gifted with sensibility and intelligence, and composed of the noblest and purest portions of the ethereal substance, unmixed with matter of an alien nature, and

[p. 671]

essentially containing light and heat. Hence he concluded them to be so many gods, of an intelligence superior to that of other existences, corresponding to the lofty height in which they moved with such perfect regularity and admirable harmony, with a movement spontaneous and free. Hence he made them "Gods," active, eternal, and intelligent "Causes"; and peopled the realm of Heaven with a host of Eternal Intelligences, celestial Genii or Angels, sharing the universal Divinity, and associated with it in the administration of the Universe, and the dominion exercised over sublunary nature and man.

We make the motive-force of the planets to be a mechanical law, which we explain by the combination of two forces, the centripetal and centrifugal, whose origin we cannot demonstrate, but whose force we can calculate. The ancients regarded them as moved by an intelligent force that had its origin in the first and universal Intelligence. Is it so certain, after all, that we are any nearer the truth than they were; or that we know what our "centripetal and centrifugal forces" mean; for what is a force? With us, the entire Deity acts upon and moves each planet, as He does the sap that circulates in the little blade of grass, and in the particles of blood in the tiny veins of the invisible rotifer. With the Ancients, the Deity of each Star was but a portion of the Universal God, the Soul of Nature. Each Star and Planet, with them, was moved of itself, and directed by its own special intelligence. And this opinion of Achilles Tatius, Diodorus, Chrysippus, Aristotle, Plato, Heraclides of Pontus, Theophrastus, Simplicius, Macrobius, and Proclus, that in each Star there is an immortal Soul and Intelligence, part of the Universal Soul and Intelligence of the Whole,--this opinion of Orpheus, Plotinus, and the Stoics, was in reality, that of many Christian philosophers. For Origen held the same opinion; and Augustin held that every visible thing in the world was superintended by an  Power: and Cosma, the Monk, believed that every Star was under the guidance of an Angel; and the author of the Octateuch, written in the time of the Emperor Justin, says that they are moved by the impulse communicated to them by Angels stationed above the firmament. Whether the stars were animated beings, was a question that Christian antiquity did not decide. Many of the Christian doctors believed they were. Saint Augustin hesitates, Saint Jerome doubts, if Solomon did not assign souls to the Stars. Saint

[p. 672]

[paragraph continues] Ambrose does not doubt they have souls; and Pamphilus says that many of the Church believe they are reasonable beings, while many think otherwise, but that neither one nor the other opinion is heretical.

Thus the Ancient Thought, earnest and sincere, wrought out the idea of a Soul inherent in the Universe and in its several parts. The next step was to separate that Soul from the Universe, and give to it an external and independent existence and personality; still omnipresent, in every inch of space and in every particle of matter, and yet not a part of Nature, but its Cause and its Creator. This is the middle ground between the two doctrines, of Pantheism (or that all is God, and God is in all and is all), on the one side, and Atheism (or that all is nature, and there is no other God), on the other; which doctrines, after all, when reduced to their simplest terms, seem to be the same.

We complacently congratulate ourselves on our recognition of a personal God, as being the conception most suited to human sympathies, and exempt from the mystifications of Pantheism. But the Divinity remains still a mystery, notwithstanding all the devices which symbolism, either from the organic or inorganic creation, can supply; and personification is itself a symbol, liable to misapprehension as much as, if not more so than, any other, since it is apt to degenerate into a mere reflection of our own infirmities; and hence any affirmative idea or conception that we can, in our own minds, picture of the Deity, must needs be infinitely inadequate.

The spirit of the Vedas (or sacred Indian Books, of great antiquity), as understood by their earliest as well as most recent expositors, is decidedly a pantheistic monotheism--one God, and He all in all; the many divinities, numerous as the prayers ad-dressed to them, being resolvable into the titles and attributes of a few, and ultimately into THE ONE. The machinery of personification was understood to have been unconsciously assumed as a mere expedient to supply the deficiencies of language; and the Mimansa justly considered itself as only interpreting the true meaning of the Mantras, when it proclaimed that, in the beginning, "Nothing was but Mind, the Creative Thought of Him which existed alone from the beginning, and breathed without afflation." The idea suggested in the Mantras is dogmatically asserted and developed in the Upanischadas. The Vedanta philosophy,

[p. 673]

assuming the mystery of the "ONE IN MANY" as the fundamental article of faith, maintained not only the Divine Unity, but the identity of matter and spirit. The unity which it advocates is that of mind. Mind is the Universal Element, the One God, the Great Soul, Mahaatma. He is the material as well as efficient cause, and the world is a texture of which he is both the web and the weaver. He is the Macrocosmos, the universal organism called Pooroosha, of which Fire, Air, and Sun are only the chief members. His head is light, his eyes the sun and moon, his breath the wind, his voice the opened Vedas. All proceeds from Brahm, like the web from the spider and the grass from the earth.

Yet it is only the impossibility of expressing in language the origination of matter from spirit, which gives to Hindu philosophy the appearance of materialism. Formless Himself, the Deity is present in all forms. His glory is displayed in the Universe as the image of the sun in water, which is, yet is not, the luminary itself. All maternal agency and appearance, the subjective world, are to a great extent phantasms, the notional representations of ignorance. They occupy, however, a middle ground between reality and non-reality; they are unreal, because nothing exists but Brahm; yet in some degree real, inasmuch as they constitute an outward manifestation of him. They are a self-induced hypostasis of the Deity, under which He presents to Himself the whole of animate and inanimate Nature, the actuality of the moment, the diversified appearances which successively invest the one Pantheistic Spirit.

The great aim of reason is to generalize; to discover unity in multiplicity, order in apparent confusion; to separate from the accidental and the transitory, the stable and universal. In the contemplation of Nature, and the vague, but almost intuitive perception of a general uniformity of plan among endless varieties of operation and form, arise those solemn and reverential feelings, which, if accompanied by intellectual activity, may eventually ripen into philosophy.

Consciousness of self and of personal identity is co-existent with our existence. We cannot conceive of mental existence without it. It is not the work of reflection nor of logic, nor the result of observation, experiment, and experience. It is a gift from God, like instinct; and that consciousness of a thinking soul which is

[p. 674]

really the person that we are, and other than our body, is the best and most solid proof of the soul's existence. We have the same consciousness of a Power on which we are dependent; which we can define and form an idea or picture of, as little as we can of the soul, and yet which we feel, and therefore know, exists. True and correct ideas of that Power, of the Absolute Existence from which all proceeds, we cannot trace; if by true and correct we mean adequate ideas; for of such we are not, with our limited faculties, capable. And ideas of His nature, so far correct as we are capable of entertaining, can only be attained either by direct inspiration or by the investigations of philosophy.

The idea of the universal preceded the recognition of any system for its explanation. It was felt rather than understood; and it was long before the grand conception on which all philosophy rests received through deliberate investigation that analytical development which might properly entitle it to the name. The sentiment, when first observed by the self-conscious mind, was, says Plato, "a Divine gift, communicated to mankind by some Prometheus, or by those ancients who lived nearer to the gods than our degenerate selves." The mind deduced from its first experiences the notion of a general Cause or Antecedent, to which it shortly gave a name and personified it. This was the statement of a theorem, obscure in proportion to its generality. It explained all things but itself. It was a true cause, but an incomprehensible one. Ages had to pass before the nature of the theorem could be rightly appreciated, and before men, acknowledging the First Cause to be an object of faith rather than science, were contented to confine their researches to those nearer relations of existence and succession, which are really within the reach of their faculties. At first, and for a long time, the intellect deserted the real for a hastily-formed ideal world, and the imagination usurped the place of reason, in attempting to put a construction on the most general and inadequate of conceptions, by transmuting its symbols into realities, and by substantializing it under a thousand arbitrary forms.

In poetry, the idea of Divine unity became, as in Nature, obscured by a multifarious symbolism; and the notionalities of transcendental philosophy reposed on views of nature scarcely more profound than those of the earliest symbolists. Yet the idea of unity was rather obscured than extinguished; and Xenophanes

[p. 675]

appeared as an enemy of Homer, only because he more emphatically insisted on the monotheistic element, which, in poetry, has been comparatively overlooked. The first philosophy reasserted the unity which poetry had lost; but being unequal to investigate its nature, it again resigned it to the world of approximate sensations, and became bewildered in materialism, considering the conceptional whole or First Element as some refinement of matter, unchangeable in its essence, though subject to mutations of quality and form in an eternal succession of seeming decay and regeneration; comparing it to water, air, or fire, as each endeavored to refine on the doctrine of his predecessor, or was influenced by a different class of theological traditions.

In the philosophical systems, the Divine Activity, divided by the poets and by popular belief among a race of personifications, in whom the idea of descent replaced that of cause, or of pantheistic evolution, was restored, without subdivision or reservation, to nature as a whole; at first as a mechanical force or life; afterward as an all-pervading soul or inherent thought; and lastly as an external directing Intelligence.

The Ionian revival of pantheism was materialistic. The Moving Force was inseparable from a material element, a subtle yet visible ingredient. Under the form of air or fire, the principle of life was associated with the most obvious material machinery of nature. Everything, it was said, is alive and full of gods. The wonders of the volcano, the magnet, the ebb and flow of the tide, were vital indications, the breathing or moving of the Great World-Animal. The imperceptible. ether of Anaximenes had no positive quality beyond the atmospheric air with which it was easily confused: and even the "Infinite" of Anaximander, though free of the conditions of quality or quantity, was only an ideal chaos, relieved of its coarseness by negations. It was the illimitable storehouse or Pleroma, out of which is evolved the endless circle of phenomenal change. A moving Force was recognized in, but not clearly distinguished from, the material. Space, Time, Figure, and Number, and other common forms or properties, which exist only as attributes, were treated as substances, or at least as making a substantial connection between the objects to which they belong: and all the conditions of material existence were supposed to have been evolved out of the Pythagorean Monad.

The Eleatic philosophers treated conceptions not only as

[p. 676]

entities, but as the only entities, alone possessing the stability and certainty and reality vainly sought among phenomena. The only reality was Thought. "All real existence," they said, "is mental existence; non-existence, being inconceivable, is therefore impossible; existence fills up the whole range of thought, and is inseparable from its exercise; thought and its object are one."

Xenophanes used ambiguous language, applicable to the material as well as to the mental, and exclusively appropriate to neither. In other words, he availed himself of material imagery to illustrate an indefinite meaning. In announcing the universal being, he appealed to the heavens as the visible manifestation, calling it spherical, a term borrowed from the material world. He said that God was neither moved nor unmoved, limited nor unlimited. He did not even attempt to express clearly what cannot be conceived clearly; admitting, says Simplicius, that such speculations were above physics. Parmenides employed similar expedients, comparing his metaphysical Deity to a sphere, or to heat, an aggregate or a continuity, and so involuntarily withdrawing its nominal attributes.

The Atomic school, dividing the All into Matter and Force, deemed matter unchangeable in its ultimate constitution, though infinitely variable in its resultant forms. They made all variety proceed from the varied combinations of atoms; but they required no mover nor director of the atoms external to themselves; no universal Reason; but a Mechanical Eternal Necessity, like that of the Poets. Still it is doubtful whether there ever was a time when reason could be said to be entirely asleep, a stranger to its own existence, notwithstanding this apparent materialism. The earliest contemplation of the external world, which brings it into an imagined association with ourselves, assigns, either to its whole or its parts, the sensation and volition which belong to our own souls.

Anaxagoras admitted the existence of ultimate elementary particles, as Empedocles did, from the combinations whereof all material phenomena resulted. But he asserted the Moving Force to be Mind; and yet, though he clearly saw the impossibility of advancing by illustration or definition beyond a reasonable faith, or a simple negation of materiality, yet he could not wholly desist from the endeavor to illustrate the nature of this non-matter or mind, by symbols drawn from those physical considerations which

[p. 677]

decided him in placing it in a separate category. Whether as human reason, or as the regulating Principle in nature, he held it different from all other things in character and effect, and that therefore it must necessarily differ in its essential constitution. It was neither Matter, nor a Force conjoined with matter, or homogeneous with it, but independent and generically distinct, especially in this, that, being the source of all motion, separation, and cognition, it is something entirely unique, pure, and unmixed; and so, being unhindered by any interfering influence limiting its independence of individual action, it has Supreme Empire over all things, over the vortex of worlds as well as over all that live in them. It is most penetrating and powerful, mixing with other things, though no other thing mixes with it; exercises universal control and cognition, and includes the Necessity of the Poets, as well as the independent power of thought which we exercise within ourselves. In short, it is the self-conscious power of thought extended to the Universe, and exalted into the Supreme External Mind which sees, knows, and directs all things.

Thus Pantheism and Materialism were both avoided; and matter, though as infinitely varied as the senses represent it, was held in a bond of unity transferred to a ruling power apart from it. That Power could not be Prime Mover, if it were itself moved; nor All-Governing, if not apart from the things it governs. If the arranging Principle were inherent in matter, it would have been impossible to account for the existence of a chaos: if something external, then the old Ionian doctrine of a "beginning" became more easily conceivable, as being the epoch at which the Arranging Intelligence commenced its operations.

But this grand idea of an all-governing independent mind involved difficulties which proved insuperable; because it gave to matter, in the form of chaos, an independent and eternal self-existence, and so introduced a dualism of mind and matter. In the Mind or Intelligence, Anaxagoras included not only life and motion, but the moral principles of the noble and good; and probably used the term on account of the popular misapplication of the word "God," and as being less liable to misconstruction, and more specifically marking his idea. His "Intelligence" principle remained practically liable to many of the same defects as the "Necessity" of the poets. It was the presentiment of a great idea, which it was for the time impossible to explain or follow out.

[p. 678]

[paragraph continues] It was not yet intelligible, nor was even the road opened through which it might be approached.

Mind cannot advance in metaphysics beyond self-deification. In attempting to go further, it only enacts the apotheosis of its own subtle conceptions, and so sinks below the simpler ground already taken. The realities which Plato could not recognize in phenomena, he discovered within his own mind, and as unhesitatingly as the old Theosophists installed its creations among the gods. He, like most philosophers after Anaxagoras, made the Supreme Being to be Intelligence; but in other respects left His nature undefined, or rather indefinite through the variety of definitions, a conception vaguely floating between Theism and Pan-theism. Though deprecating the demoralizing tendencies of poetry, he was too wise to attempt to replace them by other representations of a positive kind. He justly says, that spiritual things can be made intelligible only through figures; and the forms of allegorical expression which, in a rude age, had been adopted unconsciously, were designedly chosen by the philosopher as the most appropriate vehicles for theological ideas.

As the devices of symbolism were gradually stripped away, in order, if possible, to reach the fundamental conception, the religious feeling habitually connected with it seemed to evaporate under the process. And yet the advocates of Monotheism, Xenophanes and Heraclitus, declaimed only against the making of gods in human form. They did not attempt to strip nature of its divinity, but rather to recall religious contemplation from an exploded symbolism to a purer one. They continued the veneration which, in the background of poetry, has been maintained for Sun and Stars, the Fire or Ether. Socrates prostrated himself before the rising luminary; and the eternal spheres, which seem to have shared the religious homage of Xenophanes, retained a secondary and qualified Divinity in the Schools of the Peripatetics and Stoics.

The unseen being or beings revealed only to the Intellect became the theme of philosophy; and their more ancient symbols, if not openly discredited, were passed over with evasive generality, as beings respecting whose problematical existence we must be "content with what has been reported by those ancients, who, assuming to be their descendants, must therefore be supposed to have been well acquainted with their own ancestors and family

[p. 679]

connections." And the Theism of Anaxagoras was still more decidedly subversive, not only of Mythology, but of the whole religion of outward nature; it being an appeal from the world without, to the consciousness of spiritual dignity within man.

In the doctrines of Aristotle, the world moves on uninterruptedly, always changing, yet ever the same, like Time, the Eternal Now, knowing neither repose nor death. There is a principle which makes good the failure of identity, by multiplying resemblances; the destruction of the individual by an eternal renewal of the form in which matter is manifested. This regular eternal movement implies an Eternal Mover; not an inert Eternity, such as the Platonic Eidos, but one always acting, His essence being to act, for otherwise he might never have acted, and the existence of the world would be an accident; for what should have, in that case, decided Him to act, after long inactivity? Nor can He be partly in act and partly potential, that is, quiescent and undetermined to act or not to act, for even in that case motion would not be eternal, but contingent and precarious. He is therefore wholly in act, a pure, untiring activity, and for the sane reasons wholly immaterial. Thus Aristotle avoided the idea that God was inactive and self-contemplative for an eternity, and then for some unknown reason, or by some unknown motive, commenced to act outwardly and produce; but he incurred the opposite hazard, of making the result of His action, matter and the Universe, be co-existent with Himself; or, in other words, of denying that there was any time when His outward action commenced.

The First Cause, he said, unmoved, moves all. Act was first, and the Universe has existed forever; one persistent cause directing its continuity. The unity of the First Mover follows from His immateriality. If He were not Himself unmoved, the series of motions and causes of motion would be infinite. Unmoved, therefore, and unchangeable Himself, all movement, even that in space, is caused by Him: He is necessary: He cannot be otherwise than as He is; and it is only through the necessity of His being that we can account for those necessary eternal relations which make a science of Being possible. Thus Aristotle leaned to a seemingly personal God; not a Being of parts and passions, like the God of the Hebrews, or that of the mass even of educated men in our own day, but a Substantial Head of all the categories of being, an Individuality of Intelligence, the dogma of Anaxagoras revived

[p. 680]

out of a more elaborate and profound analysis of Nature; something like that living unambiguous Principle which the old poets, in advance of the materialistic cosmogonists from Night and Chaos, had discovered in Ouranos or Zeus. Soon, however, the vision of personality is withdrawn, and we reach that culminating point of thought where the real blends with the ideal; where moral action and objective thought (that is, thought exercised as to anything outside of itself), as well as the material body, are excluded; and where the divine action in the world retains its veil of impenetrable mystery, and to the utmost ingenuity of research presents but a contradiction. At this extreme, the series of efficient causes resolves itself into the Final Cause. That which moves, itself unmoved, can only be the immobility of Thought or Form. God is both formal, efficient, and final cause; the One Form comprising all forms, the one good including all good, the goal of the longing of the University, moving the world as the object of love or rational desire moves the individual. He is the internal or self-realized Final Cause, having no end beyond Himself. He is no moral agent; for if He were, He would be but an instrument for producing something still higher and greater. One sort of act only, activity of mind or thought, can be assigned to Him who is at once all act yet all repose. What we call our highest pleasure, which distinguishes wakefulness and sensation, and which gives a reflected charm to hope and memory, is with Him perpetual. His existence is unbroken enjoyment of that which is most excellent but only temporary with us. The divine quality of active and yet tranquil self-contemplation characterizing intelligence, is pre-eminently possessed by the divine mind; His thought, which is His existence, being, unlike ours, unconditional and wholly act. If He can receive any gratification or enjoyment from that which exists beyond Himself, He can also be displeased and pained with it, and then He would be an imperfect being. To suppose pleasure experienced by Him from anything outward, supposes an insufficient prior enjoyment and happiness, and a sort of dependency. Man's Good is beyond himself; not so God's. The eternal act which produces the world's life is the eternal desire of good. The object of the Absolute Thought is the Absolute Good. Nature is all movement, and Thought all repose. In contemplating that absolute good, the Finality can contemplate only itself; and thus, all material interference being excluded, the distinction of

[p. 681]

subject and object vanishes in complete identification, and the Divine Thought is "the thinking of thought." The energy of mind is life, and God is that energy in its purity and perfection. He is therefore life itself, eternal and perfect; and this sums up all that is meant by the term "God." And yet, after all this transcendentalism, the very essence of thought consists in its mobility and power of transference from object to object; and we can conceive of no thought, without an object beyond itself, about which to think, or of any activity in mere self-contemplation, without out-ward act, movement, or manifestation.

Plato endeavors to show how the Divine Principle of Good becomes realized in Nature: Aristotle's system is a vast analogical induction to prove how all Nature tends toward a final good. Plato considered Soul as a principle of movement, and made his Deity realize, that is, turn into realities, his ideas as a free, intelligent Force. Aristotle, for whom Soul is the motionless centre from which motion radiates, and to which it converges, conceives a correspondingly unmoved God. The Deity of Plato creates, superintends, and rejoices in the universal joy of, His creatures. That of Aristotle is the perfection of man's intellectual activity extended to the Universe. When he makes the Deity to be an eternal act of self-contemplation, the world is not excluded from His cognizance, for He contemplates it within Himself. Apart from and beyond the world, He yet mysteriously intermingles with it. He is universal as well as individual; His agency is necessary and general, yet also makes the real and the good of the particular.

When Plato had given to the unformed world the animal life of the Ionians, and added to that the Anaxagorean Intelligence, overruling the wild principle of Necessity; and when to Intelligence was added Beneficence; and the dread Wardours, Force and Strength, were made subordinate to Mildness and Goodness, it seemed as if a further advance were impossible, and that the Deny could not be more than The Wise and The Good.

But the contemplation of the Good implies that of its opposite, Evil. When God is held to be "The Good," it is not because Evil is unknown, but because it is designedly excluded from His attributes. But if Evil be a separate and independent existence, how would it fare with His prerogative of Unity and Supremacy? To meet this dilemma, it remained only to fall back on something more or less akin to the vagueness of antiquity; to make a virtual

[p. 682]

confession of ignorance, to deny the ultimate reality of evil, like Plato and Aristotle, or, with Speusippus, the eternity of its antithetical existence, to surmise that it is only one of those notions which are indeed provisionally indispensable in a condition of finite knowledge, but of which so many have been already discredited by the advance of philosophy; to revert, in short, to the original conception of "The Absolute," or of a single Being, in whom all mysteries are explained, and before whom the disturbing principle is reduced to a mere turbid spot on the ocean of Eternity, which to the eye of faith may be said no longer to exist.

But the absolute is nearly allied to the non-existent. Matter and evil obtruded themselves too constantly and convincingly to he confuted or cancelled by subtleties of Logic. It is in vain to attempt to merge the world in God, while the world of experience exhibits contrariety, imperfection, and mutability, instead of the immutability of its source. Philosophy was but another name for uncertainty; and after the mind had successively deified Nature and its own conceptions, without any practical result but toilsome occupation; when the reality it sought, without or within, seemed ever to elude its grasp, the intellect, baffled in its higher flights, sought advantage and repose in aiming at truth of a lower but more applicable kind.

The Deity of Plato is a Being proportioned to human sympathies; the Father of the World, as well as its Creator; the author of good only, not of evil. "Envy," he says, "is far removed from celestial beings, and man, if willing, and braced for the effort, is permitted to aspire to a communion with the solemn troops and sweet societies of Heaven. God is the Idea or Essence of Goodness, the Good itself [to agathon]; in goodness, He created the World, and gave to it the greatest perfection of which it was susceptible; making it, as far as possible, an image of Himself. The sublime type of all excellence is an object not only of veneration but love." The Sages of old had already intimated in enigmas that God is the Author of Good; that like the Sun in Heaven, or Aesculapius on earth, He is "Healer," "Saviour," and "Redeemer," the destroyer and averter of Evil, ever healing the mischiefs inflicted by Here, the wanton or irrational power of nature.

Plato only asserts with more distinctness the dogma of antiquity when he recognizes LOVE as the highest and most beneficent of gods, who gives to nature the invigorating energy restored by the

[p. 683]

art of medicine to the body; since Love is emphatically the physician of the Universe, the Aesculapius to whom Socrates wished to sacrifice in the hour of his death.

A figurative idea, adopted from familiar imagery, gave that endearing aspect to the divine connection with the Universe which had commanded the earliest assent of the sentiments, until, rising in refinement with the progress of mental cultivation, it ultimately established itself as firmly in the deliberate approbation of the understanding, as it had ever responded to the sympathies. Even the rude Scythians, Bithynians, and Scandinavians, called God their "Father"; all nations traced their ancestry more or less directly to Heaven. The Hyperborean Olen, one of the oldest symbols of the religious antiquity of Greece, made Love the First-born of Nature. Who will venture to pronounce at what time God was first worthily and truly honored, or when man first began to feel aright the mute eloquence of nature? In the obscure physics of the mystical Theologers who preceded Greek philosophy, Love was the Great First Cause and Parent of the Universe. "Zeus," says Proclus, "when entering upon the work of creation, changed Himself into the form of Love: and He brought forward Aphrodite, the principle of Unity and Universal Harmony, to display her light to all. In the depths of His mysterious being, He contains the principle of love within Himself; in Him creative wisdom and blessed love are united."

                    "From the first
 Of Days on these his love divine be fixed,
 His admiration; till in time complete
 What he admired and loved, his vital smile
 Unfolded into being."

The speculators of the venerable East, who had conceived the idea of an Eternal Being superior to all affection and change, in his own sufficiency enjoying a plenitude of serene and independent bliss, were led to inquire into the apparently inconsistent fact of the creation of the world. Why, they asked, did He, who required nothing external to Himself to complete His already-existing Perfection, come forth out of His unrevealed and perfect existence, and become incorporated in the vicissitudes of nature? The solution of the difficulty was Love. The Great Being beheld the beauty of His own conception, which dwelt with Him alone from the beginning, Maia, or Nature's loveliness, at once the germ

[p. 684]

of passion and the source of worlds. Love became the universal parent, when the Deity, before remote and inscrutable, became ideally separated into the loving and the beloved.

And here again recurs the ancient difficulty; that, at whatever early period this creation occurred, an eternity had previously elapsed, during which God, dwelling alone in His unimpeached unity, had no object for His love; and that the very word implies to us an existing object toward which the love is directed; so that we cannot conceive of love in the absence of any object to be loved; and therefore we again return to this point, that if love is of God's essence, and He is unchangeable, the same necessity of His nature, supposed to have caused creation, must ever have made His existence without an object to love impossible: and so that the Universe must have been co-existent with Himself.

The questions how and why evil exists in the Universe: how its existence is to be reconciled with the admitted wisdom and goodness and omnipotence of God; and how far man is a free agent, or controlled by an inexorable necessity or destiny, have two sides. On one, they are questions as to the qualities and attributes of Got; for we must infer His moral nature from His mode of governing the Universe, and they ever enter into any consideration of His intellectual nature: and on the other, they directly concern the moral responsibility, and therefore the destiny, of man. All-important, therefore, in both points of view, they have been much discussed in all ages of the world, and have no doubt urged men, more than all other questions have, to endeavor to fathom the profound mysteries of the Nature and the mode of Existence and action of an incomprehensible God.

And, with these, still another question also presents itself: whether the Deity governs the Universe by fixed and unalterable laws, or by special Providences and interferences, so that He may be induced to change His course and the results of human or material action, by prayer and supplication.

God alone is all-powerful; but the human soul has in all ages asserted its claim to be considered as part of the Divine. "The purity of the spirit," says Van Helmont, "is shown through energy and efficaciousness of will. God, by the agency of an infinite will, created the Universe, and the same sort of power in an inferior degree, limited more or less by external hindrances, exists in all spiritual beings." The higher we ascend in antiquity, the more

[p. 685]

does prayer take the form of incantation; and that form it still in a great degree retains, since the rites of public worship are generally considered not merely as an expression of trust or reverence, as real spiritual acts, the effect of which is looked for only within the mind of the worshipper, but as acts from which some direct outward result is anticipated, the attainment of some desired object, of health or wealth, of supernatural gifts for body or soul, of exemption from danger, or vengeance upon enemies. Prayer was able to change the purposes of Heaven, and to make the Devs tremble under the abyss. It exercised a compulsory influence over the gods. It promoted the magnetic sympathy of spirit with spirit; and the Hindu_ and Persian liturgies, addressed not only to the Deity Himself, but to His diversified manifestations, were considered wholesome and necessary iterations of the living or creative Word which at first effectuated the divine will, and which from instant to instant supports the universal frame by its eternal repetition.

In the narrative of the Fall we have the Hebrew mode of explaining the great moral mystery, the origin of evil and the apparent estrangement from Heaven; and a similar idea, variously modified, obtained in all the ancient creeds. Everywhere, man had at the beginning been innocent and happy, and had lapsed, by temptation and his own weakness, from his first estate. Thus was accounted for the presumed connection of increase of knowledge with increase of misery, and, in particular, the great penalty of death was reconciled with Divine Justice. Subordinate to these greater points were the questions, Why is the earth covered with thorns and weeds? whence the origin of clothing, of sexual shame and passion? whence the infliction of labor, and how to justify the degraded condition of woman in the East, or account for the loathing so generally felt toward the Serpent Tribe?

The hypothesis of a fall, required under some of its modifications in all systems, to account for the apparent imperfection in the work of a Perfect Being, was, in Eastern philosophy, the unavoidable accompaniment and condition of limited or individual existence; since the Soul, considered as a fragment of the Universal Mind, might be said to have lapsed from its pre-eminence when parted from its source, and ceasing to form part of integral perfection. The theory of its reunion was correspondent to the assumed cause of its degradation. To reach its prior condition,

[p. 686]

its individuality must cease; it must be emancipated by re-absorption into the Infinite, the consummation of all things in God, to be promoted by human effort in spiritual meditation or self-mortification, and completed in the magical transformation of death.

And as man had fallen, so it was held that the Angels of Evil had, from their first estate, to which, like men, they were, in God's good time, to be restored, and the reign of evil was then to cease forever. To this great result all the Ancient Theologies point; and thus they all endeavored to reconcile the existence of Sin and Evil with the perfect and undeniable wisdom and beneficence of God.

With man's exercise of thought are inseparably connected freedom and responsibility. Man assumes his proper rank as a moral agent, when with a sense of the limitations of his nature arise the consciousness of freedom, and of the obligations accompanying its exercise, the sense of duty and of the capacity to perform it. To suppose that man ever imagined himself not to be a free agent until he had argued himself into that belief, would be to suppose that he was in that below the brutes; for he, like them, is conscious of his freedom to act. Experience alone teaches him that this freedom of action is limited and controlled; and when what is outward to him restrains and limits this freedom of action, he instinctively rebels against it as a wrong. The rule of duty and the materials of experience are derived from an acquaintance with the conditions of the external world, in which the faculties are exerted; and thus the problem of man involves those of Nature and God. Our freedom, we learn by experience, is determined by an agency external to us; our happiness is intimately dependent on the relations of the outward World, and on the moral character of its Ruler.

Then at once arises this problem: The God of Nature must be One, and His character cannot be suspected to be other than good. Whence, then, came the evil, the consciousness of which must invariably have preceded or accompanied man's moral development? On this subject human opinion has ebbed and flowed between two contradictory extremes, one of which seems inconsistent with God's Omnipotence, and the other with His beneficence. If God, it was said, is perfectly wise and good, evil must arise from some independent and hostile principle: if, on the other hand, all agencies are subordinate to One, it is difficult, if evil does indeed exist,

[p. 687]

if there is any such thing as Evil, to avoid the impiety of making God the Author of it.

The recognition of a moral and physical dualism in nature was adverse to the doctrine of Divine Unity. Many of the Ancients thought it absurd to imagine one Supreme Being, like Homer's Jove, distributing good and evil out of two urns. They therefore substituted, as we have seen, the doctrine of two distinct and eternal principles; some making the cause of evil to be the inherent imperfection of matter and the flesh, without explaining how God was not the cause of that; while others personified the required agency, and fancifully invented an Evil Principle, the question of whose origin indeed involved all the difficulty of the original problem, but whose existence, if once taken for granted, was sufficient as a popular solution of the mystery; the difficulty being supposed no longer to exist when pushed a step further off, as the difficulty of conceiving the world upheld by an elephant was supposed to be got rid of when it was said that the elephant was supported by a tortoise.

The simpler, and probably the older, notion, treated the one only God as the Author of all things. "I form the light," says Jehovah, "and create darkness; I cause prosperity and create evil; I, the Lord, do all these things." "All mankind," says Maximus Tyrius, "are agreed that there exists one only Universal King and Father, and that the many gods are His Children." There is nothing improbable in the supposition that the primitive idea was that there was but one God. A vague sense of Nature's Unity, blended with a dim perception of an all-pervading Spiritual Essence, has been remarked among the earliest manifestations of the Human Mind. Everywhere it was the dim remembrance, uncertain and indefinite, of the original truth taught by God to the first men.

The Deity of the Old Testament is everywhere represented as the direct author of Evil, commissioning evil and lying spirits to men, hardening the heart of Pharaoh, and visiting the iniquity of the individual sinner on the whole people. The rude conception of sternness predominating over mercy in the Deity, can alone account for the human sacrifices, purposed, if not executed, by Abraham and Jephthah. It has not been uncommon, in any age or country of the world, for men to recognize the existence of one God, without forming any becoming estimate of His dignity. The

[p. 688]

causes of both good and ill are referred to a mysterious centre, to which each assigns such attributes as correspond with his own intellect and advance in civilization. Hence the assignment to the Deity of the feelings of envy and jealousy. Hence the provocation given by the healing skill of Aesculapius and the humane theft of fire by Prometheus. The very spirit of Nature, personified in Orpheus, Tantalus, or Phineus was supposed to have been killed, confined, or blinded, for having too freely divulged the Divine Mysteries to mankind. This Divine Envy still exists in a modified form, and varies according to circumstances. In Hesiod it appears in the lowest type of human malignity. In the God of Moses, it is jealousy of the infringement of the autocratic power, the check to political treason; and even the penalties denounced for worshipping other gods often seem dictated rather by a jealous regard for His own greatness in Deity, than by the immorality and degraded nature of the worship itself. In Herodotus and other writers it assumes a more philosophical shape, as a strict adherence to a moral equilibrium in the government of the world, in the punishment of pride, arrogance, and insolent pretension.

God acts providentially in Nature by regular and universal laws, by constant modes of operation; and so takes care of material things without violating their constitution, acting always according to the nature of the things which He has made. It is a fact of observation that, in the material and unconscious world, He works by its materiality and unconsciousness, not against them; in the animal world, by its animality and partial consciousness, not against them. So in the providential government of the world, He acts by regular and universal laws, and constant modes of operation; and so takes care of human things without violating their constitution, acting always according to the human nature of man, not against if, working in the human world by means of man's consciousness and partial freedom, not against them.

God acts by general laws for general purposes. The attraction of gravitation is a good thing, for it keeps the world together; and if the tower of Siloam, thereby falling to the ground, slays eighteen men of Jerusalem, that number is too small to think of, considering the myriad millions who are upheld by the same law. It could not well be repealed for their sake, and to hold up that tower; nor could it remain in force, and the tower stand.

It is difficult to conceive of a Perfect Will without confounding

[p. 689]

it with something like mechanism; since language has no name for that combination of the Inexorable with the Moral, which the old poets personified separately in Ananke or Eimarmene and Zeus. How combine understandingly the Perfect Freedom of the Supreme and All-Sovereign Will of God with the inflexible necessity, as part of His Essence, that He should and must continue to be, in all His great attributes, of justice and mercy for example, what He is now and always has been, and with the impossibility of His changing His nature and becoming unjust, merciless, cruel, fickle, or of His repealing the great moral laws which make crime wrong and the practice of virtue right?

For all that we familiarly know of Free-Will is that capricious exercise of it which we experience in ourselves and other men; and therefore the notion of Supreme Will, still guided by Infallible Law, even if that law be self-imposed, is always in danger of being either stripped of the essential quality of Freedom, or degraded under the ill-name of Necessity to something of even less moral and intellectual dignity than the fluctuating course of human operations.

It is not until we elevate the idea of law above that of partiality or tyranny, that we discover that the self-imposed limitations of the Supreme Cause, constituting an array of certain alternatives, regulating moral choice, are the very sources and safeguards of human freedom; and the doubt recurs, whether we do not set a law above God Himself; or whether laws self-imposed may not be self-repealed: and if not, what power prevents it.

The Zeus of Homer, like that of Hesiod, is an array of antitheses, combining strength with weakness, wisdom with folly, universal parentage with narrow family limitation, omnipotent control over events with submission to a superior destiny;-DESTINY, a name by means of which the theological problem was cast back into the original obscurity out of which the powers of the human mind have proved themselves as incapable of rescuing it, as the efforts of a fly caught in a spider's web to do more than increase its entanglement.

The oldest notion of Deity was rather indefinite than repulsive. The positive degradation was of later growth. The God of nature reflects the changeful character of the seasons, varying from dark to bright. Alternately angry and serene, and lavishing abundance which she again withdraws, nature seems inexplicably capricious,

[p. 690]

and though capable of responding to the highest requirements of the moral sentiment through a general comprehension of her mysteries, more liable by a partial or hasty view to become darkened into a Siva, a Saturn, or a Mexitli, a patron of fierce orgies or blood-stained altars. All the older poetical personifications exhibit traces of this ambiguity. They are neither wholly immoral nor purely beneficent.

No people have ever deliberately made their Deity a malevolent or guilty Being. The simple piety which ascribed the origin of all things to God, took all in good part, trusting and hoping all things. The Supreme Ruler was at first looked up to with unquestioning reverence. No startling discords or contradictions had yet raised a doubt as to His beneficence, or made men dissatisfied with His government. Fear might cause anxiety, but could not banish hope, still less inspire aversion. It was only later, when abstract notions began to assume the semblance of realities, and when new or more distinct ideas suggested new words for their expression, that it became necessary to fix a definite barrier between Evil and Good.

To account for moral evil, it became necessary to devise some new expedient suited both to the piety and self-complacency of the inventor, such as the perversity of woman, or an agent distinct from God, a Typhon or Ahriman, obtained either by dividing the Gods into two classes, or by dethroning the Ancient Divinity, and changing him into a Dev or Daemon. Through a similar want, the Orientals devised the inherent corruption of the fleshy and material; the Hebrew transferred to Satan everything illegal and immoral; and the Greek reflection, occasionally adopting the older and truer view, retorted upon man the obloquy cast on these creatures of his imagination, and showed how he has to thank himself alone for his calamities, while his good things are the voluntary gifts, not the plunder of Heaven. Homer had already made Zeus exclaim, in the Assembly of Olympus, "Grievous it is to hear these mortals accuse the Gods; they pretend that evils come from us; but they themselves occasion them gratuitously by their own wanton folly." "It is the fault of man," said Solon; in reference to the social evils of his day, "not of God, that destruction comes;" and Euripides, after a formal discussion of the origin of evil, comes to the conclusion that men act wrongly, not from want of natural good sense and feeling, but because knowing

[p. 691]

what is good, they yet for various reasons neglect to practise it.

And at last reaching the highest truth, Pindar, Hesiod, Aeschylus, Aesop, and Horace said, "All virtue is a struggle; life is not a scene of repose, but of energetic action. Suffering is but another name for the teaching of experience, appointed by Zeus himself, the giver of all understanding, to be the parent of instruction, the schoolmaster of life. He indeed put an end to the golden age; he gave venom to serpents and predacity to wolves; he shook the honey from the leaf, and stopped the flow of wine in the rivulets; he concealed the element of fire, and made the means of life scanty and precarious. But in all this his object was beneficent; it was not to destroy life, but to improve it. It was a blessing to man, not a curse, to be sentenced to earn his bread by the sweat of his brow; for nothing great or excellent is attainable without exertion; safe and easy virtues are prized neither by gods nor men; and the parsimoniousness of nature is justified by its powerful effect in rousing the dormant faculties, and forcing on mankind the invention of useful arts by means of meditation and thought."

Ancient religious reformers pronounced the worship of "idols" to be the root of all evil; and there have been many iconoclasts in different ages of the world. The maxim still holds good; for the worship of idols, that is, of fanciful conceits, if not the source of all evil, is still the cause of much; and it prevails as extensively now as it ever did. Men are ever engaged in worshipping the picturesque fancies of their own imaginations.

Human wisdom must always be limited and incorrect; and even right opinion is only a something intermediate between ignorance and knowledge. The normal condition of man is that of progress. Philosophy is a kind of journey, ever learning, yet never arriving at the ideal perfection of truth. A Mason should, like the wise Socrates, assume the modest title of a "lover of wisdom"; for he must ever long after something more excellent than he possesses, something still beyond his reach, which he desires to make eternally his own.

Thus the philosophic sentiment came to be associated with the poetical and the religious, under the comprehensive name of Love. Before the birth of Philosophy, Love had received but scanty and inadequate homage. This mightiest and most ancient of gods, coeval with the existence of religion and of the world, had been

[p. 692]

indeed unconsciously felt, but had neither been worthily honored nor directly celebrated in hymn or paen. In the old days of ignorance it could scarcely have been recognized. In order that it might exercise its proper influence over religion and philosophy, it was necessary that the God of Nature should cease to be a God of terrors, a personification of mere Power or arbitrary Will, a pure and stern Intelligence, an inflictor of evil, and an unrelenting Judge. The philosophy of Plato, in which this charge became forever established, was emphatically a mediation of Love. With him, the inspiration of Love first kindled the light of arts and imparted them to mankind; and not only the arts of mere existence, but the heavenly art of wisdom, which supports the Universe. It inspires high and generous deeds and noble self-devotion. Without it, neither State nor individual could do anything beautiful or great. Love is our best pilot, confederate, supporter, and saviour; the ornament and governor of all things human and divine; and he with divine harmony forever soothes the minds of men and gods.

Man is capable of a higher Love, which, marrying mind with mind and with the Universe, brings forth all that is noblest in his faculties, and lifts him beyond himself. This higher love is neither mortal nor immortal, but a power intermediate between the human and the Divine, filling up the mighty interval, and binding the Universe together. He is chief of those celestial emissaries who carry to the gods the prayers of men, and bring down to men the gifts of the gods. "He is forever poor, and far from being beautiful as mankind imagine, for he is squalid and withered; he flies low along the ground, is homeless and unsandalled; sleeping without covering before the doors and in the unsheltered streets, and possessing so far his mother's nature as being ever the companion of want. Yet, sharing also that of his father, he is forever scheming to obtain things good and beautiful; he is fearless, vehement, and strong; always devising some new contrivance; strictly cautious and full of inventive. resource; a philosopher through his whole existence, a powerful enchanter, and a subtle sophist."

The ideal consummation of Platonic science is the arrival at the contemplation of that of which earth exhibits no express image or adequate similitude, the Supreme Prototype of all beauty, pure and uncontaminated with human intermixture of flesh or color, the Divine Original itself. To one so qualified is given the prerogative

[p. 693]

of bringing forth not mere images and shadows of virtue, but virtue itself, as having been conversant not with shadows, but with the truth; and having so brought forth and nurtured a progeny of virtue, he becomes the friend of God, and, so far as such a privilege can belong to any human being, immortal.

Socrates believed, like Heraclitus, in a Universal Reason pervading all things and all minds, and consequently revealing itself in ideas. He therefore sought truth in general opinion, and perceived in the communication of mind with mind one of the greatest prerogatives of wisdom and the most powerful means of advancement. He believed true wisdom to be an attainable idea, and that the moral convictions of the mind, those eternal instincts of temperance, conscientiousness, and justice, implanted in it by the gods, could not deceive, if rightly interpreted.

This metaphysical direction given to philosophy ended in visionary extravagance. Having assumed truth to be discover-able in thought, it proceeded to treat thoughts as truths. It thus became an idolatry of notions, which it considered either as phantoms exhaled from objects, or as portions of the divine pre-existent thought; thus creating a mythology of its own, and escaping from one thraldom only to enslave itself afresh. Theories and notions indiscriminately formed and defended are the false gods or "idols" of philosophy. For the word idolon means image, and a false mind-picture of God is as much an idol as a false wooden image of Him. Fearlessly launching into the problem of universal being, the first philosophy attempted to supply a compendious and decisive solution of every doubt. To do this, it was obliged to make the most sweeping assumptions; and as poetry had already filled the vast void between the human and the divine, by personifying its Deity as man, so philosophy bowed down before the supposed reflection of the divine image in the mind of the inquirer, who, in worshipping his own notions, had unconsciously deified himself. Nature thus was enslaved to common notions, and notions very often to words.

By the clashing of incompatible opinions, philosophy was gradually reduced to the ignominious confession of utter incapacity, and found its check or intellectual fall in skepticism. Xenophanes and Heraclitus mournfully acknowledged the unsatisfactory result of all the struggles of philosophy, in the admission of a universality of doubt; and the memorable effort of Socrates to rally

[p. 694]

the discomfited champions of truth, ended in a similar confession.

The worship of abstractions continued the error which personified Evil or deified Fortune; and when mystical philosophy resigned its place to mystical religion, it changed not its nature, but only its name. The great task remained unperformed, of reducing the outward world and its principles to the dominion of the intellect, and of reconciling the conception of the supreme unalterable power asserted by reason, with the requisitions of human sympathies.

A general idea of purpose and regularity in nature had been suggested by common appearances to the earliest reflection. The ancients perceived a natural order, a divine legislation, from which human institutions were supposed to be derived, laws emblazoned in Heaven, and thence revealed to earth. But the divine law was little more than an analogical inference from human law, taken in the vulgar sense of arbitrary will or partial covenant. It was surmised rather than discovered, and remained unmoral because unintelligible. It mattered little, under the circumstances, whether the Universe were said to be governed by chance or by reason, since the latter, if misunderstood, was virtually one with the former. "Better far," said Epicurus, "acquiesce in the fables of tradition, than acknowledge the oppressive necessity of the physicists"; and Menander speaks of God, Chance, and Intelligence as undistinguishable. Law unacknowledged goes under the name of Chance: perceived, but not understood, it becomes Necessity. The wisdom of the Stoic was a dogged submission to the arbitrary behests of one; that of the Epicurean an advantage snatched by more or less dexterous management from the equal tyranny of the other.

Ignorance sees nothing necessary, and is self abandoned to a power tyrannical because defined by no rule, and paradoxical because permitting evil, while itself assumed to be unlimited, all-powerful, and perfectly good. A little knowledge, presuming the identification of the Supreme Cause with the inevitable certainty of perfect reason, but omitting the analysis or interpretation of it, leaves the mind chain-bound in the ascetic fatalism of the Stoic. Free-will, coupled with the universal rule of Chance; or Fatalism and Necessity, coupled with Omniscience and fixed and unalterable Law, these are the alternatives, between which the human

[p. 695]

mind has eternally vacillated. The Supernaturalists, contemplating a Being acting through impulse, though with superhuman wisdom, and considering the best courtier to be the most favored subject, combines contradictory expedients, inconsistently mixing the assertion of free action with the enervating service of petition; while he admits, in the words of a learned archbishop, that "if the production of the things we ask for depend on antecedent, natural, and necessary causes, our desires will be answered no less by the omission than the offering of prayers, which, therefore, are a vain thing."

The last stage is that in which the religion of action is made legitimate through comprehension of its proper objects and conditions. Man becomes morally free only when both notions, that of Chance and that of incomprehensible Necessity, are displaced by that of Law. Law, as applied to the Universe, means that universal, providential pre-arrangement, whose conditions can be discerned and discretionally acted on by human intelligence. The sense of freedom arises when the individual independence develops itself according to its own laws, without external collisions or hindrance; that of constraint, where it is thwarted or confined by other Natures, or where, by combination of external forces, the individual force is compelled into a new direction. Moral choice would not exist safely, or even at all, unless it were bounded by conditions determining its preferences. Duty supposes a rule both intelligible and certain, since an uncertain rule would be unintelligible, and if unintelligible, there could be no responsibility. No law that is unknown can be obligatory; and that Roman Emperor was justly execrated, who pretended to promulgate his penal laws, by putting them up at such a height that none could read them.

Man commands results, only by selecting among the contingent the pre-ordained results most suited to his purposes. In regard to absolute or divine morality, meaning the final cause or purpose of those comprehensive laws which often seem harsh to the individual, because inflexibly just and impartial to the universal, speculation must take refuge in faith; the immediate and obvious purpose often bearing so small a proportion to a wider and unknown one, as to be relatively absorbed or lost. The rain that, unseasonable to me, ruins my hopes of an abundant crop, does so because it could not otherwise have blessed and prospered the crops of another kind of a whole neighboring district of country. The

[p. 696]

obvious purpose of a sudden storm of snow, or an unexpected change of wind, exposed to which I lose my life, bears small proportion to the great results which are to flow from that storm or wind over a whole continent. So always, of the good and ill which at first seemed irreconcilable and capriciously distributed, the one holds its ground, the other diminishes by being explained. In a world of a multitude of individuals, a world of action and exertion, a world affording, by the conflict of interests and the clashing of passions, any scope for the exercise of the manly and generous virtues, even Omnipotence cannot make it, that the comfort and convenience of one man alone shall always be consulted.

Thus the educated mind soon begins to appreciate the moral superiority of a system of law over one of capricious interference; and as the jumble of means and ends is brought into more intelligible perspective, partial or seeming good is cheerfully resigned for the disinterested and universal. Self-restraint is found not to imply self-sacrifice. The true meaning of what appeared to be Necessity is found to be, not arbitrary Power, but Strength and Force enlisted in the service of Intelligence. God having made us men, and placed us in a world of change and eternal renovation, with ample capacity and abundant means for rational enjoyment, we learn that it is folly to repine because we are not angels, inhabiting a world in which change and the clashing of interests and the conflicts of passion are unknown.

The mystery of the world remains, but is sufficiently cleared up to inspire confidence. We are constrained to admit that if every man would but do the best in his power to do, and that which he knows he ought to do, we should need no better world than this. Man, surrounded by necessity, is free, not in a dogged determination of isolated will, because, though inevitably complying with nature's laws, he is able, proportionately to his knowledge, to modify, in regard to himself, the conditions of their action, and so to preserve an average uniformity between their forces and his own.

Such are some of the conflicting opinions of antiquity; and we have to some extent presented to you a picture of the Ancient Thought. Faithful, as far as it goes, it exhibits to us Man's Intellect ever struggling to pass beyond the narrow bounds of the circle in which its limited powers and its short vision confine it; and ever we find it travelling round the circle, like one lost in a

[p. 697]

wood, to meet the same unavoidable and insoluble difficulties. Science with her many instruments, Astronomy, particularly, with her telescope, Physics with the microscope, and Chemistry with its analyses and combinations, have greatly enlarged our ideas of the Deity, by discovering to us the vast extent of the Universe in both directions, its star-systems and its invisible swarms of minutest animal life; by acquainting us with the new and wonderful Force or Substance we call Electricity, apparently a link between Matter and Spirit: and still the Deity only becomes more incomprehensible to us than ever, and we find that in our speculations we but reproduce over and over again the Ancient Thought.

Where, then, amid all these conflicting opinions, is the True Word of a Mason?

My Brother, most of the questions which have thus tortured men's minds, it is not within the reach and grasp of the Human Intellect to understand; but without understanding, as we have explained to you heretofore, we may and must believe.

The True Word of a Mason is to be found in the concealed and profound meaning of the Ineffable Name of Deity, communicated by God to Moses; and which meaning was long lost by the very precautions taken to conceal it. The true pronunciation of that name was in truth a secret, in which, however, was involved the far more profound secret of its meaning. In that meaning is included all the truth than can be known by us, in regard to the nature of God.

Long known as AL, AL SCHADAI, ALOHAYIM, and ADONAI; as the Chief or Commander of the Heavenly Armies; as the aggregate of the Forces [ALOHAYIM] of Nature; as the Mighty, the Victorious, the Rival of Bal and Osiris; as the Soul of Nature, Nature itself, a God that was but Man personified, a God with human passions, the God of the Heathen with but a mere change of name, He assumes, in His communications to Moses, the name w ?Y?H?W?H [IHUH], and says to Him, w ?A?H?Y?H ?A?Sh?R ?A?H?Y?H [AHIH ASHR AHIH], I AM WHAT I AM. Let us examine the esoteric or inner meaning of this Ineffable Name.

w ?H?Y?H [HIH] is the imperfect tense of the verb To BE, of which w ?Y?H?Y?H [IHIH] is the present; w ?A?H?Y [AHI--w ?A being the personal pronoun "I" affixed] the first person, by apocope; and, w ?Y?H?Y [IHI] the third. The verb has the following forms: . . . Preterite, 3d person, masculine singular, w ?H?Y?H [HIH], did exist, was; 3d person corn.

[p. 698]

plural, w ?H?Y?W [HIU] . . . Present, 3d pers. masc. sing. w ?Y?H?Y?H [IHIH], once w ?Y?H?W?A [IHUA], by apocope, w ?A?H?Y, w ?Y?H?Y [AHI, IHI] . . Infinitive, w ?H?Y?H, w ?H?Y?W [HIH, HIU] . . . Imperative, 2d pers. masc. sing. w ?H?Y?H [HIH], fem. w ?H?W?Y [HUI] . . . Participle, masc. sing. w ?H?W?H [HUH], ENS--EXISTING . . EXISTENCE.

The verb is never used, as the mere logical copula or connecting word, is, was, etc., is used with the Greeks, Latins, and ourselves. It always implies existence, actuality. The present form also includes the future sense, . . shall or may be or exist. And w ?H?W?H and w ?H?W?A [HUH and HUA] Chaldaic forms of the imperfect tense of the verb, are the same as the Hebrew w ?H?W?H and w ?H?Y?H [HUH and HIH], and mean was, existed, became.

Now w ?H?W?A and w ?H?Y?A [HUA and HIA] are the Personal Pronoun [Masculine and Feminine], HE, SHE. Thus in Gen. iv. 20 we have the phrase, w ?H?W?A ?H?Y?H [HUA HIH], HE WAS: and in Lev. xxi. 9, w ?A?Th ?A?B?Y?H ?H?Y?A [ATH ABIH HIA], HER Father. This feminine pronoun, however, is often written w ?H?W?A [HUA], and w ?H?Y?A [HIA] occurs only eleven times in the Pentateuch. Sometimes the feminine form means IT; but that pronoun is generally in the masculine form.

When either, w ?Y, w ?W, w ?H,or w ?A, [Yo_d, Vav, He, or Aleph] terminates a word, and has no vowel either immediately preceding or following it, it is often rejected; as in w ?G?Y [GI], for w ?G?Y?A [GIA], a valley,

So w ?H?W?A-?H?Y?A [HUA-HIA], He-She, could properly be written w ?H?W-?H?Y [HU-HI]; or by transposition of the letters, common with the Talmudists, w ?Y?H-?W?H [Iii-UH], which is the Tetragrammaton or Ineffable Name.

In Gen. i. 27, it is said, "So the ALHIM created man in His image: in the image of ALHIM created He him: MALE and FE-MALE created He them."

Sometimes the word was thus expressed; triangularly:

And we learn that this designation of the Ineffable Name was, among the Hebrews, a symbol of Creation. The mysterious union of God with His creatures was in the letter w ?H, which they considered to be the Agent of Almighty Power; and to enable the possessor of the Name to work miracles.

The Personal Pronoun w ?H?W?A [HUA], HE, is often used by itself,

[p. 699]

to express the Deity. Lee says that in such cases, IHUH, IH, or ALHIM, or some other name of God, is understood; but there is no necessity for that. It means in such cases the Male, Generative, or Creative Principle or Power.

It was a common practice with the Talmudists to conceal secret meanings and sounds of words by transposing the letters.

The reversal of the letters of words was, indeed, anciently common everywhere. Thus from Neitha, the name of an Egyptian Goddess, the Greeks, writing backward, formed Athene, the name of Minerva. In Arabic we have Nahid, a name of the planet Venus, which, reversed, gives Dihan, Greek, in Persian, Nihad, Nature; which Sir William Jones writes also Nahid. Strabo informs us that the Armenian name of Venus was Anaitis.

Tien, Heaven, in Chinese, reversed, is Neit, or Neith, worshipped at Sais in Egypt. Reverse Neitha, drop the i, and add an e, and we, as before said, Athene. Mitra was the name of Venus among the ancient Persians. Herodotus, who tells us this, also informs us that her name, among the Scythians, was Artim pasa. Artim is Mitra, reversed. So, by reversing it, the Greeks formed Artemis, Diana.

One of the meanings of Rama, in Sanscrit, is Kama, the Deity of Love. Reverse this, and we have Amar, and by changing a into o, Amor, the Latin word for Love. Probably, as the verb is Amare, the oldest reading was Amar and not Amor. So Dipaka, in Sanscrit, one of the meanings whereof is love, is often written Dipuc. Reverse this, and we have, adding o, the Latin word Cupido.

In Arabic, the radical letters rhm, pronounced rahm, signify the trunk, compassion, mercy; this reversed, we have mhr, in Persic, love and the Sun. In Hebrew we have Lab, the heart; and in Chaldee, Bal, the heart; the radical letters of both being b and l.

The Persic word for head is Sar. Reversed, this becomes Ras in Arabic and Hebrew, Raish in Chaldee, Rash in Samaritan, and Ryas in Ethiopic; all meaning head, chief, etc. In Arabic we have Kid, in the sense of rule, regulation, article of agreement, obligation; which, reversed, becomes, adding e, the Greek dike justice. In Coptic we have Chlom, a crown. Reversed, we have in Hebrew, Moloch or Malec, a King, or he who wears a crown.

In the Kou-onen, or oldest Chinese writing, by Hieroglyphics,  Ge [Hi or Khi, with the initial letter modified], was the Sun: in Persic, Gwar and in Turkish Giun. Yue [], was the Moon;

[p. 700]

in Sanscrit Uh, and in Turkish Ai. It will be remembered that, in Egypt and elsewhere, the Sun was originally feminine, and the Moon masculine. In Egypt, Ioh was the moon: and in the feasts of Bacchus they cried incessantly, Euoi Sabvi! Euoi Bakhe! Io Bakhe! Io Bakhe!

Bunsen gives the following personal pronouns for he and she:

           

       He

       She

     
      Christian   

       Hu

       Hi

     
      Jewish   Aramaic

       Hu

       Hi

     
      Hebrew

       Hu'

       Hi'

     
      Arabic

       Huwa

       Hiya

     
   Thus the Ineffable Name not only embodies the Great Philosophical Idea, that the Deity is the ENS, the TO ON, the Absolute Existence, that of which the Essence is To Exist, the only Substance of Spinoza, the BEING, that never could not have existed, as contradistinguished from that which only becomes, not Nature or the Soul of Nature, but that which created Nature; but also the idea of the Male and Female Principles, in its highest and most profound sense; to wit, that God originally comprehended in Himself all that is: that matter was not co-existent with Him, or independent of Him; that He did not merely fashion and shape a pre-existing chaos into a Universe; but that His Thought manifested itself outwardly in that Universe, which so became, and before was not, except as comprehended in Him: that the Generative Power or Spirit, and Productive Matter, ever among the ancients deemed the Female, originally were in God; and that He Was and Is all that Was, that Is, and that Shall be: in Whom all else lives, moves, and has its being.

This was the great Mystery of the Ineffable Name; and this true arrangement of its letters, and of course its true pronunciation and its meaning, soon became lost to all except the select few to whom it was confided; it being concealed from the common people, because the Deity thus metaphysically named was not that personal and capricious, and as it were tangible God in whom they believed, and who alone was within the reach of their rude capacities.

Diodorus says that the name given by Moses to God was IAU. Theodorus says that the Samaritans termed God IABE, but the Jews IAU. Philo Byblius gives the form IEYU; and Clemens

[p. 701]

of Alexandria IAOY. Macrobius says that it was an admitted axiom among the Heathen, that the triliteral IAU was the sacred name of the Supreme God. And the Clarian oracle said: "Learn thou that IAU is the great God Supreme, that ruleth over all." The letter I signified Unity. A and U are the first and last letters of the Greek Alphabet.

Hence the frequent expression: "I am the First, and I am the Last; and besides Me there is no other God. I am A and U, the First and the Last. I am A and U, the Beginning and the Ending, which Is, and Was, and Is to come: the Omnipotent." For in this we see shadowed forth the same great truth; that God is all in all--the Cause and the Effect--the beginning, or Impulse, or Generative Power: and the Ending, or Result, or that which is produced: that He is in reality all that is, all that ever was, and all that ever will be; in this sense, that nothing besides Himself has existed eternally, and co-eternally with Him, independent of Him, and self-existent, or self-originated.

And thus the meaning of the expression, ALOHAYIM, a plural noun, used, in the account of the Creation with which Genesis commences, with a singular verb, and of the name or title IHUH-ALHIM, used for the first time in the 4th verse of the 2d chapter of the same book, becomes clear. The ALHIM is the aggregate unity of the manifested Creative Forces or Powers of Deity, His Emanations; and IHUH-ALHIM is the ABSOLUTE Existence, or Essence of these Powers and Forces, of which they are Active Manifestations and Emanations.

This was the profound truth hidden in the ancient allegory and covered from the general view with a double veil. This was the esoteric meaning of the generation and production of the Indian, Chaldaean, and Phoenician ; and the Active and Passive Powers, of the Male and Female Principles; of Heaven and its Luminaries generating, and the Earth producing; all hiding from vulgar view, as above its comprehension, the doctrine that matter is not eternal, but that God was the only original Existence, the ABSOLUTE, from Whom everything has proceeded, and to Whom all returns: and that all moral law springs not from the relation of things, but from His Wisdom and Essential Justice, as the Omnipotent Legislator. And this Taut WORD is with entire accuracy said to have been lost; because its meaning was lost, even among the Hebrews, although we still find the name (its real

[p. 702]

meaning unsuspected), in the Hu of the Druids and the FO-Hi of the Chinese.

When we conceive of the Absolute Truth, Beauty, or Good, we cannot stop short at the abstraction of either. We are forced to refer each to some living and substantial Being, in which they have their foundations, some being that is the first and last principle of each.

Moral Truth, like every other universal and necessary truth, cannot remain a mere abstraction. Abstractions are unrealities. In ourselves, moral truth is merely conceived of. There must be somewhere a Being that not only conceives of, but constitutes it. It has this characteristic; that it is not only, to the eyes of our intelligence, an universal and necessary truth, but one obligatory on our will. It is A LAW. We do not establish that law ourselves. It is imposed on us despite ourselves: its principle must be without us. It supposes a legislator. He cannot be the being to whom the law applies; but must be one that possesses in the highest degree all the characteristics of moral truth. The moral law, universal and necessary, necessarily has as its author a necessary being;--composed of justice and charity, its author most be a being possessing the plenitude of both.

As all beautiful and all true things refer themselves, these to a Unity which is absolute TRUTH, and those to a Unity which is absolute BEAUTY, so all the moral principles centre in a single principle, which is THE GOOD. Thus we arrive at the conception of GOOD in itself, the ABSOLUTE Good, superior to all particular duties, and determinate in those duties. This Absolute Good must necessarily be an attribute of the Absolute BEING. There cannot be several Absolute Beings; the one in whom are realized Absolute Truth and Absolute Beauty being different from the one in whom is realized Absolute Good. The Absolute necessarily implies absolute Unity. The True, the Beautiful, and the Good are not three distinct essences: but they are one and the same essence, considered in its fundamental attributes: the different phases which, in our eyes, the Absolute and Infinite Perfection assumes. Manifested in the World of the Finite and Relative, these three attributes separate from each other, and are distinguished by our minds, which can comprehend nothing except by division. But in the Being from Whom they emanate, they are indivisibly united; and this Being, at once triple and one, Who

[p. 703]

sums up in Himself perfect Beauty, perfect Truth, and the perfect Good, is GOD.

God is necessarily the principle of Moral Truth, and of personal morality. Man is a moral person, that is to say, one endowed with reason and liberty. He is capable of Virtue: and Virtue has with him two principal forms, respect for others and love of others, justice and charity.

The creature can possess no real and essential attribute which the Creator does not possess. The effect can draw its reality and existence only from its cause. The cause contains in itself, at least, what is essential in the effect. The characteristic of the effect is inferiority, short-coming, imperfection. Dependent and derivate, it bears in itself the marks and conditions of dependence; and its imperfection proves the perfection of the cause; or else there would be in the effect something immanent, without a cause.

God is not a logical Being, whose Nature may be explained by deduction, and by means of algebraic equations. When, setting out with a primary attribute, the attributes of God are deduced one from the other, after the manner of the Geometricians and Scholastics, we have nothing but abstractions. We must emerge from this empty , to arrive at a true and living God. The first notion which we have of God, that of an Infinite Being, is not given us a priori, independently of all experience. It is our consciousness of ourself, as at once a Being and a limited Being, that immediately raises us to the conception of a Being, the principle of our being, and Himself without limits. If the existence that we possess forces us to recur to a cause possessing the same existence in an infinite degree, all the substantial attributes of existence that we possess equally require each an infinite cause. God, then, is no longer the Infinite, Abstract, Indeterminate Being, of which reason and the heart cannot lay hold, but a real Being, determinate like ourselves, a moral person like ourself; and the study of our own souls will conduct us, without resort to hypothesis, to a conception of God, both sublime and having a connection with ourselves.

If man be free, God must be so. It would be strange if, while the creature has that marvellous power of disposing of himself, of choosing and willing freely, the Being that has made him should be subject to a necessary development, the cause of which, though

[p. 704]

in Himself, is a sort of abstract, mechanical, or metaphysical power, inferior to the personal, voluntary cause which we are, and of which we have the clearest consciousness. God is free because we are: but he is not free as we are. He is at once everything that we are, and nothing that we are. He possesses the same attributes as we, but extended to infinity. He possesses, then, an infinite liberty, united to an infinite intelligence; and as His intelligence is infallible, exempt from the uncertainty of deliberation, and perceiving at a glance where the Good is, so His liberty accomplishes it spontaneously and without effort.

As we assign to God that liberty which is the basis of our existence, so also we transfer to His character, from our own, justice and charity. In man they are virtues: in God, His attributes. What is in us the laborious conquest of liberty, is in Him His very nature. The idea of the right, and the respect paid to the right, are signs of the dignity of our existence. If respect of rights is the very essence of justice, the Perfect Being must know and respect the rights of the lowest of His creatures; for He assigned them those rights. In God resides a sovereign justice, that renders to every one what is due him, not according to deceitful appearances, but according to the truth of things. And if man, a limited being, has the power to go out of himself, to forget his own person, to love another like himself, and devote himself to his happiness, dignity, and perfection, the Perfect Being must have, in an infinite degree, that disinterested tenderness, that Charity, the Supreme Virtue of the human person. There is in God an infinite tenderness for His creatures, manifested in His giving us existence, which He might have withheld; and every day it appears in innumerable marks of His Divine Providence.

Plato well understood that love of God, and expresses it in these great words: "Let us speak of the cause which led the Supreme Arranger of the Universe to produce and regulate that Universe. He was good; and he who is good has no kind of ill-will. Exempt from that, He willed that created things should be, as far as possible, like Himself." And Christianity in its turn said, "God has so loved men that He has given them His only Son."

It is not correct to affirm, as is often done, that Christianity has in some sort discovered this noble sentiment. We must not lower human nature, to raise Christianity. Antiquity knew, described, and practised charity; the first feature of which, so touching, and

[p. 705]

thank God! so common, is goodness, as its loftiest one is heroism. Charity is devotion to another; and it is ridiculously senseless to pretend that there ever was an age of the world, when the human soul was deprived of that part of its heritage, the power of devotion. But it is certain that Christianity has diffused and popularized this virtue, and that, before Christ, these words were never spoken: "LOVE ONE ANOTHER; FOR THAT IS THE WHOLE LAW." Charity presupposes Justice. He who truly loves his brother respects the rights of his brother; but he does more, he forgets his own. Egoism sells or takes. Love delights in giving. In God, love is what it is in us; but in an infinite degree. God is inexhaustible in His charity, as He is inexhaustible in His essence. That Infinite Omnipotence and Infinite Charity, which, by an admirable good-will, draws from the bosom of its immense love the favors which it incessantly bestows on the world and on humanity, teaches us that the more we give, the more we possess.

God being all just and all good, He can will nothing but what is good and just. Being Omnipotent, whatever He wills He can do, and consequently does. The world is the work of God: it is therefore perfectly made.

Yet there is disorder in the world, that seems to impugn the justice and goodness of God.

A principle indissolubly connected with the very idea of good, tells us that every moral agent deserves reward when he does well, and punishment when he does ill. This principle is universal and necessary. It is absolute. If it does not apply in this world, it is false, or the world is badly ordered.

But good actions are not always followed by happiness, nor evil ones by misery. Though often this fact is more apparent than real; though virtue, a war against the passions, full of dignity but full of sorrow and pain, has the latter as its condition, yet the pains that follow vice are greater; and virtue conduces most to health, strength, and long life;--though the peaceful conscience that accompanies virtue creates internal happiness; though public opinion generally decides correctly on men's characters, and rewards virtue with esteem and consideration, and vice with con-tempt and infamy; and though, after all, justice reigns in the world, and the surest road to happiness is still that of virtue, yet there are exceptions. Virtue is not always rewarded, nor vice punished, in this life.

[p. 706]

The data of this problem are these: 1st. The principle of merit and demerit within us is absolute: every good action ought to be rewarded, every bad one punished: 2d. God is just as He is all-powerful: 3d. There are in this world particular cases, contradicting the necessary and universal law of merit and demerit. What is the result?

To reject the two principles, that God is just, and the law of merit and demerit absolute, is to raze to the foundations the whole edifice of human faith.

To maintain them, is to admit that the present life is to be terminated or continued elsewhere. The moral person who acts well or ill, and awaits reward or punishment, is connected with a body, lives with it, makes use of it, depends upon it in a measure, but is not it. The body is composed of parts. It diminishes or increases, it is divisible even to infinity. But this something which has a consciousness of itself, and says "I, ME"; that feels itself free and responsible, feels too that it is incapable of division, that it is a being one and simple; that the ME cannot be halved, that if a limb is cut off and thrown away, no part of the ME goes with it: that it remains identical with itself under the variety of phenomena which successively manifest it. This identity, indivisibility, and absolute unity of the person, are its spirituality, the very essence of the person. It is not in the least an hypothesis to affirm that the soul differs essentially from the body. By the soul we mean the person, not separated from the consciousness of the attributes which constitute it,--thought and will. The Existence without consciousness is an abstract being, and not a person. It is the person, that is identical, one, simple. Its attributes, developing it, do not divide it. Indivisible, it is indissoluble, and may be immortal. If absolute justice requires this immortality, it does not require what is impossible. The spirituality of the soul is the condition and necessary foundation of immortality: the law of merit and demerit the direct demonstration of it. The first is the metaphysical, the second the moral proof. Add to these the tendency of all the powers of the soul toward the Infinite, and the principle of final causes, and the proof of the immortality of the soul is complete.

God, therefore, in the Masonic creed, is INFINITE TRUTH, INFINITE BEAUTY, INFINITE GOODNESS. He is the Holy of Holies, as Author of the Moral Law, as the PRINCIPLE of Liberty, of

[p. 707]

[paragraph continues] Justice, and of Charity, Dispenser of Reward and Punishment. Such a God is not an abstract God; but an intelligent and free person, Who has made us in His image, from Whom we receive the law that presides over our destiny, and Whose judgment we await. It is His love that inspires us in our acts of charity: it is His justice that governs our justice, and that of society and the laws. We continually remind ourselves that He is infinite; because otherwise we should degrade His nature: but He would be for us as if He were not, if His infinite nature had not forms inherent in ourselves, the forms of our own reason and soul.

When we love Truth, Justice, and Nobility of Soul, we should know that it is God we love underneath these special forms, and should unite them all into one great act of total piety. We should feel that we go in and out continually in the midst of the vast forces of the Universe, which are only the Forces of God; that in our studies, when we attain a truth, we confront the thought of God; when we learn the right, we learn the will of God laid down as a rule of conduct for the Universe; and when we feel disinterested love, we should know that we partake the feeling of the Infinite God. Then, when we reverence the mighty cosmic force, it will not be a blind Fate in an Atheistic or Pantheistic world, but the Infinite God, that we shall confront and feel and know. Then we shall be mindful of the mind of God, conscious of God's conscience, sensible of His sentiments, and our own existence will be in the infinite being of God.

The world is a whole, which has its harmony; for a God who is One, could make none but a complete and harmonious work. The harmony of the Universe responds to the unity of God, as the indefinite quantity is the defective sign of the infinitude of God. To say that the Universe is God, is to admit the world only, and deny God. Give it what name you please, it is atheism at bottom. On the other hand, to suppose that the Universe is void of God, and that He is wholly apart from it, is an insupportable and al-most impossible abstraction. To distinguish is not to separate. I distinguish, but do not separate myself from my qualities and effects. So God is not the Universe, although He is everywhere present in spirit and in truth.

To us, as to Plato, absolute truth is in God. It is God Himself under one of His phases. In God, as their original, are the immutable principles of reality and cognizance. In Him things receive

[p. 708]

at once their existence and their intelligibility. It is by participating in the Divine reason that our own reason possesses something of the Absolute. Every judgment of reason envelopes a necessary truth, and every necessary truth supposes the necessary Existence.

Thus, from every direction,--from metaphysics, aesthetics, and morality above all, we rise to the same Principle, the common centre, and ultimate foundation of all truth, all beauty, all good. The True, the Beautiful, the Good, are but diverse revelations of one and the same Being. Thus we reach the threshold of religion, and are in communion with the great philosophies which all proclaim a God; and at the same time with the religions which cover the earth, and all repose on the sacred foundation of natural religion; of that religion which reveals to us the natural light given to all men, without the aid of a particular revelation. So long as philosophy does not arrive at religion, it is below all worships, even the most imperfect; for they at least give man a Father, a Witness, a Consoler, a Judge. By religion, philosophy connects itself with humanity, which, from one end of the world to the other, aspires to God, believes in God, hopes in God. Philosophy contains in itself the common basis of all religious beliefs; it, as it were, borrows from them their principle, and returns it to them surrounded with light, elevated above uncertainty, secure against all attack.

From the necessity of His Nature, the Infinite Being must create and preserve the Finite, and to the Finite must, in its forms, give and communicate of His own kind. We cannot conceive of any finite thing existing without God, the Infinite basis and ground thereof; nor of God existing without something. God is the necessary logical condition of a world, its necessitating cause; a world, the necessary logical condition of God, His necessitated consequence. It is according to His Infinite Perfection to create, and then to preserve and bless whatever He creates. That is the conclusion of modern metaphysical science. The stream of philosophy runs down from Aristotle to Hegel, and breaks off with this conclusion: and then again recurs the ancient difficulty. If it be of His nature to create,--if we cannot conceive of His existing alone, without creating, without having created, then what He created was co-existent with Himself. If He could exist an instant without creating, He could as well do so for a

[p. 709]

myriad of eternities. And so again comes round to us the old doctrine of a God, the Soul of the Universe, and co-existent with it. For what He created had a beginning; and however long since that creation occurred, an eternity had before elapsed. The difference between a beginning and no beginning is infinite.

But of some things we can be certain. We are conscious of ourselves--of ourselves if not as substances, at least as Powers to be, to do, to suffer. We are conscious of ourselves not as self-originated at all or as self-sustained alone; but only as dependent, first for existence, ever since for support.

Among the primary ideas of consciousness, that are inseparable from it, the atoms of self-consciousness, we find the idea of God. Carefully examined by the  intellect, it is the idea of God as infinite, perfectly powerful, wise, just, loving, holy; absolute being with no limitation. This made us, made all, sustains us, sustains all; made our body, not by a single act, but by a series of acts extending over a vast succession of years,--for man's body is the resultant of all created things,--made our spirit, our mind, conscience, affections, soul, will, appointed for each its natural mode of action, set each at its several aim. Thus self-consciousness leads us to consciousness of God, and at last to consciousness of an infinite God. That is the highest evidence of our own existence, and it is the highest evidence of His.

If there is a God at all, He must be omnipresent in space. Beyond the last Stars He must be, as He is here. There can be no mote that peoples the sunbeams, no little cell of life that the microscope discovers in the seed-sporule of a moss, but He is there.

He must also be omnipresent in time. There was no second of time before the Stars began to burn, but God was in that second. In the most distant nebulous spot in Orion's belt, and in every one of the millions that people a square inch of limestone, God is alike present. He is in the smallest imaginable or even unimaginable portion of time, and in every second of its most vast and unimaginable volume; His Here conterminous with the All of Space, His Now coeval with the All of Time.

Through all this Space, in all this Time, His Being extends, spreads undivided, operates unspent; God in all His infinity, perfectly powerful, wise, just, loving, and holy. His being is an infinite activity, a creating, and so a giving of Himself to the

[p. 710]

[paragraph continues] World. The World's being is a becoming, a being created and continued. It is so now, and was so, incalculable and unimaginable millions of ages ago.

All this is philosophy, the unavoidable conclusion of the human mind. It is not the opinion of Coleridge and Kant, but their science; not what they guess, but what they know.

In virtue of this in-dwelling of God in matter, we say that the world is a revelation of Him, its existence a show of His. He is in His work. The manifold action of the Universe is only His mode of operation, and all material things are in communion with Him. All grow and move and live in Him, and by means of Him, and only so. Let Him withdraw from the space occupied by anything, and it ceases to be. Let Him withdraw any quality of His nature from anything, and it ceases to be. All must partake of Him, He dwelling in each, and yet transcending all.

The failure of fanciful religion to become philosophy, does not preclude philosophy from coinciding with true religion. Philosophy, or rather its object, the divine order of the Universe, is the intellectual guide which the religious sentiment needs; while exploring the real relations of the finite, it obtains a constantly improving and self-correcting measure of the perfect law of the Gospel of Love and Liberty, and a means of carrying into effect the spiritualism of revealed religion. It establishes law, by ascertaining its terms; it guides the spirit to see its way to the amelioration of life and the increase of happiness. While religion was stationary, science could not walk alone; when both are admitted to be progressive, their interests and aims become identified. Aristotle began to show how religion may be founded on an intellectual basis; but the basis he laid was too narrow. Bacon, by giving to philosophy a definite aim and method, gave it at the same time a safer and self-enlarging basis. Our position is that of intellectual beings surrounded by limitations; and the latter being constant, have to intelligence the practical value of laws, in whose investigation and application consists that seemingly endless career of intellectual and moral progress which the sentiment of religion inspires and ennobles. The title of Saint has commonly been claimed for those whose boast it has been to despise philosophy; yet faith will stumble and sentiment mislead, unless knowledge be present, in amount and quality sufficient to purify the one and to give beneficial direction to the other.

[p. 711]

Science consists of those matured inferences from experience which all other experience confirms. It is no fixed system superior to revision, but that progressive mediation between ignorance and wisdom in part conceived by Plato, whose immediate object is happiness, and its impulse the highest kind of love. Science realizes and unites all that was truly valuable in both the old schemes of mediation; the heroic, or system of action and effort; and the mystical theory of spiritual, contemplative communion. "Listen to me," says Galen, "as to the voice of the Eleusinian Hierophant, and believe that the study of nature is a mystery no less important than theirs, nor less adapted to display the wisdom and power of the Great Creator. Their lessons and demonstrations were obscure, but ours are clear and unmistakable."

To science we owe it that no man is any longer entitled to consider himself the central point around which the whole Universe of life and motion revolves--the immensely important individual for whose convenience and even luxurious ease and indulgence the whole Universe was made. On one side it has shown us an infinite Universe of stars and suns and worlds at incalculable distances from each other, in whose majestic and awful presence we sink and even our world sinks into insignificance; while, on the other side, the microscope has placed us in communication with new worlds of organized livings beings, gifted with senses, nerves, appetites, and instincts, in every tear and in every drop of putrid water.

Thus science teaches us that we are but an infinitesimal portion of a great whole, that stretches out on every side of us, and above and below us, infinite in its complications, and which infinite wisdom alone .can comprehend. Infinite wisdom has arranged the infinite succession of beings, involving the necessity of birth, decay, and death, and made the loftiest virtues possible by providing those conflicts, reverses, trials, and hardships, without which even their names could never have been invented.

Knowledge is convertible into power, and axioms into rules of utility and duty. Modern science is social and communicative. It is moral as well as intellectual; powerful, yet pacific and disinterested; binding man to man as well as to the Universe; filling up the details of obligation, and cherishing impulses of virtue, and, by affording clear proof of the consistency and identity of all

[p. 712]

interests, substituting co-operation for rivalry, liberality for jealousy, and tending far more powerfully than any other means to realize the spirit of religion, by healing those inveterate disorders which, traced to their real origin, will be found rooted in an ignorant assumption as to the penurious severity of Providence, and the consequent greed of selfish men to confine what seemed as if extorted from it to themselves, or to steal from each other rather than quietly to enjoy their own.

We shall probably never reach those higher forms containing the true differences of things, involving the full discovery and correct expression of their very self or essence. We shall ever fall short of the most general and most simple nature, the ultimate or most comprehensive law. Our widest axioms explain many phenomena, but so too in a degree did the principles or elements of the old philosophers, and the cycles and epicycles of ancient astronomy. We cannot in any case of causation assign the whole of the conditions, nor though we may reproduce them in practice, can we mentally distinguish them all, without knowing the essences of the things including them; and we therefore must not unconsciously ascribe that absolute certainty to axioms, which the ancient religionists did to creeds, nor allow the mind, which ever strives to insulate itself and its acquisitions, to forget the nature of the process by which it substituted scientific for common notions, and so with one as with the other lay the basis of self-deception by a pedantic and superstitious employment of them.

Doubt, the essential preliminary of all improvement and discovery, must accompany all the stages of man's onward progress. His intellectual life is a perpetual beginning, a preparation for a birth. The faculty of doubting and questioning, without which those of comparison and judgment would be useless, is itself a divine prerogative of the reason. Knowledge is always imperfect, or complete only in a prospectively boundless career, in which discovery multiplies doubt, and doubt leads on to new discovery. The boast of science is not so much its manifested results, as its admitted imperfection and capacity of unlimited progress. The true religious philosophy of an imperfect being is not a system of creed, but, as Socrates thought, an infinite search or approximation. Finality is but another name for bewilderment or defeat. Science gratifies the religious feeling without arresting it, and

[p. 713]

opens out the unfathomable mystery of the One Supreme into more explicit and manageable Forms, which express not indeed His Essence, which is wholly beyond our reach and higher than our faculties can climb, but His Will, and so feeds an endless enthusiasm by accumulating forever new objects of pursuit. We have long experienced that knowledge is profitable, we are beginning to find out that it is moral, and we shall at last discover it to be religious.

God and truth are inseparable; a knowledge of God is possession of the saving oracles of truth. In proportion as the thought and purpose of the individual are trained to conformity with the rule of right prescribed by Supreme Intelligence, so far is his happiness promoted, and the purpose of his existence fulfilled. In this way a new life arises in him; he is no longer isolated, but is a part of the eternal harmonies around him. His erring will is directed by the influence of a higher will, informing and moulding it in the path of his true happiness.

Man's power of apprehending outward truth is a qualified privilege; the mental like the physical inspiration passing through a diluted medium; and yet, even when truth, imparted, as it were, by intuition, has been specious, or at least imperfect, the intoxication of sudden discovery has ever claimed it as full, infallible, and divine. And while human weakness needed ever to recur to the pure and perfect source, the revelations once popularly accepted and valued assumed an independent substantiality, perpetuating not themselves only, but the whole mass of  forms accidentally connected with them, and legalized in their names. The mists of error thickened under the shadows of prescription, until the free light again broke in upon the night of ages, redeeming the genuine treasure from the superstition which obstinately doted on its accessories.

Even to the Barbarian, Nature reveals a mighty power and a wondrous wisdom, and continually points to God. It is no wonder that men worshipped the several things of the world. The world of matter is a revelation of fear to the savage in Northern climes; he trembles at his deity throned in ice and snow. The lightning, the storm, the earthquake startle the rude man, and he sees the divine in the extraordinary.

The grand objects of Nature perpetually constrain men to think of their Author. The Alps are the great altar of Europe; the nocturnal

[p. 714]

sky has been to mankind the dome of a temple, starred all over with admonitions to reverence, trust, and love. The Scriptures for the human race are writ in earth and Heaven. No organ or miserere touches the heart like the sonorous swell of the sea or the ocean-wave's immeasurable laugh. Every year the old world puts on new bridal beauty, and celebrates its Whit-Sunday, when in the sweet Spring each bush and tree dons reverently its new glories. Autumn is a long All-Saints' day; and the harvest is Hallowmass to Mankind. Before the human race marched down from the slopes of the Himalayas to take possession of Asia, Chaldea, and Egypt, men marked each annual crisis, the solstices and the equinoxes, and celebrated religious festivals therein; and even then, and ever since, the material was and has been the element of communion between man and God.

Nature is full of religious lessons to a thoughtful man. He dissolves the matter of the Universe, leaving only its forces; he dissolves away the phenomena of human history, leaving only immortal spirit; he studies the law, the mode of action of these forces and this spirit, which make up the material and the human world, and cannot fail to be filled with reverence, with trust, with boundless love of the Infinite God, who devised these laws of matter and of mind, and thereby bears up this marvellous Universe of things and men. Science has its New Testament; and the beatitudes of Philosophy are profoundly touching. An undevout astronomer is mad. Familiarity with the grass and the trees teaches us deeper lessons of love and trust than we can glean from the writings of Fenelon and Augustine. The great Bible of God is ever open before mankind. The eternal flowers of Heaven seem to shed sweet influence on the perishable blossoms of the earth. The great sermon of Jesus was preached on a mountain, which preached to Him as He did to the people, and His figures of speech were first natural figures of fact.

If to-morrow I am to perish utterly, then I shall only take counsel for to-day, and ask for qualities which last no longer. My fathers will be to me only as the ground out of which my bread-corn is grown; dead, they are but the rotten mould of earth, their memory of small concern to me. Posterity!--I shall care nothing for the future generations of mankind! I am one atom in the trunk of a tree, and care nothing for the roots below, or the branch above. I shall sow such seed only as will bear harvest

[p. 715]

to-day. Passion may enact my statutes to-day, and ambition repeal them to-morrow. I will know no other legislators. Morality will vanish, and expediency take its place. Heroism will be gone; and instead of it there will be the savage ferocity of the he-wolf, the brute cunning of the she-fox, the rapacity of the vulture, and the headlong daring of the wild bull; but no longer the cool, calm courage that, for truth's sake, and for love's sake, looks death firmly in the face, and then wheels into line ready to be slain. Affection, friendship, philanthropy, will be but the wild fancies of the monomaniac, fit subjects for smiles or laughter or for pity.

But knowing that we shall live forever, and that the Infinite God loves all of us, we can look on all the evils of the world, and see that it is only the hour before sunrise, and that the light is coming; and so we also, even we, may light a little taper, to illuminate the darkness while it lasts, and help until the day-spring come. Eternal morning follows the night: a rainbow scarfs the shoulders of every cloud that weeps its rain away to be flowers on land and pearls at sea: Life rises out of the grave, the soul cannot be held by fettering flesh. No dawn is hopeless; and disaster is only the threshold of delight.

Beautifully, above the great wide chaos of human errors, shines the calm, clear light of natural human religion, revealing to us God as the Infinite Parent of all, perfectly powerful, wise, just, loving, and perfectly holy too. Beautiful around stretches off every way the Universe, the Great Bible of God. Material nature is its Old Testament, millions of years old, thick with eternal truths under our feet, glittering with everlasting glories over our heads; and Human Nature is the New Testament from the Infinite God, every day revealing a new page as Time turns over the leaves. Immortality stands waiting to give a recompense for every virtue not rewarded, for every tear not wiped away, for every sorrow undeserved, for every prayer, for every pure intention and emotion of the heart. And over the whole, over Nature, Material and Human, over this Mortal Life and over the eternal Past and Future, the infinite Loving-kindness of God the Father comes enfolding all and blessing everything that ever was, that is, that ever shall be.

Everything is a thought of the Infinite God. Nature is His prose, and man His Poetry. There is no Chance, no Fate; but God's Great Providence, enfolding the whole Universe in its

[p. 716]

bosom, and feeding it with everlasting life. In times past there has been evil which we cannot understand; now there are evils which we cannot solve, nor make square with God's perfect goodness by any theory our feeble intellect enables us to frame. There are sufferings, follies, and sins for all mankind, for every nation, for every man and every woman. They were all foreseen by the infinite wisdom of God, all provided for by His infinite power and justice, and all are consistent with His infinite love. To believe otherwise would be to believe that He made the world, to amuse His idle hours with the follies and agonies of mankind, as Domitian was wont to do with the wrigglings and contortions of insect agonies. Then indeed we might despairingly unite in that horrible utterance of Heine: "Alas, God's Satire weighs heavily on me! The Great Author of the Universe, the Aristophanes of Heaven, is bent on demonstrating, with crushing force, to me, the little, earthly, German Aristophanes, how my wittiest sarcasms are only pitiful attempts at jesting, in comparison with His, and how miserably I am beneath Him, in humor, in colossal mockery."

No, no! God is not thus amused with and prodigal of human suffering. The world is neither a Here without a Hereafter, a body without a soul, a chaos with no God; nor a body blasted by a soul, a Here with a worse Hereafter, a world with a God that hates more than half the creatures He has made. There is no Savage, Revengeful, and Evil God: but there is an Infinite God, seen everywhere as Perfect Cause, everywhere as Perfect Providence, transcending all, yet in-dwelling everywhere, with perfect power, wisdom, justice, holiness, and love, providing for the future welfare of each and all, foreseeing and forecaring for every bubble that breaks on the great stream of human life and human history.

The end of man and the object of existence in this world, being not only happiness, but happiness in virtue and through virtue, virtue in this world is the condition of happiness in another life, and the condition of virtue in this world is suffering, more or less frequent, briefer or longer continued, more or less intense. Take away suffering, and there is no longer any resignation or humanity, no more self-sacrifice, no more devotedness, no more heroic virtues, no more sublime morality. We are subjected to suffering, both because we are sensible, and because we ought to be virtuous. If there were no physical evil, there would be no possible virtue, and the world would be badly adapted to the destiny of man.

[p. 717]

[paragraph continues] The apparent disorders of the physical world, and the evils that result from them, are not disorders and evils that occur despite the power and goodness of God. God not only allows, but wills them. It is His will that there shall be in the physical world causes enough of pain for man, to afford him occasions for resignation and courage.

Whatever is favorable to virtue, whatever gives the moral liberty more energy, whatever can serve the greater moral development of the human race, is good. Suffering is not the worst condition of man on earth. The worst condition is the moral brutalization which the absence of physical evil would engender.

External or internal physical evil connects itself with the object of existence, which is to accomplish the moral law here below, whatever the consequences, with the firm hope that virtue unfortunate will not fail to be rewarded in another life. The moral law has its sanction and its reason in itself. It owes nothing to that law of merit and demerit that accompanies it, but is not its basis. But, though the principle of merit and demerit ought not to be the determining principle of virtuous action, it powerfully concurs with the moral law, because it offers virtue a legitimate ground of consolation and hope.

Morality is the recognition of duty, as duty, and its accomplishment, whatever the consequences.

Religion is the recognition of duty in its necessary harmony with goodness; a harmony that must have its realization in another life, through the justice and omnipotence of God.

Religion is as true as morality; for once morality is admitted, its consequences must be admitted.

The whole moral existence is included in these two words, harmonious with each other: DUTY and HOPE.

Masonry teaches that God is infinitely good. What motive, what reason, and, morally speaking, what possibility can there be to Infinite Power and Infinite Wisdom, to be anything but good? Our very sorrows, proclaiming the loss of objects inexpressibly dear to us, demonstrate His Goodness. The Being that made us intelligent cannot Himself be without intelligence; and He Who has made us so to love and to sorrow for what we love, must number love for the creatures He has made, among His infinite attributes. Amid all our sorrows, we take refuge in the assurance that He loves us; that He does not capriciously, or through indifference,

[p. 718]

and still less in mere anger, grieve and afflict us; that He chastens us, in order that by His chastisements, which are by His universal law only the consequences of our acts, we may be profited; and that He could not show so much love for His creatures, by leaving them unchastened, untried, undisciplined. We have faith in the Infinite; faith in God's Infinite Love; and it is that faith that must save us.

No dispensations of God's Providence, no suffering or bereavement is a messenger of wrath: none of its circumstances are indications of God's Anger. He is incapable of Anger; higher above any such feelings than the distant stars are above the earth. Bad men do not die because God hates them. They die because it is best for them that they should do so; and, bad as they are, it is better for them to be in the hands of the infinitely good God, than anywhere else.

Darkness and gloom lie upon the paths of men. They stumble at difficulties, are ensnared by temptations, and perplexed by trouble. They are anxious, and troubled, and fearful. Pain and affliction and sorrow often gather around the steps of their earthly pilgrimage. All this is written indelibly upon the tablets of the human heart. It is not to be erased; but Masonry sees and reads it in a new light. It does not expect these ills and trials and sufferings to be removed from life; but that the great truth will at some time be believed by all men, that they are the means, selected by infinite wisdom, to purify the heart, and to invigorate the soul whose inheritance is immortality, and the world its school.

Masonry propagates no creed except its own most simple and Sublime One; that universal religion, taught by Nature and by Reason. Its Lodges are neither Jewish, Moslem, nor Christian Temples. It reiterates the precepts of morality of all religions. It venerates the character and commends the teachings of the great and good of all ages and of all countries. It extracts the good and not the evil, the truth, and not the error, from all creeds; and acknowledges that there is much which is good and true in all.

Above all the other great teachers of morality and virtue, it reveres the character of the Great Master Who, submissive to the will of His and our Father, died upon the Cross. All must admit, that if the world were filled with beings like Him, the great ills of society would be at once relieved. For all coercion, injury, selfishness, and revenge, and all the wrongs and the greatest sufferings

[p. 719]

of life, would disappear at once. These human years would be happy; and the eternal ages would roll on in brightness and beauty; and the still, sad music of Humanity, that sounds through the world, now in the accents of grief, and now in pensive melancholy, would change to anthems, sounding to the March of Time, and bursting out from the heart of the world.

If every man were a perfect imitator of that Great, Wise, Good Teacher, clothed with all His faith and all His virtues, how the circle of Life's ills and trials would be narrowed! The sensual passions would assail the heart in vain. Want would no longer successfully tempt men to act wrongly, nor curiosity to do rashly. Ambition, spreading before men its Kingdoms and its Thrones, and offices and honors, would cause none to swerve from their great allegiance. Injury and insult would be shamed by forgiveness. "Father," men would say, "forgive them; for they know not what they do." None would seek to be enriched at another's loss or expense. Every man would feel that the whole human race were his brothers. All sorrow and pain and anguish would be soothed by a perfect faith and an entire trust in the Infinite Goodness of God. The world around us would be new, and the Heavens above us; for here, and there, and everywhere, through all the ample glories and splendors of the Universe, all men would recognize and feel the presence and the beneficent care of a loving Father.

However the Mason may believe as to creeds, and churches, and miracles, and missions from Heaven, he must admit that the Life and character of Him who taught in Galilee, and fragments of Whose teachings have come down to us, are worthy of all imitation. That Life is an undenied and undeniable Gospel. Its teachings cannot be passed by and discarded. All must admit that it would be happiness to follow and perfection to imitate Him. None ever felt for Him a sincere emotion of contempt, nor in anger accused Him of sophistry, nor saw immorality lurking in His doctrines; however they may judge of those who succeeded Him, and claimed to be His apostles. Divine or human, inspired or only a reforming Essene, it must be agreed that His teachings are far nobler, far purer, far less alloyed with error and imperfection, far less of the earth earthly, than those of Socrates, Plato, Seneca, or Mahomet, or any other of the great moralists and Reformers of the world.

[p. 720]

If our aims went as completely as His beyond personal care and selfish gratification; if our thoughts and words and actions were as entirely employed upon the great work of benefiting our kind--the true work which we have been placed here to do--as His were; if our nature were as gentle and as tender as His; and if society, country, kindred, friendship, and home were as dear to us as they were to Him, we should be at once relieved of more than half the difficulties and the diseased and painful affections of our lives. Simple obedience to rectitude, instead of self-interest; simple self-culture and self-improvement, instead of constant cultivation of the good opinion of others; single-hearted aims and purposes, instead of improper objects, sought and approached by devious and crooked ways, would free our meditations of many disturbing and irritating questions.

Not to renounce the nobler and better affections of our natures, nor happiness, nor our just dues of love and honor from men; not to vilify ourselves, nor to renounce our self-respect, nor a just and reasonable sense of our merits and deserts, nor our own righteousness of virtue, does Masonry require, nor would our imitation of Him require; but to renounce our vices, our faults, our passions, our self-flattering delusions; to forego all outward advantages, which are to be gained only through a sacrifice of our inward integrity, or by anxious and petty contrivances and appliances; to choose and keep the better part; to secure that, and let the worst take care of itself; to keep a good conscience, and let opinion come and go as it will; to retain a lofty self-respect, and let low self-indulgence go; to keep inward happiness, and let outward advantages hold a subordinate place; to renounce our selfishness, and that eternal anxiety as to what we are to have, and what men think of us; and be content with the plenitude of God's great mercies, and so to be happy. For it is the inordinate devotion to self, and consideration of self, that is ever a stumbling-block in the way; that spreads questions, snares, and difficulties around us, darkens the way of Providence, and makes the world a far less happy one to us than it might be.

As He taught, so Masonry teaches, affection to our kindred, tenderness to our friends, gentleness and forbearance toward our inferiors, pity for the suffering, forgiveness of our enemies; and to wear an affectionate nature and gentle disposition as the garment of our life, investing pain, and toil, and agony, and even death,

[p. 721]

with a serene and holy beauty. It does not teach us to wrap ourselves in the garments of reserve and pride, to care nothing for the world because it cares nothing for us, to withdraw our thoughts from society because it does us not justice, and see how patiently we can live within the confines of our own bosoms, or in quiet communion, through books, with the mighty dead. No man ever found peace or light in that way. Every relation, of hate, scorn, or neglect, to mankind, is full of vexation and torment. There is nothing to do with men but to love them, to admire their virtues, pity and bear with their faults, and forgive their injuries. To hate your adversary will not help you; to kill him will help you still less: nothing within the compass of the Universe will help you, but to pity, forgive, and love him.

If we possessed His gentle and affectionate disposition, His love and compassion for all that err and all that offend, how many difficulties, both within and without us, would they relieve! How many depressed minds should we console! How many troubles in society should we compose! How many enmities soften! How many a knot of mystery and misunderstanding would be untied by a single word, spoken in simple and confiding truth! How many a rough path would be made smooth, and how many a crooked path be made straight! Very many places, now solitary, would be made glad; very many dark places be filled with light.

Morality has its axioms, like the other sciences; and these axioms are, in all languages, justly termed moral truths. Moral truths, considered in themselves, are equally as certain as mathematical truths. Given the idea of a deposit, the idea of keeping it faithfully is attached to it as necessarily, as to the idea of q, triangle is attached the idea that its three angles are equal to two right angles. You may violate a deposit; but in doing so, do not imagine that you change the nature of things, or make what is in itself a deposit become your own property. The two ideas exclude each other. You have but a false semblance of property: and all the efforts of the passions, all the sophisms of interest, will not overturn essential differences. Therefore it is that a moral truth is so imperious; because, like all truth, it is what it is, and shapes itself to please no caprice. Always the same, and always present, little as we may like it, it inexorably condemns, with a voice always heard, but not always regarded, the insensate and guilty

[p. 722]

will which thinks to prevent its existing, by denying, or rather by pretending to deny, its existence.

The moral truths are distinguished from other truths by this singular characteristic: so soon as we perceive them, they appear to us as the rule of our conduct. If it is true that a deposit is made in order to be returned to its legitimate possessor, it must be returned. To the necessity of believing the truth, the necessity of practising it is added.

The necessity of practising the moral truths is obligation. The moral truths, necessary to the eye of reason, are obligatory on the will. The moral obligation, like the moral truth which is its basis, is absolute. As necessary truths are not more or less necessary, so obligation is not more or less obligatory. There are degrees of importance among different obligations; but there are no degrees in the obligation itself. One is not nearly obliged, almost obliged; but wholly so, or not at all. If there be any place of refuge against the obligation, it ceases to exist.

If the obligation is absolute, it is immutable and universal. For if what is obligation to-day may not be so to-morrow, if what is obligatory for me may not be so for you, the obligation differing from itself, it would be relative and contingent. This fact of absolute, immutable, universal obligation is certain and manifest. The good is the foundation of obligation. If it be not, obligation has no foundation; and that is impossible. If one act ought to be done, and another ought not, it must be because evidently there is an essential difference between the two acts. If one be not good and the other bad, the obligation imposed on us is arbitrary.

To make the Good a consequence, of anything whatever, is to annihilate it. It is the first, or it is nothing. When we ask an honest man why, despite his urgent necessities, he has respected the sanctity of a deposit, he answers, because it was his duty. Asked why it was his duty, he answers, because it was right, was just, was good. Beyond that there is no answer to be made, but there is also no question to be asked. No one permits a duty to be imposed on him without giving himself a reason for it: but when it is admitted that the duty is commanded by justice, the mind is satisfied; for it has arrived at a principle beyond which there is nothing to seek, justice being its own principle. The primary truths include their own reason: and justice, the essential distinction between good and evil, is the first truth of morality.

[p. 723]

Justice is not a consequence; because we cannot ascend to any principle above it. Moral truth forces itself on man, and does not emanate from him. It no more becomes subjective, by appearing to us obligatory, than truth does by appearing to us necessary. It is in the very nature of the true and the good that we must seek for the reason of necessity and obligation. Obligation is founded on the necessary distinction between the good and the evil; and it is itself the foundation of liberty. If man has his duties to perform, he must have the faculty of accomplishing them, of resisting desire, passion, and interest, in order to obey the law. He must be free; therefore he is so, or human nature is in contradiction with itself. The certainty of the obligation involves the corresponding certainty of free will.

It is the will that is free: though sometimes that will may be ineffectual. The power to do must not be confounded with the power to will. The former may be limited: the latter is sovereign. The external effects may be prevented: the resolution itself cannot. Of this sovereign power of the will we are conscious. We feel in ourselves, before it becomes determinate, the force which can determine itself in one way or another. At the same time when I will this or that, I am equally conscious that I can will the contrary. I am conscious that I am the master of my resolution: that I may check it, continue it, retake it. When the act has ceased, the consciousness of the power which produced if has not. That consciousness and the power remain, superior to all the manifestations of the power. Wherefore free-will is the essential and ever-subsisting attribute of the will itself.

At the same time that we judge that a free agent has done a good or a bad act, we form another judgment, as necessary as the first; that if he has done well, he deserves compensation; if ill, punishment. That judgment may be expressed in a manner more or less vivid, according as it is mingled with sentiments more or less ardent. Sometimes it will be a merely kind feeling toward a virtuous agent, and moderately hostile to a guilty one; sometimes enthusiasm or indignation. The judgment of merit and demerit is intimately connected with the judgment of good and evil. Merit is the natural right which we have to be rewarded; demerit the natural right which others have to punish us. But whether the reward is received, or the punishment undergone, or not, the merit or demerit equally subsists. Punishment and reward are

[p. 724]

the satisfaction of merit and demerit, but do not constitute them. Take away the former, and the latter continue. Take away the latter, and there are no longer real rewards or punishments. When a base man encompasses our merited honors, he has obtained but the mere appearance of a reward; a mere material advantage. The reward is essentially moral; and its value is independent of its form. One of those simple crowns of oak with which the early Romans rewarded heroism, was of more real value than all the wealth of the world, when it was the sign of the gratitude and admiration of a people. Reward accorded to merit is a debt; without merit it is an alms or a theft.

The Good is good in itself, and to be accomplished, whatever the consequences. The results of the Good cannot but be fortunate. Happiness, separated from the Good, is but a fact to which no moral idea is attached. As an effect of the Good, it enters into the moral order, completes and crowns it.

Virtue without happiness, and crime without misery, is a contradiction and disorder. If virtue suppose sacrifice (that is, suffering), eternal justice requires that sacrifice generously accepted and courageously borne, shall have for its reward the same happiness that was sacrificed: and it also requires that crime shall be punished with unhappiness, for the guilty happiness which it attempted to procure.

This law that attaches pleasure and sorrow to the good and the evil, is, in general, accomplished even here below. For order rules in the world; because the world lasts. Is that order sometimes disturbed? Are happiness and sorrow not always distributed in legitimate proportion to crime and virtue? The absolute judgment of the Good, the absolute judgment of obligation, the absolute judgment of merit and demerit, continue to subsist, inviolable and imprescriptible; and we cannot help but believe that He Who has implanted in us the sentiment and idea of order, cannot therein Himself be wanting; and that He will, sooner or later, re-establish the holy harmony of virtue and happiness, by means belonging to Himself.

The Judgment of the Good, the decision that such a thing is goad, and that such another is not,--this is the primitive fact, and reposes on itself. By its intimate resemblances to the judgment of the true and the beautiful, it shows us the secret affinities of morality, metaphysics, and esthetics. The good, so especially

[p. 725]

united to the true, is distinguished from it, only because it is truth put in practice. The good is obligatory. These are two indivisible but not identical ideas. The idea of obligation reposes on the idea of the Good. In this intimate alliance, the former borrows from the latter its universal and absolute character.

The obligatory good is the moral law. That is the foundation of all morality. By it we separate ourselves from the morality of interest and the morality of sentiment. We admit the existence of those facts, and their influence; but we do not assign them the same rank.

To the moral law, in the reason of man, corresponds liberty in action. Liberty is deduced from obligation, and is a fact irresistibly evident. Man, as free, and subject to obligation, is a moral person; and that involves the idea of rights. To these ideas is added that of merit and demerit; which supposes the distinction between good and evil, obligation and liberty; and creates the idea of reward and punishment.

The sentiments play no unimportant part in morality. All the moral judgments are accompanied by sentiments that respond to them. From the secret sources of enthusiasm the human will draws the mysterious virtue that makes heroes. Truth enlightens and illumines. Sentiment warms and inclines to action. Interest also bears its part; and the hope of happiness is the work of God, and one of the motive powers of human action.

Such is the admirable economy of the moral constitution of man. His Supreme Object, the Good: his law, Virtue, which often imposes upon him suffering, thus making him to excel all other created beings known to us. But this law is harsh, and in contradiction with the instinctive desire for happiness. Wherefore the Beneficent Author of his being has placed in his soul, by the side of the severe law of duty, the sweet, delightful force of sentiment. Generally he attaches happiness to virtue; and for the exceptions, for such there are, he has placed Hope at the end of the journey to be travelled.

Thus there is a side on which morality touches religion. It is a sublime necessity of Humanity to see in God the Legislator supremely wise, the Witness always present, the infallible judge of virtue. The human mind, ever climbing up to God, would deem the foundations of morality too unstable, if it did not place in God the first principle of the moral law. Wishing to give to the

[p. 726]

moral law a religious character, we run the risk of taking from it its moral character. We may refer it so entirely to God as to make His will an arbitrary degree. But the will of God, whence we deduce morality, in order to give it authority, itself has no moral authority, except as it is just. The Good comes from the will of God alone; but from His will, in so far as it is the expression of His wisdom and justice. The Eternal Justice of God is the sole foundation of Justice, such as Humanity perceives and practises it. The Good, duty, merit and demerit, are referred to God, as everything is referred to him; but they have none the less a proper evidence and authority. Religion is the crown of Morality, not its base. The base of Morality is in itself.

The Moral Code of Masonry is still more extensive than that developed by philosophy. To the requisitions of the law of Nature and the law of God, it adds the imperative obligation of a con-tract. Upon entering the Order, the Initiate binds to himself every Mason in the world. Once enrolled among the children of Light, every Mason on earth becomes his brother, and owes him the duties, the kindnesses, and the sympathies of a brother. On every one he may call for assistance in need, protection against danger, sympathy in sorrow, attention in sickness, and decent burial after death. There is not a Mason in the world who is not bound to go to his relief, when he is in danger, if there be a greater probability of saving his life than of losing his own. No Mason can wrong him to the value of anything, knowingly, himself, nor suffer it to be done by others, if it be in his power to prevent it. No Mason can speak evil of him, to his face or behind his back. Every Mason must keep his lawful secrets, and aid him in his business, defend his character when unjustly assailed, and protect, counsel, and assist his widow and his orphans. What so many thousands owe to him, he owes to each of them. He has solemnly bound himself to be ever ready to discharge this sacred debt. If he fails to do it he is dishonest and forsworn; and it is an unparalleled meanness in him to obtain good offices by false pretences, to receive kindness and service, rendered him under the confident expectation that he will in his turn render the same, and then to disappoint, without ample reason, that just expectation.

Masonry holds him also, by his solemn promise, to a purer life, a nobler generosity, a more perfect charity of opinion and action; to be tolerant, catholic in his love for his race, ardent in his zeal

[p. 727]

for the interest of mankind, the advancement and progress of humanity.

Such are, we think, the Philosophy and the Morality, such the TRUE WORD of a Master Mason.

The world, the ancients believed, was governed by Seven Secondary Causes; and these were the universal forces, known to the Hebrews by the plural name ELOHIM. These forces, analogous and contrary one to the other, produce equilibrium by their contrasts, and regulate the movements of the spheres. The Hebrews called them the Seven great Archangels, and gave them names, each of which, being a combination of another word with AL, the first Phoenician Nature-God, considered as the Principle of Light, represented them as His manifestations. Other peoples assigned to these Spirits the government of the Seven Planets then known, and gave them the names of their great divinities.

So, in the Kabala, the last Seven Sephiroth constituted ATIK YOMIN, the Ancient of Days; and these, as well as the Seven planets, correspond with the Seven colors separated by the prism, and the Seven notes of the musical octave.

Seven is the sacred number in all theogonies and all symbols, because it is composed of 3 and 4. It represents the magical. power in its full force. It is the Spirit assisted by all the Elementary Powers, the Soul served by Nature, the Holy Empire spoken of in the clavicules of Solomon, symbolized by a warrior, crowned, bearing a triangle on his cuirass, and standing on a cube, to which are harnessed two Sphinxes, one white and the other black, pulling contrary ways, and turning the head to look backward.

The vices are Seven, like the virtues; and the latter were anciently symbolized by the Seven Celestial bodies then known as planets. FAITH, as the converse of arrogant Confidence, was represented by the Sun; HOPE, enemy of Avarice, by the Moon; CHARITY, opposed to Luxury, by Venus; FORCE, stronger than Rage, by Mars; PRUDENCE, the opposite of Indolence, by Mercury; TEMPERANCE, the antipodes of Gluttony, by Saturn; and JUSTICE, the opposite of Envy, by Jupiter.

The Kabalistic book of the Apocalypse is represented as closed with Seven Seals. In it we find the Seven genii of the Ancient Mythologies; and the doctrine concealed under its emblems is the pure Kabala, already lost by the Pharisees at the advent of the Saviour. The pictures that follow in this wondrous epic are so

[p. 728]

many pantacles, of which the numbers 3, 4, 7, and 12 are the keys.

The Cherub, or symbolic bull, which Moses places at the gate of the Edenic world, holding a blazing sword, is a Sphinx, with the body of a bull and a human head; the old Assyrian Sphinx whereof the combat and victory of Mithras were the hieroglyphic analysis. This armed Sphinx represents the law of the Mystery, which keeps watch at the door of initiation, to repulse the Profane. It also represents the grand Magical Mystery, all the elements whereof the number 7 expresses, still without giving its last word. This "unspeakable word" of the Sages of the school of Alexandria, this word, which the Hebrew Kabalists wrote; w ?Y?H?W?H [IHUH], and translated by w ?A?R?A?R?Y?Th?A, [ARARITA,] so expressing the threefoldness of the Secondary Principle, the dualism of the middle ones, and the Unity as well of the first Principle as of the end; and also the junction of the number 3 with the number 4 in a word composed of four letters, but formed of seven by one triplicate and two repeated,--this word is pronounced Ararita.

The vowels in the Greek language are also Seven in number, and were used to designate the Seven planets.

Tsadok or Sydyc was the Supreme God in Phoenicia. His Seven Sons were probably the Seven Cabiri; and he was the Heptaktis, the God of Seven Rays.

Kronos, the Greek Saturn, Philo makes Sanchoniathon say, had six sons, and by Astarte Seven daughters, the Titanides. The Persians adored Ahura Masda or Ormuzd and the Six Amshaspands, the first three of whom were Lords of the Empires of Light, Fire, and Splendor; the Babylonians, Bal and the Gods; the Chinese, Shangti, and the Six Chief Spirits; and the Greeks, Kronos, and the Six great Male Gods, his progeny, Zeus, Poseidon, Apollo, Are_s, He_phaistos, and Hermes; while the female deities were also Seven: Rhea, wife of Kronos, He_re_, Athe_ne_, Artemis, Aphrodite_, Hestia, and De_me_te_i. In the Orphic Theogony, Gaia produced the fourteen Titans, Seven male and Seven female, Kronos being the most potent of the males; and as the number Seven appears in these, nine by threes, or the triple triangle, is found in the three Moerae or Fates, the three Centimane_s, and the three Cyclope_s, offspring of Ouranos and Gaia, or Heaven and Earth.

The metals, like the colors, were deemed to be Seven in number, and a metal and color were assigned to each planet. Of

[p. 729]

the metals, gold was assigned to the Sun and silver to the Moon.

The palace of Deioces in Ecbatana had Seven circular walls of different colors, the two innermost having their battlements covered respectively with silvering and gilding.

And the Seven Spheres of Borsippa were represented by the Seven Stories, each of a different color, of the tower or truncated pyramid of Bel at Babylon.

Pharaoh saw in his dream, which Joseph interpreted, Seven ears of wheat on one stalk, full and good, and after them Seven ears, withered, thin, and blasted with the East wind; and the Seven thin ears devoured the Seven good ears; and Joseph interpreted these to mean Seven years of plenty succeeded by Seven years of famine.

Connected with this Ebn Hesham relates that a flood of rain laid bare to view a sepulchre in Yemen, in which lay a woman having on her neck Seven collars of pearls, and on her hands and feet bracelets and ankle-rings and armlets, Seven on each, with an inscription on a tablet showing that, after attempting in vain to purchase grain of Joseph, she, Tajah, daughter of Dzu Shefar, and her people, died of famine.

Hear again the words of an adept, who had profoundly studied the mysteries of science, and wrote, as the Ancient Oracles spoke, in enigmas; but who knew that the theory of mechanical forces and of the materiality of the most potent agents of Divinity, explains nothing, and ought to satisfy no one!

Through the veil of all the hieratic and mystic allegories of the ancient dogmas, under the seal of all the sacred writings, in the ruins of Nineveh or Thebes, on the worn stones of the ancient temples, and on the blackened face of the sphinx of Assyria or Egypt, in the monstrous or marvellous pictures which the sacred pages of the Vedas translate for the believers of India, in the strange emblems of our old books of alchemy, in the ceremonies of reception practised by all the mysterious Societies, we find the traces of a doctrine, everywhere the same, and everywhere carefully concealed. The occult philosophy seems to have been the nurse or the godmother of all religions, the secret lever of all the intellectual forces, the key of all divine obscurities, and the absolute Queen of Society, in the ages when it was exclusively reserved for the education of the Priests and Kings.

[p. 730]

It had reigned in Persia with the Magi, who perished one day, as the masters of the world had perished, for having abused their power. It had endowed India with the most marvellous traditions, and an incredible luxury of poetry, grace, and terror in its emblems: it had civilized Greece by the sounds of the lyre of Orpheus: it hid the principles of all the sciences, and of the whole progression of the human spirit, in the audacious calculations of Pythagoras: fable teemed with its miracles; and history, when it undertook to judge of this unknown power, confounded itself with fable: it shook or enfeebled empires by its oracles; made tyrants turn pale on their thrones, and ruled over all minds by means of curiosity or fear. To this science, said the crowd, nothing is impossible; it commands the elements, knows the language of the planets, and controls the movements of the stars; the moon, at its voice, falls, reeking with blood, from Heaven; the dead rise upright on their graves, and shape into fatal words the wind that breathes through their skulls. Controller of Love or Hate, this science can at pleasure confer on human hearts Paradise or Hell: it disposes at will of all forms, and distributes beauty or deformity as it pleases: it changes in turn, with the rod of Circe, men into brutes and animals into men: it even disposes of Life or of Death, and can bestow on its adepts riches by the transmutation of metals, and immortality by its quintessence and elixir, compounded of gold and light.

This is what magic had been, from Zoroaster to Manes, from Orpheus to Apollonius Thyaneus; when positive Christianity, triumphing over the splendid dreams and gigantic aspirations of the school of Alexandria, publicly crushed this philosophy with its anathemas, and compelled it to become more occult and more mysterious than ever.

At the bottom of magic, nevertheless, was science, as at the bottom of Christianity there was love; and in the Evangelic Symbols we see the incarnate WORD adored in its infancy by three magi whom a star guides (the ternary and the sign of the microcosm), and receiving from them gold frankincense, and myrrh; another mysterious ternary, under the emblem whereof are allegorically contained the highest secrets of the Kabala.

Christianity should not have hated magic; but human ignorance always fears the unknown. Science was obliged to conceal itself, to avoid the impassioned aggressions of a blind love. It

[p. 731]

enveloped itself in new hieroglyphs, concealed its efforts, disguised its hopes. Then was created the jargon of alchemy, a continual deception for the vulgar herd, greedy of gold, and a living language for the true disciples of Hermes alone.

Resorting to Masonry, the alchemists there invented Degrees, and partly unveiled their doctrine to their Initiates; not by the language of their receptions, but by oral instruction afterward; for their rituals, to one who has not the key, are but incomprehensible and absurd jargon.

Among the sacred books of the Christians are two works which the infallible church does not pretend to understand, and never attempts to explain,--the prophecy of Ezekiel and the Apocalypse; two cabalistic clavicules, reserved, no doubt, in Heaven, for the exposition of the Magian kings; closed with Seven seals for all faithful believers; and perfectly clear to the unbeliever initiated in the occult sciences.

For Christians, and in their opinion, the scientific and magical clavicules of Solomon are lost. Nevertheless, it is certain that, in the domain of intelligence governed by the WORD, nothing that is written is lost. Only those things which men cease to understand no longer exist for them, at least as WORD; then they enter into the domain of enigmas and mystery.

The mysterious founder of the Christian Church was saluted in His cradle by the three Magi, that is to say by the hieratic ambassadors from the three parts of the known world, and from the three analogical worlds of the occult philosophy.

In the school of Alexandria, Magic and Christianity almost take each other by the hand under the auspices of Ammonius Saccos and Plato. The dogma of Hermes is found almost entire in the writings attributed to Dionysius the Areopagite. Synesius traces the plan of a treatise on dreams, which was subsequently to be commented on by Cardan, and composes hymns which might serve for the liturgy of the Church of Swedenborg, if a church of illuminati could have a liturgy.

To this epoch of ardent abstractions and impassioned logomachies belongs the philosophical reign of Julian, an illuminatus and Initiate of the first order, who believed in the unity of God and the universal Dogma of the Trinity, and regretted the loss of nothing of the old world but its magnificent symbols and too graceful images. He was no Pagan, but a Gnostic, infected with

[p. 732]

the allegories of Grecian polytheism, and whose misfortune it was to find the name of Jesus Christ less sonorous than that of Orpheus.

We may be sure that so soon as Religion and Philosophy become distinct departments, the mental activity of the age is in advance of its Faith; and that, though habit may sustain the latter for a time, its vitality is gone.

The dunces who led primitive Christianity astray, by substituting faith for science, reverie for experience, the fantastic for the reality; and the inquisitors who for so many ages waged against Magism a war of extermination, have succeeded in shrouding in darkness the ancient discoveries of the human mind; so that we now grope in the dark to find again the key of the phenomena of nature. But all natural phenomena depend on a single and immutable law, represented by the philosophal stone and its symbolic form, which is that of a cube. This law, expressed in the Kabala by the number 4, furnished the Hebrews with all the mysteries of their divine Tetragram.

Everything is contained in that word of four letters. It is the Azot of the Alchemists, the Thot of the Bohemians, the Taro of the Kabalists. It supplies to the Adept the last word of the human Sciences, and the Key of the Divine Power: but he alone understands how to avail himself of it who comprehends the necessity of never revealing it. If Oedipus, in place of slaying the Sphynx, had conquered it, and driven it into Thebes harnessed to his chariot, he would have been King, without incest, calamities, or exile. If Psyche, by submission and caresses, had persuaded Love to reveal himself, she would never have lost him. Love is one of the mythological images of the grand secret and the grand agent, because it expresses at once an action and a passion, a void and a plenitude, an arrow and a wound. The Initiates ought to understand this, and, lest the profane should overhear, Masonry never says too much.

When Science had been overcome in Alexandria by the fanaticism of the murderers of Hypatia, it became Christian, or, rather, it concealed itself under Christian disguises, with Ammonius, Synosius, and the author of the books of Dionysius the Areopagite. Then it was necessary to win the pardon of miracles by the appearances of superstition, and of science by a language unintelligible. Hieroglyphic writing was revived, and pantacles and

[p. 733]

characters were invented, that summed up a whole doctrine in a sign, a whole series of tendencies and revelations in a word. What was the object of the aspirants to knowledge? They sought for the secret of the great work, or the Philosophal Stone, or the perpetual motion, or the squaring of the circle, or the universal medicine; formulas which often saved them from persecution and general ill-will, by exposing them to the charge of folly; and each of which expressed one of the forces of the grand magical secret. This lasted until the time of the Roman de la Rose, which also expresses the mysterious and magical meaning of the poem of Dante, borrowed from the High Kabalah, that immense and concealed source of the universal philosophy.

It is not strange that man knows but little of the powers of the human will, and imperfectly appreciates them; since he knows nothing as to the nature of the will and its mode of operation. That his own will can move his arm, or compel another to obey him; that his thoughts, symbolically expressed by the signs of writing, can influence and lead other men, are mysteries as incomprehensible to him, as that the will of Deity could effect the creation of a Universe.

The powers of the will are as yet chiefly indefinite and unknown. Whether a multitude of well-established phenomena are to be ascribed to the power of the will alone, or to magnetism or some other natural agent, is a point as yet unsettled; but it is agreed by all that a concentrated effort of the will is in every case necessary to success.

That the phenomena are real is not to be doubted, unless credit is no longer to be given to human testimony; and if they are real, there is no reason for doubting the exercise heretofore, by many adepts, of the powers that were then termed magical. Nothing is better vouched for than the extraordinary performances of the Brahmins. No religion is supported by stronger testimony; nor has any one ever even attempted to explain what may well be termed their miracles.

How far, in this life, the mind and soul can act without and in-dependently of the body, no one as yet knows. That the will can act at all without bodily contact, and the phenomena of dreams, are mysteries that confound the wisest and most learned, whose explanations are but a Babel of words.

Man as yet knows little of the forces of nature. Surrounded,

[p. 734]

controlled, and governed by them, while he vainly thinks himself independent, not only of his race, but the universal nature and her infinite manifold forces, he is the slave of these forces, unless he becomes their master. He can neither ignore their existence nor be simply their neighbor.

There is in nature one most potent force, by means whereof a single man, who could possess himself of it, and should know how to direct it, could revolutionize and change the face of the world.

This force was known to the ancients. It is a universal agent, whose Supreme law is equilibrium; and whereby, if science can but learn how to control it, it will be possible to change the order of the Seasons, to produce in night the phenomena of day, to send a thought in an instant round the world, to heal or slay at a distance, to give our words universal success, and make them reverberate everywhere.

This agent, partially revealed by the blind guesses of the disciples of Mesmer, is precisely what the Adepts of the middle ages called the elementary matter of the great work. The Gnostics held that it composed the igneous body of the Holy Spirit; and it was adored in the secret rites of the Sabbat or the Temple, under the hieroglyphic figure of Baphomet or the hermaphroditic goat of Mendes.

There is a Life-Principle of the world, a universal agent, wherein are two natures and a double current, of love and wrath. This ambient fluid penetrates everything. It is a ray detached from the glory of the Sun, and fixed by the weight of the atmosphere and the central attraction. It is the body of the Holy Spirit, the universal Agent, the Serpent devouring his own tail. With this electro-magnetic ether, this vital and luminous caloric, the ancients and the alchemists were familiar. Of this agent, that phase of modern ignorance termed physical science talks incoherently, knowing naught of it save its effects; and theology might apply to it all its pretended definitions of spirit. Quiescent, it is appreciable by no human sense; disturbed or in movement, none can explain its mode of action; and to term it a "fluid," and speak of its "currents," is but to veil a profound ignorance under a cloud of words.

Force attracts force, life attracts life, health attracts health. It is a law of nature.

[p. 735]

If two children live together, and still more if they sleep together, and one is feeble and the other strong, the strong will absorb the feeble, and the latter will perish.

In schools, some pupils absorb the intellect of the others, and in every circle of men some one individual is soon found, who possesses himself of the wills of the others.

Enthralments by currents is very common; and one is carried away by the crowd, in morals as in physics. The human will has an almost absolute power in determining one's acts; and every external demonstration of a will has an influence on external things.

Tissot ascribed most maladies to disorders of the will, or the perverse influences of the wills of others. We become subject to the wills of others by the analogies of our inclinations, and still more by those of our defects. To caress the weaknesses of an individual, is to possess ourself of him, and make of him an instrument in the order of the same errors or depravations. But when two natures, analogical in defects, are subordinated one to the other, there is effected a kind of substitution of the stronger instead of the weaker, and a genuine imprisonment of one mind by the other. Often the weaker struggles, and would fain revolt; and then falls lower than ever in servitude.

We each have some dominant defect, by which the enemy can grasp us. In some it is vanity, in others indolence, in most egotism. Let a cunning and evil spirit possess himself of this, and you are lost. Then you become, not foolish, nor an idiot, but positively a lunatic, the slave of an impulse from without. You have an instinctive horror for everything that could restore you to reason, and will not even listen to representations that contravene your insanity.

Miracles are the natural effects of exceptional causes.

The immediate action of the human will on bodies, or at least this action exercised without visible means, constitutes a miracle in the physical order.

The influence exercised on wills or intellects, suddenly or within a given time, and capable of taking captive the thoughts, changing the firmest resolutions, paralyzing the most violent passions, constitutes a miracle in the moral order.

The common error in relation to miracles is, to regard them as effects without causes; as contradictions of nature; as sudden fictions of the Divine imagination; and men do not reflect that a

[p. 736]

single miracle of this sort would break the universal harmony and re-plunge the Universe into Chaos.

There are miracles impossible to God Himself: absurd miracles are so. If God could be absurd for a single instant, neither He nor the Universe would exist an instant afterward. To expect of the Divine Free-Will an effect whose cause is unacknowledged or does not exist, is what is termed tempting God. It is to precipitate one's self into the void.

God acts by His works: in Heaven, by angels; on earth, by men.

In the heaven of human conceptions, it is humanity that creates God; and men think that God has made them in His image, because they make Him in theirs.

The domain of man is all corporeal nature, visible on earth; and if he does not rule the planets or the stars, he can at least calculate their movement, measure their distances, and identify his will with their influence: he can modify the atmosphere, act to a certain point on the seasons, cure and afflict with sickness other men, preserve life and cause death.

The absolute in reason and will is the greatest power which it is given to men to attain; and it is by means of this power that what the multitude admires under the name of miracles, are effected.

POWER is the wise use of the will, which makes Fatality itself serve to accomplish the purposes of Sages.

Omnipotence is the most absolute Liberty; and absolute Liberty cannot exist without a perfect equilibrium; and the columns JACHIN and BOAZ are also the unlimited POWER and SPLENDOR OF PERFECTION of the Deity, the seventh and eighth SEPHIROTH of the Kabalah, from whose equilibrium result the eternal permanence and Stability of His plans and works, and of that perfect Success and undivided, unlimited Dominion, which are the ninth and tenth SEPHIROTH, and of which the Temple of Solomon, in its stately symmetry, erected without the sound of any tool of metal being heard, is to us a symbol. "For Thine," says the Most Perfect of Prayers, "is the DOMINION, the POWER, and the GLORY, during all the ages! Amen!"

The ABSOLUTE is the very necessity of BEING, the immutable law of Reason and of Truth. It is THAT WHICH IS. BUT THAT WHICH IS is in some sort before HE WHO IS. God Himself is not without a reason of existence. He does not exist accidentally. He could not not have been. His Existence, then, is necessitated,

[p. 737]

is necessary. He can exist only in virtue of a Supreme and inevitable REASON. That REASON, then, is THE ABSOLUTE; for it is in IT we must believe, if we would that our faith should have a reasonable and solid basis. It has been said in our times, that God is a Hypothesis; but Absolute Reason is not one: it is essential to Existence.

Saint Thomas said, "A thing is not just because God wills it, BUT GOD WILLS IT BECAUSE IT IS JUST." If he had deduced all the consequences of this fine thought, he would have discovered the true Philosopher's Stone; the magical elixir, to convert all the trials of the world into golden mercies. Precisely as it is a necessity for God to BE, so it is a necessity for Him to be just, loving, and merciful. He cannot be unjust, cruel, merciless. He cannot repeal the law of right and wrong, of merit and demerit; for the moral laws are as absolute as the physical laws. There are impossible things. As it is impossible to make two and two be five and not four; as it is impossible to make a thing be and not be at the same time; so it is impossible for the Deity to make crime a merit, and love and gratitude crimes. So, too, it was impossible to make Man perfect, with his bodily senses and appetites, as it was to make his nerves susceptible of pleasure and not also of pain.

Therefore, according to the idea of Saint Thomas, the moral laws are the enactments of the Divine WILL, only because they are the decisions of the Absolute WISDOM and REASON, and the Revelations of the Divine NATURE. In this alone consists the right of Deity to enact them; and thus only do we attain the certainty in Faith that the Universe is one Harmony.

To believe in the Reason of God, and in the God of Reason, is to make Atheism impossible. It is the Idolaters who have made the Atheists.

Analogy gives the Sage all the forces of Nature. It is the key of the Grand Arcanum, the root of the Tree of Life, the science of Good and Evil.

The Absolute, is REASON. Reason IS, by means of Itself. It IS BECAUSE IT IS, and not because we suppose it. IT IS, where nothing exists; but nothing could possibly exist without IT. Reason is Necessity, Law, the Rule of all Liberty, and the direction of every Initiative. If God IS, HE IS by Reason. The conception of an Absolute Deity, outside of, or independent of, Reason, is the IDOL of Black Magic, the PHANTOM of the Daemon.

[p. 738]

The Supreme Intelligence is necessarily rational. God, in philosophy, can be no more than a Hypothesis; but a Hypothesis imposed by good sense on Human Reason. To personify the Absolute Reason, is to determine the Divine Ideal.

NECESSITY, LIBERTY, and REASON! Behold the great and Supreme Triangle of the Kabalists!

FATALITY, WILL, and POWER! Such is the magical ternary which, in human things, corresponds with the Divine Triangle.

FATALITY is the inevitable linking together, in succession, of effects and causes, in a given order.

WILL is the faculty that directs the forces of the Intellect, so as to reconcile the liberty of persons with the necessity of things.

The argument from these premises must be made by yourself. Each one of us does that. "Seek," say the Holy Writings, "and ye shall find." Yet discussion is not forbidden; and without doubt the subject will be fully treated of in your hearing hereafter. Affirmation, negation, discussion,--it is by these the truth is attained.

To explore the great Mysteries of the Universe and seek to solve its manifold enigmas, is the chief use of Thought, and constitutes the principal distinction between Man and the animals. Accordingly, in all ages the Intellect has labored to understand and explain to itself the Nature of the Supreme Deity.

That one Reason and one Will created and governed the Universe was too evident not to be at once admitted by the philosophers of all ages. It was the ancient religions that sought to multiply gods. The Nature of the One Deity, and the mode in which the Universe had its beginning, are questions that have always been the racks in which the human intellect has been tortured: and it is chiefly with these that the Kabalists have dealt.

It is true that, in one sense, we can have no actual knowledge of the Absolute Itself, the very Deity. Our means of obtaining what is commonly termed actual knowledge, are our senses only. If to see and feel be knowledge, we have none of our own Soul, of electricity, of magnetism. We see and feel and taste an acid or an alkali, and know something of the qualities of each; but it is only when we use them in combination with other substances, and learn their effects, that we really begin to know their nature. It is the combination and experiments of Chemistry that give

[p. 739]

as a knowledge of the nature and powers of most animal and vegetable substances. As these are cognizable by inspection by our senses, we may partially know them by that alone: but the Soul, either of ourself or of another, being beyond that cognizance, can only be known by the acts and words which are its effects. Magnetism and electricity, when at rest, are equally beyond the jurisdiction of the senses; and when they are in action, we see, feel, hear, taste, and smell only their effects. We do not know what they are, but only what they do. We can know the attributes of Deity only through His manifestations. To ask anything more, is to ask, not knowledge, but something else, for which we have no name. God is a Power; and we know nothing of any Power itself, but only its effects, results, and action, and what Reason teaches us by analogy;

In these later days, in laboring to escape from all material ideas in regard to Deity, we have so refined away our notions of GOD, as to have no idea of Him at all. In struggling to regard Him as a pure immaterial Spirit, we have made the word Spirit synonymous with nothing, and can only say that He is a Somewhat, with certain attributes, such as Power, Wisdom, and Intelligence. To compare Him to LIGHT, would now be deemed not only unphilosophical, but the equivalent of Atheism; and we find it necessary to excuse and pity the ancients for their inadequate and gross ideas of Deity, expressed in considering Him as the Light-Principle, the invisible essence or substance from which visible Light flows.

Yet our own holy writings continually speak of Him as Light; and therefore the Tsabeans and the Kabala may well be pardoned for doing the same; especially since they did not regard Him as the visible Light known to us, but as the Primordial Ether-Ocean from which light flows.

Before the creation, did the Deity dwell alone in the Darkness, or in the Light? Did the Light co-exist with Him, or was it created, after an eternity of darkness? and if it co-existed, was it an effluence from Him, filling all space as He also filled it, He and the Light at the same time filling the same place and every place?

MILTON says, expressing the Hebraic doctrine:

"Hail, Holy Light, offspring of Heaven first-born,
 Or of th' Eternal, co-eternal beam!
 May I express thee unblamed, since God is Light. [p. 740]
 And never but in unapproached Light
 Dwelt from Eternity; dwelt then in Thee,
 Bright effluence of bright Essence uncreate."

"The LIGHT," says the Book Omschim, or Introduction to the Kabala, "Supremest of all things, and most Lofty, and Limitless, and styled INFINITE, can be attained unto by no cogitation or speculation; and its VERY SELF is evidently withdrawn and removed beyond all intellection. It WAS, before all things whatever, produced, created, formed, and made by Emanation; and in it was neither Time, Head, or Beginning; since it always existed, and remains forever, without commencement or end."

"Before the Emanations flowed forth, and created things were created, the Supreme Light was infinitely extended, and filled the whole WHERE; so that with reference to Light no vacuum could be affirmed, nor any unoccupied space; but the ALL was filled with that Light of the Infinite, thus extended, whereto in every regard was no end, inasmuch as nothing was, except that extended Light, which, with a certain single and simple equality, was everywhere like unto itself."

AINSOPH is called Light, says the Introduction to the Sohar, because it is impossible to express it by any other word.

To conceive of God as an actuality, and not as a mere non-substance or name, which involved non-existence, the Kabala, like the Egyptians, imagined Him to be "a most occult Light," AUR; not our material and visible Light, but the Substance out of which Light flows, the fire, as relative to its heat and flame. Of this Light or Ether, the Sun was to the Tsabeans the only manifestation or out-shining, and as such it was worshipped, and not as the type of dominion and power. God was the Pho_s Noe_ton, the Light cognizable only by the Intellect, the Light-Principle, the Light-Ether, from which souls emanate, and to which they return.

Light, Fire, and Flame, with the Phoenicians, were the sons of Kronos. They are the Trinity in the Chaldaean Oracles, the AOR of the Deity, manifested in flame, that issues out of the invisible Fire.

In the first three Persian Amshaspands, Lords of LIGHT, FIRE, and SPLENDOR, we recognize the AOR, ZOHAR, and ZAYO, Light, Splendor, and Brightness, of the Kabalah. The first of these is termed AOR MUPALA, Wonderful or Hidden Light, unrevealed, undisplayed--which is KETHER, the first Emanation or Sephirah,

[p. 741]

the Will of Deity: the second is NESTAR, Concealed--which is HAKEMAH, the second Sephirah, or the Intellectual Potence of the Deity: and the third is METANOTSATS, coruscating--which is BINAH, the third Sephirah, or the intellectual producing capacity. In other words, they are THE VERY SUBSTANCE of light, in the Deity: Fire, which is that light, limited and furnished with attributes, so that it can be revealed, but yet remains unrevealed, and its splendor or out-shining, or the light that goes out from the fire.

Masonry is a search after Light. That search leads us directly back, as you see, to the Kabalah. In that ancient and little understood medley of absurdity and philosophy, the Initiate will find the source of many doctrines; and may in time come to understand the Hermetic philosophers, the Alchemists, all the Anti-papal Thinkers of the Middle Ages, and Emanuel Swedenborg.

The Hansavati Rich, a celebrated Sanscrit Stanza, says: "He is Hansa (the Sun), dwelling in light; Vasu, the atmosphere dwelling in the firmament; the invoker of the gods (Agni), dwelling on the altar (i.e., the altar fire); the guest (of the worshipper), dwelling in the house (the domestic fire); the dweller amongst men (as consciousness); the dweller in the most excellent orb, (the Sun); the dweller in truth; the dweller in the sky (the air); born in the waters, in the rays of light, in the verity (of manifestation), in the Eastern mountains; the Truth (itself)."

"In the beginning," says a Sanscrit hymn, "arose the Source of golden light. He was the only born Lord of all that is. He established the earth and the sky. Who is the God to Whom we shall offer our sacrifice?"

"He who gives life, He who gives strength; Whose blessing all the bright gods desire; Whose shadow is immortality; Whose shadow is death; Who is the God, etc?"

"He through Whom the sky is bright and the earth for us; He through Whom the Heaven was established, nay, the highest Heaven; He who measured out the light in the air; Who is the God, etc?"

"He to Whom the Heaven and earth, standing firm by His will, look up trembling inwardly; He over Whom the rising sun shines forth; Who is the God, etc?"

"Wherever the mighty water-clouds went, where they placed

[p. 742]

the seed and lit the fire, thence arose He Who is the only life of the bright gods; Who is the God, etc?"

The WORD of God, said the Indian philosophy, is the universal 'and invisible Light, cognizable by the senses, that emits its blaze in the Sun, Moon, Planets, and other Stars. Philo calls it the "Universal Light," which loses a portion of its purity and splendor in descending from the intellectual to the sensible world, manifesting itself outwardly from the Deity; and the Kabalah represents that only so much of the Infinite Light flowed into the circular void prepared for creation within the Infinite Light and Wisdom, as could pass by a canal like a line or thread. The Sephiroth, emanating from the Deity, were the rays of His splendor.

The Chaldaean Oracles said: "The intellect of the Generator, stirred to action, out-spoke, forming within itself, by intellection, universals of every possible form and fashion, which issued out, flowing forth from the One Source . . . For Deity, impersonated as Dominion, before fabricating the manifold Universe, posited an intellected and unchangeable universal, the impression of the form whereof goes forth through the Universe; and that Universe, formed and fashioned accordingly, becomes visibly beautified in infinitely varying types and forms, the Source and fountain whereof is one. . . . Intellectual conceptions and forms from the Generative source, succeeding each other, considered in relation to ever-progressing Time, and intimately partaking of THE PRIMAL ETHER or FIRE; but yet all these Universals and Primal Types and Ideas flowed forth from, and are part of, the first Source of the Generative Power, perfect in itself."

The Chaldaeans termed the Supreme Deity ARAOR, Father of Light. From Him was supposed to flow the light above the world, which illuminates the heavenly regions. This Light or Fire was considered as the Symbol of the Divine Essence, extending itself to inferior spiritual natures. Hence the Chaldaean oracles say: "The Father took from Himself, and did not confine His proper fire within His intellectual potency:" . . "All things are begotten from one Fire."

The Tsabeans held that all inferior spiritual beings were emanations from the Supreme Deity; and therefore Proclus says: "The progression of the gods is one and continuous, proceeding downward from the intelligible and latent unities, and terminating in the last partition of the Divine cause."

[p. 743]

It is impossible to speak clearly of the Divinity. Whoever attempts to express His attributes by the help of abstractions, confines himself to negatives, and at once loses sight of his ideas, in wandering through a wilderness of words. To heap Superlatives on Superlatives, and call Him best, wisest, greatest, is but to exaggerate qualities which- are found in man. That there exists one only God, and that He is a Perfect and Beneficent Being, Reason legitimately teaches us; but of the Divine Nature, of the Substance of the Deity, of the manner of His Existence, or of the mode of creation of His Universe, the human mind is inadequate to form any just conception. We can affix no clear ideas to Omnipotence, Omniscience, Infinity or Eternity; and we have no more right to attribute intelligence to Him, than any other mental quality of ourselves, extended indefinitely; or than we have to attribute our senses to Him, and our bodily organs, as the Hebrew writings do.

We satisfy ourselves with negativing in the Deity everything that constitutes existence, so far as we are capable of conceiving of existence. Thus He becomes to us logically nothing, Non-Ens. The Ancients saw no difference between that and Atheism, and sought to conceive of Him as something real. It is a necessity of Human Nature. The theological idea, or rather non-idea, of the Deity, is not shared or appreciated by the unlearned. To them, God will always be The Father Who is in Heaven, a Monarch on His Throne, a Being with human feelings and human sympathies, angry at their misdeeds, lenient if they repent, accessible to their supplications. It is the Humanity, far more than the Divinity, of Christ, that makes the mass of Christians worship Him, far more than they do the Father.

"The Light of the Substance of The Infinite," is the Kabalistic expression. Christ was, according to Saint John, "the Light that lighteth every man that cometh into the. world"; and "that Light was the life of men." "The Light shone in the darkness: and the darkness comprehended it not."

The ancient ideas in respect to Light were perhaps quite as correct as our own. It does not appear that they ascribed to Light any of the qualities of matter. But modern Science defines it to be a flood of particles of matter, flowing or shot out from the Sun and Stars, and moving through space to come to us. On the theories of mechanism and force, what force of attraction here or

[p. 744]

repulsion at the Sun or at the most distant Star could draw or drive these impalpable, weightless, infinitely minute particles, appreciably by the Sense of Sight alone, so far through space? What has become of the immense aggregate of particles that have reached the earth since the creation? Have they increased its bulk? Why cannot chemistry detect and analyze them? If matter, why can they travel only in right lines?

No characteristic of matter belongs to Light, or Heat, or flame, or to Galvanism, Electricity, and Magnetism. The electric spark is light, and so is that produced by the flint, when it cuts off particles of steel. Iron, melted or heated, radiates light; and insects, infusoria, and decayed wood emit it. Heat is produced by friction and by pressure; to explain which, Science tells us of latent Caloric, thus representing it to us as existing without its only known distinctive quality. What quality of matter enables lightning, blazing from the Heavens, to rend the oak? What quality of matter enables it to make the circuit of the earth in a score of seconds?

Profoundly ignorant of the nature of these mighty agents of Divine Power, we conceal our ignorance by words that have no meaning; and we might well be asked why Light may not be an effluence from the Deity, as has been agreed by all the religions of all the Ages of the World.

All truly dogmatic religions have issued from the Kabalah and return to it: everything scientific and grand in the religious dreams of all the illuminati, Jacob Boehme, Swedenborg, Saint-Martin, and others, is borrowed from the Kabalah; all the Masonic associations owe to it their Secrets and their Symbols.

The Kabalah alone consecrates the alliance of the Universal Reason and the Divine Word; it establishes, by the counterpoises of two forces apparently opposite, the eternal balance of being; it alone reconciles Reason with Faith, Power with Liberty, Science with Mystery; it has the keys of the Present, the Past, and the Future.

The Bible, with all the allegories it contains, expresses, in an incomplete and veiled manner only, the religious science of the Hebrews. The doctrine of Moses and the Prophets, identical at bottom with that of the ancient Egyptians, also had its outward meaning and its veils. The Hebrew books were written only to recall to memory the traditions; and they were written in Symbols

[p. 745]

unintelligible to the Profane. The Pentateuch and the prophetic poems were merely elementary books of doctrine, morals, or liturgy; and the hue secret and traditional philosophy was only written afterward, under veils still less transparent. Thus was a second Bible born, unknown to, or rather uncomprehended by, the Christians; a collection, they say, of monstrous absurdities; a monument, the adept says, wherein is everything that the genius of philosophy and that of religion have ever formed or imagined of the sublime; a treasure surrounded by thorns; a diamond concealed in a rough dark stone.

One is filled with admiration, on penetrating into the Sanctuary of the Kabalah, at seeing a doctrine so logical, so simple, and at the same time so absolute. The necessary union of ideas and signs, the consecration of the most fundamental realities by the primitive characters; the Trinity of Words, Letters, and Numbers; a philosophy simple as the alphabet, profound and infinite as the Word; theorems more complete and luminous than those of Pythagoras; a theology summed up by counting on one's fingers; an Infinite which can be held in the hollow of an infant's hand; ten ciphers, and twenty-two letters, a triangle, a square, and a circle,--these are all the elements of the Kabalah. These are the elementary principles of the written Word, reflection of that spoken Word that created the world!

This is the doctrine of the Kabalah, with which you will no doubt seek to make yourself acquainted, as to the Creation.

The Absolute Deity, with the Kabalists, has no name. The terms applied to Him are w ?A?W?R ph?Sh?W?T, AOR PASOT, the Most Simple [or Pure] Light, "called, w ?A?Yn ?S?Wp, AYEN SOPH, or INFINITE, before any Emanation. For then there was no space or vacant place, but all was infinite Light."

Before the Deity created any Ideal, any limited and intelligible Nature, or any form whatever, He was alone, and without form or similitude, and there could be no cognition or comprehension of Him in any wise. He was without Idea or Figure, and it is forbidden to form any Idea or Figure of Him, neither by the letter He (w ?H), nor by the letter Yo_d (w ?Y), though these are contained in the Holy Name; nor by any other letter or point in the world.

But after He created this Idea [this limited and existing-in-intellection Nature, which the ten Numerations, SEPHIROTH or

[p. 746]

[paragraph continues] Rays are], of the Medium, the First Man ADAM KADMON, He descended therein, that, by means of this Idea, He might be called by the name TETRAGRAMMATON; that created things might have cognition of Him, in His own likeness.

When the Infinite God willed to emit what were to flow forth, He contracted Himself in the centre of His light, in such manner that that most intense light should recede to a certain circumference, and on all sides upon itself. And this is the first contraction, and termed w ?Cm?Cm Tsemsum.

w ?A?Dm ?Q?Dm?Wn, ADAM KADMON, the Primal or First Man, is the first Aziluthic emanant from the Infinite Light, immitted into the evacuated Space, and from which, afterward, all the other degrees and systems had their beginnings. It is. called the Adam prior to all the first. In it are imparted ten spherical numerations; and thereafter issued forth the rectilinear figure of a man in his sephirothic decade, as it were the diameter of the said circles; as it were the axis of these spheres, reaching from their highest point to their lowest; and from it depend all the systems.

But now, as the Infinite Light would be too excellent and great to be borne and endured, except through the medium of this Adam Kadmon, its most Secret Nature preventing this, its illuminating light had again to emanate in streams out of itself, by certain apertures, as it were, like windows, and which are termed the ears, eyes, nostrils, and mouth.

The light proceeding from this Adam Kadmon is indeed but one; but in proportion to its remoteness from the place of out-flowing, and to the grades of its descent, it is more dense.

From the word w ?A?C?L, ATSIL, to emanate or flow forth, comes the word w ?A?C?Y?L?W?Th, ATSILOTH or Aziluth, Emanation, or the System of Emanants. When the primal space was evacuated, the surrounding Light of the Infinite, and the Light immitted into the void, did not touch each other; but the Light of the Infinite flowed into that void through a line or certain slender canal; and that Light is the Emanative and emitting Principle, or the out-flow and origin of Emanation: but the Light within the void is the emanant subordinate; and the two cohere only by means of the aforesaid line.

Aziluth means specifically and principally the first system of the four Olamoth [w ?O?Lm?W?Th], worlds or systems; which is thence called the Aziluthic World.

[p. 747]

The ten Sephiroth of the general Aziluthic system are ten Nekudoth or Points.

w ?A?Yn?Zp AINSOPH, AENSOPH, or AYENSOPH, is the title of the Cause of Causes, its meaning being "endless," because there is no limit to Its loftiness, and nothing can comprehend it. Sometimes, also, the name is applied to KETHER, or the CROWN, the first emanation, because that is the Throne of the Infinite, that is, its first and highest Seat, than which none is higher, and because Ainsoph resides and is concealed therein: hence it rejoices in the same name.

Before that anything was, says the Emech Hammelech, He, of His mere will, proposed to Himself to make worlds . . . but at that time there was no vacant space for worlds; but all space was filled with the light of His Substance, which He had with fixed limits placed in the centre of Himself, and of the parts whereof, and wherein, He was thereafter to effect a folding together.

What then did the Lord of the Will, that most perfectly free Agent, do? By His own estimation, He measured off within His own Substance the width and length of a circular space to be made vacant, and wherein might be posited the worlds aforesaid; and of that Light which was included within the circle so measured, He compressed and folded over a certain portion . . . and that Light He lifted higher up, and so a place was left unoccupied by the Primal Light.

But yet was not this space left altogether empty of that Light; for the vestiges of the Primal Light still remained in the place where Itself had been; and they did not recede therefrom.

Before the Emanations out-flowed, and created things were created, the Supreme Light was infinitely extended, and filled the whole Where: nothing was, except that extended light, called AOR H' AINSOPH, the Light of the non-finite.

When it came into the mind of the Extended to will to make worlds, and by forth-flowing to utter Emanations, and to emit as Light the perfection of His active powers, and of His aspects and attributes, which was the impelling cause of the creation of worlds; then that Light, in some measure compressed, receded in every direction from a particular central point, and on all sides of it drew back, and so a certain vacuum was left, called void space, its circumference everywhere equidistant from that point which was exactly in the centre of the space . . . a certain void place and

[p. 748]

space left in Mid-Infinite: a certain Where was thereby constituted wherein Emanations might BE, and the Created, the Fashioned and the Fabricated.

This world of the garmenting,--this circular vacant space, with the vestiges of the withdrawn light of the Infinite yet remaining, is the inmost garment, nearest to His substance; and to it belongs the name AOR PENAI-AL, Light of the Countenance of God.

An interspace surrounds this great circle, established between the light of the very substance, surrounding the circle on its outside, and the substance contained within the circle. This is called SPLENDOR EXCELSUS, in contradistinction to Simple Splendor.

This light "of the vestige of the garment," is said to be, relatively to that of the vestige of the substance, like a point in the centre of a circle. This light, a point in the centre of the Great Light, is called Auir, Ether, or Space.

This Ether is somewhat more gross than the Light--not so Subtle--though not perceptible by the Senses--is termed the Primal Ether--extends everywhere; Philosophers call it the Soul of the World.

The Light so forth-shown from the Deity, cannot be said to be severed or diverse from Him. "It is flashed forth from Him, and yet all continues to be perfect unity . . . The Sephiroth, sometimes called the Persons of the Deity, are His rays, by which He is enabled most perfectly to manifest Himself.

The Introduction to the Book SONAR says:

The first compression was effected, in order that the Primal Light might be upraised, and a space become vacant. The second compression occurred when the vestiges of the removed Light remaining were compressed into points; and that compression was effected by means of the emotion of joy; the Deity rejoicing, it had already been said, on account of His Holy People, thereafter to come into being; and that joy being vehement, and a commotion and exhilaration in the Deity being caused by it, so that He flowed forth in His delight; and of this commotion an abstract power of judgment being generated, which is a collection of the letters generated by the points of the vestiges of Light left within the circle. For He writes the finite expressions, or limited manifestations of Himself upon the Book, in single letters.

Like as when water or fire, it had been said, is blown upon by the wind, it is wont to be greatly moved, and with flashes like

[p. 749]

lightning to smite the eyes, and gleam and coruscate hither and thither, even so The Infinite was moved within Himself, and shone and coruscated in that circle, from the centre outward and again to the centre: and that commotion we term exhilaration; and from that exhilaration, variously divided within Himself, was generated the potency of determining the fashioning of the letters.

Of that exhilaration, it had also been said, was generated the determination of forms, by which determination the Infinite determined them within Himself, as if by saying: "Let this Sphere be the appointed place, wherein let all worlds be created!"

He, by radiating and coruscating, effected the points, so that their sparkling should smite the eyes like lightning. Then He combined diversely the single points, until letters were fashioned thereof, in the similitude and image of those wherewith THE BLESSED had set forth the decrees of His Wisdom.

It is not possible to attain to an understanding of the creation of man, except by the mystery of letters; and in these worlds of The Infinite is nothing, except the letters of the Alphabet and their combinations. All the worlds are Letters and Names; but He Who is the Author of all, has no name.

This world of the covering [or garment--vestimenti], [that is, the circular vacant space, with the vestiges of the removed Light of The Infinite still remaining after the first contraction and compression], is the inmost covering, nearest to His substance; and to this covering belongs the general name AUR PENIAL, Light of the Countenance of God: by which we are to understand the Light of The Substance.

And after this covering was effected, He contracted it, so as to lift up the lower moiety; . . . and this is the third contraction; and in this manner He made vacant a space for the worlds, which had not the capacity to use the great Light of the covering, the end whereof was lucid and excellent as its beginning. And so [by drawing up the lower half and half the letters], are made the Male and Female, that is, the anterior and posterior adhering mutually to one another.

The vacant space effected by this retraction is called AUIR KADMON, the PRIMAL SPACE: for it was the first of all Spaces; nor was it allowable to call it covering, which is AUR PENI-BAL, the Light of the Countenance of God.

[p. 750]

The vestiges of the Light of the Garment still remained there. And this world of the garment has a name that includes all things, which is the name IHUH. Before the world of the vacant space was created, HE was, and His Name, and they alone; that is, AINSOPH and His garmenting.

The EMECH HAMMELECH says again:

The lower half of the garment [by the third retraction], was left empty of the light of the garment. But the vestiges of that light remained in the place so vacated . . . and this garment is called SHEKINAH, God in-dwelling; that is, the place where w ?Y?H Yo_d He, of the anterior [or male], and w ?W?H Vav He, of the posterior [or female], combinations of letters dwelt.

This vacant space was square, and is called the Primal Space; and in Kabalah it is called Auira Kadmah, or Rasimu Ailah, The Primal Space, or The Sublime Vestige. It is the vestige of the Light of the Garment, with which is intermingled somewhat of the vestige of the Very Substance. It is called Primal Ether, but not void Space. . . The Light of the Vestige still remains in the place it occupied, and adheres there, like somewhat spiritual, of extreme tenuity.

In this Ether are two Lights; that is, the Light of the SUBSTANCE, which was taken away, and that of the Garment. There is a vast difference between the two; for that of the Vestige of the Garment is, relatively to that of the Vestige of the Substance, like a point in the centre of a circle. And as the only appropriate name for the Light of the Vestige of Ainsoph is AUR, Light, therefore the Light of the Vestige of the Garment could not be called by that name; and so we term it a point, that is, Yo_d [' or w ?Y], which is that point in the centre of Light . . . and this Light, a point in the centre of the Great Light, is called Auir, Ether, or Space.

This Ether is somewhat more gross than The Light . . . . not so subtle, though not perceptible by the senses . . . is termed the Primal Ether . . . extends everywhere; whence the Philosophers call it The Soul of the World . . . Light is visible, though not perceptible. This Ether is neither perceptible nor visible.

The Introduction to the Book Sohar continues, in the Section of the Letter Yo_d, etc:

Worlds could not be framed in this Primal Ether, on account of its extreme tenuity and the excess of Light; and also because

[p. 751]

in it remained the vital Spirit of the Vestige of the Light Ainsoph, and that of the Vestige of the Light of the Garment; whereby such manifestation was prevented.

Wherefore HE directed the letter Yo_d, since it was not so brilliant as the Primal Ether, to descend, and take to itself the light remaining in the Primal Ether, and return above, with that Vestige which so impeded the manifestation; which Yo_d did.

It descended below five times, to remove the vital Spirit of the Vestige of the Light Ainsoph; and the Vestige of the Light and vital Spirit of the Garment from the Sphere of Splendor, so as to make of it ADAM, called KADMON. And by its return, manifestation is effected in the space below, and a Vestige of the Sublime Brilliance yet remains there, existing as a Spherical Shape, and termed in the Sohar simply Tehiru, that is, Splendor; and it is styled The First Matter. . . . it being, as it were, vapor, and, as it were, smoke. And as smoke is formless, not comprehended under any fixed definite form, so this Sphere is a formless somewhat, since it seems to be somewhat that is spherical, and yet is not limited.

The letter Yo_d, while adhering to the Shekinah, had adhering to himself the Light of the Shekinah, though his light was not so great as that of the Shekinah. But when he descended, he left that light of his own below, and the Splendor consisted of it. After which there was left in Yo_d only a vestige of that light, inasmuch as he could not re-ascend to the Shekinah and adhere to it. Wherefore The Holy and Blessed directed the letter He [w ?H, the female letter], to communicate to Yo_d of her Light; and sent him forth, to descend and share with that light in the Splendor aforesaid . . . and when he re-descended into the Sphere of Splendor, he diffused abroad in it the Light communicated to him by the letter He.

And when he again ascended he left behind him the productive light of the letter He, and thereof was constituted another Sphere, within the Sphere of Splendor; which lesser Sphere is termed in the Sohar KETHER AILAH, CORONA SUMMA, The Supreme Crown, and also ATIKA DI ATIKIM, Antiquus Antiquum, The Ancient of Ancients, and even AILIT H' AILIT, Causa Causarum, the Cause of Causes. But the Crown is very far smaller than the Sphere of Splendor, so that within the latter an immense unoccupied place and space is still left.

[p. 752]

The BETH ALOHIM says:

Before the Infinite God, the Supreme and First Good, formed objectively within Himself a particular conception, definite, limited, and the object of intellection, and gave form and shape to an intellectual conception and image. HE was alone, companionless, without form or similitude, utterly without Ideal or Figure . . . It is forbidden to make of Him any figure whatever, by any image in the world, neither by the letter He nor by the letter Yo_d, nor by any other letter or point in the world.

But after He had formed this Idea, the particular conception, limited and intelligible, which the Ten Numerations are, of the medium of transmission, Adam Kadmon, the Primal or Supreme Man, He by that medium descended, and may, through that Idea, be called by the name IHUH, and so created things have cognizance of Him, by means of His proper likeness.

Woe unto him who makes God to be like unto any mode or attribute whatever, even were it to one of His own; and still more if he make Him like unto the Sons of Men, whose elements are earthly, and so are consumed and perish!

There can be no conception had of Him, except in so far as He manifests Himself, in exercising dominion by and through some attribute . . . Abstracted from this, there can be no attribute, conception, or ideal of Him. He is comparable only to the Sea, filling some great reservoir, its bed in the earth, for example; wherein it fashions for itself a certain concavity, so that thereby we may begin to compute the dimensions of the Sea itself.

For example, the Spring and Source of the Ocean is a somewhat, which is one. If from this Source or Spring there issues forth a certain fountain, proportioned to the space occupied by the Sea in that hemispherical reservoir, such as is the letter Yo_d, there the Source of Spring is the first somewhat, and the fountain that flows forth from it is the second. Then let there be made a great reservoir, as by excavation, and let this be called the Ocean, and we have the third thing, a vessel [Vas]. Now let this great reservoir be divided into seven beds of rivers, that is, into seven oblong reservoirs, so that from this ocean the waters may flow forth in- seven rivers; and the Source, Fountain, and Ocean thus make ten in all.

The Cause of Causes made ten Numerations, and called the Source of Spring KETHER, Corona, the Crown, in which the idea

[p. 753]

of circularity is involved, for there is no end to the out-flow of Light; and therefore He called this, like Himself, endless; for this also, like Him, has no similitude or configuration, nor hath it any vessel or receptacle wherein it may be contained, or by means whereof any possible cognizance can be had of it.

After thus forming the Crown, He constituted a certain smaller receptacle, the letter Yo_d, and filled it from that source; and this is called "The Fountain gushing with Wisdom," and, manifested in this, He called Himself WISE, and the vessel He called HAKEMAH, Wisdom, Sapientia.

Then He also constituted a great reservoir, which He called the Ocean; and to it He gave the name of BINAH, Understanding, Intelligentia. In this He characterized Himself as Intelligent or Conceiver. HE is indeed the Absolutely Wise and Intelligent, but Hakemah is not Absolute Wisdom of itself, but is wise by means of Binah, who fills Himself from it, and if this supply were taken from it, would be dry and unintelligent.

And thereupon seven precious vessels become, to which are given the following names: GEDULAH, Magnificence or Benignity [or KHASED, Mercy]; GEBURAH, Austerity, Rigor or Severity; TEPHARETH, Beauty; NETSAKH, Victory; HO_D, Glory; YESOD, Foundation or Basis; and MALAKOTH, Rule, Reign, Royalty, Dominion or Power. And in GEDULAH He took the character of Great and Benignant; in GEBURAH, of Severe; in TEPHARETH, of Beautiful; in NETSAKH, of Overcoming; in HO_D, of OUR GLORIOUS AUTHOR; in YESOD, of Just, by Yesod all vessels and worlds being upheld; and in MALAKOTH He applied to Himself the title of King.

These numerations or Sephiroths are held in the Kabala to have been originally contained in each other; that is, Kether contained the nine others, Hakemah contained Binah, and Binah contained the last seven.

For all things, says the commentary of Rabbi Jizchak Lorja, in a certain most abstruse manner, consist or reside and are contained in Binah, and it projects them, and sends them downward, species by species, into the several worlds of Emanation, Creation, Formation, and Fabrication; all whereof are derived from what are above them, and are termed their out-flowings; for, from the potency which was their state there, they descend into actuality.

[p. 754]

The INTRODUCTION says:

It is said in many places in the Sohar, that all things that emanate or are created have their root above. Hence also the Ten Sephiroth have their root above, in the world of the garment, with the very Substance of HIM. And AINSOPH had full consciousness and appreciation, prior to their actual existence, of all the Grades and Impersonations contained unmanifested within Himself, with regard to the essence of each, and its domination then in potency . . . When He came to the Sephirah of the Impersonation Malakoth, which He then contained hidden within Himself, He concluded within Himself that therein worlds should be framed; since the scale of the first nine Sephiroths was so constituted, that it was neither fit nor necessary for worlds to be framed from them; for all the attributes of these nine Superior Sephiroth could be assigned to Himself, even if He should never operate outwardly; but Malakoth, which is Empire or Dominion, could not be attributed to Him, unless He ruled over other Existences; whence from the point Malakoth He produced all the worlds into actuality.

These circles are ten in number. Originated by points, they expanded in circular shape. Ten Circles, under the mystery of the ten Sephiroth, and between them ten Spaces; whence it appears that the sphere of Splendor is in the centre of the space Malakoth of the First Occult Adam.

The First Adam, in the ten circles above the Splendor, is called the First occult Adam; and in each of these spaces are formed many thousand worlds. The first Adam is involved in the Primal Ether, and is the analogue of the world Binah.

Again the Introduction repeats the first and second descent of Yo_d into the vacated space, to make the light there less great and subtile; the constitution of the Tehiru, Splendor, from the light left behind there by him; the communication of Light to him by the female letter He; the emission by him of that Light, within the sphere of Splendor, and the formation thereof, within the sphere, "of a certain sphere called the Supreme Crown," Corona Summa, KETHER, "wherein were contained, in potence, all the remaining Numerations, so that they were not distinguishable from it. Precisely as in man exist the four elements, in potence specifically undistinguishable, so in this Corona were in potence all the ten Numerations, specifically undistinguishable." This Crown, it is

[p. 755]

added, was called, after the restoration, The Cause of Causes, and the Ancient of the Ancients.

The point, Kether, adds the Introduction, was the aggregate of all the Ten . . . when it first emanated, it consisted of all the Ten; and the Light which extended from the Emanative Principle simultaneously flowed into it; and beheld the two Universals [that is, the Unities out of which manifoldness flows; as, for example, the idea, within the Deity, of Humanity as a Unit, out of which the individuals were to flow], the Vessel or Receptacle containing this immitted Light, and the Light Itself within it. And this Light is the Substance of the point Kether; for the WILL of God is the Soul of all things that are.

The Ainsophic Light, it had said, was infinite in every direction, and without end or limit. To prevent it from flowing into and re-filling the quasi-vacant space, occupied by an infinitely less Splendor, a partition between the greater and lesser Splendor was necessary; and this partition, the boundary of the sphere of Splendor, and a like one bounding the sphere Kether, were called Vessels or Receptacles, containing, including, and enclosing within themselves the light of the sphere. Imagine a sea of pellucid water, and in the centre of it a spherical mass of denser and darker water. The outer surface of this sphere, or its limits every way, is the vessel containing it. The Kabalah regards the vessels "as by their nature somewhat opaque, and not so splendid as the light they enclose."

The contained Light is the Soul of the vessels, and is active in them, like the Human Soul in the human body. The Light of the Emanative Principle [Ainsoph] inheres in the vessels, as their Life, internal Light, and Soul. . . Kether emanated, with its Very Substance, at the same time as Substance and Vessel, in like manner as the flame is annexed to the live coal, and as the Soul pervades, and is within, the body. All the Numerations were potentially contained in it.

And this potentiality is thus explained: When a woman conceives, a Soul is immediately sent into the embryo which is to become the infant, in which Soul are then, potentially, all the members and veins of the body, which afterward, from that potency of the Soul, become in the human body of the child to be born.

Then the wisdom of God commanded that these Numerations

[p. 756]

potentially in Kether, should be produced from potentiality into actuality, in order that worlds might consist; and HE directed Yo_d again to descend, and to enter into and shine within Kether, and then to re-ascend: which was so done. From which illumination and re-ascension, all the other numerations, potentially in Kether, were manifested and disclosed; but they continued still compacted together, remaining within Kether in a circle.

When God willed to produce the other emanations or numerations from Kether, it is added, HE sent Yo_d down again, to the upper part of Kether, one-half of him to remain without and one-half to penetrate within the sphere of Kether. Then HE sent the letter Vav into the Splendor, to pour out its light on Yo_d: and thus,--

Yo_d received light from Vav, and thereby so directed his countenance that it should illuminate and confer exceeding great energy on Hakemah, which yet remained in Kether; so giving it the faculty to proceed forth therefrom; and that it might collect and contain within itself, and there reveal, all the other eight numerations, until that time in Kether.

The sphere of Kether opened, and thereout issued Hakemah, to remain below Kether, containing in itself all the other numerations.

By a similar process, Binah, illuminated within Hakemah by a second Yo_d, "issued forth out of Hakemah, having within itself the Seven lower Numerations."

And since the vessel of Binah was excellent, and coruscated with rays of the color of sapphire, and was so nearly of the same color as the vessel of Hakemah that there was scarcely any difference between them, hence it would not quietly remain below Hakemah, but rose, and placed itself on his left side.

And because the light from above profusely flowed into and accumulated in the vessel of Hakemah, to so great an extent that it overflowed, and escaped, coruscating, outside of that vessel, and, flowing off to the left, communicated potency and increase to the vessel of Binah . . . . For Binah is female . . . .

Binah, therefore, by means of this energy that flowed into it from the left side of Hakemah, by virtue of the second Yo_d, came to possess such virtue and potency, as to project beyond itself the Seven remaining vessels contained within itself, and so emitted them all, continuously, one after the other . . . all connected and linked one with the other, like the links of a chain.

[p. 757]

Three points first emanated, one under the other; Kether, Hakemah, and Binah; and, so far, there was no copulation. But afterward the positions of Hakemah and Binah changed, so that they were side by side, Kether remaining above them; and then conjunction of the Male and Female, ABA and IMMA, Father and Mother, as points.

He, from Whom all emanated, created Adam Kadmon, consisting of all the worlds, so that in him should be somewhat from those above, and somewhat from those below. Hence in Him was NEPHESCH [PSYCHE, anima infima, the lowest spiritual part of man, Soul], from the world ASIAH, which is one letter He of the Tetragrammaton; RUACH [ SPIRITUS, anima media, the next higher spiritual part, or Spirit], from the world YEZIRAH, which is the Vav of the Tetragrammaton; NESCHAMAH [the highest spiritual part, mens or anima superior], from the world BRIAH, which is the other letter He; and NESCHAMAH LENESCHAMAH, from the world ATSILUTH, which is the YO_D of the Tetragrammaton.

And these letters [the Sephiroth] were changed from the spherical form into the form of a person, the symbol of which person is the BALANCE, it being Male and Female . . . Hakemah on one side, Binah on the other, and Kether over them: and so Gedulah on one side, Geburah on the other, and Tephareth under them.

The Book Omschim says: Some hold that the ten Sephiroth succeeded one another in ten degrees, one above the other, in regular gradation, one connected with the other in a direct line, from the highest to the lowest. Others hold that they issued forth in three lines, parallel with each other, one on the right hand, one on the left, and one in the middle; so that, beginning with the highest and going down to the lowest, Hakemah, Khased [or Gedulah], and Netsach are one over the other, in a perpendicular line, on the right hand; Binah, Geburah, and Ho_d on the left; and Kether, Tephareth, Yesod, and Malakoth in the middle: and many hold that all the ten subsist in circles, one within the other, and all homocentric.

It is also to be noted, that the Sephirothic tables contain still another numeration, sometimes called also a Sephirah, which is called Daath, cognition. It is in the middle, below Hakemah and Binah, and is the result of the conjunction of these two.

To Adam Kadmon, the Idea of the Universe, the Kabalah assigns a human form. In this, Kether is the cranium, Hakemah and

[p. 758]

[paragraph continues] Binah the two lobes of the brain, Gedulah and Geburah the two arms, Tephareth the trunk, Netsach and Ho_d the thighs, Yesod the male organ, and Malkuth the female organ, of generation.

Yo_d is Hakemah, and He Dinah; Vav is Tephareth, and the last He, Malkuth.

The whole, say the Books Mysterii or of Occultation, is thus summed up: The intention of God The Blessed was to form Impersonations, in order to diminish the Light. Wherefore HE constituted, in Macroprosopos, Adam Kadmon, or Arik Anpin, three Heads. The first is called, "The Head whereof is no cognition"; the second, "The Head of that which is non-existent"; and the third, "The Very Head of Macroprosopos"; and these three are Corona, Sapientia, and Informatio, Kether, Hakemah, and Binah, existent in the Corona of the World of Emanation, or in Macroprosopos; and these three are called in the Sohar ATIKA KADISCHA, Senex Sanctissimus, The Most Holy Ancient. But the Seven inferior Royalties of the first Adam are called "The Ancient of Days"; and this Ancient of Days is the internal part, or Soul, of Macroprosopos.

The human mind has never struggled harder to understand and explain to itself the process of creation, and of Divine manifestation, and at the same time to conceal its thoughts from all but the initiated, than in the Kabalah. Hence, much of it seems at first like jargon. Macroprosopos or Adam Kadmon is, we have said, the idea or intellectual aggregate of the whole Universe, included and contained unevolved in the manifested Deity, Himself yet contained unmanifested in the Absolute. The Head, Kether, "whereof is no cognition," is the Will of the Deity, or the Deity as Will. Hakemah, the head "of that which is non-existent," is the Generative Power of begetting or producing Thought; yet in the Deity, not in action, and therefore non-existent. Binah, "the very or actual head" of Macroprosopos, is the productive intellectual capacity, which, impregnated by Hakemah, is to produce the Thought. This Thought is Daath; or rather, the result is Intellection, Thinking; the Unity, of which Thoughts are the manifold outflowings.

This may be illustrated by a comparison. Pain, in the human being, is a feeling or sensation. It must be produced. To produce it, there must be, not only the capacity to produce it, in the nerves, but also the power of generating it by means of that capacity.

[p. 759]

[paragraph continues] This generative Power, the Passive Capacity which produces, and the pain produced, are like Hakemah, Dinah, and Daath.

The four Worlds or Universals, Aziluth, Briah, Yetzirah, and Asiah, of Emanation, Creation, Formation, and Fabrication, are another enigma of the Kabalah. The first three are wholly within the Deity. The first is the Universe, as it exists potentially in the Deity, determined and imagined, but as yet wholly formless and undeveloped, except so far as it is contained in His Emanations. The second is the Universe in idea, distinct within the Deity, but not invested with forms; a simple unity. The third is the same Universe in potence in the Deity, unmanifested, but invested with forms,--the idea developed into manifoldness and individuality, and succession of species and individuals; and the fourth is the potentiality become the Actuality, the Universe fabricated, and existing as it exists for us.

The Sephiroth, says the Porta Caelorum, by the virtue of their Infinite Emanator, who uses them as a workman uses his tools, and who operates with and through them, are the cause of existence of everything created, formed, and fashioned, employing in their production certain media. But these same Sephiroth, Persons and Lights, are not creatures per se, but ideas, and Rays of THE INFINITE, which, by different gradations, so descended from the Supreme Source as still not to be severed from It; but It, through them, is extended to the production and government of all Entities, and is the Single and Perfect Universal Cause of All, though becoming determinate for this or the other operation, through this or that Sephiroth or MODE.

God produced all things by His Intellect and Will and free Determination. He willed to produce them by the mediation of His Sephiroth, and Persons . . . . . by which He is enabled most perfectly to manifest Himself; and that the more perfectly, by producing the causes themselves, and the Causes of Causes, and not merely the viler effects.

God produced, in the first Originate, all the remaining causates. For, as He Himself is most simply One, and from One Simple Being One only can immediately proceed, hence it results that from the First Supreme Infinite Unity flowed forth at the same time All and One. One, that is, in so far as flowing from the Most Simple Unity, and being like unto It; but also All, in so far as, departing from that perfect Singleness which can be measured

[p. 760]

by no other Singleness, it became, to a certain extent, manifold, though still Absolute and Perfect.

Emanation, says the same, is the Resulting displayed from the Unresulting, the Finite from the Infinite, the Manifold and Composite from the Perfect Single and Simple, Potentiality from that which is Infinite Power and Act, the mobile from that which is perennially permanent; and therefore in a more imperfect and diminished mode than His Infinite Perfection is. As the First Cause is all things, in an unresulting and Infinite mode, so the Entities that flow from Him are the First Causes, in a resulting and finite mode.

THE NECESSARY ENTITY, subsisting of Itself, as It cannot be dissevered into the manifold, yet becomes, as it were, multiplied in the Causates, in respect of their Nature, or of the Subsistences, Vessels, and openings assigned to them; whereby the Single and Infinite Essence, being inclosed or comprehended in these limits, bounds, or externalnesses, takes on Itself Definiteness of dimension, and becomes Itself manifold, by the manifoldness of these envelopes.

As man [the unit of Humanity] is a microcosm, so Adam Kadmon is a macrocosm, containing all the Causates of the First Cause . . . . . as the Material Man is the end and completion of all creation, so in the Divine Man is the beginning thereof. As the inferior Adam receives all things from all, so the superior Adam supplies all things to all. As the former is the principle of reflected light, so the latter is of Direct Light. The former is the terminus of the Light, descending; the latter its terminus, ascending. As the Inferior man ascends from the lowest matter even to the First Cause, so the Superior Adam descends from the Simple and Infinite Act, even to the lowest and most attenuated Potence.

The Ternary is the bringing back of duality to unity.

The Ternary is the Principle of Number, because, bringing back the binary to unity, it restores to it the same quantity whereby it had departed from unity. It is the first odd number, containing in itself the first even number and the unit, which are the Father and Mother of all Numbers; and it has in itself the beginning, middle, and end.

Now, Adam Kadmon emanated from the Absolute Unity, and so is himself a unit; but he also descends and flows downward into

[p. 761]

his own Nature, and so is duality. Again, he returns to the Unity, which he hath in himself, and to The Highest, and so is the Ternary and Quaternary.

And this is why the Essential Name has four letters,--three different ones, and one of them once repeated; since the first He is the wife of the Yo_d, and the second He is the wife of the Vav.

Those media which manifest the First Cause, in Himself profoundly hidden, are the Sephiroth, which emanate immediately from that First Cause, and by Its Nature have produced and do control all the rest.

These Sephiroth were put forth from the One First and Simple, manifesting His Infinite Goodness. They are the mirrors of His Truth, and the analogues of His Supremest Essence, the Ideas of His Wisdom, and the representations of His will; the receptacles of His Potency, and the instruments with which He operates; the Treasury of His Felicity, the dispensers of His Benignity, the Judges of His Kingdom, and reveal His Law; and finally, the Denominations, Attributes, and Names of Him Who is above all and the Cause of all . . . . . the ten categories, wherein all things are contained; the universal genera, which in themselves include all things, and utter them outwardly . . . . the Second Causes, whereby the First Cause effects, preserves, and governs all things; the rays of the Divinity, whereby all things are illumined and manifested; the Forms and Ideas and Species, out whereof all things issue forth; the Souls and Potencies, whereby essence, life, and movement are given to all things; the Standard of times, whereby all things are measured; the incorporeal Spaces which, in themselves, hold and inclose the Universe; the Supernal Monads to which all manifolds are referred, and through them to The One and Simple; and finally the Formal Perfections, flowing forth from and still connected with the One Eminent Limitless Perfection, are the Causes of all dependent Perfections, and so illuminate the elementary Intelligences, not adjoined to matter, and the intellectual Souls, and the Celestial, Elemental and Element-produced bodies.

The IDRA SUTA says:

HE, the Most Holy Hidden Eldest, separates Himself, and is ever more and more separated from all that are; nor yet does HE in very deed separate Himself; because all things cohere with

[p. 762]

Him and HE with All. HE is All that is, the Most Holy Eldest of All, the Occult by all possible occultations.

When HE takes shape, HE produces nine Lights, which shine forth from Him, from His outforming. And those Lights out-shine from Him and emit flames, and go forth and spread out on every side; as from one elevated Lamp the Rays are poured forth in every direction, and these Rays thus diverging, are found to be, when one approaching has cognizance of them, but a single Lamp.

The Space in which to create is fixed by THE MOST HOLY ANCIENT, and illuminated by His inflowing, which is the Light of Wisdom, and the Beginning from which manifestation flows.

And HE is conformed in three Heads, which are but one Head; and these three are extended into Microprosopos, and from them shines out all that is.

Then this Wisdom instituted investiture with form, whereby the unmanifested and informous became manifested, putting on form; and produced a certain outflow.

When this Wisdom is thus expanded by flowing forth, then it is called "Father of Fathers," the whole Universe of Things being contained and comprehended in it. This Wisdom is the principle of all things, and in it beginning and end are found.

The Book of the Abstruse, says the Siphra de Zeniutha, is that which describes the equilibrium of the Balance. Before the Balance was, face did not look toward face.

And the Commentary on it says: The Scales of the Balance are designated as Male and Female. In the Spiritual world Evil and Good are in equilibrio, and it will be restored, when of the Evil Good becomes, until all is Good. Also this other world is called the World of the Balance. For, as in the Balance are two scales, one on either side and the beam and needle between them, so too in this world of restoration, the Numerations are arranged as distinct persons. For Hakemah is on the right hand, on the side of Gedulah, and Binah on the left, on the side of Geburah; and Kether is the beam of the Balance above them in the middle. So Gedulah or Khased is on one hand, and Geburah on the other, and under these Tephareth; and Netsach is on one side, and Ho_d on the other, and under these Yeso_d.

The Supreme Crown, which is the Ancient Most Holy, the most Hidden of the Hidden, is fashioned, within the occult Wisdom, of both sexes, Male and Female.

[p. 763]

Hakemah, and Binah, the Mother, whom it impregnates, are quantitatively equal. Wisdom and the Mother of Intellection go forth at once and dwell together; for when the Intellectual Power emanates, the productive Source of intellection is included in Him.

Before Adam Kadmon was fashioned into Male and Female, and the state of equilibrium introduced, the Father and Mother did not look each other in the face; for the Father denotes most perfect Love, and the Mother most perfect Rigor; and she averted her face.

There is no left [female], says the Idra Rabba, in the Ancient and Hidden One; but His totality is Right [male]. The totality of things is HUA, HE, and HE is hidden on every side.

Macroprosopos [Adam Kadmon] is not so near unto us as to speak to us in the first person; but is designated in the third person, HUA, HE.

Of the letters it says:

Yo_d is male, He is female, Vav is both.

In Yo_d [w ?Y] are three Yo_ds, the upper and the lower apex, and Vav in the middle. By the upper apex is denoted the Supreme Kether; by Vav in the middle, Hakemah; and by the lower apex, Binah.

The IDRA SUTA says:

The Universe was out-formed in the form of Male and Female. Wisdom, pregnant with all that is, when it flowed and shone forth, shone altogether under the form of male and female. Hakemah is the Father, and Binah is the Mother; and so the two are in equilibrium as male and female, and for this reason, all things whatsoever are constituted in the form of male and female; and if it were not so they would not exist.

This Principle, Hakemah, is the Generator of all things; and He and Binah conjoin, and she shines within Him. When they thus conjoin, she conceives, and the out-flow is Truth.

Yo_d impregnates the letter He and begets a son; and she, thus pregnant, brings forth. The Principle called Father [the Male or Generative Principle] is comprehended in Yo_d, which itself flows downward from the energy of the Absolute Holy One.

Yo_d is the beginning and the end of all things that are. The stream that flows forth is the Universe of things, which always becomes, having no cessation. And this becoming world is created by Yo_d: for Yo_d includes two letters. All things are included in Yo_d; wherefore it is called the Father of all.

[p. 764]

All Categories whatever go forth from Hakemah; and in it are contained all things, unmanifested; and the aggregate of all things, or the Unity in which the many are, and out of which all flow, is the Sacred Name IHUH.

In the view of the Kabalists, all individuals are contained in species, and all species in genera, and all particulars in a Universal, which is an idea, abstracted from all consideration of individuals; not an aggregate of individuals; but, as it were, an Ens, Entity or Being, ideal or intellectual, but none the less real; prior to any individual, containing them all, and out of which they are all in succession evolved.

If this discontents you, reflect that, supposing the theory correct, that all was originally in the Deity, and that the Universe has proceeded forth from Him, and not been created by Him out of nothing, the idea of the Universe, existing in the Deity before its out-flow, must have been as real as the Deity Himself. The whole Human race, or Humanity, for example, then existed in the Deity, not distinguished into individuals, but as a Unit, out of which the Manifold was to flow.

Everything actual must also first have been possible, before having actual existence; and this possibility or potentiality was to the Kabalists a real Ens. Before the evolvement of the Universe, it had to exist potentially, the whole of it, with all its individuals, included in a single Unity. This was the Idea or Plan of the Universe; and this had to be formed. It had to emanate from the Infinite Deity, and be of Himself, though not His Very Self.

Geburah, Severity, the Sephirah opposite to and conjoined sexually with Gedulah, to produce Tephareth, Harmony and Beauty, is also called in the Kabalah "Judgment," in which term are included the ideas of limitation and conditioning, which often seems, indeed, to be its principal sense; while Benignity is as often styled Infinite. Thus it is obscurely taught that in everything that is, not only the Finite but also the Infinite is present; and that the rigor of the stern law of limitation, by which everything below or beside the Infinite Absolute is limited, bounded, and conditioned, is tempered and modified by the grace, which so relaxes it that the Infinite, Unlimited, Unconditioned, is also everywhere present; and that it is thus the Spiritual and Material Natures are in equilibrio, Good everywhere counterbalancing Evil, Light everywhere in equilibrium with Darkness: from which again results

[p. 765]

the Universal Harmony of things. In the vacant space effected for creation, there at last remained a faint vestige or trace of Ainsophic Light, of the Light of the Substance of the Infinite. Man is thus both human and divine: and the apparent antagonisms in his Nature are a real equilibrium, if he wills it shall be so; from which results the Harmony, not only of Life and Action, but of Virtue and Perfection.

To understand the Kabalistic idea of the Sephiroth, it must be borne in mind that they were assigned, not only to the world of Emanation, Aziluth, but also to each of the other worlds, Briah, Jezirah, and Asiah. They were not only attributes of the Unmanifested Deity, not only Himself in limitation, but His actual manifestations, or His qualities made apparent as modes; and they were also qualities of the Universal Nature--Spiritual, Mental, and Material, produced and made existent by the outflow of Himself.

In the view of the Kabalah, God and the Universe were One, and in the One General, as the type or source, were included and involved, and from it have been evolved and issued forth, the manifold and all particulars. Where, indeed, does individuality begin? Is it the Hidden Source and Spring alone that is the individual, the Unit, or is it the flowing fountain that fills the ocean, or the ocean itself, or its waves, or the drops, or the vaporous particles, that are the individuals? The Sea and the River--these are each One; but the drops of each are many. The tree is one; but its leaves are a multitude: they drop with the frosts, and fall upon his roots; but the tree still continues to grow, and new leaves come again in the Spring. Is the Human Race not the Tree, and are not individual men the leaves? How else explain the force of will and sympathy, and the dependence of one man at every instant of his life on others, except by the oneness of the race? The links that bind all created things together are the links of a single Unity, and the whole Universe is One, developing itself into the manifold.

Obtuse commentators have said that the Kabalah assigns sexual characteristics to the very Deity. There is no warrant for such an assertion, anywhere in the Sohar or in any commentary upon it. On the contrary, the whole doctrine of the Kabalah is based on the fundamental proposition, that the Very Deity is Infinite, everywhere extended, without limitation or determination, and therefore without any conformation whatever. In order to commence

[p. 766]

the process of creation, it was necessary for Him, first of all, to effect a vacant space within Himself. To this end the Deity, whose Nature is approximately expressed by describing Him as Light filling all space, formless, limitless, contracts Himself on all sides from a point within Himself, and thus effects a quasi-vacant space, in which only a vestige of His Light remains; and into this circular or spherical space He  His Emanations, portions of His Light or Nature; and to some of these, sexual characteristics are symbolically assigned.

The Infinite first limits Himself by flowing forth in the shape of Will, of determination to act. This Will of the Deity, or the Deity as will, is Kether, or the Crown, the first Sephirah. In it are included all other Emanations. This is a philosophical necessity. The Infinite does not first will, and then, as a sequence to, or consequence of, that determination, subsequently perform. To will and to act must be, with Him, not only simultaneous, but in reality the same . . Nor does He, by His Omniscience, learn that a particular action will be wise, and then, in consequence of being so convinced, first determine to do the act, and then do it. His Wisdom and His Will, also, act simultaneously; and, with Him, to decide that it was wise to create, was to create. Thus His will contains in itself all the Sephiroth. This will, determining Him to the exercise of intellection, to thought, to frame the Idea of the Universe, caused the Power in Him to excite the intellectual Faculty to exercise, and was that Power. Its SELF, which had flowed forth from Ainsoph as Will, now flows forth as the Generative Power to beget intellectual action in the Intellectual Faculty, or Intelligence, Binah. The Act itself, the Thought, the Intellection, producing the Idea, is Daath; and as the text of the Siphra de Zeniutha says, The Power and Faculty, the Generative and Productive, the Active and Passive, the Will and Capacity, which unite to produce that Act of reflection or Thought or Intellection, are always in conjunction. As is elsewhere said in the Kabalah, both of them are contained and essentially involved in the result. And the Will, as Wisdom or Intellectual Power, and the Capacity or Faculty, are really the Father and Mother of all that is; for to the creation of anything, it was absolutely necessary that The Infinite should form for Himself and in Himself, an idea of what HE willed to produce or create: and, as there is no Time with Him, to will was to create, to plan was to will and to

[p. 767]

create; and in the Idea, the Universe in potence, the universal succession of things was included. Thenceforward all was merely evolution and development.

Netsach and Ho_d, the Seventh and Eighth Sephiroth, are usually called in the Kabalah, Victory and Glory. Netsach is the perfect Success, which, with the Deity, to Whom the Future is present, attends, and to His creatures is to result, from the plan of Equilibrium everywhere adopted by Him. It is the reconciliation of Light and Darkness, Good and Evil, Free-will and Necessity, God's omnipotence and Man's liberty; and the harmonious issue and result of all, without which the Universe would be a failure. It is the inherent Perfection of the Deity, manifested in His Idea of the Universe, and in all the departments or worlds, spiritual, mental, or material, of that Universe; but it is that Perfection regarded as the successful result, which it both causes or produces and is; the perfection of the plan being its success. It is the prevailing of Wisdom over Accident; and it, in turn, both produces and is the Glory and Laudation of the Great Infinite Contriver, whose plan is thus Successful and Victorious.

From these two, which are one,--from the excellence and perfection of the Divine Nature and Wisdom, considered as Success and Glory, as the opposites of Failure and Mortification, results what the Kabalah, styling it Yesod, Foundation or Basis, characterizes as the Generative member of the Symbolical human figure by which the ten Sephiroth are represented, and from this flows Malakoth, Empire, Dominion, or Rule. Yesod is the Stability and Permanence, which would, in ordinary language, be said to result from the perfection of the Idea or Intellectual Universal, out of which all particulars are evolved; from the success of that scheme, and the consequent Glory or Self-Satisfaction of the Deity; but which Stability and Permanence that Perfection, Success, and Glory really Is; since the Deity, infinitely Wise, and to Whom the Past, Present, and Future were and always will be one Now, and all space one HERE, had not to await the operation and evolution of His plan, as men do the result of an experiment, in order to see if it would succeed, and so to determine whether it should stand, and be stable and permanent, or fall and be temporary. Its Perfection was its Success; His Glory, its permanence and stability: and the Attributes of Permanence and Stability belong,

[p. 768]

like the others, to the Universe, material, mental, spiritual, and real, because and as they belong to the Infinite Himself.

This Stability and Permanence causes continuance and generates succession. It is Perpetuity, and continuity without solution; and by this continuous succession, whereby out of Death comes new Life, out of dissolution and resolution comes reconstruction, Necessity and Fatality result as a consequence: that is to say, the absolute control and dominion (Malakoth) of The Infinite Deity over all that He produces, and over chance and accident; and the absolute non-existence in the Universe, in Time and in Space, of any other powers or influences than those which, proceeding from Him, are and cannot not be perfectly submissive to His will. This results, humanly speaking; but in reality, the Perfection of the plan, which is its success, His glory, and its stability, is also His Absolute Autocracy, and the utter absence of Chance, Accident, or Antagonism. And, as the Infinite Wisdom or Absolute Reason rules in the Divine Nature itself, so also it does in its Emanations, and in the worlds or systems of Spirit, Soul, and Matter; in each of which there is as little Chance or Accident or Unreasoning Fate, as in the Divine Nature unmanifested.

This is the Kabalistic theory as to each of the four worlds;--1st, of the Divine Nature, or Divinity itself, quantitatively limited and determined, but not manifested into Entities, which is the world of Emanation, 2d, of the first Entities, that is, of Spirits and Angels, which is the world of Creation; 3d, of the first forms, souls, or psychical natures, which is the world of Formation or Fashioning; and, 4th, of Matter and Bodies, which is the world of Fabrication, or, as it were, of manufacture. In each of these the Deity is present, as, in, and through the Ten Sephiroth. First of these, in each, is Kether, the Crown, ring, or circlet, the HEAD. Next, in that Head, as the two Hemispheres of the Brain, are Hakemah and Binah, and their result and progeny, Daath. These three are found also in the Spiritual world, and are universals in the psychical and material world, producing the lower Sephiroth. Then follow, in perfect Equilibrium, Law and Equity, Justice and Mercy, the Divine Infinite Nature and the Human Finite Nature, Good and Evil, Light and Darkness, Benignity and Severity, the Male and the Female again, as Hakemah and Binah are, mutually tempering each other, and by their intimate union producing the other Sephiroth.

[p. 769]

The whole Universe, and all the succession of entities and events were present to The Infinite, before any act of creation; and His Benignity and Leniency, tempering and qualifying the law of rigorous Justice and inflexible Retribution, enabled Him to create: because, but for it, and if He could not but have administered the strict and stern law of justice, that would have compelled Him to destroy, immediately after its inception, the Universe He purposed to create, and so would have prevented its creation. This Leniency, therefore, was, as it were, the very essence and quintessence of the Permanence and Stability of the plan of Creation, and part of the Very Nature of the Deity. The Kabalah, therefore, designates it as Light and Whiteness, by which the Very Substance of Deity is symbolized. With this agree Paul's ideas as to Law and Grace; for Paul had studied the Kabalah at the feet of Gamaliel the Rabbi.

With this Benignity, the Autocracy of the dominion and control of the Deity is imbued and interpenetrated. The former, poured, as it were, into the latter, is an integral and essential part of it, and causes it to give birth to the succession and continuance of the Universe. For Malakoth, in the Kabalah, is female, and the matrix or womb out of which all creation is born.

--> The Sephiroth may be arranged as on page <page 770>.

The Kabalah is the primitive tradition, and its entirety rests on the single dogma of Magism, "the visible is for us the proportional measure of the invisible." The Ancients, observing that equilibrium is in physics the universal law, and that it results from the apparent opposition of two forces, concluded from the physical to the metaphysical equilibrium, and thought that in God, that is to say, in the first living and active cause, two properties necessary to each other, should be recognized; stability and movement, necessity and liberty, order dictated by reason and the self-rule of Supreme Will, Justice, and Love, and consequently Severity and Grace, Mercy or Benignity.

The idea of equilibrium among all the impersonations; of the male on one side, and the female on the other, with the Supreme Will, which is also the Absolute Reason, above each two, holding the balance, is, according to the Kabalah, the foundation of all religions and all sciences, the primary and immutable idea of things. The Sephiroth are a triple triangle and a circle, the idea of the Ternary explained by the balance and multiplied by itself in the

[p. 770]

 

Click to enlarge
Chart of the Sephiroth

 

[p. 771]

domain of the Ideal; then the realization of this Idea in forms.

Unity can only be manifested by the Binary. Unity itself and the idea of Unity are already two.

The human unity is made complete by the right and left. The primitive man was of both sexes.

The Divinity, one in its essence, has two essential conditions as fundamental bases of its existence--Necessity and Liberty.

The laws of the Supreme Reason necessitate and regulate liberty in God, Who is necessarily reasonable and wise.

Knowledge supposes the binary. An object known is indispensable to the being that knows.

The binary is the generator of Society and the law. It is also the number of the gnosis, a word adopted in lieu of Science, and expressing only the idea of cognizance by intuition. It is Unity, multiplying itself by itself to create; and therefore it is that the Sacred Symbols make Eve issue from the very chest of Adam.

Adam is the human Tetragram, which is summed up in the mysterious Yo_d of the Kabalah, image of the Kabalistic Phallus. Add to this Yo_d [w ?Y] the ternary name of Eve, and you form the name of Jehova, the Divine Tetragram, the transcendent Kabalistic and magical word:

w ?Y?H?W?H

Thus it is that Unity, complete in the fecundity of the Ternary, forms, with it, the Quaternary, which is the key of all numbers, movements, and forms.

The Square, turning upon itself, produces the circle equal to itself, and the circular movement of four equal angles turning around one point, is the quadrature of the circle.

The Binary serves as a measure for Unity; and the relation of equality between the Above and the Below, forms with them the Ternary.

To us, Creation is Mechanism: to the Ancients it was Generation. The world-producing egg figures in all cosmogonies; and modern science has discovered that all animal production is oviparous. From this idea of generation came the reverence everywhere paid the image of generative power, which formed the Stauros of the Gnostics, and the philosophical Cross of the Masons.

Aleph is the man; Beth is the woman. One is the Principle;

[p. 772]

two is the Word. A Q.E.D. is the Active; B Q.E.D. is the Passive. Unity is Boaz, and the Binary is Jachin.

The two columns, Boaz and Jachin, explain in the Kabalah all the mysteries of natural, political, and religious antagonism.

Woman is man's creation; and universal creation is the female of the First Principle. When the Principle of Existence made Himself Creator, He produced by emanation an ideal Yo_d; and to make room for it in the plenitude of the uncreated Light, He had to hollow out a pit of shadow, equal to the dimension determined by His creative desire; and attributed by Him to the ideal Yo_d of radiating Light.

The nature of the Active Principle is to diffuse: of the Passive Principle, to collect and make fruitful.

Creation is the habitation of the Creator-Word. To create, the Generative Power and Productive Capacity must unite, the Binary become Unity again by the conjunction. The WORD is the First-BEGOTTEN, not the first created Son of God.

SANCTA SANCTIS, we repeat again; the Holy things to the Holy, and to him who is so, the mysteries of the Kabalah will be holy. Seek and ye shall find, say the Scriptures: knock and it shall be opened unto you. If you desire to find and to gain admission to the Sanctuary, we have said enough to show you the way. If you do not, it is useless for us to say more, as it has been useless to say so much.

The Hermetic philosophers also drew their doctrines from the Kabalah; and more particularly from the Treatise Beth Alohim or Domus Dei, known as the Pneumatica Kabalistica, of Rabbi Abraham Cohen Irira, and the Treatise De Revolutionibus Animarum of Rabbi Jitz-chak Lorja.

This philosophy was concealed by the Alchemists under their Symbols, and in the jargon of a rude Chemistry,--a jargon incomprehensible and absurd except to the Initiates; but the key to which is within your reach; and the philosophy, it may be, worth studying. The labors of the human intellect are always interesting and instructive.

To be always rich, always young, and never to die: such has been in all times the dream of the Alchemists.

To change into gold, lead, mercury, and all the other metals; to possess the universal medicine and elixir of life; such is the problem

[p. 773]

to be resolved, in order to accomplish this desire and realize this dream.

Like all the Mysteries of Magism, the Secrets of "the Great Work" have a threefold signification: they are religious, philosophical, and natural.

The philosophal gold, in religion, is the Absolute and Supreme Reason: in philosophy, it is the Truth; in visible nature, the Sun; in the subterranean and mineral world, the most perfect and pure gold.

It is for this that the pursuit of the Great Work is called the Search for the Absolute; and the work itself, the work of the Sun.

All the masters of the Science admit that it is impossible to attain the material results, unless there are found in the two higher Degrees all the analogies of the universal medicine and of the philosophal stone.

Then, they say, the work is simple, easy, and inexpensive; otherwise, it consumes fruitlessly the fortune and lives of the seekers.

The universal medicine for the Soul is the Supreme Reason and Absolute Justice; for the mind, mathematical and practical Truth; for the body, the Quintessence, a combination of light and gold.

The prima materia of the Great Work, in the Superior World, is enthusiasm and activity; in the intermediate world, intelligence and industry; in the lower world, labor: and, in Science, it is the Sulphur, Mercury, and Salt, which by turns volatilized and fixed, compose the AZOTH of the Sages.

The Sulphur corresponds with the elementary form of the Fire; Mercury with the Air and Water; and Salt with the Earth.

The Great Work is, above all things, the creation of man by himself; that is to say, the fall and entire conquest which he effects of his faculties and his future. It is, above all, the perfect emancipation of his will, which assures him the universal empire of Azoth, and the domain of magnetism, that is, complete power over the universal Magical agent.

This Magical agent, which the Ancient Hermetic philosophers disguised under the name of "Prima Materia," determines the forms of the modifiable Substance; and the Alchemists said that by means of it they could attain the transmutation of metals and the universal medicine.

[p. 774]

There are two Hermetic operations, one spiritual, the other material, dependent the one on the other.

The whole Hermetic Science is contained in the dogma of Hermes, engraven originally, it is said, on a tablet of emerald. Its sentences that relate to operating the Great Work are as follows:

"Thou shalt separate the earth from the fire, the subtile from the gross, gently, with much industry.

"It ascends from earth to Heaven, and again descends to earth, and receives the force of things above and below.

"Thou shalt by this means possess the glory of the whole world, and therefore all obscurity shall flee away from thee.

"This is the potent force of all force, for it will overcome everything subtile, and penetrate everything solid.

"So the world was created."

All the Masters in Alchemy who have written of the Great Work, have employed symbolic and figurative expressions; being constrained to do so, as well to repel the profane from a work that would be dangerous for them, as to be well understood by Adepts, in revealing to them the whole world of analogies governed by the single and sovereign dogma of Hermes.

So, in their language, gold and silver are the King and Queen, or the Sun and Moon; Sulphur, the flying Eagle; Mercury, the Man-woman, winged, bearded, mounted on a cube, and crowned with flames; Matter or Salt, the winged Dragon; the Metals in ebullition, Lions of different colors; and, finally, the entire work has for its symbols the Pelican and the Phoenix.

The Hermetic Art is, therefore, at the same time a religion, a philosophy, and a natural science. As a religion, it is that of the Ancient Magi and the Initiates of all ages; as a philosophy, we may find its principles in the school of Alexandria and the theories of Pythagoras; as a science, we must inquire for its processes of Paracelsus, Nicholas Flamel, and Raymond Lulle.

The Science is a real one only for those who admit and understand the philosophy and the religion; and its process will succeed only for the Adept who has attained the sovereignty of will, and so become the King of the elementary world: for the grand agent of the operation of the Sun, is that force described in the Symbol of Hermes, of the table of emerald; it is the universal magical power; the spiritual, fiery, motive power; it is the Od, according to the Hebrews, and the Astral light, according to others.

[p. 775]

Therein is the secret fire, living and philosophical, of which all the Hermetic philosophers speak with the most mysterious re-serve: the Universal Seed, the secret whereof they kept, and which they represented only under the figure of the Caduceus of Hermes.

This is the grand Hermetic arcanum. What the Adepts call dead matter are bodies as found in nature; living matters are substances assimilated and magnetized by the science and will of the operator.

So that the Great Work is more than a chemical operation; it is a real creation of the human word initiated into the power of the Word of God.

The creation of gold in the Great Work is effected by transmutation and multiplication.

Raymond Lulle says, that to make gold, one must have gold and mercury; and to make silver, silver and mercury. And he adds: "I mean by mercury, that mineral spirit so fine and pure that it gilds even the seed of gold, and silvers that of silver." He meant by this, either electricity, or Od, the astral light.

The Salt and Sulphur serve in the work only to prepare the mercury, and it is to the mercury especially that we must assimilate, and, as it were, incorporate with it, the magnetic agent. Paracelsus, Lulle, and Flamel alone seem to have perfectly known this mystery.

The Great Work of Hermes is, therefore, an operation essentially magical, and the highest of all, for it supposes the Absolute in Science and in Will. There is light in gold, gold in light, and light in all things.

The disciples of Hermes, before promising their adepts the elixir of long life or the powder of projection, advised them to seek for the Philosophal Stone.

The Ancients adored the Sun, under the form of a black Stone, called Elagabalus, or Heliogabalus. The faithful are promised, in the Apocalypse, a white Stone.

This Stone, says the Masters in Alchemy, is the true Salt of the philosophers, which enters as one-third into the composition of Azoth. But Azoth is, as we know, the name of the grand Hermetic Agent, and the true philosophical Agent: wherefore they represent their Salt under the form of a cubical Stone.

The Philosophal Stone is the foundation of the Absolute philosophy, the Supreme and unalterable Reason. Before thinking of

[p. 776]

the Metallic work, we must be firmly fixed on the Absolute principles of Wisdom; we must be in possession of this Reason, which is the touchstone of Truth. A man who is the slave of prejudices will never become the King of Nature and the Master of transmutations. The Philosophal Stone, therefore, is necessary above all things. How shall it be found? Hermes tells us, in his "Table of Emerald," we must separate the subtile from the fixed, with great care and extreme attention. So we ought to separate our certainties from our beliefs, and make perfectly distinct the respective domains of science and faith; and to comprehend that we do not know the things we believe, nor believe anything that we come to know; and that thus the essence of the things of Faith are the unknown and indefinite, while it is precisely the contrary with the things of Science. Whence we shall conclude, that Science rests on reason and experience, and Faith has for its bases sentiment and reason.

The Sun and Moon of the Alchemists concur in perfecting and giving stability to the Philosophal Stone. They correspond to the two columns of the Temple, Jachin and Boaz. The Sun is the hieroglyphical sign of Truth, because it is the source of Light; and the rough Stone is the symbol of Stability. Hence the Medieval Alchemists indicated the Philosophal Stone as the first means of making the philosophical gold, that is to say, of transforming all the vital powers figured by the six metals into Sun, that is, into Truth and Light; which is the first and indispensable operation of the Great Work, which leads to the secondary adaptation, and enables the creators of the spiritual and living gold, the possessors of the true philosophical Salt, Mercury, and Sulphur, to discover, by the analogies of Nature, the natural and palpable gold.

To find the Philosophal Stone, is to have discovered the Absolute, as all the Masters say. But the Absolute is that which admits of no errors, is the Fixed from the Volatile, is the Law of the Imagination, is the very necessity of Being, is the immutable Law of Reason and Truth. The Absolute is that which IS.

To find the Absolute in the Infinite, in the Indefinite, and in the Finite, this is the Magnum Opus, the Great Work of the Sages, which Hermes called the Work of the Sun.

To find the immovable bases of true religious Faith, of Philosophical Truth, and of Metallic transmutation, this is the secret of Hermes in its entirety, the Philosophal Stone.

[p. 777]

This stone is one and manifold; it is decomposed by Analysis, and re-compounded by Synthesis. In Analysis, it is a powder, the powder of projection of the Alchemists; before Analysis, and in Synthesis, it is a stone.

The Philosophal Stone, say the Masters, must not be exposed to the atmosphere, nor to the gaze of the Profane; but it must be kept concealed and carefully preserved in the most secret place of the laboratory, and the possessor must always carry on his person the key of the place where it is kept.

He who possesses the Grand Arcanum is a genuine King, and more than a king, for he is inaccessible to all fear and all empty hopes. In all maladies of soul and body, a single particle from the precious stone, a single grain of the divine powder, is more than sufficient to cure him. "Let him hear, who hath ears to hear!" the Master said.

The Salt, Sulphur, and Mercury are but the accessorial elements and passive instruments of the Great Work. All depends, as we have said, on the internal Magnet of Paracelsus. The entire work consists in projection: and the projection is perfectly accomplished by the effective and realizable understanding of a single word.

There is but a single important operation in the work; this consists in Sublimation, which is nothing else, according to Geber than the elevation of dry matter, by means of fire, with adhesion to its proper vessel.

He who desires to attain to the understanding of the Grand Word and the possession of the Great Secret, ought carefully to read the Hermetic philosophers, and will undoubtedly attain initiation, as others have done; but he must take, for the key of their allegories, the single dogma of Hermes, contained in his table of Emerald, and follow, to class his acquisitions of knowledge and direct the operation, the order indicated in the Kabalistic alphabet of the Tarot.

Raymond Lulle has said that, to make gold, we must first have gold. Nothing is made out of nothing; we do not absolutely create wealth; we increase and multiply it. Let aspirants to science well understand, then, that neither the juggler's tricks nor miracles are to be asked of the adept. The Hermetic science, like all the real sciences, is mathematically demonstrable. Its results, even material, are as rigorous as that of a correct equation.

[p. 778]

The Hermetic Gold is not only a true dogma, a light without Shadow, a Truth without alloy of falsehood; it is also a material gold, real, pure, the most precious that can be found in the mines of the earth.

But the living gold, the living sulphur, or the true fire of the philosophers, is to be sought for in the house of Mercury. This fire is fed by the air: to express its attractive and expansive power, no better comparison can be used than that of the lightning, which is at first only a dry and earthly exhalation, united to the moist vapor, but which, by self-exhalation, takes a fiery nature, acts on the humidity inherent in it, which it attracts to itself and transmutes in its nature; after which it precipitates itself rapidly toward the earth, whither it is attracted by a fixed nature like unto its own.

These words, in form enigmatic, but clear at bottom, distinctly express what the philosophers mean by their Mercury, fecundated by Sulphur, and which becomes the Master and regenerator of the Salt. It is the AZOTH, the universal magnetic force, the grand magical agent, the Astral light, the light of life, fecundated by the mental force, the intellectual energy, which they compare to sulphur, on account of its affinities with the Divine fire.

As to the Salt, it is Absolute Matter. Whatever is matter contains salt; and all salt [nitre] may be converted into pure gold by the combined action of Sulphur and Mercury, which sometimes act so rapidly, that the transmutation may be effected in an instant, in an hour, without fatigue to the operator, and almost without expense. At other times, and according to the more refractory temper of the atmospheric media, the operation requires several days, several months, and sometimes even several years.

Two primary laws exist in nature, two essential laws, which produce, by counterbalancing each other, the universal equilibrium of things. These are fixedness and movement, analogous, in philosophy, to Truth and Fiction, and, in Absolute Conception, to Necessity and Liberty, which are the very essence of Deity. The Hermetic philosophers gave the name fixed to everything ponder-able, to everything that tends by its natural to central repose and immobility; they term volatile everything that more naturally and more readily obeys the law of movement; and they form their stone by analysis, that is to say, by the volatilization of the Fixed, and then by synthesis, that is, by fixing the volatile, which they effect

[p. 779]

by applying to the fixed, which they call their salt, the sulphurated Mercury, or the light of life, directed and made omnipotent by a Sovereign Will. Thus they master entire Nature, and their stone is found wherever there is salt, which is the reason for saying that no substance is foreign to the Great Work, and that even the most despicable and apparently vile matters may be changed into gold, which is true in this sense, that they all contain the original salt-principle, represented in our emblems by the cubical stone.

To know how to extract from all matter the pure salt concealed in it, is to have the Secret of the Stone. Wherefore this is a Saline stone, which the Od or universal astral light decomposes or re-compounds: it is single and manifold; for it may be dissolved like ordinary salt, and incorporated with other substances. Obtained by analysis, we might term it the Universal Sublimate: found by way of synthesis, it is the true panacea of the ancients, for it cures all maladies of soul and body, and has been styled, par-excellence, the medicine of all nature. When one, by absolute initiation, comes to control the forces of the universal agent, he always has this stone at his disposal, for its extraction is then a simple and easy operation, very distinct from the metallic projection or realization. This stone, when in a state of sublimation, must not be exposed to contact with the atmospheric air, which might partially dissolve it and deprive it of its virtue; nor could its emanations be inhaled without danger. The Sage prefers to preserve it in its natural envelopes, assured as he is of extracting it by a single effort of his will, and a single application of the Universal Agent to the envelopes, which the Kabalists call cortices, the shells, bark, or integuments.

Hieroglyphically to express this law of prudence, they gave their Mercury, personified in Egypt as Hermanubis, a dog's head; and to their Sulphur, represented by the Baphomet of the Temple, that goat's head which brought into such disrepute the occult Mediaeval associations.

Let us listen for a few moments to the Alchemists themselves, and endeavor to learn the hidden meaning of their mysterious words.

The RITUAL of the Degree of Scottish Elder MASTER, and Knight of Saint Andrew, being the fourth Degree of Ramsay, it is said upon the title-page, or of the Reformed or Rectified Rite of Dresden, has these passages:

[p. 780]

"O how great and glorious is the presence of the Almighty God which gloriously shines from between the Cherubim!

"How adorable and astonishing are the rays of that glorious Light, that sends forth its bright and brilliant beams from the Holy Ark of Alliance and Covenant!

"Let us with the deepest veneration and devotion adore the great Source of Life, that Glorious Spirit who is the Most Merciful and Beneficent Ruler of the Universe and of all the creatures it contains!

"The secret knowledge of the Grand Scottish Master relates to the combination and transmutation of different substances; where-of that you may obtain a clear idea and proper understanding, you are to know that all matter and all material substances are composed of combinations of three several substances, extracted from the four elements, which three substances in combination are, , Salt, , Sulphur, and , Spirit. The first of these produces Solidity, the second Softness, and the third the Spiritual, vaporous particles. These three compound substances work potently together; and therein consists the true process for the transmutation of metals.

"To these three substances allude the three golden basins, in the first of which was engraved the letter M Q.E.D., in the second, the letter G Q.E.D., and in the third nothing. The first, M Q.E.D., is the initial letter of the Hebrew word Malakh, which signifies Salt; and the second, G Q.E.D., of the Hebrew word Geparaith, which signifies Sulphur; and as there is no word in Hebrew to express the vaporous and intangible Spirit, there is no letter in the third basin.

"With these three principal substances you may effect the transmutation of metals, which must be done by means of the five points or rules of the Scottish Mastership.

"The first Master's point shows us the Brazen Sea, wherein must always be rain-water; and out of this rain-water the Scottish Masters extract the first substance, which is Salt; which salt must afterward undergo a seven-fold manipulation and purification, before it will be properly prepared. This seven-fold purification is symbolized by the Seven Steps of Solomon's Temple, which symbol is furnished us by the first point or rule of the Scottish Masters.

"After preparing the first substance, you are to extract the

[p. 781]

second, Sulphur, out of the purest gold, to which must then be added the purified or celestial Salt. They are to be mixed as the Art directs, and then placed in a vessel in the form of a SHIP, in which it is to remain, as the Ark of Noah was afloat, one hundred and fifty days, being brought to the first damp, warm degree of fire, that it may putrefy and produce the mineral fermentation. This is the second point or rule of the Scottish Masters."

If you reflect, my Brother, that it was impossible for any one to imagine that either common salt or nitre could be extracted from rain-water, or sulphur from pure gold, you will no doubt suspect that some secret meaning was concealed in these words.

The Kabalah considers the immaterial part of man as threefold, consisting of NEPHESCH, RUACH, and NESCHAMAH, Psyche, Spiritus, and Mens, or Soul, Spirit, and Intellect. There are Seven Holy Palaces, Seven Heavens and Seven Thrones; and Souls are purified by ascending through Seven Spheres. A Ship, in Hebrew, is Ani; and the same word means I, Me, or Myself.

The RITUAL continues:

"Multiplying the substance thus obtained, is the third operation, which is done by adding to them the animate, volatile Spirit; which is done by means of the water of the Celestial Salt, as well as by the Salt, which must daily be added to it very carefully, and strictly observing to put neither too much nor too little; inasmuch as, if you add too much, you will destroy that growing and multiplying substance; and if too little, it will be self-consumed and destroyed, and shrink away, not having sufficient substantiality for its preservation. This third point or rule of the Scottish Masters gives us the emblem of the building of the Tower of Babel, used by our Scottish Masters, because by irregularity and want of due proportion and harmony that work was stopped; and the workmen could proceed no further.

"Next comes the fourth operation, represented by the Cubical Stone, whose faces and angles are all equal. As soon as the work is brought to the necessary point of multiplication, it is to be submitted to the third Degree of Fire, wherein it will receive the due proportion of the strength and substance of the metallic particles of the Cubical Stone; and this is the fourth point or rule of the Scottish Masters.

"Finally, we come to the fifth and last operation, indicated to us by the Flaming Star. After the work has become a duly-proportioned

[p. 782]

substance, it is to be subjected to the fourth and strongest Degree of fire, wherein it must remain three times twenty-seven hours; until it is thoroughly glowing, by which means it becomes a bright and shining tincture, wherewith the lighter metals may be changed, by the use of one part to a thousand of the metal. Wherefore this Flaming Star shows us the fifth and last point of the Scottish Masters.

"You should pass practically through the five points or rules of the Master, and by the use of one part to a thousand, trans-mute and ennoble metals. You may then in reality say that your age is a thousand years."

In the oration of the Degree, the following hints are given as to its true meaning:

"The three divisions of the Temple, the Outer Court, Sanctuary, and Holy of Holies, signify the three Principles of our Holy Order, which direct to the knowledge of morality, and teach those most practical virtues that ought to be practised by mankind. Therefore the Seven Steps which lead up to the Outer Court of the Temple, are the emblem of the Seven-fold Light which we need to possess, before we can arrive at the height of knowledge, in which consist the ultimate limits of our order.

"In the Brazen Sea we are symbolically to purify ourselves from all pollutions, all faults and wrongful actions, as well those committed through error of judgment and mistaken opinion, as those intentionally done; inasmuch as they equally prevent us from arriving at the knowledge of True Wisdom. We must thoroughly cleanse and purify our hearts to their inmost recesses, before we can of right contemplate that Flaming Star, which is the emblem of the Divine and Glorious Shekinah, or presence of God; before we may dare approach the Throne of Supreme Wisdom."

In the Degree of The True Mason [Le Vrai Macon], styled in the title-page of its Ritual the 23d Degree of Masonry, or the 12th of the 5th class, the Tracing-board displays a luminous Triangle, with a great Yo_d in the centre.

"The Triangle," says the Ritual, "represents one God in three Persons; and the great Yo_d is the initial letter of the last word.

"The Dark Circle represents the Chaos, which in the beginning God created.

"The Cross within the Circle, the Light by means whereof He developed the Chaos.

[p. 783]

"The Square, the four Elements into which it was resolved.

"The Triangle, again, the three Principles [Salt, Sulphur, and Mercury], which the intermingling of the elements produced.

"God creates; Nature produces; Art multiplies. God created Chaos; Nature produced it; God, Nature, and Art, have perfected it.

"The Altar of Perfumes indicates the Fire that is to be applied to Nature. The two towers are the two furnaces, moist and dry, in which it is to be worked. The bowl is the mould of oak that is to inclose the philosophal egg.

"The two figures surmounted by a Cross are the two vases, Nature and Art, in which is to be consummated the double marriage of the white woman with the red Servitor, from which marriage will spring a most Potent King.

"Chaos means universal matter, formless, but susceptible of all forms. Form is the Light inclosed in the seeds of all species; and its home is in the Universal Spirit.

"To work on universal matter, use the internal and external fire: the four elements result, the Principia Principiorum and Inmediata; Fire, Air, Water, Earth. There are four qualities of these elements--the warm and dry, the cold and moist. Two appertain to each element: The dry and cold, to the Earth; the cold and moist, to Water; the moist and warm, to the Air; and the warm and dry, to Fire: whereby the Fire connects with the Earth; all the elements, as Hermes said, moving in circles.

"From the mixture of the four Elements and of their four qualities, result the three Principles,--Mercury, Sulphur, and Salt. These are the philosophical, not the vulgar.

"The philosophical Mercury is a Water and SPIRIT, which dissolves and sublimates the Sun; the philosophical Sulphur, a fire and a SOUL, which mollifies and colors it; the philosophical Salt, an Earth and a BODY, which coagulates and fixes it; and the whole is done in the bosom of the Air.

"From these three-Principles result the four Elements duplicated, or the Grand Elements, Mercury, Sulphur, Salt, and Glass; two of which are volatile,--the Water [Mercury] and the Air [Sulphur], which is oil; for all substances liquid in their nature avoid fire, which takes from the one [water] and burns the other [oil]; but the other two are dry and solid, to wit, the Salt, wherein Fire is contained, and the pure Earth, which is the Glass; on

[p. 784]

both of which the Fire has no other action than to melt and refine them, unless one makes use of the liquid alkali; for, just as each element consists of two qualities, so these great duplicated Elements partake, each of two of the simple elements, or, more properly speaking, of all the four, according to the greater or less degree of each,--the Mercury partaking more of the Water, to which it is assigned; the Oil or Sulphur, more of the Air; the Salt, of the Fire; and the Glass, of the Earth; which is found, pure and clear, in the centre of all the elementary composites, and is the last to disengage itself from the others.

"The four Elements and three Principles reside in all the Compounds, Animal, Vegetable, and Mineral; but more potently in some than in others.

"The Fire gives them Movement; the Air, Sensation; the Water, Nutriment; and the Earth, Subsistence.

"The four duplicated Elements engender THE STONE, if one is careful enough to supply them with the proper quantity of fire, and to combine them according to their natural weight. Ten parts of Air make one of Water; ten of Water, one of Earth; and ten of Earth, one of Fire; the whole by the Active Symbol of the one, and the Passive Symbol of the other, whereby the conversion of the Elements is effected."

The Allusion of the Ritual, here, is obviously to the four Worlds of the Kabalah. The ten Sephiroth of the world Briah proceed from Malakoth, the last of the ten Emanations of the world Aziluth; the ten Sephiroth of the world Yezirah, from Malakoth of Brian; and the ten of the world Asiah, from Malakoth of Yezirah. The Pass-word of the Degree is given as Metralon, which is a corruption of METATRON, the Cherub, who and Sandalphon are in the Kabalah the Chief of the Angels. The Active and Passive Symbols are the Male and Female.

The Ritual continues:

"It is thereby evident that, in the Great Work, we must employ ten parts of philosophical Mercury to one of Sun or Moon.

"This is attained by Solution and Coagulation. These words mean that we must dissolve the body and coagulate the spirit; which operations are effected by the moist and dry bath.

"Of colors, black is the Earth; white, the Water; blue, the Air; and red, the Fire; wherein also are involved very great secrets and mysteries.

[p. 785]

"The apparatus employed in 'The Great Work' consists of the Moist bath, the Dry bath, the Vases of Nature and Art, the bowl of oak, lutum sapientiae, the Seal of Hermes, the tube, the physical lamp, and the iron rod.

"The work is perfected in seventeen philosophical months, according to the mixture of ingredients. The benefits reaped from it are of two kinds--one affecting the soul, and the other the body. The former consist in knowing God, Nature, and ourself; and those to the body are wealth and health.

"The Initiate traverses Heaven and Earth. Heaven is the World manifest to the Intelligence, subdivided into Paradise and Hell; Earth is the World manifest to the Senses, also subdivided into the Celestial and that of the Elements.

"There are Sciences specially connected with each of these. The one is ordinary and common; the other, mystic and secret. The World cognizable by the Intellect has the Hermetic Theology and the Kabalah; the Celestial Astrology; and that of the Elements, Chemistry, which by its decompositions and separations, effected by fire, reveals all the most hidden secrets of Nature, in the three kinds of Compound Substances. This last science is styled 'Hermetic,' or 'The operating of the Great Work.'"

The Ritual of the Degree of Kabalistic and Hermetic Rose ###10016###, has these passages:

"The true Philosophy, known and practised by Solomon, is the basis on which Masonry is founded.

"Our Ancient Masons have concealed from us the most important point of this Divine Art, under hieroglyphical characters, which are but enigmas and parables, to all the Senseless, the Wicked, and the Ambitious.

"He will be supremely fortunate, who shall, by arduous labor, discover this sacred place of deposite, wherein all naked the sublime Truth is hidden; for he may be assured that he has found the True Light, the True Felicity, the True Heavenly Good. Then may it truly be said that he is one of the True Elect; for it is the only real and most Sublime Science of all those to which a mortal can aspire: his days will be prolonged, and his soul freed of all vices and corruption; into which" (it is added, to mislead, as if from fear too much would be disclosed), "the human race is often led by indigence."

[p. 786]

As the symbolism of the Hall and the language of the ritual mutually explain each other, it should be noted here, that in this Degree the columns of the hall, 12 in number, are white variegated with black and red. The hangings are black, and over that crimson.

Over the throne is a great Eagle, in gold, on a black ground. In the centre of the Canopy the Blazing Star in gold, with the letter Yo_d in its centre. On the right and left of the throne are the Sun in gold and the Moon in silver. The throne is ascended to by three Steps. The hall and ante-room are each lighted by ten lights, and a single one at the entrance. The colors, black, white, and crimson appear in the clothing; and the Key and Balance are among the symbols.

The duty of the Second Grand Prior, says the Ritual, is "to see if the Chapter is hermetically sealed; whether the materials are ready, and the elements; whether the Black gives place to the White, and the White to the Red."

"Be laborious," it says, "like the Star, and procure the light of the Sages, and hide yourself from the Stupid Profane and the Ambitious, and be like the Owl, which sees only by night, and hides itself from treacherous curiosity."

"The Sun, on entering each of his houses, should be received there by the four elements, which you must be careful to invite to accompany you, that they may aid you in your undertaking; for without them the House would be melancholy: wherefore you will give him to feast upon the four elements.

"When he shall have visited his twelve houses, and seen you attentive there to receive him, you will become one of his chiefest favorites, and he will allow you to share all his gifts. Matter will then no longer have power over you; you will, so to say, be no longer a dweller on the earth; but after certain periods you will give back to it a body which is its own, to take in its stead one altogether Spiritual. Matter is then deemed to be dead to the world.

"Therefore it must be re-vivified, and made to be born again from its ashes, which you will effect by virtue of the vegetation of the Tree of Life, represented to us by the branch of acacia. Whoever shall learn to comprehend and execute this great work, will know great things, say the Sages of the work; but whenever you depart from the centre of the Square and the Compass you will no longer be able to work with success.

[p. 787]

"Another Jewel is necessary for you, and in certain undertakings cannot be dispensed with. It is what is termed the Kabalistic pantacle . . . This carries with it the power of commanding the spirits of the elements. It is necessary for you to know how to use it, and that you will learn by perseverance if you are a lover of the science of our predecessors the Sages.

"A great Black Eagle, the King of Birds. He alone it is that can fire the Sun, material in its nature, that has no form, and yet by its form develops color. The black is a complete harbinger of the work: it changes color and assumes a natural form, out whereof will emerge a brilliant Sun.

"The birth of the Sun is always announced by its Star, represented by the Blazing Star, which you will know by its fiery color; and it is followed in its course by the silvery lustre of the Moon.

"A rough Ashlar is the shapeless stone which is to be prepared in order to commence the philosophical work; and to be developed, in order to change its form from triangular to cubic, after the separation from it of its Salt, Sulphur, and Mercury, by the aid of the Square, Level, Plumb, and Balance, and all the other Masonic implements which we use symbolically.

"Here me put them to philosophical use, to constitute a well-proportioned edifice, through which you are to make pass the crude material, analogous to a candidate commencing his initiation into our Mysteries. When we build we must observe all the rules and proportions; for otherwise the Spirit of Life cannot lodge therein. So you will build the great tower, in which is to burn the fire of the Sages, or, in other words, the fire of Heaven; as also the Sea of the Sages, in which the Sun and Moon are to bathe. That is the basin of Purification, in which will be the water of Celestial Grace, water that doth not soil the hands, but purifies all leprous bodies.

"Let us labor to instruct our Brother, to the end that by his toils he may succeed in discovering the principle of life contained in the profundity of matter, and known by the name of Alkahest.

"The most potent of the names of Deity is ADONAI. Its power is to put the Universe in movement; and the Knights who shall be fortunate enough to possess it, with weight and measure, shall have at their disposition all the potences that inhabit it, the Elements,

[p. 788]

and the cognizance of all the virtues and sciences that man is capable of knowing. By its power they would succeed in discovering the primary metal of the Sun, which holds within itself the Principle of the germ, and wherewith we can put in alliance and six other metals, each of which contains the principles and primitive seed of the grand philosophical work.

"The six other metals are Saturn, Jupiter, Mars, Venus, Mercury, and Luna; vulgarly known as Lead, Tin, Iron, Copper, Quicksilver, and Silver. Gold is not included; because it is not in its nature a metal. It is all Spirit and incorruptible; wherefore it is the emblem of the Sun, which presides over the Light.

"The vivifying Spirit, called Alkahest, has in itself the generative virtue of producing the triangular Cubical Stone, and contains in itself all the virtues to render men happy in this world and in that to come. To arrive at the composition of that Alkahest, we begin by laboring at the science of the union of the four Elements which are to be educed from the three Kingdoms of Nature, Mineral, Vegetable, and Animal; the rule, measure, weight, and equipoise whereof have each their key. We then employ in one work the animals, vegetables, and minerals, each in his season, which make the space of the Houses of the Sun, where they have all the virtues required.

"Something from each of the three Kingdoms of Nature is assigned to each Celestial House, to the end that everything may be done in accordance with sound philosophical rules; and that everything maybe thoroughly purified in its proper time and place in order to be presented at the wedding-table of the Spouse and the six virgins who hold the mystic shovel, without a common fire, but with an elementary fire, that comes primarily by attraction, and by digestion in the philosophical bed lighted by the four elements.

"At the banquet of the Spouses, the viands, being thoroughly, purified, are served in Salt, Sulphur, Spirit, and Oil; a sufficient quantity thereof is taken every month, and therewith is compounded, by means of the Balance of Solomon, the Alkahest, to serve the Spouses, when they are laid on the nuptial bed, there to engender their embryo, producing for the human race immense treasures, that will last as long as the world endures.

"Few are capable of engaging in this great work. Only the true Free-Masons may of right aspire to it; and even of them,

[p. 789]

very few are worthy to attain it, because most of them are ignorant of the Clavicules and their contents, and of the Pantacle of Solomon, which teaches how to labor at the great work.

"The weight raised by Solomon with his balance was 1, 2, 3, 4, 5; which contains 25 times unity, 2 multiplied by 2; 3 multiplied by 3; 4 multiplied by 4; 5 multiplied by 5, and once 9; these numbers thus involving the squares of 5 and 2, the cube of 2, the square of the square of 2, and the square of 3."

Thus far the Ritual, in the numbers mentioned by it, is an allusion to the 47th problem of Euclid, a symbol of Blue Masonry, entirely out of place there, and its meaning unknown. The base of the right-angled triangle being 3, and the perpendicular 4, the hypothenuse is 5, by the rule that the sum of the squares of the two former equals the square of the latter,--3*3 being 9; and 4*4, 16; and 9+16 being 25, the square of 5. The triangle contains in its sides the numbers 1, 2, and 3. The Perpendicular is the Male; the Base, the Female; the Hypothenuse, the product of the two.

To fix the volatile, in the Hermetic language, means to materialize the spirit; to volatilize the fixed is to spiritualize matter.

To separate the subtile from the gross, in the first operation,

[p. 790]

which is wholly internal, is to free our soul from all prejudice and all vice. This is effected by the use of the philosophical SALT, that is to say, of WISDOM; of MERCURY, that is to say, of personal aptitude and labor; and of SULPHUR, which represents the vital energy, and the ardor of the will. Thus we succeed in changing into spiritual gold such things even as are of least value, and even the foul things of the earth.

It is in this sense we are to understand the parables of the Hermetic philosophers and the prophets of Alchemy; but in their works, as in the Great Work, we must skillfully separate the subtile from the gross, the mystic from the positive, allegory from theory. If you would read them with pleasure and understandingly, you must first understand them allegorically in their entirety and then descend from allegories to realities by way of the correspondences or analogies indicated in the single dogma:

"What is above is like what is below; and what is below is like what is above."

The treatise "Minerva Mundi," attributed to Hermes Trismegistus, contains, under the most poetical and profound allegories, the dogma of the self-creation of beings, or of the law of creation that results from the accord of two forces, these which the Alchemists called the Fixed and the Volatile, and which are, in the Absolute, Necessity and Liberty.

When the Masters in Alchemy say that it needs but little time and expense to accomplish the works of Science. when they affirm, above all, that but a single vessel is necessary, when they speak of the Great and Single furnace, which all can use, which is within the reach of all the world, and which men possess without knowing it, they allude to the philosophical and moral Alchemy. In fact, a strong and determined will can, in a little while, attain complete independence; and we all possess that chemical instrument, the great and single athanor or furnace, which serves to separate the subtile from the gross, and the fixed from the volatile. This instrument, complete as the world, and accurate as the mathematics themselves, is designated by the Sages under the emblem of the Pentagram or Star with five points, the absolute sign of human intelligence.

The end and perfection of the Great Work is expressed, in alchemy, by a triangle surmounted by a cross: and the letter Tau, w ?Th, the last of the Sacred alphabet, has the same meaning.

[p. 791]

The "elementary fire," that comes primarily by attraction, is evidently Electricity or the Electric Force, primarily developed as magnetism, and in which is perhaps the secret of life or the vital force.

Paracelsus, the great Reformer in medicine, discovered magnetism long before Mesmer, and pushed to its last consequences this luminous discovery, or rather this initiation into the magic of the ancients, who understood the grand magical agent better than we do, and did not regard the Astral Light, Azoth, the universal magnetism of the Sages, as an animal and particular fluid, emanating only from certain special beings.

The four Elements, the four symbolic animals, and the re-duplicated Principles correspond with each other, and are thus arranged by the Hermetic Masons:

The Air and Earth represent the Male Principle; and the Fire and Water belong to the Female Principle. To these four forms correspond the four following philosophical ideas.

Spirit: Matter: Movement: Repose.

Alchemy reduces these four things to three:

The Absolute: the Fixed: the Volatile.

Reason: Necessity; Liberty: are the synonyms of these three words.

As all the great Mysteries of God and the Universe are thus hidden in the Ternary, it everywhere appears in Masonry and in the Hermetic Philosophy under its mask of Alchemy. It even

[p. 792]

appears where Masons do not suspect it; to teach the doctrine of the equilibrium of Contraries, and the resultant Harmony.

The double triangle of Solomon is explained by Saint John in a remarkable manner: There are, he says, three witnesses in Heaven,--the Father, the Word, and the Holy Spirit; and three witnesses on earth,--the breath, water, and blood. He thus agrees with the Masters of the Hermetic Philosophy, who give to their Sulphur the name of Ether, to their Mercury the name of philosophical water, to their Salt that of blood of the dragon, or menstruum of the earth. The blood, or Salt, corresponds by opposition with the Father; the Azothic, or Mercurial water, with the Word, or Logos; and the breath, with the Holy Spirit. But the things of High Symbolism can be well understood only by the true children of Science.

Alchemy has its Symbolic Triad of Salt, Sulphur, and Mercury,--man consisting, according to the Hermetic philosophers, of Body, Soul, and Spirit. The Dove, the Raven, and the Phoenix are striking Symbols of Good and Evil, Light and Darkness, and the Beauty resulting from the equilibrium of the two.

If you would understand the true secrets of Alchemy, you must study the works of the Masters with patience and assiduity. Every word is often an enigma; and to him who reads in haste, the whole will seem absurd. Even when they seem to teach that the Great Work is the purification of the Soul, and so to deal only with morals, they most conceal their meaning, and deceive all but the Initiates.

Yo_d [s or w ?Y] is termed in the Kabalah the opifex, workman of the Deity. It is, says the Porta Caelorum, single and primal, like one, which is the first among numbers; and like a point, the first before all bodies. Moved lengthwise, it produces a line, which is Vau, and this moved sidewise produces a superficies, which is Daleth. Thus Vau [w ?W] becomes Daleth [w ?D]; for movement tends from right to left; and all communication is from above to below. The plenitude of Yo_d, that is, the name of this letter, spelled, is w ?Y?W?D, Y-O-D. Vau [which represents 6] and Daleth [4] are 10; like Yo_d, their principle.

Yo_d, says the Siphra de Zeniutha, is the Symbol of Wisdom and of the Father.

The Principle called Father, says the Idra Suta, is comprehended in Yo_d, which flows downward from the Holy influence,

[p. 793]

wherefore Yo_d is the most occult of all the letters; for he is the beginning and end of all things. The Supernal Wisdom is Yo_d; and all things are included in Yo_d, who is therefore called Father of Fathers, or the Generator of the Universal. The Principle of all things is called the House of all things: wherefore Yo_d is the beginning and end of all things; as it is written: "Thou halt made all things in Wisdom." For The All is termed Wisdom; and in it The All is contained; and the summary of all things is the Holy Name.

Yo_d, says the Siphra de Zeniutha, signifying the Father, approaches the letter He, which is the Mother; and by the combination of these two is denoted that luminous influence wherewith Binah is imbued by the Supernal Wisdom.

In the name w ?Y?H?W, says the same, are included the Father, Mother, and Microprosopos, their issue. He, impregnated by Vau, produced Microprosopos, or Seir Anpin.

Wisdom, Hakemah, is the Principle of all things: it is the Father of Fathers, and in it are the beginning and end of all things. Microprosopos, the second Universal, is the issue of Wisdom, the Father, and Binah, the Mother, and is composed of the six Numerations, Geburah, Gedulah, and Tephareth, Netsach, , and Yesod; is represented under the form of a man, and said to have at first occupied the place afterward filled by the world Briah [of Creation], but afterward to have been raised to the Aziluthic sphere, and received Wisdom, Intelligence, and Cognition [Daath] from the Supernal Wisdom and Intellectuality.

Vau, in the tri-literal word, denotes these six members of Microprosopos. For this latter is. formed after the fashion of Macroprosopos, but without Kether, the will, which remains in the first prototype or Universal; though invested with a portion of the Divine Intellectual Power and Capacity. The first Universal does not use the first person, and is called in the third person, w ?H?W?A, HUA, HE: but the second Universal speaks in the first person, using the word w ?An?Y ANI, I.

The IDRA RABBA, or Synodus Magna, one of the books of the Sohar, says:

The Eldest of the Eldest [the Absolute Deity] is in Microprosopos. All things are one: all was, all is, all will be: there neither will be, nor is, nor has been, mutation.

But He conformed Himself, by the formings, into a form that contains all forms, in a form which comprehends all genera.

[p. 794]

This form is in the likeness of His form; and is not that form but its analogue: wherefore the human form is the form of all above and below, which are included in it: and because it embraces all above and below. The Most Holy so took form, and so Microprosopos was configured. All things are equally one, in each of the two Universals; but in the second His ways are divided, and judgment is on our side, and on the side that looks toward us, also, they differ.

These Secrets are made known only to the reapers in the Holy Field.

The Most Holy Ancient is not called ATHAH, Thou, but Hun, He: but in Microprosopos, where is the beginning of things, He has the name ATHAH, and also AB, Father. From Him is the beginning, and He is called Thou, and is the Father of Fathers. He issues from the Non-Ens; and therefore is beyond cognition.

Wisdom is the Principle of the Universe, and from it thirty-two ways diverge: and in them the law is contained, in twenty-two letters and ten words. Wisdom is the Father of Fathers, and in this Wisdom is found the Beginning and the End: wherefore there is a wisdom in each Universal, one above, the other below.

The Commentary of Rabbi Chajun Vital, on the Siphra de Zeniutha, says: At the beginning of emanation, Microprosopos issued from the Father, and was intermingled with the Mother, under the mysteries of the letter,w ?H [He], resolved in w ?D?W, that is, Daleth and Vau; by which Vau is denoted Microprosopos: because Vau is six, and he is constituted of the six parts that follow Hakemah and Binah. And, according to this conception, the Father is called Father of Fathers, because from Him these Fathers proceed, Benignity, Severity, and Beauty. Microprosopos was then like the letter Vau in the letter He, because He had no head; but when He was now born, three brains were constituted for Him, by the flow of Divine Light from above.

And as the world of restitution [after the vessels of the Sephiroth below Binah had been broken, that from the fragments evil might be created] is instituted after the fashion of the Balance, so also is it formed throughout in the human form. But Malakoth, Regnum, is a complete and separate person, behind Microprosopos, and in conjunction with him, and the two are called man.

[p. 795]

The first world [of Inanity] could not continue and did not subsist, because it had no human conformation nor the system of the Balance, the Sephiroth being points, one below the other. The first Adam [Microprosopos, as distinguished from Macroprosopos, the first Occult Adam] was the beginning, wherein the ten Numerations proceeded forth from potence into act.

Microprosopos is the second garment or interposed medium, with respect to the Elder Most Holy, who is the name Tetragrammaton; and he is called Alohim; because the former is Absolute Commiseration; while in Macroprosopos his lights have the nature of Severities, with respect to the elder Universal; though they are Commiseration, with respect to the lights of Malakoth and the three lower worlds.

All the conformations of Macroprosopos come from the first Adam; who, to interpose a second covering, caused a single spark to issue from the sphere of Severity, of whose five letters is generated the name Alohim. With this issued from the brain a most subtle air, which takes its place on the right hand, while the spark of fire is on the left. Thus the white and red do not intermix, that is, the Air and Fire, which are Mercy and Judgment.

Microprosopos is the Tree of the Knowledge of Good and Evil, his Severities being the Evil.

REGNUM, to which is given the name of Word of The Lord, superinvests Heaven, as the six members of the Degree Tephareth are called, and these become and are constituted by that superior vestiture. For every conformation and constitution is effected by means of veiling, because occultation here is the same as manifestation, the excess of light being veiled, so that, diminished in intensity and degree, it may be received by those below. Those six members conceived of as contained in Binah, are said to be in the World of Creation; as in Tephareth, in that of Formation; and as in Malakoth, in that of Fabrication.

Before the institution of equilibrium, face was not toward face: Microprosopos and his wife issuing forth back to back, and yet cohering. So above; before the prior Adam was conformed into male and female, and the state of equilibrium established, the Father and Mother were not face to face. For the Father denotes the most perfect Love; and the Mother the most perfect Rigor. And the seven supernal sons who proceeded from her, from Binah, who brought forth seven, were all most perfect rigors, having no

[p. 796]

connection with a root in the Most Holy Ancient; that is, they were all dead, destroyed, shattered; but they were placed in equilibrium, in the equipoise of the Occult Wisdom, when it was conformed into male and female, Rigor and Love, and they were then restored, and there was given them a root above.

The Father is Love and Mercy, and with a pure and subtle Aur or Benignity impregnates the Mother, who is Rigor and Severity of Judgments; and the product is the brain of Microprosopos.

It was determined, says the Introduction to the Book Sohar, by the Deity, to create Good and Evil in the world, according to what is said in Isaiah, "who makes the bight and creates the Evil." But the Evil was at first occult, and could not be generated and brought forth, except by the sinning of the First Adam. Wherefore He determined that the numerations first emanated, from Benignity downward, should be destroyed and shattered by the excessive influx of His Light; His intention being to create of them the worlds of Evils. But the first three were to remain and subsist, that among the fragments should be neither Will, Intellectual Power, nor the Capacity of Intellection of the Divinity. The last seven numerations were points, like the first three, each subsisting independently, unsustained by companionship; which was the cause of their dying and being shattered.

There was then no Love between them, but only a two-fold Fear; Wisdom, for example, fearing lest it should ascend again to its Source in Kether; and also lest it should descend into Binah. Hence there was no union between any two, except Hakemah and Binah, and this imperfect, with averted faces. This is the meaning of the saying, that the world was created by Judgment, which is fear. And so that world could not subsist, and the Seven Kings were dethroned, until the attribute of Compassion was adjoined to it, and then restoration took place. Thence came Love and Union, and six of the parts were united into one person; for Love is the attribute of Compassion or Mercy.

Binah produced the Seven Kings, not successively, but all together. The Seventh is Regnum, called a stone, the corner-stone, because on it are builded the palaces of the three lower worlds.

The first six were shattered into fragments; but Regnum was crushed into a formless mass, lest the malignant demons created from the fragments of the others should receive bodies from it, since from it came bodies and vitality [Nephesch].

[p. 797]

From the fragments of the vessels came all Evils; judgments, turbid waters, impurities, the Serpent, and Adam Belial [Baal]. But their internal light re-ascended to Binah, and then flowed down again into the worlds Briah and Yezirah, there to form vestiges of the Seven Numerations. The Sparks of the great Influence of the shattered vases descending into the four spiritual elements, Fire, Air, Water, and Earth, and thence into the inanimate, vegetable, living, and speaking kingdoms, became Souls.

Selecting the suitable from the unsuitable lights, and separating the good from the evil, the Deity first restored the universality of the Seven Kings of the World Aziluth, and afterward the three other Worlds.

And though in them were both good and evil, still this evil did not develop itself in act, since the Severities remained, though mitigated; some portion of them being necessary to prevent the fragments of the integuments from ascending. These were also left, because connection of two is necessary to generation. And this necessity for the existence of Severity is the mystery of the pleasure and warmth of the generative appetite; and thence Love between husband and wife.

If the Deity, says the Introduction, had not created worlds and then destroyed them, there could have been no evil in the world, but all things must have been good. There would have been neither reward nor punishment in the world. There would have been no merit in righteousness, for the Good is known by the evil, nor would there have been fruitfulness or multiplication in the world. If all carnal concupiscence were enchained for three days in the mouth of the great abyss, the egg of one of the days would be wanting to the sick man. In time to come it will be called Laban [w ?L?Bn--white], because it will be whitened of its impurity, and will return to the realm Israel, and they will pray the Lord to give them the appetite of carnal concupiscence, for the begetting of children.

The intention of God was, when He created the world, that His creatures should recognize His existence. Therefore He created evils, to afflict them withal when they should sin, and Light and Blessing to reward the just. And therefore man necessarily has free-will and election, since Good and Evil are in the World.

And these kings died, says the Commentary, because the condition of equilibrium did not yet exist, nor was Adam Kadmon

[p. 798]

formed male and female. They were not in contact with what was alive: nor had any root in Adam Kadmon; nor was Wisdom which outflowed from Him, their root, nor did they connect with it. For all these were pure mercies and most simple Love; but those were rigorous judgments. Whence face looked not toward face; nor the Father toward the Mother, because from her proceeded judgments. Nor Macroprosopos toward Microprosopos. And Regnum, the last numeration, was empty and inane. It has nothing of itself; and, as it were, was nothing, receiving nothing from them. Its need was, to receive Love from the Male; for it is mere rigor and judgment; and the Love and Rigor must temper each other, to produce creation, and its multitudes above and below. For it was made to be inhabited; and when rigorous judgments rule in it, it is inane because its processes cannot be carried on.

Wherefore the Balance must needs be instituted, that there might be a root above, so that judgments might be restored and tempered, and live and not again die. And Seven Conformations descend; and all things become in equilibrium, and the needle of the Balance is the root above.

In the world Yezirah, says the Pneumatica Kabalistica, w ?Y de-notes Kether; w ?Y?H, Hakemah and Binah; and w ?Y?H?W, Gedulah, Geburah, and Tephareth; and thus Vau is Beauty and Harmony. The Man is Hakemah; the Eagle, Binah; the Lion, Gedulah; and the Ox, Geburah. And the mysterious circle is thus formed by the Sohar and all the Kabalists: Michael and the face of the Lion are on the South, and the right hand, with the letter w ?Y, , and Water; Gabriel and the face of the Ox, on the North, and left hand, with the first w ?H of the Tetragrammaton and Fire; Uriel and the face of the Eagle, on the East and forward, with w ?W and Air; and Raphael and the face of the Man, on the West, and backward with the last w ?H, and Earth. In the same order, the four letters represent the four worlds.

Rabbi Schimeon Ben Jochai says that the four animals of the Mysterious Chariot, whose wheels are Netsach and Had, are Gedulah, whose face is the Lion's; Geburah, with that of the Ox; Tephareth, with that of the Eagle; and Malakoth, with that of the Man.

The Seven lower Sephiroth, says the Aesch Mezareph, will represent Seven Metals; Gedulah and Geburah, Silver and Gold;

[p. 799]

[paragraph continues] Tephareth, Iron; Netsach and , Tin and Copper; Yesod, Lead; and Malakoth will be the metallic Woman and Morn of the Sages, the field wherein are to be sowed the Seeds of the Secret Minerals, to wit, the Water of Gold; but in these such mysteries are concealed as no tongue can utter.

The word w ?Am?Sh, Amas, is composed of the initials of the three Hebrew words that signify Air, Water, and Fire; by which, say the Kabalists, are denoted Benignity, Judicial Rigor, and Mercy or Compassion mediating between them.

Malakoth, says the Apparatus, is called Haikal, Temple or Palace, because it is the Palace of the Degree Tephareth, which is concealed and contained in it, and Haikal denotes the place in which all things are contained.

For the better understanding of the Kabalah, remember that Kether, or the Crown, is treated of as a person, composed of the ten Numerations, and as such termed Arik Anpin, or Macroprosopos:

That Hakemah is a person, and termed Abba, or Father:

That Binah is a person, and termed Mother, Imma:

That Tephareth, including all the Numerations from Khased or Gedulah to Yesod, is a person, called Seir Anpin, or Microprosopos. These Numerations are six in number, and are represented by the interlaced triangle, or the Seal of Solomon.

And Malakoth is a person, and called the wife of Microprosopos. Vau represents the Beauty or Harmony, consisting of the six parts which constitute Seir Anpin.

The wife, Malakoth, is said to be behind the husband, Seir, and to have no other cognition of him. And this is thus explained: That every cognizable object is to be known in two ways: a priori, which is when it is known by means of its cause, or of itself; or, a posteriori when it is known by its effects. The most nearly perfect mode of cognition is, when the intellect knows the thing itself, in itself, and through itself. But if it knows the thing by its similitude or idea, or species separate from it, or by its effects and operations, the cognition is much feebler and more imperfect. And it is thus only that Regnum, the wife of Seir, knows her husband, until face is turned to face, when they unite, and she has the more nearly perfect knowledge. For then the Deity, as limited and manifested in Seir and the Universe are one.

Vau is Tephareth, considered as the Unity in which are

[p. 800]

the six members, of which itself is one. Tephareth, Beauty, is the column which supports the world, symbolized by the column of the junior Warden in the Blue Lodges. The world was first created by Judgment: and as it could not so subsist, Mercy was conjoined with Judgment, and the Divine Mercies sustain the Universe.

God, says the Idra Suta, formed all things in the form of male and female, since otherwise the continuance of things was impossible. The All-embracing Wisdom, issuing and shining from the Most Holy Ancient, shines not otherwise than as male and female. Wisdom as the Father, Intelligence the Mother, are in equilibrium as male and female, and they are conjoined, and one shines in the other. Then they generate, and are expanded in the Truth. Then the two are the Perfection of all things, when they are coupled; and when the Son is in them, the summary of all things is in one.

These things are intrusted only to the Holy Superiors, who have entered and gone out and known the ways of the Most Holy God, so as not to err in them, to the right hand or to the left: For these things are hidden; and the lofty Holinesses shine in them, as light flows from the splendor of a lamp.

These things are committed only to those who have entered and not withdrawn; for he who has not done so had better never have been born.

All things are comprehended in the letters Vau and He; and all are one system; and these are the letters, w ?Th?B?Wn?Th. Tabunah, Intelligence.

 

     
Morals and Dogma, by Albert Pike, [1871], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 801]

  

XXIX.

  

GRAND SCOTTISH KNIGHT OF ST. ANDREW.

A MIRACULOUS tradition, something like that connected with the labarum of Constantine, hallows the Ancient Cross of St. Andrew. Hungus, who in the ninth century reigned over the Picts in Scotland, is said to have seen in a vision, on the night before a battle, the Apostle Saint Andrew, who promised him the victory; and for an assured token thereof, he told him that there should appear over the Pictish host, in the air, such a fashioned cross as he had suffered upon. Hungus, awakened, looking up at the sky, saw the promised cross, as did all of both armies; and Hungus and the Picts, after rendering thanks to the Apostle for their victory, and making their offerings with humble devotion, vowed that from thenceforth, as well they as their posterity, in time of war, would wear a cross of St. Andrew for their badge and cognizance.

John Leslie, Bishop of Ross, says that this cross appeared to Achaius, King of the Scots, and Hungus, King of the Picts, the night before the battle was fought betwixt them and Athelstane, King of England, as they were on their knees at prayer.

Every cross of Knighthood is a symbol of the nine qualities of a Knight of St. Andrew of Scotland; for every order of chivalry required of its votaries the same virtues and the same excellencies.

Humility, Patience, and Self-denial are the three essential qualities of a Knight of St. Andrew of Scotland. The Cross, sanctified by the blood of the holy ones who have died upon it; the

[p. 802]

[paragraph continues] Cross, which Jesus of Nazareth bore, fainting, along the streets of Jerusalem and up to Calvary, upon which He cried, "Not My will, O Father! but Thine be done," is an unmistakable and eloquent symbol of these three virtues. He suffered upon it, because He consorted with and taught the poor and lowly, and found His disciples among the fishermen of Galilee and the despised publicans. His life was one of Humility, Patience, and Self-denial.

The Hospitallers and Templars took upon themselves vows of obedience, poverty, and chastity. The Lamb, which became the device of the Seal of the Order of the Poor Fellow Soldiery of the Temple of Solomon, conveyed the same lessons of humility and self-denial as the original device of two Knights riding a single horse. The Grand Commander warned every candidate not to be induced to enter the Order by a vain hope of enjoying earthly pomp and splendor. He told him that he would have to endure many things, sorely against his inclinations; and that he would be compelled to give up his own will, and submit entirely to that of his superiors.

The religious Houses of the Hospitallers, despoiled by Henry the Eighth's worthy daughter, Elizabeth, because they would not take the oath to maintain her supremacy, had been Alms-houses, and Dispensaries, and Foundling-asyla, relieving the State of many orphan and outcast children, and ministering to their necessities, God's ravens in the wilderness, bread and flesh in the morning, bread and flesh in the evening. They had been Inns to the wayfaring man, who heard from afar the sound of the Vesper-bell, inviting him to repose and devotion at once, and who might sing his matins with the Morning Star, and go on his way rejoicing. And the Knights were no less distinguished by bravery in battle, than by tenderness and zeal in their ministrations to the sick and dying.

The Knights of St. Andrew vowed to defend all orphans, maidens, and widows of good family, and wherever they heard of murderers, robbers, or masterful thieves who oppressed the people, to bring them to the laws, to the best of their power.

"If fortune fail you," so ran the vows of Rouge-Croix, "in divers lands or countries wherever you go or ride that you find any gentleman of name and arms, which hath lost goods, in worship and Knighthood, in the King's service, or in any other place of worship, and is fallen into poverty, you shall aid, and support,

[p. 803]

r and succor him, in that you may; and he ask of you your goods to his sustenance, you shall give him part of such goods as God hath sent you to your power, and as you may bear."

Thus CHARITY and GENEROSITY are even more essential qualities of a true and gentle Knight, and have been so in all ages; and so also hath CLEMENCY. It is a mark of a noble nature to spare the conquered. Valor is then best tempered, when it can turn out a stern fortitude into the mild strains of pity, which never shines more brightly than when she is clad in steel. A martial man, compassionate, shall conquer both in peace and war; and by a twofold way, get victory with honor. The most famed men in the world have had in them both courage and compassion. An enemy reconciled hath a greater value than the long train of captives of a Roman triumph.

VIRTUE, TRUTH, and HONOR are the three MOST essential qualities of a Knight of St. Andrew. "Ye shall love God above all things, and be steadfast in the Faith," it was said to the Knights, in their charge, "and ye shall be true unto your Sovereign Lord, and true to your word and promise. Also, ye shall sit in no place where that any judgment should be given wrongfully against any body, to your knowledge."

The law hath not power to strike the virtuous, nor can fortune subvert the wise. Virtue and Wisdom, only, perfect and defend man. Virtue's garment is a sanctuary so sacred, that even Princes dare not strike the man that is thus robed. It is the livery of the King of Heaven. It protects us when we are unarmed; and is an armor that we cannot lose, unless we be false to ourselves. It is the tenure by which we hold of Heaven, without which we are but outlaws, that cannot claim protection. Nor is there wisdom without virtue, but only a cunning way of procuring our own undoing.

             Peace is nigh
 Where Wisdom's voice has found a listening heart.
 Amid the howl of more than winter storms,
 The halcyon hears the voice of vernal hours,
 Already on the wing.

Sir Launcelot thought no chivalry equal to that of Virtue. This word means not continence only, but chiefly manliness, and so includes what in the old English was called souffrance, that patient endurance which is like the emerald, ever green and flowering;

[p. 804]

and also that other virtue, droicture, uprightness, a virtue so strong and so puissant, that by means of it all earthly things almost attain to be unchangeable. Even our swords are formed to remind us of the Cross, and you and any other of us may live to show how much men bear and do not die; for this world is a place of sorrow and tears, of great evils and a constant calamity, and if we would win true honor in it, we must permit no virtue of a Knight to become unfamiliar to us, as men's friends, coldly entreated and not greatly valued, become mere ordinary acquaintances.

We must not view with impatience or anger those who injure us; for it is very inconsistent with philosophy, and particularly with the Divine Wisdom that should govern every Prince Adept, to betray any great concern about the evils which the world, which the vulgar, whether in robes or tatters, can inflict upon the brave. The favor of God and the love of our Brethren rest upon a basis which the strength of malice cannot overthrow; and with these and a generous temper and noble equanimity, we have everything. To be consistent with our professions as Masons, to retain the dignity of our nature, the consciousness of our own honor, the spirit of the high chivalry that is our boast, we must disdain the evils that are only material and bodily, and therefore can be no bigger than a blow or a cozenage, than a wound or a dream.

Look to the ancient days, Sir E-------, for excellent examples of VIRTUE, TRUTH, and HONOR, and imitate with a noble emulation the Ancient Knights, the first Hospitallers and Templars, and Bayard, and Sydney, and Saint Louis; in the words of Pliny to his friend Maximus, Revere the ancient glory, and that old age which in man is venerable, in cities sacred. Honor antiquity and great deeds, and detract nothing from the dignity and liberty of any one. If those who now pretend to be the great and mighty, the learned and wise of the world, shall agree in condemning the memory of the heroic Knights of former ages, and in charging with folly us who think that they should be held in eternal remembrance, and that we should defend them from an evil hearing, do you remember that if these who now claim to rule and teach the world should condemn or scorn your poor tribute of fidelity, still it is for you to bear therewith modestly, and yet not to be ashamed, since a day will come when these who now scorn those who were of infinitely higher and finer natures than

[p. 805]

they are, will be pronounced to have lived poor and pitiful lives, and the world will make haste to forget them.

But neither must you believe that, even in this very different age, of commerce and trade, of the vast riches of many, and the poverty of thousands, of thriving towns and tenement houses swarming with paupers, of churches with rented pews, and theatres, opera-houses, custom-houses, and banks, of steam and telegraph, of shops and commercial palaces, of manufactories and trades-unions, the Gold-room and the Stock Exchange, of newspapers, elections, Congresses, and Legislatures, of the frightful struggle for wealth and the constant wrangle for place and power, of the worship paid to the children of mammon, and covetousness of official station, there are no men of the antique stamp for you to revere, no heroic and knightly souls, that preserve their nobleness and equanimity in the chaos of conflicting passions, of ambition and baseness that welters around them.

It is quite true that Government tends always to become a conspiracy against liberty; or, where votes give place, to fall habitually into such hands that little which is noble or chivalric is found among those who rule and lead the people. It is true that men, in this present age, become distinguished for other things, and may have name and fame, and flatterers and lacqueys, and the oblation of flattery, who would, in a knightly age, have been despised for the want in them of all true gentility and courage; and that such men are as likely as any to be voted for by the multitude, who rarely love or discern or receive truth; who run after fortune, hating what is oppressed, and ready to worship the prosperous; who love accusation and hate apologies; and who are always glad to hear and ready to believe evil of those who care not for their favor and seek not their applause.

But no country can ever be wholly without men of the old heroic strain and stamp, whose word no man will dare to doubt, whose virtue shines resplendent in all calamities and reverses and amid all temptations, and whose honor scintillates and glitters as purely and perfectly as the diamond--men who are not wholly the slaves of the material occupations and pleasures of life, wholly engrossed in trade, in the breeding of cattle, in the framing and enforcing of revenue regulations, in the chicanery of the law, the. objects of political envy, in the base trade of the lower literature, or in the heartless, hollow vanities of an eternal dissipation. Every

[p. 806]

generation, in every country, will bequeath to those who succeed it splendid examples and great images of the dead, to be admired and imitated; there were such among the Romans, under the basest Emperors; such in England when the Long Parliament ruled; such in France during its Saturnalia of irreligion and murder, and some such have made the annals of America illustrious.

When things tend to that state and condition in which, in any country under the sun, the management of its affairs and the customs of its people shall require men to entertain a disbelief in the virtue and honor of those who make and those who are charged to execute the laws; when there shall be everywhere a spirit of suspicion and scorn of all who hold or seek office, or have amassed wealth; when falsehood shall no longer dishonor a man, and oaths give no assurance of true testimony, and one man hardly expect another to keep faith with him, or to utter his real sentiments, or to be true to any party or to any cause when another approaches him with a bribe; when no one shall expect what he says to be printed without additions, perversions, and misrepresentations; when public misfortunes shall be turned to private profit, the press pander to licentiousness, the pulpit ring with political harangues, long prayers to God, eloquently delivered to admiring auditors, be written out for publication, like poems and political speeches; when the uprightness of judges shall be doubted, and the honesty of legislators be a standing jest; then men may come to doubt whether the old days were not better than the new, the Monastery than the Opera Bouffe, the little chapel than the drinking-saloon, the Convents than the buildings as large as they, without their antiquity, without their beauty, without their holiness, true Acherusian Temples, where the passer-by hears from within the never-ceasing din and clang and clashing of machinery, and where, when the bell rings, it is to call wretches to their work and not to their prayers; where, says an animated writer, they keep up a perennial laudation of the Devil, before furnaces which are never suffered to cool.

It has been well said, that whatever withdraws us from the power of our senses, whatever makes the Past, the Distant, or the Future, predominate over the Present, advances us in the dignity of thinking beings. The modern rivals of the German Spa, with their flaunting pretences and cheap finery, their follies and frivolities, their chronicles of dances and inelegant feasts, and their bulletins

[p. 807]

of women's names and dresses, are poor substitutes for the Monastery and Church which our ancestors would have built in the deep sequestered valleys, shut up between rugged mountains and forests of sombre pine; and a man of meditative temper, learned, and of poetic feeling, would be glad if he could exchange the showy hotel, amid the roar and tumult of the city, or the pretentious tavern of the country-town, for one old humble Monastery by the wayside, where he could refresh himself and his horse without having to fear either pride, impertinence, or knavery, or to pay for pomp, glitter, and gaudy ornamentation; then where he could make his orisons in a church which resounded with divine harmony, and there were no pews for wealth to isolate itself within; where he could behold the poor happy and edified and strengthened with the thoughts of Heaven; where he could then converse with learned and holy and gentle men, and before he took his departure could exalt and calm his spirits by hearing the evening song.

Even Free-Masonry has so multiplied its members that its obligations are less regarded than the simple promises which men make to one another upon the streets and in the markets. It clamors for public notice and courts notoriety by scores of injudicious journals; it wrangles in these, or, incorporated by law, carries its controversies into the Courts. Its elections are, in some Orients, conducted with all the heat and eagerness, the office-seeking and management of political struggles for place. And an empty pomp, with semi-military dress and drill, of peaceful citizens, glittering with painted banners, plumes, and jewels, gaudy and ostentatious, commends to the public favor and female admiration an Order that challenges comparison with the noble Knights, the heroic soldiery encased in steel and mail, stern despisers of danger and death, who made themselves immortal memories, and won Jerusalem from the infidels and fought at Acre and Ascalon, and were the bulwark of Christendom against the Saracenic legions that swarmed after the green banner of the Prophet Mohammed.

If you, Sir E------, would be respectable as a Knight, and not a mere tinselled pretender and Knight of straw, you must practise, and be diligent and ardent in the practice of, the virtues you have professed in this Degree. How can a Mason vow to be tolerant, and straightway denounce another for his political opinions? How vow to be zealous and constant in the service of the Order,

[p. 808]

and be as useless to it as if he were dead and buried? What does the symbolism of the Compass and Square profit him, if his sensual appetites and baser passions are not governed by, but domineer over his moral sense and reason, the animal over the divine, the earthly over the spiritual, both points of the compass remaining below the Square? What a hideous mockery to call one "Brother," whom he maligns to the Profane, lends money unto at usury, defrauds in trade, or plunders at law by chicanery?

VIRTUE, TRUTH, HONOR!--possessing these and never proving false to your vows, you will be worthy to call yourself a Knight, to whom Sir John Chandos might, if living, give his hand, and whom St. Louis and Falkland, Tancred and Baldassar Castiglione would recognize as worthy of their friendship.

Chivalry, a noble Spaniard said, is a religious Order, and there are Knights in the fraternity of Saints in Heaven. Therefore do you here, and for all time to come, lay aside all uncharitable and repining feeling; be proof henceforward against the suggestions of undisciplined passion and inhuman zeal; learn to hate the vices and not the vicious; be content with the discharge of the duties which your Masonic and Knightly professions require; be governed by the old principles of honor and chivalry, and reverence with constancy that Truth which is as sacred and immutable as God Himself. And above all, remember always, that jealousy is not our life, nor disputation our end, nor disunion our health, nor revenge our happiness; but loving-kindness is all these, greater than Hope, greater than Faith, which can remove mountains, properly the only thing which God requires of us, and in the possession of which lies the fulfillment of all our duties.

[By Ill Q.E.D. Bro Q.E.D. Rev Q.E.D. W. W. Lord, 32 degrees]

We are constrained to confess it to be true, that men, in this Age of Iron, worship gods of wood and iron and brass, the work of their own hands. The Steam-Engine is the pre-eminent god of the nineteenth century, whose idolaters are everywhere, and those, who wield its tremendous power securely account themselves gods, everywhere in the civilized world.

Others confess it everywhere, and we must confess here, how reluctantly soever, that the age which we represent is narrowed and not enlarged by its discoveries, and has lost a larger world than it

[p. 809]

has gained. If we cannot go as far as the satirist who says that our self-adored century

--its broad clown's back turns broadly on the glory of the stars,

we can go with him when he adds,

We are gods by our own reckoning, and may as well shut up our temples
 And wield on amidst the incense-steam, the thunder of our cars:
 For we throw out acclamations of self-thanking, self-admiring,
 With, at every step, "Run faster, O the wondrous, wondrous age!"
 Little heeding if our souls are wrought as nobly as our iron,
 Or if angels will commend us at the goal of pilgrimage.

Deceived by their increased but still very imperfect knowledge and limited mastery of the brute forces of nature, men imagine that they have discovered the secrets of Divine Wisdom, and do not hesitate, in their own thoughts, to put human prudence in the place of the Divine. Destruction was denounced by the Prophets against Tyre and Sidon, Babylon, and Damascus, and Jerusalem, as a consequence of the sins of their people; but if fire now consumes or earthquake shatters or the tornado crushes a great city, those are scoffed at as fanatics and sneered at for indulging in cant, or rebuked for Pharisaic uncharitableness, who venture to believe and say that there are divine retributions and God's judgment in the ruin wrought by His mighty agencies.

Science, wandering in error, struggles to remove God's Providence to a distance from us and the material Universe, and to substitute for its supervision and care and constant overseeing, what it calls Forces--Forces of Nature--Forces of Matter. It will not see that the Forces of Nature are the varied actions of God. Hence it becomes antagonistic to all Religion, and to all the old Faith that has from the beginning illuminated human souls and constituted their consciousness of their own dignity, their divine origin, and their immortality; that Faith which is the Light by which the human soul is enabled, as it were, to see itself.

It is not one religion only, but the basis of all religions, the Truth that is in all religions, even the religious creed of Masonry, that is in danger. For all religions have owed all of life that they have had, and their very being, to the foundation on which they were reared; the proposition, deemed undeniable and an axiom, that the Providence of God rules directly in all the affairs and changes of material things. The Science of the age has its hands

[p. 810]

upon the pillars of the Temple, and rocks it to its foundation. As yet its destructive efforts have but torn from the ancient structure the worm-eaten fret-work of superstition, and shaken down some incoherent additions--owl-inhabited turrets of ignorance, and massive props that supported nothing. The structure itself will be overthrown, when, in the vivid language of a living writer, "Human reason leaps into the throne of God and waves her torch over the ruins of the Universe."

Science deals only with phenomena, and is but charlatanism when it babbles about the powers or causes that produce these, or what the things are, in essence, of which it gives us merely the names. It no more knows what Light or Sound or Perfume is, than the Aryan cattle-herders did, when they counted the Dawn and Fire, Flame and Light and Heat as gods. And that Atheistic Science is not even half-science, which ascribes the Universe and its powers and forces to a system of natural laws or to an inherent energy of Nature, or to causes unknown, existing and operating independently of a Divine and Supra-natural power.

That theory would be greatly fortified, if science were always capable of protecting life and property, and, with anything like the certainty of which it boasts, securing human interests even against the destructive agencies that man himself develops in his endeavors to subserve them. Fire, the fourth element, as the old philosophers deemed it, is his most useful and abject servant. Why cannot man prevent his ever breaking that ancient indenture, old as Prometheus, old as Adam? Why can he not be certain that at any moment his terrible subject may not break forth and tower up into his master, tyrant, destroyer? It is because it also is a power of nature; which, in ultimate trial of forces, is always superior to man. It is also because, in a different sense from that in which it is the servant of man, it is the servant of Him Who makes His ministers a flame of fire, and Who is over nature, as nature is over man.

There are powers of nature which man does not even attempt to check or control. Naples does nothing against Vesuvius. Valparaiso only trembles with the trembling earth before the coming earthquake. The sixty thousand people who went down alive into the grave when Lisbon buried her population under both earth and sea had no knowledge of the causes, and no possible control over the power, that effected their destruction.

[p. 811]

But here the servant, and, in a sense, the creature of man, the drudge of kitchen and factory, the humble slave of the lamp, engaged in his most servile employment, appearing as a little point of flame, or perhaps a feeble spark, suddenly snaps his brittle chain, breaks from his prison, and leaps with destructive fury, as if from the very bosom of Hell, upon the doomed dwellings of fifty thousand human beings, each of whom, but a moment before, conceived himself his master. And those daring fire-brigades, with their water-artillery, his conquerors, it seemed, upon so many midnight fields, stand paralyzed in the presence of their conqueror.

In other matters relative to human safety and interests we have observed how confident science becomes upon the strength of some slight success in the war of man with nature, and how much inclined to put itself in the place of Providence, which, by the very force of the term, is the only absolute science. Near the beginning of this century, for instance, medical and sanitary science had made, in the course of a few years, great and wonderful progress. The great plague which wasted Europe in the fourteenth and fifteenth centuries, and reappeared in the seventeenth, had been identified with a disease which yields to enlightened treatment, and its ancient virulence was attributed to ignorance of hygiene, and the filthy habits of a former age. Another fatal and disfiguring scourge had to a great extent been checked by the discovery of vaccination. From Sangrado to Sydenham, from Paracelsus to Jenner, the healing art had indeed taken a long stride. The Faculty might be excused had it then said, "Man is mortal, disease will be often fatal; but there shall be no more unresisted and unnecessary slaughter by infectious disease, no more general carnage, no more carnivals of terror and high festivals of death."

The conceited boast would hardly have died upon the lip, when, from the mysterious depths of remotest India a spectre stalked forth, or rather a monster crept, more fearful than human eye had ever yet beheld. And not with surer instinct does the tiger of the jungles, where this terrible pestilence was born, catch the scent of blood upon the air, than did this invisible Destroyer, this fearful agent of Almighty Power, this tremendous Consequence of some Sufficient Cause, scent the tainted atmosphere of Europe and turn Westward his devastating march. The millions of dead left in his path through Asia proved nothing. They were unarmed, ignorant, defenceless, unaided by science, undefended by art. The

[p. 812]

cholera was to them inscrutable and irresistible as Azrael, the Angel of Death.

But it came to Europe and swept the halls of science as it had swept the Indian village and the Persian khan. It leaped as noiselessly and descended as destructively upon the population of many a high-towered, wide-paved, purified, and disinfected city of the Nest as upon the Pariahs of Tanjore and the filthy streets of Stamboul. In Vienna, Paris, London, the scenes of the great plague were re-enacted.

The sick man started in his bed,
   The watcher leaped upon the floor,
 At the cry, Bring out your dead,
   The cart is at the door!

Was this the judgment of Almighty God? He would be bold who should say that it was; he would be bolder who should say it was not. To Paris, at least, that European Babylon, how often have the further words of the prophet to the daughter of the Chaldaeans, the lady of kingdoms, been fulfilled? "Thy wisdom and thy knowledge have perverted thee, and thou hast said in thy heart I am and none else beside me. Therefore shall evil come upon thee; thou shalt not know whence it riseth; and mischief shall fall upon thee; thou shalt not be able to put it off; desolation shall come upon thee suddenly."

And as to London--it looked like judgment, if it be true that the Asiatic cholera had its origin in English avarice and cruelty, as they suppose who trace it to the tax which Warren Hastings, when Governor-General of India, imposed on salt, thus cutting off its use from millions of the vegetable-eating races of the East: just as that disease whose spectral shadow lies always upon America's threshold, originated in the avarice and cruelty of the slave-trade, translating the African coast fever to the congenial climate of the West Indies and Southern America--the yellow fever of the former, and the vomito negro of the latter.

But we should be slow to make inferences from our petty human logic to the ethics of the Almighty. Whatever the cruelty of the slave-trade, or the severity of slavery on the continents or islands of America, we should still, in regard to its supposed consequences, be wiser, perhaps, to say with that great and simple Casuist Who gave the world the Christian religion: "Suppose ye that these Galileans were sinners above all the Galileans because

[p. 813]

they suffered such things? or those eighteen upon whom the tower of Siloam fell and slew them, think ye that they were sinners above all the men that dwelt in Jerusalem?"

Retribution bars retaliation, even in words. A city shattered, burned, destroyed, desolate, a land wasted, humiliated, made a desert and a wilderness, or wearing the thorny crown of humiliation and subjugation, is invested with the sacred prerogatives and immunities of the dead. The base human revenge of exultation at its fall and ruin should shrink back abashed in the presence of the infinite Divine chastisement. "Forgiveness is wiser than revenge," our Freemasonry teaches us, "and it is better to love than to hate." Let him who sees in great calamities the hand of God, be silent, and fear His judgments.

Men are great or small in stature as it pleases God. But their nature is great or small as it pleases themselves. Men are not born, some with great souls and some with little souls. One by taking thought cannot add to his stature, but he can enlarge his soul. By an act of the will he can make himself a moral giant, or dwarf himself to a pigmy.

There are two natures in man, the higher and the lower, the great and the mean, the noble and the ignoble; and he can and must, by his own voluntary act, identify himself with the one or with the other. Freemasonry is continual effort to exalt the nobler nature over the ignoble, the spiritual over the material, the divine in man over the human. In this great effort and purpose the chivalric Degrees concur and co-operate with those that teach the magnificent lessons of morality and philosophy. Magnanimity, mercy, clemency, a forgiving temper, are virtues indispensable to the character of a perfect Knight. When the low and evil principle in our nature says, "Do not give; reserve your beneficence for impoverished friends, or at least unobjectionable strangers, Do not bestow it on successful enemies,--friends only in virtue, of our misfortunes," the diviner principle whose voice spake by the despised Galilean says, "Do good to them that hate you, for if ye love them (only) who love you, what reward have you? Do not publicans and sinners the same"--that is, the tax-gathers and wicked oppressors, armed Romans and renegade Jews, whom ye count your enemies?

     
Morals and Dogma, by Albert Pike, [1871], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 814]

  

XXX.

  

KNIGHT KADOSH.

WE often profit more by our enemies than by our friends. "We support ourselves only on that which resists," and owe our success to opposition. The best friends of Masonry in America were the Anti-Masons of 1826, and at the same time they were its worst enemies. Men are but the automata of Providence, and it uses the demagogue, the fanatic, and the knave, a common trinity in Republics, as its tools and instruments to effect that of which they do not dream, and which they imagine themselves commissioned to prevent.

The Anti-Masons, traitors and perjurors some, and some mere political knaves, purified Masonry by persecution, and so proved to be its benefactors; for that which is persecuted, grows. To them its present popularity is due, the cheapening of its Degrees, the invasion of its Lodges, that are no longer Sanctuaries, by the multitude; its pomp and pageantry and overdone display.

An hundred years ago it had become known that the w ?Q?D?Sh were the Templars under a veil, and therefore the Degree was pro-scribed, and, ceasing to be worked, became a mere brief and formal ceremony, under another name. Now, from the tomb in which after his murders he rotted, Clement the Fifth howls against the successors of his victims, in the Allocution of Pio Nono against the Free-Masons. The ghosts of the dead Templars

[p. 815]

haunt the Vatican and disturb the slumbers of the paralyzed Papacy, which, dreading the dead, shrieks out its excommunications and impotent anathemas against the living. It is a declaration of war, and was needed to arouse apathy and inertness to action.

An enemy of the Templars shall tell us the secret of this Papal hostility against an Order that has existed for centuries in despite of its anathemas, and has its Sanctuaries and Asyla even in Rome.

It will be easy, as we read, to separate the false from the true, the audacious conjectures from the simple facts.

"A power that ruled without antagonism and without concurrence, and consequently without control, proved fatal to the Sacerdotal Royalties; while the Republics, on the other hand, had perished by the conflict of liberties and franchises, which, in the absence of all duty hierarchically sanctioned and enforced, had soon become mere tyrannies, rivals one of the other. To find a stable medium between these two abysses, the idea of the Christian Hierophants was to create a society devoted to abnegation by solemn vows, protected by severe regulations; which should be recruited by initiation, and which, sole depositary of the great religious and social secrets, should make Kings and Pontiffs, without exposing it to the corruptions of Power. In that was the secret of that kingdom of Jesus Christ, which, without being of this world, would govern all its grandeurs.

"This idea presided at the foundation of the great religious orders, so often at war with the secular authorities, ecclesiastical or civil. Its realization was also the dream of the dissident sects of Gnostics or Illuminati who pretended to connect their faith with the primitive tradition of the Christianity of Saint John. It at length became a menace for the Church and Society, when a rich and dissolute Order, initiated in the mysterious doctrines of the Kabalah, seemed disposed to turn against legitimate authority the conservative principle of Hierarchy, and threatened the entire world with an immense revolution.

"The Templars, whose history is so imperfectly known, were those terrible conspirators. In 1118, nine Knights Crusaders in the East, among whom were Geoffroi de Saint-Omer and Hugues de Payens, consecrated themselves to religion, and took an oath between the hands of the Patriarch of Constantinople, a See always secretly or openly hostile to that of Rome from the time of Photius. The avowed object of the Templars was to protect

[p. 816]

the Christians who came to visit the Holy Places: their secret object was the re-building of the Temple of Solomon on the model prophesied by Ezekiel.

"This re-building, formally predicted by the Judaizing Mystics of the earlier ages, had become the secret dream of the Patriarchs of the Orient. The Temple of Solomon, re-built and consecrated to the Catholic worship would become, in effect, the Metropolis of the Universe; the East would prevail over the West, and the Patriarchs of Constantinople would possess themselves of the Papal power.

"The Templars, or Poor Fellow-Soldiery of the Holy House of the Temple intended to be re-built, took as their models, in the Bible, the Warrior-Masons of Zorobabel, who worked, holding the sword in one hand and the trowel in the other. Therefore it was that the Sword and the Trowel were the insignia of the Templars, who subsequently, as will be seen, concealed themselves under the name of Brethren Masons. [This name, Freres Masons in the French, adopted by way of secret reference to the Builders of the Second Temple, was corrupted in English into Free-Masons, as Pythagore de Crotone was into Peter Gower of Groton in England. Khairu_m or Khu_r-u_m, (a name mis-rendered into Hiram) from an artificer in brass and other metals, became the Chief Builder of the Haikal Kadosh, the Holy House, of the Temple, the Ieros Domos; and the words Bonai and Banaim yet appear in the Masonic Degrees, meaning Builder and Builders.]

"The trowel of the Templars is quadruple, and the triangular plates of it are arranged in the form of a cross, making the Kabalistic pantacle known by the name of the Cross of the East. The Knight of the East, and the Knight of the East and West, have in their titles secret allusions to the Templars of whom they were at first the successors.

"The secret thought of Hugues de Payens, in founding his Order, was not exactly to serve the ambition of the Patriarchs of Constantinople. There existed at that period in the East a Sect of Johannite Christians, who claimed to be the only true Initiates into the real mysteries of the religion of the Saviour. They pretended to know the real history of YESUS the ANOINTED, and, adopting in part the Jewish traditions and the tales of the Talmud, they held that the facts recounted in the Evangels are but allegories, the key of which Saint John gives, in saying that the

[p. 817]

world might be filled with the books that could be written upon the words and deeds of Jesus Christ; words which, they thought, would be only a ridiculous exaggeration, if he were not speaking of an allegory and a legend, that might be varied and prolonged to infinity.

"The Johannites ascribed to Saint John the foundation of their Secret Church, and the Grand Pontiffs of the Sect assumed the title of Christos, Anointed, or Consecrated, and claimed to have succeeded one another from Saint John by an uninterrupted succession of pontifical powers. He who, at the period of the foundation of the Order of the Temple, claimed these imaginary prerogatives, was named THEOCLET; he knew HUGUES DE PAYENS, he initiated him into the Mysteries and hopes of his pretended church, he seduced him by the notions of Sovereign Priesthood and Supreme royalty, and finally designated him as his successor.

"Thus the Order of Knights of the Temple was at its very origin devoted to the cause of opposition to the tiara of Rome and the crowns of Kings, and the Apostolate of Kabalistic Gnosticism was vested in its chiefs. For Saint John himself was the Father of the Gnostics, and the current translation of his polemic against the heretical of his Sect and the pagans who denied that Christ was the Word, is throughout a misrepresentation, or misunderstanding at least, of the whole Spirit of that Evangel.

"The tendencies and tenets of the Order were enveloped in profound mystery, and it externally professed the most perfect orthodoxy. The Chiefs alone knew the aim of the Order: the Subalterns followed them without distrust.

"To acquire influence and wealth, then to intrigue, and at need to fight, to establish the Johannite or Gnostic and Kabalistic dogma, were the object and means proposed to the initiated Brethren. The Papacy and the rival monarchies, they said to them, are sold and bought in these days, become corrupt, and to-morrow, perhaps, will destroy each other. All that will become the heritage of the Temple: the World will soon come to us for its Sovereigns and Pontiffs. We shall constitute the equilibrium of the Universe, and be rulers over the Masters of the World.

"The Templars, like all other Secret Orders and Associations, had two doctrines, one concealed and reserved for the Masters, which was Johannism; the other public, which was the Roman Catholic. Thus they deceived the adversaries whom they sought

[p. 818]

to supplant. Hence Free-Masonry, vulgarly imagined to have begun with the Dionysian Architects or the German Stone-workers, adopted Saint John the Evangelist as one of its patrons, associating with him, in order not to arouse the suspicions of Rome, Saint John the Baptist, and thus covertly proclaiming itself the child of the Kabalah and Essenism together."

[For the Johannism of the Adepts was the Kabalah of the earlier Gnostics, degenerating afterward into those heretical forms which Gnosticism developed, so that even Manes had his followers among them. Many adopted his doctrines of the two Principles, the recollection of which is perpetuated by the handle of the dagger and the tesserated pavement or floor of the Lodge, stupidly called "the Indented Tessel," and represented by great hanging tassels, when it really means a tesserated floor (from the Latin tessera) of white and black lozenges, with a necessarily denticulated or indented border or edging. And wherever, in the higher Degrees, the two colors white and black, are in juxtaposition, the two Principles of Zoroaster and Manes are alluded to. With others the doctrine became a mystic Pantheism, descended from that of the Brahmins, and even pushed to an idolatry of Nature and hatred of every revealed dogma.

[To all this the absurd reading of the established Church, taking literally the figurative, allegorical, and mythical language of a collection of Oriental books of different ages, directly and inevitably led. The same result long after followed the folly of regarding the Hebrew books as if they had been written by the unimaginative, hard, practical intellect of the England of James the First and the bigoted stolidity of Scottish Presbyterianism.]

"The better to succeed and win partisans, the Templars sympathized with regrets for dethroned creeds and encouraged the hopes of new worships, promising to all liberty of conscience and a new orthodoxy that should be the synthesis of all the persecuted creeds."

[It is absurd to suppose that men of intellect adored a monstrous idol called Baphomet, or recognized Mahomet as an inspired prophet. Their symbolism, invented ages before, to conceal what it was dangerous to avow, was of course misunderstood by those who were not adepts, and to their enemies seemed to be pantheistic. The calf of gold, made by Aaron for the Israelites, was but one of the oxen under the laver of bronze, and the Karobim on the Propitiatory, misunderstood. The symbols of the wise always become

[p. 819]

the idols of the ignorant multitude. What the Chiefs of the Order really believed and taught, is indicated to the Adepts by the hints contained in the high Degrees of Free-Masonry, and by the symbols which only the Adepts understand.

[The Blue Degrees are but the outer court or portico of the Temple. Part of the symbols are displayed there to the Initiate, but he is intentionally misled by false interpretations. It is not intended that he shall understand them; but it is intended that he shall imagine he understands them. Their true explication is reserved for the Adepts, the Princes of Masonry. The whole body of the Royal and Sacerdotal Art was hidden so carefully, centuries since, in the High Degrees, as that it is even yet impossible to solve many of the enigmas which they contain. It is well enough for the mass of those called Masons, to imagine that all is contained in the Blue Degrees; and whoso attempts to undeceive them will labor in vain, and without any true reward violate his obligations as an Adept. Masonry is the veritable Sphinx, buried to the head in the sands heaped round it by the ages.]

"The seeds of decay were sown in the Order of the Temple at its origin. Hypocrisy is a mortal disease. It had conceived a great work which it was incapable of executing, because it knew neither humility nor personal abnegation, because Rome was then invincible, and because the later Chiefs of the Order did not comprehend its mission. Moreover, the Templars were in general uneducated, and capable only of wielding the sword, with no qualifications for governing, and at need enchaining, that queen of the world called Opinion." [The doctrines of the Chiefs would, if expounded to the masses, have seemed to them the babblings of folly. The symbols of the wise are the idols of the vulgar, or else as meaningless as the hieroglyphics of Egypt to the nomadic Arabs. There must always be a common-place interpretation for the mass of Initiates, of the symbols that are eloquent to the Adepts.]

"Hughes de Payens himself had not that keen and far-sighted intellect nor that grandeur of purpose which afterward distinguished the military founder of another soldiery that became formidable to kings. The Templars were unintelligent and therefore unsuccessful Jesuits.

"Their watchword was, to become wealthy, in order to buy the world. They became so, and in 1312 they possessed in Europe

[p. 820]

alone more than nine thousand seignories. Riches were the shoal on which they were wrecked. They became insolent, and unwisely showed their contempt for the religious and social institutions which they aimed to overthrow. Their ambition was fatal to them. Their projects were divined and prevented. [Rome, more intolerant of heresy than of vice and crime, came to fear the Order, and fear is always cruel. It has always deemed philosophical truth the most dangerous of heresies, and has never been at a loss for a false accusation, by means of which to crush free thought.] Pope Clement V. and King Philip le Bel gave the signal to Europe, and the Templars, taken as it were in an immense net, were arrested, disarmed, and cast into prison. Never was a Coup d'Etat accomplished with a more formidable concert of action. The whole world was struck with stupor, and eagerly waited for the strange revelations of a process that was to echo through so many ages.

"It was impossible to unfold to the people the conspiracy of the Templars against the Thrones and the Tiara. It was impossible to expose to them the doctrines of the Chiefs of the Order. [This would have been to initiate the multitude into the secrets of the Masters, and to have uplifted the veil of Isis. Recourse was therefore had to the charge of magic, and denouncers and false witnesses were easily found. When the temporal and spiritual tyrannies unite to crush a victim they never want for serviceable instruments.] The Templars were gravely accused of spitting upon Christ and denying God at their receptions, of gross obscenities, conversations with female devils, and the worship of a monstrous idol.

"The end of the drama is well known, and how Jacques de Molai and his fellows perished in the flames. But before his execution, the Chief of the doomed Order organized and instituted what afterward came to be called the Occult, Hermetic, or Scottish Masonry. In the gloom of his prison, the Grand Master created four Metropolitan Lodges, at Naples for the East, at Edinburg for the West, at Stockholm for the North, and at Paris for the South." [The initials of his name, J Q.E.D. B Q.E.D. M Q.E.D. found in the same order in the first three Degrees, are but one of the many internal and cogent proofs that such was the origin of modern Free-Masonry. The legend of Osiris was revived and adopted, to symbolize the destruction of the Order, and the resurrection of

[p. 821]

[paragraph continues] Khu_ru_m, slain in the body of the Temple, of KHU_RU_M ABAI, the Master, as the martyr of fidelity to obligation, of Truth and Conscience, prophesied the restoration to life of the buried association.]

"The Pope and the King soon after perished in a strange and sudden manner. Squin de Florian, the chief denouncer of the Order, died assassinated. In breaking the sword of the Templars, they made of it a poniard; and their proscribed trowels thence-forward built only tombs."

[The Order disappeared at once. Its estates and wealth were confiscated, and it seemed to have ceased to exist. Nevertheless it lived, under other names and governed by unknown Chiefs, revealing itself only to those who, in passing through a series of Degrees, had proven themselves worthy to be entrusted with the dangerous Secret. The modern Orders that style themselves Templars have assumed a name to which they have not the shadow of a title.]

"The Successors of the Ancient Adepts Rose-Croix, abandoning by degrees the austere and hierarchial Science of their Ancestors in initiation, became a Mystic Sect, united with many of the Templars, the dogmas of the two intermingling, and believed themselves to be the sole depositaries of the secrets of the Gospel of St. John, seeing in its recitals an allegorical series of rites proper to complete the initiation.

"The Initiates, in fact, thought in the eighteenth century that their time had arrived, some to found a new Hierarchy, others to overturn all authority, and to press down all the summits of the Social Order under the level of Equality."

The mystical meanings of the Rose as a Symbol are to be looked for in the Kabalistic Commentaries on the Canticles.

The Rose was for the Initiates the living and blooming symbol of the revelation of the harmonies of being. It was the emblem of beauty, life, love, and pleasure. Flamel, or the Book of the Jew Abraham, made it the hieroglyphical sign of the accomplishment of the great Work. Such is the key of the Roman de la Rose. The Conquest of the Rose was the problem propounded to Science by Initiation, while Religion was laboring to prepare and establish the universal triumph, exclusive and definitive, of the Cross.

To unite the Rose to the Cross, was the problem proposed by the High Initiation; and in fact the Occult philosophy being the

[p. 822]

[paragraph continues] Universal Synthesis, ought to explain all the phenomena of Being. Religion, considered solely as a physiological fact, is the revelation and satisfaction of a necessity of souls. Its existence is a scientific fact; to deny it, would be to deny humanity itself.

The Rose-Croix Adepts respected the dominant, hierarchical, and revealed religion. Consequently they could no more be the enemies of the Papacy than of legitimate Monarchy; and if they conspired against the Popes and Kings, it was because they considered them personally as apostates from duty and supreme favorers of anarchy.

What, in fact, is a despot, spiritual or temporal, but a crowned anarchist?

One of the magnificent pantacles that express the esoteric and unutterable part of Science, is a Rose of Light, in the centre of which a human form extends its arms in the form of a cross.

Commentaries and studies have been multiplied upon the Divine Comedy, the work of DANTE, and yet no one, so far as we know, has pointed out its especial character. The work of the great Ghibellin is a declaration of war against the Papacy, by bold revelations of the Mysteries. The Epic of Dante is Johannite and Gnostic, an audacious application, like that of the Apocalypse, of the figures and numbers of the Kabalah to the Christian dogmas, and a secret negation of every thing absolute in these dogmas. His journey through the supernatural worlds is accomplished like the initiation into the Mysteries of Eleusis and Thebes. He escapes from that gulf of Hell over the gate of which the sentence of despair was written, by reversing the positions of his head and feet, that is to say, by accepting the direct opposite of the Catholic dogma; and then he reascends to the light, by using the Devil himself as a monstrous ladder. Faust ascends to Heaven, by stepping on the head of the vanquished Mephistopheles. Hell is impassable for those only who know not how to turn back from it. We free ourselves from its bondage by audacity.

His Hell is but a negative Purgatory. His Heaven is composed of a series of Kabalistic circles, divided by a cross, like the Pantacle of Ezekiel. In the centre of this cross blooms a rose, and we see the symbol of the Adepts of the Rose-Croix for the first time publicly expounded and almost categorically explained.

For the first time, because Guillaume de Lorris, who died in 1260, five years before the birth of Alighieri, had not completed

[p. 823]

his Roman de la Rose, which was continued by Chopinel, a half century afterward. One is astonished to discover that the Roman de la Rose and the Divina Commedia are two opposite forms of one and the same work, initiation into independence of spirit, a satire on all contemporary institutions, and the allegorical formula of the great Secrets of the Society of the Roses-Croix.

The important manifestations of Occultism coincide with the period of the fall of the Templars; since Jean de Meung or Chopinel, contemporary of the old age of Dante, flourished during the best years of his life at the Court of Philippe le Bel. The Roman de la Rose is the Epic of old France. It is a profound book, under the form of levity, a revelation as learned as that of Apuleius, of the Mysteries of Occultism. The Rose of Flamel, that of Jean de Meung, and that of Dante, grew on the same stem.

Swedenborg's system was nothing else than the Kabalah, minus the principle of the Hierarchy. It is the Temple, without the keystone and the foundation.

Cagliostro was the Agent of the Templars, and therefore wrote to the Free-Masons of London that the time had come to begin the work of re-building the Temple of the Eternal. He had introduced into Masonry a new Rite called the Egyptian, and endeavored to resuscitate the mysterious worship of Isis. The three letters L Q.E.D. P Q.E.D. D Q.E.D. on his seal, were the initials of the words "Lilia pedibus destrue;" tread under foot the Lilies [of France], and a Masonic medal of the sixteenth or seventeenth century has upon it a sword cutting off the stalk of a lily, and the words "talem dabit ultio messem," such harvest revenge will give.

A Lodge inaugurated under the auspices of Rousseau, the fanatic of Geneva, became the centre of the revolutionary movement in France, and a Prince of the blood-royal went thither to swear the destruction of the successors of Philippe le Bel on the tomb of Jacques de Molai. The registers of the Order of Templars attest that the Regent, the Duc d'Orleans, was Grand Master of that formidable Secret Society, and that his successors were the Duc de Maine, the Prince of Bourbon-Conde, and the Duc de Cosse-Brissac.

The Templars compromitted the King; they saved him from the rage of the People, to exasperate that rage and bring on the catastrophe prepared for centuries; it was a scaffold that the vengeance of the Templars demanded. The secret movers of the

[p. 824]

[paragraph continues] French Revolution had sworn to overturn the Throne and the Altar upon the Tomb of Jacques de Molai. When Louis XVI. was executed, half the work was done; and thenceforward the Army of the Temple was to direct all its efforts against the Pope.

Jacques de Molai and his companions were perhaps martyrs, but their avengers dishonored their memory. Royalty was regenerated on the scaffold of Louis XVI., the Church triumphed in the captivity of Pius VI., carried a prisoner to Valence, and dying of fatigue and sorrow, but the successors of the Ancient Knights of the Temple perished, overwhelmed in their fatal victory.

 

     
Morals and Dogma, by Albert Pike, [1871], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 825]

  

MORALS AND DOGMA.

  

CONSISTORY.

  

XXXI.

  

GRAND INSPECTOR INQUISITOR COMMANDER.

  

[Inspector Inquisitor.]

To hear patiently, to weigh deliberately and dispassionately, and to decide impartially;--these are the chief duties of a Judge. After the lessons you have received, I need not further enlarge upon them. You will be ever eloquently reminded of them by the furniture upon our Altar, and the decorations of the Tribunal.

The Holy Bible will remind you of your obligation; and that as you judge here below, so you will be yourself judged hereafter, by One who has not to submit, like an earthly judge, to the sad necessity of inferring the motives, intentions, and purposes of men [of which all crime essentially consists] from the uncertain and often unsafe testimony of their acts and words; as men in thick darkness grope their way, with hands outstretched before them: but before Whom every thought, feeling, impulse, and intention of every soul that now is, or ever was, or ever will be on earth, is, and ever will be through the whole infinite duration of eternity, present and visible.

[p. 826]

The Square and Compass, the Plumb and Level, are well known to you as a Mason. Upon you as a Judge, they peculiarly inculcate uprightness, impartiality, careful consideration of facts and circumstances, accuracy in judgment, and uniformity in decision As a Judge, too, you are to bring up square work and square work only. Like a temple erected by the plumb, you are to lean neither to one side nor the other. Like a building well squared and levelled, you are to be firm and steadfast in your convictions of right and justice. Like the circle swept with the compasses, you are to be true. In the scales of justice you are to weigh the facts and the law alone, nor place in either scale personal friendship or personal dislike, neither fear nor favor: and when reformation is no longer to be hoped for, you are to smite relentlessly with the sword of justice.

The peculiar and principal symbol of this Degree is the Tetractys of Pythagoras, suspended in the East, where ordinarily the sacred word or letter glitters, like it, representing the Deity. Its nine external points form the triangle, the chief symbol in Masonry, with many of the meanings of which you are familiar.

To us, its three sides represent the three principal attributes of the Deity, which created, and now, as ever, support, uphold, and guide the Universe in its eternal movement; the three supports of the Masonic Temple, itself an emblem of the Universe:--Wisdom, or the Infinite Divine Intelligence; Strength, or Power, the Infinite Divine Will; and Beauty, or the Infinite Divine Harmony, the Eternal Law, by virtue of which the infinite myriads of suns and worlds flash ever onward in their ceaseless revolutions, without clash or conflict, in the Infinite of space, and change and movement are the law of all created existences.

To us, as Masonic Judges, the triangle figures forth the Pyramids, which, planted firmly as the everlasting hills, and accurately adjusted to the four cardinal points, defiant of all assaults of men and time, teach us to stand firm and unshaken as they, when our feet are planted upon the solid truth.

It includes a multitude of geometrical figures, all having a deep significance to Masons. The triple triangle is peculiarly sacred, having ever been among all nations a symbol of the Deity. Prolonging all the external lines of the Hexagon, which also it includes, we have six smaller triangles, whose bases cut each other in the central point of the Tetractys, itself always the symbol of

[p. 827]

the generative power of the Universe, the Sun, Brahma, Osiris, Apollo, Bel, and the Deity Himself. Thus, too, we form twelve still smaller triangles, three times three of which compose the Tetractys itself.

I refrain from enumerating all the figures that you may trace within it: but one may not be passed unnoticed. The Hexagon itself faintly images to us a cube, not visible at the first glance, and therefore the fit emblem of that faith in things invisible, most essential to salvation. The first perfect solid, and reminding you of the cubical stone that sweated blood, and of that deposited by Enoch, it teaches justice, accuracy, and consistency.

The infinite divisibility of the triangle teaches the infinity of the Universe, of time, of space, and of the Deity, as do the lines that, diverging from the common centre, ever increase their distance from each other as they are infinitely prolonged. As they may be infinite in number, so are the attributes of Deity infinite; and as they emanate from one centre and are projected into space, so the whole Universe has emanated from God.

Remember also, my Brother, that you have other duties to perform than those of a judge. You are to inquire into and scrutinize carefully the work of the subordinate Bodies in Masonry. You are to see that recipients of the higher Degrees are not unnecessarily multiplied; that improper persons are carefully excluded from membership, and that in their life and conversation Masons bear testimony to the excellence of our doctrines and the incalculable value of the institution itself. You are to inquire also into your own heart and conduct, and keep careful watch over yourself, that you go not astray. If you harbor ill-will and jealousy, if you are hospitable to intolerance and bigotry, and churlish to gentleness and kind affections, opening wide your heart to one and closing its portals to the other, it is time for you to set in order your own temple, or else you wear in vain the name and insignia of a Mason, while yet uninvested with the Masonic nature.

Everywhere in the world there is a natural law, that is, a constant mode of action, which seems to belong to the nature of things, to the constitution of the Universe. This fact is universal. In different departments we call this mode of action by different names, as the law of Matter, the law of Mind, the law of Morals, and the like. We mean by this, a certain mode of action which belongs to the material, mental, or moral forces, the mode in

[p. 828]

which commonly they are found to act, and in which it is their ideal to act always. The ideal laws of matter we know only from the fact that they are always obeyed. To us the actual obedience is the only evidence of the ideal rule; for in respect to the conduct of the material world, the ideal and the actual are the same.

The laws of matter we learn only by observation and experience. Before experience of the fact, no man could foretell that a body, falling toward the earth, would descend sixteen feet the first second, twice that the next, four times the third, and sixteen times the fourth. No mode of action in our consciousness anticipates this rule of action in the outer world. The same is true of all the laws of matter. The ideal law is known because it is a fact. The law is imperative. It must be obeyed without hesitation. Laws of crystallization, laws of proportion in chemical combination,--neither in these nor in any other law of Nature is there any mar-gin left for oscillation of disobedience. Only the primal will of God works in the material world, and no secondary finite will.

There are no exceptions to the great general law of Attraction, which binds atom to atom in the body of a rotifier visible only by aid of a microscope, orb to orb, system to system; gives unity to the world of things, and rounds these worlds of systems to a Universe. At first there seem to be exceptions to this law, as in growth and decomposition, in the repulsions of electricity; but at length all these are found to be special cases of the one great law of attraction acting in various modes.

The variety of effect of this law at first surprises the senses; but in the end the unity of cause astonishes the cultivated mind. Looked at in reference to this globe, an earthquake is no more than a chink that opens in a garden-walk of a dry day in Summer. A sponge is porous, having small spaces between the solid parts: the solar system is only more porous, having larger room between the several orbs: the Universe yet more so, with spaces between the systems, as small, compared with infinite space, as those between the atoms that compose the bulk of the smallest invisible animalcule, of which millions swim in a drop of salt-water. The same attraction holds together the animalcule, the sponge, the system, and the Universe. Every particle of matter in that Universe is related to each and all the other particles; and attraction is their common bond.

In the spiritual world, the world of human consciousness, there

[p. 829]

is also a law, an ideal mode of action for the spiritual forces of man. The law of Justice is as universal an one as the law of At-traction; though we are very far from being able to reconcile all the phenomena of Nature with it. The lark has the same right in our view, to live, to sing, to dart at pleasure through the ambient atmosphere, as the hawk has to ply his strong wings in the Summer sunshine: and yet the hawk pounces on and devours the harmless lark, as it devours the worm, and as the worm devours the animalcule; and, so far as we know, there is nowhere, in any future state of animal existence, any compensation for this apparent injustice. Among the bees, one rules, while the others obey--some work, while others are idle. With the small ants, the soldiers feed on the proceeds of the workmen's labor. The lion lies in wait for and devours the antelope that has apparently as good a right to life as he. Among men, some govern and others serve, capital commands and labor obeys, and one race, superior in intellect, avails itself of the strong muscles of another that is inferior; and yet, for all this, no one impeaches the justice of God.

No doubt all these varied phenomena are consistent with one great law of justice; and the only difficulty is that we do not, and no doubt we cannot, understand that law. It is very easy for some dreaming and visionary theorist to say that it is most evidently unjust for the lion to devour the deer, and for the eagle to tear and eat the wren; but the trouble is, that we know of no other way, according to the frame, the constitution, and the organs which God has given them, in which the lion and the eagle could manage to live at all. Our little measure of justice is not God's measure. His justice does not require us to relieve the hard-working millions of all labor, to emancipate the serf or slave, unfitted to be free, from all control.

No doubt, underneath all the little bubbles, which are the lives, the wishes, the wills, and the plans of the two thousand millions or more of human beings on this earth (for bubbles they are, judging by the space and time they occupy in this great and age-outlasting sea of humankind),--no doubt, underneath them all resides one and the same eternal force, which they shape into this or the other special form; and over all the same paternal Providence presides, keeping eternal watch over the little and the great, and producing variety of effect from Unity of Force.

It is entirely true to say that justice is the constitution or fundamental

[p. 830]

law of the moral Universe, the law of right, a rule of conduct for man (as it is for every other living creature), in all his moral relations. No doubt all human affairs (like all other affairs), must be subject to that as the law paramount; and what is right agrees therewith and stands, while what is wrong conflicts with it and falls. The difficulty is that we ever erect our notions of what is right and just into the law of justice, and insist that God shall adopt that as His law; instead of striving to learn by observation and reflection what His law is, and then believing that law to be consistent with His infinite justice, whether it corresponds with our limited notion of justice, or does not so correspond. We are too wise in our own conceit, and ever strive to enact our own little notions into the Universal Laws of God.

It might be difficult for man to prove, even to his own satisfaction, how it is right or just for him to subjugate the horse and ox to his service, giving them in return only their daily food, which God has spread out for them on all the green meadows and savannas of the world: or how it is just that we should slay and eat the harmless deer that only crops the green herbage, the buds, and the young leaves, and drinks the free-running water that God made common to all; or the gentle dove, the innocent kid, the many other living things that so confidently trust to our protection;--quite as difficult, perhaps, as to prove it just for one man's intellect or even his wealth to make another's strong arms his servants, for daily wages or for a bare subsistence.

To find out this universal law of justice is one thing--to under-take to measure off something with our own little tape-line, and call that God's law of justice, is another. The great general plan and system, and the great general laws enacted by God, continually produce what to our limited notions is wrong and injustice, which hitherto men have been able to explain to their own satisfaction only by the hypothesis of another existence in which all inequalities and injustices in this life will be remedied and compensated for. To our ideas of justice, it is very unjust that the child is made miserable for life by deformity or organic disease, in consequence of the vices of its father; and yet that is part of the universal law. The ancients said that the child was punished for the sins of its father. We say that this its deformity or disease is the consequence of its father's vices; but so far as concerns the question of justice or injustice, that is merely the change of a word.

[p. 831]

It is very easy to lay down a broad, general principle, embodying our own idea of what is absolute justice, and to insist that everything shall conform to that: to say, "all human affairs must be subject to that as the law paramount; what is right agrees therewith and stands, what is wrong conflicts and falls. Private cohesions of self-love, of friendship, or of patriotism, must all be subordinate to this universal gravitation toward the eternal right." The difficulty is that this Universe of necessities God-created, of sequences of cause and effect, and of life evolved from death, this interminable succession and aggregate of cruelties, will not con-form to any such absolute principle or arbitrary theory, no matter in what sounding words and glittering phrases it may be embodied.

Impracticable rules in morals are always injurious; for as all men fall short of compliance with them, they turn real virtues into imaginary offences against a forged law. Justice as between man and man and as between man and the animals below him, is that which, under and according to the God-created relations existing between them, and the whole aggregate of circumstances surrounding them, is fit and right and proper to be done, with a view to the general as well as to the individual interest. It is not a theoretical principle by which the very relations that God has created and imposed on us are to be tried, and approved or condemned.

God has made this great system of the Universe, and enacted general laws for its government. Those laws environ everything that lives with a mighty network of necessity. He chose to create the tiger with such organs that he cannot crop the grass, but must eat other flesh or starve. He has made man carnivorous also; and some of the smallest birds are as much so as the tiger. In every step we take, in every breath we draw, is involved the destruction of a multitude of animate existences, each, no matter how minute, as much a living creature as ourself. He has made necessary among mankind a division of labor, intellectual and moral. He has made necessary the varied relations of society and dependence, of obedience and control.

What is thus made necessary cannot be unjust; for if it be, then God the great Lawgiver is Himself unjust. The evil to be avoided is, the legalization of injustice and wrong under the false plea of necessity. Out of all the relations of life grow duties,--as

[p. 832]

naturally grow and as undeniably, as the leaves grow upon the trees. If we have the right, created by God's law of necessity, to slay the lamb that we may eat and live, we have no right to torture it in doing so, because that is in no wise necessary. We have the right to live, if we fairly can, by the legitimate exercise of our intellect, and hire or buy the labor of the strong arms of others, to till our grounds, to dig in our mines, to toil in our manufactories; but we have no right to overwork or underpay them.

It is not only true that we may learn the moral law of justice, the law of right, by experience and observation; but that God has given us a moral faculty, our conscience, which is able to perceive this law directly and immediately, by intuitive perception of it; and it is true that man has in his nature a rule of conduct higher than what he has ever yet come up to,--an ideal of nature that shames his actual of history: because man has ever been prone to make necessity, his own necessity, the necessities of society, a plea for injustice. But this notion must not be pushed too far--for if we substitute this ideality for actuality, then it is equally true that we have within us an ideal rule of right and wrong, to which God Himself in His government of the world has never come, and against which He (we say it reverentially) every day offends. We detest the tiger and the wolf for the rapacity and love of blood which are their nature; we revolt against the law by which the crooked limbs and diseased organism of the child are the fruits of the father's vices; we even think that a God Omnipotent and Omniscient ought to have permitted no pain, no poverty, no servitude; our ideal of justice is more lofty than the actualities of God. It is well, as all else is well. He has given us that moral sense for wise and beneficent purposes. We accept it as a significant proof of the inherent loftiness of human nature, that it can entertain an ideal so exalted; and should strive to attain it, as far as we can do so consistently with the relations which He has created, and the circumstances which surround us and hold us captive.

If we faithfully use this faculty of conscience; if, applying it to the existing relations and circumstances, we develop it and all its kindred powers, and so deduce the duties that out of these relations and those circumstances, and limited and qualified by them, arise and become obligatory upon us, then we learn justice, the law of right, the divine rule of conduct for human life. But if we undertake to define and settle "the mode of action that belongs

[p. 833]

to the infinitely perfect nature of God," and so set up any ideal rule, beyond all human reach, we soon come to judge and condemn His work and the relations which it has pleased Him in His infinite wisdom to create.

A sense of justice belongs to human nature, and is a part of it. Men find a deep, permanent, and instinctive delight in justice, not only in the outward effects, but in the inward cause, and by their nature love this law of right, this reasonable rule of conduct, this justice, with a deep and abiding love. Justice is the object of the conscience, and fits it as light fits the eye and truth the mind.

Justice keeps just relations between men. It holds the balance between nation and nation, between a man and his family, tribe, nation, and race, so that his absolute rights and theirs do not interfere, nor their ultimate interests ever clash, nor the eternal interests of the one prove antagonistic to those of all or of any other one. This we must believe, if we believe that God is just. We must do justice to all, and demand it of all; it is a universal human debt, a universal human claim. But we may err greatly in defining what that justice is. The temporary interests, and what to human view are the rights, of men, do often interfere and clash. The life-interests of the individual often conflict with the permanent interests and welfare of society; and what may seem to be the natural rights of one class or race, with those of another.

It is not true to say that "one man, however little, must not be sacrificed to another, however great, to a majority, or to all men." That is not only a fallacy, but a most dangerous one. Often one man and many men must be sacrificed, in the ordinary sense of the term, to the interest of the many. It is a comfortable fallacy to the selfish; for if they cannot, by the law of justice, be sacrificed for the common good, then their country has no right to demand of them self-sacrifice; and he is a fool who lays down his life, or sacrifices his estate, or even his luxuries, to insure the safety or prosperity of his country. According to that doctrine, Curtius was a fool, and Leonidas an idiot; and to die for one's country is no longer beautiful and glorious, but a mere absurdity. Then it is no longer to be asked that the common soldier shall receive in his bosom the sword or bayonet-thrust which otherwise would let out the life of the great commander on whose fate hang the liberties of his country, and the welfare of millions yet unborn.

On the contrary, it is certain that necessity rules in all the

[p. 834]

affairs of men, and that the interest and even the life of one man must often be sacrificed to the interest and welfare of his country. Some must ever lead the forlorn hope: the missionary must go among savages, bearing his life in his hand; the physician must expose himself to pestilence for the sake of others; the sailor, in the frail boat upon the wide ocean, escaped from the foundering or burning ship, must step calmly into the hungry waters, if the lives of the passengers can be saved only by the sacrifice of his own; the pilot must stand firm at the wheel, and let the flames scorch away his own life to insure the common safety of those whom the doomed vessel bears.

The mass of men are always looking for what is just. All the vast machinery which makes up a State, a world of States, is, on the part of the people, an attempt to organize, not that ideal justice which finds fault with God's ordinances, but that practical justice which may be attained in the actual organization of the world. The minute and wide-extending civil machinery which makes up the law and the courts, with all their officers and implements, on the part of mankind, is chiefly an effort to reduce to practice the theory of right. Constitutions are made to establish justice; the decisions of courts are reported to help us judge more wisely in time to come. The nation aims to get together the most nearly just men in the State, that they may incorporate into statutes their aggregate sense of what is right. The people wish law to be embodied justice, administered without passion. Even in the wildest ages there has been a wild popular justice, but always mixed with passion and administered in hate; for justice takes a rude form with rude men, and becomes less mixed with hate and passion in more civilized communities. Every progressive State revises its statutes and revolutionizes its constitution from time to time, seeking to come closer to the utmost possible practical justice and right; and sometimes, following theorists and dreamers in their adoration for the ideal, by erecting into law positive principles of theoretical right, works practical injustice, and then has to retrace its steps.

In literature men always look for practical justice, and desire that virtue should have its own reward, and vice its appropriate punishment. They are ever on the side of justice and humanity; and the majority of them have an ideal justice, better than the things about them, juster than the law: for the law is ever imperfect,

[p. 835]

not attaining even to the utmost practicable degree of perfection; and no man is as just as his own idea of possible and practicable justice. His passions and his necessities ever cause him to sink below his own ideal. The ideal justice which men ever look up to and strive to rise toward, is true; but it will not be realized in this world. Yet we must approach as near to it as practicable, as we should do toward that ideal democracy that "now floats before the eyes of earnest and religious men,--fairer than the Republic of Plato, or More's Utopia, or the Golden Age of fabled memory," only taking care that we do not, in striving to reach and ascend to the impossible ideal, neglect to seize upon and hold fast to the possible actual. To aim at the best, but be content with the best possible, is the only true wisdom. To insist on the absolute right, and throw out of the calculation the important and all-controlling element of necessity, is the folly of a mere dreamer.

In a world inhabited by men with bodies, and necessarily with bodily wants and animal passions, the time will never come when there will be no want, no oppression, nor servitude, no fear of man, no fear of God, but only Love. That can never be while there are inferior intellect, indulgence in low vice, improvidence, indolence, awful visitations of pestilence and war and famine, earthquake and volcano, that must of necessity cause men to want, and serve, and suffer, and fear.

But still the ploughshare of justice is ever drawn through and through the field of the world, uprooting the savage plants. Ever we see a continual and progressive triumph of the right. The injustice of England lost her America, the fairest jewel of her crown. The injustice of Napoleon bore him to the ground more than the snows of Russia did, and exiled him to a barren rock, there to pine away and die, his life a warning to bid mankind be just.

We intuitively understand what justice is, better than we can depict it. What it is in a given case depends so much on circumstances, that definitions of it are wholly deceitful. Often it would be unjust to society to do what would, in the absence of that consideration, be pronounced just to the individual. General propositions of man's right to this or that are ever fallacious: and not infrequently it would be most unjust to the individual himself to do for him what the theorist, as a general proposition, would say was right and his due.

[p. 836]

We should ever do unto others what, under the same circumstances, we ought to wish, and should have the right to wish they should do unto us. There are many cases, cases constantly occur-ring, where one man must take care of himself, in preference to another, as where two struggle for the possession of a plank that will save one, but cannot uphold both; or where, assailed, he can save his own life only by slaying his adversary. So one must prefer the safety of his country to the lives of her enemies; and sometimes, to insure it, to those of her own innocent citizens. The retreating general may cut away a bridge behind him, to delay pursuit and save the main body of his army, though he thereby surrenders a detachment, a battalion, or even a corps of his own force to certain destruction.

These are not departures from justice; though, like other instances where the injury or death of the individual is the safety of the many, where the interest of one individual, class, or race is postponed to that of the public, or of the superior race, they may infringe some dreamer's ideal rule of justice. But every departure from real, practical justice is no doubt attended with loss to the unjust man, though the loss is not reported to the public. Injustice, public or private, like every other sin and wrong, is inevitably followed by its consequences. The selfish, the grasping, the inhuman, the fraudulently unjust, the ungenerous employer, and the cruel master, are detested by the great popular heart; while the kind master, the liberal employer, the generous, the humane, and the just have the good opinion of all men, and even envy is a tribute to their virtues. Men honor all who stand up for truth and right, and never shrink. The world builds monuments to its patriots. Four great statesmen, organizers of the right, embalmed in stone, look down upon the lawgivers of France as they pass to their hall of legislation, silent orators to tell how nations love the just. How we revere the marble lineaments of those just judges, Jay and Marshall, that look so calmly toward the living Bench of the Supreme Court of the United States! What a monument Washington has built in the heart of America and all the world, not because he dreamed of an impracticable ideal justice, but by his constant effort to be practically just!

But necessity alone, and the greatest good of the greatest number, can legitimately interfere with the dominion of absolute and ideal justice. Government should not foster the strong at the expense

[p. 837]

of the weak, nor protect the capitalist and tax the laborer. The powerful should not seek a monopoly of development and enjoyment; not prudence only and the expedient for to-day should be appealed to by statesmen, but conscience and the right: justice should not be forgotten in looking at interest, nor political morality neglected for political economy: we should not have national housekeeping instead of national organization on the basis of right.

We may well differ as to the abstract right of many things; for every such question has many sides, and few men look at all of them, many only at one. But we all readily recognize cruelty, unfairness, inhumanity, partiality, over-reaching, hard-dealing, by their ugly and familiar lineaments, and in order to know and to hate and despise them, we do not need to sit as a Court of Errors and Appeals to revise and reverse God's Providences.

There are certainly great evils of civilization at this day, and many questions of humanity long adjourned and put off. The hideous aspect of pauperism, the debasement and vice in our cities, tell us by their eloquent silence or in inarticulate mutterings, that the rich and the powerful and the intellectual do not do their duty by the poor, the feeble, and the ignorant; and every wretched woman who lives, Heaven scarce knows how, by making shirts at sixpence each, attests the injustice and inhumanity of man. There are cruelties to slaves, and worse cruelties to animals, each disgraceful to their perpetrators, and equally unwarranted by the lawful relation of control and dependence which it has pleased God to create.

A sentence is written against all that is unjust, written by God in the nature of man and in the nature of the Universe, because it is in the nature of the Infinite God. Fidelity to your faculties, trust in their convictions, that is justice to yourself; a life in obedience thereto, that is justice toward men. No wrong is really successful. The gain of injustice is a loss, its pleasure suffering. Iniquity often seems to prosper, but its success is its defeat and shame. After a long while, the day of reckoning ever comes, to nation as to individual. The knave deceives himself. The miser, starving his brother's body, starves also his own soul, and at death shall creep out of his great estate of injustice, poor and naked and miserable. Whoso escapes a duty avoids a gain. Outward judgment often fails, inward justice never. Let a man try to love the

[p. 838]

wrong and to do the wrong, it is eating stones and not bread, the swift feet of justice are upon him, following with woolen tread, and her iron hands are round his neck. No man can escape from this, any more than from himself. Justice is the angel of God that flies from East to West; and where she stoops her broad wings, it is to bring the counsel of God, and feed mankind with angel's bread.

We cannot understand the moral Universe. The arc is a long one, and our eyes reach but a little way; we cannot calculate the curve and complete the figure by the experience of sight; but we can divine it by conscience, and we surely know that it bends toward justice. Justice will not fail, though wickedness appears strong, and has on its side the armies and thrones of power, the riches and the glory of the world, and though poor men crouch down in despair. Justice will not fail and perish out from the world of men, nor will what is really wrong and contrary to God's real law of justice continually endure. The Power, the Wisdom, and the Justice of God are on the side of every just thought, and it cannot fail, any more than God Himself can perish.

In human affairs, the justice of God must work by human means. Men are the instruments of God's principles; our morality is the instrument of His justice, which, incomprehensible to us, seems to our short vision often to work injustice, but will at some time still the oppressor's brutal laugh. Justice is the rule of conduct written in the nature of mankind. We may, in our daily life, in house or field or shop, in the office or in the court, help to prepare the way for the commonwealth of justice which is slowly, but, we would fain hope, surely approaching. All the justice we mature will bless us here and hereafter, and at our death we shall leave it added to the common store of humankind. And every Mason who, content to do that which is possible and practicable, does and enforces justice, may help deepen the channel of human morality in which God's justice runs; and so the wrecks of evil that now check and obstruct the stream may the sooner be swept out and borne away by the resistless tide of Omnipotent Right. Let us, my Brother, in this, as in all else, endeavor always to perform the duties of a good Mason and a good man.

    
Morals and Dogma, by Albert Pike, [1871], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 839]

  

XXXII.

  

SUBLIME PRINCE OF THE ROYAL SECRET.

  

[Master of Royal Secret.]

THE Occult Science of the Ancient Magi was concealed under the shadows of the Ancient Mysteries: it was imperfectly revealed or rather disfigured by the Gnostics: it is guessed at under the obscurities that cover the pretended crimes of the Templars; and it is found enveloped in enigmas that seem impenetrable, in the Rites of the Highest Masonry.

Magism was the Science of Abraham and Orpheus, of Confucius and Zoroaster. It was the dogmas of this Science that were engraven on the tables of stone by Hanoch and Trismegistus. Moses purified and re-veiled them, for that is the meaning of the word reveal. He covered them with a new veil, when he made of the Holy Kabalah the exclusive heritage of the people of Israel,

[p. 840]

and the inviolable Secret of its priests. The Mysteries of Thebes and Eleusis preserved among the nations some symbols of it, al-ready altered, and the mysterious key whereof was lost among the instruments of an ever-growing superstition. Jerusalem, the murderess of her prophets, and so often prostituted to the false gods of the Syrians and Babylonians, had at length in its turn lost the Holy Word, when a Prophet announced to the Magi by the consecrated Star of Initiation, came to rend asunder the worn veil of the old Temple, in order to give the Church a new tissue of legends and symbols, that still and ever conceals from the Profane, and ever preserves to the Elect the same truths.

It was the remembrance of this scientific and religious Absolute, of this doctrine that is summed up in a word, of this Word, in fine, alternately lost and found again, that was transmitted to the Elect of all the Ancient Initiations: it was this same remembrance, preserved, or perhaps profaned in the celebrated Order of the Templars, that became for all the secret associations, of the Rose-Croix, of the Illuminati, and of the Hermetic Freemasons, the reason of their strange rites, of their signs more or less conventional, and, above all, of their mutual devotedness and of their power.

The Gnostics caused the Gnosis to be proscribed by the Christians, and the official Sanctuary was closed against the high initiation. Thus the Hierarchy of Knowledge was compromitted by the violences of usurping ignorance, and the disorders of the Sanctuary are reproduced in the State; for always, willingly or unwillingly, the King is sustained by the Priest, and it is from the eternal Sanctuary of the Divine instruction that the Powers of the Earth, to insure themselves durability, must receive their consecration and their force.

The Hermetic Science of the early Christian ages, cultivated also by Geber, Alfarabius, and others of the Arabs, studied by the Chiefs of the Templars, and embodied in certain symbols of the higher Degrees of Freemasonry, may be accurately defined as the Kabalah in active realization, or the Magic of Works. It has three analogous Degrees, religious, philosophical, and physical realization.

Its religious realization is the durable foundation of the true Empire and the true Priesthood that rule in the realm of human intellect: its philosophical realization is the establishment of an absolute Doctrine, known in all times as the "HOLY Doctrine,"

[p. 841]

and of which PLUTARCH, in the Treatise "de Iside et Osiride," speaks at large but mysteriously; and of a Hierarchical instruction to secure the uninterrupted succession of Adepts among the Initiates: its physical realization is the discovery and application, in the Microcosm, or Little World, of the creative law that incessantly peoples the great Universe.

Measure a corner of the Creation, and multiply that space in proportional progression, and the entire Infinite will multiply its circles filled with universes, which will pass in proportional segments between the ideal and elongating branches of your Compass. Now suppose that from any point whatever of the Infinite above you a hand holds another Compass or a Square, the lines of the Celestial triangle will necessarily meet those of the Compass of Science, to form the Mysterious Star of Solomon.

All hypotheses scientifically probable are the last gleams of the twilight of knowledge, or its last shadows. Faith begins where Reason sinks exhausted. Beyond the human Reason is the Divine Reason, to our feebleness the great Absurdity, the Infinite Absurd, which confounds us and which we believe. For the Master, the Compass of Faith is above the Square of Reason; but both rest upon the Holy Scriptures and combine to form the Blazing Star of Truth.

All eyes do not see alike. Even the visible creation is not, for all who look upon it, of one form and one color. Our brain is a book printed within and without, and the two writings are, with all men, more or less confused.

The primary tradition of the single revelation has been preserved under the name of the "Kabalah," by the Priesthood of Israel. The Kabalistic doctrine, which was also the dogma of the Magi and of Hermes, is contained in the Sepher Yetsairah, the Sohar, and the Talmud. According to that doctrine, the Absolute is the Being, in which The Word Is, the Word that is the utterance and expression of being and life.

Magic is that which it is; it is by itself, like the mathematics; for it is the exact and absolute science of Nature and its laws.

Magic is the science of the Ancient Magi: and the Christian religion, which has imposed silence on the lying oracles, and put an end to the prestiges of the false Gods, itself reveres those Magi who came from the East, guided by a Star, to adore the Saviour of the world in His cradle.

[p. 842]

Tradition also gives these Magi the title of "Kings;" because initiation into Magism constitutes a genuine royalty; and because the grand art of the Magi is styled by all the Adepts, "The Royal Art," or the Holy Realm or Empire, Sanctum Regnum.

The Star which guided them is that same Blazing Star, the image whereof we find in all initiations. To the Alchemists it is the sign of the Quintessence; to the Magists, the Grand Arcanum; to the Kabalists, the Sacred Pentagram. The study of this Pentagram could not but lead the Magi to the knowledge of the New Name which was about to raise itself above all names, and cause all creatures capable of adoration to bend the knee.

Magic unites in one and the same science, whatsoever Philosophy can possess that is most certain, and Religion of the Infallible and the Eternal. It perfectly and incontestably reconciles these two terms that at first blush seem so opposed to each other; faith and reason, science and creed, authority and liberty.

It supplies the human mind with an instrument of philosophical and religious certainty, exact as the mathematics, and accounting for the infallibility of the mathematics themselves.

Thus there is an Absolute, in the matters of the Intelligence and of Faith. The Supreme Reason has not left the gleams of the human understanding to vacillate at hazard. There is an incontestable verity, there is an infallible method of knowing this verity, and by the knowledge of it, those who accept it as a rule may give their will a sovereign power that will make them the masters of all inferior things and of all errant spirits; that is to say, will make them the Arbiters and Kings of the World.

Science has its nights and its dawns, because it gives the intellectual world a life which has its regulated movements and its progressive phases. It is with Truths, as with the luminous rays: nothing of what is concealed is lost; but also, nothing of what is discovered is absolutely new. God has been pleased to give to Science, which is the reflection of His Glory, the Seal of His Eternity.

It is not in the books of the Philosophers, but in the religious symbolism of the Ancients, that we must look for the footprints of Science, and re-discover the Mysteries of Knowledge. The Priests of Egypt knew, better than we do, the laws of movement and of life. They knew how to temper or intensify action by re-action; and readily foresaw the realization of these effects, the

[p. 843]

causes of which they had determined. The Columns of Seth, Enoch, Solomon, and Hercules have symbolized in the Magian traditions this universal law of the Equilibrium; and the Science of the Equilibrium or balancing of Forces had led the Initiates to that of the universal gravitation around the centres of Life, Heat, and Light.

Thales and Pythagoras learned in the Sanctuaries of Egypt that the Earth revolved around the Sun; but they did not attempt to make this generally known, because to do so it would have been necessary to reveal one of the great Secrets of the Temple, that double law of attraction and radiation or of sympathy and antipathy, of fixedness and movement, which is the principle of Creation, and the perpetual cause of life. This Truth was ridiculed by the Christian Lactantius, as it was long after sought to be proven a falsehood by persecution, by Papal Rome.

So the philosophers reasoned, while the Priests, without replying to them or even smiling at their errors, wrote, in those Hieroglyphics that created all dogmas and all poetry, the Secrets of the Truth.

When Truth comes into the world, the Star of Knowledge advises the Magi of it, and they hasten to adore the Infant who creates the Future. It is by means of the Intelligence of the Hierarchy and the practice of obedience, that one obtains Initiation. If the Rulers have the Divine Right to govern, the true Initiate will cheerfully obey.

The orthodox traditions were carried from Chaldea by Abraham. They reigned in Egypt in the time of Joseph, together with the knowledge of the True God. Moses carried Orthodoxy out of Egypt, and in the Secret Traditions of the Kabalah we find a Theology entire, perfect, unique, like that which in Christianity is most grand and best explained by the Fathers and the Doctors, the whole with a consistency and a harmoniousness which it is not as yet given to the world to comprehend. The Sohar, which is the Key of the Holy Books, opens also all the depths and lights, all the obscurities of the Ancient Mythologies and of the Sciences originally concealed in the Sanctuaries. It is true that the Secret of this Key must be known, to enable one to make use of it, and that for even the most penetrating intellects, not initiated in this Secret, the Sohar is absolutely incomprehensible and almost illegible.

[p. 844]

The Secret of the Occult Sciences is that of Nature itself, the Secret of the generation of the Angels and Worlds, that of the Omnipotence of God.

"Ye shall be like the Elohim, knowing good and evil," had the Serpent of Genesis said, and the Tree of Knowledge became the Tree of Death.

For six thousand years the Martyrs of Knowledge toil and die at the foot of this tree, that it may again become the Tree of Life.

The Absolute sought for unsuccessfully by the insensate and found by the Sages, is the TRUTH, the REALITY, and the REASON of the universal equilibrium!

Equilibrium is the Harmony that results from the analogy of Contraries.

Until now, Humanity has been endeavoring to stand on one foot; sometimes on one, sometimes on the other.

Civilizations have risen and perished, either by the anarchical insanity of Despotism, or by the despotic anarchy of Revolt.

To organize Anarchy, is the problem which the revolutionists have and will eternally have to resolve. It is the rock of Sisyphus that will always fall back upon them. To exist a single instant, they are and always will be by fatality reduced to improvise a despotism without other reason of existence than necessity, and which, consequently, is violent and blind as Necessity. We escape from the harmonious monarchy of Reason, only to fall under the irregular dictatorship of Folly.

Sometimes superstitious enthusiasms, sometimes the miserable calculations of the materialist instinct have led astray the nations, and God at last urges the world on toward believing Reason and reasonable Beliefs.

We have had prophets enough without philosophy, and philosophers without religion; the blind believers and the skeptics resemble each other, and are as far the one as the other from the eternal salvation.

In the chaos of universal doubt and of the conflicts of Reason and Faith, the great men and Seers have been but infirm and morbid artists, seeking the beau-ideal at the risk and peril of their reason and life.

Living only in the hope to be crowned, they are the first to do what Pythagoras in so touching a manner prohibits in his admirable Symbols; they rend crowns, and tread them under foot.

[p. 845]

Light is the equilibrium of Shadow and Lucidity.

Movement is the equilibrium of Inertia and Activity.

Authority is the equilibrium of Liberty and Power.

Wisdom is equilibrium in the Thoughts, which are the scintillations and rays of the Intellect.

Virtue is equilibrium in the Affections: Beauty is harmonious proportion in Forms.

The beautiful lives are the accurate ones, and the magnificences of Nature are an algebra of graces and splendors.

Everything just is beautiful; everything beautiful ought to be just.

---------

There is, in fact, no Nothing, no void Emptiness, in the Universe. From the upper or outer surface of our atmosphere to that of the Sun, and to those of the Planets and remote Stars, in different directions, Science has for hundreds of centuries imagined that there was simple, void, empty Space. Comparing finite knowledge with the Infinite, the Philosophers know little more than the apes! In all that "void" space are the Infinite Forces of God, acting in an infinite variety of directions, back and forth, and never for an instant inactive. In all of it, active through the whole of its Infinity, is the Light that is the Visible Manifestation of God. The earth and every other planet and sphere that is not a Centre of Light, carries its cone of shadow with it as it flies and flashes round in its orbit; but the darkness has no home in the Universe. To illuminate the sphere on one side, is to project a cone of darkness on the other; and Error also is the Shadow of the Truth with which God illuminates the Soul.

In all that "Void," also, is the Mysterious and ever Active Electricity, and Heat, and the Omnipresent Ether. At the will of God the Invisible becomes Visible. Two invisible gases, combined by the action of a Force of God, and compressed, become and remain the water that fills the great basins of the seas, flows in the rivers and rivulets, leaps forth from the rocks or springs, drops upon the earth in rains, or whitens it with snows, and bridges the Danubes with ice, or gathers in vast reservoirs in the earth's bosom. God manifested fills all the extension that we foolishly call Empty Space and the Void.

[p. 846]

And everywhere in the Universe, what we call Life and Movement results from a continual conflict of Forces or Impulses. Whenever that active antagonism ceases, the immobility and inertia, which are Death, result.

If, says the Kabalah, the Justice of God, which is Severity or the Female, alone reigned, creation of imperfect beings such as man would from the beginning have been impossible, because Sin being congenital with Humanity, the Infinite Justice, measuring the Sin by the Infinity of the God offended against, must have annihilated Humanity at the instant of its creation; and not only Humanity but the Angels, since these also, like all created by God and less than perfect, are sinful. Nothing imperfect would have been possible. If, on the other hand, the Mercy or Benignity of God, the Male, were in no wise counteracted, Sin would go unpunished, and the Universe fall into a chaos of corruption.

Let God but repeal a single principle or law of chemical attraction or sympathy, and the antagonistic forces equilibrated in matter, released from constraint, would instantaneously expand all that we term matter into impalpable and invisible gases, such as water or steam is, when, confined in a cylinder and subjected to an immense degree of that mysterious force of the Deity which we call "heat," it is by its expansion released.

Incessantly the great currents and rivers of air flow and rush and roll from the equator to the frozen polar regions, and back from these to the torrid equatorial realms. Necessarily incident to these great, immense, equilibrated and beneficent movements, caused by the antagonism of equatorial heat and polar cold, are the typhoons, tornadoes, and cyclones that result from conflicts between the rushing currents. These and the benign trade-winds result from the same great law. God is omnipotent; but effects without causes are impossible, and these effects cannot but sometimes be evil. The fire would not warm, if it could not also burn, the human flesh. The most virulent poisons are the most sovereign remedies, when given in due proportion. The Evil is the shadow of the Good, and inseparable from it.

The Divine Wisdom limits by equipoise the Omnipotence of the Divine Will or Power, and the result is Beauty or Harmony. The arch rests not on a single column, but springs from one on

[p. 847]

either side. So is it also with the Divine Justice and Mercy, and with the Human Reason and Human Faith.

That purely scholastic Theology, issue of the Categories of Aristotle and of the Sentences of Peter Lombard, that logic of the syllogism which argues instead of reasoning, and finds a response to every thing by subtilizing on terms, wholly ignored the  dogma and wandered off into the drear vacuity of darkness. It was less a philosophy or a wisdom than a philosophical automaton, replying by means of springs, and uncoiling its theses like a wheeled movement. It was not the human verb but the monotonous cry of a machine, the inanimate speech of an Android. It was the fatal precision of mechanism, instead of a free application of rational necessities. ST. THOMAS AQUINAS crushed with a single blow all this scaffolding of words built one upon the other, by proclaiming the eternal Empire of Reason, in that magnificent sentence, "A thing is not just because GOD wills it; but GOD wills it because it is just." The proximate consequence of this proposition, arguing from the greater to the less, was this: "A thing is not true because ARISTOTLE has said it; but ARISTOTLE could not reasonably say it unless it was true. Seek then, first of all, the TRUTH and JUSTICE, and the Science of ARISTOTLE will be given you in addition."

It is the fine dream of the greatest of the Poets, that Hell, become useless, is to be closed at length, by the aggrandizement of Heaven; that the problem of Evil is to receive its final solution, and Good alone, necessary and triumphant, is to reign in Eternity. So the Persian dogma taught that AHRIMAN and his subordinate ministers of Evil were at last, by means of a Redeemer and Mediator, to be reconciled with Deity, and all Evil to end. But unfortunately, the philosopher forgets all the laws of equilibrium, and seeks to absorb the Light in a splendor without shadow, and movement in an absolute repose that would be the cessation of life. So long as there shall be a visible light, there will be a shadow proportional to this Light, and whatever is illuminated will cast its cone of shadow. Repose will never be happiness, if it is not balanced by an analogous and contrary movement. This is the immutable law of Nature, the Eternal Will of the JUSTICE which is GOD.

The same reason necessitates Evil and Sorrow in Humanity, which renders indispensable the bitterness of the waters of the

[p. 848]

seas. Here also, Harmony can result only from the analogy of contraries, and what is above exists by reason of what is below. It is the depth that determines the height; and if the valleys are filled up, the mountains disappear: so, if the shadows are effaced, the Light is annulled, which is only visible by the graduated contrast of gloom and splendor, and universal obscurity will be produced by an immense dazzling. Even the colors in the Light only exist by the presence of the shadow: it is the threefold alliance of the day and night, the luminous image of the dogma, the Light made Shadow, as the Saviour is the Logos made man: and all this reposes on the same law, the primary law of creation, the single and absolute law of Nature, that of the distinction and harmonious ponderation of the contrary forces in the universal equipoise.

The two great columns of the Temple that symbolizes the Universe are Necessity, or the omnipotent Will of God, which nothing can disobey, and Liberty, or the free-will of His creatures. Apparently and to our human reason antagonistic, the same Reason is not incapable of comprehending how they can be in equipoise. The Infinite Power and Wisdom could so plan the Universe and the Infinite Succession of things as to leave man free to act, and, foreseeing what each would at every instant think and do, to make of the free-will and free-action of each an instrument to aid in effecting its general purpose. For even a man, foreseeing that another will do a certain act, and in nowise controlling or even influencing him may use that action as an instrument to effect his own purposes.

The Infinite Wisdom of God foresees what each will do, and uses it as an instrument, by the exertion of His Infinite Power, which yet does not control the Human action so as to annihilate its freedom. The result is Harmony, the third column that up-holds the Lodge. The same Harmony results from the equipoise of Necessity and Liberty. The will of God is not for an instant defeated nor thwarted, and this is the Divine Victory; and yet He does not tempt nor constrain men to do Evil, and thus His Infinite Glory is unimpaired. The result is Stability, Cohesion, and Permanence in the Universe, and undivided Dominion and Autocracy in the Deity. And these, Victory, Glory, Stability, and Dominion, are the last four Sephiroth of the Kabalah.

I Am, God said to Moses, that which Is, Was and Shall forever

[p. 849]

[paragraph continues] Be. But the Very God, in His unmanifested Essence, conceived of as not yet having created and as Alone, has no Name. Such was the doctrine of all the ancient Sages, and it is so expressly declared in the Kabalah. w ?Y?H?W?H is the Name of the Deity manifested in a single act, that of Creation, and containing within Himself, in idea and actuality, the whole Universe, to be invested with form and be materially developed during the eternal succession of ages. As God never WAS NOT, so He never THOUGHT not, and the Universe has no more had a beginning than the Divine Thought of which it is the utterance,--no more than the Deity Himself. The duration of the Universe is but a point halfway upon the infinite line of eternity; and God was not inert and uncreative during the eternity that stretches behind that point. The Archetype of the Universe did never not exist in the Divine Mind. The Word was in the BEGINNING with God, and WAS God. And the Ineffable NAME is that, not of the Very Essence but of the Absolute, manifested as Being or Existence. For Existence or Being, said the Philosophers, is limitation; and the Very Deity is not limited nor defined, but is all that may possibly be, besides all that is, was, and shall be.

Reversing the letters of the Ineffable Name, and dividing it, it becomes bi-sexual, as the word w ?Y?H, Yud-He or JAH is, and discloses the meaning of much of the obscure language of the Kabalah, and is The Highest of which the Columns Jachin and Boaz are the symbol. "In the image of Deity," we are told, "God created the Man; Male and Female created He them:" and the writer, symbolizing the Divine by the Human, then tells us that the woman, at first contained in the man, was taken from his side. So Minerva, Goddess of Wisdom, was born, a woman and in armor, of the brain of Jove; Isis was the sister before she was the wife of Osiris, and within BRAHM, the Source of all, the Very God, without sex or name, was developed MAYA, the Mother of all that is. The WORD is the First and Only-begotten of the Father; and the awe with which the Highest Mysteries were regarded has imposed silence in respect to the Nature of the Holy Spirit. The Word is Light, and the Life of Humanity.

It is for the Adepts to understand the meaning of the Symbols.

[p. 850]

Return now, with us, to the Degrees of the Blue Masonry, and for your last lesson, receive the explanation of one of their Symbols.

You see upon the altar of those Degrees the SQUARE and the COMPASS, and you remember how they lay upon the altar in each Degree.

The SQUARE is an instrument adapted for plane surfaces only, and therefore appropriate to Geometry, or measurement of the Earth, which appears to be, and was by the Ancients supposed to be, a plane. The COMPASS is an instrument that has relation to spheres and spherical surfaces, and is adapted to spherical trigonometry, or that branch of mathematics which deals with the Heavens and the orbits of the planetary bodies.

The SQUARE, therefore, is a natural and appropriate Symbol of this Earth and the things that belong to it, are of it, or concern it. The Compass is an equally natural and appropriate Symbol of the Heavens, and of all celestial things and celestial natures.

You see at the beginning of this reading, an old Hermetic Symbol, copied from the "MATERIA PRIMA" of Valentinus, printed at Franckfurt, in 1613, with a treatise entitled "AZOTH." Upon it you see a Triangle upon a Square, both of these contained in a circle; and above this, standing upon a dragon, a human body, with two arms only, but two heads, one male and the other female. By the side of the male head is the Sun, and by that of the female head, the Moon, the crescent within the circle of the full moon. And the hand on the male side holds a Compass, and that on the female side, a Square.

The Heavens and the Earth were personified as Deities, even among the Aryan Ancestors of the European nations of the Hindus, Zends, Bactrians, and Persians; and the Rig Veda Sanhita contains hymns addressed to them as gods. They were deified also among the Phoenicians; and among the Greeks OURANOS and GEA, Heaven and Earth, were sung as the most ancient of the Deities, by Hesiod.

It is the great, fertile, beautiful MOTHER, Earth, that produces, with limitless profusion of beneficence, everything that ministers to the needs, to the comfort, and to the luxury of man. From her teeming and inexhaustible bosom come the fruits, the grain, the flowers, in their season. From it comes all that feeds the animals which serve man as laborers and for food. She, in the fair

[p. 851]

[paragraph continues] Springtime, is green with abundant grass, and the trees spring from her soil, and from her teeming vitality take their wealth of green leaves. In her womb are found the useful and valuable minerals; hers are the seas the swarm with life; hers the rivers that furnish food and irrigation, and the mountains that send down the streams which swell into these rivers; hers the forests that feed the sacred fires for the sacrifices, and blaze upon the domestic hearths. The EARTH, therefore, the great PRODUCER, was always represented as a female, as the MOTHER,--Great, Bounteous, Beneficent Mother Earth.

On the other hand, it is the light and heat of the Sun in the Heavens, and the rains that seem to come from them, that in the Springtime make fruitful this bountifully-producing Earth, that restore life and warmth to her veins, chilled by Winter, set running free her streams, and beget, as it were, that greenness and that abundance of which she is so prolific. As the procreative and generative agents, the Heavens and the Sun have always been regarded as male; as the generators that fructify the Earth and cause it to produce.

The Hermaphroditic figure is the Symbol of the double nature anciently assigned to the Deity, as Generator and Producer, as BRAHM and MAYA among the Aryans, Osiris and Isis among the Egyptians. As the Sun was male, so the Moon was female; and Isis was both the sister and the wife of Osiris. The Compass, therefore, is the Hermetic Symbol of the Creative Deity, and the Square of the productive Earth or Universe.

From the Heavens come the spiritual and immortal portion of man; from the Earth his material and mortal portion. The Hebrew Genesis says that YEHOUAH formed man of the dust of the Earth, and breathed into his nostrils the breath of life. Through the seven planetary spheres, represented by the Mystic Ladder of the Mithriac Initiations, and it by that which Jacob saw in his dream (not with three, but with seven steps), the Souls, emanating from the Deity, descended, to be united to their human bodies; and through those seven spheres they must re-ascend, to return to their origin and home in the bosom of the Deity.

The COMPASS, therefore, as the Symbol of the Heavens, represents the spiritual, intellectual, and moral portion of this double nature of Humanity; and the SQUARE, as the Symbol of the Earth, its material, sensual, and baser portion.

[p. 852]

"Truth and Intelligence," said one of the Ancient Indian Sects of Philosophers, "are the Eternal attributes of God, not of the individual Soul, which is susceptible both of knowledge and ignorance, of pleasure and pain; therefore God and the individual Soul are distinct:" and this expression of the ancient Nyaya Philosophers, in regard to Truth, has been handed down to us through the long succession of ages, in the lessons of Freemasonry, wherein we read, that "Truth is a Divine Attribute, and the foundation of every virtue."

"While embodied in matter," they said, "the Soul is in a state of imprisonment, and is under the influence of evil passions; but having, by intense study, arrived at the knowledge of the elements and principles of Nature, it attains unto the place of TIE ETERNAL; in which state of happiness, its individuality does not cease."

The vitality which animates the mortal frame, the Breath of Life of the Hebrew Genesis, the Hindu Philosophers in general held, perishes with it; but the Soul is divine, an emanation of the Spirit of God, but not a portion of that Spirit. For they compared it to the heat and light sent forth from the Sun, or to a ray of that light, which neither lessens nor divides its own essence.

However created, or invested with separate existence, the Soul, which is but the creature of the Deity, cannot know the mode of its creation, nor comprehend its own individuality. It cannot even comprehend how the being which it and the body constitute, can feel pain, or see, or hear. It has pleased the Universal Creator to set bounds to the scope of our human and finite reason, beyond which it cannot reach; and if we are capable of comprehending the mode and manner of the creation or generation of the Universe of things, He has been pleased to conceal it from us by an impenetrable veil, while the words used to express the act have no other definite meaning than that He caused that Universe to commence to exist.

It is enough for us to know, what Masonry teaches, that we are not all mortal; that the Soul or Spirit, the intellectual and reasoning portion of ourself, is our Very Self, is not subject to decay and dissolution, but is simple and immaterial, survives the death of the body, and is capable of immortality; that it is also capable of improvement and advancement, of increase of knowledge of

[p. 853]

the things that are divine, of becoming wiser and better, and more and more worthy of immortality; and that to become so, and to help to improve and benefit others and all our race, is the noblest ambition and highest glory that we can entertain and attain unto, in this momentary and imperfect life.

In every human being the Divine and the Human are intermingled. In every one there are the Reason and the Moral sense, the passions that prompt to evil, and the sensual appetites. "If ye live after the flesh, ye shall die," said Paul, writing to the Christians at Rome, "but if ye through the spirit do mortify the deeds of the body, ye shall live. For as many as are led by the Spirit of God, they are the sons of God." "The flesh lusteth against the spirit, and the spirit against the flesh," he said, writing to the Christians of Galatia, "and these are contrary the one to the other, so that ye cannot do the things that ye would." "That which I do, I do not willingly do," he wrote to the Romans, "for what I wish to do, that I do not do, but that which I hate I do. It is no more I that do it, but sin that dwelleth in me. To will, is present with me; but how to perform that which is good, I find not. For, I do not do the good that I desire to do; and the evil that I do not wish to do, that I do do. I find then a law, that when I desire to do good, evil is present with me; for I delight in the law of God after the inward man, but I see another law in my members, warring against the law of my mind, and bringing me into captivity to the law of sin which is in my members. . . So then, with the mind I myself serve the law of God, but with the flesh the law of sin."

Life is a battle, and to fight that battle heroically and well is the great purpose of every man's existence, who is worthy and fit to live at all. To stem the strong currents of adversity, to advance in despite of all obstacles, to snatch victory from the jealous grasp of fortune, to become a chief and a leader among men, to rise to rank and power by eloquence, courage, perseverance, study, energy, activity, discouraged by no reverses, impatient of no delays, deterred by no hazards; to win wealth, to subjugate men by our intellect, the very elements by our audacity, to succeed, to prosper, to thrive;--thus it is, according to the general understanding, that one fights well the battle of life. Even to succeed in business by that boldness which halts for no risks, that audacity which stakes all upon hazardous chances; by the shrewdness of

[p. 854]

the close dealer, the boldness of the unscrupulous operator, even by the knaveries of the stock-board and the gold-room; to crawl up into place by disreputable means or the votes of brutal ignorance,--these also are deemed to be among the great successes of life.

But that which is the greatest battle, and in which the truest honor and most real success are to be won, is that which our intellect and reason and moral sense, our spiritual natures, fight against our sensual appetites and evil passions, our earthly and material or animal nature. Therein only are the true glories of heroism to be won, there only the successes that entitle us to triumphs.

In every human life that battle is fought; and those who win elsewhere, often suffer ignominious defeat and disastrous rout, and discomfiture and shameful downfall in this encounter.

You have heard more than one definition of freemasonry. The truest and the most significant you have yet to hear. It is taught to the entered Apprentice, the Fellow-Craft, and the Master, and it is taught in every Degree through which you have advanced to this. It is a definition of what Freemasonry is, of what its purposes and its very essence and spirit are; and it has for every one of us the force and sanctity of a divine law, and imposes on every one of us a solemn obligation.

It is symbolized and taught, to the Apprentice as well as to you, by the COMPASS and the SQUARE; upon which, as well as upon the Book of your Religion and the Book of the law of the Scottish Freemasonry, you have taken so many obligations. As a Knight, you have been taught it by the Swords, the symbols of HONOR and DUTY, on which you have taken your vows: it was taught you by the BALANCE, the symbol of all Equilibrium, and by the CROSS, the symbol of devotedness and self-sacrifice; but all that these teach and contain is taught and contained, for Entered Apprentice, Knight, and Prince alike, by the Compass and the Square.

For the Apprentice, the points of the Compass are beneath the Square. For the Fellow-Craft, one is above and one beneath. For the Master, both are dominant, and have rule, control, and empire over the symbol of the earthly and the material.

FREEMASONRY is the subjugation of the Human that is in man by the Divine; the Conquest of the Appetites and Passions by the Moral Sense and the Reason; a continual effort, struggle, and warfare of the Spiritual against the Material and Sensual. That

[p. 855]

victory, when it has been achieved and secured, and the conqueror may rest upon his shield and wear the well-earned laurels, is the true HOLY EMPIRE.

To achieve it, the Mason must first attain a solid conviction, founded upon reason, that he hath within him a spiritual nature, a soul that is not to die when the body is dissolved, but is to continue to exist and to advance toward perfection through all the ages of eternity, and to see more and more clearly, as it draws nearer unto God, the Light of the Divine Presence. This the Philosophy of the Ancient and Accepted Rite teaches him; and it encourages him to persevere by helping him to believe that his free will is entirely consistent with God's Omnipotence and Omniscience; that He is not only infinite in power, and of infinite wisdom, but of infinite mercy, and an infinitely tender pity and love for the frail and imperfect creatures that He has made.

Every Degree of the Ancient and Accepted Scottish Rite, from the first to the thirty-second, teaches by its ceremonial as well as by its instruction, that the noblest purpose of life and the highest duty of a man are to strive incessantly and vigorously to win the mastery of everything, of that which in him is spiritual and divine, over that which is material and sensual; so that in him also, as in the Universe which God governs, Harmony and Beauty may be the result of a just equilibrium.

You have been taught this in those Degrees, conferred in the Lodge of Perfection, which inculcate particularly the practical morality of Freemasonry. To be true, under whatever temptation to be false; to be honest in all your dealings, even if great losses should be the consequence; to be charitable, when selfishness would prompt you to close your hand, and deprivation of luxury or comfort must follow the charitable act; to judge justly and impartially, even in your own case, when baser impulses prompt you to do an injustice in order that you may be benefited or justified; to be tolerant, when passion prompts to intolerance and persecution; to do that which is right, when the wrong seems to promise larger profit; and to wrong no man of anything that is his, however easy it may seem so to enrich yourself;--in all these things and others which you promised in those Degrees, your spiritual nature is taught and encouraged to assert its rightful dominion over your appetites and passions.

The philosophical Degrees have taught you the value of knowledge,

[p. 856]

the excellence of truth, the superiority of intellectual labor, the dignity and value of your soul, the worth of great and noble thoughts; and thus endeavored to assist you to rise above the level of the animal appetites and passions, the pursuits of greed and the miserable struggles of ambition, and to find purer pleasure and nobler prizes and rewards in the acquisition of knowledge, the enlargement of the intellect, the interpretation of the sacred writing of God upon the great pages of the Book of Nature.

And the Chivalric Degrees have led you on the same path, by showing you the excellence of generosity, clemency, forgiveness of injuries, magnanimity, contempt of danger, and the paramount obligations of Duty and Honor. They have taught you to over-come the fear of death, to devote yourself to the great cause of civil and religious Liberty, to be the Soldier of all that is just, right, and true; in the midst of pestilence to deserve your title of Knight Commander of the Temple, and neither there nor Elsewhere to desert your post and flee dastard-like from the foe. In all this, you assert the superiority and right to dominion of that in you which is spiritual and divine. No base fear of danger or death, no sordid ambitions or pitiful greeds or base considerations can tempt a true Scottish Knight to dishonor, and so make his intellect, his reason, his soul, the bond-slave of his appetites, of his passions, of that which is material and animal, selfish and brutish in his nature.

It is not possible to create a true and genuine Brotherhood upon any theory of the baseness of human nature: nor by a community of belief in abstract propositions as to the nature of the Deity, the number of His persons, or other theorems of religious faith: nor by the establishment of a system of association simply for mutual relief, and by which, in consideration of certain payments regularly made, each becomes entitled to a certain stipend in case of sickness, to attention then, and to the ceremonies of burial after death.

There can be no genuine Brotherhood without mutual regard, good opinion and esteem, mutual charity, and mutual allowance for faults and failings. It is those only who learn habitually to think better of each other, to look habitually for the good that is in each other, and expect, allow for, and overlook, the evil, who can be Brethren one of the other, in any  sense of the word. Those who gloat over the failings of one another, who think each

[p. 857]

other to be naturally base and low, of a nature in which the Evil predominates and excellence is not to be looked for, cannot be even friends, and much less Brethren.

No one can have a right to think meanly of his race, unless he also thinks meanly of himself. If, from a single fault or error, he judges of the character of another, and takes the single act as evidence of the whole nature of the man and of the whole course of his life, he ought to consent to be judged by the same rule, and to admit it to be right that others should thus uncharitably condemn himself. But such judgments will become impossible when he incessantly reminds himself that in every man who lives there is an immortal Soul endeavoring to do that which is right and just; a Ray, however small, and almost inappreciable, from the Great Source of Light and Intelligence, which ever struggles upward amid all the impediments of sense and the obstructions of the passions; and that in every man this ray continually wages war against his evil passions and his unruly appetites, or, if it has succumbed, is never wholly extinguished and annihilated. For he will then see that it is not victory, but the struggle that de-serves honor; since in this as in all else no man can always command success. Amid a cloud of errors, of failure, and short-comings, he will look for the struggling Soul, for that which is good in every one amid the evil, and, believing that each is better than from his acts and omissions he seems to be, and that God cares for him still, and pities him and loves him, he will feel that even the erring sinner is still his brother, still entitled to his sympathy, and bound to him by the indissoluble ties of fellowship.

If there be nothing of the divine in man, what is he, after all, but a more intelligent animal? He hath no fault nor vice which some beast hath not; and therefore in his vices he is but a beast of a higher order; and he hath hardly any moral excellence, perhaps none, which some animal hath not in as great a degree,--even the more excellent of these, such as generosity, fidelity, and magnanimity.

Bardesan, the Syrian Christian, in his Book of the Laws of Countries, says, of men, that "in the things belonging to their bodies, they maintain their nature like animals, and in the things which belong to their minds, they do that which they wish, as being free and with power, and as the likeness of God"; and Meliton, Bishop of Sardis, in his Oration to Antoninus Caesar,

[p. 858]

says, "Let Him, the ever-living God, be always present in thy mind; for thy mind itself is His likeness, for it, too, is invisible and impalpable, and without form. . . As He exists forever, so thou also, when thou shalt have put off this which is visible and corruptible, shalt stand before Him forever, living and endowed with knowledge."

As a matter far above our comprehension, and in the Hebrew Genesis the words that are used to express the origin of things are of uncertain meaning, and with equal propriety may be translated by the word "generated," "produced," "made," or "created," we need not dispute nor debate whether the Soul or Spirit of man be a ray that has emanated or flowed forth from the Supreme Intelligence, or whether the Infinite Power hath called each into existence from nothing, by a mere exertion of Its will, and endowed it with immortality, and with intelligence like unto the Divine Intelligence: for, in either case it may be said that in man the Divine is united to the Human. Of this union the equilateral Triangle inscribed within the Square is a Symbol.

We see the Soul, Plato said, as men see the statue of Glaucus, recovered from the sea wherein it had lain many years--which viewing, it was not easy, if possible, to discern what was its original nature, its limbs having been partly broken and partly worn and by defacement changed, by the action of the waves, and shells, weeds, and pebbles adhering to it, so that it more resembled some strange monster than that which it was when it left its Divine Source. Even so, he said, we see the Soul, deformed by innumerable things that have done it harm, have mutilated and defaced it. But the Mason who hath the ROYAL SECRET can also with him argue, from beholding its love of wisdom, its tendency toward association with what is divine and immortal, its larger aspirations, its struggles, though they may have ended in defeat, with the impediments and enthralments of the senses and the passions, that when it shall have been rescued from the material environments that now prove too strong for it, and be freed from the deforming and disfiguring accretions that here adhere to it, it will again be seen in its true nature, and by degrees ascend by the mystic ladder of the Spheres, to its first home and place of origin.

The ROYAL SECRET, of which you are Prince, if you are a true Adept, if knowledge seems to you advisable, and Philosophy is, for you, radiant with a divine beauty, is that which the Sohar

[p. 859]

terms The Mystery of the BALANCE. It is the Secret of the UNIVERSAL EQUILIBRIUM:--

--Of that Equilibrium in the Deity, between the Infinite Divine WISDOM and the Infinite Divine POWER, from which result the Stability of the Universe, the unchangeableness of the Divine Law, and the Principles of Truth, Justice, and Right which are a part of it; and the Supreme Obligation of the Divine Law upon all men, as superior to all other law, and forming a part of all the laws of men and nations.

--Of that Equilibrium also, between the Infinite Divine JUSTICE and the Infinite Divine MERCY, the result of which is the Infinite Divine EQUITY, and the Moral Harmony or Beauty of the Universe. By it the endurance of created and imperfect natures in the presence of a Perfect Deity is made possible; and for Him, also, as for us, to love is better than to hate, and Forgiveness is wiser than Revenge or Punishment.

--Of that Equilibrium between NECESSITY and LIBERTY, between the action of the DIVINE Omnipotence and the Free-will of man, by which vices and base actions, and ungenerous thoughts and words are crimes and wrongs, justly punished by the law of cause and consequence, though nothing in the Universe can happen or be done contrary to the will of God; and without which co-existence of Liberty and Necessity, of Free-will in the creature and Omnipotence in the Creator, there could be no religion, nor any law of right and wrong, or merit and demerit, nor any justice in human punishments or penal laws.

--Of that Equilibrium between Good and Evil, and Light and Darkness in the world, which assures us that all is the work of the Infinite Wisdom and of an Infinite Love; and that there is no rebellious demon of Evil, or Principle of Darkness co-existent and in eternal controversy with God, or the Principle of Light and of Good: by attaining to the knowledge of which equilibrium we can, through Faith, see that the existence of Evil, Sin, Suffering, and Sorrow in the world, is consistent with the Infinite Goodness as well as with the Infinite Wisdom of the Almighty.

Sympathy and Antipathy, Attraction and Repulsion, each a Force of nature, are contraries, in the souls of men and in the Universe of spheres and worlds; and from the action and opposition of each against the other, result Harmony, and that movement which is the Life of the Universe and the Soul alike.

[p. 860]

[paragraph continues] They are not antagonists of each other. The force that repels a Planet from the Sun is no more an evil force, than that which attracts the Planet toward the central Luminary; for each is created and exerted by the Deity, and the result is the harmonious movement of the obedient Planets in their elliptic orbits, and the mathematical accuracy and unvarying regularity of their movements.

--Of that Equilibrium between Authority and Individual Action which constitutes Free Government, by settling on immutable foundations Liberty with Obedience to Law, Equality with Subjection to Authority, and Fraternity with Subordination to the Wisest and the Best: and of that Equilibrium between the Active Energy of the Will of the Present, expressed by the Vote of the People, and the Passive Stability and Permanence of the Will of the Past, expressed in constitutions of government, written or unwritten, and in the laws and customs, gray with age and sanctified by time, as precedents and authority; which is represented by the arch resting on the two columns, Jachin and Boaz, that stand at the portals of the Temple builded by Wisdom, on one of which Masonry sets the celestial Globe, symbol of the spiritual part of our composite nature, and on the other the terrestrial Globe, symbol of the material part.

--And, finally, of that Equilibrium, possible in ourselves, and which Masonry incessantly labors to accomplish in its Initiates, and demands of its Adepts and Princes (else unworthy of their titles), between the Spiritual and Divine and the Material and Human in man; between the Intellect, Reason, and Moral Sense on one side, and the Appetites and Passions on the other, from which result the Harmony and Beauty of a well-regulated life.

Which possible Equilibrium proves to us that our Appetites and Senses also are Forces given unto us by God, for purposes of good, and not the fruits of the malignancy of a Devil, to be detested, mortified, and, if possible, rendered inert and dead: that they are given us to be the means by which we shall be strengthened and incited to great and good deeds, and are to be wisely used, and not abused; to be controlled and kept within due bounds by the Reason and the Moral Sense; to be made useful instruments and servants, and not permitted to become the managers and masters, using our intellect and reason as base instruments for their gratification.

[p. 861]

And this Equilibrium teaches us, above all, to reverence ourselves as immortal souls, and to have respect and charity for others, who are even such as we are, partakers with us of the Divine Nature, lighted by a ray of the Divine Intelligence, struggling, like us, toward the light; capable, like us, of progress upward toward perfection, and deserving to be loved and pitied, but never to be hated nor despised; to be aided and encouraged in this life-struggle, and not to be abandoned nor left to wander in the darkness alone, still less to be trampled upon in our own efforts to ascend.

From the mutual action and re-action of each of these pairs of opposites and contraries results that which with them forms the Triangle, to all the Ancient Sages the expressive symbol of the Deity; as from Osiris and Isis, Har-oeri, the Master of Light and Life, and the Creative Word. At the angles of one stand, symbolically, the three columns that support the Lodge, itself a symbol of the Universe, Wisdom, Power, and Harmony or Beauty. One of these symbols, found on the Tracing-Board of the Apprentice's Degree, teaches this last lesson of Freemasonry. It is the right-angled Triangle, representing man, as a union of the spiritual and material, of the divine and human. The base, measured by the number 3, the number of the Triangle, represents the Deity and the Divine; the perpendicular, measured by the number 4, the number of the Square, represents the Earth, the Material, and the Human; and the hypothenuse, measured by 5, represents that nature which is produced by the union of the Divine and Human, the Soul and the Body; the squares, 9 and 16, of the base and perpendicular, added together, producing 25, the square root whereof is 5, the measure of the hypothenuse.

And as in each Triangle of Perfection, one is three and three are one, so man is one, though of a double nature; and he attains the purposes of his being only when the two natures that are in him are in just equilibrium; and his life is a success only when it too is a harmony, and beautiful, like the great Harmonies of God and the Universe.

Such, my Brother, is the TRUE WORD of a Master Mason; such the true ROYAL SECRET, which makes possible, and shall at length make real, the HOLY EMPIRE of true Masonic Brotherhood.

GLORIA DEI EST CELARE VERBUM. AMEN.

    


===== BOOK: mect.txt =====


     
The Canterbury Tales and Other Works of Chaucer (Middle English), by Geoffery Chaucer, [14th cent.], at sacred-texts.com

 

The Canterbury Tales

 

General Prologue

 [1] Whan that Aprill with his shoures soote
 [2] The droghte of March hath perced to the roote,
 [3] And bathed every veyne in swich licour
 [4] Of which vertu engendred is the flour;
 [5] Whan Zephirus eek with his sweete breeth
 [6] Inspired hath in every holt and heeth
 [7] The tendre croppes, and the yonge sonne
 [8] Hath in the Ram his half cours yronne,
 [9] And smale foweles maken melodye,
 [10] That slepen al the nyght with open ye
 [11] (So priketh hem Nature in hir corages),
 [12] Thanne longen folk to goon on pilgrimages,
 [13] And palmeres for to seken straunge strondes,
 [14] To ferne halwes, kowthe in sondry londes;
 [15] And specially from every shires ende
 [16] Of Engelond to Caunterbury they wende,
 [17] The hooly blisful martir for to seke,
 [18] That hem hath holpen whan that they were seeke.
 [19] Bifil that in that seson on a day,
 [20] In Southwerk at the Tabard as I lay
 [21] Redy to wenden on my pilgrymage
 [22] To Caunterbury with ful devout corage,
 [23] At nyght was come into that hostelrye
 [24] Wel nyne and twenty in a compaignye
 [25] Of sondry folk, by aventure yfalle
 [26] In felaweshipe, and pilgrimes were they alle,
 [27] That toward Caunterbury wolden ryde.
 [28] The chambres and the stables weren wyde,
 [29] And wel we weren esed atte beste.
 [30] And shortly, whan the sonne was to reste,
 [31] So hadde I spoken with hem everichon
 [32] That I was of hir felaweshipe anon,
 [33] And made forward erly for to ryse,
 [34] To take oure wey ther as I yow devyse.
 [35] But nathelees, whil I have tyme and space,
 [36] Er that I ferther in this tale pace,
 [37] Me thynketh it acordaunt to resoun
 [38] To telle yow al the condicioun
 [39] Of ech of hem, so as it semed me,
 [40] And whiche they weren, and of what degree,
 [41] And eek in what array that they were inne;
 [42] And at a knyght than wol I first bigynne.
 [43] A KNYGHT ther was, and that a worthy man,
 [44] That fro the tyme that he first bigan
 [45] To riden out, he loved chivalrie,
 [46] Trouthe and honour, fredom and curteisie.
 [47] Ful worthy was he in his lordes werre,
 [48] And therto hadde he riden, no man ferre,
 [49] As wel in cristendom as in hethenesse,
 [50] And evere honoured for his worthynesse;
 [51] At Alisaundre he was whan it was wonne.
 [52] Ful ofte tyme he hadde the bord bigonne
 [53] Aboven alle nacions in Pruce;
 [54] In Lettow hadde he reysed and in Ruce,
 [55] No Cristen man so ofte of his degree.
 [56] In Gernade at the seege eek hadde he be
 [57] Of Algezir, and riden in Belmarye.
 [58] At Lyeys was he and at Satalye,
 [59] Whan they were wonne, and in the Grete See
 [60] At many a noble armee hadde he be.
 [61] At mortal batailles hadde he been fiftene,
 [62] And foughten for oure feith at Tramyssene
 [63] In lystes thries, and ay slayn his foo.
 [64] This ilke worthy knyght hadde been also
 [65] Somtyme with the lord of Palatye
 [66] Agayn another hethen in Turkye;
 [67] And everemoore he hadde a sovereyn prys.
 [68] And though that he were worthy, he was wys,
 [69] And of his port as meeke as is a mayde.
 [70] He nevere yet no vileynye ne sayde
 [71] In al his lyf unto no maner wight.
 [72] He was a verray, parfit gentil knyght.
 [73] But for to tellen yow of his array,
 [74] His hors were goode, but he was nat gay.
 [75] Of fustian he wered a gypon
 [76] Al bismotered with his habergeon,
 [77] For he was late ycome from his viage,
 [78] And wente for to doon his pilgrymage.
 [79] With hym ther was his sone, a yong SQUIER,
 

 [80] A lovyere and a lusty bacheler,
 [81] With lokkes crulle as they were leyd in presse.
 [82] Of twenty yeer of age he was, I gesse.
 [83] Of his stature he was of evene lengthe,
 [84] And wonderly delyvere, and of greet strengthe.
 [85] And he hadde been somtyme in chyvachie
 [86] In Flaundres, in Artoys, and Pycardie,
 [87] And born hym weel, as of so litel space,
 [88] In hope to stonden in his lady grace.
 [89] Embrouded was he, as it were a meede
 [90] Al ful of fresshe floures, whyte and reede.
 [91] Syngynge he was, or floytynge, al the day;
 [92] He was as fressh as is the month of May.
 [93] Short was his gowne, with sleves longe and wyde.
 [94] Wel koude he sitte on hors and faire ryde.
 [95] He koude songes make and wel endite,
 [96] Juste and eek daunce, and weel purtreye and write.
 [97] So hoote he lovede that by nyghtertale
 [98] He sleep namoore than dooth a nyghtyngale.
 [99] Curteis he was, lowely, and servysable,
 [100] And carf biforn his fader at the table.
 [101] A YEMAN hadde he and servantz namo
 [102] At that tyme, for hym liste ride so,
 [103] And he was clad in cote and hood of grene.
 [104] A sheef of pecok arwes, bright and kene,
 [105] Under his belt he bar ful thriftily
 [106] (Wel koude he dresse his takel yemanly;
 [107] His arwes drouped noght with fetheres lowe),
 [108] And in his hand he baar a myghty bowe.
 [109] A not heed hadde he, with a broun visage.
 [110] Of wodecraft wel koude he al the usage.
 [111] Upon his arm he baar a gay bracer,
 [112] And by his syde a swerd and a bokeler,
 [113] And on that oother syde a gay daggere
 [114] Harneised wel and sharp as point of spere;
 [115] A Cristopher on his brest of silver sheene.
 [116] An horn he bar, the bawdryk was of grene;
 [117] A forster was he, soothly, as I gesse.
 [118] Ther was also a Nonne, a PRIORESSE,
 [119] That of hir smylyng was ful symple and coy;
 [120] Hire gretteste ooth was but by Seinte Loy;
 [121] And she was cleped madame Eglentyne.
 [122] Ful weel she soong the service dyvyne,
 [123] Entuned in hir nose ful semely;
 [124] And Frenssh she spak ful faire and fetisly,
 [125] After the scole of Stratford atte Bowe,
 [126] For Frenssh of Parys was to hire unknowe.
 [127] At mete wel ytaught was she with alle;
 [128] She leet no morsel from hir lippes falle,
 [129] Ne wette hir fyngres in hir sauce depe;
 [130] Wel koude she carie a morsel and wel kepe
 [131] That no drope ne fille upon hire brest.
 [132] In curteisie was set ful muchel hir lest.
 [133] Hir over-lippe wyped she so clene
 [134] That in hir coppe ther was no ferthyng sene
 [135] Of grece, whan she dronken hadde hir draughte.
 [136] Ful semely after hir mete she raughte.
 [137] And sikerly she was of greet desport,
 [138] And ful plesaunt, and amyable of port,
 [139] And peyned hire to countrefete cheere
 [140] Of court, and to been estatlich of manere,
 [141] And to ben holden digne of reverence.
 [142] But for to speken of hire conscience,
 [143] She was so charitable and so pitous
 [144] She wolde wepe, if that she saugh a mous
 [145] Kaught in a trappe, if it were deed or bledde.
 [146] Of smale houndes hadde she that she fedde
 [147] With rosted flessh, or milk and wastel-breed.
 [148] But soore wepte she if oon of hem were deed,
 [149] Or if men smoot it with a yerde smerte;
 [150] And al was conscience and tendre herte.
 [151] Ful semyly hir wympul pynched was,
 [152] Hir nose tretys, hir eyen greye as glas,
 [153] Hir mouth ful smal, and therto softe and reed.
 [154] But sikerly she hadde a fair forheed;
 [155] It was almoost a spanne brood, I trowe;
 [156] For, hardily, she was nat undergrowe.
 [157] Ful fetys was hir cloke, as I was war.
 [158] Of smal coral aboute hire arm she bar
 [159] A peire of bedes, gauded al with grene,
 [160] And theron heng a brooch of gold ful sheene,
 [161] On which ther was first write a crowned A,
 [162] And after Amor vincit omnia.
 [163] Another NONNE with hire hadde she,
 [164] That was hir chapeleyne, and preestes thre.
 [165] A MONK ther was, a fair for the maistrie,
 [166] An outridere, that lovede venerie,
 [167] A manly man, to been an abbot able.
 [168] Ful many a deyntee hors hadde he in stable,
 [169] And whan he rood, men myghte his brydel heere
 [170] Gynglen in a whistlynge wynd als cleere
 [171] And eek as loude as dooth the chapel belle
 [172] Ther as this lord was kepere of the celle.
 [173] The reule of Seint Maure or of Seint Beneit --
 [174] By cause that it was old and somdel streit
 [175] This ilke Monk leet olde thynges pace,
 [176] And heeld after the newe world the space.
 [177] He yaf nat of that text a pulled hen,
 [178] That seith that hunters ben nat hooly men,
 [179] Ne that a monk, whan he is recchelees,
 [180] Is likned til a fissh that is waterlees --
 [181] This is to seyn, a monk out of his cloystre.
 [182] But thilke text heeld he nat worth an oystre;
 [183] And I seyde his opinion was good.
 [184] What sholde he studie and make hymselven wood,
 [185] Upon a book in cloystre alwey to poure,
 [186] Or swynken with his handes, and laboure,
 [187] As Austyn bit? How shal the world be served?
 [188] Lat Austyn have his swynk to hym reserved!
 [189] Therfore he was a prikasour aright:
 [190] Grehoundes he hadde as swift as fowel in flight;
 [191] Of prikyng and of huntyng for the hare
 [192] Was al his lust, for no cost wolde he spare.
 [193] I seigh his sleves purfiled at the hond
 [194] With grys, and that the fyneste of a lond;
 [195] And for to festne his hood under his chyn,
 [196] He hadde of gold ywroght a ful curious pyn;
 [197] A love-knotte in the gretter ende ther was.
 [198] His heed was balled, that shoon as any glas,
 [199] And eek his face, as he hadde been enoynt.
 [200] He was a lord ful fat and in good poynt;
 [201] His eyen stepe, and rollynge in his heed,
 [202] That stemed as a forneys of a leed;
 [203] His bootes souple, his hors in greet estaat.
 [204] Now certeinly he was a fair prelaat;
 [205] He was nat pale as a forpyned goost.
 [206] A fat swan loved he best of any roost.
 [207] His palfrey was as broun as is a berye.
 [208] A FRERE ther was, a wantowne and a merye,
 [209] A lymytour, a ful solempne man.
 [210] In alle the ordres foure is noon that kan
 [211] So muchel of daliaunce and fair langage.
 [212] He hadde maad ful many a mariage
 [213] Of yonge wommen at his owene cost.
 [214] Unto his ordre he was a noble post.
 [215] Ful wel biloved and famulier was he
 [216] With frankeleyns over al in his contree,
 [217] And eek with worthy wommen of the toun;
 [218] For he hadde power of confessioun,
 [219] As seyde hymself, moore than a curat,
 [220] For of his ordre he was licenciat.
 [221] Ful swetely herde he confessioun,
 [222] And plesaunt was his absolucioun:
 [223] He was an esy man to yeve penaunce,
 [224] Ther as he wiste to have a good pitaunce.
 [225] For unto a povre ordre for to yive
 [226] Is signe that a man is wel yshryve;
 [227] For if he yaf, he dorste make avaunt,
 [228] He wiste that a man was repentaunt;
 [229] For many a man so hard is of his herte,
 [230] He may nat wepe, althogh hym soore smerte.
 [231] Therfore in stede of wepynge and preyeres
 [232] Men moote yeve silver to the povre freres.
 [233] His typet was ay farsed ful of knyves
 

 [234] And pynnes, for to yeven faire wyves.
 [235] And certeinly he hadde a murye note:
 [236] Wel koude he synge and pleyen on a rote;
 [237] Of yeddynges he baar outrely the pris.
 [238] His nekke whit was as the flour-de-lys;
 [239] Therto he strong was as a champioun.
 [240] He knew the tavernes wel in every toun
 [241] And everich hostiler and tappestere
 [242] Bet than a lazar or a beggestere,
 [243] For unto swich a worthy man as he
 [244] Acorded nat, as by his facultee,
 [245] To have with sike lazars aqueyntaunce.
 [246] It is nat honest; it may nat avaunce,
 [247] For to deelen with no swich poraille,
 [248] But al with riche and selleres of vitaille.
 [249] And over al, ther as profit sholde arise,
 [250] Curteis he was and lowely of servyse;
 [251] Ther nas no man nowher so vertuous.
 [252] He was the beste beggere in his hous;
 [252a] [And yaf a certeyn ferme for the graunt;
 [252b] Noon of his bretheren cam ther in his haunt;]
 [253] For thogh a wydwe hadde noght a sho,
 [254] So plesaunt was his "In principio,"
 [255] Yet wolde he have a ferthyng, er he wente.
 [256] His purchas was wel bettre than his rente.
 [257] And rage he koude, as it were right a whelp.
 [258] In love-dayes ther koude he muchel help,
 [259] For ther he was nat lyk a cloysterer
 [260] With a thredbare cope, as is a povre scoler,
 [261] But he was lyk a maister or a pope.
 [262] Of double worstede was his semycope,
 [263] That rounded as a belle out of the presse.
 [264] Somwhat he lipsed, for his wantownesse,
 [265] To make his Englissh sweete upon his tonge;
 [266] And in his harpyng, whan that he hadde songe,
 [267] His eyen twynkled in his heed aryght
 [268] As doon the sterres in the frosty nyght.
 [269] This worthy lymytour was cleped Huberd.
 [270] A MARCHANT was ther with a forked berd,
 [271] In mottelee, and hye on horse he sat;
 [272] Upon his heed a Flaundryssh bever hat,
 [273] His bootes clasped faire and fetisly.
 [274] His resons he spak ful solempnely,
 [275] Sownynge alwey th' encrees of his wynnyng.
 [276] He wolde the see were kept for any thyng
 [277] Bitwixe Middelburgh and Orewelle.
 [278] Wel koude he in eschaunge sheeldes selle.
 [279] This worthy man ful wel his wit bisette:
 [280] Ther wiste no wight that he was in dette,
 [281] So estatly was he of his governaunce
 [282] With his bargaynes and with his chevyssaunce.
 [283] For sothe he was a worthy man with alle,
 [284] But, sooth to seyn, I noot how men hym calle.
 [285] A CLERK ther was of Oxenford also,
 [286] That unto logyk hadde longe ygo.
 [287] As leene was his hors as is a rake,
 [288] And he nas nat right fat, I undertake,
 [289] But looked holwe, and therto sobrely.
 [290] Ful thredbare was his overeste courtepy,
 [291] For he hadde geten hym yet no benefice,
 [292] Ne was so worldly for to have office.
 [293] For hym was levere have at his beddes heed
 [294] Twenty bookes, clad in blak or reed,
 [295] Of Aristotle and his philosophie
 [296] Than robes riche, or fithele, or gay sautrie.
 [297] But al be that he was a philosophre,
 [298] Yet hadde he but litel gold in cofre;
 [299] But al that he myghte of his freendes hente,
 [300] On bookes and on lernynge he it spente,
 [301] And bisily gan for the soules preye
 [302] Of hem that yaf hym wherwith to scoleye.
 [303] Of studie took he moost cure and moost heede.
 [304] Noght o word spak he moore than was neede,
 [305] And that was seyd in forme and reverence,
 [306] And short and quyk and ful of hy sentence;
 [307] Sownynge in moral vertu was his speche,
 [308] And gladly wolde he lerne and gladly teche.
 [309] A SERGEANT OF THE LAWE, war and wys,
 [310] That often hadde been at the Parvys,
 [311] Ther was also, ful riche of excellence.
 [312] Discreet he was and of greet reverence --
 [313] He semed swich, his wordes weren so wise.
 [314] Justice he was ful often in assise,
 [315] By patente and by pleyn commissioun.
 [316] For his science and for his heigh renoun,
 [317] Of fees and robes hadde he many oon.
 

 [318] So greet a purchasour was nowher noon:
 [319] Al was fee symple to hym in effect;
 [320] His purchasyng myghte nat been infect.
 [321] Nowher so bisy a man as he ther nas,
 [322] And yet he semed bisier than he was.
 [323] In termes hadde he caas and doomes alle
 [324] That from the tyme of kyng William were falle.
 [325] Therto he koude endite and make a thyng,
 [326] Ther koude no wight pynche at his writyng;
 [327] And every statut koude he pleyn by rote.
 [328] He rood but hoomly in a medlee cote,
 [329] Girt with a ceint of silk, with barres smale;
 [330] Of his array telle I no lenger tale.
 [331] A FRANKELEYN was in his compaignye.
 [332] Whit was his berd as is the dayesye;
 [333] Of his complexioun he was sangwyn.
 [334] Wel loved he by the morwe a sop in wyn;
 [335] To lyven in delit was evere his wone,
 [336] For he was Epicurus owene sone,
 [337] That heeld opinioun that pleyn delit
 [338] Was verray felicitee parfit.
 [339] An housholdere, and that a greet, was he;
 [340] Seint Julian he was in his contree.
 [341] His breed, his ale, was alweys after oon;
 [342] A bettre envyned man was nowher noon.
 [343] Withoute bake mete was nevere his hous,
 [344] Of fissh and flessh, and that so plentevous
 [345] It snewed in his hous of mete and drynke;
 [346] Of alle deyntees that men koude thynke,
 [347] After the sondry sesons of the yeer,
 [348] So chaunged he his mete and his soper.
 [349] Ful many a fat partrich hadde he in muwe,
 [350] And many a breem and many a luce in stuwe.
 [351] Wo was his cook but if his sauce were
 [352] Poynaunt and sharp, and redy al his geere.
 [353] His table dormant in his halle alway
 [354] Stood redy covered al the longe day.
 [355] At sessiouns ther was he lord and sire;
 [356] Ful ofte tyme he was knyght of the shire.
 [357] An anlaas and a gipser al of silk
 [358] Heeng at his girdel, whit as morne milk.
 [359] A shirreve hadde he been, and a contour.
 [360] Was nowher swich a worthy vavasour.
 [361] AN HABERDASSHERE and a CARPENTER,
 [362] A WEBBE, a DYERE, and a TAPYCER --
 [363] And they were clothed alle in o lyveree
 [364] Of a solempne and a greet fraternitee.
 [365] Ful fressh and newe hir geere apiked was;
 [366] Hir knyves were chaped noght with bras
 [367] But al with silver, wroght ful clene and weel,
 [368] Hire girdles and hir pouches everydeel.
 [369] Wel semed ech of hem a fair burgeys
 [370] To sitten in a yeldehalle on a deys.
 [371] Everich, for the wisdom that he kan,
 [372] Was shaply for to been an alderman.
 [373] For catel hadde they ynogh and rente,
 [374] And eek hir wyves wolde it wel assente;
 [375] And elles certeyn were they to blame.
 [376] It is ful fair to been ycleped "madame,"
 [377] And goon to vigilies al bifore,
 [378] And have a mantel roialliche ybore.
 [379] A COOK they hadde with hem for the nones
 [380] To boille the chiknes with the marybones,
 [381] And poudre-marchant tart and galyngale.
 [382] Wel koude he knowe a draughte of Londoun ale.
 [383] He koude rooste, and sethe, and broille, and frye,
 [384] Maken mortreux, and wel bake a pye.
 [385] But greet harm was it, as it thoughte me,
 [386] That on his shyne a mormal hadde he.
 [387] For blankmanger, that made he with the beste.
 [388] A SHIPMAN was ther, wonynge fer by weste;
 [389] For aught I woot, he was of Dertemouthe.
 [390] He rood upon a rouncy, as he kouthe,
 [391] In a gowne of faldyng to the knee.
 [392] A daggere hangynge on a laas hadde he
 [393] Aboute his nekke, under his arm adoun.
 [394] The hoote somer hadde maad his hewe al broun;
 [395] And certeinly he was a good felawe.
 [396] Ful many a draughte of wyn had he ydrawe
 [397] Fro Burdeux-ward, whil that the chapman sleep.
 [398] Of nyce conscience took he no keep.
 [399] If that he faught and hadde the hyer hond,
 [400] By water he sente hem hoom to every lond.
 [401] But of his craft to rekene wel his tydes,
 [402] His stremes, and his daungers hym bisides,
 [403] His herberwe, and his moone, his lodemenage,
 [404] Ther nas noon swich from Hulle to Cartage.
 [405] Hardy he was and wys to undertake;
 [406] With many a tempest hadde his berd been shake.
 [407] He knew alle the havenes, as they were,
 [408] Fro Gootlond to the cape of Fynystere,
 [409] And every cryke in Britaigne and in Spayne.
 [410] His barge ycleped was the Maudelayne.
 [411] With us ther was a DOCTOUR OF PHISIK;
 [412] In al this world ne was ther noon hym lik,
 [413] To speke of phisik and of surgerye,
 [414] For he was grounded in astronomye.
 [415] He kepte his pacient a ful greet deel
 [416] In houres by his magyk natureel.
 [417] Wel koude he fortunen the ascendent
 [418] Of his ymages for his pacient.
 [419] He knew the cause of everich maladye,
 [420] Were it of hoot, or coold, or moyste, or drye,
 [421] And where they engendred, and of what humour.
 [422] He was a verray, parfit praktisour:
 [423] The cause yknowe, and of his harm the roote,
 [424] Anon he yaf the sike man his boote.
 [425] Ful redy hadde he his apothecaries
 [426] To sende hym drogges and his letuaries,
 [427] For ech of hem made oother for to wynne --
 [428] Hir frendshipe nas nat newe to bigynne.
 [429] Wel knew he the olde Esculapius,
 [430] And Deyscorides, and eek Rufus,
 [431] Olde Ypocras, Haly, and Galyen,
 [432] Serapion, Razis, and Avycen,
 [433] Averrois, Damascien, and Constantyn,
 [434] Bernard, and Gatesden, and Gilbertyn.
 [435] Of his diete mesurable was he,
 [436] For it was of no superfluitee,
 [437] But of greet norissyng and digestible.
 [438] His studie was but litel on the Bible.
 [439] In sangwyn and in pers he clad was al,
 [440] Lyned with taffata and with sendal.
 [441] And yet he was but esy of dispence;
 [442] He kepte that he wan in pestilence.
 [443] For gold in phisik is a cordial,
 [444] Therefore he lovede gold in special.
 [445] A good WIF was ther OF biside BATHE,
 [446] But she was somdel deef, and that was scathe.
 [447] Of clooth-makyng she hadde swich an haunt
 [448] She passed hem of Ypres and of Gaunt.
 [449] In al the parisshe wif ne was ther noon
 [450] That to the offrynge bifore hire sholde goon;
 [451] And if ther dide, certeyn so wrooth was she
 [452] That she was out of alle charitee.
 [453] Hir coverchiefs ful fyne weren of ground;
 [454] I dorste swere they weyeden ten pound
 [455] That on a Sonday weren upon hir heed.
 [456] Hir hosen weren of fyn scarlet reed,
 [457] Ful streite yteyd, and shoes ful moyste and newe.
 [458] Boold was hir face, and fair, and reed of hewe.
 [459] She was a worthy womman al hir lyve:
 [460] Housbondes at chirche dore she hadde fyve,
 [461] Withouten oother compaignye in youthe --
 [462] But thereof nedeth nat to speke as nowthe.
 [463] And thries hadde she been at Jerusalem;
 [464] She hadde passed many a straunge strem;
 [465] At Rome she hadde been, and at Boloigne,
 [466] In Galice at Seint-Jame, and at Coloigne.
 [467] She koude muchel of wandrynge by the weye.
 [468] Gat-tothed was she, soothly for to seye.
 [469] Upon an amblere esily she sat,
 [470] Ywympled wel, and on hir heed an hat
 [471] As brood as is a bokeler or a targe;
 [472] A foot-mantel aboute hir hipes large,
 [473] And on hir feet a paire of spores sharpe.
 [474] In felaweshipe wel koude she laughe and carpe.
 [475] Of remedies of love she knew per chaunce,
 [476] For she koude of that art the olde daunce.
 [477] A good man was ther of religioun,
 [478] And was a povre PERSOUN OF A TOUN,
 [479] But riche he was of hooly thoght and werk.
 [480] He was also a lerned man, a clerk,
 [481] That Cristes gospel trewely wolde preche;
 [482] His parisshens devoutly wolde he teche.
 [483] Benygne he was, and wonder diligent,
 [484] And in adversitee ful pacient,
 [485] And swich he was ypreved ofte sithes.
 [486] Ful looth were hym to cursen for his tithes,
 [487] But rather wolde he yeven, out of doute,
 [488] Unto his povre parisshens aboute
 [489] Of his offryng and eek of his substaunce.
 [490] He koude in litel thyng have suffisaunce.
 [491] Wyd was his parisshe, and houses fer asonder,
 [492] But he ne lefte nat, for reyn ne thonder,
 [493] In siknesse nor in meschief to visite
 [494] The ferreste in his parisshe, muche and lite,
 [495] Upon his feet, and in his hand a staf.
 [496] This noble ensample to his sheep he yaf,
 [497] That first he wroghte, and afterward he taughte.
 [498] Out of the gospel he tho wordes caughte,
 [499] And this figure he added eek therto,
 [500] That if gold ruste, what shal iren do?
 [501] For if a preest be foul, on whom we truste,
 [502] No wonder is a lewed man to ruste;
 [503] And shame it is, if a prest take keep,
 [504] A shiten shepherde and a clene sheep.
 [505] Wel oghte a preest ensample for to yive,
 [506] By his clennesse, how that his sheep sholde lyve.
 [507] He sette nat his benefice to hyre
 [508] And leet his sheep encombred in the myre
 [509] And ran to Londoun unto Seinte Poules
 [510] To seken hym a chaunterie for soules,
 [511] Or with a bretherhed to been withholde;
 [512] But dwelte at hoom, and kepte wel his folde,
 [513] So that the wolf ne made it nat myscarie;
 [514] He was a shepherde and noght a mercenarie.
 [515] And though he hooly were and vertuous,
 [516] He was to synful men nat despitous,
 [517] Ne of his speche daungerous ne digne,
 [518] But in his techyng discreet and benygne.
 [519] To drawen folk to hevene by fairnesse,
 [520] By good ensample, this was his bisynesse.
 [521] But it were any persone obstinat,
 [522] What so he were, of heigh or lough estat,
 [523] Hym wolde he snybben sharply for the nonys.
 [524] A bettre preest I trowe that nowher noon ys.
 [525] He waited after no pompe and reverence,
 [526] Ne maked him a spiced conscience,
 [527] But Cristes loore and his apostles twelve
 [528] He taughte; but first he folwed it hymselve.
 [529] With hym ther was a PLOWMAN, was his brother,
 [530] That hadde ylad of dong ful many a fother;
 [531] A trewe swynkere and a good was he,
 [532] Lyvynge in pees and parfit charitee.
 [533] God loved he best with al his hoole herte
 [534] At alle tymes, thogh him gamed or smerte,
 [535] And thanne his neighebor right as hymselve.
 [536] He wolde thresshe, and therto dyke and delve,
 [537] For Cristes sake, for every povre wight,
 [538] Withouten hire, if it lay in his myght.
 [539] His tithes payde he ful faire and wel,
 [540] Bothe of his propre swynk and his catel.
 [541] In a tabard he rood upon a mere.
 [542] Ther was also a REVE, and a MILLERE,
 [543] A SOMNOUR, and a PARDONER also,
 [544] A MAUNCIPLE, and myself -- ther were namo.
 [545] The MILLERE was a stout carl for the nones;
 [546] Ful byg he was of brawn, and eek of bones.
 [547] That proved wel, for over al ther he cam,
 [548] At wrastlynge he wolde have alwey the ram.
 [549] He was short-sholdred, brood, a thikke knarre;
 [550] Ther was no dore that he nolde heve of harre,
 [551] Or breke it at a rennyng with his heed.
 [552] His berd as any sowe or fox was reed,
 [553] And therto brood, as though it were a spade.
 [554] Upon the cop right of his nose he hade
 [555] A werte, and theron stood a toft of herys,
 [556] Reed as the brustles of a sowes erys;
 [557] His nosethirles blake were and wyde.
 [558] A swerd and a bokeler bar he by his syde.
 [559] His mouth as greet was as a greet forneys.
 [560] He was a janglere and a goliardeys,
 [561] And that was moost of synne and harlotries.
 [562] Wel koude he stelen corn and tollen thries;
 [563] And yet he hadde a thombe of gold, pardee.
 [564] A whit cote and a blew hood wered he.
 [565] A baggepipe wel koude he blowe and sowne,
 [566] And therwithal he broghte us out of towne.
 [567] A gentil MAUNCIPLE was ther of a temple,
 [568] Of which achatours myghte take exemple
 [569] For to be wise in byynge of vitaille;
 [570] For wheither that he payde or took by taille,
 [571] Algate he wayted so in his achaat
 [572] That he was ay biforn and in good staat.
 [573] Now is nat that of God a ful fair grace
 [574] That swich a lewed mannes wit shal pace
 [575] The wisdom of an heep of lerned men?
 [576] Of maistres hadde he mo than thries ten,
 [577] That weren of lawe expert and curious,
 [578] Of which ther were a duszeyne in that hous
 [579] Worthy to been stywardes of rente and lond
 [580] Of any lord that is in Engelond,
 [581] To make hym lyve by his propre good
 [582] In honour dettelees (but if he were wood),
 [583] Or lyve as scarsly as hym list desire;
 [584] And able for to helpen al a shire
 [585] In any caas that myghte falle or happe.
 [586] And yet this Manciple sette hir aller cappe.
 [587] The REVE was a sclendre colerik man.
 [588] His berd was shave as ny as ever he kan;
 [589] His heer was by his erys ful round yshorn;
 [590] His top was dokked lyk a preest biforn.
 [591] Ful longe were his legges and ful lene,
 [592] Ylyk a staf; ther was no calf ysene.
 [593] Wel koude he kepe a gerner and a bynne;
 [594] Ther was noon auditour koude on him wynne.
 [595] Wel wiste he by the droghte and by the reyn
 [596] The yeldynge of his seed and of his greyn.
 [597] His lordes sheep, his neet, his dayerye,
 [598] His swyn, his hors, his stoor, and his pultrye
 [599] Was hoolly in this Reves governynge,
 [600] And by his covenant yaf the rekenynge,
 [601] Syn that his lord was twenty yeer of age.
 [602] Ther koude no man brynge hym in arrerage.
 [603] Ther nas baillif, ne hierde, nor oother hyne,
 [604] That he ne knew his sleighte and his covyne;
 [605] They were adrad of hym as of the deeth.
 [606] His wonyng was ful faire upon an heeth;
 [607] With grene trees yshadwed was his place.
 [608] He koude bettre than his lord purchace.
 [609] Ful riche he was astored pryvely.
 [610] His lord wel koude he plesen subtilly,
 [611] To yeve and lene hym of his owene good,
 [612] And have a thank, and yet a cote and hood.
 [613] In youthe he hadde lerned a good myster:
 [614] He was a wel good wrighte, a carpenter.
 [615] This Reve sat upon a ful good stot
 [616] That was al pomely grey and highte Scot.
 [617] A long surcote of pers upon he hade,
 [618] And by his syde he baar a rusty blade.
 [619] Of Northfolk was this Reve of which I telle,
 [620] Biside a toun men clepen Baldeswelle.
 [621] Tukked he was as is a frere aboute,
 [622] And evere he rood the hyndreste of oure route.
 [623] A SOMONOUR was ther with us in that place,
 [624] That hadde a fyr-reed cherubynnes face,
 [625] For saucefleem he was, with eyen narwe.
 [626] As hoot he was and lecherous as a sparwe,
 [627] With scalled browes blake and piled berd.
 [628] Of his visage children were aferd.
 [629] Ther nas quyk-silver, lytarge, ne brymstoon,
 [630] Boras, ceruce, ne oille of tartre noon,
 [631] Ne oynement that wolde clense and byte,
 [632] That hym myghte helpen of his whelkes white,
 [633] Nor of the knobbes sittynge on his chekes.
 [634] Wel loved he garleek, oynons, and eek lekes,
 [635] And for to drynken strong wyn, reed as blood;
 [636] Thanne wolde he speke and crie as he were wood.
 [637] And whan that he wel dronken hadde the wyn,
 [638] Thanne wolde he speke no word but Latyn.
 [639] A fewe termes hadde he, two or thre,
 [640] That he had lerned out of som decree --
 [641] No wonder is, he herde it al the day;
 [642] And eek ye knowen wel how that a jay
 [643] Kan clepen "Watte" as wel as kan the pope.
 [644] But whoso koude in oother thyng hym grope,
 [645] Thanne hadde he spent al his philosophie;
 [646] Ay "Questio quid iuris" wolde he crie.
 [647] He was a gentil harlot and a kynde;
 [648] A bettre felawe sholde men noght fynde.
 

 [649] He wolde suffre for a quart of wyn
 [650] A good felawe to have his concubyn
 [651] A twelf month, and excuse hym atte fulle;
 [652] Ful prively a fynch eek koude he pulle.
 [653] And if he foond owher a good felawe,
 [654] He wolde techen him to have noon awe
 [655] In swich caas of the ercedekenes curs,
 [656] But if a mannes soule were in his purs;
 [657] For in his purs he sholde ypunysshed be.
 [658] "Purs is the ercedekenes helle," seyde he.
 [659] But wel I woot he lyed right in dede;
 [660] Of cursyng oghte ech gilty man him drede,
 [661] For curs wol slee right as assoillyng savith,
 [662] And also war hym of a Significavit.
 [663] In daunger hadde he at his owene gise
 [664] The yonge girles of the diocise,
 [665] And knew hir conseil, and was al hir reed.
 [666] A gerland hadde he set upon his heed,
 [667] As greet as it were for an ale-stake.
 [668] A bokeleer hadde he maad hym of a cake.
 [669] With hym ther rood a gentil PARDONER
 [670] Of Rouncivale, his freend and his compeer,
 [671] That streight was comen fro the court of Rome.
 [672] Ful loude he soong "Com hider, love, to me!"
 [673] This Somonour bar to hym a stif burdoun;
 [674] Was nevere trompe of half so greet a soun.
 [675] This Pardoner hadde heer as yelow as wex,
 [676] But smothe it heeng as dooth a strike of flex;
 [677] By ounces henge his lokkes that he hadde,
 [678] And therwith he his shuldres overspradde;
 [679] But thynne it lay, by colpons oon and oon.
 [680] But hood, for jolitee, wered he noon,
 [681] For it was trussed up in his walet.
 [682] Hym thoughte he rood al of the newe jet;
 [683] Dischevelee, save his cappe, he rood al bare.
 [684] Swiche glarynge eyen hadde he as an hare.
 [685] A vernycle hadde he sowed upon his cappe.
 [686] His walet, biforn hym in his lappe,
 [687] Bretful of pardoun comen from Rome al hoot.
 [688] A voys he hadde as smal as hath a goot.
 [689] No berd hadde he, ne nevere sholde have;
 [690] As smothe it was as it were late shave.
 [691] I trowe he were a geldyng or a mare.
 [692] But of his craft, fro Berwyk into Ware
 [693] Ne was ther swich another pardoner.
 [694] For in his male he hadde a pilwe-beer,
 [695] Which that he seyde was Oure Lady veyl;
 [696] He seyde he hadde a gobet of the seyl
 [697] That Seint Peter hadde, whan that he wente
 [698] Upon the see, til Jhesu Crist hym hente.
 [699] He hadde a croys of latoun ful of stones,
 [700] And in a glas he hadde pigges bones.
 [701] But with thise relikes, whan that he fond
 [702] A povre person dwellynge upon lond,
 [703] Upon a day he gat hym moore moneye
 [704] Than that the person gat in monthes tweye;
 [705] And thus, with feyned flaterye and japes,
 [706] He made the person and the peple his apes.
 [707] But trewely to tellen atte laste,
 [708] He was in chirche a noble ecclesiaste.
 [709] Wel koude he rede a lessoun or a storie,
 [710] But alderbest he song an offertorie;
 [711] For wel he wiste, whan that song was songe,
 [712] He moste preche and wel affile his tonge
 [713] To wynne silver, as he ful wel koude;
 [714] Therefore he song the murierly and loude.
 [715] Now have I toold you soothly, in a clause,
 [716] Th' estaat, th' array, the nombre, and eek the cause
 [717] Why that assembled was this compaignye
 [718] In Southwerk at this gentil hostelrye
 [719] That highte the Tabard, faste by the Belle.
 [720] But now is tyme to yow for to telle
 [721] How that we baren us that ilke nyght,
 [722] Whan we were in that hostelrie alyght;
 [723] And after wol I telle of our viage
 [724] And al the remenaunt of oure pilgrimage.
 [725] But first I pray yow, of youre curteisye,
 [726] That ye n' arette it nat my vileynye,
 [727] Thogh that I pleynly speke in this mateere,
 [728] To telle yow hir wordes and hir cheere,
 [729] Ne thogh I speke hir wordes proprely.
 [730] For this ye knowen al so wel as I:
 [731] Whoso shal telle a tale after a man,
 [732] He moot reherce as ny as evere he kan
 [733] Everich a word, if it be in his charge,
 [734] Al speke he never so rudeliche and large,
 [735] Or ellis he moot telle his tale untrewe,
 [736] Or feyne thyng, or fynde wordes newe.
 [737] He may nat spare, althogh he were his brother;
 [738] He moot as wel seye o word as another.
 [739] Crist spak hymself ful brode in hooly writ,
 [740] And wel ye woot no vileynye is it.
 [741] Eek Plato seith, whoso kan hym rede,
 [742] The wordes moote be cosyn to the dede.
 [743] Also I prey yow to foryeve it me,
 [744] Al have I nat set folk in hir degree
 [745] Heere in this tale, as that they sholde stonde.
 [746] My wit is short, ye may wel understonde.
 [747] Greet chiere made oure Hoost us everichon,
 [748] And to the soper sette he us anon.
 [749] He served us with vitaille at the beste;
 [750] Strong was the wyn, and wel to drynke us leste.
 [751] A semely man OURE HOOSTE was withalle
 [752] For to been a marchal in an halle.
 [753] A large man he was with eyen stepe --
 [754] A fairer burgeys was ther noon in Chepe --
 [755] Boold of his speche, and wys, and wel ytaught,
 [756] And of manhod hym lakkede right naught.
 [757] Eek therto he was right a myrie man;
 [758] And after soper pleyen he bigan,
 [759] And spak of myrthe amonges othere thynges,
 [760] Whan that we hadde maad oure rekenynges,
 [761] And seyde thus: "Now, lordynges, trewely,
 [762] Ye been to me right welcome, hertely;
 [763] For by my trouthe, if that I shal nat lye,
 [764] I saugh nat this yeer so myrie a compaignye
 [765] Atones in this herberwe as is now.
 [766] Fayn wolde I doon yow myrthe, wiste I how.
 [767] And of a myrthe I am right now bythoght,
 [768] To doon yow ese, and it shal coste noght.
 [769] "Ye goon to Caunterbury -- God yow speede,
 [770] The blisful martir quite yow youre meede!
 [771] And wel I woot, as ye goon by the weye,
 [772] Ye shapen yow to talen and to pleye;
 [773] For trewely, confort ne myrthe is noon
 [774] To ride by the weye doumb as a stoon;
 [775] And therfore wol I maken yow disport,
 [776] As I seyde erst, and doon yow som confort.
 [777] And if yow liketh alle by oon assent
 [778] For to stonden at my juggement,
 [779] And for to werken as I shal yow seye,
 [780] Tomorwe, whan ye riden by the weye,
 [781] Now, by my fader soule that is deed,
 [782] But ye be myrie, I wol yeve yow myn heed!
 [783] Hoold up youre hondes, withouten moore speche."
 [784] Oure conseil was nat longe for to seche.
 [785] Us thoughte it was noght worth to make it wys,
 [786] And graunted hym withouten moore avys,
 [787] And bad him seye his voirdit as hym leste.
 [788] "Lordynges," quod he, "now herkneth for the beste;
 [789] But taak it nought, I prey yow, in desdeyn.
 [790] This is the poynt, to speken short and pleyn,
 [791] That ech of yow, to shorte with oure weye,
 [792] In this viage shal telle tales tweye
 [793] To Caunterbury-ward, I mene it so,
 [794] And homward he shal tellen othere two,
 [795] Of aventures that whilom han bifalle.
 [796] And which of yow that bereth hym best of alle --
 [797] That is to seyn, that telleth in this caas
 [798] Tales of best sentence and moost solaas --
 [799] Shal have a soper at oure aller cost
 [800] Heere in this place, sittynge by this post,
 [801] Whan that we come agayn fro Caunterbury.
 [802] And for to make yow the moore mury,
 [803] I wol myselven goodly with yow ryde,
 [804] Right at myn owene cost, and be youre gyde;
 [805] And whoso wole my juggement withseye
 [806] Shal paye al that we spenden by the weye.
 [807] And if ye vouche sauf that it be so,
 [808] Tel me anon, withouten wordes mo,
 [809] And I wol erly shape me therfore."
 [810] This thyng was graunted, and oure othes swore
 [811] With ful glad herte, and preyden hym also
 [812] That he wolde vouche sauf for to do so,
 [813] And that he wolde been oure governour,
 [814] And of oure tales juge and reportour,
 [815] And sette a soper at a certeyn pris,
 [816] And we wol reuled been at his devys
 [817] In heigh and lough; and thus by oon assent
 [818] We been acorded to his juggement.
 [819] And therupon the wyn was fet anon;
 [820] We dronken, and to reste wente echon,
 [821] Withouten any lenger taryynge.
 [822] Amorwe, whan that day bigan to sprynge,
 [823] Up roos oure Hoost, and was oure aller cok,
 [824] And gadrede us togidre alle in a flok,
 [825] And forth we riden a litel moore than paas
 [826] Unto the Wateryng of Seint Thomas;
 [827] And there oure Hoost bigan his hors areste
 [828] And seyde, "Lordynges, herkneth, if yow leste.
 [829] Ye woot youre foreward, and I it yow recorde.
 [830] If even-song and morwe-song accorde,
 [831] Lat se now who shal telle the firste tale.
 [832] As evere mote I drynke wyn or ale,
 [833] Whoso be rebel to my juggement
 [834] Shal paye for al that by the wey is spent.
 [835] Now draweth cut, er that we ferrer twynne;
 [836] He which that hath the shorteste shal bigynne.
 [837] Sire Knyght," quod he, "my mayster and my lord,
 [838] Now draweth cut, for that is myn accord.
 [839] Cometh neer," quod he, "my lady Prioresse.
 [840] And ye, sire Clerk, lat be youre shamefastnesse,
 [841] Ne studieth noght; ley hond to, every man!"
 [842] Anon to drawen every wight bigan,
 [843] And shortly for to tellen as it was,
 [844] Were it by aventure, or sort, or cas,
 [845] The sothe is this: the cut fil to the Knyght,
 [846] Of which ful blithe and glad was every wyght,
 [847] And telle he moste his tale, as was resoun,
 [848] By foreward and by composicioun,
 [849] As ye han herd; what nedeth wordes mo?
 [850] And whan this goode man saugh that it was so,
 [851] As he that wys was and obedient
 [852] To kepe his foreward by his free assent,
 [853] He seyde, "Syn I shal bigynne the game,
 [854] What, welcome be the cut, a Goddes name!
 [855] Now lat us ryde, and herkneth what I seye."
 [856] And with that word we ryden forth oure weye,
 [857] And he bigan with right a myrie cheere
 [858] His tale anon, and seyde as ye may heere.

      
The Canterbury Tales and Other Works of Chaucer (Middle English), by Geoffery Chaucer, [14th cent.], at sacred-texts.com

 

The Canterbury Tales

 

The Knight's Tale

 [859] Whilom, as olde stories tellen us,
 [860] Ther was a duc that highte Theseus;
 [861] Of Atthenes he was lord and governour,
 [862] And in his tyme swich a conquerour
 [863] That gretter was ther noon under the sonne.
 [864] Ful many a riche contree hadde he wonne;
 [865] What with his wysdom and his chivalrie,
 [866] He conquered al the regne of Femenye,
 [867] That whilom was ycleped Scithia,
 [868] And weddede the queene Ypolita,
 [869] And broghte hire hoom with hym in his contree
 [870] With muchel glorie and greet solempnytee,
 [871] And eek hir yonge suster Emelye.
 [872] And thus with victorie and with melodye
 [873] Lete I this noble duc to Atthenes ryde,
 [874] And al his hoost in armes hym bisyde.
 [875] And certes, if it nere to long to heere,
 [876] I wolde have toold yow fully the manere
 [877] How wonnen was the regne of Femenye
 [878] By Theseus and by his chivalrye;
 [879] And of the grete bataille for the nones
 [880] Bitwixen Atthenes and Amazones;
 [881] And how asseged was Ypolita,
 [882] The faire, hardy queene of Scithia;
 [883] And of the feste that was at hir weddynge,
 [884] And of the tempest at hir hoom-comynge;
 [885] But al that thyng I moot as now forbere.
 [886] I have, God woot, a large feeld to ere,
 [887] And wayke been the oxen in my plough.
 [888] The remenant of the tale is long ynough.
 [889] I wol nat letten eek noon of this route;
 [890] Lat every felawe telle his tale aboute,
 [891] And lat se now who shal the soper wynne;
 [892] And ther I lefte, I wol ayeyn bigynne.
 [893] This duc, of whom I make mencioun,
 [894] Whan he was come almoost unto the toun,
 [895] In al his wele and in his mooste pride,
 [896] He was war, as he caste his eye aside,
 [897] Where that ther kneled in the heighe weye
 [898] A compaignye of ladyes, tweye and tweye,
 [899] Ech after oother clad in clothes blake;
 [900] But swich a cry and swich a wo they make
 [901] That in this world nys creature lyvynge
 [902] That herde swich another waymentynge;
 [903] And of this cry they nolde nevere stenten
 [904] Til they the reynes of his brydel henten.
 [905] "What folk been ye, that at myn hom-comynge
 [906] Perturben so my feste with criynge?"
 [907] Quod Theseus. "Have ye so greet envye
 [908] Of myn honour, that thus compleyne and crye?
 [909] Or who hath yow mysboden or offended?
 [910] And telleth me if it may been amended,
 [911] And why that ye been clothed thus in blak."
 [912] The eldeste lady of hem alle spak,
 [913] Whan she hadde swowned with a deedly cheere,
 [914] That it was routhe for to seen and heere;
 [915] She seyde, "Lord, to whom Fortune hath yiven
 [916] Victorie, and as a conqueror to lyven,
 [917] Nat greveth us youre glorie and youre honour,
 [918] But we biseken mercy and socour.
 [919] Have mercy on oure wo and oure distresse!
 [920] Som drope of pitee, thurgh thy gentillesse,
 [921] Upon us wrecched wommen lat thou falle,
 [922] For, certes, lord, ther is noon of us alle
 [923] That she ne hath been a duchesse or a queene.
 [924] Now be we caytyves, as it is wel seene,
 [925] Thanked be Fortune and hire false wheel,
 [926] That noon estaat assureth to be weel.
 [927] And certes, lord, to abyden youre presence,
 [928] Heere in this temple of the goddesse Clemence
 [929] We han ben waitynge al this fourtenyght.
 [930] Now help us, lord, sith it is in thy myght.
 [931] "I, wrecche, which that wepe and wayle thus,
 [932] Was whilom wyf to kyng Cappaneus,
 [933] That starf at Thebes -- cursed be that day! --
 [934] And alle we that been in this array
 [935] And maken al this lamentacioun,
 [936] We losten alle oure housbondes at that toun,
 [937] Whil that the seege theraboute lay.
 [938] And yet now the olde Creon -- weylaway! --
 [939] That lord is now of Thebes the citee,
 [940] Fulfild of ire and of iniquitee,
 [941] He, for despit and for his tirannye,
 [942] To do the dede bodyes vileynye
 [943] Of alle oure lordes whiche that been yslawe,
 [944] Hath alle the bodyes on an heep ydrawe,
 [945] And wol nat suffren hem, by noon assent,
 [946] Neither to been yburyed nor ybrent,
 [947] But maketh houndes ete hem in despit."
 [948] And with that word, withouten moore respit,
 [949] They fillen gruf and criden pitously,
 [950] "Have on us wrecched wommen som mercy,
 [951] And lat oure sorwe synken in thyn herte."
 [952] This gentil duc doun from his courser sterte
 [953] With herte pitous, whan he herde hem speke.
 [954] Hym thoughte that his herte wolde breke,
 [955] Whan he saugh hem so pitous and so maat,
 [956] That whilom weren of so greet estaat;
 [957] And in his armes he hem alle up hente,
 [958] And hem conforteth in ful good entente,
 [959] And swoor his ooth, as he was trewe knyght,
 [960] He wolde doon so ferforthly his myght
 [961] Upon the tiraunt Creon hem to wreke
 [962] That al the peple of Grece sholde speke
 [963] How Creon was of Theseus yserved
 [964] As he that hadde his deeth ful wel deserved.
 [965] And right anoon, withouten moore abood,
 [966] His baner he desplayeth, and forth rood
 [967] To Thebes-ward, and al his hoost biside.
 [968] No neer Atthenes wolde he go ne ride,
 [969] Ne take his ese fully half a day,
 [970] But onward on his wey that nyght he lay,
 [971] And sente anon Ypolita the queene,
 [972] And Emelye, hir yonge suster sheene,
 [973] Unto the toun of Atthenes to dwelle,
 [974] And forth he rit; ther is namoore to telle.
 [975] The rede statue of Mars, with spere and targe,
 [976] So shyneth in his white baner large
 [977] That alle the feeldes glyteren up and doun;
 [978] And by his baner born is his penoun
 [979] Of gold ful riche, in which ther was ybete
 

 

 [980] The Mynotaur, which that he wan in Crete.
 [981] Thus rit this duc, thus rit this conquerour,
 [982] And in his hoost of chivalrie the flour,
 [983] Til that he cam to Thebes and alighte
 [984] Faire in a feeld, ther as he thoughte to fighte.
 [985] But shortly for to speken of this thyng,
 [986] With Creon, which that was of Thebes kyng,
 [987] He faught, and slough hym manly as a knyght
 [988] In pleyn bataille, and putte the folk to flyght;
 [989] And by assaut he wan the citee after,
 [990] And rente adoun bothe wall and sparre and rafter;
 [991] And to the ladyes he restored agayn
 [992] The bones of hir freendes that were slayn,
 [993] To doon obsequies, as was tho the gyse.
 [994] But it were al to longe for to devyse
 [995] The grete clamour and the waymentynge
 [996] That the ladyes made at the brennynge
 [997] Of the bodies, and the grete honour
 [998] That Theseus, the noble conquerour,
 [999] Dooth to the ladyes, whan they from hym wente;
 [1000] But shortly for to telle is myn entente.
 [1001] Whan that this worthy duc, this Theseus,
 [1002] Hath Creon slayn and wonne Thebes thus,
 [1003] Stille in that feeld he took al nyght his reste,
 [1004] And dide with al the contree as hym leste.
 [1005] To ransake in the taas of bodyes dede,
 [1006] Hem for to strepe of harneys and of wede,
 [1007] The pilours diden bisynesse and cure
 [1008] After the bataille and disconfiture.
 [1009] And so bifel that in the taas they founde,
 [1010] Thurgh-girt with many a grevous blody wounde,
 [1011] Two yonge knyghtes liggynge by and by,
 [1012] Bothe in oon armes, wroght ful richely,
 [1013] Of whiche two Arcita highte that oon,
 [1014] And that oother knyght highte Palamon.
 [1015] Nat fully quyke, ne fully dede they were,
 [1016] But by hir cote-armures and by hir gere
 [1017] The heraudes knewe hem best in special
 [1018] As they that weren of the blood roial
 [1019] Of Thebes, and of sustren two yborn.
 [1020] Out of the taas the pilours han hem torn,
 [1021] And han hem caried softe unto the tente
 [1022] Of Theseus; and he ful soone hem sente
 [1023] To Atthenes, to dwellen in prisoun
 [1024] Perpetuelly -- he nolde no raunsoun.
 [1025] And whan this worthy duc hath thus ydon,
 [1026] He took his hoost, and hoom he rit anon
 [1027] With laurer crowned as a conquerour;
 [1028] And ther he lyveth in joye and in honour
 [1029] Terme of his lyf; what nedeth wordes mo?
 [1030] And in a tour, in angwissh and in wo,
 [1031] This Palamon and his felawe Arcite
 [1032] For everemoore; ther may no gold hem quite.
 [1033] This passeth yeer by yeer and day by day,
 [1034] Till it fil ones, in a morwe of May,
 [1035] That Emelye, that fairer was to sene
 [1036] Than is the lylie upon his stalke grene,
 [1037] And fressher than the May with floures newe --
 [1038] For with the rose colour stroof hire hewe,
 [1039] I noot which was the fyner of hem two --
 [1040] Er it were day, as was hir wone to do,
 [1041] She was arisen and al redy dight,
 [1042] For May wole have no slogardie anyght.
 [1043] The sesoun priketh every gentil herte,
 [1044] And maketh it out of his slep to sterte,
 [1045] And seith "Arys, and do thyn observaunce."
 [1046] This maked Emelye have remembraunce
 [1047] To doon honour to May, and for to ryse.
 [1048] Yclothed was she fressh, for to devyse:
 [1049] Hir yelow heer was broyded in a tresse
 [1050] Bihynde hir bak, a yerde long, I gesse.
 [1051] And in the gardyn, at the sonne upriste,
 [1052] She walketh up and doun, and as hire liste
 [1053] She gadereth floures, party white and rede,
 [1054] To make a subtil gerland for hire hede;
 [1055] And as an aungel hevenysshly she soong.
 [1056] The grete tour, that was so thikke and stroong,
 [1057] Which of the castel was the chief dongeoun
 [1058] (Ther as the knyghtes weren in prisoun
 [1059] Of which I tolde yow and tellen shal),
 [1060] Was evene joynant to the gardyn wal
 [1061] Ther as this Emelye hadde hir pleyynge.
 [1062] Bright was the sonne and cleer that morwenynge,
 [1063] And Palamoun, this woful prisoner,
 [1064] As was his wone, by leve of his gayler,
 [1065] Was risen and romed in a chambre an heigh,
 [1066] In which he al the noble citee seigh,
 [1067] And eek the gardyn, ful of braunches grene,
 [1068] Ther as this fresshe Emelye the shene
 [1069] Was in hire walk, and romed up and doun.
 [1070] This sorweful prisoner, this Palamoun,
 [1071] Goth in the chambre romynge to and fro
 [1072] And to hymself compleynynge of his wo.
 [1073] That he was born, ful ofte he seyde, "allas!"
 [1074] And so bifel, by aventure or cas,
 [1075] That thurgh a wyndow, thikke of many a barre
 [1076] Of iren greet and square as any sparre,
 [1077] He cast his eye upon Emelya,
 [1078] And therwithal he bleynte and cride, "A!"
 [1079] As though he stongen were unto the herte.
 [1080] And with that cry Arcite anon up sterte
 [1081] And seyde, "Cosyn myn, what eyleth thee,
 [1082] That art so pale and deedly on to see?
 [1083] Why cridestow? Who hath thee doon offence?
 [1084] For Goddes love, taak al in pacience
 [1085] Oure prisoun, for it may noon oother be.
 [1086] Fortune hath yeven us this adversitee.
 [1087] Som wikke aspect or disposicioun
 [1088] Of Saturne, by som constellacioun,
 [1089] Hath yeven us this, although we hadde it sworn;
 [1090] So stood the hevene whan that we were born.
 [1091] We moste endure it; this is the short and playn."
 [1092] This Palamon answerde and seyde agayn,
 [1093] "Cosyn, for sothe, of this opinioun
 [1094] Thow hast a veyn ymaginacioun.
 [1095] This prison caused me nat for to crye,
 [1096] But I was hurt right now thurghout myn ye
 [1097] Into myn herte, that wol my bane be.
 [1098] The fairnesse of that lady that I see
 [1099] Yond in the gardyn romen to and fro
 [1100] Is cause of al my criyng and my wo.
 [1101] I noot wher she be womman or goddesse,
 [1102] But Venus is it soothly, as I gesse."
 [1103] And therwithal on knees doun he fil,
 [1104] And seyde, "Venus, if it be thy wil
 [1105] Yow in this gardyn thus to transfigure
 [1106] Bifore me, sorweful, wrecched creature,
 [1107] Out of this prisoun help that we may scapen.
 [1108] And if so be my destynee be shapen
 [1109] By eterne word to dyen in prisoun,
 [1110] Of oure lynage have som compassioun,
 [1111] That is so lowe ybroght by tirannye."
 [1112] And with that word Arcite gan espye
 [1113] Wher as this lady romed to and fro,
 [1114] And with that sighte hir beautee hurte hym so,
 [1115] That, if that Palamon was wounded sore,
 [1116] Arcite is hurt as muche as he, or moore.
 [1117] And with a sigh he seyde pitously,
 [1118] "The fresshe beautee sleeth me sodeynly
 [1119] Of hire that rometh in the yonder place;
 [1120] And but I have hir mercy and hir grace,
 [1121] That I may seen hire atte leeste weye,
 [1122] I nam but deed; ther nis namoore to seye."
 [1123] This Palamon, whan he tho wordes herde,
 [1124] Dispitously he looked and answerde,
 [1125] "Wheither seistow this in ernest or in pley?"
 [1126] "Nay," quod Arcite, "in ernest, by my fey!
 [1127] God helpe me so, me list ful yvele pleye."
 [1128] This Palamon gan knytte his browes tweye.
 [1129] "It nere," quod he, "to thee no greet honour
 [1130] For to be fals, ne for to be traitour
 [1131] To me, that am thy cosyn and thy brother
 [1132] Ysworn ful depe, and ech of us til oother,
 [1133] That nevere, for to dyen in the peyne,
 [1134] Til that the deeth departe shal us tweyne,
 [1135] Neither of us in love to hyndre oother,
 [1136] Ne in noon oother cas, my leeve brother,
 [1137] But that thou sholdest trewely forthren me
 [1138] In every cas, as I shal forthren thee --
 [1139] This was thyn ooth, and myn also, certeyn;
 [1140] I woot right wel, thou darst it nat withseyn.
 [1141] Thus artow of my conseil, out of doute,
 [1142] And now thow woldest falsly been aboute
 [1143] To love my lady, whom I love and serve,
 [1144] And evere shal til that myn herte sterve.
 [1145] Nay, certes, false Arcite, thow shalt nat so.
 [1146] I loved hire first, and tolde thee my wo
 [1147] As to my conseil and my brother sworn
 [1148] To forthre me, as I have toold biforn.
 [1149] For which thou art ybounden as a knyght
 [1150] To helpen me, if it lay in thy myght,
 [1151] Or elles artow fals, I dar wel seyn."
 [1152] This Arcite ful proudly spak ageyn:
 [1153] "Thow shalt," quod he, "be rather fals than I;
 [1154] And thou art fals, I telle thee outrely,
 [1155] For paramour I loved hire first er thow.
 [1156] What wiltow seyen? Thou woost nat yet now
 [1157] Wheither she be a womman or goddesse!
 [1158] Thyn is affeccioun of hoolynesse,
 [1159] And myn is love as to a creature;
 [1160] For which I tolde thee myn aventure
 [1161] As to my cosyn and my brother sworn.
 [1162] I pose that thow lovedest hire biforn;
 [1163] Wostow nat wel the olde clerkes sawe,
 [1164] That `who shal yeve a lovere any lawe?'
 [1165] Love is a gretter lawe, by my pan,
 [1166] Than may be yeve to any erthely man;
 [1167] And therfore positif lawe and swich decree
 [1168] Is broken al day for love in ech degree.
 [1169] A man moot nedes love, maugree his heed;
 [1170] He may nat fleen it, thogh he sholde be deed,
 [1171] Al be she mayde, or wydwe, or elles wyf.
 [1172] And eek it is nat likly al thy lyf
 [1173] To stonden in hir grace; namoore shal I;
 [1174] For wel thou woost thyselven, verraily,
 [1175] That thou and I be dampned to prisoun
 [1176] Perpetuelly; us gayneth no raunsoun.
 [1177] We stryve as dide the houndes for the boon;
 [1178] They foughte al day, and yet hir part was noon.
 [1179] Ther cam a kyte, whil that they were so wrothe,
 [1180] And baar awey the boon bitwixe hem bothe.
 [1181] And therfore, at the kynges court, my brother,
 [1182] Ech man for hymself, ther is noon oother.
 [1183] Love, if thee list, for I love and ay shal;
 [1184] And soothly, leeve brother, this is al.
 [1185] Heere in this prisoun moote we endure,
 [1186] And everich of us take his aventure."
 [1187] Greet was the strif and long bitwix hem tweye,
 [1188] If that I hadde leyser for to seye;
 [1189] But to th' effect. It happed on a day,
 [1190] To telle it yow as shortly as I may,
 [1191] A worthy duc that highte Perotheus,
 [1192] That felawe was unto duc Theseus
 [1193] Syn thilke day that they were children lite,
 [1194] Was come to Atthenes his felawe to visite,
 [1195] And for to pleye as he was wont to do;
 [1196] For in this world he loved no man so,
 [1197] And he loved hym als tendrely agayn.
 [1198] So wel they lovede, as olde bookes sayn,
 [1199] That whan that oon was deed, soothly to telle,
 [1200] His felawe wente and soughte hym doun in helle --
 [1201] But of that storie list me nat to write.
 [1202] Duc Perotheus loved wel Arcite,
 [1203] And hadde hym knowe at Thebes yeer by yere,
 [1204] And finally at requeste and preyere
 [1205] Of Perotheus, withouten any raunsoun,
 [1206] Duc Theseus hym leet out of prisoun
 [1207] Frely to goon wher that hym liste over al,
 [1208] In swich a gyse as I you tellen shal.
 [1209] This was the forward, pleynly for t' endite,
 [1210] Bitwixen Theseus and hym Arcite:
 [1211] That if so were that Arcite were yfounde
 [1212] Evere in his lif, by day or nyght, oo stounde
 [1213] In any contree of this Theseus,
 [1214] And he were caught, it was acorded thus,
 [1215] That with a swerd he sholde lese his heed.
 [1216] Ther nas noon oother remedie ne reed;
 [1217] But taketh his leve, and homward he him spedde.
 [1218] Lat hym be war! His nekke lith to wedde.
 [1219] How greet a sorwe suffreth now Arcite!
 [1220] The deeth he feeleth thurgh his herte smyte;
 [1221] He wepeth, wayleth, crieth pitously;
 [1222] To sleen hymself he waiteth prively.
 [1223] He seyde, "Allas that day that I was born!
 [1224] Now is my prisoun worse than biforn;
 [1225] Now is me shape eternally to dwelle
 [1226] Noght in purgatorie, but in helle.
 [1227] Allas, that evere knew I Perotheus!
 [1228] For elles hadde I dwelled with Theseus,
 [1229] Yfetered in his prisoun everemo.
 [1230] Thanne hadde I been in blisse and nat in wo.
 [1231] Oonly the sighte of hire whom that I serve,
 [1232] Though that I nevere hir grace may deserve,
 [1233] Wolde han suffised right ynough for me.
 [1234] O deere cosyn Palamon," quod he,
 [1235] "Thyn is the victorie of this aventure.
 [1236] Ful blisfully in prison maistow dure --
 [1237] In prison? Certes nay, but in paradys!
 [1238] Wel hath Fortune yturned thee the dys,
 [1239] That hast the sighte of hire, and I th' absence.
 [1240] For possible is, syn thou hast hire presence,
 [1241] And art a knyght, a worthy and an able,
 [1242] That by som cas, syn Fortune is chaungeable,
 [1243] Thow maist to thy desir somtyme atteyne.
 [1244] But I, that am exiled and bareyne
 [1245] Of alle grace, and in so greet dispeir
 [1246] That ther nys erthe, water, fir, ne eir,
 [1247] Ne creature that of hem maked is,
 [1248] That may me helpe or doon confort in this,
 [1249] Wel oughte I sterve in wanhope and distresse.
 [1250] Farwel my lif, my lust, and my gladnesse!
 [1251] "Allas, why pleynen folk so in commune
 [1252] On purveiaunce of God, or of Fortune,
 [1253] That yeveth hem ful ofte in many a gyse
 [1254] Wel bettre than they kan hemself devyse?
 [1255] Som man desireth for to han richesse,
 [1256] That cause is of his mordre or greet siknesse;
 [1257] And som man wolde out of his prisoun fayn,
 [1258] That in his hous is of his meynee slayn.
 [1259] Infinite harmes been in this mateere.
 [1260] We witen nat what thing we preyen heere;
 [1261] We faren as he that dronke is as a mous.
 [1262] A dronke man woot wel he hath an hous,
 [1263] But he noot which the righte wey is thider,
 [1264] And to a dronke man the wey is slider.
 [1265] And certes, in this world so faren we;
 [1266] We seken faste after felicitee,
 [1267] But we goon wrong ful often, trewely.
 [1268] Thus may we seyen alle, and namely I,
 [1269] That wende and hadde a greet opinioun
 [1270] That if I myghte escapen from prisoun,
 [1271] Thanne hadde I been in joye and parfit heele,
 [1272] Ther now I am exiled fro my wele.
 [1273] Syn that I may nat seen you, Emelye,
 [1274] I nam but deed; ther nys no remedye."
 [1275] Upon that oother syde Palamon,
 [1276] Whan that he wiste Arcite was agon,
 [1277] Swich sorwe he maketh that the grete tour
 [1278] Resouneth of his youlyng and clamour.
 [1279] The pure fettres on his shynes grete
 [1280] Weren of his bittre, salte teeres wete.
 [1281] "Allas," quod he, "Arcita, cosyn myn,
 [1282] Of al oure strif, God woot, the fruyt is thyn.
 [1283] Thow walkest now in Thebes at thy large,
 [1284] And of my wo thow yevest litel charge.
 [1285] Thou mayst, syn thou hast wisdom and manhede,
 [1286] Assemblen alle the folk of oure kynrede,
 [1287] And make a werre so sharp on this citee
 [1288] That by som aventure or some tretee
 [1289] Thow mayst have hire to lady and to wyf
 [1290] For whom that I moste nedes lese my lyf.
 [1291] For, as by wey of possibilitee,
 [1292] Sith thou art at thy large, of prisoun free,
 [1293] And art a lord, greet is thyn avauntage
 [1294] Moore than is myn, that sterve here in a cage.
 [1295] For I moot wepe and wayle, whil I lyve,
 [1296] With al the wo that prison may me yive,
 

 [1297] And eek with peyne that love me yeveth also,
 [1298] That doubleth al my torment and my wo."
 [1299] Therwith the fyr of jalousie up sterte
 [1300] Withinne his brest, and hente him by the herte
 [1301] So woodly that he lyk was to biholde
 [1302] The boxtree or the asshen dede and colde.
 [1303] Thanne seyde he, "O crueel goddes that governe
 [1304] This world with byndyng of youre word eterne,
 [1305] And writen in the table of atthamaunt
 [1306] Youre parlement and youre eterne graunt,
 [1307] What is mankynde moore unto you holde
 [1308] Than is the sheep that rouketh in the folde?
 [1309] For slayn is man right as another beest,
 [1310] And dwelleth eek in prison and arreest,
 [1311] And hath siknesse and greet adversitee,
 [1312] And ofte tymes giltelees, pardee.
 [1313] "What governance is in this prescience,
 [1314] That giltelees tormenteth innocence?
 [1315] And yet encresseth this al my penaunce,
 [1316] That man is bounden to his observaunce,
 [1317] For Goddes sake, to letten of his wille,
 [1318] Ther as a beest may al his lust fulfille.
 [1319] And whan a beest is deed he hath no peyne;
 [1320] But man after his deeth moot wepe and pleyne,
 [1321] Though in this world he have care and wo.
 [1322] Withouten doute it may stonden so.
 [1323] The answere of this lete I to dyvynys,
 [1324] But wel I woot that in this world greet pyne ys.
 [1325] Allas, I se a serpent or a theef,
 [1326] That many a trewe man hath doon mescheef,
 [1327] Goon at his large, and where hym list may turne.
 [1328] But I moot been in prisoun thurgh Saturne,
 [1329] And eek thurgh Juno, jalous and eek wood,
 [1330] That hath destroyed wel ny al the blood
 [1331] Of Thebes with his waste walles wyde;
 

 [1332] And Venus sleeth me on that oother syde
 [1333] For jalousie and fere of hym Arcite."
 [1334] Now wol I stynte of Palamon a lite,
 [1335] And lete hym in his prisoun stille dwelle,
 [1336] And of Arcita forth I wol yow telle.
 [1337] The somer passeth, and the nyghtes longe
 [1338] Encressen double wise the peynes stronge
 [1339] Bothe of the lovere and the prisoner.
 [1340] I noot which hath the wofuller mester.
 [1341] For, shortly for to seyn, this Palamoun
 [1342] Perpetuelly is dampned to prisoun,
 [1343] In cheynes and in fettres to been deed;
 [1344] And Arcite is exiled upon his heed
 [1345] For everemo, as out of that contree,
 [1346] Ne nevere mo ne shal his lady see.
 [1347] Yow loveres axe I now this questioun:
 [1348] Who hath the worse, Arcite or Palamoun?
 [1349] That oon may seen his lady day by day,
 [1350] But in prison he moot dwelle alway;
 [1351] That oother wher hym list may ride or go,
 [1352] But seen his lady shal he nevere mo.
 [1353] Now demeth as yow liste, ye that kan,
 [1354] For I wol telle forth as I bigan.
 [1355] Whan that Arcite to Thebes comen was,
 [1356] Ful ofte a day he swelte and seyde "Allas!"
 [1357] For seen his lady shal he nevere mo.
 [1358] And shortly to concluden al his wo,
 [1359] So muche sorwe hadde nevere creature
 [1360] That is, or shal, whil that the world may dure.
 [1361] His slep, his mete, his drynke, is hym biraft,
 [1362] That lene he wex and drye as is a shaft;
 [1363] His eyen holwe and grisly to biholde,
 [1364] His hewe falow and pale as asshen colde,
 [1365] And solitarie he was and evere allone,
 [1366] And waillynge al the nyght, makynge his mone;
 [1367] And if he herde song or instrument,
 [1368] Thanne wolde he wepe, he myghte nat be stent.
 [1369] So feble eek were his spiritz, and so lowe,
 [1370] And chaunged so, that no man koude knowe
 [1371] His speche nor his voys, though men it herde.
 [1372] And in his geere for al the world he ferde
 [1373] Nat oonly lik the loveris maladye
 [1374] Of Hereos, but rather lyk manye,
 [1375] Engendred of humour malencolik
 [1376] Biforen, in his celle fantastik.
 [1377] And shortly, turned was al up so doun
 [1378] Bothe habit and eek disposicioun
 [1379] Of hym, this woful lovere daun Arcite.
 [1380] What sholde I al day of his wo endite?
 [1381] Whan he endured hadde a yeer or two
 [1382] This crueel torment and this peyne and wo,
 [1383] At Thebes, in his contree, as I seyde,
 [1384] Upon a nyght in sleep as he hym leyde,
 [1385] Hym thoughte how that the wynged god Mercurie
 [1386] Biforn hym stood and bad hym to be murie.
 [1387] His slepy yerde in hond he bar uprighte;
 [1388] An hat he werede upon his heris brighte.
 [1389] Arrayed was this god, as he took keep,
 [1390] As he was whan that Argus took his sleep;
 [1391] And seyde hym thus: "To Atthenes shaltou wende,
 [1392] Ther is thee shapen of thy wo an ende."
 [1393] And with that word Arcite wook and sterte.
 [1394] "Now trewely, hou soore that me smerte,"
 [1395] Quod he, "to Atthenes right now wol I fare,
 [1396] Ne for the drede of deeth shal I nat spare
 [1397] To se my lady, that I love and serve.
 [1398] In hire presence I recche nat to sterve."
 [1399] And with that word he caughte a greet mirour,
 [1400] And saugh that chaunged was al his colour,
 [1401] And saugh his visage al in another kynde.
 [1402] And right anon it ran hym in his mynde,
 [1403] That, sith his face was so disfigured
 [1404] Of maladye the which he hadde endured,
 [1405] He myghte wel, if that he bar hym lowe,
 [1406] Lyve in Atthenes everemoore unknowe,
 [1407] And seen his lady wel ny day by day.
 [1408] And right anon he chaunged his array,
 [1409] And cladde hym as a povre laborer,
 [1410] And al allone, save oonly a squier
 [1411] That knew his privetee and al his cas,
 [1412] Which was disgised povrely as he was,
 [1413] To Atthenes is he goon the nexte way.
 [1414] And to the court he wente upon a day,
 [1415] And at the gate he profreth his servyse
 [1416] To drugge and drawe, what so men wol devyse.
 [1417] And shortly of this matere for to seyn,
 [1418] He fil in office with a chamberleyn
 [1419] The which that dwellynge was with Emelye,
 [1420] For he was wys and koude soone espye,
 [1421] Of every servaunt, which that serveth here.
 [1422] Wel koude he hewen wode, and water bere,
 [1423] For he was yong and myghty for the nones,
 [1424] And therto he was long and big of bones
 [1425] To doon that any wight kan hym devyse.
 [1426] A yeer or two he was in this servyse,
 [1427] Page of the chambre of Emelye the brighte,
 [1428] And Philostrate he seyde that he highte.
 [1429] But half so wel biloved a man as he
 [1430] Ne was ther nevere in court of his degree;
 [1431] He was so gentil of condicioun
 [1432] That thurghout al the court was his renoun.
 [1433] They seyden that it were a charitee
 [1434] That Theseus wolde enhauncen his degree,
 [1435] And putten hym in worshipful servyse,
 [1436] Ther as he myghte his vertu excercise.
 [1437] And thus withinne a while his name is spronge,
 [1438] Bothe of his dedes and his goode tonge,
 [1439] That Theseus hath taken hym so neer
 [1440] That of his chambre he made hym a squier,
 [1441] And gaf hym gold to mayntene his degree.
 [1442] And eek men broghte hym out of his contree,
 [1443] From yeer to yeer, ful pryvely his rente;
 [1444] But honestly and slyly he it spente,
 [1445] That no man wondred how that he it hadde.
 [1446] And thre yeer in this wise his lif he ladde,
 [1447] And bar hym so, in pees and eek in werre,
 [1448] Ther was no man that Theseus hath derre.
 [1449] And in this blisse lete I now Arcite,
 [1450] And speke I wole of Palamon a lite.
 [1451] In derknesse and horrible and strong prisoun
 [1452] Thise seven yeer hath seten Palamoun
 [1453] Forpyned, what for wo and for distresse.
 [1454] Who feeleth double soor and hevynesse
 [1455] But Palamon, that love destreyneth so
 [1456] That wood out of his wit he goth for wo?
 [1457] And eek therto he is a prisoner
 [1458] Perpetuelly, noght oonly for a yer.
 [1459] Who koude ryme in Englyssh proprely
 [1460] His martirdom? For sothe it am nat I;
 [1461] Therfore I passe as lightly as I may.
 [1462] It fel that in the seventhe yer, of May
 [1463] The thridde nyght (as olde bookes seyn,
 [1464] That al this storie tellen moore pleyn),
 [1465] Were it by aventure or destynee --
 [1466] As, whan a thyng is shapen, it shal be --
 [1467] That soone after the mydnyght Palamoun,
 [1468] By helpyng of a freend, brak his prisoun
 [1469] And fleeth the citee faste as he may go.
 [1470] For he hadde yeve his gayler drynke so
 [1471] Of a clarree maad of a certeyn wyn,
 [1472] With nercotikes and opie of Thebes fyn,
 [1473] That al that nyght, thogh that men wolde him shake,
 [1474] The gayler sleep; he myghte nat awake.
 [1475] And thus he fleeth as faste as evere he may.
 [1476] The nyght was short and faste by the day
 [1477] That nedes cost he moot hymselven hyde,
 [1478] And til a grove faste ther bisyde
 [1479] With dredeful foot thanne stalketh Palamon.
 [1480] For, shortly, this was his opinion:
 [1481] That in that grove he wolde hym hyde al day,
 [1482] And in the nyght thanne wolde he take his way
 [1483] To Thebes-ward, his freendes for to preye
 [1484] On Theseus to helpe him to werreye;
 [1485] And shortly, outher he wolde lese his lif
 [1486] Or wynnen Emelye unto his wyf.
 [1487] This is th' effect and his entente pleyn.
 [1488] Now wol I turne to Arcite ageyn,
 [1489] That litel wiste how ny that was his care,
 [1490] Til that Fortune had broght him in the snare.
 [1491] The bisy larke, messager of day,
 [1492] Salueth in hir song the morwe gray,
 [1493] And firy Phebus riseth up so bright
 [1494] That al the orient laugheth of the light,
 [1495] And with his stremes dryeth in the greves
 [1496] The silver dropes hangynge on the leves.
 [1497] And Arcita, that in the court roial
 [1498] With Theseus is squier principal,
 [1499] Is risen and looketh on the myrie day.
 [1500] And for to doon his observaunce to May,
 [1501] Remembrynge on the poynt of his desir,
 [1502] He on a courser, startlynge as the fir,
 [1503] Is riden into the feeldes hym to pleye,
 [1504] Out of the court, were it a myle or tweye.
 [1505] And to the grove of which that I yow tolde
 [1506] By aventure his wey he gan to holde
 [1507] To maken hym a gerland of the greves,
 [1508] Were it of wodebynde or hawethorn leves,
 [1509] And loude he song ayeyn the sonne shene:
 [1510] "May, with alle thy floures and thy grene,
 [1511] Welcome be thou, faire, fresshe May,
 [1512] In hope that I som grene gete may."
 [1513] And from his courser, with a lusty herte,
 [1514] Into the grove ful hastily he sterte,
 [1515] And in a path he rometh up and doun,
 [1516] Ther as by aventure this Palamoun
 [1517] Was in a bussh, that no man myghte hym se,
 [1518] For soore afered of his deeth was he.
 [1519] No thyng ne knew he that it was Arcite;
 [1520] God woot he wolde have trowed it ful lite.
 [1521] But sooth is seyd, go sithen many yeres,
 [1522] That "feeld hath eyen and the wode hath eres."
 [1523] It is ful fair a man to bere hym evene,
 [1524] For al day meeteth men at unset stevene.
 [1525] Ful litel woot Arcite of his felawe,
 [1526] That was so ny to herknen al his sawe,
 [1527] For in the bussh he sitteth now ful stille.
 [1528] Whan that Arcite hadde romed al his fille,
 [1529] And songen al the roundel lustily,
 [1530] Into a studie he fil sodeynly,
 [1531] As doon thise loveres in hir queynte geres,
 [1532] Now in the crope, now doun in the breres,
 

 [1533] Now up, now doun, as boket in a welle.
 [1534] Right as the Friday, soothly for to telle,
 [1535] Now it shyneth, now it reyneth faste,
 [1536] Right so kan geery Venus overcaste
 [1537] The hertes of hir folk; right as hir day
 [1538] Is gereful, right so chaungeth she array.
 [1539] Selde is the Friday al the wowke ylike.
 [1540] Whan that Arcite had songe, he gan to sike
 [1541] And sette hym doun withouten any moore.
 [1542] "Allas," quod he, "that day that I was bore!
 [1543] How longe, Juno, thurgh thy crueltee,
 [1544] Woltow werreyen Thebes the citee?
 [1545] Allas, ybroght is to confusioun
 [1546] The blood roial of Cadme and Amphioun --
 [1547] Of Cadmus, which that was the firste man
 [1548] That Thebes bulte, or first the toun bigan,
 [1549] And of the citee first was crouned kyng.
 [1550] Of his lynage am I and his ofspryng
 [1551] By verray ligne, as of the stok roial,
 [1552] And now I am so caytyf and so thral,
 [1553] That he that is my mortal enemy,
 [1554] I serve hym as his squier povrely.
 [1555] And yet dooth Juno me wel moore shame,
 [1556] For I dar noght biknowe myn owene name;
 [1557] But ther as I was wont to highte Arcite,
 [1558] Now highte I Philostrate, noght worth a myte.
 [1559] Allas, thou felle Mars! Allas, Juno!
 [1560] Thus hath youre ire oure lynage al fordo,
 [1561] Save oonly me and wrecched Palamoun,
 [1562] That Theseus martireth in prisoun.
 [1563] And over al this, to sleen me outrely
 [1564] Love hath his firy dart so brennyngly
 [1565] Ystiked thurgh my trewe, careful herte
 [1566] That shapen was my deeth erst than my sherte.
 [1567] Ye sleen me with youre eyen, Emelye!
 [1568] Ye been the cause wherfore that I dye.
 [1569] Of al the remenant of myn oother care
 [1570] Ne sette I nat the montance of a tare,
 [1571] So that I koude doon aught to youre plesaunce."
 [1572] And with that word he fil doun in a traunce
 [1573] A longe tyme, and after he up sterte.
 [1574] This Palamoun, that thoughte that thurgh his herte
 [1575] He felte a coold swerd sodeynliche glyde,
 [1576] For ire he quook; no lenger wolde he byde.
 [1577] And whan that he had herd Arcites tale,
 [1578] As he were wood, with face deed and pale,
 [1579] He stirte hym up out of the buskes thikke
 [1580] And seide: "Arcite, false traytour wikke,
 [1581] Now artow hent, that lovest my lady so,
 [1582] For whom that I have al this peyne and wo,
 [1583] And art my blood, and to my conseil sworn,
 [1584] As I ful ofte have told thee heerbiforn,
 [1585] And hast byjaped heere duc Theseus,
 [1586] And falsly chaunged hast thy name thus!
 [1587] I wol be deed, or elles thou shalt dye.
 [1588] Thou shalt nat love my lady Emelye,
 [1589] But I wol love hire oonly and namo;
 [1590] For I am Palamon, thy mortal foo.
 [1591] And though that I no wepene have in this place,
 [1592] But out of prison am astert by grace,
 [1593] I drede noght that outher thow shalt dye,
 [1594] Or thow ne shalt nat loven Emelye.
 [1595] Chees which thou wolt, or thou shalt nat asterte!"
 [1596] This Arcite, with ful despitous herte,
 [1597] Whan he hym knew, and hadde his tale herd,
 [1598] As fiers as leon pulled out his swerd,
 [1599] And seyde thus: "By God that sit above,
 [1600] Nere it that thou art sik and wood for love,
 [1601] And eek that thow no wepne hast in this place,
 [1602] Thou sholdest nevere out of this grove pace,
 [1603] That thou ne sholdest dyen of myn hond.
 [1604] For I defye the seurete and the bond
 [1605] Which that thou seist that I have maad to thee.
 [1606] What! Verray fool, thynk wel that love is free,
 [1607] And I wol love hire maugree al thy myght!
 [1608] But for as muche thou art a worthy knyght
 [1609] And wilnest to darreyne hire by bataille,
 [1610] Have heer my trouthe; tomorwe I wol nat faille,
 [1611] Withoute wityng of any oother wight,
 [1612] That heere I wol be founden as a knyght,
 [1613] And bryngen harneys right ynough for thee;
 [1614] And ches the beste, and leef the worste for me.
 [1615] And mete and drynke this nyght wol I brynge
 [1616] Ynough for thee, and clothes for thy beddynge.
 [1617] And if so be that thou my lady wynne,
 [1618] And sle me in this wode ther I am inne,
 [1619] Thow mayst wel have thy lady as for me."
 [1620] This Palamon answerde, "I graunte it thee."
 [1621] And thus they been departed til amorwe,
 [1622] Whan ech of hem had leyd his feith to borwe.
 [1623] O Cupide, out of alle charitee!
 [1624] O regne, that wolt no felawe have with thee!
 [1625] Ful sooth is seyd that love ne lordshipe
 [1626] Wol noght, his thankes, have no felaweshipe.
 [1627] Wel fynden that Arcite and Palamoun.
 [1628] Arcite is riden anon unto the toun,
 [1629] And on the morwe, er it were dayes light,
 [1630] Ful prively two harneys hath he dight,
 [1631] Bothe suffisaunt and mete to darreyne
 [1632] The bataille in the feeld bitwix hem tweyne;
 [1633] And on his hors, allone as he was born,
 [1634] He carieth al the harneys hym biforn.
 [1635] And in the grove, at tyme and place yset,
 [1636] This Arcite and this Palamon ben met.
 [1637] To chaungen gan the colour in hir face;
 [1638] Right as the hunters in the regne of Trace,
 [1639] That stondeth at the gappe with a spere,
 [1640] Whan hunted is the leon or the bere,
 [1641] And hereth hym come russhyng in the greves,
 [1642] And breketh bothe bowes and the leves,
 [1643] And thynketh, "Heere cometh my mortal enemy!
 [1644] Withoute faille, he moot be deed, or I,
 [1645] For outher I moot sleen hym at the gappe,
 [1646] Or he moot sleen me, if that me myshappe."
 [1647] So ferden they in chaungyng of hir hewe,
 [1648] As fer as everich of hem oother knewe.
 [1649] Ther nas no good day, ne no saluyng,
 [1650] But streight, withouten word or rehersyng,
 [1651] Everich of hem heelp for to armen oother
 [1652] As freendly as he were his owene brother;
 [1653] And after that, with sharpe speres stronge
 [1654] They foynen ech at oother wonder longe.
 [1655] Thou myghtest wene that this Palamon
 [1656] In his fightyng were a wood leon,
 [1657] And as a crueel tigre was Arcite;
 [1658] As wilde bores gonne they to smyte,
 [1659] That frothen whit as foom for ire wood.
 [1660] Up to the ancle foghte they in hir blood.
 [1661] And in this wise I lete hem fightyng dwelle,
 [1662] And forth I wole of Theseus yow telle.
 [1663] The destinee, ministre general,
 [1664] That executeth in the world over al
 [1665] The purveiaunce that God hath seyn biforn,
 [1666] So strong it is that, though the world had sworn
 [1667] The contrarie of a thyng by ye or nay,
 [1668] Yet somtyme it shal fallen on a day
 [1669] That falleth nat eft withinne a thousand yeer.
 [1670] For certeinly, oure appetites heer,
 [1671] Be it of werre, or pees, or hate, or love,
 [1672] Al is this reuled by the sighte above.
 [1673] This mene I now by myghty Theseus,
 [1674] That for to hunten is so desirus,
 [1675] And namely at the grete hert in May,
 [1676] That in his bed ther daweth hym no day
 [1677] That he nys clad, and redy for to ryde
 [1678] With hunte and horn and houndes hym bisyde.
 [1679] For in his huntyng hath he swich delit
 [1680] That it is al his joye and appetit
 [1681] To been hymself the grete hertes bane,
 [1682] For after Mars he serveth now Dyane.
 [1683] Cleer was the day, as I have toold er this,
 [1684] And Theseus with alle joye and blis,
 [1685] With his Ypolita, the faire queene,
 [1686] And Emelye, clothed al in grene,
 [1687] On huntyng be they riden roially.
 [1688] And to the grove that stood ful faste by,
 [1689] In which ther was an hert, as men hym tolde,
 [1690] Duc Theseus the streighte wey hath holde.
 [1691] And to the launde he rideth hym ful right,
 [1692] For thider was the hert wont have his flight,
 [1693] And over a brook, and so forth on his weye.
 [1694] This duc wol han a cours at hym or tweye
 [1695] With houndes swiche as that hym list comaunde.
 [1696] And whan this duc was come unto the launde,
 [1697] Under the sonne he looketh, and anon
 [1698] He was war of Arcite and Palamon,
 [1699] That foughten breme as it were bores two.
 [1700] The brighte swerdes wenten to and fro
 [1701] So hidously that with the leeste strook
 [1702] It semed as it wolde felle an ook.
 [1703] But what they were, no thyng he ne woot.
 [1704] This duc his courser with his spores smoot,
 [1705] And at a stert he was bitwix hem two,
 [1706] And pulled out a swerd and cride, "Hoo!
 [1707] Namoore, up peyne of lesynge of youre heed!
 [1708] By myghty Mars, he shal anon be deed
 [1709] That smyteth any strook that I may seen.
 [1710] But telleth me what myster men ye been,
 [1711] That been so hardy for to fighten heere
 [1712] Withouten juge or oother officere,
 [1713] As it were in a lystes roially."
 [1714] This Palamon answerde hastily
 [1715] And seyde, "Sire, what nedeth wordes mo?
 [1716] We have the deeth disserved bothe two.
 [1717] Two woful wrecches been we, two caytyves,
 [1718] That been encombred of oure owene lyves;
 [1719] And as thou art a rightful lord and juge,
 [1720] Ne yif us neither mercy ne refuge,
 [1721] But sle me first, for seinte charitee!
 [1722] But sle my felawe eek as wel as me;
 [1723] Or sle hym first, for though thow knowest it lite,
 [1724] This is thy mortal foo, this is Arcite,
 [1725] That fro thy lond is banysshed on his heed,
 [1726] For which he hath deserved to be deed.
 [1727] For this is he that cam unto thy gate
 [1728] And seyde that he highte Philostrate.
 [1729] Thus hath he japed thee ful many a yer,
 [1730] And thou hast maked hym thy chief squier;
 [1731] And this is he that loveth Emelye.
 [1732] For sith the day is come that I shal dye,
 [1733] I make pleynly my confessioun
 [1734] That I am thilke woful Palamoun
 [1735] That hath thy prisoun broken wikkedly.
 [1736] I am thy mortal foo, and it am I
 [1737] That loveth so hoote Emelye the brighte
 [1738] That I wol dye present in hir sighte.
 [1739] Wherfore I axe deeth and my juwise;
 [1740] But sle my felawe in the same wise,
 [1741] For bothe han we deserved to be slayn."
 [1742] This worthy duc answerde anon agayn,
 [1743] And seyde, "This is a short conclusioun.
 [1744] Youre owene mouth, by youre confessioun,
 [1745] Hath dampned yow, and I wol it recorde;
 [1746] It nedeth noght to pyne yow with the corde.
 [1747] Ye shal be deed, by myghty Mars the rede!"
 [1748] The queene anon, for verray wommanhede,
 [1749] Gan for to wepe, and so dide Emelye,
 [1750] And alle the ladyes in the compaignye.
 [1751] Greet pitee was it, as it thoughte hem alle,
 [1752] That evere swich a chaunce sholde falle,
 [1753] For gentil men they were of greet estaat,
 [1754] And no thyng but for love was this debaat;
 [1755] And saugh hir blody woundes wyde and soore,
 [1756] And alle crieden, bothe lasse and moore,
 [1757] "Have mercy, Lord, upon us wommen alle!"
 [1758] And on hir bare knees adoun they falle
 [1759] And wolde have kist his feet ther as he stood;
 [1760] Til at the laste aslaked was his mood,
 [1761] For pitee renneth soone in gentil herte.
 [1762] And though he first for ire quook and sterte,
 [1763] He hath considered shortly, in a clause,
 [1764] The trespas of hem bothe, and eek the cause,
 [1765] And although that his ire hir gilt accused,
 [1766] Yet in his resoun he hem bothe excused,
 [1767] As thus: he thoghte wel that every man
 [1768] Wol helpe hymself in love, if that he kan,
 [1769] And eek delivere hymself out of prisoun.
 [1770] And eek his herte hadde compassioun
 [1771] Of wommen, for they wepen evere in oon,
 [1772] And in his gentil herte he thoughte anon,
 [1773] And softe unto hymself he seyde, "Fy
 [1774] Upon a lord that wol have no mercy,
 [1775] But been a leon, bothe in word and dede,
 [1776] To hem that been in repentaunce and drede,
 [1777] As wel as to a proud despitous man
 [1778] That wol mayntene that he first bigan.
 [1779] That lord hath litel of discrecioun,
 [1780] That in swich cas kan no divisioun
 [1781] But weyeth pride and humblesse after oon."
 [1782] And shortly, whan his ire is thus agoon,
 

 [1783] He gan to looken up with eyen lighte
 [1784] And spak thise same wordes al on highte:
 [1785] "The god of love, a benedicite!
 [1786] How myghty and how greet a lord is he!
 [1787] Ayeyns his myght ther gayneth none obstacles.
 [1788] He may be cleped a god for his myracles,
 [1789] For he kan maken, at his owene gyse,
 [1790] Of everich herte as that hym list divyse.
 [1791] Lo heere this Arcite and this Palamoun,
 [1792] That quitly weren out of my prisoun,
 [1793] And myghte han lyved in Thebes roially,
 [1794] And witen I am hir mortal enemy,
 [1795] And that hir deth lith in my myght also,
 [1796] And yet hath love, maugree hir eyen two,
 [1797] Broght hem hyder bothe for to dye.
 [1798] Now looketh, is nat that an heigh folye?
 [1799] Who may been a fool but if he love?
 [1800] Bihoold, for Goddes sake that sit above,
 [1801] Se how they blede! Be they noght wel arrayed?
 [1802] Thus hath hir lord, the god of love, ypayed
 [1803] Hir wages and hir fees for hir servyse!
 [1804] And yet they wenen for to been ful wyse
 [1805] That serven love, for aught that may bifalle.
 [1806] But this is yet the beste game of alle,
 [1807] That she for whom they han this jolitee
 [1808] Kan hem therfore as muche thank as me.
 [1809] She woot namoore of al this hoote fare,
 [1810] By God, than woot a cokkow or an hare!
 [1811] But all moot ben assayed, hoot and coold;
 [1812] A man moot ben a fool, or yong or oold --
 [1813] I woot it by myself ful yore agon,
 [1814] For in my tyme a servant was I oon.
 [1815] And therfore, syn I knowe of loves peyne
 [1816] And woot hou soore it kan a man distreyne,
 [1817] As he that hath ben caught ofte in his laas,
 [1818] I yow foryeve al hoolly this trespaas,
 [1819] At requeste of the queene, that kneleth heere,
 [1820] And eek of Emelye, my suster deere.
 [1821] And ye shul bothe anon unto me swere
 [1822] That nevere mo ye shal my contree dere,
 [1823] Ne make werre upon me nyght ne day,
 [1824] But been my freendes in all that ye may.
 [1825] I yow foryeve this trespas every deel."
 [1826] And they hym sworen his axyng faire and weel,
 [1827] And hym of lordshipe and of mercy preyde,
 [1828] And he hem graunteth grace, and thus he seyde:
 [1829] "To speke of roial lynage and richesse,
 [1830] Though that she were a queene or a princesse,
 [1831] Ech of you bothe is worthy, doutelees,
 [1832] To wedden whan tyme is; but nathelees --
 [1833] I speke as for my suster Emelye,
 [1834] For whom ye have this strif and jalousye --
 [1835] Ye woot yourself she may nat wedden two
 [1836] Atones, though ye fighten everemo,
 [1837] That oon of you, al be hym looth or lief,
 [1838] He moot go pipen in an yvy leef;
 [1839] This is to seyn, she may nat now han bothe,
 [1840] Al be ye never so jalouse ne so wrothe.
 [1841] And forthy I yow putte in this degree,
 [1842] That ech of yow shal have his destynee
 [1843] As hym is shape, and herkneth in what wyse;
 [1844] Lo, heere youre ende of that I shal devyse.
 [1845] My wyl is this, for plat conclusioun,
 [1846] Withouten any repplicacioun --
 [1847] If that you liketh, take it for the beste:
 [1848] That everich of you shal goon where hym leste
 [1849] Frely, withouten raunson or daunger,
 [1850] And this day fifty wykes, fer ne ner,
 [1851] Everich of you shal brynge an hundred knyghtes
 [1852] Armed for lystes up at alle rightes,
 [1853] Al redy to darreyne hire by bataille.
 [1854] And this bihote I yow withouten faille,
 [1855] Upon my trouthe, and as I am a knyght,
 [1856] That wheither of yow bothe that hath myght --
 [1857] This is to seyn, that wheither he or thow
 [1858] May with his hundred, as I spak of now,
 [1859] Sleen his contrarie, or out of lystes dryve,
 [1860] Thanne shal I yeve Emelya to wyve
 [1861] To whom that Fortune yeveth so fair a grace.
 [1862] The lystes shal I maken in this place,
 [1863] And God so wisly on my soule rewe
 [1864] As I shal evene juge been and trewe.
 [1865] Ye shul noon oother ende with me maken,
 [1866] That oon of yow ne shal be deed or taken.
 [1867] And if yow thynketh this is weel ysayd,
 [1868] Seyeth youre avys, and holdeth you apayd.
 [1869] This is youre ende and youre conclusioun."
 [1870] Who looketh lightly now but Palamoun?
 [1871] Who spryngeth up for joye but Arcite?
 [1872] Who kouthe telle, or who kouthe it endite,
 [1873] The joye that is maked in the place
 [1874] Whan Theseus hath doon so fair a grace?
 [1875] But doun on knees wente every maner wight,
 [1876] And thonked hym with al hir herte and myght,
 [1877] And namely the Thebans often sithe.
 [1878] And thus with good hope and with herte blithe
 [1879] They taken hir leve, and homward gonne they ride
 [1880] To Thebes with his olde walles wyde.
 [1881] I trowe men wolde deme it necligence
 [1882] If I foryete to tellen the dispence
 [1883] Of Theseus, that gooth so bisily
 [1884] To maken up the lystes roially,
 [1885] That swich a noble theatre as it was
 [1886] I dar wel seyen in this world ther nas.
 [1887] The circuit a myle was aboute,
 [1888] Walled of stoon, and dyched al withoute.
 [1889] Round was the shap, in manere of compas,
 [1890] Ful of degrees, the heighte of sixty pas,
 [1891] That whan a man was set on o degree,
 [1892] He letted nat his felawe for to see.
 [1893] Estward ther stood a gate of marbul whit,
 [1894] Westward right swich another in the opposit.
 [1895] And shortly to concluden, swich a place
 [1896] Was noon in erthe, as in so litel space;
 [1897] For in the lond ther was no crafty man
 [1898] That geometrie or ars-metrike kan,
 [1899] Ne portreyour, ne kervere of ymages,
 [1900] That Theseus ne yaf him mete and wages
 

 [1901] The theatre for to maken and devyse.
 [1902] And for to doon his ryte and sacrifise,
 [1903] He estward hath, upon the gate above,
 [1904] In worshipe of Venus, goddesse of love,
 [1905] Doon make an auter and an oratorie;
 [1906] And on the gate westward, in memorie
 [1907] Of Mars, he maked hath right swich another,
 [1908] That coste largely of gold a fother.
 [1909] And northward, in a touret on the wal,
 [1910] Of alabastre whit and reed coral,
 [1911] An oratorie, riche for to see,
 [1912] In worshipe of Dyane of chastitee,
 [1913] Hath Theseus doon wroght in noble wyse.
 [1914] But yet hadde I foryeten to devyse
 [1915] The noble kervyng and the portreitures,
 [1916] The shap, the contenaunce, and the figures
 [1917] That weren in thise oratories thre.
 [1918] First in the temple of Venus maystow se
 [1919] Wroght on the wal, ful pitous to biholde,
 [1920] The broken slepes, and the sikes colde,
 [1921] The sacred teeris, and the waymentynge,
 [1922] The firy strokes of the desirynge
 [1923] That loves servantz in this lyf enduren;
 [1924] The othes that hir covenantz assuren;
 [1925] Plesaunce and Hope, Desir, Foolhardynesse,
 [1926] Beautee and Youthe, Bauderie, Richesse,
 [1927] Charmes and Force, Lesynges, Flaterye,
 [1928] Despense, Bisynesse, and Jalousye,
 [1929] That wered of yelewe gooldes a gerland,
 [1930] And a cokkow sittynge on hir hand;
 [1931] Festes, instrumentz, caroles, daunces,
 [1932] Lust and array, and alle the circumstaunces
 [1933] Of love, which that I rekned and rekne shal,
 [1934] By ordre weren peynted on the wal,
 [1935] And mo than I kan make of mencioun.
 [1936] For soothly al the mount of Citheroun,
 [1937] Ther Venus hath hir principal dwellynge,
 [1938] Was shewed on the wal in portreyynge,
 [1939] With al the gardyn and the lustynesse.
 [1940] Nat was foryeten the porter, Ydelnesse,
 [1941] Ne Narcisus the faire of yore agon,
 [1942] Ne yet the folye of kyng Salomon,
 [1943] Ne yet the grete strengthe of Ercules --
 [1944] Th' enchauntementz of Medea and Circes --
 [1945] Ne of Turnus, with the hardy fiers corage,
 [1946] The riche Cresus, kaytyf in servage.
 [1947] Thus may ye seen that wysdom ne richesse,
 [1948] Beautee ne sleighte, strengthe ne hardynesse,
 [1949] Ne may with Venus holde champartie,
 [1950] For as hir list the world than may she gye.
 [1951] Lo, alle thise folk so caught were in hir las,
 [1952] Til they for wo ful ofte seyde "allas!"
 [1953] Suffiseth heere ensamples oon or two,
 [1954] And though I koude rekene a thousand mo.
 [1955] The statue of Venus, glorious for to se,
 [1956] Was naked, fletynge in the large see,
 [1957] And fro the navele doun al covered was
 [1958] With wawes grene, and brighte as any glas.
 [1959] A citole in hir right hand hadde she,
 [1960] And on hir heed, ful semely for to se,
 [1961] A rose gerland, fressh and wel smellynge;
 [1962] Above hir heed hir dowves flikerynge.
 [1963] Biforn hire stood hir sone Cupido;
 [1964] Upon his shuldres wynges hadde he two,
 [1965] And blynd he was, as it is often seene;
 [1966] A bowe he bar and arwes brighte and kene.
 [1967] Why sholde I noght as wel eek telle yow al
 [1968] The portreiture that was upon the wal
 [1969] Withinne the temple of myghty Mars the rede?
 [1970] Al peynted was the wal, in lengthe and brede,
 [1971] Lyk to the estres of the grisly place
 [1972] That highte the grete temple of Mars in Trace,
 [1973] In thilke colde, frosty regioun
 [1974] Ther as Mars hath his sovereyn mansioun.
 [1975] First on the wal was peynted a forest,
 [1976] In which ther dwelleth neither man ne best,
 [1977] With knotty, knarry, bareyne trees olde,
 [1978] Of stubbes sharpe and hidouse to biholde,
 [1979] In which ther ran a rumbel in a swough,
 [1980] As though a storm sholde bresten every bough.
 [1981] And dounward from an hille, under a bente,
 [1982] Ther stood the temple of Mars armypotente,
 [1983] Wroght al of burned steel, of which the entree
 [1984] Was long and streit, and gastly for to see.
 [1985] And therout came a rage and swich a veze
 [1986] That it made al the gate for to rese.
 [1987] The northren lyght in at the dores shoon,
 [1988] For wyndowe on the wal ne was ther noon,
 [1989] Thurgh which men myghten any light discerne.
 [1990] The dore was al of adamant eterne,
 [1991] Yclenched overthwart and endelong
 [1992] With iren tough; and for to make it strong,
 [1993] Every pyler, the temple to sustene,
 [1994] Was tonne-greet, of iren bright and shene.
 [1995] Ther saugh I first the derke ymaginyng
 [1996] Of Felonye, and al the compassyng;
 [1997] The crueel Ire, reed as any gleede;
 [1998] The pykepurs, and eek the pale Drede;
 [1999] The smylere with the knyf under the cloke;
 [2000] The shepne brennynge with the blake smoke;
 [2001] The tresoun of the mordrynge in the bedde;
 [2002] The open werre, with woundes al bibledde;
 [2003] Contek, with blody knyf and sharp manace.
 [2004] Al ful of chirkyng was that sory place.
 [2005] The sleere of hymself yet saugh I ther --
 [2006] His herte-blood hath bathed al his heer --
 [2007] The nayl ydryven in the shode anyght;
 [2008] The colde deeth, with mouth gapyng upright.
 [2009] Amyddes of the temple sat Meschaunce,
 [2010] With disconfort and sory contenaunce.
 [2011] Yet saugh I Woodnesse, laughynge in his rage,
 [2012] Armed Compleint, Outhees, and fiers Outrage;
 [2013] The careyne in the busk, with throte ycorve;
 [2014] A thousand slayn, and nat of qualm ystorve;
 [2015] The tiraunt, with the pray by force yraft;
 [2016] The toun destroyed, ther was no thyng laft.
 [2017] Yet saugh I brent the shippes hoppesteres;
 [2018] The hunte strangled with the wilde beres;
 [2019] The sowe freten the child right in the cradel;
 [2020] The cook yscalded, for al his longe ladel.
 [2021] Noght was foryeten by the infortune of Marte.
 [2022] The cartere overryden with his carte --
 [2023] Under the wheel ful lowe he lay adoun.
 [2024] Ther were also, of Martes divisioun,
 [2025] The barbour, and the bocher, and the smyth,
 [2026] That forgeth sharpe swerdes on his styth.
 [2027] And al above, depeynted in a tour,
 [2028] Saugh I Conquest, sittynge in greet honour,
 [2029] With the sharpe swerd over his heed
 [2030] Hangynge by a soutil twynes threed.
 [2031] Depeynted was the slaughtre of Julius,
 [2032] Of grete Nero, and of Antonius;
 [2033] Al be that thilke tyme they were unborn,
 [2034] Yet was hir deth depeynted ther-biforn
 [2035] By manasynge of Mars, right by figure;
 [2036] So was it shewed in that portreiture,
 [2037] As is depeynted in the sterres above
 [2038] Who shal be slayn or elles deed for love.
 [2039] Suffiseth oon ensample in stories olde;
 [2040] I may nat rekene hem alle though I wolde.
 [2041] The statue of Mars upon a carte stood
 [2042] Armed, and looked grym as he were wood;
 [2043] And over his heed ther shynen two figures
 

 [2044] Of sterres, that been cleped in scriptures,
 [2045] That oon Puella, that oother Rubeus --
 [2046] This god of armes was arrayed thus.
 [2047] A wolf ther stood biforn hym at his feet
 [2048] With eyen rede, and of a man he eet;
 [2049] With soutil pencel was depeynted this storie
 [2050] In redoutynge of Mars and of his glorie.
 [2051] Now to the temple of Dyane the chaste,
 [2052] As shortly as I kan, I wol me haste,
 [2053] To telle yow al the descripsioun.
 [2054] Depeynted been the walles up and doun
 [2055] Of huntyng and of shamefast chastitee.
 [2056] Ther saugh I how woful Calistopee,
 [2057] Whan that Diane agreved was with here,
 [2058] Was turned from a womman til a bere,
 [2059] And after was she maad the loode-sterre.
 [2060] Thus was it peynted; I kan sey yow no ferre.
 [2061] Hir sone is eek a sterre, as men may see.
 [2062] Ther saugh I Dane, yturned til a tree --
 [2063] I mene nat the goddesse Diane,
 [2064] But Penneus doghter, which that highte Dane.
 [2065] Ther saugh I Attheon an hert ymaked,
 [2066] For vengeaunce that he saugh Diane al naked;
 [2067] I saugh how that his houndes have hym caught
 [2068] And freeten hym, for that they knewe hym naught.
 [2069] Yet peynted was a litel forther moor
 [2070] How Atthalante hunted the wilde boor,
 [2071] And Meleagre, and many another mo,
 [2072] For which Dyane wroghte hym care and wo.
 [2073] Ther saugh I many another wonder storie,
 [2074] The which me list nat drawen to memorie.
 [2075] This goddesse on an hert ful hye seet,
 [2076] With smale houndes al aboute hir feet,
 [2077] And undernethe hir feet she hadde a moone --
 [2078] Wexynge it was and sholde wanye soone.
 [2079] In gaude grene hir statue clothed was,
 [2080] With bowe in honde and arwes in a cas.
 [2081] Hir eyen caste she ful lowe adoun
 [2082] Ther Pluto hath his derke regioun.
 [2083] A womman travaillynge was hire biforn;
 [2084] But for hir child so longe was unborn,
 [2085] Ful pitously Lucyna gan she calle
 [2086] And seyde, "Help, for thou mayst best of alle!"
 [2087] Wel koude he peynten lifly that it wroghte;
 [2088] With many a floryn he the hewes boghte.
 [2089] Now been thise lystes maad, and Theseus,
 [2090] That at his grete cost arrayed thus
 [2091] The temples and the theatre every deel,
 [2092] Whan it was doon, hym lyked wonder weel.
 [2093] But stynte I wole of Theseus a lite,
 [2094] And speke of Palamon and of Arcite.
 [2095] The day approcheth of hir retournynge,
 [2096] That everich sholde an hundred knyghtes brynge
 [2097] The bataille to darreyne, as I yow tolde.
 [2098] And til Atthenes, hir covenant for to holde,
 [2099] Hath everich of hem broght an hundred knyghtes,
 [2100] Wel armed for the werre at alle rightes.
 [2101] And sikerly ther trowed many a man
 [2102] That nevere, sithen that the world bigan,
 [2103] As for to speke of knyghthod of hir hond,
 [2104] As fer as God hath maked see or lond,
 [2105] Nas of so fewe so noble a compaignye.
 [2106] For every wight that lovede chivalrye
 [2107] And wolde, his thankes, han a passant name,
 [2108] Hath preyed that he myghte been of that game;
 [2109] And wel was hym that therto chosen was,
 [2110] For if ther fille tomorwe swich a cas,
 [2111] Ye knowen wel that every lusty knyght
 [2112] That loveth paramours and hath his myght,
 [2113] Were it in Engelond or elleswhere,
 [2114] They wolde, hir thankes, wilnen to be there --
 [2115] To fighte for a lady, benedicitee!
 [2116] It were a lusty sighte for to see.
 [2117] And right so ferden they with Palamon.
 [2118] With hym ther wenten knyghtes many on;
 [2119] Som wol ben armed in an haubergeoun,
 [2120] And in a brestplate and a light gypoun;
 

 [2121] And som wol have a paire plates large;
 [2122] And som wol have a Pruce sheeld or a targe;
 [2123] Som wol ben armed on his legges weel,
 [2124] And have an ax, and som a mace of steel --
 [2125] Ther is no newe gyse that it nas old.
 [2126] Armed were they, as I have yow told,
 [2127] Everych after his opinioun.
 [2128] Ther maistow seen, comynge with Palamoun,
 [2129] Lygurge hymself, the grete kyng of Trace.
 [2130] Blak was his berd, and manly was his face;
 [2131] The cercles of his eyen in his heed,
 [2132] They gloweden bitwixen yelow and reed,
 [2133] And lik a grifphon looked he aboute,
 [2134] With kempe heeris on his browes stoute;
 [2135] His lymes grete, his brawnes harde and stronge,
 [2136] His shuldres brode, his armes rounde and longe;
 [2137] And as the gyse was in his contree,
 [2138] Ful hye upon a chaar of gold stood he,
 [2139] With foure white boles in the trays.
 [2140] In stede of cote-armure over his harnays,
 [2141] With nayles yelewe and brighte as any gold,
 [2142] He hadde a beres skyn, col-blak for old.
 [2143] His longe heer was kembd bihynde his bak;
 [2144] As any ravenes fethere it shoon for blak;
 [2145] A wrethe of gold, arm-greet, of huge wighte,
 [2146] Upon his heed, set ful of stones brighte,
 [2147] Of fyne rubyes and of dyamauntz.
 [2148] Aboute his chaar ther wenten white alauntz,
 [2149] Twenty and mo, as grete as any steer,
 [2150] To hunten at the leoun or the deer,
 [2151] And folwed hym with mosel faste ybounde,
 [2152] Colered of gold, and tourettes fyled rounde.
 [2153] An hundred lordes hadde he in his route,
 [2154] Armed ful wel, with hertes stierne and stoute.
 [2155] With Arcita, in stories as men fynde,
 [2156] The grete Emetreus, the kyng of Inde,
 [2157] Upon a steede bay trapped in steel,
 [2158] Covered in clooth of gold, dyapred weel,
 [2159] Cam ridynge lyk the god of armes, Mars.
 [2160] His cote-armure was of clooth of Tars
 [2161] Couched with perles white and rounde and grete;
 [2162] His sadel was of brend gold newe ybete;
 [2163] A mantelet upon his shulder hangynge,
 [2164] Bret-ful of rubyes rede as fyr sparklynge;
 [2165] His crispe heer lyk rynges was yronne,
 [2166] And that was yelow, and glytered as the sonne.
 [2167] His nose was heigh, his eyen bright citryn,
 [2168] His lippes rounde, his colour was sangwyn;
 [2169] A fewe frakenes in his face yspreynd,
 [2170] Bitwixen yelow and somdel blak ymeynd;
 [2171] And as a leon he his lookyng caste.
 [2172] Of fyve and twenty yeer his age I caste.
 [2173] His berd was wel bigonne for to sprynge;
 [2174] His voys was as a trompe thonderynge.
 [2175] Upon his heed he wered of laurer grene
 [2176] A gerland, fressh and lusty for to sene.
 [2177] Upon his hand he bar for his deduyt
 [2178] An egle tame, as any lilye whyt.
 [2179] An hundred lordes hadde he with hym there,
 [2180] Al armed, save hir heddes, in al hir gere,
 [2181] Ful richely in alle maner thynges.
 [2182] For trusteth wel that dukes, erles, kynges
 [2183] Were gadered in this noble compaignye,
 [2184] For love and for encrees of chivalrye.
 [2185] Aboute this kyng ther ran on every part
 [2186] Ful many a tame leon and leopart.
 [2187] And in this wise thise lordes, alle and some,
 [2188] Been on the Sonday to the citee come
 [2189] Aboute pryme, and in the toun alight.
 [2190] This Theseus, this duc, this worthy knyght,
 [2191] Whan he had broght hem into his citee,
 [2192] And inned hem, everich at his degree,
 [2193] He festeth hem, and dooth so greet labour
 [2194] To esen hem and doon hem al honour
 [2195] That yet men wenen that no mannes wit
 [2196] Of noon estaat ne koude amenden it.
 [2197] The mynstralcye, the service at the feeste,
 [2198] The grete yiftes to the meeste and leeste,
 [2199] The riche array of Theseus paleys,
 [2200] Ne who sat first ne last upon the deys,
 [2201] What ladyes fairest been or best daunsynge,
 [2202] Or which of hem kan dauncen best and synge,
 [2203] Ne who moost felyngly speketh of love;
 [2204] What haukes sitten on the perche above,
 [2205] What houndes liggen on the floor adoun --
 [2206] Of al this make I now no mencioun,
 [2207] But al th' effect; that thynketh me the beste.
 [2208] Now cometh the point, and herkneth if yow leste.
 [2209] The Sonday nyght, er day bigan to sprynge,
 [2210] Whan Palamon the larke herde synge
 [2211] (Although it nere nat day by houres two,
 [2212] Yet song the larke) and Palamon right tho
 [2213] With hooly herte and with an heigh corage,
 [2214] He roos to wenden on his pilgrymage
 [2215] Unto the blisful Citherea benigne --
 [2216] I mene Venus, honurable and digne.
 [2217] And in hir houre he walketh forth a pas
 [2218] Unto the lystes ther hire temple was,
 [2219] And doun he kneleth, and with humble cheere
 [2220] And herte soor he seyde as ye shal heere:
 [2221] "Faireste of faire, O lady myn, Venus,
 [2222] Doughter to Jove and spouse of Vulcanus,
 

 [2223] Thow gladere of the mount of Citheron,
 [2224] For thilke love thow haddest to Adoon,
 [2225] Have pitee of my bittre teeris smerte,
 [2226] And taak myn humble preyere at thyn herte.
 [2227] Allas! I ne have no langage to telle
 [2228] Th' effectes ne the tormentz of myn helle;
 [2229] Myn herte may myne harmes nat biwreye;
 [2230] I am so confus that I kan noght seye
 [2231] But `Mercy, lady bright, that knowest weele
 [2232] My thought and seest what harmes that I feele!'
 [2233] Considere al this and rewe upon my soore,
 [2234] As wisly as I shal for everemoore,
 [2235] Emforth my myght, thy trewe servant be,
 [2236] And holden werre alwey with chastitee.
 [2237] That make I myn avow, so ye me helpe!
 [2238] I kepe noght of armes for to yelpe,
 [2239] Ne I ne axe nat tomorwe to have victorie,
 [2240] Ne renoun in this cas, ne veyne glorie
 [2241] Of pris of armes blowen up and doun;
 [2242] But I wolde have fully possessioun
 [2243] Of Emelye, and dye in thy servyse.
 [2244] Fynd thow the manere hou and in what wyse:
 [2245] I recche nat but it may bettre be
 [2246] To have victorie of hem, or they of me,
 [2247] So that I have my lady in myne armes.
 [2248] For though so be that Mars is god of armes,
 [2249] Youre vertu is so greet in hevene above
 [2250] That if yow list, I shal wel have my love.
 [2251] Thy temple wol I worshipe everemo,
 [2252] And on thyn auter, where I ride or go,
 [2253] I wol doon sacrifice and fires beete.
 [2254] And if ye wol nat so, my lady sweete,
 [2255] Thanne preye I thee, tomorwe with a spere
 [2256] That Arcita me thurgh the herte bere.
 [2257] Thanne rekke I noght, whan I have lost my lyf,
 [2258] Though that Arcita wynne hire to his wyf.
 [2259] This is th' effect and ende of my preyere:
 [2260] Yif me my love, thow blisful lady deere."
 [2261] Whan the orison was doon of Palamon,
 [2262] His sacrifice he dide, and that anon,
 [2263] Ful pitously, with alle circumstaunces,
 [2264] Al telle I noght as now his observaunces;
 [2265] But atte laste the statue of Venus shook,
 [2266] And made a signe, wherby that he took
 [2267] That his preyere accepted was that day.
 [2268] For thogh the signe shewed a delay,
 [2269] Yet wiste he wel that graunted was his boone,
 [2270] And with glad herte he wente hym hoom ful soone.
 [2271] The thridde houre inequal that Palamon
 [2272] Bigan to Venus temple for to gon,
 [2273] Up roos the sonne, and up roos Emelye
 [2274] And to the temple of Dyane gan hye.
 [2275] Hir maydens, that she thider with hire ladde,
 [2276] Ful redily with hem the fyr they hadde,
 [2277] Th' encens, the clothes, and the remenant al
 [2278] That to the sacrifice longen shal;
 [2279] The hornes fulle of meeth, as was the gyse --
 [2280] Ther lakked noght to doon hir sacrifise.
 [2281] Smokynge the temple, ful of clothes faire,
 [2282] This Emelye, with herte debonaire,
 [2283] Hir body wessh with water of a welle.
 [2284] But hou she dide hir ryte I dar nat telle,
 [2285] But it be any thing in general;
 [2286] And yet it were a game to heeren al.
 [2287] To hym that meneth wel it were no charge;
 [2288] But it is good a man been at his large.
 [2289] Hir brighte heer was kembd, untressed al;
 [2290] A coroune of a grene ook cerial
 [2291] Upon hir heed was set ful fair and meete.
 [2292] Two fyres on the auter gan she beete,
 [2293] And dide hir thynges, as men may biholde
 [2294] In Stace of Thebes and thise bookes olde.
 [2295] Whan kyndled was the fyr, with pitous cheere
 [2296] Unto Dyane she spak as ye may heere:
 [2297] "O chaste goddesse of the wodes grene,
 [2298] To whom bothe hevene and erthe and see is sene,
 [2299] Queene of the regne of Pluto derk and lowe,
 [2300] Goddesse of maydens, that myn herte hast knowe
 [2301] Ful many a yeer, and woost what I desire,
 [2302] As keepe me fro thy vengeaunce and thyn ire,
 [2303] That Attheon aboughte cruelly.
 [2304] Chaste goddesse, wel wostow that I
 [2305] Desire to ben a mayden al my lyf,
 [2306] Ne nevere wol I be no love ne wyf.
 [2307] I am, thow woost, yet of thy compaignye,
 [2308] A mayde, and love huntynge and venerye,
 [2309] And for to walken in the wodes wilde,
 [2310] And noght to ben a wyf and be with childe.
 [2311] Noght wol I knowe compaignye of man.
 [2312] Now help me, lady, sith ye may and kan,
 [2313] For tho thre formes that thou hast in thee.
 [2314] And Palamon, that hath swich love to me,
 [2315] And eek Arcite, that loveth me so soore,
 [2316] This grace I preye thee withoute moore,
 [2317] As sende love and pees bitwixe hem two,
 [2318] And fro me turne awey hir hertes so
 [2319] That al hire hoote love and hir desir,
 [2320] And al hir bisy torment, and hir fir
 [2321] Be queynt, or turned in another place.
 [2322] And if so be thou wolt nat do me grace,
 [2323] Or if my destynee be shapen so
 [2324] That I shal nedes have oon of hem two,
 [2325] As sende me hym that moost desireth me.
 [2326] Bihoold, goddesse of clene chastitee,
 [2327] The bittre teeris that on my chekes falle.
 [2328] Syn thou art mayde and kepere of us alle,
 [2329] My maydenhede thou kepe and wel conserve,
 [2330] And whil I lyve, a mayde I wol thee serve."
 [2331] The fires brenne upon the auter cleere,
 [2332] Whil Emelye was thus in hir preyere.
 [2333] But sodeynly she saugh a sighte queynte,
 [2334] For right anon oon of the fyres queynte
 [2335] And quyked agayn, and after that anon
 [2336] That oother fyr was queynt and al agon;
 [2337] And as it queynte it made a whistelynge,
 [2338] As doon thise wete brondes in hir brennynge,
 [2339] And at the brondes ende out ran anon
 [2340] As it were blody dropes many oon;
 [2341] For which so soore agast was Emelye
 [2342] That she was wel ny mad and gan to crye,
 [2343] For she ne wiste what it signyfied,
 [2344] But oonly for the feere thus hath she cried,
 [2345] And weep that it was pitee for to heere.
 [2346] And therwithal Dyane gan appeere,
 [2347] With bowe in honde, right as an hunteresse,
 [2348] And seyde, "Doghter, stynt thyn hevynesse.
 [2349] Among the goddes hye it is affermed,
 [2350] And by eterne word writen and confermed,
 [2351] Thou shalt ben wedded unto oon of tho
 [2352] That han for thee so muchel care and wo,
 [2353] But unto which of hem I may nat telle.
 [2354] Farwel, for I ne may no lenger dwelle.
 [2355] The fires which that on myn auter brenne
 [2356] Shulle thee declaren, er that thou go henne,
 [2357] Thyn aventure of love, as in this cas."
 [2358] And with that word, the arwes in the caas
 [2359] Of the goddesse clateren faste and rynge,
 [2360] And forth she wente and made a vanysshynge;
 [2361] For which this Emelye astoned was,
 [2362] And seyde, "What amounteth this, allas?
 [2363] I putte me in thy proteccioun,
 [2364] Dyane, and in thy disposicioun."
 [2365] And hoom she goth anon the nexte weye.
 [2366] This is th' effect; ther is namoore to seye.
 [2367] The nexte houre of Mars folwynge this,
 [2368] Arcite unto the temple walked is
 [2369] Of fierse Mars to doon his sacrifise,
 [2370] With alle the rytes of his payen wyse.
 [2371] With pitous herte and heigh devocioun,
 [2372] Right thus to Mars he seyde his orisoun:
 [2373] "O stronge god, that in the regnes colde
 [2374] Of Trace honoured art and lord yholde,
 [2375] And hast in every regne and every lond
 [2376] Of armes al the brydel in thyn hond,
 [2377] And hem fortunest as thee lyst devyse,
 [2378] Accepte of me my pitous sacrifise.
 [2379] If so be that my youthe may deserve,
 [2380] And that my myght be worthy for to serve
 [2381] Thy godhede, that I may been oon of thyne,
 [2382] Thanne preye I thee to rewe upon my pyne.
 [2383] For thilke peyne and thilke hoote fir
 [2384] In which thow whilom brendest for desir,
 [2385] Whan that thow usedest the beautee
 [2386] Of faire, yonge, fresshe Venus free,
 [2387] And haddest hire in armes at thy wille --
 [2388] Although thee ones on a tyme mysfille,
 [2389] Whan Vulcanus hadde caught thee in his las
 [2390] And foond thee liggynge by his wyf, allas! --
 [2391] For thilke sorwe that was in thyn herte,
 [2392] Have routhe as wel upon my peynes smerte.
 [2393] I am yong and unkonnynge, as thow woost,
 [2394] And, as I trowe, with love offended moost
 [2395] That evere was any lyves creature,
 [2396] For she that dooth me al this wo endure
 [2397] Ne reccheth nevere wher I synke or fleete.
 [2398] And wel I woot, er she me mercy heete,
 [2399] I moot with strengthe wynne hire in the place,
 [2400] And wel I woot, withouten help or grace
 [2401] Of thee ne may my strengthe noght availle.
 [2402] Thanne help me, lord, tomorwe in my bataille,
 [2403] For thilke fyr that whilom brente thee,
 [2404] As wel as thilke fyr now brenneth me,
 [2405] And do that I tomorwe have victorie.
 [2406] Myn be the travaille, and thyn be the glorie!
 [2407] Thy sovereyn temple wol I moost honouren
 [2408] Of any place, and alwey moost labouren
 [2409] In thy plesaunce and in thy craftes stronge,
 [2410] And in thy temple I wol my baner honge
 [2411] And alle the armes of my compaignye,
 [2412] And everemo, unto that day I dye,
 [2413] Eterne fir I wol bifore thee fynde.
 [2414] And eek to this avow I wol me bynde:
 [2415] My beerd, myn heer, that hongeth long adoun,
 [2416] That nevere yet ne felte offensioun
 [2417] Of rasour nor of shere, I wol thee yive,
 [2418] And ben thy trewe servant whil I lyve.
 [2419] Now, lord, have routhe upon my sorwes soore;
 [2420] Yif me [victorie]; I aske thee namoore."
 [2421] The preyere stynt of Arcita the stronge,
 [2422] The rynges on the temple dore that honge,
 [2423] And eek the dores, clatereden ful faste,
 [2424] Of which Arcita somwhat hym agaste.
 [2425] The fyres brenden upon the auter brighte
 [2426] That it gan al the temple for to lighte;
 [2427] A sweete smel the ground anon up yaf,
 [2428] And Arcita anon his hand up haf,
 [2429] And moore encens into the fyr he caste,
 [2430] With othere rytes mo; and atte laste
 [2431] The statue of Mars bigan his hauberk rynge,
 [2432] And with that soun he herde a murmurynge
 [2433] Ful lowe and dym, and seyde thus, "Victorie!"
 [2434] For which he yaf to Mars honour and glorie.
 [2435] And thus with joye and hope wel to fare
 [2436] Arcite anon unto his in is fare,
 [2437] As fayn as fowel is of the brighte sonne.
 [2438] And right anon swich strif ther is bigonne,
 [2439] For thilke grauntyng, in the hevene above,
 [2440] Bitwixe Venus, the goddesse of love,
 [2441] And Mars, the stierne god armypotente,
 [2442] That Juppiter was bisy it to stente,
 [2443] Til that the pale Saturnus the colde,
 [2444] That knew so manye of aventures olde,
 [2445] Foond in his olde experience an art
 [2446] That he ful soone hath plesed every part.
 [2447] As sooth is seyd, elde hath greet avantage;
 [2448] In elde is bothe wysdom and usage;
 [2449] Men may the olde atrenne and noght atrede.
 [2450] Saturne anon, to stynten strif and drede,
 [2451] Al be it that it is agayn his kynde,
 [2452] Of al this strif he gan remedie fynde.
 [2453] "My deere doghter Venus," quod Saturne,
 [2454] "My cours, that hath so wyde for to turne,
 [2455] Hath moore power than woot any man.
 [2456] Myn is the drenchyng in the see so wan;
 [2457] Myn is the prison in the derke cote;
 [2458] Myn is the stranglyng and hangyng by the throte,
 [2459] The murmure and the cherles rebellyng,
 [2460] The groynynge, and the pryvee empoysonyng;
 [2461] I do vengeance and pleyn correccioun,
 [2462] Whil I dwelle in the signe of the leoun.
 [2463] Myn is the ruyne of the hye halles,
 [2464] The fallynge of the toures and of the walles
 [2465] Upon the mynour or the carpenter.
 [2466] I slow Sampsoun, shakynge the piler;
 [2467] And myne be the maladyes colde,
 [2468] The derke tresons, and the castes olde;
 [2469] My lookyng is the fader of pestilence.
 [2470] Now weep namoore; I shal doon diligence
 [2471] That Palamon, that is thyn owene knyght,
 [2472] Shal have his lady, as thou hast him hight.
 [2473] Though Mars shal helpe his knyght, yet nathelees
 [2474] Bitwixe yow ther moot be som tyme pees,
 [2475] Al be ye noght of o compleccioun,
 [2476] That causeth al day swich divisioun.
 [2477] I am thyn aiel, redy at thy wille;
 [2478] Weep now namoore; I wol thy lust fulfille."
 [2479] Now wol I stynten of the goddes above,
 [2480] Of Mars, and of Venus, goddesse of love,
 [2481] And telle yow as pleynly as I kan
 [2482] The grete effect, for which that I bygan.
 [2483] Greet was the feeste in Atthenes that day,
 [2484] And eek the lusty seson of that May
 [2485] Made every wight to been in swich plesaunce
 [2486] That al that Monday justen they and daunce,
 [2487] And spenden it in Venus heigh servyse.
 [2488] But by the cause that they sholde ryse
 [2489] Eerly, for to seen the grete fight,
 [2490] Unto hir reste wenten they at nyght.
 [2491] And on the morwe, whan that day gan sprynge,
 [2492] Of hors and harneys noyse and claterynge
 [2493] Ther was in hostelryes al aboute,
 [2494] And to the paleys rood ther many a route
 [2495] Of lordes upon steedes and palfreys.
 [2496] Ther maystow seen devisynge of harneys
 [2497] So unkouth and so riche, and wroght so weel
 [2498] Of goldsmythrye, of browdynge, and of steel;
 [2499] The sheeldes brighte, testeres, and trappures,
 [2500] Gold-hewen helmes, hauberkes, cote-armures;
 [2501] Lordes in parementz on hir courseres,
 [2502] Knyghtes of retenue, and eek squieres
 [2503] Nailynge the speres, and helmes bokelynge;
 [2504] Giggynge of sheeldes, with layneres lacynge --
 [2505] There as nede is they weren no thyng ydel;
 [2506] The fomy steedes on the golden brydel
 [2507] Gnawynge, and faste the armurers also
 [2508] With fyle and hamer prikynge to and fro;
 [2509] Yemen on foote, and communes many oon
 [2510] With shorte staves, thikke as they may goon;
 [2511] Pypes, trompes, nakers, clariounes,
 [2512] That in the bataille blowen blody sounes;
 [2513] The paleys ful of peple up and doun,
 [2514] Heere thre, ther ten, holdynge hir questioun,
 [2515] Dyvynynge of thise Thebane knyghtes two.
 [2516] Somme seyden thus, somme seyde "it shal be so";
 [2517] Somme helden with hym with the blake berd,
 [2518] Somme with the balled, somme with the thikke herd;
 [2519] Somme seyde he looked grymme, and he wolde fighte:
 [2520] "He hath a sparth of twenty pound of wighte."
 [2521] Thus was the halle ful of divynynge,
 [2522] Longe after that the sonne gan to sprynge.
 [2523] The grete Theseus, that of his sleep awaked
 [2524] With mynstralcie and noyse that was maked,
 [2525] Heeld yet the chambre of his paleys riche
 [2526] Til that the Thebane knyghtes, bothe yliche
 [2527] Honured, were into the paleys fet.
 [2528] Duc Theseus was at a wyndow set,
 [2529] Arrayed right as he were a god in trone.
 [2530] The peple preesseth thiderward ful soone
 [2531] Hym for to seen, and doon heigh reverence,
 [2532] And eek to herkne his heste and his sentence.
 [2533] An heraud on a scaffold made an "Oo!"
 [2534] Til al the noyse of peple was ydo,
 [2535] And whan he saugh the peple of noyse al stille,
 [2536] Tho shewed he the myghty dukes wille:
 [2537] "The lord hath of his heigh discrecioun
 [2538] Considered that it were destruccioun
 [2539] To gentil blood to fighten in the gyse
 

 [2540] Of mortal bataille now in this emprise.
 [2541] Wherfore, to shapen that they shal nat dye,
 [2542] He wol his firste purpos modifye.
 [2543] No man therfore, up peyne of los of lyf,
 [2544] No maner shot, ne polax, ne short knyf
 [2545] Into the lystes sende or thider brynge;
 [2546] Ne short swerd, for to stoke with poynt bitynge,
 [2547] No man ne drawe, ne bere it by his syde.
 [2548] Ne no man shal unto his felawe ryde
 [2549] But o cours with a sharpe ygrounde spere;
 [2550] Foyne, if hym list, on foote, hymself to were.
 [2551] And he that is at meschief shal be take
 [2552] And noght slayn, but be broght unto the stake
 [2553] That shal ben ordeyned on either syde;
 [2554] But thider he shal by force, and there abyde.
 [2555] And if so falle the chieftayn be take
 [2556] On outher syde, or elles sleen his make,
 [2557] No lenger shal the turneiynge laste.
 [2558] God spede you! Gooth forth and ley on faste!
 [2559] With long swerd and with mace fighteth youre fille.
 [2560] Gooth now youre wey; this is the lordes wille."
 [2561] The voys of peple touchede the hevene,
 [2562] So loude cride they with murie stevene,
 [2563] "God save swich a lord, that is so good
 [2564] He wilneth no destruccion of blood!"
 [2565] Up goon the trompes and the melodye,
 [2566] And to the lystes rit the compaignye,
 [2567] By ordinance, thurghout the citee large,
 [2568] Hanged with clooth of gold, and nat with sarge.
 [2569] Ful lik a lord this noble duc gan ryde,
 [2570] Thise two Thebans upon either syde,
 [2571] And after rood the queene and Emelye,
 [2572] And after that another compaignye
 [2573] Of oon and oother, after hir degree.
 [2574] And thus they passen thurghout the citee,
 [2575] And to the lystes come they by tyme.
 [2576] It nas nat of the day yet fully pryme
 [2577] Whan set was Theseus ful riche and hye,
 [2578] Ypolita the queene, and Emelye,
 [2579] And othere ladys in degrees aboute.
 [2580] Unto the seetes preesseth al the route.
 [2581] And westward, thurgh the gates under Marte,
 [2582] Arcite, and eek the hondred of his parte,
 [2583] With baner reed is entred right anon;
 [2584] And in that selve moment Palamon
 [2585] Is under Venus, estward in the place,
 [2586] With baner whyt and hardy chiere and face.
 [2587] In al the world, to seken up and doun,
 [2588] So evene, withouten variacioun,
 [2589] Ther nere swiche compaignyes tweye,
 [2590] For ther was noon so wys that koude seye
 [2591] That any hadde of oother avauntage
 [2592] Of worthynesse, ne of estaat, ne age,
 [2593] So evene were they chosen, for to gesse.
 [2594] And in two renges faire they hem dresse.
 [2595] Whan that hir names rad were everichon,
 [2596] That in hir nombre gyle were ther noon,
 [2597] Tho were the gates shet, and cried was loude:
 [2598] "Do now youre devoir, yonge knyghtes proude!"
 [2599] The heraudes lefte hir prikyng up and doun;
 [2600] Now ryngen trompes loude and clarioun.
 [2601] Ther is namoore to seyn, but west and est
 [2602] In goon the speres ful sadly in arrest;
 [2603] In gooth the sharpe spore into the syde.
 [2604] Ther seen men who kan juste and who kan ryde;
 [2605] Ther shyveren shaftes upon sheeldes thikke;
 [2606] He feeleth thurgh the herte-spoon the prikke.
 [2607] Up spryngen speres twenty foot on highte;
 [2608] Out goon the swerdes as the silver brighte;
 [2609] The helmes they tohewen and toshrede;
 [2610] Out brest the blood with stierne stremes rede;
 [2611] With myghty maces the bones they tobreste.
 [2612] He thurgh the thikkeste of the throng gan threste;
 [2613] Ther stomblen steedes stronge, and doun gooth al,
 [2614] He rolleth under foot as dooth a bal;
 [2615] He foyneth on his feet with his tronchoun,
 [2616] And he hym hurtleth with his hors adoun;
 [2617] He thurgh the body is hurt and sithen ytake,
 [2618] Maugree his heed, and broght unto the stake;
 [2619] As forward was, right there he moste abyde.
 [2620] Another lad is on that oother syde.
 [2621] And some tyme dooth hem Theseus to reste,
 [2622] Hem to refresshe and drynken, if hem leste.
 [2623] Ful ofte a day han thise Thebanes two
 [2624] Togydre ymet, and wroght his felawe wo;
 [2625] Unhorsed hath ech oother of hem tweye.
 [2626] Ther nas no tygre in the vale of Galgopheye,
 [2627] Whan that hir whelp is stole whan it is lite,
 [2628] So crueel on the hunte as is Arcite
 [2629] For jelous herte upon this Palamon.
 [2630] Ne in Belmarye ther nys so fel leon,
 [2631] That hunted is, or for his hunger wood,
 [2632] Ne of his praye desireth so the blood,
 [2633] As Palamon to sleen his foo Arcite.
 [2634] The jelous strokes on hir helmes byte;
 [2635] Out renneth blood on bothe hir sydes rede.
 [2636] Som tyme an ende ther is of every dede.
 [2637] For er the sonne unto the reste wente,
 [2638] The stronge kyng Emetreus gan hente
 [2639] This Palamon, as he faught with Arcite,
 [2640] And made his swerd depe in his flessh to byte,
 [2641] And by the force of twenty is he take
 [2642] Unyolden, and ydrawen to the stake.
 [2643] And in the rescus of this Palamoun
 [2644] The stronge kyng Lygurge is born adoun,
 [2645] And kyng Emetreus, for al his strengthe,
 [2646] Is born out of his sadel a swerdes lengthe,
 [2647] So hitte him Palamoun er he were take.
 [2648] But al for noght; he was broght to the stake.
 [2649] His hardy herte myghte hym helpe naught:
 [2650] He moste abyde, whan that he was caught,
 [2651] By force and eek by composicioun.
 [2652] Who sorweth now but woful Palamoun,
 [2653] That moot namoore goon agayn to fighte?
 [2654] And whan that Theseus hadde seyn this sighte,
 [2655] Unto the folk that foghten thus echon
 [2656] He cryde, "Hoo! namoore, for it is doon!
 [2657] I wol be trewe juge, and no partie.
 [2658] Arcite of Thebes shal have Emelie,
 [2659] That by his fortune hath hire faire ywonne."
 [2660] Anon ther is a noyse of peple bigonne
 [2661] For joye of this, so loude and heighe withalle
 [2662] It semed that the lystes sholde falle.
 [2663] What kan now faire Venus doon above?
 [2664] What seith she now? What dooth this queene of love,
 [2665] But wepeth so, for wantynge of hir wille,
 [2666] Til that hir teeres in the lystes fille?
 [2667] She seyde, "I am ashamed, doutelees."
 [2668] Saturnus seyde, "Doghter, hoold thy pees!
 [2669] Mars hath his wille, his knyght hath al his boone,
 [2670] And, by myn heed, thow shalt been esed soone."
 [2671] The trompours, with the loude mynstralcie,
 [2672] The heraudes, that ful loude yelle and crie,
 [2673] Been in hire wele for joye of daun Arcite.
 [2674] But herkneth me, and stynteth noyse a lite,
 [2675] Which a myracle ther bifel anon.
 [2676] This fierse Arcite hath of his helm ydon,
 [2677] And on a courser, for to shewe his face,
 [2678] He priketh endelong the large place
 [2679] Lokynge upward upon this Emelye;
 [2680] And she agayn hym caste a freendlich ye
 [2681] (For wommen, as to speken in comune,
 [2682] Thei folwen alle the favour of Fortune)
 [2683] And was al his chiere, as in his herte.
 [2684] Out of the ground a furie infernal sterte,
 [2685] From Pluto sent at requeste of Saturne,
 [2686] For which his hors for fere gan to turne,
 [2687] And leep aside, and foundred as he leep;
 [2688] And er that Arcite may taken keep,
 [2689] He pighte hym on the pomel of his heed,
 [2690] That in the place he lay as he were deed,
 [2691] His brest tobrosten with his sadel-bowe.
 [2692] As blak he lay as any cole or crowe,
 [2693] So was the blood yronnen in his face.
 [2694] Anon he was yborn out of the place,
 [2695] With herte soor, to Theseus paleys.
 [2696] Tho was he korven out of his harneys
 [2697] And in a bed ybrought ful faire and blyve,
 [2698] For he was yet in memorie and alyve,
 [2699] And alwey criynge after Emelye.
 [2700] Duc Theseus, with al his compaignye,
 [2701] Is comen hoom to Atthenes his citee,
 [2702] With alle blisse and greet solempnitee.
 [2703] Al be it that this aventure was falle,
 [2704] He nolde noght disconforten hem alle.
 [2705] Men seyde eek that Arcite shal nat dye;
 [2706] He shal been heeled of his maladye.
 [2707] And of another thyng they weren as fayn,
 [2708] That of hem alle was ther noon yslayn,
 [2709] Al were they soore yhurt, and namely oon,
 [2710] That with a spere was thirled his brest boon.
 [2711] To othere woundes and to broken armes
 [2712] Somme hadden salves, and somme hadden charmes;
 [2713] Fermacies of herbes, and eek save
 [2714] They dronken, for they wolde hir lymes have.
 [2715] For which this noble duc, as he wel kan,
 [2716] Conforteth and honoureth every man,
 [2717] And made revel al the longe nyght
 [2718] Unto the straunge lordes, as was right.
 [2719] Ne ther was holden no disconfitynge
 [2720] But as a justes or a tourneiynge;
 [2721] For soothly ther was no disconfiture.
 [2722] For fallyng nys nat but an aventure,
 [2723] Ne to be lad by force unto the stake
 [2724] Unyolden, and with twenty knyghtes take,
 [2725] O persone allone, withouten mo,
 [2726] And haryed forth by arme, foot, and too,
 [2727] And eke his steede dryven forth with staves
 [2728] With footmen, bothe yemen and eek knaves --
 [2729] It nas arretted hym no vileynye;
 [2730] Ther may no man clepen it cowardye.
 [2731] For which anon duc Theseus leet crye,
 [2732] To stynten alle rancour and envye,
 [2733] The gree as wel of o syde as of oother,
 [2734] And eyther syde ylik as ootheres brother;
 [2735] And yaf hem yiftes after hir degree,
 [2736] And fully heeld a feeste dayes three,
 [2737] And conveyed the kynges worthily
 [2738] Out of his toun a journee largely.
 [2739] And hoom wente every man the righte way.
 [2740] Ther was namoore but "Fare wel, have good day!"
 [2741] Of this bataille I wol namoore endite,
 [2742] But speke of Palamon and of Arcite.
 [2743] Swelleth the brest of Arcite, and the soore
 [2744] Encreesseth at his herte moore and moore.
 [2745] The clothered blood, for any lechecraft,
 [2746] Corrupteth, and is in his bouk ylaft,
 [2747] That neither veyne-blood, ne ventusynge,
 [2748] Ne drynke of herbes may ben his helpynge.
 [2749] The vertu expulsif, or animal,
 [2750] Fro thilke vertu cleped natural
 [2751] Ne may the venym voyden ne expelle.
 [2752] The pipes of his longes gonne to swelle,
 [2753] And every lacerte in his brest adoun
 [2754] Is shent with venym and corrupcioun.
 [2755] Hym gayneth neither, for to gete his lif,
 [2756] Vomyt upward, ne dounward laxatif.
 [2757] Al is tobrosten thilke regioun;
 [2758] Nature hath now no dominacioun.
 [2759] And certeinly, ther Nature wol nat wirche,
 [2760] Fare wel phisik! Go ber the man to chirche!
 [2761] This al and som, that Arcita moot dye;
 [2762] For which he sendeth after Emelye,
 [2763] And Palamon, that was his cosyn deere.
 [2764] Thanne seyde he thus, as ye shal after heere:
 [2765] "Naught may the woful spirit in myn herte
 [2766] Declare o point of alle my sorwes smerte
 [2767] To yow, my lady, that I love moost,
 [2768] But I biquethe the servyce of my goost
 [2769] To yow aboven every creature,
 [2770] Syn that my lyf may no lenger dure.
 [2771] Allas, the wo! Allas, the peynes stronge,
 [2772] That I for yow have suffred, and so longe!
 [2773] Allas, the deeth! Allas, myn Emelye!
 [2774] Allas, departynge of oure compaignye!
 [2775] Allas, myn hertes queene! Allas, my wyf,
 [2776] Myn hertes lady, endere of my lyf!
 [2777] What is this world? What asketh men to have?
 [2778] Now with his love, now in his colde grave
 [2779] Allone, withouten any compaignye.
 [2780] Fare wel, my sweete foo, myn Emelye!
 [2781] And softe taak me in youre armes tweye,
 [2782] For love of God, and herkneth what I seye.
 [2783] "I have heer with my cosyn Palamon
 [2784] Had strif and rancour many a day agon
 [2785] For love of yow, and for my jalousye.
 [2786] And Juppiter so wys my soule gye,
 [2787] To speken of a servaunt proprely,
 [2788] With alle circumstances trewely --
 [2789] That is to seyen, trouthe, honour, knyghthede,
 [2790] Wysdom, humblesse, estaat, and heigh kynrede,
 [2791] Fredom, and al that longeth to that art --
 [2792] So Juppiter have of my soule part,
 [2793] As in this world right now ne knowe I non
 [2794] So worthy to ben loved as Palamon,
 [2795] That serveth yow, and wol doon al his lyf.
 [2796] And if that evere ye shul ben a wyf,
 [2797] Foryet nat Palamon, the gentil man."
 [2798] And with that word his speche faille gan,
 [2799] For from his feet up to his brest was come
 [2800] The coold of deeth, that hadde hym overcome,
 [2801] And yet mooreover, for in his armes two
 [2802] The vital strengthe is lost and al ago.
 [2803] Oonly the intellect, withouten moore,
 [2804] That dwelled in his herte syk and soore,
 [2805] Gan faillen whan the herte felte deeth.
 [2806] Dusked his eyen two, and failled breeth,
 [2807] But on his lady yet caste he his ye;
 [2808] His laste word was, "Mercy, Emelye!"
 [2809] His spirit chaunged hous and wente ther,
 [2810] As I cam nevere, I kan nat tellen wher.
 [2811] Therfore I stynte; I nam no divinistre;
 [2812] Of soules fynde I nat in this registre,
 [2813] Ne me ne list thilke opinions to telle
 [2814] Of hem, though that they writen wher they dwelle.
 [2815] Arcite is coold, ther Mars his soule gye!
 [2816] Now wol I speken forth of Emelye.
 [2817] Shrighte Emelye, and howleth Palamon,
 [2818] And Theseus his suster took anon
 [2819] Swownynge, and baar hire fro the corps away.
 [2820] What helpeth it to tarien forth the day
 [2821] To tellen how she weep bothe eve and morwe?
 [2822] For in swich cas wommen have swich sorwe,
 [2823] Whan that hir housbondes ben from hem ago,
 [2824] That for the moore part they sorwen so,
 [2825] Or ellis fallen in swich maladye
 [2826] That at the laste certeinly they dye.
 [2827] Infinite been the sorwes and the teeres
 [2828] Of olde folk and folk of tendre yeeres
 [2829] In al the toun for deeth of this Theban.
 [2830] For hym ther wepeth bothe child and man;
 [2831] So greet wepyng was ther noon, certayn,
 [2832] Whan Ector was ybroght, al fressh yslayn,
 [2833] To Troye. Allas, the pitee that was ther,
 [2834] Cracchynge of chekes, rentynge eek of heer.
 [2835] "Why woldestow be deed," thise wommen crye,
 [2836] "And haddest gold ynough, and Emelye?"
 [2837] No man myghte gladen Theseus,
 [2838] Savynge his olde fader Egeus,
 [2839] That knew this worldes transmutacioun,
 [2840] As he hadde seyn it chaunge bothe up and doun,
 [2841] Joye after wo, and wo after gladnesse,
 [2842] And shewed hem ensamples and liknesse.
 [2843] "Right as ther dyed nevere man," quod he,
 [2844] "That he ne lyvede in erthe in some degree,
 [2845] Right so ther lyvede never man," he seyde,
 [2846] "In al this world, that som tyme he ne deyde.
 [2847] This world nys but a thurghfare ful of wo,
 [2848] And we been pilgrymes, passynge to and fro.
 [2849] Deeth is an ende of every worldly soore."
 [2850] And over al this yet seyde he muchel moore
 [2851] To this effect, ful wisely to enhorte
 [2852] The peple that they sholde hem reconforte.
 [2853] Duc Theseus, with al his bisy cure,
 [2854] Caste now wher that the sepulture
 [2855] Of goode Arcite may best ymaked be,
 [2856] And eek moost honurable in his degree.
 [2857] And at the laste he took conclusioun
 [2858] That ther as first Arcite and Palamoun
 [2859] Hadden for love the bataille hem bitwene,
 [2860] That in that selve grove, swoote and grene,
 [2861] Ther as he hadde his amorouse desires,
 [2862] His compleynte, and for love his hoote fires,
 

 

 [2863] He wolde make a fyr in which the office
 [2864] Funeral he myghte al accomplice.
 [2865] And leet comande anon to hakke and hewe
 [2866] The okes olde, and leye hem on a rewe
 [2867] In colpons wel arrayed for to brenne.
 [2868] His officers with swifte feet they renne
 [2869] And ryde anon at his comandement.
 [2870] And after this, Theseus hath ysent
 [2871] After a beere, and it al overspradde
 [2872] With clooth of gold, the richeste that he hadde.
 [2873] And of the same suyte he cladde Arcite;
 [2874] Upon his hondes hadde he gloves white,
 [2875] Eek on his heed a coroune of laurer grene,
 [2876] And in his hond a swerd ful bright and kene.
 [2877] He leyde hym, bare the visage, on the beere;
 [2878] Therwith he weep that pitee was to heere.
 [2879] And for the peple sholde seen hym alle,
 [2880] Whan it was day, he broghte hym to the halle,
 [2881] That roreth of the criyng and the soun.
 [2882] Tho cam this woful Theban Palamoun,
 [2883] With flotery berd and ruggy, asshy heeres,
 [2884] In clothes blake, ydropped al with teeres;
 [2885] And, passynge othere of wepynge, Emelye,
 [2886] The rewefulleste of al the compaignye.
 [2887] In as muche as the servyce sholde be
 [2888] The moore noble and riche in his degree,
 [2889] Duc Theseus leet forth thre steedes brynge,
 [2890] That trapped were in steel al gliterynge,
 [2891] And covered with the armes of daun Arcite.
 [2892] Upon thise steedes, that weren grete and white,
 [2893] Ther seten folk, of whiche oon baar his sheeld,
 [2894] Another his spere up on his hondes heeld,
 [2895] The thridde baar with hym his bowe Turkeys
 [2896] (Of brend gold was the caas and eek the harneys);
 [2897] And riden forth a paas with sorweful cheere
 [2898] Toward the grove, as ye shul after heere.
 [2899] The nobleste of the Grekes that ther were
 [2900] Upon hir shuldres caryeden the beere,
 [2901] With slakke paas and eyen rede and wete,
 [2902] Thurghout the citee by the maister strete,
 [2903] That sprad was al with blak, and wonder hye
 [2904] Right of the same is the strete ywrye.
 [2905] Upon the right hond wente olde Egeus,
 [2906] And on that oother syde duc Theseus,
 [2907] With vessels in hir hand of gold ful fyn,
 [2908] Al ful of hony, milk, and blood, and wyn;
 [2909] Eek Palamon, with ful greet compaignye;
 [2910] And after that cam woful Emelye,
 [2911] With fyr in honde, as was that tyme the gyse,
 [2912] To do the office of funeral servyse.
 [2913] Heigh labour and ful greet apparaillynge
 [2914] Was at the service and the fyr-makynge,
 [2915] That with his grene top the hevene raughte;
 [2916] And twenty fadme of brede the armes straughte --
 [2917] This is to seyn, the bowes weren so brode.
 [2918] Of stree first ther was leyd ful many a lode.
 [2919] But how the fyr was maked upon highte,
 [2920] Ne eek the names that the trees highte,
 [2921] As ook, firre, birch, aspe, alder, holm, popler,
 [2922] Wylugh, elm, plane, assh, box, chasteyn, lynde, laurer,
 [2923] Mapul, thorn, bech, hasel, ew, whippeltree --
 [2924] How they weren feld shal nat be toold for me;
 [2925] Ne hou the goddes ronnen up and doun,
 [2926] Disherited of hire habitacioun,
 [2927] In which they woneden in reste and pees,
 [2928] Nymphes, fawnes and amadrides;
 [2929] Ne hou the beestes and the briddes alle
 [2930] Fledden for fere, whan the wode was falle;
 [2931] Ne how the ground agast was of the light,
 [2932] That was nat wont to seen the sonne bright;
 [2933] Ne how the fyr was couched first with stree,
 [2934] And thanne with drye stikkes cloven a thre,
 [2935] And thanne with grene wode and spicerye,
 [2936] And thanne with clooth of gold and with perrye,
 [2937] And gerlandes, hangynge with ful many a flour;
 [2938] The mirre, th' encens, with al so greet odour;
 [2939] Ne how Arcite lay among al this,
 [2940] Ne what richesse aboute his body is;
 [2941] Ne how that Emelye, as was the gyse,
 [2942] Putte in the fyr of funeral servyse;
 [2943] Ne how she swowned whan men made the fyr,
 [2944] Ne what she spak, ne what was hir desir;
 [2945] Ne what jeweles men in the fyre caste,
 [2946] Whan that the fyr was greet and brente faste;
 [2947] Ne how somme caste hir sheeld, and somme hir spere,
 [2948] And of hire vestimentz, whiche that they were,
 [2949] And coppes fulle of wyn, and milk, and blood,
 [2950] Into the fyr, that brente as it were wood;
 [2951] Ne how the Grekes, with an huge route,
 [2952] Thries riden al the fyr aboute
 [2953] Upon the left hand, with a loud shoutynge,
 [2954] And thries with hir speres claterynge;
 [2955] And thries how the ladyes gonne crye;
 [2956] And how that lad was homward Emelye;
 [2957] Ne how Arcite is brent to asshen colde;
 [2958] Ne how that lyche-wake was yholde
 [2959] Al thilke nyght; ne how the Grekes pleye
 [2960] The wake-pleyes; ne kepe I nat to seye
 [2961] Who wrastleth best naked with oille enoynt,
 [2962] Ne who that baar hym best, in no disjoynt.
 [2963] I wol nat tellen eek how that they goon
 [2964] Hoom til Atthenes, whan the pley is doon;
 [2965] But shortly to the point thanne wol I wende
 [2966] And maken of my longe tale an ende.
 [2967] By processe and by lengthe of certeyn yeres,
 [2968] Al stynted is the moornynge and the teres
 [2969] Of Grekes, by oon general assent.
 [2970] Thanne semed me ther was a parlement
 [2971] At Atthenes, upon certein pointz and caas;
 [2972] Among the whiche pointz yspoken was,
 [2973] To have with certein contrees alliaunce,
 [2974] And have fully of Thebans obeisaunce.
 [2975] For which this noble Theseus anon
 [2976] Leet senden after gentil Palamon,
 [2977] Unwist of hym what was the cause and why,
 [2978] But in his blake clothes sorwefully
 [2979] He cam at his comandement in hye.
 [2980] Tho sente Theseus for Emelye.
 [2981] Whan they were set, and hust was al the place,
 [2982] And Theseus abiden hadde a space
 [2983] Er any word cam fram his wise brest,
 [2984] His eyen sette he ther as was his lest.
 [2985] And with a sad visage he siked stille,
 [2986] And after that right thus he seyde his wille:
 [2987] "The Firste Moevere of the cause above,
 [2988] Whan he first made the faire cheyne of love,
 [2989] Greet was th' effect, and heigh was his entente.
 [2990] Wel wiste he why, and what thereof he mente,
 [2991] For with that faire cheyne of love he bond
 [2992] The fyr, the eyr, the water, and the lond
 [2993] In certeyn boundes, that they may nat flee.
 [2994] That same Prince and that Moevere," quod he,
 [2995] "Hath stablissed in this wrecched world adoun
 [2996] Certeyne dayes and duracioun
 [2997] To al that is engendred in this place,
 [2998] Over the whiche day they may nat pace,
 [2999] Al mowe they yet tho dayes wel abregge.
 [3000] Ther nedeth noght noon auctoritee t' allegge,
 [3001] For it is preeved by experience,
 [3002] But that me list declaren my sentence.
 [3003] Thanne may men by this ordre wel discerne
 [3004] That thilke Moevere stable is and eterne.
 [3005] Wel may men knowe, but it be a fool,
 [3006] That every part dirryveth from his hool,
 [3007] For nature hath nat taken his bigynnyng
 [3008] Of no partie or cantel of a thyng,
 [3009] But of a thyng that parfit is and stable,
 [3010] Descendynge so til it be corrumpable.
 [3011] And therfore, of his wise purveiaunce,
 [3012] He hath so wel biset his ordinaunce
 [3013] That speces of thynges and progressiouns
 [3014] Shullen enduren by successiouns,
 [3015] And nat eterne, withouten any lye.
 [3016] This maystow understonde and seen at ye.
 [3017] "Loo the ook, that hath so long a norisshynge
 [3018] From tyme that it first bigynneth to sprynge,
 [3019] And hath so long a lif, as we may see,
 [3020] Yet at the laste wasted is the tree.
 [3021] "Considereth eek how that the harde stoon
 [3022] Under oure feet, on which we trede and goon,
 [3023] Yet wasteth it as it lyth by the weye.
 [3024] The brode ryver somtyme wexeth dreye;
 [3025] The grete tounes se we wane and wende.
 [3026] Thanne may ye se that al this thyng hath ende.
 [3027] "Of man and womman seen we wel also
 [3028] That nedes, in oon of thise termes two --
 [3029] This is to seyn, in youthe or elles age --
 [3030] He moot be deed, the kyng as shal a page;
 [3031] Som in his bed, som in the depe see,
 [3032] Som in the large feeld, as men may see;
 [3033] Ther helpeth noght; al goth that ilke weye.
 [3034] Thanne may I seyn that al this thyng moot deye.
 [3035] "What maketh this but Juppiter, the kyng,
 [3036] That is prince and cause of alle thyng,
 [3037] Convertynge al unto his propre welle
 [3038] From which it is dirryved, sooth to telle?
 [3039] And heer-agayns no creature on lyve,
 [3040] Of no degree, availleth for to stryve.
 [3041] "Thanne is it wysdom, as it thynketh me,
 [3042] To maken vertu of necessitee,
 [3043] And take it weel that we may nat eschue,
 [3044] And namely that to us alle is due.
 [3045] And whoso gruccheth ought, he dooth folye,
 [3046] And rebel is to hym that al may gye.
 [3047] And certeinly a man hath moost honour
 [3048] To dyen in his excellence and flour,
 [3049] Whan he is siker of his goode name;
 [3050] Thanne hath he doon his freend, ne hym, no shame.
 [3051] And gladder oghte his freend been of his deeth,
 [3052] Whan with honour up yolden is his breeth,
 [3053] Than whan his name apalled is for age,
 [3054] For al forgeten is his vassellage.
 [3055] Thanne is it best, as for a worthy fame,
 [3056] To dyen whan that he is best of name.
 [3057] "The contrarie of al this is wilfulnesse.
 [3058] Why grucchen we, why have we hevynesse,
 [3059] That goode Arcite, of chivalrie flour,
 [3060] Departed is with duetee and honour
 [3061] Out of this foule prisoun of this lyf?
 [3062] Why grucchen heere his cosyn and his wyf
 [3063] Of his welfare, that loved hem so weel?
 [3064] Kan he hem thank? Nay, God woot, never a deel,
 [3065] That both his soule and eek hemself offende,
 [3066] And yet they mowe hir lustes nat amende.
 [3067] "What may I conclude of this longe serye,
 [3068] But after wo I rede us to be merye
 [3069] And thanken Juppiter of al his grace?
 [3070] And er that we departen from this place
 [3071] I rede that we make of sorwes two
 [3072] O parfit joye, lastynge everemo.
 [3073] And looketh now, wher moost sorwe is herinne,
 [3074] Ther wol we first amenden and bigynne.
 [3075] "Suster," quod he, "this is my fulle assent,
 [3076] With al th' avys heere of my parlement,
 [3077] That gentil Palamon, youre owene knyght,
 [3078] That serveth yow with wille, herte, and myght,
 [3079] And ever hath doon syn ye first hym knewe,
 [3080] That ye shul of youre grace upon hym rewe,
 [3081] And taken hym for housbonde and for lord.
 [3082] Lene me youre hond, for this is oure accord.
 [3083] Lat se now of youre wommanly pitee.
 [3084] He is a kynges brother sone, pardee;
 [3085] And though he were a povre bacheler,
 [3086] Syn he hath served yow so many a yeer,
 [3087] And had for yow so greet adversitee,
 [3088] It moste been considered, leeveth me,
 [3089] For gentil mercy oghte to passen right."
 [3090] Thanne seyde he thus to Palamon the knight:
 [3091] "I trowe ther nedeth litel sermonyng
 [3092] To make yow assente to this thyng.
 [3093] Com neer, and taak youre lady by the hond."
 [3094] Bitwixen hem was maad anon the bond
 [3095] That highte matrimoigne or mariage,
 [3096] By al the conseil and the baronage.
 [3097] And thus with alle blisse and melodye
 [3098] Hath Palamon ywedded Emelye.
 [3099] And God, that al this wyde world hath wroght,
 [3100] Sende hym his love that hath it deere aboght;
 [3101] For now is Palamon in alle wele,
 [3102] Lyvynge in blisse, in richesse, and in heele,
 [3103] And Emelye hym loveth so tendrely,
 [3104] And he hire serveth so gentilly,
 [3105] That nevere was ther no word hem bitwene
 [3106] Of jalousie or any oother teene.
 [3107] Thus endeth Palamon and Emelye;
 [3108] And God save al this faire compaignye! Amen.

      
The Canterbury Tales and Other Works of Chaucer (Middle English), by Geoffery Chaucer, [14th cent.], at sacred-texts.com

 

The Canterbury Tales

 

The Miller's Prologue

 [3109] Whan that the Knyght had thus his tale ytoold,
 [3110] In al the route nas ther yong ne oold
 [3111] That he ne seyde it was a noble storie
 [3112] And worthy for to drawen to memorie,
 [3113] And namely the gentils everichon.
 [3114] Oure Hooste lough and swoor, "So moot I gon,
 [3115] This gooth aright; unbokeled is the male.
 [3116] Lat se now who shal telle another tale;
 [3117] For trewely the game is wel bigonne.
 [3118] Now telleth ye, sir Monk, if that ye konne,
 [3119] Somwhat to quite with the Knyghtes tale."
 [3120] The Millere, that for dronken was al pale,
 [3121] So that unnethe upon his hors he sat,
 [3122] He nolde avalen neither hood ne hat,
 [3123] Ne abyde no man for his curteisie,
 [3124] But in Pilates voys he gan to crie,
 [3125] And swoor, "By armes, and by blood and bones,
 [3126] I kan a noble tale for the nones,
 [3127] With which I wol now quite the Knyghtes tale."
 [3128] Oure Hooste saugh that he was dronke of ale,
 [3129] And seyde, "Abyd, Robyn, my leeve brother;
 [3130] Som bettre man shal telle us first another.
 [3131] Abyd, and lat us werken thriftily."
 [3132] "By Goddes soule," quod he, "that wol nat I;
 [3133] For I wol speke or elles go my wey."
 [3134] Oure Hoost answerde, "Tel on, a devel wey!
 [3135] Thou art a fool; thy wit is overcome."
 [3136] "Now herkneth," quod the Millere, "alle and some!
 [3137] But first I make a protestacioun
 [3138] That I am dronke; I knowe it by my soun.
 [3139] And therfore if that I mysspeke or seye,
 [3140] Wyte it the ale of Southwerk, I you preye.
 [3141] For I wol telle a legende and a lyf
 [3142] Bothe of a carpenter and of his wyf,
 [3143] How that a clerk hath set the wrightes cappe."
 [3144] The Reve answerde and seyde, "Stynt thy clappe!
 [3145] Lat be thy lewed dronken harlotrye.
 [3146] It is a synne and eek a greet folye
 [3147] To apeyren any man, or hym defame,
 [3148] And eek to bryngen wyves in swich fame.
 [3149] Thou mayst ynogh of othere thynges seyn."
 [3150] This dronke Millere spak ful soone ageyn
 [3151] And seyde, "Leve brother Osewold,
 [3152] Who hath no wyf, he is no cokewold.
 [3153] But I sey nat therfore that thou art oon;
 [3154] Ther been ful goode wyves many oon,
 [3155] And evere a thousand goode ayeyns oon badde.
 [3156] That knowestow wel thyself, but if thou madde.
 [3157] Why artow angry with my tale now?
 [3158] I have a wyf, pardee, as wel as thow;
 [3159] Yet nolde I, for the oxen in my plogh,
 [3160] Take upon me moore than ynogh,
 [3161] As demen of myself that I were oon;
 [3162] I wol bileve wel that I am noon.
 [3163] An housbonde shal nat been inquisityf
 [3164] Of Goddes pryvetee, nor of his wyf.
 [3165] So he may fynde Goddes foyson there,
 [3166] Of the remenant nedeth nat enquere."
 [3167] What sholde I moore seyn, but this Millere
 [3168] He nolde his wordes for no man forbere,
 [3169] But tolde his cherles tale in his manere.
 [3170] M' athynketh that I shal reherce it heere.
 [3171] And therfore every gentil wight I preye,
 [3172] For Goddes love, demeth nat that I seye
 [3173] Of yvel entente, but for I moot reherce
 [3174] Hir tales alle, be they bettre or werse,
 [3175] Or elles falsen som of my mateere.
 [3176] And therfore, whoso list it nat yheere,
 [3177] Turne over the leef and chese another tale;
 [3178] For he shal fynde ynowe, grete and smale,
 [3179] Of storial thyng that toucheth gentillesse,
 [3180] And eek moralitee and hoolynesse.
 [3181] Blameth nat me if that ye chese amys.
 [3182] The Millere is a cherl; ye knowe wel this.
 [3183] So was the Reve eek and othere mo,
 [3184] And harlotrie they tolden bothe two.
 [3185] Avyseth yow, and put me out of blame;
 [3186] And eek men shal nat maken ernest of game.

      
The Canterbury Tales and Other Works of Chaucer (Middle English), by Geoffery Chaucer, [14th cent.], at sacred-texts.com

 

The Canterbury Tales

 

The Miller's Tale

 [3187] Whilom ther was dwellynge at Oxenford
 [3188] A riche gnof, that gestes heeld to bord,
 [3189] And of his craft he was a carpenter.
 [3190] With hym ther was dwellynge a poure scoler,
 [3191] Hadde lerned art, but al his fantasye
 [3192] Was turned for to lerne astrologye,
 [3193] And koude a certeyn of conclusiouns,
 [3194] To demen by interrogaciouns,
 [3195] If that men asked hym, in certein houres
 [3196] Whan that men sholde have droghte or elles shoures,
 [3197] Or if men asked hym what sholde bifalle
 [3198] Of every thyng; I may nat rekene hem alle.
 [3199] This clerk was cleped hende Nicholas.
 [3200] Of deerne love he koude and of solas;
 [3201] And therto he was sleigh and ful privee,
 [3202] And lyk a mayden meke for to see.
 [3203] A chambre hadde he in that hostelrye
 [3204] Allone, withouten any compaignye,
 [3205] Ful fetisly ydight with herbes swoote;
 [3206] And he hymself as sweete as is the roote
 [3207] Of lycorys or any cetewale.
 [3208] His Almageste, and bookes grete and smale,
 [3209] His astrelabie, longynge for his art,
 [3210] His augrym stones layen faire apart,
 [3211] On shelves couched at his beddes heed;
 [3212] His presse ycovered with a faldyng reed;
 [3213] And al above ther lay a gay sautrie,
 [3214] On which he made a-nyghtes melodie
 [3215] So swetely that all the chambre rong;
 [3216] And Angelus ad virginem he song;
 [3217] And after that he song the Kynges Noote.
 [3218] Ful often blessed was his myrie throte.
 [3219] And thus this sweete clerk his tyme spente
 [3220] After his freendes fyndyng and his rente.
 [3221] This carpenter hadde wedded newe a wyf,
 [3222] Which that he lovede moore than his lyf;
 [3223] Of eighteteene yeer she was of age.
 [3224] Jalous he was, and heeld hire narwe in cage,
 [3225] For she was wylde and yong, and he was old
 [3226] And demed hymself been lik a cokewold.
 [3227] He knew nat Catoun, for his wit was rude,
 [3228] That bad man sholde wedde his simylitude.
 [3229] Men sholde wedden after hire estaat,
 [3230] For youthe and elde is often at debaat.
 [3231] But sith that he was fallen in the snare,
 [3232] He moste endure, as oother folk, his care.
 [3233] Fair was this yonge wyf, and therwithal
 [3234] As any wezele hir body gent and smal.
 [3235] A ceynt she werede, barred al of silk,
 [3236] A barmclooth as whit as morne milk
 [3237] Upon hir lendes, ful of many a goore.
 [3238] Whit was hir smok, and broyden al bifoore
 [3239] And eek bihynde, on hir coler aboute,
 [3240] Of col-blak silk, withinne and eek withoute.
 [3241] The tapes of hir white voluper
 [3242] Were of the same suyte of hir coler;
 [3243] Hir filet brood of silk, and set ful hye.
 [3244] And sikerly she hadde a likerous ye;
 [3245] Ful smale ypulled were hire browes two,
 [3246] And tho were bent and blake as any sloo.
 [3247] She was ful moore blisful on to see
 [3248] Than is the newe pere-jonette tree,
 [3249] And softer than the wolle is of a wether.
 [3250] And by hir girdel heeng a purs of lether,
 [3251] Tasseled with silk and perled with latoun.
 [3252] In al this world, to seken up and doun,
 [3253] There nys no man so wys that koude thenche
 [3254] So gay a popelote or swich a wenche.
 [3255] Ful brighter was the shynyng of hir hewe
 [3256] Than in the Tour the noble yforged newe.
 [3257] But of hir song, it was as loude and yerne
 [3258] As any swalwe sittynge on a berne.
 [3259] Therto she koude skippe and make game,
 [3260] As any kyde or calf folwynge his dame.
 [3261] Hir mouth was sweete as bragot or the meeth,
 [3262] Or hoord of apples leyd in hey or heeth.
 [3263] Wynsynge she was, as is a joly colt,
 [3264] Long as a mast, and upright as a bolt.
 [3265] A brooch she baar upon hir lowe coler,
 [3266] As brood as is the boos of a bokeler.
 [3267] Hir shoes were laced on hir legges hye.
 [3268] She was a prymerole, a piggesnye,
 [3269] For any lord to leggen in his bedde,
 [3270] Or yet for any good yeman to wedde.
 [3271] Now, sire, and eft, sire, so bifel the cas
 [3272] That on a day this hende Nicholas
 [3273] Fil with this yonge wyf to rage and pleye,
 [3274] Whil that hir housbonde was at Oseneye,
 [3275] As clerkes ben ful subtile and ful queynte;
 [3276] And prively he caughte hire by the queynte,
 [3277] And seyde, "Ywis, but if ich have my wille,
 [3278] For deerne love of thee, lemman, I spille."
 [3279] And heeld hire harde by the haunchebones,
 [3280] And seyde, "Lemman, love me al atones,
 [3281] Or I wol dyen, also God me save!"
 [3282] And she sproong as a colt dooth in the trave,
 [3283] And with hir heed she wryed faste awey,
 [3284] And seyde, "I wol nat kisse thee, by my fey!
 [3285] Why, lat be!" quod she. "Lat be, Nicholas,
 [3286] Or I wol crie `out, harrow' and `allas'!
 [3287] Do wey youre handes, for youre curteisye!"
 [3288] This Nicholas gan mercy for to crye,
 [3289] And spak so faire, and profred him so faste,
 [3290] That she hir love hym graunted atte laste,
 [3291] And swoor hir ooth, by Seint Thomas of Kent,
 [3292] That she wol been at his comandement,
 [3293] Whan that she may hir leyser wel espie.
 [3294] "Myn housbonde is so ful of jalousie
 [3295] That but ye wayte wel and been privee,
 [3296] I woot right wel I nam but deed," quod she.
 [3297] "Ye moste been ful deerne, as in this cas."
 [3298] "Nay, therof care thee noght," quod Nicholas.
 [3299] "A clerk hadde litherly biset his whyle,
 [3300] But if he koude a carpenter bigyle."
 [3301] And thus they been accorded and ysworn
 [3302] To wayte a tyme, as I have told biforn.
 [3303] Whan Nicholas had doon thus everideel
 [3304] And thakked hire aboute the lendes weel,
 [3305] He kiste hire sweete and taketh his sawtrie,
 [3306] And pleyeth faste, and maketh melodie.
 [3307] Thanne fil it thus, that to the paryssh chirche,
 [3308] Cristes owene werkes for to wirche,
 [3309] This goode wyf went on an haliday.
 [3310] Hir forheed shoon as bright as any day,
 [3311] So was it wasshen whan she leet hir werk.
 [3312] Now was ther of that chirche a parissh clerk,
 [3313] The which that was ycleped Absolon.
 [3314] Crul was his heer, and as the gold it shoon,
 [3315] And strouted as a fanne large and brode;
 [3316] Ful streight and evene lay his joly shode.
 [3317] His rode was reed, his eyen greye as goos.
 [3318] With Poules wyndow corven on his shoos,
 [3319] In hoses rede he wente fetisly.
 [3320] Yclad he was ful smal and proprely
 [3321] Al in a kirtel of a lyght waget;
 [3322] Ful faire and thikke been the poyntes set.
 [3323] And therupon he hadde a gay surplys
 [3324] As whit as is the blosme upon the rys.
 [3325] A myrie child he was, so God me save.
 [3326] Wel koude he laten blood, and clippe and shave,
 [3327] And maken a chartre of lond or acquitaunce.
 [3328] In twenty manere koude he trippe and daunce
 [3329] After the scole of Oxenforde tho,
 [3330] And with his legges casten to and fro,
 [3331] And pleyen songes on a smal rubible;
 [3332] Therto he song som tyme a loud quynyble;
 [3333] And as wel koude he pleye on a giterne.
 [3334] In al the toun nas brewhous ne taverne
 [3335] That he ne visited with his solas,
 [3336] Ther any gaylard tappestere was.
 [3337] But sooth to seyn, he was somdeel squaymous
 [3338] Of fartyng, and of speche daungerous.
 [3339] This Absolon, that jolif was and gay,
 [3340] Gooth with a sencer on the haliday,
 [3341] Sensynge the wyves of the parisshe faste;
 [3342] And many a lovely look on hem he caste,
 [3343] And namely on this carpenteris wyf.
 [3344] To looke on hire hym thoughte a myrie lyf,
 [3345] She was so propre and sweete and likerous.
 [3346] I dar wel seyn, if she hadde been a mous,
 [3347] And he a cat, he wolde hire hente anon.
 [3348] This parissh clerk, this joly Absolon,
 [3349] Hath in his herte swich a love-longynge
 [3350] That of no wyf took he noon offrynge;
 [3351] For curteisie, he seyde, he wolde noon.
 [3352] The moone, whan it was nyght, ful brighte shoon,
 [3353] And Absolon his gyterne hath ytake;
 [3354] For paramours he thoghte for to wake.
 [3355] And forth he gooth, jolif and amorous,
 [3356] Til he cam to the carpenteres hous
 [3357] A litel after cokkes hadde ycrowe,
 [3358] And dressed hym up by a shot-wyndowe
 [3359] That was upon the carpenteris wal.
 [3360] He syngeth in his voys gentil and smal,
 [3361] "Now, deere lady, if thy wille be,
 [3362] I praye yow that ye wole rewe on me,"
 [3363] Ful wel acordaunt to his gyternynge.
 [3364] This carpenter awook, and herde him synge,
 [3365] And spak unto his wyf, and seyde anon,
 [3366] "What! Alison! Herestow nat Absolon,
 [3367] That chaunteth thus under oure boures wal?"
 [3368] And she answerde hir housbonde therwithal,
 [3369] "Yis, God woot, John, I heere it every deel."
 [3370] This passeth forth; what wol ye bet than weel?
 [3371] Fro day to day this joly Absolon
 [3372] So woweth hire that hym is wo bigon.
 [3373] He waketh al the nyght and al the day;
 [3374] He kembeth his lokkes brode, and made hym gay;
 [3375] He woweth hire by meenes and brocage,
 [3376] And swoor he wolde been hir owene page;
 [3377] He syngeth, brokkynge as a nyghtyngale;
 [3378] He sente hire pyment, meeth, and spiced ale,
 [3379] And wafres, pipyng hoot out of the gleede;
 [3380] And, for she was of town, he profred meede;
 [3381] For som folk wol ben wonnen for richesse,
 [3382] And somme for strokes, and somme for gentillesse.
 [3383] Somtyme, to shewe his lightnesse and maistrye,
 [3384] He pleyeth Herodes upon a scaffold hye.
 [3385] But what availleth hym as in this cas?
 [3386] She loveth so this hende Nicholas
 [3387] That Absolon may blowe the bukkes horn;
 [3388] He ne hadde for his labour but a scorn.
 [3389] And thus she maketh Absolon hire ape,
 [3390] And al his ernest turneth til a jape.
 [3391] Ful sooth is this proverbe, it is no lye,
 [3392] Men seyn right thus: "Alwey the nye slye
 [3393] Maketh the ferre leeve to be looth."
 [3394] For though that Absolon be wood or wrooth,
 [3395] By cause that he fer was from hire sight,
 [3396] This nye Nicholas stood in his light.
 [3397] Now ber thee wel, thou hende Nicholas,
 [3398] For Absolon may waille and synge "allas."
 [3399] And so bifel it on a Saterday,
 [3400] This carpenter was goon til Osenay;
 [3401] And hende Nicholas and Alisoun
 [3402] Acorded been to this conclusioun,
 [3403] That Nicholas shal shapen hym a wyle
 [3404] This sely jalous housbonde to bigyle;
 [3405] And if so be the game wente aright,
 [3406] She sholde slepen in his arm al nyght,
 [3407] For this was his desir and hire also.
 [3408] And right anon, withouten wordes mo,
 [3409] This Nicholas no lenger wolde tarie,
 [3410] But dooth ful softe unto his chambre carie
 [3411] Bothe mete and drynke for a day or tweye,
 [3412] And to hire housbonde bad hire for to seye,
 [3413] If that he axed after Nicholas,
 [3414] She sholde seye she nyste where he was;
 [3415] Of al that day she saugh hym nat with ye;
 [3416] She trowed that he was in maladye,
 [3417] For, for no cry hir mayde koude hym calle,
 [3418] He nolde answere for thyng that myghte falle.
 [3419] This passeth forth al thilke Saterday,
 [3420] That Nicholas stille in his chambre lay,
 [3421] And eet and sleep, or dide what hym leste,
 [3422] Til Sonday, that the sonne gooth to reste.
 [3423] This sely carpenter hath greet merveyle
 [3424] Of Nicholas, or what thyng myghte hym eyle,
 [3425] And seyde, "I am adrad, by Seint Thomas,
 [3426] It stondeth nat aright with Nicholas.
 [3427] God shilde that he deyde sodeynly!
 [3428] This world is now ful tikel, sikerly.
 [3429] I saugh today a cors yborn to chirche
 [3430] That now, on Monday last, I saugh hym wirche.
 [3431] "Go up," quod he unto his knave anoon,
 [3432] "Clepe at his dore, or knokke with a stoon.
 [3433] Looke how it is, and tel me boldely."
 [3434] This knave gooth hym up ful sturdily,
 [3435] And at the chambre dore whil that he stood,
 [3436] He cride and knokked as that he were wood,
 [3437] "What, how! What do ye, maister Nicholay?
 [3438] How may ye slepen al the longe day?"
 [3439] But al for noght; he herde nat a word.
 [3440] An hole he foond, ful lowe upon a bord,
 [3441] Ther as the cat was wont in for to crepe,
 [3442] And at that hole he looked in ful depe,
 [3443] And at the laste he hadde of hym a sight.
 [3444] This Nicholas sat evere capyng upright,
 [3445] As he had kiked on the newe moone.
 [3446] Adoun he gooth, and tolde his maister soone
 [3447] In what array he saugh this ilke man.
 [3448] This carpenter to blessen hym bigan,
 [3449] And seyde, "Help us, Seinte Frydeswyde!
 [3450] A man woot litel what hym shal bityde.
 [3451] This man is falle, with his astromye,
 [3452] In some woodnesse or in som agonye.
 [3453] I thoghte ay wel how that it sholde be!
 [3454] Men sholde nat knowe of Goddes pryvetee.
 [3455] Ye, blessed be alwey a lewed man
 [3456] That noght but oonly his bileve kan!
 [3457] So ferde another clerk with astromye;
 [3458] He walked in the feeldes for to prye
 [3459] Upon the sterres, what ther sholde bifalle,
 [3460] Til he was in a marle-pit yfalle;
 [3461] He saugh nat that. But yet, by Seint Thomas,
 [3462] Me reweth soore of hende Nicholas.
 [3463] He shal be rated of his studiyng,
 [3464] If that I may, by Jhesus, hevene kyng!
 [3465] Get me a staf, that I may underspore,
 [3466] Whil that thou, Robyn, hevest up the dore.
 [3467] He shal out of his studiyng, as I gesse."
 [3468] And to the chambre dore he gan hym dresse.
 [3469] His knave was a strong carl for the nones,
 [3470] And by the haspe he haaf it of atones;
 [3471] Into the floor the dore fil anon.
 [3472] This Nicholas sat ay as stille as stoon,
 [3473] And evere caped upward into the eir.
 [3474] This carpenter wende he were in despeir,
 [3475] And hente hym by the sholdres myghtily,
 [3476] And shook hym harde, and cride spitously,
 [3477] "What! Nicholay! What, how! What, looke adoun!
 [3478] Awak, and thenk on Cristes passioun!
 [3479] I crouche thee from elves and fro wightes."
 [3480] Therwith the nyght-spel seyde he anon-rightes
 [3481] On foure halves of the hous aboute,
 [3482] And on the thresshfold of the dore withoute:
 [3483] "Jhesu Crist and Seinte Benedight,
 [3484] Blesse this hous from every wikked wight,
 [3485] For nyghtes verye, the white pater-noster!
 [3486] Where wentestow, Seinte Petres soster?"
 [3487] And atte laste this hende Nicholas
 [3488] Gan for to sik soore, and seyde, "Allas!
 [3489] Shal al the world be lost eftsoones now?"
 [3490] This carpenter answerde, "What seystow?
 [3491] What! Thynk on God, as we doon, men that swynke."
 [3492] This Nicholas answerde, "Fecche me drynke,
 [3493] And after wol I speke in pryvetee
 [3494] Of certeyn thyng that toucheth me and thee.
 [3495] I wol telle it noon oother man, certeyn."
 [3496] This carpenter goth doun, and comth ageyn,
 [3497] And broghte of myghty ale a large quart;
 [3498] And whan that ech of hem had dronke his part,
 [3499] This Nicholas his dore faste shette,
 [3500] And doun the carpenter by hym he sette.
 [3501] He seyde, "John, myn hooste, lief and deere,
 [3502] Thou shalt upon thy trouthe swere me heere
 [3503] That to no wight thou shalt this conseil wreye,
 [3504] For it is Cristes conseil that I seye,
 [3505] And if thou telle it man, thou art forlore;
 [3506] For this vengeaunce thou shalt han therfore,
 [3507] That if thou wreye me, thou shalt be wood."
 [3508] "Nay, Crist forbede it, for his hooly blood!"
 [3509] Quod tho this sely man, "I nam no labbe,
 [3510] Ne, though I seye, I nam nat lief to gabbe.
 [3511] Sey what thou wolt, I shal it nevere telle
 [3512] To child ne wyf, by hym that harwed helle!"
 [3513] "Now John," quod Nicholas, "I wol nat lye;
 [3514] I have yfounde in myn astrologye,
 [3515] As I have looked in the moone bright,
 [3516] That now a Monday next, at quarter nyght,
 [3517] Shal falle a reyn, and that so wilde and wood
 [3518] That half so greet was nevere Noes flood.
 [3519] This world," he seyde, "in lasse than an hour
 [3520] Shal al be dreynt, so hidous is the shour.
 [3521] Thus shal mankynde drenche, and lese hir lyf."
 [3522] This carpenter answerde, "Allas, my wyf!
 [3523] And shal she drenche? Allas, myn Alisoun!"
 [3524] For sorwe of this he fil almoost adoun,
 [3525] And seyde, "Is ther no remedie in this cas?"
 [3526] "Why, yis, for Gode," quod hende Nicholas,
 [3527] "If thou wolt werken after loore and reed.
 [3528] Thou mayst nat werken after thyn owene heed;
 [3529] For thus seith Salomon, that was ful trewe:
 [3530] `Werk al by conseil, and thou shalt nat rewe.'
 [3531] And if thou werken wolt by good conseil,
 [3532] I undertake, withouten mast and seyl,
 [3533] Yet shal I saven hire and thee and me.
 [3534] Hastow nat herd hou saved was Noe,
 [3535] Whan that oure Lord hadde warned hym biforn
 [3536] That al the world with water sholde be lorn?"
 [3537] "Yis," quod this Carpenter, "ful yoore ago."
 [3538] "Hastou nat herd," quod Nicholas, "also
 [3539] The sorwe of Noe with his felaweshipe,
 [3540] Er that he myghte gete his wyf to shipe?
 [3541] Hym hadde be levere, I dar wel undertake,
 [3542] At thilke tyme, than alle his wetheres blake
 [3543] That she hadde had a ship hirself allone.
 [3544] And therfore, woostou what is best to doone?
 [3545] This asketh haste, and of an hastif thyng
 [3546] Men may nat preche or maken tariyng.
 [3547] "Anon go gete us faste into this in
 [3548] A knedyng trogh, or ellis a kymelyn,
 [3549] For ech of us, but looke that they be large,
 [3550] In which we mowe swymme as in a barge,
 [3551] And han therinne vitaille suffisant
 [3552] But for a day -- fy on the remenant!
 [3553] The water shal aslake and goon away
 [3554] Aboute pryme upon the nexte day.
 [3555] But Robyn may nat wite of this, thy knave,
 [3556] Ne eek thy mayde Gille I may nat save;
 [3557] Axe nat why, for though thou aske me,
 [3558] I wol nat tellen Goddes pryvetee.
 [3559] Suffiseth thee, but if thy wittes madde,
 [3560] To han as greet a grace as Noe hadde.
 [3561] Thy wyf shal I wel saven, out of doute.
 [3562] Go now thy wey, and speed thee heer-aboute.
 [3563] "But whan thou hast, for hire and thee and me,
 [3564] Ygeten us thise knedyng tubbes thre,
 [3565] Thanne shaltow hange hem in the roof ful hye,
 [3566] That no man of oure purveiaunce espye.
 [3567] And whan thou thus hast doon as I have seyd,
 [3568] And hast oure vitaille faire in hem yleyd,
 [3569] And eek an ax to smyte the corde atwo,
 [3570] Whan that the water comth, that we may go
 [3571] And breke an hole an heigh, upon the gable,
 [3572] Unto the gardyn-ward, over the stable,
 [3573] That we may frely passen forth oure way,
 [3574] Whan that the grete shour is goon away.
 [3575] Thanne shaltou swymme as myrie, I undertake,
 [3576] As dooth the white doke after hire drake.
 [3577] Thanne wol I clepe, `How, Alison! How, John!
 [3578] Be myrie, for the flood wol passe anon.'
 [3579] And thou wolt seyn, `Hayl, maister Nicholay!
 [3580] Good morwe, I se thee wel, for it is day.'
 [3581] And thanne shul we be lordes al oure lyf
 [3582] Of al the world, as Noe and his wyf.
 [3583] "But of o thyng I warne thee ful right:
 [3584] Be wel avysed on that ilke nyght
 [3585] That we ben entred into shippes bord,
 [3586] That noon of us ne speke nat a word,
 [3587] Ne clepe, ne crie, but be in his preyere;
 [3588] For it is Goddes owene heeste deere.
 [3589] "Thy wyf and thou moote hange fer atwynne,
 [3590] For that bitwixe yow shal be no synne,
 [3591] Namoore in lookyng than ther shal in deede.
 [3592] This ordinance is seyd. Go, God thee speede!
 [3593] Tomorwe at nyght, whan men ben alle aslepe,
 [3594] Into oure knedyng-tubbes wol we crepe,
 [3595] And sitten there, abidyng Goddes grace.
 [3596] Go now thy wey; I have no lenger space
 [3597] To make of this no lenger sermonyng.
 [3598] Men seyn thus, `sende the wise, and sey no thyng.'
 [3599] Thou art so wys, it needeth thee nat teche.
 [3600] Go, save oure lyf, and that I the biseche."
 [3601] This sely carpenter goth forth his wey.
 [3602] Ful ofte he seide "Allas and weylawey,"
 [3603] And to his wyf he tolde his pryvetee,
 [3604] And she was war, and knew it bet than he,
 [3605] What al this queynte cast was for to seye.
 [3606] But nathelees she ferde as she wolde deye,
 [3607] And seyde, "Allas! go forth thy wey anon,
 [3608] Help us to scape, or we been dede echon!
 [3609] I am thy trewe, verray wedded wyf;
 [3610] Go, deere spouse, and help to save oure lyf."
 [3611] Lo, which a greet thyng is affeccioun!
 [3612] Men may dyen of ymaginacioun,
 [3613] So depe may impressioun be take.
 [3614] This sely carpenter bigynneth quake;
 [3615] Hym thynketh verraily that he may see
 [3616] Noees flood come walwynge as the see
 [3617] To drenchen Alisoun, his hony deere.
 [3618] He wepeth, weyleth, maketh sory cheere;
 [3619] He siketh with ful many a sory swogh;
 [3620] He gooth and geteth hym a knedyng trogh,
 [3621] And after that a tubbe and a kymelyn,
 [3622] And pryvely he sente hem to his in,
 [3623] And heng hem in the roof in pryvetee.
 [3624] His owene hand he made laddres thre,
 [3625] To clymben by the ronges and the stalkes
 [3626] Unto the tubbes hangynge in the balkes,
 [3627] And hem vitailled, bothe trogh and tubbe,
 [3628] With breed, and chese, and good ale in a jubbe,
 [3629] Suffisynge right ynogh as for a day.
 [3630] But er that he hadde maad al this array,
 [3631] He sente his knave, and eek his wenche also,
 [3632] Upon his nede to London for to go.
 [3633] And on the Monday, whan it drow to nyght,
 [3634] He shette his dore withoute candel-lyght,
 [3635] And dressed alle thyng as it sholde be.
 [3636] And shortly, up they clomben alle thre;
 [3637] They seten stille wel a furlong way.
 [3638] "Now, Pater-noster, clom!" seyde Nicholay,
 [3639] And "Clom!" quod John, and "Clom!" seyde Alisoun.
 [3640] This carpenter seyde his devocioun,
 [3641] And stille he sit, and biddeth his preyere,
 [3642] Awaitynge on the reyn, if he it heere.
 [3643] The dede sleep, for wery bisynesse,
 [3644] Fil on this carpenter right, as I gesse,
 [3645] Aboute corfew-tyme, or litel moore;
 [3646] For travaille of his goost he groneth soore,
 [3647] And eft he routeth, for his heed myslay.
 [3648] Doun of the laddre stalketh Nicholay,
 [3649] And Alisoun ful softe adoun she spedde;
 [3650] Withouten wordes mo they goon to bedde,
 [3651] Ther as the carpenter is wont to lye.
 [3652] Ther was the revel and the melodye;
 [3653] And thus lith Alison and Nicholas,
 [3654] In bisynesse of myrthe and of solas,
 [3655] Til that the belle of laudes gan to rynge,
 [3656] And freres in the chauncel gonne synge.
 [3657] This parissh clerk, this amorous Absolon,
 [3658] That is for love alwey so wo bigon,
 [3659] Upon the Monday was at Oseneye
 [3660] With compaignye, hym to disporte and pleye,
 [3661] And axed upon cas a cloisterer
 [3662] Ful prively after John the carpenter;
 [3663] And he drough hym apart out of the chirche,
 [3664] And seyde, "I noot; I saugh hym heere nat wirche
 [3665] Syn Saterday; I trowe that he be went
 [3666] For tymber, ther oure abbot hath hym sent;
 [3667] For he is wont for tymber for to go
 [3668] And dwellen at the grange a day or two;
 [3669] Or elles he is at his hous, certeyn.
 [3670] Where that he be, I kan nat soothly seyn."
 [3671] This Absolon ful joly was and light,
 [3672] And thoghte, "Now is tyme to wake al nyght,
 [3673] For sikirly I saugh hym nat stirynge
 [3674] Aboute his dore, syn day bigan to sprynge.
 [3675] "So moot I thryve, I shal, at cokkes crowe,
 [3676] Ful pryvely knokken at his wyndowe
 [3677] That stant ful lowe upon his boures wal.
 [3678] To Alison now wol I tellen al
 [3679] My love-longynge, for yet I shal nat mysse
 [3680] That at the leeste wey I shal hire kisse.
 [3681] Som maner confort shal I have, parfay.
 [3682] My mouth hath icched al this longe day;
 [3683] That is a signe of kissyng atte leeste.
 [3684] Al nyght me mette eek I was at a feeste.
 [3685] Therfore I wol go slepe an houre or tweye,
 [3686] And al the nyght thanne wol I wake and pleye."
 [3687] Whan that the firste cok hath crowe, anon
 [3688] Up rist this joly lovere Absolon,
 [3689] And hym arraieth gay, at poynt-devys.
 [3690] But first he cheweth greyn and lycorys,
 [3691] To smellen sweete, er he hadde kembd his heer.
 [3692] Under his tonge a trewe-love he beer,
 [3693] For therby wende he to ben gracious.
 [3694] He rometh to the carpenteres hous,
 [3695] And stille he stant under the shot-wyndowe --
 [3696] Unto his brest it raughte, it was so lowe --
 [3697] And softe he cougheth with a semy soun:
 [3698] "What do ye, hony-comb, sweete Alisoun,
 [3699] My faire bryd, my sweete cynamome?
 [3700] Awaketh, lemman myn, and speketh to me!
 [3701] Wel litel thynken ye upon my wo,
 [3702] That for youre love I swete ther I go.
 [3703] No wonder is thogh that I swelte and swete;
 [3704] I moorne as dooth a lamb after the tete.
 [3705] Ywis, lemman, I have swich love-longynge
 [3706] That lik a turtel trewe is my moornynge.
 [3707] I may nat ete na moore than a mayde."
 [3708] "Go fro the wyndow, Jakke fool," she sayde;
 [3709] "As help me God, it wol nat be `com pa me.'
 [3710] I love another -- and elles I were to blame --
 [3711] Wel bet than thee, by Jhesu, Absolon.
 [3712] Go forth thy wey, or I wol caste a ston,
 [3713] And lat me slepe, a twenty devel wey!"
 [3714] "Allas," quod Absolon, "and weylawey,
 [3715] That trewe love was evere so yvel biset!
 [3716] Thanne kysse me, syn it may be no bet,
 [3717] For Jhesus love, and for the love of me."
 [3718] "Wiltow thanne go thy wey therwith?" quod she.
 [3719] "Ye, certes, lemman," quod this Absolon.
 [3720] "Thanne make thee redy," quod she, "I come anon."
 [3721] And unto Nicholas she seyde stille,
 [3722] "Now hust, and thou shalt laughen al thy fille."
 [3723] This Absolon doun sette hym on his knees
 [3724] And seyde, "I am a lord at alle degrees;
 [3725] For after this I hope ther cometh moore.
 [3726] Lemman, thy grace, and sweete bryd, thyn oore!"
 [3727] The wyndow she undoth, and that in haste.
 [3728] "Have do," quod she, "com of, and speed the faste,
 [3729] Lest that oure neighebores thee espie."
 [3730] This Absolon gan wype his mouth ful drie.
 [3731] Derk was the nyght as pich, or as the cole,
 [3732] And at the wyndow out she putte hir hole,
 [3733] And Absolon, hym fil no bet ne wers,
 [3734] But with his mouth he kiste hir naked ers
 [3735] Ful savourly, er he were war of this.
 [3736] Abak he stirte, and thoughte it was amys,
 [3737] For wel he wiste a womman hath no berd.
 [3738] He felte a thyng al rough and long yherd,
 [3739] And seyde, "Fy! allas! what have I do?"
 [3740] "Tehee!" quod she, and clapte the wyndow to,
 [3741] And Absolon gooth forth a sory pas.
 [3742] "A berd! A berd!" quod hende Nicholas,
 [3743] "By Goddes corpus, this goth faire and weel."
 [3744] This sely Absolon herde every deel,
 [3745] And on his lippe he gan for anger byte,
 [3746] And to hymself he seyde, "I shal thee quyte."
 [3747] Who rubbeth now, who froteth now his lippes
 [3748] With dust, with sond, with straw, with clooth, with chippes,
 [3749] But Absolon, that seith ful ofte, "Allas!"
 [3750] "My soule bitake I unto Sathanas,
 [3751] But me were levere than al this toun," quod he,
 [3752] "Of this despit awroken for to be.
 [3753] Allas," quod he, "allas, I ne hadde ybleynt!"
 [3754] His hoote love was coold and al yqueynt;
 [3755] For fro that tyme that he hadde kist hir ers,
 [3756] Of paramours he sette nat a kers,
 [3757] For he was heeled of his maladie.
 [3758] Ful ofte paramours he gan deffie,
 [3759] And weep as dooth a child that is ybete.
 [3760] A softe paas he wente over the strete
 [3761] Until a smyth men cleped daun Gerveys,
 [3762] That in his forge smythed plough harneys;
 [3763] He sharpeth shaar and kultour bisily.
 [3764] This Absolon knokketh al esily,
 [3765] And seyde, "Undo, Gerveys, and that anon."
 [3766] "What, who artow?" "It am I, Absolon."
 [3767] "What, Absolon! for Cristes sweete tree,
 [3768] Why rise ye so rathe? Ey, benedicitee!
 [3769] What eyleth yow? Som gay gerl, God it woot,
 [3770] Hath broght yow thus upon the viritoot.
 [3771] By Seinte Note, ye woot wel what I mene."
 [3772] This Absolon ne roghte nat a bene
 [3773] Of al his pley; no word agayn he yaf;
 [3774] He hadde moore tow on his distaf
 [3775] Than Gerveys knew, and seyde, "Freend so deere,
 [3776] That hoote kultour in the chymenee heere,
 [3777] As lene it me; I have therwith to doone,
 [3778] And I wol brynge it thee agayn ful soone."
 [3779] Gerveys answerde, "Certes, were it gold,
 [3780] Or in a poke nobles alle untold,
 [3781] Thou sholdest have, as I am trewe smyth.
 [3782] Ey, Cristes foo! What wol ye do therwith?"
 [3783] "Therof," quod Absolon, "be as be may.
 [3784] I shal wel telle it thee to-morwe day" --
 [3785] And caughte the kultour by the colde stele.
 [3786] Ful softe out at the dore he gan to stele,
 [3787] And wente unto the carpenteris wal.
 [3788] He cogheth first, and knokketh therwithal
 [3789] Upon the wyndowe, right as he dide er.
 [3790] This Alison answerde, "Who is ther
 [3791] That knokketh so? I warante it a theef."
 [3792] "Why, nay," quod he, "God woot, my sweete leef,
 [3793] I am thyn Absolon, my deerelyng.
 [3794] Of gold," quod he, "I have thee broght a ryng.
 [3795] My mooder yaf it me, so God me save;
 [3796] Ful fyn it is, and therto wel ygrave.
 [3797] This wol I yeve thee, if thou me kisse."
 [3798] This Nicholas was risen for to pisse,
 [3799] And thoughte he wolde amenden al the jape;
 [3800] He sholde kisse his ers er that he scape.
 [3801] And up the wyndowe dide he hastily,
 [3802] And out his ers he putteth pryvely
 [3803] Over the buttok, to the haunche-bon;
 [3804] And therwith spak this clerk, this Absolon,
 [3805] "Spek, sweete bryd, I noot nat where thou art."
 [3806] This Nicholas anon leet fle a fart
 [3807] As greet as it had been a thonder-dent,
 [3808] That with the strook he was almoost yblent;
 [3809] And he was redy with his iren hoot,
 [3810] And Nicholas amydde the ers he smoot.
 [3811] Of gooth the skyn an hande-brede aboute,
 [3812] The hoote kultour brende so his toute,
 [3813] And for the smert he wende for to dye.
 [3814] As he were wood, for wo he gan to crye,
 [3815] "Help! Water! Water! Help, for Goddes herte!"
 [3816] This carpenter out of his slomber sterte,
 [3817] And herde oon crien "water!" as he were wood,
 [3818] And thoughte, "Allas, now comth Nowelis flood!"
 [3819] He sit hym up withouten wordes mo,
 [3820] And with his ax he smoot the corde atwo,
 [3821] And doun gooth al; he foond neither to selle,
 [3822] Ne breed ne ale, til he cam to the celle
 [3823] Upon the floor, and ther aswowne he lay.
 [3824] Up stirte hire Alison and Nicholay,
 [3825] And criden "Out" and "Harrow" in the strete.
 [3826] The neighebores, bothe smale and grete,
 [3827] In ronnen for to gauren on this man,
 [3828] That yet aswowne lay, bothe pale and wan,
 [3829] For with the fal he brosten hadde his arm.
 [3830] But stonde he moste unto his owene harm;
 [3831] For whan he spak, he was anon bore doun
 [3832] With hende Nicholas and Alisoun.
 [3833] They tolden every man that he was wood;
 [3834] He was agast so of Nowelis flood
 [3835] Thurgh fantasie that of his vanytee
 [3836] He hadde yboght hym knedyng tubbes thre,
 [3837] And hadde hem hanged in the roof above;
 [3838] And that he preyed hem, for Goddes love,
 [3839] To sitten in the roof, par compaignye.
 [3840] The folk gan laughen at his fantasye;
 [3841] Into the roof they kiken and they cape,
 [3842] And turned al his harm unto a jape.
 [3843] For what so that this carpenter answerde,
 [3844] It was for noght; no man his reson herde.
 [3845] With othes grete he was so sworn adoun
 [3846] That he was holde wood in al the toun;
 [3847] For every clerk anonright heeld with oother.
 [3848] They seyde, "The man is wood, my leeve brother";
 [3849] And every wight gan laughen at this stryf.
 [3850] Thus swyved was this carpenteris wyf,
 [3851] For al his kepyng and his jalousye,
 [3852] And Absolon hath kist hir nether ye,
 [3853] And Nicholas is scalded in the towte.
 [3854] This tale is doon, and God save al the rowte!

      
The Canterbury Tales and Other Works of Chaucer (Middle English), by Geoffery Chaucer, [14th cent.], at sacred-texts.com

 

The Canterbury Tales

 

The Reeve's Prologue

 [3855] Whan folk hadde laughen at this nyce cas
 [3856] Of Absolon and hende Nicholas,
 [3857] Diverse folk diversely they seyde,
 [3858] But for the moore part they loughe and pleyde.
 [3859] Ne at this tale I saugh no man hym greve,
 [3860] But it were oonly Osewold the Reve.
 [3861] By cause he was of carpenteris craft,
 [3862] A litel ire is in his herte ylaft;
 [3863] He gan to grucche, and blamed it a lite.
 [3864] "So theek," quod he, "ful wel koude I thee quite
 [3865] With bleryng of a proud milleres ye,
 [3866] If that me liste speke of ribaudye.
 [3867] But ik am oold; me list not pley for age;
 [3868] Gras tyme is doon; my fodder is now forage;
 [3869] This white top writeth myne olde yeris;
 [3870] Myn herte is also mowled as myne heris,
 [3871] But if I fare as dooth an open-ers --
 [3872] That ilke fruyt is ever lenger the wers,
 [3873] Til it be roten in mullok or in stree.
 [3874] We olde men, I drede, so fare we:
 [3875] Til we be roten, kan we nat be rype;
 [3876] We hoppen alwey whil that the world wol pype.
 [3877] For in oure wyl ther stiketh evere a nayl,
 [3878] To have an hoor heed and a grene tayl,
 [3879] As hath a leek; for thogh oure myght be goon,
 [3880] Oure wyl desireth folie evere in oon.
 [3881] For whan we may nat doon, than wol we speke;
 [3882] Yet in oure asshen olde is fyr yreke.
 [3883] "Foure gleedes han we, which I shal devyse --
 [3884] Avauntyng, liyng, anger, coveitise;
 [3885] Thise foure sparkles longen unto eelde.
 [3886] Oure olde lemes mowe wel been unweelde,
 [3887] But wyl ne shal nat faillen, that is sooth.
 [3888] And yet ik have alwey a coltes tooth,
 [3889] As many a yeer as it is passed henne
 [3890] Syn that my tappe of lif bigan to renne.
 [3891] For sikerly, whan I was bore, anon
 [3892] Deeth drough the tappe of lyf and leet it gon,
 [3893] And ever sithe hath so the tappe yronne
 [3894] Til that almoost al empty is the tonne.
 [3895] The streem of lyf now droppeth on the chymbe.
 [3896] The sely tonge may wel rynge and chymbe
 [3897] Of wrecchednesse that passed is ful yoore;
 [3898] With olde folk, save dotage, is namoore!"
 [3899] Whan that oure Hoost hadde herd this sermonyng,
 [3900] He gan to speke as lordly as a kyng.
 [3901] He seide, "What amounteth al this wit?
 [3902] What shul we speke alday of hooly writ?
 [3903] The devel made a reve for to preche,
 [3904] Or of a soutere a shipman or a leche.
 [3905] Sey forth thy tale, and tarie nat the tyme.
 [3906] Lo Depeford, and it is half-wey pryme!
 [3907] Lo Grenewych, ther many a shrewe is inne!
 [3908] It were al tyme thy tale to bigynne."
 [3909] "Now, sires," quod this Osewold the Reve,
 [3910] "I pray yow alle that ye nat yow greve,
 [3911] Thogh I answere, and somdeel sette his howve;
 [3912] For leveful is with force force of-showve.
 [3913] "This dronke Millere hath ytoold us heer
 [3914] How that bigyled was a carpenteer,
 [3915] Peraventure in scorn, for I am oon.
 [3916] And, by youre leve, I shal hym quite anoon;
 [3917] Right in his cherles termes wol I speke.
 [3918] I pray to God his nekke mote to-breke;
 [3919] He kan wel in myn eye seen a stalke,
 [3920] But in his owene he kan nat seen a balke."

      
The Canterbury Tales and Other Works of Chaucer (Middle English), by Geoffery Chaucer, [14th cent.], at sacred-texts.com

 

The Canterbury Tales

 

The Reeve's Tale

 [3921] At Trumpyngtoun, nat fer fro Cantebrigge,
 [3922] Ther gooth a brook, and over that a brigge,
 [3923] Upon the whiche brook ther stant a melle;
 [3924] And this is verray sooth that I yow telle:
 [3925] A millere was ther dwellynge many a day.
 [3926] As any pecok he was proud and gay.
 [3927] Pipen he koude and fisshe, and nettes beete,
 [3928] And turne coppes, and wel wrastle and sheete;
 [3929] Ay by his belt he baar a long panade,
 [3930] And of a swerd ful trenchant was the blade.
 [3931] A joly poppere baar he in his pouche;
 [3932] Ther was no man, for peril, dorste hym touche.
 [3933] A Sheffeld thwitel baar he in his hose.
 [3934] Round was his face, and camus was his nose;
 [3935] As piled as an ape was his skulle.
 [3936] He was a market-betere atte fulle.
 [3937] Ther dorste no wight hand upon hym legge,
 [3938] That he ne swoor he sholde anon abegge.
 [3939] A theef he was for sothe of corn and mele,
 [3940] And that a sly, and usaunt for to stele.
 [3941] His name was hoote deynous Symkyn.
 [3942] A wyf he hadde, ycomen of noble kyn;
 [3943] The person of the toun hir fader was.
 [3944] With hire he yaf ful many a panne of bras,
 [3945] For that Symkyn sholde in his blood allye.
 [3946] She was yfostred in a nonnerye;
 [3947] For Symkyn wolde no wyf, as he sayde,
 [3948] But she were wel ynorissed and a mayde,
 [3949] To saven his estaat of yomanrye.
 [3950] And she was proud, and peert as is a pye.
 [3951] A ful fair sighte was it upon hem two;
 [3952] On halydayes biforn hire wolde he go
 [3953] With his typet wounde aboute his heed,
 [3954] And she cam after in a gyte of reed;
 [3955] And Symkyn hadde hosen of the same.
 [3956] Ther dorste no wight clepen hire but "dame";
 [3957] Was noon so hardy that wente by the weye
 [3958] That with hire dorste rage or ones pleye,
 [3959] But if he wolde be slayn of Symkyn
 [3960] With panade, or with knyf, or boidekyn.
 [3961] For jalous folk ben perilous everemo --
 [3962] Algate they wolde hire wyves wenden so.
 [3963] And eek, for she was somdel smoterlich,
 [3964] She was as digne as water in a dich,
 [3965] And ful of hoker and of bisemare.
 [3966] Hir thoughte that a lady sholde hire spare,
 [3967] What for hire kynrede and hir nortelrie
 [3968] That she hadde lerned in the nonnerie.
 [3969] A doghter hadde they bitwixe hem two
 [3970] Of twenty yeer, withouten any mo,
 [3971] Savynge a child that was of half yeer age;
 [3972] In cradel it lay and was a propre page.
 [3973] This wenche thikke and wel ygrowen was,
 [3974] With kamus nose and eyen greye as glas,
 [3975] With buttokes brode and brestes rounde and hye.
 [3976] But right fair was hire heer; I wol nat lye.
 [3977] This person of the toun, for she was feir,
 [3978] In purpos was to maken hire his heir,
 [3979] Bothe of his catel and his mesuage,
 [3980] And straunge he made it of hir mariage.
 [3981] His purpos was for to bistowe hire hye
 [3982] Into som worthy blood of auncetrye;
 [3983] For hooly chirches good moot been despended
 [3984] On hooly chirches blood, that is descended.
 [3985] Therfore he wolde his hooly blood honoure,
 [3986] Though that he hooly chirche sholde devoure.
 [3987] Greet sokene hath this millere, out of doute,
 [3988] With whete and malt of al the land aboute;
 [3989] And nameliche ther was a greet collegge
 [3990] Men clepen the Soler Halle at Cantebregge;
 [3991] Ther was hir whete and eek hir malt ygrounde.
 [3992] And on a day it happed, in a stounde,
 [3993] Sik lay the maunciple on a maladye;
 [3994] Men wenden wisly that he sholde dye.
 [3995] For which this millere stal bothe mele and corn
 [3996] An hundred tyme moore than biforn;
 [3997] For therbiforn he stal but curteisly,
 [3998] But now he was a theef outrageously,
 [3999] For which the wardeyn chidde and made fare.
 [4000] But therof sette the millere nat a tare;
 [4001] He craketh boost, and swoor it was nat so.
 [4002] Thanne were ther yonge povre scolers two,
 [4003] That dwelten in this halle, of which I seye.
 [4004] Testif they were, and lusty for to pleye,
 [4005] And, oonly for hire myrthe and revelrye,
 [4006] Upon the wardeyn bisily they crye
 [4007] To yeve hem leve, but a litel stounde,
 [4008] To goon to mille and seen hir corn ygrounde;
 [4009] And hardily they dorste leye hir nekke
 [4010] The millere sholde not stele hem half a pekke
 [4011] Of corn by sleighte, ne by force hem reve;
 [4012] And at the laste the wardeyn yaf hem leve.
 [4013] John highte that oon, and Aleyn highte that oother;
 [4014] Of o toun were they born, that highte Strother,
 [4015] Fer in the north; I kan nat telle where.
 [4016] This Aleyn maketh redy al his gere,
 [4017] And on an hors the sak he caste anon.
 [4018] Forth goth Aleyn the clerk, and also John,
 [4019] With good swerd and with bokeler by hir syde.
 [4020] John knew the wey -- hem nedede no gyde --
 [4021] And at the mille the sak adoun he layth.
 [4022] Aleyn spak first: "Al hayl, Symond, y-fayth!
 [4023] Hou fares thy faire doghter and thy wyf?"
 [4024] "Aleyn, welcome," quod Symkyn, "by my lyf!
 [4025] And John also, how now, what do ye heer?"
 [4026] "Symond," quod John, "by God, nede has na peer.
 [4027] Hym boes serve hymself that has na swayn,
 [4028] Or elles he is a fool, as clerkes sayn.
 [4029] Oure manciple, I hope he wil be deed,
 [4030] Swa werkes ay the wanges in his heed;
 [4031] And forthy is I come, and eek Alayn,
 [4032] To grynde oure corn and carie it ham agayn;
 [4033] I pray yow spede us heythen that ye may."
 [4034] "It shal be doon," quod Symkyn, "by my fay!
 [4035] What wol ye doon whil that it is in hande?"
 [4036] "By God, right by the hopur wil I stande,"
 [4037] Quod John, "and se howgates the corn gas in.
 [4038] Yet saugh I nevere, by my fader kyn,
 [4039] How that the hopur wagges til and fra."
 [4040] Aleyn answerde, "John, and wiltow swa?
 [4041] Thanne wil I be bynethe, by my croun,
 [4042] And se how that the mele falles doun
 [4043] Into the trough; that sal be my disport.
 [4044] For John, y-faith, I may been of youre sort;
 [4045] I is as ille a millere as ar ye."
 [4046] This millere smyled of hir nycetee,
 [4047] And thoghte, "Al this nys doon but for a wyle.
 [4048] They wene that no man may hem bigyle,
 [4049] But by my thrift, yet shal I blere hir ye,
 [4050] For al the sleighte in hir philosophye.
 [4051] The moore queynte crekes that they make,
 [4052] The moore wol I stele whan I take.
 [4053] In stide of flour yet wol I yeve hem bren.
 [4054] `The gretteste clerkes been noght wisest men,'
 [4055] As whilom to the wolf thus spak the mare.
 [4056] Of al hir art counte I noght a tare."
 [4057] Out at the dore he gooth ful pryvely,
 [4058] Whan that he saugh his tyme, softely.
 [4059] He looketh up and doun til he hath founde
 [4060] The clerkes hors, ther as it stood ybounde
 [4061] Bihynde the mille, under a levesel;
 [4062] And to the hors he goth hym faire and wel;
 [4063] He strepeth of the brydel right anon.
 [4064] And whan the hors was laus, he gynneth gon
 [4065] Toward the fen, ther wilde mares renne,
 [4066] And forth with "wehee," thurgh thikke and thurgh thenne.
 [4067] This millere gooth agayn, no word he seyde,
 [4068] But dooth his note, and with the clerkes pleyde
 [4069] Til that hir corn was faire and weel ygrounde.
 [4070] And whan the mele is sakked and ybounde,
 [4071] This John goth out and fynt his hors away,
 [4072] And gan to crie "Harrow!" and "Weylaway!
 [4073] Oure hors is lorn, Alayn, for Goddes banes,
 [4074] Step on thy feet! Com of, man, al atanes!
 [4075] Allas, our wardeyn has his palfrey lorn."
 [4076] This Aleyn al forgat, bothe mele and corn;
 [4077] Al was out of his mynde his housbondrie.
 [4078] "What, whilk way is he geen?" he gan to crie.
 [4079] The wyf cam lepynge inward with a ren.
 [4080] She seyde, "Allas! youre hors goth to the fen
 [4081] With wilde mares, as faste as he may go.
 [4082] Unthank come on his hand that boond hym so,
 [4083] And he that bettre sholde han knyt the reyne!"
 [4084] "Allas," quod John, "Aleyn, for Cristes peyne
 [4085] Lay doun thy swerd, and I wil myn alswa.
 [4086] I is ful wight, God waat, as is a raa;
 [4087] By Goddes herte, he sal nat scape us bathe!
 [4088] Why ne had thow pit the capul in the lathe?
 [4089] Ilhayl! By God, Alayn, thou is a fonne!"
 [4090] Thise sely clerkes han ful faste yronne
 [4091] Toward the fen, bothe Aleyn and eek John.
 [4092] And whan the millere saugh that they were gon,
 [4093] He half a busshel of hir flour hath take,
 [4094] And bad his wyf go knede it in a cake.
 [4095] He seyde, "I trowe the clerkes were aferd.
 [4096] Yet kan a millere make a clerkes berd,
 [4097] For al his art; now lat hem goon hir weye!
 [4098] Lo, wher he gooth! Ye, lat the children pleye.
 [4099] They gete hym nat so lightly, by my croun."
 [4100] Thise sely clerkes rennen up and doun
 [4101] With "Keep! Keep! Stand! Stand! Jossa, warderere,
 [4102] Ga whistle thou, and I shal kepe hym heere!"
 [4103] But shortly, til that it was verray nyght,
 [4104] They koude nat, though they dide al hir myght,
 [4105] Hir capul cacche, he ran alwey so faste,
 [4106] Til in a dych they caughte hym atte laste.
 [4107] Wery and weet, as beest is in the reyn,
 [4108] Comth sely John, and with him comth Aleyn.
 [4109] "Allas," quod John, "the day that I was born!
 [4110] Now are we dryve til hethyng and til scorn.
 [4111] Oure corn is stoln; men wil us fooles calle,
 [4112] Bathe the wardeyn and oure felawes alle,
 [4113] And namely the millere, weylaway!"
 [4114] Thus pleyneth John as he gooth by the way
 [4115] Toward the mille, and Bayard in his hond.
 [4116] The millere sittynge by the fyr he fond,
 [4117] For it was nyght, and forther myghte they noght;
 [4118] But for the love of God they hym bisoght
 [4119] Of herberwe and of ese, as for hir peny.
 [4120] The millere seyde agayn, "If ther be eny,
 [4121] Swich as it is, yet shal ye have youre part.
 [4122] Myn hous is streit, but ye han lerned art;
 [4123] Ye konne by argumentes make a place
 [4124] A myle brood of twenty foot of space.
 [4125] Lat se now if this place may suffise,
 [4126] Or make it rowm with speche, as is youre gise."
 [4127] "Now, Symond," seyde John, "by Seint Cutberd,
 [4128] Ay is thou myrie, and this is faire answerd.
 [4129] I have herd seyd, `Man sal taa of twa thynges:
 [4130] Slyk as he fyndes, or taa slyk as he brynges.'
 [4131] But specially I pray thee, hooste deere,
 [4132] Get us som mete and drynke, and make us cheere,
 [4133] And we wil payen trewely atte fulle.
 [4134] With empty hand men may na haukes tulle;
 [4135] Loo, heere oure silver, redy for to spende."
 [4136] This millere into toun his doghter sende
 [4137] For ale and breed, and rosted hem a goos,
 [4138] And boond hire hors, it sholde namoore go loos,
 [4139] And in his owene chambre hem made a bed,
 [4140] With sheetes and with chalons faire yspred
 [4141] Noght from his owene bed ten foot or twelve.
 [4142] His doghter hadde a bed, al by hirselve,
 [4143] Right in the same chambre by and by.
 [4144] It myghte be no bet, and cause why?
 [4145] Ther was no roumer herberwe in the place.
 [4146] They soupen and they speke, hem to solace,
 [4147] And drynken evere strong ale atte beste.
 [4148] Aboute mydnyght wente they to reste.
 [4149] Wel hath this millere vernysshed his heed;
 [4150] Ful pale he was for dronken, and nat reed.
 [4151] He yexeth, and he speketh thurgh the nose
 [4152] As he were on the quakke, or on the pose.
 [4153] To bedde he goth, and with hym goth his wyf.
 [4154] As any jay she light was and jolyf,
 [4155] So was hir joly whistle wel ywet.
 [4156] The cradel at hir beddes feet is set,
 [4157] To rokken, and to yeve the child to sowke.
 [4158] And whan that dronken al was in the crowke,
 [4159] To bedde wente the doghter right anon;
 [4160] To bedde goth Aleyn and also John;
 [4161] Ther nas na moore -- hem nedede no dwale.
 [4162] This millere hath so wisely bibbed ale
 [4163] That as an hors he fnorteth in his sleep,
 [4164] Ne of his tayl bihynde he took no keep.
 [4165] His wyf bar hym a burdon, a ful strong;
 [4166] Men myghte hir rowtyng heere two furlong;
 [4167] The wenche rowteth eek, par compaignye.
 [4168] Aleyn the clerk, that herde this melodye,
 [4169] He poked John, and seyde, "Slepestow?
 [4170] Herdestow evere slyk a sang er now?
 [4171] Lo, swilk a complyn is ymel hem alle;
 [4172] A wilde fyr upon thair bodyes falle!
 [4173] Wha herkned evere slyk a ferly thyng?
 [4174] Ye, they sal have the flour of il endyng.
 [4175] This lange nyght ther tydes me na reste;
 [4176] But yet, na fors, al sal be for the beste.
 [4177] For, John," seyde he, "als evere moot I thryve,
 [4178] If that I may, yon wenche wil I swyve.
 [4179] Som esement has lawe yshapen us,
 [4180] For, John, ther is a lawe that says thus:
 [4181] That gif a man in a point be agreved,
 [4182] That in another he sal be releved.
 [4183] Oure corn is stoln, sothly, it is na nay,
 [4184] And we han had an il fit al this day;
 [4185] And syn I sal have neen amendement
 [4186] Agayn my los, I will have esement.
 [4187] By Goddes sale, it sal neen other bee!"
 [4188] This John answerde, "Alayn, avyse thee!
 [4189] The millere is a perilous man," he seyde,
 [4190] "And gif that he out of his sleep abreyde,
 [4191] He myghte doon us bathe a vileynye."
 [4192] Aleyn answerde, "I counte hym nat a flye."
 [4193] And up he rist, and by the wenche he crepte.
 [4194] This wenche lay uprighte and faste slepte,
 [4195] Til he so ny was, er she myghte espie,
 [4196] That it had been to late for to crie,
 [4197] And shortly for to seyn, they were aton.
 [4198] Now pley, Aleyn, for I wol speke of John.
 [4199] This John lith stille a furlong wey or two,
 [4200] And to hymself he maketh routhe and wo.
 [4201] "Allas!" quod he, "this is a wikked jape;
 [4202] Now may I seyn that I is but an ape.
 [4203] Yet has my felawe somwhat for his harm;
 [4204] He has the milleris doghter in his arm.
 [4205] He auntred hym, and has his nedes sped,
 [4206] And I lye as a draf-sak in my bed;
 [4207] And when this jape is tald another day,
 [4208] I sal been halde a daf, a cokenay!
 [4209] I wil arise and auntre it, by my fayth!
 [4210] `Unhardy is unseely,' thus men sayth."
 [4211] And up he roos, and softely he wente
 [4212] Unto the cradel, and in his hand it hente,
 [4213] And baar it softe unto his beddes feet.
 [4214] Soone after this the wyf hir rowtyng leet,
 [4215] And gan awake, and wente hire out to pisse,
 [4216] And cam agayn, and gan hir cradel mysse,
 [4217] And groped heer and ther, but she foond noon.
 [4218] "Allas!" quod she, "I hadde almoost mysgoon;
 [4219] I hadde almoost goon to the clerkes bed.
 [4220] Ey, benedicite! Thanne hadde I foule ysped!"
 [4221] And forth she gooth til she the cradel fond.
 [4222] She gropeth alwey forther with hir hond,
 [4223] And foond the bed, and thoghte noght but good,
 [4224] By cause that the cradel by it stood,
 [4225] And nyste wher she was, for it was derk;
 [4226] But faire and wel she creep in to the clerk,
 [4227] And lith ful stille, and wolde han caught a sleep.
 [4228] Withinne a while this John the clerk up leep,
 [4229] And on this goode wyf he leith on soore.
 [4230] So myrie a fit ne hadde she nat ful yoore;
 [4231] He priketh harde and depe as he were mad.
 [4232] This joly lyf han thise two clerkes lad
 [4233] Til that the thridde cok bigan to synge.
 [4234] Aleyn wax wery in the dawenynge,
 [4235] For he had swonken al the longe nyght,
 [4236] And seyde, "Fare weel, Malyne, sweete wight!
 [4237] The day is come; I may no lenger byde;
 [4238] But everemo, wher so I go or ryde,
 [4239] I is thyn awen clerk, swa have I seel!"
 [4240] "Now, deere lemman," quod she, "go, far weel!
 [4241] But er thow go, o thyng I wol thee telle:
 [4242] Whan that thou wendest homward by the melle,
 [4243] Right at the entree of the dore bihynde
 [4244] Thou shalt a cake of half a busshel fynde
 [4245] That was ymaked of thyn owene mele,
 [4246] Which that I heelp my sire for to stele.
 [4247] And, goode lemman, God thee save and kepe!"
 [4248] And with that word almoost she gan to wepe.
 [4249] Aleyn up rist, and thoughte, "Er that it dawe,
 [4250] I wol go crepen in by my felawe,"
 [4251] And fond the cradel with his hand anon.
 [4252] "By God," thoughte he, "al wrang I have mysgon.
 [4253] Myn heed is toty of my swynk to-nyght,
 [4254] That makes me that I ga nat aright.
 [4255] I woot wel by the cradel I have mysgo;
 [4256] Heere lith the millere and his wyf also."
 [4257] And forth he goth, a twenty devel way,
 [4258] Unto the bed ther as the millere lay.
 [4259] He wende have cropen by his felawe John,
 [4260] And by the millere in he creep anon,
 [4261] And caughte hym by the nekke, and softe he spak.
 [4262] He seyde, "Thou John, thou swynes-heed, awak,
 [4263] For Cristes saule, and heer a noble game.
 [4264] For by that lord that called is Seint Jame,
 [4265] As I have thries in this shorte nyght
 [4266] Swyved the milleres doghter bolt upright,
 [4267] Whil thow hast, as a coward, been agast."
 [4268] "Ye, false harlot," quod the millere, "hast?
 [4269] A, false traitour! False clerk!" quod he,
 [4270] "Thow shalt be deed, by Goddes dignitee!
 [4271] Who dorste be so boold to disparage
 [4272] My doghter, that is come of swich lynage?"
 [4273] And by the throte-bolle he caughte Alayn,
 [4274] And he hente hym despitously agayn,
 [4275] And on the nose he smoot hym with his fest.
 [4276] Doun ran the blody streem upon his brest;
 [4277] And in the floor, with nose and mouth tobroke,
 [4278] They walwe as doon two pigges in a poke;
 [4279] And up they goon, and doun agayn anon,
 [4280] Til that the millere sporned at a stoon,
 [4281] And doun he fil bakward upon his wyf,
 [4282] That wiste no thyng of this nyce stryf;
 [4283] For she was falle aslepe a lite wight
 [4284] With John the clerk, that waked hadde al nyght,
 [4285] And with the fal out of hir sleep she breyde.
 [4286] "Help! hooly croys of Bromeholm," she seyde,
 [4287] "In manus tuas! Lord, to thee I calle!
 [4288] Awak, Symond! The feend is on me falle.
 [4289] Myn herte is broken; help! I nam but deed!
 [4290] Ther lyth oon upon my wombe and on myn heed.
 [4291] Help, Symkyn, for the false clerkes fighte!"
 [4292] This John stirte up as faste as ever he myghte,
 [4293] And graspeth by the walles to and fro,
 [4294] To fynde a staf; and she stirte up also,
 [4295] And knew the estres bet than dide this John,
 [4296] And by the wal a staf she foond anon,
 [4297] And saugh a litel shymeryng of a light,
 [4298] For at an hole in shoon the moone bright,
 [4299] And by that light she saugh hem bothe two,
 [4300] But sikerly she nyste who was who,
 [4301] But as she saugh a whit thyng in hir ye.
 [4302] And whan she gan this white thyng espye,
 [4303] She wende the clerk hadde wered a volupeer,
 [4304] And with the staf she drow ay neer and neer,
 [4305] And wende han hit this Aleyn at the fulle,
 [4306] And smoot the millere on the pyled skulle,
 [4307] That doun he gooth, and cride, "Harrow! I dye!"
 [4308] Thise clerkes beete hym weel and lete hym lye,
 [4309] And greythen hem, and tooke hir hors anon,
 [4310] And eek hire mele, and on hir wey they gon.
 [4311] And at the mille yet they tooke hir cake
 [4312] Of half a busshel flour, ful wel ybake.
 [4313] Thus is the proude millere wel ybete,
 [4314] And hath ylost the gryndynge of the whete,
 [4315] And payed for the soper everideel
 [4316] Of Aleyn and of John, that bette hym weel.
 [4317] His wyf is swyved, and his doghter als.
 [4318] Lo, swich it is a millere to be fals!
 [4319] And therfore this proverbe is seyd ful sooth,
 [4320] "Hym thar nat wene wel that yvele dooth."
 [4321] A gylour shal hymself bigyled be.
 [4322] And God, that sitteth heighe in magestee,
 [4323] Save al this compaignye, grete and smale!
 [4324] Thus have I quyt the Millere in my tale.

      
The Canterbury Tales and Other Works of Chaucer (Middle English), by Geoffery Chaucer, [14th cent.], at sacred-texts.com

 

The Canterbury Tales

 

The Cook's Prologue

 [4325] The Cook of Londoun, whil the Reve spak,
 [4326] For joye him thoughte he clawed him on the bak.
 [4327] "Ha! ha!" quod he, "For Cristes passion,
 [4328] This millere hadde a sharp conclusion
 [4329] Upon his argument of herbergage!
 [4330] Wel seyde Salomon in his langage,
 [4331] `Ne bryng nat every man into thyn hous,'
 [4332] For herberwynge by nyghte is perilous.
 [4333] Wel oghte a man avysed for to be
 [4334] Whom that he broghte into his pryvetee.
 [4335] I pray to God, so yeve me sorwe and care
 [4336] If evere, sitthe I highte Hogge of Ware,
 [4337] Herde I a millere bettre yset a-werk.
 [4338] He hadde a jape of malice in the derk.
 [4339] But God forbede that we stynte heere;
 [4340] And therfore, if ye vouche-sauf to heere
 [4341] A tale of me, that am a povre man,
 [4342] I wol yow telle, as wel as evere I kan,
 [4343] A litel jape that fil in oure citee."
 [4344] Oure Hoost answerde and seide, "I graunte it thee.
 [4345] Now telle on, Roger; looke that it be good,
 [4346] For many a pastee hastow laten blood,
 [4347] And many a Jakke of Dovere hastow soold
 [4348] That hath been twies hoot and twies coold.
 [4349] Of many a pilgrym hastow Cristes curs,
 [4350] For of thy percely yet they fare the wors,
 [4351] That they han eten with thy stubbel goos,
 [4352] For in thy shoppe is many a flye loos.
 [4353] Now telle on, gentil Roger by thy name.
 [4354] But yet I pray thee, be nat wroth for game;
 [4355] A man may seye ful sooth in game and pley."
 [4356] "Thou seist ful sooth," quod Roger, "by my fey!
 [4357] But `sooth pley, quaad pley,' as the Flemyng seith.
 [4358] And therfore, Herry Bailly, by thy feith,
 [4359] Be thou nat wrooth, er we departen heer,
 [4360] Though that my tale be of an hostileer.
 [4361] But nathelees I wol nat telle it yit;
 [4362] But er we parte, ywis, thou shalt be quit."
 [4363] And therwithal he lough and made cheere,
 [4364] And seyde his tale, as ye shul after heere.

      
The Canterbury Tales and Other Works of Chaucer (Middle English), by Geoffery Chaucer, [14th cent.], at sacred-texts.com

 

The Canterbury Tales

 

The Cook's Tale

 [4365] A prentys whilom dwelled in oure citee,
 [4366] And of a craft of vitailliers was hee.
 [4367] Gaillard he was as goldfynch in the shawe,
 [4368] Broun as a berye, a propre short felawe,
 [4369] With lokkes blake, ykembd ful fetisly.
 [4370] Dauncen he koude so wel and jolily
 [4371] That he was cleped Perkyn Revelour.
 [4372] He was as ful of love and paramour
 [4373] As is the hyve ful of hony sweete;
 [4374] Wel was the wenche with hym myghte meete.
 [4375] At every bridale wolde he synge and hoppe;
 [4376] He loved bet the taverne than the shoppe.
 [4377] For whan ther any ridyng was in Chepe,
 [4378] Out of the shoppe thider wolde he lepe --
 [4379] Til that he hadde al the sighte yseyn,
 [4380] And daunced wel, he wolde nat come ayeyn --
 [4381] And gadered hym a meynee of his sort
 [4382] To hoppe and synge and maken swich disport;
 [4383] And ther they setten stevene for to meete,
 [4384] To pleyen at the dys in swich a streete.
 [4385] For in the toune nas ther no prentys
 [4386] That fairer koude caste a paire of dys
 [4387] Than Perkyn koude, and therto he was free
 [4388] Of his dispense, in place of pryvetee.
 [4389] That fond his maister wel in his chaffare,
 [4390] For often tyme he foond his box ful bare.
 [4391] For sikerly a prentys revelour
 [4392] That haunteth dys, riot, or paramour,
 [4393] His maister shal it in his shoppe abye,
 [4394] Al have he no part of the mynstralcye.
 [4395] For thefte and riot, they been convertible,
 [4396] Al konne he pleye on gyterne or ribible.
 [4397] Revel and trouthe, as in a lowe degree,
 [4398] They been ful wrothe al day, as men may see.
 [4399] This joly prentys with his maister bood,
 [4400] Til he were ny out of his prentishood,
 [4401] Al were he snybbed bothe erly and late,
 [4402] And somtyme lad with revel to Newegate.
 [4403] But atte laste his maister hym bithoghte,
 [4404] Upon a day, whan he his papir soghte,
 [4405] Of a proverbe that seith this same word:
 [4406] "Wel bet is roten appul out of hoord
 [4407] Than that it rotie al the remenaunt."
 [4408] So fareth it by a riotous servaunt;
 [4409] It is ful lasse harm to lete hym pace,
 [4410] Than he shende alle the servantz in the place.
 [4411] Therfore his maister yaf hym acquitance,
 [4412] And bad hym go, with sorwe and with meschance!
 [4413] And thus this joly prentys hadde his leve.
 [4414] Now lat hym riote al the nyght or leve.
 [4415] And for ther is no theef withoute a lowke,
 [4416] That helpeth hym to wasten and to sowke
 [4417] Of that he brybe kan or borwe may,
 [4418] Anon he sente his bed and his array
 [4419] Unto a compeer of his owene sort,
 [4420] That lovede dys, and revel, and disport,
 [4421] And hadde a wyf that heeld for contenance
 [4422] A shoppe, and swyved for hir sustenance.

      
The Canterbury Tales and Other Works of Chaucer (Middle English), by Geoffery Chaucer, [14th cent.], at sacred-texts.com

 

The Canterbury Tales

 

The Man of Law's Introduction and Prologue

 [1] Oure Hooste saugh wel that the brighte sonne
 [2] The ark of his artificial day hath ronne
 [3] The ferthe part, and half an houre and moore,
 [4] And though he were not depe ystert in loore,
 [5] He wiste it was the eightetethe day
 [6] Of Aprill, that is messager to May;
 [7] And saugh wel that the shadwe of every tree
 [8] Was in lengthe the same quantitee
 [9] That was the body erect that caused it.
 [10] And therefore by the shadwe he took his wit
 [11] That Phebus, which that shoon so clere and brighte,
 [12] Degrees was fyve and fourty clombe on highte,
 [13] And for that day, as in that latitude,
 [14] It was ten of the clokke, he gan conclude,
 [15] And sodeynly he plighte his horse aboute.
 [16] "Lordynges," quod he, "I warne yow, al this route,
 [17] The fourthe party of this day is gon.
 [18] Now for the love of God and of Seint John,
 [19] Leseth no tyme, as ferforth as ye may.
 [20] Lordynges, the tyme wasteth nyght and day,
 [21] And steleth from us, what pryvely slepynge,
 [22] And what thurgh necligence in oure wakynge,
 [23] As dooth the streem that turneth nevere agayn,
 [24] Descendynge from the mountaigne into playn.
 [25] Wel kan Senec and many a philosophre
 [26] Biwaillen tyme moore than gold in cofre;
 [27] For `Los of catel may recovered be,
 [28] But los of tyme shendeth us,' quod he.
 [29] It wol nat come agayn, withouten drede,
 [30] Nomoore than wole Malkynes maydenhede,
 [31] Whan she hath lost it in hir wantownesse.
 [32] Lat us nat mowlen thus in ydelnesse.
 [33] "Sire Man of Lawe," quod he, "so have ye blis,
 [34] Telle us a tale anon, as forward is.
 [35] Ye been submytted, thurgh youre free assent,
 [36] To stonden in this cas at my juggement.
 [37] Acquiteth yow now of youre biheeste;
 [38] Thanne have ye do youre devoir atte leeste."
 [39] "Hooste," quod he, "depardieux, ich assente;
 [40] To breke forward is nat myn entente.
 [41] Biheste is dette, and I wole holde fayn
 [42] Al my biheste, I kan no bettre sayn.
 [43] For swich lawe as a man yeveth another wight,
 [44] He sholde hymselven usen it, by right;
 [45] Thus wole oure text. But nathelees, certeyn,
 [46] I kan right now no thrifty tale seyn
 [47] That Chaucer, thogh he kan but lewedly
 [48] On metres and on rymyng craftily,
 [49] Hath seyd hem in swich Englissh as he kan
 [50] Of olde tyme, as knoweth many a man;
 [51] And if he have noght seyd hem, leve brother,
 [52] In o book, he hath seyd hem in another.
 [53] For he hath toold of loveris up and doun
 [54] Mo than Ovide made of mencioun
 [55] In his Episteles, that been ful olde.
 [56] What sholde I tellen hem, syn they been tolde?
 [57] "In youthe he made of Ceys and Alcione,
 [58] And sitthen hath he spoken of everichone,
 [59] Thise noble wyves and thise loveris eke.
 [60] Whoso that wole his large volume seke,
 [61] Cleped the Seintes Legende of Cupide,
 [62] Ther may he seen the large woundes wyde
 [63] Of Lucresse, and of Babilan Tesbee;
 [64] The swerd of Dido for the false Enee;
 [65] The tree of Phillis for hire Demophon;
 [66] The pleinte of Dianire and of Hermyon,
 [67] Of Adriane, and of Isiphilee --
 [68] The bareyne yle stondynge in the see --
 [69] The dreynte Leandre for his Erro;
 [70] The teeris of Eleyne, and eek the wo
 [71] Of Brixseyde, and of the, Ladomya;
 [72] The crueltee of the, queene Medea,
 [73] Thy litel children hangynge by the hals,
 [74] For thy Jason, that was of love so fals!
 [75] O Ypermystra, Penelopee, Alceste,
 [76] Youre wifhod he comendeth with the beste!
 [77] "But certeinly no word ne writeth he
 [78] Of thilke wikke ensample of Canacee,
 [79] That loved hir owene brother synfully --
 [80] Of swiche cursed stories I sey fy! --
 [81] Or ellis of Tyro Appollonius,
 [82] How that the cursed kyng Antiochus
 [83] Birafte his doghter of hir maydenhede,
 [84] That is so horrible a tale for to rede,
 [85] Whan he hir threw upon the pavement.
 [86] And therfore he, of ful avysement,
 [87] Nolde nevere write in none of his sermons
 [88] Of swiche unkynde abhomynacions,
 [89] Ne I wol noon reherce, if that I may.
 [90] "But of my tale how shal I doon this day?
 [91] Me were looth be likned, doutelees,
 [92] To Muses that men clepe Pierides --
 [93] Methamorphosios woot what I mene;
 [94] But nathelees, I recche noght a bene
 [95] Though I come after hym with hawebake.
 [96] I speke in prose, and lat him rymes make."
 [97] And with that word he, with a sobre cheere,
 [98] Bigan his tale, as ye shal after heere.
 [99] O hateful harm, condicion of poverte!
 [100] With thurst, with coold, with hunger so confoundid!
 [101] To asken help thee shameth in thyn herte;
 [102] If thou noon aske, with nede artow so woundid
 [103] That verray nede unwrappeth al thy wounde hid!
 [104] Maugree thyn heed, thou most for indigence
 [105] Or stele, or begge, or borwe thy despence!
 [106] Thow blamest Crist and seist ful bitterly
 [107] He mysdeparteth richesse temporal;
 [108] Thy neighebor thou wytest synfully,
 [109] And seist thou hast to lite and he hath al.
 [110] "Parfay," seistow, "somtyme he rekene shal,
 [111] Whan that his tayl shal brennen in the gleede,
 [112] For he noght helpeth needfulle in hir neede."
 [113] Herkne what is the sentence of the wise:
 [114] "Bet is to dyen than have indigence";
 [115] "Thy selve neighebor wol thee despise."
 [116] If thou be povre, farwel thy reverence!
 [117] Yet of the wise man take this sentence:
 [118] "Alle the dayes of povre men been wikke."
 [119] Be war, therfore, er thou come to that prikke!
 [120] If thou be povre, thy brother hateth thee,
 [121] And alle thy freendes fleen from thee, allas!
 [122] O riche marchauntz, ful of wele been yee,
 [123] O noble, o prudent folk, as in this cas!
 [124] Youre bagges been nat fild with ambes as,
 [125] But with sys cynk, that renneth for youre chaunce;
 [126] At Cristemasse myrie may ye daunce!
 [127] Ye seken lond and see for yowre wynnynges;
 [128] As wise folk ye knowen al th' estaat
 [129] Of regnes; ye been fadres of tidynges
 [130] And tales, bothe of pees and of debaat.
 [131] I were right now of tales desolaat,
 [132] Nere that a marchant, goon is many a yeere,
 [133] Me taughte a tale, which that ye shal heere.

      
The Canterbury Tales and Other Works of Chaucer (Middle English), by Geoffery Chaucer, [14th cent.], at sacred-texts.com

 

The Canterbury Tales

 

The Man of Law's Tale

 [134] In Surrye whilom dwelte a compaignye
 [135] Of chapmen riche, and therto sadde and trewe,
 [136] That wyde-where senten hir spicerye,
 [137] Clothes of gold, and satyns riche of hewe.
 [138] Hir chaffare was so thrifty and so newe
 [139] That every wight hath deyntee to chaffare
 [140] With hem, and eek to sellen hem hire ware.
 [141] Now fil it that the maistres of that sort
 [142] Han shapen hem to Rome for to wende;
 [143] Were it for chapmanhod or for disport,
 [144] Noon oother message wolde they thider sende,
 [145] But comen hemself to Rome; this is the ende.
 [146] And in swich place as thoughte hem avantage
 [147] For hire entente, they take hir herbergage.
 [148] Sojourned han thise merchantz in that toun
 [149] A certein tyme, as fil to hire plesance.
 [150] And so bifel that th' excellent renoun
 [151] Of the Emperoures doghter, dame Custance,
 [152] Reported was, with every circumstance,
 [153] Unto thise Surryen marchantz in swich wyse,
 [154] Fro day to day, as I shal yow devyse.
 [155] This was the commune voys of every man:
 [156] "Oure Emperour of Rome -- God hym see! --
 [157] A doghter hath that, syn the world bigan,
 [158] To rekene as wel hir goodnesse as beautee,
 [159] Nas nevere swich another as is shee.
 [160] I prey to God in honour hire susteene,
 [161] And wolde she were of al Europe the queene.
 [162] "In hire is heigh beautee, withoute pride,
 [163] Yowthe, withoute grenehede or folye;
 [164] To alle hire werkes vertu is hir gyde;
 [165] Humblesse hath slayn in hire al tirannye.
 [166] She is mirour of alle curteisye;
 [167] Hir herte is verray chambre of hoolynesse,
 [168] Hir hand, ministre of fredam for almesse."
 [169] And al this voys was sooth, as God is trewe.
 [170] But now to purpos lat us turne agayn.
 [171] Thise marchantz han doon fraught hir shippes newe,
 [172] And whan they han this blisful mayden sayn,
 [173] Hoom to Surrye been they went ful fayn,
 [174] And doon hir nedes as they han doon yoore,
 [175] And lyven in wele; I kan sey yow namoore.
 [176] Now fil it that thise marchantz stode in grace
 [177] Of hym that was the Sowdan of Surrye;
 [178] For whan they cam from any strange place,
 [179] He wolde, of his benigne curteisye,
 [180] Make hem good chiere, and bisily espye
 [181] Tidynges of sondry regnes, for to leere
 [182] The wondres that they myghte seen or heere.
 [183] Amonges othere thynges, specially,
 [184] Thise marchantz han hym toold of dame Custance
 [185] So greet noblesse in ernest, ceriously,
 [186] That this Sowdan hath caught so greet plesance
 [187] To han hir figure in his remembrance,
 [188] That al his lust and al his bisy cure
 [189] Was for to love hire while his lyf may dure.
 [190] Paraventure in thilke large book
 [191] Which that men clepe the hevene ywriten was
 [192] With sterres, whan that he his birthe took,
 [193] That he for love sholde han his deeth, allas!
 [194] For in the sterres, clerer than is glas,
 [195] Is writen, God woot, whoso koude it rede,
 [196] The deeth of every man, withouten drede.
 [197] In sterres, many a wynter therbiforn,
 [198] Was writen the deeth of Ector, Achilles,
 [199] Of Pompei, Julius, er they were born;
 [200] The strif of Thebes; and of Ercules,
 [201] Of Sampson, Turnus, and of Socrates
 [202] The deeth; but mennes wittes ben so dulle
 [203] That no wight kan wel rede it atte fulle.
 [204] This Sowdan for his privee conseil sente,
 [205] And, shortly of this matiere for to pace,
 [206] He hath to hem declared his entente,
 [207] And seyde hem, certein, but he myghte have grace
 [208] To han Custance withinne a litel space,
 [209] He nas but deed; and charged hem in hye
 [210] To shapen for his lyf som remedye.
 [211] Diverse men diverse thynges seyden;
 [212] They argumenten, casten up and doun;
 [213] Many a subtil resoun forth they leyden;
 [214] They speken of magyk and abusioun.
 [215] But finally, as in conclusioun,
 [216] They kan nat seen in that noon avantage,
 [217] Ne in noon oother wey, save mariage.
 [218] Thanne sawe they therinne swich difficultee
 [219] By wey of reson, for to speke al playn,
 [220] By cause that ther was swich diversitee
 [221] Bitwene hir bothe lawes, that they sayn
 [222] They trowe that no "Cristen prince wolde fayn
 [223] Wedden his child under oure lawe sweete
 [224] That us was taught by Mahoun, oure prophete."
 [225] And he answerde, "Rather than I lese
 [226] Custance, I wol be cristned, doutelees.
 [227] I moot been hires; I may noon oother chese.
 [228] I prey yow hoold youre argumentz in pees;
 [229] Saveth my lyf, and beth noght recchelees
 [230] To geten hire that hath my lyf in cure,
 [231] For in this wo I may nat longe endure."
 [232] What nedeth gretter dilatacioun?
 [233] I seye, by tretys and embassadrie,
 [234] And by the popes mediacioun,
 [235] And al the chirche, and al the chivalrie,
 [236] That in destruccioun of mawmettrie,
 [237] And in encrees of Cristes lawe deere,
 [238] They been acorded, so as ye shal heere:
 [239] How that the Sowdan and his baronage
 [240] And alle his liges sholde ycristned be,
 [241] And he shal han Custance in mariage,
 [242] And certein gold, I noot what quantitee;
 [243] And heer-to founden sufficient suretee.
 [244] This same accord was sworn on eyther syde;
 [245] Now, faire Custance, almyghty God thee gyde!
 [246] Now wolde som men waiten, as I gesse,
 [247] That I sholde tellen al the purveiance
 [248] That th' Emperour, of his grete noblesse,
 [249] Hath shapen for his doghter, dame Custance.
 [250] Wel may men knowen that so greet ordinance
 [251] May no man tellen in a litel clause
 [252] As was arrayed for so heigh a cause.
 [253] Bisshopes been shapen with hire for to wende,
 [254] Lordes, ladies, knyghtes of renoun,
 [255] And oother folk ynowe; this is th' ende;
 [256] And notified is thurghout the toun
 [257] That every wight, with greet devocioun,
 [258] Sholde preyen Crist that he this mariage
 [259] Receyve in gree and spede this viage.
 [260] The day is comen of hir departynge;
 [261] I seye, the woful day fatal is come,
 [262] That ther may be no lenger tariynge,
 [263] But forthward they hem dressen, alle and some.
 [264] Custance, that was with sorwe al overcome,
 [265] Ful pale arist, and dresseth hire to wende;
 [266] For wel she seeth ther is noon oother ende.
 [267] Allas, what wonder is it thogh she wepte,
 [268] That shal be sent to strange nacioun
 [269] Fro freendes that so tendrely hire kepte,
 [270] And to be bounden under subjeccioun
 [271] Of oon, she knoweth nat his condicioun?
 [272] Housbondes been alle goode, and han ben yoore;
 [273] That knowen wyves; I dar sey yow na moore.
 [274] "Fader," she seyde, "thy wrecched child Custance,
 [275] Thy yonge doghter fostred up so softe,
 [276] And ye, my mooder, my soverayn plesance
 [277] Over alle thyng, out-taken Crist on-lofte,
 [278] Custance youre child hire recomandeth ofte
 [279] Unto youre grace, for I shal to Surrye,
 [280] Ne shal I nevere seen yow moore with ye.
 [281] "Allas, unto the Barbre nacioun
 [282] I moste anoon, syn that it is youre wille;
 [283] But Crist, that starf for our redempcioun
 [284] So yeve me grace his heestes to fulfille!
 [285] I, wrecche womman, no fors though I spille!
 [286] Wommen are born to thraldom and penance,
 [287] And to been under mannes governance."
 [288] I trowe at Troye, whan Pirrus brak the wal
 [289] Or Ilion brende, at Thebes the citee,
 [290] N' at Rome, for the harm thurgh Hanybal
 [291] That Romayns hath venquysshed tymes thre,
 [292] Nas herd swich tendre wepyng for pitee
 [293] As in the chambre was for hire departynge;
 [294] But forth she moot, wher-so she wepe or synge.
 [295] O firste moevyng! Crueel firmament,
 [296] With thy diurnal sweigh that crowdest ay
 [297] And hurlest al from est til occident
 [298] That naturelly wolde holde another way,
 [299] Thy crowdyng set the hevene in swich array
 [300] At the bigynnyng of this fiers viage,
 [301] That crueel Mars hath slayn this mariage.
 [302] Infortunat ascendent tortuous,
 [303] Of which the lord is helplees falle, allas,
 [304] Out of his angle into the derkeste hous!
 [305] O Mars, o atazir, as in this cas!
 [306] O fieble moone, unhappy been thy paas!
 [307] Thou knyttest thee ther thou art nat receyved;
 [308] Ther thou were weel, fro thennes artow weyved.
 [309] Imprudent Emperour of Rome, allas!
 [310] Was ther no philosophre in al thy toun?
 [311] Is no tyme bet than oother in swich cas?
 [312] Of viage is ther noon eleccioun,
 [313] Namely to folk of heigh condicioun?
 [314] Noght whan a roote is of a burthe yknowe?
 [315] Allas, we been to lewed or to slowe!
 [316] To shippe is brought this woful faire mayde
 [317] Solempnely, with every circumstance.
 [318] "Now Jhesu Crist be with yow alle!" she sayde;
 [319] Ther nys namoore, but "Farewel, faire Custance!"
 [320] She peyneth hire to make good contenance;
 [321] And forth I lete hire saille in this manere,
 [322] And turne I wole agayn to my matere.
 [323] The mooder of the Sowdan, welle of vices,
 [324] Espied hath hir sones pleyn entente,
 [325] How he wol lete his olde sacrifices;
 [326] And right anon she for hir conseil sente,
 [327] And they been come to knowe what she mente.
 [328] And whan assembled was this folk in-feere,
 [329] She sette hire doun, and seyde as ye shal heere.
 [330] "Lordes," quod she, "ye knowen everichon,
 [331] How that my sone in point is for to lete
 [332] The hooly lawes of our Alkaron,
 [333] Yeven by Goddes message Makomete.
 [334] But oon avow to grete God I heete,
 [335] The lyf shal rather out of my body sterte
 [336] Or Makometes lawe out of myn herte!
 [337] "What sholde us tyden of this newe lawe
 [338] But thraldom to oure bodies and penance,
 [339] And afterward in helle to be drawe,
 [340] For we reneyed Mahoun oure creance?
 [341] But, lordes, wol ye maken assurance,
 [342] As I shal seyn, assentynge to my loore,
 [343] And I shal make us sauf for everemoore?"
 [344] They sworen and assenten, every man,
 [345] To lyve with hire and dye, and by hire stonde,
 [346] And everich, in the beste wise he kan,
 [347] To strengthen hire shal alle his frendes fonde;
 [348] And she hath this emprise ytake on honde,
 [349] Which ye shal heren that I shal devyse,
 [350] And to hem alle she spak right in this wyse:
 [351] "We shul first feyne us cristendom to take --
 [352] Coold water shal nat greve us but a lite! --
 [353] And I shal swich a feeste and revel make
 [354] That, as I trowe, I shal the Sowdan quite.
 [355] For thogh his wyf be cristned never so white,
 [356] She shal have nede to wasshe awey the rede,
 [357] Thogh she a font-ful water with hire lede."
 [358] O Sowdanesse, roote of iniquitee!
 [359] Virago, thou Semyrame the secounde!
 [360] O serpent under femynynytee,
 [361] Lik to the serpent depe in helle ybounde!
 [362] O feyned womman, al that may confounde
 [363] Vertu and innocence, thurgh thy malice,
 [364] Is bred in thee, as nest of every vice!
 [365] O Sathan, envious syn thilke day
 [366] That thou were chaced from oure heritage,
 [367] Wel knowestow to wommen the olde way!
 [368] Thou madest Eva brynge us in servage;
 [369] Thou wolt fordoon this Cristen mariage.
 [370] Thyn instrument so -- weylawey the while! --
 [371] Makestow of wommen, whan thou wolt bigile.
 [372] This Sowdanesse, whom I thus blame and warye,
 [373] Leet prively hire conseil goon hire way.
 [374] What sholde I in this tale lenger tarye?
 [375] She rydeth to the Sowdan on a day,
 [376] And seyde hym that she wolde reneye hir lay,
 [377] And cristendom of preestes handes fonge,
 [378] Repentynge hire she hethen was so longe,
 [379] Bisechynge hym to doon hire that honour,
 [380] That she moste han the Cristen folk to feeste --
 [381] "To plesen hem I wol do my labour."
 [382] The Sowdan seith, "I wol doon at youre heeste,"
 [383] And knelynge thanketh hire of that requeste.
 [384] So glad he was, he nyste what to seye.
 [385] She kiste hir sone, and hoom she gooth hir weye.
 [386] Arryved been this Cristen folk to londe
 [387] In Surrye, with a greet solempne route,
 [388] And hastifliche this Sowdan sente his sonde
 [389] First to his mooder, and al the regne aboute,
 [390] And seyde his wyf was comen, out of doute,
 [391] And preyde hire for to ryde agayn the queene,
 [392] The honour of his regne to susteene.
 [393] Greet was the prees, and riche was th' array
 [394] Of Surryens and Romayns met yfeere;
 [395] The mooder of the Sowdan, riche and gay,
 [396] Receyveth hire with also glad a cheere
 [397] As any mooder myghte hir doghter deere,
 [398] And to the nexte citee ther bisyde
 [399] A softe paas solempnely they ryde.
 [400] Noght trowe I the triumphe of Julius,
 [401] Of which that Lucan maketh swich a boost,
 [402] Was roialler ne moore curius
 [403] Than was th' assemblee of this blisful hoost.
 [404] But this scorpioun, this wikked goost,
 [405] The Sowdanesse, for al hire flaterynge,
 [406] Caste under this ful mortally to stynge.
 [407] The Sowdan comth hymself soone after this
 [408] So roially that wonder is to telle,
 [409] And welcometh hire with alle joye and blis.
 [410] And thus in murthe and joye I lete hem dwelle;
 [411] The fruyt of this matiere is that I telle.
 [412] Whan tyme cam, men thoughte it for the beste
 [413] That revel stynte, and men goon to hir reste.
 [414] The tyme cam, this olde Sowdanesse
 [415] Ordeyned hath this feeste of which I tolde,
 [416] And to the feeste Cristen folk hem dresse
 [417] In general, ye, bothe yonge and olde.
 [418] Heere may men feeste and roialtee biholde,
 [419] And deyntees mo than I kan yow devyse;
 [420] But al to deere they boghte it er they ryse.
 [421] O sodeyn wo, that evere art successour
 [422] To worldly blisse, spreynd with bitternesse,
 [423] The ende of the joye of oure worldly labour!
 [424] Wo occupieth the fyn of oure gladnesse.
 [425] Herke this conseil for thy sikernesse:
 [426] Upon thy glade day have in thy mynde
 [427] The unwar wo or harm that comth bihynde.
 [428] For shortly for to tellen, at o word,
 [429] The Sowdan and the Cristen everichone
 [430] Been al tohewe and stiked at the bord,
 [431] But it were oonly dame Custance allone.
 [432] This olde Sowdanesse, cursed krone,
 [433] Hath with hir freendes doon this cursed dede,
 [434] For she hirself wolde al the contree lede.
 [435] Ne ther was Surryen noon that was converted,
 [436] That of the conseil of the Sowdan woot,
 [437] That he nas al tohewe er he asterted.
 [438] And Custance han they take anon, foot-hoot,
 [439] And in a ship al steerelees, God woot,
 [440] They han hir set, and bidde hire lerne saille
 [441] Out of Surrye agaynward to Ytaille.
 [442] A certein tresor that she thider ladde,
 [443] And, sooth to seyn, vitaille greet plentee
 [444] They han hire yeven, and clothes eek she hadde,
 [445] And forth she sailleth in the salte see.
 [446] O my Custance, ful of benignytee,
 [447] O Emperoures yonge doghter deere,
 [448] He that is lord of Fortune be thy steere!
 [449] She blesseth hire, and with ful pitous voys
 [450] Unto the croys of Crist thus seyde she:
 [451] "O cleere, o welful auter, hooly croys,
 [452] Reed of the Lambes blood ful of pitee,
 [453] That wessh the world fro the olde iniquitee,
 [454] Me fro the feend and fro his clawes kepe,
 [455] That day that I shal drenchen in the depe.
 [456] "Victorious tree, proteccioun of trewe,
 [457] That oonly worthy were for to bere
 [458] The Kyng of Hevene with his woundes newe,
 [459] The white Lamb, that hurt was with a spere,
 [460] Flemere of feendes out of hym and here
 [461] On which thy lymes feithfully extenden,
 [462] Me kepe, and yif me myght my lyf t' amenden."
 [463] Yeres and dayes fleet this creature
 [464] Thurghout the See of Grece unto the Strayte
 [465] Of Marrok, as it was hire aventure.
 [466] On many a sory meel now may she bayte;
 [467] After hir deeth ful often may she wayte,
 [468] Er that the wilde wawes wol hire dryve
 [469] Unto the place ther she shal arryve.
 [470] Men myghten asken why she was nat slayn
 [471] Eek at the feeste? Who myghte hir body save?
 [472] And I answere to that demande agayn,
 [473] Who saved Danyel in the horrible cave
 [474] Ther every wight save he, maister and knave,
 [475] Was with the leon frete er he asterte?
 [476] No wight but God that he bar in his herte.
 [477] God liste to shewe his wonderful myracle
 [478] In hire, for we sholde seen his myghty werkis;
 [479] Crist, which that is to every harm triacle,
 [480] By certeine meenes ofte, as knowen clerkis,
 [481] Dooth thyng for certein ende that ful derk is
 [482] To mannes wit, that for oure ignorance
 [483] Ne konne noght knowe his prudent purveiance.
 [484] Now sith she was nat at the feeste yslawe,
 [485] Who kepte hire fro the drenchyng in the see?
 [486] Who kepte Jonas in the fisshes mawe
 [487] Til he was spouted up at Nynyvee?
 [488] Wel may men knowe it was no wight but he
 [489] That kepte peple Ebrayk from hir drenchynge,
 [490] With drye feet thurghout the see passynge.
 [491] Who bad the foure spirites of tempest
 [492] That power han t' anoyen lond and see,
 [493] Bothe north and south, and also west and est,
 [494] "Anoyeth neither see, ne land, ne tree"?
 [495] Soothly, the comandour of that was he
 [496] That fro the tempest ay this womman kepte
 [497] As wel whan she wook as whan she slepte.
 [498] Where myghte this womman mete and drynke have
 [499] Thre yeer and moore? How lasteth hire vitaille?
 [500] Who fedde the Egipcien Marie in the cave,
 [501] Or in desert? No wight but Crist, sanz faille.
 [502] Fyve thousand folk it was as greet mervaille
 [503] With loves fyve and fisshes two to feede.
 [504] God sente his foyson at hir grete neede.
 [505] She dryveth forth into oure occian
 [506] Thurghout oure wilde see, til atte laste
 [507] Under an hoold that nempnen I ne kan,
 [508] Fer in Northhumberlond the wawe hire caste,
 [509] And in the sond hir ship stiked so faste
 [510] That thennes wolde it noght of al a tyde;
 [511] The wyl of Crist was that she sholde abyde.
 [512] The constable of the castel doun is fare
 [513] To seen this wrak, and al the ship he soghte,
 [514] And foond this wery womman ful of care;
 [515] He foond also the tresor that she broghte.
 [516] In hir langage mercy she bisoghte,
 [517] The lyf out of hir body for to twynne,
 [518] Hire to delivere of wo that she was inne.
 [519] A maner Latyn corrupt was hir speche,
 [520] But algates therby was she understonde.
 [521] The constable, whan hym lyst no longer seche,
 [522] This woful womman broghte he to the londe.
 [523] She kneleth doun and thanketh Goddes sonde;
 [524] But what she was she wolde no man seye,
 [525] For foul ne fair, thogh that she sholde deye.
 [526] She seyde she was so mazed in the see
 [527] That she forgat hir mynde, by hir trouthe.
 [528] The constable hath of hire so greet pitee,
 [529] And eek his wyf, that they wepen for routhe.
 [530] She was so diligent, withouten slouthe,
 [531] To serve and plesen everich in that place
 [532] That alle hir loven that looken in hir face.
 [533] This constable and dame Hermengyld, his wyf,
 [534] Were payens, and that contree everywhere;
 [535] But Hermengyld loved hire right as hir lyf,
 [536] And Custance hath so longe sojourned there,
 [537] In orisons, with many a bitter teere,
 [538] Til Jhesu hath converted thurgh his grace
 [539] Dame Hermengyld, constablesse of that place.
 [540] In al that lond no Cristen dorste route;
 [541] Alle Cristen folk been fled fro that contree
 [542] Thurgh payens, that conquereden al aboute
 [543] The plages of the north, by land and see.
 [544] To Walys fledde the Cristyanytee
 [545] Of olde Britons dwellynge in this ile;
 [546] Ther was hir refut for the meene while.
 [547] But yet nere Cristene Britons so exiled
 [548] That ther nere somme that in hir privetee
 [549] Honoured Crist and hethen folk bigiled,
 [550] And ny the castel swiche ther dwelten three.
 [551] That oon of hem was blynd and myghte nat see,
 [552] But it were with thilke eyen of his mynde
 [553] With whiche men seen, after that they ben blynde.
 [554] Bright was the sonne as in that someres day,
 [555] For which the constable and his wyf also
 [556] And Custance han ytake the righte way
 [557] Toward the see a furlong wey or two,
 [558] To pleyen and to romen to and fro,
 [559] And in hir walk this blynde man they mette,
 [560] Croked and oold, with eyen faste yshette.
 [561] "In name of Crist," cride this blinde Britoun,
 [562] "Dame Hermengyld, yif me my sighte agayn!"
 [563] This lady weex affrayed of the soun,
 [564] Lest that hir housbonde, shortly for to sayn,
 [565] Wolde hire for Jhesu Cristes love han slayn,
 [566] Til Custance made hire boold, and bad hire wirche
 [567] The wyl of Crist, as doghter of his chirche.
 [568] The constable weex abasshed of that sight,
 [569] And seyde, "What amounteth al this fare?"
 [570] Custance answerde, "Sire, it is Cristes myght,
 [571] That helpeth folk out of the feendes snare."
 [572] And so ferforth she gan oure lay declare
 [573] That she the constable, er that it was eve
 [574] Converteth, and on Crist made hym bileve.
 [575] This constable was nothyng lord of this place
 [576] Of which I speke, ther he Custance fond,
 [577] But kepte it strongly many a wyntres space
 [578] Under Alla, kyng of al Northhumbrelond,
 [579] That was ful wys, and worthy of his hond
 [580] Agayn the Scottes, as men may wel heere;
 [581] But turne I wole agayn to my mateere.
 [582] Sathan, that evere us waiteth to bigile,
 [583] Saugh of Custance al hire perfeccioun,
 [584] And caste anon how he myghte quite hir while,
 [585] And made a yong knyght that dwelte in that toun
 [586] Love hire so hoote, of foul affeccioun,
 [587] That verraily hym thoughte he sholde spille,
 [588] But he of hire myghte ones have his wille.
 [589] He woweth hire, but it availleth noght;
 [590] She wolde do no synne, by no weye.
 [591] And for despit he compassed in his thoght
 [592] To maken hire on shameful deeth to deye.
 [593] He wayteth whan the constable was aweye,
 [594] And pryvely upon a nyght he crepte
 [595] In Hermengyldes chambre, whil she slepte.
 [596] Wery, forwaked in hire orisouns,
 [597] Slepeth Custance, and Hermengyld also.
 [598] This knyght, thurgh Sathanas temptaciouns,
 [599] Al softely is to the bed ygo,
 [600] And kitte the throte of Hermengyld atwo,
 [601] And leyde the blody knyf by dame Custance,
 [602] And wente his wey, ther God yeve hym meschance!
 [603] Soone after cometh this constable hoom agayn,
 [604] And eek Alla, that kyng was of that lond,
 [605] And saugh his wyf despitously yslayn,
 [606] For which ful ofte he weep and wroong his hond,
 [607] And in the bed the blody knyf he fond
 [608] By Dame Custance. Allas, what myghte she seye?
 [609] For verray wo hir wit was al aweye.
 [610] To kyng Alla was toold al this meschance,
 [611] And eek the tyme, and where, and in what wise
 [612] That in a ship was founden this Custance,
 [613] As heer-biforn that ye han herd devyse.
 [614] The kynges herte of pitee gan agryse,
 [615] Whan he saugh so benigne a creature
 [616] Falle in disese and in mysaventure.
 [617] For as the lomb toward his deeth is broght,
 [618] So stant this innocent bifore the kyng.
 [619] This false knyght, that hath this tresoun wroght,
 [620] Berth hire on hond that she hath doon thys thyng.
 [621] But nathelees, ther was greet moornyng
 [622] Among the peple, and seyn they kan nat gesse
 [623] That she had doon so greet a wikkednesse,
 [624] For they han seyn hire evere so vertuous,
 [625] And lovynge Hermengyld right as hir lyf.
 [626] Of this baar witnesse everich in that hous,
 [627] Save he that Hermengyld slow with his knyf.
 [628] This gentil kyng hath caught a greet motyf
 [629] Of this witnesse, and thoghte he wolde enquere
 [630] Depper in this, a trouthe for to lere.
 [631] Allas! Custance, thou hast no champioun,
 [632] Ne fighte kanstow noght, so weylaway!
 [633] But he that starf for our redempcioun,
 [634] And boond Sathan (and yet lith ther he lay),
 [635] So be thy stronge champion this day!
 [636] For, but if Crist open myracle kithe,
 [637] Withouten gilt thou shalt be slayn as swithe.
 [638] She sette hire doun on knees, and thus she sayde:
 [639] "Immortal God, that savedest Susanne
 [640] Fro false blame, and thou, merciful mayde,
 [641] Marie I meene, doghter to Seint Anne,
 [642] Bifore whos child angeles synge Osanne,
 [643] If I be giltlees of this felonye,
 [644] My socour be, for ellis shal I dye!"
 [645] Have ye nat seyn somtyme a pale face,
 [646] Among a prees, of hym that hath be lad
 [647] Toward his deeth, wher as hym gat no grace,
 [648] And swich a colour in his face hath had
 [649] Men myghte knowe his face that was bistad
 [650] Amonges alle the faces in that route?
 [651] So stant Custance, and looketh hire aboute.
 [652] O queenes, lyvynge in prosperitee,
 [653] Duchesses, and ye ladyes everichone,
 [654] Haveth som routhe on hire adversitee!
 [655] An Emperoures doghter stant allone;
 [656] She hath no wight to whom to make hir mone.
 [657] O blood roial, that stondest in this drede,
 [658] Fer been thy freendes at thy grete nede!
 [659] This Alla kyng hath swich compassioun,
 [660] As gentil herte is fulfild of pitee,
 [661] That from his eyen ran the water doun.
 [662] "Now hastily do fecche a book," quod he,
 [663] "And if this knyght wol sweren how that she
 [664] This womman slow, yet wol we us avyse
 [665] Whom that we wole that shal been oure justise."
 [666] A Britoun book, written with Evaungiles,
 [667] Was fet, and on this book he swoor anoon
 [668] She gilty was, and in the meene whiles
 [669] An hand hym smoot upon the nekke-boon,
 [670] That doun he fil atones as a stoon,
 [671] And bothe his eyen broste out of his face
 [672] In sighte of every body in that place.
 [673] A voys was herd in general audience,
 [674] And seyde, "Thou hast desclaundred, giltelees,
 [675] The doghter of hooly chirche in heigh presence;
 [676] Thus hastou doon, and yet holde I my pees!"
 [677] Of this mervaille agast was al the prees;
 [678] As mazed folk they stoden everichone,
 [679] For drede of wreche, save Custance allone.
 [680] Greet was the drede and eek the repentance
 [681] Of hem that hadden wrong suspecioun
 [682] Upon this sely innocent, Custance;
 [683] And for this miracle, in conclusioun,
 [684] And by Custances mediacioun,
 [685] The kyng -- and many another in that place --
 [686] Converted was, thanked be Cristes grace!
 [687] This false knyght was slayn for his untrouthe
 [688] By juggement of Alla hastifly;
 [689] And yet Custance hadde of his deeth greet routhe.
 [690] And after this Jhesus, of his mercy,
 [691] Made Alla wedden ful solempnely
 [692] This hooly mayden, that is so bright and sheene;
 [693] And thus hath Crist ymaad Custance a queene.
 [694] But who was woful, if I shal nat lye,
 [695] Of this weddyng but Donegild, and namo,
 [696] The kynges mooder, ful of tirannye?
 [697] Hir thoughte hir cursed herte brast atwo.
 [698] She wolde noght hir sone had do so;
 [699] Hir thoughte a despit that he sholde take
 [700] So strange a creature unto his make.
 [701] Me list nat of the chaf, ne of the stree,
 [702] Maken so long a tale as of the corn.
 [703] What sholde I tellen of the roialtee
 [704] At mariage, or which cours goth biforn;
 [705] Who bloweth in a trumpe or in an horn?
 [706] The fruyt of every tale is for to seye:
 [707] They ete, and drynke, and daunce, and synge, and pleye.
 [708] They goon to bedde, as it was skile and right;
 [709] For thogh that wyves be ful hooly thynges,
 [710] They moste take in pacience at nyght
 [711] Swiche manere necessaries as been plesynges
 [712] To folk that han ywedded hem with rynges,
 [713] And leye a lite hir hoolynesse aside,
 [714] As for the tyme -- it may no bet bitide.
 [715] On hire he gat a knave child anon,
 [716] And to a bisshop, and his constable eke,
 [717] He took his wyf to kepe, whan he is gon
 [718] To Scotlond-ward, his foomen for to seke.
 [719] Now faire Custance, that is so humble and meke,
 [720] So longe is goon with childe, til that stille
 [721] She halt hire chambre, abidyng Cristes wille.
 [722] The tyme is come a knave child she beer;
 [723] Mauricius at the fontstoon they hym calle.
 [724] This constable dooth forth come a messageer,
 [725] And wroot unto his kyng, that cleped was Alle,
 [726] How that this blisful tidyng is bifalle,
 [727] And othere tidynges spedeful for to seye.
 [728] He taketh the lettre, and forth he gooth his weye.
 [729] This messager, to doon his avantage,
 [730] Unto the kynges mooder rideth swithe,
 [731] And salueth hire ful faire in his langage:
 [732] "Madame," quod he, "ye may be glad and blithe,
 [733] And thanketh God an hundred thousand sithe!
 [734] My lady queene hath child, withouten doute,
 [735] To joye and blisse to al this regne aboute.
 [736] "Lo, heere the lettres seled of this thyng,
 [737] That I moot bere with al the haste I may.
 [738] If ye wol aught unto youre sone the kyng,
 [739] I am youre servant, bothe nyght and day."
 [740] Donegild answerde, "As now at this tyme, nay;
 [741] But heere al nyght I wol thou take thy reste.
 [742] To-morwe wol I seye thee what me leste."
 [743] This messager drank sadly ale and wyn,
 [744] And stolen were his lettres pryvely
 [745] Out of his box, whil he sleep as a swyn;
 [746] And countrefeted was ful subtilly
 [747] Another lettre, wroght ful synfully,
 [748] Unto the kyng direct of this mateere
 [749] Fro his constable, as ye shal after heere.
 [750] The lettre spak the queene delivered was
 [751] Of so horrible a feendly creature
 [752] That in the castel noon so hardy was
 [753] That any while dorste ther endure.
 [754] The mooder was an elf, by aventure
 [755] Ycomen, by charmes or by sorcerie,
 [756] And every wight hateth hir compaignye.
 [757] Wo was this kyng whan he this lettre had sayn,
 [758] But to no wight he tolde his sorwes soore,
 [759] But of his owene hand he wroot agayn,
 [760] "Welcome the sonde of Crist for everemoore
 [761] To me that am now lerned in his loore!
 [762] Lord, welcome be thy lust and thy plesaunce;
 [763] My lust I putte al in thyn ordinaunce.
 [764] "Kepeth this child, al be it foul or feir,
 [765] And eek my wyf, unto myn hoom-comynge.
 [766] Crist, whan hym list, may sende me an heir
 [767] Moore agreable than this to my likynge."
 [768] This lettre he seleth, pryvely wepynge,
 [769] Which to the messager was take soone,
 [770] And forth he gooth; ther is na moore to doone.
 [771] O messager, fulfild of dronkenesse,
 [772] Strong is thy breeth, thy lymes faltren ay,
 [773] And thou biwreyest alle secreenesse.
 [774] Thy mynde is lorn, thou janglest as a jay,
 [775] Thy face is turned in a newe array.
 [776] Ther dronkenesse regneth in any route,
 [777] Ther is no conseil hyd, withouten doute.
 [778] O Donegild, I ne have noon Englissh digne
 [779] Unto thy malice and thy tirannye!
 [780] And therfore to the feend I thee resigne;
 [781] Lat hym enditen of thy traitorie!
 [782] Fy, mannysh, fy! -- o nay, by God, I lye --
 [783] Fy, feendlych spirit, for I dar wel telle,
 [784] Thogh thou heere walke, thy spirit is in helle!
 [785] This messager comth fro the kyng agayn,
 [786] And at the kynges moodres court he lighte,
 [787] And she was of this messager ful fayn,
 [788] And plesed hym in al that ever she myghte.
 [789] He drank, and wel his girdel underpighte;
 [790] He slepeth, and he fnorteth in his gyse
 [791] Al nyght, til the sonne gan aryse.
 [792] Eft were his lettres stolen everychon,
 [793] And countrefeted lettres in this wyse:
 [794] "The king comandeth his constable anon,
 [795] Up peyne of hangyng, and on heigh juyse,
 [796] That he ne sholde suffren in no wyse
 [797] Custance in-with his reawme for t' abyde
 [798] Thre dayes and o quarter of a tyde;
 [799] "But in the same ship as he hire fond,
 [800] Hire, and hir yonge sone, and al hir geere,
 [801] He sholde putte, and croude hire fro the lond,
 [802] And charge hire that she never eft coome theere."
 [803] O my Custance, wel may thy goost have feere,
 [804] And, slepynge, in thy dreem been in penance,
 [805] Whan Donegild cast al this ordinance.
 [806] This messager on morwe, whan he wook,
 [807] Unto the castel halt the nexte way,
 [808] And to the constable he the lettre took;
 [809] And whan that he this pitous lettre say,
 [810] Ful ofte he seyde, "Allas and weylaway!"
 [811] "Lord Crist," quod he, "how may this world endure,
 [812] So ful of synne is many a creature?
 [813] "O myghty God, if that it be thy wille,
 [814] Sith thou art rightful juge, how may it be
 [815] That thou wolt suffren innocentz to spille,
 [816] And wikked folk regne in prosperitee?
 [817] O goode Custance, allas, so wo is me
 [818] That I moot be thy tormentour, or deye
 [819] On shames deeth; ther is noon oother weye."
 [820] Wepen bothe yonge and olde in al that place
 [821] Whan that the kyng this cursed lettre sente,
 [822] And Custance, with a deedly pale face,
 [823] The ferthe day toward hir ship she wente.
 [824] But nathelees she taketh in good entente
 [825] The wyl of Crist, and knelynge on the stronde,
 [826] She seyde, "Lord, ay welcome be thy sonde!
 [827] "He that me kepte fro the false blame
 [828] While I was on the lond amonges yow,
 [829] He kan me kepe from harm and eek fro shame
 [830] In salte see, althogh I se noght how.
 [831] As strong as evere he was, he is yet now.
 [832] In hym triste I, and in his mooder deere,
 [833] That is to me my seyl and eek my steere."
 [834] Hir litel child lay wepyng in hir arm,
 [835] And knelynge, pitously to hym she seyde,
 [836] "Pees, litel sone, I wol do thee noon harm."
 [837] With that hir coverchief of hir heed she breyde,
 [838] And over his litel eyen she it leyde,
 [839] And in hir arm she lulleth it ful faste,
 [840] And into hevene hire eyen up she caste.
 [841] "Mooder," quod she, "and mayde bright, Marie,
 [842] Sooth is that thurgh wommanes eggement
 [843] Mankynde was lorn, and damned ay to dye,
 [844] For which thy child was on a croys yrent.
 [845] Thy blisful eyen sawe al his torment;
 [846] Thanne is ther no comparison bitwene
 [847] Thy wo and any wo man may sustene.
 [848] "Thow sawe thy child yslayn bifore thyne yen,
 [849] And yet now lyveth my litel child, parfay!
 [850] Now, lady bright, to whom alle woful cryen,
 [851] Thow glorie of wommanhede, thow faire may,
 [852] Thow haven of refut, brighte sterre of day,
 [853] Rewe on my child, that of thy gentillesse
 [854] Rewest on every reweful in distresse.
 [855] "O litel child, allas! What is thy gilt,
 [856] That nevere wroghtest synne as yet, pardee?
 [857] Why wil thyn harde fader han thee spilt?
 [858] O mercy, deere constable," quod she,
 [859] "As lat my litel child dwelle heer with thee;
 [860] And if thou darst nat saven hym, for blame,
 [861] So kys hym ones in his fadres name!"
 [862] Therwith she looked bakward to the londe,
 [863] And seyde, "Farewel, housbonde routhelees!"
 [864] And up she rist, and walketh doun the stronde
 [865] Toward the ship -- hir folweth al the prees --
 [866] And evere she preyeth hire child to holde his pees;
 [867] And taketh hir leve, and with an hooly entente
 [868] She blisseth hire, and into ship she wente.
 [869] Vitailled was the ship, it is no drede,
 [870] Habundantly for hire ful longe space,
 [871] And othere necessaries that sholde nede
 [872] She hadde ynogh -- heryed be Goddes grace!
 [873] For wynd and weder almyghty God purchace,
 [874] And brynge hire hoom! I kan no bettre seye,
 [875] But in the see she dryveth forth hir weye.
 [876] Alla the kyng comth hoom soone after this
 [877] Unto his castel, of the which I tolde,
 [878] And asketh where his wyf and his child is.
 [879] The constable gan aboute his herte colde,
 [880] And pleynly al the manere he hym tolde
 [881] As ye han herd -- I kan telle it no bettre --
 [882] And sheweth the kyng his seel and eek his lettre,
 [883] And seyde, "Lord, as ye comanded me
 [884] Up peyne of deeth, so have I doon, certein."
 [885] This messager tormented was til he
 [886] Moste biknowe and tellen, plat and pleyn,
 [887] Fro nyght to nyght, in what place he had leyn;
 [888] And thus, by wit and sotil enquerynge,
 [889] Ymagined was by whom this harm gan sprynge.
 [890] The hand was knowe that the lettre wroot,
 [891] And al the venym of this cursed dede,
 [892] But in what wise, certeinly, I noot.
 [893] Th' effect is this: that Alla, out of drede,
 [894] His mooder slow -- that may men pleynly rede --
 [895] For that she traitour was to hire ligeance.
 [896] Thus endeth olde Donegild, with meschance!
 [897] The sorwe that this Alla nyght and day
 [898] Maketh for his wyf, and for his child also,
 [899] Ther is no tonge that it telle may.
 [900] But now wol I unto Custance go,
 [901] That fleteth in the see, in peyne and wo,
 [902] Fyve yeer and moore, as liked Cristes sonde,
 [903] Er that hir ship approched unto londe.
 [904] Under an hethen castel, atte laste,
 [905] Of which the name in my text noght I fynde,
 [906] Custance, and eek hir child, the see up caste.
 [907] Almyghty God, that saveth al mankynde,
 [908] Have on Custance and on hir child som mynde,
 [909] That fallen is in hethen hand eft soone,
 [910] In point to spille, as I shal telle yow soone.
 [911] Doun fro the castel comth ther many a wight
 [912] To gauren on this ship and on Custance.
 [913] But shortly, from the castel, on a nyght,
 [914] The lordes styward -- God yeve hym meschance! --
 [915] A theef, that hadde reneyed oure creance,
 [916] Cam into ship allone, and seyde he sholde
 [917] Hir lemman be, wher-so she wolde or nolde.
 [918] Wo was this wrecched womman tho bigon;
 [919] Hir child cride, and she cride pitously.
 [920] But blisful Marie heelp hire right anon;
 [921] For with hir struglyng wel and myghtily
 [922] The theef fil over bord al sodeynly,
 [923] And in the see he dreynte for vengeance;
 [924] And thus hath Crist unwemmed kept Custance.
 [925] O foule lust of luxurie, lo, thyn ende!
 [926] Nat oonly that thou feyntest mannes mynde,
 [927] But verraily thou wolt his body shende.
 [928] Th' ende of thy werk, or of thy lustes blynde,
 [929] Is compleynyng. Hou many oon may men fynde
 [930] That noght for werk somtyme, but for th' entente
 [931] To doon this synne, been outher slayn or shente!
 [932] How may this wayke womman han this strengthe
 [933] Hire to defende agayn this renegat?
 [934] O Golias, unmesurable of lengthe,
 [935] Hou myghte David make thee so maat,
 [936] So yong and of armure so desolaat?
 [937] Hou dorste he looke upon thy dredful face?
 [938] Wel may men seen, it nas but Goddes grace.
 [939] Who yaf Judith corage or hardynesse
 [940] To sleen hym Olofernus in his tente,
 [941] And to deliveren out of wrecchednesse
 [942] The peple of God? I seye, for this entente,
 [943] That right as God spirit of vigour sente
 [944] To hem and saved hem out of meschance,
 [945] So sente he myght and vigour to Custance.
 [946] Forth gooth hir ship thurghout the narwe mouth
 [947] Of Jubaltare and Septe, dryvynge ay
 [948] Somtyme west, and somtyme north and south,
 [949] And somtyme est, ful many a wery day,
 [950] Til Cristes mooder -- blessed be she ay! --
 [951] Hath shapen, thurgh hir endelees goodnesse,
 [952] To make an ende of al hir hevynesse.
 [953] Now lat us stynte of Custance but a throwe,
 [954] And speke we of the Romayn Emperour,
 [955] That out of Surrye hath by lettres knowe
 [956] The slaughtre of cristen folk, and dishonour
 [957] Doon to his doghter by a fals traytour,
 [958] I mene the cursed wikked Sowdanesse
 [959] That at the feeste leet sleen bothe moore and lesse.
 [960] For which this Emperour hath sent anon
 [961] His senatour, with roial ordinance,
 [962] And othere lordes, God woot, many oon,
 [963] On Surryens to taken heigh vengeance.
 [964] They brennen, sleen, and brynge hem to meschance
 [965] Ful many a day; but shortly -- this is th' ende --
 [966] Homward to Rome they shapen hem to wende.
 [967] This senatour repaireth with victorie
 [968] To Rome-ward, saillynge ful roially,
 [969] And mette the ship dryvynge, as seith the storie,
 [970] In which Custance sit ful pitously.
 [971] Nothyng ne knew he what she was, ne why
 [972] She was in swich array, ne she nyl seye
 [973] Of hire estaat, althogh she sholde deye.
 [974] He bryngeth hire to Rome, and to his wyf
 [975] He yaf hire, and hir yonge sone also;
 [976] And with the senatour she ladde hir lyf.
 [977] Thus kan Oure Lady bryngen out of wo
 [978] Woful Custance, and many another mo.
 [979] And longe tyme dwelled she in that place,
 [980] In hooly werkes evere, as was hir grace.
 [981] The senatoures wyf hir aunte was,
 [982] But for al that she knew hire never the moore.
 [983] I wol no lenger tarien in this cas,
 [984] But to kyng Alla, which I spak of yoore,
 [985] That for his wyf wepeth and siketh soore,
 [986] I wol retourne, and lete I wol Custance
 [987] Under the senatoures governance.
 [988] Kyng Alla, which that hadde his mooder slayn,
 [989] Upon a day fil in swich repentance
 [990] That, if I shortly tellen shal and playn,
 [991] To Rome he comth to receyven his penance;
 [992] And putte hym in the Popes ordinance
 [993] In heigh and logh, and Jhesu Crist bisoghte
 [994] Foryeve his wikked werkes that he wroghte.
 [995] The fame anon thurgh Rome toun is born,
 [996] How Alla kyng shal comen in pilgrymage,
 [997] By herbergeours that wenten hym biforn;
 [998] For which the senatour, as was usage,
 [999] Rood hym agayns, and many of his lynage,
 [1000] As wel to shewen his heighe magnificence
 [1001] As to doon any kyng a reverence.
 [1002] Greet cheere dooth this noble senatour
 [1003] To kyng Alla, and he to hym also;
 [1004] Everich of hem dooth oother greet honour.
 [1005] And so bifel that in a day or two
 [1006] This senatour is to kyng Alla go
 [1007] To feste, and shortly, if I shal nat lye,
 [1008] Custances sone wente in his compaignye.
 [1009] Som men wolde seyn at requeste of Custance
 [1010] This senatour hath lad this child to feeste;
 [1011] I may nat tellen every circumstance --
 [1012] Be as be may, ther was he at the leeste.
 [1013] But sooth is this, that at his moodres heeste
 [1014] Biforn Alla, durynge the metes space,
 [1015] The child stood, lookynge in the kynges face.
 [1016] This Alla kyng hath of this child greet wonder,
 [1017] And to the senatour he seyde anon,
 [1018] "Whos is that faire child that stondeth yonder?"
 [1019] "I noot," quod he, "by God, and by Seint John!
 [1020] A mooder he hath, but fader hath he noon
 [1021] That I of woot" -- and shortly, in a stounde,
 [1022] He tolde Alla how that this child was founde.
 [1023] "But God woot," quod this senatour also,
 [1024] "So vertuous a lyvere in my lyf
 [1025] Ne saugh I nevere as she, ne herde of mo,
 [1026] Of worldly wommen, mayde, ne of wyf.
 [1027] I dar wel seyn hir hadde levere a knyf
 [1028] Thurghout hir brest, than ben a womman wikke;
 [1029] There is no man koude brynge hire to that prikke."
 [1030] Now was this child as lyk unto Custance
 [1031] As possible is a creature to be.
 [1032] This Alla hath the face in remembrance
 [1033] Of dame Custance, and ther on mused he
 [1034] If that the childes mooder were aught she
 [1035] That is his wyf, and pryvely he sighte,
 [1036] And spedde hym fro the table that he myghte.
 [1037] "Parfay," thoghte he, "fantome is in myn heed!
 [1038] I oghte deme, of skilful juggement,
 [1039] That in the salte see my wyf is deed."
 [1040] And afterward he made his argument:
 [1041] "What woot I if that Crist have hyder ysent
 [1042] My wyf by see, as wel as he hire sente
 [1043] To my contree fro thennes that she wente?"
 [1044] And after noon, hoom with the senatour
 [1045] Goth Alla, for to seen this wonder chaunce.
 [1046] This senatour dooth Alla greet honour,
 [1047] And hastifly he sente after Custaunce.
 [1048] But trusteth weel, hire liste nat to daunce
 [1049] Whan that she wiste wherfore was that sonde;
 [1050] Unnethe upon hir feet she myghte stonde.
 [1051] Whan Alla saugh his wyf, faire he hire grette,
 [1052] And weep that it was routhe for to see;
 [1053] For at the firste look he on hire sette
 [1054] He knew wel verraily that it was she.
 [1055] And she, for sorwe, as doumb stant as a tree,
 [1056] So was hir herte shet in hir distresse,
 [1057] Whan she remembred his unkyndenesse.
 [1058] Twyes she swowned in his owene sighte;
 [1059] He weep, and hym excuseth pitously.
 [1060] "Now God," quod he, "and his halwes brighte
 [1061] So wisly on my soule as have mercy,
 [1062] That of youre harm as giltelees am I
 [1063] As is Maurice my sone, so lyk youre face;
 [1064] Elles the feend me fecche out of this place!"
 [1065] Long was the sobbyng and the bitter peyne,
 [1066] Er that hir woful hertes myghte cesse;
 [1067] Greet was the pitee for to heere hem pleyne,
 [1068] Thurgh whiche pleintes gan hir wo encresse.
 [1069] I pray yow alle my labour to relesse;
 [1070] I may nat telle hir wo until to-morwe,
 [1071] I am so wery for to speke of sorwe.
 [1072] But finally, whan that the sothe is wist
 [1073] That Alla giltelees was of hir wo,
 [1074] I trowe an hundred tymes been they kist,
 [1075] And swich a blisse is ther bitwix hem two
 [1076] That, save the joye that lasteth everemo,
 [1077] Ther is noon lyk that any creature
 [1078] Hath seyn or shal, whil that the world may dure.
 [1079] Tho preyde she hir housbonde mekely,
 [1080] In relief of hir longe, pitous pyne,
 [1081] That he wolde preye hir fader specially
 [1082] That of his magestee he wolde enclyne
 [1083] To vouche sauf som day with hym to dyne.
 [1084] She preyde hym eek he sholde by no weye
 [1085] Unto hir fader no word of hire seye.
 [1086] Som men wolde seyn how that the child Maurice
 [1087] Dooth this message unto this Emperour;
 [1088] But, as I gesse, Alla was nat so nyce
 [1089] To hym that was of so sovereyn honour
 [1090] As he that is of Cristen folk the flour,
 [1091] Sente any child, but it is bet to deeme
 [1092] He wente hymself, and so it may wel seeme.
 [1093] This Emperour hath graunted gentilly
 [1094] To come to dyner, as he hym bisoughte;
 [1095] And wel rede I he looked bisily
 [1096] Upon this child, and on his doghter thoghte.
 [1097] Alla goth to his in, and as hym oghte,
 [1098] Arrayed for this feste in every wise
 [1099] As ferforth as his konnyng may suffise.
 [1100] The morwe cam, and Alla gan hym dresse,
 [1101] And eek his wyf, this Emperour to meete;
 [1102] And forth they ryde in joye and in gladnesse.
 [1103] And whan she saugh hir fader in the strete,
 [1104] She lighte doun, and falleth hym to feete.
 [1105] "Fader," quod she, "youre yonge child Custance
 [1106] Is now ful clene out of youre remembrance.
 [1107] "I am youre doghter Custance," quod she,
 [1108] "That whilom ye han sent unto Surrye.
 [1109] It am I, fader, that in the salte see
 [1110] Was put allone and dampned for to dye.
 [1111] Now, goode fader, mercy I yow crye!
 [1112] Sende me namoore unto noon hethenesse,
 [1113] But thonketh my lord heere of his kyndenesse."
 [1114] Who kan the pitous joye tellen al
 [1115] Bitwixe hem thre, syn they been thus ymette?
 [1116] But of my tale make an ende I shal;
 [1117] The day goth faste, I wol no lenger lette.
 [1118] This glade folk to dyner they hem sette;
 [1119] In joye and blisse at mete I lete hem dwelle
 [1120] A thousand foold wel moore than I kan telle.
 [1121] This child Maurice was sithen Emperour
 [1122] Maad by the Pope, and lyved cristenly;
 [1123] To Cristes chirche he dide greet honour.
 [1124] But I lete al his storie passen by;
 [1125] Of Custance is my tale specially.
 [1126] In the olde Romayn geestes may men fynde
 [1127] Maurices lyf; I bere it noght in mynde.
 [1128] This kyng Alla, whan he his tyme say,
 [1129] With his Custance, his hooly wyf so sweete,
 [1130] To Engelond been they come the righte way,
 [1131] Wher as they lyve in joye and in quiete.
 [1132] But litel while it lasteth, I yow heete,
 [1133] Joye of this world, for tyme wol nat abyde;
 [1134] Fro day to nyght it changeth as the tyde.
 [1135] Who lyved euere in swich delit o day
 [1136] That hym ne moeved outher conscience,
 [1137] Or ire, or talent, or som kynnes affray,
 [1138] Envye, or pride, or passion, or offence?
 [1139] I ne seye but for this ende this sentence,
 [1140] That litel while in joye or in plesance
 [1141] Lasteth the blisse of Alla with Custance.
 [1142] For Deeth, that taketh of heigh and logh his rente,
 [1143] Whan passed was a yeer, evene as I gesse,
 [1144] Out of this world this kyng Alla he hente,
 [1145] For whom Custance hath ful greet hevynesse.
 [1146] Now lat us prayen God his soule blesse!
 [1147] And dame Custance, finally to seye,
 [1148] Toward the toun of Rome goth hir weye.
 [1149] To Rome is come this hooly creature,
 [1150] And fyndeth hire freendes hoole and sounde;
 [1151] Now is she scaped al hire aventure.
 [1152] And whan that she hir fader hath yfounde,
 [1153] Doun on hir knees falleth she to grounde;
 [1154] Wepynge for tendrenesse in herte blithe,
 [1155] She heryeth God an hundred thousand sithe.
 [1156] In vertu and in hooly almus-dede
 [1157] They lyven alle, and nevere asonder wende;
 [1158] Til deeth departeth hem, this lyf they lede.
 [1159] And fareth now weel! my tale is at an ende.
 [1160] Now Jhesu Crist, that of his myght may sende
 [1161] Joye after wo, governe us in his grace,
 [1162] And kepe us alle that been in this place! Amen

      
The Canterbury Tales and Other Works of Chaucer (Middle English), by Geoffery Chaucer, [14th cent.], at sacred-texts.com

 

The Canterbury Tales

 

The Man of Law's Epilogue

 [1163] [Owre Hoost upon his stiropes stood anon,
 [1164] And seyde, "Goode men, herkeneth everych on!
 [1165] This was a thrifty tale for the nones!
 [1166] Sir Parisshe Prest," quod he, "for Goddes bones,
 [1167] Telle us a tale, as was thi forward yore.
 [1168] I se wel that ye lerned men in lore
 [1169] Can moche good, by Goddes dignitee!"
 [1170] The Parson him answerde, "Benedicite!
 [1171] What eyleth the man, so synfully to swere?"
 [1172] Oure Host answerde, "O Jankin, be ye there?
 [1173] I smelle a Lollere in the wynd," quod he.
 [1174] "Now! goode men," quod oure Hoste, "herkeneth me;
 [1175] Abydeth, for Goddes digne passioun,
 [1176] For we schal han a predicacioun;
 [1177] This Lollere heer wil prechen us somwhat."
 [1178] "Nay, by my fader soule, that schal he nat!"
 [1179] Seyde the Shipman, "Heer schal he nat preche;
 [1180] He schal no gospel glosen here ne teche.
 [1181] We leven alle in the grete God," quod he;
 [1182] "He wolde sowen som difficulte,
 [1183] Or springen cokkel in our clene corn.
 [1184] And therfore, Hoost, I warne thee biforn,
 [1185] My joly body schal a tale telle,
 [1186] And I schal clynken you so mery a belle,
 [1187] That I schal waken al this compaignie.
 [1188] But it schal not ben of philosophie,
 [1189] Ne phislyas, ne termes queinte of lawe.
 [1190] Ther is but litel Latyn in my mawe!"]

      
The Canterbury Tales and Other Works of Chaucer (Middle English), by Geoffery Chaucer, [14th cent.], at sacred-texts.com

 

The Canterbury Tales

 

The Wife of Bath's Prologue

 [1] "Experience, though noon auctoritee
 [2] Were in this world, is right ynogh for me
 [3] To speke of wo that is in mariage;
 [4] For, lordynges, sith I twelve yeer was of age,
 [5] Thonked be God that is eterne on lyve,
 [6] Housbondes at chirche dore I have had fyve --
 [7] If I so ofte myghte have ywedded bee --
 [8] And alle were worthy men in hir degree.
 [9] But me was toold, certeyn, nat longe agoon is,
 [10] That sith that Crist ne wente nevere but onis
 [11] To weddyng, in the Cane of Galilee,
 [12] That by the same ensample taughte he me
 [13] That I ne sholde wedded be but ones.
 [14] Herkne eek, lo, which a sharp word for the nones,
 [15] Biside a welle, Jhesus, God and man,
 [16] Spak in repreeve of the Samaritan:
 [17] `Thou hast yhad fyve housbondes,' quod he,
 [18] `And that ilke man that now hath thee
 [19] Is noght thyn housbonde,' thus seyde he certeyn.
 [20] What that he mente therby, I kan nat seyn;
 [21] But that I axe, why that the fifthe man
 [22] Was noon housbonde to the Samaritan?
 [23] How manye myghte she have in mariage?
 [24] Yet herde I nevere tellen in myn age
 [25] Upon this nombre diffinicioun.
 [26] Men may devyne and glosen, up and doun,
 [27] But wel I woot, expres, withoute lye,
 [28] God bad us for to wexe and multiplye;
 [29] That gentil text kan I wel understonde.
 [30] Eek wel I woot, he seyde myn housbonde
 [31] Sholde lete fader and mooder and take to me.
 [32] But of no nombre mencion made he,
 [33] Of bigamye, or of octogamye;
 [34] Why sholde men thanne speke of it vileynye?
 [35] Lo, heere the wise kyng, daun Salomon;
 [36] I trowe he hadde wyves mo than oon.
 [37] As wolde God it leveful were unto me
 [38] To be refresshed half so ofte as he!
 [39] Which yifte of God hadde he for alle his wyvys!
 [40] No man hath swich that in this world alyve is.
 [41] God woot, this noble kyng, as to my wit,
 [42] The firste nyght had many a myrie fit
 [43] With ech of hem, so wel was hym on lyve.
 [44] Yblessed be God that I have wedded fyve!
 [44a] [Of whiche I have pyked out the beste,
 [44b] Bothe of here nether purs and of here cheste.
 [44c] Diverse scoles maken parfyt clerkes,
 [44d] And diverse practyk in many sondry werkes
 [44e] Maketh the werkman parfyt sekirly;
 [44f] Of fyve husbondes scoleiyng am I.]
 [45] Welcome the sixte, whan that evere he shal.
 [46] For sothe, I wol nat kepe me chaast in al.
 [47] Whan myn housbonde is fro the world ygon,
 [48] Som Cristen man shal wedde me anon,
 [49] For thanne th' apostle seith that I am free
 [50] To wedde, a Goddes half, where it liketh me.
 [51] He seith that to be wedded is no synne;
 [52] Bet is to be wedded than to brynne.
 [53] What rekketh me, thogh folk seye vileynye
 [54] Of shrewed Lameth and his bigamye?
 [55] I woot wel Abraham was an hooly man,
 [56] And Jacob eek, as ferforth as I kan;
 [57] And ech of hem hadde wyves mo than two,
 [58] And many another holy man also.
 [59] Wher can ye seye, in any manere age,
 [60] That hye God defended mariage
 [61] By expres word? I pray yow, telleth me.
 [62] Or where comanded he virginitee?
 [63] I woot as wel as ye, it is no drede,
 [64] Th' apostel, whan he speketh of maydenhede,
 [65] He seyde that precept therof hadde he noon.
 [66] Men may conseille a womman to been oon,
 [67] But conseillyng is no comandement.
 [68] He putte it in oure owene juggement;
 [69] For hadde God comanded maydenhede,
 [70] Thanne hadde he dampned weddyng with the dede.
 [71] And certes, if ther were no seed ysowe,
 [72] Virginitee, thanne wherof sholde it growe?
 [73] Poul dorste nat comanden, atte leeste,
 [74] A thyng of which his maister yaf noon heeste.
 [75] The dart is set up for virginitee;
 [76] Cacche whoso may, who renneth best lat see.
 [77] But this word is nat taken of every wight,
 [78] But ther as God lust gyve it of his myght.
 [79] I woot wel that th' apostel was a mayde;
 [80] But nathelees, thogh that he wroot and sayde
 [81] He wolde that every wight were swich as he,
 [82] Al nys but conseil to virginitee.
 [83] And for to been a wyf he yaf me leve
 [84] Of indulgence; so nys it no repreve
 [85] To wedde me, if that my make dye,
 [86] Withouten excepcion of bigamye.
 [87] Al were it good no womman for to touche --
 [88] He mente as in his bed or in his couche,
 [89] For peril is bothe fyr and tow t' assemble;
 [90] Ye knowe what this ensample may resemble.
 [91] This is al and som: he heeld virginitee
 [92] Moore parfit than weddyng in freletee.
 [93] Freletee clepe I, but if that he and she
 [94] Wolde leden al hir lyf in chastitee.
 [95] I graunte it wel; I have noon envie,
 [96] Thogh maydenhede preferre bigamye.
 [97] It liketh hem to be clene, body and goost;
 [98] Of myn estaat I nyl nat make no boost,
 [99] For wel ye knowe, a lord in his houshold,
 [100] He nath nat every vessel al of gold;
 [101] Somme been of tree, and doon hir lord servyse.
 [102] God clepeth folk to hym in sondry wyse,
 [103] And everich hath of God a propre yifte --
 [104] Som this, som that, as hym liketh shifte.
 [105] Virginitee is greet perfeccion,
 [106] And continence eek with devocion,
 [107] But Crist, that of perfeccion is welle,
 [108] Bad nat every wight he sholde go selle
 [109] Al that he hadde, and gyve it to the poore,
 [110] And in swich wise folwe hym and his foore.
 [111] He spak to hem that wolde lyve parfitly;
 [112] And lordynges, by youre leve, that am nat I.
 [113] I wol bistowe the flour of al myn age
 [114] In the actes and in fruyt of mariage.
 [115] Telle me also, to what conclusion
 [116] Were membres maad of generacion,
 [117] And of so parfit wys a [wright] ywroght?
 [118] Trusteth right wel, they were nat maad for noght.
 [119] Glose whoso wole, and seye bothe up and doun
 [120] That they were maked for purgacioun
 [121] Of uryne, and oure bothe thynges smale
 [122] Were eek to knowe a femele from a male,
 [123] And for noon oother cause -- say ye no?
 [124] The experience woot wel it is noght so.
 [125] So that the clerkes be nat with me wrothe,
 [126] I sey this: that they maked ben for bothe;
 [127] That is to seye, for office and for ese
 [128] Of engendrure, ther we nat God displese.
 [129] Why sholde men elles in hir bookes sette
 [130] That man shal yelde to his wyf hire dette?
 [131] Now wherwith sholde he make his paiement,
 [132] If he ne used his sely instrument?
 [133] Thanne were they maad upon a creature
 [134] To purge uryne, and eek for engendrure.
 [135] But I seye noght that every wight is holde,
 [136] That hath swich harneys as I to yow tolde,
 [137] To goon and usen hem in engendrure.
 [138] Thanne sholde men take of chastitee no cure.
 [139] Crist was a mayde and shapen as a man,
 [140] And many a seint, sith that the world bigan;
 [141] Yet lyved they evere in parfit chastitee.
 [142] I nyl envye no virginitee.
 [143] Lat hem be breed of pured whete-seed,
 [144] And lat us wyves hoten barly-breed;
 [145] And yet with barly-breed, Mark telle kan,
 [146] Oure Lord Jhesu refresshed many a man.
 [147] In swich estaat as God hath cleped us
 [148] I wol persevere; I nam nat precius.
 [149] In wyfhod I wol use myn instrument
 [150] As frely as my Makere hath it sent.
 [151] If I be daungerous, God yeve me sorwe!
 [152] Myn housbonde shal it have bothe eve and morwe,
 [153] Whan that hym list come forth and paye his dette.
 [154] An housbonde I wol have -- I wol nat lette --
 [155] Which shal be bothe my dettour and my thral,
 [156] And have his tribulacion withal
 [157] Upon his flessh, whil that I am his wyf.
 [158] I have the power durynge al my lyf
 [159] Upon his propre body, and noght he.
 [160] Right thus the Apostel tolde it unto me,
 [161] And bad oure housbondes for to love us weel.
 [162] Al this sentence me liketh every deel" --
 [163] Up stirte the Pardoner, and that anon;
 [164] "Now, dame," quod he, "by God and by Seint John!
 [165] Ye been a noble prechour in this cas.
 [166] I was aboute to wedde a wyf; allas!
 [167] What sholde I bye it on my flessh so deere?
 [168] Yet hadde I levere wedde no wyf to-yeere!"
 [169] "Abyde!" quod she, "my tale is nat bigonne.
 [170] Nay, thou shalt drynken of another tonne,
 [171] Er that I go, shal savoure wors than ale.
 [172] And whan that I have toold thee forth my tale
 [173] Of tribulacion in mariage,
 [174] Of which I am expert in al myn age --
 [175] This is to seyn, myself have been the whippe --
 [176] Than maystow chese wheither thou wolt sippe
 [177] Of thilke tonne that I shal abroche.
 [178] Be war of it, er thou to ny approche;
 [179] For I shal telle ensamples mo than ten.
 [180] `Whoso that nyl be war by othere men,
 [181] By hym shul othere men corrected be.'
 [182] The same wordes writeth Ptholomee;
 [183] Rede in his Almageste, and take it there."
 [184] "Dame, I wolde praye yow, if youre wyl it were,"
 [185] Seyde this Pardoner, "as ye bigan,
 [186] Telle forth youre tale, spareth for no man,
 [187] And teche us yonge men of youre praktike."
 [188] "Gladly," quod she, "sith it may yow like;
 [189] But yet I praye to al this compaignye,
 [190] If that I speke after my fantasye,
 [191] As taketh not agrief of that I seye,
 [192] For myn entente nys but for to pleye.
 [193] Now, sire, now wol I telle forth my tale.
 [194] As evere moote I drynken wyn or ale,
 [195] I shal seye sooth; tho housbondes that I hadde,
 [196] As thre of hem were goode, and two were badde.
 [197] The thre were goode men, and riche, and olde;
 [198] Unnethe myghte they the statut holde
 [199] In which that they were bounden unto me.
 [200] Ye woot wel what I meene of this, pardee!
 [201] As help me God, I laughe whan I thynke
 [202] How pitously a-nyght I made hem swynke!
 [203] And, by my fey, I tolde of it no stoor.
 [204] They had me yeven hir lond and hir tresoor;
 [205] Me neded nat do lenger diligence
 [206] To wynne hir love, or doon hem reverence.
 [207] They loved me so wel, by God above,
 [208] That I ne tolde no deyntee of hir love!
 [209] A wys womman wol bisye hire evere in oon
 [210] To gete hire love, ye, ther as she hath noon.
 [211] But sith I hadde hem hoolly in myn hond,
 [212] And sith they hadde me yeven al hir lond,
 [213] What sholde I taken keep hem for to plese,
 [214] But it were for my profit and myn ese?
 [215] I sette hem so a-werke, by my fey,
 [216] That many a nyght they songen `Weilawey!'
 [217] The bacon was nat fet for hem, I trowe,
 [218] That som men han in Essex at Dunmowe.
 [219] I governed hem so wel, after my lawe,
 [220] That ech of hem ful blisful was and fawe
 [221] To brynge me gaye thynges fro the fayre.
 [222] They were ful glad whan I spak to hem faire,
 [223] For, God it woot, I chidde hem spitously.
 [224] Now herkneth hou I baar me proprely,
 [225] Ye wise wyves, that kan understonde.
 [226] Thus shulde ye speke and bere hem wrong on honde,
 [227] For half so boldely kan ther no man
 [228] Swere and lyen, as a womman kan.
 [229] I sey nat this by wyves that been wyse,
 [230] But if it be whan they hem mysavyse.
 [231] A wys wyf, if that she kan hir good,
 [232] Shal beren hym on honde the cow is wood,
 [233] And take witnesse of hir owene mayde
 [234] Of hir assent. But herkneth how I sayde:
 [235] `Sire olde kaynard, is this thyn array?
 [236] Why is my neighebores wyf so gay?
 [237] She is honoured overal ther she gooth;
 [238] I sitte at hoom; I have no thrifty clooth.
 [239] What dostow at my neighebores hous?
 [240] Is she so fair? Artow so amorous?
 [241] What rowne ye with oure mayde? Benedicite!
 [242] Sire olde lecchour, lat thy japes be!
 [243] And if I have a gossib or a freend,
 [244] Withouten gilt, thou chidest as a feend,
 [245] If that I walke or pleye unto his hous!
 [246] Thou comest hoom as dronken as a mous,
 [247] And prechest on thy bench, with yvel preef!
 [248] Thou seist to me it is a greet meschief
 [249] To wedde a povre womman, for costage;
 [250] And if that she be riche, of heigh parage,
 [251] Thanne seistow that it is a tormentrie
 [252] To soffre hire pride and hire malencolie.
 [253] And if that she be fair, thou verray knave,
 [254] Thou seyst that every holour wol hire have;
 [255] She may no while in chastitee abyde,
 [256] That is assailled upon ech a syde.
 [257] Thou seyst som folk desiren us for richesse,
 [258] Somme for oure shap, and somme for oure fairnesse,
 [259] And som for she kan outher synge or daunce,
 [260] And som for gentillesse and daliaunce;
 [261] Som for hir handes and hir armes smale;
 [262] Thus goth al to the devel, by thy tale.
 [263] Thou seyst men may nat kepe a castel wal,
 [264] It may so longe assailled been overal.
 [265] And if that she be foul, thou seist that she
 [266] Coveiteth every man that she may se,
 [267] For as a spanyel she wol on hym lepe,
 [268] Til that she fynde som man hire to chepe.
 [269] Ne noon so grey goos gooth ther in the lake
 [270] As, seistow, wol been withoute make.
 [271] And seyst it is an hard thyng for to welde
 [272] A thyng that no man wole, his thankes, helde.
 [273] Thus seistow, lorel, whan thow goost to bedde,
 [274] And that no wys man nedeth for to wedde,
 [275] Ne no man that entendeth unto hevene.
 [276] With wilde thonder-dynt and firy levene
 [277] Moote thy welked nekke be tobroke!
 [278] Thow seyst that droppyng houses, and eek smoke,
 [279] And chidyng wyves maken men to flee
 [280] Out of hir owene houses; a, benedicitee!
 [281] What eyleth swich an old man for to chide?
 [282] Thow seyst we wyves wol oure vices hide
 [283] Til we be fast, and thanne we wol hem shewe --
 [284] Wel may that be a proverbe of a shrewe!
 [285] Thou seist that oxen, asses, hors, and houndes,
 [286] They been assayed at diverse stoundes;
 [287] Bacyns, lavours, er that men hem bye,
 [288] Spoones and stooles, and al swich housbondrye,
 [289] And so been pottes, clothes, and array;
 [290] But folk of wyves maken noon assay,
 [291] Til they be wedded -- olde dotard shrewe! --
 [292] And thanne, seistow, we wol oure vices shewe.
 [293] Thou seist also that it displeseth me
 [294] But if that thou wolt preyse my beautee,
 [295] And but thou poure alwey upon my face,
 [296] And clepe me "faire dame" in every place.
 [297] And but thou make a feeste on thilke day
 [298] That I was born, and make me fressh and gay;
 [299] And but thou do to my norice honour,
 [300] And to my chamberere withinne my bour,
 [301] And to my fadres folk and his allyes --
 [302] Thus seistow, olde barel-ful of lyes!
 [303] And yet of oure apprentice Janekyn,
 [304] For his crispe heer, shynynge as gold so fyn,
 [305] And for he squiereth me bothe up and doun,
 [306] Yet hastow caught a fals suspecioun.
 [307] I wol hym noght, thogh thou were deed tomorwe!
 [308] But tel me this: why hydestow, with sorwe,
 [309] The keyes of thy cheste awey fro me?
 [310] It is my good as wel as thyn, pardee!
 [311] What, wenestow make an ydiot of oure dame?
 [312] Now by that lord that called is Seint Jame,
 [313] Thou shalt nat bothe, thogh that thou were wood,
 [314] Be maister of my body and of my good;
 [315] That oon thou shalt forgo, maugree thyne yen.
 [316] What helpith it of me to enquere or spyen?
 [317] I trowe thou woldest loke me in thy chiste!
 [318] Thou sholdest seye, "Wyf, go wher thee liste;
 [319] Taak youre disport; I wol nat leve no talys.
 [320] I knowe yow for a trewe wyf, dame Alys."
 [321] We love no man that taketh kep or charge
 [322] Wher that we goon; we wol ben at oure large.
 [323] Of alle men yblessed moot he be,
 [324] The wise astrologien, Daun Ptholome,
 [325] That seith this proverbe in his Almageste:
 [326] "Of alle men his wysdom is the hyeste
 [327] That rekketh nevere who hath the world in honde."
 [328] By this proverbe thou shalt understonde,
 [329] Have thou ynogh, what thar thee recche or care
 [330] How myrily that othere folkes fare?
 [331] For, certeyn, olde dotard, by youre leve,
 [332] Ye shul have queynte right ynogh at eve.
 [333] He is to greet a nygard that wolde werne
 [334] A man to lighte a candle at his lanterne;
 [335] He shal have never the lasse light, pardee.
 [336] Have thou ynogh, thee thar nat pleyne thee.
 [337] Thou seyst also, that if we make us gay
 [338] With clothyng, and with precious array,
 [339] That it is peril of oure chastitee;
 [340] And yet -- with sorwe! -- thou most enforce thee,
 [341] And seye thise wordes in the Apostles name:
 [342] "In habit maad with chastitee and shame
 [343] Ye wommen shul apparaille yow," quod he,
 [344] "And noght in tressed heer and gay perree,
 [345] As perles, ne with gold, ne clothes riche."
 [346] After thy text, ne after thy rubriche,
 [347] I wol nat wirche as muchel as a gnat.
 [348] Thou seydest this, that I was lyk a cat;
 [349] For whoso wolde senge a cattes skyn,
 [350] Thanne wolde the cat wel dwellen in his in;
 [351] And if the cattes skyn be slyk and gay,
 [352] She wol nat dwelle in house half a day,
 [353] But forth she wole, er any day be dawed,
 [354] To shewe hir skyn and goon a-caterwawed.
 [355] This is to seye, if I be gay, sire shrewe,
 [356] I wol renne out my borel for to shewe.
 [357] Sire olde fool, what helpeth thee to spyen?
 [358] Thogh thou preye Argus with his hundred yen
 [359] To be my warde-cors, as he kan best,
 [360] In feith, he shal nat kepe me but me lest;
 [361] Yet koude I make his berd, so moot I thee!
 [362] Thou seydest eek that ther been thynges thre,
 [363] The whiche thynges troublen al this erthe,
 [364] And that no wight may endure the ferthe.
 [365] O leeve sire shrewe, Jhesu shorte thy lyf!
 [366] Yet prechestow and seyst an hateful wyf
 [367] Yrekened is for oon of thise meschances.
 [368] Been ther none othere maner resemblances
 [369] That ye may likne youre parables to,
 [370] But if a sely wyf be oon of tho?
 [371] Thou liknest eek wommenes love to helle,
 [372] To bareyne lond, ther water may nat dwelle.
 [373] Thou liknest it also to wilde fyr;
 [374] The moore it brenneth, the moore it hath desir
 [375] To consume every thyng that brent wole be.
 [376] Thou seyest, right as wormes shende a tree,
 [377] Right so a wyf destroyeth hire housbonde;
 [378] This knowe they that been to wyves bonde.'
 [379] Lordynges, right thus, as ye have understonde,
 [380] Baar I stifly myne olde housbondes on honde
 [381] That thus they seyden in hir dronkenesse;
 [382] And al was fals, but that I took witnesse
 [383] On Janekyn, and on my nece also.
 [384] O Lord! The peyne I dide hem and the wo,
 [385] Ful giltelees, by Goddes sweete pyne!
 [386] For as an hors I koude byte and whyne.
 [387] I koude pleyne, and yit was in the gilt,
 [388] Or elles often tyme hadde I been spilt.
 [389] Whoso that first to mille comth, first grynt;
 [390] I pleyned first, so was oure werre ystynt.
 [391] They were ful glade to excuse hem blyve
 [392] Of thyng of which they nevere agilte hir lyve.
 [393] Of wenches wolde I beren hem on honde,
 [394] Whan that for syk unnethes myghte they stonde.
 [395] Yet tikled I his herte, for that he
 [396] Wende that I hadde of hym so greet chiertee!
 [397] I swoor that al my walkynge out by nyghte
 [398] Was for t' espye wenches that he dighte;
 [399] Under that colour hadde I many a myrthe.
 [400] For al swich wit is yeven us in oure byrthe;
 [401] Deceite, wepyng, spynnyng God hath yive
 [402] To wommen kyndely, whil that they may lyve.
 [403] And thus of o thyng I avaunte me:
 [404] Atte ende I hadde the bettre in ech degree,
 [405] By sleighte, or force, or by som maner thyng,
 [406] As by continueel murmur or grucchyng.
 [407] Namely abedde hadden they meschaunce:
 [408] Ther wolde I chide and do hem no plesaunce;
 [409] I wolde no lenger in the bed abyde,
 [410] If that I felte his arm over my syde,
 [411] Til he had maad his raunson unto me;
 [412] Thanne wolde I suffre hym do his nycetee.
 [413] And therfore every man this tale I telle,
 [414] Wynne whoso may, for al is for to selle;
 [415] With empty hand men may none haukes lure.
 [416] For wynnyng wolde I al his lust endure,
 [417] And make me a feyned appetit;
 [418] And yet in bacon hadde I nevere delit.
 [419] That made me that evere I wolde hem chide,
 [420] For thogh the pope hadde seten hem biside,
 [421] I wolde nat spare hem at hir owene bord,
 [422] For, by my trouthe, I quitte hem word for word.
 [423] As helpe me verray God omnipotent,
 [424] Though I right now sholde make my testament,
 [425] I ne owe hem nat a word that it nys quit.
 [426] I broghte it so aboute by my wit
 [427] That they moste yeve it up, as for the beste,
 [428] Or elles hadde we nevere been in reste;
 [429] For thogh he looked as a wood leon,
 [430] Yet sholde he faille of his conclusion.
 [431] Thanne wolde I seye, `Goode lief, taak keep
 [432] How mekely looketh Wilkyn, oure sheep!
 [433] Com neer, my spouse, lat me ba thy cheke!
 [434] Ye sholde been al pacient and meke,
 [435] And han a sweete spiced conscience,
 [436] Sith ye so preche of Jobes pacience.
 [437] Suffreth alwey, syn ye so wel kan preche;
 [438] And but ye do, certein we shal yow teche
 [439] That it is fair to have a wyf in pees.
 [440] Oon of us two moste bowen, doutelees,
 [441] And sith a man is moore resonable
 [442] Than womman is, ye moste been suffrable.
 [443] What eyleth yow to grucche thus and grone?
 [444] Is it for ye wolde have my queynte allone?
 [445] Wy, taak it al! Lo, have it every deel!
 [446] Peter! I shrewe yow, but ye love it weel;
 [447] For if I wolde selle my bele chose,
 [448] I koude walke as fressh as is a rose;
 [449] But I wol kepe it for youre owene tooth.
 [450] Ye be to blame, by God! I sey yow sooth.'
 [451] Swiche manere wordes hadde we on honde.
 [452] Now wol I speken of my fourthe housbonde.
 [453] My fourthe housbonde was a revelour --
 [454] This is to seyn, he hadde a paramour --
 [455] And I was yong and ful of ragerye,
 [456] Stibourn and strong, and joly as a pye.
 [457] How koude I daunce to an harpe smale,
 [458] And synge, ywis, as any nyghtyngale,
 [459] Whan I had dronke a draughte of sweete wyn!
 [460] Metellius, the foule cherl, the swyn,
 [461] That with a staf birafte his wyf hir lyf,
 [462] For she drank wyn, thogh I hadde been his wyf,
 [463] He sholde nat han daunted me fro drynke!
 [464] And after wyn on Venus moste I thynke,
 [465] For al so siker as cold engendreth hayl,
 [466] A likerous mouth moste han a likerous tayl.
 [467] In wommen vinolent is no defence --
 [468] This knowen lecchours by experience.
 [469] But -- Lord Crist! -- whan that it remembreth me
 [470] Upon my yowthe, and on my jolitee,
 [471] It tikleth me aboute myn herte roote.
 [472] Unto this day it dooth myn herte boote
 [473] That I have had my world as in my tyme.
 [474] But age, allas, that al wole envenyme,
 [475] Hath me biraft my beautee and my pith.
 [476] Lat go. Farewel! The devel go therwith!
 [477] The flour is goon; ther is namoore to telle;
 [478] The bren, as I best kan, now moste I selle;
 [479] But yet to be right myrie wol I fonde.
 [480] Now wol I tellen of my fourthe housbonde.
 [481] I seye, I hadde in herte greet despit
 [482] That he of any oother had delit.
 [483] But he was quit, by God and by Seint Joce!
 [484] I made hym of the same wode a croce;
 [485] Nat of my body, in no foul manere,
 [486] But certeinly, I made folk swich cheere
 [487] That in his owene grece I made hym frye
 [488] For angre, and for verray jalousye.
 [489] By God, in erthe I was his purgatorie,
 [490] For which I hope his soule be in glorie.
 [491] For, God it woot, he sat ful ofte and song,
 [492] Whan that his shoo ful bitterly hym wrong.
 [493] Ther was no wight, save God and he, that wiste,
 [494] In many wise, how soore I hym twiste.
 [495] He deyde whan I cam fro Jerusalem,
 [496] And lith ygrave under the roode beem,
 [497] Al is his tombe noght so curyus
 [498] As was the sepulcre of hym Daryus,
 [499] Which that Appelles wroghte subtilly;
 [500] It nys but wast to burye hym preciously.
 [501] Lat hym fare wel; God yeve his soule reste!
 [502] He is now in his grave and in his cheste.
 [503] Now of my fifthe housbonde wol I telle.
 [504] God lete his soule nevere come in helle!
 [505] And yet was he to me the mooste shrewe;
 [506] That feele I on my ribbes al by rewe,
 [507] And evere shal unto myn endyng day.
 [508] But in oure bed he was so fressh and gay,
 [509] And therwithal so wel koude he me glose,
 [510] Whan that he wolde han my bele chose;
 [511] That thogh he hadde me bete on every bon,
 [512] He koude wynne agayn my love anon.
 [513] I trowe I loved hym best, for that he
 [514] Was of his love daungerous to me.
 [515] We wommen han, if that I shal nat lye,
 [516] In this matere a queynte fantasye:
 [517] Wayte what thyng we may nat lightly have,
 [518] Therafter wol we crie al day and crave.
 [519] Forbede us thyng, and that desiren we;
 [520] Preesse on us faste, and thanne wol we fle.
 [521] With daunger oute we al oure chaffare;
 [522] Greet prees at market maketh deere ware,
 [523] And to greet cheep is holde at litel prys:
 [524] This knoweth every womman that is wys.
 [525] My fifthe housbonde -- God his soule blesse! --
 [526] Which that I took for love, and no richesse,
 [527] He som tyme was a clerk of Oxenford,
 [528] And hadde left scole, and wente at hom to bord
 [529] With my gossib, dwellynge in oure toun;
 [530] God have hir soule! Hir name was Alisoun.
 [531] She knew myn herte, and eek my privetee,
 [532] Bet than oure parisshe preest, so moot I thee!
 [533] To hire biwreyed I my conseil al.
 [534] For hadde myn housbonde pissed on a wal,
 [535] Or doon a thyng that sholde han cost his lyf,
 [536] To hire, and to another worthy wyf,
 [537] And to my nece, which that I loved weel,
 [538] I wolde han toold his conseil every deel.
 [539] And so I dide ful often, God it woot,
 [540] That made his face often reed and hoot
 [541] For verray shame, and blamed hymself for he
 [542] Had toold to me so greet a pryvetee.
 [543] And so bifel that ones in a Lente --
 [544] So often tymes I to my gossyb wente,
 [545] For evere yet I loved to be gay,
 [546] And for to walke in March, Averill, and May,
 [547] Fro hous to hous, to heere sondry talys --
 [548] That Jankyn clerk, and my gossyb dame Alys,
 [549] And I myself, into the feeldes wente.
 [550] Myn housbonde was at Londoun al that Lente;
 [551] I hadde the bettre leyser for to pleye,
 [552] And for to se, and eek for to be seye
 [553] Of lusty folk. What wiste I wher my grace
 [554] Was shapen for to be, or in what place?
 [555] Therfore I made my visitaciouns
 [556] To vigilies and to processiouns,
 [557] To prechyng eek, and to thise pilgrimages,
 [558] To pleyes of myracles, and to mariages,
 [559] And wered upon my gaye scarlet gytes.
 [560] Thise wormes, ne thise motthes, ne thise mytes,
 [561] Upon my peril, frete hem never a deel;
 [562] And wostow why? For they were used weel.
 [563] Now wol I tellen forth what happed me.
 [564] I seye that in the feeldes walked we,
 [565] Til trewely we hadde swich daliance,
 [566] This clerk and I, that of my purveiance
 [567] I spak to hym and seyde hym how that he,
 [568] If I were wydwe, sholde wedde me.
 [569] For certeinly -- I sey for no bobance --
 [570] Yet was I nevere withouten purveiance
 [571] Of mariage, n' of othere thynges eek.
 [572] I holde a mouses herte nat worth a leek
 [573] That hath but oon hole for to sterte to,
 [574] And if that faille, thanne is al ydo.
 [575] I bar hym on honde he hadde enchanted me --
 [576] My dame taughte me that soutiltee --
 [577] And eek I seyde I mette of hym al nyght,
 [578] He wolde han slayn me as I lay upright,
 [579] And al my bed was ful of verray blood;
 [580] `But yet I hope that ye shal do me good,
 [581] For blood bitokeneth gold, as me was taught.'
 [582] And al was fals; I dremed of it right naught,
 [583] But as I folwed ay my dames loore,
 [584] As wel of this as of othere thynges moore.
 [585] But now, sire, lat me se what I shal seyn.
 [586] A ha! By God, I have my tale ageyn.
 [587] Whan that my fourthe housbonde was on beere,
 [588] I weep algate, and made sory cheere,
 [589] As wyves mooten, for it is usage,
 [590] And with my coverchief covered my visage,
 [591] But for that I was purveyed of a make,
 [592] I wepte but smal, and that I undertake.
 [593] To chirche was myn housbonde born a-morwe
 [594] With neighebores, that for hym maden sorwe;
 [595] And Jankyn, oure clerk, was oon of tho.
 [596] As help me God, whan that I saugh hym go
 [597] After the beere, me thoughte he hadde a paire
 [598] Of legges and of feet so clene and faire
 [599] That al myn herte I yaf unto his hoold.
 [600] He was, I trowe, twenty wynter oold,
 [601] And I was fourty, if I shal seye sooth;
 [602] But yet I hadde alwey a coltes tooth.
 [603] Gat-tothed I was, and that bicam me weel;
 [604] I hadde the prente of seinte Venus seel.
 [605] As help me God, I was a lusty oon,
 [606] And faire, and riche, and yong, and wel bigon,
 [607] And trewely, as myne housbondes tolde me,
 [608] I hadde the beste quoniam myghte be.
 [609] For certes, I am al Venerien
 [610] In feelynge, and myn herte is Marcien.
 [611] Venus me yaf my lust, my likerousnesse,
 [612] And Mars yaf me my sturdy hardynesse;
 [613] Myn ascendent was Taur, and Mars therinne.
 [614] Allas, allas! That evere love was synne!
 [615] I folwed ay myn inclinacioun
 [616] By vertu of my constellacioun;
 [617] That made me I koude noght withdrawe
 [618] My chambre of Venus from a good felawe.
 [619] Yet have I Martes mark upon my face,
 [620] And also in another privee place.
 [621] For God so wys be my savacioun,
 [622] I ne loved nevere by no discrecioun,
 [623] But evere folwede myn appetit,
 [624] Al were he short, or long, or blak, or whit;
 [625] I took no kep, so that he liked me,
 [626] How poore he was, ne eek of what degree.
 [627] What sholde I seye but, at the monthes ende,
 [628] This joly clerk, Jankyn, that was so hende,
 [629] Hath wedded me with greet solempnytee,
 [630] And to hym yaf I al the lond and fee
 [631] That evere was me yeven therbifoore.
 [632] But afterward repented me ful soore;
 [633] He nolde suffre nothyng of my list.
 [634] By God, he smoot me ones on the lyst,
 [635] For that I rente out of his book a leef,
 [636] That of the strook myn ere wax al deef.
 [637] Stibourn I was as is a leonesse,
 [638] And of my tonge a verray jangleresse,
 [639] And walke I wolde, as I had doon biforn,
 [640] From hous to hous, although he had it sworn;
 [641] For which he often tymes wolde preche,
 [642] And me of olde Romayn geestes teche;
 [643] How he Symplicius Gallus lefte his wyf,
 [644] And hire forsook for terme of al his lyf,
 [645] Noght but for open-heveded he hir say
 [646] Lookynge out at his dore upon a day.
 [647] Another Romayn tolde he me by name,
 [648] That, for his wyf was at a someres game
 [649] Withouten his wityng, he forsook hire eke.
 [650] And thanne wolde he upon his Bible seke
 [651] That ilke proverbe of Ecclesiaste
 [652] Where he comandeth and forbedeth faste
 [653] Man shal nat suffre his wyf go roule aboute.
 [654] Thanne wolde he seye right thus, withouten doute:
 [655] `Whoso that buyldeth his hous al of salwes,
 [656] And priketh his blynde hors over the falwes,
 [657] And suffreth his wyf to go seken halwes,
 [658] Is worthy to been hanged on the galwes!'
 [659] But al for noght, I sette noght an hawe
 [660] Of his proverbes n' of his olde sawe,
 [661] Ne I wolde nat of hym corrected be.
 [662] I hate hym that my vices telleth me,
 [663] And so doo mo, God woot, of us than I.
 [664] This made hym with me wood al outrely;
 [665] I nolde noght forbere hym in no cas.
 [666] Now wol I seye yow sooth, by Seint Thomas,
 [667] Why that I rente out of his book a leef,
 [668] For which he smoot me so that I was deef.
 [669] He hadde a book that gladly, nyght and day,
 [670] For his desport he wolde rede alway;
 [671] He cleped it Valerie and Theofraste,
 [672] At which book he lough alwey ful faste.
 [673] And eek ther was somtyme a clerk at Rome,
 [674] A cardinal, that highte Seint Jerome,
 [675] That made a book agayn Jovinian;
 [676] In which book eek ther was Tertulan,
 [677] Crisippus, Trotula, and Helowys,
 [678] That was abbesse nat fer fro Parys,
 [679] And eek the Parables of Salomon,
 [680] Ovides Art, and bookes many on,
 [681] And alle thise were bounden in o volume.
 [682] And every nyght and day was his custume,
 [683] Whan he hadde leyser and vacacioun
 [684] From oother worldly occupacioun,
 [685] To reden on this book of wikked wyves.
 [686] He knew of hem mo legendes and lyves
 [687] Than been of goode wyves in the Bible.
 [688] For trusteth wel, it is an impossible
 [689] That any clerk wol speke good of wyves,
 [690] But if it be of hooly seintes lyves,
 [691] Ne of noon oother womman never the mo.
 [692] Who peyntede the leon, tel me who?
 [693] By God, if wommen hadde writen stories,
 [694] As clerkes han withinne hire oratories,
 [695] They wolde han writen of men moore wikkednesse
 [696] Than al the mark of Adam may redresse.
 [697] The children of Mercurie and of Venus
 [698] Been in hir wirkyng ful contrarius;
 [699] Mercurie loveth wysdam and science,
 [700] And Venus loveth ryot and dispence.
 [701] And, for hire diverse disposicioun,
 [702] Ech falleth in otheres exaltacioun.
 [703] And thus, God woot, Mercurie is desolat
 [704] In Pisces, wher Venus is exaltat,
 [705] And Venus falleth ther Mercurie is reysed.
 [706] Therfore no womman of no clerk is preysed.
 [707] The clerk, whan he is oold, and may noght do
 [708] Of Venus werkes worth his olde sho,
 [709] Thanne sit he doun, and writ in his dotage
 [710] That wommen kan nat kepe hir mariage!
 [711] But now to purpos, why I tolde thee
 [712] That I was beten for a book, pardee!
 [713] Upon a nyght Jankyn, that was oure sire,
 [714] Redde on his book, as he sat by the fire,
 [715] Of Eva first, that for hir wikkednesse
 [716] Was al mankynde broght to wrecchednesse,
 [717] For which that Jhesu Crist hymself was slayn,
 [718] That boghte us with his herte blood agayn.
 [719] Lo, heere expres of womman may ye fynde
 [720] That womman was the los of al mankynde.
 [721] Tho redde he me how Sampson loste his heres:
 [722] Slepynge, his lemman kitte it with hir sheres;
 [723] Thurgh which treson loste he bothe his yen.
 [724] Tho redde he me, if that I shal nat lyen,
 [725] Of Hercules and of his Dianyre,
 [726] That caused hym to sette hymself afyre.
 [727] No thyng forgat he the care and the wo
 [728] That Socrates hadde with his wyves two,
 [729] How Xantippa caste pisse upon his heed.
 [730] This sely man sat stille as he were deed;
 [731] He wiped his heed, namoore dorste he seyn,
 [732] But `Er that thonder stynte, comth a reyn!'
 [733] Of Phasipha, that was the queene of Crete,
 [734] For shrewednesse, hym thoughte the tale swete;
 [735] Fy! Spek namoore -- it is a grisly thyng --
 [736] Of hire horrible lust and hir likyng.
 [737] Of Clitermystra, for hire lecherye,
 [738] That falsly made hire housbonde for to dye,
 [739] He redde it with ful good devocioun.
 [740] He tolde me eek for what occasioun
 [741] Amphiorax at Thebes loste his lyf.
 [742] Myn housbonde hadde a legende of his wyf,
 [743] Eriphilem, that for an ouche of gold
 [744] Hath prively unto the Grekes told
 [745] Wher that hir housbonde hidde hym in a place,
 [746] For which he hadde at Thebes sory grace.
 [747] Of Lyvia tolde he me, and of Lucye:
 [748] They bothe made hir housbondes for to dye,
 [749] That oon for love, that oother was for hate.
 [750] Lyvia hir housbonde, on an even late,
 [751] Empoysoned hath, for that she was his fo;
 [752] Lucia, likerous, loved hire housbonde so
 [753] That, for he sholde alwey upon hire thynke,
 [754] She yaf hym swich a manere love-drynke
 [755] That he was deed er it were by the morwe;
 [756] And thus algates housbondes han sorwe.
 [757] Thanne tolde he me how oon Latumyus
 [758] Compleyned unto his felawe Arrius
 [759] That in his gardyn growed swich a tree
 [760] On which he seyde how that his wyves thre
 [761] Hanged hemself for herte despitus.
 [762] `O leeve brother,' quod this Arrius,
 [763] `Yif me a plante of thilke blissed tree,
 [764] And in my gardyn planted shal it bee.'
 [765] Of latter date, of wyves hath he red
 [766] That somme han slayn hir housbondes in hir bed,
 [767] And lete hir lecchour dighte hire al the nyght,
 [768] Whan that the corps lay in the floor upright.
 [769] And somme han dryve nayles in hir brayn,
 [770] Whil that they slepte, and thus they had hem slayn.
 [771] Somme han hem yeve poysoun in hire drynke.
 [772] He spak moore harm than herte may bithynke,
 [773] And therwithal he knew of mo proverbes
 [774] Than in this world ther growen gras or herbes.
 [775] `Bet is,' quod he, `thyn habitacioun
 [776] Be with a leon or a foul dragoun,
 [777] Than with a womman usynge for to chyde.
 [778] Bet is,' quod he, `hye in the roof abyde,
 [779] Than with an angry wyf doun in the hous;
 [780] They been so wikked and contrarious,
 [781] They haten that hir housbondes loven ay.'
 [782] He seyde, `A womman cast hir shame away,
 [783] Whan she cast of hir smok'; and forthermo,
 [784] `A fair womman, but she be chaast also,
 [785] Is lyk a gold ryng in a sowes nose.'
 [786] Who wolde wene, or who wolde suppose,
 [787] The wo that in myn herte was, and pyne?
 [788] And whan I saugh he wolde nevere fyne
 [789] To reden on this cursed book al nyght,
 [790] Al sodeynly thre leves have I plyght
 [791] Out of his book, right as he radde, and eke
 [792] I with my fest so took hym on the cheke
 [793] That in oure fyr he fil bakward adoun.
 [794] And he up stirte as dooth a wood leoun,
 [795] And with his fest he smoot me on the heed
 [796] That in the floor I lay as I were deed.
 [797] And whan he saugh how stille that I lay,
 [798] He was agast and wolde han fled his way,
 [799] Til atte laste out of my swogh I breyde.
 [800] `O! hastow slayn me, false theef?' I seyde,
 [801] `And for my land thus hastow mordred me?
 [802] Er I be deed, yet wol I kisse thee.'
 [803] And neer he cam, and kneled faire adoun,
 [804] And seyde, `Deere suster Alisoun,
 [805] As help me God, I shal thee nevere smyte!
 [806] That I have doon, it is thyself to wyte.
 [807] Foryeve it me, and that I thee biseke!'
 [808] And yet eftsoones I hitte hym on the cheke,
 [809] And seyde, `Theef, thus muchel am I wreke;
 [810] Now wol I dye, I may no lenger speke.'
 [811] But atte laste, with muchel care and wo,
 [812] We fille acorded by us selven two.
 [813] He yaf me al the bridel in myn hond,
 [814] To han the governance of hous and lond,
 [815] And of his tonge, and of his hond also;
 [816] And made hym brenne his book anon right tho.
 [817] And whan that I hadde geten unto me,
 [818] By maistrie, al the soveraynetee,
 [819] And that he seyde, `Myn owene trewe wyf,
 [820] Do as thee lust the terme of al thy lyf;
 [821] Keep thyn honour, and keep eek myn estaat' --
 [822] After that day we hadden never debaat.
 [823] God helpe me so, I was to hym as kynde
 [824] As any wyf from Denmark unto Ynde,
 [825] And also trewe, and so was he to me.
 [826] I prey to God, that sit in magestee,
 [827] So blesse his soule for his mercy deere.
 [828] Now wol I seye my tale, if ye wol heere."
 [829] The Frere lough, whan he hadde herd al this;
 [830] "Now dame," quod he, "so have I joye or blis,
 [831] This is a long preamble of a tale!"
 [832] And whan the Somonour herde the Frere gale,
 [833] "Lo," quod the Somonour, "Goddes armes two!
 [834] A frere wol entremette hym everemo.
 [835] Lo, goode men, a flye and eek a frere
 [836] Wol falle in every dyssh and eek mateere.
 [837] What spekestow of preambulacioun?
 [838] What! amble, or trotte, or pees, or go sit doun!
 [839] Thou lettest oure disport in this manere."
 [840] "Ye, woltow so, sire Somonour?" quod the Frere;
 [841] "Now, by my feith I shal, er that I go,
 [842] Telle of a somonour swich a tale or two
 [843] That alle the folk shal laughen in this place."
 [844] "Now elles, Frere, I bishrewe thy face,"
 [845] Quod this Somonour, "and I bishrewe me,
 [846] But if I telle tales two or thre
 [847] Of freres er I come to Sidyngborne
 [848] That I shal make thyn herte for to morne,
 [849] For wel I woot thy pacience is gon."
 [850] Oure Hooste cride "Pees! And that anon!"
 [851] And seyde, "Lat the womman telle hire tale.
 [852] Ye fare as folk that dronken ben of ale.
 [853] Do, dame, telle forth youre tale, and that is best."
 [854] "Al redy, sire," quod she, "right as yow lest,
 [855] If I have licence of this worthy Frere."
 [856] "Yis, dame," quod he, "tel forth, and I wol heere."

      
The Canterbury Tales and Other Works of Chaucer (Middle English), by Geoffery Chaucer, [14th cent.], at sacred-texts.com

 

The Canterbury Tales

 

The Wife of Bath's Tale

 [857] In th' olde dayes of the Kyng Arthour,
 [858] Of which that Britons speken greet honour,
 [859] Al was this land fulfild of fayerye.
 [860] The elf-queene, with hir joly compaignye,
 [861] Daunced ful ofte in many a grene mede.
 [862] This was the olde opinion, as I rede;
 [863] I speke of manye hundred yeres ago.
 [864] But now kan no man se none elves mo,
 [865] For now the grete charitee and prayeres
 [866] Of lymytours and othere hooly freres,
 [867] That serchen every lond and every streem,
 [868] As thikke as motes in the sonne-beem,
 [869] Blessynge halles, chambres, kichenes, boures,
 [870] Citees, burghes, castels, hye toures,
 [871] Thropes, bernes, shipnes, dayeryes --
 [872] This maketh that ther ben no fayeryes.
 [873] For ther as wont to walken was an elf
 [874] Ther walketh now the lymytour hymself
 [875] In undermeles and in morwenynges,
 [876] And seyth his matyns and his hooly thynges
 [877] As he gooth in his lymytacioun.
 [878] Wommen may go saufly up and doun.
 [879] In every bussh or under every tree
 [880] Ther is noon oother incubus but he,
 [881] And he ne wol doon hem but dishonour.
 [882] And so bifel that this kyng Arthour
 [883] Hadde in his hous a lusty bacheler,
 [884] That on a day cam ridynge fro ryver,
 [885] And happed that, allone as he was born,
 [886] He saugh a mayde walkynge hym biforn,
 [887] Of which mayde anon, maugree hir heed,
 [888] By verray force, he rafte hire maydenhed;
 [889] For which oppressioun was swich clamour
 [890] And swich pursute unto the kyng Arthour
 [891] That dampned was this knyght for to be deed,
 [892] By cours of lawe, and sholde han lost his heed --
 [893] Paraventure swich was the statut tho --
 [894] But that the queene and other ladyes mo
 [895] So longe preyeden the kyng of grace
 [896] Til he his lyf hym graunted in the place,
 [897] And yaf hym to the queene, al at hir wille,
 [898] To chese wheither she wolde hym save or spille.
 [899] The queene thanketh the kyng with al hir myght,
 [900] And after this thus spak she to the knyght,
 [901] Whan that she saugh hir tyme, upon a day:
 [902] "Thou standest yet," quod she, "in swich array
 [903] That of thy lyf yet hastow no suretee.
 [904] I grante thee lyf, if thou kanst tellen me
 [905] What thyng is it that wommen moost desiren.
 [906] Be war, and keep thy nekke-boon from iren!
 [907] And if thou kanst nat tellen it anon,
 [908] Yet wol I yeve thee leve for to gon
 [909] A twelf-month and a day, to seche and leere
 [910] An answere suffisant in this mateere;
 [911] And suretee wol I han, er that thou pace,
 [912] Thy body for to yelden in this place."
 [913] Wo was this knyght, and sorwefully he siketh;
 [914] But what! He may nat do al as hym liketh.
 [915] And at the laste he chees hym for to wende
 [916] And come agayn, right at the yeres ende,
 [917] With swich answere as God wolde hym purveye;
 [918] And taketh his leve, and wendeth forth his weye.
 [919] He seketh every hous and every place
 [920] Where as he hopeth for to fynde grace
 [921] To lerne what thyng wommen loven moost,
 [922] But he ne koude arryven in no coost
 [923] Wher as he myghte fynde in this mateere
 [924] Two creatures accordynge in-feere.
 [925] Somme seyde wommen loven best richesse,
 [926] Somme seyde honour, somme seyde jolynesse,
 [927] Somme riche array, somme seyden lust abedde,
 [928] And oftetyme to be wydwe and wedde.
 [929] Somme seyde that oure hertes been moost esed
 [930] Whan that we been yflatered and yplesed.
 [931] He gooth ful ny the sothe, I wol nat lye.
 [932] A man shal wynne us best with flaterye,
 [933] And with attendance and with bisynesse
 [934] Been we ylymed, bothe moore and lesse.
 [935] And somme seyen that we loven best
 [936] For to be free and do right as us lest,
 [937] And that no man repreve us of oure vice,
 [938] But seye that we be wise and no thyng nyce.
 [939] For trewely ther is noon of us alle,
 [940] If any wight wol clawe us on the galle,
 [941] That we nel kike, for he seith us sooth.
 [942] Assay, and he shal fynde it that so dooth;
 [943] For, be we never so vicious withinne,
 [944] We wol been holden wise and clene of synne.
 [945] And somme seyn that greet delit han we
 [946] For to been holden stable, and eek secree,
 [947] And in o purpos stedefastly to dwelle,
 [948] And nat biwreye thyng that men us telle.
 [949] But that tale is nat worth a rake-stele.
 [950] Pardee, we wommen konne no thyng hele;
 [951] Witnesse on Myda -- wol ye heere the tale?
 [952] Ovyde, amonges othere thynges smale,
 [953] Seyde Myda hadde, under his longe heres,
 [954] Growynge upon his heed two asses eres,
 [955] The whiche vice he hydde as he best myghte
 [956] Ful subtilly from every mannes sighte,
 [957] That, save his wyf, ther wiste of it namo.
 [958] He loved hire moost, and trusted hire also;
 [959] He preyede hire that to no creature
 [960] She sholde tellen of his disfigure.
 [961] She swoor him, "Nay"; for al this world to wynne,
 [962] She nolde do that vileynye or synne,
 [963] To make hir housbonde han so foul a name.
 [964] She nolde nat telle it for hir owene shame.
 [965] But nathelees, hir thoughte that she dyde
 [966] That she so longe sholde a conseil hyde;
 [967] Hir thoughte it swal so soore aboute hir herte
 [968] That nedely som word hire moste asterte;
 [969] And sith she dorste telle it to no man,
 [970] Doun to a mareys faste by she ran --
 [971] Til she cam there hir herte was afyre --
 [972] And as a bitore bombleth in the myre,
 [973] She leyde hir mouth unto the water doun:
 [974] "Biwreye me nat, thou water, with thy soun,"
 [975] Quod she; "to thee I telle it and namo;
 [976] Myn housbonde hath longe asses erys two!
 [977] Now is myn herte al hool; now is it oute.
 [978] I myghte no lenger kepe it, out of doute."
 [979] Heere may ye se, thogh we a tyme abyde,
 [980] Yet out it moot; we kan no conseil hyde.
 [981] The remenant of the tale if ye wol heere,
 [982] Redeth Ovyde, and ther ye may it leere.
 [983] This knyght, of which my tale is specially,
 [984] Whan that he saugh he myghte nat come therby --
 [985] This is to seye, what wommen love moost --
 [986] Withinne his brest ful sorweful was the goost.
 [987] But hoom he gooth; he myghte nat sojourne;
 [988] The day was come that homward moste he tourne.
 [989] And in his wey it happed hym to ryde,
 [990] In al this care, under a forest syde,
 [991] Wher as he saugh upon a daunce go
 [992] Of ladyes foure and twenty, and yet mo;
 [993] Toward the whiche daunce he drow ful yerne,
 [994] In hope that som wysdom sholde he lerne.
 [995] But certeinly, er he cam fully there,
 [996] Vanysshed was this daunce, he nyste where.
 [997] No creature saugh he that bar lyf,
 [998] Save on the grene he saugh sittynge a wyf --
 [999] A fouler wight ther may no man devyse.
 [1000] Agayn the knyght this olde wyf gan ryse,
 [1001] And seyde, "Sire knyght, heer forth ne lith no wey.
 [1002] Tel me what that ye seken, by youre fey!
 [1003] Paraventure it may the bettre be;
 [1004] Thise olde folk kan muchel thyng," quod she.
 [1005] "My leeve mooder," quod this knyght, "certeyn
 [1006] I nam but deed but if that I kan seyn
 [1007] What thyng it is that wommen moost desire.
 [1008] Koude ye me wisse, I wolde wel quite youre hire."
 [1009] "Plight me thy trouthe heere in myn hand," quod she,
 [1010] "The nexte thyng that I requere thee,
 [1011] Thou shalt it do, if it lye in thy myght,
 [1012] And I wol telle it yow er it be nyght."
 [1013] "Have heer my trouthe," quod the knyght, "I grante."
 [1014] "Thanne," quod she, "I dar me wel avante
 [1015] Thy lyf is sauf, for I wol stonde therby;
 [1016] Upon my lyf, the queene wol seye as I.
 [1017] Lat se which is the proudeste of hem alle
 [1018] That wereth on a coverchief or a calle
 [1019] That dar seye nay of that I shal thee teche.
 [1020] Lat us go forth withouten lenger speche."
 [1021] Tho rowned she a pistel in his ere,
 [1022] And bad hym to be glad and have no fere.
 [1023] Whan they be comen to the court, this knyght
 [1024] Seyde he had holde his day, as he hadde hight,
 [1025] And redy was his answere, as he sayde.
 [1026] Ful many a noble wyf, and many a mayde,
 [1027] And many a wydwe, for that they been wise,
 [1028] The queene hirself sittynge as a justise,
 [1029] Assembled been, his answere for to heere;
 [1030] And afterward this knyght was bode appeere.
 [1031] To every wight comanded was silence,
 [1032] And that the knyght sholde telle in audience
 [1033] What thyng that worldly wommen loven best.
 [1034] This knyght ne stood nat stille as doth a best,
 [1035] But to his questioun anon answerde
 [1036] With manly voys, that al the court it herde:
 [1037] "My lige lady, generally," quod he,
 [1038] "Wommen desiren to have sovereynetee
 [1039] As wel over hir housbond as hir love,
 [1040] And for to been in maistrie hym above.
 [1041] This is youre mooste desir, thogh ye me kille.
 [1042] Dooth as yow list; I am heer at youre wille."
 [1043] In al the court ne was ther wyf, ne mayde,
 [1044] Ne wydwe that contraried that he sayde,
 [1045] But seyden he was worthy han his lyf.
 [1046] And with that word up stirte the olde wyf,
 [1047] Which that the knyght saugh sittynge on the grene:
 [1048] "Mercy," quod she, "my sovereyn lady queene!
 [1049] Er that youre court departe, do me right.
 [1050] I taughte this answere unto the knyght;
 [1051] For which he plighte me his trouthe there,
 [1052] The firste thyng that I wolde hym requere
 [1053] He wolde it do, if it lay in his myghte.
 [1054] Bifore the court thanne preye I thee, sir knyght,"
 [1055] Quod she, "that thou me take unto thy wyf,
 [1056] For wel thou woost that I have kept thy lyf.
 [1057] If I seye fals, sey nay, upon thy fey!"
 [1058] This knyght answerde, "Allas and weylawey!
 [1059] I woot right wel that swich was my biheste.
 [1060] For Goddes love, as chees a newe requeste!
 [1061] Taak al my good and lat my body go."
 [1062] "Nay, thanne," quod she, "I shrewe us bothe two!
 [1063] For thogh that I be foul, and oold, and poore
 [1064] I nolde for al the metal, ne for oore
 [1065] That under erthe is grave or lith above,
 [1066] But if thy wyf I were, and eek thy love."
 [1067] "My love?" quod he, "nay, my dampnacioun!
 [1068] Allas, that any of my nacioun
 [1069] Sholde evere so foule disparaged be!"
 [1070] But al for noght; the ende is this, that he
 [1071] Constreyned was; he nedes moste hire wedde,
 [1072] And taketh his olde wyf, and gooth to bedde.
 [1073] Now wolden som men seye, paraventure,
 [1074] That for my necligence I do no cure
 [1075] To tellen yow the joye and al th' array
 [1076] That at the feeste was that ilke day.
 [1077] To which thyng shortly answeren I shal:
 [1078] I seye ther nas no joye ne feeste at al;
 [1079] Ther nas but hevynesse and muche sorwe.
 [1080] For prively he wedded hire on morwe,
 [1081] And al day after hidde hym as an owle,
 [1082] So wo was hym, his wyf looked so foule.
 [1083] Greet was the wo the knyght hadde in his thoght,
 [1084] Whan he was with his wyf abedde ybroght;
 [1085] He walweth and he turneth to and fro.
 [1086] His olde wyf lay smylynge everemo,
 [1087] And seyde, "O deere housbonde, benedicitee!
 [1088] Fareth every knyght thus with his wyf as ye?
 [1089] Is this the lawe of kyng Arthures hous?
 [1090] Is every knyght of his so dangerous?
 [1091] I am youre owene love and youre wyf;
 [1092] I am she which that saved hath youre lyf,
 [1093] And, certes, yet ne dide I yow nevere unright;
 [1094] Why fare ye thus with me this firste nyght?
 [1095] Ye faren lyk a man had lost his wit.
 [1096] What is my gilt? For Goddes love, tel it,
 [1097] And it shal been amended, if I may."
 [1098] "Amended?" quod this knyght, "Allas, nay, nay!
 [1099] It wol nat been amended nevere mo.
 [1100] Thou art so loothly, and so oold also,
 [1101] And therto comen of so lough a kynde,
 [1102] That litel wonder is thogh I walwe and wynde.
 [1103] So wolde God myn herte wolde breste!"
 [1104] "Is this," quod she, "the cause of youre unreste?"
 [1105] "Ye, certeinly," quod he, "no wonder is."
 [1106] "Now, sire," quod she, "I koude amende al this,
 [1107] If that me liste, er it were dayes thre,
 [1108] So wel ye myghte bere yow unto me.
 [1109] "But, for ye speken of swich gentillesse
 [1110] As is descended out of old richesse,
 [1111] That therfore sholden ye be gentil men,
 [1112] Swich arrogance is nat worth an hen.
 [1113] Looke who that is moost vertuous alway,
 [1114] Pryvee and apert, and moost entendeth ay
 [1115] To do the gentil dedes that he kan;
 [1116] Taak hym for the grettest gentil man.
 [1117] Crist wole we clayme of hym oure gentillesse,
 [1118] Nat of oure eldres for hire old richesse.
 [1119] For thogh they yeve us al hir heritage,
 [1120] For which we clayme to been of heigh parage,
 [1121] Yet may they nat biquethe for no thyng
 [1122] To noon of us hir vertuous lyvyng,
 [1123] That made hem gentil men ycalled be,
 [1124] And bad us folwen hem in swich degree.
 [1125] "Wel kan the wise poete of Florence,
 [1126] That highte Dant, speken in this sentence.
 [1127] Lo, in swich maner rym is Dantes tale:
 [1128] `Ful selde up riseth by his branches smale
 [1129] Prowesse of man, for God, of his goodnesse,
 [1130] Wole that of hym we clayme oure gentillesse';
 [1131] For of oure eldres may we no thyng clayme
 [1132] But temporel thyng, that man may hurte and mayme.
 [1133] "Eek every wight woot this as wel as I,
 [1134] If gentillesse were planted natureelly
 [1135] Unto a certeyn lynage doun the lyne,
 [1136] Pryvee and apert thanne wolde they nevere fyne
 [1137] To doon of gentillesse the faire office;
 [1138] They myghte do no vileynye or vice.
 [1139] "Taak fyr and ber it in the derkeste hous
 [1140] Bitwix this and the mount of Kaukasous,
 [1141] And lat men shette the dores and go thenne;
 [1142] Yet wole the fyr as faire lye and brenne
 [1143] As twenty thousand men myghte it biholde;
 [1144] His office natureel ay wol it holde,
 [1145] Up peril of my lyf, til that it dye.
 [1146] "Heere may ye se wel how that genterye
 [1147] Is nat annexed to possessioun,
 [1148] Sith folk ne doon hir operacioun
 [1149] Alwey, as dooth the fyr, lo, in his kynde.
 [1150] For, God it woot, men may wel often fynde
 [1151] A lordes sone do shame and vileynye;
 [1152] And he that wole han pris of his gentrye,
 [1153] For he was boren of a gentil hous
 [1154] And hadde his eldres noble and vertuous,
 [1155] And nel hymselven do no gentil dedis
 [1156] Ne folwen his gentil auncestre that deed is,
 [1157] He nys nat gentil, be he duc or erl,
 [1158] For vileyns synful dedes make a cherl.
 [1159] For gentillesse nys but renomee
 [1160] Of thyne auncestres, for hire heigh bountee,
 [1161] Which is a strange thyng to thy persone.
 [1162] Thy gentillesse cometh fro God allone.
 [1163] Thanne comth oure verray gentillesse of grace;
 [1164] It was no thyng biquethe us with oure place.
 [1165] "Thenketh hou noble, as seith Valerius,
 [1166] Was thilke Tullius Hostillius,
 [1167] That out of poverte roos to heigh noblesse.
 [1168] Reedeth Senek, and redeth eek Boece;
 [1169] Ther shul ye seen expres that it no drede is
 [1170] That he is gentil that dooth gentil dedis.
 [1171] And therfore, leeve housbonde, I thus conclude:
 [1172] Al were it that myne auncestres were rude,
 [1173] Yet may the hye God, and so hope I,
 [1174] Grante me grace to lyven vertuously.
 [1175] Thanne am I gentil, whan that I bigynne
 [1176] To lyven vertuously and weyve synne.
 [1177] "And ther as ye of poverte me repreeve,
 [1178] The hye God, on whom that we bileeve,
 [1179] In wilful poverte chees to lyve his lyf.
 [1180] And certes every man, mayden, or wyf
 [1181] May understonde that Jhesus, hevene kyng,
 [1182] Ne wolde nat chese a vicious lyvyng.
 [1183] Glad poverte is an honest thyng, certeyn;
 [1184] This wole Senec and othere clerkes seyn.
 [1185] Whoso that halt hym payd of his poverte,
 [1186] I holde hym riche, al hadde he nat a sherte.
 [1187] He that coveiteth is a povre wight,
 [1188] For he wolde han that is nat in his myght;
 [1189] But he that noght hath, ne coveiteth have,
 [1190] Is riche, although ye holde hym but a knave.
 [1191] Verray poverte, it syngeth proprely;
 [1192] Juvenal seith of poverte myrily:
 [1193] `The povre man, whan he goth by the weye,
 [1194] Bifore the theves he may synge and pleye.'
 [1195] Poverte is hateful good and, as I gesse,
 [1196] A ful greet bryngere out of bisynesse;
 [1197] A greet amendere eek of sapience
 [1198] To hym that taketh it in pacience.
 [1199] Poverte is this, although it seme alenge:
 [1200] Possessioun that no wight wol chalenge.
 [1201] Poverte ful ofte, whan a man is lowe,
 [1202] Maketh his God and eek hymself to knowe.
 [1203] Poverte a spectacle is, as thynketh me,
 [1204] Thurgh which he may his verray freendes see.
 [1205] And therfore, sire, syn that I noght yow greve,
 [1206] Of my poverte namoore ye me repreve.
 [1207] "Now, sire, of elde ye repreve me;
 [1208] And certes, sire, thogh noon auctoritee
 [1209] Were in no book, ye gentils of honour
 [1210] Seyn that men sholde an oold wight doon favour
 [1211] And clepe hym fader, for youre gentillesse;
 [1212] And auctours shal I fynden, as I gesse.
 [1213] "Now ther ye seye that I am foul and old,
 [1214] Than drede you noght to been a cokewold;
 [1215] For filthe and eelde, also moot I thee,
 [1216] Been grete wardeyns upon chastitee.
 [1217] But nathelees, syn I knowe youre delit,
 [1218] I shal fulfille youre worldly appetit.
 [1219] "Chese now," quod she, "oon of thise thynges tweye:
 [1220] To han me foul and old til that I deye,
 [1221] And be to yow a trewe, humble wyf,
 [1222] And nevere yow displese in al my lyf,
 [1223] Or elles ye wol han me yong and fair,
 [1224] And take youre aventure of the repair
 [1225] That shal be to youre hous by cause of me,
 [1226] Or in som oother place, may wel be.
 [1227] Now chese yourselven, wheither that yow liketh."
 [1228] This knyght avyseth hym and sore siketh,
 [1229] But atte laste he seyde in this manere:
 [1230] "My lady and my love, and wyf so deere,
 [1231] I put me in youre wise governance;
 [1232] Cheseth youreself which may be moost plesance
 [1233] And moost honour to yow and me also.
 [1234] I do no fors the wheither of the two,
 [1235] For as yow liketh, it suffiseth me."
 [1236] "Thanne have I gete of yow maistrie," quod she,
 [1237] "Syn I may chese and governe as me lest?"
 [1238] "Ye, certes, wyf," quod he, "I holde it best."
 [1239] "Kys me," quod she, "we be no lenger wrothe,
 [1240] For, by my trouthe, I wol be to yow bothe --
 [1241] This is to seyn, ye, bothe fair and good.
 [1242] I prey to God that I moote sterven wood,
 [1243] But I to yow be also good and trewe
 [1244] As evere was wyf, syn that the world was newe.
 [1245] And but I be to-morn as fair to seene
 [1246] As any lady, emperice, or queene,
 [1247] That is bitwixe the est and eke the west,
 [1248] Dooth with my lyf and deth right as yow lest.
 [1249] Cast up the curtyn, looke how that it is."
 [1250] And whan the knyght saugh verraily al this,
 [1251] That she so fair was, and so yong therto,
 [1252] For joye he hente hire in his armes two.
 [1253] His herte bathed in a bath of blisse.
 [1254] A thousand tyme a-rewe he gan hire kisse,
 [1255] And she obeyed hym in every thyng
 [1256] That myghte doon hym plesance or likyng.
 [1257] And thus they lyve unto hir lyves ende
 [1258] In parfit joye; and Jhesu Crist us sende
 [1259] Housbondes meeke, yonge, and fressh abedde,
 [1260] And grace t' overbyde hem that we wedde;
 [1261] And eek I praye Jhesu shorte hir lyves
 [1262] That noght wol be governed by hir wyves;
 [1263] And olde and angry nygardes of dispence,
 [1264] God sende hem soone verray pestilence!

      
The Canterbury Tales and Other Works of Chaucer (Middle English), by Geoffery Chaucer, [14th cent.], at sacred-texts.com

 

The Canterbury Tales

 

The Friar's Prologue

 [1265] This worthy lymytour, this noble Frere,
 [1266] He made alwey a maner louryng chiere
 [1267] Upon the Somonour, but for honestee
 [1268] No vileyns word as yet to hym spak he.
 [1269] But atte laste he seyde unto the wyf,
 [1270] "Dame," quod he, "God yeve yow right good lyf!
 [1271] Ye han heer touched, also moot I thee,
 [1272] In scole-matere greet difficultee.
 [1273] Ye han seyd muche thyng right wel, I seye;
 [1274] But, dame, heere as we ryde by the weye,
 [1275] Us nedeth nat to speken but of game,
 [1276] And lete auctoritees, on Goddes name,
 [1277] To prechyng and to scoles of clergye.
 [1278] But if it lyke to this compaignye,
 [1279] I wol yow of a somonour telle a game.
 [1280] Pardee, ye may wel knowe by the name
 [1281] That of a somonour may no good be sayd;
 [1282] I praye that noon of you be yvele apayd.
 [1283] A somonour is a rennere up and doun
 [1284] With mandementz for fornicacioun,
 [1285] And is ybet at every townes ende."
 [1286] Oure Hoost tho spak, "A, sire, ye sholde be hende
 [1287] And curteys, as a man of youre estaat;
 [1288] In compaignye we wol have no debaat.
 [1289] Telleth youre tale, and lat the Somonour be."
 [1290] "Nay," quod the Somonour, "lat hym seye to me
 [1291] What so hym list; whan it comth to my lot,
 [1292] By God, I shal hym quiten every grot.
 [1293] I shal hym tellen which a greet honour
 [1294] It is to be a flaterynge lymytour,
 [1295] And of many another manere cryme
 [1296] Which nedeth nat rehercen at this tyme;
 [1297] And his office I shal hym telle, ywis."
 [1298] Oure Hoost answerde, "Pees, namoore of this!"
 [1299] And after this he seyde unto the Frere,
 [1300] "Tel forth youre tale, leeve maister deere."

      
The Canterbury Tales and Other Works of Chaucer (Middle English), by Geoffery Chaucer, [14th cent.], at sacred-texts.com

 

The Canterbury Tales

 

The Friar's Tale

 [1301] Whilom ther was dwellynge in my contree
 [1302] An erchedeken, a man of heigh degree,
 [1303] That boldely dide execucioun
 [1304] In punysshynge of fornicacioun,
 [1305] Of wicchecraft, and eek of bawderye,
 [1306] Of diffamacioun, and avowtrye,
 [1307] Of chirche reves, and of testamentz,
 [1308] Of contractes and of lakke of sacramentz,
 [1309] Of usure, and of symonye also.
 [1310] But certes, lecchours dide he grettest wo;
 [1311] They sholde syngen if that they were hent;
 [1312] And smale tytheres weren foule yshent,
 [1313] If any persoun wolde upon hem pleyne.
 [1314] Ther myghte asterte hym no pecunyal peyne.
 [1315] For smale tithes and for smal offrynge
 [1316] He made the peple pitously to synge,
 [1317] For er the bisshop caughte hem with his hook,
 [1318] They weren in the erchedeknes book.
 [1319] Thanne hadde he, thurgh his jurisdiccioun,
 [1320] Power to doon on hem correccioun.
 [1321] He hadde a somonour redy to his hond;
 [1322] A slyer boye nas noon in Engelond;
 [1323] For subtilly he hadde his espiaille,
 [1324] That taughte hym wel wher that hym myghte availle.
 [1325] He koude spare of lecchours oon or two,
 [1326] To techen hym to foure and twenty mo.
 [1327] For thogh this Somonour wood were as an hare,
 [1328] To telle his harlotrye I wol nat spare;
 [1329] For we been out of his correccioun.
 [1330] They han of us no jurisdiccioun,
 [1331] Ne nevere shullen, terme of alle hir lyves.
 [1332] "Peter! so been wommen of the styves,"
 [1333] Quod the Somonour, "yput out of oure cure!"
 [1334] "Pees! with myschance and with mysaventure!"
 [1335] Thus seyde oure Hoost, "and lat hym telle his tale.
 [1336] Now telleth forth, thogh that the Somonour gale;
 [1337] Ne spareth nat, myn owene maister deere."
 [1338] This false theef, this somonour, quod the Frere,
 [1339] Hadde alwey bawdes redy to his hond,
 [1340] As any hauk to lure in Engelond,
 [1341] That tolde hym al the secree that they knewe,
 [1342] For hire acqueyntance was nat come of newe.
 [1343] They weren his approwours prively.
 [1344] He took hymself a greet profit therby;
 [1345] His maister knew nat alwey what he wan.
 [1346] Withouten mandement a lewed man
 [1347] He koude somne, on peyne of Cristes curs,
 [1348] And they were glade for to fille his purs
 [1349] And make hym grete feestes atte nale.
 [1350] And right as Judas hadde purses smale,
 [1351] And was a theef, right swich a theef was he;
 [1352] His maister hadde but half his duetee.
 [1353] He was, if I shal yeven hym his laude,
 [1354] A theef, and eek a somnour, and a baude.
 [1355] He hadde eek wenches at his retenue,
 [1356] That, wheither that sir Robert or sir Huwe,
 [1357] Or Jakke, or Rauf, or whoso that it were
 [1358] That lay by hem, they tolde it in his ere.
 [1359] Thus was the wenche and he of oon assent,
 [1360] And he wolde fecche a feyned mandement,
 [1361] And somne hem to chapitre bothe two,
 [1362] And pile the man, and lete the wenche go.
 [1363] Thanne wolde he seye, "Freend, I shal for thy sake
 [1364] Do striken hire out of oure lettres blake;
 [1365] Thee thar namoore as in this cas travaille.
 [1366] I am thy freend, ther I thee may availle."
 [1367] Certeyn he knew of briberyes mo
 [1368] Than possible is to telle in yeres two.
 [1369] For in this world nys dogge for the bowe
 [1370] That kan an hurt deer from an hool yknowe
 [1371] Bet than this somnour knew a sly lecchour,
 [1372] Or an avowtier, or a paramour.
 [1373] And for that was the fruyt of al his rente,
 [1374] Therfore on it he sette al his entente.
 [1375] And so bifel that ones on a day
 [1376] This somnour, evere waityng on his pray,
 [1377] Rood for to somne an old wydwe, a ribibe,
 [1378] Feynynge a cause, for he wolde brybe.
 [1379] And happed that he saugh bifore hym ryde
 [1380] A gay yeman, under a forest syde.
 [1381] A bowe he bar, and arwes brighte and kene;
 [1382] He hadde upon a courtepy of grene,
 [1383] An hat upon his heed with frenges blake.
 [1384] "Sire," quod this somnour, "hayl, and wel atake!"
 [1385] "Welcome," quod he, "and every good felawe!
 [1386] Wher rydestow, under this grene-wode shawe?"
 [1387] Seyde this yeman, "Wiltow fer to day?"
 [1388] This somnour hym answerde and seyde, "Nay;
 [1389] Heere faste by," quod he, "is myn entente
 [1390] To ryden, for to reysen up a rente
 [1391] That longeth to my lordes duetee."
 [1392] "Artow thanne a bailly?" "Ye," quod he.
 [1393] He dorste nat, for verray filthe and shame
 [1394] Seye that he was a somonour, for the name.
 [1395] "Depardieux," quod this yeman, "deere broother,
 [1396] Thou art a bailly, and I am another.
 [1397] I am unknowen as in this contree;
 [1398] Of thyn aqueyntance I wolde praye thee,
 [1399] And eek of bretherhede, if that yow leste.
 [1400] I have gold and silver in my cheste;
 [1401] If that thee happe to comen in oure shire,
 [1402] Al shal be thyn, right as thou wolt desire."
 [1403] "Grant mercy," quod this somonour, "by my feith!"
 [1404] Everych in ootheres hand his trouthe leith,
 [1405] For to be sworne bretheren til they deye.
 [1406] In daliance they ryden forth and pleye.
 [1407] This somonour, which that was as ful of jangles
 [1408] As ful of venym been thise waryangles
 [1409] And evere enqueryng upon every thyng,
 [1410] "Brother," quod he, "where is now youre dwellyng
 [1411] Another day if that I sholde yow seche?"
 [1412] This yeman hym answerde in softe speche,
 [1413] "Brother," quod he, "fer in the north contree,
 [1414] Whereas I hope som tyme I shal thee see.
 [1415] Er we departe, I shal thee so wel wisse
 [1416] That of myn hous ne shaltow nevere mysse."
 [1417] "Now, brother," quod this somonour, "I yow preye,
 [1418] Teche me, whil that we ryden by the weye,
 [1419] Syn that ye been a baillif as am I,
 [1420] Som subtiltee, and tel me feithfully
 [1421] In myn office how that I may moost wynne;
 [1422] And spareth nat for conscience ne synne,
 [1423] But as my brother tel me, how do ye."
 [1424] "Now, by my trouthe, brother deere," seyde he,
 [1425] "As I shal tellen thee a feithful tale,
 [1426] My wages been ful streite and ful smale.
 [1427] My lord is hard to me and daungerous,
 [1428] And myn office is ful laborous,
 [1429] And therfore by extorcions I lyve.
 [1430] For sothe, I take al that men wol me yive.
 [1431] Algate, by sleyghte or by violence,
 [1432] Fro yeer to yeer I wynne al my dispence.
 [1433] I kan no bettre telle, feithfully."
 [1434] "Now certes," quod this Somonour, "so fare I.
 [1435] I spare nat to taken, God it woot,
 [1436] But if it be to hevy or to hoot.
 [1437] What I may gete in conseil prively,
 [1438] No maner conscience of that have I.
 [1439] Nere myn extorcioun, I myghte nat lyven,
 [1440] Ne of swiche japes wol I nat be shryven.
 [1441] Stomak ne conscience ne knowe I noon;
 [1442] I shrewe thise shrifte-fadres everychoon.
 [1443] Wel be we met, by God and by Seint Jame!
 [1444] But, leeve brother, tel me thanne thy name,"
 [1445] Quod this somonour. In this meene while
 [1446] This yeman gan a litel for to smyle.
 [1447] "Brother," quod he, "wiltow that I thee telle?
 [1448] I am a feend; my dwellyng is in helle,
 [1449] And heere I ryde aboute my purchasyng,
 [1450] To wite wher men wol yeve me any thyng.
 [1451] My purchas is th' effect of al my rente.
 [1452] Looke how thou rydest for the same entente,
 [1453] To wynne good, thou rekkest nevere how;
 [1454] Right so fare I, for ryde wolde I now
 [1455] Unto the worldes ende for a preye."
 [1456] "A!" quod this somonour, "benedicite! What sey ye?
 [1457] I wende ye were a yeman trewely.
 [1458] Ye han a mannes shap as wel as I;
 [1459] Han ye a figure thanne determinat
 [1460] In helle, ther ye been in youre estat?"
 [1461] "Nay, certeinly," quod he, "ther have we noon;
 [1462] But whan us liketh we kan take us oon,
 [1463] Or elles make yow seme we been shape;
 [1464] Somtyme lyk a man, or lyk an ape,
 [1465] Or lyk an angel kan I ryde or go.
 [1466] It is no wonder thyng thogh it be so;
 [1467] A lowsy jogelour kan deceyve thee,
 [1468] And pardee, yet kan I moore craft than he."
 [1469] "Why," quod this somonour, "ryde ye thanne or goon
 [1470] In sondry shap, and nat alwey in oon?"
 [1471] "For we," quod he, "wol us swiche formes make
 [1472] As moost able is oure preyes for to take."
 [1473] "What maketh yow to han al this labour?"
 [1474] "Ful many a cause, leeve sire somonour,"
 [1475] Seyde this feend, "but alle thyng hath tyme.
 [1476] The day is short, and it is passed pryme,
 [1477] And yet ne wan I nothyng in this day.
 [1478] I wol entende to wynnyng, if I may,
 [1479] And nat entende oure wittes to declare.
 [1480] For, brother myn, thy wit is al to bare
 [1481] To understonde, althogh I tolde hem thee.
 [1482] But, for thou axest why labouren we --
 [1483] For somtyme we been Goddes instrumentz
 [1484] And meenes to doon his comandementz,
 [1485] Whan that hym list, upon his creatures,
 [1486] In divers art and in diverse figures.
 [1487] Withouten hym we have no myght, certayn,
 [1488] If that hym list to stonden ther-agayn.
 [1489] And somtyme, at oure prayere, han we leve
 [1490] Oonly the body and nat the soule greve;
 [1491] Witnesse on Job, whom that we diden wo.
 [1492] And somtyme han we myght of bothe two --
 [1493] This is to seyn, of soule and body eke.
 [1494] And somtyme be we suffred for to seke
 [1495] Upon a man and doon his soule unreste
 [1496] And nat his body, and al is for the beste.
 [1497] Whan he withstandeth oure temptacioun,
 [1498] It is a cause of his savacioun,
 [1499] Al be it that it was nat oure entente
 [1500] He sholde be sauf, but that we wolde hym hente.
 [1501] And somtyme be we servant unto man,
 [1502] As to the erchebisshop Seint Dunstan,
 [1503] And to the apostles servant eek was I."
 [1504] "Yet tel me," quod the somonour, "feithfully,
 [1505] Make ye yow newe bodies thus alway
 [1506] Of elementz?" The feend answerde, "Nay.
 [1507] Somtyme we feyne, and somtyme we aryse
 [1508] With dede bodyes, in ful sondry wyse,
 [1509] And speke as renably and faire and wel
 [1510] As to the Phitonissa dide Samuel.
 [1511] (And yet wol som men seye it was nat he;
 [1512] I do no fors of youre dyvynytee.)
 [1513] But o thyng warne I thee, I wol nat jape:
 [1514] Thou wolt algates wite how we been shape;
 [1515] Thou shalt herafterward, my brother deere,
 [1516] Come there thee nedeth nat of me to leere,
 [1517] For thou shalt, by thyn owene experience,
 [1518] Konne in a chayer rede of this sentence
 [1519] Bet than Virgile, while he was on lyve,
 [1520] Or Dant also. Now lat us ryde blyve,
 [1521] For I wole holde compaignye with thee
 [1522] Til it be so that thou forsake me."
 [1523] "Nay," quod this somonour, "that shal nat bityde!
 [1524] I am a yeman, knowen is ful wyde;
 [1525] My trouthe wol I holde, as in this cas.
 [1526] For though thou were the devel Sathanas,
 [1527] My trouthe wol I holde to my brother,
 [1528] As I am sworn, and ech of us til oother,
 [1529] For to be trewe brother in this cas;
 [1530] And bothe we goon abouten oure purchas.
 [1531] Taak thou thy part, what that men wol thee yive,
 [1532] And I shal myn; thus may we bothe lyve.
 [1533] And if that any of us have moore than oother,
 [1534] Lat hym be trewe and parte it with his brother."
 [1535] "I graunte," quod the devel, "by my fey."
 [1536] And with that word they ryden forth hir wey.
 [1537] And right at the entryng of the townes ende,
 [1538] To which this somonour shoop hym for to wende,
 [1539] They saugh a cart that charged was with hey,
 [1540] Which that a cartere droof forth in his wey.
 [1541] Deep was the wey, for which the carte stood.
 [1542] The cartere smoot and cryde as he were wood,
 [1543] "Hayt, Brok! Hayt, Scot! What spare ye for the stones?
 [1544] The feend," quod he, "yow fecche, body and bones,
 [1545] As ferforthly as evere were ye foled,
 [1546] So muche wo as I have with yow tholed!
 [1547] The devel have al, bothe hors and cart and hey!"
 [1548] This somonour seyde, "Heere shal we have a pley."
 [1549] And neer the feend he drough, as noght ne were,
 [1550] Ful prively, and rowned in his ere:
 [1551] "Herkne, my brother, herkne, by thy feith!
 [1552] Herestow nat how that the cartere seith?
 [1553] Hent it anon, for he hath yeve it thee,
 [1554] Bothe hey and cart, and eek his caples thre."
 [1555] "Nay," quod the devel, "God woot, never a deel!
 [1556] It is nat his entente, trust me weel.
 [1557] Axe hym thyself, if thou nat trowest me;
 [1558] Or elles stynt a while, and thou shalt see."
 [1559] This cartere thakketh his hors upon the croupe,
 [1560] And they bigonne to drawen and to stoupe.
 [1561] "Heyt! Now," quod he, "ther Jhesu Crist yow blesse,
 [1562] And al his handwerk, bothe moore and lesse!
 [1563] That was wel twight, myn owene lyard boy.
 [1564] I pray God save thee, and Seinte Loy!
 [1565] Now is my cart out of the slow, pardee!"
 [1566] "Lo, brother," quod the feend, "what tolde I thee?
 [1567] Heere may ye se, myn owene deere brother,
 [1568] The carl spak oo thing, but he thoghte another.
 [1569] Lat us go forth abouten oure viage;
 [1570] Heere wynne I nothyng upon cariage."
 [1571] Whan that they coomen somwhat out of towne,
 [1572] This somonour to his brother gan to rowne:
 [1573] "Brother," quod he, "heere woneth an old rebekke
 [1574] That hadde almoost as lief to lese hire nekke
 [1575] As for to yeve a peny of hir good.
 [1576] I wole han twelf pens, though that she be wood,
 [1577] Or I wol sompne hire unto oure office;
 [1578] And yet, God woot, of hire knowe I no vice.
 [1579] But for thou kanst nat, as in this contree,
 [1580] Wynne thy cost, taak heer ensample of me."
 [1581] This somonour clappeth at the wydwes gate.
 [1582] "Com out," quod he, "thou olde virytrate!
 [1583] I trowe thou hast som frere or preest with thee."
 [1584] "Who clappeth?" seyde this wyf, "benedicitee!
 [1585] God save you, sire, what is youre sweete wille?"
 [1586] "I have," quod he, "of somonce here a bille;
 [1587] Up peyne of cursyng, looke that thou be
 [1588] Tomorn bifore the erchedeknes knee
 [1589] T' answere to the court of certeyn thynges."
 [1590] "Now, Lord," quod she, "Crist Jhesu, kyng of kynges,
 [1591] So wisly helpe me, as I ne may.
 [1592] I have been syk, and that ful many a day.
 [1593] I may nat go so fer," quod she, "ne ryde,
 [1594] But I be deed, so priketh it in my syde.
 [1595] May I nat axe a libel, sire somonour,
 [1596] And answere there by my procuratour
 [1597] To swich thyng as men wole opposen me?"
 [1598] "Yis," quod this somonour, "pay anon -- lat se --
 [1599] Twelf pens to me, and I wol thee acquite.
 [1600] I shal no profit han therby but lite;
 [1601] My maister hath the profit and nat I.
 [1602] Com of, and lat me ryden hastily;
 [1603] Yif me twelf pens, I may no lenger tarye."
 [1604] "Twelf pens!" quod she, "Now, lady Seinte Marie
 [1605] So wisly help me out of care and synne,
 [1606] This wyde world thogh that I sholde wynne,
 [1607] Ne have I nat twelf pens withinne myn hoold.
 [1608] Ye knowen wel that I am povre and oold;
 [1609] Kithe youre almesse on me, povre wrecche."
 [1610] "Nay thanne," quod he, "the foule feend me fecche
 [1611] If I th' excuse, though thou shul be spilt!"
 [1612] "Allas!" quod she, "God woot, I have no gilt."
 [1613] "Pay me," quod he, "or by the sweete Seinte Anne,
 [1614] As I wol bere awey thy newe panne
 [1615] For dette which thou owest me of old.
 [1616] Whan that thou madest thyn housbonde cokewold,
 [1617] I payde at hoom for thy correccioun."
 [1618] "Thou lixt!" quod she, "by my savacioun,
 [1619] Ne was I nevere er now, wydwe ne wyf,
 [1620] Somoned unto youre court in al my lyf;
 [1621] Ne nevere I nas but of my body trewe!
 [1622] Unto the devel blak and rough of hewe
 [1623] Yeve I thy body and my panne also!"
 [1624] And whan the devel herde hire cursen so
 [1625] Upon hir knees, he seyde in this manere,
 [1626] "Now, Mabely, myn owene mooder deere,
 [1627] Is this youre wyl in ernest that ye seye?"
 [1628] "The devel," quod she, "so fecche hym er he deye,
 [1629] And panne and al, but he wol hym repente!"
 [1630] "Nay, olde stot, that is nat myn entente,"
 [1631] Quod this somonour, "for to repente me
 [1632] For any thyng that I have had of thee.
 [1633] I wolde I hadde thy smok and every clooth!"
 [1634] "Now, brother," quod the devel, "be nat wrooth;
 [1635] Thy body and this panne been myne by right.
 [1636] Thou shalt with me to helle yet tonyght,
 [1637] Where thou shalt knowen of oure privetee
 [1638] Moore than a maister of dyvynytee."
 [1639] And with that word this foule feend hym hente;
 [1640] Body and soule he with the devel wente
 [1641] Where as that somonours han hir heritage.
 [1642] And God, that maked after his ymage
 [1643] Mankynde, save and gyde us, alle and some,
 [1644] And leve thise somonours goode men bicome!
 [1645] Lordynges, I koude han toold yow, quod this Frere,
 [1646] Hadde I had leyser for this Somnour heere,
 [1647] After the text of Crist, Poul, and John,
 [1648] And of oure othere doctours many oon,
 [1649] Swiche peynes that youre hertes myghte agryse,
 [1650] Al be it so no tonge may it devyse,
 [1651] Thogh that I myghte a thousand wynter telle
 [1652] The peynes of thilke cursed hous of helle.
 [1653] But for to kepe us fro that cursed place,
 [1654] Waketh and preyeth Jhesu for his grace
 [1655] So kepe us fro the temptour Sathanas.
 [1656] Herketh this word! Beth war, as in this cas:
 [1657] "The leoun sit in his awayt alway
 [1658] To sle the innocent, if that he may."
 [1659] Disposeth ay youre hertes to withstonde
 [1660] The feend, that yow wolde make thral and bonde.
 [1661] He may nat tempte yow over youre myght,
 [1662] For Crist wol be youre champion and knyght.
 [1663] And prayeth that thise somonours hem repente
 [1664] Of hir mysdedes, er that the feend hem hente!

      
The Canterbury Tales and Other Works of Chaucer (Middle English), by Geoffery Chaucer, [14th cent.], at sacred-texts.com

 

The Canterbury Tales

 

The Summoner's Prologue

 [1665] This Somonour in his styropes hye stood;
 [1666] Upon this Frere his herte was so wood
 [1667] That lyk an aspen leef he quook for ire.
 [1668] "Lordynges," quod he, "but o thyng I desire;
 [1669] I yow biseke that, of youre curteisye,
 [1670] Syn ye han herd this false Frere lye,
 [1671] As suffreth me I may my tale telle.
 [1672] This Frere bosteth that he knoweth helle,
 [1673] And God it woot, that it is litel wonder;
 [1674] Freres and feendes been but lyte asonder.
 [1675] For, pardee, ye han ofte tyme herd telle
 [1676] How that a frere ravysshed was to helle
 [1677] In spirit ones by a visioun;
 [1678] And as an angel ladde hym up and doun,
 [1679] To shewen hym the peynes that ther were,
 [1680] In al the place saugh he nat a frere;
 [1681] Of oother folk he saugh ynowe in wo.
 [1682] Unto this angel spak the frere tho:
 [1683] `Now, sire,' quod he, `han freres swich a grace
 [1684] That noon of hem shal come to this place?'
 [1685] `Yis' quod this angel, `many a millioun!'
 [1686] And unto Sathanas he ladde hym doun.
 [1687] `And now hath Sathanas,' seith he, `a tayl
 [1688] Brodder than of a carryk is the sayl.
 [1689] Hold up thy tayl, thou Sathanas!' quod he;
 [1690] `Shewe forth thyn ers, and lat the frere se
 [1691] Where is the nest of freres in this place!'
 [1692] And er that half a furlong wey of space,
 [1693] Right so as bees out swarmen from an hyve,
 [1694] Out of the develes ers ther gonne dryve
 [1695] Twenty thousand freres on a route,
 [1696] And thurghout helle swarmed al aboute,
 [1697] And comen agayn as faste as they may gon,
 [1698] And in his ers they crepten everychon.
 [1699] He clapte his tayl agayn and lay ful stille.
 [1700] This frere, whan he looked hadde his fille
 [1701] Upon the tormentz of this sory place,
 [1702] His spirit God restored, of his grace,
 [1703] Unto his body agayn, and he awook.
 [1704] But natheles, for fere yet he quook,
 [1705] So was the develes ers ay in his mynde,
 [1706] That is his heritage of verray kynde.
 [1707] God save yow alle, save this cursed Frere!
 [1708] My prologe wol I ende in this manere."

      
The Canterbury Tales and Other Works of Chaucer (Middle English), by Geoffery Chaucer, [14th cent.], at sacred-texts.com

 

The Canterbury Tales

 

The Summoner's Tale

 [1709] Lordynges, ther is in Yorkshire, as I gesse,
 [1710] A mersshy contree called Holdernesse,
 [1711] In which ther wente a lymytour aboute
 [1712] To preche, and eek to begge, it is no doute.
 [1713] And so bifel that on a day this frere
 [1714] Hadde preched at a chirche in his manere,
 [1715] And specially, aboven every thyng,
 [1716] Excited he the peple in his prechyng
 [1717] To trentals, and to yeve, for Goddes sake,
 [1718] Wherwith men myghte hooly houses make,
 [1719] Ther as divine servyce is honoured,
 [1720] Nat ther as it is wasted and devoured,
 [1721] Ne ther it nedeth nat for to be yive,
 [1722] As to possessioners, that mowen lyve,
 [1723] Thanked be God, in wele and habundaunce.
 [1724] "Trentals," seyde he, "deliveren fro penaunce
 [1725] Hir freendes soules, as wel olde as yonge --
 [1726] Ye, whan that they been hastily ysonge,
 [1727] Nat for to holde a preest joly and gay --
 [1728] He syngeth nat but o masse in a day.
 [1729] Delivereth out," quod he, "anon the soules!
 [1730] Ful hard it is with flesshhook or with oules
 [1731] To been yclawed, or to brenne or bake.
 [1732] Now spede yow hastily, for Cristes sake!"
 [1733] And whan this frere had seyd al his entente,
 [1734] With qui cum patre forth his wey he wente.
 [1735] Whan folk in chirche had yeve him what hem leste,
 [1736] He wente his wey; no lenger wolde he reste.
 [1737] With scrippe and tipped staf, ytukked hye,
 [1738] In every hous he gan to poure and prye,
 [1739] And beggeth mele and chese, or elles corn.
 [1740] His felawe hadde a staf tipped with horn,
 [1741] A peyre of tables al of yvory,
 [1742] And a poyntel polysshed fetisly,
 [1743] And wroot the names alwey, as he stood,
 [1744] Of alle folk that yaf hym any good,
 [1745] Ascaunces that he wolde for hem preye.
 [1746] "Yif us a busshel whete, malt, or reye,
 [1747] A Goddes kechyl, or a trype of chese,
 [1748] Or elles what yow lyst, we may nat cheese;
 [1749] A Goddes halfpeny, or a masse peny,
 [1750] Or yif us of youre brawn, if ye have eny;
 [1751] A dagon of youre blanket, leeve dame,
 [1752] Oure suster deere -- lo! Heere I write youre name --
 [1753] Bacon or beef, or swich thyng as ye fynde."
 [1754] A sturdy harlot wente ay hem bihynde,
 [1755] That was hir hostes man, and bar a sak,
 [1756] And what men yaf hem, leyde it on his bak.
 [1757] And whan that he was out at dore, anon
 [1758] He planed awey the names everichon
 [1759] That he biforn had writen in his tables;
 [1760] He served hem with nyfles and with fables.
 [1761] "Nay, ther thou lixt, thou Somonour!" quod the Frere.
 [1762] "Pees," quod oure Hoost, "for Cristes mooder deere!
 [1763] Tel forth thy tale, and spare it nat at al."
 [1764] "So thryve I," quod this Somonour, "so I shal!"
 [1765] So longe he wente, hous by hous, til he
 [1766] Cam til an hous ther he was wont to be
 [1767] Refresshed moore than in an hundred placis.
 [1768] Syk lay the goode man whos that the place is;
 [1769] Bedrede upon a couche lowe he lay.
 [1770] "Deus hic!" quod he, "O Thomas, freend, good day!"
 [1771] Seyde this frere, curteisly and softe.
 [1772] "Thomas," quod he, "God yelde yow! Ful ofte
 [1773] Have I upon this bench faren ful weel;
 [1774] Heere have I eten many a myrie meel."
 [1775] And fro the bench he droof awey the cat,
 [1776] And leyde adoun his potente and his hat,
 [1777] And eek his scrippe, and sette hym softe adoun.
 [1778] His felawe was go walked into toun
 [1779] Forth with his knave, into that hostelrye
 [1780] Where as he shoop hym thilke nyght to lye.
 [1781] "O deere maister," quod this sike man,
 [1782] "How han ye fare sith that March bigan?
 [1783] I saugh yow noght this fourtenyght or moore."
 [1784] "God woot," quod he, "laboured I have ful soore,
 [1785] And specially for thy savacion
 [1786] Have I seyd many a precious orison,
 [1787] And for oure othere freendes, God hem blesse!
 [1788] I have to day been at youre chirche at messe,
 [1789] And seyd a sermon after my symple wit --
 [1790] Nat al after the text of hooly writ,
 [1791] For it is hard to yow, as I suppose,
 [1792] And therfore wol I teche yow al the glose.
 [1793] Glosynge is a glorious thyng, certeyn,
 [1794] For lettre sleeth, so as we clerkes seyn --
 [1795] There have I taught hem to be charitable,
 [1796] And spende hir good ther it is resonable;
 [1797] And there I saugh oure dame -- A! Where is she?"
 [1798] "Yond in the yerd I trowe that she be,"
 [1799] Seyde this man, "and she wol come anon."
 [1800] "Ey, maister, welcome be ye, by Seint John!"
 [1801] Seyde this wyf, "How fare ye, hertely?"
 [1802] The frere ariseth up ful curteisly,
 [1803] And hire embraceth in his armes narwe,
 [1804] And kiste hire sweete, and chirketh as a sparwe
 [1805] With his lyppes: "Dame," quod he, "right weel,
 [1806] As he that is youre servant every deel,
 [1807] Thanked be God, that yow yaf soule and lyf!
 [1808] Yet saugh I nat this day so fair a wyf
 [1809] In al the chirche, God so save me!"
 [1810] "Ye, God amende defautes, sire," quod she.
 [1811] "Algates, welcome be ye, by my fey!"
 [1812] "Graunt mercy, dame, this have I founde alwey.
 [1813] But of youre grete goodnesse, by youre leve,
 [1814] I wolde prey yow that ye nat yow greve,
 [1815] I wole with Thomas speke a litel throwe.
 [1816] Thise curatz been ful necligent and slowe
 [1817] To grope tendrely a conscience
 [1818] In shrift; in prechyng is my diligence,
 [1819] And studie in Petres wordes and in Poules.
 [1820] I walke and fisshe Cristen mennes soules
 [1821] To yelden Jhesu Crist his propre rente;
 [1822] To sprede his word is set al myn entente."
 [1823] "Now, by youre leve, o deere sire," quod she,
 [1824] "Chideth him weel, for seinte Trinitee!
 [1825] He is as angry as a pissemyre,
 [1826] Though that he have al that he kan desire;
 [1827] Though I hym wrye a-nyght and make hym warm,
 [1828] And over hym leye my leg outher myn arm,
 [1829] He groneth lyk oure boor, lith in oure sty.
 [1830] Oother desport right noon of hym have I;
 [1831] I may nat plese hym in no maner cas."
 [1832] "O Thomas, je vous dy, Thomas! Thomas!
 [1833] This maketh the feend; this moste ben amended.
 [1834] Ire is a thyng that hye God defended,
 [1835] And therof wol I speke a word or two."
 [1836] "Now, maister," quod the wyf, "er that I go,
 [1837] What wol ye dyne? I wol go theraboute."
 [1838] "Now, dame," quod he, "now je vous dy sanz doute,
 [1839] Have I nat of a capon but the lyvere,
 [1840] And of youre softe breed nat but a shyvere,
 [1841] And after that a rosted pigges heed --
 [1842] But that I nolde no beest for me were deed --
 [1843] Thanne hadde I with yow hoomly suffisaunce.
 [1844] I am a man of litel sustenaunce;
 [1845] My spirit hath his fostryng in the Bible.
 [1846] The body is ay so redy and penyble
 [1847] To wake, that my stomak is destroyed.
 [1848] I prey yow, dame, ye be nat anoyed,
 [1849] Though I so freendly yow my conseil shewe.
 [1850] By God! I wolde nat telle it but a fewe."
 [1851] "Now, sire," quod she, "but o word er I go.
 [1852] My child is deed withinne thise wykes two,
 [1853] Soone after that ye wente out of this toun."
 [1854] "His deeth saugh I by revelacioun,"
 [1855] Seide this frere, "at hoom in oure dortour.
 [1856] I dar wel seyn that, er that half an hour
 [1857] After his deeth, I saugh hym born to blisse
 [1858] In myn avision, so God me wisse!
 [1859] So dide oure sexteyn and oure fermerer,
 [1860] That han been trewe freres fifty yeer;
 [1861] They may now -- God be thanked of his loone! --
 [1862] Maken hir jubilee and walke allone.
 [1863] And up I roos, and al oure covent eke,
 [1864] With many a teere trillyng on my cheke,
 [1865] Withouten noyse or claterynge of belles;
 [1866] Te Deum was oure song, and nothyng elles,
 [1867] Save that to Crist I seyde an orison,
 [1868] Thankynge hym of his revelacion.
 [1869] For, sire and dame, trusteth me right weel,
 [1870] Oure orisons been moore effectueel,
 [1871] And moore we seen of Cristes secree thynges,
 [1872] Than burel folk, although they weren kynges.
 [1873] We lyve in poverte and in abstinence,
 [1874] And burell folk in richesse and despence
 [1875] Of mete and drynke, and in hir foul delit.
 [1876] We han this worldes lust al in despit.
 [1877] Lazar and Dives lyveden diversly,
 [1878] And divers gerdon hadden they therby.
 [1879] Whoso wol preye, he moot faste and be clene,
 [1880] And fatte his soule, and make his body lene.
 [1881] We fare as seith th' apostle; clooth and foode
 [1882] Suffisen us, though they be nat ful goode.
 [1883] The clennesse and the fastynge of us freres
 [1884] Maketh that Crist accepteth oure preyeres.
 [1885] "Lo, Moyses fourty dayes and fourty nyght
 [1886] Fasted, er that the heighe God of myght
 [1887] Spak with hym in the mountayne of Synay.
 [1888] With empty wombe, fastynge many a day,
 [1889] Receyved he the lawe that was writen
 [1890] With Goddes fynger; and Elye, wel ye witen,
 [1891] In mount Oreb, er he hadde any speche
 [1892] With hye God, that is oure lyves leche,
 [1893] He fasted longe and was in contemplaunce.
 [1894] "Aaron, that hadde the temple in governaunce,
 [1895] And eek the othere preestes everichon,
 [1896] Into the temple whan they sholde gon
 [1897] To preye for the peple and do servyse,
 [1898] They nolden drynken in no maner wyse
 [1899] No drynke which that myghte hem dronke make,
 [1900] But there in abstinence preye and wake,
 [1901] Lest that they deyden. Taak heede what I seye!
 [1902] But they be sobre that for the peple preye,
 [1903] War that -- I seye namoore, for it suffiseth.
 [1904] "Oure Lord Jhesu, as hooly writ devyseth,
 [1905] Yaf us ensample of fastynge and preyeres.
 [1906] Therfore we mendynantz, we sely freres,
 [1907] Been wedded to poverte and continence,
 [1908] To charite, humblesse, and abstinence,
 [1909] To persecucioun for rightwisnesse,
 [1910] To wepynge, misericorde, and clennesse.
 [1911] And therfore may ye se that oure preyeres --
 [1912] I speke of us, we mendynantz, we freres --
 [1913] Been to the hye God moore acceptable
 [1914] Than youres, with youre feestes at the table.
 [1915] Fro Paradys first, if I shal nat lye,
 [1916] Was man out chaced for his glotonye;
 [1917] And chaast was man in Paradys, certeyn.
 [1918] "But herkne now, Thomas, what I shal seyn.
 [1919] I ne have no text of it, as I suppose,
 [1920] But I shal fynde it in a maner glose,
 [1921] That specially oure sweete Lord Jhesus
 [1922] Spak this by freres, whan he seyde thus:
 [1923] `Blessed be they that povere in spirit been.'
 [1924] And so forth al the gospel may ye seen,
 [1925] Wher it be likker oure professioun,
 [1926] Or hirs that swymmen in possessioun.
 [1927] Fy on hire pompe and on hire glotonye!
 [1928] And for hir lewednesse I hem diffye.
 [1929] "Me thynketh they been lyk Jovinyan,
 [1930] Fat as a whale, and walkynge as a swan,
 [1931] Al vinolent as botel in the spence.
 [1932] Hir preyere is of ful greet reverence,
 [1933] Whan they for soules seye the psalm of Davit:
 [1934] Lo, `buf!' they seye, `cor meum eructavit!'
 [1935] Who folweth Cristes gospel and his foore,
 [1936] But we that humble been, and chaast, and poore,
 [1937] Werkeris of Goddes word, nat auditours?
 [1938] Therfore, right as an hauk up at a sours
 [1939] Up springeth into th' eir, right so prayeres
 [1940] Of charitable and chaste bisy freres
 [1941] Maken hir sours to Goddes eres two.
 [1942] Thomas, Thomas! So moote I ryde or go,
 [1943] And by that lord that clepid is Seint Yve,
 [1944] Nere thou oure brother, sholdestou nat thryve.
 [1945] In our chapitre praye we day and nyght
 [1946] To Crist, that he thee sende heele and myght
 [1947] Thy body for to weelden hastily."
 [1948] "God woot," quod he, "no thyng therof feele I!
 [1949] As help me Crist, as I in fewe yeres,
 [1950] Have spent upon diverse manere freres
 [1951] Ful many a pound; yet fare I never the bet.
 [1952] Certeyn, my good have I almoost biset.
 [1953] Farwel, my gold, for it is al ago!"
 [1954] The frere answerde, "O Thomas, dostow so?
 [1955] What nedeth yow diverse freres seche?
 [1956] What nedeth hym that hath a parfit leche
 [1957] To sechen othere leches in the toun?
 [1958] Youre inconstance is youre confusioun.
 [1959] Holde ye thanne me, or elles oure covent,
 [1960] To praye for yow been insufficient?
 [1961] Thomas, that jape nys nat worth a myte.
 [1962] Youre maladye is for we han to lyte.
 [1963] A, yif that covent half a quarter otes!
 [1964] A, yif that covent foure and twenty grotes!
 [1965] A, yif that frere a peny, and lat hym go!
 [1966] Nay, nay, Thomas, it may no thyng be so!
 [1967] What is a ferthyng worth parted in twelve?
 [1968] Lo, ech thyng that is oned in himselve
 [1969] Is moore strong than whan it is toscatered.
 [1970] Thomas, of me thou shalt nat been yflatered;
 [1971] Thou woldest han oure labour al for noght.
 [1972] The hye God, that al this world hath wroght,
 [1973] Seith that the werkman worthy is his hyre.
 [1974] Thomas, noght of youre tresor I desire
 [1975] As for myself, but that al oure covent
 [1976] To preye for yow is ay so diligent,
 [1977] And for to buylden Cristes owene chirche.
 [1978] Thomas, if ye wol lernen for to wirche,
 [1979] Of buyldynge up of chirches may ye fynde
 [1980] If it be good in Thomas lyf of Inde.
 [1981] Ye lye heere ful of anger and of ire,
 [1982] With which the devel set youre herte afyre,
 [1983] And chiden heere the sely innocent,
 [1984] Youre wyf, that is so meke and pacient.
 [1985] And therfore, Thomas, trowe me if thee leste,
 [1986] Ne stryve nat with thy wyf, as for thy beste;
 [1987] And ber this word awey now, by thy feith;
 [1988] Touchynge swich thyng, lo, what the wise seith:
 [1989] `Withinne thyn hous ne be thou no leon;
 [1990] To thy subgitz do noon oppression,
 [1991] Ne make thyne aqueyntances nat to flee.'
 [1992] And, Thomas, yet eft-soones I charge thee,
 [1993] Be war from Ire that in thy bosom slepeth;
 [1994] War fro the serpent that so slily crepeth
 [1995] Under the gras and styngeth subtilly.
 [1996] Be war, my sone, and herkne paciently
 [1997] That twenty thousand men han lost hir lyves
 [1998] For stryvyng with hir lemmans and hir wyves.
 [1999] Now sith ye han so hooly meke a wyf,
 [2000] What nedeth yow, Thomas, to maken stryf?
 [2001] Ther nys, ywys, no serpent so cruel,
 [2002] Whan man tret on his tayl, ne half so fel,
 [2003] As womman is, whan she hath caught an ire;
 [2004] Vengeance is thanne al that they desire.
 [2005] Ire is a synne, oon of the grete of sevene,
 [2006] Abhomynable unto the God of hevene;
 [2007] And to hymself it is destruccion.
 [2008] This every lewed viker or person
 [2009] Kan seye, how ire engendreth homycide.
 [2010] Ire is, in sooth, executour of pryde.
 [2011] I koude of ire seye so muche sorwe,
 [2012] My tale sholde laste til to-morwe.
 [2013] And therfore preye I God bothe day and nyght
 [2014] An irous man, God sende hym litel myght!
 [2015] It is greet harm and certes greet pitee
 [2016] To sette an irous man in heigh degree.
 [2017] "Whilom ther was an irous potestat,
 [2018] As seith Senek, that, durynge his estaat,
 [2019] Upon a day out ryden knyghtes two,
 [2020] And as Fortune wolde that it were so,
 [2021] That oon of hem cam hoom, that oother noght.
 [2022] Anon the knyght bifore the juge is broght,
 [2023] That seyde thus, `Thou hast thy felawe slayn,
 [2024] For which I deme thee to the deeth, certayn.'
 [2025] And to another knyght comanded he,
 [2026] `Go lede hym to the deeth, I charge thee.'
 [2027] And happed, as they wente by the weye
 [2028] Toward the place ther he sholde deye,
 [2029] The knyght cam which men wenden had be deed.
 [2030] Thanne thoughte they it were the beste reed
 [2031] To lede hem bothe to the juge agayn.
 [2032] They seiden, `Lord, the knyght ne hath nat slayn
 [2033] His felawe; heere he standeth hool alyve.'
 [2034] `Ye shul be deed,' quod he, `so moot I thryve!
 [2035] That is to seyn, bothe oon, and two, and thre!'
 [2036] And to the firste knyght right thus spak he,
 [2037] `I dampned thee; thou most algate be deed.
 [2038] And thou also most nedes lese thyn heed,
 [2039] For thou art cause why thy felawe deyth.'
 [2040] And to the thridde knyght right thus he seith,
 [2041] `Thou hast nat doon that I comanded thee.'
 [2042] And thus he dide doon sleen hem alle thre.
 [2043] "Irous Cambises was eek dronkelewe,
 [2044] And ay delited hym to been a shrewe.
 [2045] And so bifel, a lord of his meynee
 [2046] That loved vertuous moralitee
 [2047] Seyde on a day bitwix hem two right thus:
 [2048] "`A lord is lost, if he be vicius;
 [2049] And dronkenesse is eek a foul record
 [2050] Of any man, and namely in a lord.
 [2051] Ther is ful many an eye and many an ere
 [2052] Awaityng on a lord, and he noot where.
 [2053] For Goddes love, drynk moore attemprely!
 [2054] Wyn maketh man to lesen wrecchedly
 [2055] His mynde and eek his lymes everichon.'
 [2056] "`The revers shaltou se,' quod he, `anon,
 [2057] And preve it by thyn owene experience,
 [2058] That wyn ne dooth to folk no swich offence.
 [2059] Ther is no wyn bireveth me my myght
 [2060] Of hand ne foot, ne of myne eyen sight.'
 [2061] And for despit he drank ful muchel moore,
 [2062] An hondred part, than he hadde don bifoore;
 [2063] And right anon this irous, cursed wrecche
 [2064] Leet this knyghtes sone bifore hym fecche,
 [2065] Comandynge hym he sholde bifore hym stonde.
 [2066] And sodeynly he took his bowe in honde,
 [2067] And up the streng he pulled to his ere,
 [2068] And with an arwe he slow the child right there.
 [2069] `Now wheither have I a siker hand or noon?'
 [2070] Quod he; `Is al my myght and mynde agon?
 [2071] Hath wyn bireved me myn eyen sight?'
 [2072] What sholde I telle th' answere of the knyght?
 [2073] His sone was slayn; ther is namoore to seye.
 [2074] Beth war, therfore, with lordes how ye pleye.
 [2075] Syngeth Placebo and `I shal, if I kan,'
 [2076] But if it be unto a povre man.
 [2077] To a povre man men sholde his vices telle,
 [2078] But nat to a lord, thogh he sholde go to helle.
 [2079] "Lo irous Cirus, thilke Percien,
 [2080] How he destroyed the ryver of Gysen,
 [2081] For that an hors of his was dreynt therinne,
 [2082] Whan that he wente Babiloigne to wynne.
 [2083] He made that the ryver was so smal
 [2084] That wommen myghte wade it over al.
 [2085] Lo, what seyde he that so wel teche kan?
 [2086] `Ne be no felawe to an irous man,
 [2087] Ne with no wood man walke by the weye,
 [2088] Lest thee repente;' I wol no ferther seye.
 [2089] "Now, Thomas, leeve brother, lef thyn ire;
 [2090] Thou shalt me fynde as just as is a squyre.
 [2091] Hoold nat the develes knyf ay at thyn herte --
 [2092] Thyn angre dooth thee al to soore smerte --
 [2093] But shewe to me al thy confessioun."
 [2094] "Nay," quod the sike man, "by Seint Symoun!
 [2095] I have be shryven this day at my curat.
 [2096] I have hym toold hoolly al myn estat;
 [2097] Nedeth namoore to speken of it," seith he,
 [2098] "But if me list, of myn humylitee."
 [2099] "Yif me thanne of thy gold, to make oure cloystre,"
 [2100] Quod he, "for many a muscle and many an oystre,
 [2101] Whan othere men han ben ful wel at eyse,
 [2102] Hath been oure foode, our cloystre for to reyse.
 [2103] And yet, God woot, unnethe the fundement
 [2104] Parfourned is, ne of our pavement
 [2105] Nys nat a tyle yet withinne oure wones.
 [2106] By God, we owen fourty pound for stones.
 [2107] "Now help, Thomas, for hym that harwed helle!
 [2108] For elles moste we oure bookes selle.
 [2109] And if yow lakke oure predicacioun,
 [2110] Thanne goth the world al to destruccioun.
 [2111] For whoso wolde us fro this world bireve,
 [2112] So God me save, Thomas, by youre leve,
 [2113] He wolde bireve out of this world the sonne.
 [2114] For who kan teche and werchen as we konne?
 [2115] And that is nat of litel tyme," quod he,
 [2116] "But syn Elye was, or Elise,
 [2117] Han freres been -- that fynde I of record --
 [2118] In charitee, ythanked be oure Lord!
 [2119] Now Thomas, help, for seinte charitee!"
 [2120] And doun anon he sette hym on his knee.
 [2121] This sike man wax wel ny wood for ire;
 [2122] He wolde that the frere had been on-fire
 [2123] With his false dissymulacioun.
 [2124] "Swich thyng as is in my possessioun,"
 [2125] Quod he, "that may I yeve, and noon oother.
 [2126] Ye sey me thus, how that I am youre brother?"
 [2127] "Ye, certes," quod the frere, "trusteth weel.
 [2128] I took oure dame oure lettre with oure seel."
 [2129] "Now wel," quod he, "and somwhat shal I yive
 [2130] Unto youre hooly covent whil I lyve;
 [2131] And in thyn hand thou shalt it have anon,
 [2132] On this condicion, and oother noon,
 [2133] That thou departe it so, my deere brother,
 [2134] That every frere have also muche as oother.
 [2135] This shaltou swere on thy professioun,
 [2136] Withouten fraude or cavillacioun."
 [2137] "I swere it," quod this frere, "by my feith!"
 [2138] And therwithal his hand in his he leith,
 [2139] "Lo, heer my feith; in me shal be no lak."
 [2140] "Now thanne, put in thyn hand doun by my bak,"
 [2141] Seyde this man, "and grope wel bihynde.
 [2142] Bynethe my buttok there shaltow fynde
 [2143] A thyng that I have hyd in pryvetee."
 [2144] "A!" thoghte this frere, "That shal go with me!"
 [2145] And doun his hand he launcheth to the clifte
 [2146] In hope for to fynde there a yifte.
 [2147] And whan this sike man felte this frere
 [2148] Aboute his tuwel grope there and heere,
 [2149] Amydde his hand he leet the frere a fart;
 [2150] Ther nys no capul, drawynge in a cart,
 [2151] That myghte have lete a fart of swich a soun.
 [2152] The frere up stirte as dooth a wood leoun --
 [2153] "A, false cherl," quod he, "for Goddes bones!
 [2154] This hastow for despit doon for the nones.
 [2155] Thou shalt abye this fart, if that I may!"
 [2156] His meynee, whiche that herden this affray,
 [2157] Cam lepynge in and chaced out the frere;
 [2158] And forth he gooth, with a ful angry cheere,
 [2159] And fette his felawe, ther as lay his stoor.
 [2160] He looked as it were a wilde boor;
 [2161] He grynte with his teeth, so was he wrooth.
 [2162] A sturdy paas doun to the court he gooth,
 [2163] Wher as ther woned a man of greet honour,
 [2164] To whom that he was alwey confessour.
 [2165] This worthy man was lord of that village.
 [2166] This frere cam as he were in a rage,
 [2167] Where as this lord sat etyng at his bord;
 [2168] Unnethes myghte the frere speke a word,
 [2169] Til atte laste he seyde, "God yow see!"
 [2170] This lord gan looke, and seide, "Benedicitee!
 [2171] What, frere John, what maner world is this?
 [2172] I se wel that som thyng ther is amys;
 [2173] Ye looken as the wode were ful of thevys.
 [2174] Sit doun anon, and tel me what youre grief is,
 [2175] And it shal been amended, if I may."
 [2176] "I have," quod he, "had a despit this day,
 [2177] God yelde yow, adoun in youre village,
 [2178] That in this world is noon so povre a page
 [2179] That he nolde have abhomynacioun
 [2180] Of that I have receyved in youre toun.
 [2181] And yet ne greveth me nothyng so soore,
 [2182] As that this olde cherl with lokkes hoore
 [2183] Blasphemed hath oure hooly covent eke."
 [2184] "Now, maister," quod this lord, "I yow biseke --"
 [2185] "No maister, sire," quod he, "but servitour,
 [2186] Thogh I have had in scole that honour.
 [2187] God liketh nat that `Raby' men us calle,
 [2188] Neither in market ne in youre large halle."
 [2189] "No fors," quod he, "but tel me al youre grief."
 [2190] "Sire," quod this frere, "an odious meschief
 [2191] This day bityd is to myn ordre and me,
 [2192] And so, per consequens, to ech degree
 [2193] Of hooly chirche -- God amende it soone!"
 [2194] "Sire," quod the lord, "ye woot what is to doone.
 [2195] Distempre yow noght; ye be my confessour;
 [2196] Ye been the salt of the erthe and the savour.
 [2197] For Goddes love, youre pacience ye holde!
 [2198] Tel me youre grief." And he anon hym tolde,
 [2199] As ye han herd biforn -- ye woot wel what.
 [2200] The lady of the hous ay stille sat
 [2201] Til she had herd what the frere sayde.
 [2202] "Ey, Goddes mooder," quod she, "Blisful mayde!
 [2203] Is ther oght elles? Telle me feithfully."
 [2204] "Madame," quod he, "how thynke ye herby?"
 [2205] "How that me thynketh?" quod she. "So God me speede,
 [2206] I seye a cherl hath doon a cherles dede.
 [2207] What shold I seye? God lat hym nevere thee!
 [2208] His sike heed is ful of vanytee;
 [2209] I holde hym in a manere frenesye."
 [2210] "Madame," quod he, "by God, I shal nat lye,
 [2211] But I on oother wyse may be wreke,
 [2212] I shal disclaundre hym over al ther I speke,
 [2213] This false blasphemour that charged me
 [2214] To parte that wol nat departed be
 [2215] To every man yliche, with meschaunce!"
 [2216] The lord sat stille as he were in a traunce,
 [2217] And in his herte he rolled up and doun,
 [2218] "How hadde this cherl ymaginacioun
 [2219] To shewe swich a probleme to the frere?
 [2220] Nevere erst er now herde I of swich mateere.
 [2221] I trowe the devel putte it in his mynde.
 [2222] In ars-metrike shal ther no man fynde,
 [2223] Biforn this day, of swich a question.
 [2224] Who sholde make a demonstracion
 [2225] That every man sholde have yliche his part
 [2226] As of the soun or savour of a fart?
 [2227] O nyce, proude cherl, I shrewe his face!
 [2228] Lo, sires," quod the lord, "with harde grace!
 [2229] Who evere herde of swich a thyng er now?
 [2230] To every man ylike? Tel me how.
 [2231] It is an inpossible; it may nat be.
 [2232] Ey, nyce cherl, God lete him nevere thee!
 [2233] The rumblynge of a fart, and every soun,
 [2234] Nis but of eir reverberacioun,
 [2235] And evere it wasteth litel and litel awey.
 [2236] Ther is no man kan deemen, by my fey,
 [2237] If that it were departed equally.
 [2238] What, lo, my cherl, lo, yet how shrewedly
 [2239] Unto my confessour to-day he spak!
 [2240] I holde hym certeyn a demonyak!
 [2241] Now ete youre mete, and lat the cherl go pleye;
 [2242] Lat hym go honge hymself a devel weye!"
 [2243] Now stood the lordes squier at the bord,
 [2244] That karf his mete, and herde word by word
 [2245] Of alle thynges whiche I have yow sayd.
 [2246] "My lord," quod he, "be ye nat yvele apayd,
 [2247] I koude telle, for a gowne-clooth,
 [2248] To yow, sire frere, so ye be nat wrooth,
 [2249] How that this fart sholde evene deled be
 [2250] Among youre covent, if it lyked me."
 [2251] "Tel," quod the lord, "and thou shalt have anon
 [2252] A gowne-clooth, by God and by Seint John!"
 [2253] "My lord," quod he, "whan that the weder is fair,
 [2254] Withouten wynd or perturbynge of air,
 [2255] Lat brynge a cartwheel heere into this halle;
 [2256] But looke that it have his spokes alle --
 [2257] Twelve spokes hath a cartwheel comunly.
 [2258] And bryng me thanne twelve freres. Woot ye why?
 [2259] For thrittene is a covent, as I gesse.
 [2260] Youre confessour heere, for his worthynesse,
 [2261] Shal parfourne up the nombre of his covent.
 [2262] Thanne shal they knele doun, by oon assent,
 [2263] And to every spokes ende, in this manere,
 [2264] Ful sadly leye his nose shal a frere.
 [2265] Youre noble confessour -- there God hym save! --
 [2266] Shal holde his nose upright under the nave.
 [2267] Thanne shal this cherl, with bely stif and toght
 [2268] As any tabour, hyder been ybroght;
 [2269] And sette hym on the wheel right of this cart,
 [2270] Upon the nave, and make hym lete a fart.
 [2271] And ye shul seen, up peril of my lyf,
 [2272] By preeve which that is demonstratif,
 [2273] That equally the soun of it wol wende,
 [2274] And eke the stynk, unto the spokes ende,
 [2275] Save that this worthy man, youre confessour,
 [2276] By cause he is a man of greet honour,
 [2277] Shal have the firste fruyt, as resoun is.
 [2278] The noble usage of freres yet is this,
 [2279] The worthy men of hem shul first be served;
 [2280] And certeinly he hath it weel disserved.
 [2281] He hath to-day taught us so muche good
 [2282] With prechyng in the pulpit ther he stood,
 [2283] That I may vouche sauf, I sey for me,
 [2284] He hadde the firste smel of fartes thre;
 [2285] And so wolde al his covent hardily,
 [2286] He bereth hym so faire and hoolily."
 [2287] The lord, the lady, and ech man, save the frere,
 [2288] Seyde that Jankyn spak, in this matere,
 [2289] As wel as Euclide [dide] or Ptholomee.
 [2290] Touchynge the cherl, they seyde, subtiltee
 [2291] And heigh wit made hym speken as he spak;
 [2292] He nys no fool, ne no demonyak.
 [2293] And Jankyn hath ywonne a newe gowne --
 [2294] My tale is doon; we been almoost at towne.

      
The Canterbury Tales and Other Works of Chaucer (Middle English), by Geoffery Chaucer, [14th cent.], at sacred-texts.com

 

The Canterbury Tales

 

The Clerk's Prologue

 [1] "Sire Clerk of Oxenford," oure Hooste sayde,
 [2] "Ye ryde as coy and stille as dooth a mayde
 [3] Were newe spoused, sittynge at the bord;
 [4] This day ne herde I of youre tonge a word.
 [5] I trowe ye studie aboute som sophyme;
 [6] But Salomon seith `every thyng hath tyme.'
 [7] "For Goddes sake, as beth of bettre cheere!
 [8] It is no tyme for to studien heere.
 [9] Telle us som myrie tale, by youre fey!
 [10] For what man that is entred in a pley,
 [11] He nedes moot unto the pley assente.
 [12] But precheth nat, as freres doon in Lente,
 [13] To make us for oure olde synnes wepe,
 [14] Ne that thy tale make us nat to slepe.
 [15] "Telle us som murie thyng of aventures.
 [16] Youre termes, youre colours, and youre figures,
 [17] Keepe hem in stoor til so be ye endite
 [18] Heigh style, as whan that men to kynges write.
 [19] Speketh so pleyn at this tyme, we yow preye,
 [20] That we may understonde what ye seye."
 [21] This worthy clerk benignely answerde:
 [22] "Hooste," quod he, "I am under youre yerde;
 [23] Ye han of us as now the governance,
 [24] And therfore wol I do yow obeisance,
 [25] As fer as resoun axeth, hardily.
 [26] I wol yow telle a tale which that I
 [27] Lerned at Padowe of a worthy clerk,
 [28] As preved by his wordes and his werk.
 [29] He is now deed and nayled in his cheste;
 [30] I prey to God so yeve his soule reste!
 [31] "Fraunceys Petrak, the lauriat poete,
 [32] Highte this clerk, whos rethorike sweete
 [33] Enlumyned al Ytaille of poetrie,
 [34] As Lynyan dide of philosophie,
 [35] Or lawe, or oother art particuler;
 [36] But Deeth, that wol nat suffre us dwellen heer,
 [37] But as it were a twynklyng of an ye,
 [38] Hem bothe hath slayn, and alle shul we dye.
 [39] "But forth to tellen of this worthy man
 [40] That taughte me this tale, as I bigan,
 [41] I seye that first with heigh stile he enditeth,
 [42] Er he the body of his tale writeth,
 [43] A prohemye, in the which discryveth he
 [44] Pemond and of Saluces the contree,
 [45] And speketh of Apennyn, the hilles hye,
 [46] That been the boundes of West Lumbardye,
 [47] And of Mount Vesulus in special,
 [48] Where as the Poo out of a welle smal
 [49] Taketh his firste spryngyng and his sours,
 [50] That estward ay encresseth in his cours
 [51] To Emele-ward, to Ferrare, and Venyse,
 [52] The which a long thyng were to devyse.
 [53] And trewely, as to my juggement,
 [54] Me thynketh it a thyng impertinent,
 [55] Save that he wole conveyen his mateere;
 [56] But this his tale, which that ye may heere." 

      
The Canterbury Tales and Other Works of Chaucer (Middle English), by Geoffery Chaucer, [14th cent.], at sacred-texts.com

 

The Canterbury Tales

 

The Clerk's Tale

 [57] Ther is, at the west syde of Ytaille,
 [58] Doun at the roote of Vesulus the colde,
 [59] A lusty playn, habundant of vitaille,
 [60] Where many a tour and toun thou mayst biholde,
 [61] That founded were in tyme of fadres olde,
 [62] And many another delitable sighte,
 [63] And Saluces this noble contree highte.
 [64] A markys whilom lord was of that lond,
 [65] As were his worthy eldres hym bifore;
 [66] And obeisant, ay redy to his hond,
 [67] Were alle his liges, bothe lasse and moore.
 [68] Thus in delit he lyveth, and hath doon yoore,
 [69] Biloved and drad, thurgh favour of Fortune,
 [70] Bothe of his lordes and of his commune.
 [71] Therwith he was, to speke as of lynage,
 [72] The gentilleste yborn of Lumbardye,
 [73] A fair persone, and strong, and yong of age,
 [74] And ful of honour and of curteisye;
 [75] Discreet ynogh his contree for to gye,
 [76] Save in somme thynges that he was to blame;
 [77] And Walter was this yonge lordes name.
 [78] I blame hym thus: that he considered noght
 [79] In tyme comynge what myghte hym bityde,
 [80] But on his lust present was al his thoght,
 [81] As for to hauke and hunte on every syde.
 [82] Wel ny alle othere cures leet he slyde,
 [83] And eek he nolde -- and that was worst of alle --
 [84] Wedde no wyf, for noght that may bifalle.
 [85] Oonly that point his peple bar so soore
 [86] That flokmeele on a day they to hym wente,
 [87] And oon of hem, that wisest was of loore --
 [88] Or elles that the lord best wolde assente
 [89] That he sholde telle hym what his peple mente,
 [90] Or elles koude he shewe wel swich mateere --
 [91] He to the markys seyde as ye shul heere:
 [92] "O noble markys, youre humanitee
 [93] Asseureth us and yeveth us hardinesse,
 [94] As ofte as tyme is of necessitee,
 [95] That we to yow mowe telle oure hevynesse.
 [96] Accepteth, lord, now of youre gentillesse
 [97] That we with pitous herte unto yow pleyne,
 [98] And lat youre eres nat my voys desdeyne.
 [99] "Al have I noght to doone in this mateere
 [100] Moore than another man hath in this place,
 [101] Yet for as muche as ye, my lord so deere,
 [102] Han alwey shewed me favour and grace
 [103] I dar the bettre aske of yow a space
 [104] Of audience to shewen oure requeste,
 [105] And ye, my lord, to doon right as yow leste.
 [106] "For certes, lord, so wel us liketh yow
 [107] And al youre werk, and evere han doon, that we
 [108] Ne koude nat us self devysen how
 [109] We myghte lyven in moore felicitee,
 [110] Save o thyng, lord, if it youre wille be,
 [111] That for to been a wedded man yow leste;
 [112] Thanne were youre peple in sovereyn hertes reste.
 [113] "Boweth youre nekke under that blisful yok
 [114] Of soveraynetee, noght of servyse,
 [115] Which that men clepe spousaille or wedlok;
 [116] And thenketh, lord, among youre thoghtes wyse
 [117] How that oure dayes passe in sondry wyse,
 [118] For thogh we slepe, or wake, or rome, or ryde,
 [119] Ay fleeth the tyme; it nyl no man abyde.
 [120] "And thogh youre grene youthe floure as yit,
 [121] In crepeth age alwey, as stille as stoon,
 [122] And deeth manaceth every age, and smyt
 [123] In ech estaat, for ther escapeth noon;
 [124] And al so certein as we knowe echoon
 [125] That we shul deye, as uncerteyn we alle
 [126] Been of that day whan deeth shal on us falle.
 [127] "Accepteth thanne of us the trewe entente,
 [128] That nevere yet refuseden youre heeste,
 [129] And we wol, lord, if that ye wole assente,
 [130] Chese yow a wyf, in short tyme atte leeste,
 [131] Born of the gentilleste and of the meeste
 [132] Of al this land, so that it oghte seme
 [133] Honour to God and yow, as we kan deeme.
 [134] "Delivere us out of al this bisy drede,
 [135] And taak a wyf, for hye Goddes sake!
 [136] For if it so bifelle, as God forbede,
 [137] That thurgh youre deeth youre lyne sholde slake,
 [138] And that a straunge successour sholde take
 [139] Youre heritage, O wo were us alyve!
 [140] Wherfore we pray you hastily to wyve."
 [141] Hir meeke preyere and hir pitous cheere
 [142] Made the markys herte han pitee.
 [143] "Ye wol," quod he, "myn owene peple deere,
 [144] To that I nevere erst thoughte streyne me.
 [145] I me rejoysed of my liberte,
 [146] That seelde tyme is founde in mariage;
 [147] Ther I was free, I moot been in servage.
 [148] "But nathelees I se youre trewe entente,
 [149] And truste upon youre wit, and have doon ay;
 [150] Wherfore of my free wyl I wole assente
 [151] To wedde me, as soone as evere I may.
 [152] But ther as ye han profred me to-day
 [153] To chese me a wyf, I yow relesse
 [154] That choys and prey yow of that profre cesse.
 [155] "For God it woot, that children ofte been
 [156] Unlyk hir worthy eldres hem bifore;
 [157] Bountee comth al of God, nat of the streen
 [158] Of which they been engendred and ybore.
 [159] I truste in Goddes bountee, and therfore
 [160] My mariage and myn estaat and reste
 [161] I hym bitake; he may doon as hym leste.
 [162] "Lat me allone in chesynge of my wyf --
 [163] That charge upon my bak I wole endure.
 [164] But I yow preye, and charge upon youre lyf,
 [165] What wyf that I take, ye me assure
 [166] To worshipe hire, whil that hir lyf may dure,
 [167] In word and werk, bothe heere and everywheere,
 [168] As she an emperoures doghter weere.
 [169] "And forthermoore, this shal ye swere: that ye
 [170] Agayn my choys shul neither grucche ne stryve;
 [171] For sith I shal forgoon my libertee
 [172] At youre requeste, as evere moot I thryve,
 [173] Ther as myn herte is set, ther wol I wyve;
 [174] And but ye wole assente in swich manere,
 [175] I prey yow, speketh namoore of this matere."
 [176] With hertely wyl they sworen and assenten
 [177] To al this thyng -- ther seyde no wight nay --
 [178] Bisekynge hym of grace, er that they wenten,
 [179] That he wolde graunten hem a certein day
 [180] Of his spousaille, as soone as evere he may;
 [181] For yet alwey the peple somwhat dredde,
 [182] Lest that the markys no wyf wolde wedde.
 [183] He graunted hem a day, swich as hym leste,
 [184] On which he wolde be wedded sikerly,
 [185] And seyde he dide al this at hir requeste.
 [186] And they, with humble entente, buxomly,
 [187] Knelynge upon hir knees ful reverently,
 [188] Hym thonken alle; and thus they han an ende
 [189] Of hire entente, and hoom agayn they wende.
 [190] And heerupon he to his officeres
 [191] Comaundeth for the feste to purveye,
 [192] And to his privee knyghtes and squieres
 [193] Swich charge yaf as hym liste on hem leye;
 [194] And they to his comandement obeye,
 [195] And ech of hem dooth al his diligence
 [196] To doon unto the feeste reverence.
 [197] Noght fer fro thilke paleys honurable,
 [198] Wher as this markys shoop his mariage,
 [199] There stood a throop, of site delitable,
 [200] In which that povre folk of that village
 [201] Hadden hir beestes and hir herbergage,
 [202] And of hire labour tooke hir sustenance,
 [203] After that the erthe yaf hem habundance.
 [204] Amonges thise povre folk ther dwelte a man
 [205] Which that was holden povrest of hem alle;
 [206] But hye God somtyme senden kan
 [207] His grace into a litel oxes stalle;
 [208] Janicula men of that throop hym calle.
 [209] A doghter hadde he, fair ynogh to sighte,
 [210] And Grisildis this yonge mayden highte.
 [211] But for to speke of vertuous beautee,
 [212] Thanne was she oon the faireste under sonne;
 [213] For povreliche yfostred up was she,
 [214] No likerous lust was thurgh hire herte yronne.
 [215] Wel ofter of the welle than of the tonne
 [216] She drank, and for she wolde vertu plese,
 [217] She knew wel labour but noon ydel ese.
 [218] But thogh this mayde tendre were of age,
 [219] Yet in the brest of hire virginitee
 [220] Ther was enclosed rype and sad corage;
 [221] And in greet reverence and charitee
 [222] Hir olde povre fader fostred shee.
 [223] A fewe sheep, spynnynge, on feeld she kepte;
 [224] She wolde noght been ydel til she slepte.
 [225] And whan she homward cam, she wolde brynge
 [226] Wortes or othere herbes tymes ofte,
 [227] The whiche she shredde and seeth for hir lyvynge,
 [228] And made hir bed ful hard and nothyng softe;
 [229] And ay she kepte hir fadres lyf on-lofte
 [230] With everich obeisaunce and diligence
 [231] That child may doon to fadres reverence.
 [232] Upon Grisilde, this povre creature,
 [233] Ful ofte sithe this markys sette his ye
 [234] As he on huntyng rood paraventure;
 [235] And whan it fil that he myghte hire espye,
 [236] He noght with wantown lookyng of folye
 [237] His eyen caste on hire, but in sad wyse
 [238] Upon hir chiere he wolde hym ofte avyse,
 [239] Commendynge in his herte hir wommanhede,
 [240] And eek hir vertu, passynge any wight
 [241] Of so yong age, as wel in chiere as dede.
 [242] For thogh the peple have no greet insight
 [243] In vertu, he considered ful right
 [244] Hir bountee, and disposed that he wolde
 [245] Wedde hire oonly, if evere he wedde sholde.
 [246] The day of weddyng cam, but no wight kan
 [247] Telle what womman that it sholde be;
 [248] For which merveille wondred many a man,
 [249] And seyden, whan they were in privetee,
 [250] "Wol nat oure lord yet leve his vanytee?
 [251] Wol he nat wedde? Allas! Allas, the while!
 [252] Why wole he thus hymself and us bigile?"
 [253] But nathelees this markys hath doon make
 [254] Of gemmes, set in gold and in asure,
 [255] Brooches and rynges, for Grisildis sake;
 [256] And of hir clothyng took he the mesure
 [257] By a mayde lyk to hire stature,
 [258] And eek of othere aornementes alle
 [259] That unto swich a weddyng sholde falle.
 [260] The time of undren of the same day
 [261] Approcheth, that this weddyng sholde be,
 [262] And al the paleys put was in array,
 [263] Bothe halle and chambres, ech in his degree;
 [264] Houses of office stuffed with plentee
 [265] Ther maystow seen, of deyntevous vitaille
 [266] That may be founde as fer as last Ytaille.
 [267] This roial markys, richely arrayed,
 [268] Lordes and ladyes in his compaignye,
 [269] The whiche that to the feeste weren yprayed,
 [270] And of his retenue the bachelrye,
 [271] With many a soun of sondry melodye,
 [272] Unto the village of the which I tolde
 [273] In this array the righte wey han holde.
 [274] Grisilde of this, God woot, ful innocent,
 [275] That for hire shapen was al this array,
 [276] To fecchen water at a welle is went,
 [277] And cometh hoom as soone as ever she may;
 [278] For wel she hadde herd seyd that thilke day
 [279] The markys sholde wedde, and if she myghte,
 [280] She wolde fayn han seyn som of that sighte.
 [281] She thoghte, "I wole with othere maydens stonde,
 [282] That been my felawes, in oure dore and se
 [283] The markysesse, and therfore wol I fonde
 [284] To doon at hoom, as soone as it may be,
 [285] The labour which that longeth unto me,
 [286] And thanne I may at leyser hire biholde,
 [287] If she this wey unto the castel holde."
 [288] And as she wolde over hir thresshfold gon,
 [289] The markys cam and gan hire for to calle;
 [290] And she set doun hir water pot anon,
 [291] Biside the thresshfold, in an oxes stalle,
 [292] And doun upon hir knes she gan to falle,
 [293] And with sad contenance kneleth stille,
 [294] Til she had herd what was the lordes wille.
 [295] This thoghtful markys spak unto this mayde
 [296] Ful sobrely, and seyde in this manere:
 [297] "Where is youre fader, O Grisildis?" he sayde.
 [298] And she with reverence, in humble cheere,
 [299] Answerde, "Lord, he is al redy heere."
 [300] And in she gooth withouten lenger lette,
 [301] And to the markys she hir fader fette.
 [302] He by the hand thanne took this olde man,
 [303] And seyde thus, whan he hym hadde asyde:
 [304] "Janicula, I neither may ne kan
 [305] Lenger the plesance of myn herte hyde.
 [306] If that thou vouche sauf, what so bityde,
 [307] Thy doghter wol I take, er that I wende,
 [308] As for my wyf, unto hir lyves ende.
 [309] "Thou lovest me, I woot it wel certeyn,
 [310] And art my feithful lige man ybore,
 [311] And al that liketh me, I dar wel seyn
 [312] It liketh thee, and specially therfore
 [313] Tel me that poynt that I have seyd bifore,
 [314] If that thou wolt unto that purpos drawe,
 [315] To take me as for thy sone-in-lawe."
 [316] This sodeyn cas this man astonyed so
 [317] That reed he wax; abayst and al quakynge
 [318] He stood; unnethes seyde he wordes mo,
 [319] But oonly thus: "Lord," quod he, "my willynge
 [320] Is as ye wole, ne ayeynes youre likynge
 [321] I wol no thyng, ye be my lord so deere;
 [322] Right as yow lust, governeth this mateere."
 [323] "Yet wol I," quod this markys softely,
 [324] "That in thy chambre I and thou and she
 [325] Have a collacioun, and wostow why?
 [326] For I wol axe if it hire wille be
 [327] To be my wyf and reule hire after me.
 [328] And al this shal be doon in thy presence;
 [329] I wol noght speke out of thyn audience."
 [330] And in the chambre, whil they were aboute
 [331] Hir tretys, which as ye shal after heere,
 [332] The peple cam unto the hous withoute,
 [333] And wondred hem in how honest manere
 [334] And tentifly she kepte hir fader deere.
 [335] But outrely Grisildis wondre myghte,
 [336] For nevere erst ne saugh she swich a sighte.
 [337] No wonder is thogh that she were astoned
 [338] To seen so greet a gest come in that place;
 [339] She nevere was to swiche gestes woned,
 [340] For which she looked with ful pale face.
 [341] But shortly forth this matere for to chace,
 [342] Thise arn the wordes that the markys sayde
 [343] To this benigne, verray, feithful mayde:
 [344] "Grisilde," he seyde, "ye shal wel understonde
 [345] It liketh to youre fader and to me
 [346] That I yow wedde, and eek it may so stonde,
 [347] As I suppose, ye wol that it so be.
 [348] But thise demandes axe I first," quod he,
 [349] "That, sith it shal be doon in hastif wyse,
 [350] Wol ye assente, or elles yow avyse?
 [351] "I seye this: be ye redy with good herte
 [352] To al my lust, and that I frely may,
 [353] As me best thynketh, do yow laughe or smerte,
 [354] And nevere ye to grucche it, nyght ne day?
 [355] And eek whan I sey `ye,' ne sey nat `nay,'
 [356] Neither by word ne frownyng contenance?
 [357] Swere this, and heere I swere oure alliance."
 [358] Wondrynge upon this word, quakynge for drede,
 [359] She seyde, "Lord, undigne and unworthy
 [360] Am I to thilke honour that ye me beede,
 [361] But as ye wole youreself, right so wol I.
 [362] And heere I swere that nevere willyngly,
 [363] In werk ne thoght, I nyl yow disobeye,
 [364] For to be deed, though me were looth to deye."
 [365] "This is ynogh, Grisilde myn," quod he.
 [366] And forth he gooth with a ful sobre cheere
 [367] Out at the dore, and after that cam she,
 [368] And to the peple he seyde in this manere:
 [369] "This is my wyf," quod he, "that standeth heere.
 [370] Honoureth hire and loveth hire, I preye,
 [371] Whoso me loveth; ther is namoore to seye."
 [372] And for that no thyng of hir olde geere
 [373] She sholde brynge into his hous, he bad
 [374] That wommen sholde dispoillen hire right theere;
 [375] Of which thise ladyes were nat right glad
 [376] To handle hir clothes, wherinne she was clad.
 [377] But nathelees, this mayde bright of hewe
 [378] Fro foot to heed they clothed han al newe.
 [379] Hir heris han they kembd, that lay untressed
 [380] Ful rudely, and with hir fyngres smale
 [381] A corone on hire heed they han ydressed,
 [382] And sette hire ful of nowches grete and smale.
 [383] Of hire array what sholde I make a tale?
 [384] Unnethe the peple hir knew for hire fairnesse
 [385] Whan she translated was in swich richesse.
 [386] This markys hath hire spoused with a ryng
 [387] Broght for the same cause, and thanne hire sette
 [388] Upon an hors, snow-whit and wel amblyng,
 [389] And to his paleys, er he lenger lette,
 [390] With joyful peple that hire ladde and mette,
 [391] Conveyed hire; and thus the day they spende
 [392] In revel, til the sonne gan descende.
 [393] And shortly forth this tale for to chace,
 [394] I seye that to this newe markysesse
 [395] God hath swich favour sent hire of his grace
 [396] That it ne semed nat by liklynesse
 [397] That she was born and fed in rudenesse,
 [398] As in a cote or in an oxe-stalle,
 [399] But norissed in an emperoures halle.
 [400] To every wight she woxen is so deere
 [401] And worshipful that folk ther she was bore,
 [402] And from hire birthe knewe hire yeer by yeere,
 [403] Unnethe trowed they -- but dorste han swore --
 [404] That to Janicle, of which I spak bifore,
 [405] She doghter were, for, as by conjecture,
 [406] Hem thoughte she was another creature.
 [407] For though that evere vertuous was she,
 [408] She was encressed in swich excellence
 [409] Of thewes goode, yset in heigh bountee,
 [410] And so discreet and fair of eloquence,
 [411] So benigne and so digne of reverence,
 [412] And koude so the peples herte embrace,
 [413] That ech hire lovede that looked on hir face.
 [414] Noght oonly of Saluces in the toun
 [415] Publiced was the bountee of hir name,
 [416] But eek biside in many a regioun,
 [417] If oon seide wel, another seyde the same;
 [418] So spradde of hire heighe bountee the fame
 [419] That men and wommen, as wel yonge as olde,
 [420] Goon to Saluce upon hire to biholde.
 [421] Thus Walter lowely -- nay, but roially --
 [422] Wedded with fortunat honestetee,
 [423] In Goddes pees lyveth ful esily
 [424] At hoom, and outward grace ynogh had he;
 [425] And for he saugh that under low degree
 [426] Was ofte vertu hid, the peple hym heelde
 [427] A prudent man, and that is seyn ful seelde.
 [428] Nat oonly this Grisildis thurgh hir wit
 [429] Koude al the feet of wyfly hoomlinesse,
 [430] But eek, whan that the cas required it,
 [431] The commune profit koude she redresse.
 [432] Ther nas discord, rancour, ne hevynesse
 [433] In al that land that she ne koude apese,
 [434] And wisely brynge hem alle in reste and ese.
 [435] Though that hire housbonde absent were anon,
 [436] If gentil men or othere of hire contree
 [437] Were wrothe, she wolde bryngen hem aton;
 [438] So wise and rype wordes hadde she,
 [439] And juggementz of so greet equitee,
 [440] That she from hevene sent was, as men wende,
 [441] Peple to save and every wrong t' amende.
 [442] Nat longe tyme after that this Grisild
 [443] Was wedded, she a doghter hath ybore,
 [444] Al had hire levere have born a knave child;
 [445] Glad was this markys and the folk therfore,
 [446] For though a mayde child coome al bifore,
 [447] She may unto a knave child atteyne
 [448] By liklihede, syn she nys nat bareyne.
 [449] Ther fil, as it bifalleth tymes mo,
 [450] Whan that this child had souked but a throwe,
 [451] This markys in his herte longeth so
 [452] To tempte his wyf, hir sadnesse for to knowe,
 [453] That he ne myghte out of his herte throwe
 [454] This merveillous desir his wyf t' assaye;
 [455] Nedelees, God woot, he thoghte hire for t' affraye.
 [456] He hadde assayed hire ynogh bifore,
 [457] And foond hire evere good; what neded it
 [458] Hire for to tempte, and alwey moore and moore,
 [459] Though som men preise it for a subtil wit?
 [460] But as for me, I seye that yvele it sit
 [461] To assaye a wyf whan that it is no nede,
 [462] And putten hire in angwyssh and in drede.
 [463] For which this markys wroghte in this manere:
 [464] He cam allone a-nyght, ther as she lay,
 [465] With stierne face and with ful trouble cheere,
 [466] And seyde thus: "Grisilde," quod he, "that day
 [467] That I yow took out of youre povere array,
 [468] And putte yow in estaat of heigh noblesse --
 [469] Ye have nat that forgeten, as I gesse?
 [470] "I seye, Grisilde, this present dignitee,
 [471] In which that I have put yow, as I trowe,
 [472] Maketh yow nat foryetful for to be
 [473] That I yow took in povre estaat ful lowe,
 [474] For any wele ye moot youreselven knowe.
 [475] Taak heede of every word that y yow seye;
 [476] Ther is no wight that hereth it but we tweye.
 [477] "Ye woot youreself wel how that ye cam heere
 [478] Into this hous, it is nat longe ago;
 [479] And though to me that ye be lief and deere,
 [480] Unto my gentils ye be no thyng so.
 [481] They seyn, to hem it is greet shame and wo
 [482] For to be subgetz and been in servage
 [483] To thee, that born art of a smal village.
 [484] "And namely sith thy doghter was ybore
 [485] Thise wordes han they spoken, doutelees.
 [486] But I desire, as I have doon bifore,
 [487] To lyve my lyf with hem in reste and pees.
 [488] I may nat in this caas be recchelees;
 [489] I moot doon with thy doghter for the beste,
 [490] Nat as I wolde, but as my peple leste.
 [491] "And yet, God woot, this is ful looth to me;
 [492] But nathelees withoute youre wityng
 [493] I wol nat doon; but this wol I," quod he,
 [494] "That ye to me assente as in this thyng.
 [495] Shewe now youre pacience in youre werkyng,
 [496] That ye me highte and swore in youre village
 [497] That day that maked was oure mariage."
 [498] Whan she had herd al this, she noght ameved
 [499] Neither in word, or chiere, or contenaunce,
 [500] For, as it semed, she was nat agreved.
 [501] She seyde, "Lord, al lyth in youre plesaunce.
 [502] My child and I, with hertely obeisaunce,
 [503] Been youres al, and ye mowe save or spille
 [504] Youre owene thyng; werketh after youre wille.
 [505] "Ther may no thyng, God so my soule save,
 [506] Liken to yow that may displese me;
 [507] Ne I desire no thyng for to have,
 [508] Ne drede for to leese, save oonly yee.
 [509] This wyl is in myn herte, and ay shal be;
 [510] No lengthe of tyme or deeth may this deface,
 [511] Ne chaunge my corage to another place."
 [512] Glad was this markys of hire answeryng,
 [513] But yet he feyned as he were nat so;
 [514] Al drery was his cheere and his lookyng,
 [515] Whan that he sholde out of the chambre go.
 [516] Soone after this, a furlong wey or two,
 [517] He prively hath toold al his entente
 [518] Unto a man, and to his wyf hym sente.
 [519] A maner sergeant was this privee man,
 [520] The which that feithful ofte he founden hadde
 [521] In thynges grete, and eek swich folk wel kan
 [522] Doon execucioun in thynges badde.
 [523] The lord knew wel that he hym loved and dradde;
 [524] And whan this sergeant wiste his lordes wille,
 [525] Into the chambre he stalked hym ful stille.
 [526] "Madame," he seyde, "ye moote foryeve it me,
 [527] Though I do thyng to which I am constreyned.
 [528] Ye been so wys that ful wel knowe ye
 [529] That lordes heestes mowe nat been yfeyned;
 [530] They mowe wel been biwailled or compleyned,
 [531] But men moote nede unto hire lust obeye,
 [532] And so wol I; ther is namoore to seye.
 [533] "This child I am comanded for to take" --
 [534] And spak namoore, but out the child he hente
 [535] Despitously, and gan a cheere make
 [536] As though he wolde han slayn it er he wente.
 [537] Grisildis moot al suffre and al consente,
 [538] And as a lamb she sitteth meke and stille,
 [539] And leet this crueel sergeant doon his wille.
 [540] Suspecious was the diffame of this man,
 [541] Suspect his face, suspect his word also;
 [542] Suspect the tyme in which he this bigan.
 [543] Allas! Hir doghter that she loved so,
 [544] She wende he wolde han slawen it right tho.
 [545] But nathelees she neither weep ne syked,
 [546] Conformynge hire to that the markys lyked.
 [547] But atte laste to speken she bigan,
 [548] And mekely she to the sergeant preyde,
 [549] So as he was a worthy gentil man,
 [550] That she moste kisse hire child er that it deyde.
 [551] And in hir barm this litel child she leyde
 [552] With ful sad face, and gan the child to blisse,
 [553] And lulled it, and after gan it kisse.
 [554] And thus she seyde in hire benigne voys,
 [555] "Fareweel my child! I shal thee nevere see.
 [556] But sith I thee have marked with the croys
 [557] Of thilke Fader -- blessed moote he be! --
 [558] That for us deyde upon a croys of tree,
 [559] Thy soule, litel child, I hym bitake,
 [560] For this nyght shaltow dyen for my sake."
 [561] I trowe that to a norice in this cas
 [562] It had been hard this reuthe for to se;
 [563] Wel myghte a mooder thanne han cryd "allas!"
 [564] But nathelees so sad stidefast was she
 [565] That she endured al adversitee,
 [566] And to the sergeant mekely she sayde,
 [567] "Have heer agayn youre litel yonge mayde.
 [568] "Gooth now," quod she, "and dooth my lordes heeste;
 [569] But o thyng wol I prey yow of youre grace,
 [570] That, but my lord forbad yow, atte leeste
 [571] Burieth this litel body in som place
 [572] That beestes ne no briddes it torace."
 [573] But he no word wol to that purpos seye,
 [574] But took the child and wente upon his weye.
 [575] This sergeant cam unto his lord ageyn,
 [576] And of Grisildis wordes and hire cheere
 [577] He tolde hym point for point, in short and pleyn,
 [578] And hym presenteth with his doghter deere.
 [579] Somwhat this lord hadde routhe in his manere,
 [580] But nathelees his purpos heeld he stille,
 [581] As lordes doon, whan they wol han hir wille;
 [582] And bad this sergeant that he pryvely
 [583] Sholde this child softe wynde and wrappe,
 [584] With alle circumstances tendrely,
 [585] And carie it in a cofre or in a lappe;
 [586] But, upon peyne his heed of for to swappe,
 [587] That no man sholde knowe of his entente,
 [588] Ne whenne he cam, ne whider that he wente;
 [589] But at Boloigne to his suster deere,
 [590] That thilke tyme of Panik was countesse,
 [591] He sholde it take and shewe hire this mateere,
 [592] Bisekynge hire to doon hire bisynesse
 [593] This child to fostre in alle gentillesse;
 [594] And whos child that it was he bad hire hyde
 [595] From every wight, for oght that may bityde.
 [596] The sergeant gooth, and hath fulfild this thyng;
 [597] But to this markys now retourne we.
 [598] For now gooth he ful faste ymaginyng
 [599] If by his wyves cheere he myghte se,
 [600] Or by hire word aperceyve, that she
 [601] Were chaunged; but he nevere hire koude fynde
 [602] But evere in oon ylike sad and kynde.
 [603] As glad, as humble, as bisy in servyse,
 [604] And eek in love, as she was wont to be,
 [605] Was she to hym in every maner wyse;
 [606] Ne of hir doghter noght a word spak she.
 [607] Noon accident, for noon adversitee,
 [608] Was seyn in hire, ne nevere hir doghter name
 [609] Ne nempned she, in ernest nor in game.
 [610] In this estaat ther passed been foure yeer
 [611] Er she with childe was, but, as God wolde,
 [612] A knave child she bar by this Walter,
 [613] Ful gracious and fair for to biholde.
 [614] And whan that folk it to his fader tolde,
 [615] Nat oonly he but al his contree merye
 [616] Was for this child, and God they thanke and herye.
 [617] Whan it was two yeer old, and fro the brest
 [618] Departed of his norice, on a day
 [619] This markys caughte yet another lest
 [620] To tempte his wyf yet ofter, if he may.
 [621] O nedelees was she tempted in assay!
 [622] But wedded men ne knowe no mesure,
 [623] Whan that they fynde a pacient creature.
 [624] "Wyf," quod this markys, "ye han herd er this
 [625] My peple sikly berth oure mariage;
 [626] And namely sith my sone yboren is,
 [627] Now is it worse than evere in al oure age.
 [628] The murmur sleeth myn herte and my corage,
 [629] For to myne eres comth the voys so smerte
 [630] That it wel ny destroyed hath myn herte.
 [631] "Now sey they thus: `Whan Walter is agon,
 [632] Thanne shal the blood of Janicle succede
 [633] And been oure lord, for oother have we noon.'
 [634] Swiche wordes seith my peple, out of drede.
 [635] Wel oughte I of swich murmur taken heede,
 [636] For certeinly I drede swich sentence,
 [637] Though they nat pleyn speke in myn audience.
 [638] "I wolde lyve in pees, if that I myghte;
 [639] Wherfore I am disposed outrely,
 [640] As I his suster servede by nyghte,
 [641] Right so thenke I to serve hym pryvely.
 [642] This warne I yow, that ye nat sodeynly
 [643] Out of youreself for no wo sholde outreye;
 [644] Beth pacient, and therof I yow preye."
 [645] "I have," quod she, "seyd thus, and evere shal:
 [646] I wol no thyng, ne nyl no thyng, certayn,
 [647] But as yow list. Naught greveth me at al,
 [648] Though that my doughter and my sone be slayn --
 [649] At youre comandement, this is to sayn.
 [650] I have noght had no part of children tweyne
 [651] But first siknesse, and after, wo and peyne.
 [652] "Ye been oure lord; dooth with youre owene thyng
 [653] Right as yow list; axeth no reed at me.
 [654] For as I lefte at hoom al my clothyng,
 [655] Whan I first cam to yow, right so," quod she,
 [656] "Lefte I my wyl and al my libertee,
 [657] And took youre clothyng; wherfore I yow preye,
 [658] Dooth youre plesaunce; I wol youre lust obeye.
 [659] "And certes, if I hadde prescience
 [660] Youre wyl to knowe, er ye youre lust me tolde,
 [661] I wolde it doon withouten necligence;
 [662] But now I woot youre lust, and what ye wolde,
 [663] Al youre plesance ferme and stable I holde;
 [664] For wiste I that my deeth wolde do yow ese,
 [665] Right gladly wolde I dyen, yow to plese.
 [666] "Deth may noght make no comparisoun
 [667] Unto youre love." And whan this markys say
 [668] The constance of his wyf, he caste adoun
 [669] His eyen two, and wondreth that she may
 [670] In pacience suffre al this array;
 [671] And forth he goth with drery contenance,
 [672] But to his herte it was ful greet plesance.
 [673] This ugly sergeant, in the same wyse
 [674] That he hire doghter caughte, right so he --
 [675] Or worse, if men worse kan devyse --
 [676] Hath hent hire sone, that ful was of beautee.
 [677] And evere in oon so pacient was she
 [678] That she no chiere maade of hevynesse,
 [679] But kiste hir sone, and after gan it blesse;
 [680] Save this, she preyede hym that, if he myghte,
 [681] Hir litel sone he wolde in erthe grave
 [682] His tendre lymes, delicaat to sighte,
 [683] Fro foweles and fro beestes for to save.
 [684] But she noon answere of hym myghte have.
 [685] He wente his wey, as hym no thyng ne roghte,
 [686] But to Boloigne he tendrely it broghte.
 [687] This markys wondred, evere lenger the moore,
 [688] Upon hir pacience, and if that he
 [689] Ne hadde soothly knowen therbifoore
 [690] That parfitly hir children loved she,
 [691] He wolde have wend that of som subtiltee,
 [692] And of malice, or for crueel corage,
 [693] That she hadde suffred this with sad visage.
 [694] But wel he knew that next hymself, certayn,
 [695] She loved hir children best in every wyse.
 [696] But now of wommen wolde I axen fayn
 [697] If thise assayes myghte nat suffise?
 [698] What koude a sturdy housbonde moore devyse
 [699] To preeve hir wyfhod and hir stedefastnesse,
 [700] And he continuynge evere in sturdinesse?
 [701] But ther been folk of swich condicion
 [702] That whan they have a certein purpos take,
 [703] They kan nat stynte of hire entencion,
 [704] But, right as they were bounden to that stake,
 [705] They wol nat of that firste purpos slake.
 [706] Right so this markys fulliche hath purposed
 [707] To tempte his wyf as he was first disposed.
 [708] He waiteth if by word or contenance
 [709] That she to hym was changed of corage,
 [710] But nevere koude he fynde variance.
 [711] She was ay oon in herte and in visage,
 [712] And ay the forther that she was in age,
 [713] The moore trewe, if that it were possible,
 [714] She was to hym in love, and moore penyble.
 [715] For which it semed thus: that of hem two
 [716] Ther nas but o wyl, for as Walter leste,
 [717] The same lust was hire plesance also.
 [718] And, God be thanked, al fil for the beste.
 [719] She shewed wel, for no worldly unreste
 [720] A wyf, as of hirself, nothing ne sholde
 [721] Wille in effect, but as hir housbonde wolde.
 [722] The sclaundre of Walter ofte and wyde spradde,
 [723] That of a crueel herte he wikkedly,
 [724] For he a povre womman wedded hadde,
 [725] Hath mordred bothe his children prively.
 [726] Swich murmur was among hem comunly.
 [727] No wonder is, for to the peples ere
 [728] Ther cam no word but that they mordred were.
 [729] For which, where as his peple therbifore
 [730] Hadde loved hym wel, the sclaundre of his diffame
 [731] Made hem that they hym hatede therfore.
 [732] To been a mordrere is an hateful name;
 [733] But nathelees, for ernest ne for game,
 [734] He of his crueel purpos nolde stente;
 [735] To tempte his wyf was set al his entente.
 [736] Whan that his doghter twelve yeer was of age,
 [737] He to the court of Rome, in subtil wyse
 [738] Enformed of his wyl, sente his message,
 [739] Comaundynge hem swiche bulles to devyse
 [740] As to his crueel purpos may suffyse --
 [741] How that the pope, as for his peples reste,
 [742] Bad hym to wedde another, if hym leste.
 [743] I seye, he bad they sholde countrefete
 [744] The popes bulles, makynge mencion
 [745] That he hath leve his firste wyf to lete,
 [746] As by the popes dispensacion,
 [747] To stynte rancour and dissencion
 [748] Bitwixe his peple and hym; thus seyde the bulle,
 [749] The which they han publiced atte fulle.
 [750] The rude peple, as it no wonder is,
 [751] Wenden ful wel that it hadde be right so;
 [752] But whan thise tidynges came to Grisildis,
 [753] I deeme that hire herte was ful wo.
 [754] But she, ylike sad for everemo,
 [755] Disposed was, this humble creature,
 [756] The adversitee of Fortune al t' endure,
 [757] Abidynge evere his lust and his plesance,
 [758] To whom that she was yeven herte and al,
 [759] As to hire verray worldly suffisance.
 [760] But shortly if this storie I tellen shal,
 [761] This markys writen hath in special
 [762] A lettre, in which he sheweth his entente,
 [763] And secreely he to Boloigne it sente.
 [764] To the Erl of Panyk, which that hadde tho
 [765] Wedded his suster, preyde he specially
 [766] To bryngen hoom agayn his children two
 [767] In honurable estaat al openly.
 [768] But o thyng he hym preyede outrely,
 [769] That he to no wight, though men wolde enquere,
 [770] Sholde nat telle whos children that they were,
 [771] But seye the mayden sholde ywedded be
 [772] Unto the Markys of Saluce anon.
 [773] And as this erl was preyed, so dide he;
 [774] For at day set he on his wey is goon
 [775] Toward Saluce, and lordes many oon
 [776] In riche array, this mayden for to gyde,
 [777] Hir yonge brother ridynge hire bisyde.
 [778] Arrayed was toward hir mariage
 [779] This fresshe mayde, ful of gemmes cleere;
 [780] Hir brother, which that seven yeer was of age,
 [781] Arrayed eek ful fressh in his manere.
 [782] And thus in greet noblesse and with glad cheere,
 [783] Toward Saluces shapynge hir journey,
 [784] Fro day to day they ryden in hir wey.
 [785] Among al this, after his wikke usage,
 [786] This markys, yet his wyf to tempte moore
 [787] To the outtreste preeve of hir corage,
 [788] Fully to han experience and loore
 [789] If that she were as stidefast as bifoore,
 [790] He on a day in open audience
 [791] Ful boistously hath seyd hire this sentence:
 [792] "Certes, Grisilde, I hadde ynogh plesance
 [793] To han yow to my wyf for youre goodnesse,
 [794] As for youre trouthe and for youre obeisance,
 [795] Noght for youre lynage, ne for youre richesse;
 [796] But now knowe I in verray soothfastnesse
 [797] That in greet lordshipe, if I wel avyse,
 [798] Ther is greet servitute in sondry wyse.
 [799] "I may nat doon as every plowman may.
 [800] My peple me constreyneth for to take
 [801] Another wyf, and crien day by day;
 [802] And eek the pope, rancour for to slake,
 [803] Consenteth it -- that dar I undertake --
 [804] And trewely thus muche I wol yow seye:
 [805] My newe wyf is comynge by the weye.
 [806] "Be strong of herte, and voyde anon hir place;
 [807] And thilke dowere that ye broghten me,
 [808] Taak it agayn; I graunte it of my grace.
 [809] Retourneth to youre fadres hous," quod he;
 [810] "No man may alwey han prosperitee.
 [811] With evene herte I rede yow t' endure
 [812] The strook of Fortune or of aventure."
 [813] And she agayn answerde in pacience:
 [814] "My lord," quod she, "I woot, and wiste alway,
 [815] How that bitwixen youre magnificence
 [816] And my poverte no wight kan ne may
 [817] Maken comparison; it is no nay.
 [818] I ne heeld me nevere digne in no manere
 [819] To be youre wyf, no, ne youre chamberere.
 [820] "And in this hous, ther ye me lady maade --
 [821] The heighe God take I for my witnesse,
 [822] And also wysly he my soule glaade --
 [823] I nevere heeld me lady ne mistresse,
 [824] But humble servant to youre worthynesse,
 [825] And evere shal, whil that my lyf may dure,
 [826] Aboven every worldly creature.
 [827] "That ye so longe of youre benignitee
 [828] Han holden me in honour and nobleye,
 [829] Where as I was noght worthy for to bee,
 [830] That thonke I God and yow, to whom I preye
 [831] Foryelde it yow; ther is namoore to seye.
 [832] Unto my fader gladly wol I wende,
 [833] And with hym dwelle unto my lyves ende.
 [834] "Ther I was fostred of a child ful smal,
 [835] Til I be deed my lyf ther wol I lede,
 [836] A wydwe clene in body, herte, and al.
 [837] For sith I yaf to yow my maydenhede,
 [838] And am youre trewe wyf, it is no drede,
 [839] God shilde swich a lordes wyf to take
 [840] Another man to housbonde or to make!
 [841] "And of youre newe wyf God of his grace
 [842] So graunte yow wele and prosperitee!
 [843] For I wol gladly yelden hire my place,
 [844] In which that I was blisful wont to bee.
 [845] For sith it liketh yow, my lord," quod shee,
 [846] "That whilom weren al myn hertes reste,
 [847] That I shal goon, I wol goon whan yow leste.
 [848] "But ther as ye me profre swich dowaire
 [849] As I first broghte, it is wel in my mynde
 [850] It were my wrecched clothes, nothyng faire,
 [851] The whiche to me were hard now for to fynde.
 [852] O goode God! How gentil and how kynde
 [853] Ye semed by youre speche and youre visage
 [854] The day that maked was oure mariage!
 [855] "But sooth is seyd -- algate I fynde it trewe,
 [856] For in effect it preeved is on me --
 [857] Love is noght oold as whan that it is newe.
 [858] But certes, lord, for noon adversitee,
 [859] To dyen in the cas, it shal nat bee
 [860] That evere in word or werk I shal repente
 [861] That I yow yaf myn herte in hool entente.
 [862] "My lord, ye woot that in my fadres place
 [863] Ye dide me streepe out of my povre weede,
 [864] And richely me cladden, of youre grace.
 [865] To yow broghte I noght elles, out of drede,
 [866] But feith, and nakednesse, and maydenhede;
 [867] And heere agayn your clothyng I restoore,
 [868] And eek your weddyng ryng, for everemore.
 [869] "The remenant of youre jueles redy be
 [870] Inwith youre chambre, dar I saufly sayn.
 [871] Naked out of my fadres hous," quod she,
 [872] "I cam, and naked moot I turne agayn.
 [873] Al youre plesance wol I folwen fayn;
 [874] But yet I hope it be nat youre entente
 [875] That I smoklees out of youre paleys wente.
 [876] "Ye koude nat doon so dishonest a thyng,
 [877] That thilke wombe in which youre children leye
 [878] Sholde biforn the peple, in my walkyng,
 [879] Be seyn al bare; wherfore I yow preye,
 [880] Lat me nat lyk a worm go by the weye.
 [881] Remembre yow, myn owene lord so deere,
 [882] I was youre wyf, though I unworthy weere.
 [883] "Wherfore, in gerdon of my maydenhede,
 [884] Which that I broghte, and noght agayn I bere,
 [885] As voucheth sauf to yeve me, to my meede,
 [886] But swich a smok as I was wont to were,
 [887] That I therwith may wrye the wombe of here
 [888] That was youre wyf. And heer take I my leeve
 [889] Of yow, myn owene lord, lest I yow greve."
 [890] "The smok," quod he, "that thou hast on thy bak,
 [891] Lat it be stille, and bere it forth with thee."
 [892] But wel unnethes thilke word he spak,
 [893] But wente his wey, for routhe and for pitee.
 [894] Biforn the folk hirselven strepeth she,
 [895] And in hir smok, with heed and foot al bare,
 [896] Toward hir fadre hous forth is she fare.
 [897] The folk hire folwe, wepynge in hir weye,
 [898] And Fortune ay they cursen as they goon;
 [899] But she fro wepyng kepte hire eyen dreye,
 [900] Ne in this tyme word ne spak she noon.
 [901] Hir fader, that this tidynge herde anoon,
 [902] Curseth the day and tyme that Nature
 [903] Shoop hym to been a lyves creature.
 [904] For out of doute this olde poure man
 [905] Was evere in suspect of hir mariage;
 [906] For evere he demed, sith that it bigan,
 [907] That whan the lord fulfild hadde his corage,
 [908] Hym wolde thynke it were a disparage
 [909] To his estaat so lowe for t' alighte,
 [910] And voyden hire as soone as ever he myghte.
 [911] Agayns his doghter hastily goth he,
 [912] For he by noyse of folk knew hire comynge,
 [913] And with hire olde coote, as it myghte be
 [914] He covered hire, ful sorwefully wepynge.
 [915] But on hire body myghte he it nat brynge,
 [916] For rude was the clooth, and moore of age
 [917] By dayes fele than at hire mariage.
 [918] Thus with hire fader for a certeyn space
 [919] Dwelleth this flour of wyfly pacience,
 [920] That neither by hire wordes ne hire face,
 [921] Biforn the folk, ne eek in hire absence,
 [922] Ne shewed she that hire was doon offence;
 [923] Ne of hire heighe estaat no remembraunce
 [924] Ne hadde she, as by hire contenaunce.
 [925] No wonder is, for in hire grete estaat
 [926] Hire goost was evere in pleyn humylitee;
 [927] No tendre mouth, noon herte delicaat,
 [928] No pompe, no semblant of roialtee,
 [929] But ful of pacient benyngnytee,
 [930] Discreet and pridelees, ay honurable,
 [931] And to hire housbonde evere meke and stable.
 [932] Men speke of Job, and moost for his humblesse,
 [933] As clerkes, whan hem list, konne wel endite,
 [934] Namely of men, but as in soothfastnesse,
 [935] Though clerkes preise wommen but a lite,
 [936] Ther kan no man in humblesse hym acquite
 [937] As womman kan, ne kan been half so trewe
 [938] As wommen been, but it be falle of newe.
 [939] Fro Boloigne is this Erl of Panyk come,
 [940] Of which the fame up sprang to moore and lesse,
 [941] And to the peples eres, alle and some,
 [942] Was kouth eek that a newe markysesse
 [943] He with hym broghte, in swich pompe and richesse
 [944] That nevere was ther seyn with mannes ye
 [945] So noble array in al West Lumbardye.
 [946] The markys, which that shoop and knew al this,
 [947] Er that this erl was come, sente his message
 [948] For thilke sely povre Grisildis;
 [949] And she with humble herte and glad visage,
 [950] Nat with no swollen thoght in hire corage,
 [951] Cam at his heste, and on hire knees hire sette,
 [952] And reverently and wisely she hym grette.
 [953] "Grisilde," quod he, "my wyl is outrely
 [954] This mayden, that shal wedded been to me,
 [955] Received be to-morwe as roially
 [956] As it possible is in myn hous to be,
 [957] And eek that every wight in his degree
 [958] Have his estaat, in sittyng and servyse
 [959] And heigh plesaunce, as I kan best devyse.
 [960] "I have no wommen suffisaunt, certayn,
 [961] The chambres for t' arraye in ordinaunce
 [962] After my lust, and therfore wolde I fayn
 [963] That thyn were al swich manere governaunce.
 [964] Thou knowest eek of old al my plesaunce;
 [965] Thogh thyn array be badde and yvel biseye,
 [966] Do thou thy devoir at the leeste weye."
 [967] "Nat oonly, lord, that I am glad," quod she,
 [968] "To doon youre lust, but I desire also
 [969] Yow for to serve and plese in my degree
 [970] Withouten feyntyng, and shal everemo;
 [971] Ne nevere, for no wele ne no wo,
 [972] Ne shal the goost withinne myn herte stente
 [973] To love yow best with al my trewe entente."
 [974] And with that word she gan the hous to dighte,
 [975] And tables for to sette, and beddes make;
 [976] And peyned hire to doon al that she myghte,
 [977] Preyynge the chambereres, for Goddes sake,
 [978] To hasten hem, and faste swepe and shake;
 [979] And she, the mooste servysable of alle,
 [980] Hath every chambre arrayed and his halle.
 [981] Abouten undren gan this erl alighte,
 [982] That with hym broghte thise noble children tweye,
 [983] For which the peple ran to seen the sighte
 [984] Of hire array, so richely biseye;
 [985] And thanne at erst amonges hem they seye
 [986] That Walter was no fool, thogh that hym leste
 [987] To chaunge his wyf, for it was for the beste.
 [988] For she is fairer, as they deemen alle,
 [989] Than is Grisilde, and moore tendre of age,
 [990] And fairer fruyt bitwene hem sholde falle,
 [991] And moore plesant, for hire heigh lynage.
 [992] Hir brother eek so fair was of visage
 [993] That hem to seen the peple hath caught plesaunce,
 [994] Commendynge now the markys governaunce.
 [995] "O stormy peple! Unsad and evere untrewe!
 [996] Ay undiscreet and chaungynge as a fane!
 [997] Delitynge evere in rumbul that is newe,
 [998] For lyk the moone ay wexe ye and wane!
 [999] Ay ful of clappyng, deere ynogh a jane!
 [1000] Youre doom is fals, youre constance yvele preeveth;
 [1001] A ful greet fool is he that on yow leeveth."
 [1002] Thus seyden sadde folk in that citee,
 [1003] Whan that the peple gazed up and doun,
 [1004] For they were glad, right for the noveltee,
 [1005] To han a newe lady of hir toun.
 [1006] Namoore of this make I now mencioun,
 [1007] But to Grisilde agayn wol I me dresse,
 [1008] And telle hir constance and hir bisynesse.
 [1009] Ful bisy was Grisilde in every thyng
 [1010] That to the feeste was apertinent.
 [1011] Right noght was she abayst of hire clothyng,
 [1012] Thogh it were rude and somdeel eek torent;
 [1013] But with glad cheere to the yate is went
 [1014] With oother folk to greete the markysesse,
 [1015] And after that dooth forth hire bisynesse.
 [1016] With so glad chiere his gestes she receyveth,
 [1017] And so konnyngly, everich in his degree,
 [1018] That no defaute no man aperceyveth,
 [1019] But ay they wondren what she myghte bee
 [1020] That in so povre array was for to see,
 [1021] And koude swich honour and reverence,
 [1022] And worthily they preisen hire prudence.
 [1023] In al this meene while she ne stente
 [1024] This mayde and eek hir brother to commende
 [1025] With al hir herte, in ful benyngne entente,
 [1026] So wel that no man koude hir pris amende.
 [1027] But atte laste, whan that thise lordes wende
 [1028] To sitten doun to mete, he gan to calle
 [1029] Grisilde, as she was bisy in his halle.
 [1030] "Grisilde," quod he, as it were in his pley,
 [1031] "How liketh thee my wyf and hire beautee?"
 [1032] "Right wel," quod she, "my lord; for, in good fey,
 [1033] A fairer saugh I nevere noon than she.
 [1034] I prey to God yeve hire prosperitee;
 [1035] And so hope I that he wol to yow sende
 [1036] Plesance ynogh unto youre lyves ende.
 [1037] "O thyng biseke I yow, and warne also,
 [1038] That ye ne prikke with no tormentynge
 [1039] This tendre mayden, as ye han doon mo;
 [1040] For she is fostred in hire norissynge
 [1041] Moore tendrely, and, to my supposynge,
 [1042] She koude nat adversitee endure
 [1043] As koude a povre fostred creature."
 [1044] And whan this Walter saugh hire pacience,
 [1045] Hir glade chiere, and no malice at al,
 [1046] And he so ofte had doon to hire offence,
 [1047] And she ay sad and constant as a wal,
 [1048] Continuynge evere hire innocence overal,
 [1049] This sturdy markys gan his herte dresse
 [1050] To rewen upon hire wyfly stedfastnesse.
 [1051] "This is ynogh, Grisilde myn," quod he;
 [1052] "Be now namoore agast ne yvele apayed.
 [1053] I have thy feith and thy benyngnytee,
 [1054] As wel as evere womman was, assayed,
 [1055] In greet estaat and povreliche arrayed.
 [1056] Now knowe I, dere wyf, thy stedfastnesse" --
 [1057] And hire in armes took and gan hire kesse.
 [1058] And she for wonder took of it no keep;
 [1059] She herde nat what thyng he to hire seyde;
 [1060] She ferde as she had stert out of a sleep,
 [1061] Til she out of hire mazednesse abreyde.
 [1062] "Grisilde," quod he, "by God, that for us deyde,
 [1063] Thou art my wyf, ne noon oother I have,
 [1064] Ne nevere hadde, as God my soule save!
 [1065] "This is thy doghter, which thou hast supposed
 [1066] To be my wyf; that oother feithfully
 [1067] Shal be myn heir, as I have ay disposed;
 [1068] Thou bare hym in thy body trewely.
 [1069] At Boloigne have I kept hem prively;
 [1070] Taak hem agayn, for now maystow nat seye
 [1071] That thou hast lorn noon of thy children tweye.
 [1072] "And folk that ootherweys han seyd of me,
 [1073] I warne hem wel that I have doon this deede
 [1074] For no malice, ne for no crueltee,
 [1075] But for t' assaye in thee thy wommanheede,
 [1076] And nat to sleen my children -- God forbeede! --
 [1077] But for to kepe hem pryvely and stille,
 [1078] Til I thy purpos knewe and al thy wille."
 [1079] Whan she this herde, aswowne doun she falleth
 [1080] For pitous joye, and after hire swownynge
 [1081] She bothe hire yonge children to hire calleth,
 [1082] And in hire armes, pitously wepynge,
 [1083] Embraceth hem, and tendrely kissynge
 [1084] Ful lyk a mooder, with hire salte teeres
 [1085] She bathed bothe hire visage and hire heeres.
 [1086] O which a pitous thyng it was to se
 [1087] Hir swownyng, and hire humble voys to heere!
 [1088] "Grauntmercy, lord, God thanke it yow," quod she,
 [1089] "That ye han saved me my children deere!
 [1090] Now rekke I nevere to been deed right heere;
 [1091] Sith I stonde in youre love and in youre grace,
 [1092] No fors of deeth, ne whan my spirit pace!
 [1093] "O tendre, o deere, o yonge children myne!
 [1094] Youre woful mooder wende stedfastly
 [1095] That crueel houndes or som foul vermyne
 [1096] Hadde eten yow; but God of his mercy
 [1097] And youre benyngne fader tendrely
 [1098] Hath doon yow kept" -- and in that same stounde
 [1099] Al sodeynly she swapte adoun to grounde.
 [1100] And in hire swough so sadly holdeth she
 [1101] Hire children two, whan she gan hem t' embrace,
 [1102] That with greet sleighte and greet difficultee
 [1103] The children from hire arm they gonne arace.
 [1104] O many a teere on many a pitous face
 [1105] Doun ran of hem that stooden hire bisyde;
 [1106] Unnethe abouten hire myghte they abyde.
 [1107] Walter hire gladeth and hire sorwe slaketh;
 [1108] She riseth up, abaysed, from hire traunce,
 [1109] And every wight hire joye and feeste maketh
 [1110] Til she hath caught agayn hire contenaunce.
 [1111] Walter hire dooth so feithfully plesaunce
 [1112] That it was deyntee for to seen the cheere
 [1113] Bitwixe hem two, now they been met yfeere.
 [1114] Thise ladyes, whan that they hir tyme say,
 [1115] Han taken hire and into chambre gon,
 [1116] And strepen hire out of hire rude array,
 [1117] And in a clooth of gold that brighte shoon,
 [1118] With a coroune of many a riche stoon
 [1119] Upon hire heed, they into halle hire broghte,
 [1120] And ther she was honured as hire oghte.
 [1121] Thus hath this pitous day a blisful ende,
 [1122] For every man and womman dooth his myght
 [1123] This day in murthe and revel to dispende
 [1124] Til on the welkne shoon the sterres lyght.
 [1125] For moore solempne in every mannes syght
 [1126] This feste was, and gretter of costage,
 [1127] Than was the revel of hire mariage.
 [1128] Ful many a yeer in heigh prosperitee
 [1129] Lyven thise two in concord and in reste,
 [1130] And richely his doghter maryed he
 [1131] Unto a lord, oon of the worthieste
 [1132] Of al Ytaille; and thanne in pees and reste
 [1133] His wyves fader in his court he kepeth,
 [1134] Til that the soule out of his body crepeth.
 [1135] His sone succedeth in his heritage
 [1136] In reste and pees, after his fader day,
 [1137] And fortunat was eek in mariage,
 [1138] Al putte he nat his wyf in greet assay.
 [1139] This world is nat so strong, it is no nay,
 [1140] As it hath been in olde tymes yoore,
 [1141] And herkneth what this auctour seith therfoore.
 [1142] This storie is seyd nat for that wyves sholde
 [1143] Folwen Grisilde as in humylitee,
 [1144] For it were inportable, though they wolde,
 [1145] But for that every wight, in his degree,
 [1146] Sholde be constant in adversitee
 [1147] As was Grisilde; therfore Petrak writeth
 [1148] This storie, which with heigh stile he enditeth.
 [1149] For sith a womman was so pacient
 [1150] Unto a mortal man, wel moore us oghte
 [1151] Receyven al in gree that God us sent;
 [1152] For greet skile is he preeve that he wroghte.
 [1153] But he ne tempteth no man that he boghte,
 [1154] As seith Seint Jame, if ye his pistel rede;
 [1155] He preeveth folk al day, it is no drede,
 [1156] And suffreth us, as for oure excercise,
 [1157] With sharpe scourges of adversitee
 [1158] Ful ofte to be bete in sondry wise;
 [1159] Nat for to knowe oure wyl, for certes he,
 [1160] Er we were born, knew al oure freletee;
 [1161] And for oure beste is al his governaunce.
 [1162] Lat us thanne lyve in vertuous suffraunce.
 [1163] But o word, lordynges, herkneth er I go:
 [1164] It were ful hard to fynde now-a-dayes
 [1165] In al a toun Grisildis thre or two;
 [1166] For if that they were put to swiche assayes,
 [1167] The gold of hem hath now so badde alayes
 [1168] With bras, that thogh the coyne be fair at ye,
 [1169] It wolde rather breste a-two than plye.
 [1170] For which heere, for the Wyves love of Bathe --
 [1171] Whos lyf and al hire secte God mayntene
 [1172] In heigh maistrie, and elles were it scathe --
 [1173] I wol with lusty herte, fressh and grene,
 [1174] Seyn yow a song to glade yow, I wene;
 [1175] And lat us stynte of ernestful matere.
 [1176] Herkneth my song that seith in this manere:
 [1177] Grisilde is deed, and eek hire pacience,
 [1178] And bothe atones buryed in Ytaille;
 [1179] For which I crie in open audience
 [1180] No wedded man so hardy be t' assaille
 [1181] His wyves pacience in trust to fynde
 [1182] Grisildis, for in certein he shal faille.
 [1183] O noble wyves, ful of heigh prudence,
 [1184] Lat noon humylitee youre tonge naille,
 [1185] Ne lat no clerk have cause or diligence
 [1186] To write of yow a storie of swich mervaille
 [1187] As of Grisildis pacient and kynde,
 [1188] Lest Chichevache yow swelwe in hire entraille!
 [1189] Folweth Ekko, that holdeth no silence,
 [1190] But evere answereth at the countretaille.
 [1191] Beth nat bidaffed for youre innocence,
 [1192] But sharply taak on yow the governaille.
 [1193] Emprenteth wel this lessoun in youre mynde,
 [1194] For commune profit sith it may availle.
 [1195] Ye archewyves, stondeth at defense,
 [1196] Syn ye be strong as is a greet camaille;
 [1197] Ne suffreth nat that men yow doon offense.
 [1198] And sklendre wyves, fieble as in bataille,
 [1199] Beth egre as is a tygre yond in Ynde;
 [1200] Ay clappeth as a mille, I yow consaille.
 [1201] Ne dreed hem nat; doth hem no reverence,
 [1202] For though thyn housbonde armed be in maille,
 [1203] The arwes of thy crabbed eloquence
 [1204] Shal perce his brest and eek his aventaille.
 [1205] In jalousie I rede eek thou hym bynde,
 [1206] And thou shalt make hym couche as doth a quaille.
 [1207] If thou be fair, ther folk been in presence,
 [1208] Shewe thou thy visage and thyn apparaille;
 [1209] If thou be foul, be fre of thy dispence;
 [1210] To gete thee freendes ay do thy travaille;
 [1211] Be ay of chiere as light as leef on lynde,
 [1212] And lat hym care, and wepe, and wrynge, and waille!
 [1212a] [This worthy Clerk, whan ended was his tale,
 [1212b] Oure Hooste seyde, and swoor, "By Goddes bones,
 [1212c] Me were levere than a barel ale
 [1212d] My wyf at hoom had herd this legende ones!
 [1212e] This is a gentil tale for the nones,
 [1212f] As to my purpos, wiste ye my wille;
 [1212g] But thyng that wol nat be, lat it be stille."]

      
The Canterbury Tales and Other Works of Chaucer (Middle English), by Geoffery Chaucer, [14th cent.], at sacred-texts.com

 

The Canterbury Tales

 

The Merchant's Prologue

 [1213] "Wepyng and waylyng, care and oother sorwe
 [1214] I knowe ynogh, on even and a-morwe,"
 [1215] Quod the Marchant, "and so doon other mo
 [1216] That wedded been. I trowe that it be so,
 [1217] For wel I woot it fareth so with me.
 [1218] I have a wyf, the worste that may be;
 [1219] For thogh the feend to hire ycoupled were,
 [1220] She wolde hym overmacche, I dar wel swere.
 [1221] What sholde I yow reherce in special
 [1222] Hir hye malice? She is a shrewe at al.
 [1223] Ther is a long and large difference
 [1224] Bitwix Grisildis grete pacience
 [1225] And of my wyf the passyng crueltee.
 [1226] Were I unbounden, also moot I thee,
 [1227] I wolde nevere eft comen in the snare.
 [1228] We wedded men lyven in sorwe and care.
 [1229] Assaye whoso wole, and he shal fynde
 [1230] That I seye sooth, by Seint Thomas of Ynde,
 [1231] As for the moore part -- I sey nat alle.
 [1232] God shilde that it sholde so bifalle!
 [1233] "A, goode sire Hoost, I have ywedded bee
 [1234] Thise monthes two, and moore nat, pardee;
 [1235] And yet, I trowe, he that al his lyve
 [1236] Wyflees hath been, though that men wolde him ryve
 [1237] Unto the herte, ne koude in no manere
 [1238] Tellen so muchel sorwe as I now heere
 [1239] Koude tellen of my wyves cursednesse!"
 [1240] "Now," quod oure Hoost, "Marchaunt, so God yow blesse,
 [1241] Syn ye so muchel knowen of that art
 [1242] Ful hertely I pray yow telle us part."
 [1243] "Gladly," quod he, "but of myn owene soore,
 [1244] For soory herte, I telle may namoore."

      
The Canterbury Tales and Other Works of Chaucer (Middle English), by Geoffery Chaucer, [14th cent.], at sacred-texts.com

 

The Canterbury Tales

 

The Merchant's Tale

 [1245] Whilom ther was dwellynge in Lumbardye
 [1246] A worthy knyght, that born was of Pavye,
 [1247] In which he lyved in greet prosperitee;
 [1248] And sixty yeer a wyflees man was hee,
 [1249] And folwed ay his bodily delyt
 [1250] On wommen, ther as was his appetyt,
 [1251] As doon thise fooles that been seculeer.
 [1252] And whan that he was passed sixty yeer,
 [1253] Were it for hoolynesse or for dotage
 [1254] I kan nat seye, but swich a greet corage
 [1255] Hadde this knyght to been a wedded man
 [1256] That day and nyght he dooth al that he kan
 [1257] T' espien where he myghte wedded be,
 [1258] Preyinge oure Lord to graunten him that he
 [1259] Mighte ones knowe of thilke blisful lyf
 [1260] That is bitwixe an housbonde and his wyf,
 [1261] And for to lyve under that hooly boond
 [1262] With which that first God man and womman bond.
 [1263] "Noon oother lyf," seyde he, "is worth a bene,
 [1264] For wedlok is so esy and so clene,
 [1265] That in this world it is a paradys."
 [1266] Thus seyde this olde knyght, that was so wys.
 [1267] And certeinly, as sooth as God is kyng,
 [1268] To take a wyf it is a glorious thyng,
 [1269] And namely whan a man is oold and hoor;
 [1270] Thanne is a wyf the fruyt of his tresor.
 [1271] Thanne sholde he take a yong wyf and a feir,
 [1272] On which he myghte engendren hym an heir,
 [1273] And lede his lyf in joye and in solas,
 [1274] Where as thise bacheleris synge "allas,"
 [1275] Whan that they fynden any adversitee
 [1276] In love, which nys but childyssh vanytee.
 [1277] And trewely it sit wel to be so,
 [1278] That bacheleris have often peyne and wo;
 [1279] On brotel ground they buylde, and brotelnesse
 [1280] They fynde whan they wene sikernesse.
 [1281] They lyve but as a bryd or as a beest,
 [1282] In libertee and under noon arreest,
 [1283] Ther as a wedded man in his estaat
 [1284] Lyveth a lyf blisful and ordinaat
 [1285] Under this yok of mariage ybounde.
 [1286] Wel may his herte in joy and blisse habounde,
 [1287] For who kan be so buxom as a wyf?
 [1288] Who is so trewe, and eek so ententyf
 [1289] To kepe hym, syk and hool, as is his make?
 [1290] For wele or wo she wole hym nat forsake;
 [1291] She nys nat wery hym to love and serve,
 [1292] Though that he lye bedrede til he sterve.
 [1293] And yet somme clerkes seyn it nys nat so,
 [1294] Of whiche he Theofraste is oon of tho.
 [1295] What force though Theofraste liste lye?
 [1296] "Ne take no wyf," quod he, "for housbondrye,
 [1297] As for to spare in houshold thy dispence.
 [1298] A trewe servant dooth moore diligence
 [1299] Thy good to kepe than thyn owene wyf,
 [1300] For she wol clayme half part al hir lyf.
 [1301] And if thou be syk, so God me save,
 [1302] Thy verray freendes, or a trewe knave,
 [1303] Wol kepe thee bet than she that waiteth ay
 [1304] After thy good and hath doon many a day.
 [1305] And if thou take a wyf unto thyn hoold
 [1306] Ful lightly maystow been a cokewold."
 [1307] This sentence, and an hundred thynges worse,
 [1308] Writeth this man, ther God his bones corse!
 [1309] But take no kep of al swich vanytee;
 [1310] Deffie Theofraste, and herke me.
 [1311] A wyf is Goddes yifte verraily;
 [1312] Alle othere manere yiftes hardily,
 [1313] As londes, rentes, pasture, or commune,
 [1314] Or moebles -- alle been yiftes of Fortune
 [1315] That passen as a shadwe upon a wal.
 [1316] But drede nat, if pleynly speke I shal:
 [1317] A wyf wol laste, and in thyn hous endure,
 [1318] Wel lenger than thee list, paraventure.
 [1319] Mariage is a ful greet sacrement.
 [1320] He which that hath no wyf, I holde hym shent;
 [1321] He lyveth helplees and al desolat --
 [1322] I speke of folk in seculer estaat.
 [1323] And herke why -- I sey nat this for noght --
 [1324] That womman is for mannes helpe ywroght.
 [1325] The hye God, whan he hadde Adam maked,
 [1326] And saugh him al allone, bely-naked,
 [1327] God of his grete goodnesse seyde than,
 [1328] "Lat us now make an helpe unto this man
 [1329] Lyk to hymself"; and thanne he made him Eve.
 [1330] Heere may ye se, and heerby may ye preve,
 [1331] That wyf is mannes helpe and his confort,
 [1332] His paradys terrestre, and his disport.
 [1333] So buxom and so vertuous is she,
 [1334] They moste nedes lyve in unitee.
 [1335] O flessh they been, and o fleesh, as I gesse,
 [1336] Hath but oon herte, in wele and in distresse.
 [1337] A wyf! a, Seinte Marie, benedicite!
 [1338] How myghte a man han any adversitee
 [1339] That hath a wyf? Certes, I kan nat seye.
 [1340] The blisse which that is bitwixe hem tweye
 [1341] Ther may no tonge telle, or herte thynke.
 [1342] If he be povre, she helpeth hym to swynke;
 [1343] She kepeth his good, and wasteth never a deel;
 [1344] Al that hire housbonde lust, hire liketh weel;
 [1345] She seith nat ones "nay," whan he seith "ye."
 [1346] "Do this," seith he; "Al redy, sire," seith she.
 [1347] O blisful ordre of wedlok precious,
 [1348] Thou art so murye, and eek so vertuous,
 [1349] And so commended and appreved eek
 [1350] That every man that halt hym worth a leek
 [1351] Upon his bare knees oughte al his lyf
 [1352] Thanken his God that hym hath sent a wyf,
 [1353] Or elles preye to God hym for to sende
 [1354] A wyf to laste unto his lyves ende.
 [1355] For thanne his lyf is set in sikernesse;
 [1356] He may nat be deceyved, as I gesse,
 [1357] So that he werke after his wyves reed.
 [1358] Thanne may he boldely beren up his heed,
 [1359] They been so trewe and therwithal so wyse;
 [1360] For which, if thou wolt werken as the wyse,
 [1361] Do alwey so as wommen wol thee rede.
 [1362] Lo, how that Jacob, as thise clerkes rede,
 [1363] By good conseil of his mooder Rebekke,
 [1364] Boond the kydes skyn aboute his nekke,
 [1365] For which his fadres benyson he wan.
 [1366] Lo Judith, as the storie eek telle kan,
 [1367] By wys conseil she Goddes peple kepte,
 [1368] And slow hym Olofernus, whil he slepte.
 [1369] Lo Abigayl, by good conseil how she
 [1370] Saved hir housbonde Nabal whan that he
 [1371] Sholde han be slayn; and looke, Ester also
 [1372] By good conseil delyvered out of wo
 [1373] The peple of God, and made hym Mardochee
 [1374] Of Assuere enhaunced for to be.
 [1375] Ther nys no thyng in gree superlatyf,
 [1376] As seith Senek, above an humble wyf.
 [1377] Suffre thy wyves tonge, as Catoun bit;
 [1378] She shal comande, and thou shalt suffren it,
 [1379] And yet she wole obeye of curteisye.
 [1380] A wyf is kepere of thyn housbondrye;
 [1381] Wel may the sike man biwaille and wepe,
 [1382] Ther as ther nys no wyf the hous to kepe.
 [1383] I warne thee, if wisely thou wolt wirche,
 [1384] Love wel thy wyf, as Crist loved his chirche.
 [1385] If thou lovest thyself, thou lovest thy wyf;
 [1386] No man hateth his flessh, but in his lyf
 [1387] He fostreth it, and therfore bidde I thee
 [1388] Cherisse thy wyf, or thou shalt nevere thee.
 [1389] Housbonde and wyf, what so men jape or pleye,
 [1390] Of worldly folk holden the siker weye;
 [1391] They been so knyt ther may noon harm bityde,
 [1392] And namely upon the wyves syde.
 [1393] For which this Januarie, of whom I tolde,
 [1394] Considered hath, inwith his dayes olde,
 [1395] The lusty lyf, the vertuous quyete,
 [1396] That is in mariage hony-sweete,
 [1397] And for his freendes on a day he sente,
 [1398] To tellen hem th' effect of his entente.
 [1399] With face sad his tale he hath hem toold.
 [1400] He seyde, "Freendes, I am hoor and oold,
 [1401] And almoost, God woot, on my pittes brynke;
 [1402] Upon my soule somwhat moste I thynke.
 [1403] I have my body folily despended;
 [1404] Blessed be God that it shal been amended!
 [1405] For I wol be, certeyn, a wedded man,
 [1406] And that anoon in al the haste I kan.
 [1407] Unto som mayde fair and tendre of age,
 [1408] I prey yow, shapeth for my mariage
 [1409] Al sodeynly, for I wol nat abyde;
 [1410] And I wol fonde t' espien, on my syde,
 [1411] To whom I may be wedded hastily.
 [1412] But forasmuche as ye been mo than I,
 [1413] Ye shullen rather swich a thyng espyen
 [1414] Than I, and where me best were to allyen.
 [1415] "But o thyng warne I yow, my freendes deere,
 [1416] I wol noon oold wyf han in no manere.
 [1417] She shal nat passe twenty yeer, certayn;
 [1418] Oold fissh and yong flessh wolde I have fayn.
 [1419] Bet is," quod he, "a pyk than a pykerel,
 [1420] And bet than old boef is the tendre veel.
 [1421] I wol no womman thritty yeer of age;
 [1422] It is but bene-straw and greet forage.
 [1423] And eek thise olde wydwes, God it woot,
 [1424] They konne so muchel craft on Wades boot,
 [1425] So muchel broken harm, whan that hem leste,
 [1426] That with hem sholde I nevere lyve in reste.
 [1427] For sondry scoles maken sotile clerkis;
 [1428] Womman of manye scoles half a clerk is.
 [1429] But certeynly, a yong thyng may men gye,
 [1430] Right as men may warm wex with handes plye.
 [1431] Wherfore I sey yow pleynly, in a clause,
 [1432] I wol noon oold wyf han right for this cause.
 [1433] For if so were I hadde swich myschaunce
 [1434] That I in hire ne koude han no plesaunce,
 [1435] Thanne sholde I lede my lyf in avoutrye
 [1436] And go streight to the devel whan I dye.
 [1437] Ne children sholde I none upon hire geten;
 [1438] Yet were me levere houndes had me eten
 [1439] Than that myn heritage sholde falle
 [1440] In straunge hand, and this I telle yow alle.
 [1441] I dote nat; I woot the cause why
 [1442] Men sholde wedde, and forthermoore woot I
 [1443] Ther speketh many a man of mariage
 [1444] That woot namoore of it than woot my page
 [1445] For whiche causes man sholde take a wyf.
 [1446] If he ne may nat lyven chaast his lyf,
 [1447] Take hym a wyf with greet devocioun,
 [1448] By cause of leveful procreacioun
 [1449] Of children to th' onour of God above,
 [1450] And nat oonly for paramour or love;
 [1451] And for they sholde leccherye eschue,
 [1452] And yelde hir dette whan that it is due;
 [1453] Or for that ech of hem sholde helpen oother
 [1454] In meschief, as a suster shal the brother,
 [1455] And lyve in chastitee ful holily.
 [1456] But sires, by youre leve, that am nat I.
 [1457] For -- God be thanked! -- I dar make avaunt
 [1458] I feele my lymes stark and suffisaunt
 [1459] To do al that a man bilongeth to;
 [1460] I woot myselven best what I may do.
 [1461] Though I be hoor, I fare as dooth a tree
 [1462] That blosmeth er that fruyt ywoxen bee;
 [1463] And blosmy tree nys neither drye ne deed.
 [1464] I feele me nowhere hoor but on myn heed;
 [1465] Myn herte and alle my lymes been as grene
 [1466] As laurer thurgh the yeer is for to sene.
 [1467] And syn that ye han herd al myn entente,
 [1468] I prey yow to my wyl ye wole assente."
 [1469] Diverse men diversely hym tolde
 [1470] Of mariage manye ensamples olde.
 [1471] Somme blamed it, somme preysed it, certeyn,
 [1472] But atte laste, shortly for to seyn,
 [1473] As al day falleth altercacioun
 [1474] Bitwixen freendes in disputisoun,
 [1475] Ther fil a stryf bitwixe his bretheren two,
 [1476] Of whiche that oon was cleped Placebo;
 [1477] Justinus soothly called was that oother.
 [1478] Placebo seyde, "O Januarie, brother,
 [1479] Ful litel nede hadde ye, my lord so deere,
 [1480] Conseil to axe of any that is heere,
 [1481] But that ye been so ful of sapience
 [1482] That yow ne liketh, for youre heighe prudence,
 [1483] To weyven fro the word of Salomon.
 [1484] This word seyde he unto us everychon:
 [1485] `Wirk alle thyng by conseil,' thus seyde he,
 [1486] `And thanne shaltow nat repente thee.'
 [1487] But though that Salomon spak swich a word,
 [1488] Myn owene deere brother and my lord,
 [1489] So wysly God my soule brynge at reste,
 [1490] I holde youre owene conseil is the beste.
 [1491] For, brother myn, of me taak this motyf:
 [1492] I have now been a court-man al my lyf,
 [1493] And God it woot, though I unworthy be,
 [1494] I have stonden in ful greet degree
 [1495] Abouten lordes of ful heigh estaat;
 [1496] Yet hadde I nevere with noon of hem debaat.
 [1497] I nevere hem contraried, trewely;
 [1498] I woot wel that my lord kan moore than I.
 [1499] What that he seith, I holde it ferme and stable;
 [1500] I seye the same, or elles thyng semblable.
 [1501] A ful greet fool is any conseillour
 [1502] That serveth any lord of heigh honour,
 [1503] That dar presume, or elles thenken it,
 [1504] That his conseil sholde passe his lordes wit.
 [1505] Nay, lordes been no fooles, by my fay!
 [1506] Ye han youreselven shewed heer to-day
 [1507] So heigh sentence, so holily and weel,
 [1508] That I consente and conferme everydeel
 [1509] Youre wordes alle and youre opinioun.
 [1510] By God, ther nys no man in al this toun,
 [1511] Ne in Ytaille, that koude bet han sayd!
 [1512] Crist halt hym of this conseil ful wel apayd.
 [1513] And trewely, it is an heigh corage
 [1514] Of any man that stapen is in age
 [1515] To take a yong wyf; by my fader kyn,
 [1516] Youre herte hangeth on a joly pyn!
 [1517] Dooth now in this matiere right as yow leste,
 [1518] For finally I holde it for the beste."
 [1519] Justinus, that ay stille sat and herde,
 [1520] Right in this wise he to Placebo answerde:
 [1521] "Now, brother myn, be pacient, I preye,
 [1522] Syn ye han seyd, and herkneth what I seye.
 [1523] Senek, amonges othere wordes wyse,
 [1524] Seith that a man oghte hym right wel avyse
 [1525] To whom he yeveth his lond or his catel.
 [1526] And syn I oghte avyse me right wel
 [1527] To whom I yeve my good awey fro me,
 [1528] Wel muchel moore I oghte avysed be
 [1529] To whom I yeve my body for alwey.
 [1530] I warne yow wel, it is no childes pley
 [1531] To take a wyf withouten avysement.
 [1532] Men moste enquere -- this is myn assent --
 [1533] Wher she be wys, or sobre, or dronkelewe,
 [1534] Or proud, or elles ootherweys a shrewe,
 [1535] A chidestere, or wastour of thy good,
 [1536] Or riche, or poore, or elles mannyssh wood.
 [1537] Al be it so that no man fynden shal
 [1538] Noon in this world that trotteth hool in al,
 [1539] Ne man, ne beest, swich as men koude devyse;
 [1540] But nathelees it oghte ynough suffise
 [1541] With any wyf, if so were that she hadde
 [1542] Mo goode thewes than hire vices badde;
 [1543] And al this axeth leyser for t' enquere.
 [1544] For, God it woot, I have wept many a teere
 [1545] Ful pryvely, syn I have had a wyf.
 [1546] Preyse whoso wole a wedded mannes lyf,
 [1547] Certein I fynde in it but cost and care
 [1548] And observances, of alle blisses bare.
 [1549] And yet, God woot, my neighebores aboute,
 [1550] And namely of wommen many a route,
 [1551] Seyn that I have the mooste stedefast wyf,
 [1552] And eek the mekeste oon that bereth lyf;
 [1553] But I woot best where wryngeth me my sho.
 [1554] Ye mowe, for me, right as yow liketh do;
 [1555] Avyseth yow -- ye been a man of age --
 [1556] How that ye entren into mariage,
 [1557] And namely with a yong wyf and a fair.
 [1558] By hym that made water, erthe, and air,
 [1559] The yongeste man that is in al this route
 [1560] Is bisy ynough to bryngen it aboute
 [1561] To han his wyf allone. Trusteth me,
 [1562] Ye shul nat plesen hire fully yeres thre --
 [1563] This is to seyn, to doon hire ful plesaunce.
 [1564] A wyf axeth ful many an observaunce.
 [1565] I prey yow that ye be nat yvele apayd."
 [1566] "Wel," quod this Januarie, "and hastow ysayd?
 [1567] Straw for thy Senek, and for thy proverbes!
 [1568] I counte nat a panyer ful of herbes
 [1569] Of scole-termes. Wyser men than thow,
 [1570] As thou hast herd, assenteden right now
 [1571] To my purpos. Placebo, what sey ye?"
 [1572] "I seye it is a cursed man," quod he,
 [1573] "That letteth matrimoigne, sikerly."
 [1574] And with that word they rysen sodeynly,
 [1575] And been assented fully that he sholde
 [1576] Be wedded whanne hym liste and where he wolde.
 [1577] Heigh fantasye and curious bisynesse
 [1578] Fro day to day gan in the soule impresse
 [1579] Of Januarie aboute his mariage.
 [1580] Many fair shap and many a fair visage
 [1581] Ther passeth thurgh his herte nyght by nyght,
 [1582] As whoso tooke a mirour, polisshed bryght,
 [1583] And sette it in a commune market-place,
 [1584] Thanne sholde he se ful many a figure pace
 [1585] By his mirour; and in the same wyse
 [1586] Gan Januarie inwith his thoght devyse
 [1587] Of maydens whiche that dwelten hym bisyde.
 [1588] He wiste nat wher that he myghte abyde.
 [1589] For if that oon have beaute in hir face,
 [1590] Another stant so in the peples grace
 [1591] For hire sadnesse and hire benyngnytee
 [1592] That of the peple grettest voys hath she;
 [1593] And somme were riche and hadden badde name.
 [1594] But nathelees, bitwixe ernest and game,
 [1595] He atte laste apoynted hym on oon,
 [1596] And leet alle othere from his herte goon,
 [1597] And chees hire of his owene auctoritee;
 [1598] For love is blynd alday, and may nat see.
 [1599] And whan that he was in his bed ybroght,
 [1600] He purtreyed in his herte and in his thoght
 [1601] Hir fresshe beautee and hir age tendre,
 [1602] Hir myddel smal, hire armes longe and sklendre,
 [1603] Hir wise governaunce, hir gentillesse,
 [1604] Hir wommanly berynge, and hire sadnesse.
 [1605] And whan that he on hire was condescended,
 [1606] Hym thoughte his choys myghte nat ben amended.
 [1607] For whan that he hymself concluded hadde,
 [1608] Hym thoughte ech oother mannes wit so badde
 [1609] That inpossible it were to repplye
 [1610] Agayn his choys; this was his fantasye.
 [1611] His freendes sente he to, at his instaunce,
 [1612] And preyed hem to doon hym that plesaunce,
 [1613] That hastily they wolden to hym come;
 [1614] He wolde abregge hir labour, alle and some.
 [1615] Nedeth namoore for hym to go ne ryde;
 [1616] He was apoynted ther he wolde abyde.
 [1617] Placebo cam, and eek his freendes soone,
 [1618] And alderfirst he bad hem alle a boone,
 [1619] That noon of hem none argumentes make
 [1620] Agayn the purpos which that he hath take,
 [1621] Which purpos was plesant to God, seyde he,
 [1622] And verray ground of his prosperitee.
 [1623] He seyde ther was a mayden in the toun,
 [1624] Which that of beautee hadde greet renoun,
 [1625] Al were it so she were of smal degree;
 [1626] Suffiseth hym hir yowthe and hir beautee.
 [1627] Which mayde, he seyde, he wolde han to his wyf,
 [1628] To lede in ese and hoolynesse his lyf;
 [1629] And thanked God that he myghte han hire al,
 [1630] That no wight his blisse parten shal.
 [1631] And preyed hem to laboure in this nede,
 [1632] And shapen that he faille nat to spede;
 [1633] For thanne, he seyde, his spirit was at ese.
 [1634] "Thanne is," quod he, "no thyng may me displese,
 [1635] Save o thyng priketh in my conscience,
 [1636] The which I wol reherce in youre presence.
 [1637] "I have," quod he, "herd seyd, ful yoore ago,
 [1638] Ther may no man han parfite blisses two --
 [1639] This is to seye, in erthe and eek in hevene.
 [1640] For though he kepe hym fro the synnes sevene,
 [1641] And eek from every branche of thilke tree,
 [1642] Yet is ther so parfit felicitee
 [1643] And so greet ese and lust in mariage
 [1644] That evere I am agast now in myn age
 [1645] That I shal lede now so myrie a lyf,
 [1646] So delicat, withouten wo and stryf,
 [1647] That I shal have myn hevene in erthe heere.
 [1648] For sith that verray hevene is boght so deere
 [1649] With tribulacion and greet penaunce,
 [1650] How sholde I thanne, that lyve in swich plesaunce
 [1651] As alle wedded men doon with hire wyvys,
 [1652] Come to the blisse ther Crist eterne on lyve ys?
 [1653] This is my drede, and ye, my bretheren tweye,
 [1654] Assoilleth me this question, I preye."
 [1655] Justinus, which that hated his folye,
 [1656] Answerde anon right in his japerye;
 [1657] And for he wolde his longe tale abregge,
 [1658] He wolde noon auctoritee allegge,
 [1659] But seyde, "Sire, so ther be noon obstacle
 [1660] Oother than this, God of his hygh myracle
 [1661] And of his mercy may so for yow wirche
 [1662] That, er ye have youre right of hooly chirche,
 [1663] Ye may repente of wedded mannes lyf,
 [1664] In which ye seyn ther is no wo ne stryf.
 [1665] And elles, God forbede but he sente
 [1666] A wedded man hym grace to repente
 [1667] Wel ofte rather than a sengle man!
 [1668] And therfore, sire -- the beste reed I kan --
 [1669] Dispeire yow noght, but have in youre memorie,
 [1670] Paraunter she may be youre purgatorie!
 [1671] She may be Goddes meene and Goddes whippe;
 [1672] Thanne shal youre soule up to hevene skippe
 [1673] Swifter than dooth an arwe out of a bowe.
 [1674] I hope to God, herafter shul ye knowe
 [1675] That ther nys no so greet felicitee
 [1676] In mariage, ne nevere mo shal bee,
 [1677] That yow shal lette of youre savacion,
 [1678] So that ye use, as skile is and reson,
 [1679] The lustes of youre wyf attemprely,
 [1680] And that ye plese hire nat to amorously,
 [1681] And that ye kepe yow eek from oother synne.
 [1682] My tale is doon, for my wit is thynne.
 [1683] Beth nat agast herof, my brother deere,
 [1684] But lat us waden out of this mateere.
 [1685] The Wyf of Bathe, if ye han understonde,
 [1686] Of mariage, which we have on honde,
 [1687] Declared hath ful wel in litel space.
 [1688] Fareth now wel. God have yow in his grace."
 [1689] And with this word this Justyn and his brother
 [1690] Han take hir leve, and ech of hem of oother.
 [1691] For whan they saughe that it moste nedes be,
 [1692] They wroghten so, by sly and wys tretee,
 [1693] That she, this mayden which that Mayus highte,
 [1694] As hastily as evere that she myghte
 [1695] Shal wedded be unto this Januarie.
 [1696] I trowe it were to longe yow to tarie,
 [1697] If I yow tolde of every scrit and bond
 [1698] By which that she was feffed in his lond,
 [1699] Or for to herknen of hir riche array.
 [1700] But finally ycomen is the day
 [1701] That to the chirche bothe be they went
 [1702] For to receyve the hooly sacrement.
 [1703] Forth comth the preest, with stole aboute his nekke,
 [1704] And bad hire be lyk Sarra and Rebekke
 [1705] In wysdom and in trouthe of mariage;
 [1706] And seyde his orisons, as is usage,
 [1707] And croucheth hem, and bad God sholde hem blesse,
 [1708] And made al siker ynogh with hoolynesse.
 [1709] Thus been they wedded with solempnitee,
 [1710] And at the feeste sitteth he and she
 [1711] With othere worthy folk upon the deys.
 [1712] Al ful of joye and blisse is the paleys,
 [1713] And ful of instrumentz and of vitaille,
 [1714] The mooste deyntevous of al Ytaille.
 [1715] Biforn hem stoode instrumentz of swich soun
 [1716] That Orpheus, ne of Thebes Amphioun,
 [1717] Ne maden nevere swich a melodye.
 [1718] At every cours thanne cam loud mynstralcye
 [1719] That nevere tromped Joab for to heere,
 [1720] Nor he Theodomas, yet half so cleere
 [1721] At Thebes whan the citee was in doute.
 [1722] Bacus the wyn hem shynketh al aboute,
 [1723] And Venus laugheth upon every wight,
 [1724] For Januarie was bicome hir knyght
 [1725] And wolde bothe assayen his corage
 [1726] In libertee, and eek in mariage;
 [1727] And with hire fyrbrond in hire hand aboute
 [1728] Daunceth biforn the bryde and al the route.
 [1729] And certeinly, I dar right wel seyn this,
 [1730] Ymeneus, that god of weddyng is,
 [1731] Saugh nevere his lyf so myrie a wedded man.
 [1732] Hoold thou thy pees, thou poete Marcian,
 [1733] That writest us that ilke weddyng murie
 [1734] Of hire Philologie and hym Mercurie,
 [1735] And of the songes that the Muses songe!
 [1736] To smal is bothe thy penne, and eek thy tonge,
 [1737] For to descryven of this mariage.
 [1738] Whan tendre youthe hath wedded stoupyng age,
 [1739] Ther is swich myrthe that it may nat be writen.
 [1740] Assayeth it youreself; thanne may ye witen
 [1741] If that I lye or noon in this matiere.
 [1742] Mayus, that sit with so benyngne a chiere,
 [1743] Hire to biholde it semed fayerye.
 [1744] Queene Ester looked nevere with swich an ye
 [1745] On Assuer, so meke a look hath she.
 [1746] I may yow nat devyse al hir beautee.
 [1747] But thus muche of hire beautee telle I may,
 [1748] That she was lyk the brighte morwe of May,
 [1749] Fulfild of alle beautee and plesaunce.
 [1750] This Januarie is ravysshed in a traunce
 [1751] At every tyme he looked on hir face;
 [1752] But in his herte he gan hire to manace
 [1753] That he that nyght in armes wolde hire streyne
 [1754] Harder than evere Parys dide Eleyne.
 [1755] But nathelees yet hadde he greet pitee
 [1756] That thilke nyght offenden hire moste he,
 [1757] And thoughte, "Allas! O tendre creature,
 [1758] Now wolde God ye myghte wel endure
 [1759] Al my corage, it is so sharp and keene!
 [1760] I am agast ye shul it nat susteene.
 [1761] But God forbede that I dide al my myght!
 [1762] Now wolde God that it were woxen nyght,
 [1763] And that the nyght wolde lasten everemo.
 [1764] I wolde that al this peple were ago."
 [1765] And finally he dooth al his labour,
 [1766] As he best myghte, savynge his honour,
 [1767] To haste hem fro the mete in subtil wyse.
 [1768] The tyme cam that resoun was to ryse;
 [1769] And after that men daunce and drynken faste,
 [1770] And spices al aboute the hous they caste,
 [1771] And ful of joye and blisse is every man --
 [1772] Al but a squyer, highte Damyan,
 [1773] Which carf biforn the knyght ful many a day.
 [1774] He was so ravysshed on his lady May
 [1775] That for the verray peyne he was ny wood.
 [1776] Almoost he swelte and swowned ther he stood,
 [1777] So soore hath Venus hurt hym with hire brond,
 [1778] As that she bar it daunsynge in hire hond;
 [1779] And to his bed he wente hym hastily.
 [1780] Namoore of hym at this tyme speke I,
 [1781] But there I lete hym wepe ynogh and pleyne
 [1782] Til fresshe May wol rewen on his peyne.
 [1783] O perilous fyr, that in the bedstraw bredeth!
 [1784] O famulier foo, that his servyce bedeth!
 [1785] O servant traytour, false hoomly hewe,
 [1786] Lyk to the naddre in bosom sly untrewe,
 [1787] God shilde us alle from youre aqueyntaunce!
 [1788] O Januarie, dronken in plesaunce
 [1789] In mariage, se how thy Damyan,
 [1790] Thyn owene squier and thy borne man,
 [1791] Entendeth for to do thee vileynye.
 [1792] God graunte thee thyn hoomly fo t' espye!
 [1793] For in this world nys worse pestilence
 [1794] Than hoomly foo al day in thy presence.
 [1795] Parfourned hath the sonne his ark diurne;
 [1796] No lenger may the body of hym sojurne
 [1797] On th' orisonte, as in that latitude.
 [1798] Night with his mantel, that is derk and rude,
 [1799] Gan oversprede the hemysperie aboute;
 [1800] For which departed is this lusty route
 [1801] Fro Januarie, with thank on every syde.
 [1802] Hoom to hir houses lustily they ryde,
 [1803] Where as they doon hir thynges as hem leste,
 [1804] And whan they sye hir tyme, goon to reste.
 [1805] Soone after that, this hastif Januarie
 [1806] Wolde go to bedde; he wolde no lenger tarye.
 [1807] He drynketh ypocras, clarree, and vernage
 [1808] Of spices hoote t' encreessen his corage;
 [1809] And many a letuarie hath he ful fyn,
 [1810] Swiche as the cursed monk, daun Constantyn,
 [1811] Hath writen in his book De Coitu;
 [1812] To eten hem alle he nas no thyng eschu.
 [1813] And to his privee freendes thus seyde he:
 [1814] "For Goddes love, as soone as it may be,
 [1815] Lat voyden al this hous in curteys wyse."
 [1816] And they han doon right as he wol devyse.
 [1817] Men drynken and the travers drawe anon.
 [1818] The bryde was broght abedde as stille as stoon;
 [1819] And whan the bed was with the preest yblessed,
 [1820] Out of the chambre hath every wight hym dressed,
 [1821] And Januarie hath faste in armes take
 [1822] His fresshe May, his paradys, his make.
 [1823] He lulleth hire; he kisseth hire ful ofte;
 [1824] With thikke brustles of his berd unsofte,
 [1825] Lyk to the skyn of houndfyssh, sharp as brere --
 [1826] For he was shave al newe in his manere --
 [1827] He rubbeth hire aboute hir tendre face,
 [1828] And seyde thus, "Allas! I moot trespace
 [1829] To yow, my spouse, and yow greetly offende
 [1830] Er tyme come that I wil doun descende.
 [1831] But nathelees, considereth this," quod he,
 [1832] "Ther nys no werkman, whatsoevere he be,
 [1833] That may bothe werke wel and hastily;
 [1834] This wol be doon at leyser parfitly.
 [1835] It is no fors how longe that we pleye;
 [1836] In trewe wedlok coupled be we tweye,
 [1837] And blessed be the yok that we been inne,
 [1838] For in oure actes we mowe do no synne.
 [1839] A man may do no synne with his wyf,
 [1840] Ne hurte hymselven with his owene knyf,
 [1841] For we han leve to pleye us by the lawe."
 [1842] Thus laboureth he til that the day gan dawe;
 [1843] And thanne he taketh a sop in fyn clarree,
 [1844] And upright in his bed thanne sitteth he,
 [1845] And after that he sang ful loude and cleere,
 [1846] And kiste his wyf, and made wantown cheere.
 [1847] He was al coltissh, ful of ragerye,
 [1848] And ful of jargon as a flekked pye.
 [1849] The slakke skyn aboute his nekke shaketh
 [1850] Whil that he sang, so chaunteth he and craketh.
 [1851] But God woot what that May thoughte in hir herte,
 [1852] Whan she hym saugh up sittynge in his sherte,
 [1853] In his nyght-cappe, and with his nekke lene;
 [1854] She preyseth nat his pleyyng worth a bene.
 [1855] Thanne seide he thus, "My reste wol I take;
 [1856] Now day is come, I may no lenger wake."
 [1857] And doun he leyde his heed and sleep til pryme.
 [1858] And afterward, whan that he saugh his tyme,
 [1859] Up ryseth Januarie; but fresshe May
 [1860] Heeld hire chambre unto the fourthe day,
 [1861] As usage is of wyves for the beste.
 [1862] For every labour somtyme moot han reste,
 [1863] Or elles longe may he nat endure;
 [1864] This is to seyn, no lyves creature,
 [1865] Be it of fyssh, or bryd, or beest, or man.
 [1866] Now wol I speke of woful Damyan,
 [1867] That langwissheth for love, as ye shul heere;
 [1868] Therfore I speke to hym in this manere:
 [1869] I seye, "O sely Damyan, allas!
 [1870] Andswere to my demaunde, as in this cas.
 [1871] How shaltow to thy lady, fresshe May,
 [1872] Telle thy wo? She wole alwey seye nay.
 [1873] Eek if thou speke, she wol thy wo biwreye.
 [1874] God be thyn helpe! I kan no bettre seye."
 [1875] This sike Damyan in Venus fyr
 [1876] So brenneth that he dyeth for desyr,
 [1877] For which he putte his lyf in aventure.
 [1878] No lenger myghte he in this wise endure,
 [1879] But prively a penner gan he borwe,
 [1880] And in a lettre wroot he al his sorwe,
 [1881] In manere of a compleynt or a lay,
 [1882] Unto his faire, fresshe lady May;
 [1883] And in a purs of sylk heng on his sherte
 [1884] He hath it put, and leyde it at his herte.
 [1885] The moone, that at noon was thilke day
 [1886] That Januarie hath wedded fresshe May
 [1887] In two of Tawr, was into Cancre glyden;
 [1888] So longe hath Mayus in hir chambre abyden,
 [1889] As custume is unto thise nobles alle.
 [1890] A bryde shal nat eten in the halle
 [1891] Til dayes foure, or thre dayes atte leeste,
 [1892] Ypassed been; thanne lat hire go to feeste.
 [1893] The fourthe day compleet fro noon to noon,
 [1894] Whan that the heighe masse was ydoon,
 [1895] In halle sit this Januarie and May,
 [1896] As fressh as is the brighte someres day.
 [1897] And so bifel how that this goode man
 [1898] Remembred hym upon this Damyan,
 [1899] And seyde, "Seynte Marie! how may this be,
 [1900] That Damyan entendeth nat to me?
 [1901] Is he ay syk, or how may this bityde?"
 [1902] His squieres, whiche that stooden ther bisyde,
 [1903] Excused hym by cause of his siknesse,
 [1904] Which letted hym to doon his bisynesse;
 [1905] Noon oother cause myghte make hym tarye.
 [1906] "That me forthynketh," quod this Januarie,
 [1907] "He is a gentil squier, by my trouthe!
 [1908] If that he deyde, it were harm and routhe.
 [1909] He is as wys, discreet, and as secree
 [1910] As any man I woot of his degree,
 [1911] And therto manly, and eek servysable,
 [1912] And for to been a thrifty man right able.
 [1913] But after mete, as soone as evere I may,
 [1914] I wol myself visite hym, and eek May,
 [1915] To doon hym al the confort that I kan."
 [1916] And for that word hym blessed every man,
 [1917] That of his bountee and his gentillesse
 [1918] He wolde so conforten in siknesse
 [1919] His squier, for it was a gentil dede.
 [1920] "Dame," quod this Januarie, "taak good hede,
 [1921] At after-mete ye with youre wommen alle,
 [1922] Whan ye han been in chambre out of this halle,
 [1923] That alle ye go se this Damyan.
 [1924] Dooth hym disport -- he is a gentil man;
 [1925] And telleth hym that I wol hym visite,
 [1926] Have I no thyng but rested me a lite;
 [1927] And spede yow faste, for I wole abyde
 [1928] Til that ye slepe faste by my syde."
 [1929] And with that word he gan to hym to calle
 [1930] A squier, that was marchal of his halle,
 [1931] And tolde hym certeyn thynges, what he wolde.
 [1932] This fresshe May hath streight hir wey yholde
 [1933] With alle hir wommen unto Damyan.
 [1934] Doun by his beddes syde sit she than,
 [1935] Confortynge hym as goodly as she may.
 [1936] This Damyan, whan that his tyme he say,
 [1937] In secree wise his purs and eek his bille,
 [1938] In which that he ywriten hadde his wille,
 [1939] Hath put into hire hand, withouten moore,
 [1940] Save that he siketh wonder depe and soore,
 [1941] And softely to hire right thus seyde he:
 [1942] "Mercy! And that ye nat discovere me,
 [1943] For I am deed if that this thyng be kyd."
 [1944] This purs hath she inwith hir bosom hyd
 [1945] And wente hire wey; ye gete namoore of me.
 [1946] But unto Januarie ycomen is she,
 [1947] That on his beddes syde sit ful softe.
 [1948] He taketh hire, and kisseth hire ful ofte,
 [1949] And leyde hym doun to slepe, and that anon.
 [1950] She feyned hire as that she moste gon
 [1951] Ther as ye woot that every wight moot neede;
 [1952] And whan she of this bille hath taken heede,
 [1953] She rente it al to cloutes atte laste,
 [1954] And in the pryvee softely it caste.
 [1955] Who studieth now but faire fresshe May?
 [1956] Adoun by olde Januarie she lay,
 [1957] That sleep til that the coughe hath hym awaked.
 [1958] Anon he preyde hire strepen hire al naked;
 [1959] He wolde of hire, he seyde, han som plesaunce;
 [1960] He seyde hir clothes dide hym encombraunce,
 [1961] And she obeyeth, be hire lief or looth.
 [1962] But lest that precious folk be with me wrooth,
 [1963] How that he wroghte, I dar nat to yow telle,
 [1964] Or wheither hire thoughte it paradys or helle.
 [1965] But heere I lete hem werken in hir wyse
 [1966] Til evensong rong and that they moste aryse.
 [1967] Were it by destynee or by aventure,
 [1968] Were it by influence or by nature,
 [1969] Or constellacion, that in swich estaat
 [1970] The hevene stood that tyme fortunaat
 [1971] Was for to putte a bille of Venus werkes --
 [1972] For alle thyng hath tyme, as seyn thise clerkes --
 [1973] To any womman for to gete hire love,
 [1974] I kan nat seye; but grete God above,
 [1975] That knoweth that noon act is causelees,
 [1976] He deme of al, for I wole holde my pees.
 [1977] But sooth is this, how that this fresshe May
 [1978] Hath take swich impression that day
 [1979] Of pitee of this sike Damyan
 [1980] That from hire herte she ne dryve kan
 [1981] The remembrance for to doon hym ese.
 [1982] "Certeyn," thoghte she, "whom that this thyng displese
 [1983] I rekke noght, for heere I hym assure
 [1984] To love hym best of any creature,
 [1985] Though he namoore hadde than his sherte."
 [1986] Lo, pitee renneth soone in gentil herte!
 [1987] Heere may ye se how excellent franchise
 [1988] In wommen is, whan they hem narwe avyse.
 [1989] Som tyrant is, as ther be many oon
 [1990] That hath an herte as hard as any stoon,
 [1991] Which wolde han lat hym sterven in the place
 [1992] Wel rather than han graunted hym hire grace,
 [1993] And hem rejoysen in hire crueel pryde,
 [1994] And rekke nat to been an homycide.
 [1995] This gentil May, fulfilled of pitee,
 [1996] Right of hire hand a lettre made she,
 [1997] In which she graunteth hym hire verray grace.
 [1998] Ther lakketh noght oonly but day and place
 [1999] Wher that she myghte unto his lust suffise,
 [2000] For it shal be right as he wole devyse.
 [2001] And whan she saugh hir tyme, upon a day
 [2002] To visite this Damyan gooth May,
 [2003] And sotilly this lettre doun she threste
 [2004] Under his pilwe; rede it if hym leste.
 [2005] She taketh hym by the hand and harde hym twiste
 [2006] So secrely that no wight of it wiste,
 [2007] And bad hym been al hool, and forth she wente
 [2008] To Januarie, whan that he for hire sente.
 [2009] Up riseth Damyan the nexte morwe;
 [2010] Al passed was his siknesse and his sorwe.
 [2011] He kembeth hym, he preyneth hym and pyketh,
 [2012] He dooth al that his lady lust and lyketh,
 [2013] And eek to Januarie he gooth as lowe
 [2014] As evere dide a dogge for the bowe.
 [2015] He is so plesant unto every man
 [2016] (For craft is al, whoso that do it kan)
 [2017] That every wight is fayn to speke hym good,
 [2018] And fully in his lady grace he stood.
 [2019] Thus lete I Damyan aboute his nede,
 [2020] And in my tale forth I wol procede.
 [2021] Somme clerkes holden that felicitee
 [2022] Stant in delit, and therfore certeyn he,
 [2023] This noble Januarie, with al his myght,
 [2024] In honest wyse, as longeth to a knyght,
 [2025] Shoop hym to lyve ful deliciously.
 [2026] His housynge, his array, as honestly
 [2027] To his degree was maked as a kynges.
 [2028] Amonges othere of his honeste thynges,
 [2029] He made a gardyn, walled al with stoon;
 [2030] So fair a gardyn woot I nowher noon.
 [2031] For, out of doute, I verraily suppose
 [2032] That he that wroot the Romance of the Rose
 [2033] Ne koude of it the beautee wel devyse;
 [2034] Ne Priapus ne myghte nat suffise,
 [2035] Though he be god of gardyns, for to telle
 [2036] The beautee of the gardyn and the welle
 [2037] That stood under a laurer alwey grene.
 [2038] Ful ofte tyme he Pluto and his queene,
 [2039] Proserpina, and al hire fayerye,
 [2040] Disporten hem and maken melodye
 [2041] Aboute that welle, and daunced, as men tolde.
 [2042] This noble knyght, this Januarie the olde,
 [2043] Swich deyntee hath in it to walke and pleye,
 [2044] That he wol no wight suffren bere the keye
 [2045] Save he hymself; for of the smale wyket
 [2046] He baar alwey of silver a clyket,
 [2047] With which, whan that hym leste, he it unshette.
 [2048] And whan he wolde paye his wyf hir dette
 [2049] In somer seson, thider wolde he go,
 [2050] And May his wyf, and no wight but they two;
 [2051] And thynges whiche that were nat doon abedde,
 [2052] He in the gardyn parfourned hem and spedde.
 [2053] And in this wyse, many a murye day,
 [2054] Lyved this Januarie and fresshe May.
 [2055] But worldly joye may nat alwey dure
 [2056] To Januarie, ne to no creature.
 [2057] O sodeyn hap! O thou Fortune unstable!
 [2058] Lyk to the scorpion so deceyvable,
 [2059] That flaterest with thyn heed whan thou wolt stynge;
 [2060] Thy tayl is deeth, thurgh thyn envenymynge.
 [2061] O brotil joye! O sweete venym queynte!
 [2062] O monstre, that so subtilly kanst peynte
 [2063] Thy yiftes under hewe of stidefastnesse,
 [2064] That thou deceyvest bothe moore and lesse!
 [2065] Why hastow Januarie thus deceyved,
 [2066] That haddest hym for thy fulle freend receyved?
 [2067] And now thou hast biraft hym bothe his yen,
 [2068] For sorwe of which desireth he to dyen.
 [2069] Allas, this noble Januarie free,
 [2070] Amydde his lust and his prosperitee,
 [2071] Is woxen blynd, and that al sodeynly.
 [2072] He wepeth and he wayleth pitously;
 [2073] And therwithal the fyr of jalousie,
 [2074] Lest that his wyf sholde falle in som folye,
 [2075] So brente his herte that he wolde fayn
 [2076] That som man bothe hire and hym had slayn.
 [2077] For neither after his deeth nor in his lyf
 [2078] Ne wolde he that she were love ne wyf,
 [2079] But evere lyve as wydwe in clothes blake,
 [2080] Soul as the turtle that lost hath hire make.
 [2081] But atte laste, after a month or tweye,
 [2082] His sorwe gan aswage, sooth to seye;
 [2083] For whan he wiste it may noon oother be,
 [2084] He paciently took his adversitee,
 [2085] Save, out of doute, he may nat forgoon
 [2086] That he nas jalous everemoore in oon;
 [2087] Which jalousye it was so outrageous
 [2088] That neither in halle, n' yn noon oother hous,
 [2089] Ne in noon oother place, neverthemo,
 [2090] He nolde suffre hire for to ryde or go,
 [2091] But if that he had hond on hire alway;
 [2092] For which ful ofte wepeth fresshe May,
 [2093] That loveth Damyan so benyngnely
 [2094] That she moot outher dyen sodeynly
 [2095] Or elles she moot han hym as hir leste.
 [2096] She wayteth whan hir herte wolde breste.
 [2097] Upon that oother syde Damyan
 [2098] Bicomen is the sorwefulleste man
 [2099] That evere was, for neither nyght ne day
 [2100] Ne myghte he speke a word to fresshe May,
 [2101] As to his purpos, of no swich mateere,
 [2102] But if that Januarie moste it heere,
 [2103] That hadde an hand upon hire everemo.
 [2104] But nathelees, by writyng to and fro
 [2105] And privee signes wiste he what she mente,
 [2106] And she knew eek the fyn of his entente.
 [2107] O Januarie, what myghte it thee availle,
 [2108] Thogh thou myghtest se as fer as shippes saille?
 [2109] For as good is blynd deceyved be
 [2110] As to be deceyved whan a man may se.
 [2111] Lo, Argus, which that hadde an hondred yen,
 [2112] For al that evere he koude poure or pryen,
 [2113] Yet was he blent, and, God woot, so been mo
 [2114] That wenen wisly that it be nat so.
 [2115] Passe over is an ese, I sey namoore.
 [2116] This fresshe May, that I spak of so yoore,
 [2117] In warm wex hath emprented the clyket
 [2118] That Januarie bar of the smale wyket,
 [2119] By which into his gardyn ofte he wente;
 [2120] And Damyan, that knew al hire entente,
 [2121] The cliket countrefeted pryvely.
 [2122] Ther nys namoore to seye, but hastily
 [2123] Som wonder by this clyket shal bityde,
 [2124] Which ye shul heeren, if ye wole abyde.
 [2125] O noble Ovyde, ful sooth seystou, God woot,
 [2126] What sleighte is it, thogh it be long and hoot,
 [2127] That Love nyl fynde it out in som manere?
 [2128] By Piramus and Tesbee may men leere;
 [2129] Thogh they were kept ful longe streite overal,
 [2130] They been accorded, rownynge thurgh a wal,
 [2131] Ther no wight koude han founde out swich a sleighte.
 [2132] But now to purpos: er that dayes eighte
 [2133] Were passed [of] the month of [Juyn], bifil
 [2134] That Januarie hath caught so greet a wil,
 [2135] Thurgh eggyng of his wyf, hym for to pleye
 [2136] In his gardyn, and no wight but they tweye,
 [2137] That in a morwe unto his May seith he:
 [2138] "Rys up, my wyf, my love, my lady free!
 [2139] The turtles voys is herd, my dowve sweete;
 [2140] The wynter is goon with alle his reynes weete.
 [2141] Com forth now, with thyne eyen columbyn!
 [2142] How fairer been thy brestes than is wyn!
 [2143] The gardyn is enclosed al aboute;
 [2144] Com forth, my white spouse! Out of doute
 [2145] Thou hast me wounded in myn herte, O wyf!
 [2146] No spot of thee ne knew I al my lyf.
 [2147] Com forth, and lat us taken oure disport;
 [2148] I chees thee for my wyf and my confort."
 [2149] Swiche olde lewed wordes used he.
 [2150] On Damyan a signe made she,
 [2151] That he sholde go biforn with his cliket.
 [2152] This Damyan thanne hath opened the wyket,
 [2153] And in he stirte, and that in swich manere
 [2154] That no wight myghte it se neither yheere,
 [2155] And stille he sit under a bussh anon.
 [2156] This Januarie, as blynd as is a stoon,
 [2157] With Mayus in his hand, and no wight mo,
 [2158] Into his fresshe gardyn is ago,
 [2159] And clapte to the wyket sodeynly.
 [2160] "Now wyf," quod he, "heere nys but thou and I,
 [2161] That art the creature that I best love.
 [2162] For by that Lord that sit in hevene above,
 [2163] Levere ich hadde to dyen on a knyf
 [2164] Than thee offende, trewe deere wyf!
 [2165] For Goddes sake, thenk how I thee chees,
 [2166] Noght for no coveitise, doutelees,
 [2167] But oonly for the love I had to thee.
 [2168] And though that I be oold and may nat see,
 [2169] Beth to me trewe, and I wol telle yow why.
 [2170] Thre thynges, certes, shal ye wynne therby:
 [2171] First, love of Crist, and to youreself honour,
 [2172] And al myn heritage, toun and tour;
 [2173] I yeve it yow, maketh chartres as yow leste;
 [2174] This shal be doon to-morwe er sonne reste,
 [2175] So wisly God my soule brynge in blisse.
 [2176] I prey yow first, in covenant ye me kisse;
 [2177] And though that I be jalous, wyte me noght.
 [2178] Ye been so depe enprented in my thoght
 [2179] That, whan that I considere youre beautee
 [2180] And therwithal the unlikly elde of me,
 [2181] I may nat, certes, though I sholde dye,
 [2182] Forbere to been out of youre compaignye
 [2183] For verray love; this is withouten doute.
 [2184] Now kys me, wyf, and lat us rome aboute."
 [2185] This fresshe May, whan she thise wordes herde,
 [2186] Benyngnely to Januarie answerde,
 [2187] But first and forward she bigan to wepe.
 [2188] "I have," quod she, "a soule for to kepe
 [2189] As wel as ye, and also myn honour,
 [2190] And of my wyfhod thilke tendre flour,
 [2191] Which that I have assured in youre hond,
 [2192] Whan that the preest to yow my body bond;
 [2193] Wherfore I wole answere in this manere,
 [2194] By the leve of yow, my lord so deere:
 [2195] I prey to God that nevere dawe the day
 [2196] That I ne sterve, as foule as womman may,
 [2197] If evere I do unto my kyn that shame,
 [2198] Or elles I empeyre so my name,
 [2199] That I be fals; and if I do that lak,
 [2200] Do strepe me and put me in a sak,
 [2201] And in the nexte ryver do me drenche.
 [2202] I am a gentil womman and no wenche.
 [2203] Why speke ye thus? But men been evere untrewe,
 [2204] And wommen have repreve of yow ay newe.
 [2205] Ye han noon oother contenance, I leeve,
 [2206] But speke to us of untrust and repreeve."
 [2207] And with that word she saugh wher Damyan
 [2208] Sat in the bussh, and coughen she bigan,
 [2209] And with hir fynger signes made she
 [2210] That Damyan sholde clymbe upon a tree
 [2211] That charged was with fruyt, and up he wente.
 [2212] For verraily he knew al hire entente,
 [2213] And every signe that she koude make,
 [2214] Wel bet than Januarie, hir owene make,
 [2215] For in a lettre she hadde toold hym al
 [2216] Of this matere, how he werchen shal.
 [2217] And thus I lete hym sitte upon the pyrie,
 [2218] And Januarie and May romynge myrie.
 [2219] Bright was the day, and blew the firmament;
 [2220] Phebus hath of gold his stremes doun ysent
 [2221] To gladen every flour with his warmnesse.
 [2222] He was that tyme in Geminis, as I gesse,
 [2223] But litel fro his declynacion
 [2224] Of Cancer, Jovis exaltacion.
 [2225] And so bifel, that brighte morwe-tyde
 [2226] That in that gardyn, in the ferther syde,
 [2227] Pluto, that is kyng of Fayerye,
 [2228] And many a lady in his compaignye,
 [2229] Folwynge his wyf, the queene Proserpyna,
 [2230] Which that he ravysshed out of [Ethna]
 [2231] Whil that she gadered floures in the mede --
 [2232] In Claudyan ye may the stories rede,
 [2233] How in his grisely carte he hire fette --
 [2234] This kyng of Fairye thanne adoun hym sette
 [2235] Upon a bench of turves, fressh and grene,
 [2236] And right anon thus seyde he to his queene:
 [2237] "My wyf," quod he, "ther may no wight seye nay;
 [2238] Th' experience so preveth every day
 [2239] The tresons whiche that wommen doon to man.
 [2240] Ten hondred thousand [tales] tellen I kan
 [2241] Notable of youre untrouthe and brotilnesse.
 [2242] O Salomon, wys, and richest of richesse,
 [2243] Fulfild of sapience and of worldly glorie,
 [2244] Ful worthy been thy wordes to memorie
 [2245] To every wight that wit and reson kan.
 [2246] Thus preiseth he yet the bountee of man:
 [2247] `Amonges a thousand men yet foond I oon,
 [2248] But of wommen alle foond I noon.'
 [2249] "Thus seith the kyng that knoweth youre wikkednesse.
 [2250] And Jhesus, filius Syrak, as I gesse,
 [2251] Ne speketh of yow but seelde reverence.
 [2252] A wylde fyr and corrupt pestilence
 [2253] So falle upon youre bodyes yet to-nyght!
 [2254] Ne se ye nat this honurable knyght,
 [2255] By cause, allas, that he is blynd and old,
 [2256] His owene man shal make hym cokewold.
 [2257] Lo, where he sit, the lechour, in the tree!
 [2258] Now wol I graunten, of my magestee,
 [2259] Unto this olde, blynde, worthy knyght
 [2260] That he shal have ayen his eyen syght,
 [2261] Whan that his wyf wold doon hym vileynye.
 [2262] Thanne shal he knowen al hire harlotrye,
 [2263] Bothe in repreve of hire and othere mo."
 [2264] "Ye shal?" quod Proserpyne, "wol ye so?
 [2265] Now by my moodres sires soule I swere
 [2266] That I shal yeven hire suffisant answere,
 [2267] And alle wommen after, for hir sake,
 [2268] That, though they be in any gilt ytake,
 [2269] With face boold they shulle hemself excuse,
 [2270] And bere hem doun that wolden hem accuse.
 [2271] For lak of answere noon of hem shal dyen.
 [2272] Al hadde man seyn a thyng with bothe his yen,
 [2273] Yit shul we wommen visage it hardily,
 [2274] And wepe, and swere, and chyde subtilly,
 [2275] So that ye men shul been as lewed as gees.
 [2276] "What rekketh me of youre auctoritees?
 [2277] I woot wel that this Jew, this Salomon,
 [2278] Foond of us wommen fooles many oon.
 [2279] But though that he ne foond no good womman,
 [2280] Yet hath ther founde many another man
 [2281] Wommen ful trewe, ful goode, and vertuous.
 [2282] Witnesse on hem that dwelle in Cristes hous;
 [2283] With martirdom they preved hire constance.
 [2284] The Romayn geestes eek make remembrance
 [2285] Of many a verray, trewe wyf also.
 [2286] But, sire, ne be nat wrooth, al be it so,
 [2287] Though that he seyde he foond no good womman,
 [2288] I prey yow take the sentence of the man;
 [2289] He mente thus, that in sovereyn bontee
 [2290] Nis noon but God, but neither he ne she.
 [2291] "Ey! for verray God that nys but oon,
 [2292] What make ye so muche of Salomon?
 [2293] What though he made a temple, Goddes hous?
 [2294] What though he were riche and glorious?
 [2295] So made he eek a temple of false goddis.
 [2296] How myghte he do a thyng that moore forbode is?
 [2297] Pardee, as faire as ye his name emplastre,
 [2298] He was a lecchour and an ydolastre,
 [2299] And in his elde he verray God forsook;
 [2300] And if God ne hadde, as seith the book,
 [2301] Yspared him for his fadres sake, he sholde
 [2302] Have lost his regne rather than he wolde.
 [2303] I sette right noght, of al the vileynye
 [2304] That ye of wommen write, a boterflye!
 [2305] I am a womman, nedes moot I speke,
 [2306] Or elles swelle til myn herte breke.
 [2307] For sithen he seyde that we been jangleresses,
 [2308] As evere hool I moote brouke my tresses,
 [2309] I shal nat spare, for no curteisye,
 [2310] To speke hym harm that wolde us vileynye."
 [2311] "Dame," quod this Pluto, "be no lenger wrooth;
 [2312] I yeve it up! But sith I swoor myn ooth
 [2313] That I wolde graunten hym his sighte ageyn,
 [2314] My word shal stonde, I warne yow certeyn.
 [2315] I am a kyng; it sit me noght to lye."
 [2316] "And I," quod she, "a queene of Fayerye!
 [2317] Hir answere shal she have, I undertake.
 [2318] Lat us namoore wordes heerof make;
 [2319] For sothe, I wol no lenger yow contrarie."
 [2320] Now lat us turne agayn to Januarie,
 [2321] That in the gardyn with his faire May
 [2322] Syngeth ful murier than the papejay,
 [2323] "Yow love I best, and shal, and oother noon."
 [2324] So longe aboute the aleyes is he goon,
 [2325] Til he was come agaynes thilke pyrie
 [2326] Where as this Damyan sitteth ful myrie
 [2327] An heigh among the fresshe leves grene.
 [2328] This fresshe May, that is so bright and sheene,
 [2329] Gan for to syke, and seyde, "Allas, my syde!
 [2330] Now sire," quod she, "for aught that may bityde,
 [2331] I moste han of the peres that I see,
 [2332] Or I moot dye, so soore longeth me
 [2333] To eten of the smale peres grene.
 [2334] Help, for hir love that is of hevene queene!
 [2335] I telle yow wel, a womman in my plit
 [2336] May han to fruyt so greet an appetit
 [2337] That she may dyen but she of it have."
 [2338] "Allas," quod he, "that I ne had heer a knave
 [2339] That koude clymbe! Allas, allas," quod he,
 [2340] "For I am blynd!" "Ye, sire, no fors," quod she;
 [2341] "But wolde ye vouche sauf, for Goddes sake,
 [2342] The pyrie inwith youre armes for to take,
 [2343] For wel I woot that ye mystruste me,
 [2344] Thanne sholde I clymbe wel ynogh," quod she,
 [2345] "So I my foot myghte sette upon youre bak."
 [2346] "Certes," quod he, "theron shal be no lak,
 [2347] Mighte I yow helpen with myn herte blood."
 [2348] He stoupeth doun, and on his bak she stood,
 [2349] And caughte hire by a twiste, and up she gooth --
 [2350] Ladyes, I prey yow that ye be nat wrooth;
 [2351] I kan nat glose, I am a rude man --
 [2352] And sodeynly anon this Damyan
 [2353] Gan pullen up the smok, and in he throng.
 [2354] And whan that Pluto saugh this grete wrong,
 [2355] To Januarie he gaf agayn his sighte,
 [2356] And made hym se as wel as evere he myghte.
 [2357] And whan that he hadde caught his sighte agayn,
 [2358] Ne was ther nevere man of thyng so fayn,
 [2359] But on his wyf his thoght was everemo.
 [2360] Up to the tree he caste his eyen two,
 [2361] And saugh that Damyan his wyf had dressed
 [2362] In swich manere it may nat been expressed,
 [2363] But if I wolde speke uncurteisly;
 [2364] And up he yaf a roryng and a cry,
 [2365] As dooth the mooder whan the child shal dye:
 [2366] "Out! Help! Allas! Harrow!" he gan to crye,
 [2367] "O stronge lady stoore, what dostow?"
 [2368] And she answerde, "Sire, what eyleth yow?
 [2369] Have pacience and resoun in youre mynde.
 [2370] I have yow holpe on bothe youre eyen blynde.
 [2371] Up peril of my soule, I shal nat lyen,
 [2372] As me was taught, to heele with youre eyen,
 [2373] Was no thyng bet, to make yow to see,
 [2374] Than strugle with a man upon a tree.
 [2375] God woot, I dide it in ful good entente."
 [2376] "Strugle?" quod he, "Ye, algate in it wente!
 [2377] God yeve yow bothe on shames deth to dyen!
 [2378] He swyved thee; I saugh it with myne yen,
 [2379] And elles be I hanged by the hals!"
 [2380] "Thanne is," quod she, "my medicyne fals;
 [2381] For certeinly, if that ye myghte se,
 [2382] Ye wolde nat seyn thise wordes unto me.
 [2383] Ye han som glymsyng, and no parfit sighte."
 [2384] "I se," quod he, "as wel as evere I myghte,
 [2385] Thonked be God! With bothe myne eyen two,
 [2386] And by my trouthe, me thoughte he dide thee so."
 [2387] "Ye maze, maze, goode sire," quod she;
 [2388] "This thank have I for I have maad yow see.
 [2389] Allas," quod she, "that evere I was so kynde!"
 [2390] "Now, dame," quod he, "lat al passe out of mynde.
 [2391] Com doun, my lief, and if I have myssayd,
 [2392] God helpe me so, as I am yvele apayd.
 [2393] But, by my fader soule, I wende han seyn
 [2394] How that this Damyan hadde by thee leyn,
 [2395] And that thy smok hadde leyn upon his brest."
 [2396] "Ye, sire," quod she, "ye may wene as yow lest.
 [2397] But, sire, a man that waketh out of his sleep,
 [2398] He may nat sodeynly wel taken keep
 [2399] Upon a thyng, ne seen it parfitly,
 [2400] Til that he be adawed verraily.
 [2401] Right so a man that longe hath blynd ybe,
 [2402] Ne may nat sodeynly so wel yse,
 [2403] First whan his sighte is newe come ageyn,
 [2404] As he that hath a day or two yseyn.
 [2405] Til that youre sighte ysatled be a while
 [2406] Ther may ful many a sighte yow bigile.
 [2407] Beth war, I prey yow, for by hevene kyng,
 [2408] Ful many a man weneth to seen a thyng,
 [2409] And it is al another than it semeth.
 [2410] He that mysconceyveth, he mysdemeth."
 [2411] And with that word she leep doun fro the tree.
 [2412] This Januarie, who is glad but he?
 [2413] He kisseth hire and clippeth hire ful ofte,
 [2414] And on hire wombe he stroketh hire ful softe,
 [2415] And to his palays hoom he hath hire lad.
 [2416] Now, goode men, I pray yow to be glad.
 [2417] Thus endeth heere my tale of Januarie;
 [2418] God blesse us, and his mooder Seinte Marie!

      
The Canterbury Tales and Other Works of Chaucer (Middle English), by Geoffery Chaucer, [14th cent.], at sacred-texts.com

 

The Canterbury Tales

 

The Merchant's Epilogue

 [2419] "Ey! Goddes mercy!" seyde oure Hooste tho,
 [2420] "Now swich a wyf I pray God kepe me fro!
 [2421] Lo, whiche sleightes and subtilitees
 [2422] In wommen been! For ay as bisy as bees
 [2423] Been they, us sely men for to deceyve,
 [2424] And from the soothe evere wol they weyve;
 [2425] By this Marchauntes tale it preveth weel.
 [2426] But doutelees, as trewe as any steel
 [2427] I have a wyf, though that she povre be,
 [2428] But of hir tonge, a labbyng shrewe is she,
 [2429] And yet she hath an heep of vices mo;
 [2430] Therof no fors! Lat alle swiche thynges go.
 [2431] But wyte ye what? In conseil be it seyd,
 [2432] Me reweth soore I am unto hire teyd.
 [2433] For and I sholde rekenen every vice
 [2434] Which that she hath, ywis I were to nyce.
 [2435] And cause why? It sholde reported be
 [2436] And toold to hire of somme of this meynee --
 [2437] Of whom, it nedeth nat for to declare,
 [2438] Syn wommen konnen outen swich chaffare;
 [2439] And eek my wit suffiseth nat therto
 [2440] To tellen al; wherfore my tale is do."

      
The Canterbury Tales and Other Works of Chaucer (Middle English), by Geoffery Chaucer, [14th cent.], at sacred-texts.com

 

The Canterbury Tales

 

The Squire's Introduction

 [1] "Squier, com neer, if it youre wille be,
 [2] And sey somwhat of love, for certes ye
 [3] Konnen theron as muche as any man."
 [4] "Nay, sire," quod he, "but I wol seye as I kan
 [5] With hertly wyl, for I wol nat rebelle
 [6] Agayn youre lust; a tale wol I telle.
 [7] Have me excused if I speke amys;
 [8] My wyl is good, and lo, my tale is this."

      
The Canterbury Tales and Other Works of Chaucer (Middle English), by Geoffery Chaucer, [14th cent.], at sacred-texts.com

 

The Canterbury Tales

 

The Squire's Tale

 [9] At Sarray, in the land of Tartarye,
 [10] Ther dwelte a kyng that werreyed Russye,
 [11] Thurgh which ther dyde many a doughty man.
 [12] This noble kyng was cleped Cambyuskan,
 [13] Which in his tyme was of so greet renoun
 [14] That ther was nowher in no regioun
 [15] So excellent a lord in alle thyng:
 [16] Hym lakked noght that longeth to a kyng.
 [17] As of the secte of which that he was born
 [18] He kepte his lay, to which that he was sworn;
 [19] And therto he was hardy, wys, and riche,
 [20] And pitous and just, alwey yliche;
 [21] Sooth of his word, benigne, and honurable;
 [22] Of his corage as any centre stable;
 [23] Yong, fressh, and strong, in armes desirous
 [24] As any bacheler of al his hous.
 [25] A fair persone he was and fortunat,
 [26] And kept alwey so wel roial estat
 [27] That ther was nowher swich another man.
 [28] This noble kyng, this Tartre Cambyuskan,
 [29] Hadde two sones on Elpheta his wyf,
 [30] Of whiche the eldeste highte Algarsyf;
 [31] That oother sone was cleped Cambalo.
 [32] A doghter hadde this worthy kyng also,
 [33] That yongest was, and highte Canacee.
 [34] But for to telle yow al hir beautee,
 [35] It lyth nat in my tonge, n' yn my konnyng;
 [36] I dar nat undertake so heigh a thyng.
 [37] Myn Englissh eek is insufficient.
 [38] It moste been a rethor excellent
 [39] That koude his colours longynge for that art,
 [40] If he sholde hire discryven every part.
 [41] I am noon swich, I moot speke as I kan.
 [42] And so bifel that whan this Cambyuskan
 [43] Hath twenty wynter born his diademe,
 [44] As he was wont fro yeer to yeer, I deme,
 [45] He leet the feeste of his nativitee
 [46] Doon cryen thurghout Sarray his citee,
 [47] The laste Idus of March, after the yeer.
 [48] Phebus the sonne ful joly was and cleer,
 [49] For he was neigh his exaltacioun
 [50] In Martes face and in his mansioun
 [51] In Aries, the colerik hoote signe.
 [52] Ful lusty was the weder and benigne,
 [53] For which the foweles, agayn the sonne sheene,
 [54] What for the sesoun and the yonge grene,
 [55] Ful loude songen hire affecciouns.
 [56] Hem semed han geten hem protecciouns
 [57] Agayn the swerd of wynter, keene and coold.
 [58] This Cambyuskan, of which I have yow toold,
 [59] In roial vestiment sit on his deys,
 [60] With diademe, ful heighe in his paleys,
 [61] And halt his feeste so solempne and so ryche
 [62] That in this world ne was ther noon it lyche;
 [63] Of which if I shal tellen al th' array,
 [64] Thanne wolde it occupie a someres day,
 [65] And eek it nedeth nat for to devyse
 [66] At every cours the ordre of hire servyse.
 [67] I wol nat tellen of hir strange sewes,
 [68] Ne of hir swannes, ne of hire heronsewes.
 [69] Eek in that lond, as tellen knyghtes olde,
 [70] Ther is som mete that is ful deynte holde
 [71] That in this lond men recche of it but smal;
 [72] Ther nys no man that may reporten al.
 [73] I wol nat taryen yow, for it is pryme
 [74] And for it is no fruyt but los of tyme;
 [75] Unto my firste I wole have my recours.
 [76] And so bifel that after the thridde cours,
 [77] Whil that this kyng sit thus in his nobleye,
 [78] Herknynge his mynstralles hir thynges pleye
 [79] Biforn hym at the bord deliciously,
 [80] In at the halle dore al sodeynly
 [81] Ther cam a knyght upon a steede of bras,
 [82] And in his hand a brood mirour of glas.
 [83] Upon his thombe he hadde of gold a ryng,
 [84] And by his syde a naked swerd hangyng;
 [85] And up he rideth to the heighe bord.
 [86] In al the halle ne was ther spoken a word
 [87] For merveille of this knyght; hym to biholde
 [88] Ful bisily they wayten, yonge and olde.
 [89] This strange knyght, that cam thus sodeynly,
 [90] Al armed, save his heed, ful richely,
 [91] Saleweth kyng and queene and lordes alle,
 [92] By ordre, as they seten in the halle,
 [93] With so heigh reverence and obeisaunce,
 [94] As wel in speche as in contenaunce,
 [95] That Gawayn, with his olde curteisye,
 [96] Though he were comen ayeyn out of Fairye,
 [97] Ne koude hym nat amende with a word.
 [98] And after this, biforn the heighe bord,
 [99] He with a manly voys seide his message,
 [100] After the forme used in his langage,
 [101] Withouten vice of silable or of lettre;
 [102] And for his tale sholde seme the bettre,
 [103] Accordant to his wordes was his cheere,
 [104] As techeth art of speche hem that it leere.
 [105] Al be that I kan nat sowne his stile,
 [106] Ne kan nat clymben over so heigh a style,
 [107] Yet seye I this, as to commune entente:
 [108] Thus muche amounteth al that evere he mente,
 [109] If it so be that I have it in mynde.
 [110] He seyde, "The kyng of Arabe and of Inde,
 [111] My lige lord, on this solempne day
 [112] Saleweth yow, as he best kan and may,
 [113] And sendeth yow, in honour of youre feeste,
 [114] By me, that am al redy at youre heeste,
 [115] This steede of bras, that esily and weel
 [116] Kan in the space of o day natureel --
 [117] This is to seyn, in foure and twenty houres --
 [118] Wher-so yow lyst, in droghte or elles shoures,
 [119] Beren youre body into every place
 [120] To which youre herte wilneth for to pace,
 [121] Withouten wem of yow, thurgh foul or fair;
 [122] Or, if yow lyst to fleen as hye in the air
 [123] As dooth an egle whan hym list to soore,
 [124] This same steede shal bere yow evere moore,
 [125] Withouten harm, til ye be ther yow leste,
 [126] Though that ye slepen on his bak or reste,
 [127] And turne ayeyn with writhyng of a pyn.
 [128] He that it wroghte koude ful many a gyn.
 [129] He wayted many a constellacion
 [130] Er he had doon this operacion,
 [131] And knew ful many a seel and many a bond.
 [132] "This mirour eek, that I have in myn hond,
 [133] Hath swich a myght that men may in it see
 [134] Whan ther shal fallen any adversitee
 [135] Unto youre regne or to youreself also,
 [136] And openly who is youre freend or foo.
 [137] "And over al this, if any lady bright
 [138] Hath set hire herte on any maner wight,
 [139] If he be fals, she shal his tresoun see,
 [140] His newe love, and al his subtiltee,
 [141] So openly that ther shal no thyng hyde.
 [142] Wherfore, ageyn this lusty someres tyde,
 [143] This mirour and this ryng, that ye may see,
 [144] He hath sent to my lady Canacee,
 [145] Youre excellente doghter that is heere.
 [146] "The vertu of the ryng, if ye wol heere,
 [147] Is this: that if hire lust it for to were
 [148] Upon hir thombe or in hir purs it bere,
 [149] Ther is no fowel that fleeth under the hevene
 [150] That she ne shal wel understonde his stevene,
 [151] And knowe his menyng openly and pleyn,
 [152] And answere hym in his langage ageyn;
 [153] And every gras that groweth upon roote
 [154] She shal eek knowe, and whom it wol do boote,
 [155] Al be his woundes never so depe and wyde.
 [156] "This naked swerd, that hangeth by my syde,
 [157] Swich vertu hath that what man so ye smyte
 [158] Thurghout his armure it wole kerve and byte,
 [159] Were it as thikke as is a branched ook;
 [160] And what man that is wounded with the strook
 [161] Shal never be hool til that yow list, of grace,
 [162] To stroke hym with the plat in thilke place
 [163] Ther he is hurt; this is as muche to seyn,
 [164] Ye moote with the platte swerd ageyn
 [165] Stroke hym in the wounde, and it wol close.
 [166] This is a verray sooth, withouten glose;
 [167] It failleth nat whils it is in youre hoold."
 [168] And whan this knyght hath thus his tale toold,
 [169] He rideth out of halle and doun he lighte.
 [170] His steede, which that shoon as sonne brighte,
 [171] Stant in the court, stille as any stoon.
 [172] This knyght is to his chambre lad anoon,
 [173] And is unarmed, and to mete yset.
 [174] The presentes been ful roially yfet --
 [175] This is to seyn, the swerd and the mirour --
 [176] And born anon into the heighe tour
 [177] With certeine officers ordeyned therfore;
 [178] And unto Canacee this ryng is bore
 [179] Solempnely, ther she sit at the table.
 [180] But sikerly, withouten any fable,
 [181] The hors of bras, that may nat be remewed,
 [182] It stant as it were to the ground yglewed.
 [183] Ther may no man out of the place it dryve
 [184] For noon engyn of wyndas or polyve;
 [185] And cause why? For they kan nat the craft.
 [186] And therfore in the place they han it laft
 [187] Til that the knyght hath taught hem the manere
 [188] To voyden hym, as ye shal after heere.
 [189] Greet was the prees that swarmeth to and fro
 [190] To gauren on this hors that stondeth so,
 [191] For it so heigh was, and so brood and long,
 [192] So wel proporcioned for to been strong,
 [193] Right as it were a steede of Lumbardye;
 [194] Therwith so horsly, and so quyk of ye,
 [195] As it a gentil Poilleys courser were.
 [196] For certes, fro his tayl unto his ere
 [197] Nature ne art ne koude hym nat amende
 [198] In no degree, as al the people wende.
 [199] But everemoore hir mooste wonder was
 [200] How that it koude gon, and was of bras;
 [201] It was a fairye, as the peple semed.
 [202] Diverse folk diversely they demed;
 [203] As many heddes, as manye wittes ther been.
 [204] They murmureden as dooth a swarm of been,
 [205] And maden skiles after hir fantasies,
 [206] Rehersynge of thise olde poetries,
 [207] And seyden it was lyk the Pegasee,
 [208] The hors that hadde wynges for to flee;
 [209] Or elles it was the Grekes hors Synon,
 [210] That broghte Troie to destruccion,
 [211] As men in thise olde geestes rede.
 [212] "Myn herte," quod oon, "is everemoore in drede;
 [213] I trowe som men of armes been therinne,
 [214] That shapen hem this citee for to wynne.
 [215] It were right good that al swich thyng were knowe."
 [216] Another rowned to his felawe lowe,
 [217] And seyde, "He lyeth, for it is rather lyk
 [218] An apparence ymaad by som magyk,
 [219] As jogelours pleyen at thise feestes grete."
 [220] Of sondry doutes thus they jangle and trete,
 [221] As lewed peple demeth comunly
 [222] Of thynges that been maad moore subtilly
 [223] Than they kan in hir lewednesse comprehende;
 [224] They demen gladly to the badder ende.
 [225] And somme of hem wondred on the mirour,
 [226] That born was up into the maister-tour,
 [227] Hou men myghte in it swiche thynges se.
 [228] Another answerde and seyde it myghte wel be
 [229] Naturelly, by composiciouns
 [230] Of anglis and of slye reflexiouns,
 [231] And seyde that in Rome was swich oon.
 [232] They speken of Alocen, and Vitulon,
 [233] And Aristotle, that writen in hir lyves
 [234] Of queynte mirours and of perspectives,
 [235] As knowen they that han hir bookes herd.
 [236] And oother folk han wondred on the swerd
 [237] That wolde percen thurghout every thyng,
 [238] And fille in speche of Thelophus the kyng,
 [239] And of Achilles with his queynte spere,
 [240] For he koude with it bothe heele and dere,
 [241] Right in swich wise as men may with the swerd
 [242] Of which right now ye han youreselven herd.
 [243] They speken of sondry hardyng of metal,
 [244] And speke of medicynes therwithal,
 [245] And how and whanne it sholde yharded be,
 [246] Which is unknowe, algates unto me.
 [247] Tho speeke they of Canacees ryng,
 [248] And seyden alle that swich a wonder thyng
 [249] Of craft of rynges herde they nevere noon,
 [250] Save that he Moyses and kyng Salomon
 [251] Hadde a name of konnyng in swich art.
 [252] Thus seyn the peple and drawen hem apart.
 [253] But nathelees somme seiden that it was
 [254] Wonder to maken of fern-asshen glas,
 [255] And yet nys glas nat lyk asshen of fern;
 [256] But, for they han yknowen it so fern,
 [257] Therfore cesseth hir janglyng and hir wonder.
 [258] As soore wondren somme on cause of thonder,
 [259] On ebbe, on flood, on gossomer, and on myst,
 [260] And alle thyng, til that the cause is wyst.
 [261] Thus jangle they, and demen, and devyse
 [262] Til that the kyng gan fro the bord aryse.
 [263] Phebus hath laft the angle meridional,
 [264] And yet ascendynge was the beest roial,
 [265] The gentil Leon, with his Aldiran,
 [266] Whan that this Tartre kyng, Cambyuskan,
 [267] Roos fro his bord, ther as he sat ful hye.
 [268] Toforn hym gooth the loude mynstralcye
 [269] Til he cam to his chambre of parementz,
 [270] Ther as they sownen diverse instrumentz
 [271] That it is lyk an hevene for to heere.
 [272] Now dauncen lusty Venus children deere,
 [273] For in the Fyssh hir lady sat ful hye,
 [274] And looketh on hem with a freendly ye.
 [275] This noble kyng is set upon his trone.
 [276] This strange knyght is fet to hym ful soone,
 [277] And on the daunce he gooth with Canacee.
 [278] Heere is the revel and the jolitee
 [279] That is nat able a dul man to devyse.
 [280] He moste han knowen love and his servyse
 [281] And been a feestlych man as fressh as May,
 [282] That sholde yow devysen swich array.
 [283] Who koude telle yow the forme of daunces
 [284] So unkouthe, and swiche fresshe contenaunces,
 [285] Swich subtil lookyng and dissymulynges
 [286] For drede of jalouse mennes aperceyvynges?
 [287] No man but Launcelot, and he is deed.
 [288] Therfore I passe of al this lustiheed;
 [289] I sey namoore, but in this jolynesse
 [290] I lete hem til men to the soper dresse.
 [291] The styward bit the spices for to hye,
 [292] And eek the wyn, in al this melodye.
 [293] The usshers and the squiers been ygoon,
 [294] The spices and the wyn is come anoon.
 [295] They ete and drynke, and whan this hadde an ende,
 [296] Unto the temple, as reson was, they wende.
 [297] The service doon, they soupen al by day.
 [298] What nedeth yow rehercen hire array?
 [299] Ech man woot wel that a kynges feeste
 [300] Hath plentee to the meeste and to the leeste,
 [301] And deyntees mo than been in my knowyng.
 [302] At after-soper gooth this noble kyng
 [303] To seen this hors of bras, with al a route
 [304] Of lordes and of ladyes hym aboute.
 [305] Swich wondryng was ther on this hors of bras
 [306] That syn the grete sege of Troie was,
 [307] Theras men wondreden on an hors also,
 [308] Ne was ther swich a wondryng as was tho.
 [309] But fynally the kyng axeth this knyght
 [310] The vertu of this courser and the myght,
 [311] And preyde hym to telle his governaunce.
 [312] This hors anoon bigan to trippe and daunce,
 [313] Whan that this knyght leyde hand upon his reyne,
 [314] And seyde, "Sire, ther is namoore to seyne,
 [315] But, whan yow list to ryden anywhere,
 [316] Ye mooten trille a pyn, stant in his ere,
 [317] Which I shal yow telle bitwix us two.
 [318] Ye moote nempne hym to what place also,
 [319] Or to what contree, that yow list to ryde.
 [320] And whan ye come ther as yow list abyde,
 [321] Bidde hym descende, and trille another pyn,
 [322] For therin lith th' effect of al the gyn,
 [323] And he wol doun descende and doon youre wille,
 [324] And in that place he wol abyde stille.
 [325] Though al the world the contrarie hadde yswore,
 [326] He shal nat thennes been ydrawe ne ybore.
 [327] Or, if yow liste bidde hym thennes goon,
 [328] Trille this pyn, and he wol vanysshe anoon
 [329] Out of the sighte of every maner wight,
 [330] And come agayn, be it by day or nyght,
 [331] Whan that yow list to clepen hym ageyn
 [332] In swich a gyse as I shal to yow seyn
 [333] Bitwixe yow and me, and that ful soone.
 [334] Ride whan yow list; ther is namoore to doone."
 [335] Enformed whan the kyng was of that knyght,
 [336] And hath conceyved in his wit aright
 [337] The manere and the forme of al this thyng,
 [338] Ful glad and blithe, this noble doughty kyng
 [339] Repeireth to his revel as biforn.
 [340] The brydel is unto the tour yborn
 [341] And kept among his jueles leeve and deere.
 [342] The hors vanysshed, I noot in what manere,
 [343] Out of hir sighte; ye gete namoore of me.
 [344] But thus I lete in lust and jolitee
 [345] This Cambyuskan his lordes festeiynge
 [346] Til wel ny the day bigan to sprynge.
 [347] The norice of digestioun, the sleep,
 [348] Gan on hem wynke and bad hem taken keep
 [349] That muchel drynke and labour wolde han reste;
 [350] And with a galpyng mouth hem alle he keste,
 [351] And seyde that it was tyme to lye adoun,
 [352] For blood was in his domynacioun.
 [353] "Cherisseth blood, natures freend," quod he.
 [354] They thanken hym galpynge, by two, by thre,
 [355] And every wight gan drawe hym to his reste,
 [356] As sleep hem bad; they tooke it for the beste.
 [357] Hire dremes shul nat now been toold for me;
 [358] Ful were hire heddes of fumositee,
 [359] That causeth dreem of which ther nys no charge.
 [360] They slepen til that it was pryme large,
 [361] The mooste part, but it were Canacee.
 [362] She was ful mesurable, as wommen be;
 [363] For of hir fader hadde she take leve
 [364] To goon to reste soone after it was eve.
 [365] Hir liste nat appalled for to be,
 [366] Ne on the morwe unfeestlich for to se,
 [367] And slepte hire firste sleep, and thanne awook.
 [368] For swich a joye she in hir herte took
 [369] Bothe of hir queynte ryng and hire mirour,
 [370] That twenty tyme she changed hir colour;
 [371] And in hire sleep, right for impressioun
 [372] Of hire mirour, she hadde a visioun.
 [373] Wherfore, er that the sonne gan up glyde,
 [374] She cleped on hir maistresse hire bisyde,
 [375] And seyde that hire liste for to ryse.
 [376] Thise olde wommen that been gladly wyse,
 [377] As is hire maistresse, answerde hire anon,
 [378] And seyde, "Madame, whider wil ye goon
 [379] Thus erly, for the folk been alle on reste?"
 [380] "I wol," quod she, "arise, for me leste
 [381] Ne lenger for to slepe, and walke aboute."
 [382] Hire maistresse clepeth wommen a greet route,
 [383] And up they rysen, wel a ten or twelve;
 [384] Up riseth fresshe Canacee hireselve,
 [385] As rody and bright as dooth the yonge sonne,
 [386] That in the Ram is foure degrees up ronne --
 [387] Noon hyer was he whan she redy was --
 [388] And forth she walketh esily a pas,
 [389] Arrayed after the lusty seson soote
 [390] Lightly, for to pleye and walke on foote,
 [391] Nat but with fyve or sixe of hir meynee;
 [392] And in a trench forth in the park gooth she.
 [393] The vapour which that fro the erthe glood
 [394] Made the sonne to seme rody and brood;
 [395] But nathelees it was so fair a sighte
 [396] That it made alle hire hertes for to lighte,
 [397] What for the seson and the morwenynge,
 [398] And for the foweles that she herde synge.
 [399] For right anon she wiste what they mente
 [400] Right by hir song, and knew al hire entente.
 [401] The knotte why that every tale is toold,
 [402] If it be taried til that lust be coold
 [403] Of hem that han it after herkned yoore,
 [404] The savour passeth ever lenger the moore,
 [405] For fulsomnesse of his prolixitee;
 [406] And by the same resoun, thynketh me,
 [407] I sholde to the knotte condescende,
 [408] And maken of hir walkyng soone an ende.
 [409] Amydde a tree, for drye as whit as chalk,
 [410] As Canacee was pleyyng in hir walk,
 [411] Ther sat a faucon over hire heed ful hye,
 [412] That with a pitous voys so gan to crye
 [413] That all the wode resouned of hire cry.
 [414] Ybeten hadde she hirself so pitously
 [415] With bothe hir wynges til the rede blood
 [416] Ran endelong the tree ther-as she stood.
 [417] And evere in oon she cryde alwey and shrighte,
 [418] And with hir beek hirselven so she prighte
 [419] That ther nys tygre, ne noon so crueel beest
 [420] That dwelleth outher in wode or in forest,
 [421] That nolde han wept, if that he wepe koude,
 [422] For sorwe of hire, she shrighte alwey so loude.
 [423] For ther nas nevere yet no man on lyve,
 [424] If that I koude a faucon wel discryve,
 [425] That herde of swich another of fairnesse,
 [426] As wel of plumage as of gentillesse
 [427] Of shap, of al that myghte yrekened be.
 [428] A faucon peregryn thanne semed she
 [429] Of fremde land; and everemoore, as she stood,
 [430] She swowneth now and now for lak of blood,
 [431] Til wel neigh is she fallen fro the tree.
 [432] This faire kynges doghter, Canacee,
 [433] That on hir fynger baar the queynte ryng,
 [434] Thurgh which she understood wel every thyng
 [435] That any fowel may in his leden seyn,
 [436] And koude answeren hym in his ledene ageyn,
 [437] Hath understonde what this faucon seyde,
 [438] And wel neigh for the routhe almoost she deyde.
 [439] And to the tree she gooth ful hastily,
 [440] And on this faukon looketh pitously,
 [441] And heeld hir lappe abrood, for wel she wiste
 [442] The faukon moste fallen fro the twiste,
 [443] Whan that it swowned next, for lak of blood.
 [444] A longe whil to wayten hire she stood
 [445] Til atte laste she spak in this manere
 [446] Unto the hauk, as ye shal after heere:
 [447] "What is the cause, if it be for to telle,
 [448] That ye be in this furial pyne of helle?"
 [449] Quod Canacee unto this hauk above.
 [450] "Is this for sorwe of deeth or los of love?
 [451] For, as I trowe, thise been causes two
 [452] That causen moost a gentil herte wo;
 [453] Of oother harm it nedeth nat to speke.
 [454] For ye youreself upon yourself yow wreke,
 [455] Which proveth wel that outher ire or drede
 [456] Moot been enchesoun of youre cruel dede,
 [457] Syn that I see noon oother wight yow chace.
 [458] For love of God, as dooth youreselven grace,
 [459] Or what may been youre help? For west nor est
 [460] Ne saugh I nevere er now no bryd ne beest
 [461] That ferde with hymself so pitously.
 [462] Ye sle me with youre sorwe verraily,
 [463] I have of yow so greet compassioun.
 [464] For Goddes love, com fro the tree adoun;
 [465] And as I am a kynges doghter trewe,
 [466] If that I verraily the cause knewe
 [467] Of youre disese, if it lay in my myght,
 [468] I wolde amenden it er that it were nyght,
 [469] As wisly helpe me grete God of kynde!
 [470] And herbes shal I right ynowe yfynde
 [471] To heel with youre hurtes hastily."
 [472] Tho shrighte this faucon yet moore pitously
 [473] Than ever she dide, and fil to grounde anon,
 [474] And lith aswowne, deed and lyk a stoon,
 [475] Til Canacee hath in hire lappe hire take
 [476] Unto the tyme she gan of swough awake.
 [477] And after that she of hir swough gan breyde,
 [478] Right in hir haukes ledene thus she seyde:
 [479] "That pitee renneth soone in gentil herte,
 [480] Feelynge his similitude in peynes smerte,
 [481] Is preved alday, as men may it see,
 [482] As wel by werk as by auctoritee;
 [483] For gentil herte kitheth gentillesse.
 [484] I se wel that ye han of my distresse
 [485] Compassion, my faire Canacee,
 [486] Of verray wommanly benignytee
 [487] That Nature in youre principles hath set.
 [488] But for noon hope for to fare the bet,
 [489] But for to obeye unto youre herte free,
 [490] And for to maken othere be war by me,
 [491] As by the whelp chasted is the leon,
 [492] Right for that cause and that conclusion,
 [493] Whil that I have a leyser and a space,
 [494] Myn harm I wol confessen er I pace."
 [495] And evere, whil that oon hir sorwe tolde,
 [496] That oother weep as she to water wolde
 [497] Til that the faucon bad hire to be stille,
 [498] And, with a syk, right thus she seyde hir wille:
 [499] "Ther I was bred -- allas, that ilke day! --
 [500] And fostred in a roche of marbul gray
 [501] So tendrely that no thyng eyled me,
 [502] I nyste nat what was adversitee
 [503] Til I koude flee ful hye under the sky.
 [504] Tho dwelte a tercelet me faste by,
 [505] That semed welle of alle gentillesse;
 [506] Al were he ful of treson and falsnesse,
 [507] It was so wrapped under humble cheere,
 [508] And under hewe of trouthe in swich manere,
 [509] Under plesance, and under bisy peyne,
 [510] That no wight koude han wend he koude feyne,
 [511] So depe in greyn he dyed his coloures.
 [512] Right as a serpent hit hym under floures
 [513] Til he may seen his tyme for to byte,
 [514] Right so this god of loves ypocryte
 [515] Dooth so his cerymonyes and obeisaunces,
 [516] And kepeth in semblaunt alle his observaunces
 [517] That sownen into gentillesse of love.
 [518] As in a toumbe is al the faire above,
 [519] And under is the corps, swich as ye woot,
 [520] Swich was this ypocrite, bothe coold and hoot.
 [521] And in this wise he served his entente
 [522] That, save the feend, noon wiste what he mente,
 [523] Til he so longe hadde wopen and compleyned,
 [524] And many a yeer his service to me feyned,
 [525] Til that myn herte, to pitous and to nyce,
 [526] Al innocent of his crouned malice,
 [527] Forfered of his deeth, as thoughte me,
 [528] Upon his othes and his seuretee,
 [529] Graunted hym love, upon this condicioun,
 [530] That everemoore myn honour and renoun
 [531] Were saved, bothe privee and apert;
 [532] This is to seyn, that after his desert,
 [533] I yaf hym al myn herte and al my thoght --
 [534] God woot and he, that ootherwise noght --
 [535] And took his herte in chaunge of myn for ay.
 [536] But sooth is seyd, goon sithen many a day,
 [537] `A trewe wight and a theef thenken nat oon.'
 [538] And whan he saugh the thyng so fer ygoon
 [539] That I hadde graunted hym fully my love
 [540] In swich a gyse as I have seyd above,
 [541] And yeven hym my trewe herte as free
 [542] As he swoor he yaf his herte to me,
 [543] Anon this tigre, ful of doublenesse,
 [544] Fil on his knees with so devout humblesse,
 [545] With so heigh reverence, and, as by his cheere,
 [546] So lyk a gentil lovere of manere,
 [547] So ravysshed, as it semed, for the joye
 [548] That nevere Jason ne Parys of Troye --
 [549] Jason? certes, ne noon oother man
 [550] Syn Lameth was, that alderfirst bigan
 [551] To loven two, as writen folk biforn --
 [552] Ne nevere, syn the firste man was born,
 [553] Ne koude man, by twenty thousand part,
 [554] Countrefete the sophymes of his art,
 [555] Ne were worthy unbokelen his galoche,
 [556] Ther doublenesse or feynyng sholde approche,
 [557] Ne so koude thonke a wight as he dide me!
 [558] His manere was an hevene for to see
 [559] Til any womman, were she never so wys,
 [560] So peynted he and kembde at point-devys
 [561] As wel his wordes as his contenaunce.
 [562] And I so loved hym for his obeisaunce,
 [563] And for the trouthe I demed in his herte,
 [564] That if so were that any thyng hym smerte,
 [565] Al were it never so lite, and I it wiste,
 [566] Me thoughte I felte deeth myn herte twiste.
 [567] And shortly, so ferforth this thyng is went
 [568] That my wyl was his willes instrument;
 [569] This is to seyn, my wyl obeyed his wyl
 [570] In alle thyng, as fer as reson fil,
 [571] Kepynge the boundes of my worshipe evere.
 [572] Ne nevere hadde I thyng so lief, ne levere,
 [573] As hym, God woot, ne nevere shal namo.
 [574] "This laste lenger than a yeer or two,
 [575] That I supposed of hym noght but good.
 [576] But finally, thus atte laste it stood,
 [577] That Fortune wolde that he moste twynne
 [578] Out of that place which that I was inne.
 [579] Wher me was wo, that is no questioun;
 [580] I kan nat make of it discripsioun.
 [581] For o thyng dar I tellen boldely:
 [582] I knowe what is the peyne of deeth therby;
 [583] Swich harm I felte for he ne myghte bileve.
 [584] So on a day of me he took his leve,
 [585] So sorwefully eek that I wende verraily
 [586] That he had felt as muche harm as I,
 [587] Whan that I herde hym speke and saugh his hewe.
 [588] But nathelees, I thoughte he was so trewe,
 [589] And eek that he repaire sholde ageyn
 [590] Withinne a litel while, sooth to seyn;
 [591] And resoun wolde eek that he moste go
 [592] For his honour, as ofte it happeth so,
 [593] That I made vertu of necessitee,
 [594] And took it wel, syn that it moste be.
 [595] As I best myghte, I hidde fro hym my sorwe,
 [596] And took hym by the hond, Seint John to borwe,
 [597] And seyde hym thus: `Lo, I am youres al;
 [598] Beth swich as I to yow have been and shal.'
 [599] What he answerde, it nedeth noght reherce;
 [600] Who kan sey bet than he, who kan do werse?
 [601] Whan he hath al wel seyd, thanne hath he doon.
 [602] `Therfore bihoveth hire a ful long spoon
 [603] That shal ete with a feend,' thus herde I seye.
 [604] So atte laste he moste forth his weye,
 [605] And forth he fleeth til he cam ther hym leste.
 [606] Whan it cam hym to purpos for to reste,
 [607] I trowe he hadde thilke text in mynde,
 [608] That `alle thyng, repeirynge to his kynde,
 [609] Gladeth hymself;' thus seyn men, as I gesse.
 [610] Men loven of propre kynde newefangelnesse,
 [611] As briddes doon that men in cages fede.
 [612] For though thou nyght and day take of hem hede,
 [613] And strawe hir cage faire and softe as silk,
 [614] And yeve hem sugre, hony, breed and milk,
 [615] Yet right anon as that his dore is uppe
 [616] He with his feet wol spurne adoun his cuppe,
 [617] And to the wode he wole and wormes ete;
 [618] So newefangel been they of hire mete,
 [619] And loven novelries of propre kynde,
 [620] No gentillesse of blood ne may hem bynde.
 [621] "So ferde this tercelet, allas the day!
 [622] Though he were gentil born, and fressh and gay,
 [623] And goodlich for to seen, and humble and free,
 [624] He saugh upon a tyme a kyte flee,
 [625] And sodeynly he loved this kyte so
 [626] That al his love is clene fro me ago,
 [627] And hath his trouthe falsed in this wyse.
 [628] Thus hath the kyte my love in hire servyse,
 [629] And I am lorn withouten remedie!"
 [630] And with that word this faucon gan to crie
 [631] And swowned eft in Canacees barm.
 [632] Greet was the sorwe for the haukes harm
 [633] That Canacee and alle hir wommen made;
 [634] They nyste hou they myghte the faucon glade.
 [635] But Canacee hom bereth hire in hir lappe,
 [636] And softely in plastres gan hire wrappe,
 [637] Ther as she with hire beek hadde hurt hirselve.
 [638] Now kan nat Canacee but herbes delve
 [639] Out of the ground, and make salves newe
 [640] Of herbes preciouse and fyne of hewe
 [641] To heelen with this hauk. Fro day to nyght
 [642] She dooth hire bisynesse and al hire myght,
 [643] And by hire beddes heed she made a mewe
 [644] And covered it with veluettes blewe,
 [645] In signe of trouthe that is in wommen sene.
 [646] And al withoute, the mewe is peynted grene,
 [647] In which were peynted alle thise false fowles,
 [648] As ben thise tidyves, tercelettes, and owles;
 [649] Right for despit were peynted hem bisyde,
 [650] Pyes, on hem for to crie and chyde.
 [651] Thus lete I Canacee hir hauk kepyng;
 [652] I wol namoore as now speke of hir ryng
 [653] Til it come eft to purpos for to seyn
 [654] How that this faucon gat hire love ageyn
 [655] Repentant, as the storie telleth us,
 [656] By mediacion of Cambalus,
 [657] The kynges sone, of which I yow tolde.
 [658] But hennesforth I wol my proces holde
 [659] To speken of aventures and of batailles
 [660] That nevere yet was herd so grete mervailles.
 [661] First wol I telle yow of Cambyuskan,
 [662] That in his tyme many a citee wan;
 [663] And after wol I speke of Algarsif,
 [664] How that he wan Theodora to his wif,
 [665] For whom ful ofte in greet peril he was,
 [666] Ne hadde he ben holpen by the steede of bras;
 [667] And after wol I speke of Cambalo,
 [668] That faught in lystes with the bretheren two
 [669] For Canacee er that he myghte hire wynne.
 [670] And ther I lefte I wol ayeyn bigynne.
 [671] Appollo whirleth up his chaar so hye
 [672] Til that the god Mercurius hous, the slye --
 [673] "In feith, Squier, thow hast thee wel yquit
 [674] And gentilly. I preise wel thy wit,"
 [675] Quod the Frankeleyn, "considerynge thy yowthe,
 [676] So feelyngly thou spekest, sire, I allow the!
 [677] As to my doom, ther is noon that is heere
 [678] Of eloquence that shal be thy peere,
 [679] If that thou lyve; God yeve thee good chaunce,
 [680] And in vertu sende thee continuaunce,
 [681] For of thy speche I have greet deyntee.
 [682] I have a sone, and by the Trinitee,
 [683] I hadde levere than twenty pound worth lond,
 [684] Though it right now were fallen in myn hond,
 [685] He were a man of swich discrecioun
 [686] As that ye been! Fy on possessioun,
 [687] But if a man be vertuous withal!
 [688] I have my sone snybbed, and yet shal,
 [689] For he to vertu listeth nat entende;
 [690] But for to pleye at dees, and to despende
 [691] And lese al that he hath is his usage.
 [692] And he hath levere talken with a page
 [693] Than to comune with any gentil wight
 [694] Where he myghte lerne gentillesse aright."
 [695] "Straw for youre gentillesse!" quod oure Hoost.
 [696] "What, Frankeleyn! Pardee, sire, wel thou woost
 [697] That ech of yow moot tellen atte leste
 [698] A tale or two, or breken his biheste."
 [699] "That knowe I wel, sire," quod the Frankeleyn.
 [700] "I prey yow, haveth me nat in desdeyn,
 [701] Though to this man I speke a word or two."
 [702] "Telle on thy tale withouten wordes mo."
 [703] "Gladly, sire Hoost," quod he, "I wole obeye
 [704] Unto your wyl; now herkneth what I seye.
 [705] I wol yow nat contrarien in no wyse
 [706] As fer as that my wittes wol suffyse.
 [707] I prey to God that it may plesen yow;
 [708] Thanne woot I wel that it is good ynow."

      
The Canterbury Tales and Other Works of Chaucer (Middle English), by Geoffery Chaucer, [14th cent.], at sacred-texts.com

 

The Canterbury Tales

 

The Franklin's Prologue

 [709] Thise olde gentil Britouns in hir dayes
 [710] Of diverse aventures maden layes,
 [711] Rymeyed in hir firste Briton tonge,
 [712] Whiche layes with hir instrumentz they songe
 [713] Or elles redden hem for hir plesaunce;
 [714] And oon of hem have I in remembraunce,
 [715] Which I shal seyn with good wyl as I kan.
 [716] But, sires, by cause I am a burel man,
 [717] At my bigynnyng first I yow biseche,
 [718] Have me excused of my rude speche.
 [719] I lerned nevere rethorik, certeyn;
 [720] Thyng that I speke, it moot be bare and pleyn.
 [721] I sleep nevere on the Mount of Pernaso,
 [722] Ne lerned Marcus Tullius Scithero.
 [723] Colours ne knowe I none, withouten drede,
 [724] But swiche colours as growen in the mede,
 [725] Or elles swiche as men dye or peynte.
 [726] Colours of rethoryk been to me queynte;
 [727] My spirit feeleth noght of swich mateere.
 [728] But if yow list, my tale shul ye heere.

      
The Canterbury Tales and Other Works of Chaucer (Middle English), by Geoffery Chaucer, [14th cent.], at sacred-texts.com

 

The Canterbury Tales

 

The Franklin's Tale

 [729] In Armorik, that called is Britayne,
 [730] Ther was a knyght that loved and dide his payne
 [731] To serve a lady in his beste wise;
 [732] And many a labour, many a greet emprise,
 [733] He for his lady wroghte er she were wonne.
 [734] For she was oon the faireste under sonne,
 [735] And eek therto comen of so heigh kynrede
 [736] That wel unnethes dorste this knyght, for drede,
 [737] Telle hire his wo, his peyne, and his distresse.
 [738] But atte laste she, for his worthynesse,
 [739] And namely for his meke obeysaunce,
 [740] Hath swich a pitee caught of his penaunce
 [741] That pryvely she fil of his accord
 [742] To take hym for hir housbonde and hir lord,
 [743] Of swich lordshipe as men han over hir wyves.
 [744] And for to lede the moore in blisse hir lyves,
 [745] Of his free wyl he swoor hire as a knyght
 [746] That nevere in al his lyf he, day ne nyght,
 [747] Ne sholde upon hym take no maistrie
 [748] Agayn hir wyl, ne kithe hire jalousie,
 [749] But hire obeye, and folwe hir wyl in al,
 [750] As any lovere to his lady shal,
 [751] Save that the name of soveraynetee,
 [752] That wolde he have for shame of his degree.
 [753] She thanked hym, and with ful greet humblesse
 [754] She seyde, "Sire, sith of youre gentillesse
 [755] Ye profre me to have so large a reyne,
 [756] Ne wolde nevere God bitwixe us tweyne,
 [757] As in my gilt, were outher werre or stryf.
 [758] Sire, I wol be youre humble trewe wyf --
 [759] Have heer my trouthe -- til that myn herte breste."
 [760] Thus been they bothe in quiete and in reste.
 [761] For o thyng, sires, saufly dar I seye,
 [762] That freendes everych oother moot obeye,
 [763] If they wol longe holden compaignye.
 [764] Love wol nat been constreyned by maistrye.
 [765] Whan maistrie comth, the God of Love anon
 [766] Beteth his wynges, and farewel, he is gon!
 [767] Love is a thyng as any spirit free.
 [768] Wommen, of kynde, desiren libertee,
 [769] And nat to been constreyned as a thral;
 [770] And so doon men, if I sooth seyen shal.
 [771] Looke who that is moost pacient in love,
 [772] He is at his avantage al above.
 [773] Pacience is an heigh vertu, certeyn,
 [774] For it venquysseth, as thise clerkes seyn,
 [775] Thynges that rigour sholde nevere atteyne.
 [776] For every word men may nat chide or pleyne.
 [777] Lerneth to suffre, or elles, so moot I goon,
 [778] Ye shul it lerne, wher so ye wole or noon;
 [779] For in this world, certein, ther no wight is
 [780] That he ne dooth or seith somtyme amys.
 [781] Ire, siknesse, or constellacioun,
 [782] Wyn, wo, or chaungynge of complexioun
 [783] Causeth ful ofte to doon amys or speken.
 [784] On every wrong a man may nat be wreken.
 [785] After the tyme moste be temperaunce
 [786] To every wight that kan on governaunce.
 [787] And therfore hath this wise, worthy knyght,
 [788] To lyve in ese, suffrance hire bihight,
 [789] And she to hym ful wisly gan to swere
 [790] That nevere sholde ther be defaute in here.
 [791] Heere may men seen an humble, wys accord;
 [792] Thus hath she take hir servant and hir lord --
 [793] Servant in love, and lord in mariage.
 [794] Thanne was he bothe in lordshipe and servage.
 [795] Servage? Nay, but in lordshipe above,
 [796] Sith he hath bothe his lady and his love;
 [797] His lady, certes, and his wyf also,
 [798] The which that lawe of love acordeth to.
 [799] And whan he was in this prosperitee,
 [800] Hoom with his wyf he gooth to his contree,
 [801] Nat fer fro Pedmark, ther his dwellyng was,
 [802] Where as he lyveth in blisse and in solas.
 [803] Who koude telle, but he hadde wedded be,
 [804] The joye, the ese, and the prosperitee
 [805] That is bitwixe an housbonde and his wyf?
 [806] A yeer and moore lasted this blisful lyf,
 [807] Til that the knyght of which I speke of thus,
 [808] That of Kayrrud was cleped Arveragus,
 [809] Shoop hym to goon and dwelle a yeer or tweyne
 [810] In Engelond, that cleped was eek Briteyne,
 [811] To seke in armes worshipe and honour --
 [812] For al his lust he sette in swich labour --
 [813] And dwelled there two yeer; the book seith thus.
 [814] Now wol I stynten of this Arveragus,
 [815] And speken I wole of Dorigen his wyf,
 [816] That loveth hire housbonde as hire hertes lyf.
 [817] For his absence wepeth she and siketh,
 [818] As doon thise noble wyves whan hem liketh.
 [819] She moorneth, waketh, wayleth, fasteth, pleyneth;
 [820] Desir of his presence hire so destreyneth
 [821] That al this wyde world she sette at noght.
 [822] Hire freendes, whiche that knewe hir hevy thoght,
 [823] Conforten hire in al that ever they may.
 [824] They prechen hire, they telle hire nyght and day
 [825] That causelees she sleeth hirself, allas!
 [826] And every confort possible in this cas
 [827] They doon to hire with al hire bisynesse,
 [828] Al for to make hire leve hire hevynesse.
 [829] By proces, as ye knowen everichoon,
 [830] Men may so longe graven in a stoon
 [831] Til som figure therinne emprented be.
 [832] So longe han they conforted hire til she
 [833] Receyved hath, by hope and by resoun,
 [834] The emprentyng of hire consolacioun,
 [835] Thurgh which hir grete sorwe gan aswage;
 [836] She may nat alwey duren in swich rage.
 [837] And eek Arveragus, in al this care,
 [838] Hath sent hire lettres hoom of his welfare,
 [839] And that he wol come hastily agayn;
 [840] Or elles hadde this sorwe hir herte slayn.
 [841] Hire freendes sawe hir sorwe gan to slake
 [842] And preyde hire on knees, for Goddes sake,
 [843] To come and romen hire in compaignye,
 [844] Awey to dryve hire derke fantasye.
 [845] And finally she graunted that requeste,
 [846] For wel she saugh that it was for the beste.
 [847] Now stood hire castel faste by the see,
 [848] And often with hire freendes walketh shee
 [849] Hire to disporte upon the bank an heigh,
 [850] Where as she many a ship and barge seigh
 [851] Seillynge hir cours, where as hem liste go.
 [852] But thanne was that a parcel of hire wo,
 [853] For to hirself ful ofte, "Allas!" seith she,
 [854] "Is ther no ship, of so manye as I se,
 [855] Wol bryngen hom my lord? Thanne were myn herte
 [856] Al warisshed of his bittre peynes smerte."
 [857] Another tyme ther wolde she sitte and thynke,
 [858] And caste hir eyen dounward fro the brynke.
 [859] But whan she saugh the grisly rokkes blake,
 [860] For verray feere so wolde hir herte quake
 [861] That on hire feet she myghte hire noght sustene.
 [862] Thanne wolde she sitte adoun upon the grene,
 [863] And pitously into the see biholde,
 [864] And seyn right thus, with sorweful sikes colde:
 [865] "Eterne God, that thurgh thy purveiaunce
 [866] Ledest the world by certein governaunce,
 [867] In ydel, as men seyn, ye no thyng make.
 [868] But, Lord, thise grisly feendly rokkes blake,
 [869] That semen rather a foul confusion
 [870] Of werk than any fair creacion
 [871] Of swich a parfit wys God and a stable,
 [872] Why han ye wroght this werk unresonable?
 [873] For by this werk, south, north, ne west, ne eest,
 [874] Ther nys yfostred man, ne bryd, ne beest;
 [875] It dooth no good, to my wit, but anoyeth.
 [876] Se ye nat, Lord, how mankynde it destroyeth?
 [877] An hundred thousand bodyes of mankynde
 [878] Han rokkes slayn, al be they nat in mynde,
 [879] Which mankynde is so fair part of thy werk
 [880] That thou it madest lyk to thyn owene merk.
 [881] Thanne semed it ye hadde a greet chiertee
 [882] Toward mankynde; but how thanne may it bee
 [883] That ye swiche meenes make it to destroyen,
 [884] Whiche meenes do no good, but evere anoyen?
 [885] I woot wel clerkes wol seyn as hem leste,
 [886] By argumentz, that al is for the beste,
 [887] Though I ne kan the causes nat yknowe.
 [888] But thilke God that made wynd to blowe
 [889] As kepe my lord! This my conclusion.
 [890] To clerkes lete I al disputison.
 [891] But wolde God that alle thise rokkes blake
 [892] Were sonken into helle for his sake!
 [893] Thise rokkes sleen myn herte for the feere."
 [894] Thus wolde she seyn, with many a pitous teere.
 [895] Hire freendes sawe that it was no disport
 [896] To romen by the see, but disconfort,
 [897] And shopen for to pleyen somwher elles.
 [898] They leden hire by ryveres and by welles,
 [899] And eek in othere places delitables;
 [900] They dauncen and they pleyen at ches and tables.
 [901] So on a day, right in the morwe-tyde,
 [902] Unto a gardyn that was ther bisyde,
 [903] In which that they hadde maad hir ordinaunce
 [904] Of vitaille and of oother purveiaunce,
 [905] They goon and pleye hem al the longe day.
 [906] And this was on the sixte morwe of May,
 [907] Which May hadde peynted with his softe shoures
 [908] This gardyn ful of leves and of floures;
 [909] And craft of mannes hand so curiously
 [910] Arrayed hadde this gardyn, trewely,
 [911] That nevere was ther gardyn of swich prys
 [912] But if it were the verray paradys.
 [913] The odour of floures and the fresshe sighte
 [914] Wolde han maked any herte lighte
 [915] That evere was born, but if to greet siknesse
 [916] Or to greet sorwe helde it in distresse,
 [917] So ful it was of beautee with plesaunce.
 [918] At after-dyner gonne they to daunce,
 [919] And synge also, save Dorigen allone,
 [920] Which made alwey hir compleint and hir moone,
 [921] For she ne saugh hym on the daunce go
 [922] That was hir housbonde and hir love also.
 [923] But nathelees she moste a tyme abyde
 [924] And with good hope lete hir sorwe slyde.
 [925] Upon this daunce, amonges othere men,
 [926] Daunced a squier biforn Dorigen,
 [927] That fressher was and jolyer of array,
 [928] As to my doom, than is the month of May.
 [929] He syngeth, daunceth, passynge any man
 [930] That is, or was, sith that the world bigan.
 [931] Therwith he was, if men sholde hym discryve,
 [932] Oon of the beste farynge man on lyve;
 [933] Yong, strong, right vertuous, and riche, and wys,
 [934] And wel biloved, and holden in greet prys.
 [935] And shortly, if the sothe I tellen shal,
 [936] Unwityng of this Dorigen at al,
 [937] This lusty squier, servant to Venus,
 [938] Which that ycleped was Aurelius,
 [939] Hadde loved hire best of any creature
 [940] Two yeer and moore, as was his aventure,
 [941] But nevere dorste he tellen hire his grevaunce.
 [942] Withouten coppe he drank al his penaunce.
 [943] He was despeyred; no thyng dorste he seye,
 [944] Save in his songes somwhat wolde he wreye
 [945] His wo, as in a general compleynyng;
 [946] He seyde he lovede and was biloved no thyng.
 [947] Of swich matere made he manye layes,
 [948] Songes, compleintes, roundels, virelayes,
 [949] How that he dorste nat his sorwe telle,
 [950] But langwissheth as a furye dooth in helle;
 [951] And dye he moste, he seyde, as dide Ekko
 [952] For Narcisus, that dorste nat telle hir wo.
 [953] In oother manere than ye heere me seye,
 [954] Ne dorste he nat to hire his wo biwreye,
 [955] Save that, paraventure, somtyme at daunces,
 [956] Ther yonge folk kepen hir observaunces,
 [957] It may wel be he looked on hir face
 [958] In swich a wise as man that asketh grace;
 [959] But nothyng wiste she of his entente.
 [960] Nathelees it happed, er they thennes wente,
 [961] By cause that he was hire neighebour,
 [962] And was a man of worshipe and honour,
 [963] And hadde yknowen hym of tyme yoore,
 [964] They fille in speche; and forth, moore and moore,
 [965] Unto his purpos drough Aurelius,
 [966] And whan he saugh his tyme, he seyde thus:
 [967] "Madame," quod he, "by God that this world made,
 [968] So that I wiste it myghte youre herte glade,
 [969] I wolde that day that youre Arveragus
 [970] Wente over the see, that I, Aurelius,
 [971] Hadde went ther nevere I sholde have come agayn.
 [972] For wel I woot my servyce is in vayn;
 [973] My gerdon is but brestyng of myn herte.
 [974] Madame, reweth upon my peynes smerte;
 [975] For with a word ye may me sleen or save.
 [976] Heere at youre feet God wolde that I were grave!
 [977] I ne have as now no leyser moore to seye;
 [978] Have mercy, sweete, or ye wol do me deye!"
 [979] She gan to looke upon Aurelius;
 [980] "Is this youre wyl," quod she, "and sey ye thus?
 [981] Nevere erst," quod she, "ne wiste I what ye mente.
 [982] But now, Aurelie, I knowe youre entente,
 [983] By thilke God that yaf me soule and lyf,
 [984] Ne shal I nevere been untrewe wyf
 [985] In word ne werk, as fer as I have wit;
 [986] I wol been his to whom that I am knyt.
 [987] Taak this for fynal answere as of me."
 [988] But after that in pley thus seyde she:
 [989] "Aurelie," quod she, "by heighe God above,
 [990] Yet wolde I graunte yow to been youre love,
 [991] Syn I yow se so pitously complayne.
 [992] Looke what day that endelong Britayne
 [993] Ye remoeve alle the rokkes, stoon by stoon,
 [994] That they ne lette ship ne boot to goon --
 [995] I seye, whan ye han maad the coost so clene
 [996] Of rokkes that ther nys no stoon ysene,
 [997] Thanne wol I love yow best of any man;
 [998] Have heer my trouthe, in al that evere I kan."
 [999] "Is ther noon oother grace in yow?" quod he.
 [1000] "No, by that Lord," quod she, "that maked me!
 [1001] For wel I woot that it shal never bityde.
 [1002] Lat swiche folies out of youre herte slyde.
 [1003] What deyntee sholde a man han in his lyf
 [1004] For to go love another mannes wyf,
 [1005] That hath hir body whan so that hym liketh?"
 [1006] Aurelius ful ofte soore siketh;
 [1007] Wo was Aurelie whan that he this herde,
 [1008] And with a sorweful herte he thus answerde:
 [1009] "Madame," quod he, "this were an inpossible!
 [1010] Thanne moot I dye of sodeyn deth horrible."
 [1011] And with that word he turned hym anon.
 [1012] Tho coome hir othere freendes many oon,
 [1013] And in the aleyes romeden up and doun,
 [1014] And nothyng wiste of this conclusioun,
 [1015] But sodeynly bigonne revel newe
 [1016] Til that the brighte sonne loste his hewe;
 [1017] For th' orisonte hath reft the sonne his lyght --
 [1018] This is as muche to seye as it was nyght --
 [1019] And hoom they goon in joye and in solas,
 [1020] Save oonly wrecche Aurelius, allas!
 [1021] He to his hous is goon with sorweful herte.
 [1022] He seeth he may nat fro his deeth asterte;
 [1023] Hym semed that he felte his herte colde.
 [1024] Up to the hevene his handes he gan holde,
 [1025] And on his knowes bare he sette hym doun,
 [1026] And in his ravyng seyde his orisoun.
 [1027] For verray wo out of his wit he breyde.
 [1028] He nyste what he spak, but thus he seyde;
 [1029] With pitous herte his pleynt hath he bigonne
 [1030] Unto the goddes, and first unto the sonne:
 [1031] He seyde, "Appollo, god and governour
 [1032] Of every plaunte, herbe, tree, and flour,
 [1033] That yevest, after thy declinacion,
 [1034] To ech of hem his tyme and his seson,
 [1035] As thyn herberwe chaungeth lowe or heighe,
 [1036] Lord Phebus, cast thy merciable eighe
 [1037] On wrecche Aurelie, which that am but lorn.
 [1038] Lo, lord! My lady hath my deeth ysworn
 [1039] Withoute gilt, but thy benignytee
 [1040] Upon my dedly herte have som pitee.
 [1041] For wel I woot, lord Phebus, if yow lest,
 [1042] Ye may me helpen, save my lady, best.
 [1043] Now voucheth sauf that I may yow devyse
 [1044] How that I may been holpen and in what wyse.
 [1045] "Youre blisful suster, Lucina the sheene,
 [1046] That of the see is chief goddesse and queene
 [1047] (Though Neptunus have deitee in the see,
 [1048] Yet emperisse aboven hym is she),
 [1049] Ye knowen wel, lord, that right as hir desir
 [1050] Is to be quyked and lighted of youre fir,
 [1051] For which she folweth yow ful bisily,
 [1052] Right so the see desireth naturelly
 [1053] To folwen hire, as she that is goddesse
 [1054] Bothe in the see and ryveres moore and lesse.
 [1055] Wherfore, lord Phebus, this is my requeste --
 [1056] Do this miracle, or do myn herte breste --
 [1057] That now next at this opposicion
 [1058] Which in the signe shal be of the Leon,
 [1059] As preieth hire so greet a flood to brynge
 [1060] That fyve fadme at the leeste it oversprynge
 [1061] The hyeste rokke in Armorik Briteyne;
 [1062] And lat this flood endure yeres tweyne.
 [1063] Thanne certes to my lady may I seye,
 [1064] `Holdeth youre heste, the rokkes been aweye.'
 [1065] "Lord Phebus, dooth this miracle for me.
 [1066] Preye hire she go no faster cours than ye;
 [1067] I seye, preyeth your suster that she go
 [1068] No faster cours than ye thise yeres two.
 [1069] Thanne shal she been evene atte fulle alway,
 [1070] And spryng flood laste bothe nyght and day.
 [1071] And but she vouche sauf in swich manere
 [1072] To graunte me my sovereyn lady deere,
 [1073] Prey hire to synken every rok adoun
 [1074] Into hir owene dirke regioun
 [1075] Under the ground, ther Pluto dwelleth inne,
 [1076] Or nevere mo shal I my lady wynne.
 [1077] Thy temple in Delphos wol I barefoot seke.
 [1078] Lord Phebus, se the teeris on my cheke,
 [1079] And of my peyne have som compassioun."
 [1080] And with that word in swowne he fil adoun,
 [1081] And longe tyme he lay forth in a traunce.
 [1082] His brother, which that knew of his penaunce,
 [1083] Up caughte hym and to bedde he hath hym broght.
 [1084] Dispeyred in this torment and this thoght
 [1085] Lete I this woful creature lye;
 [1086] Chese he, for me, wheither he wol lyve or dye.
 [1087] Arveragus, with heele and greet honour,
 [1088] As he that was of chivalrie the flour,
 [1089] Is comen hoom, and othere worthy men.
 [1090] O blisful artow now, thou Dorigen,
 [1091] That hast thy lusty housbonde in thyne armes,
 [1092] The fresshe knyght, the worthy man of armes,
 [1093] That loveth thee as his owene hertes lyf.
 [1094] No thyng list hym to been ymaginatyf,
 [1095] If any wight hadde spoke, whil he was oute,
 [1096] To hire of love; he hadde of it no doute.
 [1097] He noght entendeth to no swich mateere,
 [1098] But daunceth, justeth, maketh hire good cheere;
 [1099] And thus in joye and blisse I lete hem dwelle,
 [1100] And of the sike Aurelius wol I telle.
 [1101] In langour and in torment furyus
 [1102] Two yeer and moore lay wrecche Aurelyus,
 [1103] Er any foot he myghte on erthe gon;
 [1104] Ne confort in this tyme hadde he noon,
 [1105] Save of his brother, which that was a clerk.
 [1106] He knew of al this wo and al this werk,
 [1107] For to noon oother creature, certeyn,
 [1108] Of this matere he dorste no word seyn.
 [1109] Under his brest he baar it moore secree
 [1110] Than evere dide Pamphilus for Galathee.
 [1111] His brest was hool, withoute for to sene,
 [1112] But in his herte ay was the arwe kene.
 [1113] And wel ye knowe that of a sursanure
 [1114] In surgerye is perilous the cure,
 [1115] But men myghte touche the arwe or come therby.
 [1116] His brother weep and wayled pryvely,
 [1117] Til atte laste hym fil in remembraunce,
 [1118] That whiles he was at Orliens in Fraunce --
 [1119] As yonge clerkes that been lykerous
 [1120] To reden artes that been curious
 [1121] Seken in every halke and every herne
 [1122] Particuler sciences for to lerne --
 [1123] He hym remembred that, upon a day,
 [1124] At Orliens in studie a book he say
 [1125] Of magyk natureel, which his felawe,
 [1126] That was that tyme a bacheler of lawe,
 [1127] Al were he ther to lerne another craft,
 [1128] Hadde prively upon his desk ylaft;
 [1129] Which book spak muchel of the operaciouns
 [1130] Touchynge the eighte and twenty mansiouns
 [1131] That longen to the moone, and swich folye
 [1132] As in oure dayes is nat worth a flye --
 [1133] For hooly chirches feith in oure bileve
 [1134] Ne suffreth noon illusioun us to greve.
 [1135] And whan this book was in his remembraunce,
 [1136] Anon for joye his herte gan to daunce,
 [1137] And to hymself he seyde pryvely:
 [1138] "My brother shal be warisshed hastily;
 [1139] For I am siker that ther be sciences
 [1140] By whiche men make diverse apparences,
 [1141] Swiche as thise subtile tregetoures pleye.
 [1142] For ofte at feestes have I wel herd seye
 [1143] That tregetours withinne an halle large
 [1144] Have maad come in a water and a barge,
 [1145] And in the halle rowen up and doun.
 [1146] Somtyme hath semed come a grym leoun;
 [1147] And somtyme floures sprynge as in a mede;
 [1148] Somtyme a vyne, and grapes white and rede;
 [1149] Somtyme a castel, al of lym and stoon;
 [1150] And whan hem lyked, voyded it anon.
 [1151] Thus semed it to every mannes sighte.
 [1152] "Now thanne conclude I thus: that if I myghte
 [1153] At Orliens som oold felawe yfynde
 [1154] That hadde thise moones mansions in mynde,
 [1155] Or oother magyk natureel above,
 [1156] He sholde wel make my brother han his love.
 [1157] For with an apparence a clerk may make,
 [1158] To mannes sighte, that alle the rokkes blake
 [1159] Of Britaigne weren yvoyded everichon,
 [1160] And shippes by the brynke comen and gon,
 [1161] And in swich forme enduren a wowke or two.
 [1162] Thanne were my brother warisshed of his wo;
 [1163] Thanne moste she nedes holden hire biheste,
 [1164] Or elles he shal shame hire atte leeste."
 [1165] What sholde I make a lenger tale of this?
 [1166] Unto his brotheres bed he comen is,
 [1167] And swich confort he yaf hym for to gon
 [1168] To Orliens that he up stirte anon,
 [1169] And on his wey forthward thanne is he fare
 [1170] In hope for to been lissed of his care.
 [1171] Whan they were come almoost to that citee,
 [1172] But if it were a two furlong or thre,
 [1173] A yong clerk romynge by hymself they mette,
 [1174] Which that in Latyn thriftily hem grette,
 [1175] And after that he seyde a wonder thyng:
 [1176] "I knowe," quod he, "the cause of youre comyng."
 [1177] And er they ferther any foote wente,
 [1178] He tolde hem al that was in hire entente.
 [1179] This Briton clerk hym asked of felawes
 [1180] The whiche that he had knowe in olde dawes,
 [1181] And he answerde hym that they dede were,
 [1182] For which he weep ful ofte many a teere.
 [1183] Doun of his hors Aurelius lighte anon,
 [1184] And with this magicien forth is he gon
 [1185] Hoom to his hous, and maden hem wel at ese.
 [1186] Hem lakked no vitaille that myghte hem plese.
 [1187] So wel arrayed hous as ther was oon
 [1188] Aurelius in his lyf saugh nevere noon.
 [1189] He shewed hym, er he wente to sopeer,
 [1190] Forestes, parkes ful of wilde deer;
 [1191] Ther saugh he hertes with hir hornes hye,
 [1192] The gretteste that evere were seyn with ye.
 [1193] He saugh of hem an hondred slayn with houndes,
 [1194] And somme with arwes blede of bittre woundes.
 [1195] He saugh, whan voyded were thise wilde deer,
 [1196] Thise fauconers upon a fair ryver,
 [1197] That with hir haukes han the heron slayn.
 [1198] Tho saugh he knyghtes justyng in a playn;
 [1199] And after this he dide hym swich plesaunce
 [1200] That he hym shewed his lady on a daunce,
 [1201] On which hymself he daunced, as hym thoughte.
 [1202] And whan this maister that this magyk wroughte
 [1203] Saugh it was tyme, he clapte his handes two,
 [1204] And farewel! Al oure revel was ago.
 [1205] And yet remoeved they nevere out of the hous,
 [1206] Whil they saugh al this sighte merveillous,
 [1207] But in his studie, ther as his bookes be,
 [1208] They seten stille, and no wight but they thre.
 [1209] To hym this maister called his squier,
 [1210] And seyde hym thus: "Is redy oure soper?
 [1211] Almoost an houre it is, I undertake,
 [1212] Sith I yow bad oure soper for to make,
 [1213] Whan that thise worthy men wenten with me
 [1214] Into my studie, ther as my bookes be."
 [1215] "Sire," quod this squier, "whan it liketh yow,
 [1216] It is al redy, though ye wol right now."
 [1217] "Go we thanne soupe," quod he, "as for the beste.
 [1218] Thise amorous folk somtyme moote han hir reste."
 [1219] At after-soper fille they in tretee
 [1220] What somme sholde this maistres gerdon be
 [1221] To remoeven alle the rokkes of Britayne,
 [1222] And eek from Gerounde to the mouth of Sayne.
 [1223] He made it straunge, and swoor, so God hym save,
 [1224] Lasse than a thousand pound he wolde nat have,
 [1225] Ne gladly for that somme he wolde nat goon.
 [1226] Aurelius, with blisful herte anoon,
 [1227] Answerde thus: "Fy on a thousand pound!
 [1228] This wyde world, which that men seye is round,
 [1229] I wolde it yeve, if I were lord of it.
 [1230] This bargayn is ful dryve, for we been knyt.
 [1231] Ye shal be payed trewely, by my trouthe!
 [1232] But looketh now, for no necligence or slouthe
 [1233] Ye tarie us heere no lenger than to-morwe."
 [1234] "Nay," quod this clerk, "have heer my feith to borwe."
 [1235] To bedde is goon Aurelius whan hym leste,
 [1236] And wel ny al that nyght he hadde his reste.
 [1237] What for his labour and his hope of blisse,
 [1238] His woful herte of penaunce hadde a lisse.
 [1239] Upon the morwe, whan that it was day,
 [1240] To Britaigne tooke they the righte way,
 [1241] Aurelius and this magicien bisyde,
 [1242] And been descended ther they wolde abyde.
 [1243] And this was, as thise bookes me remembre,
 [1244] The colde, frosty seson of Decembre.
 [1245] Phebus wax old, and hewed lyk laton,
 [1246] That in his hoote declynacion
 [1247] Shoon as the burned gold with stremes brighte;
 [1248] But now in Capricorn adoun he lighte,
 [1249] Where as he shoon ful pale, I dar wel seyn.
 [1250] The bittre frostes, with the sleet and reyn,
 [1251] Destroyed hath the grene in every yerd.
 [1252] Janus sit by the fyr, with double berd,
 [1253] And drynketh of his bugle horn the wyn;
 [1254] Biforn hym stant brawen of the tusked swyn,
 [1255] And "Nowel" crieth every lusty man.
 [1256] Aurelius in al that evere he kan
 [1257] Dooth to this maister chiere and reverence,
 [1258] And preyeth hym to doon his diligence
 [1259] To bryngen hym out of his peynes smerte,
 [1260] Or with a swerd that he wolde slitte his herte.
 [1261] This subtil clerk swich routhe had of this man
 [1262] That nyght and day he spedde hym that he kan
 [1263] To wayten a tyme of his conclusioun;
 [1264] This is to seye, to maken illusioun,
 [1265] By swich an apparence or jogelrye --
 [1266] I ne kan no termes of astrologye --
 [1267] That she and every wight sholde wene and seye
 [1268] That of Britaigne the rokkes were aweye,
 [1269] Or ellis they were sonken under grounde.
 [1270] So atte laste he hath his tyme yfounde
 [1271] To maken his japes and his wrecchednesse
 [1272] Of swich a supersticious cursednesse.
 [1273] His tables Tolletanes forth he brought,
 [1274] Ful wel corrected, ne ther lakked nought,
 [1275] Neither his collect ne his expans yeeris,
 [1276] Ne his rootes, ne his othere geeris,
 [1277] As been his centris and his argumentz
 [1278] And his proporcioneles convenientz
 [1279] For his equacions in every thyng.
 [1280] And by his eighte speere in his wirkyng
 [1281] He knew ful wel how fer Alnath was shove
 [1282] Fro the heed of thilke fixe Aries above,
 [1283] That in the ninthe speere considered is;
 [1284] Ful subtilly he kalkuled al this.
 [1285] Whan he hadde founde his firste mansioun,
 [1286] He knew the remenaunt by proporcioun,
 [1287] And knew the arisyng of his moone weel,
 [1288] And in whos face, and terme, and everydeel;
 [1289] And knew ful weel the moones mansioun
 [1290] Acordaunt to his operacioun,
 [1291] And knew also his othere observaunces
 [1292] For swiche illusiouns and swiche meschaunces
 [1293] As hethen folk useden in thilke dayes.
 [1294] For which no lenger maked he delayes,
 [1295] But thurgh his magik, for a wyke or tweye,
 [1296] It semed that alle the rokkes were aweye.
 [1297] Aurelius, which that yet despeired is
 [1298] Wher he shal han his love or fare amys,
 [1299] Awaiteth nyght and day on this myracle;
 [1300] And whan he knew that ther was noon obstacle,
 [1301] That voyded were thise rokkes everychon,
 [1302] Doun to his maistres feet he fil anon,
 [1303] And seyde, "I woful wrecche, Aurelius,
 [1304] Thanke yow, lord, and lady myn Venus,
 [1305] That me han holpen fro my cares colde."
 [1306] And to the temple his wey forth hath he holde,
 [1307] Where as he knew he sholde his lady see.
 [1308] And whan he saugh his tyme, anon-right hee,
 [1309] With dredful herte and with ful humble cheere,
 [1310] Salewed hath his sovereyn lady deere:
 [1311] "My righte lady," quod this woful man,
 [1312] "Whom I moost drede and love as I best kan,
 [1313] And lothest were of al this world displese,
 [1314] Nere it that I for yow have swich disese
 [1315] That I moste dyen heere at youre foot anon,
 [1316] Noght wolde I telle how me is wo bigon.
 [1317] But certes outher moste I dye or pleyne;
 [1318] Ye sle me giltelees for verray peyne.
 [1319] But of my deeth thogh that ye have no routhe,
 [1320] Avyseth yow er that ye breke youre trouthe.
 [1321] Repenteth yow, for thilke God above,
 [1322] Er ye me sleen by cause that I yow love.
 [1323] For, madame, wel ye woot what ye han hight --
 [1324] Nat that I chalange any thyng of right
 [1325] Of yow, my sovereyn lady, but youre grace --
 [1326] But in a gardyn yond, at swich a place,
 [1327] Ye woot right wel what ye bihighten me;
 [1328] And in myn hand youre trouthe plighten ye
 [1329] To love me best -- God woot, ye seyde so,
 [1330] Al be that I unworthy am therto.
 [1331] Madame, I speke it for the honour of yow
 [1332] Moore than to save myn hertes lyf right now --
 [1333] I have do so as ye comanded me;
 [1334] And if ye vouche sauf, ye may go see.
 [1335] Dooth as yow list; have youre biheste in mynde,
 [1336] For, quyk or deed, right there ye shal me fynde.
 [1337] In yow lith al to do me lyve or deye --
 [1338] But wel I woot the rokkes been aweye."
 [1339] He taketh his leve, and she astoned stood;
 [1340] In al hir face nas a drope of blood.
 [1341] She wende nevere han come in swich a trappe.
 [1342] "Allas," quod she, "that evere this sholde happe!
 [1343] For wende I nevere by possibilitee
 [1344] That swich a monstre or merveille myghte be!
 [1345] It is agayns the proces of nature."
 [1346] And hoom she goth a sorweful creature;
 [1347] For verray feere unnethe may she go.
 [1348] She wepeth, wailleth, al a day or two,
 [1349] And swowneth, that it routhe was to see.
 [1350] But why it was to no wight tolde shee,
 [1351] For out of towne was goon Arveragus.
 [1352] But to hirself she spak, and seyde thus,
 [1353] With face pale and with ful sorweful cheere,
 [1354] In hire compleynt, as ye shal after heere:
 [1355] "Allas," quod she, "on thee, Fortune, I pleyne,
 [1356] That unwar wrapped hast me in thy cheyne,
 [1357] Fro which t' escape woot I no socour,
 [1358] Save oonly deeth or elles dishonour;
 [1359] Oon of thise two bihoveth me to chese.
 [1360] But nathelees, yet have I levere to lese
 [1361] My lif than of my body to have a shame,
 [1362] Or knowe myselven fals, or lese my name;
 [1363] And with my deth I may be quyt, ywis.
 [1364] Hath ther nat many a noble wyf er this,
 [1365] And many a mayde, yslayn hirself, allas,
 [1366] Rather than with hir body doon trespas?
 [1367] "Yis, certes, lo, thise stories beren witnesse:
 [1368] Whan thritty tirauntz, ful of cursednesse,
 [1369] Hadde slayn Phidon in Atthenes atte feste,
 [1370] They comanded his doghtres for t' areste
 [1371] And bryngen hem biforn hem in despit,
 [1372] Al naked, to fulfille hir foul delit,
 [1373] And in hir fadres blood they made hem daunce
 [1374] Upon the pavement, God yeve hem meschaunce!
 [1375] For which thise woful maydens, ful of drede,
 [1376] Rather than they wolde lese hir maydenhede,
 [1377] They prively been stirt into a welle
 [1378] And dreynte hemselven, as the bookes telle.
 [1379] "They of Mecene leete enquere and seke
 [1380] Of Lacedomye fifty maydens eke,
 [1381] On whiche they wolden doon hir lecherye.
 [1382] But was ther noon of al that compaignye
 [1383] That she nas slayn, and with a good entente
 [1384] Chees rather for to dye than assente
 [1385] To been oppressed of hir maydenhede.
 [1386] Why sholde I thanne to dye been in drede?
 [1387] Lo, eek, the tiraunt Aristoclides,
 [1388] That loved a mayden, heet Stymphalides,
 [1389] Whan that hir fader slayn was on a nyght,
 [1390] Unto Dianes temple goth she right,
 [1391] And hente the ymage in hir handes two,
 [1392] Fro which ymage wolde she nevere go.
 [1393] No wight ne myghte hir handes of it arace
 [1394] Til she was slayn, right in the selve place.
 [1395] "Now sith that maydens hadden swich despit
 [1396] To been defouled with mannes foul delit,
 [1397] Wel oghte a wyf rather hirselven slee
 [1398] Than be defouled, as it thynketh me.
 [1399] What shal I seyn of Hasdrubales wyf,
 [1400] That at Cartage birafte hirself hir lyf?
 [1401] For whan she saugh that Romayns wan the toun,
 [1402] She took hir children alle, and skipte adoun
 [1403] Into the fyr, and chees rather to dye
 [1404] Than any Romayn dide hire vileynye.
 [1405] Hath nat Lucresse yslayn hirself, allas,
 [1406] At Rome, whan that she oppressed was
 [1407] Of Tarquyn, for hire thoughte it was a shame
 [1408] To lyven whan she hadde lost hir name?
 [1409] The sevene maydens of Milesie also
 [1410] Han slayn hemself, for verrey drede and wo,
 [1411] Rather than folk of Gawle hem sholde oppresse.
 [1412] Mo than a thousand stories, as I gesse,
 [1413] Koude I now telle as touchynge this mateere.
 [1414] Whan Habradate was slayn, his wyf so deere
 [1415] Hirselven slow, and leet hir blood to glyde
 [1416] In Habradates woundes depe and wyde,
 [1417] And seyde, `My body, at the leeste way,
 [1418] Ther shal no wight defoulen, if I may."
 [1419] "What sholde I mo ensamples heerof sayn,
 [1420] Sith that so manye han hemselven slayn
 [1421] Wel rather than they wolde defouled be?
 [1422] I wol conclude that it is bet for me
 [1423] To sleen myself than been defouled thus.
 [1424] I wol be trewe unto Arveragus,
 [1425] Or rather sleen myself in som manere,
 [1426] As dide Demociones doghter deere
 [1427] By cause that she wolde nat defouled be.
 [1428] O Cedasus, it is ful greet pitee
 [1429] To reden how thy doghtren deyde, allas,
 [1430] That slowe hemself for swich manere cas.
 [1431] As greet a pitee was it, or wel moore,
 [1432] The Theban mayden that for Nichanore
 [1433] Hirselven slow, right for swich manere wo.
 [1434] Another Theban mayden dide right so;
 [1435] For oon of Macidonye hadde hire oppressed,
 [1436] She with hire deeth hir maydenhede redressed.
 [1437] What shal I seye of Nicerates wyf,
 [1438] That for swich cas birafte hirself hir lyf?
 [1439] How trewe eek was to Alcebiades
 [1440] His love, that rather for to dyen chees
 [1441] Than for to suffre his body unburyed be.
 [1442] Lo, which a wyf was Alceste," quod she.
 [1443] "What seith Omer of goode Penalopee?
 [1444] Al Grece knoweth of hire chastitee.
 [1445] Pardee, of Laodomya is writen thus,
 [1446] That whan at Troie was slayn Protheselaus,
 [1447] Ne lenger wolde she lyve after his day.
 [1448] The same of noble Porcia telle I may;
 [1449] Withoute Brutus koude she nat lyve,
 [1450] To whom she hadde al hool hir herte yive.
 [1451] The parfit wyfhod of Arthemesie
 [1452] Honured is thurgh al the Barbarie.
 [1453] O Teuta, queene, thy wyfly chastitee
 [1454] To alle wyves may a mirour bee.
 [1455] The same thyng I seye of Bilyea,
 [1456] Of Rodogone, and eek Valeria."
 [1457] Thus pleyned Dorigen a day or tweye,
 [1458] Purposynge evere that she wolde deye.
 [1459] But nathelees, upon the thridde nyght,
 [1460] Hoom cam Arveragus, this worthy knyght,
 [1461] And asked hire why that she weep so soore;
 [1462] And she gan wepen ever lenger the moore.
 [1463] "Allas," quod she, "that evere was I born!
 [1464] Thus have I seyd," quod she, "thus have I sworn" --
 [1465] And toold hym al as ye han herd bifore;
 [1466] It nedeth nat reherce it yow namoore.
 [1467] This housbonde, with glad chiere, in freendly wyse
 [1468] Answerde and seyde as I shal yow devyse:
 [1469] "Is ther oght elles, Dorigen, but this?"
 [1470] "Nay, nay," quod she, "God helpe me so as wys!
 [1471] This is to muche, and it were Goddes wille."
 [1472] "Ye, wyf," quod he, "lat slepen that is stille.
 [1473] It may be wel, paraventure, yet to day.
 [1474] Ye shul youre trouthe holden, by my fay!
 [1475] For God so wisly have mercy upon me,
 [1476] I hadde wel levere ystiked for to be
 [1477] For verray love which that I to yow have,
 [1478] But if ye sholde youre trouthe kepe and save.
 [1479] Trouthe is the hyeste thyng that man may kepe" --
 [1480] But with that word he brast anon to wepe,
 [1481] And seyde, "I yow forbede, up peyne of deeth,
 [1482] That nevere, whil thee lasteth lyf ne breeth,
 [1483] To no wight telle thou of this aventure --
 [1484] As I may best, I wol my wo endure --
 [1485] Ne make no contenance of hevynesse,
 [1486] That folk of yow may demen harm or gesse."
 [1487] And forth he cleped a squier and a mayde:
 [1488] "Gooth forth anon with Dorigen," he sayde,
 [1489] "And bryngeth hire to swich a place anon."
 [1490] They take hir leve, and on hir wey they gon,
 [1491] But they ne wiste why she thider wente.
 [1492] He nolde no wight tellen his entente.
 [1493] Paraventure an heep of yow, ywis,
 [1494] Wol holden hym a lewed man in this
 [1495] That he wol putte his wyf in jupartie.
 [1496] Herkneth the tale er ye upon hire crie.
 [1497] She may have bettre fortune than yow semeth;
 [1498] And whan that ye han herd the tale, demeth.
 [1499] This squier, which that highte Aurelius,
 [1500] On Dorigen that was so amorus,
 [1501] Of aventure happed hire to meete
 [1502] Amydde the toun, right in the quykkest strete,
 [1503] As she was bown to goon the wey forth right
 [1504] Toward the gardyn ther as she had hight.
 [1505] And he was to the gardyn-ward also;
 [1506] For wel he spyed whan she wolde go
 [1507] Out of hir hous to any maner place.
 [1508] But thus they mette, of aventure or grace,
 [1509] And he saleweth hire with glad entente,
 [1510] And asked of hire whiderward she wente;
 [1511] And she answerde, half as she were mad,
 [1512] "Unto the gardyn, as myn housbonde bad,
 [1513] My trouthe for to holde -- allas, allas!"
 [1514] Aurelius gan wondren on this cas,
 [1515] And in his herte hadde greet compassioun
 [1516] Of hire and of hire lamentacioun,
 [1517] And of Arveragus, the worthy knyght,
 [1518] That bad hire holden al that she had hight,
 [1519] So looth hym was his wyf sholde breke hir trouthe;
 [1520] And in his herte he caughte of this greet routhe,
 [1521] Considerynge the beste on every syde,
 [1522] That fro his lust yet were hym levere abyde
 [1523] Than doon so heigh a cherlyssh wrecchednesse
 [1524] Agayns franchise and alle gentillesse;
 [1525] For which in fewe wordes seyde he thus:
 [1526] "Madame, seyth to youre lord Arveragus
 [1527] That sith I se his grete gentillesse
 [1528] To yow, and eek I se wel youre distresse,
 [1529] That him were levere han shame (and that were routhe)
 [1530] Than ye to me sholde breke thus youre trouthe,
 [1531] I have wel levere evere to suffre wo
 [1532] Than I departe the love bitwix yow two.
 [1533] I yow relesse, madame, into youre hond
 [1534] Quyt every serement and every bond
 [1535] That ye han maad to me as heerbiforn,
 [1536] Sith thilke tyme which that ye were born.
 [1537] My trouthe I plighte, I shal yow never repreve
 [1538] Of no biheste, and heere I take my leve,
 [1539] As of the treweste and the beste wyf
 [1540] That evere yet I knew in al my lyf.
 [1541] But every wyf be war of hire biheeste!
 [1542] On Dorigen remembreth, atte leeste.
 [1543] Thus kan a squier doon a gentil dede
 [1544] As wel as kan a knyght, withouten drede."
 [1545] She thonketh hym upon hir knees al bare,
 [1546] And hoom unto hir housbonde is she fare,
 [1547] And tolde hym al, as ye han herd me sayd;
 [1548] And be ye siker, he was so weel apayd
 [1549] That it were impossible me to wryte.
 [1550] What sholde I lenger of this cas endyte?
 [1551] Arveragus and Dorigen his wyf
 [1552] In sovereyn blisse leden forth hir lyf.
 [1553] Nevere eft ne was ther angre hem bitwene.
 [1554] He cherisseth hire as though she were a queene,
 [1555] And she was to hym trewe for everemoore.
 [1556] Of thise two folk ye gete of me namoore.
 [1557] Aurelius, that his cost hath al forlorn,
 [1558] Curseth the tyme that evere he was born:
 [1559] "Allas!" quod he. "Allas, that I bihighte
 [1560] Of pured gold a thousand pound of wighte
 [1561] Unto this philosophre! How shal I do?
 [1562] I se namoore but that I am fordo.
 [1563] Myn heritage moot I nedes selle,
 [1564] And been a beggere; heere may I nat dwelle
 [1565] And shamen al my kynrede in this place,
 [1566] But I of hym may gete bettre grace.
 [1567] But nathelees, I wole of hym assaye,
 [1568] At certeyn dayes, yeer by yeer, to paye,
 [1569] And thanke hym of his grete curteisye.
 [1570] My trouthe wol I kepe, I wol nat lye."
 [1571] With herte soor he gooth unto his cofre,
 [1572] And broghte gold unto this philosophre,
 [1573] The value of fyve hundred pound, I gesse,
 [1574] And hym bisecheth, of his gentillesse,
 [1575] To graunte hym dayes of the remenaunt;
 [1576] And seyde, "Maister, I dar wel make avaunt,
 [1577] I failled nevere of my trouthe as yit.
 [1578] For sikerly my dette shal be quyt
 [1579] Towardes yow, howevere that I fare
 [1580] To goon a-begged in my kirtle bare.
 [1581] But wolde ye vouche sauf, upon seuretee,
 [1582] Two yeer or thre for to respiten me,
 [1583] Thanne were I wel; for elles moot I selle
 [1584] Myn heritage; ther is namoore to telle."
 [1585] This philosophre sobrely answerde,
 [1586] And seyde thus, whan he thise wordes herde:
 [1587] "Have I nat holden covenant unto thee?"
 [1588] "Yes, certes, wel and trewely," quod he.
 [1589] "Hastow nat had thy lady as thee liketh?"
 [1590] "No, no," quod he, and sorwefully he siketh.
 [1591] "What was the cause? Tel me if thou kan."
 [1592] Aurelius his tale anon bigan,
 [1593] And tolde hym al, as ye han herd bifoore;
 [1594] It nedeth nat to yow reherce it moore.
 [1595] He seide, "Arveragus, of gentillesse,
 [1596] Hadde levere dye in sorwe and in distresse
 [1597] Than that his wyf were of hir trouthe fals."
 [1598] The sorwe of Dorigen he tolde hym als;
 [1599] How looth hire was to been a wikked wyf,
 [1600] And that she levere had lost that day hir lyf,
 [1601] And that hir trouthe she swoor thurgh innocence,
 [1602] She nevere erst hadde herde speke of apparence.
 [1603] "That made me han of hire so greet pitee;
 [1604] And right as frely as he sente hire me,
 [1605] As frely sente I hire to hym ageyn.
 [1606] This al and som; ther is namoore to seyn."
 [1607] This philosophre answerde, "Leeve brother,
 [1608] Everich of yow dide gentilly til oother.
 [1609] Thou art a squier, and he is a knyght;
 [1610] But God forbede, for his blisful myght,
 [1611] But if a clerk koude doon a gentil dede
 [1612] As wel as any of yow, it is no drede!
 [1613] Sire, I releesse thee thy thousand pound,
 [1614] As thou right now were cropen out of the ground,
 [1615] Ne nevere er now ne haddest knowen me.
 [1616] For, sire, I wol nat taken a peny of thee
 [1617] For al my craft, ne noght for my travaille.
 [1618] Thou hast ypayed wel for my vitaille.
 [1619] It is ynogh, and farewel, have good day!"
 [1620] And took his hors, and forth he goth his way.
 [1621] Lordynges, this question, thanne, wol I aske now,
 [1622] Which was the mooste fre, as thynketh yow?
 [1623] Now telleth me, er that ye ferther wende.
 [1624] I kan namoore; my tale is at an ende.

      
The Canterbury Tales and Other Works of Chaucer (Middle English), by Geoffery Chaucer, [14th cent.], at sacred-texts.com

 

The Canterbury Tales

 

The Physician's Tale

 [1] Ther was, as telleth Titus Livius,
 [2] A knyght that called was Virginius,
 [3] Fulfild of honour and of worthynesse,
 [4] And strong of freendes, and of greet richesse.
 [5] This knyght a doghter hadde by his wyf;
 [6] No children hadde he mo in al his lyf.
 [7] Fair was this mayde in excellent beautee
 [8] Aboven every wight that man may see;
 [9] For Nature hath with sovereyn diligence
 [10] Yformed hire in so greet excellence,
 [11] As though she wolde seyn, "Lo! I, Nature,
 [12] Thus kan I forme and peynte a creature,
 [13] Whan that me list; who kan me countrefete?
 [14] Pigmalion noght, though he ay forge and bete,
 [15] Or grave, or peynte; for I dar wel seyn
 [16] Apelles, Zanzis, sholde werche in veyn
 [17] Outher to grave, or peynte, or forge, or bete,
 [18] If they presumed me to countrefete.
 [19] For He that is the formere principal
 [20] Hath maked me his vicaire general,
 [21] To forme and peynten erthely creaturis
 [22] Right as me list, and ech thyng in my cure is
 [23] Under the moone, that may wane and waxe,
 [24] And for my werk right no thyng wol I axe;
 [25] My lord and I been ful of oon accord.
 [26] I made hire to the worshipe of my lord;
 [27] So do I alle myne othere creatures,
 [28] What colour that they han or what figures."
 [29] Thus semeth me that Nature wolde seye.
 [30] This mayde of age twelve yeer was and tweye,
 [31] In which that Nature hadde swich delit.
 [32] For right as she kan peynte a lilie whit,
 [33] And reed a rose, right with swich peynture
 [34] She peynted hath this noble creature,
 [35] Er she were born, upon hir lymes fre,
 [36] Where as by right swiche colours sholde be;
 [37] And Phebus dyed hath hire tresses grete
 [38] Lyk to the stremes of his burned heete.
 [39] And if that excellent was hire beautee,
 [40] A thousand foold moore vertuous was she.
 [41] In hire ne lakked no condicioun
 [42] That is to preyse, as by discrecioun.
 [43] As wel in goost as body chast was she,
 [44] For which she floured in virginitee
 [45] With alle humylitee and abstinence,
 [46] With alle attemperaunce and pacience,
 [47] With mesure eek of beryng and array.
 [48] Discreet she was in answeryng alway;
 [49] Though she were wis as Pallas, dar I seyn,
 [50] Hir facound eek ful wommanly and pleyn,
 [51] No countrefeted termes hadde she
 [52] To seme wys, but after hir degree
 [53] She spak, and alle hire wordes, moore and lesse,
 [54] Sownynge in vertu and in gentillesse.
 [55] Shamefast she was in maydens shamefastnesse,
 [56] Constant in herte, and evere in bisynesse
 [57] To dryve hire out of ydel slogardye.
 [58] Bacus hadde of hir mouth right no maistrie;
 [59] For wyn and youthe dooth Venus encresse,
 [60] As men in fyr wol casten oille or greesse.
 [61] And of hir owene vertu, unconstreyned,
 [62] She hath ful ofte tyme syk hire feyned,
 [63] For that she wolde fleen the compaignye
 [64] Where likly was to treten of folye,
 [65] As is at feestes, revels, and at daunces,
 [66] That been occasions of daliaunces.
 [67] Swich thynges maken children for to be
 [68] To soone rype and boold, as men may se,
 [69] Which is ful perilous and hath been yoore.
 [70] For al to soone may she lerne loore
 [71] Of booldnesse, whan she woxen is a wyf.
 [72] And ye maistresses, in youre olde lyf,
 [73] That lordes doghtres han in governaunce,
 [74] Ne taketh of my wordes no displesaunce.
 [75] Thenketh that ye been set in governynges
 [76] Of lordes doghtres oonly for two thynges:
 [77] Outher for ye han kept youre honestee,
 [78] Or elles ye han falle in freletee,
 [79] And knowen wel ynough the olde daunce,
 [80] And han forsaken fully swich meschaunce
 [81] For everemo; therfore, for Cristes sake,
 [82] To teche hem vertu looke that ye ne slake.
 [83] A theef of venysoun, that hath forlaft
 [84] His likerousnesse and al his olde craft,
 [85] Kan kepe a forest best of any man.
 [86] Now kepeth wel, for if ye wole, ye kan.
 [87] Looke wel that ye unto no vice assente,
 [88] Lest ye be dampned for youre wikke entente;
 [89] For whoso dooth, a traitour is, certeyn.
 [90] And taketh kep of that that I shal seyn:
 [91] Of alle tresons sovereyn pestilence
 [92] Is whan a wight bitrayseth innocence.
 [93] Ye fadres and ye moodres eek also,
 [94] Though ye han children, be it oon or mo,
 [95] Youre is the charge of al hir surveiaunce,
 [96] Whil that they been under youre governaunce.
 [97] Beth war, if by ensample of youre lyvynge,
 [98] Or by youre necligence in chastisynge,
 [99] That they ne perisse; for I dar wel seye
 [100] If that they doon, ye shul it deere abeye.
 [101] Under a shepherde softe and necligent
 [102] The wolf hath many a sheep and lamb torent.
 [103] Suffiseth oon ensample now as heere,
 [104] For I moot turne agayn to my matere.
 [105] This mayde, of which I wol this tale expresse,
 [106] So kepte hirself hir neded no maistresse,
 [107] For in hir lyvyng maydens myghten rede,
 [108] As in a book, every good word or dede
 [109] That longeth to a mayden vertuous,
 [110] She was so prudent and so bountevous.
 [111] For which the fame out sprong on every syde,
 [112] Bothe of hir beautee and hir bountee wyde,
 [113] That thurgh that land they preised hire echone
 [114] That loved vertu, save Envye allone,
 [115] That sory is of oother mennes wele
 [116] And glad is of his sorwe and his unheele.
 [117] (The Doctour maketh this descripcioun.)
 [118] This mayde upon a day wente in the toun
 [119] Toward a temple, with hire mooder deere,
 [120] As is of yonge maydens the manere.
 [121] Now was ther thanne a justice in that toun,
 [122] That governour was of that regioun.
 [123] And so bifel this juge his eyen caste
 [124] Upon this mayde, avysynge hym ful faste,
 [125] As she cam forby ther as this juge stood.
 [126] Anon his herte chaunged and his mood,
 [127] So was he caught with beautee of this mayde,
 [128] And to hymself ful pryvely he sayde,
 [129] "This mayde shal be myn, for any man!"
 [130] Anon the feend into his herte ran,
 [131] And taughte hym sodeynly that he by slyghte
 [132] The mayden to his purpos wynne myghte.
 [133] For certes, by no force ne by no meede,
 [134] Hym thoughte, he was nat able for to speede;
 [135] For she was strong of freendes, and eek she
 [136] Confermed was in swich soverayn bountee
 [137] That wel he wiste he myghte hire nevere wynne
 [138] As for to make hire with hir body synne.
 [139] For which, by greet deliberacioun,
 [140] He sente after a cherl, was in the toun,
 [141] Which that he knew for subtil and for boold.
 [142] This juge unto this cherl his tale hath toold
 [143] In secree wise, and made hym to ensure
 [144] He sholde telle it to no creature,
 [145] And if he dide, he sholde lese his heed.
 [146] Whan that assented was this cursed reed,
 [147] Glad was this juge, and maked him greet cheere,
 [148] And yaf hym yiftes preciouse and deere.
 [149] Whan shapen was al hire conspiracie
 [150] Fro point to point, how that his lecherie
 [151] Parfourned sholde been ful subtilly,
 [152] As ye shul heere it after openly,
 [153] Hoom gooth the cherl, that highte Claudius.
 [154] This false juge, that highte Apius,
 [155] (So was his name, for this is no fable,
 [156] But knowen for historial thyng notable;
 [157] The sentence of it sooth is, out of doute),
 [158] This false juge gooth now faste aboute
 [159] To hasten his delit al that he may.
 [160] And so bifel soone after, on a day,
 [161] This false juge, as telleth us the storie,
 [162] As he was wont, sat in his consistorie,
 [163] And yaf his doomes upon sondry cas.
 [164] This false cherl cam forth a ful greet pas,
 [165] And seyde, "Lord, if that it be youre wille,
 [166] As dooth me right upon this pitous bille,
 [167] In which I pleyne upon Virginius;
 [168] And if that he wol seyn it is nat thus,
 [169] I wol it preeve, and fynde good witnesse,
 [170] That sooth is that my bille wol expresse."
 [171] The juge answerde, "Of this, in his absence,
 [172] I may nat yeve diffynytyf sentence.
 [173] Lat do hym calle, and I wol gladly heere;
 [174] Thou shalt have al right, and no wrong heere."
 [175] Virginius cam to wite the juges wille,
 [176] And right anon was rad this cursed bille;
 [177] The sentence of it was as ye shul heere:
 [178] "To yow, my lord, sire Apius so deere,
 [179] Sheweth youre povre servant Claudius
 [180] How that a knyght, called Virginius,
 [181] Agayns the lawe, agayn al equitee,
 [182] Holdeth, expres agayn the wyl of me,
 [183] My servant, which that is my thral by right,
 [184] Which fro myn hous was stole upon a nyght,
 [185] Whil that she was ful yong; this wol I preeve
 [186] By witnesse, lord, so that it nat yow greeve.
 [187] She nys his doghter nat, what so he seye.
 [188] Wherfore to yow, my lord the juge, I preye,
 [189] Yeld me my thral, if that it be youre wille."
 [190] Lo, this was al the sentence of his bille.
 [191] Virginius gan upon the cherl biholde,
 [192] But hastily, er he his tale tolde,
 [193] And wolde have preeved it as sholde a knyght,
 [194] And eek by witnessyng of many a wight,
 [195] That al was fals that seyde his adversarie,
 [196] This cursed juge wolde no thyng tarie,
 [197] Ne heere a word moore of Virginius,
 [198] But yaf his juggement, and seyde thus:
 [199] "I deeme anon this cherl his servant have;
 [200] Thou shalt no lenger in thyn hous hir save.
 [201] Go bryng hire forth, and put hire in oure warde.
 [202] The cherl shal have his thral, this I awarde."
 [203] And whan this worthy knyght Virginius
 [204] Thurgh sentence of this justice Apius
 [205] Moste by force his deere doghter yiven
 [206] Unto the juge, in lecherie to lyven,
 [207] He gooth hym hoom, and sette him in his halle,
 [208] And leet anon his deere doghter calle,
 [209] And with a face deed as asshen colde
 [210] Upon hir humble face he gan biholde,
 [211] With fadres pitee stikynge thurgh his herte,
 [212] Al wolde he from his purpos nat converte.
 [213] "Doghter," quod he, "Virginia, by thy name,
 [214] Ther been two weyes, outher deeth or shame,
 [215] That thou most suffre; allas, that I was bore!
 [216] For nevere thou deservedest wherfore
 [217] To dyen with a swerd or with a knyf.
 [218] O deere doghter, endere of my lyf,
 [219] Which I have fostred up with swich plesaunce
 [220] That thou were nevere out of my remembraunce!
 [221] O doghter, which that art my laste wo,
 [222] And in my lyf my laste joye also,
 [223] O gemme of chastitee, in pacience
 [224] Take thou thy deeth, for this is my sentence.
 [225] For love, and nat for hate, thou most be deed;
 [226] My pitous hand moot smyten of thyn heed.
 [227] Allas, that evere Apius the say!
 [228] Thus hath he falsly jugged the to-day" --
 [229] And tolde hire al the cas, as ye bifore
 [230] Han herd; nat nedeth for to telle it moore.
 [231] "O mercy, deere fader!" quod this mayde,
 [232] And with that word she bothe hir armes layde
 [233] Aboute his nekke, as she was wont to do.
 [234] The teeris bruste out of hir eyen two,
 [235] And seyde, "Goode fader, shal I dye?
 [236] Is ther no grace, is ther no remedye?"
 [237] "No, certes, deere doghter myn," quod he.
 [238] "Thanne yif me leyser, fader myn," quod she,
 [239] "My deeth for to compleyne a litel space;
 [240] For, pardee, Jepte yaf his doghter grace
 [241] For to compleyne, er he hir slow, allas!
 [242] And, God it woot, no thyng was hir trespas,
 [243] But for she ran hir fader first to see,
 [244] To welcome hym with greet solempnitee."
 [245] And with that word she fil aswowne anon,
 [246] And after, whan hir swownyng is agon,
 [247] She riseth up, and to hir fader sayde,
 [248] "Blissed be God that I shal dye a mayde!
 [249] Yif me my deeth, er that I have a shame;
 [250] Dooth with youre child youre wyl, a Goddes name!"
 [251] And with that word she preyed hym ful ofte
 [252] That with his swerd he wolde smyte softe;
 [253] And with that word aswowne doun she fil.
 [254] Hir fader, with ful sorweful herte and wil,
 [255] Hir heed of smoot, and by the top it hente,
 [256] And to the juge he gan it to presente,
 [257] As he sat yet in doom in consistorie.
 [258] And whan the juge it saugh, as seith the storie,
 [259] He bad to take hym and anhange hym faste;
 [260] But right anon a thousand peple in thraste,
 [261] To save the knyght, for routhe and for pitee,
 [262] For knowen was the false iniquitee.
 [263] The peple anon had suspect in this thyng,
 [264] By manere of the cherles chalangyng,
 [265] That it was by the assent of Apius;
 [266] They wisten wel that he was lecherus.
 [267] For which unto this Apius they gon
 [268] And caste hym in a prisoun right anon,
 [269] Ther as he slow hymself; and Claudius,
 [270] That servant was unto this Apius,
 [271] Was demed for to hange upon a tree,
 [272] But that Virginius, of his pitee,
 [273] So preyde for hym that he was exiled;
 [274] And elles, certes, he had been bigyled.
 [275] The remenant were anhanged, moore and lesse,
 [276] That were consentant of this cursednesse.
 [277] Heere may men seen how synne hath his merite.
 [278] Beth war, for no man woot whom God wol smyte
 [279] In no degree, ne in which manere wyse;
 [280] The worm of conscience may agryse
 [281] Of wikked lyf, though it so pryvee be
 [282] That no man woot therof but God and he.
 [283] For be he lewed man, or ellis lered,
 [284] He noot how soone that he shal been afered.
 [285] Therfore I rede yow this conseil take:
 [286] Forsaketh synne, er synne yow forsake.

      
The Canterbury Tales and Other Works of Chaucer (Middle English), by Geoffery Chaucer, [14th cent.], at sacred-texts.com

 

The Canterbury Tales

 

The Pardoner's Introduction and Prologue

 [287] Oure Hooste gan to swere as he were wood;
 [288] "Harrow!" quod he, "by nayles and by blood!
 [289] This was a fals cherl and a fals justise.
 [290] As shameful deeth as herte may devyse
 [291] Come to thise juges and hire advocatz!
 [292] Algate this sely mayde is slayn, allas!
 [293] Allas, to deere boughte she beautee!
 [294] Wherfore I seye al day that men may see
 [295] That yiftes of Fortune and of Nature
 [296] Been cause of deeth to many a creature.
 [297] Hire beautee was hire deth, I dar wel sayn.
 [298] Allas, so pitously as she was slayn!
 [299] Of bothe yiftes that I speke of now
 [300] Men han ful ofte moore for harm than prow.
 [301] But trewely, myn owene maister deere,
 [302] This is a pitous tale for to heere.
 [303] But nathelees, passe over; is no fors.
 [304] I pray to God so save thy gentil cors,
 [305] And eek thyne urynals and thy jurdones,
 [306] Thyn ypocras, and eek thy galiones,
 [307] And every boyste ful of thy letuarie;
 [308] God blesse hem, and oure lady Seinte Marie!
 [309] So moot I theen, thou art a propre man,
 [310] And lyk a prelat, by Seint Ronyan!
 [311] Seyde I nat wel? I kan nat speke in terme;
 [312] But wel I woot thou doost myn herte to erme,
 [313] That I almoost have caught a cardynacle.
 [314] By corpus bones! but I have triacle,
 [315] Or elles a draughte of moyste and corny ale,
 [316] Or but I heere anon a myrie tale,
 [317] Myn herte is lost for pitee of this mayde.
 [318] Thou beel amy, thou Pardoner," he sayde,
 [319] "Telle us som myrthe or japes right anon."
 [320] "It shal be doon," quod he, "by Seint Ronyon!
 [321] But first," quod he, "heere at this alestake
 [322] I wol bothe drynke and eten of a cake."
 [323] But right anon thise gentils gonne to crye,
 [324] "Nay, lat hym telle us of no ribaudye!
 [325] Telle us som moral thyng, that we may leere
 [326] Som wit, and thanne wol we gladly heere."
 [327] "I graunte, ywis," quod he, "but I moot thynke
 [328] Upon som honest thyng while that I drynke."
 [329] "Lordynges," quod he, "in chirches whan I preche,
 [330] I peyne me to han an hauteyn speche,
 [331] And rynge it out as round as gooth a belle,
 [332] For I kan al by rote that I telle.
 [333] My theme is alwey oon, and evere was --
 [334] Radix malorum est Cupiditas.
 [335] "First I pronounce whennes that I come,
 [336] And thanne my bulles shewe I, alle and some.
 [337] Oure lige lordes seel on my patente,
 [338] That shewe I first, my body to warente,
 [339] That no man be so boold, ne preest ne clerk,
 [340] Me to destourbe of Cristes hooly werk.
 [341] And after that thanne telle I forth my tales;
 [342] Bulles of popes and of cardynales,
 [343] Of patriarkes and bishopes I shewe,
 [344] And in Latyn I speke a wordes fewe,
 [345] To saffron with my predicacioun,
 [346] And for to stire hem to devocioun.
 [347] Thanne shewe I forth my longe cristal stones,
 [348] Ycrammed ful of cloutes and of bones --
 [349] Relikes been they, as wenen they echoon.
 [350] Thanne have I in latoun a sholder-boon
 [351] Which that was of an hooly Jewes sheep.
 [352] `Goode men,' I seye, `taak of my wordes keep;
 [353] If that this boon be wasshe in any welle,
 [354] If cow, or calf, or sheep, or oxe swelle
 [355] That any worm hath ete, or worm ystonge,
 [356] Taak water of that welle and wassh his tonge,
 [357] And it is hool anon; and forthermoore,
 [358] Of pokkes and of scabbe, and every soore
 [359] Shal every sheep be hool that of this welle
 [360] Drynketh a draughte. Taak kep eek what I telle:
 [361] If that the good-man that the beestes oweth
 [362] Wol every wyke, er that the cok hym croweth,
 [363] Fastynge, drynken of this welle a draughte,
 [364] As thilke hooly Jew oure eldres taughte,
 [365] His beestes and his stoor shal multiplie.
 [366] `And, sires, also it heeleth jalousie;
 [367] For though a man be falle in jalous rage,
 [368] Lat maken with this water his potage,
 [369] And nevere shal he moore his wyf mystriste,
 [370] Though he the soothe of hir defaute wiste,
 [371] Al had she taken prestes two or thre.
 [372] `Heere is a miteyn eek, that ye may se.
 [373] He that his hand wol putte in this mitayn,
 [374] He shal have multipliyng of his grayn,
 [375] Whan he hath sowen, be it whete or otes,
 [376] So that he offre pens, or elles grotes.
 [377] `Goode men and wommen, o thyng warne I yow:
 [378] If any wight be in this chirche now
 [379] That hath doon synne horrible, that he
 [380] Dar nat, for shame, of it yshryven be,
 [381] Or any womman, be she yong or old,
 [382] That hath ymaked hir housbonde cokewold,
 [383] Swich folk shal have no power ne no grace
 [384] To offren to my relikes in this place.
 [385] And whoso fyndeth hym out of swich blame,
 [386] He wol come up and offre a Goddes name,
 [387] And I assoille him by the auctoritee
 [388] Which that by bulle ygraunted was to me.'
 [389] "By this gaude have I wonne, yeer by yeer,
 [390] An hundred mark sith I was pardoner.
 [391] I stonde lyk a clerk in my pulpet,
 [392] And whan the lewed peple is doun yset,
 [393] I preche so as ye han herd bifoore
 [394] And telle an hundred false japes moore.
 [395] Thanne peyne I me to strecche forth the nekke,
 [396] And est and west upon the peple I bekke,
 [397] As dooth a dowve sittynge on a berne.
 [398] Myne handes and my tonge goon so yerne
 [399] That it is joye to se my bisynesse.
 [400] Of avarice and of swich cursednesse
 [401] Is al my prechyng, for to make hem free
 [402] To yeven hir pens, and namely unto me.
 [403] For myn entente is nat but for to wynne,
 [404] And nothyng for correccioun of synne.
 [405] I rekke nevere, whan that they been beryed,
 [406] Though that hir soules goon a-blakeberyed!
 [407] For certes, many a predicacioun
 [408] Comth ofte tyme of yvel entencioun;
 [409] Som for plesance of folk and flaterye,
 [410] To been avaunced by ypocrisye,
 [411] And som for veyne glorie, and som for hate.
 [412] For whan I dar noon oother weyes debate,
 [413] Thanne wol I stynge hym with my tonge smerte
 [414] In prechyng, so that he shal nat asterte
 [415] To been defamed falsly, if that he
 [416] Hath trespased to my bretheren or to me.
 [417] For though I telle noght his propre name,
 [418] Men shal wel knowe that it is the same,
 [419] By signes, and by othere circumstances.
 [420] Thus quyte I folk that doon us displesances;
 [421] Thus spitte I out my venym under hewe
 [422] Of hoolynesse, to semen hooly and trewe.
 [423] "But shortly myn entente I wol devyse:
 [424] I preche of no thyng but for coveityse.
 [425] Therfore my theme is yet, and evere was,
 [426] Radix malorum est Cupiditas.
 [427] Thus kan I preche agayn that same vice
 [428] Which that I use, and that is avarice.
 [429] But though myself be gilty in that synne,
 [430] Yet kan I maken oother folk to twynne
 [431] From avarice and soore to repente.
 [432] But that is nat my principal entente;
 [433] I preche nothyng but for coveitise.
 [434] Of this mateere it oghte ynogh suffise.
 [435] "Thanne telle I hem ensamples many oon
 [436] Of olde stories longe tyme agoon.
 [437] For lewed peple loven tales olde;
 [438] Swiche thynges kan they wel reporte and holde.
 [439] What, trowe ye, that whiles I may preche,
 [440] And wynne gold and silver for I teche,
 [441] That I wol lyve in poverte wilfully?
 [442] Nay, nay, I thoghte it nevere, trewely!
 [443] For I wol preche and begge in sondry landes;
 [444] I wol nat do no labour with myne handes,
 [445] Ne make baskettes and lyve therby,
 [446] By cause I wol nat beggen ydelly.
 [447] I wol noon of the apostles countrefete;
 [448] I wol have moneie, wolle, chese, and whete,
 [449] Al were it yeven of the povereste page,
 [450] Or of the povereste wydwe in a village,
 [451] Al sholde hir children sterve for famyne.
 [452] Nay, I wol drynke licour of the vyne
 [453] And have a joly wenche in every toun.
 [454] But herkneth, lordynges, in conclusioun:
 [455] Youre likyng is that I shal telle a tale.
 [456] Now have I dronke a draughte of corny ale,
 [457] By God, I hope I shal yow telle a thyng
 [458] That shal by reson been at youre likyng.
 [459] For though myself be a ful vicious man,
 [460] A moral tale yet I yow telle kan,
 [461] Which I am wont to preche for to wynne.
 [462] Now hoold youre pees! My tale I wol bigynne."

      
The Canterbury Tales and Other Works of Chaucer (Middle English), by Geoffery Chaucer, [14th cent.], at sacred-texts.com

 

The Canterbury Tales

 

The Pardoner's Tale

 [463] In Flaundres whilom was a compaignye
 [464] Of yonge folk that haunteden folye,
 [465] As riot, hasard, stywes, and tavernes,
 [466] Where as with harpes, lutes, and gyternes,
 [467] They daunce and pleyen at dees bothe day and nyght,
 [468] And eten also and drynken over hir myght,
 [469] Thurgh which they doon the devel sacrifise
 [470] Withinne that develes temple in cursed wise
 [471] By superfluytee abhomynable.
 [472] Hir othes been so grete and so dampnable
 [473] That it is grisly for to heere hem swere.
 [474] Oure blissed Lordes body they totere --
 [475] Hem thoughte that Jewes rente hym noght ynough --
 [476] And ech of hem at otheres synne lough.
 [477] And right anon thanne comen tombesteres
 [478] Fetys and smale, and yonge frutesteres,
 [479] Syngeres with harpes, baudes, wafereres,
 [480] Whiche been the verray develes officeres
 [481] To kyndle and blowe the fyr of lecherye,
 [482] That is annexed unto glotonye.
 [483] The hooly writ take I to my witnesse
 [484] That luxurie is in wyn and dronkenesse.
 [485] Lo, how that dronken Looth, unkyndely,
 [486] Lay by his doghtres two, unwityngly;
 [487] So dronke he was, he nyste what he wroghte.
 [488] Herodes, whoso wel the stories soghte,
 [489] Whan he of wyn was repleet at his feeste,
 [490] Right at his owene table he yaf his heeste
 [491] To sleen the Baptist John, ful giltelees.
 [492] Senec seith a good word doutelees;
 [493] He seith he kan no difference fynde
 [494] Bitwix a man that is out of his mynde
 [495] And a man which that is dronkelewe,
 [496] But that woodnesse, yfallen in a shrewe,
 [497] Persevereth lenger than doth dronkenesse.
 [498] O glotonye, ful of cursednesse!
 [499] O cause first of oure confusioun!
 [500] O original of oure dampnacioun,
 [501] Til Crist hadde boght us with his blood agayn!
 [502] Lo, how deere, shortly for to sayn,
 [503] Aboght was thilke cursed vileynye!
 [504] Corrupt was al this world for glotonye.
 [505] Adam oure fader, and his wyf also,
 [506] Fro Paradys to labour and to wo
 [507] Were dryven for that vice, it is no drede.
 [508] For whil that Adam fasted, as I rede,
 [509] He was in Paradys; and whan that he
 [510] Eet of the fruyt deffended on the tree,
 [511] Anon he was out cast to wo and peyne.
 [512] O glotonye, on thee wel oghte us pleyne!
 [513] O, wiste a man how manye maladyes
 [514] Folwen of excesse and of glotonyes,
 [515] He wolde been the moore mesurable
 [516] Of his diete, sittynge at his table.
 [517] Allas, the shorte throte, the tendre mouth,
 [518] Maketh that est and west and north and south,
 [519] In erthe, in eir, in water, men to swynke
 [520] To gete a glotoun deyntee mete and drynke!
 [521] Of this matiere, O Paul, wel kanstow trete:
 [522] "Mete unto wombe, and wombe eek unto mete,
 [523] Shal God destroyen bothe," as Paulus seith.
 [524] Allas, a foul thyng is it, by my feith,
 [525] To seye this word, and fouler is the dede,
 [526] Whan man so drynketh of the white and rede
 [527] That of his throte he maketh his pryvee
 [528] Thurgh thilke cursed superfluitee.
 [529] The apostel wepyng seith ful pitously,
 [530] "Ther walken manye of whiche yow toold have I --
 [531] I seye it now wepyng, with pitous voys --
 [532] They been enemys of Cristes croys,
 [533] Of whiche the ende is deeth; wombe is hir god!"
 [534] O wombe! O bely! O stynkyng cod,
 [535] Fulfilled of dong and of corrupcioun!
 [536] At either ende of thee foul is the soun.
 [537] How greet labour and cost is thee to fynde!
 [538] Thise cookes, how they stampe, and streyne, and grynde,
 [539] And turnen substaunce into accident
 [540] To fulfille al thy likerous talent!
 [541] Out of the harde bones knokke they
 [542] The mary, for they caste noght awey
 [543] That may go thurgh the golet softe and swoote.
 [544] Of spicerie of leef, and bark, and roote
 [545] Shal been his sauce ymaked by delit,
 [546] To make hym yet a newer appetit.
 [547] But, certes, he that haunteth swiche delices
 [548] Is deed, whil that he lyveth in tho vices.
 [549] A lecherous thyng is wyn, and dronkenesse
 [550] Is ful of stryvyng and of wrecchednesse.
 [551] O dronke man, disfigured is thy face,
 [552] Sour is thy breeth, foul artow to embrace,
 [553] And thurgh thy dronke nose semeth the soun
 [554] As though thou seydest ay "Sampsoun, Sampsoun!"
 [555] And yet, God woot, Sampsoun drank nevere no wyn.
 [556] Thou fallest as it were a styked swyn;
 [557] Thy tonge is lost, and al thyn honeste cure,
 [558] For dronkenesse is verray sepulture
 [559] Of mannes wit and his discrecioun.
 [560] In whom that drynke hath dominacioun
 [561] He kan no conseil kepe; it is no drede.
 [562] Now kepe yow fro the white and fro the rede,
 [563] And namely fro the white wyn of Lepe
 [564] That is to selle in Fysshstrete or in Chepe.
 [565] This wyn of Spaigne crepeth subtilly
 [566] In othere wynes, growynge faste by,
 [567] Of which ther ryseth swich fumositee
 [568] That whan a man hath dronken draughtes thre,
 [569] And weneth that he be at hoom in Chepe,
 [570] He is in Spaigne, right at the toune of Lepe --
 [571] Nat at the Rochele, ne at Burdeux toun --
 [572] And thanne wol he seye "Sampsoun, Sampsoun!"
 [573] But herkneth, lordynges, o word, I yow preye,
 [574] That alle the sovereyn actes, dar I seye,
 [575] Of victories in the Olde Testament,
 [576] Thurgh verray God, that is omnipotent,
 [577] Were doon in abstinence and in preyere.
 [578] Looketh the Bible, and ther ye may it leere.
 [579] Looke, Attilla, the grete conquerour,
 [580] Deyde in his sleep, with shame and dishonour,
 [581] Bledynge ay at his nose in dronkenesse.
 [582] A capitayn sholde lyve in sobrenesse.
 [583] And over al this, avyseth yow right wel
 [584] What was comaunded unto Lamuel --
 [585] Nat Samuel, but Lamuel, seye I;
 [586] Redeth the Bible, and fynde it expresly
 [587] Of wyn-yevyng to hem that han justise.
 [588] Namoore of this, for it may wel suffise.
 [589] And now that I have spoken of glotonye,
 [590] Now wol I yow deffenden hasardrye.
 [591] Hasard is verray mooder of lesynges,
 [592] And of deceite, and cursed forswerynges,
 [593] Blaspheme of Crist, manslaughtre, and wast also
 [594] Of catel and of tyme; and forthermo,
 [595] It is repreeve and contrarie of honour
 [596] For to ben holde a commune hasardour.
 [597] And ever the hyer he is of estaat,
 [598] The moore is he yholden desolaat.
 [599] If that a prynce useth hasardrye,
 [600] In alle governaunce and policye
 [601] He is, as by commune opinioun,
 [602] Yholde the lasse in reputacioun.
 [603] Stilboun, that was a wys embassadour,
 [604] Was sent to Corynthe in ful greet honour
 [605] Fro Lacidomye to make hire alliaunce.
 [606] And whan he cam, hym happede, par chaunce,
 [607] That alle the gretteste that were of that lond,
 [608] Pleyynge atte hasard he hem fond.
 [609] For which, as soone as it myghte be,
 [610] He stal hym hoom agayn to his contree,
 [611] And seyde, "Ther wol I nat lese my name,
 [612] Ne I wol nat take on me so greet defame,
 [613] Yow for to allie unto none hasardours.
 [614] Sendeth othere wise embassadours;
 [615] For, by my trouthe, me were levere dye
 [616] Than I yow sholde to hasardours allye.
 [617] For ye, that been so glorious in honours,
 [618] Shul nat allyen yow with hasardours
 [619] As by my wyl, ne as by my tretee."
 [620] This wise philosophre, thus seyde hee.
 [621] Looke eek that to the kyng Demetrius
 [622] The kyng of Parthes, as the book seith us,
 [623] Sente him a paire of dees of gold in scorn,
 [624] For he hadde used hasard ther-biforn;
 [625] For which he heeld his glorie or his renoun
 [626] At no value or reputacioun.
 [627] Lordes may fynden oother maner pley
 [628] Honest ynough to dryve the day awey.
 [629] Now wol I speke of othes false and grete
 [630] A word or two, as olde bookes trete.
 [631] Gret sweryng is a thyng abhominable,
 [632] And fals sweryng is yet moore reprevable.
 [633] The heighe God forbad sweryng at al,
 [634] Witnesse on Mathew; but in special
 [635] Of sweryng seith the hooly Jeremye,
 [636] "Thou shalt swere sooth thyne othes, and nat lye,
 [637] And swere in doom and eek in rightwisnesse";
 [638] But ydel sweryng is a cursednesse.
 [639] Bihoold and se that in the firste table
 [640] Of heighe Goddes heestes honurable,
 [641] Hou that the seconde heeste of hym is this:
 [642] "Take nat my name in ydel or amys."
 [643] Lo, rather he forbedeth swich sweryng
 [644] Than homycide or many a cursed thyng;
 [645] I seye that, as by ordre, thus it stondeth;
 [646] This knoweth, that his heestes understondeth,
 [647] How that the seconde heeste of God is that.
 [648] And forther over, I wol thee telle al plat
 [649] That vengeance shal nat parten from his hous
 [650] That of his othes is to outrageous.
 [651] "By Goddes precious herte," and "By his nayles,"
 [652] And "By the blood of Crist that is in Hayles,
 [653] Sevene is my chaunce, and thyn is cynk and treye!"
 [654] "By Goddes armes, if thou falsly pleye,
 [655] This daggere shal thurghout thyn herte go!" --
 [656] This fruyt cometh of the bicched bones two,
 [657] Forsweryng, ire, falsnesse, homycide.
 [658] Now, for the love of Crist, that for us dyde,
 [659] Lete youre othes, bothe grete and smale.
 [660] But, sires, now wol I telle forth my tale.
 [661] Thise riotoures thre of whiche I telle,
 [662] Longe erst er prime rong of any belle,
 [663] Were set hem in a taverne to drynke,
 [664] And as they sat, they herde a belle clynke
 [665] Biforn a cors, was caried to his grave.
 [666] That oon of hem gan callen to his knave:
 [667] "Go bet," quod he, "and axe redily
 [668] What cors is this that passeth heer forby;
 [669] And looke that thou reporte his name weel."
 [670] "Sire," quod this boy, "it nedeth never-a-deel;
 [671] It was me toold er ye cam heer two houres.
 [672] He was, pardee, an old felawe of youres,
 [673] And sodeynly he was yslayn to-nyght,
 [674] Fordronke, as he sat on his bench upright.
 [675] Ther cam a privee theef men clepeth Deeth,
 [676] That in this contree al the peple sleeth,
 [677] And with his spere he smoot his herte atwo,
 [678] And wente his wey withouten wordes mo.
 [679] He hath a thousand slayn this pestilence.
 [680] And, maister, er ye come in his presence,
 [681] Me thynketh that it were necessarie
 [682] For to be war of swich an adversarie.
 [683] Beth redy for to meete hym everemoore;
 [684] Thus taughte me my dame; I sey namoore."
 [685] "By Seinte Marie!" seyde this taverner,
 [686] "The child seith sooth, for he hath slayn this yeer,
 [687] Henne over a mile, withinne a greet village,
 [688] Bothe man and womman, child, and hyne, and page;
 [689] I trowe his habitacioun be there.
 [690] To been avysed greet wysdom it were,
 [691] Er that he dide a man a dishonour."
 [692] "Ye, Goddes armes!" quod this riotour,
 [693] "Is it swich peril with hym for to meete?
 [694] I shal hym seke by wey and eek by strete,
 [695] I make avow to Goddes digne bones!
 [696] Herkneth, felawes, we thre been al ones;
 [697] Lat ech of us holde up his hand til oother,
 [698] And ech of us bicomen otheres brother,
 [699] And we wol sleen this false traytour Deeth.
 [700] He shal be slayn, he that so manye sleeth,
 [701] By Goddes dignitee, er it be nyght!"
 [702] Togidres han thise thre hir trouthes plight
 [703] To lyve and dyen ech of hem for oother,
 [704] As though he were his owene ybore brother.
 [705] And up they stirte, al dronken in this rage,
 [706] And forth they goon towardes that village
 [707] Of which the taverner hadde spoke biforn.
 [708] And many a grisly ooth thanne han they sworn,
 [709] And Cristes blessed body they torente --
 [710] Deeth shal be deed, if that they may hym hente!
 [711] Whan they han goon nat fully half a mile,
 [712] Right as they wolde han troden over a stile,
 [713] An oold man and a povre with hem mette.
 [714] This olde man ful mekely hem grette,
 [715] And seyde thus, "Now, lordes, God yow see!"
 [716] The proudeste of thise riotoures three
 [717] Answerde agayn, "What, carl, with sory grace!
 [718] Why artow al forwrapped save thy face?
 [719] Why lyvestow so longe in so greet age?"
 [720] This olde man gan looke in his visage,
 [721] And seyde thus: "For I ne kan nat fynde
 [722] A man, though that I walked into Ynde,
 [723] Neither in citee ne in no village,
 [724] That wolde chaunge his youthe for myn age;
 [725] And therfore moot I han myn age stille,
 [726] As longe tyme as it is Goddes wille.
 [727] Ne Deeth, allas, ne wol nat han my lyf.
 [728] Thus walke I, lyk a restelees kaityf,
 [729] And on the ground, which is my moodres gate,
 [730] I knokke with my staf, bothe erly and late,
 [731] And seye `Leeve mooder, leet me in!
 [732] Lo how I vanysshe, flessh, and blood, and skyn!
 [733] Allas, whan shul my bones been at reste?
 [734] Mooder, with yow wolde I chaunge my cheste
 [735] That in my chambre longe tyme hath be,
 [736] Ye, for an heyre clowt to wrappe me!'
 [737] But yet to me she wol nat do that grace,
 [738] For which ful pale and welked is my face.
 [739] "But, sires, to yow it is no curteisye
 [740] To speken to an old man vileynye,
 [741] But he trespasse in word or elles in dede.
 [742] In Hooly Writ ye may yourself wel rede:
 [743] `Agayns an oold man, hoor upon his heed,
 [744] Ye sholde arise;' wherfore I yeve yow reed,
 [745] Ne dooth unto an oold man noon harm now,
 [746] Namoore than that ye wolde men did to yow
 [747] In age, if that ye so longe abyde.
 [748] And God be with yow, where ye go or ryde!
 [749] I moot go thider as I have to go."
 [750] "Nay, olde cherl, by God, thou shalt nat so,"
 [751] Seyde this oother hasardour anon;
 [752] "Thou partest nat so lightly, by Seint John!
 [753] Thou spak right now of thilke traytour Deeth.
 [754] That in this contree alle oure freendes sleeth.
 [755] Have heer my trouthe, as thou art his espye,
 [756] Telle where he is or thou shalt it abye,
 [757] By God and by the hooly sacrement!
 [758] For soothly thou art oon of his assent
 [759] To sleen us yonge folk, thou false theef!"
 [760] "Now, sires," quod he, "if that yow be so leef
 [761] To fynde Deeth, turne up this croked wey,
 [762] For in that grove I lafte hym, by my fey,
 [763] Under a tree, and there he wole abyde;
 [764] Noght for youre boost he wole him no thyng hyde.
 [765] Se ye that ook? Right there ye shal hym fynde.
 [766] God save yow, that boghte agayn mankynde,
 [767] And yow amende!" Thus seyde this olde man;
 [768] And everich of thise riotoures ran
 [769] Til he cam to that tree, and ther they founde
 [770] Of floryns fyne of gold ycoyned rounde
 [771] Wel ny an eighte busshels, as hem thoughte.
 [772] No lenger thanne after Deeth they soughte,
 [773] But ech of hem so glad was of that sighte,
 [774] For that the floryns been so faire and brighte,
 [775] That doun they sette hem by this precious hoord.
 [776] The worste of hem, he spak the firste word.
 [777] "Bretheren," quod he, "taak kep what that I seye;
 [778] My wit is greet, though that I bourde and pleye.
 [779] This tresor hath Fortune unto us yiven
 [780] In myrthe and joliftee oure lyf to lyven,
 [781] And lightly as it comth, so wol we spende.
 [782] Ey, Goddes precious dignitee! Who wende
 [783] To-day that we sholde han so fair a grace?
 [784] But myghte this gold be caried fro this place
 [785] Hoom to myn hous, or elles unto youres --
 [786] For wel ye woot that al this gold is oures --
 [787] Thanne were we in heigh felicitee.
 [788] But trewely, by daye it may nat bee.
 [789] Men wolde seyn that we were theves stronge,
 [790] And for oure owene tresor doon us honge.
 [791] This tresor moste ycaried be by nyghte
 [792] As wisely and as slyly as it myghte.
 [793] Wherfore I rede that cut among us alle
 [794] Be drawe, and lat se wher the cut wol falle;
 [795] And he that hath the cut with herte blithe
 [796] Shal renne to the town, and that ful swithe,
 [797] And brynge us breed and wyn ful prively.
 [798] And two of us shul kepen subtilly
 [799] This tresor wel; and if he wol nat tarie,
 [800] Whan it is nyght, we wol this tresor carie,
 [801] By oon assent, where as us thynketh best."
 [802] That oon of hem the cut broghte in his fest,
 [803] And bad hem drawe and looke where it wol falle;
 [804] And it fil on the yongeste of hem alle,
 [805] And forth toward the toun he wente anon.
 [806] And also soone as that he was gon,
 [807] That oon of hem spak thus unto that oother:
 [808] "Thow knowest wel thou art my sworen brother;
 [809] Thy profit wol I telle thee anon.
 [810] Thou woost wel that oure felawe is agon.
 [811] And heere is gold, and that ful greet plentee,
 [812] That shal departed been among us thre.
 [813] But nathelees, if I kan shape it so
 [814] That it departed were among us two,
 [815] Hadde I nat doon a freendes torn to thee?"
 [816] That oother answerde, "I noot hou that may be.
 [817] He woot that the gold is with us tweye;
 [818] What shal we doon? What shal we to hym seye?"
 [819] "Shal it be conseil?" seyde the firste shrewe,
 [820] "And I shal tellen in a wordes fewe
 [821] What we shal doon, and brynge it wel aboute."
 [822] "I graunte," quod that oother, "out of doute,
 [823] That, by my trouthe, I wol thee nat biwreye."
 [824] "Now," quod the firste, "thou woost wel we be tweye,
 [825] And two of us shul strenger be than oon.
 [826] Looke whan that he is set, that right anoon
 [827] Arys as though thou woldest with hym pleye,
 [828] And I shal ryve hym thurgh the sydes tweye
 [829] Whil that thou strogelest with hym as in game,
 [830] And with thy daggere looke thou do the same;
 [831] And thanne shal al this gold departed be,
 [832] My deere freend, bitwixen me and thee.
 [833] Thanne may we bothe oure lustes all fulfille,
 [834] And pleye at dees right at oure owene wille."
 [835] And thus acorded been thise shrewes tweye
 [836] To sleen the thridde, as ye han herd me seye.
 [837] This yongeste, which that wente to the toun,
 [838] Ful ofte in herte he rolleth up and doun
 [839] The beautee of thise floryns newe and brighte.
 [840] "O Lord!" quod he, "if so were that I myghte
 [841] Have al this tresor to myself allone,
 [842] Ther is no man that lyveth under the trone
 [843] Of God that sholde lyve so murye as I!"
 [844] And atte laste the feend, oure enemy,
 [845] Putte in his thought that he sholde poyson beye,
 [846] With which he myghte sleen his felawes tweye;
 [847] For-why the feend foond hym in swich lyvynge
 [848] That he hadde leve him to sorwe brynge.
 [849] For this was outrely his fulle entente,
 [850] To sleen hem bothe and nevere to repente.
 [851] And forth he gooth, no lenger wolde he tarie,
 [852] Into the toun, unto a pothecarie,
 [853] And preyde hym that he hym wolde selle
 [854] Som poyson, that he myghte his rattes quelle;
 [855] And eek ther was a polcat in his hawe,
 [856] That, as he seyde, his capouns hadde yslawe,
 [857] And fayn he wolde wreke hym, if he myghte,
 [858] On vermyn that destroyed hym by nyghte.
 [859] The pothecarie answerde, "And thou shalt have
 [860] A thyng that, also God my soule save,
 [861] In al this world ther is no creature
 [862] That eten or dronken hath of this confiture
 [863] Noght but the montance of a corn of whete,
 [864] That he ne shal his lif anon forlete;
 [865] Ye, sterve he shal, and that in lasse while
 [866] Than thou wolt goon a paas nat but a mile,
 [867] This poysoun is so strong and violent."
 [868] This cursed man hath in his hond yhent
 [869] This poysoun in a box, and sith he ran
 [870] Into the nexte strete unto a man,
 [871] And borwed [of] hym large botelles thre,
 [872] And in the two his poyson poured he;
 [873] The thridde he kepte clene for his drynke.
 [874] For al the nyght he shoop hym for to swynke
 [875] In cariynge of the gold out of that place.
 [876] And whan this riotour, with sory grace,
 [877] Hadde filled with wyn his grete botels thre,
 [878] To his felawes agayn repaireth he.
 [879] What nedeth it to sermone of it moore?
 [880] For right as they hadde cast his deeth bifoore,
 [881] Right so they han hym slayn, and that anon.
 [882] And whan that this was doon, thus spak that oon:
 [883] "Now lat us sitte and drynke, and make us merie,
 [884] And afterward we wol his body berie."
 [885] And with that word it happed hym, par cas,
 [886] To take the botel ther the poyson was,
 [887] And drank, and yaf his felawe drynke also,
 [888] For which anon they storven bothe two.
 [889] But certes, I suppose that Avycen
 [890] Wroot nevere in no canon, ne in no fen,
 [891] Mo wonder signes of empoisonyng
 [892] Than hadde thise wrecches two, er hir endyng.
 [893] Thus ended been thise homycides two,
 [894] And eek the false empoysonere also.
 [895] O cursed synne of alle cursednesse!
 [896] O traytours homycide, O wikkednesse!
 [897] O glotonye, luxurie, and hasardrye!
 [898] Thou blasphemour of Crist with vileynye
 [899] And othes grete, of usage and of pride!
 [900] Allas, mankynde, how may it bitide
 [901] That to thy creatour, which that the wroghte
 [902] And with his precious herte-blood thee boghte,
 [903] Thou art so fals and so unkynde, allas?
 [904] Now, goode men, God foryeve yow youre trespas,
 [905] And ware yow fro the synne of avarice!
 [906] Myn hooly pardoun may yow alle warice,
 [907] So that ye offre nobles or sterlynges,
 [908] Or elles silver broches, spoones, rynges.
 [909] Boweth youre heed under this hooly bulle!
 [910] Cometh up, ye wyves, offreth of youre wolle!
 [911] Youre names I entre heer in my rolle anon;
 [912] Into the blisse of hevene shul ye gon.
 [913] I yow assoille, by myn heigh power,
 [914] Yow that wol offre, as clene and eek as cleer
 [915] As ye were born. -- And lo, sires, thus I preche.
 [916] And Jhesu Crist, that is oure soules leche,
 [917] So graunte yow his pardoun to receyve,
 [918] For that is best; I wol yow nat deceyve.
 [919] But, sires, o word forgat I in my tale:
 [920] I have relikes and pardoun in my male,
 [921] As faire as any man in Engelond,
 [922] Whiche were me yeven by the popes hond.
 [923] If any of yow wole, of devocion,
 [924] Offren and han myn absolucion,
 [925] Com forth anon, and kneleth heere adoun,
 [926] And mekely receyveth my pardoun;
 [927] Or elles taketh pardoun as ye wende,
 [928] Al newe and fressh at every miles ende,
 [929] So that ye offren, alwey newe and newe,
 [930] Nobles or pens, whiche that be goode and trewe.
 [931] It is an honour to everich that is heer
 [932] That ye mowe have a suffisant pardoneer
 [933] T' assoille yow in contree as ye ryde,
 [934] For aventures whiche that may bityde.
 [935] Paraventure ther may fallen oon or two
 [936] Doun of his hors and breke his nekke atwo.
 [937] Looke which a seuretee is it to yow alle
 [938] That I am in youre felaweshipe yfalle,
 [939] That may assoille yow, bothe moore and lasse,
 [940] Whan that the soule shal fro the body passe.
 [941] I rede that oure Hoost heere shal bigynne,
 [942] For he is moost envoluped in synne.
 [943] Com forth, sire Hoost, and offre first anon,
 [944] And thou shalt kisse the relikes everychon,
 [945] Ye, for a grote! Unbokele anon thy purs."
 [946] "Nay, nay!" quod he, "thanne have I Cristes curs!
 [947] Lat be," quod he, "it shal nat be, so theech!
 [948] Thou woldest make me kisse thyn olde breech,
 [949] And swere it were a relyk of a seint,
 [950] Though it were with thy fundement depeint!
 [951] But, by the croys which that Seint Eleyne fond,
 [952] I wolde I hadde thy coillons in myn hond
 [953] In stide of relikes or of seintuarie.
 [954] Lat kutte hem of, I wol thee helpe hem carie;
 [955] They shul be shryned in an hogges toord!"
 [956] This Pardoner answerde nat a word;
 [957] So wrooth he was, no word ne wolde he seye.
 [958] "Now," quod oure Hoost, "I wol no lenger pleye
 [959] With thee, ne with noon oother angry man."
 [960] But right anon the worthy Knyght bigan,
 [961] Whan that he saugh that al the peple lough,
 [962] "Namoore of this, for it is right ynough!
 [963] Sire Pardoner, be glad and myrie of cheere;
 [964] And ye, sire Hoost, that been to me so deere,
 [965] I prey yow that ye kisse the Pardoner.
 [966] And Pardoner, I prey thee, drawe thee neer,
 [967] And, as we diden, lat us laughe and pleye."
 [968] Anon they kiste, and ryden forth hir weye.

      
The Canterbury Tales and Other Works of Chaucer (Middle English), by Geoffery Chaucer, [14th cent.], at sacred-texts.com

 

The Canterbury Tales

 

The Shipman's Tale

 [1] A marchant whilom dwelled at Seint-Denys,
 [2] That riche was, for which men helde hym wys.
 [3] A wyf he hadde of excellent beautee;
 [4] And compaignable and revelous was she,
 [5] Which is a thyng that causeth more dispence
 [6] Than worth is al the chiere and reverence
 [7] That men hem doon at festes and at daunces.
 [8] Swiche salutaciouns and contenaunces
 [9] Passen as dooth a shadwe upon the wal;
 [10] But wo is hym that payen moot for al!
 [11] The sely housbonde, algate he moot paye,
 [12] He moot us clothe, and he moot us arraye,
 [13] Al for his owene worshipe richely,
 [14] In which array we daunce jolily.
 [15] And if that he noght may, par aventure,
 [16] Or ellis list no swich dispence endure,
 [17] But thynketh it is wasted and ylost,
 [18] Thanne moot another payen for oure cost,
 [19] Or lene us gold, and that is perilous.
 [20] This noble marchaunt heeld a worthy hous,
 [21] For which he hadde alday so greet repair
 [22] For his largesse, and for his wyf was fair,
 [23] That wonder is; but herkneth to my tale.
 [24] Amonges alle his gestes, grete and smale,
 [25] Ther was a monk, a fair man and a boold --
 [26] I trowe a thritty wynter he was oold --
 [27] That evere in oon was drawynge to that place.
 [28] This yonge monk, that was so fair of face,
 [29] Aqueynted was so with the goode man,
 [30] Sith that hir firste knoweliche bigan,
 [31] That in his hous as famulier was he
 [32] As it is possible any freend to be.
 [33] And for as muchel as this goode man,
 [34] And eek this monk of which that I bigan,
 [35] Were bothe two yborn in o village,
 [36] The monk hym claymeth as for cosynage,
 [37] And he agayn; he seith nat ones nay,
 [38] But was as glad therof as fowel of day,
 [39] For to his herte it was a greet plesaunce.
 [40] Thus been they knyt with eterne alliaunce,
 [41] And ech of hem gan oother for t' assure
 [42] Of bretherhede whil that hir lyf may dure.
 [43] Free was daun John, and manly of dispence,
 [44] As in that hous, and ful of diligence
 [45] To doon plesaunce, and also greet costage.
 [46] He noght forgat to yeve the leeste page
 [47] In al that hous; but after hir degree,
 [48] He yaf the lord, and sitthe al his meynee,
 [49] Whan that he cam, som manere honest thyng,
 [50] For which they were as glad of his comyng
 [51] As fowel is fayn whan that the sonne up riseth.
 [52] Na moore of this as now, for it suffiseth.
 [53] But so bifel, this marchant on a day
 [54] Shoop hym to make redy his array
 [55] Toward the toun of Brugges for to fare,
 [56] To byen there a porcioun of ware;
 [57] For which he hath to Parys sent anon
 [58] A messager, and preyed hath daun John
 [59] That he sholde come to Seint-Denys to pleye
 [60] With hym and with his wyf a day or tweye,
 [61] Er he to Brugges wente, in alle wise.
 [62] This noble monk, of which I yow devyse,
 [63] Hath of his abbot, as hym list, licence,
 [64] By cause he was a man of heigh prudence
 [65] And eek an officer, out for to ryde,
 [66] To seen hir graunges and hire bernes wyde,
 [67] And unto Seint-Denys he comth anon.
 [68] Who was so welcome as my lord daun John,
 [69] Oure deere cosyn, ful of curteisye?
 [70] With hym broghte he a jubbe of malvesye,
 [71] And eek another ful of fyn vernage,
 [72] And volatyl, as ay was his usage.
 [73] And thus I lete hem ete and drynke and pleye,
 [74] This marchant and this monk, a day or tweye.
 [75] The thridde day, this marchant up ariseth,
 [76] And on his nedes sadly hym avyseth,
 [77] And up into his countour-hous gooth he
 [78] To rekene with hymself, wel may be,
 [79] Of thilke yeer how that it with hym stood,
 [80] And how that he despended hadde his good,
 [81] And if that he encressed were or noon.
 [82] His bookes and his bagges many oon
 [83] He leith biforn hym on his countyng-bord.
 [84] Ful riche was his tresor and his hord,
 [85] For which ful faste his countour-dore he shette;
 [86] And eek he nolde that no man sholde hym lette
 [87] Of his acountes, for the meene tyme;
 [88] And thus he sit til it was passed pryme.
 [89] Daun John was rysen in the morwe also,
 [90] And in the gardyn walketh to and fro,
 [91] And hath his thynges seyd ful curteisly.
 [92] This goode wyf cam walkynge pryvely
 [93] Into the gardyn, there he walketh softe,
 [94] And hym saleweth, as she hath doon ofte.
 [95] A mayde child cam in hire compaignye,
 [96] Which as hir list she may governe and gye,
 [97] For yet under the yerde was the mayde.
 [98] "O deere cosyn myn, daun John," she sayde,
 [99] "What eyleth yow so rathe for to ryse?"
 [100] "Nece," quod he, "it oghte ynough suffise
 [101] Fyve houres for to slepe upon a nyght,
 [102] But it were for an old appalled wight,
 [103] As been thise wedded men, that lye and dare
 [104] As in a fourme sit a wery hare,
 [105] Were al forstraught with houndes grete and smale.
 [106] But deere nece, why be ye so pale?
 [107] I trowe, certes, that oure goode man
 [108] Hath yow laboured sith the nyght bigan
 [109] That yow were nede to resten hastily."
 [110] And with that word he lough ful murily,
 [111] And of his owene thought he wax al reed.
 [112] This faire wyf gan for to shake hir heed
 [113] And seyde thus, "Ye, God woot al," quod she.
 [114] "Nay, cosyn myn, it stant nat so with me;
 [115] For, by that God that yaf me soule and lyf,
 [116] In al the reawme of France is ther no wyf
 [117] That lasse lust hath to that sory pley.
 [118] For I may synge `allas and weylawey
 [119] That I was born,' but to no wight," quod she,
 [120] "Dar I nat telle how that it stant with me.
 [121] Wherfore I thynke out of this land to wende,
 [122] Or elles of myself to make an ende,
 [123] So ful am I of drede and eek of care."
 [124] This monk bigan upon this wyf to stare,
 [125] And seyde, "Allas, my nece, God forbede
 [126] That ye, for any sorwe or any drede,
 [127] Fordo youreself; but telleth me youre grief.
 [128] Paraventure I may, in youre meschief,
 [129] Conseille or helpe; and therfore telleth me
 [130] Al youre anoy, for it shal been secree.
 [131] For on my portehors I make an ooth
 [132] That nevere in my lyf, for lief ne looth,
 [133] Ne shal I of no conseil yow biwreye."
 [134] "The same agayn to yow," quod she, "I seye.
 [135] By God and by this portehors I swere,
 [136] Though men me wolde al into pieces tere,
 [137] Ne shal I nevere, for to goon to helle,
 [138] Biwreye a word of thyng that ye me telle,
 [139] Nat for no cosynage ne alliance,
 [140] But verraily for love and affiance."
 [141] Thus been they sworn, and heerupon they kiste,
 [142] And ech of hem tolde oother what hem liste.
 [143] "Cosyn," quod she, "if that I hadde a space,
 [144] As I have noon, and namely in this place,
 [145] Thanne wolde I telle a legende of my lyf,
 [146] What I have suffred sith I was a wyf
 [147] With myn housbonde, al be he youre cosyn."
 [148] "Nay," quod this monk, "by God and Seint Martyn,
 [149] He is na moore cosyn unto me
 [150] Than is this leef that hangeth on the tree!
 [151] I clepe hym so, by Seint Denys of Fraunce,
 [152] To have the moore cause of aqueyntaunce
 [153] Of yow, which I have loved specially
 [154] Aboven alle wommen, sikerly.
 [155] This swere I yow on my professioun.
 [156] Telleth youre grief, lest that he come adoun;
 [157] And hasteth yow, and gooth youre wey anon."
 [158] "My deere love," quod she, "O my daun John,
 [159] Ful lief were me this conseil for to hyde,
 [160] But out it moot; I may namoore abyde.
 [161] Myn housbonde is to me the worste man
 [162] That evere was sith that the world bigan.
 [163] But sith I am a wyf, it sit nat me
 [164] To tellen no wight of oure privetee,
 [165] Neither abedde ne in noon oother place;
 [166] God shilde I sholde it tellen, for his grace!
 [167] A wyf ne shal nat seyn of hir housbonde
 [168] But al honour, as I kan understonde;
 [169] Save unto yow thus muche I tellen shal:
 [170] As helpe me God, he is noght worth at al
 [171] In no degree the value of a flye.
 [172] But yet me greveth moost his nygardye.
 [173] And wel ye woot that wommen naturelly
 [174] Desiren thynges sixe as wel as I:
 [175] They wolde that hir housbondes sholde be
 [176] Hardy and wise, and riche, and therto free,
 [177] And buxom unto his wyf and fressh abedde.
 [178] But by that ilke Lord that for us bledde,
 [179] For his honour, myself for to arraye,
 [180] A Sonday next I moste nedes paye
 [181] An hundred frankes, or ellis I am lorn.
 [182] Yet were me levere that I were unborn
 [183] Than me were doon a sclaundre or vileynye;
 [184] And if myn housbonde eek it myghte espye,
 [185] I nere but lost; and therfore I yow preye,
 [186] Lene me this somme, or ellis moot I deye.
 [187] Daun John, I seye, lene me thise hundred frankes.
 [188] Pardee, I wol nat faille yow my thankes,
 [189] If that yow list to doon that I yow praye.
 [190] For at a certeyn day I wol yow paye,
 [191] And doon to yow what plesance and service
 [192] That I may doon, right as yow list devise.
 [193] And but I do, God take on me vengeance
 [194] As foul as evere hadde Genylon of France."
 [195] This gentil monk answerde in this manere:
 [196] "Now trewely, myn owene lady deere,
 [197] I have," quod he, "on yow so greet a routhe
 [198] That I yow swere, and plighte yow my trouthe,
 [199] That whan youre housbonde is to Flaundres fare,
 [200] I wol delyvere yow out of this care;
 [201] For I wol brynge yow an hundred frankes."
 [202] And with that word he caughte hire by the flankes,
 [203] And hire embraceth harde, and kiste hire ofte.
 [204] "Gooth now youre wey," quod he, "al stille and softe,
 [205] And lat us dyne as soone as that ye may;
 [206] For by my chilyndre it is pryme of day.
 [207] Gooth now, and beeth as trewe as I shal be."
 [208] "Now elles God forbede, sire," quod she;
 [209] And forth she gooth as jolif as a pye,
 [210] And bad the cookes that they sholde hem hye,
 [211] So that men myghte dyne, and that anon.
 [212] Up to hir housbonde is this wyf ygon,
 [213] And knokketh at his countour boldely.
 [214] "Quy la?" quod he. "Peter! it am I,"
 [215] Quod she; "What, sire, how longe wol ye faste?
 [216] How longe tyme wol ye rekene and caste
 [217] Youre sommes, and youre bookes, and youre thynges?
 [218] The devel have part on alle swiche rekenynges!
 [219] Ye have ynough, pardee, of Goddes sonde;
 [220] Com doun to-day, and lat youre bagges stonde.
 [221] Ne be ye nat ashamed that daun John
 [222] Shal fasting al this day alenge goon?
 [223] What, lat us heere a messe, and go we dyne."
 [224] "Wyf," quod this man, "litel kanstow devyne
 [225] The curious bisynesse that we have.
 [226] For of us chapmen, also God me save,
 [227] And by that lord that clepid is Seint Yve,
 [228] Scarsly amonges twelve tweye shul thryve
 [229] Continuelly, lastynge unto oure age.
 [230] We may wel make chiere and good visage,
 [231] And dryve forth the world as it may be,
 [232] And kepen oure estaat in pryvetee,
 [233] Til we be deed, or elles that we pleye
 [234] A pilgrymage, or goon out of the weye.
 [235] And therfore have I greet necessitee
 [236] Upon this queynte world t' avyse me,
 [237] For everemoore we moote stonde in drede
 [238] Of hap and fortune in oure chapmanhede.
 [239] "To Flaundres wol I go to-morwe at day,
 [240] And come agayn, as soone as evere I may.
 [241] For which, my deere wyf, I thee biseke,
 [242] As be to every wight buxom and meke,
 [243] And for to kepe oure good be curious,
 [244] And honestly governe wel oure hous.
 [245] Thou hast ynough, in every maner wise,
 [246] That to a thrifty houshold may suffise.
 [247] Thee lakketh noon array ne no vitaille;
 [248] Of silver in thy purs shaltow nat faille."
 [249] And with that word his countour-dore he shette,
 [250] And doun he gooth, no lenger wolde he lette.
 [251] But hastily a messe was ther seyd,
 [252] And spedily the tables were yleyd,
 [253] And to the dyner faste they hem spedde,
 [254] And richely this monk the chapman fedde.
 [255] At after-dyner daun John sobrely
 [256] This chapman took apart, and prively
 [257] He seyde hym thus: "Cosyn, it standeth so,
 [258] That wel I se to Brugges wol ye go.
 [259] God and Seint Austyn spede yow and gyde!
 [260] I prey yow, cosyn, wisely that ye ryde.
 [261] Governeth yow also of youre diete
 [262] Atemprely, and namely in this hete.
 [263] Bitwix us two nedeth no strange fare;
 [264] Farewel, cosyn; God shilde yow fro care!
 [265] And if that any thyng by day or nyght,
 [266] If it lye in my power and my myght,
 [267] That ye me wol comande in any wyse,
 [268] It shal be doon right as ye wol devyse.
 [269] "O thyng, er that ye goon, if it may be,
 [270] I wolde prey yow: for to lene me
 [271] An hundred frankes, for a wyke or tweye,
 [272] For certein beestes that I moste beye,
 [273] To stoore with a place that is oures.
 [274] God helpe me so, I wolde it were youres!
 [275] I shal nat faille surely of my day,
 [276] Nat for a thousand frankes, a mile way.
 [277] But lat this thyng be secree, I yow preye,
 [278] For yet to-nyght thise beestes moot I beye.
 [279] And fare now wel, myn owene cosyn deere;
 [280] Graunt mercy of youre cost and of youre cheere."
 [281] This noble marchant gentilly anon
 [282] Answerde and seyde, "O cosyn myn, daun John,
 [283] Now sikerly this is a smal requeste.
 [284] My gold is youres, whan that it yow leste,
 [285] And nat oonly my gold, but my chaffare.
 [286] Take what yow list; God shilde that ye spare.
 [287] "But o thyng is, ye knowe it wel ynogh
 [288] Of chapmen, that hir moneie is hir plogh.
 [289] We may creaunce whil we have a name,
 [290] But goldlees for to be, it is no game.
 [291] Paye it agayn whan it lith in youre ese;
 [292] After my myght ful fayn wolde I yow plese."
 [293] Thise hundred frankes he fette forth anon,
 [294] And prively he took hem to daun John.
 [295] No wight in al this world wiste of this loone
 [296] Savynge this marchant and daun John allone.
 [297] They drynke, and speke, and rome a while and pleye,
 [298] Til that daun John rideth to his abbeye.
 [299] The morwe cam, and forth this marchant rideth
 [300] To Flaundres-ward; his prentys wel hym gydeth
 [301] Til he came into Brugges murily.
 [302] Now gooth this marchant faste and bisily
 [303] Aboute his nede, and byeth and creaunceth.
 [304] He neither pleyeth at the dees ne daunceth,
 [305] But as a marchaunt, shortly for to telle,
 [306] He let his lyf, and there I lete hym dwelle.
 [307] The Sonday next the marchant was agon,
 [308] To Seint-Denys ycomen is daun John,
 [309] With crowne and berd al fressh and newe yshave.
 [310] In al the hous ther nas so litel a knave,
 [311] Ne no wight elles, that he nas ful fayn
 [312] That my lord daun John was come agayn.
 [313] And shortly to the point right for to gon,
 [314] This faire wyf acorded with daun John
 [315] That for thise hundred frankes he sholde al nyght
 [316] Have hire in his armes bolt upright;
 [317] And this acord parfourned was in dede.
 [318] In myrthe al nyght a bisy lyf they lede
 [319] Til it was day, that daun John wente his way,
 [320] And bad the meynee "Farewel, have good day!"
 [321] For noon of hem, ne no wight in the toun,
 [322] Hath of daun John right no suspecioun.
 [323] And forth he rydeth hoom to his abbeye,
 [324] Or where hym list; namoore of hym I seye.
 [325] This marchant, whan that ended was the faire,
 [326] To Seint-Denys he gan for to repaire,
 [327] And with his wyf he maketh feeste and cheere,
 [328] And telleth hire that chaffare is so deere
 [329] That nedes moste he make a chevyssaunce,
 [330] For he was bounden in a reconyssaunce
 [331] To paye twenty thousand sheeld anon.
 [332] For which this marchant is to Parys gon
 [333] To borwe of certeine freendes that he hadde
 [334] A certeyn frankes; and somme with him he ladde.
 [335] And whan that he was come into the toun,
 [336] For greet chiertee and greet affeccioun,
 [337] Unto daun John he first gooth hym to pleye;
 [338] Nat for to axe or borwe of hym moneye,
 [339] But for to wite and seen of his welfare,
 [340] And for to tellen hym of his chaffare,
 [341] As freendes doon whan they been met yfeere.
 [342] Daun John hym maketh feeste and murye cheere,
 [343] And he hym tolde agayn, ful specially,
 [344] How he hadde wel yboght and graciously,
 [345] Thanked be God, al hool his marchandise,
 [346] Save that he moste, in alle maner wise,
 [347] Maken a chevyssaunce, as for his beste,
 [348] And thanne he sholde been in joye and reste.
 [349] Daun John answerde, "Certes, I am fayn
 [350] That ye in heele ar comen hom agayn.
 [351] And if that I were riche, as have I blisse,
 [352] Of twenty thousand sheeld sholde ye nat mysse,
 [353] For ye so kyndely this oother day
 [354] Lente me gold; and as I kan and may,
 [355] I thanke yow, by God and by Seint Jame!
 [356] But nathelees, I took unto oure dame,
 [357] Youre wyf, at hom, the same gold ageyn
 [358] Upon youre bench; she woot it wel, certeyn,
 [359] By certeyn tokenes that I kan hire telle.
 [360] Now, by youre leve, I may no lenger dwelle;
 [361] Oure abbot wole out of this toun anon,
 [362] And in his compaignye moot I goon.
 [363] Grete wel oure dame, myn owene nece sweete,
 [364] And fare wel, deere cosyn, til we meete!"
 [365] This marchant, which that was ful war and wys,
 [366] Creanced hath, and payd eek in Parys
 [367] To certeyn Lumbardes, redy in hir hond,
 [368] The somme of gold, and gat of hem his bond;
 [369] And hoom he gooth, murie as a papejay,
 [370] For wel he knew he stood in swich array
 [371] That nedes moste he wynne in that viage
 [372] A thousand frankes aboven al his costage.
 [373] His wyf ful redy mette hym atte gate,
 [374] As she was wont of oold usage algate,
 [375] And al that nyght in myrthe they bisette;
 [376] For he was riche and cleerly out of dette.
 [377] Whan it was day, this marchant gan embrace
 [378] His wyf al newe, and kiste hire on hir face,
 [379] And up he gooth and maketh it ful tough.
 [380] "Namoore," quod she, "by God, ye have ynough!"
 [381] And wantownly agayn with hym she pleyde
 [382] Til atte laste thus this marchant seyde:
 [383] "By God," quod he, "I am a litel wrooth
 [384] With yow, my wyf, although it be me looth.
 [385] And woot ye why? By God, as that I gesse
 [386] That ye han maad a manere straungenesse
 [387] Bitwixen me and my cosyn daun John.
 [388] Ye sholde han warned me, er I had gon,
 [389] That he yow hadde an hundred frankes payed
 [390] By redy token; and heeld hym yvele apayed,
 [391] For that I to hym spak of chevyssaunce;
 [392] Me semed so, as by his contenaunce.
 [393] But nathelees, by God, oure hevene kyng,
 [394] I thoughte nat to axen hym no thyng.
 [395] I prey thee, wyf, ne do namoore so;
 [396] Telle me alwey, er that I fro thee go,
 [397] If any dettour hath in myn absence
 [398] Ypayed thee, lest thurgh thy necligence
 [399] I myghte hym axe a thing that he hath payed."
 [400] This wyf was nat afered nor affrayed,
 [401] But boldely she seyde, and that anon,
 [402] "Marie, I deffie the false monk, daun John!
 [403] I kepe nat of his tokenes never a deel;
 [404] He took me certeyn gold, that woot I weel --
 [405] What! Yvel thedam on his monkes snowte!
 [406] For, God it woot, I wende, withouten doute,
 [407] That he hadde yeve it me bycause of yow
 [408] To doon therwith myn honour and my prow,
 [409] For cosynage, and eek for beele cheere
 [410] That he hath had ful ofte tymes heere.
 [411] But sith I se I stonde in this disjoynt,
 [412] I wol answere yow shortly to the poynt.
 [413] Ye han mo slakkere dettours than am I!
 [414] For I wol paye yow wel and redily
 [415] Fro day to day, and if so be I faille,
 [416] I am youre wyf; score it upon my taille,
 [417] And I shal paye as soone as ever I may.
 [418] For by my trouthe, I have on myn array,
 [419] And nat on wast, bistowed every deel;
 [420] And for I have bistowed it so weel
 [421] For youre honour, for Goddes sake, I seye,
 [422] As be nat wrooth, but lat us laughe and pleye.
 [423] Ye shal my joly body have to wedde;
 [424] By God, I wol nat paye yow but abedde!
 [425] Forgyve it me, myn owene spouse deere;
 [426] Turne hiderward, and maketh bettre cheere."
 [427] This marchant saugh ther was no remedie,
 [428] And for to chide it nere but folie,
 [429] Sith that the thyng may nat amended be.
 [430] "Now wyf," he seyde, "and I foryeve it thee;
 [431] But, by thy lyf, ne be namoore so large.
 [432] Keep bet thy good, this yeve I thee in charge."
 [433] Thus endeth my tale, and God us sende
 [434] Taillynge ynough unto oure lyves ende. Amen
 [435] "Wel seyd, by corpus dominus," quod oure Hoost,
 [436] "Now longe moote thou saille by the cost,
 [437] Sire gentil maister, gentil maryneer!
 [438] God yeve the monk a thousand last quade yeer!
 [439] A ha! Felawes, beth ware of swich a jape!
 [440] The monk putte in the mannes hood an ape,
 [441] And in his wyves eek, by Seint Austyn!
 [442] Draweth no monkes moore unto youre in.
 [443] "But now passe over, and lat us seke aboute,
 [444] Who shal now telle first of al this route
 [445] Another tale;" and with that word he sayde,
 [446] As curteisly as it had been a mayde,
 [447] "My lady Prioresse, by youre leve,
 [448] So that I wiste I sholde yow nat greve,
 [449] I wolde demen that ye tellen sholde
 [450] A tale next, if so were that ye wolde.
 [451] Now wol ye vouche sauf, my lady deere?"
 [452] "Gladly," quod she, and seyde as ye shal heere.

      
The Canterbury Tales and Other Works of Chaucer (Middle English), by Geoffery Chaucer, [14th cent.], at sacred-texts.com

 

The Canterbury Tales

 

The Prioress' Prologue

 [453] O Lord, oure Lord, thy name how merveillous
 [454] Is in this large world ysprad -- quod she --
 [455] For noght oonly thy laude precious
 [456] Parfourned is by men of dignitee,
 [457] But by the mouth of children thy bountee
 [458] Parfourned is, for on the brest soukynge
 [459] Somtyme shewen they thyn heriynge.
 [460] Wherfore in laude, as I best kan or may,
 [461] Of thee and of the white lylye flour
 [462] Which that the bar, and is a mayde alway,
 [463] To telle a storie I wol do my labour;
 [464] Nat that I may encressen hir honour,
 [465] For she hirself is honour and the roote
 [466] Of bountee, next hir Sone, and soules boote.
 [467] O mooder Mayde, O mayde Mooder free!
 [468] O bussh unbrent, brennynge in Moyses sighte,
 [469] That ravyshedest doun fro the Deitee,
 [470] Thurgh thyn humblesse, the Goost that in th' alighte,
 [471] Of whos vertu, whan he thyn herte lighte,
 [472] Conceyved was the Fadres sapience,
 [473] Help me to telle it in thy reverence!
 [474] Lady, thy bountee, thy magnificence,
 [475] Thy vertu and thy grete humylitee
 [476] Ther may no tonge expresse in no science;
 [477] For somtyme, Lady, er men praye to thee,
 [478] Thou goost biforn of thy benyngnytee,
 [479] And getest us the lyght, of thy preyere,
 [480] To gyden us unto thy Sone so deere.
 [481] My konnyng is so wayk, O blisful Queene,
 [482] For to declare thy grete worthynesse
 [483] That I ne may the weighte nat susteene;
 [484] But as a child of twelf month oold, or lesse,
 [485] That kan unnethes any word expresse,
 [486] Right so fare I, and therfore I yow preye,
 [487] Gydeth my song that I shal of yow seye.

      
The Canterbury Tales and Other Works of Chaucer (Middle English), by Geoffery Chaucer, [14th cent.], at sacred-texts.com

 

The Canterbury Tales

 

The Prioress' Tale

 [488] Ther was in Asye, in a greet citee,
 [489] Amonges Cristene folk a Jewerye,
 [490] Sustened by a lord of that contree
 [491] For foule usure and lucre of vileynye,
 [492] Hateful to Crist and to his compaignye;
 [493] And thurgh the strete men myghte ride or wende,
 [494] For it was free and open at eyther ende.
 [495] A litel scole of Cristen folk ther stood
 [496] Doun at the ferther ende, in which ther were
 [497] Children an heep, ycomen of Cristen blood,
 [498] That lerned in that scole yeer by yere
 [499] Swich manere doctrine as men used there,
 [500] This is to seyn, to syngen and to rede,
 [501] As smale children doon in hire childhede.
 [502] Among thise children was a wydwes sone,
 [503] A litel clergeon, seven yeer of age,
 [504] That day by day to scole was his wone,
 [505] And eek also, where as he saugh th' ymage
 [506] Of Cristes mooder, hadde he in usage,
 [507] As hym was taught, to knele adoun and seye
 [508] His Ave Marie, as he goth by the weye.
 [509] Thus hath this wydwe hir litel sone ytaught
 [510] Oure blisful Lady, Cristes mooder deere,
 [511] To worshipe ay, and he forgat it naught,
 [512] For sely child wol alday soone leere.
 [513] But ay, whan I remembre on this mateere,
 [514] Seint Nicholas stant evere in my presence,
 [515] For he so yong to Crist dide reverence.
 [516] This litel child, his litel book lernynge,
 [517] As he sat in the scole at his prymer,
 [518] He Alma redemptoris herde synge,
 [519] As children lerned hire antiphoner;
 [520] And as he dorste, he drough hym ner and ner,
 [521] And herkned ay the wordes and the noote,
 [522] Til he the firste vers koude al by rote.
 [523] Noght wiste he what this Latyn was to seye,
 [524] For he so yong and tendre was of age.
 [525] But on a day his felawe gan he preye
 [526] T' expounden hym this song in his langage,
 [527] Or telle hym why this song was in usage;
 [528] This preyde he hym to construe and declare
 [529] Ful often tyme upon his knowes bare.
 [530] His felawe, which that elder was than he,
 [531] Answerde hym thus: "This song, I have herd seye,
 [532] Was maked of our blisful Lady free,
 [533] Hire to salue, and eek hire for to preye
 [534] To been oure help and socour whan we deye.
 [535] I kan namoore expounde in this mateere.
 [536] I lerne song; I kan but smal grammeere."
 [537] "And is this song maked in reverence
 [538] Of Cristes mooder?" seyde this innocent.
 [539] "Now, certes, I wol do my diligence
 [540] To konne it al er Cristemasse be went.
 [541] Though that I for my prymer shal be shent
 [542] And shal be beten thries in an houre,
 [543] I wol it konne Oure Lady for to honoure!"
 [544] His felawe taughte hym homward prively,
 [545] Fro day to day, til he koude it by rote,
 [546] And thanne he song it wel and boldely,
 [547] Fro word to word, acordynge with the note.
 [548] Twies a day it passed thurgh his throte,
 [549] To scoleward and homward whan he wente;
 [550] On Cristes mooder set was his entente.
 [551] As I have seyd, thurghout the Juerie
 [552] This litel child, as he cam to and fro,
 [553] Ful murily than wolde he synge and crie
 [554] O Alma redemptoris everemo.
 [555] The swetnesse his herte perced so
 [556] Of Cristes mooder that, to hire to preye,
 [557] He kan nat stynte of syngyng by the weye.
 [558] Oure firste foo, the serpent Sathanas,
 [559] That hath in Jues herte his waspes nest,
 [560] Up swal, and seide, "O Hebrayk peple, allas!
 [561] Is this to yow a thyng that is honest,
 [562] That swich a boy shal walken as hym lest
 [563] In youre despit, and synge of swich sentence,
 [564] Which is agayn youre lawes reverence?"
 [565] Fro thennes forth the Jues han conspired
 [566] This innocent out of this world to chace.
 [567] An homycide therto han they hyred,
 [568] That in an aleye hadde a privee place;
 [569] And as the child gan forby for to pace,
 [570] This cursed Jew hym hente, and heeld hym faste,
 [571] And kitte his throte, and in a pit hym caste.
 [572] I seye that in a wardrobe they hym threwe
 [573] Where as thise Jewes purgen hire entraille.
 [574] O cursed folk of Herodes al newe,
 [575] What may youre yvel entente yow availle?
 [576] Mordre wol out, certeyn, it wol nat faille,
 [577] And namely ther th' onour of God shal sprede;
 [578] The blood out crieth on youre cursed dede.
 [579] O martir, sowded to virginitee,
 [580] Now maystow syngen, folwynge evere in oon
 [581] The white Lamb celestial -- quod she --
 [582] Of which the grete evaungelist, Seint John,
 [583] In Pathmos wroot, which seith that they that goon
 [584] Biforn this Lamb and synge a song al newe,
 [585] That nevere, flesshly, wommen they ne knewe.
 [586] This poure wydwe awaiteth al that nyght
 [587] After hir litel child, but he cam noght;
 [588] For which, as soone as it was dayes lyght,
 [589] With face pale of drede and bisy thoght,
 [590] She hath at scole and elleswhere hym soght,
 [591] Til finally she gan so fer espie
 [592] That he last seyn was in the Juerie.
 [593] With moodres pitee in hir brest enclosed,
 [594] She gooth, as she were half out of hir mynde,
 [595] To every place where she hath supposed
 [596] By liklihede hir litel child to fynde;
 [597] And evere on Cristes mooder meeke and kynde
 [598] She cride, and atte laste thus she wroghte:
 [599] Among the cursed Jues she hym soghte.
 [600] She frayneth and she preyeth pitously
 [601] To every Jew that dwelte in thilke place,
 [602] To telle hire if hir child wente oght forby.
 [603] They seyde "nay"; but Jhesu of his grace
 [604] Yaf in hir thoght inwith a litel space
 [605] That in that place after hir sone she cryde,
 [606] Where he was casten in a pit bisyde.
 [607] O grete God, that parfournest thy laude
 [608] By mouth of innocentz, lo, heere thy myght!
 [609] This gemme of chastite, this emeraude,
 [610] And eek of martirdom the ruby bright,
 [611] Ther he with throte ykorven lay upright,
 [612] He Alma redemptoris gan to synge
 [613] So loude that al the place gan to rynge.
 [614] The Cristene folk that thurgh the strete wente
 [615] In coomen for to wondre upon this thyng,
 [616] And hastily they for the provost sente;
 [617] He cam anon withouten tariyng,
 [618] And herieth Crist that is of hevene kyng,
 [619] And eek his mooder, honour of mankynde,
 [620] And after that the Jewes leet he bynde.
 [621] This child with pitous lamentacioun
 [622] Up taken was, syngynge his song alway,
 [623] And with honour of greet processioun
 [624] They carien hym unto the nexte abbay.
 [625] His mooder swownynge by his beere lay;
 [626] Unnethe myghte the peple that was theere
 [627] This newe Rachel brynge fro his beere.
 [628] With torment and with shameful deeth echon,
 [629] This provost dooth thise Jewes for to sterve
 [630] That of this mordre wiste, and that anon.
 [631] He nolde no swich cursednesse observe.
 [632] "Yvele shal have that yvele wol deserve";
 [633] Therfore with wilde hors he dide hem drawe,
 [634] And after that he heng hem by the lawe.
 [635] Upon this beere ay lith this innocent
 [636] Biforn the chief auter, whil the masse laste;
 [637] And after that, the abbot with his covent
 [638] Han sped hem for to burien hym ful faste;
 [639] And whan they hooly water on hym caste,
 [640] Yet spak this child, whan spreynd was hooly water,
 [641] And song O Alma redemptoris mater!
 [642] This abbot, which that was an hooly man,
 [643] As monkes been -- or elles oghte be --
 [644] This yonge child to conjure he bigan,
 [645] And seyde, "O deere child, I halse thee,
 [646] In vertu of the hooly Trinitee,
 [647] Tel me what is thy cause for to synge,
 [648] Sith that thy throte is kut to my semynge?"
 [649] "My throte is kut unto my nekke boon,"
 [650] Seyde this child, "and as by wey of kynde
 [651] I sholde have dyed, ye, longe tyme agon.
 [652] But Jesu Crist, as ye in bookes fynde,
 [653] Wil that his glorie laste and be in mynde,
 [654] And for the worship of his Mooder deere
 [655] Yet may I synge O Alma loude and cleere.
 [656] "This welle of mercy, Cristes mooder sweete,
 [657] I loved alwey, as after my konnynge;
 [658] And whan that I my lyf sholde forlete,
 [659] To me she cam, and bad me for to synge
 [660] This anthem verraily in my deyynge,
 [661] As ye han herd, and whan that I hadde songe,
 [662] Me thoughte she leyde a greyn upon my tonge.
 [663] "Wherfore I synge, and synge moot certeyn,
 [664] In honour of that blisful Mayden free
 [665] Til fro my tonge of taken is the greyn;
 [666] And after that thus seyde she to me:
 [667] `My litel child, now wol I fecche thee,
 [668] Whan that the greyn is fro thy tonge ytake.
 [669] Be nat agast; I wol thee nat forsake.'"
 [670] This hooly monk, this abbot, hym meene I,
 [671] His tonge out caughte, and took awey the greyn,
 [672] And he yaf up the goost ful softely.
 [673] And whan this abbot hadde this wonder seyn,
 [674] His salte teeris trikled doun as reyn,
 [675] And gruf he fil al plat upon the grounde,
 [676] And stille he lay as he had ben ybounde.
 [677] The covent eek lay on the pavement
 [678] Wepynge, and herying Cristes mooder deere,
 [679] And after that they ryse, and forth been went,
 [680] And tooken awey this martir from his beere;
 [681] And in a tombe of marbul stones cleere
 [682] Enclosen they his litel body sweete.
 [683] Ther he is now, God leve us for to meete!
 [684] O yonge Hugh of Lyncoln, slayn also
 [685] With cursed Jewes, as it is notable,
 [686] For it is but a litel while ago,
 [687] Preye eek for us, we synful folk unstable,
 [688] That of his mercy God so merciable
 [689] On us his grete mercy multiplie,
 [690] For reverence of his mooder Marie. Amen.

      
The Canterbury Tales and Other Works of Chaucer (Middle English), by Geoffery Chaucer, [14th cent.], at sacred-texts.com

 

The Canterbury Tales

 

The Prologue to the Tale of Sir Thopas

 [691] Whan seyd was al this miracle, every man
 [692] As sobre was that wonder was to se,
 [693] Til that oure Hooste japen tho bigan,
 [694] And thanne at erst he looked upon me,
 [695] And seyde thus: "What man artow?" quod he;
 [696] "Thou lookest as thou woldest fynde an hare,
 [697] For evere upon the ground I se thee stare.
 [698] "Approche neer, and looke up murily.
 [699] Now war yow, sires, and lat this man have place!
 [700] He in the waast is shape as wel as I;
 [701] This were a popet in an arm t' enbrace
 [702] For any womman, smal and fair of face.
 [703] He semeth elvyssh by his contenaunce,
 [704] For unto no wight dooth he daliaunce.
 [705] "Sey now somwhat, syn oother folk han sayd;
 [706] Telle us a tale of myrthe, and that anon."
 [707] "Hooste," quod I, "ne beth nat yvele apayd,
 [708] For oother tale certes kan I noon,
 [709] But of a rym I lerned longe agoon."
 [710] "Ye, that is good," quod he; "now shul we heere
 [711] Som deyntee thyng, me thynketh by his cheere."

      
The Canterbury Tales and Other Works of Chaucer (Middle English), by Geoffery Chaucer, [14th cent.], at sacred-texts.com

 

The Canterbury Tales

 

The Tale of Sir Thopas

 [712] Listeth, lordes, in good entent,
 [713] And I wol telle verrayment
 [714] Of myrthe and of solas,
 [715] Al of a knyght was fair and gent
 [716] In bataille and in tourneyment;
 [717] His name was sire Thopas.
 [718] Yborn he was in fer contree,
 [719] In Flaundres, al biyonde the see,
 [720] At Poperyng, in the place.
 [721] His fader was a man ful free,
 [722] And lord he was of that contree,
 [723] As it was Goddes grace.
 [724] Sire Thopas wax a doghty swayn;
 [725] Whit was his face as payndemayn,
 [726] His lippes rede as rose;
 [727] His rode is lyk scarlet in grayn,
 [728] And I yow telle in good certayn
 [729] He hadde a semely nose.
 [730] His heer, his berd was lyk saffroun,
 [731] That to his girdel raughte adoun;
 [732] His shoon of cordewane.
 [733] Of Brugges were his hosen broun,
 [734] His robe was of syklatoun,
 [735] That coste many a jane.
 [736] He koude hunte at wilde deer,
 [737] And ride an haukyng for river
 [738] With grey goshauk on honde;
 [739] Therto he was a good archeer;
 [740] Of wrastlyng was ther noon his peer,
 [741] Ther any ram shal stonde.
 [742] Ful many a mayde, bright in bour,
 [743] They moorne for hym paramour,
 [744] Whan hem were bet to slepe;
 [745] But he was chaast and no lechour,
 [746] And sweete as is the brembul flour
 [747] That bereth the rede hepe.
 [748] And so bifel upon a day,
 [749] For sothe, as I yow telle may,
 [750] Sire Thopas wolde out ride.
 [751] He worth upon his steede gray,
 [752] And in his hand a launcegay,
 [753] A long swerd by his side.
 [754] He priketh thurgh a fair forest,
 [755] Therinne is many a wilde best,
 [756] Ye, bothe bukke and hare;
 [757] And as he priketh north and est,
 [758] I telle it yow, hym hadde almest
 [759] Bitid a sory care.
 [760] Ther spryngen herbes grete and smale,
 [761] The lycorys and the cetewale,
 [762] And many a clowe-gylofre;
 [763] And notemuge to putte in ale,
 [764] Wheither it be moyste or stale,
 [765] Or for to leye in cofre.
 [766] The briddes synge, it is no nay,
 [767] The sparhauk and the papejay,
 [768] That joye it was to heere;
 [769] The thrustelcok made eek hir lay,
 [770] The wodedowve upon the spray
 [771] She sang ful loude and cleere.
 [772] Sire Thopas fil in love-longynge,
 [773] Al whan he herde the thrustel synge,
 [774] And pryked as he were wood.
 [775] His faire steede in his prikynge
 [776] So swatte that men myghte him wrynge;
 [777] His sydes were al blood.
 [778] Sire Thopas eek so wery was
 [779] For prikyng on the softe gras,
 [780] So fiers was his corage,
 [781] That doun he leyde him in that plas
 [782] To make his steede som solas,
 [783] And yaf hym good forage.
 [784] "O Seinte Marie, benedicite!
 [785] What eyleth this love at me
 [786] To bynde me so soore?
 [787] Me dremed al this nyght, pardee,
 [788] An elf-queene shal my lemman be
 [789] And slepe under my goore.
 [790] "An elf-queene wol I love, ywis,
 [791] For in this world no womman is
 [792] Worthy to be my make
 [793] In towne;
 [794] Alle othere wommen I forsake,
 [795] And to an elf-queene I me take
 [796] By dale and eek by downe!"
 [797] Into his sadel he clamb anon,
 [798] And priketh over stile and stoon
 [799] An elf-queene for t' espye,
 [800] Til he so longe hath riden and goon
 [801] That he foond, in a pryve woon,
 [802] The contree of Fairye
 [803] So wilde;
 [804] For in that contree was ther noon
 [805] That to him durste ride or goon,
 [806] Neither wyf ne childe;
 [807] Til that ther cam a greet geaunt,
 [808] His name was sire Olifaunt,
 [809] A perilous man of dede.
 [810] He seyde, "Child, by Termagaunt,
 [811] But if thou prike out of myn haunt,
 [812] Anon I sle thy steede
 [813] With mace.
 [814] Heere is the queene of Fayerye,
 [815] With harpe and pipe and symphonye,
 [816] Dwellynge in this place."
 [817] The child seyde, "Also moote I thee,
 [818] Tomorwe wol I meete with thee,
 [819] Whan I have myn armoure;
 [820] And yet I hope, par ma fay,
 [821] That thou shalt with this launcegay
 [822] Abyen it ful sowre.
 [823] Thy mawe
 [824] Shal I percen, if I may,
 [825] Er it be fully pryme of day,
 [826] For heere thow shalt be slawe."
 [827] Sire Thopas drow abak ful faste;
 [828] This geant at hym stones caste
 [829] Out of a fel staf-slynge.
 [830] But faire escapeth child Thopas,
 [831] And al it was thurgh Goddes gras,
 [832] And thurgh his fair berynge.
 [833] Yet listeth, lordes, to my tale
 [834] Murier than the nightyngale,
 [835] For now I wol yow rowne
 [836] How sir Thopas, with sydes smale,
 [837] Prikyng over hill and dale,
 [838] Is comen agayn to towne.
 [839] His myrie men comanded he
 [840] To make hym bothe game and glee,
 [841] For nedes moste he fighte
 [842] With a geaunt with hevedes three,
 [843] For paramour and jolitee
 [844] Of oon that shoon ful brighte.
 [845] "Do come," he seyde, "my mynstrales,
 [846] And geestours for to tellen tales,
 [847] Anon in myn armynge,
 [848] Of romances that been roiales,
 [849] Of popes and of cardinales,
 [850] And eek of love-likynge."
 [851] They fette hym first the sweete wyn,
 [852] And mede eek in a mazelyn,
 [853] And roial spicerye
 [854] Of gyngebreed that was ful fyn,
 [855] And lycorys, and eek comyn,
 [856] With sugre that is trye.
 [857] He dide next his white leere
 [858] Of cloth of lake fyn and cleere,
 [859] A breech and eek a sherte;
 [860] And next his sherte an aketoun,
 [861] And over that an haubergeoun
 [862] For percynge of his herte;
 [863] And over that a fyn hawberk,
 [864] Was al ywroght of Jewes werk,
 [865] Ful strong it was of plate;
 [866] And over that his cote-armour
 [867] As whit as is a lilye flour,
 [868] In which he wol debate.
 [869] His sheeld was al of gold so reed,
 [870] And therinne was a bores heed,
 [871] A charbocle bisyde;
 [872] And there he swoor on ale and breed
 [873] How that the geaunt shal be deed,
 [874] Bityde what bityde!
 [875] His jambeux were of quyrboilly,
 [876] His swerdes shethe of yvory,
 [877] His helm of latoun bright;
 [878] His sadel was of rewel boon,
 [879] His brydel as the sonne shoon,
 [880] Or as the moone light.
 [881] His spere was of fyn ciprees,
 [882] That bodeth werre, and nothyng pees,
 [883] The heed ful sharpe ygrounde;
 [884] His steede was al dappull gray,
 [885] It gooth an ambil in the way
 [886] Ful softely and rounde
 [887] In londe.
 [888] Loo, lordes myne, heere is a fit!
 [889] If ye wol any moore of it,
 [890] To telle it wol I fonde.
 [891] Now holde youre mouth, par charitee,
 [892] Bothe knyght and lady free,
 [893] And herkneth to my spelle;
 [894] Of bataille and of chivalry,
 [895] And of ladyes love-drury
 [896] Anon I wol yow telle.
 [897] Men speken of romances of prys,
 [898] Of Horn child and of Ypotys,
 [899] Of Beves and sir Gy,
 [900] Of sir Lybeux and Pleyndamour --
 [901] But sir Thopas, he bereth the flour
 [902] Of roial chivalry!
 [903] His goode steede al he bistrood,
 [904] And forth upon his wey he glood
 [905] As sparcle out of the bronde;
 [906] Upon his creest he bar a tour,
 [907] And therinne stiked a lilie flour --
 [908] God shilde his cors fro shonde!
 [909] And for he was a knyght auntrous,
 [910] He nolde slepen in noon hous,
 [911] But liggen in his hoode;
 [912] His brighte helm was his wonger,
 [913] And by hym baiteth his dextrer
 [914] Of herbes fyne and goode.
 [915] Hymself drank water of the well,
 [916] As dide the knyght sire Percyvell
 [917] So worly under wede,
 [918] Til on a day --
 [919] "Namoore of this, for Goddes dignitee,"
 [920] Quod oure Hooste, "for thou makest me
 [921] So wery of thy verray lewednesse
 [922] That, also wisly God my soule blesse,
 [923] Myne eres aken of thy drasty speche.
 [924] Now swich a rym the devel I biteche!
 [925] This may wel be rym dogerel," quod he.
 [926] "Why so?" quod I, "why wiltow lette me
 [927] Moore of my tale than another man,
 [928] Syn that it is the beste rym I kan?"
 [929] "By God," quod he, "for pleynly, at a word,
 [930] Thy drasty rymyng is nat worth a toord!
 [931] Thou doost noght elles but despendest tyme.
 [932] Sire, at o word, thou shalt no lenger ryme.
 [933] Lat se wher thou kanst tellen aught in geeste,
 [934] Or telle in prose somwhat, at the leeste,
 [935] In which ther be som murthe or som doctryne."
 [936] "Gladly," quod I, "by Goddes sweete pyne!
 [937] I wol yow telle a litel thyng in prose
 [938] That oghte liken yow, as I suppose,
 [939] Or elles, certes, ye been to daungerous.
 [940] It is a moral tale vertuous,
 [941] Al be it told somtyme in sondry wyse
 [942] Of sondry folk, as I shal yow devyse.
 [943] "As thus: ye woot that every Evaungelist
 [944] That telleth us the peyne of Jhesu Crist
 [945] Ne seith nat alle thyng as his felawe dooth;
 [946] But nathelees hir sentence is al sooth,
 [947] And alle acorden as in hire sentence,
 [948] Al be ther in hir tellyng difference.
 [949] For somme of hem seyn moore, and somme seyn lesse,
 [950] Whan they his pitous passioun expresse --
 [951] I meene of Mark, Mathew, Luc, and John --
 [952] But doutelees hir sentence is al oon.
 [953] Therfore, lordynges alle, I yow biseche,
 [954] If that yow thynke I varie as in my speche,
 [955] As thus, though that I telle somwhat moore
 [956] Of proverbes than ye han herd bifoore
 [957] Comprehended in this litel tretys heere,
 [958] To enforce with th' effect of my mateere;
 [959] And though I nat the same wordes seye
 [960] As ye han herd, yet to yow alle I preye
 [961] Blameth me nat; for, as in my sentence,
 [962] Shul ye nowher fynden difference
 [963] Fro the sentence of this tretys lyte
 [964] After the which this murye tale I write.
 [965] And therfore herkneth what that I shal seye,
 [966] And lat me tellen al my tale, I preye."

      
The Canterbury Tales and Other Works of Chaucer (Middle English), by Geoffery Chaucer, [14th cent.], at sacred-texts.com

 

The Canterbury Tales

 

The Tale of Melibee

 [967] A yong man called Melibeus, myghty and riche, bigat upon his wyf, that called was Prudence,
 [967A] a doghter which that called was Sophie.
 [968] Upon a day bifel that he for his desport is went into the feeldes hym to pleye.
 [969] His wyf and eek his doghter hath he left inwith his hous, of which the dores weren faste yshette.
 [970] Thre of his olde foes han it espyed, and setten laddres to the walles of his hous,
 [970A] and by wyndowes been entred,
 [971] and betten his wyf, and wounded his doghter with fyve mortal woundes in fyve sondry places --
 [972] this is to seyn, in hir feet, in hire handes, in hir erys, in hir nose,
 [972A] and in hire mouth -- and leften hire for deed, and wenten awey.
 [973] Whan Melibeus retourned was into his hous, and saugh al this meschief, he,
 [973A] lyk a mad man rentynge his clothes, gan to wepe and crie.
 [974] Prudence, his wyf, as ferforth as she dorste, bisoghte hym of his wepyng for to stynte,
 [975] but nat forthy he gan to crie and wepen evere lenger the moore.
 [976] This noble wyf Prudence remembred hire upon the sentence of Ovide, in his book
 [976A] that cleped is the Remedie of Love, where as he seith,
 [977] "He is a fool that destourbeth the mooder to wepen in the deeth of hire child
 [977A] til she have wept hir fille as for a certein tyme,
 [978] and thanne shal man doon his diligence with amyable wordes hire to reconforte,
 [978A] and preyen hire of hir wepyng for to stynte."
 [979] For which resoun this noble wyf Prudence suffred hir housbonde
 [979A] for to wepe and crie as for a certein space,
 [980] and whan she saugh hir tyme, she seyde hym in this wise:
 [980A] "Allas, my lord," quod she, "why make ye youreself for to be lyk a fool?
 [981] For sothe it aperteneth nat to a wys man to maken swich a sorwe.
 [982] Youre doghter, with the grace of God, shal warisshe and escape.
 [983] And, al were it so that she right now were deed,
 [983A] ye ne oughte nat, as for hir deeth, youreself to destroye.
 [984] Senek seith: `The wise man shal nat take to greet disconfort for the deeth of his children,
 [985] but, certes, he sholde suffren it in pacience
 [985A] as wel as he abideth the deeth of his owene propre persone.'"
 [986] This Melibeus answerde anon and seyde, "What man," quod he, "sholde of his wepyng stente
 [986A] that hath so greet a cause for to wepe?
 [987] Jhesu Crist, oure Lord, hymself wepte for the deeth of Lazarus hys freend."
 [988] Prudence answerde: "Certes, wel I woot attempree wepyng is no thyng deffended to hym that sorweful is,
 [988A] amonges folk in sorwe, but it is rather graunted hym to wepe.
 [989] The Apostle Paul unto the Romayns writeth, `Man shal rejoyse
 [989A] with hem that maken joye and wepen with swich folk as wepen.'
 [990] But though attempree wepyng be ygraunted, outrageous wepyng certes is deffended.
 [991] Mesure of wepyng sholde be considered after the loore that techeth us Senek:
 [992] `Whan that thy frend is deed,' quod he, `lat nat thyne eyen to moyste been of teeris,
 [992A] ne to muche drye; although the teeris come to thyne eyen, lat hem nat falle;
 [993] and whan thou hast forgoon thy freend, do diligence to gete another freend;
 [993A] and this is moore wysdom than for to wepe for thy freend
 [993B] which that thou hast lorn, for therinne is no boote.'
 [994] And therfore, if ye governe yow by sapience, put awey sorwe out of youre herte.
 [995] Remembre yow that Jhesus Syrak seith, `A man that is joyous and glad in herte,
 [995A] it hym conserveth florissynge in his age; but soothly sorweful herte maketh his bones drye.'
 [996] He seith eek thus, that sorwe in herte sleeth ful many a man.
 [997] Salomon seith that right as motthes in the shepes flees anoyeth to the clothes,
 [997A] and the smale wormes to the tree, right so anoyeth sorwe to the herte.
 [998] Wherfore us oghte, as wel in the deeth of oure children
 [998A] as in the los of oure othere goodes temporels, have pacience.
 [999] Remembre yow upon the pacient Job. Whan he hadde lost his children and his temporeel substance,
 [999A] and in his body endured and receyved ful many a grevous tribulacion, yet seyde he thus:
 [1000] `Oure Lord hath yeve it me; oure Lord hath biraft it me; right as oure Lord hath wold,
 [1000A] right so it is doon; blessed be the name of oure Lord!'"
 [1001] To thise forseide thynges answerde Melibeus unto his wyf Prudence: "Alle thy wordes," quod he,
 [1001A] "been sothe and therto profitable, but trewely myn herte is troubled with this sorwe
 [1001B] so grevously that I noot what to doone."
 [1002] "Lat calle," quod Prudence, "thy trewe freendes alle and thy lynage whiche that been wise. Telleth youre cas,
 [1002A] and herkneth what they seye in conseillyng, and yow governe after hire sentence.
 [1003] Salomon seith, `Werk alle thy thynges by conseil, and thou shalt never repente.'"
 [1004] Thanne, by the conseil of his wyf Prudence, this Melibeus leet callen a greet congregacion of folk,
 [1005] as surgiens, phisiciens, olde folk and yonge, and somme of his olde enemys reconsiled
 [1005A] as by hir semblaunt to his love and into his grace;
 [1006] and therwithal ther coomen somme of his neighebores that diden hym reverence
 [1006A] moore for drede than for love, as it happeth ofte.
 [1007] Ther coomen also ful many subtille flatereres and wise advocatz lerned in the lawe.
 [1008] And whan this folk togidre assembled weren, this Melibeus in sorweful wise shewed hem his cas.
 [1009] And by the manere of his speche it semed that in herte he baar a crueel ire,
 [1009A] redy to doon vengeaunce upon his foes, and sodeynly desired that the werre sholde bigynne;
 [1010] but nathelees, yet axed he hire conseil upon this matiere.
 [1011] A surgien, by licence and assent of swiche as weren wise, up roos
 [1011A] and to Melibeus seyde as ye may heere:
 [1012] "Sire," quod he, "as to us surgiens aperteneth that we do to every wight the beste that we kan,
 [1012A] where as we been withholde, and to oure pacientz that we do no damage,
 [1013] wherfore it happeth many tyme and ofte that whan twey men han everich wounded oother,
 [1013A] oon same surgien heeleth hem bothe;
 [1014] wherfore unto oure art it is nat pertinent to norice werre ne parties to supporte.
 [1015] But certes, as to the warisshynge of youre doghter, al be it so that she perilously be wounded,
 [1015A] we shullen do so ententif bisynesse fro day to nyght that with the grace of God
 [1015B] she shal be hool and sound as soone as is possible."
 [1016] Almoost right in the same wise the phisiciens answerden, save that they seyden a fewe woordes moore:
 [1017] that right as maladies been cured by hir contraries, right so shul men warisshe werre by vengeaunce.
 [1018] His neighebores ful of envye, his feyned freendes that semeden reconsiled, and his flatereres
 [1019] maden semblant of wepyng, and empeireden and agreggeden muchel of this matiere
 [1019A] in preisynge greetly Melibee of myght, of power, of richesse, and of freendes, despisynge the power of his adversaries,
 [1020] and seiden outrely that he anon sholde wreken hym on his foes and bigynne werre.
 [1021] Up roos thanne an advocat that was wys,
 [1021A] by leve and by conseil of othere that were wise, and seide:
 [1022] "Lordynges, the nede for which we been assembled in this place
 [1022A] is a ful hevy thyng and an heigh matiere,
 [1023] by cause of the wrong and of the wikkednesse that hath be doon,
 [1023A] and eek by resoun of the grete damages that in tyme comynge
 [1023B] been possible to fallen for this same cause,
 [1024] and eek by resoun of the grete richesse and power of the parties bothe,
 [1025] for the whiche resouns it were a ful greet peril to erren in this matiere.
 [1026] Wherfore, Melibeus, this is oure sentence: we conseille yow aboven alle thyng that right anon thou do thy diligence
 [1026A] in kepynge of thy propre persone in swich a wise
 [1026B] that thou ne wante noon espie ne wacche thy persone for to save.
 [1027] And after that, we conseille that in thyn hous thou sette sufficeant garnisoun
 [1027A] so that they may as wel thy body as thyn hous defende.
 [1028] But certes, for to moeve werre, ne sodeynly for to doon vengeaunce, we may nat demen
 [1028A] in so litel tyme that it were profitable.
 [1029] Wherfore we axen leyser and espace to have deliberacion in this cas to deme.
 [1030] For the commune proverbe seith thus: `He that soone deemeth, soone shal repente.'
 [1031] And eek men seyn that thilke juge is wys that soone understondeth a matiere and juggeth by leyser;
 [1032] for al be it so that alle tariyng be anoyful,
 [1032A] algates it is nat to repreve in yevynge of juggement ne in vengeance takyng,
 [1032B] whan it is sufficeant and resonable.
 [1033] And that shewed oure Lord Jhesu Crist by ensample, for whan that the womman that was taken in avowtrie
 [1033A] was broght in his presence to knowen what sholde be doon with hire persone, al be it so that he wiste wel hymself what
 [1033B] that he wolde answere, yet ne wolde he nat answere sodeynly,
 [1033C] but he wolde have deliberacion, and in the ground he wroot twies.
 [1034] And by thise causes we axen deliberacioun, and we shal thanne, by the grace of God, conseille thee
 [1034A] thyng that shal be profitable."
 [1035] Up stirten thanne the yonge folk atones, and the mooste partie of that compaignye han scorned this olde wise
 [1035A] man, and bigonnen to make noyse, and seyden that
 [1036] right so as whil that iren is hoot men sholden smyte,
 [1036A] right so men sholde wreken hir wronges whil that they been fresshe and newe;
 [1036B] and with loud voys they criden "Werre! Werre!"
 [1037] Up roos tho oon of thise olde wise, and with his hand made contenaunce that
 [1037A] men sholde holden hem stille and yeven hym audience.
 [1038] "Lordynges," quod he, "ther is ful many a man that crieth `Werre, werre!'
 [1038A] that woot ful litel what werre amounteth.
 [1039] Werre at his bigynnyng hath so greet an entryng and so large that every wight may entre
 [1039A] whan hym liketh and lightly fynde werre;
 [1040] but certes what ende that shal therof bifalle, it is nat light to knowe.
 [1041] For soothly, whan that werre is ones bigonne, ther is ful many a child unborn of his mooder
 [1041A] that shal sterve yong by cause of thilke werre, or elles lyve in sorwe and dye in wrecchednesse.
 [1042] And therfore, er that any werre bigynne, men moste have greet conseil and greet deliberacion."
 [1043] And whan this olde man wende to enforcen his tale by resons, wel ny alle atones bigonne they
 [1043A] to rise for to breken his tale, and beden hym ful ofte his wordes for to abregge.
 [1044] For soothly, he that precheth to hem that listen nat heeren his wordes, his sermon hem anoieth.
 [1045] For Jhesus Syrak seith that "musik in wepynge is a noyous thyng"; this is to seyn:
 [1045A] as muche availleth to speken bifore folk to which his speche anoyeth
 [1045B] as it is to synge biforn hym that wepeth.
 [1046] And whan this wise man saugh that hym wanted audience, al shamefast he sette hym doun agayn.
 [1047] For Salomon seith: "Ther as thou ne mayst have noon audience, enforce thee nat to speke."
 [1048] "I see wel," quod this wise man, "that the commune proverbe is sooth, that
 [1048A] `good conseil wanteth whan it is moost nede.'"
 [1049] Yet hadde this Melibeus in his conseil many folk that prively in his eere conseilled hym certeyn thyng,
 [1049A] and conseilled hym the contrarie in general audience.
 [1050] Whan Melibeus hadde herd that the gretteste partie of his conseil weren accorded that he sholde maken werre,
 [1050A] anoon he consented to hir conseillyng and fully affermed hire sentence.
 [1051] Thanne dame Prudence, whan that she saugh how that hir housbonde shoop hym for to wreken hym on his
 [1051A] foes and to bigynne werre, she in ful humble wise, whan she saugh hir tyme, seide to hym thise wordes:
 [1052] "My lord," quod she, "I yow biseche, as hertely as I dar and kan,
 [1052A] ne haste yow nat to faste and, for alle gerdons, as yeveth me audience.
 [1053] For Piers Alfonce seith, `Whoso that dooth to thee oother good or harm, haste thee nat to quiten it,
 [1053A] for in this wise thy freend wole abyde and thyn enemy shal the lenger lyve in drede.'
 [1054] The proverbe seith, `He hasteth wel that wisely kan abyde,' and `in wikked haste is no profit.'"
 [1055] This Melibee answerde unto his wyf Prudence: "I purpose nat," quod he, "to werke by thy conseil,
 [1055A] for many causes and resouns. For certes, every wight wolde holde me thanne a fool;
 [1056] this is to seyn, if I, for thy conseillyng, wolde chaungen
 [1056A] thynges that been ordeyned and affermed by so manye wyse.
 [1057] Secoundely, I seye that alle wommen been wikke, and noon good of hem alle.
 [1057A] For `of a thousand men,' seith Salomon, `I foond o good man, but certes,
 [1057B] of alle wommen, good womman foond I nevere.'
 [1058] And also, certes, if I governed me by thy conseil,
 [1058A] it sholde seme that I hadde yeve to thee over me the maistrie,
 [1058B] and God forbede that it so weere!
 [1059] For Jhesus Syrak seith that `if the wyf have maistrie, she is contrarious to hir housbonde.'
 [1060] And Salomon seith: `Nevere in thy lyf to thy wyf, ne to thy child, ne to thy freend
 [1060A] ne yeve no power over thyself, for bettre it were that thy children
 [1060B] aske of thy persone thynges that hem nedeth than thou see thyself
 [1060C] in the handes of thy children.'
 [1061] And also if I wolde werke by thy conseillyng, certes, my conseil moste som tyme be secree,
 [1061A] til it were tyme that it moste be knowe, and this ne may noght be.
 [1064] Whanne dame Prudence, ful debonairly and with greet pacience, hadde herd al that hir housbonde liked for to seye,
 [1064A] thanne axed she of hym licence for to speke, and seyde in this wise:
 [1065] "My lord," quod she, "as to youre firste resoun, certes it may lightly been answered. For I seye that
 [1065A] it is no folie to chaunge conseil whan the thyng is chaunged,
 [1065B] or elles whan the thyng semeth ootherweyes than it was biforn.
 [1066] And mooreover, I seye that though ye han sworn and bihight to perfourne youre emprise, and nathelees ye weyve
 [1066A] to perfourne thilke same emprise by juste cause, men sholde nat seyn therfore that ye were a liere ne forsworn.
 [1067] For the book seith that `the wise man maketh no lesyng whan he turneth his corage to the bettre.'
 [1068] And al be it so that youre emprise be establissed and ordeyned by greet multitude of folk,
 [1068A] yet thar ye nat accomplice thilke ordinaunce but yow like.
 [1069] For the trouthe of thynges and the profit been rather founden in fewe folk that been wise and
 [1069A] ful of resoun than by greet multitude of folk ther every man crieth and clatereth what that hym liketh.
 [1069B] Soothly swich multitude is nat honest.
 [1070] And as to the seconde resoun, where as ye seyn that alle wommen been wikke;
 [1070A] save youre grace, certes ye despisen alle wommen in this wyse, and
 [1070B] `he that al despiseth, al displeseth,' as seith the book.
 [1071] And Senec seith that `whoso wole have sapience shal no man dispreyse,
 [1071A] but he shal gladly techen the science that he kan withouten presumpcion or pride;
 [1072] and swiche thynges as he noght ne kan, he shal nat been ashamed to lerne hem,
 [1072A] and enquere of lasse folk than hymself.'
 [1073] And, sire, that ther hath been many a good womman may lightly be preved.
 [1074] For certes, sire, oure Lord Jhesu Crist wolde nevere have descended to be born of a womman,
 [1074A] if alle wommen hadden been wikke.
 [1075] And after that, for the grete bountee that is in wommen,
 [1075A] oure Lord Jhesu Crist, whan he was risen fro deeth to lyve,
 [1075B] appeered rather to a womman than to his Apostles.
 [1076] And though that Salomon seith that he ne foond nevere womman good,
 [1076A] it folweth nat therfore that alle wommen ben wikke.
 [1077] For though that he ne foond no good womman, certes,
 [1077A] many another man hath founden many a womman ful good and trewe.
 [1078] Or elles, per aventure, the entente of Salomon was this:
 [1078A] that, as in sovereyn bounte, he foond no womman --
 [1079] this is to seyn, that ther is no wight that hath sovereyn bountee save God allone,
 [1079A] as he hymself recordeth in hys Evaungelie.
 [1080] For ther nys no creature so good that hym ne wanteth
 [1080A] somwhat of the perfeccioun of God, that is his makere.
 [1081] Youre thridde reson is this: ye seyn that if ye governe yow by my conseil,
 [1081A] it sholde seme that ye hadde yeve me the maistrie and the lordshipe over youre persone.
 [1082] Sire, save youre grace, it is nat so. For if it so were that no man sholde be conseilled
 [1082A] but oonly of hem that hadden lordshipe and maistrie of his persone, men wolden nat be conseilled so ofte.
 [1083] For soothly thilke man that asketh conseil of a purpos, yet hath he free choys
 [1083A] wheither he wole werke by that conseil or noon.
 [1084] And as to youre fourthe resoun, ther ye seyn that the janglerie of wommen kan hyde thynges that they
 [1084A] wot noght, as who seith that a womman kan nat hyde that she woot;
 [1085] sire, thise wordes been understonde of wommen that been jangleresses and wikked;
 [1086] of whiche wommen men seyn that thre thynges dryven a man out of his hous --
 [1086A] that is to seyn, smoke, droppyng of reyn, and wikked wyves;
 [1087] and of swiche wommen seith Salomon that
 [1087A] `it were bettre dwelle in desert than with a womman that is riotous.'
 [1088] And sire, by youre leve, that am nat I,
 [1089] for ye han ful ofte assayed my grete silence and my grete pacience, and eek how wel that
 [1089A] I kan hyde and hele thynges that men oghte secreely to hyde.
 [1090] And soothly, as to youre fifthe resoun, where as ye seyn that in wikked conseil wommen venquisshe men,
 [1090A] God woot, thilke resoun stant heere in no stede.
 [1091] For understoond now, ye asken conseil to do wikkednesse;
 [1092] and if ye wole werken wikkednesse, and youre wif restreyneth thilke wikked purpos,
 [1092A] and overcometh yow by reson and by good conseil,
 [1093] certes youre wyf oghte rather to be preised than yblamed.
 [1094] Thus sholde ye understonde the philosophre that seith, `In wikked conseil wommen venquisshen hir housbondes.'
 [1095] And ther as ye blamen alle wommen and hir resouns, I shal shewe yow by manye ensamples that
 [1095A] many a womman hath ben ful good, and yet been, and hir conseils ful hoolsome and profitable.
 [1096] Eek som men han seyd that the conseillynge of wommen
 [1096A] is outher to deere or elles to litel of pris.
 [1097] But al be it so that ful many a womman is badde and hir conseil vile and noght worth,
 [1097A] yet han men founde ful many a good womman, and ful discret and wis in conseillynge.
 [1098] Loo, Jacob by good conseil of his mooder Rebekka wan the benysoun of Ysaak his fader
 [1098A] and the lordshipe over alle his bretheren.
 [1099] Judith by hire good conseil delivered the citee of Bethulie, in which she dwelled,
 [1099A] out of the handes of Olofernus, that hadde it biseged and wolde have al destroyed it.
 [1100] Abygail delivered Nabal hir housbonde fro David the kyng, that wolde have slayn hym,
 [1100A] and apaysed the ire of the kyng by hir wit and by hir good conseillyng.
 [1101] Hester by hir good conseil enhaunced greetly the peple of God in the regne of Assuerus the kyng.
 [1102] And the same bountee in good conseillyng of many a good womman may men telle.
 [1103] And mooreover, whan oure Lord hadde creat Adam, oure forme fader, he seyde in this wise:
 [1104] `It is nat good to been a man alloone; make we to hym an helpe semblable to hymself.'
 [1105] Heere may ye se that if that wommen were nat goode, and hir conseils goode and profitable,
 [1106] oure Lord God of hevene wolde nevere han wroght hem,
 [1106A] ne called hem help of man, but rather confusioun of man.
 [1107] And ther seyde oones a clerk in two vers, `What is bettre than gold? Jaspre.
 [1107A] What is bettre than jaspre? Wisedoom.
 [1108] And what is better than wisedoom? Womman. And what is bettre than a good womman? Nothyng.'
 [1109] And, sire, by manye of othre resons may ye seen that
 [1109A] manye wommen been goode, and hir conseils goode and profitable.
 [1110] And therfore, sire, if ye wol triste to my conseil, I shal restoore yow youre doghter hool and sound.
 [1111] And eek I wol do to yow so muche that ye shul have honour in this cause."
 [1112] Whan Melibee hadde herd the wordes of his wyf Prudence, he seyde thus:
 [1113] "I se wel that the word of Salomon is sooth.
 [1113A] He seith that `wordes that been spoken discreetly by ordinaunce been honycombes,
 [1113B] for they yeven swetnesse to the soule and hoolsomnesse to the body.'
 [1114] And, wyf, by cause of thy sweete wordes, and eek for I have assayed and preved thy grete sapience
 [1114A] and thy grete trouthe, I wol governe me by thy conseil in alle thyng."
 [1115] "Now, sire," quod dame Prudence, "and syn ye vouche sauf to been governed by my conseil,
 [1115A] I wol enforme yow how ye shul governe yourself in chesynge of youre conseillours.
 [1116] Ye shul first in alle youre werkes mekely biseken to the heighe God that he wol be youre conseillour;
 [1117] and shapeth yow to swich entente that he yeve yow conseil and confort, as taughte Thobie his sone:
 [1118] `At alle tymes thou shalt blesse God, and praye hym to dresse thy weyes,
 [1118A] and looke that alle thy conseils been in hym for everemoore.'
 [1119] Seint Jame eek seith: `If any of yow have nede of sapience, axe it of God.'
 [1120] And afterward thanne shul ye taken conseil in youreself,
 [1120A] and examyne wel youre thoghtes of swich thyng as yow thynketh that is best for youre profit.
 [1121] And thanne shul ye dryve fro youre herte thre thynges that been contrariouse to good conseil;
 [1122] that is to seyn, ire, coveitise, and hastifnesse.
 [1123] "First, he that axeth conseil of hymself, certes he moste been withouten ire, for manye causes.
 [1124] The firste is this: he that hath greet ire and wratthe in hymself, he weneth alwey that
 [1124A] he may do thyng that he may nat do.
 [1125] And secoundely, he that is irous and wrooth, he ne may nat wel deme;
 [1126] and he that may nat wel deme, may nat wel conseille.
 [1127] The thridde is this, that he that is irous and wrooth, as seith Senec,
 [1127A] ne may nat speke but blameful thynges,
 [1128] and with his viciouse wordes he stireth oother folk to angre and to ire.
 [1129] And eek, sire, ye moste dryve coveitise out of youre herte.
 [1130] For the Apostle seith that coveitise is roote of alle harmes.
 [1131] And trust wel that a coveitous man ne kan noght deme ne thynke,
 [1131A] but oonly to fulfille the ende of his coveitise;
 [1132] and certes, that ne may nevere been accompliced,
 [1132A] for evere the moore habundaunce that he hath of richesse, the moore he desireth.
 [1133] And, sire, ye moste also dryve out of youre herte hastifnesse; for certes,
 [1134] ye ne may nat deeme for the beste by a sodeyn thought that falleth in youre herte,
 [1134A] but ye moste avyse yow on it ful ofte.
 [1135] For, as ye herde her biforn, the commune proverbe is this, that `he that soone deemeth, soone repenteth.'
 [1136] Sire, ye ne be nat alwey in lyk disposicioun;
 [1137] for certes, somthyng that somtyme semeth to yow that it is good for to do,
 [1137A] another tyme it semeth to yow the contrarie.
 [1138] "Whan ye han taken conseil in youreself and han deemed by good deliberacion swich thyng as you semeth best,
 [1139] thanne rede I yow that ye kepe it secree.
 [1140] Biwrey nat youre conseil to no persone, but if so be that ye wenen sikerly that
 [1140A] thurgh youre biwreyyng youre condicioun shal be to yow the moore profitable.
 [1141] For Jhesus Syrak seith, `Neither to thy foo ne to thy frend discovere nat thy secree ne thy folie,
 [1142] for they wol yeve yow audience and lookynge and supportacioun in thy presence and scorne thee in thyn absence.'
 [1143] Another clerk seith that `scarsly shaltou fynden any persone that may kepe conseil secrely.'
 [1144] The book seith, `Whil that thou kepest thy conseil in thyn herte, thou kepest it in thy prisoun,
 [1145] and whan thou biwreyest thy conseil to any wight, he holdeth thee in his snare.'
 [1146] And therfore yow is bettre to hyde youre conseil in youre herte than praye him
 [1146A] to whom ye han biwreyed youre conseil that he wole kepen it cloos and stille.
 [1147] For Seneca seith: `If so be that thou ne mayst nat thyn owene conseil hyde,
 [1147A] how darstou prayen any oother wight thy conseil secrely to kepe?'
 [1148] But nathelees, if thou wene sikerly that the biwreiyng of thy conseil to a persone wol make
 [1148A] thy condicion to stonden in the bettre plyt, thanne shaltou tellen hym thy conseil in this wise.
 [1149] First thou shalt make no semblant wheither thee were levere pees or werre, or this or that,
 [1149A] ne shewe hym nat thy wille and thyn entente.
 [1150] For trust wel that comunli thise conseillours been flatereres,
 [1151] namely the conseillours of grete lordes,
 [1152] for they enforcen hem alwey rather to speken plesante wordes, enclynynge to the lordes lust,
 [1152A] than wordes that been trewe or profitable.
 [1153] And therfore men seyn that the riche man hath seeld good conseil, but if he have it of hymself.
 [1154] And after that thou shalt considere thy freendes and thyne enemys.
 [1155] And as touchynge thy freendes, thou shalt considere which of hem been
 [1155A] moost feithful and moost wise and eldest and most approved in conseillyng;
 [1156] and of hem shalt thou aske thy conseil, as the caas requireth.
 [1157] I seye that first ye shul clepe to youre conseil youre freendes that been trewe.
 [1158] For Salomon seith that `right as the herte of a man deliteth in savour that is soote,
 [1158A] right so the conseil of trewe freendes yeveth swetnesse to the soule.'
 [1159] He seith also, `Ther may no thyng be likned to the trewe freend,
 [1160] for certes gold ne silver ben nat so muche worth as the goode wyl of a trewe freend.'
 [1161] And eek he seith that `a trewe freend is a strong deffense; who so that it fyndeth,
 [1161A] certes he fyndeth a greet tresour.'
 [1162] Thanne shul ye eek considere if that youre trewe freendes been discrete and wise.
 [1162A] For the book seith, `Axe alwey thy conseil of hem that been wise.'
 [1163] And by this same resoun shul ye clepen to youre conseil of youre freendes that been of age,
 [1163A] swiche as han seyn and been expert in manye thynges and been approved in conseillynges.
 [1164] For the book seith that `in olde men is the sapience, and in longe tyme the prudence.'
 [1165] And Tullius seith that `grete thynges ne been nat ay accompliced by strengthe, ne by delivernesse of body, but
 [1165A] by good conseil, by auctoritee of persones, and by science; the whiche thre thynges ne been nat fieble by age,
 [1165B] but certes they enforcen and encreescen day by day.'
 [1166] And thanne shul ye kepe this for a general reule: First shul ye clepen to youre conseil
 [1166A] a fewe of youre freendes that been especiale;
 [1167] for Salomon seith, `Manye freendes have thou, but among a thousand chese thee oon to be thy conseillour.'
 [1168] For al be it so that thou first ne telle thy conseil but to a fewe,
 [1168A] thou mayst afterward telle it to mo folk if it be nede.
 [1169] But looke alwey that thy conseillours have thilke thre condiciouns that I have seyd bifore --
 [1169A] that is to seyn, that they be trewe, wise, and of oold experience.
 [1170] And werke nat alwey in every nede by oon counseillour allone;
 [1170A] for somtyme bihooveth it to been conseilled by manye.
 [1171] For Salomon seith, `Salvacion of thynges is where as ther been manye conseillours.'
 [1172] "Now, sith that I have toold yow of which folk ye sholde been counseilled, now
 [1172A] wol I teche yow which conseil ye oghte to eschewe.
 [1173] First, ye shul eschue the conseillyng of fooles; for Salomon seith, `Taak no conseil of a fool,
 [1173A] for he ne kan noght conseille but after his owene lust and his affeccioun.'
 [1174] The book seith that `the propretee of a fool is this: he troweth lightly harm of every wight,
 [1174A] and lightly troweth alle bountee in hymself.'
 [1175] Thou shalt eek eschue the conseillyng of alle flatereres, swiche as enforcen hem rather to preise youre persone
 [1175A] by flaterye than for to telle yow the soothfastnesse of thynges.
 [1176] Wherfore Tullius seith, `Amonges alle the pestilences that been in freendshipe the gretteste is flaterie.'
 [1176A] And therfore is it moore nede that thou eschue and drede flatereres than any oother peple.
 [1177] The book seith, `Thou shalt rather drede and flee fro the sweete wordes of flaterynge preiseres
 [1177A] than fro the egre wordes of thy freend that seith thee thy sothes.'
 [1178] Salomon seith that `the wordes of a flaterere is a snare to cacche with innocentz.'
 [1179] He seith also that `he that speketh to his freend wordes of swetnesse and of plesaunce
 [1179A] setteth a net biforn his feet to cacche hym.'
 [1180] And therfore seith Tullius, `Enclyne nat thyne eres to flatereres, ne taak no conseil of the wordes of flaterye.'
 [1181] And Caton seith, `Avyse thee wel, and eschue the wordes of swetnesse and of plesaunce.'
 [1182] And eek thou shalt eschue the conseillyng of thyne olde enemys that been reconsiled.
 [1183] The book seith that `no wight retourneth saufly into the grace of his olde enemy.'
 [1184] And Isope seith, `Ne trust nat to hem to whiche thou hast had som tyme werre or enemytee,
 [1184A] ne telle hem nat thy conseil.'
 [1185] And Seneca telleth the cause why: `It may nat be,' seith he, `that where greet
 [1185A] fyr hath longe tyme endured, that ther ne dwelleth som vapour of warmnesse.'
 [1186] And therfore seith Salomon, `In thyn olde foo trust nevere.'
 [1187] For sikerly, though thyn enemy be reconsiled, and maketh thee chiere of humylitee,
 [1187A] and lowteth to thee with his heed, ne trust hym nevere.
 [1188] For certes he maketh thilke feyned humilitee moore for his profit than for any love of thy persone,
 [1188A] by cause that he deemeth to have victorie over thy persone by swich feyned contenance,
 [1188B] the which victorie he myghte nat have by strif or werre.
 [1189] And Peter Alfonce seith, `Make no felawshipe with thyne olde enemys, for if thou do hem bountee,
 [1189A] they wol perverten it into wikkednesse.'
 [1190] And eek thou most eschue the conseillyng of hem that been thy servantz and beren thee greet reverence,
 [1190A] for peraventure they seyn it moore for drede than for love.
 [1191] And therfore seith a philosophre in this wise:
 [1191A] `Ther is no wight parfitly trewe to hym that he to soore dredeth.'
 [1192] And Tullius seith, `Ther nys no myght so greet of any emperour that longe may endure,
 [1192A] but if he have moore love of the peple than drede.'
 [1193] Thou shalt also eschue the conseiling of folk that been dronkelewe, for they ne kan no conseil hyde.
 [1194] For Salomon seith, `Ther is no privetee ther as regneth dronkenesse.'
 [1195] Ye shul also han in suspect the conseillyng of swich folk as
 [1195A] conseille yow o thyng prively and conseille yow the contrarie openly.
 [1196] For Cassidorie seith that `it is a manere sleighte to hyndre,
 [1196A] whan he sheweth to doon o thyng openly and werketh prively the contrarie.'
 [1197] Thou shalt also have in suspect the conseillyng of wikked folk. For the book seith,
 [1197A] `The conseillyng of wikked folk is alwey ful of fraude.'
 [1198] And David seith, `Blisful is that man that hath nat folwed the conseilyng of shrewes.'
 [1199] Thou shalt also eschue the conseillyng of yong folk, for hir conseil is nat rype.
 [1200] "Now, sire, sith I have shewed yow of which folk ye shul take youre conseil
 [1200A] and of which folk ye shul folwe the conseil,
 [1201] now wol I teche yow how ye shal examyne youre conseil, after the doctrine of Tullius.
 [1202] In the examynynge thanne of youre conseillour ye shul considere manye thynges.
 [1203] Alderfirst thou shalt considere that in thilke thyng that thou purposest, and upon what thyng thou wolt have conseil,
 [1203A] that verray trouthe be seyd and conserved; this is to seyn, telle trewely thy tale.
 [1204] For he that seith fals may nat wel be conseilled in that cas of which he lieth.
 [1205] And after this thou shalt considere the thynges that acorden to that thou purposest
 [1205A] for to do by thy conseillours, if resoun accorde therto,
 [1206] and eek if thy myght may atteine therto, and if the moore part
 [1206A] and the bettre part of thy conseillours acorde therto, or noon.
 [1207] Thanne shaltou considere what thyng shal folwe of that conseillyng,
 [1207A] as hate, pees, werre, grace, profit, or damage, and manye othere thynges.
 [1208] And in alle thise thynges thou shalt chese the beste and weyve alle othere thynges.
 [1209] Thanne shaltow considere of what roote is engendred the matiere of thy conseil
 [1209A] and what fruyt it may conceyve and engendre.
 [1210] Thou shalt eek considere alle thise causes, fro whennes they been sprongen.
 [1211] And whan ye han examyned youre conseil, as I have seyd, and which partie is the bettre
 [1211A] and moore profitable, and han approved it by manye wise folk and olde,
 [1212] thanne shaltou considere if thou mayst parfourne it and maken of it a good ende.
 [1213] For certes resoun wol nat that any man sholde bigynne a thyng
 [1213A] but if he myghte parfourne it as hym oghte;
 [1214] ne no wight sholde take upon hym so hevy a charge that he myghte nat bere it.
 [1215] For the proverbe seith, `He that to muche embraceth, distreyneth litel.'
 [1216] And Catoun seith, `Assay to do swich thyng as thou hast power to doon,
 [1216A] lest that the charge oppresse thee so soore that
 [1216B] thee bihoveth to weyve thyng that thou hast bigonne.'
 [1217] And if so be that thou be in doute wheither thou mayst parfourne a thing or noon,
 [1217A] chese rather to suffre than bigynne.
 [1218] And Piers Alphonce seith, `If thou hast myght to doon a thyng of which thou most repente,
 [1218A] it is bettre "nay" than "ye."'
 [1219] This is to seyn, that thee is bettre holde thy tonge stille than for to speke.
 [1220] Thanne may ye understonde by strenger resons that if thou hast power to parfourne a werk
 [1220A] of which thou shalt repente, thanne is it bettre that thou suffre than bigynne.
 [1221] Wel seyn they that defenden every wight to assaye a thyng of which he is in doute
 [1221A] wheither he may parfourne it or noon.
 [1222] And after, whan ye han examyned youre conseil, as I have seyd biforn, and knowen wel that
 [1222A] ye may parfourne youre emprise, conferme it thanne sadly til it be at an ende.
 [1223] "Now is it resoun and tyme that I shewe yow whanne and wherfore that
 [1223A] ye may chaunge youre counseil withouten youre repreve.
 [1224] Soothly, a man may chaungen his purpos and his conseil if the cause cesseth,
 [1224A] or whan a newe caas bitydeth.
 [1225] For the lawe seith that `upon thynges that newely bityden bihoveth newe conseil.'
 [1226] And Senec seith, `If thy conseil is comen to the eeris of thyn enemy, chaunge thy conseil.'
 [1227] Thou mayst also chaunge thy conseil if so be that thou fynde that by errour,
 [1227A] or by oother cause, harm or damage may bityde.
 [1228] Also if thy conseil be dishonest, or ellis cometh of dishonest cause, chaunge thy conseil.
 [1229] For the lawes seyn that `alle bihestes that been dishoneste been of no value';
 [1230] and eek if so be that it be inpossible, or may nat goodly be parfourned or kept.
 [1231] "And take this for a general reule, that every conseil that is affermed so strongly that it may nat
 [1231A] be chaunged for no condicioun that may bityde, I seye that thilke conseil is wikked."
 [1232] This Melibeus, whanne he hadde herd the doctrine of his wyf dame Prudence, answerde in this wyse:
 [1233] "Dame," quod he, "as yet into this tyme ye han wel and covenably taught me as in general how
 [1233A] I shal governe me in the chesynge and in the withholdynge of my conseillours.
 [1234] But now wolde I fayn that ye wolde condescende in especial
 [1235] and telle me how liketh yow, or what semeth yow, by oure conseillours
 [1235A] that we han chosen in oure present nede."
 [1236] "My lord," quod she, "I biseke yow in al humblesse that ye wol nat wilfully replie agayn my resouns,
 [1236A] ne distempre youre herte, thogh I speke thyng that yow displese.
 [1237] For God woot that, as in myn entente, I speke it for youre beste,
 [1237A] for youre honour, and for youre profite eke.
 [1238] And soothly, I hope that youre benyngnytee wol taken it in pacience.
 [1239] Trusteth me wel," quod she, "that youre conseil as in this caas ne sholde nat, as to speke properly,
 [1239A] be called a conseillyng, but a mocioun or a moevyng of folye,
 [1240] in which conseil ye han erred in many a sondry wise.
 [1241] "First and forward, ye han erred in th' assemblynge of youre conseillours.
 [1242] For ye sholde first have cleped a fewe folk to youre conseil, and after ye myghte han shewed it
 [1242A] to mo folk, if it hadde been nede.
 [1243] But certes, ye han sodeynly cleped to youre conseil a greet multitude of peple,
 [1243A] ful chargeant and ful anoyous for to heere.
 [1244] Also ye han erred, for theras ye sholden oonly have cleped to youre conseil
 [1244A] youre trewe frendes olde and wise,
 [1245] ye han ycleped straunge folk, yonge folk, false flatereres, and enemys reconsiled,
 [1245A] and folk that doon yow reverence withouten love.
 [1246] And eek also ye have erred, for ye han broght with yow to youre conseil ire, coveitise, and hastifnesse,
 [1247] the whiche thre thinges been contrariouse to every conseil honest and profitable;
 [1248] the whiche thre thinges ye han nat anientissed or destroyed hem,
 [1248A] neither in youreself, ne in youre conseillours, as yow oghte.
 [1249] Ye han erred also, for ye han shewed to youre conseillours
 [1249A] youre talent and youre affeccioun to make werre anon and for to do vengeance.
 [1250] They han espied by youre wordes to what thyng ye been enclyned;
 [1251] and therfore han they rather conseilled yow to youre talent than to youre profit.
 [1252] Ye han erred also, for it semeth that yow suffiseth
 [1252A] to han been conseilled by thise conseillours oonly, and with litel avys,
 [1253] whereas in so greet and so heigh a nede it hadde been necessarie mo conseillours
 [1253A] and moore deliberacion to parfourne youre emprise.
 [1254] Ye han erred also, for ye ne han nat examyned youre conseil in the forseyde manere,
 [1254A] ne in due manere, as the caas requireth.
 [1255] Ye han erred also, for ye han maked no division bitwixe youre conseillours -- this is to seyn,
 [1255A] bitwixen youre trewe freendes and youre feyned conseillours --
 [1256] ne ye han nat knowe the wil of youre trewe freendes olde and wise,
 [1257] but ye han cast alle hire wordes in an hochepot, and enclyned youre herte to the moore part
 [1257A] and to the gretter nombre, and there been ye condescended.
 [1258] And sith ye woot wel that men shal alwey fynde a gretter nombre of fooles than of wise men,
 [1259] and therfore the conseils that been at congregaciouns and multitudes of folk, there as men take moore reward
 [1259A] to the nombre than to the sapience of persones,
 [1260] ye se wel that in swiche conseillynges fooles han the maistrie."
 [1261] Melibeus answerde agayn, and seyde, "I graunte wel that I have erred;
 [1262] but there as thou hast toold me heerbiforn
 [1262A] that he nys nat to blame that chaungeth his conseillours in certein caas and for certeine juste causes,
 [1263] I am al redy to chaunge my conseillours right as thow wolt devyse.
 [1264] The proverbe seith that `for to do synne is mannyssh,
 [1264A] but certes for to persevere longe in synne is werk of the devel.'"
 [1265] To this sentence answered anon dame Prudence, and seyde,
 [1266] "Examineth," quod she, "youre conseil, and lat us see
 [1266A] the whiche of hem han spoken most resonably and taught yow best conseil.
 [1267] And for as muche as that the examynacion is necessarie, lat us bigynne at the surgiens
 [1267A] and at the phisiciens, that first speeken in this matiere.
 [1268] I sey yow that the surgiens and phisiciens han seyd yow in youre conseil discreetly, as hem oughte,
 [1269] and in hir speche seyden ful wisely that to the office of hem aperteneth to doon to every wight
 [1269A] honour and profit, and no wight for to anoye,
 [1270] and after hir craft to doon greet diligence
 [1270A] unto the cure of hem which that they han in hir governaunce.
 [1271] And, sire, right as they han answered wisely and discreetly,
 [1272] right so rede I that they been heighly and sovereynly gerdoned for hir noble speche,
 [1273] and eek for they sholde do the moore ententif bisynesse in the curacion of youre doghter deere.
 [1274] For al be it so that they been youre freendes, therfore shal ye nat suffren
 [1274A] that they serve yow for noght,
 [1275] but ye oghte the rather gerdone hem and shewe hem youre largesse.
 [1276] And as touchynge the proposicioun which that the phisiciens encreesceden in this caas -- this is to seyn,
 [1277] that in maladies that oon contrarie is warisshed by another contrarie --
 [1278] I wolde fayn knowe hou ye understonde thilke text, and what is youre sentence."
 [1279] "Certes," quod Melibeus, "I understonde it in this wise:
 [1280] that right as they han doon me a contrarie, right so sholde I doon hem another.
 [1281] For right as they han venged hem on me and doon me wrong,
 [1281A] right so shal I venge me upon hem and doon hem wrong;
 [1282] and thanne have I cured oon contrarie by another."
 [1283] "Lo, lo," quod dame Prudence, "how lightly is every man enclined to his owene desir
 [1283A] and to his owene plesaunce!
 [1284] Certes," quod she, "the wordes of the phisiciens ne sholde nat han been understonden in thys wise.
 [1285] For certes, wikkednesse is nat contrarie to wikkednesse, ne vengeance to vengeaunce,
 [1285A] ne wrong to wrong, but they been semblable.
 [1286] And therfore o vengeaunce is nat warisshed by another vengeaunce, ne o wroong by another wroong,
 [1287] but everich of hem encreesceth and aggreggeth oother.
 [1288] But certes, the wordes of the phisiciens sholde been understonden in this wise:
 [1289] for good and wikkednesse been two contraries, and pees and werre, vengeaunce
 [1289A] and suffraunce, discord and accord, and manye othere thynges;
 [1290] but certes, wikkednesse shal be warisshed by goodnesse, discord by accord, werre by pees,
 [1290A] and so forth of othere thynges.
 [1291] And heerto accordeth Seint Paul the Apostle in manye places.
 [1292] He seith, `Ne yeldeth nat harm for harm, ne wikked speche for wikked speche,
 [1293] but do wel to hym that dooth thee harm and blesse hym that seith to thee harm.'
 [1294] And in manye othere places he amonesteth pees and accord.
 [1295] But now wol I speke to yow of the conseil which that was yeven to yow
 [1295A] by the men of lawe and the wise folk,
 [1296] that seyden alle by oon accord, as ye han herd bifore,
 [1297] that over alle thynges ye shal doon youre diligence to kepen youre persone and to warnestoore youre hous;
 [1298] and seyden also that in this caas yow oghten for to werken ful avysely and with greet deliberacioun.
 [1299] And, sire, as to the firste point, that toucheth to the kepyng of youre persone,
 [1300] ye shul understonde that he that hath werre shal everemoore mekely and devoutly preyen, biforn alle thynges,
 [1301] that Jhesus Crist of his mercy wol han hym in his proteccion
 [1301A] and been his sovereyn helpyng at his nede.
 [1302] For certes, in this world ther is no wight that may be conseilled ne kept sufficeantly
 [1302A] withouten the kepyng of oure Lord Jhesu Crist.
 [1303] To this sentence accordeth the prophete David, that seith,
 [1304] `If God ne kepe the citee, in ydel waketh he that it kepeth.'
 [1305] Now, sire, thanne shul ye committe the kepyng of youre persone
 [1305A] to youre trewe freendes that been approved and yknowe,
 [1306] and of hem shul ye axen help youre persone for to kepe. For Catoun seith,
 [1306A] `If thou hast nede of help, axe it of thy freendes,
 [1307] for ther nys noon so good a phisicien as thy trewe freend.'
 [1308] And after this thanne shul ye kepe yow fro alle straunge folk, and fro lyeres,
 [1308A] and have alwey in suspect hire compaignye.
 [1309] For Piers Alfonce seith, `Ne taak no compaignye by the weye of a straunge man,
 [1309A] but if so be that thou have knowe hym of a lenger tyme.
 [1310] And if so be that he falle into thy compaignye paraventure, withouten thyn assent,
 [1311] enquere thanne as subtilly as thou mayst of his conversacion, and of his lyf bifore, and feyne thy wey;
 [1311A] seye that [thou] wolt thider as thou wolt nat go;
 [1312] and if he bereth a spere, hoold thee on the right syde,
 [1312A] and if he bere a swerd, hoold thee on the lift syde.'
 [1313] And after this thanne shul ye kepe yow wisely from all swich manere peple as I have seyd bifore,
 [1313A] and hem and hir conseil eschewe.
 [1314] And after this thanne shul ye kepe yow in swich manere
 [1315] that, for any presumpcion of youre strengthe, that ye ne dispise nat, ne accompte nat the myght
 [1315A] of youre adversarie so litel that ye lete the kepyng of youre persone for youre presumpcioun,
 [1316] for every wys man dredeth his enemy.
 [1317] And Salomon seith, `Weleful is he that of alle hath drede,
 [1318] for certes, he that thurgh the hardynesse of his herte and thurgh the hardynesse of hymself hath
 [1318A] to greet presumpcioun, hym shal yvel bityde.'
 [1319] Thanne shul ye everemoore contrewayte embusshementz and alle espiaille.
 [1320] For Senec seith that `the wise man that dredeth harmes, eschueth harmes,
 [1321] ne he ne falleth into perils that perils eschueth.'
 [1322] And al be it so that it seme that thou art in siker place,
 [1322A] yet shaltow alwey do thy diligence in kepynge of thy persone;
 [1323] this is to seyn, ne be nat necligent to kepe thy persone
 [1323A] nat oonly fro thy gretteste enemys but fro thy leeste enemy.
 [1324] Senek seith, `A man that is well avysed, he dredeth his leste enemy.'
 [1325] Ovyde seith that `the litel wesele wol slee the grete bole and the wilde hert.'
 [1326] And the book seith, `A litel thorn may prikke a kyng ful soore,
 [1326A] and an hound wol holde the wilde boor.'
 [1327] But nathelees, I sey nat thou shalt be so coward that thou doute ther wher as is no drede.
 [1328] The book seith that `somme folk han greet lust to deceyve, but yet they dreden hem to be deceyved.'
 [1329] Yet shaltou drede to been empoisoned and kepe the from the compaignye of scorneres.
 [1330] For the book seith, `With scorneres make no compaignye, but flee hire wordes as venym.'
 [1331] "Now, as to the seconde point,
 [1331A] where as youre wise conseillours conseilled yow to warnestoore youre hous with gret diligence,
 [1332] I wolde fayn knowe how that ye understonde thilke wordes and what is youre sentence."
 [1333] Melibeus answerde and seyde, "Certes, I understande it in this wise: That I shal warnestoore myn hous with toures,
 [1333A] swiche as han castelles and othere manere edifices, and armure, and artelries,
 [1334] by whiche thynges I may my persone and myn hous so kepen and deffenden
 [1334A] that myne enemys shul been in drede myn hous for to approche."
 [1335] To this sentence answerde anon Prudence: "Warnestooryng," quod she,
 [1335A] "of heighe toures and of grete edifices apperteyneth somtyme to pryde.
 [1336] And eek men make heighe toures, [and grete edifices] with grete costages and with greet travaille,
 [1336A] and whan that they been accompliced, yet be they nat worth a stree,
 [1336B] but if they be defended by trewe freendes that been olde and wise.
 [1337] And understoond wel that the gretteste and strongeste garnysoun that a riche man may have,
 [1337A] as wel to kepen his persone as his goodes, is
 [1338] that he be biloved with hys subgetz and with his neighebores.
 [1339] For thus seith Tullius, that `ther is a manere garnysoun
 [1339A] that no man may venquysse ne disconfite, and that is
 [1340] a lord to be biloved of his citezeins and of his peple.'
 [1341] Now, sire, as to the thridde point, where as youre olde
 [1341A] and wise conseillours seyden that yow ne oghte nat sodeynly ne hastily proceden in this nede,
 [1342] but that yow oghte purveyen and apparaillen yow in this caas with greet diligence and greet deliberacioun;
 [1343] trewely, I trowe that they seyden right wisely and right sooth.
 [1344] For Tullius seith, `In every nede, er thou bigynne it, apparaille thee with greet diligence.'
 [1345] Thanne seye I that in vengeance-takyng, in werre, in bataille, and in warnestooryng,
 [1346] er thow bigynne, I rede that thou apparaille thee therto, and do it with greet deliberacion.
 [1347] For Tullius seith that `longe apparaillyng biforn the bataille maketh short victorie.'
 [1348] And Cassidorus seith, `The garnysoun is stronger whan it is longe tyme avysed.'
 [1349] But now lat us speken of the conseil that was accorded by youre neighebores,
 [1349A] swiche as doon yow reverence withouten love,
 [1350] youre olde enemys reconsiled, youre flatereres,
 [1351] that conseilled yow certeyne thynges prively, and openly conseilleden yow the contrarie;
 [1352] the yonge folk also, that conseilleden yow to venge yow and make werre anon.
 [1353] And certes, sire, as I have seyd biforn, ye han greetly erred
 [1353A] to han cleped swich manere folk to youre conseil,
 [1354] which conseillours been ynogh repreved by the resouns aforeseyd.
 [1355] But nathelees, lat us now descende to the special. Ye shuln first procede after the doctrine of Tullius.
 [1356] Certes, the trouthe of this matiere, or of this conseil, nedeth nat diligently enquere,
 [1357] for it is wel wist whiche they been that han doon to yow this trespas and vileynye,
 [1358] and how manye trespassours, and in what manere
 [1358A] they han to yow doon al this wrong and al this vileynye.
 [1359] And after this, thanne shul ye examyne the seconde condicion which that the same Tullius addeth in this matiere.
 [1360] For Tullius put a thyng which that he clepeth `consentynge'; this is to seyn,
 [1361] who been they, and whiche been they and how manye that consenten to thy conseil
 [1361A] in thy wilfulnesse to doon hastif vengeance.
 [1362] And lat us considere also who been they, and how manye been they,
 [1362A] and whiche been they that consenteden to youre adversaries.
 [1363] And certes, as to the firste poynt, it is wel knowen whiche folk been
 [1363A] they that consenteden to youre hastif wilfulnesse,
 [1364] for trewely, alle tho that conseilleden yow to maken sodeyn werre ne been nat youre freendes.
 [1365] Lat us now considere whiche been they that ye holde so greetly youre freendes as to youre persone.
 [1366] For al be it so that ye be myghty and riche, certes ye ne been but allone,
 [1367] for certes ye ne han no child but a doghter,
 [1368] ne ye ne han bretheren, ne cosyns germayns, ne noon oother neigh kynrede,
 [1369] wherfore that youre enemys for drede sholde stinte to plede with yow or to destroye youre persone.
 [1370] Ye knowen also that youre richesses mooten been dispended in diverse parties,
 [1371] and whan that every wight hath his part, they ne wollen taken but litel reward to venge thy deeth.
 [1372] But thyne enemys been thre, and they han manie children, bretheren, cosyns, and oother ny kynrede.
 [1373] And though so were that thou haddest slayn of hem two or three, yet dwellen ther ynowe
 [1373A] to wreken hir deeth and to sle thy persone.
 [1374] And though so be that youre kynrede be moore siker and stedefast than the kyn of youre adversarie,
 [1375] yet nathelees youre kynrede nys but a fer kynrede; they been but litel syb to yow,
 [1376] and the kyn of youre enemys been ny syb to hem.
 [1376A] And certes, as in that, hir condicioun is bet than youres.
 [1377] Thanne lat us considere also if the conseillyng of hem that conseilleden yow to taken sodeyn vengeaunce,
 [1377A] wheither it accorde to resoun.
 [1378] And certes, ye knowe wel `nay.'
 [1379] For, as by right and resoun, ther may no man taken vengeance on no wight
 [1379A] but the juge that hath the jurisdiccioun of it,
 [1380] whan it is graunted hym to take thilke vengeance hastily or attemprely, as the lawe requireth.
 [1381] And yet mooreover of thilke word that Tullius clepeth `consentynge,'
 [1382] thou shalt considere if thy myght and thy power may consenten
 [1382A] and suffise to thy wilfulnesse and to thy conseillours.
 [1383] And certes thou mayst wel seyn that `nay.'
 [1384] For sikerly, as for to speke proprely, we may do no thyng
 [1384A] but oonly swich thyng as we may doon rightfully.
 [1385] And certes rightfully ne mowe ye take no vengeance, as of youre propre auctoritee.
 [1386] Thanne mowe ye seen that youre power ne consenteth nat, ne accordeth nat, with youre wilfulnesse.
 [1387] "Lat us now examyne the thridde point, that Tullius clepeth `consequent.'
 [1388] Thou shalt understonde that the vengeance that thou purposest for to take is the consequent;
 [1389] and therof folweth another vengeaunce, peril, and werre, and othere damages withoute nombre,
 [1389A] of whiche we be nat war, as at this tyme.
 [1390] And as touchynge the fourthe point, that Tullius clepeth `engendrynge,'
 [1391] thou shalt considere that this wrong which that is doon to thee
 [1391A] is engendred of the hate of thyne enemys,
 [1392] and of the vengeance-takynge upon that wolde engendre another vengeance,
 [1392A] and muchel sorwe and wastynge of richesses, as I seyde.
 [1393] "Now, sire, as to the point that Tullius clepeth `causes,' which that is the laste point,
 [1394] thou shalt understonde that the wrong that thou hast receyved hath certeine causes,
 [1395] whiche that clerkes clepen Oriens and Efficiens, and Causa longinqua and Causa propinqua;
 [1395A] this is to seyn, the fer cause and the ny cause.
 [1396] The fer cause is almyghty God, that is cause of alle thynges.
 [1397] The neer cause is thy thre enemys.
 [1398] The cause accidental was hate.
 [1399] The cause material been the fyve woundes of thy doghter.
 [1400] The cause formal is the manere of hir werkynge that broghten laddres and cloumben in at thy wyndowes.
 [1401] The cause final was for to sle thy doghter. It letted nat in as muche as in hem was.
 [1402] But for to speken of the fer cause, as to what ende they shul come, or what shal finally
 [1402A] bityde of hem in this caas, ne kan I nat deeme but by conjectynge and by supposynge.
 [1403] For we shul suppose that they shul come to a wikked ende,
 [1404] by cause that the Book of Decrees seith, `Seelden, or with greet peyne, been causes ybroght to good ende
 [1404A] whanne they been baddely bigonne.'
 [1405] "Now, sire, if men wolde axe me why that God suffred men to do yow this vileynye,
 [1405A] certes, I kan nat wel answere, as for no soothfastnesse.
 [1406] For th' apostle seith that `the sciences and the juggementz of oure Lord God almyghty been ful depe;
 [1407] ther may no man comprehende ne serchen hem suffisantly.'
 [1408] Nathelees, by certeyne presumpciouns and conjectynges, I holde and bileeve
 [1409] that God, which that is ful of justice and of rightwisnesse, hath suffred this bityde by juste cause resonable.
 [1410] "Thy name is Melibee; this is to seyn, `a man that drynketh hony.'
 [1411] Thou hast ydronke so muchel hony of sweete temporeel richesses, and delices and honours of this world
 [1412] that thou art dronken and hast forgeten Jhesu Crist thy creatour.
 [1413] Thou ne hast nat doon to hym swich honour and reverence as thee oughte,
 [1414] ne thou ne hast nat wel ytaken kep to the wordes of Ovide, that seith,
 [1415] `Under the hony of the goodes of the body is hyd the venym that sleeth the soule.'
 [1416] And Salomon seith, `If thou hast founden hony, ete of it that suffiseth,
 [1417] for if thou ete of it out of mesure, thou shalt spewe' and be nedy and povre.
 [1418] And peraventure Crist hath thee in despit, and
 [1418A] hath turned awey fro thee his face and his eeris of misericorde,
 [1419] and also he hath suffred that thou hast been punysshed in the manere that thow hast ytrespassed.
 [1420] Thou hast doon synne agayn oure Lord Crist,
 [1421] for certes, the three enemys of mankynde
 [1421A] -- that is to seyn, the flessh, the feend, and the world --
 [1422] thou hast suffred hem entre in to thyn herte wilfully by the wyndowes of thy body,
 [1423] and hast nat defended thyself suffisantly agayns hire assautes and hire temptaciouns,
 [1423A] so that they han wounded thy soule in fyve places;
 [1424] this is to seyn, the deedly synnes that been entred into thyn herte by thy fyve wittes.
 [1425] And in the same manere oure Lord Crist hath woold and suffred
 [1425A] that thy three enemys been entred into thyn house by the wyndowes
 [1426] and han ywounded thy doghter in the forseyde manere."
 [1427] "Certes," quod Melibee, "I se wel that ye enforce yow muchel by wordes to overcome me in swich manere
 [1427A] that I shal nat venge me of myne enemys,
 [1428] shewynge me the perils and the yveles that myghten falle of this vengeance.
 [1429] But whoso wolde considere in alle vengeances the perils and yveles that myghte sewe of vengeance-takynge,
 [1430] a man wolde nevere take vengeance, and that were harm;
 [1431] for by the vengeance-takynge been the wikked men dissevered fro the goode men,
 [1432] and they that han wyl to do wikkednesse restreyne hir wikked purpos,
 [1432A] whan they seen the punyssynge and chastisynge of the trespassours."
 [1435] And yet seye I moore, that right as a singuler persone synneth in takynge vengeance of another man,
 [1436] right so synneth the juge if he do no vengeance of hem that it han disserved.
 [1437] For Senec seith thus: `That maister,' he seith, `is good that proveth shrewes.'
 [1438] And as Cassidore seith, `A man dredeth to do outrages whan he woot and knoweth
 [1438A] that it displeseth to the juges and the sovereyns.'
 [1439] And another seith, `The juge that dredeth to do right maketh men shrewes.'
 [1440] And Seint Paul the Apostle seith in his Epistle, whan he writeth unto the Romayns, that
 [1440A] `the juges beren nat the spere withouten cause,
 [1441] but they beren it to punysse the shrewes and mysdoers and for to defende the goode men.'
 [1442] If ye wol thanne take vengeance of youre enemys, ye shul retourne or have youre recours to the juge
 [1442A] that hath the jurisdiccion upon hem,
 [1443] and he shal punysse hem as the lawe axeth and requireth."
 [1444] "A," quod Melibee, "this vengeance liketh me no thyng.
 [1445] I bithenke me now and take heede how Fortune hath norissed me fro my childhede
 [1445A] and hath holpen me to passe many a stroong paas.
 [1446] Now wol I assayen hire, trowynge, with Goddes help, that she shal helpe me my shame for to venge."
 [1447] "Certes," quod Prudence, "if ye wol werke by my conseil, ye shul nat assaye Fortune by no wey,
 [1448] ne ye shul nat lene or bowe unto hire, after the word of Senec,
 [1449] for `thynges that been folily doon, and that been in hope of Fortune, shullen nevere come to good ende.'
 [1450] And, as the same Senec seith, `The moore cleer and the moore shynyng that Fortune is,
 [1450A] the moore brotil and the sonner broken she is.'
 [1451] Trusteth nat in hire, for she nys nat stidefast ne stable,
 [1452] for whan thow trowest to be moost seur or siker of hire help,
 [1452A] she wol faille thee and deceyve thee.
 [1453] And where as ye seyn that Fortune hath norissed yow fro youre childhede,
 [1454] I seye that in so muchel shul ye the lasse truste in hire and in hir wit.
 [1455] For Senec seith, `What man that is norissed by Fortune, she maketh hym a greet fool.'
 [1456] Now thanne, syn ye desire and axe vengeance, and the vengeance that is doon after the lawe
 [1456A] and bifore the juge ne liketh yow nat,
 [1457] and the vengeance that is doon in hope of Fortune is perilous and uncertein,
 [1458] thanne have ye noon oother remedie but for to have youre recours
 [1458A] unto the sovereyn Juge that vengeth alle vileynyes and wronges.
 [1459] And he shal venge yow after that hymself witnesseth, where as he seith,
 [1460] `Leveth the vengeance to me, and I shal do it.'"
 [1461] Melibee answerde, "If I ne venge me nat of the vileynye that men han doon to me,
 [1462] I sompne or warne hem that han doon to me that vileynye,
 [1462A] and alle othere, to do me another vileynye.
 [1463] For it is writen, `If thou take no vengeance of an oold vileynye,
 [1463A] thou sompnest thyne adversaries to do thee a newe vileynye.'
 [1464] And also for my suffrance men wolden do me so muchel vileynye that
 [1464A] I myghte neither bere it ne susteene,
 [1465] and so sholde I been put and holden overlowe.
 [1466] For men seyn, `In muchel suffrynge shul manye thynges falle unto thee whiche thou shalt nat mowe suffre.'"
 [1467] "Certes," quod Prudence, "I graunte yow that over-muchel suffraunce is nat good.
 [1468] But yet ne folweth it nat therof that every persone to whom men doon vileynye take of it vengeance,
 [1469] for that aperteneth and longeth al oonly to the juges, for they shul venge the vileynyes and injuries.
 [1470] And therfore tho two auctoritees that ye han seyd above been oonly understonden in the juges,
 [1471] for whan they suffren over-muchel the wronges and the vileynyes to be doon withouten punysshynge,
 [1472] they sompne nat a man al oonly for to do newe wronges, but they comanden it.
 [1473] Also a wys man seith that `the juge that correcteth nat the synnere comandeth and biddeth hym do synne.'
 [1474] And the juges and sovereyns myghten in hir land so muchel suffre of the shrewes and mysdoeres
 [1475] that they sholden, by swich suffrance, by proces of tyme wexen of swich power and myght
 [1475A] that they sholden putte out the juges and the sovereyns from hir places,
 [1476] and atte laste maken hem lesen hire lordshipes.
 [1477] "But lat us now putte that ye have leve to venge yow.
 [1478] I seye ye been nat of myght and power as now to venge yow,
 [1479] for if ye wole maken comparisoun unto the myght of youre adversaries, ye shul fynde in manye thynges that
 [1479A] I have shewed yow er this that hire condicion is bettre than youres.
 [1480] And therfore seye I that it is good as now that ye suffre and be pacient.
 [1481] "Forthermoore, ye knowen wel that after the comune sawe, `it is a woodnesse a man to stryve
 [1481A] with a strenger or a moore myghty man than he is hymself,
 [1482] and for to stryve with a man of evene strengthe -- that is to seyn,
 [1482A] with as strong a man as he is -- it is peril,
 [1483] and for to stryve with a weyker man, it is folie.'
 [1484] And therfore sholde a man flee stryvynge as muchel as he myghte.
 [1485] For Salomon seith, `It is a greet worshipe to a man to kepen hym fro noyse and stryf.'
 [1486] And if it so bifalle or happe that a man of gretter myght and strengthe
 [1486A] than thou art do thee grevaunce,
 [1487] studie and bisye thee rather to stille the same grevaunce than for to venge thee.
 [1488] For Senec seith that `he putteth hym in greet peril
 [1488A] that stryveth with a gretter man than he is hymself.'
 [1489] And Catoun seith, `If a man of hyer estaat or degree, or moore myghty than thou,
 [1489A] do thee anoy or grevaunce, suffre hym,
 [1490] for he that oones hath greved thee, may another tyme releeve thee and helpe.'
 [1491] Yet sette I caas ye have bothe myght and licence for to venge yow,
 [1492] I seye that ther be ful manye thynges that shul restreyne yow of vengeance-takynge
 [1493] and make yow for to enclyne to suffre, and for to han pacience
 [1493A] in the wronges that han been doon to yow.
 [1494] First and foreward, if ye wole considere the defautes that been in youre owene persone,
 [1495] for whiche defautes God hath suffred yow have this tribulacioun, as I have seyd yow heer-biforn.
 [1496] For the poete seith that `we oghte paciently taken the tribulacions
 [1496A] that comen to us, whan we thynken and consideren that we han disserved to have hem.'
 [1497] And Seint Gregorie seith that `whan a man considereth wel the nombre of his defautes and of his synnes,
 [1498] the peynes and the tribulaciouns that he suffreth semen the lesse unto hym;
 [1499] and in as muche as hym thynketh his synnes moore hevy and grevous,
 [1500] in so muche semeth his peyne the lighter and the esier unto hym.'
 [1501] Also ye owen to enclyne and bowe youre herte
 [1501A] to take the pacience of oure Lord Jhesu Crist, as seith Seint Peter in his Epistles.
 [1502] `Jhesu Crist,' he seith, `hath suffred for us and yeven ensample to every man to folwe and sewe hym,
 [1503] for he dide nevere synne, ne nevere cam ther a vileyns word out of his mouth.
 [1504] Whan men cursed hym, he cursed hem noght, and whan men betten hym, he manaced hem noght.'
 [1505] Also the grete pacience which the seintes that been in Paradys han had in tribulaciouns
 [1505A] that they han ysuffred, withouten hir desert or gilt,
 [1506] oghte muchel stiren yow to pacience.
 [1507] Forthermoore ye sholde enforce yow to have pacience,
 [1508] considerynge that the tribulaciouns of this world but litel while endure and soone passed been and goon,
 [1509] and the joye that a man seketh to have by pacience in tribulaciouns is perdurable,
 [1509A] after that the Apostle seith in his epistle.
 [1510] `The joye of God,' he seith, `is perdurable' -- that is to seyn, everelastynge.
 [1511] Also troweth and bileveth stedefastly that he nys nat wel ynorissed, ne wel ytaught,
 [1511A] that kan nat have pacience or wol nat receyve pacience.
 [1512] For Salomon seith that `the doctrine and the wit of a man is knowen by pacience.'
 [1513] And in another place he seith that `he that is pacient governeth hym by greet prudence.'
 [1514] And the same Salomon seith, `The angry and wrathful man maketh noyses,
 [1514A] and the pacient man atempreth hem and stilleth.'
 [1515] He seith also, `It is moore worth to be pacient than for to be right strong;
 [1516] and he that may have the lordshipe of his owene herte is moore to preyse than he that
 [1516A] by his force or strengthe taketh grete citees.'
 [1517] And therfore seith Seint Jame in his Epistle that `pacience is a greet vertu of perfeccioun.'"
 [1518] "Certes," quod Melibee, "I graunte yow, dame Prudence, that pacience is a greet vertu of perfeccioun;
 [1519] but every man may nat have the perfeccioun that ye seken;
 [1520] ne I nam nat of the nombre of right parfite men,
 [1521] for myn herte may nevere been in pees unto the tyme it be venged.
 [1522] And al be it so that it was greet peril to myne enemys
 [1522A] to do me a vileynye in takynge vengeance upon me,
 [1523] yet tooken they noon heede of the peril, but fulfilleden hir wikked wyl and hir corage.
 [1524] And therfore me thynketh men oghten nat repreve me,
 [1524A] though I putte me in a litel peril for to venge me,
 [1525] and though I do a greet excesse; that is to seyn, that I venge oon outrage by another."
 [1526] "A," quod dame Prudence, "ye seyn youre wyl and as yow liketh,
 [1527] but in no caas of the world a man sholde nat doon outrage ne excesse for to vengen hym.
 [1528] For Cassidore seith that `as yvele dooth he that vengeth hym by outrage as he that dooth the outrage.'
 [1529] And therfore ye shul venge yow after the ordre of right; that is to seyn, by the lawe
 [1529A] and noght by excesse ne by outrage.
 [1530] And also, if ye wol venge yow of the outrage of youre adversaries
 [1530A] in oother manere than right comandeth, ye synnen.
 [1531] And therfore seith Senec that `a man shal nevere vengen shrewednesse by shrewednesse.'
 [1532] And if ye seye that right axeth a man to defenden violence by violence and fightyng by fightyng,
 [1533] certes ye seye sooth, whan the defense is doon anon withouten intervalle or withouten tariyng or delay,
 [1534] for to deffenden hym and nat for to vengen hym.
 [1535] And it bihoveth that a man putte swich attemperance in his deffense
 [1536] that men have no cause ne matiere to repreven hym that deffendeth hym of excesse and outrage,
 [1536A] for ellis were it agayn resoun.
 [1537] Pardee, ye knowen wel that ye maken no deffense
 [1537A] as now for to deffende yow, but for to venge yow;
 [1538] and so seweth it that ye han no wyl to do youre dede attemprely.
 [1539] And therfore me thynketh that pacience is good. For Salomon seith that
 [1539A] `he that is nat pacient shal have greet harm.'"
 [1540] "Certes," quod Melibee, "I graunte yow that whan a man is inpacient and wrooth of that
 [1540A] that toucheth hym noght and that aperteneth nat unto hym, though it harme hym, it is no wonder.
 [1541] For the lawe seith that `he is coupable that entremetteth hym
 [1541A] or medleth with swych thyng as aperteneth nat unto hym.'
 [1542] And Salomon seith that `he that entremetteth hym of the noyse or strif of another man
 [1542A] is lyk to hym that taketh an hound by the eris.'
 [1543] For right as he that taketh a straunge hound by the eris is outherwhile biten with the hound,
 [1544] right in the same wise is it resoun that he have harm that by his inpacience medleth hym
 [1544A] of the noyse of another man, wheras it aperteneth nat unto hym.
 [1545] But ye knowen wel that this dede -- that is to seyn,
 [1545A] my grief and my disese -- toucheth me right ny.
 [1546] And therfore, though I be wrooth and inpacient, it is no merveille.
 [1547] And, savynge youre grace, I kan nat seen that it myghte greetly harme me though I tooke vengeaunce.
 [1548] For I am richer and moore myghty than myne enemys been;
 [1549] and wel knowen ye that by moneye and by havynge grete possessions
 [1549A] been alle the thynges of this world governed.
 [1550] And Salomon seith that `alle thynges obeyen to moneye.'"
 [1551] Whan Prudence hadde herd hir housbonde avanten hym of his richesse
 [1551A] and of his moneye, dispreisynge the power of his adversaries,
 [1551B] she spak and seyde in this wise:
 [1552] "Certes, deere sire, I graunte yow that ye been riche and myghty
 [1553] and that the richesses been goode to hem that han wel ygeten hem and wel konne usen hem.
 [1554] For right as the body of a man may nat lyven withoute the soule,
 [1554A] namoore may it lyve withouten temporeel goodes.
 [1555] And by richesses may a man gete hym grete freendes.
 [1556] And therfore seith Pamphilles: `If a net-herdes doghter,' seith he, `be riche,
 [1556A] she may chesen of a thousand men which she wol take to hir housbonde,
 [1557] for, of a thousand men, oon wol nat forsaken hire ne refusen hire.'
 [1558] And this Pamphilles seith also, `If thow be right happy -- that is to seyn,
 [1558A] if thou be right riche -- thou shalt fynde a greet nombre of felawes and freendes.
 [1559] And if thy fortune change that thou wexe povre, farewel freendshipe and felaweshipe,
 [1560] for thou shalt be alloone withouten any compaignye, but if it be the compaignye of povre folk.'
 [1561] And yet seith this Pamphilles moreover that `they that been thralle and bonde of lynage
 [1561A] shullen been maad worthy and noble by the richesses.'
 [1562] And right so as by richesses ther comen manye goodes,
 [1562A] right so by poverte come ther manye harmes and yveles,
 [1563] for greet poverte constreyneth a man to do manye yveles.
 [1564] And therfore clepeth Cassidore poverte the mooder of ruyne;
 [1565] that is to seyn, the mooder of overthrowynge or fallynge doun.
 [1566] And therfore seith Piers Alfonce, `Oon of the gretteste adversitees of this world is
 [1567] whan a free man by kynde or of burthe is constreyned by poverte
 [1567A] to eten the almesse of his enemy,'
 [1568] and the same seith Innocent in oon of his bookes. He seith that
 [1568A] `sorweful and myshappy is the condicioun of a povre beggere;
 [1569] for if he axe nat his mete, he dyeth for hunger;
 [1570] and if he axe, he dyeth for shame; and algates necessitee constreyneth hym to axe.'
 [1571] And seith Salomon that `bet it is to dye than for to have swich poverte.'
 [1572] And as the same Salomon seith, `Bettre it is to dye of bitter deeth
 [1572A] than for to lyven in swich wise.'
 [1573] By thise resons that I have seid unto yow and by manye othere resons that I koude seye,
 [1574] I graunte yow that richesses been goode to hem that geten hem wel
 [1574A] and to hem that wel usen tho richesses.
 [1575] And therfore wol I shewe yow hou ye shul have yow, and how ye shul bere yow
 [1575A] in gaderynge of richesses, and in what manere ye shul usen hem.
 [1576] "First, ye shul geten hem withouten greet desir, by good leyser, sokyngly and nat over-hastily.
 [1577] For a man that is to desirynge to gete richesses abaundoneth hym
 [1577A] first to thefte, and to alle othere yveles;
 [1578] and therfore seith Salomon, `He that hasteth hym to bisily to wexe riche shal be noon innocent.'
 [1579] He seith also that `the richesse that hastily cometh to a man soone
 [1579A] and lightly gooth and passeth fro a man,
 [1580] but that richesse that cometh litel and litel wexeth alwey and multiplieth.'
 [1581] And, sire, ye shul geten richesses by youre wit and by youre travaille unto youre profit,
 [1582] and that withouten wrong or harm doynge to any oother persone.
 [1583] For the lawe seith that `ther maketh no man himselven riche, if he do harm to another wight.'
 [1584] This is to seyn, that nature deffendeth and forbedeth by right that
 [1584A] no man make hymself riche unto the harm of another persone.
 [1585] And Tullius seith that `no sorwe, ne no drede of deeth, ne no thyng
 [1585A] that may falle unto a man, is so muchel agayns
 [1586] nature as a man to encressen his owene profit to the harm of another man.
 [1587] And though the grete men and the myghty men geten richesses moore lightly than thou,
 [1588] yet shaltou nat been ydel ne slow to do thy profit, for thou shalt in alle wise flee ydelnesse.'
 [1589] For Salomon seith that `ydelnesse techeth a man to do manye yveles.'
 [1590] And the same Salomon seith that `he that travailleth and bisieth hym to tilien his land shal eten breed,
 [1591] but he that is ydel and casteth hym to no bisynesse
 [1591A] ne occupacioun shal falle into poverte and dye for hunger.'
 [1592] And he that is ydel and slow kan nevere fynde covenable tyme for to doon his profit.
 [1593] For ther is a versifiour seith that `the ydel man excuseth hym in wynter by cause
 [1593A] of the grete coold, and in somer by enchesoun of the greete heete.'
 [1594] For thise causes seith Caton, `Waketh and enclyneth nat yow over-muchel for to slepe,
 [1594A] for over-muchel reste norisseth and causeth manye vices.'
 [1595] And therfore seith Seint Jerome, `Dooth somme goode dedes that the devel,
 [1595A] which is oure enemy, ne fynde yow nat unocupied.'
 [1596] For the devel ne taketh nat lightly unto his werkynge swiche as he fyndeth occupied in goode werkes.
 [1597] "Thanne thus in getynge richesses ye mosten flee ydelnesse.
 [1598] And afterward, ye shul use the richesses which ye have geten by youre wit and by youre travaille
 [1599] in swich a manere that men holde yow nat to scars, ne to sparynge, ne to fool-large
 [1599A] -- that is to seyen, over-large a spendere.
 [1600] For right as men blamen an avaricious man by cause of his scarsetee and chyncherie,
 [1601] in the same wise is he to blame that spendeth over-largely.
 [1602] And therfore seith Caton: `Use,' he seith, `thy richesses that thou hast geten
 [1603] in swich a manere that men have no matiere ne cause to calle thee neither wrecche ne chynche,
 [1604] for it is a greet shame to a man to have a povere herte and a riche purs.'
 [1605] He seith also, `The goodes that thou hast ygeten, use hem by mesure;'
 [1605A] that is to seyn, spende hem mesurably,
 [1606] for they that folily wasten and despenden the goodes that they han,
 [1607] whan they han namoore propre of hir owene, they shapen hem to take the goodes of another man.
 [1608] I seye thanne that ye shul fleen avarice,
 [1609] usynge youre richesses in swich manere that men seye nat that youre richesses been yburyed
 [1610] but that ye have hem in youre myght and in youre weeldynge.
 [1611] For a wys man repreveth the avaricious man, and seith thus in two vers:
 [1612] `Wherto and why burieth a man his goodes by his grete avarice,
 [1612A] and knoweth wel that nedes moste he dye?
 [1613] For deeth is the ende of every man as in this present lyf.'
 [1614] And for what cause or enchesoun joyneth he hym or knytteth he hym so faste unto his goodes
 [1615] that alle hise wittes mowen nat disseveren hym or departen hym from his goodes,
 [1616] and knoweth wel, or oghte knowe, that whan he is deed
 [1616A] he shal no thyng bere with hym out of this world?
 [1617] And therfore seith Seint Austyn that `the avaricious man is likned unto helle,
 [1618] that the moore it swelweth the moore desir it hath to swelwe and devoure.'
 [1619] And as wel as ye wolde eschewe to be called an avaricious man or chynche,
 [1620] as wel sholde ye kepe yow and governe yow in swich a wise that men calle yow nat fool-large.
 [1621] Therfore seith Tullius: `The goodes,' he seith, `of thyn hous ne sholde nat been hyd ne kept so cloos,
 [1621A] but that they myghte been opened by pitee and debonairetee'
 [1622] (that is to seyn, to yeven part to hem that han greet nede),
 [1623] `ne thy goodes shullen nat been so opene to been every mannes goodes.'
 [1624] Afterward, in getynge of youre richesses and in usynge hem ye shul alwey have thre thynges in youre herte
 [1625] (that is to seyn, oure Lord God, conscience, and good name).
 [1626] First, ye shul have God in youre herte,
 [1627] and for no richesse ye shullen do no thyng which may in any manere displese God,
 [1627A] that is youre creatour and makere.
 [1628] For after the word of Salomon, `It is bettre to have a litel good with the love of God
 [1629] than to have muchel good and tresour and lese the love of his Lord God.'
 [1630] And the prophete seith that `bettre it is to been a good man and have litel good and tresour
 [1631] than to been holden a shrewe and have grete richesses.'
 [1632] And yet seye I ferthermoore, that ye sholde alwey doon youre bisynesse to gete yow richesses,
 [1633] so that ye gete hem with good conscience.
 [1634] And th' Apostle seith that `ther nys thyng in this world of which
 [1634A] we sholden have so greet joye as whan oure conscience bereth us good witnesse.'
 [1635] And the wise man seith, `The substance of a man is ful good,
 [1635A] whan synne is nat in mannes conscience.'
 [1636] Afterward, in getynge of youre richesses and in usynge of hem,
 [1637] yow moste have greet bisynesse and greet diligence that youre goode name be alwey kept and conserved.
 [1638] For Salomon seith that `bettre it is and moore it availleth a man to have a good name
 [1638A] than for to have grete richesses.'
 [1639] And therfore he seith in another place, `Do greet diligence,' seith Salomon,
 [1639A] `in kepyng of thy freend and of thy goode name;
 [1640] for it shal lenger abide with thee than any tresour, be it never so precious.'
 [1641] And certes he sholde nat be called a gentil man that after God and good conscience, alle thynges left,
 [1641A] ne dooth his diligence and bisynesse to kepen his goode name.
 [1642] And Cassidore seith that `it is signe of a gentil herte
 [1642A] whan a man loveth and desireth to han a good name.'
 [1643] And therfore seith Seint Austyn that `ther been two thynges that arn necessarie and nedefulle,
 [1644] and that is good conscience and good loos;
 [1645] that is to seyn, good conscience to thyn owene persone inward and good loos for thy neighebor outward.'
 [1646] And he that trusteth hym so muchel in his goode conscience
 [1647] that he displeseth, and setteth at noght his goode name or loos,
 [1647A] and rekketh noght though he kepe nat his goode name, nys but a crueel cherl.
 [1648] "Sire, now have I shewed yow how ye shul do in getynge richesses, and how ye shullen usen hem,
 [1649] and I se wel that for the trust that ye han in youre richesses
 [1649A] ye wole moeve werre and bataille.
 [1650] I conseille yow that ye bigynne no werre in trust of youre richesses,
 [1650A] for they ne suffisen noght werres to mayntene.
 [1651] And therfore seith a philosophre, `That man that desireth and wole algates han werre, shal nevere have suffisaunce,
 [1652] for the richer that he is, the gretter despenses moste he make, if he wole have worshipe and victorie.'
 [1653] And Salomon seith that `the gretter richesses that a man hath, the mo despendours he hath.'
 [1654] And, deere sire, al be it so that for youre richesses ye mowe have muchel folk,
 [1655] yet bihoveth it nat, ne it is nat good, to bigynne werre whereas ye mowe
 [1655A] in oother manere have pees unto youre worshipe and profit.
 [1656] For the victorie of batailles that been in this world lyth nat in greet nombre or multitude
 [1656A] of the peple, ne in the vertu of man,
 [1657] but it lith in the wyl and in the hand of oure Lord God Almyghty.
 [1658] And therfore Judas Machabeus, which was Goddes knyght,
 [1659] whan he sholde fighte agayn his adversarie that hadde a gretter nombre
 [1659A] and a gretter multitude of folk and strenger than was this peple of Machabee,
 [1660] yet he reconforted his litel compaignye, and seyde right in this wise:
 [1661] `Als lightly,' quod he, `may oure Lord God Almyghty yeve victorie to a fewe folk as to many folk,
 [1662] for the victorie of a bataile comth nat by the grete nombre of peple,
 [1663] but it cometh from oure Lord God of hevene.'
 [1664] And, deere sire, for as muchel as ther is no man certein if he be worthy that
 [1664A] God yeve hym victorie . . . or naught, after that Salomon seith,
 [1665] therfore every man sholde greetly drede werres to bigynne.
 [1666] And by cause that in batailles fallen manye perils,
 [1667] and happeth outher while that as soone is the grete man slayn as the litel man;
 [1668] and as it is writen in the seconde Book of Kynges,
 [1668A] `The dedes of batailles been aventurouse and nothyng certeyne,
 [1669] for as lightly is oon hurt with a spere as another';
 [1670] and for ther is gret peril in werre, therfore sholde a man flee and eschue werre,
 [1670A] in as muchel as a man may goodly.
 [1671] For Salomon seith, `He that loveth peril shal falle in peril.'"
 [1672] After that Dame Prudence hadde spoken in this manere, Melibee answerde and seyde,
 [1673] "I see wel, dame Prudence, that by youre faire wordes and by youre resouns
 [1673A] that ye han shewed me, that the werre liketh yow no thyng;
 [1674] but I have nat yet herd youre conseil, how I shal do in this nede."
 [1675] "Certes," quod she, "I conseille yow that ye accorde with youre adversaries and that ye have pees with hem.
 [1676] For Seint Jame seith in his Epistles that `by concord and pees the smale richesses wexen grete,
 [1677] and by debaat and discord the grete richesses fallen doun.'
 [1678] And ye knowen wel that oon of the gretteste and moost sovereyn thyng
 [1678A] that is in this world is unytee and pees.
 [1679] And therfore seyde oure Lord Jhesu Crist to his apostles in this wise:
 [1680] `Wel happy and blessed been they that loven and purchacen pees, for they been called children of God.'"
 [1681] "A," quod Melibee, "now se I wel that ye loven nat myn honour ne my worshipe.
 [1682] Ye knowen wel that myne adversaries han bigonnen this debaat and bryge by hire outrage,
 [1683] and ye se wel that they ne requeren ne preyen me nat of pees,
 [1683A] ne they asken nat to be reconsiled.
 [1684] Wol ye thanne that I go and meke me, and obeye me to hem, and crie hem mercy?
 [1685] For sothe, that were nat my worshipe.
 [1686] For right as men seyn that `over-greet hoomlynesse engendreth dispreisynge,' so fareth it by to greet humylitee or mekenesse."
 [1687] Thanne bigan dame Prudence to maken semblant of wratthe and seyde:
 [1688] "Certes, sire, sauf youre grace, I love youre honour and youre profit
 [1688A] as I do myn owene, and evere have doon;
 [1689] ne ye, ne noon oother, seyn nevere the contrarie.
 [1690] And yit if I hadde seyd that ye sholde han purchaced the pees
 [1690A] and the reconsiliacioun, I ne hadde nat muchel mystaken me ne seyd amys.
 [1691] For the wise man seith, `The dissensioun bigynneth by another man, and the reconsilyng bygynneth by thyself.'
 [1692] And the prophete seith, `Flee shrewednesse and do goodnesse;
 [1693] seke pees and folwe it, as muchel as in thee is.'
 [1694] Yet seye I nat that ye shul rather pursue to youre adversaries for pees than they shuln to yow.
 [1695] For I knowe wel that ye been so hard-herted that ye wol do no thyng for me.
 [1696] And Salomon seith, `He that hath over-hard an herte, atte laste he shal myshappe and mystyde.'"
 [1697] Whanne Melibee hadde herd dame Prudence maken semblant of wratthe, he seyde in this wise:
 [1698] "Dame, I prey yow that ye be nat displesed of thynges that I seye,
 [1699] for ye knowe wel that I am angry and wrooth, and that is no wonder;
 [1700] and they that been wrothe witen nat wel what they don ne what they seyn.
 [1701] Therfore the prophete seith that `troubled eyen han no cleer sighte.'
 [1702] But seyeth and conseileth me as yow liketh, for I am redy to do right as ye wol desire;
 [1703] and if ye repreve me of my folye,
 [1703A] I am the moore holden to love yow and to preyse yow.
 [1704] For Salomon seith that `he that repreveth hym that dooth folye,
 [1705] he shal fynde gretter grace than he that deceyveth hym by sweete wordes.'"
 [1706] Thanne seide dame Prudence, "I make no semblant of wratthe ne anger, but for youre grete profit.
 [1707] For Salomon seith, `He is moore worth that repreveth or chideth a fool for his folye,
 [1707A] shewynge hym semblant of wratthe,
 [1708] than he that supporteth hym and preyseth hym in his mysdoynge and laugheth at his folye.'
 [1709] And this same Salomon seith afterward that
 [1709A] `by the sorweful visage of a man'
 [1709B] (that is to seyn by the sory and hevy contenaunce of a man)
 [1710] `the fool correcteth and amendeth hymself.'"
 [1711] Thanne seyde Melibee, "I shal nat konne answere to
 [1711A] so manye faire resouns as ye putten to me and shewen.
 [1712] Seyeth shortly youre wyl and youre conseil, and I am al redy to fulfille and parfourne it."
 [1713] Thanne dame Prudence discovered al hir wyl to hym and seyde,
 [1714] "I conseille yow," quod she, "aboven alle thynges, that ye make pees bitwene God and yow,
 [1715] and beth reconsiled unto hym and to his grace.
 [1716] For, as I have seyd yow heer biforn, God hath suffred yow
 [1716A] to have this tribulacioun and disese for youre synnes.
 [1717] And if ye do as I sey yow, God wol sende youre adversaries unto yow
 [1718] and maken hem fallen at youre feet, redy to do youre wyl and youre comandementz.
 [1719] For Salomon seith, `Whan the condicioun of man is plesaunt and likynge to God,
 [1720] he chaungeth the hertes of the mannes adversaries and constreyneth hem to biseken hym of pees and of grace.'
 [1721] And I prey yow lat me speke with youre adversaries in privee place,
 [1722] for they shul nat knowe that it be of youre wyl or of youre assent.
 [1723] And thanne, whan I knowe hir wil and hire entente, I may conseille yow the moore seurely."
 [1724] "Dame," quod Melibee, "dooth youre wil and youre likynge;
 [1725] for I putte me hoolly in youre disposicioun and ordinaunce."
 [1726] Thanne dame Prudence, whan she saugh the goode wyl of hir housbonde, delibered and took avys in hirself,
 [1727] thinkinge how she myghte brynge this nede unto a good conclusioun and to a good ende.
 [1728] And whan she saugh hir tyme, she sente for thise adversaries to come unto hire into a pryvee place
 [1729] and shewed wisely unto hem the grete goodes that comen of pees
 [1730] and the grete harmes and perils that been in werre,
 [1731] and seyde to hem in a goodly manere hou that hem oughten have greet repentaunce
 [1732] of the injurie and wrong that they hadden doon to Melibee hir lord,
 [1732A] and unto hire, and to hire doghter.
 [1733] And whan they herden the goodliche wordes of dame Prudence,
 [1734] they weren so supprised and ravysshed and hadden so greet joye of hire that wonder was to telle.
 [1735] "A, lady," quod they, "ye han shewed unto us the blessynge of swetnesse,
 [1735A] after the sawe of David the prophete,
 [1736] for the reconsilynge which we been nat worthy to have in no manere,
 [1737] but we oghte requeren it with greet contricioun and humylitee,
 [1738] ye of youre grete goodnesse have presented unto us.
 [1739] Now se we wel that the science and the konnynge of Salomon is ful trewe.
 [1740] For he seith that `sweete wordes multiplien and encreescen freendes and maken shrewes to be debonaire and meeke.'
 [1741] "Certes," quod they, "we putten oure dede and al oure matere and cause al hoolly in youre goode wyl
 [1742] and been redy to obeye to the speche and comandement of my lord Melibee.
 [1743] And therfore, deere and benygne lady, we preien yow and biseke yow as mekely as we konne and mowen
 [1744] that it lyke unto youre grete goodnesse to fulfillen in dede youre goodliche wordes,
 [1745] for we consideren and knowelichen that we han offended and greved my lord Melibee out of mesure,
 [1746] so ferforth that we be nat of power to maken his amendes.
 [1747] And therfore we oblige and bynden us and oure freendes for to doon al his wyl and his comandementz.
 [1748] But peraventure he hath swich hevynesse and swich wratthe to us-ward by cause of oure offense
 [1749] that he wole enjoyne us swich a peyne as we mowe nat bere ne susteene.
 [1750] And therfore, noble lady, we biseke to youre wommanly pitee
 [1751] to taken swich avysement in this nede that
 [1751A] we ne oure freendes be nat desherited ne destroyed thurgh oure folye."
 [1752] "Certes," quod Prudence, "it is an hard thyng and right perilous
 [1753] that a man putte hym al outrely in the arbitracioun and juggement,
 [1753A] and in the myght and power of his enemys.
 [1754] For Salomon seith, `Leeveth me, and yeveth credence to that I shal seyn: I seye,' quod he,
 [1754A] `ye peple, folk and governours of hooly chirche,
 [1755] to thy sone, to thy wyf, to thy freend, ne to thy broother
 [1756] ne yeve thou nevere myght ne maistrie of thy body whil thou lyvest.'
 [1757] Now sithen he deffendeth that man sholde nat yeven to his broother
 [1757A] ne to his freend the myght of his body,
 [1758] by a strenger resoun he deffendeth and forbedeth a man to yeven hymself to his enemy.
 [1759] And nathelees I conseille you that ye mystruste nat my lord,
 [1760] for I woot wel and knowe verraily that he is debonaire and meeke, large, curteys,
 [1761] and nothyng desirous ne coveitous of good ne richesse.
 [1762] For ther nys nothyng in this world that he desireth, save oonly worshipe and honour.
 [1763] Forthermoore I knowe wel and am right seur that he shal nothyng doon in this nede withouten my conseil,
 [1764] and I shal so werken in this cause that by the grace of oure Lord God
 [1764A] ye shul been reconsiled unto us."
 [1765] Thanne seyden they with o voys, "Worshipful lady, we putten us
 [1765A] and oure goodes al fully in youre wil and disposicioun,
 [1766] and been redy to comen, what day that it like unto youre noblesse to lymyte us or assigne us,
 [1767] for to maken oure obligacioun and boond as strong as it liketh unto youre goodnesse,
 [1768] that we mowe fulfille the wille of yow and of my lord Melibee."
 [1769] Whan dame Prudence hadde herd the answeres of thise men, she bad hem goon agayn prively;
 [1770] and she retourned to hir lord Melibee, and tolde hym how she foond his adversaries ful repentant,
 [1771] knowelechynge ful lowely hir synnes and trespas, and how they were redy to suffren all peyne,
 [1772] requirynge and preiynge hym of mercy and pitee.
 [1773] Thanne seyde Melibee: "He is wel worthy to have pardoun
 [1773A] and foryifnesse of his synne, that excuseth nat his synne
 [1774] but knowelecheth it and repenteth hym, axinge indulgence.
 [1775] For Senec seith, `Ther is the remissioun and foryifnesse, where as the confessioun is,'
 [1776] for confessioun is neighebor to innocence.
 [1777] And he seith in another place that `he that hath shame of his synne and knowlecheth
 [1777A] [it is worthy remissioun].' And therfore I assente and conferme me to have pees;
 [1778] but it is good that we do it nat withouten the assent and wyl of oure freendes."
 [1779] Thanne was Prudence right glad and joyeful and seyde:
 [1780] "Certes, sire," quod she, "ye han wel and goodly answered,
 [1781] for right as by the conseil, assent, and help of youre freendes
 [1781A] ye han been stired to venge yow and maken werre,
 [1782] right so withouten hire conseil shul ye nat accorden yow ne have pees with youre adversaries.
 [1783] For the lawe seith, `Ther nys no thyng so good by wey of kynde as a thyng
 [1783A] to be unbounde by hym that it was ybounde.'"
 [1784] And thanne dame Prudence withouten delay or tariynge sente anon hire messages for hire kyn
 [1784A] and for hire olde freendes which that were trewe and wyse,
 [1785] and tolde hem by ordre in the presence of Melibee al this mateere
 [1785A] as it is aboven expressed and declared,
 [1786] and preyden hem that they wolde yeven hire avys and conseil what best were to doon in this nede.
 [1787] And whan Melibees freendes hadde taken hire avys and deliberacioun of the forseide mateere,
 [1788] and hadden examyned it by greet bisynesse and greet diligence,
 [1789] they yave ful conseil for to have pees and reste,
 [1790] and that Melibee sholde receyve with good herte his adversaries to foryifnesse and mercy.
 [1791] And whan dame Prudence hadde herd the assent of hir lord Melibee, and the conseil of his freendes
 [1792] accorde with hire wille and hire entencioun,
 [1793] she was wonderly glad in hire herte and seyde:
 [1794] "Ther is an old proverbe," quod she, "seith that `the goodnesse that thou mayst do this day, do it,
 [1795] and abide nat ne delaye it nat til tomorwe.'
 [1796] And therfore I conseille that ye sende youre messages, swiche as been discrete and wise,
 [1797] unto youre adversaries, tellynge hem on youre bihalve
 [1798] that if they wole trete of pees and of accord,
 [1799] that they shape hem withouten delay or tariyng to comen unto us."
 [1800] Which thyng parfourned was in dede.
 [1801] And whanne thise trespassours and repentynge folk of hire folies
 [1801A] -- that is to seyn, the adversaries of Melibee --
 [1802] hadden herd what thise messagers seyden unto hem,
 [1803] they weren right glad and joyeful, and answereden ful mekely and benignely,
 [1804] yeldynge graces and thankynges to hir lord Melibee and to al his compaignye,
 [1805] and shopen hem withouten delay to go with the messagers and obeye to the comandement of hir lord Melibee.
 [1806] And right anon they tooken hire wey to the court of Melibee,
 [1807] and tooken with hem somme of hire trewe freendes
 [1807A] to maken feith for hem and for to been hire borwes.
 [1808] And whan they were comen to the presence of Melibee, he seyde hem thise wordes:
 [1809] "It standeth thus," quod Melibee, "and sooth it is, that ye,
 [1810] causelees and withouten skile and resoun,
 [1811] han doon grete injuries and wronges to me and to my wyf Prudence and to my doghter also.
 [1812] For ye han entred into myn hous by violence,
 [1813] and have doon swich outrage that alle men knowen wel that ye have disserved the deeth.
 [1814] And therfore wol I knowe and wite of yow
 [1815] wheither ye wol putte the punyssement and the chastisynge and the vengeance of this outrage in the wyl
 [1815A] of me and of my wyf Prudence, or ye wol nat?"
 [1816] Thanne the wiseste of hem thre answerde for hem alle and seyde,
 [1817] "Sire," quod he, "we knowen wel that we been unworthy to comen unto the court
 [1817A] of so greet a lord and so worthy as ye been.
 [1818] For we han so greetly mystaken us, and han offended
 [1818A] and agilt in swich a wise agayn youre heigh lordshipe
 [1819] that trewely we han disserved the deeth.
 [1820] But yet, for the grete goodnesse and debonairetee that al the world witnesseth of youre persone,
 [1821] we submytten us to the excellence and benignitee of youre gracious lordshipe,
 [1822] and been redy to obeie to alle youre comandementz,
 [1823] bisekynge yow that of youre merciable pitee ye wol considere oure grete repentaunce and lowe submyssioun
 [1824] and graunten us foryevenesse of oure outrageous trespas and offense.
 [1825] For wel we knowe that youre liberal grace and mercy
 [1825A] strecchen hem ferther into goodnesse than doon oure outrageouse giltes and trespas into wikkednesse,
 [1826] al be it that cursedly and dampnablely we han agilt agayn youre heigh lordshipe."
 [1827] Thanne Melibee took hem up fro the ground ful benignely,
 [1828] and receyved hire obligaciouns and hir boondes by hire othes upon hire plegges and borwes,
 [1829] and assigned hem a certeyn day to retourne unto his court
 [1830] for to accepte and receyve the sentence and juggement that Melibee wolde comande
 [1830A] to be doon on hem by the causes aforeseyd.
 [1831] Whiche thynges ordeyned, every man retourned to his hous.
 [1832] And whan that dame Prudence saugh hir tyme, she freyned and axed hir lord Melibee
 [1833] what vengeance he thoughte to taken of his adversaries.
 [1834] To which Melibee answerde and seyde, "Certes," quod he, "I thynke and purpose me fully
 [1835] to desherite hem of al that evere they han and for to putte hem in exil for evere."
 [1836] "Certes," quod dame Prudence, "this were a crueel sentence and muchel agayn resoun.
 [1837] For ye been riche ynough and han no nede of oother mennes good,
 [1838] and ye myghte lightly in this wise gete yow a coveitous name,
 [1839] which is a vicious thyng, and oghte been eschued of every good man.
 [1840] For after the sawe of the word of the Apostle, `Coveitise is roote of alle harmes.'
 [1841] And therfore it were bettre for yow to lese so muchel good of youre owene
 [1841A] than for to taken of hir good in this manere,
 [1842] for bettre it is to lesen good with worshipe than it is to wynne good with vileynye and shame.
 [1843] And everi man oghte to doon his diligence and his bisynesse to geten hym a good name.
 [1844] And yet shal he nat oonly bisie hym in kepynge of his good name,
 [1845] but he shal also enforcen hym alwey to do somthyng by which he may renovelle his good name.
 [1846] For it is writen that `the olde good loos or good name of a man is soone goon
 [1846A] and passed, whan it is nat newed ne renovelled.'
 [1847] And as touchynge that ye seyn ye wole exile youre adversaries,
 [1848] that thynketh me muchel agayn resoun and out of mesure,
 [1849] considered the power that they han yeve yow upon hemself.
 [1850] And it is writen that `he is worthy to lesen his privilege that mysuseth
 [1850A] the myght and the power that is yeven hym.'
 [1851] And I sette cas ye myghte enjoyne hem that peyne by right and by lawe,
 [1852] which I trowe ye mowe nat do;
 [1853] I seye ye mighte nat putten it to execucioun peraventure,
 [1854] and thanne were it likly to retourne to the werre as it was biforn.
 [1855] And therfore, if ye wole that men do yow obeisance, ye moste deemen moore curteisly;
 [1856] this is to seyn, ye moste yeven moore esy sentences and juggementz.
 [1857] For it is writen that `he that moost curteisly comandeth, to hym men moost obeyen.'
 [1858] And therfore I prey yow that in this necessitee and in this nede
 [1858A] ye caste yow to overcome youre herte.
 [1859] For Senec seith that `he that overcometh his herte overcometh twies.'
 [1860] And Tullius seith, `Ther is no thyng so comendable in a greet lord
 [1861] as whan he is debonaire and meeke, and appeseth him lightly.'
 [1862] And I prey yow that ye wole forbere now to do vengeance,
 [1863] in swich a manere that youre goode name may be kept and conserved,
 [1864] and that men mowe have cause and mateere to preyse yow of pitee and of mercy,
 [1865] and that ye have no cause to repente yow of thyng that ye doon.
 [1866] For Senec seith, `He overcometh in an yvel manere that repenteth hym of his victorie.'
 [1867] Wherfore I pray yow, lat mercy been in youre herte,
 [1868] to th' effect and entente that God Almighty have mercy on yow in his laste juggement.
 [1869] For Seint Jame seith in his Epistle: `Juggement withouten mercy shal be doon
 [1869A] to hym that hath no mercy of another wight.'"
 [1870] Whanne Melibee hadde herd the grete skiles and resouns of dame Prudence, and hire wise informaciouns and techynges,
 [1871] his herte gan enclyne to the wil of his wif, considerynge hir trewe entente,
 [1872] and conformed hym anon and assented fully to werken after hir conseil,
 [1873] and thonked God, of whom procedeth al vertu and alle goodnesse,
 [1873A] that hym sente a wyf of so greet discrecioun.
 [1874] And whan the day cam that his adversaries sholde appieren in his presence,
 [1875] he spak unto hem ful goodly, and seyde in this wyse:
 [1876] "Al be it so that of youre pride and heigh presumpcioun and folie, and of youre necligence and unkonnynge,
 [1877] ye have mysborn yow and trespassed unto me,
 [1878] yet for as muche as I see and biholde youre grete humylitee
 [1879] and that ye been sory and repentant of youre giltes,
 [1880] it constreyneth me to doon yow grace and mercy.
 [1881] Wherfore I receyve yow to my grace
 [1882] and foryeve yow outrely alle the offenses, injuries, and wronges that ye have doon agayn me and myne,
 [1883] to this effect and to this ende, that God of his endelees mercy
 [1884] wole at the tyme of oure diynge foryeven us oure giltes
 [1884A] that we han trespassed to hym in this wrecched world.
 [1885] For doutelees, if we be sory and repentant of the synnes and giltes which we han trespassed
 [1885A] in the sighte of oure Lord God,
 [1886] he is so free and so merciable
 [1887] that he wole foryeven us oure giltes
 [1888] and bryngen us to the blisse that nevere hath ende." Amen.

      
The Canterbury Tales and Other Works of Chaucer (Middle English), by Geoffery Chaucer, [14th cent.], at sacred-texts.com

 

The Canterbury Tales

 

The Monk's Prologue

 [1889] Whan ended was my tale of Melibee,
 [1890] And of Prudence and hire benignytee,
 [1891] Oure Hooste seyde, "As I am feithful man,
 [1892] And by that precious corpus Madrian,
 [1893] I hadde levere than a barel ale
 [1894] That Goodelief, my wyf, hadde herd this tale!
 [1895] For she nys no thyng of swich pacience
 [1896] As was this Melibeus wyf Prudence.
 [1897] By Goddes bones, whan I bete my knaves,
 [1898] She bryngeth me forth the grete clobbed staves,
 [1899] And crieth, `Slee the dogges everichoon,
 [1900] And brek hem, bothe bak and every boon!'
 [1901] "And if that any neighebor of myne
 [1902] Wol nat in chirche to my wyf enclyne,
 [1903] Or be so hardy to hire to trespace,
 [1904] Whan she comth hoom she rampeth in my face,
 [1905] And crieth, `False coward, wrek thy wyf!
 [1906] By corpus bones, I wol have thy knyf,
 [1907] And thou shalt have my distaf and go spynne!'
 [1908] Fro day to nyght right thus she wol bigynne.
 [1909] `Allas,' she seith, `that evere I was shape
 [1910] To wedden a milksop, or a coward ape,
 [1911] That wol been overlad with every wight!
 [1912] Thou darst nat stonden by thy wyves right!'
 [1913] "This is my lif, but if that I wol fighte;
 [1914] And out at dore anon I moot me dighte,
 [1915] Or elles I am but lost, but if that I
 [1916] Be lik a wilde leoun, fool-hardy.
 [1917] I woot wel she wol do me slee som day
 [1918] Som neighebor, and thanne go my way;
 [1919] For I am perilous with knyf in honde,
 [1920] Al be it that I dar nat hire withstonde,
 [1921] For she is byg in armes, by my feith:
 [1922] That shal he fynde that hire mysdooth or seith --
 [1923] But lat us passe awey fro this mateere.
 [1924] "My lord, the Monk," quod he, "be myrie of cheere,
 [1925] For ye shul telle a tale trewely.
 [1926] Loo, Rouchestre stant heer faste by!
 [1927] Ryde forth, myn owene lord, brek nat oure game.
 [1928] But, by my trouthe, I knowe nat youre name.
 [1929] Wher shal I calle yow my lord daun John,
 [1930] Or daun Thomas, or elles daun Albon?
 [1931] Of what hous be ye, by youre fader kyn?
 [1932] I vowe to God, thou hast a ful fair skyn;
 [1933] It is a gentil pasture ther thow goost.
 [1934] Thou art nat lyk a penant or a goost:
 [1935] Upon my feith, thou art som officer,
 [1936] Som worthy sexteyn, or som celerer,
 [1937] For by my fader soule, as to my doom,
 [1938] Thou art a maister whan thou art at hoom;
 [1939] No povre cloysterer, ne no novys,
 [1940] But a governour, wily and wys,
 [1941] And therwithal of brawnes and of bones
 [1942] A wel farynge persone for the nones.
 [1943] I pray to God, yeve hym confusioun
 [1944] That first thee broghte unto religioun!
 [1945] Thou woldest han been a tredefowel aright.
 [1946] Haddestow as greet a leeve as thou hast myght
 [1947] To parfourne al thy lust in engendrure,
 [1948] Thou haddest bigeten ful many a creature.
 [1949] Allas, why werestow so wyd a cope?
 [1950] God yeve me sorwe, but, and I were a pope,
 [1951] Nat oonly thou, but every myghty man,
 [1952] Though he were shorn ful hye upon his pan,
 [1953] Sholde have a wyf; for al the world is lorn!
 [1954] Religioun hath take up al the corn
 [1955] Of tredyng, and we borel men been shrympes.
 [1956] Of fieble trees ther comen wrecched ympes.
 [1957] This maketh that oure heires been so sklendre
 [1958] And feble that they may nat wel engendre.
 [1959] This maketh that oure wyves wole assaye
 [1960] Religious folk, for ye mowe bettre paye
 [1961] Of Venus paiementz than mowe we;
 [1962] God woot, no lussheburghes payen ye!
 [1963] But be nat wrooth, my lord, though that I pleye.
 [1964] Ful ofte in game a sooth I have herd seye!"
 [1965] This worthy Monk took al in pacience,
 [1966] And seyde, "I wol doon al my diligence,
 [1967] As fer as sowneth into honestee,
 [1968] To telle yow a tale, or two, or three.
 [1969] And if yow list to herkne hyderward,
 [1970] I wol yow seyn the lyf of Seint Edward;
 [1971] Or ellis, first, tragedies wol I telle,
 [1972] Of whiche I have an hundred in my celle.
 [1973] Tragedie is to seyn a certeyn storie,
 [1974] As olde bookes maken us memorie,
 [1975] Of hym that stood in greet prosperitee,
 [1976] And is yfallen out of heigh degree
 [1977] Into myserie, and endeth wrecchedly.
 [1978] And they ben versified communely
 [1979] Of six feet, which men clepen exametron.
 [1980] In prose eek been endited many oon,
 [1981] And eek in meetre in many a sondry wyse.
 [1982] Lo, this declaryng oghte ynogh suffise.
 [1983] "Now herkneth, if yow liketh for to heere.
 [1984] But first I yow biseeke in this mateere,
 [1985] Though I by ordre telle nat thise thynges,
 [1986] Be it of popes, emperours, or kynges,
 [1987] After hir ages, as men writen fynde,
 [1988] But tellen hem som bifore and som bihynde,
 [1989] As it now comth unto my remembraunce,
 [1990] Have me excused of myn ignoraunce."

      
The Canterbury Tales and Other Works of Chaucer (Middle English), by Geoffery Chaucer, [14th cent.], at sacred-texts.com

 

The Canterbury Tales

 

The Monk's Tale

 [1991] I wol biwaille in manere of tragedie
 [1992] The harm of hem that stoode in heigh degree,
 [1993] And fillen so that ther nas no remedie
 [1994] To brynge hem out of hir adversitee.
 [1995] For certein, whan that Fortune list to flee,
 [1996] Ther may no man the cours of hire withholde.
 [1997] Lat no man truste on blynd prosperitee;
 [1998] Be war by thise ensamples trewe and olde.
 [1999] At Lucifer, though he an angel were
 [2000] And nat a man, at hym wol I bigynne.
 [2001] For though Fortune may noon angel dere,
 [2002] From heigh degree yet fel he for his synne
 [2003] Doun into helle, where he yet is inne.
 [2004] O Lucifer, brightest of angels alle,
 [2005] Now artow Sathanas, that mayst nat twynne
 [2006] Out of miserie, in which that thou art falle.
 [2007] Loo Adam, in the feeld of Damyssene
 [2008] With Goddes owene fynger wroght was he,
 [2009] And nat bigeten of mannes sperme unclene,
 [2010] And welte al paradys savynge o tree.
 [2011] Hadde nevere worldly man so heigh degree
 [2012] As Adam, til he for mysgovernaunce
 [2013] Was dryven out of hys hye prosperitee
 [2014] To labour, and to helle, and to meschaunce.
 [2015] Loo Sampsoun, which that was annunciat
 [2016] By th' angel longe er his nativitee,
 [2017] And was to God Almyghty consecrat,
 [2018] And stood in noblesse whil he myghte see.
 [2019] Was nevere swich another as was hee,
 [2020] To speke of strengthe, and therwith hardynesse;
 [2021] But to his wyves toolde he his secree,
 [2022] Thurgh which he slow hymself for wrecchednesse.
 [2023] Sampsoun, this noble almyghty champioun,
 [2024] Withouten wepen save his handes tweye,
 [2025] He slow and al torente the leoun,
 [2026] Toward his weddyng walkynge by the weye.
 [2027] His false wyf koude hym so plese and preye
 [2028] Til she his conseil knew; and she, untrewe,
 [2029] Unto his foos his conseil gan biwreye,
 [2030] And hym forsook, and took another newe.
 [2031] Thre hundred foxes took Sampson for ire,
 [2032] And alle hir tayles he togydre bond,
 [2033] And sette the foxes tayles alle on fire,
 [2034] For he on every tayl had knyt a brond;
 [2035] And they brende alle the cornes in that lond,
 [2036] And alle hire olyveres, and vynes eke.
 [2037] A thousand men he slow eek with his hond,
 [2038] And hadde no wepen but an asses cheke.
 [2039] Whan they were slayn, so thursted hym that he
 [2040] Was wel ny lorn, for which he gan to preye
 [2041] That God wolde on his peyne han some pitee
 [2042] And sende hym drynke, or elles moste he deye;
 [2043] And of this asses cheke, that was dreye,
 [2044] Out of a wang-tooth sprang anon a welle,
 [2045] Of which he drank ynogh, shortly to seye;
 [2046] Thus heelp hym God, as Judicum can telle.
 [2047] By verray force at Gazan on a nyght,
 [2048] Maugree Philistiens of that citee,
 [2049] The gates of the toun he hath up plyght,
 [2050] And on his bak ycaryed hem hath hee
 [2051] Hye on an hill whereas men myghte hem see.
 [2052] O noble, almyghty Sampsoun, lief and deere,
 [2053] Had thou nat toold to wommen thy secree,
 [2054] In al this world ne hadde been thy peere!
 [2055] This Sampson nevere ciser drank ne wyn,
 [2056] Ne on his heed cam rasour noon ne sheere,
 [2057] By precept of the messager divyn,
 [2058] For alle his strengthes in his heeres weere.
 [2059] And fully twenty wynter, yeer by yeere,
 [2060] He hadde of Israel the governaunce.
 [2061] But soone shal he wepe many a teere,
 [2062] For wommen shal hym bryngen to meschaunce!
 [2063] Unto his lemman Dalida he tolde
 [2064] That in his heeris al his strengthe lay,
 [2065] And falsly to his foomen she hym solde.
 [2066] And slepynge in hir barm upon a day,
 [2067] She made to clippe or shere his heres away,
 [2068] And made his foomen al his craft espyen;
 [2069] And whan that they hym foond in this array,
 [2070] They bounde hym faste and putten out his yen.
 [2071] But er his heer were clipped or yshave,
 [2072] Ther was no boond with which men myghte him bynde;
 [2073] But now is he in prison in a cave,
 [2074] Where-as they made hym at the queerne grynde.
 [2075] O noble Sampsoun, strongest of mankynde,
 [2076] O whilom juge, in glorie and in richesse!
 [2077] Now maystow wepen with thyne eyen blynde,
 [2078] Sith thou fro wele art falle in wrecchednesse.
 [2079] The ende of this caytyf was as I shal seye.
 [2080] His foomen made a feeste upon a day,
 [2081] And made hym as hire fool biforn hem pleye;
 [2082] And this was in a temple of greet array.
 [2083] But atte laste he made a foul affray,
 [2084] For he two pilers shook and made hem falle,
 [2085] And doun fil temple and al, and ther it lay --
 [2086] And slow hymself, and eek his foomen alle.
 [2087] This is to seyn, the prynces everichoon,
 [2088] And eek thre thousand bodyes, were ther slayn
 [2089] With fallynge of the grete temple of stoon.
 [2090] Of Sampson now wol I namoore sayn.
 [2091] Beth war by this ensample oold and playn
 [2092] That no men telle hir conseil til hir wyves
 [2093] Of swich thyng as they wolde han secree fayn,
 [2094] If that it touche hir lymes or hir lyves.
 [2095] Of Hercules, the sovereyn conquerour,
 [2096] Syngen his werkes laude and heigh renoun;
 [2097] For in his tyme of strengthe he was the flour.
 [2098] He slow and rafte the skyn of the leoun;
 [2099] He of Centauros leyde the boost adoun;
 [2100] He Arpies slow, the crueel bryddes felle;
 [2101] He golden apples rafte of the dragoun;
 [2102] He drow out Cerberus, the hound of helle;
 [2103] He slow the crueel tyrant Busirus
 [2104] And made his hors to frete hym, flessh and boon;
 [2105] He slow the firy serpent venymus;
 [2106] Of Acheloys two hornes he brak oon;
 [2107] And he slow Cacus in a cave of stoon;
 [2108] He slow the geant Antheus the stronge;
 [2109] He slow the grisly boor, and that anon;
 [2110] And bar the hevene on his nekke longe.
 [2111] Was nevere wight, sith that this world bigan,
 [2112] That slow so manye monstres as dide he.
 [2113] Thurghout this wyde world his name ran,
 [2114] What for his strengthe and for his heigh bountee,
 [2115] And every reawme wente he for to see.
 [2116] He was so stroong that no man myghte hym lette.
 [2117] At bothe the worldes endes, seith Trophee,
 [2118] In stide of boundes he a pileer sette.
 [2119] A lemman hadde this noble champioun,
 [2120] That highte Dianira, fressh as May;
 [2121] And as thise clerkes maken mencioun,
 [2122] She hath hym sent a sherte, fressh and gay.
 [2123] Allas, this sherte -- allas and weylaway! --
 [2124] Envenymed was so subtilly withalle
 [2125] That er that he had wered it half a day
 [2126] It made his flessh al from his bones falle.
 [2127] But nathelees somme clerkes hire excusen
 [2128] By oon that highte Nessus, that it maked.
 [2129] Be as be may, I wol hire noght accusen;
 [2130] But on his bak this sherte he wered al naked
 [2131] Til that his flessh was for the venym blaked.
 [2132] And whan he saugh noon oother remedye,
 [2133] In hoote coles he hath hymselven raked,
 [2134] For with no venym deigned hym to dye.
 [2135] Thus starf this worthy, myghty Hercules.
 [2136] Lo, who may truste on Fortune any throwe?
 [2137] For hym that folweth al this world of prees
 [2138] Er he be war is ofte yleyd ful lowe.
 [2139] Ful wys is he that kan hymselven knowe!
 [2140] Beth war, for whan that Fortune list to glose,
 [2141] Thanne wayteth she her man to overthrowe
 [2142] By swich a wey as he wolde leest suppose.
 [2143] The myghty trone, the precious tresor,
 [2144] The glorious ceptre, and roial magestee
 [2145] That hadde the kyng Nabugodonosor
 [2146] With tonge unnethe may discryved bee.
 [2147] He twyes wan Jerusalem the citee;
 [2148] The vessel of the temple he with hym ladde.
 [2149] At Babiloigne was his sovereyn see,
 [2150] In which his glorie and his delit he hadde.
 [2151] The faireste children of the blood roial
 [2152] Of Israel he leet do gelde anoon,
 [2153] And maked ech of hem to been his thral.
 [2154] Amonges othere Daniel was oon,
 [2155] That was the wiseste child of everychon,
 [2156] For he the dremes of the kyng expowned,
 [2157] Whereas in Chaldeye clerk ne was ther noon
 [2158] That wiste to what fyn his dremes sowned.
 [2159] This proude kyng leet maken a statue of gold,
 [2160] Sixty cubites long and sevene in brede,
 [2161] To which ymage bothe yong and oold
 [2162] Comanded he to loute, and have in drede,
 [2163] Or in a fourneys, ful of flambes rede,
 [2164] He shal be brent that wolde noght obeye.
 [2165] But nevere wolde assente to that dede
 [2166] Daniel ne his yonge felawes tweye.
 [2167] This kyng of kynges proud was and elaat;
 [2168] He wende that God, that sit in magestee,
 [2169] Ne myghte hym nat bireve of his estaat.
 [2170] But sodeynly he loste his dignytee,
 [2171] And lyk a beest hym semed for to bee,
 [2172] And eet hey as an oxe, and lay theroute
 [2173] In reyn; with wilde beestes walked hee
 [2174] Til certein tyme was ycome aboute.
 [2175] And lik an egles fetheres wax his heres;
 [2176] His nayles lyk a briddes clawes weere;
 [2177] Til God relessed hym a certeyn yeres,
 [2178] And yaf hym wit, and thanne with many a teere
 [2179] He thanked God, and evere his lyf in feere
 [2180] Was he to doon amys or moore trespace;
 [2181] And til that tyme he leyd was on his beere
 [2182] He knew that God was ful of myght and grace.
 [2183] His sone, which that highte Balthasar,
 [2184] That heeld the regne after his fader day,
 [2185] He by his fader koude noght be war,
 [2186] For proud he was of herte and of array,
 [2187] And eek an ydolastre was he ay.
 [2188] His hye estaat assured hym in pryde;
 [2189] But Fortune caste hym doun, and ther he lay,
 [2190] And sodeynly his regne gan divide.
 [2191] A feeste he made unto his lordes alle
 [2192] Upon a tyme and bad hem blithe bee;
 [2193] And thanne his officeres gan he calle:
 [2194] "Gooth, bryngeth forth the vesseles," quod he,
 [2195] "Whiche that my fader in his prosperitee
 [2196] Out of the temple of Jerusalem birafte;
 [2197] And to oure hye goddes thanke we
 [2198] Of honour that oure eldres with us lafte."
 [2199] Hys wyf, his lordes, and his concubynes
 [2200] Ay dronken, whil hire appetites laste,
 [2201] Out of thise noble vessels sondry wynes.
 [2202] And on a wal this kyng his eyen caste
 [2203] And saugh an hand, armlees, that wroot ful faste,
 [2204] For feere of which he quook and siked soore.
 [2205] This hand that Balthasar so soore agaste
 [2206] Wroot Mane, techel, phares, and namoore.
 [2207] In all that land magicien was noon
 [2208] That koude expoune what this lettre mente;
 [2209] But Daniel expowned it anoon,
 [2210] And seyde, "Kyng, God to thy fader lente
 [2211] Glorie and honour, regne, tresour, rente;
 [2212] And he was proud and nothyng God ne dradde,
 [2213] And therfore God greet wreche upon hym sente,
 [2214] And hym birafte the regne that he hadde.
 [2215] "He was out cast of mannes compaignye;
 [2216] With asses was his habitacioun,
 [2217] And eet hey as a beest in weet and drye
 [2218] Til that he knew, by grace and by resoun,
 [2219] That God of hevene hath domynacioun
 [2220] Over every regne and every creature;
 [2221] And thanne hadde God of hym compassioun,
 [2222] And hym restored his regne and his figure.
 [2223] "Eek thou, that art his sone, art proud also,
 [2224] And knowest alle thise thynges verraily,
 [2225] And art rebel to God, and art his foo.
 [2226] Thou drank eek of his vessels boldely;
 [2227] Thy wyf eek, and thy wenches, synfully
 [2228] Dronke of the same vessels sondry wynys;
 [2229] And heryest false goddes cursedly;
 [2230] Therefore to thee yshapen ful greet pyne ys.
 [2231] "This hand was sent from God that on the wal
 [2232] Wroot Mane, techel, phares, truste me;
 [2233] Thy regne is doon; thou weyest noght at al.
 [2234] Dyvyded is thy regne, and it shal be
 [2235] To Medes and to Perses yeven," quod he.
 [2236] And thilke same nyght this kyng was slawe,
 [2237] And Darius occupieth his degree,
 [2238] Thogh he therto hadde neither right ne lawe.
 [2239] Lordynges, ensample heerby may ye take
 [2240] How that in lordshipe is no sikernesse,
 [2241] For whan Fortune wole a man forsake,
 [2242] She bereth awey his regne and his richesse,
 [2243] And eek his freendes, bothe moore and lesse.
 [2244] For what man that hath freendes thurgh Fortune,
 [2245] Mishap wol maken hem enemys, I gesse;
 [2246] This proverbe is ful sooth and ful commune.
 [2247] Cenobia, of Palymerie queene,
 [2248] As writen Persiens of hir noblesse,
 [2249] So worthy was in armes and so keene
 [2250] That no wight passed hire in hardynesse,
 [2251] Ne in lynage, ne in oother gentillesse.
 [2252] Of kynges blood of Perce is she descended.
 [2253] I seye nat that she hadde moost fairnesse,
 [2254] But of hir shap she myghte nat been amended.
 [2255] From hire childhede I fynde that she fledde
 [2256] Office of wommen, and to wode she wente,
 [2257] And many a wilde hertes blood she shedde
 [2258] With arwes brode that she to hem sente.
 [2259] She was so swift that she anon hem hente;
 [2260] And whan that she was elder, she wolde kille
 [2261] Leouns, leopardes, and beres al torente,
 [2262] And in hir armes weelde hem at hir wille.
 [2263] She dorste wilde beestes dennes seke,
 [2264] And rennen in the montaignes al the nyght,
 [2265] And slepen under a bussh, and she koude eke
 [2266] Wrastlen, by verray force and verray myght,
 [2267] With any yong man, were he never so wight.
 [2268] Ther myghte no thyng in hir armes stonde.
 [2269] She kepte hir maydenhod from every wight;
 [2270] To no man deigned hire for to be bonde.
 [2271] But atte laste hir freendes han hire maried
 [2272] To Odenake, a prynce of that contree,
 [2273] Al were it so that she hem longe taried.
 [2274] And ye shul understonde how that he
 [2275] Hadde swiche fantasies as hadde she.
 [2276] But natheless, whan they were knyt in-feere,
 [2277] They lyved in joye and in felicitee,
 [2278] For ech of hem hadde oother lief and deere,
 [2279] Save o thyng: that she wolde nevere assente,
 [2280] By no wey, that he sholde by hire lye
 [2281] But ones, for it was hir pleyn entente
 [2282] To have a child, the world to multiplye;
 [2283] And also soone as that she myghte espye
 [2284] That she was nat with childe with that dede,
 [2285] Thanne wolde she suffre hym doon his fantasye
 [2286] Eft-soone, and nat but oones, out of drede.
 [2287] And if she were with childe at thilke cast,
 [2288] Namoore sholde he pleyen thilke game
 [2289] Til fully fourty [wikes] weren past;
 [2290] Thanne wolde she ones suffre hym do the same.
 [2291] Al were this Odenake wilde or tame,
 [2292] He gat namoore of hire, for thus she seyde:
 [2293] It was to wyves lecherie and shame,
 [2294] In oother caas, if that men with hem pleyde.
 [2295] Two sones by this Odenake hadde she,
 [2296] The whiche she kepte in vertu and lettrure.
 [2297] But now unto oure tale turne we.
 [2298] I seye, so worshipful a creature,
 [2299] And wys therwith, and large with mesure,
 [2300] So penyble in the werre, and curteis eke,
 [2301] Ne moore labour myghte in werre endure,
 [2302] Was noon, though al this world men sholde seke.
 [2303] Hir riche array ne myghte nat be told,
 [2304] As wel in vessel as in hire clothyng.
 [2305] She was al clad in perree and in gold,
 [2306] And eek she lafte noght, for noon huntyng,
 [2307] To have of sondry tonges ful knowyng,
 [2308] Whan that she leyser hadde; and for to entende
 [2309] To lerne bookes was al hire likyng,
 [2310] How she in vertu myghte hir lyf dispende.
 [2311] And shortly of this storie for to trete,
 [2312] So doghty was hir housbonde and eek she,
 [2313] That they conquered manye regnes grete
 [2314] In the orient, with many a fair citee
 [2315] Apertenaunt unto the magestee
 [2316] Of Rome, and with strong hond held hem ful faste,
 [2317] Ne nevere myghte hir foomen doon hem flee,
 [2318] Ay whil that Odenakes dayes laste.
 [2319] Hir batailles, whoso list hem for to rede,
 [2320] Agayn Sapor the kyng and othere mo,
 [2321] And how that al this proces fil in dede,
 [2322] Why she conquered and what title had therto,
 [2323] And after, of hir meschief and hire wo,
 [2324] How that she was biseged and ytake --
 [2325] Lat hym unto my maister Petrak go,
 [2326] That writ ynough of this, I undertake.
 [2327] Whan Odenake was deed, she myghtily
 [2328] The regnes heeld, and with hire propre hond
 [2329] Agayn hir foos she faught so cruelly
 [2330] That ther nas kyng ne prynce in al that lond
 [2331] That he nas glad, if he that grace fond,
 [2332] That she ne wolde upon his lond werreye.
 [2333] With hire they maden alliance by bond
 [2334] To been in pees, and lete hire ride and pleye.
 [2335] The Emperour of Rome, Claudius
 [2336] Ne hym bifore, the Romayn Galien,
 [2337] Ne dorste nevere been so corageus,
 [2338] Ne noon Ermyn, ne noon Egipcien,
 [2339] Ne Surrien, ne noon Arabyen,
 [2340] Withinne the feeld that dorste with hire fighte,
 [2341] Lest that she wolde hem with hir handes slen,
 [2342] Or with hir meignee putten hem to flighte.
 [2343] In kynges habit wente hir sones two,
 [2344] As heires of hir fadres regnes alle,
 [2345] And Hermanno and Thymalao
 [2346] Hir names were, as Persiens hem calle.
 [2347] But ay Fortune hath in hire hony galle;
 [2348] This myghty queene may no while endure.
 [2349] Fortune out of hir regne made hire falle
 [2350] To wrecchednesse and to mysaventure.
 [2351] Aurelian, whan that the governaunce
 [2352] Of Rome cam into his handes tweye,
 [2353] He shoop upon this queene to doon vengeaunce.
 [2354] And with his legions he took his weye
 [2355] Toward Cenobie, and shortly for to seye,
 [2356] He made hire flee, and atte laste hire hente,
 [2357] And fettred hire, and eek hire children tweye,
 [2358] And wan the land, and hoom to Rome he wente.
 [2359] Amonges othere thynges that he wan,
 [2360] Hir chaar, that was with gold wroght and perree,
 [2361] This grete Romayn, this Aurelian,
 [2362] Hath with hym lad, for that men sholde it see.
 [2363] Biforen his triumphe walketh shee,
 [2364] With gilte cheynes on hire nekke hangynge.
 [2365] Coroned was she, as after hir degree,
 [2366] And ful of perree charged hire clothynge.
 [2367] Allas, Fortune! She that whilom was
 [2368] Dredeful to kynges and to emperoures,
 [2369] Now gaureth al the peple on hire, allas!
 [2370] And she that helmed was in starke stoures
 [2371] And wan by force townes stronge and toures,
 [2372] Shal on hir heed now were a vitremyte;
 [2373] And she that bar the ceptre ful of floures
 [2374] Shal bere a distaf, hire cost for to quyte.
 [2375] O noble, O worthy Petro, glorie of Spayne,
 [2376] Whom Fortune heeld so hye in magestee,
 [2377] Wel oghten men thy pitous deeth complayne!
 [2378] Out of thy land thy brother made thee flee,
 [2379] And after, at a seege, by subtiltee,
 [2380] Thou were bitraysed and lad unto his tente,
 [2381] Where as he with his owene hand slow thee,
 [2382] Succedynge in thy regne and in thy rente.
 [2383] The feeld of snow, with th' egle of blak therinne,
 [2384] Caught with the lymrod coloured as the gleede,
 [2385] He brew this cursednesse and al this synne.
 [2386] The wikked nest was werker of this nede.
 [2387] Noght Charles Olyver, that took ay heede
 [2388] Of trouthe and honour, but of Armorike
 [2389] Genylon-Olyver, corrupt for meede,
 [2390] Broghte this worthy kyng in swich a brike.
 [2391] O worthy Petro, kyng of Cipre, also,
 [2392] That Alisandre wan by heigh maistrie,
 [2393] Ful many an hethen wroghtestow ful wo,
 [2394] Of which thyne owene liges hadde envie,
 [2395] And for no thyng but for thy chivalrie
 [2396] They in thy bed han slayn thee by the morwe.
 [2397] Thus kan Fortune hir wheel governe and gye,
 [2398] And out of joye brynge men to sorwe.
 [2399] Off Melan grete Barnabo Viscounte,
 [2400] God of delit and scourge of Lumbardye,
 [2401] Why sholde I nat thyn infortune acounte,
 [2402] Sith in estaat thow cloumbe were so hye?
 [2403] Thy brother sone, that was thy double allye,
 [2404] For he thy nevew was and sone-in-lawe,
 [2405] Withinne his prisoun made thee to dye --
 [2406] But why ne how noot I that thou were slawe.
 [2407] Off the Erl Hugelyn of Pyze the langour
 [2408] Ther may no tonge telle for pitee.
 [2409] But litel out of Pize stant a tour,
 [2410] In which tour in prisoun put was he,
 [2411] And with hym been his litel children thre;
 [2412] The eldest scarsly fyf yeer was of age.
 [2413] Allas, Fortune, it was greet crueltee
 [2414] Swiche briddes for to putte in swich a cage!
 [2415] Dampned was he to dyen in that prisoun,
 [2416] For Roger, which that bisshop was of Pize,
 [2417] Hadde on hym maad a fals suggestioun,
 [2418] Thurgh which the peple gan upon hym rise
 [2419] And putten hym to prisoun in swich wise
 [2420] As ye han herd, and mete and drynke he hadde
 [2421] So smal that wel unnethe it may suffise,
 [2422] And therwithal it was ful povre and badde.
 [2423] And on a day bifil that in that hour
 [2424] Whan that his mete wont was to be broght,
 [2425] The gayler shette the dores of the tour.
 [2426] He herde it wel, but he spak right noght,
 [2427] And in his herte anon ther fil a thoght
 [2428] That they for hunger wolde doon hym dyen.
 [2429] "Allas!" quod he, "Allas, that I was wroght!"
 [2430] Therwith the teeris fillen from his yen.
 [2431] His yonge sone, that thre yeer was of age,
 [2432] Unto hym seyde, "Fader, why do ye wepe?
 [2433] Whanne wol the gayler bryngen oure potage?
 [2434] Is ther no morsel breed that ye do kepe?
 [2435] I am so hungry that I may nat slepe.
 [2436] Now wolde God that I myghte slepen evere!
 [2437] Thanne sholde nat hunger in my wombe crepe;
 [2438] Ther is no thyng, but breed, that me were levere."
 [2439] Thus day by day this child bigan to crye,
 [2440] Til in his fadres barm adoun it lay,
 [2441] And seyde, "Farewel, fader, I moot dye!"
 [2442] And kiste his fader, and dyde the same day.
 [2443] And whan the woful fader deed it say,
 [2444] For wo his armes two he gan to byte,
 [2445] And seyde, "Allas, Fortune, and weylaway!
 [2446] Thy false wheel my wo al may I wyte."
 [2447] His children wende that it for hunger was
 [2448] That he his armes gnow, and nat for wo,
 [2449] And seyde, "Fader, do nat so, allas!
 [2450] But rather ete the flessh upon us two.
 [2451] Oure flessh thou yaf us, take oure flessh us fro,
 [2452] And ete ynogh" -- right thus they to hym seyde,
 [2453] And after that, withinne a day or two,
 [2454] They leyde hem in his lappe adoun and deyde.
 [2455] Hymself, despeired, eek for hunger starf;
 [2456] Thus ended is this myghty Erl of Pize.
 [2457] From heigh estaat Fortune awey hym carf.
 [2458] Of this tragedie it oghte ynough suffise;
 [2459] Whoso wol here it in a lenger wise,
 [2460] Redeth the grete poete of Ytaille
 [2461] That highte Dant, for he kan al devyse
 [2462] Fro point to point; nat o word wol he faille.
 [2463] Although that Nero were as vicius
 [2464] As any feend that lith ful lowe adoun,
 [2465] Yet he, as telleth us Swetonius,
 [2466] This wyde world hadde in subjeccioun,
 [2467] Bothe est and west, [south], and septemtrioun.
 [2468] Of rubies, saphires, and of peerles white
 [2469] Were alle his clothes brouded up and doun,
 [2470] For he in gemmes greetly gan delite.
 [2471] Moore delicaat, moore pompous of array,
 [2472] Moore proud was nevere emperour than he;
 [2473] That ilke clooth that he hadde wered o day,
 [2474] After that tyme he nolde it nevere see.
 [2475] Nettes of gold threed hadde he greet plentee
 [2476] To fisshe in Tybre, whan hym liste pleye.
 [2477] His lustes were al lawe in his decree,
 [2478] For Fortune as his freend hym wolde obeye.
 [2479] He Rome brende for his delicasie;
 [2480] The senatours he slow upon a day
 [2481] To heere how that men wolde wepe and crie;
 [2482] And slow his brother, and by his suster lay.
 [2483] His mooder made he in pitous array,
 [2484] For he hire wombe slitte to biholde
 [2485] Where he conceyved was -- so weilaway
 [2486] That he so litel of his mooder tolde!
 [2487] No teere out of his eyen for that sighte
 [2488] Ne cam, but seyde, "A fair womman was she!"
 [2489] Greet wonder is how that he koude or myghte
 [2490] Be domesman of hire dede beautee.
 [2491] The wyn to bryngen hym comanded he,
 [2492] And drank anon -- noon oother wo he made.
 [2493] Whan myght is joyned unto crueltee,
 [2494] Allas, to depe wol the venym wade!
 [2495] In yowthe a maister hadde this emperour
 [2496] To teche hym letterure and curteisye,
 [2497] For of moralitee he was the flour,
 [2498] As in his tyme, but if bookes lye;
 [2499] And whil this maister hadde of hym maistrye,
 [2500] He maked hym so konnyng and so sowple
 [2501] That longe tyme it was er tirannye
 [2502] Or any vice dorste on hym uncowple.
 [2503] This Seneca, of which that I devyse,
 [2504] By cause Nero hadde of hym swich drede,
 [2505] For he fro vices wolde hym ay chastise
 [2506] Discreetly, as by word and nat by dede --
 [2507] "Sire," wolde he seyn, "an emperour moot nede
 [2508] Be vertuous and hate tirannye --"
 [2509] For which he in a bath made hym to blede
 [2510] On bothe his armes, til he moste dye.
 [2511] This Nero hadde eek of acustumaunce
 [2512] In youthe agayns his maister for to ryse,
 [2513] Which afterward hym thoughte a greet grevaunce;
 [2514] Therefore he made hym dyen in this wise.
 [2515] But natheless this Seneca the wise
 [2516] Chees in a bath to dye in this manere
 [2517] Rather than han another tormentise;
 [2518] And thus hath Nero slayn his maister deere.
 [2519] Now fil it so that Fortune liste no lenger
 [2520] The hye pryde of Nero to cherice,
 [2521] For though that he were strong, yet was she strenger.
 [2522] She thoughte thus: "By God! I am to nyce
 [2523] To sette a man that is fulfild of vice
 [2524] In heigh degree, and emperour hym calle.
 [2525] By God, out of his sete I wol hym trice;
 [2526] Whan he leest weneth, sonnest shal he falle."
 [2527] The peple roos upon hym on a nyght
 [2528] For his defaute, and whan he it espied,
 [2529] Out of his dores anon he hath hym dight
 [2530] Allone, and ther he wende han been allied
 [2531] He knokked faste, and ay the moore he cried
 [2532] The fastere shette they the dores alle.
 [2533] Tho wiste he wel, he hadde himself mysgyed,
 [2534] And wente his wey; no lenger dorste he calle.
 [2535] The peple cried and rombled up and doun,
 [2536] That with his erys herde he how they seyde,
 [2537] "Where is this false tiraunt, this Neroun?"
 [2538] For fere almoost out of his wit he breyde,
 [2539] And to his goddes pitously he preyde
 [2540] For socour, but it myghte nat bityde.
 [2541] For drede of this hym thoughte that he deyde,
 [2542] And ran into a gardyn hym to hyde.
 [2543] And in this gardyn foond he cherles tweye
 [2544] That seten by a fyr, greet and reed.
 [2545] And to thise cherles two he gan to preye
 [2546] To sleen hym and to girden of his heed,
 [2547] That to his body, whan that he were deed,
 [2548] Were no despit ydoon for his defame.
 [2549] Hymself he slow, he koude no bettre reed,
 [2550] Of which Fortune lough, and hadde a game.
 [2551] Was nevere capitayn under a kyng
 [2552] That regnes mo putte in subjeccioun,
 [2553] Ne strenger was in feeld of alle thyng,
 [2554] As in his tyme, ne gretter of renoun,
 [2555] Ne moore pompous in heigh presumpcioun
 [2556] Than Oloferne, which Fortune ay kiste
 [2557] So likerously, and ladde hym up and doun
 [2558] Til that his heed was of, er that he wiste.
 [2559] Nat oonly that this world hadde hym in awe
 [2560] For lesynge of richesse or libertee,
 [2561] But he made every man reneyen his lawe.
 [2562] "Nabugodonosor was god," seyde hee;
 [2563] "Noon oother god sholde adoured bee."
 [2564] Agayns his heeste no wight dorst trespace,
 [2565] Save in Bethulia, a strong citee,
 [2566] Where Eliachim a preest was of that place.
 [2567] But taak kep of the deth of Oloferne:
 [2568] Amydde his hoost he dronke lay a-nyght,
 [2569] Withinne his tente, large as is a berne,
 [2570] And yet, for al his pompe and al his myght,
 [2571] Judith, a womman, as he lay upright
 [2572] Slepynge, his heed of smoot, and from his tente
 [2573] Ful pryvely she stal from every wight,
 [2574] And with his heed unto hir toun she wente.
 [2575] What nedeth it of kyng Anthiochus
 [2576] To telle his hye roial magestee,
 [2577] His hye pride, his werkes venymus?
 [2578] For swich another was ther noon as he.
 [2579] Rede which that he was in Machabee,
 [2580] And rede the proude wordes that he seyde,
 [2581] And why he fil fro heigh prosperitee,
 [2582] And in an hill how wrecchedly he deyde.
 [2583] Fortune hym hadde enhaunced so in pride
 [2584] That verraily he wende he myghte attayne
 [2585] Unto the sterres upon every syde,
 [2586] And in balance weyen ech montayne,
 [2587] And alle the floodes of the see restrayne.
 [2588] And Goddes peple hadde he moost in hate;
 [2589] Hem wolde he sleen in torment and in payne,
 [2590] Wenynge that God ne myghte his pride abate.
 [2591] And for that Nichanore and Thymothee
 [2592] Of Jewes weren venquysshed myghtily,
 [2593] Unto the Jewes swich an hate hadde he
 [2594] That he bad greithen his chaar ful hastily,
 [2595] And swoor, and seyde ful despitously
 [2596] Unto Jerusalem he wolde eftsoone
 [2597] To wreken his ire on it ful cruelly;
 [2598] But of his purpos he was let ful soone.
 [2599] God for his manace hym so soore smoot
 [2600] With invisible wounde, ay incurable,
 [2601] That in his guttes carf it so and boot
 [2602] That his peynes weren importable.
 [2603] And certeinly the wreche was resonable,
 [2604] For many a mannes guttes dide he peyne.
 [2605] But from his purpos cursed and dampnable,
 [2606] For al his smert, he wolde hym nat restreyne,
 [2607] But bad anon apparaillen his hoost;
 [2608] And sodeynly, er he was of it war,
 [2609] God daunted al his pride and al his boost.
 [2610] For he so soore fil out of his char
 [2611] That it his limes and his skyn totar,
 [2612] So that he neyther myghte go ne ryde,
 [2613] But in a chayer men aboute hym bar,
 [2614] Al forbrused, bothe bak and syde.
 [2615] The wreche of God hym smoot so cruelly
 [2616] That thurgh his body wikked wormes crepte,
 [2617] And therwithal he stank so horribly
 [2618] That noon of al his meynee that hym kepte,
 [2619] Wheither so he wook or ellis slepte,
 [2620] Ne myghte noght the stynk of hym endure.
 [2621] In this meschief he wayled and eek wepte,
 [2622] And knew God lord of every creature.
 [2623] To al his hoost and to hymself also
 [2624] Ful wlatsom was the stynk of his careyne;
 [2625] No man ne myghte hym bere to ne fro.
 [2626] And in this stynk and this horrible peyne,
 [2627] He starf ful wrecchedly in a monteyne.
 [2628] Thus hath this robbour and this homycide,
 [2629] That many a man made to wepe and pleyne,
 [2630] Swich gerdoun as bilongeth unto pryde.
 [2631] The storie of Alisaundre is so commune
 [2632] That every wight that hath discrecioun
 [2633] Hath herd somwhat or al of his fortune.
 [2634] This wyde world, as in conclusioun,
 [2635] He wan by strengthe, or for his hye renoun
 [2636] They weren glad for pees unto hym sende.
 [2637] The pride of man and beest he leyde adoun,
 [2638] Wherso he cam, unto the worldes ende.
 [2639] Comparisoun myghte nevere yet been maked
 [2640] Bitwixe hym and another conquerour;
 [2641] For al this world for drede of hym hath quaked.
 [2642] He was of knyghthod and of fredom flour;
 [2643] Fortune hym made the heir of hire honour.
 [2644] Save wyn and wommen, no thing myghte aswage
 [2645] His hye entente in armes and labour,
 [2646] So was he ful of leonyn corage.
 [2647] What pris were it to hym, though I yow tolde
 [2648] Of Darius, and an hundred thousand mo
 [2649] Of kynges, princes, dukes, erles bolde
 [2650] Whiche he conquered, and broghte hem into wo?
 [2651] I seye, as fer as man may ryde or go,
 [2652] The world was his -- what sholde I moore devyse?
 [2653] For though I write or tolde yow everemo
 [2654] Of his knyghthod, it myghte nat suffise.
 [2655] Twelf yeer he regned, as seith Machabee.
 [2656] Philippes sone of Macidoyne he was,
 [2657] That first was kyng in Grece the contree.
 [2658] O worthy, gentil Alisandre, allas,
 [2659] That evere sholde fallen swich a cas!
 [2660] Empoysoned of thyn owene folk thou weere;
 [2661] Thy sys Fortune hath turned into aas,
 [2662] And for thee ne weep she never a teere.
 [2663] Who shal me yeven teeris to compleyne
 [2664] The deeth of gentillesse and of franchise,
 [2665] That al the world weelded in his demeyne,
 [2666] And yet hym thoughte it myghte nat suffise?
 [2667] So ful was his corage of heigh emprise.
 [2668] Allas, who shal me helpe to endite
 [2669] False Fortune, and poyson to despise,
 [2670] The whiche two of al this wo I wyte?
 [2671] By wisedom, manhede, and by greet labour,
 [2672] From humble bed to roial magestee
 [2673] Up roos he Julius, the conquerour,
 [2674] That wan al th' occident by land and see,
 [2675] By strengthe of hand, or elles by tretee,
 [2676] And unto Rome made hem tributarie;
 [2677] And sitthe of Rome the emperour was he
 [2678] Til that Fortune weex his adversarie.
 [2679] O myghty Cesar, that in Thessalie
 [2680] Agayn Pompeus, fader thyn in lawe,
 [2681] That of the orient hadde al the chivalrie
 [2682] As fer as that the day bigynneth dawe,
 [2683] Thou thurgh thy knyghthod hast hem take and slawe,
 [2684] Save fewe folk that with Pompeus fledde,
 [2685] Thurgh which thou puttest al th' orient in awe.
 [2686] Thanke Fortune, that so wel thee spedde!
 [2687] But now a litel while I wol biwaille
 [2688] This Pompeus, this noble governour
 [2689] Of Rome, which that fleigh at this bataille.
 [2690] I seye, oon of his men, a fals traitour,
 [2691] His heed of smoot, to wynnen hym favour
 [2692] Of Julius, and hym the heed he broghte.
 [2693] Allas, Pompeye, of th' orient conquerour,
 [2694] That Fortune unto swich a fyn thee broghte!
 [2695] To Rome agayn repaireth Julius
 [2696] With his triumphe, lauriat ful hye;
 [2697] But on a tyme Brutus Cassius,
 [2698] That evere hadde of his hye estaat envye,
 [2699] Ful prively hath maad conspiracye
 [2700] Agayns this Julius in subtil wise,
 [2701] And caste the place in which he sholde dye
 [2702] With boydekyns, as I shal yow devyse.
 [2703] This Julius to the Capitolie wente
 [2704] Upon a day, as he was wont to goon,
 [2705] And in the Capitolie anon hym hente
 [2706] This false Brutus and his othere foon,
 [2707] And stiked hym with boydekyns anoon
 [2708] With many a wounde, and thus they lete hym lye;
 [2709] But nevere gronte he at no strook but oon,
 [2710] Or elles at two, but if his storie lye.
 [2711] So manly was this Julius of herte,
 [2712] And so wel lovede estaatly honestee,
 [2713] That though his deedly woundes soore smerte,
 [2714] His mantel over his hypes caste he,
 [2715] For no man sholde seen his privetee;
 [2716] And as he lay of diyng in a traunce,
 [2717] And wiste verraily that deed was hee,
 [2718] Of honestee yet hadde he remembraunce.
 [2719] Lucan, to thee this storie I recomende,
 [2720] And to Swetoun, and to Valerius also,
 [2721] That of this storie writen word and ende,
 [2722] How that to thise grete conqueroures two
 [2723] Fortune was first freend, and sitthe foo.
 [2724] No man ne truste upon hire favour longe,
 [2725] But have hire in awayt for everemoo;
 [2726] Witnesse on alle thise conqueroures stronge.
 [2727] This riche Cresus, whilom kyng of Lyde,
 [2728] Of which Cresus Cirus soore hym dradde,
 [2729] Yet was he caught amyddes al his pryde,
 [2730] And to be brent men to the fyr hym ladde.
 [2731] But swich a reyn doun fro the welkne shadde
 [2732] That slow the fyr, and made hym to escape;
 [2733] But to be war no grace yet he hadde,
 [2734] Til Fortune on the galwes made hym gape.
 [2735] Whanne he escaped was, he kan nat stente
 [2736] For to bigynne a newe werre agayn.
 [2737] He wende wel, for that Fortune hym sente
 [2738] Swich hap that he escaped thurgh the rayn,
 [2739] That of his foos he myghte nat be slayn;
 [2740] And eek a sweven upon a nyght he mette,
 [2741] Of which he was so proud and eek so fayn
 [2742] That in vengeance he al his herte sette.
 [2743] Upon a tree he was, as that hym thoughte,
 [2744] Ther Juppiter hym wessh, bothe bak and syde,
 [2745] And Phebus eek a fair towaille hym broughte
 [2746] To dryen hym with; and therfore wax his pryde,
 [2747] And to his doghter, that stood hym bisyde,
 [2748] Which that he knew in heigh sentence habounde,
 [2749] He bad hire telle hym what it signyfyde,
 [2750] And she his dreem bigan right thus expounde:
 [2751] "The tree," quod she, "the galwes is to meene,
 [2752] And Juppiter bitokneth snow and reyn,
 [2753] And Phebus, with his towaille so clene,
 [2754] Tho been the sonne stremes for to seyn.
 [2755] Thou shalt anhanged be, fader, certeyn;
 [2756] Reyn shal thee wasshe, and sonne shal thee drye."
 [2757] Thus warned hym ful plat and ek ful pleyn
 [2758] His doghter, which that called was Phanye.
 [2759] Anhanged was Cresus, the proude kyng;
 [2760] His roial trone myghte hym nat availle.
 [2761] Tragedies noon oother maner thyng
 [2762] Ne kan in syngyng crie ne biwaille
 [2763] But that Fortune alwey wole assaille
 [2764] With unwar strook the regnes that been proude;
 [2765] For whan men trusteth hire, thanne wol she faille,
 [2766] And covere hire brighte face with a clowde.

      
The Canterbury Tales and Other Works of Chaucer (Middle English), by Geoffery Chaucer, [14th cent.], at sacred-texts.com

 

The Canterbury Tales

 

The Nun's Priest's Prologue

 [2767] "Hoo!" quod the Knyght, "good sire, namoore of this!
 [2768] That ye han seyd is right ynough, ywis,
 [2769] And muchel moore; for litel hevynesse
 [2770] Is right ynough to muche folk, I gesse.
 [2771] I seye for me, it is a greet disese,
 [2772] Whereas men han been in greet welthe and ese,
 [2773] To heeren of hire sodeyn fal, allas!
 [2774] And the contrarie is joye and greet solas,
 [2775] As whan a man hath been in povre estaat,
 [2776] And clymbeth up and wexeth fortunat,
 [2777] And there abideth in prosperitee.
 [2778] Swich thyng is gladsom, as it thynketh me,
 [2779] And of swich thyng were goodly for to telle."
 [2780] "Ye," quod oure Hooste, "by Seint Poules belle!
 [2781] Ye seye right sooth; this Monk he clappeth lowde.
 [2782] He spak how Fortune covered with a clowde
 [2783] I noot nevere what; and als of a tragedie
 [2784] Right now ye herde, and pardee, no remedie
 [2785] It is for to biwaille ne compleyne
 [2786] That that is doon, and als it is a peyne,
 [2787] As ye han seyd, to heere of hevynesse.
 [2788] "Sire Monk, namoore of this, so God yow blesse!
 [2789] Youre tale anoyeth al this compaignye.
 [2790] Swich talkyng is nat worth a boterflye,
 [2791] For therinne is ther no desport ne game.
 [2792] Wherfore, sire Monk, daun Piers by youre name,
 [2793] I pray yow hertely telle us somwhat elles;
 [2794] For sikerly, nere clynkyng of youre belles
 [2795] That on youre bridel hange on every syde,
 [2796] By hevene kyng that for us alle dyde,
 [2797] I sholde er this han fallen doun for sleep,
 [2798] Althogh the slough had never been so deep;
 [2799] Thanne hadde your tale al be toold in veyn.
 [2800] For certeinly, as that thise clerkes seyn,
 [2801] Whereas a man may have noon audience,
 [2802] Noght helpeth it to tellen his sentence.
 [2803] "And wel I woot the substance is in me,
 [2804] If any thyng shal wel reported be.
 [2805] Sir, sey somwhat of huntyng, I yow preye."
 [2806] "Nay," quod this Monk, "I have no lust to pleye.
 [2807] Now lat another telle, as I have toold."
 [2808] Thanne spak oure Hoost with rude speche and boold,
 [2809] And seyde unto the Nonnes Preest anon,
 [2810] "Com neer, thou preest, com hyder, thou sir John!
 [2811] Telle us swich thyng as may oure hertes glade.
 [2812] Be blithe, though thou ryde upon a jade.
 [2813] What thogh thyn hors be bothe foul and lene?
 [2814] If he wol serve thee, rekke nat a bene.
 [2815] Looke that thyn herte be murie everemo."
 [2816] "Yis, sir," quod he, "yis, Hoost, so moot I go,
 [2817] But I be myrie, ywis I wol be blamed."
 [2818] And right anon his tale he hath attamed,
 [2819] And thus he seyde unto us everichon,
 [2820] This sweete preest, this goodly man sir John.

      
The Canterbury Tales and Other Works of Chaucer (Middle English), by Geoffery Chaucer, [14th cent.], at sacred-texts.com

 

The Canterbury Tales

 

The Nun's Priest's Tale

 [2821] A povre wydwe, somdeel stape in age,
 [2822] Was whilom dwellyng in a narwe cotage,
 [2823] Biside a grove, stondynge in a dale.
 [2824] This wydwe, of which I telle yow my tale,
 [2825] Syn thilke day that she was last a wyf
 [2826] In pacience ladde a ful symple lyf,
 [2827] For litel was hir catel and hir rente.
 [2828] By housbondrie of swich as God hire sente
 [2829] She foond hirself and eek hir doghtren two.
 [2830] Thre large sowes hadde she, and namo,
 [2831] Three keen, and eek a sheep that highte Malle.
 [2832] Ful sooty was hire bour and eek hir halle,
 [2833] In which she eet ful many a sklendre meel.
 [2834] Of poynaunt sauce hir neded never a deel.
 [2835] No deyntee morsel passed thurgh hir throte;
 [2836] Hir diete was accordant to hir cote.
 [2837] Repleccioun ne made hire nevere sik;
 [2838] Attempree diete was al hir phisik,
 [2839] And exercise, and hertes suffisaunce.
 [2840] The goute lette hire nothyng for to daunce,
 [2841] N' apoplexie shente nat hir heed.
 [2842] No wyn ne drank she, neither whit ne reed;
 [2843] Hir bord was served moost with whit and blak --
 [2844] Milk and broun breed, in which she foond no lak,
 [2845] Seynd bacoun, and somtyme an ey or tweye,
 [2846] For she was, as it were, a maner deye.
 [2847] A yeerd she hadde, enclosed al aboute
 [2848] With stikkes, and a drye dych withoute,
 [2849] In which she hadde a cok, hight Chauntecleer.
 [2850] In al the land, of crowyng nas his peer.
 [2851] His voys was murier than the murie orgon
 [2852] On messe-dayes that in the chirche gon.
 [2853] Wel sikerer was his crowyng in his logge
 [2854] Than is a clokke or an abbey orlogge.
 [2855] By nature he knew ech ascencioun
 [2856] Of the equynoxial in thilke toun;
 [2857] For whan degrees fiftene weren ascended,
 [2858] Thanne crew he that it myghte nat been amended.
 [2859] His coomb was redder than the fyn coral,
 [2860] And batailled as it were a castel wal;
 [2861] His byle was blak, and as the jeet it shoon;
 [2862] Lyk asure were his legges and his toon;
 [2863] His nayles whitter than the lylye flour,
 [2864] And lyk the burned gold was his colour.
 [2865] This gentil cok hadde in his governaunce
 [2866] Sevene hennes for to doon al his plesaunce,
 [2867] Whiche were his sustres and his paramours,
 [2868] And wonder lyk to hym, as of colours;
 [2869] Of whiche the faireste hewed on hir throte
 [2870] Was cleped faire damoysele Pertelote.
 [2871] Curteys she was, discreet, and debonaire,
 [2872] And compaignable, and bar hyrself so faire
 [2873] Syn thilke day that she was seven nyght oold
 [2874] That trewely she hath the herte in hoold
 [2875] Of Chauntecleer, loken in every lith;
 [2876] He loved hire so that wel was hym therwith.
 [2877] But swich a joye was it to here hem synge,
 [2878] Whan that the brighte sonne gan to sprynge,
 [2879] In sweete accord, "My lief is faren in londe!" --
 [2880] For thilke tyme, as I have understonde,
 [2881] Beestes and briddes koude speke and synge.
 [2882] And so bifel that in a dawenynge,
 [2883] As Chauntecleer among his wyves alle
 [2884] Sat on his perche, that was in the halle,
 [2885] And next hym sat this faire Pertelote,
 [2886] This Chauntecleer gan gronen in his throte,
 [2887] As man that in his dreem is drecched soore.
 [2888] And whan that Pertelote thus herde hym roore,
 [2889] She was agast and seyde, "Herte deere,
 [2890] What eyleth yow, to grone in this manere?
 [2891] Ye been a verray sleper; fy, for shame!"
 [2892] And he answerde, and seyde thus: "Madame,
 [2893] I pray yow that ye take it nat agrief.
 [2894] By God, me mette I was in swich meschief
 [2895] Right now that yet myn herte is soore afright.
 [2896] Now God," quod he, "my swevene recche aright,
 [2897] And kepe my body out of foul prisoun!
 [2898] Me mette how that I romed up and doun
 [2899] Withinne our yeerd, wheer as I saugh a beest
 [2900] Was lyk an hound, and wolde han maad areest
 [2901] Upon my body, and wolde han had me deed.
 [2902] His colour was bitwixe yelow and reed,
 [2903] And tipped was his tayl and bothe his eeris
 [2904] With blak, unlyk the remenant of his heeris;
 [2905] His snowte smal, with glowynge eyen tweye.
 [2906] Yet of his look for feere almoost I deye;
 [2907] This caused me my gronyng, doutelees."
 [2908] "Avoy!" quod she, "fy on yow, hertelees!
 [2909] Allas," quod she, "for, by that God above,
 [2910] Now han ye lost myn herte and al my love!
 [2911] I kan nat love a coward, by my feith!
 [2912] For certes, what so any womman seith,
 [2913] We alle desiren, if it myghte bee,
 [2914] To han housbondes hardy, wise, and free,
 [2915] And secree -- and no nygard, ne no fool,
 [2916] Ne hym that is agast of every tool,
 [2917] Ne noon avauntour, by that God above!
 [2918] How dorste ye seyn, for shame, unto youre love
 [2919] That any thyng myghte make yow aferd?
 [2920] Have ye no mannes herte, and han a berd?
 [2921] Allas! And konne ye been agast of swevenys?
 [2922] Nothyng, God woot, but vanitee in sweven is.
 [2923] Swevenes engendren of replecciouns,
 [2924] And ofte of fume and of complecciouns,
 [2925] Whan humours been to habundant in a wight.
 [2926] Certes this dreem, which ye han met to-nyght,
 [2927] Cometh of the greete superfluytee
 [2928] Of youre rede colera, pardee,
 [2929] Which causeth folk to dreden in hir dremes
 [2930] Of arwes, and of fyr with rede lemes,
 [2931] Of rede beestes, that they wol hem byte,
 [2932] Of contek, and of whelpes, grete and lyte;
 [2933] Right as the humour of malencolie
 [2934] Causeth ful many a man in sleep to crie
 [2935] For feere of blake beres, or boles blake,
 [2936] Or elles blake develes wole hem take.
 [2937] Of othere humours koude I telle also
 [2938] That werken many a man sleep ful wo;
 [2939] But I wol passe as lightly as I kan.
 [2940] "Lo Catoun, which that was so wys a man,
 [2941] Seyde he nat thus, `Ne do no fors of dremes'?
 [2942] "Now sire," quod she, "whan we flee fro the bemes,
 [2943] For Goddes love, as taak som laxatyf.
 [2944] Up peril of my soule and of my lyf,
 [2945] I conseille yow the beste -- I wol nat lye --
 [2946] That bothe of colere and of malencolye
 [2947] Ye purge yow; and for ye shal nat tarie,
 [2948] Though in this toun is noon apothecarie,
 [2949] I shal myself to herbes techen yow
 [2950] That shul been for youre hele and for youre prow;
 [2951] And in oure yeerd tho herbes shal I fynde
 [2952] The whiche han of hire propretee by kynde
 [2953] To purge yow bynethe and eek above.
 [2954] Foryet nat this, for Goddes owene love!
 [2955] Ye been ful coleryk of compleccioun;
 [2956] Ware the sonne in his ascencioun
 [2957] Ne fynde yow nat repleet of humours hoote.
 [2958] And if it do, I dar wel leye a grote,
 [2959] That ye shul have a fevere terciane,
 [2960] Or an agu that may be youre bane.
 [2961] A day or two ye shul have digestyves
 [2962] Of wormes, er ye take youre laxatyves
 [2963] Of lawriol, centaure, and fumetere,
 [2964] Or elles of ellebor, that groweth there,
 [2965] Of katapuce, or of gaitrys beryis,
 [2966] Of herbe yve, growyng in oure yeerd, ther mery is;
 [2967] Pekke hem up right as they growe and ete hem yn.
 [2968] Be myrie, housbonde, for youre fader kyn!
 [2969] Dredeth no dreem; I kan sey yow namoore."
 [2970] "Madame," quod he, "graunt mercy of youre loore.
 [2971] But nathelees, as touchyng daun Catoun,
 [2972] That hath of wysdom swich a greet renoun,
 [2973] Though that he bad no dremes for to drede,
 [2974] By God, men may in olde bookes rede
 [2975] Of many a man moore of auctorite
 [2976] Than evere Caton was, so moot I thee,
 [2977] That al the revers seyn of this sentence,
 [2978] And han wel founden by experience
 [2979] That dremes been significaciouns
 [2980] As wel of joye as of tribulaciouns
 [2981] That folk enduren in this lif present.
 [2982] Ther nedeth make of this noon argument;
 [2983] The verray preeve sheweth it in dede.
 [2984] "Oon of the gretteste auctour that men rede
 [2985] Seith thus: that whilom two felawes wente
 [2986] On pilgrimage, in a ful good entente,
 [2987] And happed so, they coomen in a toun
 [2988] Wher as ther was swich congregacioun
 [2989] Of peple, and eek so streit of herbergage,
 [2990] That they ne founde as muche as o cotage
 [2991] In which they bothe myghte ylogged bee.
 [2992] Wherfore they mosten of necessitee,
 [2993] As for that nyght, departen compaignye;
 [2994] And ech of hem gooth to his hostelrye,
 [2995] And took his loggyng as it wolde falle.
 [2996] That oon of hem was logged in a stalle,
 [2997] Fer in a yeerd, with oxen of the plough;
 [2998] That oother man was logged wel ynough,
 [2999] As was his aventure or his fortune,
 [3000] That us governeth alle as in commune.
 [3001] "And so bifel that, longe er it were day,
 [3002] This man mette in his bed, ther as he lay,
 [3003] How that his felawe gan upon hym calle,
 [3004] And seyde, `Allas, for in an oxes stalle
 [3005] This nyght I shal be mordred ther I lye!
 [3006] Now help me, deere brother, or I dye.
 [3007] In alle haste com to me!' he sayde.
 [3008] This man out of his sleep for feere abrayde;
 [3009] But whan that he was wakened of his sleep,
 [3010] He turned hym and took of this no keep.
 [3011] Hym thoughte his dreem nas but a vanitee.
 [3012] Thus twies in his slepyng dremed hee;
 [3013] And atte thridde tyme yet his felawe
 [3014] Cam, as hym thoughte, and seide, `I am now slawe.
 [3015] Bihoold my bloody woundes depe and wyde!
 [3016] Arys up erly in the morwe tyde,
 [3017] And at the west gate of the toun,' quod he,
 [3018] `A carte ful of dong ther shaltow se,
 [3019] In which my body is hid ful prively;
 [3020] Do thilke carte arresten boldely.
 [3021] My gold caused my mordre, sooth to sayn,'
 [3022] And tolde hym every point how he was slayn,
 [3023] With a ful pitous face, pale of hewe.
 [3024] And truste wel, his dreem he foond ful trewe,
 [3025] For on the morwe, as soone as it was day,
 [3026] To his felawes in he took the way;
 [3027] And whan that he cam to this oxes stalle,
 [3028] After his felawe he bigan to calle.
 [3029] "The hostiler answerede hym anon,
 [3030] And seyde, `Sire, your felawe is agon.
 [3031] As soone as day he wente out of the toun.'
 [3032] "This man gan fallen in suspecioun,
 [3033] Remembrynge on his dremes that he mette,
 [3034] And forth he gooth -- no lenger wolde he lette --
 [3035] Unto the west gate of the toun, and fond
 [3036] A dong-carte, wente as it were to donge lond,
 [3037] That was arrayed in that same wise
 [3038] As ye han herd the dede man devyse.
 [3039] And with an hardy herte he gan to crye
 [3040] Vengeance and justice of this felonye:
 [3041] `My felawe mordred is this same nyght,
 [3042] And in this carte he lith gapyng upright.
 [3043] I crye out on the ministres,' quod he,
 [3044] `That sholden kepe and reulen this citee.
 [3045] Harrow! Allas! Heere lith my felawe slayn!'
 [3046] What sholde I moore unto this tale sayn?
 [3047] The peple out sterte and caste the cart to grounde,
 [3048] And in the myddel of the dong they founde
 [3049] The dede man, that mordred was al newe.
 [3050] "O blisful God, that art so just and trewe,
 [3051] Lo, how that thou biwreyest mordre alway!
 [3052] Mordre wol out; that se we day by day.
 [3053] Mordre is so wlatsom and abhomynable
 [3054] To God, that is so just and resonable,
 [3055] That he ne wol nat suffre it heled be,
 [3056] Though it abyde a yeer, or two, or thre.
 [3057] Mordre wol out, this my conclusioun.
 [3058] And right anon, ministres of that toun
 [3059] Han hent the carter and so soore hym pyned,
 [3060] And eek the hostiler so soore engyned,
 [3061] That they biknewe hire wikkednesse anon,
 [3062] And were anhanged by the nekke-bon.
 [3063] "Heere may men seen that dremes been to drede.
 [3064] And certes in the same book I rede,
 [3065] Right in the nexte chapitre after this --
 [3066] I gabbe nat, so have I joye or blis --
 [3067] Two men that wolde han passed over see,
 [3068] For certeyn cause, into a fer contree,
 [3069] If that the wynd ne hadde been contrarie,
 [3070] That made hem in a citee for to tarie
 [3071] That stood ful myrie upon an haven-syde;
 [3072] But on a day, agayn the even-tyde,
 [3073] The wynd gan chaunge, and blew right as hem leste.
 [3074] Jolif and glad they wente unto hir reste,
 [3075] And casten hem ful erly for to saille.
 [3076] But herkneth! To that o man fil a greet mervaille:
 [3077] That oon of hem, in slepyng as he lay,
 [3078] Hym mette a wonder dreem agayn the day.
 [3079] Hym thoughte a man stood by his beddes syde,
 [3080] And hym comanded that he sholde abyde,
 [3081] And seyde hym thus: `If thou tomorwe wende,
 [3082] Thow shalt be dreynt; my tale is at an ende.'
 [3083] He wook, and tolde his felawe what he mette,
 [3084] And preyde hym his viage for to lette;
 [3085] As for that day, he preyde hym to byde.
 [3086] His felawe, that lay by his beddes syde,
 [3087] Gan for to laughe, and scorned him ful faste.
 [3088] `No dreem,' quod he, `may so myn herte agaste
 [3089] That I wol lette for to do my thynges.
 [3090] I sette nat a straw by thy dremynges,
 [3091] For swevenes been but vanytees and japes.
 [3092] Men dreme alday of owles and of apes,
 [3093] And of many a maze therwithal;
 [3094] Men dreme of thyng that nevere was ne shal.
 [3095] But sith I see that thou wolt heere abyde,
 [3096] And thus forslewthen wilfully thy tyde,
 [3097] God woot, it reweth me; and have good day!'
 [3098] And thus he took his leve, and wente his way.
 [3099] But er that he hadde half his cours yseyled,
 [3100] Noot I nat why, ne what myschaunce it eyled,
 [3101] But casuelly the shippes botme rente,
 [3102] And ship and man under the water wente
 [3103] In sighte of othere shippes it bisyde,
 [3104] That with hem seyled at the same tyde.
 [3105] And therfore, faire Pertelote so deere,
 [3106] By swiche ensamples olde maistow leere
 [3107] That no man sholde been to recchelees
 [3108] Of dremes; for I seye thee, doutelees,
 [3109] That many a dreem ful soore is for to drede.
 [3110] "Lo, in the lyf of Seint Kenelm I rede,
 [3111] That was Kenulphus sone, the noble kyng
 [3112] Of Mercenrike, how Kenelm mette a thyng.
 [3113] A lite er he was mordred, on a day,
 [3114] His mordre in his avysioun he say.
 [3115] His norice hym expowned every deel
 [3116] His sweven, and bad hym for to kepe hym weel
 [3117] For traisoun; but he nas but seven yeer oold,
 [3118] And therfore litel tale hath he toold
 [3119] Of any dreem, so hooly was his herte.
 [3120] By God! I hadde levere than my sherte
 [3121] That ye hadde rad his legende, as have I.
 [3122] "Dame Pertelote, I sey yow trewely,
 [3123] Macrobeus, that writ the avisioun
 [3124] In Affrike of the worthy Cipioun,
 [3125] Affermeth dremes, and seith that they been
 [3126] Warnynge of thynges that men after seen.
 [3127] And forthermoore, I pray yow, looketh wel
 [3128] In the olde testament, of Daniel,
 [3129] If he heeld dremes any vanitee.
 [3130] Reed eek of Joseph, and ther shul ye see
 [3131] Wher dremes be somtyme -- I sey nat alle --
 [3132] Warnynge of thynges that shul after falle.
 [3133] Looke of Egipte the kyng, daun Pharao,
 [3134] His bakere and his butiller also,
 [3135] Wher they ne felte noon effect in dremes.
 [3136] Whoso wol seken actes of sondry remes
 [3137] May rede of dremes many a wonder thyng.
 [3138] Lo Cresus, which that was of Lyde kyng,
 [3139] Mette he nat that he sat upon a tree,
 [3140] Which signified he sholde anhanged bee?
 [3141] Lo heere Andromacha, Ectores wyf,
 [3142] That day that Ector sholde lese his lyf,
 [3143] She dremed on the same nyght biforn
 [3144] How that the lyf of Ector sholde be lorn,
 [3145] If thilke day he wente into bataille.
 [3146] She warned hym, but it myghte nat availle;
 [3147] He wente for to fighte natheles,
 [3148] But he was slayn anon of Achilles.
 [3149] But thilke tale is al to longe to telle,
 [3150] And eek it is ny day; I may nat dwelle.
 [3151] Shortly I seye, as for conclusioun,
 [3152] That I shal han of this avisioun
 [3153] Adversitee; and I seye forthermoor
 [3154] That I ne telle of laxatyves no stoor,
 [3155] For they been venymes, I woot it weel;
 [3156] I hem diffye, I love hem never a deel!
 [3157] "Now let us speke of myrthe, and stynte al this.
 [3158] Madame Pertelote, so have I blis,
 [3159] Of o thyng God hath sent me large grace;
 [3160] For whan I se the beautee of youre face,
 [3161] Ye been so scarlet reed aboute youre yen,
 [3162] It maketh al my drede for to dyen;
 [3163] For al so siker as In principio,
 [3164] Mulier est hominis confusio --
 [3165] Madame, the sentence of this Latyn is,
 [3166] `Womman is mannes joye and al his blis.'
 [3167] For whan I feele a-nyght your softe syde --
 [3168] Al be it that I may nat on yow ryde,
 [3169] For that oure perche is maad so narwe, allas --
 [3170] I am so ful of joye and of solas,
 [3171] That I diffye bothe sweven and dreem."
 [3172] And with that word he fley doun fro the beem,
 [3173] For it was day, and eke his hennes alle,
 [3174] And with a chuk he gan hem for to calle,
 [3175] For he hadde founde a corn, lay in the yerd.
 [3176] Real he was, he was namoore aferd.
 [3177] He fethered Pertelote twenty tyme,
 [3178] And trad hire eke as ofte, er it was pryme.
 [3179] He looketh as it were a grym leoun,
 [3180] And on his toos he rometh up and doun;
 [3181] Hym deigned nat to sette his foot to grounde.
 [3182] He chukketh whan he hath a corn yfounde,
 [3183] And to hym rennen thanne his wyves alle.
 [3184] Thus roial, as a prince is in his halle,
 [3185] Leve I this Chauntecleer in his pasture,
 [3186] And after wol I telle his aventure.
 [3187] Whan that the month in which the world bigan,
 [3188] That highte March, whan God first maked man,
 [3189] Was compleet, and passed were also,
 [3190] Syn March [was gon], thritty dayes and two,
 [3191] Bifel that Chauntecleer in al his pryde,
 [3192] His sevene wyves walkynge by his syde,
 [3193] Caste up his eyen to the brighte sonne,
 [3194] That in the signe of Taurus hadde yronne
 [3195] Twenty degrees and oon, and somwhat moore,
 [3196] And knew by kynde, and by noon oother loore,
 [3197] That it was pryme, and crew with blisful stevene.
 [3198] "The sonne," he seyde, "is clomben up on hevene
 [3199] Fourty degrees and oon, and moore ywis.
 [3200] Madame Pertelote, my worldes blis,
 [3201] Herkneth thise blisful briddes how they synge,
 [3202] And se the fresshe floures how they sprynge;
 [3203] Ful is myn herte of revel and solas!"
 [3204] But sodeynly hym fil a sorweful cas,
 [3205] For evere the latter ende of joye is wo.
 [3206] God woot that worldly joye is soone ago;
 [3207] And if a rethor koude faire endite,
 [3208] He in a cronycle saufly myghte it write
 [3209] As for a sovereyn notabilitee.
 [3210] Now every wys man, lat him herkne me;
 [3211] This storie is also trewe, I undertake,
 [3212] As is the book of Launcelot de Lake,
 [3213] That wommen holde in ful greet reverence.
 [3214] Now wol I torne agayn to my sentence.
 [3215] A col-fox, ful of sly iniquitee,
 [3216] That in the grove hadde woned yeres three,
 [3217] By heigh ymaginacioun forncast,
 [3218] The same nyght thurghout the hegges brast
 [3219] Into the yerd ther Chauntecleer the faire
 [3220] Was wont, and eek his wyves, to repaire;
 [3221] And in a bed of wortes stille he lay
 [3222] Til it was passed undren of the day,
 [3223] Waitynge his tyme on Chauntecleer to falle,
 [3224] As gladly doon thise homycides alle
 [3225] That in await liggen to mordre men.
 [3226] O false mordrour, lurkynge in thy den!
 [3227] O newe Scariot, newe Genylon,
 [3228] False dissymulour, o Greek Synon,
 [3229] That broghtest Troye al outrely to sorwe!
 [3230] O Chauntecleer, acursed be that morwe
 [3231] That thou into that yerd flaugh fro the bemes!
 [3232] Thou were ful wel ywarned by thy dremes
 [3233] That thilke day was perilous to thee;
 [3234] But what that God forwoot moot nedes bee,
 [3235] After the opinioun of certein clerkis.
 [3236] Witnesse on hym that any parfit clerk is,
 [3237] That in scole is greet altercacioun
 [3238] In this mateere, and greet disputisoun,
 [3239] And hath been of an hundred thousand men.
 [3240] But I ne kan nat bulte it to the bren
 [3241] As kan the hooly doctour Augustyn,
 [3242] Or Boece, or the Bisshop Bradwardyn,
 [3243] Wheither that Goddes worthy forwityng
 [3244] Streyneth me nedely for to doon a thyng --
 [3245] "Nedely" clepe I symple necessitee --
 [3246] Or elles, if free choys be graunted me
 [3247] To do that same thyng, or do it noght,
 [3248] Though God forwoot it er that I was wroght;
 [3249] Or if his wityng streyneth never a deel
 [3250] But by necessitee condicioneel.
 [3251] I wol nat han to do of swich mateere;
 [3252] My tale is of a cok, as ye may heere,
 [3253] That tok his conseil of his wyf, with sorwe,
 [3254] To walken in the yerd upon that morwe
 [3255] That he hadde met that dreem that I yow tolde.
 [3256] Wommennes conseils been ful ofte colde;
 [3257] Wommannes conseil broghte us first to wo
 [3258] And made Adam fro Paradys to go,
 [3259] Ther as he was ful myrie and wel at ese.
 [3260] But for I noot to whom it myght displese,
 [3261] If I conseil of wommen wolde blame,
 [3262] Passe over, for I seyde it in my game.
 [3263] Rede auctours, where they trete of swich mateere,
 [3264] And what they seyn of wommen ye may heere.
 [3265] Thise been the cokkes wordes, and nat myne;
 [3266] I kan noon harm of no womman divyne.
 [3267] Faire in the soond, to bathe hire myrily,
 [3268] Lith Pertelote, and alle hire sustres by,
 [3269] Agayn the sonne, and Chauntecleer so free
 [3270] Soong murier than the mermayde in the see
 [3271] (For Phisiologus seith sikerly
 [3272] How that they syngen wel and myrily).
 [3273] And so bifel that, as he caste his ye
 [3274] Among the wortes on a boterflye,
 [3275] He was war of this fox, that lay ful lowe.
 [3276] Nothyng ne liste hym thanne for to crowe,
 [3277] But cride anon, "Cok! cok!" and up he sterte
 [3278] As man that was affrayed in his herte.
 [3279] For natureelly a beest desireth flee
 [3280] Fro his contrarie, if he may it see,
 [3281] Though he never erst hadde seyn it with his ye.
 [3282] This Chauntecleer, whan he gan hym espye,
 [3283] He wolde han fled, but that the fox anon
 [3284] Seyde, "Gentil sire, allas, wher wol ye gon?
 [3285] Be ye affrayed of me that am youre freend?
 [3286] Now, certes, I were worse than a feend,
 [3287] If I to yow wolde harm or vileynye!
 [3288] I am nat come youre conseil for t' espye,
 [3289] But trewely, the cause of my comynge
 [3290] Was oonly for to herkne how that ye synge.
 [3291] For trewely, ye have as myrie a stevene
 [3292] As any aungel hath that is in hevene.
 [3293] Therwith ye han in musyk moore feelynge
 [3294] Than hadde Boece, or any that kan synge.
 [3295] My lord youre fader -- God his soule blesse! --
 [3296] And eek youre mooder, of hire gentillesse,
 [3297] Han in myn hous ybeen to my greet ese;
 [3298] And certes, sire, ful fayn wolde I yow plese.
 [3299] But, for men speke of syngyng, I wol seye --
 [3300] So moote I brouke wel myne eyen tweye --
 [3301] Save yow, I herde nevere man so synge
 [3302] As dide youre fader in the morwenynge.
 [3303] Certes, it was of herte, al that he song.
 [3304] And for to make his voys the moore strong,
 [3305] He wolde so peyne hym that with bothe his yen
 [3306] He moste wynke, so loude he wolde cryen,
 [3307] And stonden on his tiptoon therwithal,
 [3308] And strecche forth his nekke long and smal.
 [3309] And eek he was of swich discrecioun
 [3310] That ther nas no man in no regioun
 [3311] That hym in song or wisedom myghte passe.
 [3312] I have wel rad in `Daun Burnel the Asse,'
 [3313] Among his vers, how that ther was a cok,
 [3314] For that a preestes sone yaf hym a knok
 [3315] Upon his leg whil he was yong and nyce,
 [3316] He made hym for to lese his benefice.
 [3317] But certeyn, ther nys no comparisoun
 [3318] Bitwixe the wisedom and discrecioun
 [3319] Of youre fader and of his subtiltee.
 [3320] Now syngeth, sire, for seinte charitee;
 [3321] Lat se; konne ye youre fader countrefete?"
 [3322] This Chauntecleer his wynges gan to bete,
 [3323] As man that koude his traysoun nat espie,
 [3324] So was he ravysshed with his flaterie.
 [3325] Allas, ye lordes, many a fals flatour
 [3326] Is in youre courtes, and many a losengeour,
 [3327] That plesen yow wel moore, by my feith,
 [3328] Than he that soothfastnesse unto yow seith.
 [3329] Redeth Ecclesiaste of flaterye;
 [3330] Beth war, ye lordes, of hir trecherye.
 [3331] This Chauntecleer stood hye upon his toos,
 [3332] Strecchynge his nekke, and heeld his eyen cloos,
 [3333] And gan to crowe loude for the nones.
 [3334] And daun Russell the fox stirte up atones,
 [3335] And by the gargat hente Chauntecleer,
 [3336] And on his bak toward the wode hym beer,
 [3337] For yet ne was ther no man that hym sewed.
 [3338] O destinee, that mayst nat been eschewed!
 [3339] Allas, that Chauntecleer fleigh fro the bemes!
 [3340] Allas, his wyf ne roghte nat of dremes!
 [3341] And on a Friday fil al this meschaunce.
 [3342] O Venus, that art goddesse of plesaunce,
 [3343] Syn that thy servant was this Chauntecleer,
 [3344] And in thy servyce dide al his poweer,
 [3345] Moore for delit than world to multiplye,
 [3346] Why woldestow suffre hym on thy day to dye?
 [3347] O Gaufred, deere maister soverayn,
 [3348] That whan thy worthy kyng Richard was slayn
 [3349] With shot, compleynedest his deeth so soore,
 [3350] Why ne hadde I now thy sentence and thy loore,
 [3351] The Friday for to chide, as diden ye?
 [3352] For on a Friday, soothly, slayn was he.
 [3353] Thanne wolde I shewe yow how that I koude pleyne
 [3354] For Chauntecleres drede and for his peyne.
 [3355] Certes, swich cry ne lamentacion
 [3356] Was nevere of ladyes maad whan Ylion
 [3357] Was wonne, and Pirrus with his streite swerd,
 [3358] Whan he hadde hent kyng Priam by the berd,
 [3359] And slayn hym, as seith us Eneydos,
 [3360] As maden alle the hennes in the clos,
 [3361] Whan they had seyn of Chauntecleer the sighte.
 [3362] But sovereynly dame Pertelote shrighte
 [3363] Ful louder than dide Hasdrubales wyf,
 [3364] Whan that hir housbonde hadde lost his lyf
 [3365] And that the Romayns hadde brend Cartage.
 [3366] She was so ful of torment and of rage
 [3367] That wilfully into the fyr she sterte
 [3368] And brende hirselven with a stedefast herte.
 [3369] O woful hennes, right so criden ye
 [3370] As whan that Nero brende the citee
 [3371] Of Rome cryden senatoures wyves
 [3372] For that hir husbondes losten alle hir lyves --
 [3373] Withouten gilt this Nero hath hem slayn.
 [3374] Now wole I turne to my tale agayn.
 [3375] This sely wydwe and eek hir doghtres two
 [3376] Herden thise hennes crie and maken wo,
 [3377] And out at dores stirten they anon,
 [3378] And syen the fox toward the grove gon,
 [3379] And bar upon his bak the cok away,
 [3380] And cryden, "Out! Harrow and weylaway!
 [3381] Ha, ha! The fox!" and after hym they ran,
 [3382] And eek with staves many another man.
 [3383] Ran Colle oure dogge, and Talbot and Gerland,
 [3384] And Malkyn, with a dystaf in hir hand;
 [3385] Ran cow and calf, and eek the verray hogges,
 [3386] So fered for the berkyng of the dogges
 [3387] And shoutyng of the men and wommen eeke
 [3388] They ronne so hem thoughte hir herte breeke.
 [3389] They yolleden as feendes doon in helle;
 [3390] The dokes cryden as men wolde hem quelle;
 [3391] The gees for feere flowen over the trees;
 [3392] Out of the hyve cam the swarm of bees.
 [3393] So hydous was the noyse -- a, benedicitee! --
 [3394] Certes, he Jakke Straw and his meynee
 [3395] Ne made nevere shoutes half so shrille
 [3396] Whan that they wolden any Flemyng kille,
 [3397] As thilke day was maad upon the fox.
 [3398] Of bras they broghten bemes, and of box,
 [3399] Of horn, of boon, in whiche they blewe and powped,
 [3400] And therwithal they skriked and they howped.
 [3401] It semed as that hevene sholde falle.
 [3402] Now, goode men, I prey yow herkneth alle:
 [3403] Lo, how Fortune turneth sodeynly
 [3404] The hope and pryde eek of hir enemy!
 [3405] This cok, that lay upon the foxes bak,
 [3406] In al his drede unto the fox he spak,
 [3407] And seyde, "Sire, if that I were as ye,
 [3408] Yet sholde I seyn, as wys God helpe me,
 [3409] `Turneth agayn, ye proude cherles alle!
 [3410] A verray pestilence upon yow falle!
 [3411] Now I am come unto the wodes syde;
 [3412] Maugree youre heed, the cok shal heere abyde.
 [3413] I wol hym ete, in feith, and that anon!'"
 [3414] The fox answerde, "In feith, it shal be don."
 [3415] And as he spak that word, al sodeynly
 [3416] This cok brak from his mouth delyverly,
 [3417] And heighe upon a tree he fleigh anon.
 [3418] And whan the fox saugh that the cok was gon,
 [3419] "Allas!" quod he, "O Chauntecleer, allas!
 [3420] I have to yow," quod he, "ydoon trespas,
 [3421] In as muche as I maked yow aferd
 [3422] Whan I yow hente and broghte out of the yerd.
 [3423] But, sire, I dide it in no wikke entente.
 [3424] Com doun, and I shal telle yow what I mente;
 [3425] I shal seye sooth to yow, God help me so!"
 [3426] "Nay thanne," quod he, "I shrewe us bothe two.
 [3427] And first I shrewe myself, bothe blood and bones,
 [3428] If thou bigyle me ofter than ones.
 [3429] Thou shalt namoore thurgh thy flaterye
 [3430] Do me to synge and wynke with myn ye;
 [3431] For he that wynketh, whan he sholde see,
 [3432] Al wilfully, God lat him nevere thee!"
 [3433] "Nay," quod the fox, "but God yeve hym meschaunce,
 [3434] That is so undiscreet of governaunce
 [3435] That jangleth whan he sholde holde his pees."
 [3436] Lo, swich it is for to be recchelees
 [3437] And necligent, and truste on flaterye.
 [3438] But ye that holden this tale a folye,
 [3439] As of a fox, or of a cok and hen,
 [3440] Taketh the moralite, goode men.
 [3441] For Seint Paul seith that al that writen is,
 [3442] To oure doctrine it is ywrite, ywis;
 [3443] Taketh the fruyt, and lat the chaf be stille.
 [3444] Now, goode God, if that it be thy wille,
 [3445] As seith my lord, so make us alle goode men,
 [3446] And brynge us to his heighe blisse! Amen.

      
The Canterbury Tales and Other Works of Chaucer (Middle English), by Geoffery Chaucer, [14th cent.], at sacred-texts.com

 

The Canterbury Tales

 

The Nun's Priest's Epilogue

 [3447] ["Sire Nonnes Preest," oure Hooste seide anoon,
 [3448] "I-blessed be thy breche, and every stoon!
 [3449] This was a murie tale of Chauntecleer.
 [3450] But by my trouthe, if thou were seculer,
 [3451] Thou woldest ben a trede-foul aright.
 [3452] For if thou have corage as thou hast myght,
 [3453] Thee were nede of hennes, as I wene,
 [3454] Ya, moo than seven tymes seventene.
 [3455] See, whiche braunes hath this gentil preest,
 [3456] So gret a nekke, and swich a large breest!
 [3457] He loketh as a sperhauk with his yen;
 [3458] Him nedeth nat his colour for to dyen
 [3459] With brasile ne with greyn of Portyngale.
 [3460] Now, sire, faire falle yow for youre tale!"
 [3461] And after that he, with ful merie chere,
 [3462] Seide unto another, as ye shuln heere.]

      
The Canterbury Tales and Other Works of Chaucer (Middle English), by Geoffery Chaucer, [14th cent.], at sacred-texts.com

 

The Canterbury Tales

 

The Second Nun's Prologue

 [1] The ministre and the norice unto vices,
 [2] Which that men clepe in Englissh Ydelnesse,
 [3] That porter of the gate is of delices,
 [4] To eschue, and by hire contrarie hire oppresse --
 [5] That is to seyn, by leveful bisynesse --
 [6] Wel oghten we to doon al oure entente,
 [7] Lest that the feend thurgh ydelnesse us hente.
 [8] For he that with his thousand cordes slye
 [9] Continuelly us waiteth to biclappe,
 [10] Whan he may man in ydelnesse espye,
 [11] He kan so lightly cache hym in his trappe,
 [12] Til that a man be hent right by the lappe,
 [13] He nys nat war the feend hath hym in honde.
 [14] Wel oghte us werche and ydelnesse withstonde.
 [15] And though men dradden nevere for to dye,
 [16] Yet seen men wel by resoun, doutelees,
 [17] That ydelnesse is roten slogardye,
 [18] Of which ther nevere comth no good n' encrees;
 [19] And syn that slouthe hire holdeth in a lees
 [20] Oonly to slepe, and for to ete and drynke,
 [21] And to devouren al that othere swynke,
 [22] And for to putte us fro swich ydelnesse,
 [23] That cause is of so greet confusioun,
 [24] I have heer doon my feithful bisynesse
 [25] After the legende in translacioun
 [26] Right of thy glorious lif and passioun,
 [27] Thou with thy gerland wroght with rose and lilie --
 [28] Thee meene I, mayde and martyr, Seint Cecilie.
 [29] And thow that flour of virgines art alle,
 [30] Of whom that Bernard list so wel to write,
 [31] To thee at my bigynnyng first I calle;
 [32] Thou confort of us wrecches, do me endite
 [33] Thy maydens deeth, that wan thurgh hire merite
 [34] The eterneel lyf and of the feend victorie,
 [35] As man may after reden in hire storie.
 [36] Thow Mayde and Mooder, doghter of thy Sone,
 [37] Thow welle of mercy, synful soules cure,
 [38] In whom that God for bountee chees to wone,
 [39] Thow humble, and heigh over every creature,
 [40] Thow nobledest so ferforth oure nature,
 [41] That no desdeyn the Makere hadde of kynde
 [42] His Sone in blood and flessh to clothe and wynde.
 [43] Withinne the cloistre blisful of thy sydis
 [44] Took mannes shap the eterneel love and pees,
 [45] That of the tryne compas lord and gyde is,
 [46] Whom erthe and see and hevene out of relees
 [47] Ay heryen; and thou, Virgine wemmelees,
 [48] Baar of thy body -- and dweltest mayden pure --
 [49] The Creatour of every creature.
 [50] Assembled is in thee magnificence
 [51] With mercy, goodnesse, and with swich pitee
 [52] That thou, that art the sonne of excellence
 [53] Nat oonly helpest hem that preyen thee,
 [54] But often tyme of thy benygnytee
 [55] Ful frely, er that men thyn help biseche,
 [56] Thou goost biforn and art hir lyves leche.
 [57] Now help, thow meeke and blisful faire mayde,
 [58] Me, flemed wrecche, in this desert of galle;
 [59] Thynk on the womman Cananee, that sayde
 [60] That whelpes eten somme of the crommes alle
 [61] That from hir lordes table been yfalle;
 [62] And though that I, unworthy sone of Eve,
 [63] Be synful, yet accepte my bileve.
 [64] And, for that feith is deed withouten werkis,
 [65] So for to werken yif me wit and space,
 [66] That I be quit fro thennes that most derk is!
 [67] O thou, that art so fair and ful of grace,
 [68] Be myn advocat in that heighe place
 [69] Theras withouten ende is songe "Osanne,"
 [70] Thow Cristes mooder, doghter deere of Anne!
 [71] And of thy light my soule in prison lighte,
 [72] That troubled is by the contagioun
 [73] Of my body, and also by the wighte
 [74] Of erthely lust and fals affeccioun;
 [75] O havene of refut, O salvacioun
 [76] Of hem that been in sorwe and in distresse,
 [77] Now help, for to my werk I wol me dresse.
 [78] Yet preye I yow that reden that I write,
 [79] Foryeve me that I do no diligence
 [80] This ilke storie subtilly to endite,
 [81] For bothe have I the wordes and sentence
 [82] Of hym that at the seintes reverence
 [83] The storie wroot, and folwen hire legende,
 [84] And pray yow that ye wole my werk amende.
 [85] First wolde I yow the name of Seint Cecilie
 [86] Expowne, as men may in hir storie see.
 [87] It is to seye in Englissh "hevenes lilie,"
 [88] For pure chaastnesse of virginitee;
 [89] Or, for she whitnesse hadde of honestee,
 [90] And grene of conscience, and of good fame
 [91] The soote savour, "lilie" was hir name.
 [92] Or Cecilie is to seye "the wey to blynde,"
 [93] For she ensample was by good techynge;
 [94] Or elles Cecile, as I writen fynde,
 [95] Is joyned, by a manere conjoynynge
 [96] Of "hevene" and "Lia"; and heere, in figurynge,
 [97] The "hevene" is set for thoght of hoolynesse,
 [98] And "Lia" for hire lastynge bisynesse.
 [99] Cecile may eek be seyd in this manere,
 [100] "Wantynge of blyndnesse," for hir grete light
 [101] Of sapience and for hire thewes cleere;
 [102] Or elles, loo, this maydens name bright
 [103] Of "hevene" and "leos" comth, for which by right
 [104] Men myghte hire wel "the hevene of peple" calle,
 [105] Ensample of goode and wise werkes alle.
 [106] For "leos" "peple" in Englissh is to seye,
 [107] And right as men may in the hevene see
 [108] The sonne and moone and sterres every weye,
 [109] Right so men goostly in this mayden free
 [110] Seyen of feith the magnanymytee,
 [111] And eek the cleernesse hool of sapience,
 [112] And sondry werkes, brighte of excellence.
 [113] And right so as thise philosophres write
 [114] That hevene is swift and round and eek brennynge,
 [115] Right so was faire Cecilie the white
 [116] Ful swift and bisy evere in good werkynge,
 [117] And round and hool in good perseverynge,
 [118] And brennynge evere in charite ful brighte.
 [119] Now have I yow declared what she highte.

      
The Canterbury Tales and Other Works of Chaucer (Middle English), by Geoffery Chaucer, [14th cent.], at sacred-texts.com

 

The Canterbury Tales

 

The Second Nun's Tale

 [120] This mayden bright Cecilie, as hir lif seith,
 [121] Was comen of Romayns and of noble kynde,
 [122] And from hir cradel up fostred in the feith
 [123] Of Crist, and bar his gospel in hir mynde.
 [124] She nevere cessed, as I writen fynde,
 [125] Of hir preyere and God to love and drede,
 [126] Bisekynge hym to kepe hir maydenhede.
 [127] And whan this mayden sholde unto a man
 [128] Ywedded be, that was ful yong of age,
 [129] Which that ycleped was Valerian,
 [130] And day was comen of hir marriage,
 [131] She, ful devout and humble in hir corage,
 [132] Under hir robe of gold, that sat ful faire,
 [133] Hadde next hire flessh yclad hire in an haire.
 [134] And whil the organs maden melodie,
 [135] To God allone in herte thus sang she:
 [136] "O Lord, my soule and eek my body gye
 [137] Unwemmed, lest that I confounded be."
 [138] And for his love that dyde upon a tree
 [139] Every seconde and thridde day she faste,
 [140] Ay biddynge in hire orisons ful faste.
 [141] The nyght cam, and to bedde moste she gon
 [142] With hire housbonde, as ofte is the manere,
 [143] And pryvely to hym she seyde anon,
 [144] "O sweete and wel biloved spouse deere,
 [145] Ther is a conseil, and ye wolde it heere,
 [146] Which that right fayn I wolde unto yow seye,
 [147] So that ye swere ye shul it nat biwreye."
 [148] Valerian gan faste unto hire swere
 [149] That for no cas ne thyng that myghte be,
 [150] He sholde nevere mo biwreyen here;
 [151] And thanne at erst to hym thus seyde she:
 [152] "I have an aungel which that loveth me,
 [153] That with greet love, wher so I wake or sleepe,
 [154] Is redy ay my body for to kepe.
 [155] "And if that he may feelen, out of drede,
 [156] That ye me touche, or love in vileynye,
 [157] He right anon wol sle yow with the dede,
 [158] And in youre yowthe thus ye shullen dye;
 [159] And if that ye in clene love me gye,
 [160] He wol yow loven as me, for youre clennesse,
 [161] And shewen yow his joye and his brightnesse."
 [162] Valerian, corrected as God wolde,
 [163] Answerde agayn, "If I shal trusten thee,
 [164] Lat me that aungel se and hym biholde;
 [165] And if that it a verray angel bee,
 [166] Thanne wol I doon as thou hast prayed me;
 [167] And if thou love another man, for sothe
 [168] Right with this swerd thanne wol I sle yow bothe."
 [169] Cecile answerde anon-right in this wise:
 [170] "If that yow list, the angel shul ye see,
 [171] So that ye trowe on Crist and yow baptize.
 [172] Gooth forth to Via Apia," quod shee,
 [173] "That fro this toun ne stant but miles three,
 [174] And to the povre folkes that ther dwelle,
 [175] Sey hem right thus, as that I shal yow telle.
 [176] "Telle hem that I, Cecile, yow to hem sente
 [177] To shewen yow the goode Urban the olde,
 [178] For secree nedes and for good entente.
 [179] And whan that ye Seint Urban han biholde,
 [180] Telle hym the wordes whiche I to yow tolde;
 [181] And whan that he hath purged yow fro synne,
 [182] Thanne shul ye se that angel, er ye twynne."
 [183] Valerian is to the place ygon,
 [184] And right as hym was taught by his lernynge,
 [185] He foond this hooly olde Urban anon
 [186] Among the seintes buryeles lotynge.
 [187] And he anon withouten tariynge
 [188] Dide his message; and whan that he it tolde,
 [189] Urban for joye his handes gan up holde.
 [190] The teeris from his eyen leet he falle.
 [191] "Almyghty Lord, O Jhesu Crist," quod he,
 [192] "Sower of chaast conseil, hierde of us alle,
 [193] The fruyt of thilke seed of chastitee
 [194] That thou hast sowe in Cecile, taak to thee!
 [195] Lo, lyk a bisy bee, withouten gile,
 [196] Thee serveth ay thyn owene thral Cecile.
 [197] "For thilke spouse that she took but now
 [198] Ful lyk a fiers leoun, she sendeth heere,
 [199] As meke as evere was any lomb, to yow!"
 [200] And with that word anon ther gan appeere
 [201] An oold man, clad in white clothes cleere,
 [202] That hadde a book with lettre of gold in honde,
 [203] And gan bifore Valerian to stonde.
 [204] Valerian as deed fil doun for drede
 [205] Whan he hym saugh, and he up hente hym tho,
 [206] And on his book right thus he gan to rede:
 [207] "O Lord, o feith, o God, withouten mo,
 [208] O Cristendom, and Fader of alle also,
 [209] Aboven alle and over alle everywhere."
 [210] Thise wordes al with gold ywriten were.
 [211] Whan this was rad, thanne seyde this olde man,
 [212] "Leevestow this thyng or no? Sey ye or nay."
 [213] "I leeve al this thyng," quod Valerian,
 [214] "For sother thyng than this, I dar wel say,
 [215] Under the hevene no wight thynke may."
 [216] Tho vanysshed this olde man, he nyste where,
 [217] And Pope Urban hym cristned right there.
 [218] Valerian gooth hoom and fynt Cecilie
 [219] Withinne his chambre with an angel stonde.
 [220] This angel hadde of roses and of lilie
 [221] Corones two, the which he bar in honde;
 [222] And first to Cecile, as I understonde,
 [223] He yaf that oon, and after gan he take
 [224] That oother to Valerian, hir make.
 [225] "With body clene and with unwemmed thoght
 [226] Kepeth ay wel thise corones," quod he;
 [227] "Fro paradys to yow have I hem broght,
 [228] Ne nevere mo ne shal they roten bee,
 [229] Ne lese hir soote savour, trusteth me;
 [230] Ne nevere wight shal seen hem with his ye,
 [231] But he be chaast and hate vileynye.
 [232] "And thow, Valerian, for thow so soone
 [233] Assentedest to good conseil also,
 [234] Sey what thee list, and thou shalt han thy boone."
 [235] "I have a brother," quod Valerian tho,
 [236] "That in this world I love no man so.
 [237] I pray yow that my brother may han grace
 [238] To knowe the trouthe, as I do in this place."
 [239] The angel seyde, "God liketh thy requeste,
 [240] And bothe with the palm of martirdom
 [241] Ye shullen come unto his blisful feste."
 [242] And with that word Tiburce his brother coom.
 [243] And whan that he the savour undernoom,
 [244] Which that the roses and the lilies caste,
 [245] Withinne his herte he gan to wondre faste,
 [246] And seyde, "I wondre, this tyme of the yeer,
 [247] Whennes that soote savour cometh so
 [248] Of rose and lilies that I smelle heer.
 [249] For though I hadde hem in myne handes two,
 [250] The savour myghte in me no depper go.
 [251] The sweete smel that in myn herte I fynde
 [252] Hath chaunged me al in another kynde."
 [253] Valerian seyde: "Two corones han we,
 [254] Snow white and rose reed, that shynen cleere,
 [255] Whiche that thyne eyen han no myght to see;
 [256] And as thou smellest hem thurgh my preyere,
 [257] So shaltow seen hem, leeve brother deere,
 [258] If it so be thou wolt, withouten slouthe,
 [259] Bileve aright and knowen verray trouthe."
 [260] Tiburce answerde, "Seistow this to me
 [261] In soothnesse, or in dreem I herkne this?"
 [262] "In dremes," quod Valerian, "han we be
 [263] Unto this tyme, brother myn, ywis.
 [264] But now at erst in trouthe oure dwellyng is."
 [265] "How woostow this?" quod Tiburce, "and in what wyse?"
 [266] Quod Valerian, "That shal I thee devyse.
 [267] "The aungel of God hath me the trouthe ytaught
 [268] Which thou shalt seen, if that thou wolt reneye
 [269] The ydoles and be clene, and elles naught."
 [270] And of the myracle of thise corones tweye
 [271] Seint Ambrose in his preface list to seye;
 [272] Solempnely this noble doctour deere
 [273] Commendeth it, and seith in this manere:
 [274] "The palm of martirdom for to receyve,
 [275] Seinte Cecile, fulfild of Goddes yifte,
 [276] The world and eek hire chambre gan she weyve;
 [277] Witnesse Tyburces and [Valerians] shrifte,
 [278] To whiche God of his bountee wolde shifte
 [279] Corones two of floures wel smellynge,
 [280] And made his angel hem the corones brynge.
 [281] "The mayde hath broght thise men to blisse above;
 [282] The world hath wist what it is worth, certeyn,
 [283] Devocioun of chastitee to love."
 [284] Tho shewed hym Cecile al open and pleyn
 [285] That alle ydoles nys but a thyng in veyn,
 [286] For they been dombe, and therto they been deve,
 [287] And charged hym his ydoles for to leve.
 [288] "Whoso that troweth nat this, a beest he is,"
 [289] Quod tho Tiburce, "if that I shal nat lye."
 [290] And she gan kisse his brest, that herde this,
 [291] And was ful glad he koude trouthe espye.
 [292] "This day I take thee for myn allye,"
 [293] Seyde this blisful faire mayde deere,
 [294] And after that she seyde as ye may heere:
 [295] "Lo, right so as the love of Crist," quod she,
 [296] "Made me thy brotheres wyf, right in that wise
 [297] Anon for myn allye heer take I thee,
 [298] Syn that thou wolt thyne ydoles despise.
 [299] Go with thy brother now, and thee baptise,
 [300] And make thee clene, so that thou mowe biholde
 [301] The angels face of which thy brother tolde."
 [302] Tiburce answerde and seyde, "Brother deere,
 [303] First tel me whider I shal, and to what man?"
 [304] "To whom?" quod he, "com forth with right good cheere,
 [305] I wol thee lede unto the Pope Urban."
 [306] "Til Urban? Brother myn Valerian,"
 [307] Quod tho Tiburce, "woltow me thider lede?
 [308] Me thynketh that it were a wonder dede.
 [309] "Ne menestow nat Urban," quod he tho,
 [310] "That is so ofte dampned to be deed,
 [311] And woneth in halkes alwey to and fro,
 [312] And dar nat ones putte forth his heed?
 [313] Men sholde hym brennen in a fyr so reed
 [314] If he were founde, or that men myghte hym spye,
 [315] And we also, to bere hym compaignye;
 [316] "And whil we seken thilke divinitee
 [317] That is yhid in hevene pryvely,
 [318] Algate ybrend in this world shul we be!"
 [319] To whom Cecile answerde boldely,
 [320] "Men myghten dreden wel and skilfully
 [321] This lyf to lese, myn owene deere brother,
 [322] If this were lyvynge oonly and noon oother.
 [323] "But ther is bettre lif in oother place,
 [324] That nevere shal be lost, ne drede thee noght,
 [325] Which Goddes Sone us tolde thurgh his grace.
 [326] That Fadres Sone hath alle thyng ywroght,
 [327] And al that wroght is with a skilful thoght;
 [328] The Goost, that fro the Fader gan procede,
 [329] Hath sowled hem, withouten any drede.
 [330] "By word and by myracle heigh Goddes Sone,
 [331] Whan he was in this world, declared heere
 [332] That ther was oother lyf ther men may wone."
 [333] To whom answerde Tiburce, "O suster deere,
 [334] Ne seydestow right now in this manere,
 [335] Ther nys but o God, lord in soothfastnesse?
 [336] And now of three how maystow bere witnesse?"
 [337] "That shal I telle," quod she, "er I go.
 [338] Right as a man hath sapiences three --
 [339] Memorie, engyn, and intellect also --
 [340] So in o beynge of divinitee,
 [341] Thre persones may ther right wel bee."
 [342] Tho gan she hym ful bisily to preche
 [343] Of Cristes come, and of his peynes teche,
 [344] And manye pointes of his passioun;
 [345] How Goddes Sone in this world was withholde
 [346] To doon mankynde pleyn remissioun,
 [347] That was ybounde in synne and cares colde;
 [348] Al this thyng she unto Tiburce tolde.
 [349] And after this Tiburce in good entente
 [350] With Valerian to Pope Urban he wente,
 [351] That thanked God, and with glad herte and light
 [352] He cristned hym and made hym in that place
 [353] Parfit in his lernynge, Goddes knyght.
 [354] And after this Tiburce gat swich grace
 [355] That every day he saugh in tyme and space
 [356] The aungel of God; and every maner boone
 [357] That he God axed, it was sped ful soone.
 [358] It were ful hard by ordre for to seyn
 [359] How manye wondres Jhesus for hem wroghte;
 [360] But atte laste, to tellen short and pleyn,
 [361] The sergeantz of the toun of Rome hem soghte,
 [362] And hem biforn Almache, the prefect, broghte,
 [363] Which hem apposed, and knew al hire entente,
 [364] And to the ymage of Juppiter hem sente,
 [365] And seyde, "Whoso wol nat sacrifise,
 [366] Swape of his heed; this my sentence heer."
 [367] Anon thise martirs that I yow devyse,
 [368] Oon Maximus, that was an officer
 [369] Of the prefectes, and his corniculer,
 [370] Hem hente, and whan he forth the seintes ladde,
 [371] Hymself he weep for pitee that he hadde.
 [372] Whan Maximus had herd the seintes loore,
 [373] He gat hym of the tormentoures leve,
 [374] And ladde hem to his hous withoute moore,
 [375] And with hir prechyng, er that it were eve,
 [376] They gonnen fro the tormentours to reve,
 [377] And fro Maxime, and fro his folk echone,
 [378] The false feith, to trowe in God allone.
 [379] Cecile cam, whan it was woxen nyght,
 [380] With preestes that hem cristned alle yfeere;
 [381] And afterward, whan day was woxen light,
 [382] Cecile hem seyde with a ful stedefast cheere,
 [383] "Now, Cristes owene knyghtes leeve and deere,
 [384] Cast alle awey the werkes of derknesse,
 [385] And armeth yow in armure of brightnesse.
 [386] "Ye han for sothe ydoon a greet bataille,
 [387] Youre cours is doon, youre feith han ye conserved.
 [388] Gooth to the corone of lif that may nat faille;
 [389] The rightful Juge, which that ye han served,
 [390] Shal yeve it yow, as ye han it deserved."
 [391] And whan this thyng was seyd as I devyse,
 [392] Men ledde hem forth to doon the sacrefise.
 [393] But whan they weren to the place broght
 [394] To tellen shortly the conclusioun,
 [395] They nolde encense ne sacrifise right noght,
 [396] But on hir knees they setten hem adoun
 [397] With humble herte and sad devocioun,
 [398] And losten bothe hir hevedes in the place.
 [399] Hir soules wenten to the Kyng of grace.
 [400] This Maximus, that saugh this thyng bityde,
 [401] With pitous teeris tolde it anonright,
 [402] That he hir soules saugh to hevene glyde
 [403] With aungels ful of cleernesse and of light,
 [404] And with his word converted many a wight;
 [405] For which Almachius dide hym so bete
 [406] With whippe of leed til he his lif gan lete.
 [407] Cecile hym took and buryed hym anon
 [408] By Tiburce and Valerian softely
 [409] Withinne hire buriyng place, under the stoon;
 [410] And after this, Almachius hastily
 [411] Bad his ministres fecchen openly
 [412] Cecile, so that she myghte in his presence
 [413] Doon sacrifice and Juppiter encense.
 [414] But they, converted at hir wise loore,
 [415] Wepten ful soore, and yaven ful credence
 [416] Unto hire word, and cryden moore and moore,
 [417] "Crist, Goddes Sone, withouten difference,
 [418] Is verray God -- this is al oure sentence --
 [419] That hath so good a servant hym to serve.
 [420] This with o voys we trowen, thogh we sterve!"
 [421] Almachius, that herde of this doynge,
 [422] Bad fecchen Cecile, that he myghte hire see,
 [423] And alderfirst, lo, this was his axynge.
 [424] "What maner womman artow?" tho quod he.
 [425] "I am a gentil womman born," quod she.
 [426] "I axe thee," quod he, "though it thee greeve,
 [427] Of thy religioun and of thy bileeve."
 [428] "Ye han bigonne youre questioun folily,"
 [429] Quod she, "that wolden two answeres conclude
 [430] In o demande; ye axed lewedly."
 [431] Almache answerde unto that similitude,
 [432] "Of whennes comth thyn answeryng so rude?"
 [433] "Of whennes?" quod she, whan that she was freyned,
 [434] "Of conscience and of good feith unfeyned."
 [435] Almachius seyde, "Ne takestow noon heede
 [436] Of my power?" And she answerde hym this:
 [437] "Youre myght," quod she, "ful litel is to dreede,
 [438] For every mortal mannes power nys
 [439] But lyk a bladdre ful of wynd, ywys.
 [440] For with a nedles poynt, whan it is blowe,
 [441] May al the boost of it be leyd ful lowe."
 [442] "Ful wrongfully bigonne thow," quod he,
 [443] "And yet in wrong is thy perseveraunce.
 [444] Wostow nat how oure myghty princes free
 [445] Han thus comanded and maad ordinaunce
 [446] That every Cristen wight shal han penaunce
 [447] But if that he his Cristendom withseye,
 [448] And goon al quit, if he wole it reneye?"
 [449] "Yowre princes erren, as youre nobleye dooth,"
 [450] Quod tho Cecile, "and with a wood sentence
 [451] Ye make us gilty, and it is nat sooth.
 [452] For ye, that knowen wel oure innocence,
 [453] For as muche as we doon a reverence
 [454] To Crist, and for we bere a Cristen name,
 [455] Ye putte on us a cryme and eek a blame.
 [456] "But we that knowen thilke name so
 [457] For vertuous, we may it nat withseye."
 [458] Almache answerde, "Chees oon of thise two:
 [459] Do sacrifice, or Cristendom reneye,
 [460] That thou mowe now escapen by that weye."
 [461] At which the hooly blisful faire mayde
 [462] Gan for to laughe, and to the juge sayde:
 [463] "O juge, confus in thy nycetee,
 [464] Woltow that I reneye innocence,
 [465] To make me a wikked wight?" quod shee.
 [466] "Lo, he dissymuleth heere in audience;
 [467] He stareth, and woodeth in his advertence!"
 [468] To whom Almachius, "Unsely wrecche,
 [469] Ne woostow nat how fer my myght may strecche?
 [470] "Han noght oure myghty princes to me yiven,
 [471] Ye, bothe power and auctoritee
 [472] To maken folk to dyen or to lyven?
 [473] Why spekestow so proudly thanne to me?"
 [474] "I speke noght but stedfastly," quod she;
 [475] "Nat proudly, for I seye, as for my syde,
 [476] We haten deedly thilke vice of pryde.
 [477] "And if thou drede nat a sooth to heere,
 [478] Thanne wol I shewe al openly, by right,
 [479] That thou hast maad a ful gret lesyng heere.
 [480] Thou seyst thy princes han thee yeven myght
 [481] Bothe for to sleen and for to quyken a wight;
 [482] Thou, that ne mayst but oonly lyf bireve,
 [483] Thou hast noon oother power ne no leve.
 [484] "But thou mayst seyn thy princes han thee maked
 [485] Ministre of deeth; for if thou speke of mo,
 [486] Thou lyest, for thy power is ful naked."
 [487] "Do wey thy booldnesse," seyde Almachius tho,
 [488] "And sacrifice to oure goddes er thou go!
 [489] I recche nat what wrong that thou me profre,
 [490] For I kan suffre it as a philosophre;
 [491] "But thilke wronges may I nat endure
 [492] That thou spekest of oure goddes heere," quod he.
 [493] Cecile answerde, "O nyce creature!
 [494] Thou seydest no word syn thou spak to me
 [495] That I ne knew therwith thy nycetee
 [496] And that thou were in every maner wise
 [497] A lewed officer and a veyn justise.
 [498] "Ther lakketh no thyng to thyne outter yen
 [499] That thou n' art blynd; for thyng that we seen alle
 [500] That it is stoon -- that men may wel espyen --
 [501] That ilke stoon a god thow wolt it calle.
 [502] I rede thee, lat thyn hand upon it falle
 [503] And taste it wel, and stoon thou shalt it fynde,
 [504] Syn that thou seest nat with thyne eyen blynde.
 [505] "It is a shame that the peple shal
 [506] So scorne thee and laughe at thy folye,
 [507] For communly men woot it wel overal
 [508] That myghty God is in his hevenes hye;
 [509] And thise ymages, wel thou mayst espye,
 [510] To thee ne to hemself mowen noght profite,
 [511] For in effect they been nat worth a myte."
 [512] Thise wordes and swiche othere seyde she,
 [513] And he weex wroth, and bad men sholde hir lede
 [514] Hom til hir hous, and "In hire hous," quod he,
 [515] "Brenne hire right in a bath of flambes rede."
 [516] And as he bad, right so was doon the dede;
 [517] For in a bath they gonne hire faste shetten,
 [518] And nyght and day greet fyr they under betten.
 [519] The longe nyght, and eek a day also,
 [520] For al the fyr and eek the bathes heete
 [521] She sat al coold and feelede no wo.
 [522] It made hire nat a drope for to sweete.
 [523] But in that bath hir lyf she moste lete,
 [524] For he Almachius, with ful wikke entente,
 [525] To sleen hire in the bath his sonde sente.
 [526] Thre strokes in the nekke he smoot hire tho,
 [527] The tormentour, but for no maner chaunce
 [528] He myghte noght smyte al hir nekke atwo;
 [529] And for ther was that tyme an ordinaunce
 [530] That no man sholde doon man swich penaunce
 [531] The ferthe strook to smyten, softe or soore,
 [532] This tormentour ne dorste do namoore,
 [533] But half deed, with hir nekke ycorven there,
 [534] He lefte hir lye, and on his wey he went.
 [535] The Cristen folk, which that aboute hire were,
 [536] With sheetes han the blood ful faire yhent.
 [537] Thre dayes lyved she in this torment,
 [538] And nevere cessed hem the feith to teche
 [539] That she hadde fostred; hem she gan to preche,
 [540] And hem she yaf hir moebles and hir thyng,
 [541] And to the Pope Urban bitook hem tho,
 [542] And seyde, "I axed this of hevene kyng,
 [543] To han respit thre dayes and namo
 [544] To recomende to yow, er that I go,
 [545] Thise soules, lo, and that I myghte do werche
 [546] Heere of myn hous perpetuelly a cherche."
 [547] Seint Urban with his deknes prively
 [548] The body fette and buryed it by nyghte
 [549] Among his othere seintes honestly.
 [550] Hir hous the chirche of Seint Cecilie highte;
 [551] Seint Urban halwed it, as he wel myghte;
 [552] In which, into this day, in noble wyse,
 [553] Men doon to Crist and to his seint servyse.

      
The Canterbury Tales and Other Works of Chaucer (Middle English), by Geoffery Chaucer, [14th cent.], at sacred-texts.com

 

The Canterbury Tales

 

The Canon's Yeoman's Prologue

 [554] Whan ended was the lyf of Seinte Cecile,
 [555] Er we hadde riden fully fyve mile,
 [556] At Boghtoun under Blee us gan atake
 [557] A man that clothed was in clothes blake,
 [558] And undernethe he hadde a whyt surplys.
 [559] His hakeney, that was al pomely grys,
 [560] So swatte that it wonder was to see;
 [561] It semed as he had priked miles three.
 [562] The hors eek that his yeman rood upon
 [563] So swatte that unnethe myghte it gon.
 [564] Aboute the peytrel stood the foom ful hye;
 [565] He was of foom al flekked as a pye.
 [566] A male tweyfoold on his croper lay;
 [567] It semed that he caried lite array.
 [568] Al light for somer rood this worthy man,
 [569] And in myn herte wondren I bigan
 [570] What that he was til that I understood
 [571] How that his cloke was sowed to his hood,
 [572] For which, whan I hadde longe avysed me,
 [573] I demed hym som chanoun for to be.
 [574] His hat heeng at his bak doun by a laas,
 [575] For he hadde riden moore than trot or paas;
 [576] He hadde ay priked lik as he were wood.
 [577] A clote-leef he hadde under his hood
 [578] For swoot and for to keep his heed from heete.
 [579] But it was joye for to seen hym swete!
 [580] His forheed dropped as a stillatorie
 [581] Were ful of plantayne and of paritorie.
 [582] And whan that he was come, he gan to crye,
 [583] "God save," quod he, "this joly compaignye!
 [584] Faste have I priked," quod he, "for youre sake,
 [585] By cause that I wolde yow atake,
 [586] To riden in this myrie compaignye."
 [587] His yeman eek was ful of curteisye,
 [588] And seyde, "Sires, now in the morwe-tyde
 [589] Out of youre hostelrie I saugh yow ryde,
 [590] And warned heer my lord and my soverayn,
 [591] Which that to ryden with yow is ful fayn
 [592] For his desport; he loveth daliaunce."
 [593] "Freend, for thy warnyng God yeve thee good chaunce,"
 [594] Thanne seyde oure Hoost, "for certein it wolde seme
 [595] Thy lord were wys, and so I may wel deme.
 [596] He is ful jocunde also, dar I leye!
 [597] Can he oght telle a myrie tale or tweye,
 [598] With which he glade may this compaignye?"
 [599] "Who, sire? My lord? Ye, ye, withouten lye,
 [600] He kan of murthe and eek of jolitee
 [601] Nat but ynough; also, sire, trusteth me,
 [602] And ye hym knewe as wel as do I,
 [603] Ye wolde wondre how wel and craftily
 [604] He koude werke, and that in sondry wise.
 [605] He hath take on hym many a greet emprise,
 [606] Which were ful hard for any that is heere
 [607] To brynge aboute, but they of hym it leere.
 [608] As hoomly as he rit amonges yow,
 [609] If ye hym knewe, it wolde be for youre prow.
 [610] Ye wolde nat forgoon his aqueyntaunce
 [611] For muchel good, I dar leye in balaunce
 [612] Al that I have in my possessioun.
 [613] He is a man of heigh discrecioun;
 [614] I warne yow wel, he is a passyng man."
 [615] "Wel," quod oure Hoost, "I pray thee, tel me than,
 [616] Is he a clerk, or noon? Telle what he is."
 [617] "Nay, he is gretter than a clerk, ywis,"
 [618] Seyde this Yeman, "and in wordes fewe,
 [619] Hoost, of his craft somwhat I wol yow shewe.
 [620] "I seye, my lord kan swich subtilitee --
 [621] But al his craft ye may nat wite at me,
 [622] And somwhat helpe I yet to his wirkyng --
 [623] That al this ground on which we been ridyng,
 [624] Til that we come to Caunterbury toun,
 [625] He koude al clene turnen up-so-doun,
 [626] And pave it al of silver and of gold."
 [627] And whan this Yeman hadde this tale ytold
 [628] Unto oure Hoost, he seyde, "Benedicitee!
 [629] This thyng is wonder merveillous to me,
 [630] Syn that thy lord is of so heigh prudence,
 [631] By cause of which men sholde hym reverence,
 [632] That of his worshipe rekketh he so lite.
 [633] His overslope nys nat worth a myte,
 [634] As in effect, to hym, so moot I go,
 [635] It is al baudy and totore also.
 [636] Why is thy lord so sluttissh, I the preye,
 [637] And is of power bettre clooth to beye,
 [638] If that his dede accorde with thy speche?
 [639] Telle me that, and that I thee biseche."
 [640] "Why?" quod this Yeman, "wherto axe ye me?
 [641] God help me so, for he shal nevere thee!
 [642] (But I wol nat avowe that I seye,
 [643] And therfore keepe it secree, I yow preye.)
 [644] He is to wys, in feith, as I bileeve.
 [645] That that is overdoon, it wol nat preeve
 [646] Aright, as clerkes seyn; it is a vice.
 [647] Wherfore in that I holde hym lewed and nyce.
 [648] For whan a man hath over-greet a wit,
 [649] Ful oft hym happeth to mysusen it.
 [650] So dooth my lord, and that me greveth soore;
 [651] God it amende! I kan sey yow namoore."
 [652] "Ther-of no fors, good Yeman," quod oure Hoost;
 [653] "Syn of the konnyng of thy lord thow woost,
 [654] Telle how he dooth, I pray thee hertely,
 [655] Syn that he is so crafty and so sly.
 [656] Where dwelle ye, if it to telle be?"
 [657] "In the suburbes of a toun," quod he,
 [658] "Lurkynge in hernes and in lanes blynde,
 [659] Whereas thise robbours and thise theves by kynde
 [660] Holden hir pryvee fereful residence,
 [661] As they that dar nat shewen hir presence;
 [662] So faren we, if I shal seye the sothe."
 [663] "Now," quod oure Hoost, "yit lat me talke to the.
 [664] Why artow so discoloured of thy face?"
 [665] "Peter!" quod he, "God yeve it harde grace,
 [666] I am so used in the fyr to blowe
 [667] That it hath chaunged my colour, I trowe.
 [668] I am nat wont in no mirour to prie,
 [669] But swynke soore and lerne multiplie.
 [670] We blondren evere and pouren in the fir,
 [671] And for al that we faille of oure desir,
 [672] For evere we lakken oure conclusioun.
 [673] To muchel folk we doon illusioun,
 [674] And borwe gold, be it a pound or two,
 [675] Or ten, or twelve, or manye sommes mo,
 [676] And make hem wenen, at the leeste weye,
 [677] That of a pound we koude make tweye.
 [678] Yet is it fals, but ay we han good hope
 [679] It for to doon, and after it we grope.
 [680] But that science is so fer us biforn,
 [681] We mowen nat, although we hadden it sworn,
 [682] It overtake, it slit awey so faste.
 [683] It wole us maken beggers atte laste."
 [684] Whil this Yeman was thus in his talkyng,
 [685] This Chanoun drough hym neer and herde al thyng
 [686] Which this Yeman spak, for suspecioun
 [687] Of mennes speche evere hadde this Chanoun.
 [688] For Catoun seith that he that gilty is
 [689] Demeth alle thyng be spoke of hym, ywis.
 [690] That was the cause he gan so ny hym drawe
 [691] To his Yeman, to herknen al his sawe.
 [692] And thus he seyde unto his Yeman tho:
 [693] "Hoold thou thy pees and spek no wordes mo,
 [694] For if thou do, thou shalt it deere abye.
 [695] Thou sclaundrest me heere in this compaignye,
 [696] And eek discoverest that thou sholdest hyde."
 [697] "Ye," quod oure Hoost, "telle on, what so bityde.
 [698] Of al his thretyng rekke nat a myte!"
 [699] "In feith," quod he, "namoore I do but lyte."
 [700] And whan this Chanon saugh it wolde nat bee,
 [701] But his Yeman wolde telle his pryvetee,
 [702] He fledde awey for verray sorwe and shame.
 [703] "A!" quod the Yeman, "heere shal arise game;
 [704] Al that I kan anon now wol I telle.
 [705] Syn he is goon, the foule feend hym quelle!
 [706] For nevere heerafter wol I with hym meete
 [707] For peny ne for pound, I yow biheete.
 [708] He that me broghte first unto that game,
 [709] Er that he dye, sorwe have he and shame!
 [710] For it is ernest to me, by my feith;
 [711] That feele I wel, what so any man seith.
 [712] And yet, for al my smert and al my grief,
 [713] For al my sorwe, labour, and meschief,
 [714] I koude nevere leve it in no wise.
 [715] Now wolde God my wit myghte suffise
 [716] To tellen al that longeth to that art!
 [717] But nathelees yow wol I tellen part.
 [718] Syn that my lord is goon, I wol nat spare;
 [719] Swich thyng as that I knowe, I wol declare.

      
The Canterbury Tales and Other Works of Chaucer (Middle English), by Geoffery Chaucer, [14th cent.], at sacred-texts.com

 

The Canterbury Tales

 

The Canon's Yeoman's Tale

 [720] With this Chanoun I dwelt have seven yeer,
 [721] And of his science am I never the neer.
 [722] Al that I hadde I have lost therby,
 [723] And, God woot, so hath many mo than I.
 [724] Ther I was wont to be right fressh and gay
 [725] Of clothyng and of oother good array,
 [726] Now may I were an hose upon myn heed;
 [727] And wher my colour was bothe fressh and reed,
 [728] Now is it wan and of a leden hewe --
 [729] Whoso it useth, soore shal he rewe! --
 [730] And of my swynk yet blered is myn ye.
 [731] Lo, which avantage is to multiplie!
 [732] That slidynge science hath me maad so bare
 [733] That I have no good, wher that evere I fare;
 [734] And yet I am endetted so therby
 [735] Of gold that I have borwed, trewely,
 [736] That whil I lyve I shal it quite nevere.
 [737] Lat every man be war by me for evere!
 [738] What maner man that casteth hym therto,
 [739] If he continue, I holde his thrift ydo.
 [740] For so helpe me God, therby shal he nat wynne,
 [741] But empte his purs and make his wittes thynne.
 [742] And whan he thurgh his madnesse and folye
 [743] Hath lost his owene good thurgh jupartye,
 [744] Thanne he exciteth oother folk therto,
 [745] To lesen hir good as he hymself hath do.
 [746] For unto shrewes joye it is and ese
 [747] To have hir felawes in peyne and disese.
 [748] Thus was I ones lerned of a clerk.
 [749] Of that no charge; I wol speke of oure werk.
 [750] Whan we been there as we shul exercise
 [751] Oure elvysshe craft, we semen wonder wise,
 [752] Oure termes been so clergial and so queynte.
 [753] I blowe the fir til that myn herte feynte.
 [754] What sholde I tellen ech proporcion
 [755] Of thynges whiche that we werche upon --
 [756] As on fyve or sixe ounces, may wel be,
 [757] Of silver, or som oother quantitee --
 [758] And bisye me to telle yow the names
 [759] Of orpyment, brent bones, iren squames,
 [760] That into poudre grounden been ful smal;
 [761] And in an erthen pot how put is al,
 [762] And salt yput in, and also papeer,
 [763] Biforn thise poudres that I speke of heer;
 [764] And wel ycovered with a lampe of glas;
 [765] And of muche oother thyng which that ther was;
 [766] And of the pot and glasses enlutyng
 [767] That of the eyr myghte passe out nothyng;
 [768] And of the esy fir, and smart also,
 [769] Which that was maad, and of the care and wo
 [770] That we hadde in oure matires sublymyng,
 [771] And in amalgamyng and calcenyng
 [772] Of quyksilver, yclept mercurie crude?
 [773] For alle oure sleightes we kan nat conclude.
 [774] Oure orpyment and sublymed mercurie,
 [775] Oure grounden litarge eek on the porfurie,
 [776] Of ech of thise of ounces a certeyn --
 [777] Noght helpeth us; oure labour is in veyn.
 [778] Ne eek oure spirites ascencioun,
 [779] Ne oure materes that lyen al fix adoun,
 [780] Mowe in oure werkyng no thyng us availle,
 [781] For lost is al oure labour and travaille;
 [782] And al the cost, a twenty devel waye,
 [783] Is lost also, which we upon it laye.
 [784] Ther is also ful many another thyng
 [785] That is unto oure craft apertenyng.
 [786] Though I by ordre hem nat reherce kan,
 [787] By cause that I am a lewed man,
 [788] Yet wol I telle hem as they come to mynde,
 [789] Thogh I ne kan nat sette hem in hir kynde:
 [790] As boole armonyak, verdegrees, boras,
 [791] And sondry vessels maad of erthe and glas,
 [792] Oure urynales and oure descensories,
 [793] Violes, crosletz, and sublymatories,
 [794] Cucurbites and alambikes eek,
 [795] And othere swiche, deere ynough a leek --
 [796] Nat nedeth it for to reherce hem alle --
 [797] Watres rubifiyng, and boles galle,
 [798] Arsenyk, sal armonyak, and brymstoon;
 [799] And herbes koude I telle eek many oon,
 [800] As egremoyne, valerian, and lunarie,
 [801] And othere swiche, if that me liste tarie;
 [802] Oure lampes brennyng bothe nyght and day,
 [803] To brynge aboute oure purpos, if we may;
 [804] Oure fourneys eek of calcinacioun,
 [805] And of watres albificacioun;
 [806] Unslekked lym, chalk, and gleyre of an ey,
 [807] Poudres diverse, asshes, donge, pisse, and cley,
 [808] Cered pokkets, sal peter, vitriole,
 [809] And diverse fires maad of wode and cole;
 [810] Sal tartre, alkaly, and sal preparat,
 [811] And combust materes and coagulat;
 [812] Cley maad with hors or mannes heer, and oille
 [813] Of tartre, alum glas, berme, wort, and argoille,
 [814] Resalgar, and oure materes enbibyng,
 [815] And eek of oure materes encorporyng,
 [816] And of oure silver citrinacioun,
 [817] Oure cementyng and fermentacioun,
 [818] Oure yngottes, testes, and many mo.
 [819] I wol yow telle, as was me taught also,
 [820] The foure spirites and the bodies sevene,
 [821] By ordre, as ofte I herde my lord hem nevene.
 [822] The firste spirit quyksilver called is,
 [823] The seconde orpyment, the thridde, ywis,
 [824] Sal armonyak, and the ferthe brymstoon.
 [825] The bodyes sevene eek, lo, hem heere anoon:
 [826] Sol gold is, and Luna silver we threpe,
 [827] Mars iren, Mercurie quyksilver we clepe,
 [828] Saturnus leed, and Juppiter is tyn,
 [829] And Venus coper, by my fader kyn!
 [830] This cursed craft whoso wole excercise,
 [831] He shal no good han that hym may suffise,
 [832] For al the good he spendeth theraboute
 [833] He lese shal; therof have I no doute.
 [834] Whoso that listeth outen his folie,
 [835] Lat hym come forth and lerne multiplie;
 [836] And every man that oght hath in his cofre,
 [837] Lat hym appiere and wexe a philosophre.
 [838] Ascaunce that craft is so light to leere?
 [839] Nay, nay, God woot, al be he monk or frere,
 [840] Preest or chanoun, or any oother wyght,
 [841] Though he sitte at his book bothe day and nyght
 [842] In lernyng of this elvysshe nyce loore,
 [843] Al is in veyn, and parde, muchel moore.
 [844] To lerne a lewed man this subtiltee --
 [845] Fy! Spek nat therof, for it wol nat bee.
 [846] And konne he letterure or konne he noon,
 [847] As in effect, he shal fynde it al oon.
 [848] For bothe two, by my savacioun,
 [849] Concluden in multiplicacioun
 [850] Ylike wel, whan they han al ydo;
 [851] This is to seyn, they faillen bothe two.
 [852] Yet forgat I to maken rehersaille
 [853] Of watres corosif, and of lymaille,
 [854] And of bodies mollificacioun,
 [855] And also of hire induracioun;
 [856] Oilles, ablucions, and metal fusible --
 [857] To tellen al wolde passen any bible
 [858] That owher is; wherfore, as for the beste,
 [859] Of alle thise names now wol I me reste,
 [860] For, as I trowe, I have yow toold ynowe
 [861] To reyse a feend, al looke he never so rowe.
 [862] A! Nay! Lat be; the philosophres stoon,
 [863] Elixer clept, we sechen faste echoon;
 [864] For hadde we hym, thanne were we siker ynow.
 [865] But unto God of hevene I make avow,
 [866] For al oure craft, whan we han al ydo,
 [867] And al oure sleighte, he wol nat come us to.
 [868] He hath ymaad us spenden muchel good,
 [869] For sorwe of which almoost we wexen wood,
 [870] But that good hope crepeth in oure herte,
 [871] Supposynge evere, though we sore smerte,
 [872] To be releeved by hym afterward.
 [873] Swich supposyng and hope is sharp and hard;
 [874] I warne yow wel, it is to seken evere.
 [875] That futur temps hath maad men to dissevere,
 [876] In trust therof, from al that evere they hadde.
 [877] Yet of that art they kan nat wexen sadde,
 [878] For unto hem it is a bitter sweete --
 [879] So semeth it -- for nadde they but a sheete
 [880] Which that they myghte wrappe hem inne a-nyght,
 [881] And a brat to walken inne by daylyght,
 [882] They wolde hem selle and spenden on this craft.
 [883] They kan nat stynte til no thyng be laft.
 [884] And everemoore, where that evere they goon,
 [885] Men may hem knowe by smel of brymstoon.
 [886] For al the world they stynken as a goot;
 [887] Hir savour is so rammyssh and so hoot
 [888] That though a man from hem a mile be,
 [889] The savour wole infecte hym, trusteth me.
 [890] Lo, thus by smellyng and threedbare array,
 [891] If that men liste, this folk they knowe may.
 [892] And if a man wole aske hem pryvely
 [893] Why they been clothed so unthriftily,
 [894] They right anon wol rownen in his ere,
 [895] And seyn that if that they espied were,
 [896] Men wolde hem slee by cause of hir science.
 [897] Lo, thus this folk bitrayen innocence!
 [898] Passe over this; I go my tale unto.
 [899] Er that the pot be on the fir ydo,
 [900] Of metals with a certeyn quantitee,
 [901] My lord hem tempreth, and no man but he --
 [902] Now he is goon, I dar seyn boldely --
 [903] For, as men seyn, he kan doon craftily.
 [904] Algate I woot wel he hath swich a name;
 [905] And yet ful ofte he renneth in a blame.
 [906] And wite ye how? Ful ofte it happeth so
 [907] The pot tobreketh, and farewel, al is go!
 [908] Thise metals been of so greet violence
 [909] Oure walles mowe nat make hem resistence,
 [910] But if they weren wroght of lym and stoon;
 [911] They percen so, and thurgh the wal they goon.
 [912] And somme of hem synken into the ground --
 [913] Thus han we lost by tymes many a pound --
 [914] And somme are scatered al the floor aboute;
 [915] Somme lepe into the roof. Withouten doute,
 [916] Though that the feend noght in oure sighte hym shewe,
 [917] I trowe he with us be, that ilke shrewe!
 [918] In helle, where that he is lord and sire,
 [919] Nis ther moore wo, ne moore rancour ne ire.
 [920] Whan that oure pot is broke, as I have sayd,
 [921] Every man chit and halt hym yvele apayd.
 [922] Somme seyde it was long on the fir makyng;
 [923] Somme seyde nay, it was on the blowyng --
 [924] Thanne was I fered, for that was myn office.
 [925] "Straw!" quod the thridde, "ye been lewed and nyce.
 [926] It was nat tempred as it oghte be."
 [927] "Nay," quod the fourthe, "stynt and herkne me.
 [928] By cause oure fir ne was nat maad of beech,
 [929] That is the cause and oother noon, so thee 'ch!"
 [930] I kan nat telle wheron it was long,
 [931] But wel I woot greet strif is us among.
 [932] "What," quod my lord, "ther is namoore to doone;
 [933] Of thise perils I wol be war eftsoone.
 [934] I am right siker that the pot was crased.
 [935] Be as be may, be ye no thyng amased;
 [936] As usage is, lat swepe the floor as swithe,
 [937] Plukke up youre hertes and beeth glad and blithe."
 [938] The mullok on an heep ysweped was,
 [939] And on the floor ycast a canevas,
 [940] And al this mullok in a syve ythrowe,
 [941] And sifted, and ypiked many a throwe.
 [942] "Pardee," quod oon, "somwhat of oure metal
 [943] Yet is ther heere, though that we han nat al.
 [944] And though this thyng myshapped have as now,
 [945] Another tyme it may be well ynow.
 [946] Us moste putte oure good in aventure.
 [947] A marchant, pardee, may nat ay endure,
 [948] Trusteth me wel, in his prosperitee.
 [949] Somtyme his good is drowned in the see,
 [950] And somtyme comth it sauf unto the londe."
 [951] "Pees!" quod my lord, "the nexte tyme I wol fonde
 [952] To bryngen oure craft al in another plite,
 [953] And but I do, sires, lat me han the wite.
 [954] Ther was defaute in somwhat, wel I woot."
 [955] Another seyde the fir was over-hoot --
 [956] But, be it hoot or coold, I dar seye this,
 [957] That we concluden everemoore amys.
 [958] We faille of that which that we wolden have,
 [959] And in oure madnesse everemoore we rave.
 [960] And whan we been togidres everichoon,
 [961] Every man semeth a Salomon.
 [962] But al thyng which that shineth as the gold
 [963] Nis nat gold, as that I have herd told;
 [964] Ne every appul that is fair at eye
 [965] Ne is nat good, what so men clappe or crye.
 [966] Right so, lo, fareth it amonges us:
 [967] He that semeth the wiseste, by Jhesus,
 [968] Is moost fool, whan it cometh to the preef;
 [969] And he that semeth trewest is a theef.
 [970] That shul ye knowe, er that I fro yow wende,
 [971] By that I of my tale have maad an ende.
 [972] Ther is a chanoun of religioun
 [973] Amonges us, wolde infecte al a toun,
 [974] Thogh it as greet were as was Nynyvee,
 [975] Rome, Alisaundre, Troye, and othere three.
 [976] His sleightes and his infinite falsnesse
 [977] Ther koude no man writen, as I gesse,
 [978] Though that he myghte lyve a thousand yeer.
 [979] In al this world of falshede nis his peer,
 [980] For in his termes he wol hym so wynde,
 [981] And speke his wordes in so sly a kynde,
 [982] Whanne he commune shal with any wight,
 [983] That he wol make hym doten anonright,
 [984] But it a feend be, as hymselven is.
 [985] Ful many a man hath he bigiled er this,
 [986] And wole, if that he lyve may a while;
 [987] And yet men ride and goon ful many a mile
 [988] Hym for to seke and have his aqueyntaunce,
 [989] Noght knowynge of his false governaunce.
 [990] And if yow list to yeve me audience,
 [991] I wol it tellen heere in youre presence.
 [992] But worshipful chanons religious,
 [993] Ne demeth nat that I sclaundre youre hous,
 [994] Although that my tale of a chanoun bee.
 [995] Of every ordre som shrewe is, pardee,
 [996] And God forbede that al a compaignye
 [997] Sholde rewe o singuleer mannes folye.
 [998] To sclaundre yow is no thyng myn entente,
 [999] But to correcten that is mys I mente.
 [1000] This tale was nat oonly toold for yow,
 [1001] But eek for othere mo; ye woot wel how
 [1002] That among Cristes apostelles twelve
 [1003] Ther nas no traytour but Judas hymselve.
 [1004] Thanne why sholde al the remenant have a blame
 [1005] That giltlees were? By yow I seye the same,
 [1006] Save oonly this, if ye wol herkne me:
 [1007] If any Judas in youre covent be,
 [1008] Remoeveth hym bitymes, I yow rede,
 [1009] If shame or los may causen any drede.
 [1010] And beeth no thyng displesed, I yow preye,
 [1011] But in this cas herkneth what I shal seye.
 [1012] In Londoun was a preest, an annueleer,
 [1013] That therinne dwelled hadde many a yeer,
 [1014] Which was so plesaunt and so servysable
 [1015] Unto the wyf, where as he was at table,
 [1016] That she wolde suffre hym no thyng for to paye
 [1017] For bord ne clothyng, wente he never so gaye,
 [1018] And spendyng silver hadde he right ynow.
 [1019] Therof no fors; I wol procede as now,
 [1020] And telle forth my tale of the chanoun
 [1021] That broghte this preest to confusioun.
 [1022] This false chanon cam upon a day
 [1023] Unto this preestes chambre, wher he lay,
 [1024] Bisechynge hym to lene hym a certeyn
 [1025] Of gold, and he wolde quite it hym ageyn.
 [1026] "Leene me a marc," quod he, "but dayes three,
 [1027] And at my day I wol it quiten thee.
 [1028] And if so be that thow me fynde fals,
 [1029] Another day do hange me by the hals!"
 [1030] This preest hym took a marc, and that as swithe,
 [1031] And this chanoun hym thanked ofte sithe,
 [1032] And took his leve, and wente forth his weye,
 [1033] And at the thridde day broghte his moneye,
 [1034] And to the preest he took his gold agayn,
 [1035] Wherof this preest was wonder glad and fayn.
 [1036] "Certes," quod he, "no thyng anoyeth me
 [1037] To lene a man a noble, or two, or thre,
 [1038] Or what thyng were in my possessioun,
 [1039] Whan he so trewe is of condicioun
 [1040] That in no wise he breke wole his day;
 [1041] To swich a man I kan never seye nay."
 [1042] "What!" quod this chanoun, "sholde I be untrewe?
 [1043] Nay, that were thyng yfallen al of newe.
 [1044] Trouthe is a thyng that I wol evere kepe
 [1045] Unto that day in which that I shal crepe
 [1046] Into my grave, and ellis God forbede.
 [1047] Bileveth this as siker as your Crede.
 [1048] God thanke I, and in good tyme be it sayd,
 [1049] That ther was nevere man yet yvele apayd
 [1050] For gold ne silver that he to me lente,
 [1051] Ne nevere falshede in myn herte I mente.
 [1052] And sire," quod he, "now of my pryvetee,
 [1053] Syn ye so goodlich han been unto me,
 [1054] And kithed to me so greet gentillesse,
 [1055] Somwhat to quyte with youre kyndenesse
 [1056] I wol yow shewe, and if yow list to leere,
 [1057] I wol yow teche pleynly the manere
 [1058] How I kan werken in philosophie.
 [1059] Taketh good heede; ye shul wel seen at ye
 [1060] That I wol doon a maistrie er I go."
 [1061] "Ye," quod the preest, "ye, sire, and wol ye so?
 [1062] Marie, therof I pray yow hertely."
 [1063] "At youre comandement, sire, trewely,"
 [1064] Quod the chanoun, "and ellis God forbeede!"
 [1065] Loo, how this theef koude his service beede!
 [1066] Ful sooth it is that swich profred servyse
 [1067] Stynketh, as witnessen thise olde wyse,
 [1068] And that ful soone I wol it verifie
 [1069] In this chanoun, roote of al trecherie,
 [1070] That everemoore delit hath and gladnesse --
 [1071] Swiche feendly thoghtes in his herte impresse --
 [1072] How Cristes peple he may to meschief brynge.
 [1073] God kepe us from his false dissymulynge!
 [1074] Noght wiste this preest with whom that he delte,
 [1075] Ne of his harm comynge he no thyng felte.
 [1076] O sely preest! O sely innocent!
 [1077] With coveitise anon thou shalt be blent!
 [1078] O gracelees, ful blynd is thy conceite,
 [1079] No thyng ne artow war of the deceite
 [1080] Which that this fox yshapen hath to thee!
 [1081] His wily wrenches thou ne mayst nat flee.
 [1082] Wherfore, to go to the conclusion,
 [1083] That refereth to thy confusion,
 [1084] Unhappy man, anon I wol me hye
 [1085] To tellen thyn unwit and thy folye,
 [1086] And eek the falsnesse of that oother wrecche,
 [1087] As ferforth as that my konnyng wol strecche.
 [1088] This chanon was my lord, ye wolden weene?
 [1089] Sire hoost, in feith, and by the hevenes queene,
 [1090] It was another chanoun, and nat hee,
 [1091] That kan an hundred foold moore subtiltee.
 [1092] He hath bitrayed folkes many tyme;
 [1093] Of his falsnesse it dulleth me to ryme.
 [1094] Evere whan that I speke of his falshede,
 [1095] For shame of hym my chekes wexen rede.
 [1096] Algates they bigynnen for to glowe,
 [1097] For reednesse have I noon, right wel I knowe,
 [1098] In my visage; for fumes diverse
 [1099] Of metals, whiche ye han herd me reherce,
 [1100] Consumed and wasted han my reednesse.
 [1101] Now taak heede of this chanons cursednesse!
 [1102] "Sire," quod he to the preest, "lat youre man gon
 [1103] For quyksilver, that we it hadde anon;
 [1104] And lat hym bryngen ounces two or three;
 [1105] And whan he comth, as faste shal ye see
 [1106] A wonder thyng, which ye saugh nevere er this."
 [1107] "Sire," quod the preest, "it shal be doon, ywis."
 [1108] He bad his servant fecchen hym this thyng,
 [1109] And he al redy was at his biddyng,
 [1110] And wente hym forth, and cam anon agayn
 [1111] With this quyksilver, shortly for to sayn,
 [1112] And took thise ounces thre to the chanoun;
 [1113] And he hem leyde faire and wel adoun,
 [1114] And bad the servant coles for to brynge,
 [1115] That he anon myghte go to his werkynge.
 [1116] The coles right anon weren yfet,
 [1117] And this chanoun took out a crosselet
 [1118] Of his bosom, and shewed it to the preest.
 [1119] "This instrument," quod he, "which that thou seest,
 [1120] Taak in thyn hand, and put thyself therinne
 [1121] Of this quyksilver an ounce, and heer bigynne,
 [1122] In name of Crist, to wexe a philosofre.
 [1123] Ther been ful fewe to whiche I wolde profre
 [1124] To shewen hem thus muche of my science.
 [1125] For ye shul seen heer, by experience,
 [1126] That this quyksilver I wol mortifye
 [1127] Right in youre sighte anon, withouten lye,
 [1128] And make it as good silver and as fyn
 [1129] As ther is any in youre purs or myn,
 [1130] Or elleswhere, and make it malliable;
 [1131] And elles holdeth me fals and unable
 [1132] Amonges folk for evere to appeere.
 [1133] I have a poudre heer, that coste me deere,
 [1134] Shal make al good, for it is cause of al
 [1135] My konnyng, which that I yow shewen shal.
 [1136] Voyde youre man, and lat hym be theroute,
 [1137] And shette the dore, whils we been aboute
 [1138] Oure pryvetee, that no man us espie,
 [1139] Whils that we werke in this philosophie."
 [1140] Al as he bad fulfilled was in dede.
 [1141] This ilke servant anonright out yede,
 [1142] And his maister shette the dore anon,
 [1143] And to hire labour spedily they gon.
 [1144] This preest, at this cursed chanons biddyng,
 [1145] Upon the fir anon sette this thyng,
 [1146] And blew the fir, and bisyed hym ful faste.
 [1147] And this chanoun into the crosselet caste
 [1148] A poudre, noot I wherof that it was
 [1149] Ymaad, outher of chalk, outher of glas,
 [1150] Or somwhat elles, was nat worth a flye,
 [1151] To blynde with this preest; and bad hym hye
 [1152] The coles for to couchen al above
 [1153] The crosselet. "For in tokenyng I thee love,"
 [1154] Quod this chanoun, "thyne owene handes two
 [1155] Shul werche al thyng which that shal heer be do."
 [1156] "Graunt mercy," quod the preest, and was ful glad,
 [1157] And couched coles as the chanoun bad.
 [1158] And while he bisy was, this feendly wrecche,
 [1159] This false chanoun -- the foule feend hym fecche! --
 [1160] Out of his bosom took a bechen cole,
 [1161] In which ful subtilly was maad an hole,
 [1162] And therinne put was of silver lemaille
 [1163] An ounce, and stopped was, withouten faille,
 [1164] This hole with wex, to kepe the lemaille in.
 [1165] And understondeth that this false gyn
 [1166] Was nat maad ther, but it was maad bifore;
 [1167] And othere thynges I shal tellen moore
 [1168] Herafterward, whiche that he with hym broghte.
 [1169] Er he cam there, hym to bigile he thoghte,
 [1170] And so he dide, er that they wente atwynne;
 [1171] Til he had terved hym, koude he nat blynne.
 [1172] It dulleth me whan that I of hym speke.
 [1173] On his falshede fayn wolde I me wreke,
 [1174] If I wiste how, but he is heere and there;
 [1175] He is so variaunt, he abit nowhere.
 [1176] But taketh heede now, sires, for Goddes love!
 [1177] He took his cole of which I spak above,
 [1178] And in his hand he baar it pryvely.
 [1179] And whiles the preest couched bisily
 [1180] The coles, as I tolde yow er this,
 [1181] This chanoun seyde, "Freend, ye doon amys.
 [1182] This is nat couched as it oghte be;
 [1183] But soone I shal amenden it," quod he.
 [1184] "Now lat me medle therwith but a while,
 [1185] For of yow have I pitee, by Seint Gile!
 [1186] Ye been right hoot; I se wel how ye swete.
 [1187] Have heere a clooth, and wipe awey the wete."
 [1188] And whiles that the preest wiped his face,
 [1189] This chanoun took his cole -- with sory grace! --
 [1190] And leyde it above upon the myddeward
 [1191] Of the crosselet, and blew wel afterward
 [1192] Til that the coles gonne faste brenne.
 [1193] "Now yeve us drynke," quod the chanoun thenne;
 [1194] "As swithe al shal be wel, I undertake.
 [1195] Sitte we doun, and lat us myrie make."
 [1196] And whan that this chanounes bechen cole
 [1197] Was brent, al the lemaille out of the hole
 [1198] Into the crosselet fil anon adoun;
 [1199] And so it moste nedes, by resoun,
 [1200] Syn it so evene above couched was.
 [1201] But therof wiste the preest nothyng, alas!
 [1202] He demed alle the coles yliche good,
 [1203] For of that sleighte he nothyng understood.
 [1204] And whan this alkamystre saugh his tyme,
 [1205] "Ris up," quod he, "sire preest, and stondeth by me;
 [1206] And for I woot wel ingot have ye noon,
 [1207] Gooth, walketh forth, and bryngeth a chalk stoon;
 [1208] For I wol make it of the same shap
 [1209] That is an ingot, if I may han hap.
 [1210] And bryngeth eek with yow a bolle or a panne
 [1211] Ful of water, and ye shul se wel thanne
 [1212] How that oure bisynesse shal thryve and preeve.
 [1213] And yet, for ye shul han no mysbileeve
 [1214] Ne wrong conceite of me in youre absence,
 [1215] I ne wol nat been out of youre presence,
 [1216] But go with yow and come with yow ageyn."
 [1217] The chambre dore, shortly for to seyn,
 [1218] They opened and shette, and wente hir weye.
 [1219] And forth with hem they carieden the keye,
 [1220] And coome agayn withouten any delay.
 [1221] What sholde I tarien al the longe day?
 [1222] He took the chalk and shoop it in the wise
 [1223] Of an ingot, as I shal yow devyse.
 [1224] I seye, he took out of his owene sleeve
 [1225] A teyne of silver -- yvele moot he cheeve! --
 [1226] Which that ne was nat but an ounce of weighte.
 [1227] And taaketh heede now of his cursed sleighte!
 [1228] He shoop his ingot in lengthe and in breede
 [1229] Of this teyne, withouten any drede,
 [1230] So slyly that the preest it nat espide,
 [1231] And in his sleve agayn he gan it hide,
 [1232] And fro the fir he took up his mateere,
 [1233] And in th' yngot putte it with myrie cheere,
 [1234] And in the water-vessel he it caste,
 [1235] Whan that hym luste, and bad the preest as faste,
 [1236] "Loke what ther is; put in thyn hand and grope.
 [1237] Thow fynde shalt ther silver, as I hope."
 [1238] What, devel of helle, sholde it elles be?
 [1239] Shaving of silver silver is, pardee!
 [1240] He putte his hand in and took up a teyne
 [1241] Of silver fyn, and glad in every veyne
 [1242] Was this preest, whan he saugh it was so.
 [1243] "Goddes blessyng, and his moodres also,
 [1244] And alle halwes, have ye, sire chanoun,"
 [1245] Seyde the preest, "and I hir malisoun,
 [1246] But, and ye vouche-sauf to techen me
 [1247] This noble craft and this subtilitee,
 [1248] I wol be youre in al that evere I may."
 [1249] Quod the chanoun, "Yet wol I make assay
 [1250] The seconde tyme, that ye may taken heede
 [1251] And been expert of this, and in youre neede
 [1252] Another day assaye in myn absence
 [1253] This disciplyne and this crafty science.
 [1254] Lat take another ounce," quod he tho,
 [1255] "Of quyksilver, withouten wordes mo,
 [1256] And do therwith as ye han doon er this
 [1257] With that oother, which that now silver is."
 [1258] This preest hym bisieth in al that he kan
 [1259] To doon as this chanoun, this cursed man,
 [1260] Comanded hym, and faste blew the fir,
 [1261] For to come to th' effect of his desir.
 [1262] And this chanon, right in the meene while,
 [1263] Al redy was this preest eft to bigile,
 [1264] And for a contenaunce in his hand he bar
 [1265] An holwe stikke -- taak kep and be war! --
 [1266] In the ende of which an ounce, and namoore,
 [1267] Of silver lemaille put was, as bifore
 [1268] Was in his cole, and stopped with wex weel
 [1269] For to kepe in his lemaille every deel.
 [1270] And whil this preest was in his bisynesse,
 [1271] This chanoun with his stikke gan hym dresse
 [1272] To hym anon, and his poudre caste in
 [1273] As he dide er -- the devel out of his skyn
 [1274] Hym terve, I pray to God, for his falshede!
 [1275] For he was evere fals in thoght and dede --
 [1276] And with this stikke, above the crosselet,
 [1277] That was ordeyned with that false jet,
 [1278] He stired the coles til relente gan
 [1279] The wex agayn the fir, as every man,
 [1280] But it a fool be, woot wel it moot nede,
 [1281] And al that in the stikke was out yede,
 [1282] And in the crosselet hastily it fel.
 [1283] Now, good sires, what wol ye bet than wel?
 [1284] Whan that this preest thus was bigiled ageyn,
 [1285] Supposynge noght but treuthe, sooth to seyn,
 [1286] He was so glad that I kan nat expresse
 [1287] In no manere his myrthe and his gladnesse;
 [1288] And to the chanoun he profred eftsoone
 [1289] Body and good. "Ye," quod the chanoun soone,
 [1290] "Though poure I be, crafty thou shalt me fynde.
 [1291] I warne thee, yet is ther moore bihynde.
 [1292] Is ther any coper herinne?" seyde he.
 [1293] "Ye," quod the preest, "sire, I trowe wel ther be."
 [1294] "Elles go bye us som, and that as swithe;
 [1295] Now, goode sire, go forth thy wey and hy the."
 [1296] He wente his wey, and with the coper cam,
 [1297] And this chanon it in his handes nam,
 [1298] And of that coper weyed out but an ounce.
 [1299] Al to symple is my tonge to pronounce,
 [1300] As ministre of my wit, the doublenesse
 [1301] Of this chanoun, roote of alle cursednesse!
 [1302] He semed freendly to hem that knewe hym noght,
 [1303] But he was feendly bothe in werk and thoght.
 [1304] It weerieth me to telle of his falsnesse,
 [1305] And nathelees yet wol I it expresse,
 [1306] To th' entente that men may be war therby,
 [1307] And for noon oother cause, trewely.
 [1308] He putte this ounce of coper in the crosselet,
 [1309] And on the fir as swithe he hath it set,
 [1310] And caste in poudre, and made the preest to blowe,
 [1311] And in his werkyng for to stoupe lowe,
 [1312] As he dide er -- and al nas but a jape;
 [1313] Right as hym liste, the preest he made his ape!
 [1314] And afterward in the ingot he it caste,
 [1315] And in the panne putte it at the laste
 [1316] Of water, and in he putte his owene hand,
 [1317] And in his sleve (as ye biforen-hand
 [1318] Herde me telle) he hadde a silver teyne.
 [1319] He slyly took it out, this cursed heyne,
 [1320] Unwityng this preest of his false craft,
 [1321] And in the pannes botme he hath it laft;
 [1322] And in the water rombled to and fro,
 [1323] And wonder pryvely took up also
 [1324] The coper teyne, noght knowynge this preest,
 [1325] And hidde it, and hym hente by the breest,
 [1326] And to hym spak, and thus seyde in his game:
 [1327] "Stoupeth adoun. By God, ye be to blame!
 [1328] Helpeth me now, as I dide yow whileer;
 [1329] Putte in youre hand, and looketh what is theer."
 [1330] This preest took up this silver teyne anon,
 [1331] And thanne seyde the chanoun, "Lat us gon
 [1332] With thise thre teynes, whiche that we han wroght,
 [1333] To som goldsmyth and wite if they been oght,
 [1334] For, by my feith, I nolde, for myn hood,
 [1335] But if that they were silver fyn and good,
 [1336] And that as swithe preeved it shal bee."
 [1337] Unto the goldsmyth with thise teynes three
 [1338] They wente and putte thise teynes in assay
 [1339] To fir and hamer; myghte no man seye nay,
 [1340] But that they weren as hem oghte be.
 [1341] This sotted preest, who was gladder than he?
 [1342] Was nevere brid gladder agayn the day,
 [1343] Ne nyghtyngale, in the sesoun of May,
 [1344] Was nevere noon that luste bet to synge;
 [1345] Ne lady lustier in carolynge,
 [1346] Or for to speke of love and wommanhede,
 [1347] Ne knyght in armes to doon an hardy dede,
 [1348] To stonden in grace of his lady deere,
 [1349] Than hadde this preest this soory craft to leere.
 [1350] And to the chanoun thus he spak and seyde:
 [1351] "For love of God, that for us alle deyde,
 [1352] And as I may deserve it unto yow,
 [1353] What shal this receite coste? Telleth now!"
 [1354] "By oure Lady," quod this chanon, "it is deere,
 [1355] I warne yow wel; for save I and a frere,
 [1356] In Engelond ther kan no man it make."
 [1357] "No fors," quod he, "now, sire, for Goddes sake,
 [1358] What shal I paye? Telleth me, I preye."
 [1359] "Ywis," quod he, "it is ful deere, I seye.
 [1360] Sire, at o word, if that thee list it have,
 [1361] Ye shul paye fourty pound, so God me save!
 [1362] And nere the freendshipe that ye dide er this
 [1363] To me, ye sholde paye moore, ywis."
 [1364] This preest the somme of fourty pound anon
 [1365] Of nobles fette, and took hem everichon
 [1366] To this chanoun for this ilke receite.
 [1367] Al his werkyng nas but fraude and deceite.
 [1368] "Sire preest," he seyde, "I kepe han no loos
 [1369] Of my craft, for I wolde it kept were cloos;
 [1370] And, as ye love me, kepeth it secree.
 [1371] For, and men knewen al my soutiltee,
 [1372] By God, they wolden han so greet envye
 [1373] To me by cause of my philosophye
 [1374] I sholde be deed; ther were noon oother weye."
 [1375] "God it forbeede," quod the preest, "what sey ye?
 [1376] Yet hadde I levere spenden al the good
 [1377] Which that I have, and elles wexe I wood,
 [1378] Than that ye sholden falle in swich mescheef."
 [1379] "For youre good wyl, sire, have ye right good preef,"
 [1380] Quod the chanoun, "and farwel, grant mercy!"
 [1381] He wente his wey, and never the preest hym sy
 [1382] After that day; and whan that this preest shoolde
 [1383] Maken assay, at swich tyme as he wolde,
 [1384] Of this receit, farwel! It wolde nat be.
 [1385] Lo, thus byjaped and bigiled was he!
 [1386] Thus maketh he his introduccioun,
 [1387] To brynge folk to hir destruccioun.
 [1388] Considereth, sires, how that, in ech estaat,
 [1389] Bitwixe men and gold ther is debaat
 [1390] So ferforth that unnethes is ther noon.
 [1391] This multiplying blent so many oon
 [1392] That in good feith I trowe that it bee
 [1393] The cause grettest of swich scarsetee.
 [1394] Philosophres speken so mystily
 [1395] In this craft that men kan nat come therby,
 [1396] For any wit that men han now-a-dayes.
 [1397] They mowe wel chiteren as doon jayes,
 [1398] And in hir termes sette hir lust and peyne,
 [1399] But to hir purpos shul they nevere atteyne.
 [1400] A man may lightly lerne, if he have aught,
 [1401] To multiplie, and brynge his good to naught!
 [1402] Lo! swich a lucre is in this lusty game,
 [1403] A mannes myrthe it wol turne unto grame,
 [1404] And empten also grete and hevye purses,
 [1405] And maken folk for to purchacen curses
 [1406] Of hem that han hir good therto ylent.
 [1407] O, fy, for shame! They that han been brent,
 [1408] Allas, kan they nat flee the fires heete?
 [1409] Ye that it use, I rede ye it leete,
 [1410] Lest ye lese al; for bet than nevere is late.
 [1411] Nevere to thryve were to long a date.
 [1412] Though ye prolle ay, ye shul it nevere fynde.
 [1413] Ye been as boold as is Bayard the blynde,
 [1414] That blondreth forth and peril casteth noon.
 [1415] He is as boold to renne agayn a stoon
 [1416] As for to goon bisides in the weye.
 [1417] So faren ye that multiplie, I seye.
 [1418] If that youre eyen kan nat seen aright,
 [1419] Looke that youre mynde lakke noght his sight.
 [1420] For though ye looken never so brode and stare,
 [1421] Ye shul nothyng wynne on that chaffare,
 [1422] But wasten al that ye may rape and renne.
 [1423] Withdraweth the fir, lest it to faste brenne;
 [1424] Medleth namoore with that art, I mene,
 [1425] For if ye doon, youre thrift is goon ful clene.
 [1426] And right as swithe I wol yow tellen heere
 [1427] What philosophres seyn in this mateere.
 [1428] Lo, thus seith Arnold of the Newe Toun,
 [1429] As his Rosarie maketh mencioun;
 [1430] He seith right thus, withouten any lye:
 [1431] "Ther may no man mercurie mortifie
 [1432] But it be with his brother knowlechyng";
 [1433] How [be] that he which that first seyde this thyng
 [1434] Of philosophres fader was, Hermes;
 [1435] He seith how that the dragon, doutelees,
 [1436] Ne dyeth nat but if that he be slayn
 [1437] With his brother; and that is for to sayn,
 [1438] By the dragon, Mercurie, and noon oother
 [1439] He understood, and brymstoon by his brother,
 [1440] That out of Sol and Luna were ydrawe.
 [1441] "And therfore," seyde he -- taak heede to my sawe --
 [1442] "Lat no man bisye hym this art for to seche,
 [1443] But if that he th' entencioun and speche
 [1444] Of philosophres understonde kan;
 [1445] And if he do, he is a lewed man.
 [1446] For this science and this konnyng," quod he,
 [1447] "Is of the secree of the secretes, pardee."
 [1448] Also ther was a disciple of Plato,
 [1449] That on a tyme seyde his maister to,
 [1450] As his book Senior wol bere witnesse,
 [1451] And this was his demande in soothfastnesse:
 [1452] "Telle me the name of the privee stoon."
 [1453] And Plato answerde unto hym anoon,
 [1454] "Take the stoon that Titanos men name."
 [1455] "Which is that?" quod he. "Magnasia is the same,"
 [1456] Seyde Plato. "Ye, sire, and is it thus?
 [1457] This is ignotum per ignocius.
 [1458] What is Magnasia, good sire, I yow preye?"
 [1459] "It is a water that is maad, I seye,
 [1460] Of elementes foure," quod Plato.
 [1461] "Telle me the roote, good sire," quod he tho,
 [1462] "Of that water, if it be youre wil."
 [1463] "Nay, nay," quod Plato, "certein, that I nyl.
 [1464] The philosophres sworn were everychoon
 [1465] That they sholden discovere it unto noon,
 [1466] Ne in no book it write in no manere.
 [1467] For unto Crist it is so lief and deere
 [1468] That he wol nat that it discovered bee,
 [1469] But where it liketh to his deitee
 [1470] Men for t' enspire, and eek for to deffende
 [1471] Whom that hym liketh; lo, this is the ende."
 [1472] Thanne conclude I thus, sith that God of hevene
 [1473] Ne wil nat that the philosophres nevene
 [1474] How that a man shal come unto this stoon,
 [1475] I rede, as for the beste, lete it goon.
 [1476] For whoso maketh God his adversarie,
 [1477] As for to werken any thyng in contrarie
 [1478] Of his wil, certes, never shal he thryve,
 [1479] Thogh that he multiplie terme of his lyve.
 [1480] And there a poynt, for ended is my tale.
 [1481] God sende every trewe man boote of his bale!

      
The Canterbury Tales and Other Works of Chaucer (Middle English), by Geoffery Chaucer, [14th cent.], at sacred-texts.com

 

The Canterbury Tales

 

The Manciple's Prologue

 [1] Woot ye nat where ther stant a litel toun
 [2] Which that ycleped is Bobbe-up-and-doun,
 [3] Under the Blee, in Caunterbury Weye?
 [4] Ther gan oure Hooste for to jape and pleye,
 [5] And seyde, "Sires, what! Dun is in the myre!
 [6] Is ther no man, for preyere ne for hyre,
 [7] That wole awake oure felawe al bihynde?
 [8] A theef myghte hym ful lightly robbe and bynde.
 [9] See how he nappeth! See how, for cokkes bones,
 [10] That he wol falle fro his hors atones!
 [11] Is that a cook of Londoun, with meschaunce?
 [12] Do hym come forth, he knoweth his penaunce;
 [13] For he shal telle a tale, by my fey,
 [14] Although it be nat worth a botel hey.
 [15] Awake, thou Cook," quod he, "God yeve thee sorwe!
 [16] What eyleth thee to slepe by the morwe?
 [17] Hastow had fleen al nyght, or artow dronke?
 [18] Or hastow with som quene al nyght yswonke,
 [19] So that thow mayst nat holden up thyn heed?"
 [20] This Cook, that was ful pale and no thyng reed,
 [21] Seyde to oure Hoost, "So God my soule blesse,
 [22] As ther is falle on me swich hevynesse,
 [23] Noot I nat why, that me were levere slepe
 [24] Than the beste galon wyn in Chepe."
 [25] "Wel," quod the Maunciple, "if it may doon ese
 [26] To thee, sire Cook, and to no wight displese,
 [27] Which that heere rideth in this compaignye,
 [28] And that oure Hoost wole, of his curteisye,
 [29] I wol as now excuse thee of thy tale.
 [30] For, in good feith, thy visage is ful pale,
 [31] Thyne eyen daswen eek, as that me thynketh,
 [32] And, wel I woot, thy breeth ful soure stynketh:
 [33] That sheweth wel thou art nat wel disposed.
 [34] Of me, certeyn, thou shalt nat been yglosed.
 [35] See how he ganeth, lo, this dronken wight,
 [36] As though he wolde swolwe us anonright.
 [37] Hoold cloos thy mouth, man, by thy fader kyn!
 [38] The devel of helle sette his foot therin!
 [39] Thy cursed breeth infecte wole us alle.
 [40] Fy, stynkyng swyn! Fy, foule moote thee falle!
 [41] A, taketh heede, sires, of this lusty man.
 [42] Now, sweete sire, wol ye justen atte fan?
 [43] Therto me thynketh ye been wel yshape!
 [44] I trowe that ye dronken han wyn ape,
 [45] And that is whan men pleyen with a straw."
 [46] And with this speche the Cook wax wrooth and wraw,
 [47] And on the Manciple he gan nodde faste
 [48] For lakke of speche, and doun the hors hym caste,
 [49] Where as he lay, til that men hym up took.
 [50] This was a fair chyvachee of a cook!
 [51] Allas, he nadde holde hym by his ladel!
 [52] And er that he agayn were in his sadel,
 [53] Ther was greet showvyng bothe to and fro
 [54] To lifte hym up, and muchel care and wo,
 [55] So unweeldy was this sory palled goost.
 [56] And to the Manciple thanne spak oure Hoost:
 [57] "By cause drynke hath dominacioun
 [58] Upon this man, by my savacioun,
 [59] I trowe he lewedly wolde telle his tale.
 [60] For, were it wyn or oold or moysty ale
 [61] That he hath dronke, he speketh in his nose,
 [62] And fneseth faste, and eek he hath the pose.
 [63] "He hath also to do moore than ynough
 [64] To kepen hym and his capul out of the slough;
 [65] And if he falle from his capul eftsoone,
 [66] Thanne shal we alle have ynogh to doone
 [67] In liftyng up his hevy dronken cors.
 [68] Telle on thy tale; of hym make I no fors.
 [69] "But yet, Manciple, in feith thou art to nyce,
 [70] Thus openly repreve hym of his vice.
 [71] Another day he wole, peraventure,
 [72] Reclayme thee and brynge thee to lure;
 [73] I meene, he speke wole of smale thynges,
 [74] As for to pynchen at thy rekenynges,
 [75] That were nat honest, if it cam to preef."
 [76] "No," quod the Manciple, "that were a greet mescheef!
 [77] So myghte he lightly brynge me in the snare.
 [78] Yet hadde I levere payen for the mare
 [79] Which he rit on, than he sholde with me stryve.
 [80] I wol nat wratthen hym, also moot I thryve!
 [81] That that I spak, I seyde it in my bourde.
 [82] And wite ye what? I have heer in a gourde
 [83] A draghte of wyn, ye, of a ripe grape,
 [84] And right anon ye shul seen a good jape.
 [85] This Cook shal drynke therof, if I may.
 [86] Up peyne of deeth, he wol nat seye me nay."
 [87] And certeynly, to tellen as it was,
 [88] Of this vessel the Cook drank faste, allas!
 [89] What neded hym? He drank ynough biforn.
 [90] And whan he hadde pouped in this horn,
 [91] To the Manciple he took the gourde agayn;
 [92] And of that drynke the Cook was wonder fayn,
 [93] And thanked hym in swich wise as he koude.
 [94] Thanne gan oure Hoost to laughen wonder loude,
 [95] And seyde, "I se wel it is necessarie,
 [96] Where that we goon, good drynke with us carie;
 [97] For that wol turne rancour and disese
 [98] T' acord and love, and many a wrong apese.
 [99] "O Bacus, yblessed be thy name,
 [100] That so kanst turnen ernest into game!
 [101] Worshipe and thank be to thy deitee!
 [102] Of that mateere ye gete namoore of me.
 [103] Telle on thy tale, Manciple, I thee preye."
 [104] "Wel, sire," quod he, "now herkneth what I  seye.

      
The Canterbury Tales and Other Works of Chaucer (Middle English), by Geoffery Chaucer, [14th cent.], at sacred-texts.com

 

The Canterbury Tales

 

The Manciple's Tale

 [105] Whan Phebus dwelled heere in this erthe adoun,
 [106] As olde bookes maken mencioun,
 [107] He was the mooste lusty bachiler
 [108] In al this world, and eek the beste archer.
 [109] He slow Phitoun, the serpent, as he lay
 [110] Slepynge agayn the sonne upon a day;
 [111] And many another noble worthy dede
 [112] He with his bowe wroghte, as men may rede.
 [113] Pleyen he koude on every mynstralcie,
 [114] And syngen that it was a melodie
 [115] To heeren of his cleere voys the soun.
 [116] Certes the kyng of Thebes, Amphioun,
 [117] That with his syngyng walled that citee,
 [118] Koude nevere syngen half so wel as hee.
 [119] Therto he was the semelieste man
 [120] That is or was sith that the world bigan.
 [121] What nedeth it his fetures to discryve?
 [122] For in this world was noon so faire on-lyve.
 [123] He was therwith fulfild of gentillesse,
 [124] Of honour, and of parfit worthynesse.
 [125] This Phebus, that was flour of bachilrie,
 [126] As wel in fredom as in chivalrie,
 [127] For his desport, in signe eek of victorie
 [128] Of Phitoun, so as telleth us the storie,
 [129] Was wont to beren in his hand a bowe.
 [130] Now hadde this Phebus in his hous a crowe
 [131] Which in a cage he fostred many a day,
 [132] And taughte it speken, as men teche a jay.
 [133] Whit was this crowe as is a snow-whit swan,
 [134] And countrefete the speche of every man
 [135] He koude, whan he sholde telle a tale.
 [136] Therwith in al this world no nyghtyngale
 [137] Ne koude, by an hondred thousand deel,
 [138] Syngen so wonder myrily and weel.
 [139] Now hadde this Phebus in his hous a wyf
 [140] Which that he lovede moore than his lyf,
 [141] And nyght and day dide evere his diligence
 [142] Hir for to plese and doon hire reverence,
 [143] Save oonly, if the sothe that I shal sayn,
 [144] Jalous he was, and wolde have kept hire fayn.
 [145] For hym were looth byjaped for to be,
 [146] And so is every wight in swich degree;
 [147] But al in ydel, for it availleth noght.
 [148] A good wyf, that is clene of werk and thoght,
 [149] Sholde nat been kept in noon awayt, certayn;
 [150] And trewely the labour is in vayn
 [151] To kepe a shrewe, for it wol nat bee.
 [152] This holde I for a verray nycetee,
 [153] To spille labour for to kepe wyves:
 [154] Thus writen olde clerkes in hir lyves.
 [155] But now to purpos, as I first bigan:
 [156] This worthy Phebus dooth al that he kan
 [157] To plesen hire, wenynge for swich plesaunce,
 [158] And for his manhede and his governaunce,
 [159] That no man sholde han put hym from hir grace.
 [160] But God it woot, ther may no man embrace
 [161] As to destreyne a thyng which that nature
 [162] Hath natureelly set in a creature.
 [163] Taak any bryd, and put it in a cage,
 [164] And do al thyn entente and thy corage
 [165] To fostre it tendrely with mete and drynke
 [166] Of alle deyntees that thou kanst bithynke,
 [167] And keep it al so clenly as thou may,
 [168] Although his cage of gold be never so gay,
 [169] Yet hath this brid, by twenty thousand foold,
 [170] Levere in a forest that is rude and coold
 [171] Goon ete wormes and swich wrecchednesse.
 [172] For evere this brid wol doon his bisynesse
 [173] To escape out of his cage, yif he may.
 [174] His libertee this brid desireth ay.
 [175] Lat take a cat, and fostre hym wel with milk
 [176] And tendre flessh, and make his couche of silk,
 [177] And lat hym seen a mous go by the wal,
 [178] Anon he weyveth milk and flessh and al,
 [179] And every deyntee that is in that hous,
 [180] Swich appetit hath he to ete a mous.
 [181] Lo, heere hath lust his dominacioun,
 [182] And appetit fleemeth discrecioun.
 [183] A she-wolf hath also a vileyns kynde.
 [184] The lewedeste wolf that she may fynde,
 [185] Or leest of reputacioun, wol she take,
 [186] In tyme whan hir lust to han a make.
 [187] Alle thise ensamples speke I by thise men
 [188] That been untrewe, and nothyng by wommen.
 [189] For men han evere a likerous appetit
 [190] On lower thyng to parfourne hire delit
 [191] Than on hire wyves, be they never so faire,
 [192] Ne never so trewe, ne so debonaire.
 [193] Flessh is so newefangel, with meschaunce,
 [194] That we ne konne in nothyng han plesaunce
 [195] That sowneth into vertu any while.
 [196] This Phebus, which that thoghte upon no gile,
 [197] Deceyved was, for al his jolitee.
 [198] For under hym another hadde shee,
 [199] A man of litel reputacioun,
 [200] Nat worth to Phebus in comparisoun.
 [201] The moore harm is, it happeth ofte so,
 [202] Of which ther cometh muchel harm and wo.
 [203] And so bifel, whan Phebus was absent,
 [204] His wyf anon hath for hir lemman sent.
 [205] Hir lemman? Certes, this is a knavyssh speche!
 [206] Foryeveth it me, and that I yow biseche.
 [207] The wise Plato seith, as ye may rede,
 [208] The word moot nede accorde with the dede.
 [209] If men shal telle proprely a thyng,
 [210] The word moot cosyn be to the werkyng.
 [211] I am a boystous man, right thus seye I:
 [212] Ther nys no difference, trewely,
 [213] Bitwixe a wyf that is of heigh degree,
 [214] If of hir body dishonest she bee,
 [215] And a povre wenche, oother than this --
 [216] If it so be they werke bothe amys --
 [217] But that the gentile, in estaat above,
 [218] She shal be cleped his lady, as in love;
 [219] And for that oother is a povre womman,
 [220] She shal be cleped his wenche or his lemman.
 [221] And, God it woot, myn owene deere brother,
 [222] Men leyn that oon as lowe as lith that oother.
 [223] Right so bitwixe a titlelees tiraunt
 [224] And an outlawe or a theef erraunt,
 [225] The same I seye: ther is no difference.
 [226] To Alisaundre was toold this sentence,
 [227] That, for the tirant is of gretter myght
 [228] By force of meynee for to sleen dounright,
 [229] And brennen hous and hoom, and make al playn,
 [230] Lo, therfore is he cleped a capitayn;
 [231] And for the outlawe hath but smal meynee,
 [232] And may nat doon so greet an harm as he,
 [233] Ne brynge a contree to so greet mescheef,
 [234] Men clepen hym an outlawe or a theef.
 [235] But for I am a man noght textueel,
 [236] I wol noght telle of textes never a deel;
 [237] I wol go to my tale, as I bigan.
 [238] Whan Phebus wyf had sent for hir lemman,
 [239] Anon they wroghten al hire lust volage.
 [240] The white crowe, that heeng ay in the cage,
 [241] Biheeld hire werk, and seyde never a word.
 [242] And whan that hoom was come Phebus, the lord,
 [243] This crowe sang "Cokkow! Cokkow! Cokkow!"
 [244] "What, bryd?" quod Phebus. "What song syngestow?
 [245] Ne were thow wont so myrily to synge
 [246] That to myn herte it was a rejoysynge
 [247] To heere thy voys? Allas, what song is this?"
 [248] "By God," quod he, "I synge nat amys.
 [249] Phebus," quod he, "for al thy worthynesse,
 [250] For al thy beautee and thy gentilesse,
 [251] For al thy song and al thy mynstralcye,
 [252] For al thy waityng, blered is thyn ye
 [253] With oon of litel reputacioun,
 [254] Noght worth to thee, as in comparisoun,
 [255] The montance of a gnat, so moote I thryve!
 [256] For on thy bed thy wyf I saugh hym swyve."
 [257] What wol ye moore? The crowe anon hym tolde,
 [258] By sadde tokenes and by wordes bolde,
 [259] How that his wyf had doon hire lecherye,
 [260] Hym to greet shame and to greet vileynye,
 [261] And tolde hym ofte he saugh it with his yen.
 [262] This Phebus gan aweyward for to wryen,
 [263] And thoughte his sorweful herte brast atwo.
 [264] His bowe he bente, and sette therinne a flo,
 [265] And in his ire his wyf thanne hath he slayn.
 [266] This is th' effect; ther is namoore to sayn;
 [267] For sorwe of which he brak his mynstralcie,
 [268] Bothe harpe, and lute, and gyterne, and sautrie;
 [269] And eek he brak his arwes and his bowe,
 [270] And after that thus spak he to the crowe:
 [271] "Traitour," quod he, "with tonge of scorpioun,
 [272] Thou hast me broght to my confusioun;
 [273] Allas, that I was wroght! Why nere I deed?
 [274] O deere wyf! O gemme of lustiheed!
 [275] That were to me so sad and eek so trewe,
 [276] Now listow deed, with face pale of hewe,
 [277] Ful giltelees, that dorste I swere, ywys!
 [278] O rakel hand, to doon so foule amys!
 [279] O trouble wit, O ire recchelees,
 [280] That unavysed smyteth gilteles!
 [281] O wantrust, ful of fals suspecion,
 [282] Where was thy wit and thy discrecion?
 [283] O every man, be war of rakelnesse!
 [284] Ne trowe no thyng withouten strong witnesse.
 [285] Smyt nat to soone, er that ye witen why,
 [286] And beeth avysed wel and sobrely
 [287] Er ye doon any execucion
 [288] Upon youre ire for suspecion.
 [289] Allas, a thousand folk hath rakel ire
 [290] Fully fordoon, and broght hem in the mire.
 [291] Allas! For sorwe I wol myselven slee!"
 [292] And to the crowe, "O false theef!" seyde he,
 [293] "I wol thee quite anon thy false tale.
 [294] Thou songe whilom lyk a nyghtyngale;
 [295] Now shaltow, false theef, thy song forgon,
 [296] And eek thy white fetheres everichon,
 [297] Ne nevere in al thy lif ne shaltou speke.
 [298] Thus shal men on a traytour been awreke;
 [299] Thou and thyn ofspryng evere shul be blake,
 [300] Ne nevere sweete noyse shul ye make,
 [301] But evere crie agayn tempest and rayn,
 [302] In tokenynge that thurgh thee my wyf is slayn."
 [303] And to the crowe he stirte, and that anon,
 [304] And pulled his white fetheres everychon,
 [305] And made hym blak, and refte hym al his song,
 [306] And eek his speche, and out at dore hym slong
 [307] Unto the devel, which I hym bitake;
 [308] And for this caas been alle crowes blake.
 [309] Lordynges, by this ensample I yow preye,
 [310] Beth war, and taketh kep what that ye seye:
 [311] Ne telleth nevere no man in youre lyf
 [312] How that another man hath dight his wyf;
 [313] He wol yow haten mortally, certeyn.
 [314] Daun Salomon, as wise clerkes seyn,
 [315] Techeth a man to kepen his tonge weel.
 [316] But, as I seyde, I am noght textueel.
 [317] But nathelees, thus taughte me my dame:
 [318] "My sone, thenk on the crowe, a Goddes name!
 [319] My sone, keep wel thy tonge, and keep thy freend.
 [320] A wikked tonge is worse than a feend;
 [321] My sone, from a feend men may hem blesse.
 [322] My sone, God of his endelees goodnesse
 [323] Walled a tonge with teeth and lippes eke,
 [324] For man sholde hym avyse what he speeke.
 [325] My sone, ful ofte, for to muche speche
 [326] Hath many a man been spilt, as clerkes teche,
 [327] But for litel speche avysely
 [328] Is no man shent, to speke generally.
 [329] My sone, thy tonge sholdestow restreyne
 [330] At alle tymes, but whan thou doost thy peyne
 [331] To speke of God, in honour and preyere.
 [332] The firste vertu, sone, if thou wolt leere,
 [333] Is to restreyne and kepe wel thy tonge;
 [334] Thus lerne children whan that they been yonge.
 [335] My sone, of muchel spekyng yvele avysed,
 [336] Ther lasse spekyng hadde ynough suffised,
 [337] Comth muchel harm; thus was me toold and taught.
 [338] In muchel speche synne wanteth naught.
 [339] Wostow wherof a rakel tonge serveth?
 [340] Right as a swerd forkutteth and forkerveth
 [341] An arm a-two, my deere sone, right so
 [342] A tonge kutteth freendshipe al a-two.
 [343] A jangler is to God abhomynable.
 [344] Reed Salomon, so wys and honurable;
 [345] Reed David in his psalmes; reed Senekke.
 [346] My sone, spek nat, but with thyn heed thou bekke.
 [347] Dissimule as thou were deef, if that thou heere
 [348] A janglere speke of perilous mateere.
 [349] The Flemyng seith, and lerne it if thee leste,
 [350] That litel janglyng causeth muchel reste.
 [351] My sone, if thou no wikked word hast seyd,
 [352] Thee thar nat drede for to be biwreyd;
 [353] But he that hath mysseyd, I dar wel sayn,
 [354] He may by no wey clepe his word agayn.
 [355] Thyng that is seyd is seyd, and forth it gooth,
 [356] Though hym repente, or be hym nevere so looth.
 [357] He is his thral to whom that he hath sayd
 [358] A tale of which he is now yvele apayd.
 [359] My sone, be war, and be noon auctour newe
 [360] Of tidynges, wheither they been false or trewe.
 [361] Whereso thou come, amonges hye or lowe,
 [362] Kepe wel thy tonge and thenk upon the crowe."

      
The Canterbury Tales and Other Works of Chaucer (Middle English), by Geoffery Chaucer, [14th cent.], at sacred-texts.com

 

The Canterbury Tales

 

The Parson's Prologue

 [1] By that the Maunciple hadde his tale al ended,
 [2] The sonne fro the south lyne was descended
 [3] So lowe that he nas nat, to my sighte,
 [4] Degrees nyne and twenty as in highte.
 [5] Foure of the clokke it was tho, as I gesse,
 [6] For ellevene foot, or litel moore or lesse,
 [7] My shadwe was at thilke tyme, as there
 [8] Of swiche feet as my lengthe parted were
 [9] In sixe feet equal of proporcioun.
 [10] Therwith the moones exaltacioun --
 [11] I meene Libra -- alwey gan ascende
 [12] As we were entryng at a thropes ende;
 [13] For which oure Hoost, as he was wont to gye,
 [14] As in this caas, oure joly compaignye,
 [15] Seyde in this wise: "Lordynges everichoon,
 [16] Now lakketh us no tales mo than oon.
 [17] Fulfilled is my sentence and my decree;
 [18] I trowe that we han herd of ech degree;
 [19] Almoost fulfild is al myn ordinaunce.
 [20] I pray to God, so yeve hym right good chaunce,
 [21] That telleth this tale to us lustily.
 [22] "Sire preest," quod he, "artow a vicary?
 [23] Or arte a person? Sey sooth, by thy fey!
 [24] Be what thou be, ne breke thou nat oure pley;
 [25] For every man, save thou, hath toold his tale.
 [26] Unbokele and shewe us what is in thy male;
 [27] For trewely, me thynketh by thy cheere
 [28] Thou sholdest knytte up wel a greet mateere.
 [29] Telle us a fable anon, for cokkes bones!"
 [30] This Persoun answerde, al atones,
 [31] "Thou getest fable noon ytoold for me,
 [32] For Paul, that writeth unto Thymothee,
 [33] Repreveth hem that weyven soothfastnesse
 [34] And tellen fables and swich wrecchednesse.
 [35] Why sholde I sowen draf out of my fest,
 [36] Whan I may sowen whete, if that me lest?
 [37] For which I seye, if that yow list to heere
 [38] Moralitee and vertuous mateere,
 [39] And thanne that ye wol yeve me audience,
 [40] I wol ful fayn, at Cristes reverence,
 [41] Do yow plesaunce leefful, as I kan.
 [42] But trusteth wel, I am a Southren man;
 [43] I kan nat geeste `rum, ram, ruf,' by lettre,
 [44] Ne, God woot, rym holde I but litel bettre;
 [45] And therfore, if yow list -- I wol nat glose --
 [46] I wol yow telle a myrie tale in prose
 [47] To knytte up al this feeste and make an ende.
 [48] And Jhesu, for his grace, wit me sende
 [49] To shewe yow the wey, in this viage,
 [50] Of thilke parfit glorious pilgrymage
 [51] That highte Jerusalem celestial.
 [52] And if ye vouche sauf, anon I shal
 [53] Bigynne upon my tale, for which I preye
 [54] Telle youre avys; I kan no bettre seye.
 [55] "But nathelees, this meditacioun
 [56] I putte it ay under correccioun
 [57] Of clerkes, for I am nat textueel;
 [58] I take but the sentence, trusteth weel.
 [59] Therfore I make protestacioun
 [60] That I wol stonde to correccioun."
 [61] Upon this word we han assented soone,
 [62] For, as it seemed, it was for to doone --
 [63] To enden in som vertuous sentence,
 [64] And for to yeve hym space and audience,
 [65] And bade oure Hoost he sholde to hym seye
 [66] That alle we to telle his tale hym preye.
 [67] Oure Hoost hadde the wordes for us alle;
 [68] "Sire preest," quod he, "now faire yow bifalle!
 [69] Telleth," quod he, "youre meditacioun.
 [70] But hasteth yow; the sonne wole adoun;
 [71] Beth fructuous, and that in litel space,
 [72] And to do wel God sende yow his grace!
 [73] Sey what yow list, and we wol gladly heere."
 [74] And with that word he seyde in this manere.

      
The Canterbury Tales and Other Works of Chaucer (Middle English), by Geoffery Chaucer, [14th cent.], at sacred-texts.com

 

The Canterbury Tales

 

The Parson's Tale

 [75] Oure sweete Lord God of hevene, that no man wole perisse but wole that
 [75A] we comen alle to the knoweleche of hym and to the blisful lif that is perdurable,
 [76] amonesteth us by the prophete Jeremie, that seith in thys wyse:
 [77] "Stondeth upon the weyes, and seeth and axeth of olde pathes (that is to seyn, of olde sentences) which is the goode wey,
 [78] and walketh in that wey, and ye shal fynde refresshynge for youre soules, etc."
 [79] Manye been the weyes espirituels that leden folk to oure Lord Jhesu Crist and to the regne of glorie.
 [80] Of whiche weyes ther is a ful noble wey and a ful covenable, which may nat fayle to man ne to womman
 [80A] that thurgh synne hath mysgoon fro the righte wey of Jerusalem celestial;
 [81] and this wey is cleped Penitence, of which man sholde gladly herknen and enquere with al his herte
 [82] to wyten what is Penitence, and whennes it is cleped Penitence, and in how manye maneres been the acciouns or werkynges of Penitence,
 [83] and how manye speces ther been of Penitence, and whiche thynges apertenen and bihoven to Penitence, and whiche thynges destourben Penitence.
 [84] Seint Ambrose seith that Penitence is the pleynynge of man for the gilt that he hath doon,
 [84A] and namoore to do any thyng for which hym oghte to pleyne.
 [85] And som doctour seith, "Penitence is the waymentynge of man that sorweth for his synne and pyneth hymself for he hath mysdoon."
 [86] Penitence, with certeyne circumstances, is verray repentance of a man that halt hymself in sorwe and oother peyne for his giltes.
 [87] And for he shal be verray penitent, he shal first biwaylen the synnes that he hath doon,
 [87A] and stidefastly purposen in his herte to have shrift of mouthe, and to doon satisfaccioun,
 [88] and nevere to doon thyng for which hym oghte moore to biwayle
 [88A] or to compleyne, and to continue in goode werkes, or elles his repentance may nat availle.
 [89] For, as seith Seint Ysidre,
 [89A] "He is a japere and a gabbere and no verray repentant that eftsoone dooth thyng for which hym oghte repente."
 [90] Wepynge, and nat for to stynte to do synne, may nat avayle.
 [91] But nathelees, men shal hope that every tyme that man falleth, be it never so ofte,
 [91A] that he may arise thurgh Penitence, if he have grace; but certeinly it is greet doute.
 [92] For, as seith Seint Gregorie, "Unnethe ariseth he out of his synne, that is charged with the charge of yvel usage."
 [93] And therfore repentant folk, that stynte for to synne and forlete synne er that synne forlete hem,
 [93A] hooly chirche holdeth hem siker of hire savacioun.
 [94] And he that synneth and verraily repenteth hym in his laste, hooly chirche yet hopeth his savacioun,
 [94A] by the grete mercy of oure Lord Jhesu Crist, for his repentaunce; but taak the siker wey.
 [95] And now, sith I have declared yow what thyng is Penitence, now shul ye understonde that ther been three acciouns of Penitence.
 [96] The firste is that if a man be baptized after that he hath synned.
 [97] Seint Augustyn seith, "But he be penytent for his olde synful lyf, he may nat bigynne the newe clene lif."
 [98] For, certes, if he be baptized withouten penitence of his olde gilt, he receyveth the mark of baptesme
 [98A] but nat the grace ne the remission of his synnes, til he have repentance verray.
 [99] Another defaute is this: that men doon deedly synne after that they han receyved baptesme.
 [100] The thridde defaute is that men fallen in venial synnes after hir baptesme fro day to day.
 [101] Therof seith Seint Augustyn that penitence of goode and humble folk is the penitence of every day.
 [102] The speces of Penitence been three. That oon of hem is solempne, another is commune, and the thridde is privee.
 [103] Thilke penance that is solempne is in two maneres;
 [103A] as to be put out of hooly chirche in Lente for slaughtre of children, and swich maner thyng.
 [104] Another is, whan a man hath synned openly, of which synne the fame is openly spoken in the contree,
 [104A] and thanne hooly chirche by juggement destreyneth hym for to do open penaunce.
 [105] Commune penaunce is that preestes enjoynen men communly in certeyn caas, as for to goon peraventure naked in pilgrimages, or barefoot.
 [106] Pryvee penaunce is thilke that men doon alday for privee synnes, of whiche we shryve us prively and receyve privee penaunce.
 [107] Now shaltow understande what is bihovely and necessarie to verray parfit Penitence. And this stant on three thynges:
 [108] Contricioun of Herte, Confessioun of Mouth, and Satisfaccioun.
 [109] For which seith Seint John Crisostom, "Penitence destreyneth a man to accepte benygnely every peyne that hym is enjoyned,
 [109A] with contricioun of herte, and shrift of mouth, with satisfaccioun, and in werkynge of alle manere humylitee."
 [110] And this is fruytful penitence agayn three thynges in which we wratthe oure Lord Jhesu Crist;
 [111] this is to seyn, by delit in thynkynge, by reccheleesnesse in spekynge, and by wikked synful werkynge.
 [112] And agayns thise wikkede giltes is Penitence, that may be likned unto a tree.
 [113] The roote of this tree is Contricioun, that hideth hym in the herte of hym that is verray repentaunt,
 [113A] right as the roote of a tree hydeth hym in the erthe.
 [114] Of the roote of Contricioun spryngeth a stalke that bereth braunches and leves of Confessioun, and fruyt of Satisfaccioun.
 [115] For which Crist seith in his gospel, "Dooth digne fruyt of Penitence"; for by this fruyt may men knowe this tree,
 [115A] and nat by the roote that is hyd in the herte of man, ne by the braunches, ne by the leves of Confessioun.
 [116] And therfore oure Lord Jhesu Crist seith thus: "By the fruyt of hem shul ye knowen hem."
 [117] Of this roote eek spryngeth a seed of grace, the which seed is mooder of sikernesse, and this seed is egre and hoot.
 [118] The grace of this seed spryngeth of God thurgh remembrance of the day of doom and on the peynes of helle.
 [119] Of this matere seith Salomon that in the drede of God man forleteth his synne.
 [120] The heete of this seed is the love of God and the desiryng of the joye perdurable.
 [121] This heete draweth the herte of a man to God and dooth hym haten his synne.
 [122] For soothly ther is nothyng that savoureth so wel to a child as the milk of his norice,
 [122A] ne nothyng is to hym moore abhomynable than thilke milk whan it is medled with oother mete.
 [123] Right so the synful man that loveth his synne, hym semeth that it is to him moost sweete of any thyng;
 [124] but fro that tyme that he loveth sadly oure Lord Jhesu Crist,
 [124A] and desireth the lif perdurable, ther nys to him no thyng moore abhomynable.
 [125] For soothly the lawe of God is the love of God; for which David the prophete seith.
 [125A] "I have loved thy lawe and hated wikkednesse and hate"; he that loveth God kepeth his lawe and his word.
 [126] This tree saugh the prophete Daniel in spirit, upon the avysioun of the kyng Nabugodonosor, whan he conseiled hym to do penitence.
 [127] Penaunce is the tree of lyf to hem that it receyven,
 [127A] and he that holdeth hym in verray penitence is blessed, after the sentence of Salomon.
 [128] In this Penitence or Contricioun man shal understonde foure thynges; that is to seyn, what is Contricioun,
 [128A] and whiche been the causes that moeven a man to Contricioun, and how he sholde be contrit, and what Contricioun availleth to the soule.
 [129] Thanne is it thus: that Contricioun is the verray sorwe that a man receyveth in his herte for his synnes,
 [129A] with sad purpos to shryve hym, and to do penaunce, and neveremoore to do synne.
 [130] And this sorwe shal been in this manere, as seith Seint Bernard:
 [130A] "It shal been hevy and grevous, and ful sharp and poynaunt in herte."
 [131] First, for man hath agilt his Lord and his Creatour; and moore sharp and poynaunt for he hath agilt hys Fader celestial;
 [132] and yet moore sharp and poynaunt for he hath wrathed and agilt hym that boghte hym, that with his precious blood hath delivered us
 [132A] fro the bondes of synne, and fro the crueltee of the devel, and fro the peynes of helle.
 [133] The causes that oghte moeve a man to Contricioun been sixe. First a man shal remembre hym of his synnes;
 [134] but looke he that thilke remembraunce ne be to hym no delit by no wey, but greet shame and sorwe for his gilt.
 [134A] For Job seith, "Synful men doon werkes worthy of confusioun."
 [135] And therfore seith Ezechie, "I wol remembre me alle the yeres of my lyf in bitternesse of myn herte."
 [136] And God seith in the Apocalipse, "Remembreth yow fro whennes that ye been falle";
 [136A] for biforn that tyme that ye synned, ye were the children of God and lymes of the regne of God;
 [137] but for youre synne ye been woxen thral, and foul, and membres of the feend, hate of aungels, sclaundre of hooly chirche,
 [137A] and foode of the false serpent, perpetueel matere of the fir of helle;
 [138] and yet moore foul and abhomynable, for ye trespassen so ofte tyme as dooth the hound that retourneth to eten his spewyng.
 [139] And yet be ye fouler for youre longe continuyng in synne and youre synful usage,
 [139A] for which ye be roten in youre synne, as a beest in his dong.
 [140] Swiche manere of thoghtes maken a man to have shame of his synne, and no delit, as God seith by the prophete Ezechiel,
 [141] "Ye shal remembre yow of youre weyes, and they shuln displese yow." Soothly synnes been the weyes that leden folk to helle.
 [142] The seconde cause that oghte make a man to have desdeyn of synne is this:
 [142A] that, as seith Seint Peter, "whoso that dooth synne is thral of synne"; and synne put a man in greet thraldom.
 [143] And therfore seith the prophete Ezechiel: "I wente sorweful in desdayn of myself."
 [143A] Certes, wel oghte a man have desdayn of synne and withdrawe hym from that thraldom and vileynye.
 [144] And lo, what seith Seneca in this matere? He seith thus: "Though I wiste that neither God ne man ne sholde nevere knowe it,
 [144A] yet wolde I have desdayn for to do synne."
 [145] And the same Seneca also seith, "I am born to gretter thynges than to be thral to my body,
 [145A] or than for to maken of my body a thral."
 [146] Ne a fouler thral may no man ne womman maken of his body than for to yeven his body to synne.
 [147] Al were it the fouleste cherl or the fouleste womman that lyveth, and leest of value,
 [147A] yet is he thanne moore foul and moore in servitute.
 [148] Evere fro the hyer degree that man falleth, the moore is he thral, and moore to God and to the world vile and abhomynable.
 [149] O goode God, wel oghte man have desdayn of synne, sith that thurgh synne ther he was free now is he maked bonde.
 [150] And therfore seyth Seint Augustyn: "If thou hast desdayn of thy servant,
 [150A] if he agilte or synne, have thou thanne desdayn that thou thyself sholdest do synne."
 [151] Tak reward of thy value, that thou ne be to foul to thyself.
 [152] Allas, wel oghten they thanne have desdayn to been servauntz and thralles to synne, and soore been ashamed of hemself
 [153] that God of his endelees goodnesse hath set hem in heigh estaat, or yeven hem wit, strengthe of body, heele, beautee, prosperitee,
 [154] and boghte hem fro the deeth with his herte-blood,
 [154A] that they so unkyndely, agayns his gentilesse, quiten hym so vileynsly to slaughtre of hir owene soules.
 [155] O goode God, ye wommen that been of so greet beautee, remembreth yow of the proverbe of Salomon. He seith,
 [156] "Likneth a fair womman that is a fool of hire body
 [156A] lyk to a ryng of gold that were in the groyn of a soughe."
 [157] For right as a soughe wroteth in everich ordure, so wroteth she hire beautee in the stynkynge ordure of synne.
 [158] The thridde cause that oghte moeve a man to Contricioun is drede of the day of doom and of the horrible peynes of helle.
 [159] For as Seint Jerome seith, "At every tyme that me remembreth of the day of doom I quake;
 [160] for whan I ete or drynke, or what so that I do, evere semeth me that the trompe sowneth in myn ere:
 [161] `Riseth up, ye that been dede, and cometh to the juggement.'"
 [162] O goode God, muchel oghte a man to drede swich a juggement, "ther as we shullen been alle,"
 [162A] as Seint Poul seith, "biforn the seete of oure Lord Jhesu Crist";
 [163] whereas he shal make a general congregacioun, whereas no man may been absent.
 [164] For certes there availleth noon essoyne ne excusacioun.
 [165] And nat oonly that oure defautes shullen be jugged, but eek that alle oure werkes shullen openly be knowe.
 [166] And, as seith Seint Bernard, "Ther ne shal no pledynge availle, ne no sleighte; we shullen yeven rekenynge of everich ydel word."
 [167] Ther shul we han a juge that may nat been deceyved ne corrupt. And why?
 [167A] For, certes, alle oure thoghtes been discovered as to hym, ne for preyere ne for meede he shal nat been corrupt.
 [168] And therfore seith Salomon, "The wratthe of God ne wol nat spare no wight, for preyere ne for yifte";
 [168A] and therfore, at the day of doom ther nys noon hope to escape.
 [169] Wherfore, as seith Seint Anselm, "Ful greet angwyssh shul the synful folk have at that tyme;
 [170] ther shal the stierne and wrothe juge sitte above, and under hym the horrible pit of helle open to destroyen hym
 [170A] that moot biknowen his synnes, whiche synnes openly been shewed biforn God and biforn every creature;
 [171] and in the left syde mo develes than herte may bithynke, for to harye and drawe the synful soules to the peyne of helle;
 [172] and withinne the hertes of folk shal be the bitynge conscience, and withouteforth shal be the world al brennynge.
 [173] Whider shal thanne the wrecched synful man flee to hiden hym? Certes, he may nat hyden hym; he moste come forth and shewen hym."
 [174] For certes, as seith Seint Jerome, "the erthe shal casten hym out of hym, and the see also,
 [174A] and the eyr also, that shal be ful of thonder-clappes and lightnynges."
 [175] Now soothly, whoso wel remembreth hym of thise thynges, I gesse that his synne shal nat turne hym into delit,
 [175A] but to greet sorwe for drede of the peyne of helle.
 [176] And therfore seith Job to God, "Suffre, Lord, that I may a while biwaille and wepe,
 [176A] er I go withoute returnyng to the derke lond, covered with the derknesse of deeth,
 [177] to the lond of mysese and of derknesse, whereas is the shadwe of deeth,
 [177A] whereas ther is noon ordre or ordinaunce but grisly drede that evere shal laste."
 [178] Loo, heere may ye seen that Job preyde respit a while to biwepe and waille his trespas,
 [178A] for soothly oo day of respit is bettre than al the tresor of this world.
 [179] And forasmuche as a man may acquiten hymself biforn God by penitence in this world, and nat by tresor,
 [179A] therfore sholde he preye to God to yeve hym respit a while to biwepe and biwaillen his trespas.
 [180] For certes, al the sorwe that a man myghte make fro the bigynnyng of the world
 [180A] nys but a litel thyng at regard of the sorwe of helle.
 [181] The cause why that Job clepeth helle the "lond of derkness.":
 [182] understondeth that he clepeth it "lond" or erthe, for it is stable and nevere shal faille; "derk,"
 [182A] for he that is in helle hath defaute of light material.
 [183] For certes, the derke light that shal come out of the fyr that evere shal brenne
 [183A] shal turne hym al to peyne that is in helle for it sheweth him to the horrible develes that hym tormenten.
 [184] "Covered with the derknesse of deeth" -- that is to seyn, that
 [184A] he that is in helle shal have defaute of the sighte of God, for certes the sighte of God is the lyf perdurable.
 [185] "The derknesse of deeth" been the synnes that the wrecched man hath doon, whiche that destourben hym to see the face of God,
 [185A] right as dooth a derk clowde bitwixe us and the sonne.
 [186] "Lond of misese," by cause that ther been three maneres of defautes,
 [186A] agayn three thynges that folk of this world han in this present lyf; that is to seyn, honours, delices, and richesses.
 [187] Agayns honour, have they in helle shame and confusioun.
 [188] For wel ye woot that men clepen honour the reverence that man doth to man, but in helle is noon honour ne reverence.
 [188A] For certes, namoore reverence shal be doon there to a kyng than to a knave.
 [189] For which God seith by the prophete Jeremye, "Thilke folk that me despisen shul been in despit."
 [190] Honour is eek cleped greet lordshipe; ther shal no wight serven other, but of harm
 [190A] and torment. Honour is eek cleped greet dignytee and heighnesse, but in helle shul they been al fortroden of develes.
 [191] And God seith, "The horrible develes shulle goon and comen upon the hevedes of the dampned folk." And this is for as muche as
 [191A] the hyer that they were in this present lyf, the moore shulle they been abated and defouled in helle.
 [192] Agayns the richesse of this world shul they han mysese of poverte, and this poverte shal been in foure thynges:
 [193] In defaute of tresor, of which that David seith, "The riche folk, that embraceden and oneden al hire herte to tresor of this world,
 [193A] shul slepe in the slepynge of deeth; and nothyng ne shal they fynden in hir handes of al hir tresor."
 [194] And mooreover the myseyse of helle shal been in defaute of mete and drinke.
 [195] For God seith thus by Moyses: "They shul been wasted with hunger, and the briddes of helle shul devouren hem with bitter deeth,
 [195A] and the galle of the dragon shal been hire drynke, and the venym of the dragon hire morsels."
 [196] And forther over, hire myseyse shal been in defaute of clothyng, for they shulle be naked in body as of clothyng,
 [196A] save the fyr in which they brenne, and othere filthes;
 [197] and naked shul they been of soule, as of alle manere vertues, which that is the clothyng of the soule.
 [197A] Where been thanne the gaye robes, and the softe shetes, and the smale shertes?
 [198] Loo, what seith God of hem by the prophete Ysaye: that
 [198A] "under hem shul been strawed motthes, and hire covertures shulle been of wormes of helle."
 [199] And forther over, hir myseyse shal been in defaute of freendes.
 [199A] For he nys nat povre that hath goode freendes; but there is no frend,
 [200] for neither God ne no creature shal been freend to hem, and everich of hem shal haten oother with deedly hate.
 [201] "The sones and the doghtren shullen rebellen agayns fader and mooder, and kynrede agayns kynrede, and chiden
 [201A] and despisen everich of hem oother bothe day and nyght," as God seith by the prophete Michias.
 [202] And the lovynge children, that whilom loveden so flesshly everich oother, wolden everich of hem eten oother if they myghte.
 [203] For how sholden they love hem togidre in the peyne of helle,
 [203A] whan they hated everich of hem oother in the prosperitee of this lyf?
 [204] For truste wel, hir flesshly love was deedly hate, as seith the prophete David: "Whoso that loveth wikkednesse, he hateth his soule."
 [205] And whoso hateth his owene soule, certes, he may love noon oother wight in no manere.
 [206] And therfore, in helle is no solas ne no freendshipe, but evere the moore flesshly kynredes that been in helle,
 [206A] the moore cursynges, the more chidynges, and the moore deedly hate ther is among hem.
 [207] And forther over, they shul have defaute of alle manere delices.
 [207A] For certes, delices been after the appetites of the fyve wittes, as sighte, herynge, smellynge, savorynge, and touchynge.
 [208] But in helle hir sighte shal be ful of derknesse and of smoke,
 [208A] and therfore ful of teeres; and hir herynge ful of waymentynge and of gryntynge of teeth, as seith Jhesu Crist.
 [209] Hir nose-thirles shullen be ful of stynkynge stynk; and, as seith Ysaye the prophete, "hir savoryng shal be ful of bitter galle";
 [210] and touchynge of al hir body ycovered with "fir
 [210A] that nevere shal quenche and with wormes that nevere shul dyen,"
 [210B] as God seith by the mouth of Ysaye.
 [211] And for as muche as they shul nat wene that they may dyen for peyne, and by hir deeth flee fro peyne,
 [211A] that may they understonden by the word of Job, that seith, "ther as is the shadwe of deeth."
 [212] Certes, a shadwe hath the liknesse of the thyng of which it is shadwe,
 [212A] but shadwe is nat the same thyng of which it is shadwe.
 [213] Right so fareth the peyne of helle; it is lyk deeth for the horrible angwissh, and why?
 [213A] For it peyneth hem evere, as though they sholde dye anon; but certes, they shal nat dye.
 [214] For, as seith Seint Gregorie, "To wrecche caytyves shal be deeth withoute deeth, and ende withouten ende, and defaute withoute failynge.
 [215] For hir deeth shal alwey lyven, and hir ende shal everemo bigynne, and hir defaute shal nat faille."
 [216] And therfore seith Seint John the Evaungelist, "They shullen folwe deeth,
 [216A] and they shul nat fynde hym; and they shul desiren to dye, and deeth shal flee fro hem."
 [217] And eek Job seith that in helle is noon ordre of rule.
 [218] And al be it so that God hath creat alle thynges in right ordre, and no thyng withouten ordre,
 [218A] but alle thynges been ordeyned and nombred; yet, nathelees, they that been dampned been nothyng in ordre, ne holden noon ordre,
 [219] for the erthe ne shal bere hem no fruyt.
 [220] For, as the prophete David seith, "God shal destroie the fruyt of the erthe as fro hem;
 [220A] ne water ne shal yeve hem no moisture, ne the eyr no refresshyng, ne fyr no light."
 [221] For, as seith Seint Basilie, "The brennynge of the fyr of this world shal God yeven in helle to hem that been dampned,
 [222] but the light and the cleernesse shal be yeven in hevene to his children,"
 [222A] right as the goode man yeveth flessh to his children and bones to his houndes.
 [223] And for they shullen have noon hope to escape, seith Seint Job atte laste that "ther shal horrour and grisly drede dwellen withouten ende."
 [224] Horrour is alwey drede of harm that is to come, and this drede shal evere dwelle in the hertes of hem that been dampned.
 [224A] And therfore han they lorn al hire hope, for sevene causes.
 [225] First, for God, that is hir juge, shal be withouten mercy to hem; and they may nat plese hym ne noon of his halwes;
 [225A] ne they ne may yeve no thyng for hir raunsoun;
 [226] ne they have no voys to speke to hym; ne they may nat fle fro peyne;
 [226A] ne they have no goodnesse in hem, that they mowe shewe to delivere hem fro peyne.
 [227] And therfore seith Salomon: "The wikked man dyeth, and whan he is deed, he shal have noon hope to escape fro peyne."
 [228] Whoso thanne wolde wel understande thise peynes and bithynke hym weel that he hath deserved thilke peynes for his synnes,
 [228A] certes, he sholde have moore talent to siken and to wepe than for to syngen and to pleye.
 [229] For, as that seith Salomon, "Whoso that hadde the science to knowe the peynes
 [229A] that been establissed and ordeyned for synne, he wolde make sorwe."
 [230] "Thilke science," as seith Seint Augustyn, "maketh a man to waymenten in his herte."
 [231] The fourthe point that oghte maken a man to have contricion is the sorweful remembraunce of the good
 [231A] that he hath left to doon heere in erthe, and eek the good that he hath lorn.
 [232] Soothly, the goode werkes that he hath lost, outher they been the goode werkes that he wroghte er he fel into deedly synne
 [232A] or elles the goode werkes that he wroghte while he lay in synne.
 [233] Soothly, the goode werkes that he dide biforn that he fil in synne been al mortefied and astoned and dulled by the ofte synnyng.
 [234] The othere goode werkes, that he wroghte whil he lay in deedly synne,
 [234A] thei been outrely dede, as to the lyf perdurable in hevene.
 [235] Thanne thilke goode werkes that been mortefied by ofte synnyng,
 [235A] whiche goode werkes he dide whil he was in charitee, ne mowe nevere quyken agayn withouten verray penitence.
 [236] And therof seith God by the mouth of Ezechiel, that
 [236A] "if the rightful man returne agayn from his rightwisnesse and werke wikkednesse, shal he lyve?"
 [237] Nay, for alle the goode werkes that he hath wroght ne shul nevere been in remembraunce, for he shal dyen in his synne.
 [238] And upon thilke chapitre seith Seint Gregorie thus: that "we shulle understonde this principally;
 [239] that whan we doon deedly synne,
 [239A] it is for noght thanne to rehercen or drawen into memorie the goode werkes that we han wroght biforn."
 [240] For certes, in the werkynge of the deedly synne, ther is no trust to no good werk that we han doon biforn;
 [240A] that is to seyn, as for to have therby the lyf perdurable in hevene.
 [241] But nathelees, the goode werkes quyken agayn, and comen agayn, and helpen,
 [241A] and availlen to have the lyf perdurable in hevene, whan we han contricioun.
 [242] But soothly, the goode werkes that men doon whil they been in deedly synne,
 [242A] for as muche as they were doon in deedly synne, they may nevere quyke agayn.
 [243] For certes, thyng that nevere hadde lyf may nevere quykene; and nathelees, al be it that they ne availle noght to han the lyf perdurable,
 [243A] yet availlen they to abregge of the peyne of helle, or elles to geten temporal richesse,
 [244] or elles that God wole the rather enlumyne and lightne the herte of the synful man to have repentaunce;
 [245] and eek they availlen for to usen a man to doon goode werkes, that the feend have the lasse power of his soule.
 [246] And thus the curteis Lord Jhesu Crist ne wole that no good werk be lost, for in somwhat it shal availle.
 [247] But, for as muche as the goode werkes that men doon whil they been in good lyf been al mortefied by synne folwynge,
 [247A] and eek sith that alle the goode werkes that men doon whil they been in deedly synne been outrely dede
 [247B] as for to have the lyf perdurable,
 [248] wel may that man that no good werk ne dooth synge thilke newe Frenshe song, "Jay tout perdu mon temps et mon labour."
 [249] For certes, synne bireveth a man bothe goodnesse of nature and eek the goodnesse of grace.
 [250] For soothly, the grace of the Hooly Goost fareth lyk fyr, that may nat been ydel;
 [250A] for fyr fayleth anoon as it forleteth his wirkynge, and right so grace fayleth anoon as it forleteth his werkynge.
 [251] Then leseth the synful man the goodnesse of glorie, that oonly is bihight to goode men that labouren and werken.
 [252] Wel may he be sory thanne, that oweth al his lif to God as longe as he hath lyved, and eek as longe
 [252A] as he shal lyve, that no goodnesse ne hath to paye with his dette to God to whom he oweth al his lyf.
 [253] For trust wel, "He shal yeven acountes," as seith Seint Bernard,
 [253A] "of alle the goodes that han be yeven hym in this present lyf, and how he hath hem despended,
 [254] [in] so muche that ther shal nat perisse an heer of his heed, ne a moment of an houre
 [254A] ne shal nat perisse of his tyme, that he ne shal yeve of it a rekenyng."
 [255] The fifthe thyng that oghte moeve a man to contricioun
 [255A] is remembrance of the passioun that oure Lord Jhesu Crist suffred for oure synnes.
 [256] For, as seith Seint Bernard, "Whil that I lyve I shal have remembrance of the travailles that oure Lord Crist suffred in prechyng:
 [257] his werynesse in travaillyng, his temptaciouns whan he fasted, his longe wakynges
 [257A] whan he preyde, hise teeres whan that he weep for pitee of good peple,
 [258] the wo and the shame and the filthe that men seyden to hym, of the foule spittyng that men spitte in his face,
 [258A] of the buffettes that men yaven hym, of the foule mowes, and of the repreves that men to hym seyden,
 [259] of the nayles with whiche he was nayled to the croys,
 [259A] and of al the remenant of his passioun that he suffred for my synnes, and no thyng for his gilt."
 [260] And ye shul understonde that in mannes synne is every manere of ordre or ordinaunce turned up-so-doun.
 [261] For it is sooth that God, and resoun, and sensualitee, and the body of man been so ordeyned
 [261A] that everich of thise foure thynges sholde have lordshipe over that oother,
 [262] as thus: God sholde have lordshipe over resoun, and resoun over sensualitee, and sensualitee over the body of man.
 [263] But soothly, whan man synneth, al this ordre or ordinaunce is turned up-so-doun.
 [264] And therfore thanne, for as muche as the resoun of man ne wol nat be subget ne obeisant to God, that is
 [264A] his lord by right, therfore leseth it the lordshipe that it sholde have over sensualitee, and eek over the body of man.
 [265] And why? For sensualitee rebelleth thanne agayns resoun, and by that way leseth resoun the lordshipe over sensualitee and over the body.
 [266] For right as resoun is rebel to God, right so is bothe sensualitee rebel to resoun and the body also.
 [267] And certes this disordinaunce and this rebellioun oure Lord Jhesu Crist aboghte upon his precious body ful deere, and herkneth in which wise.
 [268] For as muche thanne as resoun is rebel to God, therfore is man worthy to have sorwe and to be deed.
 [269] This suffred oure Lord Jhesu Crist for man, after that he hadde be bitraysed of his disciple, and distreyned and bounde
 [269A] so that his blood brast out at every nayl of his handes, as seith Seint Augustyn.
 [270] And forther over, for as muchel as resoun of man ne wol nat daunte sensualitee whan it may,
 [270A] therfore is man worthy to have shame; and this suffred oure Lord Jhesu Crist for man, whan they spetten in his visage.
 [271] And forther over, for as muchel thanne as the caytyf body of man is rebel bothe to resoun and to sensualitee,
 [271A] therfore is it worthy the deeth.
 [272] And this suffred oure Lord Jhesu Crist for man upon the croys,
 [272A] where as ther was no part of his body free withouten greet peyne and bitter passioun.
 [273] And al this suffred Jhesu Crist, that nevere forfeted. And therfore resonably may be seyd of Jhesu in this manere:
 [273A] "To muchel am I peyned for the thynges that I nevere deserved, and to muche defouled for shendshipe that man is worthy to have."
 [274] And therfore may the synful man wel seye, as seith Seint Bernard,
 [274A] "Acursed be the bitternesse of my synne, for which ther moste be suffred so muchel bitternesse."
 [275] For certes, after the diverse [disordinaunces] of oure wikkednesses was the passioun of Jhesu Crist ordeyned in diverse thynges.
 [276] As thus: Certes, synful mannes soule is bitraysed of the devel by coveitise of temporeel prosperitee, and scorned by deceite
 [276A] whan he cheseth flesshly delices; and yet is it tormented by inpacience of adversitee and bispet by servage and subjeccioun of synne;
 [276B] and atte laste it is slayn fynally.
 [277] For this disordinaunce of synful man was Jhesu Crist first bitraysed,
 [277A] and after that was he bounde, that cam for to unbynden us of synne and peyne.
 [278] Thanne was he byscorned, that oonly sholde han been honoured in alle thynges and of alle thynges.
 [279] Thanne was his visage, that oghte be desired to be seyn of al mankynde, in which visage aungels desiren to looke, vileynsly bispet.
 [280] Thanne was he scourged, that no thyng hadde agilt; and finally, thanne was he crucified and slayn.
 [281] Thanne was acompliced the word of Ysaye, "He was wounded for oure mysdedes and defouled for oure felonies."
 [282] Now sith that Jhesu Crist took upon hymself the peyne of alle oure wikkednesses, muchel oghte synful man wepen and biwayle,
 [282A] that for his synnes Goddes sone of hevene sholde al this peyne endure.
 [283] The sixte thyng that oghte moeve a man to contricioun is the hope of three thynges; that is to seyn, foryifnesse of synne,
 [283A] and the yifte of grace wel for to do, and the glorie of hevene, with which God shal gerdone man for his goode dedes.
 [284] And for as muche as Jhesu Crist yeveth us thise yiftes of his largesse and of his sovereyn bountee,
 [284A] therfore is he cleped Jhesus Nazarenus rex Judeorum.
 [285] Jhesus is to seyn "saveour" or "salvacioun," on whom men shul hope to have foryifnesse of synnes, which that is proprely salvacioun of synnes.
 [286] And therfore seyde the aungel to Joseph, "Thou shalt clepen his name Jhesus, that shal saven his peple of hir synnes."
 [287] And heerof seith Seint Peter: "Ther is noon oother name under hevene
 [287A] that is yeve to any man, by which a man may be saved, but oonly Jhesus."
 [288] Nazarenus is as muche for to seye as "florisshynge," in which a man shal hope that
 [288A] he that yeveth hym remissioun of synnes shal yeve hym eek grace wel for to do.
 [288B] For in the flour is hope of fruyt in tyme comynge, and in foryifnesse of synnes hope of grace wel for to do.
 [289] "I was atte dore of thyn herte," seith Jhesus, "and cleped for to entre. He that openeth to me shal have foryifnesse of synne.
 [290] I wol entre into hym by my grace and soupe with hym," by the goode werkes that he shal doon,
 [290A] whiche werkes been the foode of God; "and he shal soupe with me" by the grete joye that I shal yeven hym.
 [291] Thus shal man hope, for his werkes of penaunce that God shal yeven hym his regne, as he bihooteth hym in the gospel.
 [292] Now shal a man understonde in which manere shal been his contricioun. I seye that it shal been universal and total.
 [292A] This is to seyn, a man shal be verray repentaunt for alle his synnes that he hath doon
 [292B] in delit of his thoght, for delit is ful perilous.
 [293] For ther been two manere of consentynges: that oon of hem is cleped consentynge of affeccioun,
 [293A] whan a man is moeved to do synne, and deliteth hym longe for to thynke on that synne;
 [294] and his reson aperceyveth it wel that it is synne agayns the lawe of God,
 [294A] and yet his resoun refreyneth nat his foul delit or talent, though he se wel apertly that it is agayns the reverence of God.
 [294B] Although his resoun ne consente noght to doon that synne in dede,
 [295] yet seyn somme doctours that swich delit that dwelleth longe, it is ful perilous, al be it nevere so lite.
 [296] And also a man sholde sorwe namely for al that evere he hath desired agayn the lawe of God
 [296A] with parfit consentynge of his resoun, for therof is no doute, that it is deedly synne in consentynge.
 [297] For certes, ther is no deedly synne that it nas first in mannes thought
 [297A] and after that in his delit, and so forth into consentynge and into dede.
 [298] Wherfore I seye that many men ne repenten hem nevere of swiche thoghtes and delites,
 [298A] ne nevere shryven hem of it, but oonly of the dede of grete synnes outward.
 [299] Wherfore I seye that swiche wikked delites and wikked thoghtes been subtile bigileres of hem that shullen be dampned.
 [300] Mooreover, man oghte to sorwe for his wikkede wordes as wel as for his wikkede dedes.
 [300A] For certes, the repentaunce of a synguler synne, and nat repente of alle his othere synnes,
 [300B] or elles repenten hym of alle his othere synnes and nat of a synguler synne, may nat availle.
 [301] For certes, God almyghty is al good, and therfore he foryeveth al or elles right noght.
 [302] And heerof seith Seint Augustyn,
 [303] "I wot certeynly that God is enemy to everich synnere." And how thanne?
 [303A] He that observeth o synne, shal he have foryifnesse of the remenaunt of his othere synnes? Nay.
 [304] And forther over, contricioun sholde be wonder sorweful and angwissous; and therfore yeveth hym God pleynly his mercy;
 [304A] and therfore, whan my soule was angwissous withinne me, I hadde remembrance of God that my preyere myghte come to hym.
 [305] Forther over, contricioun moste be continueel, and that man have stedefast purpos to shriven hym, and for to amenden hym of his lyf.
 [306] For soothly, whil contricioun lasteth, man may evere have hope of foryifnesse;
 [306A] and of this comth hate of synne, that destroyeth synne, bothe in himself and eek in oother folk at his power.
 [307] For which seith David: "Ye that loven God, hateth wikkednesse."
 [307A] For trusteth wel, to love God is for to love that he loveth, and hate that he hateth.
 [308] The laste thyng that men shal understonde in contricioun is this:
 [308A] wherof avayleth contricioun. I seye that somtyme contricioun delivereth a man fro synne;
 [309] of which that David seith, "I seye," quod David (that is to seyn,
 [309A] I purposed fermely) "to shryve me, and thow, Lord, relessedest my synne."
 [310] And right so as contricion availleth noght withouten sad purpos of shrifte,
 [310A] if man have oportunitee, right so litel worth is shrifte or satisfaccioun withouten contricioun.
 [311] And mooreover contricion destroyeth the prisoun of helle, and maketh wayk and fieble alle the strengthes of the develes,
 [311A] and restoreth the yiftes of the Hooly Goost and of alle goode vertues;
 [312] and it clenseth the soule of synne, and delivereth the soule fro the peyne of helle, and fro the compaignye of the devel,
 [312A] and fro the servage of synne, and restoreth it to alle goodes espirituels, and to the compaignye and communyoun of hooly chirche.
 [313] And forther over, it maketh hym that whilom was sone of ire to be sone of grace;
 [313A] and alle thise thynges been preved by hooly writ.
 [314] And therfore, he that wolde sette his entente to thise thynges, he were ful wys;
 [314A] for soothly he ne sholde nat thanne in al his lyf have corage to synne,
 [314B] but yeven his body and al his herte to the service of Jhesu Crist, and therof doon hym hommage.
 [315] For soothly oure sweete Lord Jhesu Crist hath spared us so debonairly in oure folies that
 [315A] if he ne hadde pitee of mannes soule, a sory song we myghten alle synge.
 [316] The seconde partie of Penitence is Confessioun, that is signe of contricioun.
 [317] Now shul ye understonde what is Confessioun,
 [317A] and wheither it oghte nedes be doon or noon, and whiche thynges been covenable to verray Confessioun.
 [318] First shaltow understonde that Confessioun is verray shewynge of synnes to the preest.
 [319] This is to seyn "verray," for he moste confessen hym of alle the condiciouns that bilongen to his synne, as ferforth as he kan.
 [320] Al moot be seyd, and no thyng excused ne hyd ne forwrapped, and noght avaunte thee of thy goode werkes.
 [321] And forther over, it is necessarie to understonde whennes that synnes spryngen, and how they encreessen, and whiche they been.
 [322] Of the spryngynge of synnes seith Seint Paul in this wise: that "Right as by a man synne entred first into this world,
 [322A] and thurgh that synne deeth, right so thilke deeth entred into alle men that synneden."
 [323] And this man was Adam, by whom synne entred into this world, whan he brak the comaundementz of God.
 [324] And therfore, he that first was so myghty that he sholde nat have dyed, bicam swich oon that he moste nedes dye,
 [324A] wheither he wolde or noon, and al his progenye in this world, that in thilke man synneden.
 [325] Looke that in th' estaat of innocence, whan Adam and Eve naked weren in Paradys, and nothyng ne hadden shame of hir nakednesse,
 [326] how that the serpent, that was moost wily of alle othere beestes that God hadde maked, seyde to the womman,
 [326A] "Why comaunded God to yow ye sholde nat eten of every tree in Paradys?"
 [327] The womman answerde: "Of the fruyt," quod she, "of the trees in Paradys we feden us,
 [327A] but soothly, of the fruyt of the tree that is in the myddel of Paradys, God forbad us for to ete,
 [327B] ne nat touchen it, lest per aventure we sholde dyen."
 [328] The serpent seyde to the womman, "Nay, nay, ye shul nat dyen of deeth; for sothe, God woot that
 [328A] what day that ye eten therof, youre eyen shul opene and ye shul been as goddes, knowynge good and harm."
 [329] The womman thanne saugh that the tree was good to feedyng, and fair to the eyen, and delitable to the sighte.
 [329A] She took of the fruyt of the tree, and eet it, and yaf to hire housbonde,
 [329B] and he eet, and anoon the eyen of hem bothe openeden.
 [330] And whan that they knewe that they were naked, they sowed of fige leves a maner of breches to hiden hire membres.
 [331] There may ye seen that deedly synne hath, first, suggestion of the feend, as sheweth heere by the naddre;
 [331A] and afterward, the delit of the flessh, as sheweth heere by Eve; and after that, the consentynge of resoun, as sheweth heere by Adam.
 [332] For trust wel, though so were that the feend tempted Eve -- that is to seyn, the flessh --
 [332A] and the flessh hadde delit in the beautee of the fruyt defended, yet certes, til that resoun -- that is to seyn, Adam --
 [332B] consented to the etynge of the fruyt, yet stood he in th' estaat of innocence.
 [333] Of thilke Adam tooke we thilke synne original,
 [333A] for of hym flesshly descended be we alle, and engendred of vile and corrupt mateere.
 [334] And whan the soule is put in oure body, right anon is contract original synne;
 [334A] and that that was erst but oonly peyne of concupiscence is afterward bothe peyne and synne.
 [335] And therfore be we alle born sones of wratthe and of dampnacioun perdurable, if it nere baptesme that we receyven,
 [335A] which bynymeth us the culpe. But for sothe, the peyne dwelleth with us, as to temptacioun, which peyne highte concupiscence.
 [336] And this concupiscence, whan it is wrongfully disposed or ordeyned in man, it maketh hym coveite, by coveitise of flessh,
 [336A] flesshly synne, by sighte of his eyen as to erthely thynges, and eek coveitise of hynesse by pride of herte.
 [337] Now, as for to speken of the firste coveitise, that is concupiscence, after the lawe of oure membres
 [337A] that weren lawefulliche ymaked and by rightful juggement of God,
 [338] I seye, forasmuche as man is nat obeisaunt to God, that is his lord,
 [338A] therfore is the flessh to hym disobeisaunt thurgh concupiscence, which yet is cleped norrissynge of synne and occasioun of synne.
 [339] Therfore, al the while that a man hath in hym the peyne of concupiscence,
 [339A] it is impossible but he be tempted somtime and moeved in his flessh to synne.
 [340] And this thyng may nat faille as longe as he lyveth.
 [340A] it may wel wexe fieble and faille by vertu of baptesme and by the grace of God thurgh penitence,
 [341] but fully ne shal it nevere quenche, that he ne shal som tyme be moeved in hymself,
 [341A] but if he were al refreyded by siknesse, or by malefice of sorcerie, or colde drynkes.
 [342] For lo, what seith Seint Paul: "The flessh coveiteth agayn the spirit, and the spirit agayn the flessh;
 [342A] they been so contrarie and so stryven that a man may nat alway doon as he wolde."
 [343] The same Seint Paul, after his grete penaunce in water and in lond --
 [343B] in water by nyght and by day in greet peril and in greet peyne;
 [343C] in lond, in famyne and thurst, in coold and cloothlees, and ones stoned almoost to the deeth
 [344] -- yet seyde he, "Allas, I caytyf man! Who shal delivere me fro the prisoun of my caytyf body?"
 [345] And Seint Jerome, whan he longe tyme hadde woned in desert, where as he hadde no compaignye but of wilde beestes,
 [345A] where as he ne hadde no mete but herbes, and water to his drynke, ne no bed but the naked erthe,
 [345B] for which his flessh was blak as an Ethiopeen for heete, and ny destroyed for coold,
 [346] yet seyde he that "the brennynge of lecherie boyled in al his body."
 [347] Wherfore I woot wel sykerly that they been deceyved that seyn that they ne be nat tempted in hir body.
 [348] Witnesse on Seint Jame the Apostel, that seith that "every wight is tempted in his owene concupiscence"; that is to seyn,
 [348A] that everich of us hath matere and occasioun to be tempted of the norissynge of synne that is in his body.
 [349] And therfore seith Seint John the Evaungelist, "If that we seyn that we be withoute synne,
 [349A] we deceyve us selve, and trouthe is nat in us."
 [350] Now shal ye understonde in what manere that synne wexeth or encreesseth in man.
 [350A] The firste thyng is thilke norissynge of synne of which I spak biforn, thilke flesshly concupiscence.
 [351] And after that comth the subjeccioun of the devel --
 [351A] this is to seyn, the develes bely, with which he bloweth in man the fir of flesshly concupiscence.
 [352] And after that, a man bithynketh hym wheither he wol doon or no thilke thing to which he is tempted.
 [353] And thanne, if that a man withstonde and weyve the firste entisynge of his flessh and of the feend,
 [353A] thanne is it no synne; and if it so be that he do nat so, thanne feeleth he anoon a flambe of delit.
 [354] And thanne is it good to be war and kepen hym wel,
 [354A] or elles he wol falle anon into consentynge of synne; and thanne wol he do it, if he may have tyme and place.
 [355] And of this matere seith Moyses by the devel in this manere: "The feend seith,
 [355A] `I wole chace and pursue the man by wikked suggestioun, and I wole hente hym by moevynge or stirynge of synne.
 [355B] And I wol departe my prise or my praye by deliberacioun, and my lust shal been acompliced in delit.
 [355C] I wol drawe my swerd in consentyng.'" --
 [356] for certes, right as a swerd departeth a thyng in two peces, right so consentynge departeth God fro man --
 [356A] "`and thanne wol I sleen hym with myn hand in dede of synne'; thus seith the feend."
 [357] For certes, thanne is a man al deed in soule.
 [357A] And thus is synne acompliced by temptacioun, by delit, and by consentynge; and thanne is the synne cleped actueel.
 [358] For sothe, synne is in two maneres; outher it is venial or deedly synne.
 [358A] Soothly, whan man loveth any creature moore than Jhesu Crist oure Creatour, thanne is it deedly synne.
 [358B] And venial synne is it, if man love Jhesu Crist lasse than hym oghte.
 [359] For sothe, the dede of this venial synne is ful perilous,
 [359A] for it amenuseth the love that men sholde han to God moore and moore.
 [360] And therfore, if a man charge hymself with manye swiche venial synnes,
 [360A] certes, but if so be that he somtyme descharge hym of hem by shrifte,
 [360B] they mowe ful lightly amenuse in hym al the love that he hath to Jhesu Crist;
 [361] and in this wise skippeth venial into deedly synne. For certes, the moore that a man chargeth his soule with venial synnes,
 [361A] the moore is he enclyned to fallen into deedly synne.
 [362] And therfore lat us nat be necligent to deschargen us of venial synnes. For the proverbe seith that "Manye smale maken a greet."
 [363] And herkne this ensample. A greet wawe of the see comth som tyme with so greet a violence that it drencheth the ship.
 [363A] And the same harm doon som tyme the smale dropes of water, that entren thurgh a litel crevace into the thurrok,
 [363B] and in the botme of the ship, if men be so necligent that they ne descharge hem nat by tyme.
 [364] And therfore, although ther be a difference bitwixe thise two causes of drenchynge, algates the ship is dreynt.
 [365] Right so fareth it somtyme of deedly synne, and of anoyouse veniale synnes,
 [365A] whan they multiplie in a man so greetly that [the love of] thilke worldly thynges that he loveth,
 [365B] thurgh whiche he synneth venyally, is as greet in his herte as the love of God, or moore.
 [366] And therfore, the love of every thyng that is nat biset in God, ne doon principally for Goddes sake,
 [366A] although that a man love it lasse than God, yet is it venial synne;
 [367] and deedly synne whan the love of any thyng weyeth in the herte of man as muchel as the love of God, or moore.
 [368] "Deedly synne," as seith Seint Augustyn, "is whan a man turneth his herte fro God,
 [368A] which that is verray sovereyn bountee, that may nat chaunge, and yeveth his herte to thyng that may chaunge and flitte."
 [369] And certes, that is every thyng save God of hevene.
 [369A] For sooth is that if a man yeve his love, the which that he oweth al to God with al his herte, unto a creature,
 [369B] certes, as muche of his love as he yeveth to thilke creature, so muche he bireveth fro God;
 [370] and therfore dooth he synne. For he that is dettour to God ne yeldeth nat to God al his dette;
 [370A] that is to seyn, al the love of his herte.
 [371] Now sith man understondeth generally which is venial synne, thanne is it covenable to tellen specially of synnes whiche that many
 [371A] a man peraventure ne demeth hem nat synnes, and ne shryveth him nat of the same thynges, and yet natheless they been synnes
 [372] soothly, as thise clerkes writen; this is to seyn, that at every tyme that a man eteth or drynketh
 [372A] moore than suffiseth to the sustenaunce of his body, in certein he dooth synne.
 [373] And eek whan he speketh moore than it nedeth, it is synne. Eke whan he herkneth nat benignely the compleint of the povre;
 [374] eke whan he is in heele of body and wol nat faste whan other folk faste, withouten cause resonable;
 [374A] eke whan he slepeth moore than nedeth, or whan he comth by thilke enchesoun to late to chirche, or to othere werkes of charite;
 [375] eke whan he useth his wyf withouten sovereyn desir of engendrure to the honour of God
 [375A] or for the entente to yelde to his wyf the dette of his body;
 [376] eke whan he wol nat visite the sike and the prisoner, if he may;
 [376A] eke if he love wyf or child, or oother worldly thyng, moore than resoun requireth.
 [376B] eke if he flatere or blandise moore than hym oghte for any necessitee;
 [377] eke if he amenuse or withdrawe the almesse of the povre;
 [377A] eke if he apparailleth his mete moore deliciously than nede is, or ete it to hastily by likerousnesse;
 [378] eke if he tale vanytees at chirche or at Goddes service, or that he be a talker
 [378A] of ydel wordes of folye or of vileynye, for he shal yelden acountes of it at the day of doom;
 [379] eke whan he biheteth or assureth to do thynges that he may nat parfourne;
 [379A] eke whan that he by lightnesse or folie mysseyeth or scorneth his neighebor;
 [380] eke whan he hath any wikked suspecioun of thyng ther he ne woot of it no soothfastnesse:
 [381] thise thynges, and mo withoute nombre, been synnes, as seith Seint Augustyn.
 [382] Now shal men understonde that, al be it so that noon erthely man may eschue alle venial synnes,
 [382A] yet may he refreyne hym by the brennynge love that he hath to oure Lord Jhesu Crist,
 [382B] and by preyeres and confessioun and othere goode werkes, so that it shal but litel greve.
 [383] For, as seith Seint Augustyn, "If a man love God in swich manere that al that evere he dooth
 [383B] is in the love of God and for the love of God verraily, for he brenneth in the love of God,
 [384] looke how muche that a drope of water that falleth in a fourneys ful of fyr anoyeth
 [384A] or greveth, so muche anoyeth a venial synne unto a man that is parfit in the love of Jhesu Crist."
 [385] Men may also refreyne venial synne by receyvynge worthily of the precious body of Jhesu Crist;
 [386] by receyvynge eek of hooly water, by almesdede, by general confessioun of Confiteor at masse and at complyn,
 [386A] and by blessynge of bisshopes and of preestes, and by oothere goode werkes.
 [387] Now is it bihovely thyng to telle whiche been the sevene deedly synnes,
 [387A] this is to seyn, chieftaynes of synnes. Alle they renne in o lees, but in diverse manneres.
 [387B] Now been they cleped chieftaynes, for as muche as they been chief and spryng of alle othere synnes.
 [388] Of the roote of thise sevene synnes, thanne, is Pride the general roote of alle harmes.
 [388B] For of this roote spryngen certein braunches, as Ire, Envye, Accidie or Slewthe, Avarice or Coveitise (to commune understondynge), Glotonye, and Lecherye.
 [389] And everich of thise chief synnes hath his braunches and his twigges, as shal be declared in hire chapitres folwynge.
 [390] And thogh so be that no man kan outrely telle the nombre of the twigges and of the harmes that cometh of Pride,
 [390A] yet wol I shewe a partie of hem, as ye shul understonde.
 [391] Ther is inobedience, avauntynge, ypocrisie, despit, arrogance, inpudence, swellynge of herte, insolence, elacioun, inpacience, strif, contumacie, presumpcioun, irreverence, pertinacie, veyneglorie,
 [391A] and many another twig that I kan nat declare.
 [392] Inobedient is he that disobeyeth for despit to the comandementz of God, and to his sovereyns, and to his goostly fader.
 [393] Avauntour is he that bosteth of the harm or of the bountee that he hath doon.
 [394] Ypocrite is he that hideth to shewe hym swich as he is and sheweth hym swich as he noght is.
 [395] Despitous is he that hath desdeyn of his neighebor --
 [395A] that is to seyn, of his evene-Cristene -- or hath despit to doon that hym oghte to do.
 [396] Arrogant is he that thynketh that he hath thilke bountees in hym that he hath noght,
 [396A] or weneth that he sholde have hem by his desertes, or elles he demeth that he be that he nys nat.
 [397] Inpudent is he that for his pride hath no shame of his synnes.
 [398] Swellynge of herte is whan a man rejoyseth hym of harm that he hath doon.
 [399] Insolent is he that despiseth in his juggement alle othere folk,
 [399A] as to regard of his value, and of his konnyng, and of his spekyng, and of his beryng.
 [400] Elacioun is whan he ne may neither suffre to have maister ne felawe.
 [401] Inpacient is he that wol nat been ytaught ne undernome of his vice, and by strif werreieth trouthe wityngly, and deffendeth his folye.
 [402] Contumax is he that thurgh his indignacioun is agayns everich auctoritee or power of hem that been his sovereyns.
 [403] Presumpcioun is whan a man undertaketh an emprise that hym oghte nat do, or elles that he may nat do;
 [403A] and this is called surquidrie. Irreverence is whan men do nat honour there as hem oghte to doon, and waiten to be reverenced.
 [404] Pertinacie is whan man deffendeth his folie and trusteth to muchel to his owene wit.
 [405] Veyneglorie is for to have pompe and delit in his temporeel hynesse, and glorifie hym in this worldly estaat.
 [406] Janglynge is whan a man speketh to muche biforn folk, and clappeth as a mille, and taketh no keep what he seith.
 [407] And yet is ther a privee spece of Pride that waiteth first to be salewed
 [407A] er he wole salewe, al be he lasse worth than that oother is, peraventure;
 [407B] and eek he waiteth or desireth to sitte, or elles to goon above hym in the wey,
 [407C] or kisse pax, or been encensed, or goon to offryng biforn his neighebor,
 [408] and swiche semblable thynges, agayns his duetee, peraventure, but that he hath his herte
 [408A] and his entente in swich a proud desir to be magnified and honoured biforn the peple.
 [409] Now been ther two maneres of Pride: that oon of hem is withinne the herte of man, and that oother is withoute.
 [410] Of whiche, soothly, thise forseyde thynges, and mo than I have seyd, apertenen to Pride that is in the herte of man;
 [410A] and that othere speces of Pride been withoute.
 [411] But natheles that oon of thise speces of Pride is signe of that oother,
 [411A] right as the gaye leefsel atte taverne is signe of the wyn that is in the celer.
 [412] And this is in manye thynges: as in speche and contenaunce, and in outrageous array of clothyng.
 [413] For certes, if ther ne hadde be no synne in clothyng,
 [413A] Crist wolde nat so soone have noted and spoken of the clothyng of thilke riche man in the gospel.
 [414] And, as seith Seint Gregorie, that "precious clothyng is cowpable for the derthe of it, and for his softenesse,
 [414A] and for his strangenesse and degisynesse, and for the superfluitee, or for the inordinat scantnesse of it."
 [415] Allas, may man nat seen, as in oure dayes, the synful costlewe array of clothynge,
 [415A] and namely in to muche superfluite, or elles in to desordinat scantnesse?
 [416] As to the first synne, that is in superfluitee of clothynge, which that maketh it so deere, to harm of the peple;
 [417] nat oonly the cost of embrowdynge, the degise endentynge or barrynge, owndynge, palynge, wyndynge or bendynge, and semblable wast of clooth in vanitee,
 [418] but ther is also costlewe furrynge in hir gownes, so muche pownsonynge of chisels to maken holes, so muche daggynge of sheres;
 [419] forth-with the superfluitee in lengthe of the forseide gownes, trailynge in the dong and in the mire, on horse and eek on foote,
 [419A] as wel of man as of womman, that al thilke trailyng is verraily as in effect wasted, consumed, thredbare, and roten with donge,
 [419B] rather than it is yeven to the povre, to greet damage of the forseyde povre folk.
 [420] And that in sondry wise; this is to seyn that the moore that clooth is wasted,
 [420A] the moore moot it coste to the peple for the scarsnesse.
 [421] And forther over, if so be that they wolde yeven swich pownsoned and dagged clothyng to the povre folk,
 [421A] it is nat convenient to were for hire estaat, ne suffisant to beete hire necessitee, to kepe hem fro the distemperance of the firmament.
 [422] Upon that oother side, to speken of the horrible disordinat scantnesse of clothyng, as been thise kutted sloppes, or haynselyns,
 [422A] that thurgh hire shortnesse ne covere nat the shameful membres of man, to wikked entente.
 [423] Allas, somme of hem shewen the boce of hir shap, and the horrible swollen membres,
 [423A] that semeth lik the maladie of hirnia, in the wrappynge of hir hoses;
 [424] and eek the buttokes of hem faren as it were the hyndre part of a she-ape in the fulle of the moone.
 [425] And mooreover, the wrecched swollen membres that they shewe thurgh disgisynge,
 [425A] in departynge of hire hoses in whit and reed, semeth that half hir shameful privee membres weren flayne.
 [426] And if so be that they departen hire hoses in othere colours,
 [426A] as is whit and blak, or whit and blew, or blak and reed, and so forth,
 [427] thanne semeth it, as by variaunce of colour, that half the partie of hire privee membres were corrupt
 [427A] by the fir of Seint Antony, or by cancre, or by oother swich meschaunce.
 [428] Of the hyndre part of hir buttokes, it is ful horrible for to see.
 [428A] For certes, in that partie of hir body ther as they purgen hir stynkynge ordure,
 [429] that foule partie shewe they to the peple prowdly in despit of honestitee,
 [429A] which honestitee that Jhesu Crist and his freendes observede to shewen in hir lyve.
 [430] Now, as of the outrageous array of wommen, God woot that though the visages of somme of hem seme ful chaast and debonaire,
 [430A] yet notifie they in hire array of atyr likerousnesse and pride.
 [431] I sey nat that honestitee in clothynge of man or womman is uncovenable, but certes the superfluitee or disordinat scantitee of clothynge is reprevable.
 [432] Also the synne of aornement or of apparaille is in thynges that apertenen to ridynge,
 [432A] as in to manye delicat horses that been hoolden for delit, that been so faire, fatte, and costlewe;
 [433] and also in many a vicious knave that is sustened by cause of hem; and in to curious harneys,
 [433A] as in sadeles, in crouperes, peytrels, and bridles covered with precious clothyng, and riche barres and plates of gold and of silver.
 [434] For which God seith by Zakarie the prophete, "I wol confounde the rideres of swiche horses."
 [435] This folk taken litel reward of the ridynge of Goddes sone of hevene, and of his harneys whan he rood upon the asse,
 [435A] and ne hadde noon oother harneys but the povre clothes of his disciples;
 [435B] ne we ne rede nat that evere he rood on oother beest.
 [436] I speke this for the synne of superfluitee, and nat for resonable honestitee, whan reson it requireth.
 [437] And forther over, certes, pride is greetly notified in holdynge of greet meynee, whan they be of litel profit or of right no profit,
 [438] and namely whan that meynee is felonous and damageous to the peple by hardynesse of heigh lordshipe or by wey of offices.
 [439] For certes, swiche lordes sellen thanne hir lordshipe to the devel of helle, whanne they sustenen the wikkednesse of hir meynee.
 [440] Or elles, whan this folk of lowe degree, as thilke that holden hostelries, sustenen the thefte of hire hostilers,
 [440A] and that is in many manere of deceites.
 [441] Thilke manere of folk been the flyes that folwen the hony,
 [441A] or elles the houndes that folwen the careyne. Swich forseyde folk stranglen spiritually hir lordshipes;
 [442] for which thus seith David the prophete:
 [442A] "Wikked deeth moote come upon thilke lordshipes, and God yeve that they moote descenden into helle al doun,
 [442B] for in hire houses been iniquitees and shrewednesses and nat God of hevene."
 [443] And certes, but if they doon amendement, right as God yaf his benysoun to [Laban] by the service of Jacob,
 [443A] and to [Pharao] by the service of Joseph, right so God wol yeve his malisoun
 [443B] to swiche lordshipes as sustenen the wikkednesse of hir servauntz, but they come to amendement.
 [444] Pride of the table appeereth eek ful ofte; for certes, riche men been cleped to festes, and povre folk been put awey and rebuked.
 [445] Also in excesse of diverse metes and drynkes, and namely swich manere bake-metes and dissh-metes, brennynge of wilde fir
 [445A] and peynted and castelled with papir, and semblable wast, so that it is abusioun for to thynke.
 [446] And eek in to greet preciousnesse of vessel and curiositee of mynstralcie, by whiche a man is stired the moore to delices of luxurie,
 [447] if so be that he sette his herte the lasse upon oure Lord Jhesu Crist, certeyn it is a synne;
 [447A] and certeinly the delices myghte been so grete in this caas that man myghte lightly falle by hem into deedly synne.
 [448] The especes that sourden of Pride, soothly whan they sourden of malice ymagined, avised, and forncast,
 [448A] or elles of usage, been deedly synnes, it is no doute.
 [449] And whan they sourden by freletee unavysed, and sodeynly withdrawen
 [449A] ayeyn, al been they grevouse synnes, I gesse that they ne been nat deedly.
 [450] Now myghte men axe wherof that Pride sourdeth and spryngeth, and I seye,
 [450A] somtyme it spryngeth of the goodes of nature, and somtyme of the goodes of fortune, and somtyme of the goodes of grace.
 [451] Certes, the goodes of nature stonden outher in goodes of body or in goodes of soule.
 [452] Certes, goodes of body been heele of body, strengthe, delivernesse, beautee, gentrice, franchise.
 [453] Goodes of nature of the soule been good wit, sharp understondynge, subtil engyn, vertu natureel, good memorie.
 [454] Goodes of fortune been richesse, hyghe degrees of lordshipes, preisynges of the peple.
 [455] Goodes of grace been science, power to suffre spiritueel travaille, benignitee, vertuous contemplacioun, withstondynge of temptacioun, and semblable thynges.
 [456] Of whiche forseyde goodes, certes it is a ful greet folye a man to priden hym in any of hem alle.
 [457] Now as for to speken of goodes of nature,
 [457A] God woot that somtyme we han hem in nature as muche to oure damage as to oure profit.
 [458] As for to speken of heele of body, certes it passeth ful lightly,
 [458A] and eek it is ful ofte enchesoun of the siknesse of oure soule.
 [458B] For, God woot, the flessh is a ful greet enemy to the soule,
 [458C] and therfore, the moore that the body is hool, the moore be we in peril to falle.
 [459] Eke for to pride hym in his strengthe of body, it is an heigh folye.
 [459A] For certes, the flessh coveiteth agayn the spirit, and ay the moore strong that the flessh is, the sorier may the soule be.
 [460] And over al this, strengthe of body and worldly hardynesse causeth ful ofte many a man to peril and meschaunce.
 [461] Eek for to pride hym of his gentrie is ful greet folie; for
 [461A] ofte tyme the gentrie of the body binymeth the gentrie of the soule;
 [461B] and eek we ben alle of o fader and of o mooder;
 [461C] and alle we been of o nature, roten and corrupt, bothe riche and povre.
 [462] For sothe, o manere gentrie is for to preise, that apparailleth mannes corage with vertues and moralitees, and maketh hym Cristes child.
 [463] For truste wel that over what man that synne hath maistrie, he is a verray cherl to synne.
 [464] Now been ther generale signes of gentillesse, as eschewynge of vice and ribaudye and servage of synne, in word, in werk, and contenaunce,
 [465] and usynge vertu, curteisye, and clennesse, and to be liberal --
 [465A] that is to seyn, large by mesure, for thilke that passeth mesure is folie and synne.
 [466] Another is to remembre hym of bountee that he of oother folk hath receyved.
 [467] Another is to be benigne to his goode subgetis; wherfore seith Senek,
 [467A] "Ther is no thing moore covenable to a man of heigh estaat than debonairetee and pitee.
 [468] And therfore thise flyes that men clepen bees, whan they maken hir kyng,
 [468A] they chesen oon that hath no prikke wherwith he may stynge."
 [469] Another is, a man to have a noble herte and a diligent to attayne to heighe vertuouse thynges.
 [470] Now certes, a man to pride hym in the goodes of grace is eek an outrageous folie, for thilke
 [470A] yifte of grace that sholde have turned hym to goodnesse and to medicine, turneth hym to venym and to confusioun, as seith Seint Gregorie.
 [471] Certes also, whoso prideth hym in the goodes of fortune, he is a ful greet fool;
 [471A] for somtyme is a man a greet lord by the morwe, that is a caytyf and a wrecche er it be nyght;
 [472] and somtyme the richesse of a man is cause of his deth;
 [472A] somtyme the delices of a man ben cause of the grevous maladye thurgh which he dyeth.
 [473] Certes, the commendacioun of the peple is somtyme ful fals and ful brotel for to triste; this day they preyse, tomorwe they blame.
 [474] God woot, desir to have commendacioun eek of the peple hath caused deeth to many a bisy man.
 [475] Now sith that so is that ye han understonde what is Pride,
 [475A] and whiche been the speces of it, and whennes Pride sourdeth and spryngeth,
 [476] now shul ye understonde which is the remedie agayns the synne of Pride; and that is humylitee, or mekenesse.
 [477] That is a vertu thurgh which a man hath verray knoweleche of hymself, and holdeth of hymself no pris ne deyntee,
 [477A] as in regard of his desertes, considerynge evere his freletee.
 [478] Now been ther three maneres of humylitee: as humylitee in herte; another humylitee is in his mouth; the thridde in his werkes.
 [479] The humilitee in herte is in foure maneres. That oon is whan a man holdeth hymself as noght worth biforn God of hevene.
 [479A] Another is whan he ne despiseth noon oother man.
 [480] The thridde is whan he rekketh nat, though men holde hym noght worth. The ferthe is whan he nys nat sory of his humiliacioun.
 [481] Also the humilitee of mouth is in foure thynges:
 [481A] in attempree speche, and in humblesse of speche, and whan he biknoweth with his owene mouth
 [481B] that he is swich as hym thynketh that he is in his herte.
 [481C] Another is whan he preiseth the bountee of another man, and nothyng therof amenuseth.
 [482] Humilitee eek in werkes is in foure maneres. The firste is whan he putteth othere men biforn hym.
 [482A] The seconde is to chese the loweste place over al. The thridde is gladly to assente to good conseil.
 [483] The ferthe is to stonde gladly to the award of his sovereyns,
 [483A] or of hym that is in hyer degree. Certein, this is a greet werk of humylitee.
 [484] After Pride wol I speken of the foule synne of Envye, which that is, as by the word of the Philosophre,
 [484A] "sorwe of oother mannes prosperitee"; and after the word of Seint Augustyn, it is "Sorwe
 [484B] of oother mennes wele, and joye of othere mennes harm."
 [485] This foule synne is platly agayns the Hooly Goost. Al be it so that every synne is agayns the Hooly Goost,
 [485A] yet nathelees, for as muche as bountee aperteneth proprely to the Hooly Goost, and Envye comth proprely of malice,
 [485B] therfore it is proprely agayn the bountee of the Hooly Goost.
 [486] Now hath malice two speces; that is to seyn, hardnesse of herte in wikkednesse,
 [486A] or elles the flessh of man is so blynd that he considereth nat that he is in synne
 [486B] or rekketh nat that he is in synne, which is the hardnesse of the devel.
 [487] That oother spece of malice is whan a man werreyeth trouthe, whan he woot that it is trouthe;
 [487A] and eek whan he werreyeth the grace that God hath yeve to his neighebor; and al this is by Envye.
 [488] Certes, thanne is Envye the worste synne that is. For soothly, alle othere synnes been somtyme oonly agayns o special vertu,
 [489] but certes Envye is agayns alle vertues and agayns alle goodnesses.
 [489A] For it is sory of alle the bountees of his neighebor, and in this manere it is divers from alle othere synnes.
 [490] For wel unnethe is ther any synne that it ne hath som delit in itself,
 [490A] save oonly Envye, that evere hath in itself angwissh and sorwe.
 [491] The speces of Envye been thise. Ther is first, sorwe of oother mannes goodnesse and of his prosperitee;
 [491A] and prosperitee is kyndely matere of joye; thanne is Envye a synne agayns kynde.
 [492] The seconde spece of Envye is joye of oother mannes harm,
 [492A] and that is proprely lyk to the devel, that evere rejoyseth hym of mannes harm.
 [493] Of thise two speces comth bakbityng; and this synne of bakbityng or detraccion hath certeine speces, as thus:
 [493A] Som man preiseth his neighebor by a wikked entente,
 [494] for he maketh alwey a wikked knotte atte laste ende. Alwey he maketh a "but" atte laste ende,
 [494A] that is digne of moore blame than worth is al the preisynge.
 [495] The seconde spece is that if a man be good and dooth or seith a thing to good entente,
 [495A] the bakbitere wol turne al thilke goodnesse up-so-doun to his shrewed entente.
 [496] The thridde is to amenuse the bountee of his neighebor.
 [497] The fourthe spece of bakbityng is this: that if men speke goodnesse of a man, thanne wol the bakbitere seyn,
 [497A] "Parfey, swich a man is yet bet than he," in dispreisynge of hym that men preise.
 [498] The fifte spece is this: for to consente gladly and herkne gladly to the harm that men speke of oother folk.
 [498A] This synne is ful greet and ay encreesseth after the wikked entente of the bakbitere.
 [499] After bakbityng cometh gruchchyng or murmuracioun; and somtyme it spryngeth of inpacience agayns God, and somtyme agayns man.
 [500] Agayn God it is whan a man gruccheth agayn the peyne of helle, or agayns poverte, or los of catel,
 [500A] or agayn reyn or tempest; or elles gruccheth that shrewes han prosperitee, or elles for that goode men han adversitee.
 [501] And alle thise thynges sholde man suffre paciently, for they comen by the rightful juggement and ordinaunce of God.
 [502] Somtyme comth grucching of avarice;
 [502A] as Judas grucched agayns the Magdaleyne whan she enoynted the heved of oure Lord Jhesu Crist with hir precious oynement.
 [503] This manere murmure is swich as whan man gruccheth of goodnesse that hymself dooth, or that oother folk doon of hir owene catel.
 [504] Somtyme comth murmure of Pride, as whan Simon the Pharisee gruchched agayn the Magdaleyne
 [504A] whan she approched to Jhesu Crist and weep at his feet for hire synnes.
 [505] And somtyme grucchyng sourdeth of Envye, whan men discovereth a mannes harm that was pryvee or
 [505A] bereth hym on hond thyng that is fals.
 [506] Murmure eek is ofte amonges servauntz that grucchen whan hir sovereyns bidden hem doon leveful thynges;
 [507] and forasmuche as they dar nat openly withseye the comaundementz of hir sovereyns,
 [507A] yet wol they seyn harm, and grucche, and murmure prively for verray despit;
 [508] whiche wordes men clepen the develes Pater noster, though so be that the devel ne hadde nevere Pater noster,
 [508A] but that lewed folk yeven it swich a name.
 [509] Somtyme it comth of Ire or prive hate that norisseth rancour in herte, as afterward I shal declare.
 [510] Thanne cometh eek bitternesse of herte, thurgh which bitternesse every good dede of his neighebor semeth to hym bitter and unsavory.
 [511] Thanne cometh discord that unbyndeth alle manere of freendshipe. Thanne comth scornynge of his neighebor, al do he never so weel.
 [512] Thanne comth accusynge, as whan man seketh occasioun to anoyen his neighebor,
 [512A] which that is lyk the craft of the devel, that waiteth bothe nyght and day to accusen us alle.
 [513] Thanne comth malignitee, thurgh which a man anoyeth his neighebor prively, if he may;
 [514] and if he noght may, algate his wikked wil ne shal nat wante,
 [514A] as for to brennen his hous pryvely, or empoysone or sleen his beestes, and semblable thynges.
 [515] Now wol I speke of remedie agayns this foule synne of Envye. First is the love of God principal
 [515A] and lovyng of his neighebor as hymself, for soothly that oon ne may nat been withoute that oother.
 [516] And truste wel that in the name of thy neighebor thou shalt understonde the name of thy brother;
 [516A] for certes alle we have o fader flesshly and o mooder -- that is to seyn, Adam and Eve --
 [516B] and eek o fader espiritueel, and that is God of hevene.
 [517] Thy neighebor artow holden for to love and wilne hym alle goodnesse; and therfore seith God,
 [517A] "Love thy neighebor as thyselve" -- that is to seyn, to salvacioun bothe of lyf and of soule.
 [518] And mooreover thou shalt love hym in word, and in benigne amonestynge and chastisynge,
 [518A] and conforten hym in his anoyes, and preye for hym with al thyn herte.
 [519] And in dede thou shalt love hym in swich wise that thou shalt doon to hym in charitee
 [519A] as thou woldest that it were doon to thyn owene persone.
 [520] And therfore thou ne shalt doon hym no damage in wikked word, ne harm in his body,
 [520A] ne in his catel, ne in his soule, by entissyng of wikked ensample.
 [521] Thou shalt nat desiren his wyf ne none of his thynges. Understoond eek that in the name of neighebor is comprehended his enemy.
 [522] Certes, man shal loven his enemy, by the comandement of God; and soothly thy freend shaltow love in God.
 [523] I seye, thyn enemy shaltow love for Goddes sake, by his commandement.
 [523A] For if it were reson that man sholde haten his enemy,
 [523B] for sothe God nolde nat receyven us to his love that been his enemys.
 [524] Agayns three manere of wronges that his enemy dooth to hym, he shal doon three thynges, as thus:
 [525] Agayns hate and rancour of herte, he shal love hym in herte.
 [525A] Agayns chidyng and wikkede wordes, he shal preye for his enemy. Agayns the wikked dede of his enemy, he shal doon hym bountee.
 [526] For Crist seith, "Loveth youre enemys, and preyeth for hem that speke yow harm, and eek for hem that yow chacen and pursewen,
 [526A] and dooth bountee to hem that yow haten." Loo, thus comaundeth us oure Lord Jhesu Crist to do to oure enemys.
 [527] For soothly, nature dryveth us to loven oure freendes, and parfey, oure enemys han moore nede to love than oure freendes;
 [527A] and they that moore nede have, certes to hem shal men doon goodnesse;
 [528] and certes, in thilke dede have we remembraunce of the love of Jhesu Crist that deyde for his enemys.
 [529] And in as muche as thilke love is the moore grevous to parfourne, so muche is the moore gret the merite;
 [529A] and therfore the lovynge of oure enemy hath confounded the venym of the devel.
 [530] For right as the devel is disconfited by humylitee, right so is he wounded to the deeth by love of oure enemy.
 [531] Certes, thanne is love the medicine that casteth out the venym of Envye fro mannes herte.
 [532] The speces of this paas shullen be moore largely declared in hir chapitres folwynge.
 [533] After Envye wol I discryven the synne of Ire. For soothly, whoso hath envye upon his neighebor,
 [533A] anon he wole comunly fynde hym a matere of wratthe, in word or in dede, agayns hym to whom he hath envye.
 [534] And as wel comth Ire of Pride as of Envye, for soothly he that is proud or envyous is lightly wrooth.
 [535] This synne of Ire, after the discryvyng of Seint Augustyn, is wikked wil to been avenged by word or by dede.
 [536] Ire, after the Philosophre, is the fervent blood of man yquyked in his herte,
 [536A] thurgh which he wole harm to hym that he hateth.
 [537] For certes, the herte of man, by eschawfynge and moevynge of his blood, wexeth
 [537A] so trouble that he is out of alle juggement of resoun.
 [538] But ye shal understonde that Ire is in two maneres; that oon of hem is good, and that oother is wikked.
 [539] The goode Ire is by jalousie of goodnesse,
 [539A] thurgh which a man is wrooth with wikkednesse and agayns wikkednesse; and therfore seith a wys man that Ire is bet than pley.
 [540] This Ire is with debonairetee, and it is wrooth withouten bitternesse; nat wrooth agayns the man,
 [540A] but wrooth with the mysdede of the man, as seith the prophete David, "Irascimini et nolite peccare."
 [541] Now understondeth that wikked Ire is in two maneres;
 [541A] that is to seyn, sodeyn Ire or hastif Ire, withouten avisement and consentynge of resoun.
 [542] The menyng and the sens of this is that the resoun of a man ne consente nat to thilke sodeyn Ire,
 [542A] and thanne is it venial.
 [543] Another Ire is ful wikked, that comth of felonie of herte avysed and cast biforn, with wikked wil to do vengeance,
 [543A] and therto his resoun consenteth. and soothly this is deedly synne.
 [544] This Ire is so displesant to God that it troubleth his hous and chaceth the Hooly Goost out of mannes soule,
 [544A] and wasteth and destroyeth the liknesse of God -- that is to seyn, the vertu that is in mannes soule --
 [545] and put in hym the liknesse of the devel, and bynymeth the man fro God, that is his rightful lord.
 [546] This Ire is a ful greet plesaunce to the devel,
 [546A] for it is the develes fourneys, that is eschawfed with the fir of helle.
 [547] For certes, right so as fir is moore mighty to destroyen erthely thynges than any oother element,
 [547A] right so Ire is myghty to destroyen alle spiritueel thynges.
 [548] Looke how that fir of smale gleedes that been almost dede under asshen wollen quike agayn whan they been touched with brymstoon;
 [548A] right so Ire wol everemo quyken agayn whan it is touched by the pride that is covered in mannes herte.
 [549] For certes, fir ne may nat comen out of no thyng, but if it were first in the same thyng natureelly,
 [549A] as fir is drawen out of flyntes with steel.
 [550] And right so as pride is ofte tyme matere of Ire, right so is rancour norice and kepere of Ire.
 [551] Ther is a maner tree, as seith Seint Ysidre, that whan men maken fir of thilke tree
 [551A] and covere the coles of it with asshen, soothly the fir of it wol lasten al a yeer or moore.
 [552] And right so fareth it of rancour; whan it is ones conceyved in the hertes of som men,
 [552A] certein, it wol lasten peraventure from oon Estre day unto another Estre day, and moore.
 [553] But certes, thilke man is ful fer fro the mercy of God al thilke while.
 [554] In this forseyde develes fourneys ther forgen three shrewes: Pride, that ay bloweth and encreesseth the fir by chidynge and wikked wordes;
 [555] thanne stant Envye and holdeth the hoote iren upon the herte of man with a peire of longe toonges of long rancour;
 [556] and thanne stant the synne of Contumelie, or strif and cheeste, and batereth and forgeth by vileyns reprevynges.
 [557] Certes, this cursed synne anoyeth bothe to the man hymself and eek to his neighebor.
 [557A] For soothly, almoost al the harm that any man dooth to his neighebor comth of wratthe.
 [558] For certes, outrageous wratthe dooth al that evere the devel hym comaundeth, for he ne spareth neither Crist ne his sweete Mooder.
 [559] And in his outrageous anger and ire -- allas, allas! --
 [559A] ful many oon at that tyme feeleth in his herte ful wikkedly, bothe of Crist and eek of alle his halwes.
 [560] Is nat this a cursed vice? Yis, certes. Allas! It bynymeth from man his wit and his resoun,
 [560A] and al his debonaire lif espiritueel that sholde kepen his soule.
 [561] Certes, it bynymeth eek Goddes due lordshipe, and that is mannes soule and the love of his neighebores.
 [561A] It stryveth eek alday agayn trouthe. It reveth hym the quiete of his herte and subverteth his soule.
 [562] Of Ire comen thise stynkynge engendrures: First, hate, that is oold wratthe;
 [562A] discord, thurgh which a man forsaketh his olde freend that he hath loved ful longe;
 [563] and thanne cometh werre and every manere of wrong that man dooth to his neighebor, in body or in catel.
 [564] Of this cursed synne of Ire cometh eek manslaughtre. And understonde wel that homycide, that is manslaughtre, is in diverse wise.
 [564A] Som manere of homycide is spiritueel, and som is bodily.
 [565] Spiritueel manslaughtre is in sixe thynges. First by hate, as seith Seint John: "He that hateth his brother is an homycide."
 [566] Homycide is eek by bakbitynge, of whiche bakbiteres seith Salomon that "they han two swerdes with whiche they sleen hire neighebores."
 [566A] For soothly, as wikke is to bynyme his good name as his lyf.
 [567] Homycide is eek in yevynge of wikked conseil by fraude, as for to yeven conseil to areysen wrongful custumes and taillages.
 [568] Of whiche seith Salomon, "Leon rorynge and bere hongry been like to the cruel lordshipes" in withholdynge or abreggynge of the shepe
 [568A] (or the hyre), or of the wages of servauntz, or elles in usure, or in withdrawynge of the almesse of povre folk.
 [569] For which the wise man seith, "Fedeth hym that almoost dyeth for honger"; for soothly, but if thow feede hym, thou sleest hym;
 [569A] and alle thise been deedly synnes.
 [570] Bodily manslaughtre is, whan thow sleest him with thy tonge in oother manere,
 [570A] as whan thou comandest to sleen a man or elles yevest hym conseil to sleen a man.
 [571] Manslaughtre in dede is in foure maneres.
 [571A] That oon is by lawe, right as a justice dampneth hym that is coupable to the deeth.
 [571B] But lat the justice be war that he do it rightfully, and
 [571C] that he do it nat for delit to spille blood but for kepynge of rightwisnesse.
 [572] Another homycide is that is doon for necessitee, as whan o man sleeth another in his defendaunt
 [572A] and that he ne may noon ootherwise escape from his owene deeth.
 [573] But certeinly if he may escape withouten slaughtre of his adversarie, and sleeth hym,
 [573A] he dooth synne and he shal bere penance as for deedly synne.
 [574] Eek if a man, by caas or aventure, shete an arwe,
 [574A] or caste a stoon with which he sleeth a man, he is homycide.
 [575] Eek if a womman by necligence overlyeth hire child in hir slepyng, it is homycide and deedly synne.
 [576] Eek whan man destourbeth concepcioun of a child, and maketh a womman outher bareyne
 [576A] by drynkynge venenouse herbes thurgh which she may nat conceyve,
 [576B] or sleeth a child by drynkes wilfully, or elles putteth certeine material thynges in hire secree places to slee the child,
 [577] or elles dooth unkyndely synne, by which man or womman shedeth hire nature in manere or in place
 [577A] ther as a child may nat be conceived, or elles if a woman have conceyved,
 [577B] and hurt hirself and sleeth the child, yet is it homycide.
 [578] What seye we eek of wommen that mordren hir children for drede of worldly shame? Certes, an horrible homicide.
 [579] Homycide is eek if a man approcheth to a womman by desir of lecherie, thurgh which the child is perissed,
 [579A] or elles smyteth a womman wityngly, thurgh which she leseth hir child. Alle thise been homycides and horrible deedly synnes.
 [580] Yet comen ther of Ire manye mo synnes, as wel in word as in thoght and in dede;
 [580A] as he that arretteth upon God, or blameth God of thyng of which he is hymself gilty,
 [580B] or despiseth God and alle his halwes, as doon thise cursede hasardours in diverse contrees.
 [581] This cursed synne doon they, whan they feelen in hir herte ful wikkedly of God and of his halwes.
 [582] Also whan they treten unreverently the sacrement of the auter, thilke synne is so greet that unnethe may it been releessed,
 [582A] but that the mercy of God passeth alle his werkes; it is so greet, and he so benigne.
 [583] Thanne comth of Ire attry angre. Whan a man is sharply amonested in his shrifte to forleten his synne,
 [584] thanne wole he be angry, and answeren hokerly and angrily, and deffenden or excusen his synne by unstedefastnesse of his flessh;
 [584A] or elles he dide it for to holde compaignye with his felawes; or elles, he seith, the feend enticed hym;
 [585] or elles he dide it for his youthe; or elles his compleccioun is so corageous that he may nat forbere;
 [585A] or elles it is his destinee, as he seith, unto a certein
 [585B] age; or elles, he seith, it cometh hym of gentillesse of his auncestres; and semblable thynges.
 [586] Alle thise manere of folk so wrappen hem in hir synnes that they ne wol nat delivere hemself.
 [586A] For soothly, no wight that excuseth hym wilfully of his synne
 [586B] may nat been delivered of his synne til that he mekely biknoweth his synne.
 [587] After this, thanne cometh sweryng, that is expres agayn the comandement of God; and this bifalleth ofte of anger and of Ire.
 [588] God seith, "Thow shalt nat take the name of thy Lord God in veyn or in ydel."
 [588A] Also oure Lord Jhesu Crist seith, by the word of Seint Mathew,
 [589] "Ne wol ye nat swere in alle manere; neither by hevene, for it is Goddes trone;
 [589A] ne by erthe, for it is the bench of his feet; ne by Jerusalem, for it is the citee of a greet kyng;
 [589B] ne by thyn heed, for thou mayst nat make an heer whit ne blak.
 [590] But seyeth by youre word `ye, ye,' and `nay, nay'; and what that is moore, it is of yvel" -- thus seith Crist.
 [591] For Cristes sake, ne swereth nat so synfully in dismembrynge of Crist by soule, herte, bones, and body.
 [591A] For certes, it semeth that ye thynke that the cursede Jewes ne dismembred nat ynough the preciouse persone of Crist,
 [591B] but ye dismembre hym moore.
 [592] And if so be that the lawe compelle yow to swere, thanne rule yow after the lawe of God in youre swerying,
 [592A] as seith Jeremye, quarto capitulo: Thou shalt kepe three condicions: thou shalt swere "in trouthe, in doom, and in rightwisnesse."
 [593] This is to seyn, thou shalt swere sooth, for every lesynge is agayns Crist;
 [593A] for Crist is verray trouthe. And thynk wel this: that "every greet swerere, nat compelled lawefully to
 [593B] swere, the wounde shal nat departe from his hous" whil he useth swich unleveful swerying.
 [594] Thou shalt sweren eek in doom, whan thou art constreyned by thy domesman to witnessen the trouthe.
 [595] Eek thow shalt nat swere for envye, ne for favour, ne for meede, but for rightwisnesse, for declaracioun of it,
 [595A] to the worshipe of God and helpyng of thyne evene-Cristene.
 [596] And therfore every man that taketh Goddes name in ydel, or falsly swereth with his mouth,
 [596A] or elles taketh on hym the name of Crist, to be called a Cristen man
 [596B] and lyveth agayns Cristes lyvynge and his techynge, alle they taken Goddes name in ydel.
 [597] Looke eek what Seint Peter seith, Actuum quarto, Non est aliud nomen sub celo, etc., "Ther nys noon oother name," seith Seint Peter,
 [597A] "under hevene yeven to men, in which they mowe be saved"; that is to seyn, but the name of Jhesu Crist.
 [598] Take kep eek how precious is the name of Crist, as seith Seint Paul, ad Philipenses secundo, In nomine Jhesu, etc.,
 [598A] "That in the name of Jhesu every knee of hevenely creatures, or erthely, or of helle sholde
 [598B] bowe," for it is so heigh and so worshipful that the cursede feend in helle sholde tremblen to heeren it ynempned.
 [599] Thanne semeth it that men that sweren so horribly by his blessed name,
 [599A] that they despise it moore booldely than dide the cursede Jewes or elles the devel, that trembleth whan he heereth his name.
 [600] Now certes, sith that sweryng, but if it be lawefully doon, is so heighly deffended, muche worse is forsweryng falsly, and yet nedelees.
 [601] What seye we eek of hem that deliten hem in sweryng,
 [601A] and holden it a gentrie or a manly dede to swere grete othes?
 [601B] And what of hem that of verray usage ne cesse nat to swere grete othes, al be the cause nat worth a straw?
 [601C] Certes, this is horrible synne.
 [602] Swerynge sodeynly withoute avysement is eek a synne.
 [603] But lat us go now to thilke horrible sweryng of adjuracioun and conjuracioun,
 [603A] as doon thise false enchauntours or nigromanciens in bacyns ful of water,
 [603B] or in a bright swerd, in a cercle, or in a fir, or in a shulder-boon of a sheep.
 [604] I kan nat seye but that they doon cursedly and dampnably agayns Crist and al the feith of hooly chirche.
 [605] What seye we of hem that bileeven on divynailes, as by flight or by noyse of briddes, or of beestes,
 [605A] or by sort, by nigromancie, by dremes, by chirkynge of dores or crakkynge of houses, by gnawynge of rattes, and swich manere wrecchednesse?
 [606] Certes, al this thyng is deffended by God and by hooly chirche.
 [606A] For which they been acursed, til they come to amendement, that on swich filthe setten hire bileeve.
 [607] Charmes for woundes or maladie of men or of beestes, if they taken any effect,
 [607A] it may be peraventure that God suffreth it, for folk sholden yeve the moore feith and reverence to his name.
 [608] Now wol I speken of lesynges, which generally is fals signyficaunce of word, in entente to deceyven his evene-Cristene.
 [609] Som lesynge is of which ther comth noon avantage to no wight;
 [609A] and som lesynge turneth to the ese and profit of o man, and to disese and damage of another man.
 [610] Another lesynge is for to saven his lyf or his catel. Another
 [610A] lesynge comth of delit for to lye, in which delit they wol forge a long tale
 [610B] and peynten it with alle circumstaunces, where al the ground of the tale is fals.
 [611] Som lesynge comth for he wole sustene his word; and som lesynge comth of reccheleesnesse withouten avisement; and semblable thynges.
 [612] Lat us now touche the vice of flaterynge, which ne comth nat gladly but for drede or for coveitise.
 [613] Flaterye is generally wrongful preisynge. Flatereres been the develes norices, that norissen his children with milk of losengerie.
 [614] For sothe, Salomon seith that "Flaterie is wors than detraccioun." For somtyme detraccion maketh an hauteyn man be the moore humble,
 [614A] for he dredeth detraccion; but certes flaterye, that maketh a man to enhauncen his herte and his contenaunce.
 [615] Flatereres been the develes enchauntours; for they make a man to wene of hymself be lyk that he nys nat lyk.
 [616] They been lyk to Judas that bitraysen a man to sellen hym to his enemy; that is to the devel.
 [617] Flatereres been the develes chapelleyns, that syngen evere Placebo.
 [618] I rekene flaterie in the vices of Ire,
 [618A] for ofte tyme if o man be wrooth with another, thanne wole he flatere som wight to sustene hym in his querele.
 [619] Speke we now of swich cursynge as comth of irous herte. Malisoun generally may be seyd every maner power of harm.
 [619A] Swich cursynge bireveth man fro the regne of God, as seith Seint Paul.
 [620] And ofte tyme swich cursynge wrongfully retorneth agayn to hym that curseth, as a bryd that retorneth agayn to his owene nest.
 [621] And over alle thyng men oghten eschewe to cursen hire children, and yeven to the devel hire engendrure,
 [621A] as ferforth as in hem is. Certes, it is greet peril and greet synne.
 [622] Lat us thanne speken of chidynge and reproche, whiche been ful grete woundes in mannes herte,
 [622A] for they unsowen the semes of freendshipe in mannes herte.
 [623] For certes, unnethes may a man pleynly been accorded with hym that hath hym openly revyled and repreved and disclaundred.
 [623A] This is a ful grisly synne, as Crist seith in the gospel.
 [624] And taak kep now, that he that repreveth his neighebor, outher he repreveth hym by som harm of peyne
 [624A] that he hath on his body, as "mesel," "croked harlot," or by som synne that he dooth.
 [625] Now if he repreve hym by harm of peyne, thanne turneth the repreve to Jhesu Crist,
 [625A] for peyne is sent by the rightwys sonde of God, and by his suffrance, be it meselrie, or maheym, or maladie.
 [626] And if he repreve hym uncharitably of synne, as "thou holour," "thou dronkelewe harlot," and so forth,
 [626A] thanne aperteneth that to the rejoysynge of the devel, that evere hath joye that men doon synne.
 [627] And certes, chidynge may nat come but out of a vileyns herte.
 [627A] For after the habundance of the herte speketh the mouth ful ofte.
 [628] And ye shul understonde that looke, by any wey,
 [628A] whan any man shal chastise another, that he be war from chidynge or reprevynge.
 [628B] For trewely, but he be war, he may ful lightly quyken the fir of angre and of wratthe,
 [628C] which that he sholde quenche, and peraventure sleeth hym which that he myghte chastise with benignitee.
 [629] For as seith Salomon, "The amyable tonge is the tree of lyf" -- that is to seyn, of lyf espiritueel --
 [629A] and soothly, a deslavee tonge sleeth the spirites of hym that repreveth and eek of hym that is repreved.
 [630] Loo, what seith Seint Augustyn: "Ther is nothyng so lyk the develes child as he that ofte chideth."
 [630A] Seint Paul seith eek, "The servant of God bihoveth nat to chide."
 [631] And how that chidynge be a vileyns thyng bitwixe alle manere folk,
 [631A] yet is it certes moost uncovenable bitwixe a man and his wyf,
 [631B] for there is nevere reste. And therfore seith Salomon, "An
 [631C] hous that is uncovered and droppynge and a chidynge wyf been lyke."
 [632] A man that is in a droppynge hous in manye places,
 [632A] though he eschewe the droppynge in o place, it droppeth on hym in another place.
 [632B] So fareth it by a chydynge wyf; but she chide hym in o place, she wol chide hym in another.
 [633] And therfore, "Bettre is a morsel of breed with joye than an hous ful of delices with chidynge," seith Salomon.
 [634] Seint Paul seith, "O ye wommen, be ye subgetes to youre housbondes as bihoveth in God,
 [634A] and ye men loveth youre wyves." Ad Colossenses tertio.
 [635] Afterward speke we of scornynge, which is a wikked synne, and namely whan he scorneth a man for his goode werkes.
 [636] For certes, swiche scorneres faren lyk the foule
 [636A] tode, that may nat endure to smelle the soote savour of the vyne whanne it florissheth.
 [637] Thise scorneres been partyng felawes with the devel; for they han joye whan the devel wynneth and sorwe whan he leseth.
 [638] They been adversaries of Jhesu Crist, for they haten that he loveth -- that is to seyn, salvacioun of soule.
 [639] Speke we now of wikked conseil, for he that wikked conseil yeveth is a traytour.
 [639A] For he deceyveth hym that trusteth in hym, ut Achitofel ad Absolonem. But nathelees, yet is his wikked conseil first agayn hymself.
 [640] For, as seith the wise man, "Every fals lyvynge hath this propertee in hymself, that
 [640A] he that wole anoye another man, he anoyeth first hymself."
 [641] And men shul understonde that man shal nat taken his conseil of fals folk, ne of angry folk, or grevous folk,
 [641A] ne of folk that loven specially to muchel hir owene profit, ne to muche worldly folk, namely in conseilynge of soules.
 [642] Now comth the synne of hem that sowen and maken discord amonges folk, which is a synne that Crist hateth outrely.
 [642A] And no wonder is, for he deyde for to make concord.
 [643] And moore shame do they to Crist than dide they that hym crucifiede,
 [643A] for God loveth bettre that freendshipe be amonges folk, than he dide his owene body,
 [643B] the which that he yaf for unitee. Therfore been they likned to the devel, that evere is aboute to maken discord.
 [644] Now comth the synne of double tonge, swiche as speken faire byforn folk and wikkedly bihynde, or elles they maken semblant
 [644A] as though they speeke of good entencioun, or elles in game and pley, and yet they speke of wikked entente.
 [645] Now comth biwreying of conseil, thurgh which a man is defamed; certes, unnethe may he restoore the damage.
 [646] Now comth manace, that is an open folye, for he that ofte manaceth, he threteth moore than he may parfourne ful ofte tyme.
 [647] Now cometh ydel wordes, that is withouten profit of hym that speketh tho wordes,
 [647A] and eek of hym that herkneth tho wordes. Or elles ydel wordes been tho that been nedelees or withouten entente of natureel profit.
 [648] And al be it that ydel wordes been somtyme venial synne,
 [648A] yet sholde men douten hem, for we shul yeve rekenynge of hem bifore God.
 [649] Now comth janglynge, that may nat been withoute synne. And, as seith Salomon, "It is a sygne of apert folye."
 [650] And therfore a philosophre seyde, whan men axed hym how that men sholde plese the peple,
 [650A] and he answerde, "Do manye goode werkes, and spek fewe jangles."
 [651] After this comth the synne of japeres, that been the develes apes,
 [651A] for they maken folk to laughe at hire japerie as folk doon at the gawdes of an ape.
 [651B] Swiche japeres deffendeth Seint Paul.
 [652] Looke how that vertuouse wordes and hooly conforten hem that travaillen in the service of Crist,
 [652A] right so conforten the vileyns wordes and knakkes of japeris hem that travaillen in the service of the devel.
 [653] Thise been the synnes that comen of the tonge, that comen of Ire and of othere synnes mo.
 [654] The remedie agayns Ire is a vertu that men clepen mansuetude, that is debonairetee;
 [654A] and eek another vertu, that men callen pacience or suffrance.
 [655] Debonairetee withdraweth and refreyneth the stirynges and the moevynges of mannes corage in his herte,
 [655A] in swich manere that they ne skippe nat out by angre ne by ire.
 [656] Suffrance suffreth swetely alle the anoyaunces and the wronges that men doon to man outward.
 [657] Seint Jerome seith thus of debonairetee, that "it dooth noon harm to no wight ne seith.
 [657A] ne for noon harm that men doon or seyn, he ne eschawfeth nat agayns his resoun."
 [658] This vertu somtyme comth of nature, for, as seith the Philosophre,
 [658A] "A man is a quyk thyng, by nature debonaire and tretable to goodnesse;
 [658B] but whan debonairetee is enformed of grace, thanne is it the moore worth."
 [659] Pacience, that is another remedie agayns Ire, is a vertu that suffreth swetely every mannes goodnesse,
 [659A] and is nat wrooth for noon harm that is doon to hym.
 [660] The Philosophre seith that pacience is thilke vertu that suffreth debonairely alle the outrages of adversitee and every wikked word.
 [661] This vertu maketh a man lyk to God, and maketh hym Goddes owene deere child, as seith Crist.
 [661A] This vertu disconfiteth thyn enemy. And therfore seith the wise man, "If thow wolt venquysse thyn enemy, lerne to suffre."
 [662] And thou shalt understonde that man suffreth foure manere of grevances in outward thynges,
 [662A] agayns the whiche foure he moot have foure manere of paciences.
 [663] The firste grevance is of wikkede wordes. Thilke suffrede Jhesu Crist withouten grucchyng, ful paciently,
 [663A] whan the Jewes despised and repreved hym ful ofte.
 [664] Suffre thou therfore paciently; for the wise man seith, "If thou stryve with a fool,
 [664A] though the fool be wrooth or though he laughe, algate thou shalt have no reste."
 [665] That oother grevance outward is to have damage of thy catel. Theragayns suffred Crist ful paciently, whan
 [665A] he was despoyled of al that he hadde in this lyf, and that nas but his clothes.
 [666] The thridde grevance is a man to have harm in his body. That suffred Crist ful paciently in al his passioun.
 [667] The fourthe grevance is in outrageous labour in werkes.
 [667A] Wherfore I seye that folk that maken hir servantz to travaillen to grevously or out of tyme, as on haly dayes,
 [667B] soothly they do greet synne.
 [668] Heer-agayns suffred Crist ful paciently and taughte us pacience, whan he baar upon his blissed shulder
 [668A] the croys upon which he sholde suffren despitous deeth.
 [669] Heere may men lerne to be pacient, for certes noght oonly Cristen men been pacient for love of Jhesu Crist
 [669A] and for gerdoun of the blisful lyf that is perdurable, but
 [669B] certes, the olde payens that nevere were Cristene commendeden and useden the vertu of pacience.
 [670] A philosophre upon a tyme, that wolde have beten his disciple for his grete trespas,
 [670A] for which he was greetly amoeved, and broghte a yerde to scoure with the child;
 [671] and whan this child saugh the yerde, he seyde to his maister,
 [671A] "What thenke ye do?" "I wol bete thee," quod the maister, "for thy correccioun."
 [672] "For sothe," quod the child, "ye oghten first correcte youreself,
 [672A] that han lost al youre pacience for the gilt of a child."
 [673] "For sothe," quod the maister al wepynge, "thow seyst sooth. Have thow the yerde, my deere sone, and correcte me for myn inpacience."
 [674] Of pacience comth obedience, thurgh which a man is obedient to Crist and to alle hem
 [674A] to whiche he oghte to been obedient in Crist.
 [675] And understond wel that obedience is parfit
 [675A] whan that a man dooth gladly and hastily, with good herte entierly, al that he sholde do.
 [676] Obedience generally is to parfourne the doctrine of God and of his sovereyns, to whiche hym oghte to ben obeisaunt in alle rightwisnesse.
 [677] After the synne of Envye and of Ire, now wol I speken of the synne of Accidie.
 [677A] For Envye blyndeth the herte of a man, and Ire troubleth a man, and Accidie maketh hym hevy, thoghtful, and wraw.
 [678] Envye and Ire maken bitternesse in herte, which bitternesse is mooder of Accidie, and bynymeth hym the love of alle goodnesse.
 [678A] Thanne is Accidie the angwissh of troubled herte; and Seint Augustyn seith, "It is anoy of goodnesse and joye of harm."
 [679] Certes, this is a dampnable synne, for it dooth wrong to Jhesu Crist,
 [679B] in as muche as it bynymeth the service that men oghte doon to Crist with alle diligence, as seith Salomon.
 [680] But Accidie dooth no swich diligence. He dooth alle thyng with anoy, and with wrawnesse, slaknesse, and excusacioun, and with ydelnesse, and unlust;
 [680A] for which the book seith, "Acursed be he that dooth the service of God necligently."
 [681] Thanne is Accidie enemy to everich estaat of man, for certes the estaat of man is in three maneres.
 [682] Outher it is th' estaat of innocence, as was th' estaat of Adam biforn that he fil into synne,
 [682A] in which estaat he was holden to wirche as in heriynge and adowrynge of God.
 [683] Another estaat is the estaat of synful men, in which estaat men been holden to laboure in preiynge to God
 [683A] for amendement of hire synnes, and that he wole graunte hem to arysen out of hir synnes.
 [684] Another estaat is th' estaat of grace, in which estaat he is holden to werkes of penitence.
 [684A] And certes, to alle thise thynges is Accidie enemy and contrarie, for he loveth no bisynesse at al.
 [685] Now certes this foule synne Accidie is eek a ful greet enemy to the liflode of the body,
 [685A] for it ne hath no purveaunce agayn temporeel necessitee, for it forsleweth and forsluggeth and destroyeth alle goodes temporeles by reccheleesnesse.
 [686] The fourthe thyng is that Accidie is lyk hem that been in the peyne of helle, by cause of hir slouthe
 [686A] and of hire hevynesse, for they that been dampned been so bounde that they ne may neither wel do ne wel thynke.
 [687] Of Accidie comth first that a man is anoyed and encombred for to doon any goodnesse,
 [687A] and maketh that God hath abhomynacion of swich Accidie, as seith Seint John.
 [688] Now comth Slouthe, that wol nat suffre noon hardnesse ne no penaunce. For soothly, Slouthe is so tendre and so delicaat,
 [688A] as seith Salomon, that he wol nat suffre noon hardnesse ne penaunce, and therfore he shendeth al that he dooth.
 [689] Agayns this roten-herted synne of Accidie and Slouthe sholde men exercise hemself to doon goode werkes, and manly
 [689A] and vertuously cacchen corage wel to doon, thynkynge that oure Lord Jhesu Crist quiteth every good dede, be it never so lite.
 [690] Usage of labour is a greet thyng, for it maketh, as seith Seint Bernard, the laborer to have stronge armes and harde synwes;
 [690A] and slouthe maketh hem feble and tendre.
 [691] Thanne comth drede to bigynne to werke anye goode werkes. For certes, he that is enclyned to synne,
 [691A] hym thynketh it is so greet an emprise for to undertake to doon werkes of goodnesse,
 [692] and casteth in his herte that the circumstaunces of goodnesse been so grevouse
 [692A] and so chargeaunt for to suffre, that he dar nat undertake to do werkes of goodnesse, as seith Seint Gregorie.
 [693] Now comth wanhope, that is despeir of the mercy of God, that comth somtyme of to muche outrageous sorwe,
 [693A] and somtyme of to muche drede, ymaginynge that he hath doon so muche synne that it wol nat availlen hym,
 [693B] though he wolde repenten hym and forsake synne,
 [694] thurgh which despeir or drede he abaundoneth al his herte to every maner synne, as seith Seint Augustin.
 [695] Which dampnable synne, if that it continue unto his ende, it is cleped synnyng in the Hooly Goost.
 [696] This horrible synne is so perilous that he that is despeired,
 [696A] ther nys no felonye ne no synne that he douteth for to do, as shewed wel by Judas.
 [697] Certes, aboven alle synnes thanne is this synne moost displesant to Crist, and moost adversarie.
 [698] Soothly, he that despeireth hym is lyk the coward champioun recreant, that seith "creant" withoute nede.
 [698A] Allas, allas, nedeles is he recreant and nedelees despeired.
 [699] Certes, the mercy of God is evere redy to the penitent, and is aboven alle his werkes.
 [700] Allas, kan a man nat bithynke hym on the gospel of Seint Luc, 15,
 [700A] where as Crist seith that "as wel shal ther be joye in hevene upon a synful man that dooth penitence,
 [700B] as upon nynty and nyne rightful men that neden no penitence."
 [701] Looke forther, in the same gospel, the joye and the feeste of the goode man that hadde lost his sone,
 [701A] whan his sone with repentaunce was retourned to his fader.
 [702] Kan they nat remembren hem eek that, as seith Seint Luc, 23, how that the theef that was hanged bisyde Jhesu Crist seyde,
 [702A] "Lord, remembre of me, whan thow comest into thy regn."?
 [703] "For sothe," seyde Crist, "I seye to thee, to-day shaltow been with me in paradys."
 [704] Certes, ther is noon so horrible synne of man
 [704A] that it ne may in his lyf be destroyed by penitence, thurgh vertu of the passion and of the deeth of Crist.
 [705] Allas, what nedeth man thanne to been despeired, sith that his mercy so redy is and large? Axe and have.
 [706] Thanne cometh sompnolence, that is sloggy slombrynge, which maketh a man be hevy and dul in body and in soule,
 [706A] and this synne comth of Slouthe.
 [707] And certes, the tyme that, by wey of resoun, men sholde nat slepe, that is by the morwe,
 [707A] but if ther were cause resonable.
 [708] For soothly, the morwe tyde is moost covenable a man to seye his preyeres, and for to thynken on God,
 [708A] and for to honoure God, and to yeven almesse to the povre that first cometh in the name of Crist.
 [709] Lo, what seith Salomon: "Whoso wolde by the morwe awaken and seke me, he shal fynde."
 [710] Thanne cometh necligence, or reccheleesnesse, that rekketh of no thyng.
 [710A] And how that ignoraunce be mooder of alle harm, certes, necligence is the norice.
 [711] Necligence ne dooth no fors, whan he shal doon a thyng, wheither he do it weel or baddely.
 [712] Of the remedie of thise two synnes, as seith the wise man,
 [712A] that "He that dredeth God, he spareth nat to doon that him oghte doon."
 [713] And he that loveth God, he wol doon diligence to plese God by his werkes
 [713A] and abaundone hymself, with al his myght, wel for to doon.
 [714] Thanne comth ydelnesse, that is the yate of alle harmes. An ydel man is lyk to a place that hath no walles;
 [714A] the develes may entre on every syde, or sheten at hym at discovert, by temptacion on every syde.
 [715] This ydelnesse is the thurrok of alle wikked and vileyns thoghtes, and of alle jangles, trufles, and of alle ordure.
 [716] Certes, the hevene is yeven to hem that wol labouren, and nat to ydel folk. Eek David seith that
 [716A] "they ne been nat in the labour of men, ne they shul nat been whipped with men"
 [716B] -- that is to seyn, in purgatorie.
 [717] Certes, thanne semeth it they shul be tormented with the devel in helle, but if they doon penitence.
 [718] Thanne comth the synne that men clepen tarditas, as whan a man is to laterede or tariynge er he wole turne to God,
 [718A] and certes that is a greet folie. He is lyk to hym that falleth in the dych and wol nat arise.
 [719] And this vice comth of a fals hope, that he thynketh that he shal lyve longe; but that hope faileth ful ofte.
 [720] Thanne comth lachesse; that is he that whan he biginneth any good werk
 [720A] anon he shal forleten it and stynten, as doon they that han any wight to governe
 [720B] and ne taken of hym namoore kep anon as they fynden any contrarie or any anoy.
 [721] Thise been the newe sheepherdes that leten hir sheep wityngly go renne
 [721A] to the wolf that is in the breres, or do no fors of hir owene governaunce.
 [722] Of this comth poverte and destruccioun, bothe of spiritueel and temporeel thynges.
 [722A] Thanne comth a manere cooldnesse, that freseth al the herte of a man.
 [723] Thanne comth undevocioun, thurgh which a man is so blent, as seith Seint Bernard,
 [723A] and hath swich langour in soule that he may neither rede ne singe in hooly chirche, ne heere ne thynke of no devocioun,
 [723B] ne travaille with his handes in no good werk, that it nys hym unsavory and al apalled.
 [724] Thanne wexeth he slough and slombry, and soone wol be wrooth, and soone is enclyned to hate and to envye.
 [725] Thanne comth the synne of worldly sorwe, swich as is cleped tristicia, that sleeth man, as seith Seint Paul.
 [726] For certes, swich sorwe werketh to the deeth of the soule and of the body also;
 [726A] for therof comth that a man is anoyed of his owene lif.
 [727] Wherfore swich sorwe shorteth ful ofte the lif of man, er that his tyme be come by wey of kynde.
 [728] Agayns this horrible synne of Accidie, and the branches of the same, ther is a vertu that is called fortitudo or strengthe,
 [728A] that is an affeccioun thurgh which a man despiseth anoyouse thinges.
 [729] This vertu is so myghty and so vigerous that it dar withstonde myghtily and wisely kepen hymself fro perils that been wikked,
 [729A] and wrastle agayn the assautes of the devel.
 [730] For it enhaunceth and enforceth the soule, right as Accidie abateth it and maketh it fieble.
 [730A] For this fortitudo may endure by long suffraunce the travailles that been covenable.
 [731] This vertu hath manye speces; and the firste is cleped magnanimitee, that is to seyn, greet corage.
 [731A] For certes, ther bihoveth greet corage agains Accidie,
 [731B] lest that it ne swolwe the soule by the synne of sorwe, or destroye it by wanhope.
 [732] This vertu maketh folk to undertake harde thynges and grevouse thynges, by hir owene wil, wisely and resonably.
 [733] And for as muchel as the devel fighteth agayns a man moore by queyntise and by sleighte than by strengthe,
 [733A] therfore men shal withstonden hym by wit and by resoun and by discrecioun.
 [734] Thanne arn ther the vertues of feith and hope in God and in his seintes
 [734A] to acheve and acomplice the goode werkes in the whiche he purposeth fermely to continue.
 [735] Thanne comth seuretee or sikernesse, and that is
 [735A] whan a man ne douteth no travaille in tyme comynge of the goode werkes that a man hath bigonne.
 [736] Thanne comth magnificence; that is to seyn, whan a man dooth and parfourneth grete werkes of goodnesse; and that is the ende
 [736A] why that men sholde do goode werkes, for in the acomplissynge of grete goode werkes lith the grete gerdoun.
 [737] Thanne is ther constaunce, that is stablenesse of corage, and this sholde been in herte by stedefast feith,
 [737A] and in mouth, and in berynge, and in chiere, and in dede.
 [738] Eke ther been mo speciale remedies against Accidie in diverse werkes, and
 [738A] in consideracioun of the peynes of helle and of the joyes of hevene,
 [738B] and in the trust of the grace of the Holy Goost, that wole yeve hym myght to parfourne his goode entente.
 [739] After Accidie wol I speke of Avarice and of Coveitise, of which synne seith
 [739A] Seint Paul that "the roote of alle harmes is Coveitise." Ad Thimotheum Sexto.
 [740] For soothly, whan the herte of a man is confounded in itself and troubled, and that
 [740A] the soule hath lost the confort of God, thanne seketh he an ydel solas of worldly thynges.
 [741] Avarice, after the descripcioun of Seint Augustyn, is a likerousnesse in herte to have erthely thynges.
 [742] Som oother folk seyn that Avarice is for to purchacen manye erthely thynges and no thyng yeve to hem that han nede.
 [743] And understoond that Avarice ne stant nat oonly in lond ne catel,
 [743A] but somtyme in science and in glorie, and in every manere of outrageous thyng is Avarice and Coveitise.
 [744] And the difference bitwixe Avarice and Coveitise is this: Coveitise is for to coveite swiche thynges as thou hast nat;
 [744A] and Avarice is for to withholde and kepe swiche thynges as thou hast, withoute rightful nede.
 [745] Soothly, this Avarice is a synne that is ful dampnable, for al hooly writ curseth it and speketh agayns that vice,
 [745A] for it dooth wrong to Jhesu Crist.
 [746] For it bireveth hym the love that men to hym owen, and turneth it bakward agayns alle resoun,
 [747] and maketh that the avaricious man hath moore hope in his catel than in Jhesu Crist,
 [747A] and dooth moore observance in kepynge of his tresor than he dooth to the service of Jhesu Crist.
 [748] And therfore seith Seint Paul Ad Ephesios quinto, that an avaricious man is the thraldom of ydolatrie.
 [749] What difference is bitwixe an ydolastre and an avaricious man, but that an ydolastre, per aventure, ne hath but o mawmet or two,
 [749A] and the avaricious man hath manye? For certes, every floryn in his cofre is his mawmet.
 [750] And certes, the synne of mawmettrie is the firste thyng
 [750A] that God deffended in the ten comaundementz, as bereth witnesse in Exodi capitulo vicesimo:
 [751] "Thou shalt have no false goddes bifore me, ne thou shalt make to thee no grave thyng."
 [751A] Thus is an avaricious man, that loveth his tresor biforn God, an ydolastre,
 [752] thurgh this cursed synne of avarice. Of Coveitise comen thise harde lordshipes,
 [752A] thurgh whiche men been distreyned by taylages, custumes, and cariages, moore than hire duetee or resoun is.
 [752B] And eek taken they of hire bonde-men amercimentz, whiche myghten moore resonably ben cleped extorcions than amercimentz.
 [753] Of whiche amercimentz and raunsonynge of boonde-men somme lordes stywardes seyn that it is rightful,
 [753A] for as muche as a cherl hath no temporeel thyng that it ne is his lordes, as they seyn.
 [754] But certes, thise lord-shipes doon wrong
 [754A] that bireven hire bonde-folk thynges that they nevere yave hem. Augustinus, De Civitate libro nono.
 [755] "Sooth is that the condicioun of thraldom and the firste cause of thraldom is for synne. Genesis nono.
 [756] Thus may ye seen that the gilt disserveth thraldom, but nat nature."
 [757] Wherfore thise lordes ne sholde nat muche glorifien hem in hir lordshipes,
 [757A] sith that by natureel condicion they been nat lordes over thralles, but that thraldom comth first by the desert of synne.
 [758] And forther over, ther as the lawe seith that temporeel goodes of boonde-folk been the goodes of hir lordshipes, ye,
 [758A] that is for to understonde, the goodes of the emperour, to deffenden hem in hir right,
 [758B] but nat for to robben hem ne reven hem.
 [759] And therfore seith Seneca, "Thy prudence sholde lyve benignely with thy thralles."
 [760] Thilke that thou clepest thy thralles been Goddes peple, for humble folk been Cristes freendes; they been contubernyal with the Lord.
 [761] Thynk eek that of swich seed as cherles spryngen, of swich seed spryngen lordes.
 [761A] As wel may the cherl be saved as the lord.
 [762] The same deeth that taketh the cherl, swich deeth taketh the lord.
 [762A] Wherfore I rede, do right so with thy cherl, as thou woldest that thy lord dide with thee,
 [762B] if thou were in his plit.
 [763] Every synful man is a cherl to synne. I rede thee, certes, that thou, lord,
 [763A] werke in swich wise with thy cherles that they rather love thee than drede.
 [764] I woot wel ther is degree above degree, as reson is,
 [764A] and skile is that men do hir devoir ther as it is due,
 [764B] but certes, extorcions and despit of youre underlynges is dampnable.
 [765] And forther over, understoond wel that thise conquerours or tirauntz maken ful ofte thralles
 [765A] of hem that been born of as roial blood as been they that hem conqueren.
 [766] This name of thraldom was nevere erst kowth til
 [766A] that Noe seyde that his sone Canaan sholde be thral to his bretheren for his synne.
 [767] What seye we thanne of hem that pilen and doon extorcions to hooly chirche?
 [767A] Certes, the swerd that men yeven first to a knyght, whan he is newe dubbed, signifieth that he sholde deffenden hooly chirche,
 [767B] and nat robben it ne pilen it; and whoso dooth is traitour to Crist.
 [768] And, as seith Seint Augustyn, "They been the develes wolves that stranglen the sheep of Jhesu Crist," and doon worse than wolves.
 [769] For soothly, whan the wolf hath ful his wombe, he stynteth to strangle sheep.
 [769A] But soothly, the pilours and destroyours of the godes of hooly chirche ne do nat so, for they ne stynte nevere to pile.
 [770] Now as I have seyd, sith so is that synne was first cause of thraldom, thanne is it thus:
 [770A] that thilke tyme that al this world was in synne, thanne was al this world in thraldom and subjeccioun.
 [771] But certes, sith the time of grace cam, God ordeyned that som folk sholde be moore heigh in estaat and in degree,
 [771A] and som folk moore lough, and that everich sholde be served in his estaat and in his degree.
 [772] And therfore in somme contrees, ther they byen thralles, whan they han turned hem to the feith,
 [772A] they maken hire thralles free out of thraldom. And therfore,
 [772B] certes, the lord oweth to his man that the man oweth to his lord.
 [773] The Pope calleth hymself servant of the servantz of God; but
 [773A] for as muche as the estaat of hooly chirche ne myghte nat han be, ne the commune profit myghte nat han be kept,
 [773B] ne pees and rest in erthe, but if God hadde ordeyned that som men hadde hyer degree and som men lower,
 [774] therfore was sovereyntee ordeyned, to kepe and mayntene and deffenden hire underlynges or hire subgetz in resoun,
 [774A] as ferforth as it lith in hire power, and nat to destroyen hem ne confounde.
 [775] Wherfore I seye that thilke lordes that been lyk wolves,
 [775A] that devouren the possessiouns or the catel of povre folk wrongfully, withouten mercy or mesure,
 [776] they shul receyven by the same mesure that they han mesured to povre folk the
 [776A] mercy of Jhesu Crist, but if it be amended.
 [777] Now comth deceite bitwixe marchaunt and marchant. And thow shalt understonde that marchandise is in manye maneres;
 [777A] that oon is bodily, and that oother is goostly; that oon is honest and leveful, and that oother is deshonest and unleveful.
 [778] Of thilke bodily marchandise that is leveful and honest is this:
 [778A] that, there as God hath ordeyned that a regne or a contree is suffisaunt to hymself,
 [778B] thanne is it honest and leveful that of habundaunce of this contree, that men helpe another contree that is moore nedy.
 [779] And therfore ther moote been marchantz to bryngen fro that o contree to that oother hire marchandises.
 [780] That oother marchandise, that men haunten with fraude and trecherie and deceite, with lesynges and false othes, is cursed and dampnable.
 [781] Espiritueel marchandise is proprely symonye, that is ententif desir to byen thyng espiritueel;
 [781A] that is, thyng that aperteneth to the seintuarie of God and to cure of the soule.
 [782] This desir, if so be that a man do his diligence to parfournen it,
 [782A] al be it that his desir ne take noon effect, yet is it to hym a deedly synne;
 [782B] and if he be ordred, he is irreguleer.
 [783] Certes symonye is cleped of Simon Magus, that wolde han boght for temporeel catel
 [783A] the yifte that God hadde yeven by the Hooly Goost to Seint Peter and to the apostles.
 [784] And therfore understoond that bothe he that selleth and he that beyeth thynges espirituels been cleped symonyals,
 [784A] be it by catel, be it by procurynge, or by flesshly preyere of his freendes, flesshly freendes or espiritueel freendes:
 [785] Flesshly in two maneres; as by kynrede, or othere freendes. Soothly, if they praye for hym that is nat worthy and able,
 [785A] it is symonye, if he take the benefice; and if he be worthy and able, ther nys noon.
 [786] That oother manere is whan men or wommen preyen for folk to avauncen hem,
 [786A] oonly for wikked flesshly affeccioun that they han unto the persone, and that is foul symonye.
 [787] But certes, in service, for which men yeven thynges espirituels unto hir servantz, it moot been understonde that
 [787A] the service moot been honest and elles nat; and eek that it be withouten bargaynynge, and that the persone be able.
 [788] For, as seith Seint Damasie, "Alle the synnes of the world, at regard of this synne, arn as thyng of noght."
 [788A] For it is the gretteste synne that may be, after the synne of Lucifer and Antecrist.
 [789] For by this synne God forleseth the chirche and the soule that he boghte with his precious blood,
 [789A] by hem that yeven chirches to hem that been nat digne.
 [790] For they putten in theves that stelen the soules of Jhesu Crist and destroyen his patrimoyne.
 [791] By swiche undigne preestes and curates han lewed men the lasse reverence of the sacramentz of hooly chirche,
 [791A] and swiche yeveres of chirches putten out the children of Crist and putten into the chirche the develes owene sone.
 [792] They sellen the soules that lambes sholde kepen to the wolf that strangleth hem.
 [792A] And therfore shul they nevere han part of the pasture of lambes, that is the blisse of hevene.
 [793] Now comth hasardrie with his apurtenaunces, as tables and rafles, of which comth deceite, false othes, chidynges, and alle ravynes,
 [793A] blasphemynge and reneiynge of God, and hate of his neighebores, wast of goodes, mysspendynge of tyme, and somtyme manslaughtre.
 [794] Certes, hasardours ne mowe nat been withouten greet synne whiles they haunte that craft.
 [795] Of Avarice comen eek lesynges, thefte, fals witnesse, and false othes.
 [795A] And ye shul understonde that thise been grete synnes and expres agayn the comaundementz of God, as I have seyd.
 [796] Fals witnesse is in word and eek in dede. In word, as for to bireve thy neighebores goode name by thy fals witnessyng,
 [796A] or bireven hym his catel or his heritage by thy fals witnessyng, whan thou for ire, or for meede,
 [796B] or for envye, berest fals witnesse, or accusest hym or excusest hym by thy fals witnesse, or elles excusest thyself falsly.
 [797] Ware yow, questemongeres and notaries! Certes, for fals witnessyng was Susanna in ful gret sorwe and peyne, and many another mo.
 [798] The synne of thefte is eek expres agayns Goddes heeste, and that in two maneres, corporeel or spiritueel.
 [799] Corporeel, as for to take thy neighebores catel agayn his wyl,
 [799A] be it by force or by sleighte, be it by met or by mesure;
 [800] by stelyng eek of false enditementz upon hym, and in borwynge of thy neighebores catel,
 [800A] in entente nevere to payen it agayn, and semblable thynges.
 [801] Espiritueel thefte is sacrilege; that is to seyn, hurtynge of hooly thynges, or of thynges sacred to Crist, in two maneres:
 [801A] by reson of the hooly place, as chirches or chirche-hawes,
 [802] for which every vileyns synne that men doon in swiche places may be cleped sacrilege, or every violence in the semblable places;
 [802A] also, they that withdrawen falsly the rightes that longen to hooly chirche.
 [803] And pleynly and generally, sacrilege is to reven hooly thyng fro hooly place,
 [803A] or unhooly thyng out of hooly place, or hooly thing out of unhooly place.
 [804] Now shul ye understonde that the releevynge of Avarice is misericorde, and pitee largely taken.
 [804A] And men myghten axe why that misericorde and pitee is releevynge of Avarice.
 [805] Certes, the avricious man sheweth no pitee ne misericorde to the nedeful man, for he deliteth hym
 [805A] in the kepynge of his tresor, and nat in the rescowynge ne releevynge of his evene-Cristen. And therfore speke I first of misericorde.
 [806] Thanne is misericorde, as seith the Philosophre, a vertu
 [806A] by which the corage of a man is stired by the mysese of hym that is mysesed.
 [807] Upon which misericorde folweth pitee in parfournynge of charitable werkes of misericorde.
 [808] And certes, thise thynges moeven a man to the misericorde of Jhesu Crist,
 [808A] that he yaf hymself for oure gilt, and suffred deeth for misericorde, and forgaf us oure originale synnes,
 [809] and therby relessed us fro the peynes of helle, and amenused the peynes of purgatorie by penitence,
 [809A] and yeveth grace wel to do, and atte laste the blisse of hevene.
 [810] The speces of misericorde been, as for to lene and for to yeve, and to foryeven and relesse,
 [810A] and for to han pitee in herte and compassioun of the meschief of his evene-Cristene, and eek to chastise, there as nede is.
 [811] Another manere of remedie agayns avarice is resonable largesse; but soothly, heere bihoveth the consideracioun of the grace of Jhesu Crist,
 [811A] and of his temporeel goodes, and eek of the goodes perdurables that Crist yaf to us;
 [812] and to han remembrance of the deeth that he shal receyve, he noot whanne, where, ne how;
 [812A] and eek that he shal forgon al that he hath, save oonly that he hath despended in goode werkes.
 [813] But for as muche as som folk been unmesurable, men oghten eschue fool-largesse, that men clepen wast.
 [814] Certes, he that is fool-large ne yeveth nat his catel, but he leseth his catel.
 [814A] Soothly, what thyng that he yeveth for veyne glorie, as to mynstrals and to folk for to beren his renoun
 [814B] in the world, he hath synne therof and noon almesse.
 [815] Certes, he leseth foule his good that ne seketh with the yifte of his good nothyng but synne.
 [816] He is lyk to an hors that seketh
 [816A] rather to drynken drovy or trouble water than for to drynken water of the clere welle.
 [817] And for as muchel as they yeven ther as they sholde nat yeven, to hem aperteneth
 [817A] thilke malisoun that Crist shal yeven at the day of doom to hem that shullen been dampned.
 [818] After Avarice comth Glotonye, which is expres eek agayn the comandement of God. Glotonye is unmesurable appetit to ete or to drynke,
 [818A] or elles to doon ynogh to the unmesurable appetit and desordeynee coveitise to eten or to drynke.
 [819] This synne corrumped al this world, as is wel shewed in the synne of Adam and of Eve.
 [819A] Looke eek what seith Seint Paul of Glotonye:
 [820] "Manye," seith Saint Paul, "goon, of whiche I have ofte seyd to yow,
 [820A] and now I seye it wepynge, that been the enemys of the croys of Crist; of whiche the ende is deeth,
 [820B] and of whiche hire wombe is hire god, and hire glorie in confusioun of hem that so savouren erthely thynges."
 [821] He that is usaunt to this synne of glotonye, he ne may no synne withstonde.
 [821A] He moot been in servage of alle vices, for it is the develes hoord ther he hideth hym and resteth.
 [822] This synne hath manye speces. The firste is dronkenesse, that is the horrible sepulture of mannes resoun;
 [822A] and therfore, whan a man is dronken, he hath lost his resoun; and this is deedly synne.
 [823] But soothly, whan that a man is nat wont to strong drynke, and peraventure ne knoweth nat the strengthe of the drynke,
 [823A] or hath feblesse in his heed, or hath travailed, thurgh which he drynketh the moore, al be he sodeynly caught with drynke,
 [823B] it is no deedly synne, but venyal.
 [824] The seconde spece of glotonye is that the spirit of a man wexeth al trouble,
 [824A] for dronkenesse bireveth hym the discrecioun of his wit.
 [825] The thridde spece of glotonye is whan a man devoureth his mete and hath no rightful manere of etynge.
 [826] The fourthe is whan, thurgh the grete habundaunce of his mete, the humours in his body been distempred.
 [827] The fifthe is foryetelnesse by to muchel drynkynge, for which somtyme
 [827A] a man foryeteth er the morwe what he dide at even, or on the nyght biforn.
 [828] In oother manere been distinct the speces of Glotonye, after Seint Gregorie. The firste is for to ete biforn tyme to ete.
 [828A] The seconde is whan a man get hym to delicaat mete or drynke.
 [829] The thridde is whan men taken to muche over mesure. The fourthe is curiositee, with greet entente to maken and apparaillen his mete.
 [829A] The fifthe is for to eten to gredily.
 [830] Thise been the fyve fyngres of the develes hand, by whiche he draweth folk to synne.
 [831] Agayns Glotonye is the remedie abstinence, as seith Galien; but that holde I nat meritorie,
 [831A] if he do it oonly for the heele of his body. Seint Augustyn wole that abstinence be doon for vertu and with pacience.
 [832] "Abstinence," he seith, "is litel worth but if a man have good wil therto,
 [832A] and but it be enforced by pacience and by charitee, and that men doon it for Godes sake,
 [832B] and in hope to have the blisse of hevene."
 [833] The felawes of abstinence been attemperaunce, that holdeth the meene in alle thynges; eek shame, that eschueth alle deshonestee;
 [833A] suffisance, that seketh no riche metes ne drynkes, ne dooth no fors of to outrageous apparailynge of mete;
 [834] mesure also, that restreyneth by resoun the deslavee appetit of etynge; sobrenesse also, that restreyneth the outrage of drynke;
 [835] sparynge also, that restreyneth the delicaat ese to sitte longe at his mete and softely,
 [835A] wherfore some folk stonden of hir owene wyl to eten at the lasse leyser.
 [836] After Glotonye thanne comth Lecherie, for thise two synnes been so ny cosyns that ofte tyme they wol nat departe.
 [837] God woot, this synne is ful displesaunt thyng to God, for he seyde hymself,
 [837A] "Do no lecherie." And therfore he putte grete peynes agayns this synne in the olde lawe.
 [838] If womman thral were taken in this synne, she sholde be beten with staves to the deeth;
 [838A] and if she were a gentil womman, she sholde be slayn with
 [838B] stones; and if she were a bisshoppes doghter, she sholde been brent, by Goddes comandement.
 [839] Forther over, by the synne of lecherie God dreynte al the world at the diluge.
 [839A] And after that he brente fyve citees with thonder-leyt, and sank hem into helle.
 [840] Now lat us speke thanne of thilke stynkynge synne of Lecherie that men clepe avowtrie of wedded folk;
 [840A] that is to seyn, if that oon of hem be wedded, or elles bothe.
 [841] Seint John seith that avowtiers shullen been in helle, in a stank brennynge of fyr and of brymston
 [841A] -- in fyr for hire lecherye, in brymston for the stynk of hire ordure.
 [842] Certes, the brekynge of this sacrement is an horrible thyng.
 [842A] It was maked of God hymself in paradys, and confermed by Jhesu Crist, as witnesseth Seint Mathew in the gospel:
 [842B] "A man shal lete fader and mooder and taken hym to his wif, and they shullen be two in o flessh."
 [843] This sacrement bitokneth the knyttynge togidre of Crist and of hooly chirche.
 [844] And nat oonly that God forbad avowtrie in dede, but eek he comanded that thou sholdest nat coveite thy neighebores wyf.
 [845] "In this heeste," seith Seint Augustyn, "is forboden alle manere coveitise to doon lecherie." Lo, what seith Seint Mathew in the gospel, that
 [845A] "whoso seeth a womman to coveitise of his lust, he hath doon lecherie with hire in his herte."
 [846] Heere may ye seen that nat oonly the dede of this synne is forboden, but eek the desir to doon that synne.
 [847] This cursed synne anoyeth grevousliche hem that it haunten. And first to hire soule,
 [847A] for he obligeth it to synne and to peyne of deeth that is perdurable.
 [848] Unto the body anoyeth it grevously also, for it dreyeth hym, and wasteth him, and shent hym, and of his blood
 [848A] he maketh sacrifice to the feend of helle. It wasteth eek his catel and his substaunce.
 [849] And certes, if it be a foul thyng a man to waste his catel on wommen,
 [849A] yet is it a fouler thyng whan that, for swich ordure, wommen dispenden upon men hir catel and substaunce.
 [850] This synne, as seith the prophete, bireveth man and womman hir goode fame and al hire honour,
 [850A] and it is ful plesaunt to the devel, for therby wynneth he the mooste partie of this world.
 [851] And right as a marchant deliteth hym moost in chaffare that he hath moost avantage of,
 [851A] right so deliteth the fend in this ordure.
 [852] This is that oother hand of the devel with fyve fyngres to cacche the peple to his vileynye.
 [853] The firste fynger is the fool lookynge of the fool womman and of the fool man; that sleeth, right
 [853A] as the basilicok sleeth folk by the venym of his sighte, for the coveitise of eyen folweth the coveitise of the herte.
 [854] The seconde fynger is the vileyns touchynge in wikkede manere.
 [854A] And therfore seith Salomon that "whoso toucheth and handleth a womman, he fareth lyk
 [854B] hym that handleth the scorpioun that styngeth and sodeynly sleeth thurgh his envenymynge"; as whoso toucheth warm pych, it shent his fyngres.
 [855] The thridde is foule wordes, that fareth lyk fyr, that right anon brenneth the herte.
 [856] The fourthe fynger is the kissynge; and trewely he were a greet fool
 [856A] that wolde kisse the mouth of a brennynge oven or of a fourneys.
 [857] And moore fooles been they that kissen in vileynye, for that mouth is the mouth of helle;
 [857A] and namely thise olde dotardes holours, yet wol they kisse, though they may nat do, and smatre hem.
 [858] Certes, they been lyk to houndes; for an hound, whan he comth by the roser or by othere [bushes],
 [858A] though he may nat pisse, yet wole he heve up his leg and make a contenaunce to pisse.
 [859] And for that many man weneth that he may nat synne for no likerousnesse that he dooth with his wyf,
 [859A] certes, that opinion is fals. God woot, a man may sleen hymself with his owene knyf,
 [859B] and make hymselve dronken of his owene tonne.
 [860] Certes, be it wyf, be it child,
 [860A] or any worldly thyng that he loveth biforn God, it is his mawmet, and he is an ydolastre.
 [861] Man sholde loven hys wyf by discrecioun, paciently and atemprely, and thanne is she as though it were his suster.
 [862] The fifthe fynger of the develes hand is the stynkynge dede of Leccherie.
 [863] Certes, the fyve fyngres of Glotonie the feend put in the wombe of a man,
 [863A] and with his fyve fingres of Lecherie he gripeth hym by the reynes for to throwen hym into the fourneys of helle,
 [864] ther as they shul han the fyr and the wormes that evere shul lasten, and wepynge and wailynge, sharp hunger and thurst,
 [864A] [and] grymnesse of develes, that shullen al totrede hem withouten respit and withouten ende.
 [865] Of Leccherie, as I seyde, sourden diverse speces, as fornicacioun, that is bitwixe man and womman that been nat maried,
 [865A] and this is deedly synne and agayns nature.
 [866] Al that is enemy and destruccioun to nature is agayns nature.
 [867] Parfay, the resoun of a man telleth eek hym wel that it is deedly synne, for as muche as God forbad leccherie.
 [867A] And Seint Paul yeveth hem the regne that nys dewe to no wight but to hem that doon deedly synne.
 [868] Another synne of Leccherie is to bireve a mayden of hir maydenhede, for he that so dooth,
 [868A] certes, he casteth a mayden out of the hyeste degree that is in this present lif
 [869] and bireveth hire thilke precious fruyt that the book clepeth the hundred fruyt.
 [869A] I ne kan seye it noon ootherweyes in Englissh, but in Latyn it highte Centesimus fructus.
 [870] Certes, he that so dooth is cause of manye damages and vileynyes, mo than any man kan rekene;
 [870A] right as he somtyme is cause of alle damages that beestes don in the feeld, that breketh the hegge or the closure,
 [870B] thurgh which he destroyeth that may nat been restoored.
 [871] For certes, namoore may maydenhede be restoored than an arm that is smyten fro the body may retourne agayn to wexe.
 [872] She may have mercy, this woot I wel, if she do penitence; but nevere shal it be that she nas corrupt.
 [873] And al be it so that I have spoken somwhat of avowtrie,
 [873A] it is good to shewen mo perils that longen to avowtrie, for to eschue that foule synne.
 [874] Avowtrie in Latyn is for to seyn approchynge of oother mannes bed,
 [874A] thurgh which tho that whilom weren o flessh abawndone hir bodyes to othere persones.
 [875] Of this synne, as seith the wise man, folwen manye harmes.
 [875A] First, brekynge of feith, and certes in feith is the keye of Cristendom.
 [876] And whan that feith is broken and lorn, soothly Cristendom stant veyn and withouten fruyt.
 [877] This synne is eek a thefte, for thefte generally is for to reve a wight his thyng agayns his wille.
 [878] Certes, this is the fouleste thefte that may be, whan a womman steleth hir body from hir housbonde
 [878A] and yeveth it to hire holour to defoulen hire, and steleth hir soule fro Crist and yeveth it to the devel.
 [879] This is a fouler thefte than for to breke a chirche and stele the chalice,
 [879A] for thise avowtiers breken the temple of God spiritually, and stelen the vessel of grace, that is the body and the soule,
 [879B] for which Crist shal destroyen hem, as seith Seint Paul.
 [880] Soothly, of this thefte douted gretly Joseph, whan that his lordes wyf preyed hym of vileynye, whan he seyde,
 [880A] "Lo, my lady, how my lord hath take to me under my warde al that he hath in this world,
 [880B] ne no thyng of his thynges is out of my power, but oonly ye, that been his wyf.
 [881] And how sholde I thanne do this wikkednesse, and synne so horribly agayns God and agayns my lord?
 [881A] God it forbeede!" Allas, al to litel is swich trouthe now yfounde.
 [882] The thridde harm is the filthe thurgh which they breken the comandement of God, and defoulen the auctour of matrimoyne, that is Crist.
 [883] For certes, in so muche as the sacrement of mariage is so noble and so digne, so muche is it gretter synne
 [883A] for to breken it, for God made mariage in paradys, in the estaat of innocence, to multiplye mankynde to the service of God.
 [884] And therfore is the brekynge therof the moore grevous; of which brekynge comen false heires ofte tyme, that wrongfully ocupien folkes heritages.
 [884A] And therfore wol Crist putte hem out of the regne of hevene, that is heritage to goode folk.
 [885] Of this brekynge comth eek ofte tyme that folk unwar wedden or synnen with hire owene kynrede, and namely thilke harlotes that haunten
 [885A] bordels of thise fool wommen, that mowe be likned to a commune gong, where as men purgen hire ordure.
 [886] What seye we eek of putours that lyven by the horrible synne of putrie, and constreyne wommen to yelden hem a certeyn rente
 [886A] of hire bodily puterie, ye, somtyme of his owene wyf or his child, as doon thise bawdes? Certes, thise been cursede synnes.
 [887] Understoond eek that Avowtrie is set gladly in the ten comandementz bitwixe thefte and manslaughtre;
 [887A] for it is the gretteste thefte that may be, for it is thefte of body and of soule.
 [888] And it is lyk to homycide, for it kerveth atwo and breketh atwo hem that first were maked o flessh.
 [888A] And therfore, by the olde lawe of God, they sholde be slayn.
 [889] But nathelees, by the lawe of Jhesu Crist, that is lawe of pitee, whan he seyde to the womman
 [889A] that was founden in avowtrie, and sholde han been slayn with stones, after the wyl of the Jewes, as was hir lawe,
 [889B] "Go," quod Jhesu Crist, "and have namoore wyl to synne," or, "wille namoore to do synne."
 [890] Soothly the vengeaunce of Avowtrie is awarded to the peynes of helle, but if so be that it be destourbed by penitence.
 [891] Yet been ther mo speces of this cursed synne; as whan that oon of hem is religious, or elles bothe;
 [891A] or of folk that been entred into ordre, as subdekne, or dekne, or preest, or hospitaliers.
 [891B] And evere the hyer that he is in ordre, the gretter is the synne.
 [892] The thynges that gretly agreggen hire synne is the brekynge of hire avow of chastitee, whan they receyved the ordre.
 [893] And forther over, sooth is that hooly ordre is chief of al the tresorie of God
 [893A] and his especial signe and mark of chastitee to shewe that they been joyned to chastitee,
 [893B] which that is the moost precious lyf that is.
 [894] And thise ordred folk been specially titled to God, and of the special meignee of God,
 [894A] for which, whan they doon deedly synne, they been the special traytours of God and of his peple;
 [894B] for they lyven of the peple, to preye for the peple,
 [894C] and while they ben suche traitours, here preyer avayleth nat to the peple.
 [895] Preestes been aungels, as by the dignitee of hir mysterye;
 [895A] but for sothe, Seint Paul seith that Sathanas transformeth hym in an aungel of light.
 [896] Soothly, the preest that haunteth deedly synne, he may be likned to the aungel of derknesse transformed in the aungel of light.
 [896A] He semeth aungel of light, but for sothe he is aungel of derknesse.
 [897] Swiche preestes been the sones of Helie,
 [897A] as sheweth in the Book of Kynges, that they weren the sones of Belial -- that is, the devel.
 [898] Belial is to seyn, "withouten juge." And so faren they; hem thynketh they been free and han no juge,
 [898A] namoore than hath a free bole that taketh which cow that hym liketh in the town.
 [899] So faren they by wommen. For right as a free bole is ynough for al a toun,
 [899A] right so is a wikked preest corrupcioun ynough for al a parisshe, or for al a contree.
 [900] Thise preestes, as seith the book, ne konne nat the mysterie of preesthod to the peple, ne God ne knowe they nat.
 [900A] They ne helde hem nat apayd, as seith the book, of soden flessh that was to hem offred,
 [900B] but they tooke by force the flessh that is rawe.
 [901] Certes, so thise shrewes ne holden hem nat apayed of roosted flessh and sode flessh,
 [901A] with which the peple feden hem in greet reverence, but they wole have raw flessh of folkes wyves and hir doghtres.
 [902] And certes, thise wommen that consenten to hire harlotrie doon greet wrong to Crist,
 [902A] and to hooly chirche, and alle halwes, and to alle soules;
 [902B] for they bireven alle thise hym that sholde worshipe Crist and hooly chirche and preye for Cristene soules.
 [903] And therfore han swiche preestes, and hire lemmanes eek that consenten to hir leccherie,
 [903A] the malisoun of al the court Cristien, til they come to amendement.
 [904] The thridde spece of avowtrie is somtyme bitwixe a man and his wyf, and that is
 [904A] whan they take no reward in hire assemblynge but oonly to hire flesshly delit, as seith Seint Jerome,
 [905] and ne rekken of nothyng but that they been assembled;
 [905A] by cause that they been maried, al is good ynough, as thynketh to hem.
 [906] But in swich folk hath the devel power, as seyde the aungel Raphael to Thobie,
 [906A] for in hire assemblynge they putten Jhesu Crist out of hire herte and yeven hemself to alle ordure.
 [907] The fourthe spece is the assemblee of hem that been of hire kynrede, or of hem that been of oon affynytee,
 [907A] or elles with hem with whiche hir fadres or hir kynrede han deled in the synne of lecherie.
 [907B] This synne maketh hem lyk to houndes, that taken no kep to kynrede.
 [908] And certes, parentele is in two maneres, outher goostly or flesshly; goostly, as for to deelen with his godsibbes.
 [909] For right so as he that engendreth a child is his flesshly fader, right so is his godfader his fader espiritueel.
 [909A] For which a womman may in no lasse synne assemblen with hire godsib than with hire owene flesshly brother.
 [910] The fifthe spece is thilke abhomynable synne, of which that no man unnethe oghte speke ne write;
 [910A] nathelees it is openly reherced in holy writ.
 [911] This cursednesse doon men and wommen in diverse entente and in diverse manere; but though that hooly writ speke of horrible synne,
 [911A] certes hooly writ may nat been defouled, namoore than the sonne that shyneth on the mixne.
 [912] Another synne aperteneth to leccherie, that comth in slepynge, and this synne cometh ofte to hem that been maydenes,
 [912A] and eek to hem that been corrupt; and this synne men clepen polucioun, that comth in foure maneres.
 [913] Somtyme of langwissynge of body, for the humours been to ranke and to habundaunt in the body of man;
 [913A] somtyme of infermetee, for the fieblesse of the vertu retentif, as phisik maketh mencion; somtyme for surfeet of mete and drynke;
 [914] and somtyme of vileyns thoghtes that been enclosed in mannes mynde whan he gooth to slepe, which may nat been withoute synne;
 [914A] for which men moste kepen hem wisely, or elles may men synnen ful grevously.
 [915] Now comth the remedie agayns Leccherie, and that is generally chastitee and continence,
 [915A] that restreyneth alle the desordeynee moevynges that comen of flesshly talentes.
 [916] And evere the gretter merite shal he han that moost restreyneth the wikkede eschawfynges of the [ardour] of this synne.
 [916A] And this is in two maneres -- that is to seyn, chastitee in mariage, and chastitee of widwehod.
 [917] Now shaltow understonde that matrimoyne is leefful assemblynge of man and of womman that receyven by vertu of the sacrement the boond
 [917A] thurgh which they may nat be departed in al hir lyf -- that is to seyn, whil that they lyven bothe.
 [918] This, as seith the book, is a ful greet sacrement.
 [918A] God maked it, as I have seyd, in paradys, and wolde hymself be born in mariage.
 [919] And for to halwen mariage he was at a weddynge, where as he turned water into wyn,
 [919A] which was the firste miracle that he wroghte in erthe biforn his disciples.
 [920] Trewe effect of mariage clenseth fornicacioun and replenysseth hooly chirche of good lynage, for that is the ende of mariage;
 [920A] and it chaungeth deedly synne into venial synne bitwixe hem that been ywedded,
 [920B] and maketh the hertes al oon of hem that been ywedded, as wel as the bodies.
 [921] This is verray mariage, that was establissed by God, er that synne bigan, whan natureel lawe was in his right poynt in paradys;
 [921A] and it was ordeyned that o man sholde have but o womman, and o womman but o man,
 [921B] as seith Seint Augustyn, by manye resouns.
 [922] First, for mariage is figured bitwixe Crist and holy chirche. And that oother is for a man is heved of a womman;
 [922A] algate, by ordinaunce it sholde be so.
 [923] For if a womman hadde mo men than oon, thanne sholde she have moo hevedes than oon, and
 [923A] that were an horrible thyng biforn God; and eek a womman ne myghte nat plese to many folk at oones.
 [923B] And also ther ne sholde nevere be pees ne reste amonges hem, for everich wolde axen his owene thyng.
 [924] And forther over, no man ne sholde knowe his owene engendrure, ne who sholde have his heritage;
 [924A] and the womman sholde been the lasse biloved fro the tyme that she were conjoynt to many men.
 [925] Now comth how that a man sholde bere hym with his wif, and namely in two thynges;
 [925A] that is to seyn, in suffraunce and reverence, as shewed Crist whan he made first womman.
 [926] For he ne made hire nat of the heved of Adam, for she sholde nat clayme to greet lordshipe.
 [927] For ther as the womman hath the maistrie, she maketh to muche desray.
 [927A] Ther neden none ensamples of this; the experience of day by day oghte suffise.
 [928] Also, certes, God ne made nat womman of the foot of Adam, for she ne sholde nat been holden to lowe;
 [928A] for she kan nat paciently suffre. But God made womman of the ryb of Adam, for womman sholde be felawe unto man.
 [929] Man sholde bere hym to his wyf in feith, in trouthe, and in love,
 [929A] as seith Seint Paul, that a man sholde loven his wyf as Crist loved hooly chirche,
 [929B] that loved it so wel that he deyde for it. So sholde a man for his wyf, if it were nede.
 [930] Now how that a womman sholde be subget to hire housbonde, that telleth Seint Peter. First, in obedience.
 [931] And eek, as seith the decree, a womman that is wyf, as longe as she is a wyf,
 [931A] she hath noon auctoritee to swere ne to bere witnesse withoute leve of hir housbonde,
 [931B] that is hire lord; algate, he sholde be so by resoun.
 [932] She sholde eek serven hym in alle honestee, and been attempree of hire array.
 [932A] I woot wel that they sholde setten hire entente to plesen hir housbondes, but nat by hire queyntise of array.
 [933] Seint Jerome seith that "wyves that been apparailled in silk and in precious purpre ne mowe nat clothen hem in Jhesu Crist."
 [933A] Loke what seith Seint John eek in thys matere?
 [934] Seint Gregorie eek seith that "No wight seketh precious array but oonly for veyne glorie, to been honoured the moore biforn the peple."
 [935] It is a greet folye, a womman to have a fair array outward and in hirself be foul inward.
 [936] A wyf sholde eek be mesurable in lookynge and in berynge and in lawghynge, and discreet in alle hire wordes and hire dedes.
 [937] And aboven alle worldly thyng she sholde loven hire housbonde with al hire herte, and to hym be trewe of hir body.
 [938] So sholde an housbonde eek be to his wyf. For sith that al the body is the housbondes,
 [938A] so sholde hire herte been, or elles ther is bitwixe hem two, as in that, no parfit mariage.
 [939] Thanne shal men understonde that for thre thynges a man and his wyf flesshly mowen assemble.
 [939A] The firste is in entente of engendrure of children to the service of God, for certes that is the cause final of matrimoyne.
 [940] Another cause is to yelden everich of hem to oother the dette of hire bodies,
 [940A] for neither of hem hath power of his owene body. The thridde is for to eschewe leccherye and vileynye.
 [940B] The ferthe is for sothe deedly synne.
 [941] As to the firste, it is meritorie; the seconde also, for, as seith the decree, that
 [941A] she hath merite of chastitee that yeldeth to hire housbonde the dette of hir body,
 [941B] ye, though it be agayn hir likynge and the lust of hire herte.
 [942] The thridde manere is venyal synne; and, trewely, scarsly may ther any of thise be withoute venial synne,
 [942A] for the corrupcion and for the delit.
 [943] The fourthe manere is for to understonde, as if they assemble oonly for amorous love and for noon of the foreseyde causes,
 [943A] but for to accomplice thilke brennynge delit, they rekke nevere how ofte.
 [943B] Soothly it is deedly synne; and yet, with sorwe, somme folk wol peynen hem moore to doon than to hire appetit suffiseth.
 [944] The seconde manere of chastitee is for to been a clene wydewe,
 [944A] and eschue the embracynges of man, and desiren the embracynge of Jhesu Crist.
 [945] Thise been tho that han been wyves and han forgoon hire housbondes,
 [945A] and eek wommen that han doon leccherie and been releeved by penitence.
 [946] And certes, if that a wyf koude kepen hire al chaast by licence of hir housbonde,
 [946A] so that she yeve nevere noon occasion that he agilte, it were to hire a greet merite.
 [947] Thise manere wommen that observen chastitee moste be clene in herte as wel as in body and in thought,
 [947A] and mesurable in clothynge and in contenaunce, and been abstinent in etynge and drynkynge, in spekynge, and in dede.
 [947B] They been the vessel or the boyste of the blissed Magdelene, that fulfilleth hooly chirche of good odour.
 [948] The thridde manere of chastitee is virginitee, and it bihoveth that she be hooly in herte and clene of body.
 [948A] Thanne is she spouse to Jhesu Crist, and she is the lyf of angeles.
 [949] She is the preisynge of this world, and she is as thise martirs in egalitee;
 [949A] she hath in hire that tonge may nat telle ne herte thynke.
 [950] Virginitee baar oure Lord Jhesu Crist, and virgine was hymselve.
 [951] Another remedie agayns Leccherie is specially to withdrawen swiche thynges as yeve occasion to thilke vileynye, as ese, etynge, and drynkynge.
 [951A] For certes, whan the pot boyleth strongly, the beste remedie is to withdrawe the fyr.
 [952] Slepynge longe in greet quiete is eek a greet norice to Leccherie.
 [953] Another remedie agayns Leccherie is that a man or a womman eschue the compaignye of hem
 [953A] by whiche he douteth to be tempted, for al be it so that the dede be withstonden, yet is ther greet temptacioun.
 [954] Soothly, a whit wal, although it ne brenne noght fully by stikynge of a candele, yet is the wal blak of the leyt.
 [955] Ful ofte tyme I rede that no man truste in his owene perfeccioun,
 [955A] but he be stronger than Sampson, and hoolier than David, and wiser than Salomon.
 [956] Now after that I have declared yow, as I kan, the sevene deedly synnes,
 [956A] and somme of hire braunches and hire remedies, soothly, if I koude, I wolde telle yow the ten comandementz.
 [957] But so heigh a doctrine I lete to divines. Nathelees, I hope to God,
 [957A] they been touched in this tretice, everich of hem alle.
 [958] Now for as muche as the seconde partie of Penitence stant in confessioun of mouth,
 [958A] as I bigan in the firste chapitre, I seye, Seint Augustyn seith,
 [959] "Synne is every word and every dede, and al that men coveiten, agayn the lawe of Jhesu Crist;
 [959A] and this is for to synne in herte, in mouth, and in dede, by thy fyve wittes,
 [959B] that been sighte, herynge, smellynge, tastynge or savourynge, and feelynge."
 [960] Now is it good to understonde the circumstances that agreggen muchel every synne.
 [961] Thou shalt considere what thow art that doost the synne,
 [961A] wheither thou be male or femele, yong or oold, gentil or thral,
 [961B] free or servant, hool or syk, wedded or sengle, ordred or unordred, wys or fool, clerk or seculeer;
 [962] if she be of thy kynrede, bodily or goostly, or noon;
 [962A] if any of thy kynrede have synned with hire, or noon; and manye mo thinges.
 [963] Another circumstaunce is this: wheither it be doon in fornicacioun or in avowtrie or noon, incest or noon, mayden or noon,
 [963A] in manere of homicide or noon, horrible grete synnes or smale, and how longe thou hast continued in synne.
 [964] The thridde circumstaunce is the place ther thou hast do synne, wheither in oother mennes hous or in thyn owene,
 [964A] in feeld or in chirche or in chirchehawe, in chirche dedicaat or noon.
 [965] For if the chirche be halwed, and man or womman
 [965A] spille his kynde inwith that place by wey of synne or by wikked temptacioun,
 [965B] the chirche is entredited til it be reconsiled by the bysshop.
 [966] And the preest sholde be enterdited that dide swich a vileynye; to terme of al his lif he sholde namoore synge masse,
 [966A] and if he dide, he sholde doon deedly synne at every time that he so songe masse.
 [967] The fourthe circumstaunce is by whiche mediatours, or by whiche messagers, as for enticement, or for consentement to bere compaignye with felaweshipe;
 [967A] for many a wrecche, for to bere compaignye, wol go to the devel of helle.
 [968] Wherfore they that eggen or consenten to the synne been parteners of the synne, and of the dampnacioun of the synnere.
 [969] The fifthe circumstaunce is how manye tymes that he hath synned,
 [969A] if it be in his mynde, and how ofte that he hath falle.
 [970] For he that ofte falleth in synne, he despiseth the mercy of God, and encreesseth hys synne, and is unkynde to Crist;
 [970A] and he wexeth the moore fieble to withstonde synne, and synneth the moore lightly,
 [971] and the latter ariseth, and is the moore eschew for to shryven hym, and namely, to hym that is his confessour.
 [972] For which that folk, whan they falle agayn in hir olde folies, outher they forleten hir olde confessours al outrely
 [972A] or elles they departen hir shrift in diverse places; but soothly, swich departed shrift deserveth no mercy of God of his synnes.
 [973] The sixte circumstaunce is why that a man synneth, as by which temptacioun, and if hymself procure thilke temptacioun,
 [973A] or by the excitynge of oother folk; or if he synne with a womman by force, or by hire owene assent;
 [974] or if the womman, maugree hir hed, hath been afforced, or noon. This shal she telle:
 [974A] for coveitise, or for poverte, and if it was hire procurynge, or noon; and swich manere harneys.
 [975] The seventhe circumstaunce is in what manere he hath doon his synne,
 [975A] or how that she hath suffred that folk han doon to hire.
 [976] And the same shal the man telle pleynly with alle circumstaunces; and wheither he hath synned with comune bordel wommen or noon,
 [977] or doon his synne in hooly tymes or noon, in fastyng tymes or noon, or biforn his shrifte, or after his latter shrifte,
 [978] and hath peraventure broken therfore his penance enjoyned, by whos help and whos conseil, by sorcerie or craft; al moste be toold.
 [979] Alle thise thynges, after that they been grete or smale, engreggen the conscience of man.
 [979A] And eek the preest, that is thy juge, may the bettre been avysed of his juggement
 [979B] in yevynge of thy penaunce, and that is after thy contricioun.
 [980] For understond wel that after tyme that a man hath defouled his baptesme by synne,
 [980A] if he wole come to salvacioun, ther is noon other wey but by penitence and shrifte and satisfaccioun,
 [981] and namely by the two, if ther be a confessour to which he may shriven hym,
 [981A] and the thridde, if he have lyf to parfournen it.
 [982] Thanne shal man looke and considere that if he wole maken a trewe and a profitable confessioun, ther moste be foure condiciouns.
 [983] First, it moot been in sorweful bitternesse of herte, as seyde the kyng Ezechias to God,
 [983A] "I wol remembre me alle the yeres of my lif in bitternesse of myn herte."
 [984] This condicioun of bitternesse hath fyve signes. The firste is that confessioun moste be shamefast, nat for to covere ne hyden his synne,
 [984A] for he hath agilt his God and defouled his soule.
 [985] And herof seith Seint Augustyn, "The herte travailleth for shame of his synne";
 [985A] and for he hath greet shamefastnesse, he is digne to have greet mercy of God.
 [986] Swich was the confessioun of the publican that wolde nat heven up his eyen to hevene,
 [986A] for he hadde offended God of hevene; for which shamefastnesse he hadde anon the mercy of God.
 [987] And therof seith Seint Augustyn that swich shamefast folk been next foryevenesse and remissioun.
 [988] Another signe is humylitee in confessioun, of which seith Seint Peter,
 [988A] "Humbleth yow under the myght of God." The hond of God is myghty in confessioun, for
 [988B] therby God foryeveth thee thy synnes, for he allone hath the power.
 [989] And this humylitee shal been in herte and in signe outward, for right as he hath humylitee to God in his herte,
 [989A] right so sholde he humble his body outward to the preest, that sit in Goddes place.
 [990] For which in no manere, sith that Crist is sovereyn, and the preest meene and mediatour bitwixe Crist and the synnere,
 [990A] and the synnere is the laste by wey of resoun,
 [991] thanne sholde nat the synnere sitte as heighe as his confessour, but knele biforn hym or at his feet,
 [991A] but if maladie destourbe it. For he shal nat taken kep who sit there, but in whos place that he sitteth.
 [992] A man that hath trespased to a lord, and comth for to axe mercy and maken his accord,
 [992A] and set him doun anon by the lord,
 [992B] men wolde holden hym outrageous, and nat worthy so soone for to have remissioun ne mercy.
 [993] The thridde signe is how that thy shrift sholde be ful of teeris, if man may,
 [993A] and if man may nat wepe with his bodily eyen, lat hym wepe in herte.
 [994] Swich was the confession of Seint Peter, for after that he hadde forsake Jhesu Crist, he wente out and weep ful bitterly.
 [995] The fourthe signe is that he ne lette nat for shame to shewen his confessioun.
 [996] Swich was the confessioun of the Magdalene, that ne spared for no shame of hem
 [996A] that weren atte feeste, for to go to oure Lord Jhesu Crist and biknowe to hym hire synne.
 [997] The fifthe signe is that a man or a womman be obeisant to receyven the penaunce that hym is enjoyned for his synnes,
 [997A] for certes, Jhesu Crist, for the giltes of o man, was obedient to the deeth.
 [998] The seconde condicion of verray confession is that it be hastily doon.
 [998A] For certes, if a man hadde a deedly wounde, evere the lenger that he taried to warisshe hymself,
 [998B] the moore wolde it corrupte and haste hym to his deeth, and eek the wounde wolde be the wors for to heele.
 [999] And right so fareth synne that longe tyme is in a man unshewed.
 [1000] Certes, a man oghte hastily shewen his synnes for manye causes; as for drede of deeth, that cometh ofte sodeynly,
 [1000A] and no certeyn what tyme it shal be, ne in what place; and eek the drecchynge of o synne draweth in another;
 [1001] and eek the lenger that he tarieth, the ferther he is fro Crist. And if he abide to his laste day, scarsly
 [1001A] may he shryven hym or remembre hym of his synnes or repenten hym, for the grevous maladie of his deeth.
 [1002] And for as muche as he ne hath nat in his lyf herkned Jhesu Crist
 [1002A] whanne he hath spoken, he shal crie to Jhesu Crist at his laste day, and scarsly wol he herkne hym.
 [1003] And understond that this condicioun moste han foure thynges. Thi shrift moste be purveyed bifore and avysed;
 [1003A] for wikked haste dooth no profit; and that a man konne shryve hym of his synnes,
 [1003B] be it of pride, or of envye, and so forth with the speces and circumstances;
 [1004] and that he have comprehended in hys mynde the nombre and the greetnesse of his synnes,
 [1004A] and how longe that he hath leyn in synne;
 [1005] and eek that he be contrit of his synnes, and in stidefast purpos,
 [1005A] by the grace of God, nevere eft to falle in synne;
 [1005B] and eek that he drede and countrewaite hymself, that he fle the occasiouns of synne to whiche he is enclyned.
 [1006] Also thou shalt shryve thee of alle thy synnes to o man, and nat a parcel to o man and a parcel to another;
 [1006A] that is to understonde, in entente to departe thy confessioun, as for shame or drede, for it nys but stranglynge of thy soule.
 [1007] For certes Jhesu Crist is entierly al good; in hym nys noon imperfeccioun,
 [1007A] and therfore outher he foryeveth al parfitly or elles never a deel.
 [1008] I seye nat that if thow be assigned to the penitauncer for certein synne,
 [1008A] that thow art bounde to shewen hym al the remenaunt of thy synnes, of whiche thow hast be shryven of thy curaat,
 [1008B] but if it like to thee of thyn humylitee; this is no departynge of shrifte.
 [1009] Ne I seye nat, ther as I speke of divisioun of confessioun, that if thou have licence
 [1009A] for to shryve thee to a discreet and an honest preest, where thee liketh, and by licence of thy curaat,
 [1009B] that thow ne mayst wel shryve thee to him of alle thy synnes.
 [1010] But lat no blotte be bihynde; lat no synne been untoold, as fer as thow hast remembraunce.
 [1011] And whan thou shalt be shryven to thy curaat, telle hym eek alle the synnes that thow hast doon
 [1011A] syn thou were last yshryven; this is no wikked entente of divisioun of shrifte.
 [1012] Also the verray shrifte axeth certeine condiciouns. First, that thow shryve thee by thy free wil,
 [1012A] noght constreyned, ne for shame of folk, ne for maladie, ne swiche thynges.
 [1012B] For it is resoun that he that trespaseth by his free wyl, that by his free wyl he confesse his trespas,
 [1013] and that noon oother man telle his synne but he hymself;
 [1013A] ne he shal nat nayte ne denye his synne, ne wratthe hym agayn the preest for his amonestynge to lete synne.
 [1014] The seconde condicioun is that thy shrift be laweful; that is to seyn, that
 [1014A] thow that shryvest thee and eek the preest that hereth thy confessioun been verraily in the feith of hooly chirche,
 [1015] and that a man ne be nat despeired of the mercy of Jhesu Crist, as Caym or Judas.
 [1016] And eek a man moot accusen hymself of his owene trespas, and nat another;
 [1016A] but he shal blame and wyten hymself and his owene malice of his synne, and noon oother.
 [1017] But nathelees, if that another man be occasioun or enticere of his synne,
 [1017A] or the estaat of a persone be swich thurgh which his synne is agregged, or elles that he may nat pleynly shryven
 [1017B] hym but he telle the persone with which he hath synned, thanne may he telle it,
 [1018] so that his entente ne be nat to bakbite the persone, but oonly to declaren his confessioun.
 [1019] Thou ne shalt nat eek make no lesynges in thy confessioun, for humylitee,
 [1019A] peraventure, to seyn that thou hast doon synnes of whiche thow were nevere gilty.
 [1020] For Seint Augustyn seith, "If thou, by cause of thyn humylitee, makest lesynges on thyself,
 [1020A] though thow ne were nat in synne biforn, yet artow thanne in synne thurgh thy lesynges."
 [1021] Thou most eek shewe thy synne by thyn owene propre mouth, but thow be woxe dowmb, and nat by no lettre;
 [1021A] for thow that hast doon the synne, thou shalt have the shame therfore.
 [1022] Thow shalt nat eek peynte thy confessioun by faire subtile wordes, to covere the moore thy synne;
 [1022A] for thanne bigilestow thyself, and nat the preest. Thow most tellen it platly, be it nevere so foul ne so horrible.
 [1023] Thow shalt eek shryve thee to a preest that is discreet to conseille
 [1023A] thee; and eek thou shalt nat shryve thee for veyne glorie, ne for ypocrisye, ne for no cause
 [1023B] but oonly for the doute of Jhesu Crist and the heele of thy soule.
 [1024] Thow shalt nat eek renne to the preest sodeynly to tellen hym lightly thy synne,
 [1024A] as whoso telleth a jape or a tale, but avysely and with greet devocioun.
 [1025] And generally, shryve thee ofte. If thou ofte falle, ofte thou arise by confessioun.
 [1026] And though thou shryve thee ofter than ones of synne of which thou hast be shryven, it is the moore merite.
 [1026A] And, as seith Seint Augustyn, thow shalt have the moore lightly relessyng and grace of God, bothe of synne and of peyne.
 [1027] And certes, oones a yeere atte leeste wey it is laweful for to been housled, for certes, oones a yeere alle thynges renovellen.
 [1028] Now have I toold yow of verray Confessioun, that is the seconde partie of Penitence.
 [1029] The thridde partie of Penitence is Satisfaccioun, and that stant moost generally in almesse and in bodily peyne.
 [1030] Now been ther thre manere of almesse: contricion of herte, where a man offreth hymself to God;
 [1030A] another is to han pitee of defaute of his neighebores; and the thridde is
 [1030B] in yevynge of good conseil and comfort, goostly and bodily, where men han nede, and namely in sustenaunce of mannes foode.
 [1031] And tak kep that a man hath nede of thise thinges generally: he hath nede of foode, he hath nede of clothyng and herberwe,
 [1031A] he hath nede of charitable conseil and visitynge in prisone and in maladie, and sepulture of his dede body.
 [1032] And if thow mayst nat visite the nedeful with thy persone, visite hym by thy message and by thy yiftes.
 [1033] Thise been general almesses or werkes of charitee
 [1033A] of hem that han temporeel richesses or discrecioun in conseilynge. Of thise werkes shaltow heren at the day of doom.
 [1034] Thise almesses shaltow doon of thyne owene propre thynges, and hastily and prively, if thow mayst.
 [1035] But nathelees, if thow mayst nat doon it prively, thow shalt nat forbere to doon almesse though men seen it,
 [1035A] so that it be nat doon for thank of the world, but oonly for thank of Jhesu Crist.
 [1036] For, as witnesseth Seint Mathew, capitulo quinto, "A citee may nat been hyd that is set on a montayne,
 [1036A] ne men lighte nat a lanterne and put it under a busshel,
 [1036B] but men sette it on a candle-stikke to yeve light to the men in the hous.
 [1037] Right so shal youre light lighten bifore men, that they may seen youre goode werkes, and glorifie youre fader that is in hevene."
 [1038] Now as to speken of bodily peyne, it stant in preyeres, in wakynges, in fastynges, in vertuouse techynges of orisouns.
 [1039] And ye shul understonde that orisouns or preyeres is for to seyn a pitous wyl of herte,
 [1039A] that redresseth it in God and expresseth it by word outward, to remoeven harmes and to han thynges espiritueel and durable,
 [1039B] and somtyme temporele thynges; of whiche orisouns, certes, in the orison of the Pater noster hath Jhesu Crist enclosed moost thynges.
 [1040] Certes, it is privyleged of thre thynges in his dignytee,
 [1040A] for which it is moore digne than any oother preyere, for that Jhesu Crist hymself maked it;
 [1041] and it is short, for it sholde be koud the moore lightly, and
 [1041A] for to withholden it the moore esily in herte, and helpen hymself the ofter with the orisoun,
 [1042] and for a man sholde be the lasse wery to seyen it, and for a man may nat excusen hym to lerne it,
 [1042A] it is so short and so esy, and for it comprehendeth in it self alle goode preyeres.
 [1043] The exposicioun of this hooly preyere, that is so excellent and digne, I bitake to thise maistres of theologie,
 [1043A] save thus muchel wol I seyn; that whan thow prayest that God sholde foryeve thee thy giltes as
 [1043B] thou foryevest hem that agilten to thee, be ful wel war that thow ne be nat out of charitee.
 [1044] This hooly orison amenuseth eek venyal synne, and therfore it aperteneth specially to penitence.
 [1045] This preyere moste be trewely seyd, and in verray feith, and that men preye to God ordinatly and discreetly and devoutly;
 [1045A] and alwey a man shal putten his wyl to be subget to the wille of God.
 [1046] This orisoun moste eek been seyd with greet humblesse and ful pure, honestly and nat to the anoyaunce of any man or womman.
 [1046A] It moste eek been continued with the werkes of charitee.
 [1047] It avayleth eek agayn the vices of the soule, for, as seith Seint Jerome,
 [1047A] "By fastynge been saved the vices of the flessh, and by preyere the vices of the soule."
 [1048] After this, thou shalt understonde that bodily peyne stant in wakynge, for Jhesu Crist seith,
 [1048A] "Waketh and preyeth, that ye ne entre in wikked temptacioun."
 [1049] Ye shul understanden also that fastynge stant in thre thynges: in forberynge of bodily mete and drynke, and in forberynge of worldly jolitee,
 [1049A] and in forberynge of deedly synne; this is to seyn, that a man shal kepen hym fro deedly synne with al his myght.
 [1050] And thou shalt understanden eek that God ordeyned fastynge, and to fastynge appertenen foure thinges:
 [1051] largenesse to povre folk, gladnesse of herte espiritueel, nat to been angry ne anoyed, ne grucche for he fasteth,
 [1051A] and also resonable houre for to ete; ete by mesure; that is for to seyn,
 [1051B] a man shal nat ete in untyme, ne sitte the lenger at his table to ete for he fasteth.
 [1052] Thanne shaltow understonde that bodily peyne stant in disciplyne or techynge, by word, or by writynge, or in ensample;
 [1052A] also in werynge of heyres, or of stamyn, or of haubergeons on hire naked flessh, for Cristes sake, and swiche manere penances.
 [1053] But war thee wel that swiche manere penaunces on thy flessh ne make nat thyn herte bitter or angry or anoyed of thyself,
 [1053A] for bettre is to caste awey thyn heyre, than for to caste awey the swetenesse of Jhesu Crist.
 [1054] And therfore seith Seint Paul, "Clothe yow, as they that been chosen of God, in herte of misericorde, debonairetee, suffraunce,
 [1054A] and swich manere of clothynge," of whiche Jhesu Crist is moore apayed than of heyres, or haubergeouns, or hauberkes.
 [1055] Thanne is discipline eek in knokkynge of thy brest, in scourgynge with yerdes, in knelynges, in tribulacions,
 [1056] in suffrynge paciently wronges that been doon to thee,
 [1056A] and eek in pacient suffraunce of maladies, or lesynge of worldly catel, or of wyf, or of child, or othere freendes.
 [1057] Thanne shaltow understonde whiche thynges destourben penaunce; and this is in foure maneres:
 [1057A] that is, drede, shame, hope, and wanhope, that is desperacion.
 [1058] And for to speke first of drede, for which he weneth that he may suffre no penaunce;
 [1059] ther-agayns is remedie for to thynke that bodily penaunce is but short and litel at regard of the peyne of helle,
 [1059A] that is so crueel and so long that it lasteth withouten ende.
 [1060] Now again the shame that a man hath to shryven hym,
 [1060A] and namely thise ypocrites that wolden been holden so parfite that they han no nede to shryven hem;
 [1061] agayns that shame sholde a man thynke that, by wey of resoun, that he that hath nat been shamed to doon foule thinges,
 [1061A] certes hym oghte nat been ashamed to do faire thynges, and that is confessiouns.
 [1062] A man sholde eek thynke that God seeth and woot alle his thoghtes and alle his werkes,
 [1062A] to hym may no thyng been hyd ne covered.
 [1063] Men sholden eek remembren hem of the shame that is to come at the day of doom
 [1063A] to hem that been nat penitent and shryven in this present lyf.
 [1064] For alle the creatures in hevene, in erthe, and in helle shullen seen apertly al that they hyden in this world.
 [1065] Now for to speken of the hope of hem that been necligent and slowe to shryven hem, that stant in two maneres.
 [1066] That oon is that he hopeth for to lyve longe and for to purchacen muche richesse for his delit,
 [1066A] and thanne he wol shryven hym; and, as he seith, hym semeth thanne tymely ynough to come to shrifte.
 [1067] Another is of surquidrie that he hath in Cristes mercy.
 [1068] Agayns the firste vice, he shal thynke that oure lif is in no sikernesse,
 [1068A] and eek that alle the richesses in this world ben in aventure and passen as a shadwe on the wal;
 [1069] and, as seith Seint Gregorie, that it aperteneth to the grete rightwisnesse of God that
 [1069A] nevere shal the peyne stynte of hem that nevere wolde withdrawen hem fro synne, hir thankes,
 [1069B] but ay continue in synne; for thilke perpetueel wil to do synne shul they han perpetueel peyne.
 [1070] Wanhope is in two maneres: the firste wanhope is in the mercy of Crist;
 [1070A] that oother is that they thynken that they ne myghte nat longe persevere in goodnesse.
 [1071] The firste wanhope comth of that he demeth that he hath synned so greetly and so ofte,
 [1071A] and so longe leyn in synne, that he shal nat be saved.
 [1072] Certes, agayns that cursed wanhope sholde he thynke that
 [1072A] the passion of Jhesu Crist is moore strong for to unbynde than synne is strong for to bynde.
 [1073] Agayns the seconde wanhope he shal thynke that as ofte as he falleth he may arise agayn by penitence.
 [1073A] And though he never so longe have leyn in synne, the mercy of Crist is alwey redy to receiven hym to mercy.
 [1074] Agayns the wanhope that he demeth that he sholde nat longe persevere in goodnesse,
 [1074A] he shal thynke that the feblesse of the devel may nothyng doon, but if men wol suffren hym;
 [1075] and eek he shal han strengthe of the help of God,
 [1075A] and of al hooly chirche, and of the proteccioun of aungels, if hym list.
 [1076] Thanne shal men understonde what is the fruyt of penaunce; and, after the word of Jhesu Crist,
 [1076A] it is the endelees blisse of hevene,
 [1077] ther joye hath no contrarioustee of wo ne grevaunce; ther alle harmes been passed of this present lyf;
 [1077A] ther as is the sikernesse fro the peyne of helle; ther as is the blisful compaignye
 [1077B] that rejoysen hem everemo, everich of otheres joye;
 [1078] ther as the body of man, that whilom was foul and derk, is moore cleer than the sonne;
 [1078A] ther as the body, that whilom was syk, freele, and fieble, and mortal, is inmortal,
 [1078B] and so strong and so hool that ther may no thyng apeyren it;
 [1079] ther as ne is neither hunger, thurst, ne coold, but every soule replenyssed with the sighte of the parfit knowynge of God.
 [1080] This blisful regne may men purchace by poverte espiritueel, and the glorie by lowenesse, the plentee of joye
 [1080A] by hunger and thurst, and the reste by travaille, and the lyf by deeth and mortificacion of synne.
 [1081] Now preye I to hem alle that herkne this litel tretys or rede,
 [1081A] that if ther be any thyng in it that liketh hem,
 [1081B] that therof they thanken oure Lord Jhesu Crist, of whom procedeth al wit and al goodnesse.
 [1082] And if ther be any thyng that displese hem, I preye hem also that they arrette it to the defaute
 [1082A] of myn unkonnynge and nat to my wyl, that wolde ful fayn have seyd bettre if I hadde had konnynge.
 [1083] For oure book seith, "Al that is writen is writen for oure doctrine,"
 [1083A] and that is myn entente.
 [1084] Wherfore I biseke yow mekely, for the mercy of God,
 [1084A] that ye preye for me that Crist have mercy on me and foryeve me my giltes;
 [1085] and namely of my translacions and enditynges of worldly vanitees, the whiche I revoke in my retracciouns:
 [1086] as is the book of Troilus; the book also of Fame;
 [1086A] the book of the XXV. Ladies; the book of the Duchesse;
 [1086B] the book of Seint Valentynes day of the Parlement of Briddes; the tales of Caunterbury, thilke that sownen into synne;
 [1087] the book of the Leoun; and many another book, if they were in my remembrance, and many a song
 [1087A] and many a leccherous lay, that Crist for his grete mercy foryeve me the synne.
 [1088] But of the translacion of Boece de Consolacione, and othere bookes of legendes of seintes, and omelies, and moralitee, and devocioun,
 [1089] that thanke I oure Lord Jhesu Crist and his blisful Mooder, and alle the seintes of hevene,
 [1090] bisekynge hem that they from hennes forth unto my lyves ende sende me grace to biwayle my giltes and to studie
 [1090A] to the salvacioun of my soule, and graunte me grace of verray penitence, confessioun and satisfaccioun to doon in this present lyf,
 [1091] thurgh the benigne grace of hym that is kyng of kynges and preest over alle preestes,
 [1091A] that boghte us with the precious blood of his herte,
 [1092] so that I may been oon of hem at the day of doom that shulle be saved.
 [1092A] Qui cum Patre et Spiritu Sancto vivit et regnat Deus per omnia secula. Amen.

      
The Canterbury Tales and Other Works of Chaucer (Middle English), by Geoffery Chaucer, [14th cent.], at sacred-texts.com

 

The Canterbury Tales

 

Chaucer's Retraction

 [1081] Now preye I to hem alle that herkne this litel tretys or rede,
 [1081A] that if ther be any thyng in it that liketh hem,
 [1081B] that therof they thanken oure Lord Jhesu Crist, of whom al wit and al goodnesse.
 [1082] And if ther be any thyng that displese hem, I preye hem that they arrette it to the defaute
 [1082A] of myn unkonnynge and nat to my wyl, that wolde ful fayn seyd bettre if I hadde had konnynge.
 [1083] For oure book seith, "Al that is writen is writen for doctrine,"
 [1083A] and that is myn entente.
 [1084] Wherfore I biseke yow mekely, for the mercy of God,
 [1084A] that ye preye for me that Crist have mercy on me and me my giltes;
 [1085] and namely of my translacions and enditynges of worldly vanitees, the whiche I revoke in my retracciouns:
 [1086] as is the book of Troilus; the book also of Fame;
 [1086A] the book of the XXV. Ladies; the book of the Duchesse;
 [1086B] the book of Seint Valentynes day of the Parlement of Briddes; the tales of Caunterbury, thilke that sownen into synne;
 [1087] the book of the Leoun; and many another book, if they were in my remembrance, and many a song
 [1087A] and many a leccherous lay, that Crist for his grete mercy foryeve me the synne.
 [1088] But of the translacion of Boece de Consolacione, and othere bookes of legendes of seintes, and omelies, and moralitee, and devocioun,
 [1089] that thanke I oure Lord Jhesu Crist and his blisful Mooder, and alle the seintes of hevene,
 [1090] bisekynge hem that they from hennes forth unto my lyves ende sende me grace to biwayle my giltes and to studie
 [1090A] to the salvacioun of my soule, and graunte me grace of verray penitence, confessioun and satisfaccioun to doon in this present lyf,
 [1091] thurgh the benigne grace of hym that is kyng of kynges and preest over alle preestes,
 [1091A] that boghte us with the precious blood of his herte,
 [1092] so that I may been oon of hem at the day of doom that shulle be saved.
 [1092A] Qui cum Patre et Spiritu Sancto vivit et regnat Deus per omnia secula. Amen.

      
The Canterbury Tales and Other Works of Chaucer (Middle English), by Geoffery Chaucer, [14th cent.], at sacred-texts.com

 

Other Works

 

The Book of the Duchess

 [1] I have gret wonder, be this lyght,
 [2] How that I lyve, for day ne nyght
 [3] I may nat slepe wel nygh noght;
 [4] I have so many an ydel thoght
 [5] Purely for defaute of slep
 [6] That, by my trouthe, I take no kep
 [7] Of nothing, how hyt cometh or gooth,
 [8] Ne me nys nothyng leef nor looth.
 [9] Al is ylyche good to me --
 [10] Joye or sorowe, wherso hyt be --
 [11] For I have felynge in nothyng,
 [12] But as yt were a mased thyng,
 [13] Alway in poynt to falle a-doun;
 [14] For sorwful ymagynacioun
 [15] Ys alway hooly in my mynde.
 [16] And wel ye woot, agaynes kynde
 [17] Hyt were to lyven in thys wyse,
 [18] For nature wolde nat suffyse
 [19] To noon erthly creature
 [20] Nat longe tyme to endure
 [21] Withoute slep and be in sorwe.
 [22] And I ne may, ne nyght ne morwe,
 [23] Slepe; and [thus] melancolye
 [24] And drede I have for to dye.
 [25] Defaute of slep and hevynesse
 [26] Hath sleyn my spirit of quyknesse
 [27] That I have lost al lustyhede.
 [28] Suche fantasies ben in myn hede
 [29] So I not what is best to doo.
 [30] But men myght axe me why soo
 [31] I may not slepe and what me is.
 [32] But natheles, who aske this
 [33] Leseth his asking trewely.
 [34] Myselven can not telle why
 [35] The sothe; but trewly, as I gesse,
 [36] I holde hit be a sicknesse
 [37] That I have suffred this eight yeer;
 [38] And yet my boote is never the ner,
 [39] For there is phisicien but oon
 [40] That may me hele; but that is don.
 [41] Passe we over untill eft;
 [42] That wil not be mot nede be left;
 [43] Our first mater is good to kepe.
 [44] So whan I saw I might not slepe
 [45] Til now late this other night,
 [46] Upon my bed I sat upright
 [47] And bad oon reche me a book,
 [48] A romaunce, and he it me tok
 [49] To rede and drive the night away;
 [50] For me thoughte it better play
 [51] Then playe either at ches or tables.
 [52] And in this bok were written fables
 [53] That clerkes had in olde tyme,
 [54] And other poetes, put in rime
 [55] To rede and for to be in minde,
 [56] While men loved the lawe of kinde.
 [57] This bok ne spak but of such thinges,
 [58] Of quenes lives, and of kinges,
 [59] And many other thinges smale.
 [60] Amonge al this I fond a tale
 [61] That me thoughte a wonder thing.
 [62] This was the tale: There was a king
 [63] That highte Seys, and had a wif,
 [64] The beste that mighte bere lyf,
 [65] And this quene highte Alcyone.
 [66] So it befil thereafter soone
 [67] This king wol wenden over see.
 [68] To tellen shortly, whan that he
 [69] Was in the see thus in this wise,
 [70] Such a tempest gan to rise
 [71] That brak her mast and made it falle,
 [72] And clefte her ship, and dreinte hem alle,
 [73] That never was founde, as it telles,
 [74] Bord ne man, ne nothing elles.
 [75] Right thus this king Seys loste his lif.
 [76] Now for to speke of Alcyone, his wif:
 [77] This lady, that was left at hom,
 [78] Hath wonder that the king ne com
 [79] Hom, for it was a longe terme.
 [80] Anon her herte began to [erme];
 [81] And for that her thoughte evermo
 [82] It was not wele [he dwelte] so,
 [83] She longed so after the king
 [84] That certes it were a pitous thing
 [85] To telle her hertely sorowful lif
 [86] That she had, this noble wif,
 [87] For him, alas, she loved alderbest.
 [88] Anon she sent bothe eest and west
 [89] To seke him, but they founde nought.
 [90] "Alas!" quod she, "that I was wrought!
 [91] And wher my lord, my love, be deed?
 [92] Certes, I nil never ete breed,
 [93] I make avow to my god here,
 [94] But I mowe of my lord here!"
 [95] Such sorowe this lady to her tok
 [96] That trewly I, that made this book,
 [97] Had such pittee and such rowthe
 [98] To rede hir sorwe that, by my trowthe,
 [99] I ferde the worse al the morwe
 [100] Aftir to thenken on hir sorwe.
 [101] So whan this lady koude here noo word
 [102] That no man myghte fynde hir lord,
 [103] Ful ofte she swouned, and sayed "Alas!"
 [104] For sorwe ful nygh wood she was,
 [105] Ne she koude no reed but oon;
 [106] But doun on knees she sat anoon
 [107] And wepte that pittee was to here.
 [108] "A, mercy, swete lady dere!"
 [109] Quod she to Juno, hir goddesse,
 [110] "Helpe me out of thys distresse,
 [111] And yeve me grace my lord to se
 [112] Soone or wite wher-so he be,
 [113] Or how he fareth, or in what wise,
 [114] And I shal make yow sacrifise,
 [115] And hooly youres become I shal
 [116] With good wille, body, herte, and al;
 [117] And but thow wolt this, lady swete,
 [118] Send me grace to slepe and mete
 [119] In my slep som certeyn sweven
 [120] Wherthourgh that I may knowen even
 [121] Whether my lord be quyk or ded."
 [122] With that word she heng doun the hed
 [123] And fel a-swowne as cold as ston.
 [124] Hyr women kaught hir up anoon
 [125] And broghten hir in bed al naked,
 [126] And she, forweped and forwaked,
 [127] Was wery; and thus the dede slep
 [128] Fil on hir or she tooke kep,
 [129] Throgh Juno, that had herd hir bone,
 [130] That made hir to slepe sone.
 [131] For as she prayede, ryght so was don
 [132] In dede; for Juno ryght anon
 [133] Called thus hir messager
 [134] To doo hir erande, and he com ner.
 [135] Whan he was come, she bad hym thus:
 [136] "Go bet," quod Juno, "to Morpheus --
 [137] Thou knowest hym wel, the god of slep.
 [138] Now understond wel and tak kep!
 [139] Sey thus on my half: that he
 [140] Go faste into the Grete Se,
 [141] And byd hym that, on alle thyng,
 [142] He take up Seys body the kyng,
 [143] That lyeth ful pale and nothyng rody.
 [144] Bid hym crepe into the body
 [145] And doo hit goon to Alcione
 [146] The quene, ther she lyeth allone,
 [147] And shewe hir shortly, hit ys no nay,
 [148] How hit was dreynt thys other day;
 [149] And do the body speke ryght soo,
 [150] Ryght as hyt was woned to doo
 [151] The whiles that hit was alyve.
 [152] Goo now faste, and hye the blyve!"
 [153] This messager tok leve and wente
 [154] Upon hys wey, and never ne stente
 [155] Til he com to the derke valeye
 [156] That stant betwixe roches tweye
 [157] Ther never yet grew corn ne gras,
 [158] Ne tre, ne noght that ought was,
 [159] Beste, ne man, ne noght elles,
 [160] Save ther were a fewe welles
 [161] Came rennynge fro the clyves adoun,
 [162] That made a dedly slepynge soun,
 [163] And ronnen doun ryght by a cave
 [164] That was under a rokke ygrave
 [165] Amydde the valey, wonder depe.
 [166] There these goddes lay and slepe,
 [167] Morpheus and Eclympasteyr,
 [168] That was the god of slepes heyr,
 [169] That slep and dide noon other werk.
 [170] This cave was also as derk
 [171] As helle-pit overal aboute.
 [172] They had good leyser for to route,
 [173] To envye who myghte slepe best.
 [174] Somme henge her chyn upon hir brest
 [175] And slept upryght, hir hed yhed,
 [176] And somme lay naked in her bed
 [177] And slepe whiles the dayes laste.
 [178] This messager com fleynge faste
 [179] And cried, "O, how! Awake anoon!"
 [180] Hit was for noght; there herde hym non.
 [181] "Awake!" quod he, "whoo ys lyth there?"
 [182] And blew his horn ryght in here eere,
 [183] And cried "Awaketh!" wonder hye.
 [184] This god of slep with hys oon ye
 [185] Cast up, and axed, "Who clepeth ther?"
 [186] "Hyt am I," quod this messager.
 [187] "Juno bad thow shuldest goon" --
 [188] And tolde hym what he shulde doon
 [189] (As I have told yow here-to-fore;
 [190] Hyt ys no nede reherse hyt more)
 [191] And went hys wey whan he had sayd.
 [192] Anoon this god of slep abrayd
 [193] Out of hys slep, and gan to goon,
 [194] And dyde as he had bede hym doon:
 [195] Took up the dreynte body sone
 [196] And bar hyt forth to Alcione,
 [197] Hys wif the quene, ther as she lay
 [198] Ryght even a quarter before day,
 [199] And stood ryght at hyr beddes fet,
 [200] And called hir ryght as she het
 [201] By name, and sayde, "My swete wyf,
 [202] Awake! Let be your sorwful lyf,
 [203] For in your sorwe there lyth no red;
 [204] For, certes, swete, I am but ded.
 [205] Ye shul me never on lyve yse.
 [206] But, goode swete herte, that ye
 [207] Bury my body, for such a tyde
 [208] Ye mowe hyt fynde the see besyde;
 [209] And farewel, swete, my worldes blysse!
 [210] I praye God youre sorwe lysse.
 [211] To lytel while oure blysse lasteth!"
 [212] With that hir eyen up she casteth
 [213] And saw noght. "Allas!" quod she for sorwe,
 [214] And deyede within the thridde morwe.
 [215] But what she sayede more in that swow
 [216] I may not telle yow as now;
 [217] Hyt were to longe for to dwelle.
 [218] My first matere I wil yow telle,
 [219] Wherfore I have told this thyng
 [220] Of Alcione and Seys the kyng,
 [221] For thus moche dar I saye wel:
 [222] I had be dolven everydel
 [223] And ded, ryght thurgh defaute of slep,
 [224] Yif I ne had red and take kep
 [225] Of this tale next before.
 [226] And I wol telle yow wherfore:
 [227] For I ne myghte, for bote ne bale,
 [228] Slepe or I had red thys tale
 [229] Of this dreynte Seys the kyng
 [230] And of the goddes of slepyng.
 [231] Whan I had red thys tale wel
 [232] And overloked hyt everydel,
 [233] Me thoghte wonder yf hit were so,
 [234] For I had never herd speke or tho
 [235] Of noo goddes that koude make
 [236] Men to slepe, ne for to wake,
 [237] For I ne knew never god but oon.
 [238] And in my game I sayde anoon
 [239] (And yet me lyst ryght evel to pleye)
 [240] Rather then that y shulde deye
 [241] Thorgh defaute of slepynge thus,
 [242] I wolde yive thilke Morpheus,
 [243] Or hys goddesse, dame Juno,
 [244] Or som wight elles, I ne roghte who --
 [245] "To make me slepe and have som reste
 [246] I wil yive hym the alderbeste
 [247] Yifte that ever he abod hys lyve.
 [248] And here on warde, ryght now as blyve,
 [249] Yif he wol make me slepe a lyte,
 [250] Of down of pure dowves white
 [251] I wil yive hym a fether-bed,
 [252] Rayed with gold and ryght wel cled
 [253] In fyn blak satyn doutremer,
 [254] And many a pilowe, and every ber
 [255] Of cloth of Reynes, to slepe softe --
 [256] Hym thar not nede to turnen ofte --
 [257] And I wol yive hym al that falles
 [258] To a chambre, and al hys halles
 [259] I wol do peynte with pure gold
 [260] And tapite hem ful many fold
 [261] Of oo sute; this shal he have
 [262] (Yf I wiste where were hys cave),
 [263] Yf he kan make me slepe sone,
 [264] As did the goddesse quene Alcione.
 [265] And thus this ylke god, Morpheus,
 [266] May wynne of me moo fees thus
 [267] Than ever he wan; and to Juno,
 [268] That ys hys goddesse, I shal soo do,
 [269] I trow, that she shal holde hir payd."
 [270] I hadde unneth that word ysayd
 [271] Ryght thus as I have told hyt yow,
 [272] That sodeynly, I nyste how,
 [273] Such a lust anoon me took
 [274] To slepe that ryght upon my book
 [275] Y fil aslepe, and therwith even
 [276] Me mette so ynly swete a sweven,
 [277] So wonderful that never yit
 [278] Y trowe no man had the wyt
 [279] To konne wel my sweven rede;
 [280] No, not Joseph, withoute drede,
 [281] Of Egipte, he that redde so
 [282] The kynges metynge Pharao,
 [283] No more than koude the lest of us;
 [284] Ne nat skarsly Macrobeus
 [285] (He that wrot al th' avysyoun
 [286] That he mette, kyng Scipioun,
 [287] The noble man, the Affrikan --
 [288] Suche marvayles fortuned than),
 [289] I trowe, arede my dremes even.
 [290] Loo, thus hyt was; thys was my sweven.
 [291] Me thoghte thus: that hyt was May,
 [292] And in the dawenynge I lay
 [293] (Me mette thus) in my bed al naked
 [294] And loked forth, for I was waked
 [295] With smale foules a gret hep
 [296] That had affrayed me out of my slep
 [297] Thorgh noyse and swetnesse of her song.
 [298] And, as me mette, they sate among
 [299] Upon my chambre roof wythoute,
 [300] Upon the tyles, overal aboute,
 [301] And songe, everych in hys wyse,
 [302] The moste solempne servise
 [303] By noote that ever man, y trowe,
 [304] Had herd, for som of hem song lowe,
 [305] Som high, and al of oon acord.
 [306] To telle shortly, att oo word,
 [307] Was never herd so swete a steven
 [308] But hyt had be a thyng of heven --
 [309] So mery a soun, so swete entewnes,
 [310] That certes, for the toun of Tewnes
 [311] I nolde but I had herd hem synge;
 [312] For al my chambre gan to rynge
 [313] Thurgh syngynge of her armonye;
 [314] For instrument nor melodye
 [315] Was nowhere herd yet half so swete,
 [316] Nor of acord half so mete;
 [317] For ther was noon of hem that feyned
 [318] To synge, for ech of hem hym peyned
 [319] To fynde out mery crafty notes.
 [320] They ne spared not her throtes.
 [321] And sooth to seyn, my chambre was
 [322] Ful wel depeynted, and with glas
 [323] Were al the wyndowes wel yglased
 [324] Ful clere, and nat an hoole ycrased,
 [325] That to beholde hyt was gret joye.
 [326] For hooly al the story of Troye
 [327] Was in the glasynge ywroght thus,
 [328] Of Ector and of kyng Priamus,
 [329] Of Achilles and of kyng Lamedon,
 [330] And eke of Medea and of Jason,
 [331] Of Paris, Eleyne, and of Lavyne.
 [332] And alle the walles with colours fyne
 [333] Were peynted, bothe text and glose,
 [334] [Of] al the Romaunce of the Rose.
 [335] My wyndowes were shette echon,
 [336] And throgh the glas the sonne shon
 [337] Upon my bed with bryghte bemes,
 [338] With many glade gilde stremes;
 [339] And eke the welken was so fair --
 [340] Blew, bryght, clere was the ayr,
 [341] And ful attempre for sothe hyt was;
 [342] For nother to cold nor hoot yt nas,
 [343] Ne in al the welken was a clowde.
 [344] And as I lay thus, wonder lowde
 [345] Me thoght I herde an hunte blowe
 [346] T' assay hys horn and for to knowe
 [347] Whether hyt were clere or hors of soun.
 [348] And I herde goynge bothe up and doun
 [349] Men, hors, houndes, and other thyng;
 [350] And al men speken of huntyng,
 [351] How they wolde slee the hert with strengthe,
 [352] And how the hert had upon lengthe
 [353] So moche embosed -- y not now what.
 [354] Anoon ryght whan I herde that,
 [355] How that they wolde on-huntynge goon,
 [356] I was ryght glad, and up anoon
 [357] Took my hors, and forth I wente
 [358] Out of my chambre; I never stente
 [359] Til I com to the feld withoute.
 [360] Ther overtok y a gret route
 [361] Of huntes and eke of foresteres,
 [362] With many relayes and lymeres,
 [363] And hyed hem to the forest faste
 [364] And I with hem. So at the laste
 [365] I asked oon, ladde a lymere:
 [366] "Say, felowe, who shal hunte here?"
 [367] Quod I, and he answered ageyn,
 [368] "Syr, th' emperour Octovyen,"
 [369] Quod he, "and ys here faste by."
 [370] "A Goddes half, in good tyme!" quod I,
 [371] "Go we faste!" and gan to ryde.
 [372] Whan we came to the forest syde,
 [373] Every man dide ryght anoon
 [374] As to huntynge fil to doon.
 [375] The mayster-hunte anoon, fot-hot,
 [376] With a gret horn blew thre mot
 [377] At the uncouplynge of hys houndes.
 [378] Withynne a while the hert yfounde ys,
 [379] Yhalowed, and rechased faste
 [380] Longe tyme; and so at the laste
 [381] This hert rused and staal away
 [382] Fro alle the houndes a privy way.
 [383] The houndes had overshote hym alle
 [384] And were on a defaute yfalle.
 [385] Therwyth the hunte wonder faste
 [386] Blew a forloyn at the laste.
 [387] I was go walked fro my tree,
 [388] And as I wente, ther cam by mee
 [389] A whelp, that fauned me as I stood,
 [390] That hadde yfolowed and koude no good.
 [391] Hyt com and crepte to me as lowe
 [392] Ryght as hyt hadde me yknowe,
 [393] Helde doun hys hed and joyned hys eres,
 [394] And leyde al smothe doun hys heres.
 [395] I wolde have kaught hyt, and anoon
 [396] Hyt fledde and was fro me goon;
 [397] And I hym folwed, and hyt forth wente
 [398] Doun by a floury grene wente
 [399] Ful thikke of gras, ful softe and swete.
 [400] With floures fele, faire under fete,
 [401] And litel used; hyt semed thus,
 [402] For both Flora and Zephirus,
 [403] They two that make floures growe,
 [404] Had mad her dwellynge ther, I trowe;
 [405] For hit was, on to beholde,
 [406] As thogh the erthe envye wolde
 [407] To be gayer than the heven,
 [408] To have moo floures, swiche seven,
 [409] As in the welken sterres bee.
 [410] Hyt had forgete the povertee
 [411] That wynter, thorgh hys colde morwes,
 [412] Had mad hyt suffre, and his sorwes;
 [413] All was forgeten, and that was sene,
 [414] For al the woode was waxen grene;
 [415] Swetnesse of dew had mad hyt waxe.
 [416] Hyt ys no nede eke for to axe
 [417] Wher there were many grene greves,
 [418] Or thikke of trees, so ful of leves;
 [419] And every tree stood by hymselve
 [420] Fro other wel ten foot or twelve --
 [421] So grete trees, so huge of strengthe,
 [422] Of fourty or fifty fadme lengthe,
 [423] Clene withoute bowgh or stikke,
 [424] With croppes brode, and eke as thikke --
 [425] They were nat an ynche asonder --
 [426] That hit was shadewe overal under.
 [427] And many an hert and many an hynde
 [428] Was both before me and behynde.
 [429] Of founes, sowres, bukkes, does
 [430] Was ful the woode, and many roes,
 [431] And many sqwirelles that sete
 [432] Ful high upon the trees and ete,
 [433] And in hir maner made festes.
 [434] Shortly, hyt was so ful of bestes
 [435] That thogh Argus, the noble countour,
 [436] Sete to rekene in hys countour,
 [437] And rekene with his figures ten --
 [438] For by tho figures mowe al ken,
 [439] Yf they be crafty, rekene and noumbre,
 [440] And telle of every thing the noumbre --
 [441] Yet shoulde he fayle to rekene even
 [442] The wondres me mette in my sweven.
 [443] But forth they romed ryght wonder faste
 [444] Doun the woode; so at the laste
 [445] I was war of a man in blak,
 [446] That sat and had yturned his bak
 [447] To an ook, an huge tree.
 [448] "Lord," thoght I, "who may that be?
 [449] What ayleth hym to sitten her?"
 [450] Anoon-ryght I wente ner;
 [451] Than found I sitte even upryght
 [452] A wonder wel-farynge knyght --
 [453] By the maner me thoghte so --
 [454] Of good mochel, and ryght yong therto,
 [455] Of the age of foure and twenty yer,
 [456] Upon hys berd but lytel her,
 [457] And he was clothed al in blak.
 [458] I stalked even unto hys bak,
 [459] And there I stood as stille as ought,
 [460] That, soth to saye, he saw me nought;
 [461] For-why he heng hys hed adoun,
 [462] And with a dedly sorwful soun
 [463] He made of rym ten vers or twelve
 [464] Of a compleynte to hymselve --
 [465] The moste pitee, the moste rowthe,
 [466] That ever I herde; for, by my trowthe,
 [11-ch] 467 Hit was gret wonder that Nature
 [468] Myght suffre any creature
 [469] To have such sorwe and be not ded.
 [470] Ful pitous pale and nothyng red,
 [471] He sayd a lay, a maner song,
 [472] Withoute noote, withoute song;
 [473] And was thys, for ful wel I kan
 [474] Reherse hyt; ryght thus hyt began:
 [475] "I have of sorwe so gret won
 [476] That joye gete I never non,
 [477] Now that I see my lady bryght,
 [478] Which I have loved with al my myght,
 [479] Is fro me ded and ys agoon.
 [481] "Allas, deth, what ayleth the,
 [482] That thou noldest have taken me,
 [483] Whan thou toke my lady swete,
 [484] That was so fair, so fresh, so fre,
 [485] So good that men may wel se
 [486] Of al goodnesse she had no mete!"
 [487] Whan he had mad thus his complaynte,
 [488] Hys sorwful hert gan faste faynte
 [489] And his spirites wexen dede;
 [490] The blood was fled for pure drede
 [491] Doun to hys herte, to make hym warm --
 [492] For wel hyt feled the herte had harm --
 [493] To wite eke why hyt was adrad
 [494] By kynde, and for to make hyt glad,
 [495] For hit ys membre principal
 [496] Of the body; and that made al
 [497] Hys hewe chaunge and wexe grene
 [498] And pale, for ther noo blood ys sene
 [499] In no maner lym of hys.
 [500] Anoon therwith whan y sawgh this --
 [501] He ferde thus evel there he set --
 [502] I went and stood ryght at his fet,
 [503] And grette hym; but he spak noght,
 [504] But argued with his owne thoght,
 [505] And in hys wyt disputed faste
 [506] Why and how hys lyf myght laste;
 [507] Hym thoughte hys sorwes were so smerte
 [508] And lay so colde upon hys herte.
 [509] So, throgh hys sorwe and hevy thoght,
 [510] Made hym that he herde me noght;
 [511] For he had wel nygh lost hys mynde,
 [512] Thogh Pan, that men clepeth god of kynde,
 [513] Were for hys sorwes never so wroth.
 [514] But at the last, to sayn ryght soth,
 [515] He was war of me, how y stood
 [516] Before hym and did of myn hood,
 [517] And had ygret hym as I best koude,
 [518] Debonayrly, and nothyng lowde.
 [519] He sayde, "I prey the, be not wroth.
 [520] I herde the not, to seyn the soth,
 [521] Ne I sawgh the not, syr, trewely."
 [522] "A, goode sir, no fors," quod y,
 [523] "I am ryght sory yif I have ought
 [524] Destroubled yow out of your thought.
 [525] Foryive me, yif I have mystake."
 [526] "Yis, th' amendes is lyght to make,"
 [527] Quod he, "for ther lyeth noon therto;
 [528] There ys nothyng myssayd nor do."
 [529] Loo, how goodly spak thys knyght,
 [530] As hit had be another wyght;
 [531] He made hyt nouther towgh ne queynte.
 [532] And I saw that, and gan me aqueynte
 [533] With hym, and fond hym so tretable,
 [534] Ryght wonder skylful and resonable,
 [535] As me thoghte, for al hys bale.
 [536] Anoon ryght I gan fynde a tale
 [537] To hym, to loke wher I myght ought
 [538] Have more knowynge of hys thought.
 [539] "Sir," quod I, "this game is doon.
 [540] I holde that this hert be goon;
 [541] These huntes konne hym nowher see."
 [542] "Y do no fors therof," quod he;
 [543] "My thought ys theron never a del."
 [544] "By oure Lord," quod I, "y trow yow wel;
 [545] Ryght so me thinketh by youre chere.
 [546] But, sir, oo thyng wol ye here?
 [547] Me thynketh in gret sorowe I yow see;
 [548] But certes, sire, yif that yee
 [549] Wolde ought discure me youre woo,
 [550] I wolde, as wys God helpe me soo,
 [551] Amende hyt, yif I kan or may.
 [552] Ye mowe preve hyt be assay;
 [553] For, by my trouthe, to make yow hool
 [554] I wol do al my power hool.
 [555] And telleth me of your sorwes smerte;
 [556] Paraunter hyt may ese youre herte,
 [557] That semeth ful sek under your syde."
 [558] With that he loked on me asyde,
 [559] As who sayth, "Nay, that wol not be."
 [560] "Graunt mercy, goode frend," quod he,
 [561] "I thanke the that thow woldest soo,
 [562] But hyt may never the rather be doo.
 [563] No man may my sorwe glade,
 [564] That maketh my hewe to falle and fade,
 [565] And hath myn understondynge lorn
 [566] That me ys wo that I was born!
 [567] May noght make my sorwes slyde,
 [568] Nought al the remedyes of Ovyde,
 [569] Ne Orpheus, god of melodye,
 [570] Ne Dedalus with his playes slye;
 [571] Ne hele me may no phisicien,
 [572] Noght Ypocras ne Galyen;
 [573] Me ys wo that I lyve houres twelve.
 [574] But whooso wol assay hymselve
 [575] Whether his hert kan have pitee
 [576] Of any sorwe, lat hym see me.
 [577] Y wrecche, that deth hath mad al naked
 [578] Of al the blysse that ever was maked,
 [579] Yworthe worste of alle wyghtes,
 [580] That hate my dayes and my nyghtes!
 [581] My lyf, my lustes, be me loothe,
 [582] For al welfare and I be wroothe.
 [583] The pure deth ys so ful my foo
 [584] That I wolde deye, hyt wolde not soo;
 [585] For whan I folwe hyt, hit wol flee;
 [586] I wolde have hym, hyt nyl nat me.
 [587] This ys my peyne wythoute red,
 [588] Alway deynge and be not ded,
 [589] That Cesiphus, that lyeth in helle,
 [590] May not of more sorwe telle.
 [591] And whoso wiste al, by my trouthe,
 [592] My sorwe, but he hadde rowthe
 [593] And pitee of my sorwes smerte,
 [594] That man hath a fendly herte;
 [595] For whoso seeth me first on morwe
 [596] May seyn he hath met with sorwe,
 [597] For y am sorwe, and sorwe ys y.
 [598] "Allas! and I wol tel the why:
 [599] My [song] ys turned to pleynynge,
 [600] And al my laughtre to wepynge,
 [601] My glade thoghtes to hevynesse;
 [602] In travayle ys myn ydelnesse
 [603] And eke my reste; my wele is woo,
 [604] My good ys harm, and evermoo
 [605] In wrathe ys turned my pleynge
 [606] And my delyt into sorwynge.
 [607] Myn hele ys turned into seknesse,
 [608] In drede ys al my sykernesse;
 [609] To derke ys turned al my lyght,
 [610] My wyt ys foly, my day ys nyght,
 [611] My love ys hate, my slep wakynge,
 [612] My myrthe and meles ys fastynge,
 [613] My countenaunce ys nycete
 [614] And al abaved, where so I be;
 [615] My pees in pledynge and in werre.
 [616] Allas, how myghte I fare werre?
 [617] My boldnesse ys turned to shame,
 [618] For fals Fortune hath pleyd a game
 [619] Atte ches with me, allas the while!
 [620] The trayteresse fals and ful of gyle,
 [621] That al behoteth and nothyng halt,
 [622] She goth upryght and yet she halt,
 [623] That baggeth foule and loketh faire,
 [624] The dispitouse debonaire
 [625] That skorneth many a creature!
 [626] An ydole of fals portrayture
 [627] Ys she, for she wol sone wrien;
 [628] She is the monstres hed ywrien,
 [629] As fylthe over-ystrawed with floures.
 [630] Hir moste worshippe and hir flour ys
 [631] To lyen, for that ys hyr nature;
 [632] Withoute feyth, lawe, or mesure
 [633] She ys fals, and ever laughynge
 [634] With oon eye, and that other wepynge.
 [635] That ys broght up she set al doun.
 [636] I lykne hyr to the scorpioun,
 [637] That ys a fals, flaterynge beste,
 [638] For with his hed he maketh feste,
 [639] But al amydde hys flaterynge
 [640] With hys tayle he wol stynge
 [641] And envenyme; and so wol she.
 [642] She ys th' envyouse charite
 [643] That ys ay fals and semeth wel;
 [644] So turneth she hyr false whel
 [645] Aboute, for hyt ys nothyng stable --
 [646] Now by the fire, now at table;
 [647] For many oon hath she thus yblent.
 [648] She ys pley of enchauntement,
 [649] That semeth oon and ys not soo.
 [650] The false thef! What hath she doo,
 [651] Trowest thou? By oure Lord I wol the seye:
 [652] "At the ches with me she gan to pleye;
 [653] With hir false draughtes dyvers
 [654] She staal on me and tok my fers.
 [655] And whan I sawgh my fers awaye,
 [656] Allas, I kouthe no lenger playe,
 [657] But seyde, `Farewel, swete, ywys,
 [658] And farewel al that ever ther ys!'
 [659] "Therwith Fortune seyde `Chek her!
 [660] And mat in the myd poynt of the chekker,
 [661] With a poun errant!' Allas,
 [662] Ful craftier to pley she was
 [663] Than Athalus, that made the game
 [664] First of the ches, so was hys name.
 [665] But God wolde I had oones or twyes
 [666] Ykoud and knowe the jeupardyes
 [667] That kowde the Grek Pictagores!
 [668] I shulde have pleyd the bet at ches
 [669] And kept my fers the bet therby.
 [670] And thogh wherto? For trewely
 [671] I holde that wyssh nat worth a stree!
 [672] Hyt had be never the bet for me,
 [673] For Fortune kan so many a wyle
 [674] Ther be but fewe kan hir begile;
 [675] And eke she ys the lasse to blame;
 [676] Myself I wolde have do the same,
 [677] Before God, hadde I ben as she;
 [678] She oghte the more excused be.
 [679] For this I say yet more therto:
 [680] Had I be God and myghte have do
 [681] My wille whan she my fers kaughte,
 [682] I wolde have drawe the same draughte.
 [683] For, also wys God yive me reste,
 [684] I dar wel swere she took the beste.
 [685] But through that draughte I have lorn
 [686] My blysse; allas, that I was born!
 [687] For evermore, y trowe trewly,
 [688] For al my wille, my lust holly
 [689] Ys turned; but yet, what to doone?
 [690] Be oure Lord, hyt ys to deye soone.
 [691] For nothyng I leve hyt noght,
 [692] But lyve and deye ryght in this thoght;
 [693] For there nys planete in firmament,
 [694] Ne in ayr ne in erthe noon element,
 [695] That they ne yive me a yifte echone
 [696] Of wepynge whan I am allone.
 [697] For whan that I avise me wel
 [698] And bethenke me every del
 [699] How that ther lyeth in rekenyng,
 [700] In my sorwe, for nothyng,
 [701] And how ther leveth no gladnesse
 [702] May glade me of my distresse,
 [703] And how I have lost suffisance,
 [704] And therto I have no plesance,
 [705] Than may I say I have ryght noght.
 [706] And whan al this falleth in my thoght,
 [707] Allas, than am I overcome!
 [708] For that ys doon ys not to come.
 [709] I have more sorowe than Tantale."
 [710] And whan I herde hym tel thys tale
 [711] Thus pitously, as I yow telle,
 [712] Unnethe myght y lenger dwelle,
 [713] Hyt dyde myn herte so moche woo.
 [714] "A, goode sir," quod I, "say not soo!
 [715] Have som pitee on your nature
 [716] That formed yow to creature.
 [717] Remembre yow of Socrates,
 [718] For he ne counted nat thre strees
 [719] Of noght that Fortune koude doo."
 [720] "No," quod he, "I kan not soo."
 [721] "Why so, good syr? Yis parde!" quod y;
 [722] "Ne say noght soo, for trewely,
 [723] Thogh ye had lost the ferses twelve,
 [724] And ye for sorwe mordred yourselve,
 [725] Ye sholde be dampned in this cas
 [726] By as good ryght as Medea was,
 [727] That slough hir children for Jasoun;
 [728] And Phyllis also for Demophoun
 [729] Heng hirself -- so weylaway! --
 [730] For he had broke his terme-day
 [11-ch] 731 To come to hir. Another rage
 [732] Had Dydo, the quene eke of Cartage,
 [733] That slough hirself for Eneas
 [734] Was fals -- which a fool she was!
 [735] And Ecquo died for Narcisus
 [736] Nolde nat love hir, and ryght thus
 [737] Hath many another foly doon;
 [738] And for Dalida died Sampson,
 [739] That slough hymself with a piler.
 [740] But ther is no man alyve her
 [741] Wolde for a fers make this woo!"
 [742] "Why so?" quod he, "hyt ys nat soo.
 [743] Thou wost ful lytel what thou menest;
 [744] I have lost more than thow wenest."
 [745] "Loo, [sey] how that may be?" quod y;
 [746] "Good sir, telle me al hooly
 [747] In what wyse, how, why, and wherfore
 [748] That ye have thus youre blysse lore."
 [749] "Blythely," quod he; "com sytte adoun!
 [750] I telle the upon a condicioun
 [751] That thou shalt hooly, with al thy wyt,
 [752] Doo thyn entent to herkene hit."
 [753] "Yis, syr." "Swere thy trouthe therto."
 [754] "Gladly." "Do thanne holde hereto!"
 [755] "I shal ryght blythely, so God me save,
 [756] Hooly, with al the wit I have,
 [757] Here yow as wel as I kan."
 [758] "A Goddes half!" quod he, and began:
 [759] "Syr," quod he, "sith first I kouthe
 [760] Have any maner wyt fro youthe,
 [761] Or kyndely understondyng
 [762] To comprehende in any thyng
 [763] What love was, in myn owne wyt,
 [764] Dredeles, I have ever yit
 [765] Be tributarye and yive rente
 [766] To Love, hooly with good entente,
 [767] And throgh plesaunce become his thral
 [768] With good wille, body, hert, and al.
 [769] Al this I putte in his servage,
 [770] As to my lord, and dide homage;
 [771] And ful devoutly I prayed hym to
 [772] He shulde besette myn herte so
 [773] That hyt plesance to hym were
 [774] And worship to my lady dere.
 [775] "And this was longe, and many a yer
 [776] Or that myn herte was set owher,
 [777] That I dide thus, and nyste why;
 [778] I trowe hit cam me kyndely.
 [779] Paraunter I was therto most able,
 [780] As a whit wal or a table,
 [781] For hit ys redy to cacche and take
 [782] Al that men wil theryn make,
 [783] Whethir so men wil portreye or peynte,
 [784] Be the werkes never so queynte.
 [785] "And thilke tyme I ferde ryght so,
 [786] I was able to have lerned tho,
 [787] And to have kend as wel or better,
 [788] Paraunter, other art or letre;
 [789] But for love cam first in my thoght,
 [790] Therfore I forgat hyt noght.
 [791] I ches love to my firste craft;
 [792] Therfore hit ys with me laft,
 [793] For-why I tok hyt of so yong age
 [794] That malyce hadde my corage
 [795] Nat that tyme turned to nothyng
 [796] Thorgh to mochel knowlechyng.
 [797] For that tyme Yowthe, my maistresse,
 [798] Governed me in ydelnesse;
 [799] For hyt was in my firste youthe,
 [800] And thoo ful lytel good y couthe,
 [801] For al my werkes were flyttynge
 [802] That tyme, and al my thoght varyinge.
 [803] Al were to me ylyche good
 [804] That I knew thoo; but thus hit stood:
 [805] "Hit happed that I cam on a day
 [806] Into a place ther that I say
 [807] Trewly the fayrest companye
 [808] Of ladyes that evere man with ye
 [809] Had seen togedres in oo place.
 [810] Shal I clepe hyt hap other grace
 [811] That broght me there? Nay, but Fortune,
 [812] That ys to lyen ful comune,
 [11-ch] 813 The false trayteresse pervers!
 [814] God wolde I koude clepe hir wers,
 [815] For now she worcheth me ful woo,
 [816] And I wol telle sone why soo.
 [817] "Among these ladyes thus echon,
 [818] Soth to seyen, y sawgh oon
 [819] That was lyk noon of the route;
 [820] For I dar swere, withoute doute,
 [821] That as the someres sonne bryght
 [822] Ys fairer, clerer, and hath more lyght
 [823] Than any other planete in heven,
 [824] The moone or the sterres seven,
 [825] For al the world so hadde she
 [826] Surmounted hem alle of beaute,
 [827] Of maner, and of comlynesse,
 [828] Of stature, and of wel set gladnesse,
 [829] Of goodlyhede so wel beseye --
 [830] Shortly, what shal y more seye?
 [831] By God and by his halwes twelve,
 [832] Hyt was my swete, ryght as hirselve.
 [833] She had so stedfast countenaunce,
 [834] So noble port and meyntenaunce,
 [835] And Love, that had wel herd my boone,
 [836] Had espyed me thus soone,
 [837] That she ful sone in my thoght,
 [838] As helpe me God, so was ykaught
 [839] So sodenly that I ne tok
 [840] No maner counseyl but at hir lok
 [841] And at myn herte; for-why hir eyen
 [842] So gladly, I trow, myn herte seyen
 [843] That purely tho myn owne thoght
 [844] Seyde hit were beter serve hir for noght
 [845] Than with another to be wel.
 [846] And hyt was soth, for everydel
 [847] I wil anoon ryght telle thee why.
 [848] "I sawgh hyr daunce so comlily,
 [849] Carole and synge so swetely,
 [850] Laughe and pleye so womanly,
 [851] And loke so debonairly,
 [852] So goodly speke and so frendly,
 [853] That certes y trowe that evermor
 [854] Nas seyn so blysful a tresor.
 [855] For every heer on hir hed,
 [856] Soth to seyne, hyt was not red,
 [857] Ne nouther yelowe ne broun hyt nas;
 [858] Me thoghte most lyk gold hyt was.
 [859] "And whiche eyen my lady hadde!
 [860] Debonaire, goode, glade, and sadde,
 [861] Symple, of good mochel, noght to wyde.
 [862] Therto hir look nas not asyde
 [863] Ne overthwert, but beset so wel
 [864] Hyt drew and took up everydel
 [865] Al that on hir gan beholde.
 [866] Hir eyen semed anoon she wolde
 [867] Have mercy -- fooles wenden soo --
 [868] But hyt was never the rather doo.
 [869] Hyt nas no countrefeted thyng;
 [870] Hyt was hir owne pure lokyng
 [871] That the goddesse, dame Nature,
 [872] Had mad hem opene by mesure
 [873] And close; for were she never so glad,
 [874] Hyr lokynge was not foly sprad,
 [875] Ne wildely, thogh that she pleyde;
 [876] But ever, me thoght, hir eyen seyde,
 [877] `Be God, my wrathe ys al foryive!'
 [878] "Therwith hir lyste so wel to lyve,
 [879] That dulnesse was of hir adrad.
 [880] She nas to sobre ne to glad;
 [881] In alle thynges more mesure
 [882] Had never, I trowe, creature.
 [883] But many oon with hire lok she herte,
 [884] And that sat hyr ful lyte at herte,
 [885] For she knew nothyng of her thoght;
 [886] But whether she knew or knew it nowght
 [887] Algate she ne roughte of hem a stree! --
 [888] To gete her love no ner nas he
 [889] That woned at hom than he in Ynde;
 [890] The formest was alway behynde.
 [891] But goode folk, over al other,
 [892] She loved as man may do hys brother;
 [893] Of which love she was wonder large,
 [894] In skilful places that bere charge.
 [895] "But which a visage had she thertoo!
 [896] Allas, myn herte ys wonder woo
 [897] That I ne kan discryven hyt!
 [898] Me lakketh both Englyssh and wit
 [899] For to undo hyt at the fulle;
 [900] And eke my spirites be so dulle
 [901] So gret a thyng for to devyse.
 [902] I have no wit that kan suffise
 [903] To comprehende hir beaute.
 [904] But thus moche dar I sayn, that she
 [905] Was whit, rody, fressh, and lyvely hewed,
 [906] And every day hir beaute newed.
 [907] And negh hir face was alderbest,
 [908] For certes Nature had swich lest
 [909] To make that fair that trewly she
 [910] Was hir chef patron of beaute,
 [911] And chef ensample of al hir werk,
 [912] And moustre; for be hyt never so derk,
 [913] Me thynketh I se hir ever moo.
 [914] And yet moreover, thogh alle thoo
 [915] That ever livede were now alyve,
 [916] Ne sholde have founde to discryve
 [917] Yn al hir face a wikked sygne,
 [918] For hit was sad, symple, and benygne.
 [919] "And which a goodly, softe speche
 [920] Had that swete, my lyves leche!
 [921] So frendly, and so wel ygrounded,
 [922] Up al resoun so wel yfounded,
 [923] And so tretable to alle goode
 [924] That I dar swere wel, by the roode,
 [925] Of eloquence was never founde
 [926] So swete a sownynge facounde,
 [927] Ne trewer tonged, ne skorned lasse,
 [928] Ne bet koude hele -- that, by the masse
 [929] I durste swere, thogh the pope hit songe,
 [930] That ther was never yet throgh hir tonge
 [931] Man ne woman gretly harmed;
 [932] As for her, was al harm hyd --
 [933] Ne lasse flaterynge in hir word,
 [934] That purely hir symple record
 [935] Was founde as trewe as any bond
 [936] Or trouthe of any mannes hond;
 [937] Ne chyde she koude never a del;
 [938] That knoweth al the world ful wel.
 [939] "But swich a fairnesse of a nekke
 [940] Had that swete that boon nor brekke
 [941] Nas ther non sene that myssat.
 [942] Hyt was whit, smothe, streght, and pure flat,
 [943] Wythouten hole or canel-boon,
 [944] As be semynge had she noon.
 [945] Hyr throte, as I have now memoyre,
 [946] Semed a round tour of yvoyre,
 [947] Of good gretnesse, and noght to gret.
 [948] "And goode faire White she het;
 [949] That was my lady name ryght.
 [950] She was bothe fair and bryght;
 [951] She hadde not hir name wrong.
 [952] Ryght faire shuldres and body long
 [953] She had, and armes, every lyth
 [954] Fattyssh, flesshy, not gret therwith;
 [955] Ryght white handes, and nayles rede;
 [956] Rounde brestes; and of good brede
 [957] Hyr hippes were; a streight flat bak.
 [958] I knew on hir noon other lak
 [959] That al hir lymmes nere pure sewynge
 [960] In as fer as I had knowynge.
 [961] "Therto she koude so wel pleye,
 [962] Whan that hir lyste, that I dar seye
 [963] That she was lyk to torche bryght
 [964] That every man may take of lyght
 [965] Ynogh, and hyt hath never the lesse.
 [966] Of maner and of comlynesse
 [967] Ryght so ferde my lady dere,
 [968] For every wight of hir manere
 [969] Myght cacche ynogh, yif that he wolde,
 [970] Yif he had eyen hir to beholde;
 [971] For I dar swere wel, yif that she
 [972] Had among ten thousand be,
 [973] She wolde have be, at the leste,
 [974] A chef myrour of al the feste,
 [975] Thogh they had stonden in a rowe,
 [976] To mennes eyen that koude have knowe;
 [977] For wher-so men had pleyd or waked,
 [978] Me thoghte the felawsshyppe as naked
 [979] Withouten hir that sawgh I oones
 [980] As a corowne withoute stones.
 [11-ch] 981 Trewly she was, to myn ye
 [982] The soleyn fenix of Arabye,
 [983] For ther livyth never but oon,
 [984] Ne swich as she ne knowe I noon.
 [985] "To speke of godnesse, trewly she
 [986] Had as moche debonairte
 [987] As ever had Hester in the Bible,
 [988] And more, yif more were possyble.
 [989] And soth to seyne, therwythal
 [990] She had a wyt so general,
 [991] So hool enclyned to alle goode,
 [992] That al hir wyt was set, by the rode,
 [993] Withoute malyce, upon gladnesse;
 [994] And therto I saugh never yet a lesse
 [995] Harmful than she was in doynge.
 [996] I sey nat that she ne had knowynge
 [997] What harm was, or elles she
 [998] Had koud no good, so thinketh me.
 [999] "And trewly for to speke of trouthe,
 [1000] But she had had, hyt hadde be routhe.
 [1001] Therof she had so moche hyr del --
 [1002] And I dar seyn and swere hyt wel --
 [1003] That Trouthe hymself over al and al
 [1004] Had chose hys maner principal
 [1005] In hir that was his restyng place.
 [1006] Therto she hadde the moste grace
 [1007] To have stedefast perseveraunce
 [1008] And esy, atempre governaunce
 [1009] That ever I knew or wyste yit,
 [1010] So pure suffraunt was hir wyt;
 [1011] And reson gladly she understood;
 [1012] Hyt folowed wel she koude good.
 [1013] She used gladly to do wel;
 [1014] These were hir maners everydel.
 [1015] "Therwith she loved so wel ryght
 [1016] She wrong do wolde to no wyght.
 [1017] No wyght myghte do hir noo shame,
 [1018] She loved so wel hir owne name.
 [1019] Hyr lust to holde no wyght in honde,
 [1020] Ne, be thou siker, she wolde not fonde
 [1021] To holde no wyght in balaunce
 [1022] By half word ne by countenaunce --
 [1023] But if men wolde upon hir lye --
 [1024] Ne sende men into Walakye,
 [1025] To Pruyse, and into Tartarye,
 [1026] To Alysaundre, ne into Turkye,
 [1027] And byd hym faste anoon that he
 [1028] Goo hoodles into the Drye Se
 [1029] And come hom by the Carrenar,
 [1030] And seye, `Sir, be now ryght war
 [1031] That I may of yow here seyn
 [1032] Worshyp or that ye come ageyn!'
 [1033] She ne used no suche knakkes smale.
 [1034] "But wherfore that y telle my tale?
 [1035] Ryght on thys same, as I have seyd,
 [1036] Was hooly al my love leyd;
 [1037] For certes she was, that swete wif,
 [11-ch] 1038 My suffisaunce, my lust, my lyf,
 [1039] Myn hap, myn hele, and al my blesse,
 [1040] My worldes welfare, and my goddesse,
 [1041] And I hooly hires and everydel."
 [1042] "By oure Lord," quod I, "y trowe yow wel!
 [1043] Hardely, your love was wel beset;
 [1044] I not how ye myghte have do bet."
 [1045] "Bet? Ne no wyght so wel," quod he.
 [1046] "Y trowe hyt wel, sir," quod I, "parde!"
 [1047] "Nay, leve hyt wel!" "Sire, so do I;
 [1048] I leve yow wel, that trewely
 [1049] Yow thoghte that she was the beste
 [1050] And to beholde the alderfayreste,
 [1051] Whoso had loked hir with your eyen."
 [1052] "With myn? Nay, alle that hir seyen
 [1053] Seyde and sworen hyt was soo.
 [1054] And thogh they ne hadde, I wolde thoo
 [1055] Have loved best my lady free,
 [1056] Thogh I had had al the beaute
 [1057] That ever had Alcipyades,
 [1058] And al the strengthe of Ercules,
 [1059] And therto had the worthynesse
 [1060] Of Alysaunder, and al the rychesse
 [1061] That ever was in Babyloyne,
 [1062] In Cartage, or in Macedoyne,
 [11-ch] 1063 Or in Rome, or in Nynyve;
 [1064] And therto also hardy be
 [1065] As was Ector, so have I joye,
 [1066] That Achilles slough at Troye --
 [1067] And therfore was he slayn alsoo
 [1068] In a temple, for bothe twoo
 [1069] Were slayne, he and Antylegyus
 [1070] (And so seyth Dares Frygius),
 [1071] For love of Polixena --
 [1072] Or ben as wis as Mynerva,
 [1073] I wolde ever, withoute drede,
 [1074] Have loved hir, for I moste nede.
 [1075] `Nede?' Nay, trewly, I gabbe now;
 [1076] Noght `nede,' and I wol tellen how:
 [1077] For of good wille myn herte hyt wolde,
 [1078] And eke to love hir I was holde
 [1079] As for the fairest and the beste.
 [1080] She was as good, so have I reste,
 [1081] As ever was Penelopee of Grece,
 [1082] Or as the noble wif Lucrece,
 [1083] That was the beste -- he telleth thus,
 [1084] The Romayn, Tytus Lyvyus --
 [1085] She was as good, and nothyng lyk
 [1086] (Thogh hir stories be autentyk),
 [1087] Algate she was as trewe as she.
 [1088] "But wherfore that I telle thee
 [1089] Whan I first my lady say?
 [1090] I was ryght yong, soth to say,
 [1091] And ful gret nede I hadde to lerne;
 [1092] Whan my herte wolde yerne
 [1093] To love, hyt was a gret empryse.
 [1094] But as my wyt koude best suffise,
 [1095] After my yonge childly wyt,
 [1096] Withoute drede, I besette hyt
 [1097] To love hir in my beste wyse,
 [1098] To do hir worship and the servise
 [1099] That I koude thoo, be my trouthe,
 [1100] Withoute feynynge outher slouthe,
 [1101] For wonder feyn I wolde hir se.
 [1102] So mochel hyt amended me
 [1103] That whan I saugh hir first a-morwe
 [1104] I was warished of al my sorwe
 [1105] Of al day after; til hyt were eve
 [1106] Me thoghte nothyng myghte me greve,
 [1107] Were my sorwes never so smerte.
 [1108] And yet she syt so in myn herte
 [1109] That, by my trouthe, y nolde noght
 [1110] For al thys world out of my thoght
 [1111] Leve my lady; noo, trewely!"
 [1112] "Now, by my trouthe, sir," quod I,
 [1113] "Me thynketh ye have such a chaunce
 [1114] As shryfte wythoute repentaunce."
 [1115] "Repentaunce? Nay, fy!" quod he,
 [1116] "Shulde y now repente me
 [1117] To love? Nay, certes, than were I wel
 [1118] Wers than was Achitofel,
 [1119] Or Anthenor, so have I joye,
 [1120] The traytor that betraysed Troye,
 [1121] Or the false Genelloun,
 [1122] He that purchased the tresoun
 [1123] Of Rowland and of Olyver.
 [1124] Nay, while I am alyve her,
 [1125] I nyl foryete hir never moo."
 [1126] "Now, goode syre," quod I thoo,
 [1127] "Ye han wel told me herebefore;
 [1128] Hyt ys no nede to reherse it more,
 [1129] How ye sawe hir first, and where.
 [1130] But wolde ye tel me the manere
 [1131] To hire which was your firste speche --
 [1132] Therof I wolde yow beseche --
 [1133] And how she knewe first your thoght,
 [1134] Whether ye loved hir or noght?
 [1135] And telleth me eke what ye have lore,
 [1136] I herde yow telle herebefore."
 [1137] "Yee!" seyde he, "thow nost what thow menest;
 [1138] I have lost more than thou wenest."
 [1139] "What los ys that?" quod I thoo;
 [1140] "Nyl she not love yow? Ys hyt soo?
 [1141] Or have ye oght doon amys,
 [1142] That she hath left yow? Ys hyt this?
 [1143] For Goddes love, telle me al."
 [1144] "Before God," quod he, "and I shal.
 [1145] I saye ryght as I have seyd,
 [1146] On hir was al my love leyd,
 [1147] And yet she nyste hyt nat, never a del
 [1148] Noght longe tyme, leve hyt wel!
 [1149] For be ryght siker, I durste noght
 [1150] For al this world telle hir my thoght,
 [1151] Ne I wolde have wraththed hir, trewely.
 [1152] For wostow why? She was lady
 [1153] Of the body; she had the herte,
 [1154] And who hath that may not asterte.
 [1155] But for to kepe me fro ydelnesse,
 [1156] Trewly I dide my besynesse
 [1157] To make songes, as I best koude,
 [1158] And ofte tyme I song hem loude;
 [1159] And made songes thus a gret del,
 [1160] Althogh I koude not make so wel
 [1161] Songes, ne knewe the art al,
 [1162] As koude Lamekes sone Tubal,
 [1163] That found out first the art of songe;
 [1164] For as hys brothres hamers ronge
 [1165] Upon hys anvelt up and doun,
 [1166] Therof he took the firste soun --
 [1167] But Grekes seyn Pictagoras,
 [1168] That he the firste fynder was
 [1169] Of the art (Aurora telleth so);
 [1170] But therof no fors of hem two.
 [1171] Algates songes thus I made
 [1172] Of my felynge, myn herte to glade;
 [1173] And, lo, this was [the] altherferste --
 [1174] I not wher hyt were the werste.
 [1175] `Lord, hyt maketh myn herte lyght
 [1176] Whan I thenke on that swete wyght
 [1177] That is so semely on to see;
 [1178] And wisshe to God hit myghte so bee
 [1179] That she wolde holde me for hir knyght,
 [1180] My lady, that is so fair and bryght!'
 [1181] "Now have I told thee, soth to say,
 [1182] My firste song. Upon a day
 [1183] I bethoghte me what woo
 [1184] And sorwe that I suffred thoo
 [1185] For hir, and yet she wyste hyt noght,
 [1186] Ne telle hir durste I nat my thoght.
 [1187] `Allas,' thoghte I, `y kan no red;
 [1188] And but I telle hir, I [nam] but ded;
 [1189] And yif I telle hyr, to seye ryght soth,
 [1190] I am adred she wol be wroth.
 [1191] Allas, what shal I thanne do?'
 [1192] "In this debat I was so wo
 [1193] Me thoghte myn herte braste atweyne!
 [1194] So at the laste, soth to sayne,
 [1195] I bethoghte me that Nature
 [1196] Ne formed never in creature
 [1197] So moche beaute, trewely,
 [1198] And bounte, wythoute mercy.
 [1199] In hope of that, my tale I tolde
 [1200] With sorwe, as that I never sholde,
 [1201] For nedes, and mawgree my hed,
 [1202] I most have told hir or be ded.
 [1203] I not wel how that I began;
 [1204] Ful evel rehersen hyt I kan;
 [1205] And eke, as helpe me God withal,
 [1206] I trowe hyt was in the dismal,
 [1207] That was the ten woundes of Egipte --
 [1208] For many a word I over-skipte
 [1209] In my tale, for pure fere
 [1210] Lest my wordes mysset were.
 [1211] With sorweful herte and woundes dede,
 [1212] Softe and quakynge for pure drede
 [1213] And shame, and styntynge in my tale
 [1214] For ferde, and myn hewe al pale --
 [1215] Ful ofte I wex bothe pale and red --
 [1216] Bowynge to hir, I heng the hed;
 [1217] I durste nat ones loke hir on,
 [1218] For wit, maner, and al was goon.
 [1219] I seyde `Mercy!' and no more.
 [1220] Hyt nas no game; hyt sat me sore.
 [1221] "So at the laste, soth to seyn,
 [1222] Whan that myn hert was come ageyn,
 [1223] To telle shortly al my speche,
 [1224] With hool herte I gan hir beseche
 [1225] That she wolde be my lady swete;
 [1226] And swor, and gan hir hertely hete
 [1227] Ever to be stedfast and trewe,
 [1228] And love hir alwey fresshly newe,
 [1229] And never other lady have,
 [1230] And al hir worship for to save
 [1231] As I best koude. I swor hir this:
 [1232] `For youres is alle that ever ther ys
 [1233] For evermore, myn herte swete!
 [1234] And never to false yow, but I mete,
 [1235] I nyl, as wys God helpe me soo!'
 [1236] "And whan I had my tale y-doo,
 [1237] God wot, she acounted nat a stree
 [1238] Of al my tale, so thoghte me.
 [1239] To telle shortly ryght as hyt ys,
 [1240] Trewly hir answere hyt was this --
 [1241] I kan not now wel counterfete
 [1242] Hir wordes, but this was the grete
 [1243] Of hir answere: she sayde `Nay'
 [1244] Al outerly. Allas, that day
 [1245] The sorowe I suffred and the woo
 [1246] That trewly Cassandra, that soo
 [1247] Bewayled the destruccioun
 [1248] Of Troye and of Ilyoun,
 [1249] Had never swich sorwe as I thoo.
 [1250] I durste no more say thertoo
 [1251] For pure fere, but stal away;
 [11-ch] 1252 And thus I lyved ful many a day,
 [1253] That trewely I hadde no ned
 [1254] Ferther than my beddes hed
 [1255] Never a day to seche sorwe;
 [1256] I fond hyt redy every morwe,
 [1257] For-why I loved hyr in no gere.
 [1258] "So hit befel, another yere
 [1259] I thoughte ones I wolde fonde
 [1260] To do hir knowe and understonde
 [1261] My woo; and she wel understod
 [1262] That I ne wilned thyng but god,
 [1263] And worship, and to kepe hir name
 [1264] Over alle thynges, and drede hir shame,
 [1265] And was so besy hyr to serve,
 [1266] And pitee were I shulde sterve,
 [1267] Syth that I wilned noon harm, ywis.
 [1268] So whan my lady knew al this,
 [1269] My lady yaf me al hooly
 [1270] The noble yifte of hir mercy,
 [1271] Savynge hir worship by al weyes --
 [1272] Dredles, I mene noon other weyes.
 [1273] And therwith she yaf me a ryng;
 [1274] I trowe hyt was the firste thyng;
 [1275] But if myn herte was ywaxe
 [1276] Glad, that is no nede to axe!
 [1277] As helpe me God, I was as blyve
 [1278] Reysed as fro deth to lyve --
 [1279] Of al happes the alderbeste,
 [1280] The gladdest, and the moste at reste.
 [1281] For trewely that swete wyght,
 [1282] Whan I had wrong and she the ryght,
 [11-ch] 1283 She wolde alway so goodly
 [1284] Foryeve me so debonairly.
 [1285] In al my yowthe, in al chaunce,
 [1286] She took me in hir governaunce.
 [1287] Therwyth she was alway so trewe
 [1288] Our joye was ever ylyche newe;
 [1289] Oure hertes wern so evene a payre
 [1290] That never nas that oon contrayre
 [1291] To that other for no woo.
 [1292] For sothe, ylyche they suffred thoo
 [1293] Oo blysse and eke oo sorwe bothe;
 [1294] Ylyche they were bothe glad and wrothe;
 [1295] Al was us oon, withoute were.
 [1296] And thus we lyved ful many a yere
 [1297] So wel I kan nat telle how."
 [1298] "Sir," quod I, "where is she now?"
 [1299] "Now?" quod he, and stynte anoon.
 [1300] Therwith he wax as ded as stoon
 [1301] And seyde, "Allas, that I was bore!
 [1302] That was the los that here-before
 [1303] I tolde the that I hadde lorn.
 [1304] Bethenke how I seyde here-beforn,
 [1305] `Thow wost ful lytel what thow menest;
 [1306] I have lost more than thow wenest.'
 [1307] God wot, allas! Ryght that was she!"
 [1308] "Allas, sir, how? What may that be?"
 [1309] "She ys ded!" "Nay!" "Yis, be my trouthe!"
 [1310] "Is that youre los? Be God, hyt ys routhe!"
 [1311] And with that word ryght anoon
 [1312] They gan to strake forth; al was doon,
 [1313] For that tyme, the hert-huntyng.
 [1314] With that me thoghte that this kyng
 [1315] Gan homwarde for to ryde
 [1316] Unto a place, was there besyde,
 [1317] Which was from us but a lyte --
 [1318] A long castel with walles white,
 [1319] Be Seynt Johan, on a ryche hil,
 [1320] As me mette; but thus hyt fil.
 [1321] Ryght thus me mette, as I yow telle,
 [1322] That in the castell ther was a belle,
 [1323] As hyt hadde smyten houres twelve.
 [1324] Therwyth I awook myselve
 [1325] And fond me lyinge in my bed;
 [1326] And the book that I hadde red,
 [1327] Of Alcione and Seys the kyng,
 [1328] And of the goddes of slepyng,
 [1329] I fond hyt in myn hond ful even.
 [1330] Thoghte I, "Thys ys so queynt a sweven
 [1331] That I wol, be processe of tyme,
 [1332] Fonde to put this sweven in ryme
 [1333] As I kan best, and that anoon."
 [1334] This was my sweven; now hit ys doon.

      
The Canterbury Tales and Other Works of Chaucer (Middle English), by Geoffery Chaucer, [14th cent.], at sacred-texts.com

 

Other Works

 

The House of Fame

 [1] God turne us every drem to goode!
 [2] For hyt is wonder, be the roode,
 [3] To my wyt, what causeth swevenes
 [4] Eyther on morwes or on evenes,
 [5] And why th' effect folweth of somme,
 [6] And of somme hit shal never come;
 [7] Why that is an avision
 [8] And why this a revelacion,
 [9] Why this a drem, why that a sweven,
 [10] And noght to every man lyche even;
 [11] Why this a fantome, why these oracles,
 [12] I not; but whoso of these miracles
 [13] The causes knoweth bet then I,
 [14] Devyne he, for I certeinly
 [15] Ne kan hem noght, ne never thinke
 [16] To besily my wyt to swinke
 [17] To knowe of hir signifiaunce
 [18] The gendres, neyther the distaunce
 [19] Of tymes of hem, ne the causes,
 [20] Or why this more then that cause is --
 [21] As yf folkys complexions
 [22] Make hem dreme of reflexions,
 [23] Or ellys thus, as other sayn,
 [24] For to gret feblenesse of her brayn,
 [25] By abstinence or by seknesse,
 [26] Prison-stewe or gret distresse,
 [27] Or ellys by dysordynaunce
 [28] Of naturel acustumaunce,
 [29] That som man is to curious
 [30] In studye, or melancolyous,
 [31] Or thus so inly ful of drede
 [32] That no man may hym bote bede;
 [33] Or elles that devocion
 [34] Of somme, and contemplacion
 [35] Causeth suche dremes ofte;
 [36] Or that the cruel lyf unsofte
 [37] Which these ilke lovers leden
 [38] That hopen over-muche or dreden,
 [39] That purely her impressions
 [40] Causeth hem avisions;
 [41] Or yf that spirites have the myght
 [42] To make folk to dreme a-nyght;
 [43] Or yf the soule of propre kynde
 [44] Be so parfit, as men fynde,
 [45] That yt forwot that ys to come,
 [46] And that hyt warneth alle and some
 [47] Of everych of her aventures
 [48] Be avisions or be figures,
 [49] But that oure flessh ne hath no myght
 [50] To understonde hyt aryght,
 [51] For hyt is warned to derkly --
 [52] But why the cause is, noght wot I.
 [53] Wel worth of this thyng grete clerkys
 [54] That trete of this and other werkes,
 [55] For I of noon opinion
 [56] Nyl as now make mensyon,
 [57] But oonly that the holy roode
 [58] Turne us every drem to goode!
 [59] For never sith that I was born,
 [60] Ne no man elles me beforn,
 [61] Mette, I trowe stedfastly,
 [62] So wonderful a drem as I
 [63] The tenthe day now of Decembre,
 [64] The which, as I kan now remembre,
 [65] I wol yow tellen everydel.
 [66] But at my gynnynge, trusteth wel,
 [67] I wol make invocacion,
 [68] With special devocion,
 [69] Unto the god of slep anoon,
 [70] That duelleth in a cave of stoon
 [71] Upon a strem that cometh fro Lete,
 [72] That is a flood of helle unswete,
 [73] Besyde a folk men clepeth Cymerie --
 [74] There slepeth ay this god unmerie
 [75] With his slepy thousand sones,
 [76] That alwey for to slepe hir wone is.
 [77] And to this god that I of rede
 [78] Prey I that he wol me spede
 [79] My sweven for to telle aryght,
 [80] Yf every drem stonde in his myght.
 [81] And he that mover ys of al,
 [82] That is and was and ever shal,
 [83] So yive hem joye that hyt here
 [84] Of alle that they dreme to-yere,
 [85] And for to stonden alle in grace
 [86] Of her loves, or in what place
 [87] That hem were levest for to stonde,
 [88] And shelde hem fro poverte and shonde,
 [89] And from unhap and ech disese,
 [90] And sende hem al that may hem plese,
 [91] That take hit wel and skorne hyt noght,
 [92] Ne hyt mysdemen in her thoght
 [93] Thorgh malicious entencion.
 [94] And whoso thorgh presumpcion,
 [95] Or hate, or skorn, or thorgh envye,
 [96] Dispit, or jape, or vilanye,
 [97] Mysdeme hyt, pray I Jesus God
 [98] That (dreme he barefot, dreme he shod),
 [99] That every harm that any man
 [100] Hath had syth the world began
 [101] Befalle hym therof or he sterve,
 [102] And graunte he mote hit ful deserve,
 [103] Lo, with such a conclusion
 [104] As had of his avision
 [105] Cresus, that was kyng of Lyde,
 [106] That high upon a gebet dyde.
 [107] This prayer shal he have of me;
 [108] I am no bet in charyte!
 [109] Now herkeneth, as I have yow seyd,
 [110] What that I mette or I abreyd.
 [111] Of Decembre the tenthe day,
 [112] Whan hit was nyght to slepe I lay
 [113] Ryght ther as I was wont to done,
 [114] And fil on slepe wonder sone,
 [115] As he that wery was forgo
 [116] On pilgrymage myles two
 [117] To the corseynt Leonard,
 [118] To make lythe of that was hard.
 [119] But as I slepte, me mette I was
 [120] Withyn a temple ymad of glas,
 [121] In which ther were moo ymages
 [122] Of gold, stondynge in sondry stages,
 [123] And moo ryche tabernacles,
 [124] And with perre moo pynacles,
 [125] And moo curiouse portreytures,
 [126] And queynte maner of figures
 [127] Of olde werk, then I saugh ever.
 [128] For certeynly, I nyste never
 [129] Wher that I was, but wel wyste I
 [130] Hyt was of Venus redely,
 [131] The temple; for in portreyture
 [132] I sawgh anoon-ryght hir figure
 [133] Naked fletynge in a see,
 [134] And also on hir hed, pardee,
 [135] Hir rose garlond whit and red,
 [136] And hir comb to kembe hyr hed,
 [137] Hir dowves, and daun Cupido
 [138] Hir blynde sone, and Vulcano,
 [139] That in his face was ful broun.
 [140] But as I romed up and doun,
 [141] I fond that on a wall ther was
 [142] Thus writen on a table of bras:
 [143] "I wol now synge, yif I kan,
 [144] The armes and also the man
 [145] That first cam, thurgh his destinee,
 [146] Fugityf of Troy contree,
 [147] In Itayle, with ful moche pyne
 [148] Unto the strondes of Lavyne."
 [149] And tho began the story anoon,
 [150] As I shal telle yow echon.
 [151] First sawgh I the destruction
 [152] Of Troye thurgh the Grek Synon,
 [153] [That] with his false forswerynge,
 [154] And his chere and his lesynge,
 [155] Made the hors broght into Troye,
 [156] Thorgh which Troyens loste al her joye.
 [157] And aftir this was grave, allas,
 [158] How Ilyon assayled was
 [159] And wonne, and kyng Priam yslayn
 [160] And Polytes his sone, certayn,
 [161] Dispitously, of daun Pirrus.
 [162] And next that sawgh I how Venus,
 [163] Whan that she sawgh the castel brende,
 [164] Doun fro the heven gan descende,
 [165] And bad hir sone Eneas flee;
 [166] And how he fledde, and how that he
 [167] Escaped was from al the pres,
 [168] And took his fader Anchises,
 [169] And bar hym on hys bak away,
 [170] Cryinge, "Allas, and welaway!"
 [171] The whiche Anchises in hys hond
 [172] Bar the goddes of the lond,
 [173] Thilke that unbrende were.
 [174] And I saugh next, in al thys fere,
 [175] How Creusa, daun Eneas wif,
 [176] Which that he lovede as hys lyf,
 [177] And hir yonge sone Iulo,
 [178] And eke Askanius also,
 [179] Fledden eke with drery chere,
 [180] That hyt was pitee for to here;
 [181] And in a forest as they wente,
 [182] At a turnynge of a wente,
 [183] How Creusa was ylost, allas,
 [184] That ded, not I how, she was;
 [185] How he hir soughte, and how hir gost
 [186] Bad hym to flee the Grekes host,
 [187] And seyde he moste unto Itayle,
 [188] As was hys destinee, sauns faille;
 [189] That hyt was pitee for to here,
 [190] When hir spirit gan appere,
 [191] The wordes that she to hym seyde,
 [192] And for to kepe hir sone hym preyde.
 [193] Ther sawgh I graven eke how he,
 [194] Hys fader eke, and his meynee,
 [195] With hys shippes gan to saylle
 [196] Towardes the contree of Itaylle
 [197] As streight as that they myghte goo.
 [198] Ther saugh I thee, cruel Juno,
 [199] That art daun Jupiteres wif,
 [200] That hast yhated al thy lyf
 [201] Al the Troianysshe blood,
 [202] Renne and crye as thou were wood
 [203] On Eolus, the god of wyndes,
 [204] To blowen oute, of alle kyndes,
 [205] So lowde that he shulde drenche
 [206] Lord and lady, grom and wenche,
 [207] Of al the Troian nacion,
 [208] Withoute any savacion.
 [209] Ther saugh I such tempeste aryse
 [210] That every herte myght agryse
 [211] To see hyt peynted on the wal.
 [212] Ther saugh I graven eke withal,
 [213] Venus, how ye, my lady dere,
 [214] Wepynge with ful woful chere,
 [215] Prayen Jupiter on hye
 [216] To save and kepe that navye
 [217] Of the Troian Eneas,
 [218] Syth that he hir sone was.
 [219] Ther saugh I Joves Venus kysse,
 [220] And graunted of the tempest lysse.
 [221] Ther saugh I how the tempest stente,
 [222] And how with alle pyne he wente,
 [223] And prively tok arryvage
 [224] In the contree of Cartage;
 [225] And on the morwe, how that he
 [226] And a knyght highte Achate
 [227] Mette with Venus that day,
 [228] Goynge in a queynt array
 [229] As she had ben an hunteresse,
 [230] With wynd blowynge upon hir tresse;
 [231] How Eneas gan hym to pleyne,
 [232] When that he knew hir, of his peyne;
 [233] And how his shippes dreynte were,
 [234] Or elles lost, he nyste where;
 [235] How she gan hym comforte thoo,
 [236] And bad hym to Cartage goo,
 [237] And ther he shulde his folk fynde,
 [238] That in the see were left behynde.
 [239] And, shortly of this thyng to pace,
 [240] She made Eneas so in grace
 [241] Of Dido, quene of that contree,
 [242] That, shortly for to tellen, she
 [243] Becam hys love and let him doo
 [244] Al that weddynge longeth too.
 [245] What shulde I speke more queynte,
 [246] Or peyne me my wordes peynte
 [247] To speke of love? Hyt wol not be;
 [248] I kan not of that faculte.
 [249] And eke to telle the manere
 [250] How they aqueynteden in fere,
 [251] Hyt were a long proces to telle,
 [252] And over-long for yow to dwelle.
 [253] Ther sawgh I grave how Eneas
 [254] Tolde Dido every caas
 [255] That hym was tyd upon the see.
 [256] And after grave was how shee
 [257] Made of hym shortly at oo word
 [258] Hyr lyf, hir love, hir lust, hir lord,
 [259] And dide hym al the reverence
 [260] And leyde on hym al the dispence
 [261] That any woman myghte do,
 [262] Wenynge hyt had al be so
 [263] As he hir swor; and herby demed
 [264] That he was good, for he such semed.
 [265] Allas! what harm doth apparence,
 [266] Whan hit is fals in existence!
 [267] For he to hir a traytour was;
 [268] Wherfore she slow hirself, allas!
 [269] Loo, how a woman doth amys
 [270] To love hym that unknowen ys.
 [271] For, be Cryste, lo, thus yt fareth.
 [272] "Hyt is not al gold that glareth."
 [273] For also browke I wel myn hed,
 [274] Ther may be under godlyhed
 [275] Kevered many a shrewed vice.
 [276] Therfore be no wyght so nyce
 [277] To take a love oonly for chere,
 [278] Or speche, or for frendly manere,
 [279] For this shal every woman fynde,
 [280] That som man, of his pure kynde,
 [281] Wol shewen outward the fayreste,
 [282] Tyl he have caught that what him leste;
 [283] And thanne wol he causes fynde
 [284] And swere how that she ys unkynde,
 [285] Or fals, or privy, or double was.
 [286] Al this seye I be Eneas
 [287] And Dido, and hir nyce lest,
 [288] That loved al to sone a gest;
 [289] Therfore I wol seye a proverbe,
 [290] That "he that fully knoweth th' erbe
 [291] May saufly leye hyt to his ye" --
 [292] Withoute drede, this ys no lye.
 [293] But let us speke of Eneas,
 [294] How he betrayed hir, allas,
 [295] And lefte hir ful unkyndely.
 [296] So when she saw al utterly
 [297] That he wolde hir of trouthe fayle,
 [298] And wende fro hir to Itayle,
 [299] She gan to wringe hir hondes two.
 [300] "Allas," quod she, "what me ys woo!
 [301] Allas, is every man thus trewe,
 [302] That every yer wolde have a newe,
 [303] Yf hit so longe tyme dure,
 [304] Or elles three, peraventure?
 [305] As thus: of oon he wolde have fame
 [306] In magnyfyinge of hys name;
 [307] Another for frendshippe, seyth he;
 [308] And yet ther shal the thridde be
 [309] That shal be take for delyt,
 [310] Loo, or for synguler profit""
 [311] In suche wordes gan to pleyne
 [312] Dydo of hir grete peyne,
 [313] As me mette redely --
 [314] Non other auctour alegge I.
 [315] "Allas!" quod she, "my swete herte,
 [316] Have pitee on my sorwes smerte,
 [317] And slee mee not! Goo noght awey!
 [318] O woful Dido, wel-away!"
 [319] Quod she to hirselve thoo.
 [320] "O Eneas, what wol ye doo?
 [321] O that your love, ne your bond
 [322] That ye have sworn with your ryght hond,
 [323] Ne my crewel deth," quod she,
 [324] "May holde yow stille here with me!
 [325] O haveth of my deth pitee!
 [326] Iwys, my dere herte, ye
 [327] Knowen ful wel that never yit,
 [328] As ferforth as I hadde wyt,
 [329] Agylte [I] yow in thoght ne dede.
 [330] O, have ye men such godlyhede
 [331] In speche, and never a del of trouthe?
 [332] Allas, that ever hadde routhe
 [333] Any woman on any man!
 [334] Now see I wel, and telle kan,
 [335] We wrechched wymmen konne noon art;
 [336] For certeyn, for the more part,
 [337] Thus we be served everychone.
 [338] How sore that ye men konne groone,
 [339] Anoon as we have yow receyved,
 [340] Certaynly we ben deceyvyd!
 [341] For, though your love laste a seson,
 [342] Wayte upon the conclusyon,
 [343] And eke how that ye determynen,
 [344] And for the more part diffynen.
 [345] "O wel-awey that I was born!
 [346] For thorgh yow is my name lorn,
 [347] And alle myn actes red and songe
 [348] Over al thys lond, on every tonge.
 [349] O wikke Fame! -- for ther nys
 [350] Nothing so swift, lo, as she is.
 [351] O, soth ys, every thing ys wyst,
 [352] Though hit be kevered with the myst.
 [353] Eke, though I myghte duren ever,
 [354] That I have don rekever I never,
 [355] That I ne shal be seyd, allas,
 [356] Yshamed be thourgh Eneas,
 [357] And that I shal thus juged be:
 [358] `Loo, ryght as she hath don, now she
 [359] Wol doo eft-sones, hardely' --
 [360] Thus seyth the peple prively."
 [361] But that is don, is not to done;
 [362] Al hir compleynt ne al hir moone,
 [363] Certeyn, avayleth hir not a stre.
 [364] And when she wiste sothly he
 [365] Was forth unto his shippes goon,
 [366] She into hir chambre wente anoon,
 [367] And called on hir suster Anne,
 [368] And gan hir to compleyne thanne,
 [369] And seyde that she cause was
 [370] That she first loved him, allas,
 [371] And thus counseylled hir thertoo.
 [372] But what! When this was seyd and doo,
 [373] She rof hirselve to the herte
 [374] And deyde thorgh the wounde smerte.
 [375] And al the maner how she deyde,
 [376] And alle the wordes that she seyde,
 [377] Whoso to knowe hit hath purpos,
 [378] Rede Virgile in Eneydos
 [379] Or the Epistle of Ovyde,
 [380] What that she wrot or that she dyde;
 [381] And nere hyt to long to endyte,
 [382] Be God, I wolde hyt here write.
 [383] But wel-away, the harm, the routhe,
 [384] That hath betyd for such untrouthe,
 [385] As men may ofte in bokes rede,
 [386] And al day sen hyt yet in dede,
 [387] That for to thynken hyt, a tene is.
 [388] Loo Demophon, duk of Athenys,
 [389] How he forswor hym ful falsly,
 [390] And traysed Phillis wikkidly,
 [391] That kynges doghtre was of Trace,
 [392] And falsly gan hys terme pace;
 [393] And when she wiste that he was fals,
 [394] She heng hirself ryght be the hals,
 [395] For he had doon hir such untrouthe.
 [396] Loo, was not this a woo and routhe?
 [397] Eke lo how fals and reccheles
 [398] Was to Breseyda Achilles,
 [399] And Paris to Oenone,
 [400] And Jason to Isiphile,
 [401] And eft Jason to Medea,
 [402] And Ercules to Dyanira,
 [403] For he left hir for Yole,
 [404] That made hym cache his deth, parde.
 [405] How fals eke was he Theseus,
 [406] That, as the story telleth us,
 [407] How he betrayed Adriane --
 [408] The devel be hys soules bane!
 [409] For had he lawghed, had he loured,
 [410] He moste have ben al devoured,
 [411] Yf Adriane ne had ybe.
 [412] And for she had of hym pite,
 [413] She made hym fro the deth escape,
 [414] And he made hir a ful fals jape;
 [415] For aftir this, withyn a while,
 [416] He lefte hir slepynge in an ile
 [417] Desert allone, ryght in the se,
 [418] And stal away and let hir be,
 [419] And took hir suster Phedra thoo
 [420] With him, and gan to shippe goo.
 [421] And yet he had yswore to here
 [422] On al that ever he myghte swere
 [423] That, so she saved hym hys lyf,
 [424] He wolde have take hir to hys wif;
 [425] For she desired nothing ellis,
 [426] In certeyn, as the book us tellis.
 [427] But to excusen Eneas
 [428] Fullyche of al his grete trespas,
 [429] The book seyth Mercurie, sauns fayle,
 [430] Bad hym goo into Itayle,
 [431] And leve Auffrikes regioun,
 [432] And Dido and hir faire toun.
 [433] Thoo sawgh I grave how to Itayle
 [434] Daun Eneas is goo to sayle;
 [435] And how the tempest al began,
 [436] And how he loste hys sterisman,
 [437] Which that the stere, or he tok kep,
 [438] Smot over bord, loo, as he slep.
 [439] And also sawgh I how Sybile
 [440] And Eneas, besyde an yle,
 [441] To helle wente for to see
 [442] His fader, Anchyses the free;
 [443] How he ther fond Palinurus,
 [444] And Dido, and eke Deiphebus;
 [445] And every turment eke in helle
 [446] Saugh he, which is longe to telle;
 [447] Which whoso willeth for to knowe,
 [448] He moste rede many a rowe
 [449] On Virgile or on Claudian,
 [450] Or Daunte, that hit telle kan.
 [451] Tho saugh I grave al the aryvayle
 [452] That Eneas had in Itayle;
 [453] And with kyng Latyne hys tretee
 [454] And alle the batayles that hee
 [455] Was at hymself, and eke hys knyghtis,
 [456] Or he had al ywonne his ryghtis;
 [457] And how he Turnus reft his lyf,
 [458] And wan Lavina to his wif;
 [459] And alle the mervelous signals
 [460] Of the goddys celestials;
 [461] How, mawgree Juno, Eneas,
 [462] For al hir sleight and hir compas,
 [463] Acheved al his aventure,
 [464] For Jupiter took of hym cure
 [465] At the prayer of Venus --
 [466] The whiche I preye alwey save us,
 [467] And us ay of oure sorwes lyghte!
 [468] When I had seen al this syghte
 [469] In this noble temple thus,
 [470] "A, Lord," thoughte I, "that madest us,
 [471] Yet sawgh I never such noblesse
 [472] Of ymages, ne such richesse,
 [473] As I saugh graven in this chirche;
 [474] But not wot I whoo did hem wirche,
 [475] Ne where I am, ne in what contree.
 [476] But now wol I goo out and see,
 [477] Ryght at the wiket, yf y kan
 [478] See owhere any stiryng man
 [479] That may me telle where I am."
 [480] When I out at the dores cam,
 [481] I faste aboute me beheld.
 [482] Then sawgh I but a large feld,
 [483] As fer as that I myghte see,
 [484] Withouten toun, or hous, or tree,
 [485] Or bush, or grass, or eryd lond;
 [486] For al the feld nas but of sond
 [487] As smal as man may se yet lye
 [488] In the desert of Lybye.
 [489] Ne no maner creature
 [490] That ys yformed be Nature
 [491] Ne sawgh I, me to rede or wisse.
 [492] "O Crist," thoughte I, "that art in blysse,
 [493] Fro fantome and illusion
 [494] Me save!" And with devocion
 [495] Myn eyen to the hevene I caste.
 [496] Thoo was I war, lo, at the laste,
 [497] That faste be the sonne, as hye
 [498] As kenne myghte I with myn ye,
 [499] Me thoughte I sawgh an egle sore,
 [500] But that hit semed moche more
 [501] Then I had any egle seyn.
 [502] But this as sooth as deth, certeyn,
 [503] Hyt was of gold, and shon so bryghte
 [504] That never sawe men such a syghte,
 [505] But yf the heven had ywonne
 [506] Al newe of gold another sonne;
 [507] So shone the egles fethers bryghte,
 [508] And somwhat dounward gan hyt lyghte.
 [509] Now herkeneth every maner man
 [510] That Englissh understonde kan
 [511] And [listeth. of my drem to lere,
 [512] For now at erste shul ye here
 [513] So sely an avisyon,
 [514] That Isaye, ne Scipion,
 [515] Ne kyng Nabugodonosor,
 [516] Pharoo, Turnus, ne Elcanor,
 [517] Ne mette such a drem as this.
 [518] Now faire blisfull, O Cipris,
 [519] So be my favour at this tyme!
 [520] And ye, me to endite and ryme
 [521] Helpeth, that on Parnaso duelle,
 [522] Be Elicon, the clere welle.
 [523] O Thought, that wrot al that I mette,
 [524] And in the tresorye hyt shette
 [525] Of my brayn, now shal men se
 [526] Yf any vertu in the be
 [527] To tellen al my drem aryght.
 [528] Now kythe thyn engyn and myght!
 [529] This egle, of which I have yow told,
 [530] That shon with fethres as of gold,
 [531] Which that so hye gan to sore,
 [532] I gan beholde more and more
 [533] To se the beaute and the wonder;
 [534] But never was ther dynt of thonder,
 [535] Ne that thyng that men calle fouder,
 [536] That smot somtyme a tour to powder
 [537] And in his swifte comynge brende,
 [538] That so swithe gan descende
 [539] As this foul, when hyt beheld
 [540] That I a-roume was in the feld.
 [541] And with hys grymme pawes stronge,
 [542] Withyn hys sharpe nayles longe,
 [543] Me, fleynge, in a swap he hente,
 [544] And with hys sours ayen up wente,
 [545] Me caryinge in his clawes starke
 [546] As lyghtly as I were a larke,
 [547] How high, I can not telle yow,
 [548] For I cam up, y nyste how.
 [549] For so astonyed and asweved
 [550] Was every vertu in my heved,
 [551] What with his sours and with my drede,
 [552] That al my felynge gan to dede,
 [553] For-whi hit was to gret affray.
 [554] Thus I longe in hys clawes lay,
 [555] Til at the laste he to me spak
 [556] In mannes vois, and seyde, "Awak!
 [557] And be not agast so, for shame!"
 [558] And called me tho by my name,
 [559] And for I shulde the bet abreyde,
 [560] Me mette "Awak," to me he seyde
 [561] Ryght in the same vois and stevene
 [562] That useth oon I koude nevene;
 [563] And with that vois, soth for to seyn,
 [564] My mynde cam to me ageyn,
 [565] For hyt was goodly seyd to me,
 [566] So nas hyt never wont to be.
 [567] And here-withal I gan to stere,
 [568] And he me in his fet to bere,
 [569] Til that he felte that I had hete,
 [570] And felte eke tho myn herte bete.
 [571] And thoo gan he me to disporte,
 [572] And with wordes to comforte,
 [573] And sayde twyes, "Seynte Marye,
 [574] Thou art noyous for to carye!
 [575] And nothyng nedeth it, pardee,
 [576] For also wis God helpe me,
 [577] As thou noon harm shalt have of this;
 [578] And this caas that betyd the is,
 [579] Is for thy lore and for thy prow.
 [580] Let see! Darst thou yet loke now?
 [581] Be ful assured, boldely,
 [582] I am thy frend." And therwith I
 [583] Gan for to wondren in my mynde.
 [584] "O God," thoughte I, "that madest kynde,
 [585] Shal I noon other weyes dye?
 [586] Wher Joves wol me stellyfye,
 [587] Or what thing may this sygnifye?
 [588] I neyther am Ennok, ne Elye,
 [589] Ne Romulus, ne Ganymede,
 [590] That was ybore up, as men rede,
 [591] To hevene with daun Jupiter,
 [592] And mad the goddys botiller."
 [593] Loo, this was thoo my fantasye.
 [594] But he that bar me gan espye
 [595] That I so thoughte, and seyde this:
 [596] "Thow demest of thyself amys,
 [597] For Joves ys not theraboute --
 [598] I dar wel putte the out of doute --
 [599] To make of the as yet a sterre;
 [600] But er I bere the moche ferre,
 [601] I wol the telle what I am,
 [602] And whider thou shalt, and why I cam
 [603] To do thys, so that thou take
 [604] Good herte, and not for fere quake."
 [605] "Gladly," quod I. "Now wel," quod he,
 [606] "First, I, that in my fet have the,
 [607] Of which thou hast a fere and wonder,
 [608] Am dwellynge with the god of thonder,
 [609] Which that men callen Jupiter,
 [610] That dooth me flee ful ofte fer
 [611] To do al hys comaundement.
 [612] And for this cause he hath me sent
 [613] To the. Now herke, be thy trouthe:
 [614] Certeyn, he hath of the routhe
 [615] That thou so longe trewely
 [616] Hast served so ententyfly
 [617] Hys blynde nevew Cupido,
 [618] And faire Venus also,
 [619] Withoute guerdon ever yit,
 [620] And never-the-lesse hast set thy wit --
 [621] Although that in thy hed ful lyte is --
 [622] To make bookys, songes, dytees,
 [623] In ryme or elles in cadence,
 [624] As thou best canst, in reverence
 [625] Of Love and of hys servantes eke,
 [626] That have hys servyse soght, and seke;
 [627] And peynest the to preyse hys art,
 [628] Although thou haddest never part.
 [629] Wherfore, also God me blesse,
 [630] Joves halt hyt gret humblesse
 [631] And vertu eke, that thou wolt make
 [632] A-nyght ful ofte thyn hed to ake
 [633] In thy studye, so thou writest,
 [634] And ever mo of love enditest,
 [635] In honour of hym and in preysynges,
 [636] And in his folkes furtherynges,
 [637] And in hir matere al devisest,
 [638] And noght hym nor his folk dispisest,
 [639] Although thou maist goo in the daunce
 [640] Of hem that hym lyst not avaunce.
 [641] "Wherfore, as I seyde, ywys,
 [642] Jupiter considereth this,
 [643] And also, beau sir, other thynges:
 [644] That is, that thou hast no tydynges
 [645] Of Loves folk yf they be glade,
 [646] Ne of noght elles that God made;
 [647] And noght oonly fro fer contree
 [648] That ther no tydynge cometh to thee,
 [649] But of thy verray neyghebores,
 [650] That duellen almost at thy dores,
 [651] Thou herist neyther that ne this;
 [652] For when thy labour doon al ys,
 [653] And hast mad alle thy rekenynges,
 [654] In stede of reste and newe thynges
 [655] Thou goost hom to thy hous anoon,
 [656] And, also domb as any stoon,
 [657] Thou sittest at another book
 [658] Tyl fully daswed ys thy look;
 [659] And lyvest thus as an heremyte,
 [660] Although thyn abstynence ys lyte.
 [661] "And therfore Joves, thorgh hys grace,
 [662] Wol that I bere the to a place
 [663] Which that hight the Hous of Fame,
 [664] To do the som disport and game,
 [665] In som recompensacion
 [666] Of labour and devocion
 [667] That thou hast had, loo causeles,
 [668] To Cupido the rechcheles.
 [669] And thus this god, thorgh his merite,
 [670] Wol with som maner thing the quyte,
 [671] So that thou wolt be of good chere.
 [672] For truste wel that thou shalt here,
 [673] When we be come there I seye,
 [674] Mo wonder thynges, dar I leye,
 [675] And of Loves folk moo tydynges,
 [676] Both sothe sawes and lesinges,
 [677] And moo loves newe begonne,
 [678] And longe yserved loves wonne,
 [679] And moo loves casuelly
 [680] That ben betyd, no man wot why,
 [681] But as a blynd man stert an hare;
 [682] And more jolytee and fare
 [683] While that they fynde love of stel,
 [684] As thinketh hem, and over-al wel;
 [685] Mo discordes, moo jelousies,
 [686] Mo murmures and moo novelries,
 [687] And moo dissymulacions,
 [688] And feyned reparacions,
 [689] And moo berdys in two houres
 [690] Withoute rasour or sisoures
 [691] Ymad then greynes be of sondes;
 [692] And eke moo holdynge in hondes,
 [693] And also moo renovelaunces
 [694] Of olde forleten aqueyntaunces;
 [695] Mo love-dayes and acordes
 [696] Then on instrumentes be cordes;
 [697] And eke of loves moo eschaunges
 [698] Then ever cornes were in graunges --
 [699] Unnethe maistow trowen this?"
 [700] Quod he. "Noo, helpe me God so wys,"
 [701] Quod I. "Noo? why?" quod he. "For hyt
 [702] Were impossible, to my wit,
 [703] Though that Fame had alle the pies
 [704] In al a realme, and alle the spies,
 [705] How that yet she shulde here al this,
 [706] Or they espie hyt." "O yis, yis!"
 [707] Quod he to me, "that kan I preve
 [708] Be reson worthy for to leve,
 [709] So that thou yeve thyn advertence
 [710] To understonde my sentence.
 [711] "First shalt thou here where she duelleth,
 [712] And so thyn oune bok hyt tellith.
 [713] Hir paleys stant, as I shal seye,
 [714] Ryght even in myddes of the weye
 [715] Betwixen hevene and erthe and see,
 [716] That what so ever in al these three
 [717] Is spoken, either privy or apert,
 [718] The way therto ys so overt,
 [719] And stant eke in so juste a place
 [720] That every soun mot to hyt pace;
 [721] Or what so cometh from any tonge,
 [722] Be hyt rouned, red, or songe,
 [723] Or spoke in suerte or in drede,
 [724] Certeyn, hyt moste thider nede.
 [725] "Now herkene wel, for-why I wille
 [726] Tellen the a propre skille
 [727] And a worthy demonstracion
 [728] In myn ymagynacion.
 [729] "Geffrey, thou wost ryght wel this,
 [730] That every kyndely thyng that is
 [731] Hath a kyndely stede ther he
 [732] May best in hyt conserved be;
 [733] Unto which place every thyng
 [734] Thorgh his kyndely enclynyng
 [735] Moveth for to come to
 [736] Whan that hyt is awey therfro;
 [737] As thus: loo, thou maist alday se
 [738] That any thing that hevy be,
 [739] As stoon, or led, or thyng of wighte,
 [740] And bere hyt never so hye on highte,
 [741] Lat goo thyn hand, hit falleth doun.
 [742] Ryght so seye I be fyr or soun,
 [743] Or smoke or other thynges lyghte;
 [744] Alwey they seke upward on highte,
 [745] While ech of hem is at his large:
 [746] Lyght thing upward, and dounward charge.
 [747] And for this cause mayst thou see
 [748] That every ryver to the see
 [749] Enclyned ys to goo by kynde,
 [750] And by these skilles, as I fynde,
 [751] Hath fyssh duellynge in flood and see,
 [752] And trees eke in erthe bee.
 [753] Thus every thing, by thys reson,
 [754] Hath his propre mansyon
 [755] To which hit seketh to repaire,
 [756] Ther-as hit shulde not apaire.
 [757] Loo, this sentence ys knowen kouth
 [758] Of every philosophres mouth,
 [759] As Aristotle and daun Platon,
 [760] And other clerkys many oon;
 [761] And to confirme my resoun,
 [762] Thou wost wel this, that spech is soun,
 [763] Or elles no man myghte hyt here;
 [764] Now herke what y wol the lere.
 [765] "Soun ys noght but eyr ybroken;
 [766] And every speche that ys spoken,
 [767] Lowd or pryvee, foul or fair,
 [768] In his substaunce ys but air;
 [769] For as flaumbe ys but lyghted smoke,
 [770] Ryght soo soun ys air ybroke.
 [771] But this may be in many wyse,
 [772] Of which I wil the twoo devyse,
 [773] As soun that cometh of pipe or harpe.
 [774] For whan a pipe is blowen sharpe
 [775] The air ys twyst with violence
 [776] And rent -- loo, thys ys my sentence.
 [777] Eke whan men harpe-strynges smyte,
 [778] Whether hyt be moche or lyte,
 [779] Loo, with the strok the ayr tobreketh.
 [780] And ryght so breketh it when men speketh.
 [781] Thus wost thou wel what thing is speche.
 [782] "Now hennesforth y wol the teche
 [783] How every speche, or noyse, or soun,
 [784] Thurgh hys multiplicacioun,
 [785] Thogh hyt were piped of a mous,
 [786] Mot nede come to Fames Hous.
 [787] I preve hyt thus -- take hede now --
 [788] Be experience; for yf that thow
 [789] Throwe on water now a stoon,
 [790] Wel wost thou hyt wol make anoon
 [791] A litel roundell as a sercle,
 [792] Paraunter brod as a covercle;
 [793] And ryght anoon thow shalt see wel
 [794] That whel wol cause another whel,
 [795] And that the thridde, and so forth, brother,
 [796] Every sercle causynge other
 [797] Wydder than hymselve was;
 [798] And thus fro roundel to compas,
 [799] Ech aboute other goynge
 [800] Causeth of othres sterynge
 [801] And multiplyinge ever moo,
 [802] Til that hyt be so fer ygoo
 [803] That hyt at bothe brynkes bee.
 [804] Although thou mowe hyt not ysee
 [805] Above, hyt gooth yet alway under,
 [806] Although thou thenke hyt a gret wonder.
 [807] And whoso seyth of trouthe I varye,
 [808] Bid hym proven the contrarye.
 [809] And ryght thus every word, ywys,
 [810] That lowd or pryvee spoken ys,
 [811] Moveth first an ayr aboute,
 [812] And of thys movynge, out of doute,
 [813] Another ayr anoon ys meved;
 [814] As I have of the watir preved,
 [815] That every cercle causeth other,
 [816] Ryght so of ayr, my leve brother:
 [817] Everych ayr another stereth
 [818] More and more, and speche up bereth,
 [819] Or voys, or noyse, or word, or soun,
 [820] Ay through multiplicacioun,
 [821] Til hyt be atte Hous of Fame --
 [822] Take yt in ernest or in game.
 [823] "Now have I told, yf thou have mynde,
 [824] How speche or soun, of pure kynde,
 [825] Enclyned ys upward to meve --
 [826] This mayst thou fele wel I preve --
 [827] And that same place, ywys,
 [828] That every thyng enclyned to ys
 [829] Hath his kyndelyche stede:
 [830] That sheweth hyt, withouten drede,
 [831] That kyndely the mansioun
 [832] Of every speche, of every soun,
 [833] Be hyt eyther foul or fair,
 [834] Hath hys kynde place in ayr.
 [835] And syn that every thyng that is
 [836] Out of hys kynde place, ywys,
 [837] Moveth thidder for to goo,
 [838] Yif hyt aweye be therfroo --
 [839] As I have before preved the --
 [840] Hyt seweth, every soun, parde,
 [841] Moveth kyndely to pace
 [842] Al up into his kyndely place.
 [843] And this place of which I telle,
 [844] Ther as Fame lyst to duelle,
 [845] Ys set amyddys of these three,
 [846] Heven, erthe, and eke the see,
 [847] As most conservatyf the soun.
 [848] Than ys this the conclusyoun:
 [849] That every speche of every man,
 [850] As y the telle first began,
 [851] Moveth up on high to pace
 [852] Kyndely to Fames place.
 [853] "Telle me this now feythfully,
 [854] Have y not preved thus symply,
 [855] Withoute any subtilite
 [856] Of speche, or gret prolixite
 [857] Of termes of philosophie,
 [858] Of figures of poetrie,
 [859] Or colours of rethorike?
 [860] Pardee, hit oughte the to lyke,
 [861] For hard langage and hard matere
 [862] Ys encombrous for to here
 [863] Attones; wost thou not wel this?"
 [864] And y answered and seyde, "Yis."
 [865] "A ha," quod he, "lo, so I can
 [866] Lewedly to a lewed man
 [867] Speke, and shewe hym swyche skiles
 [868] That he may shake hem be the biles,
 [869] So palpable they shulden be.
 [870] But telle me this, now praye y the,
 [871] How thinketh the my conclusyon?"
 [872] [Quod he]. "A good persuasion,"
 [873] Quod I, "hyt is, and lyk to be
 [874] Ryght so as thou hast preved me."
 [875] "Be God," quod he, "and as I leve,
 [876] Thou shalt have yet, or hit be eve,
 [877] Of every word of thys sentence
 [878] A preve by experience,
 [879] And with thyne eres heren wel,
 [880] Top and tayl and everydel,
 [881] That every word that spoken ys
 [882] Cometh into Fames Hous, ywys,
 [883] As I have seyd; what wilt thou more?"
 [884] And with this word upper to sore
 [885] He gan, and seyde, "Be Seynt Jame,
 [886] Now wil we speken al of game!"
 [887] "How farest thou?" quod he to me.
 [888] "Wel," quod I. "Now see," quod he,
 [889] "By thy trouthe, yond adoun,
 [890] Wher that thou knowest any toun,
 [891] Or hous, or any other thing.
 [892] And whan thou hast of ought knowyng,
 [893] Looke that thou warne me,
 [894] And y anoon shal telle the
 [895] How fer that thou art now therfro."
 [896] And y adoun gan loken thoo,
 [897] And beheld feldes and playnes,
 [898] And now hilles, and now mountaynes,
 [899] Now valeyes, now forestes,
 [900] And now unnethes grete bestes,
 [901] Now ryveres, now citees,
 [902] Now tounes, and now grete trees,
 [903] Now shippes seyllynge in the see.
 [904] But thus sone in a while he
 [905] Was flowen fro the ground so hye
 [906] That al the world, as to myn ye,
 [907] No more semed than a prikke;
 [908] Or elles was the air so thikke
 [909] That y ne myghte not discerne.
 [910] With that he spak to me as yerne,
 [911] And seyde, "Seest thou any [toun]
 [912] Or ought thou knowest yonder doun?"
 [913] I sayde, "Nay." "No wonder nys,"
 [914] Quod he, "for half so high as this
 [915] Nas Alixandre Macedo;
 [916] Ne the kyng, Daun Scipio,
 [917] That saw in drem, at poynt devys,
 [918] Helle and erthe and paradys;
 [919] Ne eke the wrechche Dedalus,
 [920] Ne his child, nyce Ykarus,
 [921] That fleigh so highe that the hete
 [922] Hys wynges malt, and he fel wete
 [923] In myd the see, and ther he dreynte,
 [924] For whom was maked moch compleynte.
 [925] "Now turn upward," quod he, "thy face,
 [926] And behold this large space,
 [927] This eyr, but loke thou ne be
 [928] Adrad of hem that thou shalt se,
 [929] For in this region, certeyn,
 [930] Duelleth many a citezeyn,
 [931] Of which that speketh Daun Plato;
 [932] These ben the eyryssh bestes, lo!"
 [933] And so saw y all that meynee
 [934] Boothe goon and also flee.
 [935] "Now," quod he thoo, "cast up thyn ye.
 [936] Se yonder, loo, the Galaxie,
 [937] Which men clepeth the Milky Wey
 [938] For hit ys whit (and somme, parfey,
 [939] Kallen hyt Watlynge Strete),
 [940] That ones was ybrent with hete,
 [941] Whan the sonnes sone the rede,
 [942] That highte Pheton, wolde lede
 [943] Algate hys fader carte, and gye.
 [944] The carte-hors gonne wel espye
 [945] That he koude no governaunce,
 [946] And gonne for to lepe and launce,
 [947] And beren hym now up, now doun,
 [948] Til that he sey the Scorpioun,
 [949] Which that in heven a sygne is yit.
 [950] And he for ferde loste hys wyt
 [951] Of that, and let the reynes gon
 [952] Of his hors; and they anoon
 [953] Gonne up to mounte and doun descende,
 [954] Til bothe the eyr and erthe brende,
 [955] Til Jupiter, loo, atte laste,
 [956] Hym slow, and fro the carte caste.
 [957] Loo, ys it not a gret myschaunce
 [958] To lete a fool han governaunce
 [959] Of thing that he can not demeyne?"
 [960] And with this word, soth for to seyne,
 [961] He gan alway upper to sore,
 [962] And gladded me ay more and more,
 [963] So feythfully to me spak he.
 [964] Tho gan y loken under me
 [965] And beheld the ayerissh bestes,
 [966] Cloudes, mystes, and tempestes,
 [967] Snowes, hayles, reynes, wyndes,
 [968] And th' engendrynge in hir kyndes,
 [969] All the wey thrugh which I cam.
 [970] "O God," quod y, "that made Adam,
 [971] Moche ys thy myght and thy noblesse!"
 [972] And thoo thoughte y upon Boece,
 [973] That writ, "A thought may flee so hye
 [974] Wyth fetheres of Philosophye,
 [975] To passen everych element,
 [976] And whan he hath so fer ywent,
 [977] Than may be seen behynde hys bak
 [978] Cloude" -- and al that y of spak.
 [979] Thoo gan y wexen in a were,
 [980] And seyde, "Y wot wel y am here,
 [981] But wher in body or in gost
 [982] I not, ywys, but God, thou wost,"
 [983] For more clere entendement
 [984] Nas me never yit ysent.
 [985] And than thoughte y on Marcian,
 [986] And eke on Anteclaudian,
 [987] That sooth was her descripsion
 [988] Of alle the hevenes region,
 [989] As fer as that y sey the preve;
 [990] Therfore y kan hem now beleve.
 [991] With that this egle gan to crye,
 [992] "Lat be," quod he, "thy fantasye!
 [993] Wilt thou lere of sterres aught?"
 [994] "Nay, certeynly," quod y, "ryght naught."
 [995] "And why?" "For y am now to old."
 [996] "Elles I wolde the have told,"
 [997] Quod he, "the sterres names, lo,
 [998] And al the hevenes sygnes therto,
 [999] And which they ben." "No fors," quod y.
 [1000] "Yis, pardee," quod he; "wostow why?
 [1001] For when thou redest poetrie,
 [1002] How goddes gonne stellifye
 [1003] Bridd, fissh, best, or him or here,
 [1004] As the Raven or eyther Bere,
 [1005] Or Arionis harpe fyn,
 [1006] Castor, Pollux, or Delphyn,
 [1007] Or Athalantes doughtres sevene,
 [1008] How alle these arn set in hevene;
 [1009] For though thou have hem ofte on honde,
 [1010] Yet nostow not wher that they stonde."
 [1011] "No fors," quod y, "hyt is no nede.
 [1012] I leve as wel, so God me spede,
 [1013] Hem that write of this matere,
 [1014] As though I knew her places here;
 [1015] And eke they shynen here so bryghte,
 [1016] Hyt shulde shenden al my syghte
 [1017] To loke on hem." "That may wel be,"
 [1018] Quod he. And so forth bar he me
 [1019] A while, and than he gan to crye,
 [1020] That never herde I thing so hye,
 [1021] "Now up the hed, for al ys wel;
 [1022] Seynt Julyan, loo, bon hostel!
 [1023] Se here the Hous of Fame, lo!
 [1024] Maistow not heren that I do?"
 [1025] "What?" quod I. "The grete soun,"
 [1026] Quod he, "that rumbleth up and doun
 [1027] In Fames Hous, full of tydynges,
 [1028] Bothe of feir speche and chidynges,
 [1029] And of fals and soth compouned.
 [1030] Herke wel; hyt is not rouned.
 [1031] Herestow not the grete swogh?"
 [1032] "Yis, parde," quod y, "wel ynogh."
 [1033] "And what soun is it lyk?" quod hee.
 [1034] "Peter, lyk betynge of the see,"
 [1035] Quod y, "ayen the roches holowe,
 [1036] Whan tempest doth the shippes swalowe,
 [1037] And lat a man stonde, out of doute,
 [1038] A myle thens, and here hyt route;
 [1039] Or elles lyk the last humblynge
 [1040] After the clappe of a thundringe,
 [1041] Whan Joves hath the air ybete.
 [1042] But yt doth me for fere swete."
 [1043] "Nay, dred the not therof," quod he;
 [1044] "Hyt is nothing will byten the;
 [1045] Thou shalt non harm have trewely."
 [1046] And with this word both he and y
 [1047] As nygh the place arryved were
 [1048] As men may casten with a spere.
 [1049] Y nyste how, but in a strete
 [1050] He sette me fair on my fete,
 [1051] And seyde, "Walke forth a pas,
 [1052] And tak thyn aventure or cas
 [1053] That thou shalt fynde in Fames place."
 [1054] "Now," quod I, "while we han space
 [1055] To speke, or that I goo fro the,
 [1056] For the love of God, telle me --
 [1057] In sooth, that wil I of the lere --
 [1058] Yf thys noyse that I here
 [1059] Be, as I have herd the tellen,
 [1060] Of folk that doun in erthe duellen,
 [1061] And cometh here in the same wyse
 [1062] As I the herde or this devyse;
 [1063] And that there lives body nys
 [1064] In al that hous that yonder ys,
 [1065] That maketh al this loude fare."
 [1066] "Noo," quod he, "by Seynte Clare,
 [1067] And also wis God rede me;
 [1068] But o thing y will warne the,
 [1069] Of the whiche thou wolt have wonder.
 [1070] Loo, to the Hous of Fame yonder,
 [1071] Thou wost now how, cometh every speche --
 [1072] Hyt nedeth noght eft the to teche.
 [1073] But understond now ryght wel this:
 [1074] Whan any speche ycomen ys
 [1075] Up to the paleys, anon-ryght
 [1076] Hyt wexeth lyk the same wight
 [1077] Which that the word in erthe spak,
 [1078] Be hyt clothed red or blak;
 [1079] And hath so verray hys lyknesse
 [1080] That spak the word, that thou wilt gesse
 [1081] That it the same body be,
 [1082] Man or woman, he or she.
 [1083] And ys not this a wonder thyng?"
 [1084] "Yis," quod I tho, "by heven kyng!"
 [1085] And with this word, "Farewel," quod he,
 [1086] "And here I wol abyden the;
 [1087] And God of heven sende the grace
 [1088] Some good to lernen in this place."
 [1089] And I of him tok leve anon,
 [1090] And gan forth to the paleys gon.
 [1091] O God of science and of lyght,
 [1092] Appollo, thurgh thy grete myght,
 [1093] This lytel laste bok thou gye!
 [1094] Nat that I wilne, for maistrye,
 [1095] Here art poetical be shewed,
 [1096] But for the rym ys lyght and lewed,
 [1097] Yit make hyt sumwhat agreable,
 [1098] Though som vers fayle in a sillable;
 [1099] And that I do no diligence
 [1100] To shewe craft, but o sentence.
 [1101] And yif, devyne vertu, thow
 [1102] Wilt helpe me to shewe now
 [1103] That in myn hed ymarked ys --
 [1104] Loo, that is for to menen this,
 [1105] The Hous of Fame for to descryve --
 [1106] Thou shalt se me go as blyve
 [1107] Unto the nexte laure y see,
 [1108] And kysse yt, for hyt is thy tree.
 [1109] Now entre in my brest anoon!
 [1110] Whan I was fro thys egle goon,
 [1111] I gan beholde upon this place.
 [1112] And certein, or I ferther pace,
 [1113] I wol yow al the shap devyse
 [1114] Of hous and [site], and al the wyse
 [1115] How I gan to thys place aproche
 [1116] That stood upon so hygh a roche,
 [1117] Hier stant ther non in Spayne.
 [1118] But up I clomb with alle payne,
 [1119] And though to clymbe it greved me,
 [1120] Yit I ententyf was to see,
 [1121] And for to powren wonder lowe,
 [1122] Yf I koude any weyes knowe
 [1123] What maner stoon this roche was.
 [1124] For hyt was lyk alum de glas,
 [1125] But that hyt shoon ful more clere;
 [1126] But of what congeled matere
 [1127] Hyt was, I nyste redely.
 [1128] But at the laste aspied I,
 [1129] And found that hit was every del
 [1130] A roche of yse, and not of stel.
 [1131] Thoughte I, "By Seynt Thomas of Kent,
 [1132] This were a feble fundament
 [1133] To bilden on a place hye.
 [1134] He ought him lytel glorifye
 [1135] That hereon bilt, God so me save!"
 [1136] Tho sawgh I al the half ygrave
 [1137] With famous folkes names fele,
 [1138] That had iben in mochel wele,
 [1139] And her fames wide yblowe.
 [1140] But wel unnethes koude I knowe
 [1141] Any lettres for to rede
 [1142] Hir names by; for, out of drede,
 [1143] They were almost ofthowed so
 [1144] That of the lettres oon or two
 [1145] Was molte away of every name,
 [1146] So unfamous was woxe hir fame.
 [1147] But men seyn, "What may ever laste?"
 [1148] Thoo gan I in myn herte caste
 [1149] That they were molte awey with hete,
 [1150] And not awey with stormes bete.
 [1151] For on that other syde I say
 [1152] Of this hil, that northward lay,
 [1153] How hit was writen ful of names
 [1154] Of folkes that hadden grete fames
 [1155] Of olde tyme, and yet they were
 [1156] As fressh as men had writen hem here
 [1157] The selve day ryght, or that houre
 [1158] That I upon hem gan to poure.
 [1159] But wel I wiste what yt made;
 [1160] Hyt was conserved with the shade
 [1161] Of a castel that stood on high --
 [1162] Al this writynge that I sigh --
 [1163] And stood eke on so cold a place
 [1164] That hete myghte hit not deface.
 [1165] Thoo gan I up the hil to goon,
 [1166] And fond upon the cop a woon,
 [1167] That al the men that ben on lyve
 [1168] Ne han the kunnynge to descrive
 [1169] The beaute of that ylke place,
 [1170] Ne coude casten no compace
 [1171] Swich another for to make,
 [1172] That myght of beaute ben hys make,
 [1173] Ne so wonderlych ywrought;
 [1174] That hit astonyeth yit my thought,
 [1175] And maketh al my wyt to swynke,
 [1176] On this castel to bethynke,
 [1177] So that the grete craft, beaute,
 [1178] The cast, the curiosite
 [1179] Ne kan I not to yow devyse;
 [1180] My wit ne may me not suffise.
 [1181] But natheles al the substance
 [1182] I have yit in my remembrance;
 [1183] For whi me thoughte, be Seynt Gyle,
 [1184] Al was of ston of beryle,
 [1185] Bothe the castel and the tour,
 [1186] And eke the halle and every bour,
 [1187] Wythouten peces or joynynges.
 [1188] But many subtil compassinges,
 [1189] [Babewynnes] and pynacles,
 [1190] Ymageries and tabernacles
 [1191] I say; and ful eke of wyndowes
 [1192] As flakes falle in grete snowes.
 [1193] And eke in ech of the pynacles
 [1194] Weren sondry habitacles,
 [1195] In which stoden, al withoute --
 [1196] Ful the castel, al aboute --
 [1197] Of alle maner of mynstralles
 [1198] And gestiours that tellen tales
 [1199] Both of wepinge and of game,
 [1200] Of al that longeth unto Fame.
 [1201] Ther herde I pleyen on an harpe,
 [1202] That sowned bothe wel and sharpe,
 [1203] Orpheus ful craftely,
 [1204] And on his syde, faste by,
 [1205] Sat the harper Orion,
 [1206] And Eacides Chiron,
 [1207] And other harpers many oon,
 [1208] And the Bret Glascurion;
 [1209] And smale harpers with her glees
 [1210] Sate under hem in dyvers sees,
 [1211] And gunne on hem upward to gape,
 [1212] And countrefete hem as an ape,
 [1213] Or as craft countrefeteth kynde.
 [1214] Tho saugh I stonden hem behynde,
 [1215] Afer fro hem, al be hemselve,
 [1216] Many thousand tymes twelve,
 [1217] That maden lowde mynstralcies
 [1218] In cornemuse and shalemyes,
 [1219] And many other maner pipe,
 [1220] That craftely begunne to pipe,
 [1221] Bothe in doucet and in rede,
 [1222] That ben at festes with the brede;
 [1223] And many flowte and liltyng horn,
 [1224] And pipes made of grene corn,
 [1225] As han thise lytel herde-gromes
 [1226] That kepen bestis in the bromes.
 [1227] Ther saugh I than Atiteris,
 [1228] And of Athenes daun Pseustis,
 [1229] And Marcia that loste her skyn,
 [1230] Bothe in face, body, and chyn,
 [1231] For that she wolde envien, loo,
 [1232] To pipen bet than Appolloo.
 [1233] Ther saugh I famous, olde and yonge,
 [1234] Pipers of the Duche tonge,
 [1235] To lerne love-daunces, sprynges,
 [1236] Reyes, and these straunge thynges.
 [1237] Tho saugh I in an other place
 [1238] Stonden in a large space,
 [1239] Of hem that maken blody soun
 [1240] In trumpe, beme, and claryoun;
 [1241] For in fight and blod-shedynge
 [1242] Ys used gladly clarionynge.
 [1243] Ther herde I trumpen Messenus,
 [1244] Of whom that speketh Virgilius.
 [1245] There herde I trumpe Joab also,
 [1246] Theodomas, and other mo;
 [1247] And alle that used clarion
 [1248] In Cataloigne and Aragon,
 [1249] That in her tyme famous were
 [1250] To lerne, saugh I trumpe there.
 [1251] There saugh I sitte in other sees,
 [1252] Pleyinge upon sondry glees,
 [1253] Whiche that I kan not nevene,
 [1254] Moo than sterres ben in hevene,
 [1255] Of whiche I nyl as now not ryme,
 [1256] For ese of yow and los of tyme.
 [1257] For tyme ylost, this knowen ye,
 [1258] Be no way may recovered be.
 [1259] Ther saugh I pleye jugelours,
 [1260] Magiciens, and tregetours,
 [1261] And Phitonesses, charmeresses,
 [1262] Olde wicches, sorceresses,
 [1263] That use exorsisacions,
 [1264] And eke these fumygacions;
 [1265] And clerkes eke, which konne wel
 [1266] Al this magik naturel,
 [1267] That craftely doon her ententes
 [1268] To make, in certeyn ascendentes,
 [1269] Ymages, lo, thrugh which magik
 [1270] To make a man ben hool or syk.
 [1271] Ther saugh I the, quene Medea,
 [1272] And Circes eke, and Calipsa;
 [1273] Ther saugh I Hermes Ballenus,
 [1274] Limote, and eke Symon Magus.
 [1275] There saugh I, and knew hem by name,
 [1276] That by such art don men han fame.
 [1277] Ther saugh I Colle tregetour
 [1278] Upon a table of sycamour
 [1279] Pleye an uncouth thyng to telle --
 [1280] Y saugh him carien a wynd-melle
 [1281] Under a walsh-note shale.
 [1282] What shuld I make lenger tale
 [1283] Of alle the pepil y ther say,
 [1284] Fro hennes into domes day?
 [1285] Whan I had al this folk beholde,
 [1286] And fond me lous and nought yholde,
 [1287] And eft imused longe while
 [1288] Upon these walles of berile,
 [1289] That shoone ful lyghter than a glas
 [1290] And made wel more than hit was
 [1291] To semen every thing, ywis,
 [1292] As kynde thyng of Fames is,
 [1293] I gan forth romen til I fond
 [1294] The castel-yate on my ryght hond,
 [1295] Which that so wel corven was
 [1296] That never such another nas;
 [1297] And yit it was be aventure
 [1298] Iwrought, as often as be cure.
 [1299] Hyt nedeth noght yow more to tellen,
 [1300] To make yow to longe duellen,
 [1301] Of this yates florisshinges,
 [1302] Ne of compasses, ne of kervynges,
 [1303] Ne how they hatte in masoneries,
 [1304] As corbetz, ful of ymageries.
 [1305] But Lord, so fair yt was to shewe,
 [1306] For hit was al with gold behewe.
 [1307] But in I wente, and that anoon.
 [1308] Ther mette I cryinge many oon,
 [1309] "A larges, larges, hold up wel!
 [1310] God save the lady of thys pel,
 [1311] Our oune gentil lady Fame,
 [1312] And hem that wilnen to have name
 [1313] Of us!" Thus herde y crien alle,
 [1314] And faste comen out of halle
 [1315] And shoken nobles and sterlynges.
 [1316] And somme corouned were as kynges,
 [1317] With corounes wroght ful of losenges;
 [1318] And many ryban and many frenges
 [1319] Were on her clothes trewely.
 [1320] Thoo atte last aspyed y
 [1321] That pursevantes and heraudes,
 [1322] That crien ryche folkes laudes,
 [1323] Hyt weren alle; and every man
 [1324] Of hem, as y yow tellen can,
 [1325] Had on him throwen a vesture
 [1326] Which that men clepe a cote-armure,
 [1327] Enbrowded wonderliche ryche,
 [1328] Although they nere nought ylyche.
 [1329] But noght nyl I, so mote y thryve,
 [1330] Ben aboute to dyscryve
 [1331] Alle these armes that ther weren,
 [1332] That they thus on her cotes beren,
 [1333] For hyt to me were impossible;
 [1334] Men myghte make of hem a bible
 [1335] Twenty foot thykke, as y trowe.
 [1336] For certeyn, whoso koude iknowe
 [1337] Myghte ther alle the armes seen
 [1338] Of famous folk that han ybeen
 [1339] In Auffrike, Europe, and Asye,
 [1340] Syth first began the chevalrie.
 [1341] Loo, how shulde I now telle al thys?
 [1342] Ne of the halle eke what nede is
 [1343] To tellen yow that every wal
 [1344] Of hit, and flor, and roof, and al
 [1345] Was plated half a foote thikke
 [1346] Of gold, and that nas nothyng wikke,
 [1347] But for to prove in alle wyse,
 [1348] As fyn as ducat in Venyse,
 [1349] Of which to lite al in my pouche is.
 [1350] And they were set as thik of nouchis
 [1351] Ful of the fynest stones faire
 [1352] That men rede in the Lapidaire,
 [1353] As grasses growen in a mede.
 [1354] But hit were al to longe to rede
 [1355] The names, and therfore I pace.
 [1356] But in this lusty and ryche place
 [1357] That Fames halle called was,
 [1358] Ful moche prees of folk ther nas,
 [1359] Ne crowdyng for to mochil prees.
 [1360] But al on hye, above a dees,
 [1361] Sitte in a see imperiall,
 [1362] That mad was of a rubee all,
 [1363] Which that a carbuncle ys ycalled,
 [1364] Y saugh, perpetually ystalled,
 [1365] A femynyne creature,
 [1366] That never formed by Nature
 [1367] Nas such another thing yseye.
 [1368] For alther-first, soth for to seye,
 [1369] Me thoughte that she was so lyte
 [1370] That the lengthe of a cubite
 [1371] Was lengere than she semed be.
 [1372] But thus sone in a whyle she
 [1373] Hir tho so wonderliche streighte
 [1374] That with hir fet she erthe reighte,
 [1375] And with hir hed she touched hevene,
 [1376] Ther as shynen sterres sevene,
 [1377] And therto eke, as to my wit,
 [1378] I saugh a gretter wonder yit,
 [1379] Upon her eyen to beholde;
 [1380] But certeyn y hem never tolde,
 [1381] For as feele eyen hadde she
 [1382] As fetheres upon foules be,
 [1383] Or weren on the bestes foure
 [1384] That Goddis trone gunne honoure,
 [1385] As John writ in th' Apocalips.
 [1386] Hir heer, that oundy was and crips,
 [1387] As burned gold hyt shoon to see;
 [1388] And soth to tellen, also she
 [1389] Had also fele upstondyng eres
 [1390] And tonges, as on bestes heres;
 [1391] And on hir fet woxen saugh Y
 [1392] Partriches wynges redely.
 [1393] But Lord, the perry and the richesse
 [1394] I saugh sittyng on this godesse!
 [1395] And Lord, the hevenyssh melodye
 [1396] Of songes ful of armonye
 [1397] I herde aboute her trone ysonge,
 [1398] That al the paleys-walles ronge.
 [1399] So song the myghty Muse, she
 [1400] That cleped ys Caliope,
 [1401] And hir eighte sustren eke,
 [1402] That in her face semen meke;
 [1403] And ever mo, eternally,
 [1404] They songe of Fame, as thoo herd y:
 [1405] "Heryed be thou and thy name,
 [1406] Goddesse of Renoun or of Fame!"
 [1407] Tho was I war, loo, atte laste,
 [1408] As I myne eyen gan up caste,
 [1409] That thys ylke noble quene
 [1410] On her shuldres gan sustene
 [1411] Bothe th' armes and the name
 [1412] Of thoo that hadde large fame:
 [1413] Alexander and Hercules,
 [1414] That with a sherte hys lyf les.
 [1415] And thus fond y syttynge this goddesse
 [1416] In nobley, honour, and rychesse;
 [1417] Of which I stynte a while now,
 [1418] Other thing to tellen yow.
 [1419] Tho saugh I stonde on eyther syde,
 [1420] Streight doun to the dores wide,
 [1421] Fro the dees, many a peler
 [1422] Of metal that shoon not ful cler;
 [1423] But though they nere of no rychesse,
 [1424] Yet they were mad for gret noblesse,
 [1425] And in hem hy and gret sentence;
 [1426] And folk of digne reverence,
 [1427] Of which I wil yow telle fonde,
 [1428] Upon the piler saugh I stonde.
 [1429] Alderfirst, loo, ther I sigh
 [1430] Upon a piler stonde on high,
 [1431] That was of led and yren fyn,
 [1432] Hym of secte saturnyn,
 [1433] The Ebrayk Josephus the olde,
 [1434] That of Jewes gestes tolde;
 [1435] And he bar on hys shuldres hye
 [1436] The fame up of the Jewerye.
 [1437] And by hym stoden other sevene,
 [1438] Wise and worthy for to nevene,
 [1439] To helpen him bere up the charge,
 [1440] Hyt was so hevy and so large.
 [1441] And for they writen of batayles,
 [1442] As wel as other olde mervayles,
 [1443] Therfor was, loo, thys piler
 [1444] Of which that I yow telle her,
 [1445] Of led and yren bothe, ywys,
 [1446] For yren Martes metal ys,
 [1447] Which that god is of bataylle;
 [1448] And the led, withouten faille,
 [1449] Ys, loo, the metal of Saturne,
 [1450] That hath a ful large whel to turne.
 [1451] Thoo stoden forth on every rowe
 [1452] Of hem which that I koude knowe,
 [1453] Though I hem noght be ordre telle,
 [1454] To make yow to longe to duelle,
 [1455] These of whiche I gynne rede.
 [1456] There saugh I stonden, out of drede,
 [1457] Upon an yren piler strong
 [1458] That peynted was al endelong
 [1459] With tigres blod in every place,
 [1460] The Tholosan that highte Stace,
 [1461] That bar of Thebes up the fame
 [1462] Upon his shuldres, and the name
 [1463] Also of cruel Achilles.
 [1464] And by him stood, withouten les,
 [1465] Ful wonder hy on a piler
 [1466] Of yren, he, the gret Omer;
 [1467] And with him Dares and Tytus
 [1468] Before, and eke he Lollius,
 [1469] And Guydo eke de Columpnis,
 [1470] And Englyssh Gaufride eke, ywis;
 [1471] And ech of these, as have I joye,
 [1472] Was besy for to bere up Troye.
 [1473] So hevy therof was the fame
 [1474] That for to bere hyt was no game.
 [1475] But yet I gan ful wel espie,
 [1476] Betwex hem was a litil envye.
 [1477] Oon seyde that Omer made lyes,
 [1478] Feynynge in hys poetries,
 [1479] And was to Grekes favorable;
 [1480] Therfor held he hyt but fable.
 [1481] Tho saugh I stonde on a piler,
 [1482] That was of tynned yren cler,
 [1483] The Latyn poete Virgile,
 [1484] That bore hath up a longe while
 [1485] The fame of Pius Eneas.
 [1486] And next hym on a piler was,
 [1487] Of coper, Venus clerk Ovide,
 [1488] That hath ysowen wonder wide
 [1489] The grete god of Loves name.
 [1490] And ther he bar up wel hys fame
 [1491] Upon this piler, also hye
 [1492] As I myghte see hyt with myn ye;
 [1493] For-why this halle, of which I rede,
 [1494] Was woxen on highte, length, and brede,
 [1495] Wel more be a thousand del
 [1496] Than hyt was erst, that saugh I wel.
 [1497] Thoo saugh I on a piler by,
 [1498] Of yren wroght ful sternely,
 [1499] The grete poete daun Lucan,
 [1500] And on hys shuldres bar up than,
 [1501] As high as that y myghte see,
 [1502] The fame of Julius and Pompe.
 [1503] And by him stoden alle these clerkes
 [1504] That writen of Romes myghty werkes,
 [1505] That yf y wolde her names telle,
 [1506] Al to longe most I dwelle.
 [1507] And next him on a piler stood
 [1508] Of soulfre, lyk as he were wood,
 [1509] Daun Claudian, the sothe to telle,
 [1510] That bar up al the fame of helle,
 [1511] Of Pluto, and of Proserpyne,
 [1512] That quene ys of the derke pyne.
 [1513] What shulde y more telle of this?
 [1514] The halle was al ful, ywys,
 [1515] Of hem that writen olde gestes
 [1516] As ben on trees rokes nestes;
 [1517] But hit a ful confus matere
 [1518] Were alle the gestes for to here
 [1519] That they of write, or how they highte.
 [1520] But while that y beheld thys syghte,
 [1521] I herde a noyse aprochen blyve,
 [1522] That ferde as been don in an hive
 [1523] Ayen her tyme of out-fleynge;
 [1524] Ryght such a maner murmurynge,
 [1525] For al the world, hyt semed me.
 [1526] Tho gan I loke aboute and see
 [1527] That ther come entryng into the halle
 [1528] A ryght gret companye withalle,
 [1529] And that of sondry regiouns,
 [1530] Of alleskynnes condiciouns
 [1531] That dwelle in erthe under the mone,
 [1532] Pore and ryche. And also sone
 [1533] As they were come in to the halle,
 [1534] They gonne doun on knees falle
 [1535] Before this ilke noble quene,
 [1536] And seyde, "Graunte us, lady shene,
 [1537] Ech of us of thy grace a bone!"
 [1538] And somme of hem she graunted sone,
 [1539] And somme she werned wel and faire,
 [1540] And some she graunted the contraire
 [1541] Of her axyng outterly.
 [1542] But thus I seye yow, trewely,
 [1543] What her cause was, y nyste.
 [1544] For of this folk ful wel y wiste
 [1545] They hadde good fame ech deserved,
 [1546] Although they were dyversly served;
 [1547] Ryght as her suster, dame Fortune,
 [1548] Ys wont to serven in comune.
 [1549] Now herke how she gan to paye
 [1550] That gonne her of her grace praye;
 [1551] And yit, lo, al this companye
 [1552] Seyden sooth, and noght a lye.
 [1553] "Madame," seyde they, "we be
 [1554] Folk that here besechen the
 [1555] That thou graunte us now good fame,
 [1556] And let our werkes han that name.
 [1557] In ful recompensacioun
 [1558] Of good werkes, yive us good renoun."
 [1559] "I werne yow hit," quod she anon;
 [1560] "Ye gete of me good fame non,
 [1561] Be God, and therfore goo your wey."
 [1562] "Allas," quod they, "and welaway!
 [1563] Telle us what may your cause be."
 [1564] "For me lyst hyt noght," quod she;
 [1565] "No wyght shal speke of yow, ywis,
 [1566] Good ne harm, ne that ne this."
 [1567] And with that word she gan to calle
 [1568] Her messager, that was in halle,
 [1569] And bad that he shulde faste goon,
 [1570] Upon peyne to be blynd anon,
 [1571] For Eolus the god of wynde --
 [1572] "In Trace, ther ye shal him fynde,
 [1573] And bid him bringe his clarioun,
 [1574] That is ful dyvers of his soun,
 [1575] And hyt is cleped Clere Laude,
 [1576] With which he wont is to heraude
 [1577] Hem that me list ypreised be.
 [1578] And also bid him how that he
 [1579] Brynge his other clarioun,
 [1580] That highte Sklaundre in every toun,
 [1581] With which he wont is to diffame
 [1582] Hem that me liste, and do hem shame."
 [1583] This messager gan faste goon,
 [1584] And found where in a cave of ston,
 [1585] In a contree that highte Trace,
 [1586] This Eolus, with harde grace,
 [1587] Held the wyndes in distresse,
 [1588] And gan hem under him to presse,
 [1589] That they gonne as beres rore,
 [1590] He bond and pressed hem so sore.
 [1591] This messager gan faste crie,
 [1592] "Rys up," quod he, "and faste hye,
 [1593] Til thou at my lady be;
 [1594] And tak thy clariouns eke with the,
 [1595] And sped the forth." And he anon
 [1596] Tok to a man that highte Triton
 [1597] Hys clarions to bere thoo,
 [1598] And let a certeyn wynd to goo,
 [1599] That blew so hydously and hye
 [1600] That hyt ne lefte not a skye
 [1601] In alle the welken long and brod.
 [1602] This Eolus nowhere abod
 [1603] Til he was come to Fames fet,
 [1604] And eke the man that Triton het;
 [1605] And ther he stod, as stille as stoon.
 [1606] And her-withal ther come anoon
 [1607] Another huge companye
 [1608] Of goode folk, and gunne crie,
 [1609] "Lady, graunte us now good fame,
 [1610] And lat oure werkes han that name
 [1611] Now in honour of gentilesse,
 [1612] And also God your soule blesse!
 [1613] For we han wel deserved hyt,
 [1614] Therfore is ryght that we ben quyt."
 [1615] "As thryve I," quod she, "ye shal faylle!
 [1616] Good werkes shal yow noght availle
 [1617] To have of me good fame as now.
 [1618] But wite ye what? Y graunte yow
 [1619] That ye shal have a shrewed fame,
 [1620] And wikkyd loos, and worse name,
 [1621] Though ye good loos have wel deserved.
 [1622] Now goo your wey, for ye be served.
 [1623] And thou, dan Eolus, let see,
 [1624] Tak forth thy trumpe anon," quod she,
 [1625] "That is ycleped Sklaundre lyght,
 [1626] And blow her loos, that every wight
 [1627] Speke of hem harm and shrewednesse
 [1628] In stede of good and worthynesse.
 [1629] For thou shalt trumpe alle the contrayre
 [1630] Of that they han don wel or fayre."
 [1631] "Allas," thoughte I, "what aventures
 [1632] Han these sory creatures!
 [1633] For they, amonges al the pres,
 [1634] Shul thus be shamed gilteles.
 [1635] But what, hyt moste nedes be."
 [1636] What dide this Eolus, but he
 [1637] Tok out hys blake trumpe of bras,
 [1638] That fouler than the devel was,
 [1639] And gan this trumpe for to blowe,
 [1640] As al the world shulde overthrowe,
 [1641] That thrughout every regioun
 [1642] Wente this foule trumpes soun,
 [1643] As swifte as pelet out of gonne
 [1644] Whan fyr is in the poudre ronne.
 [1645] And such a smoke gan out wende
 [1646] Out of his foule trumpes ende,
 [1647] Blak, bloo, grenyssh, swartish red,
 [1648] As doth where that men melte led,
 [1649] Loo, al on high fro the tuel.
 [1650] And therto oo thing saugh I wel,
 [1651] That the ferther that hit ran,
 [1652] The gretter wexen hit began,
 [1653] As dooth the ryver from a welle,
 [1654] And hyt stank as the pit of helle.
 [1655] Allas, thus was her shame yronge,
 [1656] And gilteles, on every tonge!
 [1657] Tho come the thridde companye,
 [1658] And gunne up to the dees to hye,
 [1659] And doun on knes they fille anon,
 [1660] And seyde, "We ben everychon
 [1661] Folk that han ful trewely
 [1662] Deserved fame ryghtfully,
 [1663] And praye yow, hit mote be knowe
 [1664] Ryght as hit is, and forth yblowe."
 [1665] "I graunte," quod she, "for me list
 [1666] That now your goode werkes be wist,
 [1667] And yet ye shul han better loos,
 [1668] Right in dispit of alle your foos,
 [1669] Than worthy is, and that anoon.
 [1670] Lat now," quod she, "thy trumpe goon,
 [1671] Thou Eolus, that is so blak;
 [1672] And out thyn other trumpe tak
 [1673] That highte Laude, and blow yt soo
 [1674] That thrugh the world her fame goo
 [1675] Al esely, and not to faste,
 [1676] That hyt be knowen atte laste."
 [1677] "Ful gladly, lady myn," he seyde;
 [1678] And out hys trumpe of gold he brayde
 [1679] Anon, and sette hyt to his mouth,
 [1680] And blew it est, and west, and south,
 [1681] And north, as lowde as any thunder,
 [1682] That every wight hath of hit wonder,
 [1683] So brode hyt ran or than hit stente.
 [1684] And, certes, al the breth that wente
 [1685] Out of his trumpes mouth it smelde
 [1686] As men a pot of bawme helde
 [1687] Among a basket ful of roses.
 [1688] This favour dide he til her loses.
 [1689] And ryght with this y gan aspye,
 [1690] Ther come the ferthe companye --
 [1691] But certeyn they were wonder fewe --
 [1692] And gunne stonden in a rewe,
 [1693] And seyden, "Certes, lady bryght,
 [1694] We han don wel with al our myght,
 [1695] But we ne kepen have no fame.
 [1696] Hyde our werkes and our name,
 [1697] For Goddys love; for certes we
 [1698] Han certeyn doon hyt for bounte,
 [1699] And for no maner other thing."
 [1700] "I graunte yow alle your askyng,"
 [1701] Quod she; "let your werkes be ded."
 [1702] With that aboute y clew myn hed,
 [1703] And saugh anoon the fifte route
 [1704] That to this lady gunne loute,
 [1705] And doun on knes anoon to falle;
 [1706] And to hir thoo besoughten alle
 [1707] To hide her goode werkes ek,
 [1708] And seyden they yeven noght a lek
 [1709] For fame ne for such renoun;
 [1710] For they for contemplacioun
 [1711] And Goddes love hadde ywrought,
 [1712] Ne of fame wolde they nought.
 [1713] "What?" quod she, "and be ye wood?
 [1714] And wene ye for to doo good,
 [1715] And for to have of that no fame?
 [1716] Have ye dispit to have my name?
 [1717] Nay, ye shul lyven everychon!
 [1718] Blow thy trumpes, and that anon,"
 [1719] Quod she, "thou Eolus, y hote,
 [1720] And ryng this folkes werk be note,
 [1721] That al the world may of hyt here."
 [1722] And he gan blowe her loos so clere
 [1723] In his golden clarioun
 [1724] That thrugh the world wente the soun
 [1725] Also kenely and eke so softe;
 [1726] But atte last hyt was on-lofte.
 [1727] Thoo come the sexte companye,
 [1728] And gunne faste on Fame crie.
 [1729] Ryght verraily in this manere
 [1730] They seyden: "Mercy, lady dere!
 [1731] To tellen certeyn as hyt is,
 [1732] We han don neither that ne this,
 [1733] But ydel al oure lyf ybe.
 [1734] But natheles yet preye we
 [1735] That we mowe han as good a fame,
 [1736] And gret renoun and knowen name,
 [1737] As they that han doon noble gestes,
 [1738] And acheved alle her lestes,
 [1739] As wel of love as other thyng.
 [1740] Al was us never broche ne ryng,
 [1741] Ne elles noght, from wymmen sent,
 [1742] Ne ones in her herte yment
 [1743] To make us oonly frendly chere,
 [1744] But myghten temen us upon bere;
 [1745] Yet lat us to the peple seme
 [1746] Suche as the world may of us deme
 [1747] That wommen loven us for wod.
 [1748] Hyt shal doon us as moche good,
 [1749] And to oure herte as moche avaylle
 [1750] To countrepese ese and travaylle,
 [1751] As we had wonne hyt with labour;
 [1752] For that is dere boght honour
 [1753] At regard of oure grete ese.
 [1754] And yet thou most us more plese:
 [1755] Let us be holden eke therto
 [1756] Worthy, wise, and goode also,
 [1757] And riche, and happy unto love.
 [1758] For Goddes love, that sit above,
 [1759] Thogh we may not the body have
 [1760] Of wymmen, yet, so God yow save,
 [1761] Leet men gliwe on us the name --
 [1762] Sufficeth that we han the fame."
 [1763] "I graunte," quod she, "be my trouthe!
 [1764] Now, Eolus, withouten slouthe,
 [1765] Tak out thy trumpe of gold, let se,
 [1766] And blow as they han axed me,
 [1767] That every man wene hem at ese,
 [1768] Though they goon in ful badde lese."
 [1769] This Eolus gan hit so blowe
 [1770] That thrugh the world hyt was yknowe.
 [1771] Thoo come the seventh route anoon,
 [1772] And fel on knees everychoon,
 [1773] And seyde, "Lady, graunte us sone
 [1774] The same thing, the same bone,
 [1775] That [ye] this nexte folk han doon."
 [1776] "Fy on yow," quod she, "everychon!
 [1777] Ye masty swyn, ye ydel wrechches,
 [1778] Ful of roten, slowe techches!
 [1779] What? False theves! Wher ye wolde
 [1780] Be famous good, and nothing nolde
 [1781] Deserve why, ne never ye roughte?
 [1782] Men rather yow to hangen oughte!
 [1783] For ye be lyke the sweynte cat
 [1784] That wolde have fissh; but wostow what?
 [1785] He wolde nothing wete his clowes.
 [1786] Yvel thrift come to your jowes,
 [1787] And eke to myn, if I hit graunte,
 [1788] Or do yow favour, yow to avaunte!
 [1789] Thou Eolus, thou kyng of Trace,
 [1790] Goo blowe this folk a sory grace,"
 [1791] Quod she, "anon; and wostow how?
 [1792] As I shal telle thee ryght now.
 [1793] Sey: `These ben they that wolde honour
 [1794] Have, and do noskynnes labour,
 [1795] Ne doo no good, and yet han lawde;
 [1796] And that men wende that bele Isawde
 [1797] Ne coude hem noght of love werne,
 [1798] And yet she that grynt at a querne
 [1799] Ys al to good to ese her herte.'"
 [1800] This Eolus anon up sterte,
 [1801] And with his blake clarioun
 [1802] He gan to blasen out a soun
 [1803] As lowde as beloweth wynd in helle;
 [1804] And eke therwith, soth to telle,
 [1805] This soun was so ful of japes,
 [1806] As ever mowes were in apes.
 [1807] And that wente al the world aboute,
 [1808] That every wight gan on hem shoute
 [1809] And for to lawghe as they were wod,
 [1810] Such game fonde they in her hod.
 [1811] Tho come another companye,
 [1812] That had ydoon the trayterye,
 [1813] The harm, the grettest wikkednesse
 [1814] That any herte kouth. gesse;
 [1815] And prayed her to han good fame,
 [1816] And that she nolde doon hem no shame,
 [1817] But yeve hem loos and good renoun,
 [1818] And do hyt blowe in a clarioun.
 [1819] "Nay, wis," quod she, "hyt were a vice.
 [1820] Al be ther in me no justice,
 [1821] Me lyste not to doo hyt now,
 [1822] Ne this nyl I not graunte yow."
 [1823] Tho come ther lepynge in a route,
 [1824] And gunne choppen al aboute
 [1825] Every man upon the crowne,
 [1826] That al the halle gan to sowne,
 [1827] And seyden: "Lady, leef and dere,
 [1828] We ben suche folk as ye mowe here.
 [1829] To tellen al the tale aryght,
 [1830] We ben shrewes, every wyght,
 [1831] And han delyt in wikkednesse,
 [1832] As goode folk han in godnesse;
 [1833] And joye to be knowen shrewes,
 [1834] And ful of vice and wikked thewes;
 [1835] Wherefore we praye yow, a-rowe,
 [1836] That oure fame such be knowe
 [1837] In alle thing ryght as hit ys."
 [1838] "Y graunte hyt yow," quod she, "ywis.
 [1839] But what art thow that seyst this tale,
 [1840] That werest on thy hose a pale,
 [1841] And on thy tipet such a belle?"
 [1842] "Madame," quod he, "soth to telle,
 [1843] I am that ylke shrewe, ywis,
 [1844] That brende the temple of Ysidis
 [1845] In Athenes, loo, that citee."
 [1846] "And wherfor didest thou so?" quod she.
 [1847] "By my thrift," quod he, "madame,
 [1848] I wolde fayn han had a fame,
 [1849] As other folk hadde in the toun,
 [1850] Although they were of gret renoun
 [1851] For her vertu and for her thewes.
 [1852] Thoughte y, as gret a fame han shrewes,
 [1853] Though hit be for shrewednesse,
 [1854] As goode folk han for godnesse;
 [1855] And sith y may not have that oon,
 [1856] That other nyl y noght forgoon.
 [1857] And for to gette of Fames hire,
 [1858] The temple sette y al afire.
 [1859] Now do our loos be blowen swithe,
 [1860] As wisly be thou ever blythe!"
 [1861] "Gladly," quod she; "thow Eolus,
 [1862] Herestow not what they prayen us?"
 [1863] "Madame, yis, ful wel," quod he,
 [1864] "And I wil trumpen it, parde!"
 [1865] And tok his blake trumpe faste,
 [1866] And gan to puffen and to blaste,
 [1867] Til hyt was at the worldes ende.
 [1868] With that y gan aboute wende,
 [1869] For oon that stood ryght at my bak,
 [1870] Me thoughte, goodly to me spak,
 [1871] And seyde, "Frend, what is thy name?
 [1872] Artow come hider to han fame?"
 [1873] "Nay, for sothe, frend," quod y;
 [1874] "I cam noght hyder, graunt mercy,
 [1875] For no such cause, by my hed!
 [1876] Sufficeth me, as I were ded,
 [1877] That no wight have my name in honde.
 [1878] I wot myself best how y stonde;
 [1879] For what I drye, or what I thynke,
 [1880] I wil myselven al hyt drynke,
 [1881] Certeyn, for the more part,
 [1882] As fer forth as I kan myn art."
 [1883] "But what doost thou here than?" quod he.
 [1884] Quod y, "That wyl y tellen the,
 [1885] The cause why y stonde here:
 [1886] Somme newe tydynges for to lere,
 [1887] Somme newe thinges, y not what,
 [1888] Tydynges, other this or that,
 [1889] Of love or suche thynges glade.
 [1890] For certeynly, he that me made
 [1891] To comen hyder, seyde me,
 [1892] Y shulde bothe here and se
 [1893] In this place wonder thynges;
 [1894] But these be no suche tydynges
 [1895] As I mene of." "Noo?" quod he.
 [1896] And I answered, "Noo, parde!
 [1897] For wel y wiste ever yit,
 [1898] Sith that first y hadde wit,
 [1899] That somme folk han desired fame
 [1900] Diversly, and loos, and name.
 [1901] But certeynly, y nyste how
 [1902] Ne where that Fame duelled, er now,
 [1903] And eke of her descripcioun,
 [1904] Ne also her condicioun,
 [1905] Ne the ordre of her dom,
 [1906] Unto the tyme y hidder com."
 [1907] "[Whych] than be, loo, these tydynges,
 [1908] That thou now [thus] hider brynges,
 [1909] That thou hast herd?" quod he to me;
 [1910] "But now no fors, for wel y se
 [1911] What thou desirest for to here.
 [1912] Com forth and stond no lenger here,
 [1913] And y wil thee, withouten drede,
 [1914] In such another place lede
 [1915] Ther thou shalt here many oon."
 [1916] Tho gan I forth with hym to goon
 [1917] Out of the castel, soth to seye.
 [1918] Tho saugh y stonde in a valeye,
 [1919] Under the castel, faste by,
 [1920] An hous, that Domus Dedaly,
 [1921] That Laboryntus cleped ys,
 [1922] Nas mad so wonderlych, ywis,
 [1923] Ne half so queyntelych ywrought.
 [1924] And ever mo, as swyft as thought,
 [1925] This queynte hous aboute wente,
 [1926] That never mo hyt stille stente.
 [1927] And therout com so gret a noyse
 [1928] That, had hyt stonden upon Oyse,
 [1929] Men myghte hyt han herd esely
 [1930] To Rome, y trowe sikerly.
 [1931] And the noyse which that I herde,
 [1932] For al the world ryght so hyt ferde
 [1933] As dooth the rowtynge of the ston
 [1934] That from th' engyn ys leten gon.
 [1935] And al thys hous of which y rede
 [1936] Was mad of twigges, falwe, rede,
 [1937] And grene eke, and somme weren white,
 [1938] Swiche as men to these cages thwite,
 [1939] Or maken of these panyers,
 [1940] Or elles [hottes] or dossers;
 [1941] That, for the swough and for the twygges,
 [1942] This hous was also ful of gygges,
 [1943] And also ful eke of chirkynges,
 [1944] And of many other werkynges;
 [1945] And eke this hous hath of entrees
 [1946] As fele as of leves ben in trees
 [1947] In somer, whan they grene been;
 [1948] And on the roof men may yet seen
 [1949] A thousand holes, and wel moo,
 [1950] To leten wel the soun out goo.
 [1951] And be day, in every tyde,
 [1952] Been al the dores opened wide,
 [1953] And be nyght echon unshette;
 [1954] Ne porter ther is noon to lette
 [1955] No maner tydynges in to pace.
 [1956] Ne never rest is in that place
 [1957] That hit nys fild ful of tydynges,
 [1958] Other loude or of whisprynges;
 [1959] And over alle the houses angles
 [1960] Ys ful of rounynges and of jangles
 [1961] Of werres, of pes, of mariages,
 [1962] Of reste, of labour, of viages,
 [1963] Of abood, of deeth, of lyf,
 [1964] Of love, of hate, acord, of stryf,
 [1965] Of loos, of lore, and of wynnynges,
 [1966] Of hele, of seknesse, of bildynges,
 [1967] Of faire wyndes, and of tempestes,
 [1968] Of qwalm of folk, and eke of bestes;
 [1969] Of dyvers transmutacions
 [1970] Of estats, and eke of regions;
 [1971] Of trust, of drede, of jelousye,
 [1972] Of wit, of wynnynge, of folye;
 [1973] Of plente, and of gret famyne,
 [1974] Of chepe, of derthe, and of ruyne;
 [1975] Of good or mys governement,
 [1976] Of fyr, and of dyvers accident.
 [1977] And loo, thys hous, of which I write,
 [1978] Syker be ye, hit nas not lyte,
 [1979] For hyt was sixty myle of lengthe.
 [1980] Al was the tymber of no strengthe,
 [1981] Yet hit is founded to endure
 [1982] While that hit lyst to Aventure,
 [1983] That is the moder of tydynges,
 [1984] As the see of welles and of sprynges;
 [1985] And hyt was shapen lyk a cage.
 [1986] "Certys," quod y, "in al myn age,
 [1987] Ne saugh y such an hous as this."
 [1988] And as y wondred me, ywys,
 [1989] Upon this hous, tho war was y
 [1990] How that myn egle faste by
 [1991] Was perched hye upon a stoon;
 [1992] And I gan streghte to hym gon,
 [1993] And seyde thus: "Y preye the
 [1994] That thou a while abide me,
 [1995] For Goddis love, and lete me seen
 [1996] What wondres in this place been;
 [1997] For yit, paraunter, y may lere
 [1998] Som good theron, or sumwhat here
 [1999] That leef me were, or that y wente."
 [2000] "Petre, that is myn entente,"
 [2001] Quod he to me; "therfore y duelle.
 [2002] But certeyn, oon thyng I the telle,
 [2003] That but I bringe the therinne,
 [2004] Ne shalt thou never kunne gynne
 [2005] To come into hyt, out of doute,
 [2006] So faste hit whirleth, lo, aboute.
 [2007] But sith that Joves, of his grace,
 [2008] As I have seyd, wol the solace
 [2009] Fynally with these thinges,
 [2010] Unkouthe syghtes and tydynges,
 [2011] To passe with thyn hevynesse,
 [2012] Such routhe hath he of thy distresse,
 [2013] That thou suffrest debonairly --
 [2014] And wost thyselven outtirly
 [2015] Disesperat of alle blys,
 [2016] Syth that Fortune hath mad amys
 [2017] The [fruit] of al thyn hertys reste
 [2018] Languisshe and eke in poynt to breste --
 [2019] That he, thrugh hys myghty merite,
 [2020] Wol do the an ese, al be hyt lyte,
 [2021] And yaf in expres commaundement,
 [2022] To which I am obedient,
 [2023] To further the with al my myght,
 [2024] And wisse and teche the aryght
 [2025] Where thou maist most tidynges here.
 [2026] Shaltow here anoon many oon lere."
 [2027] With this word he ryght anoon
 [2028] Hente me up bytweene hys toon,
 [2029] And at a wyndowe yn me broghte,
 [2030] That in this hous was, as me thoghte --
 [2031] And therwithalle, me thoughte hit stente,
 [2032] And nothing hyt aboute wente --
 [2033] And me sette in the flor adoun.
 [2034] But which a congregacioun
 [2035] Of folk, as I saugh rome aboute,
 [2036] Some wythin and some wythoute,
 [2037] Nas never seen, ne shal ben eft;
 [2038] That, certys, in the world nys left
 [2039] So many formed be Nature,
 [2040] Ne ded so many a creature;
 [2041] That wel unnethe in that place
 [2042] Hadde y a fote-brede of space.
 [2043] And every wight that I saugh there
 [2044] Rouned everych in others ere
 [2045] A newe tydynge prively,
 [2046] Or elles tolde al openly
 [2047] Ryght thus, and seyde: "Nost not thou
 [2048] That ys betyd, lo, late or now?"
 [2049] "No," quod he, "telle me what."
 [2050] And than he tolde hym this and that,
 [2051] And swor therto that hit was soth --
 [2052] "Thus hath he sayd," and "Thus he doth,"
 [2053] "Thus shal hit be," "Thus herde y seye,"
 [2054] "That shal be founde," "That dar I leye" --
 [2055] That al the folk that ys alyve
 [2056] Ne han the kunnynge to discryve
 [2057] The thinges that I herde there,
 [2058] What aloude, and what in ere.
 [2059] But al the wondermost was this:
 [2060] Whan oon had herd a thing, ywis,
 [2061] He com forth ryght to another wight,
 [2062] And gan him tellen anon-ryght
 [2063] The same that to him was told,
 [2064] Or hyt a forlong way was old,
 [2065] But gan somwhat for to eche
 [2066] To this tydynge in this speche
 [2067] More than hit ever was.
 [2068] And nat so sone departed nas
 [2069] Tho fro him, that he ne mette
 [2070] With the thridde; and or he lette
 [2071] Any stounde, he told him als;
 [2072] Were the tydynge soth or fals,
 [2073] Yit wolde he telle hyt natheles,
 [2074] And evermo with more encres
 [2075] Than yt was erst. Thus north and south
 [2076] Wente every tydyng fro mouth to mouth,
 [2077] And that encresing ever moo,
 [2078] As fyr ys wont to quyke and goo
 [2079] From a sparke spronge amys,
 [2080] Til al a citee brent up ys.
 [2081] And whan that was ful yspronge,
 [2082] And woxen more on every tonge
 [2083] Than ever hit was, [hit] wente anoon
 [2084] Up to a wyndowe out to goon;
 [2085] Or, but hit myghte out there pace,
 [2086] Hyt gan out crepe at som crevace,
 [2087] And flygh forth faste for the nones.
 [2088] And somtyme saugh I thoo at ones
 [2089] A lesyng and a sad soth sawe,
 [2090] That gonne of aventure drawe
 [2091] Out at a wyndowe for to pace;
 [2092] And, when they metten in that place,
 [2093] They were achekked bothe two,
 [2094] And neyther of hem moste out goo
 [2095] For other, so they gonne crowde,
 [2096] Til ech of hem gan crien lowde,
 [2097] "Lat me go first!" "Nay, but let me!
 [2098] And here I wol ensuren the,
 [2099] Wyth the nones that thou wolt do so,
 [2100] That I shal never fro the go,
 [2101] But be thyn owne sworen brother!
 [2102] We wil medle us ech with other,
 [2103] That no man, be they never so wrothe,
 [2104] Shal han on [of us] two, but bothe
 [2105] At ones, al besyde his leve,
 [2106] Come we a-morwe or on eve,
 [2107] Be we cried or stille yrouned."
 [2108] Thus saugh I fals and soth compouned
 [2109] Togeder fle for oo tydynge.
 [2110] Thus out at holes gunne wringe
 [2111] Every tydynge streght to Fame,
 [2112] And she gan yeven ech hys name,
 [2113] After hir disposicioun,
 [2114] And yaf hem eke duracioun,
 [2115] Somme to wexe and wane sone,
 [2116] As doth the faire white mone,
 [2117] And let hem goon. Ther myghte y seen
 [2118] Wynged wondres faste fleen,
 [2119] Twenty thousand in a route,
 [2120] As Eolus hem blew aboute.
 [2121] And, Lord, this hous in alle tymes
 [2122] Was ful of shipmen and pilgrimes,
 [2123] With scrippes bret-ful of lesinges,
 [2124] Entremedled with tydynges,
 [2125] And eek allone be hemselve.
 [2126] O, many a thousand tymes twelve
 [2127] Saugh I eke of these pardoners,
 [2128] Currours, and eke messagers,
 [2129] With boystes crammed ful of lyes
 [2130] As ever vessel was with lyes.
 [2131] And as I alther-fastest wente
 [2132] About, and dide al myn entente
 [2133] Me for to pleyen and for to lere,
 [2134] And eke a tydynge for to here,
 [2135] That I had herd of som contre
 [2136] That shal not now be told for me --
 [2137] For hit no nede is, redely;
 [2138] Folk kan synge hit bet than I;
 [2139] For al mot out, other late or rathe,
 [2140] Alle the sheves in the lathe --
 [2141] I herde a gret noyse withalle
 [2142] In a corner of the halle,
 [2143] Ther men of love-tydynges tolde,
 [2144] And I gan thiderward beholde;
 [2145] For I saugh rennynge every wight
 [2146] As faste as that they hadden myght,
 [2147] And everych cried, "What thing is that?"
 [2148] And somme sayde, "I not never what."
 [2149] And whan they were alle on an hepe,
 [2150] Tho behynde begunne up lepe,
 [2151] And clamben up on other faste,
 [2152] And up the nose and yen kaste,
 [2153] And troden fast on others heles,
 [2154] And stampen, as men doon aftir eles.
 [2155] Atte laste y saugh a man,
 [2156] Which that y [nevene] nat ne kan;
 [2157] But he semed for to be
 [2158] A man of gret auctorite. . . .

      
The Canterbury Tales and Other Works of Chaucer (Middle English), by Geoffery Chaucer, [14th cent.], at sacred-texts.com

 

Other Works

 

Anelida and Arcite

 [1] Thou ferse god of armes, Mars the rede,
 [2] That in the frosty contre called Trace,
 [3] Within thy grisly temple ful of drede
 [4] Honoured art as patroun of that place;
 [5] With thy Bellona, Pallas, ful of grace,
 [6] Be present and my song contynue and guye;
 [7] At my begynnyng thus to the I crye.
 [8] For hit ful depe is sonken in my mynde,
 [9] With pitous hert in Englyssh to endyte
 [10] This olde storie, in Latyn which I fynde,
 [11] Of quene Anelida and fals Arcite,
 [12] That elde, which that al can frete and bite,
 [13] As hit hath freten mony a noble storie,
 [14] Hath nygh devoured out of oure memorie.
 [15] Be favorable eke, thou Polymya,
 [16] On Parnaso that with thy sustres glade,
 [17] By Elycon, not fer from Cirrea,
 [18] Singest with vois memorial in the shade,
 [19] Under the laurer which that may not fade,
 [20] And do that I my ship to haven wynne.
 [21] First folowe I Stace, and after him Corynne.
 [22] When Theseus with werres longe and grete
 [23] The aspre folk of Cithe had overcome,
 [24] With laurer corouned, in his char gold-bete,
 [25] Hom to his contre-houses is he come,
 [26] For which the peple, blisful al and somme,
 [27] So cryeden that to the sterres hit wente,
 [28] And him to honouren dide al her entente.
 [29] Beforn this duk, in signe of victorie,
 [30] The trompes come, and in his baner large
 [31] The ymage of Mars, and in tokenyng of glorie
 [32] Men myghte sen of tresour many a charge,
 [33] Many a bright helm, and many a spere and targe,
 [34] Many a fresh knyght, and many a blysful route,
 [35] On hors, on fote, in al the feld aboute.
 [36] Ipolita his wif, the hardy quene
 [37] Of Cithia, that he conquered hadde,
 [38] With Emelye her yonge suster shene,
 [39] Faire in a char of gold he with him ladde,
 [40] That al the ground about her char she spradde
 [41] With brightnesse of the beaute in her face,
 [42] Fulfilled of largesse and of alle grace.
 [43] With his tryumphe and laurer-corouned thus,
 [44] In al the flour of Fortunes yevynge,
 [45] Let I this noble prince Theseus
 [46] Toward Athenes in his wey rydinge,
 [47] And founde I wol in shortly for to bringe
 [48] The slye wey of that I gan to write,
 [49] Of quene Anelida and fals Arcite.
 [50] Mars, which that through his furious cours of ire,
 [51] The olde wrathe of Juno to fulfille,
 [52] Hath set the peples hertes bothe on fire
 [53] Of Thebes and Grece, everich other to kille
 [54] With blody speres, ne rested never stille,
 [55] But throng now her, now ther, among hem bothe,
 [56] That everych other slough, so were they wrothe.
 [57] For when Amphiorax and Tydeus,
 [58] Ipomedon, Parthonope also
 [59] Were ded, and slayn proude Campaneus,
 [60] And when the wrecched Thebans, bretheren two,
 [61] Were slayn, and kyng Adrastus hom ago,
 [62] So desolat stod Thebes and so bare
 [63] That no wight coude remedie of his fare.
 [64] And when the olde Creon gan espye
 [65] How that the blood roial was broght a-doun,
 [66] He held the cite by his tyrannye
 [67] And dyde the gentils of that regioun
 [68] To ben his frendes and wonnen in the toun.
 [69] So, what for love of him and what for awe,
 [70] The noble folk were to the toun idrawe.
 [71] Among al these Anelida, the quene
 [72] Of Ermony, was in that toun dwellynge,
 [73] That fairer was then is the sonne shene.
 [74] Thurghout the world so gan her name springe
 [75] That her to seen had every wyght likynge,
 [76] For, as of trouthe, is ther noon her lyche
 [77] Of al the women in this worlde riche.
 [78] Yong was this quene, of twenty yer of elde,
 [79] Of mydel stature, and of such fairenesse
 [80] That Nature had a joye her to behelde;
 [81] And for to speken of her stidfastnesse,
 [82] She passed hath Penelope and Lucresse;
 [83] And shortly, yf she shal be comprehended,
 [84] In her ne myghte no thing been amended.
 [85] This Theban knyght Arcite eke, soth to seyn,
 [86] Was yong and therwithal a lusty knyght,
 [87] But he was double in love and no thing pleyn,
 [88] And subtil in that craft over any wyght,
 [89] And with his kunnyng wan this lady bryght;
 [90] For so ferforth he gan her trouthe assure
 [91] That she him trusted over any creature.
 [92] What shuld I seyn? She loved Arcite so
 [93] That when that he was absent any throwe,
 [94] Anon her thoghte her herte brast a-two;
 [95] For in her sight to her he bar hym lowe,
 [96] So that she wende have al his hert yknowe;
 [97] But he was fals; hit nas but feyned chere --
 [98] As nedeth not to men such craft to lere.
 [99] But nevertheles ful mykel besynesse
 [100] Had he er that he myghte his lady wynne,
 [101] And swor he wolde dyen for distresse
 [102] Or from his wit he seyde he wolde twynne.
 [103] Alas, the while! For hit was routhe and synne
 [104] That she upon his sorowes wolde rewe;
 [105] But nothing thinketh the fals as doth the trewe.
 [106] Her fredom fond Arcite in such manere
 [107] That al was his that she hath, moche or lyte;
 [108] Ne to no creature made she chere
 [109] Ferther then that hit lyked to Arcite.
 [110] Ther nas no lak with which he myghte her wite;
 [111] She was so ferforth yeven hym to plese
 [112] That al that lyked hym hit dyde her ese.
 [113] Ther nas to her no maner lettre sent
 [114] That touched love, from any maner wyght,
 [115] That she ne shewed hit him er hit was brent;
 [116] So pleyn she was and dide her fulle myght
 [117] That she nyl hiden nothing from her knyght,
 [118] Lest he of any untrouthe her upbreyde.
 [119] Withoute bode his heste she obeyde.
 [120] And eke he made him jelous over here,
 [121] That what that any man had to her seyd
 [122] Anoon he wolde preyen her to swere
 [123] What was that word or make him evel apaid.
 [124] Then wende she out of her wyt have breyd;
 [125] But al this nas but sleght and flaterie;
 [126] Withoute love he feyned jelousye.
 [127] And al this tok she so debonerly
 [128] That al his wil her thoghte hit skilful thing,
 [129] And ever the lenger she loved him tendirly
 [130] And dide him honour as he were a kyng.
 [131] Her herte was to him wedded with a ring;
 [132] So ferforth upon trouthe is her entente
 [133] That wher he gooth her herte with him wente.
 [134] When she shal ete, on him is so her thoght
 [135] That wel unnethe of mete tok she kep;
 [136] And when that she was to her reste broght,
 [137] On him she thoghte alwey til that she slep;
 [138] When he was absent, prevely she wep:
 [139] Thus lyveth feire Anelida the quene
 [140] For fals Arcite, that dide her al this tene.
 [141] This fals Arcite, of his newfanglenesse,
 [142] For she to him so lowly was and trewe,
 [143] Tok lesse deynte of her stidfastnesse
 [144] And saw another lady, proud and newe,
 [145] And ryght anon he cladde him in her hewe --
 [146] Wot I not whethir in white, rede, or grene --
 [147] And falsed fair Anelida the quene.
 [148] But neverthelesse, gret wonder was hit noon
 [149] Thogh he were fals, for hit is kynde of man
 [150] Sith Lamek was, that is so longe agoon,
 [151] To ben in love as fals as evere he can;
 [152] He was the firste fader that began
 [153] To loven two, and was in bigamye,
 [154] And he found tentes first, but yf men lye.
 [155] This fals Arcite, sumwhat moste he feyne,
 [156] When he wex fals, to covere his traitorie,
 [157] Ryght as an hors that can both bite and pleyne,
 [158] For he bar her on honde of trecherie,
 [159] And swor he coude her doublenesse espie,
 [160] And al was falsnes that she to him mente.
 [161] Thus swor this thef, and forth his way he wente.
 [162] Alas, what herte myght enduren hit,
 [163] For routhe and wo, her sorwe for to telle?
 [164] Or what man hath the cunnyng or the wit?
 [165] Or what man mighte within the chambre dwelle,
 [166] Yf I to him rehersen sholde the helle
 [167] That suffreth fair Anelida the quene
 [168] For fals Arcite, that dide her al this tene.
 [169] She wepith, waileth, swowneth pitously;
 [170] To grounde ded she falleth as a ston;
 [171] Craumpyssheth her lymes crokedly;
 [172] She speketh as her wit were al agon;
 [173] Other colour then asshen hath she noon;
 [174] Non other word speketh she, moche or lyte,
 [175] But `Merci, cruel herte myn, Arcite!'
 [176] And thus endureth til that she was so mat
 [177] That she ne hath foot on which she may sustene,
 [178] But forth languisshing evere in this estat,
 [179] Of which Arcite hath nouther routhe ne tene.
 [180] His herte was elleswhere, newe and grene,
 [181] That on her wo ne deyneth him not to thinke;
 [182] Him rekketh never wher she flete or synke.
 [183] His newe lady holdeth him so narowe
 [184] Up by the bridil, at the staves ende,
 [185] That every word he dredeth as an arowe;
 [186] Her daunger made him bothe bowe and bende,
 [187] And as her liste, made him turne or wende,
 [188] For she ne graunted him in her lyvynge
 [189] No grace whi that he hath lust to singe,
 [190] But drof hym forth. Unnethe liste her knowe
 [191] That he was servaunt unto her ladishippe;
 [192] But lest that he were proud, she held him lowe.
 [193] Thus serveth he withoute fee or shipe;
 [194] She sent him now to londe, now to shippe;
 [195] And for she yaf him daunger al his fille,
 [196] Therfor she hadde him at her owne wille.
 [197] Ensample of this, ye thrifty wymmen alle,
 [198] Take her of Anelida and Arcite,
 [199] That for her liste him `dere herte' calle
 [200] And was so meke, therfor he loved her lyte.
 [201] The kynde of mannes herte is to delyte
 [202] In thing that straunge is, also God me save!
 [203] For what he may not gete, that wolde he have.
 [204] Now turne we to Anelida ageyn,
 [205] That pyneth day be day in langwisshinge,
 [206] But when she saw that her ne gat no geyn,
 [207] Upon a day, ful sorowfully wepinge,
 [208] She caste her for to make a compleynynge,
 [209] And of her owne hond she gan hit write,
 [210] And sente hit to her Theban knyght, Arcite.
 [211] So thirleth with the poynt of remembraunce
 [212] The swerd of sorowe, ywhet with fals plesaunce,
 [213] Myn herte, bare of blis and blak of hewe,
 [214] That turned is in quakyng al my daunce,
 [215] My surete in awhaped countenaunce,
 [216] Sith hit availeth not for to ben trewe;
 [217] For whoso trewest is, hit shal hir rewe
 [218] That serveth love and doth her observaunce
 [219] Alwey til oon, and chaungeth for no newe.
 [220] I wot myself as wel as any wight,
 [221] For I loved oon with al myn herte and myght,
 [222] More then myself an hundred thousand sithe,
 [223] And called him myn hertes lif, my knyght,
 [224] And was al his, as fer as hit was ryght;
 [225] And when that he was glad, then was I blithe,
 [226] And his disese was my deth as swithe;
 [227] And he ayein his trouthe hath me plyght
 [228] For evermore, his lady me to kythe.
 [229] Now is he fals, alas, and causeles,
 [230] And of my wo he is so routheles
 [231] That with a word him list not ones deyne
 [232] To bringe ayen my sorowful herte in pes,
 [233] For he is caught up in another les.
 [234] Ryght as him list, he laugheth at my peyne,
 [235] And I ne can myn herte not restreyne
 [236] For to love him alwey neveretheles;
 [237] And of al this I not to whom me pleyne.
 [238] And shal I pleyne -- alas, the harde stounde! --
 [239] Unto my foo that yaf myn herte a wounde
 [240] And yet desireth that myn harm be more?
 [241] Nay, certis, ferther wol I never founde
 [242] Non other helpe, my sores for to sounde.
 [243] My destinee hath shapen hit so ful yore;
 [244] I wil non other medecyne ne lore;
 [245] I wil ben ay ther I was ones bounde.
 [246] That I have seid, be seid for evermore!
 [247] Alas! Wher is become your gentilesse,
 [248] Youre wordes ful of plesaunce and humblesse,
 [249] Youre observaunces in so low manere,
 [250] And your awayting and your besynesse
 [251] Upon me, that ye calden your maistresse,
 [252] Your sovereyne lady in this world here?
 [253] Alas! Is ther now nother word ne chere
 [254] Ye vouchen sauf upon myn hevynesse?
 [255] Alas! Youre love, I bye hit al to dere.
 [256] Now, certis, swete, thogh that ye
 [257] Thus causeles the cause be
 [258] Of my dedly adversyte,
 [259] Your manly resoun oghte hit to respite
 [260] To slen your frend, and namely me,
 [261] That never yet in no degre
 [262] Offended yow, as wisly He
 [263] That al wot, out of wo my soule quyte!
 [264] But for I shewed yow, Arcite,
 [265] Al that men wolde to me write,
 [266] And was so besy yow to delyte --
 [267] Myn honor save -- meke, kynde, and fre,
 [268] Therfor ye put on me this wite,
 [269] And of me rekke not a myte,
 [270] Thogh that the swerd of sorwe byte
 [271] My woful herte through your cruelte.
 [272] My swete foo, why do ye so, for shame?
 [273] And thenke ye that furthered be your name
 [274] To love a newe, and ben untrewe? Nay!
 [275] And putte yow in sclaunder now and blame,
 [276] And do to me adversite and grame,
 [277] That love yow most -- God, wel thou wost -- alway?
 [278] Yet come ayein, and yet be pleyn som day,
 [279] And than shal this, that now is mys, be game,
 [280] And al foryive, while that I lyve may.
 [281] Lo, herte myn, al this is for to seyne
 [282] As whether shal I preye or elles pleyne?
 [283] Which is the wey to doon yow to be trewe?
 [284] For either mot I have yow in my cheyne
 [285] Or with the deth ye mote departe us tweyne;
 [286] Ther ben non other mene weyes newe.
 [287] For God so wisly upon my soule rewe,
 [288] As verrayly ye sleen me with the peyne;
 [289] That may ye se unfeyned of myn hewe.
 [290] For thus ferforth have I my deth y-soght?
 [291] Myself I mordre with my privy thoght;
 [292] For sorowe and routhe of your unkyndenesse
 [293] I wepe, I wake, I faste; al helpeth noght;
 [294] I weyve joye that is to speke of oght,
 [295] I voyde companye, I fle gladnesse.
 [296] Who may avaunte her beter of hevynesse
 [297] Then I? And to this plyte have ye me broght,
 [298] Withoute gilt -- me nedeth no witnesse.
 [299] And shal I preye, and weyve womanhede? --
 [300] Nay! Rather deth then do so foul a dede! --
 [301] And axe merci, gilteles -- what nede?
 [302] And yf I pleyne what lyf that I lede,
 [303] Yow rekketh not; that knowe I, out of drede;
 [304] And if that I to yow myne othes bede
 [305] For myn excuse, a skorn shal be my mede.
 [306] Your chere floureth, but it wol not sede;
 [307] Ful longe agoon I oghte have taken hede.
 [308] For thogh I hadde yow to-morowe ageyn,
 [309] I myghte as wel holde Aperill fro reyn
 [310] As holde yow, to make yow be stidfast.
 [311] Almyghty God, of trouthe sovereyn,
 [312] Wher is the trouthe of man? Who hath hit slayn?
 [313] Who that hem loveth, she shal hem fynde as fast
 [314] As in a tempest is a roten mast.
 [315] Is that a tame best that is ay feyn
 [316] To fleen away when he is lest agast?
 [317] Now merci, swete, yf I mysseye!
 [318] Have I seyd oght amys, I preye?
 [319] I noot; my wit is al aweye.
 [320] I fare as doth the song of Chaunte-pleure;
 [321] For now I pleyne, and now I pleye;
 [322] I am so mased that I deye;
 [323] Arcite hath born awey the keye
 [324] Of al my world, and my good aventure.
 [325] For in this world nis creature
 [326] Wakynge in more discomfiture
 [327] Then I, ne more sorowe endure.
 [328] And yf I slepe a furlong wey or tweye,
 [329] Then thynketh me that your figure
 [330] Before me stont, clad in asure,
 [331] To profren eft and newe assure
 [332] For to be trewe, and merci me to preye.
 [333] The longe nyght this wonder sight I drye,
 [334] And on the day for thilke afray I dye,
 [335] And of al this ryght noght, iwis, ye reche.
 [336] Ne nevere mo myn yen two be drie,
 [337] And to your routhe, and to your trouthe, I crie.
 [338] But welawey! To fer be they to feche;
 [339] Thus holdeth me my destinee a wreche.
 [340] But me to rede out of this drede, or guye,
 [341] Ne may my wit, so weyk is hit, not streche.
 [342] Then ende I thus, sith I may do no more.
 [343] I yeve hit up for now and evermore,
 [344] For I shal never eft putten in balaunce
 [345] My sekernes, ne lerne of love the lore.
 [346] But as the swan, I have herd seyd ful yore,
 [347] Ayeins his deth shal singen his penaunce,
 [348] So singe I here my destinee or chaunce,
 [349] How that Arcite Anelida so sore
 [350] Hath thirled with the poynt of remembraunce.
 [351] When that Anelida, this woful quene,
 [352] Hath of her hand ywriten in this wise,
 [353] With face ded, betwixe pale and grene,
 [354] She fel a-swowe; and sith she gan to rise,
 [355] And unto Mars avoweth sacrifise
 [356] Withinne the temple, with a sorowful chere,
 [357] That shapen was as ye shal after here....??

      
The Canterbury Tales and Other Works of Chaucer (Middle English), by Geoffery Chaucer, [14th cent.], at sacred-texts.com

 

Other Works

 

The Parliament of Fowls

 [1] The lyf so short, the craft so long to lerne,
 [2] Th' assay so hard, so sharp the conquerynge,
 [3] The dredful joye alwey that slit so yerne:
 [4] Al this mene I by Love, that my felynge
 [5] Astonyeth with his wonderful werkynge
 [6] So sore, iwis, that whan I on hym thynke
 [7] Nat wot I wel wher that I flete or synke.
 [8] For al be that I knowe nat Love in dede,
 [9] Ne wot how that he quiteth folk here hyre,
 [10] Yit happeth me ful ofte in bokes reede
 [11] Of his myrakles and his crewel yre.
 [12] There rede I wel he wol be lord and syre;
 [13] I dar nat seyn, his strokes been so sore,
 [14] But "God save swich a lord!" -- I can na moore.
 [15] Of usage -- what for lust and what for lore --
 [16] On bokes rede I ofte, as I yow tolde.
 [17] But wherfore that I speke al this? Nat yoore
 [18] Agon it happede me for to beholde
 [19] Upon a bok, was write with lettres olde,
 [20] And therupon, a certeyn thing to lerne,
 [21] The longe day ful faste I redde and yerne.
 [22] For out of olde feldes, as men seyth,
 [23] Cometh al this newe corn from yer to yere,
 [24] And out of olde bokes, in good feyth,
 [25] Cometh al this newe science that men lere.
 [26] But now to purpos as of this matere:
 [27] To rede forth hit gan me so delite
 [28] That al that day me thoughte but a lyte.
 [29] This bok of which I make mencioun
 [30] Entitled was al ther, as I shal telle:
 [31] "Tullyus of the Drem of Scipioun."
 [32] Chapitres sevene it hadde, of hevene and helle
 [33] And erthe, and soules that therinne dwelle,
 [34] Of whiche, as shortly as I can it trete,
 [35] Of his sentence I wol yow seyn the greete.
 [36] Fyrst telleth it, whan Scipion was come
 [37] In Affrike, how he meteth Massynisse,
 [38] That hym for joie in armes hath inome;
 [39] Thanne telleth [it] here speche and al the blysse
 [40] That was betwix hem til the day gan mysse,
 [41] And how his auncestre, Affrycan so deere,
 [42] Gan in his slep that nyght to hym apere.
 [43] Thanne telleth it that, from a sterry place,
 [44] How Affrycan hath hym Cartage shewed,
 [45] And warnede hym beforn of al his grace,
 [46] And seyde hym what man, lered other lewed,
 [47] That lovede commune profyt, wel ithewed,
 [48] He shulde into a blysful place wende
 [49] There as joye is that last withouten ende.
 [50] Thanne axede he if folk that here been dede
 [51] Han lyf and dwellynge in another place.
 [52] And Affrican seyde, "Ye, withouten drede,"
 [53] And that oure present worldes lyves space
 [54] Nis but a maner deth, what wey we trace;
 [55] And rightful folk shul gon, after they dye,
 [56] To hevene; and shewede hym the Galaxye.
 [57] Thanne shewede he hym the lytel erthe that here is,
 [58] At regard of the hevenes quantite;
 [59] And after shewede he hym the nyne speres;
 [60] And after that the melodye herde he
 [61] That cometh of thilke speres thryes thre,
 [62] That welle is of musik and melodye
 [63] In this world here, and cause of armonye.
 [64] Than bad he hym, syn erthe was so lyte,
 [65] And dissevable and ful of harde grace,
 [66] That he ne shulde hym in the world delyte.
 [67] Thanne tolde he hym, in certeyn yeres space
 [68] That every sterre shulde come into his place
 [69] Ther it was first, and al shulde out of mynde
 [70] That in this world is don of al mankynde.
 [71] Thanne preyede hym Scipion to telle hym al
 [72] The wey to come into that hevene blisse.
 [73] And he seyde, "Know thyself first immortal,
 [74] And loke ay besyly thow werche and wysse
 [75] To commune profit, and thow shalt not mysse
 [76] To comen swiftly to that place deere
 [77] That ful of blysse is and of soules cleere.
 [78] "But brekers of the lawe, soth to seyne,
 [79] And likerous folk, after that they ben dede,
 [80] Shul whirle aboute th' erthe alwey in peyne,
 [81] Tyl many a world be passed, out of drede,
 [82] And than, foryeven al hir wikked dede,
 [83] Than shul they come into that blysful place,
 [84] To which to comen God the sende his grace."
 [85] The day gan faylen, and the derke nyght,
 [86] That reveth bestes from here besynesse,
 [87] Berafte me my bok for lak of lyght,
 [88] And to my bed I gan me for to dresse,
 [89] Fulfyld of thought and busy hevynesse;
 [90] For bothe I hadde thyng which that I nolde,
 [91] And ek I ne hadde that thyng that I wolde.
 [92] But fynally my spirit at the laste,
 [93] For wery of my labour al the day,
 [94] Tok reste, that made me to slepe faste;
 [95] And in my slep I mette, as that I lay,
 [96] How Affrican, ryght in the selve aray
 [97] That Scipion hym say byfore that tyde,
 [98] Was come and stod right at my beddes syde.
 [99] The wery huntere, slepynge in his bed,
 [100] To wode ayeyn his mynde goth anon;
 [101] The juge dremeth how his plees been sped;
 [102] The cartere dremeth how his cart is gon;
 [103] The riche, of gold; the knyght fyght with his fon;
 [104] The syke met he drynketh of the tonne;
 [105] The lovere met he hath his lady wonne.
 [106] Can I not seyn if that the cause were
 [107] For I hadde red of Affrican byforn
 [108] That made me to mete that he stod there;
 [109] But thus seyde he: "Thow hast the so wel born
 [110] In lokynge of myn olde bok totorn,
 [111] Of which Macrobye roughte nat a lyte,
 [112] That sumdel of thy labour wolde I quyte."
 [113] Cytherea, thow blysful lady swete,
 [114] That with thy fyrbrond dauntest whom the lest
 [115] And madest me this sweven for to mete,
 [116] Be thow myn helpe in this, for thow mayst best!
 [117] As wisly as I sey the north-north-west,
 [118] Whan I began my sweven for to write,
 [119] So yif me myght to ryme, and endyte!
 [120] This forseyde Affrican me hente anon
 [121] And forth with hym unto a gate broughte,
 [122] Ryght of a park walled with grene ston;
 [123] And over the gate, with lettres large iwroughte,
 [124] There were vers iwriten, as me thoughte,
 [125] On eyther half, of ful gret difference,
 [126] Of which I shal yow seyn the pleyn sentence:
 [127] "Thorgh me men gon into that blysful place
 [128] Of hertes hele and dedly woundes cure;
 [129] Thorgh me men gon unto the welle of grace,
 [130] There grene and lusty May shal evere endure.
 [131] This is the wey to al good aventure.
 [132] Be glad, thow redere, and thy sorwe of-caste;
 [133] Al open am I -- passe in, and sped thee faste!"
 [134] "Thorgh me men gon," than spak that other side,
 [135] "Unto the mortal strokes of the spere
 [136] Of which Disdayn and Daunger is the gyde,
 [137] Ther nevere tre shal fruyt ne leves bere.
 [138] This strem yow ledeth to the sorweful were
 [139] There as the fish in prysoun is al drye;
 [140] Th' eschewing is only the remedye!"
 [141] These vers of gold and blak iwriten were,
 [142] Of whiche I gan astoned to beholde.
 [143] For with that oon encresede ay my fere
 [144] And with that other gan myn herte bolde;
 [145] That oon me hette, that other dide me colde;
 [146] No wit hadde I, for errour, for to chese
 [147] To entre or flen, or me to save or lese.
 [148] Right as betwixen adamauntes two
 [149] Of evene myght, a pece of yren set
 [150] Ne hath no myght to meve to ne fro --
 [151] For what that oon may hale, that other let --
 [152] Ferde I, that nyste whether me was bet
 [153] To entre or leve, til Affrycan, my gide,
 [154] Me hente and shof in at the gates wide,
 [155] And seyde, "It stondeth writen in thy face,
 [156] Thyn errour, though thow telle it not to me;
 [157] But dred the not to come into this place,
 [158] For this writyng nys nothyng ment bi the,
 [159] Ne by non but he Loves servaunt be:
 [160] For thow of love hast lost thy tast, I gesse,
 [161] As sek man hath of swete and bytternesse.
 [162] "But natheles, although that thow be dul,
 [163] Yit that thow canst not do, yit mayst thow se.
 [164] For many a man that may nat stonde a pul
 [165] Yet liketh hym at wrastlyng for to be,
 [166] And demen yit wher he do bet or he.
 [167] And if thow haddest connyng for t' endite,
 [168] I shal the shewe mater of to wryte."
 [169] With that myn hand in his he tok anon,
 [170] Of which I confort caughte, and wente in faste.
 [171] But, Lord, so I was glad and wel begoon!
 [172] For overal where that I myne eyen caste
 [173] Were trees clad with leves that ay shal laste,
 [174] Ech in his kynde, of colour fresh and greene
 [175] As emeraude, that joye was to seene.
 [176] The byldere ok, and ek the hardy asshe;
 [177] The piler elm, the cofre unto carayne;
 [178] The boxtre pipere, holm to whippes lashe;
 [179] The saylynge fyr; the cipresse, deth to playne;
 [180] The shetere ew; the asp for shaftes pleyne;
 [181] The olyve of pes, and eke the dronke vyne;
 [182] The victor palm, the laurer to devyne.
 [183] A gardyn saw I ful of blosmy bowes
 [184] Upon a ryver, in a grene mede,
 [185] There as swetnesse everemore inow is,
 [186] With floures white, blewe, yelwe, and rede,
 [187] And colde welle-stremes, nothyng dede,
 [188] That swymmen ful of smale fishes lighte,
 [189] With fynnes rede and skales sylver bryghte.
 [190] On every bow the bryddes herde I synge,
 [191] With voys of aungel in here armonye;
 [192] Some besyede hem here bryddes forth to brynge;
 [193] The litel conyes to here pley gonne hye;
 [194] And ferther al aboute I gan aspye
 [195] The dredful ro, the buk, the hert and hynde,
 [196] Squyrels, and bestes smale of gentil kynde.
 [197] Of instruments of strenges in acord
 [198] Herde I so pleye a ravyshyng swetnesse,
 [199] That God, that makere is of al and lord,
 [200] Ne herde nevere beter, as I gesse.
 [201] Therwith a wynd, unnethe it myghte be lesse,
 [202] Made in the leves grene a noyse softe
 [203] Acordaunt to the foules song alofte.
 [204] Th' air of that place so attempre was
 [205] That nevere was grevaunce of hot ne cold.
 [206] There wex ek every holsom spice and gras;
 [207] No man may there waxe sek ne old;
 [208] Yit was there joye more a thousandfold
 [209] Than man can telle; ne nevere wolde it nyghte,
 [210] But ay cler day to any mannes syghte.
 [211] Under a tre, besyde a welle, I say
 [212] Cupide, oure lord, his arwes forge and file;
 [213] And at his fet his bowe al redy lay;
 [214] And Wille, his doughter, temprede al this while
 [215] The hevedes in the welle, and with hire wile
 [216] She couchede hem, after they shulde serve
 [217] Some for to sle, and some to wounde and kerve.
 [218] Tho was I war of Plesaunce anon-ryght,
 [219] And of Aray, and Lust, and Curteysie,
 [220] And of the Craft that can and hath the myght
 [221] To don by force a wyght to don folye --
 [222] Disfigurat was she, I nyl nat lye;
 [223] And by hymself, under an ok, I gesse,
 [224] Saw I Delyt, that stod with Gentilesse.
 [225] I saw Beute withouten any atyr,
 [226] And Youthe, ful of game and jolyte;
 [227] Foolhardynesse, Flaterye, and Desyr,
 [228] Messagerye, and Meede, and other thre --
 [229] Here names shul not here be told for me --
 [230] And upon pilers greete of jasper longe
 [231] I saw a temple of bras ifounded stronge.
 [232] Aboute the temple daunsedyn alwey
 [233] Women inowe, of whiche some ther weere
 [234] Fayre of hemself, and some of hem were gay;
 [235] In kertels, al dishevele, wente they there:
 [236] That was here offyce alwey, yer by yeere.
 [237] And on the temple, of dowves white and fayre
 [238] Saw I syttynge many an hundred peyre.
 [239] Byfore the temple-dore ful soberly
 [240] Dame Pees sat, with a curtyn in hire hond,
 [241] And by hire syde, wonder discretly,
 [242] Dame Pacience syttynge there I fond,
 [243] With face pale, upon an hil of sond;
 [244] And aldernext, withinne and ek withoute,
 [245] Byheste and Art, and of here folk a route.
 [246] Withinne the temple, of sykes hoote as fyr
 [247] I herde a swogh that gan aboute renne,
 [248] Whiche sikes were engendered with desyr,
 [249] That maden every auter for to brenne
 [250] Of newe flaume; and wel espyed I thenne
 [251] That al the cause of sorwes that they drye
 [252] Cam of the bittere goddesse Jelosye.
 [253] The god Priapus saw I, as I wente,
 [254] Withinne the temple in sovereyn place stonde,
 [255] In swich aray as whan the asse hym shente
 [256] With cri by nighte, and with hys sceptre in honde.
 [257] Ful besyly men gonne assaye and fonde
 [258] Upon his hed to sette, of sondry hewe,
 [259] Garlondes ful of freshe floures newe.
 [260] And in a prive corner in disport
 [261] Fond I Venus and hire porter Richesse,
 [262] That was ful noble and hautayn of hyre port --
 [263] Derk was that place, but afterward lightnesse
 [264] I saw a lyte, unnethe it myghte be lesse --
 [265] And on a bed of gold she lay to reste,
 [266] Til that the hote sonne gan to weste.
 [267] Hyre gilte heres with a golden thred
 [268] Ibounden were, untressed as she lay,
 [269] And naked from the brest unto the hed
 [270] Men myghte hire sen; and, sothly for to say,
 [271] The remenaunt was wel kevered to my pay,
 [272] Ryght with a subtyl coverchef of Valence --
 [273] Ther was no thikkere cloth of no defense.
 [274] The place yaf a thousand savours sote,
 [275] And Bachus, god of wyn, sat hire besyde,
 [276] And Ceres next, that doth of hunger boote,
 [277] And, as I seyde, amyddes lay Cypride,
 [278] To whom on knees two yonge folk ther cryde
 [279] To ben here helpe. But thus I let hire lye,
 [280] And ferther in the temple I gan espie
 [281] That, in dispit of Dyane the chaste,
 [282] Ful many a bowe ibroke heng on the wal
 [283] Of maydenes swiche as gonne here tymes waste
 [284] In hyre servyse; and peynted overal
 [285] Ful many a story, of which I touche shal
 [286] A fewe, as of Calyxte and Athalante,
 [287] And many a mayde of which the name I wante.
 [288] Semyramis, Candace, and Hercules,
 [289] Biblis, Dido, Thisbe, and Piramus,
 [290] Tristram, Isaude, Paris, and Achilles,
 [291] Eleyne, Cleopatre, and Troylus,
 [292] Silla, and ek the moder of Romulus:
 [293] Alle these were peynted on that other syde,
 [294] And al here love, and in what plyt they dyde.
 [295] Whan I was come ayeyn into the place
 [296] That I of spak, that was so sote and grene,
 [297] Forth welk I tho myselven to solace.
 [298] Tho was I war wher that ther sat a queene
 [299] That, as of lyght the somer sonne shene
 [300] Passeth the sterre, right so over mesure
 [301] She fayrer was than any creature.
 [302] And in a launde, upon an hil of floures,
 [303] Was set this noble goddesse Nature.
 [304] Of braunches were here halles and here boures
 [305] Iwrought after here cast and here mesure;
 [306] Ne there nas foul that cometh of engendrure
 [307] That they ne were prest in here presence
 [308] To take hire dom and yeve hire audyence.
 [309] For this was on Seynt Valentynes day,
 [310] Whan every foul cometh there to chese his make,
 [311] Of every kynde that men thynke may,
 [312] And that so huge a noyse gan they make
 [313] That erthe, and eyr, and tre, and every lake
 [314] So ful was that unethe was there space
 [315] For me to stonde, so ful was al the place.
 [316] And right as Aleyn, in the Pleynt of Kynde,
 [317] Devyseth Nature of aray and face,
 [318] In swich aray men myghte hire there fynde.
 [319] This noble emperesse, ful of grace,
 [320] Bad every foul to take his owne place,
 [321] As they were woned alwey fro yer to yeere,
 [322] Seynt Valentynes day, to stonden theere.
 [323] That is to seyn, the foules of ravyne
 [324] Weere hyest set, and thanne the foules smale
 [325] That eten, as hem Nature wolde enclyne,
 [326] As worm or thyng of which I telle no tale;
 [327] And water-foul sat lowest in the dale;
 [328] But foul that lyveth by sed sat on the grene,
 [329] And that so fele that wonder was to sene.
 [330] There myghte men the royal egle fynde,
 [331] That with his sharpe lok perseth the sonne,
 [332] And othere egles of a lowere kynde,
 [333] Of whiche that clerkes wel devyse conne.
 [334] Ther was the tiraunt with his fetheres donne
 [335] And grey -- I mene the goshauk that doth pyne
 [336] To bryddes for his outrageous ravyne.
 [337] The gentyl faucoun, that with his feet distrayneth
 [338] The kynges hand; the hardy sperhauk eke,
 [339] The quayles foo; the merlioun, that payneth
 [340] Hymself ful ofte the larke for to seke;
 [341] There was the douve with hire yen meke;
 [342] The jelous swan, ayens his deth that syngeth.
 [343] The oule ek, that of deth the bode bryngeth.
 [344] The crane, the geaunt, with his trompes soun;
 [345] The thef, the chough; and ek the janglynge pye;
 [346] The skornynge jay; the eles fo, heroun;
 [347] The false lapwynge, ful of trecherye;
 [348] The stare, that the conseyl can bewrye;
 [349] The tame ruddok, and the coward kyte;
 [350] The kok, that orloge is of thorpes lyte;
 [351] The sparwe, Venus sone; the nyghtyngale,
 [352] That clepeth forth the grene leves newe;
 [353] The swalwe, mortherere of the foules smale
 [354] That maken hony of floures freshe of hewe;
 [355] The wedded turtil, with hire herte trewe;
 [356] The pekok, with his aungels fetheres bryghte;
 [357] The fesaunt, skornere of the cok by nyghte;
 [358] The waker goos; the cukkow ever unkynde;
 [359] The popynjay, ful of delicasye;
 [360] The drake, stroyere of his owene kynde;
 [361] The stork, the wrekere of avouterye;
 [362] The hote cormeraunt of glotenye;
 [363] The raven wys; the crowe with vois of care;
 [364] The throstil old; the frosty feldefare.
 [365] What shulde I seyn? Of foules every kynde
 [366] That in this world han fetheres and stature
 [367] Men myghten in that place assembled fynde
 [368] Byfore the noble goddesse Nature,
 [369] And ech of hem dide his besy cure
 [370] Benygnely to chese or for to take,
 [371] By hire acord, his formel or his make.
 [372] But to the poynt: Nature held on hire hond
 [373] A formel egle, of shap the gentilleste
 [374] That evere she among hire werkes fond,
 [375] The moste benygne and the goodlieste.
 [376] In hire was everi vertu at his reste,
 [377] So ferforth that Nature hireself hadde blysse
 [378] To loke on hire, and ofte hire bek to kysse.
 [379] Nature, the vicaire of the almyghty Lord,
 [380] That hot, cold, hevy, lyght, moyst, and dreye
 [381] Hath knyt by evene noumbres of acord,
 [382] In esy voys began to speke and seye,
 [383] "Foules, tak hed of my sentence, I preye,
 [384] And for youre ese, in fortheryng of youre nede,
 [385] As faste as I may speke, I wol yow speede.
 [386] "Ye knowe wel how, Seynt Valentynes day,
 [387] By my statut and thorgh my governaunce,
 [388] Ye come for to cheese -- and fle youre wey --
 [389] Youre makes, as I prike yow with plesaunce;
 [390] But natheles, my ryghtful ordenaunce
 [391] May I nat lete for al this world to wynne,
 [392] That he that most is worthi shal begynne.
 [393] "The tersel egle, as that ye knowe wel,
 [394] The foul royal, above yow in degre,
 [395] The wyse and worthi, secre, trewe as stel,
 [396] Which I have formed, as ye may wel se,
 [397] In every part as it best liketh me --
 [398] It nedeth not his shap yow to devyse --
 [399] He shal first chese and speken in his gyse.
 [400] "And after hym by ordre shul ye chese,
 [401] After youre kynde, everich as yow lyketh,
 [402] And, as youre hap is, shul ye wynne or lese.
 [403] But which of yow that love most entriketh,
 [404] God sende hym hire that sorest for hym syketh!"
 [405] And therwithal the tersel gan she calle,
 [406] And seyde, "My sone, the choys is to the falle.
 [407] "But natheles, in this condicioun
 [408] Mot be the choys of everich that is heere,
 [409] That she agre to his eleccioun,
 [410] Whoso he be that shulde be hire feere.
 [411] This is oure usage alwey, fro yer to yeere,
 [412] And whoso may at this tyme have his grace
 [413] In blisful tyme he cam into this place!"
 [414] With hed enclyned and with humble cheere
 [415] This royal tersel spak, and tariede noght:
 [416] "Unto my soverayn lady, and not my fere,
 [417] I chese, and chese with wil, and herte, and thought,
 [418] The formel on youre hond, so wel iwrought,
 [419] Whos I am al, and evere wol hire serve,
 [420] Do what hire lest, to do me lyve or sterve;
 [421] "Besekynge hire of merci and of grace,
 [422] As she that is my lady sovereyne;
 [423] Or let me deye present in this place.
 [424] For certes, longe may I nat lyve in payne,
 [425] For in myn herte is korven every veyne.
 [426] Havynge reward only to my trouthe,
 [427] My deere herte, have on my wo som routhe.
 [428] "And if that I be founde to hyre untrewe,
 [429] Disobeysaunt, or wilful necligent,
 [430] Avauntour, or in proces love a newe,
 [431] I preye to yow this be my jugement:
 [432] That with these foules I be al torent,
 [433] That ilke day that evere she me fynde
 [434] To hir untrewe, or in my gilt unkynde.
 [435] "And syn that non loveth hire so wel as I,
 [436] Al be she nevere of love me behette,
 [437] Thanne oughte she be myn thourgh hire mercy,
 [438] For other bond can I non on hire knette.
 [439] Ne nevere for no wo ne shal I lette
 [440] To serven hire, how fer so that she wende;
 [441] Say what yow list, my tale is at an ende."
 [442] Ryght as the freshe, rede rose newe
 [443] Ayeyn the somer sonne coloured is,
 [444] Ryght so for shame al wexen gan the hewe
 [445] Of this formel, whan she herde al this;
 [446] She neyther answerde wel, ne seyde amys,
 [447] So sore abasht was she, tyl that Nature
 [448] Seyde, "Doughter, drede yow nought, I yow assure."
 [449] Another tersel egle spak anon,
 [450] Of lower kynde, and seyde, "That shal nat be!
 [451] I love hire bet than ye don, by Seint John,
 [452] Or at the leste I love hire as wel as ye,
 [453] And lenger have served hire in my degre;
 [454] And if she shulde have loved for long lovynge,
 [455] To me allone hadde be the guerdonynge.
 [456] "I dar ek seyn, if she me fynde fals,
 [457] Unkynde, janglere, or rebel any wyse,
 [458] Or jelous, do me hangen by the hals!
 [459] And, but I bere me in hire servyse
 [460] As wel as that my wit can me suffyse,
 [461] From poynt in poynt, hyre honour for to save,
 [462] Take she my lif and al the good I have!"
 [463] The thridde tercel egle answerde tho,
 [464] "Now, sires, ye seen the lytel leyser heere;
 [465] For every foul cryeth out to ben ago
 [466] Forth with his make, or with his lady deere;
 [467] And ek Nature hireself ne wol not heere,
 [468] For taryinge here, not half that I wolde seye;
 [469] And but I speke, I mot for sorwe deye.
 [470] "Of long servyse avaunte I me nothing;
 [471] But as possible is me to deye to-day
 [472] For wo as he that hath ben languysshyng
 [473] This twenty wynter, and wel happen may;
 [474] A man may serven bet and more to pay
 [475] In half a yer, although it were no moore,
 [476] Than som man doth that hath served ful yoore.
 [477] "I seye not this by me, for I ne can
 [478] Don no servyse that may my lady plese;
 [479] But I dar seyn, I am hire treweste man
 [480] As to my dom, and faynest wolde hire ese.
 [481] At shorte wordes, til that deth me sese
 [482] I wol ben heres, whether I wake or wynke,
 [483] And trewe in al that herte may bethynke."
 [484] Of al my lyf, syn that day I was born,
 [485] So gentil ple in love or other thyng
 [486] Ne herde nevere no man me beforn --
 [487] Who that hadde leyser and connyng
 [488] For to reherse hire chere and hire spekyng;
 [489] And from the morwe gan this speche laste
 [490] Tyl dounward went the sonne wonder faste.
 [491] The noyse of foules for to ben delyvered
 [492] So loude rong, "Have don, and lat us wende!"
 [493] That wel wende I the wode hadde al to-shyvered.
 [494] "Com of!" they criede, "allas, ye wol us shende!
 [495] Whan shal youre cursede pletynge have an ende?
 [496] How sholde a juge eyther parti leve
 [497] For ye or nay withouten any preve?"
 [498] The goos, the cokkow, and the doke also
 [499] So cryede, "Kek kek! kokkow! quek quek!" hye,
 [500] That thourgh myne eres the noyse wente tho.
 [501] The goos seyde, "Al this nys not worth a flye!
 [502] But I can shape herof a remedie,
 [503] And I wol seye my verdit fayre and swythe
 [504] For water-foul, whoso be wroth or blythe!"
 [505] "And I for worm-foul," seyde the fol kokkow,
 [506] "For I wol of myn owene autorite,
 [507] For comune spede, take on the charge now,
 [508] For to delyvere us is gret charite."
 [509] "Ye may abyde a while yit, parde!"
 [510] Quod the turtel, "If it be youre wille
 [511] A wight may speke, hym were as fayr be stylle.
 [512] "I am a sed-foul, oon the unworthieste,
 [513] That wot I wel, and litel of connynge.
 [514] But bet is that a wyghtes tonge reste
 [515] Than entermeten hym of such doinge,
 [516] Of which he neyther rede can ne synge;
 [517] And whoso hit doth ful foule hymself acloyeth,
 [518] For office uncommytted ofte anoyeth."
 [519] Nature, which that alwey hadde an ere
 [520] To murmur of the lewednesse behynde,
 [521] With facound voys seyde, "Hold youre tonges there!
 [522] And I shal sone, I hope, a conseyl fynde
 [523] Yow to delyvere, and fro this noyse unbynde:
 [524] I juge, of every folk men shul oon calle
 [525] To seyn the verdit for yow foules alle."
 [526] Assented were to this conclusioun
 [527] The briddes alle; and foules of ravyne
 [528] Han chosen fyrst, by pleyn eleccioun,
 [529] The tercelet of the faucoun to diffyne
 [530] Al here sentence, and as him lest, termyne;
 [531] And to Nature hym gonne to presente,
 [532] And she accepteth hym with glad entente.
 [533] The terslet seyde thanne in this manere:
 [534] "Ful hard were it to preve by resoun
 [535] Who loveth best this gentil formel heere;
 [536] For everych hath swich replicacioun
 [537] That non by skilles may be brought adoun.
 [538] I can not se that argumentes avayle:
 [539] Thanne semeth it there moste be batayle."
 [540] "Al redy!" quod these egles tercels tho.
 [541] "Nay, sires," quod he, "if that I durste it seye,
 [542] Ye don me wrong, my tale is not ido!
 [543] For, sires -- ne taketh not agref I preye --
 [544] It may not gon as ye wolde in this weye;
 [545] Oure is the voys that han the charge in honde,
 [546] And to the juges dom ye moten stonde.
 [547] "And therfore pes! I seye, as to my wit,
 [548] Me wolde thynke how that the worthieste
 [549] Of knyghthod, and lengest had used it,
 [550] Most of estat, of blod the gentilleste,
 [551] Were sittyngest for hire, if that hir leste;
 [552] And of these thre she wot hireself, I trowe,
 [553] Which that he be, for it is light to knowe."
 [554] The water-foules han here hedes leid
 [555] Togedere, and of a short avysement,
 [556] Whan everych hadde his large golee seyd,
 [557] They seyden sothly, al by oon assent,
 [558] How that the goos, with here facounde gent,
 [559] "That so desyreth to pronounce oure nede,
 [560] Shal telle oure tale," and preyede "God hire spede!"
 [561] And for these water-foules tho began
 [562] The goos to speke, and in hire kakelynge
 [563] She seyde, "Pes! Now tak kep every man,
 [564] And herkeneth which a resoun I shal forth brynge!
 [565] My wit is sharp; I love no taryinge;
 [566] I seye I rede hym, though he were my brother,
 [567] But she wol love hym, lat hym love another!"
 [568] "Lo, here a parfit resoun of a goos!"
 [569] Quod the sperhauk; "Nevere mot she thee!
 [570] Lo, swich it is to have a tonge loos!
 [571] Now parde, fol, yit were it bet for the
 [572] Han holde thy pes than shewed thy nycete.
 [573] It lyth nat in his wit, ne in his wille,
 [574] But soth is seyd, `a fol can not be stille.'"
 [575] The laughter aros of gentil foules alle,
 [576] And right anon the sed-foul chosen hadde
 [577] The turtle trewe, and gonne hire to hem calle,
 [578] And preyeden hire to seyn the sothe sadde
 [579] Of this matere, and axede what she radde.
 [580] And she answerde that pleynly hire entente
 [581] She wolde shewe, and sothly what she mente.
 [582] "Nay, God forbede a lovere shulde chaunge!"
 [583] The turtle seyde, and wex for shame al red,
 [584] "Though that his lady everemore be straunge,
 [585] Yit lat hym serve hire ever, til he be ded.
 [586] Forsothe, I preyse nat the goses red;
 [587] `For, though she deyede, I wolde non other make;
 [588] I wol ben hires, til that the deth me take.'"
 [589] "Wel bourded," quod the doke, "by myn hat!
 [590] That men shulde loven alwey causeles!
 [591] Who can a resoun fynde or wit in that?
 [592] Daunseth he murye that is myrtheles?
 [593] Who shulde recche of that is recheles?"
 [594] "Ye queke," seyde the goos, "ful wel and fayre!
 [595] There been mo sterres, God wot, than a payre!"
 [596] "Now fy, cherl!" quod the gentil tercelet,
 [597] "Out of the donghil cam that word ful right!
 [598] Thow canst nat seen which thyng is wel beset!
 [599] Thow farst by love as oules don by lyght:
 [600] The day hem blent, ful wel they se by nyght.
 [601] Thy kynde is of so low a wrechednesse
 [602] That what love is, thow canst nouther seen ne gesse."
 [603] Tho gan the kokkow putte hym forth in pres
 [604] For foul that eteth worm, and seyde blyve: --
 [605] "So I," quod he, "may have my make in pes,
 [606] I reche nat how longe that ye stryve.
 [607] Lat ech of hem be soleyn al here lyve!
 [608] This is my red, syn they may nat acorde;
 [609] This shorte lessoun nedeth nat recorde."
 [610] "Ye, have the glotoun fild inow his paunche,
 [611] Thanne are we wel!" seyde the merlioun;
 [612] "Thow mortherere of the heysoge on the braunche
 [613] That broughte the forth, thow reufullest glotoun!
 [614] Lyve thow soleyn, wormes corupcioun,
 [615] For no fors is of lak of thy nature!
 [616] Go, lewed be thow whil the world may dure!"
 [617] "Now pes," quod Nature, "I comaunde heer!
 [618] For I have herd al youre opynyoun,
 [619] And in effect yit be we nevere the neer.
 [620] But fynally, this is my conclusioun,
 [621] That she hireself shal han hir eleccioun
 [622] Of whom hire lest; whoso be wroth or blythe,
 [623] Hym that she cheest, he shal hire han as swithe.
 [624] "For sith it may not here discussed be
 [625] Who loveth hire best, as seyde the tercelet,
 [626] Thanne wol I don hire this favour, that she
 [627] Shal han right hym on whom hire herte is set,
 [628] And he hire that his herte hath on hire knet:
 [629] Thus juge I, Nature, for I may not lye;
 [630] To non estat I have non other ye.
 [631] "But as for counseyl for to chese a make,
 [632] If I were Resoun, thanne wolde I
 [633] Conseyle yow the royal tercel take,
 [634] As seyde the tercelet ful skylfully,
 [635] As for the gentilleste and most worthi,
 [636] Which I have wrought so wel to my plesaunce
 [637] That to yow hit oughte to been a suffisaunce."
 [638] With dredful vois the formel hire answerde,
 [639] "My rightful lady, goddesse of Nature!
 [640] Soth is that I am evere under youre yerde,
 [641] As is everich other creature,
 [642] And mot be youres whil my lyf may dure;
 [643] And therfore graunteth me my firste bone,
 [644] And myn entente I wol yow sey right sone."
 [645] "I graunte it yow," quod she; and right anon
 [646] This formel egle spak in this degre:
 [647] "Almyghty queen, unto this yer be don,
 [648] I axe respit for to avise me,
 [649] And after that to have my choys al fre.
 [650] This al and som that I wol speke and seye;
 [651] Ye gete no more, although ye do me deye!
 [652] "I wol nat serve Venus ne Cupide,
 [653] Forsothe as yit, by no manere weye."
 [654] "Now, syn it may non otherwise betyde,"
 [655] Quod Nature, "heere is no more to seye.
 [656] Thanne wolde I that these foules were aweye,
 [657] Ech with his make, for taryinge lengere heere!"
 [658] And seyde hem thus, as ye shul after here.
 [659] "To yow speke I, ye tercelets," quod Nature,
 [660] "Beth of good herte, and serveth alle thre.
 [661] A yer is nat so longe to endure,
 [662] And ech of yow peyne him in his degre
 [663] For to do wel, for, God wot, quyt is she
 [664] Fro yow this yer; what after so befalle,
 [665] This entremes is dressed for yow alle."
 [666] And whan this werk al brought was to an ende,
 [667] To every foul Nature yaf his make
 [668] By evene acord, and on here way they wende.
 [669] And, Lord, the blisse and joye that they make!
 [670] For ech of hem gan other in wynges take,
 [671] And with here nekkes ech gan other wynde,
 [672] Thankynge alwey the noble goddesse of kynde.
 [673] But fyrst were chosen foules for to synge,
 [674] As yer by yer was alwey hir usaunce
 [675] To synge a roundel at here departynge,
 [676] To don Nature honour and plesaunce.
 [677] The note, I trowe, imaked was in Fraunce,
 [678] The wordes were swiche as ye may heer fynde,
 [679] The nexte vers, as I now have in mynde.
 [680] "Now welcome, somer, with thy sonne softe,
 [681] That hast thes wintres wedres overshake,
 [682] And driven away the longe nyghtes blake!
 [683] "Saynt Valentyn, that art ful hy on-lofte,
 [684] Thus syngen smale foules for thy sake:
 [685] Now welcome, somer, with thy sonne softe,
 [686] That hast thes wintres wedres overshake.
 [687] "Wel han they cause for to gladen ofte,
 [688] Sith ech of hem recovered hath hys make,
 [689] Ful blissful mowe they synge when they wake:
 [690] Now welcome, somer, with thy sonne softe,
 [691] That hast thes wintres wedres overshake,
 [692] And driven away the longe nyghtes blake!"
 [693] And with the shoutyng, whan the song was do
 [694] That foules maden at here flyght awey,
 [695] I wok, and othere bokes tok me to,
 [696] To reede upon, and yit I rede alwey.
 [697] I hope, ywis, to rede so som day
 [698] That I shal mete som thyng for to fare
 [699] The bet, and thus to rede I nyl nat spare.

      
The Canterbury Tales and Other Works of Chaucer (Middle English), by Geoffery Chaucer, [14th cent.], at sacred-texts.com

 

Boece

 

Book 1

 [1] Allas! I wepynge, am constreyned to bygynnen
 [2] vers of sorwful matere, that whilom in florysschyng
 [3] studie made delitable ditees. For
 [4] lo, rendynge muses of poetes enditen to me
 [5] thynges to ben writen, and drery vers of wretchidnesse
 [6] weten my face with verray teres. At
 [7] the leeste, no drede ne myghte overcomen
 [8] tho muses, that thei ne were felawes, and folwyden
 [9] my wey (that is to seyn, whan
 [10] I was exiled). They that weren glorie of
 [11] my youthe, whilom weleful and grene,
 [12] conforten nowe the sorwful wyerdes of me, olde
 [13] man. For eelde is comyn unwarly uppon me,
 [14] hasted by the harmes that Y have, and sorwe
 [15] hath comandid his age to ben in me. Heeris hore
 [16] arn schad overtymeliche upon myn heved, and
 [17] the slakke skyn trembleth of myn emptid body.
 [18] Thilke deth of men is weleful that ne comyth
 [19] noght in yeeris that ben swete, but
 [20] cometh to wrecches often yclepid. Allas,
 [21] allas! With how deef an ere deth, cruwel,
 [22] turneth awey fro wrecches and nayteth to
 [23] closen wepynge eien. Whil Fortune, unfeithful,
 [24] favourede me with lyghte goodes, the sorwful
 [25] houre (that is to seyn, the deth) hadde almoost
 [26] dreynt myn heved. But now, for Fortune
 [27] cloudy hath chaunged hir deceyvable
 [28] chere to meward, myn unpietous lif draweth
 [29] along unagreable duellynges in me. O ye,
 [30] my frendes, what or wherto avaunted ye
 [31] me to be weleful? For he that hath fallen stood
 [32] noght in stedefast degre.
 [1] In the mene while that I, stille, recordede
 [2] these thynges with myself and merkid my weply
 [3] compleynte with office of poyntel, I saw,
 [4] stondynge aboven the heghte of myn heved, a
 [5] womman of ful greet reverence by semblaunt,
 [6] hir eien brennynge and cleer-seynge over the
 [7] comune myghte of men; with a lifly colour
 [8] and with swich vigour and strengthe that it ne
 [9] myghte nat ben emptid, al were it so
 [10] that sche was ful of so greet age that men
 [11] ne wolden nat trowen in no manere that
 [12] sche were of our elde. The stature of hire was
 [13] of a doutous jugement, for somtyme sche constreyned
 [14] and schronk hirselven lik to the comune
 [15] mesure of men, and somtyme it semede
 [16] that sche touchede the hevene with the heghte
 [17] of here heved. And whan sche hef hir heved
 [18] heyere, sche percede the selve hevene so that
 [19] the sighte of men lokynge was in ydel.
 [20] Hir clothes weren makid of right delye
 [21] thredes and subtil craft of perdurable matere;
 [22] the whiche clothes sche hadde woven with
 [23] hir owene handes, as I knew wel aftir by hirselve
 [24] declarynge and schewynge to me. The
 [25] beaute [of] the whiche clothes a derknesse of a
 [26] forleten and despised elde hadde duskid and
 [27] dirked, as it is wont to dirken besmokede
 [28] ymages. In the nethereste hem or bordure of
 [29] thise clothes, men redden ywoven in a
 [30] Grekissch P (that signifieth the lif actif);
 [31] and aboven that lettre, in the heieste
 [32] bordure, a Grekyssh T (that signifieth the lif
 [33] contemplatif). And bytwixen thise two lettres
 [34] ther were seyn degrees nobly ywrought in
 [35] manere of laddres, by whiche degrees men
 [36] myghten clymben fro the nethereste lettre to the
 [37] uppereste. Natheles handes of some men hadden
 [38] korve that cloth by violence and by
 [39] strengthe, and everich man of hem hadde
 [40] boren awey swiche peces as he myghte
 [41] geten. And forsothe this forseide womman bar
 [42] smale bokis in hir right hand, and in hir left hand
 [43] sche bar a ceptre.
 [44] And whan she saughe thise poetical muses
 [45] aprochen aboute my bed and enditynge wordes
 [46] to my wepynges, sche was a litil amoeved, and
 [47] glowede with cruel eighen. "Who," quat sche,
 [48] "hath suffred aprochen to this sike man thise
 [49] comune strompettis of swich a place that
 [50] men clepen the theatre? The whiche nat
 [51] oonly ne asswagen noght his sorwes with
 [52] none remedies, but thei wolden fedyn and
 [53] noryssen hym with sweete venym. Forsothe
 [54] thise ben tho that with thornes and prikkynges
 [55] of talentz or affeccions, whiche that ne bien
 [56] nothyng fructifyenge nor profitable, destroyen
 [57] the corn plentyvous of fruytes of resoun. For
 [58] thei holden hertes of men in usage, but thei
 [59] delyvre noght folk fro maladye. But yif ye
 [60] muses hadden withdrawen fro me with
 [61] youre flateries any unkunnynge and unprofitable
 [62] man, as men ben wont to fynde
 [63] comonly among the peple, I wolde wene suffre
 [64] the lasse grevosly; forwhi, in swych an unprofitable
 [65] man, myne ententes weren nothyng
 [66] endamaged. But ye withdrawen me this man,
 [67] that hath ben noryssed in the studies or scoles of
 [68] Eliaticis and Achademycis in Grece. But goth
 [69] now rather awey, ye mermaydenes, whiche
 [70] that ben swete til it be at the laste, and
 [71] suffreth this man to ben cured and heeled
 [72] by myne muses (that is to seyn, by noteful
 [73] sciences)."
 [74] And thus this companye of muses, iblamed,
 [75] casten wrothly the chere dounward to the erthe,
 [76] and, schewynge by rednesse hir schame, thei
 [77] passeden sorwfully the thresschefold. And I, of
 [78] whom the sighte, ploungid in teeres, was dirked
 [79] so that Y ne myghte noght knowen what
 [80] that womman was of so imperial auctorite,
 [81] I wax al abayssched and astoned, and caste
 [82] my syghte doun to the erthe, and bygan stille for
 [83] to abide what sche woolde doon aftirward. Tho
 [84] com sche ner and sette her doun uppon the
 [85] uttereste corner of my bed; and sche, byholdynge
 [86] my chere that was cast to the erthe
 [87] hevy and grevous of wepynge, compleynede
 [88] with thise wordis that I schal seyn the perturbacion thought.
 [1] "Allas! How the thought of this man, dreynt
 [2] in overthrowynge depnesse, dulleth and forleteth
 [3] his propre clernesse, myntynge to gon into
 [4] foreyne dirknesses as ofte as his anoyos
 [5] bysynes waxeth withoute mesure, that is
 [6] dryven with werldly wyndes. This man, that
 [7] whilom was fre, to whom the hevene was
 [8] opyn and knowen, and was wont to gon in
 [9] hevenliche pathes, and saughe the lyghtnesse
 [10] of the rede sonne, and saughe the
 [11] sterres of the coolde mone, and whiche
 [12] sterre in hevene useth wandrynge recourses
 [13] iflyt by diverse speeris -- this man, overcomere,
 [14] hadde comprehendid al this by nombre (of
 [15] acontynge in astronomye). And, over this, he
 [16] was wont to seken the causes whennes the sounynge
 [17] wyndes moeven and bysien the smothe
 [18] watir of the see; and what spirit turneth the
 [19] stable hevene; and why the sterre ariseth
 [20] out of the rede est, to fallen in the westrene
 [21] wawes; and what attemprith the lusty
 [22] houres of the firste somer sesoun, that highteth
 [23] and apparaileth the erthe with rosene
 [24] floures; and who maketh that plentyvous
 [25] autumpne in fulle [yere] fletith with hevy
 [26] grapes. And eek this man was wont to tellen
 [27] the diverse causes of nature that weren yhidd.
 [28] Allas! Now lyth he emptid of lyght of his
 [29] thoght, and his nekke is pressyd with hevy
 [30] cheynes, and bereth his chere enclyned
 [31] adoun for the grete weyghte, and is constreyned
 [32] to loken on the fool erthe!"
 [1] "But tyme is now," quod sche, "of medicyne
 [2] more than of compleynte." Forsothe thanne
 [3] sche, entendynge to meward with al the lookynge
 [4] of hir eien, seyde: "Art nat thou he,"
 [5] quod sche, "that whilom, norissched with my
 [6] melk and fostred with myne metes, were escaped
 [7] and comyn to corage of a parfit man?
 [8] Certes I yaf the swiche armures that, yif thou
 [9] thiselve ne haddest first cast hem awey,
 [10] they schulden han defended the in sekernesse
 [11] that mai nat ben overcomyn. Knowestow
 [12] me nat? Why arttow stille? Is it for
 [13] schame or for astonynge? It were me levere
 [14] that it were for schame, but it semeth me that
 [15] astonynge hath oppresside the." And whan sche
 [16] say me nat oonly stille but withouten office
 [17] of tunge and al dowmbe, sche leyde hir hand
 [18] sooftly uppon my breest and seide: "Here nys
 [19] no peril," quod sche; "he is fallen into a
 [20] litargye, whiche that is a comune seknesse
 [21] to hertes that been desceyved. He hath a
 [22] litil foryeten hymselve, but certes he schal
 [23] lightly remembren hymself yif so be that he
 [24] hath knowen me or now; and that he may so
 [25] doon, I will wipe a litil his eien that ben
 [26] dirked by the cloude of mortel thynges." Thise
 [27] woordes seide sche, and with the lappe of hir
 [28] garnement yplited in a frownce sche dryede
 [29] myn eien, that weren fulle of the wawes of wepynges.
 [1] Thus, whan that nyght was discussed and
 [2] chased awey, dirknesses forleten me, and to
 [3] myn eien repeyred ayen hir firste strengthe.
 [4] And ryght by ensaumple as the sonne is hydd
 [5] whan the sterres ben clustred (that is to seyn,
 [6] whan sterres ben covered with cloudes) by
 [7] a swyft wynd that hyghte Chorus, and that
 [8] the firmament stant dirked with wete plowngy
 [9] cloudes; and that the sterres nat apeeren
 [10] upon hevene, so that the nyght semeth
 [11] sprad upon erthe: yif thanne the wynde that
 [12] hyghte Boreas, isent out of the kaves of the
 [13] cuntre of Trace, betith this nyght (that is to
 [14] seyn, chaseth it awey) and discovereth the
 [15] closed day, thanne schyneth Phebus ischaken
 [16] with sodeyn light and smyteth with his beemes
 [17] in merveylynge eien.
 [1] Ryght so, and noon other wise, the cloudes
 [2] of sorwe dissolved and doon awey, I took hevene,
 [3] and resceyved mynde to knowe the face
 [4] of my fisycien; so that [whan] [that] I sette myne
 [5] eien on hir and fastned my lookynge, I byholde
 [6] my noryce, Philosophie, in whoos houses I
 [7] hadde conversed and hauntyd fro my youthe;
 [8] and I seide thus: "O thou maystresse of alle
 [9] vertues, descended from the sovereyne
 [10] sete, whi arttow comen into this solitarie
 [11] place of myn exil? Artow comen for thou
 [12] art maad coupable with me of false blames?"
 [13] "O," quod sche, "my nory, schulde I forsake
 [14] the now, and schulde I nat parten with the by
 [15] comune travaile the charge that thow hast
 [16] suffred for envye of my name? Certes it nere nat
 [17] leveful ne syttynge thyng to Philosophie to leten
 [18] withouten companye the weye of hym that is
 [19] innocent. Schulde I thanne redowte my
 [20] blame and agrysen as though ther were
 [21] byfallen a newe thyng? For trowestow that
 [22] Philosophie be now alderferst assailed in periles
 [23] by folk of wykkide maneris? Have I noght
 [24] stryven with ful greet strif in old tyme, byfor the
 [25] age of my Plato, ayens the foolhardynesse
 [26] of folye? And eek, the same Plato lyvynge, his
 [27] mayster Socrates desserved victorie of unryghtful
 [28] deth in my presence. The heritage of
 [29] the whiche Socrates (the heritage is to
 [30] seyn the doctryne of the whiche Socrates
 [31] in his opinyoun of felicite, that I clepe
 [32] welefulnesse) whan that the peple of Epycuriens
 [33] and Stoyciens and manye othere enforceden
 [34] hem to gon ravyssche everyche man for his part
 [35] (that is to seyn, that everych of hem wolde
 [36] drawen to the deffense of his opinyoun the
 [37] wordes of Socrates), they as in partye of hir
 [38] preye todrowen me, cryinge and debatyng
 [39] ther-ayens, and korven and torente my
 [40] clothes that I hadde woven with myn
 [41] handes; and with tho cloutes that thei
 [42] hadden arased out of my clothes thei wenten
 [43] awey wenynge that I hadde gon with hem every
 [44] del. In whiche Epycuriens and Stoyciens for as
 [45] myche as ther semede some traces or steppes of
 [46] myn abyte, the folie of men wenynge tho
 [47] Epycuryens and Stoyciens my familiers pervertede
 [48] some thurw the errour of the wikkide
 [49] or unkunnynge multitude of hem.
 [50] (This is to seyn, that for they semeden
 [51] philosophres thei weren pursuyed to the
 [52] deth and slayn.)
 [53] "So yif thou ne hast noght knowen the
 [54] exilynge of Anaxogore, ne the empoisonynge of
 [55] Socrates, ne the turmentz of Zeno, for they
 [56] weren straungiers, yit myghtestow han knowen
 [57] the Senecciens and the Canyos and the Soranas,
 [58] of whiche folk the renoun is neyther over-oold
 [59] ne unsollempne. The whiche men nothyng
 [60] elles ne broght hem to the deeth but oonly
 [61] for thei weren enformyd of myne maneris,
 [62] and semyde moost unlyk to the studies of
 [63] wykkid folk. And forthi thou oughtest noght to
 [64] wondren thoughe that I, in the byttere see of this
 [65] lif, be fordryven with tempestes blowynge
 [66] aboute, in the whiche this is my moste purpoos,
 [67] that is to seyn to displesen to wikkide men. Of
 [68] whiche schrewes al be the oost nevere so greet,
 [69] it es to despise; for it nys nat governyd with
 [70] no ledere (of resoun), but it es ravyssched
 [71] oonly by fleetynge errour folyly and
 [72] lyghtly; and yif they somtyme, makynge an oost
 [73] ayens us, assayle us as strengere, our ledere
 [74] draweth togidre his richesses into his tour, and
 [75] they ben ententyf aboute sarpleris or sachelis,
 [76] unprofitable for to taken. But we that ben heghe
 [77] above, syker fro alle tumolte and wood noyse,
 [78] warnstoryd and enclosed in swiche a palys
 [79] whider as that chaterynge or anoyinge
 [80] folye ne may nat atayne, we scorne swyche
 [81] ravyneres and henteres of fouleste thynges.
 [1] "Whoso it be that is cleer of vertue, sad and
 [2] wel ordynat of lyvynge, that hath put under
 [3] fote the proude wierdes, and loketh upryght
 [4] upon either fortune, he may holden his chere
 [5] undesconfited. The rage ne the manaces of the
 [6] see, commoevynge or chasynge upward hete
 [7] fro the botme, ne schal nat moeve that man.
 [8] Ne the unstable mowntaigne that highte Visevus,
 [9] that writhith out thurw his brokene
 [10] chemeneyes smokynge fieres, ne the wey of
 [11] thonderleit, that is wont to smyten hye
 [12] toures, ne schal nat moeve that man. Wharto
 [13] thanne, o wrecches, drede ye tirauntz that ben
 [14] wode and felenous withouten ony strengthe?
 [15] Hope aftir no thyng, ne drede nat; and so
 [16] schaltow desarmen the ire of thilke unmyghty
 [17] tiraunt. But whoso that, qwakynge, dredeth
 [18] or desireth thyng that nys noght stable of his
 [19] ryght, that man that so dooth hath cast
 [20] awey his scheeld, and is remoeved from
 [21] his place, and enlaceth hym in the cheyne
 [22] with whiche he mai ben drawen.
 [1] "Felistow," quod sche, "thise thynges, and
 [2] entren thei aughte in thy corage? Artow like
 [3] an asse to the harpe? Why wepistow, why
 [4] spillestow teeris? Yif thou abidest after helpe
 [5] of thi leche, the byhoveth discovre thy
 [6] wownde."
 [7] Tho I, that hadde gaderyd strengthe in my
 [8] corage, answeride and seide: "And nedeth it
 [9] yit," quod I, "of rehersynge or of ammonicioun?
 [10] And scheweth it nat ynoghe by
 [11] hymselve the scharpnesse of Fortune, that
 [12] waxeth wood ayens me? Ne moeveth it nat
 [13] the to seen the face or the manere of this place?
 [14] Is this the librarye which that thou haddest
 [15] chosen for a ryght certein sege to the in myn
 [16] hous, there as thow disputedest ofte with me
 [17] of the sciences of thynges touchynge dyvinyte
 [18] and mankynde? Was thanne myn habit
 [19] swiche as it is now? Was my face or my
 [20] chere swyche as now whan I soghte with
 [21] the the secretis of nature, whan thow enformedest
 [22] my maneris and the resoun of al my
 [23] lif to the ensaumple of the ordre of hevene? Is
 [24] noght this the gerdouns that I referre to the, to
 [25] whom I have ben obeisaunt?
 [26] "Certes thou confermedest by the mouth of
 [27] Plato this sentence, that is to seyn that comune
 [28] thynges or comunalites weren blisful yif they
 [29] that hadden studied al fully to wysdom
 [30] governeden thilke thynges; or elles yif it so
 [31] befille that the governours of comunalites
 [32] studieden to geten wysdom. Thou seidest eek by
 [33] the mouth of the same Plato that it was a
 [34] necessarie cause wise men to taken and desire
 [35] the governance of comune thynges, for that the
 [36] governementz of cites, ilefte in the handes of
 [37] felonous turmentours citezeens, ne schulde
 [38] noght bryngen in pestilence ande destruccioun
 [39] to good folk. And therfore I, folwynge
 [40] thilke auctorite, desired to putten forth in
 [41] execucion and in acte of comune administracioun
 [42] thilk thynges that I hadde lernyd
 [43] of the among my secre restyng-whiles.
 [44] "Thow and God, that putte the in the
 [45] thoughtes of wise folk, ben knowynge with me
 [46] that nothyng ne brought me to maistrie or
 [47] dignyte but the comune studie of alle goodnesse.
 [48] And therof cometh it that bytwixen
 [49] wikkid folk and me han ben grevous
 [50] discordes, that ne myghte nat ben relessed
 [51] by preyeris; for this liberte hath the fredom
 [52] of conscience, that the wraththe of more myghty
 [53] folk hath alwey ben despised of me for savacioun
 [54] of right. How ofte have I resisted and withstonden
 [55] thilke man that highte Connigaste, that
 [56] made alwey assawtes ayens the propre fortunes
 [57] of pore feble folk! How ofte eek have I put of
 [58] or cast out hym Trygwille, provoste of the
 [59] kyngis hous, bothe of the wronges that he
 [60] hadde bygunne to doon, and ek fully
 [61] performed! How ofte have I covered and
 [62] defended by the auctorite of me put ayens perils
 [63] (that is to seyn, put myn auctorite in peril for)
 [64] the wrecche pore folk, that the covetise of
 [65] straungiers unpunyschid tormentyde alwey with
 [66] myseses and grevances out of nombre! Nevere
 [67] man ne drow me yit fro right to wrong. Whan
 [68] I say the fortunes and the richesses of the peple
 [69] of the provinces ben harmed or amenuced
 [70] outher be pryve ravynes or by comune
 [71] tributz or cariages, as sory was I as they
 [72] that suffriden the harm. (Glosa. Whan that
 [73] Theodoric, the kyng of Gothes, in a dere yeer,
 [74] hadde his gerneeris ful of corn, and comaundede
 [75] that no man schulde byen no coorn til
 [76] his corn were soold, and that at a grevous dere
 [77] prys, Boece withstood that ordenaunce and
 [78] overcome it, knowynge al this the kyng hymselve.
 [79] Coempcioun is to seyn comune
 [80] achat or beyinge togidre, that were establissed
 [81] upon the peple by swich a
 [82] manere imposicioun, as whoso boughte a
 [83] busschel corn, he most yyve the kyng the fyfte
 [84] part.) Textus. Whan it was in the sowre hungry
 [85] tyme, ther was establissed or cryed grevous and
 [86] unplitable coempcioun, that men sayen wel it
 [87] schulde gretly tormenten and endamagen al the
 [88] provynce of Campayne, I took stryf ayens the
 [89] provost of the pretorie for comune profit;
 [90] and, the kyng knowynge of it, Y overcom
 [91] it, so that the coempcioun ne was nat axid
 [92] ne took effect. Paulyn, a conseiller of Rome, the
 [93] richesses of the whiche Paulyn the howndes of
 [94] the paleys (that is to seyn, the officeres) wolden
 [95] han devoured by hope and covetyse, yit drowe
 [96] I hym out of the jowes of hem that gapeden. And
 [97] for as moche as the peyne of the accusacioun
 [98] ajugid byforn ne schulde noght sodeynli henten
 [99] ne punyssche wrongfully Albyn, a
 [100] conseiller of Rome, I putte me ayens the
 [101] hates and indignacions of the accusour
 [102] Cyprian. Is it nat thanne inoghe isene that I have
 [103] purchaced grete discordes ayens myself? But I
 [104] oughte be the more asseured ayens alle othere
 [105] folk, that for the love of rightwisnesse I ne
 [106] reservede nevere nothyng to myselve to hemward
 [107] of the kyngis halle, by whiche I were the
 [108] more syker. But thurw tho same accusours accusynge
 [109] I am condempned.
 [110] "Of the nombre of whiche accusours,
 [111] oon Basilius, that whilom was chased out of
 [112] the kyngis servyse, is now compelled in accusynge
 [113] of my name for nede of foreyne moneye.
 [114] Also Opilion and Gaudencius han accused me,
 [115] al be it so that the justise regal hadde whilom
 [116] demed hem bothe to gon into exil for hir trecheries
 [117] and frawdes withouten nombre, to whiche
 [118] juggement they nolden nat obeye, but defendeden
 [119] hem by the sikernesse of holi
 [120] houses (that is to seyn, fledden into
 [121] seyntewarie); and whan this was aperceyved
 [122] to the kyng, he comandide that, but they
 [123] voydide the cite of Ravenne by certeyn day
 [124] assigned, that men scholde marken hem on the
 [125] forheved with an hoot iren and chasen hem out
 [126] of towne. Now what thyng semyth myghte ben
 [127] likned to this cruelte? For certes thilke same day
 [128] was resceyved the accusynge of myn name by
 [129] thilke same accusours. What may ben seyd
 [130] herto? Hath my studie and my kunnynge
 [131] disserved thus? Or elles the forseyde
 [132] dampnacioun of me -- made that hem ryghtfulle
 [133] accusours or no? Was noght Fortune
 [134] aschamed of this? Certes, al hadde noght
 [135] Fortune ben aschamed that innocence was
 [136] accused, yit oughte sche han hadde schame of
 [137] the fylthe of myn accusours.
 [138] "But axestow in somme of what gylt I am
 [139] accused? Men seyn that I wolde saven
 [140] the companye of the senatours. And
 [141] desirestow to heren in what manere? I am
 [142] accused that I schulde han disturbed the
 [143] accusour to beren lettres, by whiche he scholde
 [144] han maked the senatours gylty ayens the kynges
 [145] real majeste. O Maystresse, what demestow of
 [146] this? Schal I forsake this blame, that Y ne be no
 [147] schame to the? Certes I have wolde it (that is to
 [148] seyn, the savacioun of the senat), ne I schal
 [149] nevere letten to wilne it. And that I
 [150] confesse and am aknowe; but the entente of
 [151] the accusour to ben distorbed schal cese.
 [152] For schal I clepe it thanne a felonye or a synne
 [153] that I have desired the savacioun of the ordre of
 [154] the senat? And certes yit hadde thilke same senat
 [155] don by me thurw hir decretz and hir jugementz
 [156] as thoughe it were a synne and a felonye (that
 [157] is to seyn, to wilne the savacioun of hem). But
 [158] folye, that lyeth alwey to hymselve, may noght
 [159] chaunge the merite of thynges, ne I trowe
 [160] nat by the jugement of Socrates that it were
 [161] leveful to me to hide the sothe ne assente
 [162] to lesynges.
 [163] "But certes, how so evere it be of this, I putte
 [164] it to gessen or prisen to the jugement of the and
 [165] of wys folk. Of whiche thyng al the ordenaunce
 [166] and the sothe, for as moche as folk that been to
 [167] comen aftir our dayes schullen knowen it, I have
 [168] put it in scripture and in remembraunce. For
 [169] touchynge the lettres falsly maked, by
 [170] whiche lettres I am accused to han hoped
 [171] the fredom of Rome, what aperteneth me
 [172] to speken therof? Of whiche lettres the fraude
 [173] hadde ben schewed apertely, yif I hadde had
 [174] liberte for to han used and ben at the confessioun
 [175] of myn accusours, the whiche thyng in
 [176] alle nedes hath greet strengthe. For what other
 [177] fredom mai men hopen? Certes I wolde that som
 [178] other fredom myghte ben hoped; I wolde
 [179] thanne han answeryd by the wordys of a
 [180] man that hyghte Canyus. For whan he was
 [181] accused by Gaius Cesar, Germaynes sone,
 [182] that he was knowynge and consentynge of a
 [183] conjuracioun ymaked ayens hym, this Canyus
 [184] answeride thus: `Yif I hadde wyst it, thou
 [185] haddest noght wyst it.'
 [186] "In whiche thyng sorwe hath noght so dullid
 [187] my wyt that I pleyne oonly that schrewed folk
 [188] apparailen felonyes ayens vertu; but I wondre
 [189] gretly how that thei may performe thynges
 [190] that thei han hoped for to doon. Forwhy to
 [191] wylne schrewydnesse -- that cometh peraventure
 [192] of our defaute; but it is lyk a monstre
 [193] and a merveyle how that, in the presente
 [194] sight of God, may ben acheved and performed
 [195] swiche thynges as every felonous man
 [196] hath conceyved in his thoght ayens innocentz.
 [197] For whiche thynge oon of thy familiers
 [198] noght unskilfully axed thus: `Yif God
 [199] is, whennes comen wikkide thyngis? And
 [200] yif God ne is, whennes comen gode
 [201] thynges?' But al hadde it ben leveful that
 [202] felonous folk, that now desiren the blood and
 [203] the deeth of alle gode men and ek of al the senat,
 [204] han wilned to gon destroyen me, whom they han
 [205] seyn alwey bataylen and defenden gode men
 [206] and eek al the senat, yit hadde I nought
 [207] disservyd of the faderes (that is to seyn, of
 [208] the senatours) that they schulden wilne my
 [209] destruccioun.
 [210] "Thow remembrest wel, as I gesse, that
 [211] whan I wolde doon or seyn any thyng,
 [212] thow thiselve alwey present reuledest me. [And]
 [213] [wel] [thow] [remembrest] at the cite of Verone,
 [214] whan that the kyng, gredy of comune slaughtre,
 [215] caste hym to transporten upon al the ordre of the
 [216] senat the gilt of his real majeste, of the whiche
 [217] gilt that Albyn was accused, with how gret
 [218] sykernesse of peril to me defended I al the senat!
 [219] Thow woost wel that I sey sooth, ne
 [220] I n' avawntede me nevere in preysynge
 [221] of myselve. For alwey whan any wyght
 [222] resceyveth precious renoun in avauntynge
 [223] hymselve of his werkes, he amenuseth the secre
 [224] of his conscience. But now thow mayst wel seen
 [225] to what eende I am comen for myn innocence;
 [226] I resceyve peyne of fals felonye for guerdoun of
 [227] verrai vertue. And what opene confessioun of
 [228] felonye hadde evere juges so accordaunt in
 [229] cruelte (that is to seyn, as myn accusynge
 [230] hath. that either errour of mannys wit, or
 [231] elles condicion of fortune, that is uncerteyn
 [232] to alle mortel folk, ne submyttede some of hem
 [233] (that is to seyn, that it ne enclynede som juge
 [234] to have pite or compassioun)? For althoughe I
 [235] hadde ben accused that I wolde brenne holi
 [236] houses and straungle preestis with wykkid
 [237] sweerd, or that I hadde greythed deth to alle
 [238] gode men, algates the sentence scholde han
 [239] punysshed me present, confessed or convict.
 [240] But now I am remuwed fro the cite of
 [241] Rome almest fyve hundred thowsand paas,
 [242] I am withoute deffense dampnyd to proscripcion
 [243] and to the deth for the studie and
 [244] bountes that I have doon to the senat. But, O,
 [245] wel ben thei wurthy of meryte (as who seith,
 [246] nay), ther myghte nevere yit noon of hem ben
 [247] convicte of swiche a blame as myn is. Of whiche
 [248] trespas myne accusours sayen ful wel the
 [249] dignete; the whiche dignyte, for thei
 [250] wolden derken it with medlynge of some
 [251] felonye, they bare me on hande and lieden
 [252] that I hadde pollut and defouled my conscience
 [253] with sacrilegie for covetise of dignyte. And
 [254] certes thou thiselve, that art plaunted in me,
 [255] chacedest out of the sege of my corage alle
 [256] covetise of mortel thynges, ne sacrilege ne
 [257] hadde no leve to han a place in me byforn
 [258] thyne eien. For thow droppiddest every day
 [259] in myn eris and in my thought thilke
 [260] comaundement of Pictagoras, that is to
 [261] seyn, men schal serven to God and noght
 [262] to goddes. Ne it was noght convenient ne no
 [263] nede to taken help of the fouleste spiritz -- I,
 [264] that thow hast ordeyned and set in swiche
 [265] excellence, that thou makedest me lyk to God.
 [266] And over this, the right clene secre chaumbre of
 [267] myn hous (that is to seyn, my wif), and the
 [268] companye of myne honeste freendes, and
 [269] my wyves fadir, as wel holi as worthy to
 [270] ben reverenced thurw his owene dedes,
 [271] defenden me fro alle suspecioun of swiche
 [272] blame. But O malice! For they that accusen me
 [273] taken of the, Philosophie, feith of so greet
 [274] blame, for they trowen that I have had affinyte
 [275] to malefice or enchauntement, bycause that I am
 [276] replenysshid and fulfild with thy techynges, and
 [277] enformed of thi maneris. And thus it suffiseth nat
 [278] oonly that thi reverence ne avayle me nat, but yif
 [279] that thow of thy free wil rather be
 [280] blemessched with myne offencioun.
 [281] "But certes, to the harmes that I have,
 [282] ther bytideth yit this encrees of harm, that the
 [283] gessynge and the jugement of moche folk ne
 [284] loken nothyng to the desertes of thynges, but
 [285] oonly to the aventure of fortune; and jugen
 [286] that oonly swiche thynges ben purveied of
 [287] God, whiche that temporel welefulnesse
 [288] commendeth. (Glose. As thus: that yif a
 [289] wyght have prosperite, he is a good man
 [290] and worthy to han that prosperite; and
 [291] whoso hath adversite, he is a wikkid
 [292] man, and God hath forsake hym, and he is
 [293] worthy to han that adversite. This is the
 [294] opinyoun of some folk.) Textus. And therof
 [295] cometh that good gessynge, first of alle thynge,
 [296] forsaketh wrecches. Certes it greveth me to
 [297] thynke ryght now the diverse sentences that the
 [298] peple seith of me. And thus moche I seie, that
 [299] the laste charge of contrarious fortune is
 [300] this: that whan eny blame is leid upon a
 [301] caytif, men wenen that he hath desservyd
 [302] that he suffreth. And I, that am put awey fro
 [303] gode men, and despoyled of dignytes, and
 [304] defouled of myn name by gessynge, have
 [305] suffride torment for my gode dedes. Certes me
 [306] semyth that I se the felonous covynes of wykkid
 [307] men habounden in joye and in gladnesse; and I
 [308] se that every lorel schapeth hym to fynde out
 [309] newe fraudes for to accuse good folk; and
 [310] I se that goode men [lien] overthrowen for
 [311] drede of my peril, and every luxurious
 [312] turmentour dar doon alle felonye unpunysschyd,
 [313] and ben excited therto by yiftes; and
 [314] innocentz ne ben noght oonly despoiled of
 [315] sikernesse, but of defense; and therfore me lyst manere:
 [1] "O thow makere of the wheel that bereth
 [2] the sterres, whiche that art festnyd to thi perdurable
 [3] chayer, and turnest the hevene with a
 [4] ravysschynge sweighe, and constreynest the
 [5] sterres to suffren thi lawe; so that the moone
 [6] somtyme, schynynge with hir fulle hornes metynge
 [7] with alle the beemes of the sonne hir
 [8] brothir, hideth the sterres that ben lasse; and
 [9] somtyme, whan the moone pale with hir
 [10] derke hornes aprocheth the sonne, leeseth
 [11] hir lyghtes; and that the eve sterre, Hesperus,
 [12] whiche that in the first tyme of the nyght
 [13] bryngeth forth hir colde arysynges, cometh eft
 [14] ayen hir used cours, and is pale by the morwe
 [15] at rysynge of the sonne, and is thanne clepid
 [16] Lucyfer! Thow restreynest the day by schortere
 [17] duellynge in the tyme of coold wynter that
 [18] maketh the leeves falle. Thow devydest the
 [19] swyfte tydes of the nyght, whan the hote
 [20] somer is comen. Thy myghte attempreth
 [21] the variauntz sesouns of the yer, so that
 [22] Zephirus, the debonere wynd, bryngeth ayen
 [23] in the first somer sesoun the leeves that the
 [24] wynd that hyghte Boreas hath reft awey in
 [25] autumpne (that is to seie, in the laste ende of
 [26] somer); and the seedes that the sterre that
 [27] highte Arcturus saugh ben waxen heye cornes
 [28] whan the sterre Syrius eschaufeth hem. Ther
 [29] nys no thyng unbounde from his olde lawe,
 [30] ne forleteth the werk of his propre estat.
 [31] "O thou governour, governynge alle
 [32] thynges by certein ende, whi refusestow oonly
 [33] to governe the werkes of men by duwe manere?
 [34] Why suffrestow that slydynge Fortune turneth
 [35] so grete enterchaungynges of thynges? So
 [36] that anoyous peyne, that scholde duweliche
 [37] punysche felons, punysscheth innocentz; and
 [38] folk of wikkide maneres sitten in heie chayeres;
 [39] and anoyinge folk treden, and that unrightfully,
 [40] on the nekkes of holi men; and
 [41] vertu, cleer and schynynge naturely, is
 [42] hidde in derke derknesses; and the rightful man
 [43] bereth the blame and the peyne of the feloun; ne
 [44] the forswerynge ne the fraude covered and
 [45] kembd with a false colour, ne anoieth nat to
 [46] schrewes? The whiche schrewes, whan hem list
 [47] to usen hir strengthe, they rejoyssen hem to
 [48] putten undir hem the sovereyne kynges, whiche
 [49] that peple withouten nombre dreden. O
 [50] thou, what so evere thou be that knyttest
 [51] alle boondes of thynges, loke on thise
 [52] wrecchide erthes. We men, that ben noght a foul
 [53] partie, but a fair partie of so greet a werk, we
 [54] ben turmented in this see of fortune. Thow
 [55] governour, withdraughe and restreyne the
 [56] ravysschynge flodes, and fastne and ferme thise
 [57] erthes stable with thilke boond by whiche thou
 [58] governest the hevene that is so large."
 [1] Whan I hadde with a contynuel sorwe
 [2] sobbyd or borken out thise thynges, sche, with
 [3] hir cheere pesible and nothyng amoeved with
 [4] my compleyntes, seide thus: "Whan I saugh
 [5] the," quod sche, "sorwful and wepynge, I
 [6] wiste anoon that thow were a wrecche and
 [7] exiled; but I wyste nevere how fer thyn exil
 [8] was yif thy tale ne hadde schewid it me. But
 [9] certes, al be thow fer fro thy cuntre, thou
 [10] n' art nat put out of it, but thow hast fayled
 [11] of thi weye and gon amys. And yif thou
 [12] hast levere for to wene that thow be put out
 [13] of thy cuntre, thanne hastow put out thyselve
 [14] rather than ony other wyght hath. For no
 [15] wyght but thyselve ne myghte nevere han doon
 [16] that to the. For yif thow remembre of what
 [17] cuntre thow art born, it nys nat governed by
 [18] emperoures, ne by governement of multitude,
 [19] as weren the cuntrees of hem of Atthenes;
 [20] but o lord and o kyng, and that is God, that
 [21] is lord of thi cuntre, whiche that rejoisseth
 [22] hym of the duellynge of his citezeens, and nat
 [23] for to putten hem in exil; of the whiche lord
 [24] it is a sovereyn fredom to ben governed by the
 [25] brydel of hym and obeye to his justice. Hastow
 [26] foryeten thilke ryghte oolde lawe of thi citee, in
 [27] the whiche cite it es ordeyned and establysschid
 [28] that what wyght that hath levere
 [29] founden therin his sete or his hous than
 [30] elleswhere, he may nat ben exiled by no
 [31] ryght fro that place? For whoso that is
 [32] contened inwith the palys and the clos of
 [33] thilke cite, ther nys no drede that he mai deserve
 [34] to ben exiled; but who that leteth the
 [35] wil for to enhabyten there, he forleteth also
 [36] to deserve to ben citezen of thilke cite. So that
 [37] I seie that the face of this place ne moeveth
 [38] me noght so mochel as thyn owene face, ne
 [39] I ne axe nat rather the walles of thy librarye,
 [40] apparayled and wrought with yvory
 [41] and with glas, than after the sete of thi
 [42] thought, in whiche I put noght whilom bookes,
 [43] but I putte that that maketh bokes wurthy
 [44] of prys or precyous, that is to seyn the sentence
 [45] of my bookes.
 [46] "And certeynly of thy dessertes bystowed in
 [47] comune good thow hast seyd soth, but after the
 [48] multitude of thy gode dedes thou hast seyd
 [49] fewe. And of the honestete or of the falsnesse
 [50] of thynges that ben opposed ayens
 [51] the, thow hast remembred thynges that ben
 [52] knowen to alle folk. And of the felonyes and
 [53] fraudes of thyn accusours, it semeth the have
 [54] touched it for sothe ryghtfully and schortly, al
 [55] myghten tho same thynges betere and more
 [56] plentevously ben couth in the mouth of the
 [57] peple that knoweth al this. Thow hast eek
 [58] blamed gretly and compleyned of the wrongdede
 [59] of the senat, and thow hast sorwyd
 [60] for my blame, and thow hast wepen for
 [61] the damage of thi renoun that is apayred;
 [62] and thi laste sorwe eschaufede ayens Fortune,
 [63] and compleyndest that guerdouns ne ben nat
 [64] eveneliche yolden to the dessertes of folk. And
 [65] in the lattre eende of thy wode muse, thow
 [66] preydest that thilke pees that governeth the
 [67] hevene schulde governe the erthe.
 [68] "But for that many [turbacions] of affeccions
 [69] han assailed the, and sorwe and ire and
 [70] wepynge todrawen the diversely, as thou
 [71] art now feble of thought, myghtyere remedies
 [72] ne schullen noght yit touchen the. For
 [73] wyche we wol usen somdel lyghtere medicynes,
 [74] so that thilke passiouns that ben waxen hard in
 [75] swellynge by perturbacions flowynge into thy
 [76] thought, mowen waxen esy and softe to resceyven
 [77] the strengthe of a more myghty and
 [78] more egre medicyne, by an esyere touchynge.
 [1] "Whan that the hevy sterre of the Cancre
 [2] eschaufeth by the bemes of Phebus (that is to
 [3] seyn, whan that Phebus the sonne is in the
 [4] sygne of the Cancre), whoso yeveth thanne
 [5] largely his seedes to the feeldes that refusen
 [6] to resceyven hem, lat hym gon, begiled of trust
 [7] that he hadde to his corn, to accornes of okes.
 [8] Yif thow wolt gadere vyolettes, ne go thow
 [9] nat to the purpre wode whan the feeld,
 [10] chirkynge, agryseth of cold by the felnesse
 [11] of the wynd that hyghte Aquilon. Yif thou
 [12] desirest or wolt usen grapes, ne seek thou nat
 [13] with a glotonos hand to streyne and presse the
 [14] stalkes of the vyne in the first somer sesoun;
 [15] for Bachus, the god of wyn, hath rather yyven
 [16] his yiftes to autumpne (the lattere ende of
 [17] somer). God tokneth and assigneth the tymes,
 [18] ablynge hem to hir propre offices, ne he ne suffreth
 [19] nat the stowndes whiche that hymself
 [20] hath devyded and constreyned to ben
 [21] imedled togidre. And forthy he that forleteth
 [22] certein ordenaunce of doynge by overthrowynge
 [23] wey, he hath no glad issue or ende of his
 [24] werkes.
 [1] "First wiltow suffre me to touche and assaye
 [2] th' estaat of thi thought by a fewe demaundes,
 [3] so that I may understande what be the manere
 [4] of thi curacioun?"
 [5] "Axe me," quod I, "at thi wille what thou
 [6] wolt, and I schal answere." Tho seyde sche
 [7] thus: "Whethir wenestow," quod sche, "that
 [8] this world be governed by foolyssche happes
 [9] and fortunows, or elles wenestow that ther
 [10] be inne it ony governement of resoun?"
 [11] "Certes," quod I, "I ne trowe nat in no
 [12] manere that so certeyn thynges schulden be
 [13] moeved by fortunows [folie]; but I woot wel
 [14] that God, makere and maister, is governour of
 [15] his werk, ne nevere nas yit day that myghte
 [16] putte me out of the sothnesse of that sentence."
 [17] "So it is," quod sche, "for the same thyng
 [18] songe thow a litil herebyforn, and bywayledest
 [19] and byweptest, that oonly men weren
 [20] put out of the cure of God; for of alle othere
 [21] thynges thou ne doutedest the nat that they
 [22] nere governed by resoun. But owgh! I wondre
 [23] gretly, certes, whi that thou art sik, syn that
 [24] thow art put in so holsome a sentence. But lat
 [25] us seken deppere; I conjecte that ther lakketh
 [26] Y not what. But sey me this: syn that thow
 [27] ne doutest noght that this world be governed
 [28] by God, with whiche governayles takestow
 [29] heede that it is governed?"
 [30] "Unnethes," quod I, "knowe I the sentence
 [31] of thy questioun, so that I ne may
 [32] nat yit answeren to thy demandes."
 [33] "I nas nat desseyved," quod sche, "that ther
 [34] ne faileth somwhat, by whiche the maladye of
 [35] perturbacion is crept into thi thought, so as
 [36] [by] the strengthe of the palys chynynge
 [37] [and] open. But sey me this: remembrestow
 [38] what is the ende of thynges, and whider that
 [39] the entencion of alle kende tendeth?"
 [40] "I have herd tolde it somtyme," quod I,
 [41] "but drerynesse hath dulled my memorie."
 [42] "Certes," quod sche, "thou wost wel whennes
 [43] that alle thynges bien comen and proceded?"
 [44] "I woot wel," quod I, and answerede that
 [45] God is bygynnynge of al.
 [46] "And how may this be," quod sche, "that,
 [47] syn thow knowest the bygynnynge of thynges,
 [48] that thow ne knowest nat what is the eende
 [49] of thynges? But swiche ben the customes
 [50] of perturbaciouns, and this power they han,
 [51] that they mai moeve a man from his place
 [52] (that is to seyn, fro the stabelnesse and perfeccion
 [53] of his knowynge); but certes, thei mai nat
 [54] al arrace hym, ne aliene hym in al. But I wolde
 [55] that thou woldest answere to this: Remembrestow
 [56] that thow art a man?"
 [57] Boece. "Whi schulde I nat remembren that?"
 [58] quod I.
 [59] Philosophie. "Maystow noght telle me
 [60] thanne," quod sche, "what thyng is a man?"
 [61] "Axestow me nat," quod I, "whethir
 [62] that I [woot wel that I] be a resonable mortel
 [63] beste? I woot wel, and I confesse wel that I am
 [64] it."
 [65] "Wystestow nevere yit that thow were ony
 [66] othir thyng?" quod sche.
 [67] "No," quod I.
 [68] "Now woot I," quod sche, "other cause of thi
 [69] maladye, and that ryght greet: thow hast
 [70] left for to knowen thyselve what thou art.
 [71] Thurw whiche I have pleynly fownde the
 [72] cause of thi maladye, or elles the entree of
 [73] recoverynge of thyn hele. For-why, for thow art
 [74] confunded with foryetynge of thiself, forthi
 [75] sorwestow that thow art exiled [and] [despoyled]
 [76] of thy propre goodes; and for thow ne woost
 [77] what is the eende of thynges, forthy demestow
 [78] that felonus and wikkide men ben myghty and
 [79] weleful; and for thow hast foryeten by
 [80] whiche governementz the werld is governed,
 [81] forthy weenestow that thise mutacions
 [82] of fortunes fleten withouten governour.
 [83] Thise ben grete causes, noght oonly to
 [84] maladye, but certes gret causes to deth. But I
 [85] thanke the auctour and the makere of hele, that
 [86] nature hath nat al forleten the. I have gret
 [87] noryssynges of thyn hele, and that is, the sothe
 [88] sentence of governance of the werld, that thou
 [89] bylevest that the governynge of it nis nat
 [90] subgit ne underput to the folye of thise
 [91] happes aventurous, but to the resoun of
 [92] God. And therfore doute the nothing, for of this
 [93] litel spark thine heet of liif schal shine.
 [94] "But for as moche as it is nat tyme yet of
 [95] fastere remedies, and the nature of thoughtes
 [96] desceyved is this, that, as ofte as they casten awey
 [97] sothe opynyouns, they clothen hem in false
 [98] opynyouns, of the whiche false opynyouns the
 [99] derknesse of perturbacion waxeth up, that
 [100] confowndeth the verray insyghte -- [that]
 [101] derknesse schal I assaie somwhat to maken
 [102] thynne and wayk by lyghte and meneliche
 [103] remedies; so that, aftir that the derknesse of
 [104] desceyvynge desyrynges is doon away, thow
 [105] mowe knowe the schynynge of verraye light.
 [1] "The sterres, covred with blake cloudes, ne
 [2] owen yeten adoun no lyght. Yif the truble
 [3] wynd that hyghte Auster, turnynge and walwynge
 [4] the see, edleth the heete (that is to
 [5] seyn, the boylynge up fro the bote), the
 [6] wawes, that whilo weren clere as glas and
 [7] lyk to the fayre bryghte dayes, withstande
 [8] anon the syghtes of en by the filthe and
 [9] ordure that is resolved. And the fleetynge
 [10] stree, that royleth doun diversely fro heye
 [11] ontaygnes, is areestid and resisted ofte
 [12] tye by the encountrynge of a stoon that is
 [13] departed and fallen fro soe roche. And forthy,
 [14] yif thou wolt loken and deen soth with cleer
 [15] lyght, and hoolden the weye with a ryght path,
 [16] weyve thow joie, dryf fro the drede, flee thow
 [17] hope, ne lat no sorwe aproche (that is to seyn,
 [18] lat non of thise foure passiouns overcoen the
 [19] or blenden the). For cloudy and derk is
 [20] thilke thoght, and bownde with bridelis,
 [21] where as thise thynges reignen."

      
The Canterbury Tales and Other Works of Chaucer (Middle English), by Geoffery Chaucer, [14th cent.], at sacred-texts.com

 

Boece

 

Book 2

 [1] Aftir this sche stynte a lytel; and after that
 [2] sche hadde ygadrede by atempre stillenesse myn
 [3] attencioun, she seyde thus (as who so myghte
 [4] seyn thus: after thise thynges sche stynte a
 [5] litil, and whan sche aperceyved by atempre
 [6] stillenesse that I was ententyf to herkne hire,
 [7] sche bygan to speke in this wyse): "If I," quod
 [8] sche, "have undirstonden and knowen outrely
 [9] the causes and the habyt of thy maladye,
 [10] thow languyssest and art desfeted for desir
 [11] and talent of thi rather fortune. Sche (that
 [12] ilke Fortune) oonly, that is chaunged, as
 [13] thow feynest, to the-ward, hath perverted the
 [14] cleernesse and the estat of thi corage. I
 [15] undirstonde the felefolde colours and desceytes
 [16] of thilke merveylous monstre Fortune and how
 [17] sche useth ful flaterynge famylarite with hem
 [18] that sche enforceth to bygyle, so longe, til that
 [19] sche confounde with unsuffrable sorwe
 [20] hem that sche hath left in despeer unpurveied.
 [21] And yif thou remembrest wel the
 [22] kende, the maneris, and the desserte of thilke
 [23] Fortune, thou shalt wel knowe that, as in hir,
 [24] thow nevere ne haddest ne hast ylost any fair
 [25] thyng. But, as I trowe, I schal nat greetly
 [26] travailen to don the remembren on thise
 [27] thynges. For thow were wont to hurtlen and
 [28] despysen hir with manly woordes whan sche
 [29] was blaundyssching and present, and
 [30] pursuydest hir with sentences that weren
 [31] drawen out of myn entre (that is to seyn,
 [32] of myn enformacioun). But no sodeyn mutacioun
 [33] ne bytideth noght withouten a manere
 [34] chaungynge of corages; and so is it byfallen
 [35] that thou art a litil departed fro the pees of thi
 [36] thought.
 [37] "But now is tyme that thou drynke and ataste
 [38] some softe and delitable thynges, so that whanne
 [39] thei ben entred withynne the, it mowe
 [40] maken wey to strengere drynkes of medycines.
 [41] Com now forth, therfore, the
 [42] suasyoun of swetnesse rethorien, whiche that
 [43] goth oonly the righte wey while sche forsaketh
 [44] nat myn estatutz. And with Rethorice com forth
 [45] Musice, a damoysele of our hous, that syngeth
 [46] now lightere moedes or prolacions, now
 [47] hevyere. What eyleth the, man? What is it that
 [48] hath cast the into moornynge and into wepynge?
 [49] I trow that thou hast seyn some newe thyng
 [50] and unkouth. Thou wenest that Fortune be
 [51] chaunged ayens the; but thow wenest
 [52] wrong (yif thou that wene): alway tho ben hir
 [53] maneres. Sche hath rather kept, as to the-ward,
 [54] hir propre stablenesse in the chaungynge of
 [55] hirself. Ryght swiche was sche whan sche
 [56] flateryd the and desseyved the with unleful
 [57] lykynges of false welefulnesse. Thou hast now
 [58] knowen and ateynt the doutous or double visage
 [59] of thilke blynde goddesse Fortune. Sche,
 [60] that yit covereth and wympleth hir to other
 [61] folk, hath schewyd hir every del to the. Yif
 [62] thou approvest here (and thynkest that sche is
 [63] good), use hir maneris and pleyne the nat; and
 [64] yif thou agrisest hir false trecherie, despise and
 [65] cast awey hir that pleyeth so harmfully. For sche,
 [66] that is now cause of so mochel sorwe to the,
 [67] sholde ben cause to the of pees and of joye. Sche
 [68] hath forsaken the, forsothe, the whiche that
 [69] nevere man mai ben siker that sche ne schal
 [70] forsaken hym. (Glose. But natheles some
 [71] bookes han the texte thus: forsothe sche
 [72] hath forsaken the, ne ther nys no man siker
 [73] that sche ne hath nat forsake.) Holdestow
 [74] thanne thilke welefulnesse precious to the, that
 [75] schal passen? And is present Fortune dereworth
 [76] to the, whiche that nys nat feithful for to duelle,
 [77] and whan sche goth awey that sche bryngeth a
 [78] wyght in sorwe? For syn she may nat ben
 [79] withholden at a mannys wille, [and] sche
 [80] maketh hym a wrecche whan sche departeth
 [81] fro hym, what other thyng is
 [82] flyttynge Fortune but a maner schewynge of
 [83] wrecchidnesse that is to comen? Ne it suffiseth
 [84] nat oonly to loken on thyng that is present
 [85] byforn the eien of a man; but wisdom loketh and
 [86] mesureth the ende of thynges. And the same
 [87] chaungynge from oon into another (that is to
 [88] seyn, fro adversite into prosperite) maketh that
 [89] the manaces of Fortune ne ben nat for to
 [90] dreden, ne the flaterynges of hir to ben
 [91] desired. Thus, at the laste, it byhoveth the
 [92] to suffren wyth evene wil in pacience al that is
 [93] doon inwith the floor of Fortune (that is to seyn,
 [94] in this world), syn thou hast oonys put thy nekke
 [95] undir the yok of hir. For yif thow wilt writen a
 [96] lawe of wendynge and of duellynge to Fortune,
 [97] whiche that thow hast chosen frely to ben thi
 [98] lady, artow nat wrongful in that, and makest
 [99] Fortune wroth and aspre by thyn
 [100] inpacience? And yit thow mayst nat
 [101] chaungen hir. Yif thou committest and
 [102] betakest thi seyles to the wynd, thow schalt ben
 [103] shoven, nat thider that thow woldest, but whider
 [104] that the wynd schouveth the. Yif thow castest thi
 [105] seedes in the feeldes, thou sholdest han in
 [106] mynde that the yeres ben amonges, outherwhile
 [107] plentevous and outherwhile bareyne. Thow hast
 [108] bytaken thiself to the governaunce of Fortune
 [109] and forthi it byhoveth the to ben obeisaunt
 [110] to the maneris of thi lady. Enforcestow the
 [111] to aresten or withholden the swyftnesse
 [112] and the sweighe of hir turnynge wheel? O thow
 [113] fool of alle mortel foolis! Yif Fortune bygan to
 [114] duelle stable, she cessede thanne to ben Fortune.
 [1] "Whan Fortune with a proud ryght hand hath
 [2] turned hir chaungynge stowndes, sche fareth
 [3] lyke the maneres of the boylynge Eurippe.
 [4] (Glosa. Eurippe is an arm of the see that ebbeth
 [5] and floweth, and somtyme the streem is on
 [6] o side, and somtyme on the tothir.) Textus.
 [7] She, cruel Fortune, casteth adoun kynges that
 [8] whilom weren ydradd; and sche, desceyvable,
 [9] enhaunceth up the humble chere of hym
 [10] that is discounfited. Ne sche neither heereth
 [11] ne rekketh of wrecchide wepynges; and
 [12] she is so hard that sche leygheth and scorneth
 [13] the wepynges of hem, the whiche sche hath
 [14] maked wepe with hir free wille. Thus sche
 [15] pleyeth, and thus sche prooeveth hir strengthes,
 [16] and scheweth a greet wonder to alle hir servauntz
 [17] yif that a wyght is seyn weleful and
 [18] overthrowe in an houre.
 [1] "Certes I wolde pleten with the a fewe
 [2] thynges, usynge the woordes of Fortune. Tak
 [3] hede now thyselve, yif that sche asketh ryght:
 [4] `O thow man, wherfore makestow me gyltyf by
 [5] thyne every dayes pleynynges? What wrong
 [6] have I don the? What godes have I byreft the
 [7] that weren thyne? Stryf or pleet with me byforn
 [8] what juge that thow wolt of the possessioun
 [9] of rychesses or of dignytees; and yif
 [10] thou maist schewen me that ever any mortel
 [11] man hath resceyved ony of tho thynges
 [12] to ben hise in propre, thanne wil I graunte freely
 [13] that thilke thynges weren thyne whiche that
 [14] thow axest.
 [15] "Whan that nature brought the foorth out of
 [16] thi modir wombe, I resceyved the nakid and
 [17] nedy of alle thynges, and I norissched the with
 [18] my richesses, and was redy and ententyf thurwe
 [19] my favour to sustene the -- and that maketh
 [20] the now inpacient ayens me; and I
 [21] envyrounde the with al the habundaunce
 [22] and schynynge of alle goodes that ben in my
 [23] ryght. Now it liketh me to withdrawe myn
 [24] hand. Thow hast had grace as he that hath
 [25] used of foreyne goodes; thow hast no ryght to
 [26] pleyne the, as though thou haddest outrely
 [27] forlorn alle thy thynges. Why pleynestow
 [28] thanne? I have doon the no wrong. Richesses,
 [29] honours, and swiche othere thinges ben of
 [30] my right. My servauntz knowen me for
 [31] hir lady; they comen with me, and departen
 [32] whan I wende. I dar wel affermen hardely
 [33] that, yif tho thynges of whiche thow pleynest
 [34] that thou hast forlorn [hem] hadden ben
 [35] thyne, thow ne haddest nat lorn hem. Schal
 [36] I thanne, oonly, be defended to usen my ryght?
 [37] "Certes it is leveful to the hevene to maken
 [38] clere dayes, and after that to coveren tho same
 [39] dayes with dirke nyghtes. The yeer hath
 [40] eek leve to apparaylen the visage of the
 [41] erthe, now with floures, and now with
 [42] fruyt, and to confownden hem somtyme with
 [43] reynes and with coldes. The see hath eek his
 [44] ryght to ben somtyme calm and blaundysschyng
 [45] with smothe watir, and somtyme to ben
 [46] horrible with wawes and with tempestes. But
 [47] the covetise of men, that mai nat be stawnched
 [48] -- schal it bynde me to ben stedfast, syn that
 [49] stidfastnesse is uncouth to my maneris?
 [50] Swiche is my strengthe, and this pley
 [51] I pleye continuely. I torne the whirlynge
 [52] wheel with the turnynge sercle; I am glad to
 [53] chaungen the loweste to the heyeste, and the
 [54] heyeste to the loweste. Worth up yif thow
 [55] wolt, so it be by this lawe, that thow ne holde
 [56] nat that I do the wroong, though thow descende
 [57] adown whan the resoun of my pley axeth it.
 [58] Wystestow nat how Cresus, kyng of Lydyens,
 [59] of whiche kyng Cirus was ful sore agast a
 [60] lytil byforn -- that this rewliche Cresus
 [61] was caught of Cirus and lad to the fyer to
 [62] ben brend; but that a rayn descendede down
 [63] fro hevene that rescowyde hym? And is it out
 [64] of thy mynde how that Paulus, consul of Rome,
 [65] whan he had taken the kyng of Percyens, weep
 [66] pitously for the captivyte of the selve kyng?
 [67] What other thynge bywaylen the cryinges of
 [68] tragedyes but oonly the dedes of Fortune, that
 [69] with an unwar strook overturneth the
 [70] realmes of greet nobleye? (Glose. Tragedye
 [71] is to seyn a dite of a prosperite for a
 [72] tyme, that endeth in wrecchidnesse.) Lernedest
 [73] nat thow in Greek whan thow were yong, that
 [74] in the entre or in the seler of Juppiter ther ben
 [75] cowched two tonnes, the toon is ful of good,
 [76] and the tother is ful of harm? What ryght
 [77] hastow to pleyne, yif thou hast taken more
 [78] plentevously of the gode side (that is to seyn,
 [79] of my richesses and prosperites)? And
 [80] what ek yif Y ne be nat al departed fro
 [81] the? What eek yif my mutabilite yeveth
 [82] the ryghtful cause of hope to han yit bettere
 [83] thynges? Natheles dismaye the nat in thi
 [84] thought; and thow that art put in the comune
 [85] realme of alle, desire nat to lyven by thyn oonly
 [86] propre ryght.
 [1] "Though Plente that is goddesse of rychesses
 [2] hielde adoun with ful horn, and withdraweth
 [3] nat hir hand, as many richesses as the
 [4] see torneth upward sandes whan it is moeved
 [5] with ravysshynge blastes, or elles as manye
 [6] rychesses as ther schynen bryghte sterres in
 [7] hevene on the sterry nyghtes; yit, for al that,
 [8] mankende nolde nat cese to wepe wrecchide
 [9] pleyntes. And al be it so that God resceyveth
 [10] gladly hir preiers, and yyveth hem, as
 [11] fool-large, moche gold, and apparayleth
 [12] coveytous folk with noble or cleer honours;
 [13] yit semeth hem haven igeten nothyng, but
 [14] alwey hir cruel ravyne, devourynge al that
 [15] they han geten, scheweth othere gapynges (that
 [16] is to seyn, gapyn and desiren yit after mo rychesses).
 [17] What brydles myghte withholden to
 [18] any certeyn ende the disordene covetise of
 [19] men, whan evere the rather that it fletith
 [20] in large yiftes, the more ay brenneth in
 [21] hem the thurst of havynge? Certes he that
 [22] qwakynge and dredful weneth hymselven
 [23] nedy, he ne lyveth nevermo ryche.
 [1] "Therfore, yif that Fortune spake with the
 [2] for hirself in this manere, forsothe thow ne
 [3] haddest noght what thou myghtest answere.
 [4] And yif thow hast any thyng wherwith thow
 [5] mayst rightfully defenden thi compleynte, it
 [6] behoveth the to schewen it, and I wol yyve
 [7] the space to tellen it."
 [8] "Serteynly," quod I thanne, "thise ben faire
 [9] thynges and enoynted with hony swetnesse
 [10] of Rethorik and Musike; and oonly
 [11] whil thei ben herd thei ben delycious, but
 [12] to wrecches is a deppere felyng of harm
 [13] (this is to seyn, that wrecches felen the harmes
 [14] that thei suffren more grevously than the remedies
 [15] or the delites of thise wordes mowen gladen
 [16] or conforten hem). So that, whanne thise
 [17] thynges stynten for to soune in eris, the sorwe
 [18] that es inset greveth the thought."
 [19] "Right so is it," quod sche. "For thise ne
 [20] ben yit none remedies of thy maladye, but
 [21] they ben a maner norisschynges of thi
 [22] sorwe, yit rebel ayen thi curacioun. For whan
 [23] that tyme is, I schal moeve and ajuste swiche
 [24] thynges that percen hemselve depe. But natheles
 [25] that thow schalt noght wilne to leten thiself
 [26] a wrecche, hastow foryeten the nowmbre
 [27] and the maner of thi welefulnesse? I holde
 [28] me stille how that the sovereyn men of the
 [29] cite token the in cure and in kepynge,
 [30] whan thow were orphelyn of fadir and of
 [31] modir, and were chose in affynite of
 [32] prynces of the cite; and thow bygonne rather
 [33] to ben leef and deere than for to been a
 [34] neyghebour, the whiche thyng is the moste
 [35] precyous kende of any propinquyte or alliaunce
 [36] that mai ben. Who is it that ne seide tho that
 [37] thow neere right weleful, with so gret a nobleye
 [38] of thi fadres-in-lawe, and with the chastete
 [39] of thy wyf, and with the oportunyte
 [40] and noblesse of thyne masculyn children
 [41] (that is to seyn, thy sones)? And over al this
 [42] me list to passen of comune thynges, how
 [43] thow haddest in thy youthe dignytees that
 [44] weren wernd to oolde men; but it deliteth
 [45] me to comen now to the synguler uphepynge
 [46] of thi welefulnesse. Yif any fruyt of mortel
 [47] thynges mai han any weyghte or pris of welefulnesse,
 [48] myghtestow evere forgeten, for any
 [49] charge of harm that myghte byfalle the, remembraunce
 [50] of thilke day that thow seye
 [51] thi two sones maked conseileris and iladde
 [52] togidre fro thyn hous under so greet assemble
 [53] of senatours and under the blithnesse of peple,
 [54] and whan thow saye hem set in the court in
 [55] hir chayeres of dignytes? Thow, rethorien or
 [56] pronouncere of kynges preysynges, desservedest
 [57] glorie of wit and of eloquence whan thow, syttynge
 [58] bytwixen thi two sones conseylers, in the
 [59] place that highte Circo, fulfildest the abydynge
 [60] of the multitude of peple that was
 [61] sprad abouten the with so large preysynge
 [62] and laude as men syngen in victories. Tho
 [63] yave thow woordes to Fortune, as I trowe, (that
 [64] is to seyn, tho feffedestow Fortune with glosynge
 [65] wordes and desceyvedest hir) whan sche
 [66] accoyede the and norysside the as hir owne
 [67] delices. Thow bare awey of Fortune a yifte
 [68] (that is to seye, swich guerdoun) that sche
 [69] nevere yaf to prive man. Wiltow therfore
 [70] leye a reknynge with Fortune? Sche hath
 [71] now twynkled first upon the with a wikkid
 [72] eye. If thow considere the nowmbre and the
 [73] maner of thy blisses and of thy sorwes, thow
 [74] mayst noght forsaken that thow nart yit blisful.
 [75] For yif thou therfore wenest thiself nat
 [76] weleful, for thynges that tho semeden joyeful
 [77] ben passed, ther nys nat why thow sholdest
 [78] wene thiself a wrecche; for thynges that semen
 [79] now sory passen also. Artow now comen
 [80] first, a sodeyn gest, into the schadowe or
 [81] tabernacle of this lif? Or trowestow that
 [82] any stedfastnesse be in mannes thynges, whan
 [83] ofte a swyft hour dissolveth the same man (that
 [84] is to seyn, whan the soule departeth fro the
 [85] body)? For although that zelde is ther any
 [86] feith that fortunous thynges wollen dwellen,
 [87] yet natheles the laste day of a mannes lif is
 [88] a maner deth to Fortune, and also to thilke
 [89] that hath dwelt. And therfore what wenestow
 [90] dar rekke, yif thow forleete hir in
 [91] deyinge, or elles that sche, Fortune, forleete awey?
 [1] "Whan Phebus, the sonne, bygynneth to
 [2] spreden his clernesse with rosene chariettes,
 [3] thanne the sterre, ydymmed, paleth hir white
 [4] cheeres by the flambes of the sonne that overcometh
 [5] the sterre lyght. (This to seyn, whan
 [6] the sonne is rysen, the day-sterre waxeth pale,
 [7] and leeseth hir lyght for the grete bryghtnesse
 [8] of the sonne.) Whan the wode waxeth rody
 [9] of rosene floures in the fyrst somer sesoun
 [10] thurw the breeth of the wynd Zephirus that
 [11] waxeth warm, yif the cloudy wynd Auster
 [12] blowe felliche, than goth awey the fairnesse
 [13] of thornes. Ofte the see is cleer and calm
 [14] without moevynge flodes, and ofte the horrible
 [15] wynd Aquylon moeveth boylynge tempestes,
 [16] and overwhelveth the see. Yif the forme
 [17] of this world is so zeeld stable, and yif it torneth
 [18] by so manye entrechaungynges, wiltow
 [19] thanne trusten in the tumblenge fortunes of
 [20] men? Wiltow trowen on flyttynge goodes?
 [21] It is certeyn and establissched by lawe perdurable,
 [22] that nothyng that is engendred nys
 [23] stedfast ne stable."
 [1] Thanne seide I thus: "O norysshe of alle vertues,
 [2] thou seist ful sooth; ne I mai noght forsake
 [3] the ryght swyfte cours of my prosperite
 [4] (that is to seyn, that prosperite ne be comen
 [5] to me wonder swyftli and sone); but this is a
 [6] thyng that greetly smerteth me whan it remembreth
 [7] me. For in alle adversites of fortune
 [8] the moost unzeely kynde of contrarious
 [9] fortune is to han ben weleful."
 [10] "But that thow," quod sche, "abyest thus
 [11] the torment of thi false opynioun, that
 [12] maistow nat ryghtfully blamen ne aretten to
 [13] thynges. (As who seith, for thow hast yit
 [14] manye habundances of thynges.) Textus. For
 [15] al be it so that the ydel name of aventuros
 [16] welefulnesse moeveth the now, it is leveful that
 [17] thow rekne with me of how many grete thynges
 [18] thow hast yit plente. And therfore yif that
 [19] thilke thyng that thow haddest for moost
 [20] precyous in al thy rychesse of fortune be
 [21] kept to the yit by the grace of God unwemmed
 [22] and undefouled, maistow thanne
 [23] pleyne ryghtfully upon the mescheef of Fortune,
 [24] syn thow hast yit thi beste thynges?
 [25] Certes yit lyveth in good poynt thilke precyous
 [26] honour of mankynde, Symacus, thi wyves fader,
 [27] whiche that is a man maked al of sapience and
 [28] of vertu, the whiche man thow woldest byen
 [29] redyly with the pris of thyn owene lif. He
 [30] bywayleth the wronges that men don to
 [31] the, and nat for hymself; for he lyveth in
 [32] sikernesse of anye sentences put ayens hym.
 [33] And yit lyveth thi wyf, that is atempre of wyt
 [34] and passynge othere wommen in clennesse of
 [35] chastete; and, for I wol closen schortly hir
 [36] bountes, sche is lyk to hir fadir. I telle the wel
 [37] that sche lyveth, loth of this lyf, and kepeth
 [38] to the oonly hir goost, and is al maat and overcomen
 [39] by wepynge and sorwe for desir of
 [40] the; in the whiche thyng oonly I moot
 [41] graunten that thi welefulnesse is amenused.
 [42] What schal I seyn eek of thi two sones conseylours,
 [43] of whiche, as of children of hir age,
 [44] ther shyneth the liknesse of the wit of hir fadir
 [45] or of hir eldefader! And syn the sovereyne
 [46] cure of al mortel folk is to saven hir owene
 [47] lyves, O how weleful artow, if thow knowe
 [48] thy goodes! For yit ben ther thynges dwelled
 [49] to the-ward that no man douteth that they
 [50] ne be more derworthe to the than thyn
 [51] owene lif. And forthy drye thi teeris, for
 [52] yit nys nat every fortune al hateful to theward,
 [53] ne overgreet tempest hath nat yit fallen
 [54] upon the, whan that thyne ancres clyven faste,
 [55] that neither wolen suffren the counfort of this
 [56] tyme present ne the hope of tyme comyng to
 [57] passen ne to faylen."
 [58] "And I preie," quod I, "that faste mote thei
 [59] halden; for, whiles that thei halden, how so
 [60] evere that thynges been, I shal wel fleetyn
 [61] forth and escapyn: but thou mayst wel seen
 [62] how grete apparailes and array that me lakketh,
 [63] that ben passed awey fro me."
 [64] "I have somwhat avaunced and forthred
 [65] the," quod sche, "yif that thow anoye nat, or
 [66] forthynke nat of al thy fortune. (As who seith,
 [67] I have somwhat conforted the, so that thou
 [68] tempeste the nat thus with al thy fortune, syn
 [69] thow hast yit thy beste thynges.) But I mai
 [70] nat suffren thi delices, that pleynest the so
 [71] wepynge and angwysschous for that ther
 [72] lakketh somwhat to thy welefulnesse. For what
 [73] man is so sad or of so parfite welefulnesse, that
 [74] he ne stryveth and pleyneth on some halfe
 [75] ayen the qualite of his estat? Forwhy ful anguysschous
 [76] thing is the condicioun of mannes
 [77] goodes; for eyther it cometh nat altogidre to
 [78] a wyght, or elles it ne last nat perpetuel. For
 [79] som man hath gret rychesse, but he is
 [80] aschamed of his ungentil lynage; and som
 [81] man is renomyd of noblesse of kynrede, but
 [82] he is enclosed in so greet angwyssche of nede
 [83] of thynges that hym were levere that he were
 [84] unknowe; and som man haboundeth bothe in
 [85] rychesse and noblesse, but yit he bewayleth his
 [86] chaste lyf, for he ne hath no wyf; and som man
 [87] is wel and zelily ymaried, but he hath no children,
 [88] and norissheth his rychesses to the eyres
 [89] of straunge folk; and som man is gladed
 [90] with children, but he wepeth ful sory for
 [91] the trespas of his sone or of his doughter.
 [92] And for this ther ne accordeth no wyght lyghtly
 [93] to the condicioun of his fortune; for alwey to
 [94] every man ther is in somwhat that, unassayed,
 [95] he ne woot nat, or elles he dredeth that he hath
 [96] assaied. And adde this also, that every weleful
 [97] man hath a ful delicaat feelynge; so that, but
 [98] yif alle thynges byfalle at his owene wil, for
 [99] he is inpacient or is nat used to have noon
 [100] adversite, anoon he is throwen adoun for
 [101] every litil thyng. And ful litel thynges ben
 [102] tho that withdrawen the somme or the perfeccioun
 [103] of blisfulnesse fro hem that been most
 [104] fortunat. How manye men trowestow wolde
 [105] demen hemself to ben almoste in hevene, yif
 [106] thei myghten atayne to the leste partye of the
 [107] remenaunt of thi fortune? This same place
 [108] that thow clepest exil is contre to hem that
 [109] enhabiten here, and forthi nothyng [is.
 [110] wrecchide but whan thou wenest it. (As
 [111] who seith, thow thiself ne no wyght elles
 [112] nis a wrecche but whanne he weneth hymself
 [113] a wrechche by reputacion of his corage.) And
 [114] ayenward, alle fortune is blisful to a man by
 [115] the aggreablete or by the egalyte of hym that
 [116] suffreth it. What man is that that is so weleful
 [117] that nolde chaunge his estat whan he hath lost
 [118] pacience? The swetnesse of mannes welefulnesse
 [119] is spraynd with many bitternesses;
 [120] the whiche welefulnesse although it seme
 [121] swete and joieful to hym that useth it, yit
 [122] mai it nat ben withholden that it ne goth awey
 [123] whan it wole. Thanne is it wele seene how
 [124] wrecchid is the blisfulnesse of mortel thynges,
 [125] that neyther it dureth perpetuel with hem that
 [126] every fortune resceyven agreablely or egaly, ne
 [127] it deliteth nat in al to hem that ben angwyssous.
 [128] "O ye mortel folk, what seeke ye thanne blisfulnesse
 [129] out of yourself whiche that is put
 [130] in yowrself? Errour and folie confoundeth
 [131] yow. I schal schewe the schortly the
 [132] poynt of soverayn blisfulnesse. Is there anythyng
 [133] more precyous to the than thiself? Thow
 [134] wolt answere, `nay.' Thanne, yif it so be that
 [135] thow art myghty over thyself (that is to seyn,
 [136] by tranquillite of thi soule), than hastow thyng
 [137] in thi powere that thow noldest nevere leesen,
 [138] ne Fortune may nat bynymen it the. And that
 [139] thow mayst knowe that blisfulnesse ne mai
 [140] nat standen in thynges that ben fortunous
 [141] and temporel, now undirstond and gadere
 [142] it togidre thus: yif blisfulnesse be the soverayn
 [143] good of nature that lyveth by resoun,
 [144] ne thilke thyng nys nat soverayn good that
 [145] may ben taken awey in any wise (for more
 [146] worthy thyng and more dygne is thilke thyng
 [147] that mai nat ben take awey); than scheweth
 [148] it wel that the unstablenesse of fortune may
 [149] nat atayne to resceyven verray blisfulnesse.
 [150] And yit more over, what man that this
 [151] towmblynge welefulnesse ledeth, eyther
 [152] he woot that it is chaungeable, or elles he woot
 [153] it nat. And yif he woot it nat, what blisful
 [154] fortune may ther ben in the blyndnesse of ignoraunce?
 [155] And yif he woot that it is chaungeable,
 [156] he mot alwey ben adrad that he ne lese
 [157] that thyng that he ne douteth nat but that he
 [158] may leesen it (as who seith he mot bien alwey
 [159] agast lest he lese that he woot wel he may
 [160] lese it); for whiche the contynuel drede that
 [161] he hath ne suffreth hym nat to ben weleful --
 [162] or elles yif he lese it he weneth to ben
 [163] despised and forleten. Certes eek that is a
 [164] ful litel good that is born with evene herte
 [165] whan it es lost (that is to seyn, that men do no
 [166] more force of the lost than of the havynge).
 [167] And for as moche as thow thiself art he to
 [168] whom it hath be [sewed] and proved by ful
 [169] many demonstracyons, as I woot wele that
 [170] the soules of men ne mowen nat deyen in
 [171] no wyse; and ek syn it es cleer and certeyn
 [172] that fortunous welefulnesse endeth by the deth
 [173] of the body; it mai nat be douted that, yif that
 [174] deth may take awey blisfulnesse, that al the
 [175] kynde of mortel thyng ne descendeth into
 [176] wrecchidnesse by the ende of the deth. And
 [177] syn we knowe wel that many a man hath
 [178] sought the fruyt of blysfulnesse, nat oonly with
 [179] suffrynge of deeth, but eek with suffrynge
 [180] of peynes and tormentz, how myghte
 [181] thanne this present lif make men blisful,
 [182] syn that whanne thilke selve lif es ended it
 [183] ne maketh folk no wrechches? 
 [1] "What maner man stable and war, that wol
 [2] fownden hym a perdurable seete, and ne wol
 [3] noght ben cast doun with the lowde blastes of
 [4] the wynd Eurus, and wole despise the see
 [5] manasynge with flodes; lat hym eschuwen to
 [6] bilde on the cop of the mountaigne, or in the
 [7] moyste sandes; for the felle wynd Auster tormenteth
 [8] the cop of the mountaigne with alle
 [9] hise strengthes, and the lause sandes refusen
 [10] to beren the hevy weyghte. And
 [11] forthi, yif thow wolt fleen the perilous
 [12] aventure (that is to seyn, of the werld) have
 [13] mynde certeynly to fycchen thin hous of a
 [14] myrie sete in a low stoon. For although the
 [15] wynd troublynge the see thondre with overthrowynges,
 [16] thou, that art put in quiete and
 [17] weleful by strengthe of thi palys, schalt leden
 [18] a cler age, scornynge the woodnesses and the
 [19] ires of the eyr.
 [1] "But for as mochel as the norisschynges of
 [2] my resouns descenden now into the, I trowe it
 [3] were tyme to usen a litel strengere medicynes.
 [4] Now undirstand heere; al were it so that the
 [5] yiftes of Fortune ne were noght brutel ne transitorie,
 [6] what is ther in hem that mai be thyn
 [7] in any tyme, or elles that it nys fowl, yif that
 [8] it be considered and lookyd parfitely? Richesses
 [9] ben they preciouse by the nature of hemself,
 [10] or elles by the nature of the? What is
 [11] most worth of rychesses? Is it nat gold or
 [12] myght of moneye assembled? Certes thilke
 [13] gold and thilke moneye schyneth and yeveth
 [14] bettre renoun to hem that dispenden it than
 [15] to thilke folk that mokeren it; for avaryce maketh
 [16] alwey mokereres to ben hated, and largesse
 [17] maketh folk cleer of renoun. For, syn that
 [18] swiche thyng as is transferred fro o man to an
 [19] othir ne may nat duellen with no man,
 [20] certes thanne is thilke moneye precyous
 [21] whan it is translated into other folk and
 [22] stynteth to ben had by usage of large yyvynge
 [23] of hym that hath yeven it. And also yif al the
 [24] moneye that is overal in the world were gadryd
 [25] toward o man, it scholde make alle othere men
 [26] to be nedy as of that. And certes a voys al hool
 [27] (that is to seyn, withouten amenusynge) fulfilleth
 [28] togydre the herynge of moche folk. But
 [29] certes your rychesses ne mowen noght
 [30] passen unto moche folk withouten amenusynge;
 [31] and whan they ben apassed, nedes
 [32] they maken hem pore that forgoon tho rychesses.
 [33] O streyte and nedy clepe I this richesse,
 [34] syn that many folk ne mai nat han it al, ne al
 [35] mai it nat comen to o man withoute povert
 [36] of alle othere folk. And the schynynge of
 [37] gemmes (that I clepe precyous stones) draweth
 [38] it nat the eighen of folk to hem-ward (that
 [39] is to seyn, for the beautes)? But certes, yif
 [40] ther were beaute or bountee in the schynynge
 [41] of stones, thilke clernesse is of the
 [42] stones hemselve, and nat of men; for whiche I
 [43] wondre gretly that men merveylen on swiche
 [44] thynges. Forwhi what thyng is it that, yif it
 [45] wanteth moevynge and joynture of soule and
 [46] body, that by right myghte semen a fair creature
 [47] to hym that hath a soule of resoun? For
 [48] al be it so that gemmes drawen to hemself a
 [49] litel of the laste beaute of the world thurw
 [50] the entente of hir creatour and thurw the
 [51] distinccioun of hemself, yit, for as mochel
 [52] as thei ben put under yowr excellence, thei ne
 [53] han nat desserved by no way that ye schulde
 [54] merveylen on hem. And the beaute of feeldes,
 [55] deliteth it nat mochel unto yow?"
 [56] Boece. "Why schulde it nat deliten us, syn
 [57] that it is a [fayr] porcioun of the ryght fair
 [58] werk (that is to seyn, of this worlde)? And
 [59] right so ben we gladed somtyme of the
 [60] face of the see whan it es cleer; and also
 [61] merveylen we on the hevene, and on the
 [62] sterres, and on the sonne, and on the moone."
 [63] Philosophie. "Aperteneth," quod sche, "any
 [64] of thilke thynges to the? Why darstow glorifye
 [65] the in the shynynge of any swiche thynges?
 [66] Artow distyngwed and embelysed by the
 [67] spryngynge floures of the first somer sesoun,
 [68] or swelleth thi plente in fruites of somer? Whi
 [69] artow ravyssched with idel joies? Why enbracest
 [70] thow straunge goodes as they weren
 [71] thyne? Fortune ne schal nevere maken that
 [72] swiche thynges ben thyne that nature of thynges
 [73] hath maked foreyne fro the. Soth is that, withouten
 [74] doute, the fruites of the erthe owen to
 [75] be to the noryssynge of beestis; and yif thow
 [76] wilt fulfille thyn nede after that it suffiseth to
 [77] nature, thanne is it no nede that thow seke
 [78] aftir the superfluyte of fortune. For [with]
 [79] fewe thynges and with ful litel thynges nature
 [80] halt hir apayed; and yif thow wolt
 [81] achoken the fulfillynge of nature with superfluytees,
 [82] certes thilke thynges that thow
 [83] wolt thresten or powren into nature schulle
 [84] ben unjoyeful to the, or elles anoyous. Wenestow
 [85] eek that it be a fair thyng to schyne with
 [86] diverse clothynge? Of whiche clothynge yif the
 [87] beaute be aggreable to loken uppon, I wol
 [88] merveylen on the nature of the matiere of
 [89] thilke clothes, or elles on the werkman that
 [90] wroughte hem. But also a long route of
 [91] meyne, maketh that a blisful man? The
 [92] whiche servantz yif thei ben vicyous of condyciouns,
 [93] it is a gret charge and a destruccioun
 [94] to the hous, and a gret enemy to the lord hymself;
 [95] and yif they ben gode men, how schal
 [96] straunge or foreyne goodnesse ben put in the
 [97] nowmbre of thi richesse? So that by alle thise
 [98] forseide thynges it es cleerly schewed, that nevere
 [99] oon of thilke thynges that thou acountedest
 [100] for thyne goodes nas nat thi good.
 [101] "In the whiche thynges yif ther be no
 [102] beaute to ben desired, why scholdestow ben sory
 [103] yif thou leese hem, or whi scholdestow rejoysen
 [104] the for to holden hem? For yif thei ben faire
 [105] of hir owene kynde, what aperteneth that to
 [106] the? For al so wel scholde they han ben fayre
 [107] by hemselve, though thei were departed fro
 [108] alle thyne rychesses. Forwhy fair ne precyous
 [109] were thei nat for that thei comen among
 [110] thi rychesses; but for they semeden fair
 [111] and precyous, therfore thou haddest levere
 [112] rekne hem among thi rychesses. But what
 [113] desirestow of Fortune with so greet a noyse
 [114] and with so greet [affraie]? I trowe thou seeke
 [115] to dryve awey nede with habundaunce of
 [116] thynges, but certes it turneth to you al in the
 [117] contrarie. Forwhy certes it nedeth of ful manye
 [118] helpynges to kepyn the diversite of precious
 [119] ostelementz; and sooth it es that of many
 [120] thynges han they nede, that many thynges
 [121] han; and ayenward of litel nedeth hem
 [122] that mesuren hir fille after the nede of kynde,
 [123] and nat after the oultrage of covetyse.
 [124] "Is it thanne so, that ye men ne han no propre
 [125] good iset in yow, for whiche ye mooten seke
 [126] outward your goodes in foreyne and subgit
 [127] thynges? So is thanne the condicion of thynges
 [128] turned up-so-doun, that a man, that is a devyne
 [129] beest be meryte of his resoun, thynketh
 [130] that hymself nys neyther fair ne noble but
 [131] yif it be thurw possessioun of ostelementz
 [132] that ne han no soules. And certes alle othere
 [133] thynges ben apayed of hir owene beautes, but ye
 [134] men that ben semlable to God by yowr
 [135] resonable thought, desiren to apparailen your
 [136] excellent kynde of the loweste thynges; ne ye
 [137] undirstanden nat how greet a wrong ye don to
 [138] your creatour. For he wolde that mankynde
 [139] were moost wurthy and noble of any
 [140] othere erthly thynges, and ye thresten
 [141] adoun yowre dignytes bynethen the loweste
 [142] thynges. For yif that al the good of every
 [143] thyng be more precyous than is thilke thyng
 [144] whos that the good es, syn ye demen that the
 [145] fowleste thynges ben your goodes, thanne
 [146] submitten ye and putten yourselven undir the
 [147] fouleste thynges by your estimacioun; and certes
 [148] this betydeth nat withouten your desert. For
 [149] certes swiche is the condicioun of alle mankynde,
 [150] that oonly whan it hath knowynge
 [151] of itself, thanne passeth it in noblesse alle
 [152] othere thynges; and whan it forletith the
 [153] knowynge of itself, thanne is it brought
 [154] bynethen alle beestes. Forwhi alle othere lyvynge
 [155] beestes han of kynde to knowe nat hemself;
 [156] but whan that men leeten the knowynge
 [157] of hemself, it cometh hem of vice. But
 [158] how broode scheweth the errour and the folie of
 [159] yow men, that wenen that anythyng mai
 [160] ben apparailed with straunge apparailementz!
 [161] But forsothe that mai nat be done.
 [162] For yif a wyght schyneth with thynges that
 [163] ben put to hym (as thus, yif thilke thynges
 [164] schynen with whiche a man is aparayled),
 [165] certes thilke thynges ben comended and preysed
 [166] with whiche he is apparayled; but natheles, the
 [167] thyng that is covered and wrapped under that
 [168] duelleth in his felthe.
 [169] "And I denye that thilke thyng be good
 [170] that anoyeth hym that hath it. Gabbe I of
 [171] this? Thow wolt sey `nay.' Sertes rychesses
 [172] han anoyed ful ofte hem that han tho rychesses,
 [173] syn that every wikkide schrewe -- and for his
 [174] wikkidnesse the more gredy aftir othir folkes
 [175] rychesses, wher so evere it be in ony place, be
 [176] it gold or precyous stones -- [weneth. hym
 [177] oonly most worthy that hath hem. Thow thanne,
 [178] that so bysy dredest now the swerd and the
 [179] spere, yif thou haddest entred in the path
 [180] of this lif a voyde weyfarynge man, thanne
 [181] woldestow syngen byfor the theef. (As
 [182] who seith, a pore man that bereth no rychesse
 [183] on hym by the weie may boldely synge byforn
 [184] theves, for he hath nat whereof to be robbed.)
 [185] O precyous and ryght cleer is the blisfulnesse of
 [186] mortel rychesses, that, whan thow hast geten it,
 [187] thanne hastow lorn thi sekernesse!
 [1] "Blisful was the firste age of men. They
 [2] heelden hem apayed with the metes that the
 [3] trewe feeldes broughten forth. They ne destroyeden
 [4] ne desseyvede nat hemself with outrage.
 [5] They weren wont lyghtly to slaken hir
 [6] hungir at even with accornes of ookes. They
 [7] ne coude nat medle the yift of Bachus to the
 [8] cleer hony (that is to seyn, they coude make
 [9] no pyement or clarree), ne they coude nat
 [10] medle the bryghte fleezes of the contre of
 [11] Seryens with the venym of Tyrie (this
 [12] to seyn, thei coude nat deyen white fleezes
 [13] of Syrien contre with the blood of a maner
 [14] schellefyssche that men fynden in Tirie, with
 [15] whiche blood men deyen purpre). They
 [16] slepen holsome slepes uppon the gras, and
 [17] dronken of the rennynge watres, and layen
 [18] undir the schadwes of the heye pyn-trees. Ne
 [19] no gest ne straunger ne karf yit the heye
 [20] see with oores or with schipes; ne thei ne
 [21] hadden seyn yit none newe stroondes to
 [22] leden marchandise into diverse contrees. Tho
 [23] weren the cruele claryouns ful hust and ful
 [24] stille. Ne blood ischad by egre hate ne hadde
 [25] nat deyed yit armures. For wherto or which
 [26] woodnesse of enemys wolde first moeven
 [27] armes whan thei seyen cruele wowndes, ne
 [28] none medes be of blood ischad? I wolde that
 [29] our tymes sholde torne ayen to the oolde
 [30] maneris! But the anguysschous love of
 [31] havynge brenneth in folk more cruely than
 [32] the fyer of the mountaigne of Ethna that ay
 [33] brenneth. Allas! What was he that first dalf
 [34] up the gobbettes or the weyghtes of gold covered
 [35] undir erthe and the precyous stones that
 [36] wolden han be hydd? He dalf up precious
 [37] periles. (That is to seyn, that he that hem
 [38] firsst up dalf, he dalf up a precious peril;
 [39] for-why, for the preciousnesse of swich
 [40] thyng hath many man ben in peril.)
 [1] "But what schal I seye of dignytes and of
 [2] powers, the whiche ye men, that neither
 [3] knowen verray dignyte ne verray powere,
 [4] areysen hem as heyghe as the hevene? The
 [5] whiche dignytees and poweres yif thei comen
 [6] to any wikkid man, thei doon as greet damages
 [7] and destrucciouns as dooth. the flaumbe
 [8] of the mountaigne Ethna whan the flaumbe
 [9] walweth up, ne no deluge ne doth so cruele
 [10] harmes. Certes the remembreth wel, as I
 [11] trowe, that thilke dignyte that men clepyn
 [12] the imperie of consulers, the whiche that
 [13] whilom was begynnynge of fredom, yowr eldres
 [14] coveyteden to han don awey that dignyte for
 [15] the pride of the consulers. And ryght for the
 [16] same pride yowr eldres byforn that tyme hadden
 [17] doon awey out of the cite of Rome the
 [18] kynges name (that is to seyn, thei nolden han
 [19] no lengere no kyng).
 [20] "But now, if so be that dignytees and poweris
 [21] ben yyven to gode men, the whiche
 [22] thyng is ful zelde, what aggreable thynges is
 [23] ther in tho dignytees or powers but oonly the
 [24] goodnesse of folk that usen hem? And therfore
 [25] it is thus that honour ne cometh nat to
 [26] vertu for cause of dygnite, but, ayenward, honour
 [27] cometh to dignyte for cause of vertu. But
 [28] whiche is thilke your derworthe power that is
 [29] so cleer and so requerable? O, ye erthliche
 [30] bestes, considere ye nat over whiche thyng
 [31] that it semeth that ye han power? Now yif
 [32] thou saye a mows among othere mysz that chalanged
 [33] to hymself-ward ryght and power over
 [34] alle othere mysz, how gret scorn woldestow han
 [35] of it! (Glosa. So fareth it by men [that the
 [36] wikkid men have power over the wikkid men;
 [37] that is to seye], the body hath power over the
 [38] body.) For yif thou looke wel upon the body of
 [39] a wyght, what thyng schaltow fynde more
 [40] freele than is mankynde; the whiche men
 [41] ful ofte ben slayn with bytynge of smale
 [42] flyes, or elles with the entrynge of crepynge
 [43] wormes into the pryvetees of mannes body?
 [44] But wher schal men fynden any man that mai
 [45] exercen or haunten any ryght upon another
 [46] man, but oonly on his body, or elles upon
 [47] thynges that ben lowere than the body, the
 [48] whiche I clepe fortunous possessiouns? Maystow
 [49] evere have any comaundement over a free
 [50] corage? Maystowe remuwen fro the estat
 [51] of his propre reste a thought that is
 [52] clyvynge togidre in hymself by stedfast resoun?
 [53] As whilom a tyraunt wende to confownde a fre
 [54] man of corage, and wende to constreyne hym by
 [55] torment to maken hym discoveren and accusen
 [56] folk that wisten of a conjuracioun (which I clepe
 [57] a confederacye) that was cast ayens this tyraunt;
 [58] but this fre man boot of his owene tonge, and
 [59] caste it in the visage of thilk wode tyraunt.
 [60] So that the tormentz that this tyraunt
 [61] wende to han maked matere of cruelte, this
 [62] wise man maked it matere of vertu. But what
 [63] thing is it that a man may doon to an other man,
 [64] that he ne may resceyven the same thyng of
 [65] other folk in hymself? (Or thus: what may a
 [66] man don to folk, that folk ne may don hym
 [67] the same?) I have herd told of Busyrides, that
 [68] was wont to sleen his gestes that herberweden
 [69] in his hous, and he was slayn hymself of
 [70] Ercules that was his gest. Regulus hadde
 [71] taken in bataile manye men of Affryke
 [72] and cast hem into feteres, but sone after he
 [73] most yyve hise handes to ben bownde with
 [74] the cheynes of hem that he hadde whilom
 [75] overcomen. Wenestow thanne that he be
 [76] myghty that hath no power to doon a thyng that
 [77] othere ne mai doon in hym that he doth in
 [78] othere?
 [79] "And yit moreover, yif it so were that
 [80] thise dygnytes or poweris hadden any
 [81] propre or naturel goodnesse in hemself,
 [82] nevere nolde they comen to schrewes. For
 [83] contrarious thynges ne ben nat wont to ben
 [84] ifelaschiped togydre. Nature refuseth that contrarious
 [85] thynges ben ijoygned. And so, as I am
 [86] in certeyn that ryght wykkyd folk han
 [87] dignytees ofte tyme, thanne scheweth it wel that
 [88] dignytees and poweres ne ben nat gode of
 [89] hir owene kynde, syn that they suffren
 [90] hemselve to cleven or joynen hem to
 [91] schrewes. And certes the same thyng mai I
 [92] most digneliche juggen and seyn of alle the
 [93] yiftes of Fortune that most plentevously comen
 [94] to schrewes. Of the whiche yiftes I trowe that it
 [95] oughte ben considered, that no man douteth that
 [96] he ne is strong in whom he seeth strengthe; and
 [97] in whom that swyftnesse is, sooth it is that he
 [98] is swyft; also musyke maketh mucisyens, and
 [99] phisyk maketh phisicyeens, and rethoryke,
 [100] rethoriens. Forwhy the nature of every
 [101] thyng maketh his proprete, ne it is nat
 [102] entremedlyd with the effectz of contrarious
 [103] thynges, and as of wil it chaseth out thynges that
 [104] to it ben contrarie. But certes rychesse mai nat
 [105] restreyne avarice unstaunched; ne power ne
 [106] maketh nat a man myghty over hymselve,
 [107] whiche that vicyous lustes holden destreyned
 [108] with cheynes that ne mowen nat ben
 [109] unbownden. And dignytees that ben yyven
 [110] to schrewide folk nat oonly ne maketh hem
 [111] nat digne, but it scheweth rather al opynly
 [112] that they been unworthy and undigne. And whi
 [113] is it thus? Certes for ye han joie to clepen
 [114] thynges with false names, that beren hem al in
 [115] the contrarie; the whiche names ben ful [ethe]
 [116] reproved by the effect of the same thynges; so
 [117] that thise ilke rychesses ne oughten nat by ryghte
 [118] to ben cleped rychesses, ne swyche power ne
 [119] aughte nat ben clepyd power, ne swiche
 [120] dignyte ne aughte nat ben clepyd dignyte.
 [121] And at the laste, I may conclude the same
 [122] thyng of alle the yyftes of Fortune, in whiche
 [123] ther nys nothyng to ben desired, ne that hath in
 [124] hymselve naturel bownte, as it es ful wel yseene.
 [125] For neither thei ne joygnen hem nat alwey to
 [126] gode men, ne maken hem alwey gode to whom
 [127] they been ijoyned.
 [1] "We han wel knowen how many grete harmes
 [2] and destrucciouns weren idoon by the emperour
 [3] Nero. He leet brennen the cite of Rome,
 [4] and made sleen the senatours; and he cruel
 [5] whilom sloughe his brothir, and he was maked
 [6] moyst with the blood of his modir (that is to
 [7] seyn, he leet sleen and slitten the body of his
 [8] modir to seen wher he was conceyved); and he
 [9] lookede on every halve uppon hir cold
 [10] deed body, ne no teer ne wette his face,
 [11] but he was so hardherted that he myghte
 [12] ben domesman or juge of hir dede beaute. And
 [13] natheles yit governed this Nero by septre alle
 [14] the peples that Phebus, the sonne, may seen,
 [15] comynge fro his uttreste arysynge til he hide
 [16] his bemes undir the wawes. (That is to seyn
 [17] he governede al the peples by ceptre imperial
 [18] that the sonne goth aboute from est to west.)
 [19] And ek this Nero governyde by ceptre alle
 [20] the peples that ben undir the colde sterres
 [21] that highten the septemtryones. (This is
 [22] to seyn he governede alle the peples that ben
 [23] under the partye of the north.) And eek Nero
 [24] governede alle the peples that the vyolent
 [25] wynd Nothus scorklith, and baketh the brennynge
 [26] sandes by his drye heete (that is to seyn,
 [27] al the peples in the south). But yit ne myghte
 [28] nat al his heie power torne the woodnesse of
 [29] this wikkid Nero? Allas! It is grevous fortune
 [30] as ofte as wikkid sweerd is joyned to
 [31] cruel venym (that is to seyn, venymows
 [32] cruelte to lordschipe)."
 [1] Thanne seyde I thus: "Thow woost wel thiselve
 [2] that the covetise of mortel thynges ne
 [3] hadde nevere lordschipe of me, but I have wel
 [4] desired matere of thynges to done (as who
 [5] seith, I desirede to have matiere of governaunce
 [6] over comunalites), for vertue stille sholde nat
 [7] elden (that is to seyn, that list that or he
 [8] waxe oold, his vertu, that lay now ful stille, ne
 [9] schulde nat perysshe unexercised in
 [10] governaunce of comune, for whiche men
 [11] myghten speken or wryten of his gode
 [12] governement)."
 [13] Philosophie. "For sothe," quod sche, "and
 [14] that is [o] thyng that mai drawen to governaunce
 [15] swiche hertes as ben worthy and noble of hir
 [16] nature, but natheles it may nat drawen or tollen
 [17] swiche hertes as ben ibrought to the ful perfeccioun
 [18] of vertue; that is to seyn, covetise of
 [19] glorie and renoun to han wel adminystred
 [20] the comune thynges, or doon gode desertes
 [21] to profyt of the comune. For see now
 [22] and considere how litel and how voyde of alle
 [23] prys is thylk glorye. Certeyn thyng es, as thou
 [24] hast leerned by the demonstracioun of astronomye,
 [25] that al the envyrounynge of the erthe
 [26] aboute ne halt but the resoun of a prykke at
 [27] regard of the gretnesse of hevene; that is to
 [28] seyn that, yif ther were maked comparysoun of
 [29] the erthe to the gretnesse of hevene, men
 [30] wolde juggen in al that the erthe ne heelde
 [31] no space. Of the whiche litel regioun of
 [32] this world, the ferthe partye is enhabited with
 [33] lyvynge beestes that we knowen, as thou hast
 [34] thyselve leerned by Tholome that proveth it.
 [35] And yif thow haddest withdrawen and abated
 [36] in thy thought fro thilke ferthe partie as moche
 [37] space as the see and the mareys contene and
 [38] overgoon, and as moche space as the regioun
 [39] of drowghte overstreccheth (that is to
 [40] seyn, sandes and desertes), wel unnethe
 [41] sholde ther duellen a ryght streyte place to the
 [42] habitacioun of men. And ye thanne, that ben
 [43] envyrouned and closed withynne the leeste
 [44] prykke of thilke prykke, thynken ye to manyfesten
 [45] or publisschen your renoun and doon
 [46] yowr name for to be born forth? But yowr
 [47] glorye that is so narwe and so streyt ithrungen
 [48] into so litel bowndes, how mochel conteneth it
 [49] in largesse and in greet doynge? And also
 [50] set this therto: that manye a nacioun, diverse
 [51] of tonge and of maneris and ek of resoun
 [52] of hir lyvynge, ben enhabited in the cloos
 [53] of thilke lytel habitacle; to the whiche nacyons,
 [54] what for difficulte of weyes, and what for diversite
 [55] of langages, and what for defaute of
 [56] unusage [of] entrecomunynge of marchandise,
 [57] nat oonly the names of synguler men ne may
 [58] nat strecchen, but eek the fame of citees ne
 [59] may nat strecchen. At the laste, certes, in
 [60] the tyme of Marcus Tulyus, as hymselve
 [61] writ in his book, that the renoun of the
 [62] comune of Rome ne hadde nat yit passid ne
 [63] clomben over the montaigne that highte Caucasus;
 [64] and yit was thilke tyme Rome wel waxen,
 [65] and greetly redouted of the Parthes and eek of
 [66] the othere folk enhabitynge aboute. Seestow
 [67] nat thanne how streyte and how compressid is
 [68] thilke glorie that ye travailen aboute to schewe
 [69] and to multeplye? May thanne the glorie
 [70] of a synguler Romeyn strecchen thider
 [71] as the fame of the name of Rome may nat
 [72] clymben ne passen? And ek seestow nat that the
 [73] maneris of diverse folk and ek hir lawes ben
 [74] discordaunt among hemselve, so that thilke
 [75] thyng that som men juggen worthy of preysynge,
 [76] other folk juggen that it is worthy of torment?
 [77] And therof comyth it that, though a
 [78] man delyte hym in preysynge of his renoun, he
 [79] ne mai nat in no wyse bryngen forthe ne
 [80] spreden his name to many manere peples.
 [81] And therfore every maner man aughte to
 [82] ben apayed of his glorie that is publysschid among
 [83] his owene neyghebours; and thilke noble renoun
 [84] schal ben restreyned withynne the boundes of
 [85] o manere folk.
 [86] "But how many a man, that was ful noble in
 [87] his tyme, hath the wrecchid and nedy foryetynge
 [88] of writeris put out of mynde and doon awey; al
 [89] be it so that, certes, thilke wrytynges
 [90] profiten litel, the whiche writynges long
 [91] and dirk eelde doth awey, bothe hem and
 [92] ek hir auctours! But yow men semeth to geten
 [93] yow a perdurablete, whan ye thynken that in
 [94] tyme comynge your fame schal lasten. But
 [95] natheles yif thow wolt maken comparysoun to
 [96] the endles spaces of eternyte, what thyng hastow
 [97] by whiche thow mayst rejoisen the of long
 [98] lastynge of thi name? For yif ther were makyd
 [99] comparysoun of the abydynge of a moment
 [100] to ten thowsand wynter, for as mochel as
 [101] bothe tho spaces ben endyd, [yit] hath the
 [102] moment som porcioun of it, although it litel be.
 [103] But natheles thilke selve nowmbre of yeeris, and
 [104] eek as many yeris as therto mai be multiplyed, ne
 [105] mai nat certes be comparysoned to the
 [106] perdurablete that is endlees; for of thinges that
 [107] han ende may ben maked comparysoun, but of
 [108] thynges that ben withouten ende to thynges that
 [109] han ende may be makid no comparysoun.
 [110] And forthi is it that, although renome, of as
 [111] longe tyme as evere the list to thynken,
 [112] were thought to the regard of eternyte, that is
 [113] unstaunchable and infynyt, it ne sholde nat only
 [114] semen litel, but pleynliche ryght noght.
 [115] "But ye men, certes, ne konne doon no thyng
 [116] aryght, but yif it be for the audience of peple and
 [117] for idel rumours; and ye forsaken the grete
 [118] worthynesse of conscience and of vertu, and ye
 [119] seeken yowr gerdouns of the smale wordes
 [120] of straunge folk. Have now here and
 [121] undirstand, in the lyghtnesse of swiche
 [122] pryde and veyne glorye, how a man scornede
 [123] festyvaly and myriely swich vanyte. Whilom ther
 [124] was a man that hadde [assaillede] with stryvynge
 [125] wordes another man, the whiche, nat for usage
 [126] of verray vertu but for proud veyn glorie, had
 [127] taken upon hym falsly the name of a philosophre.
 [128] This rather man that I spak of thoughte
 [129] he wolde assaie where he, thilke, were a
 [130] philosophre or no; that is to seyn, yif that
 [131] he wolde han suffride lyghtly in pacience
 [132] the wronges that weren doon unto hym. This
 [133] feynede philosophre took pacience a litel while;
 [134] and whan he hadde resceyved wordes of
 [135] outrage, he, as in stryvynge ayen and rejoysynge
 [136] of hymself, seide at the laste ryght thus: `undirstondistow
 [137] nat that I am a philosophre?' The
 [138] tother man answerede ayen ful bytyngely and
 [139] seyde: `I hadde wel undirstonden it yif thou
 [140] haddest holde thi tonge stille.'
 [141] "But what is it to thise noble worthy men
 [142] (for, certes, of swych folk speke I) that seken
 [143] glorie with vertue? What is it?" quod sche.
 [144] "What atteyneth fame to swiche folk, whan the
 [145] body is resolved by the deeth at the laste? For if
 [146] it so be that men dyen in all (that is to seyen,
 [147] body and soule), the whiche thing our reson
 [148] defendeth us to byleeven, thanne is ther no
 [149] glorie in no wyse; for what schulde thilke
 [150] glorie ben, whan he, of whom thilke glorie
 [151] is seyd to be, nys ryght naught in no wise?
 [152] And yif the soule, whiche that hath in itself
 [153] science of gode werkes, unbownden fro the
 [154] prysone of the erthe, weendeth frely to the
 [155] hevene, despiseth it nat thanne al erthly
 [156] ocupacioun; and [usynge] hevene rejoyseth that
 [157] it is exempt fro alle erthly thynges? (As who
 [158] seith, thanne rekketh the soule of no glorye of
 [159] renoun of this world.)
 [1] "Whoso that with overthrowynge thought
 [2] oonly seketh glorie of fame, and weneth that
 [3] it be sovereyn good, lat hym looke upon the
 [4] brode schewynge contrees of the hevene, and
 [5] upon the streyte sete of this erthe; and he schal
 [6] be asschamed of the encres of his name, that
 [7] mai nat fulfille the litel compas of the erthe.
 [8] O, what coveyten proude folk to lyften up hir
 [9] nekkes on idel in the dedly yok of this
 [10] world? For although that renoun ysprad,
 [11] passynge to ferne peples, goth by diverse
 [12] tonges; and although that greet houses or
 [13] kynredes shynen with cleer titles of honours;
 [14] yit natheles deth despiseth al heye glorie of
 [15] fame, and deth wrappeth togidre the heyghe
 [16] heved and the lowe, and maketh egal and
 [17] evene the heygheste to the loweste. Where
 [18] wonen now the bones of trewe Fabricius?
 [19] What is now Brutus or stierne Catoun? The
 [20] thynne fame yit lastynge of here idel names
 [21] is marked with a fewe lettres. But althoughe
 [22] that we han knowen the fayre wordes
 [23] of the fames of hem, it is nat yyven to knowen
 [24] hem that ben dede and consumpt. Liggeth
 [25] thanne stille, al outrely unknowable, ne fame
 [26] ne maketh yow nat knowe. And yif ye wene to
 [27] lyve the lengere for wynd of yowr mortel name
 [28] whan o cruel day schal ravyssche yow, than is
 [29] the seconde deth duellynge unto yow."
 [30] (Glose. The first deeth he clepeth here departynge
 [31] of the body and the soule, and
 [32] the seconde deth he clepeth as here the styntynge
 [33] of the renoun of fame.)
 [1] "But for as mochel as thow schalt nat
 [2] wenen," quod sche, "that I bere an untretable
 [3] batayle ayens Fortune, yit somtyme it byfalleth
 [4] that sche desceyvable desserveth to han ryght
 [5] good thank of men. And that is whan sche hirself
 [6] opneth, and whan sche discovereth hir
 [7] frownt and scheweth hir maneris. Peraventure
 [8] yit undirstandestow nat that I schal seie. It is
 [9] a wonder that I desire to telle, and forthi
 [10] unnethe may I unplyten my sentence with
 [11] wordes. For I deme that contrarious Fortune
 [12] profiteth more to men than Fortune debonayre.
 [13] For alwey, whan Fortune semeth debonayre,
 [14] thanne sche lieth, falsly byhetynge the
 [15] hope of welefulnesse; but forsothe contraryous
 [16] Fortune is alwey sothfast, whan sche scheweth
 [17] hirself unstable thurw hir chaungynge. The
 [18] amyable Fortune desceyveth folk; the contrarie
 [19] Fortune techeth. The amyable Fortune
 [20] byndeth with the beaute of false goodes
 [21] the hertes of folk that usen hem: the contrarye
 [22] Fortune unbyndeth hem by the knowynge
 [23] of freel welefulnesse. The amyable Fortune
 [24] maystow seen alwey wyndy and flowynge,
 [25] and evere mysknowynge of hirself; the contrarie
 [26] Fortune is atempre and restreyned and
 [27] wys thurw exercise of hir adversite. At the
 [28] laste, amyable Fortune with hir flaterynges
 [29] draweth myswandrynge men fro the sovereyne
 [30] good; the contrarious Fortune ledeth
 [31] ofte folk ayen to sothfast goodes, and
 [32] haleth hem ayen as with an hook. Wenestow
 [33] thanne that thow augghtest to leeten this a litel
 [34] thyng, that this aspre and horrible Fortune
 [35] hath discovered to the the thoughtes of thi
 [36] trewe freendes? Forwhy this ilke Fortune hath
 [37] departed and uncovered to the bothe the certein
 [38] visages and eek the doutous visages of thi
 [39] felawes. Whan she departed awey fro the,
 [40] she took awey hir freendes and lefte the
 [41] thyne freendes. Now whanne thow were
 [42] ryche and weleful, as the semede, with how
 [43] mochel woldestow han bought the fulle knowynge
 [44] of thys (that is to seyn, the knowynge of
 [45] thyne verray freendes)? Now pleyne the nat
 [46] thanne of rychesse ylorn, syn thow hast
 [47] fownden the moste precyous kynde of rychesses,
 [48] that is to seyn, thi verray freendes.
 [1] "That the world with stable feyth varieth
 [2] accordable chaungynges; that the contrarious
 [3] qualites of elementz holden among hemself
 [4] allyaunce perdurable; that Phebus, the sonne,
 [5] with his goldene chariet bryngeth forth the
 [6] rosene day; that the moone hath comaundement
 [7] over the nyghtes, whiche nyghtes Esperus,
 [8] the eve-sterre, hath brought; that the
 [9] see, gredy to flowen, constreyneth with a
 [10] certein eende his floodes, so that it is nat
 [11] leveful to strecche his brode termes or
 [12] bowndes uppon the erthes (that is to seyn, to
 [13] coveren al the erthe) -- al this accordaunce
 [14] [and] ordenaunce of thynges is bounde with
 [15] love, that governeth erthe and see, and hath also
 [16] comandement to the hevene. And yif this love
 [17] slakede the bridelis, alle thynges that now loven
 [18] hem togidres wolden make batayle contynuely,
 [19] and stryven to fordo the fassoun of this
 [20] world, the which they now leden in
 [21] accordable feith by fayre moevynges. This
 [22] love halt togidres peples joyned with an holy
 [23] boond, and knytteth sacrement of mariages of
 [24] chaste loves; and love enditeth lawes to trewe
 [25] felawes. O weleful were mankynde, yif thilke
 [26] love that governeth hevene governede yowr
 [27] corages."

      
The Canterbury Tales and Other Works of Chaucer (Middle English), by Geoffery Chaucer, [14th cent.], at sacred-texts.com

 

Boece

 

Book 3

 [1] By this sche hadde ended hir song, whan the
 [2] swetnesse of here dite hadde thurw-perced me,
 [3] that was desyrous of herknynge, and I astoned
 [4] hadde yit streyghte myn eres (that is to seyn, to
 [5] herkne the bet what sche wolde seye). So that
 [6] a litel herafter I seide thus: "O thow that art
 [7] sovereyne confort of angwyssous corages, so
 [8] thow hast remounted and norysshed me with
 [9] the weyghte of thi sentences and with delyt
 [10] of thy syngynge; so that I trowe nat
 [11] nowe that I be unparygal to the strokes of
 [12] Fortune (as who seith, I dar wel now suffren
 [13] alle the assautes of Fortune and wel defende
 [14] me fro hir). And tho remedies whiche that
 [15] thou seydest herbyforn that weren ryght
 [16] scharpe, nat oonly that I ne am nat agrisen of
 [17] hem now, but I, desiros of herynge, axe gretly
 [18] to heren tho remedies."
 [19] Thanne seyde sche thus: "That feeled I
 [20] ful wel," quod sche, "whan that thow ententyf
 [21] and stille ravysschedest my wordes,
 [22] and I abood til that thou haddest swich habite
 [23] of thi thought as thou hast now, or elles til that
 [24] I myself hadde maked to the the same habite,
 [25] whiche that is a more verray thyng. And certes
 [26] the remenant of thynges that ben yet to seie
 [27] ben swiche that first whan men tasten hem they
 [28] ben bytynge; but whan they ben resceyved
 [29] withynne a wyght, thanne ben thei swete.
 [30] But for thou seyst that thow art so desyrous
 [31] to herkne hem, with how greet brennynge
 [32] woldestow glowen, yif thow wistest whider I
 [33] wol leden the!"
 [34] "Whider is that?" quod I.
 [35] "To thilke verraye welefulnesse," quod sche,
 [36] "of whiche thyn herte dremeth. but forasmoche
 [37] as thi syghte is ocupyed and destourbed by
 [38] imagynacioun of erthly thynges, thow mayst
 [39] nat yit seen thilke selve welefulnesse."
 [40] "Do," quod I, "and schewe me what is
 [41] thilke verray welefulnesse, I preie the,
 [42] withoute taryinge."
 [43] "That wol I gladly do," quod sche, "for the
 [44] cause of the. But I wol first marken the by
 [45] woordes, and I wol enforcen me to enforme the,
 [46] thilke false cause of blisfulnesse that thou more
 [47] knowest; so that whanne thow hast fully byhoolden
 [48] thilke false goodes and torned thin
 [49] eighen to the tother syde, thow mowe
 [50] knowe the cleernesse of verray blisfulnesse.
 [1] "Whoso wole sowe a feld plentevous, let hym
 [2] first delyvren it of thornes, and kerve asondir
 [3] with his hook the bussches and the feern, so
 [4] that the corn may comen hevy of erys and of
 [5] greynes. Hony is the more swete, if mouthes
 [6] han first tasted savours that ben wykke. The
 [7] sterres schynen more aggreablely whan the
 [8] wynd Nothus leteth his plowngy blastes; and
 [9] aftir that Lucifer, the day-sterre, hath
 [10] chased awey the dirke nyght, the day the
 [11] fairere ledeth the rosene hors (of the
 [12] sonne). And ryght so thow, byhooldyng ferst the
 [13] false goodes, bygyn to withdrawe thy nekke
 [14] fro the yok (of erthely affeccions); and
 [15] afterward the verray goodes schullen entren into
 [16] thy corage."
 [1] Tho fastnede sche a litel the syghte of hir
 [2] eyen, and withdrowghe hir ryght as it were into
 [3] the streyte seete of here thought, and bygan to
 [4] speke ryght thus: "Alle the cures," quod sche,
 [5] "of mortel folk, whiche that travailen hem in
 [6] many manere studies, gon certes by diverse
 [7] weyes; but natheles thei enforcen hem alle to
 [8] comyn oonly to oon ende of blisfulnesse. And
 [9] blisfulnesse is swiche a good, that whoso
 [10] that hath geten it, he ne may over that
 [11] nothyng more desire. And this thyng forsothe
 [12] is the soverayn good that conteneth in
 [13] hymself alle maner goodes; to the whiche goode
 [14] if ther fayled any thyng, it myghte nat ben
 [15] sovereyn good, for thanne wer ther som good
 [16] out of thilke sovereyn good, that myghte ben
 [17] desired. Now is it cleer and certeyne thanne,
 [18] that blisfulnesse is a parfyt estat by the congregacioun
 [19] of alle goodes; the whiche blisfulnesse,
 [20] as I have seyd, alle mortel folk enforcen
 [21] hem to geten by diverse weyes.
 [22] Forwhy the covetise of verray good is naturely
 [23] iplauntyd in the hertes of men, but the myswandrynge
 [24] errour mysledeth hem into false
 [25] goodes. Of the whiche men, some of hem
 [26] wenen that sovereyn good be to lyven withoute
 [27] nede of any thyng, and travaylen hem to ben
 [28] habundaunt of rychesses. And some othere
 [29] men demen that sovereyn good be for to be
 [30] ryght digne of reverence, and enforcen
 [31] hem to ben reverenced among hir neyghbours
 [32] by the honours that thei han igeten. And
 [33] some folk ther ben that holden that ryght heye
 [34] power be sovereyn good, and enforcen hem for
 [35] to reignen or elles to joygnen hem to hem that
 [36] reignen. And it semeth to some other folk, that
 [37] noblesse of renoun be the sovereyn good, and
 [38] hasten hem to geten hem gloryouse name by the
 [39] artz of werre or of pees. And many folk
 [40] mesuren and gessen that the sovereyne
 [41] good be joye and gladnesse, and wenen
 [42] that it be ryght blisful thyng to plowngen hem
 [43] in voluptuous delyt. And ther ben folk that
 [44] entrechaungen the causes and the endes of
 [45] thyse forseyde goodes, as they that desiren
 [46] rychesses to han power and delitz, or elles they
 [47] desiren power for to have moneye or for cause
 [48] of renoun. In thise thynges and in swiche other
 [49] thynges is torned al the entencioun of desyrynges
 [50] and werkes of men; as thus:
 [51] noblesse and favour of peple, whiche that
 [52] yyveth to men, as it semeth hem, a maner
 [53] cleernesse of renoun; and wyf and children,
 [54] that men desiren for cause of delyt and myrynesse.
 [55] But forsothe freendes ne schulde nat ben
 [56] rekned among the goodes of fortune, but of
 [57] vertu, for it is a ful hooly maner thyng; alle
 [58] thise othere thinges forsothe ben taken for
 [59] cause of power or elles for cause of delyt.
 [60] Certes now am I redy to referren the
 [61] goodes of the body to thise forseide thynges
 [62] aboven; for it semeth that strengthe and gretnesse
 [63] of body yyven power and worthynesse,
 [64] and that beaute and swyftnesse yyven noblesse
 [65] and glorie of renoun; and heele of body semeth
 [66] yyven delyt. In alle thise thynges it semeth
 [67] oonly that blisfulnesse is desyred; forwhy thilk
 [68] thing that every man desireth moost over alle
 [69] thynges he demeth that it be the sovereyn
 [70] good; but I have diffyned that blisfulnesse
 [71] is the sovereyn good; for whiche every
 [72] wyght demeth that thilke estat that he desireth
 [73] over alle thynges, that it be blisfulnesse.
 [74] "Now hastow thanne byforn thyne eien almest
 [75] al the purposede forme of the welefulnesse
 [76] of mankynde: that is to seyn rychesses,
 [77] honours, power, glorie, and delitz. The whiche
 [78] delit oonly considered Epicurus, and juggid
 [79] and establissyde that delyt is the soverayn
 [80] good, for as moche as alle othere thynges,
 [81] as hym thoughte, byrefte awey joye and
 [82] myrthe from the herte. But I retorne ayen to
 [83] the studies of men, of whiche men the corage
 [84] alwey reherceth and seketh the sovereyne good,
 [85] al be it so that it be with a dyrkyd memorie;
 [86] but he not by whiche path, ryght as a dronke
 [87] man not nat by whiche path he may retourne
 [88] hom to his hous. Semeth it thanne that folk
 [89] foleyen and erren, that enforcen hem to
 [90] have nede of nothyng? Certes ther nys
 [91] noon other thyng that mai so wel performe
 [92] blisfulnesse, as an estat plentevous of alle godes,
 [93] that ne hath nede of noon other thyng, but
 [94] that it is suffisant of hymself unto hymself.
 [95] And foleyen swiche folk, thanne, that wenen
 [96] that thilk thyng that is ryght good, that it be
 [97] eek ryght worthy of honour and of reverence?
 [98] Certes, nay. For that thyng nis neither foul ne
 [99] worthy to ben despysed that wel neyghe al
 [100] the entencioun of mortel folk [travayleth.
 [101] for to geten it. And power, aughte nat that
 [102] ek to ben rekned amonge goodes? What elles?
 [103] For it nys nat to wene that thilke thyng that is
 [104] most worthy of alle thynges be feble and
 [105] withoute strengthe. And cleernesse of renoun,
 [106] aughte that to ben despysed? Certes ther may no
 [107] man forsake, that alle thyng that is right
 [108] excellent and noble, that it ne semeth to ben
 [109] ryght cleer and renomed. For certes it
 [110] nedeth nat to saie that blisfulnesse be
 [111] [n'] [angwyssous] ne drery, ne subgit to
 [112] grevaunces ne to sorwes; syn that in ryght litele
 [113] thynges folk seken to haven and to usen that may
 [114] delyten hem. Certes thise ben the thinges that
 [115] men wolen and desiren to geten, and for this
 [116] cause desiren they rychesses, dignytes, reignes,
 [117] glorie, and delices; for therby wenen they to
 [118] han suffysaunce, honour, power, renoun, and
 [119] gladnesse. Thanne is it good that men
 [120] seken thus, by so manye diverse studies; in
 [121] whiche desir it mai lyghtly be schewyd how
 [122] greet is the strengthe of nature. For how so that
 [123] men han diverse sentences and discordynge,
 [124] algates men accorden alle in lovynge the eende
 [125] of good.
 [1] "It liketh me to schewe by subtil soong, with
 [2] slakke and delytable sown of strenges, how
 [3] that Nature, myghty, enclyneth and flytteth the
 [4] governementz of thynges, and by whiche lawes
 [5] sche, purveiable, kepith the grete world; and
 [6] how sche, byndynge, restreyneth alle thynges
 [7] by a boond that may nat be unbownde. Al be
 [8] it so that the lyouns of the contre of Pene beren
 [9] the fayre chaynes, and taken metes of the
 [10] handes of folk that yeven it hem, and
 [11] dreden hir stourdy [maistre] of whiche thei
 [12] ben wont to suffre betynges; yif that hir horrible
 [13] mouthes ben bybled (that is to seyn, of
 [14] beestes devoured), hir corage of tyme passed,
 [15] that hath ben idel and rested, repeireth ayen,
 [16] and thei roren grevously, and remembren on
 [17] hir nature, and slaken hir nekkes from hir
 [18] cheynes unbownde; and hir mayster fyrst,
 [19] totorn with blody tooth, assaieth the wode
 [20] wratthes of hem (this to seyn, thei freten
 [21] hir maister). And the janglynge brid that
 [22] syngeth on the heghe braunches (that is to
 [23] seyn, in the wode), and after is enclosed in a
 [24] streyte cage, althoughe that the pleyinge bysynes
 [25] of men yeveth [hym] honyed drynkes and large
 [26] metes with swete studye, yit natheles yif thilke
 [27] bryd skippynge out of hir streyte cage seith the
 [28] agreables schadwes of the wodes, sche defouleth
 [29] with hir feet hir metes ischad, and seketh
 [30] mornynge oonly the wode, and twytereth
 [31] desyrynge the wode with hir swete voys.
 [32] The yerde of a tree, that is haled adoun by
 [33] myghty strengthe, boweth redily the crop
 [34] adown; but yif that the hand of hym that it bente
 [35] leet it goon ageyn, anoon the crop loketh upryght
 [36] to hevene. The sonne, Phebus, that falleth
 [37] at even in the westrene wawes, retorneth
 [38] ayen eftsones his cart, by a pryve path, there
 [39] as it is wont t' aryse. Alle thynges seken
 [40] ayen to hir propre cours, and alle thynges
 [41] rejoysen hem of hir retornynge ayen to
 [42] hir nature. Ne noon ordenaunce is bytaken to
 [43] thynges, but that that hath joyned the endynge
 [44] to the bygynnynge, and hath maked the cours
 [45] of itself stable (that it chaunge nat from his
 [46] propre kynde).
 [1] "Certes also ye men, that ben erthliche
 [2] beestes, dremen alwey your bygynnynge, althoughe
 [3] it be with a thynne ymaginacioun; and
 [4] by a maner thought, al be it nat clerly ne parfitely,
 [5] ye loken from afer to thilke verray fyn of
 [6] blisfulnesse. And therfore naturel entencioun
 [7] ledeth yow to thilke verray good, but many
 [8] maner errours mystorneth yow therfro. Considere
 [9] now yif that by thilke thynges by
 [10] whiche a man weneth to geten hym blisfulnesse,
 [11] yif that he mai comen to thilk ende
 [12] that he weneth to come by nature. For yif that
 [13] moneye, or honours, or thise othere forseyde
 [14] thynges, brynge to men swiche a thyng that no
 [15] good ne fayle hem ne semeth faile, certes
 [16] thanne wol I graunte that they ben maked blisful
 [17] by thilke thynges that thei han geten. But
 [18] yif so be that thilke thynges ne mowen nat performen
 [19] that they byheten, and that there
 [20] be defaute of manye goodis, scheweth it
 [21] nat thanne clerly that false beute of blysfulnesse
 [22] is knowen and ataynt in thilke thynges?
 [23] First and forward thow thiself, that haddest
 [24] haboundances of rychesses nat longe agoon, I
 [25] aske the yif that, in the habowndance of alle
 [26] thilke rychesses, thow were nevere angwysous
 [27] ne sory in thy corage of any wrong or grevance
 [28] that bytydde the on any side?"
 [29] "Certes," quod I, "it ne remembreth me
 [30] nat that evere I was so fre of my thought
 [31] that I ne was alwey in angwyse of somwhat."
 [33] "And was nat that," quod sche, "for that the
 [34] lakkide somwhat that thow noldest nat han
 [35] lakkid, or elles thou haddest that thow noldest
 [36] nat han had?"
 [37] "Ryght so is it," quod I.
 [38] "Than desiredest thow the presence of the
 [39] toon and the absence of the tothir?"
 [40] "I graunte wel," quod I.
 [41] "Forsothe," quod sche, "thanne nedeth
 [42] ther somwhat that every man desireth?"
 [43] "Yee, ther nedeth," quod I.
 [44] "Certes," quod sche, "and he that hath lak or
 [45] nede of aught nys nat in every wey suffisant to
 [46] hymself?"
 [47] "No," quod I.
 [48] "And thow," quod sche, "in al the plente of
 [49] thy richesses haddest thilke lakke of suffisaunce?"
 [51] "What elles?" quod I.
 [52] "Thanne mai nat richesses maken that a man
 [53] nys nedy, ne that he be suffisaunt to hymself;
 [54] and yit that was it that thei byhighten, as it
 [55] semeth. And eek certes I trow that this be
 [56] gretly to considere, that moneye ne hath nat in
 [57] his owene kynde that it ne mai ben bynomen
 [58] of hem that han it, maugre hem."
 [59] "I byknowe it wel," quod I.
 [60] "Whi sholdestow nat byknowen it,"
 [61] quod sche, "whan every day the strengere
 [62] folk bynymen it fro the feblere maugre hem?
 [63] For whennes comen elles alle thise [forense]
 [64] compleyntes or quereles of pledynges but
 [65] for that men axen ayen hir moneye that hath
 [66] ben bynomen hem by force or by gyle, and
 [67] alwey maugre hem?"
 [68] "Right so is it," quod I.
 [69] "Than," quod sche, "hath a man nede to
 [70] seken hym foreyne help by whiche he may
 [71] defenden his moneye?"
 [72] "Who mai seie nay?" quod I.
 [73] "Certes," quod sche, "and hym nedide noon
 [74] help yif he ne hadde no moneye that he myghte
 [75] leese."
 [76] "That is douteles," quod I.
 [77] "Than is this thyng torned into the contrarie,"
 [78] quod sche; "for rychesses, that men
 [79] wenen scholde maken suffisaunce, they
 [80] maken a man rather have nede of foreyne
 [81] help. Whiche is the maner or the gyse,"
 [82] quod sche, "that rychesse mai dryve awey
 [83] nede? Riche folk, mai they neyther han hungir
 [84] ne thurst? Thise riche men, may they fele no
 [85] cold on hir lymes in wynter? But thow wolt
 [86] answeren that ryche men han inoghe wherwith
 [87] thei mai staunchen hir hungir, and slaken hir
 [88] thurst, and don awey cold. In this wise mai
 [89] nede be conforted by richesses, but certes
 [90] nede ne mai nat al outrely be doon awey;
 [91] for thoughe this nede that is alwey gapynge
 [92] and gredy, be fulfild with richesses, and axe any
 [93] thyng, yit duelleth thanne a nede that myghte be
 [94] fulfild. I holde me stille and telle nat how that
 [95] litel thyng suffiseth to nature; but certes to
 [96] avarice inowghe ne suffiseth nothyng. For syn
 [97] that rychesse ne mai nat al doon awey nede, but
 [98] richesses maken nede, what mai it thanne be that
 [99] ye wenen that richesses mowen yyven yow
 [100] suffisaunce?
 [1] "Al weere it so that a riche coveytous man
 [2] hadde a ryver or a goter fletynge al of gold, yit
 [3] sholde it nevere staunchen his covetise; and
 [4] thoughe he hadde his nekke charged with precyous
 [5] stones of the Rede See, and thoughe he
 [6] do ere his feeldes plentevous with an hundred
 [7] oxen, nevere ne schal his bytynge bysynesse
 [8] forleeten hym whil he lyveth, ne the lyghte
 [9] richesses ne schal nat beren hym companye
 [10] whan he is deed.
 [1] "But dignytees, to whom thei ben comen,
 [2] make they hym honourable and reverent? Han
 [3] thei nat so gret strengthe that thei mai putten
 [4] vertus in the hertes of folk that usen the lordschipes
 [5] of hem, or elles may they don awey the
 [6] vices? Certes thei ben nat wont to don awey
 [7] wikkidnesse, but thei ben wont rather to
 [8] schewen wykkydnesse. And therof cometh it
 [9] that Y have right gret disdayn that dignytes
 [10] ben yyven ofte to wikkide men. For
 [11] which thyng Catullus clepid a consul of
 [12] Rome that hyghte Nonyus `postum' or `boch'
 [13] (as who seith, he clepid hym a congregacioun
 [14] of vices in his brest, as a postum is ful of corrupcioun),
 [15] al were this Nonyus set in chayere
 [16] of dygnite. Sestow nat thanne how grete
 [17] vylenye dignytes don to wikkide men? Certes
 [18] unworthynesse of wikkide men schulde ben the
 [19] lesse isene if thei neere renomed of none
 [20] honours. Certes thou thiself ne myghtest
 [21] nat ben broght, with as many perils as
 [22] thow myghtest suffren, that thow woldest beren
 [23] the magistrat with Decorat (that is to seyn,
 [24] that for no peril that myghte byfallen the by
 [25] offence of the kyng Theodorik, thou noldest nat
 [26] be felawe in governaunce with Decorat), whan
 [27] thow seye that he hadde wikkide corage of a
 [28] likerous schrewe and of an accusour. Ne I ne
 [29] mai nat for swiche honours juggen hem
 [30] worthy of reverence that I deme and holde
 [31] unworthy to han thilke same honours.
 [32] Now yif thow seie a man that were fulfild of
 [33] wysdom, certes thou ne myghtest nat deme
 [34] that he were unworthy to the honour or elles
 [35] to the wisdom of whiche he is fulfild?"
 [36] "No," quod I.
 [37] "Certes dignytees," quod sche, "aperteignen
 [38] properly to vertu, and vertu transporteth dignyte
 [39] anoon to thilke man to whiche sche
 [40] hirself is conjoigned. And for as moche as
 [41] honours of peple ne mai nat maken folk
 [42] digne of honour, it is wel seyn cleerly that thei
 [43] ne han no propre beaute of dignyte. And yet
 [44] men aughten taken more heede in this. For yif
 [45] a wykkyd wyght be in so mochel the fowlere
 [46] and the more outcast that he is despysed of
 [47] moost folk, so as dignyte ne mai nat maken
 [48] schrewes worthy of no reverence, the whiche
 [49] schrewes dignyte scheweth to moche folk;
 [50] than maketh dignyte schrewes rather so
 [51] much more despised than preysed, and
 [52] forsothe nat unpunyssched (that is for to seyn
 [53] that schrewes revengen hem ayenward uppon
 [54] dignytes), for thei yelden ayen to dignytees
 [55] as greet gerdoun, whan they byspotten and
 [56] defoulen dignytes with hir vylenye. And for as
 [57] mochel as thou now knowe that thilke verray
 [58] reverence ne mai nat comen by thise schadwy
 [59] transitorie dignytes, undirstond now thus:
 [60] yif that a man hadde used and had manye
 [61] maner dignytees of consules, and weere
 [62] comen peraventure among straunge nacions,
 [63] scholde thilke honour maken hym worschipful
 [64] and redouted of straunge folk? Certes yif
 [65] that honour of peple were a natureel yifte to
 [66] dignytes, it ne myghte nevere cesen nowhere
 [67] amonges no maner folk to don his office; right
 [68] as fyer in every contre ne stynteth nat to
 [69] eschaufen and to ben hoot. But for as
 [70] mochel as for to be holden honurable or
 [71] reverent ne cometh nat to folk of hir
 [72] propre strengthe of nature, but oonly of the false
 [73] opynyoun of folk (that is to seyn, that weenen
 [74] that dignytees maken folk digne of honour),
 [75] anoon therfore, whan that thei comen there as
 [76] folk ne knowen nat thilke dignytees, hir honours
 [77] vanysschen away, and that anoon. But that is
 [78] amonges straunge folk, maystow seyn. Ne
 [79] amonges hem ther thei weren born, ne
 [80] duren nat thilke dignytes alwey? Certes the
 [81] dignyte of the provostrye of Rome was
 [82] whilom a greet power; now nys it no thyng but
 [83] an idel name, and the rente of the senatorie a
 [84] greet charge; and yif a wyght whilom hadde the
 [85] office to taken heede to the vitayles of the peple,
 [86] as of corn and othere thynges, he was holden
 [87] amonges grete; but what thyng is now more
 [88] outcast than thilke provostrye? And, as I have
 [89] seyd a litel herebyforn, that thilke thyng
 [90] that hath no propre beute of hymself
 [91] resceyveth somtyme prys and schynynge,
 [92] and somtyme leeseth it, by the opinyoun of
 [93] usaunces. Now yif that dignytes thanne ne
 [94] mowen nat make folk digne of reverence, and if
 [95] that dignytees waxen foule of hir wil by the
 [96] filthe of schrewes, and yif dignytees leesen hir
 [97] schynynge by chaungynge of tymes, and yif thei
 [98] waxen fowle by estimacion of peple, what is it
 [99] that they han in hemself of beaute that
 [100] oughte ben desired? (As who seith noon;
 [101] thanne ne mowen they yeven no beute of
 [102] dignyte to noone othere.)
 [1] "Al be it so that the proude Nero, with al his
 [2] wode luxure, kembde hym and apparayled
 [3] hym with faire purpres of Tyrie and with white
 [4] peerles, algates yit throf he haatful to alle folk
 [5] (this is to seyn that, al was he byhated of alle
 [6] folk, yit this wikkide Nero hadde gret lordschipe),
 [7] and yaf whilom to the reverentz senatours
 [8] the unworschipful seetis of dignytees.
 [9] (Unworschipful seetes he clepeth here, for that
 [10] Nero, that was so wikkide, yaf tho dignytees.)
 [11] Who wolde thanne resonably
 [12] wenen that blisfulnesse were in swiche honours
 [13] as ben yyven by vycious schrewes?
 [1] "But regnes, and familiarites of kynges, mai
 [2] thei maken a man to ben myghti? How elles,
 [3] whan hir blisfulnesse dureth perpetuely? But
 [4] certes the olde age of tyme passed, and ek the
 [5] present tyme now, is ful of ensaumples how
 [6] that kynges han chaungyd into wrecchidnesse
 [7] out of hir welefulnesse. O, a noble thyng and
 [8] a cleer thyng is power, that is nat fownden
 [9] myghty to kepe itself! And yif that power
 [10] of remes be auctour and makere of blisfulnesse,
 [11] yif thilke power lakketh on any syde,
 [12] amenuseth it nat thilke blisfulnesse and bryngeth
 [13] in wrecchidnesse? But yit, al be it so that
 [14] the remes of mankynde strecchen broode, yit
 [15] moot ther nede ben moche folk over whiche
 [16] that every kyng ne hath no lordschipe ne
 [17] comaundement. And certes uppon thilke syde
 [18] that power fayleth, whiche that maketh folk blisful,
 [19] ryght on that same syde noun-power
 [20] entreth undirnethe, that maketh hem
 [21] wrecches. In this manere thanne moten
 [22] kynges han more porcioun of wrecchidnesse
 [23] than of welefulnesse. A tyraunt, that was kyng
 [24] of Sysile, that hadde assayed the peril of his
 [25] estat, schewede by simylitude the dredes of
 [26] remes by gastnesse of a swerd that heng over
 [27] the heved of his familyer. What thyng is
 [28] thanne this power, that mai nat done awey the
 [29] bytynges of bysynesse, ne eschewe the
 [30] prykkes of drede? And certes yit wolde
 [31] thei lyven in sykernesse, but thei may nat,
 [32] and yit they glorifien hem in hir power. Holdestow
 [33] thanne that thilke man be mighty, that
 [34] thow seest that he wolde doon that he may nat
 [35] done? And holdestow thanne hym a myghti
 [36] man, that hath envyrowned his sydes with men
 [37] of armes or sergeantz, and dredeth more hem
 [38] that he maketh agast thanne thei dreden hym,
 [39] and that is put in the handes of hise servauntz
 [40] for he scholde seme myghty? But of
 [41] familiers or servantz of kynges, what
 [42] scholde I telle the any thyng, syn that I myself
 [43] have schewyd the that rewmes hemself ben
 [44] ful of greet feblesse? The whiche famylieres,
 [45] certes, the real power of kynges, in hool estat
 [46] and in estaat abated, ful ofte throweth adoun.
 [47] Nero constreynede Senek, his familyer and his
 [48] mayster, to chesen on what deeth he wolde
 [49] deye. Antonyus comaundede that knyghtes
 [50] slowen with here swerdes Papynian (his
 [51] famylier) [whiche] that had ben long
 [52] tyme ful myghty amonges hem of the court.
 [53] And yet certes thei wolden bothe han renounced
 [54] hir power; of whiche two Senek enforcede
 [55] hym to yeven to Nero his richesses, and
 [56] also to han gon into solitarie exil. But whan the
 [57] grete weyghte (that is to seyn, of lordes power
 [58] or of fortune) draweth hem that schullen falle,
 [59] neither of hem ne myghte don that he
 [60] wolde. What thyng is thanne thilke powere,
 [61] that though men han it, yit thei ben agast;
 [62] and whanne thow woldest han it, thou nart nat
 [63] siker; and yif thou woldest forleeten it, thow
 [64] mayst nat eschuen it? But whethir swiche men
 [65] ben freendes at nede, as ben [consyled] by fortune
 [66] and nat be vertu? Certes swiche folk as
 [67] weleful fortune maketh frendes, contraryous
 [68] fortune maketh hem enemys. And what pestilence
 [69] is more myghty for to anoye a wyght
 [70] than a famylier enemy?
 [1] "Whoso wol ben myghti he moot daunten his
 [2] cruel corages, ne putte nat his nekke, overcomen,
 [3] undir the foule reynes of leccherie. For
 [4] al be it so that thi lordschipe strecche so fer
 [5] that the contre of Ynde quaketh at thy comaundementz
 [6] or at thi lawes, and that the laste
 [7] ile in the see that highte Tyle be thral to the,
 [8] yit yif thou maist nat putten awey thi foule
 [9] dirke desires, and dryven out fro the
 [10] wrecchide compleyntes, certes it nys no
 [11] power that thow hast.
 [1] "But glorie, how deceyvable and how foul is
 [2] it ofte! For which thyng nat unskilfully a tragedien
 [3] (that is to seyn, a makere of dytees that
 [4] highten tragedies) cride and seide: `O glorie,
 [5] glorie,' quod he, `thow nart nothyng elles to
 [6] thousandes of folk but a greet swellere of eres!'
 [7] For manye han had ful greet renoun by the
 [8] false opinyoun of the peple, and what thyng
 [9] mai ben thought foulere than swiche preysynge?
 [10] For thilke folk that ben preysed
 [11] falsly, they mote nedes han schame of hire
 [12] preysynges. And yif that folk han geten hem
 [13] thonk or preysynge by here dissertes, what
 [14] thyng hath thilke pris echid or encresed to the
 [15] conscience of wise folk, that mesuren hir good,
 [16] nat by the rumour of the peple, but by the
 [17] sothfastnesse of conscience? And yif it seme a
 [18] fair thyng a man to han encreced and sprad his
 [19] name, thanne folweth it that it is demed to
 [20] ben a foul thyng yif it ne be yspradde and
 [21] encreced. But, as I seide a litil herebyforn,
 [22] that syn ther moot nedes ben many folk to
 [23] whiche folk the renoun of [o] man ne mai nat
 [24] comen, it byfalleth that he that thow wenest be
 [25] glorious and renomed semeth in the nexte
 [26] partie of the erthes to ben withouten glorie and
 [27] withouten renoun. And certes amonges thise
 [28] thynges I ne trowe nat that the pris and the
 [29] grace of the peple nys neyther worthi to
 [30] ben remembred, ne cometh of wys jugement,
 [31] ne is ferme perdurably.
 [32] "But now of this name of gentilesse, what
 [33] man is it that ne may wele seen how veyn and
 [34] how flyttynge a thyng it es? For yif the name
 [35] of gentilesse be referred to renoun and cleernesse
 [36] of lynage, thanne is gentil name but a
 [37] foreyne thyng (that is to seyn, to hem that gloryfien
 [38] hem of hir lynage.) For it semeth that
 [39] gentilesse be a maner preisynge that cometh
 [40] of the dessertes of auncestres; and yif
 [41] preisynge make gentilesse, thanne mote
 [42] they nedes ben gentil that been preysed. For
 [43] whiche thing it folweth that yif thou ne have no
 [44] gentilesse of thiself (that is to seyn, prys that
 [45] cometh of thy deserte), foreyne gentilesse ne
 [46] maketh the nat gentil. But certes yif ther be
 [47] ony good in gentilesse, I trowe it be al only
 [48] this, that it semeth as that a maner necessite
 [49] be imposed to gentil men for that thei ne
 [50] schulde nat owtrayen or forlynen fro the
 [51] vertus of hir noble kynrede.
 [1] "Alle the lynage of men that ben in erthe ben
 [2] of semblable byrthe. On allone is fadir of
 [3] thynges; on allone mynystreth alle thynges.
 [4] He yaf to the sonne his bemes, he yaf to the
 [5] moone hir hornes, he yaf the men to the erthe,
 [6] he yaf the sterres to the hevene. He encloseth
 [7] with membres the soules that comen from his
 [8] heye sete. Thanne comen alle mortel folk of
 [9] noble seed. Why noysen ye or bosten of
 [10] your eldres? For yif thow loke youre bygynnyng,
 [11] and God your auctour and yowr
 [12] makere, thanne nis ther none forlyned wyght or
 [13] ongentil, but if he noryssche his corage unto
 [14] vices and forlete his propre byrthe.
 [1] "But what schal I seye of delyces of body, of
 [2] whiche delices the desirynges ben ful of anguyssch,
 [3] and the fulfillynges of hem ben ful of
 [4] penance? How grete seknesses and how grete
 [5] sorwes unsuffrable, ryght as a maner fruyt
 [6] of wykkidnesse, ben thilke delices wont to
 [7] bryngen to the bodyes of folk that usen hem!
 [8] Of whiche delices I not what joie mai ben had
 [9] of here moevynge, but this woot I wel, that
 [10] whosoevere wol remembren hym of hise
 [11] luxures, he schal wel undirstonden that the
 [12] issues of delices ben sorweful and sorye. And
 [13] yif thilke delices mowen maken folk blisful,
 [14] thanne by the same cause moten thise beestis
 [15] ben clepid blisful, of whiche beestis al the entencioun
 [16] hasteth to fulfille here bodily jolyte.
 [17] And the gladnesse of wyf and children were an
 [18] honest thyng, but it hath ben seyd that it is
 [19] overmochel ayens kynde that children han
 [20] ben fownden tormentours to here fadris, I
 [21] not how manye; of whiche children how
 [22] bytynge is every condicioun, it nedeth nat to
 [23] tellen it the that hast er this tyme assayed it,
 [24] and art yit now angwysshous. In this approve
 [25] I the sentence of my disciple Euripidis, that
 [26] seide that he that hath no children is weleful
 [27] by infortune.
 [1] "Every delit hath this, that it angwisscheth
 [2] hem with prykkes that usen it. It resembleth
 [3] to thise flyenge flyes that we clepen ben; that,
 [4] aftir that the be hath sched hise agreable honyes,
 [5] he fleeth awey, and styngeth the hertes of hem
 [6] that ben ysmyte, with bytynge overlonge holdynge.
 [1] "Now is it no doute thanne that thise weyes
 [2] ne ben a maner mysledynges to blisfulnesse, ne
 [3] that they ne mowen nat leden folk thider as
 [4] thei byheeten to leden hem. But with how grete
 [5] harmes thise forseide weyes ben enlaced, I
 [6] schal schewe the shortly. Forwhy yif thou enforcest
 [7] the to assemble moneye, thow must byreven
 [8] hym his moneye that hath it; and yif
 [9] thow wolt schynen with dignytees, thow
 [10] must bysechen and supplyen hem that
 [11] yyven tho dignytees; and yif thow coveytest
 [12] be honour to gon byfore othere folk, thow
 [13] schalt defoule thiself thurw humblesse of axynge.
 [14] Yif thou desirest power, thow schalt, be
 [15] awaytes of thy subgetis, anoyously ben cast undir
 [16] by manye periles. Axestow glorye? Thow
 [17] schalt so bien distract by aspere thynges that
 [18] thow schalt forgon sykernesse. And yif thow
 [19] wolt leden thi lif in delyces, every wyght
 [20] schal despysen the and forleeten the, as
 [21] thow that art thral to thyng that is right
 [22] foul and brutyl (that is to seyn, servaunt to thi
 [23] body). Now is it thanne wel yseyn how litil
 [24] and how brotel possessioun thei coveyten that
 [25] putten the goodes of the body aboven hir
 [26] owene resoun. For maystow surmounten thise
 [27] olifauntes in gretnesse or weighte of body? Or
 [28] maistow ben strengere than the bole? Maystow
 [29] ben swyftere than the tigre? Byhoold the
 [30] spaces and the stablenesse and the swyft
 [31] cours of the hevene, and stynt somtyme to
 [32] wondren on foule thynges. The whiche hevene
 [33] certes nys nat rathere for thise thynges to ben
 [34] wondryd upon, than for the resoun by whiche it
 [35] is governed. But the schynynge of thi forme
 [36] (that is to seyn, the beute of thi body), how
 [37] swyftly passynge is it, and how transitorie!
 [38] "Certes it es more flyttynge than the mutabilite
 [39] of floures of the somer sesoun. For so as
 [40] Aristotle telleth, that if that men hadden
 [41] eyghen of a beeste that highte lynx, so that
 [42] the lokynge of folk myghte percen thurw the
 [43] thynges that withstonden it, whoso lokide
 [44] thanne in the entrayles of the body of Alcibiades,
 [45] that was ful fair in the superfice withoute,
 [46] it schulde seme ryght foul. And forthi yif
 [47] thow semest fair, thy nature ne maketh nat
 [48] that, but the deceyvaunce or the feblesse of the
 [49] eighen that loken. But preise the goodes of
 [50] the body as mochil as evere the lyst, so that
 [51] thow knowe algatis that, whatso it be (that
 [52] is to seyn, of the godes of the body) whiche that
 [53] thou wondrist uppon, mai ben destroied or dissolvid
 [54] by the heete of a fevere of thre dayes.
 [55] Of alle whiche forseide thynges Y mai reducen
 [56] this schortly in a somme: that thise worldly
 [57] goodes, whiche that ne mowen nat yeven that
 [58] they byheeten, ne ben nat parfite by the congregacioun
 [59] of alle goodis, that they ne ben
 [60] nat weyes ne pathes that bryngen men to
 [61] blisfulnesse, ne maken men to ben blisful.
 [1] "Allas! Whiche folie and whiche ignorance
 [2] mysledeth wandrynge wrecchis fro the path of
 [3] verray good! Certes ye ne seke no gold in
 [4] grene trees, ne ye gadere nat precyous stones in
 [5] the vynes, ne ye ne hiden nat yowre gynnes in
 [6] heye mountaignes to kacchen fyssche of whiche
 [7] ye mai maken riche festes. And if yow liketh
 [8] to hunte to roos, ye ne gon nat to the foordes
 [9] of the watir that highte Tyrene. And over
 [10] this, men knowen wel the krikes and the
 [11] cavernes of the see yhidde in the flodes,
 [12] and knowen ek whiche watir is moost plentevous
 [13] of white peerlis, and knowen whiche watir
 [14] haboundeth moost of reed purpre (that is to
 [15] seyn, of a maner schellefyssche with whiche men
 [16] deien purpre), and knowen whiche strondes
 [17] habounden most of tendre fysches, or of scharpe
 [18] fyssches that hyghten echynnys. But folk suffren
 [19] hemselve to ben so blynde, that hem
 [20] ne reccheth nat to knowe where thilke
 [21] goodes ben yhud whiche that thei coveyten,
 [22] but ploungen hem in erthe, and seken
 [23] there thilke good that surmounteth the hevene
 [24] that bereth the sterris. What preyere mai I
 [25] make, that be digne to the nyce thoughtes of
 [26] men? But I preie that thei coveyten rychesses
 [27] and honours, so that, whanne thei han geten
 [28] tho false goodes with greet travaile, that therby
 [29] they mowen knowen the verray goodes.
 [1] "It suffiseth that I have schewyd hiderto the
 [2] forme of fals welefulnesse, so that yif thou loke
 [3] now cleerly, the ordre of myn entencioun requireth
 [4] from hennes forth to schewe the verray
 [5] welefulnesse."
 [6] "Forsothe," quod I, "I se wel now that suffisaunce
 [7] may nat comen by rychesse, ne power
 [8] by remes, ne reverence by dignites, ne gentilesse
 [9] by glorie, ne joie be delices."
 [10] "And hastow wel knowen the causes,"
 [11] quod sche, "whi it es?"
 [12] "Certes me semeth," quod I, "that Y see hem
 [13] ryght as thoughe it were thurw a litil clyfte, but
 [14] me were levere knowen hem more opynly of
 [15] the."
 [16] "Certes," quod sche, "the resoun is al redy.
 [17] For thilke thyng that symply is o thyng withouten
 [18] ony devysioun, the errour and folie of
 [19] mankynde departeth and divideth it, and
 [20] mysledeth it and transporteth from verray
 [21] and parfit good to godes that ben false and
 [22] inparfit. But seye me this. Wenestow that he
 [23] that hath nede of power, that hym ne lakketh
 [24] nothyng?"
 [25] "Nay," quod I.
 [26] "Certes," quod sche, "thou seyst aryght; for
 [27] if so be that ther is a thyng that in ony partie
 [28] be feblere of power, certes, as in that, it moot
 [29] nedes be nedy of foreyne help."
 [30] "Ryght so is it," quod I.
 [31] "Suffisaunce and power ben thanne of
 [32] o kynde?"
 [33] "So semeth it," quod I.
 [34] "And demestow," quod sche, "that a thyng
 [35] that is of this manere (that is to seyn, suffisaunt
 [36] and myghty) oughte ben despised, or ellis that
 [37] it be right digne of reverence aboven alle
 [38] thynges?"
 [39] "Certes," quod I, "it nys no doute that it
 [40] nys right worthy to ben reverenced."
 [41] "Lat us," quod sche, "adden thanne reverence
 [42] to suffisaunce and to power, so that we
 [43] demen that thise thre thynges be al o thyng."
 [44] "Certes," quod I, "lat us adden it, yif we
 [45] wiln graunten the sothe."
 [46] "What demestow thanne," quod sche, "is
 [47] that a dirk thyng and nat noble that is suffisaunt,
 [48] reverent, and myghty; or elles that it is
 [49] ryght noble and ryght cleer by celebrete of
 [50] renoun? Considere thanne," quod sche, "as
 [51] we han grauntide hirbyfore that he that ne
 [52] hath nede of no thyng and is moost myghty
 [53] and moost digne of honour, if hym nedeth ony
 [54] cleernesse of renoun, whiche clernesse he myght
 [55] nat graunten of hymself; so that for lak of
 [56] thilke cleernesse he myghte seme the feblere
 [57] on any side, or the more outcast." (Glose. This
 [58] to seyn, nay; for whoso that is suffisaunt,
 [59] myghty, and reverent, clernesse of renoun
 [60] folweth of the forseyde thynges; he hath it
 [61] al redy of his suffysaunce.)
 [62] Boece. "I mai nat," quod I, "denye it, but I
 [63] moot granten, as it is, that this thyng be ryght
 [64] celebrable by clernesse of renoun and noblesse."
 [65] "Thanne folweth it," quod sche, "that we
 [66] adden clernesse of renoun to the thre forseyde
 [67] thynges, so that there ne be amonges hem no
 [68] difference."
 [69] "This a consequence," quod I.
 [70] "This thyng thanne," quod sche, "that ne
 [71] hath nede of no foreyne thyng, and that
 [72] may don alle thynges by hise strengthis, and
 [73] that is noble and honourable, nys nat that a
 [74] myry thyng and a joyful?"
 [75] Boece. "But whennes," quod I, "that any sorwe
 [76] myghte comen to this thyng that is swiche,
 [77] certes I mai nat thynke."
 [78] Philosophie. "Thanne mote we graunten,"
 [79] quod sche, "that this thing be ful of gladnesse,
 [80] if the forseide thynges ben sothe;
 [81] and certes also mote we graunten that suffisaunce,
 [82] power, noblesse, reverence, and gladnesse
 [83] be oonly diverse by names, but hir substaunce
 [84] hath no diversite."
 [85] Boece. "It moot nedly ben so," quod I.
 [86] Philosophie. "Thilke thyng thanne," quod
 [87] sche, "that is oon and symple in his nature, the
 [88] wikkidnesse of men departeth it and divideth
 [89] it; and whanne thei enforcen hem to gete
 [90] partie of a thyng that ne hath no part, thei
 [91] ne geten hem neyther thilke partie that nis
 [92] noon, ne the thyng al hool that thei ne desire
 [93] nat."
 [94] Boece. "In whiche manere?" quod I.
 [95] Philosophie. "Thilke man," quod sche, "that
 [96] seketh richesse to fleen poverte, he ne travaileth
 [97] hym nat for to geten power, for he hath
 [98] lever ben dirk and vyl; and eek withdraweth
 [99] from hymself manye naturel delites, for he
 [100] nolde leese the moneie that he hath assembled.
 [101] But certes in this manere he ne
 [102] geteth hym nat suffisance, that power forleteth,
 [103] and that moleste prikketh, and that filthe maketh
 [104] outcaste, and that dirknesse hideth. And
 [105] certes he that desireth oonly power, he wasteth
 [106] and scatereth rychesse, and despyseth delices
 [107] and eek honour that is withoute power, ne he
 [108] ne preiseth glorie nothyng. Certes thus seestow
 [109] wel that manye thynges failen to hym, for
 [110] he hath som tyme defaute of manye necessites,
 [111] and manye anguysshes byten hym;
 [112] and whan he ne mai nat do tho defautes awey,
 [113] he forletith to ben myghty, and that is the
 [114] thyng that he moost desireth. And ryght thus
 [115] mai I make semblable resouns of honours, and
 [116] of glorie, and of delyces; for so as every of
 [117] thise forseide thinges is the same that thise
 [118] othere thynges ben (that is to seyn, al oon
 [119] thyng), whoso that evere seketh to geten
 [120] the toon of thise, and nat the tothir, he ne
 [121] geteth nat that he desireth."
 [122] Boece. "What seystow thanne, yif that a
 [123] man coveyte to geten alle thise thynges togidre?"
 [125] Philosophie. "Certes," quod sche, "I wolde
 [126] seye that he wolde geten hym sovereyn blisfulnesse;
 [127] but that schal he nat fynde in tho
 [128] thynges that I have schewed that ne mowen
 [129] nat yeven that thei byheeten?"
 [130] Boece. "Certes no," quod I.
 [131] "Thanne," quod sche, "ne sholde men
 [132] nat by no weye seken blisfulnesse in siche
 [133] thynges as men wenen that they ne mowen
 [134] yeven but o thyng sengly of al that men
 [135] seken."
 [136] Boece. "I graunte wel," quod I, "ne no
 [137] sothere thyng ne may be seyd."
 [138] Philosophie. "Now hastow thanne," quod
 [139] sche, "the forme and the causes of fals
 [140] welefulnesse. Now torne and flytte the
 [141] eighen of thi thought, for ther shaltow
 [142] seen anoon thilke verray blisfulnesse that I
 [143] have behyght the."
 [144] Boece. "Certes," quod I, "it is cler and opene,
 [145] theyghe it were to a blynd man; and that
 [146] schewedestow me ful wel a litel herbyforn,
 [147] whan thow enforcedest the to schewe me the
 [148] causes of the fals blisfulnesse. For, but if I be
 [149] begiled, thanne is thilke the verray parfit
 [150] blisfulnesse that parfitly maketh a man suffisaunt,
 [151] myghty, honourable, noble, and
 [152] ful of gladnesse. And for thow schalt wel
 [153] knowe that I have wel undirstonden thise
 [154] thinges withynne myn herte, I knowe wel that
 [155] thilke blisfulnesse that may verrayly yeven on
 [156] of the forseyde thynges, syn thei ben alle oon
 [157] -- I knowe dowtelees that thilke thyng is the
 [158] ful blysfulnesse."
 [159] Philosophie. "O my nory," quod sche,
 [160] "by this opynyoun I seie that thow art
 [161] blisful, yif thow putte this therto that I
 [162] schal seyn."
 [163] "What is that?" quod I.
 [164] "Trowestow that ther be any thyng in this
 [165] erthly, mortel, toumblynge thynges that may
 [166] brynge this estat?"
 [167] "Certes," quod I, "Y trowe it nought; and
 [168] thow hast schewyd me wel that over thilke good
 [169] ther nys no thyng more to ben desired."
 [170] Philosophie. "Thise thynges thanne,"
 [171] quod sche (that is to seyn, erthly
 [172] suffysaunce and power and swiche thynges),
 [173] "outher thei semen lyknesses of verray good, or
 [174] elles it semeth that thei yeve to mortel folk a
 [175] maner of goodes that ne be nat parfyt. But thilke
 [176] good that is verray and parfyt, that mai thei nat
 [177] yeven."
 [178] Boece. "I accorde me wel," quod I.
 [179] Philosophie. "Thanne," quod sche, "for as
 [180] moche as thou hast knowen whiche is thilke
 [181] verray blisfulnesse, and eek whiche thilke
 [182] thynges ben that lyen falsly blisfulnesse (that is
 [183] to seyn, that be deceyte semen verray goodes),
 [184] now byhoveth the to knowe, whennes and
 [185] where thow mowe seke thilke verrai blisfulnesse."
 [187] "Certes," quod I "that desire I gretly and
 [188] have abyden longe tyme to herkne it."
 [189] "But for as moche," quod sche, "as it
 [190] liketh to my disciple Plato, in his book of
 [191] In Thymeo, that in ryght litel thynges men
 [192] schulde byseche the help of God, what juggestow
 [193] that be now to done, so that we may
 [194] desserve to fynde the seete of thilk sovereyn
 [195] good?"
 [196] Boece. "Certes," quod I, "Y deme that we
 [197] schul clepe to the Fadir of alle [thyng], for
 [198] withouten hym nis ther no [begynnyng] founded
 [199] aryght."
 [200] "Thow seyst aryght," quod sche, and
 [201] bygan anoon to syngen right thus:
 [1] "O thow Fadir, soowere and creatour of
 [2] hevene and of erthes, that governest this world
 [3] by perdurable resoun, that comaundest the
 [4] tymes to gon from syn that age hadde bygynnynge;
 [5] thow that duellest thiselve ay stedefast
 [6] and stable, and yevest alle othere thynges to
 [7] ben meved, ne foreyne causes necesseden the
 [8] nevere to compoune werk of floterynge matere,
 [9] but oonly the forme of sovereyn good iset
 [10] within the withoute envye, that moevede
 [11] the frely. Thow, that art althir-fayrest,
 [12] berynge the faire world in thy thought, formedest
 [13] this world to the lyknesse semblable of
 [14] that faire world in thy thought. Thou drawest
 [15] alle thyng of thy sovereyn ensaumpler and
 [16] comaundest that this world, parfytely ymakid,
 [17] have frely and absolut hise parfyte parties.
 [18] Thow byndest the elementis by nombres proporcionables,
 [19] that the coolde thinges
 [20] mowen accorde with the hote thinges, and
 [21] the drye thinges with the moyste; that the
 [22] fuyer, that is purest, ne fle nat over-heye, ne that
 [23] the hevynesse ne drawe nat adoun over-lowe the
 [24] erthes that ben ploungid in the watris. Thow
 [25] knyttest togidere the mene soule of treble
 [26] kynde moevynge alle thingis, and divydest it
 [27] by membrys accordynge; and whan it es thus
 [28] divyded [and] hath assembled a moevynge
 [29] into two rowndes, it gooth to torne ayen
 [30] to hymself, and envyrouneth a ful deep
 [31] thought and turneth the hevene by semblable
 [32] ymage. Thow by evene-lyke causes enhauncest
 [33] the soules and the lasse lyves; and,
 [34] ablynge hem heye by lyghte waynes or cartes,
 [35] thow sowest hem into hevene and into erthe.
 [36] And whan thei ben convertyd to the by thi
 [37] benygne lawe, thow makest hem retourne ayen
 [38] to the by ayen-ledynge fyer. O Fadir, yyve
 [39] thou to the thought to steyen up into the
 [40] streyte seete; and graunte hym to enviroune
 [41] the welle of good; and, the lyght
 [42] ifounde, graunte hym to fycchen the clere
 [43] syghtes of his corage in the; and skatere thou
 [44] and tobreke the weyghtes and the cloudes of
 [45] erthly hevynesse; and schyn thou by thi bryghtnesse,
 [46] for thou art cleernesse, thow art pesible
 [47] reste to debonayre folk; thow thiself art bygynnynge,
 [48] berere, ledere, path, and terme; to looke
 [49] on the, that is our ende.
 [1] "For as moche thanne as thow hast seyn
 [2] whiche is the fourme of good that nys nat parfit,
 [3] and whiche is the forme of good that is parfit,
 [4] now trowe I that it were good to schewe in
 [5] what this perfeccioun of blisfulnesse is set.
 [6] And in this thing I trowe that we schulde first
 [7] enquere for to witen, yf that any swich maner
 [8] good as thilke good that thow hast dyffinysshed
 [9] a litel herebyforn (that is to seyn, sovereyn
 [10] good) may be founde in the nature of
 [11] thinges, for that veyn ymagynacioun of
 [12] thought ne desceyve us nat, and put us out of
 [13] the sothfastnesse of thilke thing that is summytted
 [14] to us. But it may nat be denyed that
 [15] thilke good ne is, and that it nys ryght as a
 [16] welle of alle goodes. For alle thing that is
 [17] cleped inparfyt is proevid inparfit be the
 [18] amenusynge of perfeccioun or of thing that is
 [19] parfit. And herof cometh it that in every
 [20] thing general, yif that men seen any thing
 [21] that is inparfit, certes in thilke general ther
 [22] moot ben som thing that is parfit. For yif so be
 [23] that perfeccioun is don awey, men may nat
 [24] thinke ne say fro whennes thilke thing is that
 [25] is cleped inparfyt. For the nature of thinges ne
 [26] took nat hir begynnynge of thinges amenused
 [27] and inparfit, but it procedith of thinges that
 [28] ben alle hole and absolut, and descendith so
 [29] doun into uttereste thinges and into thinges
 [30] empty and withouten fruyt. But, as I have
 [31] schewid a litel herebyforn that yif ther be
 [32] a blisfulnesse that be freel and veyn and inparfyt,
 [33] ther may no man doute that ther nys
 [34] som blisfulnesse that is sad, stedefast, and
 [35] parfyt."
 [36] Boece. "This is concluded," quod I, "feermely
 [37] and soothfastly."
 [38] Philosophie. "But considere also," quod sche,
 [39] "in whom this blissefulnes enhabiteth. The
 [40] comune accordaunce and conceyt of the
 [41] corages of men proveth and graunteth that
 [42] God, prince of alle thinges, is good. For, so as
 [43] nothyng mai ben thought betere than God, it
 [44] mai nat ben douted thanne that he that no
 [45] thinge nys betere, that he nys good. Certes resoun
 [46] scheweth that God is so good that it
 [47] proeveth by verray force that parfyt good is in
 [48] hym. For yif God nys swyche, he ne mai nat be
 [49] prince of alle thinges; for certes somthing
 [50] possessyng in itself parfyt good schulde be
 [51] more worthy than God, and it scholde
 [52] semen that thilke thing were first and eldere than
 [53] God. For we han schewyd apertely that alle
 [54] thinges that ben parfyt ben first er thynges that
 [55] ben inparfit; and forthy, for as moche as that
 [56] my resoun or my proces ne go nat awey withouten
 [57] an ende, we owe to graunte that the
 [58] sovereyn God is ryght ful of sovereyn parfit
 [59] good. And we han establissched that the
 [60] sovereyne good is verray blisfulnesse.
 [61] Thanne moot it nedis be that verray blisfulnesse
 [62] is set in sovereyn God."
 [63] Boece. "This take I wel," quod I, "ne this
 [64] ne mai nat be withseid in no manere."
 [65] "But I preye the," quod sche, "see now how
 [66] thou mayst proeven holily and withoute corrupcioun
 [67] this that I have seid, that the sovereyn
 [68] God is ryght ful of sovereyne good."
 [69] "In whiche manere?" quod I.
 [70] "Wenestow aught," quod sche, "that this
 [71] prince of alle thynges have itake thilke sovereyne
 [72] good anywher out of hymself, of whiche
 [73] sovereyne good men proeveth that he is ful;
 [74] ryght as thou myghtest thenken that God, that
 [75] hath blisfulnesse in hymself, and thilke blisfulnesse
 [76] that is in hym, were divers in substaunce?
 [77] For yif thow wene that God have resseyved
 [78] thilke good out of hymself, thow mayst wene
 [79] that he that yaf thilke good to God be more
 [80] worth than is God. But I am beknowe and
 [81] confesse, and that ryght dignely, that God
 [82] is ryght worthy aboven alle thinges. And yif
 [83] so be that this good be in hym by nature, but
 [84] that it is dyvers from hym by wenynge resoun,
 [85] syn we speke of God prynce of alle thynges,
 [86] feyne who so feyne mai who was he that
 [87] hath conjoyned thise divers thynges togidre.
 [88] And eek at the laste se wel that a thing that is
 [89] divers from any thing, that thilke thing nys
 [90] nat that same thing fro whiche it es undirstonden
 [91] to be diverse. Thanne folweth it
 [92] that thilke thing that be his nature is divers
 [93] from sovereyn good, that that thyng nys nat
 [94] sovereyn good; but certes it were a felenous
 [95] cursydnesse to thinken that of hym that no
 [96] thing nys more worth. For alwey, of alle
 [97] thinges, the nature of hem ne may nat ben betere
 [98] thanne hir begynnynge. For whiche I mai concluden
 [99] by ryght verray resoun that thilke
 [100] that is begynnynge of alle thinges, thilke
 [101] same thing is sovereyn good in his substaunce."
 [103] Boece. "Thow hast seyd ryghtfully," quod I.
 [104] Philosophie. "But we han graunted," quod
 [105] sche, "that the sovereyn good is blisfulnesse."
 [106] "That is sooth," quod I.
 [107] "Thanne," quod sche, "moten we nedes
 [108] granten and confessen that thilke same sovereyn
 [109] good be God."
 [110] "Certes," quod I, "Y ne may nat denye
 [111] ne withstonde the resouns purposed; and
 [112] I se wel that it folweth by strengthe of the
 [113] premisses."
 [114] "Loke now," quod sche, "yif this be proevid
 [115] yet more fermely thus, that there ne mowen not
 [116] ben two sovereyn goodis that ben divers among
 [117] hemself. For certes the goodis that ben divers
 [118] among hemself, the toon is nat that that the
 [119] tothir is. thanne ne mowen neither of hem
 [120] ben parfit, so as eyther of hem lakketh to
 [121] othir. But that that nys nat parfit, men
 [122] mai seen apertely that it nys not sovereyn. The
 [123] thinges thanne that ben sovereynly gode ne
 [124] mowe by no weie be divers. But I have wel
 [125] concluded that blisfulnesse and God ben the
 [126] sovereyn good; for whiche it mote nedes be that
 [127] sovereyne blisfulnesse is sovereyn devynite."
 [128] "No thing," quod I, "nys more sothfaste than
 [129] this, ne more ferme by resoun, ne a more
 [130] worthy thing than God mai not ben concluded."
 [132] Philosophie. "Upon thise thynges thanne," quod
 [133] sche, "ryght as thise geometriens whan thei han
 [134] schewed her proposicions ben wont to bryngen
 [135] yn thinges that thei clepen porismes or declaracions
 [136] of forseide thinges, right so wol I yeve
 [137] the here as a corolarie or a meede of coroune.
 [138] Forwhy, for as moche as by the getynge of blisfulnesse
 [139] men ben makid blisful, and blisfulnesse
 [140] is dyvinite, than is it manifest and
 [141] opene that by the getynge of dyvinite men
 [142] ben makid blisful. Right as by the getynge of
 [143] justise [men ben maked just], and be the getynge
 [144] of sapience thei ben maked wise, ryght so
 [145] nedes by the semblable resoun, whan they han
 [146] geten dyvinite thei ben maked goddes. Thanne
 [147] is every blisful man God. But certes by nature
 [148] ther nys but o God; but by the participacioun
 [149] of dyvinite ther ne let ne distourbeth nothyng
 [150] that ther ne ben many goddis."
 [151] "This ys," quod I, "a fair thing and a
 [152] precious, clepe it as thou wilt, be it corolarie, or
 [153] porisme, or mede of coroune, or declarynges."
 [154] "Certes," quod sche, "nothing nys fairere
 [155] than is the thing that by resoun schulde ben
 [156] addide to thise forseide thinges."
 [157] "What thing?" quod I.
 [158] "So," quod sche, "as it semeth that blisfulnesse
 [159] conteneth many thinges, it weere for
 [160] to witen whether that alle thise thinges
 [161] maken or conjoynen as a maner body of
 [162] blisfulnesse by diversite of parties or membres,
 [163] or elles yif ony of alle thilke thinges be swich
 [164] that it acomplise by hymself the substaunce of
 [165] blisfulnesse, so that alle thise othere thynges
 [166] ben referrid and brought to blisfulnesse (that
 [167] is to seyn, as to the cheef of hem)."
 [168] "I wolde," quod I, "that thow madest me
 [169] clerly to undirstonde what thou seist, and
 [170] that thou recordidest me the forseide
 [171] thinges."
 [172] "Have I not jugged," quod sche, "that blisfulnesse
 [173] is good?"
 [174] "Yys for sothe," quod I, "and that sovereyn
 [175] good."
 [176] "Adde thanne," quod sche, "thilke good that
 [177] is maked blisfulnesse to alle the forseide
 [178] thinges. For thilke same blisfulnesse [is.
 [179] demed to ben sovereyn suffisaunce, thilke
 [180] selve is sovereyn power, sovereyn reverence,
 [181] sovereyn clernesse or noblesse, and
 [182] sovereyn delyt. What seistow thanne of alle
 [183] thise thinges, that is to seyn, suffisaunce, power,
 [184] and thise othere thinges, -- ben thei thanne as
 [185] membris of blisfulnesse, or ben they reffered
 [186] and brought to sovereyne good ryght as alle
 [187] thinges [ben] brought to the cheef of hem?"
 [188] Boece. "I undirstonde wel," quod I, "what
 [189] thou purposest to seke, but I desire for
 [190] to herkne that thow schew it me."
 [191] Philosophie. "Tak now thus the discrecioun
 [192] of this questioun," quod sche; "yif alle thise
 [193] thinges," quod sche, "weren membris to felicite,
 [194] thanne weren thei dyverse that on fro that
 [195] othir. And swich is the nature of parties or of
 [196] membres, that diverse membris compounen a
 [197] body."
 [198] "Certes," quod I, "it hath wel ben schewyd
 [199] herebyforn that alle thise thinges ben
 [200] al o thyng."
 [201] "Thanne ben thei none membres," quod
 [202] sche, "for elles it schulde seme that blisfulnesse
 [203] were conjoyned al of o membre allone;
 [204] but that is a thing that mai not ben don."
 [205] "This thing," quod I, "nys not doutous; but
 [206] I abide to herknen the remenaunt of the question."
 [208] "This is opene and cler," quod sche, "that
 [209] alle othere thinges ben referrid and
 [210] brought to good. For therfore is suffisaunce
 [211] requerid, for it is demyd to ben
 [212] good; and forthy is power requirid, for men
 [213] trowen also that it be good; and this same thing
 [214] mowen we thinken and conjecten of reverence,
 [215] and of noblesse, and of delyt. Thanne is sovereyn
 [216] good the somme and the cause of al that
 [217] oughte ben desired; forwhy thilke thing that
 [218] withholdeth no good in itselve, ne semblance
 [219] of good, it ne mai not wel in no
 [220] manere be desired ne requerid. And the
 [221] contrarie; for thoughe that thinges by here
 [222] nature ne ben not gode, algates yif men wene
 [223] that thei ben gode, yet ben thei desired as
 [224] theigh that thei were verrayliche gode; and
 [225] therefore is it that men oughte to wene by ryghte
 [226] that bounte be the sovereyn fyn and the cause
 [227] of alle the thinges that ben to requiren. But
 [228] certes thilke that is cause for whiche men
 [229] requiren any thing, it semeth that thilke
 [230] same thing be moost desired. As thus: yf
 [231] that a wyght wolde ryden for cause of hele,
 [232] he ne desireth not so mochel the moevyng to
 [233] ryden, as the effect of his hele. Now thanne,
 [234] syn that alle thynges ben required for the grace
 [235] of good, thei ne ben not desired of alle folk
 [236] more than the same good. But we han grauntide
 [237] that blisfulnesse is that thing for whiche that
 [238] alle thise othere thinges ben desired; thanne
 [239] is it thus that certes oonly blysfulnesse is
 [240] requered and desired. By whiche thing it
 [241] scheweth cleerly that of good and of blisfulnesse
 [242] is al on and the same substaunce."
 [243] "I se nat," quod I, "wherfore that men
 [244] myghten discorden in this."
 [245] "And we han schewed that God and verray
 [246] blisfulnesse is al o thing."
 [247] "That is sooth," quod I.
 [248] "Thanne mowen we concluden sykerly, that
 [249] the substaunce of God is set in thilke same
 [250] good, and in noon other place.
 [1] "Cometh alle to-gidre now, ye that ben
 [2] ykaught and ybounde with wikkide cheynes by
 [3] the desceyvable delyt of erthly thynges enhabitynge
 [4] in yowr thought! Her schal ben the
 [5] reste of your labours, her is the havene stable
 [6] in pesible quiete; this allone is the open refut
 [7] to wreches. (Glose. This to seyn, that ye that
 [8] ben combryd and disseyvid with worldly
 [9] affeccions, cometh now to this sovereyn
 [10] good, that is God, that is refut to hem
 [11] that wolen come to hym.) Textus. Alle the
 [12] thinges that the ryver Tagus yyveth yow with
 [13] his goldene gravelis, or elles alle the thinges
 [14] that the ryver Hermus yeveth with his rede
 [15] brinke, or that Indus yyveth, that is next the
 [16] hote partie of the world, that medleth the grene
 [17] stones with the white, ne scholden not cleren
 [18] the lookynge of your thought, but hiden rather
 [19] your blynde corages withynne here derknesse.
 [20] Al that liketh yow here, and exciteth
 [21] and moeveth your thoughtes, the
 [22] erthe hath norysschid it in his lowe caves. But
 [23] the schynynge by whiche the hevene is governed
 [24] and whennes that it hath his strengthe, that
 [25] eschueth the derke overthrowynge of the soule;
 [26] and whosoevere may knowen thilke light (of
 [27] blisfulnesse), he schal wel seyn that the white
 [28] beemes of the sonne ne ben nat cleer."
 [1] Boece. "I assente me," quod I, "for alle thise
 [2] thinges ben strongly bounden with ryght ferme
 [3] resouns."
 [4] "How mychel wiltow preysen it," quod sche,
 [5] "yif that thow knowe what thilke good is?"
 [6] "I wol preyse it," quod I, "be pris withouten
 [7] ende, yif it schal betyde me to knowe also togidre
 [8] God that is good."
 [9] "Certes," quod sche, "that schal I [undo]
 [10] the be verray resoun, yif that tho
 [11] thinges that I have concluded a litel herebyforn
 [12] duellen only in hir first grauntynge."
 [13] Boece. "Thei dwellen graunted to the," quod
 [14] I. (This to seyn as who seith, "I graunte thi
 [15] forseide conclusyouns.")
 [16] "Have I nat schewed the," quod sche, "that
 [17] the thinges that ben required of many folk ne
 [18] ben not verray goodis ne parfite, for thei ben
 [19] divers that on fro that othir; and so as iche
 [20] of hem is lakkynge to othir, thei ne han no
 [21] power to bryngen a good that is ful and
 [22] absolut; but thanne at erste ben thei verraye
 [23] good, whan thei ben gadred togidre [als] into o
 [24] forme and into oon werkynge, so that thilke
 [25] thing that is suffisaunce, thilke same be power,
 [26] and reverence, and noblesse, and myrthe; and
 [27] for sothe, but yif alle thise thinges ben alle o
 [28] same thing, thei ne han not wherby that thei
 [29] mowen be put in the nombre of thinges
 [30] that oughten ben required or desired?"
 [31] Boece. "It is schewyd," quod I, "ne herof
 [32] mai ther no man douten."
 [33] Philosophie. "The thinges thanne," quod sche,
 [34] "that ne ben none goodis whan thei ben diverse,
 [35] and whanne thei bygynnen to ben al o thing,
 [36] thanne ben thei goodes -- ne cometh it hem nat
 [37] thanne be the getynge of unyte that thei ben
 [38] maked goodes?"
 [39] Boece. "So it semeth," quod I.
 [40] "But alle thing that is good," quod sche,
 [41] "grauntestow that it be good by the participacioun
 [42] of good, or no?"
 [43] "I graunte it," quod I.
 [44] "Thanne mustow graunten," quod sche, "by
 [45] semblable resoun that oon and good be o same
 [46] thing; for of thinges of whiche that the effect nys
 [47] nat naturely divers, nedes the substaunce moot
 [48] be oo same thing."
 [49] "I ne may nat denye it," quod I.
 [50] "Hastow nat knowen wel," quod sche,
 [51] "that alle thing that is hath so longe his
 [52] duellynge and his substaunce as longe as it es
 [53] oon, but whanne it forletith to be oon, it moot
 [54] nedys deien and corrumpen togidres?"
 [55] "In whiche manere?" quod I.
 [56] "Ryght as in beestes," quod sche, "whanne
 [57] the soule and the body ben conjoyned in oon
 [58] and dwellen togidre, it es cleped a beeste; and
 [59] whanne her unyte is destroyed be the
 [60] disseveraunce the toon fro the tothir,
 [61] thanne scheweth it wel that it is a deed
 [62] thing, and that it nys no lengere no beeste. And
 [63] the body of a wyght, while it duelleth in oo
 [64] fourme be conjunccion of membris, it is wel
 [65] seyn that it is a figure of mankynde; and yif
 [66] the parties of the body ben so devyded and
 [67] disseverid the ton fro the tother that thei destroyen
 [68] unite, the body forletith to ben that it was
 [69] beforn. And whoso wolde renne in the
 [70] same manere be alle thinges, he scholde
 [71] seen that withouten doute every thing is in
 [72] his substaunce as longe as it is oon; and whanne
 [73] it forletith to ben oon, it dyeth and peryssheth."
 [74] Boece. "Whanne I considere," quod I, "manye
 [75] thinges, I se noon other."
 [76] "Is ther any thing thanne," quod sche, "that,
 [77] in as moche as it lyveth naturely, that forletith
 [78] the talent or the appetyt of his beynge and
 [79] desireth to come to deth and to corrupcioun?"
 [81] "Yif I considere," quod I, "the beestes
 [82] that han any maner nature of wyllynge and of
 [83] nyllynge, I ne fynde no beeste, but if it be
 [84] constreyned fro withoute-forth, that forletith or
 [85] despiseth the entencion to lyven and to duren;
 [86] or that wole, his thankes, hasten hym to dyen.
 [87] For every beest travaileth hym to defende and
 [88] kepe the savacion of his lif, and eschueth deeth
 [89] and destruccioun. But certes I doute me of
 [90] herbes and of trees [and] I am in a doute
 [91] of swiche thinges [as] ne han no felyng
 [92] soules (ne no naturel werkynges servynge to
 [93] appetites as beestes han, whether thei han
 [94] appetyt to duellen and to duren).
 [95] "Certes," quod sche, "ne therof thar the nat
 [96] doute. Now looke upon thise herbes and thise
 [97] trees. They wexen first in suche places as ben
 [98] covenable to hem, in whiche places thei mowen
 [99] nat sone deye ne dryen, as longe as hir
 [100] nature mai defenden hem. For some of
 [101] hem waxen in feeldis, and some in mountaynes,
 [102] and othere waxen in mareys, and
 [103] othre cleven on roches, and some wexen
 [104] plentyvous in soondes; and yif any wyght
 [105] enforce hym to bere hem into other places, thei
 [106] wexen drye. For nature yeveth to every thing
 [107] that that is convenient to hym, and travailleth
 [108] that they ne deie nat, as longe as thei han power
 [109] to duellen and to lyven. What wiltow seyn
 [110] of this, that thei drawen alle here
 [111] norysschynges by here rootes, ryght as thei
 [112] hadden here mouthes yplounged withynne the
 [113] erthes, and sheden be hir maryes hir wode and
 [114] hir bark? And what wyltow seyn of this, that
 [115] thilke thing that is ryght softe, as the marie is,
 [116] that it is alwey hyd in the seete al withinne, and
 [117] that it is defended fro withoute by the
 [118] stedfastnesse of wode, and that the outreste bark
 [119] is put ayens the distemperaunce of the
 [120] hevene as a deffendour myghty to suffren
 [121] harm? And thus certes maistow wel seen
 [122] how greet is the diligence of nature; for alle
 [123] thinges renovelen and publysschen hem with
 [124] seed ymultiplied, ne ther nys no man that ne
 [125] woot wel that they ne ben ryght as a foundement
 [126] and edifice for to duren, noght oonly for a tyme,
 [127] but ryght as for to dure perdurably by
 [128] generacion.
 [129] "And the thinges eek that men wenen ne
 [130] haven none soules, ne desire thei nat, iche
 [131] of hem, by semblable resoun to kepyn that
 [132] that is hirs (that is to seyn, that is accordynge
 [133] to hir nature in conservacioun of hir beynge
 [134] and endurynge)? For wherfore ellis bereth
 [135] lightnesse the flaumbes up, and the weyghte
 [136] presseth the erthe adoun, but for as moche as
 [137] thilke places and thilke moevynges ben covenable
 [138] to everyche of hem? And forsothe every
 [139] thing kepeth thilke that is accordynge
 [140] and propre to hym, ryght as thinges that
 [141] ben contrarious and enemys corrumpen
 [142] hem. And yet the harde thinges, as stones,
 [143] clyven and holden here parties togidere ryght
 [144] faste and harde, and defenden hem in
 [145] withstondynge that thei ne departe nat lyghtly
 [146] atwynne. And the thinges that ben softe and
 [147] fletynge, as is watir and eyr, thei departen
 [148] lyghtly and yeven place to hem that breken or
 [149] divyden hem; but natheles they retorne
 [150] sone ageyn into the same thinges fro
 [151] whennes thei ben arraced; but fyer fleeth
 [152] and refuseth alle dyvisioun.
 [153] "Ne I ne trete not here now of willeful
 [154] moevynges of the soule that is knowyng, but of
 [155] the naturel entencioun of thinges, as thus: ryght
 [156] as we swolwen the mete that we resseyven and
 [157] ne thinke nat on it, and as we drawen our breeth
 [158] in slepynge that we witen it nat while we slepyn.
 [159] For certes in the beestis the love of hire
 [160] lyvynges ne of hire beynges ne cometh
 [161] not of the wilnynges of the soule, but of
 [162] the bygynnynges of nature. For certes, thurw
 [163] constreynynge causes, wil desireth and embraceth
 [164] ful ofte tyme the deeth that nature
 [165] dredeth. (That is to seyn as thus: that a man
 [166] may be constreyned so, by som cause, that his
 [167] wille desireth and taketh the deeth whiche
 [168] that nature hateth and dredeth ful sore.) And
 [169] somtyme we seen the contrarye, as thus:
 [170] that the wil of a wyght distourbeth and
 [171] constreyneth that that nature desireth and
 [172] requirith alwey, that is to seyn the werk of
 [173] generacioun, by whiche generacioun only
 [174] duelleth and is susteyned the longe durablete of
 [175] mortel thinges. And thus this charite and this
 [176] love, that every thing hath to hymself, ne
 [177] cometh not of the moevynge of the soule, but of
 [178] the entencioun of nature. For the purveaunce of
 [179] God hath yeven to thinges that ben creat of
 [180] hym this, that is a ful grete cause to lyven
 [181] and to duren, for whiche they desiren
 [182] naturely here lif as longe as evere thei mowen.
 [183] For which thou mayst not drede be no manere
 [184] that alle the thinges that ben anywhere, that thei
 [185] ne requiren naturely the ferme stablenesse of
 [186] perdurable duellynge, and eek the eschuynge of
 [187] destruccioun."
 [188] Boece. "Now confesse I wel," quod I, "that Y
 [189] see wel now certeynly withouten doutes
 [190] the thinges that whilom semeden uncerteyn
 [191] to me."
 [192] Philosophie. "But," quod sche, "thilke thing
 [193] that desireth to be and to duelle perdurably, he
 [194] desireth to ben oon. For yif that oon were
 [195] destroyed, certes, beynge schulde ther noon
 [196] duellen to no wyght."
 [197] "That is sooth," quod I.
 [198] "Thanne," quod sche, "desiren alle thinges
 [199] oon."
 [200] "I assente," quod I.
 [201] "And I have schewed," quod sche, "that
 [202] thilke same oon is thilke that is good."
 [203] Boece. "Ye, forsothe," quod I.
 [204] "Alle thinges thanne," quod sche, "requiren
 [205] good; and thilke good thow mayst descryven
 [206] ryght thus: good is thilk thing that every wyght
 [207] desireth."
 [208] "Ther ne may be thought," quod I, "no more
 [209] verraye thing. For eyther alle thinges ben
 [210] referrid and brought to noght, and floteren
 [211] withouten governour, despoyled of oon as
 [212] of hire propre heved; or elles, yif ther be any
 [213] thing to whiche that alle thinges tenden and
 [214] hyen to, that thing muste ben the sovereyn good
 [215] of alle goodes."
 [216] Philosophie. Thanne seide sche thus: "O my
 [217] nory," quod sche, "I have greet gladnesse of
 [218] the, for thow hast fycched in thyn herte the
 [219] [marke] [of] [the] myddel sothfastnesse, (that
 [220] is to seyn, the prykke). But [in] this thing
 [221] hath ben discoveryd to the [that] thow
 [222] seydest that thow wistest not a litel herbyforn."
 [223] "What was that?" quod I.
 [224] "That thou ne wistest noght," quod sche,
 [225] "whiche was the ende of thinges. And certes that
 [226] is the thyng that every wyght desireth. and for
 [227] as mochel as we han gadrid and comprehendid
 [228] that good is thilke thing that is desired of alle,
 [229] thanne mote we nedys confessen that good
 [230] is the fyn of alle thinges.
 [1] "Whoso that seketh sooth by a deep thought,
 [2] and coveyteth not to ben disseyvid by no mysweyes,
 [3] lat hym rollen and trenden withynne
 [4] hymself the lyght of his ynwarde sighte; and
 [5] let hym gaderyn ayein, enclynynge into a compas,
 [6] the longe moevynges of his thoughtes; and
 [7] let hym techyn his corage that he hath enclosid
 [8] and hid in his tresors al that he compasseth or
 [9] secheth fro withoute. And thanne thilke
 [10] thing that the blake cloude of errour
 [11] whilom hadde ycovered schal lighte more
 [12] clerly than Phebus hymself ne schyneth.
 [13] (Glosa. Whoso wol seke the depe ground of
 [14] soth in his thought, and wil nat ben disseyvid
 [15] by false proposiciouns that goon amys fro the
 [16] trouthe, lat hym wel examine and rolle withynne
 [17] hymself the nature and the propretes of
 [18] the thing; and let hym yet eftsones examinen
 [19] and rollen his thoughtes by good deliberacioun
 [20] or that he deme, and lat hym techyn
 [21] his soule that it hath, by naturel principles
 [22] kyndeliche yhud withynne itself, al the trouthe
 [23] the whiche he ymagineth to ben in thinges
 [24] withoute. And thanne al the derknesse of his
 [25] mysknowynge shall [schewen] more evydently
 [26] to the sighte of his undirstondynge then the
 [27] sonne ne semeth to the sighte withoute-forth.)
 [28] For certes the body, bryngynge the weighte of
 [29] foryetynge, ne hath nat chased out of your
 [30] thought al the cleernesse of your knowyng;
 [31] for certeynli the seed of soth haldeth and
 [32] clyveth within yowr corage, and it is awaked
 [33] and excited by the wynde and by the blastes
 [34] of doctrine. For wherfore elles demen ye of
 [35] your owene wil the ryghtes, whan ye ben axid,
 [36] but if so were that the norysschynges of resoun
 [37] ne lyvede yplounged in the depe of your herte?
 [38] (This to seyn, how schulde men deme the sothe
 [39] of any thing that were axid, yif ther nere a
 [40] rote of sothfastnesse that were yploungid
 [41] and hyd in the naturel principles, the
 [42] whiche sothfastnesse lyvede within the depnesse
 [43] of the thought?) And if so be that the
 [44] Muse and the doctrine of Plato syngeth soth,
 [45] al that every wyght leerneth, he ne doth no
 [46] thing elles thanne but recordeth, as men recorden
 [47] thinges that ben foryeten."
 [1] Thanne seide I thus: "I accorde me gretly to
 [2] Plato, for thou recordist and remembrist me
 [3] thise thinges yet the seconde tyme; that is to
 [4] seye, first whan I loste my memorie be the contagious
 [5] conjunccioun of the body with the
 [6] soule, and eftsones aftirward, whan Y lost it
 [7] confounded by the charge and be the burdene
 [8] of my sorwe."
 [9] And thanne seide sche thus: "Yif thow
 [10] loke," quod sche, "first the thynges that
 [11] thou hast graunted, it ne schal nat ben
 [12] ryght fer that thow ne schalt remembren thilke
 [13] thing that thou seidest that thou nystist nat."
 [14] "What thing?" quod I.
 [15] "By whiche governement," quod sche, "that
 [16] this world is governed."
 [17] "Me remembreth it wel," quod I; "and I confesse
 [18] wel that I ne wyste it nat. But al be it so
 [19] that I see now from afer what thou purposist,
 [20] algates I desire yit to herknen it of
 [21] the more pleynly."
 [22] "Thou ne wendest nat," quod sche, "a litel
 [23] herebyforn, that men schulde doute that this
 [24] world nys governed by God."
 [25] "Certes," quod I, "ne yet ne doute I it
 [26] naught, ne I nyl nevere wene that it were to
 [27] doute" (as who seith, "but I woot wel that God
 [28] governeth this world"); "and I schal schortly
 [29] answeren the be what resouns I
 [30] am brought to this. This world," quod I,
 [31] "of so manye diverse and contraryous
 [32] parties, ne myghte nevere han ben assembled
 [33] in o forme, but yif ther ne were oon that conjoyned
 [34] so manye diverse thinges; and the same
 [35] diversite of here natures, that so discorden the
 [36] ton fro that other, most departen and unjoynen
 [37] the thinges that ben conjoynid, yif ther ne were
 [38] oon that contenyde that he hath conjoynid and
 [39] ybounden. Ne the certein ordre of nature ne
 [40] schulde not brynge forth so ordene moevynges
 [41] by places, by tymes, by doynges, by
 [42] spaces, by qualites, yif ther ne were on, that
 [43] were ay stedfaste duellynge, that ordeynide and
 [44] disponyde thise diversites of moevynges. And
 [45] thilke thing, whatsoevere it be, by whiche that
 [46] alle things ben ymaked and ilad, Y clepe hym
 [47] `God,' that is a word that is used to alle folk."
 [48] Thanne seide sche: "Syn thou feelist thus
 [49] thise thinges," quod sche, "I trowe that I
 [50] have litel more to done that thou, myghty
 [51] of welefulnesse, hool and sound, ne see
 [52] eftsones thi contre. But let us loken the thinges
 [53] that we han purposed herebyforn. Have I nat
 [54] nombrid and seid," quod sche, "that suffisaunce
 [55] is in blisfulnesse, and we han accorded that
 [56] God is thilke same blisfulnesse?"
 [57] "Yis, forsothe," quod I.
 [58] "And that to governen this world," quod
 [59] sche, "ne schal he nevere han nede of noon
 [60] help fro withoute? For elles, yif he hadde
 [61] nede of any help, he ne schulde nat have
 [62] no ful suffisaunce?"
 [63] "Yys, thus it moot nedes be," quod I.
 [64] "Thanne ordeyneth he be hymself alone alle
 [65] thinges?" quod sche.
 [66] "That may noght ben denyed," quod I.
 [67] "And I have schewyd that God is the same
 [68] good?"
 [69] "It remembreth me wel," quod I.
 [70] "Thanne ordeigneth he alle thinges by
 [71] thilke good," quod sche, "syn he, whiche
 [72] that we han accordid to ben good, governeth
 [73] alle thinges by hymself; and he is as a keye and
 [74] a styere, by whiche that the edifice of this world
 [75] is kept stable and withouten corrumpynge."
 [76] "I accorde me greetly," quod I. "And I
 [77] aperceyvede a litil herebyforn that thow woldest
 [78] seyn thus, al be it so that it were by a
 [79] thynne suspecioun."
 [80] "I trowe it wel," quod sche; "for, as I
 [81] trowe, thou ledist now more ententyfliche
 [82] thyn eyen to loken the verray goodes. But natheles
 [83] the thing that I schal telle the yet ne
 [84] scheweth not lesse to loken."
 [85] "What is that?" quod I.
 [86] "So as men trowen," quod sche, "and that
 [87] ryghtfully, that God governeth alle thinges by
 [88] the keye of his goodnesse, and alle thise same
 [89] thinges, as I have taught the, hasten hem
 [90] by naturel entencioun to come to good,
 [91] ther may no man douten that thei ne
 [92] ben governed voluntariely, and that they ne
 [93] converten hem of here owene wil to the wil of
 [94] here ordeynour, as thei that ben accordynge
 [95] and enclynynge to here governour and here
 [96] kyng."
 [97] "It moot nedes be so," quod I, "for the reume
 [98] ne schulde nat seme blisful yif ther were a yok
 [99] of mysdrawynges in diverse parties, ne the
 [100] savynge of obedient thynges ne scholde
 [101] nat be."
 [102] "Thanne is ther nothyng," quod sche, "that
 [103] kepith his nature, that enforceth hym to gon
 [104] ayen God."
 [105] "No," quod I.
 [106] "And yif that any thing enforcede hym to
 [107] withstonde God, myghte it avayle at the laste
 [108] ayens hym that we han graunted to ben almyghty
 [109] by the ryght of blisfulnesse?"
 [110] "Certes," quod I, "al outrely it ne
 [111] myghte nat avaylen hym."
 [112] "Thanne is ther nothing," quod she, "that
 [113] either mai or wole withstonden to this sovereyn
 [114] good."
 [115] "I trowe nat," quod I.
 [116] "Thanne is thilke the sovereyn good," quod
 [117] sche, "that alle thinges governeth strongly
 [118] and ordeyneth hem softly?"
 [119] Thanne seide I thus: "I delite me,"
 [120] quod I, "nat oonly in the eendes or in the
 [121] somme of the resouns that thou hast concluded
 [122] and proved, but thilke woordes that
 [123] thou usest deliten me moche more. So that, at
 [124] the laste, foolis that somtyme reenden grete
 [125] thinges oughten ben asschamid of hemself
 [126] (that is to seyn, that we foolis that reprehenden
 [127] wikkidly the thinges that touchen Godis
 [128] governaunce, we aughten ben asschamid of
 [129] ourself), as I, that seide that God refuseth
 [130] oonly the werkis of men and ne entremettith
 [131] nat of it."
 [132] Philosophie. "Thow hast wel herd," quod
 [133] sche, "the fables of the poetis, how the geauntis
 [134] assaileden hevene with the goddis, but forsothe
 [135] the debonayre force of God disposide hem as it
 [136] was worthy (that is to sey, destroyed the
 [137] geauntes, as it was worthy). But wiltow that
 [138] we joynen togidres thilke same resouns, for
 [139] paraventure of swiche conjunccioun may
 [140] sterten up som fair sparcle of soth?"
 [141] "Do," quod I, "as the list."
 [142] "Wenestow," quod sche, "that God ne be
 [143] almyghty? No man is in doute of it."
 [144] "Certes," quod I, "no wyght ne douteth it,
 [145] yif he be in his mynde."
 [146] "But he," quod sche, "that is almyghti, ther
 [147] nys no thyng that he ne may?"
 [148] "That is sooth," quod I.
 [149] "May God don evel?" quod sche.
 [150] "Nay, forsothe," quod I.
 [151] "Thanne is evel nothing," quod sche,
 [152] "syn that he ne may not don evel, that mai
 [153] doon alle thinges."
 [154] "Scornestow me," quod I, "or elles, pleyestow
 [155] or disseyvistow me, that hast so woven
 [156] me with thi resouns the hous of Didalus,
 [157] so entrelaced that it is unable to ben unlaced,
 [158] thow that otherwhile entrist ther thow issist,
 [159] and other while issist ther thow entrest?
 [160] Ne fooldist thou nat togidre by replicacioun
 [161] of wordes a manere wondirful sercle
 [162] or envirounynge of the simplicite devyne?
 [163] For certes a litel herebyforne, whanne thou bygunne
 [164] at blisfulnesse, thou seidest that it is
 [165] sovereyn good, and seidest that it is set in sovereyn
 [166] God; and seidest that God hymself is
 [167] sovereyn good, and that God is the ful blisfulnesse;
 [168] for whiche thou yave me as a covenable
 [169] yifte, that is to seyn, that no wyght nis
 [170] blisful, but yif he be God also therwith.
 [171] And seidest eke that the forme of good is
 [172] the substaunce of God and of blisfulnesse; and
 [173] seidest that thilke same oon is thilke same good
 [174] that is required and desired of al the kynde of
 [175] thinges. And thou provedest in disputynge that
 [176] God governeth alle the thinges of the world by
 [177] the governementis of bounte, and seidest that
 [178] alle thinges wolen obeyen to hym, and seidest
 [179] that the nature of yvel nys no thing. And
 [180] thise thinges ne schewedest thou naught
 [181] with noone resouns ytaken fro withouten,
 [182] but by proeves in cercles and homliche knowen,
 [183] the whiche proeves drawen to hemself heer
 [184] feyth and here accord everiche of hem of othir."
 [185] Thanne seide sche thus: "I ne scorne the nat,
 [186] ne pleie, ne disceyve the; but I have schewed
 [187] the the thing that is grettest over alle thinges,
 [188] by the yifte of God that we whelome prayeden.
 [189] For this is the forme of the devyne substaunce,
 [190] that is swiche that it ne slideth nat
 [191] into uttreste foreyne thinges, ne ne resceyveth
 [192] noone straunge thinges in hym; but
 [193] ryght as Parmanydes seide in Grees of thilke
 [194] devyne substaunce -- he seide thus: that thilke
 [195] devyne substaunce tornith the world and the
 [196] moevable sercle of thinges, while thilke devyne
 [197] substaunce kepith itself withouten moevynge
 [198] (that is to seyn, that it ne moeveth nevere mo,
 [199] and yet it moeveth alle othere thinges).
 [200] But natheles, yif I have styred resouns
 [201] that ne ben nat taken from withouten the compas
 [202] of the thing of whiche we treten, but resouns
 [203] that ben bystowyd withinne that compas,
 [204] ther nys nat why that thou schuldest merveillen,
 [205] sith thow hast lernyd by the sentence
 [206] of Plato that nedes the wordis moot be cosynes
 [207] to the thinges of whiche thei speken.
 [1] "Blisful is that man that may seen the clere
 [2] welle of good! Blisful is he that mai unbynden
 [3] hym fro the boondes of the hevy erthe! The
 [4] poete of Trace, Orpheus, that whilome hadde
 [5] ryght greet sorwe for the deth of his wyf, aftir
 [6] that he hadde makid by his weeply songes the
 [7] wodes moevable to renne, and hadde makid
 [8] the ryveris to stonden stille, and hadde maked
 [9] the hertes and the hyndes to joynen dreedles
 [10] here sydes to cruel lyouns for to herknen
 [11] his song, and hadde maked that the
 [12] hare was nat agast of the hound, whiche was
 [13] plesed by his song; so, whanne the moste ardaunt
 [14] love of his wif brende the entrayles of his
 [15] breest, ne the songes that hadden overcomen
 [16] alle thinges ne mighten nat asswagen hir lord
 [17] Orpheus, he pleynid hym of the hevene
 [18] goddis that weren cruel to hym.
 [19] "He wente hym to the houses of helle,
 [20] and ther he tempride his blaundysschinge
 [21] songes by resounynge strenges, and spak
 [22] and song in wepynge al that evere he hadde
 [23] resceyved and lavyd out of the noble welles of
 [24] his modir Callyope the goddesse. And he sang
 [25] with as mochel as he myghte of wepynge, and
 [26] with as moche as love that doublide his sorwe
 [27] myghte yeve hym and teche hym, and he
 [28] commoevde the helle, and requyred and bysoughte
 [29] by swete preyere the lordes of
 [30] soules in helle of relessynge, that is to seyn,
 [31] to yelden hym his wyf. Cerberus, the porter
 [32] of helle, with hise thre hevedes, was caught and
 [33] al abasschid of the newe song. And the thre
 [34] goddesses, furiis and vengeresses of felonyes,
 [35] that tormenten and agasten the soules by anoy,
 [36] woxen sorweful and sory, and wepyn teeris for
 [37] pite. Tho was nat the heved of Yxion ytormented
 [38] by the overthrowynge wheel. And Tantalus, that
 [39] was destroied by the woodnesse of long
 [40] thurst, despyseth the floodes to drynken.
 [41] The foul that highte voltor, that etith the
 [42] stomak or the gyser of Tycius, is so fulfild of
 [43] his song that it nil eten ne tiren no more. At the
 [44] laste the lord and juge of soules was moevid to
 [45] misericordes, and cryede: `We ben overcomen,'
 [46] quod he; `yyve we to Orpheus his wif to beren
 [47] hym compaignye; he hath wel ybought hire by
 [48] his faire song and his ditee. But we wolen putten
 [49] a lawe in this and covenaunt in the yifte;
 [50] that is to seyn that, til he be out of helle, yif
 [51] he loke byhynde hym, that his wyf schal
 [52] comen ageyn unto us.' But what is he that may
 [53] yeven a lawe to loverys? Love is a grettere lawe
 [54] and a strengere to hymself thanne any lawe that
 [55] men mai yyven. Allas! Whanne Orpheus and his
 [56] wif weren almest at the termes of the nyght
 [57] (that is to seyn, at the laste boundes of helle),
 [58] Orpheus lokede abakward on Erudyce his wif,
 [59] and lost hire, and was deed.
 [60] "This fable apertenith to yow alle, whosoevere
 [61] desireth or seketh to lede his
 [62] thought into the sovereyn day, that is to seyn, to
 [63] cleernesse of sovereyn good. For whoso that
 [64] evere be so overcomen that he ficche his eien
 [65] into the put of helle, that is to seyn, whoso sette
 [66] his thoughtes in erthly thinges, al that evere he
 [67] hath drawen of the noble good celestial he lesith
 [68] it, whanne he looketh the helles, that is to seyn,
 [69] into lowe thinges of the erthe.

      
The Canterbury Tales and Other Works of Chaucer (Middle English), by Geoffery Chaucer, [14th cent.], at sacred-texts.com

 

Boece

 

Book 4

 [1] Whanne Philosophie hadde songen softly
 [2] and delitably the forseide thinges, kepynge the
 [3] dignyte of hir cheere and the weyghte of hir
 [4] wordes, I, thanne, that ne hadde nat al outrely
 [5] foryeten the wepynge and the moornynge that
 [6] was set in myn herte, forbrak the entencioun of
 [7] hir that entendede yit to seyn some othere
 [8] thinges. "O," quod I, "thou that art gyderesse
 [9] of verray light, the thinges that thou hast
 [10] seid me hidirto ben to me so cleer and so
 [11] schewynge by the devyne lookynge of hem,
 [12] and by thy resouns, that they ne mowen nat
 [13] ben overcomen. And thilke thinges that thou
 [14] toldest me, al be it so that I hadde whilom foryeten
 [15] hem for the sorwe of the wrong that hath
 [16] ben don to me, yet nathales thei ne weren not
 [17] al outrely unknowen to me. But this same is
 [18] namely a ryght gret cause of my sorwe: that so
 [19] as the governour of thinges is good, yif
 [20] that eveles mowen ben by any weyes,
 [21] or elles yif that evelis passen withouten
 [22] punysschynge. The whiche thing oonly, how
 [23] worthy it es to ben wondrid uppon, thou considerest
 [24] it wel thiselve certeynly. But yit to this
 [25] thing ther is yit another thing ijoyned more to
 [26] ben wondrid uppon: for felonye is emperisse,
 [27] and floureth ful of richesses, and vertu nis nat al
 [28] oonly withouten meedes, but it is cast undir
 [29] and fortroden undir the feet of felenous
 [30] folk, and it abyeth the tormentz in stede of
 [31] wikkide felouns. Of alle whiche thinges
 [32] ther nys no wyght that may merveillen ynowghe
 [33] ne compleyne that swiche thinges ben don in
 [34] the reigne of God, that alle things woot and
 [35] alle thinges may and ne wole nat but only
 [36] gode thinges."
 [37] Thanne seide sche thus: "Certes," quod sche,
 [38] "that were a greet merveille and an abaysschinge
 [39] withouten ende, and wel more horrible than
 [40] alle monstres, yif it were as thou wenest;
 [41] that is to seyn, that in the ryght ordene
 [42] hous of so mochel a fadir and an ordeynour of
 [43] meyne, that the vesselis that ben foule and vyl
 [44] schulden ben honoured and heryed, and the
 [45] precious vesselis schulden ben defouled and
 [46] vyl. But it nys nat so. For yif the thinges that
 [47] I have concluded a litel herebyforn ben kept
 [48] hoole and unaraced, thou schalt wel knowe by
 [49] the auctorite of God, of the whos reigne I
 [50] speke, that certes the gode folk ben alwey
 [51] myghty and schrewes ben alwey outcast
 [52] and feble; ne the vices ben neveremo withouten
 [53] peyne, ne the vertus ne ben nat withouten
 [54] mede; and that blisfulnesses comen alwey
 [55] to good folk, and infortune comith alwey to
 [56] wykkide folk. And thou schalt wel knowe
 [57] manye thinges of this kynde, that schullen
 [58] cesen thi pleyntis and strengthen the with stedfaste
 [59] sadnesse. And for thou hast seyn the
 [60] forme of the verray blisfulnesse by me that
 [61] have whilom yschewid it the, and thow
 [62] hast knowen in whom blisfulnesse is yset, alle
 [63] thingis ytreted that I trowe ben necessarie to
 [64] putten forth, I schal schewe the the weye that
 [65] schal bryngen the ayen unto thyn hous; and I
 [66] schal fycchen fetheris in thi thought, by whiche
 [67] it mai arisen in heighte; so that, alle tribulacioun
 [68] idon awey, thow, by my gyding and by
 [69] my path and by my sledys, shalt mowen
 [70] retourne hool and sownd into thi contree.
 [1] "I have, forthi, swifte fetheris that surmounten
 [2] the heighte of the hevene. Whanne
 [3] the swift thoght hath clothid itself in tho
 [4] fetheris, it despiseth the hateful erthes, and surmounteth
 [5] the rowndenesse of the gret ayr; and
 [6] it seth the clowdes byhynde his bak, and passeth
 [7] the heighte of the regioun of the fir, that
 [8] eschaufeth by the swifte moevynge of the firmament,
 [9] til that he areyseth hym into the
 [10] houses that beren the sterres, and joyneth
 [11] his weies with the sonne, Phebus, and
 [12] felawschipeth the weie of the olde colde Saturnus;
 [13] and he, imaked a knyght of the clere
 [14] sterre (that is to seyn, whan the thought is
 [15] makid Godis knyght by the sekynge of
 [16] trouthe to comen to the verray knowleche of
 [17] God) -- and thilke soule renneth by the cercle
 [18] of the sterres in alle the places there as the
 [19] schynynge nyght is ypainted (that is to
 [20] sey, the nyght that is cloudeles; for on
 [21] nyghtes that ben cloudeles it semeth as
 [22] the hevene were peynted with diverse ymages
 [23] of sterres). And whan [that] he hath gon there
 [24] inoghe, he schal forleten the laste point of the
 [25] hevene, and he schal pressen and wenden on
 [26] the bak of the swifte firmament, and he schal
 [27] be makid parfit of the worschipful lyght [or]
 [28] dredefulle clerenesse of God. There halt the
 [29] lord of kynges the septre of his myght and
 [30] atemprith the governementz of the world,
 [31] and the schynynge juge of thinges, stable in
 [32] hymself, governeth the swifte cart or wayn (that
 [33] is to seyn, the circuler moevynge of the sonne).
 [34] And yif thi wey ledeth the ayein so that thou be
 [35] brought thider, thanne wiltow seye now that
 [36] that is the contre that thou requerist, of whiche
 [37] thow ne haddest no mynde -- `but now it
 [38] remembreth me wel, here was I born, her wol
 [39] I fastne my degree, here wol I duelle.' But
 [40] yif the liketh thanne to looken on the
 [41] derknesse of the erthe that thou hast
 [42] forleten, thanne shaltow seen that these felonus
 [43] tirantz, that the wrecchide peple dredeth now,
 [44] schullen ben exiled fro thilke faire contre."
 [1] Thanne seide I thus: "Owh! I wondre me
 [2] that thow byhetist me so grete thinges. Ne I
 [3] ne doute nat that thou ne maist wel parforme
 [4] that thow behetist; but I preie the oonly this,
 [5] that thow ne tarie nat to telle me thilke thinges
 [6] that thou hast moevid."
 [7] "First," quod sche, "thow most nedes knowen
 [8] that good folk ben alwey strong and myghti,
 [9] and the schrewes ben feble and desert and
 [10] naked of alle strengthes. And of thise
 [11] thinges, certes, everiche of hem is declared
 [12] and schewed by other. For so as good and
 [13] yvel ben two contraries, yif so be that good be
 [14] stedfast, thanne scheweth the feblesse of yvel
 [15] al opynly; and yif thow knowe clerly the freelnesse
 [70-ch] 16 of yvel, the stedfastnesse of good is
 [17] knowen. But for as moche as the fey of my
 [18] sentence schal ben the more ferme and haboundant,
 [19] I wil gon by the to weye and by the
 [20] tothir, and I wil conferme the thinges that
 [21] ben purposed, now on this side and now on
 [22] that side.
 [23] "Two thinges ther ben in whiche the effect of
 [24] alle the dedes of mankynde standeth (that is to
 [25] seyn, wil and power); and yif that oon of thise
 [26] two faileth, ther nys nothing that may be doon.
 [27] For yif that wille lakketh, ther nys no wyght that
 [28] undirtaketh to done that he wol nat doon; and
 [29] yif power faileth, the wil nys but in idel and
 [30] stant for naught. And therof cometh it that
 [31] yif thou see a wyght that wolde geten that
 [32] he mai not geten, thow maist nat douten that
 [33] power ne faileth hym to have that he wolde."
 [34] "This is open and cler," quod I, "ne it ne mai
 [70-ch] 35 nat be denyed in no manere."
 [36] "And yif thou se a wyght," quod sche, "that
 [37] hath doon that he wolde doon, thow nilt nat
 [38] douten that he ne hath had power to doon it?"
 [39] "No," quod I.
 [40] "And in that that every wyght may, in
 [41] that men may holden hym myghti. (As
 [42] who seith, in so moche as a man is myghty to
 [43] doon a thing, in so mochel men halt hym
 [44] myghti.) And in that that he ne mai, in that men
 [45] demen hym to ben feble."
 [46] "I confesse it wel," quod I.
 [47] "Remembreth the," quod sche, "that I have
 [70-ch] 48 gaderid and ischewid by forseide resouns that al
 [49] the entencioun of the wil of mankynde,
 [50] whiche that is lad by diverse studies,
 [51] hasteth to comen to blisfulnesse."
 [70-ch] 52 "It remembreth me wel," quod I, "that it hath
 [53] ben schewed."
 [54] "And recordeth the nat thanne," quod sche,
 [55] "that blisfulnesse is thilke same good that men
 [56] requiren, so that whanne that blisfulnesse is
 [57] required of alle, that good also is required and
 [58] desired of alle?"
 [70-ch] 59 "It ne recordeth me noght," quod I, "for
 [60] I have it gretly alwey ficched in my memorie."
 [62] "Alle folk thanne," quod sche, "goode and
 [63] eek badde, enforcen hem withoute difference of
 [64] entencioun to comen to good."
 [65] "This is a verray consequence," quod I.
 [66] "And certein is," quod sche, "that by the
 [70-ch] 67 getynge of good ben men ymakid gode."
 [68] "This is certein," quod I.
 [69] "Thanne geten gode men that thei desiren?"
 [71] "So semeth it," quod I.
 [72] "But wikkide folk," quod sche, "yif thei geten
 [73] the good that thei desiren, thei ne mowe nat
 [74] ben wikkid."
 [75] "So is it," quod I.
 [76] "Than so as the ton and the tothir," quod
 [77] sche, "desiren good, and the gode folk geten
 [78] good and not the wikkide folk, than is it no
 [79] doute that the gode folk ne ben myghty
 [80] and wikkid folk ben feble."
 [81] "Whoso that evere," quod I, "douteth
 [82] of this, he ne mai nat considere the nature of
 [83] thinges ne the consequence of resouns."
 [84] "And over this," quod sche, "if that ther ben
 [85] two thinges that han o same purpos by kynde,
 [86] and that oon of hem pursuweth and performeth
 [87] thilke same thing by naturel office, and the
 [88] tother mai nat doon thilke naturel office, but
 [89] folweth, by other manere than is covenable
 [90] to nature, hym that acomplisseth his purpos
 [70-ch] 91 kyndely, and yit he ne acomplisseth
 [92] nat his owene purpos -- whethir of thise two
 [93] demestow for more myghti?"
 [94] "Yif that I conjecte," quod I, "that thou wilt
 [95] seie, algates yit I desire to herkne it more
 [96] pleynly of the."
 [97] "Thou nilt nat thanne denye," quod sche,
 [98] "that the moevement of goynge nys in men by
 [99] kynde?"
 [100] "No, forsothe," quod I.
 [101] "Ne thou ne doutest nat," quod sche,
 [102] "that thilke naturel office of goinge ne be the
 [103] office of feet?"
 [104] "I ne doute it nat," quod I.
 [105] "Thanne," quod sche, "yif that a wight be
 [106] myghti to moeve, and goth uppon hise feet, and
 [107] another, to whom thilke naturel office of feet
 [108] lakketh, enforceth hym to gone crepinge uppon
 [70-ch] 109 his handes, whiche of thise two oughte to
 [110] ben holden the more myghty by right?"
 [111] "Knyt forth the remenaunt," quod I,
 [112] "for no wight ne douteth that he that mai gon
 [70-ch] 113 by naturel office of feet ne be more myghti than
 [114] he that ne may nat."
 [115] "But the soverein good," quod sche, "that is
 [116] eveneliche purposed to the good folk and to
 [117] badde, the gode folk seken it by naturel office of
 [118] vertus, and the schrewes enforcen hem to getin
 [119] it by diverse coveytise of erthly thinges,
 [70-ch] 120 whiche that nys noon naturel office to gete
 [121] thilke same soverein good. Trowestow that
 [122] it be any other wise?"
 [123] "Nai," quod I, "for the consequence is opene
 [124] and schewynge of thinges that I have graunted,
 [70-ch] 125 that nedes good folk moten be myghty, and
 [126] schrewes feble and unmyghti."
 [127] "Thou rennist aryght byforn me," quod sche,
 [128] "and this is the jugement (that is to sein, I juge
 [70-ch] 129 of the), ryght as thise leches ben wont to
 [130] hopin of sike folk, whan thei aperceyven
 [131] that nature is redressed and withstondeth
 [132] to the maladye. But for I se the now al redy to
 [133] the undirstondynge, I schal schewe the more
 [134] thikke and contynuel resouns. For loke now,
 [135] how greetly scheweth the feblesse and infirmite
 [136] of wikkid folk, that ne mowen nat comen to that
 [137] hir naturel entencioun ledeth hem; and yit
 [138] almest thilke naturel entencioun constreyneth
 [139] hem. And what were to demen thanne of
 [140] schrewes, yif thilk naturel help hadde
 [141] forleten hem, the whiche naturel help of
 [70-ch] 142 entencioun goth alwey byforn hem and is so gret
 [143] that unnethe it mai ben overcome? Considere
 [144] thanne how gret defaute of power and how gret
 [145] feblesse ther is in wikkide felonous folke. (As
 [146] who seith, the grettere thing that is coveyted
 [147] and the desir nat acomplissed, of the lasse
 [148] myght is he that coveyteth it and mai nat
 [149] acomplisse; and forthi Philosophie seith
 [150] thus be sovereyn good.) Ne schrewes ne
 [151] requeren not lighte meedes ne veyne
 [152] games, whiche thei ne mai nat folwen ne holden;
 [153] but thei failen of thilke somme and of the
 [154] heighte of thinges (that is to seyn, soverein
 [155] good). Ne these wrecches ne comen nat to the
 [156] effect of sovereyn good, the whiche thei enforcen
 [157] hem oonly to geten by nyghtes and by
 [70-ch] 158 dayes. In the getyng of whiche good the
 [159] strengthe of good folk is ful wel yseene.
 [160] For ryght so as thou myghtest demen hym
 [161] myghty of goinge that goth on his feet til
 [70-ch] 162 he myghte comen to thilke place fro the whiche
 [163] place ther ne laye no weie forthere to be gon,
 [164] ryght so mostow nedes demen hym for ryght
 [165] myghty, that geteth and atteyneth to the ende of
 [166] alle thinges that ben to desire, byyonde the
 [167] whiche ende ther nys no thing to desire. Of the
 [168] whiche power of good folk men mai conclude
 [70-ch] 169 that the wikkide men semen to be bareyne
 [170] and naked of alle strengthe.
 [171] "For whi forleten thei vertus and folwen
 [172] vices? Nys it nat for that thei ne knowen nat the
 [173] godes? But what thing is more feble and more
 [174] caytif than is the blyndnesse of ignorance? Or
 [175] elles thei knowen ful wel whiche thinges that
 [176] thei oughten folwe, but lecherie and covetise
 [177] overthroweth hem mystorned. And certes so
 [178] doth distempraunce to feble men, that ne
 [179] mowen nat wrastlen ayen the vices. Ne
 [180] knowen thei nat thanne wel that thei
 [181] forleten the good wilfully, and turnen hem
 [182] wilfully to vices?
 [183] "And in this wise thei ne forleten nat oonly to
 [184] ben myghti, but thei forleten al outrely in any
 [185] wise for to been. For thei that forleten the
 [186] comune fyn of alle thinges that ben, thei forleten
 [187] also therwithal for to been. And peraventure
 [70-ch] 188 it scholde seme to som folk that this were
 [189] a merveile to seien, that schrewes, whiche
 [190] that contenen the more partie of men, ne
 [191] ben nat ne han no beynge; but natheles it
 [70-ch] 192 is so, and thus stant this thing. For thei that Bo4 p2 ben
 [193] schrewes I denye nat that they ben schrewes, but
 [194] I denye and seie simply and pleynly that thei ne
 [195] ben nat, ne han no beynge. For right as thou
 [196] myghtest seyn of the careyne of a man, that it
 [197] were a deed man, but thou ne myghtest nat
 [198] symply callen it a man; so graunte I wel forsothe
 [70-ch] 199 that vicyous folk ben wikkid, but I ne may
 [200] nat graunten absolutly and symply that thei
 [201] ben. For thilke thing that withholdeth
 [202] ordre and kepeth nature, thilke thing es, and
 [203] hath beinge; but what thing that faileth of
 [204] that (that is to seyn, he that forleteth naturel
 [205] ordre), he forleteth thilke beinge that is set in his
 [70-ch] 206 nature.
 [207] "But thow wolt seyn that schrewes mowen.
 [208] Certes, that ne denye I nat; but certes hir
 [209] power ne desscendeth nat of strengthe,
 [210] but of feblesse. For thei mowen don
 [211] wikkydnesses, the whiche thei ne myghten
 [212] nat don yif thei myghten duellen in the forme
 [213] and in the doynge of good folk. And thilke
 [214] power scheweth ful evidently that they ne
 [70-ch] 215 mowen ryght nat. For so as I have gadrid
 [216] and proevid a litil herebyforn that evel is
 [217] nawght, and so as schrewes mowen oonly but
 [218] schrewednesses, this conclusion is al cler, that
 [219] schrewes ne mowen ryght nat, ne han no
 [220] power.
 [221] "And for as moche as thou undirstonde
 [222] which is the strengthe of this power of schrewes,
 [223] I have diffinysched a litil herbyforn that no thing
 [224] is so myghti as sovereyn good."
 [225] "That is soth," quod I.
 [226] "And thilke same sovereyn good may don
 [227] noon yvel?"
 [228] "Certes, no," quod I.
 [229] "Is ther any wyght thanne," quod sche,
 [230] "that weneth that men mowen don alle
 [231] thinges?"
 [232] "No man," quod I, "but yif he be out of his
 [233] wyt."
 [234] "But certes schrewes mowen don evel?" quod
 [235] sche.
 [236] "Ye. Wolde God," quod I, "that thei ne
 [237] myghten don noon!"
 [238] "Thanne," quod sche, "so as he that is myghty
 [239] to doon oonly but goode thinges mai doon
 [240] alle thinges, and thei that ben myghti to
 [241] doon yvele thinges ne mowen nat alle
 [242] thinges, thanne is it open thing and manyfest
 [243] that thei that mowen doon yvele ben of lasse
 [244] power.
 [245] "And yit to proeve this conclusioun ther
 [246] helpeth me this, that I have schewed herebyforn,
 [247] that alle power is to be noumbred among
 [248] thinges that men oughten requere; and I have
 [249] schewed that alle thinges that oughten ben
 [250] desired ben referred to good, ryght as to a
 [251] maner heighte of hir nature. But for to
 [252] mowen don yvel and felonye ne mai nat ben
 [253] referrid to good; thanne nys nat yvel of the
 [254] nombre of thinges that oughten ben desired.
 [255] But alle power aughte ben desired and requerid;
 [256] thanne is it open and cler that the power ne the
 [257] mowynge of schrewes nis no power.
 [258] "And of alle thise thinges it scheweth wel that
 [259] the gode folk ben certeinli myghty, and the
 [260] schrewes doutelees ben unmyghty. And
 [261] it is cler and opene that thilke sentence
 [262] of Plato is verray and soth, that seith that
 [263] oonly wise men may doon that thei desiren,
 [264] and schrewes mowen haunten that hem liketh,
 [265] but that thei desiren (that is to seyn, to come
 [266] to sovereyn good), thei ne han no power to
 [267] acomplissen that. For schrewes don that hem lyst
 [268] whan, by tho thinges in whiche thei deliten, thei
 [269] wenen to ateynen to thilke good that thei
 [270] desiren; but thei ne geten ne ateyne nat
 [271] therto, for vices ne comen nat to blisfulnesse.
 [1] "Whoso that the coverturis of hir veyn apparailes
 [2] myghte strepen of thise proude kynges,
 [3] that thow seest sitten an hye in here chayeres,
 [4] gliterynge in schynynge purpre, envyrowned
 [5] with sorwful armures, manasyng with cruel
 [6] mowth, blowynge by woodnesse of herte, he
 [7] schulde seen thanne that thilke lordis berin
 [8] withynne hir corages ful streyte cheynes. For
 [9] lecherye tormenteth hem on that o side
 [10] with gredy venymes; and trowblable ire,
 [11] that areyseth in hem the floodes of trowblynges,
 [12] tormenteth upon that othir side hir
 [13] thought; or sorwe halt hem wery and icawght,
 [14] or slidynge and desceyvynge hope turmenteth
 [15] hem. And therfore, syn thow seest on heved
 [16] (that is to seyn, o tiraunt) beren so manye
 [17] tyranyes, than ne doth thilke tyraunt nat that he
 [18] desireth, syn he is cast doun with so manye
 [19] wikkide lordes (that is to seyn, with so
 [20] manye vices that han so wikkidly lordschipes
 [21] over hym).
 [1] "Seestow nat thanne in how greet filthe thise
 [2] schrewes been iwrapped, and with which clernesse
 [3] thise gode folk schynen? In this scheweth
 [4] it wel that to good folk ne lakketh neveremo
 [5] hir meedes, ne schrewes ne lakken neveremo
 [6] turmentes. For of alle thinges that ben idoon,
 [7] thilke thing for which any thing is doon, it
 [8] semeth as by ryght that thilke thing be the
 [9] mede of that; as thus, yif a man renneth in
 [10] the stadye or in the forlonge for the
 [11] corone, thanne lith the mede in the coroune
 [12] for whiche he renneth. And I have schewed
 [13] that blisfulnesse is thilke same good for whiche
 [14] that alle thinges ben doon; thanne is thilke
 [15] same good purposed to the werkes of mankynde
 [16] right as a comune mede, which mede ne
 [17] may nat ben disseveryd fro good folk. For no
 [18] wight as by ryght, fro thennesforth that hym
 [19] lakketh goodnesse, ne schal ben cleped
 [20] good. For whiche thing folk of gode maneres,
 [21] hir medes ne forsaken hem neveremo.
 [22] For al be it so that schrewes waxen as wode
 [23] as hem lyst ayein good folk, yit natheles the
 [24] coroune of wise men ne schal nat fallen ne
 [25] faden; for foreyne schrewednesse ne bynemeth
 [26] nat fro the corages of good folk hir propre
 [27] honour. But yif that any wyght rejoysede hym
 [28] of goodnesse that he hadde taken fro withoute
 [29] (as who seith, yif any man hadde his goodnesse
 [30] of any other man than of hymself),
 [31] certes he that yaf hym thilke goodnesse, or
 [32] elles som other wyght, myghte benymen it
 [33] hym. But for as moche as to every wyght his
 [34] owene propre bounte yeveth hym his mede,
 [35] thanne at erste schal he failen of mede whan
 [36] he forletith to ben good. And at the laste, so
 [37] as alle medes ben requerid for men wenen that
 [38] thei ben gode, who is he that nolde deme that
 [39] he that is ryght myghti of good were partlees
 [40] of the mede? And of what mede schal
 [41] he ben gerdoned? Certes of ryght fair
 [42] mede and ryght greet aboven alle medes. Remembre
 [43] the of thilke noble corrolarie that I
 [44] yaf the a litel herebyforn, and gadre it togidre
 [45] in this manere: so as good [hytself] is blisfulnesse,
 [46] thanne is it cler and certein that alle
 [47] gode folk ben imaked blisful for thei ben gode;
 [48] and thilke folk that ben blisful it accordeth and
 [49] is covenable to ben goddes. Thanne is the
 [50] mede of good folk swych that no day ne
 [51] schal empeiren it, ne no wikkidnesse schal
 [52] derkne it, ne power of no wyght ne schal nat
 [53] amenusen it; that is to seyn, to ben maked
 [54] goddes. And syn it is thus (that gode men ne
 [55] failen neveremo of hir mede), certes no wise man
 [56] ne may doute of the undepartable peyne of
 [57] schrewes (that is to seyn, that the peyne of
 [58] schrewes ne departeth nat from hemself neveremo).
 [59] For so as good and yvel, and peyne and
 [60] medes, ben contrarie, it moot nedes ben
 [61] that, ryght as we seen betyden in guerdoun
 [62] of gode, that also moot the peyne of yvel answere
 [63] by the contrarie partie to schrewes. Now
 [64] thanne, so as bounte and pruesse ben the mede
 [65] to good folk, also is schrewidnesse itself torment
 [66] to schrewes. Thanne whoso that evere is
 [67] entecchid or defouled with peyne, he ne douteth
 [68] nat that he nys entecchid and defouled
 [69] with yvel. Yif schrewes thanne wol preysen
 [70] hemself, may it semen to hem that thei ben
 [71] withouten parti of torment, syn thei ben
 [72] swiche that the uttreste wikkidnesse (that is to
 [73] seyn, wikkide thewes, which that is the uttereste
 [74] and the worst kynde of schrewednesse)
 [75] ne defouleth ne enteccheth nat hem oonly, but
 [76] enfecteth and envenymeth hem greetly? And
 [77] also loke on schrewes, that ben the contrarie
 [78] partie of gode men, how gret peyne felawschipith
 [79] and folweth hem! For thou hast
 [80] lerned a litil herebyforn that alle thing that
 [81] is and hath beynge is oon, and thilke same
 [82] oon is good: than is this the consequence, that
 [83] it semeth wel that al that is and hath beynge
 [84] is good. (This is to seyn, as who seith that
 [85] beinge and unite and goodnesse is al oon.)
 [86] And in this manere it folweth thanne that alle
 [87] thing that fayleth to ben good, it stynteth for
 [88] to be and for to han any beynge. Wherfore it
 [89] es that schrewes stynten for to ben that
 [90] thei weeren. But thilke othir forme [of] [the]
 [91] [body] of mankynde (that is to seyn, the
 [92] [forme] withowte) scheweth yit that thise
 [93] schrewes weren whilom men. Wherfore, whan
 [94] thei ben perverted and turned into malice,
 [95] certes, thanne have thei forlorn the nature of
 [96] mankynde. But so as oonly bownte and prowesse
 [97] may enhawnsen every man over othere
 [98] men, than moot it nedes be that schrewes,
 [99] whiche that schrewednesse hath cast out of
 [100] the condicion of mankynde, ben put undir
 [101] the merit and the dissert of men. Than
 [102] betidith it that, yif thou seest a wyght that be
 [103] transformed into vices, thow ne mayst nat wene
 [104] that he be a man. For if he be ardaunt in avaryce,
 [105] and that he be a ravynour by violence of foreyne
 [106] richesse, thou schalt seyn that he is lik to the
 [107] wolf; and if he be felonows and withoute reste,
 [108] and exercise his tonge to chidynges, thow schalt
 [109] likne hym to the hownd; and if he be a
 [110] pryve awaytour yhid, and rejoiseth hym to
 [111] ravyssche be wiles, thow schalt seyn hym
 [112] lik to the fox whelpes; and yif he be distempre,
 [113] and quakith for ire, men schal wene that he
 [114] bereth the corage of a lyoun; and yif he be
 [115] dredful and fleynge, and dredith thinges that ne
 [116] aughte nat to ben dredd, men schal holden hym
 [117] lik to the hert; and yf he be slow, and astonyd,
 [118] and lache, he lyveth as an asse; yif he be lyght
 [119] and unstedfast of corage and chaungith ay
 [120] his studies, he is likned to briddes; and if he
 [121] be ploungid in fowle and unclene luxuris,
 [122] he is withholden in the foule delices of the fowle
 [123] sowe. Than folweth it that he that forleteth
 [124] bounte and prowesse, he forletith to ben a man;
 [125] syn he ne may nat passe into the condicion of
 [126] God, he is torned into a beeste.
 [1] "Eurus, the wynd, aryved the sayles of Ulixes,
 [2] duc of the cuntre of Narice, and his wandrynge
 [3] shippes by the see, into the ile theras
 [4] Cerces, the faire goddesse, dowhter of the
 [5] sonne, duelleth, that medleth to hir newe
 [6] gestes drynkes that ben touchid and makid
 [7] with enchauntementz. And aftir that hir hand,
 [8] myghti over the erbes, hadde chaunged hir
 [9] gestes into diverse maneres, that oon of
 [10] hem is coverid his face with forme of a
 [11] boor; the tother is chaungid into a lyoun
 [12] of the contre of Marmoryke, and his nayles and
 [13] his teth waxen; that oother of hem is newliche
 [14] chaunged into a wolf, and howleth whan he
 [15] wolde wepe; that other goth debonayrely in
 [16] the hows as a tigre of Inde. But al be it so
 [17] that the godhede of Mercurie, that is cleped
 [18] the bridde of Arcadye, hath had merci of the
 [19] duc Ulixes, bysegid with diverse yveles,
 [20] and hath unbownden hym fro the pestilence
 [21] of his oostesse, algates the rowerys
 [22] and the maryneres hadden by this idrawen into
 [23] hir mouthes and dronken the wikkide drynkes.
 [24] Thei that weren woxen swyn hadden by this
 [25] ichaunged hir mete of breed for to eten akkornes
 [26] of ookes. Noon of hir lymes ne duelleth
 [27] with hem hool, but thei han lost the voys
 [28] and the body; oonly hir thought duelleth with
 [29] hem stable, that wepeth and bywayleth the
 [30] monstruous chaungynge that thei suffren.
 [31] O overlyght hand! (As who seith. O
 [32] feble and light is the hand of Circes the enchaunteresse,
 [33] that chaungith the bodyes of
 [34] folk into beestes, to regard and to comparysoun
 [35] of mutacioun that is makid by vices!)
 [36] Ne the herbes of Circes ne ben nat myghty.
 [37] For al be it so that thei mai chaungen the
 [38] lymes of the body, algates yit thei may nat
 [39] chaungen the hertes. For withinne is ihidd
 [40] the strengthe and the vygour of men, in the
 [41] secre tour of hir hertes, (that is to seyn, the
 [42] strengthe of resoun); but thilke venyms of vices
 [43] todrawen a man to hem more myghtely than
 [44] the venym of Circes. For vices ben so cruel
 [45] that they percen and thurw-passen the corage
 [46] withinne; and, thoughe thei ne anoye nat the
 [47] body, yit vices woden to destroyen men by
 [48] wounde of thought."
 [1] Thanne seide I thus: "I confesse and am
 [2] aknowe it," quod I, "ne I ne se nat that men
 [3] may seyn as by ryght that schrewes ne ben
 [4] chaunged into beestes by the qualite of hir
 [5] soules, al be it so that thei kepin yit the forme
 [6] of the body of mankynde. But I nolde nat of
 [7] schrewes, of whiche the thought crwel woodeth
 [8] alwey into destruccion of gode men, that
 [9] it were leveful to hem to don that."
 [10] "Certes," quod sche, "ne it is nat leveful
 [11] to hem, as I schal wel schewen the in covenable
 [12] place. But natheles, yif so were that
 [13] thilke that men wenen ben leveful to schrewes
 [14] were bynomyn hem, so that they ne myghte
 [15] nat anoyen or doon harm to gode men, certes
 [16] a gret partie of the peyne to schrewes scholde
 [17] ben alegged and releved. For al be it so that
 [18] this ne seme nat credible thing peraventure to
 [19] some folk, yit moot it nedes be that
 [20] schrewes ben more wrecches and unsely
 [21] whan thei mai doon and parforme that
 [22] thei coveyten, than yif thei ne myghte nat
 [23] acomplissen that thei coveiten. For yif so
 [24] be that it be wrecchidnesse to wilne to doon
 [25] yvel, thanne is it more wrecchidnesse to mowe
 [26] don yvel, withoute whiche mowynge the wrecchid
 [27] wil scholde langwisse withouten effect.
 [28] Thanne syn that everiche of thise thinges hath his
 [29] wrecchidnesse (that is to seyn, wil to don
 [30] ivel and mowynge to don yvel), it moot
 [31] nedes be that schrewes ben constreyned by
 [32] thre unselynesses, that wolen, and mowen, and
 [33] parformen felonyes and schrewednesses."
 [34] "I acorde me," quod I; "but I desire gretly
 [35] that schrewes losten sone thilke unselynesses,
 [36] that is to seyn, that schrewes weren despoyled
 [37] of mowynge to don yvel."
 [38] "So schollen thei," quod sche, "sonnere peraventure
 [39] than thou woldest, or sonnere
 [40] than they hemselve wene. For ther nis
 [41] nothing so late, in so schorte bowndes of
 [42] this lif, that is long to abyde, nameliche to a corage
 [43] immortel. Of whiche schrewes the grete
 [44] hope and the heye compassynges of schrewednesses
 [45] is ofte destroyed by a sodeyn ende, or
 [46] thei ben war; and that thing establisseth to
 [47] schrewes the ende of hir schrewednesse. For
 [48] yf that schrewednesse makith wrecches, than
 [49] mot he nedes ben moost wrecchide that
 [50] lengest is a schrewe. The whiche wikkide
 [51] schrewes wolde I demen althermost unsely
 [52] and kaytifs, yif that hir schrewednesse ne were
 [53] fynissched at the leste weye by the owtreste
 [54] deth; for yif I have concluded soth of the unselynesse
 [55] of schrewednesse, thanne schewith it
 [56] clerly that thilke wrecchidnesse is withouten
 [57] ende the whiche is certein to ben perdurable."
 [58] "Certes," quod I, "this conclusioun is hard and
 [59] wondirful to graunte; but I knowe wel
 [60] that it accordeth moche to the thinges that
 [61] I have grauntid herebiforn."
 [62] "Thou hast," quod sche, "the ryght estimacion
 [63] of this. But whosoevere wene that it be
 [64] an hard thing to accorde hym to a conclusioun,
 [65] it is ryght that he schewe that some
 [66] of the premysses ben false, or elles he mot
 [67] schewe that the collacioun of proposicions
 [68] nis nat spedful to a necessarie conclusioun;
 [69] and yif it ne be nat so, but that the premisses
 [70] ben ygraunted, ther nys nat why he
 [71] scholde blame the argument. For this thing
 [72] that I schal telle the now ne schal nat seme
 [73] lesse wondirful, but of the thingis that ben
 [74] taken also it is necessarie." (As who seith, it
 [75] folweth of that which that is purposed byforn.)
 [77] "What is that?" quod I.
 [78] "Certes," quod sche, "that is that thise wikkid
 [79] schrewes ben more blisful, or elles
 [80] lasse wrecches, that abyen the tormentz
 [81] that thei han desservid, than if no peyne of
 [82] justise ne chastisede hem. Ne this ne seie I
 [83] nat now for that any man myghte thinke that
 [84] the maneris of schrewes ben coriged and chastised
 [85] by vengeaunce and that thei ben brought
 [86] to the ryghte weye by the drede of the torment,
 [87] ne for that they yeven to other folk ensaumple
 [88] to fleen fro vices; but I undirstonde yit in another
 [89] manere that schrewes ben more unsely
 [90] whan thei ne ben nat punyssched, al
 [91] be it so that ther ne be hadde no resoun or
 [92] lawe of correccioun, ne noon ensample of
 [93] lokynge."
 [94] "And what manere schal that be," quod I,
 [95] "other than hath ben told herbyforn?"
 [96] "Have we nat thanne graunted," quod sche,
 [97] "that good folk ben blisful and schrewes ben
 [98] wrecches?"
 [99] "Yis," quod I.
 [100] "Thanne," quod sche, "yif that any good
 [101] were added to the wrecchidnesse of any
 [102] wyght, nis he nat more blisful than he that
 [103] ne hath no medlynge of good in his solitarie
 [104] wrecchidnesse?"
 [105] "So semeth it," quod I.
 [106] "And what seistow thanne," quod sche, "of
 [107] thilke wrecche that lakketh alle goodes so that
 [108] no good nys medlyd in his wrecchidnesse,
 [109] and yit over al his wikkidnesse, for which
 [110] he is a wrecche, that ther be yit another
 [111] yvel anexed and knyt to hym -- schal nat
 [112] men demen hym more unsely thanne thilke
 [113] wrecche of whiche the unselynesse is relevid by
 [114] the participacioun of som good?"
 [115] "Why sholde he nat?" quod I.
 [116] "Thanne certes," quod sche, "han schrewes,
 [117] whan thei ben punyschid, somwhat of good
 [118] anexid to hir wrecchidnesse (that is to seyn, the
 [119] same peyne that thei suffren, which that is
 [120] good by the resoun of justice); and whanne
 [121] thilke same schrewes ascapen withouten
 [122] torment, than han they somwhat more of yvel
 [123] yit over the wikkidnesse that thei han don, that
 [124] is to seyn, defaute of peyne, whiche defaute of
 [125] peyne thou hast grauntid is yvel for the disserte
 [126] of felonye?"
 [127] "I ne may nat denye it," quod I.
 [128] "Moche more thanne," quod sche, "ben
 [129] schrewes unsely whan thei ben wrongfully
 [130] delivred fro peyne, thanne whan thei
 [131] ben punyschid by ryghtful vengeaunce.
 [132] But this is opene thing and cleer, that it is ryght
 [133] that schrewes ben punyschid, and it is wikkidnesse
 [134] and wrong that thei escapen unpunyschid."
 [136] "Who myghte denye that?" quod I.
 [137] "But," quod sche, "may any man denye that
 [138] al that is ryght nis good, and also the contrarie,
 [139] that al that is wrong is wikke?"
 [140] "Certes," quod I, "thise thinges ben
 [141] clere ynowe, and [folwen that] that we han
 [142] concluded a lytel herebyforn. But I preye the
 [143] that thow telle me, yif thow accordest to leten
 [144] no torment to the soules aftir that the body is
 [145] ended by the deeth?" (This to seyn, "Undirstondestow
 [146] aught that soules han any
 [147] torment aftir the deeth of the body?")
 [148] "Certes," quod sche, "ye, and that ryght
 [149] greet. Of whiche soules," quod sche, "I
 [150] trowe that some ben tormented by asprenesse
 [151] of peyne, and some soules I trowe
 [152] ben excercised by a purgynge mekenesse; but
 [153] my conseil nys nat to determyne of thise peynes.
 [154] "But I have travailed and told yit hiderto for
 [155] thou scholdest knowe that the mowynge of
 [156] schrewes, whiche mowynge the semeth to ben
 [157] unworthy, nis no mowynge; and ek of schrewes,
 [158] of whiche thou pleynedest that they ne were nat
 [159] punysschid, that thow woldest seen that
 [160] thei ne were neveremo withouten the
 [161] tormentz of hir wikkidnesse; and of the
 [162] licence of mowynge to don yvel that thou
 [163] preyedest that it myghte sone ben ended, and
 [164] that thou woldest fayn lernen that it ne sholde
 [165] nat longe endure, and that schrewes ben more
 [166] unsely yif thei were of lengere durynge, and
 [167] most unsely yif thei weren perdurable. And aftir
 [168] this I have schewyd the that more unsely ben
 [169] schrewes whan thei escapen withouten hir
 [170] ryghtful peyne thanne whan thei ben
 [171] punyschid by ryghtful venjaunce; and of
 [172] this sentence folweth it that thanne ben schrewes
 [173] constreyned at the laste with most grevous
 [174] torment, whan men wene that thei ne ben nat
 [175] punyssched."
 [176] "Whan I considere thi resouns," quod I, "I ne
 [177] trowe nat that men seyn any thing more
 [178] verrayly. And yif I turne ayein to the studies of
 [179] men, who is he to whom it sholde seme that
 [180] he ne scholde nat oonly leven thise thinges,
 [181] but ek gladly herkne hem?"
 [182] "Certes," quod sche, "so it es -- but men may
 [183] nat. For they have hir eien so wont to the
 [184] derknesse of erthly thinges that they ne may nat
 [185] lyften hem up to the light of cler sothfastnesse,
 [186] but thei ben lyk to briddes of whiche the nyght
 [187] lightneth hir lokynge and the day blendith hem.
 [188] For whan men loke nat the ordre of thinges, but
 [189] hir lustes and talentz, they wene that either
 [190] the leve or the mowynge to don wikkidnesse,
 [191] or elles the scapynge withouten
 [192] peyne be weleful.
 [193] "But considere the jugement of the perdurable
 [194] lawe. For yif thou conferme thi corage to the
 [195] beste thinges, thow ne hast noon nede of no juge
 [196] to yeven the prys or mede; for thow hast joyned
 [197] thiself to the most excellent thing. And yif thow
 [198] have enclyned thi studies to the wikkide thinges,
 [199] ne seek no foreyne wrekere out of thiself;
 [200] for thow thiself hast thrist thiself into wikke
 [201] thinges, ryght as thow myghtest loken by
 [202] diverse tymes the fowle erthe and the hevene,
 [203] and that alle othere thinges stynten fro withoute,
 [204] so that thow nere neyther in [hevene] ne in
 [205] erthe, ne saye no thyng more; thanne scholde it
 [206] semen to the as by oonly resoun of lokynge that
 [207] thow were now in the sterres, and now in the
 [208] erthe. But the peple ne loketh nat on these
 [209] thinges. What thanne? Schal we thanne
 [210] approchen us to hem that I have schewed
 [211] that thei ben lyke to beestes? And what
 [212] wyltow seyn of this: yif that a man hadde al
 [213] forlorn his syghte, and hadde foryeten that he
 [214] evere sawhe, and wende that no thing ne faylede
 [215] hym of perfeccioun of mankynde; now we that
 [216] myghten sen the same thinges -- wolde we nat
 [217] wene that he were blynd? Ne also ne accordeth
 [218] nat the peple to that I schal seyn, the whiche
 [219] thing is sustenyd by as stronge foundementz
 [220] of resouns, that is to seyn, that
 [221] more unsely ben they that doon wrong to
 [222] othere folk, than they that the wrong suffren."
 [223] "I wolde here thilke same resouns," quod I.
 [224] "Denyestow," quod sche, "that alle schrewes
 [225] ne ben worthy to han torment?"
 [226] "Nay," quod I.
 [227] "But," quod sche, "I am certein by many
 [228] resouns that schrewes ben unsely."
 [229] "It accordeth," quod I.
 [230] "Thanne ne dowtestow nat," quod sche,
 [231] "that thilke folk that ben worthy of
 [232] torment, that they ne ben wrecches?"
 [233] "It accordeth wel," quod I.
 [234] "Yif thou were thanne iset a juge or a
 [235] knowere of thinges, whethir trowestow that men
 [236] scholden tormenten, hym that hath don the
 [237] wrong or elles hym that hath suffred the
 [238] wrong?"
 [239] "I ne doute nat," quod I, "that I nolde
 [240] doon suffisaunt satisfaccioun to hym that
 [241] hadde suffrid the wrong, by the sorwe of
 [242] hym that hadde doon the wrong."
 [243] "Thanne semeth it," quod sche, "that the
 [244] doere of wrong is more wrecche than he that
 [245] hath suffride wrong?"
 [246] "That folweth wel," quod I.
 [247] "Than," quod sche, "by thise causes and by
 [248] othere causes that ben enforced by the same
 [249] roote, that filthe [of] synne be the propre
 [250] nature of it maketh men wrecches, [it]
 [251] scheweth wel that the wrong that men
 [252] doon nis nat the wrecchidnesse of hym that
 [253] resceyveth the wrong, but the wrecchidnesse of
 [254] hym that dooth the wrong. But certes," quod
 [255] sche, "thise oratours or advocattes don al the
 [256] contrarie; for thei enforcen hem to commoeve
 [257] the juges to han pite of hem that han suffrid
 [258] and resceyved the thinges that ben grevous
 [259] and aspre, and yit men scholden more
 [260] ryghtfully han pite of hem that doon the
 [261] grevances and the wronges: the whiche
 [262] schrewes it were a more covenable thing that the
 [263] accusours or advocattes, nat wrooth but pytous
 [264] and debonayre, ledden tho schrewes that han
 [265] don wrong to the jugement ryght as men leden
 [266] syke folk to the leche, for that thei sholden seken
 [267] out the maladyes of synne by torment. And
 [268] by this covenant, eyther the entent of the
 [269] deffendours or advocatz sholde fayle and
 [270] cesen in al, or elles, yif the office of
 [271] advocatz wolde betre profiten to men, it
 [272] sholde be torned into the habyte of accusacioun.
 [273] (That is to seyn, thei scholden accuse
 [274] schrewes, and nat excusen hem.) And eek the
 [275] schrewes hemself, yif it were leveful to hem to
 [276] seen at any clifte the vertu that thei han forleten,
 [277] and sawen that they scholden putten adoun the
 [278] filthes of hir vices by the tormentz of peynes,
 [279] they ne aughten nat, ryght for the
 [280] recompensacioun for to geten hem bounte
 [281] and prowesse whiche that thei han lost,
 [282] demen ne holden that thilke peynes weren
 [283] tormentz to hem; and eek thei wolden refuse the
 [284] attendaunce of hir advocattz, and taken hemself
 [285] to hir juges and to hir accusours. For whiche it
 [286] betydeth that, as to the wise folk, ther nis no
 [287] place yleten to hate (that is to seyn, that hate
 [288] ne hath no place among wise men); for no
 [289] wyght nil haten gode men, but yif he were
 [290] overmochel a fool, and for to haten
 [291] schrewes it nis no resoun. For ryght so as
 [292] langwissynge is maladye of body, ryght so ben
 [293] vices and synne maladye of corage; and so as we
 [294] ne deme nat that they that ben sike of hir body
 [295] ben worthy to ben hated, but rather worthy of
 [296] pite; wel more worthy nat to ben hated, but
 [297] for to ben had in pite, ben thei of whiche
 [298] the thoughtes ben constreyned by felonous
 [299] wikkidnesse, that is more crwel than any
 [300] langwissynge of body.
 [1] "What deliteth yow to exciten so grete moevynges
 [2] of hatredes, and to hasten and bysien
 [3] the fatal disposicioun of your deth with your
 [4] propre handes (that is to seyn, by batayles or
 [5] contek)? For yif ye axen the deth, it hasteth
 [6] hym of his owene wil, ne deth ne taryeth nat
 [7] his swifte hors. And the men that the serpent,
 [8] and the lyoun, and the tigre, and the
 [9] bere, and the boor, seken to sleen with hir
 [10] teeth, yit thilke same men seken to sleen
 [11] everiche of hem oothir with swerd. Lo, for
 [12] hir maneres ben diverse and discordaunt, thei
 [13] moeven unryghtful oostes and cruel batayles,
 [14] and wilnen to perise by entrechaungynge of
 [15] dartes! But the resoun of cruelte nis nat inowhe
 [16] ryghtful. Wiltow thanne yelden a covenable
 [17] gerdoun to the dissertes of men? Love ryghtfully
 [18] good folk, and have pite on schrewes."
 [1] "Thus se I wel," quod I, "eyther what blisfulnesse
 [2] or elles what unselynesse is establisshid
 [3] in the dissertes of gode men and of
 [4] schrewes. But in this ilke fortune of peple I
 [5] se somwhat of good and somwhat of yvel. For
 [6] no wise man hath nat levere ben exiled, pore
 [7] and nedy and nameles, thanne for to duellen
 [8] in his cyte, and flouren of rychesses, and be
 [9] redowtable by honour and strong of power.
 [10] For in this wise more clerly and more witnesfully
 [11] is the office of wise men ytreted,
 [12] whanne the blisfulnesse and the pouste of
 [13] gouvernours is, as it ware, ischadde among peples
 [14] that ben neyghbors and subgitz; syn that
 [15] namely prisown, lawe, and thise othere tormentz
 [16] of laweful peynes ben rather owed to
 [17] felonus citezeins, for the whiche felonus citezeens
 [18] tho peynes ben establisschid than for
 [19] good folk.
 [20] "Thanne I merveile me gretly," quod I,
 [21] "why that the thinges ben so mysentrechaunged
 [22] that tormentz of felonyes pressen and
 [23] confounden good folk, and schrewes ravysschen
 [24] medes of vertu and ben in honours
 [25] and in grete estatz; and I desire eek for to
 [26] witen of the what semeth the to be the resoun
 [27] of this so wrongful a confusioun; for I wolde
 [28] wondre wel the lasse, yif I trowede that alle
 [29] thise thinges weren medled by fortunows
 [30] hap. But now hepith and encreseth myn
 [31] astonyenge God, governour of thinges,
 [32] that, so as God yyveth ofte tymes to gode men
 [33] godes and myrthes, and to schrewes yvelis and
 [34] aspre thinges, and yeveth ayeinward to good
 [35] folk hardnesses, and to schrewes he graunteth
 [36] hem hir wil and that they desiren -- what difference
 [37] thanne may ther be bytwixen that that
 [38] God doth and the hap of fortune, yif men ne
 [39] knowe nat the cause why that it is?"
 [40] "Ne it nis no merveile," quod sche,
 [41] "thowh that men wenen that ther be somwhat
 [42] foolisshe and confus, whan the resoun of
 [43] the ordre is unknowe. But although that thou
 [44] ne knowe nat the cause of so gret a disposicioun,
 [45] natheles for as moche as God, the gode
 [46] governour, atempreth and governeth the world,
 [47] ne doute the nat that alle thinges ne ben don
 [48] aryght.
 [1] "Whoso that ne knowe nat the sterres of
 [2] Arctour, ytorned neyghe to the sovereyne centre
 [3] or poynt (that is to seyn, ytorned neyghe to
 [4] the sovereyne pool of the firmament), and wot
 [5] nat why the sterre Boetes passeth or gadreth
 [6] his waynes and drencheth his late flaumbes in
 [7] the see; and whi that Boetes, the sterre, unfooldeth
 [8] hise overswifte arysynges, thanne schal
 [9] he wondryn of the lawe of the heie eyr.
 [10] And eek yif that he ne knowe nat why that
 [11] the hornes of the fulle mone waxen pale
 [12] and infect by bowndes of the derk nyght, and
 [13] how the mone derk and confus discovereth the
 [14] sterres that sche hadde covered by hir clere
 [15] vysage. The comune errour moeveth folk, and
 [16] [the Coribantes maken hir tabours sounen and
 [17] maken] weery hir basyns of bras by thikke
 [18] strokes. (That is to seyn, that ther is a maner
 [19] peple that hyghte Coribantes, that wenen
 [20] that whan the mone is in the eclips that
 [21] it be enchaunted, and therfore for to
 [22] rescowe the mone thei betyn hir basyns with
 [23] thikke strokes.) Ne no man ne wondreth
 [24] whanne the blastes of the wynd Chorus beten
 [25] the strondes of the see by quakynge floodes; ne
 [26] no man ne wondrith whan the weighte of the
 [27] snowh, ihardid by the cold, is resolvyd by the
 [28] brennynge hete of Phebus, the sonne; for her
 [29] seen men redily the causes. But [ther] the
 [30] causes yhidd (that is to seyn, in hevene)
 [31] trowblen the brestes of men. The
 [32] moevable peple is astoned of alle thinges that
 [33] comen seelde and sodeynly in our age; but yif
 [34] the trubly errour of our ignoraunce departed fro
 [35] us, so that we wisten the causes why that swiche
 [36] thinges bytyden, certes thei scholde cesen to
 [37] seme wondres."
 [1] "Thus is it," quod I. "But so as thou hast
 [2] yeven or byhyght me to unwrappen the hidde
 [3] causes of thinges, and to discovere me the
 [4] resouns covered with derknes, I preie the that
 [5] thou devyse and juge me of this matere, and
 [6] that thou do me to undirstonden it. For this
 [7] miracle or this wonder trowbleth me ryght
 [8] gretly."
 [9] And thanne sche, a litelwhat smylinge,
 [10] seide: "Thou clepist me," quod sche, "to
 [11] telle thing that is gretteste of alle thingis
 [12] that mowen ben axed, and to the whiche questioun
 [13] unethes is ther aught inowh to laven
 [14] it. (As who seith, unnethes is ther suffisauntly
 [15] any thing to answeren parfitly to thy questioun.)
 [16] For the matere of it is swich, that
 [17] whan o doute is determined and kut awey, ther
 [18] waxen othere doutes withoute nombre, ryght
 [19] as the hevedes wexen of Idre, the serpent
 [20] that Hercules slowh. Ne ther ne were no
 [21] manere ne noon ende, but if that a wyght
 [22] constreynede tho doutes by a ryght lifly and
 [23] quyk fir of thought (that is to seyn, by vigour
 [24] and strengthe of wit). For in this matere
 [25] men weren wont to maken questiouns of the
 [26] symplicite of the purveaunce of God, and of
 [27] the ordre of destyne, and of sodeyn hap, and
 [28] of the knowynge and predestinacioun devyne,
 [29] and of the liberte of fre wil; the whiche
 [30] thinges thou thiself aperceyvest wel of
 [31] what weighte thei ben. But for as moche
 [32] as the knowynge of thise thinges is a maner
 [33] porcioun of the medycyne to the, al be it so
 [34] that I have litil tyme to doon it, yit natheles
 [35] Y wol enforcen me to schewe somwhat of it.
 [36] But although the noryssynges of dite of musyk
 [37] deliteth the, thou most suffren and forberen a
 [38] litel of thilke delit, whil that I weve to the resouns
 [39] yknyt by ordre."
 [40] "As it liketh to the," quod I, "so do."
 [41] Tho spak sche ryght as by another bygynnynge,
 [42] and seide thus: "The engendrynge
 [43] of alle thinges," quod sche, "and alle the progressiouns
 [44] of muable nature, and al that moeveth
 [45] in any manere, taketh hise causes, his ordre,
 [46] and his formes, of the stablenesse of the devyne
 [47] thought. And thilke devyne thought that
 [48] is iset and put in the tour (that is to seyn, in
 [49] the heighte) of the simplicite of God, stablissith
 [50] many maner gises to thinges that ben
 [51] to done; the whiche manere whan that
 [52] men looken it in thilke pure clennesse of the
 [53] devyne intelligence, it is ycleped purveaunce;
 [54] but whanne thilke manere is referred by men
 [55] to thinges that it moeveth and disponyth, than
 [56] of olde men it was clepyd destyne. The whiche
 [57] thinges yif that any wyght loketh wel in his
 [58] thought the strengthe of that oon and of that
 [59] oothir, he schal lyghtly mowen seen that
 [60] thise two thinges ben dyvers. For purveaunce
 [61] is thilke devyne resoun that is establissed
 [62] in the sovereyn prince of thinges, the
 [63] whiche purveaunce disponith alle thinges; but,
 [64] certes, destyne is the disposicioun and ordenance
 [65] clyvynge to moevable thinges, by the
 [66] whiche disposicion the purveaunce knytteth
 [67] alle thingis in hir ordres; for purveaunce enbraceth
 [68] alle thinges to-hepe, althoghe that thei
 [69] ben diverse and although thei ben infinit.
 [70] But destyne, certes, departeth and ordeyneth
 [71] alle thinges singulerly and devyded in
 [72] moevynges in places, in formes, in tymes, as
 [73] thus: lat the unfoldynge of temporel ordenaunce,
 [74] assembled and oonyd in the lokynge
 [75] of the devyne thought, be cleped purveaunce,
 [76] and thilke same assemblynge and oonynge, devyded
 [77] and unfolden by tymes, lat that ben
 [78] called destyne.
 [79] "And al be it so that thise thinges ben
 [80] diverse, yit natheles hangeth that oon of
 [81] that oother; forwhi the ordre destynal
 [82] procedith of the simplicite of purveaunce. For
 [83] ryght as a werkman that aperceyveth in his
 [84] thought the forme of the thing that he wol make,
 [85] and moeveth the effect of the werk, and ledith
 [86] that he hadde lookid byforn in his thought
 [87] symplely and presently by temporel ordenaunce;
 [88] certes, ryght so God disponith in his
 [89] purveaunce singulerly and stablely the
 [90] thinges that ben to doone; but he
 [91] amynistreth in many maneris and in diverse
 [92] tymes by destyne thilke same thinges that he
 [93] hath disponyd. Thanne, whethir that destyne be
 [94] exercised outhir by some devyne spiritz,
 [95] servantz to the devyne purveaunce, or elles by
 [96] some soule, or elles by alle nature servynge to
 [97] God, or elles by the celestial moevynges of
 [98] sterres, or ellis by vertu of aungelis, or elles by
 [99] divers subtilite of develis, or elles by any of
 [100] hem, or elles by hem alle the destinal
 [101] ordenaunce is ywoven and acomplissid,
 [102] certes, it es opene thing that the purveaunce is
 [103] an unmoevable and symple forme of thinges
 [104] to doone, and the moevable bond and the
 [105] temporel ordenaunce of thinges whiche that the
 [106] devyne symplicite of purveaunce hath ordeyned
 [107] to doone, that is destyne.
 [108] "For whiche it is that alle thinges that ben
 [109] put undir destyne ben certes subgitz to
 [110] purveaunce, to whiche purveaunce destyne
 [111] itself is subgit and under. But some thinges
 [112] ben put undir purveaunce, that sourmounten
 [113] the ordenance of destyne; and tho ben thilke
 [114] that stablely ben ifycchid neyghe to the first
 [115] godhede. They surmounten the ordre of
 [116] destynal moevablete. For ryght as of cerklis that
 [117] tornen aboute a same centre or aboute a poynt,
 [118] thilke cerkle that is innerest or most withinne
 [119] joyneth to the symplesse of the myddle,
 [120] and is, as it were, a centre or a poynt to the
 [121] tothere cerklis that tornen abouten hym;
 [122] and thilke that is utterest, compased by a largere
 [123] envyrownynge, is unfolden by largere spaces in
 [124] so moche as it is ferthest fro the myddel
 [125] symplicite of the poynt; and yif ther be any thing
 [126] that knytteth and felawschipeth hymself to thilke
 [127] myddel poynt, it is constreyned into simplicite
 [128] (that is to seyn, into unmoevablete), and it
 [129] ceseth to ben schad and to fleten diversely;
 [130] ryght so, by semblable reson, thilke thing
 [131] that departeth ferrest fro the firste thought
 [132] of God, it is unfolden and summittid to grettere
 [133] bondes of destyne; and in so moche is the thing
 [134] more fre and laus fro destyne, as it axeth and
 [135] hooldeth hym neer to thilke centre of thinges
 [136] (that is to seyn, to God); and yif the thing
 [137] clyveth to the stedfastnesse of the thought of
 [138] God and be withoute moevynge, certes it
 [139] surmounteth the necessite of destyne.
 [140] Thanne ryght swich comparysoun as is of
 [141] skillynge to undirstondyng, and of thing
 [142] that ys engendrid to thing that is, and of tyme to
 [143] eternite, and of the cercle to the centre; ryght so
 [144] is the ordre of moevable destyne to the stable
 [145] symplicite of purveaunce.
 [146] "Thilke ordenaunce moveth the hevene and
 [147] the sterres, and atemprith the elementz togidre
 [148] amonges hemself, and transformeth hem by
 [149] entrechaungeable mutacioun. And thilke
 [150] same ordre neweth ayein alle thinges
 [151] growynge and fallynge adoun, by semblable
 [152] progressions of sedes and of sexes (that
 [153] is to seyn, male and femele). And this ilke
 [154] ordre constreyneth the fortunes and the dedes of
 [155] men by a bond of causes nat able to ben
 [156] unbownde; the whiche destynal causes, whan
 [157] thei passen out fro the bygynnynges of the
 [158] unmoevable purveaunce, it moot nedes be that
 [159] thei ne be nat mutable. And thus ben the
 [160] thinges ful wel igoverned yif that the
 [161] symplicite duellynge in the devyne thoght
 [162] scheweth forth the ordre of causes unable to ben
 [163] ibowed. And this ordre constreyneth by his
 [164] propre stablete the moevable thingis, or elles
 [165] thei scholden fleten folyly.
 [166] "For whiche it es that alle thingis semen to
 [167] ben confus and trouble to us men, for we ne
 [168] mowen nat considere thilke ordenaunce.
 [169] Natheles the propre maner of every thing,
 [170] dressynge hem to gode, disponith hem alle,
 [171] for ther nys no thing doon for cause of yvel,
 [172] ne thilk thing that is doon by wikkid folk nys nat
 [173] doon for yvel, the whiche schrewes, as I have
 [174] schewed ful plentyvously, seken good, but
 [175] wikkid errour mystorneth hem; ne the ordre
 [176] comynge fro the poynt of sovereyn good ne
 [177] declyneth nat fro his bygynnynge.
 [178] "But thou mayst seyn, `What unreste may ben
 [179] a worse confusioun than that gode men
 [180] han somtyme adversite and somtyme
 [181] prosperite, and schrewes also han now
 [182] thingis that they desiren and now thinges that
 [183] thei haten?' Whethir men lyven now in swich
 [184] holnesse of thought (as who seith, ben men now
 [185] so wyse) that swiche folk as thei demen to ben
 [186] gode folk or schrewes, that it moste nedes ben
 [187] that folk ben swiche as thei wenen? But in this
 [188] manere the domes of men discorden, that thilke
 [189] men that som folk demen worthy of mede,
 [190] other folk demen hem worthy of torment.
 [191] But lat us graunten, I pose, that som man
 [192] may wel demen or knowen the good folk and
 [193] the badde; may he thanne knowen and seen
 [194] thilke innereste atempraunce of corages as it
 [195] hath ben wont to ben seyd of bodyes? (As who
 [196] seith, may a man speken and determinen of
 [197] atempraunce in corages, as men were wont to
 [198] demen or speken of complexions and atempraunces
 [199] of bodies?) Ne it ne is nat an
 [200] unlike miracle to hem that ne knowen it nat
 [201] (as who seith, but it is lik a mervayle or
 [202] miracle to hem that ne knowen it nat) whi
 [203] that swete thinges ben covenable to some bodies
 [204] that ben hole, and to some bodies byttere
 [205] thinges ben covenable; and also why that some
 [206] syk folk ben holpen with lyghte medicynes, and
 [207] some folk ben holpen with sharpe medicynes.
 [208] But natheles the leche, that knoweth the manere
 [209] and the atempraunce of hele and of
 [210] maladye, ne merveyleth of it nothyng. But
 [211] what othir thing semeth hele of corages but
 [212] bounte and prowesse? And what othir thing
 [213] semeth maladye of corages but vices? Who is
 [214] elles kepere of good or dryvere awey of yvel but
 [215] God, governour and lechere of thoughtes? The
 [216] whiche God, whan he hath byholden from the
 [217] hye tour of his purveaunce, he knoweth what is
 [218] covenable to every wight, and lenyth hem that
 [219] he woot that is covenable to hem. Lo, herof
 [220] comyth and herof is don this noble miracle
 [221] of the ordre destynal, whan God, that al
 [222] knoweth, dooth swiche thing, of whiche thing
 [223] unknowynge folk ben astonyd.
 [224] "But for to constreyne (as who seith, but for
 [225] to comprehende and to telle) a fewe thingis of
 [226] the devyne depnesse the whiche that mannys
 [227] resoun may undirstonde, thilke man that thow
 [228] wenest to ben ryght just and ryght kepynge of
 [229] equite, the contrarie of that semeth to the
 [230] devyne purveaunce, that al woot. And
 [231] Lucan, my famylier, telleth that the
 [232] victorious cause likide to the goddes, and the
 [233] cause overcomen likide to Catoun. Thanne
 [234] whatsoevere thou mayst seen that is doon in this
 [235] world unhopid or unwened, certes it es the
 [236] ryghte ordre of thinges, but as to thi wikkid
 [237] opynioun it is a confusioun. But I suppose that
 [238] som man be so wel ithewed that the devyne
 [239] jugement and the jugement of mankynde
 [240] accorden hem togidre of hym; but he is so
 [241] unstidfast of corage that, yif any adversite
 [242] come to hym, he wol forleten peraventure to
 [243] continue innocence by the whiche he ne may
 [244] nat withholden fortune. Thanne the wise
 [245] dispensacion of God sparith hym, the whiche
 [246] man adversite myghte enpeyren; for that God
 [247] wol nat suffren hym to travaile to whom that
 [248] travaile nis nat covenable. Anothir man is parfit
 [249] in alle vertus, and is an holi man and neigh
 [250] to God, so that the purveaunce of God
 [251] wolde deme that it were a felonie that he
 [252] were touched with any adversites; so that he wol
 [253] nat suffre that swich a man be moeved with any
 [254] bodily maladye. But so as seyde a philosophre,
 [255] the more excellent by me -- he seyde in Grec
 [256] that `vertues han edified the body of the holi
 [257] man.'
 [258] "And ofte tyme it betydeth that the somme of
 [259] thingis that ben to done is taken to governe
 [260] to good folk, for that the malice
 [261] haboundaunt of schrewes scholde ben
 [262] abated. And God yeveth and departeth to other
 [263] folk prosperites and adversites imedled to-hepe
 [264] aftir the qualite of hir corages, and remordith
 [265] some folk by adversite, for thei ne scholden nat
 [266] waxen proude by long welefulnesse; and other
 [267] folk he suffreth to ben travailed with harde
 [268] thinges for that thei scholden confermen the
 [269] vertues of corage by the usage and the
 [270] exercitacioun of pacience. And other folk
 [271] dreden more than thei oughten the whiche
 [272] thei myghte wel beren, and thilke folk God
 [273] ledeth into experience of hemself by aspre and
 [274] sorweful thingis. And many other folk han
 [275] bought honourable renoun of this world by the
 [276] prys of glorious deth; and som men, that ne
 [277] mowen nat ben overcomen by torment, han
 [278] yeven ensample to other folk that vertu mai nat
 [279] ben overcomyn by adversites. And of alle
 [280] thise thinges ther nis no doute that thei ne
 [281] ben doon ryghtfully and ordeynly, to the
 [282] profit of hem to whom we seen thise thingis
 [283] betyde.
 [284] "For certes, that adversite cometh somtyme to
 [285] schrewes and somtyme that that they desiren, it
 [286] comith of thise forseyde causes. And of sorweful
 [287] thinges that betyden to schrewes, certes, no man
 [288] ne wondreth. for alle men wenen that thei han
 [289] wel desservid it, and that thei ben of wykkid
 [290] meryt. Of whiche schrewes the torment
 [291] somtyme agasteth othere to don felonyes,
 [292] and somtyme it amendeth hem that suffren the
 [293] tormentz; and the prosperite that is yeven to
 [294] schrewes scheweth a gret argument to good
 [295] folk what thing thei scholde demen of thilke
 [296] welefulnesse, the whiche prosperite men seen
 [297] ofte serven to schrewes. In the whiche thing I
 [298] trowe that God dispenseth. For peraventure the
 [299] nature of som man is so overthrowynge to
 [300] yvel, and so uncovenable, that the nedy
 [301] poverte of his houshold myghte rather
 [302] egren hym to don felonyes; and to the maladye
 [303] of hym God putteth remedye to yeven hym
 [304] rychesses. And som othir man byholdeth his
 [305] conscience defouled with synnes, and makith
 [306] comparysoun of his fortune and of hymself, and
 [307] dredith peraventure that his blisfulnesse, of
 [308] whiche the usage is joyeful to hym, that the
 [309] lesynge of thilke blisfulnesse ne be nat
 [310] sorwful to hym; and therfore he wol
 [311] chaunge his maneris, and, for he dredith to
 [312] lesen his fortune, he forletith his wikkidnesse.
 [313] To other folke is welefulnesse iyeven unworthely,
 [314] the whiche overthroweth hem into
 [315] destruccioun, that thei han disservid; and to som
 [316] othir folk is yeven power to punysshen, for
 [317] that it schal be cause of contynuacioun and
 [318] exercisynge to good folk, and cause of torment
 [319] to schrewes. For so as ther nis noon
 [320] alliaunce bytwixe good folk and schrewes,
 [321] ne schrewes ne mowen nat acorden among
 [322] hemself. And whi nat? For schrewes discorden
 [323] of hemself by hir vices, the whiche vices al
 [324] toreenden her consciences, and doon ofte time
 [325] thinges the whiche thingis, whan thei han doon
 [326] hem, they demen that tho thinges ne scholden
 [327] nat han ben doon.
 [328] "For whiche thing thilke sovereyne purveaunce
 [329] hath makid ofte tyme fair
 [330] myracle, so that schrewes han makid
 [331] schrewes to ben gode men. For whan that
 [332] some schrewes seen that they suffren wrongfully
 [333] felonyes of othere schrewes, they wexen
 [334] eschaufed into hate of hem that anoyed hem,
 [335] and retornen to the fruyt of vertu, whan thei
 [336] studien to ben unlyke to hem that thei han hated.
 [337] Certis oonly this is the devyne myght to the
 [338] whiche myghte yvelis ben thanne gode whan it
 [339] useth the yvelis covenably and draweth out
 [340] the effect of any good. (As who seith that
 [341] yvel is good only to the myghte of God, for
 [342] the myght of God ordeyneth thilke yvel to
 [343] good.)
 [344] "For oon ordre enbraseth alle thinges, so that
 [345] what wyght that departeth fro the resoun of
 [346] thilke ordre whiche that is assigned to hym,
 [347] algatis yit he slideth into an othir ordre; so that
 [348] no thing nis leveful to folye in the reaume of the
 [349] devyne purveaunce (as who seith, no
 [350] thing nis withouten ordenaunce in the
 [351] reame of the devyne purveaunce), syn that
 [352] the ryght strong God governeth alle thinges in
 [353] this world. For it nis nat leveful to man to
 [354] comprehenden by wit, ne unfolden by word,
 [355] alle the subtil ordenaunces and disposiciounis of
 [356] the devyne entente. For oonly it owghte suffise
 [357] to han lokid that God hymself, makere of alle
 [358] natures, ordeineth and dresseth alle thingis to
 [359] gode; whil that he hasteth to withholden
 [360] the thingis that he hath makid into his
 [361] semblaunce (that is to seyn, for to withholden
 [362] thingis into gode, for he hymself is
 [363] good), he chasith out alle yvel fro the boundes
 [364] of his comynalite by the ordre of necessite
 [365] destinable. For whiche it folweth that, yif thou
 [366] loke the purveaunce ordeynynge the thinges
 [367] that men wenen ben outraious or haboundaunt
 [368] in erthis, thou ne schalt nat seen in no place no
 [369] thing of yvel.
 [370] "But I se now that thou art charged with
 [371] the weyghte of the questioun, and wery
 [372] with the lengthe of my resoun, and that thou
 [373] abydest som swetnesse of songe. Tak thanne this
 [374] drawght, and, whanne thou art wel reffressched
 [375] and refect, thou schalt be more stedfast to stye
 [376] into heyere questions or thinges.
 [1] "Yif thou, wys, wilt demen in thi pure thought
 [2] the ryghtes or the lawes of the heye thondrere
 [3] (that is to seyn, of God), loke thou and byhoold
 [4] the heightes of the sovereyn hevene.
 [5] Ther kepin the sterres, be ryghtful alliaunce of
 [6] thinges, hir oolde pees. The sonne, imoevid by
 [7] his rody fyr, ne distorbeth nat the colde cercle
 [8] of the mone. Ne the sterre yclepid the Bere,
 [9] that enclyneth his ravysschynge coursis
 [10] abowte the sovereyn heighte of the world
 [11] -- ne the same sterre Ursa nis nevere mo
 [12] wasschen in the depe westrene see, ne coveyteth
 [13] nat to deeyen his flaumbes in the see
 [14] of the Occian, although it see othere sterres
 [15] iplowngid in the see. And Hesperus the sterre
 [16] bodith and telleth alwey the late nyghtes, and
 [17] Lucyfer the sterre bryngeth ayein the clere
 [18] day.
 [19] "And thus maketh Love entrechaungeable
 [20] the perdurable courses; and thus is discordable
 [21] bataile yput out of the contre of
 [22] the sterres. This accordaunce atempryth by evenelyke
 [23] maneres the elementz, that the moiste
 [24] thingis, stryvynge with the drye thingis, yeven
 [25] place by stoundes; and that the colde thingis
 [26] joynen hem by feyth to the hote thingis; and
 [27] that the lyghte fyr ariseth into heighte, and
 [28] the hevy erthes avalen by her weyghtes. By
 [29] thise same causes the floury yer yeldeth
 [30] swote smelles in the first somer sesoun
 [31] warmynge; and the hote somer dryeth the
 [32] cornes; and autumpne comith ayein hevy of
 [33] apples; and the fletyng reyn bydeweth the
 [34] wynter. This atempraunce norysscheth and
 [35] bryngeth forth alle thinges that brethith lif
 [36] in this world; and thilke same attempraunce,
 [37] ravysschynge, hideth and bynymeth, and
 [38] drencheth undir the laste deth, alle thinges
 [39] iborn.
 [40] "Among thise thinges sitteth the heye
 [41] makere, kyng and lord, welle and bygynnynge,
 [42] lawe and wys juge to don equite, and
 [43] governeth and enclyneth the brydles of thinges.
 [44] And tho thinges that he stireth to gon by
 [45] moevynge, he withdraweth and aresteth, and
 [46] affermeth the moevable or wandrynge thinges.
 [47] For yif that he ne clepide nat ayein the ryght
 [48] goynge of thinges, and yif that he ne constreynede
 [49] hem nat eftsones into roundnesses
 [50] enclyned, the thinges that ben now
 [51] contynued by stable ordenaunce, thei scholden
 [52] departen from hir welle (that is to seyn,
 [53] from hir bygynnynge), and failen (that is to
 [54] seyn, tornen into noght). This is the comune
 [55] love to alle thingis, and alle thinges axen to ben
 [56] holden by the fyn of good. For elles ne
 [57] myghten they nat lasten yif thei ne comen nat
 [58] eftsones ayein, by love retorned, to the cause
 [59] that hath yeven hem beinge (that is to
 [60] seyn, to God).
 [1] "Sestow nat thanne what thing folweth alle
 [2] the thingis that I have seyd?"
 [3] "What thing?" quod I.
 [4] "Certes," quod sche, "al outrely that alle fortune
 [5] is good."
 [6] "And how may that be?" quod I.
 [7] "Now undirstand," quod sche. "So as al fortune,
 [8] whethir so it be joyeful fortune or aspre
 [9] fortune, is yeven eyther by cause of gerdonynge
 [10] or elles of exercisynge of good
 [11] folk or elles by cause to punysschen or elles
 [12] chastisen schrewes; thanne is alle fortune good,
 [13] the whiche fortune is certeyn that it be either
 [14] ryghtful or elles profitable."
 [15] "Forsothe this is a ful verray resoun," quod
 [16] I; "and yif I considere the purveaunce and the
 [17] destyne that thou taughtest me a litel herebyforn
 [18] this sentence is sustenyd by stedfast
 [19] resouns. But yif it like unto the, lat us
 [20] nombren [hyt] amonges thilke thingis, of
 [21] whiche thow seydest a litel herebyforn that
 [22] thei ne were nat able to ben wened to the
 [23] peple."
 [24] "Why so?" quod sche.
 [25] "For that the comune word of men," quod I,
 [26] "mysuseth this manere speche of fortune, and
 [27] seyn ofte tymes that the fortune of som wyght
 [28] is wikkid."
 [29] "Woltow thanne," quod sche, "that I approche
 [30] a litil to the wordis of the peple,
 [31] so that it seme nat to hem that I be overmoche
 [32] departed as fro the usage of mankynde?"
 [33] "As thou wilt," quod I.
 [34] "Demestow nat," quod sche, "that alle thing
 [35] that profiteth is good?"
 [36] "Yis," quod I.
 [37] "And certes thilke thing that exerciseth or
 [38] corrigith profitith?"
 [39] "I confesse it wel," quod I.
 [40] "Thanne is it good," quod sche.
 [41] "Why nat?" quod I.
 [42] "But this is the fortune," quod sche, "of hem
 [43] that eyther ben put in vertu and batayllen
 [44] ayein aspre thingis, or elles of hem that eschuen
 [45] and declynen fro vices and taken the
 [46] weye of vertu."
 [47] "This ne mai I nat denye," quod I.
 [48] "But what seistow of the merye fortune that
 [49] is yeven to good folk in gerdoun -- demeth
 [50] aught the peple that it is wikkid?"
 [51] "Nay forsothe," quod I; "but thei
 [52] demen, as it soth is, that it is ryght good."
 [53] "And what seistow of that othir fortune,"
 [54] quod sche, "that, although it be aspre and
 [55] restreyneth the schrewes by ryghtful torment,
 [56] weneth aught the peple that it be good?"
 [57] "Nay," quod I, "but the peple demeth that
 [58] it is moost wrecchid of alle thingis that mai
 [59] ben thought."
 [60] "War now and loke wel," quod sche,
 [61] "lest that we, in folwynge the opynioun of
 [62] the peple, have confessid and concluded thing
 [63] that is unable to be wened to the peple."
 [64] "What is that?" quod I.
 [65] "Certis," quod sche, "it folweth or comith of
 [66] thingis that ben grauntid that alle fortune, what
 [67] so evere it be, of hem that ben eyther in possessioun
 [68] of vertu, or in the encres of vertu, or
 [69] elles in the purchasynge of vertu, that thilke
 [70] fortune is good; and that alle fortune is
 [71] ryght wikkid to hem that duellen in
 [72] schrewidnesse." (As who seith. "And thus
 [73] weneth nat the peple.")
 [74] "That is soth," quod I, "al be it so that no
 [75] man dar confessen it ne byknowen it."
 [76] "Whi so?" quod sche; "for ryght as the
 [77] stronge man ne semeth nat to abaissen or disdaignen
 [78] as ofte tyme as he herith the noyse
 [79] of the bataile, ne also it ne semeth nat to
 [80] the wise man to beren it grevously as ofte
 [81] as he is lad into the stryf of fortune. For,
 [82] bothe to the to man and eek to the tothir thilke
 [83] difficulte is the matere, to the to man of encres
 [84] of his glorious renoun, and to the tothir man
 [85] to confermen his sapience (that is to seyn, to the
 [86] asprenesse of his estat). For therfore it is
 [87] called `vertu,' for that it sustenith and enforceth
 [88] by hise strengthes that it nis nat overcomen by
 [89] adversites. Ne certes thou, that art put in
 [90] the encres or in the heyghte of vertu, ne
 [91] hast nat comen to fleten with delices, and
 [92] for to welken in bodily lust; thou sowest or
 [93] plawntest a ful egre bataile in thy corage ayeins
 [94] every fortune, for that the sorwful fortune ne
 [95] confownde the nat, ne that the myrie fortune
 [96] ne corrumpe the nat. Ocupye the mene by stidefast
 [97] strengthes; for al that evere is undir the
 [98] mene, or elles al that overpasseth the mene,
 [99] despyseth welefulnesse (as who seith, it
 [100] is vycious), and ne hath no mede of his
 [101] travaile. For it is set in your hand (as who
 [102] seith, it lyth in your power) what fortune yow
 [103] is levest (that is to seyn, good or yvel). For
 [104] alle fortune that semeth scharp or aspre, yif it
 [105] ne exercise nat the good folk ne chastiseth the
 [106] wikkide folk, it punysseth.
 [1] "The wrekere Attrides (that is to seyn, Agamenon),
 [2] that wrought and contynued the batailes
 [3] by ten yer, recovered and purgide in
 [4] wrekynge, by the destruccioun of Troye, the
 [5] loste chaumbris of mariage of his brothir.
 [6] (That is to seyn, that he, Agamenon, wan ayein
 [7] Eleyne that was Menelaus wif his brothir.)
 [8] In the mene while that thilke Agamenon desirede
 [9] to yeven sayles to the Grykkyssche
 [10] naveye, and boughte ayein the wyndes by
 [11] blood, he unclothide hym of pite of fadir;
 [12] and the sory preest yeveth in sacrifyenge the
 [13] wrecchide kuttynge of throte of the doughter.
 [14] (That is to seyn that Agamenon leet kutten the
 [15] throte of his doughter by the preest, to maken
 [16] alliaunce with his goddes and for to han wynd
 [17] with whiche he myghte wenden to Troye.)
 [18] "Ytakus (that is to seyn, Ulixes) bywepte his
 [19] felawes ilorne, the whiche felawes the
 [20] fyerse Poliphemus, ligginge in his grete cave,
 [21] had fretyn and dreynt in his empty wombe.
 [22] But natheles Poliphemus, wood for his blynde
 [23] visage, yald to Ulixes joye by his sorwful
 [24] teres. (This to seyn, that Ulixes smoot out the
 [25] eye of Poliphemus, that stood in his forheed,
 [26] for whiche Ulixes hadde joye whan he say Poliphemus
 [27] wepynge and blynd).
 [28] "Hercules is celebrable for his harde travailes.
 [29] He dawntide the proude Centauris (half
 [30] hors, half man), and he byrafte the dispoilynge
 [31] fro the cruel lyoun (that is to seyn, he
 [32] slouhe the lyoun and rafte hym his skyn); he
 [33] smot the briddes that hyghten Arpiis with certein
 [34] arwes; he ravysschide applis fro the wakynge
 [35] dragoun, and his hand was the more hevy
 [36] for the goldene metal; he drowh Cerberus, the
 [37] hound of helle, by his treble cheyne; he, overcomer,
 [38] as it is seyd, hath put an unmeke lord
 [39] foddre to his crwel hors (this to seyn, that
 [40] Hercules slowh Diomedes, and made his
 [41] hors to freten hym); and he, Hercules,
 [42] slowh Idra the serpent, and brende the venym;
 [43] and Acheleous the flod, defowled in his forheed,
 [44] dreynte his schamefast visage in his
 [45] strondes (that is to seyn, that Achaleous coude
 [46] transfiguren hymself into diverse liknesse, and,
 [47] as he faughte with Hercules, at the laste he
 [48] torned hym into a bole, and Hercules brak of
 [49] oon of his hornes, and he for schame hidde
 [50] hym in his ryver); and he, Hercules, caste
 [51] adoun Antheus the geaunt in the [sondes]
 [52] of Libye; and Kacus apaysede the wratthes of
 [53] Evander (this to seyn, that Hercules slouh the
 [54] monstre Kacus, and apaysed with that deth the
 [55] wratthe of Evander); and the bristilede boor
 [56] markide with scomes the scholdres of Hercules,
 [57] the whiche scholdres the heye cercle of
 [58] hevene sholde thriste; and the laste of his labours
 [59] was that he susteynede the hevene
 [60] uppon his nekke unbowed; and he disservide
 [61] eftsones the hevene to ben the pris
 [62] of his laste travaile.
 [63] "Goth now thanne, ye stronge men, ther as
 [64] the heye wey of the greet ensaumple ledith
 [65] yow. O nyce men! why nake ye your bakkes?
 [66] (As who seith, "O ye slowe and delicat men!
 [67] whi flee ye adversites, and ne fyghte nat ayeins
 [68] hem by vertu, to wynnen the mede of the hevene?")
 [69] For the erthe overcomen yeveth the
 [70] sterres." (This to seyn, that whan that
 [71] erthly lust is overcomyn, a man is makid
 [72] worthy to the hevene.)

      
The Canterbury Tales and Other Works of Chaucer (Middle English), by Geoffery Chaucer, [14th cent.], at sacred-texts.com

 

Boece

 

Book 5

 [1] Sche hadde seyd, and torned the cours of
 [2] hir resoun to some othere thingis to ben treted
 [3] and to ben ispedd. Thanne seide I, "Certes
 [4] ryghtful is thin amonestynge and ful digne by
 [5] auctorite. But that thou seydest whilom that
 [6] the questioun of the devyne purveaunce is enlaced
 [7] with many othere questiouns, I undirstande
 [8] wel and prove it by the same thing.
 [9] But I axe yif that thou wenest that hap be
 [10] anything in any weys; and yif thou wenest
 [11] that hap be anything, what is it?"
 [12] Thanne quod sche, "I haste me to yelden
 [13] and assoilen to the the dette of my byheste, and
 [14] to schewen and openen the the
 [15] wey, by whiche wey thou maist comen ayein to thi contre. But
 [16] al be it so that the thingis whiche that thou axest
 [17] ben ryght profitable to knowe, yit ben thei
 [18] divers somwhat fro the path of my purpos; and
 [19] it is to douten that thou ne be makid weery
 [20] by mysweyes, so that thou ne maist nat
 [21] suffise to mesuren the ryghte weie."
 [22] "Ne doute the therof nothing," quod I; "for
 [23] for to knowen thilke thingis togidre, in the
 [24] whiche thinges I delite me gretly -- that schal
 [25] ben to me in stede of reste, syn it nis nat to
 [26] douten of the thingis folwynge, whan every syde
 [27] of thi disputesoun schal han ben stedfast to me
 [28] by undoutous feyth."
 [29] "Thanne," seide sche, "that manere wol
 [30] I don the," and bygan to speken ryght thus:
 [31] "Certes," quod sche, "yif any wyght
 [32] diffynisse hap in this manere, that is to seyn that
 [33] `hap is bytydynge ibrought forth by foolisshe
 [34] moevynge and by no knyttynge of causes,' I
 [35] conferme that hap nis ryght naught in no wise;
 [36] and I deme al outrely that hap nis but an idel
 [37] voys (as who seith, but an idel word), withouten
 [38] any significacioun of thing summitted
 [39] to that voys. For what place myght ben
 [40] left or duellynge to folie and to disordenaunce,
 [41] syn that God ledeth and
 [42] constreyneth alle thingis by ordre? For this
 [43] sentence is verray and soth, that `no thing hath
 [44] his beynge of naught,' to the whiche sentence
 [45] noon of thise oolde folk ne withseide nevere; al
 [46] be it so that they ne undirstoden ne meneden it
 [47] nat by God, prince and bygynnere of wirkynge,
 [48] but thei casten as a maner foundement of subject
 [49] material (that is to seyn, of the nature of
 [50] alle resouns). And yif that any thing is
 [51] woxen or comen of no causes, thanne schal
 [52] it seme that thilke thing is comen or woxen of
 [53] nawght; but yif this ne mai nat ben don, thanne
 [54] is it nat possible that hap be any swich thing as
 [55] I have diffynysschid a litil herebyforn."
 [56] "How schal it thanne be?" quod I. "Nys ther
 [57] thanne nothing that by right may ben clepid
 [58] other hap or elles aventure of fortune; or is ther
 [59] awght, al be it so that it is hidd fro the
 [60] peple, to whiche thing thise wordes ben
 [61] covenable?"
 [62] "Myn Aristotle," quod sche, "in the book of
 [63] his Phisic diffynysseth this thing by schort
 [64] resoun, and nyghe to the sothe."
 [65] "In whiche manere?" quod I.
 [66] "As ofte, quod sche, "as men don any thing
 [67] for grace of any other thing, and another thing
 [68] than thilke thing that men entenden to don
 [69] bytideth by some causes, it is clepid hap.
 [70] Ryght as a man dalf the erthe bycause of
 [71] tylyinge of the feld, and founde ther a
 [72] gobet of gold bydolven; thanne wenen folk
 [73] that it is byfalle by fortunous bytydynge. But
 [74] forsothe it nis nat of naught, for it hath his
 [75] propre causes, of whiche causes the cours unforseyn
 [76] and unwar semeth to han makid hap.
 [77] For yif the tiliere of the feeld ne dulve nat in the
 [78] erthe, and yif the hidere of the gold ne hadde
 [79] hyd the gold in thilke place, the gold ne
 [80] hadde nat ben founde. Thise ben thanne
 [81] the causes of the abregginge of fortuit hap,
 [82] the whiche abreggynge of fortuit hap cometh of
 [83] causes encontrynge and flowynge togidere to
 [84] hemself, and nat by the entencioun of the doere.
 [85] For neither the hidere of the gold ne the delvere
 [86] of the feeld ne undirstoden nat that the gold
 [87] sholde han ben founde; but, as I seide, it bytidde
 [88] and ran togidre that he dalf thare as that oothir
 [89] had hid the gold. Now mai I thus diffinysshen
 [90] hap: hap is an unwar betydinge
 [91] of causes assembled in thingis that ben
 [92] doon for som oothir thing; but thilke ordre,
 [93] procedinge by an uneschuable byndinge togidre,
 [94] whiche that descendeth fro the welle of
 [95] purveaunce that ordeyneth alle thingis in hir
 [96] places and in hir tymes, makith that the causes
 [97] rennen and assemblen togidre.
 [1] "Tigrys and Eufrates resolven and springen
 [2] of o welle in the cragges of the roche of the
 [3] contre of Achemenye, ther as the fleinge bataile
 [4] ficcheth hir dartes retorned in the breestis
 [5] of hem that folwen hem. And sone aftir the
 [6] same ryverys, Tigris and Eufrates, unjoignen
 [7] and departen hir watres. And if thei comen togidre
 [8] and ben assemblid and clepid togidre
 [9] into o cours, thanne moten thilke thingis
 [10] fleten togidre whiche that the watir of
 [11] the entrechaungynge flood bryngeth. The
 [12] schippes and the stokkes araced with the flood
 [13] moten assemblen; and the watris imedled
 [14] wrappeth or emplieth many fortunel happes
 [15] or maneris; the whiche wandrynge happes
 [16] natheles thilke enclynynge lowenesse of the
 [17] erthe and the flowinge ordre of the slydinge
 [18] watir governeth. Right so fortune, that semeth
 [19] as it fletith with slakid or ungoverned
 [20] bridles, it suffreth bridelis (that is to seyn,
 [21] to ben governed), and passeth by thilke
 [22] lawe (that is to seyn, by the devyne ordenaunce)."
 [1] "This undirstonde I wel," quod I, "and I accorde
 [2] me that it is ryght as thou seist. But I
 [3] axe yif ther be any liberte of fre wille in this
 [4] ordre of causes that clyven thus togidre in
 [5] hemself, or elles I wolde witen yif that the
 [6] destinal cheyne constrenith the moevynges of
 [7] the corages of men."
 [8] "Yis," quod sche, "ther is liberte of fre wil,
 [9] ne ther ne was nevere no nature of resoun
 [10] that it ne hadde liberte of fre wil. For every
 [11] thing that may naturely usen resoun,
 [12] it hath doom by whiche it discernith and demeth
 [13] every thing; thanne knoweth it by itself
 [14] thinges that ben to fleen and thinges that ben
 [15] to desiren. And thilke thing that any wight
 [16] demeth to ben desired, that axeth or desireth
 [17] he; and fleeth thilke thing that he troweth be
 [18] to fleen. Wherfore in alle thingis that resoun
 [19] is, in hem also is liberte of willynge and of
 [20] nillynge. But I ne ordeyne nat (as who
 [21] seith, I ne graunte nat) that this liberte be
 [22] evenelyk in alle thinges. Forwhy in the sovereynes
 [23] devynes substaunces (that is to seyn,
 [24] in spiritz) jugement is more cleer, and wil nat
 [25] icorrumped, and myght redy to speden thinges
 [26] that ben desired. But the soules of men moten
 [27] nedes be more fre whan thei loken hem in the
 [28] speculacioun or lokynge of the devyne thought;
 [29] and lasse fre whan thei slyden into the bodyes;
 [30] and yit lasse fre whan thei ben gadrid
 [31] togidre and comprehended in erthli
 [32] membres; but the laste servage is whan that
 [33] thei ben yeven to vices and han ifalle fro the
 [34] possessioun of hir propre resoun. For aftir that
 [35] thei han cast awey hir eyghen fro the lyght
 [36] of the sovereyn sothfastnesse to lowe thingis
 [37] and derke, anon thei derken by the cloude of
 [38] ignoraunce and ben troubled by felonous talentz;
 [39] to the whiche talentz whan thei approchen
 [40] and assenten, thei helpen and
 [41] encrecen the servage whiche thei han
 [42] joyned to hemself; and in this manere thei ben
 [43] caytifs fro hir propre liberte. The whiche thingis
 [44] natheles the lokynge of the devyne purveaunce
 [45] seth, that alle thingis byholdeth and seeth fro
 [46] eterne, and ordeyneth hem everiche in here
 [47] merites as thei ben predestinat; and it is seid in
 [48] Greke that `alle thinges he seeth and alle thinges
 [49] he herith.'
 [1] "Homer with the hony mouth (that is to seyn,
 [2] Homer with the swete ditees) singeth that the
 [3] sonne is cler by pure light; natheles yit ne
 [4] mai it nat, by the infirme light of his bemes,
 [5] breken or percen the inward entrayles of the
 [6] erthe or elles of the see. So ne seth nat God,
 [7] makere of the grete werld. To hym, that loketh
 [8] alle thinges from an hey, ne withstondeth
 [9] no thinges by hevynesse of erthe, ne the
 [10] nyght ne withstondeth nat to hym by the
 [11] blake cloudes. Thilke God seeth in o strok
 [12] of thought alle thinges that ben, or weren, or
 [13] schollen comen; and thilke God, for he loketh
 [14] and seeth alle thingis alone, thou maist seyn
 [15] that he is the verrai sonne."
 [1] Thanne seide I, "Now am I confowndide by
 [2] a more hard doute than I was."
 [3] "What doute is that?" quod sche, "for certes I
 [4] conjecte now by whiche thingis thou art trubled."
 [5] "It semeth," quod I, "to repugnen and to
 [6] contrarien gretly, that God knoweth byforn alle
 [7] thinges and that ther is any fredom of liberte.
 [8] For yif so be that God loketh alle thinges
 [9] byforn, ne God ne mai nat ben desceyved
 [10] in no manere, thanne moot it nedes ben that
 [11] alle thinges betyden the whiche that the
 [12] purveaunce of God hath seyn byforn to comen.
 [13] For whiche, yif that God knoweth byforn nat
 [14] oonly the werkes of men, but also hir conseilles
 [15] and hir willes, thanne ne schal ther be no liberte
 [16] of arbitrie; ne certes ther ne may be noon
 [17] othir dede, ne no wil, but thilke whiche that the
 [18] devyne purveaunce, that ne mai nat ben disseyved,
 [19] hath felid byforn. For yif that thei
 [20] myghten writhen awey in othere manere
 [21] than thei ben purveyed, thanne ne sholde
 [22] ther be no stedefast prescience of thing to
 [23] comen, but rather an uncerteyn opynioun; the
 [24] whiche thing to trowen of God, I deme it felonye
 [25] and unleveful.
 [26] "Ne I ne proeve nat thilke same resoun (as who
 [27] seith, I ne allowe nat, or I ne preyse nat, thilke
 [28] same resoun) by whiche that som men wenen
 [29] that thei mowe assoilen and unknytten the
 [30] knotte of this questioun. For certes thei
 [31] seyn that thing nis nat to comen for that the
 [32] purveaunce of God hath seyn byforn that it is to
 [33] comen, but rathir the contrarie; and that is this:
 [34] that, for that the thing is to comen, that therfore
 [35] ne mai it nat ben hidd fro the purveaunce of
 [36] God; and in this manere this necessite slideth
 [37] ayein into the contrarie partie: ne it ne byhoveth
 [38] nat nedes that thinges betiden that ben
 [39] ipurveied, but it byhoveth nedes that thinges
 [40] that ben to comen ben ipurveied -- but as
 [41] it were Y travailed (as who seith, that
 [42] thilke answere procedith ryght as though men
 [43] travaileden or weren besy) to enqueren the
 [44] whiche thing is cause of the whiche thing, as
 [45] whethir the prescience is cause of the necessite
 [46] of thinges to comen, or elles that the necessite of
 [47] thinges to comen is cause of the purveaunce. But
 [48] I ne enforce me nat now to schewen it, that
 [49] the bytidynge of thingis iwyst byforn is
 [50] necessarie, how so or in what manere that
 [51] the ordre of causes hath itself; although
 [52] that it ne seme naught that the prescience bringe
 [53] in necessite of bytydinge to thinges to comen.
 [54] "For certes yif that any wyght sitteth, it byhoveth
 [55] by necessite that the opynioun be soth of
 [56] hym that conjecteth that he sitteth. and
 [57] ayeinward also is it of the contrarie: yif the
 [58] opinioun be soth of any wyght for that he sitteth,
 [59] it byhoveth by necessite that he sitte.
 [60] Thanne is here necessite in the toon and in
 [61] the tothir; for in the toon is necessite of
 [62] syttynge, and certes in the tothir is necessite of
 [63] soth. But therfore ne sitteth nat a wyght for that
 [64] the opynioun of the sittynge is soth, but the
 [65] opinioun is rather soth for that a wyght sitteth
 [66] byforn. And thus, althoughe that the cause of the
 [67] soth cometh of that other side (as who seith,
 [68] that althoughe the cause of soth cometh of the
 [69] sittynge, and nat of the trewe opinioun),
 [70] algatis yit is ther comune necessite in that
 [71] oon and in that othir. Thus scheweth it that
 [72] Y may make semblable skiles of the purveaunce
 [73] of God and of thingis to comen. For althoughe
 [74] that for that thingis ben to comen therfore ben
 [75] thei purveied, and nat certes for thei be purveied
 [76] therfore ne bytide thei nat; yit natheles byhoveth
 [77] it by necessite that eyther the thinges to comen
 [78] ben ipurveied of God, or elles that the thinges
 [79] that ben ipurveyed of God betyden. And
 [80] this thing oonly suffiseth inow to destroien
 [81] the fredom of oure arbitre (that is to seyn,
 [82] of our fre wil).
 [83] "But certes now schewith it wel how fer fro
 [84] the sothe and how up-so-doun is this thing that
 [85] we seyn, that the betydynge of temporel thingis
 [86] is cause of the eterne prescience. But for to
 [87] wenen that God purveieth the thinges to comen
 [88] for thei ben to comen -- what oothir thing is it
 [89] but for to wene that thilke thinges that
 [90] bytidden whilom ben cause of thilke
 [91] soverein purveaunce that is in God? And
 [92] herto I adde yit this thing: that ryght as whanne
 [93] that I woot that a thing is, it byhoveth by
 [94] necessite that thilke selve thing be; and eek
 [95] whan I have knowen that any thing schal
 [96] betyden; so byhovith it by necessite that thilke
 [97] same thing betide; so folweth it thanne that the
 [98] betydynge of the thing iwyste byforn ne may nat
 [99] ben eschued. And at the laste, yif that any
 [100] wyght wene a thing to ben oothir weyes
 [101] than it is, it nis nat oonly unscience, but it
 [102] is desceyvable opynioun ful divers and fer fro
 [103] the sothe of science. Wherfore, yif any thing be
 [104] so to comen that the betidynge of it ne be nat
 [105] certein ne necessarie, who mai witen byforn that
 [106] thilke thing is to comen? For ryght as science ne
 [107] may nat ben medled with falsnesse (as who
 [108] seith, that yif I woot a thing, it ne mai nat
 [109] ben fals that I ne woot it), ryght so thilke
 [110] thing that is conceyved by science ne may
 [111] nat ben noon other weies than as it is
 [112] conceyved. For that is the cause why that science
 [113] wanteth lesynge (as who seith, why that
 [114] wytynge ne resceyveth nat lesynge of that it
 [115] woot); for it byhoveth by necessite that every
 [116] thing be ryght as science comprehendeth it
 [117] to be.
 [118] "What schal I thanne seyn? In whiche manere
 [119] knoweth God byforn the thinges to comen,
 [120] yif thei ne ben nat certein? For yif that he
 [121] deme that thei ben to comen uneschewably,
 [122] and so may be that it is possible that thei
 [123] ne schollen nat comen, God is disseyved. But
 [124] not oonly to trowe that God is disseyved, but for
 [125] to speke it with mouthe, it is a felonous synne.
 [126] But yif that God woot that ryght so as thinges
 [127] ben to comen, so schollen they comen, so that he
 [128] wite egaly (as who seith, indifferently) that
 [129] thingis mowen ben doon or elles nat
 [130] idoon, what is thilke prescience that ne
 [131] comprehendeth no certein thing ne stable?
 [132] Or elles what difference is ther bytwixe the
 [133] prescience and thilke japeworthi devynynge of
 [134] Tyresie the divynour, that seide, `Al that I seie,'
 [135] quod he, `either it schal be or elles it ne schal nat
 [136] be?' Or elles how mochel is worth the devyne
 [137] prescience more than the opinioun of mankynde,
 [138] yif so be that it demeth the thinges
 [139] uncertayn, as men doon, of the whiche
 [140] domes of men the betydinge nis nat
 [141] certein? But yif so be that noon uncertein
 [142] thing ne mai ben in hym that is right certeyn
 [143] welle of alle thingis, than is the betydinge
 [144] certein of thilke thingis whiche he hath wist
 [145] byforn fermely to comen. For whiche it folweth
 [146] that the fredom of the conseiles and of the
 [147] werkis of mankynde nis noon, syn that the
 [148] thought of God, that seeth alle thinges withouten
 [149] errour of falsnesse, byndeth and
 [150] constreyneth hem to o bytidynge by
 [151] necessite.
 [152] "And yif this thing be oonys igrauntid and
 [153] resceyved (that is to seyn, that ther nis no fre
 [154] wil), thanne scheweth it wel how gret destruccioun
 [155] and how gret damages ther folwen of
 [156] thingis of mankynde. For in idel ben ther thanne
 [157] purposed and byhyght medes to good folk, and
 [158] peynes to badde folk, syn that no moevynge of
 [159] fre corage and voluntarie ne hath nat
 [160] disservid hem (that is to seyn, neither
 [161] mede ne peyne). And it scholde seme
 [162] thanne that thilke thing is alther-worst whiche
 [163] that is now demed for alther-moost just
 [164] and moost ryghtful, that is to seyn that schrewes ben
 [165] punysschid or elles that good folk ben
 [166] igerdoned, the whiche folk syn that hir propre
 [167] wil ne sent hem nat to the toon ne to that othir
 [168] (that is to seyn, neither to good ne to harm), but
 [169] constreyneth hem certein necessite of
 [170] thingis to comen. Thanne ne schulle ther
 [171] nevere be, ne nevere were, vice ne vertu,
 [172] but it scholde rather ben confusion of alle
 [173] dissertes medlid withouten discrecioun. And yit
 [174] ther folweth anothir inconvenient, of the whiche
 [175] ther ne mai be thought no more felonous ne
 [176] more wikke, and that is this: that, so as the ordre
 [177] of thingis is iled and cometh of the purveaunce
 [178] of God, ne that nothing is leveful to the
 [179] conseiles of mankynde (as who seith that
 [180] men han no power to don nothing ne wilne
 [181] nothing), thanne folweth it that oure vices
 [182] ben referrid to the makere of alle good
 [183] (as who seith, thanne folweth it that God
 [184] oughte han the blame of our vices), syn he
 [185] constreyneth us by necessite to doon vices.
 [186] "Than nis ther no resoun to han hope in God,
 [187] ne for to preien to God. For what scholde any
 [188] wyght hopen to God, or why scholde he preien
 [189] to God, syn that the ordenance of destyne
 [190] whiche that mai nat ben enclyned knytteth
 [191] and streyneth alle thingis that men mai
 [192] desiren? Thanne scholde ther be don awey
 [193] thilke oonly alliaunce bytwixen God and men
 [194] (that is to seyn, to hopen and to preien). But
 [195] by the pris of ryghtwisnesse and of verray
 [196] mekenesse we disserven the gerdon of the
 [197] devyne grace whiche that is inestimable (that is
 [198] to seyn, that it is so greet that it ne mai nat ben
 [199] ful ipreysed). And this is oonly the manere
 [200] (that is to seyn, hope and preieris) for
 [201] whiche it semeth that men mowen spekyn
 [202] with God, and by resoun of supplicacion be
 [203] conjoyned to thilke cleernesse that nis nat
 [204] aprochid no rather or that men byseken it and
 [205] impetren it. And yif men ne wene nat that hope
 [206] ne preieris ne han no strengthis by the necessite
 [207] of thingis to comen iresceyved, what thing
 [208] is ther thanne by whiche we mowen ben
 [209] conjoyned and clyven to thilke sovereyne
 [210] prince of thingis? For whiche it byhoveth
 [211] by necessite that the lynage of mankynde,
 [212] as thou songe a litil herebyforn, be departed and
 [213] unjoyned from his welle, and failen of his
 [214] bygynnynge (that is to seyn, God).
 [1] "What discordable cause hath torent and unjoyned
 [2] the byndynge or the alliaunce of thingis
 [3] (that is to seyn, the conjunccions of God and
 [4] of man)? Whiche god hath establisschid so
 [5] gret bataile bytwixen these two sothfast or
 [6] verreie thinges (that is to seyn, bytwyxen the
 [7] purveaunce of God and fre wil) that thei ben
 [8] singuler and dyvided, ne that they ne wole
 [9] nat ben medled ne couplid togidre? But
 [10] ther nis no discord to the verray thinges,
 [11] but thei clyven alwey certein to hemself;
 [12] but the thought of man, confownded and over-throwen
 [13] by the derke membres of the body,
 [14] ne mai nat be fyr of his derked lookynge (that
 [15] is to seyn, by the vigour of his insyghte while
 [16] the soule is in the body) knowen the thynne
 [17] sutile knyttynges of thinges. But wherfore
 [18] eschaufeth it so by so gret love to fynden
 [19] thilke notes of soth icovered? (That is to
 [20] seyn, wherfore eschaufeth the thought of
 [21] man by so gret desir to knowen thilke notificaciouns
 [22] that ben ihid undir the covertures of
 [23] soth?) Woot it aught thilke thing that it angwisshous
 [24] desireth to knowe? (As who seith,
 [25] nay; for no man ne travaileth for to witen
 [26] thingis that he wot. And therfore the texte
 [27] seith thus:) But who travaileth to wite thingis
 [28] iknowe? And yif that he ne knoweth hem nat,
 [29] what sekith thilke blynde thoght? What is
 [30] he that desireth any thyng of which he wot
 [31] right naught? (As who seith, whoso desireth
 [32] any thing, nedes somwhat he knoweth of it,
 [33] or elles he ne coude nat desiren it.) Or who may
 [34] folwen thinges that ne ben nat iwist? And
 [35] thoughe that he seke tho thingis, wher schal
 [36] he fynde hem? What wyght that is al unkunnynge
 [37] and ignoraunt may knowe the forme
 [38] that is ifounde? But whanne the soule byholdeth
 [39] and seeth the heye thought (that is to
 [40] seyn, God), thanne knoweth it togidre the
 [41] somme and the singularites (that is to seyn,
 [42] the principles and everyche by hymself)? But
 [43] now, while the soule is hidd in the cloude and
 [44] in the derknesse of the membres of the body,
 [45] it ne hath nat al foryeten itself, but it withholdeth
 [46] the somme of thinges and lesith the
 [47] singularites. Thanne who so that sekith sothnesse,
 [48] he nis in neyther nother habite, for he
 [49] not nat al, ne he ne hath nat al foryeten;
 [50] but yit hym remembreth the somme of
 [51] thinges that he withholdeth, and axeth conseile,
 [52] and retretith deepliche thinges iseyn byforne
 [53] (that is to seyn, the grete somme in his
 [54] mynde) so that he mowe adden the parties
 [55] that he hath foryeten to thilke that he hath
 [56] withholden."
 [1] Than seide sche, "This is," quod sche, "the
 [2] olde questioun of the purveaunce of God. And
 [3] Marcus Tullius, whan he devyded the divynaciouns
 [4] (that is to seyn, in his book that he wrot
 [5] of dyvynaciouns), he moevede gretly this questioun;
 [6] and thou thiself hast ysought it mochel
 [7] and outrely and longe. But yit ne hath it nat
 [8] ben determined ne isped fermely and diligently
 [9] of any of yow. And the cause of this dirknesse
 [10] and of this difficulte is, for that the
 [11] moevynge of the resoun of mankynde ne
 [12] may nat moeven to (that is to seyn, applien
 [13] or joignen to) the simplicite of the devyne prescience;
 [14] the whiche symplicite of the devyne
 [15] prescience, yif that men myghte thinken it
 [16] in any manere (that is to seyn, that yif
 [17] men myghten thinken and comprehenden the
 [18] thinges as God seeth hem), thanne ne scholde
 [19] ther duelle outrely no doute. The whiche
 [20] resoun and cause of difficulte I schal assaye
 [21] at the laste to schewe and to speden, whan
 [22] I have first ispendid and answerd to the resouns
 [23] by whiche thou art ymoeved.
 [24] "For I axe whi thou wenest that thilke resoun
 [25] of hem that assoilen this questioun ne be
 [26] nat speedful inow ne sufficient; the whiche solucioun,
 [27] or the whiche resoun, for that it demeth
 [28] that the prescience nis nat cause of necessite
 [29] to thinges to comen, than ne weneth it
 [30] nat that fredom of wil be distorbed or
 [31] ylet be prescience. For ne drawestow nat
 [32] argumentz fro elleswhere of the necessite of
 [33] thingis to comen (as who seith, any oothir wey
 [34] than thus) but that thilke thinges that the
 [35] prescience woot byforn ne mowen nat unbetyde
 [36] (that is to seyn, that thei moten betide)?
 [37] But thanne, yif that prescience ne putteth
 [38] no necessite to thingis to comen, as thou thiself
 [39] hast confessed it and byknowen a litel
 [40] herebyforn, what cause or what is it (as
 [41] who seith, ther may no cause be) by
 [42] whiche that the endes voluntarie of thinges
 [43] myghten be constreyned to certein bytydynge?
 [44] For by grace of posicioun, so that thou mowe the
 [45] betere undirstonde this that folweth, I pose that
 [46] ther ne be no prescience. Thanne axe I," quod
 [47] sche, "in as moche as aperteneth to that,
 [48] scholden thanne thingis that comen of fre wil
 [49] ben constreyned to bytiden by necessite?"
 [50] Boecius. "Nay," quod I.
 [51] "Thanne ayeinward," quod sche, "I
 [52] suppose that ther be prescience, but that it ne
 [53] putteth no necessite to thingis; thanne trowe I
 [54] that thilke selve fredom of wil schal duellen al
 [55] hool and absolut and unbounden. But thou wolt
 [56] seyn that, al be it so that prescience nis nat cause
 [57] of the necessite of bytydynge to thingis to
 [58] comen, algatis yit it is a signe that the thingis ben
 [59] to bytyden by necessite. By this manere
 [60] thanne, althoughe the prescience ne hadde
 [61] nevere iben, yit algate, or at the leste wey,
 [62] it is certein thing that the endes and bytydinges
 [63] of thingis to comen scholden ben necessarie. For
 [64] every signe scheweth and signifieth oonly what
 [65] the thing is, but it ne makith nat the thing that
 [66] it signifieth. For whiche it byhoveth first to
 [67] schewen that nothing ne bytideth that it ne
 [68] betideth by necessite, so that it mai apiere that
 [69] the prescience is signe of this necessite; or
 [70] elles, yif ther nere no necessite, certes
 [71] thilke prescience ne myghte nat ben signe
 [72] of thing that nis nat. But certes, it is now certein
 [73] that the proeve of this, isusteyned by stedfast
 [74] resoun, ne schal nat ben lad ne proeved by
 [75] signes, ne by argumentz itaken fro withoute, but
 [76] by causes covenable and necessarie.
 [77] "But thou mayst seyn, `How may it be that the
 [78] thingis ne betyden nat that ben ipurveied to
 [79] comen? But certes, ryght as we troweden
 [80] that tho thingis whiche that the purveaunce
 [81] woot byforn to comen, ne ben nat to
 [82] bytiden!' But that ne scholde we nat demen; but
 [83] rathir, althoughe that thei schal betyden, yit ne
 [84] have thei no necessite of hir kynde to betyden.
 [85] And this maystow lyghtly aperceyven by this
 [86] that I schal seyn. For we seen many thingis whan
 [87] thei ben done byforn oure eyen, ryght as men
 [88] seen the cartere worken in the tornynge and in
 [89] atemprynge or adressynge of hise cartes or
 [90] chariottes, and by this manere (as who
 [91] seith, maistow undirstonden) of alle othere
 [92] werkmen. Is ther thanne any necessite (as who
 [93] seith, in our lookynge) that constreynith or
 [94] compelleth any of thilke thingis to ben don so?"
 [95] Boece. "Nay," quod I, "for in idel and in veyn
 [96] were al the effect of craft, yif that alle thingis
 [97] weren moeved by constreynynge (that is to seyn,
 [98] by constreinynge of our eyen or of our sighte)."
 [99] Philosophie. "The thingis thanne," quod
 [100] she, "that, whan men doon hem, ne han no
 [101] necessite that men doon hem, eek tho same
 [102] thingis, first or thei ben don, thei ben to comen
 [103] withoute necessite. Forwhy ther ben some
 [104] thingis to betyden, of whiche the eendes and the
 [105] bytydynges of hem ben absolut and quit of alle
 [106] necessite. For certes I ne trowe nat that any man
 [107] wolde seyn this: that tho thingis that men don
 [108] now, that thei ne weren to bytiden first or thei
 [109] weren idoon; and thilke same thinges,
 [110] althoughe that men hadden iwyst hem
 [111] byforn, yit thei han fre bytydynges. For
 [112] ryght as science of thingis present ne bryngith in
 [113] no necessite to thingis that men doon, right so
 [114] the prescience of thinges to comen ne bryngith
 [115] in no necessite to thinges to bytiden.
 [116] "But thou maist seyn that of thilke same it is
 [117] idouted, as whethir that of thilke thingis that ne
 [118] han noon issues and bytidynges necessaries, yif
 [119] therof mai ben any prescience. For certes
 [120] thei semen to discorden, for thou wenest
 [121] that yif that thingis ben iseyn byfore, that
 [122] necessite folwith hem; and yif necessite faileth
 [123] hem, thei ne myghten nat ben wist byforn; and
 [124] that nothing may be comprehended by science
 [125] but certein. And yif tho thinges that ne han no
 [126] certein bytydingis ben ipurveied as certein, it
 [127] scholde ben dirknesse of opinioun, nat sothfastnesse
 [128] of science. And thou wenest that it be
 [129] dyvers fro the holnesse of science that any
 [130] man scholde deme a thing to ben otherwyse
 [131] than it is itself.
 [132] "And the cause of this errour is that of alle the
 [133] thingis that every wyght hath iknowe,
 [134] thei wenen that tho thingis ben iknowe al only by the
 [135] strengthe and by the nature of the thinges that
 [136] ben iwyst or iknowe. And it is al the contrarye;
 [137] for al that evere is iknowe, it is rather
 [138] comprehendid and knowen, nat aftir his
 [139] strengthe and his nature, but aftir the
 [140] faculte (that is to seyn, the power and the
 [141] nature) of hem that knowen. And, for
 [142] that this schal mowen schewen by a schort
 [143] ensaumple, the same rowndnesse of a body,
 [144] otherweys the sighte of the eighe knoweth it,
 [145] and otherweys the touchynge. The lookynge, by
 [146] castynge of his bemys, waiteth and seeth fro afer
 [147] al the body togidre, withoute moevynge of
 [148] itself; but the touchynge clyveth and conjoyneth
 [149] to the rounde body, and moeveth aboute
 [150] the envyrounynge, and comprehendeth by
 [151] parties the roundnesse. And the man
 [152] hymself, ootherweys wit byholdeth hym, and
 [153] ootherweys ymaginacioun, and otherweyes
 [154] resoun, and ootherweies intelligence. For the
 [155] wit comprehendith withoute-forth the figure of
 [156] the body of the man that is establisschid in the
 [157] matere subgett; but the ymaginacioun comprehendith
 [158] oonly the figure withoute the
 [159] matere; resoun surmountith ymaginacioun
 [160] and comprehendith by an universel lokynge
 [161] the comune spece that is in the
 [162] singuler peces. But the eighe of intelligence is
 [163] heyere, for it surmountith the envyrounynge of
 [164] the universite, and loketh over that bi pure
 [165] subtilte of thought thilke same symple forme of
 [166] man that is perdurablely in the devyne thought.
 [167] In whiche this oughte gretly to ben considered,
 [168] that the heyeste strengthe to comprehenden
 [169] thinges enbraseth and contienith the
 [170] lowere strengthe; but the lower strengthe
 [171] ne ariseth nat in no manere to the heyere
 [172] strengthe. For wit ne mai no thing comprehende
 [173] out of matere ne the ymaginacioun ne loketh nat
 [174] the universel speces, ne resoun ne taketh nat the
 [175] symple forme so as intelligence takith it; but
 [176] intelligence, that lookith as aboven, whanne it
 [177] hath comprehended the forme, it knowith and
 [178] demyth alle the thinges that ben undir that
 [179] foorme; but sche knoweth hem in thilke
 [180] manere in the whiche it comprehendith
 [181] thilke same symple forme that ne may
 [182] nevere ben knowen to noon of that othere (that
 [183] is to seyn, to none of tho thre forseyde strengthis
 [184] of the soule). For it knoweth the universite of
 [185] resoun, and the figure of ymaginacioun, and the
 [186] sensible material conceyved by wit; ne it ne
 [187] useth nat nor of resoun ne of ymaginacioun ne
 [188] of wit withoute-forth; but it byholdeth alle
 [189] thingis, so as I schal seie, by o strook of
 [190] thought formely (withoute discours or
 [191] collacioun). Certes resoun, whan it lokith
 [192] any thing universel, it ne useth nat of
 [193] ymaginacioun, nor of wit; and algatis yit it
 [194] comprehendith the thingis ymaginable and
 [195] sensible. For reson is she that diffynyscheth the
 [196] universel of here conceyte ryght thus: man is a
 [197] resonable two-foted beest. And how so that this
 [198] knowynge is universel, yit nis ther no wyght that
 [199] ne wot wel that a man is a thing ymaginable
 [200] and sensible; and this same considereth wel
 [201] resoun; but that nis nat by ymaginacioun
 [202] nor by wit, but it lookith it by resonable
 [203] concepcioun. Also ymaginacioun, albeit so that
 [204] it takith of wit the bygynnynges to seen and to
 [205] formen the figures, algates althoughe that wit ne
 [206] were nat present, yit it envyrowneth and
 [207] comprehendith alle thingis sensible, nat by
 [208] resoun sensible of demynge, but by resoun
 [209] ymaginatyf. Seestow nat thanne that alle
 [210] the thingis in knowynge usen more of hir
 [211] faculte or of hir power than thei don of the
 [212] faculte or power of thingis that ben iknowe? Ne
 [213] that nis nat wrong; for so as every jugement is
 [214] the dede or the doyng of hym that demeth, it
 [215] byhoveth that every wyght performe the werk
 [216] and his entencioun, nat of foreyne power, but of
 [217] his propre power.
 [1] "The porche (that is to seyn, a gate of the
 [2] toun of Athenis there as philosophris hadden
 [3] hir congregacioun to desputen) -- thilke porche
 [4] broughte somtyme olde men, ful dirke in hir
 [5] sentences (that is to seyn, philosophris that
 [6] hyghten Stoycienis), that wenden that ymages
 [7] and sensibilities (that is to seyn, sensible ymaginaciouns
 [8] or ellis ymaginaciouns of sensible
 [9] thingis) weren enprientid into soules fro
 [10] bodyes withoute-forth (as who seith that
 [11] thilke Stoycienis wenden that the sowle
 [12] had ben nakid of itself, as a mirour or a clene
 [13] parchemyn, so that alle figures most first
 [14] comen fro thinges fro withoute into soules,
 [15] and ben emprientid into soules); (Textus)
 [16] ryght as we ben wont somtyme by a swift
 [17] poyntel to fycchen lettres emprientid in the
 [18] smothnesse or in the pleynesse of the table of
 [19] wex or in parchemyn that ne hath no figure
 [20] ne note in it. (Glose. But now argueth
 [21] Boece ayens that opynioun and seith
 [22] thus:) But yif the thryvynge soule ne unpliteth
 [23] nothing (that is to seyn, ne doth nothing) by his
 [24] propre moevynges, but suffrith and lith subgit
 [25] to the figures and to the notes of bodies
 [26] withoute-forth, and yeldith ymages ydel and
 [27] vein in the manere of a mirour, whennes
 [28] thryveth thanne or whennes comith thilke
 [29] knowynge in our soule, that discernith and
 [30] byholdith alle thinges? And whennes is
 [31] thilke strengthe that byholdeth the singuler
 [32] thinges? Or whennes is the strengthe that
 [33] devydeth thinges iknowe; and thilke strengthe
 [34] that gadreth togidre the thingis devyded; and
 [35] the strengthe that chesith his entrechaunged
 [36] wey? For somtyme it hevyth up the heved (that
 [37] is to seyn, that it hevyth up the entencioun) to
 [38] ryght heye thinges, and somtyme it descendith
 [39] into ryght lowe thinges; and whan
 [40] it retorneth into hymself it reproveth and
 [41] destroyeth the false thingis by the trewe
 [42] thinges. Certes this strengthe is cause more
 [43] efficient, and mochel more myghty to seen and
 [44] to knowe thinges, than thilke cause that suffrith
 [45] and resceyveth the notes and the figures
 [46] empressid in manere of matere. Algatis the
 [47] passion (that is to seyn, the suffraunce or the wit)
 [48] in the quyke body goth byforn, excitynge and
 [49] moevynge the strengthes of the thought,
 [50] ryght so as whan that cleernesse smyteth
 [51] the eyen and moeveth hem to seen, or
 [52] ryght so as voys or soun hurteleth to the eres
 [53] and commoeveth hem to herkne; than is the
 [54] strengthe of the thought imoevid and excited,
 [55] and clepith forth to semblable moevyngis the
 [56] speces that it halt withynne itself, and addith
 [57] tho speces to the notes and to the thinges
 [58] withoute-forth, and medleth the ymagis of
 [59] thinges withoute-forth to the foormes ihidd
 [60] withynne hymself.
 [1] "But what yif that in bodyes to ben feled
 [2] (that is to seyn, in the takynge of knowlechynge
 [3] of bodily thinges), and albeit so that the
 [4] qualites of bodies that ben object fro withoute-forth
 [5] moeven and entalenten the instrumentz
 [6] of the wittes, and albeit so that the passioun
 [7] of the body (that is to seyn, the wit or the suffraunce)
 [8] goth toforn the strengthe of the wirkynge
 [9] corage, the whiche passioun or
 [10] sufraunce clepith forth the dede of the
 [11] thought in hymself and moeveth and exciteth
 [12] in this menewhile the formes that resten
 [13] within-forth, and yif that in sensible bodies,
 [14] as I have seid, our corage nis nat ytaught or
 [15] empriented by passioun to knowe thise thinges,
 [16] but demeth and knoweth of his owne strengthe
 [17] the passioun or suffrance subject to the body --
 [18] moche more than tho thingis that ben absolut
 [19] and quit fro alle talentz or affecciouns of
 [20] bodyes (as God or his aungelis) ne folwen
 [21] nat in discernynge thinges object fro withoute-forth,
 [22] but thei acomplissen and speden
 [23] the dede of hir thought. By this resoun,
 [24] thanne, ther comen many maner knowynges to
 [25] dyverse and differynge substaunces. For the
 [26] wit of the body, the whiche wit is naked and
 [27] despoiled of alle oothre knowynges -- thilke
 [28] wit cometh to beestis that ne mowen nat
 [29] moeven hemself her and ther, as oistres
 [30] and muscles and oothir swich schellefyssche
 [31] of the see that clyven and ben norisschid
 [32] to roches. But the ymaginacioun cometh
 [33] to remuable bestis, that semen to han talent to
 [34] fleen or to desiren any thing. But resoun is al
 [35] oonly to the lynage of mankynde, ryght as
 [36] intelligence is oonly the devyne nature. Of
 [37] whiche it folweth that thilke knowynge is more
 [38] worth than thise oothre, syn it knoweth by his
 [39] propre nature nat oonly his subget (as who
 [40] seith, it ne knoweth nat al oonly that apertenith
 [41] properly to his knowinge) but it knoweth
 [42] the subjectz of alle othre knowynges.
 [43] "But how schal it thanne be, yif that wit and
 [44] ymaginacioun stryven ayein resonynge and seyn
 [45] that, of thilke universel thingis that resoun
 [46] weneth to seen, that it nis ryght naught? For wit
 [47] and ymaginacioun seyn that that that is sensible
 [48] or ymaginable, it ne mai nat ben universel;
 [49] thanne is either the jugement of resoun
 [50] soth, ne that ther nis no thing sensible; or
 [51] elles, for that resoun woot wel that many
 [52] thinges ben subject to wit and to ymaginacioun,
 [53] thanne is the concepcioun of resoun veyn and
 [54] fals, whiche that lokith and comprehendith that
 [55] that is sensible and singuler as universel. And yif
 [56] that resoun wolde answere ayein to thise two
 [57] (that is to seyn, to wit and to ymaginacioun),
 [58] and seyn that sothly sche hirselve (that is to
 [59] seyn, resoun) lokith and comprehendith,
 [60] by resoun of universalite, bothe that that is
 [61] sensible and that that is ymaginable;
 [62] and that thilke two (that is to seyn, wit and
 [63] ymaginacioun) ne mowen nat strecchen ne
 [64] enhaunsen hemself to knowynge of universalite,
 [65] for that the knowynge of hem ne mai exceden ne
 [66] surmounten the bodily figures: certes of the
 [67] knowynge of thinges, men oughten rather yeven
 [68] credence to the more stidfast and to the mor
 [69] parfit jugement; in this manere stryvynge,
 [70] thanne, we that han strengthe of resonynge
 [71] and of ymagynynge and of wit (that is to
 [72] seyn, by resoun and by imagynacioun and by
 [73] wit), we scholde rathir preise the cause of resoun
 [74] (as who seith, than the cause of wit and of
 [75] ymaginacioun).
 [76] "Semblable thing is it, that the resoun of
 [77] mankynde ne weneth nat that the devyne
 [78] intelligence byholdeth or knoweth thingis to
 [79] comen, but ryght as the resoun of
 [80] mankynde knoweth hem. For thou arguist
 [81] and seist thus: that if it ne seme nat to men
 [82] that some thingis han certeyn and necessarie
 [83] bytydynges, thei ne mowen nat ben wist byforn
 [84] certeinly to betyden, and thanne nis ther no
 [85] prescience of thilke thinges; and yif we trowe
 [86] that prescience be in thise thingis, thanne is ther
 [87] nothing that it ne bytydeth by necessite. But
 [88] certes yif we myghten han the jugement of
 [89] the devyne thoght, as we ben parsoners of
 [90] resoun, ryght so as we han demyd that it
 [91] byhovith that ymaginacioun and wit ben
 [92] bynethe resoun, ryght so wolde we demen that
 [93] it were ryghtfull thing that mannys resoun
 [94] oughte to summytten itself and to ben bynethe
 [95] the devyne thought. For whiche yif that we
 [96] mowen (as who seith that, if that we mowen,
 [97] I conseile that) we enhaunse us into the heighte
 [98] of thilke soverein intelligence; for ther schal
 [99] resoun wel seen that that it ne mai nat
 [100] byholden in itself, and certes that is this:
 [101] in what manere the prescience of God
 [102] seeth alle thinges certeins and diffinyssched,
 [103] althoughe thei ne han no certein issues or
 [104] bytydyngis; ne this nis noon opinioun, but it is
 [105] rather the simplicite of the soverein science,
 [106] that nis nat enclosed nor ischet withinne none
 [107] boundes.
 [1] "The beestes passen by the erthes be ful
 [2] diverse figures. For some of hem han hir bodyes
 [3] straught, and crepyn in the dust, and drawen
 [4] aftir hem a traas or a furwe icontynued (that
 [5] is to sein, as naddres or snakes); and oothre
 [6] beestis by the wandrynge lyghtnesse of hir
 [7] wynges beten the wyndes, and overswymmen
 [8] the spaces of the longe eir by moyst fleynge;
 [9] and oothere beestes gladen hemself to diggen
 [10] hir traas or hir steppys in the erthe
 [11] with hir goinges or with hir feet, and to
 [12] gon either by the grene feeldes or elles to
 [13] walken undir the wodes. And al be it so that
 [14] thou seest that thei alle discorden by diverse
 [15] foormes, algatis hir faces enclyned hevyeth hir
 [16] dulle wittes. Only the lynage of man heveth
 [17] heyest his heie heved, and stondith light with
 [18] his upryght body, and byholdeth the erthes
 [19] undir hym. And, but yif thou, erthly man,
 [20] waxest yvel out of thi wit, this figure
 [21] amonesteth the, that axest the hevene with
 [22] thi ryghte visage and hast areised thi forheved,
 [23] to beren up an hye thi corage, so that thi thought
 [24] ne be nat ihevyed ne put lowe undir fote, syn
 [25] that thi body is so heyghe areysed.
 [1] "Therfore thanne, as I have schewed a litel
 [2] herebyforne that alle thing that is iwist nis nat
 [3] knowen by his nature propre, but by the nature
 [4] of hem that comprehenden it, lat us loke
 [5] now, in as mochil as it is leveful to us (as who
 [6] seith, lat us loke now as we mowen) whiche that
 [7] the estat is of the devyne substaunce; so that
 [8] we mowe eek knowen what his science is. The
 [9] comune jugement of alle creatures resonables
 [10] thanne is this: that God is eterne.
 [11] Lat us considere thanne what is eternite;
 [12] for certes that schal schewen us togidre the
 [13] devyne nature and the devyne science. Eternite,
 [14] thanne, is parfit possessioun and al togidre
 [15] of lif interminable; and that scheweth. more
 [16] cleerly by the comparysoun or collacioun of
 [17] temporel thinges. For alle thing that lyveth in
 [18] tyme, it is present and procedith fro preteritz
 [19] into futures (that is to seyn, fro tyme passed
 [20] into tyme comynge), ne ther nis nothing
 [21] establisshed in tyme that mai enbrasen togidre
 [22] al the space of his lif. For certis yit ne
 [23] hath it nat taken the tyme of tomorwe, and it
 [24] hath lost that of yusterday, and certes in the
 [25] lif of this dai ye ne lyve namore but right
 [26] as in this moevable and transitorie moment.
 [27] Thanne thilke thing that suffreth temporel condicioun,
 [28] althoughe that it nevere bygan to
 [29] be, ne thoughe it nevere ne cese for to be,
 [30] as Aristotile deemed of the world, and
 [31] althoughe that the lif of it be strecchid with
 [32] infinite of tyme; yit algatis nis it no swich thing
 [33] that men mighten trowen by ryght that it is
 [34] eterne. For althouhe that it comprehende and
 [35] embrase the space of lif infinit, yit algatis ne
 [36] enbraseth it nat the space of the lif al togidre; for
 [37] it ne hath nat the futuris (that ne ben nat yit),
 [38] ne it ne hath no lengere the preteritz (that
 [39] ben idoon or ipassed). But thilke thing,
 [40] thanne, that hath and comprehendith
 [41] togidre al the plente of the lif interminable,
 [42] to whom ther ne faileth naught of the future, and
 [43] to whom ther nis noght of the preteryt escaped
 [44] nor ipassed, thilke same is iwitnessed and
 [45] iproevid by right to ben eterne; and it byhovith
 [46] by necessite that thilke thing be alwey present to
 [47] hymself and compotent (as who seith, alwey
 [48] present to hymselve and so myghty that al be
 [49] right at his plesaunce), and that he have al
 [50] present the infinit of the moevable tyme.
 [51] "Wherfore som men trowen wrongfully
 [52] that, whan thei heren that it semede to Plato that
 [53] this world ne hadde nevere bygynnynge of
 [54] tyme, ne that it nevere schal han failynge, thei
 [55] wenen in this manere that this world be makid
 [56] coeterne with his makere. (As who seith, thei
 [57] wene that this world and God ben makid
 [58] togidre eterne, and that is a wrongful wenynge.)
 [59] For other thing is it to ben ilad
 [60] by lif interminable, as Plato grauntide to
 [61] the world, and oothir is it to enbrace
 [62] togidre al the presence of the lif intermynable,
 [63] the whiche thing it is cleer and manyfest that it
 [64] is propre to the devyne thought. Ne it ne
 [65] scholde nat semen to us that God is eldere than
 [66] thinges that ben imaked by quantite of tyme, but
 [67] rathir by the proprete of his simple nature. For
 [68] this ilke infinit moevyng of temporel thinges
 [69] folweth this presentarie estat of the lif
 [70] inmoevable; and, so as it ne mai nat
 [71] contrefetin it ne feynen it, ne be evene lik
 [72] to it, [fro] the immoevablete (that is to sein, that
 [73] is in the eternite of God) it faileth and fallith into
 [74] moevynge, [and] fro the simplicite of the
 [75] presence of [God] disencresith into the infinit
 [76] quantite of future and of preterit; and so as it ne
 [77] mai nat han togidre al the plente of the lif,
 [78] algates yit, for as moche as it ne ceseth nevere for
 [79] to ben in som manere, it semyth somdel to
 [80] us that it folwith and resembleth thilke
 [81] thing that it ne mai nat atayne to ne
 [82] fulfillen, and byndeth itself to som maner
 [83] presence of this litle and swift moment, the
 [84] whiche presence of this litle and swifte moment,
 [85] for that it bereth a maner ymage or liknesse of
 [86] the ai duellynge presence of God, it grauntith to
 [87] swich manere thinges as it betydith to that it
 [88] semeth hem that thise thinges han iben and ben.
 [89] And for that the presence of swiche litil
 [90] moment ne mai nat duelle, therfore it
 [91] ravysschide and took the infynit wey of
 [92] tyme (that is to seyn, by successioun). And by
 [93] this manere is it idoon for that it sholde contynue
 [94] the lif in goinge, of the whiche lif it ne myght nat
 [95] enbrace the plente in duellinge. And forthi yif
 [96] we wollen putten worthi names to thinges and
 [97] folwen Plato, lat us seyen thanne sothly that God
 [98] is `eterne,' and that the world is `perpetuel.'
 [99] "Thanne, syn that every jugement knoweth
 [100] and comprehendith by his owne nature
 [101] thinges that ben subgect unto hym,
 [102] ther is sothly to God alweys an eterne
 [103] and presentarie estat; and the science of hym, that
 [104] overpasseth alle temporel moevement, duelleth
 [105] in the simplicite of his presence, and embraceth
 [106] and considereth alle the infynit spaces of tymes
 [107] preteritz and futures, and lokith in his simple
 [108] knowynge alle thinges of preterit ryght as thei
 [109] weren idoon presently ryght now. Yif
 [110] thou wolt thanne thinken and avise the
 [111] prescience by whiche it knoweth alle
 [112] thinges, thou ne schalt naught demen it as
 [113] prescience of thinges to comen, but thou schalt
 [114] demen more ryghtfully that it is science of
 [115] presence or of instaunce that nevere ne faileth.
 [116] For whiche it nis nat ycleped `previdence,' but it
 [117] sholde rathir ben clepid `purveaunce,' that is
 [118] establisshed ful fer fro ryght lowe thinges, and
 [119] byholdeth fro afer alle thingis, right as it
 [120] were fro the heye heighte of thinges.
 [121] "Why axestow thanne, or whi desputestow
 [122] thanne, that thilke thingis ben doon
 [123] by necessite whiche that ben yseyn and knowen
 [124] by the devyne sighte, syn that forsothe men ne
 [125] maken nat thilke thinges necessarie whiche that
 [126] thei seen ben idoon in hir sighte? For addith thi
 [127] byholdynge any necessite to thilke thinges that
 [128] thou byholdest present?"
 [129] "Nay," quod I.
 [130] Philosophie. "Certes, thanne, yif men
 [131] myghte maken any digne comparysoun or
 [132] collacioun of the presence devyne and of the
 [133] presence of mankynde, ryght so as ye seen some
 [134] thinges in this temporel present, ryght so seeth
 [135] God alle thinges by his eterne present.
 [136] "Wherfore this devyne prescience ne chaungeth
 [137] nat the nature ne the proprete of thinges,
 [138] but byholdeth swiche thingis present to hym-ward
 [139] as thei shollen betyde to yow-ward
 [140] in tyme to comen. Ne it ne confowndeth
 [141] nat the jugementz of thingis; but by o
 [142] sight of his thought he knoweth the thinges
 [143] to comen, as wel necessarie as nat necessarie.
 [144] Ryght so as whan ye seen togidre a man walke
 [145] on the erthe and the sonne arisen in the
 [146] hevene, albeit so that ye seen and byholden the
 [147] ton and the tothir togidre, yit natheles ye demen
 [148] and discerne that the toon is voluntarie
 [149] and the tothir is necessarie. Ryght so
 [150] thanne the devyne lookynge, byholdynge
 [151] alle thinges undir hym, ne trowbleth nat
 [152] the qualite of thinges that ben certeinly present
 [153] to hym-ward but, as to the condicioun of tyme,
 [154] forsothe thei ben futur. For which it folwith that
 [155] this nis noon opynioun, but rathir a stidfast
 [156] knowynge istrengthid by soothnesse that, whan
 [157] that God knoweth any thing to be, he ne unwot
 [158] not that thilke thing wantith necessite to be.
 [159] (This is to sein that whan that God knoweth
 [160] any thing to betide, he wot wel that it ne
 [161] hath no necessite to betyde.)
 [162] "And yif thou seist here that thilke thing that
 [163] God seeth to betide, it ne may nat unbytide (as
 [164] who seith, it moot bytide), and thilke thing that
 [165] ne mai nat unbytide, it mot bytiden by necessite,
 [166] and that thou streyne me to this name of
 [167] necessite, certes I wol wel confessen and
 [168] byknowen a thing of ful sad trouthe. But
 [169] unnethe schal ther any wight mowe seen it
 [170] or come therto, but yif that he be
 [171] byholdere of the devyne thought. For I wol
 [172] answeren the thus: that thilke thing that is futur,
 [173] whan it is referred to the devyne knowynge,
 [174] than is it necessarie; but certis whan it is
 [175] undirstonden in his owene kynde, men seen it
 [176] outrely fre and absolut fro alle necessite.
 [177] "For certes ther ben two maneris of
 [178] necessites: that oon necessite is symple, as thus:
 [179] that it byhovith by necessite that alle men
 [180] ben mortal or dedly; anothir necessite is
 [181] condicionel, as thus: yif thow wost that a
 [182] man walketh, it byhovith by necessite that he
 [183] walke. Thilke thing, thanne, that any wight hath
 [184] iknowe to be, it ne mai ben noon oothir weys
 [185] thanne he knowith it to be. But this condicion ne
 [186] draweth nat with hir thilke necessite simple; for
 [187] certes this necessite condicionel -- the propre
 [188] nature of it ne makith it nat, but the adjeccioun
 [189] of the condicioun makith it. For no necessite
 [190] ne constreyneth a man to gon that
 [191] goth by his propre wil, al be it so that whan
 [192] he goth that it is necessarie that he goth. Ryght
 [193] on this same manere thanne, yf that the
 [194] purveaunce of God seeth any thyng present,
 [195] than moot thilke thing ben by necessite,
 [196] althoghe that it ne have no necessite of his owne
 [197] nature. But certes the futures that bytiden by
 [198] fredom of arbitrie, God seth hem alle togidre
 [199] presentz. Thise thinges thanne, yif thei ben
 [200] referrid to the devyne sighte, than ben they
 [201] maked necessarie by the condicioun of the
 [202] devyne knowynge. But certes yif thilke thingis
 [203] ben considered by hemself, thei ben absolut of
 [204] necessite, and ne forleten nat ne cesen nat of
 [205] the liberte of hir owne nature. Thanne certes
 [206] withoute doute alle the thinges shollen ben
 [207] doon whiche that God woot byforn that thei ben
 [208] to comen. But some of hem comen and bytiden
 [209] of fre arbitrie or of fre wil, that, al be it so
 [210] that thei bytiden, yit algates ne lese thei nat
 [211] hir propre nature in beinge, by the whiche,
 [212] first or that thei weren idon, thei hadden power
 [213] noght to han bytyd."
 [214] Boece. "What is this to seyn thanne," quod I,
 [215] "that thinges ne ben nat necessarie by hir propre
 [216] nature, so as thei comen in alle maneris in the
 [217] liknesse of necessite by the condicioun of the
 [218] devyne science?"
 [219] Philosophie. "This is the difference,"
 [220] quod sche, "that tho thinges that I purposide
 [221] the a litil herbyforn -- that is to seyn,
 [222] the sonne arysynge and the man walkynge --
 [223] that ther-whiles that thilke thinges ben idoon,
 [224] they ne myghte nat ben undoon; natheles that
 [225] oon of hem, or it was idoon, it byhovide by
 [226] necessite that it was idoon, but nat that oothir.
 [227] Ryght so is it here, that the thinges that God
 [228] hath present, withoute doute thei shollen ben.
 [229] But some of hem descendith of the nature
 [230] of thinges (as the sonne arysynge); and
 [231] some descendith of the power of the doeris
 [232] (as the man walkynge). Thanne seide I no wrong
 [233] that, yif that thise thinges ben referred to the
 [234] devyne knowynge, thanne ben thei necessarie;
 [235] and yif thei ben considered by hemself, than ben
 [236] thei absolut fro the boond of necessite. Right so
 [237] as alle thingis that apiereth or scheweth to the
 [238] wittes, yif thou referre it to resoun, it is
 [239] universel; and yif thou loke it or referre it
 [240] to itself, than is it singuler.
 [241] "But now yif thou seist thus: that, `If it be
 [242] in my power to chaunge my purpos, than schal
 [243] I voiden the purveaunce of God, whan paraventure
 [244] I schal han chaungid the thingis that
 [245] he knoweth byforn,' thanne schal I answeren
 [246] the thus: `Certes thou maist wel chaungen thi
 [247] purpos; but for as mochil as the present
 [248] sothnesse of the devyne purveaunce byholdeth
 [249] that thou maist chaunge thi purpos, and
 [250] whethir thou wolt chaunge it or no, and
 [251] whider-ward that thou torne it, thou ne
 [252] maist nat eschuen the devyne prescience, ryght
 [253] as thou ne maist nat fleen the sighte of the
 [254] present eye, althoghe that thou torne thiself by
 [255] thi fre wil into diverse acciouns.' But thou maist
 [256] sein ayein: `How schal it thanne be -- schal nat
 [257] the devyne science ben chaunged by my
 [258] disposicioun whan that I wol o thing now and
 [259] now anothir? And thilke prescience -- ne
 [260] semeth it nat to entrechaunge stoundis of
 [261] knowynge?'" (As who seith, ne schal it nat
 [262] seme to us that the devyne prescience entrechaungith
 [263] hise diverse stoundes of knowynge,
 [264] so that it knowe somtyme o thing, and somtyme
 [265] the contrarie?)
 [266] "No, forsothe," quod she, "for the devyne
 [267] sighte renneth toforn and seeth alle futures, and
 [268] clepith hem ayen and retorneth hem to the
 [269] presence of his propre knowynge; ne he ne
 [270] entrechaungith nat, so as thou wenest, the
 [271] stoundes of foreknowynge, as now this,
 [272] now that; but he ay duellynge cometh byforn,
 [273] and enbraseth at o strook alle thi mutaciouns.
 [274] And this presence to comprehenden and to seen
 [275] alle thingis -- God ne hath nat taken it of the
 [276] bytidynge of thinges to come, but of his propre
 [277] symplicite. And herby is assoiled thilke thing
 [278] that thou puttest a litel herebyforn; that is to
 [279] seyn, that it is unworthy thing to seyn that
 [280] our futures yeven cause of the science of
 [281] God. For certis this strengthe of the devyne
 [282] science, whiche that embraseth alle thinges by
 [283] his presentarie knowynge, establissheth manere
 [284] to alle thinges, and it ne oweth nawht to lattere
 [285] thinges.
 [286] "And syn that thise thinges ben thus (that is
 [287] to seyn, syn that necessite nis nat in thinges by
 [288] the devyne prescience), thanne is ther fredom of
 [289] arbitrie, that duelleth hool and unwemmed
 [290] to mortal men; ne the lawes ne purposen
 [291] nat wikkidly medes and peynes to the
 [292] willynges of men that ben unbownden and quyt
 [293] of alle necessite; and God, byholdere and
 [294] forwytere of alle thingis, duelleth above, and the
 [295] present eternite of his sighte renneth alwey with
 [296] the diverse qualite of our dedes, dispensynge
 [297] and ordeynynge medes to gode men and
 [298] tormentz to wikkide men. Ne in ydel ne in veyn
 [299] ne ben ther put in God hope and preyeris
 [300] that ne mowen nat ben unspedful ne
 [301] withouten effect whan they been ryghtful.
 [302] "Withstond thanne and eschue thou vices;
 [303] worschipe and love thou vertues; areise thi
 [304] corage to ryghtful hopes; yilde thou humble
 [305] preieres an heyhe. Gret necessite of prowesse
 [306] and vertu is encharged and comaunded to yow,
 [307] yif ye nil nat dissimulen; syn that ye worken and
 [308] don (that is to seyn, your dedes or your werkes)
 [309] byforn the eyen of the juge that seeth and
 [310] demeth alle thinges."

      
The Canterbury Tales and Other Works of Chaucer (Middle English), by Geoffery Chaucer, [14th cent.], at sacred-texts.com

 

Troilus and Criseyde

 

Book 1

 [1] The double sorwe of Troilus to tellen,
 [2] That was the kyng Priamus sone of Troye,
 [3] In lovynge, how his aventures fellen
 [4] Fro wo to wele, and after out of joie,
 [5] My purpos is, er that I parte fro ye.
 [6] Thesiphone, thow help me for t' endite
 [7] Thise woful vers, that wepen as I write.
 [8] To the clepe I, thow goddesse of torment,
 [9] Thow cruwel Furie, sorwynge evere in peyne,
 [10] Help me, that am the sorwful instrument,
 [11] That helpeth loveres, as I kan, to pleyne;
 [12] For wel sit it, the sothe for to seyne,
 [13] A woful wight to han a drery feere,
 [14] And to a sorwful tale, a sory chere.
 [15] For I, that God of Loves servantz serve,
 [16] Ne dar to Love, for myn unliklynesse,
 [17] Preyen for speed, al sholde I therfore sterve,
 [18] So fer am I from his help in derknesse.
 [19] But natheles, if this may don gladnesse
 [20] Unto any lovere, and his cause availle,
 [21] Have he my thonk, and myn be this travaille!
 [22] But ye loveres, that bathen in gladnesse,
 [23] If any drope of pyte in yow be,
 [24] Remembreth yow on passed hevynesse
 [25] That ye han felt, and on the adversite
 [26] Of othere folk, and thynketh how that ye
 [27] Han felt that Love dorste yow displese,
 [28] Or ye han wonne hym with to gret an ese.
 [29] And preieth for hem that ben in the cas
 [30] Of Troilus, as ye may after here,
 [31] That Love hem brynge in hevene to solas;
 [32] And ek for me preieth to God so dere
 [33] That I have myght to shewe, in som manere,
 [34] Swich peyne and wo as Loves folk endure,
 [35] In Troilus unsely aventure.
 [36] And biddeth ek for hem that ben despeired
 [37] In love, that nevere nyl recovered be,
 [38] And ek for hem that falsly ben apeired
 [39] Thorugh wikked tonges, be it he or she;
 [40] Thus biddeth God, for his benignite,
 [41] So graunte hem soone owt of this world to pace,
 [42] That ben despeired out of Loves grace.
 [43] And biddeth ek for hem that ben at ese,
 [44] That God hem graunte ay good perseveraunce,
 [45] And sende hem myght hire ladies so to plese
 [46] That it to Love be worship and plesaunce.
 [47] For so hope I my sowle best avaunce,
 [48] To prey for hem that Loves servauntz be,
 [49] And write hire wo, and lyve in charite,
 [50] And for to have of hem compassioun,
 [51] As though I were hire owne brother dere.
 [52] Now herkneth with a good entencioun,
 [53] For now wil I gon streght to my matere,
 [54] In which ye may the double sorwes here
 [55] Of Troilus in lovynge of Criseyde,
 [56] And how that she forsook hym er she deyde.
 [57] Yt is wel wist how that the Grekes stronge
 [58] In armes with a thousand shippes wente
 [59] To Troiewardes, and the cite longe
 [60] Assegeden, neigh ten yer er they stente,
 [61] And in diverse wise and oon entente,
 [62] The ravysshyng to wreken of Eleyne,
 [63] By Paris don, they wroughten al hir peyne.
 [64] Now fel it so that in the town ther was
 [65] Dwellynge a lord of gret auctorite,
 [66] A gret devyn, that clepid was Calkas,
 [67] That in science so expert was that he
 [68] Knew wel that Troie sholde destroied be,
 [69] By answere of his god, that highte thus:
 [70] Daun Phebus or Appollo Delphicus.
 [71] So whan this Calkas knew by calkulynge,
 [72] And ek by answer of this Appollo,
 [73] That Grekes sholden swich a peple brynge,
 [74] Thorugh which that Troie moste ben fordo,
 [75] He caste anon out of the town to go;
 [76] For wel wiste he by sort that Troye sholde
 [77] Destroyed ben, ye, wolde whoso nolde.
 [78] For which for to departen softely
 [79] Took purpos ful this forknowynge wise,
 [80] And to the Grekes oost ful pryvely
 [81] He stal anon; and they, in curteys wise,
 [82] Hym diden bothe worship and servyce,
 [83] In trust that he hath konnynge hem to rede
 [84] In every peril which that is to drede.
 [85] Gret rumour gan, whan it was first aspied
 [86] Thorugh al the town, and generaly was spoken,
 [87] That Calkas traitour fled was and allied
 [88] With hem of Grece, and casten to be wroken
 [89] On hym that falsly hadde his feith so broken,
 [90] And seyden he and al his kyn at-ones
 [91] Ben worthi for to brennen, fel and bones.
 [92] Now hadde Calkas left in this meschaunce,
 [93] Al unwist of this false and wikked dede,
 [94] His doughter, which that was in gret penaunce,
 [95] For of hire lif she was ful sore in drede,
 [96] As she that nyste what was best to rede;
 [97] For bothe a widewe was she and allone
 [98] Of any frend to whom she dorste hir mone.
 [99] Criseyde was this lady name al right.
 [100] As to my doom, in al Troies cite
 [101] Nas non so fair, forpassynge every wight,
 [102] So aungelik was hir natif beaute,
 [103] That lik a thing inmortal semed she,
 [104] As doth an hevenyssh perfit creature,
 [105] That down were sent in scornynge of nature.
 [106] This lady, which that alday herd at ere
 [107] Hire fadres shame, his falsnesse and tresoun,
 [108] Wel neigh out of hir wit for sorwe and fere,
 [109] In widewes habit large of samyt broun,
 [110] On knees she fil biforn Ector adown
 [111] With pitous vois, and tendrely wepynge,
 [112] His mercy bad, hirselven excusynge.
 [113] Now was this Ector pitous of nature,
 [114] And saugh that she was sorwfully bigon,
 [115] And that she was so fair a creature;
 [116] Of his goodnesse he gladede hire anon,
 [117] And seyde, "Lat youre fadres treson gon
 [118] Forth with meschaunce, and ye youreself in joie
 [119] Dwelleth with us, whil yow good list, in Troie.
 [120] "And al th' onour that men may don yow have,
 [121] As ferforth as youre fader dwelled here,
 [122] Ye shul have, and youre body shal men save,
 [123] As fer as I may ought enquere or here."
 [124] And she hym thonked with ful humble chere,
 [125] And ofter wolde, and it hadde ben his wille,
 [126] And took hire leve, and hom, and held hir stille.
 [127] And in hire hous she abood with swich meyne
 [128] As til hire honour nede was to holde;
 [129] And whil she was dwellynge in that cite,
 [130] Kepte hir estat, and both of yonge and olde
 [131] Ful wel biloved, and wel men of hir tolde.
 [132] But wheither that she children hadde or noon,
 [133] I rede it naught, therfore I late it goon.
 [134] The thynges fellen, as they don of werre,
 [135] Bitwixen hem of Troie and Grekes ofte;
 [136] For som day boughten they of Troie it derre,
 [137] And eft the Grekes founden nothing softe
 [138] The folk of Troie; and thus Fortune on lofte
 [139] And under eft gan hem to whielen bothe
 [140] Aftir hir course, ay whil that thei were wrothe.
 [141] But how this town com to destruccion
 [142] Ne falleth naught to purpos me to telle,
 [143] For it were a long digression
 [144] Fro my matere, and yow to long to dwelle.
 [145] But the Troian gestes, as they felle,
 [146] In Omer, or in Dares, or in Dite,
 [147] Whoso that kan may rede hem as they write.
 [148] But though that Grekes hem of Troie shetten,
 [149] And hir cite biseged al aboute,
 [150] Hire olde usage nolde they nat letten,
 [151] As for to honoure hir goddes ful devoute;
 [152] But aldirmost in honour, out of doute,
 [153] Thei hadde a relik, heet Palladion,
 [154] That was hire trist aboven everichon.
 [155] And so bifel, whan comen was the tyme
 [156] Of Aperil, whan clothed is the mede
 [157] With newe grene, of lusty Veer the pryme,
 [158] And swote smellen floures white and rede,
 [159] In sondry wises shewed, as I rede,
 [160] The folk of Troie hire observaunces olde,
 [161] Palladiones feste for to holde.
 [162] And to the temple, in al hir beste wise,
 [163] In general ther wente many a wight,
 [164] To herknen of Palladions servyce;
 [165] And namely, so many a lusty knyght,
 [166] So many a lady fressh and mayden bright,
 [167] Ful wel arayed, both meeste, mene, and leste,
 [168] Ye, bothe for the seson and the feste.
 [169] Among thise othere folk was Criseyda,
 [170] In widewes habit blak; but natheles,
 [171] Right as oure firste lettre is now an A,
 [172] In beaute first so stood she, makeles.
 [173] Hire goodly lokyng gladed al the prees.
 [174] Nas nevere yet seyn thyng to ben preysed derre,
 [175] Nor under cloude blak so bright a sterre
 [176] As was Criseyde, as folk seyde everichone
 [177] That hir behelden in hir blake wede.
 [178] And yet she stood ful lowe and stille allone,
 [179] Byhynden other folk, in litel brede,
 [180] And neigh the dore, ay undre shames drede,
 [181] Simple of atir and debonaire of chere,
 [182] With ful assured lokyng and manere.
 [183] This Troilus, as he was wont to gide
 [184] His yonge knyghtes, lad hem up and down
 [185] In thilke large temple on every side,
 [186] Byholding ay the ladies of the town,
 [187] Now here, now there; for no devocioun
 [188] Hadde he to non, to reven hym his reste,
 [189] But gan to preise and lakken whom hym leste.
 [190] And in his walk ful faste he gan to wayten
 [191] If knyght or squyer of his compaignie
 [192] Gan for to syke, or lete his eighen baiten
 [193] On any womman that he koude espye.
 [194] He wolde smyle and holden it folye,
 [195] And seye hym thus, "God woot, she slepeth softe
 [196] For love of the, whan thow turnest ful ofte!
 [197] "I have herd told, pardieux, of youre lyvynge,
 [198] Ye loveres, and youre lewed observaunces,
 [199] And which a labour folk han in wynnynge
 [200] Of love, and in the kepyng which doutaunces;
 [201] And whan youre prey is lost, woo and penaunces.
 [202] O veray fooles, nyce and blynde be ye!
 [203] Ther nys nat oon kan war by other be."
 [204] And with that word he gan caste up the browe,
 [205] Ascaunces, "Loo! is this naught wisely spoken?"
 [206] At which the God of Love gan loken rowe
 [207] Right for despit, and shop for to ben wroken.
 [208] He kidde anon his bowe nas naught broken;
 [209] For sodeynly he hitte hym atte fulle --
 [210] And yet as proud a pekok kan he pulle.
 [211] O blynde world, O blynde entencioun!
 [212] How often falleth al the effect contraire
 [213] Of surquidrie and foul presumpcioun;
 [214] For kaught is proud, and kaught is debonaire.
 [215] This Troilus is clomben on the staire,
 [216] And litel weneth that he moot descenden;
 [217] But alday faileth thing that fooles wenden.
 [218] As proude Bayard gynneth for to skippe
 [219] Out of the weye, so pryketh hym his corn,
 [220] Til he a lasshe have of the longe whippe --
 [221] Than thynketh he, "Though I praunce al byforn
 [222] First in the trays, ful fat and newe shorn,
 [223] Yet am I but an hors, and horses lawe
 [224] I moot endure, and with my feres drawe" --
 [225] So ferde it by this fierse and proude knyght:
 [226] Though he a worthy kynges sone were,
 [227] And wende nothing hadde had swich myght
 [228] Ayeyns his wille that shuld his herte stere,
 [229] Yet with a look his herte wex a-fere,
 [230] That he that now was moost in pride above,
 [231] Wax sodeynly moost subgit unto love.
 [232] Forthy ensample taketh of this man,
 [233] Ye wise, proude, and worthi folkes alle,
 [234] To scornen Love, which that so soone kan
 [235] The fredom of youre hertes to hym thralle;
 [236] For evere it was, and evere it shal byfalle,
 [237] That Love is he that alle thing may bynde,
 [238] For may no man fordon the lawe of kynde.
 [239] That this be soth, hath preved and doth yit.
 [240] For this trowe I ye knowen alle or some,
 [241] Men reden nat that folk han gretter wit
 [242] Than they that han be most with love ynome;
 [243] And strengest folk ben therwith overcome,
 [244] The worthiest and grettest of degree:
 [245] This was, and is, and yet men shall it see.
 [246] And trewelich it sit wel to be so,
 [247] For alderwisest han therwith ben plesed;
 [248] And they that han ben aldermost in wo,
 [249] With love han ben comforted moost and esed;
 [250] And ofte it hath the cruel herte apesed,
 [251] And worthi folk maad worthier of name,
 [252] And causeth moost to dreden vice and shame.
 [253] Now sith it may nat goodly ben withstonde,
 [254] And is a thing so vertuous in kynde,
 [255] Refuseth nat to Love for to ben bonde,
 [256] Syn, as hymselven liste, he may yow bynde;
 [257] The yerde is bet that bowen wole and wynde
 [258] Than that that brest, and therfore I yow rede
 [259] To folowen hym that so wel kan yow lede.
 [260] But for to tellen forth in special
 [261] Of this kynges sone of which I tolde,
 [262] And leten other thing collateral,
 [263] Of hym thenke I my tale forth to holde,
 [264] Both of his joie and of his cares colde;
 [265] And al his werk, as touching this matere,
 [266] For I it gan, I wol therto refere.
 [267] Withinne the temple he wente hym forth pleyinge,
 [268] This Troilus, of every wight aboute,
 [269] On this lady, and now on that, lokynge,
 [270] Wher so she were of town or of withoute;
 [271] And upon cas bifel that thorugh a route
 [272] His eye percede, and so depe it wente,
 [273] Til on Criseyde it smot, and ther it stente.
 [274] And sodeynly he wax therwith astoned,
 [275] And gan hir bet biholde in thrifty wise.
 [276] "O mercy, God," thoughte he, "wher hastow woned,
 [277] That art so feyr and goodly to devise?"
 [278] Therwith his herte gan to sprede and rise,
 [279] And softe sighed, lest men myghte hym here,
 [280] And caught ayeyn his firste pleyinge chere.
 [281] She nas nat with the leste of hire stature,
 [282] But alle hire lymes so wel answerynge
 [283] Weren to wommanhod, that creature
 [284] Was nevere lasse mannyssh in semynge;
 [285] And ek the pure wise of hire mevynge
 [286] Shewed wel that men myght in hire gesse
 [287] Honour, estat, and wommanly noblesse.
 [288] To Troilus right wonder wel with alle
 [289] Gan for to like hire mevynge and hire chere,
 [290] Which somdel deignous was, for she let falle
 [291] Hire look a lite aside in swich manere,
 [292] Ascaunces, "What, may I nat stonden here?"
 [293] And after that hir lokynge gan she lighte,
 [294] That nevere thoughte hym seen so good a syghte.
 [295] And of hire look in him ther gan to quyken
 [296] So gret desir and such affeccioun,
 [297] That in his herte botme gan to stiken
 [298] Of hir his fixe and depe impressioun.
 [299] And though he erst hadde poured up and down,
 [300] He was tho glad his hornes in to shrinke:
 [301] Unnethes wiste he how to loke or wynke.
 [302] Lo, he that leet hymselven so konnynge,
 [303] And scorned hem that Loves peynes dryen,
 [304] Was ful unwar that Love hadde his dwellynge
 [305] Withinne the subtile stremes of hire yen;
 [306] That sodeynly hym thoughte he felte dyen,
 [307] Right with hire look, the spirit in his herte:
 [308] Blissed be Love, that kan thus folk converte!
 [309] She, this in blak, likynge to Troilus
 [310] Over alle thing, he stood for to biholde;
 [311] Ne his desir, ne wherfore he stood thus,
 [312] He neither chere made, ne word tolde;
 [313] But from afer, his manere for to holde,
 [314] On other thing his look som tyme he caste,
 [315] And eft on hire, whil that servyse laste.
 [316] And after this, nat fullich al awhaped,
 [317] Out of the temple al esilich he wente,
 [318] Repentynge hym that he hadde evere ijaped
 [319] Of Loves folk, lest fully the descente
 [320] Of scorn fille on hymself; but what he mente,
 [321] Lest it were wist on any manere syde,
 [322] His woo he gan dissimilen and hide.
 [323] Whan he was fro the temple thus departed,
 [324] He streght anon unto his paleys torneth.
 [325] Right with hire look thorugh-shoten and thorugh-darted,
 [326] Al feyneth he in lust that he sojorneth,
 [327] And al his chere and speche also he borneth,
 [328] And ay of Loves servantz every while,
 [329] Hymself to wrye, at hem he gan to smyle,
 [330] And seyde, "Lord, so ye lyve al in lest,
 [331] Ye loveres! For the konnyngeste of yow,
 [332] That serveth most ententiflich and best,
 [333] Hym tit as often harm therof as prow.
 [334] Youre hire is quyt ayeyn, ye, God woot how!
 [335] Nought wel for wel, but scorn for good servyse.
 [336] In feith, youre ordre is ruled in good wise!
 [337] "In nouncerteyn ben alle youre observaunces,
 [338] But it a sely fewe pointes be;
 [339] Ne no thing asketh so gret attendaunces
 [340] As doth youre lay, and that knowe alle ye;
 [341] But that is nat the worste, as mote I the!
 [342] But, tolde I yow the worste point, I leve,
 [343] Al seyde I soth, ye wolden at me greve.
 [344] "But take this: that ye loveres ofte eschuwe,
 [345] Or elles doon, of good entencioun,
 [346] Ful ofte thi lady wol it mysconstruwe,
 [347] And deme it harm in hire oppynyoun;
 [348] And yet if she, for other enchesoun,
 [349] Be wroth, than shaltow have a groyn anon.
 [350] Lord, wel is hym that may ben of yow oon!"
 [351] But for al this, whan that he say his tyme,
 [352] He held his pees -- non other boote hym gayned --
 [353] For love bigan his fetheres so to lyme
 [354] That wel unnethe until his folk he fayned
 [355] That other besy nedes hym destrayned;
 [356] For wo was hym, that what to doon he nyste,
 [357] But bad his folk to gon wher that hem liste.
 [358] And whan that he in chambre was allone,
 [359] He doun upon his beddes feet hym sette,
 [360] And first he gan to sike, and eft to grone,
 [361] And thought ay on hire so, withouten lette,
 [362] That, as he sat and wook, his spirit mette
 [363] That he hire saugh a-temple, and al the wise
 [364] Right of hire look, and gan it newe avise.
 [365] Thus gan he make a mirour of his mynde
 [366] In which he saugh al holly hire figure,
 [367] And that he wel koude in his herte fynde.
 [368] It was to hym a right good aventure
 [369] To love swich oon, and if he dede his cure
 [370] To serven hir, yet myghte he falle in grace,
 [371] Or ellis for oon of hire servantz pace.
 [372] Imagenynge that travaille nor grame
 [373] Ne myghte for so goodly oon be lorn
 [374] As she, ne hym for his desir no shame,
 [375] Al were it wist, but in pris and up-born
 [376] Of alle lovers wel more than biforn,
 [377] Thus argumented he in his gynnynge,
 [378] Ful unavysed of his woo comynge.
 [379] Thus took he purpos loves craft to suwe,
 [380] And thoughte he wolde werken pryvely,
 [381] First to hiden his desir in muwe
 [382] From every wight yborn, al outrely,
 [383] But he myghte ought recovered be therby,
 [384] Remembryng hym that love to wide yblowe
 [385] Yelt bittre fruyt, though swete seed be sowe.
 [386] And over al this, yet muchel more he thoughte
 [387] What for to speke, and what to holden inne;
 [388] And what to arten hire to love he soughte,
 [389] And on a song anon-right to bygynne,
 [390] And gan loude on his sorwe for to wynne;
 [391] For with good hope he gan fully assente
 [392] Criseyde for to love, and nought repente.
 [393] And of his song naught only the sentence,
 [394] As writ myn auctour called Lollius,
 [395] But pleinly, save oure tonges difference,
 [396] I dar wel seyn, in al, that Troilus
 [397] Seyde in his song, loo, every word right thus
 [398] As I shal seyn; and whoso list it here,
 [399] Loo, next this vers he may it fynden here.
 [400] "If no love is, O God, what fele I so?
 [401] And if love is, what thing and which is he?
 [402] If love be good, from whennes cometh my woo?
 [403] If it be wikke, a wonder thynketh me,
 [404] When every torment and adversite
 [405] That cometh of hym may to me savory thinke,
 [406] For ay thurst I, the more that ich it drynke.
 [407] "And if that at myn owen lust I brenne,
 [408] From whennes cometh my waillynge and my pleynte?
 [409] If harm agree me, wherto pleyne I thenne?
 [410] I noot, ne whi unwery that I feynte.
 [411] O quike deth, O swete harm so queynte,
 [412] How may of the in me swich quantite,
 [413] But if that I consente that it be?
 [414] "And if that I consente, I wrongfully
 [415] Compleyne, iwis. Thus possed to and fro,
 [416] Al sterelees withinne a boot am I
 [417] Amydde the see, bitwixen wyndes two,
 [418] That in contrarie stonden evere mo.
 [419] Allas, what is this wondre maladie?
 [420] For hote of cold, for cold of hote, I dye."
 [421] And to the God of Love thus seyde he
 [422] With pitous vois, "O lord, now youres is
 [423] My spirit, which that oughte youres be.
 [424] Yow thanke I, lord, that han me brought to this.
 [425] But wheither goddesse or womman, iwis,
 [426] She be, I not, which that ye do me serve;
 [427] But as hire man I wol ay lyve and sterve.
 [428] "Ye stonden in hir eighen myghtily,
 [429] As in a place unto youre vertu digne;
 [430] Wherfore, lord, if my service or I
 [431] May liken yow, so beth to me benigne;
 [432] For myn estat roial I here resigne
 [433] Into hire hond, and with ful humble chere
 [434] Bicome hir man, as to my lady dere."
 [435] In hym ne deyned spare blood roial
 [436] The fyr of love -- wherfro God me blesse --
 [437] Ne him forbar in no degree, for al
 [438] His vertu or his excellent prowesse,
 [439] But held hym as his thral lowe in destresse,
 [440] And brende hym so in soundry wise ay newe,
 [441] That sexti tyme a day he loste his hewe.
 [442] So muche, day by day, his owene thought,
 [443] For lust to hire, gan quiken and encresse,
 [444] That every other charge he sette at nought.
 [445] Forthi ful ofte, his hote fir to cesse,
 [446] To sen hire goodly lok he gan to presse;
 [447] For therby to ben esed wel he wende,
 [448] And ay the ner he was, the more he brende.
 [449] For ay the ner the fir, the hotter is --
 [450] This, trowe I, knoweth al this compaignye;
 [451] But were he fer or ner, I dar sey this:
 [452] By nyght or day, for wisdom or folye,
 [453] His herte, which that is his brestez ye,
 [454] Was ay on hire, that fairer was to sene
 [455] Than evere were Eleyne or Polixene.
 [456] Ek of the day ther passed nought an houre
 [457] That to hymself a thousand tyme he seyde,
 [458] "Good goodly, to whom serve I and laboure
 [459] As I best kan, now wolde God, Criseyde,
 [460] Ye wolden on me rewe, er that I deyde!
 [461] My dere herte, allas, myn hele and hewe
 [462] And lif is lost, but ye wol on me rewe!"
 [463] Alle other dredes weren from him fledde,
 [464] Both of th' assege and his savacioun;
 [465] N' yn him desir noon other fownes bredde,
 [466] But argumentes to his conclusioun:
 [467] That she of him wolde han compassioun,
 [468] And he to ben hire man while he may dure.
 [469] Lo, here his lif, and from the deth his cure!
 [470] The sharpe shoures felle of armes preve
 [471] That Ector or his othere brethren diden
 [472] Ne made hym only therfore ones meve;
 [473] And yet was he, where so men wente or riden,
 [474] Founde oon the beste, and longest tyme abiden
 [475] Ther peril was, and dide ek swich travaille
 [476] In armes, that to thenke it was merveille.
 [477] But for non hate he to the Grekes hadde,
 [478] Ne also for the rescous of the town,
 [479] Ne made hym thus in armes for to madde,
 [480] But only, lo, for this conclusioun:
 [481] To liken hire the bet for his renoun.
 [482] Fro day to day in armes so he spedde
 [483] That the Grekes as the deth him dredde.
 [484] And fro this forth tho refte hym love his slep,
 [485] And made his mete his foo, and ek his sorwe
 [486] Gan multiplie, that, whoso tok kep,
 [487] It shewed in his hewe both eve and morwe.
 [488] Therfor a title he gan him for to borwe
 [489] Of other siknesse, lest men of hym wende
 [490] That the hote fir of love hym brende,
 [491] And seyde he hadde a fevere and ferde amys.
 [492] But how it was, certeyn, kan I nat seye,
 [493] If that his lady understood nat this,
 [494] Or feynede hire she nyste, oon of the tweye;
 [495] But wel I rede that, by no manere weye,
 [496] Ne semed it that she of hym roughte,
 [497] Or of his peyne, or whatsoevere he thoughte.
 [498] But thanne felte this Troilus swich wo
 [499] That he was wel neigh wood; for ay his drede
 [500] Was this, that she som wight hadde loved so,
 [501] That nevere of hym she wolde han taken hede,
 [502] For which hym thoughte he felte his herte blede;
 [503] Ne of his wo ne dorste he nat bygynne
 [504] To tellen hir, for al this world to wynne.
 [505] But whan he hadde a space from his care,
 [506] Thus to hymself ful ofte he gan to pleyne;
 [507] He seyde, "O fool, now artow in the snare,
 [508] That whilom japedest at loves peyne.
 [509] Now artow hent, now gnaw thin owen cheyne!
 [510] Thow were ay wont ech lovere reprehende
 [511] Of thing fro which thou kanst the nat defende.
 [512] "What wol now every lovere seyn of the,
 [513] If this be wist, but evere in thin absence
 [514] Laughen in scorn, and seyn, `Loo, ther goth he
 [515] That is the man of so gret sapience,
 [516] That held us loveres leest in reverence.
 [517] Now, thanked God, he may gon in the daunce
 [518] Of hem that Love list febly for to avaunce.'
 [519] "But, O thow woful Troilus, God wolde,
 [520] Sith thow most loven thorugh thi destine,
 [521] That thow beset were on swich oon that sholde
 [522] Know al thi wo, al lakked hir pitee!
 [523] But also cold in love towardes the
 [524] Thi lady is as frost in wynter moone,
 [525] And thow fordon as snow in fire is soone.
 [526] "God wold I were aryved in the port
 [527] Of deth, to which my sorwe wol me lede!
 [528] A, Lord, to me it were a gret comfort;
 [529] Than were I quyt of languisshyng in drede;
 [530] For, be myn hidde sorwe iblowe on brede,
 [531] I shal byjaped ben a thousand tyme
 [532] More than that fol of whos folie men ryme.
 [533] "But now help, God, and ye, swete, for whom
 [534] I pleyne, ikaught, ye, nevere wight so faste!
 [535] O mercy, dere herte, and help me from
 [536] The deth, for I, whil that my lyf may laste,
 [537] More than myself wol love yow to my laste;
 [538] And with som frendly lok gladeth me, swete,
 [539] Though nevere more thing ye me byheete."
 [540] Thise wordes, and ful many an other to,
 [541] He spak, and called evere in his compleynte
 [542] Hire name, for to tellen hire his wo,
 [543] Til neigh that he in salte teres dreynte.
 [544] Al was for nought: she herde nat his pleynte;
 [545] And whan that he bythought on that folie,
 [546] A thousand fold his wo gan multiplie.
 [547] Bywayling in his chambre thus allone,
 [548] A frend of his that called was Pandare
 [549] Com oones in unwar, and herde hym groone,
 [550] And say his frend in swich destresse and care:
 [551] "Allas," quod he, "who causeth al this fare?
 [552] O mercy, God! What unhap may this meene?
 [553] Han now thus soone Grekes maad yow leene?
 [554] "Or hastow som remors of conscience,
 [555] And art now falle in som devocioun,
 [556] And wailest for thi synne and thin offence,
 [557] And hast for ferde caught attricioun?
 [558] God save hem that biseged han oure town,
 [559] That so kan leye oure jolite on presse,
 [560] And bringe oure lusty folk to holynesse!"
 [561] Thise wordes seyde he for the nones alle,
 [562] That with swich thing he myght hym angry maken,
 [563] And with angre don his wo to falle,
 [564] As for the tyme, and his corage awaken.
 [565] But wel he wist, as fer as tonges spaken,
 [566] Ther nas a man of gretter hardinesse
 [567] Thanne he, ne more desired worthinesse.
 [568] "What cas," quod Troilus, "or what aventure
 [569] Hath gided the to sen me langwisshinge,
 [570] That am refus of every creature?
 [571] But for the love of God, at my preyinge,
 [572] Go hennes awey; for certes my deyinge
 [573] Wol the disese, and I mot nedes deye;
 [574] Therfore go wey, ther is na more to seye.
 [575] "But if thow wene I be thus sik for drede,
 [576] It is naught so, and therfore scorne nought.
 [577] Ther is another thing I take of hede
 [578] Wel more than aught the Grekes han yet wrought,
 [579] Which cause is of my deth, for sorowe and thought;
 [580] But though that I now telle it the ne leste,
 [581] Be thow naught wroth; I hide it for the beste."
 [582] This Pandare, that neigh malt for wo and routhe,
 [583] Ful ofte seyde, "Allas, what may this be?
 [584] Now frend," quod he, "if evere love or trouthe
 [585] Hath ben, or is, bitwixen the and me,
 [586] Ne do thow nevere swich a crueltee
 [587] To hiden fro thi frend so gret a care!
 [588] Wostow naught wel that it am I, Pandare?
 [589] "I wol parten with the al thi peyne,
 [590] If it be so I do the no comfort,
 [591] As it is frendes right, soth for to seyne,
 [592] To entreparten wo as glad desport.
 [593] I have, and shal, for trewe or fals report,
 [594] In wrong and right iloved the al my lyve:
 [595] Hid nat thi wo fro me, but telle it blyve."
 [596] Than gan this sorwful Troylus to syke,
 [597] And seide hym thus: "God leve it be my beste
 [598] To telle it the; for sith it may the like,
 [599] Yet wol I telle it, though myn herte breste.
 [600] And wel woot I thow mayst do me no reste;
 [601] But lest thow deme I truste nat to the,
 [602] Now herke, frend, for thus it stant with me.
 [603] "Love, ayeins the which whoso defendeth
 [604] Hymselven most, hym alderlest avaylleth,
 [605] With disespeyr so sorwfulli me offendeth,
 [606] That streight unto the deth myn herte sailleth.
 [607] Therto desir so brennyngly me assailleth,
 [608] That to ben slayn it were a gretter joie
 [609] To me than kyng of Grece ben and Troye.
 [610] "Suffiseth this, my fulle frend Pandare,
 [611] That I have seyd, for now wostow my wo;
 [612] And for the love of God, my colde care,
 [613] So hide it wel -- I tolde it nevere to mo,
 [614] For harmes myghten folwen mo than two
 [615] If it were wist -- but be thow in gladnesse,
 [616] And lat me sterve, unknowe, of my destresse."
 [617] "How hastow thus unkyndely and longe
 [618] Hid this fro me, thow fol?" quod Pandarus.
 [619] "Paraunter thow myghte after swich oon longe,
 [620] That myn avys anoon may helpen us."
 [621] "This were a wonder thing," quod Troilus;
 [622] "Thow koudest nevere in love thiselven wisse.
 [623] How devel maistow brynge me to blisse?"
 [624] "Ye, Troilus, now herke," quod Pandare;
 [625] "Though I be nyce, it happeth often so,
 [626] That oon that excesse doth ful yvele fare
 [627] By good counseil kan kepe his frend therfro.
 [628] I have myself ek seyn a blynd man goo
 [629] Ther as he fel that couth. loken wide;
 [630] A fool may ek a wis-man ofte gide.
 [631] "A wheston is no kervyng instrument,
 [632] But yet it maketh sharppe kervyng tolis;
 [633] And there thow woost that I have aught myswent,
 [634] Eschuw thow that, for swich thing to the scole is.
 [635] Thus often wise men ben war by foolys.
 [636] If thow do so, thi wit is wel bewared;
 [637] By his contrarie is every thyng declared.
 [638] "For how myghte evere swetnesse han ben knowe
 [639] To him that nevere tasted bitternesse?
 [640] Ne no man may ben inly glad, I trowe,
 [641] That nevere was in sorwe or som destresse.
 [642] Eke whit by blak, by shame ek worthinesse,
 [643] Ech set by other, more for other semeth,
 [644] As men may se, and so the wyse it demeth.
 [645] "Sith thus of two contraries is o lore,
 [646] I, that have in love so ofte assayed
 [647] Grevances, oughte konne, and wel the more,
 [648] Counseillen the of that thow art amayed.
 [649] Ek the ne aughte nat ben yvel appayed,
 [650] Though I desyre with the for to bere
 [651] Thyn hevy charge; it shal the lasse dere.
 [652] "I woot wel that it fareth thus be me
 [653] As to thi brother, Paris, an herdesse
 [654] Which that icleped was Oenone
 [655] Wrot in a compleynte of hir hevynesse.
 [656] Yee say the lettre that she wrot, I gesse?"
 [657] "Nay, nevere yet, ywys," quod Troilus.
 [658] "Now," quod Pandare, "herkne, it was thus:
 [659] "`Phebus, that first fond art of medicyne,'
 [660] Quod she, `and couth. in every wightes care
 [661] Remedye and reed, by herbes he knew fyne,
 [662] Yet to hymself his konnyng was ful bare,
 [663] For love hadde hym so bounden in a snare,
 [664] Al for the doughter of the kyng Amete,
 [665] That al his craft ne koude his sorwes bete.'
 [666] "Right so fare I, unhappyly for me.
 [667] I love oon best, and that me smerteth sore;
 [668] And yet, peraunter, kan I reden the
 [669] And nat myself; repreve me na more.
 [670] I have no cause, I woot wel, for to sore
 [671] As doth an hauk that listeth for to pleye;
 [672] But to thin help yet somwhat kan I seye.
 [673] "And of o thing right siker maistow be,
 [674] That certein, for to dyen in the peyne,
 [675] That I shal nevere mo discoveren the;
 [676] Ne, by my trouthe, I kepe nat restreyne
 [677] The fro thi love, theigh that it were Eleyne
 [678] That is thi brother wif, if ich it wiste:
 [679] Be what she be, and love hire as the liste!
 [680] "Therfore, as frend, fullich in me assure,
 [681] And tel me plat what is th' enchesoun
 [682] And final cause of wo that ye endure;
 [683] For douteth nothyng, myn entencioun
 [684] Nis nat to yow of reprehencioun,
 [685] To speke as now, for no wight may byreve
 [686] A man to love, tyl that hym list to leve.
 [687] "And witteth wel that bothe two ben vices:
 [688] Mistrusten alle, or elles alle leve.
 [689] But wel I woot, the mene of it no vice is,
 [690] For to trusten som wight is a preve
 [691] Of trouth; and forthi wolde I fayn remeve
 [692] Thi wrong conseyte, and do the som wyght triste
 [693] Thi wo to telle; and tel me, if the liste.
 [694] "The wise seith, `Wo hym that is allone,
 [695] For, and he falle, he hath non helpe to ryse';
 [696] And sith thow hast a felawe, tel thi mone;
 [697] For this nys naught, certein, the nexte wyse
 [698] To wynnen love -- as techen us the wyse --
 [699] To walwe and wepe as Nyobe the queene,
 [700] Whos teres yet in marble ben yseene.
 [701] "Lat be thy wepyng and thi drerynesse,
 [702] And lat us lissen wo with oother speche;
 [703] So may thy woful tyme seme lesse.
 [704] Delyte nat in wo thi wo to seche,
 [705] As don thise foles that hire sorwes eche
 [706] With sorwe, whan thei han mysaventure,
 [707] And listen naught to seche hem other cure.
 [708] "Men seyn, `to wrecche is consolacioun
 [709] To have another felawe in hys peyne.'
 [710] That owghte wel ben oure opynyoun,
 [711] For bothe thow and I of love we pleyne.
 [712] So ful of sorwe am I, soth for to seyne,
 [713] That certeinly namore harde grace
 [714] May sitte on me, for-why ther is no space.
 [715] "If God wol, thow art nat agast of me,
 [716] Lest I wolde of thi lady the bygyle!
 [717] Thow woost thyself whom that I love, parde,
 [718] As I best kan, gon sithen longe while.
 [719] And sith thow woost I do it for no wyle,
 [720] And sith I am he that thow trustest moost,
 [721] Tel me somwhat, syn al my wo thow woost."
 [722] Yet Troilus for al this no word seyde,
 [723] But longe he ley as stylle as he ded were;
 [724] And after this with sikynge he abreyde,
 [725] And to Pandarus vois he lente his ere,
 [726] And up his eighen caste he, that in feere
 [727] Was Pandarus, lest that in frenesie
 [728] He sholde falle, or elles soone dye;
 [729] And cryde "Awake!" ful wonderlich and sharpe;
 [730] "What! Slombrestow as in a litargie?
 [731] Or artow lik an asse to the harpe,
 [732] That hereth sown whan men the strynges plye,
 [733] But in his mynde of that no melodie
 [734] May sinken hym to gladen, for that he
 [735] So dul ys of his bestialite?"
 [736] And with that, Pandare of his wordes stente;
 [737] And Troilus yet hym nothyng answerde,
 [738] For-why to tellen nas nat his entente
 [739] To nevere no man, for whom that he so ferde;
 [740] For it is seyd, "Men maketh ofte a yerde
 [741] With which the maker is hymself ybeten
 [742] In sondry manere," as thise wyse treten,
 [743] And namelich in his counseil tellynge
 [744] That toucheth love that oughte ben secree;
 [745] For of himself it wol ynough out sprynge,
 [746] But if that it the bet governed be.
 [747] Ek som tyme it is a craft to seme fle
 [748] Fro thyng whych in effect men hunte faste;
 [749] Al this gan Troilus in his herte caste.
 [750] But natheles, whan he hadde herd hym crye
 [751] "Awake!" he gan to syken wonder soore,
 [752] And seyde, "Frend, though that I stylle lye,
 [753] I am nat deef. Now pees, and crye namore,
 [754] For I have herd thi wordes and thi lore;
 [755] But suffre me my meschief to bywaille,
 [756] For thy proverbes may me naught availle.
 [757] "Nor other cure kanstow non for me;
 [758] Ek I nyl nat ben cured; I wol deye.
 [759] What knowe I of the queene Nyobe?
 [760] Lat be thyne olde ensaumples, I the preye."
 [761] "No," quod Pandarus, "therfore I seye,
 [762] Swych is delit of foles to bywepe
 [763] Hire wo, but seken bote they ne kepe.
 [764] "Now knowe I that ther reson in the failleth.
 [765] But tel me, if I wiste what she were
 [766] For whom that the al this mysaunter ailleth,
 [767] Dorstestow that I tolde in hire ere
 [768] Thi wo, sith thow darst naught thiself for feere,
 [769] And hire bysoughte on the to han som routhe?"
 [770] "Why, nay," quod he, "by God and by my trouthe!"
 [771] "What, nat as bisyly," quod Pandarus,
 [772] "As though myn owene lyf lay on this nede?"
 [773] "No, certes, brother," quod this Troilus,
 [774] "And whi? For that thow scholdest nevere spede."
 [775] "Wostow that wel?" -- "Ye, that is out of drede,"
 [776] Quod Troilus; "for al that evere ye konne,
 [777] She nyl to noon swich wrecche as I ben wonne."
 [778] Quod Pandarus, "Allas! What may this be,
 [779] That thow dispeired art thus causeles?
 [780] What! lyveth nat thi lady, bendiste?
 [781] How wostow so that thow art graceles?
 [782] Swich yvel is nat alwey booteles.
 [783] Why, put nat impossible thus thi cure,
 [784] Syn thyng to come is oft in aventure.
 [785] "I graunte wel that thow endurest wo
 [786] As sharp as doth he Ticius in helle,
 [787] Whos stomak foughles tiren evere moo
 [788] That hightyn volturis, as bokes telle;
 [789] But I may nat endure that thow dwelle
 [790] In so unskilful an oppynyoun
 [791] That of thi wo is no curacioun.
 [792] "But oones nyltow, for thy coward herte,
 [793] And for thyn ire and folissh wilfulnesse,
 [794] For wantrust, tellen of thy sorwes smerte,
 [795] Ne to thyn owen help don bysynesse
 [796] As muche as speke a resoun moore or lesse,
 [797] But list as he that lest of nothyng recche.
 [798] What womman koude loven swich a wrecche?
 [799] "What may she demen oother of thy deeth,
 [800] If thow thus deye, and she not why it is,
 [801] But that for feere is yolden up thy breth,
 [802] For Grekes han biseged us, iwys?
 [803] Lord, which a thonk than shaltow han of this!
 [804] Thus wol she seyn, and al the town attones,
 [805] `The wrecche is ded, the devel have his bones!'
 [806] "Thow mayst allone here wepe and crye and knele --
 [807] But love a womman that she woot it nought,
 [808] And she wol quyte it that thow shalt nat fele;
 [809] Unknowe, unkist, and lost that is unsought.
 [810] What, many a man hath love ful deere ybought
 [811] Twenty wynter that his lady wiste,
 [812] That nevere yet his lady mouth he kiste.
 [813] "What sholde he therfore fallen in dispayr,
 [814] Or be recreant for his owne tene,
 [815] Or slen hymself, al be his lady fair?
 [816] Nay, nay, but evere in oon be fressh and grene
 [817] To serve and love his deere hertes queene,
 [818] And thynk it is a guerdon hire to serve,
 [819] A thousand fold moore than he kan deserve."
 [820] Of that word took hede Troilus,
 [821] And thoughte anon what folie he was inne,
 [822] And how that soth hym seyde Pandarus,
 [823] That for to slen hymself myght he nat wynne,
 [824] But bothe don unmanhod and a synne,
 [825] And of his deth his lady naught to wite;
 [826] For of his wo, God woot, she knew ful lite.
 [827] And with that thought he gan ful sore syke,
 [828] And seyde, "Allas! What is me best to do?"
 [829] To whom Pandare answered, "If the like,
 [830] The beste is that thow telle me al thi wo;
 [831] And have my trouthe, but thow it fynde so
 [832] I be thi boote, er that it be ful longe,
 [833] To pieces do me drawe and sithen honge!"
 [834] "Ye, so thow seyst," quod Troilus tho, "allas!
 [835] But, God woot, it is naught the rather so.
 [836] Ful hard were it to helpen in this cas,
 [837] For wel fynde I that Fortune is my fo;
 [838] Ne al the men that riden konne or go
 [839] May of hire cruel whiel the harm withstonde;
 [840] For as hire list she pleyeth with free and bonde."
 [841] Quod Pandarus, "Than blamestow Fortune
 [842] For thow art wroth; ye, now at erst I see.
 [843] Woost thow nat wel that Fortune is comune
 [844] To everi manere wight in som degree?
 [845] And yet thow hast this comfort, lo, parde,
 [846] That, as hire joies moten overgon,
 [847] So mote hire sorwes passen everechon.
 [848] "For if hire whiel stynte any thyng to torne,
 [849] Than cessed she Fortune anon to be.
 [850] Now, sith hire whiel by no way may sojourne,
 [851] What woostow if hire mutabilite
 [852] Right as thyselven list wol don by the,
 [853] Or that she be naught fer fro thyn helpynge?
 [854] Paraunter thow hast cause for to synge.
 [855] "And therfore wostow what I the biseche?
 [856] Lat be thy wo and tornyng to the grounde;
 [857] For whoso list have helyng of his leche,
 [858] To hym byhoveth first unwre his wownde.
 [859] To Cerberus yn helle ay be I bounde,
 [860] Were it for my suster, al thy sorwe,
 [861] By my wil she sholde al be thyn to-morwe.
 [862] "Look up, I seye, and telle me what she is
 [863] Anon, that I may gon about thy nede.
 [864] Knowe ich hire aught? For my love, telle me this.
 [865] Thanne wolde I hopen rather for to spede."
 [866] Tho gan the veyne of Troilus to blede,
 [867] For he was hit, and wax al reed for shame.
 [868] "A ha!" quod Pandare; "Here bygynneth game."
 [869] And with that word he gan hym for to shake,
 [870] And seyde, "Thef, thow shalt hyre name telle."
 [871] But tho gan sely Troilus for to quake
 [872] As though men sholde han led hym into helle,
 [873] And seyde, "Allas, of al my wo the welle,
 [874] Thanne is my swete fo called Criseyde!"
 [875] And wel neigh with the word for feere he deide.
 [876] And whan that Pandare herde hire name nevene,
 [877] Lord, he was glad, and seyde, "Frend so deere,
 [878] Now far aright, for Joves name in hevene.
 [879] Love hath byset the wel; be of good cheere!
 [880] For of good name and wisdom and manere
 [881] She hath ynough, and ek of gentilesse.
 [882] If she be fayr, thow woost thyself, I gesse,
 [883] "Ne nevere saugh a more bountevous
 [884] Of hire estat, n' a gladder, ne of speche
 [885] A frendlyer, n' a more gracious
 [886] For to do wel, ne lasse hadde nede to seche
 [887] What for to don; and al this bet to eche,
 [888] In honour, to as fer as she may strecche,
 [889] A kynges herte semeth by hyrs a wrecche.
 [890] "And forthi loke of good comfort thow be;
 [891] For certeinly, the ferste poynt is this
 [892] Of noble corage and wel ordeyne,
 [893] A man to have pees with hymself, ywis.
 [894] So oghtist thow, for noht but good it is
 [895] To love wel, and in a worthy place;
 [896] The oghte not to clepe it hap, but grace.
 [897] "And also thynk, and therwith glade the,
 [898] That sith thy lady vertuous is al,
 [899] So foloweth it that there is some pitee
 [900] Amonges alle thise other in general;
 [901] And forthi se that thow, in special,
 [902] Requere naught that is ayeyns hyre name;
 [903] For vertu streccheth naught hymself to shame.
 [904] "But wel is me that evere that I was born,
 [905] That thow biset art in so good a place;
 [906] For by my trouthe, in love I dorste have sworn
 [907] The sholde nevere han tid thus fayr a grace.
 [908] And wostow why? For thow were wont to chace
 [909] At Love in scorn, and for despit him calle
 [910] `Seynt Idiot, lord of thise foles alle.'
 [911] "How often hastow maad thi nyce japes,
 [912] And seyd that Loves servantz everichone
 [913] Of nycete ben verray Goddes apes;
 [914] And some wolde mucche hire mete allone,
 [915] Liggyng abedde, and make hem for to grone;
 [916] And som, thow seydest, hadde a blaunche fevere,
 [917] And preydest God he sholde nevere kevere.
 [918] "And som of hem took on hym, for the cold,
 [919] More than ynough, so seydestow ful ofte.
 [920] And som han feyned ofte tyme, and told
 [921] How that they waken, whan thei slepen softe;
 [922] And thus they wolde han brought hemself alofte,
 [923] And natheles were under at the laste.
 [924] Thus seydestow, and japedest ful faste.
 [925] "Yet seydestow that for the moore part
 [926] Thise loveres wolden speke in general,
 [927] And thoughten that it was a siker art,
 [928] For faylyng, for t' assaien overal.
 [929] Now may I jape of the, if that I shal;
 [930] But natheles, though that I sholde deye,
 [931] That thow art non of tho, I dorste saye.
 [932] "Now bet thi brest, and sey to God of Love,
 [933] `Thy grace, lord, for now I me repente,
 [934] If I mysspak, for now myself I love.'
 [935] Thus sey with al thyn herte in good entente."
 [936] Quod Troilus, "A, lord! I me consente,
 [937] And preye to the my japes thow foryive,
 [938] And I shal nevere more whyle I live."
 [939] "Thow seist wel," quod Pandare, "and now I hope
 [940] That thow the goddes wrathe hast al apesed;
 [941] And sithen thow hast wopen many a drope,
 [942] And seyd swych thyng wherwith thi god is plesed,
 [943] Now wolde nevere god but thow were esed!
 [944] And thynk wel, she of whom rist al thi wo
 [945] Hereafter may thy comfort be also.
 [946] "For thilke grownd that bereth the wedes wikke
 [947] Bereth ek thise holsom herbes, as ful ofte
 [948] Next the foule netle, rough and thikke,
 [949] The rose waxeth swoote and smothe and softe;
 [950] And next the valeye is the hil o-lofte;
 [951] And next the derke nyght the glade morwe;
 [952] And also joie is next the fyn of sorwe.
 [953] "Now loke that atempre be thi bridel,
 [954] And for the beste ay suffre to the tyde,
 [955] Or elles al oure labour is on ydel:
 [956] He hasteth wel that wisely kan abyde.
 [957] Be diligent and trewe, and ay wel hide;
 [958] Be lusty, fre; persevere in thy servyse,
 [959] And al is wel, if thow werke in this wyse.
 [960] "But he that departed is in everi place
 [961] Is nowher hol, as writen clerkes wyse.
 [962] What wonder is, though swich oon have no grace?
 [963] Ek wostow how it fareth of som servise,
 [964] As plaunte a tree or herbe, in sondry wyse,
 [965] And on the morwe pulle it up as blyve!
 [966] No wonder is, though it may nevere thryve.
 [967] "And sith that God of Love hath the bistowed
 [968] In place digne unto thi worthinesse,
 [969] Stond faste, for to good port hastow rowed;
 [970] And of thiself, for any hevynesse,
 [971] Hope alwey wel; for, but if drerinesse
 [972] Or over-haste oure bothe labour shende,
 [973] I hope of this to maken a good ende.
 [974] "And wostow why I am the lasse afered
 [975] Of this matere with my nece trete?
 [976] For this have I herd seyd of wyse lered,
 [977] Was nevere man or womman yet bigete
 [978] That was unapt to suffren loves hete,
 [979] Celestial, or elles love of kynde;
 [980] Forthy som grace I hope in hire to fynde.
 [981] "And for to speke of hire in specyal,
 [982] Hire beaute to bithynken and hire youthe,
 [983] It sit hire naught to ben celestial
 [984] As yet, though that hire liste bothe and kowthe;
 [985] But trewely, it sate hire wel right nowthe
 [986] A worthi knyght to loven and cherice,
 [987] And but she do, I holde it for a vice.
 [988] "Wherfore I am, and wol ben, ay redy
 [989] To peyne me to do yow this servyse;
 [990] For bothe yow to plese thus hope I
 [991] Herafterward; for ye ben bothe wyse,
 [992] And konne it counseil kepe in swych a wyse
 [993] That no man shal the wiser of it be;
 [994] And so we may ben gladed alle thre.
 [995] "And, by my trouthe, I have right now of the
 [996] A good conceyte in my wit, as I gesse,
 [997] And what it is, I wol now that thow se.
 [998] I thenke, sith that Love, of his goodnesse,
 [999] Hath the converted out of wikkednesse,
 [1000] That thow shalt ben the beste post, I leve,
 [1001] Of al his lay, and moost his foos to greve.
 [1002] "Ensample why, se now thise wise clerkes,
 [1003] That erren aldermost ayeyn a lawe,
 [1004] And ben converted from hire wikked werkes
 [1005] Thorugh grace of God that list hem to hym drawe,
 [1006] Thanne arn thise folk that han moost God in awe,
 [1007] And strengest feythed ben, I undirstonde,
 [1008] And konne an errowr alderbest withstonde."
 [1009] Whan Troilus hadde herd Pandare assented
 [1010] To ben his help in lovyng of Cryseyde,
 [1011] Weex of his wo, as who seith, untormented,
 [1012] But hotter weex his love, and thus he seyde,
 [1013] With sobre chere, although his herte pleyde:
 [1014] "Now blisful Venus helpe, er that I sterve,
 [1015] Of the, Pandare, I mowe som thank deserve.
 [1016] "But, deere frend, how shal my wo be lesse
 [1017] Til this be doon? And good, ek telle me this:
 [1018] How wiltow seyn of me and my destresse,
 [1019] Lest she be wroth -- this drede I moost, ywys --
 [1020] Or nyl nat here or trowen how it is.
 [1021] Al this drede I, and ek for the manere
 [1022] Of the, hire em, she nyl no swich thyng here."
 [1023] Quod Pandarus, "Thow hast a ful gret care
 [1024] Lest that the cherl may falle out of the moone!
 [1025] Whi, Lord! I hate of the thi nyce fare!
 [1026] Whi, entremete of that thow hast to doone!
 [1027] For Goddes love, I bidde the a boone:
 [1028] So lat m' alone, and it shal be thi beste."
 [1029] "Whi, frend," quod he, "now do right as the leste.
 [1030] "But herke, Pandare, o word, for I nolde
 [1031] That thow in me wendest so gret folie,
 [1032] That to my lady I desiren sholde
 [1033] That toucheth harm or any vilenye;
 [1034] For dredeles me were levere dye
 [1035] Than she of me aught elles understode
 [1036] But that that myghte sownen into goode."
 [1037] Tho lough this Pandare, and anon answerde,
 [1038] "And I thi borugh? Fy! No wight doth but so.
 [1039] I roughte naught though that she stood and herde
 [1040] How that thow seist! but farewel, I wol go.
 [1041] Adieu! Be glad! God spede us bothe two!
 [1042] Yef me this labour and this bisynesse,
 [1043] And of my spede be thyn al that swetnesse."
 [1044] Tho Troilus gan doun on knees to falle,
 [1045] And Pandare in his armes hente faste,
 [1046] And seyde, "Now, fy on the Grekes alle!
 [1047] Yet, parde, God shal helpe us atte laste.
 [1048] And dredelees, if that my lyf may laste,
 [1049] And God toforn, lo, som of hem shal smerte;
 [1050] And yet m' athenketh that this avant m' asterte!
 [1051] "Now, Pandare, I kan na more seye,
 [1052] But, thow wis, thow woost, thow maist, thow art al!
 [1053] My lif, my deth, hol in thyn hond I leye.
 [1054] Help now!" Quod he, "Yis, by mi trowthe, I shal."
 [1055] "God yelde the, frend, and this in special,"
 [1056] Quod Troilus, "that thow me recomande
 [1057] To hire that to the deth me may comande."
 [1058] This Pandarus, tho desirous to serve
 [1059] His fulle frend, than seyde in this manere:
 [1060] "Farwell, and thenk I wol thi thank deserve!
 [1061] Have here my trowthe, and that thow shalt wel here."
 [1062] And went his wey, thenkyng on this matere,
 [1063] And how he best myghte hire biseche of grace,
 [1064] And fynde a tyme therto, and a place.
 [1065] For everi wight that hath an hous to founde
 [1066] Ne renneth naught the werk for to bygynne
 [1067] With rakel hond, but he wol bide a stounde,
 [1068] And sende his hertes line out fro withinne
 [1069] Aldirfirst his purpos for to wynne.
 [1070] Al this Pandare in his herte thoughte,
 [1071] And caste his werk ful wisely or he wroughte.
 [1072] But Troilus lay tho no lenger down,
 [1073] But up anon upon his stede bay,
 [1074] And in the feld he pleyde tho leoun;
 [1075] Wo was that Grek that with hym mette a-day!
 [1076] And in the town his manere tho forth ay
 [1077] So goodly was, and gat hym so in grace,
 [1078] That ecch hym loved that loked on his face.
 [1079] For he bicom the frendlieste wight,
 [1080] The gentilest, and ek the mooste fre,
 [1081] The thriftiest, and oon the beste knyght
 [1082] That in his tyme was or myghte be;
 [1083] Dede were his japes and his cruelte,
 [1084] His heighe port and his manere estraunge,
 [1085] And ecch of tho gan for a vertu chaunge.
 [1086] Now lat us stynte of Troilus a stounde,
 [1087] That fareth lik a man that hurt is soore,
 [1088] And is somdeel of akyngge of his wownde
 [1089] Ylissed wel, but heeled no deel moore,
 [1090] And, as an esy pacyent, the loore
 [1091] Abit of hym that gooth aboute his cure;
 [1092] And thus he dryeth forth his aventure.

      
The Canterbury Tales and Other Works of Chaucer (Middle English), by Geoffery Chaucer, [14th cent.], at sacred-texts.com

 

Troilus and Criseyde

 

Book 2

 [1] Owt of thise blake wawes for to saylle,
 [2] O wynd, o wynd, the weder gynneth clere;
 [3] For in this see the boot hath swych travaylle,
 [4] Of my connyng, that unneth I it steere.
 [5] This see clepe I the tempestous matere
 [6] Of disespeir that Troilus was inne;
 [7] But now of hope the kalendes bygynne.
 [8] O lady myn, that called art Cleo,
 [9] Thow be my speed fro this forth, and my Muse,
 [10] To ryme wel this book til I have do;
 [11] Me nedeth here noon other art to use.
 [12] Forwhi to every lovere I me excuse,
 [13] That of no sentement I this endite,
 [14] But out of Latyn in my tonge it write.
 [15] Wherfore I nyl have neither thank ne blame
 [16] Of al this werk, but prey yow mekely,
 [17] Disblameth me if any word be lame,
 [18] For as myn auctour seyde, so sey I.
 [19] Ek though I speeke of love unfelyngly,
 [20] No wondre is, for it nothyng of newe is.
 [21] A blynd man kan nat juggen wel in hewis.
 [22] Ye knowe ek that in forme of speche is chaunge
 [23] Withinne a thousand yeer, and wordes tho
 [24] That hadden pris, now wonder nyce and straunge
 [25] Us thinketh hem, and yet thei spake hem so,
 [26] And spedde as wel in love as men now do;
 [27] Ek for to wynnen love in sondry ages,
 [28] In sondry londes, sondry ben usages.
 [29] And forthi if it happe in any wyse,
 [30] That here be any lovere in this place
 [31] That herkneth, as the storie wol devise,
 [32] How Troilus com to his lady grace,
 [33] And thenketh, "So nold I nat love purchace,"
 [34] Or wondreth on his speche or his doynge,
 [35] I noot; but it is me no wonderynge.
 [36] For every wight which that to Rome went
 [37] Halt nat o path, or alwey o manere;
 [38] Ek in som lond were al the game shent,
 [39] If that they ferde in love as men don here,
 [40] As thus, in opyn doyng or in chere,
 [41] In visityng in forme, or seyde hire sawes;
 [42] Forthi men seyn, "Ecch contree hath his lawes."
 [43] Ek scarsly ben ther in this place thre
 [44] That have in love seid lik, and don, in al;
 [45] For to thi purpos this may liken the,
 [46] And the right nought; yet al is seid or schal;
 [47] Ek som men grave in tree, some in ston wal,
 [48] As it bitit. But syn I have bigonne,
 [49] Myn auctour shal I folwen, if I konne.
 [50] In May, that moder is of monthes glade,
 [51] That fresshe floures, blew and white and rede,
 [52] Ben quike agayn, that wynter dede made,
 [53] And ful of bawme is fletyng every mede,
 [54] Whan Phebus doth his bryghte bemes sprede
 [55] Right in the white Bole, it so bitidde,
 [56] As I shal synge, on Mayes day the thrydde,
 [57] That Pandarus, for al his wise speche,
 [58] Felt ek his part of loves shotes keene,
 [59] That, koude he nevere so wel of lovyng preche,
 [60] It made his hewe a-day ful ofte greene.
 [61] So shop it that hym fil that day a teene
 [62] In love, for which in wo to bedde he wente,
 [63] And made, er it was day, ful many a wente.
 [64] The swalowe Proigne, with a sorowful lay,
 [65] Whan morwen com, gan make hire waymentynge
 [66] Whi she forshapen was; and evere lay
 [67] Pandare abedde, half in a slomberynge,
 [68] Til she so neigh hym made hire cheterynge
 [69] How Tereus gan forth hire suster take,
 [70] That with the noyse of hire he gan awake,
 [71] And gan to calle, and dresse hym up to ryse,
 [72] Remembryng hym his erand was to doone
 [73] From Troilus, and ek his grete emprise;
 [74] And caste and knew in good plit was the moone
 [75] To doon viage, and took his way ful soone
 [76] Unto his neces palays ther biside.
 [77] Now Janus, god of entree, thow hym gyde!
 [78] Whan he was come unto his neces place,
 [79] "Wher is my lady?" to hire folk quod he;
 [80] And they hym tolde, and he forth in gan pace,
 [81] And fond two othere ladys sete and she,
 [82] Withinne a paved parlour, and they thre
 [83] Herden a mayden reden hem the geste
 [84] Of the siege of Thebes, while hem leste.
 [85] Quod Pandarus, "Madame, God yow see,
 [86] With youre book and all the compaignie!"
 [87] "Ey, uncle myn, welcome iwys," quod she;
 [88] And up she roos, and by the hond in hye
 [89] She took hym faste, and seyde, "This nyght thrie,
 [90] To goode mot it turne, of yow I mette."
 [91] And with that word she doun on bench hym sette.
 [92] "Ye, nece, yee shal faren wel the bet,
 [93] If God wol, al this yeer," quod Pandarus;
 [94] "But I am sory that I have yow let
 [95] To herken of youre book ye preysen thus.
 [96] For Goddes love, what seith it? telle it us!
 [97] Is it of love? O, som good ye me leere!"
 [98] "Uncle," quod she, "youre maistresse is nat here."
 [99] With that thei gonnen laughe, and tho she seyde,
 [100] "This romaunce is of Thebes that we rede;
 [101] And we han herd how that kyng Layus deyde
 [102] Thorugh Edippus his sone, and al that dede;
 [103] And here we stynten at thise lettres rede --
 [104] How the bisshop, as the book kan telle,
 [105] Amphiorax, fil thorugh the ground to helle."
 [106] Quod Pandarus, "Al this knowe I myselve,
 [107] And al th' assege of Thebes and the care;
 [108] For herof ben ther maked bookes twelve.
 [109] But lat be this, and telle me how ye fare.
 [110] Do wey youre barbe, and shew youre face bare;
 [111] Do wey youre book, rys up, and lat us daunce,
 [112] And lat us don to May som observaunce."
 [113] "I! God forbede!" quod she. "Be ye mad?
 [114] Is that a widewes lif, so God yow save?
 [115] By God, ye maken me ryght soore adrad!
 [116] Ye ben so wylde, it semeth as ye rave.
 [117] It satte me wel bet ay in a cave
 [118] To bidde and rede on holy seyntes lyves;
 [119] Lat maydens gon to daunce, and yonge wyves."
 [120] "As evere thrive I," quod this Pandarus,
 [121] "Yet koude I telle a thyng to doon yow pleye."
 [122] "Now, uncle deere," quod she, "telle it us
 [123] For Goddes love; is than th' assege aweye?
 [124] I am of Grekes so fered that I deye."
 [125] "Nay, nay," quod he, "as evere mote I thryve,
 [126] It is a thing wel bet than swyche fyve."
 [127] "Ye, holy God," quod she, "what thyng is that?
 [128] What! Bet than swyche fyve? I! Nay, ywys!
 [129] For al this world ne kan I reden what
 [130] It sholde ben; some jape I trowe is this;
 [131] And but youreselven telle us what it is,
 [132] My wit is for t' arede it al to leene.
 [133] As help me God, I not nat what ye meene."
 [134] "And I youre borugh, ne nevere shal, for me,
 [135] This thyng be told to yow, as mote I thryve!"
 [136] "And whi so, uncle myn? Whi so?" quod she.
 [137] "By God," quod he, "that wol I telle as blyve!
 [138] For proudder womman is ther noon on lyve,
 [139] And ye it wiste, in al the town of Troye.
 [140] I jape nought, as evere have I joye!"
 [141] Tho gan she wondren moore than biforn
 [142] A thousand fold, and down hire eyghen caste;
 [143] For nevere, sith the tyme that she was born,
 [144] To knowe thyng desired she so faste;
 [145] And with a syk she seyde hym atte laste,
 [146] "Now, uncle myn, I nyl yow nought displese,
 [147] Nor axen more that may do yow disese."
 [148] So after this, with many wordes glade,
 [149] And frendly tales, and with merie chiere,
 [150] Of this and that they pleide, and gonnen wade
 [151] In many an unkouth, glad, and dep matere,
 [152] As frendes doon whan thei ben mette yfere,
 [153] Tyl she gan axen hym how Ector ferde,
 [154] That was the townes wal and Grekes yerde.
 [155] "Ful wel, I thonk it God," quod Pandarus,
 [156] "Save in his arm he hath a litel wownde;
 [157] And ek his fresshe brother Troilus,
 [158] The wise, worthi Ector the secounde,
 [159] In whom that alle vertu list habounde,
 [160] As alle trouthe and alle gentilesse,
 [161] Wisdom, honour, fredom, and worthinesse."
 [162] "In good feith, em," quod she, "that liketh me
 [163] Thei faren wel; God save hem bothe two!
 [164] For trewelich I holde it gret deynte
 [165] A kynges sone in armes wel to do,
 [166] And ben of goode condiciouns therto;
 [167] For gret power and moral vertu here
 [168] Is selde yseyn in o persone yfeere."
 [169] "In good faith, that is soth," quod Pandarus.
 [170] "But, by my trouthe, the kyng hath sones tweye --
 [171] That is to mene, Ector and Troilus --
 [172] That certeynly, though that I sholde deye,
 [173] Thei ben as voide of vices, dar I seye,
 [174] As any men that lyven under the sonne:
 [175] Hire myght is wyde yknowe, and what they konne.
 [176] "Of Ector nedeth it namore for to telle:
 [177] In al this world ther nys a bettre knyght
 [178] Than he, that is of worthynesse welle;
 [179] And he wel moore vertu hath than myght;
 [180] This knoweth many a wis and worthi wight.
 [181] The same pris of Troilus I seye;
 [182] God help me so, I knowe nat swiche tweye."
 [183] "By God," quod she, "of Ector that is sooth.
 [184] Of Troilus the same thyng trowe I;
 [185] For, dredeles, men tellen that he doth
 [186] In armes day by day so worthily,
 [187] And bereth hym here at hom so gentily
 [188] To everi wight, that alle pris hath he
 [189] Of hem that me were levest preysed be."
 [190] "Ye sey right sooth, ywys," quod Pandarus;
 [191] "For yesterday, whoso had with hym ben,
 [192] He myghte han wondred upon Troilus;
 [193] For nevere yet so thikke a swarm of been
 [194] Ne fleigh, as Grekes for hym gonne fleen,
 [195] And thorugh the feld, in everi wightes eere,
 [196] Ther nas no cry but `Troilus is there!'
 [197] "Now here, now ther, he hunted hem so faste,
 [198] Ther nas but Grekes blood -- and Troilus.
 [199] Now hem he hurte, and hem al down he caste;
 [200] Ay wher he wente, it was arayed thus:
 [201] He was hire deth, and sheld and lif for us,
 [202] That, as that day, ther dorste non withstonde
 [203] Whil that he held his blody swerd in honde.
 [204] "Therto he is the frendlieste man
 [205] Of gret estat that evere I saugh my lyve;
 [206] And wher hym lest, best felawshipe kan
 [207] To swich as hym thynketh able for to thryve."
 [208] And with that word tho Pandarus, as blyve,
 [209] He took his leve, and seyde, "I wol gon henne."
 [210] "Nay, blame have I, myn uncle," quod she thenne.
 [211] "What aileth yow to be thus wery soone,
 [212] And namelich of wommen? Wol ye so?
 [213] Nay, sitteth down; by God, I have to doone
 [214] With yow, to speke of wisdom er ye go."
 [215] And everi wight that was aboute hem tho,
 [216] That herde that, gan fer awey to stonde,
 [217] Whil they two hadde al that hem liste in honde.
 [218] Whan that hire tale al brought was to an ende,
 [219] Of hire estat and of hire governaunce,
 [220] Quod Pandarus, "Now tyme is that I wende.
 [221] But yet, I say, ariseth, lat us daunce,
 [222] And cast youre widewes habit to mischaunce!
 [223] What list yow thus youreself to disfigure,
 [224] Sith yow is tid thus fair an aventure?"
 [225] "A, wel bithought! For love of God," quod she,
 [226] "Shal I nat witen what ye meene of this?"
 [227] "No, this thing axeth leyser," tho quod he,
 [228] "And eke me wolde muche greve, iwis,
 [229] If I it tolde and ye it toke amys.
 [230] Yet were it bet my tonge for to stille
 [231] Than seye a soth that were ayeyns youre wille.
 [232] "For, nece, by the goddesse Mynerve,
 [233] And Jupiter, that maketh the thondre rynge,
 [234] And by the blisful Venus that I serve,
 [235] Ye ben the womman in this world lyvynge --
 [236] Withouten paramours, to my wyttynge --
 [237] That I best love, and lothest am to greve;
 [238] And that ye weten wel youreself, I leve."
 [239] "Iwis, myn uncle," quod she, "grant mercy!
 [240] Youre frendshipe have I founden evere yit.
 [241] I am to no man holden, trewely,
 [242] So muche as yow, and have so litel quyt;
 [243] And with the grace of God, emforth my wit,
 [244] As in my gylt I shal yow nevere offende;
 [245] And if I have er this, I wol amende.
 [246] "But for the love of God I yow biseche,
 [247] As ye ben he that I love moost and triste,
 [248] Lat be to me youre fremde manere speche,
 [249] And sey to me, youre nece, what yow liste."
 [250] And with that word hire uncle anoon hire kiste,
 [251] And seyde, "Gladly, leve nece dere!
 [252] Tak it for good, that I shal sey yow here."
 [253] With that she gan hire eighen down to caste,
 [254] And Pandarus to coghe gan a lite,
 [255] And seyde, "Nece, alwey -- lo! -- to the laste,
 [256] How so it be that som men hem delite
 [257] With subtyl art hire tales for to endite,
 [258] Yet for al that, in hire entencioun
 [259] Hire tale is al for som conclusioun.
 [260] "And sithe th' ende is every tales strengthe,
 [261] And this matere is so bihovely,
 [262] What sholde I peynte or drawen it on lengthe
 [263] To yow, that ben my frend so feythfully?"
 [264] And with that word he gan right inwardly
 [265] Byholden hire and loken on hire face,
 [266] And seyde, "On swich a mirour goode grace!"
 [267] Than thought he thus: "If I my tale endite
 [268] Aught harde, or make a proces any whyle,
 [269] She shal no savour have therin but lite,
 [270] And trowe I wolde hire in my wil bigyle;
 [271] For tendre wittes wenen al be wyle
 [272] Theras thei kan nought pleynly understonde;
 [273] Forthi hire wit to serven wol I fonde" --
 [274] And loked on hire in a bysi wyse,
 [275] And she was war that he byheld hire so,
 [276] And seyde, "Lord! so faste ye m' avise!
 [277] Sey ye me nevere er now? What sey ye, no?"
 [278] "Yis, yys," quod he, "and bet wol er I go!
 [279] But be my trouthe, I thoughte now if ye
 [280] Be fortunat, for now men shal it se.
 [281] "For to every wight som goodly aventure
 [282] Som tyme is shape, if he it kan receyven;
 [283] But if he wol take of it no cure,
 [284] Whan that it commeth, but wilfully it weyven,
 [285] Lo, neyther cas ne fortune hym deceyven,
 [286] But ryght his verray slouthe and wrecchednesse;
 [287] And swich a wight is for to blame, I gesse.
 [288] "Good aventure, O beele nece, have ye
 [289] Ful lightly founden, and ye konne it take;
 [290] And for the love of God, and ek of me,
 [291] Cache it anon, lest aventure slake!
 [292] What sholde I lenger proces of it make?
 [293] Yif me youre hond, for in this world is noon --
 [294] If that yow list -- a wight so wel bygon.
 [295] "And sith I speke of good entencioun,
 [296] As I to yow have told wel herebyforn,
 [297] And love as wel youre honour and renoun
 [298] As creature in al this world yborn,
 [299] By alle the othes that I have yow sworn,
 [300] And ye be wrooth therfore, or wene I lye,
 [301] Ne shal I nevere sen yow eft with ye.
 [302] "Beth naught agast, ne quaketh naught! Wherto?
 [303] Ne chaungeth naught for fere so youre hewe!
 [304] For hardely the werst of this is do;
 [305] And though my tale as now be to yow newe,
 [306] Yet trist alwey ye shal me fynde trewe;
 [307] And were it thyng that me thoughte unsittynge,
 [308] To yow wolde I no swiche tales brynge."
 [309] "Now, good em, for Goddes love, I preye,"
 [310] Quod she, "come of, and telle me what it is.
 [311] For both I am agast what ye wol seye,
 [312] And ek me longeth it to wite, ywis;
 [313] For whethir it be wel or be amys,
 [314] Say on, lat me nat in this feere dwelle."
 [315] "So wol I doon; now herkeneth! I shall telle:
 [316] "Now, nece myn, the kynges deere sone,
 [317] The goode, wise, worthi, fresshe, and free,
 [318] Which alwey for to don wel is his wone,
 [319] The noble Troilus, so loveth the,
 [320] That, but ye helpe, it wol his bane be.
 [321] Lo, here is al! What sholde I moore seye?
 [322] Doth what yow lest to make hym lyve or deye.
 [323] "But if ye late hym deyen, I wol sterve --
 [324] Have here my trouthe, nece, I nyl nat lyen --
 [325] Al sholde I with this knyf my throte kerve."
 [326] With that the teris breste out of his yen,
 [327] And seide, "If that ye don us bothe dyen
 [328] Thus gilteles, than have ye fisshed fayre!
 [329] What mende ye, though that we booth appaire?
 [330] "Allas, he which that is my lord so deere,
 [331] That trewe man, that noble gentil knyght,
 [332] That naught desireth but youre frendly cheere,
 [333] I se hym dyen, ther he goth upryght,
 [334] And hasteth hym with al his fulle myght
 [335] For to ben slayn, if his fortune assente.
 [336] Allas, that God yow swich a beaute sente!
 [337] "If it be so that ye so cruel be
 [338] That of his deth yow liste nought to recche,
 [339] That is so trewe and worthi, as ye se,
 [340] Namoore than of a japer or a wrecche --
 [341] If ye be swich, youre beaute may nat strecche
 [342] To make amendes of so cruel a dede;
 [343] Avysement is good byfore the nede.
 [344] "Wo worth the faire gemme vertulees!
 [345] Wo worth that herbe also that dooth no boote!
 [346] Wo worth that beaute that is routheles!
 [347] Wo worth that wight that tret ech undir foote!
 [348] And ye, that ben of beaute crop and roote,
 [349] If therwithal in yow ther be no routhe,
 [350] Than is it harm ye lyven, by my trouthe!
 [351] "And also think wel that this is no gaude;
 [352] For me were levere thow and I and he
 [353] Were hanged, than I sholde ben his baude,
 [354] As heigh as men myghte on us alle ysee!
 [355] I am thyn em; the shame were to me,
 [356] As wel as the, if that I sholde assente
 [357] Thorugh myn abet that he thyn honour shente.
 [358] "Now understond, for I yow nought requere
 [359] To bynde yow to hym thorugh no byheste,
 [360] But only that ye make hym bettre chiere
 [361] Than ye han doon er this, and moore feste,
 [362] So that his lif be saved atte leeste;
 [363] This al and som, and pleynly, oure entente.
 [364] God help me so, I nevere other mente!
 [365] "Lo, this requeste is naught but skylle, ywys,
 [366] Ne doute of resoun, pardee, is ther noon.
 [367] I sette the worste, that ye dreden this:
 [368] Men wolde wondren sen hym come or goon.
 [369] Ther-ayeins answere I thus anoon,
 [370] That every wight, but he be fool of kynde,
 [371] Wol deme it love of frendshipe in his mynde.
 [372] "What, who wol demen, though he se a man
 [373] To temple go, that he th' ymages eteth.
 [374] Thenk ek how wel and wisely that he kan
 [375] Governe hymself, that he no thyng foryeteth,
 [376] That where he cometh he pris and thank hym geteth.
 [377] And ek therto, he shal come here so selde,
 [378] What fors were it though al the town byhelde?
 [379] "Swych love of frendes regneth al this town;
 [380] And wre yow in that mantel evere moo,
 [381] And God so wys be my savacioun,
 [382] As I have seyd, youre beste is to do soo.
 [383] But alwey, goode nece, to stynte his woo,
 [384] So lat youre daunger sucred ben a lite,
 [385] That of his deth ye be naught for to wite."
 [386] Criseyde, which that herde hym in this wise,
 [387] Thoughte, "I shal felen what he meneth, ywis."
 [388] "Now em," quod she, "what wolde ye devise?
 [389] What is youre reed I sholde don of this?"
 [390] "That is wel seyd," quod he. "Certein, best is
 [391] That ye hym love ayeyn for his lovynge,
 [392] As love for love is skilful guerdonynge.
 [393] "Thenk ek how elde wasteth every houre
 [394] In ech of yow a partie of beautee;
 [395] And therfore er that age the devoure,
 [396] Go love; for old, ther wol no wight of the.
 [397] Lat this proverbe a loore unto yow be:
 [398] To late ywar, quod Beaute, whan it paste;
 [399] And Elde daunteth Daunger at the laste.
 [400] "The kynges fool is wont to crien loude,
 [401] Whan that hym thinketh a womman berth hire hye,
 [402] `So longe mote ye lyve, and alle proude,
 [403] Til crowes feet be growe under youre ye,
 [404] And sende yow than a myrour in to prye,
 [405] In which that ye may se youre face a morwe!'
 [406] I bidde wisshe yow namore sorwe."
 [407] With this he stynte, and caste adown the heed,
 [408] And she began to breste a-wepe anoon,
 [409] And seyde, "Allas, for wo! Why nere I deed?
 [410] For of this world the feyth is al agoon.
 [411] Allas, what sholden straunge to me doon,
 [412] Whan he that for my beste frend I wende
 [413] Ret me to love, and sholde it me defende?
 [414] "Allas! I wolde han trusted, douteles,
 [415] That if that I, thorugh my dysaventure,
 [416] Hadde loved outher hym or Achilles,
 [417] Ector, or any mannes creature,
 [418] Ye nolde han had no mercy ne mesure
 [419] On me, but alwey had me in repreve.
 [420] This false world -- allas! -- who may it leve?
 [421] "What, is this al the joye and al the feste?
 [422] Is this youre reed? Is this my blisful cas?
 [423] Is this the verray mede of youre byheeste?
 [424] Is al this paynted proces seyd -- allas! --
 [425] Right for this fyn? O lady myn, Pallas!
 [426] Thow in this dredful cas for me purveye,
 [427] For so astoned am I that I deye."
 [428] Wyth that she gan ful sorwfully to syke.
 [429] "A, may it be no bet?" quod Pandarus;
 [430] "By God, I shal namore come here this wyke,
 [431] And God toforn, that am mystrusted thus!
 [432] I se wel that ye sette lite of us,
 [433] Or of oure deth! Allas, I woful wrecche!
 [434] Might he yet lyve, of me is nought to recche.
 [435] "O cruel god, O dispitouse Marte,
 [436] O Furies thre of helle, on yow I crye!
 [437] So lat me nevere out of this hous departe,
 [438] If I mente harm or vilenye!
 [439] But sith I se my lord mot nedes dye,
 [440] And I with hym, here I me shryve, and seye
 [441] That wikkedly ye don us bothe deye.
 [442] "But sith it liketh yow that I be ded,
 [443] By Neptunus, that god is of the see,
 [444] Fro this forth shal I nevere eten bred
 [445] Til I myn owen herte blood may see;
 [446] For certeyn I wol deye as soone as he."
 [447] And up he sterte, and on his wey he raughte,
 [448] Tyl she agayn hym by the lappe kaughte.
 [449] Criseyde, which that wel neigh starf for feere,
 [450] So as she was the ferfulleste wight
 [451] That myghte be, and herde ek with hire ere
 [452] And saugh the sorwful ernest of the knyght,
 [453] And in his preier ek saugh noon unryght,
 [454] And for the harm that myghte ek fallen moore,
 [455] She gan to rewe and dredde hire wonder soore,
 [456] And thoughte thus: "Unhappes fallen thikke
 [457] Alday for love, and in swych manere cas
 [458] As men ben cruel in hemself and wikke;
 [459] And if this man sle here hymself -- allas! --
 [460] In my presence, it wol be no solas.
 [461] What men wolde of hit deme I kan nat seye;
 [462] It nedeth me ful sleighly for to pleie."
 [463] And with a sorowful sik she sayde thrie,
 [464] "A, Lord! What me is tid a sory chaunce!
 [465] For myn estat lith in a jupartie,
 [466] And ek myn emes lif is in balaunce;
 [467] But natheles, with Goddes governaunce,
 [468] I shal so doon, myn honour shal I kepe,
 [469] And ek his lif" -- and stynte for to wepe.
 [470] "Of harmes two, the lesse is for to chese;
 [471] Yet have I levere maken hym good chere
 [472] In honour, than myn emes lyf to lese.
 [473] Ye seyn, ye nothyng elles me requere?"
 [474] "No, wis," quod he, "myn owen nece dere."
 [475] "Now wel," quod she, "and I wol doon my peyne;
 [476] I shal myn herte ayeins my lust constreyne.
 [477] "But that I nyl nat holden hym in honde,
 [478] Ne love a man ne kan I naught ne may
 [479] Ayeins my wyl, but elles wol I fonde,
 [480] Myn honour sauf, plese hym fro day to day.
 [481] Therto nolde I nat ones han seyd nay,
 [482] But that I drede, as in my fantasye;
 [483] But cesse cause, ay cesseth maladie.
 [484] "And here I make a protestacioun
 [485] That in this proces if ye depper go,
 [486] That certeynly, for no salvacioun
 [487] Of yow, though that ye sterven bothe two,
 [488] Though al the world on o day be my fo,
 [489] Ne shal I nevere of hym han other routhe."
 [490] "I graunte wel," quod Pandare, "by my trowthe.
 [491] "But may I truste wel to yow," quod he,
 [492] "That of this thyng that ye han hight me here,
 [493] Ye wole it holden trewely unto me?"
 [494] "Ye, doutelees," quod she, "myn uncle deere."
 [495] "Ne that I shal han cause in this matere,"
 [496] Quod he, "to pleyne, or ofter yow to preche?"
 [497] "Why, no, parde; what nedeth moore speche?"
 [498] Tho fellen they in other tales glade,
 [499] Tyl at the laste, "O good em," quod she tho,
 [500] "For his love, that us bothe made,
 [501] Tel me how first ye wisten of his wo.
 [502] Woot noon of it but ye?" He seyde, "No."
 [503] "Kan he wel speke of love?" quod she; "I preye
 [504] Tel me, for I the bet me shal purveye."
 [505] Tho Pandarus a litel gan to smyle,
 [506] And seyde, "By my trouthe, I shal yow telle.
 [507] This other day, naught gon ful longe while,
 [508] In-with the paleis gardyn, by a welle,
 [509] Gan he and I wel half a day to dwelle,
 [510] Right for to speken of an ordinaunce,
 [511] How we the Grekes myghten disavaunce.
 [512] "Soon after that bigonne we to lepe,
 [513] And casten with oure dartes to and fro,
 [514] Tyl at the laste he seyde he wolde slepe,
 [515] And on the gres adoun he leyde hym tho;
 [516] And I afer gan romen to and fro,
 [517] Til that I herde, as that I welk alone,
 [518] How he bigan ful wofully to grone.
 [519] "Tho gan I stalke hym softely byhynde,
 [520] And sikirly, the soothe for to seyne,
 [521] As I kan clepe ayein now to my mynde,
 [522] Right thus to Love he gan hym for to pleyne:
 [523] He seyde, `Lord, have routhe upon my peyne,
 [524] Al have I ben rebell in myn entente;
 [525] Now, mea culpa, lord, I me repente!
 [526] "`O god, that at thi disposicioun
 [527] Ledest the fyn by juste purveiaunce
 [528] Of every wight, my lowe confessioun
 [529] Accepte in gree, and sende me swich penaunce
 [530] As liketh the, but from disesperaunce,
 [531] That may my goost departe awey fro the,
 [532] Thow be my sheld, for thi benignite.
 [533] "`For certes, lord, so soore hath she me wounded,
 [534] That stood in blak, with lokyng of hire eyen,
 [535] That to myn hertes botme it is ysounded,
 [536] Thorugh which I woot that I moot nedes deyen.
 [537] This is the werste, I dar me nat bywreyen;
 [538] And wel the hotter ben the gledes rede,
 [539] That men hem wrien with asshen pale and dede.'
 [540] "Wyth that he smot his hed adown anon,
 [541] And gan to motre, I noot what, trewely.
 [542] And I with that gan stille awey to goon,
 [543] And leet therof as nothing wist had I,
 [544] And com ayein anon, and stood hym by,
 [545] And seyde, `Awake, ye slepen al to longe!
 [546] It semeth nat that love doth yow longe,
 [547] "`That slepen so that no man may yow wake.
 [548] Who sey evere or this so dul a man?'
 [549] `Ye, frend,' quod he, `do ye youre hedes ake
 [550] For love, and lat me lyven as I kan.'
 [551] But though that he for wo was pale and wan,
 [552] Yet made he tho as fresshe a countenaunce
 [553] As though he sholde have led the newe daunce.
 [554] "This passed forth til now, this other day,
 [555] It fel that I com romyng al allone
 [556] Into his chaumbre, and fond how that he lay
 [557] Upon his bed; but man so soore grone
 [558] Ne herde I nevere, and what that was his mone
 [559] Ne wist I nought; for, as I was comynge,
 [560] Al sodeynly he lefte his complaynynge.
 [561] "Of which I took somwat suspecioun,
 [562] And ner I com, and fond he wepte soore;
 [563] And God so wys be my savacioun,
 [564] As nevere of thyng hadde I no routhe moore;
 [565] For neither with engyn, ne with no loore,
 [566] Unnethes myghte I fro the deth hym kepe,
 [567] That yet fele I myn herte for hym wepe.
 [568] "And God woot, nevere sith that I was born
 [569] Was I so besy no man for to preche,
 [570] Ne nevere was to wight so depe isworn,
 [571] Or he me told who myghte ben his leche.
 [572] But now to yow rehercen al his speche,
 [573] Or alle his woful wordes for to sowne,
 [574] Ne bid me naught, but ye wol se me swowne.
 [575] "But for to save his lif, and elles nought,
 [576] And to noon harm of yow, thus am I dryven;
 [577] And for the love of God, that us hath wrought,
 [578] Swich cheer hym dooth that he and I may lyven!
 [579] Now have I plat to yow myn herte shryven,
 [580] And sith ye woot that myn entent is cleene,
 [581] Take heede therof, for I non yvel meene.
 [582] "And right good thrift, I prey to God, have ye,
 [583] That han swich oon ykaught withouten net!
 [584] And be ye wis as ye be fair to see,
 [585] Wel in the ryng than is the ruby set.
 [586] Ther were nevere two so wel ymet,
 [587] Whan ye ben his al hool as he is youre;
 [588] Ther myghty God graunte us see that houre!"
 [589] "Nay, therof spak I nought, ha, ha!" quod she;
 [590] "As helpe me God, ye shenden every deel!"
 [591] "O, mercy, dere nece," anon quod he,
 [592] "What so I spak, I mente naught but wel,
 [593] By Mars, the god that helmed is of steel!
 [594] Now beth naught wroth, my blood, my nece dere."
 [595] "Now wel," quod she, "foryeven be it here!"
 [596] With this he took his leve, and hom he wente;
 [597] And, Lord, he was glad and wel bygon!
 [598] Criseyde aros, no lenger she ne stente,
 [599] But streght into hire closet wente anon,
 [600] And set hire doun as stylle as any ston,
 [601] And every word gan up and down to wynde
 [602] That he had seyd, as it com hire to mynde,
 [603] And wex somdel astoned in hire thought
 [604] Right for the newe cas; but whan that she
 [605] Was ful avysed, tho fond she right nought
 [606] Of peril why she ought afered be.
 [607] For man may love, of possibilite,
 [608] A womman so, his herte may tobreste,
 [609] And she naught love ayein, but if hire leste.
 [610] But as she sat allone and thoughte thus,
 [611] Ascry aros at scarmuch al withoute,
 [612] And men criden in the strete, "Se, Troilus
 [613] Hath right now put to flighte the Grekes route!"
 [614] With that gan al hire meyne for to shoute,
 [615] "A, go we se! Cast up the yates wyde!
 [616] For thorwgh this strete he moot to paleys ride;
 [617] "For other wey is to the yate noon
 [618] Of Dardanus, there opyn is the cheyne."
 [619] With that com he and al his folk anoon
 [620] An esy pas rydyng, in routes tweyne,
 [621] Right as his happy day was, sooth to seyne,
 [622] For which, men seyn, may nought destourbed be
 [623] That shal bityden of necessitee.
 [624] This Troilus sat on his baye steede
 [625] Al armed, save his hed, ful richely;
 [626] And wownded was his hors, and gan to blede,
 [627] On which he rood a pas ful softely.
 [628] But swich a knyghtly sighte trewely
 [629] As was on hym, was nought, withouten faille,
 [630] To loke on Mars, that god is of bataille.
 [631] So lik a man of armes and a knyght
 [632] He was to seen, fulfilled of heigh prowesse,
 [633] For bothe he hadde a body and a myght
 [634] To don that thing, as wel as hardynesse;
 [635] And ek to seen hym in his gere hym dresse,
 [636] So fressh, so yong, so weldy semed he,
 [637] It was an heven upon hym for to see.
 [638] His helm tohewen was in twenty places,
 [639] That by a tyssew heng his bak byhynde;
 [640] His sheeld todasshed was with swerdes and maces,
 [641] In which men myghte many an arwe fynde
 [642] That thirled hadde horn and nerf and rynde;
 [643] And ay the peple cryde, "Here cometh oure joye,
 [644] And, next his brother, holder up of Troye!"
 [645] For which he wex a litel reed for shame
 [646] When he the peple upon hym herde cryen,
 [647] That to byholde it was a noble game
 [648] How sobrelich he caste down his yen.
 [649] Criseyda gan al his chere aspien,
 [650] And leet it so softe in hire herte synke,
 [651] That to hireself she seyde, "Who yaf me drynke?"
 [652] For of hire owen thought she wex al reed,
 [653] Remembryng hire right thus, "Lo, this is he
 [654] Which that myn uncle swerith he moot be deed,
 [655] But I on hym have mercy and pitee."
 [656] And with that thought, for pure ashamed, she
 [657] Gan in hire hed to pulle, and that as faste,
 [658] Whil he and alle the peple forby paste,
 [659] And gan to caste and rollen up and down
 [660] Withinne hire thought his excellent prowesse,
 [661] And his estat, and also his renown,
 [662] His wit, his shap, and ek his gentilesse;
 [663] But moost hire favour was, for his distresse
 [664] Was al for hire, and thoughte it was a routhe
 [665] To sleen swich oon, if that he mente trouthe.
 [666] Now myghte som envious jangle thus:
 [667] "This was a sodeyn love; how myght it be
 [668] That she so lightly loved Troilus
 [669] Right for the firste syghte, ye, parde?"
 [670] Now whoso seith so, mote he nevere ythe!
 [671] For every thing a gynnyng hath it nede
 [672] Er al be wrought, withowten any drede.
 [673] For I sey nought that she so sodeynly
 [674] Yaf hym hire love, but that she gan enclyne
 [675] To like hym first, and I have told yow whi;
 [676] And after that, his manhod and his pyne
 [677] Made love withinne hire for to myne,
 [678] For which by proces and by good servyse
 [679] He gat hire love, and in no sodeyn wyse.
 [680] And also blisful Venus, wel arrayed,
 [681] Sat in hire seventhe hous of hevene tho,
 [682] Disposed wel, and with aspectes payed,
 [683] To helpe sely Troilus of his woo.
 [684] And soth to seyne, she nas not al a foo
 [685] To Troilus in his nativitee;
 [686] God woot that wel the sonner spedde he.
 [687] Now lat us stynte of Troilus a throwe,
 [688] That rideth forth, and lat us torne faste
 [689] Unto Criseyde, that heng hire hed ful lowe
 [690] Ther as she sat allone, and gan to caste
 [691] Where on she wolde apoynte hire atte laste,
 [692] If it so were hire em ne wolde cesse
 [693] For Troilus upon hire for to presse.
 [694] And, Lord! So she gan in hire thought argue
 [695] In this matere of which I have yow told,
 [696] And what to doone best were, and what eschue,
 [697] That plited she ful ofte in many fold.
 [698] Now was hire herte warm, now was it cold;
 [699] And what she thoughte somwhat shal I write,
 [700] As to myn auctour listeth for t' endite.
 [701] She thoughte wel that Troilus persone
 [702] She knew by syghte, and ek his gentilesse,
 [703] And thus she seyde, "Al were it nat to doone
 [704] To graunte hym love, yet for his worthynesse
 [705] It were honour with pley and with gladnesse
 [706] In honestee with swich a lord to deele,
 [707] For myn estat, and also for his heele.
 [708] "Ek wel woot I my kynges sone is he,
 [709] And sith he hath to se me swich delit,
 [710] If I wolde outreliche his sighte flee,
 [711] Peraunter he myghte have me in dispit,
 [712] Thorugh whicch I myghte stonde in worse plit.
 [713] Now were I wis, me hate to purchace,
 [714] Withouten need, ther I may stonde in grace?
 [715] "In every thyng, I woot, ther lith mesure;
 [716] For though a man forbede dronkenesse,
 [717] He naught forbet that every creature
 [718] Be drynkeles for alwey, as I gesse.
 [719] Ek sith I woot for me is his destresse,
 [720] I ne aughte nat for that thing hym despise,
 [721] Sith it is so he meneth in good wyse.
 [722] "And ek I knowe of longe tyme agon
 [723] His thewes goode, and that he is nat nyce;
 [724] N' avantour, seith men, certein, he is noon;
 [725] To wis is he to doon so gret a vice;
 [726] Ne als I nyl hym nevere so cherice
 [727] That he may make avaunt, by juste cause,
 [728] He shal me nevere bynde in swich a clause.
 [729] "Now sette a caas: the hardest is, ywys,
 [730] Men myghten demen that he loveth me.
 [731] What dishonour were it unto me, this?
 [732] May ich hym lette of that? Why, nay, parde!
 [733] I knowe also, and alday heere and se,
 [734] Men loven wommen al biside hire leve,
 [735] And whan hem leste namore, lat hem byleve!
 [736] "I thenke ek how he able is for to have
 [737] Of al this noble town the thriftieste
 [738] To ben his love, so she hire honour save.
 [739] For out and out he is the worthieste,
 [740] Save only Ector, which that is the beste;
 [741] And yet his lif al lith now in my cure.
 [742] But swich is love, and ek myn aventure.
 [743] "Ne me to love, a wonder is it nought;
 [744] For wel woot I myself, so God me spede --
 [745] Al wolde I that noon wiste of this thought --
 [746] I am oon the faireste, out of drede,
 [747] And goodlieste, who that taketh hede,
 [748] And so men seyn, in al the town of Troie.
 [749] What wonder is though he of me have joye?
 [750] "I am myn owene womman, wel at ese --
 [751] I thank it God -- as after myn estat,
 [752] Right yong, and stonde unteyd in lusty leese,
 [753] Withouten jalousie or swich debat:
 [754] Shal noon housbonde seyn to me `Chek mat!'
 [755] For either they ben ful of jalousie,
 [756] Or maisterfull, or loven novelrie.
 [757] "What shal I doon? To what fyn lyve I thus?
 [758] Shal I nat love, in cas if that me leste?
 [759] What, pardieux! I am naught religious.
 [760] And though that I myn herte sette at reste
 [761] Upon this knyght, that is the worthieste,
 [762] And kepe alwey myn honour and my name,
 [763] By alle right, it may do me no shame."
 [764] But right as when the sonne shyneth brighte
 [765] In March, that chaungeth ofte tyme his face,
 [766] And that a cloude is put with wynd to flighte,
 [767] Which oversprat the sonne as for a space,
 [768] A cloudy thought gan thorugh hire soule pace,
 [769] That overspradde hire brighte thoughtes alle,
 [770] So that for feere almost she gan to falle.
 [771] That thought was this: "Allas! Syn I am free,
 [772] Sholde I now love, and put in jupartie
 [773] My sikernesse, and thrallen libertee?
 [774] Allas, how dorst I thenken that folie?
 [775] May I naught wel in other folk aspie
 [776] Hire dredfull joye, hire constreinte, and hire peyne?
 [777] Ther loveth noon, that she nath why to pleyne.
 [778] "For love is yet the mooste stormy lyf,
 [779] Right of hymself, that evere was bigonne;
 [780] For evere som mystrust or nice strif
 [781] Ther is in love, som cloude is over that sonne.
 [782] Therto we wrecched wommen nothing konne,
 [783] Whan us is wo, but wepe and sitte and thinke;
 [784] Oure wrecche is this, oure owen wo to drynke.
 [785] "Also thise wikked tonges ben so prest
 [786] To speke us harm; ek men ben so untrewe,
 [787] That right anon as cessed is hire lest,
 [788] So cesseth love, and forth to love a newe.
 [789] But harm ydoon is doon, whoso it rewe:
 [790] For though thise men for love hem first torende,
 [791] Ful sharp bygynnyng breketh ofte at ende.
 [792] "How ofte tyme hath it yknowen be
 [793] The tresoun that to wommen hath ben do!
 [794] To what fyn is swich love I kan nat see,
 [795] Or wher bycometh it, whan that it is ago.
 [796] Ther is no wight that woot, I trowe so,
 [797] Where it bycometh. Lo, no wight on it sporneth.
 [798] That erst was nothing, into nought it torneth.
 [799] "How bisy, if I love, ek most I be
 [800] To plesen hem that jangle of love, and dremen,
 [801] And coye hem, that they seye noon harm of me!
 [802] For though ther be no cause, yet hem semen
 [803] Al be for harm that folk hire frendes quemen;
 [804] And who may stoppen every wikked tonge,
 [805] Or sown of belles whil that thei ben ronge?"
 [806] And after that, hire thought gan for to clere,
 [807] And seide, "He which that nothing undertaketh,
 [808] Nothyng n' acheveth, be hym looth or deere."
 [809] And with an other thought hire herte quaketh.
 [810] Than slepeth hope, and after drede awaketh.
 [811] Now hoot, now cold; but thus, bitwixen tweye,
 [812] She rist hire up, and went hire for to pleye.
 [813] Adown the steyre anonright tho she wente
 [814] Into the gardyn with hire neces thre,
 [815] And up and down ther made many a wente --
 [816] Flexippe, she, Tharbe, and Antigone --
 [817] To pleyen that it joye was to see;
 [818] And other of hire wommen, a gret route,
 [819] Hire folowede in the gardyn al aboute.
 [820] This yerd was large, and rayled alle th' aleyes,
 [821] And shadewed wel with blosmy bowes grene,
 [822] And benched newe, and sonded alle the weyes,
 [823] In which she walketh arm in arm bitwene,
 [824] Til at the laste Antigone the shene
 [825] Gan on a Troian song to singen cleere,
 [826] That it an heven was hire vois to here.
 [827] She seyde, "O Love, to whom I have and shal
 [828] Ben humble subgit, trewe in myn entente,
 [829] As I best kan, to yow, lord, yeve ich al
 [830] For everemo myn hertes lust to rente;
 [831] For nevere yet thi grace no wight sente
 [832] So blisful cause as me, my lif to lede
 [833] In alle joie and seurte out of drede.
 [834] "Ye, blisful god, han me so wel byset
 [835] In love, iwys, that al that bereth lif
 [836] Ymagynen ne kouth. how to be bet;
 [837] For, lord, withouten jalousie or strif,
 [838] I love oon which is moost ententif
 [839] To serven wel, unweri or unfeyned,
 [840] That evere was, and leest with harm desteyned.
 [841] "As he that is the welle of worthynesse,
 [842] Of trouthe grownd, mirour of goodlihed,
 [843] Of wit Apollo, stoon of sikernesse,
 [844] Of vertu roote, of lust fynder and hed,
 [845] Thorugh which is alle sorwe fro me ded --
 [846] Iwis, I love hym best, so doth he me;
 [847] Now good thrift have he, wherso that he be!
 [848] "Whom shulde I thanken but yow, god of Love,
 [849] Of al this blisse, in which to bathe I gynne?
 [850] And thanked be ye, lord, for that I love!
 [851] This is the righte lif that I am inne,
 [852] To flemen alle manere vice and synne:
 [853] This dooth me so to vertu for t' entende,
 [854] That day by day I in my wille amende.
 [855] "And whoso seith that for to love is vice,
 [856] Or thraldom, though he feele in it destresse,
 [857] He outher is envyous, or right nyce,
 [858] Or is unmyghty, for his shrewednesse,
 [859] To loven; for swich manere folk, I gesse,
 [860] Defamen Love, as nothing of hym knowe.
 [861] Thei speken, but thei benten nevere his bowe!
 [862] "What is the sonne wers, of kynde right,
 [863] Though that a man, for fieblesse of his yen,
 [864] May nought endure on it to see for bright?
 [865] Or love the wers, though wrecches on it crien?
 [866] No wele is worth, that may no sorwe dryen.
 [867] And forthi, who that hath an hed of verre,
 [868] Fro cast of stones war hym in the werre!
 [869] "But I with al myn herte and al my myght,
 [870] As I have seyd, wol love unto my laste
 [871] My deere herte and al myn owen knyght,
 [872] In which myn herte growen is so faste,
 [873] And his in me, that it shal evere laste.
 [874] Al dredde I first to love hym to bigynne,
 [875] Now woot I wel, ther is no peril inne."
 [876] And of hir song right with that word she stente,
 [877] And therwithal, "Now nece," quod Cryseyde,
 [878] "Who made this song now with so good entente?"
 [879] Antygone answerde anoon and seyde,
 [880] "Madame, ywys, the goodlieste mayde
 [881] Of gret estat in al the town of Troye,
 [882] And let hire lif in moste honour and joye."
 [883] "Forsothe, so it semeth by hire song,"
 [884] Quod tho Criseyde, and gan therwith to sike,
 [885] And seyde, "Lord, is ther swych blisse among
 [886] Thise loveres, as they konne faire endite?"
 [887] "Ye, wis," quod fresshe Antigone the white,
 [888] "For alle the folk that han or ben on lyve
 [889] Ne konne wel the blisse of love discryve.
 [890] "But wene ye that every wrecche woot
 [891] The parfit blisse of love? Why, nay, iwys!
 [892] They wenen all be love, if oon be hoot.
 [893] Do wey, do wey, they woot no thyng of this!
 [894] Men moste axe at seyntes if it is
 [895] Aught fair in hevene (Why? For they kan telle),
 [896] And axen fendes is it foul in helle."
 [897] Criseyde unto that purpos naught answerde,
 [898] But seyde, "Ywys, it wol be nyght as faste."
 [899] But every word which that she of hire herde,
 [900] She gan to prenten in hire herte faste,
 [901] And ay gan love hire lasse for t' agaste
 [902] Than it dide erst, and synken in hire herte,
 [903] That she wex somwhat able to converte.
 [904] The dayes honour, and the hevenes ye,
 [905] The nyghtes foo -- al this clepe I the sonne --
 [906] Gan westren faste, and downward for to wrye,
 [907] As he that hadde his dayes cours yronne,
 [908] And white thynges wexen dymme and donne
 [909] For lak of lyght, and sterres for t' apere,
 [910] That she and alle hire folk in went yfeere.
 [911] So whan it liked hire to go to reste,
 [912] And voided weren thei that voiden oughte,
 [913] She seyde that to slepen wel hire leste.
 [914] Hire wommen soone til hire bed hire broughte.
 [915] Whan al was hust, than lay she stille and thoughte
 [916] Of al this thing; the manere and the wise
 [917] Reherce it nedeth nought, for ye ben wise.
 [918] A nyghtyngale, upon a cedre grene,
 [919] Under the chambre wal ther as she ley,
 [920] Ful loude song ayein the moone shene,
 [921] Peraunter in his briddes wise a lay
 [922] Of love, that made hire herte fressh and gay.
 [923] That herkned she so longe in good entente,
 [924] Til at the laste the dede slep hire hente.
 [925] And as she slep, anonright tho hire mette
 [926] How that an egle, fethered whit as bon,
 [927] Under hire brest his longe clawes sette,
 [928] And out hire herte he rente, and that anon,
 [929] And dide his herte into hire brest to gon --
 [930] Of which she nought agroos, ne nothyng smerte --
 [931] And forth he fleigh, with herte left for herte.
 [932] Now lat hire slepe, and we oure tales holde
 [933] Of Troilus, that is to paleis riden
 [934] Fro the scarmuch of the which I tolde,
 [935] And in his chaumbre sit and hath abiden
 [936] Til two or thre of his messages yeden
 [937] For Pandarus, and soughten hym ful faste,
 [938] Til they him founde and broughte him at the laste.
 [939] This Pandarus com lepyng in atones,
 [940] And seyde thus: "Who hath ben wel ibete
 [941] To-day with swerdes and with slynge-stones,
 [942] But Troilus, that hath caught hym an hete?"
 [943] And gan to jape, and seyde, "Lord, so ye swete!
 [944] But ris and lat us soupe and go to reste."
 [945] And he answerde hym, "Do we as the leste."
 [946] With al the haste goodly that they myghte
 [947] They spedde hem fro the soper unto bedde;
 [948] And every wight out at the dore hym dyghte,
 [949] And where hym liste upon his wey him spedde.
 [950] But Troilus, that thoughte his herte bledde
 [951] For wo, til that he herde som tydynge,
 [952] He seyde, "Frend, shal I now wepe or synge?"
 [953] Quod Pandarus, "Ly stylle and lat me slepe,
 [954] And don thyn hood; thy nedes spedde be!
 [955] And ches if thow wolt synge or daunce or lepe!
 [956] At shorte wordes, thow shal trowen me:
 [957] Sire, my nece wol do wel by the,
 [958] And love the best, by God and by my trouthe,
 [959] But lak of pursuyt make it in thi slouthe.
 [960] "For thus ferforth I have thi werk bigonne
 [961] Fro day to day, til this day by the morwe
 [962] Hire love of frendshipe have I to the wonne,
 [963] And therto hath she leyd hire feyth to borwe.
 [964] Algate a foot is hameled of thi sorwe!"
 [965] What sholde I lenger sermoun of it holde?
 [966] As ye han herd byfore, al he hym tolde.
 [967] But right as floures, thorugh the cold of nyght
 [968] Iclosed, stoupen on hire stalke lowe,
 [969] Redressen hem ayein the sonne bright,
 [970] And spreden on hire kynde cours by rowe,
 [971] Right so gan tho his eighen up to throwe
 [972] This Troilus, and seyde, "O Venus deere,
 [973] Thi myght, thi grace, yheried be it here!"
 [974] And to Pandare he held up bothe his hondes,
 [975] And seyde, "Lord, al thyn be that I have!
 [976] For I am hool, al brosten ben my bondes.
 [977] A thousand Troyes whoso that me yave,
 [978] Ech after other, God so wys me save,
 [979] Ne myghte me so gladen; lo, myn herte,
 [980] It spredeth so for joie it wol tosterte!
 [981] "But, Lord, how shal I doon? How shal I lyven?
 [982] Whan shal I next my deere herte see?
 [983] How shal this longe tyme awey be dryven
 [984] Til that thow be ayein at hire fro me?
 [985] Thow maist answer, `Abid, abid,' but he
 [986] That hangeth by the nekke, soth to seyne
 [987] In gret disese abideth for the peyne."
 [988] "Al esily, now, for the love of Marte,"
 [989] Quod Pandarus, "for every thing hath tyme.
 [990] So longe abid til that the nyght departe,
 [991] For also siker as thow list here by me,
 [992] And God toforn, I wol be ther at pryme;
 [993] And forthi, werk somwhat as I shal seye,
 [994] Or on som other wight this charge leye.
 [995] "For, pardee, God woot I have evere yit
 [996] Ben redy the to serve, and to this nyght
 [997] Have I naught feyned, but emforth my wit
 [998] Don al thi lust, and shal with al my myght.
 [999] Do now as I shal seyn, and far aright;
 [1000] And if thow nylt, wite al thiself thi care!
 [1001] On me is nought along thyn yvel fare.
 [1002] "I woot wel that thow wiser art than I
 [1003] A thousand fold, but if I were as thow,
 [1004] God help me so, as I wolde outrely
 [1005] Of myn owen hond write hire right now
 [1006] A lettre, in which I wolde hire tellen how
 [1007] I ferde amys, and hire biseche of routhe.
 [1008] Now help thiself, and leve it nought for slouthe!
 [1009] "And I myself wol therwith to hire gon;
 [1010] And whan thow woost that I am with hire there,
 [1011] Worth thow upon a courser right anon --
 [1012] Ye, hardily, right in thi beste gere --
 [1013] And ryd forth by the place, as nought ne were,
 [1014] And thow shalt fynde us, if I may, sittynge
 [1015] At som wyndow, into the strete lokynge.
 [1016] "And if the list, than maystow us salue;
 [1017] And upon me make thow thi countenaunce;
 [1018] But by thi lif, be war and faste eschue
 [1019] To tarien ought -- God shilde us fro meschaunce!
 [1020] Rid forth thi wey, and hold thi governaunce;
 [1021] And we shal speek of the somwhat, I trowe,
 [1022] Whan thow art gon, to don thyn eris glowe!
 [1023] "Towchyng thi lettre, thou art wys ynough.
 [1024] I woot thow nylt it dygneliche endite,
 [1025] As make it with thise argumentes tough;
 [1026] Ne scryvenyssh or craftyly thow it write;
 [1027] Biblotte it with thi teris ek a lite;
 [1028] And if thow write a goodly word al softe,
 [1029] Though it be good, reherce it nought to ofte.
 [1030] "For though the beste harpour upon lyve
 [1031] Wolde on the beste sowned joly harpe
 [1032] That evere was, with alle his fyngres fyve
 [1033] Touche ay o stryng, or ay o werbul harpe,
 [1034] Were his nayles poynted nevere so sharpe,
 [1035] It sholde maken every wight to dulle,
 [1036] To here his glee, and of his strokes fulle.
 [1037] "Ne jompre ek no discordant thyng yfeere,
 [1038] As thus, to usen termes of phisik
 [1039] In loves termes; hold of thi matere
 [1040] The forme alwey, and do that it be lik;
 [1041] For if a peyntour wolde peynte a pyk
 [1042] With asses feet, and hedde it as an ape,
 [1043] It cordeth naught, so were it but a jape."
 [1044] This counseil liked wel to Troilus,
 [1045] But, as a dredful lovere, he seyde this:
 [1046] "Allas, my deere brother Pandarus,
 [1047] I am ashamed for to write, ywys,
 [1048] Lest of myn innocence I seyde amys,
 [1049] Or that she nolde it for despit receyve;
 [1050] Than were I ded: ther myght it nothyng weyve."
 [1051] To that Pandare answered, "If the lest,
 [1052] Do that I seye, and lat me therwith gon;
 [1053] For by that Lord that formede est and west,
 [1054] I hope of it to brynge answere anon
 [1055] Of hire hond; and if that thow nylt noon,
 [1056] Lat be, and sory mote he ben his lyve
 [1057] Ayeins thi lust that helpeth the to thryve."
 [1058] Quod Troilus, "Depardieux, ich assente!
 [1059] Sith that the list, I wil arise and write;
 [1060] And blisful God prey ich with good entente,
 [1061] The viage, and the lettre I shal endite,
 [1062] So spede it; and thow, Minerva, the white,
 [1063] Yif thow me wit my lettre to devyse."
 [1064] And sette hym down, and wrot right in this wyse:
 [1065] First he gan hire his righte lady calle,
 [1066] His hertes lif, his lust, his sorwes leche,
 [1067] His blisse, and ek thise other termes alle
 [1068] That in swich cas thise loveres alle seche;
 [1069] And in ful humble wise, as in his speche,
 [1070] He gan hym recomaunde unto hire grace;
 [1071] To telle al how, it axeth muchel space.
 [1072] And after this ful lowely he hire preyde
 [1073] To be nought wroth, thogh he, of his folie,
 [1074] So hardy was to hire to write, and seyde
 [1075] That love it made, or elles most he die,
 [1076] And pitousli gan mercy for to crye;
 [1077] And after that he seyde -- and leigh ful loude --
 [1078] Hymself was litel worth, and lasse he koude;
 [1079] And that she sholde han his konnyng excused,
 [1080] That litel was, and ek he dredde hire soo;
 [1081] And his unworthynesse he ay acused;
 [1082] And after that than gan he telle his woo --
 [1083] But that was endeles, withouten hoo --
 [1084] And seyde he wolde in trouthe alwey hym holde;
 [1085] And radde it over, and gan the lettre folde.
 [1086] And with his salte teris gan he bathe
 [1087] The ruby in his signet, and it sette
 [1088] Upon the wex deliverliche and rathe.
 [1089] Therwith a thousand tymes er he lette
 [1090] He kiste tho the lettre that he shette,
 [1091] And seyde, "Lettre, a blisful destine
 [1092] The shapyn is. my lady shal the see!"
 [1093] This Pandare tok the lettre, and that bytyme
 [1094] A-morwe, and to his neces paleis sterte,
 [1095] And faste he swor that it was passed prime,
 [1096] And gan to jape, and seyde, "Ywys, myn herte,
 [1097] So fressh it is, although it sore smerte,
 [1098] I may naught slepe nevere a Mayes morwe;
 [1099] I have a joly wo, a lusty sorwe."
 [1100] Criseyde, whan that she hire uncle herde,
 [1101] With dredful herte, and desirous to here
 [1102] The cause of his comynge, thus answerde:
 [1103] "Now, by youre fey, myn uncle," quod she, "dere,
 [1104] What manere wyndes gydeth yow now here?
 [1105] Tel us youre joly wo and youre penaunce.
 [1106] How ferforth be ye put in loves daunce?"
 [1107] "By God," quod he, "I hoppe alwey byhynde!"
 [1108] And she to laughe, it thoughte hire herte brest.
 [1109] Quod Pandarus, "Loke alwey that ye fynde
 [1110] Game in myn hood; but herkneth, if yow lest!
 [1111] Ther is right now come into town a gest,
 [1112] A Greek espie, and telleth newe thinges,
 [1113] For which I come to telle yow tydynges.
 [1114] "Into the gardyn go we, and ye shal here,
 [1115] Al pryvely, of this a long sermoun."
 [1116] With that they wenten arm in arm yfeere
 [1117] Into the gardyn from the chaumbre down;
 [1118] And whan that he so fer was that the sown
 [1119] Of that he spak no man heren myghte,
 [1120] He seyde hire thus, and out the lettre plighte:
 [1121] "Lo, he that is al holy youres free
 [1122] Hym recomaundeth lowely to youre grace,
 [1123] And sente yow this lettre here by me.
 [1124] Avyseth yow on it, whan ye han space,
 [1125] And of som goodly answere yow purchace,
 [1126] Or, helpe me God, so pleynly for to seyne,
 [1127] He may nat longe lyven for his peyne."
 [1128] Ful dredfully tho gan she stonden stylle,
 [1129] And took it naught, but al hire humble chere
 [1130] Gan for to chaunge, and seyde, "Scrit ne bille,
 [1131] For love of God, that toucheth swich matere,
 [1132] Ne bryng me noon; and also, uncle deere,
 [1133] To myn estat have more reward, I preye,
 [1134] Than to his lust! What sholde I more seye?
 [1135] "And loketh now if this be resonable,
 [1136] And letteth nought, for favour ne for slouthe,
 [1137] To seyn a sooth; now were it covenable
 [1138] To myn estat, by God and by youre trouthe,
 [1139] To taken it, or to han of hym routhe,
 [1140] In harmyng of myself, or in repreve?
 [1141] Ber it ayein, for hym that ye on leve!"
 [1142] This Pandarus gan on hire for to stare,
 [1143] And seyde, "Now is this the grettest wondre
 [1144] That evere I seigh! Lat be this nyce fare!
 [1145] To dethe mot I smyten be with thondre,
 [1146] If for the citee which that stondeth yondre,
 [1147] Wolde I a lettre unto yow brynge or take
 [1148] To harm of yow! What list yow thus it make?
 [1149] "But thus ye faren, wel neigh alle and some,
 [1150] That he that most desireth yow to serve,
 [1151] Of hym ye recche leest wher he bycome,
 [1152] And whethir that he lyve or elles sterve.
 [1153] But for al that that ever I may deserve,
 [1154] Refuse it naught," quod he, and hente hire faste,
 [1155] And in hire bosom the lettre down he thraste,
 [1156] And seyde hire, "Now cast it awey anon,
 [1157] That folk may seen and gauren on us tweye."
 [1158] Quod she, "I kan abyde til they be gon";
 [1159] And gan to smyle, and seyde hym, "Em, I preye,
 [1160] Swich answere as yow list, youreself purveye,
 [1161] For trewely I nyl no lettre write."
 [1162] "No? than wol I," quod he, "so ye endite."
 [1163] Therwith she lough, and seyde, "Go we dyne."
 [1164] And he gan at hymself to jape faste,
 [1165] And seyde, "Nece, I have so gret a pyne
 [1166] For love, that everich other day I faste --"
 [1167] And gan his beste japes forth to caste,
 [1168] And made hire so to laughe at his folye,
 [1169] That she for laughter wende for to dye.
 [1170] And whan that she was comen into halle,
 [1171] "Now, em," quod she, "we wol go dyne anon."
 [1172] And gan some of hire wommen to hire calle,
 [1173] And streght into hire chambre gan she gon;
 [1174] But of hire besynesses this was on --
 [1175] Amonges othere thynges, out of drede --
 [1176] Ful pryvely this lettre for to rede;
 [1177] Avysed word by word in every lyne,
 [1178] And fond no lak, she thoughte he koude good,
 [1179] And up it putte, and wente hire in to dyne.
 [1180] But Pandarus, that in a studye stood,
 [1181] Er he was war, she took hym by the hood,
 [1182] And seyde, "Ye were caught er that ye wiste."
 [1183] "I vouche sauf," quod he. "Do what you liste."
 [1184] Tho wesshen they, and sette hem down, and ete;
 [1185] And after noon ful sleighly Pandarus
 [1186] Gan drawe hym to the wyndowe next the strete,
 [1187] And seyde, "Nece, who hath araied thus
 [1188] The yonder hous, that stant aforyeyn us?"
 [1189] "Which hous?" quod she, and gan for to byholde,
 [1190] And knew it wel, and whos it was hym tolde;
 [1191] And fillen forth in speche of thynges smale,
 [1192] And seten in the windowe bothe tweye.
 [1193] Whan Pandarus saugh tyme unto his tale,
 [1194] And saugh wel that hire folk were alle aweye,
 [1195] "Now, nece myn, tel on," quod he; "I seye,
 [1196] How liketh yow the lettre that ye woot?
 [1197] Kan he theron? For, by my trouthe, I noot."
 [1198] Therwith al rosy hewed tho wex she,
 [1199] And gan to homme, and seyde, "So I trowe."
 [1200] "Aquite hym wel, for Goddes love," quod he;
 [1201] "Myself to medes wol the lettre sowe."
 [1202] And held his hondes up, and sat on knowe;
 [1203] "Now, goode nece, be it nevere so lite,
 [1204] Yif me the labour it to sowe and plite."
 [1205] "Ye, for I kan so writen," quod she tho;
 [1206] "And ek I noot what I sholde to hym seye."
 [1207] "Nay, nece," quod Pandare, "sey nat so.
 [1208] Yet at the leeste thonketh hym, I preye,
 [1209] Of his good wille, and doth hym nat to deye.
 [1210] Now, for the love of me, my nece deere,
 [1211] Refuseth nat at this tid my prayere!"
 [1212] "Depardieux," quod she, "God leve al be wel!
 [1213] God help me so, this is the firste lettre
 [1214] That evere I wroot, ye, al or any del."
 [1215] And into a closet, for t' avise hire bettre,
 [1216] She wente allone, and gan hire herte unfettre
 [1217] Out of desdaynes prisoun but a lite,
 [1218] And sette hire down, and gan a lettre write,
 [1219] Of which to telle in short is myn entente
 [1220] Th' effect, as fer as I kan understonde.
 [1221] She thanked hym of al that he wel mente
 [1222] Towardes hire, but holden hym in honde
 [1223] She nolde nought, ne make hireselven bonde
 [1224] In love; but as his suster, hym to plese,
 [1225] She wolde fayn to doon his herte an ese.
 [1226] She shette it, and to Pandare in gan goon,
 [1227] Ther as he sat and loked into the strete,
 [1228] And down she sette hire by hym on a stoon
 [1229] Of jaspre, upon a quysshyn gold-ybete,
 [1230] And seyde, "As wisly help me God the grete,
 [1231] I nevere dide thing with more peyne
 [1232] Than writen this, to which ye me constreyne,"
 [1233] And took it hym. He thonked hire and seyde,
 [1234] "God woot, of thyng ful often looth bygonne
 [1235] Comth ende good; and nece myn, Criseyde,
 [1236] That ye to hym of hard now ben ywonne
 [1237] Oughte he be glad, by God and yonder sonne;
 [1238] For-whi men seith, `Impressiounes lighte
 [1239] Ful lightly ben ay redy to the flighte.'
 [1240] "But ye han played tirant neigh to longe,
 [1241] And hard was it youre herte for to grave.
 [1242] Now stynte, that ye no lenger on it honge,
 [1243] Al wolde ye the forme of daunger save,
 [1244] But hasteth you to doon hym joye have;
 [1245] For trusteth wel, to long ydoon hardnesse
 [1246] Causeth despit ful often for destresse."
 [1247] And right as they declamed this matere,
 [1248] Lo, Troilus, right at the stretes ende,
 [1249] Com rydyng with his tenthe som yfere,
 [1250] Al softely, and thiderward gan bende
 [1251] Ther as they sete, as was his way to wende
 [1252] To paleis-ward; and Pandare hym aspide,
 [1253] And seyde, "Nece, ysee who comth here ride!
 [1254] "O fle naught in (he seeth us, I suppose),
 [1255] Lest he may thynken that ye hym eschuwe."
 [1256] "Nay, nay," quod she, and wex as red as rose.
 [1257] With that he gan hire humbly to saluwe
 [1258] With dredful chere, and oft his hewes muwe;
 [1259] And up his look debonairly he caste,
 [1260] And bekked on Pandare, and forth he paste.
 [1261] God woot if he sat on his hors aright,
 [1262] Or goodly was biseyn, that ilke day!
 [1263] God woot wher he was lik a manly knyght!
 [1264] What sholde I drecche, or telle of his aray?
 [1265] Criseyde, which that alle thise thynges say,
 [1266] To telle in short, hire liked al in-fere,
 [1267] His persoun, his aray, his look, his chere,
 [1268] His goodly manere, and his gentilesse,
 [1269] So wel that nevere, sith that she was born,
 [1270] Ne hadde she swych routh of his destresse;
 [1271] And how so she hath hard ben here-byforn,
 [1272] To God hope I, she hath now kaught a thorn,
 [1273] She shal nat pulle it out this nexte wyke.
 [1274] God sende mo swich thornes on to pike!
 [1275] Pandare, which that stood hire faste by,
 [1276] Felte iren hoot, and he bygan to smyte,
 [1277] And seyde, "Nece, I pray yow hertely,
 [1278] Tel me that I shal axen yow a lite:
 [1279] A womman that were of his deth to wite,
 [1280] Withouten his gilt, but for hire lakked routhe,
 [1281] Were it wel doon?" Quod she, "Nay, by my trouthe!"
 [1282] "God help me so," quod he, "ye sey me soth.
 [1283] Ye felen wel youreself that I nought lye.
 [1284] Lo, yond he rit!" Quod she, "Ye, so he doth!"
 [1285] "Wel," quod Pandare, "as I have told yow thrie,
 [1286] Lat be youre nyce shame and youre folie,
 [1287] And spek with hym in esyng of his herte;
 [1288] Lat nycete nat do yow bothe smerte."
 [1289] But theron was to heven and to doone.
 [1290] Considered al thing it may nat be;
 [1291] And whi? For speche; and it were ek to soone
 [1292] To graunten hym so gret a libertee.
 [1293] For pleynly hire entente, as seyde she,
 [1294] Was for to love hym unwist, if she myghte,
 [1295] And guerdoun hym with nothing but with sighte.
 [1296] But Pandarus thought, "It shal nought be so,
 [1297] Yif that I may; this nyce opynyoun
 [1298] Shal nought be holden fully yeres two."
 [1299] What sholde I make of this a long sermoun?
 [1300] He moste assente on that conclusioun,
 [1301] As for the tyme; and whan that it was eve,
 [1302] And al was wel, he roos and tok his leve.
 [1303] And on his wey ful faste homward he spedde,
 [1304] And right for joye he felte his herte daunce;
 [1305] And Troilus he fond allone abedde,
 [1306] That lay, as do thise lovers, in a traunce
 [1307] Bitwixen hope and derk disesperaunce.
 [1308] But Pandarus, right at his in-comynge,
 [1309] He song, as who seyth, "Somwhat I brynge,"
 [1310] And seyde, "Who is in his bed so soone
 [1311] Iburied thus?" "It am I, frend," quod he.
 [1312] "Who, Troilus? Nay, help me so the moone,"
 [1313] Quod Pandarus, "thow shalt arise and see
 [1314] A charme that was sent right now to the,
 [1315] The which kan helen the of thyn accesse,
 [1316] If thow do forthwith al thi bisynesse."
 [1317] "Ye, thorugh the myght of God," quod Troilus,
 [1318] And Pandarus gan hym the lettre take,
 [1319] And seyde, "Parde, God hath holpen us!
 [1320] Have here a light, and loke on al this blake."
 [1321] But ofte gan the herte glade and quake
 [1322] Of Troilus, whil that he gan it rede,
 [1323] So as the wordes yave hym hope or drede.
 [1324] But finaly, he took al for the beste
 [1325] That she hym wroot, for somwhat he byheld
 [1326] On which hym thoughte he myghte his herte reste,
 [1327] Al covered she tho wordes under sheld.
 [1328] Thus to the more worthi part he held,
 [1329] That what for hope and Pandarus byheste,
 [1330] His grete wo foryede he at the leste.
 [1331] But as we may alday oureselven see,
 [1332] Thorugh more wode or col, the more fir,
 [1333] Right so encreese hope, of what it be,
 [1334] Therwith ful ofte encresseth ek desir;
 [1335] Or as an ook comth of a litil spir,
 [1336] So thorugh this lettre which that she hym sente
 [1337] Encrescen gan desir, of which he brente.
 [1338] Wherfore I seye alwey, that day and nyght
 [1339] This Troilus gan to desiren moore
 [1340] Thanne he did erst, thorugh hope, and did his myght
 [1341] To preessen on, as by Pandarus loore,
 [1342] And writen to hire of his sorwes soore.
 [1343] Fro day to day he leet it nought refreyde,
 [1344] That by Pandare he wroot somwhat or seyde;
 [1345] And dide also his other observaunces
 [1346] That til a lovere longeth in this cas;
 [1347] And after that thise dees torned on chaunces,
 [1348] So was he outher glad or seyde "Allas!"
 [1349] And held after his gistes ay his pas;
 [1350] And after swiche answeres as he hadde,
 [1351] So were his dayes sory outher gladde.
 [1352] But to Pandare alwey was his recours,
 [1353] And pitously gan ay tyl hym to pleyne,
 [1354] And hym bisoughte of reed and som socours.
 [1355] And Pandarus, that sey his woode peyne,
 [1356] Wex wel neigh ded for routhe, sooth to seyne,
 [1357] And bisily with al his herte caste
 [1358] Som of his wo to slen, and that as faste;
 [1359] And seyde, "Lord, and frend, and brother dere,
 [1360] God woot that thi disese doth me wo.
 [1361] But wiltow stynten al this woful cheere,
 [1362] And, by my trouthe, er it be dayes two,
 [1363] And God toforn, yet shal I shape it so,
 [1364] That thow shalt come into a certeyn place,
 [1365] There as thow mayst thiself hire preye of grace.
 [1366] "And certeynly -- I noot if thow it woost,
 [1367] But tho that ben expert in love it seye --
 [1368] It is oon of the thynges forthereth most,
 [1369] A man to han a layser for to preye,
 [1370] And siker place his wo for to bywreye;
 [1371] For in good herte it mot som routhe impresse,
 [1372] To here and see the giltlees in distresse.
 [1373] "Peraunter thynkestow: though it be so,
 [1374] That Kynde wolde don hire to bygynne
 [1375] To have a manere routhe upon my woo,
 [1376] Seyth Daunger, `Nay, thow shalt me nevere wynne!'
 [1377] So reulith hire hir hertes gost withinne,
 [1378] That though she bende, yeet she stant on roote;
 [1379] What in effect is this unto my boote?
 [1380] "Thenk here-ayeins: whan that the stordy ook,
 [1381] On which men hakketh ofte, for the nones,
 [1382] Receyved hath the happy fallyng strook,
 [1383] The greete sweigh doth it come al at ones,
 [1384] As don thise rokkes or thise milnestones;
 [1385] For swifter cours comth thyng that is of wighte,
 [1386] Whan it descendeth, than don thynges lighte.
 [1387] "And reed that boweth down for every blast,
 [1388] Ful lightly, cesse wynd, it wol aryse;
 [1389] But so nyl nought an ook, whan it is cast;
 [1390] It nedeth me nought the longe to forbise.
 [1391] Men shal rejoissen of a gret empryse
 [1392] Acheved wel, and stant withouten doute,
 [1393] Al han men ben the lenger theraboute.
 [1394] "But, Troilus, yet telle me, if the lest,
 [1395] A thing now which that I shal axen the:
 [1396] Which is thi brother that thow lovest best,
 [1397] As in thi verray hertes privetee?"
 [1398] "Iwis, my brother Deiphebus," quod he.
 [1399] "Now," quod Pandare, "er houres twyes twelve,
 [1400] He shal the ese, unwist of it hymselve.
 [1401] "Now lat m' alone, and werken as I may,"
 [1402] Quod he; and to Deiphebus wente he tho,
 [1403] Which hadde his lord and grete frend ben ay;
 [1404] Save Troilus, no man he loved so.
 [1405] To telle in short, withouten wordes mo,
 [1406] Quod Pandarus, "I pray yow that ye be
 [1407] Frend to a cause which that toucheth me."
 [1408] "Yis, parde," quod Deiphebus, "wel thow woost,
 [1409] In al that evere I may, and God tofore,
 [1410] Al nere it but for man I love moost,
 [1411] My brother Troilus; but sey wherfore
 [1412] It is. for sith that day that I was bore,
 [1413] I nas, ne nevere mo to ben I thynke,
 [1414] Ayeins a thing that myghte the forthynke."
 [1415] Pandare gan hym thanke, and to hym seyde,
 [1416] "Lo, sire, I have a lady in this town,
 [1417] That is my nece, and called is Criseyde,
 [1418] Which some men wolden don oppressioun,
 [1419] And wrongfully han hire possessioun;
 [1420] Wherfore I of youre lordship yow biseche
 [1421] To ben oure frend, withouten more speche."
 [1422] Deiphebus hym answerde, "O, is nat this,
 [1423] That thow spekest of to me thus straungely,
 [1424] Criseda, my frend?" He seyde, "Yis."
 [1425] "Than nedeth," quod Deiphebus, "hardyly,
 [1426] Namore to speke, for trusteth wel that I
 [1427] Wol be hire champioun with spore and yerde;
 [1428] I roughte nought though alle hire foos it herde.
 [1429] "But tel me how -- thow woost of this matere --
 [1430] It myghte best avaylen." "Now lat se,"
 [1431] Quod Pandarus; "if ye, my lord so dere,
 [1432] Wolden as now do this honour to me,
 [1433] To preyen hire to-morwe, lo, that she
 [1434] Come unto yow, hire pleyntes to devise,
 [1435] Hire adversaries wolde of it agrise.
 [1436] "And yif I more dorste preye as now,
 [1437] And chargen yow to han so gret travaille,
 [1438] To han some of youre bretheren here with yow,
 [1439] That myghten to hire cause bet availle,
 [1440] Than wot I wel she myghte nevere faille
 [1441] For to ben holpen, what at youre instaunce,
 [1442] What with hire other frendes governaunce."
 [1443] Deiphebus, which that comen was of kynde
 [1444] To alle honour and bounte to consente,
 [1445] Answerd, "It shal be don; and I kan fynde
 [1446] Yet grettere help to this in myn entente.
 [1447] What wiltow seyn if I for Eleyne sente
 [1448] To speke of this? I trowe it be the beste,
 [1449] For she may leden Paris as hire leste.
 [1450] "Of Ector, which that is my lord, my brother,
 [1451] It nedeth naught to preye hym frend to be;
 [1452] For I have herd hym, o tyme and ek oother,
 [1453] Speke of Cryseyde swich honour that he
 [1454] May seyn no bet, swich hap to hym hath she.
 [1455] It nedeth naught his helpes for to crave;
 [1456] He shal be swich, right as we wol hym have.
 [1457] "Spek thow thiself also to Troilus
 [1458] On my byhalve, and prey hym with us dyne."
 [1459] "Syre, al this shal be don," quod Pandarus,
 [1460] And took his leve, and nevere gan to fyne,
 [1461] But to his neces hous, as streyght as lyne,
 [1462] He com; and fond hire fro the mete arise,
 [1463] And sette hym down, and spak right in this wise:
 [1464] He seide, "O verray God, so have I ronne!
 [1465] Lo, nece myn, se ye nought how I swete?
 [1466] I not wheither ye the more thank me konne.
 [1467] Be ye naught war how false Poliphete
 [1468] Is now aboute eftsones for to plete,
 [1469] And brynge on yow advocacies newe?"
 [1470] "I, no!" quod she, and chaunged al hire hewe.
 [1471] "What is he more aboute, me to drecche
 [1472] And don me wrong? What shal I doon, allas?
 [1473] Yet of hymself nothing ne wolde I recche,
 [1474] Nere it for Antenor and Eneas,
 [1475] That ben his frendes in swich manere cas.
 [1476] But, for the love of God, myn uncle deere,
 [1477] No fors of that; lat hym han al yfeere,
 [1478] "Withouten that I have ynough for us."
 [1479] "Nay," quod Pandare, "it shal nothing be so.
 [1480] For I have ben right now at Deiphebus,
 [1481] At Ector, and myn oother lordes moo,
 [1482] And shortly maked ech of hem his foo,
 [1483] That, by my thrift, he shal it nevere wynne,
 [1484] For aught he kan, whan that so he bygynne."
 [1485] And as thei casten what was best to doone,
 [1486] Deiphebus, of his owen curteisie,
 [1487] Com hire to preye, in his propre persone,
 [1488] To holde hym on the morwe compaignie
 [1489] At dyner, which she nolde nought denye,
 [1490] But goodly gan to his preier obeye.
 [1491] He thonked hire, and went upon his weye.
 [1492] Whan this was don, this Pandare up anon,
 [1493] To telle in short, and forth gan for to wende
 [1494] To Troilus, as stille as any ston;
 [1495] And al this thyng he tolde hym, word and ende,
 [1496] And how that he Deiphebus gan to blende,
 [1497] And seyde hym, "Now is tyme, if that thow konne,
 [1498] To bere the wel tomorwe, and al is wonne.
 [1499] "Now spek, now prey, now pitously compleyne;
 [1500] Lat nought for nyce shame, or drede, or slouthe!
 [1501] Somtyme a man mot telle his owen peyne.
 [1502] Bileve it, and she shal han on the routhe:
 [1503] Thow shalt be saved by thi feyth, in trouthe.
 [1504] But wel woot I thow art now in drede,
 [1505] And what it is, I leye, I kan arede.
 [1506] "Thow thynkest now, `How sholde I don al this?
 [1507] For by my cheres mosten folk aspie
 [1508] That for hire love is that I fare amys;
 [1509] Yet hadde I levere unwist for sorwe dye.'
 [1510] Now thynk nat so, for thow dost gret folie;
 [1511] For I right now have founden o manere
 [1512] Of sleyghte, for to coveren al thi cheere.
 [1513] "Thow shalt gon over nyght, and that bylyve,
 [1514] Unto Deiphebus hous as the to pleye,
 [1515] Thi maladie awey the bet to dryve --
 [1516] For-whi thow semest sik, soth for to seye.
 [1517] Sone after that, down in thi bed the leye,
 [1518] And sey thow mayst no lenger up endure,
 [1519] And ly right there, and byd thyn aventure.
 [1520] "Sey that thi fevre is wont the for to take
 [1521] The same tyme, and lasten til a-morwe;
 [1522] And lat se now how wel thow kanst it make,
 [1523] For, parde, sik is he that is in sorwe.
 [1524] Go now, farwel! And Venus here to borwe,
 [1525] I hope, and thow this purpos holde ferme,
 [1526] Thi grace she shal fully ther conferme."
 [1527] Quod Troilus, "Iwis, thow nedeles
 [1528] Conseilest me that siklich I me feyne,
 [1529] For I am sik in ernest, douteles,
 [1530] So that wel neigh I sterve for the peyne."
 [1531] Quod Pandarus, "Thow shalt the bettre pleyne,
 [1532] And hast the lasse need to countrefete,
 [1533] For hym men demen hoot that men seen swete.
 [1534] "Lo, hold the at thi triste cloos, and I
 [1535] Shal wel the deer unto thi bowe dryve."
 [1536] Therwith he took his leve al softely,
 [1537] And Troilus to paleis wente blyve.
 [1538] So glad ne was he nevere in al his lyve,
 [1539] And to Pandarus reed gan al assente,
 [1540] And to Deiphebus hous at nyght he wente.
 [1541] What nedeth yow to tellen al the cheere
 [1542] That Deiphebus unto his brother made,
 [1543] Or his accesse, or his sikliche manere,
 [1544] How men gan hym with clothes for to lade
 [1545] Whan he was leyd, and how men wolde hym glade?
 [1546] But al for nought; he held forth ay the wyse
 [1547] That ye han herd Pandare er this devyse.
 [1548] But certayn is, er Troilus hym leyde,
 [1549] Deiphebus had hym preied over-nyght
 [1550] To ben a frend and helpyng to Criseyde.
 [1551] God woot that he it graunted anon-right,
 [1552] To ben hire fulle frend with al his myght.
 [1553] But swich a nede was to preye hym thenne,
 [1554] As for to bidde a wood man for to renne!
 [1555] The morwen com, and neighen gan the tyme
 [1556] Of meeltid, that the faire queene Eleyne
 [1557] Shoop hire to ben, an houre after the prime,
 [1558] With Deiphebus, to whom she nolde feyne;
 [1559] But as his suster, homly, soth to seyne,
 [1560] She com to dyner in hire pleyne entente.
 [1561] But God and Pandare wist al what this mente.
 [1562] Com ek Criseyde, al innocent of this,
 [1563] Antigone, hire suster Tarbe also.
 [1564] But fle we now prolixitee best is,
 [1565] For love of God, and lat us faste go
 [1566] Right to th' effect, withouten tales mo,
 [1567] Whi al this folk assembled in this place;
 [1568] And lat us of hire saluynges pace.
 [1569] Gret honour did hem Deiphebus, certeyn,
 [1570] And fedde hem wel with al that myghte like;
 [1571] But evere mo "Allas!" was his refreyn,
 [1572] "My goode brother Troilus, the syke,
 [1573] Lith yet" -- and therwithal he gan to sike;
 [1574] And after that, he peyned hym to glade
 [1575] Hem as he myghte, and cheere good he made.
 [1576] Compleyned ek Eleyne of his siknesse
 [1577] So feythfully that pite was to here,
 [1578] And every wight gan waxen for accesse
 [1579] A leche anon, and seyde, "In this manere
 [1580] Men curen folk." -- "This charme I wol yow leere."
 [1581] But ther sat oon, al list hire nought to teche,
 [1582] That thoughte, "Best koud I yet ben his leche."
 [1583] After compleynte, hym gonnen they to preyse,
 [1584] As folk don yet whan som wight hath bygonne
 [1585] To preise a man, and up with pris hym reise
 [1586] A thousand fold yet heigher than the sonne:
 [1587] "He is, he kan, that fewe lordes konne."
 [1588] And Pandarus, of that they wolde afferme,
 [1589] He naught forgat hire preisynge to conferme.
 [1590] Herde al this thyng Criseyde wel inough,
 [1591] And every word gan for to notifie;
 [1592] For which with sobre cheere hire herte lough.
 [1593] For who is that ne wolde hire glorifie,
 [1594] To mowen swich a knyght don lyve or dye?
 [1595] But al passe I, lest ye to longe dwelle;
 [1596] For for o fyn is al that evere I telle.
 [1597] The tyme com fro dyner for to ryse,
 [1598] And as hem aughte, arisen everichon.
 [1599] And gonne a while of this and that devise.
 [1600] But Pandarus brak al that speche anon,
 [1601] And seide to Deiphebus, "Wol ye gon,
 [1602] If it youre wille be, as I yow preyde,
 [1603] To speke here of the nedes of Criseyde?"
 [1604] Eleyne, which that by the hond hire held,
 [1605] Took first the tale, and seyde, "Go we blyve";
 [1606] And goodly on Criseyde she biheld,
 [1607] And seyde, "Joves lat hym nevere thryve
 [1608] That doth yow harm, and brynge hym soone of lyve,
 [1609] And yeve me sorwe, but he shal it rewe,
 [1610] If that I may, and alle folk be trewe!"
 [1611] "Tel thow thi neces cas," quod Deiphebus
 [1612] To Pandarus, "for thow kanst best it telle."
 [1613] "My lordes and my ladys, it stant thus:
 [1614] What sholde I lenger," quod he, "do yow dwelle?"
 [1615] He rong hem out a proces lik a belle
 [1616] Upon hire foo that highte Poliphete,
 [1617] So heynous that men myghten on it spete.
 [1618] Answerde of this ech werse of hem than other,
 [1619] And Poliphete they gonnen thus to warien:
 [1620] "Anhonged be swich oon, were he my brother!
 [1621] And so he shal, for it ne may nought varien!"
 [1622] What shold I lenger in this tale tarien?
 [1623] Pleynliche, alle at ones, they hire highten
 [1624] To ben hire help in al that evere they myghten.
 [1625] Spak than Eleyne, and seyde, "Pandarus,
 [1626] Woot ought my lord, my brother, this matere --
 [1627] I meene Ector -- or woot it Troilus?"
 [1628] He seyde, "Ye, but wole ye now me here?
 [1629] Me thynketh this, sith that Troilus is here,
 [1630] It were good, if that ye wolde assente,
 [1631] She tolde hireself hym al this er she wente.
 [1632] "For he wol have the more hir grief at herte,
 [1633] By cause, lo, that she a lady is.
 [1634] And, by youre leve, I wol but in right sterte
 [1635] And do yow wyte, and that anon, iwys,
 [1636] If that he slepe, or wol ought here of this."
 [1637] And in he lepte, and seyde hym in his ere,
 [1638] "God have thi soule, ibrought have I thi beere!"
 [1639] To smylen of this gan tho Troilus,
 [1640] And Pandarus, withouten rekenynge,
 [1641] Out wente anon to Eleyne and Deiphebus,
 [1642] And seyde hem, "So ther be no taryinge,
 [1643] Ne moore prees, he wol wel that ye brynge
 [1644] Criseda, my lady, that is here;
 [1645] And as he may enduren, he wol here.
 [1646] "But wel ye woot, the chaumbre is but lite,
 [1647] And fewe folk may lightly make it warm;
 [1648] Now loketh ye (for I wol have no wite
 [1649] To brynge in prees that myghte don hym harm,
 [1650] Or hym disesen, for my bettre arm)
 [1651] Wher it be bet she bide til eft-sonys;
 [1652] Now loketh ye that knowen what to doon is.
 [1653] "I sey for me, best is, as I kan knowe,
 [1654] That no wight in ne wente but ye tweye,
 [1655] But it were I, for I kan in a throwe
 [1656] Reherce hire cas unlik that she kan seye;
 [1657] And after this she may hym ones preye
 [1658] To ben good lord, in short, and take hire leve.
 [1659] This may nought muchel of his ese hym reve.
 [1660] "And ek, for she is straunge, he wol forbere
 [1661] His ese, which that hym thar nought for yow;
 [1662] Ek oother thing that toucheth nought to here
 [1663] He wol yow telle -- I woot it wel right now --
 [1664] That secret is, and for the townes prow."
 [1665] And they, that nothyng knewe of his entente,
 [1666] Withouten more, to Troilus in they wente.
 [1667] Eleyne, in al hire goodly softe wyse,
 [1668] Gan hym salue, and wommanly to pleye,
 [1669] And seyde, "Iwys, ye moste alweies arise!
 [1670] Now faire brother, beth al hool, I preye!"
 [1671] And gan hire arm right over his shulder leye,
 [1672] And hym with al hire wit to reconforte;
 [1673] As she best koude, she gan hym to disporte.
 [1674] So after this quod she, "We yow biseke,
 [1675] My deere brother Deiphebus and I,
 [1676] For love of God -- and so doth Pandare eke --
 [1677] To ben good lord and frend, right hertely,
 [1678] Unto Criseyde, which that certeynly
 [1679] Receyveth wrong, as woot weel here Pandare,
 [1680] That kan hire cas wel bet than I declare."
 [1681] This Pandarus gan newe his tong affile,
 [1682] And al hire cas reherce, and that anon.
 [1683] Whan it was seyd, soone after in a while,
 [1684] Quod Troilus, "As sone as I may gon,
 [1685] I wol right fayn with al my myght ben oon --
 [1686] Have God my trouthe -- hire cause to sustene."
 [1687] "Good thrift have ye!" quod Eleyne the queene.
 [1688] Quod Pandarus, "And it youre wille be
 [1689] That she may take hire leve, er that she go?"
 [1690] "O, elles God forbede it," tho quod he,
 [1691] "If that she vouche sauf for to do so."
 [1692] And with that word quod Troilus, "Ye two,
 [1693] Deiphebus and my suster lief and deere,
 [1694] To yow have I to speke of o matere,
 [1695] "To ben avysed by youre reed the bettre --"
 [1696] And fond, as hap was, at his beddes hed
 [1697] The copie of a tretys and a lettre
 [1698] That Ector hadde hym sent to axen red
 [1699] If swych a man was worthi to ben ded,
 [1700] Woot I nought who; but in a grisly wise
 [1701] He preyede hem anon on it avyse.
 [1702] Deiphebus gan this lettre for t' onfolde
 [1703] In ernest greet; so did Eleyne the queene;
 [1704] And romyng outward, faste it gonne byholde,
 [1705] Downward a steire, into an herber greene.
 [1706] This ilke thing they redden hem bitwene,
 [1707] And largely, the mountance of an houre,
 [1708] Thei gonne on it to reden and to poure.
 [1709] Now lat hem rede, and torne we anon
 [1710] To Pandarus, that gan ful faste prye
 [1711] That al was wel, and out he gan to gon
 [1712] Into the grete chaumbre, and that in hye,
 [1713] And seyde, "God save al this compaynye!
 [1714] Com, nece myn; my lady queene Eleyne
 [1715] Abideth yow, and ek my lordes tweyne.
 [1716] "Rys, take with yow youre nece Antigone,
 [1717] Or whom yow list; or no fors; hardyly
 [1718] The lesse prees, the bet; com forth with me,
 [1719] And loke that ye thonken humblely
 [1720] Hem alle thre, and whan ye may goodly
 [1721] Youre tyme se, taketh of hem youre leeve,
 [1722] Lest we to longe his restes hym byreeve."
 [1723] Al innocent of Pandarus entente,
 [1724] Quod tho Criseyde, "Go we, uncle deere";
 [1725] And arm in arm inward with hym she wente,
 [1726] Avysed wel hire wordes and hire cheere;
 [1727] And Pandarus, in ernestful manere,
 [1728] Seyde, "Alle folk, for Goddes love, I preye,
 [1729] Stynteth right here, and softely yow pleye.
 [1730] "Avyseth yow what folk ben hire withinne,
 [1731] And in what plit oon is, God hym amende!"
 [1732] And inward thus, "Ful softely bygynne,
 [1733] Nece, I conjure and heighly yow defende,
 [1734] On his half which that soule us alle sende,
 [1735] And in the vertu of corones tweyne,
 [1736] Sle naught this man, that hath for yow this peyne!
 [1737] "Fy on the devel! Thynk which oon he is,
 [1738] And in what plit he lith. com of anon!
 [1739] Thynk al swich taried tyde, but lost it nys.
 [1740] That wol ye bothe seyn, whan ye ben oon.
 [1741] Secoundely, ther yet devyneth noon
 [1742] Upon yow two; come of now, if ye konne!
 [1743] While folk is blent, lo, al the tyme is wonne.
 [1744] "In titeryng, and pursuyte, and delayes,
 [1745] The folk devyne at waggyng of a stree;
 [1746] And though ye wolde han after mirye dayes,
 [1747] Than dar ye naught. And whi? For she, and she
 [1748] Spak swych a word; thus loked he, and he!
 [1749] Las, tyme ilost! I dar nought with yow dele.
 [1750] Com of, therfore, and bryngeth hym to hele!"
 [1751] But now to yow, ye loveres that ben here,
 [1752] Was Troilus nought in a kankedort,
 [1753] That lay, and myghte whisprynge of hem here,
 [1754] And thoughte, "O Lord, right now renneth my sort
 [1755] Fully to deye, or han anon comfort!"
 [1756] And was the firste tyme he shulde hire preye
 [1757] Of love; O myghty God, what shal he seye?

      
The Canterbury Tales and Other Works of Chaucer (Middle English), by Geoffery Chaucer, [14th cent.], at sacred-texts.com

 

Troilus and Criseyde

 

Book 3

 [1] O blisful light of which the bemes clere
 [2] Adorneth al the thridde heven faire!
 [3] O sonnes lief, O Joves doughter deere,
 [4] Plesance of love, O goodly debonaire,
 [5] In gentil hertes ay redy to repaire!
 [6] O veray cause of heele and of gladnesse,
 [7] Iheryed be thy myght and thi goodnesse!
 [8] In hevene and helle, in erthe and salte see
 [9] Is felt thi myght, if that I wel descerne,
 [10] As man, brid, best, fissh, herbe, and grene tree
 [11] Thee fele in tymes with vapour eterne.
 [12] God loveth, and to love wol nought werne,
 [13] And in this world no lyves creature
 [14] Withouten love is worth, or may endure.
 [15] Ye Joves first to thilke effectes glade,
 [16] Thorugh which that thynges lyven alle and be,
 [17] Comeveden, and amorous him made
 [18] On mortal thyng, and as yow list, ay ye
 [19] Yeve hym in love ese or adversitee,
 [20] And in a thousand formes down hym sente
 [21] For love in erthe, and whom yow liste he hente.
 [22] Ye fierse Mars apaisen of his ire,
 [23] And as yow list, ye maken hertes digne;
 [24] Algates hem that ye wol sette a-fyre,
 [25] They dreden shame, and vices they resygne;
 [26] Ye do hem corteys be, fresshe and benigne;
 [27] And heighe or lowe, after a wight entendeth,
 [28] The joies that he hath, youre myght it sendeth.
 [29] Ye holden regne and hous in unitee;
 [30] Ye sothfast cause of frendship ben also;
 [31] Ye knowe al thilke covered qualitee
 [32] Of thynges, which that folk on wondren so,
 [33] Whan they kan nought construe how it may jo
 [34] She loveth hym, or whi he loveth here,
 [35] As whi this fissh, and naught that, comth to were.
 [36] Ye folk a lawe han set in universe,
 [37] And this knowe I by hem that lovers be,
 [38] That whoso stryveth with yow hath the werse.
 [39] Now, lady bryght, for thi benignite,
 [40] At reverence of hem that serven the,
 [41] Whos clerc I am, so techeth me devyse
 [42] Som joye of that is felt in thi servyse.
 [43] Ye in my naked herte sentement
 [44] Inhielde, and do me shewe of thy swetnesse.
 [45] Caliope, thi vois be now present,
 [46] For now is nede: sestow nought my destresse,
 [47] How I mot telle anonright the gladnesse
 [48] Of Troilus, to Venus heryinge?
 [49] To which gladnesse, who nede hath, God hym brynge!
 [50] Lay al this mene while Troilus,
 [51] Recordyng his lesson in this manere:
 [52] "Mafay," thoughte he, "thus wol I sey, and thus;
 [53] Thus wol I pleyne unto my lady dere;
 [54] That word is good, and this shal be my cheere;
 [55] This nyl I nought foryeten in no wise."
 [56] God leve hym werken as he kan devyse!
 [57] And, Lord, so that his herte gan to quappe,
 [58] Heryng hire come, and shorte for to sike!
 [59] And Pandarus, that ledde hire by the lappe,
 [60] Com ner, and gan in at the curtyn pike,
 [61] And seyde, "God do boot on alle syke!
 [62] Se who is here yow comen to visite:
 [63] Lo, here is she that is youre deth to wite."
 [64] Therwith it semed as he wepte almost.
 [65] "Ha, a," quod Troilus so reufully,
 [66] "Wher me be wo, O myghty God, thow woost!
 [67] Who is al ther? I se nought trewely."
 [68] "Sire," quod Criseyde, "it is Pandare and I."
 [69] "Ye, swete herte? Allas, I may nought rise,
 [70] To knele and do yow honour in som wyse."
 [71] And dressed hym upward, and she right tho
 [72] Gan bothe hire hondes softe upon hym leye.
 [73] "O, for the love of God, do ye nought so
 [74] To me," quod she, "I! What is this to seye?
 [75] Sire, comen am I to yow for causes tweye:
 [76] First, yow to thonke, and of youre lordshipe eke
 [77] Continuance I wolde yow biseke."
 [78] This Troilus, that herde his lady preye
 [79] Of lordshipe hym, wax neither quyk ne ded,
 [80] Ne myghte o word for shame to it seye,
 [81] Although men sholde smyten of his hed.
 [82] But Lord, so he wex sodeynliche red,
 [83] And sire, his lessoun, that he wende konne
 [84] To preyen hire, is thorugh his wit ironne.
 [85] Criseyde al this aspied wel ynough,
 [86] For she was wis, and loved hym nevere the lasse,
 [87] Al nere he malapert, or made it tough,
 [88] Or was to bold, to synge a fool a masse.
 [89] But whan his shame gan somwhat to passe,
 [90] His resons, as I may my rymes holde,
 [91] I yow wol telle, as techen bokes olde.
 [92] In chaunged vois, right for his verray drede,
 [93] Which vois ek quook, and therto his manere
 [94] Goodly abaist, and now his hewes rede,
 [95] Now pale, unto Criseyde, his lady dere,
 [96] With look down cast and humble iyolden chere,
 [97] Lo, the alderfirste word that hym asterte
 [98] Was, twyes, "Mercy, mercy, swete herte!"
 [99] And stynte a while, and whan he myghte out brynge,
 [100] The nexte word was, "God woot, for I have,
 [101] As ferforthly as I have had konnynge,
 [102] Ben youres al, God so my soule save,
 [103] And shal til that I, woful wight, be grave!
 [104] And though I dar, ne kan, unto yow pleyne,
 [105] Iwis, I suffre nought the lasse peyne.
 [106] "Thus muche as now, O wommanliche wif,
 [107] I may out brynge, and if this yow displese,
 [108] That shal I wreke upon myn owen lif
 [109] Right soone, I trowe, and do youre herte an ese,
 [110] If with my deth youre wreththe may apese.
 [111] But syn that ye han herd me somwhat seye,
 [112] Now recche I nevere how soone that I deye."
 [113] Therwith his manly sorwe to biholde
 [114] It myghte han mad an herte of stoon to rewe;
 [115] And Pandare wep as he to water wolde,
 [116] And poked evere his nece new and newe,
 [117] And seyde, "Wo bygon ben hertes trewe!
 [118] For love of God, make of this thing an ende,
 [119] Or sle us both at ones er ye wende."
 [120] "I, what?" quod she, "by God and by my trouthe,
 [121] I not nat what ye wilne that I seye."
 [122] "I, what?" quod he, "That ye han on hym routhe,
 [123] For Goddes love, and doth hym nought to deye!"
 [124] "Now than thus," quod she, "I wolde hym preye
 [125] To telle me the fyn of his entente.
 [126] Yet wist I nevere wel what that he mente."
 [127] "What that I mene, O swete herte deere?"
 [128] Quod Troilus, "O goodly, fresshe free,
 [129] That with the stremes of youre eyen cleere
 [130] Ye wolde somtyme frendly on me see,
 [131] And thanne agreen that I may ben he,
 [132] Withouten braunche of vice on any wise,
 [133] In trouthe alwey to don yow my servise,
 [134] "As to my lady right and chief resort,
 [135] With al my wit and al my diligence;
 [136] And I to han, right as yow list, comfort,
 [137] Under yowre yerde, egal to myn offence,
 [138] As deth, if that I breke youre defence;
 [139] And that ye deigne me so muchel honoure
 [140] Me to comanden aught in any houre;
 [141] "And I to ben youre -- verray, humble, trewe,
 [142] Secret, and in my paynes pacient,
 [143] And evere mo desiren fresshly newe
 [144] To serve, and ben ylike diligent,
 [145] And with good herte al holly youre talent
 [146] Receyven wel, how sore that me smerte;
 [147] Lo, this mene I, myn owen swete herte."
 [148] Quod Pandarus, "Lo, here an hard requeste,
 [149] And resonable, a lady for to werne!
 [150] Now, nece myn, by natal Joves feste,
 [151] Were I a god, ye sholden sterve as yerne,
 [152] That heren wel this man wol nothing yerne
 [153] But youre honour, and sen hym almost sterve,
 [154] And ben so loth to suffren hym yow serve."
 [155] With that she gan hire eyen on hym caste
 [156] Ful esily and ful debonairly,
 [157] Avysyng hire, and hied nought to faste
 [158] With nevere a word, but seyde hym softely,
 [159] "Myn honour sauf, I wol wel trewely,
 [160] And in swich forme as he gan now devyse,
 [161] Receyven hym fully to my servyse,
 [162] "Bysechyng hym, for Goddes love, that he
 [163] Wolde, in honour of trouthe and gentilesse,
 [164] As I wel mene, ek menen wel to me,
 [165] And myn honour with wit and bisynesse
 [166] Ay kepe; and if I may don hym gladnesse,
 [167] From hennesforth, iwys, I nyl nought feyne.
 [168] Now beth al hool; no lenger ye ne pleyne.
 [169] "But natheles, this warne I yow," quod she,
 [170] "A kynges sone although ye be, ywys,
 [171] Ye shal namore han sovereignete
 [172] Of me in love, than right in that cas is.
 [173] N' y nyl forbere, if that ye don amys,
 [174] To wratthe yow; and whil that ye me serve,
 [175] Chericen yow right after ye disserve.
 [176] "And shortly, deere herte and al my knyght,
 [177] Beth glad, and draweth yow to lustinesse,
 [178] And I shal trewely, with al my myght,
 [179] Youre bittre tornen al into swetenesse.
 [180] If I be she that may yow do gladnesse,
 [181] For every wo ye shal recovere a blisse" --
 [182] And hym in armes took, and gan hym kisse.
 [183] Fil Pandarus on knees, and up his eyen
 [184] To heven threw, and held his hondes highe:
 [185] "Immortal god," quod he, "that mayst nought deyen,
 [186] Cupide I mene, of this mayst glorifie;
 [187] And Venus, thow mayst maken melodie!
 [188] Withouten hond, me semeth that in the towne,
 [189] For this merveille ich here ech belle sowne.
 [190] "But ho! namore as now of this matere;
 [191] For-whi this folk wol comen up anon,
 [192] That han the lettre red; lo, I hem here.
 [193] But I conjure the, Criseyde, anon,
 [194] And to, thow Troilus, whan thow mayst goon,
 [195] That at myn hous ye ben at my warnynge,
 [196] For I ful well shal shape youre comynge;
 [197] "And eseth there youre hertes right ynough;
 [198] And lat se which of yow shal bere the belle
 [199] To speke of love aright!" -- therwith he lough --
 [200] "For ther have ye a leiser for to telle."
 [201] Quod Troilus, "How longe shal I dwelle,
 [202] Er this be don?" Quod he, "Whan thow mayst ryse,
 [203] This thyng shal be right as I yow devyse."
 [204] With that Eleyne and also Deiphebus
 [205] Tho comen upward, right at the steires ende;
 [206] And Lord, so thanne gan gronen Troilus,
 [207] His brother and his suster for to blende.
 [208] Quod Pandarus, "It tyme is that we wende.
 [209] Tak, nece myn, youre leve at alle thre,
 [210] And lat hem speke, and cometh forth with me."
 [211] She took hire leve at hem ful thriftily,
 [212] As she wel koude, and they hire reverence
 [213] Unto the fulle diden, hardyly,
 [214] And wonder wel speken, in hire absence,
 [215] Of hire in preysing of hire excellence --
 [216] Hire governaunce, hire wit, and hire manere
 [217] Comendeden, it joie was to here.
 [218] Now lat hire wende unto hire owen place,
 [219] And torne we to Troilus ayein,
 [220] That gan ful lightly of the lettre pace
 [221] That Deiphebus hadde in the gardyn seyn;
 [222] And of Eleyne and hym he wolde feyn
 [223] Delivered ben, and seyde that hym leste
 [224] To slepe, and after tales have reste.
 [225] Eleyne hym kiste, and took hire leve blyve,
 [226] Deiphebus ek, and hom wente every wight;
 [227] And Pandarus, as faste as he may dryve,
 [228] To Troilus tho com, as lyne right,
 [229] And on a paillet al that glade nyght
 [230] By Troilus he lay, with mery chere,
 [231] To tale; and wel was hem they were yfeere.
 [232] Whan every wight was voided but they two,
 [233] And alle the dores weren faste yshette,
 [234] To telle in short, withouten wordes mo,
 [235] This Pandarus, withouten any lette,
 [236] Up roos, and on his beddes syde hym sette,
 [237] And gan to speken in a sobre wyse
 [238] To Troilus, as I shal yow devyse:
 [239] "Myn alderlevest lord, and brother deere,
 [240] God woot, and thow, that it sat me so soore,
 [241] Whan I the saugh so langwisshyng to-yere
 [242] For love, of which thi wo wax alwey moore,
 [243] That I, with al my myght and al my loore,
 [244] Have evere sithen don my bisynesse
 [245] To brynge the to joye out of distresse,
 [246] "And have it brought to swich plit as thow woost,
 [247] So that thorugh me thow stondest now in weye
 [248] To faren wel; I sey it for no bost,
 [249] And wostow whi? For shame it is to seye:
 [250] For the have I bigonne a gamen pleye
 [251] Which that I nevere do shal eft for other,
 [252] Although he were a thousand fold my brother.
 [253] "That is to seye, for the am I bicomen,
 [254] Bitwixen game and ernest, swich a meene
 [255] As maken wommen unto men to comen;
 [256] Al sey I nought, thow wost wel what I meene.
 [257] For the have I my nece, of vices cleene,
 [258] So fully maad thi gentilesse triste,
 [259] That al shal ben right as thiselven liste.
 [260] "But God, that al woot, take I to witnesse,
 [261] That nevere I this for coveitise wroughte,
 [262] But oonly for t' abregge that distresse
 [263] For which wel neigh thow deidest, as me thoughte.
 [264] But, goode brother, do now as the oughte,
 [265] For Goddes love, and kep hire out of blame,
 [266] Syn thow art wys, and save alwey hire name.
 [267] "For wel thow woost, the name as yet of here
 [268] Among the peeple, as who seyth, halwed is.
 [269] For that man is unbore, I dar wel swere,
 [270] That evere wiste that she dide amys.
 [271] But wo is me, that I, that cause al this,
 [272] May thynken that she is my nece deere,
 [273] And I hire em, and traitour ek yfeere!
 [274] "And were it wist that I, thorugh myn engyn,
 [275] Hadde in my nece yput this fantasie,
 [276] To doon thi lust and holly to ben thyn,
 [277] Whi, al the world upon it wolde crie,
 [278] And seyn that I the werste trecherie
 [279] Dide in this cas, that evere was bigonne,
 [280] And she forlost, and thow right nought ywonne.
 [281] "Wherfore, er I wol ferther gon a pas,
 [282] The preie ich eft, althogh thow shuldest deye,
 [283] That privete go with us in this cas;
 [284] That is to seyn, that thow us nevere wreye;
 [285] And be nought wroth, though I the ofte preye
 [286] To holden secree swich an heigh matere,
 [287] For skilfull is, thow woost wel, my praiere.
 [288] "And thynk what wo ther hath bitid er this,
 [289] For makyng of avantes, as men rede;
 [290] And what meschaunce in this world yet ther is,
 [291] Fro day to day, right for that wikked dede;
 [292] For which thise wise clerkes that ben dede
 [293] Han evere yet proverbed to us yonge,
 [294] That `firste vertu is to kepe tonge.'
 [295] "And nere it that I wilne as now t' abregge
 [296] Diffusioun of speche, I koude almoost
 [297] A thousand olde stories the allegge
 [298] Of wommen lost through fals and foles bost.
 [299] Proverbes kanst thiself ynowe and woost
 [300] Ayeins that vice, for to ben a labbe,
 [301] Al seyde men soth as often as thei gabbe.
 [302] "O tonge, allas, so often here-byforn
 [303] Hath mad ful many a lady bright of hewe
 [304] Seyd `Weilaway, the day that I was born!'
 [305] And many a maydes sorwe for to newe;
 [306] And for the more part, al is untrewe
 [307] That men of yelpe, and it were brought to preve.
 [308] Of kynde non avauntour is to leve.
 [309] "Avauntour and a lyere, al is on;
 [310] As thus: I pose, a womman grante me
 [311] Hire love, and seith that other wol she non,
 [312] And I am sworn to holden it secree,
 [313] And after I go telle it two or thre --
 [314] Iwis, I am avauntour at the leeste,
 [315] And lyere, for I breke my biheste.
 [316] "Now loke thanne, if they be nought to blame,
 [317] Swich manere folk -- what shal I clepe hem, what? --
 [318] That hem avaunte of wommen, and by name,
 [319] That nevere yet bihyghte hem this ne that,
 [320] Ne knewe hem more than myn olde hat!
 [321] No wonder is, so God me sende hele,
 [322] Though wommen dreden with us men to dele.
 [323] "I sey nought this for no mistrust of yow,
 [324] Ne for no wis-man, but for foles nyce,
 [325] And for the harm that in the werld is now,
 [326] As wel for folie ofte as for malice;
 [327] For wel woot I, in wise folk that vice
 [328] No womman drat, if she be wel avised;
 [329] For wyse ben by foles harm chastised.
 [330] "But now to purpos; leve brother deere,
 [331] Have al this thyng that I have seyd in mynde,
 [332] And kep the clos, and be now of good cheere,
 [333] For at thi day thow shalt me trewe fynde.
 [334] I shal thi proces set in swych a kynde,
 [335] And God toforn, that it shal the suffise,
 [336] For it shal be right as thow wolt devyse.
 [337] "For wel I woot, thow menest wel, parde;
 [338] Therfore I dar this fully undertake.
 [339] Thow woost ek what thi lady graunted the,
 [340] And day is set the chartres up to make.
 [341] Have now good nyght, I may no lenger wake;
 [342] And bid for me, syn thow art now in blysse,
 [343] That God me sende deth or soone lisse."
 [344] Who myghte tellen half the joie or feste
 [345] Which that the soule of Troilus tho felte,
 [346] Heryng th' effect of Pandarus byheste?
 [347] His olde wo, that made his herte swelte,
 [348] Gan tho for joie wasten and tomelte,
 [349] And al the richesse of his sikes sore
 [350] At ones fledde; he felte of hem namore.
 [351] But right so as thise holtes and thise hayis,
 [352] That han in wynter dede ben and dreye,
 [353] Revesten hem in grene whan that May is,
 [354] Whan every lusty liketh best to pleye;
 [355] Right in that selve wise, soth to seye,
 [356] Wax sodeynliche his herte ful of joie,
 [357] That gladder was ther nevere man in Troie.
 [358] And gan his look on Pandarus up caste
 [359] Ful sobrely, and frendly for to se,
 [360] And seyde, "Frend, in Aperil the laste --
 [361] As wel thow woost, if it remembre the --
 [362] How neigh the deth for wo thow fownde me,
 [363] And how thow dedest al thi bisynesse
 [364] To knowe of me the cause of my destresse.
 [365] "Thow woost how longe ich it forbar to seye
 [366] To the, that art the man that I best triste;
 [367] And peril non was it to the bywreye,
 [368] That wist I wel; but telle me, if the liste,
 [369] Sith I so loth was that thiself it wiste,
 [370] How dorst I mo tellen of this matere,
 [371] That quake now, and no wight may us here?
 [372] "But natheles, by that God I the swere,
 [373] That, as hym list, may al this world governe --
 [374] And, if I lye, Achilles with his spere
 [375] Myn herte cleve, al were my lif eterne,
 [376] As I am mortal, if I late or yerne
 [377] Wolde it bewreye, or dorst, or sholde konne,
 [378] For al the good that God made under sonne --
 [379] "That rather deye I wolde, and determyne,
 [380] As thynketh me, now stokked in prisoun,
 [381] In wrecchidnesse, in filthe, and in vermyne,
 [382] Caytif to cruel kyng Agamenoun;
 [383] And this in all the temples of this town
 [384] Upon the goddes alle, I wol the swere
 [385] To-morwe day, if that it liketh here.
 [386] "And that thow hast so muche ido for me
 [387] That I ne may it nevere more disserve,
 [388] This know I wel, al myghte I now for the
 [389] A thousand tymes on a morwe sterve.
 [390] I kan namore, but that I wol the serve
 [391] Right as thi sclave, whider so thow wende,
 [392] For evere more, unto my lyves ende.
 [393] "But here, with al myn herte, I the biseche
 [394] That nevere in me thow deme swich folie
 [395] As I shal seyn: me thoughte by thi speche
 [396] That this which thow me dost for compaignie,
 [397] I sholde wene it were a bauderye.
 [398] I am nought wood, al if I lewed be!
 [399] It is nought so, that woot I wel, parde!
 [400] "But he that gooth for gold or for ricchesse
 [401] On swich message, calle hym what the list;
 [402] And this that thow doost, calle it gentilesse,
 [403] Compassioun, and felawship, and trist.
 [404] Departe it so, for wyde-wher is wist
 [405] How that ther is diversite requered
 [406] Bytwixen thynges like, as I have lered.
 [407] "And that thow knowe I thynke nought ne wene
 [408] That this servise a shame be or jape,
 [409] I have my faire suster Polixene,
 [410] Cassandre, Eleyne, or any of the frape --
 [411] Be she nevere so fair or wel yshape,
 [412] Tel me which thow wilt of everychone,
 [413] To han for thyn, and lat me thanne allone.
 [414] "But, sith thow hast don me this servyse
 [415] My lif to save and for non hope of mede,
 [416] So for the love of God, this grete emprise
 [417] Perfourme it out, for now is moste nede;
 [418] For heigh and lough, withowten any drede,
 [419] I wol alwey thyn hestes alle kepe.
 [420] Have now good nyght, and lat us bothe slepe."
 [421] Thus held hym ech of other wel apayed,
 [422] That al the world ne myghte it bet amende;
 [423] And on the morwe, whan they were arayed,
 [424] Ech to his owen nedes gan entende.
 [425] But Troilus, though as the fir he brende
 [426] For sharp desir of hope and of plesaunce,
 [427] He nought forgat his goode governaunce,
 [428] But in hymself with manhod gan restreyne
 [429] Ech racle dede and ech unbridled cheere,
 [430] That alle tho that lyven, soth to seyne,
 [431] Ne sholde han wist, by word or by manere,
 [432] What that he mente, as touchyng this matere.
 [433] From every wight as fer as is the cloude
 [434] He was, so wel dissimilen he koude.
 [435] And al the while which that I yow devyse,
 [436] This was his lif: with all his fulle myght,
 [437] By day, he was in Martes heigh servyse --
 [438] This is to seyn, in armes as a knyght;
 [439] And for the more part, the longe nyght
 [440] He lay and thoughte how that he myghte serve
 [441] His lady best, hire thonk for to deserve.
 [442] Nil I naught swere, although he lay ful softe,
 [443] That in his thought he nas somwhat disesed,
 [444] Ne that he torned on his pilwes ofte,
 [445] And wold of that hym missed han ben sesed.
 [446] But in swich cas men is nought alwey plesed,
 [447] For aught I woot, namore than was he;
 [448] That kan I deme of possibilitee.
 [449] But certeyn is, to purpos for to go,
 [450] That in this while, as writen is in geeste,
 [451] He say his lady somtyme, and also
 [452] She with hym spak, whan that she dorst or leste;
 [453] And by hire bothe avys, as was the beste,
 [454] Apoynteden full warly in this nede,
 [455] So as they durste, how they wolde procede.
 [456] But it was spoken in so short a wise,
 [457] In swich await alwey, and in swich feere,
 [458] Lest any wight devynen or devyse
 [459] Wolde of hem two, or to it laye an ere,
 [460] That al this world so leef to hem ne were
 [461] As that Cupide wolde hem grace sende
 [462] To maken of hire speche aright an ende.
 [463] But thilke litel that they spake or wroughte,
 [464] His wise goost took ay of al swych heede,
 [465] It semed hire he wiste what she thoughte
 [466] Withouten word, so that it was no nede
 [467] To bidde hym ought to doon, or ought forbeede;
 [468] For which she thought that love, al come it late,
 [469] Of alle joie hadde opned hire the yate.
 [470] And shortly of this proces for to pace,
 [471] So wel his werk and wordes he bisette,
 [472] That he so ful stood in his lady grace,
 [473] That twenty thousand tymes, er she lette,
 [474] She thonked God that evere she with hym mette.
 [475] So koude he hym governe in swich servyse,
 [476] That al the world ne myght it bet devyse.
 [477] For whi she fond hym so discret in al,
 [478] So secret, and of swich obeisaunce,
 [479] That wel she felte he was to hire a wal
 [480] Of stiel, and sheld from every displesaunce;
 [481] That to ben in his goode governaunce,
 [482] So wis he was, she was namore afered --
 [483] I mene, as fer as oughte ben requered.
 [484] And Pandarus, to quike alwey the fir,
 [485] Was evere ylike prest and diligent;
 [486] To ese his frend was set al his desir.
 [487] He shof ay on, he to and fro was sent;
 [488] He lettres bar whan Troilus was absent;
 [489] That nevere man, as in his frendes nede,
 [490] Ne bar hym bet than he, withouten drede.
 [491] But now, paraunter, som man wayten wolde
 [492] That every word, or soonde, or look, or cheere
 [493] Of Troilus that I rehercen sholde,
 [494] In al this while unto his lady deere --
 [495] I trowe it were a long thyng for to here --
 [496] Or of what wight that stant in swich disjoynte,
 [497] His wordes alle, or every look, to poynte.
 [498] For sothe, I have naught herd it don er this
 [499] In story non, ne no man here, I wene;
 [500] And though I wolde, I koude nought, ywys;
 [501] For ther was som epistel hem bitwene,
 [502] That wolde, as seyth myn autour, wel contene
 [503] Neigh half this book, of which hym liste nought write.
 [504] How sholde I thanne a lyne of it endite?
 [505] But to the grete effect: than sey I thus,
 [506] That stondyng in concord and in quiete,
 [507] Thise ilke two, Criseyde and Troilus,
 [508] As I have told, and in this tyme swete --
 [509] Save only often myghte they nought mete,
 [510] Ne leiser have hire speches to fulfelle --
 [511] That it bifel right as I shal yow telle:
 [512] That Pandarus, that evere dide his myght
 [513] Right for the fyn that I shal speke of here,
 [514] As for to bryngen to his hows som nyght
 [515] His faire nece and Troilus yfere,
 [516] Wheras at leiser al this heighe matere,
 [517] Touchyng here love, were at the fulle upbounde,
 [518] Hadde out of doute a tyme to it founde.
 [519] For he with gret deliberacioun
 [520] Hadde every thyng that herto myght availle
 [521] Forncast and put in execucioun,
 [522] And neither left for cost ne for travaille.
 [523] Come if hem list, hem sholde no thyng faille;
 [524] And for to ben in ought aspied there,
 [525] That, wiste he wel, an impossible were.
 [526] Dredeles, it cler was in the wynd
 [527] Of every pie and every lette-game;
 [528] Now al is wel, for al the world is blynd
 [529] In this matere, bothe fremde and tame.
 [530] This tymbur is al redy up to frame;
 [531] Us lakketh nought but that we witen wolde
 [532] A certeyn houre, in which she comen sholde.
 [533] And Troilus, that al this purveiaunce
 [534] Knew at the fulle, and waited on it ay,
 [535] Hadde hereupon ek mad gret ordinaunce,
 [536] And found his cause, and therto his aray,
 [537] If that he were missed, nyght or day,
 [538] Ther-while he was aboute this servyse,
 [539] That he was gon to don his sacrifise,
 [540] And moste at swich a temple allone wake,
 [541] Answered of Apollo for to be;
 [542] And first to sen the holy laurer quake,
 [543] Er that Apollo spak out of the tree,
 [544] To telle hym next whan Grekes sholde flee --
 [545] And forthy lette hym no man, God forbede,
 [546] But prey Apollo helpen in this nede.
 [547] Now is ther litel more for to doone,
 [548] But Pandare up and, shortly for to seyne,
 [549] Right sone upon the chaungynge of the moone,
 [550] Whan lightles is the world a nyght or tweyne,
 [551] And that the wolken shop hym for to reyne,
 [552] He streght o morwe unto his nece wente --
 [553] Ye han wel herd the fyn of his entente.
 [554] Whan he was com, he gan anon to pleye
 [555] As he was wont, and of hymself to jape;
 [556] And finaly he swor and gan hire seye,
 [557] By this and that, she sholde hym nought escape,
 [558] Ne lenger don hym after hire to cape;
 [559] But certeynly she moste, by hire leve,
 [560] Come soupen in his hous with hym at eve.
 [561] At which she lough, and gan hire faste excuse,
 [562] And seyde, "It reyneth. lo, how sholde I gon?"
 [563] "Lat be," quod he, "ne stant nought thus to muse.
 [564] This moot be don! Ye shal be ther anon."
 [565] So at the laste herof they fille aton,
 [566] Or elles, softe he swor hire in hire ere,
 [567] He nolde nevere comen ther she were.
 [568] Soone after this, she to hym gan to rowne,
 [569] And axed hym if Troilus were there.
 [570] He swor hire nay, for he was out of towne,
 [571] And seyde, "Nece, I pose that he were;
 [572] Yow thurste nevere han the more fere;
 [573] For rather than men myghte hym ther aspie,
 [574] Me were levere a thousand fold to dye."
 [575] Nought list myn auctour fully to declare
 [576] What that she thoughte whan he seyde so,
 [577] That Troilus was out of towne yfare,
 [578] As if he seyde therof soth or no;
 [579] But that, withowten await, with hym to go,
 [580] She graunted hym, sith he hire that bisoughte,
 [581] And, as his nece, obeyed as hire oughte.
 [582] But natheles, yet gan she hym biseche,
 [583] Although with hym to gon it was no fere,
 [584] For to ben war of goosissh poeples speche,
 [585] That dremen thynges whiche as nevere were,
 [586] And wel avyse hym whom he broughte there;
 [587] And seyde hym, "Em, syn I moste on yow triste,
 [588] Loke al be wel, and do now as yow liste."
 [589] He swor hire yis, by stokkes and by stones,
 [590] And by the goddes that in hevene dwelle,
 [591] Or elles were hym levere, soule and bones,
 [592] With Pluto kyng as depe ben in helle
 [593] As Tantalus -- what sholde I more telle?
 [594] Whan al was wel, he roos and took his leve,
 [595] And she to soper com, whan it was eve,
 [596] With a certein of hire owen men,
 [597] And with hire faire nece Antigone,
 [598] And other of hire wommen nyne or ten.
 [599] But who was glad now, who, as trowe ye,
 [600] But Troilus, that stood and myght it se
 [601] Thorughout a litel wyndow in a stewe,
 [602] Ther he bishet syn mydnyght was in mewe,
 [603] Unwist of every wight but of Pandare?
 [604] But to the point: now whan that she was come,
 [605] With alle joie and alle frendes fare
 [606] Hire em anon in armes hath hire nome,
 [607] And after to the soper, alle and some,
 [608] Whan tyme was, ful softe they hem sette.
 [609] God woot, ther was no deynte for to fette!
 [610] And after soper gonnen they to rise,
 [611] At ese wel, with herte fresshe and glade;
 [612] And wel was hym that koude best devyse
 [613] To liken hire, or that hire laughen made:
 [614] He song; she pleyde; he tolde tale of Wade.
 [615] But at the laste, as every thyng hath ende,
 [616] She took hire leve, and nedes wolde wende.
 [617] But O Fortune, executrice of wierdes,
 [618] O influences of thise hevenes hye!
 [619] Soth is, that under God ye ben oure hierdes,
 [620] Though to us bestes ben the causez wrie.
 [621] This mene I now: for she gan homward hye,
 [622] But execut was al bisyde hire leve
 [623] The goddes wil, for which she moste bleve.
 [624] The bente moone with hire hornes pale,
 [625] Saturne, and Jove, in Cancro joyned were,
 [626] That swych a reyn from heven gan avale
 [627] That every maner womman that was there
 [628] Hadde of that smoky reyn a verray feere;
 [629] At which Pandare tho lough, and seyde thenne,
 [630] "Now were it tyme a lady to gon henne!
 [631] "But goode nece, if I myghte evere plese
 [632] Yow any thyng, than prey ich yow," quod he,
 [633] "To don myn herte as now so gret an ese
 [634] As for to dwelle here al this nyght with me,
 [635] For-whi this is youre owen hous, parde.
 [636] For by my trouthe, I sey it nought a-game,
 [637] To wende as now, it were to me a shame."
 [638] Criseyde, which that koude as muche good
 [639] As half a world, took hede of his preiere;
 [640] And syn it ron, and al was on a flod,
 [641] She thoughte, "As good chep may I dwellen here,
 [642] And graunte it gladly with a frendes chere,
 [643] And have a thonk, as grucche and thanne abide;
 [644] For hom to gon, it may nought wel bitide."
 [645] "I wol," quod she, "myn uncle lief and deere;
 [646] Syn that yow list, it skile is to be so.
 [647] I am right glad with yow to dwellen here;
 [648] I seyde but a-game I wolde go."
 [649] "Iwys, graunt mercy, nece," quod he tho,
 [650] "Were it a game or no, soth for to telle,
 [651] Now am I glad, syn that yow list to dwelle."
 [652] Thus al is wel; but tho bigan aright
 [653] The newe joie and al the feste agayn.
 [654] But Pandarus, if goodly hadde he myght,
 [655] He wolde han hyed hire to bedde fayn,
 [656] And seyde, "Lord, this is an huge rayn!
 [657] This were a weder for to slepen inne --
 [658] And that I rede us soone to bygynne.
 [659] "And nece, woot ye wher I wol yow leye,
 [660] For that we shul nat liggen far asonder,
 [661] And for ye neither shullen, dar I seye,
 [662] Heren noyse of reynes nor of thonder?
 [663] By God, right in my litel closet yonder.
 [664] And I wol in that outer hous allone
 [665] Be wardein of youre wommen everichone.
 [666] "And in this myddel chambre that ye se
 [667] Shal youre wommen slepen, wel and softe;
 [668] And there I seyde shal youreselven be;
 [669] And if ye liggen wel to-nyght, com ofte,
 [670] And careth nought what weder is alofte.
 [671] The wyn anon, and whan so that yow leste,
 [672] So go we slepe: I trowe it be the beste."
 [673] Ther nys no more, but hereafter soone,
 [674] The voide dronke, and travers drawe anon,
 [675] Gan every wight that hadde nought to done
 [676] More in the place out of the chaumbre gon.
 [677] And evere mo so sterneliche it ron,
 [678] And blew therwith so wondirliche loude,
 [679] That wel neigh no man heren other koude.
 [680] Tho Pandarus, hire em, right as hym oughte,
 [681] With wommen swiche as were hire most aboute,
 [682] Ful glad unto hire beddes syde hire broughte,
 [683] And took his leve, and gan ful lowe loute,
 [684] And seyde, "Here at this closet dore withoute,
 [685] Right overthwart, youre wommen liggen alle,
 [686] That whom yow list of hem ye may here calle."
 [687] So whan that she was in the closet leyd,
 [688] And alle hire wommen forth by ordinaunce
 [689] Abedde weren, ther as I have seyd,
 [690] Ther was nomore to skippen nor to traunce,
 [691] But boden go to bedde, with meschaunce,
 [692] If any wight was steryng anywhere,
 [693] And lat hem slepen that abedde were.
 [694] But Pandarus, that wel koude ech a deel
 [695] Th' olde daunce, and every point therinne,
 [696] Whan that he sey that alle thyng was wel,
 [697] He thought he wolde upon his werk bigynne,
 [698] And gan the stuwe doore al softe unpynne;
 [699] And stille as stoon, withouten lenger lette,
 [700] By Troilus adown right he hym sette,
 [701] And shortly to the point right for to gon,
 [702] Of al this werk he tolde hym word and ende,
 [703] And seyde, "Make the redy right anon,
 [704] For thow shalt into hevene blisse wende."
 [705] "Now, blisful Venus, thow me grace sende!"
 [706] Quod Troilus, "For nevere yet no nede
 [707] Hadde ich er now, ne halvendel the drede."
 [708] Quod Pandarus, "Ne drede the nevere a deel,
 [709] For it shal be right as thow wolt desire;
 [710] So thryve I, this nyght shal I make it weel,
 [711] Or casten al the gruwel in the fire."
 [712] "Yet, blisful Venus, this nyght thow me enspire,"
 [713] Quod Troilus, "As wys as I the serve,
 [714] And evere bet and bet shal, til I sterve.
 [715] "And if ich hadde, O Venus ful of myrthe,
 [716] Aspectes badde of Mars or of Saturne,
 [717] Or thow combust or let were in my birthe,
 [718] Thy fader prey al thilke harm disturne
 [719] Of grace, and that I glad ayein may turne,
 [720] For love of hym thow lovedest in the shawe --
 [721] I meene Adoun, that with the boor was slawe.
 [722] "O Jove ek, for the love of faire Europe,
 [723] The which in forme of bole awey thow fette,
 [724] Now help! O Mars, thow with thi blody cope,
 [725] For love of Cipris, thow me nought ne lette!
 [726] O Phebus, thynk whan Dane hireselven shette
 [727] Under the bark, and laurer wax for drede;
 [728] Yet for hire love, O help now at this nede!
 [729] "Mercurie, for the love of Hierse eke,
 [730] For which Pallas was with Aglawros wroth,
 [731] Now help! And ek Diane, I the biseke
 [732] That this viage be nought to the looth!
 [733] O fatal sustren which, er any cloth
 [734] Me shapen was, my destine me sponne,
 [735] So helpeth to this werk that is bygonne!"
 [736] Quod Pandarus, "Thow wrecched mouses herte,
 [737] Artow agast so that she wol the bite?
 [738] Wy! Don this furred cloke upon thy sherte,
 [739] And folwe me, for I wol have the wite.
 [740] But bid, and lat me gon biforn a lite."
 [741] And with that word he gan undon a trappe,
 [742] And Troilus he brought in by the lappe.
 [743] The sterne wynd so loude gan to route
 [744] That no wight oother noise myghte heere;
 [745] And they that layen at the dore withoute,
 [746] Ful sikerly they slepten alle yfere;
 [747] And Pandarus, with a ful sobre cheere,
 [748] Goth to the dore anon, withouten lette,
 [749] Ther as they laye, and softely it shette.
 [750] And as he com ayeynward pryvely,
 [751] His nece awook, and axed, "Who goth there?"
 [752] "My dere nece," quod he, "it am I.
 [753] Ne wondreth nought, ne have of it no fere."
 [754] And ner he com and seyde hire in hire ere,
 [755] "No word, for love of God, I yow biseche!
 [756] Lat no wight risen and heren of oure speche."
 [757] "What, which wey be ye comen, benedicite?"
 [758] Quod she; "And how, unwist of hem alle?"
 [759] "Here at this secre trappe-dore," quod he.
 [760] Quod tho Criseyde, "Lat me som wight calle!"
 [761] "I! God forbede that it sholde falle,"
 [762] Quod Pandarus, "that ye swich folye wroughte!
 [763] They myghte demen thyng they nevere er thoughte.
 [764] "It is nought good a slepyng hound to wake,
 [765] Ne yeve a wight a cause to devyne:
 [766] Youre wommen slepen alle, I undertake,
 [767] So that, for hem, the hous men myghte myne,
 [768] And slepen wollen til the sonne shyne.
 [769] And whan my tale brought is to an ende,
 [770] Unwist, right as I com, so wol I wende.
 [771] "Now, nece myn, ye shul wel understonde,"
 [772] Quod he, "so as ye wommen demen alle,
 [773] That for to holde in love a man in honde,
 [774] And hym hire lief and deere herte calle,
 [775] And maken hym an howve above a calle --
 [776] I meene, as love another in this while --
 [777] She doth hireself a shame and hym a gyle.
 [778] "Now, wherby that I telle yow al this:
 [779] Ye woot youreself, as wel as any wight,
 [780] How that youre love al fully graunted is
 [781] To Troilus, the worthieste knyght,
 [782] Oon of this world, and therto trouthe yplight,
 [783] That, but it were on hym along, ye nolde
 [784] Hym nevere falsen while ye lyven sholde.
 [785] "Now stant it thus, that sith I fro yow wente,
 [786] This Troilus, right platly for to seyn,
 [787] Is thorugh a goter, by a pryve wente,
 [788] Into my chaumbre come in al this reyn,
 [789] Unwist of every manere wight, certeyn,
 [790] Save of myself, as wisly have I joye,
 [791] And by that feith I shal Priam of Troie.
 [792] "And he is come in swich peyne and distresse
 [793] That, but he be al fully wood by this,
 [794] He sodeynly mot falle into wodnesse,
 [795] But if God helpe; and cause whi this is.
 [796] He seith hym told is of a frend of his,
 [797] How that ye sholden love oon hatte Horaste;
 [798] For sorwe of which this nyght shal ben his laste."
 [799] Criseyde, which that al this wonder herde,
 [800] Gan sodeynly aboute hire herte colde,
 [801] And with a sik she sorwfully answerde,
 [802] "Allas! I wende, whoso tales tolde,
 [803] My deere herte wolde me nought holde
 [804] So lightly fals! Allas, conceytes wronge,
 [805] What harm they don! For now lyve I to longe!
 [806] "Horaste! Allas, and falsen Troilus?
 [807] I knowe hym nought, God helpe me so!" quod she.
 [808] "Allas, what wikked spirit tolde hym thus?
 [809] Now certes, em, tomorwe and I hym se,
 [810] I shal therof as ful excusen me,
 [811] As evere dide womman, if hym like."
 [812] And with that word she gan ful soore sike.
 [813] "O God," quod she, "so worldly selynesse,
 [814] Which clerkes callen fals felicitee,
 [815] Imedled is with many a bitternesse!
 [816] Ful angwissous than is, God woot," quod she,
 [817] "Condicioun of veyn prosperitee:
 [818] For either joies comen nought yfeere,
 [819] Or elles no wight hath hem alwey here.
 [820] "O brotel wele of mannes joie unstable!
 [821] With what wight so thow be, or how thow pleye,
 [822] Either he woot that thow, joie, art muable,
 [823] Or woot it nought; it mot ben oon of tweye.
 [824] Now if he woot it nought, how may he seye
 [825] That he hath verray joie and selynesse,
 [826] That is of ignoraunce ay in derknesse?
 [827] "Now if he woot that joie is transitorie,
 [828] As every joye of worldly thyng mot flee,
 [829] Than every tyme he that hath in memorie,
 [830] The drede of lesyng maketh hym that he
 [831] May in no perfit selynesse be;
 [832] And if to lese his joie he sette a myte,
 [833] Than semeth it that joie is worth ful lite.
 [834] "Wherfore I wol diffyne in this matere,
 [835] That trewely, for aught I kan espie,
 [836] Ther is no verray weele in this world heere.
 [837] But O thow wikked serpent, jalousie,
 [838] Thow mysbyleved envyous folie,
 [839] Why hastow Troilus mad to me untriste,
 [840] That nevere yet agylte hym, that I wiste?"
 [841] Quod Pandarus, "Thus fallen is this cas --"
 [842] "Wy! Uncle myn," quod she, "who tolde hym this?
 [843] Why doth my deere herte thus, allas?"
 [844] "Ye woot, ye, nece myn," quod he, "what is.
 [845] I hope al shal be wel that is amys,
 [846] For ye may quenche al this, if that yow leste --
 [847] And doth right so, for I holde it the beste."
 [848] "So shal I do to-morwe, ywys," quod she,
 [849] "And God toforn, so that it shal suffise."
 [850] "To-morwe? Allas, that were a fair!" quod he;
 [851] "Nay, nay, it may nat stonden in this wise,
 [852] For, nece myn, thus writen clerkes wise,
 [853] That peril is with drecchyng in ydrawe;
 [854] Nay, swiche abodes ben nought worth an hawe.
 [855] "Nece, alle thyng hath tyme, I dar avowe;
 [856] For whan a chaumbre afire is or an halle,
 [857] Wel more nede is, it sodeynly rescowe
 [858] Than to dispute and axe amonges alle
 [859] How this candel in the strawe is falle.
 [860] A, benedicite! For al among that fare
 [861] The harm is don, and fare-wel feldefare!
 [862] "And nece myn -- ne take it naught agrief --
 [863] If that ye suffre hym al nyght in this wo,
 [864] God help me so, ye hadde hym nevere lief!
 [865] That dar I seyn, now ther is but we two.
 [866] But wel I woot that ye wol nat do so;
 [867] Ye ben to wys to doon so gret folie,
 [868] To putte his lif al nyght in jupertie."
 [869] "Hadde I hym nevere lief? by God, I weene
 [870] Ye hadde nevere thyng so lief!" quod she.
 [871] "Now by my thrift," quod he, "that shal be seene!
 [872] For syn ye make this ensaumple of me,
 [873] If ich al nyght wolde hym in sorwe se,
 [874] For al the tresour in the town of Troie,
 [875] I bidde God I nevere mote have joie.
 [876] "Now loke thanne, if ye that ben his love
 [877] Shul putte his lif al night in jupertie
 [878] For thyng of nought, now by that God above,
 [879] Naught oonly this delay comth of folie,
 [880] But of malice, if that I shal naught lie.
 [881] What! Platly, and ye suffre hym in destresse,
 [882] Ye neyther bounte don ne gentilesse."
 [883] Quod tho Criseyde, "Wol ye don o thyng
 [884] And ye therwith shal stynte al his disese?
 [885] Have heere, and bereth hym this blewe ryng,
 [886] For ther is nothyng myghte hym bettre plese,
 [887] Save I myself, ne more hys herte apese;
 [888] And sey my deere herte that his sorwe
 [889] Is causeles; that shal be sene to-morwe."
 [890] "A ryng?" quod he, "Ye haselwodes shaken!
 [891] Ye, nece myn, that ryng moste han a stoon
 [892] That myghte dede men alyve maken;
 [893] And swich a ryng trowe I that ye have non.
 [894] Discrecioun out of youre hed is gon;
 [895] That fele I now," quod he, "and that is routhe.
 [896] O tyme ilost, wel maistow corsen slouthe!
 [897] "Woot ye not wel that noble and heigh corage
 [898] Ne sorweth nought, ne stynteth ek, for lite?
 [899] But if a fool were in a jalous rage,
 [900] I nolde setten at his sorwe a myte,
 [901] But feffe hym with a fewe wordes white
 [902] Anothir day, whan that I myghte hym fynde;
 [903] But this thyng stant al in another kynde.
 [904] "This is so gentil and so tendre of herte
 [905] That with his deth he wol his sorwes wreke;
 [906] For trusteth wel, how sore that hym smerte,
 [907] He wol to yow no jalous wordes speke.
 [908] And forthi, nece, er that his herte breke,
 [909] So speke youreself to hym of this matere,
 [910] For with o word ye may his herte stere.
 [911] "Now have I told what peril he is inne,
 [912] And his comynge unwist is to every wight;
 [913] Ne, parde, harm may ther be non, ne synne:
 [914] I wol myself be with yow al this nyght.
 [915] Ye knowe ek how it is youre owen knyght,
 [916] And that bi right ye moste upon hym triste,
 [917] And I al prest to fecche hym whan yow liste."
 [918] This accident so pitous was to here,
 [919] And ek so like a sooth at prime face,
 [920] And Troilus hire knyght to hir so deere,
 [921] His prive comyng, and the siker place,
 [922] That though that she did hym as thanne a grace,
 [923] Considered alle thynges as they stoode,
 [924] No wonder is, syn she did al for goode.
 [925] Criseyde answerde, "As wisly God at reste
 [926] My soule brynge, as me is for hym wo!
 [927] And em, iwis, fayn wolde I don the beste,
 [928] If that ich hadde grace to do so;
 [929] But whether that ye dwelle or for hym go,
 [930] I am, til God me bettre mynde sende,
 [931] At dulcarnoun, right at my wittes ende."
 [932] Quod Pandarus, "Yee, nece, wol ye here?
 [933] Dulcarnoun called is `flemyng of wrecches':
 [934] It semeth hard, for wrecches wol nought lere,
 [935] For verray slouthe or other wilfull tecches;
 [936] This seyd by hem that ben nought worth two fecches;
 [937] But ye ben wis, and that we han on honde
 [938] Nis neither hard, ne skilful to withstonde."
 [939] "Than, em," quod she, "doth herof as yow list.
 [940] But er he com, I wil up first arise,
 [941] And for the love of God, syn al my trist
 [942] Is on yow two, and ye ben bothe wise,
 [943] So werketh now in so discret a wise
 [944] That I honour may have, and he plesaunce:
 [945] For I am here al in youre governaunce."
 [946] "That is wel seyd," quod he, "my nece deere.
 [947] Ther good thrift on that wise gentil herte!
 [948] But liggeth stille, and taketh hym right here --
 [949] It nedeth nought no ferther for hym sterte.
 [950] And ech of yow ese otheres sorwes smerte,
 [951] For love of God! And Venus, I the herye;
 [952] For soone hope I we shul ben alle merye."
 [953] This Troilus ful soone on knees hym sette
 [954] Ful sobrely, right be hyre beddes hed,
 [955] And in his beste wyse his lady grette.
 [956] But Lord, so she wex sodeynliche red!
 [957] Ne though men sholde smyten of hire hed,
 [958] She kouth. nought a word aright out brynge
 [959] So sodeynly, for his sodeyn comynge.
 [960] But Pandarus, that so wel koude feele
 [961] In every thyng, to pleye anon bigan,
 [962] And seyde, "Nece, se how this lord kan knele!
 [963] Now for youre trouthe, se this gentil man!"
 [964] And with that word he for a quysshen ran,
 [965] And seyde, "Kneleth now, while that yow leste;
 [966] There God youre hertes brynge soone at reste!"
 [967] Kan I naught seyn, for she bad hym nought rise,
 [968] If sorwe it putte out of hire remembraunce,
 [969] Or elles that she took it in the wise
 [970] Of dewete, as for his observaunce;
 [971] But wel fynde I she dede hym this plesaunce,
 [972] That she hym kiste, although she siked sore,
 [973] And bad hym sitte adown withouten more.
 [974] Quod Pandarus, "Now wol ye wel bigynne.
 [975] Now doth hym sitte, goode nece deere,
 [976] Upon youre beddes syde al ther withinne,
 [977] That ech of yow the bet may other heere."
 [978] And with that word he drow hym to the feere,
 [979] And took a light, and fond his contenaunce,
 [980] As for to looke upon an old romaunce.
 [981] Criseyde, that was Troilus lady right,
 [982] And cler stood on a ground of sikernesse,
 [983] Al thoughte she hire servant and hire knyght
 [984] Ne sholde of right non untrouthe in hire gesse,
 [985] Yet natheles, considered his distresse,
 [986] And that love is in cause of swich folie,
 [987] Thus to hym spak she of his jalousie:
 [988] "Lo, herte myn, as wolde the excellence
 [989] Of love, ayeins the which that no man may --
 [990] Ne oughte ek -- goodly make resistence,
 [991] And ek bycause I felte wel and say
 [992] Youre grete trouthe and servise every day,
 [993] And that youre herte al myn was, soth to seyne,
 [994] This drof me for to rewe upon youre peyne.
 [995] "And youre goodnesse have I founde alwey yit,
 [996] Of which, my deere herte and al my knyght,
 [997] I thonke it yow, as fer as I have wit,
 [998] Al kan I nought as muche as it were right;
 [999] And I, emforth my connyng and my might,
 [1000] Have and ay shal, how sore that me smerte,
 [1001] Ben to yow trewe and hool with al myn herte,
 [1002] "And dredeles, that shal be founde at preve.
 [1003] But, herte myn, what al this is to seyne
 [1004] Shal wel be told, so that ye nought yow greve,
 [1005] Though I to yow right on youreself compleyne,
 [1006] For therwith mene I fynaly the peyne
 [1007] That halt youre herte and myn in hevynesse
 [1008] Fully to slen, and every wrong redresse.
 [1009] "My goode myn, noot I for-why ne how
 [1010] That jalousie, allas, that wikked wyvere,
 [1011] Thus causeles is cropen into yow,
 [1012] The harm of which I wolde fayn delyvere.
 [1013] Allas, that he, al hool or of hym slyvere,
 [1014] Shuld han his refut in so digne a place;
 [1015] Ther Jove hym sone out of youre herte arace!
 [1016] "But O, thow Jove, O auctour of nature,
 [1017] Is this an honour to thi deyte,
 [1018] That folk ungiltif suffren hire injure,
 [1019] And who that giltif is, al quyt goth he?
 [1020] O, were it lefull for to pleyn on the,
 [1021] That undeserved suffrest jalousie,
 [1022] Of that I wolde upon the pleyne and crie!
 [1023] "Ek al my wo is this, that folk now usen
 [1024] To seyn right thus, `Ye, jalousie is love!'
 [1025] And wolde a busshel venym al excusen,
 [1026] For that o greyn of love is on it shove.
 [1027] But that woot heighe God that sit above,
 [1028] If it be likkere love, or hate, or grame;
 [1029] And after that, it oughte bere his name.
 [1030] "But certeyn is, som manere jalousie
 [1031] Is excusable more than som, iwys;
 [1032] As whan cause is, and som swich fantasie
 [1033] With piete so wel repressed is
 [1034] That it unnethe doth or seyth amys,
 [1035] But goodly drynketh up al his distresse --
 [1036] And that excuse I, for the gentilesse;
 [1037] "And som so ful of furie is and despit
 [1038] That it sourmounteth his repressioun.
 [1039] But herte myn, ye be nat in that plit,
 [1040] That thonke I God; for which youre passioun
 [1041] I wol nought calle it but illusioun
 [1042] Of habundaunce of love and besy cure,
 [1043] That doth youre herte this disese endure.
 [1044] "Of which I am right sory but nought wroth;
 [1045] But, for my devoir and youre hertes reste,
 [1046] Wherso yow list, by ordal or by oth,
 [1047] By sort, or in what wise so yow leste,
 [1048] For love of God, lat preve it for the beste;
 [1049] And if that I be giltif, do me deye!
 [1050] Allas, what myght I more don or seye?"
 [1051] With that a fewe brighte teris newe
 [1052] Owt of hire eighen fille, and thus she seyde,
 [1053] "Now God, thow woost, in thought ne dede untrewe
 [1054] To Troilus was nevere yet Criseyde."
 [1055] With that here heed down in the bed she leyde,
 [1056] And with the sheete it wreigh, and sighte soore,
 [1057] And held hire pees; nought o word spak she more.
 [1058] But now help God to quenchen al this sorwe!
 [1059] So hope I that he shal, for he best may.
 [1060] For I have seyn of a ful misty morwe
 [1061] Folowen ful ofte a myrie someris day;
 [1062] And after wynter foloweth grene May;
 [1063] Men sen alday, and reden ek in stories,
 [1064] That after sharpe shoures ben victories.
 [1065] This Troilus, whan he hire wordes herde,
 [1066] Have ye no care, hym liste nought to slepe;
 [1067] For it thoughte hym no strokes of a yerde
 [1068] To heere or seen Criseyde, his lady, wepe;
 [1069] But wel he felt aboute his herte crepe,
 [1070] For everi tere which that Criseyde asterte,
 [1071] The crampe of deth to streyne hym by the herte.
 [1072] And in his mynde he gan the tyme acorse
 [1073] That he com there, and that, that he was born;
 [1074] For now is wikke torned into worse,
 [1075] And al that labour he hath don byforn,
 [1076] He wende it lost; he thoughte he nas but lorn.
 [1077] "O Pandarus," thoughte he, "allas, thi wile
 [1078] Serveth of nought, so weylaway the while!"
 [1079] And therwithal he heng adown the heed,
 [1080] And fil on knees, and sorwfully he sighte.
 [1081] What myghte he seyn? He felte he nas but deed,
 [1082] For wroth was she that sholde his sorwes lighte.
 [1083] But natheles, whan that he speken myghte,
 [1084] Than seyde he thus, "God woot that of this game,
 [1085] Whan al is wist, than am I nought to blame."
 [1086] Therwith the sorwe so his herte shette
 [1087] That from his eyen fil there nought a tere,
 [1088] And every spirit his vigour in knette,
 [1089] So they astoned or oppressed were.
 [1090] The felyng of his sorwe, or of his fere,
 [1091] Or of aught elles, fled was out of towne;
 [1092] And down he fel al sodeynly a-swowne.
 [1093] This was no litel sorwe for to se;
 [1094] But al was hust, and Pandare up as faste;
 [1095] "O nece, pes, or we be lost!" quod he,
 [1096] "Beth naught agast!" But certeyn, at the laste,
 [1097] For this or that, he into bed hym caste,
 [1098] And seyde, "O thef, is this a mannes herte?"
 [1099] And of he rente al to his bare sherte,
 [1100] And seyde, "Nece, but ye helpe us now,
 [1101] Allas, youre owen Troilus is lorn!"
 [1102] "Iwis, so wolde I, and I wiste how,
 [1103] Ful fayn," quod she. "Allas, that I was born"!
 [1104] "Yee, nece, wol ye pullen out the thorn
 [1105] That stiketh in his herte?" quod Pandare.
 [1106] "Sey `Al foryeve,' and stynt is al this fare!"
 [1107] "Ye, that to me," quod she, "ful levere were
 [1108] Than al the good the sonne aboute gooth."
 [1109] And therwithal she swor hym in his ere,
 [1110] "Iwys, my deere herte, I am nought wroth,
 [1111] Have here my trouthe!" -- and many an other oth.
 [1112] "Now speke to me, for it am I, Criseyde!"
 [1113] But al for nought; yit myght he nought abreyde.
 [1114] Therwith his pous and paumes of his hondes
 [1115] They gan to frote, and wete his temples tweyne;
 [1116] And to deliveren hym fro bittre bondes
 [1117] She ofte hym kiste; and shortly for to seyne,
 [1118] Hym to revoken she did al hire peyne;
 [1119] And at the laste, he gan his breth to drawe,
 [1120] And of his swough sone after that adawe,
 [1121] And gan bet mynde and reson to hym take,
 [1122] But wonder soore he was abayst, iwis;
 [1123] And with a sik, whan he gan bet awake,
 [1124] He seyde, "O mercy, God, what thyng is this?"
 [1125] "Why do ye with youreselven thus amys?"
 [1126] Quod tho Criseyde, "Is this a mannes game?
 [1127] What, Troilus, wol ye do thus for shame?"
 [1128] And therwithal hire arm over hym she leyde,
 [1129] And al foryaf, and ofte tyme hym keste.
 [1130] He thonked hire, and to hire spak, and seyde
 [1131] As fil to purpos for his herte reste;
 [1132] And she to that answerde hym as hire leste,
 [1133] And with hire goodly wordes hym disporte
 [1134] She gan, and ofte his sorwes to comforte.
 [1135] Quod Pandarus, "For aught I kan aspien,
 [1136] This light, nor I, ne serven here of nought.
 [1137] Light is nought good for sike folkes yen!
 [1138] But, for the love of God, syn ye ben brought
 [1139] In thus good plit, lat now no hevy thought
 [1140] Ben hangyng in the hertes of yow tweye" --
 [1141] And bar the candel to the chymeneye.
 [1142] Soone after this, though it no nede were,
 [1143] Whan she swiche othes as hire leste devyse
 [1144] Hadde of hym take, hire thoughte tho no fere,
 [1145] Ne cause ek non to bidde hym thennes rise.
 [1146] Yet lasse thyng than othes may suffise
 [1147] In many a cas, for every wyght, I gesse,
 [1148] That loveth wel, meneth but gentilesse.
 [1149] But in effect she wolde wite anon
 [1150] Of what man, and ek wheer, and also why
 [1151] He jalous was, syn ther was cause non;
 [1152] And ek the sygne that he took it by,
 [1153] She badde hym that to telle hire bisily,
 [1154] Or elles, certeyn, she bar hym on honde
 [1155] That this was don of malice, hire to fonde.
 [1156] Withouten more, shortly for to seyne,
 [1157] He most obeye unto his lady heste;
 [1158] And for the lasse harm, he moste feyne.
 [1159] He seyde hire, whan she was at swich a feste,
 [1160] She myght on hym han loked at the leste --
 [1161] Noot I nought what, al deere ynough a rysshe,
 [1162] As he that nedes most a cause fisshe.
 [1163] And she answerde, "Swete, al were it so,
 [1164] What harm was that, syn I non yvel mene?
 [1165] For, by that God that bought us bothe two,
 [1166] In alle thyng is myn entente cleene.
 [1167] Swiche argumentes ne ben naught worth a beene.
 [1168] Wol ye the childissh jalous contrefete?
 [1169] Now were it worthi that ye were ybete."
 [1170] Tho Troilus gan sorwfully to sike --
 [1171] Lest she be wroth, hym thoughte his herte deyde --
 [1172] And seyde, "Allas, upon my sorwes sike
 [1173] Have mercy, swete herte myn, Criseyde!
 [1174] And if that in tho wordes that I seyde
 [1175] Be any wrong, I wol no more trespace.
 [1176] Doth what yow list; I am al in youre grace."
 [1177] And she answerde, "Of gilt misericorde!
 [1178] That is to seyn, that I foryeve al this;
 [1179] And evere more on this nyght yow recorde,
 [1180] And beth wel war ye do namore amys."
 [1181] "Nay, dere herte myn," quod he, "iwys!"
 [1182] "And now," quod she, "that I have don yow smerte,
 [1183] Foryeve it me, myn owene swete herte."
 [1184] This Troilus, with blisse of that supprised,
 [1185] Putte al in Goddes hand, as he that mente
 [1186] Nothing but wel; and sodeynly avysed,
 [1187] He hire in armes faste to hym hente.
 [1188] And Pandarus with a ful good entente
 [1189] Leyde hym to slepe, and seyde, "If ye be wise,
 [1190] Swouneth nought now, lest more folk arise!"
 [1191] What myghte or may the sely larke seye,
 [1192] Whan that the sperhauk hath it in his foot?
 [1193] I kan namore; but of thise ilke tweye --
 [1194] To whom this tale sucre be or soot --
 [1195] Though that I tarie a yer, somtyme I moot,
 [1196] After myn auctour, tellen hire gladnesse,
 [1197] As wel as I have told hire hevynesse.
 [1198] Criseyde, which that felte hire thus itake,
 [1199] As writen clerkes in hire bokes olde,
 [1200] Right as an aspes leef she gan to quake,
 [1201] Whan she hym felte hire in his armes folde.
 [1202] But Troilus, al hool of cares colde,
 [1203] Gan thanken tho the bryghte goddes sevene;
 [1204] Thus sondry peynes bryngen folk in hevene.
 [1205] This Troilus in armes gan hire streyne,
 [1206] And seyde, "O swete, as evere mot I gon,
 [1207] Now be ye kaught; now is ther but we tweyne!
 [1208] Now yeldeth yow, for other bote is non!"
 [1209] To that Criseyde answerde thus anon,
 [1210] "Ne hadde I er now, my swete herte deere,
 [1211] Ben yolde, ywis, I were now nought heere!"
 [1212] O, sooth is seyd, that heled for to be
 [1213] As of a fevre or other gret siknesse,
 [1214] Men moste drynke, as men may ofte se,
 [1215] Ful bittre drynke; and for to han gladnesse
 [1216] Men drynken ofte peyne and gret distresse --
 [1217] I mene it here, as for this aventure,
 [1218] That thorugh a peyne hath founden al his cure.
 [1219] And now swetnesse semeth more swete,
 [1220] That bitternesse assaied was byforn;
 [1221] For out of wo in blisse now they flete;
 [1222] Non swich they felten sithen they were born.
 [1223] Now is this bet than bothe two be lorn.
 [1224] For love of God, take every womman heede
 [1225] To werken thus, if it comth to the neede.
 [1226] Criseyde, al quyt from every drede and tene,
 [1227] As she that juste cause hadde hym to triste,
 [1228] Made hym swych feste it joye was to sene,
 [1229] Whan she his trouthe and clene entente wiste;
 [1230] And as aboute a tree, with many a twiste,
 [1231] Bytrent and writh the swote wodebynde,
 [1232] Gan ech of hem in armes other wynde.
 [1233] And as the newe abaysed nyghtyngale,
 [1234] That stynteth first whan she bygynneth to synge,
 [1235] Whan that she hereth any herde tale,
 [1236] Or in the hegges any wyght stirynge,
 [1237] And after siker doth hire vois out rynge,
 [1238] Right so Criseyde, whan hire drede stente,
 [1239] Opned hire herte and tolde hym hire entente.
 [1240] And right as he that seth his deth yshapen,
 [1241] And dyen mot, in ought that he may gesse,
 [1242] And sodeynly rescous doth hym escapen,
 [1243] And from his deth is brought in sykernesse,
 [1244] For al this world, in swych present gladnesse
 [1245] Was Troilus, and hath his lady swete.
 [1246] With worse hap God lat us nevere mete!
 [1247] Hire armes smale, hire streghte bak and softe,
 [1248] Hire sydes longe, flesshly, smothe, and white
 [1249] He gan to stroke, and good thrift bad ful ofte
 [1250] Hire snowissh throte, hire brestes rounde and lite.
 [1251] Thus in this hevene he gan hym to delite,
 [1252] And therwithal a thousand tyme hire kiste,
 [1253] That what to don, for joie unnethe he wiste.
 [1254] Than seyde he thus: "O Love, O Charite!
 [1255] Thi moder ek, Citheria the swete,
 [1256] After thiself next heried be she --
 [1257] Venus mene I, the wel-willy planete! --
 [1258] And next that, Imeneus, I the grete,
 [1259] For nevere man was to yow goddes holde
 [1260] As I, which ye han brought fro cares colde.
 [1261] "Benigne Love, thow holy bond of thynges,
 [1262] Whoso wol grace and list the nought honouren,
 [1263] Lo, his desir wol fle withouten wynges;
 [1264] For noldestow of bownte hem socouren
 [1265] That serven best and most alwey labouren,
 [1266] Yet were al lost, that dar I wel seyn, certes,
 [1267] But if thi grace passed oure desertes.
 [1268] "And for thow me, that koude leest disserve
 [1269] Of hem that noumbred ben unto thi grace,
 [1270] Hast holpen, ther I likly was to sterve,
 [1271] And me bistowed in so heigh a place
 [1272] That thilke boundes may no blisse pace,
 [1273] I kan namore; but laude and reverence
 [1274] Be to thy bounte and thyn excellence!"
 [1275] And therwithal Criseyde anon he kiste,
 [1276] Of which certein she felte no disese,
 [1277] And thus seyde he: "Now wolde God I wiste,
 [1278] Myn herte swete, how I yow myght plese!
 [1279] What man," quod he, "was evere thus at ese
 [1280] As I, on which the faireste and the beste
 [1281] That evere I say deyneth hire herte reste?
 [1282] "Here may men seen that mercy passeth right;
 [1283] Th' experience of that is felt in me,
 [1284] That am unworthi to so swete a wight.
 [1285] But herte myn, of youre benignite,
 [1286] So thynketh, though that I unworthi be,
 [1287] Yet mot I nede amenden in som wyse,
 [1288] Right thorugh the vertu of youre heigh servyse.
 [1289] "And for the love of God, my lady deere,
 [1290] Syn God hath wrought me for I shall yow serve --
 [1291] As thus I mene: he wol ye be my steere,
 [1292] To do me lyve, if that yow liste, or sterve --
 [1293] So techeth me how that I may disserve
 [1294] Youre thonk, so that I thorugh myn ignoraunce
 [1295] Ne do no thyng that yow be displesaunce.
 [1296] "For certes, fresshe wommanliche wif,
 [1297] This dar I seye, that trouth and diligence,
 [1298] That shal ye fynden in me al my lif;
 [1299] N' y wol nat, certein, breken youre defence;
 [1300] And if I do, present or in absence,
 [1301] For love of God, lat sle me with the dede,
 [1302] If that it like unto youre wommanhede."
 [1303] "Iwys," quod she, "myn owen hertes list,
 [1304] My ground of ese, and al myn herte deere,
 [1305] Gramercy, for on that is al my trist!
 [1306] But lat us falle awey fro this matere,
 [1307] For it suffiseth, this that seyd is heere,
 [1308] And at o word, withouten repentaunce,
 [1309] Welcome, my knyght, my pees, my suffisaunce!"
 [1310] Of hire delit or joies oon the leeste
 [1311] Were impossible to my wit to seye;
 [1312] But juggeth ye that han ben at the feste
 [1313] Of swich gladnesse, if that hem liste pleye!
 [1314] I kan namore, but thus thise ilke tweye
 [1315] That nyght, bitwixen drede and sikernesse,
 [1316] Felten in love the grete worthynesse.
 [1317] O blisful nyght, of hem so longe isought,
 [1318] How blithe unto hem bothe two thow weere!
 [1319] Why nad I swich oon with my soule ybought,
 [1320] Ye, or the leeste joie that was theere?
 [1321] Awey, thow foule daunger and thow feere,
 [1322] And lat hem in this hevene blisse dwelle,
 [1323] That is so heigh that al ne kan I telle!
 [1324] But sooth is, though I kan nat tellen al,
 [1325] As kan myn auctour, of his excellence,
 [1326] Yet have I seyd, and God toforn, and shal
 [1327] In every thyng, al holly his sentence;
 [1328] And if that ich, at Loves reverence,
 [1329] Have any word in eched for the beste,
 [1330] Doth therwithal right as youreselven leste.
 [1331] For myne wordes, heere and every part,
 [1332] I speke hem alle under correccioun
 [1333] Of yow that felyng han in loves art,
 [1334] And putte it al in youre discrecioun
 [1335] To encresse or maken dymynucioun
 [1336] Of my langage, and that I yow biseche.
 [1337] But now to purpos of my rather speche.
 [1338] Thise ilke two, that ben in armes laft,
 [1339] So loth to hem asonder gon it were,
 [1340] That ech from other wenden ben biraft,
 [1341] Or elles -- lo, this was hir mooste feere --
 [1342] That al this thyng but nyce dremes were;
 [1343] For which ful ofte ech of hem seyde, "O swete,
 [1344] Clippe ich yow thus, or elles I it meete?"
 [1345] And Lord! So he gan goodly on hire se
 [1346] That nevere his look ne bleynte from hire face,
 [1347] And seyde, "O deere herte, may it be
 [1348] That it be soth, that ye ben in this place?"
 [1349] "Yee, herte myn, God thank I of his grace,"
 [1350] Quod tho Criseyde, and therwithal hym kiste,
 [1351] That where his spirit was, for joie he nyste.
 [1352] This Troilus ful ofte hire eyen two
 [1353] Gan for to kisse, and seyde, "O eyen clere,
 [1354] It weren ye that wroughte me swich wo,
 [1355] Ye humble nettes of my lady deere!
 [1356] Though ther be mercy writen in youre cheere,
 [1357] God woot, the text ful hard is, soth, to fynde!
 [1358] How koude ye withouten bond me bynde?"
 [1359] Therwith he gan hire faste in armes take,
 [1360] And wel a thousand tymes gan he syke --
 [1361] Naught swiche sorwfull sikes as men make
 [1362] For wo, or elles when that folk ben sike,
 [1363] But esy sykes, swiche as ben to like,
 [1364] That shewed his affeccioun withinne;
 [1365] Of swiche sikes koude he nought bilynne.
 [1366] Soone after this they spake of sondry thynges,
 [1367] As fel to purpos of this aventure,
 [1368] And pleyinge entrechaungeden hire rynges,
 [1369] Of whiche I kan nought tellen no scripture;
 [1370] But wel I woot, a broche, gold and asure,
 [1371] In which a ruby set was lik an herte,
 [1372] Criseyde hym yaf, and stak it on his sherte.
 [1373] Lord, trowe ye a coveytous or a wrecche,
 [1374] That blameth love and halt of it despit,
 [1375] That of tho pens that he kan mokre and kecche
 [1376] Was evere yit yyeven hym swich delit
 [1377] As is in love, in o poynt, in som plit?
 [1378] Nay, douteles, for also God me save,
 [1379] So perfit joie may no nygard have.
 [1380] They wol seyn "Yis," but Lord, so they lye,
 [1381] Tho besy wrecches, ful of wo and drede!
 [1382] Thei callen love a woodnesse or folie,
 [1383] But it shall falle hem as I shal yow rede:
 [1384] They shal forgon the white and ek the rede,
 [1385] And lyve in wo, ther God yeve hem meschaunce,
 [1386] And every lovere in his trouthe avaunce!
 [1387] As wolde God tho wrecches that dispise
 [1388] Servise of love hadde erys also longe
 [1389] As hadde Mida, ful of coveytise,
 [1390] And therto dronken hadde as hoot and stronge
 [1391] As Crassus did for his affectis wronge,
 [1392] To techen hem that they ben in the vice,
 [1393] And loveres nought, although they holde hem nyce.
 [1394] Thise ilke two of whom that I yow seye,
 [1395] Whan that hire hertes wel assured were,
 [1396] Tho gonne they to speken and to pleye,
 [1397] And ek rehercen how, and whan, and where
 [1398] Thei knewe hem first, and every wo and feere
 [1399] That passed was; but al swich hevynesse --
 [1400] I thank it God -- was torned to gladnesse.
 [1401] And evere mo, when that hem fel to speke
 [1402] Of any wo of swich a tyme agoon,
 [1403] With kissyng al that tale sholde breke
 [1404] And fallen in a newe joye anoon;
 [1405] And diden al hire myght, syn they were oon,
 [1406] For to recoveren blisse and ben at eise,
 [1407] And passed wo with joie contrepeise.
 [1408] Resoun wol nought that I speke of slep,
 [1409] For it acordeth nought to my matere.
 [1410] God woot, they took of that ful litel kep!
 [1411] But lest this nyght, that was to hem so deere,
 [1412] Ne sholde in veyn escape in no manere,
 [1413] It was byset in joie and bisynesse
 [1414] Of al that souneth into gentilesse.
 [1415] But whan the cok, comune astrologer,
 [1416] Gan on his brest to bete and after crowe,
 [1417] And Lucyfer, the dayes messager,
 [1418] Gan for to rise and out hire bemes throwe,
 [1419] And estward roos -- to hym that koude it knowe --
 [1420] Fortuna Major, that anoon Criseyde,
 [1421] With herte soor, to Troilus thus seyde:
 [1422] "Myn hertes lif, my trist, al my plesaunce,
 [1423] That I was born, allas, what me is wo,
 [1424] That day of us moot make disseveraunce!
 [1425] For tyme it is to ryse and hennes go,
 [1426] Or ellis I am lost for evere mo!
 [1427] O nyght, allas, why nyltow over us hove
 [1428] As longe as whan Almena lay by Jove?
 [1429] "O blake nyght, as folk in bokes rede,
 [1430] That shapen art by God this world to hide
 [1431] At certeyn tymes wyth thi derke wede,
 [1432] That under that men myghte in reste abide,
 [1433] Wel oughten bestes pleyne and folk the chide,
 [1434] That there as day wyth labour wolde us breste,
 [1435] That thow thus fleest, and deynest us nought reste.
 [1436] "Thow doost, allas, to shortly thyn office,
 [1437] Thow rakle nyght! Ther God, maker of kynde,
 [1438] The, for thyn haste and thyn unkynde vice,
 [1439] So faste ay to oure hemysperie bynde
 [1440] That nevere more under the ground thow wynde!
 [1441] For now, for thow so hiest out of Troie,
 [1442] Have I forgon thus hastili my joie!"
 [1443] This Troilus, that with tho wordes felte,
 [1444] As thoughte hym tho, for pietous distresse
 [1445] The blody teris from his herte melte,
 [1446] As he that nevere yet swich hevynesse
 [1447] Assayed hadde, out of so gret gladnesse,
 [1448] Gan therwithal Criseyde, his lady deere,
 [1449] In armes streyne, and seyde in this manere:
 [1450] "O cruel day, accusour of the joie
 [1451] That nyght and love han stole and faste iwryen,
 [1452] Acorsed be thi comyng into Troye,
 [1453] For every bore hath oon of thi bryghte yen!
 [1454] Envyous day, what list the so to spien?
 [1455] What hastow lost? Why sekestow this place?
 [1456] Ther God thi light so quenche, for his grace!
 [1457] "Allas, what have thise loveris the agylt,
 [1458] Dispitous day? Thyn be the peyne of helle!
 [1459] For many a lovere hastow slayn, and wilt;
 [1460] Thy pourynge in wol nowher lat hem dwelle.
 [1461] What profrestow thi light here for to selle?
 [1462] Go selle it hem that smale selys grave;
 [1463] We wol the nought; us nedeth no day have."
 [1464] And ek the sonne, Titan, gan he chide,
 [1465] And seyde, "O fool, wel may men the dispise,
 [1466] That hast the dawyng al nyght by thi syde,
 [1467] And suffrest hire so soone up fro the rise
 [1468] For to disese loveris in this wyse.
 [1469] What, holde youre bed ther, thow, and ek thi Morwe!
 [1470] I bidde God, so yeve yow bothe sorwe!"
 [1471] Therwith ful soore he syghte, and thus he seyde:
 [1472] "My lady right, and of my wele or wo
 [1473] The welle and roote, O goodly myn Criseyde,
 [1474] And shal I rise, allas, and shal I so?
 [1475] Now fele I that myn herte moot a-two,
 [1476] For how sholde I my lif an houre save,
 [1477] Syn that with yow is al the lif ich have?
 [1478] "What shal I don? For, certes, I not how,
 [1479] Ne whan, allas, I shal the tyme see
 [1480] That in this plit I may ben eft with yow;
 [1481] And of my lif, God woot how that shal be,
 [1482] Syn that desir right now so streyneth me
 [1483] That I am ded anon, but I retourne.
 [1484] How sholde I longe, allas, fro yow sojourne?
 [1485] "But natheles, myn owen lady bright,
 [1486] Were it so that I wiste outrely
 [1487] That I, youre humble servant and youre knyght,
 [1488] Were in youre herte iset so fermely
 [1489] As ye in myn -- the which thyng, trewely,
 [1490] Me levere were than thise worldes tweyne --
 [1491] Yet sholde I bet enduren al my peyne."
 [1492] To that Criseyde answerde right anon,
 [1493] And with a sik she seyde, "O herte deere,
 [1494] The game, ywys, so ferforth now is gon
 [1495] That first shal Phebus fallen fro his speere,
 [1496] And everich egle ben the dowves feere,
 [1497] And everich roche out of his place sterte,
 [1498] Er Troilus oute of Criseydes herte.
 [1499] "Ye ben so depe in-with myn herte grave,
 [1500] That, though I wolde it torne out of my thought,
 [1501] As wisly verray God my soule save,
 [1502] To dyen in the peyne, I koude nought.
 [1503] And, for the love of God that us hath wrought,
 [1504] Lat in youre brayn non other fantasie
 [1505] So crepe that it cause me to dye!
 [1506] "And that ye me wolde han as faste in mynde
 [1507] As I have yow, that wolde I yow biseche;
 [1508] And if I wiste sothly that to fynde,
 [1509] God myghte nought a poynt my joies eche.
 [1510] But herte myn, withouten more speche,
 [1511] Beth to me trewe, or ellis were it routhe,
 [1512] For I am thyn, by God and by my trouthe!
 [1513] "Beth glad, forthy, and lyve in sikernesse!
 [1514] Thus seyde I nevere er this, ne shal to mo;
 [1515] And if to yow it were a gret gladnesse
 [1516] To torne ayeyn soone after that ye go,
 [1517] As fayn wolde I as ye that it were so,
 [1518] As wisly God myn herte brynge at reste!"
 [1519] And hym in armes tok, and ofte keste.
 [1520] Agayns his wil, sith it mot nedes be,
 [1521] This Troilus up ros, and faste hym cledde,
 [1522] And in his armes took his lady free
 [1523] An hondred tyme, and on his wey hym spedde;
 [1524] And with swich voys as though his herte bledde,
 [1525] He seyde, "Farwel, dere herte swete;
 [1526] Ther God us graunte sownde and soone to mete!"
 [1527] To which no word for sorwe she answerde,
 [1528] So soore gan his partyng hire distreyne;
 [1529] And Troilus unto his paleys ferde,
 [1530] As wo-bygon as she was, soth to seyne.
 [1531] So harde hym wrong of sharp desir the peyne
 [1532] For to ben eft there he was in plesaunce,
 [1533] That it may nevere out of his remembraunce.
 [1534] Retorned to his real paleys soone,
 [1535] He softe into his bed gan for to slynke,
 [1536] To slepe longe, as he was wont to doone.
 [1537] But al for nought; he may wel ligge and wynke,
 [1538] But slep ne may ther in his herte synke,
 [1539] Thynkyng how she for whom desir hym brende
 [1540] A thousand fold was worth more than he wende.
 [1541] And in his thought gan up and down to wynde
 [1542] Hire wordes alle, and every countenaunce,
 [1543] And fermely impressen in his mynde
 [1544] The leeste point that to him was plesaunce;
 [1545] And verraylich of thilke remembraunce
 [1546] Desir al newe hym brende, and lust to brede
 [1547] Gan more than erst, and yet took he non hede.
 [1548] Criseyde also, right in the same wyse,
 [1549] Of Troilus gan in hire herte shette
 [1550] His worthynesse, his lust, his dedes wise,
 [1551] His gentilesse, and how she with hym mette,
 [1552] Thonkyng Love he so wel hire bisette,
 [1553] Desiryng eft to han hire herte deere
 [1554] In swich a plit, she dorste make hym cheere.
 [1555] Pandare, o-morwe, which that comen was
 [1556] Unto his nece and gan hire faire grete,
 [1557] Seyde, "Al this nyght so reyned it, allas,
 [1558] That al my drede is that ye, nece swete,
 [1559] Han litel laiser had to slepe and mete.
 [1560] Al nyght," quod he, "hath reyn so do me wake,
 [1561] That som of us, I trowe, hire hedes ake."
 [1562] And ner he com, and seyde, "How stant it now
 [1563] This mury morwe? Nece, how kan ye fare?"
 [1564] Criseyde answerde, "Nevere the bet for yow,
 [1565] Fox that ye ben! God yeve youre herte kare!
 [1566] God help me so, ye caused al this fare,
 [1567] Trowe I," quod she, "for al youre wordes white.
 [1568] O, whoso seeth yow knoweth yow ful lite."
 [1569] With that she gan hire face for to wrye
 [1570] With the shete, and wax for shame al reed;
 [1571] And Pandarus gan under for to prie,
 [1572] And seyde, "Nece, if that I shal be ded,
 [1573] Have here a swerd and smyteth of myn hed!"
 [1574] With that his arm al sodeynly he thriste
 [1575] Under hire nekke, and at the laste hire kyste.
 [1576] I passe al that which chargeth nought to seye.
 [1577] What! God foryaf his deth, and she al so
 [1578] Foryaf, and with here uncle gan to pleye,
 [1579] For other cause was ther noon than so.
 [1580] But of this thing right to the effect to go:
 [1581] Whan tyme was, hom til here hous she wente,
 [1582] And Pandarus hath fully his entente.
 [1583] Now torne we ayeyn to Troilus,
 [1584] That resteles ful longe abedde lay,
 [1585] And pryvely sente after Pandarus,
 [1586] To hym to com in al the haste he may.
 [1587] He com anon -- nought ones seyde he nay --
 [1588] And Troilus ful sobrely he grette,
 [1589] And down upon his beddes syde hym sette.
 [1590] This Troilus, with al th' affeccioun
 [1591] Of frendes love that herte may devyse,
 [1592] To Pandarus on knowes fil adown,
 [1593] And er that he wolde of the place arise
 [1594] He gan hym thonken in his beste wise
 [1595] An hondred sythe, and gan the tyme blesse
 [1596] That he was born, to brynge hym fro destresse.
 [1597] He seyde, "O frend of frendes the alderbeste
 [1598] That evere was, the sothe for to telle,
 [1599] Thow hast in hevene ybrought my soule at reste
 [1600] Fro Flegitoun, the fery flood of helle,
 [1601] That, though I myght a thousand tymes selle
 [1602] Upon a day my lif in thi servise,
 [1603] It myghte naught a moote in that suffise.
 [1604] "The sonne, which that al the world may se,
 [1605] Saugh nevere yet my lif, that dar I leye,
 [1606] So inly fair and goodly as is she
 [1607] Whos I am al, and shal, tyl that I deye.
 [1608] And that I thus am hires, dar I seye,
 [1609] That thanked be the heighe worthynesse
 [1610] Of Love, and ek thi kynde bysynesse.
 [1611] "Thus hastow me no litel thing yyive,
 [1612] For which to the obliged be for ay
 [1613] My lif. And whi? For thorugh thyn help I lyve,
 [1614] Or elles ded hadde I ben many a day."
 [1615] And with that word down in his bed he lay,
 [1616] And Pandarus ful sobrely hym herde
 [1617] Tyl al was seyd, and than he thus answerde:
 [1618] "My deere frend, if I have don for the
 [1619] In any cas, God wot, it is me lief,
 [1620] And am as glad as man may of it be,
 [1621] God help me so; but tak now nat a-grief
 [1622] That I shal seyn: be war of this meschief,
 [1623] That, there as thow now brought art in thy blisse,
 [1624] That thow thiself ne cause it nat to misse.
 [1625] "For of fortunes sharpe adversitee
 [1626] The worste kynde of infortune is this,
 [1627] A man to han ben in prosperitee,
 [1628] And it remembren whan it passed is.
 [1629] Th' art wis ynough; forthi do nat amys:
 [1630] Be naught to rakel, theigh thow sitte warme,
 [1631] For if thow be, certeyn it wol the harme.
 [1632] "Thow art at ese, and hold the wel therinne;
 [1633] For also seur as reed is every fir,
 [1634] As gret a craft is kepe wel as wynne.
 [1635] Bridle alwey wel thi speche and thi desir,
 [1636] For worldly joie halt nought but by a wir.
 [1637] That preveth wel, it brest al day so ofte;
 [1638] Forthi nede is to werken with it softe."
 [1639] Quod Troilus, "I hope, and God toforn,
 [1640] My deere frend, that I shal so me beere
 [1641] That in my gylt ther shal nothyng be lorn,
 [1642] N' y nyl nought rakle as for to greven heere.
 [1643] It nedeth naught this matere ofte stere;
 [1644] For wystestow myn herte wel, Pandare,
 [1645] God woot, of this thow woldest litel care."
 [1646] Tho gan he telle hym of his glade nyght,
 [1647] And wherof first his herte dred, and how,
 [1648] And seyde, "Frend, as I am trewe knyght,
 [1649] And by that feyth I shal to God and yow,
 [1650] I hadde it nevere half so hote as now;
 [1651] And ay the more that desir me biteth
 [1652] To love hire best, the more it me deliteth.
 [1653] "I not myself naught wisly what it is,
 [1654] But now I feele a newe qualitee --
 [1655] Yee, al another than I dide er this."
 [1656] Pandare answerd, and seyde thus, that "he
 [1657] That ones may in hevene blisse be,
 [1658] He feleth other weyes, dar I leye,
 [1659] Than thilke tyme he first herde of it seye."
 [1660] This is o word for al: this Troilus
 [1661] Was nevere ful to speke of this matere,
 [1662] And for to preisen unto Pandarus
 [1663] The bounte of his righte lady deere,
 [1664] And Pandarus to thanke and maken cheere.
 [1665] This tale ay was span-newe to bygynne,
 [1666] Til that the nyght departed hem atwynne.
 [1667] Soon after this, for that Fortune it wolde,
 [1668] Icomen was the blisful tyme swete
 [1669] That Troilus was warned that he sholde,
 [1670] There he was erst, Criseyde his lady mete,
 [1671] For which he felte his herte in joie flete
 [1672] And feithfully gan alle the goddes herie.
 [1673] And lat se now if that he kan be merie!
 [1674] And holden was the forme and al the wise
 [1675] Of hire commyng, and of his also,
 [1676] As it was erst, which nedeth nought devyse.
 [1677] But pleynly to th' effect right for to go:
 [1678] In joie and suerte Pandarus hem two
 [1679] Abedde brought, whan that hem bothe leste,
 [1680] And thus they ben in quyete and in reste.
 [1681] Nought nedeth it to yow, syn they ben met,
 [1682] To axe at me if that they blithe were;
 [1683] For if it erst was wel, tho was it bet
 [1684] A thousand fold; this nedeth nought enquere.
 [1685] Ago was every sorwe and every feere;
 [1686] And bothe, ywys, they hadde, and so they wende,
 [1687] As muche joie as herte may comprende.
 [1688] This is no litel thyng of for to seye;
 [1689] This passeth every wit for to devyse;
 [1690] For ech of hem gan otheres lust obeye.
 [1691] Felicite, which that thise clerkes wise
 [1692] Comenden so, ne may nought here suffise;
 [1693] This joie may nought writen be with inke;
 [1694] This passeth al that herte may bythynke.
 [1695] But cruel day -- so wailaway the stounde! --
 [1696] Gan for t' aproche, as they by sygnes knewe,
 [1697] For which hem thoughte feelen dethis wownde.
 [1698] So wo was hem that chaungen gan hire hewe,
 [1699] And day they gonnen to despise al newe,
 [1700] Callyng it traitour, envyous, and worse,
 [1701] And bitterly the dayes light thei corse.
 [1702] Quod Troilus, "Allas, now am I war
 [1703] That Piros and tho swifte steedes thre,
 [1704] Which that drawen forth the sonnes char,
 [1705] Han gon som bi-path in dispit of me;
 [1706] That maketh it so soone day to be;
 [1707] And for the sonne hym hasteth thus to rise,
 [1708] Ne shal I nevere don hire sacrifise."
 [1709] But nedes day departe hem moste soone,
 [1710] And whan hire speche don was and hire cheere,
 [1711] They twynne anon, as they were wont to doone,
 [1712] And setten tyme of metyng eft yfeere;
 [1713] And many a nyght they wroughte in this manere,
 [1714] And thus Fortune a tyme ledde in joie
 [1715] Criseyde and ek this kynges sone of Troie.
 [1716] In suffisaunce, in blisse, and in singynges,
 [1717] This Troilus gan al his lif to lede.
 [1718] He spendeth, jousteth, maketh festeynges;
 [1719] He yeveth frely ofte, and chaungeth wede,
 [1720] And held aboute hym alwey, out of drede,
 [1721] A world of folk, as com hym wel of kynde,
 [1722] The fresshest and the beste he koude fynde;
 [1723] That swich a vois was of hym and a stevene,
 [1724] Thorughout the world, of honour and largesse,
 [1725] That it up rong unto the yate of hevene;
 [1726] And, as in love, he was in swich gladnesse
 [1727] That in his herte he demed, as I gesse,
 [1728] That ther nys lovere in this world at ese
 [1729] So wel as he; and thus gan love hym plese.
 [1730] The goodlihede or beaute which that kynde
 [1731] In any other lady hadde yset
 [1732] Kan nought the montance of a knotte unbynde
 [1733] Aboute his herte of al Criseydes net.
 [1734] He was so narwe ymasked and yknet,
 [1735] That it undon on any manere syde,
 [1736] That nyl naught ben, for aught that may bitide.
 [1737] And by the hond ful ofte he wolde take
 [1738] This Pandarus, and into gardyn lede,
 [1739] And swich a feste and swich a proces make
 [1740] Hym of Criseyde, and of hire wommanhede,
 [1741] And of hire beaute, that withouten drede
 [1742] It was an hevene his wordes for to here;
 [1743] And thanne he wolde synge in this manere:
 [1744] "Love, that of erthe and se hath governaunce,
 [1745] Love, that his hestes hath in hevene hye,
 [1746] Love, that with an holsom alliaunce
 [1747] Halt peples joyned, as hym lest hem gye,
 [1748] Love, that knetteth lawe of compaignie,
 [1749] And couples doth in vertu for to dwelle,
 [1750] Bynd this acord, that I have told and telle.
 [1751] "That, that the world with feith which that is stable
 [1752] Diverseth so his stowndes concordynge,
 [1753] That elementz that ben so discordable
 [1754] Holden a bond perpetuely durynge,
 [1755] That Phebus mote his rosy day forth brynge,
 [1756] And that the mone hath lordshipe over the nyghtes:
 [1757] Al this doth Love, ay heried be his myghtes! --
 [1758] "That, that the se, that gredy is to flowen,
 [1759] Constreyneth to a certeyn ende so
 [1760] His flodes that so fiersly they ne growen
 [1761] To drenchen erthe and al for evere mo;
 [1762] And if that Love aught lete his bridel go,
 [1763] Al that now loveth asondre sholde lepe,
 [1764] And lost were al that Love halt now to-hepe.
 [1765] "So wolde God, that auctour is of kynde,
 [1766] That with his bond Love of his vertu liste
 [1767] To cerclen hertes alle and faste bynde,
 [1768] That from his bond no wight the wey out wiste;
 [1769] And hertes colde, hem wolde I that he twiste
 [1770] To make hem love, and that hem liste ay rewe
 [1771] On hertes sore, and kepe hem that ben trewe!"
 [1772] In alle nedes for the townes werre
 [1773] He was, and ay, the first in armes dyght,
 [1774] And certeynly, but if that bokes erre,
 [1775] Save Ector most ydred of any wight;
 [1776] And this encrees of hardynesse and myght
 [1777] Com hym of love, his ladies thank to wynne,
 [1778] That altered his spirit so withinne.
 [1779] In tyme of trewe, on haukyng wolde he ride,
 [1780] Or elles honte boor, beer, or lyoun;
 [1781] The smale bestes leet he gon biside.
 [1782] And whan that he com ridyng into town,
 [1783] Ful ofte his lady from hire wyndow down,
 [1784] As fressh as faukoun comen out of muwe,
 [1785] Ful redy was hym goodly to saluwe.
 [1786] And moost of love and vertu was his speche,
 [1787] And in despit hadde alle wrecchednesse;
 [1788] And douteles, no nede was hym biseche
 [1789] To honouren hem that hadde worthynesse,
 [1790] And esen hem that weren in destresse;
 [1791] And glad was he if any wyght wel ferde,
 [1792] That lovere was, whan he it wiste or herde.
 [1793] For soth to seyne, he lost held every wyght,
 [1794] But if he were in Loves heigh servise --
 [1795] I mene folk that oughte it ben of right.
 [1796] And over al this, so wel koude he devyse
 [1797] Of sentement and in so unkouth wise
 [1798] Al his array, that every lovere thoughte
 [1799] That al was wel, what so he seyde or wroughte.
 [1800] And though that he be come of blood roial,
 [1801] Hym liste of pride at no wight for to chace;
 [1802] Benigne he was to ech in general,
 [1803] For which he gat hym thank in every place.
 [1804] Thus wolde Love -- yheried be his grace! --
 [1805] That Pride, Envye, Ire, and Avarice
 [1806] He gan to fle, and everich other vice.
 [1807] Thow lady bryght, the doughter to Dyone,
 [1808] Thy blynde and wynged sone ek, daun Cupide,
 [1809] Yee sustren nyne ek, that by Elicone
 [1810] In hil Pernaso listen for t' abide,
 [1811] That ye thus fer han deyned me to gyde --
 [1812] I kan namore, but syn that ye wol wende,
 [1813] Ye heried ben for ay withouten ende!
 [1814] Thorugh yow have I seyd fully in my song
 [1815] Th' effect and joie of Troilus servise,
 [1816] Al be that ther was som disese among,
 [1817] As to myn auctour listeth to devise.
 [1818] My thridde bok now ende ich in this wyse,
 [1819] And Troilus in lust and in quiete
 [1820] Is with Criseyde, his owen herte swete.

      
The Canterbury Tales and Other Works of Chaucer (Middle English), by Geoffery Chaucer, [14th cent.], at sacred-texts.com

 

Troilus and Criseyde

 

Book 4

 [1] But al to litel, weylaway the whyle,
 [2] Lasteth swich joie, ythonked be Fortune,
 [3] That semeth trewest whan she wol bygyle
 [4] And kan to fooles so hire song entune
 [5] That she hem hent and blent, traitour comune!
 [6] And whan a wight is from hire whiel ythrowe,
 [7] Than laugheth she, and maketh hym the mowe.
 [8] From Troilus she gan hire brighte face
 [9] Awey to writhe, and tok of hym non heede,
 [10] But caste hym clene out of his lady grace,
 [11] And on hire whiel she sette up Diomede;
 [12] For which myn herte right now gynneth blede,
 [13] And now my penne, allas, with which I write,
 [14] Quaketh for drede of that I moste endite.
 [15] For how Criseyde Troilus forsook --
 [16] Or at the leeste, how that she was unkynde --
 [17] Moot hennesforth ben matere of my book,
 [18] As writen folk thorugh which it is in mynde.
 [19] Allas, that they sholde evere cause fynde
 [20] To speke hire harm! And if they on hire lye,
 [21] Iwis, hemself sholde han the vilanye.
 [22] O ye Herynes, Nyghtes doughtren thre,
 [23] That endeles compleignen evere in pyne,
 [24] Megera, Alete, and ek Thesiphone,
 [25] Thow cruel Mars ek, fader to Quyryne,
 [26] This ilke ferthe book me helpeth fyne,
 [27] So that the losse of lyf and love yfeere
 [28] Of Troilus be fully shewed heere.
 [29] Liggyng in oost, as I have seyd er this,
 [30] The Grekys stronge aboute Troie town,
 [31] Byfel that, whan that Phebus shynyng is
 [32] Upon the brest of Hercules lyoun,
 [33] That Ector, with ful many a bold baroun,
 [34] Caste on a day with Grekis for to fighte,
 [35] As he was wont, to greve hem what he myghte.
 [36] Not I how longe or short it was bitwene
 [37] This purpos and that day they issen mente,
 [38] But on a day, wel armed, brighte, and shene,
 [39] Ector and many a worthi wight out wente,
 [40] With spere in honde and bigge bowes bente;
 [41] And in the berd, withouten lenger lette,
 [42] Hire fomen in the feld hem faste mette.
 [43] The longe day, with speres sharpe igrounde,
 [44] With arwes, dartes, swerdes, maces felle,
 [45] They fighte and bringen hors and man to grounde,
 [46] And with hire axes out the braynes quelle.
 [47] But in the laste shour, soth for to telle,
 [48] The folk of Troie hemselven so mysledden
 [49] That with the worse at nyght homward they fledden.
 [50] At which day was taken Antenore,
 [51] Maugre Polydamas or Monesteo,
 [52] Santippe, Sarpedoun, Polynestore,
 [53] Polite, or ek the Trojan daun Rupheo,
 [54] And other lasse folk as Phebuseo;
 [55] So that, for harm, that day the folk of Troie
 [56] Dredden to lese a gret part of hire joie.
 [57] Of Priamus was yeve, at Grek requeste,
 [58] A tyme of trewe, and tho they gonnen trete
 [59] Hire prisoners to chaungen, meste and leste,
 [60] And for the surplus yeven sommes grete.
 [61] This thing anon was couth in every strete,
 [62] Bothe in th' assege, in town, and everywhere,
 [63] And with the firste it com to Calkas ere.
 [64] Whan Calkas knew this tretis sholde holde,
 [65] In consistorie among the Grekes soone
 [66] He gan in thringe forth with lordes olde,
 [67] And sette hym there as he was wont to doone;
 [68] And with a chaunged face hem bad a boone,
 [69] For love of God, to don that reverence,
 [70] To stynte noyse and yeve hym audience.
 [71] Than seyde he thus: "Lo, lordes myn, ich was
 [72] Troian, as it is knowen out of drede;
 [73] And, if that yow remembre, I am Calkas,
 [74] That alderfirst yaf comfort to youre nede,
 [75] And tolde wel how that ye shulden spede.
 [76] For dredeles, thorugh yow shal in a stownde
 [77] Ben Troie ybrend and beten down to grownde.
 [78] "And in what forme, or in what manere wise,
 [79] This town to shende, and al youre lust t' acheve,
 [80] Ye han er this wel herd me yow devyse;
 [81] This knowe ye, my lordes, as I leve.
 [82] And for the Grekis weren me so leeve,
 [83] I com myself, in my propre persone,
 [84] To teche in this how yow was best to doone.
 [85] "Havyng unto my tresor ne my rente
 [86] Right no resport, to respect of youre ese,
 [87] Thus al my good I lefte and to yow wente,
 [88] Wenyng in this yow lordes for to plese.
 [89] But al that los ne doth me no disese.
 [90] I vouchesauf, as wisly have I joie,
 [91] For yow to lese al that I have in Troie,
 [92] "Save of a doughter that I lefte, allas,
 [93] Slepyng at hom, whanne out of Troie I sterte.
 [94] O sterne, O cruel fader that I was!
 [95] How myghte I have in that so hard an herte?
 [96] Allas, I ne hadde ibrought hire in hire sherte!
 [97] For sorwe of which I wol nought lyve to-morwe,
 [98] But if ye lordes rewe upon my sorwe.
 [99] "For by that cause I say no tyme er now
 [100] Hire to delivere, ich holden have my pees;
 [101] But now or nevere, if that it like yow,
 [102] I may hire have right soone, douteles.
 [103] O help and grace amonges al this prees!
 [104] Rewe on this olde caytyf in destresse,
 [105] Syn I thorugh yow have al this hevynesse.
 [106] "Ye have now kaught and fetered in prisoun
 [107] Troians ynowe, and if youre willes be,
 [108] My child with oon may han redempcioun;
 [109] Now for the love of God and of bounte,
 [110] Oon of so fele, allas, so yive hym me!
 [111] What nede were it this preiere for to werne,
 [112] Syn ye shul bothe han folk and town as yerne?
 [113] "On peril of my lif, I shal nat lye;
 [114] Appollo hath me told it feithfully;
 [115] I have ek founde it be astronomye,
 [116] By sort, and by augurye ek, trewely,
 [117] And dar wel say, the tyme is faste by
 [118] That fire and flaumbe on al the town shal sprede,
 [119] And thus shal Troie torne to asshen dede.
 [120] "For certein, Phebus and Neptunus bothe,
 [121] That makeden the walles of the town,
 [122] Ben with the folk of Troie alwey so wrothe
 [123] That they wol brynge it to confusioun,
 [124] Right in despit of kyng Lameadoun;
 [125] Bycause he nolde payen hem here hire,
 [126] The town of Troie shal ben set on-fire."
 [127] Tellyng his tale alwey, this olde greye,
 [128] Humble in his speche and in his lokyng eke,
 [129] The salte teris from his eyen tweye
 [130] Ful faste ronnen down by either cheke.
 [131] So longe he gan of socour hem biseke
 [132] That, for to hele hym of his sorwes soore,
 [133] They yave hym Antenor, withouten moore.
 [134] But who was glad ynough but Calkas tho?
 [135] And of this thyng ful soone his nedes leyde
 [136] On hem that sholden for the tretis go,
 [137] And hem for Antenor ful ofte preyde
 [138] To bryngen hom kyng Toas and Criseyde.
 [139] And whan Priam his save-garde sente,
 [140] Th' embassadours to Troie streight they wente.
 [141] The cause itold of hire comyng, the olde
 [142] Priam, the kyng, ful soone in general
 [143] Let her-upon his parlement to holde,
 [144] Of which th' effect rehercen yow I shal.
 [145] Th' embassadours ben answerd for fynal;
 [146] Th' eschaunge of prisoners and al this nede
 [147] Hem liketh wel, and forth in they procede.
 [148] This Troilus was present in the place
 [149] Whan axed was for Antenor Criseyde,
 [150] For which ful soone chaungen gan his face,
 [151] As he that with tho wordes wel neigh deyde.
 [152] But natheles he no word to it seyde,
 [153] Lest men sholde his affeccioun espye;
 [154] With mannes herte he gan his sorwes drye,
 [155] And ful of angwissh and of grisly drede
 [156] Abod what lordes wolde unto it seye;
 [157] And if they wolde graunte -- as God forbede --
 [158] Th' eschaunge of hire, than thoughte he thynges tweye:
 [159] First, how to save hire honour, and what weye
 [160] He myghte best th' eschaunge of hire withstonde.
 [161] Ful faste he caste how al this myghte stonde.
 [162] Love hym made al prest to don hire byde,
 [163] And rather dyen than she sholde go;
 [164] But Resoun seyde hym, on that other syde,
 [165] "Withouten assent of hire ne do nat so,
 [166] Lest for thi werk she wolde be thy fo,
 [167] And seyn that thorugh thy medlynge is iblowe
 [168] Youre bother love, ther it was erst unknowe."
 [169] For which he gan deliberen, for the beste,
 [170] That though the lordes wolde that she wente,
 [171] He wolde lat hem graunte what hem leste,
 [172] And telle his lady first what that they mente;
 [173] And whan that she hadde seyd hym hire entente,
 [174] Therafter wolde he werken also blyve,
 [175] Theigh al the world ayeyn it wolde stryve.
 [176] Ector, which that wel the Grekis herde,
 [177] For Antenor how they wolde han Criseyde,
 [178] Gan it withstonde, and sobrely answerde:
 [179] "Syres, she nys no prisonere," he seyde;
 [180] "I not on yow who that this charge leyde,
 [181] But, on my part, ye may eftsone hem telle,
 [182] We usen here no wommen for to selle."
 [183] The noyse of peple up stirte thanne at ones,
 [184] As breme as blase of straw iset on-fire;
 [185] For infortune it wolde, for the nones,
 [186] They sholden hire confusioun desire.
 [187] "Ector," quod they, "what goost may yow enspyre
 [188] This womman thus to shilde and don us leese
 [189] Daun Antenor -- a wrong wey now ye chese --
 [190] "That is so wys and ek so bold baroun?
 [191] And we han nede to folk, as men may se.
 [192] He is ek oon the grettest of this town.
 [193] O Ector, lat tho fantasies be!
 [194] O kyng Priam," quod they, "thus sygge we,
 [195] That al oure vois is to forgon Criseyde."
 [196] And to deliveren Antenor they preyde.
 [197] O Juvenal, lord, trewe is thy sentence,
 [198] That litel wyten folk what is to yerne,
 [199] That they ne fynde in hire desir offence;
 [200] For cloude of errour let hem to discerne
 [201] What best is. And lo, here ensample as yerne:
 [202] This folk desiren now deliveraunce
 [203] Of Antenor, that brought hem to meschaunce,
 [204] For he was after traitour to the town
 [205] Of Troye. Allas, they quytte hym out to rathe!
 [206] O nyce world, lo, thy discrecioun!
 [207] Criseyde, which that nevere dide hem scathe,
 [208] Shal now no lenger in hire blisse bathe;
 [209] But Antenor, he shal com hom to towne,
 [210] And she shal out; thus seyden here and howne.
 [211] For which delibered was by parlement
 [212] For Antenor to yelden out Criseyde,
 [213] And it pronounced by the president,
 [214] Altheigh that Ector "nay" ful ofte preyde.
 [215] And fynaly, what wight that it withseyde,
 [216] It was for nought; it moste ben and sholde,
 [217] For substaunce of the parlement it wolde.
 [218] Departed out of parlement echone,
 [219] This Troilus, withouten wordes mo,
 [220] Unto his chambre spedde hym faste allone,
 [221] But if it were a man of his or two
 [222] The which he bad out faste for to go
 [223] Bycause he wolde slepen, as he seyde,
 [224] And hastily upon his bed hym leyde.
 [225] And as in wynter leves ben biraft,
 [226] Ech after other, til the tree be bare,
 [227] So that ther nys but bark and braunche ilaft,
 [228] Lith Troilus, byraft of ech welfare,
 [229] Ibounden in the blake bark of care,
 [230] Disposed wood out of his wit to breyde,
 [231] So sore hym sat the chaungynge of Criseyde.
 [232] He rist hym up, and every dore he shette,
 [233] And wyndow ek, and tho this sorwful man
 [234] Upon his beddes syde adown hym sette,
 [235] Ful lik a ded ymage, pale and wan;
 [236] And in his brest the heped wo bygan
 [237] Out breste, and he to werken in this wise
 [238] In his woodnesse, as I shal yow devyse.
 [239] Right as the wylde bole bygynneth sprynge,
 [240] Now her, now ther, idarted to the herte,
 [241] And of his deth roreth in compleynynge,
 [242] Right so gan he aboute the chaumbre sterte,
 [243] Smytyng his brest ay with his fistes smerte;
 [244] His hed to the wal, his body to the grounde
 [245] Ful ofte he swapte, hymselven to confounde.
 [246] His eyen two, for piete of herte,
 [247] Out stremeden as swifte welles tweye;
 [248] The heighe sobbes of his sorwes smerte
 [249] His speche hym refte; unnethes myghte he seye,
 [250] "O deth, allas, why nyltow do me deye?
 [251] Acorsed be that day which that Nature
 [252] Shop me to ben a lyves creature!"
 [253] But after, whan the furie and al the rage,
 [254] Which that his herte twiste and faste threste,
 [255] By lengthe of tyme somwhat gan aswage,
 [256] Upon his bed he leyde hym down to reste.
 [257] But tho bygonne his teeris more out breste,
 [258] That wonder is the body may suffise
 [259] To half this wo which that I yow devyse.
 [260] Than seyde he thus: "Fortune, allas the while!
 [261] What have I don? What have I thus agylt?
 [262] How myghtestow for rowthe me bygile?
 [263] Is ther no grace, and shal I thus be spilt?
 [264] Shal thus Creiseyde awey, for that thow wilt?
 [265] Allas, how maistow in thyn herte fynde
 [266] To ben to me thus cruwel and unkynde?
 [267] "Have I the nought honoured al my lyve,
 [268] As thow wel woost, above the goddes alle?
 [269] Whi wiltow me fro joie thus deprive?
 [270] O Troilus, what may men now the calle
 [271] But wrecche of wrecches, out of honour falle
 [272] Into miserie, in which I wol bewaille
 [273] Criseyde -- allas! -- til that the breth me faille?
 [274] "Allas, Fortune, if that my lif in joie
 [275] Displesed hadde unto thi foule envye,
 [276] Why ne haddestow my fader, kyng of Troye,
 [277] Byraft the lif, or don my bretheren dye,
 [278] Or slayn myself, that thus compleyne and crye --
 [279] I, combre-world, that may of nothyng serve,
 [280] But evere dye and nevere fulli sterve.
 [281] "If that Criseyde allone were me laft,
 [282] Nought roughte I whiderward thow woldest me steere;
 [283] And hire, allas, than hastow me biraft.
 [284] But everemore, lo, this is thi manere,
 [285] To reve a wight that most is to hym deere,
 [286] To preve in that thi gerful violence.
 [287] Thus am I lost; ther helpeth no diffence.
 [288] "O verrey lord, O Love! O god, allas!
 [289] That knowest best myn herte and al my thought,
 [290] What shal my sorwful lif don in this cas,
 [291] If I forgo that I so deere have bought?
 [292] Syn ye Criseyde and me han fully brought
 [293] Into youre grace, and bothe oure hertes seled,
 [294] How may ye suffre, allas, it be repeled?
 [295] "What shal I don? I shal, while I may dure
 [296] On lyve in torment and in cruwel peyne
 [297] This infortune or this disaventure,
 [298] Allone as I was born, iwys, compleyne;
 [299] Ne nevere wol I seen it shyne or reyne,
 [300] But ende I wol, as Edippe, in derknesse
 [301] My sorwful lif, and dyen in distresse.
 [302] "O wery goost, that errest to and fro,
 [303] Why nyltow fleen out of the wofulleste
 [304] Body that evere myghte on grounde go?
 [305] O soule, lurkynge in this wo, unneste,
 [306] Fle forth out of myn herte, and lat it breste,
 [307] And folowe alwey Criseyde, thi lady dere.
 [308] Thi righte place is now no lenger here.
 [309] "O woful eyen two, syn youre disport
 [310] Was al to sen Criseydes eyen brighte,
 [311] What shal ye don but, for my discomfort,
 [312] Stonden for naught, and wepen out youre sighte,
 [313] Syn she is queynt that wont was yow to lighte?
 [314] In vayn fro this forth have ich eyen tweye
 [315] Ifourmed, syn youre vertu is aweye.
 [316] "O my Criseyde, O lady sovereigne
 [317] Of thilke woful soule that thus crieth,
 [318] Who shal now yeven comfort to my peyne?
 [319] Allas, no wight. But whan myn herte dieth,
 [320] My spirit, which that so unto yow hieth,
 [321] Receyve in gree, for that shal ay yow serve;
 [322] Forthi no fors is, though the body sterve.
 [323] "O ye loveris, that heigh upon the whiel
 [324] Ben set of Fortune, in good aventure,
 [325] God leve that ye fynde ay love of stiel,
 [326] And longe mote youre lif in joie endure!
 [327] But whan ye comen by my sepulture,
 [328] Remembreth that youre felawe resteth there;
 [329] For I loved ek, though ich unworthi were.
 [330] "O oold, unholsom, and myslyved man --
 [331] Calkas I mene -- allas, what eiled the
 [332] To ben a Grek, syn thow art born Troian?
 [333] O Calkas, which that wolt my bane be,
 [334] In corsed tyme was thow born for me!
 [335] As wolde blisful Jove, for his joie,
 [336] That I the hadde wher I wolde, in Troie!"
 [337] A thousand sikes, hotter than the gleede,
 [338] Out of his brest ech after other wente,
 [339] Medled with pleyntes new, his wo to feede,
 [340] For which his woful teris nevere stente;
 [341] And shortly, so his peynes hym torente,
 [342] And wex so mat, that joie nor penaunce
 [343] He feleth non, but lith forth in a traunce.
 [344] Pandare, which that in the parlement
 [345] Hadde herd what every lord and burgeys seyde,
 [346] And how ful graunted was by oon assent
 [347] For Antenor to yelden so Criseyde,
 [348] Gan wel neigh wood out of his wit to breyde,
 [349] So that for wo he nyste what he mente,
 [350] But in a rees to Troilus he wente.
 [351] A certeyn knyght that for the tyme kepte
 [352] The chambre door undide it hym anon;
 [353] And Pandare, that ful tendreliche wepte,
 [354] Into the derke chambre, as stille as ston,
 [355] Toward the bed gan softely to gon,
 [356] So confus that he nyste what to seye;
 [357] For verray wo his wit was neigh aweye.
 [358] And with his chiere and lokyng al totorn
 [359] For sorwe of this, and with his armes folden,
 [360] He stood this woful Troilus byforn,
 [361] And on his pitous face he gan byholden.
 [362] But Lord, so ofte gan his herte colden,
 [363] Seyng his frend in wo, whos hevynesse
 [364] His herte slough, as thoughte hym, for destresse.
 [365] This woful wight, this Troilus, that felte
 [366] His frend Pandare ycomen hym to se,
 [367] Gan as the snow ayeyn the sonne melte;
 [368] For which this sorwful Pandare, of pitee,
 [369] Gan for to wepe as tendreliche as he;
 [370] And specheles thus ben thise ilke tweye,
 [371] That neither myghte o word for sorwe seye.
 [372] But at the laste this woful Troilus,
 [373] Neigh ded for smert, gan bresten out to rore,
 [374] And with a sorwful noise he seyde thus,
 [375] Among hise sobbes and his sikes sore:
 [376] "Lo, Pandare, I am ded, withouten more.
 [377] Hastow nat herd at parlement," he seyde,
 [378] "For Antenor how lost is my Criseyde?"
 [379] This Pandarus, ful ded and pale of hewe,
 [380] Ful pitously answerde and seyde, "Yis!
 [381] As wisly were it fals as it is trewe,
 [382] That I have herd, and woot al how it is.
 [383] O mercy, God, who wolde have trowed this?
 [384] Who wolde have wend that in so litel a throwe
 [385] Fortune oure joie wold han overthrowe?
 [386] "For in this world ther is no creature,
 [387] As to my dom, that ever saugh ruyne
 [388] Straunger than this, thorugh cas or aventure.
 [389] But who may al eschue, or al devyne?
 [390] Swich is this world! Forthi I thus diffyne:
 [391] Ne trust no wight to fynden in Fortune
 [392] Ay propretee; hire yiftes ben comune.
 [393] "But telle me this: whi thow art now so mad
 [394] To sorwen thus? Whi listow in this wise,
 [395] Syn thi desir al holly hastow had,
 [396] So that, by right, it oughte ynough suffise?
 [397] But I, that nevere felte in my servyse
 [398] A frendly cheere or lokyng of an eye,
 [399] Lat me thus wepe and wailen til I deye.
 [400] "And over al this, as thow wel woost thiselve,
 [401] This town is ful of ladys al aboute;
 [402] And, to my doom, fairer than swiche twelve
 [403] As evere she was, shal I fynde in som route --
 [404] Yee, on or two, withouten any doute.
 [405] Forthi be glad, myn owen deere brother!
 [406] If she be lost, we shal recovere an other.
 [407] "What! God forbede alwey that ech plesaunce
 [408] In o thyng were and in non other wight!
 [409] If oon kan synge, an other kan wel daunce;
 [410] If this be goodly, she is glad and light;
 [411] And this is fair, and that kan good aright.
 [412] Ech for his vertu holden is for deere,
 [413] Both heroner and faucoun for ryvere.
 [414] "And ek, as writ Zanzis, that was ful wys,
 [415] `The newe love out chaceth ofte the olde';
 [416] And upon newe cas lith newe avys.
 [417] Thenk ek, thi lif to saven artow holde.
 [418] Swich fir, by proces, shal of kynde colde,
 [419] For syn it is but casuel plesaunce,
 [420] Som cas shal putte it out of remembraunce;
 [421] "For also seur as day comth after nyght,
 [422] The newe love, labour, or oother wo,
 [423] Or elles selde seynge of a wight,
 [424] Don olde affecciouns alle over-go.
 [425] And, for thi part, thow shalt have oon of tho
 [426] T' abregge with thi bittre peynes smerte;
 [427] Absence of hire shal dryve hire out of herte."
 [428] Thise wordes seyde he for the nones alle,
 [429] To help his frend, lest he for sorwe deyde;
 [430] For douteles, to don his wo to falle,
 [431] He roughte nought what unthrift that he seyde.
 [432] But Troilus, that neigh for sorwe deyde,
 [433] Took litel heede of al that evere he mente --
 [434] Oon ere it herde, at tother out it wente --
 [435] But at the laste answerde, and seyde, "Frend,
 [436] This lechecraft, or heeled thus to be,
 [437] Were wel sittyng, if that I were a fend --
 [438] To traysen a wight that trewe is unto me!
 [439] I pray God lat this conseil nevere ythe;
 [440] But do me rather sterve anon-right here,
 [441] Er I thus do as thow me woldest leere!
 [442] "She that I serve, iwis, what so thow seye,
 [443] To whom myn herte enhabit is by right,
 [444] Shal han me holly hires til that I deye.
 [445] For Pandarus, syn I have trouthe hire hight,
 [446] I wol nat ben untrewe for no wight,
 [447] But as hire man I wol ay lyve and sterve,
 [448] And nevere other creature serve.
 [449] "And ther thow seist thow shalt as faire fynde
 [450] As she, lat be; make no comparisoun
 [451] To creature yformed here by kynde!
 [452] O leve Pandare, in conclusioun,
 [453] I wol nat ben of thyn opynyoun
 [454] Touchyng al this. For which I the biseche,
 [455] So hold thi pees; thow sleest me with thi speche!
 [456] "Thow biddest me I shulde love another
 [457] Al fresshly newe, and lat Criseyde go!
 [458] It lith nat in my power, leeve brother;
 [459] And though I myght, I wolde nat do so.
 [460] But kanstow playen raket, to and fro,
 [461] Nettle in, dok out, now this, now that, Pandare?
 [462] Now foule falle hire for thi wo that care!
 [463] "Thow farest ek by me, thow Pandarus,
 [464] As he that, whan a wight is wo bygon,
 [465] He cometh to hym a paas and seith right thus:
 [466] `Thynk nat on smert, and thow shalt fele non.'
 [467] Thow moost me first transmewen in a ston,
 [468] And reve me my passiones alle,
 [469] Er thow so lightly do my wo to falle.
 [470] "The deth may wel out of my brest departe
 [471] The lif, so longe may this sorwe myne,
 [472] But fro my soule shal Criseydes darte
 [473] Out nevere mo; but down with Proserpyne,
 [474] Whan I am ded, I wol go wone in pyne,
 [475] And ther I wol eternaly compleyne
 [476] My wo, and how that twynned be we tweyne.
 [477] "Thow hast here made an argument for fyn,
 [478] How that it sholde a lasse peyne be
 [479] Criseyde to forgon, for she was myn
 [480] And lyved in ese and in felicite.
 [481] Whi gabbestow, that seydest unto me
 [482] That `hym is wors that is fro wele ythrowe,
 [483] Than he hadde erst noon of that wele yknowe'?
 [484] "But tel me now, syn that the thynketh so light
 [485] To changen so in love ay to and fro,
 [486] Whi hastow nat don bisily thi myght
 [487] To chaungen hire that doth the al thi wo?
 [488] Why nyltow lete hire fro thyn herte go?
 [489] Whi nyltow love an other lady swete,
 [490] That may thyn herte setten in quiete?
 [491] "If thou hast had in love ay yet myschaunce
 [492] And kanst it not out of thyn herte dryve,
 [493] I, that levede yn lust and in plesaunce
 [494] With here, as muche as creature on lyve,
 [495] How sholde I that foryete, and that so blyve?
 [496] O, where hastow ben hid so longe in muwe,
 [497] That kanst so wel and formely arguwe?
 [498] "Nay, God wot, nought worth is al thi red,
 [499] For which, for what that evere may byfalle,
 [500] Withouten wordes mo, I wol be ded.
 [501] O deth, that endere art of sorwes alle,
 [502] Com now, syn I so ofte after the calle;
 [503] For sely is that deth, soth for to seyne,
 [504] That, ofte ycleped, cometh and endeth peyne.
 [505] "Wel wot I, whil my lyf was in quyete,
 [506] Er thow me slowe, I wolde have yeven hire;
 [507] But now thi comynge is to me so swete
 [508] That in this world I nothing so desire.
 [509] O deth, syn with this sorwe I am a-fyre,
 [510] Thou other do me anoon yn teris drenche,
 [511] Or with thi colde strok myn hete quenche.
 [512] "Syn that thou sleest so fele in sondry wyse
 [513] Ayens hire wil, unpreyed, day and nyght,
 [514] Do me at my requeste this service:
 [515] Delyvere now the world -- so dostow right --
 [516] Of me, that am the wofulleste wyght
 [517] That evere was; for tyme is that I sterve,
 [518] Syn in this world of right nought may I serve."
 [519] This Troylus in teris gan distille,
 [520] As licour out of a lambyc ful faste;
 [521] And Pandarus gan holde his tunge stille,
 [522] And to the ground his eyen doun he caste.
 [523] But natheles, thus thought he at the laste:
 [524] "What! Parde, rather than my felawe deye,
 [525] Yet shal I somwhat more unto hym seye."
 [526] And seyde, "Frend, syn thow hast swych distresse,
 [527] And syn the list myn argumentz to blame,
 [528] Why nylt thiselven helpen don redresse
 [529] And with thy manhod letten al this grame?
 [530] Go ravysshe here! Ne kanstow nat, for shame?
 [531] And other lat here out of towne fare,
 [532] Or hold here stille, and leve thi nyce fare.
 [533] "Artow in Troie, and hast non hardyment
 [534] To take a womman which that loveth the
 [535] And wolde hireselven ben of thyn assent?
 [536] Now is nat this a nyce vanitee?
 [537] Ris up anon, and lat this wepyng be,
 [538] And kith thow art a man; for in this houre
 [539] I wol ben ded, or she shal bleven oure."
 [540] To this answerde hym Troilus ful softe,
 [541] And seyde, "Parde, leve brother deere,
 [542] Al this have I myself yet thought ful ofte,
 [543] And more thyng than thow devysest here.
 [544] But whi this thyng is laft, thow shalt wel here;
 [545] And whan thow me hast yeve an audience,
 [546] Therafter maystow telle al thi sentence.
 [547] "First, syn thow woost this town hath al this werre
 [548] For ravysshyng of wommen so by myght,
 [549] It sholde nought be suffred me to erre,
 [550] As it stant now, ne don so gret unright.
 [551] I sholde han also blame of every wight,
 [552] My fadres graunt if that I so withstoode,
 [553] Syn she is chaunged for the townes goode.
 [554] "I have ek thought, so it were hire assent,
 [555] To axe hire at my fader, of his grace;
 [556] Than thynke I this were hire accusement,
 [557] Syn wel I woot I may hire nought purchace;
 [558] For syn my fader, in so heigh a place
 [559] As parlement hath hire eschaunge enseled,
 [560] He nyl for me his lettre be repeled.
 [561] "Yet drede I moost hire herte to perturbe
 [562] With violence, if I do swich a game;
 [563] For if I wolde it openly desturbe,
 [564] It mooste be disclaundre to hire name.
 [565] And me were levere ded than hire diffame --
 [566] As nolde God but if I sholde have
 [567] Hire honour levere than my lif to save!
 [568] "Thus am I lost, for aught that I kan see.
 [569] For certeyn is, syn that I am hire knyght,
 [570] I moste hire honour levere han than me
 [571] In every cas, as lovere ought of right.
 [572] Thus am I with desir and reson twight:
 [573] Desir for to destourben hire me redeth,
 [574] And reson nyl nat; so myn herte dredeth."
 [575] Thus wepyng that he koude nevere cesse,
 [576] He seyde, "Allas, how shal I, wrecche, fare?
 [577] For wel fele I alwey my love encresse,
 [578] And hope is lasse and lasse alway, Pandare.
 [579] Encressen ek the causes of my care.
 [580] So weilaway, whi nyl myn herte breste?
 [581] For, as in love, ther is but litel reste."
 [582] Pandare answerde, "Frend, thow maist, for me,
 [583] Don as the list; but hadde ich it so hoote,
 [584] And thyn estat, she sholde go with me,
 [585] Though al this town cride on this thyng by note.
 [586] I nolde sette at al that noys a grote!
 [587] For whan men han wel cryd, than wol they rowne;
 [588] Ek wonder last but nyne nyght nevere in towne.
 [589] "Devyne not in resoun ay so depe
 [590] Ne preciously, but help thiself anon.
 [591] Bet is that othere than thiselven wepe,
 [592] And namely, syn ye two ben al on,
 [593] Ris up, for by myn hed, she shal not goon!
 [594] And rather be in blame a lite ifounde
 [595] Than sterve here as a gnat, withouten wounde.
 [596] "It is no rape, in my dom, ne no vice,
 [597] Hire to witholden that ye love moost;
 [598] Peraunter she myghte holde the for nyce
 [599] To late hire go thus unto the Grekis oost.
 [600] Thenk ek Fortune, as wel thiselven woost,
 [601] Helpeth hardy man unto his enprise,
 [602] And weyveth wrecches for hire cowardise.
 [603] "And though thy lady wolde a lite hire greve,
 [604] Thow shalt thiself thi pees hereafter make;
 [605] But as for me, certeyn, I kan nat leve
 [606] That she wolde it as now for yvel take.
 [607] Whi sholde thanne of ferd thyn herte quake?
 [608] Thenk ek how Paris hath, that is thi brother,
 [609] A love; and whi shaltow nat have another?
 [610] "And Troilus, o thyng I dar the swere:
 [611] That if Criseyde, which that is thi lief,
 [612] Now loveth the as wel as thow dost here,
 [613] God help me so, she nyl nat take a-grief,
 [614] Theigh thow do boote anon in this meschief;
 [615] And if she wilneth fro the for to passe,
 [616] Thanne is she fals; so love hire wel the lasse.
 [617] "Forthi tak herte, and thynk right as a knyght:
 [618] Thorugh love is broken al day every lawe.
 [619] Kith now somwhat thi corage and thi myght;
 [620] Have mercy on thiself for any awe.
 [621] Lat nat this wrecched wo thyn herte gnawe,
 [622] But manly sette the world on six and sevene;
 [623] And if thow deye a martyr, go to hevene!
 [624] "I wol myself ben with the at this dede,
 [625] Theigh ich and al my kyn upon a stownde
 [626] Shulle in a strete as dogges liggen dede,
 [627] Thorugh-girt with many a wid and blody wownde;
 [628] In every cas I wol a frend be founde.
 [629] And if the list here sterven as a wrecche,
 [630] Adieu, the devel spede hym that it recche!"
 [631] This Troilus gan with tho wordes quyken,
 [632] And seyde, "Frend, graunt mercy, ich assente.
 [633] But certeynly thow maist nat so me priken,
 [634] Ne peyne non ne may me so tormente,
 [635] That, for no cas, it is nat myn entente,
 [636] At shorte wordes, though I deyen sholde,
 [637] To ravysshe hire, but if hireself it wolde."
 [638] "Whi, so mene I," quod Pandare, "al this day.
 [639] But telle me thanne, hastow hire wil assayed,
 [640] That sorwest thus?" And he answerde hym, "Nay."
 [641] "Wherof artow," quod Pandare, "thanne amayed,
 [642] That nost nat that she wol ben yvele appayed
 [643] To ravysshe hire, syn thow hast nought ben there,
 [644] But if that Jove told it in thyn ere?
 [645] "Forthi ris up, as nought ne were, anon,
 [646] And wassh thi face, and to the kyng thow wende,
 [647] Or he may wondren whider thow art goon.
 [648] Thow most with wisdom hym and othere blende,
 [649] Or, upon cas, he may after the sende
 [650] Er thow be war; and shortly, brother deere,
 [651] Be glad, and lat me werke in this matere,
 [652] "For I shal shape it so, that sikerly
 [653] Thow shalt this nyght som tyme, in som manere,
 [654] Come speken with thi lady pryvely,
 [655] And by hire wordes ek, and by hire cheere,
 [656] Thow shalt ful sone aperceyve and wel here
 [657] Al hire entente, and in this cas the beste.
 [658] And far now wel, for in this point I reste."
 [659] The swifte Fame, which that false thynges
 [660] Egal reporteth lik the thynges trewe,
 [661] Was thorughout Troie yfled with preste wynges
 [662] Fro man to man, and made this tale al newe,
 [663] How Calkas doughter, with hire brighte hewe,
 [664] At parlement, withouten wordes more,
 [665] Ygraunted was in chaunge of Antenore.
 [666] The whiche tale anon-right as Criseyde
 [667] Hadde herd, she, which that of hire fader roughte,
 [668] As in this cas, right nought, ne whan he deyde,
 [669] Ful bisily to Jupiter bisoughte
 [670] Yeve hem meschaunce that this tretis broughte;
 [671] But shortly, lest thise tales sothe were,
 [672] She dorst at no wight asken it, for fere.
 [673] As she that hadde hire herte and al hire mynde
 [674] On Troilus iset so wonder faste
 [675] That al this world ne myghte hire love unbynde,
 [676] Ne Troilus out of hire herte caste,
 [677] She wol ben his, while that hire lif may laste.
 [678] And thus she brenneth both in love and drede,
 [679] So that she nyste what was best to reede.
 [680] But as men seen in towne and al aboute
 [681] That wommen usen frendes to visite,
 [682] So to Criseyde of wommen com a route,
 [683] For pitous joie, and wenden hire delite;
 [684] And with hire tales, deere ynough a myte,
 [685] Thise wommen, which that in the cite dwelle,
 [686] They sette hem down and seyde as I shall telle.
 [687] Quod first that oon, "I am glad, trewely,
 [688] Bycause of yow, that shal youre fader see."
 [689] Another seyde, "Ywis, so nam nat I,
 [690] For al to litel hath she with us be."
 [691] Quod tho the thridde, "I hope, ywis, that she
 [692] Shal bryngen us the pees on every syde,
 [693] That, whan she goth, almyghty God hire gide!"
 [694] Tho wordes and tho wommanysshe thynges,
 [695] She herde hem right as though she thennes were;
 [696] For God it woot, hire herte on othir thyng is.
 [697] Although the body sat among hem there,
 [698] Hire advertence is alwey elleswhere,
 [699] For Troilus ful faste hire soule soughte;
 [700] Withouten word, on hym alwey she thoughte.
 [701] Thise wommen, that thus wenden hire to plese,
 [702] Aboute naught gonne alle hire tales spende.
 [703] Swich vanyte ne kan don hire non ese,
 [704] As she that al this mene while brende
 [705] Of other passioun than that they wende,
 [706] So that she felte almost hire herte dye
 [707] For wo and wery of that compaignie.
 [708] For which no lenger myghte she restreyne
 [709] Hir teeris, so they gonnen up to welle,
 [710] That yaven signes of the bittre peyne
 [711] In which hir spirit was, and moste dwelle,
 [712] Remembryng hir, fro heven into which helle
 [713] She fallen was, syn she forgoth the syghte
 [714] Of Troilus, and sorwfully she sighte.
 [715] And thilke fooles sittynge hire aboute
 [716] Wenden that she wepte and siked sore
 [717] Bycause that she sholde out of that route
 [718] Departe, and nevere pleye with hem more.
 [719] And they that hadde yknowen hire of yore
 [720] Seigh hire so wepe and thoughte it kyndenesse,
 [721] And ech of hem wepte ek for hire destresse.
 [722] And bisyly they gonnen hire comforten
 [723] Of thyng, God woot, on which she litel thoughte;
 [724] And with hire tales wenden hire disporten,
 [725] And to be glad they often hire bysoughte;
 [726] But swich an ese therwith they hire wroughte,
 [727] Right as a man is esed for to feele
 [728] For ache of hed to clawen hym on his heele!
 [729] But after al this nyce vanyte
 [730] They toke hire leve, and hom they wenten alle.
 [731] Criseyde, ful of sorwful piete,
 [732] Into hire chambre up went out of the halle,
 [733] And on hire bed she gan for ded to falle,
 [734] In purpos nevere thennes for to rise;
 [735] And thus she wroughte, as I shal yow devyse.
 [736] Hire ownded heer, that sonnyssh was of hewe,
 [737] She rente, and ek hire fyngeres longe and smale
 [738] She wrong ful ofte, and bad God on hire rewe,
 [739] And with the deth to doon boote on hire bale.
 [740] Hire hewe, whilom bright, that tho was pale,
 [741] Bar witnesse of hire wo and hire constreynte;
 [742] And thus she spak, sobbyng in hire compleynte:
 [743] "Allas," quod she, "out of this regioun
 [744] I, woful wrecche and infortuned wight,
 [745] And born in corsed constellacioun,
 [746] Moot goon and thus departen fro my knyght!
 [747] Wo worth, allas, that ilke dayes light
 [748] On which I saugh hym first with eyen tweyne,
 [749] That causeth me, and ich hym, al this peyne!"
 [750] Therwith the teris from hire eyen two
 [751] Down fille, as shour in Aperil ful swithe;
 [752] Hire white brest she bet, and for the wo
 [753] After the deth she cryed a thousand sithe,
 [754] Syn he that wont hire wo was for to lithe
 [755] She moot forgon; for which disaventure
 [756] She held hireself a forlost creature.
 [757] She seyde, "How shal he don, and ich also?
 [758] How sholde I lyve if that I from hym twynne?
 [759] O deere herte eke, that I love so,
 [760] Who shal that sorwe slen that ye ben inne?
 [761] O Calkas, fader, thyn be al this synne!
 [762] O moder myn, that cleped were Argyve,
 [763] Wo worth that day that thow me bere on lyve!
 [764] "To what fyn sholde I lyve and sorwen thus?
 [765] How sholde a fissh withouten water dure?
 [766] What is Criseyde worth, from Troilus?
 [767] How sholde a plaunte or lyves creature
 [768] Lyve withouten his kynde noriture?
 [769] For which ful ofte a by-word here I seye,
 [770] That `rooteles moot grene soone deye.'
 [771] "I shal doon thus -- syn neither swerd ne darte
 [772] Dar I noon handle, for the crueltee --
 [773] That ilke day that I from yow departe,
 [774] If sorwe of that nyl nat my bane be:
 [775] Thanne shal no mete or drynke come in me
 [776] Til I my soule out of my breste unshethe,
 [777] And thus myselven wol I don to dethe.
 [778] "And, Troilus, my clothes everychon
 [779] Shul blake ben in tokenyng, herte swete,
 [780] That I am as out of this world agon,
 [781] That wont was yow to setten in quiete;
 [782] And of myn ordre, ay til deth me mete,
 [783] The observance evere, in youre absence,
 [784] Shal sorwe ben, compleynt, and abstinence.
 [785] "Myn herte and ek the woful goost therinne
 [786] Byqueth. I with youre spirit to compleyne
 [787] Eternaly, for they shal nevere twynne;
 [788] For though in erthe ytwynned be we tweyne,
 [789] Yet in the feld of pite, out of peyne,
 [790] That highte Elisos, shal we ben yfeere,
 [791] As Orpheus and Erudice, his fere.
 [792] "Thus, herte myn, for Antenor, allas,
 [793] I soone shal be chaunged, as I wene.
 [794] But how shul ye don in this sorwful cas?
 [795] How shal youre tendre herte this sustene?
 [796] But, herte myn, foryete this sorwe and tene,
 [797] And me also; for sothly for to seye,
 [798] So ye wel fare, I recche naught to deye."
 [799] How myghte it evere yred ben or ysonge,
 [800] The pleynte that she made in hire destresse?
 [801] I not; but, as for me, my litel tonge,
 [802] If I discryven wolde hire hevynesse,
 [803] It sholde make hire sorwe seme lesse
 [804] Than that it was, and childisshly deface
 [805] Hire heigh compleynte, and therfore ich it pace.
 [806] Pandare, which that sent from Troilus
 [807] Was to Criseyde -- as ye han herd devyse
 [808] That for the beste it was acorded thus,
 [809] And he ful glad to doon hym that servyse --
 [810] Unto Criseyde, in a ful secree wise,
 [811] Ther as she lay in torment and in rage,
 [812] Com hire to telle al hoolly his message,
 [813] And fond that she hireselven gan to trete
 [814] Ful pitously, for with hire salte teris
 [815] Hire brest, hire face, ybathed was ful wete;
 [816] The myghty tresses of hire sonnysshe heeris
 [817] Unbroiden hangen al aboute hire eeris,
 [818] Which yaf hym verray signal of martire
 [819] Of deth, which that hire herte gan desire.
 [820] Whan she hym saugh, she gan for shame anon
 [821] Hire tery face atwixe hire armes hide;
 [822] For which this Pandare is so wo-bygon
 [823] That in the hous he myghte unnethe abyde,
 [824] As he that pite felt on every syde;
 [825] For if Criseyde hadde erst compleyned soore,
 [826] Tho gan she pleyne a thousand tymes more.
 [827] And in hire aspre pleynte thus she seyde:
 [828] "Pandare first of joies mo than two
 [829] Was cause causyng unto me, Criseyde,
 [830] That now transmewed ben in cruel wo.
 [831] Wher shal I seye to yow welcom or no,
 [832] That alderfirst me broughte unto servyse
 [833] Of love -- allas! -- that endeth in swich wise?
 [834] "Endeth than love in wo? Ye, or men lieth,
 [835] And alle worldly blisse, as thynketh me.
 [836] The ende of blisse ay sorwe it occupieth.
 [837] And whoso troweth nat that it so be,
 [838] Lat hym upon me, woful wrecche, ysee,
 [839] That myself hate and ay my burthe acorse,
 [840] Felyng alwey fro wikke I go to worse.
 [841] "Whoso me seeth, he seeth sorwe al atonys --
 [842] Peyne, torment, pleynte, wo, distresse!
 [843] Out of my woful body harm ther noon is,
 [844] As angwissh, langour, cruel bitternesse,
 [845] Anoy, smert, drede, fury, and ek siknesse.
 [846] I trowe, ywys, from hevene teeris reyne
 [847] For pite of myn aspre and cruel peyne."
 [848] "And thow, my suster, ful of discomfort,"
 [849] Quod Pandarus, "what thynkestow to do?
 [850] Whi ne hastow to thyselven som resport?
 [851] Whi wiltow thus thiself, allas, fordo?
 [852] Leef al this werk, and tak now heede to
 [853] That I shal seyn; and herkne of good entente
 [854] This which by me thi Troilus the sente."
 [855] Tornede hire tho Criseyde, a wo makynge
 [856] So gret that it a deth was for to see.
 [857] "Allas," quod she, "what wordes may ye brynge?
 [858] What wol my deere herte seyn to me,
 [859] Which that I drede nevere mo to see?
 [860] Wol he han pleynte or teris er I wende?
 [861] I have ynough, if he therafter sende!"
 [862] She was right swich to seen in hire visage
 [863] As is that wight that men on beere bynde;
 [864] Hire face, lik of Paradys the ymage,
 [865] Was al ychaunged in another kynde.
 [866] The pleye, the laughter, men was wont to fynde
 [867] On hire, and ek hire joies everichone,
 [868] Ben fled; and thus lith now Criseyde allone.
 [869] Aboute hire eyen two a purpre ryng
 [870] Bytrent, in sothfast tokenyng of hire peyne,
 [871] That to biholde it was a dedly thyng;
 [872] For which Pandare myghte nat restreyne
 [873] The teeris from his eighen for to reyne;
 [874] But natheles, as he best myghte, he seyde
 [875] From Troilus thise wordes to Criseyde:
 [876] "Lo, nece, I trowe ye han herd al how
 [877] The kyng with othere lordes, for the beste,
 [878] Hath mad eschaunge of Antenor and yow,
 [879] That cause is of this sorwe and this unreste.
 [880] But how this cas dooth Troilus moleste,
 [881] That may non erthly mannes tonge seye --
 [882] As he that shortly shapith hym to deye.
 [883] "For which we han so sorwed, he and I,
 [884] That into litel bothe it hadde us slawe;
 [885] But thorugh my conseyl this day finaly
 [886] He somwhat is fro wepynge now withdrawe,
 [887] And semeth me that he desireth fawe
 [888] With yow to ben al nyght, for to devyse
 [889] Remedie in this, if ther were any wyse.
 [890] "This, short and pleyn, th' effect of my message,
 [891] As ferforth as my wit kan comprehende,
 [892] For ye that ben of torment in swich rage
 [893] May to no long prologe as now entende.
 [894] And hereupon ye may answere hym sende;
 [895] And for the love of God, my nece deere,
 [896] So lef this wo er Troilus be here!"
 [897] "Gret is my wo," quod she, and sighte soore
 [898] As she that feleth dedly sharp distresse;
 [899] "But yit to me his sorwe is muchel more,
 [900] That love hym bet than he hymself, I gesse.
 [901] Allas, for me hath he swich hevynesse?
 [902] Kan he for me so pitously compleyne?
 [903] Iwis, his sorwe doubleth al my peyne.
 [904] "Grevous to me, God woot, is for to twynne,"
 [905] Quod she, "but yet it harder is to me
 [906] To sen that sorwe which that he is inne;
 [907] For wel I woot it wol my bane be,
 [908] And deye I wol in certeyn," tho quod she;
 [909] "But bid hym come, er deth, that thus me threteth,
 [910] Dryve out that goost which in myn herte beteth."
 [911] Thise wordes seyd, she on hire armes two
 [912] Fil gruf, and gan to wepen pitously.
 [913] Quod Pandarus, "Allas, whi do ye so,
 [914] Syn wel ye woot the tyme is faste by
 [915] That he shal come? Aris up hastily,
 [916] That he yow nat bywopen thus ne fynde,
 [917] But ye wole have hym wood out of his mynde.
 [918] "For wiste he that ye ferde in this manere,
 [919] He wolde hymselven sle; and if I wende
 [920] To han this fare, he sholde nat come here
 [921] For al the good that Priam may dispende.
 [922] For to what fyn he wolde anon pretende,
 [923] That knowe ich wel; and forthi yet I seye:
 [924] So lef this sorwe, or platly he wol deye.
 [925] "And shapeth yow his sorwe for t' abregge,
 [926] And nought encresse, leeve nece swete!
 [927] Beth rather to hym cause of flat than egge,
 [928] And with som wisdom ye his sorwe bete.
 [929] What helpeth it to wepen ful a strete,
 [930] Or though ye bothe in salte teeris dreynte?
 [931] Bet is a tyme of cure ay than of pleynte.
 [932] "I mene thus: whan ich hym hider brynge,
 [933] Syn ye be wise and bothe of oon assent,
 [934] So shapeth how destourbe youre goynge,
 [935] Or come ayeyn soon after ye be went.
 [936] Women ben wise in short avysement;
 [937] And lat sen how youre wit shal now availle,
 [938] And that that I may helpe, it shal nat faille."
 [939] "Go," quod Criseyde, "and uncle, trewely,
 [940] I shal don al my myght me to restreyne
 [941] From wepyng in his sighte, and bisily
 [942] Hym for to glade I shal don al my peyne,
 [943] And in myn herte seken every veyne.
 [944] If to his sore ther may be fonden salve,
 [945] It shal nat lakke, certeyn, on my halve."
 [946] Goth Pandarus, and Troilus he soughte
 [947] Til in a temple he fond hym al allone,
 [948] As he that of his lif no lenger roughte;
 [949] But to the pitouse goddes everichone
 [950] Ful tendrely he preyde and made his mone,
 [951] To doon hym sone out of this world to pace,
 [952] For wel he thoughte ther was non other grace.
 [953] And shortly, al the sothe for to seye,
 [954] He was so fallen in despeir that day,
 [955] That outrely he shop hym for to deye.
 [956] For right thus was his argument alway:
 [957] He seyde he nas but lorn, weylaway!
 [958] "For al that comth, comth by necessitee:
 [959] Thus to ben lorn, it is my destinee.
 [960] "For certeynly, this wot I wel," he seyde,
 [961] "That forsight of divine purveyaunce
 [962] Hath seyn alwey me to forgon Criseyde,
 [963] Syn God seeth every thyng, out of doutaunce,
 [964] And hem disponyth, thorugh his ordinaunce,
 [965] In hire merites sothly for to be,
 [966] As they shul comen by predestyne.
 [967] "But natheles, allas, whom shal I leeve?
 [968] For ther ben grete clerkes many oon
 [969] That destyne thorugh argumentes preve;
 [970] And som men seyn that nedely ther is noon,
 [971] But that fre chois is yeven us everychon.
 [972] O, welaway! So sleighe arn clerkes olde
 [973] That I not whos opynyoun I may holde.
 [974] "For som men seyn, if God seth al biforn --
 [975] Ne God may nat deceyved ben, parde --
 [976] Than moot it fallen, theigh men hadde it sworn,
 [977] That purveiance hath seyn before to be.
 [978] Wherfore I sey, that from eterne if he
 [979] Hath wist byforn oure thought ek as oure dede,
 [980] We han no fre chois, as thise clerkes rede.
 [981] "For other thought, nor other dede also,
 [982] Myghte nevere ben, but swich as purveyaunce,
 [983] Which may nat ben deceyved nevere mo,
 [984] Hath feled byforn, withouten ignoraunce.
 [985] For yf ther myghte ben a variaunce
 [986] To writhen out fro Goddis purveyinge,
 [987] Ther nere no prescience of thyng comynge,
 [988] "But it were rather an opynyoun
 [989] Uncerteyn, and no stedfast forseynge;
 [990] And certes, that were an abusioun,
 [991] That God sholde han no parfit cler wytynge
 [992] More than we men that han doutous wenynge.
 [993] But swich an errour upon God to gesse
 [994] Were fals and foul, and wikked corsednesse.
 [995] "Ek this is an opynyoun of some
 [996] That han hire top ful heighe and smothe yshore:
 [997] They seyn right thus, that thyng is nat to come
 [998] For that the prescience hath seyn byfore
 [999] That it shal come; but they seyn that therfore
 [1000] That it shal come, therfore the purveyaunce
 [1001] Woot it byforn, withouten ignoraunce;
 [1002] "And in this manere this necessite
 [1003] Retorneth in his part contrarie agayn.
 [1004] For nedfully byhoveth it nat to bee
 [1005] That thilke thynges fallen in certayn
 [1006] That ben purveyed; but nedly, as they sayn,
 [1007] Byhoveth it that thynges whiche that falle,
 [1008] That they in certayn ben purveyed alle.
 [1009] "I mene as though I laboured me in this
 [1010] To enqueren which thyng cause of which thyng be:
 [1011] As wheither that the prescience of God is
 [1012] The certeyn cause of the necessite
 [1013] Of thynges that to comen ben, parde,
 [1014] Or if necessite of thyng comynge
 [1015] Be cause certeyn of the purveyinge.
 [1016] "But now n' enforce I me nat in shewynge
 [1017] How the ordre of causes stant; but wel woot I
 [1018] That it byhoveth that the byfallynge
 [1019] Of thynges wist byfore certeynly
 [1020] Be necessarie, al seme it nat therby
 [1021] That prescience put fallynge necessaire
 [1022] To thyng to come, al falle it foule or faire.
 [1023] "For if ther sitte a man yond on a see,
 [1024] Than by necessite bihoveth it
 [1025] That, certes, thyn opynyoun sooth be
 [1026] That wenest or conjectest that he sit.
 [1027] And further over now ayeynward yit,
 [1028] Lo, right so is it of the part contrarie,
 [1029] As thus -- now herkne, for I wol nat tarie:
 [1030] "I sey that if the opynyoun of the
 [1031] Be soth, for that he sitte, than sey I this:
 [1032] That he mot sitten by necessite;
 [1033] And thus necessite in eyther is.
 [1034] For in hym, nede of sittynge is, ywys,
 [1035] And in the, nede of soth; and thus, forsothe,
 [1036] There mot necessite ben in yow bothe.
 [1037] "But thow mayst seyn, the man sit nat therfore
 [1038] That thyn opynyoun of his sittynge soth is,
 [1039] But rather, for the man sit ther byfore,
 [1040] Therfore is thyn opynyoun soth, ywis.
 [1041] And I seye, though the cause of soth of this
 [1042] Comth of his sittyng, yet necessite
 [1043] Is entrechaunged, both in hym and the.
 [1044] "Thus in this same wise, out of doutaunce,
 [1045] I may wel maken, as it semeth me,
 [1046] My resonyng of Goddes purveyaunce
 [1047] And of the thynges that to comen be;
 [1048] By which resoun men may wel yse
 [1049] That thilke thynges that in erthe falle,
 [1050] That by necessite they comen alle.
 [1051] "For although that for thyng shal come, ywys,
 [1052] Therfore is it purveyed, certeynly --
 [1053] Nat that it comth for it purveyed is --
 [1054] Yet natheles, bihoveth it nedfully
 [1055] That thing to come be purveyd, trewely,
 [1056] Or elles, thynges that purveyed be,
 [1057] That they bitiden by necessite.
 [1058] "And this suffiseth right ynough, certeyn,
 [1059] For to destruye oure fre chois every del.
 [1060] But now is this abusioun, to seyn
 [1061] That fallyng of the thynges temporel
 [1062] Is cause of Goddes prescience eternel.
 [1063] Now trewely, that is a fals sentence,
 [1064] That thyng to come sholde cause his prescience.
 [1065] "What myght I wene, and I hadde swich a thought,
 [1066] But that God purveyeth thyng that is to come
 [1067] For that it is to come, and ellis nought?
 [1068] So myghte I wene that thynges alle and some
 [1069] That whilom ben byfalle and overcome
 [1070] Ben cause of thilke sovereyne purveyaunce
 [1071] That forwoot al withouten ignoraunce.
 [1072] "And over al this, yet sey I more herto:
 [1073] That right as whan I wot ther is a thyng,
 [1074] Iwys, that thyng moot nedfully be so;
 [1075] Ek right so, whan I woot a thyng comyng,
 [1076] So mot it come; and thus the bifallyng
 [1077] Of thynges that ben wist bifore the tyde,
 [1078] They mowe nat ben eschued on no syde."
 [1079] Thanne seyde he thus: "Almyghty Jove in trone,
 [1080] That woost of al thys thyng the sothfastnesse,
 [1081] Rewe on my sorwe: or do me deyen sone,
 [1082] Or bryng Criseyde and me fro this destresse!"
 [1083] And whil he was in al this hevynesse,
 [1084] Disputyng with hymself in this matere,
 [1085] Com Pandare in, and seyde as ye may here:
 [1086] "O myghty God," quod Pandarus, "in trone,
 [1087] I! Who say evere a wis man faren so?
 [1088] Whi, Troilus, what thinkestow to doone?
 [1089] Hastow swich lust to ben thyn owen fo?
 [1090] What, parde, yet is nat Criseyde ago!
 [1091] Whi list the so thiself fordoon for drede
 [1092] That in thyn hed thyne eyen semen dede?
 [1093] "Hastow nat lyved many a yer byforn
 [1094] Withouten hire, and ferd ful wel at ese?
 [1095] Artow for hire and for noon other born?
 [1096] Hath Kynde the wrought al only hire to plese?
 [1097] Lat be, and thynk right thus in thi disese:
 [1098] That, in the dees right as ther fallen chaunces,
 [1099] Right so in love ther come and gon plesaunces.
 [1100] "And yet this is a wonder most of alle,
 [1101] Whi thow thus sorwest, syn thow nost nat yit,
 [1102] Touchyng hire goyng, how that it shal falle,
 [1103] Ne yif she kan hireself destourben it.
 [1104] Thow hast nat yet assayed al hire wit.
 [1105] A man may al bytyme his nekke beede
 [1106] Whan it shal of, and sorwen at the nede.
 [1107] "Forthi tak hede of that that I shal seye:
 [1108] I have with hire yspoke and longe ybe,
 [1109] So as acorded was bitwixe us tweye;
 [1110] And evere mor me thynketh thus, that she
 [1111] Hath somwhat in hire hertes privete
 [1112] Wherwith she kan, if I shal right arede,
 [1113] Destourbe al this of which thow art in drede.
 [1114] "For which my counseil is, whan it is nyght
 [1115] Thow to hire go and make of this an ende;
 [1116] And blisful Juno thorugh hire grete myght
 [1117] Shal, as I hope, hire grace unto us sende.
 [1118] Myn herte seyth, `Certeyn, she shal nat wende.'
 [1119] And forthi put thyn herte a while in reste,
 [1120] And hold this purpos, for it is the beste."
 [1121] This Troilus answerd, and sighte soore:
 [1122] "Thow seist right wel, and I wol don right so."
 [1123] And what hym liste, he seyde unto it more.
 [1124] And whan that it was tyme for to go,
 [1125] Ful pryvely hymself, withouten mo,
 [1126] Unto hire com, as he was wont to doone;
 [1127] And how they wroughte, I shal yow tellen soone.
 [1128] Soth is, that whan they gonnen first to mete,
 [1129] So gan the peyne hire hertes for to twiste
 [1130] That neyther of hem other myghte grete,
 [1131] But hem in armes toke, and after kiste.
 [1132] The lasse woful of hem bothe nyste
 [1133] Wher that he was, ne myghte o word out brynge,
 [1134] As I seyde erst, for wo and for sobbynge.
 [1135] The woful teeris that they leten falle
 [1136] As bittre weren, out of teris kynde,
 [1137] For peyne, as is ligne aloes or galle --
 [1138] So bittre teeris weep nought, as I fynde,
 [1139] The woful Mirra thorugh the bark and rynde --
 [1140] That in this world ther nys so hard an herte
 [1141] That nolde han rewed on hire peynes smerte.
 [1142] But whan hire woful weri goostes tweyne
 [1143] Retourned ben ther as hem oughte dwelle,
 [1144] And that somwhat to wayken gan the peyne
 [1145] By lengthe of pleynte, and ebben gan the welle
 [1146] Of hire teeris, and the herte unswelle,
 [1147] With broken vois, al hoors forshright, Criseyde
 [1148] To Troilus thise ilke wordes seyde:
 [1149] "O Jove, I deye, and mercy I beseche!
 [1150] Help, Troilus!" And therwithal hire face
 [1151] Upon his brest she leyde and loste speche --
 [1152] Hire woful spirit from his propre place,
 [1153] Right with the word, alwey o poynt to pace.
 [1154] And thus she lith with hewes pale and grene,
 [1155] That whilom fressh and fairest was to sene.
 [1156] This Troilus, that on hire gan biholde,
 [1157] Clepyng hire name -- and she lay as for ded --
 [1158] Without answere, and felte hire lymes colde,
 [1159] Hire eyen throwen upward to hire hed,
 [1160] This sorwful man kan now noon other red,
 [1161] But ofte tyme hire colde mowth he kiste.
 [1162] Wher hym was wo, God and hymself it wiste!
 [1163] He rist hym up, and long streght he hire leyde;
 [1164] For signe of lif, for aught he kan or may,
 [1165] Kan he non fynde in nothyng on Criseyde,
 [1166] For which his song ful ofte is "weylaway!"
 [1167] But whan he saugh that specheles she lay,
 [1168] With sorweful vois and herte of blisse al bare,
 [1169] He seyde how she was fro this world yfare.
 [1170] So after that he longe hadde hire compleyned,
 [1171] His hondes wrong, and seyd that was to seye,
 [1172] And with his teeris salt hire brest byreyned,
 [1173] He gan tho teeris wypen of ful dreye,
 [1174] And pitously gan for the soule preye,
 [1175] And seyde, "O Lord, that set art in thi trone,
 [1176] Rewe ek on me, for I shal folwe hire sone!"
 [1177] She cold was, and withouten sentement
 [1178] For aught he woot, for breth ne felte he non,
 [1179] And this was hym a pregnant argument
 [1180] That she was forth out of this world agon.
 [1181] And whan he say ther was non other woon,
 [1182] He gan hire lymes dresse in swich manere
 [1183] As men don hem that shal ben layd on beere.
 [1184] And after this, with sterne and cruel herte,
 [1185] His swerd anon out of his shethe he twighte
 [1186] Hymself to slen, how sore that hym smerte,
 [1187] So that his soule hire soule folwen myghte
 [1188] Ther as the doom of Mynos wolde it dighte,
 [1189] Syn Love and cruel Fortune it ne wolde
 [1190] That in this world he lenger lyven sholde.
 [1191] Than seyde he thus, fulfild of heigh desdayn:
 [1192] "O cruel Jove, and thow, Fortune adverse,
 [1193] This al and som: that falsly have ye slayn
 [1194] Criseyde, and syn ye may do me no werse,
 [1195] Fy on youre myght and werkes so dyverse!
 [1196] Thus cowardly ye shul me nevere wynne;
 [1197] Ther shal no deth me fro my lady twynne.
 [1198] "For I this world, syn ye have slayn hire thus,
 [1199] Wol lete and folwe hire spirit low or hye.
 [1200] Shal nevere lovere seyn that Troilus
 [1201] Dar nat for fere with his lady dye;
 [1202] For certeyn I wol beere hire compaignie.
 [1203] But syn ye wol nat suffre us lyven here,
 [1204] Yet suffreth that oure soules ben yfere.
 [1205] "And thow, cite, which that I leve in wo,
 [1206] And thow, Priam, and bretheren alle yfeere,
 [1207] And thow, my moder, farwel, for I go;
 [1208] And Atropos, make redy thow my beere;
 [1209] And thow, Criseyde, o swete herte deere,
 [1210] Receyve now my spirit!" wolde he seye,
 [1211] With swerd at herte, al redy for to deye.
 [1212] But as God wolde, of swough therwith sh' abreyde,
 [1213] And gan to sike, and "Troilus" she cride;
 [1214] And he answerde, "Lady myn, Criseyde,
 [1215] Lyve ye yet?" and leet his swerd down glide.
 [1216] "Ye, herte myn, that thonked be Cipride!"
 [1217] Quod she; and therwithal she soore syghte,
 [1218] And he bigan conforte hire as he myghte,
 [1219] Took hire in armes two, and kiste hire ofte,
 [1220] And hire to glade he did al his entente;
 [1221] For which hire goost, that flikered ay o-lofte,
 [1222] Into hire woful herte ayeyn it wente.
 [1223] But at the laste, as that hire eye glente
 [1224] Asyde, anon she gan his swerd espie,
 [1225] As it lay bare, and gan for fere crye,
 [1226] And asked hym, whi he it hadde out drawe.
 [1227] And Troilus anon the cause hire tolde,
 [1228] And how hymself therwith he wolde han slawe;
 [1229] For which Criseyde upon hym gan biholde,
 [1230] And gan hym in hire armes faste folde,
 [1231] And seyde, "O mercy, God! Lo, which a dede!
 [1232] Allas, how neigh we weren bothe dede!
 [1233] "Than if I nadde spoken, as grace was,
 [1234] Ye wolde han slayn youreself anon?" quod she.
 [1235] "Yee, douteles"; and she answerde, "Allas,
 [1236] For by that ilke Lord that made me,
 [1237] I nolde a forlong wey on lyve have be
 [1238] After youre deth, to han ben crowned queene
 [1239] Of al that lond the sonne on shyneth sheene.
 [1240] "But with this selve swerd, which that here is,
 [1241] Myselve I wolde han slawe," quod she tho.
 [1242] "But hoo, for we han right ynough of this,
 [1243] And lat us rise, and streght to bedde go,
 [1244] And there lat us speken of oure wo;
 [1245] For, by the morter which that I se brenne,
 [1246] Knowe I ful wel that day is nat far henne."
 [1247] Whan they were in hire bed, in armes folde,
 [1248] Naught was it lik tho nyghtes here-byforn.
 [1249] For pitously ech other gan byholde,
 [1250] As they that hadden al hire blisse ylorn,
 [1251] Bywaylinge ay the day that they were born;
 [1252] Til at the laste this sorwful wight, Criseyde,
 [1253] To Troilus thise ilke wordes seyde:
 [1254] "Lo, herte myn, wel woot ye this," quod she,
 [1255] "That if a wight alwey his wo compleyne
 [1256] And seketh nought how holpen for to be,
 [1257] It nys but folie and encrees of peyne;
 [1258] And syn that here assembled be we tweyne
 [1259] To fynde boote of wo that we ben inne,
 [1260] It were al tyme soone to bygynne.
 [1261] "I am a womman, as ful wel ye woot,
 [1262] And as I am avysed sodeynly,
 [1263] So wol I telle yow, whil it is hoot.
 [1264] Me thynketh thus: that nouther ye nor I
 [1265] Ought half this wo to maken, skilfully;
 [1266] For ther is art ynough for to redresse
 [1267] That yet is mys, and slen this hevynesse.
 [1268] "Soth is, the wo, the which that we ben inne,
 [1269] For aught I woot, for nothyng ellis is
 [1270] But for the cause that we sholden twynne.
 [1271] Considered al, ther nys namore amys.
 [1272] But what is thanne a remede unto this,
 [1273] But that we shape us soone for to meete?
 [1274] This al and som, my deere herte sweete.
 [1275] "Now, that I shal wel bryngen it aboute
 [1276] To come ayeyn, soone after that I go,
 [1277] Therof am I no manere thyng in doute;
 [1278] For, dredeles, withinne a wowke or two
 [1279] I shal ben here; and that it may be so
 [1280] By alle right and in a wordes fewe,
 [1281] I shal yow wel an heep of weyes shewe.
 [1282] "For which I wol nat make long sermoun --
 [1283] For tyme ylost may nought recovered be --
 [1284] But I wol gon to my conclusioun,
 [1285] And to the beste, in aught that I kan see.
 [1286] And for the love of God, foryeve it me
 [1287] If I speke aught ayeyns youre hertes reste;
 [1288] For trewely, I speke it for the beste,
 [1289] "Makyng alwey a protestacioun
 [1290] That now thise wordes which that I shal seye
 [1291] Nis but to shewen yow my mocioun
 [1292] To fynde unto oure help the beste weye;
 [1293] And taketh it non other wise, I preye,
 [1294] For in effect, what so ye me comaunde,
 [1295] That wol I don, for that is no demaunde.
 [1296] "Now herkneth this: ye han wel understonde
 [1297] My goyng graunted is by parlement
 [1298] So ferforth that it may nat be withstonde
 [1299] For al this world, as by my jugement.
 [1300] And syn ther helpeth non avisement
 [1301] To letten it, lat it passe out of mynde,
 [1302] And lat us shape a bettre wey to fynde.
 [1303] "The soth is this: the twynnyng of us tweyne
 [1304] Wol us disese and cruelich anoye,
 [1305] But hym byhoveth somtyme han a peyne
 [1306] That serveth Love, if that he wol have joye.
 [1307] And syn I shal no ferther out of Troie
 [1308] Than I may ride ayeyn on half a morwe,
 [1309] It oughte lesse causen us to sorwe;
 [1310] "So as I shal not so ben hid in muwe,
 [1311] That day by day, myn owne herte deere --
 [1312] Syn wel ye woot that it is now a trewe --
 [1313] Ye shal ful wel al myn estat yheere.
 [1314] And er that trewe is doon, I shal ben heere;
 [1315] And thanne have ye both Antenore ywonne
 [1316] And me also. Beth glad now, if ye konne,
 [1317] "And thenk right thus: `Criseyde is now agon.
 [1318] But what, she shal come hastiliche ayeyn!'
 [1319] And whanne, allas? By God, lo, right anon,
 [1320] Er dayes ten, this dar I saufly seyn.
 [1321] And than at erste shal we be so feyn,
 [1322] So as we shal togideres evere dwelle,
 [1323] That al this world ne myghte oure blisse telle.
 [1324] "I se that oft-tyme, there as we ben now,
 [1325] That for the beste, oure counseyl for to hide,
 [1326] Ye speke nat with me, nor I with yow
 [1327] In fourtenyght, ne se yow go ne ride.
 [1328] May ye naught ten dayes thanne abide,
 [1329] For myn honour, in swich an aventure?
 [1330] Iwys, ye mowen ellis lite endure!
 [1331] "Ye knowe ek how that al my kyn is heere,
 [1332] But if that onliche it my fader be,
 [1333] And ek myn othere thynges alle yfeere,
 [1334] And nameliche, my deere herte, ye,
 [1335] Whom that I nolde leven for to se
 [1336] For al this world, as wyd as it hath space,
 [1337] Or ellis se ich nevere Joves face!
 [1338] "Whi trowe ye my fader in this wise
 [1339] Coveyteth so to se me, but for drede
 [1340] Lest in this town that folkes me despise
 [1341] Because of hym, for his unhappy dede?
 [1342] What woot my fader what lif that I lede?
 [1343] For if he wiste in Troie how wel I fare,
 [1344] Us neded for my wendyng nought to care.
 [1345] "Ye sen that every day ek, more and more,
 [1346] Men trete of pees, and it supposid is
 [1347] That men the queene Eleyne shal restore,
 [1348] And Grekis us restoren that is mys;
 [1349] So, though ther nere comfort non but this,
 [1350] That men purposen pees on every syde,
 [1351] Ye may the bettre at ese of herte abyde.
 [1352] "For if that it be pees, myn herte deere,
 [1353] The nature of the pees moot nedes dryve
 [1354] That men moost entrecomunen yfeere,
 [1355] And to and fro ek ride and gon as blyve
 [1356] Alday as thikke as been fleen from an hyve,
 [1357] And every wight han liberte to bleve
 [1358] Whereas hym liste the bet, withouten leve.
 [1359] "And though so be that pees ther may be non,
 [1360] Yet hider, though ther nevere pees ne were,
 [1361] I moste come; for whider sholde I gon,
 [1362] Or how, meschaunce, sholde I dwelle there
 [1363] Among tho men of armes evere in feere?
 [1364] For which, as wisly God my soule rede,
 [1365] I kan nat sen wherof ye sholden drede.
 [1366] "Have here another wey, if it so be
 [1367] That al this thyng ne may yow nat suffise:
 [1368] My fader, as ye knowen wel, parde,
 [1369] Is old, and elde is ful of coveytise,
 [1370] And I right now have founden al the gise,
 [1371] Withouten net, wherwith I shal hym hente.
 [1372] And herkeneth how, if that ye wol assente:
 [1373] "Lo, Troilus, men seyn that hard it is
 [1374] The wolf ful and the wether hool to have;
 [1375] This is to seyn, that men ful ofte, iwys,
 [1376] Mote spenden part the remenant for to save;
 [1377] For ay with gold men may the herte grave
 [1378] Of hym that set is upon coveytise;
 [1379] And how I mene, I shal it yow devyse:
 [1380] "The moeble which that I have in this town
 [1381] Unto my fader shal I take, and seye
 [1382] That right for trust and for savacioun
 [1383] It sent is from a frend of his or tweye,
 [1384] The whiche frendes ferventliche hym preye
 [1385] To senden after more, and that in hie,
 [1386] Whil that this town stant thus in jupartie.
 [1387] "And that shal ben an huge quantite --
 [1388] Thus shal I seyn -- but lest it folk espide,
 [1389] This may be sent by no wyght but by me.
 [1390] I shal ek shewen hym, yf pees bytyde,
 [1391] What frendes that ich have on every syde
 [1392] Toward the court, to don the wrathe pace
 [1393] Of Priamus and don hym stonde in grace.
 [1394] "So what for o thyng and for other, swete,
 [1395] I shal hym so enchaunten with my sawes
 [1396] That right in hevene his sowle is, shal he mete;
 [1397] For al Appollo, or his clerkes lawes,
 [1398] Or calkullynge, avayleth nought thre hawes;
 [1399] Desir of gold shal so his soule blende
 [1400] That, as me lyst, I shal wel make an ende.
 [1401] "And yf he wolde ought by hys sort it preve
 [1402] If that I lye, in certayn I shal fonde
 [1403] Distorben hym and plukke hym by the sleve,
 [1404] Makynge his sort, and beren hym on honde
 [1405] He hath not wel the goddes understonde;
 [1406] For goddes speken in amphibologies,
 [1407] And for o soth they tellen twenty lyes.
 [1408] "Ek, `Drede fond first goddes, I suppose' --
 [1409] Thus shal I seyn -- and that his coward herte
 [1410] Made hym amys the goddes text to glose,
 [1411] Whan he for fered out of Delphos sterte.
 [1412] And but I make hym soone to converte
 [1413] And don my red withinne a day or tweye,
 [1414] I wol to yow oblige me to deye."
 [1415] And treweliche, as writen wel I fynde
 [1416] That al this thyng was seyd of good entente,
 [1417] And that hire herte trewe was and kynde
 [1418] Towardes hym, and spak right as she mente,
 [1419] And that she starf for wo neigh whan she wente,
 [1420] And was in purpos evere to be trewe:
 [1421] Thus writen they that of hire werkes knewe.
 [1422] This Troilus, with herte and erys spradde,
 [1423] Herde al this thyng devysen to and fro,
 [1424] And verrayliche him semed that he hadde
 [1425] The selve wit; but yet to late hire go
 [1426] His herte mysforyaf hym evere mo;
 [1427] But fynaly, he gan his herte wreste
 [1428] To trusten hire, and took it for the beste.
 [1429] For which the grete furie of his penaunce
 [1430] Was queynt with hope, and therwith hem bitwene
 [1431] Bigan for joie th' amorouse daunce;
 [1432] And as the briddes, whanne the sonne is shene,
 [1433] Deliten in hire song in leves grene,
 [1434] Right so the wordes that they spake yfeere
 [1435] Delited hem, and made hire hertes clere.
 [1436] But natheles, the wendyng of Criseyde,
 [1437] For al this world, may nat out of his mynde,
 [1438] For which ful ofte he pitously hire preyde
 [1439] That of hire heste he myghte hire trewe fynde,
 [1440] And seyde hire, "Certes, if ye be unkynde,
 [1441] And but ye come at day set into Troye,
 [1442] Ne shal I nevere have hele, honour, ne joye.
 [1443] "For also soth as sonne uprist o-morwe --
 [1444] And God so wisly thow me, woful wrecche,
 [1445] To reste brynge out of this cruel sorwe! --
 [1446] I wol myselven sle if that ye drecche.
 [1447] But of my deeth though litel be to recche,
 [1448] Yet, er that ye me causen so to smerte,
 [1449] Dwelle rather here, myn owen swete herte.
 [1450] "For trewely, myn owne lady deere,
 [1451] Tho sleghtes yet that I have herd yow stere
 [1452] Ful shaply ben to faylen alle yfeere.
 [1453] For thus men seyth `That on thenketh the beere,
 [1454] But al another thenketh his ledere.'
 [1455] Youre syre is wys; and seyd is, out of drede,
 [1456] `Men may the wise atrenne, and naught atrede.'
 [1457] "It is ful hard to halten unespied
 [1458] Byfore a crepel, for he kan the craft;
 [1459] Youre fader is in sleght as Argus eyed;
 [1460] For al be that his moeble is hym biraft,
 [1461] His olde sleighte is yet so with hym laft
 [1462] Ye shal nat blende hym for youre wommanhede,
 [1463] Ne feyne aright; and that is al my drede.
 [1464] "I not if pees shal evere mo bitide;
 [1465] But pees or no, for ernest ne for game,
 [1466] I woot, syn Calkas on the Grekis syde
 [1467] Hath ones ben and lost so foule his name,
 [1468] He dar nomore come here ayeyn for shame;
 [1469] For which that wey, for aught I kan espie,
 [1470] To trusten on nys but a fantasie.
 [1471] "Ye shal ek sen, youre fader shal yow glose
 [1472] To ben a wif; and as he kan wel preche,
 [1473] He shal som Grek so preyse and wel alose
 [1474] That ravysshen he shal yow with his speche,
 [1475] Or do yow don by force as he shal teche;
 [1476] And Troilus, of whom ye nyl han routhe,
 [1477] Shal causeles so sterven in his trouthe!
 [1478] "And over al this, youre fader shal despise
 [1479] Us alle, and seyn this cite nys but lorn,
 [1480] And that th' assege nevere shal aryse,
 [1481] For-whi the Grekis han it alle sworn,
 [1482] Til we be slayn and down oure walles torn.
 [1483] And thus he shal yow with his wordes fere,
 [1484] That ay drede I that ye wol bleven there.
 [1485] "Ye shal ek seen so many a lusty knyght
 [1486] Among the Grekis, ful of worthynesse,
 [1487] And ech of hem with herte, wit, and myght
 [1488] To plesen yow don al his bisynesse,
 [1489] That ye shul dullen of the rudenesse
 [1490] Of us sely Troians, but if routhe
 [1491] Remorde yow, or vertu of youre trouthe.
 [1492] "And this to me so grevous is to thynke
 [1493] That fro my brest it wol my soule rende;
 [1494] Ne dredeles, in me ther may nat synke
 [1495] A good opynyoun, if that ye wende,
 [1496] For whi youre fadres sleghte wol us shende.
 [1497] And if ye gon, as I have told yow yore,
 [1498] So thenk I n' am but ded, withoute more.
 [1499] "For which, with humble, trewe, and pitous herte,
 [1500] A thousand tymes mercy I yow preye;
 [1501] So rueth on myn aspre peynes smerte,
 [1502] And doth somwhat as that I shal yow seye,
 [1503] And lat us stele awey bitwixe us tweye;
 [1504] And thynk that folie is, whan man may chese,
 [1505] For accident his substaunce ay to lese.
 [1506] "I mene thus: that syn we mowe er day
 [1507] Wel stele awey and ben togidere so,
 [1508] What wit were it to putten in assay,
 [1509] In cas ye sholden to youre fader go,
 [1510] If that ye myghten come ayeyn or no?
 [1511] Thus mene I: that it were a gret folie
 [1512] To putte that sikernesse in jupertie.
 [1513] "And vulgarly to speken of substaunce
 [1514] Of tresour, may we bothe with us lede
 [1515] Inough to lyve in honour and plesaunce
 [1516] Til into tyme that we shal ben dede;
 [1517] And thus we may eschuen al this drede.
 [1518] For everich other wey ye kan recorde,
 [1519] Myn herte, ywys, may therwith naught acorde.
 [1520] "And hardily, ne dredeth no poverte,
 [1521] For I have kyn and frendes elleswhere
 [1522] That, though we comen in oure bare sherte,
 [1523] Us sholde neyther lakken gold ne gere,
 [1524] But ben honured while we dwelten there.
 [1525] And go we anon; for as in myn entente,
 [1526] This is the beste, if that ye wole assente."
 [1527] Criseyde, with a sik, right in this wise
 [1528] Answerde, "Ywys, my deere herte trewe,
 [1529] We may wel stele awey, as ye devyse,
 [1530] And fynden swich unthrifty weyes newe,
 [1531] But afterward ful soore it wol us rewe.
 [1532] And helpe me God so at my mooste nede,
 [1533] As causeles ye suffren al this drede!
 [1534] "For thilke day that I for cherisynge
 [1535] Or drede of fader, or for other wight,
 [1536] Or for estat, delit, or for weddynge,
 [1537] Be fals to yow, my Troilus, my knyght,
 [1538] Saturnes doughter, Juno, thorugh hire myght,
 [1539] As wood as Athamante do me dwelle
 [1540] Eternalich in Stix, the put of helle!
 [1541] "And this on every god celestial
 [1542] I swere it yow, and ek on ech goddesse,
 [1543] On every nymphe and deite infernal,
 [1544] On satiry and fawny more and lesse,
 [1545] That halve goddes ben of wildernesse;
 [1546] And Attropos my thred of lif tobreste
 [1547] If I be fals! Now trowe me if yow leste!
 [1548] "And thow, Symois, that as an arwe clere
 [1549] Thorugh Troie rennest downward to the se,
 [1550] Ber witnesse of this word that seyd is here:
 [1551] That thilke day that ich untrewe be
 [1552] To Troilus, myn owene herte fre,
 [1553] That thow retourne bakward to thi welle,
 [1554] And I with body and soule synke in helle!
 [1555] "But that ye speke, awey thus for to go
 [1556] And leten alle youre frendes, God forbede
 [1557] For any womman that ye sholden so,
 [1558] And namely syn Troie hath now swich nede
 [1559] Of help. And ek of o thyng taketh hede:
 [1560] If this were wist, my lif lay in balaunce,
 [1561] And youre honour; God shilde us fro meschaunce!
 [1562] "And if so be that pees heere-after take,
 [1563] As alday happeth after anger game,
 [1564] Whi, Lord, the sorwe and wo ye wolden make,
 [1565] That ye ne dorste come ayeyn for shame!
 [1566] And er that ye juparten so youre name,
 [1567] Beth naught to hastif in this hoote fare,
 [1568] For hastif man ne wanteth nevere care.
 [1569] "What trowe ye the peple ek al aboute
 [1570] Wolde of it seye? It is ful light t' arede.
 [1571] They wolden seye, and swere it out of doute,
 [1572] That love ne drof yow naught to don this dede,
 [1573] But lust voluptuous and coward drede.
 [1574] Thus were al lost, ywys, myn herte deere,
 [1575] Youre honour, which that now shyneth so clere.
 [1576] "And also thynketh on myn honeste,
 [1577] That floureth yet, how foule I sholde it shende,
 [1578] And with what filthe it spotted sholde be,
 [1579] If in this forme I sholde with yow wende.
 [1580] Ne though I lyved unto the werldes ende,
 [1581] My name sholde I nevere ayeynward wynne;
 [1582] Thus were I lost, and that were routhe and synne.
 [1583] "And forthi sle with resoun al this hete!
 [1584] Men seyn, `The suffrant overcomith,' parde;
 [1585] Ek `Whoso wol han lief, he lief moot lete.'
 [1586] Thus maketh vertu of necessite
 [1587] By pacience, and thynk that lord is he
 [1588] Of Fortune ay that naught wole of hire recche,
 [1589] And she ne daunteth no wight but a wrecche.
 [1590] "And trusteth this: that certes, herte swete,
 [1591] Er Phebus suster, Lucina the sheene,
 [1592] The Leoun passe out of this Ariete,
 [1593] I wol ben here, withouten any wene.
 [1594] I mene, as helpe me Juno, hevenes quene,
 [1595] The tenthe day, but if that deth m' assaile,
 [1596] I wol yow sen withouten any faille."
 [1597] "And now, so this be soth," quod Troilus,
 [1598] "I shal wel suffre unto the tenthe day,
 [1599] Syn that I se that nede it mot be thus.
 [1600] But for the love of God, if it be may,
 [1601] So late us stelen priveliche away;
 [1602] For evere in oon, as for to lyve in reste,
 [1603] Myn herte seyth that it wol be the beste."
 [1604] "O mercy, God, what lif is this?" quod she.
 [1605] "Allas, ye sle me thus for verray tene!
 [1606] I se wel now that ye mystrusten me,
 [1607] For by youre wordes it is wel yseene.
 [1608] Now for the love of Cinthia the sheene,
 [1609] Mistrust me nought thus causeles, for routhe,
 [1610] Syn to be trewe I have yow plight my trouthe.
 [1611] "And thynketh wel that somtyme it is wit
 [1612] To spende a tyme, a tyme for to wynne;
 [1613] Ne, parde, lorn am I naught fro yow yit,
 [1614] Though that we ben a day or two atwynne.
 [1615] Drif out the fantasies yow withinne,
 [1616] And trusteth me, and leveth ek youre sorwe,
 [1617] Or here my trouthe: I wol naught lyve tyl morwe.
 [1618] "For if ye wiste how soore it doth me smerte,
 [1619] Ye wolde cesse of this; for, God, thow wost,
 [1620] The pure spirit wepeth in myn herte
 [1621] To se yow wepen that I love most,
 [1622] And that I mot gon to the Grekis oost.
 [1623] Ye, nere it that I wiste remedie
 [1624] To come ayeyn, right here I wolde dye!
 [1625] "But certes, I am naught so nyce a wight
 [1626] That I ne kan ymaginen a wey
 [1627] To come ayeyn that day that I have hight.
 [1628] For who may holde a thing that wol awey?
 [1629] My fader naught, for al his queynte pley!
 [1630] And by my thrift, my wendyng out of Troie
 [1631] Another day shal torne us alle to joie.
 [1632] "Forthi with al myn herte I yow biseke,
 [1633] If that yow list don ought for my preyere,
 [1634] And for that love which that I love yow eke,
 [1635] That er that I departe fro yow here,
 [1636] That of so good a confort and a cheere
 [1637] I may yow sen that ye may brynge at reste
 [1638] Myn herte, which that is o poynt to breste.
 [1639] "And over al this I prey yow," quod she tho,
 [1640] "Myn owene hertes sothfast suffisaunce,
 [1641] Syn I am thyn al hol, withouten mo,
 [1642] That whil that I am absent, no plesaunce
 [1643] Of oother do me fro youre remembraunce;
 [1644] For I am evere agast, forwhy men rede
 [1645] That love is thyng ay ful of bisy drede.
 [1646] "For in this world ther lyveth lady non,
 [1647] If that ye were untrewe -- as God defende! --
 [1648] That so bitraised were or wo-bigon
 [1649] As I, that alle trouthe in yow entende.
 [1650] And douteles, if that ich other wende,
 [1651] I ner but ded; and er ye cause fynde,
 [1652] For Goddes love, so beth me naught unkynde!"
 [1653] To this answerde Troilus and seyde,
 [1654] "Now God, to whom ther nys no cause ywrye,
 [1655] Me glade, as wys I nevere unto Criseyde,
 [1656] Syn thilke day I saugh hire first with ye,
 [1657] Was fals, ne nevere shal til that I dye.
 [1658] At shorte wordes, wel ye may me leve.
 [1659] I kan na more; it shal be founde at preve."
 [1660] "Grant mercy, goode myn, iwys!" quod she,
 [1661] "And blisful Venus lat me nevere sterve
 [1662] Er I may stonde of plesaunce in degree
 [1663] To quyte hym wel that so wel kan deserve;
 [1664] And while that God my wit wol me conserve,
 [1665] I shal so don, so trewe I have yow founde,
 [1666] That ay honour to me-ward shal rebounde.
 [1667] "For trusteth wel that youre estat roial,
 [1668] Ne veyn delit, nor only worthinesse
 [1669] Of yow in werre or torney marcial,
 [1670] Ne pompe, array, nobleye, or ek richesse
 [1671] Ne made me to rewe on youre destresse,
 [1672] But moral vertu, grounded upon trouthe --
 [1673] That was the cause I first hadde on yow routhe!
 [1674] "Eke gentil herte and manhod that ye hadde,
 [1675] And that ye hadde, as me thoughte, in despit
 [1676] Every thyng that souned into badde,
 [1677] As rudenesse and poeplissh appetit,
 [1678] And that youre resoun bridlede youre delit,
 [1679] This made, aboven every creature,
 [1680] That I was youre, and shal while I may dure.
 [1681] "And this may lengthe of yeres naught fordo,
 [1682] Ne remuable Fortune deface.
 [1683] But Juppiter, that of his myght may do
 [1684] The sorwful to be glad, so yeve us grace
 [1685] Or nyghtes ten to meten in this place,
 [1686] So that it may youre herte and myn suffise!
 [1687] And fareth now wel, for tyme is that ye rise."
 [1688] And after that they longe ypleyned hadde,
 [1689] And ofte ykist, and streite in armes folde,
 [1690] The day gan rise, and Troilus hym cladde,
 [1691] And rewfullich his lady gan byholde,
 [1692] As he that felte dethes cares colde,
 [1693] And to hire grace he gan hym recomaunde.
 [1694] Wher hym was wo, this holde I no demaunde.
 [1695] For mannes hed ymagynen ne kan,
 [1696] N' entendement considere, ne tonge telle
 [1697] The cruele peynes of this sorwful man,
 [1698] That passen every torment down in helle.
 [1699] For whan he saugh that she ne myghte dwelle,
 [1700] Which that his soule out of his herte rente,
 [1701] Withouten more out of the chaumbre he wente.

      
The Canterbury Tales and Other Works of Chaucer (Middle English), by Geoffery Chaucer, [14th cent.], at sacred-texts.com

 

Troilus and Criseyde

 

Book 5

 [1] Aprochen gan the fatal destyne
 [2] That Joves hath in disposicioun,
 [3] And to yow, angry Parcas, sustren thre,
 [4] Committeth to don execucioun;
 [5] For which Criseyde moste out of the town,
 [6] And Troilus shal dwellen forth in pyne
 [7] Til Lachesis his thred no lenger twyne.
 [8] The gold-tressed Phebus heighe on-lofte
 [9] Thries hadde alle with his bemes cleene
 [10] The snowes molte, and Zepherus as ofte
 [11] Ibrought ayeyn the tendre leves grene,
 [12] Syn that the sone of Ecuba the queene
 [13] Bigan to love hire first for whom his sorwe
 [14] Was al, that she departe sholde a-morwe.
 [15] Ful redy was at prime Diomede
 [16] Criseyde unto the Grekis oost to lede,
 [17] For sorwe of which she felt hire herte blede,
 [18] As she that nyste what was best to rede.
 [19] And trewely, as men in bokes rede,
 [20] Men wiste nevere womman han the care,
 [21] Ne was so loth out of a town to fare.
 [22] This Troilus, withouten reed or loore,
 [23] As man that hath his joies ek forlore,
 [24] Was waytyng on his lady evere more
 [25] As she that was the sothfast crop and more
 [26] Of al his lust or joies heretofore.
 [27] But Troilus, now far-wel al thi joie,
 [28] For shaltow nevere sen hire eft in Troie!
 [29] Soth is that while he bood in this manere,
 [30] He gan his wo ful manly for to hide,
 [31] That wel unnethe it sene was in his chere;
 [32] But at the yate ther she sholde out ride,
 [33] With certeyn folk he hoved hire t' abide,
 [34] So wo-bigon, al wolde he naught hym pleyne,
 [35] That on his hors unnethe he sat for peyne.
 [36] For ire he quook, so gan his herte gnawe,
 [37] Whan Diomede on horse gan hym dresse,
 [38] And seyde to hymself this ilke sawe:
 [39] "Allas," quod he, "thus foul a wrecchednesse,
 [40] Whi suffre ich it? Whi nyl ich it redresse?
 [41] Were it nat bet atones for to dye
 [42] Than evere more in langour thus to drye?
 [43] "Whi nyl I make atones riche and pore
 [44] To have inough to doone er that she go?
 [45] Why nyl I brynge al Troie upon a roore?
 [46] Whi nyl I slen this Diomede also?
 [47] Why nyl I rather with a man or two
 [48] Stele hire away? Whi wol I this endure?
 [49] Whi nyl I helpen to myn owen cure?"
 [50] But why he nolde don so fel a dede,
 [51] That shal I seyn, and whi hym liste it spare:
 [52] He hadde in herte alweyes a manere drede
 [53] Lest that Criseyde, in rumour of this fare,
 [54] Sholde han ben slayn; lo, this was al his care.
 [55] And ellis, certeyn, as I seyde yore,
 [56] He hadde it don, withouten wordes more.
 [57] Criseyde, whan she redy was to ride,
 [58] Ful sorwfully she sighte, and seyde "Allas!"
 [59] But forth she moot, for aught that may bitide;
 [60] Ther is non other remedie in this cas.
 [61] And forth she rit ful sorwfully a pas.
 [62] What wonder is, though that hire sore smerte,
 [63] Whan she forgoth hire owen swete herte?
 [64] This Troilus, in wise of curteysie,
 [65] With hauk on honde and with an huge route
 [66] Of knyghtes, rood and did hire companye,
 [67] Passyng al the valeye fer withoute,
 [68] And ferther wolde han riden, out of doute,
 [69] Ful fayn, and wo was hym to gon so sone;
 [70] But torne he moste, and it was ek to done.
 [71] And right with that was Antenor ycome
 [72] Out of the Grekis oost, and every wight
 [73] Was of it glad, and seyde he was welcome.
 [74] And Troilus, al nere his herte light,
 [75] He peyned hym with al his fulle myght
 [76] Hym to withholde of wepyng atte leeste,
 [77] And Antenor he kiste and made feste.
 [78] And therwithal he moste his leve take,
 [79] And caste his eye upon hire pitously,
 [80] And neer he rood, his cause for to make,
 [81] To take hire by the honde al sobrely.
 [82] And Lord, so she gan wepen tendrely!
 [83] And he ful softe and sleighly gan hire seye,
 [84] "Now holde youre day, and do me nat to deye."
 [85] With that his courser torned he aboute
 [86] With face pale, and unto Diomede
 [87] No word he spak, ne non of al his route;
 [88] Of which the sone of Tideus took hede,
 [89] As he that koude more than the crede
 [90] In swich a craft, and by the reyne hire hente;
 [91] And Troilus to Troie homward he wente.
 [92] This Diomede, that ledde hire by the bridel,
 [93] Whan that he saugh the folk of Troie aweye,
 [94] Thoughte, "Al my labour shal nat ben on ydel,
 [95] If that I may, for somwhat shal I seye,
 [96] For at the werste it may yet shorte oure weye.
 [97] I have herd seyd ek tymes twyes twelve,
 [98] `He is a fool that wol foryete hymselve.'"
 [99] But natheles, this thoughte he wel ynough,
 [100] That "Certeynlich I am aboute nought,
 [101] If that I speke of love or make it tough;
 [102] For douteles, if she have in hire thought
 [103] Hym that I gesse, he may nat ben ybrought
 [104] So soon awey; but I shal fynde a meene
 [105] That she naught wite as yet shal what I mene."
 [106] This Diomede, as he that koude his good,
 [107] Whan tyme was, gan fallen forth in speche
 [108] Of this and that, and axed whi she stood
 [109] In swich disese, and gan hire ek biseche
 [110] That if that he encresse myghte or eche
 [111] With any thyng hire ese, that she sholde
 [112] Comaunde it hym, and seyde he don it wolde.
 [113] For treweliche he swor hire as a knyght
 [114] That ther nas thyng with which he myghte hire plese,
 [115] That he nolde don his peyne and al his myght
 [116] To don it, for to don hire herte an ese;
 [117] And preyede hire she wolde hire sorwe apese,
 [118] And seyde, "Iwis, we Grekis kan have joie
 [119] To honouren yow as wel as folk of Troie."
 [120] He seyde ek thus: "I woot yow thynketh straunge --
 [121] Ne wonder is, for it is to yow newe --
 [122] Th' aquayntaunce of thise Troianis to chaunge
 [123] For folk of Grece, that ye nevere knewe.
 [124] But wolde nevere God but if as trewe
 [125] A Grek ye sholde among us alle fynde
 [126] As any Troian is, and ek as kynde.
 [127] "And by the cause I swor yow right, lo, now,
 [128] To ben youre frend, and helply, to my myght,
 [129] And for that more aquayntaunce ek of yow
 [130] Have ich had than another straunger wight,
 [131] So fro this forth, I pray yow, day and nyght
 [132] Comaundeth me, how soore that me smerte,
 [133] To don al that may like unto youre herte;
 [134] "And that ye me wolde as youre brother trete,
 [135] And taketh naught my frendshipe in despit;
 [136] And though youre sorwes be for thynges grete --
 [137] Not I nat whi -- but out of more respit
 [138] Myn herte hath for t' amende it gret delit;
 [139] And if I may youre harmes nat redresse,
 [140] I am right sory for youre hevynesse,
 [141] "For though ye Troians with us Grekes wrothe
 [142] Han many a day ben, alwey yet, parde,
 [143] O god of Love in soth we serven bothe.
 [144] And for the love of God, my lady fre,
 [145] Whomso ye hate, as beth nat wroth with me,
 [146] For trewely, ther kan no wyght yow serve
 [147] That half so loth youre wratthe wold disserve.
 [148] "And nere it that we ben so neigh the tente
 [149] Of Calcas, which that sen us bothe may,
 [150] I wolde of this yow telle al myn entente --
 [151] But this enseled til anothir day.
 [152] Yeve me youre hond; I am, and shal ben ay,
 [153] God helpe me so, while that my lyf may dure,
 [154] Youre owene aboven every creature.
 [155] "Thus seyde I nevere er now to womman born,
 [156] For God myn herte as wisly glade so,
 [157] I loved never womman here-biforn
 [158] As paramours, ne nevere shal no mo.
 [159] And for the love of God, beth nat my fo,
 [160] Al kan I naught to yow, my lady deere,
 [161] Compleyne aright, for I am yet to leere.
 [162] "And wondreth nought, myn owen lady bright,
 [163] Though that I speke of love to yow thus blyve;
 [164] For I have herd er this of many a wight,
 [165] Hath loved thyng he nevere saigh his lyve.
 [166] Ek I am nat of power for to stryve
 [167] Ayeyns the god of Love, but hym obeye
 [168] I wole alwey; and mercy I yow preye.
 [169] "Ther ben so worthi knyghtes in this place,
 [170] And ye so fayr, that everich of hem alle
 [171] Wol peynen hym to stonden in youre grace.
 [172] But myghte me so faire a grace falle,
 [173] That ye me for youre servant wolde calle,
 [174] So lowely ne so trewely yow serve
 [175] Nil non of hem as I shal til I sterve."
 [176] Criseyde unto that purpos lite answerde,
 [177] As she that was with sorwe oppressed so
 [178] That, in effect, she naught his tales herde
 [179] But here and ther, now here a word or two.
 [180] Hire thoughte hire sorwful herte brast a-two,
 [181] For whan she gan hire fader fer espie
 [182] Wel neigh down of hire hors she gan to sye.
 [183] But natheles she thonketh Diomede
 [184] Of al his travaile and his goode cheere,
 [185] And that hym list his frendshipe hire to bede;
 [186] And she accepteth it in good manere,
 [187] And wol do fayn that is hym lief and dere,
 [188] And tristen hym she wolde, and wel she myghte,
 [189] As seyde she; and from hire hors sh' alighte.
 [190] Hire fader hath hire in his armes nome,
 [191] And twenty tyme he kiste his doughter sweete,
 [192] And seyde, "O deere doughter myn, welcome!"
 [193] She seyde ek she was fayn with hym to mete,
 [194] And stood forth muwet, milde, and mansuete.
 [195] But here I leve hire with hire fader dwelle,
 [196] And forth I wol of Troilus yow telle.
 [197] To Troie is come this woful Troilus,
 [198] In sorwe aboven alle sorwes smerte,
 [199] With feloun look and face dispitous.
 [200] Tho sodeynly doun from his hors he sterte,
 [201] And thorugh his paleis, with a swollen herte,
 [202] To chaumbre he wente; of nothyng took he hede,
 [203] Ne non to hym dar speke a word for drede.
 [204] And ther his sorwes that he spared hadde
 [205] He yaf an issue large, and "Deth!" he criede;
 [206] And in his throwes frenetik and madde
 [207] He corseth Jove, Appollo, and ek Cupide;
 [208] He corseth Ceres, Bacus, and Cipride,
 [209] His burthe, hymself, his fate, and ek nature,
 [210] And, save his lady, every creature.
 [211] To bedde he goth, and walwith ther and torneth
 [212] In furie, as doth he Ixion in helle,
 [213] And in this wise he neigh til day sojorneth.
 [214] But tho bigan his herte a lite unswelle
 [215] Thorugh teris, which that gonnen up to welle,
 [216] And pitously he cryde upon Criseyde,
 [217] And to hymself right thus he spak, and seyde,
 [218] "Wher is myn owene lady, lief and deere?
 [219] Wher is hire white brest? Wher is it, where?
 [220] Wher ben hire armes and hire eyen cleere
 [221] That yesternyght this tyme with me were?
 [222] Now may I wepe allone many a teere,
 [223] And graspe aboute I may, but in this place,
 [224] Save a pilowe, I fynde naught t' enbrace.
 [225] "How shal I do? Whan shal she come ayeyn?
 [226] I not, allas, whi lete ich hire to go;
 [227] As wolde God ich hadde as tho ben sleyn!
 [228] O herte myn, Criseyde, O swete fo!
 [229] O lady myn, that I love and na mo,
 [230] To whom for evermo myn herte I dowe,
 [231] Se how I dey, ye nyl me nat rescowe!
 [232] "Who seth yow now, my righte lode-sterre?
 [233] Who sit right now or stant in youre presence?
 [234] Who kan conforten now youre hertes werre?
 [235] Now I am gon, whom yeve ye audience?
 [236] Who speketh for me right now in myn absence?
 [237] Allas, no wight; and that is al my care,
 [238] For wel woot I, as yvele as I ye fare.
 [239] "How sholde I thus ten dayes ful endure,
 [240] Whan I the firste nyght have al this tene?
 [241] How shal she don ek, sorwful creature?
 [242] For tendernesse, how shal she sustene
 [243] Swich wo for me? O pitous, pale, grene
 [244] Shal ben youre fresshe, wommanliche face
 [245] For langour, er ye torne unto this place."
 [246] And whan he fil in any slomberynges,
 [247] Anon bygynne he sholde for to grone
 [248] And dremen of the dredefulleste thynges
 [249] That myghte ben; as mete he were allone
 [250] In place horrible makyng ay his mone,
 [251] Or meten that he was amonges alle
 [252] His enemys, and in hire hondes falle.
 [253] And therwithal his body sholde sterte,
 [254] And with the stert al sodeynliche awake,
 [255] And swich a tremour fele aboute his herte
 [256] That of the fere his body sholde quake;
 [257] And therwithal he sholde a noyse make,
 [258] And seme as though he sholde falle depe
 [259] From heighe o-lofte; and thanne he wolde wepe,
 [260] And rewen on hymself so pitously
 [261] That wonder was to here his fantasie.
 [262] Another tyme he sholde myghtyly
 [263] Conforte hymself, and sein it was folie
 [264] So causeles swich drede for to drye;
 [265] And eft bygynne his aspre sorwes newe,
 [266] That every man myght on his sorwes rewe.
 [267] Who koude telle aright or ful discryve
 [268] His wo, his pleynt, his langour, and his pyne?
 [269] Naught alle the men that han or ben on lyve.
 [270] Thow, redere, maist thiself ful wel devyne
 [271] That swich a wo my wit kan nat diffyne;
 [272] On ydel for to write it sholde I swynke,
 [273] Whan that my wit is wery it to thynke.
 [274] On hevene yet the sterres weren seene,
 [275] Although ful pale ywoxen was the moone,
 [276] And whiten gan the orisonte shene
 [277] Al estward, as it wont is for to doone;
 [278] And Phebus with his rosy carte soone
 [279] Gan after that to dresse hym up to fare
 [280] Whan Troilus hath sent after Pandare.
 [281] This Pandare, that of al the day biforn
 [282] Ne myghte han comen Troilus to se,
 [283] Although he on his hed it hadde sworn --
 [284] For with the kyng Priam al day was he,
 [285] So that it lay nought in his libertee
 [286] Nowher to gon -- but on the morwe he wente
 [287] To Troilus, whan that he for hym sente.
 [288] For in his herte he koude wel devyne
 [289] That Troilus al nyght for sorwe wook;
 [290] And that he wolde telle hym of his pyne,
 [291] This knew he wel ynough, withoute book.
 [292] For which to chaumbre streght the wey he took,
 [293] And Troilus tho sobrelich he grette,
 [294] And on the bed ful sone he gan hym sette.
 [295] "My Pandarus," quod Troilus, "the sorwe
 [296] Which that I drye I may nat longe endure.
 [297] I trowe I shal nat lyven til to-morwe.
 [298] For which I wolde alweys, on aventure,
 [299] To the devysen of my sepulture
 [300] The forme; and of my moeble thow dispone
 [301] Right as the semeth best is for to done.
 [302] "But of the fir and flaumbe funeral
 [303] In which my body brennen shal to glede,
 [304] And of the feste and pleyes palestral
 [305] At my vigile, I prey the, tak good hede
 [306] That that be wel; and offre Mars my steede,
 [307] My swerd, myn helm; and, leve brother deere,
 [308] My sheld to Pallas yef, that shyneth cleere.
 [309] "The poudre in which myn herte ybrend shal torne,
 [310] That preye I the thow take and it conserve
 [311] In a vessell that men clepeth an urne,
 [312] Of gold, and to my lady that I serve,
 [313] For love of whom thus pitouslich I sterve,
 [314] So yeve it hire, and do me this plesaunce,
 [315] To preyen hire kepe it for a remembraunce.
 [316] "For wele I fele, by my maladie
 [317] And by my dremes now and yore ago,
 [318] Al certeynly that I mot nedes dye.
 [319] The owle ek, which that hette Escaphilo,
 [320] Hath after me shright al thise nyghtes two.
 [321] And god Mercurye, of me now, woful wrecche,
 [322] The soule gyde, and whan the liste, it fecche!"
 [323] Pandare answerde and seyde, "Troilus,
 [324] My deere frend, as I have told the yore,
 [325] That it is folye for to sorwen thus,
 [326] And causeles, for which I kan namore.
 [327] But whoso wil nought trowen reed ne loore,
 [328] I kan nat sen in hym no remedie,
 [329] But lat hym worthen with his fantasie.
 [330] "But, Troilus, I prey the, tel me now
 [331] If that thow trowe er this that any wight
 [332] Hath loved paramours as wel as thow?
 [333] Ye, God woot, and fro many a worthi knyght
 [334] Hath his lady gon a fourtenyght,
 [335] And he nat yet made halvendel the fare.
 [336] What nede is the to maken al this care?
 [337] "Syn day by day thow maist thiselven se
 [338] That from his love, or ellis from his wif,
 [339] A man mot twynnen of necessite --
 [340] Ye, though he love hire as his owene lif --
 [341] Yet nyl he with hymself thus maken strif.
 [342] For wel thou woost, my leve brother deere,
 [343] That alwey frendes may nat ben yfeere.
 [344] "How don this folk that seen hire loves wedded
 [345] By frendes myght, as it bitit ful ofte,
 [346] And sen hem in hire spouses bed ybedded?
 [347] God woot, they take it wisly, faire, and softe,
 [348] Forwhi good hope halt up hire herte o-lofte.
 [349] And for they kan a tyme of sorwe endure,
 [350] As tyme hem hurt, a tyme doth hem cure.
 [351] "So shuldestow endure, and laten slide
 [352] The tyme, and fonde to ben glad and light.
 [353] Ten dayes nys so longe nought t' abide.
 [354] And syn she the to comen hath bihyght,
 [355] She nyl hire heste breken for no wight.
 [356] For dred the nat that she nyl fynden weye
 [357] To come ayein; my lif that dorste I leye.
 [358] "Thi swevnes ek and al swich fantasie
 [359] Drif out and lat hem faren to meschaunce,
 [360] For they procede of thi malencolie
 [361] That doth the fele in slep al this penaunce.
 [362] A straw for alle swevenes signifiaunce!
 [363] God helpe me so, I counte hem nought a bene!
 [364] Ther woot no man aright what dremes mene.
 [365] "For prestes of the temple tellen this,
 [366] That dremes ben the revelaciouns
 [367] Of goddes, and as wel they telle, ywis,
 [368] That they ben infernals illusiouns;
 [369] And leches seyn that of complexiouns
 [370] Proceden they, or fast, or glotonye.
 [371] Who woot in soth thus what thei signifie?
 [372] "Ek oother seyn that thorugh impressiouns,
 [373] As if a wight hath faste a thyng in mynde,
 [374] That therof cometh swiche avysiouns;
 [375] And other seyn, as they in bokes fynde,
 [376] That after tymes of the yer, by kynde,
 [377] Men dreme, and that th' effect goth by the moone.
 [378] But leve no drem, for it is nought to doone.
 [379] "Wel worth. of dremes ay thise olde wives,
 [380] And treweliche ek augurye of thise fowles,
 [381] For fere of which men wenen lese here lyves,
 [382] As revenes qualm, or shrichyng of thise owles.
 [383] To trowen on it bothe fals and foul is.
 [384] Allas, allas, so noble a creature
 [385] As is a man shal dreden swich ordure!
 [386] "For which with al myn herte I the biseche,
 [387] Unto thiself that al this thow foryyve;
 [388] And ris now up withowten more speche,
 [389] And lat us caste how forth may best be dryve
 [390] This tyme, and ek how fresshly we may lyve
 [391] Whan that she comth, the which shal be right soone.
 [392] God helpe me so, the beste is thus to doone.
 [393] "Ris, lat us speke of lusty lif in Troie
 [394] That we han led, and forth the tyme dryve;
 [395] And ek of tyme comyng us rejoie,
 [396] That bryngen shal oure blisse now so blyve;
 [397] And langour of thise twyes dayes fyve
 [398] We shal therwith so foryete or oppresse
 [399] That wel unneth it don shal us duresse.
 [400] "This town is ful of lordes al aboute,
 [401] And trewes lasten al this mene while.
 [402] Go we pleye us in som lusty route
 [403] To Sarpedoun, nat hennes but a myle;
 [404] And thus thow shalt the tyme wel bygile,
 [405] And dryve it forth unto that blisful morwe
 [406] That thow hire se, that cause is of thi sorwe.
 [407] "Now ris, my deere brother Troilus,
 [408] For certes it non honour is to the
 [409] To wepe and in thi bedde to jouken thus;
 [410] For trewelich, of o thyng trust to me:
 [411] If thow thus ligge a day, or two, or thre,
 [412] The folk wol seyn that thow for cowardise
 [413] The feynest sik, and that thow darst nat rise!"
 [414] This Troilus answerde, "O brother deere,
 [415] This knowen folk that han ysuffred peyne,
 [416] That though he wepe and make sorwful cheere
 [417] That feleth harm and smert in every veyne,
 [418] No wonder is. and though ich evere pleyne,
 [419] Or alwey wepe, I am no thyng to blame,
 [420] Syn I have lost the cause of al my game.
 [421] "But syn of fyne force I mot arise,
 [422] I shal arise as soone as evere I may;
 [423] And God, to whom myn herte I sacrifice,
 [424] So sende us hastely the tenthe day!
 [425] For was ther nevere fowel so fayn of May
 [426] As I shal ben whan that she comth in Troie
 [427] That cause is of my torment and my joie.
 [428] "But whider is thi reed," quod Troilus,
 [429] "That we may pleye us best in al this town?"
 [430] "By God, my conseil is," quod Pandarus,
 [431] "To ride and pleye us with kyng Sarpedoun."
 [432] So longe of this they speken up and down
 [433] Til Troilus gan at the laste assente
 [434] To rise, and forth to Sarpedoun they wente.
 [435] This Sarpedoun, as he that honourable
 [436] Was evere his lyve, and ful of heigh largesse,
 [437] With al that myghte yserved ben on table
 [438] That deynte was, al coste it gret richesse,
 [439] He fedde hem day by day, that swich noblesse,
 [440] As seyden bothe the mooste and ek the leeste,
 [441] Was nevere er that day wist at any feste.
 [442] Nor in this world ther is non instrument
 [443] Delicious, thorugh wynd or touche of corde,
 [444] As fer as any wight hath evere ywent,
 [445] That tonge telle or herte may recorde,
 [446] That at that feste it nas wel herd acorde;
 [447] Ne of ladys ek so fair a compaignie
 [448] On daunce, er tho, was nevere iseye with ie.
 [449] But what availeth this to Troilus,
 [450] That for his sorwe nothyng of it roughte?
 [451] For evere in oon his herte pietous
 [452] Ful bisyly Criseyde, his lady, soughte.
 [453] On hire was evere al that his herte thoughte,
 [454] Now this, now that, so faste ymagenynge
 [455] That glade, iwis, kan hym no festeyinge.
 [456] Thise ladies ek that at this feste ben,
 [457] Syn that he saugh his lady was aweye,
 [458] It was his sorwe upon hem for to sen,
 [459] Or for to here on instrumentes pleye.
 [460] For she that of his herte berth the keye
 [461] Was absent, lo, this was his fantasie --
 [462] That no wight sholde maken melodie.
 [463] Nor ther nas houre in al the day or nyght,
 [464] Whan he was there as no wight myghte hym heere,
 [465] That he ne seyde, "O lufsom lady bryght,
 [466] How have ye faren syn that ye were here?
 [467] Welcome, ywis, myn owne lady deere!"
 [468] But weylaway, al this nat but a maze.
 [469] Fortune his howve entended bet to glaze!
 [470] The lettres ek that she of olde tyme
 [471] Hadde hym ysent, he wolde allone rede
 [472] An hondred sithe atwixen noon and prime,
 [473] Refiguryng hire shap, hire wommanhede,
 [474] Withinne his herte, and every word or dede
 [475] That passed was; and thus he drof t' an ende
 [476] The ferthe day, and seyde he wolde wende.
 [477] And seyde, "Leve brother Pandarus,
 [478] Intendestow that we shal here bleve
 [479] Til Sarpedoun wol forth congeyen us?
 [480] Yet were it fairer that we toke oure leve.
 [481] For Goddes love, lat us now soone at eve
 [482] Oure leve take, and homward lat us torne,
 [483] For treweliche, I nyl nat thus sojourne."
 [484] Pandare answerde, "Be we comen hider
 [485] To fecchen fir and rennen hom ayein?
 [486] God help me so, I kan nat tellen whider
 [487] We myghte gon, if I shal sothly seyn,
 [488] Ther any wight is of us more feyn
 [489] Than Sarpedoun; and if we hennes hye
 [490] Thus sodeynly, I holde it vilanye.
 [491] "Syn that we seyden that we wolde bleve
 [492] With hym a wowke, and now, thus sodeynly,
 [493] The ferthe day to take of hym owre leve --
 [494] He wolde wondren on it, trewely!
 [495] Lat us holden forth oure purpos fermely;
 [496] And syn that ye bihighten hym to bide,
 [497] Holde forward now, and after lat us ride."
 [498] Thus Pandarus, with alle peyne and wo,
 [499] Made hym to dwelle; and at the wikes ende
 [500] Of Sarpedoun they toke hire leve tho,
 [501] And on hire wey they spedden hem to wende.
 [502] Quod Troilus, "Now Lord me grace sende,
 [503] That I may fynden at myn hom-comynge
 [504] Criseyde comen!" And therwith gan he synge.
 [505] "Ye, haselwode!" thoughte this Pandare,
 [506] And to hymself ful softeliche he seyde,
 [507] "God woot, refreyden may this hote fare,
 [508] Er Calkas sende Troilus Criseyde!"
 [509] But natheles, he japed thus, and pleyde,
 [510] And swor, ywys, his herte hym wel bihighte
 [511] She wolde come as soone as evere she myghte.
 [512] Whan they unto the paleys were ycomen
 [513] Of Troilus, they doun of hors alighte,
 [514] And to the chambre hire wey than han they nomen;
 [515] And into tyme that it gan to nyghte
 [516] They spaken of Criseyde the brighte;
 [517] And after this, whan that hem bothe leste,
 [518] They spedde hem fro the soper unto reste.
 [519] On morwe, as soone as day bygan to clere,
 [520] This Troilus gan of his slep t' abrayde,
 [521] And to Pandare, his owen brother deere,
 [522] "For love of God," ful pitously he sayde,
 [523] "As go we sen the palais of Criseyde;
 [524] For syn we yet may have namore feste,
 [525] So lat us sen hire paleys atte leeste."
 [526] And therwithal, his meyne for to blende,
 [527] A cause he fond in towne for to go,
 [528] And to Criseydes hous they gonnen wende.
 [529] But Lord, this sely Troilus was wo!
 [530] Hym thoughte his sorwful herte braste a-two.
 [531] For whan he saugh hire dores spered alle,
 [532] Wel neigh for sorwe adoun he gan to falle.
 [533] Therwith, whan he was war and gan biholde
 [534] How shet was every wyndow of the place,
 [535] As frost, hym thoughte, his herte gan to colde;
 [536] For which with chaunged dedlich pale face,
 [537] Withouten word, he forthby gan to pace,
 [538] And as God wolde, he gan so faste ride
 [539] That no wight of his contenance espide.
 [540] Than seide he thus: "O paleys desolat,
 [541] O hous of houses whilom best ihight,
 [542] O paleys empty and disconsolat,
 [543] O thow lanterne of which queynt is the light,
 [544] O paleys, whilom day, that now art nyght,
 [545] Wel oughtestow to falle, and I to dye,
 [546] Syn she is went that wont was us to gye!
 [547] "O paleis, whilom crowne of houses alle,
 [548] Enlumyned with sonne of alle blisse!
 [549] O ryng, fro which the ruby is out falle,
 [550] O cause of wo, that cause hast ben of lisse!
 [551] Yet, syn I may no bet, fayn wolde I kisse
 [552] Thy colde dores, dorste I for this route;
 [553] And farwel shryne, of which the seynt is oute!"
 [554] Therwith he caste on Pandarus his ye,
 [555] With chaunged face, and pitous to biholde;
 [556] And whan he myghte his tyme aright aspie,
 [557] Ay as he rood to Pandarus he tolde
 [558] His newe sorwe and ek his joies olde,
 [559] So pitously and with so ded an hewe
 [560] That every wight myghte on his sorwe rewe.
 [561] Fro thennesforth he rideth up and down,
 [562] And every thyng com hym to remembraunce
 [563] As he rood forby places of the town
 [564] In which he whilom hadde al his plesaunce.
 [565] "Lo, yonder saugh ich last my lady daunce;
 [566] And in that temple, with hire eyen cleere,
 [567] Me kaughte first my righte lady dere.
 [568] "And yonder have I herd ful lustyly
 [569] My dere herte laugh; and yonder pleye
 [570] Saugh ich hire ones ek ful blisfully;
 [571] And yonder ones to me gan she seye,
 [572] `Now goode swete, love me wel, I preye';
 [573] And yond so goodly gan she me biholde
 [574] That to the deth myn herte is to hire holde.
 [575] "And at that corner, in the yonder hous,
 [576] Herde I myn alderlevest lady deere
 [577] So wommanly, with vois melodious,
 [578] Syngen so wel, so goodly, and so cleere
 [579] That in my soule yet me thynketh ich here
 [580] The blisful sown; and in that yonder place
 [581] My lady first me took unto hire grace."
 [582] Thanne thoughte he thus: "O blisful lord Cupide,
 [583] Whan I the proces have in my memorie
 [584] How thow me hast wereyed on every syde,
 [585] Men myght a book make of it, lik a storie.
 [586] What nede is the to seke on me victorie,
 [587] Syn I am thyn and holly at thi wille?
 [588] What joie hastow thyn owen folk to spille?
 [589] "Wel hastow, lord, ywroke on me thyn ire,
 [590] Thow myghty god, and dredefull for to greve!
 [591] Now mercy, lord! Thow woost wel I desire
 [592] Thi grace moost of alle lustes leeve,
 [593] And lyve and dye I wol in thy byleve;
 [594] For which I n' axe in guerdoun but o bone --
 [595] That thow Criseyde ayein me sende sone.
 [596] "Destreyne hire herte as faste to retorne
 [597] As thow doost myn to longen hire to see;
 [598] Than woot I wel that she nyl naught sojorne.
 [599] Now blisful lord, so cruel thow ne be
 [600] Unto the blood of Troie, I preye the,
 [601] As Juno was unto the blood Thebane,
 [602] For which the folk of Thebes caughte hire bane."
 [603] And after this he to the yates wente
 [604] Ther as Criseyde out rood a ful good paas,
 [605] And up and down ther made he many a wente,
 [606] And to hymself ful ofte he seyde, "Allas,
 [607] Fro hennes rood my blisse and my solas!
 [608] As wolde blisful God now, for his joie,
 [609] I myghte hire sen ayein come into Troie!
 [610] "And to the yonder hille I gan hire gyde,
 [611] Allas, and ther I took of hire my leve!
 [612] And yond I saugh hire to hire fader ride,
 [613] For sorwe of which myn herte shal tocleve;
 [614] And hider hom I com whan it was eve,
 [615] And here I dwelle out cast from alle joie,
 [616] And shal, til I may sen hire eft in Troie."
 [617] And of hymself ymagened he ofte
 [618] To ben defet, and pale, and waxen lesse
 [619] Than he was wont, and that men seyden softe,
 [620] "What may it be? Who kan the sothe gesse
 [621] Whi Troilus hath al this hevynesse?"
 [622] And al this nas but his malencolie,
 [623] That he hadde of hymself swich fantasie.
 [624] Another tyme ymaginen he wolde
 [625] That every wight that wente by the weye
 [626] Hadde of hym routhe, and that they seyen sholde,
 [627] "I am right sory Troilus wol deye."
 [628] And thus he drof a day yet forth or tweye,
 [629] As ye have herd; swich lif right gan he lede
 [630] As he that stood bitwixen hope and drede.
 [631] For which hym likede in his songes shewe
 [632] Th' enchesoun of his wo, as he best myghte;
 [633] And made a song of wordes but a fewe,
 [634] Somwhat his woful herte for to lighte;
 [635] And whan he was from every mannes syghte,
 [636] With softe vois he of his lady deere,
 [637] That absent was, gan synge as ye may heere:
 [638] "O sterre, of which I lost have al the light,
 [639] With herte soor wel oughte I to biwaille
 [640] That evere derk in torment, nyght by nyght,
 [641] Toward my deth with wynd in steere I saille;
 [642] For which the tenthe nyght, if that I faille
 [643] The gydyng of thi bemes bright an houre,
 [644] My ship and me Caribdis wol devoure."
 [645] This song whan he thus songen hadde, soone
 [646] He fil ayeyn into his sikes olde;
 [647] And every nyght, as was his wone to doone,
 [648] He stood the brighte moone to byholde,
 [649] And al his sorwe he to the moone tolde,
 [650] And seyde, "Ywis, whan thow art horned newe,
 [651] I shal be glad, if al the world be trewe!
 [652] "I saugh thyn hornes olde ek by the morwe
 [653] Whan hennes rood my righte lady dere
 [654] That cause is of my torment and my sorwe;
 [655] For which, O brighte Latona the clere,
 [656] For love of God, ren faste aboute thy spere!
 [657] For whan thyne hornes newe gynnen sprynge,
 [658] Than shal she come that may my blisse brynge."
 [659] The dayes moore and lenger every nyght
 [660] Than they ben wont to be, hym thoughte tho,
 [661] And that the sonne went his cours unright
 [662] By lenger weye than it was wont to do;
 [663] And seyde, "Ywis, me dredeth evere mo
 [664] The sonnes sone, Pheton, be on lyve,
 [665] And that his fader carte amys he dryve."
 [666] Upon the walles faste ek wolde he walke,
 [667] And on the Grekis oost he wolde se;
 [668] And to hymself right thus he wolde talke:
 [669] "Lo, yonder is myn owene lady free,
 [670] Or ellis yonder, ther tho tentes be;
 [671] And thennes comth this eyr, that is so soote
 [672] That in my soule I fele it doth me boote.
 [673] "And hardily, this wynd that more and moore
 [674] Thus stoundemele encresseth in my face
 [675] Is of my ladys depe sikes soore.
 [676] I preve it thus: for in noon other place
 [677] Of al this town, save onliche in this space,
 [678] Fele I no wynd that sowneth so lik peyne;
 [679] It seyth, `Allas! Whi twynned be we tweyne?'"
 [680] This longe tyme he dryveth forth right thus
 [681] Til fully passed was the nynthe nyght;
 [682] And ay bisyde hym was this Pandarus,
 [683] That bisily did al his fulle myght
 [684] Hym to conforte and make his herte light,
 [685] Yevyng hym hope alwey the tenthe morwe
 [686] That she shal come and stynten al his sorwe.
 [687] Upon that other syde ek was Criseyde,
 [688] With wommen fewe, among the Grekis stronge,
 [689] For which ful ofte a day "Allas," she seyde,
 [690] "That I was born! Wel may myn herte longe
 [691] After my deth, for now lyve I to longe.
 [692] Allas, and I ne may it nat amende,
 [693] For now is wors than evere yet I wende!
 [694] "My fader nyl for nothyng do me grace
 [695] To gon ayeyn, for naught I kan hym queme;
 [696] And if so be that I my terme pace,
 [697] My Troilus shal in his herte deme
 [698] That I am fals, and so it may wel seme:
 [699] Thus shal ich have unthonk on every side --
 [700] That I was born so weilaway the tide!
 [701] "And if that I me putte in jupartie
 [702] To stele awey by nyght, and it bifalle
 [703] That I be kaught, I shal be holde a spie;
 [704] Or elles -- lo, this drede I moost of alle --
 [705] If in the hondes of som wrecche I falle,
 [706] I nam but lost, al be myn herte trewe.
 [707] Now, myghty God, thow on my sorwe rewe!"
 [708] Ful pale ywoxen was hire brighte face,
 [709] Hire lymes lene, as she that al the day
 [710] Stood, whan she dorste, and loked on the place
 [711] Ther she was born, and ther she dwelt hadde ay;
 [712] And al the nyght wepyng, allas, she lay.
 [713] And thus despeired, out of alle cure,
 [714] She ladde hire lif, this woful creature.
 [715] Ful ofte a day she sighte ek for destresse,
 [716] And in hireself she wente ay purtraynge
 [717] Of Troilus the grete worthynesse,
 [718] And al his goodly wordes recordynge
 [719] Syn first that day hire love bigan to springe.
 [720] And thus she sette hire woful herte afire
 [721] Thorugh remembraunce of that she gan desire.
 [722] In al this world ther nys so cruel herte
 [723] That hire hadde herd compleynen in hire sorwe
 [724] That nolde han wepen for hire peynes smerte,
 [725] So tendrely she weep, bothe eve and morwe.
 [726] Hire nedede no teris for to borwe!
 [727] And this was yet the werste of al hire peyne:
 [728] Ther was no wight to whom she dorste hire pleyne.
 [729] Ful rewfully she loked upon Troie,
 [730] Biheld the toures heigh and ek the halles;
 [731] "Allas," quod she, "the plesance and the joie,
 [732] The which that now al torned into galle is,
 [733] Have ich had ofte withinne yonder walles!
 [734] O Troilus, what dostow now?" she seyde.
 [735] "Lord, wheyther thow yet thenke upon Criseyde?
 [736] "Allas, I ne hadde trowed on youre loore
 [737] And went with yow, as ye me redde er this!
 [738] Than hadde I now nat siked half so soore.
 [739] Who myghte han seyd that I hadde don amys
 [740] To stele awey with swich oon as he ys.
 [741] But al to late comth the letuarie
 [742] Whan men the cors unto the grave carie.
 [743] "To late is now to speke of that matere.
 [744] Prudence, allas, oon of thyne eyen thre
 [745] Me lakked alwey, er that I come here!
 [746] On tyme ypassed wel remembred me,
 [747] And present tyme ek koud ich wel ise,
 [748] But future tyme, er I was in the snare,
 [749] Koude I nat sen; that causeth now my care.
 [750] "But natheles, bityde what bityde,
 [751] I shal to-morwe at nyght, by est or west,
 [752] Out of this oost stele in som manere syde,
 [753] And gon with Troilus where as hym lest.
 [754] This purpos wol ich holde, and this is best.
 [755] No fors of wikked tonges janglerie,
 [756] For evere on love han wrecches had envye.
 [757] "For whoso wol of every word take hede,
 [758] Or reulen hym by every wightes wit,
 [759] Ne shal he nevere thryven, out of drede;
 [760] For that that som men blamen evere yit,
 [761] Lo, other manere folk comenden it.
 [762] And as for me, for al swich variaunce,
 [763] Felicite clepe I my suffisaunce.
 [764] "For which, withouten any wordes mo,
 [765] To Troie I wole, as for conclusioun."
 [766] But God it wot, er fully monthes two,
 [767] She was ful fer fro that entencioun!
 [768] For bothe Troilus and Troie town
 [769] Shal knotteles thorughout hire herte slide;
 [770] For she wol take a purpos for t' abide.
 [771] This Diomede, of whom yow telle I gan,
 [772] Goth now withinne hymself ay arguynge,
 [773] With al the sleghte and al that evere he kan,
 [774] How he may best, with shortest taryinge,
 [775] Into his net Criseydes herte brynge.
 [776] To this entent he koude nevere fyne;
 [777] To fisshen hire he leyde out hook and lyne.
 [778] But natheles, wel in his herte he thoughte
 [779] That she nas nat withoute a love in Troie,
 [780] For nevere sythen he hire thennes broughte
 [781] Ne koude he sen hire laughe or maken joie.
 [782] He nyst how best hire herte for t' acoye;
 [783] "But for t' asay," he seyde, "it naught n' agreveth,
 [784] For he that naught n' asaieth naught n' acheveth."
 [785] Yet seyde he to hymself upon a nyght,
 [786] "Now am I nat a fool, that woot wel how
 [787] Hire wo for love is of another wight,
 [788] And hereupon to gon assaye hire now?
 [789] I may wel wite it nyl nat ben my prow,
 [790] For wise folk in bookes it expresse,
 [791] `Men shal nat wowe a wight in hevynesse.'
 [792] "But whoso myghte wynnen swich a flour
 [793] From hym for whom she morneth nyght and day,
 [794] He myghte seyn he were a conquerour."
 [795] And right anon, as he that bold was ay,
 [796] Thoughte in his herte, "Happe how happe may,
 [797] Al sholde I dye, I wol hire herte seche!
 [798] I shal namore lesen but my speche."
 [799] This Diomede, as bokes us declare,
 [800] Was in his nedes prest and corageous,
 [801] With sterne vois and myghty lymes square,
 [802] Hardy, testif, strong, and chivalrous
 [803] Of dedes, lik his fader Tideus.
 [804] And som men seyn he was of tonge large;
 [805] And heir he was of Calydoigne and Arge.
 [806] Criseyde mene was of hire stature;
 [807] Therto of shap, of face, and ek of cheere,
 [808] Ther myghte ben no fairer creature.
 [809] And ofte tymes this was hire manere:
 [810] To gon ytressed with hire heres clere
 [811] Doun by hire coler at hire bak byhynde,
 [812] Which with a thred of gold she wolde bynde;
 [813] And, save hire browes joyneden yfeere,
 [814] Ther nas no lak, in aught I kan espien.
 [815] But for to speken of hire eyen cleere,
 [816] Lo, trewely, they writen that hire syen
 [817] That Paradis stood formed in hire yen.
 [818] And with hire riche beaute evere more
 [819] Strof love in hire ay, which of hem was more.
 [820] She sobre was, ek symple, and wys withal,
 [821] The best ynorisshed ek that myghte be,
 [822] And goodly of hire speche in general,
 [823] Charitable, estatlich, lusty, fre;
 [824] Ne nevere mo ne lakked hire pite;
 [825] Tendre-herted, slydynge of corage;
 [826] But trewely, I kan nat telle hire age.
 [827] And Troilus wel woxen was in highte,
 [828] And complet formed by proporcioun
 [829] So wel that kynde it nought amenden myghte;
 [830] Yong, fressh, strong, and hardy as lyoun;
 [831] Trewe as stiel in ech condicioun;
 [832] Oon of the beste entecched creature
 [833] That is or shal whil that the world may dure.
 [834] And certeynly in storye it is yfounde
 [835] That Troilus was nevere unto no wight,
 [836] As in his tyme, in no degree secounde
 [837] In durryng don that longeth to a knyght.
 [838] Al myghte a geant passen hym of myght,
 [839] His herte ay with the first and with the beste
 [840] Stood paregal, to durre don that hym leste.
 [841] But for to tellen forth of Diomede:
 [842] It fel that after, on the tenthe day
 [843] Syn that Criseyde out of the citee yede,
 [844] This Diomede, as fressh as braunche in May,
 [845] Com to the tente ther as Calkas lay,
 [846] And feyned hym with Calkas han to doone;
 [847] But what he mente, I shal yow tellen soone.
 [848] Criseyde, at shorte wordes for to telle,
 [849] Welcomed hym and down hym by hire sette --
 [850] And he was ethe ynough to maken dwelle!
 [851] And after this, withouten longe lette,
 [852] The spices and the wyn men forth hem fette;
 [853] And forth they speke of this and that yfeere,
 [854] As frendes don, of which som shal ye heere.
 [855] He gan first fallen of the werre in speche
 [856] Bitwixe hem and the folk of Troie town;
 [857] And of th' assege he gan hire ek biseche
 [858] To telle hym what was hire opynyoun;
 [859] Fro that demaunde he so descendeth down
 [860] To axen hire if that hire straunge thoughte
 [861] The Grekis gise and werkes that they wroughte;
 [862] And whi hire fader tarieth so longe
 [863] To wedden hire unto som worthy wight.
 [864] Criseyde, that was in hire peynes stronge
 [865] For love of Troilus, hire owen knyght,
 [866] As ferforth as she konnyng hadde or myght
 [867] Answerde hym tho; but as of his entente,
 [868] It semed nat she wiste what he mente.
 [869] But natheles, this ilke Diomede
 [870] Gan in hymself assure, and thus he seyde:
 [871] "If ich aright have taken of yow hede,
 [872] Me thynketh thus, O lady myn, Criseyde,
 [873] That syn I first hond on youre bridel leyde,
 [874] Whan ye out come of Troie by the morwe,
 [875] Ne koude I nevere sen yow but in sorwe.
 [876] "Kan I nat seyn what may the cause be,
 [877] But if for love of som Troian it were,
 [878] The which right sore wolde athynken me
 [879] That ye for any wight that dwelleth there
 [880] Sholden spille a quarter of a tere
 [881] Or pitously youreselven so bigile --
 [882] For dredeles, it is nought worth the while.
 [883] "The folk of Troie, as who seyth, alle and some
 [884] In prisoun ben, as ye youreselven se;
 [885] Nor thennes shal nat oon on-lyve come
 [886] For al the gold atwixen sonne and se.
 [887] Trusteth wel, and understondeth me,
 [888] Ther shal nat oon to mercy gon on-lyve,
 [889] Al were he lord of worldes twies fyve!
 [890] "Swich wreche on hem for fecchynge of Eleyne
 [891] Ther shal ben take, er that we hennes wende,
 [892] That Manes, which that goddes ben of peyne,
 [893] Shal ben agast that Grekes wol hem shende,
 [894] And men shul drede, unto the worldes ende,
 [895] From hennesforth to ravysshen any queene,
 [896] So cruel shal oure wreche on hem be seene.
 [897] "And but if Calkas lede us with ambages --
 [898] That is to seyn, with double wordes slye,
 [899] Swiche as men clepen a word with two visages --
 [900] Ye shal wel knowen that I naught ne lie,
 [901] And al this thyng right sen it with youre ye,
 [902] And that anon, ye nyl nat trowe how sone;
 [903] Now taketh hede, for it is for to doone.
 [904] "What! Wene ye youre wise fader wolde
 [905] Han yeven Antenor for yow anon,
 [906] If he ne wiste that the cite sholde
 [907] Destroied ben? Whi, nay, so mote I gon!
 [908] He knew ful wel ther shal nat scapen oon
 [909] That Troian is. and for the grete feere
 [910] He dorste nat ye dwelte lenger there.
 [911] "What wol ye more, lufsom lady deere?
 [912] Lat Troie and Troian fro youre herte pace!
 [913] Drif out that bittre hope, and make good cheere,
 [914] And clepe ayeyn the beaute of youre face
 [915] That ye with salte teris so deface,
 [916] For Troie is brought in swich a jupartie
 [917] That it to save is now no remedie.
 [918] "And thenketh wel, ye shal in Grekis fynde
 [919] A moore parfit love, er it be nyght,
 [920] Than any Troian is, and more kynde,
 [921] And bet to serven yow wol don his myght.
 [922] And if ye vouchesauf, my lady bright,
 [923] I wol ben he to serven yow myselve,
 [924] Yee, levere than be kyng of Greces twelve!"
 [925] And with that word he gan to waxen red,
 [926] And in his speche a litel wight he quok,
 [927] And caste asyde a litel wight his hed,
 [928] And stynte a while; and afterward he wok,
 [929] And sobreliche on hire he threw his lok,
 [930] And seyde, "I am, al be it yow no joie,
 [931] As gentil man as any wight in Troie.
 [932] "For if my fader Tideus," he seyde,
 [933] "Ilyved hadde, ich hadde ben er this
 [934] Of Calydoyne and Arge a kyng, Criseyde!
 [935] And so hope I that I shal yet, iwis.
 [936] But he was slayn -- allas, the more harm is. --
 [937] Unhappily at Thebes al to rathe,
 [938] Polymyte and many a man to scathe.
 [939] "But herte myn, syn that I am youre man --
 [940] And ben the first of whom I seche grace --
 [941] To serve yow as hertely as I kan,
 [942] And evere shal whil I to lyve have space,
 [943] So, er that I departe out of this place,
 [944] Ye wol me graunte that I may to-morwe,
 [945] At bettre leyser, telle yow my sorwe."
 [946] What sholde I telle his wordes that he seyde?
 [947] He spak inough for o day at the meeste.
 [948] It preveth wel; he spak so that Criseyde
 [949] Graunted on the morwe, at his requeste,
 [950] For to speken with hym at the leeste --
 [951] So that he nolde speke of swich matere.
 [952] And thus to hym she seyde, as ye may here,
 [953] As she that hadde hire herte on Troilus
 [954] So faste that ther may it non arace;
 [955] And strangely she spak, and seyde thus:
 [956] "O Diomede, I love that ilke place
 [957] Ther I was born; and Joves, for his grace,
 [958] Delyvere it soone of al that doth it care!
 [959] God, for thy myght, so leve it wel to fare!
 [960] "That Grekis wolde hire wrath on Troie wreke,
 [961] If that they myght, I knowe it wel, iwis;
 [962] But it shal naught byfallen as ye speke,
 [963] And God toforn! And forther over this,
 [964] I woot my fader wys and redy is,
 [965] And that he me hath bought, as ye me tolde,
 [966] So deere, I am the more unto hym holde.
 [967] "That Grekis ben of heigh condicioun
 [968] I woot ek wel; but certeyn, men shal fynde
 [969] As worthi folk withinne Troie town,
 [970] As konnyng, and as parfit, and as kynde,
 [971] As ben bitwixen Orkades and Inde;
 [972] And that ye koude wel yowre lady serve,
 [973] I trowe ek wel, hire thank for to deserve.
 [974] "But as to speke of love, ywis," she seyde,
 [975] "I hadde a lord, to whom I wedded was,
 [976] The whos myn herte al was, til that he deyde;
 [977] And other love, as help me now Pallas,
 [978] Ther in myn herte nys, ne nevere was.
 [979] And that ye ben of noble and heigh kynrede,
 [980] I have wel herd it tellen, out of drede.
 [981] "And that doth me to han so gret a wonder
 [982] That ye wol scornen any womman so.
 [983] Ek, God woot, love and I ben fer ysonder!
 [984] I am disposed bet, so mot I go,
 [985] Unto my deth, to pleyne and maken wo.
 [986] What I shal after don I kan nat seye;
 [987] But trewelich, as yet me list nat pleye.
 [988] "Myn herte is now in tribulacioun,
 [989] And ye in armes bisy day by day.
 [990] Herafter, whan ye wonnen han the town,
 [991] Peraventure so it happen may
 [992] That whan I se that nevere yit I say
 [993] Than wol I werke that I nevere wroughte!
 [994] This word to yow ynough suffisen oughte.
 [995] "To-morwe ek wol I speken with yow fayn,
 [996] So that ye touchen naught of this matere.
 [997] And whan yow list, ye may come here ayayn;
 [998] And er ye gon, thus muche I sey yow here:
 [999] As help me Pallas with hire heres clere,
 [1000] If that I sholde of any Grek han routhe,
 [1001] It sholde be youreselven, by my trouthe!
 [1002] "I say nat therfore that I wol yow love,
 [1003] N' y say nat nay; but in conclusioun,
 [1004] I mene wel, by God that sit above!"
 [1005] And therwithal she caste hire eyen down,
 [1006] And gan to sike, and seyde, "O Troie town,
 [1007] Yet bidde I God in quiete and in reste
 [1008] I may yow sen, or do myn herte breste."
 [1009] But in effect, and shortly for to seye,
 [1010] This Diomede al fresshly newe ayeyn
 [1011] Gan pressen on, and faste hire mercy preye;
 [1012] And after this, the sothe for to seyn,
 [1013] Hire glove he took, of which he was ful feyn;
 [1014] And finaly, whan it was woxen eve
 [1015] And al was wel, he roos and tok his leve.
 [1016] The brighte Venus folwede and ay taughte
 [1017] The wey ther brode Phebus down alighte;
 [1018] And Cynthea hire char-hors overraughte
 [1019] To whirle out of the Leoun, if she myghte;
 [1020] And Signifer his candels sheweth brighte
 [1021] Whan that Criseyde unto hire bedde wente
 [1022] Inwith hire fadres faire brighte tente,
 [1023] Retornyng in hire soule ay up and down
 [1024] The wordes of this sodeyn Diomede,
 [1025] His grete estat, and perel of the town,
 [1026] And that she was allone and hadde nede
 [1027] Of frendes help; and thus bygan to brede
 [1028] The cause whi, the sothe for to telle,
 [1029] That she took fully purpos for to dwelle.
 [1030] The morwen com, and gostly for to speke,
 [1031] This Diomede is come unto Criseyde;
 [1032] And shortly, lest that ye my tale breke,
 [1033] So wel he for hymselven spak and seyde
 [1034] That alle hire sikes soore adown he leyde;
 [1035] And finaly, the sothe for to seyne,
 [1036] He refte hire of the grete of al hire peyne.
 [1037] And after this the storie telleth us
 [1038] That she hym yaf the faire baye stede
 [1039] The which he ones wan of Troilus;
 [1040] And ek a broche -- and that was litel nede --
 [1041] That Troilus was, she yaf this Diomede.
 [1042] And ek, the bet from sorwe hym to releve,
 [1043] She made hym were a pencel of hire sleve.
 [1044] I fynde ek in stories elleswhere,
 [1045] Whan thorugh the body hurt was Diomede
 [1046] Of Troilus, tho wep she many a teere
 [1047] Whan that she saugh his wyde wowndes blede,
 [1048] And that she took, to kepen hym, good hede;
 [1049] And for to helen hym of his sorwes smerte,
 [1050] Men seyn -- I not -- that she yaf hym hire herte.
 [1051] But trewely, the storie telleth us,
 [1052] Ther made nevere womman moore wo
 [1053] Than she, whan that she falsed Troilus.
 [1054] She seyde, "Allas, for now is clene ago
 [1055] My name of trouthe in love, for everemo!
 [1056] For I have falsed oon the gentileste
 [1057] That evere was, and oon the worthieste!
 [1058] "Allas, of me, unto the worldes ende,
 [1059] Shal neyther ben ywriten nor ysonge
 [1060] No good word, for thise bokes wol me shende.
 [1061] O, rolled shal I ben on many a tonge!
 [1062] Thorughout the world my belle shal be ronge!
 [1063] And wommen moost wol haten me of alle.
 [1064] Allas, that swich a cas me sholde falle!
 [1065] "Thei wol seyn, in as muche as in me is,
 [1066] I have hem don dishonour, weylaway!
 [1067] Al be I nat the first that dide amys,
 [1068] What helpeth that to don my blame awey?
 [1069] But syn I se ther is no bettre way,
 [1070] And that to late is now for me to rewe,
 [1071] To Diomede algate I wol be trewe.
 [1072] "But, Troilus, syn I no bettre may,
 [1073] And syn that thus departen ye and I,
 [1074] Yet prey I God, so yeve yow right good day,
 [1075] As for the gentileste, trewely,
 [1076] That evere I say, to serven feythfully,
 [1077] And best kan ay his lady honour kepe."
 [1078] And with that word she brast anon to wepe.
 [1079] "And certes yow ne haten shal I nevere;
 [1080] And frendes love, that shal ye han of me,
 [1081] And my good word, al sholde I lyven evere.
 [1082] And trewely I wolde sory be
 [1083] For to seen yow in adversitee;
 [1084] And gilteles, I woot wel, I yow leve.
 [1085] But al shal passe; and thus take I my leve."
 [1086] But trewely, how longe it was bytwene
 [1087] That she forsok hym for this Diomede,
 [1088] Ther is non auctour telleth it, I wene.
 [1089] Take every man now to his bokes heede,
 [1090] He shal no terme fynden, out of drede.
 [1091] For though that he bigan to wowe hire soone,
 [1092] Er he hire wan, yet was ther more to doone.
 [1093] Ne me ne list this sely womman chyde
 [1094] Forther than the storye wol devyse.
 [1095] Hire name, allas, is publysshed so wide
 [1096] That for hire gilt it oughte ynough suffise.
 [1097] And if I myghte excuse hire any wise,
 [1098] For she so sory was for hire untrouthe,
 [1099] Iwis, I wolde excuse hire yet for routhe.
 [1100] This Troilus, as I byfore have told,
 [1101] Thus driveth forth, as wel as he hath myght;
 [1102] But often was his herte hoot and cold,
 [1103] And namely that ilke nynthe nyght,
 [1104] Which on the morwe she hadde hym bihight
 [1105] To com ayeyn. God woot, ful litel reste
 [1106] Hadde he that nyght -- nothyng to slepe hym leste.
 [1107] The laurer-crowned Phebus with his heete
 [1108] Gan, in his cours ay upward as he wente,
 [1109] To warmen of the est se the wawes weete,
 [1110] And Nysus doughter song with fressh entente,
 [1111] Whan Troilus his Pandare after sente;
 [1112] And on the walles of the town they pleyde,
 [1113] To loke if they kan sen aught of Criseyde.
 [1114] Tyl it was noon they stoden for to se
 [1115] Who that ther come, and every maner wight
 [1116] That com fro fer, they seyden it was she --
 [1117] Til that thei koude knowen hym aright.
 [1118] Now was his herte dul, now was it light.
 [1119] And thus byjaped stonden for to stare
 [1120] Aboute naught this Troilus and Pandare.
 [1121] To Pandarus this Troilus tho seyde,
 [1122] "For aught I woot, byfor noon, sikirly,
 [1123] Into this town ne comth nat here Criseyde.
 [1124] She hath ynough to doone, hardyly,
 [1125] To wynnen from hire fader, so trowe I.
 [1126] Hire olde fader wol yet make hire dyne
 [1127] Er that she go -- God yeve hys herte pyne!"
 [1128] Pandare answerede, "It may wel be, certeyn.
 [1129] And forthi lat us dyne, I the byseche,
 [1130] And after noon than maystow come ayeyn."
 [1131] And hom they go, withoute more speche,
 [1132] And comen ayeyn -- but longe may they seche
 [1133] Er that they fynde that they after cape.
 [1134] Fortune hem bothe thenketh for to jape!
 [1135] Quod Troilus, "I se wel now that she
 [1136] Is taried with hire olde fader so,
 [1137] That er she come, it wol neigh even be.
 [1138] Com forth; I wol unto the yate go.
 [1139] Thise porters ben unkonnyng evere mo,
 [1140] And I wol don hem holden up the yate
 [1141] As naught ne were, although she come late."
 [1142] The day goth faste, and after that com eve,
 [1143] And yet com nought to Troilus Criseyde.
 [1144] He loketh forth by hegge, by tre, by greve,
 [1145] And fer his hed over the wal he leyde;
 [1146] And at the laste he torned hym and seyde,
 [1147] "By God, I woot hire menyng now, Pandare!
 [1148] Almoost, ywys, al newe was my care.
 [1149] "Now douteles, this lady kan hire good;
 [1150] I woot she meneth riden pryvely.
 [1151] I comende hire wisdom, by myn hood!
 [1152] She wol nat maken peple nycely
 [1153] Gaure on hire whan she comth, but softely
 [1154] By nyghte into the town she thenketh ride.
 [1155] And, deere brother, thynk nat longe t' abide.
 [1156] "We han naught elles for to don, ywis.
 [1157] And Pandarus, now woltow trowen me?
 [1158] Have here my trouthe, I se hire! Yond she is.
 [1159] Heve up thyn eyen, man! Maistow nat se?"
 [1160] Pandare answerede, "Nay, so mote I the!
 [1161] Al wrong, by God! What saistow, man? Where arte?
 [1162] That I se yond nys but a fare-carte."
 [1163] "Allas, thow seyst right soth," quod Troilus.
 [1164] "But, hardily, it is naught al for nought
 [1165] That in myn herte I now rejoysse thus;
 [1166] It is ayeyns som good I have a thought.
 [1167] Not I nat how, but syn that I was wrought
 [1168] Ne felte I swich a comfort, dar I seye;
 [1169] She comth to-nyght, my lif that dorste I leye!"
 [1170] Pandare answerde, "It may be, wel ynough,"
 [1171] And held with hym of al that evere he seyde.
 [1172] But in his herte he thoughte, and softe lough,
 [1173] And to hymself ful sobreliche he seyde,
 [1174] "From haselwode, there joly Robyn pleyde,
 [1175] Shal come al that that thow abidest heere.
 [1176] Ye, fare wel al the snow of ferne yere!"
 [1177] The warden of the yates gan to calle
 [1178] The folk which that withoute the yates were,
 [1179] And bad hem dryven in hire bestes alle,
 [1180] Or all the nyght they moste bleven there.
 [1181] And fer withinne the nyght, with many a teere,
 [1182] This Troilus gan homward for to ride,
 [1183] For wel he seth it helpeth naught t' abide.
 [1184] But natheles, he gladed hym in this:
 [1185] He thought he misacounted hadde his day,
 [1186] And seyde, "I understonde have al amys.
 [1187] For thilke nyght I last Criseyde say,
 [1188] She seyde, `I shal ben here, if that I may,
 [1189] Er that the moone, O deere herte swete,
 [1190] The Leoun passe, out of this Ariete.'
 [1191] "For which she may yet holde al hire byheste."
 [1192] And on the morwe unto the yate he wente,
 [1193] And up and down, by west and ek by este,
 [1194] Upon the walles made he many a wente.
 [1195] But al for nought; his hope alwey hym blente.
 [1196] For which at nyght, in sorwe and sikes sore,
 [1197] He wente hym hom, withouten any more.
 [1198] His hope al clene out of his herte fledde;
 [1199] He nath wheron now lenger for to honge;
 [1200] But for the peyne hym thoughte his herte bledde,
 [1201] So were his throwes sharpe and wonder stronge;
 [1202] For whan he saugh that she abood so longe,
 [1203] He nyste what he juggen of it myghte,
 [1204] Syn she hath broken that she hym bihighte.
 [1205] The thridde, ferthe, fifte, sexte day
 [1206] After tho dayes ten of which I tolde,
 [1207] Bitwixen hope and drede his herte lay,
 [1208] Yet somwhat trustyng on hire hestes olde.
 [1209] But whan he saugh she nolde hire terme holde,
 [1210] He kan now sen non other remedie
 [1211] But for to shape hym soone for to dye.
 [1212] Therwith the wikked spirit, God us blesse,
 [1213] Which that men clepeth woode jalousie,
 [1214] Gan in hym crepe, in al this hevynesse;
 [1215] For which, by cause he wolde soone dye,
 [1216] He ne et ne drank, for his malencolye,
 [1217] And ek from every compaignye he fledde:
 [1218] This was the lif that al the tyme he ledde.
 [1219] He so defet was, that no manere man
 [1220] Unneth hym myghte knowen ther he wente;
 [1221] So was he lene, and therto pale and wan,
 [1222] And feble, that he walketh by potente;
 [1223] And with his ire he thus hymselve shente.
 [1224] But whoso axed hym wherof hym smerte,
 [1225] He seyde his harm was al aboute his herte.
 [1226] Priam ful ofte, and ek his moder deere,
 [1227] His bretheren and his sustren gonne hym freyne
 [1228] Whi he so sorwful was in al his cheere,
 [1229] And what thyng was the cause of al his peyne;
 [1230] But al for naught. He nolde his cause pleyne,
 [1231] But seyde he felte a grevous maladie
 [1232] Aboute his herte, and fayn he wolde dye.
 [1233] So on a day he leyde hym doun to slepe,
 [1234] And so byfel that yn his slep hym thoughte
 [1235] That in a forest faste he welk to wepe
 [1236] For love of here that hym these peynes wroughte;
 [1237] And up and doun as he the forest soughte,
 [1238] He mette he saugh a bor with tuskes grete,
 [1239] That slepte ayeyn the bryghte sonnes hete.
 [1240] And by this bor, faste in his armes folde,
 [1241] Lay, kyssyng ay, his lady bryght, Criseyde.
 [1242] For sorwe of which, whan he it gan byholde,
 [1243] And for despit, out of his slep he breyde,
 [1244] And loude he cride on Pandarus, and seyde:
 [1245] "O Pandarus, now know I crop and roote.
 [1246] I n' am but ded; ther nys noon other bote.
 [1247] "My lady bryght, Criseyde, hath me bytrayed,
 [1248] In whom I trusted most of ony wight.
 [1249] She elliswhere hath now here herte apayed.
 [1250] The blysful goddes thorugh here grete myght
 [1251] Han in my drem yshewed it ful right.
 [1252] Thus yn my drem Criseyde have I byholde" --
 [1253] And al this thing to Pandarus he tolde.
 [1254] "O my Criseyde, allas, what subtilte,
 [1255] What newe lust, what beaute, what science,
 [1256] What wratthe of juste cause have ye to me?
 [1257] What gilt of me, what fel experience
 [1258] Hath fro me raft, allas, thyn advertence?
 [1259] O trust, O feyth, O depe asseuraunce!
 [1260] Who hath me reft Criseyde, al my plesaunce?
 [1261] "Allas, whi leet I you from hennes go,
 [1262] For which wel neigh out of my wit I breyde?
 [1263] Who shal now trowe on any othes mo?
 [1264] God wot, I wende, O lady bright, Criseyde,
 [1265] That every word was gospel that ye seyde!
 [1266] But who may bet bigile, yf hym lyste,
 [1267] Than he on whom men weneth best to triste?
 [1268] "What shal I don, my Pandarus, allas?
 [1269] I fele now so sharp a newe peyne,
 [1270] Syn that ther lith no remedye in this cas,
 [1271] That bet were it I with myn hondes tweyne
 [1272] Myselven slowh alwey than thus to pleyne;
 [1273] For thorugh the deth my wo sholde han an ende,
 [1274] Ther every day with lyf myself I shende."
 [1275] Pandare answerde and seyde, "Allas the while
 [1276] That I was born! Have I nat seyd er this,
 [1277] That dremes many a maner man bigile?
 [1278] And whi? For folk expounden hem amys.
 [1279] How darstow seyn that fals thy lady ys
 [1280] For any drem, right for thyn owene drede?
 [1281] Lat be this thought; thow kanst no dremes rede.
 [1282] "Peraunter, ther thow dremest of this boor,
 [1283] It may so be that it may signifie
 [1284] Hire fader, which that old is and ek hoor,
 [1285] Ayeyn the sonne lith o poynt to dye,
 [1286] And she for sorwe gynneth wepe and crie,
 [1287] And kisseth hym, ther he lith on the grounde:
 [1288] Thus sholdestow thi drem aright expounde!"
 [1289] "How myghte I than don," quod Troilus,
 [1290] "To knowe of this, yee, were it nevere so lite?"
 [1291] "Now seystow wisly," quod this Pandarus;
 [1292] "My red is this: syn thow kanst wel endite,
 [1293] That hastily a lettre thow hire write,
 [1294] Thorugh which thow shalt wel bryngyn it aboute
 [1295] To know a soth of that thow art in doute.
 [1296] "And se now whi: for this I dar wel seyn,
 [1297] That if so is that she untrewe be,
 [1298] I kan nat trowen that she wol write ayeyn.
 [1299] And if she write, thow shalt ful sone yse
 [1300] As wheither she hath any liberte
 [1301] To come ayeyn; or ellis in som clause,
 [1302] If she be let, she wol assigne a cause.
 [1303] "Thow hast nat writen hire syn that she wente,
 [1304] Nor she to the; and this I dorste laye,
 [1305] Ther may swich cause ben in hire entente
 [1306] That hardily thow wolt thiselven saye
 [1307] That hire abod the best is for yow twaye.
 [1308] Now writ hire thanne, and thow shalt feele sone
 [1309] A soth of al. Ther is namore to done."
 [1310] Acorded ben to this conclusioun,
 [1311] And that anon, thise ilke lordes two;
 [1312] And hastily sit Troilus adown,
 [1313] And rolleth in his herte to and fro
 [1314] How he may best discryven hire his wo.
 [1315] And to Criseyde, his owen lady deere,
 [1316] He wrot right thus, and seyde as ye may here:
 [1317] "Right fresshe flour, whos I ben have and shal,
 [1318] Withouten part of elleswhere servyse,
 [1319] With herte, body, lif, lust, thought, and al,
 [1320] I, woful wyght, in everich humble wise
 [1321] That tonge telle or herte may devyse,
 [1322] As ofte as matere occupieth place,
 [1323] Me recomaunde unto youre noble grace.
 [1324] "Liketh yow to witen, swete herte,
 [1325] As ye wel knowe, how longe tyme agon
 [1326] That ye me lefte in aspre peynes smerte,
 [1327] Whan that ye wente, of which yet boote non
 [1328] Have I non had, but evere wors bigon
 [1329] Fro day to day am I, and so mot dwelle,
 [1330] While it yow list, of wele and wo my welle.
 [1331] "For which to yow, with dredful herte trewe,
 [1332] I write, as he that sorwe drifth to write,
 [1333] My wo, that everich houre encresseth newe,
 [1334] Compleynyng, as I dar or kan endite.
 [1335] And that defaced is, that may ye wite
 [1336] The teris which that fro myn eyen reyne,
 [1337] That wolden speke, if that they koude, and pleyne.
 [1338] "Yow first biseche I, that youre eyen clere
 [1339] To loke on this defouled ye nat holde;
 [1340] And over al this, that ye, my lady deere,
 [1341] Wol vouchesauf this lettre to byholde;
 [1342] And by the cause ek of my cares colde
 [1343] That sleth my wit, if aught amys m' asterte,
 [1344] Foryeve it me, myn owen swete herte!
 [1345] "If any servant dorste or oughte of right
 [1346] Upon his lady pitously compleyne,
 [1347] Thanne wene I that ich oughte be that wight,
 [1348] Considered this, that ye thise monthes tweyne
 [1349] Han taried, ther ye seyden, soth to seyne,
 [1350] But dayes ten ye nolde in oost sojourne --
 [1351] But in two monthes yet ye nat retourne.
 [1352] "But for as muche as me moot nedes like
 [1353] Al that yow liste, I dar nat pleyne moore,
 [1354] But humblely, with sorwful sikes sike,
 [1355] Yow write ich myn unresty sorwes soore,
 [1356] Fro day to day desiryng evere moore
 [1357] To knowen fully, if youre wille it weere,
 [1358] How ye han ferd and don whil ye be theere;
 [1359] "The whos welfare and hele ek God encresse
 [1360] In honour swich that upward in degree
 [1361] It growe alwey, so that it nevere cesse.
 [1362] Right as youre herte ay kan, my lady free,
 [1363] Devyse, I prey to God so moot it be,
 [1364] And graunte it that ye soone upon me rewe,
 [1365] As wisly as in al I am yow trewe.
 [1366] "And if yow liketh knowen of the fare
 [1367] Of me, whos wo ther may no wit discryve,
 [1368] I kan namore but, chiste of every care,
 [1369] At wrytyng of this lettre I was on-lyve,
 [1370] Al redy out my woful gost to dryve,
 [1371] Which I delaye, and holde hym yet in honde,
 [1372] Upon the sighte of matere of youre sonde.
 [1373] "Myn eyen two, in veyn with which I se,
 [1374] Of sorwful teris salte arn waxen welles;
 [1375] My song, in pleynte of myn adversitee;
 [1376] My good, in harm; myn ese ek woxen helle is.
 [1377] My joie, in wo; I kan sey yow naught ellis,
 [1378] But torned is -- for which my lif I warie --
 [1379] Everich joie or ese in his contrarie;
 [1380] "Which with youre comyng hom ayeyn to Troie
 [1381] Ye may redresse, and more a thousand sithe
 [1382] Than evere ich hadde encressen in me joie.
 [1383] For was ther nevere herte yet so blithe
 [1384] To han his lif as I shal ben as swithe
 [1385] As I yow se; and though no manere routhe
 [1386] Commeve yow, yet thynketh on youre trouthe.
 [1387] "And if so be my gilt hath deth deserved,
 [1388] Or if yow list namore upon me se,
 [1389] In guerdoun yet of that I have yow served,
 [1390] Byseche I yow, myn owen lady free,
 [1391] That hereupon ye wolden write me,
 [1392] For love of God, my righte lode-sterre,
 [1393] That deth may make an ende of al my werre;
 [1394] "If other cause aught doth yow for to dwelle,
 [1395] That with youre lettre ye me recomforte;
 [1396] For though to me youre absence is an helle,
 [1397] With pacience I wol my wo comporte,
 [1398] And with youre lettre of hope I wol desporte.
 [1399] Now writeth, swete, and lat me thus nat pleyne;
 [1400] With hope, or deth, delivereth me fro peyne.
 [1401] "Iwis, myne owene deere herte trewe,
 [1402] I woot that whan ye next upon me se,
 [1403] So lost have I myn hele and ek myn hewe,
 [1404] Criseyde shal nought konne knowen me.
 [1405] Iwys, myn hertes day, my lady free,
 [1406] So thursteth ay myn herte to byholde
 [1407] Youre beute, that my lif unnethe I holde.
 [1408] "I say namore, al have I for to seye
 [1409] To yow wel more than I telle may;
 [1410] But wheither that ye do me lyve or deye,
 [1411] Yet praye I God, so yeve yow right good day!
 [1412] And fareth wel, goodly, faire, fresshe may,
 [1413] As she that lif or deth may me comande!
 [1414] And to youre trouthe ay I me recomande,
 [1415] "With hele swich that, but ye yeven me
 [1416] The same hele, I shal non hele have.
 [1417] In yow lith, whan yow liste that it so be,
 [1418] The day in which me clothen shal my grave;
 [1419] In yow my lif, in yow myght for to save
 [1420] Me fro disese of alle peynes smerte;
 [1421] And far now wel, myn owen swete herte! Le vostre T."
 [1422] This lettre forth was sent unto Criseyde,
 [1423] Of which hire answere in effect was this:
 [1424] Ful pitously she wroot ayeyn, and seyde,
 [1425] That also sone as that she myghte, ywys,
 [1426] She wolde come, and mende al that was mys.
 [1427] And fynaly she wroot and seyde hym thenne,
 [1428] She wolde come, ye, but she nyste whenne.
 [1429] But in hire lettre made she swich festes
 [1430] That wonder was, and swerth she loveth hym best,
 [1431] Of which he fond but botmeles bihestes.
 [1432] But Troilus, thow maist now, est or west,
 [1433] Pipe in an ivy lef, if that the lest!
 [1434] Thus goth the world. God shilde us fro meschaunce,
 [1435] And every wight that meneth trouthe avaunce!
 [1436] Encressen gan the wo fro day to nyght
 [1437] Of Troilus, for tarying of Criseyde;
 [1438] And lessen gan his hope and ek his myght,
 [1439] For which al down he in his bed hym leyde.
 [1440] He ne eet, ne dronk, ne slep, ne word seyde,
 [1441] Ymagynyng ay that she was unkynde,
 [1442] For which wel neigh he wex out of his mynde.
 [1443] This drem, of which I told have ek byforn,
 [1444] May nevere outen of his remembraunce.
 [1445] He thought ay wel he hadde his lady lorn,
 [1446] And that Joves of his purveyaunce
 [1447] Hym shewed hadde in slep the signifiaunce
 [1448] Of hire untrouthe and his disaventure,
 [1449] And that the boor was shewed hym in figure.
 [1450] For which he for Sibille his suster sente,
 [1451] That called was Cassandre ek al aboute,
 [1452] And al his drem he tolde hire er he stente,
 [1453] And hire bisoughte assoilen hym the doute
 [1454] Of the stronge boor with tuskes stoute;
 [1455] And fynaly, withinne a litel stounde,
 [1456] Cassandre hym gan right thus his drem expounde:
 [1457] She gan first smyle, and seyde, "O brother deere,
 [1458] If thow a soth of this desirest knowe,
 [1459] Thow most a fewe of olde stories heere,
 [1460] To purpos how that Fortune overthrowe
 [1461] Hath lordes olde, thorugh which, withinne a throwe,
 [1462] Thow wel this boor shalt knowe, and of what kynde
 [1463] He comen is, as men in bokes fynde.
 [1464] "Diane, which that wroth was and in ire
 [1465] For Grekis nolde don hire sacrifice,
 [1466] Ne encens upon hire auter sette afire,
 [1467] She, for that Grekis gonne hire so despise,
 [1468] Wrak hire in a wonder cruel wise;
 [1469] For with a boor as gret as ox in stalle
 [1470] She made up frete hire corn and vynes alle.
 [1471] "To sle this boor was al the contre raysed,
 [1472] Amonges which ther com, this boor to se,
 [1473] A mayde, oon of this world the beste ypreysed;
 [1474] And Meleagre, lord of that contree,
 [1475] He loved so this fresshe mayden free
 [1476] That with his manhod, er he wolde stente,
 [1477] This boor he slough, and hire the hed he sente;
 [1478] "Of which, as olde bokes tellen us,
 [1479] Ther ros a contek and a gret envye;
 [1480] And of this lord descended Tideus
 [1481] By ligne, or ellis olde bookes lye.
 [1482] But how this Meleagre gan to dye
 [1483] Thorugh his moder, wol I yow naught telle,
 [1484] For al to longe it were for to dwelle."
 [1485] She tolde ek how Tideus, er she stente,
 [1486] Unto the stronge citee of Thebes,
 [1487] To cleymen kyngdom of the citee, wente,
 [1488] For his felawe, daun Polymytes,
 [1489] Of which the brother, daun Ethiocles,
 [1490] Ful wrongfully of Thebes held the strengthe;
 [1491] This tolde she by proces, al by lengthe.
 [1492] She tolde ek how Hemonydes asterte,
 [1493] Whan Tideus slough fifty knyghtes stoute.
 [1494] She tolde ek alle the prophecyes by herte,
 [1495] And how that seven kynges with hire route
 [1496] Bysegeden the citee al aboute;
 [1497] And of the holy serpent, and the welle,
 [1498] And of the furies, al she gan hym telle;
 [1499] Of Archymoris brennynge and the pleyes,
 [1500] And how Amphiorax fil thorugh the grounde,
 [1501] How Tideus was sleyn, lord of Argeyes,
 [1502] And how Ypomedoun in litel stounde
 [1503] Was dreynt, and ded Parthonope of wownde;
 [1504] And also how Capaneus the proude
 [1505] With thonder-dynt was slayn, that cride loude.
 [1506] She gan ek telle hym how that eyther brother,
 [1507] Ethiocles and Polymyte also,
 [1508] At a scarmuche ech of hem slough other,
 [1509] And of Argyves wepynge and hire wo;
 [1510] And how the town was brent, she tolde ek tho;
 [1511] And so descendeth down from gestes olde
 [1512] To Diomede, and thus she spak and tolde:
 [1513] "This ilke boor bitokneth Diomede,
 [1514] Tideus sone, that down descended is
 [1515] Fro Meleagre, that made the boor to blede;
 [1516] And thy lady, wherso she be, ywis,
 [1517] This Diomede hire herte hath, and she his.
 [1518] Wep if thow wolt, or lef, for out of doute,
 [1519] This Diomede is inne, and thow art oute."
 [1520] "Thow seyst nat soth," quod he, "thow sorceresse,
 [1521] With al thy false goost of prophecye!
 [1522] Thow wenest ben a gret devyneresse!
 [1523] Now sestow nat this fool of fantasie
 [1524] Peyneth hire on ladys for to lye?
 [1525] Awey!" quod he. "Ther Joves yeve the sorwe!
 [1526] Thow shalt be fals, peraunter, yet tomorwe!
 [1527] "As wel thow myghtest lien on Alceste,
 [1528] That was of creatures, but men lye,
 [1529] That evere weren, kyndest and the beste!
 [1530] For whan hire housbonde was in jupertye
 [1531] To dye hymself but if she wolde dye,
 [1532] She ches for hym to dye and gon to helle,
 [1533] And starf anon, as us the bokes telle."
 [1534] Cassandre goth, and he with cruel herte
 [1535] Foryat his wo, for angre of hire speche;
 [1536] And from his bed al sodeynly he sterte,
 [1537] As though al hool hym hadde ymad a leche.
 [1538] And day by day he gan enquere and seche
 [1539] A sooth of this with al his fulle cure;
 [1540] And thus he drieth forth his aventure.
 [1541] Fortune, which that permutacioun
 [1542] Of thynges hath, as it is hire comitted
 [1543] Thorugh purveyaunce and disposicioun
 [1544] Of heighe Jove, as regnes shal be flitted
 [1545] Fro folk in folk, or when they shal be smytted,
 [1546] Gan pulle awey the fetheres brighte of Troie
 [1547] Fro day to day, til they ben bare of joie.
 [1548] Among al this, the fyn of the parodie
 [1549] Of Ector gan aprochen wonder blyve.
 [1550] The fate wolde his soule sholde unbodye,
 [1551] And shapen hadde a mene it out to dryve,
 [1552] Ayeyns which fate hym helpeth nat to stryve;
 [1553] But on a day to fighten gan he wende,
 [1554] At which -- allas! -- he caughte his lyves ende.
 [1555] For which me thynketh every manere wight
 [1556] That haunteth armes oughte to biwaille
 [1557] The deth of hym that was so noble a knyght;
 [1558] For as he drough a kyng by th' aventaille,
 [1559] Unwar of this, Achilles thorugh the maille
 [1560] And thorugh the body gan hym for to ryve;
 [1561] And thus this worthi knyght was brought of lyve.
 [1562] For whom, as olde bokes tellen us,
 [1563] Was mad swich wo that tonge it may nat telle,
 [1564] And namely, the sorwe of Troilus,
 [1565] That next hym was of worthynesse welle;
 [1566] And in this wo gan Troilus to dwelle
 [1567] That, what for sorwe, and love, and for unreste,
 [1568] Ful ofte a day he bad his herte breste.
 [1569] But natheles, though he gan hym dispaire,
 [1570] And dradde ay that his lady was untrewe,
 [1571] Yet ay on hire his herte gan repaire.
 [1572] And as thise lovers don, he soughte ay newe
 [1573] To gete ayeyn Criseyde, brighte of hewe;
 [1574] And in his herte he wente hire excusynge,
 [1575] That Calkas caused al hire tariynge.
 [1576] And ofte tyme he was in purpos grete
 [1577] Hymselven lik a pilgrym to desgise
 [1578] To seen hire; but he may nat contrefete
 [1579] To ben unknowen of folk that weren wise,
 [1580] Ne fynde excuse aright that may suffise
 [1581] If he among the Grekis knowen were;
 [1582] For which he wep ful ofte and many a tere.
 [1583] To hire he wroot yet ofte tyme al newe
 [1584] Ful pitously -- he lefte it nought for slouthe --
 [1585] Bisechyng hire that sithen he was trewe,
 [1586] That she wol come ayeyn and holde hire trouthe.
 [1587] For which Criseyde upon a day, for routhe --
 [1588] I take it so -- touchyng al this matere,
 [1589] Wrot hym ayeyn, and seyde as ye may here:
 [1590] "Cupides sone, ensample of goodlyheede,
 [1591] O swerd of knyghthod, sours of gentilesse,
 [1592] How myght a wight in torment and in drede
 [1593] And heleles, yow sende as yet gladnesse?
 [1594] I herteles, I sik, I in destresse!
 [1595] Syn ye with me, nor I with yow, may dele,
 [1596] Yow neyther sende ich herte may nor hele.
 [1597] "Youre lettres ful, the papir al ypleynted,
 [1598] Conceyved hath myn hertes pietee.
 [1599] I have ek seyn with teris al depeynted
 [1600] Youre lettre, and how that ye requeren me
 [1601] To come ayeyn, which yet ne may nat be;
 [1602] But whi, lest that this lettre founden were,
 [1603] No mencioun ne make I now, for feere.
 [1604] "Grevous to me, God woot, is youre unreste,
 [1605] Youre haste, and that the goddes ordinaunce
 [1606] It semeth nat ye take it for the beste.
 [1607] Nor other thyng nys in youre remembraunce,
 [1608] As thynketh me, but only youre plesaunce.
 [1609] But beth nat wroth, and that I yow biseche;
 [1610] For that I tarie is al for wikked speche.
 [1611] "For I have herd wel moore than I wende,
 [1612] Touchyng us two, how thynges han ystonde,
 [1613] Which I shal with dissymelyng amende.
 [1614] And beth nat wroth, I have ek understonde
 [1615] How ye ne do but holden me in honde.
 [1616] But now no force. I kan nat in yow gesse
 [1617] But alle trouthe and alle gentilesse.
 [1618] "Come I wole; but yet in swich disjoynte
 [1619] I stonde as now that what yer or what day
 [1620] That this shal be, that kan I naught apoynte.
 [1621] But in effect I pray yow, as I may,
 [1622] Of youre good word and of youre frendship ay;
 [1623] For trewely, while that my lif may dure,
 [1624] As for a frend ye may in me assure.
 [1625] "Yet preye ich yow, on yvel ye ne take
 [1626] That it is short which that I to yow write;
 [1627] I dar nat, ther I am, wel lettres make,
 [1628] Ne nevere yet ne koude I wel endite.
 [1629] Ek gret effect men write in place lite;
 [1630] Th' entente is al, and nat the lettres space.
 [1631] And fareth now wel. God have yow in his grace! La vostre Tr 5 C."
 [1632] This Troilus this lettre thoughte al straunge
 [1633] Whan he it saugh, and sorwfullich he sighte;
 [1634] Hym thoughte it lik a kalendes of chaunge.
 [1635] But fynaly, he ful ne trowen myghte
 [1636] That she ne wolde hym holden that she hyghte;
 [1637] For with ful yvel wille list hym to leve
 [1638] That loveth wel, in swich cas, though hym greve.
 [1639] But natheles men seyen that at the laste,
 [1640] For any thyng, men shal the soothe se;
 [1641] And swich a cas bitidde, and that as faste,
 [1642] That Troilus wel understod that she
 [1643] Nas nought so kynde as that hire oughte be.
 [1644] And fynaly, he woot now out of doute
 [1645] That al is lost that he hath ben aboute.
 [1646] Stood on a day in his malencolie
 [1647] This Troilus, and in suspecioun
 [1648] Of hire for whom he wende for to dye.
 [1649] And so bifel that thorughout Troye town,
 [1650] As was the gise, iborn was up and down
 [1651] A manere cote-armure, as seith the storie,
 [1652] Byforn Deiphebe, in signe of his victorie;
 [1653] The whiche cote, as telleth Lollius,
 [1654] Deiphebe it hadde rent fro Diomede
 [1655] The same day. And whan this Troilus
 [1656] It saugh, he gan to taken of it hede,
 [1657] Avysyng of the lengthe and of the brede,
 [1658] And al the werk; but as he gan byholde,
 [1659] Ful sodeynly his herte gan to colde,
 [1660] As he that on the coler fond withinne
 [1661] A broch that he Criseyde yaf that morwe
 [1662] That she from Troie moste nedes twynne,
 [1663] In remembraunce of hym and of his sorwe.
 [1664] And she hym leyde ayeyn hire feith to borwe
 [1665] To kepe it ay! But now ful wel he wiste,
 [1666] His lady nas no lenger on to triste.
 [1667] He goth hym hom and gan ful soone sende
 [1668] For Pandarus, and al this newe chaunce,
 [1669] And of this broche, he tolde hym word and ende,
 [1670] Compleynyng of hire hertes variaunce,
 [1671] His longe love, his trouthe, and his penaunce.
 [1672] And after deth, withouten wordes moore,
 [1673] Ful faste he cride, his reste hym to restore.
 [1674] Than spak he thus, "O lady myn, Criseyde,
 [1675] Where is youre feith, and where is youre biheste?
 [1676] Where is youre love? Where is youre trouthe?" he seyde.
 [1677] "Of Diomede have ye now al this feeste!
 [1678] Allas, I wolde han trowed atte leeste
 [1679] That syn ye nolde in trouthe to me stonde,
 [1680] That ye thus nolde han holden me in honde!
 [1681] "Who shal now trowe on any othes mo?
 [1682] Allas, I nevere wolde han wend, er this,
 [1683] That ye, Criseyde, koude han chaunged so;
 [1684] Ne, but I hadde agilt and don amys,
 [1685] So cruel wende I nought youre herte, ywis,
 [1686] To sle me thus! Allas, youre name of trouthe
 [1687] Is now fordon, and that is al my routhe.
 [1688] "Was ther non other broch yow liste lete
 [1689] To feffe with youre newe love," quod he,
 [1690] "But thilke broch that I, with teris wete,
 [1691] Yow yaf as for a remembraunce of me?
 [1692] Non other cause, allas, ne hadde ye
 [1693] But for despit, and ek for that ye mente
 [1694] Al outrely to shewen youre entente.
 [1695] "Thorugh which I se that clene out of youre mynde
 [1696] Ye han me cast -- and I ne kan nor may,
 [1697] For al this world, withinne myn herte fynde
 [1698] To unloven yow a quarter of a day!
 [1699] In corsed tyme I born was, weilaway,
 [1700] That yow, that doon me al this wo endure,
 [1701] Yet love I best of any creature!
 [1702] "Now God," quod he, "me sende yet the grace
 [1703] That I may meten with this Diomede!
 [1704] And trewely, if I have myght and space,
 [1705] Yet shal I make, I hope, his sydes blede.
 [1706] O God," quod he, "that oughtest taken heede
 [1707] To fortheren trouthe, and wronges to punyce,
 [1708] Whi nyltow don a vengeaunce of this vice?
 [1709] "O Pandarus, that in dremes for to triste
 [1710] Me blamed hast, and wont art oft upbreyde,
 [1711] Now maistow sen thiself, if that the liste,
 [1712] How trewe is now thi nece, bright Criseyde!
 [1713] In sondry formes, God it woot," he seyde,
 [1714] "The goddes shewen bothe joie and tene
 [1715] In slep, and by my drem it is now sene.
 [1716] "And certeynly, withouten moore speche,
 [1717] From hennesforth, as ferforth as I may,
 [1718] Myn owen deth in armes wol I seche;
 [1719] I recche nat how soone be the day!
 [1720] But trewely, Criseyde, swete may,
 [1721] Whom I have ay with al my myght yserved,
 [1722] That ye thus doon, I have it nat deserved."
 [1723] This Pandarus, that al thise thynges herde,
 [1724] And wiste wel he seyde a soth of this,
 [1725] He nought a word ayeyn to hym answerde;
 [1726] For sory of his frendes sorwe he is,
 [1727] And shamed for his nece hath don amys,
 [1728] And stant, astoned of thise causes tweye,
 [1729] As stille as ston; a word ne kowde he seye.
 [1730] But at the laste thus he spak, and seyde:
 [1731] "My brother deer, I may do the namore.
 [1732] What sholde I seyen? I hate, ywys, Cryseyde;
 [1733] And, God woot, I wol hate hire evermore!
 [1734] And that thow me bisoughtest don of yoore,
 [1735] Havyng unto myn honour ne my reste
 [1736] Right no reward, I dide al that the leste.
 [1737] "If I dide aught that myghte liken the,
 [1738] It is me lief; and of this tresoun now,
 [1739] God woot that it a sorwe is unto me!
 [1740] And dredeles, for hertes ese of yow,
 [1741] Right fayn I wolde amende it, wiste I how.
 [1742] And fro this world, almyghty God I preye
 [1743] Delivere hire soon! I kan namore seye."
 [1744] Gret was the sorwe and pleynte of Troilus,
 [1745] But forth hire cours Fortune ay gan to holde.
 [1746] Criseyde loveth the sone of Tideus,
 [1747] And Troilus moot wepe in cares colde.
 [1748] Swich is this world, whoso it kan byholde;
 [1749] In ech estat is litel hertes reste.
 [1750] God leve us for to take it for the beste!
 [1751] In many cruel bataille, out of drede,
 [1752] Of Troilus, this ilke noble knyght,
 [1753] As men may in thise olde bokes rede,
 [1754] Was seen his knyghthod and his grete myght;
 [1755] And dredeles, his ire, day and nyght,
 [1756] Ful cruwely the Grekis ay aboughte;
 [1757] And alwey moost this Diomede he soughte.
 [1758] And ofte tyme, I fynde that they mette
 [1759] With blody strokes and with wordes grete,
 [1760] Assayinge how hire speres weren whette;
 [1761] And, God it woot, with many a cruel hete
 [1762] Gan Troilus upon his helm to bete!
 [1763] But natheles, Fortune it naught ne wolde
 [1764] Of oothers hond that eyther deyen sholde.
 [1765] And if I hadde ytaken for to write
 [1766] The armes of this ilke worthi man,
 [1767] Than wolde ich of his batailles endite;
 [1768] But for that I to writen first bigan
 [1769] Of his love, I have seyd as I kan --
 [1770] His worthi dedes, whoso list hem heere,
 [1771] Rede Dares, he kan telle hem alle ifeere --
 [1772] Bysechyng every lady bright of hewe,
 [1773] And every gentil womman, what she be,
 [1774] That al be that Criseyde was untrewe,
 [1775] That for that gilt she be nat wroth with me.
 [1776] Ye may hire gilt in other bokes se;
 [1777] And gladlier I wol write, yif yow leste,
 [1778] Penolopees trouthe and good Alceste.
 [1779] N' y sey nat this al oonly for thise men,
 [1780] But moost for wommen that bitraised be
 [1781] Thorugh false folk -- God yeve hem sorwe, amen! --
 [1782] That with hire grete wit and subtilte
 [1783] Bytraise yow. And this commeveth me
 [1784] To speke, and in effect yow alle I preye,
 [1785] Beth war of men, and herkneth what I seye!
 [1786] Go, litel bok, go, litel myn tragedye,
 [1787] Ther God thi makere yet, er that he dye,
 [1788] So sende myght to make in som comedye!
 [1789] But litel book, no makyng thow n' envie,
 [1790] But subgit be to alle poesye;
 [1791] And kis the steppes where as thow seest pace
 [1792] Virgile, Ovide, Omer, Lucan, and Stace.
 [1793] And for ther is so gret diversite
 [1794] In Englissh and in writyng of oure tonge,
 [1795] So prey I God that non myswrite the,
 [1796] Ne the mysmetre for defaute of tonge;
 [1797] And red wherso thow be, or elles songe,
 [1798] That thow be understonde, God I biseche!
 [1799] But yet to purpos of my rather speche:
 [1800] The wrath, as I bigan yow for to seye,
 [1801] Of Troilus the Grekis boughten deere,
 [1802] For thousandes his hondes maden deye,
 [1803] As he that was withouten any peere,
 [1804] Save Ector, in his tyme, as I kan heere.
 [1805] But -- weilawey, save only Goddes wille,
 [1806] Despitously hym slough the fierse Achille.
 [1807] And whan that he was slayn in this manere,
 [1808] His lighte goost ful blisfully is went
 [1809] Up to the holughnesse of the eighthe spere,
 [1810] In convers letyng everich element;
 [1811] And ther he saugh with ful avysement
 [1812] The erratik sterres, herkenyng armonye
 [1813] With sownes ful of hevenyssh melodie.
 [1814] And down from thennes faste he gan avyse
 [1815] This litel spot of erthe that with the se
 [1816] Embraced is, and fully gan despise
 [1817] This wrecched world, and held al vanite
 [1818] To respect of the pleyn felicite
 [1819] That is in hevene above; and at the laste,
 [1820] Ther he was slayn his lokyng down he caste,
 [1821] And in hymself he lough right at the wo
 [1822] Of hem that wepten for his deth so faste,
 [1823] And dampned al oure werk that foloweth so
 [1824] The blynde lust, the which that may nat laste,
 [1825] And sholden al oure herte on heven caste;
 [1826] And forth he wente, shortly for to telle,
 [97-ch] 1827 Ther as Mercurye sorted hym to dwelle.
 [1828] Swich fyn hath, lo, this Troilus for love!
 [1829] Swich fyn hath al his grete worthynesse!
 [1830] Swich fyn hath his estat real above!
 [1831] Swich fyn his lust, swich fyn hath his noblesse!
 [1832] Swych fyn hath false worldes brotelnesse!
 [1833] And thus bigan his lovyng of Criseyde,
 [1834] As I have told, and in this wise he deyde.
 [1835] O yonge, fresshe folkes, he or she,
 [1836] In which that love up groweth with youre age,
 [1837] Repeyreth hom fro worldly vanyte,
 [1838] And of youre herte up casteth the visage
 [1839] To thilke God that after his ymage
 [1840] Yow made, and thynketh al nys but a faire,
 [1841] This world that passeth soone as floures faire.
 [1842] And loveth hym the which that right for love
 [1843] Upon a crois, oure soules for to beye,
 [97-ch] 1844 First starf, and roos, and sit in hevene above;
 [1845] For he nyl falsen no wight, dar I seye,
 [1846] That wol his herte al holly on hym leye.
 [1847] And syn he best to love is, and most meke,
 [1848] What nedeth feynede loves for to seke?
 [1849] Lo here, of payens corsed olde rites!
 [1850] Lo here, what alle hire goddes may availle!
 [1851] Lo here, thise wrecched worldes appetites!
 [1852] Lo here, the fyn and guerdoun for travaille
 [1853] Of Jove, Appollo, of Mars, of swich rascaille!
 [1854] Lo here, the forme of olde clerkis speche
 [1855] In poetrie, if ye hire bokes seche.
 [1856] O moral Gower, this book I directe
 [1857] To the and to the, philosophical Strode,
 [1858] To vouchen sauf, ther nede is, to correcte,
 [1859] Of youre benignites and zeles goode.
 [1860] And to that sothfast Crist, that starf on rode,
 [1861] With al myn herte of mercy evere I preye,
 [1862] And to the Lord right thus I speke and seye:
 [1863] Thow oon, and two, and thre, eterne on lyve,
 [1864] That regnest ay in thre, and two, and oon,
 [1865] Uncircumscript, and al maist circumscrive,
 [1866] Us from visible and invisible foon
 [1867] Defende, and to thy mercy, everichon,
 [1868] So make us, Jesus, for thi mercy, digne,
 [1869] For love of mayde and moder thyn benigne.
 [1870] Amen.

      
The Canterbury Tales and Other Works of Chaucer (Middle English), by Geoffery Chaucer, [14th cent.], at sacred-texts.com

 

The Legend of Good Women

 

Prologue F

 [1] A thousand tymes have I herd men telle
 [2] That ther ys joy in hevene and peyne in helle,
 [3] And I acorde wel that it ys so;
 [4] But, natheles, yet wot I wel also
 [5] That ther nis noon dwellyng in this contree
 [6] That eyther hath in hevene or helle ybe,
 [7] Ne may of hit noon other weyes witen
 [8] But as he hath herd seyd or founde it writen;
 [9] For by assay ther may no man it preve.
 [10] But God forbede but men shulde leve
 [11] Wel more thing than men han seen with ye!
 [12] Men shal not wenen every thing a lye
 [13] But yf himself yt seeth or elles dooth.
 [14] For, God wot, thing is never the lasse sooth,
 [15] Thogh every wight ne may it nat ysee.
 [16] Bernard the monk ne saugh nat all, pardee!
 [17] Than mote we to bokes that we fynde,
 [18] Thurgh whiche that olde thinges ben in mynde,
 [19] And to the doctrine of these olde wyse,
 [20] Yeve credence, in every skylful wise,
 [21] That tellen of these olde appreved stories
 [22] Of holynesse, of regnes, of victories,
 [23] Of love, of hate, of other sondry thynges,
 [24] Of whiche I may not maken rehersynges.
 [25] And yf that olde bokes were aweye,
 [26] Yloren were of remembraunce the keye.
 [27] Wel ought us thanne honouren and beleve
 [28] These bokes, there we han noon other preve.
 [29] And as for me, though that I konne but lyte,
 [30] On bokes for to rede I me delyte,
 [31] And to hem yive I feyth and ful credence,
 [32] And in myn herte have hem in reverence
 [33] So hertely, that ther is game noon
 [34] That fro my bokes maketh me to goon,
 [35] But yt be seldom on the holyday,
 [36] Save, certeynly, whan that the month of May
 [37] Is comen, and that I here the foules synge,
 [38] And that the floures gynnen for to sprynge,
 [39] Farewel my bok and my devocioun!
 [40] Now have I thanne eek this condicioun,
 [41] That, of al the floures in the mede,
 [42] Thanne love I most thise floures white and rede,
 [43] Swiche as men callen daysyes in our toun.
 [44] To hem have I so gret affeccioun,
 [45] As I seyde erst, whanne comen is the May,
 [46] That in my bed ther daweth me no day
 [47] That I nam up and walkyng in the mede
 [48] To seen this flour ayein the sonne sprede,
 [49] Whan it upryseth erly by the morwe.
 [50] That blisful sighte softneth al my sorwe,
 [51] So glad am I, whan that I have presence
 [52] Of it, to doon it alle reverence,
 [53] As she that is of alle floures flour,
 [54] Fulfilled of al vertu and honour,
 [55] And evere ilyke faire and fressh of hewe;
 [56] And I love it, and ever ylike newe,
 [57] And evere shal, til that myn herte dye.
 [58] Al swere I nat, of this I wol nat lye;
 [59] Ther loved no wight hotter in his lyve.
 [60] And whan that hit ys eve, I renne blyve,
 [61] As sone as evere the sonne gynneth weste,
 [62] To seen this flour, how it wol go to reste,
 [63] For fere of nyght, so hateth she derknesse.
 [64] Hire chere is pleynly sprad in the brightnesse
 [65] Of the sonne, for ther yt wol unclose.
 [66] Allas, that I ne had Englyssh, ryme or prose,
 [67] Suffisant this flour to preyse aryght!
 [68] But helpeth, ye that han konnyng and myght,
 [69] Ye lovers that kan make of sentement;
 [70] In this cas oghte ye be diligent
 [71] To forthren me somwhat in my labour,
 [72] Whethir ye ben with the leef or with the flour.
 [73] For wel I wot that ye han her-biforn
 [74] Of makyng ropen, and lad awey the corn,
 [75] And I come after, glenyng here and there,
 [76] And am ful glad yf I may fynde an ere
 [77] Of any goodly word that ye han left.
 [78] And thogh it happen me rehercen eft
 [79] That ye han in your fresshe songes sayd,
 [80] Forbereth me, and beth nat evele apayd,
 [81] Syn that ye see I do yt in the honour
 [82] Of love, and eke in service of the flour
 [83] Whom that I serve as I have wit or myght.
 [84] She is the clernesse and the verray lyght
 [85] That in this derke world me wynt and ledeth.
 [86] The hert in-with my sorwfull brest yow dredeth
 [87] And loveth so sore that ye ben verrayly
 [88] The maistresse of my wit, and nothing I.
 [89] My word, my werk ys knyt so in youre bond
 [90] That, as an harpe obeieth to the hond
 [91] And maketh it soune after his fyngerynge,
 [92] Ryght so mowe ye oute of myn herte bringe
 [93] Swich vois, ryght as yow lyst, to laughe or pleyne.
 [94] Be ye my gide and lady sovereyne!
 [95] As to myn erthly god to yow I calle,
 [96] Bothe in this werk and in my sorwes alle.
 [97] But wherfore that I spak, to yive credence
 [98] To olde stories and doon hem reverence,
 [99] And that men mosten more thyng beleve
 [100] Then men may seen at eye, or elles preve --
 [101] That shal I seyn, whanne that I see my tyme;
 [102] I may not al at-ones speke in ryme.
 [103] My besy gost, that thursteth alwey newe
 [104] To seen this flour so yong, so fressh of hewe,
 [105] Constreyned me with so gledy desir
 [106] That in myn herte I feele yet the fir
 [107] That made me to ryse er yt were day --
 [108] And this was now the firste morwe of May --
 [109] With dredful hert and glad devocioun,
 [110] For to ben at the resureccioun
 [111] Of this flour, whan that yt shulde unclose
 [112] Agayn the sonne, that roos as red as rose,
 [113] That in the brest was of the beste, that day,
 [114] That Agenores doghtre ladde away.
 [115] And doun on knes anoon-ryght I me sette,
 [116] And, as I koude, this fresshe flour I grette,
 [117] Knelyng alwey, til it unclosed was,
 [118] Upon the smale, softe, swote gras,
 [119] That was with floures swote enbrouded al,
 [120] Of swich swetnesse and swich odour overal,
 [121] That, for to speke of gomme, or herbe, or tree,
 [122] Comparisoun may noon ymaked bee;
 [123] For yt surmounteth pleynly alle odoures,
 [124] And of riche beaute alle floures.
 [125] Forgeten hadde the erthe his pore estat
 [126] Of wynter, that hym naked made and mat,
 [127] And with his swerd of cold so sore greved;
 [128] Now hath th' atempre sonne all that releved,
 [129] That naked was, and clad him new agayn.
 [130] The smale foules, of the sesoun fayn,
 [131] That from the panter and the net ben scaped,
 [132] Upon the foweler, that hem made awhaped
 [133] In wynter, and distroyed hadde hire brood,
 [134] In his dispit hem thoghte yt did hem good
 [135] To synge of hym, and in hir song despise
 [136] The foule cherl that, for his coveytise,
 [137] Had hem betrayed with his sophistrye.
 [138] This was hire song: "The foweler we deffye,
 [139] And al his craft." And somme songen clere
 [140] Layes of love, that joye it was to here,
 [141] In worship and in preysinge of hir make;
 [142] And for the newe blisful somers sake,
 [143] Upon the braunches ful of blosmes softe,
 [144] In hire delyt they turned hem ful ofte,
 [145] And songen, "Blessed be Seynt Valentyn,
 [146] For on his day I chees yow to be myn,
 [147] Withouten repentyng, myn herte swete!"
 [148] And therwithalle hire bekes gonnen meete,
 [149] Yeldyng honour and humble obeysaunces
 [150] To love, and diden hire other observaunces
 [151] That longeth onto love and to nature;
 [152] Construeth that as yow lyst, I do no cure.
 [153] And thoo that hadde doon unkyndenesse --
 [154] As dooth the tydif, for newfangelnesse --
 [155] Besoghte mercy of hir trespassynge,
 [156] And humblely songen hire repentynge,
 [157] And sworen on the blosmes to be trewe
 [158] So that hire makes wolde upon hem rewe,
 [159] And at the laste maden hire acord.
 [160] Al founde they Daunger for a tyme a lord,
 [161] Yet Pitee, thurgh his stronge gentil myght,
 [162] Forgaf, and made Mercy passen Ryght,
 [163] Thurgh innocence and ruled Curtesye.
 [164] But I ne clepe nat innocence folye,
 [165] Ne fals pitee, for vertu is the mene,
 [166] As Etik seith. in swich maner I mene.
 [167] And thus thise foweles, voide of al malice,
 [168] Acordeden to love, and laften vice
 [169] Of hate, and songen alle of oon acord,
 [170] "Welcome, somer, oure governour and lord!"
 [171] And Zepherus and Flora gentilly
 [172] Yaf to the floures, softe and tenderly,
 [173] Hire swoote breth, and made hem for to sprede,
 [174] As god and goddesse of the floury mede;
 [175] In which me thoghte I myghte, day by day,
 [176] Duellen alwey, the joly month of May,
 [177] Withouten slep, withouten mete or drynke.
 [178] Adoun ful softely I gan to synke,
 [179] And, lenynge on myn elbowe and my syde,
 [180] The longe day I shoop me for t' abide
 [181] For nothing elles, and I shal nat lye,
 [182] But for to loke upon the dayesie,
 [183] That wel by reson men it calle may
 [184] The "dayesye," or elles the "ye of day,"
 [185] The emperice and flour of floures alle.
 [186] I pray to God that faire mote she falle,
 [187] And alle that loven floures, for hire sake!
 [188] But natheles, ne wene nat that I make
 [189] In preysing of the flour agayn the leef,
 [190] No more than of the corn agayn the sheef;
 [191] For, as to me, nys lever noon ne lother.
 [192] I nam withholden yit with never nother;
 [193] Ne I not who serveth leef ne who the flour.
 [194] Wel browken they her service or labour;
 [195] For this thing is al of another tonne,
 [196] Of olde storye, er swich stryf was begonne.
 [197] Whan that the sonne out of the south gan weste,
 [198] And that this flour gan close and goon to reste
 [199] For derknesse of the nyght, the which she dredde,
 [200] Hom to myn hous ful swiftly I me spedde
 [201] To goon to reste, and erly for to ryse,
 [202] To seen this flour to sprede, as I devyse.
 [203] And in a litel herber that I have,
 [204] That benched was on turves fressh ygrave,
 [205] I bad men sholde me my couche make;
 [206] For deyntee of the newe someres sake,
 [207] I bad hem strawen floures on my bed.
 [208] Whan I was leyd and had myn eyen hed,
 [209] I fel on slepe within an houre or twoo.
 [210] Me mette how I lay in the medewe thoo,
 [211] To seen this flour that I so love and drede;
 [212] And from afer com walkyng in the mede
 [213] The god of Love, and in his hand a quene,
 [214] And she was clad in real habit grene.
 [215] A fret of gold she hadde next her heer,
 [216] And upon that a whit corowne she beer
 [217] With flourouns smale, and I shal nat lye;
 [218] For al the world, ryght as a dayesye
 [219] Ycorouned ys with white leves lyte,
 [220] So were the flowrouns of hire coroune white.
 [221] For of o perle fyn, oriental,
 [222] Hire white coroune was ymaked al;
 [223] For which the white coroune above the grene
 [224] Made hire lyk a daysie for to sene,
 [225] Considered eke hir fret of gold above.
 [226] Yclothed was this myghty god of Love
 [227] In silk, enbrouded ful of grene greves,
 [228] In-with a fret of rede rose-leves,
 [229] The fresshest syn the world was first bygonne.
 [230] His gilte heer was corowned with a sonne
 [231] Instede of gold, for hevynesse and wyghte.
 [232] Therwith me thoghte his face shoon so bryghte
 [233] That wel unnethes myghte I him beholde;
 [234] And in his hand me thoghte I saugh him holde
 [235] Twoo firy dartes as the gledes rede,
 [236] And aungelyke hys wynges saugh I sprede.
 [237] And al be that men seyn that blynd ys he,
 [238] Algate me thoghte that he myghte se;
 [239] For sternely on me he gan byholde,
 [240] So that his loking dooth myn herte colde.
 [241] And by the hand he held this noble quene
 [242] Corowned with whit and clothed al in grene,
 [243] So womanly, so benigne, and so meke,
 [244] That in this world, thogh that men wolde seke,
 [245] Half hire beaute shulde men nat fynde
 [246] In creature that formed ys by kynde.
 [247] And therfore may I seyn, as thynketh me,
 [248] This song in preysyng of this lady fre:
 [249] Hyd, Absolon, thy gilte tresses clere;
 [250] Ester, ley thou thy meknesse al adown;
 [251] Hyd, Jonathas, al thy frendly manere;
 [252] Penalopee and Marcia Catoun,
 [253] Make of youre wifhod no comparysoun;
 [254] Hyde ye youre beautes, Ysoude and Eleyne:
 [255] My lady cometh, that al this may disteyne.
 [256] Thy faire body, lat yt nat appere,
 [257] Lavyne; and thou, Lucresse of Rome toun,
 [258] And Polixene, that boghten love so dere,
 [259] And Cleopatre, with al thy passyoun,
 [260] Hyde ye your trouthe of love and your renoun;
 [261] And thou, Tisbe, that hast for love swich peyne:
 [262] My lady cometh, that al this may disteyne.
 [263] Herro, Dido, Laudomia, alle yfere,
 [264] And Phillis, hangyng for thy Demophoun,
 [265] And Canace, espied by thy chere,
 [266] Ysiphile, betrayed with Jasoun,
 [267] Maketh of your trouthe neythir boost ne soun;
 [268] Nor Ypermystre or Adriane, ye tweyne:
 [269] My lady cometh, that al this may dysteyne.
 [270] This balade may ful wel ysongen be,
 [271] As I have seyd erst, by my lady free;
 [272] For certeynly al thise mowe nat suffise
 [273] To apperen wyth my lady in no wyse.
 [274] For as the sonne wole the fyr disteyne,
 [275] So passeth al my lady sovereyne,
 [276] That ys so good, so faire, so debonayre,
 [277] I prey to God that ever falle hire faire!
 [278] For, nadde comfort ben of hire presence,
 [279] I hadde ben ded, withouten any defence,
 [280] For drede of Loves wordes and his chere,
 [281] As, when tyme ys, herafter ye shal here.
 [282] Behynde this god of Love, upon the grene,
 [283] I saugh comyng of ladyes nyntene,
 [284] In real habit, a ful esy paas,
 [285] And after hem coome of wymen swich a traas
 [286] That, syn that God Adam hadde mad of erthe,
 [287] The thridde part, of mankynde, or the ferthe,
 [288] Ne wende I not by possibilitee
 [289] Had ever in this wide world ybee;
 [290] And trewe of love thise women were echon.
 [291] Now wheither was that a wonder thing or non,
 [292] That ryght anoon as that they gonne espye
 [293] Thys flour which that I clepe the dayesie,
 [294] Ful sodeynly they stynten al attones,
 [295] And kneled doun, as it were for the nones,
 [296] And songen with o vois, "Heel and honour
 [297] To trouthe of womanhede, and to this flour
 [298] That bereth our alder pris in figurynge!
 [299] Hire white corowne bereth the witnessynge."
 [300] And with that word, a-compas enviroun,
 [301] They setten hem ful softely adoun.
 [302] First sat the god of Love, and syth his quene
 [303] With the white corowne, clad in grene,
 [304] And sithen al the remenaunt by and by,
 [305] As they were of estaat, ful curteysly;
 [306] Ne nat a word was spoken in the place
 [307] The mountaunce of a furlong wey of space.
 [308] I, knelying by this flour, in good entente,
 [309] Abood to knowen what this peple mente,
 [310] As stille as any ston; til at the laste
 [311] This god of Love on me hys eyen caste,
 [312] And seyde, "Who kneleth there?" And I answerde
 [313] Unto his askynge, whan that I it herde,
 [314] And seyde, "Sir, it am I," and com him ner,
 [315] And salwed him. Quod he, "What dostow her
 [316] So nygh myn oune floure, so boldely?
 [317] Yt were better worthy, trewely,
 [318] A worm to neghen ner my flour than thow."
 [319] "And why, sire," quod I, "and yt lyke yow?"
 [320] "For thow," quod he, "art therto nothing able.
 [321] Yt is my relyke, digne and delytable,
 [322] And thow my foo, and al my folk werreyest,
 [323] And of myn olde servauntes thow mysseyest,
 [324] And hynderest hem with thy translacioun,
 [325] And lettest folk from hire devocioun
 [326] To serve me, and holdest it folye
 [327] To serve Love. Thou maist yt nat denye,
 [328] For in pleyn text, withouten nede of glose,
 [329] Thou hast translated the Romaunce of the Rose,
 [330] That is an heresye ayeins my lawe,
 [331] And makest wise folk fro me withdrawe;
 [332] And of Creseyde thou hast seyd as the lyste,
 [333] That maketh men to wommen lasse triste,
 [334] That ben as trewe as ever was any steel.
 [335] Of thyn answere avise the ryght weel;
 [336] For thogh thou reneyed hast my lay,
 [337] As other wrecches han doon many a day,
 [338] By Seynt Venus that my moder ys,
 [339] If that thou lyve, thou shalt repenten this
 [340] So cruelly that it shal wel be sene!"
 [341] Thoo spak this lady, clothed al in grene,
 [342] And seyde, "God, ryght of youre curtesye,
 [343] Ye moten herken yf he can replye
 [344] Agayns al this that ye have to him meved.
 [345] A god ne sholde nat thus be agreved,
 [346] But of hys deitee he shal be stable,
 [347] And therto gracious and merciable.
 [348] And yf ye nere a god, that knowen al,
 [349] Thanne myght yt be as I yow tellen shal:
 [350] This man to yow may falsly ben accused
 [351] That as by right him oughte ben excused.
 [352] For in youre court ys many a losengeour,
 [353] And many a queynte totelere accusour,
 [354] That tabouren in youre eres many a sown,
 [355] Ryght after hire ymagynacioun,
 [356] To have youre daliance, and for envie.
 [357] Thise ben the causes, and I shal not lye.
 [358] Envie ys lavendere of the court alway,
 [359] For she ne parteth, neither nyght ne day,
 [360] Out of the hous of Cesar; thus seith Dante;
 [361] Whoso that gooth, algate she wol nat wante.
 [362] And eke, peraunter, for this man ys nyce,
 [363] He myghte doon yt, gessyng no malice,
 [364] But for he useth thynges for to make;
 [365] Hym rekketh noght of what matere he take.
 [366] Or him was boden maken thilke tweye
 [367] Of som persone, and durste yt nat withseye;
 [368] Or him repenteth outrely of this.
 [369] He ne hath nat doon so grevously amys
 [370] To translaten that olde clerkes writen,
 [371] As thogh that he of malice wolde enditen
 [372] Despit of love, and had himself yt wroght.
 [373] This shoolde a ryghtwis lord have in his thoght,
 [374] And nat be lyk tirauntz of Lumbardye,
 [375] That han no reward but at tyrannye.
 [376] For he that kynge or lord ys naturel,
 [377] Hym oghte nat be tiraunt ne crewel
 [378] As is a fermour, to doon the harm he kan.
 [379] He moste thinke yt is his lige man,
 [380] And is his tresour and his gold in cofre.
 [381] This is the sentence of the Philosophre,
 [382] A kyng to kepe his liges in justice;
 [383] Withouten doute, that is his office.
 [384] Al wol he kepe his lordes hire degree,
 [385] As it ys ryght and skilful that they bee
 [386] Enhaunced and honoured, and most dere --
 [387] For they ben half-goddes in this world here --
 [388] Yit mot he doon bothe ryght, to poore and ryche,
 [389] Al be that hire estaat be nat yliche,
 [390] And han of poore folk compassyoun.
 [391] For loo, the gentil kynde of the lyoun:
 [392] For whan a flye offendeth him or biteth,
 [393] He with his tayl awey the flye smyteth
 [394] Al esely; for, of hys genterye,
 [395] Hym deyneth not to wreke hym on a flye,
 [396] As dooth a curre, or elles another best.
 [397] In noble corage ought ben arest,
 [398] And weyen every thing by equytee,
 [399] And ever have reward to his owen degree.
 [400] For, syr, yt is no maistrye for a lord
 [401] To dampne a man without answere of word,
 [402] And for a lord that is ful foul to use.
 [403] And if so be he may hym nat excuse,
 [404] But asketh mercy with a dredeful herte,
 [405] And profereth him, ryght in his bare sherte,
 [406] To ben ryght at your owen jugement,
 [407] Than oght a god by short avysement
 [408] Consydre his owne honour and hys trespas.
 [409] For, syth no cause of deth lyeth in this caas,
 [410] Yow oghte to ben the lyghter merciable;
 [411] Leteth youre ire, and beth sumwhat tretable.
 [412] The man hath served yow of his kunnynge,
 [413] And furthred wel youre lawe in his makynge.
 [414] Al be hit that he kan nat wel endite,
 [415] Yet hath he maked lewed folk delyte
 [416] To serve yow, in preysinge of your name.
 [417] He made the book that hight the Hous of Fame,
 [418] And eke the Deeth of Blaunche the Duchesse,
 [419] And the Parlement of Foules, as I gesse,
 [420] And al the love of Palamon and Arcite
 [421] Of Thebes, thogh the storye ys knowen lyte;
 [422] And many an ympne for your halydayes,
 [423] That highten balades, roundels, virelayes;
 [424] And, for to speke of other holynesse,
 [425] He hath in prose translated Boece,
 [426] And maad the lyf also of Seynt Cecile.
 [427] He made also, goon ys a gret while,
 [428] Origenes upon the Maudeleyne.
 [429] Hym oughte now to have the lesse peyne;
 [430] He hath maad many a lay and many a thing.
 [431] Now as ye be a god and eke a kyng,
 [432] I, your Alceste, whilom quene of Trace,
 [433] Y aske yow this man, ryght of your grace,
 [434] That ye him never hurte in al his lyve;
 [435] And he shal swere to yow, and that as blyve,
 [436] He shal no more agilten in this wyse,
 [437] But he shal maken, as ye wol devyse,
 [438] Of wommen trewe in lovyng al hire lyve,
 [439] Wherso ye wol, of mayden or of wyve,
 [440] And forthren yow as muche as he mysseyde
 [441] Or in the Rose or elles in Creseyde."
 [442] The god of Love answerede hire thus anoon:
 [443] "Madame," quod he, "it is so long agoon
 [444] That I yow knew so charitable and trewe,
 [445] That never yit syn that the world was newe
 [446] To me ne fond y better noon than yee.
 [447] If that I wol save my degree,
 [448] I may, ne wol, nat werne your requeste.
 [449] Al lyeth in yow, dooth wyth hym what yow leste.
 [450] I al foryeve, withouten lenger space;
 [451] For whoso yeveth a yifte or dooth a grace,
 [452] Do it by tyme, his thank ys wel the more.
 [453] And demeth ye what he shal doo therfore.
 [454] Goo thanke now my lady here," quod he.
 [455] I roos, and doun I sette me on my knee,
 [456] And seyde thus: "Madame, the God above
 [457] Foryelde yow that ye the god of Love
 [458] Han maked me his wrathe to foryive,
 [459] And yeve me grace so longe for to lyve
 [460] That I may knowe soothly what ye bee
 [461] That han me holpe and put in this degree.
 [462] But trewly I wende, as in this cas,
 [463] Naught have agilt, ne doon to love trespas.
 [464] For-why a trewe man, withouten drede,
 [465] Hath nat to parten with a theves dede;
 [466] Ne a trewe lover oght me not to blame
 [467] Thogh that I speke a fals lovere som shame.
 [468] They oghte rather with me for to holde
 [469] For that I of Creseyde wroot or tolde,
 [470] Or of the Rose; what so myn auctour mente,
 [471] Algate, God woot, yt was myn entente
 [472] To forthren trouthe in love and yt cheryce,
 [473] And to ben war fro falsnesse and fro vice
 [474] By swich ensample; this was my menynge."
 [475] And she answerde, "Lat be thyn arguynge,
 [476] For Love ne wol nat countrepleted be
 [477] In ryght ne wrong; and lerne that at me!
 [478] Thow hast thy grace, and hold the ryght therto.
 [479] Now wol I seyn what penance thou shalt do
 [480] For thy trespas. Understonde yt here:
 [481] Thow shalt, while that thou lyvest, yer by yere,
 [482] The moste partye of thy tyme spende
 [483] In makyng of a glorious legende
 [484] Of goode wymmen, maydenes and wyves,
 [485] That weren trewe in lovyng al hire lyves;
 [486] And telle of false men that hem bytraien,
 [487] That al hir lyf ne don nat but assayen
 [488] How many women they may doon a shame;
 [489] For in youre world that is now holde a game.
 [490] And thogh the lyke nat a lovere bee,
 [491] Speke wel of love; this penance yive I thee.
 [492] And to the god of Love I shal so preye
 [493] That he shal charge his servantz by any weye
 [494] To forthren thee, and wel thy labour quyte.
 [495] Goo now thy wey, this penaunce ys but lyte.
 [496] And whan this book ys maad, yive it the quene,
 [497] On my byhalf, at Eltham or at Sheene."
 [498] The god of Love gan smyle, and than he sayde:
 [499] "Wostow," quod he, "wher this be wyf or mayde,
 [500] Or queene, or countesse, or of what degre,
 [501] That hath so lytel penance yiven thee,
 [502] That hast deserved sorer for to smerte?
 [503] But pite renneth soone in gentil herte;
 [504] That maistow seen; she kytheth what she ys."
 [505] And I answered, "Nay, sire, so have I blys,
 [506] No moore but that I see wel she is good."
 [507] "That is a trewe tale, by myn hood!"
 [508] Quod Love; "And that thou knowest wel, pardee,
 [509] If yt be so that thou avise the.
 [510] Hastow nat in a book, lyth in thy cheste,
 [511] The grete goodnesse of the quene Alceste,
 [512] That turned was into a dayesye;
 [513] She that for hire housbonde chees to dye,
 [514] And eke to goon to helle, rather than he,
 [515] And Ercules rescowed hire, parde,
 [516] And broght hir out of helle agayn to blys?"
 [517] And I answerd ageyn, and sayde, "Yis,
 [518] Now knowe I hire. And is this good Alceste,
 [519] The dayesie, and myn owene hertes reste?
 [520] Now fele I weel the goodnesse of this wyf,
 [521] That both aftir hir deth and in hir lyf
 [522] Hir grete bounte doubleth hire renoun.
 [523] Wel hath she quyt me myn affeccioun
 [524] That I have to hire flour, the dayesye.
 [525] No wonder ys thogh Jove hire stellyfye,
 [526] As telleth Agaton, for hire goodnesse!
 [527] Hire white corowne berith of hyt witnesse;
 [528] For also many vertues hadde shee
 [529] As smale florouns in hire corowne bee.
 [530] In remembraunce of hire and in honour
 [531] Cibella maade the daysye and the flour
 [532] Ycrowned al with whit, as men may see;
 [533] And Mars yaf to hire corowne reed, pardee,
 [534] In stede of rubyes, sette among the white."
 [535] Therwith this queene wex reed for shame a lyte
 [536] Whan she was preysed so in hire presence.
 [537] Thanne seyde Love, "A ful gret necligence
 [538] Was yt to the, that ylke tyme thou made
 [539] `Hyd, Absolon, thy tresses,' in balade,
 [540] That thou forgate hire in thi song to sette,
 [541] Syn that thou art so gretly in hire dette,
 [542] And wost so wel that kalender ys shee
 [543] To any woman that wol lover bee.
 [544] For she taught al the craft of fyn lovynge,
 [545] And namely of wyfhod the lyvynge,
 [546] And al the boundes that she oghte kepe.
 [547] Thy litel wit was thilke tyme aslepe.
 [548] But now I charge the upon thy lyf
 [549] That in thy legende thou make of thys wyf
 [550] Whan thou hast other smale ymaad before;
 [551] And far now wel, I charge the namore.
 [552] But er I goo, thus muche I wol the telle:
 [553] Ne shal no trewe lover come in helle.
 [554] Thise other ladies sittynge here arowe
 [555] Ben in thy balade, yf thou kanst hem knowe,
 [556] And in thy bookes alle thou shalt hem fynde.
 [557] Have hem now in thy legende al in mynde;
 [558] I mene of hem that ben in thy knowynge.
 [559] For here ben twenty thousand moo sittynge
 [560] Than thou knowest, goode wommen alle,
 [561] And trewe of love for oght that may byfalle.
 [562] Make the metres of hem as the lest --
 [563] I mot goon hom (the sonne draweth west)
 [564] To paradys, with al this companye --
 [565] And serve alwey the fresshe dayesye.
 [566] At Cleopatre I wol that thou begynne,
 [567] And so forth, and my love so shal thou wynne.
 [568] For lat see now what man that lover be,
 [569] Wol doon so strong a peyne for love as she.
 [570] I wot wel that thou maist nat al yt ryme
 [571] That swiche lovers diden in hire tyme;
 [572] It were to long to reden and to here.
 [573] Suffiseth me thou make in this manere:
 [574] That thou reherce of al hir lyf the grete,
 [575] After thise olde auctours lysten for to trete.
 [576] For whoso shal so many a storye telle,
 [577] Sey shortly, or he shal to longe dwelle."
 [578] And with that word my bokes gan I take,
 [579] And ryght thus on my Legende gan I make.

      
The Canterbury Tales and Other Works of Chaucer (Middle English), by Geoffery Chaucer, [14th cent.], at sacred-texts.com

 

The Legend of Good Women

 

Prologue G

 [1] A thousand sythes have I herd men telle
 [2] That there is joye in hevene and peyne in helle,
 [3] And I acorde wel that it be so;
 [4] But natheles, this wot I wel also,
 [5] That there ne is non that dwelleth in this contre
 [6] That eyther hath in helle or hevene ybe,
 [7] Ne may of it non other weyes witen
 [8] But as he hath herd seyd or founde it writen;
 [9] For by assay there may no man it preve.
 [10] But Goddes forbode but men shulde leve
 [11] Wel more thyng than men han seyn with ye!
 [12] Men shal nat wenen every thyng a lye
 [13] For that he say it nat of yore ago.
 [14] God wot a thyng is nevere the lesse so
 [15] Thow every wyght ne may it nat yse.
 [16] Bernard the monk ne say nat al, parde!
 [17] Thanne mote we to bokes that we fynde,
 [18] Thourgh whiche that olde thynges ben in mynde,
 [19] And to the doctryne of these olde wyse
 [20] Yeven credence, in every skylful wyse,
 [21] And trowen on these olde aproved storyes
 [22] Of holynesse, of regnes, of victoryes,
 [23] Of love, of hate, of othere sondry thynges,
 [24] Of which I may nat make rehersynges.
 [25] And if that olde bokes weren aweye,
 [26] Yloren were of remembrance the keye.
 [27] Wel oughte us thanne on olde bokes leve,
 [28] There as there is non other assay by preve.
 [29] And as for me, though that my wit be lite,
 [30] On bokes for to rede I me delyte,
 [31] And in myn herte have hem in reverence,
 [32] And to hem yeve swich lust and swich credence
 [33] That there is wel unethe game non
 [34] That fro my bokes make me to gon,
 [35] But it be other upon the halyday,
 [36] Or ellis in the joly tyme of May,
 [37] Whan that I here the smale foules synge,
 [38] And that the floures gynne for to sprynge.
 [39] Farwel my stodye, as lastynge that sesoun!
 [40] Now have I therto this condicioun,
 [41] That, of alle the floures in the mede,
 [42] Thanne love I most these floures white and rede,
 [43] Swyche as men calle dayesyes in oure toun.
 [44] To hem have I so gret affeccioun,
 [45] As I seyde erst, whan comen is the May,
 [46] That in my bed there daweth me no day
 [47] That I n' am up and walkynge in the mede
 [48] To sen these floures agen the sonne sprede
 [49] Whan it up ryseth by the morwe shene,
 [50] The longe day thus walkynge in the grene.
 [51] And whan the sonne gynneth for to weste,
 [52] Thanne closeth it, and draweth it to reste,
 [53] So sore it is afered of the nyght,
 [54] Til on the morwe that it is dayes lyght.
 [55] This dayesye, of alle floures flour,
 [56] Fulfyld of vertu and of alle honour,
 [57] And evere ylike fayr and fresh of hewe,
 [58] As wel in wynter as in somer newe,
 [59] Fayn wolde I preysen, if I coude aryght;
 [60] But wo is me, it lyth nat in my myght.
 [61] For wel I wot that folk han here-beforn
 [62] Of makyng ropen, and lad awey the corn;
 [63] [And] I come after, glenynge here and there,
 [64] And am ful glad if I may fynde an ere
 [65] Of any goodly word that they han left.
 [66] And if it happe me rehersen eft
 [67] That they han in here freshe songes said,
 [68] I hope that they wole nat ben evele apayd,
 [69] Sith it is seyd in fortheryng and honour
 [70] Of hem that eyther serven lef or flour.
 [71] For trusteth wel, I ne have nat undertake
 [72] As of the lef agayn the flour to make,
 [73] Ne of the flour to make ageyn the lef,
 [74] No more than of the corn agen the shef;
 [75] For, as to me, is lefer non, ne lother.
 [76] I am witholde yit with never nother;
 [77] I not who serveth lef ne who the flour.
 [78] That nys nothyng the entent of my labour.
 [79] For this werk is al of another tonne,
 [80] Of olde story, er swich strif was begonne.
 [81] But wherfore that I spak, to yeve credence
 [82] To bokes olde and don hem reverence,
 [83] Is for men shulde autoritees beleve,
 [84] There as there lyth non other assay by preve.
 [85] For myn entent is, or I fro yow fare,
 [86] The naked text in English to declare
 [87] Of many a story, or elles of many a geste,
 [88] As autours seyn; leveth hem if yow leste.
 [89] Whan passed was almost the month of May,
 [90] And I hadde romed, al the someres day,
 [91] The grene medewe, of which that I yow tolde,
 [92] Upon the freshe dayseie to beholde,
 [93] And that the sonne out of the south gan weste,
 [94] And closed was the flour and gon to reste,
 [95] For derknesse of the nyght, of which she dredde,
 [96] Hom to myn hous ful swiftly I me spedde,
 [97] And in a lytel herber that I have,
 [98] Ybenched newe with turves fresshe ygrave,
 [99] I bad men shulde me my couche make;
 [100] For deynte of the newe someres sake,
 [101] I bad hem strowe floures on my bed.
 [102] Whan I was layd, and hadde myn eyen hed,
 [103] I fel aslepe withinne an hour or two.
 [104] Me mette how I was in the medewe tho,
 [105] And that I romede in that same gyse,
 [106] To sen that flour, as ye han herd devyse.
 [107] Fayr was this medewe, as thoughte me, overal;
 [108] With floures sote enbrouded was it al.
 [109] As for to speke of gomme, or herbe, or tre,
 [110] Comparisoun may non ymaked be;
 [111] For it surmountede pleynly alle odoures,
 [112] And of ryche beaute alle floures.
 [113] Forgeten hadde the erthe his pore estat
 [114] Of wynter, that hym naked made and mat,
 [115] And with his swerd of cold so sore hadde greved.
 [116] Now hadde th' atempre sonne al that releved,
 [117] And clothed hym in grene al newe ageyn.
 [118] The smale foules, of the seson fayn,
 [119] That from the panter and the net ben skaped,
 [120] Upon the foulere, that hem made awhaped
 [121] In wynter, and distroyed hadde hire brod,
 [122] In his dispit hem thoughte it dide hem good
 [123] To synge of hym, and in here song despise
 [124] The foule cherl that for his coveytyse
 [125] Hadde hem betrayed with his sophistrye.
 [126] This was here song, "The foulere we defye,
 [127] [And] [al] [his] [craft]." [And] [some] [songen] [clere]
 [128] [Layes] of love that joye it was to here,
 [129] In worshipe and in preysyng of hire make;
 [130] And [for] the newe blysful somers sake,
 [131] [They] sungen, "Blyssed be Seynt Valentyn!
 [132] [For] [on] his day I ches yow to be myn,
 [133] Withoute repentynge, myn herte swete!"
 [134] And therwithal here bekes gonne mete,
 [135] [Yelding] honour and humble obeysaunces;
 [136] And after diden othere observaunces
 [137] Ryht [longing] onto love and to nature;
 [138] So ech of hem [doth] [wel] to creature.
 [139] This song to herkenen I dide al myn entente,
 [140] For-why I mette I wiste what they mente,
 [141] Tyl at the laste a larke son above:
 [142] "I se," quod she, "the myghty god of Love.
 [143] Lo! yond he cometh! I se his wynges sprede."
 [144] Tho gan I loken endelong the mede
 [145] And saw hym come, and in his hond a quene
 [146] Clothed in real habyt al of grene.
 [147] A fret of goold she hadde next hyre her
 [148] And upon that a whit corone she ber
 [149] With many floures, and I shal nat lye;
 [150] For al the world, ryght as the dayesye
 [151] Ycorouned is with white leves lite,
 [152] Swiche were the floures of hire coroune white.
 [153] For of o perle fyn and oryental
 [154] Hyre white coroun was ymaked al;
 [155] For which the white coroun above the grene
 [156] Made hire lyk a dayesye for to sene,
 [157] Considered ek the fret of gold above.
 [158] Yclothed was this myghty god of Love
 [159] Of silk, ybrouded ful of grene greves,
 [160] A garlond on his hed of rose-leves
 [161] Stiked al with lylye floures newe.
 [162] But of his face I can not seyn the hewe,
 [163] For sikerly his face shon so bryghte
 [164] That with the glem astoned was the syghte;
 [165] A furlong-wey I myhte hym not beholde.
 [166] But at the laste in hande I saw hym holde
 [167] Two firy dartes as the gleedes rede,
 [168] And aungellych hys winges gan he sprede.
 [169] And al be that men seyn that blynd is he,
 [170] Algate me thoughte he myghte wel yse;
 [171] For sternely on me he gan beholde,
 [172] So that his lokynge doth myn herte colde.
 [173] And by the hond he held the noble quene
 [174] Corouned with whit and clothed al in grene,
 [175] So womanly, so benygne, and so meke,
 [176] That in this world, thogh that men wolde seke,
 [177] Half hire beaute shulde men nat fynde
 [178] In creature that formed is by kynde.
 [179] Hire name was Alceste the debonayre.
 [180] I preye to God that evere falle she fayre,
 [181] For ne hadde confort been of hire presence,
 [182] I hadde be ded, withouten any defence,
 [183] For dred of Loves wordes and his chere,
 [184] As, whan tyme is, hereafter ye shal here.
 [185] Byhynde this god of Love, upon this grene,
 [186] I saw comynge of ladyes nyntene
 [187] In real habyt, a ful esy pas,
 [188] And after hem come of wemen swich a tras
 [189] That, syn that God Adam [had] mad of erthe,
 [190] The thridde part of wemen, ne the ferthe,
 [191] Ne wende I not by possibilite
 [192] Hadden evere in this [wyde] world ybe;
 [193] And trewe of love these wemen were echon.
 [194] Now whether was that a wonder thyng or non,
 [195] That ryght anon as that they gonne espye
 [196] This flour, which that I clepe the dayesye,
 [197] Ful sodeynly they stynten alle atones,
 [198] And knelede adoun, as it were for the nones.
 [199] And after that they wenten in compas,
 [200] Daunsynge aboute this flour an esy pas,
 [201] And songen, as it were in carole-wyse,
 [202] This balade, which that I shal yow devyse.
 [203] Hyd, Absalon, thy gilte tresses clere;
 [204] Ester, ley thow thy meknesse al adoun;
 [205] Hyd, Jonathas, al thyn frendly manere;
 [206] Penelope and Marcia Catoun,
 [207] Mak of youre wyfhod no comparisoun;
 [208] Hyde ye youre beautes, Ysoude and Eleyne:
 [209] Alceste is here, that al that may desteyne.
 [210] Thy fayre body, lat it nat apeere,
 [211] Laveyne; and thow, Lucresse of Rome toun,
 [212] And Polixene, that boughte love so dere,
 [213] Ek Cleopatre, with al thy passioun,
 [214] Hide ye youre trouth in love and youre renoun;
 [215] And thow, Tysbe, that hast for love swich peyne:
 [216] Alceste is here, that al that may desteyne.
 [217] Herro, Dido, Laodomya, alle in-fere,
 [218] Ek Phillis, hangynge for thy Demophoun,
 [219] And Canace, espied by thy chere,
 [220] Ysiphile, betrayed with Jasoun,
 [221] Mak of youre trouthe in love no bost ne soun;
 [222] Nor Ypermystre or Adriane, ne pleyne
 [223] Alceste is here, that al that may disteyne.
 [224] Whan that this balade al ysongen was,
 [225] Upon the softe and sote grene gras
 [226] They setten hem ful softely adoun,
 [227] By order alle in compas, enveroun.
 [228] Fyrst sat the god of Love, and thanne this queene
 [229] With the white corone, clad in grene,
 [230] And sithen al the remenant by and by,
 [231] As they were of degre, ful curteysly;
 [232] Ne nat a word was spoken in that place
 [233] The mountaunce of a furlong-wey of space.
 [234] I, lenynge faste by under a bente,
 [235] Abod to knowe what this peple mente,
 [236] As stille as any ston, til at the laste
 [237] The god of Love on me his eye caste
 [238] And seyde, "Who restith there?" And I answerde
 [239] Unto his axynge, whan that I hym herde,
 [240] And seyde, "Sire, it am I," and cam hym ner,
 [241] And salewede hym. Quod he, "What dost thow her
 [242] In my presence, and that so boldely?
 [243] For it were better worthi, trewely,
 [244] A worm to comen in my syght than thow."
 [245] "And why, sire," quod I, "and it lyke yow?"
 [246] "For thow," quod he, "art therto nothyng able.
 [247] My servaunts ben alle wyse and honourable.
 [248] Thow art my mortal fo and me werreyest,
 [249] And of myne olde servauntes thow mysseyest,
 [250] And hynderest hem with thy translacyoun,
 [251] And lettest folk to han devocyoun
 [252] To serven me, and holdest it folye
 [253] To truste on me. Thow mayst it nat denye,
 [254] For in pleyn text, it nedeth nat to glose,
 [255] Thow hast translated the Romauns of the Rose,
 [256] That is an heresye ageyns my lawe,
 [257] And makest wise folk fro me withdrawe;
 [258] And thynkest in thy wit, that is ful col,
 [259] That he nys but a verray propre fol
 [260] That loveth paramours to harde and hote.
 [261] Wel wot I therby thow begynnyst dote,
 [262] As olde foles whan here spiryt fayleth;
 [263] Thanne blame they folk, and wite nat what hem ayleth.
 [264] Hast thow nat mad in Englysh ek the bok
 [265] How that Crisseyde Troylus forsok,
 [266] In shewynge how that wemen han don mis?
 [267] But natheles, answere me now to this;
 [268] Why noldest thow as wel [han] seyd goodnesse
 [269] Of wemen, as thow hast seyd wikednesse?
 [270] Was there no good matere in thy mynde,
 [271] Ne in alle thy bokes ne coudest thow nat fynde
 [272] Som story of wemen that were goode and trewe?
 [273] Yis, God wot, sixty bokes olde and newe
 [274] Hast thow thyself, alle ful of storyes grete,
 [275] That bothe Romayns and ek Grekes trete
 [276] Of sundry wemen, which lyf that they ladde,
 [277] And evere an hundred goode ageyn oon badde.
 [278] This knoweth God, and alle clerkes eke
 [279] That usen swiche materes for to seke.
 [280] What seith Valerye, Titus, or Claudyan?
 [281] What seith Jerome agayns Jovynyan?
 [282] How clene maydenes and how trewe wyves,
 [283] How stedefaste widewes durynge alle here lyves,
 [284] Telleth Jerome, and that nat of a fewe,
 [285] But, I dar seyn, an hundred on a rewe,
 [286] That it is pite for to rede, and routhe,
 [287] The wo that they endure for here trouthe
 [288] For to hyre love were they so trewe
 [289] That, rathere than they wolde take a newe,
 [290] They chose to be ded in sondry wyse,
 [291] And deiden, as the story wol devyse;
 [292] And some were brend, and some were cut the hals,
 [293] And some dreynt for they wolden not be fals;
 [294] For alle keped they here maydenhede,
 [295] Or elles wedlok, or here widewehede.
 [296] And this thing was nat kept for holynesse,
 [297] But al for verray vertu and clennesse,
 [298] And for men schulde sette on hem no lak;
 [299] And yit they were hethene, al the pak,
 [300] That were so sore adrad of alle shame.
 [301] These olde wemen kepte so here name
 [302] That in this world I trowe men shal nat fynde
 [303] A man that coude be so trewe and kynde
 [304] As was the leste woman in that tyde.
 [305] What seyth also the epistel of Ovyde
 [306] Of trewe wyves and of here labour?
 [307] What Vincent in his Estoryal Myrour?
 [308] Ek al the world of autours maystow here,
 [309] Cristene and hethene, trete of swich matere;
 [310] It nedeth nat al day thus for to endite.
 [311] But yit, I seye, what eyleth the to wryte
 [312] The draf of storyes, and forgete the corn?
 [313] By Seynt Venus, of whom that I was born,
 [314] Althogh thow reneyed hast my lay,
 [315] As othere olde foles many a day,
 [316] Thow shalt repente it, so that it shal be sene!"
 [317] Thanne spak Alceste, the worthyeste queene,
 [318] And seyde, "God, ryght of youre curteysye,
 [319] Ye moten herkenen if he can replye
 [320] Ageyns these poynts that ye han to hym meved.
 [321] A god ne sholde not thus been agreved,
 [322] But of his deite he shal be stable,
 [323] And therto ryghtful, and ek mercyable.
 [324] He shal nat ryghtfully his yre wreke
 [325] Or he have herd the tother partye speke.
 [326] Al ne is nat gospel that is to yow pleyned;
 [327] The god of Love hereth many a tale yfeyned.
 [328] For in youre court is many a losengeour,
 [329] And many a queynte totelere accusour,
 [330] That tabouren in youre eres many a thyng
 [331] For hate, or for jelous ymagynyng,
 [332] And for to han with you som dalyaunce.
 [333] Envye -- I preye to God yeve hire myschaunce! --
 [334] Is lavender in the grete court alway,
 [335] For she ne parteth, neyther nyght ne day,
 [336] Out of the hous of Cesar; thus seyth Dante;
 [337] Whoso that goth, alwey she mot [nat] wante.
 [338] This man to yow may wrongly ben acused,
 [339] There as by ryght hym oughte ben excusid.
 [340] Or elles, sire, for that this man is nyce,
 [341] He may translate a thyng in no malyce,
 [342] But for he useth bokes for to make,
 [343] And taketh non hed of what matere he take,
 [344] Therfore he wrot the Rose and ek Crisseyde
 [345] Of innocence, and nyste what he seyde.
 [346] Or hym was boden make thilke tweye
 [347] Of som persone, and durste it not withseye;
 [348] For he hath write many a bok er this.
 [349] He ne hath not don so grevously amys
 [350] To translate that olde clerkes wryte,
 [351] As thogh that he of maleys wolde endyte
 [352] Despit of love, and hadde hymself ywrought.
 [353] This shulde a ryghtwys lord han in his thought,
 [354] And not ben lyk tyraunts of Lumbardye,
 [355] That usen wilfulhed and tyrannye.
 [356] For he that kyng or lord is naturel,
 [357] Hym oughte nat be tyraunt and crewel
 [358] As is a fermour, to don the harm he can.
 [359] He moste thynke it is his lige man,
 [360] And that hym oweth, of verray duetee,
 [361] Shewen his peple pleyn benygnete,
 [362] And wel to heren here excusacyouns,
 [363] And here compleyntes and petyciouns,
 [364] In duewe tyme, whan they shal it profre.
 [365] This is the sentence of the Philosophre,
 [366] A kyng to kepe his lyges in justice;
 [367] Withouten doute, that is his office.
 [368] And therto is a kyng ful depe ysworn
 [369] Ful many an hundred wynter herebeforn;
 [370] And for to kepe his lordes hir degre,
 [371] As it is ryght and skylful that they be
 [372] Enhaunsed and honoured, [and] most dere --
 [373] For they ben half-goddes in this world here --
 [374] This shal he don bothe to pore [and] ryche,
 [375] Al be that her estat be nat alyche,
 [376] And han of pore folk compassioun.
 [377] For lo, the gentyl kynde of the lyoun:
 [378] For whan a flye offendeth hym or byteth,
 [379] He with his tayl awey the flye smyteth
 [380] Al esyly; for, of his genterye,
 [381] Hym deyneth nat to wreke hym on a flye,
 [382] As doth a curre, or elles another best.
 [383] In noble corage oughte ben arest,
 [384] And weyen every thing by equite,
 [385] And evere han reward to his owen degre.
 [386] For, sire, it is no maystrye for a lord
 [387] To dampne a man withoute answere or word,
 [388] And, for a lord, that is ful foul to use.
 [389] And if so be he may hym nat excuse,
 [390] [But] axeth mercy with a sorweful herte,
 [391] And profereth hym, ryght in his bare sherte,
 [392] To been ryght at youre owene jugement,
 [393] Than ought a god, by short avisement,
 [394] Considere his owene honour and his trespas.
 [395] For syth no cause of deth lyth in this cas,
 [396] Yow oughte to ben the lyghter merciable;
 [397] Leteth youre yre, and beth somwhat tretable.
 [398] The man hath served yow of his konnynge,
 [399] And forthered [wel] youre lawe with his makynge.
 [400] Whil he was yong, he kepte youre estat;
 [401] I not wher he be now a renegat.
 [402] But wel I wot, with that he can endyte
 [403] He hath maked lewed folk to delyte
 [404] To serven yow, in preysynge of youre name.
 [405] He made the bok that highte the Hous of Fame,
 [406] And ek the Deth of Blaunche the Duchesse,
 [407] And the Parlement of Foules, as I gesse,
 [408] And al the love of Palamon and Arcite
 [409] Of Thebes, thogh the storye is knowen lite;
 [410] And many an ympne for your halydayes,
 [411] That highten balades, roundeles, vyrelayes;
 [412] And, for to speke of other besynesse,
 [413] He hath in prose translated Boece,
 [414] And Of the Wreched Engendrynge of Mankynde,
 [415] As man may in Pope Innocent yfynde;
 [416] And mad the lyf also of Seynt Cecile.
 [417] He made also, gon is a gret while,
 [418] Orygenes upon the Maudeleyne.
 [419] Hym oughte now to have the lesse peyne;
 [420] He hath mad many a lay and many a thyng.
 [421] Now as ye ben a god and ek a kyng,
 [422] I, youre Alceste, whilom quene of Trace,
 [423] I axe yow this man, ryght of youre grace,
 [424] That ye hym nevere hurte in al his lyve;
 [425] And he shal swere to yow, and that as blyve,
 [426] He shal no more agilten in this wyse,
 [427] But he shal maken, as ye wol devyse,
 [428] Of women trewe in lovynge al here lyve,
 [429] Wherso ye wol, of mayden or of wyve,
 [430] And fortheren yow as muche as he mysseyde
 [431] Or in the Rose or elles in Crisseyde."
 [432] The god of Love answerede hire thus anon:
 [433] "Madame," quod he, "it is so longe agon
 [434] That I yow knew so charytable and trewe,
 [435] That nevere yit sith that the world was newe
 [436] To me ne fond I betere non than ye;
 [437] That, if that I wol save my degre,
 [438] I may, ne wol, not warne youre requeste.
 [439] Al lyth in yow, doth with hym what yow leste;
 [440] And al foryeve, withoute lenger space.
 [441] For whoso yeveth a yifte or doth a grace,
 [442] Do it by tyme, his thank is wel the more.
 [443] And demeth ye what he shal do therfore.
 [444] Go thanke now my lady here," quod he.
 [445] I ros, and doun I sette me on my kne,
 [446] And seyde thus, "Madame, the God above
 [447] Foryelde yow that ye the god of Love
 [448] Han maked me his wrathe to foryive,
 [449] And yeve me grace so longe for to live
 [450] That I may knowe sothly what ye be
 [451] That han me holpen and put in swich degre.
 [452] But trewely I wende, as in this cas,
 [453] Naught have agilt, ne don to love trespas.
 [454] For-why a trewe man, withoute drede,
 [455] Hath nat to parte with a theves dede;
 [456] Ne a trewe lovere oghte me nat to blame
 [457] Thogh that I speke a fals lovere som shame.
 [458] They oughte rathere with me for to holde
 [459] For that I of Criseyde wrot or tolde,
 [460] Or of the Rose; what so myn auctour mente,
 [461] Algate, God wot, it was myn entente
 [462] To forthere trouthe in love and it cheryce,
 [463] And to be war fro falsnesse and fro vice
 [464] By swich ensaumple; this was my menynge."
 [465] And she answerde, "Lat be thyn arguynge,
 [466] For Love ne wol nat counterpletyd be
 [467] In ryght ne wrong; and lerne this at me!
 [468] Thow hast thy grace, and hold the ryght therto.
 [469] Now wol I seyn what penaunce thow shalt do
 [470] For thy trespas, and understond it here:
 [471] Thow shalt, whil that thow livest, yer by yere,
 [472] The moste partye of thy tyme spende
 [473] In makynge of a gloryous legende
 [474] Of goode women, maydenes and wyves,
 [475] That were trewe in lovynge al here lyves;
 [476] And telle of false men that hem betrayen,
 [477] That al here lyf ne don nat but assayen
 [478] How manye wemen they may don a shame;
 [479] For in youre world that is now holden game.
 [480] And thogh the lesteth nat a lovere be,
 [481] Spek wel of love; this penaunce yeve I thee.
 [482] And to the god of Love I shal so preye
 [483] That he shal charge his servaunts by any weye
 [484] To fortheren the, and wel thy labour quite.
 [485] Go now thy wey, thy penaunce is but lyte."
 [486] The god of Love gan smyle, and thanne he seyde:
 [487] "Wostow," quod he, "wher this be wif or mayde,
 [488] Or queen, or countesse, or of what degre,
 [489] That hath so lytel penaunce yiven the,
 [490] That hast deserved sorer for to smerte?
 [491] But pite renneth sone in gentil herte;
 [492] That mayst thow sen; she kytheth what she is."
 [493] And I answerde, "Nay, sire, so have I blys,
 [494] No more but that I se wel she is good."
 [495] "That is a trewe tale, by myn hood!"
 [496] Quod Love, "and that thow knowest wel, parde,
 [497] Yif it be so that thow avise the.
 [498] Hast thow nat in a bok, lyth in thy cheste,
 [499] The grete goodnesse of the queene Alceste,
 [500] That turned was into a dayesye;
 [501] She that for hire husbonde ches to dye,
 [502] And ek to gon to helle rather than he,
 [503] And Ercules rescued hire, parde,
 [504] And broughte hyre out of helle ageyn to blys?"
 [505] And I answerde ayen, and seyde, "Yis,
 [506] Now knowe I hire. And is this goode Alceste,
 [507] The dayesye, and myn owene hertes reste?
 [508] Now fele I wel the goodnesse of this wif,
 [509] That bothe after hire deth and in hire lyf
 [510] Hire grete bounte doubleth hire renoun.
 [511] Wel hath she quit me myn affeccioun
 [512] That I have to hire flour, the dayesye.
 [513] No wonder is thogh Jove hire stellifye,
 [514] As telleth Agaton, for hyre goodnesse!
 [515] Hire white coroun bereth of it witnesse;
 [516] For also manye vertues hadde she
 [517] As smale flourys in hyre coroun be.
 [518] In remembraunce of hire and in honour
 [519] Cibella made the dayesye and the flour
 [520] Ycoroned al with whit, as men may se;
 [521] And Mars yaf to hire corone red, parde,
 [522] In stede of rubies, set among the white."
 [523] Therwith this queene wex red for shame a lyte
 [524] Whan she was preysed so in hire presence.
 [525] Thanne seyde Love, "A ful gret neglygence
 [526] Was it to the, to write unstedefastnesse
 [527] Of women, sith thow knowest here goodnesse
 [528] By pref, and ek by storyes herebyforn.
 [529] Let be the chaf, and writ wel of the corn.
 [530] Why noldest thow han writen of Alceste,
 [531] And laten Criseide ben aslepe and reste?
 [532] For of Alceste shulde thy wrytynge be,
 [533] Syn that thow wost that calandier is she
 [534] Of goodnesse, for she taughte of fyn lovynge,
 [535] And namely of wifhod the lyvynge,
 [536] And alle the boundes that she oughte kepe.
 [537] Thy litel wit was thilke tyme aslepe.
 [538] But now I charge the upon thy lyf
 [539] That in thy legende thow make of this wif
 [540] Whan thow hast othere smale mad byfore;
 [541] And far now wel, I charge the no more.
 [542] At Cleopatre I wol that thow begynne,
 [543] And so forth, and my love so shalt thow wynne."
 [544] And with that word, of slep I gan awake,
 [545] And ryght thus on my Legende gan I make.

      
The Canterbury Tales and Other Works of Chaucer (Middle English), by Geoffery Chaucer, [14th cent.], at sacred-texts.com

 

The Legend of Good Women

 

The Legends

 [580] After the deth of Tholome the kyng,
 [581] That al Egipt hadde in his governyng,
 [582] Regned his queene Cleopataras;
 [583] Tyl on a tyme befel there swich a cas
 [584] That out of Rome was sent a senatour
 [585] For to conqueren regnes and honour
 [586] Unto the toun of Rome, as was usaunce,
 [587] To han the world at hire obesaunce,
 [588] And soth to seyne, Antonius was his name.
 [589] So fil it, as Fortune hym oughte a shame,
 [590] Whan he was fallen in prosperite
 [591] Rebel unto the toun of Rome is he.
 [592] And over al this, the suster of Cesar,
 [593] He lafte hire falsly, or that she was war,
 [594] And wolde algates han another wyf,
 [595] For which he tok with Rome and Cesar stryf.
 [596] Natheles, for sothe, this ilke senatour
 [597] Was a ful worthy gentil werreyour,
 [598] And of his deth it was ful gret damage.
 [599] But love hadde brought this man in swich a rage
 [600] And hym so narwe bounden in his las,
 [601] Al for the love of Cleopataras,
 [602] That al the world he sette at no value.
 [603] Hym thoughte there nas nothyng to hym so due
 [604] As Cleopatras for to love and serve;
 [605] Hym roughte nat in armes for to sterve
 [606] In the defence of hyre and of hire ryght.
 [607] This noble queene ek lovede so this knyght,
 [608] Thourgh his desert, and for his chyvalrye;
 [609] As certeynly, but if that bokes lye,
 [610] He was, of persone and of gentillesse,
 [611] And of discrecioun and hardynesse,
 [612] Worthi to any wyght that liven may;
 [613] And she was fayr as is the rose in May.
 [614] And, for to make shortly is the beste,
 [615] She wax his wif, and hadde hym as hire leste.
 [616] The weddynge and the feste to devyse,
 [617] To me, that have ytake swich empryse
 [618] Of so many a story for to make,
 [619] It were to longe, lest that I shulde slake
 [620] Of thyng that bereth more effect and charge;
 [621] For men may overlade a ship or barge.
 [622] And forthy to th' effect thanne wol I skyppe,
 [623] And al the remenaunt, I wol lete it slippe.
 [624] Octovyan, that wod was of this dede,
 [625] Shop hym an ost on Antony to lede
 [626] Al uterly for his destruccioun,
 [627] With stoute Romeyns, crewel as lyoun;
 [628] To ship they wente, and thus I lat hem sayle.
 [629] Antonius was war, and wol nat fayle
 [630] To meten with these Romeyns, if he may;
 [631] Tok ek his red, and bothe, upon a day,
 [632] His wif and he, and al his ost, forth wente
 [633] To shipe anon, no lengere they ne stente;
 [634] And in the se it happede hem to mete.
 [635] Up goth the trompe, and for to shoute and shete,
 [636] And peynen hem to sette on with the sunne.
 [637] With grysely soun out goth the grete gonne,
 [638] And heterly they hurtelen al atones,
 [639] And from the top doun come the grete stones.
 [640] In goth the grapenel, so ful of crokes;
 [641] Among the ropes renne the sherynge-hokes.
 [642] In with the polax preseth he and he;
 [643] Byhynde the mast begynnyth he to fle,
 [644] And out ageyn, and dryveth hym overbord;
 [645] He styngeth hym upon his speres ord;
 [646] He rent the seyl with hokes lyke a sithe;
 [647] He bryngeth the cuppe and biddeth hem be blythe;
 [648] He poureth pesen upon the haches slidere;
 [649] With pottes ful of lyme they gon togidere;
 [650] And thus the longe day in fyght they spende,
 [651] Tyl at the laste, as every thyng hath ende,
 [652] Antony is schent and put hym to the flyghte,
 [653] And al his folk to-go that best go myghte.
 [654] Fleth ek the queen, with al hire purpre sayl,
 [655] For strokes, whiche that wente as thikke as hayl;
 [656] No wonder was she myghte it nat endure.
 [657] And whan that Antony saw that aventure,
 [658] "Allas," quod he, "the day that I was born!
 [659] My worshipe in this day thus have I lorn."
 [660] And for dispeyr out of his wit he sterte
 [661] And rof hymself anon thourghout the herte
 [662] Or that he ferther wente out of the place.
 [663] His wif, that coude of Cesar have no grace,
 [664] To Egipt is fled for drede and for destresse.
 [665] But herkeneth, ye that speken of kyndenesse,
 [666] Ye men that falsly sweren many an oth
 [667] That ye wol deye if that youre love be wroth,
 [668] Here may ye sen of wemen which a trouthe!
 [669] This woful Cleopatre hath mad swich routhe
 [670] That ther is tonge non that may it telle.
 [671] But on the morwe she wolde no lengere dwelle,
 [672] But made hire subtyl werkmen make a shryne
 [673] Of alle the rubyes and the stones fyne
 [674] In al Egypte that she coude espie,
 [675] And putte ful the shryne of spicerye,
 [676] And let the cors enbaume, and forth she fette
 [677] This dede cors, and in the shryne it shette.
 [678] And next the shryne a pit thanne doth she grave,
 [679] And alle the serpentes that she myghte have,
 [680] She putte hem in that grave, and thus she seyde:
 [681] "Now, love, to whom my sorweful herte obeyde
 [682] So ferforthly that from that blisful houre
 [683] That I yow swor to ben al frely youre --
 [684] I mene yow, Antonius, my knyght --
 [685] That nevere wakynge, in the day or nyght,
 [686] Ye nere out of myn hertes remembraunce,
 [687] For wel or wo, for carole or for daunce;
 [688] And in myself this covenaunt made I tho,
 [689] That ryght swich as ye felten, wel or wo,
 [690] As fer forth as it in my power lay,
 [691] Unreprovable unto my wyfhod ay,
 [692] The same wolde I fele, lyf or deth --
 [693] And thilke covenant whil me lasteth breth
 [694] I wol fulfille; and that shal ben wel sene,
 [695] Was nevere unto hire love a trewer quene."
 [696] And with that word, naked, with ful good herte,
 [697] Among the serpents in the pit she sterte,
 [698] And there she ches to have hire buryinge.
 [699] Anon the nadderes gonne hire for to stynge,
 [700] And she hire deth receyveth with good cheere
 [701] For love of Antony that was hire so dere.
 [702] And this is storyal soth, it is no fable.
 [703] Now, or I fynde a man thus trewe and stable,
 [704] And wol for love his deth so frely take,
 [705] I preye God let oure hedes nevere ake! Amen.
 [706] At Babiloyne whylom fil it thus,
 [707] The whyche toun the queen Semyramus
 [708] Let dychen al aboute and walles make
 [709] Ful hye, of hard tiles wel ybake:
 [710] There were dwellyng in this noble toun
 [711] Two lordes, whiche that were of gret renoun,
 [712] And woneden so nygh, upon a grene,
 [713] That there nas but a ston-wal hem betweene,
 [714] As ofte in grete tounes is the wone.
 [715] And soth to seyne, that o man hadde a sone,
 [716] Of al that lond oon of the lustyeste.
 [717] That other hadde a doughter, the fayreste
 [718] That estward in the world was tho dwellynge.
 [719] The name of everych gan to other sprynge
 [720] By women that were neighebores aboute.
 [721] For in that contre yit, withouten doute,
 [722] Maydenes been ykept, for jelosye,
 [723] Ful streyte, lest they diden som folye.
 [724] This yonge man was called Piramus,
 [725] Tysbe hight the maide, Naso seyth thus;
 [726] And thus by report was hire name yshove
 [727] That, as they wex in age, wex here love.
 [728] And certeyn, as by resoun of hire age,
 [729] There myghte have ben bytwixe hem maryage,
 [730] But that here fadres nolde it nat assente;
 [731] And bothe in love ylyke sore they brente,
 [732] That non of alle hyre frendes myght it lette,
 [733] But pryvyly som tyme yit they mette
 [734] By sleyghte, and spoken som of here desyr;
 [735] As wry the glede and hotter is the fyr,
 [736] Forbede a love, and it is ten so wod.
 [737] This wal, which that bitwixe hem bothe stod,
 [738] Was clove a-two, ryght from the cop adoun,
 [739] Of olde tyme of his fundacioun;
 [740] But yit this clyfte was so narw and lyte
 [741] It nas nat sene, deere ynogh a myte.
 [742] But what is that that love can nat espye?
 [743] Ye loveres two, if that I shal nat lye,
 [744] Ye founden first this litel narwe clifte;
 [745] And with a soun as softe as any shryfte,
 [746] They lete here wordes thourgh the clifte pace,
 [747] And tolden, whil that they stode in the place,
 [748] Al here compleynt of love and al here wo,
 [749] At every tyme whan they durste so.
 [750] Upon that o syde of the wal stod he,
 [751] And on that other side stod Thesbe,
 [752] The swote soun of other to receyve.
 [753] And thus here wardeyns wolde they deceyve,
 [754] And every day this wal they wolde threte,
 [755] And wisshe to God that it were doun ybete.
 [756] Thus wolde they seyn: "Alas, thow wikkede wal!
 [757] Thorgh thyn envye thow us lettest al.
 [758] Why nylt thow cleve or fallen al a-two?
 [759] Or at the leste, but thou woldist so,
 [760] Yit woldest thow but ones lat us mete,
 [761] Or ones that we myghte kyssen swete,
 [762] Thanne were we covered of oure cares colde.
 [763] But, natheles, yit be we to thee holde,
 [764] In as muche as thow sufferest for to gon
 [765] Oure wordes thourgh thy lym and ek thy ston.
 [766] Yit oughte we with the been wel apayd."
 [767] And whan these ydele wordes weren sayd,
 [768] The colde wal they wolden kysse of ston,
 [769] And take here leve and forth they wolden gon.
 [770] And this was gladly in the eve-tyde,
 [771] Or wonder erly, lest men it espyde.
 [772] And longe tyme they wroughte in this manere,
 [773] Tyl on a day, whan Phebus gan to cleere --
 [774] Aurora with the stremes of hire hete
 [775] Hadde dreyed up the dew of herbes wete --
 [776] Unto this clyft, as it was wont to be,
 [777] Com Piramus, and after com Thysbe,
 [778] And plyghten trouthe fully in here fey
 [779] That ilke same nyght to stele awey,
 [780] And to begile here wardeyns everichon,
 [781] And forth out of the cite for to goon;
 [782] And, for the feldes ben so brode and wide,
 [783] For to mete in o place at o tyde,
 [784] They sette mark here metynge sholde be
 [785] There kyng Nynus was grave under a tre --
 [786] For olde payens that idoles heryed
 [787] Useden tho in feldes to ben beryed --
 [788] And faste by this grave was a welle.
 [789] And shortly of this tale for to telle,
 [790] This covenaunt was affermed wonder faste;
 [791] And longe hem thoughte that the sonne laste,
 [792] That it nere gon under the se adoun.
 [793] This Tisbe hath so gret affeccioun
 [794] And so gret lykinge Piramus to se,
 [795] That whan she say hire tyme myghte be,
 [796] At nyght she stal awey ful pryvyly,
 [797] With hire face ywympled subtyly;
 [798] For alle hire frendes -- for to save hire trouthe --
 [799] She hath forsake; allas, and that is routhe
 [800] That evere woman wolde ben so trewe
 [801] To truste man, but she the bet hym knewe.
 [802] And to the tre she goth a ful good pas,
 [803] For love made hire so hardy in this cas,
 [804] And by the welle adoun she gan hyre dresse.
 [805] Allas! Than cometh a wilde lyonesse
 [806] Out of the wode, withoute more arest,
 [807] With blody mouth, of strangelynge of a best,
 [808] To drynken of the welle there as she sat.
 [809] And whan that Tisbe hadde espyed that,
 [810] She rist hire up, with a ful drery herte,
 [811] And in a cave with dredful fot she sterte,
 [812] For by the mone she say it wel withalle.
 [813] And as she ran hire wympel let she falle
 [814] And tok non hed, so sore she was awhaped,
 [815] And ek so glad that that she was escaped;
 [816] And thus she sit and darketh wonder stylle.
 [817] Whan that this lyonesse hath dronke hire fille,
 [818] Aboute the welle gan she for to wynde,
 [819] And ryght anon the wympel gan she fynde,
 [820] And with hire blody mouth it al torente.
 [821] Whan this was don, no lengere she ne stente,
 [822] But to the wode hire weye thanne hath she nome.
 [823] And at the laste this Piramus is come;
 [824] But al to longe, allas, at hom was he!
 [825] The mone shon, and he myghte wel yse,
 [826] And in his wey, as that he com ful faste.
 [827] His eyen to the ground adoun he caste,
 [828] And in the sond, as he byheld adoun,
 [829] He sey the steppes brode of a lyoun,
 [830] And in his herte he sodeynly agros,
 [831] And pale he wex; therwith his heer aros,
 [832] And ner he com, and fond the wimpel torn.
 [833] "Allas," quod he, "the day that I was born!
 [834] This o nyght wol us lovers bothe sle!
 [835] How shulde I axe mercy of Tisbe,
 [836] Whan I am he that have yow slayn, allas!
 [837] My biddyng hath yow slayn, as in this cas.
 [838] Allas, to bidde a woman gon by nyghte
 [839] In place there as peril falle myghte!
 [840] And I so slow! Allas, I ne hadde be
 [841] Here in this place a furlong wey or ye!
 [842] Now what lyoun that be in this forest,
 [843] My body mote he renten, or what best
 [844] That wilde is, gnawe mote he now myn herte!"
 [845] And with that word he to the wympel sterte,
 [846] And kiste it ofte, and wep on it ful sore,
 [847] And seyde, "Wympel, allas! There is no more
 [848] But thow shalt feele as wel the blod of me
 [849] As thow hast felt the bledyng of Thisbe!"
 [850] And with that word he smot hym to the herte.
 [851] The blod out of the wounde as brode sterte
 [852] As water whan the condit broken is.
 [853] Now Tisbe, which that wiste nat of this,
 [854] But sittynge in hire drede, she thoughte thus:
 [855] "If it so falle that my Piramus
 [856] Be comen hider, and may me not yfynde,
 [857] He may me holde fals and ek unkynde."
 [858] And out she cometh and after hym gan espien,
 [859] Bothe with hire herte and with hire yen,
 [860] And thoughte, "I wol hym tellen of my drede,
 [861] Bothe of the lyonesse and al my deede."
 [862] And at the laste hire love thanne hath she founde,
 [863] Betynge with his heles on the grounde,
 [864] Al blody, and therwithal a-bak she sterte,
 [865] And lik the wawes quappe gan hire herte,
 [866] And pale as box she was, and in a throwe
 [867] Avisede hire, and gan hym wel to knowe,
 [868] That it was Piramus, hire herte deere.
 [869] Who coude wryte which a dedly cheere
 [870] Hath Thisbe now, and how hire heer she rente,
 [871] And how she gan hireselve to turmente,
 [872] And how she lyth and swouneth on the grounde,
 [873] And how she wep of teres ful his wounde;
 [874] How medeleth she his blod with hire compleynte;
 [875] How with his blod hireselve gan she peynte;
 [876] How clyppeth she the deede cors, allas!
 [877] How doth this woful Tisbe in this cas!
 [878] How kysseth she his frosty mouth so cold!
 [879] "Who hath don this, and who hath been so bold
 [880] To sle my leef? O spek, my Piramus!
 [881] I am thy Tisbe, that the calleth thus."
 [882] And therwithal she lifteth up his hed.
 [883] This woful man, that was nat fully ded,
 [884] Whan that he herde the name of Tisbe cryen,
 [885] On hire he caste his hevy, dedly yen,
 [886] And doun agayn, and yeldeth up the gost.
 [887] Tysbe ryst up withouten noyse or bost,
 [888] And saw hire wympel and his empty shethe,
 [889] And ek his swerd that hym hath don to dethe.
 [890] Thanne spak she thus: "My woful hand," quod she,
 [891] "Is strong ynogh in swich a werk to me;
 [892] For love shal yeve me strengthe and hardynesse
 [893] To make my wounde large ynogh, I gesse.
 [894] I wol thee folwe ded, and I wol be
 [895] Felawe and cause ek of thy deth," quod she.
 [896] "And thogh that nothing, save the deth only,
 [897] Mighte thee fro me departe trewely,
 [898] Thow shalt no more departe now fro me
 [899] Than fro the deth, for I wol go with thee.
 [900] And now, ye wrechede jelos fadres oure,
 [901] We that whilom were children youre,
 [902] We preyen yow, withouten more envye,
 [903] That in o grave yfere we moten lye,
 [904] Sith love hath brought us to this pitous ende.
 [905] And ryghtwis God to every lovere sende,
 [906] That loveth trewely, more prosperite
 [907] Than evere yit had Piramus and Tisbe!
 [908] And lat no gentil woman hyre assure
 [909] To putten hire in swich an aventure.
 [910] But God forbede but a woman can
 [911] Ben as trewe in lovynge as a man!
 [912] And for my part, I shal anon it kythe."
 [913] And with that word his swerd she tok as swythe,
 [914] That warm was of hire loves blod, and hot,
 [915] And to the herte she hireselven smot.
 [916] And thus are Tisbe and Piramus ygo.
 [917] Of trewe men I fynde but fewe mo
 [918] In alle my bokes, save this Piramus,
 [919] And therfore have I spoken of hym thus.
 [920] For it is deynte to us men to fynde
 [921] A man that can in love been trewe and kynde.
 [922] Here may ye se, what lovere so he be,
 [923] A woman dar and can as wel as he.
 [924] Glorye and honour, Virgil Mantoan,
 [925] Be to thy name! and I shal, as I can,
 [926] Folwe thy lanterne, as thow gost byforn,
 [927] How Eneas to Dido was forsworn.
 [928] In thyn Eneyde and Naso wol I take
 [929] The tenor, and the grete effectes make.
 [930] Whan Troye brought was to destruccioun
 [931] By Grekes sleyghte, and namely by Synoun,
 [932] Feynynge the hors offered unto Mynerve,
 [933] Thourgh which that many a Troyan moste sterve;
 [934] And Ector hadde, after his deth, apeered;
 [935] And fyr so wod it myghte nat been steered
 [936] In al the noble tour of Ylioun,
 [937] That of the cite was the chef dongeoun;
 [938] And al the contre was so lowe ybrought,
 [939] And Priamus the kyng fordon and nought;
 [940] And Enyas was charged by Venus
 [941] To fleen awey, he tok Ascanius,
 [942] That was his sone, in his ryght hand and fledde;
 [943] And on his bak he bar and with hym ledde
 [944] His olde fader cleped Anchises,
 [945] And by the weye his wif Creusa he les.
 [946] And moche sorwe hadde he in his mynde,
 [947] Or that he coude his felaweshipe fynde.
 [948] But at the laste, whan he hadde hem founde,
 [949] He made hym redy in a certeyn stounde,
 [950] And to the se ful faste he gan him hye,
 [951] And sayleth forth with al his companye
 [952] Toward Ytayle, as wolde his destinee.
 [953] But of his aventures in the se
 [954] Nis nat to purpos for to speke of here,
 [955] For it acordeth nat to my matere.
 [956] But, as I seyde, of hym and of Dido
 [957] Shal be my tale, til that I have do.
 [958] So longe he saylede in the salte se
 [959] Tyl in Libie unnethe aryvede he
 [960] With shipes sevene and with no more navye;
 [961] And glad was he to londe for to hye,
 [962] So was he with the tempest al toshake.
 [963] And whan that he the haven hadde ytake,
 [964] He hadde a knyght, was called Achates,
 [965] And hym of al his felawshipe he ches
 [966] To gon with hym, the cuntre for t' espie.
 [967] He tok with hym no more companye,
 [968] But forth they gon, and lafte his shipes ryde,
 [969] His fere and he, withouten any gyde.
 [970] So longe he walketh in this wildernesse,
 [971] Til at the laste he mette an hunteresse.
 [972] A bowe in hande and arwes hadde she;
 [973] Hire clothes cutted were unto the kne.
 [974] But she was yit the fayreste creature
 [975] That evere was yformed by Nature;
 [976] And Eneas and Achates she grette,
 [977] And thus she to hem spak whan she hem mette:
 [978] "Saw ye," quod she, "as ye han walked wyde,
 [979] Any of my sustren walke yow besyde
 [980] With any wilde bor or other best,
 [981] That they han hunted to, in this forest,
 [982] Ytukked up, with arwes in hire cas?"
 [983] "Nay, sothly, lady," quod this Eneas;
 [984] "But by thy beaute, as it thynketh me,
 [985] Thow myghtest nevere erthly woman be,
 [986] But Phebus syster art thow, as I gesse.
 [987] And if so be that thow be a goddesse,
 [988] Have mercy on oure labour and oure wo."
 [989] "I n' am no goddesse, sothly," quod she tho;
 [990] "For maydens walken in this contre here,
 [991] With arwes and with bowe, in this manere.
 [992] This is the reyne of Libie there ye ben,
 [993] Of which that Dido lady is and queen" --
 [994] And shortly tolde hym al the occasyoun
 [995] Why Dido cam into that regioun,
 [996] Of which as now me lesteth nat to ryme;
 [997] It nedeth nat, it were but los of tyme.
 [998] For this is al and som, it was Venus,
 [999] His owene moder, that spak with him thus,
 [1000] And to Cartage she bad he sholde hym dighte,
 [1001] And vanyshed anon out of his syghte.
 [1002] I coude folwe, word for word, Virgile,
 [1003] But it wolde lasten al to longe while.
 [1004] This noble queen that cleped was Dido,
 [1005] That whilom was the wif of Sytheo,
 [1006] That fayrer was than is the bryghte sonne,
 [1007] This noble toun of Cartage hath bigonne;
 [1008] In which she regneth in so gret honour
 [1009] That she was holden of alle queenes flour
 [1010] Of gentillesse, of fredom, of beaute,
 [1011] That wel was hym that myghte hire ones se;
 [1012] Of kynges and of lordes so desyred
 [1013] That al the world hire beaute hadde yfyred,
 [1014] She stod so wel in every wightes grace.
 [1015] Whan Eneas was come unto that place,
 [1016] Unto the mayster temple of al the toun
 [1017] Ther Dido was in hire devocyoun,
 [1018] Ful pryvyly his weye than hath he nome.
 [1019] Whan he was in the large temple come,
 [1020] I can nat seyn if that it be possible,
 [1021] But Venus hadde hym maked invysible --
 [1022] Thus seyth the bok, withouten any les.
 [1023] And whan this Eneas and Achates
 [1024] Hadden in this temple ben overal,
 [1025] Thanne founde they, depeynted on a wal,
 [1026] How Troye and al the lond destroyed was.
 [1027] "Allas, that I was born!" quod Eneas;
 [1028] "Thourghout the world oure shame is kid so wyde,
 [1029] Now it is peynted upon every syde.
 [1030] We, that weren in prosperite,
 [1031] Been now desclandred, and in swich degre,
 [1032] No lenger for to lyven I ne kepe."
 [1033] And with that word he brast out for to wepe
 [1034] So tenderly that routhe it was to sene.
 [1035] This fresshe lady, of the cite queene,
 [1036] Stod in the temple in hire estat real,
 [1037] So rychely and ek so fayr withal,
 [1038] So yong, so lusty, with hire eyen glade,
 [1039] That, if that God, that hevene and erthe made,
 [1040] Wolde han a love, for beaute and goodnesse,
 [1041] And womanhod, and trouthe, and semelynesse,
 [1042] Whom shulde he loven but this lady swete?
 [1043] Ther nys no woman to hym half so mete.
 [1044] Fortune, that hath the world in governaunce,
 [1045] Hath sodeynly brought in so newe a chaunce
 [1046] That nevere was ther yit so fremde a cas.
 [1047] For al the companye of Eneas,
 [1048] Which that he wende han loren in the se,
 [1049] Aryved is nat fer from that cite;
 [1050] For which the gretteste of his lordes some
 [1051] By aventure ben to the cite come,
 [1052] Unto that same temple, for to seke
 [1053] The queene, and of hire socour to beseke,
 [1054] Swich renoun was there sprongen of hire goodnesse.
 [1055] And whan they hadden told al here distresse,
 [1056] And al here tempest and here harde cas,
 [1057] Unto the queen apeered Eneas,
 [1058] And openly biknew that it was he.
 [1059] Who hadde joye thanne but his meyne,
 [1060] That hadde founde here lord, here governour?
 [1061] The queen saugh that they dide hym swych honour,
 [1062] And hadde herd ofte of Eneas er tho,
 [1063] And in hire herte she hadde routhe and wo
 [1064] That evere swich a noble man as he
 [1065] Shal ben disherited in swich degre;
 [1066] And saw the man, that he was lyk a knyght,
 [1067] And suffisaunt of persone and of myght,
 [1068] And lyk to been a verray gentil man;
 [1069] And wel his wordes he besette can,
 [1070] And hadde a noble visage for the nones,
 [1071] And formed wel of braunes and of bones.
 [1072] For after Venus hadde he swich fayrnesse
 [1073] That no man myghte be half so fayr, I gesse;
 [1074] And wel a lord he semede for to be.
 [1075] And, for he was a straunger, somwhat she
 [1076] Likede hym the bet, as, God do bote,
 [1077] To som folk ofte newe thyng is sote.
 [1078] Anon hire herte hath pite of his wo,
 [1079] And with that pite love com in also;
 [1080] And thus, for pite and for gentillesse,
 [1081] Refreshed moste he been of his distresse.
 [1082] She seyde, certes, that she sory was
 [1083] That he hath had swych peryl and swich cas;
 [1084] And, in hire frendly speche, in this manere
 [1085] She to hym spak, and seyde as ye may here:
 [1086] "Be ye nat Venus sone and Anchises?
 [1087] In good feyth, al the worshipe and encres
 [1088] That I may goodly don yow, ye shal have.
 [1089] Youre shipes and youre meyne shal I save."
 [1090] And many a gentil word she spak hym to,
 [1091] And comaunded hire messageres to go
 [1092] The same day, withouten any fayle,
 [1093] His shippes for to seke, and hem vitayle.
 [1094] Ful many a beste she to the shippes sente,
 [1095] And with the wyn she gan hem to presente,
 [1096] And to hire royal paleys she hire spedde,
 [1097] And Eneas alwey with hire she ledde.
 [1098] What nedeth yow the feste to descrive?
 [1099] He nevere beter at ese was in his lyve.
 [1100] Ful was the feste of deyntees and rychesse,
 [1101] Of instruments, of song, and of gladnesse,
 [1102] Of many an amorous lokyng and devys.
 [1103] This Eneas is come to paradys
 [1104] Out of the swolow of helle, and thus in joye
 [1105] Remembreth hym of his estat in Troye.
 [1106] To daunsynge chaumberes ful of paramentes,
 [1107] Of riche beddes, and of ornementes,
 [1108] This Eneas is led after the mete.
 [1109] And with the quene, whan that he hadde sete,
 [1110] And spices parted, and the wyn agon,
 [1111] Unto his chambres was he led anon
 [1112] To take his ese and for to have his reste,
 [1113] With al his folk, to don what so hem leste.
 [1114] There nas courser wel ybrydeled non,
 [1115] Ne stede, for the justing wel to gon,
 [1116] Ne large palfrey, esy for the nones,
 [1117] Ne jewel, fretted ful of ryche stones,
 [1118] Ne sakkes ful of gold, of large wyghte,
 [1119] Ne ruby non, that shynede by nyghte,
 [1120] Ne gentil hawtein faucoun heroner,
 [1121] Ne hound for hert or wilde bor or der,
 [1122] Ne coupe of gold, with floreyns newe ybete,
 [1123] That in the land of Libie may be gete,
 [1124] That Dido ne hath it Eneas ysent;
 [1125] And al is payed, what that he hath spent.
 [1126] Thus can this quene honurable hire gestes calle,
 [1127] As she that can in fredom passen alle.
 [1128] Eneas sothly ek, withouten les,
 [1129] Hadde sent unto his ship by Achates
 [1130] After his sone, and after riche thynges,
 [1131] Bothe sceptre, clothes, broches, and ek rynges,
 [1132] Some for to were, and some for to presente
 [1133] To hire that alle thise noble thynges hym sente;
 [1134] And bad his sone how that he shulde make
 [1135] The presenting, and to the queen it take.
 [1136] Repeyred is this Achates agayn,
 [1137] And Eneas ful blysful is and fayn
 [1138] To sen his yonge sone Ascanyus.
 [1139] But natheles, oure autour telleth us,
 [1140] That Cupido, that is the god of love,
 [1141] At preyere of his moder hye above,
 [1142] Hadde the liknesse of the child ytake,
 [1143] This noble queen enamored to make
 [1144] On Eneas; but, as of that scripture,
 [1145] Be as be may, I take of it no cure.
 [1146] But soth is this, the queen hath mad swich chere
 [1147] Unto this child, that wonder is to here;
 [1148] And of the present that his fader sente
 [1149] She thanked hym ful ofte, in good entente.
 [1150] Thus is this queen in plesaunce and in joye,
 [1151] With alle these newe lusty folk of Troye.
 [1152] And of the dedes hath she more enquered
 [1153] Of Eneas, and al the story lered
 [1154] Of Troye, and al the longe day they tweye
 [1155] Entendeden to speken and to pleye;
 [1156] Of which ther gan to breden swich a fyr
 [1157] That sely Dido hath now swich desyr
 [1158] With Eneas, hire newe gest, to dele,
 [1159] That she hath lost hire hewe and ek hire hele.
 [1160] Now to th' effect, now to the fruyt of al,
 [1161] Whi I have told this story, and telle shal.
 [1162] Thus I begynne: it fil upon a nyght,
 [1163] Whan that the mone up reysed hadde his lyght,
 [1164] This noble queene unto hire reste wente.
 [1165] She siketh sore, and gan hyreself turmente;
 [1166] She waketh, walweth, maketh many a breyd,
 [1167] As don these lovers, as I have herd seyd.
 [1168] And at the laste, unto hire syster Anne
 [1169] She made hire mone, and ryght thus spak she thanne:
 [1170] "Now, dere sister myn, what may it be
 [1171] That me agasteth in my drem?" quod she.
 [1172] "This newe Troyan is so in my thought,
 [1173] For that me thynketh he is so wel ywrought,
 [1174] And ek so likly for to ben a man,
 [1175] And therwithal so moche good he can,
 [1176] That al my love and lyf lyth in his cure.
 [1177] Have ye nat herd him telle his aventure?
 [1178] Now certes, Anne, if that ye rede it me,
 [1179] I wolde fayn to hym ywedded be;
 [1180] This is th' effect; what sholde I more seye?
 [1181] In hym lyth al, to do me live or deye."
 [1182] Hyre syster Anne, as she that coude hire good,
 [1183] Seyde as hire thoughte, and somdel it withstod.
 [1184] But herof was so long a sermounynge
 [1185] It were to long to make rehersynge.
 [1186] But finaly, it may nat ben withstonde;
 [1187] Love wol love, for nothing wol it wonde.
 [1188] The dawenyng up-rist out of the se.
 [1189] This amorous queene chargeth hire meyne
 [1190] The nettes dresse, and speres brode and kene;
 [1191] An huntyng wol this lusty freshe queene,
 [1192] So priketh hire this newe joly wo.
 [1193] To hors is al hir lusty folk ygo;
 [1194] Into the court the houndes been ybrought;
 [1195] And upon coursers swift as any thought
 [1196] Hire yonge knyghtes hoven al aboute,
 [1197] And of hire women ek an huge route.
 [1198] Upon a thikke palfrey, paper-whit,
 [1199] With sadel red, enbrouded with delyt,
 [1200] Of gold the barres up enbosede hye,
 [1201] Sit Dido, al in gold and perre wrye;
 [1202] And she as fair as is the bryghte morwe,
 [1203] That heleth syke folk of nyghtes sorwe.
 [1204] Upon a courser stertlynge as the fyr --
 [1205] Men myghte turne hym with a litel wyr --
 [1206] Sit Eneas, lik Phebus to devyse,
 [1207] So was he fressh arayed in his wyse.
 [1208] The fomy brydel with the bit of gold
 [1209] Governeth he ryght as hymself hath wold.
 [1210] And forth this noble queen thus lat I ride
 [1211] On huntynge, with this Troyan by hyre side.
 [1212] The herde of hertes founden is anon,
 [1213] With "Hay! Go bet! Pryke thow! Lat gon, lat gon!
 [1214] Why nyl the leoun comen, or the bere,
 [1215] That I myghte ones mete hym with this spere?"
 [1216] Thus seyn these yonge folk, and up they kylle
 [1217] These bestes wilde, and han hem at here wille.
 [1218] Among al this to rumbelen gan the hevene;
 [1219] The thunder rored with a grisely stevene;
 [1220] Doun cam the reyn with hayl and slet so faste,
 [1221] With hevenes fyr, that it so sore agaste
 [1222] This noble queen, and also hire meyne,
 [1223] That ech of hem was glad awey to fle.
 [1224] And shortly, from the tempest hire to save,
 [1225] She fledde hireself into a litel cave,
 [1226] And with hire wente this Eneas also.
 [1227] I not, with hem if there wente any mo;
 [1228] The autour maketh of it no mencioun.
 [1229] And here began the depe affeccioun
 [1230] Betwixe hem two; this was the firste morwe
 [1231] Of hire gladnesse, and gynning of hire sorwe.
 [1232] For there hath Eneas ykneled so,
 [1233] And told hire al his herte and al his wo,
 [1234] And swore so depe to hire to be trewe
 [1235] For wel or wo and chaunge hire for no newe;
 [1236] And as a fals lovere so wel can pleyne,
 [1237] That sely Dido rewede on his peyne,
 [1238] And tok hym for husbonde and becom his wyf
 [1239] For everemo, whil that hem laste lyf.
 [1240] And after this, whan that the tempest stente,
 [1241] With myrthe out as they comen, hom they wente.
 [1242] The wikke fame upros, and that anon,
 [1243] How Eneas hath with the queen ygon
 [1244] Into the cave; and demede as hem liste.
 [1245] And whan the kyng that Yarbas highte it wiste,
 [1246] As he that hadde hir loved evere his lyf,
 [1247] And wowede hyre, to han hire to his wyf,
 [1248] Swich sorwe as he hath maked, and swich cheere,
 [1249] It is a routhe and pite for to here.
 [1250] But as in love, alday it happeth so
 [1251] That oon shal laughen at anothers wo.
 [1252] Now laugheth Eneas and is in joye
 [1253] And more richesse than evere he was in Troye.
 [1254] O sely wemen, ful of innocence,
 [1255] Ful of pite, of trouthe and conscience,
 [1256] What maketh yow to men to truste so?
 [1257] Have ye swych routhe upon hyre feyned wo,
 [1258] And han swich olde ensaumples yow beforn?
 [1259] Se ye nat alle how they ben forsworn?
 [1260] Where sen ye oon that he ne hath laft his leef,
 [1261] Or ben unkynde, or don hire som myscheef,
 [1262] Or piled hire, or bosted of his dede?
 [1263] Ye may as wel it sen as ye may rede.
 [1264] Tak hede now of this grete gentil-man,
 [1265] This Troyan, that so wel hire plesen can,
 [1266] That feyneth hym so trewe and obeysynge,
 [1267] So gentil, and so privy of his doinge,
 [1268] And can so wel don alle his obeysaunces,
 [1269] And wayten hire at festes and at daunces,
 [1270] And whan she goth to temple and hom ageyn,
 [1271] And fasten til he hath his lady seyn,
 [1272] And beren in his devyses, for hire sake,
 [1273] Not I not what; and songes wolde he make,
 [1274] Justen, and don of armes many thynges,
 [1275] Sende hire lettres, tokens, broches, rynges --
 [1276] Now herkneth how he shal his lady serve!
 [1277] There as he was in peril for to sterve
 [1278] For hunger, and for myschef in the se,
 [1279] And desolat, and fled from his cuntre,
 [1280] And al his folk with tempest al todryven,
 [1281] She hath hire body and ek hire reame yiven
 [1282] Into his hand, there as she myghte have been
 [1283] Of othere land than of Cartage a queen,
 [1284] And lyved in joye ynogh; what wole ye more?
 [1285] This Eneas, that hath so depe yswore,
 [1286] Is wery of his craft withinne a throwe;
 [1287] The hote ernest is al overblowe.
 [1288] And pryvyly he doth his shipes dyghte,
 [1289] And shapeth hym to stele awey by nyghte.
 [1290] This Dido hath suspecioun of this,
 [1291] And thoughte wel that it was al amys.
 [1292] For in hir bed he lyth a-nyght and syketh.
 [1293] She axeth hym anon what hym myslyketh --
 [1294] "My dere herte, which that I love most?"
 [1295] "Certes," quod he, "this nyght my faderes gost
 [1296] Hath in my slep so sore me tormented,
 [1297] And ek Mercurye his message hath presented,
 [1298] That nedes to the conquest of Ytayle
 [1299] My destine is sone for to sayle;
 [1300] For which, me thynketh, brosten is myn herte!"
 [1301] Therwith his false teres out they sterte,
 [1302] And taketh hire withinne his armes two.
 [1303] "Is that in ernest?" quod she; "Wole ye so?
 [1304] Have ye nat sworn to wyve me to take?
 [1305] Allas, what woman wole ye of me make?
 [1306] I am a gentil woman and a queen.
 [1307] Ye wole nat from youre wif thus foule fleen?
 [1308] That I was born, allas! What shal I do?"
 [1309] To telle in short, this noble quen Dydo,
 [1310] She seketh halwes and doth sacryfise;
 [1311] She kneleth, cryeth, that routhe is to devyse;
 [1312] Conjureth hym, and profereth hym to be
 [1313] His thral, his servant in the leste degre;
 [1314] She falleth hym to fote and swouneth ther,
 [1315] Dischevele, with hire bryghte gilte her,
 [1316] And seyth, "Have mercy; let me with yow ryde!
 [1317] These lordes, which that wonen me besyde,
 [1318] Wole me distroyen only for youre sake.
 [1319] And, so ye wole me now to wive take,
 [1320] As ye han sworn, thanne wol I yeve yow leve
 [1321] To slen me with youre swerd now sone at eve!
 [1322] For thanne yit shal I deyen as youre wif.
 [1323] I am with childe, and yeve my child his lyf!
 [1324] Mercy, lord! Have pite in youre thought!"
 [1325] But al this thing avayleth hire ryght nought,
 [1326] For on a nyght, slepynge he let hire lye,
 [1327] And stal awey unto his companye,
 [1328] And as a traytour forth he gan to sayle
 [1329] Toward the large contre of Ytayle.
 [1330] Thus he hath laft Dido in wo and pyne,
 [1331] And wedded ther a lady hyghte Lavyne.
 [1332] A cloth he lafte, and ek his swerd stondynge,
 [1333] Whan he from Dido stal in hire slepynge,
 [1334] Ryght at hire beddes hed, so gan he hie,
 [1335] Whan that he stal awey to his navye;
 [1336] Which cloth, whan sely Dido gan awake,
 [1337] She hath it kyst ful ofte for his sake,
 [1338] And seyde, "O swete cloth, whil Juppiter it leste,
 [1339] Tak now my soule, unbynd me of this unreste!
 [1340] I have fulfild of fortune al the cours."
 [1341] And thus, allas, withouten his socours,
 [1342] Twenty tyme yswouned hath she thanne.
 [1343] And whanne that she unto hire syster Anne
 [1344] Compleyned hadde -- of which I may nat wryte,
 [1345] So gret a routhe I have it for t' endite --
 [1346] And bad hire norice and hire sister gon
 [1347] To fechen fyr and other thyng anon,
 [1348] And seyde that she wolde sacryfye --
 [1349] And whan she myghte hire tyme wel espie,
 [1350] Upon the fir of sacryfice she sterte,
 [1351] And with his swerd she rof hyre to the herte.
 [1352] But, as myn auctour seith, yit thus she seyde;
 [1353] Or she was hurt, byforen or she deyde,
 [1354] She wrot a lettre anon that thus began:
 [1355] "Ryght so," quod she, "as that the white swan
 [1356] Ayens his deth begynnyth for to synge,
 [1357] Right so to yow make I my compleynynge.
 [1358] Not that I trowe to geten yow ageyn,
 [1359] For wel I wot that it is al in veyn,
 [1360] Syn that the goddes been contraire to me.
 [1361] But syn my name is lost thourgh yow," quod she,
 [1362] "I may wel lese on yow a word or letter,
 [1363] Al be it that I shal ben nevere the better;
 [1364] For thilke wynd that blew youre ship awey,
 [1365] The same wynd hath blowe awey youre fey."
 [1366] But who wol al this letter have in mynde,
 [1367] Rede Ovyde, and in hym he shal it fynde.
 [1368] Thow rote of false lovers, Duc Jasoun,
 [1369] Thow sly devourere and confusioun
 [1370] Of gentil wemen, tendre creatures,
 [1371] Thow madest thy recleymyng and thy lures
 [1372] To ladyes of thy statly aparaunce,
 [1373] And of thy wordes farced with plesaunce,
 [1374] And of thy feyned trouthe and thy manere,
 [1375] With thyn obesaunce and humble cheere,
 [1376] And with thy contrefeted peyne and wo.
 [1377] There othere falsen oon, thow falsest two!
 [1378] O, often swore thow that thow woldest dye
 [1379] For love, whan thow ne feltest maladye
 [1380] Save foul delyt, which that thow callest love!
 [1381] Yif that I live, thy name shal be shove
 [1382] In English that thy sekte shal be knowe!
 [1383] Have at thee, Jason! Now thyn horn is blowe!
 [1384] But certes, it is bothe routhe and wo
 [1385] That love with false loveres werketh so;
 [1386] For they shal have wel betere love and chere
 [1387] Than he that hath abought his love ful dere,
 [1388] Or hadde in armes many a blody box.
 [1389] For evere as tendre a capoun et the fox,
 [1390] Thow he be fals and hath the foul betrayed,
 [1391] As shal the good-man that therfore hath payed.
 [1392] Al have he to the capoun skille and ryght,
 [1393] The false fox wol have his part at nyght.
 [1394] On Jason this ensaumple is wel ysene
 [1395] By Isiphile and Medea the queene.
 [1396] In Tessalie, as Guido tellith us,
 [1397] There was a kyng that highte Pelleus,
 [1398] That hadde a brother which that highte Eson;
 [1399] And whan for age he myghte unnethes gon,
 [1400] He yaf to Pelleus the governyng
 [1401] Of al his regne and made hym lord and kyng.
 [1402] Of which Eson this Jason geten was,
 [1403] That in his tyme in al that land there nas
 [1404] Nat swich a famous knyght of gentilesse,
 [1405] Of fredom, and of strengthe and lustynesse.
 [1406] After his fadres deth he bar hym so
 [1407] That there nas non that liste ben his fo,
 [1408] But dide hym al honour and companye.
 [1409] Of which this Pelleus hadde gret envye,
 [1410] Imagynynge that Jason myghte be
 [1411] Enhaunsed so and put in swich degre
 [1412] With love of lordes of his regioun,
 [1413] That from his regne he may ben put adoun.
 [1414] And in his wit a-nyght compassed he
 [1415] How Jason myghte best distroyed be
 [1416] Withoute sclaunder of his compassement,
 [1417] And at the last he tok avysement
 [1418] To senden hym into som fer contre,
 [1419] There as this Jason may destroyed be.
 [1420] This was his wit, al made he to Jasoun
 [1421] Gret chere of love and of affeccioun,
 [1422] For drede lest his lordes it espide.
 [1423] So fyl it, so as fame renneth wide,
 [1424] There was swich tydyng overal and swich loos,
 [1425] That in an yle that called was Colcos,
 [1426] Beyonde Troye, estward in the se,
 [1427] That therin was a ram that men mighte se
 [1428] That hadde a fles of gold that shon so bryghte
 [1429] That nowher was ther swich anothir syghte;
 [1430] But it was kept alwey with a dragoun,
 [1431] And many other merveyles, up and doun,
 [1432] And with two boles maked al of bras,
 [1433] That spitten fyr, and moche thyng there was.
 [1434] But this was ek the tale, natheles,
 [1435] That whoso wolde wynne thylke fles,
 [1436] He moste bothe, or he it wynne myghte,
 [1437] With the boles and the dragoun fyghte.
 [1438] And kyng Oetes lord was of that yle.
 [1439] This Pelleus bethoughte upon this wile,
 [1440] That he his neveu Jason wolde enhorte
 [1441] To saylen to that lond, hym to disporte,
 [1442] And seyde, "Nevew, if it myghte be
 [1443] That swich a worshipe myghte fallen the,
 [1444] That thow this famous tresor myghtest wynne,
 [1445] And bryngen it my regioun withinne,
 [1446] It were to me gret plesaunce and honour.
 [1447] Thanne were I holde to quyte thy labour;
 [1448] And al the cost I wol myselven make.
 [1449] And chees what folk that thow wilt with the take;
 [1450] Lat sen now, darst thow take this viage?"
 [1451] Jason was yong, and lusty of corage,
 [1452] And undertok to don this ilke empryse.
 [1453] Anon Argus his shipes gan devyse;
 [1454] With Jason wente the stronge Ercules,
 [1455] And many another that he with hym ches.
 [1456] But whoso axeth who is with hym gon,
 [1457] Lat hym go rede Argonautycon,
 [1458] For he wole telle a tale long ynogh.
 [1459] Philotetes anon the sayl up drogh,
 [1460] Whan that the wynd was good, and gan hym hye
 [1461] Out of his contre called Thessalye.
 [1462] So longe he seyled in the salte se,
 [1463] Til in the yle of Lemnon aryvede he --
 [1464] Al be this nat rehersed of Guido,
 [1465] Yit seyth Ovyde in his Epistels so --
 [1466] And of this ile lady was and quene
 [1467] The fayre yonge Ysiphele, the shene,
 [1468] That whylom Thoas doughter was, the kyng.
 [1469] Isiphile was gon in hire pleying,
 [1470] And, romynge on the clyves by the se,
 [1471] Under a banke anon aspied she
 [1472] Where that the ship of Jason gan aryve.
 [1473] Of hire goodnesse adoun she sendeth blyve
 [1474] To witen if that any straunge wight
 [1475] With tempest thider were yblowe a-nyght,
 [1476] To don him socour, as was hire usaunce
 [1477] To fortheren every wight, and don plesaunce
 [1478] Of verrey bounte and of curteysye.
 [1479] This messangeer adoun hym gan to hye,
 [1480] And fond Jason and Ercules also,
 [1481] That in a cog to londe were ygo,
 [1482] Hem to refreshen and to take the eyr.
 [1483] The morwenynge attempre was and fayr,
 [1484] And in his weye this messanger hem mette.
 [1485] Ful cunnyngly these lordes two he grette,
 [1486] And dide his message, axinge hem anon
 [1487] If they were broken, or ought wo begon,
 [1488] Or hadden nede of lodman or vitayle;
 [1489] For of socour they sholde nothyng fayle,
 [1490] For it was outrely the quenes wille.
 [1491] Jason answerde mekely and stylle:
 [1492] "My lady," quod he, "thanke I hertely
 [1493] Of hire goodnesse; us nedeth, trewely,
 [1494] Nothyng as now, but that we wery be,
 [1495] And come for to pleye out of the se
 [1496] Tyl that the wynd be better in oure weye."
 [1497] This lady rometh by the clyf to pleye,
 [1498] With hire meyne, endelong the stronde,
 [1499] And fynt this Jason and this other stonde
 [1500] In spekynge of this thyng, as I yow tolde.
 [1501] This Ercules and Jason gan beholde
 [1502] How that the queen it was, and fayre hire grette
 [1503] Anon-ryght as they with this lady mette;
 [1504] And she tok hed, and knew by hyre manere,
 [1505] By hire aray, by wordes, and by chere,
 [1506] That it were gentil-men of gret degre,
 [1507] And to the castel with hire ledeth she
 [1508] These straunge folk and doth hem gret honour,
 [1509] And axeth hem of travayle and labour
 [1510] That they han suffered in the salte se;
 [1511] So that, withinne a day, or two, or thre,
 [1512] She knew, by folk that in his shipes be,
 [1513] That it was Jason, ful of renone,
 [1514] And Ercules, that hadde the grete los,
 [1515] That soughten the aventures of Colcos;
 [1516] And dide hem honour more than before,
 [1517] And with hem deled evere lenger the more,
 [1518] For they ben worthy folk, withouten les.
 [1519] And namely, most she spak with Ercules;
 [1520] To hym hire herte bar, he shulde be
 [1521] Sad, wys, and trewe, of wordes avyse,
 [1522] Withouten any other affeccioun
 [1523] Of love, or evyl ymagynacyoun.
 [1524] This Ercules hath so this Jason preysed
 [1525] That to the sonne he hath hym up areysed,
 [1526] That half so trewe a man there nas of love
 [1527] Under the cope of heven that is above;
 [1528] And he was wis, hardy, secre, and ryche.
 [1529] Of these thre poyntes there nas non hym liche:
 [1530] Of fredom passede he, and lustyhede,
 [1531] Alle tho that lyven or been dede;
 [1532] Therto so gret a gentilman was he,
 [1533] And of Thessalye likly kyng to be.
 [1534] There nas no lak, but that he was agast
 [1535] To love, and for to speke shamefast.
 [1536] He hadde lever hymself to morder, and dye,
 [1537] Than that men shulde a lovere hym espye.
 [1538] "As wolde God that I hadde yive
 [1539] My blod and flesh, so that I myghte live,
 [1540] With the nones that he hadde owher a wif
 [1541] For hys estat; for swich a lusty lyf
 [1542] She shulde lede with this lusty knyght!"
 [1543] And al this was compassed on the nyght
 [1544] Bytwixe hym Jason and this Ercules.
 [1545] Of these two here was a shrewed lees,
 [1546] To come to hous upon an innocent!
 [1547] For to bedote this queen was here assent.
 [1548] And Jason is as coy as is a mayde;
 [1549] He loketh pitously, but nought he sayde,
 [1550] But frely yaf he to hire conseyleres
 [1551] Yiftes grete, and to hire officeres.
 [1552] As wolde God I leyser hadde and tyme
 [1553] By proces al his wowyng for to ryme!
 [1554] But in this hous if any fals lovere be,
 [1555] Ryght as hymself now doth, ryght so dide he,
 [1556] With feynynge, and with every subtil dede.
 [1557] Ye gete namore of me, but ye wole rede
 [1558] Th' origynal, that telleth al the cas.
 [1559] The somme is this: that Jason wedded was
 [1560] Unto this queen and tok of hir substaunce
 [1561] What so hym leste unto his purveyaunce;
 [1562] And upon hire begat he children two,
 [1563] And drogh his sayl and saw hir nevere mo.
 [1564] A letter sente she to hym, certeyn,
 [1565] Which were to longe to wryten and to sen,
 [1566] And hym reprevith of his grete untrouthe,
 [1567] And preyeth him on hire to have som routhe.
 [1568] And of his children two she seyde hym this:
 [1569] That they ben lyk of alle thyng, ywis,
 [1570] To Jason, save they coude nat begile;
 [1571] And preyede God, or it were longe while,
 [1572] That she that hadde his herte yraft hire fro
 [1573] Moste fynden hym untrewe to hir also,
 [1574] And that she moste bothe hire chyldren spylle,
 [1575] And alle tho that sufferede hym his wille.
 [1576] And trewe to Jason was she al hire lyf,
 [1577] And evere kepte hire chast, as for his wif;
 [1578] Ne nevere hadde she joye at hire herte,
 [1579] But deyede for his love, of sorwes smerte.
 [1580] To Colcos comen is this duc Jasoun,
 [1581] That is of love devourer and dragoun.
 [1582] As mater apetiteth forme alwey
 [1583] And from forme into forme it passen may,
 [1584] Or as a welle that were botomles,
 [1585] Ryght so can false Jason have no pes.
 [1586] For to desyren thourgh his apetit
 [1587] To don with gentil women his delyt,
 [1588] This is his lust and his felicite.
 [1589] Jason is romed forth to the cyte
 [1590] That whilom cleped was Jaconitos,
 [1591] That was the mayster-toun of al Colcos,
 [1592] And hath ytold the cause of his comyng
 [1593] Unto Oetes, of that contre kyng,
 [1594] Preyinge hym that he moste don his assay
 [1595] To gete the fles of gold if that he may;
 [1596] Of which the kyng assenteth to his bone,
 [1597] And doth hym honour, as it was to done,
 [1598] So fer forth that his doughter and his eyr,
 [1599] Medea, which that was so wis and fayr
 [1600] That fayrer say there nevere man with ye,
 [1601] He made hire don to Jason companye
 [1602] At mete, and sitte by hym in the halle.
 [1603] Now was Jason a semely man withalle,
 [1604] And lyk a lord, and hadde a gret renoun,
 [1605] And of his lok as real as a leoun,
 [1606] And goodly of his speche, and familer,
 [1607] And coude of love al craft and art pleyner
 [1608] Withoute bok, with everych observaunce.
 [1609] And, as Fortune hire oughte a foul myschaunce,
 [1610] She wex enamoured upon this man.
 [1611] "Jason," quod she, "for ought I se or can,
 [1612] As of this thyng the whiche ye ben aboute,
 [1613] Ye han youreself yput in moche doute.
 [1614] For whoso wol this aventure acheve,
 [1615] He may nat wel asterten, as I leve,
 [1616] Withouten deth, but I his helpe be.
 [1617] But natheles, it is my wylle," quod she,
 [1618] "To fortheren yow so that ye shal nat die,
 [1619] But turnen sound hom to youre Tessalye."
 [1620] "My ryghte lady," quod this Jason tho,
 [1621] "That ye han of my deth or of my wo
 [1622] Any reward, and don me this honour,
 [1623] I wot wel that my myght ne my labour
 [1624] May nat disserve it in my lyves day.
 [1625] God thanke yow there I ne can ne may!
 [1626] Youre man I am, and lowely yow beseche
 [1627] To ben my helpe, withoute more speche;
 [1628] But, certes, for my deth shal I nat spare."
 [1629] Tho gan this Medea to hym declare
 [1630] The peril of this cas from poynt to poynt,
 [1631] And of his batayle, and in what disjoynt
 [1632] He mote stonde, of which no creature
 [1633] Save only she ne myghte his lyf assure.
 [1634] And shortly to the poynt ryght for to go,
 [1635] They been acorded ful bytwixe hem two
 [1636] That Jason shal hire wedde, as trewe knyght;
 [1637] And terme set to come sone at nyght
 [1638] Unto hire chamber and make there his oth
 [1639] Upon the goddes, that he for lef or loth
 [1640] Ne sholde nevere hire false, nyght ne day,
 [1641] To ben hire husbonde whil he lyve may,
 [1642] As she that from his deth hym saved here.
 [1643] And hereupon at nyght they mette in-feere,
 [1644] And doth his oth, and goth with hire to bedde;
 [1645] And on the morwe upward he hym spedde,
 [1646] For she hath taught hym how he shal nat fayle
 [1647] The fles to wynne and stynten his batayle;
 [1648] And saved hym his lyf and his honour;
 [1649] And gat hym a name ryght as a conquerour,
 [1650] Ryght thourgh the sleyghte of hire enchauntement.
 [1651] Now hath Jason the fles, and hom is went
 [1652] With Medea, and tresor ful gret won;
 [1653] But unwist of hire fader is she gon
 [1654] To Tessaly with Duk Jason hire lef,
 [1655] That afterward hath brought hire to myschef.
 [1656] For as a traytour he is from hire go,
 [1657] And with hire lafte his yonge children two,
 [1658] And falsly hath betraysed hire, allas,
 [1659] As evere in love a chef traytour he was;
 [1660] And wedded yit the thridde wif anon,
 [1661] That was the doughter of the kyng Creon.
 [1662] This is the mede of lovynge and guerdoun
 [1663] That Medea receyved of Jasoun
 [1664] Ryght for hire trouthe and for hire kyndenesse,
 [1665] That lovede hym beter than hireself, I gesse,
 [1666] And lafte hire fader and hire herytage.
 [1667] And of Jason this is the vassellage,
 [1668] That in his dayes nas ther non yfounde
 [1669] So fals a lovere goinge on the grounde.
 [1670] And therfore in hire letter thus she seyde
 [1671] Fyrst, whan she of his falsnesse hym upbreyde:
 [1672] "Whi lykede me thy yelwe her to se
 [1673] More than the boundes of myn honeste?
 [1674] Why lykede me thy youthe and thy fayrnesse,
 [1675] And of thy tonge, the infynyt graciousnesse?
 [1676] O, haddest thow in thy conquest ded ybe,
 [1677] Ful mikel untrouthe hadde ther deyd with the!"
 [1678] Wel can Ovyde hire letter in vers endyte,
 [1679] Which were as now to long for me to wryte.
 [1680] Now mot I seyn the exilynge of kynges
 [1681] Of Rome, for here horible doinges,
 [1682] And of the laste kyng Tarquinius,
 [1683] As seyth Ovyde and Titus Lyvius.
 [1684] But for that cause telle I nat this storye,
 [1685] But for to preyse and drawe to memorye
 [1686] The verray wif, the verray trewe Lucresse,
 [1687] That for hyre wifhod and hire stedefastnesse
 [1688] Nat only that these payens hire comende,
 [1689] But he that cleped is in oure legende
 [1690] The grete Austyn hath gret compassioun
 [1691] Of this Lucresse, that starf at Rome toun;
 [1692] And in what wise, I wol but shortly trete,
 [1693] And of this thyng I touche but the grete.
 [1694] Whan Ardea beseged was aboute
 [1695] With Romeyns, that ful sterne were and stoute,
 [1696] Ful longe lay the sege and lytel wroughten,
 [1697] So that they were half idel, as hem thoughten;
 [1698] And in his pley Tarquinius the yonge
 [1699] Gan for to jape, for he was lyght of tonge,
 [1700] And seyde that it was an ydel lyf;
 [1701] No man dide there no more than his wif.
 [1702] "And lat us speke of wyves, that is best;
 [1703] Preyse every man his owene as hym lest,
 [1704] And with oure speche lat us ese oure herte."
 [1705] A knyght that highte Colatyn up sterte,
 [1706] And seyde thus: "Nay, sire, it is no nede
 [1707] To trowen on the word, but on the dede.
 [1708] I have a wif," quod he, "that, as I trowe,
 [1709] Is holden good of alle that evere hire knowe.
 [1710] Go we to-nyght to Rome, and we shal se."
 [1711] Tarquinius answerde, "That liketh me."
 [1712] To Rome be they come, and faste hem dyghte
 [1713] To Colatynes hous and doun they lyghte,
 [1714] Tarquinius and ek this Colatyn.
 [1715] The husbonde knew the estris wel and fyn,
 [1716] And prively into the hous they gon,
 [1717] Nor at the yate porter nas there non,
 [1718] And at the chambre-dore they abyde.
 [1719] This noble wif sat by hire beddes side
 [1720] Dischevele, for no malyce she ne thoughte;
 [1721] And softe wolle oure bok seyth that she wroughte
 [1722] To kepen hire from slouthe and idelnesse;
 [1723] And bad hire servaunts don hire besynesse,
 [1724] And axeth hem, "What tydyngs heren ye?
 [1725] How seyth men of the sege, how shal it be?
 [1726] God wolde the walles were falle adoun!
 [1727] Myn husbonde is to longe out of this toun,
 [1728] For which the drede doth me so to smerte
 [1729] That with a swerd it stingeth to myn herte
 [1730] Whan I thynke on the sege or on that place.
 [1731] God save my lord, I preye hym for his grace!"
 [1732] And therwithal ful tenderly she wep,
 [1733] And of hire werk she tok no more kep,
 [1734] And mekely she let hyre eyen falle;
 [1735] And thilke semblaunt sat hire wel withalle.
 [1736] And eek hire teres, ful of honeste,
 [1737] Embelished hire wifly chastite;
 [1738] Hyre contenaunce is to hire herte dygne,
 [1739] For they acorde bothe in dede and sygne.
 [1740] And with that word hire husbonde Colatyn,
 [1741] Or she of him was war, com stertynge in
 [1742] And seyde, "Drede the nat, for I am here!"
 [1743] And she anon up ros with blysful chere
 [1744] And kiste hym, as of wives is the wone.
 [1745] Tarquinius, this proude kynges sone,
 [1746] Conceyved hath hire beaute and hyre cheere,
 [1747] Hire yelwe her, hire shap, and hire manere,
 [1748] Hire hew, hire wordes, that she hath compleyned
 [1749] (And by no craft hire beaute nas nat feyned),
 [1750] And caughte to this lady swich desyr
 [1751] That in his herte brende as any fyr,
 [1752] So wodly that his wit was al forgeten.
 [1753] For wel thoghte he she wolde nat ben geten;
 [1754] And ay the more that he was in dispayr,
 [1755] The more he coveyteth and thoughte hire fayr.
 [1756] His blynde lust was al his coveytynge.
 [1757] A-morwe, whan the brid began to synge,
 [1758] Unto the sege he cometh ful privily,
 [1759] And by hymself he walketh soberly,
 [1760] Th' ymage of hire recordynge alwey newe:
 [1761] "Thus lay hire her, and thus fresh was hyre hewe;
 [1762] Thus sat, thus spak, thus span; this was hire chere;
 [1763] Thus fayr she was, and this was hire manere."
 [1764] Al this conseit hys herte hath newe ytake.
 [1765] And as the se, with tempest al toshake,
 [1766] That after, whan the storm is al ago,
 [1767] Yit wol the water quappe a day or two,
 [1768] Ryght so, thogh that hire forme were absent,
 [1769] The plesaunce of hire forme was present;
 [1770] But natheles, nat plesaunce but delit,
 [1771] Or an unrightful talent, with dispit --
 [1772] "For, maugre hyre, she shal my leman be!
 [1773] Hap helpeth hardy man alday," quod he;
 [1774] "What ende that I make, it shal be so."
 [1775] And girte hym with his swerd and gan to go,
 [1776] And forth he rit til he to Rome is come,
 [1777] And al alone his wey than hath he nome
 [1778] Unto the hous of Colatyn ful ryght.
 [1779] Doun was the sonne and day hath lost his lyght;
 [1780] And in he cometh into a prive halke,
 [1781] And in the nyght ful thefly gan he stalke,
 [1782] Whan every wight was to his reste brought,
 [1783] Ne no wight hadde of tresoun swich a thought.
 [1784] Were it by wyndow or by other gyn,
 [1785] With swerd ydrawe shortly he com in
 [1786] There as she lay, this noble wif Lucresse.
 [1787] And as she wok, hire bed she felte presse.
 [1788] "What beste is that," quod she, "that weyeth thus?"
 [1789] "I am the kynges sone, Tarquinius,"
 [1790] Quod he, "but, and thow crye or noyse make,
 [1791] Or if there any creature awake,
 [1792] By thilke God that formed man alyve,
 [1793] This swerd thourghout thyn herte shal I ryve."
 [1794] And therwithal unto hire throte he sterte,
 [1795] And sette the poynt al sharp upon hire herte.
 [1796] No word she spak, she hath no myght therto.
 [1797] What shal she seyn? Hire wit is al ago.
 [1798] Ryght as a wolf that fynt a lomb alone,
 [1799] To whom shal she compleyne or make mone?
 [1800] What, shal she fyghte with an hardy knyght?
 [1801] Wel wot men that a woman hath no myght.
 [1802] What, shal she crye, or how shal she asterte
 [1803] That hath hire by the throte with swerd at herte?
 [1804] She axeth grace, and seyth al that she can.
 [1805] "Ne wilt thow nat," quod he, this crewel man,
 [1806] "As wisly Jupiter my soule save,
 [1807] As I shal in the stable slen thy knave,
 [1808] And ley hym in thy bed, and loude crye
 [1809] That I the fynde in swich avouterye.
 [1810] And thus thow shalt be ded and also lese
 [1811] Thy name, for thow shalt non other chese."
 [1812] These Romeyns wyves lovede so here name
 [1813] At thilke tyme, and dredde so the shame,
 [1814] That, what for fer of sclaunder and drede of deth,
 [1815] She loste bothe at ones wit and breth,
 [1816] And in a swogh she lay, and wex so ded
 [1817] Men myghte smyten of hire arm or hed;
 [1818] She feleth no thyng, neyther foul ne fayr.
 [1819] Tarquinius, that art a kynges eyr,
 [1820] And sholdest, as by lynage and by ryght,
 [1821] Don as a lord and as a verray knyght,
 [1822] Whi hastow don dispit to chivalrye?
 [1823] Whi hastow don this lady vilanye?
 [1824] Allas, of the this was a vileyns dede!
 [1825] But now to purpos; in the story I rede,
 [1826] Whan he was gon and this myschaunce is falle,
 [1827] This lady sente after hire frendes alle,
 [1828] Fader, moder, husbonde, alle yfeere;
 [1829] And al dischevele, with hire heres cleere,
 [1830] In habit swich as women used tho
 [1831] Unto the buryinge of hire frendes go,
 [1832] She sit in halle with a sorweful sighte.
 [1833] Hyre frendes axen what hire eylen myghte,
 [1834] And who was ded; and she sit ay wepynge;
 [1835] A word, for shame, forth ne myght she brynge,
 [1836] Ne upon hem she durste nat beholde.
 [1837] But atte last of Tarquyny she hem tolde
 [1838] This rewful cas and al thys thing horryble.
 [1839] The woo to tellen were an impossible,
 [1840] That she and al hir frendes made attones.
 [1841] Al hadde folkes hertes ben of stones,
 [1842] Hyt myght have maked hem upon hir rewe,
 [1843] Hir herte was so wyfly and so trewe.
 [1844] She sayde that, for hir gylt ne for hir blame,
 [1845] Hir husbonde shulde nat have the foule name,
 [1846] That wolde she nat suffre by no wey.
 [1847] And they answerden alle, upon hir fey,
 [1848] That they forgave yt hyr, for yt was ryght;
 [1849] It was no gilt, it lay not in hir myght;
 [1850] And seyden hir ensamples many oon.
 [1851] But al for noght; for thus she seyde anoon:
 [1852] "Be as be may," quod she, "of forgyvyng,
 [1853] I wol not have noo forgyft for nothing."
 [1854] But pryvely she kaughte forth a knyf,
 [1855] And therwithal she rafte hirself hir lyf;
 [1856] And as she fel adoun, she kaste hir lok,
 [1857] And of hir clothes yet she hede tok.
 [1858] For in hir fallynge yet she had a care,
 [1859] Lest that hir fet or suche thyng lay bare;
 [1860] So wel she loved clennesse and eke trouthe.
 [1861] Of hir had al the toun of Rome routhe,
 [1862] And Brutus by hir chaste blood hath swore
 [1863] That Tarquyn shulde ybanysshed be therfore,
 [1864] And al hys kyn; and let the peple calle,
 [1865] And openly the tale he tolde hem alle,
 [1866] And openly let cary her on a bere
 [1867] Thurgh al the toun, that men may see and here
 [1868] The horryble dede of hir oppressyoun,
 [1869] Ne never was ther kyng in Rome toun
 [1870] Syn thilke day; and she was holden there
 [1871] A seynt, and ever hir day yhalwed dere
 [1872] As in hir lawe; and thus endeth Lucresse,
 [1873] The noble wyf, as Tytus bereth witnesse.
 [1874] I telle hyt for she was of love so trewe,
 [1875] Ne in hir wille she chaunged for no newe;
 [1876] And for the stable herte, sadde and kynde,
 [1877] That in these wymmen men may alday fynde.
 [1878] Ther as they kaste hir herte, there it dwelleth.
 [1879] For wel I wot that Crist himselve telleth
 [1880] That in Israel, as wyd as is the lond,
 [1881] That so gret feyth in al that he ne fond
 [1882] As in a woman; and this is no lye.
 [1883] And as of men, loke ye which tirannye
 [1884] They doon alday; assay hem whoso lyste,
 [1885] The trewest ys ful brotel for to triste.
 [1886] Juge infernal, Mynos, of Crete kyng,
 [1887] Now cometh thy lot, now comestow on the ryng.
 [1888] Nat for thy sake oonly write I this storye,
 [1889] But for to clepe ageyn unto memorye
 [1890] Of Theseus the grete untrouthe of love;
 [1891] For which the goddes of the heven above
 [1892] Ben wrothe, and wreche han take for thy synne.
 [1893] Be red for shame! Now I thy lyf begynne.
 [1894] Mynos, that was the myghty kyng of Crete,
 [1895] That hadde an hundred citees stronge and grete,
 [1896] To scole hath sent hys sone Androgeus,
 [1897] To Athenes; of the which hyt happed thus,
 [1898] That he was slayn, lernynge philosophie,
 [1899] Ryght in that citee, nat but for envye.
 [1900] The grete Mynos, of the which I speke,
 [1901] Hys sones deth ys come for to wreke.
 [1902] Alcathoe he besegeth harde and longe;
 [1903] But natheles, the walles be so stronge,
 [1904] And Nysus, that was kyng of that citee,
 [1905] So chevalrous, that lytel dredeth he;
 [1906] Of Mynos or hys ost tok he no cure,
 [1907] Til on a day befel an aventure,
 [1908] That Nysus doughter stod upon the wal,
 [1909] And of the sege saw the maner al.
 [1910] So happed it that at a scarmishyng
 [1911] She caste hire herte upon Mynos the kyng,
 [1912] For his beaute and for his chyvalrye,
 [1913] So sore that she wende for to dye.
 [1914] And, shortly of this proces for to pace,
 [1915] She made Mynos wynnen thilke place,
 [1916] So that the cite was al at his wille,
 [1917] To saven whom hym leste or elles spille.
 [1918] But wikkedly he quitte hire kyndenesse,
 [1919] And let hire drenche in sorwe and distresse,
 [1920] Nere that the goddes hadde of hire pite;
 [1921] But that tale were to long as now for me.
 [1922] Athenes wan thys kyng Mynos also,
 [1923] As Alcathoe, and other tounes mo.
 [1924] And this th' effect, that Mynos hath so driven
 [1925] Hem of Athenes that they mote hym yiven
 [1926] From yer to yer hire owene children dere
 [1927] For to be slayne right as ye shal here.
 [1928] This Mynos hadde a monstre, a wiked best,
 [1929] That was so crewel that, withoute arest,
 [1930] Whan that a man was brought in his presence,
 [1931] He wolde hym ete; ther helpeth no defence.
 [1932] And every thridde yeer, withouten doute,
 [1933] They caste lot, and as it com aboute
 [1934] On riche, on pore, he moste his sone take,
 [1935] And of his child he moste present make
 [1936] Unto Minos, to save hym or to spylle,
 [1937] Or lete his best devoure hym at his wille.
 [1938] And this hath Mynos don, ryght in dispit;
 [1939] To wreke his sone was set al his delyt,
 [1940] And maken hem of Athenes his thral
 [1941] From yer to yer, whil that he liven shal;
 [1942] And hom he sayleth whan this toun is wonne.
 [1943] This wiked custom is so longe yronne,
 [1944] Til that of Athenes kyng Egeus
 [1945] Mot senden his owene sone, Theseus,
 [1946] Sith that the lot is fallen hym upon,
 [1947] To ben devoured, for grace is there non.
 [1948] And forth is lad this woful yonge knyght
 [1949] Unto the court of kyng Mynos ful ryght,
 [1950] And into a prysoun, fetered, cast is he
 [1951] Tyl thilke tyme he sholde freten be.
 [1952] Wel maystow wepe, O woful Theseus,
 [1953] That art a kynges sone, and dampned thus.
 [1954] Me thynketh this, that thow were depe yholde
 [1955] To whom that savede thee from cares colde!
 [1956] And if now any woman helpe the,
 [1957] Wel oughtestow hire servaunt for to be,
 [1958] And ben hire trewe lovere yer be yere!
 [1959] But now to come ageyn to my matere.
 [1960] The tour there as this Theseus is throwe
 [1961] Doun in the botom derk and wonder lowe,
 [1962] Was joynynge in the wal to a foreyne;
 [1963] And it was longynge to the doughtren tweyne
 [1964] Of Mynos, that in hire chaumbers grete
 [1965] Dwellten above, toward the mayster-strete
 [1966] Of Athenes, in joye and in solas.
 [1967] Noot I not how, it happede par cas,
 [1968] As Theseus compleynede hym by nyghte,
 [1969] The kynges doughter, Adryane that highte,
 [1970] And ek hire syster Phedra, herden al
 [1971] His compleynynge as they stode on the wal
 [1972] And lokeden upon the bryghte mone.
 [1973] Hem leste nat to go to bedde so sone;
 [1974] And of his wo they hadde compassioun.
 [1975] A kynges sone to ben in swich prysoun,
 [1976] And ben devoured, thoughte hem gret pite.
 [1977] This Adryane spak to hire syster fre,
 [1978] And seyde, "Phedra, leve syster dere,
 [1979] This woful lordes sone may ye nat here,
 [1980] How pitously compleyneth he his kyn,
 [1981] And ek his povre estat that he is in,
 [1982] And gilteles? Now, certes, it is routhe!
 [1983] And if ye wol assenten, by my trouthe,
 [1984] He shal ben holpen, how so that we do."
 [1985] Phedra answerde, "Ywis, me is as wo
 [1986] For hym as evere I was for any man;
 [1987] And, to his help, the beste red I can
 [1988] Is that we do the gayler prively
 [1989] To come and speke with us hastily,
 [1990] And don this woful man with hym to come.
 [1991] For if he may this monstre overcome,
 [1992] Thanne were he quyt; ther is non other bote.
 [1993] Lat us wel taste hym at his herte-rote,
 [1994] That if so be that he a wepen have,
 [1995] Wher that he dar, his lyf to kepe and save,
 [1996] Fyghten with the fend, and hym defende.
 [1997] For in the prysoun ther he shal descende,
 [1998] Ye wote wel that the beste is in a place
 [1999] That nys nat derk, and hath roum eek and space
 [2000] To welde an ax, or swerd, or staf, or knyf;
 [2001] So that, me thynketh, he shulde save his lyf.
 [2002] If that he be a man, he shal do so.
 [2003] And we shul make hym balles ek also
 [2004] Of wex and tow, that whan he gapeth faste,
 [2005] Into the bestes throte he shal hem caste
 [2006] To slake his hunger and encombre his teth;
 [2007] And right anon, whan that Theseus seth
 [2008] The beste achoked, he shal on hym lepe
 [2009] To slen hym or they comen more to-hepe.
 [2010] This wepen shal the gayler, or that tyde,
 [2011] Ful prively withinne the prysoun hyde;
 [2012] And for the hous is krynkeled to and fro,
 [2013] And hath so queynte weyes for to go --
 [2014] For it is shapen as the mase is wrought --
 [2015] Therto have I a remedye in my thought,
 [2016] That, by a clewe of twyn, as he hath gon,
 [2017] The same weye he may returne anon,
 [2018] Folwynge alwey the thred as he hath come.
 [2019] And whan that he this beste hath overcome,
 [2020] Thanne may he flen awey out of this drede,
 [2021] And ek the gayler may he with hym lede,
 [2022] And hym avaunce at hom in his cuntre,
 [2023] Syn that so gret a lordes sone is he.
 [2024] This is my red, if that he dar it take."
 [2025] What sholde I lenger sarmoun of it make?
 [2026] This gayler cometh, and with hym Theseus.
 [2027] Whan these thynges ben acorded thus,
 [2028] Adoun sit Theseus upon his kne --
 [2029] "The ryghte lady of my lyf," quod he,
 [2030] "I, sorweful man, ydampned to the deth,
 [2031] Fro yow, whil that me lasteth lyf or breth,
 [2032] I wol nat twynne, after this aventure,
 [2033] But in youre servise thus I wol endure,
 [2034] That, as a wreche unknowe, I wol yow serve
 [2035] For everemo, til that myn herte sterve.
 [2036] Forsake I wol at hom myn herytage,
 [2037] And, as I seyde, ben of youre court a page,
 [2038] If that ye vouche-sauf that in this place
 [2039] Ye graunte me to han so gret a grace
 [2040] That I may han nat but my mete and drynke.
 [2041] And for my sustenaunce yit wol I swynke,
 [2042] Ryght as yow leste, that Mynos ne no wight --
 [2043] Syn that he saw me nevere with eyen syght --
 [2044] Ne no man elles, shal me conne espye;
 [2045] So slyly and so wel I shal me gye,
 [2046] And me so wel disfigure and so lowe,
 [2047] That in this world ther shal no man me knowe,
 [2048] To han my lyf, and for to han presence
 [2049] Of yow, that don to me this excellence.
 [2050] And to my fader shal I sende here
 [2051] This worthy man that is now youre gaylere,
 [2052] And hym so gwerdone that he shal wel be
 [2053] Oon of the gretteste men of my cuntre.
 [2054] And if I durste seyn, my lady bryght,
 [2055] I am a kynges sone and ek a knyght.
 [2056] As wolde God, if that it myghte be
 [2057] Ye weren in my cuntre, alle thre,
 [2058] And I with yow to bere yow compaignye,
 [2059] Thanne shulde ye se if that I therof lye.
 [2060] And if I profre yow in low manere
 [2061] To ben youre page and serven yow ryght here,
 [2062] But I yow serve as lowly in that place,
 [2063] I preye to Mars to yeve me swich a grace
 [2064] That shames deth on me ther mote falle,
 [2065] And deth and poverte to my frendes alle;
 [2066] And that my spirit by nyghte mote go,
 [2067] After my deth, and walke to and fro,
 [2068] That I mote of traytour have a name,
 [2069] For which my spirit go, to do me shame!
 [2070] And if I evere cleyme other degre,
 [2071] But if ye vouche-sauf to yeve it me,
 [2072] As I have seyd, of shames deth I deye!
 [2073] And mercy, lady! I can nat elles seye."
 [2074] A semely knyght was Theseus to se,
 [2075] And yong, but of a twenty yer and thre.
 [2076] But whoso hadde seyn his contenaunce,
 [2077] He wolde have wept for routhe of his penaunce;
 [2078] For which this Adryane in this manere
 [2079] Answerde hym to his profre and to his chere:
 [2080] "A kynges sone, and ek a knyght," quod she,
 [2081] "To ben my servaunt in so low degre,
 [2082] God shilde it, for the shame of wemen alle,
 [2083] And lene me nevere swich a cas befalle!
 [2084] But sende yow grace of herte and sleyghte also,
 [2085] Yow to defende and knyghtly slen youre fo,
 [2086] And leve hereafter that I may yow fynde
 [2087] To me and to my syster here so kynde,
 [2088] That I repente nat to yeve yow lyf!
 [2089] Yit were it betere that I were youre wyf,
 [2090] Syn that ye ben as gentil born as I,
 [2091] And have a reaume, nat but faste by,
 [2092] Than that I suffered, gilteles, yow sterve,
 [2093] Or that I let yow as a page serve.
 [2094] It nys no profre as unto youre kynrede;
 [2095] But what is that that man nyl don for drede?
 [2096] And to my syster, syn that it is so
 [2097] That she mot gon with me, if that I go,
 [2098] Or elles suffre deth as wel as I,
 [2099] That ye unto youre sone as trewely
 [2100] Don hire ben wedded at youre hom-comyng.
 [2101] This is the final ende of al this thyng;
 [2102] Ye swere it here, upon al that may be sworn."
 [2103] "Ye, lady myn," quod he, "or ellis torn
 [2104] Mote I be with the Mynotaur to-morwe!
 [2105] And haveth hereof myn herte blod to borwe,
 [2106] If that ye wole; if I hadde knyf or spere,
 [2107] I wolde it laten out, and theron swere,
 [2108] For thanne at erst I wot ye wole me leve.
 [2109] By Mars, that is the chef of my beleve,
 [2110] So that I myghte liven and nat fayle
 [2111] To-morwe for t' acheve my batayle,
 [2112] I wolde nevere from this place fle,
 [2113] Til that ye shulde the verray preve se.
 [2114] For now, if that the sothe I shal yow say,
 [2115] I have yloved yow ful many a day,
 [2116] Thogh ye ne wiste it nat, in my cuntre,
 [2117] And aldermost desired yow to se
 [2118] Of any erthly livynge creature.
 [2119] Upon my trouthe I swere and yow assure,
 [2120] This sevene yer I have youre servaunt be.
 [2121] Now have I yow, and also have ye me,
 [2122] My dere herte, of Athenes duchesse!"
 [2123] This lady smyleth at his stedefastnesse,
 [2124] And at his hertely wordes and his chere,
 [2125] And to hyre sister seyde in this manere,
 [2126] Al softely: "Now, syster myn," quod she,
 [2127] "Now be we duchesses, bothe I and ye,
 [2128] And sekered to the regals of Athenes,
 [2129] And bothe hereafter likly to ben quenes;
 [2130] And saved from his deth a kynges sone,
 [2131] As evere of gentil women is the wone
 [2132] To save a gentyl man, emforth hire myght,
 [2133] In honest cause, and namely in his ryght.
 [2134] Me thynketh no wight oughte us herof blame,
 [2135] Ne beren us therfore an evil name."
 [2136] And shortly of this mater for to make,
 [2137] This Theseus of hire hath leve take,
 [2138] And every poynt was performed in dede
 [2139] As ye han in this covenaunt herd me rede.
 [2140] His wepne, his clewe, his thyng, that I have sayd,
 [2141] Was by the gayler in the hous yleyd,
 [2142] Ther as the Mynotaur hath his dwellynge,
 [2143] Ryght faste by the dore, at his entrynge.
 [2144] And Theseus is lad unto his deth,
 [2145] And forth unto this Mynotaur he geth,
 [2146] And by the techynge of this Adryane
 [2147] He overcom this beste and was his bane;
 [2148] And out he cometh by the clewe agayn
 [2149] Ful prively, whan he this beste hath slayn;
 [2150] And by the gayler geten hath a barge,
 [2151] And of his wyves tresor gan it charge,
 [2152] And tok his wif, and ek hire sister fre,
 [2153] And ek the gayler, and with hem alle thre
 [2154] Is stole awey out of the lond by nyghte,
 [2155] And to the contre of Ennopye hym dyghte
 [2156] There as he hadde a frend of his knowynge.
 [2157] There feste they, there daunce they and synge;
 [2158] And in his armes hath this Adryane,
 [2159] That of the beste hath kept hym from his bane;
 [2160] And gat hym there a newe barge anon,
 [2161] And of his contre-folk a ful gret won,
 [2162] And taketh his leve, and homward sayleth he.
 [2163] And in an yle amyd the wilde se,
 [2164] Ther as there dwelled creature non
 [2165] Save wilde bestes, and that ful many oon,
 [2166] He made his ship a-londe for to sette;
 [2167] And in that yle half a day he lette,
 [2168] And seyde that on the lond he moste hym reste.
 [2169] His maryners han don ryght as hym leste;
 [2170] And, for to tellen shortly in this cas,
 [2171] Whan Adryane his wif aslepe was,
 [2172] For that hire syster fayrer was than she,
 [2173] He taketh hire in his hond and forth goth he
 [2174] To shipe, and as a traytour stal his wey,
 [2175] Whil that this Adryane aslepe lay,
 [2176] And to his contre-ward he sayleth blyve --
 [2177] A twenty devel-wey the wynd hym dryve! --
 [2178] And fond his fader drenched in the se.
 [2179] Me lest no more to speke of hym, parde.
 [2180] These false lovers, poysoun be here bane!
 [2181] But I wol turne ageyn to Adryane,
 [2182] That is with slep for werynesse atake.
 [2183] Ful sorwefully hire herte may awake.
 [2184] Allas, for thee myn herte hath now pite!
 [2185] Ryght in the dawenyng awaketh she,
 [2186] And gropeth in the bed, and fond ryght nought.
 [2187] "Allas," quod she, "that evere I was wrought!
 [2188] I am betrayed!" and hire her torente,
 [2189] And to the stronde barefot faste she wente,
 [2190] And cryed, "Theseus, myn herte swete!
 [2191] Where be ye, that I may nat with yow mete,
 [2192] And myghte thus with bestes ben yslayn?"
 [2193] The holwe rokkes answerde hire agayn.
 [2194] No man she saw, and yit shyned the mone,
 [2195] And hye upon a rokke she wente sone,
 [2196] And saw his barge saylynge in the se.
 [2197] Cold wex hire herte, and ryght thus seyde she:
 [2198] "Meker than ye fynde I the bestes wilde!"
 [2199] Hadde he nat synne that hire thus begylde?
 [2200] She cryed, "O turn ageyn, for routhe and synne!
 [2201] Thy barge hath nat al his meyne inne!"
 [2202] Hire coverchef on a pole up steked she,
 [2203] Ascaunce that he shulde it wel yse,
 [2204] And hym remembre that she was behynde,
 [2205] And turne ageyn, and on the stronde hire fynde.
 [2206] But al for nought; his wey he is ygon.
 [2207] Adoun she fyl aswoune upon a ston;
 [2208] And up she rist, and kyssed, in al hire care,
 [2209] The steppes of his fet ther he hath fare,
 [2210] And to hire bed ryght thus she speketh tho:
 [2211] "Thow bed," quod she, "that hast receyved two,
 [2212] Thow shalt answere of two, and nat of oon!
 [2213] Where is thy gretter part awey ygon?
 [2214] Allas! Where shal I, wreche wight, become?
 [2215] For thogh so be that ship or boot here come,
 [2216] Hom to my contre dar I nat for drede.
 [2217] I can myselven in this cas nat rede."
 [2218] What shulde I more telle hire compleynyng?
 [2219] It is so long, it were an hevy thyng.
 [2220] In hire Epistel Naso telleth al;
 [2221] But shortly to the ende I telle shal.
 [2222] The goddes han hire holpen for pite,
 [2223] And in the signe of Taurus men may se
 [2224] The stones of hire corone shyne clere.
 [2225] I wol no more speke of this mateere;
 [2226] But thus this false lovere can begyle
 [2227] His trewe love, the devel quyte hym his while!
 [2228] Thow yevere of the formes, that hast wrought
 [2229] This fayre world and bar it in thy thought
 [2230] Eternaly er thow thy werk began,
 [2231] Why madest thow, unto the slaunder of man,
 [2232] Or, al be that it was nat thy doing,
 [2233] As for that fyn, to make swich a thyng,
 [2234] Whi sufferest thow that Tereus was bore,
 [2235] That is in love so fals and so forswore,
 [2236] That fro this world up to the firste hevene
 [2237] Corrumpeth whan that folk his name nevene?
 [2238] And, as to me, so grisely was his dede
 [2239] That, whan that I his foule storye rede,
 [2240] Myne eyen wexe foule and sore also.
 [2241] Yit last the venym of so longe ago,
 [2242] That it enfecteth hym that wol beholde
 [2243] The storye of Tereus, of which I tolde.
 [2244] Of Trace was he lord, and kyn to Marte,
 [2245] The crewel god that stant with blody darte;
 [2246] And wedded hadde he, with a blysful cheere,
 [2247] Kyng Pandiones fayre doughter dere,
 [2248] That highte Progne, flour of hire cuntre,
 [2249] Thogh Juno lyst nat at the feste to be,
 [2250] Ne Imeneus that god of wedyng is.
 [2251] But at the feste redy ben, ywis,
 [2252] The Furies thre with al here mortal brond.
 [2253] The oule al nyght aboute the balkes wond,
 [2254] That prophete is of wo and of myschaunce.
 [2255] This revel, ful of song and ek of daunce,
 [2256] Laste a fortenyght, or lytel lasse.
 [2257] But shortly of this story for to passe,
 [2258] For I am wery of hym for to telle,
 [2259] Fyve yer his wif and he togeder dwelle,
 [2260] Til on a day she gan so sore longe
 [2261] To sen hire sister that she say nat longe,
 [2262] That for desyr she nyste what to seye.
 [2263] But to hire husbonde gan she for to preye,
 [2264] For Godes love, that she moste ones gon
 [2265] Hyre syster for to sen, and come anon,
 [2266] Or elles, but she moste to hire wende,
 [2267] She preyde hym that he wolde after hire sende;
 [2268] And this was day by day al hire preyere,
 [2269] With al humblesse of wifhod, word and chere.
 [2270] This Tereus let make his shipes yare,
 [2271] And into Grece hymself is forth yfare.
 [2272] Unto his fadyr-in-lawe gan he preye
 [2273] To vouche-sauf that for a month or tweye
 [2274] That Philomene, his wyves syster, myghte
 [2275] On Progne his wyf but ones han a syghte --
 [2276] "And she shal come to yow ageyn anon.
 [2277] Myself with hyre wol bothe come and gon,
 [2278] And as myn hertes lyf I wol hire kepe."
 [2279] This olde Pandion, this kyng, gan wepe
 [2280] For tendernesse of herte for to leve
 [2281] His doughter gon, and for to yeve hire leve;
 [2282] Of al this world he loveth nothyng so;
 [2283] But at the laste leve hath she to go.
 [2284] For Philomene with salte teres eke
 [2285] Gan of hire fader grace to beseke
 [2286] To sen hire syster that she loveth so,
 [2287] And hym embraseth with hire armes two.
 [2288] And therwithal so yong and fayr was she
 [2289] That, whan that Tereus saw hire beaute,
 [2290] And of aray that there was non hire lyche,
 [2291] And yit of beaute was she two so ryche,
 [2292] He caste his fyry herte upon hyre so
 [2293] That he wol have hir, how so that it go;
 [2294] And with his wiles kneled and so preyde,
 [2295] Tyl at the laste Pandyon thus seyde:
 [2296] "Now, sone," quod he, "that art to me so dere,
 [2297] I the betake my yonge doughter here
 [2298] That bereth the keye of al myn hertes lyf.
 [2299] And gret me wel my doughter and thy wif,
 [2300] And yif hire leve somtyme for to pleye,
 [2301] That she may sen me ones er I deye."
 [2302] And sothly, he hath mad hym riche feste,
 [2303] And to his folk, the moste and ek the leste,
 [2304] That with hym com; and yaf hym yiftes grete,
 [2305] And hym conveyeth thourgh the mayster-strete
 [2306] Of Athenes, and to the se hym broughte,
 [2307] And turneth hom; no malyce he ne thoughte.
 [2308] The ores pullen forth the vessel faste,
 [2309] And into Trace aryveth at the laste,
 [2310] And up into a forest he hire ledde,
 [2311] And to a cave pryvely hym spedde;
 [2312] And in this derke cave, yif hir leste,
 [2313] Or leste nat, he bad hire for to reste;
 [2314] Of which hire herte agros, and seyde thus:
 [2315] "Where is my sister, brother Tereus?"
 [2316] And therwithal she wepte tenderly
 [2317] And quok for fere, pale and pitously,
 [2318] Ryght as the lamb that of the wolf is biten;
 [2319] Or as the culver that of the egle is smiten,
 [2320] And is out of his clawes forth escaped,
 [2321] Yit it is afered and awhaped,
 [2322] Lest it be hent eft-sones; so sat she.
 [2323] But utterly it may non other be.
 [2324] By force hath this traytour don a dede,
 [2325] That he hath reft hire of hire maydenhede,
 [2326] Maugre hire hed, by strengthe and by his myght.
 [2327] Lo! here a dede of men, and that a ryght!
 [2328] She cryeth "Syster!" with ful loud a stevene,
 [2329] And "Fader dere!" and "Help me, God in hevene!"
 [2330] Al helpeth nat; and yit this false thef
 [2331] Hath don this lady yit a more myschef,
 [2332] For fere lest she shulde his shame crye
 [2333] And don hym openly a vilenye,
 [2334] And with his swerd hire tonge of kerveth he,
 [2335] And in a castel made hire for to be
 [2336] Ful pryvely in prisoun everemore,
 [2337] And kepte hire to his usage and his store,
 [2338] So that she myghte hym neveremore asterte.
 [2339] O sely Philomene, wo is thyn herte!
 [2340] God wreke thee, and sende the thy bone!
 [2341] Now is it tyme I make an ende sone.
 [2342] This Tereus is to his wif ycome,
 [2343] And in his armes hath his wif ynome,
 [2344] And pitously he wep and shok his hed,
 [2345] And swor hir that he fond hir sister ded;
 [2346] For which this sely Progne hath swich wo
 [2347] That nygh hire sorweful herte brak a-two.
 [2348] And thus in terys lete I Progne dwelle,
 [2349] And of hire sister forth I wol yow telle.
 [2350] This woful lady lerned hadde in youthe
 [2351] So that she werken and enbroude couthe,
 [2352] And weven in hire stol the radevore
 [2353] As it of wemen hath be woned yore.
 [2354] And, sothly for to seyne, she hadde hire fille
 [2355] Of mete and drynk, and clothyng at hire wille.
 [2356] She coude eek rede and wel ynow endyte,
 [2357] But with a penne coude she nat wryte.
 [2358] But letters can she weve to and fro,
 [2359] So that, by that the yer was al ago,
 [2360] She hadde ywoven in a stamyn large
 [2361] How she was brought from Athenes in a barge,
 [2362] And in a cave how that she was brought;
 [2363] And al the thyng that Tereus hath wrought,
 [2364] She waf it wel, and wrot the storye above,
 [2365] How she was served for hire systers love.
 [2366] And to a knave a ryng she yaf anon,
 [2367] And preyed hym by signes for to gon
 [2368] Unto the queen, and beren hir that cloth,
 [2369] And by signes swor hym many an oth
 [2370] She wolde hym yeven what she geten myghte.
 [2371] This knave anon unto the quene hym dyghte,
 [2372] And tok it hire, and al the maner tolde.
 [2373] And whan that Progne hath this thing beholde,
 [2374] No word she spak, for sorwe and ek for rage,
 [2375] But feynede hire to gon on pilgrymage
 [2376] To Bacus temple; and in a litel stounde
 [2377] Hire dombe sister sittynge hath she founde,
 [2378] Wepynge in the castel, here alone.
 [2379] Allas! The wo, the compleynt, and the mone
 [2380] That Progne upon hire doumbe syster maketh.
 [2381] In armes everych of hem other taketh,
 [2382] And thus I late hem in here sorwe dwelle.
 [2383] The remenaunt is no charge for to telle,
 [2384] For this is al and som: thus was she served,
 [2385] That nevere harm agilte ne deserved
 [2386] Unto this crewel man, that she of wiste.
 [2387] Ye may be war of men, if that yow liste.
 [2388] For al be it that he wol nat, for shame,
 [2389] Don as Tereus, to lese his name,
 [2390] Ne serve yow as a morderour or a knave,
 [2391] Ful lytel while shal ye trewe hym have --
 [2392] That wol I seyn, al were he now my brother --
 [2393] But it so be that he may have non other.
 [2394] By preve as wel as by autorite,
 [2395] That wiked fruit cometh of a wiked tre,
 [2396] That may ye fynde, if that it like yow.
 [2397] But for this ende I speke this as now,
 [2398] To tellen yow of false Demophon.
 [2399] In love a falser herde I nevere non,
 [2400] But if it were his fader Theseus.
 [2401] "God, for his grace, fro swich oon kepe us!"
 [2402] Thus may these women preyen that it here.
 [2403] Now to the effect turne I of my matere.
 [2404] Destroyed is of Troye the cite;
 [2405] This Demophon com seylynge in the se
 [2406] Toward Athenes, to his paleys large.
 [2407] With hym com many a ship and many a barge
 [2408] Ful of his folk, of whiche ful many oon
 [2409] Is wounded sore, and sek, and wo begon,
 [2410] As they han at th' asege longe yleyn.
 [2411] Byhynde hym com a wynd and ek a reyn
 [2412] That shof so sore his sayl ne myghte stonde;
 [2413] Hym were levere than al the world a-londe,
 [2414] So hunteth hym the tempest to and fro.
 [2415] So derk it was, he coude nowher go;
 [2416] And with a wawe brosten was his stere.
 [2417] His ship was rent so lowe, in swich manere,
 [2418] That carpenter ne coude it nat amende.
 [2419] The se, by nyghte, as any torche it brende
 [2420] For wod, and possith hym now up, now doun,
 [2421] Til Neptune hath of hym compassioun,
 [2422] And Thetis, Thorus, Triton, and they alle,
 [2423] And maden hym upon a lond to falle,
 [2424] Wherof that Phillis lady was and queene,
 [2425] Ligurges doughter, fayrer on to sene
 [2426] Than is the flour ageyn the bryghte sonne.
 [2427] Unnethe is Demophon to londe ywonne,
 [2428] Wayk, and ek wery, and his folk forpyned
 [2429] Of werynesse, and also enfamyned,
 [2430] That to the deth he almost was ydriven.
 [2431] His wise folk to conseyl han hym yiven
 [2432] To seken help and socour of the queen,
 [2433] And loke what his grace myghte been,
 [2434] And maken in that lond som chevysaunce,
 [2435] To kepen hym fro wo and fro myschaunce.
 [2436] For syk he was, and almost at the deth;
 [2437] Unnethe myghte he speke or drawe his breth,
 [2438] And lyth in Rodopeya hym for to reste.
 [2439] Whan he may walke, hym thoughte it was the beste
 [2440] Unto the court to seken for socour.
 [2441] Men knewen hym wel and diden hym honour;
 [2442] For of Athenes duk and lord was he,
 [2443] As Theseus his fader hadde be,
 [2444] That in his tyme was of gret renoun,
 [2445] No man so gret in al the regyoun,
 [2446] And lyk his fader of face and of stature,
 [2447] And fals of love; it com hym of nature.
 [2448] As doth the fox Renard, the foxes sone,
 [2449] Of kynde he coude his olde faders wone
 [2450] Withoute lore, as can a drake swimme
 [2451] Whan it is caught and caryed to the brymme.
 [2452] This honurable Phillis doth hym chere;
 [2453] Hire liketh wel his port and his manere.
 [2454] But, for I am agroted herebyforn
 [2455] To wryte of hem that ben in love forsworn,
 [2456] And ek to haste me in my legende,
 [2457] (Which to performe God me grace sende)
 [2458] Therfore I passe shortly in this wyse.
 [2459] Ye han wel herd of Theseus devyse
 [2460] In the betraysynge of fayre Adryane
 [2461] That of hire pite kepte him from his bane.
 [2462] At shorte wordes, ryght so Demophon
 [2463] The same wey, the same path hath gon,
 [2464] That dide his false fader Theseus.
 [2465] For unto Phillis hath he sworen thus,
 [2466] To wedden hire, and hire his trouthe plyghte,
 [2467] And piked of hire al the good he myghte,
 [2468] Whan he was hol and sound, and hadde his reste;
 [2469] And doth with Phillis what so that hym leste,
 [2470] As wel coude I, if that me leste so,
 [2471] Tellen al his doynge to and fro.
 [2472] He seyde unto his contre moste he sayle,
 [2473] For there he wolde hire weddynge aparayle,
 [2474] As fel to hire honour and his also.
 [2475] And openly he tok his leve tho,
 [2476] And hath hire sworn he wolde nat sojorne,
 [2477] But in a month he wolde ageyn retorne;
 [2478] And in that lond let make his ordenaunce
 [2479] As verray lord, and tok the obeysaunce
 [2480] Wel and homly, and let his shipes dighte,
 [2481] And hom he goth the nexte wey he myghte.
 [2482] For unto Phillis yit ne com he nought,
 [2483] And that hath she so harde and sore abought --
 [2484] Allas! -- that, as the storyes us recorde,
 [2485] She was hire owene deth ryght with a corde,
 [2486] Whan that she saw that Demophon hire trayed.
 [2487] But to hym first she wrot, and faste him prayed
 [2488] He wolde come and hire delyvere of peyne,
 [2489] As I reherce shal a word or tweyne.
 [2490] Me lyste nat vouche-sauf on hym to swynke,
 [2491] Ne spende on hym a penne ful of ynke,
 [2492] For fals in love was he, ryght as his syre.
 [2493] The devil sette here soules bothe afyre!
 [2494] But of the letter of Phillis wol I wryte
 [2495] A word or two, althogh it be but lyte.
 [2496] "Thyn hostesse," quod she, "O Demophon,
 [2497] Thy Phillis, which that is so wo begon,
 [2498] Of Rodopeye, upon yow mot compleyne
 [2499] Over the terme set bytwixe us tweyne,
 [2500] That ye ne holde forward, as ye seyde.
 [2501] Youre anker, which ye in oure haven leyde,
 [2502] Hyghte us that ye wolde comen, out of doute,
 [2503] Or that the mone wente ones aboute.
 [2504] But tymes foure the mone hath hid hire face,
 [2505] Syn thilke day ye wente from this place,
 [2506] And foure tymes lyghte the world ageyn.
 [2507] But for al that, yif I shal soothly seyn,
 [2508] Yit hath the strem of Sytho nat ybrought
 [2509] From Athenes the ship; yit cometh it noght.
 [2510] And if that ye the terme rekene wolde
 [2511] As I or as a trewe lovere shulde,
 [2512] I pleyne nat, God wot, byforn my day."
 [2513] But al hire letter wryten I ne may
 [2514] By order, for it were to me a charge;
 [2515] Hire letter was ryght long and therto large.
 [2516] But here and ther in rym I have it layd,
 [2517] There as me thoughte that she wel hath sayd.
 [2518] She seyde, "Thy sayles come nat agen,
 [2519] Ne to thy word there is no fey certeyn;
 [2520] But I wot why ye come nat," quod she,
 [2521] "For I was of my love to yow to fre.
 [2522] And of the goddes that ye han forswore,
 [2523] Yif hire vengeaunce falle on yow therfore,
 [2524] Ye be nat suffisaunt to bere the peyne.
 [2525] To moche trusted I, wel may I pleyne,
 [2526] Upon youre lynage and youre fayre tonge,
 [2527] And on youre teres falsly out yronge.
 [2528] How coude ye wepe so by craft?" quod she.
 [2529] "May there swiche teres feyned be?
 [2530] Now certes, yif ye wol have in memorye,
 [2531] It oughte be to yow but lyte glorye
 [2532] To han a sely mayde thus betrayed!
 [2533] To God," quod she, "preye I, and ofte have prayed,
 [2534] That it mot be the grettest prys of alle
 [2535] And most honour that evere the shal befalle!
 [2536] And whan thyne olde auncestres peynted be,
 [2537] In which men may here worthynesse se,
 [2538] Thanne preye I God thow peynted be also
 [2539] That folk may rede forby as they go,
 [2540] `Lo! this is he that with his flaterye
 [2541] Bytraised hath and don hire vilenye
 [2542] That was his trewe love in thought and dede!'
 [2543] But sothly, of oo poynt yit may they rede,
 [2544] That ye ben lyk youre fader as in this,
 [2545] For he begiled Adriane, ywis,
 [2546] With swich an art and with swich subtilte
 [2547] As thow thyselven hast begyled me.
 [2548] As in that poynt, althogh it be nat fayr,
 [2549] Thow folwest hym, certayn, and art his ayr.
 [2550] But syn thus synfully ye me begile,
 [2551] My body mote ye se withinne a while,
 [2552] Ryght in the haven of Athenes fletynge,
 [2553] Withoute sepulture and buryinge,
 [2554] Thogh ye ben harder than is any ston."
 [2555] And whan this letter was forth sent anon,
 [2556] And knew how brotel and how fals he was,
 [2557] She for dispeyr fordide hyreself, allas.
 [2558] Swych sorwe hath she, for she besette hire so.
 [2559] Be war, ye wemen, of youre subtyl fo,
 [2560] Syn yit this day men may ensaumple se;
 [2561] And trusteth, as in love, no man but me.
 [2562] In Grece whilom weren brethren two,
 [2563] Of whiche that oon was called Danao,
 [2564] That many a sone hath of his body wonne,
 [2565] As swiche false lovers ofte conne.
 [2566] Among his sones alle there was oon
 [2567] That aldermost he lovede of everychoon.
 [2568] And whan this child was born, this Danao
 [2569] Shop hym a name and callede hym Lyno.
 [2570] That other brother called was Egiste,
 [2571] That was of love as fals as evere hym liste,
 [2572] And many a doughter gat he in his lyf;
 [2573] Of whiche he gat upon his ryghte wyf
 [2574] A doughter dere, and dide hire for to calle
 [2575] Ypermystra, yongeste of hem alle.
 [2576] The whiche child of hire natyvyte
 [2577] To alle thewes goode yborn was she,
 [2578] As likede to the goddes er she was born,
 [2579] That of the shef she sholde be the corn.
 [2580] The Wirdes, that we clepen Destine,
 [2581] Hath shapen hire that she mot nedes be
 [2582] Pyetous, sad, wis, and trewe as stel,
 [2583] As to these wemen it acordeth wel.
 [2584] For thogh that Venus yaf hire gret beaute,
 [2585] With Jupiter compouned so was she
 [2586] That conscience, trouthe, and drede of shame,
 [2587] And of hyre wifhod for to kepe hire name,
 [2588] This, thoughte hire, was felycite as here.
 [2589] The rede Mars was that tyme of the yeere
 [2590] So feble that his malyce is hym raft;
 [2591] Repressed hath Venus his crewel craft,
 [2592] That, what with Venus and other oppressioun
 [2593] Of houses, Mars his venim is adoun,
 [2594] That Ypermystra dar nat handle a knyf
 [2595] In malyce, thogh she shulde lese hire lyf.
 [2596] But natheles, as hevene gan tho turne,
 [2597] To badde aspectes hath she of Saturne,
 [2598] That made hire for to deyen in prisoun,
 [2599] As I shal after make mencioun.
 [2600] To Danao and Egistes also,
 [2601] Althogh so be that they were brethren two --
 [2602] For thilke tyme was spared no lynage --
 [2603] It lykede hem to make a maryage
 [2604] Bytwixen Ypermystre and hym Lyno,
 [2605] And casten swich a day it shal be so,
 [2606] And ful acorded was it utterly;
 [2607] The aray is wrought, the tyme is faste by.
 [2608] And thus Lyno hath of his faders brother
 [2609] The doughter wedded, and ech of hem hath other.
 [2610] The torches brennen, and the laumpes bryghte;
 [2611] The sacryfices ben ful redy dighte;
 [2612] Th' encens out of the fyre reketh sote;
 [2613] The flour, the lef is rent up by the rote
 [2614] To maken garlondes and crounes hye.
 [2615] Ful is the place of soun of minstralsye,
 [2616] Of songes amorous of maryage,
 [2617] As thylke tyme was the pleyne usage.
 [2618] And this was in the paleys of Egiste,
 [2619] That in his hous was lord, ryght as hym lyste.
 [2620] And thus the day they dryve to an ende;
 [2621] The frendes taken leve, and hom they wende;
 [2622] The nyght is come, the bryd shal go to bedde.
 [2623] Egistus to his chamber faste hym spedde,
 [2624] And prively he let his doughter calle.
 [2625] Whan that the hous was voyded of hem alle,
 [2626] He loketh on his doughter with glad chere
 [2627] And to hire spak, as ye shal after here:
 [2628] "My ryghte doughter, tresor of myn herte,
 [2629] Syn fyrst that day that shapen was my sherte,
 [2630] Or by the fatal systren had my dom,
 [2631] So nygh myn herte nevere thyng ne com
 [2632] As thow, myn Ypermystre, doughter dere.
 [2633] Tak hed what I, thy fader, seye the here,
 [2634] And werk after thy wiser evere mo.
 [2635] For alderfirst, doughter, I love the so
 [2636] That al the world to me nis half so lef;
 [2637] Ne I nolde rede the to thy myschef
 [2638] For al the good under the colde mone.
 [2639] And what I mene, it shal be seyd right sone,
 [2640] With protestacioun, as in this wyse,
 [2641] That, but thow do as I shal the devyse,
 [2642] Thow shalt be ded, by hym that al hath wrought!
 [2643] At shorte wordes, thow ne scapest nought
 [2644] Out of my paleys or that thow be ded,
 [2645] But thow consente and werke after my red;
 [2646] Tak this to thee for ful conclusioun."
 [2647] This Ypermystre caste hire eyen doun,
 [2648] And quok as doth the lef of aspe grene.
 [2649] Ded wex hire hew, and lyk an ash to sene,
 [2650] And seyde, "Lord and fader, al youre wille,
 [2651] After my myght, God wot, I shal fulfille,
 [2652] So it to me be no confusioun."
 [2653] "I nele," quod he, "have non excepcioun";
 [2654] And out he caught a knyf, as rasour kene.
 [2655] "Hyd this," quod he, "that it be nat ysene;
 [2656] And whan thyn husbonde is to bedde go,
 [2657] Whil that he slepeth, kit his throte atwo.
 [2658] For in my dremes it is warned me
 [2659] How that my nevew shal my bane be,
 [2660] But which I noot, wherfore I wol be siker.
 [2661] If thow sey nay, we two shul have a biker,
 [2662] As I have seyd, by hym that I have sworn!"
 [2663] This Ipermystre hath nygh hire wit forlorn;
 [2664] And, for to passen harmles of that place,
 [2665] She graunteth hym; ther is non other grace.
 [2666] And therwithal a costret taketh he,
 [2667] And seyde, "Herof a draught, or two, or thre,
 [2668] Yif hym to drynke, whan he goth to reste,
 [2669] And he shal slepe as longe as evere thee leste,
 [2670] The narcotyks and opies ben so stronge.
 [2671] And go thy wey, lest that him thynke longe."
 [2672] Out cometh the bryd, and with ful sobre cheere,
 [2673] As is of maydens ofte the manere,
 [2674] To chaumbre is brought with revel and with song.
 [2675] And shortly, lest this tale be to long,
 [2676] This Lyno and she ben brought to bedde,
 [2677] And every wight out at the dore hym spedde.
 [2678] The nyght is wasted, and he fyl aslepe.
 [2679] Ful tenderly begynneth she to wepe;
 [2680] She rist hire up, and dredfully she quaketh,
 [2681] As doth the braunche that Zepherus shaketh,
 [2682] And hust were alle in Argon that cite.
 [2683] As cold as any frost now waxeth she;
 [2684] For pite by the herte hire streyneth so,
 [2685] And drede of deth doth hire so moche wo,
 [2686] That thryes doun she fyl in swich a were.
 [2687] She rist yit up, and stakereth her and there,
 [2688] And on hire hondes faste loketh she.
 [2689] "Allas! and shal myne hondes blody be?
 [2690] I am a mayde, and, as by my nature,
 [2691] And bi my semblaunt and by my vesture,
 [2692] Myne handes ben nat shapen for a knyf,
 [2693] As for to reve no man fro his lyf.
 [2694] What devel have I with the knyf to do?
 [2695] And shal I have my throte korve a-two?
 [2696] Thanne shal I blede, allas, and me beshende!
 [2697] And nedes-cost this thyng moste have an ende;
 [2698] Or he or I mot nedes lese oure lyf.
 [2699] Now certes," quod she, "syn I am his wif,
 [2700] And hath my feyth, yit is it bet for me
 [2701] For to be ded in wifly honeste
 [2702] Than ben a traytour lyvynge in my shame.
 [2703] Be as be may, for ernest or for game,
 [2704] He shal awake, and ryse, and gon his way,
 [2705] Out at this goter, or that it be day" --
 [2706] And wep ful tenderly upon his face,
 [2707] And in hyre armes gan hym to enbrace,
 [2708] And hym she roggeth and awaketh softe.
 [2709] And at a wyndow lep he fro the lofte,
 [2710] Whan she hath warned hym, and don hym bote.
 [2711] This Lyno swift was, and lyght of fote,
 [2712] And from his wif he ran a ful good pas.
 [2713] This sely woman is so weik -- Allas! --
 [2714] And helples, so that or that she fer wente,
 [2715] Hire crewel fader dide hire for to hente.
 [2716] Allas, Lyno, whi art thow so unkynde?
 [2717] Why ne haddest thow remembred in thy mynde
 [2718] To taken hire, and lad hire forth with the?
 [2719] For whan she saw that gon awey was he,
 [2720] And that she myghte nat so faste go,
 [2721] Ne folwen hym, she sat hire doun ryght tho,
 [2722] Til she was caught and fetered in prysoun.
 [2723] This tale is seyd for this conclusioun --

      
The Canterbury Tales and Other Works of Chaucer (Middle English), by Geoffery Chaucer, [14th cent.], at sacred-texts.com

 

The Shorter Poems

 

An ABC

 [1] Almighty and al merciable queene,
 [2] To whom that al this world fleeth for socour,
 [3] To have relees of sinne, of sorwe, and teene,
 [4] Glorious virgine, of alle floures flour,
 [5] To thee I flee, confounded in errour.
 [6] Help and releeve, thou mighti debonayre,
 [7] Have mercy on my perilous langour.
 [8] Venquisshed me hath my cruel adversaire.
 [9] Bountee so fix hath in thin herte his tente
 [10] That wel I wot thou wolt my socour bee;
 [11] Thou canst not warne him that with good entente
 [12] Axeth thin helpe, thin herte is ay so free.
 [13] Thou art largesse of pleyn felicitee,
 [14] Haven of refut, of quiete, and of reste.
 [15] Loo, how that theeves sevene chasen mee.
 [16] Help, lady bright, er that my ship tobreste.
 [17] Comfort is noon but in yow, ladi deere;
 [18] For loo, my sinne and my confusioun,
 [19] Which oughten not in thi presence appeere,
 [20] Han take on me a greevous accioun
 [21] Of verrey right and desperacioun;
 [22] And as bi right thei mighten wel susteene
 [23] That I were wurthi my dampnacioun,
 [24] Nere merci of you, blisful hevene queene.
 [25] Dowte is ther noon, thou queen of misericorde,
 [26] That thou n' art cause of grace and merci heere;
 [27] God vouched sauf thurgh thee with us to accorde.
 [28] For certes, Crystes blisful mooder deere,
 [29] Were now the bowe bent in swich maneere
 [30] As it was first of justice and of ire,
 [31] The rightful God nolde of no mercy heere;
 [32] But thurgh thee han we grace as we desire.
 [33] Evere hath myn hope of refut been in thee,
 [34] For heer-biforn ful ofte in many a wyse
 [35] Hast thou to misericorde receyved me.
 [36] But merci, ladi, at the grete assyse
 [37] Whan we shule come bifore the hye justyse.
 [38] So litel fruit shal thanne in me be founde
 [39] That, but thou er that day correcte [vice],
 [40] Of verrey right my werk wol me confounde.
 [41] Fleeinge, I flee for socour to thi tente
 [42] Me for to hide from tempeste ful of dreede,
 [43] Biseeching yow that ye you not absente
 [44] Thouh I be wikke. O, help yit at this neede!
 [45] Al have I ben a beste in wil and deede,
 [46] Yit, ladi, thou me cloth. with thi grace.
 [47] Thin enemy and myn -- ladi, tak heede --
 [48] Unto my deth in poynt is me to chace!
 [49] Glorious mayde and mooder, which that nevere
 [50] Were bitter, neither in erthe nor in see,
 [51] But ful of swetnesse and of merci evere,
 [52] Help that my Fader be not wroth with me.
 [53] Spek thou, for I ne dar not him ysee,
 [54] So have I doon in erthe, allas the while,
 [55] That certes, but if thou my socour bee,
 [56] To stink eterne he wole my gost exile.
 [57] He vouched sauf, tel him, as was his wille,
 [58] Bicome a man, to have oure alliaunce,
 [59] And with his precious blood he wrot the bille
 [60] Upon the crois as general acquitaunce
 [61] To every penitent in ful creaunce;
 [62] And therfore, ladi bright, thou for us praye.
 [63] Thanne shalt thou bothe stinte al his grevaunce,
 [64] And make oure foo to failen of his praye.
 [65] I wot it wel, thou wolt ben oure socour,
 [66] Thou art so ful of bowntee, in certeyn,
 [67] For whan a soule falleth in errour
 [68] Thi pitee goth and haleth him ayein.
 [69] Thanne makest thou his pees with his sovereyn
 [70] And bringest him out of the crooked strete.
 [71] Whoso thee loveth, he shal not love in veyn,
 [72] That shal he fynde as he the lyf shal lete.
 [73] Kalenderes enlumyned ben thei
 [74] That in this world ben lighted with thi name,
 [75] And whoso goth to yow the righte wey,
 [76] Him thar not drede in soule to be lame.
 [77] Now, queen of comfort, sith thou art that same
 [78] To whom I seeche for my medicyne,
 [79] Lat not my foo no more my wounde entame;
 [80] Myn hele into thin hand al I resygne.
 [81] Ladi, thi sorwe kan I not portreye
 [82] Under the cros, ne his greevous penaunce;
 [83] But for youre bothes peynes I yow preye,
 [84] Lat not oure alder foo make his bobaunce
 [85] That he hath in his lystes of mischaunce
 [86] Convict that ye bothe have bought so deere.
 [87] As I seide erst, thou ground of oure substaunce,
 [88] Continue on us thi pitous eyen cleere!
 [89] Moises, that saugh the bush with flawmes rede
 [90] Brenninge, of which ther never a stikke brende,
 [91] Was signe of thin unwemmed maidenhede.
 [92] Thou art the bush on which ther gan descende
 [93] The Holi Gost, the which that Moyses wende
 [94] Had ben a-fyr, and this was in figure.
 [95] Now, ladi, from the fyr thou us defende
 [96] Which that in helle eternalli shal dure.
 [97] Noble princesse, that nevere haddest peere,
 [98] Certes if any comfort in us bee,
 [99] That cometh of thee, thou Cristes mooder deere.
 [100] We han noon oother melodye or glee
 [101] Us to rejoyse in oure adversitee,
 [102] Ne advocat noon that wole and dar so preye
 [103] For us, and that for litel hire as yee
 [104] That helpen for an Ave-Marie or tweye.
 [105] O verrey light of eyen that ben blynde,
 [106] O verrey lust of labour and distresse,
 [107] O tresoreere of bountee to mankynde,
 [108] Thee whom God ches to mooder for humblesse!
 [109] From his ancille he made the maistresse
 [110] Of hevene and erthe, oure bille up for to beede.
 [111] This world awaiteth evere on thi goodnesse
 [112] For thou ne failest nevere wight at neede.
 [113] Purpos I have sum time for to enquere
 [114] Wherfore and whi the Holi Gost thee soughte
 [115] Whan Gabrielles vois cam to thin ere.
 [116] He not to werre us swich a wonder wroughte,
 [117] But for to save us that he sithen boughte.
 [118] Thanne needeth us no wepen us for to save,
 [119] But oonly ther we dide not, as us oughte,
 [120] Doo penitence, and merci axe and have.
 [121] Queen of comfort, yit whan I me bithinke
 [122] That I agilt have bothe him and thee,
 [123] And that my soule is worthi for to sinke,
 [124] Allas, I caityf, whider may I flee?
 [125] Who shal unto thi Sone my mene bee?
 [126] Who, but thiself, that art of pitee welle?
 [127] Thou hast more reuthe on oure adversitee
 [128] Than in this world might any tonge telle.
 [129] Redresse me, mooder, and me chastise,
 [130] For certeynly my Faderes chastisinge,
 [131] That dar I nouht abiden in no wise,
 [132] So hidous is his rightful rekenynge.
 [133] Mooder, of whom oure merci gan to springe,
 [134] Beth ye my juge and eek my soules leche;
 [135] For evere in you is pitee haboundinge
 [136] To ech that wole of pitee you biseeche.
 [137] Soth is that God ne granteth no pitee
 [138] Withoute thee; for God of his goodnesse
 [139] Foryiveth noon, but it like unto thee.
 [140] He hath thee maked vicaire and maistresse
 [141] Of al this world, and eek governouresse
 [142] Of hevene, and he represseth his justise
 [143] After thi wil; and therfore in witnesse
 [144] He hath thee corowned in so rial wise.
 [145] Temple devout, ther God hath his woninge,
 [146] Fro which these misbileeved deprived been,
 [147] To you my soule penitent I bringe.
 [148] Receyve me -- I can no ferther fleen.
 [149] With thornes venymous, O hevene queen,
 [150] For which the eerthe acursed was ful yore,
 [151] I am so wounded, as ye may wel seen,
 [152] That I am lost almost, it smert so sore.
 [153] Virgine, that art so noble of apparaile,
 [154] And ledest us into the hye tour
 [155] Of Paradys, thou me wisse and counsaile
 [156] How I may have thi grace and thi socour,
 [157] All have I ben in filthe and in errour.
 [158] Ladi, unto that court thou me ajourne
 [159] That cleped is thi bench, O freshe flour,
 [160] Ther as that merci evere shal sojourne.
 [161] Xristus, thi sone, that in this world alighte
 [162] Upon the cros to suffre his passioun,
 [163] And eek that Longius his herte pighte
 [164] And made his herte blood to renne adoun,
 [165] And al was this for my salvacioun;
 [166] And I to him am fals and eek unkynde,
 [167] And yit he wole not my dampnacioun --
 [168] This thanke I yow, socour of al mankynde!
 [169] Ysaac was figure of his deth, certeyn,
 [170] That so fer forth his fader wolde obeye
 [171] That him ne roughte nothing to be slayn;
 [172] Right soo thi Sone list as a lamb to deye.
 [173] Now, ladi ful of merci, I yow preye,
 [174] Sith he his merci mesured so large,
 [175] Be ye not skant, for alle we singe and seye
 [176] That ye ben from vengeaunce ay oure targe.
 [177] Zacharie yow clepeth the open welle
 [178] To wasshe sinful soule out of his gilt.
 [179] Therfore this lessoun oughte I wel to telle,
 [180] That, nere thi tender herte, we were spilt.
 [181] Now, ladi bryghte, sith thou canst and wilt
 [182] Ben to the seed of Adam merciable,
 [183] Bring us to that palais that is bilt
 [184] To penitentes that ben to merci able. Amen.

      
The Canterbury Tales and Other Works of Chaucer (Middle English), by Geoffery Chaucer, [14th cent.], at sacred-texts.com

 

The Shorter Poems

 

The Complaint Unto Pity

 [1] Pite, that I have sought so yore agoo
 [2] With herte soore and ful of besy peyne,
 [3] That in this world was never wight so woo
 [4] Withoute deth -- and yf I shal not feyne,
 [5] My purpos was to Pite to compleyne
 [6] Upon the crueltee and tirannye
 [7] Of Love, that for my trouthe doth me dye.
 [8] And when that I, be lengthe of certeyne yeres,
 [9] Had evere in oon a tyme sought to speke,
 [10] To Pitee ran I al bespreynt with teres
 [11] To prayen hir on Cruelte me awreke.
 [12] But er I myghte with any word outbreke
 [13] Or tellen any of my peynes smerte,
 [14] I fond hir ded, and buried in an herte.
 [15] Adoun I fel when that I saugh the herse,
 [16] Ded as a ston while that the swogh me laste;
 [17] But up I roos with colour ful dyverse
 [18] And pitously on hir myn eyen I caste,
 [19] And ner the corps I gan to presen faste,
 [20] And for the soule I shop me for to preye.
 [21] I was but lorn, ther was no more to seye.
 [22] Thus am I slayn sith that Pite is ded.
 [23] Allas, that day, that ever hyt shulde falle.
 [24] What maner man dar now hold up his hed?
 [25] To whom shal any sorwful herte calle?
 [26] Now Cruelte hath cast to slee us alle,
 [27] In ydel hope, folk redeless of peyne,
 [28] Syth she is ded, to whom shul we compleyne?
 [29] But yet encreseth me this wonder newe,
 [30] That no wight woot that she is ded, but I --
 [31] So many men as in her tyme hir knewe --
 [32] And yet she dyed not so sodeynly,
 [33] For I have sought hir ever ful besely
 [34] Sith first I hadde wit or mannes mynde,
 [35] But she was ded er that I koude hir fynde.
 [36] Aboute hir herse there stoden lustely,
 [37] Withouten any woo as thoughte me,
 [38] Bounte parfyt, wel armed and richely,
 [39] And fresshe Beaute, Lust, and Jolyte,
 [40] Assured Maner, Youthe, and Honeste,
 [41] Wisdom, Estaat, Drede, and Governaunce,
 [42] Confedred both by bonde and alliaunce.
 [43] A compleynt had I, writen in myn hond,
 [44] For to have put to Pite as a bille;
 [45] But when I al this companye ther fond,
 [46] That rather wolden al my cause spille
 [47] Then do me help, I held my pleynte stille,
 [48] For to that folk, withouten any fayle,
 [49] Withoute Pitee ther may no bille availe.
 [50] Then leve I al these vertues, sauf Pite,
 [51] Kepynge the corps as ye have herd me seyn,
 [52] Confedered alle by bond of Cruelte
 [53] And ben assented when I shal be sleyn.
 [54] And I have put my complaynt up ageyn,
 [55] For to my foes my bille I dar not shewe,
 [56] Th' effect of which seith thus, in wordes fewe:
 [57] Humblest of herte, highest of reverence,
 [58] Benygne flour, coroune of vertues alle,
 [59] Sheweth unto youre rial excellence
 [60] Youre servaunt, yf I durste me so calle,
 [61] Hys mortal harm in which he is yfalle,
 [62] And noght al oonly for his evel fare,
 [63] But for your renoun, as he shal declare.
 [64] Hit stondeth thus: your contraire, Crueltee,
 [65] Allyed is ayenst your regalye
 [66] Under colour of womanly Beaute --
 [67] For men shulde not, lo, knowe hir tirannye --
 [68] With Bounte, Gentilesse, and Curtesye,
 [69] And hath depryved yow now of your place
 [70] That hyghte "Beaute apertenant to Grace."
 [71] For kyndely by youre herytage ryght
 [72] Ye ben annexed ever unto Bounte;
 [73] And verrayly ye oughte do youre myght
 [74] To helpe Trouthe in his adversyte.
 [75] Ye be also the corowne of Beaute,
 [76] And certes yf ye wanten in these tweyne,
 [77] The world is lore; ther is no more to seyne.
 [78] Eke what availeth Maner and Gentilesse
 [79] Withoute yow, benygne creature?
 [80] Shal Cruelte be your governeresse?
 [81] Allas, what herte may hyt longe endure?
 [82] Wherfore, but ye the rather take cure
 [83] To breke that perilouse alliaunce,
 [84] Ye sleen hem that ben in your obeisaunce.
 [85] And further over yf ye suffre this,
 [86] Youre renoun ys fordoo than in a throwe;
 [87] Ther shal no man wite well what Pite is.
 [88] Allas, that your renoun is falle so lowe!
 [89] Ye be than fro youre heritage ythrowe
 [90] By Cruelte that occupieth youre place,
 [91] And we despeyred that seken to your grace.
 [92] Have mercy on me, thow Herenus quene,
 [93] That yow have sought so tendirly and yore;
 [94] Let som strem of youre lyght on me be sene
 [95] That love and drede yow ever lenger the more;
 [96] For sothly for to seyne I bere the soore,
 [97] And though I be not konnynge for to pleyne,
 [98] For Goddis love have mercy on my peyne.
 [99] My peyne is this, that what so I desire
 [100] That have I not, ne nothing lyk therto;
 [101] And ever setteth Desir myn hert on fire.
 [102] Eke on that other syde where so I goo,
 [103] What maner thing that may encrese my woo,
 [104] That have I redy, unsoght, everywhere;
 [105] Me lakketh but my deth and than my bere.
 [106] What nedeth to shewe parcel of my peyne?
 [107] Syth every woo that herte may bethynke
 [108] I suffre and yet I dar not to yow pleyne;
 [109] For wel I wot although I wake or wynke,
 [110] Ye rekke not whether I flete or synke.
 [111] But natheles yet my trouthe I shal sustene
 [112] Unto my deth, and that shal wel be sene.
 [113] This is to seyne I wol be youres evere,
 [114] Though ye me slee by Crueltee your foo,
 [115] Algate my spirit shal never dissevere
 [116] Fro youre servise for any peyne or woo.
 [117] Sith ye be ded -- allas that hyt is soo --
 [118] Thus for your deth I may wel wepe and pleyne
 [119] With herte sore and ful of besy peyne.

      
The Canterbury Tales and Other Works of Chaucer (Middle English), by Geoffery Chaucer, [14th cent.], at sacred-texts.com

 

The Shorter Poems

 

A Complaint to His Lady

 [1] The longe nightes, whan every creature
 [2] Shulde have hir rest in somwhat as by kynde,
 [3] Or elles ne may hir lif nat longe endure,
 [4] Hit falleth most into my woful mynde
 [5] How I so fer have broght myself behynde
 [6] That, sauf the deeth, ther may nothyng me lisse,
 [7] So desespaired I am from alle blisse.
 [8] This same thoght me lasteth til the morwe
 [9] And from the morwe forth til hit be eve;
 [10] Ther nedeth me no care for to borwe,
 [11] For bothe I have good leyser and good leve;
 [12] Ther is no wyght that wol me wo bereve
 [13] To wepe ynogh and wailen al my fille;
 [14] The sore spark of peyne now doth me spille.
 [15] This Love, that hath me set in such a place
 [16] That my desir [he] nevere wol fulfille,
 [17] For neither pitee, mercy, neither grace
 [18] Can I nat fynde, and yit my sorwful herte
 [19] For to be deed I can hit nought arace.
 [20] The more I love, the more she doth me smerte,
 [21] Thourgh which I see withoute remedye
 [22] That from the deeth I may no wyse asterte.
 [23] Now sothly what she hight I wol reherse:
 [24] Hir name is Bountee set in womanhede,
 [25] Sadnesse in youthe and Beautee prydelees
 [26] And Plesaunce under governaunce and drede;
 [27] Hir surname is eek Faire Rewthelees
 [28] The Wyse, yknit unto Good Aventure,
 [29] That, for I love hir, she sleeth me giltelees.
 [30] Hir love I best, and shal, whyl I may dure,
 [31] Bet than myself an hundred thousand deel,
 [32] Than al this worldes richesse or creature.
 [33] Now hath not Love me bestowed weel
 [34] To love ther I never shal have part?
 [35] Allas, right thus is turned me the wheel,
 [36] Thus am I slayn with Loves fyry dart!
 [37] I can but love hir best, my swete fo;
 [38] Love hath me taught no more of his art
 [39] But serve alwey and stinte for no wo.
 [40] In my trewe [and] careful herte ther is
 [41] So moche wo and [eek] so litel blis
 [42] That wo is me that ever I was bore;
 [43] For al that thyng which I desyre I mis
 [44] And al that ever I wolde not ywis,
 [45] That finde I redy to me evermore;
 [46] And of al this I not to whom me pleyne.
 [47] For she that mighte me out of this brynge
 [48] Ne reccheth nought whether I wepe or synge,
 [49] So litel rewthe hath she upon my peyne.
 [50] Allas! Whan slepyng-tyme is than I wake,
 [51] Whan I shulde daunce, for fere, lo, than I quake.
 [52] This hevy lif I lede, lo, for your sake
 [53] Thogh ye therof in no wyse hede take,
 [54] Myn hertes lady and hool my lyves quene.
 [55] For trewly durste I seye as that I fele,
 [56] Me semeth that your swete herte of stele
 [57] Is whetted now ageynes me to kene.
 [58] My dere herte and best beloved fo,
 [59] Why lyketh yow to do me al this wo?
 [60] What have I doon that greveth yow or sayd,
 [61] But for I serve and love yow and no mo?
 [62] And while I lyve I wol ever do so,
 [63] And therfor, swete, ne beth nat yvel apayd.
 [64] For so good and so fair as ye be
 [65] Hit were right gret wonder but ye hadde
 [66] Of alle servantes, bothe of goode and badde;
 [67] And leest worthy of alle hem, I am he.
 [68] But nevertheles, my righte lady swete,
 [69] Thogh that I be unconnyng and unmete
 [70] To serve, as I coude best, ay your hynesse,
 [71] Yit is ther noon fayner, that wolde I hete,
 [72] Than I, to do yow ese, or elles bete
 [73] What so I wiste that were to youre hevynesse;
 [74] And hadde I myght as good as I have wille,
 [75] Than shulde ye fele wher it were so or noon;
 [76] For in this world livyng than is ther noon
 [77] That fayner wolde your hertes wil fulfille.
 [78] For bothe I love and eek drede yow so sore,
 [79] And algates moot, and have doon yow, ful yore,
 [80] That bettre loved is noon ne never shal;
 [81] And yit I wolde beseche yow of no more,
 [82] But leveth wel and be not wrooth therfore,
 [83] And lat me serve yow forth; lo, this is al.
 [84] For I am not so hardy ne so wood,
 [85] For to desire that ye shulde love me,
 [86] For wel I wot -- allas -- that wil nat be;
 [87] I am so litel worthy and ye so good.
 [88] For ye be oon the worthiest on-lyve
 [89] And I the most unlykly for to thryve,
 [90] Yit for al this, witeth ye right wele
 [91] That ye ne shul me from your servyce dryve
 [92] That I ne wil ay, with alle my wittes fyve,
 [93] Serve yow trewly, what wo so that I fele.
 [94] For I am set on yow in such manere
 [95] That, thogh ye never wil upon me rewe,
 [96] I moste yow love and been ever as trewe
 [97] As any man can, or may, on-lyve [here].
 [98] But the more that I love yow, goodly free,
 [99] The lasse fynde I that ye loven me;
 [100] Allas, whan shal that harde wit amende?
 [101] Wher is now al your wommanly pitee,
 [102] Your gentilesse and your debonairtee?
 [103] Wil ye nothyng therof upon me spende?
 [104] And so hool, swete, as I am youres al,
 [105] And so gret wil as I have yow to serve,
 [106] Now certes, and ye lete me thus sterve,
 [107] Yit have ye wonne theron but a smal.
 [108] For at my knowyng I do nought why,
 [109] And this I wol beseche yow hertely,
 [110] That ther ever ye fynde, whyles ye lyve,
 [111] A trewer servant to yow than am I,
 [112] Leveth thanne and sleeth me hardely,
 [113] And I my deeth to yow wol al foryive.
 [114] And if ye fynde no trewer verrayly,
 [115] Wil ye suffre than that I thus spille
 [116] And for no maner gilt but my good wille?
 [117] As good were thanne untrewe as trewe to be.
 [118] But I, my lyf and deeth, to yow obeye
 [119] And with right buxom herte hooly I preye
 [120] As is your moste plesure, so doth by me;
 [121] Wel lever is me liken yow and deye
 [122] Than for to anythyng or thynke or seye
 [123] That yow myghte offende in any tyme.
 [124] And therfor, swete, rewe on my peynes smerte,
 [125] And of your grace graunteth me som drope,
 [126] For elles may me laste no blis ne hope,
 [127] Ne dwelle within my trouble careful herte.

      
The Canterbury Tales and Other Works of Chaucer (Middle English), by Geoffery Chaucer, [14th cent.], at sacred-texts.com

 

The Shorter Poems

 

The Complaint of Mars

 [1] Gladeth, ye foules, of the morowe gray;
 [2] Lo, Venus, rysen among yon rowes rede.
 [3] And floures fressh, honoureth ye this day,
 [4] For when the sunne uprist then wol ye sprede.
 [5] But ye lovers, that lye in any drede,
 [6] Fleeth, lest wikked tonges yow espye.
 [7] Lo, yond the sunne, the candel of jelosye!
 [8] Wyth teres blewe and with a wounded herte
 [9] Taketh your leve, and with Seint John to borowe
 [10] Apeseth sumwhat of your sorowes smerte.
 [11] Tyme cometh eft that cese shal your sorowe;
 [12] The glade nyght ys worth an hevy morowe --
 [13] Seynt Valentyne, a foul thus herde I synge
 [14] Upon thy day er sonne gan up-sprynge.
 [15] Yet sang this foul -- I rede yow al awake,
 [16] And ye that han not chosen in humble wyse,
 [17] Without repentynge cheseth yow your make,
 [18] And ye that han ful chosen as I devise,
 [19] Yet at the leste renoveleth your servyse.
 [20] Confermeth hyt perpetuely to dure,
 [21] And paciently taketh your aventure.
 [22] And for the worship of this highe feste,
 [23] Yet wol I, in my briddes wise, synge
 [24] The sentence of the compleynt, at the leste,
 [25] That woful Mars made atte departyng
 [26] Fro fresshe Venus in a morwenynge,
 [27] Whan Phebus with his firy torches rede
 [28] Ransaked every lover in hys drede.
 [29] Whilom the thridde hevenes lord above,
 [30] As wel by hevenysh revolucioun
 [31] As by desert, hath wonne Venus his love,
 [32] And she hath take him in subjeccioun,
 [33] And as a maistresse taught him his lessoun,
 [34] Commaundynge him that nevere, in her servise,
 [35] He nere so bold no lover to dispise.
 [36] For she forbad him jelosye at al,
 [37] And cruelte, and bost, and tyrannye.
 [38] She made him at her lust so humble and tal,
 [39] That when her deyned to cast on hym her ye,
 [40] He tok in pacience to lyve or dye.
 [41] And thus she brydeleth him in her manere,
 [42] With nothing but with scourging of her chere.
 [43] Who regneth now in blysse but Venus,
 [44] That hath thys worthy knyght in governaunce?
 [45] Who syngeth now but Mars, that serveth thus
 [46] The faire Venus, causer of plesaunce?
 [47] He bynt him to perpetuall obeisaunce,
 [48] And she bynt her to loven him for evere,
 [49] But so be that his trespas hyt desevere.
 [50] Thus be they knyt and regnen as in hevene
 [51] Be lokyng moost; til hyt fil on a tyde
 [52] That by her bothe assent was set a stevene
 [53] That Mars shal entre, as fast as he may glyde,
 [54] Into hir nexte paleys, and ther abyde,
 [55] Walkynge hys cours, til she had him atake,
 [56] And he preide her to haste her for his sake.
 [57] Then seyde he thus, "Myn hertes lady swete,
 [58] Ye knowe wel my myschef in that place,
 [59] For sikerly, til that I with yow mete,
 [60] My lyf stant ther in aventure and grace;
 [61] But when I se the beaute of your face,
 [62] Ther ys no drede of deth may do me smerte,
 [63] For al your lust is ese to myn herte."
 [64] She hath so gret compassioun of her knyght,
 [65] That dwelleth in solitude til she come --
 [66] For hyt stod so that thilke tyme no wight
 [67] Counseyled hym ther, ne seyde to hym welcome --
 [68] That nygh her wit for wo was overcome;
 [69] Wherfore she sped her as faste in her weye
 [70] Almost in oo day as he dyde in tweye.
 [71] The grete joye that was betwix hem two
 [72] When they be mette ther may no tunge telle.
 [73] Ther is no more but unto bed thei go,
 [74] And thus in joy and blysse I lete hem duelle.
 [75] This worthi Mars, that is of knyghthod welle,
 [76] The flour of feyrnesse lappeth in his armes,
 [77] And Venus kysseth Mars, the god of armes.
 [78] Sojourned hath this Mars of which I rede
 [79] In chambre amyd the paleys prively
 [80] A certeyn tyme, til him fel a drede
 [81] Throgh Phebus, that was comen hastely
 [82] Within the paleys yates sturdely,
 [83] With torche in honde, of which the stremes bryghte
 [84] On Venus chambre knokkeden ful lyghte.
 [85] The chambre ther as ley this fresshe quene
 [86] Depeynted was with white boles grete,
 [87] And by the lyght she knew, that shon so shene,
 [88] That Phebus cam to brenne hem with his hete.
 [89] This sely Venus nygh dreynt in teres wete
 [90] Enbraceth Mars and seyde, "Alas, I dye!
 [91] The torche is come that al this world wol wrie."
 [92] Up sterte Mars; hym liste not to slepe
 [93] When he his lady herde so compleyne,
 [94] But, for his nature was not for to wepe,
 [95] In stede of teres, from his eyen tweyne
 [96] The firi sparkes brosten out for peyne,
 [97] And hente his hauberk that ley hym besyde.
 [98] Fle wolde he not, ne myghte himselven hide.
 [99] He throweth on his helm of huge wyghte,
 [100] And girt him with his swerd, and in his hond
 [101] His myghty spere, as he was wont to fyghte,
 [102] He shaketh so that almost hit towond.
 [103] Ful hevy was he to walken over lond;
 [104] He may not holde with Venus companye
 [105] But bad her fleen lest Phebus her espye.
 [106] O woful Mars -- alas -- what maist thou seyn,
 [107] That in the paleys of thy disturbaunce
 [108] Art left byhynde in peril to be sleyn?
 [109] And yet therto ys double thy penaunce,
 [110] For she that hath thyn herte in governaunce
 [111] Is passed half the stremes of thin yen;
 [112] That thou nere swift, wel maist thou wepe and crien.
 [113] Now fleeth Venus unto Cilenios tour
 [114] With voide cours for fere of Phebus lyght --
 [115] Alas -- and ther ne hath she no socour,
 [116] For she ne found ne saugh no maner wyght,
 [117] And eke as ther she hath but litil myght,
 [118] Wherfor, herselven for to hyde and save,
 [119] Within the gate she fledde into a cave.
 [120] Derk was this cave and smokyng as the helle;
 [121] Not but two pas within the yate hit stod.
 [122] A naturel day in derk I lete her duelle.
 [123] Now wol I speke of Mars, furious and wod.
 [124] For sorow he wolde have sen his herte blod;
 [125] Sith that he myghte don her no companye,
 [126] He ne roghte not a myte for to dye.
 [127] So feble he wex for hete and for his wo
 [128] That nygh he swelte, he myghte unnethe endure;
 [129] He passeth but o steyre in dayes two.
 [130] But nathelesse, for al his hevy armure,
 [131] He foloweth her that is his lyves cure,
 [132] For whos departyng he tok gretter ire
 [133] Then for al his brennyng in the fire.
 [134] After he walketh softely a paas,
 [135] Compleynyng, that hyt pite was to here,
 [136] He seyde, "O lady bryght, Venus, alas,
 [137] That evere so wyd a compas ys my spere!
 [138] Alas, when shal I mete yow, herte dere?
 [139] This twelfte daye of April I endure
 [140] Throgh jelous Phebus this mysaventure."
 [141] Now God helpe sely Venus allone.
 [142] But as God wolde, hyt happed for to be
 [143] That, while that Venus weping made her mone,
 [144] Cilenius, rydinge in his chevache,
 [145] Fro Venus valaunse myghte his paleys se,
 [146] And Venus he salueth and doth chere,
 [147] And her receyveth as his frend ful dere.
 [148] Mars dwelleth forth in his adversyte,
 [149] Compleynyng ever on her departynge,
 [150] And what his compleynt was, remembreth me;
 [151] And therfore, in this lusty morwenynge
 [152] As I best can, I wol hit seyn and synge;
 [153] And after that I wol my leve take,
 [154] And God yeve every wyght joy of his make!
 [155] The ordre of compleynt requireth skylfully
 [156] That yf a wight shal pleyne pitously,
 [157] Ther mot be cause wherfore that men pleyne;
 [158] Or men may deme he pleyneth folily
 [159] And causeles; alas, that am not I.
 [160] Wherfore the ground and cause of al my peyne,
 [161] So as my troubled wit may hit atteyne,
 [162] I wol reherse; not for to have redresse,
 [163] But to declare my ground of hevynesse.
 [164] The firste tyme, alas, that I was wroght
 [165] And for certeyn effectes hider broght
 [166] Be him that lordeth ech intelligence,
 [167] I yaf my trewe servise and my thoght
 [168] For evermore -- how dere I have hit boght --
 [169] To her that is of so gret excellence
 [170] That what wight that first sheweth his presence,
 [171] When she is wroth and taketh of hym no cure,
 [172] He may not longe in joye of love endure.
 [173] This is no feyned mater that I telle;
 [174] My lady is the verrey sours and welle
 [175] Of beaute, lust, fredom, and gentilnesse,
 [176] Of riche aray -- how dere men hit selle! --
 [177] Of al disport in which men frendly duelle,
 [178] Of love and pley, and of benigne humblesse,
 [179] Of soun of instrumentes of al swetnesse;
 [180] And therto so wel fortuned and thewed
 [181] That thorogh the world her goodnesse is yshewed.
 [182] What wonder ys it then, thogh I besette
 [183] My servise on such on that may me knette
 [184] To wele or wo sith hit lyth in her myght?
 [185] Therfore my herte forever I to her hette,
 [186] Ne truly, for my deth, I shal not lette
 [187] To ben her truest servaunt and her knyght.
 [188] I flater noght, that may wete every wyght;
 [189] For this day in her servise shal I dye.
 [190] But grace be, I se her never wyth ye.
 [191] To whom shal I than pleyne of my distresse?
 [192] Who may me helpe? Who may my harm redresse?
 [193] Shal I compleyne unto my lady fre?
 [194] Nay, certes, for she hath such hevynesse,
 [195] For fere and eke for wo that, as I gesse,
 [196] In lytil tyme hit wol her bane be.
 [197] But were she sauf, hit were no fors of me.
 [198] Alas, that ever lovers mote endure
 [199] For love so many a perilous aventure!
 [200] For thogh so be that lovers be as trewe
 [201] As any metal that is forged newe,
 [202] In many a cas hem tydeth ofte sorowe.
 [203] Somtyme her lady wil not on hem rewe;
 [204] Somtyme yf that jelosie hyt knewe,
 [205] They myghten lyghtly leye her hed to borowe;
 [206] Somtyme envyous folk with tunges horowe
 [207] Depraven hem; alas, whom may they plese?
 [208] But he be fals, no lover hath non ese.
 [209] But what availeth such a long sermoun
 [210] Of aventures of love up and doun?
 [211] I wol returne and speken of my peyne.
 [212] The poynt is this of my distruccioun:
 [213] My righte lady, my savacyoun,
 [214] Is in affray, and not to whom to pleyne.
 [215] O herte swete, O lady sovereyne!
 [216] For your disese wel oughte I swowne and swelte,
 [217] Though I non other harm ne drede felte.
 [218] To what fyn made the God, that sit so hye,
 [219] Benethen him love other companye
 [220] And streyneth folk to love, malgre her hed?
 [221] And then her joy, for oght I can espye,
 [222] Ne lasteth not the twynkelyng of an ye,
 [223] And somme han never joy til they be ded.
 [224] What meneth this? What is this mystihed?
 [225] Wherto constreyneth he his folk so faste
 [226] Thing to desyre, but hit shulde laste?
 [227] And thogh he made a lover love a thing
 [228] And maketh hit seme stedfast and during,
 [229] Yet putteth he in hyt such mysaventure
 [230] That reste nys ther non in his yeving.
 [231] And that is wonder, that so juste a kyng
 [232] Doth such hardnesse to his creature.
 [233] Thus, whether love breke or elles dure,
 [234] Algates he that hath with love to done
 [235] Hath ofter wo then changed ys the mone.
 [236] Hit semeth he hath to lovers enmyte,
 [237] And lyk a fissher, as men alday may se,
 [238] Baiteth hys angle-hok with som plesaunce
 [239] Til many a fissh ys wod til that he be
 [240] Sesed therwith; and then at erst hath he
 [241] Al his desir, and therwith al myschaunce;
 [242] And thogh the lyne breke, he hath penaunce;
 [243] For with the hok he wounded is so sore
 [244] That he his wages hath for evermore.
 [245] The broche of Thebes was of such a kynde,
 [246] So ful of rubies and of stones of Ynde
 [247] That every wight, that sette on hit an ye,
 [248] He wende anon to worthe out of his mynde;
 [249] So sore the beaute wolde his herte bynde.
 [250] Til he hit had, him thoghte he moste dye;
 [251] And whan that hit was his, then shulde he drye
 [252] Such woo for drede, ay while that he hit hadde,
 [253] That wel nygh for the fere he shulde madde.
 [254] And whan hit was fro his possessioun,
 [255] Then had he double wo and passioun
 [256] For he so feir a tresor had forgo;
 [257] But yet this broche as in conclusioun
 [258] Was not the cause of his confusioun,
 [259] But he that wroghte hit enfortuned hit so
 [260] That every wight that had hit shulde have wo;
 [261] And therfore in the worcher was the vice,
 [262] And in the covetour that was so nyce.
 [263] So fareth hyt by lovers and by me;
 [264] For thogh my lady have so gret beaute
 [265] That I was mad til I had gete her grace,
 [266] She was not cause of myn adversite,
 [267] But he that wroghte her, also mot I the,
 [268] That putte such a beaute in her face,
 [269] That made me coveyten and purchace
 [270] Myn oune deth -- him wite I that I dye,
 [271] And myn unwit that ever I clamb so hye.
 [272] But to yow, hardy knyghtes of renoun,
 [273] Syn that ye be of my devisioun,
 [274] Al be I not worthy to so gret a name,
 [275] Yet, seyn these clerkes, I am your patroun;
 [276] Therfore ye oghte have som compassioun
 [277] Of my disese, and take hit not a-game.
 [278] The proudest of yow may be mad ful tame;
 [279] Wherfore I prey yow of your gentilesse
 [280] That ye compleyne for myn hevynesse.
 [281] And ye, my ladyes, that ben true and stable,
 [282] Be wey of kynde, ye oughten to be able
 [283] To have pite of folk that be in peyne.
 [284] Now have ye cause to clothe yow in sable,
 [285] Sith that youre emperise, the honurable,
 [286] Is desolat; wel oghte ye to pleyne.
 [287] Now shulde your holy teres falle and reyne.
 [288] Alas, your honour and your emperise,
 [289] Negh ded for drede ne can her not chevise!
 [290] Compleyneth eke, ye lovers, al in-fere,
 [291] For her that with unfeyned humble chere
 [292] Was evere redy to do yow socour;
 [293] Compleyneth her that evere hath had yow dere;
 [294] Compleyneth Beaute, Fredom, and Manere;
 [295] Compleyneth her that endeth your labour;
 [296] Compleyneth thilke ensample of al honour,
 [297] That never dide but al gentilesse;
 [298] Kytheth therfore on her sum kyndenesse.

      
The Canterbury Tales and Other Works of Chaucer (Middle English), by Geoffery Chaucer, [14th cent.], at sacred-texts.com

 

The Shorter Poems

 

The Complaint of Venus

 [1] Ther nys so high comfort to my pleasaunce,
 [2] When that I am in any hevynesse,
 [3] As for to have leyser of remembraunce
 [4] Upon the manhod and the worthynesse,
 [5] Upon the trouthe and on the stidfastnesse
 [6] Of him whos I am al, while I may dure.
 [7] Ther oghte blame me no creature,
 [8] For every wight preiseth his gentilesse.
 [9] In him is bounte, wysdom, governaunce,
 [10] Wel more then any mannes wit can gesse,
 [11] For grace hath wold so ferforth hym avaunce
 [12] That of knyghthod he is parfit richesse.
 [13] Honour honoureth him for his noblesse;
 [14] Therto so wel hath formed him Nature
 [15] That I am his for ever, I him assure,
 [16] For every wight preyseth his gentilesse.
 [17] And notwithstondyng al his suffisaunce,
 [18] His gentil herte is of so gret humblesse
 [19] To me in word, in werk, in contenaunce,
 [20] And me to serve is al his besynesse,
 [21] That I am set in verrey sikernesse.
 [22] Thus oghte I blesse wel myn aventure
 [23] Sith that him list me serven and honoure,
 [24] For every wight preiseth his gentilesse.
 [25] Now certis, Love, hit is right covenable
 [26] That men ful dere bye thy nobil thing,
 [27] As wake abedde and fasten at the table,
 [28] Wepinge to laughe and singe in compleynyng,
 [29] And doun to caste visage and lokyng,
 [30] Often to chaunge hewe and contenaunce,
 [31] Pleyne in slepyng and dremen at the daunce,
 [32] Al the revers of any glad felyng.
 [33] Jelosie be hanged by a cable!
 [34] She wolde al knowe thurgh her espying;
 [35] Ther doth no wyght nothing so resonable
 [36] That al nys harm in her ymagenyng.
 [37] Thus dere abought is Love in yevyng,
 [38] Which ofte he yiveth withouten ordynaunce,
 [39] As sorwe ynogh and litil of plesaunce,
 [40] Al the revers of any glad felyng.
 [41] A lytel tyme his yift ys agreable,
 [42] But ful encomberous is the usyng,
 [43] For subtil Jelosie, the deceyvable,
 [44] Ful often tyme causeth desturbyng.
 [45] Thus be we ever in drede and sufferyng;
 [46] In nouncerteyn we languisshe in penaunce,
 [47] And han wele ofte many an hard mischaunce,
 [48] Al the revers of any glad felyng.
 [49] But certes, Love, I sey not in such wise
 [50] That for t' escape out of youre las I mente,
 [51] For I so longe have ben in your servise
 [52] That for to lete of wil I never assente;
 [53] No fors thogh Jelosye me turmente.
 [54] Sufficeth me to sen hym when I may,
 [55] And therfore certes, to myn endyng day
 [56] To love hym best ne shal I never repente.
 [57] And certis, Love, when I me wel avise
 [58] On any estat that man may represente,
 [59] Then have ye made me thurgh your fraunchise
 [60] Chese the best that ever on erthe wente.
 [61] Now love wel, herte, and lok thou never stente,
 [62] And let the jelous putte it in assay
 [63] That for no peyne wol I not sey nay;
 [64] To love him best ne shal I never repente.
 [65] Herte, to the hit oughte ynogh suffise
 [66] That Love so high a grace to the sente
 [67] To chese the worthieste in alle wise
 [68] And most agreable unto myn entente.
 [69] Seche no ferther, neythir wey ne wente,
 [70] Sith I have suffisaunce unto my pay.
 [71] Thus wol I ende this compleynt or this lay;
 [72] To love hym best ne shal I never repente.
 [73] Princes, receyveth this compleynt in gre,
 [74] Unto your excelent benignite
 [75] Direct after my litel suffisaunce.
 [76] For elde, that in my spirit dulleth me,
 [77] Hath of endyting al the subtilte
 [78] Wel nygh bereft out of my remembraunce,
 [79] And eke to me it ys a gret penaunce,
 [80] Syth rym in Englissh hath such skarsete,
 [81] To folowe word by word the curiosite
 [82] Of Graunson, flour of hem that make in Fraunce.

      
The Canterbury Tales and Other Works of Chaucer (Middle English), by Geoffery Chaucer, [14th cent.], at sacred-texts.com

 

The Shorter Poems

 

To Rosemounde

 [1] Madame, ye ben of al beaute shryne
 [2] As fer as cercled is the mapamounde,
 [3] For as the cristal glorious ye shyne,
 [4] And lyke ruby ben your chekes rounde.
 [5] Therwith ye ben so mery and so jocounde
 [6] That at a revel whan that I see you daunce,
 [7] It is an oynement unto my wounde,
 [8] Thogh ye to me ne do no daliaunce.
 [9] For thogh I wepe of teres ful a tyne,
 [10] Yet may that wo myn herte nat confounde;
 [11] Your semy voys that ye so smal out twyne
 [12] Maketh my thoght in joy and blis habounde.
 [13] So curtaysly I go with love bounde
 [14] That to myself I sey in my penaunce,
 [15] "Suffyseth me to love you, Rosemounde,
 [16] Thogh ye to me ne do no daliaunce."
 [17] Nas never pyk walwed in galauntyne
 [18] As I in love am walwed and ywounde,
 [19] For which ful ofte I of myself devyne
 [20] That I am trewe Tristam the secounde.
 [21] My love may not refreyde nor affounde,
 [22] I brenne ay in an amorous plesaunce.
 [23] Do what you lyst, I wyl your thral be founde,
 [24] Thogh ye to me ne do no daliaunce.

      
The Canterbury Tales and Other Works of Chaucer (Middle English), by Geoffery Chaucer, [14th cent.], at sacred-texts.com

 

The Shorter Poems

 

Womanly Noblesse

 [1] So hath myn herte caught in remembraunce
 [2] Your beaute hoole and stidefast governaunce,
 [3] Your vertues al and yowre hie noblesse,
 [4] That you to serve is set al my plesaunce.
 [5] So wel me liketh your womanly contenaunce,
 [6] Your fresshe fetures and your comlynesse,
 [7] That whiles I live myn hert to his maystresse
 [8] You hath ful chose in trewe perseveraunce
 [9] Never to chaunge, for no maner distresse.
 [10] And sith I shal do [you] this observaunce,
 [11] Al my lif withouten displesaunce
 [12] You for to serve with al my besynesse,
 [13] And have me somwhat in your souvenaunce.
 [14] My woful herte suffreth greet duresse,
 [15] And [loke] how humbly with al symplesse
 [16] My wil I conforme to your ordynaunce,
 [17] As you best list, my peynes for to redresse.
 [18] Considryng eke how I hange in balaunce
 [19] In your service, such, lo, is my chaunce,
 [20] Abidyng grace, whan that your gentilnesse
 [21] Of my grete wo liste do alleggeaunce,
 [22] And with your pite me som wise avaunce
 [23] In ful rebatyng of myn hevynesse;
 [24] And thynketh by resoun that wommanly noblesse
 [25] Shuld nat desire for to do the outrance
 [26] Ther as she fyndeth non unbuxumnesse.
 [27] Auctour of norture, lady of plesaunce,
 [28] Soveraigne of beautee, floure of wommanhede,
 [29] Take ye non hede unto myn ignoraunce,
 [30] But this receyveth of your goodlihede,
 [31] Thynkyng that I have caught in remembraunce,
 [32] Your beaute hole, your stidefast governaunce.

      
The Canterbury Tales and Other Works of Chaucer (Middle English), by Geoffery Chaucer, [14th cent.], at sacred-texts.com

 

The Shorter Poems

 

Chaucers Wordes unto Adam, His Owne Scriveyn

 [1] Adam scriveyn, if ever it thee bifalle
 [2] Boece or Troylus for to wryten newe,
 [3] Under thy long lokkes thou most have the scalle,
 [4] But after my makyng thow wryte more trewe;
 [5] So ofte adaye I mot thy werk renewe,
 [6] It to correcte and eke to rubbe and scrape,
 [7] And al is thorugh thy negligence and rape.

      
The Canterbury Tales and Other Works of Chaucer (Middle English), by Geoffery Chaucer, [14th cent.], at sacred-texts.com

 

The Shorter Poems

 

The Former Age

 [1] A blisful lyf, a paisible and a swete,
 [2] Ledden the peples in the former age.
 [3] They helde hem payed of the fruites that they ete,
 [4] Which that the feldes yave hem by usage;
 [5] They ne were nat forpampred with outrage.
 [6] Unknowen was the quern and ek the melle;
 [7] They eten mast, hawes, and swich pounage,
 [8] And dronken water of the colde welle.
 [9] Yit nas the ground nat wounded with the plough,
 [10] But corn up-sprong, unsowe of mannes hond,
 [11] The which they gnodded and eete nat half ynough.
 [12] No man yit knew the forwes of his lond,
 [13] No man the fyr out of the flint yit fond,
 [14] Unkorven and ungrobbed lay the vyne;
 [15] No man yit in the morter spyces grond
 [16] To clarre ne to sause of galantyne.
 [17] No mader, welde, or wood no litestere
 [18] Ne knew; the flees was of his former hewe;
 [19] No flesh ne wiste offence of egge or spere.
 [20] No coyn ne knew man which was fals or trewe,
 [21] No ship yit karf the wawes grene and blewe,
 [22] No marchaunt yit ne fette outlandish ware.
 [23] No trompes for the werres folk ne knewe,
 [24] Ne toures heye and walles rounde or square.
 [25] What sholde it han avayled to werreye?
 [26] Ther lay no profit, ther was no richesse;
 [27] But cursed was the tyme, I dare wel seye,
 [28] That men first dide hir swety bysinesse
 [29] To grobbe up metal, lurkinge in derknesse,
 [30] And in the riveres first gemmes soghte.
 [31] Allas, than sprong up al the cursednesse
 [32] Of coveytyse, that first our sorwe broghte.
 [33] Thise tyraunts putte hem gladly nat in pres
 [34] No wildnesse ne no busshes for to winne,
 [35] Ther poverte is, as seith Diogenes,
 [36] Ther as vitaile is ek so skars and thinne
 [37] That noght but mast or apples is therinne;
 [38] But, ther as bagges ben and fat vitaile,
 [39] Ther wol they gon, and spare for no sinne
 [40] With al hir ost the cite for to asayle.
 [41] Yit was no paleis-chaumbres ne non halles;
 [42] In caves and wodes softe and swete
 [43] Slepten this blissed folk withoute walles
 [44] On gras or leves in parfit quiete.
 [45] Ne doun of fetheres ne no bleched shete
 [46] Was kid to hem, but in seurtee they slepte.
 [47] Hir hertes were al oon withoute galles;
 [48] Everich of hem his feith to other kepte.
 [49] Unforged was the hauberk and the plate;
 [50] The lambish peple, voyd of alle vyce,
 [51] Hadden no fantasye to debate,
 [52] But ech of hem wolde other wel cheryce.
 [53] No pryde, non envye, non avaryce,
 [54] No lord, no taylage by no tyrannye;
 [55] Humblesse and pees, good feith the emperice.
 [56] Yit was not Jupiter the likerous,
 [57] That first was fader of delicacye,
 [58] Come in this world; ne Nembrot, desirous
 [59] To regne, had nat maad his toures hye.
 [60] Allas, allas, now may men wepe and crye!
 [61] For in oure dayes nis but covetyse,
 [62] Doublenesse, and tresoun, and envye,
 [63] Poyson, manslawhtre, and mordre in sondry wyse.

      
The Canterbury Tales and Other Works of Chaucer (Middle English), by Geoffery Chaucer, [14th cent.], at sacred-texts.com

 

The Shorter Poems

 

Fortune

 [1] This wrecched worldes transmutacioun,
 [2] As wele or wo, now povre and now honour,
 [3] Withouten ordre or wys discrecioun
 [4] Governed is by Fortunes errour.
 [5] But natheles, the lak of hir favour
 [6] Ne may nat don me singen though I dye,
 [7] Jay tout perdu mon temps et mon labour;
 [8] For fynally, Fortune, I thee defye.
 [9] Yit is me left the light of my resoun
 [10] To knowen frend fro fo in thy mirour.
 [11] So muchel hath yit thy whirling up and doun
 [12] Ytaught me for to knowen in an hour.
 [13] But trewely, no force of thy reddour
 [14] To him that over himself hath the maystrye.
 [15] My suffisaunce shal be my socour,
 [16] For fynally Fortune, I thee defye.
 [17] O Socrates, thou stidfast champioun,
 [18] She never mighte be thy tormentour;
 [19] Thou never dreddest hir oppressioun,
 [20] Ne in hir chere founde thou no savour.
 [21] Thou knewe wel the deceit of hir colour,
 [22] And that hir moste worshipe is to lye.
 [23] I knowe hir eek a fals dissimulour,
 [24] For fynally, Fortune, I thee defye!
 [25] No man is wrecched but himself it wene,
 [26] And he that hath himself hath suffisaunce.
 [27] Why seystow thanne I am to thee so kene,
 [28] That hast thyself out of my governaunce?
 [29] Sey thus: "Graunt mercy of thyn haboundaunce
 [30] That thou hast lent or this." Why wolt thou stryve?
 [31] What wostow yit how I thee wol avaunce?
 [32] And eek thou hast thy beste frend alyve.
 [33] I have thee taught divisioun bitwene
 [34] Frend of effect and frend of countenaunce;
 [35] Thee nedeth nat the galle of noon hyene,
 [36] That cureth eyen derked for penaunce;
 [37] Now seestow cleer that were in ignoraunce.
 [38] Yit halt thyn ancre and yit thou mayst arryve
 [39] Ther bountee berth the keye of my substaunce,
 [40] And eek thou hast thy beste frend alyve.
 [41] How many have I refused to sustene
 [42] Sin I thee fostred have in thy plesaunce.
 [43] Woltow than make a statut on thy quene
 [44] That I shal been ay at thyn ordinaunce?
 [45] Thou born art in my regne of variaunce,
 [46] Aboute the wheel with other most thou dryve.
 [47] My lore is bet than wikke is thy grevaunce,
 [48] And eek thou hast thy beste frend alyve.
 [49] Thy lore I dampne; it is adversitee.
 [50] My frend maystow nat reven, blind goddesse;
 [51] That I thy frendes knowe, I thanke it thee.
 [52] Tak hem agayn, lat hem go lye on presse.
 [53] The negardye in keping hir richesse
 [54] Prenostik is thou wolt hir tour assayle;
 [55] Wikke appetyt comth ay before syknesse.
 [56] In general, this reule may nat fayle.
 [57] Thou pinchest at my mutabilitee
 [58] For I thee lente a drope of my richesse,
 [59] And now me lyketh to withdrawe me.
 [60] Why sholdestow my realtee oppresse?
 [61] The see may ebbe and flowen more or lesse;
 [62] The welkne hath might to shyne, reyne, or hayle;
 [63] Right so mot I kythen my brotelnesse.
 [64] In general, this reule may nat fayle.
 [65] Lo, th' execucion of the majestee
 [66] That al purveyeth of his rightwysnesse,
 [67] That same thing "Fortune" clepen ye,
 [68] Ye blinde bestes ful of lewednesse.
 [69] The hevene hath propretee of sikernesse,
 [70] This world hath ever resteles travayle;
 [71] Thy laste day is ende of myn intresse.
 [72] In general, this reule may nat fayle.
 [73] Princes, I prey you of your gentilesse
 [74] Lat nat this man on me thus crye and pleyne,
 [75] And I shal quyte you your bisinesse
 [76] At my requeste, as three of you or tweyne,
 [77] And but you list releve him of his peyne,
 [78] Preyeth his beste frend of his noblesse
 [79] That to som beter estat he may atteyne.

      
The Canterbury Tales and Other Works of Chaucer (Middle English), by Geoffery Chaucer, [14th cent.], at sacred-texts.com

 

The Shorter Poems

 

Truth

 [1] Flee fro the prees and dwelle with sothfastnesse;
 [2] Suffyce unto thy thing, though it be smal,
 [3] For hord hath hate, and climbing tikelnesse,
 [4] Prees hath envye, and wele blent overal.
 [5] Savour no more than thee bihove shal,
 [6] Reule wel thyself that other folk canst rede,
 [7] And trouthe thee shal delivere, it is no drede.
 [8] Tempest thee noght al croked to redresse
 [9] In trust of hir that turneth as a bal;
 [10] Gret reste stant in litel besinesse.
 [11] Be war therfore to sporne ayeyns an al,
 [12] Stryve not, as doth the crokke with the wal.
 [13] Daunte thyself, that dauntest otheres dede,
 [14] And trouthe thee shal delivere, it is no drede.
 [15] That thee is sent, receyve in buxumnesse;
 [16] The wrastling for this world axeth a fal.
 [17] Her is non hoom, her nis but wildernesse:
 [18] Forth, pilgrim, forth! Forth, beste, out of thy stal!
 [19] Know thy contree, look up, thank God of al;
 [20] Hold the heye wey and lat thy gost thee lede,
 [21] And trouthe thee shal delivere, it is no drede.
 [22] Therfore, thou Vache, leve thyn old wrecchednesse;
 [23] Unto the world leve now to be thral.
 [24] Crye him mercy, that of his hy goodnesse
 [25] Made thee of noght, and in especial
 [26] Draw unto him, and pray in general
 [27] For thee, and eek for other, hevenlich mede;
 [28] And trouthe thee shal delivere, it is no drede.

      
The Canterbury Tales and Other Works of Chaucer (Middle English), by Geoffery Chaucer, [14th cent.], at sacred-texts.com

 

The Shorter Poems

 

Gentilesse

 [1] The firste stok, fader of gentilesse --
 [2] What man that desireth gentil for to be
 [3] Must folowe his trace, and alle his wittes dresse
 [4] Vertu to love and vyces for to flee.
 [5] For unto vertu longeth dignitee
 [6] And noght the revers, saufly dar I deme,
 [7] Al were he mytre, croune, or diademe.
 [8] This firste stok was ful of rightwisnesse,
 [9] Trewe of his word, sobre, pitous, and free,
 [10] Clene of his gost, and loved besinesse,
 [11] Ayeinst the vyce of slouthe, in honestee;
 [12] And, but his heir love vertu as dide he,
 [13] He is noght gentil, thogh he riche seme,
 [14] Al were he mytre, croune, or diademe.
 [15] Vyce may wel be heir to old richesse,
 [16] But ther may no man, as men may wel see,
 [17] Bequethe his heir his vertuous noblesse
 [18] (That is appropred unto no degree
 [19] But to the firste fader in magestee,
 [20] That maketh hem his heyres that him queme),
 [21] Al were he mytre, croune, or diademe.

      
The Canterbury Tales and Other Works of Chaucer (Middle English), by Geoffery Chaucer, [14th cent.], at sacred-texts.com

 

The Shorter Poems

 

Lak of Stedfastnesse

 [1] Somtyme the world was so stedfast and stable
 [2] That mannes word was obligacioun,
 [3] And now it is so fals and deceivable
 [4] That word and deed, as in conclusioun,
 [5] Ben nothing lyk, for turned up-so-doun
 [6] Is al this world for mede and wilfulnesse,
 [7] That al is lost for lak of stedfastnesse.
 [8] What maketh this world to be so variable
 [9] But lust that folk have in dissensioun?
 [10] For among us now a man is holde unable,
 [11] But if he can by som collusioun
 [12] Don his neighbour wrong or oppressioun.
 [13] What causeth this but wilful wrecchednesse,
 [14] That al is lost for lak of stedfastnesse?
 [15] Trouthe is put doun, resoun is holden fable,
 [16] Vertu hath now no dominacioun;
 [17] Pitee exyled, no man is merciable.
 [18] Through covetyse is blent discrecioun.
 [19] The world hath mad a permutacioun
 [20] Fro right to wrong, fro trouthe to fikelnesse,
 [21] That al is lost for lak of stedfastnesse.
 [22] O prince, desyre to be honourable,
 [23] Cherish thy folk and hate extorcioun.
 [24] Suffre nothing that may be reprevable
 [25] To thyn estat don in thy regioun.
 [26] Shew forth thy swerd of castigacioun,
 [27] Dred God, do law, love trouthe and worthinesse,
 [28] And wed thy folk agein to stedfastnesse.

      
The Canterbury Tales and Other Works of Chaucer (Middle English), by Geoffery Chaucer, [14th cent.], at sacred-texts.com

 

The Shorter Poems

 

Lenvoy de Chaucer a Scogan

 [1] Tobroken been the statutz hye in hevene
 [2] That creat were eternally to dure,
 [3] Syth that I see the bryghte goddis sevene
 [4] Mowe wepe and wayle, and passioun endure,
 [5] As may in erthe a mortal creature.
 [6] Allas, fro whennes may thys thing procede,
 [7] Of which errour I deye almost for drede?
 [8] By word eterne whilom was it shape
 [9] That fro the fyfte sercle, in no manere,
 [10] Ne myght a drope of teeres doun escape.
 [11] But now so wepith Venus in hir spere
 [12] That with hir teeres she wol drenche us here.
 [13] Allas! Scogan, this is for thyn offence;
 [14] Thow causest this diluge of pestilence.
 [15] Hastow not seyd, in blaspheme of the goddis,
 [16] Thurgh pride, or thrugh thy grete rekelnesse,
 [17] Swich thing as in the lawe of love forbode is,
 [18] That, for thy lady sawgh nat thy distresse,
 [19] Therfore thow yave hir up at Michelmesse?
 [20] Allas! Scogan, of olde folk ne yonge
 [21] Was never erst Scogan blamed for his tonge.
 [22] Thow drowe in skorn Cupide eke to record
 [23] Of thilke rebel word that thow hast spoken,
 [24] For which he wol no lenger be thy lord.
 [25] And, Scogan, though his bowe be nat broken,
 [26] He wol nat with his arwes been ywroken
 [27] On the, ne me, ne noon of oure figure;
 [28] We shul of him have neyther hurt ne cure.
 [29] Now certes, frend, I dreed of thyn unhap,
 [30] Lest for thy gilt the wreche of Love procede
 [31] On alle hem that ben hoor and rounde of shap,
 [32] That ben so lykly folk in love to spede.
 [33] Than shal we for oure labour have no mede;
 [34] But wel I wot, thow wolt answere and saye,
 [35] "Lo, olde Grisel lyst to ryme and playe!"
 [36] Nay, Scogan, say not so, for I m' excuse --
 [37] God helpe me so! -- in no rym, dowteles,
 [38] Ne thynke I never of slep to wake my muse,
 [39] That rusteth in my shethe stille in pees.
 [40] While I was yong, I put hir forth in prees;
 [41] But al shal passe that men prose or ryme;
 [42] Take every man hys turn, as for his tyme.
 [43] Scogan, that knelest at the stremes hed
 [44] Of grace, of alle honour and worthynesse,
 [45] In th' ende of which strem I am dul as ded,
 [46] Forgete in solytarie wildernesse --
 [47] Yet, Scogan, thenke on Tullius kyndenesse;
 [48] Mynne thy frend, there it may fructyfye!
 [49] Far-wel, and loke thow never eft Love dyffye.

      
The Canterbury Tales and Other Works of Chaucer (Middle English), by Geoffery Chaucer, [14th cent.], at sacred-texts.com

 

The Shorter Poems

 

Lenvoy de Chaucer a Bukton

 [1] My maister Bukton, whan of Crist our kyng
 [2] Was axed what is trouthe or sothfastnesse,
 [3] He nat a word answerde to that axing,
 [4] As who saith, "No man is al trewe," I gesse.
 [5] And therfore, though I highte to expresse
 [6] The sorwe and wo that is in mariage,
 [7] I dar not writen of it no wikkednesse,
 [8] Lest I myself falle eft in swich dotage.
 [9] I wol nat seyn how that yt is the cheyne
 [10] Of Sathanas, on which he gnaweth evere,
 [11] But I dar seyn, were he out of his peyne,
 [12] As by his wille he wolde be bounde nevere.
 [13] But thilke doted fool that eft hath levere
 [14] Ycheyned be than out of prison crepe,
 [15] God lete him never fro his wo dissevere,
 [16] Ne no man him bewayle, though he wepe.
 [17] But yet, lest thow do worse, take a wyf;
 [18] Bet ys to wedde than brenne in worse wise.
 [19] But thow shal have sorwe on thy flessh, thy lyf,
 [20] And ben thy wives thral, as seyn these wise;
 [21] And yf that hooly writ may nat suffyse,
 [22] Experience shal the teche, so may happe,
 [23] That the were lever to be take in Frise
 [24] Than eft to falle of weddynge in the trappe.
 [25] This lytel writ, proverbes, or figure
 [26] I sende yow; take kepe of yt, I rede;
 [27] Unwys is he that kan no wele endure.
 [28] If thow be siker, put the nat in drede.
 [29] The Wyf of Bathe I pray yow that ye rede
 [30] Of this matere that we have on honde.
 [31] God graunte yow your lyf frely to lede
 [32] In fredam, for ful hard is to be bonde.

      
The Canterbury Tales and Other Works of Chaucer (Middle English), by Geoffery Chaucer, [14th cent.], at sacred-texts.com

 

The Shorter Poems

 

The Complaint of Chaucer to His Purse

 [1] To yow, my purse, and to noon other wight
 [2] Complayne I, for ye be my lady dere.
 [3] I am so sory, now that ye been lyght;
 [4] For certes but yf ye make me hevy chere,
 [5] Me were as leef be layd upon my bere;
 [6] For which unto your mercy thus I crye,
 [7] Beth hevy ageyn, or elles mot I dye.
 [8] Now voucheth sauf this day or hyt be nyght
 [9] That I of yow the blisful soun may here
 [10] Or see your colour lyk the sonne bryght
 [11] That of yelownesse hadde never pere.
 [12] Ye be my lyf, ye be myn hertes stere.
 [13] Quene of comfort and of good companye,
 [14] Beth hevy ageyn, or elles moot I dye.
 [15] Now purse that ben to me my lyves lyght
 [16] And saveour as doun in this world here,
 [17] Out of this toune helpe me thurgh your myght,
 [18] Syn that ye wole nat ben my tresorere;
 [19] For I am shave as nye as any frere.
 [20] But yet I pray unto your curtesye,
 [21] Beth hevy agen, or elles moot I dye.
 [22] O conquerour of Brutes Albyon,
 [23] Which that by lyne and free eleccion
 [24] Been verray kyng, this song to yow I sende,
 [25] And ye, that mowen alle oure harmes amende,
 [26] Have mynde upon my supplicacion.

      
The Canterbury Tales and Other Works of Chaucer (Middle English), by Geoffery Chaucer, [14th cent.], at sacred-texts.com

 

The Shorter Poems

 

Proverbs

 [1] What shul these clothes thus manyfold,
 [2] Lo this hote somers day?
 [3] After grete hete cometh cold;
 [4] No man caste his pilche away.
 [5] Of al this world the large compas
 [6] Yt wil not in myn armes tweyne;
 [7] Who so mochel wol embrace,
 [8] Litel therof he shal distreyne.

      
The Canterbury Tales and Other Works of Chaucer (Middle English), by Geoffery Chaucer, [14th cent.], at sacred-texts.com

 

The Shorter Poems

 

Against Women Unconstant

 [1] Madame, for your newefangelnesse
 [2] Many a servaunt have ye put out of grace.
 [3] I take my leve of your unstedfastnesse,
 [4] For wel I wot, whyl ye have lyves space,
 [5] Ye can not love ful half yeer in a place,
 [6] To newe thing your lust is ay so kene.
 [7] In stede of blew, thus may ye were al grene.
 [8] Right as a mirour nothing may impresse,
 [9] But, lightly as it cometh, so mot it pace,
 [10] So fareth your love, your werkes beren witnesse.
 [11] Ther is no feith that may your herte enbrace,
 [12] But as a wedercok, that turneth his face
 [13] With every wind, ye fare, and that is sene;
 [14] In stede of blew, thus may ye were al grene.
 [15] Ye might be shryned for your brotelnesse
 [16] Bet than Dalyda, Creseyde or Candace,
 [17] For ever in chaunging stant your sikernesse;
 [18] That tache may no wight fro your herte arace.
 [19] If ye lese oon, ye can wel tweyn purchace;
 [20] Al light for somer (ye woot wel what I mene),
 [21] In stede of blew, thus may ye were al grene.

      
The Canterbury Tales and Other Works of Chaucer (Middle English), by Geoffery Chaucer, [14th cent.], at sacred-texts.com

 

The Shorter Poems

 

Complaynt D'Amours

 [1] I, which that am the sorwefulleste man
 [2] That in this world was ever yit livinge,
 [3] And leest recoverer of himselven can,
 [4] Beginne right thus my deedly compleininge
 [5] On hir that may to lyf and deeth me bringe,
 [6] Which hath on me no mercy ne no rewthe,
 [7] That love hir best, but sleeth me for my trewthe.
 [8] Can I noght doon ne seye that may yow lyke?
 [9] Ne, certes now; allas, allas the whyle!
 [10] Your plesaunce is to laughen whan I syke,
 [11] And thus ye me from al my blisse exyle.
 [12] Ye han me cast in thilke spitous yle
 [13] Ther never man on lyve mighte asterte;
 [14] This have I, for I love you, swete herte!
 [15] Sooth is, that wel I woot, by lyklinesse,
 [16] If that it were a thing possible to do
 [17] For to acompte youre beautee and goodnesse,
 [18] I have no wonder thogh ye do me wo;
 [19] Sith I, th' unworthiest that may ryde or go,
 [20] Durste ever thinken in so hy a place.
 [21] What wonder is, thogh ye do me no grace?
 [22] Allas, thus is my lyf brought to an ende;
 [23] My deeth, I see, is my conclusioun.
 [24] I may wel singe, "In sory tyme I spende
 [25] My lyf." That song may have confusioun.
 [26] For mercy, pitee, and deep affeccioun,
 [27] I sey for me, for al my deedly chere,
 [28] Alle thise diden, in that, me love yow dere.
 [29] And in this wyse and in dispayr I live
 [30] In love -- nay, but in dispayr I dye!
 [31] But shal I thus yow my deeth foryive,
 [32] That causeles doth me this sorwe drye?
 [33] Ye, certes, I! For she of my folye
 [34] Hath nought to done although she do me sterve,
 [35] Hit is nat with hir wil that I hir serve.
 [36] Than sithen I am of my sorwe the cause
 [37] And sithen I have this withoute hir reed,
 [38] Than may I seyn right shortly in a clause,
 [39] It is no blame unto hir womanheed
 [40] Though swich a wrecche as I be for hir deed.
 [41] Yet alwey two thinges doon me dye,
 [42] That is to seyn, hir beautee and myn ye';
 [43] So that, algates, she is verray rote
 [44] Of my disese and of my deth also,
 [45] For with oon word she mighte be my bote,
 [46] If that she vouched sauf for to do so.
 [47] But than is hir gladnesse at my wo?
 [48] It is hir wone plesaunce for to take
 [49] To seen hir servaunts dyen for hir sake.
 [50] But certes, than is al my wonderinge,
 [51] Sithen she is the fayrest creature,
 [52] As to my doom, that ever was livinge,
 [53] The benignest and beste eek that Nature
 [54] Hath wrought or shal, whyl that the world may dure,
 [55] Why that she lefte Pite so behinde?
 [56] It was, ywis, a greet defaute in Kinde.
 [57] Yit is al this no lak to hir, pardee,
 [58] But God or Nature sore wolde I blame.
 [59] For though she shewe no pite unto me,
 [60] Sithen that she doth othere men the same,
 [61] I ne oughte to despyse my ladyes game;
 [62] It is hir pley to laughen whan men syketh,
 [63] And I assente al that hir list and lyketh.
 [64] Yet wolde I, as I dar, with sorwful herte
 [65] Biseche unto your meke womanhede
 [66] That I now dorste my sharpe sorwes smerte
 [67] Shewe by word, that ye wolde ones rede
 [68] The compleynte of me, which ful sore I drede
 [69] That I have seid here, through myn unkonninge,
 [70] In any word to your displesinge.
 [71] Lothest of anything that ever was loth
 [72] Were me, as wisly God my soule save,
 [73] To seyn a thing through which ye might be wroth;
 [74] And, to that day that I be leyd in grave,
 [75] A trewer servaunt shulle ye never have;
 [76] And, though that I have pleyned unto you here,
 [77] Foryiveth it me, myn owne lady dere.
 [78] Ever have I been, and shal, how-so I wende,
 [79] Outher to live or dye, your humble trewe.
 [80] Ye been to me my ginning and myn ende,
 [81] Sonne of the sterre bright and clere of hewe;
 [82] Alwey in oon to love yow freshly newe,
 [83] By God and by my trouthe, is myn entente;
 [84] To live or dye, I wol it never repente!
 [85] This compleynte on Seint Valentynes day,
 [86] Whan every foughel chesen shal his make,
 [87] To hir, whos I am hool and shal alwey,
 [88] This woful song and this compleynte I make,
 [89] That never yit wolde me to mercy take;
 [90] And yit wol I evermore her serve
 [91] And love hir best, although she do me sterve.

      
The Canterbury Tales and Other Works of Chaucer (Middle English), by Geoffery Chaucer, [14th cent.], at sacred-texts.com

 

The Shorter Poems

 

Merciles Beaute

 [1] Your yen two wol slee me sodenly;
 [2] I may the beautee of hem not sustene,
 [3] So woundeth hit thourghout my herte kene.
 [4] And but your word wol helen hastily
 [5] My hertes wounde while that hit is grene,
 [6] Your yen [two wol slee me sodenly];
 [7] [I may the beautee of hem not sustene].
 [8] Upon my trouthe I sey you feithfully
 [9] That ye ben of my lyf and deeth the quene,
 [10] For with my deeth the trouthe shal be sene.
 [11] Your yen [two wol slee me sodenly];
 [12] [I may the beautee of hem not sustene],
 [13] [So woundeth it thourghout my herte kene].
 [14] So hath your beautee fro your herte chaced
 [15] Pitee, that me ne availeth not to pleyne,
 [16] For Daunger halt your mercy in his cheyne.
 [17] Giltles my deeth thus han ye me purchaced;
 [18] I sey you sooth, me nedeth not to feyne;
 [19] So hath your beautee [fro your herte chaced]
 [20] [Pitee, that me ne availeth not to pleyne].
 [21] Allas, that Nature hath in you compassed
 [22] So greet beautee, that no man may atteyne
 [23] To mercy though he sterve for the peyne.
 [24] So hath your beautee [fro your herte chaced]
 [25] [Pitee, that me ne availeth not to pleyne],
 [26] [For Daunger halt your mercy in his cheyne].
 [27] Sin I fro Love escaped am so fat,
 [28] I never thenk to ben in his prison lene;
 [29] Sin I am free, I counte him not a bene.
 [30] He may answere and seye this and that;
 [31] I do no fors, I speke right as I mene.
 [32] Sin I fro Love [escaped am so fat],
 [33] [I never thenk to ben in his prison lene].
 [34] Love hath my name ystrike out of his sclat,
 [35] And he is strike out of my bokes clene
 [36] For evermo; [ther] is non other mene.
 [37] Sin I fro Love [escaped am so fat],
 [38] [I never thenk to ben in his prison lene];
 [39] [Sin I am free, I counte him not a bene].

      
The Canterbury Tales and Other Works of Chaucer (Middle English), by Geoffery Chaucer, [14th cent.], at sacred-texts.com

 

The Shorter Poems

 

A Balade of Complaint

 [1] Compleyne ne koude, ne might myn herte never,
 [2] My peynes halve, ne what torment I have,
 [3] Though that I sholde in your presence ben ever,
 [4] Myn hertes lady, as wisly he me save
 [5] That Bountee made, and Beautee list to grave
 [6] In your persone, and bad hem bothe in-fere
 [7] Ever t' awayte, and ay be wher ye were.
 [8] As wisly he gye alle my joyes here
 [9] As I am youres, and to yow sad and trewe,
 [10] And ye, my lyf and cause of my gode chere,
 [11] And deeth also, whan ye my peynes newe,
 [12] My worldes joye, whom I wol serve and sewe,
 [13] Myn heven hool, and al my suffisaunce,
 [14] Whom for to serve is set al my plesaunce.
 [15] Beseching yow in my most humble wyse
 [16] T' accepte in worth this litel pore dyte,
 [17] And for my trouthe my servyce not despyse,
 [18] Myn observaunce eke have not in despyte,
 [19] Ne yit to longe to suffren in this plyte;
 [20] I yow beseche, myn hertes lady, here,
 [21] Sith I yow serve, and so wil yeer by yere.

      
The Canterbury Tales and Other Works of Chaucer (Middle English), by Geoffery Chaucer, [14th cent.], at sacred-texts.com

 

A Treatise on the Astrolabe

 

Part 1

 [1] Lyte Lowys my sone, I aperceyve wel by certeyne
 [2] evydences thyn abilite to lerne sciences
 [3] touching nombres and proporciouns; and as wel
 [4] considre I thy besy praier in special to lerne the
 [5] tretys of the Astrelabie. Than for as moche as a
 [6] philosofre saith, "he wrappith him in his frend,
 [7] that condescendith to the rightfulle praiers of his
 [8] frend," therfore have I yeven the a suffisant Astrolabie
 [9] as for oure orizonte, compowned
 [10] after the latitude of Oxenforde; upon
 [11] which, by mediacioun of this litel tretys, I
 [12] purpose to teche the a certein nombre of conclusions
 [13] aperteynyng to the same instrument. I
 [14] seie a certein of conclusions, for thre causes. The
 [15] first cause is this: truste wel that alle the conclusions
 [16] that han be founde, or ellys possibly
 [17] might be founde in so noble an instrument as is
 [18] an Astrelabie ben unknowe parfitly to eny mortal
 [19] man in this regioun, as I suppose. Another
 [20] cause is this, that sothly in any tretis of the
 [21] Astrelabie that I have seyn, there be somme
 [22] conclusions that wol not in alle thinges parformen
 [23] her bihestes; and somme of hem ben to
 [24] harde to thy tendir age of ten yeer to conceyve.
 [25] This tretis, divided in 5 parties, wol I shewe
 [26] the under full light reules and naked wordes in
 [27] Englissh, for Latyn canst thou yit but small,
 [28] my litel sone. But natheles suffise to the these
 [29] trewe conclusions in Englissh as wel as sufficith
 [30] to these noble clerkes Grekes these
 [31] same conclusions in Grek; and to Arabiens
 [32] in Arabik, and to Jewes in Ebrew, and to
 [33] Latyn folk in Latyn; whiche Latyn folk had
 [34] hem first out of othere dyverse langages, and
 [35] writen hem in her owne tunge, that is to seyn,
 [36] in Latyn. And God woot that in alle these
 [37] langages and in many moo han these conclusions
 [38] ben suffisantly lerned and taught, and yit
 [39] by diverse reules; right as diverse pathes
 [40] leden diverse folk the righte way to Rome.
 [41] Now wol I preie mekely every discret persone
 [42] that redith or herith this litel tretys to have
 [43] my rude endityng for excusid, and my superfluite
 [44] of wordes, for two causes. The firste cause
 [45] is for that curious endityng and hard sentence
 [46] is ful hevy at onys for such a child to lerne.
 [47] And the secunde cause is this, that sothly me
 [48] semith better to writen unto a child twyes a
 [49] god sentence, than he forgete it onys.
 [50] And Lowys, yf so be that I shewe the in
 [51] my lighte Englissh as trewe conclusions
 [52] touching this mater, and not oonly as trewe
 [53] but as many and as subtile conclusiouns, as
 [54] ben shewid in Latyn in eny commune tretys
 [55] of the Astrelabie, konne me the more thank.
 [56] And preie God save the king, that is lord of
 [57] this langage, and alle that him feith berith and
 [58] obeieth, everich in his degre, the more and
 [59] the lasse. But considre wel that I ne usurpe
 [60] not to have founden this werk of my labour
 [61] or of myn engyn. I n' am but a lewd compilator
 [62] of the labour of olde astrologiens, and have it
 [63] translatid in myn Englissh oonly for thy doctrine.
 [64] And with this swerd shal I sleen envie.
 [65] Prima pars. -- The firste partie of this tretys
 [66] shal reherse the figures and the membres of
 [67] thyn Astrelabie by cause that thou shalt have
 [68] the gretter knowing of thyn oune instrument.
 [69] Secunda pars. -- The secunde partie
 [70] shal techen the worken the verrey practik
 [71] of the forseide conclusiouns, as ferforth and
 [72] as narwe as may be shewed in so small an
 [73] instrument portatif aboute. For wel woot
 [74] every astrologien that smallist fraccions ne
 [75] wol not be shewid in so small an instrument as
 [76] in subtile tables calculed for a cause.
 [77] Tertia pars. -- The thirde partie shal contene
 [78] diverse tables of longitudes and latitudes
 [79] of sterres fixe for the Astrelabie, and tables
 [80] of the declinacions of the sonne, and tables
 [81] of longitudes of citees and townes; and
 [82] tables as well for the governaunce of a clokke, as
 [83] for to fynde the altitude meridian; and many anothir
 [84] notable conclusioun after the kalenders
 [85] of the reverent clerkes, Frere J. Somer and
 [86] Frere N. Lenne.
 [87] Quarta pars. -- The fourthe partie shal ben
 [88] a theorike to declare the moevyng of the celestiall
 [89] bodies with the causes. The whiche
 [90] fourthe partie in speciall shal shewen a
 [91] table of the verrey moeving of the mone
 [92] from houre to houre every day and in every
 [93] signe after thyn almenak. Upon which table
 [94] there folewith a canoun suffisant to teche as
 [95] wel the manere of the worchynge of the same
 [96] conclusioun as to knowe in oure orizonte with
 [97] which degre of the zodiak that the mone arisith
 [98] in any latitude, and the arisyng of any planete
 [99] after his latitude fro the ecliptik lyne.
 [100] Quinta pars. -- The fifthe partie shal
 [101] be an introductorie, after the statutes of
 [102] oure doctours, in which thou maist lerne a gret
 [103] part of the generall rewles of theorik in astrologie.
 [104] In which fifthe partie shalt thou fynden
 [105] tables of equaciouns of houses after the latitude of
 [106] Oxenforde; and tables of dignitees of planetes,
 [107] and othere notefull thinges, yf God wol vouche
 [108] saaf and his Moder the Maide, moo then I behete.
 [1] Thyn Astrolabie hath a ring to putten on
 [2] the thombe of thi right hond in taking the
 [3] height of thinges. And tak kep, for from henes
 [4] forthward I wol clepen the heighte of any thing
 [5] that is taken by the rewle "the altitude," withoute
 [6] moo wordes.
 [1] This ryng renneth in a maner toret fast
 [2] to the moder of thyn Astrelabie in so rowme a
 [3] space that it distourbith not the instrument to
 [4] hangen after his right centre.
 [1] The moder of thin Astrelabye is thikkest
 [2] plate, perced with a large hool, that resceiveth
 [in] hir wombe the thynne plates compowned
 [4] for diverse clymates, and thy reet shapen in
 [5] manere of a nett or of a web of a loppe.
 [1] This moder is dividid on the bakhalf with
 [2] a lyne that cometh descending fro the ring
 [3] doun to the netherist bordure. The whiche
 [4] lyne, fro the forseide ring unto the centre of
 [5] the large hool amidde, is clepid the south lyne,
 [6] or ellis the lyne meridional. And the remenaunt
 [7] of this lyne doun to the bordure is
 [8] clepid the north lyne, or ellis the lyne of midnyght.
 [1] Overthwart this forseide longe lyne ther
 [2] crossith him another lyne of the same lengthe
 [3] from eest to west. Of the whiche lyne, from
 [4] a litel cros (+) in the bordure unto the centre
 [5] of the large hool, is clepid the est lyne, or
 [6] ellis the lyne orientale. And the remenaunt of
 [7] this lyne, fro the forseide centre unto the bordure,
 [8] is clepid the west lyne, or ellis the lyne
 [9] occidentale. Now hast thou here the foure
 [10] quarters of thin Astrolabie divided after the
 [11] foure principales plages or quarters of the firmament.
 [1] The est syde of thyn Astrolabie is clepid
 [2] the right syde, and the west syde is clepid the
 [3] left syde. Forget not thys, litel Lowys. Put
 [4] the ryng of thyn Astrolabie upon the thombe
 [5] of thi right hond, and than wol his right side
 [6] be toward thi lift side, and his left side wol be
 [7] toward thy right side. Tak this rewle generall,
 [8] as wel on the bak as on the wombe syde. Upon
 [9] the ende of this est lyne, as I first seide, is
 [10] marked a litel cros (+), where as evere
 [11] moo generaly is considerid the entring of
 [12] the first degre in which the sonne arisith.
 [1] Fro this litel cros (+) up to the ende
 [2] of the lyne meridionall, under the ryng, shalt
 [3] thou fynden the bordure divided with 90 degrees;
 [4] and by that same proporcioun is every
 [5] quarter of thin Astrolabie divided. Over the
 [6] whiche degrees there ben noumbres of augrym
 [7] that dividen thilke same degres fro 5 to 5, as
 [8] shewith by longe strikes bitwene. Of whiche
 [9] longe strikes the space bitwene contenith
 [10] a myle wey, and every degre of the bordure
 [11] conteneth 4 minutes; this is to seien,
 [12] mynutes of an houre.
 [1] Under the compas of thilke degrees ben
 [2] writen the names of the 12 Signes: as
 [3] Aries, Taurus, Gemini, Cancer, Leo, Virgo,
 [4] Libra, Scorpio, Sagittarius, Capricornus, Aquarius,
 [5] Piscis. And the nombres of the degrees of
 [6] thoo signes be writen in augrym above, and
 [7] with longe divisiouns fro 5 to 5, dyvidid fro
 [8] the tyme that the signe entrith unto the last
 [9] ende. But understond wel that these degres
 [10] of signes ben everich of hem considred
 [11] of 60 mynutes, and every mynute of
 [12] 60 secundes, and so furth into smale fraccions
 [13] infinite, as saith Alkabucius. And therfore
 [14] knowe wel that a degre of the bordure contenith
 [15] 4 minutes, and a degre of a signe conteneth
 [16] 60 minutes, and have this in mynde.
 [1] Next this folewith the cercle of the daies,
 [2] that ben figured in manere of degres, that contenen
 [3] in nombre 365, dividid also with longe
 [4] strikes fro 5 to 5, and the nombre in augrym
 [5] writen under that cercle.
 [1] Next the cercle of the daies folewith the
 [2] cercle of the names of the monthes, that is to
 [3] say, Januarius, Februarius, Marcius, Aprilis,
 [4] Maius, Junius, Julius, Augustus, September,
 [5] October, November, December. The names
 [6] of these monthes were clepid somme for
 [7] her propirtees and somme by statutes of
 [8] Arabiens, somme by othre lordes of Rome.
 [9] Eke of these monthes, as liked to Julius
 [10] Cesar and to Cesar Augustus, somme were
 [11] compouned of diverse nombres of daies, as
 [12] Julie and August. Than hath Januarie 31 daies,
 [13] Februarie 28, March 31, Aprill 30, May 31,
 [14] Junius 30, Julius 31, Augustus 31, Septembre
 [15] 30, Octobre 31, Novembre 30, Decembre 31.
 [16] Natheles, all though that Julius Cesar toke 2
 [17] daies out of Feverer and putte hem in his
 [18] month of Juyll, and Augustus Cesar clepid the
 [19] month of August after his name and ordeined
 [20] it of 31 daies, yit truste wel that the
 [21] sonne dwellith therfore nevere the more
 [22] ne lasse in oon signe than in another.
 [1] Than folewen the names of the holy
 [2] daies in the Kalender, and next hem the lettres
 [3] of the A B C on whiche thei fallen.
 [1] Next the forseide cercle of the A B C,
 [2] under the cross lyne, is marked the skale in
 [3] manere of 2 squyres, or ellis in manere of laddres,
 [4] that serveth by his 12 pointes and his
 [5] dyvisiouns of ful many a subtil conclusioun.
 [6] Of this forseide skale fro the cross lyne unto
 [7] the verrey angle is clepid Umbra Versa, and
 [8] the nethir partie is clepid Umbra Recta, or
 [9] ellis Umbra Extensa.
 [1] Than hast thou a brod reule, that hath
 [2] on either ende a square plate perced with certein
 [3] holes, somme more and somme lasse, to
 [4] resceyve the stremes of the sonne by day, and
 [5] eke by mediacioun of thin eye to knowe the
 [6] altitude of sterres by night.
 [1] Than is there a large pyn in manere of
 [2] an extre, that goth thorugh the hole that halt
 [3] the tables of the clymates and the riet in the
 [4] wombe of the moder; thorugh which pyn ther
 [5] goth a litel wegge, which that is clepid the
 [6] hors, that streynith all these parties to-hepe.
 [7] Thys forseide grete pyn in manere of an extre
 [8] is ymagyned to be the Pool Artik in thyn
 [9] Astralabie.
 [1] The wombe syde of thyn Astrelabie is
 [2] also divided with a longe cros in 4 quarters
 [3] from est to west, fro southe to northe, fro
 [4] right syde to left side, as is the bakside.
 [1] The bordure of which wombe side is
 [2] divided fro the point of the est lyne unto the
 [3] point of the south lyne under the ring, in 90
 [4] degrees; and by that same proporcioun is every
 [5] quarter divided, as is the bakside. That
 [6] amountith 360 degrees. And understond wel
 [7] that degres of this bordure ben aunswering and
 [8] consentrike to the degrees of the equinoxiall,
 [9] that is dividid in the same nombre as every
 [10] othir cercle is in the highe hevene. This
 [11] same bordure is divided also with 23
 [12] lettres capitals and a small cross (+) above
 [13] the south lyne, that shewith the 24 houres
 [14] equals of the clokke. And, as I have seid, 5
 [15] of these degres maken a myle wey, and 3 mile-wei
 [16] maken an houre. And every degre of thys
 [17] bordure contenith 4 minutes, and every minute
 [18] 60 secundes. Now have I told the twyes.
 [1] The plate under the riet is discrived
 [2] with 3 cercles, of whiche the leest is
 [3] clepid the cercle of Cancre by cause that the
 [4] heved of Cancre turnith evermo consentrik
 [5] upon the same cercle. In this heved
 [6] of Cancer is the grettist declinacioun northward
 [7] of the sonne, and therfore is he clepid
 [8] solsticium of somer; which declinacioun, after
 [9] Ptholome, is 23 degrees and 50 minutes as
 [10] wel in Cancer as in Capricorn. This signe
 [11] of Cancer is clepid the tropik of somer, of
 [12] tropos, that is to seien "ageynward." For than
 [13] beginneth the sonne to passen from us-ward.
 [14] The myddel cercle in wydnesse, of these 3,
 [15] is clepid the cercle equinoxiall, upon which
 [16] turnith evermo the hevedes of Aries and Libra.
 [17] And understond wel that evermo thys cercle
 [18] equinoxiall turnith justly from verrey est to verrey
 [19] west as I have shewed the in the speer
 [20] solide. This same cercle is clepid also
 [21] Equator, that is the weyer of the day; for
 [22] whan the sonne is in the hevedes of Aries and
 [23] Libra, than ben the dayes and the nightes ylike
 [24] of lengthe in all the world. And therfore ben
 [25] these 2 signes called the equinoxiis. And all
 [26] that moeveth withinne the hevedes of these
 [27] Aries and Libra, his moevyng is clepid northward;
 [28] and all that moevith withoute these
 [29] hevedes, his moevyng is clepid southward,
 [30] as fro the equinoxiall. Tak kep of these
 [31] latitudes north and south, and forget it nat.
 [32] By this cercle equinoxiall ben considred the
 [33] 24 houres of the clokke; for evermo the arisyng
 [34] of 15 degrees of the equinoxiall makith an
 [35] houre equal of the clokke. This equinoxiall is
 [36] clepid the gurdel of the first moeving, or ellis
 [37] of the firste moevable. And note that the firste
 [38] moevyng is clepid moevyng of the firste moevable
 [39] of the 8 speer, which moeving is from
 [40] est to west, and eft ageyn into est. Also
 [41] it is clepid girdel of the firste moeving for it
 [42] departith the firste moevable, that is to seyn
 [43] the spere, in two like partyes evene distantz
 [44] fro the poles of this world.
 [45] The widest of these 3 principale cercles is
 [46] clepid the cercle of Capricorne, by cause that
 [47] the heved of Capricorne turneth evermo consentrik
 [48] upon the same cercle. In the heved of
 [49] this forseide Capricorne is the grettist declinacioun
 [50] southward of the sonne, and therfore
 [51] it is clepid the solsticium of wynter.
 [52] This signe of Capricorne is also clepid the
 [53] tropic of wynter, for than begynneth the sonne
 [54] to come ageyn to us-ward.
 [1] Upon this forseide plate ben compassed
 [2] certeyn cercles that highten almycanteras, of
 [3] whiche somme of hem semen parfit cercles and
 [4] somme semen inparfit. The centre that stondith
 [5] amyddes the narwest cercle is clepid the
 [6] cenyth. And the netherist cercle, or the firste
 [7] cercle, is clepid the orizonte, that is to seyn,
 [8] the cercle that divideth the two emysperies,
 [9] that is, the partie of the hevene above the
 [10] erthe and the partie bynethe. These almykanteras
 [11] ben compowned by 2 and 2, all
 [12] be it so that on diverse Astrelabies somme
 [13] almykanteras ben divided by oon, and somme
 [14] by two, and somme by thre, after the quantite
 [15] of the Astrelabie. This forseide cenyth is
 [16] ymagined to ben the verrey point over the
 [17] crowne of thin heved. And also this cenyth
 [18] is the verray pool of the orizonte in every regioun.
 [1] From this cenyth, as it semeth, there
 [2] comen a maner croked strikes like to the clawes
 [3] of a loppe, or elles like the werk of a wommans
 [4] calle, in kervyng overthwart the almykanteras.
 [5] And these same strikes or divisiouns
 [6] ben clepid azimutz, and thei dividen the orisounte
 [7] of thin Astrelabie in 24 divisiouns. And
 [8] these azymutz serven to knowe the costes of
 [9] the firmament, and to othre conclusions, as
 [10] for to knowe the cenyth of the sonne and
 [11] of every sterre.
 [1] Next these azymutz, under the cercle
 [2] of Cancer, ben there 12 divisiouns embelif,
 [3] muche like to the shap of the azemutz, that
 [4] shewen the spaces of the houres of planetes.
 [1] The riet of thin Astrelabie with thy zodiak,
 [2] shapen in manere of a net or of a lopweb
 [3] after the olde descripcioun, which thou maist
 [4] turnen up and doun as thiself liketh, contenith
 [5] certein nombre of sterres fixes, with her longitudes
 [6] and latitudes determinat, yf so be that the
 [7] maker have not errid. The names of the sterres
 [8] ben writen in the margyn of the riet there as thei
 [9] sitte, of whiche sterres the smale point is
 [10] clepid the centre. And understond also that
 [11] alle the sterres sitting within the zodiak of
 [12] thin Astrelabie ben clepid sterres of the north,
 [13] for thei arise by northe the est lyne. And all the
 [14] remenaunt fixed oute of the zodiak ben clepid
 [15] sterres of the south. But I seie not that thei arisen
 [16] alle by southe the est lyne; witnesse on Aldeberan
 [17] and Algomeysa. Generaly understond this
 [18] rewle, that thilke sterres that ben clepid sterres
 [19] of the north arisen rather than the degre of
 [20] her longitude, and alle the sterres of the
 [21] south arisen after the degre of her longitude --
 [22] this is to seyn, sterres fixed in thyn
 [23] Astrelabie. The mesure of this longitude of
 [24] sterres is taken in the lyne ecliptik of hevene,
 [25] under which lyne, whan that the sonne and the
 [26] mone be lyne-right, or ellis in the superficie of
 [27] this lyne, than is the eclipse of the sonne or of
 [28] the mone, as I shal declare, and eke the cause
 [29] why. But sothly the ecliptik lyne of thy
 [30] zodiak is the utterist bordure of thy zodiak
 [31] there the degrees be marked.
 [32] Thy zodiak of thin Astrelabie is shapen as
 [33] a compas which that contenith a large brede
 [34] as after the quantite of thyn Astrelabie, in ensample
 [35] that the zodiak in hevene is ymagyned
 [36] to ben a superfice contenyng a latitude of 12
 [37] degrees, whereas alle the remenaunt of cercles
 [38] in the hevene ben ymagyned verrey lynes withoute
 [39] eny latitude. Amiddes this celestial
 [40] zodiak is ymagined a lyne which that is
 [41] clepid the ecliptik lyne, under which lyne
 [42] is evermo the wey of the sonne. Thus ben
 [43] there 6 degres of the zodiak on that oo syde
 [44] of the lyne and 6 degrees on that othir. This
 [45] zodiak is dividid in 12 principale divisiouns that
 [46] departen the 12 signes, and, for the streitnesse
 [47] of thin Astrolabie, than is every smal divisioun
 [48] in a signe departed by two degrees and two, I
 [49] mene degrees contenyng 60 mynutes. And
 [50] this forseide hevenysshe zodiak is clepid
 [51] the cercle of the signes, or the cercle of the
 [52] bestes, for "zodia" in langage of Grek sowneth
 [53] "bestes" in Latyn tunge. And in the zodiak
 [54] ben the 12 signes that han names of bestes,
 [55] or ellis for whan the sonne entrith in eny
 [56] of tho signes he takith the propirte of suche
 [57] bestes, or ellis for that the sterres that ben
 [58] ther fixed ben disposid in signes of bestes or
 [59] shape like bestes, or elles whan the planetes
 [60] ben under thilke signes thei causen us by
 [61] her influence operaciouns and effectes like
 [62] to the operaciouns of bestes.
 [63] And understond also that whan an hot planete
 [64] cometh into an hot signe, than encrescith
 [65] his hete; and yf a planete be cold, than amenusith
 [66] his coldnesse by cause of the hoote sygne.
 [67] And by thys conclusioun maist thou take ensample
 [68] in alle the signes, be thei moist or drie,
 [69] or moeble or fixe, reknyng the qualite of the
 [70] planete as I first seide. And everich of
 [71] these 12 signes hath respect to a certeyn
 [72] parcel of the body of a man, and hath it in
 [73] governaunce; as Aries hath thin heved, and
 [74] Taurus thy nekke and thy throte, Gemini thin
 [75] armholes and thin armes, and so furth, as shall
 [76] be shewid more pleyn in the 5 partie of this
 [77] tretis.
 [78] This zodiak, which that is part of the 8 speer,
 [79] over-kervith the equinoxial, and he over-kervith
 [80] him ageyn in evene parties; and
 [81] that oo half declineth southward; and that
 [82] othir northward, as pleinly declarith the Tretys
 [83] of the Speer.
 [84] Than hast thou a label that is shapen like
 [85] a reule, save that it is streit and hath no plates
 [86] on either ende with holes. But with the smale
 [87] point of the forseide label shalt thou calcule
 [88] thin equaciouns in the bordure of thin Astralabie,
 [89] as by thin almury.
 [90] Thin almury is clepid the denticle of
 [91] Capricorne, or ellis the calculer. This same
 [92] almury sitt fix in the heved of Capricorne, and
 [93] it serveth of many a necessarie conclusioun in
 [94] equacions of thinges as shal be shewid.

      
The Canterbury Tales and Other Works of Chaucer (Middle English), by Geoffery Chaucer, [14th cent.], at sacred-texts.com

 

A Treatise on the Astrolabe

 

Part 2

 [Rub] To fynde the degre in which the sonne is
 [RubA] day by day, after his cours aboute.
 [1] Rekne and knowe which is the day of thy
 [2] month, and ley thy rewle upon that same day,
 [3] and than wol the verrey poynt of thy rewle
 [4] sitten in the bordure upon the degre of thy
 [5] sonne.
 [6] Ensample as thus: The yeer of oure Lord
 [7] 1391, the 12 day of March at midday, I wolde
 [8] knowe the degre of the sonne. I soughte in
 [9] the bakhalf of myn Astrelabie and fond the
 [10] cercle of the daies, the whiche I knowe by
 [11] the names of the monthes writen under the
 [12] same cercle. Tho leyde I my reule over this
 [13] foreseide day, and fond the point of my reule
 [14] in the bordure upon the firste degre of Aries,
 [15] a litel within the degre. And thus knowe I this
 [16] conclusioun.
 [17] Anothir day I wolde knowen the degre of
 [18] my sonne, and this was at midday in the 13
 [19] day of Decembre. I fond the day of the
 [20] month in manere as I seide; tho leide I my
 [21] rewle upon this forseide 13 day, and fond
 [22] the point of my rewle in the bordure upon
 [23] the firste degre of Capricorne a lite within the
 [24] degre. And than had I of this conclusioun the
 [25] ful experience.
 [Rub] To knowe the altitude of the sonne or of
 [RubA] othre celestial bodies.
 [1] Put the ryng of thyn Astrelabie upon thy
 [2] right thombe, and turne thi lift syde ageyn
 [3] the light of the sonne; and remewe thy rewle
 [4] up and doun til that the stremes of the sonne
 [5] shine thorugh bothe holes of thi rewle. Loke
 [6] than how many degrees thy rule is areised fro
 [7] the litel cros upon thin est lyne, and tak there
 [8] the altitude of thi sonne. And in this same
 [9] wise maist thow knowe by night the altitude
 [10] of the mone or of brighte sterres.
 [11] This chapitre is so generall evere in oon
 [12] that there nedith no more declaracioun; but
 [13] forget it not.
 [Rub] To knowe every tyme of the day by light
 [RubA] of the sonne; and every tyme of the nyght by
 [RubB] the sterres fixe; and eke to knowe by nyght or
 [RubC] by day the degre of eny signe that ascendith on
 [RubD] the est orisonte, which that is clepid comounly
 [RubE] the ascendent, or ellis horoscopum.
 [1] Tak the altitude of the sonne whan the list,
 [2] as I have seid, and set the degre of the sonne,
 [3] in caas that it be beforn the myddel of the day,
 [4] among thyn almykanteras on the est syde of
 [5] thin Astrelabie; and if it be after the myddel
 [6] of the day, set the degre of thy sonne upon the
 [7] west syde. Tak this manere of settyng for a
 [8] general rule, ones for evere. And whan thou
 [9] hast set the degre of thy sonne upon as
 [10] many almykanteras of height as was the altitude
 [11] of the sonne taken by thy rule, ley
 [12] over thi label upon the degre of the sonne; and
 [13] than wol the point of thi labell sitte in the
 [14] bordure upon the verrey tyde of the day.
 [15] Ensample as thus: The yeer of oure lord
 [16] 1391, the 12 day of March, I wolde knowe the
 [17] tyde of the day. I tok the altitude of my sonne,
 [18] and fond that it was 25 degrees and 30 minutes
 [19] of height in the bordure on the bak
 [20] side. Tho turned I myn Astrelabye, and by
 [21] cause that it was before mydday, I turned
 [22] my riet and sette the degre of the sonne, that
 [23] is to seyn the firste degre of Aries, on the right
 [24] side of myn Astrelabye upon 25 degrees and
 [25] 30 mynutes of height among myn almykanteras.
 [26] Tho leide I my label upon the degre of my
 [27] sonne, and fond the point of my label in the
 [28] bordure upon a capital lettre that is clepid
 [29] an X. Tho rekned I alle the capitale lettres
 [30] fro the lyne of mydnight unto this forseide
 [31] lettre X, and fond that it was 9 of the
 [32] clokke of the day. Tho loked I doun upon myn
 [33] est orizonte, and fond there the 20 degre of
 [34] Geminis ascendyng, which that I tok for myn
 [35] ascendent. And in this wise had I the experience
 [36] for evermo in which manere I shulde
 [37] knowe the tyde of the day and eke myn ascendent.
 [39] Tho wolde I wite the same nyght folewyng
 [40] the houre of the nyght, and wroughte
 [41] in this wise: Among an heep of sterres
 [42] fixe it liked me for to take the altitude of the
 [43] faire white sterre that is clepid Alhabor, and
 [44] fond hir sittyng on the west side of the lyne
 [45] of midday, 12 degrees of heighte taken by my
 [46] rewle on the bak side. Tho sette I the centre
 [47] of this Alhabor upon 12 degrees among myn
 [48] almykanteras upon the west side, by cause that
 [49] she was founde on the west side. Tho
 [50] leyde I my label over the degre of the
 [51] sonne, that was discendid under the west
 [52] orisounte, and rekned all the lettres capitals
 [53] fro the lyne of midday unto the point of my
 [54] label in the bordure, and fond that it was
 [55] passed 9 of the clokke the space of 10 degrees.
 [56] Tho lokid I doun upon myn est orisounte, and
 [57] fond there 10 degrees of Scorpius ascendyng,
 [58] whom I tok for myn ascendent. And thus
 [59] lerned I to knowe onys for ever in which
 [60] manere I shuld come to the houre of the
 [61] nyght, and to myn ascendent, as verrely as
 [62] may be taken by so smal an instrument.
 [63] But natheles this rule in generall wol I warne
 [64] the for evere: Ne make the nevere bold to
 [65] have take a just ascendent by thin Astrelabie,
 [66] or elles to have set justly a clokke, whan eny
 [67] celestial body by which that thou wenyst governe
 [68] thilke thinges be nigh the south lyne.
 [69] For trust wel, whan the sonne is nygh the
 [70] meridional lyne, the degre of the sonne
 [71] renneth so longe consentrik upon the almykanteras
 [72] that sothly thou shalt erre fro the
 [73] just ascendent. The same conclusioun sey I by
 [74] the centre of eny sterre fix by nyght. And
 [75] more over, by experience I wot wel that in
 [76] oure orisounte, from xi of the clokke unto oon
 [77] of the clokke, in taking of a just ascendent in
 [78] a portatif Astrelabie it is to hard to knowe --
 [79] I mene from xi of the clokke before the
 [80] houre of noon til oon of the clokke next
 [81] folewyng.
 [Rub] A special declaracioun of the ascendent.
 [1] The ascendent sothly, as wel in alle nativites
 [2] as in questions and eleccions of tymes, is a
 [3] thing which that these astrologiens gretly observen.
 [4] Wherfore me semeth convenyent, syth
 [5] that I speke of the ascendent, to make of it
 [6] speciall declaracioun.
 [7] The ascendent sothly, to take it at the largest,
 [8] is thilke degre that ascendith at eny of
 [9] these forseide tymes upon the est orisounte.
 [10] And therfore, yf that eny planete ascende
 [11] at thatt same tyme in thilke forseide degre,
 [12] than hath he no latitude fro the ecliptik lyne,
 [13] but he is than in the degre of the ecliptik
 [14] which that is the degre of his longitude. Men
 [15] sayn that thilke planete is in horoscopo.
 [16] But sothly the hous of the ascendent, that
 [17] is to seyn, the first hous or the est angle, is a
 [18] thing more brod and large. For, after the statutes
 [19] of astrologiens, what celestial body
 [20] that is 5 degrees above thilke degre that
 [21] ascendith, or withinne that nombre, that is
 [22] to seyn neer the degree that ascendith, yit
 [23] rekne they thilke planete in the ascendent.
 [24] And what planete that is under thilke degre
 [25] that ascendith the space of 25 degres, yit seyn
 [26] thei that thilke planete is "like to him that is
 [27] the hous of the ascendent." But sothly, if he
 [28] passe the boundes of these forseide spaces,
 [29] above or bynethe, thei seyn that the planete
 [30] is "fallyng fro the ascendent." Yit saien
 [31] these astrologiens that the ascendent and
 [32] eke the lord of the ascendent may be shapen
 [33] for to be fortunat or infortunat, as thus: A
 [34] "fortunat ascendent" clepen they whan that no
 [35] wicked planete, as Saturne or Mars or elles
 [36] the Tayl of the Dragoun, is in the hous of the
 [37] ascendent, ne that no wicked planete have
 [38] noon aspect of enemyte upon the ascendent.
 [39] But thei wol caste that thei have a fortunat
 [40] planete in hir ascendent, and yit in his felicite;
 [41] and than sey thei that it is wel.
 [42] Further over thei seyn that the infortunyng of
 [43] an ascendent is the contrarie of these forseide
 [44] thinges. The lord of the ascendent, sey thei
 [45] that he is fortunat whan he is in god place
 [46] fro the ascendent, as in an angle, or in a succident
 [47] where as he is in hys dignite and comfortid
 [48] with frendly aspectes of planetes and
 [49] wel resceyved; and eke that he may seen
 [50] the ascendent; and that he be not retrograd,
 [51] ne combust, ne joyned with no
 [52] shrewe in the same signe; ne that he be not
 [53] in his discencioun, ne joyned with no planete
 [54] in his descencioun, ne have upon him noon
 [55] aspect infortunat; and than sey thei that he is
 [56] well.
 [57] Natheles these ben observaunces of judicial
 [58] matere and rytes of payens, in whiche my
 [59] spirit hath no feith, ne knowing of her
 [60] horoscopum. For they seyn that every
 [61] signe is departid in thre evene parties by
 [62] 10 degrees, and thilke porcioun they clepe a
 [63] face. And although that a planete have a latitude
 [64] fro the ecliptik, yit sey somme folk, so
 [65] that the planete arise in that same signe with
 [66] eny degre of the forseide face in which his
 [67] longitude is rekned, that yit is the planete
 [68] in horoscopo, be it in nativyte or in eleccion,
 [69] etc.
 [Rub] To knowe the verrey equacioun of the
 [RubA] degre of the sonne yf so be that it falle bitwene
 [RubC] thyn almykanteras.
 [1] For as muche as the almykanteras in thin
 [2] Astrelabie ben compowned by two and two,
 [3] where as somme almykanteras in sondry astrelabies
 [4] be compowned by 1 and 1, or elles by 2
 [5] and 2, it is necessarie to thy lernyng to teche
 [6] the first to knowe and worke with thin oune
 [7] instrument. Wherfore whan that the degre of
 [8] thi sonne fallith bytwixe 2 almykanteras, or
 [9] ellis yf thin almykanteras ben graven with
 [10] over-gret a poynt of a compas (for bothe
 [11] these thinges may causen errour as wel in
 [12] knowing of the tide of the day, as of the verrey
 [13] ascendent), thou must worken in this
 [14] wise:
 [15] Set the degre of thy sonne upon the hyer
 [16] almykanteras of bothe, and wayte wel where
 [17] as thin almury touchith the bordure and set
 [18] there a prikke of ynke. Sett doun agayn the
 [19] degre of the sunne upon the nether almykanteras
 [20] of bothe, and sett there another
 [21] pricke. Remeve than thin almury in
 [22] the bordure evene amiddes bothe prickes, and
 [23] this wol lede justly the degre of thi sonne to
 [24] sitte bitwene bothe almykanteras in his right
 [25] place. Ley than thy label over the degre of
 [26] thi sonne, and fynd in the bordure the verrey
 [27] tyde of the day, or of the night. And as verraily
 [28] shalt thou fynde upon thin est orisonte
 [29] thin ascendent.
 [Rub] To knowe the spryng of the dawenyng
 [RubA] and the ende of the evenyng, the whiche ben
 [RubB] called the two crepuscules.
 [1] Set the nadir of thy sonne upon 18 degrees
 [2] of height among thyn almykanteras on the west
 [3] syde; and ley thy label on the degre of thy
 [4] sonne, and than shal the point of thy label
 [5] shewen the spryng of the day. Also set the
 [6] nader of thy sonne upon 18 degrees of height
 [7] among thin almykanteras on the est side, and
 [8] ley over thy label upon the degre of the sonne,
 [9] and with the point of thy label fynd in the
 [10] bordure the ende of the evenyng, that is
 [11] verrey nyght.
 [12] The nader of the sonne is thilke degre that
 [13] is opposyt to the degre of the sonne, in the
 [14] 7 signe, as thus: every degre of Aries by
 [15] ordir is nadir to every degre of Libra by ordre,
 [16] and Taurus to Scorpioun, Gemini to Sagittarie,
 [17] Cancer to Capricorne, Leo to Aquarie, Virgo
 [18] to Piscis. And if eny degre in thy zodiak be
 [19] derk, his nadir shal declare hym.
 [Rub] To knowe the arch of the day, that some
 [RubA] folk callen the day artificiall, fro sonne arisyng
 [RubB] tyl it go to reste.
 [1] Set the degre of thi sonne upon thin est
 [2] orisonte, and ley thy label on the degre of
 [3] the sonne, and at the point of thy label in the
 [4] bordure set a pricke. Turne than thy riet
 [5] aboute tyl the degre of the sonne sitte upon
 [6] the west orisonte, and ley thy label upon the
 [7] same degre of the sonne, and at the poynt of
 [8] thy label set another pricke. Rekne than
 [9] the quantite of tyme in the bordure bitwixe
 [10] bothe prickes, and tak there thyn arch of
 [11] the day. The remenaunt of the bordure
 [12] under the orisonte is the arch of the nyght.
 [13] Thus maist thou rekne bothe arches, or every
 [14] porcioun, of whether that the liketh. And by
 [15] this manere of worching maist thou se how
 [16] longe that eny sterre fix dwelleth above the
 [17] erthe, fro tyme that he riseth til he go to reste.
 [18] But the day naturall, that is to seyn 24 hours,
 [19] is the revolucioun of the equinoxial with as
 [20] muche partie of the zodiak as the sonne of
 [21] his propre moeving passith in the mene
 [22] while.
 [Rub] To turne the houres inequales in houres
 [RubA] equales.
 [1] Know the nombre of the degrees in the
 [2] houres inequales, and depart hem by 15, and
 [3] tak there thin houres equales.
 [Rub] To knowe the quantite of the day vulgar,
 [RubA] that is to seyn fro spryng of the day unto
 [RubB] verrey nyght.
 [1] Know the quantite of thy crepuscles, as I
 [2] have taught in the 3 chapitre bifore, and adde
 [3] hem to the arch of thy day artificial, and tak
 [4] there the space of all the hool day vulgar unto
 [5] verrey night. The same manere maist thou
 [6] worche to knowe the quantite of the vulgar
 [7] nyght.
 [] 
 [Rub] To knowe the quantite of houres inequales
 [RubA] by day.
 [1] Understond wel that these houres inequales
 [2] ben clepid houres of planetes. And understond
 [3] wel that som tyme ben thei lenger by
 [4] day than by night, and som tyme the contrarie.
 [5] But understond wel that evermo generaly
 [6] the houre inequal of the day with the
 [7] houre inequal of the night contenen 30 degrees
 [8] of the bordure, which bordure is evermo answeryng
 [9] to the degrees of the equinoxial.
 [10] Wherfore departe the arch of the day artificial
 [11] in 12, and tak there the quantite of
 [12] the houre inequale by day. And if thou abate
 [13] the quantite of the houre inequale by day out
 [14] of 30, than shal the remenaunt that levith parforme
 [15] the houre inequale by night.
 [Rub] To knowe the quantite of houres
 [RubA] equales.
 [1] The quantite of houres equales, that is to
 [2] seyn the houres of the clokke, ben departid by
 [3] 15 degrees alredy in the bordure of thin Astrelaby,
 [4] as wel by night as by day, generaly for
 [5] evere. What nedith more declaracioun?
 [6] Wherfore whan the list to knowe hou many
 [7] houres of the clokke ben passed, or eny part
 [8] of eny of these houres that ben passed, or ellis
 [9] how many houres or parties of houres ben
 [10] to come fro such a tyme to such a tyme by
 [11] day or by night, know the degre of thy
 [12] sonne, and ley thy label on it. Turne thy ryet
 [13] aboute joyntly with thy label, and with the
 [14] poynt of it rekne in the bordure fro the sonne
 [15] arise unto that same place there thou desirist,
 [16] by day as by nyght. This conclusioun wol I declare
 [17] in the laste chapitre of the 4 partie of this
 [18] tretys so openly that ther shal lakke no word
 [19] that nedith to the declaracioun.
 [Rub] Special declaracioun of the houres of
 [RubA] planetes.
 [1] Understond wel that evermo, fro the arisyng
 [2] of the sonne til it go to reste, the nadir of
 [3] the sonne shal shewe the houre of the planete;
 [4] and fro that tyme forward al the night til the
 [5] sonne arise, than shal the verrey degre of the
 [6] sonne shewe the houre of the planete.
 [7] Ensample as thus: The xiij day of March
 [8] fyl upon a Saturday, peraventure, and atte risyng
 [9] of the sonne I fond the secunde degre
 [10] of Aries sittyng upon myn est orisonte, all
 [11] be it that it was but litel. Than fond I the
 [12] 2 degre of Libra, nadir of my sonne, discending
 [13] on my west orisonte, upon which west orisonte
 [14] every day generaly, atte sonne arist, entrith the
 [15] houre of eny planete, after which planete the
 [16] day berith his name, and endith in the next
 [17] strike of the plate under the forseide west
 [18] orisonte. And evere as the sonne clymbith upper
 [19] and upper, so goth his nadir downer
 [20] and downer, teching by suche strikes the
 [21] houres of planetes by ordir as they sitten
 [22] in the hevene. The firste houre inequal of
 [23] every Saturday is to Saturne, and the secunde
 [24] to Jupiter, the thirde to Mars, the fourthe
 [25] to the sonne, the fifte to Venus, the sixte to
 [26] Mercurius, the seventhe to the mone. And
 [27] then ageyn the 8 is to Saturne, the 9 to
 [28] Jupiter, the 10 to Mars, the 11 to the sonne,
 [29] the 12 to Venus. And now is my sonne gon
 [30] to reste as for that Saturday. Than shewith
 [31] the verrey degre of the sonne the houre
 [32] of Mercurie entring under my west orisonte at
 [33] eve; and next him succedith the mone, and
 [34] so furth by ordir, planete after planete in houre
 [35] after houre, all the nyght longe til the sonne
 [36] arise. Now risith the sonne that Sonday by
 [37] the morwe, and the nadir of the sonne upon
 [38] the west orisonte shewith me the entring of the
 [39] houre of the forseide sonne. And in this
 [40] manere succedith planete under planete fro
 [41] Saturne unto the mone, and fro the mone up
 [42] ageyn to Saturne, houre after houre generaly.
 [43] And thus knowe I this conclusyoun.
 [Rub] To knowe the altitude of the sonne in
 [RubA] myddes of the day that is clepid the altitude
 [RubB] meridian.
 [1] Set the degre of the sonne upon the lyne
 [2] meridional, and rekne how many degres of
 [3] almykanteras ben bitwyxe thin est orisonte and
 [4] the degre of thy sonne; and tak there thin altitude
 [5] meridian, this to seyn, the highest of the
 [6] sonne as for that day. So maist thou knowe in
 [7] the same lyne the heighest cours that eny sterre
 [8] fix clymbeth by night. This is to seyn that whan
 [9] eny sterre fix is passid the lyne meridional,
 [10] than begynneth it to descende; and so doth
 [11] the sonne.
 [Rub] To knowe the degre of the sonne by thy
 [RubA] ryet, for a maner curiosite.
 [1] Sek besily with thy rule the highest of the
 [2] sonne in mydde of the day. Turne than thin
 [3] Astrelabie, and with a pricke of ynke marke
 [4] the nombre of that same altitude in the lyne
 [5] meridional; turne than thy ryet aboute tyl thou
 [6] fynde a degre of thy zodiak according with the
 [7] pricke, this is to seyn, sitting on the pricke.
 [8] And in soth thou shalt finde but 2 degrees in
 [9] all the zodiak of that condicioun; and yit
 [10] thilke 2 degrees ben in diverse signes.
 [11] Than maist thou lightly, by the sesoun of
 [12] the yere, knowe the signe in which that is the
 [13] sonne.
 [Rub] To knowe which day is lik to which
 [RubA] day as of lengthe.
 [1] Loke whiche degrees ben ylike fer fro the
 [2] hevedes of Cancer and Capricorne, and loke
 [3] when the sonne is in eny of thilke degrees;
 [4] than ben the dayes ylike of lengthe. This is
 [5] to seyn that as longe is that day in that month,
 [6] as was such a day in such a month; there varieth
 [7] but litel.
 [8] Also, yf thou take 2 dayes naturales in the
 [9] yere ylike fer fro either point of the equinoxiall
 [10] in the opposyt parties, than as longe
 [11] is the day artificiall of that oon day as is the
 [12] night of that othir, and the contrarie.
 [Rub] This chapitre is a maner declaracioun
 [RubA] to conclusiouns that folewen.
 [1] Understond wel that thy zodiak is departed
 [2] in two halve circles, as fro the heved of Capricorne
 [3] unto the heved of Cancer, and ageynward
 [4] fro the heved of Cancer unto the heved
 [5] of Capricorne. The heved of Capricorne is
 [6] the lowest point where as the sonne goth in
 [7] wynter, and the heved of Cancer is the heighist
 [8] point in which the sonne goth in somer. And
 [9] therfore understond wel that eny two degrees
 [10] that ben ylike fer fro eny of these two
 [11] hevedes, truste wel that thilke two degrees
 [12] ben of ilike declinacioun, be it southward or
 [13] northward, and the daies of hem ben ilike of
 [14] lengthe and the nyghtes also, and the shadewes
 [15] ilyke, and the altitudes ylike atte midday
 [16] for evere.
 [Rub] To knowe the verrey degre of eny maner
 [RubA] sterre, straunge or unstraunge, after his longitude;
 [RubB] though he be indetermynat in thin
 [RubC] Astralabye, sothly to the trouthe thus he shal
 [RubD] be knowe.
 [1] Tak the altitude of this sterre whan he is on
 [2] the est syde of the lyne meridionall, as nye
 [3] as thou mayst gesse; and tak an ascendent anon
 [4] right by som manere sterre fix which that thou
 [5] knowist; and forget not the altitude of the firste
 [6] sterre ne thyn ascendent. And whan that this
 [7] is don, aspye diligently whan this same firste
 [8] sterre passith eny thyng the south westward;
 [9] and cacche him anon right in the same
 [10] nombre of altitude on the west syde of this
 [11] lyne meridional, as he was kaught on the
 [12] est syde; and tak a newe ascendent anon-ryght
 [13] by som maner sterre fix which that thou knowist,
 [14] and forget not this secunde ascendent. And
 [15] whan that this is don, rekne than how many
 [16] degrees ben bitwixe the firste ascendent and
 [17] the secunde ascendent; and rekne wel the myddel
 [18] degre bitwene bothe ascendentes, and set
 [19] thilke myddel degre upon thyn est orizonte;
 [20] and wayte than what degre that sitte upon
 [21] the lyne meridional, and tak there the verrey
 [22] degre of the ecliptik in which the sterre
 [23] stondith for the tyme. For in the ecliptik is the
 [24] longitude of a celestiall body rekned, evene
 [25] fro the heved of Aries unto the ende of Pisces;
 [26] and his latitude is rekned after the quantite of
 [27] his declynacioun north or south toward the
 [28] polys of this world.
 [29] As thus: Yif it be of the sonne or of
 [30] eny fix sterre, rekne hys latitude or his
 [31] declinacioun fro the equinoxiall cercle; and
 [32] if it be of a planete, rekne than the quantite
 [33] of his latitude fro the ecliptik lyne, all be it
 [34] so that fro the equinoxiall may the declinacioun
 [35] or the latitude of eny body celestiall be rekned
 [36] after the site north or south and after the quantite
 [37] of his declinacioun. And right so may the
 [38] latitude or the declinacioun of eny body celestiall,
 [39] saaf oonly of the sonne, after hys site
 [40] north or south and after the quantite of his
 [41] declinacioun, be rekned fro the ecliptik
 [42] lyne; fro which lyne alle planetes som tyme
 [43] declinen north or south saaf oonly the forseide
 [44] sonne.
 [Rub] To knowe the degrees of longitudes of
 [RubA] fixe sterres after that they be determynat in
 [RubB] thin Astrelabye, yf so be that thei be trewly
 [RubC] sette.
 [1] Set the centre of the sterre upon the lyne
 [2] meridionall, and tak kep of thy zodiak, and
 [3] loke what degre of eny signe that sitte upon
 [4] the same lyne meridionall at that same tyme,
 [5] and tak there the degre in which the sterre
 [6] stondith. and with that same degre cometh that
 [7] same sterre unto that same lyne fro the orisonte.
 [Rub] To knowe with which degre of the zodiak
 [RubA] eny sterre fix in thin Astrelabie arisith
 [RubB] upon the est orisonte, all though his dwellyng
 [RubC] be in another signe.
 [1] Set the centre of the sterre upon the est
 [2] orisonte, and loke what degre of eny signe that
 [3] sitt upon the same orisonte at that same tyme.
 [4] And understond wel that with that same degre
 [5] arisith that same sterre.
 [6] And thys merveylous arisyng with a straunge
 [7] degre in another signe is by cause that the
 [8] latitude of the sterre fix is either north or south
 [9] fro the equinoxiall. But sothly the latitudes
 [10] of planetes be comounly rekened fro the
 [11] ecliptyk, by cause that noon of hem declyneth
 [12] but fewe degrees out fro the brede of the
 [13] zodiak. And tak god kep of this chapitre of
 [14] arisyng of celestialle bodies; for truste wel that
 [15] neyther mone ne sterre, as in our embelif
 [16] orisonte, arisith with that same degre of his
 [17] longitude saaf in oo cas, and that is whan they
 [18] have no latitude fro the ecliptyk lyne. But
 [19] natheles som tyme is everich of these planetes
 [20] under the same lyne.
 [Rub] To knowe the declinacioun of eny degre
 [RubA] in the zodiak fro the equinoxiall cercle.
 [1] Set the degre of eny signe upon the lyne
 [2] meridionall, and rekne hys altitude in the
 [3] almykanteras fro the est orisonte up to the same
 [4] degre set in the forseide lyne, and set there a
 [5] prikke; turne up than thy riet, and set the heved
 [6] of Aries or Libra in the same meridionall lyne,
 [7] and set there a nother prikke. And whan that
 [8] this is don, considre the altitudes of hem bothe;
 [9] for sothly the difference of thilke altitudes
 [10] is the declinacioun of thilke degre fro the
 [11] equinoxiall. And yf it so be that thilke degre
 [12] be northward fro the equinoxiall, than is
 [13] his declinacyoun north; yif it be southward,
 [14] than is it south.
 [Rub] To knowe for what latitude in eny regioun
 [RubA] the almykanteras of eny table ben compowned.
 [1] Rekene how many degrees of almykanteras
 [2] in the meridionall lyne ben fro the cercle equinoxiall
 [3] unto the cenyth, or elles from the pool
 [4] artyk unto the north orisonte; and for so gret
 [5] a latitude, or for so smal a latitude, is the table
 [6] compowned.
 [Rub] To knowe in speciall the latitude of
 [RubA] oure countre, I mene after the latitude of Oxenford,
 [RubB] and the height of oure pool.
 [1] Understond wel that as fer is the heved of
 [2] Aries or Libra in the equinoxiall fro oure orisonte
 [3] as is the cenyth fro the pool artik; and
 [4] as high is the pool artik fro the orisonte as the
 [5] equinoxiall is fer fro the cenyth. I prove it
 [6] thus by the latitude of Oxenford: understond
 [7] wel that the height of oure pool artik fro oure
 [8] north orisonte is 51 degrees and 50 mynutes;
 [9] than is the cenyth fro oure pool artik 38 degrees
 [10] and 10 mynutes; than is the equinoxial
 [11] from oure cenyth 51 degrees and 50
 [12] mynutes; than is oure south orisonte from oure
 [13] equinoxiall 38 degres and 10 mynutes. Understond
 [14] wel this rekenyng. Also forget not
 [15] that the cenyth is 90 degrees of height from
 [16] the orisonte, and oure equinoxiall is 90 degres
 [17] from oure pool artik. Also this shorte rule is
 [18] soth, that the latitude of eny place in a regioun
 [19] is the distaunce fro the cenyth unto
 [20] the equinoxiall.
 [Rub] To prove evidently the latitude of eny
 [RubA] place in a regioun by the preve of the height
 [RubB] of the pool artik in that same place.
 [1] In som wynters nyght whan the firmament
 [2] is cler and thikke sterred, wayte a tyme til
 [3] that eny sterre fix sitte lyne-right perpendiculer
 [4] over the pool artik, and clepe that sterre A;
 [5] and wayte another sterre that sitte lyne-right
 [6] under A, and under the pool, and clepe that
 [7] sterre F. And understond wel that F is not
 [8] considrid but oonly to declare that A sitte
 [9] evene over the pool. Tak than anoon-right
 [10] the altitude of A from the orisonte, and forget
 [11] it not; let A and F goo fare wel tyl
 [12] ageynst the dawenyng a gret while, and com
 [13] than ageyn, and abid til that A is evene under
 [14] the pool, and under F; for sothly than wol F
 [15] sitte over the pool, and A wol sitte under the
 [16] pool. Tak than eftsonys the altitude of A from
 [17] the orisonte, and note as wel his secunde altitude
 [18] as hys firste altitude. And whan that this
 [19] is doon, rekene how many degrees that the
 [20] firste altitude of A excedith his secunde altitude,
 [21] and tak half thilke porcioun that is
 [22] excedid and adde it to his secunde altitude,
 [23] and tak there the elevacioun of thy pool, and
 [24] eke the latitude of thy regioun; for these two
 [25] ben of oo nombre, this is to seyn, as many degres
 [26] as thy pool is elevat, so muche is the latitude
 [27] of the regioun.
 [28] Ensample as thus: Peraventure the altitude of
 [29] A in the evenyng is 56 degrees of height;
 [30] than wol his secunde altitude or the dawenyng
 [31] be 48 degres, that is 8 degrees lasse
 [32] than 56, that was his first altitude att even.
 [33] Tak than the half of 8 and adde it to 48 that
 [34] was his secunde altitude, and than hast thou
 [35] 52. Now hast thou the height of thy pool and
 [36] the latitude of the regioun. But understond
 [37] wel that to prove this conclusioun and many
 [38] another faire conclusioun, thou must have a
 [39] plomet hongyng on a lyne, heygher than
 [40] thin heved, on a perche; and thilke lyne
 [41] must hange evene perpendiculer bytwixe
 [42] the pool and thin eye; and than shalt thou
 [43] seen yf A sitte evene over the pool, and over
 [44] F atte evene; and also yf F sitte evene over the
 [45] pool and over A or day.
 [Rub] Another conclusioun to prove the
 [RubA] height of the pool artik fro the orisonte.
 [1] Tak eny sterre fix that never descendith under
 [2] the orisonte in thilke regioun, and considre
 [3] his heighist altitude and his lowist altitude
 [4] fro the orisonte, and make a nombre of
 [5] bothe these altitudes; tak than and abate half
 [6] that nombre, and take there the elevacioun of
 [7] the pool artik in that same regioun.
 [Rub] Another conclusioun to prove the latitude
 [RubA] of the regioun.
 [1] Understond wel that the latitude of eny
 [2] place in a regioun is verrely the space bytwixe
 [3] the cenyth of hem that dwellen there and the
 [4] equinoxiall cercle north or south, takyng the
 [5] mesure in the meridional lyne, as shewith in
 [6] the almykanteras of thin Astrelabye. And thilke
 [7] space is as much as the pool artike is high in
 [8] that same place fro the orisonte. And than is
 [9] the depressioun of the pool antartik, that
 [10] is to seyn, than is the pool antartik, bynethe
 [11] the orisonte the same quantite of
 [12] space neither more ne lasse.
 [13] Than if thou desire to knowe this latitude
 [14] of the regioun, tak the altitude of the sonne
 [15] in the myddel of the day, whan the sonne is
 [16] in the hevedes of Aries or of Libra; for than
 [17] moeveth the sonne in the lyne equinoxiall;
 [18] and abate the nombre of that same sonnes altitude
 [19] out of 90 degrees, and than is the
 [20] remenaunt of the nombre that leveth
 [21] the latitude of the regioun. As thus:
 [22] I suppose that the sonne is thilke day at
 [23] noon 38 degrees of height; abate than 38
 [24] degrees oute of 90; so leveth there 52; than is
 [25] 52 degrees the latitude. I say not this but for
 [26] ensample; for wel I wot the latitude of Oxenford
 [27] is certeyn minutes lasse; thow might
 [28] preve the same.
 [29] Now yf so be that the semeth to longe a
 [30] tarieng to abide til that the sonne be in the
 [31] hevedes of Aries or of Libra, than wayte
 [32] whan the sonne is in eny othir degre of the
 [33] zodiak, and considre the degre of his declinacioun
 [34] fro the equinoxiall lyne; and if it so be
 [35] that the sonnes declinacioun be northward fro
 [36] the equinoxiall, abate than fro the sonnes altitude
 [37] at non the nombre of his declinacioun,
 [38] and than hast thou the height of the hevedes
 [39] of Aries and Libra. As thus: My sonne
 [40] is peraventure in the 10 degre of Leoun,
 [41] almost 56 degrees of height at non,
 [42] and his declinacioun is almost 18 degrees
 [43] northward fro the equinoxiall; abate than thilke
 [44] 18 degrees of declinacioun out of the altitude
 [45] at non; than leveth there 38 degrees and odde
 [46] minutes. Lo there the heved of Aries or Libra
 [47] and thin equinoxiall in that regioun. Also if
 [48] so be that the sonnes declinacioun be southward
 [49] fro the equinoxiall, adde than thilke
 [50] declinacioun to the altitude of the sonne at
 [51] noon, and tak there the hevedes of Aries
 [52] and Libra and thin equinoxial; abate than the
 [53] height of the equinoxial out of 90 degrees;
 [54] than leveth there the distance of the pool of
 [55] that regioun fro the equinoxiall. Or elles, if
 [56] the list, tak the highest altitude fro the equinoxial
 [57] of eny sterre fix that thou knowist, and
 [58] tak his netherest elongacioun (lengthing) fro
 [59] the same equinoxial lyne, and work in the
 [60] manere forseid.
 [Rub] Declaracioun of the ascensioun of
 [RubA] signes.
 [1] The excellence of the spere solide, amonges
 [2] othir noble conclusiouns, shewith manyfest the
 [3] diverse ascenciouns of signes in diverse places,
 [4] as wel in the right cercle as in the embelif
 [5] cercle. These auctours writen that thilke signe
 [6] is cleped of right ascensioun with which more
 [7] part of the cercle equinoxiall and lasse part of
 [8] the zodiak ascendith. and thilke signe ascendith
 [9] embelif with which lasse part of the
 [10] equinoxiall and more part of the zodiak
 [11] ascendith. Ferther-over, they seyn that in
 [12] thilke cuntrey where as the senith of hem that
 [13] dwellen there is in the equinoxial lyne, and
 [14] her orisonte passyng by the two poles of this
 [15] world, thilke folk han this right cercle and
 [16] the right orisonte; and evermore the arch of
 [17] the day and the arch of the night is there ilike
 [18] longe; and the sonne twies every yer passing
 [19] thorugh the cenith of hir heed, and two
 [20] someres and two wynters in a yer han these
 [21] forseide peple. And the almycanteras in
 [22] her Astrelabyes ben streight as a lyne, so as
 [23] shewith in the figure.
 [24] The utilite to knowe the ascensions of signes
 [25] in the right cercle is this: Truste wel that
 [26] by mediacioun of thilke ascensions these astrologiens,
 [27] by her tables and her instrumentes,
 [28] knowen verreily the ascensioun of every degre
 [29] and minute in all the zodiak in the embelif
 [30] cercle, as shal be shewed. And nota that
 [31] this forseide right orisonte, that is clepid
 [32] Orison Rectum, dividith the equinoxial into
 [33] right angles; and the embelif orisonte, where
 [34] as the pool is enhaunced upon the orisonte,
 [35] overkervith the equinoxiall in embilif angles,
 [36] as shewith in the figure.
 [Rub] This is the conclusioun to knowe the
 [RubA] ascensions of signes in the right cercle, that is
 [RubB] circulus directus.
 [1] Set the heved of what signe the lyst to knowe
 [2] his ascendyng in the right cercle upon the lyne
 [3] meridionall, and wayte where thyn almury
 [4] touchith the bordure, and set there a prikke;
 [5] turne than thy riet westward til that the ende
 [6] of the forseide signe sitte upon the meridional
 [7] lyne and eftsonys wayte where thin almury
 [8] touchith the bordure, and set there another
 [9] pricke. Rekene than the nombre of degres
 [10] in the bordure bitwixe bothe prikkes, and
 [11] tak the ascensioun of the signe in the right
 [12] cercle. And thus maist thou werke with every
 [13] porcioun of thy zodiak.
 [Rub] To knowe the ascensions of signes in the
 [RubA] embelif cercle in every regioun, I mene, in
 [RubB] circulo obliquo.
 [1] Set the heved of the signe which as the list
 [2] to knowe his ascensioun upon the est orisonte,
 [3] and wayte where thin almury touchith the bordure,
 [4] and there set a prikke. Turne than thy
 [5] riet upward til that the ende of the same signe
 [6] sitte upon the est orisonte, and wayte eftsonys
 [7] where as thin almury touchith the bordure,
 [8] and set there a nother prikke. Rekene than
 [9] the nombre of degrees in the bordure bitwyxe
 [10] bothe prikkes and tak there the ascensioun
 [11] of the signe in the embelif cercle.
 [12] And understond wel that alle the signes in thy
 [13] zodiak, fro the heved of Aries unto the ende
 [14] of Virgo, ben clepid signes of the north fro
 [15] the equinoxiall. And these signes arisen bitwyxe
 [16] the verrey est and the verrey north in
 [17] oure orisonte generaly for evere. And alle the
 [18] signes fro the heved of Libra unto the ende
 [19] of Pisces ben clepid signes of the south fro
 [20] the equinoxial; and these signes arisen
 [21] evermore bitwixe the verrey est and the
 [22] verrey south in oure orisonte. Also every signe
 [23] bitwixe the heved of Capricorne unto the ende
 [24] of Geminis arisith on oure orisonte in lasse
 [25] than 2 houres equales. And these same signes
 [26] fro the heved of Capricorne unto the ende of
 [27] Geminis ben cleped tortuose signes, or croked
 [28] signes, for thei arise embelyf on oure orisonte.
 [29] And these croked signes ben obedient to
 [30] the signes that ben of right ascensioun.
 [31] The signes of right ascencioun ben fro the
 [32] heved of Cancer unto the ende of Sagittarie;
 [33] and these signes arisen more upright, and thei
 [34] ben called eke sovereyn signes and everich of
 [35] hem arisith in more space than 2 houres. Of
 [36] whiche signes Gemini obeieth to Cancer, and
 [37] Taurus to Leo, Aries to Virgo, Pisces to Libra,
 [38] Aquarius to Scorpioun, and Capricorne to Sagittarie.
 [39] And thus evermore 2 signes that
 [40] ben ilike fer fro the heved of Capricorne
 [41] obeyen everich of hem to othir.
 [Rub] To knowe justly the 4 quarters of the
 [RubA] world, as Est, West, North, and South.
 [1] Tak the altitude of thy sonne whan the list,
 [2] and note wel the quarter of the world in which
 [3] the sonne is for the tyme by the azymutz.
 [4] Turne than thin Astrelabie, and set the degre
 [5] of the sonne in the almykanteras of his altitude
 [6] on thilke syde that the sonne stant, as is the
 [7] manere in takyng of houres, and ley thy label
 [8] on the degre of the sonne; and rekene how
 [9] many degrees of the bordure ben bitwixe
 [10] the lyne meridional and the point of thy
 [11] label, and note wel that nombre. Turne
 [12] than ageyn thin Astrelabie, and set the point
 [13] of thy gret rule there thou takist thin altitudes
 [14] upon as many degrees in his bordure fro his
 [15] meridional as was the point of thy label fro
 [16] the lyne meridional on the wombe side. Take
 [17] than thin Astrelabie with bothe hondes sadly
 [18] and slighly, and let the sonne shyne thorugh
 [19] bothe holes of thy rule, and slighly in thilke
 [20] shynyng lat thin Astrelabie kouche adoun
 [21] evene upon a smothe ground, and than wol
 [22] the verrey lyne meridional of thin Astrelabie
 [23] lye evene south, and the est lyne wol lye est,
 [24] and the west lyne west, and the north lyne
 [25] north, so that thou worke softly and avysely
 [26] in the kouching. And thus hast thou the 4
 [27] quarters of the firmament.
 [Rub] To knowe the latitude of planetes fro
 [RubA] the wey of the sonne, whethir so they be north
 [RubB] or south fro the forseide wey.
 [1] Loke whan that a planete is in the lyne
 [2] meridional, yf that hir altitude be of the same
 [3] height that is the degre of the sonne for that
 [4] day, and than is the planete in the verrey wey
 [5] of the sonne and hath no latitude. And if the
 [6] altitude of the planete be heigher than the
 [7] degre of the sonne, than is the planete north
 [8] fro the wey of the sonne such a quantite of
 [9] latitude as shewith by thin almykanteras.
 [10] And if the altitude of the planete be lasse
 [11] than the degre of the sonne, than is the
 [12] planete south fro the wey of the sonne such
 [13] a quantite of latitude as shewith by thin
 [14] almykanteras. This is to seyn, fro the wey
 [15] where as the sonne went thilke day, but not
 [16] fro the wey of the sonne in every place of the
 [17] zodiak.
 [Rub] To knowe the cenyth of the arising of
 [RubA] the sonne, this is to seyn, the partie of the
 [RubB] orisonte in which that the sonne arisith.
 [1] Thou must first considere that the sonne arisith
 [2] not alwey verrey est, but somtyme by northe
 [3] the est and somtyme by south the est. Sothly
 [4] the sonne arisith nevere moo verrey est in oure
 [5] orisonte, but he be in the heved of Aries or
 [6] Libra. Now is thin orisonte departed in 24 parties
 [7] by thin azimutes in significacioun of 24 parties
 [8] of the world; al be it so that shipmen rekene
 [9] thilke parties in 32. Than is there no
 [10] more but wayte in which azimut that thy
 [11] sonne entrith at his arisyng, and take there
 [12] the cenith of the arisyng of the sonne.
 [13] The manere of the divisioun of thin Astrelabie
 [14] is this, I mene as in this cas: First
 [15] it is divided in 4 plages principalis with the
 [16] lyne that goth from est to west; and than with
 [17] another lyne that goth fro south to north; than
 [18] is it divided in smale parties of azymutz, as est,
 [19] and est by south, where as is the first azymut
 [20] above the est lyne; and so furth fro
 [21] partie to partie til that thou come ageyn
 [22] unto the est lyne. Thus maist thou understonde
 [23] also the cenyth of eny sterre, in which partie
 [24] he riseth.
 [Rub] To knowe in which partie of the firmament
 [RubA] is the conjunccyoun.
 [1] Considere the tyme of the conjunccyoun by
 [2] the kalender, as thus: Loke hou many houres
 [3] thilke conjunccioun is fro the midday of the
 [4] day precedent, as shewith by the canon of
 [5] thy kalender. Rekene than thilke nombre of
 [6] houres in the bordure of thin Astrelabie, as
 [7] thou art wont to do in knowyng of the houres
 [8] of the day or of the nyght, and ley thy label
 [9] over the degre of the sonne, and than wol
 [10] the point of thy label sitte upon the houre
 [11] of the conjunccioun. Loke than in which
 [12] azymut the degre of thy sonne sittith, and in
 [13] that partie of the firmament is the conjunccioun.
 [Rub] To knowe the cenyth of the altitude of
 [RubA] the sonne.
 [1] This is no more to seyn but eny tyme of
 [2] the day tak the altitude of the sonne, and by
 [3] the azymut in which he stondith maist thou
 [4] seen in which partie of the firmament he is.
 [5] And the same wise maist thou seen by night,
 [6] of eny sterre, wheither the sterre sitte est or
 [7] west, or north or south, or eny partie bitwene,
 [8] after the name of the azimut in which is the
 [9] sterre.
 [Rub] To knowe sothly the degre of the longitude
 [RubA] of the mone, or of eny planete that hath
 [RubB] no latitude for the tyme fro the ecliptik lyne.
 [1] Tak the altitude of the mone, and rekne thy
 [2] altitude up among thyn almykanteras on
 [3] which syde that the mone stondith, and set
 [4] there a prikke. Tak than anon-right upon the
 [5] mones syde the altitude of eny sterre fix which
 [6] that thou knowist, and set his centre upon his
 [7] altitude among thyn almykanteras there the
 [8] sterre is founde. Wayte than which degre of
 [9] the zodiak touchith the prykke of the altitude
 [10] of the mone, and tak there the degre
 [11] in which the mone stondith. This conclusioun
 [12] is verrey soth, yf the sterres in thin
 [13] Astrelabie stonden after the trouthe. Comoun
 [14] tretes of the Astrelabie ne maken non excepcioun
 [15] whether the mone have latitude or
 [16] noon, ne on wheyther syde of the mone the
 [17] altitude of the sterre fixe be taken.
 [18] And nota that yf the mone shewe himself
 [19] by light of day, than maist thou worche
 [20] this same conclusioun by the sonne, as wel
 [21] as by the fixe sterre.
 [Rub] This is the worchinge of the conclusioun
 [RubA] to knowe yf that eny planete be direct
 [RubB] or retrograd.
 [1] Tak the altitude of eny sterre that is clepid
 [2] a planete, and note it wel; and tak eke anon
 [3] the altitude of any sterre fix that thou knowist,
 [4] and note it wel also. Com than ageyn the
 [5] thridde or the fourthe nyght next folewing, for
 [6] than shalt thou perceyve wel the moeving of
 [7] a planete, wheither so he moeve forward or
 [8] bakward. Awayte wel than whan that thy
 [9] sterre fixe is in the same altitude that she
 [10] was whan thou toke hir firste altitude.
 [11] And tak than eft-sones the altitude of the
 [12] forseide planete and note it wel; for truste wel
 [13] yf so be that the planete be on the right syde
 [14] of the meridional lyne, so that his secunde altitude
 [15] be lasse than hys first altitude was, than
 [16] is the planete direct; and yf he be on the west
 [17] syde in that condicioun, than is he retrograd.
 [18] And yf so be that this planete be upon the est
 [19] side whan his altitude is ytaken, so that his
 [20] secunde altitude be more than his first altitude,
 [21] than is he retrograd. And if he be on
 [22] the west syde, than is he direct. But the contrarie
 [23] of these parties is of the cours of the
 [24] mone; for certis the mone moeveth the contrarie
 [25] from othre planetes as in hir epicicle, but
 [26] in noon othir manere.
 [Rub] The conclusioun of equaciouns of
 [RubA] houses after the Astrelabie.
 [1] Set the begynnyng of the degre that ascendith
 [2] upon the ende of the 8 houre inequal; than
 [3] wol the begynnyng of the 2 hous sitte upon
 [4] the lyne of mydnight. Remeve than the degre
 [5] that ascendith, and set him on the ende of the
 [6] 10 houre inequal, and than wol the begynnyng
 [7] of the 3 hous sitte up on the mydnight lyne.
 [8] Bring up ageyn the same degre that ascended
 [9] first, and set him upon the est orisonte, and
 [10] than wol the begynnyng of the 4 hous sitte
 [11] upon the lyne of mydnight. Tak than the
 [12] nader of the degre that first ascendid, and set
 [13] him on the ende of the 2 houre inequal; and
 [14] than wol the begynnyng of the 5 hous sitte
 [15] upon the lyne of mydnight. Set than the nader
 [16] of the ascendent on the ende of the 4 houre
 [17] inequal, and than wol the begynnyng of the
 [18] 6 hous sitte on the mydnight lyne. The begynnyng
 [19] of the 7 hous is nader of the ascendent,
 [20] and the begynnyng of the 8 hous
 [21] is nader of the 2, and the begynnyng
 [22] of the 9 hous is nader of the 3, and the begynnyng
 [23] of the 10 hous is nader of the 4,
 [24] and the begynnyng of the 11 hous is nader
 [25] of the 5, and the begynnyng of the 12 hous
 [26] is nader of the 6.
 [Rub] Another maner of equaciouns of houses
 [RubA] by the Astrelabye.
 [1] Tak thin ascendent, and than hast thou thy
 [2] 4 angles; for wel thou wost that the opposit
 [3] of thin ascendent, that is to seyn, the begynnyng
 [4] of the 7 hous, sitt upon the west orisonte,
 [5] and the begynnyng of the 10 hous sitt upon
 [6] the lyne meridional, and his opposyt upon the
 [7] lyne of mydnight. Than ley thy label over the
 [8] degre that ascendith, and rekne fro the point
 [9] of thy label alle the degrees in the bordure
 [10] tyl thou come to the meridional lyne; and
 [11] departe alle thilke degrees in 3 evene parties,
 [12] and take there the evene equacions of 3
 [13] houses; for ley thy label over everich of these
 [14] 3 parties, and than maist thou se by thy label,
 [15] in the zodiak, the begynnyng of everich
 [16] of these same houses fro the ascendent; that
 [17] is to seyn, the begynnyng of the 12 hous next
 [18] above thin ascendent, the begynnyng of the
 [19] 11 hous, and than the 10 upon the meridional
 [20] lyne, as I first seide. The same wise
 [21] worch thou fro the ascendent doun to the
 [22] lyne of mydnyght, and thus hast thou othre
 [23] 3 houses; that is to seyn, the begynnyng of
 [24] the 2, and the 3, and the 4 hous. Than is the
 [25] nader of these 3 houses the begynnyng of the
 [26] 3 houses that folewen.
 [Rub] To fynde the lyne meridional to dwelle
 [RubA] fix in eny certeyn place.
 [1] Tak a round plate of metal; for werpyng,
 [2] the brodder the better; and make there upon
 [3] a just compas a lite within the bordure. And
 [4] ley this rounde plate upon an evene ground,
 [5] or on an evene ston, or on an evene stok fix
 [6] in the ground; and ley it evene by a level.
 [7] And in the centre of the compas styke an
 [8] evene pyn, or a wyr, upright, the smaller the
 [9] better; set thy pyn by a plom-rule evene
 [10] upright, and let this pyn be no lenger than
 [11] a quarter of the dyametre of thy compas,
 [12] fro the centre amiddes. And wayte bisely
 [13] aboute 10 or 11 of the clokke, whan the sonne
 [14] shineth, whan the shadewe of the pyn entrith
 [15] enythyng within the cercle of thy compas an
 [16] heer-mele; and marke there a pricke with inke.
 [17] Abid than stille waityng on the sonne til after
 [18] 1 of the clokke, til that the shadwe of the wyr,
 [19] or of the pyn, passe enything out of the
 [20] cercle of the compas, be it nevere so lyte,
 [21] and set there another pricke of ynke. Tak
 [22] than a compas, and mesure evene the myddel
 [23] bitwixe bothe prickes, and set there a prikke.
 [24] Tak me than a rule and draw a strike evene
 [25] a-lyne, fro the pyn unto the middel prikke; and
 [26] tak there thi lyne meridional for evermore, as
 [27] in that same place. And yif thou drawe a
 [28] cross-lyne overthwart the compas justly over
 [29] the lyne meridional, than hast thou est and
 [30] west and south, and par consequens,
 [31] the opposit of the south lyne, i.e. the north.
 [Rub] Descripcion of the meridional lyne, of
 [RubA] longitudes and latitudes of citees and townes,
 [RubB] as wel as of climates.
 [1] Thys lyne meridional is but a maner descripcioun,
 [2] or lyne ymagined, that passith upon the
 [3] poles of this world and by the cenyth of oure
 [4] heved. And it is cleped the lyne meridional,
 [5] for in what place that eny man is at any tyme
 [6] of the yer, whan that the sonne, by mevynge
 [7] of the firmament, cometh to his verrey meridian
 [8] place, than is it verrey mydday, that we clepen
 [9] oure non, as to thilke man. And therfore
 [10] is it clepid the lyne of midday. And nota
 [11] that evermore of eny 2 cytes or of 2 townes,
 [12] of which that oo town approchith ner toward
 [13] the est than doth that othir town, trust
 [14] wel that thilke townes han diverse meridians.
 [15] Nota also that the arch of the equinoxial that
 [16] is contened or bownded bitwixe the 2 meridians
 [17] is clepid the longitude of the toun. And
 [18] yf so be that two townes have ilike meridian
 [19] or oon meridian, than is the distaunce of
 [20] hem bothe ilike fer fro the est, and the contrarie;
 [21] and in this manere thei change not
 [22] her meridian. But sothly thei chaungen her
 [23] almykanteras, for the enhaunsyng of the pool
 [24] and the distance of the sonne.
 [25] The longitude of a climat is a lyne ymagined
 [26] fro est to west ilike distant fro the equinoxiall.
 [27] And the latitude of a climat may be
 [28] cleped the space of the erthe fro the begynnyng
 [29] of the first clymat unto the verrey
 [30] ende of the same clymat evene direct
 [31] ageyns the pool artyke. Thus sayn somme
 [32] auctours; and somme of hem sayn that yf men
 [33] clepe the latitude of a cuntrey the arch meridian
 [34] that is contened or intercept bitwix the
 [35] cenyth and the equinoxial, than say they that
 [36] the distance fro the equinoxial unto the ende
 [37] of a clymat evene ageynst the pool artik is the
 [38] latitude of a clymat forsoothe.
 [Rub] To knowe with which degre of the zodiak
 [RubA] that eny planete ascendith on the orisonte,
 [RubB] wheither so that his latitude be north
 [RubC] or south.
 [1] Know by thin almenak the degre of the
 [2] ecliptik of eny signe in which that the planete
 [3] is rekned for to be, and that is clepid the
 [4] degre of his longitude. And know also the
 [5] degre of his latitude fro the ecliptik north or
 [6] south. And by these ensamples folewynge in
 [7] speciall maist thou worche in general in every
 [8] signe of the zodiak:
 [9] The degree of the longitude peraventure
 [10] of Venus or of another planete was 1 of
 [11] Capricorne, and the latitude of him was
 [12] northward 4 degrees fro the ecliptik lyne. Than
 [13] tok I a subtil compas, and clepid that oo point
 [14] of my compas A, and that other point F. Than
 [15] tok I the point of A and sette it in the ecliptik
 [16] lyne in my zodiak in the degre of the longitude
 [17] of Venus, that is to seyn, in the 1 degre
 [18] of Capricorne; and than sette I the point of
 [19] F upward in the same signe by cause that
 [20] latitude was north upon the latitude of
 [21] Venus, that is to seyn, in the 4 degre fro the
 [22] heved of Capricorne; and thus have I 4 degrees
 [23] bitwixe my two prickes. Than leide I down
 [24] softly my compas, and sette the degre of the
 [25] longitude upon the orisonte; tho tok I and
 [26] waxed my label in manere of a peire tables to
 [27] receyve distinctly the prickes of my compas.
 [28] Tho tok I thys forseide label, and leyde it fix
 [29] over the degre of my longitude; tho tok I
 [30] up my compas and sette the point of A in
 [31] the wax on my label, as evene as I koude
 [32] gesse, over the ecliptik lyne in the ende of the
 [33] longitude, and sette the point of F endelong
 [34] in my label upon the space of the latitude,
 [35] inward and over the zodiak, that is to seyn
 [36] northward fro the ecliptik. Than leide I doun
 [37] my compas, and loked wel in the wey upon
 [38] the prickes of A and of F; tho turned I my ryet
 [39] til that the pricke of F satt upon the orisonte;
 [40] than saw I wel that the body of
 [41] Venus in hir latitude of 4 degrees septemtrionals
 [42] ascendid, in the ende of the 8 degre,
 [43] fro the heved of Capricorne.
 [44] And nota that in this manere maist thou
 [45] worche with any latitude septemtrional in alle
 [46] signes. But sothly the latitude meridional of
 [47] a planete in Capricorne ne may not be take by
 [48] cause of the litel space bitwixe the ecliptyk
 [49] and the bordure of the Astrelabie; but
 [50] sothely in all othre signes it may.
 [51] Also the degre peraventure of Jupiter, or of
 [52] another planete, was in the first degre of Piscis
 [53] in longitude, and his latitude was 2 degrees
 [54] meridional; tho tok I the point of A and sette
 [55] it in the first degre of Piscis on the ecliptik;
 [56] and than sette I the point of F dounward in
 [57] the same signe by cause that the latitude was
 [58] south 2 degres, that is to seyn, fro the heved
 [59] of Piscis; and thus have I 2 degres bitwixe
 [60] bothe prikkes. Than sette I the degre of
 [61] the longitude upon the orisonte; tho tok I
 [62] my label, and leide it fix upon the degre of the
 [63] longitude; tho sette I the point of A on my
 [64] label evene over the ecliptik lyne in the ende
 [65] of the degre of the longitude, and sette the
 [66] point of F endlong in my label the space of
 [67] 2 degres of the latitude outward fro the zodiak
 [68] (this is to seyn southward fro the ecliptik toward
 [69] the bordure), and turned my riet
 [70] til that the pricke of F saat upon the orisonte.
 [71] Than say I wel that the body of
 [72] Jupiter in his latitude of 2 degrees meridional
 [73] ascendid with 8 degres of Piscis in horoscopo.
 [74] And in this manere maist thou worche with
 [75] any latitude meridional, as I first seide, save in
 [76] Capricorne. And yif thou wilt pleye this craft
 [77] with the arisyng of the mone, loke thou rekne
 [78] wel hir cours houre by houre, for she ne dwellith
 [79] not in a degre of hir longitude but litel
 [80] while, as thow wel knowist. But natheles
 [81] yf thou rekne hir verrey moevyng by thy
 [82] tables houre after houre, [thou shalt do wel
 [83] ynow].
 [Rub] Umbra Recta.
 [1] Yif it so be that thou wilt werke by umbra
 [12] recta, and thou may come to the bas of the
 [13] tour, in this maner shalt thou werke. Tak the
 [14] altitude of the tour by bothe holes, so that
 [15] thy rewle ligge even in a poynt. Ensample as
 [16] thus: I see him thorw at the poynt of 4; than
 [17] mete I the space betwixe me and the tour,
 [18] and I finde it 20 foot; than beholde I how 4
 [19] is to 12, right so is the space betwixe thee
 [110] and the tour to the altitude of the tour.
 [111] For 4 is the thridde part of 12, so is the
 [112] space between thee and the tour the thridde
 [113] part of the altitude of the tour; than thryes 20
 [114] foot is the heyghte of the tour, with adding of
 [115] thyn owne persone to thyn eye. And this rewle
 [116] is general in umbra recta, fro the poynt of
 [117] oon to 12. And yif thy rewle falle upon 5, than
 [118] is 5 12-partyes of the heyght the space between
 [119] thee and the tour; with adding of
 [120] thyn owne heyghte.
 [Rub] Umbra Versa.
 [1] Another maner of the werkinge, by umbra
 [12] versa. Yif so be that thou may nat come to
 [13] the bas of the tour, I see him thorw at the nombre
 [14] of 1; I sette ther a prikke at my fot; than
 [15] go I neer to the tour, and I see him thorw at
 [16] the poynt of 2, and there I sette another prikke;
 [17] and I beholde how 1 hath him to 12, and ther
 [18] finde I that it hath him twelfe sythes; than
 [19] beholde I how 2 hath him to 12, and thou
 [110] shalt finde it sexe sythes; than thou shalt
 [111] finde that 12 passith 6 by the numbre of
 [112] 6; right so is the space between thy two prikkes
 [113] the space of 6 tymes thyn altitude. And note,
 [114] that at the ferste altitude of 1, thou settest a
 [115] prikke; and afterward, whan thou seest him at
 [116] 2, ther thou settest another prikke; than thou
 [117] findest betwyx thes two prikkys 60 foot; than
 [118] thou shalt finde that 10 is the 6-party of 60.
 [119] And then is 10 feet the altitude of the tour.
 [120] For other poyntis, yif it fille in umbra versa,
 [121] as thus: I sette caas it fill upon 2, and at
 [122] the secunde upon 3; than schalt thou finde
 [123] that 2 is 6 partyes of 12; and 3 is 4 partyes of
 [124] 12; than passeth 6 4, by nombre of 2; so is the
 [125] space between two prikkes twyes the heyghte
 [126] of the tour. And yif the differens were thryes,
 [127] than shulde it be three tymes; and thus mayst
 [128] thou werke fro 1 to 12; and yif it be 4, 4 tymes;
 [129] or 5, 5 tymes; et sic de ceteris.
 [Rub] Umbra Recta.
 [1] Another maner of wyrking, by umbra recta:
 [2] Yif it so be that thou mayst nat come to the
 [3] baas of the tour, in this maner thou schalt
 [4] werke. Set thy rewle upon 1 till thou see the
 [5] altitude, and set at thy foot a prikke. Than
 [6] set thy rewle upon 2, and behold what is the
 [7] differense between 1 and 2, and thou shalt
 [8] finde that it is 1. Than mete the space between
 [9] two prikkes, and that is the 12 partie
 [10] of the altitude of the tour. And yif ther
 [11] were 2, it were the 6 partye; and yif ther
 [12] were 3, the 4 partye; et sic deinceps. And
 [13] note, yif it were 5, it were the 5 party of 12;
 [14] and 7, 7 party of 12; and note, at the altitude
 [15] of thy conclusion, adde the stature of thyn
 [16] heyghte to thyn eye.
 [Rub] Another maner conclusion, to knowe
 [RubA] the mene mote and the argumentis of any
 [RubB] planete. To know the mene mote and the argumentis
 [RubC] of every planete fro yeer to yeer, from
 [RubD] day to day, from houre to houre, and from
 [RubE] smale fraccionis infinite.
 [1] In this maner shalt thou worche; consider
 [2] thy rote first, the whiche is made the beginning
 [3] of the tables fro the yer of oure Lord
 [4] 1397, and enter hit into thy slate for the laste
 [5] meridie of December; and than consider the
 [6] yer of oure Lord, what is the date, and behold
 [7] whether thy date be more or lasse than the
 [8] yer 1397. And yf hit so be that hit be more,
 [9] loke how many yeres hit passeth, and with
 [10] so many enter into thy tables in the first
 [11] lyne theras is writen anni collecti et expansi.
 [12] And loke where the same planet is
 [13] writen in the hed of thy table, and than loke
 [14] what thou findest in direct of the same yer of
 [15] oure Lord which is passid, be hit 8, or 9, or
 [16] 10, or what nombre that evere it be, til the
 [17] tyme that thou come to 20, or 40, or 60. And
 [18] that thou findest in direct wryt in thy slate under
 [19] thy rote, and adde hit togeder, and that is
 [20] thy mene mote, for the laste meridian of
 [21] the December, for the same yer which that
 [22] thou hast purposed. And if hit so be that hit
 [23] passe 20, consider wel that fro 1 to 20 ben
 [24] anni expansi, and fro 20 to 3000 ben anni collecti;
 [25] and if thy nomber passe 20, than tak that
 [26] thou findest in direct of 20, and if hit be more,
 [27] as 6 or 18, than tak that thou findest in direct
 [28] thereof, that is to sayen, signes, degrees, minutes,
 [29] and secoundes, and adde togedere
 [30] unto thy rote; and thus to make rotes. And
 [31] note, that if hit so be that the yer of oure
 [32] Lord be lasse than the rote, which is the yer
 [33] of oure Lord 1397, than shalt thou wryte in
 [34] the same wyse first thy rote in thy slate, and
 [35] after enter into thy table in the same yer that
 [36] be lasse, as I taught before; and than consider
 [37] how many signes, degrees, minutes, and secoundes
 [38] thyn entringe conteyneth. And so be
 [39] that ther be 2 entrees, than adde hem togeder,
 [40] and after withdraw hem from the
 [41] rote, the yer of oure Lord 1397; and the
 [42] residue that leveth is thy mene mote for the
 [43] laste meridie of December, the whiche thou
 [44] hast purposid; and if hit so be that thou wolt
 [45] witen thy mene mote for any day, or for any
 [46] fraccioun of day, in this maner thou shalt
 [47] worche. Make thy rote fro the laste day of
 [48] December in the maner as I have taught,
 [49] and afterward behold how many monethes,
 [50] dayes, and houres ben passid from the
 [51] meridie of December, and with that enter
 [52] with the laste moneth that is ful passed, and
 [53] take that thou findest in direct of him, and
 [54] wryt hit in thy slate; and enter with as mony
 [55] dayes as be more, and wryt that thou findest
 [56] in direct of the same planete that thou worchest
 [57] for; and in the same wyse in the table of
 [58] houres, for houres that ben passed, and adde
 [59] alle these to thy rote; and the residue is the
 [60] mene mote for the same day and the same
 [61] houre.
 [Rub] Another manere to knowe the mene
 [RubA] mote.
 [1] Whan thou wolt make the mene mote of eny
 [2] planete to be by Arsechieles tables, tak thy
 [3] rote, the which is for the yer of oure Lord
 [4] 1397; and if so be that thy yer be passid the
 [5] date, wryt that date, and than wryt the nomber
 [6] of the yeres. Than withdraw the yeres
 [7] out of the yeres that ben passed that rote.
 [8] Ensampul as thus: the yer of oure Lord 1400,
 [9] I wolde wyten, precise, my rote; than wrot
 [10] I first 1400. And under that nomber I
 [11] wrot a 1397; than withdrow I the laste
 [12] nomber out of that, and than fond I the residue
 [13] was 3 yer; I wiste that 3 yer was passed
 [14] fro the rote, the which was writen in my
 [15] tables. Than afterward soghte I in my tables
 [16] the annis collectis et expansis, and among myn
 [17] expanse yeres fond I 3 yeer. Than tok I alle
 [18] the signes, degrees, and minutes, that I fond
 [19] direct under the same planete that I
 [20] wroghte for, and wrot so many signes,
 [21] degrees, and minutes in my slate, and afterward
 [22] added I to signes, degrees, minutes, and
 [23] secoundes, the whiche I fond in my rote the
 [24] yer of oure Lord 1397; and kepte the residue;
 [25] and than had I the mene mote for the laste
 [26] day of December. And if thou woldest wete
 [27] the mene mote of any planete in March, April,
 [28] or May, other in any other tyme or moneth of
 [29] the yer, loke how many monethes and
 [30] dayes ben passed from the laste day of December,
 [31] the yer of oure Lord 1400; and so
 [32] with monethis and dayes enter into thy table
 [33] ther thou findest thy mene mote iwriten in
 [34] monethes and dayes, and tak alle the signes,
 [35] degrees, minutes, and secoundes that thou findest
 [36] ywrite in direct of thy monethes, and adde
 [37] to signes, degrees, minutes, and secoundes that
 [38] thou findest with thy rote the yer of oure
 [39] Lord 1400, and the residue that leveth is the
 [40] mene mote for that same day. And note,
 [41] if hit so be that thou woldest wite the mene
 [42] mote in any yer that is lasse than thy rote,
 [43] withdraw the nomber of so many yeres as hit
 [44] is lasse than the yer of oure Lord a 1397, and
 [45] kep the residue; and so many yeres, monethes,
 [46] and dayes enter into thy tables of thy mene
 [47] mote. And tak alle the signes, degrees, and
 [48] minutes, and secoundes, that thou findest in
 [49] direct of alle the yeres, monethes, and
 [50] dayes, and wryt hem in thy slate; and
 [51] above thilke nomber wryt the signes, degrees,
 [52] minutes, and secoundes, the which thou
 [53] findest with thy rote the yer of oure Lord a
 [54] 1397; and withdraw alle the nethere signes
 [55] and degrees fro the signes and degrees, minutes,
 [56] and secoundes of other signes with thy
 [57] rote; and thy residue that leveth is thy mene
 [58] mote for that day.
 [Rub] For to knowe at what houre of the day,
 [RubA] or of the night, shal be flod or ebbe.
 [1] First wite thou certeinly, hou that haven
 [2] stondeth, that thou list to werke for; that is
 [3] to say in which place of the firmament the
 [4] mone beyng, makith full see. Than awayte
 [5] thou redily in what degree of the zodiak that
 [6] the mone at that tyme is ynne. Bring furth
 [7] than the label, and set the point therof in
 [8] that same cost that the mone makith flod, and
 [9] set thou there the degree of the mone according
 [10] with the egge of the label. Than
 [11] afterward awayte where is than the degree
 [12] of the sonne, at that tyme. Remeve thou than
 [13] the label fro the mone, and bring and set it
 [14] justly upon the degree of the sonne. And the
 [15] point of the label shal than declare to thee, at
 [16] what houre of the day or of the night shal
 [17] be flod. And there also maist thou wite by the
 [18] same point of the label, whethir it be, at that
 [19] same tyme, flod or ebbe, or half flod, or
 [20] quarter flod, or ebbe, or half or quarter
 [21] ebbe; or ellis at what houre it was last, or
 [22] shal be next by night or by day, thou than
 [23] shalt esely knowe, &c. Furthermore, if it so
 [24] be that thou happe to worke for this matere
 [25] aboute the tyme of the conjunccioun, bring
 [26] furth the degree of the mone with the label
 [27] to that coste as it is before seyd. But than thou
 [28] shalt understonde that thou may not bringe
 [29] furth the label fro the degree of the mone
 [30] as thou dide before; for-why the sonne is
 [31] than in the same degree with the mone.
 [32] And so thou may at that tyme by the point of
 [33] the label unremevid knowe the houre of the
 [34] flod or of the ebbe, as it is before seyd, &c.
 [35] And evermore as thou findest the mone passe
 [36] fro the sonne, so remeve thou the label than
 [37] fro the degree of the mone, and bring it to
 [38] the degree of the sonne. And work thou than
 [39] as thou dide before, &c. Or ellis know
 [40] thou what houre it is that thou art inne,
 [41] by thyn instrument. Than bring thou furth
 [42] fro thennes the label and ley it upon the degree
 [43] of the mone, and therby may thou wite
 [44] also whan it was flod, or whan it wol be next,
 [45] be it night or day; &c.

      
The Canterbury Tales and Other Works of Chaucer (Middle English), by Geoffery Chaucer, [14th cent.], at sacred-texts.com

 

The Romaunt of the Rose

 

Fragment A

 [1] Many men sayn that in sweveninges
 [2] Ther nys but fables and lesynges;
 [3] But men may some sweven[es] sen
 [4] Whiche hardely that false ne ben,
 [5] But afterward ben apparaunt.
 [6] This may I drawe to warraunt
 [7] An authour that hight Macrobes,
 [8] That halt nat dremes false ne lees,
 [9] But undoth us the avysioun
 [10] That whilom mette kyng Cipioun.
 [11] And whoso saith or weneth it be
 [12] A jape, or elles nycete,
 [13] To wene that dremes after falle,
 [14] Let whoso lyste a fol me calle.
 [15] For this trowe I, and say for me,
 [16] That dremes signifiaunce be
 [17] Of good and harm to many wightes
 [18] That dremen in her slep a-nyghtes
 [19] Ful many thynges covertly
 [20] That fallen after al openly.
 [21] Within my twenty yer of age,
 [22] Whan that Love taketh his cariage
 [23] Of yonge folk, I wente soone
 [24] To bedde, as I was wont to done,
 [25] And faste I slepte; and in slepyng
 [26] Me mette such a swevenyng
 [27] That lyked me wonders wel.
 [28] But in that sweven is never a del
 [29] That it nys afterward befalle,
 [30] Ryght as this drem wol tel us alle.
 [31] Now this drem wol I ryme aright
 [32] To make your hertes gaye and lyght,
 [33] For Love it prayeth, and also
 [34] Commaundeth me that it be so.
 [35] And if there any aske me,
 [36] Whether that it be he or she,
 [37] How this book, which is here,
 [38] Shal hatte, that I rede you here:
 [39] It is the Romance of the Rose,
 [40] In which al the art of love I close.
 [41] The mater fayre is of to make;
 [42] God graunt me in gree that she it take
 [43] For whom that it begonnen is.
 [44] And that is she that hath, ywis,
 [45] So mochel pris, and therto she
 [46] So worthy is biloved to be,
 [47] That she wel ought, of pris and ryght,
 [48] Be cleped Rose of every wight.
 [49] That it was May me thoughte tho
 [50] It is fyve yer or more ago
 [51] That it was May, thus dremed me,
 [52] In tyme of love and jolite,
 [53] That al thing gynneth waxen gay,
 [54] For ther is neither busk nor hay
 [55] In May that it nyl shrouded ben
 [56] And it with newe leves wren.
 [57] These wodes eek recoveren grene,
 [58] That drie in wynter ben to sene,
 [59] And the erthe wexith proud withalle,
 [60] For swote dewes that on it falle,
 [61] And the pore estat forget
 [62] In which that wynter had it set.
 [63] And than bycometh the ground so proud
 [64] That it wole have a newe shroud,
 [65] And makith so queynt his robe and faire
 [66] That it hath hewes an hundred payre
 [67] Of gras and flouris, ynde and pers,
 [68] And many hewes ful dyvers
 [69] That is the robe I mene, iwys,
 [70] Through which the ground to preisen is.
 [71] The briddes that haven left her song,
 [72] While thei suffride cold so strong,
 [73] In wedres gryl and derk to sighte,
 [74] Ben in May for the sonne brighte
 [75] So glade that they shewe in syngyng
 [76] That in her hertis is sich lykyng
 [77] That they mote syngen and be light.
 [78] Than doth the nyghtyngale hir myght
 [79] To make noyse and syngen blythe,
 [80] Than is blisful many sithe
 [81] The chelaundre and papyngay,
 [82] Than yonge folk entenden ay
 [83] Forto ben gay and amorous
 [84] The tyme is than so saverous.
 [85] Hard is the hert that loveth nought
 [86] In May whan al this mirth is wrought,
 [87] Whan he may on these braunches here
 [88] The smale briddes syngen clere
 [89] Her blisful swete song pitous.
 [90] And in this sesoun delytous,
 [91] Whan love affraieth alle thing,
 [92] Me thought a-nyght in my sleping,
 [93] Right in my bed, ful redily,
 [94] That it was by the morowe erly,
 [95] And up I roos and gan me clothe.
 [96] Anoon I wissh myn hondis bothe.
 [97] A sylvre nedle forth I drough
 [98] Out of an aguler queynt ynough,
 [99] And gan this nedle threde anon,
 [100] For out of toun me list to gon
 [101] The song of briddes forto here
 [102] That in thise buskes syngen clere.
 [103] And in [the] swete seson that leef is,
 [104] With a thred bastyng my slevis,
 [105] Alone I wente in my plaiyng,
 [106] The smale foules song harknyng.
 [107] They peyned hem, ful many peyre,
 [108] To synge on bowes blosmed feyre.
 [109] Joly and gay, ful of gladnesse,
 [110] Toward a ryver gan I me dresse
 [111] That I herd renne faste by,
 [112] For fairer plaiyng non saugh I
 [113] Than playen me by that ryver.
 [114] For from an hill that stood ther ner
 [115] Cam doun the strem ful stif and bold.
 [116] Cleer was the water, and as cold
 [117] As any welle is, soth to seyne,
 [118] And somdel lasse it was than Seyne,
 [119] But it was strayghter wel away.
 [120] And never saugh I, er that day,
 [121] The watir that so wel lyked me,
 [122] And wondir glad was I to se
 [123] That lusty place and that ryver.
 [124] And with that watir, that ran so cler,
 [125] My face I wyssh. Tho saugh I well
 [126] The botme paved everydell
 [127] With gravel, ful of stones shene.
 [128] The medewe softe, swote, and grene,
 [129] Beet right on the watir syde.
 [130] Ful cler was than the morowtyde,
 [131] And ful attempre, out of drede.
 [132] Tho gan I walke thorough the mede,
 [133] Dounward ay in my pleiyng,
 [134] The ryver syde costeiyng.
 [135] And whan I had a while goon,
 [136] I saugh a gardyn right anoon,
 [137] Ful long and brood, and everydell
 [138] Enclosed was, and walled well
 [139] With highe walles enbatailled,
 [140] Portraied without and wel entailled
 [141] With many riche portraitures.
 [142] And bothe the ymages and the peyntures
 [143] Gan I biholde bysyly,
 [144] And I wole telle you redyly
 [145] Of thilk ymages the semblaunce,
 [146] As fer as I have in remembraunce.
 [147] Amydde saugh I Hate stonde,
 [148] That for hir wrathe, yre, and onde,
 [149] Semede to ben a mynoresse,
 [150] An angry wight, a chideresse;
 [151] And ful of gyle and fel corage,
 [152] By semblaunt, was that ilk ymage.
 [153] And she was nothyng wel arraied,
 [154] But lyk a wod womman afraied.
 [155] Frounced foule was hir visage,
 [156] And grennyng for dispitous rage,
 [157] Hir nose snorted up for tene.
 [158] Ful hidous was she for to sene,
 [159] Ful foul and rusty was she, this.
 [160] Hir heed writhen was, ywis,
 [161] Ful grymly with a greet towayle.
 [162] An ymage of another entayle
 [163] A lyft half was hir faste by.
 [164] Hir name above hir heed saugh I,
 [165] And she was called Felonye.
 [166] Another ymage that Vilanye
 [167] Clepid was saugh I and fond
 [168] Upon the wal on hir right hond.
 [169] Vilany was lyk somdell
 [170] That other ymage, and, trustith wel,
 [171] She semede a wikked creature.
 [172] By countenaunce in portrayture
 [173] She semed be ful dispitous,
 [174] And eek ful proud and outragious.
 [175] Wel coude he peynte, I undirtake,
 [176] That sich ymage coude make.
 [177] Ful foul and cherlyssh semed she,
 [178] And eek vylayneus for to be,
 [179] And litel coude of norture
 [180] To worshipe any creature.
 [181] And next was peynted Coveitise,
 [182] That eggith folk in many gise
 [183] To take and yeve right nought ageyn,
 [184] And gret tresouris up to leyn.
 [185] And that is she that for usure
 [186] Leneth to many a creature
 [187] The lasse for the more wynnyng,
 [188] So coveitous is her brennyng.
 [189] And that is she that penyes fele
 [190] Techith for to robbe and stele
 [191] These theves and these smale harlotes;
 [192] And that is routh, for by her throtes
 [193] Ful many oon hangith at the laste.
 [194] She makith folk compasse and caste
 [195] To taken other folkis thyng
 [196] Thorough robberie or myscounting.
 [197] And that is she that makith trechoures,
 [198] And she makith false pleadoures
 [199] That with hir termes and hir domes
 [200] Doon maydens, children, and eek gromes
 [201] Her heritage to forgo.
 [202] Ful croked were hir hondis two,
 [203] For Coveitise is evere wod
 [204] To gripen other folkis god.
 [205] Coveityse, for hir wynnyng,
 [206] Ful leef hath other mennes thing.
 [207] Another ymage set saugh I
 [208] Next Coveitise faste by,
 [209] And she was clepid Avarice.
 [210] Ful foul in peyntyng was that vice;
 [211] Ful fade and caytif was she eek,
 [212] And also grene as ony leek.
 [213] So yvel hewed was hir colour,
 [214] Hir semed to have lyved in langour.
 [215] She was lyk thyng for hungre deed,
 [216] That ladde hir lyf oonly by breed
 [217] Kneden with eisel strong and egre,
 [218] And therto she was lene and megre.
 [219] And she was clad ful porely
 [220] Al in an old torn courtepy,
 [221] As she were al with doggis torn;
 [222] And bothe bihynde and eke biforn
 [223] Clouted was she beggarly.
 [224] A mantyl heng hir faste by,
 [225] Upon a perche, weik and small;
 [226] A burnet cote heng therwithall
 [227] Furred with no menyver,
 [228] But with a furre rough of her,
 [229] Of lambe-skynnes hevy and blake.
 [230] It was ful old, I undirtake,
 [231] For Avarice to clothe hir well
 [232] Ne hastith hir never a dell.
 [233] For certeynly it were hir loth
 [234] To weren ofte that ilke cloth,
 [235] And if it were forwered, she
 [236] Wolde have ful gret necessite
 [237] Of clothyng er she bought hir newe,
 [238] Al were it bad of woll and hewe.
 [239] This Avarice hild in hir hand
 [240] A purs that heng by a band,
 [241] And that she hidde and bond so stronge,
 [242] Men must abyde wondir longe
 [243] Out of that purs er ther come ought.
 [244] For that ne cometh not in hir thought;
 [245] It was not, certein, hir entente
 [246] That fro that purs a peny wente.
 [247] And by that ymage, nygh ynough,
 [248] Was peynted Envye, that never lough
 [249] Nor never wel in hir herte ferde
 [250] But if she outher saugh or herde
 [251] Som gret myschaunce or gret disese.
 [252] Nothyng may so moch hir plese
 [253] As myschef and mysaventure,
 [254] Or whan she seeth discomfiture
 [255] Upon ony worthy man falle,
 [256] Than likith hir wel withalle.
 [257] She is ful glad in hir corage,
 [258] If she se any gret lynage
 [259] Be brought to nought in shamful wise.
 [260] And if a man in honour rise,
 [261] Or by his wit or by his prowesse,
 [262] Of that hath she gret hevynesse.
 [263] For, trustith wel, she goth nygh wod
 [264] Whan any chaunce happith god.
 [265] Envie is of such crueltee
 [266] That feith ne trouthe holdith she
 [267] To freend ne felawe, bad or good.
 [268] Ne she hath kyn noon of hir blood,
 [269] That she nys ful her enemy;
 [270] She nolde, I dar seyn hardely,
 [271] Hir owne fadir ferde well.
 [272] And sore abieth she everydell
 [273] Hir malice and hir maltalent,
 [274] For she is in so gret turment,
 [275] And hath such [wo] whan folk doth good
 [276] That nygh she meltith for pure wood.
 [277] Hir herte kervyth and so brekith
 [278] That God the puple wel awrekith.
 [279] Envie, iwis, shal nevere lette
 [280] Som blame upon the folk to sette.
 [281] I trowe that if Envie, iwis,
 [282] Knewe the beste man that is
 [283] On this side or biyonde the see,
 [284] Yit somwhat lakken hym wolde she;
 [285] And if he were so hende and wis
 [286] That she ne myght al abate his pris,
 [287] Yit wolde she blame his worthynesse
 [288] Or by hir wordis make it lesse.
 [289] I saugh Envie in that peyntyng
 [290] Hadde a wondirful lokyng,
 [291] For she ne lokide but awry
 [292] Or overthwart, all baggyngly.
 [293] And she hadde a [foul] usage:
 [294] She myght loke in no visage
 [295] Of man or womman forth-right pleyn,
 [296] But shette hir [oon] eie for disdeyn.
 [297] So for envie brenned she
 [298] Whan she myght any man se
 [299] That fair or worthi were, or wis,
 [300] Or elles stod in folkis prys.
 [301] Sorowe was peynted next Envie
 [302] Upon that wall of masonrye.
 [303] But wel was seyn in hir colour
 [304] That she hadde lyved in langour;
 [305] Hir semede to have the jaunyce.
 [306] Nought half so pale was Avarice,
 [307] Nor nothyng lyk of lenesse;
 [308] For sorowe, thought, and gret distresse,
 [309] That she hadde suffred day and nyght,
 [310] Made hir ful yelow and nothyng bright,
 [311] Ful fade, pale, and megre also.
 [312] Was never wight yit half so wo
 [313] As that hir semede for to be,
 [314] Nor so fulfilled of ire as she.
 [315] I trowe that no wight myght hir please
 [316] Nor do that thyng that myght hir ease;
 [317] Nor she ne wolde hir sorowe slake,
 [318] Nor comfort noon unto hir take,
 [319] So depe was hir wo bigonnen,
 [320] And eek hir hert in angre ronnen.
 [321] A sorowful thyng wel semed she,
 [322] Nor she hadde nothyng slowe be
 [323] For to forcracchen al hir face,
 [324] And for to rent in many place
 [325] Hir clothis, and for to tere hir swire,
 [326] As she that was fulfilled of ire.
 [327] And al totorn lay eek hir her
 [328] Aboute hir shuldris here and ther,
 [329] As she that hadde it al torent
 [330] For angre and for maltalent.
 [331] And eek I telle you certeynly
 [332] How that she wep ful tendirly.
 [333] In world nys wight so hard of herte
 [334] That hadde sen her sorowes smerte,
 [335] That nolde have had of her pyte,
 [336] So wo-begon a thyng was she.
 [337] She al todassht herself for woo
 [338] And smot togyder her hondes two.
 [339] To sorowe was she ful ententyf,
 [340] That woful recheles caytyf.
 [341] Her roughte lytel of playing
 [342] Or of clypping or kissyng;
 [343] For whoso sorouful is in herte,
 [344] Him luste not to play ne sterte,
 [345] Ne for to dauncen, ne to synge,
 [346] Ne may his herte in temper bringe
 [347] To make joye on even or morowe,
 [348] For joy is contrarie unto sorowe.
 [349] Elde was paynted after this,
 [350] That shorter was a foot, iwys,
 [351] Than she was wont in her yonghede.
 [352] Unneth herself she mighte fede.
 [353] So feble and eke so old was she
 [354] That faded was al her beaute.
 [355] Ful salowe was waxen her colour;
 [356] Her heed, for hor, was whyt as flour.
 [357] Iwys, great qualm ne were it non,
 [358] Ne synne, although her lyf were gon.
 [359] Al woxen was her body unwelde,
 [360] And drie and dwyned al for elde.
 [361] A foul, forwelked thyng was she,
 [362] That whylom round and softe had be.
 [363] Her eeres shoken faste withalle,
 [364] As from her heed they wolde falle;
 [365] Her face frounced and forpyned,
 [366] And bothe her hondes lorne, fordwyned.
 [367] So old she was that she ne wente
 [368] A foot, but it were by potente.
 [369] The tyme that passeth nyght and day,
 [370] And resteles travayleth ay,
 [371] And steleth from us so prively
 [372] That to us semeth sykerly
 [373] That it in oon poynt dwelleth ever
 [374] And certes, it ne resteth never,
 [375] But goth so faste, and passeth ay,
 [376] That ther nys man that thynke may
 [377] What tyme that now present is
 [378] (Asketh at these clerkes this),
 [379] For [er] men thynke it, redily
 [380] Thre tymes ben passed by
 [381] The tyme, that may not sojourne,
 [382] But goth and may never retourne,
 [383] As watir that doun renneth ay,
 [384] But never drope retourne may;
 [385] Ther may nothing as tyme endure,
 [386] Metall nor erthely creature,
 [387] For alle thing it fret and shall;
 [388] The tyme eke that chaungith all,
 [389] And all doth waxe and fostred be,
 [390] And alle thing distroieth he;
 [391] The tyme that eldith our auncessours,
 [392] And eldith kynges and emperours,
 [393] And that us alle shal overcomen,
 [394] Er that deth us shal have nomen;
 [395] The tyme that hath al in welde
 [396] To elden folk had maad hir elde
 [397] So ynly that, to my witing,
 [398] She myghte helpe hirsilf nothing,
 [399] But turned ageyn unto childhede.
 [400] She had nothing hirsilf to lede,
 [401] Ne wit ne pithe in hir hold,
 [402] More than a child of two yeer old.
 [403] But natheles, I trowe that she
 [404] Was fair sumtyme, and fresh to se,
 [405] Whan she was in hir rightful age,
 [406] But she was past al that passage,
 [407] And was a doted thing bicomen.
 [408] A furred cope on had she nomen;
 [409] Wel had she clad hirsilf and warm,
 [410] For cold myght elles don hir harm.
 [411] These olde folk have alwey cold;
 [412] Her kynde is sich, whan they ben old.
 [413] Another thing was don there write
 [414] That semede lyk an ipocrite,
 [415] And it was clepid Poope-Holy.
 [416] That ilk is she that pryvely
 [417] Ne spareth never a wikked dede,
 [418] Whan men of hir taken noon hede,
 [419] And maketh hir outward precious,
 [420] With pale visage and pitous,
 [421] And semeth a simple creature;
 [422] But ther nys no mysaventure
 [423] That she ne thenkith in hir corage.
 [424] Ful lyk to hir was that ymage,
 [425] That makid was lyk hir semblaunce.
 [426] She was ful symple of countenaunce,
 [427] And she was clothed and eke shod
 [428] As she were, for the love of God,
 [429] Yolden to relygioun,
 [430] Sich semede hir devocioun.
 [431] A sauter held she fast in honde,
 [432] And bisily she gan to fonde
 [433] To make many a feynt praiere
 [434] To God and to his seyntis dere.
 [435] Ne she was gay, ne fresh, ne jolyf,
 [436] But semede to be ful ententyf
 [437] To gode werkis and to faire,
 [438] And therto she had on an haire.
 [439] Ne, certis, she was fatt nothing,
 [440] But semed wery for fasting;
 [441] Of colour pale and deed was she.
 [442] From hir the gate ay werned be
 [443] Of paradys, that blisful place;
 [444] For sich folk maketh lene her face,
 [445] As Crist seith in his evangile,
 [446] To gete hem prys in toun a while;
 [447] And for a litel glorie veine
 [448] They lesen God and his reigne.
 [449] And alderlast of everychon
 [450] Was peynted Povert al aloon,
 [451] That not a peny hadde in wolde,
 [452] All though she hir clothis solde,
 [453] And though she shulde anhonged be,
 [454] For nakid as a worm was she.
 [455] And if the wedir stormy were,
 [456] For cold she shulde have deyed there.
 [457] She nadde on but a streit old sak,
 [458] And many a clout on it ther stak:
 [459] This was hir cote and hir mantell.
 [460] No more was there, never a dell,
 [461] To clothe hir with, I undirtake;
 [462] Gret leyser hadde she to quake.
 [463] And she was putt, that I of talke,
 [464] Fer fro these other, up in an halke.
 [465] There lurked and there coured she,
 [466] For pover thing, whereso it be,
 [467] Is shamefast and dispised ay.
 [468] Acursed may wel be that day
 [469] That povere man conceyved is.
 [470] For, God wot, al to selde, iwys,
 [471] Is ony povere man wel fed,
 [472] Or wel araied or [wel] cled,
 [473] Or wel biloved, in sich wise
 [474] In honour that he may arise.
 [475] Alle these thingis, well avised,
 [476] As I have you er this devysed,
 [477] With gold and asure over all
 [478] Depeynted were upon the wall.
 [479] Square was the wall, and high sumdell;
 [480] Enclosed and barred well,
 [481] In stede of hegge, was that gardyn;
 [482] Com nevere shepherde theryn.
 [483] Into that gardyn, wel wrought,
 [484] Whoso that me coude have brought,
 [485] By laddre or elles by degre,
 [486] It wolde wel have liked me.
 [487] For sich solas, sich joie and play,
 [488] I trowe that nevere man ne say,
 [489] As was in that place delytous.
 [490] The gardeyn was not daungerous
 [491] To herberwe briddes many oon.
 [492] So riche a yer[d] was never noon
 [493] Of briddes song and braunches grene;
 [494] Therynne were briddes mo, I wene,
 [495] Than ben in all the rewme of Fraunce.
 [496] Ful blisful was the accordaunce
 [497] Of swete and pitous song thei made,
 [498] For all this world it owghte glade.
 [499] And I mysilf so mery ferde,
 [500] Whan I her blisful songes herde,
 [501] That for an hundred pound nolde I
 [502] (If that the passage openly
 [503] Hadde be unto me free)
 [504] That I nolde entren for to se
 [505] Th' assemble God kepe it fro care!
 [506] Of briddis whiche therynne ware,
 [507] That songen thorugh her mery throtes
 [508] Daunces of love and mery notes.
 [509] Whan I thus herde foules synge,
 [510] I fel fast in a weymentynge
 [511] By which art or by what engyn
 [512] I myght come into that gardyn;
 [513] But way I couth. fynde noon
 [514] Into that gardyn for to goon.
 [515] Ne nought wist I if that ther were
 [516] Eyther hole or place [o-]where
 [517] By which I myght have entre.
 [518] Ne ther was noon to teche me,
 [519] For I was al aloone, iwys,
 [520] Ful wo and angwishus of this,
 [521] Til atte last bithought I me
 [522] That by no weye ne myght it be
 [523] That ther nas laddre or wey to passe,
 [524] Or hole, into so faire a place.
 [525] Tho gan I go a full gret pas
 [526] Envyronyng evene in compas
 [527] The closing of the square wall,
 [528] Tyl that I fond a wiket small
 [529] So shett that I ne myght in gon,
 [530] And other entre was ther noon.
 [531] Uppon this dore I gan to smyte,
 [532] That was fetys and so lite,
 [533] For other wey coude I not seke.
 [534] Ful long I shof, and knokkide eke,
 [535] And stood ful long and of[t] herknyng,
 [536] If that I herde ony wight comyng,
 [537] Til that [the] dore of thilk entre
 [538] A mayden curteys openyde me.
 [539] Hir heer was as yelowe of hewe
 [540] As ony basyn scoured newe,
 [541] Hir flesh tendre as is a chike,
 [542] With bente browis smothe and slyke.
 [543] And by mesure large were
 [544] The openyng of hir yen clere,
 [545] Hir nose of good proporcioun,
 [546] Hir yen grey as is a faucoun,
 [547] With swete breth and wel savoured,
 [548] Hir face whit and wel coloured,
 [549] With litel mouth and round to see.
 [550] A clove chynne eke hadde she.
 [551] Hir nekke was of good fasoun
 [552] In lengthe and gretnesse, by resoun,
 [553] Withoute bleyne, scabbe, or royne;
 [554] Fro Jerusalem unto Burgoyne
 [555] Ther nys a fairer nekke, iwys,
 [556] To fele how smothe and softe it is.
 [557] Hir throte, also whit of hewe
 [558] As snowe on braunche snowed newe.
 [559] Of body ful wel wrought was she;
 [560] Men neded not in no cuntre
 [561] A fairer body for to seke.
 [562] And of fyn orfrays hadde she eke
 [563] A chapelet so semly oon
 [564] Ne werede never mayde upon
 [565] And faire above that chapelet
 [566] A rose gerland had she sett.
 [567] She hadde [in honde] a gay mirrour,
 [568] And with a riche gold tressour
 [569] Hir heed was tressed queyntely,
 [570] Hir sleves sewid fetisly,
 [571] And for to kepe hir hondis faire
 [572] Of gloves white she had a paire.
 [573] And she hadde on a cote of grene
 [574] Of cloth of Gaunt. Withouten wene,
 [575] Wel semyde by hir apparayle
 [576] She was not wont to gret travayle,
 [577] For whan she kempt was fetisly,
 [578] And wel arayed and richely,
 [579] Thanne had she don al hir journe,
 [580] For merye and wel bigoon was she.
 [581] She ladde a lusty lyf in May:
 [582] She hadde no thought, by nyght ne day,
 [583] Of nothyng, but if it were oonly
 [584] To graythe hir wel and uncouthly.
 [585] Whan that this dore hadde opened me
 [586] This may[de] semely for to see,
 [587] I thanked hir as I best myghte,
 [588] And axide hir how that she highte,
 [589] And what she was I axide eke.
 [590] And she to me was nought unmeke,
 [591] Ne of hir answer daungerous,
 [592] But faire answerde, and seide thus:
 [593] "Lo, sir, my name is Ydelnesse;
 [594] So clepe men me, more and lesse.
 [595] Ful myghty and ful riche am I,
 [596] And that of oon thyng namely,
 [597] For I entende to nothyng
 [598] But to my joye and my pleying,
 [599] And for to kembe and tresse me.
 [600] Aqueynted am I and pryve
 [601] With Myrthe, lord of this gardyn,
 [602] That fro the land of Alexandryn
 [603] Made the trees hidre be fet
 [604] That in this gardyn ben set.
 [605] And whan the trees were woxen on highte,
 [606] This wall, that stant heere in thi sighte,
 [607] Dide Myrthe enclosen al aboute;
 [608] And these ymages, al withoute,
 [609] He dide hem bothe entaile and peynte,
 [610] That neithir ben jolyf ne queynte,
 [611] But they ben ful of sorowe and woo,
 [612] As thou hast seen a while agoo.
 [613] And ofte tyme, hym to solace,
 [614] Sir Myrthe cometh into this place,
 [615] And eke with hym cometh his meynee
 [616] That lyven in lust and jolite.
 [617] And now is Myrthe therynne to here
 [618] The briddis how they syngen clere,
 [619] The mavys and the nyghtyngale,
 [620] And other joly briddis smale.
 [621] And thus he walketh to solace
 [622] Hym and his folk, for swetter place
 [623] To pleyen ynne he may not fynde,
 [624] Although he sought oon in-tyl Ynde.
 [625] The alther-fairest folk to see
 [626] That in this world may founde be
 [627] Hath Mirthe with hym in his route,
 [628] That folowen hym always aboute."
 [629] Whan Ydelnesse had told al this,
 [630] And I hadde herkned wel, ywys,
 [631] Thanne seide I to dame Ydelnesse,
 [632] "Now, also wisly God me blesse,
 [633] Sith Myrthe, that is so faire and fre,
 [634] Is in this yerde with his meyne,
 [635] Fro thilk assemble, if I may,
 [636] Shal no man werne me to-day,
 [637] That I this nyght ne mote it see.
 [638] For wel wene I there with hym be
 [639] A fair and joly companye
 [640] Fulfilled of alle curtesie."
 [641] And forth, withoute wordis mo,
 [642] In at the wiket went I tho,
 [643] That Ydelnesse hadde opened me,
 [644] Into that gardyn fair to see.
 [645] And whan I was inne, iwys,
 [646] Myn herte was ful glad of this,
 [647] For wel wende I ful sikerly
 [648] Have ben in paradys erthly.
 [649] So fair it was that, trusteth wel,
 [650] It semede a place espirituel,
 [651] For certys, as at my devys,
 [652] Ther is no place in paradys
 [653] So good inne for to dwelle or be
 [654] As in that gardyn, thoughte me.
 [655] For there was many a bridd syngyng,
 [656] Thoroughout the yerd al thringyng;
 [657] In many places were nyghtyngales,
 [658] Alpes, fynches, and wodewales,
 [659] That in her swete song deliten
 [660] In thilke places as they habiten.
 [661] There myghte men see many flokkes
 [662] Of turtles and laverokkes.
 [663] Chalaundres fele sawe I there,
 [664] That wery, nygh forsongen were;
 [665] And thrustles, terins, and mavys,
 [666] That songen for to wynne hem prys,
 [667] And eke to sormounte in her song
 [668] That other briddes hem among.
 [669] By note made fair servyse
 [670] These briddes, that I you devise;
 [671] They songe her song as faire and wel
 [672] As angels don espirituel.
 [673] And trusteth wel, whan I hem herde,
 [674] Ful lustily and wel I ferde,
 [675] For never yitt sich melodye
 [676] Was herd of man that myghte dye.
 [677] Sich swete song was hem among
 [678] That me thought it no briddis song,
 [679] But it was wondir lyk to be
 [680] Song of mermaydens of the see,
 [681] That, for her syngyng is so clere,
 [682] Though we mermaydens clepe hem here
 [683] In English, as is oure usaunce,
 [684] Men clepe hem sereyns in Fraunce.
 [685] Ententif weren for to synge
 [686] These briddis, that nought unkunnynge
 [687] Were of her craft, and apprentys,
 [688] But of song sotil and wys.
 [689] And certis, whan I herde her song,
 [690] And saw the grene place among,
 [691] In herte I wex so wondir gay
 [692] That I was never erst, er that day,
 [693] So jolyf nor so wel bigoo,
 [694] Ne merye in herte, as I was thoo.
 [695] And than wist I and saw ful well
 [696] That Ydelnesse me served well,
 [697] That me putte in sich jolite.
 [698] Hir freend wel ought I for to be,
 [699] Sith she the dore of that gardyn
 [700] Hadde opened and me leten in.
 [701] From hennes forth hou that I wroughte,
 [702] I shal you tellen, as me thoughte.
 [703] First, whereof Myrthe served there,
 [704] And eke what folk there with hym were,
 [705] Withoute fable I wol discryve.
 [706] And of that gardyn eke as blyve
 [707] I wole you tellen aftir this
 [708] The faire fasoun all, ywys,
 [709] That wel wrought was for the nones.
 [710] I may not telle you all at ones,
 [711] But, as I may and can, I shall
 [712] By ordre tellen you it all.
 [713] Ful fair servise and eke ful swete
 [714] These briddis maden as they sete.
 [715] Layes of love, ful wel sownyng,
 [716] They songen in her jargonyng;
 [717] Summe high and summe eke lowe songe
 [718] Upon the braunches grene spronge.
 [719] The swetnesse of her melodye
 [720] Made al myn herte in reverye.
 [721] And whan that I hadde herd, I trowe,
 [722] These briddis syngyng on a rowe,
 [723] Than myght I not withholde me
 [724] That I ne wente inne for to see
 [725] Sir Myrthe, for my desiryng
 [726] Was hym to seen, over alle thyng,
 [727] His countenaunce and his manere
 [728] That sighte was to me ful dere.
 [729] Tho wente I forth on my right hond
 [730] Doun by a lytel path I fond
 [731] Of mentes full, and fenell grene,
 [732] And faste by, without wene,
 [733] Sir Myrthe I fond, and right anoon
 [734] Unto Sir Myrthe gan I goon,
 [735] There as he was hym to solace.
 [736] And with hym in that lusty place
 [737] So fair folk and so fresh had he
 [738] That whan I saw, I wondred me
 [739] Fro whennes siche folk myght come,
 [740] So faire they weren, alle and some;
 [741] For they were lyk, as to my sighte,
 [742] To angels that ben fethered brighte.
 [743] This folk, of which I telle you soo,
 [744] Upon a karole wenten thoo.
 [745] A lady karolede hem that hyghte
 [746] Gladnesse, [the] blissful and the lighte;
 [747] Wel coude she synge and lustyly,
 [748] Noon half so wel and semely,
 [749] And make in song sich refreynynge:
 [750] It sat hir wondir wel to synge.
 [751] Hir vois ful clere was and ful swete.
 [752] She was nought rude ne unmete
 [753] But couth. ynow of sich doyng
 [754] As longeth unto karolyng,
 [755] For she was wont in every place
 [756] To syngen first, folk to solace.
 [757] For syngyng moost she gaf hir to;
 [758] No craft had she so leef to do.
 [759] Tho myghtist thou karoles sen,
 [760] And folk daunce and mery ben,
 [761] And made many a fair tournyng
 [762] Upon the grene gras springyng.
 [763] There myghtist thou see these flowtours,
 [764] Mynstrales, and eke jogelours,
 [765] That wel to synge dide her peyne.
 [766] Somme songe songes of Loreyne,
 [767] For in Loreyn her notes bee
 [768] Full swetter than in this contre.
 [769] There was many a tymbestere,
 [770] And saillouris, that I dar wel swere
 [771] Couth. her craft ful parfitly.
 [772] The tymbres up ful sotilly
 [773] They caste and hente full ofte
 [774] Upon a fynger fair and softe,
 [775] That they failide never mo.
 [776] Ful fetys damyseles two,
 [777] Ryght yonge and full of semelyhede,
 [778] In kirtles and noon other wede,
 [779] And faire tressed every tresse,
 [780] Hadde Myrthe doon, for his noblesse,
 [781] Amydde the karole for to daunce;
 [782] But herof lieth no remembraunce,
 [783] Hou that they daunced queyntely.
 [784] That oon wolde come all pryvyly
 [785] Agayn that other, and whan they were
 [786] Togidre almost, they threwe yfere
 [787] Her mouthis so that thorough her play
 [788] It semed as they kiste alway
 [789] To dauncen well koude they the gise.
 [790] What shulde I more to you devyse?
 [791] Ne bede I never thennes go,
 [792] Whiles that I saw hem daunce so.
 [793] Upon the karoll wonder faste
 [794] I gan biholde, til atte laste
 [795] A lady gan me for to espie,
 [796] And she was cleped Curtesie,
 [797] The worshipfull, the debonaire
 [798] I pray to God evere falle hir faire!
 [799] Ful curteisly she called me:
 [800] "What do ye there, beau ser?" quod she,
 [801] "Come and, if it lyke you
 [802] To dauncen, dauncith with us now."
 [803] And I, withoute tariyng,
 [804] Wente into the karolyng.
 [805] I was abasshed never a dell,
 [806] But it to me liked right well
 [807] That Curtesie me cleped so
 [808] And bad me on the daunce go.
 [809] For if I hadde durst, certeyn
 [810] I wolde have karoled right fayn,
 [811] As man that was to daunce right blithe.
 [812] Thanne gan I loken ofte sithe
 [813] The shap, the bodies, and the cheres,
 [814] The countenaunce and the maneres
 [815] Of all the folk that daunced there,
 [816] And I shal telle what they were.
 [817] Ful fair was Myrthe, ful long and high;
 [818] A fairer man I nevere sigh.
 [819] As round as appil was his face,
 [820] Ful rody and whit in every place.
 [821] Fetys he was and wel beseye,
 [822] With metely mouth and yen greye;
 [823] His nose by mesure wrought ful right;
 [824] Crisp was his heer, and eek ful bright;
 [825] His shuldris of a large brede,
 [826] And smalish in the girdilstede.
 [827] He semed lyk a portreiture,
 [828] So noble he was of his stature,
 [829] So fair, so joly, and so fetys,
 [830] With lymes wrought at poynt devys,
 [831] Delyver, smert, and of gret myght;
 [832] Ne sawe thou nevere man so lyght.
 [833] Of berd unnethe hadde he nothyng,
 [834] For it was in the firste spryng.
 [835] Ful yong he was, and mery of thought,
 [836] And in samet, with briddis wrought,
 [837] And with gold beten ful fetysly,
 [838] His body was clad ful richely.
 [839] Wrought was his robe in straunge gise,
 [840] And al toslytered for queyntise
 [841] In many a place, lowe and hie.
 [842] And shod he was with gret maistrie,
 [843] With shoon decoped, and with laas.
 [844] By druery and by solas
 [845] His leef a rosyn chapelet
 [846] Hadde mad, and on his heed it set.
 [847] And wite ye who was his leef?
 [848] Dame Gladnesse there was hym so leef,
 [849] That syngith so wel with glad courage,
 [850] That from she was twelve yeer of age
 [851] She of hir love graunt hym made.
 [852] Sir Mirthe hir by the fynger hadde
 [853] Daunsyng, and she hym also;
 [854] Gret love was atwixe hem two.
 [855] Bothe were they faire and bright of hewe.
 [856] She semed lyk a rose newe
 [857] Of colour, and hir flesh so tendre
 [858] That with a brere smale and slendre
 [859] Men myght it cleve, I dar wel seyn.
 [860] Hir forheed, frounceles al pleyn;
 [861] Bente were hir browis two,
 [862] Hir yen greye and glad also,
 [863] That laugheden ay in hir semblaunt
 [864] First or the mouth, by covenaunt.
 [865] I not what of hir nose descryve,
 [866] So fair hath no womman alyve.
 [867] Hir heer was yelowe and clere shynyng;
 [868] I wot no lady so likyng.
 [869] Of orfrays fresh was hir gerland;
 [870] I, which seyen have a thousand,
 [871] Saugh never, ywys, no gerlond yitt
 [872] So wel wrought of silk as it.
 [873] And in an overgilt samit
 [874] Clad she was, by gret delit,
 [875] Of which hir leef a robe werde
 [876] The myrier she in hir herte ferde.
 [877] And next hir wente, on hir other side,
 [878] The God of Love that can devyde
 [879] Love, and as hym likith it be.
 [880] But he can cherles daunten, he,
 [881] And maken folkis pride fallen;
 [882] And he can wel these lordis thrallen,
 [883] And ladyes putt at lowe degre,
 [884] Whan he may hem to p[r]oude see.
 [885] This God of Love of his fasoun
 [886] Was lyk no knave ne quystroun;
 [887] His beaute gretly was to pryse.
 [888] But of his robe to devise
 [889] I drede encombred for to be;
 [890] For nought clad in silk was he,
 [891] But all in floures and in flourettes,
 [893] And with losenges and scochouns,
 [894] With briddes, lybardes, and lyouns,
 [895] And other beestis wrought ful well.
 [896] His garnement was everydell
 [897] Portreied and wrought with floures,
 [898] By dyvers medlyng of coloures.
 [899] Floures there were of many gise
 [900] Sett by compas in assise.
 [901] Ther lakkide no flour, to my dom,
 [902] Ne nought so mych as flour of brom,
 [903] Ne violete, ne eke pervynke,
 [904] Ne flour noon that man can on thynke;
 [905] And many a rose-leef ful long
 [906] Was entermedled theramong.
 [907] And also on his heed was set
 [908] Of roses reed a chapelett,
 [909] But nyghtyngales, a ful gret route,
 [910] That flyen over his heed aboute,
 [911] The leeves felden as they flyen.
 [912] And he was all with briddes wryen,
 [913] With popynjay, with nyghtyngale,
 [914] With chalaundre, and with wodewale,
 [915] With fynch, with lark, and with archaungell.
 [916] He semede as he were an aungell
 [917] That doun were comen fro hevene cler.
 [918] Love hadde with hym a bacheler
 [919] That he made alweyes with hym be;
 [920] Swete-Lokyng cleped was he.
 [921] This bacheler stod biholdyng
 [922] The daunce, and in his hond holdyng
 [923] Turke bowes two had he.
 [924] That oon of hem was of a tree
 [925] That bereth a fruyt of savour wykke;
 [926] Ful crokid was that foule stikke,
 [927] And knotty here and there also,
 [928] And blak as bery or ony slo.
 [929] That other bowe was of a plante
 [930] Withoute wem, I dar warante,
 [931] Ful evene and by proporcioun
 [932] Treitys and long, of ful good fasoun.
 [933] And it was peynted wel and thwyten,
 [934] And overal diapred and writen
 [935] With ladyes and with bacheleris,
 [936] Ful lyghtsom and glad of cheris.
 [937] These bowes two held Swete-Lokyng,
 [938] That semede lyk no gadelyng.
 [939] And ten brode arowis hild he there,
 [940] Of which fyve in his right hond were.
 [941] But they were shaven wel and dight,
 [942] Nokked and fethered right,
 [943] And all they were with gold bygoon,
 [944] And stronge poynted everychoon,
 [945] And sharpe for to kerven well.
 [946] But iren was ther noon ne steell,
 [947] For al was gold, men myght it see,
 [948] Out-take the fetheres and the tree.
 [949] The swiftest of these arowis fyve
 [950] Out of a bowe for to dryve,
 [951] And best fethered for to flee,
 [952] And fairest eke, was clepid Beaute.
 [953] That other arowe, that hurteth lesse,
 [954] Was clepid, as I trowe, Symplesse.
 [955] The thridde cleped was Fraunchise,
 [956] That fethred was in noble wise
 [957] With valour and with curtesye.
 [958] The fourthe was cleped Compaignye,
 [959] That hevy for to sheten ys.
 [960] But whoso shetith right, ywys,
 [961] May therwith doon gret harm and wo.
 [962] The fifte of these and laste also,
 [963] Faire-Semblaunt men that arowe calle,
 [964] The leeste grevous of hem alle,
 [965] Yit can it make a ful gret wounde.
 [966] But he may hope his soris sounde,
 [967] That hurt is with that arowe, ywys.
 [968] His wo the bet bistowed is,
 [969] For he may sonner have gladnesse
 [970] His langour oughte be the lesse.
 [971] Five arowis were of other gise,
 [972] That ben ful foule to devyse,
 [973] For shaft and ende, soth for to telle,
 [974] Were also blak as fend in helle.
 [975] The first of hem is called Pride.
 [976] That other arowe next hym biside,
 [977] It was cleped Vylanye;
 [978] That arowe was al with felonye
 [979] Envenymed, and with spitous blame.
 [980] The thridde of hem was cleped Shame.
 [981] The fourthe Wanhope cleped is.
 [982] The fifte, the Newe-Thought, ywys.
 [983] These arowis that I speke of heere
 [984] Were alle fyve on oon maneere,
 [985] And alle were they resemblable.
 [986] To hem was wel sittyng and able
 [987] The foule croked bowe hidous,
 [988] That knotty was and al roynous.
 [989] That bowe semede wel to shete
 [990] These arowis fyve that ben unmete
 [991] And contrarye to that other fyve.
 [992] But though I telle not as blyve
 [993] Of her power ne of her myght,
 [994] Herafter shal I tellen right
 [995] The soothe and eke signyfiaunce,
 [996] As fer as I have remembraunce.
 [997] All shal be seid, I undirtake,
 [998] Er of this book an ende I make.
 [999] Now come I to my tale ageyn.
 [1000] But aldirfirst I wol you seyn
 [1001] The fasoun and the countenaunces
 [1002] Of all the folk that on the daunce is.
 [1003] The God of Love, jolyf and lyght,
 [1004] Ladde on his hond a lady bright,
 [1005] Of high prys and of gret degre.
 [1006] This lady called was Beaute,
 [1007] As an arowe, of which I tolde.
 [1008] Ful wel thewed was she holde,
 [1009] Ne she was derk ne broun, but bright,
 [1010] And clere as the mone lyght
 [1011] Ageyn whom all the sterres semen
 [1012] But smale candels, as we demen.
 [1013] Hir flesh was tendre as dew of flour,
 [1014] Hir chere was symple as byrde in bour,
 [1015] As whyt as lylye or rose in rys,
 [1016] Hir face, gentyl and tretys.
 [1017] Fetys she was, and smal to se;
 [1018] No wyndred browis hadde she,
 [1019] Ne popped hir, for it neded nought
 [1020] To wyndre hir or to peynte hir ought.
 [1021] Hir tresses yelowe and longe straughten,
 [1022] Unto hir helys doun they raughten.
 [1023] Hir nose, hir mouth, and eye, and cheke
 [1024] Wel wrought, and all the remenaunt eke.
 [1025] A ful gret savour and a swote
 [1026] Me toucheth in myn herte rote,
 [1027] As helpe me God, whan I remembre
 [1028] Of the fasoun of every membre.
 [1029] In world is noon so fair a wight,
 [1030] For yong she was, and hewed bright,
 [1031] Sore plesaunt, and fetys withall,
 [1032] Gente, and in hir myddill small.
 [1033] Biside Beaute yede Richesse,
 [1034] An high lady of gret noblesse,
 [1035] And gret of prys in every place.
 [1036] But whoso durste to hir trespace,
 [1037] Or til hir folk, in word or dede,
 [1038] He were full hardy, out of drede,
 [1039] For bothe she helpe and hyndre may.
 [1040] And that is nought of yisterday
 [1041] That riche folk have full gret myght
 [1042] To helpe and eke to greve a wyght.
 [1043] The beste and the grettest of valour
 [1044] Diden Rychesse ful gret honour,
 [1045] And besy weren hir to serve,
 [1046] For that they wolde hir love deserve:
 [1047] They cleped hir lady, gret and small.
 [1048] This wide world hir dredith all;
 [1049] This world is all in hir daunger.
 [1050] Hir court hath many a losenger,
 [1051] And many a traytour envyous,
 [1052] That ben ful besy and curyous
 [1053] For to dispreisen and to blame
 [1054] That best deserven love and name.
 [1055] Bifore the folk, hem to bigilen,
 [1056] These losengeris hem preyse and smylen,
 [1057] And thus the world with word anoynten;
 [1058] And aftirward they prikke and poynten
 [1059] The folk right to the bare boon,
 [1060] Bihynde her bak whan they ben goon,
 [1061] And foule abate the folkis prys.
 [1062] Ful many a worthy man and wys,
 [1063] An hundred, have [they] do to dye.
 [1064] These losengers thorough flaterye
 [1065] Have made folk ful straunge be,
 [1066] There hem oughte be pryve.
 [1067] Wel yvel mote they thryve and thee,
 [1068] And yvel aryved mote they be,
 [1069] These losengers, ful of envye!
 [1070] No good man loveth her companye.
 [1071] Richesse a robe of purpur on hadde
 [1072] Ne trowe not that I lye or madde,
 [1073] For in this world is noon it lyche,
 [1074] Ne by a thousand deell so riche,
 [1075] Ne noon so fair; for it ful well
 [1076] With orfrays leyd was everydeell,
 [1077] And portraied in the ribanynges
 [1078] Of dukes storyes, and of kynges,
 [1079] And with a bend of gold tasseled,
 [1080] And knoppis fyne of gold ameled.
 [1081] Aboute hir nekke of gentyl entayle
 [1082] Was shet the riche chevesaile,
 [1083] In which ther was full gret plente
 [1084] Of stones clere and bright to see.
 [1085] Rychesse a girdell hadde upon,
 [1086] The bokel of it was of a stoon
 [1087] Of vertu gret and mochel of myght,
 [1088] For whoso bar the stoon so bright,
 [1089] Of venym durst hym nothing doute,
 [1090] While he the stoon hadde hym aboute.
 [1091] That stoon was gretly for to love,
 [1092] And tyl a riche mannes byhove
 [1093] Worth all the gold in Rome and Frise.
 [1094] The mourdaunt wrought in noble wise
 [1095] Was of a stoon full precious,
 [1096] That was so fyn and vertuous
 [1097] That hol a man it koude make
 [1098] Of palasie and toth-ake.
 [1099] And yit the stoon hadde such a grace
 [1100] That he was siker in every place,
 [1101] All thilke day, not blynd to ben,
 [1102] That fastyng myghte that stoon seen.
 [1103] The barres were of gold ful fyn
 [1104] Upon a tyssu of satyn,
 [1105] Full hevy, gret, and nothyng lyght;
 [1106] In everich was a besaunt-wight.
 [1107] Upon the tresses of Richesse
 [1108] Was sette a cercle, for noblesse,
 [1109] Of brend gold that full lyghte shoon;
 [1110] So fair, trowe I, was never noon.
 [1111] But he were kunnyng, for the nonys,
 [1112] That koude devyse all the stonys
 [1113] That in that cercle shewen clere.
 [1114] It is a wondir thing to here,
 [1115] For no man koude preyse or gesse
 [1116] Of hem the valewe or richesse.
 [1117] Rubyes there were, saphires, jagounces,
 [1118] And emeraudes, more than two ounces,
 [1119] But all byfore, ful sotilly,
 [1120] A fyn charboncle set saugh I.
 [1121] The stoon so clere was and so bright
 [1122] That, also soone as it was nyght,
 [1123] Men myghte seen to go, for nede,
 [1124] A myle or two in lengthe and brede.
 [1125] Sich lyght sprang out of the ston
 [1126] That Richesse wondir brighte shon,
 [1127] Bothe hir heed and all hir face,
 [1128] And eke aboute hir al the place.
 [1129] Dame Richesse on hir hond gan lede
 [1130] A yong man ful of semelyhede,
 [1131] That she best loved of ony thing.
 [1132] His lust was mych in housholding.
 [1133] In clothyng was he ful fetys,
 [1134] And loved well to have hors of prys.
 [1135] He wende to have reproved be
 [1136] Of theft or moordre if that he
 [1137] Hadde in his stable ony hakeney.
 [1138] And therfore he desired ay
 [1139] To be aqueynted with Richesse,
 [1140] For all his purpos, as I gesse,
 [1141] Was forto make gret dispense,
 [1142] Withoute wernyng or diffense.
 [1143] And Richesse myght it wel sustene,
 [1144] And hir dispence well mayntene,
 [1145] And hym alwey sich plente sende
 [1146] Of gold and silver for to spende
 [1147] Withoute lakking or daunger,
 [1148] As it were poured in a garner.
 [1149] And after on the daunce wente
 [1150] Largesse, that settith al hir entente
 [1151] For to be honourable and free.
 [1152] Of Alexandres kyn was she.
 [1153] Hir most joye was, ywys,
 [1154] Whan that she yaf and seide, "Have this."
 [1155] Not Avarice, the foule caytyf,
 [1156] Was half to gripe so ententyf,
 [1157] As Largesse is to yeve and spende;
 [1158] And God ynough alwey hir sende,
 [1159] So that the more she yaf awey
 [1160] The more, ywys, she hadde alwey.
 [1161] Gret loos hath Largesse and gret pris,
 [1162] For bothe [wys] folk and unwys
 [1163] Were hooly to hir baundon brought,
 [1164] So wel with yiftes hath she wrought.
 [1165] And if she hadde an enemy,
 [1166] I trowe that she coude tristily
 [1167] Make hym full soone hir freend to be,
 [1168] So large of yift and free was she.
 [1169] Therfore she stod in love and grace
 [1170] Of riche and pover in every place.
 [1171] A full gret fool is he, ywys,
 [1172] That bothe riche and nygard is.
 [1173] A lord may have no maner vice
 [1174] That greveth more than avarice,
 [1175] For nygart never with strengthe of hond
 [1176] May wynne gret lordship or lond,
 [1177] For freendis all to fewe hath he
 [1178] To doon his will perfourmed be.
 [1179] And whoso wole have freendis heere,
 [1180] He may not holde his tresour deere.
 [1181] For by ensample I telle this:
 [1182] Right as an adamaunt, iwys,
 [1183] Can drawen to hym sotylly
 [1184] The iren that is leid therby,
 [1185] So drawith folkes hertis, ywis,
 [1186] Silver and gold that yeven is.
 [1187] Largesse hadde on a robe fresh
 [1188] Of riche purpur Sarsynesh.
 [1189] Wel fourmed was hir face and cleer,
 [1190] And opened hadde she hir coler,
 [1191] For she right there hadde in present
 [1192] Unto a lady maad present
 [1193] Of a gold broche, ful wel wrought.
 [1194] And certys, it myssat hir nought,
 [1195] For thorough hir smokke, wrought with silk,
 [1196] The flesh was seen as whit as mylk.
 [1197] Largesse, that worthy was and wys,
 [1198] Hild by the hond a knyght of prys,
 [1199] Was sib to Artour of Britaigne,
 [1200] And that was he that bar the ensaigne
 [1201] Of worship and the gounfanoun.
 [1202] And yit he is of sich renoun
 [1203] That men of hym seye faire thynges
 [1204] Byfore barouns, erles, and kynges.
 [1205] This knyght was comen all newely
 [1206] Fro tourneiynge faste by;
 [1207] There hadde he don gret chyvalrie
 [1208] Thorough his vertu and his maistrie;
 [1209] And for the love of his lemman
 [1210] He caste doun many a doughty man.
 [1211] And next hym daunced dame Fraunchise,
 [1212] Arayed in full noble gyse.
 [1213] She was not broun ne dun of hewe,
 [1214] But whit as snow fallen newe.
 [1215] Hir nose was wrought at poynt devys,
 [1216] For it was gentyl and tretys,
 [1217] With eyen gladde, and browes bente.
 [1218] Hir heer doun to hir helis wente,
 [1219] And she was symple as dowve on tree.
 [1220] Ful debonaire of herte was she.
 [1221] She durst never seyn ne do
 [1222] But that that hir longed to;
 [1223] And if a man were in distresse,
 [1224] And for hir love in hevynesse,
 [1225] Hir herte wolde have full gret pite,
 [1226] She was so amiable and free.
 [1227] For were a man for hir bistad,
 [1228] She wolde ben right sore adrad
 [1229] That she dide over-gret outrage,
 [1230] But she hym holpe his harm to aswage;
 [1231] Hir thought it elles a vylanye.
 [1232] And she hadde on a sukkenye,
 [1233] That not of hempene heerdis was
 [1234] So fair was noon in all Arras.
 [1235] Lord, it was ridled fetysly!
 [1236] Ther nas [nat] a poynt, trewely,
 [1237] That it nas in his right assise.
 [1238] Full wel clothed was Fraunchise,
 [1239] For ther is no cloth sittith bet
 [1240] On damysell than doth roket.
 [1241] A womman wel more fetys is
 [1242] In roket than in cote, ywis.
 [1243] The whyte roket, rydled faire,
 [1244] Bitokeneth that full debonaire
 [1245] And swete was she that it ber.
 [1246] Bi hir daunced a bacheler.
 [1247] I can not telle you what he highte,
 [1248] But faire he was and of good highte,
 [1249] All hadde he be, I sey no more,
 [1250] The lordis sone of Wyndesore.
 [1251] And next that daunced Curtesye,
 [1252] That preised was of lowe and hye,
 [1253] For neither proud ne fool was she.
 [1254] She for to daunce called me
 [1255] (I pray God yeve hir right good grace!),
 [1256] Whanne I com first into the place.
 [1257] She was not nyce ne outrageous,
 [1258] But wys and war and vertuous,
 [1259] Of fair speche and of fair answere.
 [1260] Was never wight mysseid of here;
 [1261] She bar rancour to no wight.
 [1262] Clere broun she was, and therto bright
 [1263] Of face, of body avenaunt
 [1264] I wot no lady so plesaunt.
 [1265] She [were] worthy for to bene
 [1266] An emperesse or crowned quene.
 [1267] And by hir wente a knyght dauncyng,
 [1268] That worthy was and wel spekyng,
 [1269] And ful wel koude he don honour.
 [1270] The knyght was fair and styf in stour,
 [1271] And in armure a semely man,
 [1272] And wel biloved of his lemman.
 [1273] Faire Idilnesse thanne saugh I,
 [1274] That alwey was me faste by.
 [1275] Of hir have I, withoute fayle,
 [1276] Told yow the shap and apparayle;
 [1277] For (as I seide) loo, that was she
 [1278] That dide to me so gret bounte
 [1279] That she the gate of the gardyn
 [1280] Undide and let me passen in.
 [1281] And after daunced, as I gesse,
 [1282] [Youthe], fulfilled of lustynesse,
 [1283] That nas not yit twelve yeer of age,
 [1284] With herte wylde and thought volage.
 [1285] Nyce she was, but she ne mente
 [1286] Noon harm ne slight in hir entente,
 [1287] But oonly lust and jolyte;
 [1288] For yonge folk, wel witen ye,
 [1289] Have lytel thought but on her play.
 [1290] Hir lemman was biside alway
 [1291] In sich a gise that he hir kyste
 [1292] At alle tymes that hym lyste,
 [1293] That all the daunce myght it see.
 [1294] They make no force of pryvete,
 [1295] For who spake of hem yvel or well,
 [1296] They were ashamed never a dell,
 [1297] But men myght seen hem kisse there
 [1298] As it two yonge dowves were.
 [1299] For yong was thilke bacheler;
 [1300] Of beaute wot I noon his per.
 [1301] And he was right of sich an age
 [1302] As Youthe his leef, and sich corage.
 [1303] The lusty folk thus daunced there,
 [1304] And also other that with hem were,
 [1305] That weren alle of her meyne;
 [1306] Ful hende folk and wys and free,
 [1307] And folk of faire port, truely,
 [1308] There weren alle comunly.
 [1309] Whanne I hadde seen the countenaunces
 [1310] Of hem that ladden thus these daunces,
 [1311] Thanne hadde I will to gon and see
 [1312] The gardyn that so lyked me,
 [1313] And loken on these faire loreres,
 [1314] On pyntrees, cedres, and oliveris.
 [1315] The daunces thanne eended were,
 [1316] For many of them that daunced there
 [1317] Were with her loves went awey
 [1318] Undir the trees to have her pley.
 [1319] A, Lord, they lyved lustyly!
 [1320] A gret fool were he, sikirly,
 [1321] That nolde, his thankes, such lyf lede!
 [1322] For this dar I seyn, oute of drede,
 [1323] That whoso myghte so wel fare,
 [1324] For better lyf durst hym not care;
 [1325] For ther nys so good paradys
 [1326] As to have a love at his devys.
 [1327] Oute of that place wente I thoo,
 [1328] And in that gardyn gan I goo,
 [1329] Pleyyng along full meryly.
 [1330] The God of Love full hastely
 [1331] Unto hym Swete-Lokyng clepte;
 [1332] No lenger wolde he that he kepte
 [1333] His bowe of gold, that shoon so bright.
 [1334] He bad hym bende [it] anoon ryght,
 [1335] And he full soone [it] sette an-ende,
 [1336] And at a braid he gan it bende,
 [1337] And tok hym of his arowes fyve,
 [1338] Full sharp and redy for to dryve.
 [1339] Now God, that sittith in mageste,
 [1340] Fro deedly woundes he kepe me,
 [1341] If so be that he hadde me shette!
 [1342] For if I with his arowe mette,
 [1343] It hadde me greved sore, iwys.
 [1344] But I, that nothyng wist of this,
 [1345] Wente up and doun full many a wey,
 [1346] And he me folwed fast alwey,
 [1347] But nowhere wold I reste me,
 [1348] Till I hadde in all the gardyn be.
 [1349] The gardyn was, by mesuryng,
 [1350] Right evene and square in compassing:
 [1351] It as long was as it was large.
 [1352] Of fruyt hadde every tree his charge,
 [1353] But it were any hidous tree,
 [1354] Of which ther were two or three.
 [1355] There were, and that wot I full well,
 [1356] Of pome-garnettys a full gret dell;
 [1357] That is a fruyt full well to lyke,
 [1358] Namely to folk whanne they ben sike.
 [1359] And trees there were, gret foisoun,
 [1360] That baren notes in her sesoun,
 [1361] Such as men notemygges calle,
 [1362] That swote of savour ben withalle.
 [1363] And alemandres gret plente,
 [1364] Fyges, and many a date-tree
 [1365] There wexen, if men hadde nede,
 [1366] Thorough the gardyn in length and brede.
 [1367] Ther was eke wexyng many a spice,
 [1368] As clowe-gelofre and lycorice,
 [1369] Gyngevre and greyn de parys,
 [1370] Canell and setewale of prys,
 [1371] And many a spice delitable
 [1372] To eten whan men rise fro table.
 [1373] And many homly trees ther were
 [1374] That peches, coynes, and apples beere,
 [1375] Medlers, plowmes, perys, chesteynes,
 [1376] Cherys, of which many oon fayn is,
 [1377] Notes, aleys, and bolas,
 [1378] That for to seen it was solas.
 [1379] With many high lorer and pyn
 [1380] Was renged clene all that gardyn,
 [1381] With cipres and with olyveres,
 [1382] Of which that nygh no plente heere is.
 [1383] There were elmes grete and stronge,
 [1384] Maples, assh, ok, asp, planes longe,
 [1385] Fyn ew, popler, and lyndes faire,
 [1386] And othere trees full many a payre.
 [1387] What shulde I tel you more of it?
 [1388] There were so many trees yit,
 [1389] That I shulde al encombred be
 [1390] Er I had rekened every tree.
 [1391] These trees were set, that I devyse,
 [1392] Oon from another, in assyse,
 [1393] Fyve fadome or sixe, I trowe so;
 [1394] But they were hye and great also,
 [1395] And for to kepe out wel the sonne,
 [1396] The croppes were so thicke ronne,
 [1397] And every braunche in other knet
 [1398] And ful of grene leves set,
 [1399] That sonne myght there non discende,
 [1400] Lest [it] the tender grasses shende.
 [1401] There myght men does and roes se,
 [1402] And of squyrels ful great plente
 [1403] From bowe to bowe alway lepynge.
 [1404] Conies there were also playinge,
 [1405] That comyn out of her clapers,
 [1406] Of sondrie colours and maners,
 [1407] And maden many a tourneying
 [1408] Upon the fresshe grass spryngyng.
 [1409] In places saw I welles there,
 [1410] In whiche there no frogges were,
 [1411] And fayr in shadowe was every welle.
 [1412] But I ne can the nombre telle
 [1413] Of stremys smal that by devys
 [1414] Myrthe had don come through condys,
 [1415] Of whiche the water in rennyng
 [1416] Gan make a noyse ful lykyng.
 [1417] About the brinkes of these welles,
 [1418] And by the stremes overal elles,
 [1419] Sprang up the grass, as thicke set
 [1420] And softe as any veluet,
 [1421] On which men myght his lemman leye
 [1422] As on a fetherbed to pleye,
 [1423] For the erthe was ful softe and swete.
 [1424] Through moisture of the welle wete
 [1425] Sprong up the sote grene gras
 [1426] As fayre, as thicke, as myster was.
 [1427] But moche amended it the place
 [1428] That th' erthe was of such a grace
 [1429] That it of floures hath plente,
 [1430] That bothe in somer and wynter be.
 [1431] There sprang the vyolet al newe,
 [1432] And fressh pervynke, riche of hewe,
 [1433] And floures yelowe, white, and rede
 [1434] Such plente grew there never in mede.
 [1435] Ful gay was al the ground, and queynt,
 [1436] And poudred, as men had it peynt,
 [1437] With many a fressh and sondri flour,
 [1438] That casten up ful good savour.
 [1439] I wol nat longe holde you in fable
 [1440] Of al this garden dilectable.
 [1441] I mot my tonge stynten nede,
 [1442] For I ne may, withouten drede,
 [1443] Naught tellen you the beaute al,
 [1444] Ne half the bounte therewithal.
 [1445] I went on right hond and on left
 [1446] About the place; it was nat left,
 [1447] Tyl I had [in] al the garden ben,
 [1448] In the estres that men myghte sen.
 [1449] And thus while I wente in my play,
 [1450] The God of Love me folowed ay,
 [1451] Right as an hunter can abyde
 [1452] The beest, tyl he seeth his tyde
 [1453] To sheten at good mes to the der,
 [1454] Whan that hym nedeth go no ner.
 [1455] And so befyl, I rested me
 [1456] Besydes a wel, under a tree,
 [1457] Which tree in Fraunce men cal a pyn.
 [1458] But sithe the tyme of Kyng Pepyn,
 [1459] Ne grew there tree in mannes syghte
 [1460] So fayr, ne so wel woxe in highte
 [1461] In al that yard so high was non.
 [1462] And springyng in a marble ston
 [1463] Had Nature set, the sothe to telle,
 [1464] Under that pyn-tree a welle.
 [1465] And on the border, al withoute,
 [1466] Was written in the ston aboute,
 [1467] Letters smal that sayden thus,
 [1468] "Here starf the fayre Narcisus."
 [1469] Narcisus was a bacheler
 [1470] That Love had caught in his danger,
 [1471] And in his net gan hym so strayne,
 [1472] And dyd him so to wepe and playne,
 [1473] That nede him must his lyf forgo.
 [1474] For a fayr lady that hight Echo
 [1475] Him loved over any creature,
 [1476] And gan for hym such payne endure
 [1477] That on a tyme she him tolde
 [1478] That if he her loven nolde,
 [1479] That her behoved nedes dye;
 [1480] There laye non other remedye.
 [1481] But natheles for his beaute
 [1482] So feirs and daungerous was he
 [1483] That he nolde graunten hir askyng,
 [1484] For wepyng ne for fair praiyng.
 [1485] And whanne she herde hym werne [her] soo,
 [1486] She hadde in herte so gret woo,
 [1487] And took it in so gret dispit,
 [1488] That she, withoute more respit,
 [1489] Was deed anoon. But er she deide,
 [1490] Full pitously to God she preide
 [1491] That proude-hertid Narcisus,
 [1492] That was in love so daungerous,
 [1493] Myght on a day ben hampred so
 [1494] For love, and ben so hoot for woo,
 [1495] That never he myght to joye atteyne,
 [1496] And that he shulde feele in every veyne
 [1497] What sorowe trewe lovers maken,
 [1498] That ben so vilaynsly forsaken.
 [1499] This prayer was but resonable;
 [1500] Therfore God held it ferme and stable.
 [1501] For Narcisus, shortly to telle,
 [1502] By aventure com to that welle
 [1503] To reste hym in that shadowing
 [1504] A day whanne he com fro huntyng.
 [1505] This Narcisus hadde suffred paynes
 [1506] For rennyng alday in the playnes,
 [1507] And was for thurst in gret distresse
 [1508] Of heet and of his werynesse
 [1509] That hadde his breth almost bynomen.
 [1510] Whanne he was to that welle comen,
 [1511] That shadowid was with braunches grene,
 [1512] He thoughte of thilke water shene
 [1513] To drynke, and fresshe hym wel withalle.
 [1514] And doun on knees he gan to falle,
 [1515] And forth his heed and necke he straughte
 [1516] To drynken of that welle a draughte.
 [1517] And in the water anoon was seene
 [1518] His nose, his mouth, his yen sheene,
 [1519] And he therof was all abasshed.
 [1520] His owne shadowe had hym bytrasshed,
 [1521] For well wende he the forme see
 [1522] Of a child of gret beaute.
 [1523] Well kouth. Love hym wreke thoo
 [1524] Of daunger and of pride also,
 [1525] That Narcisus somtyme hym beer.
 [1526] He quytte hym well his guerdoun ther,
 [1527] For he musede so in the welle
 [1528] That, shortly all the sothe to telle,
 [1529] He lovede his owne shadowe soo
 [1530] That atte laste he starf for woo.
 [1531] For whanne he saugh that he his wille
 [1532] Myght in no maner wey fulfille,
 [1533] And that he was so faste caught
 [1534] That he hym kouth. comfort nought,
 [1535] He loste his wit right in that place,
 [1536] And diede withynne a lytel space.
 [1537] And thus his warisoun he took
 [1538] For the lady that he forsook.
 [1539] Ladyes, I preye ensample takith,
 [1540] Ye that ageyns youre love mistakith,
 [1541] For if her deth be yow to wite,
 [1542] God kan ful well youre while quyte.
 [1543] Whanne that this lettre of which I telle
 [1544] Hadde taught me that it was the welle
 [1545] Of Narcisus in his beaute,
 [1546] I gan anoon withdrawe me,
 [1547] Whanne it fel in my remembraunce
 [1548] That hym bitidde such myschaunce.
 [1549] But at the laste thanne thought I
 [1550] That scatheles, full sykerly,
 [1551] I myght unto the welle goo.
 [1552] Wherof shulde I abasshen soo?
 [1554] And doun I loutede for to see
 [1555] The clere water in the stoon,
 [1556] And eke the gravell, which that shoon
 [1557] Down in the botme as silver fyn,
 [1558] For of the well this is the fyn:
 [1559] In world is noon so cler of hewe.
 [1560] The water is evere fresh and newe,
 [1561] That welmeth up with wawis brighte
 [1562] The mountance of two fynger highte.
 [1563] Abouten it is gras spryngyng,
 [1564] For moiste so thikke and wel likyng
 [1565] That it ne may in wynter dye
 [1566] No more than may the see be drye.
 [1567] Down at the botme set saw I
 [1568] Two cristall stonys craftely
 [1569] In thilke freshe and faire welle.
 [1570] But o thing sothly dar I telle,
 [1571] That ye wole holde a gret mervayle
 [1572] Whanne it is told, withouten fayle.
 [1573] For whanne the sonne, cler in sighte,
 [1574] Cast in that well his bemys brighte,
 [1575] And that the heete descendid is,
 [1576] Thanne taketh the cristall stoon, ywis,
 [1577] Agayn the sonne an hundrid hewis,
 [1578] Blew, yelow, and red, that fresh and newe is.
 [1579] Yitt hath the merveilous cristall
 [1580] Such strengthe that the place overall,
 [1581] Bothe flour and tree and leves grene
 [1582] And all the yerd in it is seene.
 [1583] And for to don you to undirstonde,
 [1584] To make ensample wole I fonde.
 [1585] Ryght as a myrrour openly
 [1586] Shewith all thing that stondith therby,
 [1587] As well the colour as the figure,
 [1588] Withouten ony coverture,
 [1589] Right so the cristall stoon shynyng
 [1590] Withouten ony disseyvyng
 [1591] The estrees of the yerd accusith
 [1592] To hym that in the water musith.
 [1593] For evere, in which half that he be,
 [1594] He may well half the gardyn se,
 [1595] And if he turne, he may right well
 [1596] Sen the remenaunt everydell.
 [1597] For ther is noon so litil thyng
 [1598] So hid, ne closid with shittyng,
 [1599] That it ne is sene, as though it were
 [1600] Peyntid in the cristall there.
 [1601] This is the mirrour perilous
 [1602] In which the proude Narcisus
 [1603] Saw all his face fair and bright,
 [1604] That made hym sithe to ligge upright.
 [1605] For whoso loketh in that mirrour,
 [1606] Ther may nothyng ben his socour
 [1607] That he ne shall there sen somthyng
 [1608] That shal hym lede into lovyng.
 [1609] Full many worthy man hath it
 [1610] Blent, for folk of grettist wit
 [1611] Ben soone caught heere and awayted;
 [1612] Withouten respit ben they baited.
 [1613] Heere comth to folk of newe rage;
 [1614] Heere chaungith many wight corage;
 [1615] Heere lith no red ne wit therto;
 [1616] For Venus sone, daun Cupido,
 [1617] Hath sowen there of love the seed,
 [1618] That help ne lith there noon, ne red,
 [1619] So cerclith it the welle aboute.
 [1620] His gynnes hath he sette withoute,
 [1621] Ryght for to cacche in his panters
 [1622] These damoysels and bachelers.
 [1623] Love will noon other bridde[s] cacche,
 [1624] Though he sette either net or lacche.
 [1625] And for the seed that heere was sowen,
 [1626] This welle is clepid, as well is knowen,
 [1627] The Welle of Love, of verray right,
 [1628] Of which ther hath ful many a wight
 [1629] Spoken in bookis dyversely.
 [1630] But they shull never so verily
 [1631] Descripcioun of the welle heere,
 [1632] Ne eke the sothe of this matere,
 [1633] As ye shull, whanne I have undo
 [1634] The craft that hir bilongith too.
 [1635] Allway me liked for to dwelle
 [1636] To sen the cristall in the welle
 [1637] That shewide me full openly
 [1638] A thousand thinges faste by.
 [1639] But I may say, in sory houre
 [1640] Stode I to loken or to poure,
 [1641] For sithen [have] I sore siked.
 [1642] That mirrour hath me now entriked,
 [1643] But hadde I first knowen in my wit
 [1644] The vertu and [the] strengthe of it,
 [1645] I nolde not have mused there.
 [1646] Me hadde bet ben elliswhere,
 [1647] For in the snare I fell anoon
 [1648] That hath bitrasshed many oon.
 [1649] In thilke mirrour saw I tho,
 [1650] Among a thousand thinges mo,
 [1651] A roser chargid full of rosis,
 [1652] That with an hegge aboute enclos is.
 [1653] Tho had I sich lust and envie,
 [1654] That for Parys ne for Pavie
 [1655] Nolde I have left to goon and see
 [1656] There grettist hep of roses be.
 [1657] Whanne I was with this rage hent,
 [1658] That caught hath many a man and shent,
 [1659] Toward the roser gan I go;
 [1660] And whanne I was not fer therfro,
 [1661] The savour of the roses swote
 [1662] Me smot right to the herte-rote,
 [1663] As I hadde all enbawmed be.
 [1664] And if I ne hadde endouted me
 [1665] To have ben hatid or assailed,
 [1666] My thankis, wolde I not have failed
 [1667] To pulle a rose of all that route
 [1668] To beren in myn hond aboute
 [1669] And smellen to it where I wente;
 [1670] But ever I dredde me to repente,
 [1671] And lest it grevede or forthoughte
 [1672] The lord that thilke gardyn wroughte.
 [1673] Of roses ther were gret wone,
 [1674] So faire waxe never in rone.
 [1675] Of knoppes clos some sawe I there;
 [1676] And some wel beter woxen were;
 [1677] And some ther ben of other moysoun
 [1678] That drowe nygh to her sesoun
 [1679] And spedde hem faste for to sprede.
 [1680] I love well sich roses rede,
 [1681] For brode roses and open also
 [1682] Ben passed in a day or two,
 [1683] But knoppes wille [al] freshe be
 [1684] Two dayes, atte leest, or thre.
 [1685] The knoppes gretly liked me,
 [1686] For fairer may ther no man se.
 [1687] Whoso myght have oon of alle,
 [1688] It ought hym ben full lief withalle.
 [1689] Might I [a] gerlond of hem geten,
 [1690] For no richesse I wolde it leten.
 [1691] Among the knoppes I ches oon
 [1692] So fair that of the remenaunt noon
 [1693] Ne preise I half so well as it,
 [1694] Whanne I avise it in my wit.
 [1695] For it so well was enlumyned
 [1696] With colour reed, [and] as well fyned
 [1697] As nature couth. it make faire.
 [1698] And it hath leves wel foure paire,
 [1699] That Kynde hath sett, thorough his knowyng,
 [1700] Aboute the rede roses spryngyng.
 [1701] The stalke was as rishe right,
 [1702] And theron stod the knoppe upright
 [1703] That it ne bowide upon no side.
 [1704] The swote smelle sprong so wide
 [1705] That it dide all the place aboute

      
The Canterbury Tales and Other Works of Chaucer (Middle English), by Geoffery Chaucer, [14th cent.], at sacred-texts.com

 

The Romaunt of the Rose

 

Fragment B

 [1706] Whanne I hadde smelled the savour swote,
 [1707] No will hadde I fro thens yit goo,
 [1708] Bot somdell neer it wente I thoo,
 [1709] To take it, but myn hond, for drede,
 [1710] Ne dorste I to the Rose bede
 [1711] For thesteles sharpe, of many maneres,
 [1712] Netles, thornes, and hokede breres,
 [1713] For mych they distourbled me,
 [1714] For sore I dradde to harmed be.
 [1715] The God of Love, with bowe bent,
 [1716] That all day set hadde his talent
 [1717] To pursuen and to spien me,
 [1718] Was stondyng by a fige-tree.
 [1719] And whanne he saw hou that I
 [1720] Hadde chosen so ententifly
 [1721] The botoun, more unto my pay
 [1722] Than ony other that I say,
 [1723] He tok an arowe full sharply whet,
 [1724] And in his bowe whanne it was set,
 [1725] He streight up to his ere drough
 [1726] The stronge bowe that was so tough,
 [1727] And shet att me so wondir smerte
 [1728] That thorough myn ye unto myn herte
 [1729] The takel smot, and depe it wente.
 [1730] And therwithall such cold me hente
 [1731] That under clothes warme and softe
 [1732] Sithen that day I have chevered ofte.
 [1733] Whanne I was hurt thus, in [a] stounde
 [1734] I felle doun plat unto the grounde.
 [1735] Myn herte failed and feynted ay,
 [1736] And longe tyme a-swoone I lay.
 [1737] But whanne I come out of swonyng,
 [1738] And hadde witt and my felyng,
 [1739] I was all maat, and wende full well
 [1740] Of blood have loren a full gret dell.
 [1741] But certes, the arowe that in me stod
 [1742] Of me ne drew no drope of blod,
 [1743] For-why I found my wounde all dreie.
 [1744] Thanne tok I with myn hondis tweie
 [1745] The arowe, and ful fast out it plighte,
 [1746] And in the pullyng sore I sighte.
 [1747] So at the last the shaft of tree
 [1748] I drough out with the fethers thre.
 [1749] But yet the hokede heed, ywis,
 [1750] The which [that] Beaute callid is,
 [1751] Gan so depe in myn herte passe,
 [1752] That I it myghte nought arace;
 [1753] But in myn herte still it stod,
 [1754] Al bledde I not a drope of blod.
 [1755] I was bothe anguyssous and trouble
 [1756] For the perill that I saw double:
 [1757] I nyste what to seye or do,
 [1758] Ne gete a leche my woundis to;
 [1759] For neithir thurgh gras ne rote
 [1760] Ne hadde I help of hope ne bote.
 [1761] But to the botoun evermo
 [1762] Myn herte drew, for all my wo;
 [1763] My thought was in noon other thing,
 [1764] For hadde it ben in my kepyng,
 [1765] It wolde have brought my lyf agayn.
 [1766] For certis evenly, I dar wel seyn,
 [1767] The sight oonly and the savour
 [1768] Alegged mych of my langour.
 [1769] Thanne gan I for to drawe me
 [1770] Toward the botoun faire to se;
 [1771] And Love hadde gete hym, in a throwe,
 [1772] Another arowe into his bowe,
 [1773] And for to shete gan hym dresse.
 [1774] The arowis name was Symplesse,
 [1775] And whanne that Love gan nygh me nere,
 [1776] He drow it up, withouten were,
 [1777] And shet at me with all his myght,
 [1778] So that this arowe anoon-right
 [1779] Thourghout [myn] eigh, as it was founde,
 [1780] Into myn herte hath maad a wounde.
 [1781] Thanne I anoon dide al my craft
 [1782] For to drawen out the shaft,
 [1783] And therwithall I sighed eft.
 [1784] But in myn herte the heed was left,
 [1785] Which ay encreside my desir
 [1786] Unto the botoun drawe ner;
 [1787] And evermo that me was woo,
 [1788] The more desir hadde I to goo
 [1789] Unto the roser, where that grew
 [1790] The freysshe botoun so bright of hew.
 [1791] Betir me were to have laten be,
 [1792] But it bihovede nedes me
 [1793] To don right as myn herte bad,
 [1794] For evere the body must be lad
 [1795] Aftir the herte, in wele and woo;
 [1796] Of force togidre they must goo.
 [1797] But never this archer wolde feyne
 [1798] To shete at me with all his peyne,
 [1799] And for to make me to hym mete.
 [1800] The thridde arowe he gan to shete,
 [1801] Whanne best his tyme he myght espie,
 [1802] The which was named Curtesie.
 [1803] Into myn herte it dide avale;
 [1804] A-swoone I fell bothe deed and pale.
 [1805] Long tyme I lay and stired nought,
 [1806] Till I abraide out of my thought,
 [1807] And faste thanne I avysede me
 [1808] To drawe out the shaft of tree.
 [1809] But evere the heed was left bihynde,
 [1810] For ought I couth. pulle or wynde,
 [1811] So sore it stikid whanne I was hit,
 [1812] That by no craft I myght it flit.
 [1813] But anguyssous and full of thought,
 [1814] I felte sich woo my wounde ay wrought,
 [1815] That somonede me alway to goo
 [1816] Toward the Rose that plesede me soo,
 [1817] But I ne durste in no maner,
 [1818] Bicause the archer was so ner.
 [1819] "For evermore gladly," as I rede,
 [1820] "Brent child of fir hath myche drede."
 [1821] And, certis yit, for al my peyne,
 [1822] Though that I sigh yit arwis reyne,
 [1823] And grounde quarels sharpe of steell,
 [1824] Ne for no payne that I myght feell,
 [1825] Yit myght I not mysilf witholde
 [1826] The faire roser to biholde,
 [1827] For Love me yaf sich hardement
 [1828] For to fulfille his comaundement.
 [1829] Upon my fete I ros up than,
 [1830] Feble as a forwoundid man,
 [1831] And forth to gon [my] myght I sette,
 [1832] And for the archer nolde I lette.
 [1833] Toward the roser fast I drow,
 [1834] But thornes sharpe mo than ynow
 [1835] Ther were, and also thisteles thikke,
 [1836] And breres, brymme for to prikke,
 [1837] That I ne myghte gete grace
 [1838] The rowe thornes for to passe,
 [1839] To sen the roses fresshe of hewe.
 [1840] I must abide, though it me rewe,
 [1841] The hegge aboute so thikke was,
 [1842] That closide the roses in compas.
 [1843] But o thing lyked me right well:
 [1844] I was so nygh, I myghte fel
 [1845] Of the botoun the swote odour,
 [1846] And also se the fresshe colour,
 [1847] And that right gretly liked me,
 [1848] That I so neer myghte it se.
 [1849] Sich joie anoon therof hadde I
 [1850] That I forgat my malady.
 [1851] To sen I hadde sich delit,
 [1852] Of sorwe and angre I was al quyt,
 [1853] And of my woundes that I hadde thore;
 [1854] For nothing liken me myght more
 [1855] Than dwellen by the roser ay,
 [1856] And thennes never to passe away.
 [1857] But whanne a while I hadde be thar,
 [1858] The God of Love, which al toshar
 [1859] Myn herte with his arwis kene,
 [1860] Castith hym to yeve me woundis grene.
 [1861] He shet at me full hastily
 [1862] An arwe named Company,
 [1863] The whiche takell is full able
 [1864] To make these ladies merciable.
 [1865] Thanne I anoon gan chaungen hewe
 [1866] For grevaunce of my wounde newe,
 [1867] That I agayn fell in swonyng
 [1868] And sighede sore in compleynyng.
 [1869] Soore I compleyned that my sore
 [1870] On me gan greven more and more.
 [1871] I hadde noon hope of allegeaunce;
 [1872] So nygh I drow to desperaunce,
 [1873] I roughte of deth ne of lyf,
 [1874] Wheder that Love wolde me dryf.
 [1875] Yf me a martir wolde he make,
 [1876] I myght his power nought forsake.
 [1877] And while for anger thus I wok,
 [1878] The God of Love an arowe tok --
 [1879] Ful sharp it was and pugnaunt --
 [1880] And it was callid Faire-Semblaunt,
 [1881] The which in no wise wole consente
 [1882] That ony lover hym repente
 [1883] To serve his love with herte and alle,
 [1884] For ony perill that may bifalle.
 [1885] But though this arwe was kene grounde
 [1886] As ony rasour that is founde,
 [1887] To kutte and kerve, at the poynt
 [1888] The God of Love it hadde anoynt
 [1889] With a precious oynement,
 [1890] Somdell to yeve aleggement
 [1891] Upon the woundes that he had
 [1893] To helpe her sores, and to cure,
 [1894] And that they may the bet endure.
 [1895] But yit this arwe, withoute more,
 [1896] Made in myn herte a large sore,
 [1897] That in full gret peyne I abod.
 [1898] But ay the oynement wente abrod;
 [1899] Thourghout my woundes large and wide
 [1900] It spredde aboute in every side,
 [1901] Thorough whos vertu and whos myght
 [1902] Myn herte joyfull was and light.
 [1903] I hadde ben deed and al toshent,
 [1904] But for the precious oynement.
 [1905] The shaft I drow out of the arwe,
 [1906] Rokyng for wo right wondir narwe;
 [1907] But the heed, which made me smerte,
 [1908] Lefte bihynde in myn herte
 [1909] With other foure, I dar wel say,
 [1910] That never wole be take away.
 [1911] But the oynement halp me wel,
 [1912] And yit sich sorwe dide I fel
 [1913] That al day I chaunged hewe
 [1914] Of my woundes fresshe and newe,
 [1915] As men myght se in my visage.
 [1916] The arwis were so full of rage,
 [1917] So variaunt of diversitee,
 [1918] That men in everich myghte se
 [1919] Bothe gret anoy and eke swetnesse,
 [1920] And joie meynt with bittirnesse.
 [1921] Now were they esy, now were they wod;
 [1922] In hem I felte bothe harm and good;
 [1923] Now sore without alleggement,
 [1924] Now softenyng with oynement;
 [1925] It softnede heere and prikkith there:
 [1926] Thus ese and anger togidre were.
 [1927] The God of Love delyverly
 [1928] Com lepande to me hastily,
 [1929] And seide to me in gret rape,
 [1930] "Yeld thee, for thou may not escape!
 [1931] May no defence availe thee heer;
 [1932] Therfore I rede make no daunger.
 [1933] If thou wolt yelde thee hastily,
 [1934] Thou shalt rather have mercy.
 [1935] He is a fool in sikernesse,
 [1936] That with daunger or stoutnesse
 [1937] Rebellith there that he shulde plese;
 [1938] In sich folye is litel ese.
 [1939] Be meke where thou must nedis bow;
 [1940] To stryve ageyn is nought thi prow.
 [1941] Com at oones, and have ydoo,
 [1942] For I wol that it be soo.
 [1943] Thanne yeld thee heere debonairly."
 [1944] And I answerid ful hombly,
 [1945] "Gladly, sir, at youre biddyng,
 [1946] I wole me yelde in alle thyng.
 [1947] To youre servyse I wol me take,
 [1948] For God defende that I shulde make
 [1949] Ageyn youre biddyng resistence.
 [1950] I wole not don so gret offence,
 [1951] For if I dide, it were no skile.
 [1952] Ye may do with me what ye wile,
 [1953] Save or spille, and also sloo.
 [1954] Fro you in no wise may I goo.
 [1955] My lyf, my deth is in youre hond;
 [1956] I may not laste out of youre bond.
 [1957] Pleyn at youre lyst I yelde me,
 [1958] Hopyng in herte that sumtyme ye
 [1959] Comfort and ese shull me sende;
 [1960] Or ellis, shortly, this is the eende,
 [1961] Withouten helthe I mot ay dure,
 [1962] But if ye take me to youre cure.
 [1963] Comfort or helthe how shuld I have,
 [1964] Sith ye me hurt, but ye me save?
 [1965] The helthe of love mot be founde
 [1966] Where as they token first her wounde.
 [1967] And if ye lyst of me to make
 [1968] Youre prisoner, I wol it take
 [1969] Of herte and will, fully at gree.
 [1970] Hoolly and pleyn Y yelde me,
 [1971] Withoute feynyng or feyntise,
 [1972] To be governed by youre emprise.
 [1973] Of you I here so myche pris,
 [1974] I wole ben hool at youre devis
 [1975] For to fulfille youre lykyng
 [1976] And repente for nothyng,
 [1977] Hopyng to have yit in som tide
 [1978] Mercy of that I abide."
 [1979] And with that covenaunt yelde I me
 [1980] Anoon, down knelyng upon my kne,
 [1981] Proferyng for to kisse his feet;
 [1982] But for nothyng he wolde [me] let,
 [1983] And seide, "I love thee bothe and preise,
 [1984] Sen that thyn aunswar doth me ease,
 [1985] For thou answerid so curteisly.
 [1986] For now I wot wel uttirly
 [1987] That thou art gentyll by thi speche.
 [1988] For though a man fer wolde seche,
 [1989] He shulde not fynden, in certeyn,
 [1990] No sich answer of no vileyn;
 [1991] For sich a word ne myghte nought
 [1992] Isse out of a vilayns thought.
 [1993] Thou shalt not lesen of thi speche,
 [1994] For [to] thy helpyng wole I eche,
 [1995] And eke encresen that I may.
 [1996] But first I wole that thou obay
 [1997] Fully, for thyn avauntage,
 [1998] Anoon to do me heere homage.
 [1999] And sithe kisse thou shalt my mouth,
 [2000] Which to no vilayn was never couth
 [2001] For to aproche it, ne for to touche;
 [2002] For sauff of cherlis I ne vouche
 [2003] That they shull never neigh it nere.
 [2004] For curteis and of faire manere,
 [2005] Well taught and ful of gentilnesse
 [2006] He muste ben that shal me kysse,
 [2007] And also of full high fraunchise,
 [2008] That shal atteyne to that emprise.
 [2009] And first of o thing warne I thee,
 [2010] That peyne and gret adversite
 [2011] He mot endure, and eke travaile,
 [2012] That shal me serve, withouten faile.
 [2013] But ther-ageyns thee to comforte,
 [2014] And with thi servise to desporte,
 [2015] Thou mayst full glad and joyfull be
 [2016] So good a maister to have as me,
 [2017] And lord of so high renoun.
 [2018] I bere of love the gonfanoun,
 [2019] Of curtesie the banere.
 [2020] For I am of the silf manere,
 [2021] Gentil, curteys, meke, and fre,
 [2022] That whoever ententyf be
 [2023] Me to honoure, doute, and serve,
 [2024] And also that he hym observe
 [2025] Fro trespas and fro vilanye,
 [2026] And hym governe in curtesie
 [2027] With will and with entencioun.
 [2028] For whanne he first in my prisoun
 [2029] Is caught, thanne must he uttirly
 [2030] Fro thennes forth full bisily
 [2031] Caste hym gentyll for to bee,
 [2032] If he desire help of me."
 [2033] Anoon withouten more delay,
 [2034] Withouten daunger or affray,
 [2035] I bicom his man anoon,
 [2036] And gaf hym thankes many a oon,
 [2037] And knelide doun with hondis joynt
 [2038] And made it in my port full queynt.
 [2039] The joye wente to myn herte rote,
 [2040] Whanne I hadde kissed his mouth so swote;
 [2041] I hadde sich myrthe and sich likyng,
 [2042] It cured me of langwisshing.
 [2043] He askide of me thanne hostages:
 [2044] "I have," he seide, "taken fele homages
 [2045] Of oon and other, where I have ben
 [2046] Disceyved ofte, withouten wen.
 [2047] These felouns, full of falsite,
 [2048] Have many sithes biguyled me
 [2049] And thorough falshed her lust achieved,
 [2050] Wherof I repente and am agreved.
 [2051] And I hem gete in my daunger,
 [2052] Her falshede shull they bie full der.
 [2053] But for I love thee, I seie thee pleyn,
 [2054] I wol of thee be more certeyn;
 [2055] For thee so sore I wole now bynde
 [2056] That thou away ne shalt not wynde
 [2057] For to denyen the covenaunt,
 [2058] Or don that is not avenaunt.
 [2059] That thou were fals it were gret reuthe,
 [2060] Sith thou semest so full of treuthe."
 [2061] "Sire, if thee lyst to undirstande,
 [2062] I merveile the askyng this demande.
 [2063] For why or wherfore shulde ye
 [2064] Ostages or borwis aske of me,
 [2065] Or ony other sikirnesse,
 [2066] Sith ye wot, in sothfastnesse,
 [2067] That ye have me susprised so,
 [2068] And hol myn herte taken me fro,
 [2069] That it wole do for me nothing,
 [2070] But if it be at youre biddyng?
 [2071] Myn herte is youres, and myn right nought,
 [2072] As it bihoveth, in dede and thought,
 [2073] Redy in all to worche youre will,
 [2074] Whether so turne to good or ill,
 [2075] So sore it lustith you to plese,
 [2076] No man therof may you disseise.
 [2077] Ye have theron sette sich justice,
 [2078] That it is werreid in many wise;
 [2079] And if ye doute it nolde obeye,
 [2080] Ye may therof do make a keye,
 [2081] And holde it with you for ostage."
 [2082] "Now, certis, this is noon outrage,"
 [2083] Quod Love, "and fully I acord.
 [2084] For of the body he is full lord
 [2085] That hath the herte in his tresor;
 [2086] Outrage it were to asken more."
 [2087] Thanne of his awmener he drough
 [2088] A litell keye, fetys ynowgh,
 [2089] Which was of gold polisshed clere,
 [2090] And seide to me, "With this keye heere
 [2091] Thyn herte to me now wole I shette.
 [2092] For all my jowelles, loke and knette,
 [2093] I bynde undir this litel keye,
 [2094] That no wight may carie aweye.
 [2095] This keye is full of gret poeste."
 [2096] With which anoon he touchide me
 [2097] Undir the side full softely,
 [2098] That he myn herte sodeynly
 [2099] Without anoy hadde spered,
 [2100] That yit right nought it hath me dered.
 [2101] Whanne he hadde don his will al oute,
 [2102] And I hadde putte hym out of doute,
 [2103] "Sire," I seide, "I have right gret wille
 [2104] Youre lust and plesaunce to fulfille.
 [2105] Loke ye my servise take at gree,
 [2106] By thilke feith ye owe to me.
 [2107] I seye nought for recreaundise,
 [2108] For I nought doute of youre servise,
 [2109] But the servaunt traveileth in vayne,
 [2110] That for to serven doth his payne
 [2111] Unto that lord, which in no wise
 [2112] Kan hym no thank for his servyse."
 [2113] Love seide, "Dismaie thee nought.
 [2114] Syn thou for sokour hast me sought,
 [2115] In thank thi servise wol I take,
 [2116] And high of degre I wol thee make,
 [2117] If wikkidnesse ne hyndre thee.
 [2118] But, as I hope, it shal nought be;
 [2119] To worshipe no wight by aventure
 [2120] May come, but if he peyne endure.
 [2121] Abid and suffre thy distresse;
 [2122] That hurtith now, it shal be lesse.
 [2123] I wot mysilf what may thee save,
 [2124] What medicyne thou woldist have.
 [2125] And if thi trouthe to me thou kepe,
 [2126] I shal unto thy helpyng eke,
 [2127] To cure thy woundes and make hem clene,
 [2128] Where so they be olde or grene --
 [2129] Thou shalt be holpen, at wordis fewe.
 [2130] For certeynly thou shalt well shewe
 [2131] Wher that thou servest with good wille
 [2132] For to complysshen and fulfille
 [2133] My comaundementis, day and nyght,
 [2134] Whiche I to lovers yeve of right."
 [2135] "A sire, for Goddis love," seide I,
 [2136] "Er ye passe hens, ententyfly
 [2137] Youre comaundementis to me ye say,
 [2138] And I shall kepe hem, if I may;
 [2139] For hem to kepen is all my thought.
 [2140] And if so be I wot hem nought,
 [2141] Thanne may I [erre] unwityngly.
 [2142] Wherfore I pray you enterely,
 [2143] With all myn herte, me to lere,
 [2144] That I trespasse in no manere."
 [2145] The God of Love thanne chargide me
 [2146] Anoon, as ye shall here and see,
 [2147] Word by word, by right emprise,
 [2148] So as the Romance shall devise.
 [2149] The maister lesith his tyme to lere,
 [2150] Whanne that the disciple wol not here;
 [2151] It is but veyn on hym to swynke
 [2152] That on his lernyng wol not thinke.
 [2153] Whoso luste love, lat hym entende,
 [2154] For now the Romance bigynneth to amende.
 [2155] Now is good to here, in fay,
 [2156] If ony be that can it say,
 [2157] And poynte it as the resoun is
 [2158] Set; for other-gate, ywys,
 [2159] It shall nought well in alle thyng
 [2160] Be brought to good undirstondyng.
 [2161] For a reder that poyntith ille
 [2162] A good sentence may ofte spille.
 [2163] The book is good at the eendyng,
 [2164] Maad of newe and lusty thyng;
 [2165] For whoso wol the eendyng here,
 [2166] The craft of love he shall mowe lere,
 [2167] If that ye wol so long abide,
 [2168] Tyl I this Romance may unhide,
 [2169] And undo the signifiance
 [2170] Of this drem into Romance.
 [2171] The sothfastnesse that now is hid,
 [2172] Without coverture shall be kid
 [2173] Whanne I undon have this dremyng,
 [2174] Wherynne no word is of lesyng.
 [2175] "Vilanye, at the bigynnyng,
 [2176] I wole," sayde Love, "over alle thyng,
 [2177] Thou leve if thou wolt [not] be
 [2178] Fals, and trespasse ageynes me.
 [2179] I curse and blame generaly
 [2180] All hem that loven vilany,
 [2181] For vilanye makith vilayn,
 [2182] And by his dedis a cherl is seyn.
 [2183] Thise vilayns arn withouten pitee,
 [2184] Frendshipe, love, and all bounte.
 [2185] I nyl resseyve unto my servise
 [2186] Hem that ben vilayns of emprise.
 [2187] But undirstonde in thyn entent
 [2188] That this is not myn entendement,
 [2189] To clepe no wight in noo ages
 [2190] Oonly gentill for his lynages.
 [2191] But whoso is vertuous,
 [2192] And in his port nought outrageous,
 [2193] Whanne sich oon thou seest thee biforn,
 [2194] Though he be not gentill born,
 [2195] Thou maist well seyn, this is in soth,
 [2196] That he is gentil by cause he doth
 [2197] As longeth to a gentilman;
 [2198] Of hem noon other deme I can.
 [2199] For certeynly, withouten drede,
 [2200] A cherl is demed by his dede
 [2201] Of hie or lowe, as we may see,
 [2202] Or of what kynrede that he bee.
 [2203] Ne say nought, for noon yvel wille,
 [2204] Thyng that is to holden stille;
 [2205] It is no worshipe to myssey.
 [2206] Thou maist ensample take of Key,
 [2207] That was somtyme, for mysseiyng,
 [2208] Hated bothe of olde and ying.
 [2209] As fer as Gaweyn, the worthy,
 [2210] Was preised for his curtesy,
 [2211] Kay was hated, for he was fell,
 [2212] Of word dispitous and cruell.
 [2213] Wherfore be wise and aqueyntable,
 [2214] Goodly of word, and resonable
 [2215] Bothe to lesse and eke to mare.
 [2216] And whanne thou comest there men are,
 [2217] Loke that thou have in custome ay
 [2218] First to salue hem, if thou may;
 [2219] And if it fall that of hem som
 [2220] Salue thee first, be not domm,
 [2221] But quyte hem curteisly anoon,
 [2222] Without abidyng, er they goon.
 [2223] "For nothyng eke thy tunge applye
 [2224] To speke wordis of rebaudrye.
 [2225] To vilayn speche in no degre
 [2226] Lat never thi lippe unbounden be.
 [2227] For I nought holde hym, in good feith,
 [2228] Curteys, that foule wordis seith.
 [2229] And alle wymmen serve and preise,
 [2230] And to thy power her honour reise;
 [2231] And if that ony myssaiere
 [2232] Dispise wymmen, that thou maist here,
 [2233] Blame hym, and bidde hym holde hym stille.
 [2234] And [set] thy myght and all thy wille
 [2235] Wymmen and ladies for to please,
 [2236] And to do thyng that may hem ese,
 [2237] That they ever speke good of thee,
 [2238] For so thou maist best preised be.
 [2239] "Loke fro pride thou kepe thee wel;
 [2240] For thou maist bothe perceyve and fel
 [2241] That pride is bothe foly and synne,
 [2242] And he that pride hath hym withynne
 [2243] Ne may his herte in no wise
 [2244] Meken ne souplen to servyse.
 [2245] For pride is founde in every part
 [2246] Contrarie unto loves art.
 [2247] And he that loveth, trewely,
 [2248] Shulde hym contene jolily
 [2249] Without pride in sondry wise,
 [2250] And hym disgysen in queyntise.
 [2251] For queynt array, without drede,
 [2252] Is nothyng proud, who takith hede;
 [2253] For fresh array, as men may see,
 [2254] Withouten pride may ofte be.
 [2255] "Mayntene thysilf aftir thi rent
 [2256] Of robe and eke of garnement,
 [2257] For many sithe fair clothyng
 [2258] A man amendith in myche thyng.
 [2259] And loke alwey that they be shape --
 [2260] What garnement that thou shalt make --
 [2261] Of hym that kan best do,
 [2262] With all that perteyneth therto.
 [2263] Poyntis and sleves be well sittand,
 [2264] Right and streght on the hand.
 [2265] Of shon and bootes, newe and faire,
 [2266] Loke at the leest thou have a paire,
 [2267] And that they sitte so fetisly
 [2268] That these rude may uttirly
 [2269] Merveyle, sith that they sitte so pleyn,
 [2270] How they come on or off ageyn.
 [2271] Were streite gloves with awmenere
 [2272] Of silk; and alwey with good chere
 [2273] Thou yeve, if thou have richesse;
 [2274] And if thou have nought, spende the lesse.
 [2275] Alwey be mery, if thou may,
 [2276] But waste not thi good alway.
 [2277] Have hat of floures as fresh as May,
 [2278] Chapelett of roses of Whitsonday,
 [2279] For sich array ne costeth but lite.
 [2280] Thyn hondis wassh, thy teeth make white,
 [2281] And let no filthe upon thee bee.
 [2282] Thy nailes blak if thou maist see,
 [2283] Voide it awey delyverly,
 [2284] And kembe thyn heed right jolily.
 [2285] Fard not thi visage in no wise,
 [2286] For that of love is not th' emprise;
 [2287] For love doth haten, as I fynde,
 [2288] A beaute that cometh not of kynde.
 [2289] Alwey in herte I rede thee
 [2290] Glad and mery for to be,
 [2291] And be as joyfull as thou can;
 [2292] Love hath no joye of sorowful man.
 [2293] That yvell is full of curtesie
 [2294] That laughith in his maladie;
 [2295] For ever of love the siknesse
 [2296] Is meynd with swete and bitternesse.
 [2297] The sore of love is merveilous;
 [2298] For now the lover [is. joyous,
 [2299] Now can he pleyne, now can he grone,
 [2300] Now can he syngen, now maken mone;
 [2301] To-day he pleyneth for hevynesse,
 [2302] To-morowe he pleyeth for jolynesse.
 [2303] The lyf of love is full contrarie,
 [2304] Which stoundemele can ofte varie.
 [2305] But if thou canst mirthis make,
 [2306] That men in gre wole gladly take,
 [2307] Do it goodly, I comaunde thee.
 [2308] For men shulde, wheresoevere they be,
 [2309] Do thing that hem sittyng is,
 [2310] For therof cometh good loos and pris.
 [2311] Whereof that thou be vertuous,
 [2312] Ne be not straunge ne daungerous;
 [2313] For if that thou good ridere be,
 [2314] Prike gladly, that men may se.
 [2315] In armes also if thou konne,
 [2316] Pursue til thou a name hast wonne.
 [2317] And if thi voice be faire and cler,
 [2318] Thou shalt maken [no] gret daunger
 [2319] Whanne to synge they goodly preye --
 [2320] It is thi worship for t' obeye.
 [2321] Also to you it longith ay
 [2322] To harpe and gitterne, daunce and play,
 [2323] For if he can wel foote and daunce,
 [2324] It may hym greetly do avaunce.
 [2325] Among eke, for thy lady sake,
 [2326] Songes and complayntes that thou make,
 [2327] For that wole meven in hir herte,
 [2328] Whanne they reden of thy smerte.
 [2329] Loke that no man for scarce thee holde,
 [2330] For that may greve thee many folde.
 [2331] Resoun wole that a lover be
 [2332] In his yiftes more large and fre
 [2333] Than cherles that ben not of lovyng.
 [2334] For who therof can ony thyng,
 [2335] He shal be leef ay for to yeve,
 [2336] In Loves lore whoso wolde leve;
 [2337] For he that thorough a sodeyn sight,
 [2338] Or for a kyssyng, anoonright
 [2339] Yaff hool his herte in will and thought,
 [2340] And to hymsilf kepith right nought,
 [2341] Aftir [swich] [gift] it is good resoun
 [2342] He yeve his good in abandoun.
 [2343] "Now wol I shortly heere reherce
 [2344] Of that I have seid in verce
 [2345] Al the sentence by and by,
 [2346] In wordis fewe compendiously,
 [2347] That thou the better mayst on hem thynke,
 [2348] Whether so it be thou wake or wynke.
 [2349] For the wordis litel greve
 [2350] A man to kepe, whanne it is breve.
 [2351] Whoso with Love wole goon or ride,
 [2352] He mot be curteis, and voide of pride,
 [2353] Mery, and full of jolite,
 [2354] And of largesse alosed be.
 [2355] "First I joyne thee, heere in penaunce,
 [2356] That evere, withoute repentaunce,
 [2357] Thou sette thy thought in thy lovyng
 [2358] To laste withoute repentyng,
 [2359] And thenke upon thi myrthis swete,
 [2360] That shall folowe aftir, whan ye mete.
 [2361] "And for thou trewe to love shalt be,
 [2362] I wole, and comaunde thee,
 [2363] That in oo place thou sette, all hool,
 [2364] Thyn herte withoute halfen dool
 [2365] Of trecherie and sikernesse;
 [2366] For I lovede nevere doublenesse.
 [2367] To many his herte that wole depart,
 [2368] Everich shal have but litel part;
 [2369] But of hym drede I me right nought,
 [2370] That in oo place settith his thought.
 [2371] Therfore in oo place it sette,
 [2372] And lat it nevere thannys flette.
 [2373] For if thou yevest it in lenyng,
 [2374] I holde it but a wrecchid thyng;
 [2375] Therfore yeve it hool and quyt,
 [2376] And thou shalt have the more merit.
 [2377] If it be lent, than aftir soon
 [2378] The bounte and the thank is doon;
 [2379] But, in love, fre yeven thing
 [2380] Requyrith a gret guerdonyng.
 [2381] Yeve it in yift al quyt fully,
 [2382] And make thi yift debonairly,
 [2383] For men that yift holde more dere
 [2384] That yeven [is. with gladsom chere.
 [2385] That yift nought to preisen is
 [2386] That man yeveth maugre his.
 [2387] Whanne thou hast yeven thyn herte, as I
 [2388] Have seid thee heere openly,
 [2389] Thanne aventures shull thee falle,
 [2390] Which harde and hevy ben withalle.
 [2391] For ofte whan thou bithenkist thee
 [2392] Of thy lovyng, whereso thou be,
 [2393] Fro folk thou must departe in hie,
 [2394] That noon perceyve thi maladie.
 [2395] But hyde thyne harm thou must alone,
 [2396] And go forth sool, and make thy mone.
 [2397] Thou shalt no whyle be in o stat,
 [2398] But whylom cold and whilom hat,
 [2399] Now reed as rose, now yelowe and fade.
 [2400] Such sorowe, I trowe, thou never hade;
 [2401] Cotidien ne quarteyne,
 [2402] It is nat so ful of peyne.
 [2403] For often tymes it shal falle
 [2404] In love, among thy paynes alle,
 [2405] That thou thyself al holly
 [2406] Foryeten shalt so utterly
 [2407] That many tymes thou shalt be
 [2408] Styl as an ymage of tree,
 [2409] Domm as a ston, without steryng
 [2410] Of fot or hond, without spekyng.
 [2411] Than, soone after al thy payn,
 [2412] To memorye shalt thou come agayn,
 [2413] As man abasshed wonder sore,
 [2414] And after syghen more and more.
 [2415] For wyt thou wel, withouten wen,
 [2416] In such astat ful ofte have ben
 [2417] That have the yvel of love assayd
 [2418] Wherthrough thou art so dismayd.
 [2419] "After, a thought shal take the so,
 [2420] That thy love is to fer the fro.
 [2421] Thou shalt saye, `God! what may this be,
 [2422] That I ne may my lady se?
 [2423] Myn herte alone is to her go,
 [2424] And I abyde al sol in wo,
 [2425] Departed fro myn owne thought,
 [2426] And with myne eyen se right nought.
 [2427] Alas, myne eyen sende I ne may
 [2428] My careful herte to convay!
 [2429] Myn hertes gyde but they be,
 [2430] I prayse nothyng, whatever they se.
 [2431] Shul they abyde thanne? Nay;
 [2432] But gon and visyten without delay
 [2433] That myn herte desyreth so.
 [2434] For certainly, but if they go,
 [2435] A fool myself I may wel holde,
 [2436] Whan I ne se what myn herte wolde.
 [2437] Wherfore I wol gon her to sen,
 [2438] Or eased shal I never ben,
 [2439] But I have som tokenyng.'
 [2440] Than gost thou forth without dwellyng;
 [2441] But ofte thou faylest of thy desyr,
 [2442] Er thou mayst come her any ner,
 [2443] And wastest in vayn thi passage.
 [2444] Thanne fallest thou in a newe rage;
 [2445] For want of sight thou gynnest morne,
 [2446] And homward pensyf thou dost retorne.
 [2447] In greet myscheef thanne shalt thou bee,
 [2448] For thanne agayn shall come to thee
 [2449] Sighes and pleyntes with newe woo,
 [2450] That no ycchyng prikketh soo.
 [2451] Who wot it nought, he may go lere
 [2452] Of hem that bien love so dere.
 [2453] "Nothyng thyn herte appesen may
 [2454] That ofte thou wolt goon and assay
 [2455] If thou maist seen, by aventure,
 [2456] Thi lyves joy, thin hertis cure;
 [2457] So that, bi grace, if thou myght
 [2458] Atteyne of hire to have a sight,
 [2459] Thanne shalt thou don noon other dede,
 [2460] But with that sight thyne eyen fede.
 [2461] That faire fresh whanne thou maist see,
 [2462] Thyne herte shall so ravysshed be
 [2463] That nevere thou woldest, thi thankis, lete,
 [2464] Ne remove for to see that swete.
 [2465] The more thou seest in sothfastnesse,
 [2466] The more thou coveytest of that swetnesse;
 [2467] The more thin herte brenneth in fir,
 [2468] The more thin herte is in desir.
 [2469] For who considreth everydeell,
 [2470] It may be likned wondir well,
 [2471] The peyne of love, unto a fer;
 [2472] For evermore thou neighest ner,
 [2473] Thou, or whooso that it bee,
 [2474] For verray sothe I tell it thee,
 [2475] The hatter evere shall thou brenne,
 [2476] As experience shall thee kenne:
 [2477] Whereso [thou] comest in ony coost,
 [2478] Who is next fyr, he brenneth moost.
 [2479] And yitt forsothe, for all thin hete,
 [2480] Though thou for love swelte and swete,
 [2481] Ne for nothyng thou felen may,
 [2482] Thou shalt not willen to passen away.
 [2483] And though thou go, yitt must thee nede
 [2484] Thenke all day on hir fairhede
 [2485] Whom thou biheelde with so good will,
 [2486] And holde thisilf biguyled ill
 [2487] That thou ne haddest noon hardement
 [2488] To shewe hir ought of thyn entent.
 [2489] Thyn herte full sore thou wolt dispise,
 [2490] And eke repreve of cowardise,
 [2491] That thou, so dul in every thing,
 [2492] Were domm for drede, withoute spekyng.
 [2493] Thou shalt eke thenke thou didest folye
 [2494] That thou were hir so faste bye,
 [2495] And durst not auntre thee to saye
 [2496] Somthyng er thou cam awaye;
 [2497] For thou haddist no more wonne,
 [2498] To speke of hir whanne thou bigonne.
 [2499] But yitt she wolde, for thy sake,
 [2500] In armes goodly thee have take --
 [2501] It shulde have be more worth to thee
 [2502] Than of tresour gret plente.
 [2503] Thus shalt thou morne and eke compleyn,
 [2504] And gete enchesoun to goon ageyn
 [2505] Unto thi walk, or to thi place
 [2506] Where thou biheelde hir fleshly face.
 [2507] And never, for fals suspeccioun,
 [2508] Thou woldest fynde occasioun
 [2509] For to gon unto hire hous.
 [2510] So art thou thanne desirous
 [2511] A sight of hir for to have,
 [2512] If thou thin honour myghtist save,
 [2513] Or ony erande myghtist make
 [2514] Thider for thi loves sake,
 [2515] Full fayn thou woldist, but for drede
 [2516] Thou gost not, lest that men take hede.
 [2517] Wherfore I rede, in thi goyng,
 [2518] And also in thyn ageyn-comyng,
 [2519] Thou be well war that men ne wit.
 [2520] Feyne thee other cause than it
 [2521] To go that weye, or faste by;
 [2522] To hele wel is no foly.
 [2523] And if so be it happe thee
 [2524] That thou thi love there maist see,
 [2525] In siker wise thou hir salewe,
 [2526] Wherewith thi colour wole transmewe,
 [2527] And eke thy blod shal al toquake,
 [2528] Thyn hewe eke chaungen for hir sake.
 [2529] But word and wit, with chere full pale,
 [2530] Shull wante for to tell thy tale.
 [2531] And if thou maist so fer forth wynne
 [2532] That thou resoun durst bigynne,
 [2533] And woldist seyn thre thingis or mo,
 [2534] Thou shalt full scarsly seyn the two.
 [2535] Though thou bithenke thee never so well,
 [2536] Thou shalt foryete yit somdell,
 [2537] But if thou dele with trecherie.
 [2538] For fals lovers mowe all folye
 [2539] Seyn, what hem lust, withouten drede,
 [2540] They be so double in her falshede;
 [2541] For they in herte cunne thenke a thyng,
 [2542] And seyn another in her spekyng.
 [2543] And whanne thi speche is eendid all,
 [2544] Ryght thus to thee it shall byfall:
 [2545] If ony word thanne come to mynde
 [2546] That thou to seye hast left bihynde,
 [2547] Thanne thou shalt brenne in gret martir,
 [2548] For thou shalt brenne as ony fir.
 [2549] This is the stryf and eke the affray,
 [2550] And the batell that lastith ay.
 [2551] This bargeyn eende may never take,
 [2552] But if that she thi pees will make.
 [2553] And whanne the nyght is comen, anoon
 [2554] A thousand angres shall come uppon.
 [2555] To bedde as fast thou wolt thee dight,
 [2556] Where thou shalt have but smal delit.
 [2557] For whanne thou wenest for to slepe,
 [2558] So full of peyne shalt thou crepe,
 [2559] Sterte in thi bed aboute full wide,
 [2560] And turne full ofte on every side,
 [2561] Now dounward groff and now upright,
 [2562] And walowe in woo the longe nyght.
 [2563] Thine armys shalt thou sprede a-bred,
 [2564] As man in werre were forwerreyd.
 [2565] Thanne shall thee come a remembraunce
 [2566] Of hir shap and hir semblaunce,
 [2567] Whereto non other may be pere.
 [2568] And wite thou wel, withoute were,
 [2569] That thee shal se[me] somtyme that nyght
 [2570] That thou hast hir that is so bright
 [2571] Naked bitwene thyne armes there,
 [2572] All sothfastnesse as though it were.
 [2573] Thou shalt make castels thanne in Spayne
 [2574] And dreme of joye, all but in vayne,
 [2575] And thee deliten of right nought,
 [2576] While thou so slombrest in that thought
 [2577] That is so swete and delitable,
 [2578] The which, in soth, nys but fable,
 [2579] For it ne shall no while laste.
 [2580] Thanne shalt thou sighe and wepe faste,
 [2581] And say, `Dere God, what thing is this?
 [2582] My drem is turned all amys,
 [2583] Which was full swete and apparent;
 [2584] But now I wake, it is al shent!
 [2585] Now yede this mery thought away!
 [2586] Twenty tymes upon a day
 [2587] I wolde this thought wolde come ageyn,
 [2588] For it aleggith well my peyn.
 [2589] It makith me full of joyfull thought;
 [2590] It sleth me, that it lastith noght.
 [2591] A, Lord! Why nyl ye me socoure
 [2592] The joye, I trowe, that I langoure?
 [2593] The deth I wolde me shulde sloo
 [2594] While I lye in hir armes twoo.
 [2595] Myn harm is hard, withouten wene;
 [2596] My gret unese full ofte I meene.
 [2597] "`But wolde Love do so I myght
 [2598] Have fully joye of hir so bright,
 [2599] My peyne were quyt me rychely.
 [2600] Allas, to gret a thing aske I!
 [2601] Hit is but foly and wrong wenyng
 [2602] To aske so outrageous a thyng;
 [2603] And whoso askith folily,
 [2604] He mot be warned hastily.
 [2605] And I ne wot what I may say,
 [2606] I am so fer out of the way;
 [2607] For I wolde have full gret likyng
 [2608] And full gret joye of lasse thing.
 [2609] For wolde she, of hir gentylnesse,
 [2610] Without and more, me oonys kysse,
 [2611] It were to me a gret guerdoun,
 [2612] Relees of all my passioun.
 [2613] But it is hard to come therto;
 [2614] All is but folye that I do,
 [2615] So high I have myn herte set,
 [2616] Where I may no comfort get.
 [2617] I wote not wher I seye well or nought,
 [2618] But this I wot wel in my thought,
 [2619] That it were better of hir alloone,
 [2620] For to stynte my woo and moone,
 [2621] A lok on hir I caste goodly,
 [2622] Than for to have al utterly
 [2623] Of an other all hool the pley.
 [2624] A, Lord! Wher I shall byde the day
 [2625] That evere she shall my lady be?
 [2626] He is full cured that may hir see.
 [2627] A, God! Whanne shal the dawnyng spring?
 [2628] To liggen thus is an angry thyng;
 [2629] I have no joye thus heere to ly,
 [2630] Whanne that my love is not me by.
 [2631] A man to lyen hath gret disese,
 [2632] Which may not slepe ne reste in ese.
 [2633] I wolde it dawed, and were now day,
 [2634] And that the nyght were went away;
 [2635] For were it day, I wolde uprise.
 [2636] A, slowe sonne, shewe thin enprise!
 [2637] Sped thee to sprede thy beemys bright,
 [2638] And chace the derknesse of the nyght,
 [2639] To putte away the stoundes stronge,
 [2640] Whiche in me lasten all to longe.'
 [2641] "The nyght shalt thou contene soo
 [2642] Withoute rest, in peyne and woo.
 [2643] If evere thou knewe of love distresse,
 [2644] Thou shalt mowe lerne in that siknesse,
 [2645] And thus enduryng shalt thou ly,
 [2646] And ryse on morwe up erly
 [2647] Out of thy bedde, and harneyse thee,
 [2648] Er evere dawnyng thou maist see.
 [2649] All pryvyly thanne shalt thou goon,
 [2650] What weder it be, thisilf alloon,
 [2651] For reyn or hayl, for snow, for slet,
 [2652] Thider she dwellith that is so swet,
 [2653] The which may fall a-slepe be,
 [2654] And thenkith but lytel upon thee.
 [2655] Thanne shalt thou goon, ful foule afeered,
 [2656] Loke if the gate be unspered,
 [2657] And waite without in woo and peyn,
 [2658] Full yvel a-coold, in wynd and reyn.
 [2659] Thanne shal thou go the dore bifore,
 [2660] If thou maist fynde ony score,
 [2661] Or hool, or reeft, whatevere it were;
 [2662] Thanne shalt thou stoupe and lay to ere,
 [2663] If they withynne a-slepe be --
 [2664] I mene all save the lady free,
 [2665] Whom wakyng if thou maist aspie,
 [2666] Go putte thisilf in jupartie
 [2667] To aske grace, and thee bimene,
 [2668] That she may wite, without wene,
 [2669] That thou [a-]nyght no rest hast had,
 [2670] So sore for hir thou were bystad.
 [2671] Wommen wel ought pite to take
 [2672] Of hem that sorwen for her sake.
 [2673] And loke, for love of that relyk,
 [2674] That thou thenke noon other lyk,
 [2675] For whom thou hast so gret annoy,
 [2676] Shall kysse thee, er thou go away,
 [2677] And holde that in full gret deynte.
 [2678] And for that no man shal thee see
 [2679] Bifore the hous ne in the way,
 [2680] Loke thou be goon ageyn er day.
 [2681] Such comyng and such goyng,
 [2682] Such hevynesse and such wakyng,
 [2683] Makith lovers, withouten ony wene,
 [2684] Under her clothes pale and lene.
 [2685] For Love leveth colour ne cleernesse;
 [2686] Who loveth trewe hath no fatnesse.
 [2687] Thou shalt wel by thysilf see
 [2688] That thou must nedis assayed be.
 [2689] For men that shape hem other wey
 [2690] Falsly her ladyes for to bitray,
 [2691] It is no wonder though they be fatt;
 [2692] With false othes her loves they gatt.
 [2693] For oft I see suche losengours
 [2694] Fatter than abbatis or priours.
 [2695] "Yit with o thing I thee charge,
 [2696] That is to seye, that thou be large
 [2697] Unto the mayde that hir doth serve,
 [2698] So best hir thank thou shalt deserve.
 [2699] Yeve hir yiftes, and get hir grace,
 [2700] For so thou may thank purchace,
 [2701] That she thee worthy holde and free,
 [2702] Thi lady, and all that may thee see.
 [2703] Also hir servauntes worshipe ay,
 [2704] And please as mych as thou may;
 [2705] Gret good thorough hem may come to thee
 [2706] Bicause with hir they ben pryve.
 [2707] They shal hir telle hou they thee fand
 [2708] Curteis, and wys, and well doand,
 [2709] And she shall preise well the mare.
 [2710] Loke oute of londe thou be not fare,
 [2711] And if such cause thou have that thee
 [2712] Bihoveth to gon out of contree,
 [2713] Leve hool thin herte in hostage,
 [2714] Till thou ageyn make thi passage.
 [2715] Thenk long to see the swete thyng
 [2716] That hath thin herte in hir kepyng.
 [2717] "Now have I told thee in what wise
 [2718] A lovere shall do me servise.
 [2719] Do it thanne, if thou wolt have
 [2720] The meede that thou aftir crave."
 [2721] Whanne Love all this hadde boden me,
 [2722] I seide hym: "Sire, how may it be
 [2723] That lovers may in such manere
 [2724] Endure the peyne ye have seid heere?
 [2725] I merveyle me wonder faste
 [2726] How ony man may lyve or laste
 [2727] In such peyne and such brennyng,
 [2728] In sorwe and thought and such sighing,
 [2729] Ay unrelesed woo to make,
 [2730] Whether so it be they slepe or wake,
 [2731] In such annoy contynuely --
 [2732] As helpe me God, this merveile I
 [2733] How man, but he were maad of stele,
 [2734] Myght lyve a month, such peynes to fele."
 [2735] The God of Love thanne seide me:
 [2736] "Freend, by the feith I owe to thee,
 [2737] May no man have good, but he it by.
 [2738] A man loveth more tendirly
 [2739] The thyng that he hath bought most dere.
 [2740] For wite thou well, withouten were,
 [2741] In thank that thyng is taken more,
 [2742] For which a man hath suffred sore.
 [2743] Certis, no wo ne may atteyne
 [2744] Unto the sore of loves peyne;
 [2745] Noon yvel therto ne may amounte,
 [2746] No more than a man [may] counte
 [2747] The dropes that of the water be.
 [2748] For drye as well the greete see
 [2749] Thou myghtist as the harmes telle
 [2750] Of hem that with love dwelle
 [2751] In servyse, for peyne hem sleeth.
 [2752] And yet ech man wolde fle the deeth,
 [2753] And trowe thei shulde nevere escape,
 [2754] Nere that hope couth. hem make
 [2755] Glad, as man in prisoun sett,
 [2756] And may not geten for to et
 [2757] But barly breed and watir pure,
 [2758] And lyeth in vermyn and in ordure;
 [2759] With all this yitt can he lyve,
 [2760] Good hope such comfort hath hym yive,
 [2761] Which maketh wene that he shall be
 [2762] Delyvered, and come to liberte.
 [2763] In fortune is [his] fulle trust,
 [2764] Though he lye in strawe or dust;
 [2765] In hoope is all his susteynyng.
 [2766] And so for lovers, in her wenyng,
 [2767] Whiche Love hath shit in his prisoun,
 [2768] Good hope is her salvacioun.
 [2769] Good hope, how sore that they smerte,
 [2770] Yeveth hem bothe will and herte
 [2771] To profre her body to martire;
 [2772] For hope so sore doth hem desire
 [2773] To suffre ech harm that men devise,
 [2774] For joye that aftirward shall aryse.
 [2775] "Hope in desir caccheth victorie;
 [2776] In hope of love is all the glorie;
 [2777] For hope is all that love may yive;
 [2778] Nere hope, ther shulde no lover lyve.
 [2779] Blessid be hope, which with desir
 [2780] Avaunceth lovers in such maner!
 [2781] Good hope is curteis for to please,
 [2782] To kepe lovers from all disese.
 [2783] Hope kepith his bond, and wole abide,
 [2784] For ony perill that may betyde;
 [2785] For hope to lovers, as most cheef,
 [2786] Doth hem endure all myscheef;
 [2787] Hope is her helpe whanne myster is.
 [2788] "And I shall yeve thee eke, iwys,
 [2789] Three other thingis that gret solas
 [2790] Doth to hem that be in my las.
 [2791] The firste good that may be founde
 [2792] To hem that in my las be bounde
 [2793] Is Swete-Thought, for to recorde
 [2794] Thing wherwith thou canst accorde
 [2795] Best in thyn herte, where she be --
 [2796] Thenkyng in absence is good to thee.
 [2797] Whanne ony lover doth compleyne,
 [2798] And lyveth in distresse and in peyne,
 [2799] Thanne Swete-Thought shal come as blyve
 [2800] Awey his angre for to dryve:
 [2801] It makith lovers to have remembraunce
 [2802] Of comfort and of high plesaunce
 [2803] That Hope hath hight hym for to wynne.
 [2804] For Thought anoon thanne shall bygynne,
 [2805] As fer, God wot, as he can fynde,
 [2806] To make a mirrour of his mynde;
 [2807] For to biholde he wole not lette.
 [2808] Hir persone he shall afore hym sette,
 [2809] Hir laughing eyen, persaunt and clere,
 [2810] Hir shape, hir forme, hir goodly chere,
 [2811] Hir mouth, that is so gracious,
 [2812] So swete and eke so saverous;
 [2813] Of all hir fetures he shall take heede,
 [2814] His eyen with all hir lymes fede.
 [2815] "Thus Swete-Thenkyng shall aswage
 [2816] The peyne of lovers and her rage.
 [2817] Thi joye shall double, withoute gesse,
 [2818] Whanne thou thenkist on hir semlynesse,
 [2819] Or of hir laughing, or of hir chere,
 [2820] That to thee made thi lady dere.
 [2821] This comfort wole I that thou take;
 [2822] And if the next thou wolt forsake,
 [2823] Which is not lesse saverous,
 [2824] Thou shuldist ben to daungerous.
 [2825] "The secounde shal be Swete-Speche,
 [2826] That hath to many oon be leche,
 [2827] To bringe hem out of woo and wer,
 [2828] And holpe many a bachiler,
 [2829] And many a lady sent socour,
 [2830] That have loved paramour,
 [2831] Thorough spekyng, whanne they myghte heere
 [2832] Of her lovers to hem so dere.
 [2833] To hem it voidith all her smerte,
 [2834] The which is closed in her herte.
 [2835] In herte it makith hem glad and light,
 [2836] Speche, whanne they [ne] mowe have sight.
 [2837] And therfore now it cometh to mynde,
 [2838] In olde dawes, as I fynde,
 [2839] That clerkis writen that hir knewe,
 [2840] Ther was a lady fresh of hewe,
 [2841] Which of hir love made a song
 [2842] On hym for to remembre among,
 [2843] In which she seyde, `Whanne that I here
 [2844] Speken of hym that is so dere,
 [2845] To me it voidith all smert,
 [2846] Iwys, he sittith so ner myn hert.
 [2847] To speke of hym, at eve or morwe,
 [2848] It cureth me of all my sorwe.
 [2849] To me is noon so high plesaunce
 [2850] As of his persone dalyaunce.'
 [2851] She wist full well that Swete-Spekyng
 [2852] Comfortith in full myche thyng.
 [2853] Hir love she hadde full well assayed;
 [2854] Of him she was full well apaied;
 [2855] To speke of hym hir joye was sett.
 [2856] Therfore I rede thee that thou gett
 [2857] A felowe that can well concele,
 [2858] And kepe thi counsell, and well hele,
 [2859] To whom go shewe hoolly thine herte,
 [2860] Bothe wele and woo, joye and smerte.
 [2861] To gete comfort to hym thou goo,
 [2862] And pryvyly, bitwene yow twoo,
 [2863] Yee shall speke of that goodly thyng
 [2864] That hath thyn herte in hir kepyng,
 [2865] Of hir beaute and hir semblaunce
 [2866] And of hir goodly countenaunce.
 [2867] Of all thi stat thou shalt hym sey,
 [2868] And aske hym counseill how thou may
 [2869] Do ony thyng that may hir plese;
 [2870] For it to thee shall do gret ese
 [2871] That he may wite thou trust hym soo,
 [2872] Bothe of thi wele and of thi woo.
 [2873] And if his herte to love be sett,
 [2874] His companye is myche the bett,
 [2875] For resoun wole he shewe to thee
 [2876] All uttirly his pryvyte;
 [2877] And what she is he loveth so,
 [2878] To thee pleynly he shal undo,
 [2879] Withoute drede of ony shame,
 [2880] Bothe tell hir renoun and hir name.
 [2881] Thanne shall he forther, fer and ner,
 [2882] And namely to thi lady der,
 [2883] In syker wise; yee, every other
 [2884] Shall helpen as his owne brother,
 [2885] In trouthe withoute doublenesse,
 [2886] And kepen cloos in sikernesse.
 [2887] For it is noble thing, in fay,
 [2888] To have a man thou darst say
 [2889] Thy pryve counsell every deell;
 [2890] For that wole comforte thee right well,
 [2891] And thou shalt holde thee well apayed,
 [2892] Whanne such a freend thou hast assayed.
 [2893] "The thridde good of gret comfort,
 [2894] That yeveth to lovers most disport,
 [2895] Comyth of sight and of biholdyng,
 [2896] That clepid is Swete-Lokyng,
 [2897] The whiche may noon ese do
 [2898] Whanne thou art fer thy lady fro;
 [2899] Wherfore thou prese alwey to be
 [2900] In place where thou maist hir see.
 [2901] For it is thyng most amerous,
 [2902] Most delytable and saverous,
 [2903] For to aswage a mannes sorowe,
 [2904] To sen his lady by the morwe.
 [2905] For it is a full noble thing,
 [2906] Whanne thyne eyen have metyng
 [2907] With that relike precious,
 [2908] Wherof they be so desirous.
 [2909] But al day after, soth it is,
 [2910] They have no drede to faren amys;
 [2911] They dreden neither wynd ne reyn,
 [2912] Ne noon other maner peyn.
 [2913] For whanne thyne eyen were thus in blis,
 [2914] Yit of hir curtesie, ywys,
 [2915] Alloone they can not have her joye,
 [2916] But to the herte they [it] convoye;
 [2917] Part of her blisse to hym they sende,
 [2918] Of all this harm to make an ende.
 [2919] The eye is a good messanger,
 [2920] Which can to the herte in such maner
 [2921] Tidyngis sende that [he] hath sen,
 [2922] To voide hym of his peynes clen.
 [2923] Wherof the herte rejoiseth soo,
 [2924] That a gret party of his woo
 [2925] Is voided and put awey to flight.
 [2926] Right as the derknesse of the nyght
 [2927] Is chased with clernesse of the mone,
 [2928] Right so is al his woo full soone
 [2929] Devoided clene, whanne that the sight
 [2930] Biholden may that freshe wight
 [2931] That the herte desireth soo,
 [2932] That al his derknesse is agoo.
 [2933] For thanne the herte is all at ese,
 [2934] Whanne the eyen sen that may hem plese.
 [2935] "Now have I declared thee all oute
 [2936] Of that thou were in drede and doute;
 [2937] For I have told thee feithfully
 [2938] What thee may curen utterly,
 [2939] And alle lovers that wole be
 [2940] Feithfull and full of stabilite.
 [2941] Good-Hope alwey kep bi thi side,
 [2942] And Swete-Thought make eke abide,
 [2943] Swete-Lokyng and Swete-Speche --
 [2944] Of all thyne harmes thei shall be leche,
 [2945] Of every thou shalt have gret plesaunce.
 [2946] If thou canst bide in sufferaunce,
 [2947] And serve wel withoute feyntise,
 [2948] Thou shalt be quyt of thyn emprise
 [2949] With more guerdoun, if that thou lyve;
 [2950] But at this tyme this I thee yive."
 [2951] The God of Love whanne al the day
 [2952] Had taught me, as ye have herd say,
 [2953] And enfourmed compendiously,
 [2954] He vanyshide awey all sodeynly,
 [2955] And I alloone lefte, all sool,
 [2956] So full of compleynt and of dool,
 [2957] For I saw no man there me by.
 [2958] My woundes me greved wondirly;
 [2959] Me for to curen nothyng I knew,
 [2960] Save the botoun bright of hew,
 [2961] Wheron was sett hoolly my thought.
 [2962] Of other comfort knew I nought,
 [2963] But it were thorugh the God of Love;
 [2964] I knew not elles to my bihove
 [2965] That myght me ease or comfort gete,
 [2966] But if he wolde hym entermete.
 [2967] The roser was, withoute doute,
 [2968] Closed with an hegge withoute,
 [2969] As ye toforn have herd me seyn;
 [2970] And fast I bisiede, and wolde fayn
 [2971] Have passed the hay, if I myghte
 [2972] Have geten ynne by ony slighte
 [2973] Unto the botoun so faire to see.
 [2974] But evere I dradde blamed to be,
 [2975] If men wolde have suspeccioun
 [2976] That I wolde of entencioun
 [2977] Have stole the roses that there were;
 [2978] Therfore to entre I was in fere.
 [2979] But at the last, as I bithought
 [2980] Whether I shulde passe or nought,
 [2981] I saw come with a glad cher
 [2982] To me, a lusty bacheler,
 [2983] Of good stature and of good highte,
 [2984] And Bialacoil forsothe he highte.
 [2985] Sone he was to Curtesy,
 [2986] And he me grauntide full gladly
 [2987] The passage of the outter hay,
 [2988] And seide: "Sir, how that yee may
 [2989] Passe, if youre wille be
 [2990] The freshe roser for to see,
 [2991] And yee the swete savour fele.
 [2992] Youre warrant may [I] [be] right wele;
 [2993] So thou thee kepe fro folye,
 [2994] Shall no man do thee vylanye.
 [2995] If I may helpe you in ought,
 [2996] I shall not feyne, dredeth nought,
 [2997] For I am bounde to youre servise,
 [2998] Fully devoide of feyntise."
 [2999] Thanne unto Bialacoil saide I,
 [3000] "I thanke you, sir, full hertely,
 [3001] And youre biheeste take at gre,
 [3002] That ye so goodly profer me.
 [3003] To you it cometh of gret fraunchise
 [3004] That ye me profer youre servise."
 [3005] Thanne aftir, full delyverly,
 [3006] Thorough the breres anoon wente I,
 [3007] Wherof encombred was the hay.
 [3008] I was wel plesed, the soth to say,
 [3009] To se the botoun faire and swote
 [3010] So freshe spronge out of the rote.
 [3011] And Bialacoil me served well,
 [3012] Whanne I so nygh me myghte fel
 [3013] Of the botoun the swete odour,
 [3014] And so lusty hewed of colour.
 [3015] But thanne a cherl (foule hym bityde!)
 [3016] Biside the roses gan hym hyde,
 [3017] To kepe the roses of that roser,
 [3018] Of whom the name was Daunger.
 [3019] This cherl was hid there in the greves,
 [3020] Kovered with gras and with leves,
 [3021] To spie and take whom that he fond
 [3022] Unto that roser putte an hond.
 [3023] He was not sool, for ther was moo,
 [3024] For with hym were other twoo
 [3025] Of wikkid maners and yvel fame.
 [3026] That oon was clepid, by his name,
 [3027] Wykked-Tonge -- God yeve hym sorwe! --
 [3028] For neither at eve ne at morwe,
 [3029] He can of no man good speke;
 [3030] On many a just man doth he wreke.
 [3031] Ther was a womman eke that hight
 [3032] Shame, that, who can reken right,
 [3033] Trespas was hir fadir name,
 [3034] Hir moder Resoun; and thus was Shame
 [3035] Brought of these ilke twoo.
 [3036] And yitt hadde Trespas never adoo
 [3037] With Resoun, ne never ley hir by,
 [3038] He was so hidous and so ugly,
 [3039] I mene this that Trespas highte;
 [3040] But Resoun conceyveth of a sighte
 [3041] Shame, of that I spak aforn.
 [3042] And whanne that Shame was thus born,
 [3043] It was ordeyned that Chastite
 [3044] Shulde of the roser lady be,
 [3045] Which, of the botouns more and las,
 [3046] With sondry folk assailed was,
 [3047] That she ne wiste what to doo.
 [3048] For Venus hir assailith soo,
 [3049] That nyght and day from hir she stal
 [3050] Botouns and roses overal.
 [3051] To Resoun thanne praieth Chastite,
 [3052] Whom Venus hath flemed over the see,
 [3053] That she hir doughter wolde hir lene,
 [3054] To kepe the roser fresh and grene.
 [3055] Anoon Resoun to Chastite
 [3056] Is fully assented that it be,
 [3057] And grauntide hir, at hir request,
 [3058] That Shame, by cause she [is. honest,
 [3059] Shall keper of the roser be.
 [3060] And thus to kepe it ther were three,
 [3061] That noon shulde hardy be ne bold,
 [3062] Were he yong or were he old,
 [3063] Ageyn hir will awey to bere
 [3064] Botouns ne roses that there were.
 [3065] I hadde wel sped, hadde I not ben
 [3066] Awayted with these three and sen.
 [3067] For Bialacoil, that was so fair,
 [3068] So gracious and debonair,
 [3069] Quytt hym to me full curteisly,
 [3070] And, me to plese, bad that I
 [3071] Shulde drawe me to the botoun ner;
 [3072] Prese in, to touche the roser
 [3073] Which bar the roses, he yaf me leve;
 [3074] This graunt ne myght but lytel greve.
 [3075] And for he saw it liked me,
 [3076] Ryght nygh the botoun pullede he
 [3077] A leef all grene, and yaff me that,
 [3078] The whiche ful nygh the botoun sat.
 [3079] I made [me] of that leef full queynt,
 [3080] And whanne I felte I was aqueynt
 [3081] With Bialacoil, and so pryve,
 [3082] I wende all at my will hadde be.
 [3083] Thanne wax I hardy for to tel
 [3084] To Bialacoil hou me bifel
 [3085] Of Love, that tok and wounded me,
 [3086] And seide, "Sir, so mote I thee,
 [3087] I may no joye have in no wise,
 [3088] Uppon no side, but it rise.
 [3089] For sithe (if I shall not feyne)
 [3090] In herte I have had so gret peyne,
 [3091] So gret annoy and such affray,
 [3092] That I ne wot what I shall say;
 [3093] I drede youre wrath to disserve.
 [3094] Lever me were that knyves kerve
 [3095] My body shulde in pecys smale,
 [3096] Than in any wise it shulde falle
 [3097] That ye wratthed shulde ben with me."
 [3098] "Sey boldely thi will," quod he,
 [3099] "I nyl be wroth, if that I may,
 [3100] For nought that thou shalt to me say."
 [3101] Thanne seide I, "Ser, not you displease
 [3102] To knowen of my gret unese,
 [3103] In which oonly Love hath me brought;
 [3104] For peynes gret, disese, and thought
 [3105] Fro day to day he doth me drye;
 [3106] Supposeth not, sir, that I lye.
 [3107] In me fyve woundes dide he make,
 [3108] The soore of whiche shall nevere slake,
 [3109] But ye the botoun graunte me,
 [3110] Which is moost passaunt of beaute,
 [3111] My lyf, my deth, and my martire,
 [3112] And tresour that I moost desire."
 [3113] Thanne Bialacoil, affrayed all,
 [3114] Seyde, "Sir, it may not fall;
 [3115] That ye desire, it may not arise.
 [3116] What? Wolde ye shende me in this wise?
 [3117] A mochel fool thanne I were,
 [3118] If I suffride you awey to bere
 [3119] The fresh botoun so faire of sight.
 [3120] For it were neither skile ne right,
 [3121] Of the roser ye broke the rynde,
 [3122] Or take the Rose aforn his kynde.
 [3123] Ye are not curteys to aske it.
 [3124] Late it still on the roser sitt
 [3125] And growe til it amended be,
 [3126] And parfytly come to beaute.
 [3127] I nolde not that it pulled were
 [3128] Fro the roser that it bere,
 [3129] To me it is so leef and deer."
 [3130] With that sterte oute anoon Daunger,
 [3131] Out of the place were he was hid.
 [3132] His malice in his chere was kid;
 [3133] Full gret he was and blak of hewe,
 [3134] Sturdy and hidous, whoso hym knewe;
 [3135] Like sharp urchouns his her was growe;
 [3137] His nose frounced, full kirked stood.
 [3138] He com criand as he were wood,
 [3139] And seide, "Bialacoil, telle me why
 [3140] Thou bryngest hider so booldely
 [3141] Hym that so nygh [is. the roser?
 [3142] Thou worchist in a wrong maner.
 [3143] He thenkith to dishonoure thee;
 [3144] Thou art wel worthy to have maugree
 [3145] To late hym of the roser wit.
 [3146] Who serveth a feloun is yvel quit.
 [3147] Thou woldist have doon gret bounte,
 [3148] And he with shame wolde quyte thee.
 [3149] Fle hennes, felowe! I rede thee goo!
 [3150] It wanteth litel I wole thee sloo.
 [3151] For Bialacoil ne knew thee nought,
 [3152] Whanne thee to serve he sette his thought;
 [3153] For thou wolt shame hym, if thou myght,
 [3154] Bothe ageyns resoun and right.
 [3155] I wole no more in thee affye,
 [3156] That comest so slyghly for t' espye;
 [3157] For it preveth wonder well,
 [3158] Thy slight and tresoun, every deell."
 [3159] I durst no more there make abod
 [3160] For the cherl, he was so wod,
 [3161] So gan he threte and manace,
 [3162] And thurgh the haye he dide me chace.
 [3163] For feer of hym I tremblyde and quok,
 [3164] So cherlishly his heed it shok,
 [3165] And seide, if eft he myght me take,
 [3166] I shulde not from his hondis scape.
 [3167] Thanne Bialacoil is fled and mat,
 [3168] And I, all sool, disconsolat,
 [3169] Was left aloone in peyne and thought;
 [3170] For shame to deth I was nygh brought.
 [3171] Thanne thought I on myn high foly,
 [3172] How that my body utterly
 [3173] Was yeve to peyne and to martire;
 [3174] And therto hadde I so gret ire,
 [3175] That I ne durst the hayes passe.
 [3176] There was noon hope; there was no grace.
 [3177] I trowe nevere man wiste of peyne,
 [3178] But he were laced in loves cheyne;
 [3179] Ne no man [wot], and sooth it is,
 [3180] But if he love, what anger is.
 [3181] Love holdith his heest to me right wel,
 [3182] Whanne peyne he seide I shulde fel;
 [3183] Noon herte may thenke, ne tunge seyn,
 [3184] A quarter of my woo and peyn.
 [3185] I myght not with the anger laste;
 [3186] Myn herte in poynt was for to braste,
 [3187] Whanne I thought on the Rose, that soo
 [3188] Was thurgh Daunger cast me froo.
 [3189] A long while stod I in that stat,
 [3190] Til that me saugh so mad and mat
 [3191] The lady of the highe ward,
 [3192] Which from hir tour lokide thiderward.
 [3193] Resoun men clepe that lady,
 [3194] Which from hir tour delyverly
 [3195] Com doun to me, withouten mor.
 [3196] But she was neither yong ne hoor,
 [3197] Ne high ne lowe, ne fat ne lene,
 [3198] But best as it were in a mene.
 [3199] Hir eyen twoo were cleer and light
 [3200] As ony candell that brenneth bright;
 [3201] And on hir heed she hadde a crowne.
 [3202] Hir semede wel an high persoune,
 [3203] For round enviroun, hir crownet
 [3204] Was full of riche stonys frett.
 [3205] Hir goodly semblaunt, by devys,
 [3206] I trowe were maad in paradys,
 [3207] For Nature hadde nevere such a grace,
 [3208] To forge a werk of such compace.
 [3209] For certeyn, but if the letter ly,
 [3210] God hymsilf, that is so high,
 [3211] Made hir aftir his ymage,
 [3212] And yaff hir sith sich avauntage
 [3213] That she hath myght and seignorie
 [3214] To kepe men from all folye.
 [3215] Whoso wole trowe hir lore,
 [3216] Ne may offenden nevermore.
 [3217] And while I stod thus derk and pale,
 [3218] Resoun bigan to me hir tale.
 [3219] She seide, "Al hayl, my swete freend!
 [3220] Foly and childhood wol thee sheend,
 [3221] Which the have putt in gret affray.
 [3222] Thou hast bought deere the tyme of May,
 [3223] That made thyn herte mery to be.
 [3224] In yvell tyme thou wentist to see
 [3225] The gardyn, whereof Ydilnesse
 [3226] Bar the keye and was maistresse,
 [3227] Whanne thou yedest in the daunce
 [3228] With hir, and haddest aqueyntaunce.
 [3229] Hir aqueyntaunce is perilous,
 [3230] First softe, and aftir noious;
 [3231] She hath [thee] trasshed, withoute wen.
 [3232] The God of Love hadde the not sen,
 [3233] Ne hadde Ydilnesse thee conveyed
 [3234] In the verger where Myrthe hym pleyed.
 [3235] If foly have supprised thee,
 [3236] Do so that it recovered be,
 [3237] And be wel ware to take nomore
 [3238] Counsel, that greveth aftir sore.
 [3239] He is wis that wol hymsilf chastise.
 [3240] And though a yong man in ony wise
 [3241] Trespace among, and do foly,
 [3242] Late hym not tarye, but hastily
 [3243] Late hym amende what so be mys.
 [3244] And eke I counseile thee, iwys,
 [3245] The God of Love hoolly foryet,
 [3246] That hath thee in sich peyne set,
 [3247] And thee in herte tourmented soo.
 [3248] I can [nat] sen how thou maist goo
 [3249] Other weyes to garisoun;
 [3250] For Daunger, that is so feloun,
 [3251] Felly purposith thee to werreye,
 [3252] Which is ful cruel, the soth to seye.
 [3253] "And yitt of Daunger cometh no blame,
 [3254] In reward of my doughter Shame,
 [3255] Which hath the roses in hir ward,
 [3256] As she that may be no musard.
 [3257] And Wikked-Tunge is with these two,
 [3258] That suffrith no man thider goo;
 [3259] For er a thing be do, he shall,
 [3260] Where that he cometh, overall,
 [3261] In fourty places, if it be sought,
 [3262] Seye thyng that nevere was don ne wrought;
 [3263] So moche tresoun is in his male
 [3264] Of falsnesse, for to seyne a tale.
 [3265] Thou delest with angry folk, ywis;
 [3266] Wherfore to thee bettir is
 [3267] From these folk awey to fare,
 [3268] For they wole make thee lyve in care.
 [3269] This is the yvell that love they call,
 [3270] Wherynne ther is but foly al,
 [3271] For love is foly everydell.
 [3272] Who loveth in no wise may do well,
 [3273] Ne sette his thought on no good werk.
 [3274] His scole he lesith, if he be a clerk.
 [3275] Of other craft eke if he be,
 [3276] He shal not thryve therynne, for he
 [3277] In love shal have more passioun
 [3278] Than monk, hermyte, or chanoun.
 [3279] The peyne is hard, out [of] mesure;
 [3280] The joye may eke no while endure;
 [3281] And in the possessioun
 [3282] Is myche tribulacioun.
 [3283] The joye it is so short lastyng,
 [3284] And but in hap is the getyng;
 [3285] For I see there many in travaille,
 [3286] That atte laste foule fayle.
 [3287] I was nothyng thi counseler,
 [3288] Whanne thou were maad the omager
 [3289] Of God of Love to hastily;
 [3290] Ther was no wisdom, but foly.
 [3291] Thyn herte was joly but not sage,
 [3292] Whanne thou were brought in sich a rage
 [3293] To yelde thee so redily,
 [3294] And to leve of is gret maistry.
 [3295] "I rede thee Love awey to dryve,
 [3296] That makith thee recche not of thi lyve.
 [3297] The foly more fro day to day
 [3298] Shal growe, but thou it putte away.
 [3299] Tak with thy teeth the bridel faste,
 [3300] To daunte thyn herte, and eke thee caste,
 [3301] If that thou maist, to gete thee defence
 [3302] For to redresse thi first offence.
 [3303] Whoso his herte alwey wol leve,
 [3304] Shal fynde among that shal hym greve."
 [3305] Whanne I hir herd thus me chastise,
 [3306] I answerd in ful angry wise.
 [3307] I prayed hir ceessen of hir speche,
 [3308] Outher to chastise me or teche,
 [3309] To bidde me my thought refreyne,
 [3310] Which Love hath caught in his demeyne:
 [3311] "What? Wene ye Love wol consent,
 [3312] That me assailith with bowe bent,
 [3313] To drawe myn herte out of his hond,
 [3314] Which is so qwikly in his bond?
 [3315] That ye counseyle may nevere be,
 [3316] For whanne he first arestide me,
 [3317] He took myn herte so hool hym till,
 [3318] That it is nothyng at my wil.
 [3319] He taught it so hym for to obeye,
 [3320] That he it sparrede with a keye.
 [3321] I pray yow, late me be all stille.
 [3322] For ye may well, if that ye wille,
 [3323] Youre wordis waste in idilnesse;
 [3324] For utterly, withouten gesse,
 [3325] All that ye seyn is but in veyne.
 [3326] Me were lever dye in the peyne,
 [3327] Than Love to me-ward shulde arette
 [3328] Falsheed, or tresoun on me sette.
 [3329] I wole me gete prys or blame,
 [3330] And love trewe, to save my name.
 [3331] Who that me chastisith, I hym hate."
 [3332] With that word Resoun wente hir gate,
 [3333] Whanne she saugh for no sermonynge
 [3334] She myght me fro my foly brynge.
 [3335] Thanne dismaied, I lefte all sool,
 [3336] Forwery, forwandred as a fool,
 [3337] For I ne knew no chevisaunce.
 [3338] Thanne fell into my remembraunce
 [3339] How Love bad me to purveye
 [3340] A felowe to whom I myghte seye
 [3341] My counsell and my pryvete,
 [3342] For that shulde moche availe me.
 [3343] With that bithought I me that I
 [3344] Hadde a felowe faste by,
 [3345] Trewe and siker, curteys and hend,
 [3346] And he was called by name a Freend --
 [3347] A trewer felowe was nowher noon.
 [3348] In haste to hym I wente anoon,
 [3349] And to hym all my woo I tolde;
 [3350] Fro hym right nought I wold witholde.
 [3351] I tolde hym all, withoute wer,
 [3352] And made my compleynt on Daunger,
 [3353] How for to see he was hidous,
 [3354] And to me-ward contrarious,
 [3355] The whiche thurgh his cruelte
 [3356] Was in poynt to [have] meygned me.
 [3357] With Bialacoil whanne he me sey
 [3358] Withynne the gardeyn walke and pley,
 [3359] Fro me he made hym for to go.
 [3360] And I, bilefte aloone in woo,
 [3361] I durst no lenger with hym speke,
 [3362] For Daunger seide he wolde be wreke,
 [3363] Whanne that he saw how I wente
 [3364] The freshe botoun for to hente,
 [3365] If I were hardy to come neer
 [3366] Bitwene the hay and the roser.
 [3367] This freend, whanne he wiste of my thought,
 [3368] He discomforted me right nought,
 [3369] But seide, "Felowe, be not so mad,
 [3370] Ne so abaysshed nor bystad.
 [3371] Mysilf I knowe full well Daunger,
 [3372] And how he is feers of his cheer,
 [3373] At prime temps, love to manace;
 [3374] Ful ofte I have ben in his caas.
 [3375] A feloun first though that he be,
 [3376] Aftir thou shalt hym souple se.
 [3377] Of longe passed I knew hym well;
 [3378] Ungoodly first though men hym feel,
 [3379] He wol meke aftir in his beryng
 [3380] Been, for service and obeysshyng.
 [3381] I shal thee telle what thou shalt doo.
 [3382] Mekely I rede thou go hym to,
 [3383] Of herte pray hym specialy
 [3384] Of thy trespas to have mercy,
 [3385] And hote hym wel, here to plese,
 [3386] That thou shalt nevermore hym displese.
 [3387] Who can best serve of flatery,
 [3388] Shall please Daunger most uttirly."
 [3389] Mi freend hath seid to me so wel
 [3390] That he me esid hath somdell,
 [3391] And eke allegged of my torment;
 [3392] For thurgh hym had I hardement
 [3393] Agayn to Daunger for to go,
 [3394] To preve if I myght meke hym soo.
 [3395] To Daunger came I all ashamed,
 [3396] The which aforn me hadde blamed,
 [3397] Desiryng for to pese my woo,
 [3398] But over hegge durst I not goo,
 [3399] For he forbed me the passage.
 [3400] I fond hym cruel in his rage,
 [3401] And in his hond a gret burdoun.
 [3402] To hym I knelide lowe adoun,
 [3403] Ful meke of port and symple of chere,
 [3404] And seide, "Sir, I am comen heere
 [3405] Oonly to aske of you mercy.
 [3406] That greveth me full gretly
 [3407] That evere my lyf I wratthed you;
 [3408] But for to amenden I am come now,
 [3409] With all my myght, bothe loude and stille,
 [3410] To doon right at youre owne wille.
 [3411] For Love made me for to doo
 [3412] That I have trespassed hidirto,
 [3413] Fro whom I ne may withdrawe myn hert.
 [3414] Yit shall [I] never, for joy ne smert,
 [3415] What so bifalle, good or ill,
 [3416] Offende more ageyn youre will.
 [3417] Lever I have endure disese,
 [3418] Than do that you shulde displese.
 [3419] "I you require and pray that ye
 [3420] Of me have mercy and pitee,
 [3421] To stynte your ire that greveth soo,
 [3422] That I wol swere for ever mo
 [3423] To be redressid at youre likyng,
 [3424] If I trespasse in ony thyng.
 [3425] Save that I pray thee graunte me
 [3426] A thyng that may not warned be,
 [3427] That I may love, all oonly;
 [3428] Noon other thyng of you aske I.
 [3429] I shall doon elles well, iwys,
 [3430] If of youre grace ye graunte me this.
 [3431] And ye may not letten me,
 [3432] For wel wot ye that love is free,
 [3433] And I shall loven, sithen that I will,
 [3434] Who ever like it well or ill;
 [3435] And yit ne wold I, for all Fraunce,
 [3436] Do thyng to do you displesaunce."
 [3437] Thanne Daunger fil in his entent
 [3438] For to foryeve his maltalent;
 [3439] But all his wratthe yit at laste
 [3440] He hath relesed, I preyde so faste.
 [3441] Shortly he seide, "Thy request
 [3442] Is not to mochel dishonest,
 [3443] Ne I wole not werne it thee,
 [3444] For yit nothyng engreveth me.
 [3445] For though thou love thus evermor,
 [3446] To me is neither softe ne soor.
 [3447] Love where that the list -- what recchith me,
 [3448] So [thou] fer fro my roses be?
 [3449] Trust not on me, for noon assay,
 [3450] If ony tyme thou passe the hay."
 [3451] Thus hath he graunted my praiere.
 [3452] Thanne wente I forth, withouten were,
 [3453] Unto my freend, and tolde hym all,
 [3454] Which was right joyful of my tall.
 [3455] He seide, "Now goth wel thyn affaire.
 [3456] He shall to thee be debonaire;
 [3457] Though he aforn was dispitous,
 [3458] He shall heere aftir be gracious.
 [3459] If he were touchid on som good veyne,
 [3460] He shuld yit rewen on thi peyne.
 [3461] Suffre, I rede, and no boost make,
 [3462] Till thou at good mes maist hym take.
 [3463] By sufferaunce and wordis softe
 [3464] A man may overcome ofte
 [3465] Hym that aforn he hadde in drede,
 [3466] In bookis sothly as I rede."
 [3467] Thus hath my freend with gret comfort
 [3468] Avaunced [me] with high disport,
 [3469] Which wolde me good as mych as I.
 [3470] And thanne anoon full sodeynly
 [3471] I tok my leve, and streight I went
 [3472] Unto the hay, for gret talent
 [3473] I hadde to sen the fresh botoun
 [3474] Wherynne lay my salvacioun;
 [3475] And Daunger tok kep if that I
 [3476] Kepe hym covenaunt trewely.
 [3477] So sore I dradde his manasyng,
 [3478] I durst not breke his biddyng;
 [3479] For, lest that I were of hym shent,
 [3480] I brak not his comaundement,
 [3481] For to purchase his good wil.
 [3482] It was [nat] for to come ther-til;
 [3483] His mercy was to fer bihynde.
 [3484] I wepte for I ne myght it fynde.
 [3485] I compleyned and sighed sore,
 [3486] And langwisshed evermore,
 [3487] For I durst not over goo
 [3488] Unto the Rose I loved soo.
 [3489] Thurgh my demenyng outerly
 [3490] Than he had knowledge certanly
 [3491] That Love me ladde in sich a wise
 [3492] That in me ther was no feyntise,
 [3493] Falsheed, ne no trecherie.
 [3494] And yit he, full of vylanye,
 [3495] Of disdeyn, and cruelte,
 [3496] On me ne wolde have pite,
 [3497] His cruel will for to refreyne,
 [3498] Though I wepe alwey, and me compleyne.
 [3499] And while I was in this torment,
 [3500] Were come of grace, by God sent,
 [3501] Fraunchise, and with hir Pite.
 [3502] Fulfild the bothen of bounte,
 [3503] They go to Daunger anoon-right
 [3504] To forther me with all her myght,
 [3505] And helpe in worde and in dede,
 [3506] For well they saugh that it was nede.
 [3507] First, of hir grace, dame Fraunchise
 [3508] Hath taken [word] of this emprise.
 [3509] She seide, "Daunger, gret wrong ye do,
 [3510] To worche this man so myche woo,
 [3511] Or pynen hym so angerly;
 [3512] It is to you gret villany.
 [3513] I can not see why, ne how,
 [3514] That he hath trespassed ageyn you,
 [3515] Save that he loveth, wherfore ye shulde
 [3516] The more in cherete of hym holde.
 [3517] The force of love makith hym do this;
 [3518] Who wolde hym blame he dide amys?
 [3519] He leseth more than ye may do;
 [3520] His peyne is hard, ye may see, lo!
 [3521] And Love in no wise wolde consente
 [3522] That he have power to repente,
 [3523] For though that quyk ye wolde hym sloo,
 [3524] Fro love his herte may not goo.
 [3525] Now, swete sir, is it youre ese
 [3526] Hym for to angre or disese?
 [3527] Allas! what may it you avaunce
 [3528] To don to hym so gret grevaunce?
 [3529] What worship is it agayn hym take,
 [3530] Or on youre man a werre make,
 [3531] Sith he so lowly, every wise,
 [3532] Is redy, as ye lust devise?
 [3533] If Love hath caught hym in his las,
 [3534] You for t' obeye in every caas,
 [3535] And ben youre suget at youre will,
 [3536] Shuld ye therfore willen hym ill?
 [3537] Ye shulde hym spare more, all out,
 [3538] Than hym that is bothe proud and stout.
 [3539] Curtesie wol that ye socoure
 [3540] Hem that ben meke undir youre cure.
 [3541] His herte is hard that wole not meke,
 [3542] Whanne men of mekenesse hym biseke."
 [3543] "That is certeyn," seide Pite;
 [3544] "We se ofte that humilite
 [3545] Bothe ire and also felonye
 [3546] Venquyssheth, and also malencolye.
 [3547] To stonde forth in such duresse,
 [3548] This cruelte and wikkidnesse.
 [3549] Wherfore I pray you, sir Daunger,
 [3550] For to mayntene no lenger heer
 [3551] Such cruel werre agayn youre man,
 [3552] As hoolly youres as ever he can;
 [3553] Nor that ye worchen no more woo
 [3554] Upon this caytif, that langwisshith soo,
 [3555] Which wole no more to you trespasse,
 [3556] But putte hym hoolly in youre grace.
 [3557] His offense ne was but lite;
 [3558] The God of Love it was to wite,
 [3559] That he youre thrall so gretly is,
 [3560] And if ye harme hym, ye don amys.
 [3561] For he hath had full hard penaunce,
 [3562] Sith that ye refte hym th' aqueyntaunce
 [3563] Of Bialacoil, his moste joye,
 [3564] Which alle his peynes myght acoye.
 [3565] He was biforn anoyed sore,
 [3566] But thanne ye doubled hym well more;
 [3567] For he of blis hath ben full bare,
 [3568] Sith Bialacoil was fro hym fare.
 [3569] Love hath to hym do gret distresse,
 [3570] He hath no nede of more duresse.
 [3571] Voideth from hym youre ire, I rede;
 [3572] Ye may not wynnen in this dede.
 [3573] Makith Bialacoil repeire ageyn,
 [3574] And haveth pite upon his peyn;
 [3575] For Fraunchise wole, and I, Pite,
 [3576] That mercyful to hym ye be;
 [3577] And sith that she and I accorde,
 [3578] Have upon hym misericorde.
 [3579] For I you pray and eke moneste
 [3580] Nought to refusen oure requeste,
 [3581] For he is hard and fell of thought,
 [3582] That for us twoo wole do right nought."
 [3583] Daunger ne myght no more endure;
 [3584] He mekede hym unto mesure.
 [3585] "I wole in no wise," seith Daunger,
 [3586] "Denye that ye have asked heer;
 [3587] It were to gret uncurtesie.
 [3588] I wole he have the companye
 [3589] Of Bialacoil, as ye devise;
 [3590] I wole hym lette in no wise."
 [3591] To Bialacoil thanne wente in hy
 [3592] Fraunchise, and seide full curteisly,
 [3593] "Ye have to longe be deignous
 [3594] Unto this lover, and daungerous,
 [3595] Fro him to withdrawe your presence,
 [3596] Which hath do to him gret offence,
 [3597] That ye not wolde upon him se,
 [3598] Wherfore a sorouful man is he.
 [3599] Shape ye to paye him, and to please,
 [3600] Of my love if ye wol have ease.
 [3601] Fulfyl his wyl, sith that ye knowe
 [3602] Daunger is daunted and brought lowe
 [3603] Through help of me and of Pyte.
 [3604] You dar no more afered be."
 [3605] "I shal do right as ye wyl,"
 [3606] Saith Bialacoil, "for it is skyl,
 [3607] Sithe Daunger wol that it so be."
 [3608] Than Fraunchise hath him sent to me.
 [3609] Byalacoil at the begynnyng
 [3610] Salued me in his commyng.
 [3611] No straungenesse was in him sen,
 [3612] No more than he ne had wrathed ben.
 [3613] As fayr semblaunt than shewed he me,
 [3614] And goodly, as aforn dyd he;
 [3615] And by the hond, withouten doute,
 [3616] Within the haye, right al aboute
 [3617] He ladde me, with right good cher,
 [3618] Al envyron the verger,
 [3619] That Daunger hadde me chased fro.
 [3620] Now have I leave overal to go;
 [3621] Now am I raysed, at my devys,
 [3622] Fro helle unto paradys.
 [3623] Thus Bialacoil, of gentylnesse,
 [3624] With al his payne and besynesse,
 [3625] Hath shewed me, only of grace,
 [3626] The estres of the swote place.
 [3627] I saw the Rose, whan I was nygh,
 [3628] Was greatter woxen and more high,
 [3629] Fressh, roddy, and fayr of hewe,
 [3630] Of colour ever yliche newe.
 [3631] And whan I hadde it longe sen,
 [3632] I saw that through the leves gren
 [3633] The Rose spredde to spaunysshing;
 [3634] To sene it was a goodly thyng.
 [3635] But it ne was so spred on bred
 [3636] That men within myght knowe the sed;
 [3637] For it covert was and close,
 [3638] Bothe with the leves and with the rose.
 [3639] The stalke was even and grene upright,
 [3640] It was theron a goodly syght;
 [3641] And wel the better, withoute wene,
 [3642] For the seed was nat sene.
 [3643] Ful fayre it spradde (God it blesse!),
 [3644] For such another, as I gesse,
 [3645] Aforn ne was, ne more vermayle.
 [3646] I was abawed for marveyle,
 [3647] For ever the fayrer that it was,
 [3648] The more I am bounden in Loves laas.
 [3649] Longe I abod there, soth to saye,
 [3650] Tyl Bialacoil I gan to praye,
 [3651] Whan that I saw him in no wyse
 [3652] To me warnen his servyse,
 [3653] That he me wolde graunt a thyng,
 [3654] Which to remembre is wel syttyng;
 [3655] This is to sayn, that of his grace
 [3656] He wolde me yeve leysar and space,
 [3657] To me that was so desyrous,
 [3658] To have a kyssynge precious
 [3659] Of the goodly fresshe Rose,
 [3660] That so swetely smelleth in my nose.
 [3661] "For if it you displeased nought,
 [3662] I wolde gladly, as I have sought,
 [3663] Have a cos therof freely,
 [3664] Of your yefte; for certainly,
 [3665] I wol non have but by your leve,
 [3666] So loth me were you for to greve."
 [3667] He sayde, "Frend, so God me spede,
 [3668] Of Chastite I have such drede;
 [3669] Thou shuldest nat warned be for me,
 [3670] But I dar nat for Chastyte.
 [3671] Agayn her dar I nat mysdo,
 [3672] For alway byddeth she me so
 [3673] To yeve no lover leave to kys,
 [3674] For who therto may wynnen, ywis,
 [3675] He of the surplus of the pray
 [3676] May lyve in hoope to get som day.
 [3677] For whoso kyssynge may attayne
 [3678] Of loves payne hath (soth to sayne)
 [3679] The beste and most avenaunt,
 [3680] And ernest of the remenaunt."
 [3681] Of his answere I sighed sore;
 [3682] I durst assaye him tho no more,
 [3683] I hadde such drede to greve him ay.
 [3684] A man shulde nat to moche assay
 [3685] To chafe hys frend out of measure,
 [3686] Nor putte his lyf in aventure;
 [3687] For no man at the firste strok
 [3688] Ne may nat felle down an ok,
 [3689] Nor of the reysyns have the wyn,
 [3690] Tyl grapes be rype, and wel afyn
 [3691] Be sore empressid, I you ensure,
 [3692] And drawen out of the pressure.
 [3693] But I, forpeyned wonder stronge,
 [3694] Thought that I abood right longe
 [3695] Aftir the kis, in peyne and woo,
 [3696] Sith I to kis desired soo;
 [3697] Till that, rewyng on my distresse,
 [3698] Ther to me Venus the goddesse,
 [3699] Which ay werreyeth Chastite,
 [3700] Cam of hir grace to socoure me,
 [3701] Whos myght is knowe fer and wide,
 [3702] For she is modir of Cupide,
 [3703] The God of Love, blynde as stoon,
 [3704] That helpith lovers many oon.
 [3705] This lady brought in hir right hond
 [3706] Of brennyng fyr a blasyng brond,
 [3707] Wherof the flawme and hoote fir
 [3708] Hath many a lady in desir
 [3709] Of love brought, and sore het,
 [3710] And in hir servise her hertes set.
 [3711] This lady was of good entaile,
 [3712] Right wondirfull of apparayle.
 [3713] Bi hir atyr so bright and shen
 [3714] Men myght perceyve well and sen
 [3715] She was not of religioun.
 [3716] Nor I nell make mencioun
 [3717] Nor of robe, nor of tresour,
 [3718] Of broche, neithir of hir riche attour,
 [3719] Ne of hir girdill aboute hir side,
 [3720] For that I nyll not longe abide.
 [3721] But knowith wel that certeynly
 [3722] She was araied richely.
 [3723] Devoyd of pryde certeyn she was.
 [3724] To Bialacoil she wente apas,
 [3725] And to hym shortly, in a clause,
 [3726] She seide, "Sir, what is the cause
 [3727] Ye ben of port so daungerous
 [3728] Unto this lover and deynous,
 [3729] To graunte hym nothyng but a kis?
 [3730] To werne it hym ye don amys,
 [3731] Sith well ye wote how that he
 [3732] Is Loves servaunt, as ye may see,
 [3733] And hath beaute, wherthrough [he] is
 [3734] Worthy of love to have the blis.
 [3735] How he is semely, biholde and see,
 [3736] How he is fair, how he is free,
 [3737] How he is swoote and debonair,
 [3738] Of age yong, lusty, and fair.
 [3739] Ther is no lady so hawteyn,
 [3740] Duchesse, ne countesse, ne chasteleyn,
 [3741] That I nolde holde hir ungoodly
 [3742] For to refuse hym outterly.
 [3743] His breth is also good and swete,
 [3744] And eke his lippis rody, and mete
 [3745] Oonly to pleyen and to kisse.
 [3746] Graunte hym a kis, of gentilnysse!
 [3747] His teth arn also white and clene;
 [3748] Me thinkith wrong, withouten wene,
 [3749] If ye now werne hym, trustith me,
 [3750] To graunte that a kis have he.
 [3751] The lasse to helpe hym that ye haste,
 [3752] The more tyme shul ye waste."
 [3753] Whanne the flawme of the verry brond,
 [3754] That Venus brought in hir right hond,
 [3755] Hadde Bialacoil with hete smete,
 [3756] Anoon he bad, withouten lette,
 [3757] Graunte to me the Rose kisse.
 [3758] Thanne of my peyne I gan to lysse,
 [3759] And to the Rose anoon wente I,
 [3760] And kisside it full feithfully.
 [3761] Thar no man aske if I was blithe,
 [3762] Whanne the savour soft and lythe
 [3763] Strok to myn herte withoute more,
 [3764] And me alegged of my sore,
 [3765] So was I full of joye and blisse.
 [3766] It is fair sich a flour to kisse,
 [3767] It was so swoote and saverous.
 [3768] I myght not be so angwisshous
 [3769] That I [ne] mote glad and joly be,
 [3770] Whanne that I remembre me.
 [3771] Yit ever among, sothly to seyne,
 [3772] I suffre noy and moche peyne.
 [3773] The see may never be so stille
 [3774] That with a litel wynde it nille
 [3775] Overwhelme and turne also,
 [3776] As it were wood in wawis goo.
 [3777] Aftir the calm the trouble sone
 [3778] Mot folowe and chaunge as the moone.
 [3779] Right so farith Love, that selde in oon
 [3780] Holdith his anker, for right anoon
 [3781] Whanne they in ese wene best to lyve,
 [3782] They ben with tempest all fordryve.
 [3783] Who serveth Love can telle of woo;
 [3784] The stoundemele joie mot overgoo.
 [3785] Now he hurteth, and now he cureth.
 [3786] For selde in oo poynt Love endureth.
 [3787] Now is it right me to procede,
 [3788] How Shame gan medle and take hede
 [3789] Thurgh whom fele angres I have had,
 [3790] And how the stronge wall was maad,
 [3791] And the castell of brede and lengthe,
 [3792] That God of Love wan with his strengthe.
 [3793] All this in romance will I sette,
 [3794] And for nothyng ne will I lette,
 [3795] So that it lykyng to hir be,
 [3796] That is the flour of beaute,
 [3797] For she may best my labour quyte,
 [3798] That I for hir love shal endite.
 [3799] Wikkid-Tunge, that the covyne
 [3800] Of every lover can devyne
 [3801] Worst, and addith more somdell
 [3802] (For Wikkid-Tunge seith never well),
 [3803] To me-ward bar he right gret hate,
 [3804] Espiyng me erly and late,
 [3805] Till he hath sen the grete chere
 [3806] Of Bialacoil and me ifeere.
 [3807] He myghte not his tunge withstond
 [3808] Worse to reporte than he fond,
 [3809] He was so full of cursed rage.
 [3810] It sat hym well of his lynage,
 [3811] For hym an Irish womman bar.
 [3812] His tunge was fyled sharp and squar,
 [3813] Poignaunt, and right kervyng,
 [3814] And wonder bitter in spekyng.
 [3815] For whanne that he me gan espie,
 [3816] He swoor, affermyng sikirlye,
 [3817] Bitwene Bialacoil and me
 [3818] Was yvel aquayntaunce and pryve.
 [3819] He spak therof so folily
 [3820] That he awakide Jelousy,
 [3821] Which, all afrayed in his risyng,
 [3822] Whanne that he herde janglyng,
 [3823] He ran anoon, as he were wood,
 [3824] To Bialacoil, there that he stod,
 [3825] Which hadde lever in this caas
 [3826] Have ben at Reynes or Amyas;
 [3827] For foot-hoot, in his felonye,
 [3828] To hym thus seide Jelousie:
 [3829] "Why hast thou ben so necligent
 [3830] To kepen, whanne I was absent,
 [3831] This verger heere left in thi ward?
 [3832] To me thou haddist no reward,
 [3833] To truste (to thy confusioun!)
 [3834] Hym thus, to whom suspeccioun
 [3835] I have right gret, for it is nede;
 [3836] It is well shewed by the dede.
 [3837] Gret faute in thee now have I founde.
 [3838] By God, anoon thou shalt be bounde,
 [3839] And faste loken in a tour,
 [3840] Withoute refuyt or socour.
 [3841] For Shame to longe hath be thee froo;
 [3842] Over-soone she was agoo.
 [3843] Whanne thou hast lost bothe drede and feere,
 [3844] It semede wel she was not heere.
 [3845] She was bisy in no wyse
 [3846] To kepe thee and chastise,
 [3847] And for to helpen Chastite
 [3848] To kepe the roser, as thenkith me.
 [3849] For thanne this boy-knave so booldely
 [3850] Ne shulde not have be hardy,
 [3851] [Ne] in this verger hadde such game,
 [3852] Which now me turneth to gret shame."
 [3853] Bialacoil nyste what to sey;
 [3854] Full fayn he wolde have fled awey,
 [3855] For feere han hid, nere that he
 [3856] All sodeynly tok hym with me.
 [3857] And whanne I saugh he hadde soo,
 [3858] This Jelousie, take us twoo,
 [3859] I was astoned, and knew no red,
 [3860] But fledde awey for verrey dred.
 [3861] Thanne Shame cam forth full symply
 [3862] (She wende have trespaced full gretly),
 [3863] Humble of hir port, and made it symple,
 [3864] Weryng a vayle in stide of wymple,
 [3865] As nonnys don in her abbey.
 [3866] By cause hir herte was in affray,
 [3867] She gan to speke withynne a throwe
 [3868] To Jelousie right wonder lowe.
 [3869] First of his grace she bysought,
 [3870] And seide, "Sire, ne leveth nought
 [3871] Wikkid-Tunge, that false espie,
 [3872] Which is so glad to feyne and lye.
 [3873] He hath you maad, thurgh flateryng,
 [3874] On Bialacoil a fals lesyng.
 [3875] His falsnesse is not now a-new;
 [3876] It is to long that he hym knew.
 [3877] This is not the firste day,
 [3878] For Wikkid-Tunge hath custome ay
 [3879] Yonge folkis to bewreye,
 [3880] And false lesynges on hem leye.
 [3881] "Yit nevertheles I see among,
 [3882] That the loigne it is so long,
 [3883] Of Bialacoil, hertis to lure,
 [3884] In Loves servyse for to endure,
 [3885] Drawyng suche folk hym to,
 [3886] That he hath nothyng with to doo.
 [3887] But in sothnesse I trowe nought
 [3888] That Bialacoil hadde ever in thought
 [3889] To do trespas or vylonye,
 [3890] But for his modir Curtesie
 [3891] Hath taught hym ever to be
 [3892] Good of aqueyntaunce and pryve.
 [3893] For he loveth noon hevynesse,
 [3894] But mirthe and pley and all gladnesse;
 [3895] He hateth alle trecherous,
 [3896] Soleyn folk, and envyous;
 [3897] For ye witen how that he
 [3898] Wol ever glad and joyfull be
 [3899] Honestly with folk to pley.
 [3900] I have be negligent, in good fey,
 [3901] To chastise hym; therfore now I
 [3902] Of herte crye you heere mercy,
 [3903] That I have been so recheles
 [3904] To tamen hym, withouten lees.
 [3905] Of my foly I me repente.
 [3906] Now wole I hool sette myn entente
 [3907] To kepe, bothe lowde and stille,
 [3908] Bialacoil to do youre wille."
 [3909] "Shame, Shame," seyde Jelousy,
 [3910] "To be bytrasshed gret drede have I.
 [3911] Leccherie hath clombe so hye
 [3912] That almoost blered is myn ye;
 [3913] No wonder is, if that drede have I.
 [3914] Overall regnyth Lecchery,
 [3915] Whos myght growith nyght and day
 [3916] Bothe in cloistre and in abbey.
 [3917] Chastite is werreyed overall;
 [3918] Therfore I wole with siker wall
 [3919] Close bothe roses and roser.
 [3920] I have to longe in this maner
 [3921] Left hem unclosid wilfully;
 [3922] Wherfore I am right inwardly
 [3923] Sorowfull, and repente me.
 [3924] But now they shall no lenger be
 [3925] Unclosid; and yit I drede sore,
 [3926] I shall repente ferthermore,
 [3927] For the game goth all amys.
 [3928] Counsell I must newe, ywys.
 [3929] I have to longe tristed thee,
 [3930] But now it shal no lenger be,
 [3931] For he may best, in every cost,
 [3932] Disceyve, that men tristen most.
 [3933] I see wel that I am nygh shent,
 [3934] But if I sette my full entent
 [3935] Remedye to purveye.
 [3936] Therfore close I shall the weye
 [3937] Fro hem that wole the Rose espie,
 [3938] And come to wayte me vilonye,
 [3939] For, in good feith and in trouthe,
 [3940] I wole not lette for no slouthe
 [3941] To lyve the more in sikirnesse,
 [3942] To make anoon a forteresse,
 [3943] T' enclose the roses of good savour.
 [3944] In myddis shall I make a tour
 [3945] To putte Bialacoil in prisoun,
 [3946] For evere I drede me of tresoun.
 [3947] I trowe I shal hym kepe soo
 [3948] That he shal have no myght to goo
 [3949] Aboute to make companye
 [3950] To hem that thenke of vylanye;
 [3951] Ne to no such as hath ben heere
 [3952] Aforn, and founde in hym good chere,
 [3953] Which han assailed hym to shende,
 [3954] And with her trowandyse to blende.
 [3955] A fool is eythe to bigyle;
 [3956] But may I lyve a litel while,
 [3957] He shal forthenke his fair semblaunt."
 [3958] And with that word came Drede avaunt,
 [3959] Which was abasshed and in gret fere,
 [3960] Whanne he wiste Jelousie was there.
 [3961] He was for drede in sich affray
 [3962] That not a word durste he say,
 [3963] But quakyng stod full still aloon,
 [3964] Til Jelousie his weye was gon,
 [3965] Save Shame, that him not forsok.
 [3966] Bothe Drede and she ful sore quok,
 [3967] That atte laste Drede abreyde,
 [3968] And to his cosyn Shame seide:
 [3969] "Shame," he seide, "in sothfastnesse,
 [3970] To me it is gret hevynesse
 [3971] That the noyse so fer is go,
 [3972] And the sclaundre of us twoo.
 [3973] But sithe that it is byfalle,
 [3974] We may it not ageyn calle
 [3975] Whanne onys sprongen is a fame.
 [3976] For many a yeer withouten blame
 [3977] We han ben, and many a day;
 [3978] For many an Aprill and many a May
 [3979] We han passed, not shamed,
 [3980] Till Jelousie hath us blamed,
 [3981] Of mystrust and suspecioun,
 [3982] Causeles, withoute enchesoun.
 [3983] Go we to Daunger hastily,
 [3984] And late us shewe hym openly
 [3985] That [he] hath not aright wrought,
 [3986] Whanne that [he] sette nought his thought
 [3987] To kepe better the purprise;
 [3988] In his doyng he is not wise.
 [3989] He hath to us do gret wrong,
 [3990] That hath suffred now so long
 [3991] Bialacoil to have his wille,
 [3992] All his lustes to fulfille.
 [3993] He must amende it utterly,
 [3994] Or ellys shall he vilaynesly
 [3995] Exiled be out of this lond;
 [3996] For he the werre may not withstond
 [3997] Of Jelousie, nor the greef,
 [3998] Sith Bialacoil is at myscheef."
 [3999] To Daunger, Shame and Drede anoon
 [4000] The righte weye ben goon.
 [4001] The cherl thei founden hem aforn,
 [4002] Liggyng undir an hawethorn;
 [4003] Undir his heed no pilowe was,
 [4004] But in the stede a trusse of gras.
 [4005] He slombred, and a nappe he tok,
 [4006] Tyll Shame pitously hym shok,
 [4007] And grete manace on hym gan make.
 [4008] "Why slepist thou, whanne thou shulde wake?"
 [4009] Quod Shame; "Thou doist us vylanye!
 [4010] Who tristith thee, he doth folye,
 [4011] To kepe roses or botouns,
 [4012] Whanne thei ben faire in her sesouns.
 [4013] Thou art woxe to familiere,
 [4014] Where thou shulde be straunge of chere,
 [4015] Stout of thi port, redy to greve.
 [4016] Thou doist gret folye for to leve
 [4017] Bialacoil hereinne to calle
 [4018] The yonder man to shenden us alle.
 [4019] Though that thou slepe, we may here
 [4020] Of Jelousie gret noyse heere.
 [4021] Art thou now late? Ris up in hy,
 [4022] And stop sone and delyverly
 [4023] All the gappis of the haye.
 [4024] Do no favour, I thee praye.
 [4025] It fallith nothyng to thy name
 [4026] To make faire semblaunt, where thou maist blame.
 [4027] Yf Bialacoil be sweete and free,
 [4028] Dogged and fell thou shuldist be,
 [4029] Froward and outrageous, ywis;
 [4030] A cherl chaungeth that curteis is.
 [4031] This have I herd ofte in seiyng,
 [4032] That man [ne] may, for no dauntyng,
 [4033] Make a sperhauk of a bosard.
 [4034] Alle men wole holde thee for musard,
 [4035] That debonair have founden thee;
 [4036] It sittith thee nought curteis to be.
 [4037] To do men plesaunce or servise,
 [4038] In thee it is recreaundise.
 [4039] Let thi werkis fer and ner
 [4040] Be like thi name, which is Daunger."
 [4041] Thanne, all abawid in shewing,
 [4042] Anoon spak Drede, right thus seiyng,
 [4043] And seide, "Daunger, I drede me
 [4044] That thou ne wolt bisy be
 [4045] To kepe that thou hast to kepe:
 [4046] Whanne thou shuldist wake, thou art aslepe.
 [4047] Thou shalt be greved, certeynly,
 [4048] If the aspie Jelousy,
 [4049] Or if he fynde thee in blame.
 [4050] He hath to-day assailed Shame,
 [4051] And chased awey with gret manace
 [4052] Bialacoil out of this place,
 [4053] And swereth shortly that he shall
 [4054] Enclose hym in a sturdy wall;
 [4055] And all is for thi wikkednesse,
 [4056] For that thee faileth straungenesse.
 [4057] Thyn herte, I trowe, be failed all;
 [4058] Thou shalt repente in speciall,
 [4059] If Jelousie the soothe knewe;
 [4060] Thou shalt forthenke and sore rewe."
 [4061] With that the cherl his clubbe gan shake,
 [4062] Frounyng his eyen gan to make,
 [4063] And hidous chere; as man in rage
 [4064] For ire he brente in his visage,
 [4065] Whanne that [he] herd hym blamed soo.
 [4066] He seide, "Out of my wit I goo!
 [4067] To be discomfyt I have gret wrong.
 [4068] Certis, I have now lyved to long,
 [4069] Sith I may not this closer kepe.
 [4070] All quyk I wolde be dolven deepe,
 [4071] If ony man shal more repeire
 [4072] Into this gardyn, for foule or faire.
 [4073] Myn herte for ire goth a-fere,
 [4074] That I let ony entre heere.
 [4075] I have do folie, now I see,
 [4076] But now it shall amended bee.
 [4077] Who settith foot heere ony more,
 [4078] Truly he shall repente it sore;
 [4079] For no man moo into this place
 [4080] Of me to entre shal have grace.
 [4081] Lever I hadde with swerdis tweyne
 [4082] Thurghoute myn herte in every veyne
 [4083] Perced to be with many a wounde,
 [4084] Thanne slouthe shulde in me be founde.
 [4085] From hennes forth, by nyght or day,
 [4086] I shall defende it, if I may,
 [4087] Withouten ony excepcioun
 [4088] Of ech maner condicioun.
 [4089] And if I it eny man graunt,
 [4090] Holdeth me for recreaunt."
 [4091] Thanne Daunger on his feet gan stond,
 [4092] And hente a burdoun in his hond.
 [4093] Wroth in his ire, ne lefte he nought,
 [4094] But thurgh the verger he hath sought.
 [4095] If he myght fynde hole or trace,
 [4096] Wherethurgh that me mot forth-by pace,
 [4097] Or ony gappe, he dide it close,
 [4098] That no man myghte touche a rose
 [4099] Of the roser all aboute.
 [4100] He shitteth every man withoute.
 [4101] Thus day by day Daunger is wers,
 [4102] More wondirfull and more dyvers,
 [4103] And feller eke than evere he was.
 [4104] For hym full ofte I synge "Allas!"
 [4105] For I ne may nought, thurgh his ire,
 [4106] Recovere that I moost desire.
 [4107] Myn herte, allas, wole brest a-twoo,
 [4108] For Bialacoil I wratthed soo.
 [4109] For certeynly, in every membre
 [4110] I quake, whanne I me remembre
 [4111] Of the botoun, which I wolde
 [4112] Full ofte a day sen and biholde.
 [4113] And whanne I thenke upon the kiss,
 [4114] And how myche joye and bliss
 [4115] I hadde thurgh the savour swete,
 [4116] For want of it I grone and grete.
 [4117] Me thenkith I fele yit in my nose
 [4118] The swete savour of the Rose.
 [4119] And now I woot that I mot goo
 [4120] So fer the freshe floures froo,
 [4121] To me full welcome were the deth.
 [4122] Absens therof, allas, me sleeth.
 [4123] For whilom with this Rose -- allas! --
 [4124] I touched nose, mouth, and face;
 [4125] But now the deth I must abide.
 [4126] But Love consente another tyde
 [4127] That onys I touche may and kisse,
 [4128] I trowe my peyne shall never lisse;
 [4129] Theron is all my coveitise,
 [4130] Which brent myn herte in many wise.
 [4131] Now shal repaire agayn sighinge,
 [4132] Long wacche on nyghtis, and no slepinge,
 [4133] Thought in wisshing, torment and woo,
 [4134] With many a turnyng to and froo,
 [4135] That half my peyne I can not telle.
 [4136] For I am fallen into helle
 [4137] From paradys, and wel the more
 [4138] My turment greveth. more and more
 [4139] Anoieth now the bittirnesse,
 [4140] That I toforn have felt swetnesse.
 [4141] And Wikkid-Tunge, thurgh his falshede,
 [4142] Causeth all my woo and drede.
 [4143] On me he leieth a pitous charge,
 [4144] Bicause his tunge was to large.
 [4145] Now it is tyme, shortly, that I
 [4146] Telle you som thyng of Jelousy,
 [4147] That was in gret suspecioun.
 [4148] Aboute hym lefte he no masoun,
 [4149] That stoon coude leye, ne querrour;
 [4150] He hirede hem to make a tour.
 [4151] And first, the roses for to kep,
 [4152] Aboute hem made he a diche deep,
 [4153] Right wondir large, and also brood;
 [4154] Upon the whiche also stod
 [4155] Of squared stoon a sturdy wall,
 [4156] Which on a cragge was founded all;
 [4157] And right gret thikkenesse eke it bar.
 [4158] Aboute, it was founded squar,
 [4159] An hundred fademe on every sid;
 [4160] It was all liche longe and wid.
 [4161] Lest ony tyme it were assayled,
 [4162] Ful wel aboute it was batayled,
 [4163] And rounde enviroun eke were set
 [4164] Ful many a riche and fair touret.
 [4165] At every corner of this wall
 [4166] Was set a tour full pryncipall;
 [4167] And everich hadde, withoute fable,
 [4168] A porte-colys defensable
 [4169] To kepe of enemyes, and to greve,
 [4170] That there her force wolde preve.
 [4171] And eke amydde this purprise
 [4172] Was maad a tour of gret maistrise;
 [4173] A fairer saugh no man with sight,
 [4174] Large and wid, and of gret myght.
 [4175] They dredde noon assaut
 [4176] Of gyn, gunne, nor skaffaut.
 [4177] The temperure of the morter
 [4178] Was maad of lycour wonder der,
 [4179] Of quykke lym, persant and egre,
 [4180] The which was tempred with vynegre.
 [4181] The stoon was hard, of ademant,
 [4182] Wherof they made the foundement.
 [4183] The tour was round, maad in compas;
 [4184] In all this world no riccher was,
 [4185] Ne better ordeigned therwithall.
 [4186] Aboute the tour was maad a wall,
 [4187] So that bitwixt that and the tour
 [4188] Rosers were sette of swete savour,
 [4189] With many roses that thei bere;
 [4190] And eke withynne the castell were
 [4191] Spryngoldes, gunnes, bows, and archers;
 [4192] And eke above, atte corners,
 [4193] Men seyn over the wall stonde
 [4194] Grete engynes, who were nygh honde.
 [4195] And in the kernels, heere and there,
 [4196] Of arblasters gret plente were;
 [4197] Noon armure myght her strok withstonde;
 [4198] It were foly to prece to honde.
 [4199] Withoute the diche were lystes maad,
 [4200] With wall batayled large and brad,
 [4201] For men and hors shulde not atteyne
 [4202] To neigh the dyche over the pleyne.
 [4203] Thus Jelousie hath enviroun
 [4204] Set aboute his garnysoun
 [4205] With walles rounde and diche dep,
 [4206] Oonly the roser for to kep.
 [4207] And Daunger, erly and late,
 [4208] The keyes [kepte] of the utter gate,
 [4209] The which openeth toward the eest.
 [4210] And he hadde with hym atte leest
 [4211] Thritty servauntes, echon by name.
 [4212] That other gate kepte Shame,
 [4213] Which openede, as it was couth,
 [4214] Toward the partie of the south.
 [4215] Sergeauntes assigned were hir to
 [4216] Ful many, hir wille for to doo.
 [4217] Thanne Drede hadde in hir baillie
 [4218] The kepyng of the conestablerye
 [4219] Toward the north, I undirstond,
 [4220] That openyde upon the lyft hond;
 [4221] The which for nothyng may be sure,
 [4222] But if she do bisy cure,
 [4223] Erly on morowe and also late,
 [4224] Strongly to shette and barre the gate.
 [4225] Of every thing that she may see
 [4226] Drede is aferd, wherso she be;
 [4227] For with a puff of litell wynd
 [4228] Drede is astonyed in hir mynd.
 [4229] Therfore, for stelyng of the Rose,
 [4230] I rede hir nought the yate unclose.
 [4231] A foulis flight wol make hir flee,
 [4232] And eke a shadowe, if she it see.
 [4233] Thanne Wikked-Tunge, ful of envye,
 [4234] With soudiours of Normandye,
 [4235] As he that causeth all the bate,
 [4236] Was keper of the fourthe gate,
 [4237] And also to the tother three
 [4238] He wente full ofte for to see.
 [4239] Whanne his lot was to wake anyght,
 [4240] His instrumentis wolde he dight,
 [4241] For to blowe and make sown
 [4242] Ofter thanne he hath enchesoun,
 [4243] And walken oft upon the wall,
 [4244] Corners and wikettis overall
 [4245] Full narwe serchen and espie;
 [4246] Though he nought fond, yit wolde he lye.
 [4247] Discordaunt ever fro armonye,
 [4248] And distoned from melodie,
 [4249] Controve he wolde, and foule fayle,
 [4250] With hornepipes of Cornewaile.
 [4251] In floytes made he discordaunce,
 [4252] And in his musyk -- with myschaunce! --
 [4253] He wolde seyn, with notes newe,
 [4254] That he fond no womman trewe,
 [4255] Ne that he saugh never in his lyf
 [4256] Unto hir husbonde a trewe wyf,
 [4257] Ne noon so ful of honeste
 [4258] That she nyl laughe and mery be
 [4259] Whanne that she hereth, or may espie,
 [4260] A man speken of leccherie.
 [4261] Everich of hem hath som vice:
 [4262] Oon is dishonest, another is nyce;
 [4263] If oon be full of vylanye,
 [4264] Another hath a likerous ye;
 [4265] If oon be full of wantonesse,
 [4266] Another is a chideresse.
 [4267] Thus Wikked-Tunge -- God yeve him shame! --
 [4268] Can putt hem everychon in blame,
 [4269] Withoute desert and causeles;
 [4270] He lieth, though they ben giltles.
 [4271] I have pite to sen the sorwe
 [4272] That waketh bothe eve and morwe,
 [4273] To innocentis doith such grevaunce.
 [4274] I pray God yeve him evel chaunce,
 [4275] That he ever so bisy is
 [4276] Of ony womman to seyn amys!
 [4277] Eke Jelousie God confound,
 [4278] That hath maad a tour so round,
 [4279] And made aboute a garisoun,
 [4280] To sette Bealacoil in prisoun,
 [4281] The which is shet there in the tour
 [4282] Ful longe to holde there sojour,
 [4283] There for to lyve in penaunce.
 [4284] And for to do hym more grevaunce,
 [4285] Ther hath ordeyned Jelousie
 [4286] An olde vekke, for to espye
 [4287] The maner of his governaunce;
 [4288] The whiche devel in hir enfaunce
 [4289] Hadde lerned of loves art,
 [4290] And of his pleyes tok hir part;
 [4291] She was expert in his servise.
 [4292] She knew ech wrench and every gise
 [4293] Of love, and every wile;
 [4294] It was [the] harder hir to gile.
 [4295] Of Bealacoil she tok ay hede,
 [4296] That evere he lyveth in woo and drede.
 [4297] He kepte hym koy and eke pryve,
 [4298] Lest in hym she hadde see
 [4299] Ony foly countenaunce,
 [4300] For she knew all the olde daunce.
 [4301] And aftir this, whanne Jelousie
 [4302] Hadde Bealacoil in his baillie,
 [4303] And shette hym up that was so fre,
 [4304] For seur of hym he wolde be,
 [4305] He trusteth sore in his castell;
 [4306] The stronge werk hym liketh well.
 [4307] He dradde not that no glotouns
 [4308] Shulde stele his roses or botouns.
 [4309] The roses weren assured all,
 [4310] Defenced with the stronge wall.
 [4311] Now Jelousie full well may be
 [4312] Of drede devoid in liberte,
 [4313] Whether that he slepe or wake,
 [4314] For his roses may noon be take.
 [4315] But I -- allas! -- now morne shall;
 [4316] Bicause I was withoute the wall,
 [4317] Full moche dool and moone I made.
 [4318] Who hadde wist what woo I hadde,
 [4319] I trowe he wolde have had pite.
 [4320] Love to deere hadde soold to me
 [4321] The good that of his love hadde I.
 [4322] I wende a bought it all queyntly;
 [4323] But now, thurgh doublyng of my peyn,
 [4324] I see he wolde it selle ageyn,
 [4325] And me a newe bargeyn leere,
 [4326] The which all-oute the more is deere,
 [4327] For the solas that I have lorn,
 [4328] Thanne I hadde it never aforn.
 [4329] Certayn, I am ful lik in deed
 [4330] To hym that cast in erthe his seed,
 [4331] And hath joie of the newe spryng,
 [4332] Whanne it greneth in the gynnyng,
 [4333] And is also fair and fresh of flour,
 [4334] Lusty to seen, swoote of odour;
 [4335] But er he it in sheves shere,
 [4336] May falle a weder that shal it dere,
 [4337] And make it to fade and falle,
 [4338] The stalke, the greyn, and floures alle,
 [4339] That to the tylyer is fordon
 [4340] The hope that he hadde to soon.
 [4341] I drede, certeyn, that so fare I;
 [4342] For hope and travaile sikerly
 [4343] Ben me byraft all with a storm;
 [4344] The flour nyl seeden of my corn.
 [4345] For Love hath so avaunced me,
 [4346] Whanne I bigan my pryvite
 [4347] To Bialacoil all for to tel,
 [4348] Whom I ne fond froward ne fel,
 [4349] But tok a-gree all hool my play.
 [4350] But Love is of so hard assay,
 [4351] That al at oonys he reved me,
 [4352] Whanne I wende best aboven to have be.
 [4353] It is of Love, as of Fortune,
 [4354] That chaungeth ofte, and nyl contune,
 [4355] Which whilom wol on folk smyle,
 [4356] And glowmbe on hem another while.
 [4357] Now freend, now foo, [thow] shalt hir feel,
 [4358] For [in] a twynklyng turneth hir wheel.
 [4359] She can writhe hir heed awey;
 [4360] This is the concours of hir pley.
 [4361] She can areise that doth morne,
 [4362] And whirle adown, and overturne
 [4363] Who sittith hyest, but as hir lust.
 [4364] A fool is he that wole hir trust;
 [4365] For it is I that am come down
 [4366] Thurgh change and revolucioun!
 [4367] Sith Bealacoil mot fro me twynne,
 [4368] Shet in the prisoun yond withynne,
 [4369] His absence at myn herte I fele;
 [4370] For all my joye and all myn hele
 [4371] Was in hym and in the Rose,
 [4372] That but yon wal, which hym doth close,
 [4373] Opene that I may hym see,
 [4374] Love nyl not that I cured be
 [4375] Of the peynes that I endure,
 [4376] Nor of my cruel aventure.
 [4377] A, Bialacoil, myn owne deer!
 [4378] Though thou be now a prisoner,
 [4379] Kep atte leste thyn herte to me
 [4380] And suffre not that it daunted be;
 [4381] Ne lat not Jelousie, in his rage,
 [4382] Putten thin herte in no servage.
 [4383] Although he chastice thee withoute
 [4384] And make thy body unto hym loute,
 [4385] Have herte as hard as dyamaunt,
 [4386] Stedefast and nought pliaunt.
 [4387] In prisoun though thi body be,
 [4388] At large kep thyn herte free;
 [4389] A trewe herte wole not plie
 [4390] For no manace that it may drye.
 [4391] If Jelousie doth thee payn,
 [4392] Quyte hym his while thus agayn,
 [4393] To venge thee, atte leest in thought,
 [4394] If other way thou maist nought;
 [4395] And in this wise sotilly
 [4396] Worche, and wynne the maistry.
 [4397] But yit I am in gret affray
 [4398] Lest thou do not as I say.
 [4399] I drede thou canst me gret maugre,
 [4400] That thou enprisoned art for me;
 [4401] But that [is. not for my trespas,
 [4402] For thurgh me never discovred was
 [4403] Yit thyng that oughte be secree.
 [4404] Wel more anoy is in me,
 [4405] Than is in thee, of this myschaunce;
 [4406] For I endure more hard penaunce,
 [4407] Than ony can seyn or thynke,
 [4408] That for the sorwe almost I synke.
 [4409] Whanne I remembre me of my woo,
 [4410] Full nygh out of my witt I goo.
 [4411] Inward myn herte I feele blede,
 [4412] For comfortles the deth I drede.
 [4413] Owe I not wel to have distresse,
 [4414] Whanne false, thurgh hir wikkednesse,
 [4415] And traitours, that arn envyous,
 [4416] To noyen me be so corajous?
 [4417] A, Bialacoil, full wel I see
 [4418] That they hem shape to disceyve thee,
 [4419] To make thee buxom to her lawe,
 [4420] And with her corde thee to drawe
 [4421] Where so hem lust, right at her will.
 [4422] I drede they have thee brought thertill.
 [4423] Withoute comfort, thought me sleeth.
 [4424] This game wole brynge me to my deeth.
 [4425] For if youre goode wille I leese,
 [4426] I mot be deed, I may not chese.
 [4427] And if that thou foryete me,
 [4428] Myn herte shal nevere in likyng be,
 [4429] Nor elleswhere fynde solas,
 [4430] If I be putt out of youre gras --
 [4431] As it shal never been, I hope --
 [4432] Thanne shulde I falle in wanhope.
 [4433] Allas, in wanhope? Nay, pardee!
 [4434] For I wole never dispeired be.
 [4435] If hope me faile, thanne am I
 [4436] Ungracious and unworthy.
 [4437] In hope I wole comforted be,
 [4438] For Love, whanne he bitaught hir me,
 [4439] Seide that Hope, whereso I goo,
 [4440] Shulde ay be relees to my woo.
 [4441] But what and she my baalis beete,
 [4442] And be to me curteis and sweete?
 [4443] She is in nothyng full certeyn.
 [4444] Lovers she putt in full gret peyn,
 [4445] And makith hem with woo to deele.
 [4446] Hir faire biheeste disceyveth feele,
 [4447] For she wole byhote, sikirly,
 [4448] And failen aftir outrely.
 [4449] A, that is a full noyous thyng!
 [4450] For many a lover, in lovyng,
 [4451] Hangeth upon hir, and trusteth faste,
 [4452] Whiche leese her travel at the laste.
 [4453] Of thyng to comen she woot right nought;
 [4454] Therfore, if it be wysely sought,
 [4455] Hir counseill foly is to take.
 [4456] For many tymes, whanne she wole make
 [4457] A full good silogisme, I dreede
 [4458] That aftirward ther shal in deede
 [4459] Folwe an evell conclusioun.
 [4460] This put me in confusioun.
 [4461] For many tymes I have it seen,
 [4462] That many have bigyled been
 [4463] For trust that they have set in Hope,
 [4464] Which fell hem aftirward a-slope.
 [4465] But nevertheles, yit gladly she wolde
 [4466] That he, that wole hym with hir holde,
 [4467] Hadde alle tymes his purpos cler,
 [4468] Withoute deceyte or ony wer --
 [4469] That she desireth sikirly.
 [4470] Whanne I hir blamed, I dide foly.
 [4471] But what avayleth hir good wille,
 [4472] Whanne she ne may staunche my stounde ille?
 [4473] That helpith litel that she may doo,
 [4474] Out-take biheest unto my woo.
 [4475] And heeste certeyn, in no wise,
 [4476] Withoute yift, is not to prise.
 [4477] Whanne heest and deede a-sundry varie,
 [4478] They doon a gret contrarie.
 [4479] Thus am I possed up and doun
 [4480] With dool, thought, and confusioun;
 [4481] Of my disese ther is no noumbre.
 [4482] Daunger and Shame me encumbre,
 [4483] Drede also, and Jelousie,
 [4484] And Wikked-Tunge, full of envie,
 [4485] Of whiche the sharpe and cruel ire
 [4486] Full ofte me putte in gret martire.
 [4487] They han my joye fully let,
 [4488] Sith Bialacoil they have bishet
 [4489] Fro me in prisoun wikkidly,
 [4490] Whom I love so entierly
 [4491] That it wole my bane bee
 [4492] But I the sonner may hym see.
 [4493] And yit moreover, wurst of alle,
 [4494] Ther is set to kepe -- foule hir bifalle! --
 [4495] A rympled vekke, fer ronne in age,
 [4496] Frownyng and yelowe in hir visage,
 [4497] Which in awayt lyth day and nyght,
 [4498] That noon of him may have a sight.
 [4499] Now mote my sorwe enforced be.
 [4500] Full soth it is that Love yaf me
 [4501] Three wonder yiftes of his grace,
 [4502] Whiche I have lorn now in this place,
 [4503] Sith they ne may, withoute drede,
 [4504] Helpen but lytel, who taketh heede.
 [4505] For here availeth no Swete-Thought,
 [4506] And Sweete-Speche helpith right nought.
 [4507] The thridde was called Swete-Lokyng,
 [4508] That now is lorn, without lesyng.
 [4509] Yiftes were faire, but not forthy
 [4510] They helpe me but symply,
 [4511] But Bialacoil loosed be,
 [4512] To gon at large and to be free.
 [4513] For hym my lyf lyth all in doute,
 [4514] But if he come the rather oute.
 [4515] Allas, I trowe it wole not ben!
 [4516] For how shuld I evermore hym sen?
 [4517] He may not out, and that is wrong,
 [4518] By cause the tour is so strong.
 [4519] How shulde he out? By whos prowesse,
 [4520] Out of so strong a forteresse?
 [4521] By me, certeyn, it nyl be doo;
 [4522] God woot, I have no wit therto!
 [4523] But, wel I woot, I was in rage,
 [4524] Whonne I to Love dide homage.
 [4525] Who was in cause, in sothfastnesse,
 [4526] But hirsilf, Dame Idelnesse,
 [4527] Which me conveied, thurgh my praier,
 [4528] To entre into that faire verger.
 [4529] She was to blame me to leve,
 [4530] The which now doth me soore greve.
 [4531] A foolis word is nought to trowe,
 [4532] Ne worth an appel for to lowe;
 [4533] Men shulde hym snybbe bittirly,
 [4534] At pryme temps of his foly.
 [4535] I was a fool, and she me leeved,
 [4536] Thurgh whom I am right nought releeved.
 [4537] She accomplisshid all my will,
 [4538] That now me greveth wondir ill.
 [4539] Resoun me seide what shulde falle.
 [4540] A fool mysilf I may well calle,
 [4541] That love asyde I had [nat] leyd,
 [4542] And trowed that Dame Resoun seid.
 [4543] Resoun hadde bothe skile and ryght,
 [4544] Whanne she me blamed, with all hir myght,
 [4545] To medle of love that hath me shent;
 [4546] But certeyn, now I wole repent.
 [4547] And shulde I repente? Nay, parde!
 [4548] A fals traitour thanne shulde I be.
 [4549] The develes engynnes wolde me take,
 [4550] If I my lord wolde forsake,
 [4551] Or Bialacoil falsly bitraye.
 [4552] Shulde I at myscheef hate hym? Nay,
 [4553] Sith he now, for his curtesie,
 [4554] Is in prisoun of Jelousie.
 [4555] Curtesie certeyn dide he me,
 [4556] So mych that may not yolden be,
 [4557] Whanne he the hay passen me let,
 [4558] To kisse the Rose, faire and swet.
 [4559] Shulde I therfore cunne hym mawgre?
 [4560] Nay, certeynly, it shal not be;
 [4561] For Love shal nevere, yif God wille,
 [4562] Here of me, thurgh word or wille,
 [4563] Offence or complaynt, more or lesse,
 [4564] Neither of Hope nor Idilnesse.
 [4565] For certis, it were wrong that I
 [4566] Hated hem for her curtesy.
 [4567] Ther is not ellys but suffre and thynke,
 [4568] And waken whanne I shulde wynke;
 [4569] Abide in hope, til Love, thurgh chaunce,
 [4570] Sende me socour or allegeaunce,
 [4571] Expectant ay till I may mete
 [4572] To geten mercy of that swete.
 [4573] Whilom I thenke how Love to me
 [4574] Seide he wolde take att gree
 [4575] My servise, if unpacience
 [4576] [Ne] caused me to don offence.
 [4577] He seide, "In thank I shal it take,
 [4578] And high maister eke thee make,
 [4579] If wikkednesse ne reve it thee;
 [4580] But sone, I trowe, that shall not be."
 [4581] These were his wordis, by and by;
 [4582] It semede he lovede me trewely.
 [4583] Now is ther not but serve hym wel,
 [4584] If that I thenke his thank to fel.
 [4585] My good, myn harm lyth hool in me.
 [4586] In Love may no defaute be,
 [4587] For trewe Love ne failide never man.
 [4588] Sothly the faute mot nedys than --
 [4589] As God forbede! -- be founde in me;
 [4590] And how it cometh, I can not see.
 [4591] Now late it goon as it may goo;
 [4592] Whether Love wole socoure me or sloo,
 [4593] He may do hool on me his will.
 [4594] I am so sore bounde hym till,
 [4595] From his servise I may not fleen;
 [4596] For lyf and deth, withouten wen,
 [4597] Is in his hand -- I may not chese --
 [4598] He may me doo bothe wynne and leese.
 [4599] And sith so sore he doth me greve,
 [4600] Yit, if my lust he wolde acheve,
 [4601] To Bialacoil goodly to be,
 [4602] I yeve no force what felle on me.
 [4603] For though I dye, as I mot nede,
 [4604] I praye Love, of his goodlyhede,
 [4605] To Bialacoil do gentylnesse,
 [4606] For whom I lyve in such distresse
 [4607] That I mot deyen for penaunce.
 [4608] But first, withoute repentaunce,
 [4609] I wole me confesse in good entent,
 [4610] And make in haste my testament,
 [4611] As lovers doon that feelen smert:
 [4612] To Bialacoil leve I myn hert
 [4613] All hool, withoute departyng,
 [4614] Doublenesse of repentyng.
 [4615] Thus, as I made my passage
 [4616] In compleynt and in cruel rage,
 [4617] And I not where to fynde a leche
 [4618] That couth. unto myn helpyng eche,
 [4619] Sodeynly agayn comen doun
 [4620] Out of hir tour I saugh Resoun,
 [4621] Discret and wis and full plesaunt,
 [4622] And of hir port full avenaunt.
 [4623] The righte weye she took to me,
 [4624] Which stod in gret perplexite,
 [4625] That was posshed in every side,
 [4626] That I nyst where I myght abide,
 [4627] Till she, demurely sad of cher,
 [4628] Seide to me, as she com ner,
 [4629] "Myn owne freend, art thou yit greved?
 [4630] How is this quarell yit acheved
 [4631] Of Loves side? Anoon me telle.
 [4632] Hast thou not yit of love thi fille?
 [4633] Art thou not wery of thy servise,
 [4634] That the hath [greved] in sich wise?
 [4635] What joye hast thou in thy lovyng?
 [4636] Is it swete or bitter thing?
 [4637] Canst thou yit chese, lat me see,
 [4638] What best thi socour myghte be?
 [4639] "Thou servest a full noble lord,
 [4640] That maketh thee thrall for thi reward,
 [4641] Which ay renewith thy turment,
 [4642] With foly so he hath thee blent.
 [4643] Thou fell in myscheef thilke day
 [4644] Whanne thou didist, the sothe to say,
 [4645] Obeysaunce and eke homage.
 [4646] Thou wroughtest nothyng as the sage,
 [4647] Whanne thou bicam his liege man.
 [4648] Thou didist a gret foly than,
 [4649] Thou wistest not what fell therto,
 [4650] With what lord thou haddist to do.
 [4651] If thou haddist hym wel knowe,
 [4652] Thou haddist nought be brought so lowe;
 [4653] For if thou wistest what it wer,
 [4654] Thou noldist serve hym half a yeer,
 [4655] Not a weke, nor half a day,
 [4656] Ne yit an hour, withoute delay,
 [4657] Ne never han loved paramours,
 [4658] His lordshipp is so full of shours.
 [4659] Knowest hym ought?" L'amaunt "Ye, dame, parde!"
 [4660] Raisoun "Nay, nay." L'amaunt "Yis, I." Raisoun "Wherof? Late se."
 [191-ap] 4661 L'amaunt "Of that he seide I shulde be
 [4662] Glad to have sich lord as he,
 [4663] And maister of sich seignorie."
 [4664] Raisoun "Knowist hym no more?" L'amaunt "Nay, certis, I,
 [4665] Save that he yaf me rewles there,
 [4666] And wente his wey, I nyste where,
 [4667] And I abood, bounde in balaunce."
 [4668] Raisoun "Lo, there a noble conisaunce!
 [4669] But I wille that thou knowe hym now,
 [4670] Gynnyng and eende, sith that thou
 [4671] Art so anguisshous and mate,
 [4672] Disfigured out of astate;
 [4673] Ther may no wrecche have more of woo,
 [4674] Ne caytyf noon enduren soo.
 [4675] It were to every man sittyng
 [4676] Of his lord have knowleching;
 [4677] For if thou knewe hym, out of doute,
 [4678] Lightly thou shulde escapen oute
 [4679] Of the prisoun that marreth thee."
 [4680] L'amant "Ye, dame, sith my lord is he,
 [4681] And I his man, maad with myn hond,
 [4682] I wolde right fayn undirstond
 [4683] To knowe of what kynde he be,
 [4684] If ony wolde enforme me."
 [4685] Raisoun "I wolde," seide Resoun, "thee ler,
 [4686] Sith thou to lerne hast sich desir,
 [4687] And shewe thee, withouten fable,
 [4688] A thyng that is not demonstrable.
 [4689] Thou shalt [wite] withouten science,
 [4690] And knowe withouten experience,
 [4691] The thyng that may not knowen be,
 [4692] Ne wist, ne shewid, in no degre.
 [4693] Thou maist the sothe of it not witen,
 [4694] Though in thee it were writen.
 [4695] Thou shalt not knowe therof more,
 [4696] While thou art reuled by his lore;
 [4697] But unto hym that love wole flee,
 [4698] The knotte may unclosed bee,
 [4699] Which hath to thee, as it is founde,
 [4700] So long be knet and not unbounde.
 [4701] Now set wel thyn entencioun,
 [4702] To here of love discripcioun.
 [4703] "Love, it is an hatefull pees,
 [4704] A free acquitaunce, withoute relees,
 [4705] A trouthe, fret full of falsheede,
 [4706] A sikernesse all set in drede.
 [4707] In herte is a dispeiryng hope,
 [4708] And full of hope, it is wanhope;
 [4709] Wis woodnesse, and wod resoun;
 [4710] A swete perell in to droun;
 [4711] An hevy birthen, lyght to bere;
 [4712] A wikked wawe, awey to were.
 [4713] It is Karibdous perilous,
 [4714] Disagreable and gracious.
 [4715] It is discordaunce that can accorde,
 [4716] And accordaunce to discorde.
 [4717] It is kunnyng withoute science,
 [4718] Wisdom withoute sapience,
 [4719] Wit withoute discrecioun,
 [4720] Havoir withoute possessioun.
 [4721] It is sike hele and hool seknesse,
 [4722] A thurst drowned in dronknesse,
 [4723] And helthe full of maladie,
 [4724] And charite full of envie,
 [4725] And hunger full of habundaunce,
 [4726] And a gredy suffisaunce;
 [4727] Delit right full of hevynesse,
 [4728] And drerihed full of gladnesse;
 [4729] Bitter swetnesse and swete errour,
 [4730] Right evell savoured good savour;
 [4731] Sin that pardoun hath withynne,
 [4732] And pardoun spotted withoute [with] synne.
 [4733] A peyne also it is, joious,
 [4734] And felonye right pitous;
 [4735] Also pley that selde is stable,
 [4736] And stedefast [stat], right mevable;
 [4737] A strengthe, weyked to stonde upright,
 [4738] And feblenesse full of myght;
 [4739] Wit unavised, sage folie,
 [4740] And joie full of turmentrie;
 [4741] A laughter it is, weping ay;
 [4742] Reste that traveyleth nyght and day;
 [4743] Also a swete helle it is,
 [4744] And a soroufull paradys;
 [4745] A pleasant gayl and esy prisoun,
 [4746] And, full of froste, somer sesoun;
 [4747] Pryme temps full of frostes whit,
 [4748] And May devoide of al delit,
 [4749] With seer braunches, blossoms ungrene,
 [4750] And newe fruyt, fillid with wynter tene.
 [4751] It is a slowe, may not forbere
 [4752] Ragges, ribaned with gold, to were;
 [4753] For also wel wol love be set
 [4754] Under ragges, as riche rochet;
 [4755] And eke as wel be amourettes
 [4756] In mournyng blak, as bright burnettes.
 [4757] For noon is of so mochel pris,
 [4758] Ne no man founden so wys,
 [4759] Ne noon so high is of parage,
 [4760] Ne no man founde of wit so sage,
 [4761] No man so hardy ne so wight,
 [4762] Ne no man of so mochel myght,
 [4763] Noon so fulfilled of bounte,
 [4764] That he with love [ne] may daunted be.
 [4765] All the world holdith this wey;
 [4766] Love makith all to goon myswey,
 [4767] But it be they of yvel lyf,
 [4768] Whom Genius cursith, man and wyf,
 [4769] That wrongly werke ageyn nature.
 [4770] Noon such I love, ne have no cure
 [4771] Of sich as Loves servauntes ben,
 [4772] And wole not by my counsel flen.
 [4773] For I ne preise that lovyng
 [4774] Wherthurgh men, at the laste eendyng,
 [4775] Shall calle hem wrecchis full of woo,
 [4776] Love greveth hem and shendith soo.
 [4777] But if thou wolt wel Love eschewe,
 [4778] For to escape out of his mewe,
 [4779] And make al hool thi sorwe to slake,
 [4780] No bettir counsel maist thou take
 [4781] Than thynke to fleen wel, iwis.
 [4782] May nought helpe elles, for wite thou this:
 [4783] If thou fle it, it shal flee thee;
 [4784] Folowe it, and folowen shal it thee."
 [4785] L'amant Whanne I hadde herde all Resoun seyn,
 [4786] Which hadde spilt hir speche in veyn,
 [4787] "Dame," seide I, "I dar wel sey,
 [4788] Of this avaunt me wel I may
 [4789] That from youre scole so devyaunt
 [4790] I am, that never the more avaunt
 [4791] Right nought am I thurgh youre doctrine.
 [4792] I dulle under youre discipline.
 [4793] I wot no more than [I] wist er,
 [4794] To me so contrarie and so fer
 [4795] Is every thing that ye me ler,
 [4796] And yit I can it all par cuer.
 [4797] Myn herte foryetith therof right nought,
 [4798] It is so writen in my thought;
 [4799] And depe greven it is so tendir
 [4800] That all by herte I can it rendre,
 [4801] And rede it over comunely;
 [4802] But to mysilf lewedist am I.
 [4803] But sith ye love discreven so,
 [4804] And lak and preise it, bothe twoo,
 [4805] Defyneth it into this letter,
 [4806] That I may thenke on it the better;
 [4807] For I herde never diffyne it er,
 [4808] And wilfully I wolde it ler."
 [4809] Raisoun "If love be serched wel and sought,
 [4810] It is a syknesse of the thought
 [4811] Annexed and knet bitwixe tweyne,
 [4812] Which male and female, with oo cheyne,
 [4813] So frely byndith that they nyll twynne,
 [4814] Whether so therof they leese or wynne.
 [4815] The roote springith thurgh hoot brennyng
 [4816] Into disordinat desiryng
 [4817] For to kissen and enbrace,
 [4818] And at her lust them to solace.
 [4819] Of other thyng love recchith nought,
 [4820] But setteth her herte and all her thought
 [4821] More for delectacioun
 [4822] Than ony procreacioun
 [4823] Of other fruyt by engendring,
 [4824] Which love to God is not plesyng;
 [4825] For of her body fruyt to get
 [4826] They yeve no force, they are so set
 [4827] Upon delit to pley in-feere.
 [4828] And somme have also this manere,
 [4829] To feynen hem for love sek;
 [4830] Sich love I preise not at a lek.
 [4831] For paramours they do but feyne;
 [4832] To love truly they disdeyne.
 [4833] They falsen ladies traitoursly,
 [4834] And swern hem othes utterly,
 [4835] With many a lesyng and many a fable,
 [4836] And all they fynden deceyvable.
 [4837] And whanne they han her lust geten,
 [4838] The hoote ernes they al foryeten.
 [4839] Wymmen, the harm they bien full sore;
 [4840] But men this thenken evermore,
 [4841] That lasse harm is, so mote I the,
 [4842] Deceyve them than deceyved be;
 [4843] And namely, where they ne may
 [4844] Fynde non other mene wey.
 [4845] For I wot wel, in sothfastnesse,
 [4846] [What man] doth now his bisynesse
 [4847] With ony womman for to dele,
 [4848] For ony lust that he may fele,
 [4849] But if it be for engendrure,
 [4850] He doth trespas, I you ensure.
 [4851] For he shulde setten all his wil
 [4852] To geten a likly thyng hym til,
 [4853] And to sustene, if he myght,
 [4854] And kepe forth, by Kyndes right,
 [4855] His owne lyknesse and semblable;
 [4857] And faile shulde successioun,
 [4858] Ne were ther generacioun
 [4859] Oure sectis strene for to save.
 [4860] Whanne fader or moder arn in grave,
 [4861] Her children shulde, whanne they ben deede,
 [4862] Full diligent ben, in her steede,
 [4863] To use that werk on such a wise
 [4864] That oon may thurgh another rise.
 [4865] Therfore sette Kynde therynne delit,
 [4866] For men therynne shulde hem delit,
 [4867] And of that deede be not erk,
 [4868] But ofte sithes haunt that werk.
 [4869] For noon wolde drawe therof a draught,
 [4870] Ne were delit, which hath hym kaught.
 [4871] Thus hath sotilled dame Nature;
 [4872] For noon goth right, I thee ensure,
 [4873] Ne hath entent hool ne parfit;
 [4874] For her desir is for delyt,
 [4875] The which fortened crece and eke
 [4876] The pley of love for-ofte seke,
 [4877] And thrall hemsilf, they be so nyce,
 [4878] Unto the prince of every vice.
 [4879] For of ech synne it is the rote,
 [4880] Unlefull lust, though it be sote,
 [4881] And of all yvell the racyne,
 [4882] As Tulius can determyne,
 [4883] Which in his tyme was full sage,
 [4884] In a bok he made `Of Age,'
 [4885] Where that more he preyseth eelde,
 [4886] Though he be croked and unweelde,
 [4887] And more of commendacioun
 [4888] Than youthe in his discripcioun.
 [4889] For youthe set bothe man and wyf
 [4890] In all perell of soule and lyf;
 [4891] And perell is, but men have grace,
 [4892] The tyme of youthe for to pace
 [4893] Withoute ony deth or distresse,
 [4894] It is so full of wyldenesse,
 [4895] So ofte it doth shame or damage
 [4896] To hym or to his lynage.
 [4897] It ledith man now up, now doun,
 [4898] In mochel dissolucioun,
 [4899] And makith hym love yvell company,
 [4900] And lede his lyf disrewlily,
 [4901] And halt hym payed with noon estat.
 [4902] Withynne hymsilf is such debat,
 [4903] He chaungith purpos and entent,
 [4904] And yalt [him] into som covent,
 [4905] To lyven aftir her emprise,
 [4906] And lesith fredom and fraunchise,
 [4907] That Nature in hym hadde set,
 [4908] The which ageyn he may not get,
 [4909] If he there make his mansioun,
 [4910] For to abide professioun.
 [4911] Though for a tyme his herte absente,
 [4912] It may not fayle, he shal repente,
 [4913] And eke abide thilke day
 [4914] To leve his abit, and gon his way,
 [4915] And lesith his worshipp and his name,
 [4916] And dar not come ageyn for shame;
 [4917] But al his lyf he doth so mourne,
 [4918] By cause he dar not hom retourne.
 [4919] Fredom of kynde so lost hath he
 [4920] That never may recured be,
 [4921] But if that God hym graunte grace
 [4922] That he may, er he hennes pace,
 [4923] Conteyne undir obedience
 [4924] Thurgh the vertu of pacience.
 [4925] For Youthe sett man in all folye,
 [4926] In unthrift and in ribaudie,
 [4927] In leccherie and in outrage,
 [4928] So ofte it chaungith of corage.
 [4929] Youthe gynneth ofte sich bargeyn,
 [4930] That may not eende withouten peyn.
 [4931] In gret perell is sett youthede,
 [4932] Delit so doth his bridil leede.
 [4933] Delit thus hangith, dred thee nought,
 [4934] Bothe mannys body and his thought,
 [4935] Oonly thurgh Youthe, his chaumberere,
 [4936] That to don yvell is customere,
 [4937] And of nought elles taketh hede
 [4938] But oonly folkes for to lede
 [4939] Into disport and wyldenesse,
 [4940] So is [she] froward from sadnesse.
 [4941] "But Eelde drawith hem therfro;
 [4942] Who wot it nought, he may wel goo
 [4943] Demande of hem that now arn olde,
 [4944] That whilom Youthe hadde in holde,
 [4945] Which yit remembre of tendir age,
 [4946] Hou it hem brought in many a rage,
 [4947] And many a foly therynne wrought.
 [4948] But now that Eelde hath hem thourgh-sought,
 [4949] They repente hem of her folye,
 [4950] That Youthe hem putte in jupardye,
 [4951] In perell, and in myche woo,
 [4952] And made hem ofte amys to do,
 [4953] And suen yvell companye,
 [4954] Riot and avouterie.
 [4955] "But Eelde can ageyn restreyne
 [4956] From sich foly, and refreyne,
 [4957] And sette men by her ordinaunce
 [4958] In good reule and in governaunce.
 [4959] But yvell she spendith hir servise,
 [4960] For no man wole hir love neither prise;
 [4961] She is hated, this wot I wel.
 [4962] Hir acqueyntaunce wolde no man fel,
 [4963] Ne han of Elde companye;
 [4964] Men hate to be of hir alye.
 [4965] For no man wolde bicomen old,
 [4966] Ne dye whanne he is yong and bold.
 [4967] And Eelde merveilith right gretly,
 [4968] Whanne thei remembre hem inwardly
 [4969] Of many a perelous emprise,
 [4970] Which that they wrought in sondry wise,
 [4971] Houevere they myght, withoute blame,
 [4972] Escape awey withoute shame,
 [4973] In youthe, withoute damage
 [4974] Or repreef of her lynage,
 [4975] Loss of membre, shedyng of blod,
 [4976] Perell of deth, or los of good.
 [4977] Wost thou nought where Youthe abit,
 [4978] That men so preisen in her wit?
 [4979] With Delit she halt sojour,
 [4980] For bothe they dwellen in oo tour.
 [4981] As longe as Youthe is in sesoun,
 [4982] They dwellen in oon mansioun.
 [4983] Delit of Youthe wole have servise
 [4984] To do what so he wole devise;
 [4985] And Youthe is redy evermore
 [4986] For to obey, for smert of sore,
 [4987] Unto Delit, and hym to yive
 [4988] Hir servise, while that she may lyve.
 [4989] "Where Elde abit I wol thee telle
 [4990] Shortly, and no while dwelle,
 [4991] For thidir byhoveth thee to goo.
 [4992] If Deth in youthe thee not sloo,
 [4993] Of this journey thou maist not faile.
 [4994] With hir Labour and Travaile
 [4995] Logged ben, with Sorwe and Woo,
 [4996] That never out of hir court goo.
 [4997] Peyne and Distresse, Syknesse and Ire,
 [4998] And Malencoly, that angry sire,
 [4999] Ben of hir paleys senatours;
 [5000] Gronyng and Grucchyng, hir herbejours.
 [5001] The day and nyght, hir to turmente,
 [5002] With cruell Deth they hir presente,
 [5003] And tellen hir, erliche and late,
 [5004] That Deth stondeth armed at hir gate.
 [5005] Thanne brynge they to her remembraunce
 [5006] The foly dedis of hir infaunce,
 [5007] Whiche causen hir to mourne in woo
 [5008] That Youthe hath hir bigiled so,
 [5009] Which sodeynly awey is hasted.
 [5010] She wepeth the tyme that she hath wasted,
 [5011] Compleynyng of the preterit,
 [5012] And the present that not abit,
 [5013] And of hir olde vanite,
 [5014] That, but aforn hir she may see
 [5015] In the future som socour,
 [5016] To leggen hir of hir dolour,
 [5017] To graunte hir tyme of repentaunce,
 [5018] For her synnes to do penaunce,
 [5019] And at the laste so hir governe
 [5020] To wynne the joy that is eterne,
 [5021] Fro which go bakward Youthe hir made,
 [5022] In vanite to droune and wade.
 [5023] For present tyme abidith nought;
 [5024] It is more swift than any thought.
 [5025] So litel while it doth endure
 [5026] That ther nys compte ne mesure.
 [5027] But hou that evere the game go,
 [5028] Who list to have joie and mirth also
 [5029] Of love, be it he or she,
 [5030] High or lowe, who it be,
 [5031] In fruyt they shulde hem delyte;
 [5032] Her part they may not elles quyte,
 [5033] To save hemsilf in honeste.
 [5034] And yit full many on I se
 [5035] Of wymmen, sothly for to seyn,
 [5036] That desire and wolde fayn
 [5037] The pley of love, they be so wilde,
 [5038] And not coveite to go with childe.
 [5039] And if with child they be, perchaunce,
 [5040] They wole it holde a gret myschaunce;
 [5041] But whatsomever woo they fele,
 [5042] They wole not pleyne but concele;
 [5043] But if it be ony fool or nyce,
 [5044] In whom that Shame hath no justice.
 [5045] For to delyt echon they drawe,
 [5046] That haunte this werk, bothe high and lawe,
 [5047] Save sich that arn worth right nought,
 [5048] That for money wole be bought.
 [5049] Such love I preise in no wise,
 [5050] Whanne it is goven for coveitise.
 [5051] I preise no womman, though she be wood,
 [5052] That yeveth hirsilf for ony good.
 [5053] For litel shulde a man telle
 [5054] Of hir, that wole hir body selle,
 [5055] Be she mayde, be she wyf,
 [5056] That quyk wole selle hir, bi hir lif.
 [5057] Hou faire chere that evere she make,
 [5058] He is a wrecche, I undirtake,
 [5059] That loveth such on, for swete or sour,
 [5060] Though she hym calle hir paramour,
 [5061] And laugheth on hym, and makith hym feeste.
 [5062] For certeynly no such beeste
 [5063] To be loved is not worthy,
 [5064] Or bere the name of druery.
 [5065] Noon shulde hir please, but he were wood,
 [5066] That wole dispoile hym of his good.
 [5067] Yit nevertheles, I wol not sey
 [5068] That she, for solas and for pley,
 [5069] [Ne] may a jewel or other thyng
 [5070] Take of her loves fre yevyng;
 [5071] But that she aske it in no wise,
 [5072] For drede of shame of coveitise.
 [5073] And she of hirs may hym, certeyn,
 [5074] Withoute sclaundre yeven ageyn,
 [5075] And joyne her hertes togidre so
 [5076] In love, and take and yeve also.
 [5077] Trowe not that I wolde hem twynne,
 [5078] Whanne in her love ther is no synne;
 [5079] I wol that they togedre go,
 [5080] And don al that they han ado,
 [5081] As curteis shulde and debonaire,
 [5082] And in her love beren hem faire,
 [5083] Withoute vice, bothe he and she,
 [5084] So that alwey, in honeste,
 [5085] Fro foly love they kepe hem cler,
 [5086] That brenneth hertis with his fer;
 [5087] And that her love, in ony wise,
 [5088] Be devoide of coveitise.
 [5089] Good love shulde engendrid be
 [5090] Of trewe herte, just, and secre,
 [5091] And not of such as sette her thought
 [5092] To have her lust and ellis nought --
 [5093] So are they caught in Loves las,
 [5094] Truly, for bodily solas.
 [5095] Fleshly delit is so present
 [5096] With thee, that sette all thyn entent
 [5097] Withoute more (what shulde I glose?)
 [5098] For to gete and have the Rose,
 [5099] Which makith [thee] so mat and wood
 [5100] That thou desirest noon other good.
 [5101] But thou art not an inche the nerre,
 [5102] But evere abidist in sorwe and werre,
 [5103] As in thi face it is sene.
 [5104] It makith thee bothe pale and lene;
 [5105] Thy myght, thi vertu goth away.
 [5106] A sory gest, in goode fay,
 [5107] Thou herberest than in thyn inn,
 [5108] The God of Love whanne thou let inn!
 [5109] Wherfore I rede, thou shette hym oute,
 [5110] Or he shall greve thee, out of doute;
 [5111] For to thi profit it wol turne,
 [5112] If he nomore with thee sojourne.
 [5113] In gret myscheef and sorwe sonken
 [5114] Ben hertis that of love arn dronken,
 [5115] As thou peraventure knowen shall,
 [5116] Whanne thou hast lost thy tyme all,
 [5117] And spent thy youthe in ydilnesse,
 [5118] In waste and wofull lustynesse.
 [5119] If thou maist lyve the tyme to se
 [5120] Of love for to delyvered be,
 [5121] Thy tyme thou shalt biwepe sore,
 [5122] The whiche never thou maist restore;
 [5123] For tyme lost, as men may see,
 [5124] For nothyng may recured be.
 [5125] And if thou scape yit, atte laste,
 [5126] Fro Love, that hath thee so faste
 [5127] Knytt and bounden in his las,
 [5128] Certeyn I holde it but a gras.
 [5129] For many oon, as it is seyn,
 [5130] Have lost and spent also in veyn,
 [5131] In his servise, withoute socour,
 [5132] Body and soule, good and tresour,
 [5133] Wit and strengthe, and eke richesse,
 [5134] Of which they hadde never redresse."
 [5135] L'amant Thus taught and preched hath
 [5136] Resoun, but Love spilte hir sermoun,
 [5137] That was so ymped in my thought,
 [5138] That hir doctrine I sette at nought.
 [5139] And yitt ne seide she never a del
 [5140] That I ne undirstod it wel,
 [5141] Word by word, the mater all;
 [5142] But unto Love I was so thrall,
 [5143] Which callith overall his pray,
 [5144] He chasith so my thought alway,
 [5145] And holdith myn herte undir his sel
 [5146] As trust and trew as ony stel;
 [5147] So that no devocioun
 [5148] Ne hadde I in the sermoun
 [5149] Of dame Resoun, ne of hir red.
 [5150] It tok no sojour in myn hed,
 [5151] For all yede out at oon ere
 [5152] That in that other she dide lere.
 [5153] Fully on me she lost hir lore;
 [5154] Hir speche me greved wondir sore.
 [5155] Than unto hir for ire I seide,
 [5156] For anger, as I dide abraide:
 [5157] "Dame, and is it youre wille algate
 [5158] That I not love, but that I hate
 [5159] Alle men, as ye me teche?
 [5160] For if I do aftir youre speche,
 [5161] Sith that ye seyn love is not good,
 [5162] Thanne must I nedis ay with mood,
 [5163] If I it leve, in hatrede ay
 [5164] Lyven, and voide love away
 [5165] From me, [and] [ben] a synfull wrecche
 [5166] Hated of all [that] [love] that tecche.
 [5167] I may not go noon other gate,
 [5168] For other must I love or hate.
 [5169] And if I hate men of-newe
 [5170] More than love, it wol me rewe,
 [5171] As by youre preching semeth me,
 [5172] For Love nothing ne preisith thee.
 [5173] Ye yeve good counsel, sikirly,
 [5174] That prechith me alday that I
 [5175] Shulde not Loves lore alowe.
 [5176] He were a fool, wolde you not trowe!
 [5177] In speche also ye han me taught
 [5178] Another love, that knowen is naught,
 [5179] Which I have herd you not repreve,
 [5180] To love ech other. By youre leve,
 [5181] If ye wolde diffyne it me,
 [5182] I wolde gladly here, to se,
 [5183] At the leest, if I may lere
 [5184] Of sondry loves the manere."
 [5185] Raisoun "Certis, freend, a fool art thou,
 [5186] Whan that thou nothyng wolt allow
 [5187] That I for thi profit say.
 [5188] Yit wole I sey thee more in fay,
 [5189] For I am redy, at the leste,
 [5190] To accomplisshe thi requeste.
 [5191] But I not where it wole avayle;
 [5192] In veyn, perauntre, I shal travayle.
 [5193] Love ther is in sondry wise,
 [5194] As I shal thee heere devise.
 [5195] For som love leful is and good --
 [5196] I mene not that which makith thee wood,
 [5197] And bringith thee in many a fit,
 [5198] And ravysshith fro thee al thi wit,
 [5199] It is so merveilous and queynt;
 [5200] With such love be no more aqueynt.
 [5201] "Love of freendshipp also ther is,
 [5202] Which makith no man don amys,
 [5203] Of wille knytt bitwixe two,
 [5204] That wole not breke for wele ne woo;
 [5205] Which long is likly to contune,
 [5206] Whanne wille and goodis ben in comune;
 [5207] Grounded by Goddis ordinaunce,
 [5208] Hool, withoute discordaunce;
 [5209] With hem holdyng comunte
 [5210] Of all her good in charite,
 [5211] That ther be noon excepcioun
 [5212] Thurgh chaungyng of entencioun;
 [5213] That ech helpe other at her neede,
 [5214] And wisely hele bothe word and dede;
 [5215] Trewe of menyng, devoide of slouthe,
 [5216] For witt is nought withoute trouthe;
 [5217] So that the ton dar all his thought
 [5218] Seyn to his freend, and spare nought,
 [5219] As to hymsilf, without dredyng
 [5220] To be discovered by wreying.
 [5221] For glad is that conjunccioun,
 [5222] Whanne ther is noon susspecioun
 [5223] [Of] [blame] [in] [hem], whom they wolde prove
 [5224] That trewe and parfit weren in love.
 [5225] For no man may be amyable,
 [5226] But if he be so ferme and stable
 [5227] That fortune chaunge hym not, ne blynde,
 [5228] But that his freend allwey hym fynde,
 [5229] Bothe pore and riche, in oo state.
 [5230] For if his freend, thurgh ony gate,
 [5231] Wole compleyne of his poverte,
 [5232] He shulde not bide so long til he
 [5233] Of his helpyng hym requere;
 [5234] For good dede, don thurgh praiere,
 [5235] Is sold and bought to deere, iwys,
 [5236] To hert that of gret valour is.
 [5237] For hert fulfilled of gentilnesse
 [5238] Can yvel demene his distresse;
 [5239] And man that worthy is of name
 [5240] To asken often hath gret shame.
 [5241] A good man brenneth in his thought
 [5242] For shame, whanne he axeth ought.
 [5243] He hath gret thought and dredeth ay
 [5244] For his disese, whanne he shal pray
 [5245] His freend, lest that he warned be,
 [5246] Til that he preve his stabilte.
 [5247] But whanne that he hath founden oon
 [5248] That trusty is and trewe as ston,
 [5249] And assaied hym at all,
 [5250] And founde hym stedefast as a wall,
 [5251] And of his freendshipp be certeyn,
 [5252] He shal hym shewe bothe joye and peyn,
 [5253] And all that [he] dar thynke or sey,
 [5254] Withoute shame, as he wel may.
 [5255] For how shulde he ashamed be
 [5256] Of sich on as I tolde thee?
 [5257] For whanne he woot his secre thought,
 [5258] The thridde shal knowe therof right nought;
 [5259] For tweyne of noumbre is bet than thre
 [5260] In every counsell and secre.
 [5261] Repreve he dredeth never a deel,
 [5262] Who that bisett his wordis wel;
 [5263] For every wise man, out of drede,
 [5264] Can kepe his tunge til he se nede;
 [5265] And fooles can not holde her tunge;
 [5266] A fooles belle is soone runge.
 [5267] Yit shal a trewe freend do more
 [5268] To helpe his felowe of his sore,
 [5269] And socoure hym, whanne he hath neede,
 [5270] In all that he may don in deede,
 [5271] And gladder [be] that he hym plesith,
 [5272] Than his felowe that he esith.
 [5273] And if he do not his requeste,
 [5274] He shal as mochel hym moleste
 [5275] As his felow, for that he
 [5276] May not fulfille his volunte
 [5277] Fully, as he hath requered.
 [5278] If bothe the hertis Love hath fered,
 [5279] Joy and woo they shull depart,
 [5280] And take evenly ech his part.
 [5281] Half his anoy he shal have ay,
 [5282] And comfort [him] what that he may;
 [5283] And of his blisse parte shal he,
 [5284] If love wel departed be.
 [5285] "And whilom of this amyte
 [5286] Spak Tulius in a ditee:
 [5287] `Man shulde maken his request
 [5288] Unto his freend, that is honest;
 [5289] And he goodly shulde it fulfille,
 [5290] But it the more were out of skile,
 [5291] And otherwise not graunte therto,
 [5292] Except oonly in causes twoo:
 [5293] If men his freend to deth wolde drive,
 [5294] Lat hym be bisy to save his lyve;
 [5295] Also if men wolen hym assayle,
 [5296] Of his wurshipp to make hym faile,
 [5297] And hyndren hym of his renoun,
 [5298] Lat hym, with full entencioun,
 [5299] His dever don in ech degre
 [5300] That his freend ne shamed be.
 [5301] In thise two caas with his myght,
 [5302] Taking no kep to skile nor right,
 [5303] As fer as love may hym excuse,
 [5304] This oughte no man to refuse.'
 [5305] This love that I have told to thee
 [5306] Is nothing contrarie to me;
 [5307] This wole I that thou folowe wel,
 [5308] And leve the tother everydel.
 [5309] This love to vertu all entendith,
 [5310] The tothir fooles blent and shendith.
 [5311] "Another love also there is
 [5312] That is contrarie unto this,
 [5313] Which desir is so constreyned
 [5314] That [it] is but wille feyned.
 [5315] Awey fro trouthe it doth so varie
 [5316] That to good love it is contrarie;
 [5317] For it maymeth, in many wise,
 [5318] Sike hertis with coveitise.
 [5319] All in wynnyng and in profit
 [5320] Sich love settith his delit.
 [5321] This love so hangeth in balaunce
 [5322] That, if it lese his hope, perchaunce,
 [5323] Of lucre, that he is sett upon,
 [5324] It wole faile and quenche anoon;
 [5325] For no man may be amerous,
 [5326] Ne in his lyvyng vertuous,
 [5327] But he love more, in mood,
 [5328] Men for hemsilf than for her good.
 [5329] For love that profit doth abide
 [5330] Is fals, and bit not in no tyde.
 [5331] [This] love cometh of dame Fortune,
 [5332] That litel while wol contune;
 [5333] For it shal chaungen wonder soone,
 [5334] And take eclips, right as the moone,
 [5335] Whanne she is from us lett
 [5336] Thurgh erthe, that bitwixe is sett
 [5337] The sonne and hir, as it may fall,
 [5338] Be it in partie, or in all.
 [5339] The shadowe maketh her bemys merke,
 [5340] And hir hornes to shewe derke,
 [5341] That part where she hath lost hir lyght
 [5342] Of Phebus fully, and the sight;
 [5343] Til, whanne the shadowe is overpast,
 [5344] She is enlumyned ageyn as fast,
 [5345] Thurgh the brightnesse of the sonne bemes,
 [5346] That yeveth to hir ageyn hir lemes.
 [5347] That lov is right of sich nature;
 [5348] Now is faire, and now obscure,
 [5349] Now bright, now clipsi of manere,
 [5350] And whilom dym, and whilom clere.
 [5351] As soone as Poverte gynneth take,
 [5352] With mantel and wedis blake
 [5353] Hidith of love the light awey,
 [5354] That into nyght it turneth day,
 [5355] It may not see Richesse shyne
 [5356] Till the blak shadowes fyne.
 [5357] For, whanne Richesse shyneth bright,
 [5358] Love recovereth ageyn his light;
 [5359] And whanne it failith he wol flit,
 [5360] And as she groweth, so groweth it.
 [5361] Of this love -- here what I sey! --
 [5362] The riche men are loved ay,
 [5363] And namely tho that sparand ben,
 [5364] That wole not wasshe her hertes clen
 [5365] Of the filthe nor of the vice
 [5366] Of gredy brennyng avarice.
 [5367] The riche man full fonned is, ywys,
 [5368] That weneth that he loved is.
 [5369] If that his herte it undirstod,
 [5370] It is not he, it is his good;
 [5371] He may wel witen in his thought,
 [5372] His good is loved, and he right nought.
 [5373] For if he be a nygard ek,
 [5374] Men wole not sette by hym a lek,
 [5375] But haten hym; this is the soth.
 [5376] Lo, what profit his catell doth.
 [5377] Of every man that may hym see
 [5378] It geteth hym nought but enmyte.
 [5379] But he amende hym of that vice,
 [5380] And knowe hymsilf, he is not wys.
 [5381] Certys, he shulde ay freendly be,
 [5382] To gete hym love also ben free,
 [5383] Or ellis he is not wise ne sage
 [5384] Nomore than is a goot ramage.
 [5385] That he not loveth, his dede proveth,
 [5386] Whan he his richesse so wel loveth
 [5387] That he wole hide it ay and spare,
 [5388] His pore freendis sen forfare,
 [5389] To kepen ay his purpos,
 [5390] Til for drede his yen clos,
 [5391] And til a wikked deth hym take.
 [5392] Hym hadde lever asondre shake,
 [5393] And late alle his lymes asondre ryve,
 [5394] Than leve his richesse in his lyve.
 [5395] He thenkith parte it with no man;
 [5396] Certayn, no love is in hym than.
 [5397] How shulde love withynne hym be,
 [5398] Whanne in his herte is no pite?
 [5399] That he trespasseth, wel I wat,
 [5400] For ech man knowith his estat;
 [5401] For wel hym ought to be reproved
 [5402] That loveth nought, ne is not loved.
 [5403] "But sith we arn to Fortune comen,
 [5404] And han oure sermoun of hir nomen,
 [5405] A wondir will Y telle thee now,
 [5406] Thou herdist never sich oon, I trow.
 [5407] I not where thou me leven shall,
 [5408] Though sothfastnesse it be all,
 [5409] As it is writen, and is soth,
 [5410] That unto men more profit doth
 [5411] The froward Fortune and contraire
 [5412] Than the swote and debonaire.
 [5413] And if thee thynke it is doutable,
 [5414] It is thurgh argument provable;
 [5415] For the debonaire and softe
 [5416] Falsith and bigilith ofte;
 [5417] For lyche a moder she can cherish,
 [5418] And mylken as doth a norys,
 [5419] And of hir goode to hem deles,
 [5420] And yeveth hem part of her joweles,
 [5421] With gret richeses and dignite;
 [5422] And hem she hoteth stabilite
 [5423] In a stat that is not stable,
 [5424] But chaungynge ay and variable;
 [5425] And fedith hem with glorie veyn,
 [5426] And worldly blisse noncerteyn.
 [5427] Whanne she hem settith on hir whel,
 [5428] Thanne wene they to be right wel,
 [5429] And in so stable stat withalle,
 [5430] That never they wene for to falle.
 [5431] And whanne they sette so highe be,
 [5432] They wene to have in certeynte
 [5433] Of hertly freendis so gret noumbre,
 [5434] That nothyng myght her stat encombre.
 [5435] They trust hem so on every side,
 [5436] Wenyng with hem they wolde abide
 [5437] In every perell and myschaunce,
 [5438] Withoute chaunge or variaunce,
 [5439] Bothe of catell and of good;
 [5440] And also for to spende her blood,
 [5441] And all her membris for to spille,
 [5442] Oonly to fulfille her wille.
 [5443] They maken it hool in many wise,
 [5444] And hoten hem her full servise,
 [5445] How sore that it do hem smerte,
 [5446] Into her naked sherte!
 [5447] Herte and all so hool they yive,
 [5448] For the tyme that they may lyve,
 [5449] So that with her flaterie
 [5450] They maken foolis glorifie
 [5451] Of her wordis spekyng,
 [5452] And han therof a rejoysyng,
 [5453] And trowe hem as the Evangile;
 [5454] And it is all falsheede and gile,
 [5455] As they shal aftirward se,
 [5456] Whanne they arn falle in poverte
 [5457] And ben of good and catell bare;
 [5458] Thanne shulde they sen who freendis ware.
 [5459] For of an hundred, certeynly,
 [5460] Nor of a thousand full scarsly,
 [5461] Ne shal they fynde unnethis oon,
 [5462] Whanne poverte is comen upon.
 [5463] For this Fortune that I of telle,
 [5464] With men whanne hir lust to dwelle,
 [5465] Makith hem to leese her conisaunce,
 [5466] And norishith hem in ignoraunce.
 [5467] "But froward Fortune and pervers,
 [5468] Whanne high estatis she doth revers,
 [5469] And maketh hem to tumble doun
 [5470] Of hir whel, with sodeyn tourn,
 [5471] And from her richesse doth hem fle,
 [5472] And plongeth hem in poverte,
 [5473] As a stepmoder envyous,
 [5474] And leieth a plastre dolorous
 [5475] Unto her hertis, wounded egre,
 [5476] Which is not tempred with vynegre,
 [5477] But with poverte and indigence,
 [5478] For to shewe, by experience,
 [5479] That she is Fortune verely,
 [5480] In whom no man shulde affy,
 [5481] Nor in hir yeftis have fiaunce,
 [5482] She is so full of variaunce --
 [5483] Thus kan she maken high and lowe,
 [5484] Whanne they from richesse arn throwe,
 [5485] Fully to knowen, without were,
 [5486] Freend of affect and freend of chere,
 [5487] And which in love weren trewe and stable,
 [5488] And whiche also weren variable,
 [5489] After Fortune, her goddesse,
 [5490] In poverte outher in richesse.
 [5491] For all she yeveth here, out of drede,
 [5492] Unhap bereveth it in dede;
 [5493] For Infortune lat not oon
 [5494] Of freendis, whanne Fortune is gon;
 [5495] I mene tho freendis that wole fle
 [5496] Anoon as entreth poverte.
 [5497] And yit they wole not leve hem so,
 [5498] But in ech place where they go
 [5499] They calle hem `wrecche,' scorne, and blame,
 [5500] And of her myshappe hem diffame;
 [5501] And namely siche as in richesse
 [5502] Pretendith moost of stablenesse,
 [5503] Whanne that they sawe hym sett on lofte,
 [5504] And weren of hym socoured ofte,
 [5505] And most yholpe in all her neede.
 [5506] But now they take no maner heede,
 [5507] But seyn in voice of flaterie,
 [5508] That now apperith her folye,
 [5509] Overall where so they fare,
 [5510] And synge, `Go, farewel, feldefare.'
 [5511] All suche freendis I beshrewe,
 [5512] For of trewe ther be to fewe.
 [5513] But sothfast freendis, what so bitide,
 [5514] In every fortune wolen abide;
 [5515] Thei han her hertis in such noblesse
 [5516] That they nyl love for no richesse,
 [5517] Nor for that Fortune may hem sende
 [5518] Thei wolen hem socoure and defende,
 [5519] And chaunge for softe ne for sore;
 [5520] For who is freend, loveth evermore.
 [5521] Though men drawe swerd his freend to slo,
 [5522] He may not hewe her love a-two.
 [5523] But, in cas that I shall sey,
 [5524] For pride and ire lese it he may,
 [5525] And for reprove by nycete,
 [5526] And discovering of privite,
 [5527] With tonge woundyng, as feloun,
 [5528] Thurgh venemous detraccioun.
 [5529] Frend in this cas wole gon his way,
 [5530] For nothyng greve hym more ne may;
 [5531] And for nought ellis wole he fle,
 [5532] If that he love in stabilite.
 [5533] And certeyn, he is wel bigon,
 [5534] Among a thousand that fyndith oon.
 [5535] For ther may be no richesse
 [5536] Ageyns frendshipp, of worthynesse;
 [5537] For it ne may so high atteigne
 [5538] As may the valour, soth to seyne,
 [5539] Of hym that loveth trew and well.
 [5540] Frendshipp is more than is catell.
 [5541] For freend in court ay better is
 [5542] Than peny in purs, certis;
 [5543] And Fortune myshappyng
 [5544] Whanne upon men she is fallyng,
 [5545] Thurgh mysturnyng of hir chaunce,
 [5546] And casteth hem out of balaunce,
 [5547] She makith, thurgh hir adversite,
 [5548] Men full clerly for to se
 [5549] Hym that is freend in existence
 [5550] From hym that is by apparence.
 [5551] For Ynfortune makith anoon
 [5552] To knowe thy freendis fro thy foon,
 [5553] By experience, right as it is,
 [5554] The which is more to preise, ywis,
 [5555] Than is myche richesse and tresour.
 [5556] For more doth profit and valour
 [5557] Poverte and such adversite
 [5558] Bifore, than doth prosperite;
 [5559] For the toon yeveth conysaunce,
 [5560] And the tother ignoraunce.
 [5561] "And thus in poverte is in dede
 [5562] Trouthe declared fro falsheede;
 [5563] For feynte frendis it wole declare,
 [5564] And trewe also, what wey they fare.
 [5565] For whanne he was in his richesse,
 [5566] These freendis, ful of doublenesse,
 [5567] Offrid hym in many wise
 [5568] Hert, and body, and servise.
 [5569] What wolde he thanne ha yove to ha bought
 [5570] To knowen openly her thought,
 [5571] That he now hath so clerly seen?
 [5572] The lasse bigiled he shulde have ben,
 [5573] And he hadde thanne perceyved it;
 [5574] But richesse nold not late hym wit.
 [5575] Wel more avauntage doth hym than,
 [5576] Sith that it makith hym a wise man,
 [5577] The gret myscheef that he receyveth,
 [5578] Than doth richesse that hym deceyveth.
 [5579] Richesse riche ne makith nought
 [5580] Hym that on tresour set his thought;
 [5581] For richesse stont in suffisaunce
 [5582] And nothyng in habundaunce;
 [5583] For suffisaunce all oonly
 [5584] Makith men to lyve richely.
 [5585] For he that at mycches tweyne
 [5586] Ne valued [is. in his demeigne,
 [5587] Lyveth more at ese, and more is riche,
 [5588] Than doth he that is chiche,
 [5589] And in his berne hath, soth to seyn,
 [5590] An hundred mowis of whete greyn,
 [5591] Though he be chapman or marchaunt,
 [5592] And have of gold many besaunt.
 [5593] For in the getyng he hath such woo,
 [5594] And in the kepyng drede also,
 [5595] And set evermore his bisynesse
 [5596] For to encrese, and not to lesse,
 [5597] For to aument and multiply.
 [5598] And though on hepis it lye hym by,
 [5599] Yit never shal make his richesse
 [5600] Asseth unto his gredynesse.
 [5601] But the povre that recchith nought,
 [5602] Save of his lyflode, in his thought,
 [5603] Which that he getith with his travaile,
 [5604] He dredith nought that it shall faile,
 [5605] Though he have lytel worldis good,
 [5606] Mete, and drynke, and esy food,
 [5607] Upon his travel and lyvyng,
 [5608] And also suffisaunt clothyng.
 [5609] Or if in syknesse that he falle,
 [5610] And loth. mete and drynke withalle,
 [5611] Though he have noght his mete to by,
 [5612] He shal bithynke hym hastily,
 [5613] To putte hym oute of all daunger,
 [5614] That he of mete hath no myster;
 [5615] Or that he may with lytel ek
 [5616] Be founden, while that he is sek;
 [5617] Or that men shull hym beren in hast,
 [5618] To lyve til his syknesse be past,
 [5619] To som maysondew biside;
 [5620] He cast nought what shal hym bitide.
 [5621] He thenkith nought that evere he shall
 [5622] Into ony syknesse fall.
 [5623] "And though it falle, as it may be,
 [5624] That all betyme spare shall he
 [5625] As mochel as shal to hym suffice,
 [5626] While he is sik in ony wise,
 [5627] He doth [it] for that he wole be
 [5628] Content with his poverte
 [5629] Withoute nede of ony man.
 [5630] So myche in litel have he can,
 [5631] He is apaied with his fortune;
 [5632] And for he nyl be importune
 [5633] Unto no wight, ne onerous,
 [5634] Nor of her goodes coveitous,
 [5635] Therfore he spareth, it may wel ben,
 [5636] His pore estat for to susten.
 [5637] "Or if hym lust not for to spare,
 [5638] But suffrith forth, as noght ne ware,
 [5639] Atte last it hapneth, as it may,
 [5640] Right unto his laste day,
 [5641] And taketh the world as it wolde be;
 [5642] For evere in herte thenkith he,
 [5643] The sonner that deth hym slo,
 [5644] To paradys the sonner go
 [5645] He shal, there for to lyve in blisse,
 [5646] Where that he shal noo good misse.
 [5647] Thider he hopith God shal hym sende
 [5648] Aftir his wrecchid lyves ende.
 [5649] Pictigoras hymsilf reherses
 [5650] In a book that `The Golden Verses'
 [5651] Is clepid, for the nobilite
 [5652] Of the honourable ditee: --
 [5653] `Thanne, whanne thou gost thy body fro,
 [5654] Fre in the eir thou shalt up go,
 [5655] And leven al humanite,
 [5656] And purely lyve in deite.'
 [5657] He is a fool, withouten were,
 [5658] That trowith have his countre heere.
 [5659] `In erthe is not oure countre,'
 [5660] That may these clerkis seyn and see
 [5661] In Boece of Consolacioun,
 [5662] Where it is maked mencioun
 [5663] Of oure contre pleyn at the ye,
 [5664] By teching of Philosophie,
 [5665] Where lewid men myght lere wit,
 [5666] Whoso that wolde translaten it.
 [5667] If he be sich that can wel lyve
 [5668] Aftir his rente may hym yive,
 [5669] And not desireth more to have
 [5670] Than may fro poverte hym save,
 [5671] A wise man seide, as we may seen,
 [5672] Is no man wrecched, but he it wen,
 [5673] Be he kyng, knyght, or ribaud.
 [5674] And many a ribaud is mery and baud,
 [5675] That swynkith, and berith, bothe day and nyght,
 [5676] Many a burthen of gret myght,
 [5677] The whiche doth hym lasse offense
 [5678] For he suffrith in pacience.
 [5679] They laugh and daunce, trippe and synge,
 [5680] And ley not up for her lyvynge,
 [5681] But in the taverne all dispendith
 [5682] The wynnyng that God hem sendith.
 [5683] Thanne goth he, fardeles for to ber
 [5684] With as good chere as he dide er.
 [5685] To swynke and traveile he not feynith,
 [5686] For for to robben he disdeynith.
 [5687] But right anoon aftir his swynk
 [5688] He goth to taverne for to drynk.
 [5689] All these ar riche in abundaunce
 [5690] That can thus have suffisaunce
 [5691] Wel more than can an usurere,
 [5692] As God wel knowith, withoute were.
 [5693] For an usurer, so God me se,
 [5694] Shal nevere for richesse riche be,
 [5695] But evermore pore and indigent,
 [5696] Scarce and gredy in his entent.
 [5697] "For soth it is, whom it displese,
 [5698] Ther may no marchaunt lyve at ese;
 [5699] His herte in sich a were is sett
 [5700] That it quyk brenneth [more] to get,
 [5701] Ne never shal ynogh have geten,
 [5702] Though he have gold in gerners yeten,
 [5703] For to be nedy he dredith sore.
 [5704] Wherfore to geten more and more
 [5705] He set his herte and his desir;
 [5706] So hote he brennyth in the fir
 [5707] Of coveitise, that makith hym wood
 [5708] To purchace other mennes good.
 [5709] He undirfongith a gret peyne,
 [5710] That undirtakith to drynke up Seyne;
 [5711] For the more he drynkith, ay
 [5712] The more he leveth, the soth to say.
 [5713] Thus is thurst of fals getyng,
 [5714] That last ever in coveityng,
 [5715] And the angwisshe and distresse
 [5716] With the fir of gredynesse.
 [5717] She fightith with hym ay, and stryveth,
 [5718] That his herte asondre ryveth.
 [5719] Such gredynesse hym assaylith
 [5720] That whanne he most hath, most he failith.
 [5721] Phisiciens and advocates
 [5722] Gon right by the same yates;
 [5723] They selle her science for wynnyng,
 [5724] And haunte her craft for gret getyng.
 [5725] Her wynnyng is of such swetnesse
 [5726] That if a man falle in siknesse,
 [5727] They are full glad for her encres;
 [5728] For by her wille, withoute lees,
 [5729] Everich man shulde be sek,
 [5730] And though they die, they sette not a lek.
 [5731] After, whanne they the gold have take,
 [5732] Full litel care for hem they make.
 [5733] They wolde that fourty were seke at onys,
 [5734] Ye, two hundred, in flesh and bonys,
 [5735] And yit two thousand, as I gesse,
 [5736] For to encrecen her richesse.
 [5737] They wole not worchen, in no wise,
 [5738] But for lucre and coveitise.
 [5739] For fysic gynneth first by fy,
 [5740] The physicien also sothely;
 [5741] And sithen it goth fro fy to sy:
 [5742] To truste on hem is foly;
 [5743] For they nyl, in no maner gre,
 [5744] Do right nought for charite.
 [5745] "Eke in the same secte ar sett
 [5746] All tho that prechen for to get
 [5747] Worshipes, honour, and richesse.
 [5748] Her hertis arn in gret distresse
 [5749] That folk lyve not holily.
 [5750] But aboven all, specialy,
 [5751] Sich as prechen [for] veynglorie,
 [5752] And toward God have no memorie,
 [5753] But forth as ypocrites trace,
 [5754] And to her soules deth purchace,
 [5755] And outward shewen holynesse,
 [5756] Though they be full of cursidnesse.
 [5757] Not liche to the apostles twelve,
 [5758] They deceyve other and hemselve.
 [5759] Bigiled is the giler than,
 [5760] For prechyng of a cursed man,
 [5761] Though [it] to other may profite,
 [5762] Hymsilf it availeth not a myte;
 [5763] For ofte good predicacioun
 [5764] Cometh of evel entencioun.
 [5765] To hym not vailith his preching,
 [5766] All helpe he other with his teching;
 [5767] For where they good ensaumple take,
 [5768] There is he with veynglorie shake.
 [5769] "But late us leven these prechoures,
 [5770] And speke of hem that in her toures
 [5771] Hepe up hir gold, and faste shette,
 [5772] And sore theron her herte sette.
 [5773] They neither love God ne drede;
 [5774] They kepe more than it is nede,
 [5775] And in her bagges sore it bynde,
 [5776] Out of the sonne and of the wynde.
 [5777] They putte up more than nede ware,
 [5778] Whanne they seen pore folk forfare,
 [5779] For hunger die, and for cold quake.
 [5780] God can wel vengeaunce therof take!
 [5781] Three gret myscheves hem assailith,
 [5782] And thus in gadring ay travaylith.
 [5783] With myche peyne they wynne richesse;
 [5784] And drede hem holdith in distresse
 [5785] To kepe that they gadre faste;
 [5786] With sorwe they leve it at the laste.
 [5787] With sorwe they bothe dye and lyve,
 [5788] That unto richesse her hertis yive;
 [5789] And in defaute of love it is,
 [5790] As it shewith ful wel, iwys.
 [5791] For if thise gredy, the sothe to seyn,
 [5792] Loveden and were loved ageyn,
 [5793] And good love regned overall,
 [5794] Such wikkidnesse ne shulde fall;
 [5795] But he shulde yeve that most good had
 [5796] To hem that weren in nede bistad,
 [5797] And lyve withoute false usure,
 [5798] For charite full clene and pure.
 [5799] If they hem yeve to goodnesse,
 [5800] Defendyng hem from ydelnesse,
 [5801] In all this world thanne pore noon
 [5802] We shulde fynde, I trowe, not oon.
 [5803] But chaunged is this world unstable,
 [5804] For love is overall vendable.
 [5805] We se that no man loveth now,
 [5806] But for wynnyng and for prow;
 [5807] And love is thralled in servage,
 [5808] Whanne it is sold for avauntage.
 [5809] Yit wommen wole her bodyes selle;
 [5810] Suche soules goth to the devel of helle!"

     
The Canterbury Tales and Other Works of Chaucer (Middle English), by Geoffery Chaucer, [14th cent.], at sacred-texts.com

 

The Romaunt of the Rose

 

Fragment C

 [5811] Whanne Love hadde told hem his entente,
 [5812] The baronage to councel wente.
 [5813] In many sentences they fille,
 [5814] And dyversely they seide hir wille;
 [5815] But aftir discord they accorded,
 [5816] And her accord to Love recorded.
 [5817] "Sir," seiden they, "we ben at on,
 [5818] Bi evene accord of everichon,
 [5819] Out-take Richesse al oonly,
 [5820] That sworen hath ful hauteynly,
 [5821] That she the castel nyl not assaile,
 [5822] Ne smyte a strok in this bataile,
 [5823] With darte, ne mace, spere, ne knyf,
 [5824] For man that spekith or berith the lyf,
 [5825] And blameth youre emprise, iwys,
 [5826] And from oure hoost departed is,
 [5827] Atte leste wey, as in this plyt,
 [5828] So hath she this man in dispit.
 [5829] For she seith he ne loved hir never,
 [5830] And therfore she wole hate hym evere.
 [5831] For he wole gadre no tresor,
 [5832] He hath hir wrath for evermor.
 [5833] He agylte hir never in other caas,
 [5834] Lo, heere all hoolly his trespas!
 [5835] She seith wel that this other day
 [5836] He axide hir leve to gon the way
 [5837] That is clepid To-Moche-Yevyng,
 [5838] And spak full faire in his praiyng;
 [5839] But whanne he praiede hir, pore was he,
 [5840] Therfore she warned hym the entre.
 [5841] Ne yit is he not thryven so
 [5842] That he hath geten a peny or two
 [5843] That quytly is his owne in hold.
 [5844] Thus hath Richesse us alle told,
 [5845] And whanne Richesse us this recorded,
 [5846] Withouten hir we ben accorded.
 [5847] "And we fynde in oure accordaunce
 [5848] That Fals-Semblant and Abstinaunce,
 [5849] With all the folk of her bataille,
 [5850] Shull at the hyndre gate assayle,
 [5851] That Wikkid-Tunge hath in kepyng,
 [5852] With his Normans full of janglyng.
 [5853] And with hem Curtesie and Largesse,
 [5854] That shull shewe her hardynesse
 [5855] To the olde wyf that kepte so harde
 [5856] Fair-Welcomyng withynne her warde.
 [5857] Thanne shal Delit and Wel-Heelynge
 [5858] Fonde Shame adown to brynge;
 [5859] With all her oost, erly and late,
 [5860] They shull assailen that ilke gate.
 [5861] Agaynes Drede shall Hardynesse
 [5862] Assayle, and also Sikernesse,
 [5863] With all the folk of her ledyng,
 [5864] That never wist what was fleyng.
 [5865] "Fraunchise shall fight, and eke Pite,
 [5866] With Daunger, full of cruelte.
 [5867] Thus is youre hoost ordeyned wel.
 [5868] Doun shall the castell every del,
 [5869] If everich do his entent,
 [5870] So that Venus be present,
 [5871] Youre modir, full of vasselage,
 [5872] That can ynough of such usage.
 [5873] Withouten hir may no wight spede
 [5874] This werk, neithir for word ne deede;
 [5875] Therfore is good ye for hir sende,
 [5876] For thurgh hir may this werk amende."
 [5877] "Lordynges, my modir, the goddesse,
 [5878] That is my lady and my maistresse,
 [5879] Nis not [at] all at my willyng,
 [5880] Ne doth not all my desiryng.
 [5881] Yit can she som tyme don labour,
 [5882] Whanne that hir lust, in my socour,
 [5883] Al my nedes for to acheve,
 [5884] But now I thenke hir not to greve.
 [5885] My modir is she, and of childhede
 [5886] I bothe worshipe hir and eke drede;
 [5887] For who that dredith sire ne dame,
 [5888] Shal it abye in body or name.
 [5889] And, natheles, yit kunne we
 [5890] Sende aftir hir, if nede be;
 [5891] And were she nygh, she comen wolde;
 [5892] I trowe that nothyng myght hir holde.
 [5893] "Mi modir is of gret prowesse;
 [5894] She hath tan many a forteresse,
 [5895] That cost hath many a pound, er this,
 [5896] There I nas not present, ywis.
 [5897] And yit men seide it was my dede;
 [5898] But I com never in that stede,
 [5899] Ne me ne likith, so mote I the,
 [5900] That such toures ben take withoute me.
 [5901] For-why me thenkith that, in no wise,
 [5902] It may ben clepid but marchandise.
 [5903] "Go bye a courser, blak or whit,
 [5904] And pay therfore; than art thou quyt.
 [5905] The marchaunt owith thee right nought,
 [5906] Ne thou hym, whanne thou it bought.
 [5907] I wole not sellyng clepe yevyng,
 [5908] For sellyng axeth no guerdonyng:
 [5909] Here lith no thank ne no merit;
 [5910] That oon goth from that other al quyt.
 [5911] But this sellyng is not semblable;
 [5912] For whanne his hors is in the stable,
 [5913] He may it selle ageyn, parde,
 [5914] And wynnen on it, such hap may be;
 [5915] All may the man not leese, iwys,
 [5916] For at the leest the skyn is his.
 [5917] Or ellis, if it so bitide
 [5918] That he wole kepe his hors to ride,
 [5919] Yit is he lord ay of his hors.
 [5920] But thilke chaffare is wel wors,
 [5921] There Venus entremetith ought.
 [5922] For whoso such chaffare hath bought,
 [5923] He shal not worchen so wisely
 [5924] That he ne shal leese al outerly
 [5925] Bothe his money and his chaffare;
 [5926] But the seller of the ware
 [5927] The prys and profit have shall.
 [5928] Certeyn, the bier shal leese all.
 [5929] For he ne can so dere it bye
 [5930] To have lordship and full maistrie,
 [5931] Ne have power to make lettyng,
 [5932] Neithir for yift ne for prechyng,
 [5933] That of his chaffare, maugre his,
 [5934] Another shal have as moche, iwis,
 [5935] If he wol yeve as myche as he,
 [5936] Of what contrey so that he be --
 [5937] Or for right nought, so happe may,
 [5938] If he can flater hir to hir pay.
 [5939] Ben thanne siche marchauntz wise?
 [5940] No, but fooles in every wise,
 [5941] Whanne they bye sich thyng wilfully,
 [5942] There as they leese her good fully.
 [5943] But natheles, this dar I saye,
 [5944] My modir is not wont to paye,
 [5945] For she is neither so fool ne nyce
 [5946] To entremete hir of sich vice.
 [5947] But truste wel, he shal pay all,
 [5948] That repent of his bargeyn shall,
 [5949] Whanne poverte putte hym in distresse,
 [5950] All were he scoler to Richesse,
 [5951] That is for me in gret yernyng,
 [5952] Whanne she assentith to my willyng.
 [5953] "But [by] my modir, seint Venus,
 [5954] And by hir fader Saturnus,
 [5955] That hir engendride by his lyf --
 [5956] But not upon his weddid wyf --
 [5957] Yit wole I more unto you swer,
 [5958] To make this thyng the seurere --
 [5959] Now by that feith and that leaute
 [5960] That I owe to all my britheren fre,
 [5961] Of which ther nys wight undir heven
 [5962] That kan her fadris names neven,
 [5963] So dyverse and so many ther be
 [5964] That with my modir have be prive!
 [5965] Yit wolde I swere, for sikirnesse,
 [5966] The pol of helle to my witnesse --
 [5967] Now drynke I not this yeer clarre,
 [5968] If that I lye or forsworn be!
 [5969] (For of the goddes the usage is
 [5970] That whoso hym forswereth amys
 [5971] Shal that yeer drynke no clarre.)
 [5972] Now have I sworn ynough, pardee,
 [5973] If I forswere me, thanne am I lorn,
 [5974] But I wole never be forsworn.
 [5975] Syth Richesse hath me failed heere,
 [5976] She shal abye that trespas ful dere,
 [5977] Atte leeste wey, but [she] hir arme
 [5978] With swerd, or sparth, or gysarme.
 [5979] For certis, sith she loveth not me,
 [5980] Fro thilke tyme that she may se
 [5981] The castell and the tour toshake,
 [5982] In sory tyme she shal awake.
 [5983] If I may grype a riche man,
 [5984] I shal so pulle hym, if I can,
 [5985] That he shal in a fewe stoundes
 [5986] Lese all his markis and his poundis.
 [5987] I shal hym make his pens outslynge,
 [5988] But they in his gerner sprynge.
 [5989] Oure maydens shal eke pluk hym so
 [5990] That hym shal neden fetheres mo,
 [5991] And make hym selle his lond to spende,
 [5992] But he the bet kunne hym defende.
 [5993] "Pore men han maad her lord of me;
 [5994] Although they not so myghty be
 [5995] That they may fede me in delit,
 [5996] I wol not have hem in despit.
 [5997] No good man hateth hem, as I gesse,
 [5998] For chynche and feloun is Richesse,
 [5999] That so can chase hem and dispise,
 [6000] And hem defoule in sondry wise.
 [6001] They loven full bet, so God me spede,
 [6002] Than doth the riche, chynchy gnede,
 [6003] And ben, in good feith, more stable
 [6004] And trewer and more serviable;
 [6005] And therfore it suffisith me
 [6006] Her goode herte and her leaute.
 [6007] They han on me set all her thought,
 [6008] And therfore I forgete hem nought.
 [6009] I wol hem bringe in gret noblesse,
 [6010] If that I were god of richesse,
 [6011] As I am god of love sothly,
 [6012] Sich routhe upon her pleynt have I.
 [6013] Therfore I must his socour be,
 [6014] That peyneth hym to serven me,
 [6015] For if he deide for love of this,
 [6016] Thanne semeth in me no love ther is."
 [6017] "Sir," seide they, "soth is every deel
 [6018] That ye reherce, and we wote wel
 [6019] Thilk oth to holde is resonable;
 [6020] For it is good and covenable
 [6021] That ye on riche men han sworn.
 [6022] For, sir, this wote we wel biforn:
 [6023] If riche men don you homage,
 [6024] That is as fooles don outrage;
 [6025] But ye shull not forsworn be,
 [6026] Ne lette therfore to drynke clarre,
 [6027] Or pyment makid fresh and newe.
 [6028] Ladies shull hem such pepir brewe,
 [6029] If that they fall into her laas,
 [6030] That they for woo mowe seyn `allas!'
 [6031] Ladyes shullen evere so curteis be
 [6032] That they shal quyte youre oth all free.
 [6033] Ne sekith never othir vicaire,
 [6034] For they shal speke with hem so faire
 [6035] That ye shal holde you paied full wel,
 [6036] Though ye you medle never a del.
 [6037] Late ladies worche with her thyngis,
 [6038] They shal hem telle so fele tidynges,
 [6039] And moeve hem eke so many requestis
 [6040] Bi flateri, that not honest is,
 [6041] And therto yeve hem such thankynges,
 [6042] What with kissyng and with talkynges,
 [6043] That, certis, if they trowed be,
 [6044] Shal never leve hem lond ne fee
 [6045] That it nyl as the moeble fare,
 [6046] Of which they first delyverid are.
 [6047] Now may ye telle us all youre wille,
 [6048] And we youre heestes shal fulfille.
 [6049] "But Fals-Semblant dar not, for drede
 [6050] Of you, sir, medle hym of this dede,
 [6051] For he seith that ye ben his foo;
 [6052] He not if ye wole worche hym woo.
 [6053] Wherfore we pray you alle, beau sire,
 [6054] That ye forgyve hym now your ire,
 [6055] And that he may dwelle, as your man,
 [6056] With Abstinence, his dere lemman;
 [6057] This oure accord and oure wille now."
 [6058] "Parfay," seide Love, "I graunte it yow.
 [6059] I wole wel holde hym for my man;
 [6060] Now late hym come" -- and he forth ran.
 [6061] "Fals-Semblant," quod Love, "in this wise
 [6062] I take thee heere to my servise,
 [6063] That thou oure freendis helpe alway,
 [6064] And hyndre hem neithir nyght ne day,
 [6065] But do thy myght hem to releve,
 [6066] And eke oure enemyes that thou greve.
 [6067] Thyn be this myght, I graunte it thee,
 [6068] My kyng of harlotes shalt thou be;
 [6069] We wole that thou have such honour.
 [6070] Certeyn, thou art a fals traitour,
 [6071] And eke a theef; sith thou were born,
 [6072] A thousand tyme thou art forsworn.
 [6073] But natheles, in oure heryng,
 [6074] To putte oure folk out of doutyng,
 [6075] I bidde thee teche hem, wostow how,
 [6076] Bi som general signe now,
 [6077] In what place thou shalt founden be,
 [6078] If that men had myster of thee;
 [6079] And how men shal thee best espye,
 [6080] For thee to knowe is gret maistrie.
 [6081] Telle in what place is thyn hauntyng."
 [6082] "Sir, I have fele dyvers wonyng,
 [6083] That I kepe not rehersed be,
 [6084] So that ye wolde respiten me.
 [6085] For if that I telle you the sothe,
 [6086] I may have harm and shame bothe.
 [6087] If that my felowes wisten it,
 [6088] My talis shulden me be quytt;
 [6089] For certeyn, they wolde hate me,
 [6090] If ever I knewe her cruelte.
 [6091] For they wolde overall holde hem stille
 [6092] Of trouthe that is ageyne her wille;
 [6093] Suche tales kepen they not here.
 [6094] I myght eftsoone bye it full deere,
 [6095] If I seide of hem ony thing
 [6096] That ought displesith to her heryng.
 [6097] For what word that hem prikke or biteth,
 [6098] In that word noon of hem deliteth,
 [6099] Al were it gospel, the evangile,
 [6100] That wolde reprove hem of her gile,
 [6101] For they are cruel and hauteyn.
 [6102] And this thyng wot I well, certeyn,
 [6103] If I speke ought to peire her loos,
 [6104] Your court shal not so well be cloos
 [6105] That they ne shall wite it atte last.
 [6106] Of good men am I nought agast,
 [6107] For they wole taken on hem nothyng,
 [6108] Whanne that they knowe al my menyng;
 [6109] But he that wole it on hym take,
 [6110] He wole hymsilf suspecious make,
 [6111] That he his lyf let covertly
 [6112] In Gile and in Ipocrisy
 [6113] That me engendred and yaf fostryng."
 [6114] "They made a full good engendryng,"
 [6115] Quod Love, "for whoso sothly telle,
 [6116] They engendred the devel of helle!
 [6117] But nedely, howsoevere it be,"
 [6118] Quod Love, "I wole and charge thee
 [6119] To telle anoon thy wonyng places,
 [6120] Heryng ech wight that in this place is.
 [6121] And what lyf that thou lyvest also.
 [6122] Hide it no lenger now; wherto?
 [6123] Thou most discovere all thi wurchyng,
 [6124] How thou servest, and of what thyng,
 [6125] Though that thou shuldist for thi soth-sawe
 [6126] Ben al tobeten and todrawe --
 [6127] And yit art thou not wont, pardee.
 [6128] But natheles, though thou beten be,
 [6129] Thou shalt not be the first that so
 [6130] Hath for sothsawe suffred woo."
 [6131] "Sir, sith that it may liken you,
 [6132] Though that I shulde be slayn right now,
 [6133] I shal don youre comaundement,
 [6134] For therto have I gret talent."
 [6135] Withouten wordis mo, right than,
 [6136] Fals-Semblant his sermon bigan,
 [6137] And seide hem thus in audience:
 [6138] "Barouns, take heede of my sentence!
 [6139] That wight that list to have knowing
 [6140] Of Fals-Semblant, full of flatering,
 [6141] He must in worldly folk hym seke,
 [6142] And, certes, in the cloistres eke.
 [6143] I wone nowhere but in hem tweye,
 [6144] But not lyk even, soth to seye.
 [6145] Shortly, I wole herberwe me
 [6146] There I hope best to hulstred be,
 [6147] And certeynly, sikerest hidyng
 [6148] Is undirnethe humblest clothing.
 [6149] Religiouse folk ben full covert;
 [6150] Seculer folk ben more appert.
 [6151] But natheles, I wole not blame
 [6152] Religious folk, ne hem diffame,
 [6153] In what habit that ever they go.
 [6154] Religioun umble and trewe also,
 [6155] Wole I not blame ne dispise;
 [6156] But I nyl love it, in no wise.
 [6157] I mene of fals religious,
 [6158] That stoute ben and malicious,
 [6159] That wolen in an abit goo,
 [6160] And setten not her herte therto.
 [6161] "Religious folk ben al pitous;
 [6162] Thou shalt not seen oon dispitous.
 [6163] They loven no pride ne no strif,
 [6164] But humbly they wole lede her lyf.
 [6165] With swich folk wole I never be,
 [6166] And if I dwelle, I feyne me.
 [6167] I may wel in her abit go;
 [6168] But me were lever my nekke a-two,
 [6169] Than lete a purpos that I take,
 [6170] What covenaunt that ever I make.
 [6171] I dwelle with hem that proude be,
 [6172] And full of wiles and subtilte,
 [6173] That worship of this world coveiten,
 [6174] And grete nedes kunnen espleiten,
 [6175] And gon and gadren gret pitaunces,
 [6176] And purchace hem the acqueyntaunces
 [6177] Of men that myghty lyf may leden;
 [6178] And feyne hem pore, and hemsilf feden
 [6179] With gode morcels delicious,
 [6180] And drinken good wyn precious,
 [6181] And preche us povert and distresse,
 [6182] And fisshen hemsilf gret richesse
 [6183] With wily nettis that they caste.
 [6184] It wole come foule out at the laste.
 [6185] They ben fro clene religioun went;
 [6186] They make the world an argument
 [6187] That [hath. a foul conclusioun.
 [6188] `I have a robe of religioun,
 [6189] Thanne am I all religious.'
 [6190] This argument is all roignous;
 [6191] It is not worth a croked brere.
 [6192] Abit ne makith neithir monk ne frere,
 [6193] But clene lyf and devocioun
 [6194] Makith gode men of religioun.
 [6195] Natheles, ther kan noon answere,
 [6196] How high that evere his heed he shere,
 [6197] With resoun whetted never so kene,
 [6198] That Gile in braunches kut thrittene;
 [6199] Ther can no wight distincte it so,
 [6200] That he dar sey a word therto.
 [6201] "But what herberwe that ever I take,
 [6202] Or what semblant that evere I make,
 [6203] I mene but gile, and folowe that;
 [6204] For right no mo than Gibbe oure cat,
 [6206] Ne entende I but to bigilyng.
 [6207] Ne no wight may by my clothing
 [6208] Wite with what folk is my dwellyng,
 [6209] Ne by my wordis yit, parde,
 [6210] So softe and so plesaunt they be.
 [6211] Bihold the dedis that I do;
 [6212] But thou be blynd, thou oughtest so;
 [6213] For, varie her wordis fro her deede,
 [6214] They thenke on gile, withoute dreede,
 [6215] What maner clothing that they were,
 [6216] Or what estat that evere they bere,
 [6217] Lered or lewde, lord or lady,
 [6218] Knyght, squyer, burgeis, or bayly."
 [6219] Right thus while Fals-Semblant sermoneth,
 [6220] Eftsones Love hym aresoneth,
 [6221] And brak his tale in his spekyng,
 [6222] As though he had hym told lesyng,
 [6223] And seide, "What, devel, is that I here?
 [6224] What folk hast thou us nempned heere?
 [6225] May men fynde religioun
 [6226] In worldly habitacioun?"
 [6227] "Ye, sir; it folowith not that they
 [6228] Shulde lede a wikked lyf, parfey,
 [6229] Ne not therfore her soules leese
 [6230] That hem to worldly clothes chese;
 [6231] For, certis, it were gret pitee.
 [6232] Men may in seculer clothes see
 [6233] Florishen hooly religioun.
 [6234] Full many a seynt in feeld and toun,
 [6235] With many a virgine glorious,
 [6236] Devout, and full religious,
 [6237] Han deied, that comun cloth ay beeren,
 [6238] Yit seyntes nevere the lesse they weren.
 [6239] I cowde reken you many a ten;
 [6240] Ye, wel nygh [al] these hooly wymmen
 [6241] That men in chirchis herie and seke,
 [6242] Bothe maydens and these wyves eke
 [6243] That baren full many a fair child heere,
 [6244] Wered alwey clothis seculere,
 [6245] And in the same dieden they
 [6246] That seyntes weren, and ben alwey.
 [6247] The eleven thousand maydens deere
 [6248] That beren in heven hir ciergis clere,
 [6249] Of whiche men rede in chirche and synge,
 [6250] Were take in seculer clothinge
 [6251] Whanne they resseyved martirdom,
 [6252] And wonnen hevene unto her hom.
 [6253] Good herte makith the goode thought;
 [6254] The clothing yeveth ne reveth nought.
 [6255] The goode thought and the worching,
 [6256] That makith the religioun flowryng,
 [6257] Ther lyth the good religioun,
 [6258] Aftir the right entencioun.
 [6259] "Whoso took a wethers skyn,
 [6260] And wrapped a gredy wolf theryn,
 [6261] For he shulde go with lambis whyte,
 [6262] Wenest thou not he wolde hem bite?
 [6263] Yis, neverthelasse, as he were wood,
 [6264] He wolde hem wery and drinke the blood,
 [6265] And wel the rather hem disceyve;
 [6266] For, sith they cowde not perceyve
 [6267] His treget and his cruelte,
 [6268] They wolde hym folowe, al wolde he fle.
 [6269] "If ther be wolves of sich hewe
 [6270] Amonges these apostlis newe,
 [6271] Thou hooly chirche, thou maist be wailed!
 [6272] Sith that thy citee is assayled
 [6273] Thourgh knyghtis of thyn owne table,
 [6274] God wot thi lordship is doutable!
 [6275] If thei enforce [hem] it to wynne
 [6276] That shulde defende it fro withynne,
 [6277] Who myght defense ayens hem make?
 [6278] Withoute strok it mot be take
 [6279] Of trepeget or mangonel,
 [6280] Without displaiyng of pensel.
 [6281] And if God nyl don it socour,
 [6282] But lat [hem] renne in this colour,
 [6283] Thou most thyn heestis laten be.
 [6284] Thanne is ther nought but yelde thee,
 [6285] Or yeve hem tribut, doutelees,
 [6286] And holde it of hem to have pees,
 [6287] But gretter harm bitide thee,
 [6288] That they al maister of it be.
 [6289] Wel konne they scorne thee withal;
 [6290] By day stuffen they the wall,
 [6291] And al the nyght they mynen there.
 [6292] Nay, thou planten most elleswhere
 [6293] Thyn ympes, if thou wolt fruyt have;
 [6294] Abid not there thisilf to save.
 [6295] "But now pees! Heere I turne ageyn.
 [6296] I wole nomore of this thing seyn,
 [6297] If I may passen me herby;
 [6298] I myghte maken you wery.
 [6299] But I wole heten you alway
 [6300] To helpe youre freendis what I may,
 [6301] So they wollen my company;
 [6302] For they be shent al outerly,
 [6303] But if so falle that I be
 [6304] Ofte with hem, and they with me.
 [6305] And eke my lemman mote they serve,
 [6306] Or they shull not my love deserve.
 [6307] Forsothe, I am a fals traitour;
 [6308] God jugged me for a theef trichour.
 [6309] Forsworn I am, but wel nygh non
 [6310] Wot of my gile, til it be don.
 [6311] "Thourgh me hath many oon deth resseyved,
 [6312] That my treget nevere aperceyved;
 [6313] And yit resseyveth, and shal resseyve,
 [6314] That my falsnesse shal nevere aperceyve.
 [6315] But whoso doth, if he wis be,
 [6316] Hym is right good be war of me,
 [6317] But so sligh is the deceyvyng
 [6319] For Protheus, that cowde hym chaunge
 [6320] In every shap, homly and straunge,
 [6321] Cowde nevere sich gile ne tresoun
 [6322] As I; for I com never in toun
 [6323] There as I myghte knowen be,
 [6324] Though men me bothe myght here and see.
 [6325] Full wel I can my clothis chaunge,
 [6326] Take oon, and make another straunge.
 [6327] Now am I knyght, now chasteleyn,
 [6328] Now prelat, and now chapeleyn,
 [6329] Now prest, now clerk, and now forster;
 [6330] Now am I maister, now scoler,
 [6331] Now monk, now chanoun, now baily;
 [6332] Whatever myster man am I.
 [6333] Now am I prince, now am I page,
 [6334] And kan by herte every langage.
 [6335] Som tyme am I hor and old;
 [6336] Now am I yong, stout, and bold;
 [6337] Now am I Robert, now Robyn,
 [6338] Now Frere Menour, now Jacobyn;
 [6339] And with me folwith my loteby,
 [6340] To don me solas and company,
 [6341] That hight Dame Abstinence-Streyned,
 [6342] In many a queynte array feyned.
 [6343] Ryght as it cometh to hir lykyng,
 [6344] I fulfille al hir desiryng.
 [6345] Somtyme a wommans cloth take I;
 [6346] Now am I a mayde, now lady.
 [6347] Somtyme I am religious;
 [6348] Now lyk an anker in an hous.
 [6349] Somtyme am I prioresse,
 [6350] And now a nonne, and now abbesse;
 [6351] And go thurgh alle regiouns,
 [6352] Sekyng alle religiouns.
 [6353] But to what ordre that I am sworn,
 [6354] I take the strawe, and lete the corn.
 [6355] To gyle folk I enhabit;
 [6356] I axe nomore but her abit.
 [6357] What wole ye more in every wise?
 [6358] Right as me lyst, I me disgise.
 [6359] Wel can I wre me undir wede;
 [6360] Unlyk is my word to my dede.
 [6361] [I] make into my trappis falle,
 [6362] Thurgh my pryveleges, alle
 [6363] That ben in Cristendom alyve.
 [6364] I may assoile and I may shryve,
 [6365] That no prelat may lette me,
 [6366] All folk, where evere thei founde be.
 [6367] I not no prelat may don so,
 [6368] But it the pope be, and no mo,
 [6369] That made thilk establisshing.
 [6370] Now is not this a propre thing?
 [6371] But, were my sleightis aperceyved
 [6373] As I was wont, and wostow why?
 [6374] For I dide hem a tregetry.
 [6375] But therof yeve I lytel tale;
 [6376] I have the silver and the male.
 [6377] So have I prechid, and eke shriven,
 [6378] So have I take, so have me yiven,
 [6379] Thurgh her foly, husbonde and wyf,
 [6380] That I lede right a joly lyf,
 [6381] Thurgh symplesse of the prelacye --
 [6382] They knowe not al my tregettrie.
 [6383] "But forasmoche as man and wyf
 [6384] Shulde shewe her paroch-prest her lyf,
 [6385] Onys a yeer, as seith the book,
 [6386] Er ony wight his housel took,
 [6387] Thanne have I pryvylegis large,
 [6388] That may of myche thing discharge.
 [6389] For he may seie right thus, parde:
 [6390] `Sir preest, in shrift I telle it thee,
 [6391] That he to whom that I am shryven
 [6392] Hath me assoiled, and me yiven
 [6393] Penaunce, sothly, for my synne,
 [6394] Which that I fond me gilty ynne;
 [6395] Ne I ne have nevere entencioun
 [6396] To make double confessioun,
 [6397] Ne reherce eft my shrift to thee.
 [6398] O shrift is right ynough to me.
 [6399] This oughte thee suffice wel;
 [6400] Ne be not rebel never a del.
 [6401] For certis, though thou haddist it sworn,
 [6402] I wot no prest ne prelat born,
 [6403] That may to shrift eft me constreyne;
 [6404] And if they don, I wole me pleyne,
 [6405] For I wot where to pleyne wel.
 [6406] Thou shalt not streyne me a del,
 [6407] Ne enforce me, ne not me trouble,
 [6408] To make my confessioun double.
 [6409] Ne I have non affeccioun
 [6410] To have double absolucioun.
 [6411] The firste is right ynough to me;
 [6412] This latter assoilyng quyte I thee.
 [6413] I am unbounde -- what maist thou fynde
 [6414] More of my synnes me to unbynde?
 [6415] For he, that myght hath in his hond,
 [6416] Of all my synnes me unbond.
 [6417] And if thou wolt me thus constreyne
 [6418] That me mot nedis on thee pleyne,
 [6419] There shall no jugge imperial,
 [6420] Ne bisshop, ne official,
 [6421] Don jugement on me; for I
 [6422] Shal gon and pleyne me openly
 [6423] Unto my shrifte-fadir newe
 [6424] (That hight not Frere Wolf untrewe!),
 [6425] And he shal cheveys hym for me,
 [6426] For I trowe he can hampre thee.
 [6427] But, Lord, he wolde be wrooth withalle,
 [6428] If men hym wolde Frere Wolf calle!
 [6429] For he wolde have no pacience,
 [6430] But don al cruel vengeaunce.
 [6431] He wolde his myght don at the leeste,
 [6432] Nothing spare for Goddis heeste.
 [6433] And, God so wys be my socour,
 [6434] But thou yeve me my Savyour
 [6435] At Ester, whanne it likith me,
 [6436] Withoute presyng more on thee,
 [6437] I wole forth, and to hym gon,
 [6438] And he shal housel me anoon.
 [6439] For I am out of thi grucching;
 [6440] I kepe not dele with thee nothing.'
 [6441] "Thus may he shryve hym, that forsaketh
 [6442] His paroch-prest, and to me taketh.
 [6443] And if the prest wole hym refuse,
 [6444] I am full redy hym to accuse,
 [6445] And hym punysshe and hampre so
 [6446] That he his chirche shal forgo.
 [6447] "But whoso hath in his felyng
 [6448] The consequence of such shryvyng,
 [6449] Shal sen that prest may never have myght
 [6450] To knowe the conscience aright
 [6451] Of hym that is undir his cure.
 [6452] And this ageyns holy scripture,
 [6453] That biddith every heerde honest
 [6454] Have verry knowing of his beest.
 [6455] But pore folk that gone by strete,
 [6456] That have no gold, ne sommes grete,
 [6457] Hem wolde I lete to her prelates,
 [6458] Or lete her prestis knowe her states,
 [6459] For to me right nought yeve they.
 [6460] And why? It is for they ne may.
 [6461] They ben so bare, I take no kep,
 [6462] But I wole have the fatte sheep;
 [6463] Lat parish prestis have the lene.
 [6464] I yeve not of her harm a bene!
 [6465] And if that prelates grucchen it,
 [6466] That oughten wroth be in her wit
 [6467] To leese her fatte beestes so,
 [6468] I shal yeve hem a strok or two,
 [6469] That they shal leesen with force,
 [6470] Ye, bothe her mytre and her croce.
 [6471] Thus jape I hem, and have do longe,
 [6472] My pryveleges ben so stronge."
 [6473] Fals-Semblant wolde have stynted heere,
 [6474] But Love ne made hym no such cheere
 [6475] That he was wery of his sawe;
 [6476] But for to make hym glad and fawe,
 [6477] He seide, "Telle on more specialy
 [6478] Hou that thou servest untrewly.
 [6479] Telle forth, and shame thee never a del;
 [6480] For, as thyn abit shewith wel,
 [6481] Thou semest an hooly heremyte."
 [6482] "Soth is, but I am an ypocrite."
 [6483] "Thou gost and prechest poverte."
 [6484] "Ye, sir, but richesse hath pouste."
 [6485] "Thou prechest abstinence also."
 [6486] "Sir, I wole fillen, so mote I go,
 [6487] My paunche of good mete and wyn,
 [6488] As shulde a maister of dyvyn;
 [6489] For how that I me pover feyne,
 [6490] Yit alle pore folk I disdeyne.
 [6491] "I love bettir th' acqueyntaunce,
 [6492] Ten tyme, of the kyng of Fraunce
 [6493] Than of a pore man of mylde mod,
 [6494] Though that his soule be also god.
 [6495] For whanne I see beggers quakyng,
 [6496] Naked on myxnes al stynkyng,
 [6497] For hungre crie, and eke for care,
 [6498] I entremete not of her fare.
 [6499] They ben so pore and ful of pyne,
 [6500] They myght not oonys yeve me dyne,
 [6501] For they have nothing but her lyf.
 [6502] What shulde he yeve that likketh his knyf?
 [6503] It is but foly to entremete,
 [6504] To seke in houndes nest fat mete.
 [6505] Lete bere hem to the spitel anoon,
 [6506] But, for me, comfort gete they noon.
 [6507] But a riche sik usurer
 [6508] Wolde I visite and drawe ner;
 [6509] Hym wole I comforte and rehete,
 [6510] For I hope of his gold to gete.
 [6511] And if that wikkid deth hym have,
 [6512] I wole go with hym to his grave.
 [6513] And if ther ony reprove me,
 [6514] Why that I lete the pore be,
 [6515] Wostow how I mot ascape?
 [6516] I sey, and swere hym ful rape,
 [6517] That riche men han more tecches
 [6518] Of synne than han pore wrecches,
 [6519] And han of counsel more mister,
 [6520] And therfore I wole drawe hem ner.
 [6521] But as gret hurt, it may so be,
 [6522] Hath a soule in right gret poverte
 [6523] As soule in gret richesse, forsothe,
 [6524] Al be it that they hurten bothe.
 [6525] For richesse and mendicitees
 [6526] Ben clepid two extremytees;
 [6527] The mene is cleped suffisaunce;
 [6528] Ther lyth of vertu the aboundaunce.
 [6529] For Salamon, full wel I wot,
 [6530] In his Parablis us wrot,
 [6531] As it is knowe to many a wight,
 [6532] In his thrittene chapitre right,
 [6533] `God thou me kepe, for thi pouste,
 [6534] Fro richesse and mendicite;
 [6535] For if a riche man hym dresse
 [6536] To thenke to myche on richesse,
 [6537] His herte on that so fer is set
 [6538] That he his creatour foryet;
 [6539] And hym that begging wole ay greve,
 [6540] How shulde I bi his word hym leve?
 [6541] Unnethe that he nys a mycher
 [6542] Forsworn, or ellis God is lyer.'
 [6543] Thus seith Salamones sawes.
 [6544] Ne we fynde writen in no lawis,
 [6545] And namely in oure Cristen lay,
 [6546] (Whoso seith `ye,' I dar sey `nay')
 [6547] That Crist, ne his apostlis dere,
 [6548] While that they walkide in erthe heere,
 [6549] Were never seen her bred beggyng,
 [6550] For they nolden beggen for nothing.
 [6551] And right thus was men wont to teche,
 [6552] And in this wise wolde it preche
 [6553] The maistres of divinite
 [6554] Somtyme in Parys the citee.
 [6555] "And if men wolde ther-geyn appose
 [6556] The nakid text, and lete the glose,
 [6557] It myghte soone assoiled be;
 [6558] For men may wel the sothe see,
 [6559] That, parde, they myght aske a thing
 [6560] Pleynly forth, without begging.
 [6561] For they weren Goddis herdis deere,
 [6562] And cure of soules hadden heere,
 [6563] They nolde nothing begge her fode;
 [6564] For aftir Crist was don on rode,
 [6565] With ther propre hondis they wrought,
 [6566] And with travel, and ellis nought,
 [6567] They wonnen all her sustenaunce,
 [6568] And lyveden forth in her penaunce,
 [6569] And the remenaunt yave awey
 [6570] To other pore folkis alwey.
 [6571] They neither bilden tour ne halle,
 [6572] But ley in houses smale withalle.
 [6573] A myghty man, that can and may,
 [6574] Shulde with his hond and body alway
 [6575] Wynne hym his fode in laboring,
 [6576] If he ne have rent or sich a thing,
 [6577] Although he be religious,
 [6578] And God to serven curious.
 [6579] Thus mot he don, or do trespas,
 [6580] But if it be in certeyn cas,
 [6581] That I can reherce, if myster be,
 [6582] Right wel, whanne the tyme I se.
 [6583] "Sek the book of Seynt Austyn,
 [6584] Be it in papir or perchemyn,
 [6585] There as he writ of these worchynges,
 [6586] Thou shalt seen that noon excusynges
 [6587] A parfit man ne shulde seke
 [6588] Bi wordis ne bi dedis eke,
 [6589] Although he be religious,
 [6590] And God to serven curious,
 [6591] That he ne shal, so mote I go,
 [6592] With propre hondis and body also,
 [6593] Gete his fode in laboryng,
 [6594] If he ne have proprete of thing.
 [6595] Yit shulde he selle all his substaunce,
 [6596] And with his swynk have sustenaunce,
 [6597] If he be parfit in bounte.
 [6598] Thus han tho bookes told me.
 [6599] For he that wole gon ydilly,
 [6600] And usith it ay besily
 [6601] To haunten other mennes table,
 [6602] He is a trechour, ful of fable;
 [6603] Ne he ne may, by god resoun,
 [6604] Excuse hym by his orisoun.
 [6605] For men bihoveth, in som gise,
 [6606] Somtyme leven Goddis servise
 [6607] To gon and purchasen her nede.
 [6608] Men mote eten, that is no drede,
 [6609] And slepe, and eke do other thing;
 [6610] So longe may they leve praiyng.
 [6611] So may they eke her praier blynne,
 [6612] While that they werke, her mete to wynne.
 [6613] Seynt Austyn wole therto accorde,
 [6614] In thilke book that I recorde.
 [6615] Justinian eke, that made lawes,
 [6616] Hath thus forboden, by olde dawes:
 [6617] `No man, up peyne to be ded,
 [6618] Mighty of body, to begge his bred,
 [6619] If he may swynke it for to gete;
 [6620] Men shulde hym rather mayme or bete,
 [6621] Or don of hym apert justice,
 [6622] Than suffren hym in such malice.'
 [6623] They don not wel, so mote I go,
 [6624] That taken such almesse so,
 [6625] But if they have som pryvelege,
 [6626] That of the peyne hem wole allege.
 [6627] But how that is, can I not see,
 [6628] But if the prince disseyved be;
 [6629] Ne I ne wene not, sikerly,
 [6630] That they may have it rightfully.
 [6631] But I wole not determine
 [6632] Of prynces power, ne defyne,
 [6633] Ne by my word comprende, iwys,
 [6634] If it so fer may strecche in this.
 [6635] I wole not entremete a del;
 [6636] But I trowe that the book seith wel,
 [6637] Who that takith almessis that be
 [6638] Dewe to folk that men may se
 [6639] Lame, feble, wery, and bare,
 [6640] Pore, or in such maner care --
 [6641] That konne wynne hem never mo,
 [6642] For they have no power therto --
 [6643] He etith his owne dampnyng,
 [6644] But if he lye, that made al thing.
 [6645] And if ye such a truaunt fynde,
 [6646] Chastise hym wel, if ye be kynde.
 [6647] But they wolde hate you, percas,
 [6648] And, if ye fillen in her laas,
 [6649] They wolde eftsoonys do you scathe,
 [6650] If that they myghte, late or rathe;
 [6651] For they be not full pacient
 [6652] That han the world thus foule blent.
 [6653] And witeth wel that [ther] God bad
 [6654] The good-man selle al that he had,
 [6655] And folowe hym, and to pore it yive,
 [6656] He wolde not therfore that he lyve
 [6657] To serven hym in mendience,
 [6658] For it was nevere his sentence;
 [6659] But he bad wirken whanne that neede is,
 [6660] And folwe hym in goode dedis.
 [6661] Seynt Poul, that loved al hooly chirche,
 [6662] He bad th' appostles for to wirche,
 [6663] And wynnen her lyflode in that wise,
 [6664] And hem defended truandise,
 [6665] And seide, `Wirketh with youre honden.'
 [6666] Thus shulde the thing be undirstonden:
 [6667] He nolde, iwys, have bidde hem begging,
 [6668] Ne sellen gospel, ne prechyng,
 [6669] Lest they berafte, with her askyng,
 [6670] Folk of her catel or of her thing.
 [6671] For in this world is many a man
 [6672] That yeveth his good, for he ne can
 [6673] Werne it for shame; or ellis he
 [6674] Wolde of the asker delyvered be,
 [6675] And, for he hym encombrith so,
 [6676] He yeveth hym good to late hym go.
 [6677] But it can hym nothyng profite;
 [6678] They lese the yift and the meryte.
 [6679] The goode folk, that Poul to preched,
 [6680] Profred hym ofte, whan he hem teched,
 [6681] Som of her good in charite.
 [6682] But therof right nothing tok he;
 [6683] But of his hondwerk wolde he gete
 [6684] Clothes to wryen hym, and his mete."
 [6685] "Telle me thanne how a man may lyven,
 [6686] That al his good to pore hath yiven,
 [6687] And wole but oonly bidde his bedis
 [6689] May he do so?" "Ye, sir." "And how?"
 [6690] "Sir, I wole gladly telle yow:
 [6691] Seynt Austyn seith a man may be
 [6692] In houses that han proprete,
 [6693] As Templers and Hospitelers,
 [6694] And as these Chanouns Regulers,
 [6695] Or White Monkes, or these Blake --
 [6696] I wole no mo ensamplis make --
 [6697] And take therof his sustenyng,
 [6698] For therynne lyth no begging;
 [6699] But other weyes not, ywys,
 [6700] Yif Austyn gabbith not of this.
 [6701] And yit full many a monk laboureth,
 [6702] That God in hooly chirche honoureth.
 [6703] For whanne her swynkyng is agon,
 [6704] They rede and synge in chirche anon.
 [6705] "And for ther hath ben gret discord,
 [6706] As many a wight may bere record,
 [6707] Upon the estat of mendience,
 [6708] I wole shortly, in youre presence,
 [6709] Telle how a man may begge at nede,
 [6710] That hath not wherwith hym to fede,
 [6711] Maugre his felones jangelyngis,
 [6712] For sothfastnesse wole none hidyngis.
 [6713] And yit, percas, I may abeye
 [6714] That I to yow sothly thus seye.
 [6715] "Lo, heere the caas especial:
 [6716] If a man be so bestial
 [6717] That he of no craft hath science,
 [6718] And nought desireth ignorence,
 [6719] Thanne may he go a-begging yerne,
 [6720] Til he som maner craft kan lerne,
 [6721] Thurgh which withoute truaundyng,
 [6722] He may in trouthe have his lyvyng.
 [6723] Or if he may don no labour,
 [6724] For elde, or syknesse, or langour,
 [6725] Or for his tendre age also,
 [6726] Thanne may he yit a-begging go.
 [6727] Or if he have, peraventure,
 [6728] Thurgh usage of his noriture,
 [6729] Lyved over deliciously,
 [6730] Thanne oughten good folk comunly
 [6731] Han of his myscheef som pitee,
 [6732] And suffren hym also that he
 [6733] May gon aboute and begge his breed,
 [6734] That he be not for hungur deed.
 [6735] Or if he have of craft kunnyng,
 [6736] And strengthe also, and desiryng
 [6737] To wirken, as he hadde what,
 [6738] But he fynde neithir this ne that,
 [6739] Thanne may he begge til that he
 [6740] Have geten his necessite.
 [6741] Or if his wynnyng be so lite
 [6742] That his labour wole not acquyte
 [6743] Sufficiantly al his lyvyng,
 [6744] Yit may he go his breed begging;
 [6745] Fro dore to dore he may go trace,
 [6746] Til he the remenaunt may purchace.
 [6747] Or if a man wolde undirtake
 [6748] Ony emprise for to make
 [6749] In the rescous of oure lay,
 [6750] And it defenden as he may,
 [6751] Be it with armes or lettrure,
 [6752] Or other covenable cure,
 [6753] If it be so he pore be,
 [6754] Thanne may he begge til that he
 [6755] May fynde in trouthe for to swynke,
 [6756] And gete hym clothes, mete, and drynke,
 [6757] Swynke he with his hondis corporell,
 [6758] And not with hondis espirituell.
 [6759] "In al thise caas, and in semblables,
 [6760] If that ther ben mo resonables,
 [6761] He may begge, as I telle you heere,
 [6762] And ellis nought, in no manere,
 [6763] As William Seynt Amour wolde preche,
 [6764] And ofte wolde dispute and teche
 [6765] Of this mater all openly
 [6766] At Parys full solempnely.
 [6767] And, also God my soule blesse,
 [6768] As he had, in this stedfastnesse,
 [6769] The accord of the universite
 [6770] And of the puple, as semeth me.
 [6771] "No good man oughte it to refuse,
 [6772] Ne ought hym therof to excuse,
 [6773] Be wroth or blithe whoso be.
 [6774] For I wole speke, and telle it thee,
 [6775] Al shulde I dye, and be putt doun,
 [6776] As was Seynt Poul, in derk prisoun;
 [6777] Or be exiled in this caas
 [6778] With wrong, as maister William was,
 [6779] That my moder, Ypocrysie,
 [6780] Banysshed for hir gret envye.
 [6781] "Mi modir flemed hym Seynt Amour;
 [6782] The noble dide such labour
 [6783] To susteyne evere the loyalte,
 [6784] That he to moche agilte me.
 [6785] He made a book, and lete it write,
 [6787] And wolde ich reneyed begging,
 [6788] And lyved by my traveylyng,
 [6789] If I ne had rent ne other good.
 [6790] What? Wened he that I were wood?
 [6791] For labour myght me never plese.
 [6792] I have more wille to ben at ese,
 [6793] And have wel lever, soth to seye,
 [6794] Bifore the puple patre and preye,
 [6795] And wrie me in my foxerie
 [6796] Under a cope of papelardie."
 [6797] Quod Love, "What devel is this that I heere?
 [6798] What wordis tellest thou me heere?"
 [6799] "What, sir?" "Falsnesse, that apert is.
 [6800] Thanne dredist thou not God?" "No, certis;
 [6801] For selde in gret thing shal he spede
 [6802] In this world, that God wole drede.
 [6803] For folk that hem to vertu yiven,
 [6804] And truly on her owne lyven,
 [6805] And hem in goodnesse ay contene,
 [6806] On hem is lytel thrift sene.
 [6807] Such folk drinken gret mysese;
 [6808] That lyf may me never plese.
 [6809] But se what gold han usurers,
 [6810] And silver eke in garners,
 [6811] Taylagiers, and these monyours,
 [6812] Bailifs, bedels, provost, countours;
 [6813] These lyven wel nygh by ravyne.
 [6814] The smale puple hem mote enclyne,
 [6815] And they as wolves wole hem eten.
 [6816] Upon the pore folk they geten
 [6817] Full moche of that they spende or kepe.
 [6818] Nis non of hem that he nyl strepe
 [6819] And wrien hemsilf wel atte fulle;
 [6820] Withoute scaldyng they hem pulle.
 [6821] The stronge the feble overgoth.
 [6822] But I, that were my symple cloth,
 [6823] Robbe bothe robbed and robbours
 [6824] And gile giled and gilours.
 [6825] By my treget I gadre and threste
 [6826] The gret tresour into my cheste,
 [6827] That lyth with me so faste bounde.
 [6828] Myn highe paleys do I founde,
 [6829] And my delites I fulfille
 [6830] With wyn at feestes at my wille,
 [6831] And tables full of entremees.
 [6832] I wole no lyf but ese and pees,
 [6833] And wynne gold to spende also.
 [6834] For whanne the grete bagge is go,
 [6835] It cometh right with my japes.
 [6836] Make I not wel tumble myn apes?
 [6837] To wynnen is alwey myn entente;
 [6838] My purchace is bettir than my rente.
 [6839] For though I shulde beten be,
 [6840] Overal I entremete me.
 [6841] Without me may no wight dure;
 [6842] I walke soules for to cure.
 [6843] Of al the world cure have I;
 [6844] In brede and lengthe boldely
 [6845] I wole bothe preche and eke counceilen.
 [6846] With hondis wille I not traveilen,
 [6847] For of the Pope I have the bulle --
 [6848] I ne holde not my wittes dulle.
 [6849] I wole not stynten, in my lyve,
 [6850] These emperoures for to shryve,
 [6851] Or kyngis, dukis, lordis grete;
 [6852] But pore folk al quyte I lete.
 [6853] I love no such shryvyng, parde,
 [6854] But it for other cause be.
 [6855] I rekke not of pore men --
 [6856] Her astat is not worth an hen.
 [6857] Where fyndest thou a swynker of labour
 [6858] Have me unto his confessour?
 [6859] But emperesses and duchesses,
 [6860] Thise queenes, and eke countesses,
 [6861] Thise abbessis, and eke bygyns,
 [6862] These grete ladyes palasyns,
 [6863] These joly knyghtis and baillyves,
 [6864] Thise nonnes, and thise burgeis wyves,
 [6865] That riche ben and eke plesyng,
 [6866] And thise maidens welfaryng,
 [6867] Wherso they clad or naked be,
 [6868] Uncounceiled goth ther noon fro me.
 [6869] And, for her soules savete,
 [6870] At lord and lady, and her meyne,
 [6871] I axe, whanne thei hem to me shryve,
 [6872] The proprete of al her lyve,
 [6873] And make hem trowe, bothe meest and leest,
 [6874] Hir paroch-prest nys but a beest
 [6875] Ayens me and my companye,
 [6876] That shrewis ben as gret as I;
 [6877] Fro whiche I wole not hide in hold
 [6878] No pryvete that me is told,
 [6879] That I by word or signe, ywis,
 [6880] [Ne] wole make hem knowe what it is,
 [6881] And they wolen also tellen me;
 [6882] They hele fro me no pryvyte.
 [6883] And for to make yow hem perceyven,
 [6884] That usen folk thus to disceyven,
 [6885] I wole you seyn, withouten drede,
 [6886] What men may in the gospel rede
 [6887] Of Seynt Mathew, the gospelere,
 [6888] That seith, as I shal you sey heere:
 [6889] "`Uppon the chaire of Moyses' --
 [6890] Thus is it glosed, douteles,
 [6891] That is the Olde Testament,
 [6892] For therby is the chaire ment --
 [6893] `Sitte Scribes and Pharisen;'
 [6894] That is to seyn, the cursid men
 [6895] Whiche that we ypocritis calle.
 [6896] `Doth that they preche, I rede you alle,
 [6897] But doth not as they don a del;
 [6898] That ben not wery to seye wel,
 [6899] But to do wel no will have they.
 [6900] And they wolde bynde on folk alwey,
 [6901] That ben to be begiled able,
 [6902] Burdons that ben importable;
 [6903] On folkes shuldris thinges they couchen,
 [6904] That they nyl with her fyngris touchen.'"
 [6905] "And why wole they not touche it?" "Why?
 [6906] For hem ne lyst not, sikirly;
 [6907] For sadde burdons that men taken
 [6908] Make folkes shuldris aken.
 [6909] And if they do ought that good be,
 [6910] That is for folk it shulde se.
 [6911] Her bordurs larger maken they,
 [6912] And make her hemmes wide alwey,
 [6913] And loven setes at the table,
 [6914] The firste and most honourable;
 [6915] And for to han the first chaieris
 [6916] In synagogis, to hem full deere is.
 [6917] And willen that folk hem loute and grete,
 [6918] Whanne that they passen thurgh the strete,
 [6919] And wolen be cleped `maister' also.
 [6920] But they ne shulde not willen so;
 [6921] The gospel is ther-ageyns, I gesse,
 [6922] That shewith wel her wikkidnesse.
 [6923] "Another custome use we:
 [6924] Of hem that wole ayens us be,
 [6925] We hate hem deedly everichon,
 [6926] And we wole werrey hem, as oon.
 [6927] Hym that oon hatith, hate we alle,
 [6928] And congecte hou to don hym falle.
 [6929] And if we seen hym wynne honour,
 [6930] Richesse, or preis, thurgh his valour,
 [6931] Provende, rent, or dignyte,
 [6932] Ful fast, iwys, compassen we
 [6933] Bi what ladder he is clomben so;
 [6934] And for to maken hym doun to go,
 [6935] With traisoun we wole hym defame,
 [6936] And don hym leese his goode name.
 [6937] Thus from his ladder we hym take,
 [6938] And thus his freendis foes we make;
 [6939] But word ne wite shal he noon,
 [6940] Till alle his freendis ben his foon.
 [6941] For if we dide it openly,
 [6942] We myght have blame redily;
 [6943] For hadde he wist of oure malice,
 [6944] He hadde hym kept, but he were nyce.
 [6945] "Another is this, that if so falle
 [6946] That ther be oon amonge us alle
 [6947] That doth a good turn, out of drede,
 [6948] We seyn it is oure alder deede.
 [6949] Ye, sikerly, though he it feyned,
 [6950] Or that hym list, or that hym deyned
 [6951] A man thurgh hym avaunced be;
 [6952] Therof all parseners be we,
 [6953] And tellen folk, whereso we go,
 [6954] That man thurgh us is sprongen so.
 [6955] And for to have of men preysyng,
 [6956] We purchace, thurgh oure flateryng,
 [6957] Of riche men of gret pouste
 [6958] Lettres to witnesse oure bounte,
 [6959] So that man weneth, that may us see,
 [6960] That alle vertu in us be.
 [6961] And alwey pore we us feyne;
 [6962] But how so that we begge or pleyne,
 [6963] We ben the folk, without lesyng,
 [6964] That all thing have without havyng.
 [6965] Thus be we dred of the puple, iwis.
 [6966] And gladly my purpos is this:
 [6967] I dele with no wight, but he
 [6968] Have gold and tresour gret plente.
 [6969] Her acqueyntaunce wel love I;
 [6970] This is moche my desir, shortly.
 [6971] I entremete me of brokages,
 [6972] I make pees and mariages,
 [6973] I am gladly executour,
 [6974] And many tymes procuratour;
 [6975] I am somtyme messager,
 [6976] That fallith not to my myster;
 [6977] And many tymes I make enquestes --
 [6978] For me that office not honest is.
 [6979] To dele with other mennes thing,
 [6980] That is to me a gret lykyng.
 [6981] And if that ye have ought to do
 [6982] In place that I repeire to,
 [6983] I shal it speden, thurgh my witt,
 [6984] As soone as ye have told me it.
 [6985] So that ye serve me to pay,
 [6986] My servyse shal be youre alway.
 [6987] But whoso wole chastise me,
 [6988] Anoon my love lost hath he;
 [6989] For I love no man, in no gise,
 [6990] That wole me repreve or chastise.
 [6991] But I wolde al folk undirtake,
 [6992] And of no wight no teching take;
 [6993] For I, that other folk chastie,
 [6994] Wole not be taught fro my folie.
 [6995] "I love noon hermitage more.
 [6996] All desertes and holtes hore,
 [6997] And grete wodes everichon,
 [6998] I lete hem to the Baptist John.
 [6999] I queth hym quyt and hym relesse
 [7000] Of Egipt all the wildirnesse.
 [7001] To fer were alle my mansiounes
 [7002] Fro citees and goode tounes.
 [7003] My paleis and myn hous make I
 [7004] There men may renne ynne openly,
 [7005] And sey that I the world forsake,
 [7006] But al amydde I bilde and make
 [7007] My hous, and swimme and pley therynne,
 [7008] Bet than a fish doth with his fynne.
 [7009] "Of Antecristes men am I,
 [7010] Of whiche that Crist seith openly,
 [7011] They have abit of hoolynesse,
 [7012] And lyven in such wikkednesse.
 [7013] Outward, lambren semen we,
 [7014] Fulle of goodnesse and of pitee,
 [7015] And inward we, withouten fable,
 [7016] Ben gredy wolves ravysable.
 [7017] We enviroune bothe lond and se;
 [7018] With all the world werreyen we;
 [7019] We wole ordeyne of alle thing,
 [7020] Of folkis good, and her lyvyng.
 [7021] "If ther be castel or citee,
 [7022] Wherynne that ony bouger be,
 [7023] Although that they of Milayn were
 [7024] (For therof ben they blamed there);
 [7025] Or if a wight out of mesure
 [7026] Wolde lene his gold, and take usure,
 [7027] For that he is so coveitous;
 [7028] Or if he be to leccherous,
 [7029] Or theef [or] haunte symonye,
 [7030] Or provost full of trecherie,
 [7031] Or prelat lyvyng jolily,
 [7032] Or prest that halt his quene hym by,
 [7033] Or olde horis hostilers,
 [7034] Or other bawdes or bordillers,
 [7035] Or elles blamed of ony vice
 [7036] Of which men shulden don justice:
 [7037] Bi all the seyntes that me pray,
 [7038] But they defende them with lamprey,
 [7039] With luce, with elys, with samons,
 [7040] With tendre gees and with capons,
 [7041] With tartes, or with cheses fat,
 [7042] With deynte flawnes brode and flat,
 [7043] With caleweis, or with pullaylle,
 [7044] With conynges, or with fyn vitaille,
 [7045] That we, undir our clothes wide,
 [7046] Maken thourgh oure golet glide;
 [7047] Or but he wole do come in haste
 [7048] Roo-venysoun, bake in paste;
 [7049] Whether so that he loure or groyne,
 [7050] He shal have of a corde a loigne,
 [7051] With whiche men shal hym bynde and lede,
 [7052] To brenne hym for his synful deede,
 [7053] That men shull here hym crie and rore
 [7054] A myle-wey aboute, and more;
 [7055] Or ellis he shal in prisoun dye,
 [7056] But if he wole oure frendship bye,
 [7057] Or smerten that that he hath do,
 [7058] More than his gilt amounteth to.
 [7059] But, and he couth. thurgh his sleight,
 [7060] Do maken up a tour of height,
 [7061] Nought rought I whethir of ston, or tree,
 [7062] Or erthe, or turves though it be,
 [7063] Though it were of no vounde ston,
 [7064] Wrought with squyre and scantilon,
 [7065] So that the tour were stuffed well
 [7066] With alle richesse temporell,
 [7067] And thanne that he wolde updresse
 [7068] Engyns, bothe more and lesse,
 [7069] To cast at us by every side,
 [7070] To bere his goode name wide,
 [7071] Such sleghtes [as] I shal yow nevene,
 [7072] Barelles of wyn, by sixe or sevene,
 [7073] Or gold in sakkis gret plente,
 [7074] He shulde soone delyvered be.
 [7075] And if [he have] noon sich pitaunces,
 [7076] Late hym study in equipolences,
 [7077] And late lyes and fallaces,
 [7078] If that he wolde deserve oure graces;
 [7079] Or we shal bere hym such witnesse
 [7080] Of synne and of his wrecchidnesse,
 [7081] And don his loos so wide renne,
 [7082] That al quyk we shulden hym brenne;
 [7083] Or ellis yeve hym such penaunce,
 [7084] That is wel wors than the pitaunce.
 [7085] "For thou shalt never, for nothing,
 [7086] Kon knowen aright by her clothing
 [7087] The traitours fulle of trecherie,
 [7088] But thou her werkis can aspie.
 [7089] And ne hadde the goode kepyng be
 [7090] Whilom of the universite,
 [7091] That kepith the key of Cristendom,
 [7093] Suche ben the stynkyng prophetis;
 [7094] Nys non of hem that good prophete is,
 [7095] For they thurgh wikked entencioun,
 [7096] The yeer of the Incarnacioun,
 [7097] A thousand and two hundred yeer,
 [7098] Fyve and fifty, ferther ne neer,
 [7099] Broughten a book, with sory grace,
 [7100] To yeven ensample in comune place,
 [7101] That seide thus, though it were fable:
 [7102] `This is the gospel perdurable,
 [7103] That fro the Holy Goost is sent.'
 [7104] Wel were it worth to ben brent!
 [7105] Entitled was in such manere
 [7106] This book, of which I telle heere.
 [7107] Ther nas no wight in all Parys,
 [7108] Biforne Oure Lady, at parvys,
 [7110] To copy if hym talent tok.
 [7111] There myght he se, by gret tresoun,
 [7112] Full many fals comparisoun:
 [7113] `As moche as, thurgh his grete myght,
 [7114] Be it of hete or of lyght,
 [7115] The sonne sourmounteth the mone,
 [7116] That troublere is, and chaungith soone,
 [7117] And the note-kernell the shelle
 [7118] (I scorne not that I yow telle),
 [7119] Right so, withouten ony gile,
 [7120] Sourmounteth this noble evangile
 [7121] The word of ony evangelist.'
 [7122] And to her title they token Crist.
 [7123] And many a such comparisoun,
 [7124] Of which I make no mencioun,
 [7125] Mighte men in that book fynde,
 [7126] Whoso coude of hem have mynde.
 [7127] "The universite, that tho was aslep,
 [7128] Gan for to braide and taken kep;
 [7129] And at the noys the heed upcaste,
 [7130] Ne never sithen slept it faste,
 [7131] But up it stert, and armes tok
 [7132] Ayens this fals horrible bok,
 [7133] Al redy bateil [for] to make,
 [7134] And to the juge the book to take.
 [7135] But they that broughten the bok there
 [7136] Hent it anoon awey, for fere.
 [7137] They nolde shewe more a del,
 [7138] But thenne it kept, and kepen will,
 [7139] Til such a tyme that they may see
 [7140] That they so stronge woxen be
 [7141] That no wyght may hem wel withstonde,
 [7142] For by that book [they] durst not stonde.
 [7143] Awey they gonne it for to bere,
 [7144] For they ne durst not answere
 [7145] By exposicioun ne glose
 [7146] To that that clerkis wole appose
 [7147] Ayens the cursednesse, iwys,
 [7148] That in that book writen is.
 [7149] Now wot I not, ne I can not see
 [7150] What maner eende that there shal be
 [7151] Of al this [bok] that they hyde;
 [7152] But yit algate they shal abide
 [7153] Til that they may it bet defende.
 [7154] This, trowe I best, wol be her ende.
 [7155] "Thus, Antecrist abiden we,
 [7156] For we ben alle of his meyne;
 [7157] And what man that wole not be so,
 [7158] Right soone he shal his lyf forgo.
 [7159] We wole a puple upon hym areyse,
 [7160] And thurgh oure gile don hym seise,
 [7161] And hym on sharpe speris ryve,
 [7162] Or other weyes brynge hym fro lyve,
 [7163] But if that he wole folowe, iwis,
 [7164] That in oure book writen is.
 [7165] "Thus mych wole oure book signifie,
 [7166] That while Petre hath maistrie,
 [7167] May never John shewe well his myght.
 [7168] Now have I you declared right
 [7169] The menyng of the bark and rynde,
 [7170] That makith the entenciouns blynde;
 [7171] But now at erst I wole bigynne
 [7172] To expowne you the pith withynne:
 [7173] And the seculers comprehende,
 [7174] That Cristes lawe wole defende,
 [7175] And shulde it kepen and mayntenen
 [7176] Ayenes hem that all sustenen,
 [7177] And falsly to the puple techen.
 [7178] And John bitokeneth hem that prechen
 [7179] That ther nys lawe covenable
 [7180] But thilke gospel perdurable,
 [7181] That fro the Holy Gost was sent
 [7182] To turne folk that ben myswent.
 [7183] "The strengthe of John they undirstonde
 [7184] The grace, in which they seie they stonde,
 [7185] That doth the synfull folk converte,
 [7186] And hem to Jesus Crist reverte.
 [7187] Full many another orribilite
 [7188] May men in that book se,
 [7189] That ben comaunded, douteles,
 [7190] Ayens the lawe of Rome expres;
 [7191] And all with Antecrist they holden,
 [7192] As men may in the book biholden.
 [7193] And thanne comaunden they to sleen
 [7194] Alle tho that with Petre been;
 [7195] But they shal nevere have that myght,
 [7196] And, God toforn, for strif to fight,
 [7197] That they ne shal ynowe fynde
 [7198] That Petres lawe shal have in mynde,
 [7199] And evere holde, and so mayntene,
 [7200] That at the last it shal be sene
 [7201] That they shal alle come therto,
 [7202] For ought that they can speke or do.
 [7203] And thilke lawe shal not stonde,
 [7204] That they by John have undirstonde,
 [7205] But, maugre hem, it shal adown,
 [7206] And ben brought to confusioun.
 [7207] But I wole stynt of this matere,
 [7208] For it is wonder longe to here.
 [7209] But hadde that ilke book endured,
 [7210] Of better estat I were ensured,
 [7211] And freendis have I yit, pardee,
 [7212] That han me sett in gret degre.
 [7213] "Of all this world is emperour
 [7214] Gyle my fadir, the trechour,
 [7215] And emperisse my moder is,
 [7216] Maugre the Holy Gost, iwis.
 [7217] Oure myghty lynage and oure rowte
 [7218] Regneth in every regne aboute;
 [7219] And well is worthy we maistres be,
 [7220] For all this world governe we,
 [7221] And can the folk so wel disceyve
 [7222] That noon oure gile can perceyve.
 [7223] And though they don, they dar not seye;
 [7224] The sothe dar no wight bywreye.
 [7225] But he in Cristis wrath hym ledith,
 [7226] That more than Crist my britheren dredith.
 [7227] He nys no full good champioun,
 [7228] That dredith such simulacioun,
 [7229] Nor that for peyne wole refusen
 [7230] Us to correcte and accusen.
 [7231] He wole not entremete by right,
 [7232] Ne have God in his eye-sight,
 [7233] And therfore God shal hym punyshe.
 [7234] But me ne rekketh of no vice,
 [7235] Sithen men us loven comunably,
 [7236] And holden us for so worthy
 [7237] That we may folk repreve echoon,
 [7238] And we nyl have repref of noon.
 [7239] Whom shulden folk worshipen so
 [7240] But us, that stynten never mo
 [7241] To patren while that folk may us see,
 [7242] Though it not so bihynde be?
 [7243] "And where is more wod folye
 [7244] Than to enhaunce chyvalrie,
 [7245] And love noble men and gay,
 [7246] That joly clothis weren alway?
 [7247] If they be sich folk as they semen,
 [7248] So clene, as men her clothis demen,
 [7249] And that her wordis folowe her dede,
 [7250] It is gret pite, out of drede,
 [7251] For they wole be noon ypocritis!
 [7252] Of hem, me thynketh, gret spite is.
 [7253] I can not love hem on no side.
 [7254] But beggers with these hodes wide,
 [7255] With sleighe and pale faces lene,
 [7256] And greye clothis not full clene,
 [7257] But fretted full of tatarwagges,
 [7258] And highe shoos, knopped with dagges,
 [7259] That frouncen lyke a quaile pipe,
 [7260] Or botis rivelyng as a gype;
 [7261] To such folk as I you dyvyse
 [7262] Shulde princes, and these lordis wise,
 [7263] Take all her londis and her thingis,
 [7264] Bothe werre and pees, in governyngis;
 [7265] To such folk shulde a prince hym yive,
 [7266] That wolde his lyf in honour lyve.
 [7267] "And if they be not as they seme,
 [7268] That serven thus the world to queme,
 [7269] There wolde I dwelle, to disceyve
 [7270] The folk, for they shal not perceyve.
 [7271] But I ne speke in no such wise,
 [7272] That men shulde humble abit dispise,
 [7273] So that no pride ther-undir be.
 [7274] No man shulde hate, as thynkith me,
 [7275] The pore man in sich clothyng.
 [7276] But God ne preisith hym nothing,
 [7277] That seith he hath the world forsake,
 [7278] And hath to worldly glorie hym take,
 [7279] And wole of siche delices use.
 [7280] Who may that begger wel excuse,
 [7281] That papelard, that hym yeldith so,
 [7282] And wole to worldly ese go,
 [7283] And seith that he the world hath left,
 [7284] And gredily it grypeth eft?
 [7285] He is the hound, shame is to seyn,
 [7286] That to his castyng goth ageyn.
 [7287] "But unto you dar I not lye.
 [7288] But myght I felen or aspie
 [7289] That ye perceyved it no thyng,
 [7290] Ye shulde have a stark lesyng
 [7291] Right in youre honde thus, to bigynne;
 [7292] I nolde it lette for no synne."
 [7293] The god lough at the wondir tho,
 [7294] And every wight gan laugh also,
 [7295] And seide, "Lo, heere a man aright
 [7296] For to be trusty to every wight!"
 [7297] "Fals-Semblant," quod Love, "sey to me,
 [7298] Sith I thus have avaunced thee,
 [7299] That in my court is thi dwellyng,
 [7300] And of ribawdis shalt be my kyng,
 [7301] Wolt thou wel holden my forwardis?"
 [7302] "Ye, sir, from hennes forwardis;
 [7303] Hadde never youre fadir heere-biforn
 [7304] Servaunt so trewe, sith he was born."
 [7305] "That is ayenes all nature."
 [7306] "Sir, putte you in that aventure.
 [7307] For though ye borowes take of me,
 [7308] The sikerer shal ye never be
 [7309] For ostages, ne sikirnesse,
 [7310] Or chartres, for to bere witnesse.
 [7311] I take youresilf to recorde heere,
 [7312] That men ne may in no manere
 [7313] Teren the wolf out of his hide,
 [7314] Til he be flayn, bak and side,
 [7315] Though men hym bete and al defile.
 [7316] What! Wene ye that I nil bigile
 [7317] For I am clothed mekely?
 [7318] Ther-undir is all my trechery;
 [7319] Myn herte chaungith never the mo
 [7320] For noon abit in which I go.
 [7321] Though I have chere of symplenesse,
 [7322] I am not wery of shrewidnesse.
 [7323] My lemman, Streyned-Abstinaunce,
 [7324] Hath myster of my purveaunce;
 [7325] She hadde ful longe ago be deed,
 [7326] Nere my councel and my red.
 [7327] Lete hir allone, and you and me."
 [7328] And Love answerde, "I truste thee
 [7329] Withoute borowe, for I wole noon."
 [7330] And Fals-Semblant, the theef, anoon,
 [7331] Ryght in that ilke same place,
 [7332] That hadde of tresoun al his face
 [7333] Ryght blak withynne and whit withoute,
 [7334] Thankyth hym, gan on his knees loute.
 [7335] Thanne was ther nought but, "Every man
 [7336] Now to assaut, that sailen can,"
 [7337] Quod Love, "and that full hardyly!"
 [7338] Thanne armed they hem communly
 [7339] Of sich armour as to hem fel.
 [7340] Whanne they were armed, fers and fel,
 [7341] They wente hem forth, alle in a route,
 [7342] And set the castel al aboute.
 [7343] They will nought away, for no drede,
 [7344] Till it so be that they ben dede,
 [7345] Or til they have the castel take.
 [7346] And foure batels they gan make,
 [7347] And parted hem in foure anoon,
 [7348] And toke her way, and forth they gon,
 [7349] The foure gates for to assaile,
 [7350] Of whiche the kepers wole not faile;
 [7351] For they ben neithir sike ne dede,
 [7352] But hardy folk, and stronge in dede.
 [7353] Now wole I seyn the countynaunce
 [7354] Of Fals-Semblant and Abstynaunce,
 [7355] That ben to Wikkid-Tonge went.
 [7356] But first they heelde her parlement,
 [7357] Whether it to done were
 [7358] To maken hem be knowen there,
 [7359] Or elles walken forth disgised.
 [7360] But at the laste they devysed
 [7361] That they wolde gon in tapinage,
 [7362] As it were in a pilgrimage,
 [7363] Lyke good and hooly folk unfeyned.
 [7364] And Dame Abstinence-Streyned
 [7365] Tok on a robe of kamelyne,
 [7366] And gan hir graithe as a Bygyne.
 [7367] A large coverechief of thred
 [7368] She wrapped all aboute hir heed,
 [7369] But she forgat not hir sawter;
 [7370] A peire of bedis eke she ber
 [7371] Upon a las, all of whit thred,
 [7372] On which that she hir bedes bed.
 [7373] But she ne bought hem never a del,
 [7374] For they were geven her, I wot wel,
 [7375] God wot, of a full hooly frere,
 [7376] That seide he was hir fadir dere,
 [7377] To whom she hadde ofter went
 [7378] Than ony frere of his covent.
 [7379] And he visited hir also,
 [7380] And many a sermoun seide hir to;
 [7381] He nolde lette, for man on lyve,
 [7382] That he ne wolde hir ofte shryve.
 [7383] And with so great devocion
 [7384] They made her confession,
 [7385] That they had ofte, for the nones,
 [7386] Two heedes in oon hood at ones.
 [7387] Of fayre shap I devyse her the,
 [7388] But pale of face somtyme was she;
 [7389] That false traytouresse untrewe
 [7390] Was lyk that salowe hors of hewe,
 [7391] That in the Apocalips is shewed,
 [7392] That signifyeth tho folk beshrewed
 [7393] That ben al ful of trecherye,
 [7394] And pale through hypocrisye;
 [7395] For on that hors no colour is,
 [7396] But only deed and pale, ywis.
 [7397] Of such a colour enlangoured
 [7398] Was Abstynence, iwys, coloured;
 [7399] Of her estat she her repented,
 [7400] As her visage represented.
 [7401] She had a burdown al of Thefte,
 [7402] That Gyle had yeve her of his yefte;
 [7403] And a skryppe of Faynt Distresse,
 [7404] That ful was of elengenesse;
 [7405] And forth she walked sobrely.
 [7406] And Fals-Semblant saynt, je vous die,
 [7407] Had, as it were for such mister,
 [7408] Don on the cope of a frer,
 [7409] With chere symple and ful pytous.
 [7410] Hys lokyng was not disdeynous,
 [7411] Ne proud, but meke and ful pesyble.
 [7412] About his necke he bar a byble,
 [7413] And squierly forth gan he gon,
 [7414] And, for to rest his lymmes upon,
 [7415] He had of Treason a potente;
 [7416] As he were feble, his way he wente.
 [7417] But in his sleve he gan to thringe
 [7418] A rasour sharp and wel bytynge,
 [7419] That was forged in a forge,
 [7420] Which that men clepen Coupe-Gorge.
 [7421] So longe forth her way they nomen,
 [7422] Tyl they to Wicked-Tonge comen,
 [7423] That at his gate was syttyng,
 [7424] And saw folk in the way passyng.
 [7425] The pilgrymes saw he faste by,
 [7426] That beren hem ful mekely,
 [7427] And humbly they with him mette.
 [7428] Dame Abstynence first him grette,
 [7429] And sythe him Fals-Semblant salued,
 [7430] And he hem; but he not remued,
 [7431] For he ne dredde hem not a del.
 [7432] For whan he saw her faces wel,
 [7433] Alway in herte him thoughte so,
 [7434] He shulde knowe hem bothe two,
 [7435] For wel he knew Dame Abstynaunce,
 [7436] But he ne knew not Constreynaunce.
 [7437] He knew nat that she was constrayned,
 [7438] Ne of her theves lyve fayned,
 [7439] But wende she com of wyl al free,
 [7440] But she com in another degree,
 [7441] And if of good wyl she began,
 [7442] That wyl was fayled her than.
 [7443] And Fals-Semblant had he sayn als,
 [7444] But he knew nat that he was fals.
 [7445] Yet fals was he, but his falsnesse
 [7446] Ne coude he nat espye nor gesse;
 [7447] For Semblant was so slye wrought,
 [7448] That Falsnesse he ne espyed nought.
 [7449] But haddest thou knowen hym beforn,
 [7450] Thou woldest on a bok have sworn,
 [7451] Whan thou him saugh in thylke aray,
 [7452] That he, that whilom was so gay,
 [7453] And of the daunce joly Robyn,
 [7454] Was tho become a Jacobyn.
 [7455] But sothly, what so men hym calle,
 [7456] Freres Preachours ben good men alle;
 [7457] Her order wickedly they beren,
 [7458] Suche mynstrelles if they weren.
 [7459] So ben Augustyns and Cordyleres,
 [7460] And Carmes, and eke Sacked Freeres,
 [7461] And alle freres, shodde and bare
 [7462] (Though some of hem ben great and square),
 [7463] Ful hooly men, as I hem deme;
 [7464] Everych of hem wolde good man seme.
 [7465] But shalt thou never of apparence
 [7466] Sen conclude good consequence
 [7467] In non argument, ywis,
 [7468] If existens al fayled is.
 [7469] For men may fynde alway sophyme
 [7470] The consequence to envenyme,
 [7471] Whoso that hath the subtelte
 [7472] The double sentence for to se.
 [7473] Whan the pylgrymes commen were
 [7474] To Wicked-Tonge, that dwelled there,
 [7475] Her harneys nygh hem was algate;
 [7476] By Wicked-Tonge adown they sate,
 [7477] That bad hem ner him for to come,
 [7478] And of tidynges telle him some,
 [7479] And sayd hem, "What cas maketh you
 [7480] To come into this place now?"
 [7481] "Sir," sayde Strayned-Abstynaunce,
 [7482] "We, for to drye our penaunce,
 [7483] With hertes pytous and devoute
 [7484] Are commen, as pylgrimes gon aboute.
 [7485] Wel nygh on fote alwey we go;
 [7486] Ful dusty ben our heeles two;
 [7487] And thus bothe we ben sent
 [7488] Throughout this world, that is miswent,
 [7489] To yeve ensample, and preche also.
 [7490] To fysshen synful men we go,
 [7491] For other fysshynge ne fysshe we.
 [7492] And, sir, for that charyte,
 [7493] As we be wonte, herborowe we crave,
 [7494] Your lyf to amende, Christ it save!
 [7495] And, so it shulde you nat displese,
 [7496] We wolden, if it were youre ese,
 [7497] A short sermon unto you sayn."
 [7498] And Wicked-Tonge answered agayn:
 [7499] "The hous," quod he, "such as ye see,
 [7500] Shal nat be warned you for me.
 [7501] Say what you lyst, and I wol here."
 [7502] "Graunt mercy, swete sire dere!"
 [7503] Quod alderfirst Dame Abstynence,
 [7504] And thus began she her sentence:
 [7505] "Sir, the firste vertu, certayn,
 [7506] The greatest and moste soverayn
 [7507] That may be founde in any man,
 [7508] For havynge, or for wyt he can,
 [7509] That is his tonge to refrayne;
 [7510] Therto ought every wight him payne.
 [7511] For it is better stylle be
 [7512] Than for to speken harm, parde!
 [7513] And he that herkeneth it gladly,
 [7514] He is no good man, sykerly.
 [7515] "And, sir, aboven al other synne,
 [7516] In that art thou most gylty inne.
 [7517] Thou spake a jape not longe ago,
 [7518] (And, sir, that was ryght yvel do)
 [7519] Of a young man that here repayred,
 [7520] And never yet this place apayred.
 [7521] Thou saydest he awayted nothyng
 [7522] But to disceyve Fayr-Welcomyng;
 [7523] Ye sayde nothyng soth of that.
 [7524] But, sir, ye lye, I tel you plat.
 [7525] He ne cometh no more, ne goth, parde!
 [7526] I trowe ye shal him never se.
 [7527] Fayr-Welcomyng in prison is,
 [7528] That ofte hath played with you, er this,
 [7529] The fayrest games that he coude,
 [7530] Withoute fylthe, stylle or loude.
 [7531] Now dar he nat himself solace.
 [7532] Ye han also the man do chace,
 [7533] That he dar neyther come ne go.
 [7534] What meveth you to hate him so,
 [7535] But properly your wicked thought,
 [7536] That many a fals leasyng hath thought
 [7537] That meveth your foole eloquence,
 [7538] That jangleth ever in audyence,
 [7539] And on the folk areyseth blame,
 [7540] And doth hem dishonour and shame,
 [7541] For thyng that may have no prevyng,
 [7542] But lyklynesse, and contryvyng?
 [7543] "For I dar sayn that Reson demeth
 [7544] It is nat al soth thyng that semeth,
 [7545] And it is synne to controve
 [7546] Thyng that is to reprove.
 [7547] This wote ye wel, and sir, therfore
 [7548] Ye arn to blame the more.
 [7549] And nathelesse, he recketh lyte;
 [7550] He yeveth nat now therof a myte.
 [7551] For if he thoughte harm, parfay,
 [7552] He wolde come and gon al day;
 [7553] He coude himselve nat abstene.
 [7554] Now cometh he nat, and that is sene,
 [7555] For he ne taketh of it no cure,
 [7556] But if it be through aventure,
 [7557] And lasse than other folk, algate.
 [7558] And thou her watchest at the gate,
 [7559] With spere in thyn arest alway;
 [7560] There muse, musard, al the day.
 [7561] Thou wakest night and day for thought;
 [7562] Iwis, thy traveyle is for nought;
 [7563] And Jelousye, withouten fayle,
 [7564] Shal never quyte the thy traveyle.
 [7565] And skathe is that Fayr-Welcomyng,
 [7566] Withouten any trespassyng,
 [7567] Shal wrongfully in prison be,
 [7568] There wepeth and languyssheth he.
 [7569] And though thou never yet, ywis,
 [7570] Agyltest man no more but this,
 [7571] (Take nat a-gref) it were worthy
 [7572] To putte the out of this bayly,
 [7573] And afterward in prison lye,
 [7574] And fettre the tyl that thou dye;
 [7575] For thou shalt for this synne dwelle
 [7576] Right in the devels ers of helle,
 [7577] But if that thou repente thee."
 [7578] "Ma fay, thou liest falsly!" quod he.
 [7579] "What? Welcome with myschaunce now!
 [7580] Have I therfore herbered yow,
 [7581] To seye me shame, and eke reprove?
 [7582] With sory hap, to youre bihove,
 [7583] Am I to day youre herberger!
 [7584] Go herber yow elleswhere than heer,
 [7585] That han a lyer called me!
 [7586] Two tregetours art thou and he,
 [7587] That in myn hous do me this shame,
 [7588] And for my soth-sawe ye me blame.
 [7589] Is this the sermoun that ye make?
 [7590] To all the develles I me take,
 [7591] Or elles, God, thou me confounde,
 [7592] But, er men diden this castel founde,
 [7593] It passith not ten daies or twelve,
 [7594] But it was told right to myselve,
 [7595] And as they seide, right so tolde I,
 [7596] He kyst the Rose pryvyly!
 [7597] Thus seide I now, and have seid yore;
 [7598] I not wher he dide ony more.
 [7599] Why shulde men sey me such a thyng,
 [7600] If it hadde ben gabbyng?
 [7601] Ryght so seide I, and wol seye yit;
 [7602] I trowe, I lied not of it.
 [7603] And with my bemes I wole blowe
 [7604] To alle neighboris a-rowe,
 [7605] How he hath bothe comen and gon."
 [7606] Tho spak Fals-Semblant right anon:
 [7607] "All is not gospel, out of doute,
 [7608] That men seyn in the town aboute.
 [7609] Ley no deef ere to my spekyng;
 [7610] I swere yow, sir, it is gabbyng!
 [7611] I trowe ye wote wel, certeynly,
 [7612] That no man loveth hym tenderly
 [7613] That seith hym harm, if he wot it,
 [7614] All he be never so pore of wit.
 [7615] And soth is also, sikerly
 [7616] (This knowe ye, sir, as wel as I),
 [7617] That lovers gladly wole visiten
 [7618] The places there her loves habiten.
 [7619] This man yow loveth and eke honoureth.
 [7620] This man to serve you laboureth,
 [7621] And clepith you his freend so deere:
 [7622] And this man makith you good chere,
 [7623] And everywhere that [he] you meteth,
 [7624] He yow saloweth, and he you greteth.
 [7625] He preseth not so ofte that ye
 [7626] Ought of his come encombred be;
 [7627] Ther presen other folk on yow
 [7628] Full ofter than he doth now.
 [7629] And if his herte hym streyned so
 [7630] Unto the Rose for to go,
 [7631] Ye shulde hym sen so ofte nede,
 [7632] That ye shulde take hym with the dede.
 [7633] He cowde his comyng not forbere,
 [7634] Though me hym thrilled with a spere;
 [7635] It nere not thanne as it is now.
 [7636] But trusteth wel, I swere it yow,
 [7637] That it is clene out of his thought.
 [7638] Sir, certis, he ne thenkith it nought;
 [7639] No more ne doth Fair-Welcomyng,
 [7640] That sore abieth al this thing.
 [7641] And if they were of oon assent,
 [7642] Full soone were the Rose hent;
 [7643] The maugre youres wolde be.
 [7644] And sir, of o thing herkeneth me,
 [7645] Sith ye this man that loveth yow
 [7646] Han seid such harm and shame now,
 [7647] Witeth wel, if he gessed it,
 [7648] Ye may wel demen in youre wit
 [7649] He nolde nothyng love you so,
 [7650] Ne callen you his freend also,
 [7651] But nyght and day he wolde wake
 [7652] The castell to destroie and take,
 [7653] If it were soth as ye devise;
 [7654] Or som man in som maner wise
 [7655] Might it warne hym everydel,
 [7656] Or by hymsilf perceyven wel.
 [7657] For sith he myght not come and gon,
 [7658] As he was whilom wont to don,
 [7659] He myght it sone wite and see;
 [7660] But now all other wise doth he.
 [7661] Thanne have [ye], sir, al outerly,
 [7662] Deserved helle, and jolyly
 [7663] The deth of helle, douteles,
 [7664] That thrallen folk so gilteles."
 [7665] Fals-Semblant proveth so this thing
 [7666] That he can noon answeryng,
 [7667] And seth alwey such apparaunce
 [7668] That nygh he fel in repentaunce,
 [7669] And seide hym, "Sir, it may wel be.
 [7670] Semblant, a good man semen ye,
 [7671] And, Abstinence, full wise ye seme.
 [7672] Of o talent you bothe I deme.
 [7673] What counceil wole ye to me yiven?"
 [7674] "Ryght heere anoon thou shalt be shryven,
 [7675] And sey thy synne withoute more;
 [7676] Of this shalt thou repente sore.
 [7677] For I am prest and have pouste
 [7678] To shryve folk of most dignyte
 [7679] That ben, as wide as world may dure.
 [7680] Of all this world I have the cure,
 [7681] And that hadde never yit persoun,
 [7682] Ne vicarie of no maner toun.
 [7683] And, God wot, I have of thee
 [7684] A thousand tyme more pitee
 [7685] Than hath thi preest parochial,
 [7686] Though he thy freend be special.
 [7687] I have avauntage, in o wise,
 [7688] That youre prelatis ben not so wise
 [7689] Ne half so lettred as am I.
 [7690] I am licenced boldely
 [7691] To reden in divinite,
 [7692] And longe have red. . . .
 


===== BOOK: mes.txt =====


    
The Mesnavi and The Acts of the Adepts, by Jelal-'d-din Rumi and Shemsu-'d-Din Ahmed, tr. by James W. Redhouse, [1881], at sacred-texts.com

A dozen pages of Trubner advertisements at the start of this volume have been omitted for technical reasons.

[p. i]

  

TRUBNER'S

  

ORIENTAL SERIES.

[p. ii]

EDINBURGH: PRINTED BY
 BALLANTYNE, HANSON AND CO., PAUL'S WORK
 AND CHANDOS STREET, LONDON

[p. iii]

  

THE MESNEVI

  

(USUALLY KNOWN AS THE MESNEVIYI SHERIF, OR HOLY MESNEVI)

  

OF

  

MEVLANA (OUR LORD) JELALU-'D-DIN, MUHAMMED, ER-RUMI.

  

BOOK THE FIRST.

  

TOGETHER WITH SOME ACCOUNT OF THE LIFE AND ACTS
 OF THE AUTHOR, OF HIS ANCESTORS, AND
 OF HIS DESCENDANTS;

  

Illustrated by a Selection of Characteristic Anecdotes,

  

AS COLLECTED BY THEIR HISTORIAN,

  

MEVLANA SHEMSU-'D-DIN AHMED, EL EFLAKI, EL 'ARIFI.

  

TRANSLATED, AND THE POETRY VERSIFIED,

  

BY

  

JAMES W. REDHOUSE, M.R.A.S., ETC.

  

LONDON:

  

TRUBNER & CO., LUDGATE HILL.

  

[1881]

Scanned, proofed and formatted at sacred-texts.com, November 2007, by John Bruno Hare. This text is in the public domain in the US because it was published prior to 1923.

Click to enlarge
front cover medallion

Click to enlarge
back cover medallion

Click to enlarge
Title Page

[p. vi]

(Title Page Overleaf)

"MATHNAOUI ou Methnevi (in Persian and Turkish: Mesnevi). C'est le nom d'un des plus fameux Livres de l'Orient, compose en vers Persiens sur un grand nombre de differentes matieres de Religion, d'Histoire, do Morale, et de Politique.

"Il a ete compose par Gelaleddin Mohammed, fils de Mohammed, Al Balkhi, Al Konoui, environ l'an 600 de l'Hegire.

"Les surnoms de Balkhi et de Konoui sont donnes a cet Auteur, parcequ'il etait natif de la ville de Balkh en Khorassan, et qu'il vint s'etablir ensuite dans celle de Cogni en Natolie.

"Ce fut dans cette meme ville qu'il institua un ordre de Derviches plus spirituels que les autres, lesquels on appelle ordinairement Mevlevis, qui font leur Capital de l'ouvrage de leur Maistre, auquel ils ne portent gueres moins de respect qu' a l'Alcoran. C'est pourquoi on donne aussi souvent au Mathnaoui le surnom de Mevlevi.

"Il y a un grand nombre de Commentaires Persiens et Turcs sur ce Livre, dont la poesie est estimee si excellente, que tous ses vers en sont cites, comme autant de sentences."--D'Herbelot, Bibliotheque Orientale.

     
The Mesnavi and The Acts of the Adepts, by Jelal-'d-din Rumi and Shemsu-'d-Din Ahmed, tr. by James W. Redhouse, [1881], at sacred-texts.com

[p. v]

  

CONTENTS.

           

        

       PAGE

     
       

       
   TRANSLATOR'S PREFACE.

       <page vii>

     
       

       
   SELECTED ANECDOTES.

        

     
      CHAP.

        

        

     
      I.

       Baha'u-'d-Din, Veled,   Sultanu-'l-'Ulema

       <page 3>

     
      II.

       Seyyid Burhanu-'d-Din, Sirr-Dan

       <page 13>

     
      III.

       Mevlana Jelalu-'d-Din, Muhammed

       <page 18>

     
      IV.

       Shemsu-'d-Din, Tebrizi.

       <page 99>

     
      V.

       Sheykh Salahu-'d-Din, Feridun

       <page 110>

     
      VI.

       Chelebi Husamu-'d-Din, Hasan

       <page 113>

     
      VII.

       Baha'u-'d-Din, Sultan Veled

       <page 122>

     
      VIII.

       Chelebi Emir 'Arif

       <page 126>

     
      IX.

       Genealogical

       <page 132>

     
       

       
   THE MESNEVI--BOOK I.

        

     
       

       
   PREFACE

       <page mi>

     
       

       INTRODUCTION.--PLAINT OF THE REED-FLUTE

       <page m1>

     
      TALE

        

        

     
      I.

       The Prince and the Handmaid

       <page m4>

     
      II.

       The Oilman and the Parrot

       <page m19>

     
      III.

       The Jewish King, Persecutor of Christians

       <page m25>

     
      IV.

       Another Jewish King, Persecutor of Christians

       <page m55>

     
      V.

       The Lion and the Beasts

       <page m67>

     
      VI.

       The Greater (Spiritual) Warfare

       <page m101>

     
       

       [p. vi]

        

     
      TALE

        

       PAGE

     
      VII.

       The Merchant and the Parrot

       <page m114>

     
      VIII.

       The Harper

       <page m139>

     
      IX.

       The Poor Scenite Arab and his Wife

       <page m165>

     
      X.

       Patience and Perseverance

       <page m212>

     
      XI.

       The Lion's Hunt

       <page m218>

     
      XII.

       Joseph and the Mirror

       <page m228>

     
      XIII.

       The Prophet's Amanuensis

       <page m234>

     
      XIV.

       The Chinese and Roman Artists

       <page m248>

     
      XV.

       Zeyd's Inspiration

       <page m254>

     
      XVI.

       'Ali's Forbearance

       <page m270>

     
       

       CONCLUSION

       <page m289>

     
   
     
The Mesnavi and The Acts of the Adepts, by Jelal-'d-din Rumi and Shemsu-'d-Din Ahmed, tr. by James W. Redhouse, [1881], at sacred-texts.com

[p. vii]

  

TRANSLATOR'S PREFACE [*1]

THE historian El Eflaki was a disciple of Chelebi Emir 'Arif, a grandson of the author of the Mesnevi. 'Arif died in A.D. 1320; but as the dates of 'Arif's successors are carried down to A.H. 754 (A.D. 1353), when Eflaki's collection of anecdotes was completed, the historian must have outlived this last date. As a disciple of the Emir 'Arif, he was a dervish of the order named Mevlevi, as being followers of the rule and practices of Mevlana Jelalu-'d-Din, er-Rumi, commonly known in English literature as "the dancing dervishes," expressed by Americans: "whirling dervishes." The dervishes of the order do not all dance or "whirl." Some are musicians, and some singers or chanters, who may, however, be occasional dancers also.

Eflaki's work gives a sufficiency of dates to fix the principal events that he commemorates. His dates do not agree exactly with those found in other historians. They are, however, sufficiently near for general purposes not of a chronologically critical nature. They commence with A.H. 605 A.D. (1208), and thus cover a period of 145 years dated, besides another 30 years of the lifetime of

[p. viii]

[paragraph continues] Jelal's grandfather undated, who was a noble of such high standing and of so great a reputation for learning and sanctity at Balkh, that the king gave him his only daughter in marriage, unsolicited. His mother was also a princess of the same royal house with his wife.

This royal house was the one known in history as that of Kh'arezm-shah or the Kharezmians. They were overthrown, and Balkh (the ancient Bactra, or Zariaspa), their capital, destroyed, by Jengiz Khan in A.D. 1211. A remnant of their kingdom was continued for twelve years longer by the last of the line, who died, at once a fugitive and an invader, in Azerbayjan, in a battle fought against the combined forces of Egypt, Syria, and Asia Minor.

Jelal's family claimed descent from Abu-Bekr, a father-in-law and the first successor of Muhammed, the lawgiver of Islam. One of the descendants of Abu-Bekr was among the conquerors of the ancient Bactria, when it was first brought under Muslim rule, in about A.D. 650, under the Caliph 'Uthman and his children had maintained a prominent position in that country, possessed of great wealth, until the time immediately preceding the irruption of Jengiz.

Jelal was the youngest of three children, two being sons, born of the princess, his mother, in Balkh. The eldest, a daughter, was already married, and remained behind with her husband, when her father and brothers left their native city some time between A.D. 1208 and 121 I, in which latter year they were at Bagdad. There is no further mention of Jelal's elder brother. Jelal was five years old when they left Balkh. By way of Bagdad they went to Mekka, thence to Damascus, and next to

[p. ix]

[paragraph continues] Erzinjan, in Armenia; thence to Larenda, in Asia Minor. Jelal's mother was still with the party. He was now eighteen years old; and was married, at Larenda, to a lady named Gevher (Pearl), daughter of a certain Lala Sherefu-'d-Din of Samarqand, in A.D. 1226. [*1] She bore him two sons there, 'Ala'u-'d-Din (afterwards killed in a tumult at Qonya) and Baha'u-'d-Din Sultan Veled, through whom the succession of the house was continued. She appears to have died rather young; for Jelal afterwards married another lady of Qonya, who outlived him, and by whom he had two other children, a son and a daughter. (See Anecdotes, Chap. iii., No. 69, for a variant.)

After the birth of Sultan Veled at Larenda, Jelal's father was invited to Qonya by the Seljuqi king, 'Ala'u-'d-Din Kayqubad, where he founded a college, and where he died in A.D. 1231. The king built a marble mausoleum over his grave, with this date inscribed on it. The king himself died, five years later, in A.D. 1236.

At his father's death, Jelal went to Aleppo and Damascus for several years to study, and then returned to Qonya, where he was appointed professor of four separate colleges. His reputation for learning and sanctity became very great.

But before this journey to Damascus, he appears to have paid a visit to Larenda. For, a former pupil of his father's at Balkh, who had become a great saint and anchoret, came to Qonya to seek Jelal, and was the cause of his returning from Larenda to the capital.

[p. x]

This was the Sheykh and Seyyid Burhanu-'d-Din, who became Jelal's spiritual teacher for some time. The dates given do not agree in the various branches of Eflaki's compilation; for he here gives a period of nine years'' spiritual study at Qonya under Burhan.

After Burhan's instructions and departure from Qonya to Qaysariyya, where he died, and after Jelal's studies at Aleppo and Damascus, with his subsequent return to Qonya and appointment to the four colleges, another great saint came to visit Jelal at this latter city. This was Shemsu-'d-Din of Tebriz, for whom Jelal conceived a very great friendship. He is mentioned in the Mesnevi several times in very high terms. He appears to have been exceedingly aggressive and domineering in his manner. This roused a fierce animosity against him, which at length broke out in a tumult. Jelal's eldest son, 'Ala'u-'d-Din, was killed or mortally hurt in this disturbance. The local police seized Shemsu-'d-Din in consequence, and he was never again seen alive by his friends. Jelal went himself to Damascus, in hopes that he might have been sent away, or have got away, privately. But the effort was fruitless. Later traditions cause his corpse to have been recovered and buried at Qonya, differing, however, as to the place of interment.

When Jelal found that he required assistance in conducting all the various duties that fell on him, he selected first for that office his former fellow-student, Sheykh Salahu-'d-Din Feridun, surnamed Zer-Kub (the Gold-beater), from his business. He assisted Jelal for about ten years, and died in A.D. 1258.

Jelal now took as his assistant his own favourite pupil,

[p. xi]

[paragraph continues] Hasan Husamu-'d-Din, surnamed the son of Akhi-Turk, through his being descended from some man of celebrity of the name or designation of Akhi-Turk. There appears to have been a large family of very influential men residing at Qonya and other towns of Asia Minor, all calling themselves Akhi, and distinguished as Akhi: Ahmed, Akhi: Eshref, &c. The word "Akhi" is Arabic, and signifies "my brother." It may also mean "one related to a brother," as a servant, slave, client, &c., of some prince, &c.; or of some dervish "brother" of some religious order. Indeed, these very numerous individuals named Akhi, may have been each a "brother" of such a fraternity or fraternities, or even of some industrial guild.

Ten years after Husam was taken as his assistant by Jelal, this latter was called to his rest in December A.D. 1273; and was buried in his father's mausoleum, leaving Husam as his successor. But meanwhile, at Husam's suggestion, and with himself as the first amanuensis thereof, the Mesnevi had been composed, in six volumes, books, or parts, by Jelal. The second volume was commenced in A.D. 1263. There had been an interval of two years between the completion of the first and this, caused by Husam's grief at the death of his wife. The whole work is stated to contain twenty-six thousand six hundred and sixty couplets. A seventh volume or book has been also attributed to the Mesnevi, to make up the number to that of the "seven planets;" some say it was composed or collected by Sultan Veled. The anecdotes of Eflaki make mention of many hundreds of odes composed also by Jelal.

[p. xii]

He is said to have instituted his peculiar order of dervishes, with their special dress, the Indian garb of mourning, in memory of his murdered friend, Shemsu-'d-Din of Tebriz; and to have adopted the use of instrumental music, the flute, the rebeck, the drum, and the tambourine, with singing or chanting, as an accompaniment to the holy dance, on account of the lethargic nature of the "Romans." As a child is tempted to take a salutary medicine by the exhibition of a little jam or honey, so Jelal judged that the "Romans" might be tempted to a devotional love for God through the bait of sweet sounds addressed to their outward senses. Dancing or twirling by dervishes was of much older date, as will be recollected in one of the tales of the Arabian Nights.

Husam died in A.D. 1284, just ten years after his teacher Jelal; whose son, Baha'u-'d-Din, Sultan Veled, succeeded Husam as chief of the order, and died in A.D. 1312. His son, Chelebi Emir 'Arif, succeeded him, and passed away in A.D. 1320; two of his half-brothers becoming chiefs of the order after him in succession.

Eflaki informs us that he undertook the compilation of his work at the express desire of his spiritual teacher, Chelebi Emir 'Arif. The preface gives the year A.H. 710 (A.D. 1310) as that of its commencement, and the colophon at the end mentions A.H. 754 (A.D. 1353) as the date of its completion. He thus spent forty-three years in his labour of love. The copy used for the present translation was written in A.H. 1027 (A.D. 1617), and belongs to the library of the India Office, being No. 1670. It is a quarto volume of 291 numbered folios of two pages each folio, and twenty-three lines in each page. It is subdivided

[p. xiii]

into a preface, of two folios, and ten chapters of very different lengths, thus:

          1.

       Acts of Baha'u-'d-Din Veled,   Sultanu-'l-'Ulema

       14

       folios.

     
      2.

       Acts of Seyyid Sirr-Dan, Burhanu-'d-Din,   Termizi

       5

       "

     
      3.

       Acts of Mevlana Jelalu-'d-Din, Muhammed

       155

       "

     
      4.

       Acts of Shemsu-'d-Din, Tebrizi

       23

       "

     
      5.

       Acts of Sheykh Salahu-'d-Din, Zer-Kub

       11

       "

     
      6.

       Acts of Husamu-'d-Din, Khalifa of God

       14

       "

     
      7.

       Acts of Mevlana , Sultan Veled

       13

       "

     
      8.

       Acts of Chelebi Emir 'Arif

       45

       "

     
      9.

       Acts of Chelebi Emir 'Abid, &c.

       6

       "

     
      10.

       Genealogical

          2

       "

     
       

       Total

       288

        

     
   The work contains many hundreds of anecdotes, related to Eflaki by trustworthy reporters, whose names are generally given, and a few for which he vouches himself as an eyewitness. Every anecdote is the account of a miracle wrought by the living or the dead; or is the narrative of some strange or striking event. It is, in fact, a species of the Acts of the Apostles of the Mevlevi dervish fathers, and is a rare specimen of what fervid religious enthusiasm can invent or exaggerate, pious credulity can believe, and confiding ignorance accept. In these days of Christian "Spiritualism," let not the reader be over-shocked at learning that Muslim "Saints," lovers of their Creator, and beloved by Him in return, hold themselves and are held by their dervish brethren to be the successors and spiritual inheritors of the prophets, from Adam to Muhammed; that, in virtue of this spiritual communion with God, they know all the secrets and mysteries of heaven and earth, and not only suspend or overrule the laws of nature at their will, but also deal out death or disease by their

[p. xiv]

anger, health or prosperity by their blessing; the whole in strict accordance, however, with the eternal will and foreknowledge of Him by whom alone all things are made.

The anecdotes translated are chosen as being characteristic of various points of dervish credence or assertion. Most of them inculcate some moral truth or point of practical wisdom. A few will be found, however, to go far beyond the credible; and one or two, unless totally misunderstood by the translator, are simply and grossly blasphemous. These last are here given as specimens of the exaggerated dervish doctrines which cause the orthodox among the 'Ulema [*1] of Islam to hold all such quasi-religious associations to be more or less heterodox.

The dervishes of Islam appear to be a kind of Gnostics. They style themselves Poor, Impassioned, Adepts, and Perfect. In many respects their doctrines correspond with those of Buddha, Pythagoras, and Plato, making all souls that are destined to salvation to be emanations from the divine Light or Glory of God, in which they will be again congregated; and all those doomed to perdition to have been formed out of the Fire of His wrath, to which also they will eventually be consigned.

It is but too patent to the translator that he is bound to sue for the kind indulgence of a critical public, in offering them the present volume in verse. He has no claim to being a poet himself; and had never practised the art

[p. xv]

of metrical composition until very lately. Sensible himself to the earnestness of thought and beauty of diction imbedded in the writings of the great poets of Ishim, and keenly aware of the condition of dry bones to which literal prose translation almost always reduces a songster's numbers, he has preferred to clothe his author in a presentable garb, though it be but a crumpled wrap, rather than exhibit him to readers of taste as a mangled mass, stripped of all beauty, and in great measure divested even of cognisable form, through the conflict of dictions and diversities of ideas.

He is in the position of the raindrop sung by Sa'di (see Chap. iii., No. 14., of the Anecdotes), and mentioned of old by Chardin, Addison, and Sir William Jones. May the thoughts in the Mesnevi be the gems that will make his effort acceptable to the British public. At most, he is but the diver who risks extinction in the hope that he may have a chance to offer an acceptable pearl of price to those for whom he has worked

	"A raindrop, from a cloud distilled,
	  At sea's expanse with tremor filled,
	  Mused: 'Where the main rolls, am I aught?
	  In ocean's presence, sure, I'm naught.'
	  Itself, thus eyed with scorn profound,
	  In oyster's bosom nurture found.
	  Time's wheel wrought changes manifold;
	  Rich pearl of price the raindrop's told.
	  Meek modesty its prize received;
	  By naught's gate ent'ring, worth achieved."

KILBURN PRIORY, LONDON. 1880.

Footnotes

^vii:1 For the incidents and dates mentioned in this preface, see the various chapters of the Anecdotes.

^ix:1 He must have been born in about A.D. 1204 or 2205, to have been five years old when the family left Balkh. In 1226 he would, therefore, be twenty-one or twenty-two years of  age. But see Anecdotes, Chap. i., No. 2, &c.

^xiv:1 The "'Ulema of Islam" are the Learned Doctors of Law and Divinity; their chief is the Lord Chancellor. They are ignorantly spoken of as "priests" and "clergy" by Europeans. There are no "priests" in Islam. The 'Ulema may be likened to the Jewish Rabbis. They often have followed, and do follow, all kinds of trades.

     
The Mesnavi and The Acts of the Adepts, by Jelal-'d-din Rumi and Shemsu-'d-Din Ahmed, tr. by James W. Redhouse, [1881], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 1] [p. 2]

  

SELECTED ANECDOTES

  

FROM THE WORK ENTITLED

  

THE ACTS OF THE ADEPTS

  

(MENAQIBU 'L 'ARIFIN),

  

BY

  

SHEMSU-'D-DIN AHMED, EL EFLAKI.

     
The Mesnavi and The Acts of the Adepts, by Jelal-'d-din Rumi and Shemsu-'d-Din Ahmed, tr. by James W. Redhouse, [1881], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 3]

  

THE ACTS OF THE ADEPTS. [*1]

  

CHAPTER I.

Baha'u-'d-Din, Veled, Sultanu-'l-'Ulema (The Beauty of the Religion of Islam, Son, Sultan of the Doctors of the Law).

  

1.

THE king of Khurasan, [*2] 'Ala'u-'d-Din Muhammed, Khurrem-Shah, uncle of Jelalu-'d-Din Muhammed Kh'arezm-Shah, and the proudest, as he was the most handsome man of his time, gave his daughter, Melika'i-Jihan (Queen of the World), as to the only man worthy of her, to Jelalu-'d-Din Huseyn, el Khatibi, of the race of Abu-Bekr.

An ancestor of his was one of the original Muslim conquerors of Khurasan. He was himself very virtuous and learned, surrounded with numerous disciples. He had not married until then; which gave him many an anxious and self-accusing thought.

He himself, the king, the king's daughter, and the king's Vazir were all four warned in a dream by the Prince of the Apostles of God (Muhammed) that he should wed the princess; which was done. He was then thirty years old. In due course, nine months afterwards, a son was born to

[p. 4]

him, and was named Baha'u-'d-Din Muhammed. He is commonly mentioned as Baha'u-'d-Din Veled.

When adolescent, this latter was so extremely learned that the family of his mother wished to raise him to the throne as king; but this he utterly rejected.

By the divine command, as conveyed in the selfsame night, and in an identical dream, to three hundred of the most learned men of the city of Balkh, [*1] the capital of the kingdom, where he dwelt, those sage doctors unanimously conferred upon him the honorific title of Sultanu-'l-'Ulema, and they all became his disciples.

Such are the names and titles by which he is more commonly mentioned; but he is also styled Mevlanayi Buzurg (the Greater or Elder Master). Many miracles and prodigies were attributed to him; and some men were found who conceived a jealousy at his growing reputation and influence.

  

2.

In A.H. 605 (A.D. 1208) he, Baha'u-'d-Din Veled, began to preach against the innovations of the king and sundry of his courtiers, declaiming against the philosophers and rationalists, while he pressed all his hearers to study and practise the precepts of Islam. Those courtiers maligned him with the king, calling him an intriguer who had designs on the throne. The king sent and made him an offer of the sovereignty, promising to retire elsewhere himself. Baha answered that he had no concern with earthly greatness, being a poor recluse; and that he would willingly leave the country, so as to remove from the king's mind all misgivings on his score.

He accordingly quitted Balkh, with a suite of about forty souls, after delivering a public address in the great mosque before the king and people. In this address he foretold the advent of the Moguls to overturn the kingdom, possess the country, destroy Balkh, and drive out the king, who

[p. 5]

would then flee to the Roman land, and there at length be killed.

So he left Balkh, as the prophet (Muhammed) had fled from Mekka to Medina. His son Jelalu-'d-Din was then five, and the elder brother, 'Ala'u-'d-Din, seven years old.

The people everywhere on his road, hearing of his approach or forewarned in dreams of his coming, flocked to meet him and do him honour. Thus he drew near to Bagdad. Here he was met by the great Sheykh Shahabu-'d-Din, 'Umer, Suherverdi, the most eminent man of the place, deputed by the Caliph Musta'zim to do him honour. He became the guest of the Sheykh.

The Caliph sent him a present of three thousand sequins, but he declined the gift as being money unlawfully acquired. He also refused to visit the Caliph; but consented to preach in the great mosque after the noon service of worship on the following Friday, the Caliph being present. In his discourse he reproached the Caliph to his face with his evil course of life, and warned him of his approaching slaughter by the Moguls with great cruelty and ignominy. The Caliph again sent him rich presents in money, horses, and valuables, but he refused to accept them.

Before Baha'u-'d-Din quitted Bagdad, intelligence was received there of the siege of Balkh, of its capture, and of its entire destruction, with its twelve thousand mosques, by the Mogul army of five hundred thousand men commanded by Jengiz in person (in A.H. 608, A.D. 1211). Fourteen thousand copies of the Qur'an were destroyed, fifteen thousand students and professors of the law were slain, and two hundred thousand adult male inhabitants led out and shot to death with arrows.

Baha'u-'d-Din went from Bagdad to Mekka, [*1] performed the greater pilgrimage there, proceeding thence to Damascus, and next to Malatia (Melitene, on the Upper Euphrates), where, in A.H. 614 (A.D. 1217), he

[p. 6]

heard of the death of Jengiz. The Seljuqi Sultan, 'Ala'u-'d-Din Keyqubad, was then sovereign of the land of Rome (Rum, i.e., Asia Minor), and was residing at Siwas (Sebaste). In A.H. 620 (A.D. 1223) Sultan Jelalu-'d-Din, the dispossessed monarch of Kh'arezm (Chorasmia) was killed in a battle fought by him in Azerbayjan (Atropatene) against the Sultans of Rome, Syria, and Egypt, when his forces were totally defeated. And thus ended that great dynasty, after ruling about a hundred and forty years.

Baha'u-'d-Din went from Malatia and remained four years near Erzinjan (the ancient Aziris, on the Western Euphrates), in Armenia, at a college built for him by a saintly lady, 'Ismet Khatun. She was the wife of the local sovereign, Melik Fakhru-'d-Din. She and her husband both died, and then Baha'u-'d-Din passed on to Larenda (in Cataonia), in Asia Minor, and remained there about seven years at the head of a college, the princess Melika'i-Jihan, his mother, being still with him.

Here it was that his younger son, Jelalu-'d-Din Muhammed, the future author of the Mesnevi, attained to man's estate, being then eighteen years old; when, in A.H. 623 (A.D. 1226), he married a young lady named Gevher Khatun, daughter of the Lala Sherefu-'d-Din, of Samarqand. She gave birth in due course to Jelal's eldest son, 'Ala'u-'d-Din.

The king had now returned to his capital, Qonya (the ancient Iconium). Hearing of Baha'u-'d-Din's great learning and sanctity, the king sent and invited him to the capital, where he installed him in a college, and soon professed himself a disciple. Many miracles are related as having been worked at Qonya by Baha'u-'d-Din, who at length died there on Friday, the 18th of Rebi'u-'l-akhir, A.H. 628 (February A.D. 1231). The Sultan erected a marble mausoleum over his tomb, on which this date is recorded. Many miracles continued to occur at this sanctuary. The Sultan died also a few years later, in A.H. 634 (A.D. 1236).

[p. 7]

(After the death of Baha'u-'d-Din Veled, and the acquisition of still greater fame by his son Jelalu-'d-Din, who received the honorific title of Khudavendgar--Lord--the father was distinguished from the son, among the disciples, by the customary title of Mevlana Buzurg--the Greater or Elder Master. The traditions collected by Eflaki, relating to this period, vary considerably from one another on minor points of date and order of succession, though the main facts come out sufficiently clear.)

  

3.

Jelal's son, Sultan Veled, related to Eflaki that his father Jelal used frequently to say, "I and all my disciples will be under the protection of the Great Master, my father, on the day of resurrection; and under His guidance we shall enter the divine presence; God will pardon all of us for His sake."

  

4.

It is related that when the Great Master departed this life, his son, Jelalu-'d-Din, was fourteen years old. (This is apparently a copyist's error for "twenty-four." Jalal is said to have been born in A.H. 604--A.D. 1207.) He married when seventeen (or eighteen); and often did he say in the presence of the congregation of his friends, "The Great Master will remain with me a few years. I shall be in need of Shemsu-'d-Din of Tebriz (the capital of Azerbayjan); for every prophet has had an Abu-Bekr, as Jesus had His apostles."

  

5.

Shortly after the death of the Great Master Baha'u-'d-Din Veled, news was received by the Sultan 'Ala'u-'d-Din of Qonya of the arrival of Sultan Jelalu-'d-Din Kh'arezm-Shah on the borders of Asia Minor. The Sultan went and prayed at the tomb of the deceased saint, and then prepared to meet the Kh'arezmians, who were in the neighbourhood

[p. 8]

of Erzenu-'r-Rum (Erzen of the Romans, the ancient Arzes, now Erzerum). Scouts brought in the intelligence that the Kh'arezmians were very numerous; and great anxiety prevailed among the Sultan's troops. He resolved to see for himself.

He put on a disguise and set out with a few followers, on fleet horses, for the Kh'arezmian camp. They gave out that they were nomad Turks of the neighbourhood, their ancestors having come from the Oxus; that latterly the Sultan had withdrawn his favour from them; and that, in consequence, they had for some time past been looking for the Kh'arezmian advent. This was reported to the king, Jelalu-'d-Din, who sent for them and received them kindly, giving them tents and assigning them rations.

During the night King Jelalu-'d-Din began to reflect that every one had hitherto spoken well of Sultan 'Ala'u-'d-Din, and a doubt arose in his mind in consequence respecting the story of these newcomers, especially as he learned that the Sultan was on his march to meet him. Consulting with the Prince of Erzenu-'r-Ram, further perquisition was postponed until the morrow.

But at midnight the deceased saint of Qonya, Baha-Veled, appeared in a dream to Sultan 'Ala'u-'d-Din, and warned him to fly at once. The Sultan awoke, found it was a dream, and went to sleep again. The saint now appeared a second time. The Sultan saw himself seated on his throne, and the saint coming to him, smiting him on the breast with his staff, and angrily saying, "Why sleepest thou? Arise!"

Now the Sultan did arise, quietly called his people, saddled horses, and stole away out of the camp. Towards morning King Jelal caused guards to be placed round the tents of the strangers to watch them. But afterwards, when orders were given to bring them to the king's presence to be questioned, their tents were found to be empty. Pursuit was attempted, but in vain.

[p. 9]

After an interval the two armies came into collision. The Sultan of Qonya was victorious. From that time forward, whenever difficulties threatened, he always betook himself to the shrine of the saint, Baha Veled, who always answered his prayers.

(As Sultan Jelalu-'d-Din Kh'arezm-Shah has already been stated to have died in battle in Azerbayjan in A.D. 1223, whereas the saint of Qonya did not die until A.D. 1231, eight years afterwards, the discrepancy of that date with the present anecdote is irreconcilable.)

  

6.

The Great Master, Baha Veled, used to say that while he himself lived no other teacher would be his equal, but that when his son, Jelalu-'d-Din, should succeed him at his death, that son of his would equal and even surpass him:

  

7.

Seyyid Burhanu-'d-Din Termizi [*1] is related to have said that one night the door of the mausoleum of Baha Veled opened of itself, and that a great glory shone forth from it, which gradually filled his house, so that no shadow fell from anything. The glory then gradually filled the city in like manner, spreading thence over the whole face of nature. On beholding this prodigy the Seyyid swooned away.

This vision is a sure indication that the whole human race will one day own themselves the disciples of the descendants of the great saint.

  

8.

Before he quitted Balkh, Baha Veled one day saw a man performing his devotions in the great mosque in his shirt sleeves, with his coat upon his back. Baha reproved him, telling him to put on his coat properly and decently,

[p. 10]

then to continue his devotions. "And what if I will not?" asked the man in a disdainful tone. "Thy dead-like soul will obey my command, quit thy body, and thou wilt die!" answered Baha. Instantly the man fell dead; and crowds flocked to become disciples to the saint who spoke with such power and authority.

  

9.

When Sultan 'Ala'u-'d-Din had fortified Qonya, he invited Baha Veled to mount to the terraced roof of the palace, thence to survey the walls and towers. After his inspection, Baha remarked to the Sultan, "Against torrents, and against the horsemen of the enemy, thou hast raised a goodly defence. But what protection hast thou built against those unseen arrows, the sighs and moans of the oppressed, which overleap a thousand walls and sweep whole worlds to destruction? Go to, now! strive to acquire the blessings of thy subjects. These are a stronghold, compared to which the walls and turrets of the strongest castles are as nothing."

  

10.

On one occasion Sultan 'Ala'u-'d-Din paid a visit to Baha Veled. In lieu of his hand the latter offered the tip of his staff to be kissed by the Sultan, who thought within himself: "The proud scholar!" Baha read the Sultan's thoughts as a seer, and remarked in reply thereto: "Mendicant students are bound to be humble and lowly. Not so a Sultan of the Faith who has attained to the utmost circumference of the orbit thereof, and revolves therein."

  

11.

A certain Sheykh Hajjaj, a disciple of Baha Veled and one of God's elect not known to the herd of mankind, quitted the college after the decease of his teacher, and betook himself to his former trade of a weaver, therewith

[p. 11]

to gain an honest livelihood. He used to buy the coarsest brown bread of unsifted flour, mash this up with water, and break his fast with this sop alone. All the rest of his earnings he saved up until they would reach to two or three hundred piastres. This sum he would then carry to the college, and place it in the shoes of his teacher's son, Jelalu-'d-Din, the new rector. This practice he continued so long as he lived.

At his death a professional washer was appointed to perform the last ablution for Sheykh Hajjaj. In the execution of his office the washer was about to touch the privities of the deceased, when the defunct seized his hand with so strong a grip as to make him scream with pain and fright. The friends came to rescue him, but they were unable to release the imprisoned hand. They therefore sent word to Jelalu-'d-Din of what had occurred. He came and saw, knew the reason, and whispered into the ear of the deceased man: "The poor simpleton has been unaware of the high station of thy sanctity. Pardon his unintentional transgression for my sake." Immediately the poor washer's hand was released; but three days afterwards he was himself washed and borne lifeless to his grave.

  

12.

The Sultan had a governor of his childhood still living, the Emir Bedru-'d-Din Guhertash, commonly known as the Dizdar (Castellan), whom he held in great esteem. One day, as Baha Veled was lecturing in the mosque, in presence of the Sultan and his court, he suddenly called upon the Dizdar to recite any ten verses of the Qur'an, saying he would then expound them to the congregation. The Dizdar had been admiring the eloquence of the preacher's expositions. Upon this sudden call, without the slightest hesitation and without ever having committed them to memory, he recited the first ten verses of chapter xxiii., "The believers have attained to prosperity," &c., which

[p. 12]

[paragraph continues] Baha forthwith explained in such a manner as to draw down the plaudits of the assembly. The Dizdar, with the Sultan's permission, went to the foot of the pulpit and declared himself a disciple to Baha. "Then," said the preacher, "as a thank-offering for this happy event, do thou build and endow a college where my descendants shall teach their disciples after me." The Dizdar did so, and richly endowed it. This is the college where Jelalu-'d-Din afterwards lived. When the Dizdar died he left all his possessions to enrich the foundation. (See chap. iii. No. 69.)

  

13.

The Sultan had a dream (something like one of Nebuchadnezzar's). He saw himself with a head of gold, a breast of silver, a belly of brass, thighs of lead, and shanks of tin. Baha Veled explained the dream as follows:--"All will go well in the kingdom during thy lifetime. It will be as silver in the days of thy son; as brass in the next generation, when the rabble will get the upper hand. Troubles will thicken during the next reign; and after that the kingdom of Rome will go to ruin, the house of Seljuq will come to an end, and unknown upstarts will seize the reins of government."

Footnotes

^3:1 There is an allusion in the word 'Arifin (Adepts) to the name of Eflaki's patron, the Chelebi Emir 'Arif (well-knowing).

^3:2 Eastern Persia.

^4:1 The ancient Bactra, sometimes called Zariaspa, the capital of Bactria.

^5:1 Incorrectly written Mecca by Europeans.

^9:1 Of Termiz (Tirmez), on the north bank of the Oxus, near to Balkh.

     
The Mesnavi and The Acts of the Adepts, by Jelal-'d-din Rumi and Shemsu-'d-Din Ahmed, tr. by James W. Redhouse, [1881], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 13]

  

CHAPTER II.

Seyyid Burhanu-'d-Din, Sirr-Dan, el Muhaqqiq, el Huseyni, of the posterity of Ya-Sin (Muhammed). [*1]

(HE is called Seyyid, the "Syud" of our East India authorities, for the reason that he was a descendant of the prophet, of whom Ya-Sin is one of the titles, as it is also the name of the thirty-sixth chapter of the Qur'an, at the head of which the two letters stand which form the name. Burhanu-'d-Din means The Proof of the Religion; Sirr-Dan signifies The Confidant, one who possesses a knowledge of a secret or secrets, a mystery or mysteries. Muhaqqiq is one who verifies, who probes the truth; and Huseyni indicates that the Seyyid was of the branch of Huseyn, the younger of the two sons of Fatima, Muhammed's only child that left posterity.)

  

1.

Seyyid Burhanu-'d-Din was popularly known by the name of Sirr-Dan at Balkh, Bukhara, (Alexandria Oxiana?), and Termiz. His discourse was continually running upon the subjects of spiritual and mental phenomena, of the mysteries of earth and of heaven.

When Baha Veled quitted Balkh, the Seyyid went to Termiz, and there secluded himself as a hermit. After a while again he began to lecture in public on the significations of knowledge. Suddenly, one morning, that of Friday the 18th of Rebi'u-'l-akhir, A.H. 628 (February,

[p. 14]

[paragraph continues] 1231 A.D.), he cried out most bitterly, in a flood of tears, "Alas! my master has passed away from this tabernacle of dust to the abode of sincerity!" His words and the date were noted down, and, on inquiry, after his arrival in Qonya, were found to correspond exactly with the moment of Baha Veled's decease.

  

2.

For forty days the disciples at Termiz mourned for the death of the great teacher. At the end of that period the Seyyid said: "The son of my master, his successor, Jelalu-'d-Din Muhammed, is left alone and is wishing to see me. I must go to the land of Rome and place myself at his service, delivering over to him the trust which my teacher confided to my safe-keeping."

  

3.

When the Seyyid reached Qonya, Baha Veled had been dead about a year, and Jelal had gone to Larenda. The Seyyid applied himself for several months to devotional seclusion in one of the mosques of Qonya; after which he sent off a letter to Jelal by the hands of two mendicants, saying: "Come and meet this stranger to thee at the resting-place of thy father, for Larenda is not a place of permanency for thee. From that hill (on which Baha's mausoleum was built) a fire will shower down on the city of Qonya."

After reading this epistle Jelal returned to Qonya with all possible despatch. There he went at once to visit the Seyyid, who came forth from the mosque to receive him. They embraced. They now entered into conversation on various subjects. So delighted was the Seyyid with the expositions set forth by Jelal that he kissed the soles of his feet, and exclaimed: "A hundredfold hast thou surpassed thy father in all knowledge of the humanities; but thy father was versed also in the mysteries of mute reality and ecstasy. From this day forward my desire is that

[p. 15]

thou shouldest also acquire that knowledge,--the knowledge possessed by the prophets and the saints, which is entitled The Science of Divine Intuition--the science spoken of by God (in Qur'an xviii. 64): 'We have taught him a science from within us.' This knowledge did I acquire from my teacher; do thou receive it from me, so that thou mayest be the heir to thy father in spiritual matters as well as in things temporal. Thou wilt then be his second self."

Jelal complied with all the Seyyid pressed upon him. He took the Seyyid to his college, and for nine years received instruction from him. Some accounts make it appear that Jelal first became the Seyyid's disciple at this time; but others go to show that Baha Veled gave Jelal as a pupil to the Seyyid at Balkh, and that the Seyyid used now and then to carry Jelal about on his shoulders, like as is practised by the nursing-tutors--lala--of children. (Compare chap. iii., Nos. 6 and 8.)

  

4.

Husamu-'d-Din told us that Jelal had informed him of the following occurrence:--

The Seyyid once arrived at a certain city in Khurasan named Samanek. The chief people went forth to meet him and show him honour, all excepting the Sheykhu-'l-Islam of the place (the local vice-chancellor). Nevertheless the Seyyid went to pay his respects to the legal functionary. The latter went barefoot to the door of the house to meet the Seyyid, whose hand he kissed, and to whom he offered excuses for his seeming lack of courtesy.

In reply, the Seyyid said to him: "I am come to inform you that, on the 10th day of next month, Ramazan, you will have occasion to go forth to a hot-bath. On your way thither you will be assassinated by the emissaries of the Old Man of the Mountain. This I communicate to thee, that thou mayest set thy affairs in order, and repent thee of thy sins."

[p. 16]

The Sheykhu-'l-Islam fell at the Seyyid's feet, wailing; but the latter remarked: "This is of no avail. Events are in God's hands, and He has so ordered it. Still, as thou showest so much contrition, I may add, for thy consolation, that thou wilt die in the faith, and shalt not be cut off from the divine mercy and grace."

And so it happened as thus predicted. The assassins took his life on the very day foretold by the Seyyid.

(The stronghold, Alamut, of the Old Man of the Mountain, was stormed by forces sent against it by Helagu, grandson of Jengiz, in about the year A.H. 654 (A.D. 1256). The last prince of the dynasty was sent to China, and there put to death by the emperor; and thus these detestable scourges of humanity were at length suppressed.)

  

5.

After a certain time the Seyyid asked permission of Jelal to go for a while to Qaysariyya (Caesarea), but Jelal could not spare him. So he remained at Qonya still.

Somewhat later a party of friends took the Seyyid out for a ride among the vineyards. The thought occurred to him that, without saying anything to anybody, he might now easily abscond and get away to Qaysariyya. Scarcely had he conceived this vagabond idea than his beast reared with him, threw him, and broke his leg. His friends raised him, set him again on his horse, and conducted him to a neighbouring country-house to which Jelal had also come.

On seeing Jelal the Seyyid exclaimed to him, "Is this the proper way to reward your teacher--to break his leg?" Jelal at once ordered the Seyyid's boot to be removed, and saw that his foot and toes were crushed. He now passed his hands along the injured limb and blew on it. The limb was at once restored whole. Jelal now granted permission, and the Seyyid forthwith proceeded to Qaysariyya.

[p. 17]

  

6.

When the time was come that the Seyyid should die, he told his servant to prepare for him an ewer of warm water, and to go. The water was made ready, placed in the Seyyid's room, and the servant went forth. The Seyyid called after him: "Go and proclaim that the stranger Seyyid has departed to the other world." He then bolted the door, that none should enter to him.

The servant, however, had his curiosity excited by those words, and went back to the door, to listen and to see what might happen. Through a chink he saw his master perform an ablution, arrange his dress, lie down on his couch, and cry out: "All ye angels, saints, and heavens, who have at any time intrusted to me a secret, come to me now and receive back your charges. Ye are here all present."

He then recited the following hymn:--

	"God, my beloved, darling God, adored, to me incline;
	  My soul receive; intoxicate, release poor me distraught.
	  In Thee alone my heart finds peace; it fire with love divine;
	  Take it unto Thyself; to it both worlds are naught."

These were the Seyyid's last words, ere he yielded up his spirit. The servant carried the news to the Seyyid's friends, who gathered together, carried him forth, and buried him.

A mausoleum was raised over his grave by a rich and powerful disciple. The departed saint would not allow a cupola to stand. Twice the dome was shaken down by earthquakes, and in a dream the Seyyid himself forbade its third edification.

After the usual forty days of mourning, a letter was sent to Jelal, who at once journeyed from Qonya to Qaysariyya, and prayed at the tomb of his deceased teacher, returning home again afterwards.

Footnotes

^13:1 The two letters Ya and Sin heading the thirty-sixth chapter of the Qur'an are said to stand for the words, Ya insan, O man! as Mohammed is there addressed.

     
The Mesnavi and The Acts of the Adepts, by Jelal-'d-din Rumi and Shemsu-'d-Din Ahmed, tr. by James W. Redhouse, [1881], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 18]

  

CHAPTER III.

Mevlana Jelalu-'d-Din Muhammed, the Revered Mystery of God upon Earth. [*1]

JELaLU-'D-DiN is related to have been born at Balkh on the 6th of Rebi'u-'l-evvel, A.H. 604 (29th September 1207).

When five years old, he used at times to become extremely uneasy and restless, so much so that his attendants used to take him into the midst of themselves.

The cause of these perturbations was that spiritual forms and shapes of the absent (invisible world) would arise before his sight, that is, angelic messengers, righteous genii, and saintly men--the concealed ones of the bowers of the True One (spiritual spouses of God), used to appear to him in bodily shape, exactly as the cherubim and seraphim used to show themselves to the holy apostle of God, Muhammed, in the earlier days, before his call to the prophetic office; as Gabriel appeared to Mary, and as the four angels were seen by Abraham and Lot; as well as others to other prophets.

His father, Baha'u-'d-Din Veled, the Sultanu-'l-'Ulema, used on these occasions to coax and soothe him by saying: "These are the Occult Existences. They come to present themselves before you, to offer unto you gifts and presents from the invisible world."

These ecstasies and transports of his began to be publicly known and talked about; and the affectionately

[p. 19]

honorific title of Khudavendgar, by which he is so often mentioned, was conferred upon him at this time by his father, who used to address him and speak of him by this title, as "My Lord."

  

2.

His son, Sultan Veled, related that there was a paper in the handwriting of his father, Baha Veled, which set forth that at Balkh, when Jelal was six years old, he was taking the air one Friday, on the terraced roof of the house, and reciting the Qur'an, when some other children of good families came in and joined him there.

After a time, one of these children proposed that they should try and jump from thence on to a neighbouring terrace, and should lay wagers on the result.

Jelal smiled at this childish proposal, and remarked: "My brethren, to jump from terrace to terrace is an act well adapted for cats, dogs, and the like, to perform; but is it not degrading to man, whose station is so superior? Come now, if you feel disposed, let us spring up to the firmament, and visit the regions of God's realm." As he yet spake, he vanished from their sight.

Frightened at Jelal's sudden disappearance, the other children raised a shout of dismay, that some one should come to their assistance; when lo, in an instant, there he was again in their midst; but with an altered expression of countenance and blanched cheeks. They all uncovered before him, fell to the earth in humility, and all declared themselves his disciples.

He now told them that, as he was yet speaking to them, a company of visible forms, clad in green raiment, had led him away from them, and had conducted him about the various concentric orbs of the spheres, and through the signs of the Zodiac, showing him the wonders of the world of spirits, and bringing him back to them so soon as their cries had reached his ears.

At that age, he was used not to break his fast more

[p. 20]

often than once in three or four, and sometimes even seven, days.

  

3.

A different witness, a disciple of Jelal's father, related that Baha Veled frequently affirmed publicly that his Lord, Jelal, was of exalted descent, being of the lineage of a king, and also of an hereditary saint.

His maternal grandmother was a daughter of the great Imam Es-Sarakhsi [*1] (died at Damascus A.H. 571, A.D. 1175), who was of the lineage of the Prophet. The mother of Es-Sarakhsi was descended from the Caliph 'Ali; and Jelal's paternal grandmother was a daughter of the King of Kh'arezm, who resided at Balkh.

Jelal's paternal great-great-grandmother, also, the mother of Ahmed, El-Khatibi, grandfather of Jelal's father, was a daughter of a king of Balkh. These particulars establish that Jelal was well descended on both sides, in a mundane and in a spiritual sense. The well-known proverb--

	"Hereditary disposition ever insinuates itself,"

proved fully true in his most illustrious case.

  

4.

When Jelal was seven years old, he used every morning to recite the very short chapter, cviii., of the Qur'an--

"Verily we have given unto thee the abounding good. Therefore, do thou perform thy devotions unto thy Lord, and slaughter victims. Verily, he who evil entreateth thee is one who shall leave no issue after him."

He used to weep as he recited these inspired words.

Suddenly, God one day vouchsafed to appear to him visibly. On this he fainted away. Regaining consciousness, he heard a voice from heaven, that said--

"O Jelalu-'d-Din [*1] By the majesty (jelal) of Our glory, do thou henceforward cease to combat with thyself; for We have exalted thee to the station of ocular vision."

[p. 21]

Jelal vowed, therefore, out of gratitude for this mark of grace, to serve the Lord to the end of his days, to the utmost of his power; in the firm hope that they who followed him would also attain to that high grade of favour and excellence.

  

5.

Two years after the death of his father, Jelal went from Qonya to Haleb (Aleppo) to study. (This account is altogether subversive, as to time and date, of that already given in chap. ii. No. 3.)

As he was known to be a son of Baha'u-'d-Din Veled, and was also an apt scholar, his professor showed him every attention.

Others were offended, and evinced their jealousy at the preference thus accorded to him. They complained to the governor of the city that Jelal was immoral, as he was in the habit, each night, of quitting his cell at midnight for some unknown purpose. The governor resolved to see and judge for himself. He therefore hid himself in the porter's room.

At midnight, Jelal came forth from his room, and went straight to the locked gate of the college, watched by the governor. The gate flew open; and Jelal, followed at a distance by the governor, went through the streets to the locked city gate. This, too, opened of itself; and again both passed forth.

They went on and came to the tomb of Abraham (at Hebron, about 350 miles distant), the "Friend of the All-Merciful." There a domed edifice was seen, filled with a large company of forms in green raiment, who came forth to meet Jelal, and conducted him into the building.

The governor hereupon lost his senses through fright, and did not recover until after the sun had risen.

Now, he could see nothing of a domed edifice, nor one single human being. He wandered about on a trackless

[p. 22]

plain for three days and three nights, hungry, thirsty, and footsore. At length he sank under his sufferings.

Meanwhile, the porter of the college had given intelligence of the governor's pursuit after Jelal. When his officers found that he did not return, they sent a numerous party of guards to seek him. These, on the second day, met Jelal. He told them where they would find their master. The next day, late, they came up with him, found him to be nearly dead, and brought him home.

The governor became a sincere convert, and a disciple to Jelal for ever after.

(A parallel tale is told of Jelal's fetching water from the Tigris for his father by night when he was a little child at Bagdad. There, too, all the gates opened to him of themselves.)

  

6.

It is related that the Seyyid Burhanu-'d-Din was often heard to narrate that, when Jelal was a child, the Seyyid was his governor and tutor. He had often taken Jelal up on his shoulder, and so carried him to the empyrean. "But now," he would add, "Jelal has attained to such eminence of station that he carries me up." These sayings of the Seyyid were repeated to Jelal, who confirmed them with the remark: "It is quite true; and a hundredfold more also; the services rendered to me by that man are infinite."

  

7.

When Jelal went to Damascus to study, he passed by Sis in Upper Cilicia. There, in a cave, dwelt forty Christian monks, who had a great reputation for sanctity, but in reality were mere jugglers.

On the approach of Jelal's caravan to the cave, the monks caused a little boy to ascend into the air, and there remain standing between heaven and earth.

Jelal noticed this exhibition, and fell into a reverie. Hereupon, the child began to weep and wail, saying that

[p. 23]

the man in the reverie was frightening him. The monks told him not to be afraid, but to come down. "Oh!" cried the child, "I am as though nailed here, unable to move hand or foot."

The monks became alarmed. They flocked around Jelal, and begged him to release the child. After a time, he seemed to hear and understand them. His answer was: "Only through the acceptance of Islam by yourselves, all of you, as well as by the child, can he be saved."

In the end they all embraced Islam, and wished to follow Jelal as his disciples. He recommended them, however, to remain in their cave, as before, to cease from practising jugglery, and to serve God in the spirit and in truth. So he proceeded on his journey.

  

8.

Jelal remained seven years, or four years, at Damascus; and there he first saw his great friend Shemsu-'d-Din of Tebriz, clothed in his noted black felt and peculiar cap. Shems addressed him; but he turned away, and mixed in the crowd. Soon afterwards, he returned to Qonya by way of Qaysariyya. At this latter place, under the guiding supervision of his spiritual teacher, the Seyyid Burhanu-'d-Din, Jelal fasted three consecutive periods of forty days each, [*1] with only a pot of water and two or three loaves of barley bread. He showed no signs of suffering. Burhan now pronounced him perfect in all science, patent and occult, human and spiritual. (Compare chap. ii. No. 3.)

  

9.

In the year A.H. 642 (A.D. 1244), Shemsu-'d-Din of Tebriz came to Qonya.

This great man, after acquiring a reputation of superior

[p. 24]

sanctity at Tebriz, as the disciple of a certain holy man, a basket-maker by trade, had travelled about much in various lands, in search of the best spiritual teachers, thus gaining the nickname of Perenda (the Flier, Bird, &c.).

He prayed to God that it might be revealed to him who was the most occult of the favourites of the divine will, so that he might go to him and learn still more of the mysteries of divine love.

The son of Baha'u-'d-Din Veled, of Balkh, was designated to him as the man most in favour with God. Shems went, accordingly, to Qonya; arriving there on Saturday, the 26th of Jemada-'l-akhir, A.H. 642 (December A.D. 1244). He engaged a lodging at an inn, and pretended to be a great merchant. In his room, however, there was nothing but a broken water-pot, an old mat, and a bolster of unbaked clay. He broke his fast once in every ten or twelve days, with a damper soaked in broth of sheep's trotters.

One day, as he was seated at the gate of the inn, Jelal came by, riding on a mule, in the midst of a crowd of students and disciples on foot.

Shemsu-'d-Din arose, advanced, and took hold of the mule's bridle, addressing Jelal in these words: "Exchanger of the current coins of recondite significations, who knowest the names of the Lord! Tell me: Was Muhammed the greater servant of God, or Bayezid of Bestam?"

Jelal answered him: "Muhammed was incomparably the greater--the greatest of all prophets and all saints."

"Then," rejoined Shemsu-'d-Din, "how is it that Muhammed said: 'We have not known Thee, O God, as Thou rightly shouldest be known,' whereas Bayezid said: 'Glory unto me! How very great is my glory'?"

On hearing this question, Jelal fainted away. On recovering his consciousness, he took his new acquaintance home with him. They were closeted together for weeks or months in holy communications.

Jelal's disciples at length became impatient, raising a

[p. 25]

fearful and threatening tumult; so that, on Thursday, the 21st of Shewwal, A.H. 643 (March A.D. 1246), Shemsu-'d-Din mysteriously disappeared; and Jelal adopted, as a sign of mourning for his loss, the drab hat and wide cloak since worn by the dervishes of his order.

It was about this time, also, that he first instituted the musical services observed by that order, as they perform their peculiar waltzing. All men took to music and dancing in consequence. Fanatics objected, out of envy. They said Jelal was gone mad, even as the chiefs of Mekka had said of old of the Prophet. His supposed malady was attributed to the malefic influence of Shemsu-'d-Din of Tebriz.

  

10.

The widow of Jelal, Kira (or Gira) Khatun, a model of virtue, the Mary of her age, is related to have seen, through a chink in the door of the room where he and Shems were closeted in spiritual communion, that the wall suddenly opened, and six men of majestic mien entered by the cleft.

These strangers, who were of the occult saints, saluted, bowed, and laid a nosegay at the feet of Jelal, although it was then in the depth of the midwinter season. They remained until near the hour of dawn worship, when they motioned to Shemsu-'d-Din to act as leader on the occasion of the service. He excused himself, and Jelal performed the office. The service of worship over, the six strangers took leave, and passed out by the same cleft in the wall.

Jelal now came forth from the chamber, bringing the nosegay in his hand. Seeing his wife in the passage, he gave her the nosegay, saying that the strangers had brought it as an offering to her.

The next day, she sent her servant, with a few leaves from her nosegay, to the perfumers' mart of the city, to inquire what might be the flowers composing it, as she had never seen their like before. The merchants were all equally astonished; no one had ever seen such leaves.

[p. 26]

At length, however, a spice merchant from India, who was then sojourning in Qonya, saw those leaves, and knew them to be the petals of a flower that grows in the south of India, in the neighbourhood of Ceylon.

The wonder now was: How did these Indian flowers get to Qonya; and in the depth of winter, too?

The servant carried the leaves back, and reported to his lady what he had learnt. This increased her astonishment a hundredfold. Just then Jelal made his appearance, and enjoined on her to take the greatest care of the nosegay, as it had been sent to her by the florists of the lost earthly paradise, through those Indian saints, as a special offering.

It is related that she preserved them as long as she lived, merely giving a few leaves, with Jelal's express permission, to the Georgian wife of the king. If any one suffered with any disease of the eyes, one leaf from that nosegay, applied to the ailing part, was an instant cure. The flowers never lost their fragrance or freshness. What is musk compared with such?

  

11.

To prove that man lives through God's will alone, and not by blood, Jelal one day, in the presence of a crowd of physicians and philosophers, had the veins of both his arms opened, and allowed them to bleed until they ceased to flow. He then ordered incisions to be made in various parts of his body; but not one drop of moisture was anywhere obtainable. He now went to a hot bath, washed, performed an ablution, and then commenced the exercise of the sacred dance.

  

12.

One of Jelal's disciples died, and there was a consultation among his friends as to whether he should be buried in a coffin or without one.

Another disciple, after Jelal had been consulted, and had

[p. 27]

told them to do as they pleased, made the observation that it would be better to bury their relative without a coffin. On being asked why, he answered: "A mother can better nurse her child, than can her child's brother. The earth is the mother of the human race, and the wood of a coffin is also the earth's child; therefore, the coffin is the man's brother. Man's corpse should be committed, then, not to a coffin, but to mother earth, his loving, affectionate parent."

Jelal expressed his admiration for this apposite and sublime doctrine, which, he said, was not to be found written in any then extant book.

The name of the disciple who made this beautiful remark was Kerimu-'d-Din, son of Begh-Timur.

  

13.

Many of the chief disciples of Jelal have related that he himself explained to them, as his reasons for instituting the musical service of his order, with their dancing, the following reflections:--

"God has a great regard for the Roman people. In answer to a prayer of the first Caliph, Abu-Bekr, God made the Romans a chief receptacle of His mercy; and the land of the Romans (Asia Minor) is the most beautiful on the face of the earth. But the people of the land were utterly void of all idea of the riches of a love towards God, and of the remotest shade of a taste for the delights of the inner, spiritual life. The great Causer of all causes caused a source of affection to arise, and out of the wilderness of causelessness raised a means by which I was attracted away from the land of Khurasan to the country of the Romans. That country He made a home for my children and posterity, in order that, with the elixir of His grace, the copper of their existences might be transmuted into gold and into philosopher-stone, they themselves being received into the communion of saints. When I perceived that they had no inclination for the practice of religious

[p. 28]

austerities, and no knowledge of the divine mysteries, I imagined to arrange metrical exhortations and musical services, as being captivating for men's minds, and more especially so for the Romans, who are naturally of a lively disposition, and fond of incisive expositions. Even as a sick child is coaxed into taking a salutary, though nauseous medicine, so, in like manner, were the Romans led by art to acquire a taste for spiritual truth."

  

14.

As an instance of the great value attached to the poetry of Jelal, the following anecdote is related:--

Shemsu-'d-Din Hindi, Prince of Shiraz in the province of Fars, Southern Persia), wrote a flattering letter to the renowned poet, Sheykh Sa'di, of Shiraz (who lived A.H. 571-691, A.D. 1175-1291, and was consequently a contemporary of Jelal's), begging him to select the best ode,, with the most sublime thoughts, that he knew of as existing in Persian, and to send it to him, for presentation to the great Khan of the Moguls (who then ruled over nearly all Asia).

It so happened that the ode by Jelal had just become known at Shiraz, which commences:--

	"Divine love's voice each instant left and right is heard to sound,
	  We're bound for heaven. To witness our departure who'll be found'?"

This ode had captivated the minds of all the men of culture in the city; and this ode Sa'di selected, wrote it out, and sent it to the prince, with the remark: "A monarch, of auspicious advent, has sprung up in the land of Rome, from whose privacy these are some of the breathings. Never have more beautiful words been uttered, and never will be. Would that I could go to Rome, and rub my face in the dust under his feet!"

The prince thanked Sa'di exceedingly, and sent him valuable presents in return. Eventually, Sa'di did go to

[p. 29]

[paragraph continues] "Rome," arrived in Qonya, and had the gratification to kiss the hand of Jelal. He was well received in that city by the dervish circle.

The prince was himself a disciple of Sheykh .... 'd-Din, of Bakharz (in Khurasan, about midway between Turshiz and Herat), to whom he sent a copy of the ode, to learn what the Sheykh would think of it. All the learned men of Bakharz assembled round the Sheykh. He read the ode attentively, and then burst out into exclamations of the wildest delight and most fervid admiration, rending his garments, and acting as though mad. At length he calmed down and said: "O wonderful man! O thou champion of the Faith! Thou pole of the heavens and of the earth! Verily, thou art a wonderful Sultan, who hast appeared on earth! In good sooth, all the Sheykhs of bygone ages who were seers, have been frustrated in not having seen this man! They would have supplicated the Lord of Truth to allow them to meet him! But it was not to be; and this mercy will last until the end of time, as has been sung:--

	"A fortune, by the men of ancient times in dreams long sought,
	  Has been vouchsafed to modern men; without their efforts caught."

"One ought to put on ironed shoes, and take in hand an ironed staff, to set out at once and visit this great light. I make it a legacy to all my friends to do so without the least delay, if they have the means and the strength, so as to achieve the happiness and secure the honour of making the acquaintance of this prince, so obtaining the grace and favour of hearing him. His father, Baha Veled, and his ancestors, were great Sheykhs and most illustrious; their great progenitor having been the first Caliph, Abu-Bekr, the glorious Confirmer of the truth spoken by the Apostle of God. I am myself old and infirm, unequal to the fatigues of travel. Otherwise, I would have walked, not on the soles of my feet, but on the tips of my great toes, to visit that eminent man."

[p. 30]

The Sheykh's eldest son, Muzahhiru-'d-Din, was there present. To him the Sheykh addressed himself, saying: "My son, I do hope that thy eyes will behold this sacred visage; and, if God so will, convey to him my salutation and my respects."

After the death of the old man, his son went to Rome, had the felicity to see Jelal, and presented his father's message. He returned to Bakharz; but it is said that a son of his lies buried at Qonya.

  

15.

Kira Khatun, the widow of Jelal, is reported to have related to a friend that there was in their household a candlestick of the height of a man, before which Jelal used to stand on foot the night through, until daydawn, studying the writings of his father.

One night, a company of the genii, dwellers in the college where Jelal and his wife lived, appeared to her in a body, to complain of the great inconvenience and suffering to which they were subjected by this practice of Jelal's, and saying: "We can put up with it no longer. Take care, lest we do a mischief to some one in the college."

The lady reported this complaint of the genii to her husband. He merely smiled, and took no further notice of the matter for several days.

At the end of that time, however, he spoke of it, and told his wife to trouble herself no more about the threat of the genii, as he had converted them all. They had become disciples of his, and would certainly do no harm to any friend or dependent of their teacher.

  

16.

It was related by one of the chief of Jelal's disciples, a butcher by trade, a trainer of dogs for the chase, and a purveyor of horses of the best kind, which he used to sell to princes and grandees at high prices, that, at a certain

[p. 31]

time, Jelal was much exercised by visions from the spiritual world, so that for forty days he was as though beside himself, passing through the streets with his head bare, and his turban twisted round his neck.

After that, he came suddenly one day, bathed in perspiration, to the butcher, and said he wanted a certain unbroken horse to be saddled for him immediately. The butcher, with the help of three stable-men, managed with the utmost difficulty to saddle the horse and bring him out. Jelal mounted him without opposition, and set off in a southerly direction. The butcher asked whether he should accompany him, and Jelal replied: "Give me your prayers and holy good wishes."

In the evening Jelal returned covered with dust. The poor horse, though of gigantic frame, was reduced to mere skin and bone, being nearly broken-backed with fatigue.

The next day he came again, and asked for another horse, better than the one of yesterday, mounted it, and rode off. He returned at the hour of sunset devotions, and this horse also was reduced to a pitiable condition. The butcher dared not offer a word of remonstrance.

On the third day he came again, mounted a third horse, and returned as before, at sunset. He sat down now in the most composed manner possible, and called out cheerily: "Good news! Glad tidings, O ye of the Faith! That dog of hell has gone back to his pit of fire!"

The butcher was too much astonished at his manner to feel any inclination to inquire what these words might mean; but a certain number of days afterwards, a large caravan came into Qonya from Syria, and brought news that the Mogul army had besieged Damascus, and had reduced it to straits.

Helaw Khan (Holagu, Helagu) had taken Bagdad in A.H. 655 (A.D. 1257-58). Two years later, A.H. 657 (A.D. 1259-60), he advanced against Aleppo and Syria, sending his general, Ketbuga, against Damascus with a numerous army. He laid siege to the city. But the inhabitants

[p. 32]

witnessed, with their very own eyes, that Jelal came and joined himself there to the forces of Islam. He inflicted defeat on the Mogul forces, who were compelled to retreat, totally frustrated.

The butcher was overjoyed at this welcome intelligence, and went forthwith to communicate the news to Jelal. The latter smilingly replied: "Yes, yes! Jelalu-'d-Din was the horseman who obtained a victory over the enemy, and showed himself a Sultan in the eyes of the people of Islam." On hearing this, his disciples rent the air with their shouts of joy and triumph, and the townspeople of Qonya decked out and illuminated the city, holding public rejoicings.

This miracle of power became noised abroad, and everywhere Jelal's friends and adherents were transported with ecstasy at its occurrence.

  

17.

On one occasion a rich merchant of Tebriz came to Qonya. He inquired of his agents there who was the most eminent man of learning and piety in the city, as he wished to go and pay his respects to him. He remarked to them: "It is not merely for the sake of making money that I travel about in every country on earth; I desire also to make the acquaintance of every man of eminence I can find in each city."

His correspondents told him that the Sheykhu-'l-Islam of the capital had a great reputation for learning and piety, and that they would be proud to present him to that celebrated luminary. Accordingly, he selected a number of rarities from among his store, to the value of thirty sequins; and the party set out to visit the great lawyer.

The merchant found the dignitary lodged in a great palace, with guards at the gate, crowds of servants and attendants in the courtyard, and eunuchs, pages, grooms, ushers, chamberlains, and the like, in the halls.

Turning to his conductors, he expressed some doubt as

[p. 33]

to whether they had not, by mistake, brought him to the king's palace. They quieted his fears, and led him into the presence of the great fountain of legal erudition. He felt a very great dislike for all he saw; and he remarked to his friends: "A great lawyer is never anything the worse for possessing a clear conscience. A physician may himself indulge in sweetmeats; but he does not prescribe them to a patient suffering with fever."

He now offered his presents; and then inquired of the great lawyer whether he could solve a doubt under which he was then labouring. This he stated as follows:--"Of late, I have been sustaining a series of losses. Can you indicate a way by which I may escape from that unfortunate position? I give, every year, the fortieth part of my liable possessions to the poor; and I distribute alms besides, to the extent of my power. I cannot conceive, therefore, why I am unfortunate."

Other remarks he made also to the same effect. They appeared to be lost on the great luminary, who affected to be otherwise preoccupied. At length the merchant took leave without obtaining a solution to his difficulty.

The day following he inquired of his friends whether there did not chance to be, in the great city, some poor mendicant of exemplary piety, to whom he might offer his respects, and from whom he might, haply, learn what he longed to know, together with advice that would be of service to him. They answered: "Just such a man as thou describest is our Lord, Jelalu-'d-Din. He has forsaken all pleasures, save only his love towards God. Not only has he given up all concern for worldly matters, he has also renounced all care as to a future state. He passes his nights, as well as his days, in the worship of God; and he is a very ocean of knowledge in all temporal and spiritual subjects."

The Tebriz merchant was enchanted with this information. He begged to see that holy man, the bare mention of whose virtues had filled him with delight. They

[p. 34]

accordingly conducted him to the college of Jelal, the merchant having privately furnished himself with a rouleau of fifty sequins in gold as his offering to the saint.

When they reached the college, Jelal was sitting alone in the lecture-hall, immersed in the study of some books. The party made their obeisances, and the merchant felt himself completely overpowered at the aspect of the venerable teacher; so that he burst .into tears, and could not utter a word. Jelal addressed him, therefore, as follows:--

"The fifty sequins thou hast provided as thy offering are accepted. But better for thee than these are the two hundred sequins thou hast lost. God, whose glory be exalted, had determined to visit thee with a sore judgment and a heavy trial; but, through this thy visit here, He hath pardoned thee, and the trial is averted from thee. Be not dismayed. From this day forth thou shalt not suffer loss; and that which thou hast already suffered shall be made up to thee."

The merchant was equally astonished and delighted at these words; more so, however, when Jelal proceeded with his discourse: "The cause and reason of thy bygone losses and misfortunes was, that, on a certain day thou wast in the west of Firengistan (Europe), where thou wentest into a certain ward of a certain city, and there sawest a poor Firengi (European) man, one of the greatest of God's cherished saints, who was lying stretched out at the corner of a market-place. As thou didst pass by him, thou spattest on him, evincing aversion from him. His heart was grieved by thy act and demeanour. Hence the visitations that have afflicted thee. Go thou, then, and make thy peace with him, asking his forgiveness, and offering him our salutations."

The merchant was petrified at this announcement. Jelal then asked him: "Wilt thou that we this instant show him to thee?" So saying, he placed his hand on the wall of the apartment, and told the merchant to

[p. 35]

behold. Instantly, a doorway opened in the wall, and the merchant thence perceived that man in Firengistan, lying down in a market-place. At this sight he bowed down his head and rent his garments, coming away from the saintly presence in a state of stupor. He remembered all these incidents as facts.

Immediately commencing his preparations, he set out without delay, and reached the city in question. He inquired for the ward he wished to visit, and for the man whom he had offended. Him he discovered lying down, stretched out as Jelal had shown him. The merchant dismounted from his beast, and made his obeisance to the prostrate Firengi dervish, who at once addressed him thus: "What wilt thou that I do? Our Lord Jelal suffereth me not; or otherwise, I had a desire to make thee see the power of God, and what I am. But now, draw near."

The Firengi dervish then clasped the merchant to his bosom, kissed him repeatedly on both cheeks, and then added: "Look now, that thou mayest see my Lord and Teacher, my spiritual Master, and that thou mayest witness a marvel." The merchant looked. He saw the Lord Jelal immersed in a holy dance, chanting this hymn, and entranced with sacred music:--

	"His kingdom's vast and pure; each sort its fitting place finds there;
	  Cornelian, ruby, clod, or pebble be thou on His hill.
	  Believe, He seeks thee; disbelieve, He'll haply cleanse thee fair;
	  Be here a faithful Abu-Bekr; Firengi there; at will."

When the merchant happily reached Qonya on his return, he gave the salutations of the Firengi saint, and his respects, to Jelal; and distributed much substance among the disciples. He settled at Qonya, and became a member of the fraternity of the Pure Lovers of God.

  

18.

Jelal was one day passing by a street, where two men were quarrelling. He stood on one side. One of the

[p. 36]

men called out to the other: "Say what thou will; thou shalt hear from me a thousandfold for every word thou mayest utter."

Hereupon Jelal stepped forward and addressed this speaker, saying: "No, no! Whatsoever thou have to say, say it to me; and for every thousand thou mayest say to me, thou shalt hear from me one word."

On hearing this rebuke, the adversaries were abashed, and made their peace with one another.

  

19.

One day, a very learned professor brought all his pupils to pay their respects to Jelal.

On their way to him, the young men agreed together to put some questions to Jelal on certain points of Arabic grammar, with the design of comparing his knowledge in that science with that of their professor, whom they looked upon as unequalled.

When they were seated, Jelal addressed them on various fitting subjects for a while, and thereby paved the way for the following anecdote

"An ingenuous jurist was once travelling with an Arabic grammarian, and they chanced to come to a ruinous well.

The jurist hereupon began to recite the text (of Qur'an xxii. 44): And of a ruined well.'

"The Arabic word for 'well' he pronounced 'bir,' with the vowel long. To this the grammarian instantly objected, telling the jurist to pronounce that word with a short vowel and hiatus--bi'r, so as to be in accord with the requirements of classical purity.

"A dispute now arose between the two on the point. It lasted all the rest of the day, and well on into a pitchy dark night; every author being ransacked by them, page by page, each sustaining his own theory of the word. No conclusion was arrived at, and each disputant remained of his own opinion still.

"It so happened in the dark, that the grammarian slipped

[p. 37]

into the well, and fell to the bottom. There he set up a wail of entreaty: 'O my most courteous fellow-traveller, lend thy help to extricate me from this most darksome pit.'

"The jurist at once expressed his most pleasurable willingness to lend him that help, with only one trifling condition--that he should confess himself in error, and consent to suppress the hiatus in the word 'bi'r.' The grammarian's answer was 'Never.' So in the well he remained."

"Now," said Jelal, "to apply this to yourselves. Unless you will consent to cast out from your hearts the 'hiatus' of indecision and of self-love, you can never hope to escape from the noisome pit of self-worship,--the well of man's nature and of fleshly lusts. The dungeon of Joseph's well' in the human breast is this very 'self-worship;' and from it you will not escape, nor will you ever attain to those heavenly regions--'the spacious land of God'" (Qur'an iv. 99, xxix. 56, xxxix. 13).

On hearing these pregnant words, the whole assembly of undergraduates uncovered their heads, and with fervent zeal professed themselves his spiritual disciples.

  

20.

There was a great and good governor (apparently) of Qonya, of the name of Mu'inu-'d-Din, whose title was the Perwana (moth or fly-wheel, viz., of the far-distant Mogul Emperor, resident at the court of the king). He was a great friend to the dervishes, to the learned, and to Jelal, whose loving disciple he was.

One day, a company of the dervishes and learned men united in extolling the Perwana to the skies, in Jelal's presence. He assented to all they advanced in that respect, and added: "The Perwana merits a hundredfold all your eulogiums. But there is another side to the question, which may be exemplified by the following anecdote:--

"A company of pilgrims were once proceeding towards

[p. 38]

[paragraph continues] Mekka, when the camel of one of the party fell down in the desert, totally exhausted. The camel could not be got to rise again. Its load was, therefore, transferred to another beast, the fallen brute was abandoned to its fate, and the caravan resumed its journey.

"Ere long the fallen camel was surrounded by a circle of ravenous wild beasts,--wolves, jackals, &c. But none of these ventured to attack hint. The members of the caravan became aware of this singularity, and one of them went back to investigate the matter. He found that an amulet had been left suspended on the animal's neck; and this he removed. When he had retreated to a short distance, the hungry brutes fell upon the poor camel, and soon tore him piecemeal."

"Now," said Jelal, "this world is in an exactly similar category with that poor camel. The learned of the world are the company of pilgrims, and our (Jelal's) existence among them is the amulet suspended round the neck of the camel--the world. So long as we remain so suspended, the world will go on, the caravan will proceed. But so soon as the divine mandate shall be spoken: 'O thou submissive spirit, come thou back to thy Lord, content and approved' (Qur'an lxxxix. 2 7-8), and we be removed from the neck of the world-camel, people will see how it shall fare with the world, how its inhabitants shall be driven,--what shall become of its sultans, its doctors, its scribes."

It is said that these words were spoken a short time before Jelal's death. When he departed this life, not much time elapsed ere the Sultan, with many of his great men of learning and nobles, followed him to the grave, while troubles of all kinds overwhelmed the land for a season, until God again vouchsafed it peace.

  

21.

During one of his expositions, Jelal said: "Thou seest naught, save that thou seest God therein."

A dervish came forward and raised the objection that

[p. 39]

the term " therein " indicated a receptacle, whereas it could not be predicated of God that He is comprehensible by any receptacle, as this would imply a contradiction in terms. Jelal answered him as follows:--

"Had not that unimpeachable proposition been true, we had not proffered it. There is therein, forsooth, a contradiction in terms; but it is a contradiction in time, so that the receptacle and the recepted may differ,--may be two distinct things; even as the universe of God's qualities is the receptacle of the universe of God's essence. But, these two universes are really one. The first of them is not He; the second of them is not other than He. Those, apparently, two things are in truth one and the same. How, then, is a contradiction in terms implied? God comprises the exterior and the interior. If we cannot say He is the interior, He will not include the interior. But He comprises all, and in Him all things have their being. He is, then, the receptacle also, comprising all existences, as the Qur'an (xli. 54) says: 'He comprises all things.'"

The dervish was convinced, bowed, and declared himself a disciple.

  

22.

Jelal was one day seated in the shop of his great disciple the Goldbeater, Salahu-'d-Din; and was surrounded by a circle of other disciples, listening to his discourse; when an old man came rushing in, beating his breast, and uttering loud lamentations. He entreated Jelal to help him in his endeavours to recover his little son, a child seven years old, lost for several days past, in spite of every effort made to find him.

Jelal expressed his disapprobation at the extreme importance the old man appeared to attach to his loss; and said: "Mankind in general have lost their God. Still, one does not hear that they go about in quest of Him, beating their breasts and making a great noise. What, then, has happened to thee so very particular, that thou

[p. 40]

makest all this fuss, and degradest thyself, an elder, by these symptoms of grief for the loss of a little child? Why seekest thou not for a time the Lord of the whole world, begging assistance of Him, that peradventure thy lost Joseph may be found, and thou be comforted, as was Jacob on the recovery of his child?"

The old man at once followed Jelal's advice, and begged forgiveness of God. Just then, news was brought him there that his son had been found. Many who were witnesses of these circumstances became devoted followers of Jelal.

  

23.

Jelal was one day lecturing, when a young man of distinction came in, pushed his way, and took a seat higher up than an old man, one of the audience.

Jelal at once remarked: "In days of yore it was the command of God, that, if any young man should take precedence of an elder, the earth should at once swallow him up; such being the divine punishment for that offence. Now, however, I see that young men, barely out of leading-strings, show no respect for age, but trample over those in years. They have no dread of the earth's swallowing them up, nor any fear of being transformed into apes. [*1] It happened, however, that one morning the Victorious Lion of God, 'Ali, son of Abu-Talib, was hasting from his house to perform his devotions at dawn in the mosque of the Prophet. On his way, he overtook an old man, a Jew, who was going in the same direction. The future Caliph, out of innate nobility and politeness of nature, had respect for the Jew's age, and would not pass him, though the Jew's pace was slow. When 'Ali reached the mosque, the Prophet was already bowed down in his devotions; and was about to chant the 'Gloria;' but, by God's command, Gabriel came down, laid his hand on the Prophet's shoulder, and stopped him, lest 'Ali should lose

[p. 41]

the merit attaching to his being present at the opening of the dawn service; for it is more meritorious to perform that early service once, than to fulfil the devotions of a hundred years at other hours of the day. The Prophet has said: 'The first act of reverence at dawn worship is of more value than the world and all that is therein.'

"When the Apostle of God had concluded his worship, offered up his customary prayers, and recited his usual lessons from the Qur'an, he turned, and asked of Gabriel the occult cause of his interruption at that time. Gabriel replied that God had not seen fit that 'Ali should be deprived of the merit attaching to the performance of the first portion of the dawn worship, through the respect he had shown to the old Jew he had overtaken, but whom he would not pass.

"Now," remarked Jelal, "when a saint like 'Ali showed so much respect for a poor old misbelieving Jew, and when God viewed his respectful consideration in so highly favourable a manner, you may all infer how He will view any honour and veneration shown to an elderly saint of approved piety, whose beard has grown grey in the service of God, and whose companions are the elect of their Maker, whose chosen servant he is; and what reward He will mete out in consequence. For, in truth, glory and power belong to God, to the Apostle, and to the believers, as God hath Himself declared (Qur'an lxiii. 8): 'Unto God belongeth the power, and to the apostle, and to the believers.'

"If then," added he, "ye wish to be prosperous in your affairs, take fast hold on the skirts of your spiritual elders. For, without the blessing of his pious elders, a young man will never live to be old, and will never attain the station of a spiritual elder."

  

24.

One day Jelal took as his text the following words (Qur'an xxxi. 18):--"Verily, the most discordant of all

[p. 42]

sounds is the voice of the asses." He then put the question: "Do my friends know what this signifies?"

The congregation all bowed, and entreated him to expound it to them. Jelal therefore proceeded:--

"All other brutes have a cry, a lesson, and a doxology, with which they commemorate their Maker and Provider. Such are, the yearning cry of the camel, the roar of the lion, the bleat of the gazelle, the buzz of the fly, the hum, of the bee, &c.

"The angels in heaven, and the genii, have their doxologies also, even as man has his doxology--his Magnificat, and various forms of worship for his heart (or mind) and for his body.

"The poor ass, however, has nothing but his bray. He sounds this bray on two occasions only: when he desires his female, and when he feels hunger. He is the slave of his lust and of his gullet.

"In like manner, if man have not in his heart a doxology for God, a cry, and a love, together with a secret and a care in his mind, he is less than an ass in God's esteem; for He has said (Qur'an vii. 178): 'They are like the camels; nay, they are yet more erring.'" He then related the following anecdote:--

"In bygone days there was a monarch, who, by way of trial, requested another sovereign to send him three things, the worst of their several kinds that he could procure; namely, the worst article of food, the worst dispositioned thing, and the worst animal.

"The sovereign so applied to sent him some cheese, as the worst food; an Armenian slave, as the worst-dispositioned thing; and an ass, as the worst of animals. In the superscription to the epistle sent with these offerings, the sovereign quoted the verse of Scripture pointed out above."

  

25.

On a certain day, the Lord Jelalu-'d-Din went forth to the country residence of the saint Husamu-'d-Din, riding

[p. 43]

on an ass. He remarked: "This is the saddle-beast of the righteous. Several of the prophets have ridden on asses: as Seth, Ezra, Jesus, and Muhammed."

It so chanced that one of his disciples was also mounted on an ass. The creature suddenly began to bray; and the rider, annoyed at the occurrence, struck the ass on the head several times.

Jelal remonstrated: "Why strike the poor brute? Strikest thou him because he bears thy burden? Returnest thou not thanks for that thou art the rider, and he the vehicle? Suppose now, which God forbid, that the reverse were the case. What wouldst thou have done? His cry arises from one or the other of two causes, his gullet or his lust. In this respect, he shares the common lot of all creatures. They are all continually thus actuated. All, then, would have to be scolded and beaten over the head."

The disciple was abashed. He dismounted, kissed the hoof of his ass, and caressed him.

  

26.

On a certain occasion, one of his disciples complained to Jelal of the scantiness of his means and the extent of his needs. Jelal answered: "Out upon thee! Get thee gone! Henceforward, count me not a friend of thine; and so, peradventure, wealth may come to thee." He then related the following anecdote:--

"It happened, once, that a certain disciple of the Prophet said to him: 'I love thee!' The Prophet answered: 'Why tarriest thou, then? Haste to put on a breastplate of steel, and set thy face to encounter misfortunes. Prepare thyself, also, to endure straitness, the special gift of the friends and lovers (of God and His Apostle)!"

Another anecdote, also, he thus narrated: "A Gnostic adept once asked of a rich man which he loved best, riches or sin. The latter answered that he loved riches

[p. 44]

best. The other replied: 'Thou sayest not the truth. Thou better lovest sin and calamity. Seest thou not that thou leavest thy riches behind, whilst thou carriest thy sin and thy calamity about with thee, making thyself reprehensible in the sight of God! Be a man! Exert thyself to carry thy riches with thee, and sin not; since thou lovest thy riches. What thou hast to do is this: Send thy riches to God ere thou goest before Him thyself; peradventure, they may work thee some advantage; even as God hath said (Qur'an lxxiii. 20): 'And that which ye send before, for your souls, of good works, shall ye find with God. He is the best and the greatest in rewarding.'"

  

27.

It is related that one day the Perwana, Mu'inu-'d-Din, held a great assembly in his palace. To this meeting were collected together all the Doctors of the Law, the Sheykhs, the men of piety, the recluses, and the strangers who had congregated from various lands.

The chiefs of the law had taken their places in the highest seats. The Perwana had had a great desire that Jelal should honour the assembly with his presence. He had a son-in-law, Mejdu-'d-Din, governor to the young princes, the sons of the king. This son-in-law of his was a disciple of Jelal's, and a man of very eminent qualities, with great faith in his teacher. He offered to go and invite Jelal to the meeting.

Hereupon, the arch-sower of doubts and animosities in the human breast spread among the chiefs of the law, there present, the suspicion that, if Jelal should come, the question of precedence would arise: "Where should he be seated?" They all agreed that they were themselves in their proper places, and that Jelal must find a seat where he could.

Mejdu-'d-Din delivered the Perwana's courteous message to his teacher. Jelal, inviting Husamu-'d-Din and others of his disciples to accompany him, set out for the Perwana's

[p. 45]

palace. The disciples went on a little ahead, and Jelal brought up the procession.

When Husam entered the apartment of the Perwana, all present rose to receive him, making room for him in the upper seats. Lastly, Jelal made his appearance.

The Perwana and other courtiers crowded forward to receive Jelal with honour, and kissed His Lordship's blessed hands with reverence, expressing regret that he had been put to inconvenience by his condescension. He returned compliment for compliment, and was shown upstairs.

On reaching the assembly room, he saw that the grandees had occupied the whole of the sofa, from end to end. He saluted them, and prayed for God's grace to be showered upon them; seating himself then in the middle of the floor. Husamu-'d-Din immediately rose from his seat, descended from the sofa, and took a place by the side of Jelal.

The grandees of the assembly now arose also, excepting those who, in spite and pride, had formed the confederacy mentioned above. These kept their seats. Some of them were of the greatest eminence in learning; and one, especially, was not only very learned, but also eloquent, witty, and bold?

He, seeing what had taken place, and that all the men of rank had quitted the sofa, to seat themselves on the floor, asked in a jocose manner: "Where, according to the rules of the Order, is the chief seat in an assembly?"

Some one answered him: "In an assembly of the learned, the chief seat is in the middle of the sofa, where the professor always sits." Another added: "With recluses, the cell of solitude is the chief seat." A third said: "In the convents of dervish brethren, the chief seat is the lower end of the sofa, where, in reality, people put off their shoes."

After these remarks, some one present, as an experiment, asked Jelal, saying: "In your rule and opinion, where is

[p. 46]

the chief seat?" His answer was: "The chief seat is that where one's beloved is found." The interrogator now asked: "And where is your beloved?" Jelal replied: "Thou must be blind, not to see."

Jelal then arose, and began to sing. Many joined; and the singing became so enthusiastic, that the nobles rent their garments.

It so happened that, after Jelal's death, this interlocutor of his went to Damascus, and there became blind. Friends flocked to visit him, and to condole with him. He wept bitterly, and cried aloud: "Alas, alas! what have I not suffered? That very moment, when Jelal gave me that fatal answer, a black veil seemed to fall down over my eyes, so that I could not distinguish objects clearly, or their colours. But I have hope and faith in him, that, out of his sublime generosity, he will yet take pity on me, and pardon my presumption. The goodness of the saints is infinite; and Jelal himself hath said: 'Despair not because of one sin; for the ocean of divine mercy accepteth penitence.'"

The foregoing incident is also related with the following variation:--

Shemsu-'d-Din of Tebriz had just then returned to Qonya, and was among those who accompanied Jelal to the Perwana's palace, sitting down near him on the floor. When the question was put: "Where is your beloved?" Jelal arose, and cast himself on the breast of Shems. That occurrence it was that made Shems, from that time forward, a man of mark in all Qonya.

  

28.

There was in Qonya a great physician, of eminence and ability, who used occasionally to visit Jelal.

On one of those days, Jelal requested him to prepare seventeen purgative draughts by a certain time, propitious for taking medicine, as that number of his friends required them.

[p. 47]

When the specified time came, Jelal went to the physician's house, and received the seventeen draughts. He immediately began, and, in the physician's presence, drank off the whole seventeen in succession, thence returning home.

The physician followed him there, to render the assistance he felt sure would be wanted. He found Jelal seated as usual, in perfect health, and lecturing to his disciples. On inquiring how he felt, Jelal answered, in the words so often repeated in the Qur'an (ii. 23, &c.): "Beneath which rivers flow." The physician recommended Jelal to abstain from water. Jelal instantly ordered ice to be brought and broken up small. Of this he swallowed an inordinate quantity, while the physician looked on.

Jelal then went to a hot-bath. After bathing, he began to sing and dance; continuing in those exercises three whole days and nights, without intermission.

The physician declared this to be the greatest miracle ever wrought by prophet or by saint. With his whole family, and with many of the greatest in the medical profession, he joined himself to the multitude of Jelal's disciples of the most sincere.

  

29.

The Perwana is related to have said publicly, in his own palace, that Jelal was a matchless monarch, no sovereign having ever appeared in any age like unto him; but that his disciples were a very disreputable set.

These words were reported to them, and the company of disciples were greatly scandalised at the imputation. Jelal sent a note to the Perwana, of which the following is the substance:--

"Had my disciples been good men, I had been their disciple. Inasmuch as they were bad, I accepted them as my disciples, that they might reform and become good,

[p. 48]

[paragraph continues] --of the company of the righteous. By the soul of my father, they were not accepted as disciples, until God had made Himself responsible that they would attain to mercy and grace, admitted among those accepted of Him. Until that assurance was given, they were not received by me, nor had they any place in the hearts of the servants of God. 'The sons of grace are saved; the children of wrath are sick; for the sake of Thy mercy, we, a people of wrath, have come to Thee.'"

When the Perwana had read and considered these words, he became still more attached to Jelal; arose, came to him, asked pardon, and prayed for forgiveness of God, distributing largely of his bounty among the disciples.

  

30.

Another great and good man once observed: "Jelal is a great saint and a sovereign; but he must be dragged forth from among his disciples." This was reported to Jelal, who smiled, and said: "If he can!"

Soon afterwards he added: "Why, then, is it that my followers are looked upon with spite by the men of the world? It is because they are beloved of God, and favourably regarded by Him. I have sifted all mankind; and all have fallen through my sieve, excepting these friends of mine. They have remained. My existence is the life of my friends, and the existence of my friends is the life of the men of the world, whether they know this, or whether they ignore it."

  

31.

There was a young merchant, whose house was near Jelal's college, and who had professed himself a sincere and ardent disciple.

He conceived a desire and intention to make a voyage to Egypt; but his friends tried to dissuade him. His intention was reported to Jelal, who strictly and rigorously prohibited his undertaking the voyage.

[p. 49]

The young man could not divest himself of his desire, and had no peace of mind; so one night he clandestinely stole away, and went off to Syria. Arrived at Antioch, he embarked in a ship, and set sail. As God had willed, his ship was taken by Firengi pirates. He was made prisoner, and was confined in a deep dungeon, where he had a daily portion of food doled out to him, barely sufficient to keep his body and soul together.

He was thus kept imprisoned forty days, during which he wept bitterly, and reproached himself for having been disobedient to the injunction of Jelal; saying: "This is the reward of my crime. I have disobeyed the command of my sovereign, following after my own evil propensity."

Precisely on the night of the fortieth day, he saw Jelal in a dream, who addressed him, and said: "To-morrow, to whatever questions these misbelievers may ask thee, do thou return the answer: 'I know.' By that means shalt, thou be released." He awoke bewildered, returned thanks to Heaven, and sat down in holy meditation, awaiting the solution of the dream.

Shortly, he saw a company of Firengi people come to him, with whom was an interpreter. They asked him: "Knowest thou aught of philosophy, and canst thou practise therapeutics? Our prince is sick." His answer was: "I know."

They immediately took him out of the pit, led him to a bath, and dressed him in a handsome vestment of honour. They then conducted him to the residence of the sick man.

The young merchant, inspired of God, ordered them to bring him seven fruits. These he prepared with a little scammony, and made the whole into a draught, which he administered to the patient.

By the grace of God, and the intercession of the saints, his treatment was crowned with success, after two or three visits. The Firengi prince recovered; and by reason that the favour of Jelal was upon that young merchant, though

[p. 50]

he was utterly illiterate, he became a philosopher. Jelal assisted him.

When the Firengi prince had entirely recovered his health, and had arisen from his sick-bed, he told the young merchant to ask of him whatsoever he might wish. He asked for his freedom, and for leave to return home, that he might rejoin his teacher. He then related all that had befallen him;--his disobedience, his vision, and the assistance of Jelal. The whole audience of Firengis, without sight of Jelal, became believers in him, and wooers of him.

They set the young merchant free, and allowed him to depart, bestowing on him rich presents and a bountiful outfit.

On his arrival at the metropolis, before going to his own house, he hastened to pay his respects to Jelal. On beholding the sacred features from afar, he threw himself on the earth, embraced Jelal's two feet, kissed them, rubbed his face upon them, and wept. Jelal raised him, kissed both his cheeks, and said: "It was a narrow escape through thy curing the Firengi prince. Thou didst abscond; but henceforward, do thou remain at home, and occupy thyself in earning what is lawful. Take contentment as thy exemplar. The sufferings of the sea, the commotion of the ship, the calamity of captivity, and the darkness of the dungeon, are so many evils. Contentment is a very blessing from God."

  

32.

Jelal one day was going from his college into the town, when by chance he met a Christian monk, who made him an obeisance. Jelal asked him which was the elder, himself or his beard. The monk replied: "I am twenty years older than my beard. It came forth that number of years later." Jelal answered him "Then I pity thee. Thy young beard has attained to maturity, whereas thou hast remained immature, as thou wast. Thou art as black,

[p. 51]

and as weak, and as untutored as ever. Alas for thee, if thou change not, and ripen not 1"

The poor monk at once renounced his rope girdle, threw it away, professed the faith of Islam, and became a believer.

  

33.

A company of black-habited ones (Christian priests or monks) chanced to meet Jelal one day, as they came from a distant place. When his disciples espied them afar off, they expressed their aversion from them by exclaiming: "O the dark-looking, disagreeable things!"

Jelal remarked: "In the whole world, none are more generous than they are. They have given over to us, in this life, the faith of Islam, purity, cleanliness, and the various modes of worshipping God; while, in the world to come, they have left to us the everlasting abodes of paradise, the large-eyed damsels, and the pavilions, as well as the sight of God, of which they will enjoy no share; for God hath said (Qur'an vii. 48): 'Verily God hath made both of them forbidden things to the misbelievers!' They walk in darkness and misbelief, willingly incurring the torments of hell. But, let only the sun of righteousness rise upon them suddenly, and they will become believers."

Being now come near enough, they all made their obeisances to Jelal, entered into conversation with him, and professed themselves true Muslims. Jelal now turned to his disciples, and added: "God swallows up the darkness in the light, and the light in the darkness. He also makes in the darkness a place for the light." The disciples bowed, and rejoiced.

  

34.

A certain well-known disciple related that, on one occasion, Jelal and his friends went forth to the country-seat of Husam, and there held a grand festival of holy

[p. 52]

music and dancing until near daybreak. Jelal then left off, to give his followers a little rest.

They dispersed about the grounds; and the narrator took a seat in a spot from whence he could see and observe Jelal. The others all fell asleep; but he occupied himself with reflections on the miracles performed by various of the prophets and of the saints. He thought to himself: "I wonder whether this holy man works miracles. Of course he does; only, he keeps the fact quiet, to avoid the inconveniences of notoriety."

Hardly had the thought crossed his mind, when Jelal called him by name. On his approaching Jelal, the latter stooped, picked up a pebble from the earth, placed it on the back of his own hand, and said to him: "Here, take this; it is thy portion; and be thou one of the thankful" (Qur'an vii. 141).

The disciple examined the pebble by the light of the moon, and saw that it was a large ruby, exceedingly clear and brilliant, not to be found in the treasuries of kings.

Utterly astounded, he shrieked out, and swooned away; awaking the whole company with his shout; for he was a very loud-voiced man. On recovery, he told the others what had occurred. He also expressed to Jelal his contrition for the temerity of his reflections.

Jelal told him to carry the stone to the queen, and to mention how he had become possessed of it. The queen accepted it, had it valued, and gave to him a hundred and eighty thousand pieces of silver in return, besides rich gifts. She also distributed presents to all the members of the fraternity.

  

35.

A certain sheykh, son of a sheykh, and a man of great reputation for learning, came to Qonya, and was respect- fully visited by all the people of eminence residing there.

It so happened that Jelal and his friends were gone that day to a mosque in the country; and the new-comer,

[p. 53]

offended at Jelal's not basting to visit him, made the remark in public: "Has Jelal never heard the adage: 'The newly-arrived one is visited'?"

One of Jelal's disciples chanced to be present, and heard this remark. On the other hand, Jelal was expounding sublime truths in the mosque to his disciples, when suddenly he exclaimed, "My dear brother! I am the newly-arrived one, not thou. Thou and those like thee are bound to visit me, and so gain honour to yourselves."

All his audience were surprised at this apostrophe; wondering to whom it was addressed. Jelal then spake a parable: "One man came from Bagdad, and another went forth out of his house and ward; which of the two ought to pay the first visit to the other?"

All agreed in opinion that the man from Bagdad ought to be visited by the other. Then Jelal explained, thus: "In reality, I am returned from the Bagdad of nulliquity, whereas this dearly beloved son of a sheykh, who has come here, has gone forth from a ward of this world. I am better entitled, therefore, to be visited than is he. I have been hymning in the Bagdad of the world of spirits the heavenly canticle: 'I am the Truth,' since a time anterior to the commencement of the present war, ere the truth obtained its victory." The disciples expressed their concurrence, and rejoiced exceedingly.

By and by, the sheykh's son was informed of this wonder. He at once arose, went on foot to visit Jelal, uncovered his head, and owned that Jelal was right. He further declared himself Jelal's disciple, and said: "My father enjoined me to put on ironed sandals, taking an iron-shod staff in my hand, and go forth in quest of Jelalu-'d-Din, since it is a duty of all to visit and reverence him who has spoken the truth and reposes on the truth. But the majesty of Jelal is a hundredfold greater than what my father explained to me."

[p. 54]

  

36.

Jelal once commanded one of his attendants to go and arrange a certain matter. The attendant answered: "God willing."

Upon this, Jelal was wroth, and shouted to him: "Stupid, garrulous fool!" The attendant fainted and foamed at the mouth.

The disciples interceded. Jelal expressed his forgiveness; and the attendant recovered.

  

37.

On the occasion of a grand religious commemoration at the house of the Perwana, in the presence of the Sultan Ruknu-'d-Din, this monarch was taken unwell, and the exercises were suspended, only, one of the disciples continued to sing and shout.

The Sultan remarked: "How ill-behaved is that man! Does he pretend to be more ecstatic than his teacher Jelalu-'d-Din?"

Jelal heard this, and answered the king: "Thou art unable to withstand an attack of fever. How then canst thou expect a man devoured with an enthusiasm that threatens to swallow up even heaven itself, to calm down on a sudden?"

When the disciples heard this, they set up a shout; and the Sultan, after himself witnessing one or two of the mighty signs wrought by Jelal, made his obeisance to him, and became a disciple.

  

38.

It has been related by some that the final overthrow of the rule of the Seljuqi dynasty in Asia Minor (in A.H. 700, A.D. 1300, was in this manner:--

The Sultan Ruknu-'d-Din had adopted Jelal as his (spiritual) father. After a while, he held a great dervish

[p. 55]

festival in the palace. But, about that period, a certain Sheykh Baba had created for himself a great name in Qonya, and certain intriguers had led the king to visit him.

It was shortly after that visit that the king held the revival in honour of Baba in the Hall of the Bowls.

The sheykh was met and introduced in state by the court officials, and was then installed on the throne, with the Sultan seated on a chair by his side. Jelal now made his appearance, saluted, and took his seat in a corner of the hall. Portions of the Qur'an were recited, and exhortations were delivered, with hymns.

The Sultan then turned to Jelal, and spoke: "Be it known to the Lord Jelal, to the Doctors of the Law, and to the grandees, that I have adopted the Sheykh Baba as my, (spiritual) father, who has accepted me as his dutiful and affectionate son."

All present shouted their approval, and prayed for a blessing on the arrangement. But Jelal, burning with divine jealousy, instantly exclaimed (in words traditionally related of the prophet, Muhammed): "Verily, Sa'd is a jealous man; but I am more jealous than Sa'd; and God is still more jealous than I am." To this he further added: "Since the Sultan has made the sheykh his father, we will make some other our son." So saying, he gave his usual religious shout of ecstasy, and stalked out from the assembly.

Husamu-'d-Din related that he saw the Sultan, when Jelal thus quitted the presence, turn pale, as though shot with an arrow.

The grandees ran to stop Jelal; but he would not return.

A few days afterwards, the officers of state adopted the resolution to invite the Sultan to go to another city, that they might take measures to get rid of Sheykh Baba. The Sultan now went to consult Jelal, and ask for his blessing before setting out. Jelal advised him not to go. The

[p. 56]

matter had, however, been officially promulgated, and there was no possibility to alter arrangements.

On arriving at the other town, the Sultan was conducted to a private apartment, and forthwith strangled with a bowstring. Ere his breath failed, he invoked the name of Jelal.

At that moment Jelal was at his college, lost to consciousness in the enthusiasm of a musical service. Suddenly, he put his two forefingers into his two ears, and ordered the trumpets and chorus to join in. He then shouted vociferously, and recited aloud two of his own odes, of which one commences thus:

	"My words were: 'Go not; I'm thy friend; the world is rife
	  With threats of dire destruction; I'm the Fount of Life."

.         .         .         .         .         .

When the service was over, the disciples requested Jelal's son, Sultan Veled, to inquire of his father what all this might signify. In reply, he merely put off his cloak, and said aloud: "Let us perform the service for the burial of the dead."

He acted as Precentor in the service, and all present joined in. Then, without waiting for his son to put any question, he addressed the assembly, saying: "Yea, Baha'u-'d-Din and my friends! They have strangled the poor Sultan Ruknu-'d-Din. In his agony, he called on me, and shrieked. God had so ordained. I did not wish his voice to ring in my ears, and interrupt my devotions. He will fare better in the other world."

(There is a serious anachronism in the foregoing account. Sultan Ruknu-'d-Din, whose name was Suleyman son of Key-Khusrew, was put to death by order of the Mogul emperor Abaqa Khan, in A.H. 664 (A.D. 1265), thirty-six years before the final extinction of the dynasty by order of Qazan Khan, between Abaqa and whom no less than four emperors reigned. Besides this, Jelal himself died in A.H. 672 (A.D. 1273), twenty-seven years before the last of the Seljuqi sovereigns, Key-Qubad son of Ferramurz

[p. 57]

son of Key-Kawus, was slaughtered, together with all living members of the race. Historians differ much respecting the names and order of succession of the last sovereigns of the dynasty; and the present anecdote shows how confused had become on the spot the legend of these puppets. Ruknu-'d-Din caused his own brother to be poisoned, as he had become jealous of the favour shown to that brother by the Mogul emperor. His own death was the reward of that act.)

  

39.

One day, in lecturing on self-abasement and humility, Jelal spake a parable from the trees of the field, and said: "Every tree that yields no fruit, as the pine, the cypress, the box, &c., grows tall and straight, lifting up its head on high, and sending all its branches upwards; whereas all the fruit-bearing trees droop their heads, and trail their branches. In like manner, the Apostle of God was the most humble of men. Though he carried within himself all the virtues and excellencies of the ancients and of the moderns, he, like a fruitful tree, was more humble, and more of a dervish, than any other prophet. He is related to have said: 'I am commanded to show consideration to all men, to be kind to them; and yet, no prophet was ever so ill-treated by men as I have been.' We know that he had his head broken, and his teeth knocked out. Still he prayed: 'O our Lord God, guide Thou my people aright; for they know not what they do.' Other prophets have launched denunciations against the people to whom they were sent; and certainly, none have had greater cause to do so, than Muhammed."

	"Old Adam's form was moulded first of clay from nature's face;
	  Who's not, as mire, low-minded's not true son of Adam's race."

In like manner, Jelal also had the commendable habit to show himself humble and considerate to all, even the lowest; especially so to children, and to old women. He

[p. 58]

used to bless them; and always bowed to those who bowed to him, even though these were not Muslims.

One day he met an Armenian butcher, who bowed to him seven times. Jelal bowed to him in return. At another time he chanced upon a number of children who were playing, and who left their game, ran to him, and bowed. Jelal bowed to them also; so much so, that one little fellow called out from afar: "Wait for me until I come." Jelal moved not away, until the child had come, bowed, and been bowed to.

At that time, people were speaking and writing against him. Legal opinions were obtained and circulated, to the effect that music, singing, and dancing, are unlawful. Out of his kindly disposition, and love of peace, Jelal made no reply; and after a while all his detractors were silenced, and their writings clean forgotten, as though they had never been written; whereas, his family and followers will endure to the end of time, and will go on increasing continually.

  

40.

Jelal once wrote a note to the Perwana, interceding for a disciple who had been involved in an act of homicide, and had taken refuge in the house of another.

The Perwana demurred; saying it was a very grave matter, a question of blood. Jelal thereupon facetiously replied: "A homicide is popularly termed 'a son of 'Azra'il (the angel of death).' Being such, what on earth is he to do, unless he kill some one?"

This repartee so pleased the Perwana, that he pardoned the culprit, and paid himself to the heirs of the slain man the price of his blood.

  

41.

Jelal one day went forth and preached in the market. Crowds collected round him. But he continued until night fell around him; so he was at length left alone.

[p. 59]

The dogs of the market-place now collected in a circle about him, wagging their tails and whining.

Seeing this, Jelal exclaimed: "By the Lord, the Highest, the Strongest, the All-Compelling One, besides whom none is high, or strong, or powerful! These dogs comprehend my discourse, and the truths I expound. Men call them dogs; but henceforward let them not be so termed. They are of the family of the 'Seven Sleepers.'" [*1]

  

42.

The Perwana much wished Jelal to give him private instruction at his palace; and requested Jelal's son, Sultan Veled, to intercede for him in the matter; which he did.

Jelal replied to his son: "Baha'u-'d-Din! He cannot bear that burden." This was thrice repeated. Jelal then remarked to his son: "Baha'u-'d-Din! A bucket, the water of which is enough for forty, cannot be drained by one."

Baha made the reflection: "Had I not pressed the matter, I had never heard this wonderful saying."

  

43.

At another time, the Perwana, through Baha'u-'d-Din, requested Jelal to give a public lecture to all the men of science of the city, who were desirous to hear him.

His answer was: "A tree laden with fruit, had its branches bowed down to the earth therewith. At the time, doubts and gainsayings prevented the gardeners from gathering and enjoying the fruit. The tree has now raised its head to the skies, and beyond. Can they hope, then, to pluck and eat of its fruit?"

  

44.

Again, the Perwana requested Jelal himself to instruct him and give him counsel.

After a little reflection, Jelal said: "I have heard that

[p. 60]

thou hast committed the Qur'an to memory. Is it so?" "I have." "I have heard that thou hast studied, under a great teacher, the Jami'u-'l-Usul, that mighty work on the 'Elements of Jurisprudence.' Is it so?" "It is."

"Then," answered Jelal, "thou knowest the Word of God, and thou knowest all the words and acts reported of His Apostle. But thou settest them at naught, and attest not up to their precepts. How, then, canst thou expect that words of mine will profit thee?"

The Perwana was abashed, and burst into tears. He went his way; but from that day he began to execute justice, so as to become a rival of the great Chosroes. He made himself the phoenix of the age, and Jelal accepted him as a disciple.

  

45.

A company of pilgrims arrived one year at Qonya from Mekka, on their way home elsewhere. They were taken in succession to visit all the chief men of rank and learning in the capital, and were received with every demonstration of respect.

At last they were conducted to Jelal also, in his college. On seeing him seated there, they all screamed out and fainted away.

When they were recovered, Jelal began to offer excuses, saying to them: "I fear you have been deceived, either by an impostor, or by some person resembling me in feature. There are men who strongly resemble one another."

The pilgrims one and all objected: "Why talks he thus? Why strive to make us doubt our eyes? By the God of heaven and earth, he was with us in person, habited in the very dress he now wears, when we all assumed the pilgrim garb at Mekka. He performed with us all the ceremonies of the pilgrimage, there and at 'Arafat. [*1] He visited with us the tomb of the Prophet at Medina; though

[p. 61]

he never once ate or drank with us. Now he pretends that he does not know us or we know him."

On hearing this declaration, Jelal's disciples were transported with joy, a musical festival ensued, and all those pilgrims became disciples.

  

46.

A certain rich merchant of Qonya, a disciple, as was his wife, of Jelal's, went to Mekka one year for the pilgrimage.

On the day when the victims are slaughtered, the lady had a dish of sweetmeat prepared, and sent some of it in a china bowl to Jelal, to be eaten at dinner. She made the request that, when he partook of the food, he would favour her absent husband with his remembrance, his prayers, and his blessing.

Jelal invited his disciples to the feast; and all ate of the lady's sweetmeat to repletion. But the bowl still remained full.

Jelal then said: "Oh, he too must partake of it." He took the bowl, ascended to the terraced roof of the college with it, returning immediately empty-handed. His friends asked him what he had done with the bowl and the food. "I have handed them," said Jelal, "to her husband, whose property they are." The company remained bewildered.

In due course of time, the pilgrims from Qonya returned home from Mekka; and out of the baggage of the merchant, the china bowl was produced, and sent in to the lady, who was much astonished at sight of it. She inquired of her husband how he had become possessed of that identical dish. He replied: "Ah! I also am at a loss to know how it happened. But, on the eve of the slaughter of the victims, I was seated in my tent, at 'Arafat, with a company of other pilgrims, when an arm projected into the tent, and placed this dish before me, filled with sweetmeat. I sent out servants to see who had brought it to me; but no one was found." The lady at once inferred

[p. 62]

the truth, and guessed what had happened. Her husband was more and more astonished at such miraculous power.

Next day, husband and wife went to Jelal, stood bareheaded before him, wept for joy, and related what had occurred. He answered:

"The whole thing is the effect of your trust and belief. God has merely made use of my hand as the instrument wherewith to make manifest His power."

  

47.

Jelal was accustomed to go every year for about six weeks to a place near Qonya, called "The Hot Waters," where there is a lake or marsh inhabited by a large colony of frogs.

A religious musical festival was arranged one day near the lake, and Jelal delivered a discourse. The frogs were vociferous, and made his words inaudible. He therefore addressed himself to them, with a loud shout, saying: "What is all this noise about? Either do you pronounce a discourse, or allow me to speak." Complete silence immediately ensued; nor was a frog ever once heard to croak again, so long as Jelal remained there.

Before leaving, he went to the marsh, and gave them his permission to croak again now as much as they pleased. The chorus instantly began. Numbers of people, who were witnesses of this miraculous power over the frogs, became believers in Jelal, and professed themselves his disciples.

  

48.

A party of butchers had purchased a heifer, and were leading her away to be slaughtered, when she broke loose from them, and ran away, a crowd following and shouting after her, so that she became furious, and none could pass near her.

By chance Jelal met her, his followers being at some distance behind. On beholding him, the heifer became

[p. 63]

calm and quiet, came gently towards him, and then stood still, as though communing with him mutely, heart to heart, as is the wont with saints; and as though pleading for her life. Jelal patted and caressed her.

The butchers now came up. Jelal begged of them the animal's life, as having placed herself under his protection. They gave their consent, and let her go free.

Jelal's disciples now joined the party, and he improved the occasion by the following remarks:--"If a brute beast, on being led away to slaughter, break loose and take refuge with me, so that God grants it immunity for my sake, how much more so would the case be, when a human being turns unto God with all his heart and soul, devoutly seeking Him. God will certainly save such a man from the tormenting demons of hell-fire, and lead him to heaven, there to dwell eternally."

Those words caused such joy and gladness among the disciples that a musical festival, with dancing, at once commenced, and was carried on into the night. Alms and clothing were distributed to the poor singers of the chorus.

It is related that the heifer was never seen again in the meadows of Qonya.

  

49.

A meeting was held at the Perwana's palace, each guest bringing his own waxlight of about four or five pounds' weight. Jelal came to the assembly with a small wax-taper.

The grandees smiled at the taper. Jelal, however, told them that their imposing candles depended on his taper for their light. Their looks expressed their incredulity at this. Jelal, therefore, blew out his taper, and all the candles were at once extinguished; the company being left in darkness.

After a short interval, Jelal fetched a sigh. His taper took fire therefrom, and the candles all burnt brightly as

[p. 64]

before. Numerous were the conversions resulting from this miraculous display.

  

50.

One day, the poet-laureate, Qani'i, came to visit Jelal at his college. He was the very Khaqani [*1] of the age, and was accompanied by a crowd of noble admirers.

After much conversation, Qani'i remarked that he did not like the writings of the poet Sana'i, [*2] and Jelal inquired the reason. The poet-laureate replied: "Sana'i was not a Muslim." Again Jelal asked why he had formed that opinion; and Qani'i replied: "He has quoted passages from the Qur'an in his poetry, and has even used them as his rhymes."

Jelal hereupon rebuked him most severely, as follows:--

"Do hold thy peace. What sort of a Muslim art thou? Could a Muslim perceive the grandeur of that poet, his hair would stand on end, and his turban would fall from his head. That Muslim, and thousands such as he,--such as thee,--out of this lower world, and out of the land of spirits, would become real Muslims. His poetry, which is an exposition of the mysteries of the Qur'an, is so beautifully embellished, that one may apply to it the adage: 'We have drawn from the ocean, and we have poured out again into the ocean.' Thou hast not understood his philosophy; thou hast not studied it; for thou art a Qani'i (Follower of one who is satisfied). The vicars of God have a technology, of which the rhetoricians have no knowledge. Hence these truths appear to be imperfect, because men of crude minds are prevented from comprehending them. Though thou hast no part in the lot of the recondite mysteries of the saints, it does not thence follow that thou shouldest deny their position, and so place thyself in a position where destruction may be

[p. 65]

brought down upon thee. On the contrary, shouldest thou fix thy faith upon them, and act with true sincerity, thou shalt find in the day of judgment no heavy burden on thy shoulders. In lieu thereof, a burden-bearer will be present at thy side,--a refuge, who will prove thy most earnest intercessor."

Struck with these words, the poet-laureate arose, uncovered, begged forgiveness, confessed contrition for his disrespect, and became one of Jelal's disciples.

  

51.

A disciple of Husamu-'d-Din wished to make a vow never to do an act not expressly authorised by the Canon Law of Islam. For the purpose of administering the oath to him, instead of the Qur'an, a copy of the Ilahi-nama (Divine Hymns) of the philosopher Sana'i was placed on a lectern, covered over with a cloth, and tendered as "the Book" on which he was to swear.

Just then, Jelal came into the room, and asked what was going on. Husam replied: "One of my disciples is going to make a vow against backsliding. We shrank from swearing him on the Qur'an, and have therefore prepared a copy of the Ilahi-nama for the occasion."

Jelal observed: "Indeed! Why, the Ilahi-nama would draw down on a forswearer a more severe chastisement than the Qur'an itself. The Word of God is but milk, of which the Ilahi-nama is the cream and the butter!"

  

52.

When Adam was created, God commanded Gabriel to take the three most precious pearls of the divine treasury, and offer them in a golden salver to Adam, to choose for himself one of the three.

The three pearls were: wisdom, faith, and modesty.

Adam chose the pearl of wisdom.

Gabriel then proceeded to remove the salver with the remaining two pearls, in order to replace them in the

[p. 66]

divine treasury. With all his mighty power, he found he could not lift the salver.

The two pearls said to him: "We will not separate from our beloved wisdom. We could not be happy and quiet away from it. From all eternity, we three have been the three compeers of God's glory, the pearls of His power. We cannot be separated."

A voice was now heard to proceed from the divine presence, saying: "Gabriel! leave them, and come away."

From that time, wisdom has taken its seat on the summit of the brain of Adam; faith took up its abode in his heart; modesty established itself in his countenance. Those three pearls have remained as the heirlooms of the chosen children of Adam. For, whoever, of all his descendants, is not embellished and enriched with those three jewels, is lacking of the sentiment and lustre of his divine origin.

So runs the narrative reported by Husam, Jelal's successor, as having been imparted to him by the latter.

  

53.

A certain flute-player named Hamza, much beloved by Jelal, happened to die. Jelal sent some of his disciples to array the defunct in his grave-clothes. He himself followed them to the house of the deceased.

On entering the room, Jelal addresses the dead body: "My dear friend Hamza, arise!" Instantly, the deceased arose, saying: "Lo, here I am!" He then took his flute, and for three whole days and nights a religious festival was kept up in his house.

Above a hundred Roman misbelievers were thereby converted to the faith of Islam. When Jelal left the house, life departed from the corpse also.

  

54.

Among the disciples there was a hunchback, a devout man, and a player on the tambourine, whom Jelal loved.

[p. 67]

On the occasion of a festival, this poor man beat his tambourine and shouted in ecstasy to an unusual degree. Jelal was also greatly moved in the spirit with the holy dance.

Approaching the hunchback, he said to him: "Why erectest thou not thyself like the rest?" The infirmity of the hunch was pleaded. Jelal then patted him on the back, and stroked him down. The poor man immediately arose, erect and graceful as a cypress.

When he went home, his wife refused him admittance, denying that he was her husband. His companions came, and bare witness to her of what had happened. Then she was convinced, let him in, and the couple lived together for many years afterwards.

  

55.

It was once remarked to Jelal, with respect to the burial service for the dead, that, from the earliest times, it had been usual for certain prayers and Qur'anic recitations to be said at the grave and round the corpse; but, that people could not understand why he had introduced into the ceremony the practice of singing hymns during the procession towards the place of burial, which canonists had pronounced to be a mischievous innovation.

Jelal replied: "The ordinary reciters, by their services, bear witness that the deceased lived a Muslim. My singers, however, testify that he was a Muslim, a believer and a lover of God."

He added also: "Besides that; when the human spirit, after years of imprisonment in the cage and dungeon of the body, is at length set free, and wings its flight to the source whence it came, is not this an occasion for rejoicings, thanks, and dancings? The soul, in ecstasy, soars to the presence of the Eternal; and stirs up others to make proof of courage and self-sacrifice. If a prisoner be released from a dungeon and be clothed with honour, who would doubt that rejoicings are proper? So, too, the death of a saint is an exactly parallel case.

[p. 68]

  

56.

One of Jelal's chief disciples related that, when he first began to study under that teacher, a company of pilgrims from Mekka came to Qonya, and among them was a very handsome young man of this latter city, son to one of the chief professors there.

This young man brought rich presents to Jelal, and gifts for the disciples, relating to the latter the following adventure:--

"We were travelling in the desert of Arabia, and I chanced to fall asleep. The caravan went on without me. When I awoke, I found myself alone in the trackless sands. I knew not which way to turn. I wept and lamented for a considerable time, took a direction at hazard, and walked until I was thoroughly exhausted.

"To my surprise and joy I espied a large tent at a distance, with a great smoke rising by it. I made for the tent, and there encountered a most formidable-looking personage, to whom I related my misadventure. He bid me welcome, asked me in, and invited me to rest myself. Within the tent I observed a large kettle, full of fresh-cooked sweetmeat of the finest kind, and a plentiful supply of cool clear water.

"My wonder was great. I asked my host what these preparations might mean, and he answered: "I am a disciple of the great Jelalu-'d-Din of Qonya, son of Baha'u-'d-Din of Balkh. He is used to pass by here every day. I have therefore pitched this tent for him, and I prepare this food. Perchance, he may honour and bless me with his presence, partaking of hospitality here.'

"As he yet spake, in walked Jelal. We saluted; and he was begged to partake of the food. He took a little morsel, no larger than a filbert, giving me some also. I fell at his feet, and told him I was from Qonya on pilgrimage, and had missed the caravan by falling asleep. 'Well,' answered he, 'as we are fellow-townsmen, be of

[p. 69]

good cheer.' He then bade me close my eyes. I did so; and on opening them again I found myself in the midst of my companions of the caravan. I am now come here, on my return home in safety, to offer my thanks for that miraculous kindness, and to profess myself a disciple of the holy man."

  

57.

A man of great learning came once to visit Jelal. By way of a test, he asked Jelal two questions: "Is it correct to speak of God as 'a living soul?' since God hath said (Qur'an iii. 182): 'Every living soul shall taste death!'" and: "If one ought not to call God 'a living soul,' what did Jesus mean when he said (Qur'an v. 116): 'Thou knowest what is in my soul, but I know not what is in Thy soul'?" The second question was: "Can God properly be called 'a thing'? If He can be so called, what is the signification of His word (Qur'an xxviii. 88): Every thing shall perish, save His cause'?"

Jelal immediately replied: "'But I know not what is in Thy soul' means in Thy knowledge, in Thy absentness, or, as we seers say, in Thy secrecy. Thus the passage would be paraphrased: Thou knowest what is in my secrecy; but I know not what is in the secret of Thy secrecy; or, as 'the people of heart' would put it: Thou knowest what issues from me in the world; but I know not the secret of what issues from Thee in the world to come. It is quite proper to speak of God as 'a thing;' for He hath said (Qur'an vi. 19): 'What thing is greatest in testimony? Say thou: "God;"' i.e., God is the greatest thing in testimony; 'God will be a witness between me and you in the day of the resurrection.' The signification of the passage 'Every thing shall perish' is: every created thing shall perish; not the Creator, i.e., 'save He.' The thing excepted from the general category is 'He: But God knows best."

The man of learning instantly professed himself a disciple, and composed a panegyric on Jelal.

[p. 70]

  

58.

The legend goes that Jelal made a practice of seeing the new moon of the Arabian new year, and always uttered the following prayer on seeing it:--"O our Lord God! Thou art the Past-eternal One, the Future-eternal One, the Ancient One! This is a new year. I beg of Thee therein steadfastness to withstand the lapidated Satan, [*1] and assistance against the rebellious spirit (within me); also, occupation in what will approximate me to Thee, and an avoidance of what might elongate me from Thee. O God! O the All-merciful One, the All-compassionate One! Through Thy mercy, O Most-compassionate of the merciful ones! O thou Lord of majesty and of honour!"

  

59.

It is related that Jelal cured one of his disciples of an intermittent fever by writing down the following invocation on paper, washing off the ink in water, and giving this to the patient to drink; who was, under God's favour, immediately relieved from the malady:--"O Mother of the sleek one (a nickname of the tertian ague)! If thou hast believed in God, the Most Great, make not the head to ache; vitiate not the swallow; eat not the flesh; drink not the blood; and depart thou out of So-and-So, betaking thyself to some one who attributes to God partners of other false gods. And I bear witness that there is not any god save God, and I testify that Muhammed is His servant and apostle."

  

60.

One day Jelal paid a visit to a great Sheykh. He was received with the utmost respect, and seated with the

[p. 71]

[paragraph continues] Sheykh on the same carpet, both together falling into ecstatic heart-communion with the world of spirits.

A certain dervish was there present also, who had repeatedly performed the pilgrimage at Mekka. The dervish addressed Jelal, and inquired: "What is poverty?" Jelal returned no answer; and the question was thrice repeated.

When Jelal took his leave, the great Sheykh accompanied him to the street door. On his return to his room, he reprimanded the dervish severely for his insolent intrusion on the guest; "especially," said the Sheykh, "as he fully answered thy question the first time thou puttest it." The dervish, surprised, asked what the answer had been. "The poor man," said the Sheykh, "when he hath known God, hath his tongue tied. That is being a real dervish; who, when in the presence of saints, speaks not; neither with the tongue, nor with the heart. This is what is signified by (Qur'an xlvi. 28): 'Hold ye your peace.' But now, prepare thyself for thy end. Thou art struck by a shaft from heaven."

Three days later, the dervish was met by a gang of reprobates, who attacked and killed him, carrying off every thing he had about him. Salve fac nos, Domine! 

  

61.

In the days of Jelal there was in Qonya a lady-saint, named Fakhru-'n-Nisa (the Glory of Women). She was known to all the holy men of the time, who were all aware of her sanctity. Miracles were wrought by her in countless numbers. She constantly attended the meetings at Jelal's home, and he occasionally paid her a visit at her house.

Her friends suggested to her that she ought to go and perform the pilgrimage at Mekka; but she would not undertake this duty unless she should first consult with Jelal about it. Accordingly she went to see him. As she entered his presence, before she spoke, he called out to her: "Oh, most happy idea! May thy journey be prosperous!

[p. 72]

[paragraph continues] God willing, we shall be together." She bowed, but said nothing. The disciples present were puzzled.

That night she remained a guest at Jelal's house, conversing with him till past midnight. At that hour he went up to the terraced roof of the college to perform the divine service of the vigil. When he had completed that service of worship, he fell into an ecstasy, shouting and exclaiming. Then he lifted the skylight of the room below, where the lady was, and invited her to come up on to the roof also.

When she was come, he told her to look upwards, saying that her wish was come to pass. On looking up, she beheld the Cubical House of Mekka in the air, circumambulating round Jelal's head above him, and spinning round like a dervish in his waltz, plainly and distinctly, so as to leave no room for doubt or uncertainty. She screamed out with astonishment and fright, swooning away. On coming to herself, she felt the conviction that the journey to Mekka was not one for her to perform; so she totally relinquished the idea.

  

62.

Jelal was once standing at the edge of the moat round the city of Qonya, when a company of students, undergraduates of one of the colleges in the neighbourhood, seeing him, agreed to try him by asking the question: "Of what colour was the dog of the Seven Sleepers?"

Jelal's immediate, unpremeditated answer was: "Yellow. A lover is always yellow (sallow); as am I; and that dog was a lover." The students bowed to him, and all became disciples.

  

63.

The Superior of the monks of the monastery of Plato was an old man, and was held in the very highest esteem for his learning in all Constantinople and Firengistan, in Sis, Janik, and other lands. (Sis was capital of the kingdom

[p. 73]

of Lower Armenia, and Janik was the secondary "Roman Empire" of Trebizond.) From all those lands did disciples flock to learn wisdom from him.

This Superior related the following anecdote:--

"One day, Jelal came to the monastery of Plato, situated at the foot of a hill, with a cavern therein, from whence issued a stream of cold water. Jelal entered the cavern, and proceeded to its farther extremity. The Superior remained at the cavern's mouth, watching for what might happen. For seven whole days and nights Jelal remained there, seated in the midst of the cold water. At the end of that period he came forth from the cavern, and walked away, singing a hymn. Not the slightest change was apparent in his features, nor in his eyes."

The Superior made oath that all he had read about the person and qualities of the Messiah, as also in the books of Abraham and Moses, were found in the person of Jelal, as well as the grandeur and mien of the prophets, as set forth in books of ancient history, and far more besides.

  

64.

Shemsu-'d-Din of Tebriz once asserted, in Jelal's college, that whosoever wished to see again the prophets, had only to look on Jelal, who possessed all their qualifications; more especially of those to whom revelations were made, whether by angelic communications, or whether in visions; the chief of such qualities being serenity of mind with perfect inward confidence and consciousness of being one of God's elect. "Now," said he, "to possess Jelal's approbation is heaven; while hell is to incur his displeasure. Jelal is the key of heaven. Go then, and look upon Jelal, if thou wish to comprehend the signification of that saying 'the learned are the heirs of the prophets,' together with something beyond that, which I will not here specify. He has more learning in every science than any one else upon earth. He explains better, with greater tact and taste, as also more exhaustively, than all others. Were I,

[p. 74]

with my mere intellect, to study for a hundred years, I could not acquire a tenth part of what he knows. He has intuitively thought out that knowledge, without being aware of it, in my presence, by his own subtlety."

  

65.

One of the greatest teachers of Qonya was one day giving a lecture on a terraced roof, when suddenly he heard the sound of a lute. He exclaimed: "These lutes are an innovation on the prophetic usages. They must be interdicted."

Forthwith, the form of Jelal appeared before him, and answered: "That must not be." On this the teacher fainted away.

When he regained his consciousness, he sought to make his peace with Jelal, by sending an apology and a recantation to him, through the medium of Jelal's son, Sultan Veled; but Jelal would not accept them. He answered: "It would be easier to convert seventy Roman bishops to Islam, than to clear away from the mind of that teacher the stains of hate, and so set him on the right road. His soul is as foul as the paper on which children practise their writing exercises."

At length, however, he allowed himself to be appeased by his son; so that he permitted the teacher, with his pupils, to constitute themselves his disciples.

  

66.

Jelal one day addressed his son, saying: "Baha'u-'d-Din, dost thou wish to love thy enemy, and to be loved of him? Speak well of him, and extol his virtues. He will then be thy friend; and for this reason: In like manner as there is a road open between the heart and the tongue, so also is there a way from the tongue to the heart. The love of God may be found by bearing His comely names. God hath said: 'O My servants, take ye heed that ye often commemorate Me, so that sincerity may abound.'

[p. 75]

[paragraph continues] The more that sincerity prevails, the more do the rays of the light of truth shine into the heart. The hotter a baker's oven is, the more bread will it bake; if cool, it will not bake at all."

  

67.

Sultan Veled, Baha'u-'d-Din, is said to have recounted of his father, Jelal, this saying: "A true disciple is he who holds his teacher to be superior to all others. So much so, that, for instance, a disciple of Bayezid of Bestam was once asked whether Bayezid or Abu-Hanifa was the greater, and he replied that his teacher, Bayezid, was the greater. 'Then,' said the questioner, 'is Bayezid the greater, or is Abu-Bekr?' 'My teacher is the greater.' Bayezid or Muhammed?' 'Bayezid.' 'Bayezid or God?' I only know my teacher; I know no other than him; and I know that he is greater than all others.'

"Another was asked the last question, and his reply was: 'There is no difference between the two.' A third was asked it also, and he replied: 'It would require a greater one than either of the two to determine which of them is the greater.'

"As God does not walk in this world of sensible objects, the prophets are the substitutes of God. No, no! I am wrong! For if thou suppose that those substitutes and their principal are two different things, thou hast judged erroneously, not rightly."

  

68.

Sultan Veled is reported to have said: "My grandfather, the Great Master, used to recommend to his disciples to honour his son Jelal exceedingly, as one of noble extraction and exalted pedigree, of an eternal descent in the past; since the mother of his mother was the daughter of the Imam Sarakhsi, a descendant from Huseyn, son of 'Ali, and grandson of the Prophet."

[p. 76]

  

69.

Sultan Veled is also reported to have said: "My father told his disciples that I was seven, and my brother 'Ala'u-'d-Din eight years old, when the Dizdar Bedru-'d-Din Guhertash had us circumcised at Qara-Hisar." (See chap. i., No. 12.)

He is also reported to have declared: "When the Sultan invited my grandfather to Qonya, a year passed, and then the Emir Musa invited my grandfather to Larenda, and took my father to be his own son-in-law; so that I was born in that town." (See chap. i., No. 2. The account now given here is at variance with that mentioned in the preface, which makes 'Ala'u-'d-Din and Baha'u-'d-Din to have been born at Larenda before Jelal and his father went to Qonya. Moreover, their mother, Gevher Khatun, is there said to have been the daughter of Lala Sherefu-'d-Din of Samarqand. Is that an alias of the Emir Musa of the present anecdote; or did Jelal marry two ladies of Larenda at different times? There are several difficulties here. Sultan Veled puts only one year as the difference of age between himself and his elder brother. If the daughter of the Emir Musa was the mother of both these brothers, Jelal's stay at Larenda must have been of about two years at least. If they were by different mothers, and born, the one before, the other after Baha Veled's settling at Qonya, there must have been a greater difference in their ages. Jelal's age at his marriage is also variously stated. These discrepancies show that the anecdotes were collected from traditions of various sources, long after the events recorded.)

  

70.

Sultan Veled is said to have related that one day, two Turks, law-students, brought to Jelal an offering of a few lentils, excusing the paucity of the gift, as the result of their poverty. Jelal thereupon narrated the following anecdote:--

[p. 77]

"God revealed to Mustafa (Muhammed) that the believers should contribute of their possessions, for the service of God, as much as they could spare. Some brought the half, some the third part; Abu-Bekr brought the whole of what he possessed. Thus a large treasure was collected, of money, beasts, and arms, for God's service.

"A poor woman, too, brought three dates and a cake of bread--all she had on earth.

"The disciples smiled. Mustafa perceived their action, and said that God had showed him a vision, which he desired to tell to them. They all begged he would favour them with the recital. He therefore thus proceeded:

"'God hath removed the veils from before me. And lo, I saw that the angels had placed in one scale of a balance the whole of your very liberal offerings together, and in the other scale the three dates and one cake of this poor woman. The latter scale was preponderant; its contents outweighed all the rest.'

"The disciples bowed, thanked the prophet; and inquired the hidden explanation of this mystery. He answered: 'This poor woman has parted with her all, whereas my disciples have kept back a part of their possessions. Proverbs say: "The generous one is generous out of what he possesses," and, "A little, in the eyes of the Most Great, is much." You put into the earth a single date-stone, intrusting it to God. He makes that stone become a tree, which yields fruits without number; because the stone was confided to Him. Therefore, let your alms be given to the poor, and to God's servants, as a trust committed unto God. For it is said: "Alms fall first into God's hand, before reaching the hands of the poor;" and again: "Alms for the poor and the destitute."'

"The poor of Mekka and Medina, refugees and auxiliaries, shouted their admiration as they heard these words."

When the two Turkish students heard this anecdote related, they professed themselves disciples of Jelal.

[p. 78]

  

71.

When Jelal was quite young, he was one day preaching on the subject of Moses and Elias (Qur'an xviii. 59-81). One of his disciples noticed a stranger seated in a corner, paying great attention, and every now and then saying: "Good! Quite true! Quite correct! He might have been the third one with us two!" The disciple surmised that the stranger might be Elias. (Elias is believed by Muslims to be always visible somewhere, but that people know him not. Did they recognise him, they could obtain from him a knowledge of the secret of eternal life, which he possesses.) He therefore seized hold of the stranger's skirt, and asked for his spiritual aid. "Oh," said the stranger, "rather seek assistance from Jelal, as we all do. Every occult saint of God is the loving and admiring friend of him." So saying, he managed to disengage his skirt from the disciple's hold, and instantly disappeared. The disciple went to pay his respects to Jelal, who at once addressed him, saying: "Elias, and Moses, and the prophets, are all friends of mine." The disciple understood the allusion, and became more and more devoted at heart to Jelal than he even was before.

  

72.

It is related that when the burial service was about to be performed over the corpse of Jelal, the precentor gave a shriek, and swooned away. After a while, he recovered, and then performed his office, weeping bitterly.

On being asked the cause of his emotion, he answered: "As I stood forward to perform my office, I perceived a row of the most noble of spiritual saints of the spiritual world, as being present, and as being engaged in reciting the prayers for the dead over the departed one. Those angels of heaven wore robes of blue (the mourning of some sects of Muslims), and wept."

[p. 79]

For forty days, that precentor and others daily visited Jelal's grave.

  

73.

At Damascus, when a young student, Jelal was frequently seen by others to walk several arrow-flights' distance in the air, tranquilly returning to the terraced roof on which they were standing.

Those fellow-pupils were among his earliest believers and disciples.

  

74.

A friend of Jelal's once took leave of him at Qonya, and went to Damascus. On his arrival there, he found Jelal seated in a corner of his room. Asking for an explanation of this surprising phenomenon, Jelal replied: "The men of God are like fishes in the ocean; they pop up into view on the surface here and there and everywhere, as they please."

  

75.

Jelal once met a Turk in Qonya, who was selling fox-skins in the market, and crying them: "Dilku! Dilku!" (Fox! Fox! in Turkish.)

Jelal immediately began to parody his cry, calling out in Persian: "Dil ku! Dil ku!" (Heart, where art thou?) At the same time he broke out into one of his holy waltzes of ecstasy.

  

76.

In the time of Sultan Veled (A.D. 1284-1312), a young man, of the descendants of the Prophet, and son of the guardian of the holy tomb of Muhammed at Medina, came to Qonya with a company of his fellow-descendants, belonging to that city. He was presented to Sultan Veled, and became his disciple.

He wore a most singular head-dress. One end of his turban hung down in front to below his navel; while the

[p. 80]

other end was formed into the sheker-aviz [*1] of the Mevlevi dervishes.

When they had become somewhat intimate, Sultan Veled asked him how it happened that he wore the sheker-aviz of the Mevlevis, when nobody else but those dervishes wear it, in imitation of their founder, Jelal.

The young man explained that his family were descended from the Prophet. That the Prophet, on the night of his ascension to heaven, after seeing God and many mysteries, had returned a certain distance, and, as is well known, then went back to intercede with God for his people. He now perceived, on the pinnacle of God's throne, the ideal portrait of a form, so beautiful, that he had not hitherto witnessed anything so charming among the angels and inhabitants of heaven.

After contemplating the lovely vision, in amazement, for some time, Muhammed was able to notice that the ideal form wore on its head a sheker-aviz. He asked Gabriel what that ideal portrait might portend, which was so attractive in its beauty as to surpass all the wonders he had witnessed in all the nine heavens. "Is it the portrait of an angel, a prophet, or a saint?" Gabriel replied: "It is the portrait of a personage of the descendants of Abu-Bekr, who will appear in the latter days among the people of thy Church, and will fill the whole world with the effulgence of the knowledge of thy mysteries. To him will God vouchsafe a precedency, and a pen, and a breath, such that kings and princes will profess themselves his disciples; and he will be a most pure upholder of thy religion, being, in every respect, the counterpart of thyself in aspect and in morals. His name will be Muhammed, as is thine; and his surname will be Jelalu-'d-Din. His words will explain thy sayings, and will expound thy Qur'an."

[p. 81]

On his return home, the Prophet adopted the form of turban he had seen worn in that ideal portrait, making one end hang down a span in front, and binding the other end behind into a sheker-aviz.

"From that day to this," said the young man, "the fathers of our family have followed that fashion, so adopted by the Prophet; and we continue to do so too."

It is said that when Abu-Bekr heard this narrative from the Prophet, respecting his great descendant that was thus foretold, he gave the whole of his possessions to the Prophet, to be expended in God's cause.

When Muhammed died, Abu-Bekr wept long and bitterly. But the Prophet appeared to him, and consoled him by saying: "One day I will reappear among my people from out of the collar of one of thy race."

The young man continued: "From that time onwards, our family were on the outlook for the manifestation of the holy personage whose ideal portrait the Prophet so saw. Thank God that I have witnessed the realisation of their hope."

The Qonya pilgrims published this communication to all the disciples there present.

  

77.

In the days of Sultan Veled, a great merchant came to Qonya to visit the tomb of Jelal. He offered many rich gifts to Sultan Veled, making presents also to the disciples. He related to them many anecdotes of adventures encountered by him in his travels, such as the following:--

He once went to Kish and Bahreyn in quest of pearls and rubies. "An inhabitant told me," said he, "that I should find some in the hands of a certain fisherman. I went to him, and the fisher showed me a chest, containing pearls of inestimable value, such as impressed me with astonishment. I asked him how he had collected them; and he told me, calling God to witness, that he, his three

[p. 82]

brothers, and his father, were formerly poor fishermen. One day they hooked something that gave them immense trouble before they could bring it to land.

"They now found they had captured a 'Lord of the Waters,' also named a 'Marvel of the Sea,' as is commonly known. [*1]

"We wondered," said he, "what we could do with the beast. We wept for the ill fortune that had brought us such a disappointment. The creature looked at us as we spoke. Suddenly my father cried out: 'I have it! I will put him on a cart, and exhibit him all over the country at a penny a head!'

"Through the miraculous power of Him who has endowed man with speech and His creatures with life, the beast broke forth and exclaimed: 'Make me not a staring-block in the world, and I will do anything you may wish of me, so as to suffice for you and your children for many years to come!'

"Our father answered: 'How should I set thee free, when thou art so strange and unparalleled a creature?' The beast replied: 'I will make an oath.' Our father said: 'Speak! Let us hear thy oath.'

"The beast now said: 'We are of the faith of Muhammed, and disciples of the holy Mevlana. By the soul of the Mevlana, the holy Jelalu-'d-Din of Rome, I will go, and I will return.'

"Our father fainted away with astonishment. I, therefore, now asked: 'How hast thou any knowledge of him?' The beast replied: 'We are a nation of twelve thousand individuals. We have believed in him, and he frequently showed himself to us at the bottom of the sea, lecturing and sermonising to us on the divine mysteries of the truth. He brought us to a knowledge of the true faith; so that we continually practise what he taught us.'

"Our father instantly told him he was free. He went

[p. 83]

back, therefore, into the water, and was lost to sight. But two days later he returned, and brought with him innumerable pearls and precious stones. He asked whether he had been true and faithful to his promise; and on our expressing our satisfaction on that score, he took an affectionate farewell from us.

"We were thus raised from the depths of poverty to the pinnacle of wealth. We became merchant princes, and our slaves are the great merchants of the earth. Every dealer who wishes for pearls and rubies comes to us. We are known as the Sons of the Fisherman. Our father went to Qonya, and paid his respects to the Mevlana.

"Through his narrative, I formed the design, now carried into effect, to visit the son of that great saint."

This wonderful narrative has been handed down ever since in the mouths of the merchants of Qonya.

  

78.

(The following appears to be an account of one of the first visits of the Perwana to Jelal, to whom he subsequently became so devotedly attached.)

One of the most eminent among the men of learning in Qonya was visited by the Perwana. The learned man held forth eloquently on several exalted themes, and then informed the Perwana that he had, the night before, been taken up into the highest heaven, and had there learnt many mysteries. He said that he there saw Jelal hold a higher station of proximity to God than any other saint, as he stood on a level with God's throne.

A day or two later, the Perwana, filled with reverence for Jelal's unequalled sanctity, went and paid him a visit with the utmost deference. Before the Perwana could broach any subject of conversation, Jelal said to him: "Mu'inu-'d-Din! the vision related to you by your learned friend is quite true in the main facts, though I never saw him there at any time." He then extemporised the following ode:--

[p. 84]

  

74.

	Fellow-visitant wert thou? Then say what thou sawest there last night.
	 'Twixt my heart and inspiring loved darling what passed in thy sight?
	 And if thou, in thy dream, with thy eyes sawest my beautiful love,
	 Tell us then, in the earrings he wore there what jewels were wove.
	 If with me thou be fellow in coat, as in thoughts and in creeds,
	 Let us hear the details of that ragged old mendicant's weeds.
	 If thou poverty's son be, and unspoken mysteries hear,
	 Thou'lt recount all the words that were thought by my silent compeer,
	 If thou'st learnt whence the source of mankind and of souls did proceed.
	 Since the source was but one, what then means all this search, all this greed?
	 And if thou hast not seen any place of his form and face free,
	 Say then what, in the thoughts of his lovers, that face and form be.
	 And if I head the lists of those lovers, as thou seemest to say,
	 Tell us, What are those lists? What his messages, words, answers? Pray!"

A musical service was then got up, this ode being chanted during its performance. The Perwana was so utterly bewildered by this incident, that he could say nothing. He therefore rose, bowed, and took his leave.

  

79.

One day, it is said, the Prophet (Muhammed) recited to 'Ali in private the secrets and mysteries of the "Brethren of Sincerity" (who appear to be the "Freemasons" of the Muslim dervish world), enjoining on him not to divulge them to any of the uninitiated, so that they should not be betrayed; also, to yield obedience to the rule of implicit submission.

For forty days, 'Ali kept the secret in his own sole breast, and bore therewith until he was sick at heart. Like a pregnant woman, his abdomen became swollen with the burden, so that he could no longer breathe freely.

He therefore fled to the open wilderness, and there chanced upon a well. He stooped, reached his head as far down into the well as he was able; and then, one by one,

[p. 85]

he confided those mysteries to the bowels of the earth. From the excess of his excitement, his mouth filled with froth and foam. These he spat out into the water of the well, until he had freed himself of the whole, and he felt relieved.

After a certain number of days, a single reed was observed to be growing in that well. It waxed and shot up, until at length a youth, whose heart was miraculously enlightened on the point, became aware of this growing plant, cut it down, drilled holes in it, and began to play upon it airs, similar to those performed by the dervish lovers of God, as he pastured his sheep in the neighbourhood.

By degrees, the various tribes of Arabs of the desert heard of this flute-playing of the shepherd, and its fame spread abroad. The camels and the sheep of the whole region would gather around him as he piped, ceasing to pasture that they might listen. From all directions, north and south, the nomads flocked to hear his strains, going into ecstasies with delight, weeping for joy and pleasure, breaking forth in transports of gratification.

The rumour at length reached the ears of the Prophet, who gave orders for the piper to be brought before him. When he began to play in the sacred presence, all the holy disciples of God's messenger were moved to tears and transports, bursting forth with shouts and exclamations of pure bliss, and losing all consciousness. The Prophet declared that the notes of the shepherd's flute were the interpretation of the holy mysteries he had confided in private to 'Ali's charge. [*1]

Thus it is that, until a man acquire the sincere devotion of the linnet-voiced flute-reed, he cannot hear the mysteries of the Brethren of Sincerity in its dulcet notes, or realise the delights thereof; for "faith is altogether a yearning of the heart, and a gratification of the spiritual sense."

[p. 86]

	"To whom, alas, the pangs my love for thee excites, to breathe?
	 My sighs, like 'Ali, I'll to some deep well's recess bequeathe.
	 Perchance some reeds may spring therefrom, its brink to overgrow;
	 Those reeds may moaning flutes become, and so betray my woe.
	 Who hear will say: 'Be silent, flutes! We're not love's confidants;
	 To that sweet tyrant make excuse for us and for those plants!'"

  

80.

One of Jelal's disciples possessed a slave girl of Roman origin, whom Jelal had named Siddiqa (after Muhammed's virgin wife 'A'isha). Occasionally she had miraculous visions. She used to see aureolas of heavenly light, green, red, and black. Various of the angels used to visit her, and souls of the departed.

Her master was vexed at her being so favoured above himself. Once he was visited by Jelal, and expressed his chagrin to him on the subject. Jelal replied: "True! There is a heavenly light resides in the pupils of some eyes. These occasionally mislead a few with visions of beauteous form, with which they fall in love. Others they preserve in chastity, and lead them to their adored Maker. Others, again, they may lead to take delight in exterior objects, so as to cast their eyes on every pretty face they see, while the wife at home is curtained away from her husband. Thus, whenever God opens a way to any one, appearing to him, and showing him glimpses of the hidden world, he is apt to become entranced therewith, and to lose all power of further progress, saying to himself: 'How greatly in favour am I! ' Others, in short, use every endeavour; but nothing is vouchsafed to them in visions, until they be favoured with a special sight of God Himself, and they be admitted to a near approach unto Him."

The girl's master was comforted, and bowed to his teacher, whose disciples then broke out into a holy service of psalmody and dancing.

[p. 87]

  

81.

There was once a wise monk in the monastery of Plato, who was on very friendly terms with Jelal's grandson 'Arif. He was very aged, and used to be visited by the dervishes of his neighbourhood, to whom he was very polite, and towards whom he exhibited great confidence; so much so that, one day, some of them inquired of him how he had found Jelal, and what he had thought of him.

The monk replied to them: "What do you know of him, as to who or what he was? I have seen signs and miracles without number worked by him. I became his devoted servant. I had read in the gospel and in the prophets the lives and the works of the saints of old, and I saw that he compassed them all. I therefore had faith in the truth of his reality.

"One day he came here, conferring on me the honour of a visit. For forty days he shut himself up in ecstatic seclusion. When at length he came forth from his privacy, I laid hold of his skirt, and said to him: 'God, in His holy scripture hath said (Qur'an xix. 72): "And there is none of you but shall come to it (hellfire)." Now, since it is incontestable that all shall come to the fire of hell, what preference is there in Islam over our faith?'

"For a little time he made no answer. At length, however, he made a sign towards the city, and went away in that direction. I followed after him leisurely. Near the city, we came to a bakehouse, the oven of which was being heated. He now took my black cassock, wrapped it in his own cloak, and threw the bundle into the oven. He then withdrew for a time into a corner, sunk in meditation.

"I saw a great smoke come out of the oven, such that no one had the power of utterance. After that, he said to me: 'Behold!' The baker withdrew the bundle from the oven, and assisted the saint to put on his cloak, which had

[p. 88]

become exquisitely clean; whereas my cassock was, as it were, branded and scorched, so as to fall in pieces. Then he said: 'Thus shall we enter therein, and thus shall you enter!'

"That self-same moment I made my bow to him and became his disciple."

  

82.

The reason why the Mesnevi was written is related to have been the following:--

Husamu-'d-Din learnt that several of the followers of Jelal were fond of studying the Ilahi-nama of Sena'i, the Hakim, and the Mantiqu-'t-Tayr of 'Attar, as also the Nasib-nama of the latter.

He therefore sought and found an opportunity to propose that Jelal should indite something in the style of the Ilahi-nama, but in the metre of the Mantiqu-'t-Tayr; saying that the circle of friends would then willingly give up all other poetry, and study that alone.

Jelal immediately produced a portion of the Mesnevi, saying that God had forewarned him of the wishes of the brethren, in consequence of which he had already begun to compose the work. That fragment consisted of the first eighteen couplets of the introductory verses

	"From reed-flute hear what tale it tells,
	  What plaint it makes of absence' ills," &c.

It is of the metre Remel, hexameter contracted: 

Jelal frequently mentions Husam as the cause of the work's having been begun and continued. In the fourth book he addresses him in the opening couplet:

	"Of Truth, the light; of Faith, the sword; Husamu-'d-Din aye be;
	  Above the lunar orb has clomb my Mesnevi, through thee."

And again the sixth book has for its opening verse the following apostrophe:--

[p. 89]

	"O thou, Husamu-'d-Din, my heart's true life! Zeal, for thy sake,
	  I feel springs up in me sixth book hereby to undertake."

Often they spent whole nights at the task, Jelal inditing, and Husam writing down his inspirations, chanting it aloud, as he wrote it, with his beautiful voice. Just as the first book was completed, Husam's wife died, and an interval ensued.

Two years thus passed without progress. Husam married again; and in that year, A.H. 662 (A.D. 1263), the second book was commenced. No other interval occurred until the work was brought to a conclusion. The third couplet of the second book mentions Husam in these terms--

	"When thou, of Truth the light, Husamu-'d-Din, thy courser's rein
	  Didst turn, descending earthward from the zenith's starry plain."

The third, fifth, and seventh books have similar addresses to Husam in their opening verses. His name is also mentioned cursorily in the third tale of the first book.

  

83.

On the death of Jelal, a party of zealots went in a body to the Perwana, explaining to him that the new practices of music and dancing, introduced by Jelal, were innovations altogether contrary to the canonical institutes, and begging him to use his utmost endeavours to suppress them.

The Perwana called on the learned Mufti of Qonya, Sheykh Sadru-'d-Din, and consulted him on the subject. The Mufti's answer was: "Do nothing of the kind. Listen not to such biased suggestions. There is an apostolical saying to this effect: 'A laudable innovation, introduced by a perfect follower of the prophets, is of the same nature with the customary practices of the prophets themselves.'" The Perwana resolved, therefore, to do nothing towards suppressing Jelal's institutions.

[p. 90]

  

84.

A certain great man, who esteemed Jelal, was nevertheless shocked that he should, with all his learning and piety, sanction the use of music and dancing.

He had occasion to visit Jelal, who at once addressed him as follows:--"It is an axiom in the sacred canons that a Muslim, if hard pressed, and in danger of death, may eat of carrion and other forbidden food, so that the life of a man be not sacrificed. This rule is admitted and approved by all the authorities of the law. Now, we men of God are exactly in that position of extreme danger to our lives; and from that danger there is no escape, save by song, by music, and by the dance. Otherwise, through the awful majesty of the divine manifestations, the bodies of the saints would melt away as wax, and disappear like snow under the beams of a July sun."

The personage thus addressed was so struck with the earnestness of Jelal's manner, and the cogency of his reasoning, that he became convinced, and thenceforward was a defender and upholder of Jelal's institutions, so that these formed, as it were, the very nourishment of his heart. Many of the learned followed his example, and joined themselves to Jelal's followers and disciples.

  

85.

Kaluman and 'Aynu-'d-Devla were two Roman painters. They were unrivalled in their art of painting portraits and pictures. Both were disciples of Jelal.

Kaluman one day narrated that in Constantinople, on a certain tablet, the portraits of the Lady Meryem and of Jesus were painted, in such style as to be matchless. From all parts of the world artists came and tried their best; but none could produce the equal of those two portraits.

'Aynu-'d-Devla undertook, therefore, to journey to Constantinople, and see this picture. He made himself

[p. 91]

an inmate of the great church of Constantinople for a whole year, and served the priests thereof in various ways.

One night, then, he spied his opportunity, took the tablet under his arm, and absconded with it.

On reaching Qonya, he paid his respects to Jelal, who inquired of him where he had been. He narrated to Jelal all that had occurred with the tablet, which he exhibited.

Jelal found the picture exceedingly beautiful, and gazed on it long with the utmost pleasure. He then spake as follows

"These two beautiful portraits complain of you, saying that you are not a faithful admirer of theirs, but are an untrue lover." The artist asked: "How?" Jelal replied: "They say they are not supplied with food and rest. On the contrary, they are kept sleepless every night, and fasting every day. They complain: 'Aynu-'d-Devla leaves us, sleeps himself all night, and takes his meals by day, never remaining with us to do as we do!'"

The artist remarked: "Food and sleep are to them impossibilities. Neither have they speech, with which to say anything. They are mere lifeless effigies."

Jelal now replied: "Thou art a living effigy. Thou hast acquired a knowledge of various arts. Thou art the handiwork of a limner whose hand has framed the universe, the human race, and all things on earth and in heaven. Is it right that thou forsake Him, and enamour thyself of an insignificant lifeless effigy? What profit is there in these portraits? What advantage can accrue to thee from them?"

Touched by these reproaches, the artist vowed repentance of his sin, and professed himself a Muslim.

  

86.

When the time of Jelal's death drew near, he cautioned his disciples to have no fear or anxiety on that account;

[p. 92]

[paragraph continues] "for," said he, "as the spirit of Mansur [*1] appeared, a hundred and fifty years after his death, to the Sheykh Feridu-'d-Din 'Attar, and became the Sheykh's spiritual guide and teacher, so, too, do you always be with me, whatever may happen, and remember me, so that I may show myself to you, in whatever form that may be;--that I may always belong to you, and ever be shedding in your breasts the light of heavenly inspiration. I will simply remind you now that our dear Lord, Muhammed, the Apostle of God, said to his disciples: 'My life is a blessing unto you, and my death will be a blessing unto you. In my life I have guided you, and after my death I will send blessings on you.'"

Jelal's friends shed tears all, and broke out into sighs and lamentations; but bowed their heads in reverence.

It is said that he gave directions to get ready his grave-clothes, and that his wife, Kira Khatun, began to wail, tearing her clothes, and exclaiming: "O thou light of the world, life of the human race; unto whom wilt thou commit us? Whither wilt thou go?"

He answered her: "Whither will I go? Verily, I shall not quit your circle." She then asked: "Will there be another like unto thee, our Lord? Will another become manifest?" He replied: "If there be, he will be I." After a while he added: "While in the body, I have two attachments; one, to you; the other, to the flesh. When, by the grace of the unique Spirit, I become disembodied,--when the world of unbodied spirits, unity, and singleness, shall appear, my attachment to the flesh will become attachment to . you, and I shall then have but one sole attachment."

[p. 93]

  

87.

With his last breath Jelal recommended to Husamu-'d-Din to lay him in the upper part of his tomb, so that he might be the first to rise at the last day.

As he lay in his extreme sickness, there were earthquakes for seven days and nights, very severe, so that walls and houses were overthrown. On the seventh occasion, all his disciples were alarmed. He, however, calmly remarked: "Poor earth! it is eager for a fat morsel! It shall have one!"

He then gave his last instructions to his disciples, as follows:--"I recommend unto you the fear of God, in public and in private; abstemiousness in eating and in sleeping, as also in speaking; the avoidance of rebelliousness and of sin; constancy in fasting, continuous worship, and perpetual abstinence from fleshly lusts; long-suffering under the ill-treatment of all mankind; to shun the companionship of the light-minded and of the common herd; to associate with the righteous and with men of worth. For verily 'the best of mankind is he who benefiteth men,' [*1] and 'the best of speech is that which is short and to the purpose.'" [*2]

  

88.

The following is a prayer taught by Jelal, on his deathbed, to one of his friends, to be used whenever affliction or care might weigh upon him:--

"O our Lord God, I breathe but for Thee, and I stretch forth my spirit towards Thee, that I may recite Thy doxologies abundantly, commemorating Thee frequently. O our Lord God, lay not on me an ailment that may make me forgetful to commemorate Thee, or lessen my yearning towards Thee, or cut off the delight I experience in reciting the litanies of Thy praise. Grant me not a health that

[p. 94]

may engender or increase in me presumptuous or thankless insolence. For Thy mercy's sake, O Thou Most-Merciful of the compassionate. Amen."

  

89.

A friend was seated by Jelal's pillow, and Jelal leaned on that friend's bosom. Suddenly a most handsome youth appeared at the door of the room, to the utmost astonishment of the friend.

Jelal arose and advanced to receive the stranger. But the friend was quicker, and quietly asked his business. The stranger answered: "I am 'Azra'il, the angel of departure and separation. I am come, by the divine command, to inquire what commission the Master may have to intrust to me."

Blessed are the eyes that can perceive such sights!

The friend was near fainting at this answer. But he heard Jelal call out: "Come in, come in, thou messenger of my King. Do that which thou art bidden; and, God willing, thou shalt find me one of the patient."

He now told his attendants to bring a vessel of water, placed his two feet therein, and occasionally sprinkled a little on his breast and forehead, saying: "My beloved (God) has proffered me a cup of poison (bitterness). From his hand I drink that poison with delight."

The singers and musicians now came in, and executed a hymn, while the whole company of friends wept, and sobbed loudly.

Jelal observed: "It is as my friends say. But, were they even to pull down the house, what use? See my panting heart; look at my delight. The sun sheds a grateful light on the moth. My friends invite me one way; my teacher Shemsu-'d-Din beckons me the other way. Comply ye with the summoner of the Lord, and have faith in Him. Departure is inevitable. All being came out of nothing, and again it will be shut up in the prison of nullity. Such is God's decree from all eternity;

[p. 95]

and, to decree belongeth unto God, the Most High, the All-Great!"

His son Sultan Veled had been unremitting in his attentions. He wept and sobbed. He was reduced to a shadow. Jelal therefore said to him: "Baha'u-'d-Din, my son, I am better. Go and lie down a little. Rest thyself, and sleep awhile!"

When he was gone, Jelal indited his last ode; thus:--

	"Go! head on pillow lay; alone, in peace, me leave,
	 Loved tyrant, plague by night, while all around thee grieve.
	 That peerless beauty (God) has no need kind care to show;
	 But, sallow lovers, ye must patient faith still know.
	 Perplexity is ours to bear; 'tis his to own hard heart;
	 Shed he our blood; what sin? He'll not pay murder's smart.
	 To die's hard, after all; but remedy there's none;
	 How, then, to crave a remedy? The evil's done.
	 Last night, in dream, a warder, from my love's abode,
	 Made sign to me, and said: 'This way! Hold thou my lode.'"

.         .         .         .         .         .

  

90.

It is related that, after his death, when laid on his bier, and while he was being washed by the hands of a loving and beloved disciple, while others poured the water for the ablution of Jelal's body, not one drop was allowed to fall to the earth. All was caught by the fond ones around, as had been the case with the Prophet at his death. Every drop was drunk by them as the holiest and purest of waters.

As the washer folded Jelal's arms over his breast, a tremor appeared to pass over the corpse, and the washer fell with his face on the lifeless breast, weeping. He felt his ear pulled by the dead saint's hand, as an admonition. On this, he fainted away, and in his swoon he heard a cry from heaven, which said to him: "Ho there! Verily the saints of the Lord have nothing to fear, neither shall they sorrow. Believers die not; they merely depart from one habitation to another abode!"

[p. 96]

  

91.

When the corpse was brought forth, all the men, women, and children, who flocked to the funeral procession, smote. their breasts, rent their garments, and uttered loud lamentations. These mourners were of all creeds, and of various nations; Jews and Christians, Turks, Romans, and Arabians were among them. Each recited sacred passages, according to their several usages, from the Law, the Psalms, or the Gospel.

The Muslims strove to drive away these strangers, with blows of fist, or staff, or sword. They would not be repelled. A great tumult was the result. The Sultan, the Heir-Apparent, and the Perwana all flew to appease the strife, together with the chief Rabbis, the Bishops, Abbots, &c.

It was asked of these latter why they mixed themselves up with the funeral of an eminent Muslim sage and saint. They replied that they had learnt from him more of the mysteries shrouded in their scriptures, than they had ever known before; and had found in him all the signs and qualities of a prophet and saint, as set forth in those writings. They further declared: "If you Muslims hold him to have been the Muhammed of his age, we esteem him as the Moses, the David, the Jesus of our time; and we are his disciples, his adherents."

The Muslim leaders could make no answer. And so, in all honour, with every possible demonstration of love and respect, was he borne along, and at length laid in his grave.

He had died as the sun went down, on Sunday, the fifth of the month Jumada-'l-akhir, A.H. 672 (16th December A.D. 1273); being thus sixty-eight (lunar) years (sixty-six solar years) of age.

  

92.

Sultan Veled is reported to have related that, shortly after the death of his father, Jelal, he was sitting with his

[p. 97]

step-mother, Jelal's widow, Kira Khatun, and Husamu-'d-Din, when his step-mother saw the spirit of the departed saint, winged as a seraph, poised over his, Sultan Veled's, head, to watch over him.

  

93.

Jelal had a female disciple, a saint, named Nizama Khatun, an intimate friend of his wife's.

Nizama formed the design to give a spiritual party to Jelal, with an entertainment for his disciples. She possessed nothing but a Thevr (or Sevr) [*1] veil, which she had destined to be her own winding-sheet.

She now ordered her servants to sell this veil, and so procure the necessaries for the projected feast. But, that same morning, Jelal came to her house with his disciples, and, addressing her, said: "Nizama Khatun, sell not thy veil; to thee it is a piece of necessary furniture. Lo! we are come to thy entertainment."

He and his disciples remained with her, engaged in spiritual exercises, three whole days and nights.

  

94.

After Jelal's death, Kigatu Khan, a Mogul general, came up against Qonya, intending to sack the city and massacre the inhabitants. (He was emperor from A.H. 690 to 696, A.D. 1290-1294.)

That night, in a dream, he saw Jelal, who seized him by the throat, and nearly choked him, saying to him: "Qonya is mine. What seekest thou from its people?"

On awaking from his dream, he fell on his knees and prayed for mercy, seeking also for information as to what that portent might signify. He sent in an ambassador to beg permission for him to enter the city as a friendly guest.

When he arrived at the palace, the nobles of Qonya

[p. 98]

flocked to his court with rich offerings. All being seated in solemn conclave, Kigatu was suddenly seized with a violent tremor, and asked one of the princes of the city, who was seated on a sofa by himself: "Who may the personage be that is sitting at your side on your sofa?" The prince looked about, right and left; but saw no one. He replied accordingly. Kigatu answered: "What? How sayest thou? I see by thy side, seated, a tall man with a grisly beard and a sallow complexion, a grey turban, and an Indian plaid over his chest, who looks at me most pryingly."

The prince sagaciously suspected forthwith that Jelal's shade was there present by his side, and made answer: "The sacred eyes of majesty alone are privileged to witness that vision. It is the son of Baha'u-'d-Din of Balkh, our Lord Jelalu-'d-Din, who is entombed in this land."

The Khan replied: "Last night I saw him in my dream. He went nigh choking me, and told me Qonya is his possession. Now, prince, thee I call my adoptive father; and I entirely forego my intention to devastate this city. Tell me; has that holy man any son or descendant alive here?"

The prince told him of Baha Veled, now Sheykh of the city, and the peerless saint of God. Kigatu expressed the wish to go and visit the Sheykh. The prince conducted him and his suite of nobles to Sultan Veled. They all declared themselves his disciples, and assumed the dervish turban. Baha recounted to the Khan the history of his grandfather's expulsion from Balkh, and of all that followed. The Khan offered him royal presents, and accompanied him on a visit of reverence to the shrine of the deceased saint.

Footnotes

^18:1 The truly eminent author of the Mesnevi.

^20:1 From the city of Sarakhs in Khurasan.

^23:1 Had Dr. Tanner, the forty days' faster at New York, heard of these performances?

^40:1 As related of certain Sabbath-breaking Jews, in Qur'an ii. 61.

^59:1 Qur'an xviii. 8, &c.

^60:1 The mount where the victims are slaughtered by the pilgrims.

^64:1 The great Persian poet Khaqani,  at Shirwan, died and was buried at Tebriz A.H. 582 (A.D. 1186).

^64:2 Sana'i, of Gazna in Afganistan, surnamed "the Wise," or "the Philosopher," died and was buried at the place of his birth, A.H. 576 (A.D. 1180).

^70:1 "Satan, the Lapidated One," is the chief title of the accursed one. Muslims believe that the "shooting stars" are missiles cast by angels at demons who attempt to approach heaven for eavesdropping purposes.

^80:1 I have not met with an explanation of this word in any Persian dictionary. Literally it signifies sugar-hanging. In the Bahari-'Ajem alone is it mentioned, with a distich from Hafiz; but it is left unexplained.

^82:1 Apparently a "merman" is intended.

^85:1 This is a much more poetical account of the origin of the reed-flute than the pagan Greek myths of Orpheus and his lyre, Pan and his pipe, for which no reasons are assigned.

^92:1 Mansur, son of 'Ammar, thus mentioned by D'Herbelot: "Scheikh des plus consideres parmi les Musulmans. On le cite au sujet d'un passage du chapitre Enfathar de l'Alcoran (lxxxii.), ou Dieu est introduit faisant ce reproche aux hommes: Qu'est-ce qui vous rend si orgueilleux contre votre maitre qui vous fait tant de biens? (v. 6). Ce Scheikh disait: Quand Dieu me fera ce reproche, je lui repondrai: Le sont ces biens et ces graces memes que vous me faites, qui me rendent si superbe." As Sheykh 'Attar lived about A.H. 600, Mansur must have died about A.H. 400 (A.D. 1020). He is mentioned in No. 51, p. 68, of the Nafahatu-'l-Uns.

^93:1 Khayru 'n nasi, men yenfa'u 'n nasa.--Arabic Proverb.

^93:2 Khayru 'l kelami, qasiruhu 'l mufidu.--Arabic Proverb.

^97:1 Thevr is the name of a tribe of Arabians, and of two hills, one at Mekka, the other at Medina; but the explanation of the term "a Thevr or Sevr veil" I have not met with.

     
The Mesnavi and The Acts of the Adepts, by Jelal-'d-din Rumi and Shemsu-'d-Din Ahmed, tr. by James W. Redhouse, [1881], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 99]

  

CHAPTER IV.

Shemsu-'d-Din Tebrizi, Muhammed son of 'Ali, son of Melik-dad.

  

1.

SHEMSU-'D-DiN of Tebriz was surnamed the Sultan of Mendicants, the Mystery of God upon earth, the Perfect in word and deed. Some had styled him the Flier, because he travelled about so much; and others spoke of him as the Perfect One of Tebriz.

He went about seeking for instruction, human and spiritual. He had visited many of the chief spiritual teachers of the world; but he had found none equal to himself. The teachers of all lands became, therefore, pupils and disciples to him.

He was always in quest of the beloved object of the soul (God). His corporeal frame he habited in coarsest felt, shrouding his eminent greatness from all eyes in what are really the jewelled robes of spirituality.

At Damascus it was, where he was then studying, that he first saw Jelalu-'d-Din by chance in a crowded marketplace; but Jelal, who was at that time a student also, avoided him.

Ultimately, he was led to Qonya in Jelal's traces, and first arrived there at dawn, on Saturday, the twenty-sixth of Jumada-'l-akhir, A.H. 642 (28th November, A.D. 1244), Jelal being then professor at four colleges there. They met as is related in a former chapter (chap. iii. Nos. 8, 9).

At the end of three months' seclusion together, passed in religious, scientific, and spiritual disquisitions and

[p. 100]

investigations, Shemsu-'d-Din became satisfied that he had never met Jelal's equal.

  

2.

When Shemsu-'d-Din was quite worn out by a series of divine manifestations and the consequent ecstasies, he used to break away, hide himself, and work as a day-labourer at the water-wheels of the Damascus gardens, until his equanimity would be restored. Then he would return to his studies and meditations.

In his supplications to God, he was constantly inquiring whether there was not in either world, corporeal and spiritual, one other saint who could bear him company. In answer thereto, there came at length from the unseen world the answer, that the one holy man of the whole universe who could bear him company was the Lord Jelalu-'d-Din of Rome.

On receiving this answer, he set out at once from Damascus, and went in quest of his object to the land of Rome (Asia Minor).

  

3.

Chelebi Emir 'Arif related that his father, Sultan Veled, told him that one day, as a trial and test. Shemsu-'d-Din requested Jelal to make him a present of a slave. Jelal instantly went and fetched his own wife, Kira Khatun, who was as extremely beautiful as virtuous and saintlike, offering her to him.

To this act of renunciation Shemsu-'d-Din replied: "She is my most esteemed sister. What I want is a youth to wait on me." Jelal thereupon produced his own son, Sultan Veled, who, he said, would be proud to carry the shoes of Shems, placing them before him for use when required for a walk abroad. Again Shems objected: "He is as my son. But, perhaps, you will supply me with some wine. I am accustomed to drink it, and am not comfortable without it."

[p. 101]

Jelal now took a pitcher, went himself to the Jews' ward of the city, and returned with it full of wine, which he set before Shems.

"I now saw," continued Sultan Veled in his recital, "that Shemsu-'d-Din, uttering an intense cry, rent his garment, bowed down to Jelal's feet, lost in wondering admiration at this implicit compliance with the behests of a teacher, and then said: 'By the truth of the First, who had no beginning, the Last, who will have no end, there never has been, from the commencement of creation, and there never, until the end of time, will be, in the universe of substance, a lord and master, heart-captivating and Muhammed-like, as thou art.'"

He now bowed down again, declared himself a disciple to Jelal, and added: "I have tested and tried to the utmost the patient long-suffering of our Lord; and I have found his greatness of heart to be totally unlimited by any bounds."

  

4.

Jelal is reported to have said: "When Shemsu-'d-Din first came, and I felt a mighty spark of love for him lighted up in my heart, he took upon himself to command me in the most despotic and peremptory manner.

"'Study,' said he, 'the writings of thy father.' For a while I studied nothing else. 'Keep silent, and speak to no one.' I ceased from all intercourse with my fellows.

"My words were, however, the food of my disciples; my thoughts were the nectar of my pupils. They hungered and thirsted. Thence, ill feelings were engendered amongst them, and a blight fell upon my teacher.

"He came to me another day as I was, by his command, studying the writings of my father. Thrice he called out to me: 'Study them not.' From his sacred features the effulgence of spiritual wisdom streamed. I laid down the book, and never since have I opened it."

[p. 102]

  

5.

Jelal is said to have related that Shemsu-'d-Din forbade him to study any more the writings of his father, Baha Veled, and that he punctually obeyed the injunction.

But one night he dreamt that he was in company with a number of friends, who were all studying and discussing with him those very writings of Baha Veled.

As he woke from his dream, Shems was entering the room with a severe look. Addressing Jelal, he asked: "How hast thou dared to study that book again?" Jelal protested that, since his prohibition, he had never once opened his father's works.

"Yes," retorted Shems, "there is a study by reading, and there is also a study by contemplating. Dreams are but the shadows of our waking thoughts. Hadst thou not occupied thy thoughts with those writings, thou wouldst not have dreamt about them."

"From that time forward," remarked Jelal, "I never again busied myself with my father's writings, so long as Shemsu-'d-Din remained alive."

  

6.

Jelal is related to have informed his disciples that Shemsu-'d-Din was a scholar in every science known to man, and also a great alchemist; but that he had renounced them all, to devote himself to the study and contemplation of the mysteries of divine love.

  

7.

Shemsu-'d-Din was one day sitting with his disciples, when the public executioner passed by. Shems remarked to those around him: "There goes one of God's saints."

The disciples knew the man, and told Shems that he was the common headsman. Shems replied: "True! In the exercise of his calling, he put to death a man of God, whose soul he thus released from the bondage of the body.

[p. 103]

[paragraph continues] As a recompense for this kind act of his, the saint bequeathed to him his own saintship."

On the following day the executioner relinquished his office, vowed repentance, came to Shemsu-'d-Din, made his bow, and professed himself a disciple.

  

8.

Sheykh Husamu-'d-Din was originally a young man who showed great respect and humility towards Shemsu-'d-Din, to whom he rendered services of every kind.

One day Shems said to him: "Husam, this is not the way. Religion is a question of money. Give me some coin, and offer your services to the Lord; so, peradventure, thou mayest rise in our order."

Husam at once went forth to his own house, collected all his own valuables and money, with his wife's jewels, and all the provisions of the house, brought them to Shems, and laid them at his feet. He furthermore sold a vineyard and country-seat he possessed, bringing their price also to his teacher, and thanking him for having taught him a duty, as also for having deigned to accept so insignificant a trifle from his hand.

"Yes, Husam," said Shems, "it is to be hoped that, with God's grace, and the prayers of the saints, thou wilt henceforth attain to such a station, as to be the envy of the most perfect men of God, and be bowed down to by the Brethren of Sincerity. It is true that God's saints are not in want of anything, being independent of both worlds. But, at the outset, there is no other way to test the sincerity of one we love, and the affection of a friend, than to call upon him to sacrifice his worldly possessions. The next step is, to summon him to give up all that is not his God. No disciple who wishes to rise, has ever made progress by following his own devices. Advancement is earned by rendering service, and by spending in God's cause. Every pupil who sacrifices possessions at the call of his teacher, would also lay down his life, if needs

[p. 104]

were. No lover of God can retain both mammon and religion."

Shems then restored to Husam the whole of his goods, keeping back only one piece of silver. Nine times as much more did he bestow upon Husam from first to last; and, as the results of all things are in God's hands, so did Husam at length become the ruler of God's saints, and Jelal made him the keeper of God's treasury. He it was who wrote down the twenty-four thousand six hundred and sixty couplets contained in the six books of the Mesnevi.

  

9.

Shemsu-'d-Din left Qonya, at the end of his first visit, on Thursday, the twenty-first day of the month of Shawwal, A.H. 643 (14th March, A.D. 1246), after a stay of about sixteen months.

He returned to Damascus; and his departure left Jelal in a state of great uneasiness and excitement. (Compare a conflicting date given in No. 13, further on.)

  

10.

Shemsu-'d-Din was one day at Bagdad, and entered one of the palaces there. A eunuch who saw him enter, without being himself visible, made a sign to a slave to go and drive away the mendicant.

The slave drew his sword, and raised it to strike; but his arm withered, and fell palsied.

The eunuch then motioned to another slave to execute the commission; and he, too, became similarly incapacitated.

Shems then went away of himself, and none dared to pursue him. Two days later, the eunuch died also.

  

11.

Jelal's father, Baha Veled, had a disciple, who, for some reason, gave offence to Shemsu-'d-Din; the latter, in punishment, inflicted a deafness on both the disciple's ears.

After a time, Shems pardoned the offender, and restored

[p. 105]

his hearing. But the man bore him a grudge in his heart, nevertheless. One day, Shems said to him: "Friend, I have pardoned thee; wherefore art thou still cast down? Be comforted." Notwithstanding this, his rancour remained.

One day, however, he met Shems in the midst of a market. Suddenly, he felt a new faith glow within him, and he shouted out: "There is no god save God; Shemsu-'d-Din is the apostle of God."

The market-people, on this, raised a great hubbub, and wished to kill him. One of them came forward to cut him down; but Shems uttered so terrific a shout, that the man at once fell down dead. The rest of the market-people bowed, and submitted.

Shems now took the disciple by the hand, and led him away, remarking to him: "My good friend; my name is Muhammed. Thou shouldest have shouted: 'Muhammed is the apostle of God.' The rabble will not take gold that is not coined."

  

12.

One beautiful moonlight night, Jelal and Shems were together on the terraced roof of the college, and all the inhabitants of Qonya were sleeping on their housetops.

Shems remarked: "See all these poor creatures! They are dead to every sense of their Creator on this beautiful night of God's decree. Wilt thou not, Jelal, of thy infinite compassion, wake them up, and let them gain a share in the shower of blessings of this night?"

Thus appealed to, Jelal faced toward Mekka, and offered up this prayer to God: "O Thou Lord of heaven, and of earth, for the love of Thy servant Shemsu-'d-Din, vouchsafe wakefulness to this people."

Immediately a black cloud gathered from the unseen world. Thunders and lightnings burst forth; and so heavy a rain fell, that all the sleepers, catching up what clothing they could find, quickly took refuge in their

[p. 106]

houses below. Shems smiled at the saintly joke, and was greatly amused.

When daylight dawned, the disciples gathered round, numerous as the raindrops of that shower; and Shems related to them the story, with the following remarks:--

"Hitherto, all the prophets and saints have ever sought to hide from vulgar eyes the miraculous powers they have possessed, so that none should be aware of the fact. But now, our Lord and Master, Jelal, has been so successful in secretly following up the path of mystic love, that his miraculous powers have hitherto escaped the searching eyes of even the chiefest of God's elect, even as it hath been said: 'Verily, God hath saints of whom no man knoweth.'"

  

13.

Kimiya Khatun, the wife of Shemsu-'d-Din, was a very beautiful, and also a very virtuous, woman. One day, however, it so happened that, without his permission or knowledge, the grandmother of Sultan Veled, and her attendant ladies, took Kimiya with them for an outing to the vineyards of the city.

As chance would have it, Shems came home while she was still away. He asked for her, and was informed where she had gone, and with whom. He was exceedingly annoyed at her absence.

Kimiya had scarcely returned home, ere she began to feel unwell. Her limbs stiffened like dry firewood, and became motionless. She continued screaming and moaning for three days, and then gave up the ghost, in the month of Sha'ban, A.H. 644 (December, A.D. 1246. But compare a conflicting date given in No. 9, further back.)

  

14.

It is related that, a second time, Shems and Jelal shut themselves up for a whole six months in Jelal's room at the college, without partaking of meat or drink, and without

[p. 107]

the entrance of a single individual to interrupt them, or either of them coming forth, Sultan Veled and one other disciple alone excepted.

  

15.

Shemsu-'d-Din was extremely bitter in his preachings and lectures to the learned auditory who used to gather around him in Qonya. He likened them to oxen and asses. He reproached them with being further than ever astray from the path of living love, and taxed them with the presumption of supposing themselves the equals of Bayezid of Bestam.

He once went to Erzen-of-Rome (Erzrum), the prince of which city had a son so extremely stupid, though very handsome, that he could be taught nothing, or next thereto.

Shems let no one know who or what he was; but opened a school for children. Inquiries were made by the prince, and Shems undertook to instruct the child, and enable him, in one month, to recite the whole Qur'an by heart.

He kept his promise. The young prince acquired, further, during the same period, a beautiful handwriting, and sundry other accomplishments.

It began to be suspected, now, that he was a saint in disguise. He therefore quietly slipped away from that city.

  

16.

There is a tradition that Jelal one day called his son Sultan Veled, gave him a large sum of money, and bade him go, with a suite of the disciples, to Damascus, and request Shems to return to Qonya.

Jelal told his son that he would find Shems in a certain inn, playing at backgammon with a young Firengi (European, Frank), also one of God's saints. Sultan Veled went, found Shems exactly so occupied, and brought him back to Qonya, the Firengi youth returning to his own country, there to preach Jelal's doctrines, as his vicar.

[p. 108]

Sultan Veled walked the whole way from Damascus to Qonya, at the stirrup-side of Shems, as a groom walks by the side of a prince's charger. The whole city went forth to receive them. Jelal and Shems embraced each other. Jelal became more than ever devoted to his friend; and his disciples resented his neglect of them, as they had done before. Not long afterwards, the dolorous event occurred that terminated the life of Shemsu-'d-Din.

  

17.

The Vazir of Qonya had built a college. On its completion, he gave a great entertainment, in the college, of religious music and dancing, all the learned men of the city being present.

The Qur'an was first recited in its entirety; after which, the holy waltzing began. The Vazir and Shemsu-'d-Din both joined in the dance. Several times they came into collision; or, the Vazir's skirt swept against Shems's person, as he observed no caution in his gyrations.

Jelal expressed great indignation at this want of courtesy and reverence for his guest and friend. He took Shems by the hand, to lead him away. The grandees present essayed to appease him, but their entreaties were of no avail. The police of the Sultan were therefore sent for; and when they arrived, they instantly seized Shems, led him forth a prisoner with every mark of indignity, and put him to death without further inquiry or formality.

  

18.

Chelebi Emir 'Arif related, as informed by his mother, Fatima Khatun, that when Shemsu-'d-Din was thus made a martyr, his executioners threw his corpse down a well.

Sultan Veled saw Shems in a dream, and was informed by him where the body would be found. Sultan Veled went therefore at midnight with some friends, recovered the corpse, washed it, and privately buried it in the college grounds, by the side of the founder.

[p. 109]

  

19.

Forty days after the disappearance of Shemsu-'d-Din, Jelal, wishing to appease his own sorrow, and quell the mutinous spirit that had broken out among the disciples, appointed Husamu-'d-Din his local deputy, and set out to seek Shems at Damascus for the third time. All the learned men of Syria became his disciples, and he was absent about a year, more or less.

The Sultan and the nobles grew impatient at this long absence, and wrote him an urgent petition, begging him to return to Qonya. With this request he complied.

Naturally, he had failed to find Shemsu-'d-Din in the flesh at Damascus; but he had found within himself what was still greater. He went to the lodging of Shems, and wrote on the door, with red ink: "This is the station of the beloved one of Elias, on whom be peace!"

It is said that the body of Shemsu-'d-Din disappeared, and that he was buried by the side of Jelal's father, Sultan Baha Veled the Elder.

     
The Mesnavi and The Acts of the Adepts, by Jelal-'d-din Rumi and Shemsu-'d-Din Ahmed, tr. by James W. Redhouse, [1881], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 110]

  

CHAPTER V.

Sheykh Salahu-'d-Din [*1] Feridun, surnamed Zer-Kub (Goldbeater).

  

1.

SHEYKH SALaHU-'D-DiN was originally a fellow-disciple with Jelal, as pupils to Seyyid Burhanu-'d-Din. He afterwards became a goldbeater, as his parents were poor.

After a while, when Jelal's reputation became great, Salah went and paid him his respects. Jelal knew how highly Burhan had esteemed Salah, when his pupil. He therefore received him in a very friendly manner, and their intercourse became warmly renewed.

One day, after the murder of Shemsu-'d-Din, and the return of Jelal from Damascus, he sent for Salah, and appointed him his own assistant in the government and instruction of the disciples, presenting him also to the king in that capacity.

  

2.

Jelal's first royal protector, 'Ala'u-'d-Din Keyqubad, was now dead, and his son, Gayasu-'d-Din Key-Khusrev, reigned in his stead.

The monarch one day made a feast in the vineyards, and went forth into the fields for a walk, alone. He picked up a young snake, carried it indoors, placed it in a gold box, sealed this up, and then rejoined his courtiers.

To those attendants the king exhibited the sealed packet, as having just then been privately received from the Qaysar [*2]

[p. 111]

of Constantinople with a message to this effect: "If your religion of Islam be the true faith, some one of your wise men will be able to see into this packet without breaking its seals, and to tell what it contains."

The king then called upon his ministers to prove their loyalty to him, and their faithfulness to their religion, by solving this riddle. None of them was able.

The packet was now sent round in succession to all the eminent teachers and theologians of the city; but none could unravel the enigma.

At last it was brought to Jelal, as Sheykh Feridun and he were sitting together. Jelal invited Feridun to tell them the contents of the packet; and he immediately replied: "It is not a dignified act in the king to imprison a young snake in a gold box, sealing this up as a packet, and then tempting his courtiers, ministers, and learned men with a false pretence. A saint, however, knows not only the solution of so paltry a trick as this, but is also aware of every thought in the king's heart, and every secret of earth and heaven."

When this answer was reported to the king, he came to the college, and professed himself a disciple, remarking: "If the disciples of Shemsu-'d-Din possess such power, and work such miracles, how great must have been the sanctity of the murdered martyr."

Feridun acted for ten years as assistant to Jelal.

  

3.

Fatima, the daughter of Sheykh Salahu-'d-Din Feridun, was married to Sultan Veled, Jelal's son. Jelal used to teach her to read the Qur'an and other books.

Jelal used to call Fatima his right eye; her sister Hediyya, his left eye; and their mother, Latifa Khatun, the personification of God's grace.

When Fatima's marriage was solemnised, all the angels of heaven were present, and wished the young couple all happiness.

[p. 112]

She was a saint, and continually worked miracles. She fasted by day and watched by night, tasting food only once in three days. She was very charitable to the poor, the orphans, and the widows, distributing to them food and raiment.

Sheykh Feridun died on New Year's Day, A.H. 657 (28th December, A.D. 1258).

Footnotes

^110:1 Saladin of European writings. The words mean: the Fitness of the Religion (of Islam).

^110:2 The Muslim world knows but one Qaysar (Caesar), the Emperor of Rome (Old or New), which title is now borne by the Emperor of Austria.

     
The Mesnavi and The Acts of the Adepts, by Jelal-'d-din Rumi and Shemsu-'d-Din Ahmed, tr. by James W. Redhouse, [1881], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 113]

  

CHAPTER VI.

Chelebi Husamu-'l-Haqqi-wa-'d-Din, Hasan, son of Muhammed, son of Hasan, son of Akhi-Turk, [*1] related to Esh-Sheykhu-'l-Mukerrem. [*2]

  

1.

ON the death of Sheykh Feridun, Chelebi Husamu-'d-Din was appointed by Jelal his assistant in place of the deceased saint. For another ten years these two spiritual friends worked together in perfect unity as Superior and Assistant. Husam was surnamed "the Juneyd and the Bayezid [*3] of the age," "the Key of the Treasuries of God's throne," "the Trustee of the Treasures on earth," and "God's next Friend in the World."

  

2.

Husam once made his obeisance to Jelal, and related to him that, when the disciples recited the poetry of the Mesnevi, and became entranced, he had himself seen a company of invisible ones, armed with clubs and scimitars, keeping guard over them. If any one did not listen to those sacred words with reverence and believing, the clubs and swords were brought into play, and he was hurled into the pit of hell-fire. Jelal confirmed, as being a fact, all Husam had related.

[p. 114]

  

3.

Husamu-'d-Din was very eloquent, pious, and God-fearing. He would never use the water, even, of the college, for drink or for ablutions; but always brought his water from his own home for those purposes. He distributed, to the very last farthing, the whole of the revenues of the college among the disciples.

  

4.

Sultan Veled and his friends went one day to Husam's garden. Some of the disciples felt a desire to eat of some honey, but had said nothing on the subject. Husam read their thoughts. He therefore ordered his gardener to bring some new honeycomb from a certain hive. More, and more, and still more comb was brought, until all were satisfied; still, the hive was yet full. When they left his garden, Husam sent the hive with them; and for a long time it supplied all their wants.

  

5.

A severe drought afflicted Qonya and its environs. Prayers for rain were publicly offered without avail.

Recourse was now had to Husamu-'d-Din, who was begged to intercede for the people, and to pray for rain.

He first went to Jelal's tomb, there performed his devotions to God, and then put up the prayer for rain, his disciples weeping as they chanted "Amen."

Clouds now began to collect and lower; shortly after which an abundance of rain was vouchsafed.

  

6.

Not only were all the revenues of the college, arising from its endowments, committed by Jelal to the sole administration of Husam, but, whatever gifts and contributions were offered by princes and friends, in money or in kind, they were all consigned to his care, to augment the

[p. 115]

resources of the general fund. Jelal's family, and also his son, though often pinched, fared as the disciples.

  

7.

The disciples were both surprised and scandalised, at one time, by Husam's publicly speaking very much in praise of certain individuals who bore an extremely bad character, while he disparaged certain others who were noted for their pious lives.

They complained to Jelal; but he confirmed what Husam had said, and remarked to them: "God looks only to man's heart. Those seemingly lewd fellows are really God-loving saints, while those outwardly pious livers are merely inward hypocrites."

  

8.

One day Husam was lecturing. Suddenly he beckoned to one of the disciples, and told him to go with all speed to the royal palace, ask to see the queen, give her his greeting, and say to her: "Instantly quit this apartment thou art in, if thou wouldest avoid impending destruction, the result of God's decree."

The queen believed his word, and at once removed to another part of the palace. The apartment was speedily stripped of its furniture; and scarcely had the last loads been removed, when, with a loud crash, the building fell in. Her faith in his miraculous power was thenceforward increased a hundredfold.

  

9.

A certain Sheykh died at Qonya, who was rector of two different colleges. The prince who was the trustee of both, elected to nominate Husamu-'d-Din as rector of one of them; and a great entertainment was prepared by the prince for the occasion.

Jelal was informed of the arrangement, and he expressed the intention to bear himself Husam's carpet to his new

[p. 116]

college, and himself spreading it for Husam in his new seat.

A certain brawler, a kinsman of Husam's, Akhi Ahmed by name, was of the company; and he had felt nettled at Husam's appointment. He came forward, snatched away Husam's carpet, gave it to one of his companions to cast out of the building, and exclaimed: "We will not suffer this fellow to be installed here as Sheykh."

Great confusion ensued. Several nobles of the Akhi clan, who were present, drew their swords and knives, a scene of blood appearing to be about to commence.

Jelal now addressed the crowd, reproaching them for such behaviour. He told them that their family and college would not prosper, but that the Mevlevi order, founded by himself, and his lineal posterity would go on ever steadily increasing. He then related the following anecdote:--

"A certain Sheykh from Samarqand, Abu-'l-Lays by name, went on his travels for about twenty years, with a view to study, partly at Mekka. At length he set out on his return home, whither his reputation, as well as numerous disciples, had preceded him.

"Arrived at the outskirts of his native place, he went to the riverside to perform an ablution. There he found a number of women, occupied with laundry work. From among these, one old woman advanced, looked at him attentively, and then exclaimed: 'Why, if here isn't our little Abu-'l-Lays come back again! Go quickly, girls, and carry the news to our family.'

"The Sheykh returned forthwith to his party of fellow-travellers, and gave orders for their beasts to be at once reloaded for an immediate return to Damascus. On being questioned as to his reason for this sudden change of intention he answered: 'My people still think of me as "little Abu-'l-Lays," and will treat me with familiar indignity accordingly, esteeming me of small account, and thereby committing a grievous sin; for it is an incumbent

[p. 117]

duty on all to honour the learned and the wise. To respect them is to show reverence to the apostle of God, and to revere him is to serve the Creator.'

"Now, the truth was that, when a child, his father had always called him 'little Abu-'l-Lays.' But strangers would not so understand that term of endearment; they would think it one of too free and easy familiarity, and as likely to draw down on the city and its inhabitants the divine displeasure. It was not consistent with true affection to allow the possibility of such a visitation to occur."

Having delivered himself of this constructive reprimand, Jelal left the college barefoot, and in high dudgeon. The chief people came after him to intercede, but he would not be pacified. Their intervention was declined, and he refused to be reconciled with the broiler, Akhi Ahmed. He would not consent to go near that offender, who died soon afterwards; though most of his sons, relatives, and even his fellow-revellers, became disciples of Jelal's.

The Sultan would have caused him to be put to death at once; but Jelal would not permit that.

Akhi Ahmed was never again allowed to show himself at any public reception, and was shunned by all, like the wandering Jew.

Eventually, Husamu-'d-Din was appointed rector of both the colleges in question; and Ahmed's son, Akhi 'Ali, was a disciple of Sultan Veled.

  

10.

Jelalu-'d-Din was of the school of Abu-Hanifa; but Husam belonged to that of Shafi'i. [*1] He thought of joining the Hanefi school, out of deference to his teacher. Jelal, however, recommended him to remain what he had always been, and to strive to inculcate to all the doctrine of divine love, as set forth by Jelal.

[p. 118]

  

11.

After Jelal's death, his widow, Kira Khatun, suggested to her stepson, Sultan Veled Baha'u-'d-Din, that he ought to have succeeded his father as Rector of the fraternity, and not Husain.

Sultan Veled answered that it had been his father's bequest that Husain should succeed, that he himself had sworn the oath of fealty to Husam, and that Husam was now become a kind of spiritual beehive, through the incessant and multitudinous visitations of angelic ministers sent to him with messages from on high.

  

12.

Husamu-'d-Din had a gardener, whose name was Sheykh Muhammed. About four years after Jelal's death, Husam had reason to reprimand the gardener, who took offence at this, and went away to another garden, resolved never to return to Husam's service.

As he sat reflecting, he fell asleep. In his dreams he saw Jelal coming towards him, with an executioner by his side, who held up an axe. Jelal ordered the executioner to cut off Muhammed's head, as the punishment for his having offended Husain.

This was done; and Muhammed saw his own head fall off, and his own blood flow. He knew that he was dead.

After a while he saw Jelal return, pick up Muhammed's decapitated head, place it in proper junction with the neck of the corpse, and utter the exclamation: "In the name of God, with God, from God, and to God." Muhammed saw himself instantly alive again, felt very penitent, threw himself at Jelal's feet, and cried out piteously.

He now awoke and arose. No one was in sight. All traces of blood had vanished, and no sign of a wound was discernible on his neck. In all speed he returned to Husam's garden, and resumed his work with alacrity.

But now he saw Husain approaching, who said to him:

[p. 119]

"Well, Sheykh Muhammed! Until Jelalu-'d-Din chastised thee, thou wert no Muslim, and wert given over to stiffneckedness. Had not I interceded for thee, thou hadst been dead to all eternity, shut out from every hope of heaven."

Muhammed protested his sincere repentance, became a dervish, and professed himself a disciple.

  

13.

When Husamu-'d-Din had faithfully executed for ten years, as a just and wise steward, all his duties as successor to Jelalu-'d-Din, he one day went, with his companions and disciples, to visit the shrine of his predecessor.

As he drew near to the mausoleum, information was brought to him that the gilt crescent surmounting the cupola had fallen down.

On the moment, Husam felt himself to be stricken. He asked for an examination of dates to be made, and found that ten years previously Jelal had departed this life. He therefore said to those around him: "Lead me back home. The time for my dissolution is at hand."

He was conducted to his chamber, where, a few days later, on Thursday, the twenty-second of Sha'ban, in the year A.H. 683 (4th November, A.D. 1284), he breathed his last exactly at the time when the gilt crescent was replaced over Jelal's tomb, and the works brought to a close.

  

14.

Shortly after the death of Husamu-'d-Din, the widow of Jelal, Kira Khatun, too, departed this life, and was buried by the side of her husband.

As her corpse was being borne towards its last resting-place, the procession passed through one of the gates of the town. Here, the bearers found themselves arrested by some unseen power, so that they could not move, hand or foot. This singular effect lasted for about half an hour.

Her stepson, Sultan Veled, with the other mourners,

[p. 120]

struck up a hymn, and commenced a holy dance. Soon after this, the bearers recovered the use of their limbs, and found themselves able to proceed. All now went well, and the interment was completed.

That same night, a holy man of the fraternity saw Kira Khatun in heaven near to her husband. [*1] He inquired of her concerning the arrestation of the funeral. She informed him thus: "The day previous, a man and a woman had been stoned to death at that gate for the sin of adultery. I took compassion on them, interceded for their forgiveness, and obtained for them admittance to paradise. My preoccupation in their cause was the reason of the delay met with by the funeral procession."

  

15.

One day, while Jelal was yet living, Satan appeared in person to Husamu-'d-Din, and complained bitterly of the torments inflicted on him by the continuous pious exercises of Jelal. He said that such was his deep reverence for Jelal and his followers, that he dared not attempt to seduce one of them; and that, had he known that, of the seed of Adam, so holy a race of men were to spring, he never would have tempted the father of mankind. He further added: "I entertain a hope that the kindness of heart of his sons will lead them to intercede with Jelal for me, and so obtain my eventual release and salvation."

Husam related this occurrence to Jelal, who smiled, and said: "There is reason to hope that he need not despair. God forbid that he should despair!"

  

16.

Whenever the grandees of Qonya entertained a desire to have an audience of the Sheykh Shemsu-'d-Din of Tebriz, during his lifetime, they used to request Husam to beg

[p. 121]

[paragraph continues] Jelal to intercede for them with Sheens, and so obtain for them the desired interview.

Jelal and Husam used to tax those nobles for this favour, according to their means and circumstances.

On one occasion the Grand Vazir solicited an audience, and was taxed at forty thousand pieces of silver; which, after much chaffering, was reduced to thirty thousand.

At his audience with Shems, the Vazir was so charmed with the mysteries revealed to him, that, on his return therefrom, he voluntarily sent the ten thousand pieces of silver to Husam, which had been abated from the sum originally fixed.

These monies were always expended by Husam, as he saw fit, in relieving the necessities of the holy community, and the families of Jelal, the Goldbeater, and their various dependants.

Footnotes

^113:1 I have not met with any notice of Akhi-Turk.

^113:2 The Honoured Elder; by which Abu-Bekr is probably intended; but see a note to the Preface of the Mesnevi.

^113:3 Juneyd and Bayezid of Bestam were two great doctors of mysticism; the latter died in A.H. 234 or 261 (A.D. 848 or 874), and the former in A.H. 297-8 (A.D. 909-10).

^117:1 These are two of the four orthodox schools of Islam; they differ in certain details. There are reputed to be seventy-two schismatic or heretical sects.

^120:1 This anecdote directly contradicts the foolish idea, so common in Europe, that, in the religious system of Islam, women are held to have no souls, and no hope of paradise.

     
The Mesnavi and The Acts of the Adepts, by Jelal-'d-din Rumi and Shemsu-'d-Din Ahmed, tr. by James W. Redhouse, [1881], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 122]

  

CHAPTER VII.

The Sultan of them who attain to the Truth, in whom are manifested the mysteries of Positive Knowledge, Baha'u-'l-Haqqiwa-'d-Din, [*1] El Veled.

  

1.

WHILE Sultan Veled was yet a child, his father, Jelalu-'d-Din, was once discoursing on the miracle of the rod of Moses, which swallowed up the rods and other engines of Pharaoh's magicians, related to have been in such quantities as to form seventy camel-loads, and yet that staff became no thicker or longer than before.

Turning to Sultan Veled, his father asked how this could be, and to what it could be likened for the sake of illustration.

The child at once replied: "In a very dark night, if a lighted taper be brought into a large room or hall, it instantly devours all the darkness, and yet remains a little taper."

Jelal jumped up from his seat, ran to his son, took the child to his bosom, kissed him with effusion, and then said: "May God bless thee, my child! Verily, thou hast strung a pearl of the very first water on the string of illustration."

  

2.

Sultan Veled's elder brother, 'Ala'u-'d-Din, was killed in the tumult for which the police authorities of Qonya put to death the Sheykh Shemsu-'d-Din of Tebriz. Sultan Veled ruled the dervish community, in room of his father

[p. 123]

[paragraph continues] (after the death of Husamu-'d-Din), for many years (from A.H. 683 to 712, being twenty-nine lunar years). He composed three volumes of poetry in couplets, like the Mesnevi (hence styled Mesneviyat, Mesnevian Poems), and a volume (Diwan) of odes in the Arabian style, arranged in the alphabetical order of their rhymes.

  

3.

It is related that when Husamu-'d-Din was in his last illness, Sultan Veled came to visit him. Finding the sickness was unto death, he began to wail and lament, asking what would become of himself after the removal of so dear a friend and so able a director.

Husam collected himself, and, leaning on Sultan Veled, sat up. He then addressed the latter thus: "Be of good cheer, and let not thy heart be dismayed through my departure in the body. In another form, I will ever be near thee still. Thou shalt never be in need of counsel from another. In all difficulties and troubles that may beset thee, I will always be present, and in the visions of the night will I solve every doubt, and direct thee in each matter, whether it relate to the spirit and religion, or whether it pertain to the flesh and mundane affairs. Whenever thou shalt receive counsel in this manner, know of a surety that it is I who suggest it to thee--it will be none other than I myself. I will show myself to thee in thy visions; and I will be thy counsel and thy guide."

Sultan Veled was the first who narrated his dreams in his poems. Seek them there; there shalt thou find them consigned.

  

4.

One day a great man asked Sultan Veled whether God ever speaks to His servant--man.

This inquirer had frequently had the idea to send an offering to Sultan Veled; but had hesitated between a gift of money and one of Indian muslins.

[p. 124]

Sultan Veled answered his inquiry thus: "God does certainly speak to His servants. And as to the method by which He addresses then, I will relate to thee an anecdote."

"There was in Balkh a preacher, who was also one of God's most precious saints. He had many disciples, who loved him dearly. I heard him once say, during one of his discourses: 'Long hath God spoken to you in words; but you will not hearken to Him. This conduct is strangely improper on the part of obsequious servants. In God's name, therefore, I warn you that you ought to hearken to God's words, and yield obedience to His commands.'

"Just then, a dervish in the congregation stood up, and begged that some one would bestow on him a handkerchief.

"A merchant, who was seated in a corner of the mosque, thrice conceived the resolve to give the dervish a handkerchief; but thrice he failed to carry that design into effect.

"That merchant now rose, and, addressing the preacher, said: 'Sir, how does God speak to His servants? Pray explain this, that the method may be known unto us.'

"The preacher answered: 'For one handkerchief, God does not speak more than three times!'

"The merchant was petrified. He cried aloud, and cast himself at the feet of the preacher. What he had thrice resolved to do, and had not performed, he now carried out, giving a handkerchief to the dervish, and professing himself a disciple to the preacher."

"Now," added Sultan Veled, "I say unto thee, O grandee, do thou also hearken unto the words of God. Give the Indian handkerchiefs, and distribute 'also the money. When thou shalt have hearkened to the words of God, He will listen also to that which thou mayest say unto Him. All thou mayest ask of Him, God will give thee; and whatsoever thou seekest of Him, thou shalt find."

[p. 125]

Forthwith that grandee became a sincere convert and disciple. Similar miraculous works of Sultan Veled are beyond all count.

  

5.

Sultan Veled died on Saturday, the tenth day of Rejeb, A.H. 712 (11th November, A.D. 1312). He had as many as a dozen children by his wife Fatima, daughter of the Sheykh Salahu-'d-Din Feridun, the Goldbeater; but they all died in infancy, immediately after birth, or ere they were six months old. At length, on a Monday, the eighth day of the month of Zu-'l-Qa'da, A.H. 670 (6th May, A.D. 1272), his son and successor, Chelebi Emir 'Arif, was born.

Soon after his birth, or when only a few months old, the Emir 'Arif, at the invitation of his grandfather, Jelalu-'d-Din, and in the hearing of a numerous circle of assembled friends, thrice pronounced, audibly and distinctly, God's great name. His grandfather prophesied thence that he would be a very great saint, and would sit in the seat of his own successorship, after his father Sultan Veled. The Emir 'Arif lived about fifty years, surviving his father, however, but the short term of eight or nine summers.

Footnotes

^122:1 The Beauty of the Truth and of the Religion (of Islam).

     
The Mesnavi and The Acts of the Adepts, by Jelal-'d-din Rumi and Shemsu-'d-Din Ahmed, tr. by James W. Redhouse, [1881], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 126]

  

CHAPTER VIII.

Chelebi Emir 'Arif, Jelalu-'d-Din.

(NINETY pages of the volume by Eflaki give more than two hundred anecdotes of the acts and miracles, of various kinds, of this illustrious grandson of Jelalu-'d-Din, the teacher and friend of the author, who vouches as an eyewitness for the truth and correctness of some of the narratives.

The Emir 'Arif passed the far greater portion of his life in travelling about to various cities in central and eastern Asia Minor, and north-western Persia, countries then subject to the great Khans, descendants of Jengiz. He appears to have been of a more energetic or bellicose character than his father, and to have ruled with vigour during his short Rectorship.)

  

1.

On the last day but one of the period of the greater pilgrimage at Mekka, the eve of the Festival of Sacrifices, the ninth of the month of Zu-'l-Hijja, A.H. 717 (11th February, A.D. 1313), the Emir 'Arif, and the historian Eflaki, his disciple, were together at Sultaniyya, in the north of Persia, the new capital of the great western Mogul empire.

They were visiting at the convent of a certain Mevlevi dervish, named Sheykh Suhrab, [*1] with sundry of the friends and saints, all of whom were engaged in the study of different books, at about the hour of midday, excepting 'Arif, who was enjoying a siesta.

[p. 127]

Suddenly, 'Arif raised his head, and gave one of his loud, awe-inspiring shouts, which caused all present to tremble. Without a word, however, he again composed himself to sleep.

When he at length fully roused himself, and finally woke up from his sleep, Sheykh Eflaki ventured to inquire what it was that had disturbed him.

He answered: "I had gone in the spirit to pay a visit to the tomb of my great-grandfather, when there I saw the two Mevlevi dervishes, Nasiru-'d-Din and Shuja'u-'d-Din Chanaqi, who had seized each other by the collar, and were engaged in a violent dispute and struggle. I called out to them to desist; and two men, with one pious woman, being there present, saw me."

Eflaki at once made a note of this narrative, putting down the date and hour of the occurrence.

Some time afterwards, 'Arif returned to the land of Rome, and went to the town of Ladik (Laodicaea Combusta, not far from Qonya); and there they met the above-named Nasiru-'d-Din. In the presence of all the friends, 'Arif asked Nasir to relate to them the circumstances of his quarrel with Shuja'.

Nasir replied: "On the eve of the Festival of Sacrifices, I was standing at the upper end of the mausoleum, when Shuja' came there, and committed an unseemly act, for which I reprehended him. He immediately collared me, and I him; when suddenly, from the direction of the feet of the holy Baha Veled, the voice of 'Arif was heard shouting to us, and made us tremble. In awe thereat, we immediately embraced each other, and bowed in reverence. That is all I know of the matter."

'Arif then addressed Eflaki, and said: "Pray relate to our friends what thou knowest thereof, that they may be edified."

Eflaki now produced his memorandum-book, and showed the entry he had made, with the date. The friends marvelled at this, and rejoiced exceedingly, their spirits

[p. 128]

being refreshed with an influence from the invisible world.

'Arif then said: "By the soul of my ancestor, I dislike exceedingly to make a display of any miraculous power. But, now and then, for the edification of my disciples, such scenes will slip out. Then Eflaki takes note thereof."

Such miracles are known by the names of "manifestations," and "ektasis of the spirit."

When Qonya was reached, three friends, one a lady, bore testimony to having seen 'Arif at the tomb on that day, and to their having heard him shout.

  

2.

'Arif's last journey was from Larenda to Aq-Seray (on the road to Qonya). In the latter place he remained about ten days; when, one night, he laid his head on his pillow, and wept bitterly, continuously moaning and sobbing in his sleep.

In the morning his friends inquired the cause. He said he had seen a strange dream. He was seated in a vaulted chamber, with windows looking on to a garden as beautiful as paradise, with all kinds of flowering shrubs and fruit-bearing trees, beneath the shade of which the youths and maidens of heaven were walking and disporting themselves. Melodious voices were also heard. In one direction he noticed a flower-garden, and there he saw his grandfather, Jelalu-'d-Din. He wondered at his appearance; when lo, Jelal looked towards him, and beckoned him to approach. On his drawing near, Jelal asked him what had brought him there; and then added: "The time is come; the end of thy term. Thou must come to me."

It was from joy and delight at this kind invitation of his grandfather, that 'Arif had wept and sobbed.

He then said: "It is time for me to make my journey to heaven,--to drink of the cup of God's might."

Two days later, they continued their journey towards Qonya, and 'Arif showed some slight symptoms of indisposition.

[p. 129]

[paragraph continues] These daily grew more severe. He reached Qonya. One morning he came out of his house, and stood in the gateway of his great-grandfather's mausoleum, silent, in the midst of his disciples. It was Friday, the last day of the month of Zu-'l-qa'da, A.H. 719 (13th January, A.D. 1320).

The orb of the sun rose like a disk of gold, careering over the azure vault from an impulse given to it by the bat of God's decree. It attained the altitude of a lance-length. 'Arif contemplated it, and smiled. Shortly afterwards, he spoke as follows:

"I am tired of this lower world, and have no wish to remain beneath the sun, surrounded with dust and misery. The time is come for me to trample on the stars that encircle the pole, mounting beyond the sun, to occupy myself with the mysteries of the heavenly choir, and to be entirely delivered from the instabilities of this world of change."

His disciples burst into tears, and he continued--

"There is no remedy hereto, but to die. During life, my pleasure has been to journey and wander about, in outward space, and in inward self-exploration. For idle spirits come into the world of material forms to contemplate the marvels of the horizons, and the wonders of men's minds,--to acquire knowledge, and attain to certainty. Through the gravity of the body I have been impeded in the investigation, and I shall not be able to travel again. Let me, then, wend my way to the future state, for here below I have no real companion. My only anxiety is, to be with my father and grandfather. How long shall I be severed from them in this world of suffering? I long to behold my grandfather, and I will certainly depart."

He then cried aloud. After which he slowly returned to his chamber, and there continued to moan.

He managed to crawl, as well as he could, to the congregational service of worship of that Friday at noon. Thence he proceeded to the mausoleum, kissed the shrine,

[p. 130]

sang a hymn, performed a holy dance, and uttered ecstatic cries. He then laid himself down at full length on the floor, under which he is now buried, and said: "Where the man falls, there let him be interred. Bury you the deposit of my corpse in this spot."

That day was as though the last judgment were at hand. A tempest arose; all creation, mortal and immortal, seemed to be groaning.

The day following, Saturday, the traces of his malady were but too visible in 'Arif's features. He strove to battle with it, and to converse, as if he were in perfect health.

His sickness lasted about five and twenty days. On the twenty-second of Zu-'l-Hijja there was a violent shock of earthquake.

There was then in Qonya a certain saint, commonly known as "the Student," a successor of the legist Ahmed. In his youth he had made himself a great reputation for learning, in all its branches. But, for forty years, he had been paralysed, and had never risen from his seat, summer or winter. He was well versed in all mysteries, and now began to say: "They are taking away the lamp of Qonya! Alas, the world will go to utter confusion! I, too, will follow after that holy man!"

Shocks followed after shocks of the earthquake; and 'Arif exclaimed: "The hour of departure is at hand! See, the earth yawns for the mouthful it will make of my body. It shows signs of impatience for its food!"

He then asked: "Look! what birds are these that are come here?" His eyes remained fixed for a time on the angelic visions which he now saw. From time to time he would start, as though about to fly. The assembled disciples, men and women, wept bitterly. But he again spoke, and said--

"Sheykhs, be not troubled! Even as my descent into this world was for the regulation of the affairs of your community, so is my existence of equal advantage to you,

[p. 131]

and I will at all times be with you, never absent from you. Even in the other world will I be with you. Here below, separation is a thing unavoidable. In the other world there is union without disrupture, and junction without a parting. Let me go without a pang. To outward appearance, I shall be absent; but in truth, I shall not be away from you. So long as a sword is in its sheath, it cuts not; but, when it shall be drawn, you shall see its effects. From this day forward, I dash my fist through the curtain that veils the invisible world; and my disciples shall hear the clash of the blows."

As he spake these words, his eldest son, Shah-Zada, and his own half-brother, Chelebi 'Abid, entered the room. Sheykh Eflaki asked him what commands he had to give for them. 'Arif replied: "They belong to the Lord, and have no longer a relation to me; He will take care of them."

Eflaki now asked: "And what are your wishes with respect to me, your most humble servant?" The answer was: "Do thou remain in the service of the mausoleum. Forsake it not. Go not elsewhere. That which I have commanded thee to do, as to collecting in writing all the memoirs of my ancestors and family, that do thou in all diligence until its completion. So mayest thou be approved of the Lord, and blessed by His saints."

All wept.

'Arif now recited some verses; pronounced thrice the holy name of God, with a sigh; recited some more verses; and then, between the noon and afternoon hours of worship, having recited two short chapters of the Qur'an, he departed, in peace and rejoicing, to the centre of his existence, on Tuesday, the twenty-fourth day of Zu-'l-Hijja, A.H. 719 (5th February, A.D. 1320). Unto God be all glory, now and for ever!

He was buried on the 25th, where he had himself indicated, by the side of his grandfather. His half-brother 'Abid succeeded him.

Footnotes

^126:1 Europeanised Armenians have made this into Zohrab, as their own family name.

     
The Mesnavi and The Acts of the Adepts, by Jelal-'d-din Rumi and Shemsu-'d-Din Ahmed, tr. by James W. Redhouse, [1881], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 132]

  

CHAPTER IX.

Genealogy of Jelalu-'d-Din, Rumi.

ON his father's side, the remote ancestor of Jelalu-'d-Din, during Islamic times, was Abu-Bekr, the dearest and most faithful friend of Muhammed the Arabian lawgiver, and his successor in the government of the community of Islam, as the first of the long line of Caliphs.

Like Muhammed himself, Abu-Bekr was of the tribe of Quraysh, which claims descent, through Ishmael, from Abraham, the chosen Friend of God, and Father of the faithful. The stem of Abu-Bekr's branch of the tribe unites with that of Muhammed in Murra, ancestor to Muhammed in the seventh degree, and to Abu-Bekr in the sixth.

Abu-Bekr was, furthermore, one of Mohammed's fathers-in-law, as his daughter 'A'isha was the Prophet's only virgin bride.

A son or grandson of Abu-Bekr is said to have been among the Arabian conquerors of Khurasan during the caliphate of 'Uthman (Osman), about A.H. 25 (A.D. 647), and to have settled at Balkh (the capital of the ancient Bactria), where his family flourished until after the birth of Jelalu-'d-Din. [*1]

[p. 133]

At an uncertain period subsequent to A.H. 491 (A.D. 1097), a daughter of one of the Kh'arezmian kings of Central Asia was given in marriage to Jelalu-'d-Din's great-great-grandfather, whose name is either not mentioned by Eflaki, or I have missed it. She gave birth to Jelal's great-grandfather, Ahmed, surnamed El-Khatibi (as being, apparently, a son or descendant, or a client, of a public preacher, Khatib).

Nothing more is mentioned of Ahmed by Eflaki, than that he had a son Huseyn, surnamed Jelalu-'d-Din, who married a daughter of a certain Khurrem-Shah, King of Khurasan, and became grandfather, by her, to the author of the Mesnevi. His son, Mohammed, surnamed Baha'u-'d-Din, styled Sultanu-'l-'Ulema, and commonly known as Baha'u-'d-Din Veled, or shorter as Baha Veled, appears also to have married a lady, by whom he had three children, a daughter and two sons.

Baha Veled's eldest child, his daughter, was married off, and remained at Balkh, when Baha Veled, his mother, and two sons left it, a year or so before it was taken and devastated by Jengiz Khan in A.H. 608 (A.D. 1211). His elder son is not again mentioned by Eflaki after their departure from Balkh. Neither is the mother of his children once mentioned. But his own mother, the princess, was alive, and was still with him in about A.D. 1230; after which, she too is not again mentioned.

Baha Veled's youngest child, his most celebrated son Mohammed, surnamed Jelalu-'d-Din, Mevlana, Khudavendgar, and Rumi, the principal personage of these memoirs, the founder of the order of the Mevlevi dervishes, and author of the Mesnevi, had four children, three boys and a girl, by two wives. His eldest son was killed

[p. 134]

in the broil that caused the murder of his father's friend Shemsu-'d-Din of Tebriz. His youngest son is not taken further notice of; but his daughter was married off to a local prince, and left Qonya.

His second son, and eventually his successor as Principal or Abbot of his order, was named Muhammed, and surnamed Baha'u-'Din. He is commonly known as Sultan Veled.

Sultan Veled had six children, a boy and two girls by his wife Fatima, daughter of Sheykh Feridun the Gold- beater, and three boys, of whom two were twins, by two slave women. The daughters married well, and all his sons, or three of them, succeeded him as Abbot, one after the other. The eldest was Mir 'Arif (Chelebi Emir 'Arif), the second was named 'Abid, the third Zahid, and the fourth Wahid.

Chelebi Emir 'Arif, the eldest, and Eflaki's patron, had two sons and a daughter. His eldest son, Emir 'Alim, surnamed Shah-zada, succeeded eventually to the primacy after his uncles. With him, Eflaki's memoir is brought to a close.

Such was the natural line of this dynasty of eminent men. But Eflaki has also given the links of a spiritual series, through whom the mysteries of the dervish doctrines were handed down to and in the line of Jelalu-'d-Din.

In the anecdote No. 79, of chapter iii., the account is given of the manner in which the prophet Muhammed confided those mysteries to his cousin, son-in-law, and afterwards his fourth successor, as Caliph, 'Ali son of Abu-Talib, the "Victorious Lion of God."

'Ali communicated the mysteries to the Imam Hasan of Basra, who died in A.H. 110 (A.D. 728); Hasan taught them to Habib the Persian, [*1] who confided them to Dawud

[p. 135]

of the tribe of Tayyi',--Et-Ta'i (mentioned by D'Herbelot, without a date, as Davud Al Thai; he died A.H. 165, A.D. 781).

Dawud transmitted them to Ma'ruf of Kerkh (who died A.H. 200, A.D. 815); he to Sirri the merchant of damaged goods (Es-Saqati?; died A.H. 253, A.D. 867); and he to the great Juneyd (who died in about A.H. 297--A.D. 909). Juneyd's spiritual pupil was Shibli (died A.H. 334, A.D. 945) who taught Abu-'Amr Muhammed, son of Ibrahim Zajjaj (the Glazier), of Nishapur (who died in A.H. 348--A.D. 959) and his pupil was Abu-Bekr, son of 'Abdu-'llah, of Tus, the Weaver, who taught Abu-Ahmed (Muhammed son of Muhammed, El-Gazali (who died A.H. 504--A.D. 1110), and he committed those mysteries to Ahmed el-Khatibi, Jelal's great-grandfather, who consigned them to the Imam Sarakhsi (who died in A.H. 571--A.D. 1175).

Sarakhsi was the spiritual teacher of Jelal's father Baha Veled, who taught the Seyyid Burhanu-'d-Din Termizi, the instructor of Jelal. He again passed on the tradition to Shemsu-'d-Din of Tebriz, the teacher of Jelal's son, Sultan Veled, who himself taught the Emir 'Arif.

At the same time that the mysteries were thus being gradually transmitted to Jelalu-'d-Din and his successors by these links, they were also being diffused in thousands of other channels, and are at this day widely diffused over the world of Islam, which daily boasts of its living saints and their miracles. These latter are perhaps not less veracious that those continually blazoned forth by the Church of Rome, and by its Eastern sisters. We, too, have our spiritualists. Credulity will never forsake mankind and prodigies will never be lacking for the credulous to place faith in. There is much that is human in man, all the world over.

Footnotes

^132:1 A genealogy is given in the Turkish preface to my copy of the Mesnevi, which traces the descent of Jelalu-'d-Din Mohammed from Abu-Bekr in ten degrees, as follows:--"Jelalu-'d-Din, son of Baha'u-'d-Din, son of Huseyn, son of Ahmed, son of Mevdud, son of Sabit (Thabit), son of Museyyeb, son of Mutahhar, son of Hammad, son of 'Abdu-'r-Rahman, son of 'Abu-Bekr." Now, Abdu-'r-Rahman, the eldest of all the sons of Abu-Bekr, died and was buried at Mekka in A.H. 53(A.D. 672), and [p. 133] Jelalu-'d-Din was born at Balkh in A.H. 604 (A.D. 1207). Between these two there are nine degrees of descent given, for a period of 535 years, or 66 years for each life after the birth of the next link. This alone suffices to show that the genealogy is not to be depended on. Supposing the names given to be true, many other links must be missing; as many, probably, as those given.

^134:1 Habib the Persian, a wealthy man, converted to Islam by one word from Hasan of Basra, whose devoted disciple he became. He died A.H. 106 (A.D. 724).

     
The Mesnavi and The Acts of the Adepts, by Jelal-'d-din Rumi and Shemsu-'d-Din Ahmed, tr. by James W. Redhouse, [1881], at sacred-texts.com

  

THE

  

BOOK OF THE MESNEVI

  

OF

  

MEVLANA JELALU-'D-DIN, MUHAMMED, ER-RUMI,

  

OF QONYA.

     
The Mesnavi and The Acts of the Adepts, by Jelal-'d-din Rumi and Shemsu-'d-Din Ahmed, tr. by James W. Redhouse, [1881], at sacred-texts.com

[p. i]

  

PREFACE.

THIS is the book of the Rhymed Couplets (Mathnawi, Mesnevi). It contains the roots of the roots of the roots of the (one true) Religion (of Islam); and treats of the discovery of the mysteries of reunion and sure knowledge. It is the Grand Jurisprudence of God, the most glorious Law of the Deity, the most manifest Evidence of the Divine Being. The refulgence thereof "is like that of a lantern in which is a lamp" [*1] that scatters beams more bright than the morn. It is the paradise of the heart, with springs and foliage. One of those springs is "the fount named Salsabil" [*2] by the brethren of this religious order (of mystical devotees known as the Mevlevi or Dancing Dervishes); but, by saints and the miraculously endowed, it is called "the Good Station" [*3] and "the Best Resting-place." [*4] The just shall eat and drink therein, and the righteous shall rejoice and be glad thereof. Like the Egyptian Nile, it is a beverage for the patient, but a delusion to the people of Pharaoh and to blasphemers; even as God, whose name be glorified, hath said: "He misleads therewith many, and He guides therewith many; but He misleads not therewith (any), save the wicked." [*5]

[p. ii]

It is a comfort to men's breasts, an expeller of cares. It is an exposition of the Qur'an, an amplification of spiritual aliments, and a dulcifier of the disposition; written "by the hands of honorable scribes," [*1] who inscribe thereon the prohibition: "Let none touch it save the purified." [*2] It is (a revelation) "sent down (from on high) by the Lord of (all) the worlds," [*3] which vanity approacheth not from before, nor from behind," [*4] which God watches over and observes, He being " the best as a Preserver," [*5] and "the Most Compassionate of the merciful ones," [*6] unto whom pertain (many) titles, His utmost title being God, whose name be exalted.

We have been brief in (stating) this little; for a little is an index to much, and a mouthful may point out a pond, as a handful may serve as a sample for a whole threshing-floor, however large.

Thus saith the feeble servant, in need of the mercy of God, whose name be extolled, Muhammed son of Muhammed son of Huseyn, of (the city of) Balkh, [*7] of whom may God accept it: "I have exerted myself to enlarge this book of poetry in rhyming couplets, which contains strange and rare narratives, beautiful sayings, and recondite indications, a path for the devout, and a garden for the pious, short in its expressions, numerous in their applications. This have I done at the instance of my lord and master, my trust, and as the soul in my body, the moral store of my to-day and my morrow, the Sheykh Hasan son of Muhammed son of Hasan, commonly known by the appellation of Akhi-Turk (my brother Turk), a

[p. iii]

chief of the knowing ones (Gnostics?), a leader of right direction and sure knowledge, a helper of the human race, a confidant of men's hearts and minds, a charge of God among His creatures, His pure one among His reasoning servants, (a compendium of) His commandments to His Prophet, of His mysteries with His chosen one, a key to the treasures of the throne, a custodian of the riches of the extended earth, a man of excellencies, a sharp sword for the severance of truth and religion (from falsehood and blasphemy), [*1] the Bayezid [*2] of the age, the Juneyd [*3] of the period, the true friend son of a true friend son of a true friend, may God be pleased with him and with them, originally from the town of Urmiyya, [*4] and related to the venerated Sheykh, [*5] as he himself expressed it: 'I was a Kurd one evening, and was an Arabian in the morning.' [*6] May God sanctify his spirit, and the spirits of his successors! Blessed is such a predecessor; blessed are such successors! He was descended from a line on which the sun had cast its

[p. iv]

lustrous mantle, and personal nobility such that the stars shed their lights around it. May their courtyard ever be a centre to which the sons of saints will turn, and a temple of hopes about which embassies of spotless men will circulate. May it not cease to be thus while a constellation rises and a sparkling orb appears above the horizon in the east; so that it may be a thing held to by those who are possessed of insight, the godly, the spiritual, the heavenly, the celestial, the men of light, who keep silence and observe, who are absent though present, who are kings clothed in rags, the nobles of nations, endowed with virtues, the lights of guidances. Amen, O Lord of (all) the worlds. And this is a prayer not to be rejected; for it is a prayer joined in by all the good. And glory be to God in His unity. And may God pronounce blessings on our lord, Muhammed, and on his family and kin, the good, the clean!

Footnotes

^mi:1 Qur'an xxiv. 35.

^mi:2 Qur'an lxxvi. 18.

^mi:3 Qur'an xix. 94.

^mi:4 Qur'an xxv. 26.

^mi:5 Qur'an ii. 24.

^mii:1 Qur'an lxxx. 15.

^mii:2 Qur'an lvi. 78.

^mii:3 Qur'an lvi. 79.

^mii:4 Qur'an xli. 42.

^mii:5 Qur'an xii. 64.

^mii:6 Qur'an vii. 150

^mii:7 Balkh, to the south of the west part of the Upper Oxus, is in latitude 36 degrees, 48' N., longitude 67 degrees, 4' E. from Greenwich. It represents the ancient Bactra, otherwise called Zariaspa.

^miii:1 Husamu-'l-Haqqi-wa-'d-Din, his full title of honour. (See Anecdotes, chap. vi.)

^miii:2 Bayezid or Abu-Yazid, of Bestam, in Khurasan, Persia, latitude 36 degrees, 25' N., longitude 55 degrees, 0' E., a celebrated teacher and saint among the mystics of Islam, died A.H. 265, A.D. 874 (though A.H. 234, A.D. 848, has also been mentioned by some). His name was Tayfur, son of 'Isa, son of Adam, son of Surushan, a Zoroastrian who embraced Islam.

^miii:3 Juneyd, surname of Abu-'l-Qasim Sa'id son of 'Ubayd, entitled Sultan of the Sufi Community, a saint who died at Bagdad in A.H. 287 (A.D. 900).

^miii:4 Urmiyya, on the lake of that name, south-west from Tebriz, the capital city of Azerbayjan, the northwest province of Persia.

^miii:5 The expression of: "The venerated Sheykh," might, perhaps, at first, be thought to indicate the Caliph Abu-Bekr, the Sheykh par excellence, as he and his successor 'Umer (Omar) were designated "the two Sheykhs," from each being a father-in-law to Muhammed, whereas the third and fourth caliphs, 'Uthman (Osman) and 'Ali, were his sons-in-law. If this supposition were correct, Jelal and Husam would have been descended from the same remote ancestor. The commentators, however. I am informed, name a certain "Seyyid Abu-'l-Wefa, the Kurd," as being intended. Particulars as to his individuality and history have not, unfortunately, reached me.

^miii:6 I have not met with an explanation of this expression, which is again introduced in Tale xiv., distich 40.

     
The Mesnavi and The Acts of the Adepts, by Jelal-'d-din Rumi and Shemsu-'d-Din Ahmed, tr. by James W. Redhouse, [1881], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 1]

  

THE BOOK OF THE MESNEVI.

  

IN THE NAME OF GOD,
 THE ALL-MERCIFUL, THE VERY-COMPASSIONATE.

  

PROEM. 

FROM reed-flute [*1] hear what tale it tells;
 What plaint it makes of absence' ills:

"From jungle-bed since me they tore,
 Men's, women's, eyes have wept right sore.
 My breast I tear and rend in twain,
 To give, through sighs, vent to my pain.
 Who's from his home snatched far away,
 Longs to return some future day.
 I sob and sigh in each retreat,
 Be't joy or grief for which men meet. [5]
 They fancy they can read my heart;
 Grief's secrets I to none impart.
 My throes and moans form but one chain,
 Men's eyes and ears catch not their train.
 Though soul and body be as one,
 Sight of his soul hath no man won.

[p. 2]

A flame's the flute's wail; not a breath,
 That flame who feels not, doom him death.
 The flame of love, 'tis, prompts the flute,
 [10] Wine's ferment, love; its tongue not mute.
 The absent lover's flute's no toy;
 Its trills proclaim his grief, his joy.
 Or bane, or cure, the flute is still;
 Content, complaining, as you will.
 It tells its tale of burning grief;
 Recounts how love is mad, in brief.
 The lover lover's pangs best knows;
 As ear receives tongue's plaint of woes.
 Through grief, his day is but a dawn;
 [15] Each day of sorrow, torment's pawn.
 My days are waste; take thou no heed,
 Thou still are left; my joy, indeed.
 Whole seas a fish will never drown;
 A poor man's day seems all one frown.
 What boot from counsel to a fool?
 Waste not thy words; thy wrath let cool.
 Cast off lust's bonds; stand free from all.
 Slave not for pelf; be not greed's thrall.
 Pour rivers into one small gill,
 [20] It can but hold its little fill.
 The eye's a vase that's ne'er content;
 The oyster's filled ere pearl is sent. [*1]
 The heart that's bleeding from love's dart,
 From vice of greed is kept apart.
 Then hie thee, love, a welcome guest;--
 Physician thou to soothe my breast.
 Thou cure of pride and shame in me;
 Old Galen's skill was nought to thee
 Through love, this earthly frame ascends
 [25] To heaven; a hill, to skip pretends.

[p. 3]

In trance of love, Mount Sinai shakes,
 At God's descent; 'and Moses quakes.' [*1]
 Found I the friend on whom I dote,
 I'd emulate flute's dulcet note.
 But from my love, while torn away,
 Unmeaning words alone I say.
 The spring is o'er; the rose is gone;
 The song of Philomel is done.
 His love was all; himself, a note.
 His love, alive; himself, dead mote. [30]
 Who feels not love's all-quick'ning flame,
 Is like the bird whose wing is lame.
 Can I be quiet, easy, glad,
 When my delight's away? No! Sad.
 Love bids my plaint all bonds to burst.
 My heart would break, with silence curst.
 A mirror best portrays when bright;
 Begrimed with rust, its gleam grows slight.
 Then wipe such foul alloy away;
 Bright shall it, so, reflect each ray." [35]
 Thou'st heard what tale the flute can tell;
 Such is my case; sung all too well.

Footnotes

^m1:1 The reed-flute is the sacred musical instrument of the Mevlevi dervishes, commonly known as the Dancing Dervishes, from their peculiar religious waltz to the sound of the reed-flute, &c., with outstretched arms and inclined head, in their special public services of commemoration. They love the reed-flute as the symbol of a sighing absent lover.

^m2:1 There is a poetical Eastern notion by dewdrops or raindrops falling into that pearls are formed in the oysters them at a certain season.

^m3:1 Qur'an vii. 139, where the words are: "And Moses fell down, swooning."

     
The Mesnavi and The Acts of the Adepts, by Jelal-'d-din Rumi and Shemsu-'d-Din Ahmed, tr. by James W. Redhouse, [1881], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 4]

  

I.

A PRINCE there was, long since in time it is.
 Of Church and State the power and wealth were his.
 The chase on horse one day to follow, bent;'
 With pompous courtier-train afield he went.
 A handmaid [*1] fair was wand'ring near a grove.
 Her he espied, and straightway fell in love.
 His heart was snared; her form its cage, its stall.
 He lavished gold; and made her thus his thrall.
 But now, behold the wayward spite of fate!
 [5] The maid fell sick, this prince's joy to bate.

An ass had Hodge; no saddle to the fore.
 A saddle bought; a wolf straight Jacky tore.
 A jug had Dick; the well, alas, was dry.
 The well then filled; the jug was broke hard by.

Now leeches called the prince, from left, from right.
 "Two lives," quoth he, "depend upon your might.
 My health is naught; she's life of life to me.
 I'm sad at heart; my sov'reign balm is she.
 Who finds a remedy to save her life,
 [10] Much gold, with jewels, his; and thanks more rife."

All promised marvels; each, to use his skill;
 To search the case; to ease the maiden's ill.

[p. 5]

"Each one of us has Jesu's [*1] healing power.
 Of all their ills we cure men every hour."
 Through pride, "God willing" said they not, I trow. [*2]
 Man's nothingness, in them the Lord would show.
 That is to say--to leave out this good word
 Is sin; said by mere rote, it will not please the Lord,
 How many shrink from tonguing it aloud,
 Whose hearts each action with "God willing" shroud. [15]

The doctors now prescribe full many a drug.
 In vain they ponder, vain their shoulders shrug.
 The maid a very skeleton became;
 The prince's tears their want of skill did blame.
 With oxymel, through fate, did bile increase;
 E'en almond oil ran dry where rubbed as grease.
 Lax myrobalans act as nutgalls first;
 As naphtha feeds a fire, drinks brought but thirst.

The prince no sooner saw their art was vain,
 Than barefoot sped, heaven's worship-house [*3] to gain. [20]
 The holy altar, there, he bowed before;
 With flood of tears he bathed its sacred floor.
 Then, heart-relieved with sorrow's fierce outbreak,
 'Mid praise and blessing, thus his suit he spake
 "To Thee, whose meanest gift is world-wide sway,
 Who know'st each secret wish, why need I pray?
 Our refuge art Thou in our every need;
 We've erred again; do Thou in mercy lead.
 'Tis Thy behest, to whom all thoughts are known,
 That man with words approach Thy awful throne." [25]

[p. 6]

His humble supplication proffered so,
 Sweet mercy's fount at once did overflow.
 His tears undried, deep slumber on him fell,
 And heavenly-dulcet tones he heard thus tell:
 "Glad tidings, prince, to thee this day I bring:
 Next daydawn at thy gate a guest shall ring;
 A heav'n-sent stranger, versed in healing art,
 In him have faith; he's true in speech and heart.
 Imagine not his treatment magic's spell;
 [30] God's power alone can make thy maiden well."

The promised hour at hand, the daydawn broke;
 The sunbeams paled the stars; the prince awoke.
 An outlook sought he, whence to watch the way,
 And first th' expected stranger to survey.
 One he espied of most majestic mien,
 Of radiance mild,--as sun, dark clouds between;
 Or moon at full;--so seem'd he from afar.
 Mere fancy's pictures ever objects mar.
 Things non-existent often frenzy paints;
 [35] We see mankind deluded over feints.
 Their peace, their war, not seldom for a sham;
 Their pride, their shame, some sorry epigram.
 But visions, such as blessed saints entrance,
 Reflections are from heaven's inhabitants.

The semblance by our prince seen in his swoon,
 The features wore that now in flesh are shown.
 The prince, in lieu of ushers, forward came,
 To meet the heaven-sent guest, in his own name.
 Their trains one column formed from mingling bands;
 [40] Their hearts united, fettered not their hands.
 The prince: "Would thou'dst my soul enslaved; not she!
 But here below effect a cause must see.

[p. 7]

Be my Muhammed! I thy 'Umar stand,
 With girded loins awaiting thy command."

Pray God to grant thee ever meek respect;
 The puffed-up fool's remote from Heaven's elect.
 A shameless monarch to himself's a curse,
 A firebrand to his realm; nay, even worse.
 Food in the wilderness by God was sent;
 Food without toil, food gratis, without stint. [45]
 Some graceless scoffers out of Moses' host
 Dared to demand the onions, lentils lost. [*1]
 Such toilless food then ceased to fall from Heaven;
 To dig, to sow, to reap, in lieu is given.
 Fresh suit, much later, Jesus made; God willed;
 Again food rife became; men's dishes filled.
 That food's a gift from Heaven is clearly said,
 In Jesu's prayer: "Give us our daily bread." [*2]
 Men's bold presumption Heaven again incensed,
 When basketsful to beggars were dispensed. [50]
 Jesus proclaimed the miracle would last;--
 That food would never lack as in the past.
 Men doubted, asked for more to store away;
 They trusted not God's word for bread each day.
 Importunate those suitors, full of greed;
 Heaven's gate of mercy closed against their breed.

Withheld is rain when alms have ceased to flow;
 Where fornication reigns, black death will grow.
 Whatever grief and sorrow's on us sent,
 Of wickedness and guilt's a punishment. [55]
 The hardened sinner, who his God offends,
 A ruthless robber is; he spoils his friends.
 He who is shameless in his words and deeds,
 Despair from disappointment is his meed.

[p. 8]

Yon orbs of heaven obey their Maker's word;
 The holy angels meekly serve the Lord.
 The sun's eclipse is but a check to pride;
 E'en Satan's fall presumption caused to tide.
 Return we now the sequel to attest,
 [60] Of what befell our prince with his new guest.

His circling arms the welcome form embraced,
 And, lover-like, with joy his neck enlaced.
 Kisses bestowed he on his hand and brow;
 Hoped kindly he'd fared well from home till now.
 His health and welfare asking, led him in.
 "Its own reward is patience," thought he then.
 Patience at first is bitter; but at length
 Its fruit is sweet. It gives us heart's content.

Then he aloud: "A gift from God thou'rt come,
 [65] The proverb's pith: 'By patience overcome.'
 This meeting's the reward of all my prayer;
 Thou'lt solve the riddle of my dark despair.
 Th' expounder, thou, of all my soul's desires,
 Thou'lt extricate me from despond's deep mires.
 Be welcome, then; a very friend in need;
 Hadst thou delayed, my case were sad indeed.
 Prince of physicians! Who'd not welcome thee,
 Deserves rejection. Do his eyes not see?"

Urbanity's requirements thus bested,
 [70] Our prince the stranger to a chamber led.
 The maiden's tale and case he there unfolds.,
 The patient, next, unveiled, the guest beholds.
 Complexion, pulse, egesta, all are seen;
 Disposing causes, symptoms, sought, I weep.
 Then he: "The remedies till now adduced,
 Have detrimental been, no good produced.
 The case has been from first misunderstood.
 Protect us, Heaven! A blundering brotherhood!"

[p. 9]

He saw her trouble; thence divined her ill.
 Her secret kept he; hidden held it still. [75]
 The sickness was not caused by bile or spleen.
 The scent of perfume's better smelt than seen.
 He traced her suffering to a mind oppressed;
 Her body sound, her soul a wish suppressed.
 Her hesitations made him guess her love;
 The symptoms plain,--her heart was sick, poor dove!

A lover's smart is not from fleshly pine;
 A probe is love; it sounds hearts' depths, divine.
 Let love proceed from this or other cause,
 It matters not; heavenward it mortals draws. [80]
 However well we strive love to portray,
 We blush thereat, when love our hearts doth sway.
 Words make most matters plain and manifest;
 But love unspoken speaks whole volumes best.
 When pen took up from zeal the writing trade,
 In love's description, oh! such blots it made!
 Our wits in love's affairs stand sore perplexed;
 Love only can elucidate love's text.

The sun alone can well explain the sun.
 Wilt see't expounded? Turn to him alone. [85]
 A shade, 'tis true, of him gives some small hint;
 The shining sun surpasses all comment.
 A shade, like evening chitchat, sends to sleep,
 From sun's effulgence does full knowledge leap.
 That day-orb, still, each eve sets, here below;
 The soul-sun, God, shines in eternal glow.
 'Mong things extern that orb has not a peer;
 But mock suns we can make, our nights to cheer.
 On heart unless the soul-sun cast a ray,
 No thought, no picture can its sheen portray. [90]
 Can mind His glorious essence comprehend?
 His presence, then, to image who'll pretend?

[p. 10]

Of poet's verse when God's the holy theme,
 Its minished head the sun may hide, 'twould seem.
 At mention of His name each breast must find,
 A duty 'tis His grace to call to mind.
 The breath of life He to this body gave,
 With Him to reunite, should mercy save.
 These years I've conversed with Him. Life serene!
 [95] One repetition more! O blissful scene!
 How pleasant heaven and earth their smiling hold!
 He offers soul, mind, eye, a hundredfold!

Beyond my strength, O try me not these days!
 My reason 'd fail to falter forth Thy praise.
 The song of man, when uninspired by Thee,
 Mere fulsome, flattering trash is seen to be.
 Bid me describe, whose every nerve is seared,
 A lover's woe, whom mistress never cheered.
 His lonesomeness, the anguish of his breast,
 [100] Not here I'll paint; elsewhere it may be best.
 He cries: "O succour me; I faint, I pant;
 And quickly; lest delay the dagger plant!"

The Mystic [*1] true relieves each moment's need;
 "To-morrow " 's not a point in his pure creed.
 Art not persuaded so? The proverb scan:
 "Delay's the thief of time;" say: "bane of man."
 Love's sweetest favours are conferred by stealth;
 Its darksome hints are treasured mines of wealth.
 The tale's most pleasant to a lover's ears,
 [105] That tells of joys he's tasted, ills he fears.

Speak, meddler, then, in plain, unvarnished guise;
 No subterfuge employ; deal not in lies.

[p. 11]

The veil tear off, dissimulation lost:
 "When unadorned, beauty's adorned the most."
 Should my sweet love unveil'd her charms display,
 Thy smirks and smiles would all be borne away.
 Thy suit prefer; use moderation still:
 A blade of grass ne'er overturns a hill.
 The sun that lights and warms this nether world,
 If brought too near, had all to ruin hurled. [110]
 Seek not to sow dissension in the earth;
 Vaunt not the Sun of Tebriz' [*1] holy birth.
 Contention's never-ending. Better far,
 Commit to memory this wordy war.

The guest, convinced that love had caused her ill,
 Proceeded next the prince's mind to still.
 "These chambers clear of every mortal soul;
 Leave me alone the patient to control.
 No prying ear may linger in the hall;
 I've things to ask may not be heard by all." [115]

The place was cleared; no soul remained within,
 Save leech and patient; other, none was seen.
 In gentlest tones he asked: "Where was thy home?
 For each town's folk a different cure must come.
 What friends, what family hast left behind,--
 Companions, playmates, who to thee were kind?"
 On pulse his finger. He then, one by one,
 Inquired anew each point, omitting none.

So he whose foot is wounded with a thorn,
 Upon his knee doth take the limb that's torn. [120]
 With needle's point he seeks the intrusive dart;
 Not finding it, from lip he soothes the smart.

[p. 12]

If thorn in foot is thus a task to find,
 Judge what must be a rankling pang of mind.
 Could every chance observer spy those ills,
 Where'd be the cankering care, the grief that kills?
 Boys place a thorn beneath an ass's tail;
 The cure Ned knows not; jumping's no avail.
 Whisking's still worse; it deeper drives the dart.
 [125] 'Tis reason's task to ease the burning smart.
 The ass, if sharper grow the throbs and pains,
 Kicks, plunges, rolls, his hide with gore bestains.

Our doctor's mind, by art full well prepared,
 With gentle measures sought the ill he feared.
 Once more, with tact, he bids fresh memories come,
 And leads the maid again to talk of home.
 The spring once tapped, the stream began to flow;
 She told th' inquirer much he wished to know.
 He lends his ear as she each scene displays;
 [130] His finger notes her pulse, as on she strays;
 To learn if any name should raise a start,
 And thus betray the secret of her heart.
 Anew he mentions every friend, each place;
 Repeated such as gave of hope a trace.
 He asked: "On quitting, thou, thy native town,
 Where first was it thy guardians set thee down?"

A place she named, and on to others passed;
 Nor blush, nor pulse gave sign, or notice massed.
 Of lords and citizens she gave report,
 [135] Of festivals, and seats of gay resort.
 Town after town, house after house, by name,
 She spoke about; no blush, no throb still came.
 Her pulse retained its normal ebb and flow.
 Till Samarqand's name made her cheeks to glow,
 Her pulse beat high, her colour went and came;
 Of goldsmith youth she there had been the flame.

[p. 13]

This point drawn forth,--this secret once confessed,
 More easily our leech the sequel guessed.
 "O maiden, let me know this youth's abode."
 "At Holywell, near Bridge-end's public road." [140]

"I knew," said he, "at once, thy case was such.
 Now trust me. Thee to serve I will do much.
 Make thyself happy. Cast away all care,
 As showers cheer meadows, thee I'll greatly spare.
 I'll prove thy guardian angel; never fear;
 Thy father's place I'll take;--thy burden bear.
 Tell not this secret unto mortal soul,
 However much the prince may thee cajole.
 Keep safe this knowledge in thy own heart's core;
 So mayest thou, lass, thy lover see once more. [145]
 Our holy Prophet's sacred maxim 'twas:
 'Who keeps his secret, speedy success has.'
 The seed to earth committed sure must be,
 Ere field or garden's pride men may it see.
 If gold and silver were not hard to find,
 How could they grow? [*1] They soon would be out-mined."

The good physician's soothing words perceived,
 Our maiden's mind from carking care's relieved.
 Some promises are truly meant, sincere;
 Others are merely made to cheat the ear. [150]
 A good man's promise is a gem of price;
 Rely not on the words of sons of vice.

Our doctor, now, with subtle speech and wiles,
 The maiden's grief had turn'd to sunny smiles.
 He leaves her then; seeks out the prince; and tells
 The news he'd learnt, the source of all her ills.

[p. 14]

"What's now to do?" the prince's care inquired;
 "Delay is dangerous; patience may grow tired."
 The doctor then: "Send for him; come he must,
 [155] From his far home to fill some post of trust.
 Invite him here; a dress of honour give;
 On him shower gold; new life 'twill make him live."
 The prince assented; took the doctor's plan;
 Thought it was sound and wise from such a man.
 Two trusty messengers he quickly sent,
 Sedate, fair-spoken, loved where'er they went.
 To Samarqand they journeyed, prompt and sure.
 The goldsmith found; the prince's message bore.
 "Great man of art, the marvels of thy skill,
 [160] Are viewed with rapture, or with envy still.
 Our prince has need of thee, his mint to guide;
 For none like thee is heard of, far and wide.
 This dress of honour, yonder gold he sends;
 Requests thou'lt come, and be his best of friends."

The gold and dress of honour won his heart;
 Goodbye to home he said, with them to start.
 He travels joyous; thinks his luck is great;
 And never dreams of what's to be his fate.
 An Arab charger proudly bore him on;
 [165] He reeked not at what price all this was won.
 O fatuous fool! Thou hastest to thy doom.
 The post thou dream'st of, soon will be thy tomb.
 His fancy webs of power and fame did weave;
 Death's angel thundered: "Come, and all this leave!"

Arrived betimes at his long journey's end,
 The doctor led him to the prince, his friend.
 Most nobly was he there received in turn.
 One trims the lampwick, still, to make it burn.
 The prince addressed him; bade him welcome there;
 [170] Mint-master nam'd him, treasurer, and mayor.

[p. 15]

Our doctor once again his counsel gave:
 "The damsel to this youth for service leave.
 United to him, she'll her health regain;
 Love's fever will subside with absence' pain."

The prince bestows the sick one on her mate.
 United were the two in solemn state.
 Six months they feasted on love's joys so sweet;
 The handmaid's health from day to day more meet.

The doctor, now, a potion mixed for him.
 His health declines; he every day grows slim. [175]
 The coin that passes much from hand to hand
 Soon loses currency, has no demand.
 So he, when beauty no more graced his cheek,
 Began to lack worth with the handmaid sleek.
 All love that's built on outer skin-deep charms,
 Is not true love. At length shame 'tis that warms.
 Would it were shame alone that pricks him now!
 He'd not been victimised and brought thus low.
 His eyes pour forth two streams of bitter tears;
 His altered features the worst foe he fears. [180]

The peacock's enemy his plumage call.
 The monarch bleeds whose splendours neighbours gall.
 The musk-deer for the musk-pod still is slain;
 His blood for that alone the ground will stain.
 The marten for its fur is trapped, surprised,
 And strangled. Kings its pelt have prized.
 The elephant, sagacious creature, dies,
 For iv'ry pierced with weapons as he flies.

"He who slays me for what I leave behind,
 Reflects not: 'Blood that's spilt demands its kind.' [185]
 To-day 'tis I; to-morrow 'twill be thou;
 Who'll be most loser? 'Tis not I, all know.

[p. 16]

The shadow of a wall, 'tis true, is wide;
 The sun revolves; the shadow's turn'd aside.
 The world's a mountain; all our works, a voice;
 Our voice goes forth; its echo has no choice."
 Reflecting thus, the goldsmith breath'd his last;
 The handmaid's love and grief behind her cast.

A dead mate's love can never more be shown;
 [190] A dead mate's voice will never more be known;
 Love for the living, in the heart and eyes,
 Will ever spring; the dead no more can rise.
 One Living is there, death that never knows;
 Love Him! The life from Him alone still flows,
 Love Him, whom saints and prophets all have loved;
 Through whom alone we all have lived and moved.
 Say not thou canst not to His throne approach;
 He's gracious. His rich grace bears no reproach!

The goldsmith's death through lethal drugs, be sure,
 [195] Was not from hope, or fear, or baser lure.
 The doctor kill'd him, not to please our prince;
 Him some divine suggestion did convince.
 The story of the child by angel slain [*1]
 Cannot be fully grasped by minds too plain.
 A saint that acts on Heaven's high behest,
 Can never do amiss; 'tis always best.
 He who can pardon, he may also doom;
 He's God's vicegerent; acts in Heaven's room.
 As Ishmael beneath his father's knife, [*2]
 [200] Do thou for such a prince lay down thy life;

[p. 17]

Thus may thy soul, in future blessed abode,
 Muhammed-like, in peace be with thy God.
 His lovers joyful are, most, when they slay
 Their worldly joys with their own hands, as play.

Our prince took not the goldsmith's life through lust.
 Chase such suspicion from thy mind thou must.
 Imagine not he'd stoop to mortal sin.
 Can holy saint have tainted heart within?
 The trial of the fire, and of the flame,
 Is but to cleanse pure gold from every blame. [205]
 So too, temptation on us all is sent,
 To part the good from those of bad intent.
 Had he not acted thus by God's command,
 No prince, a wolf he'd been, rav'ning the land.
 From lust, greed, foul caprice, his soul was free;
 So did God will, whate'er the cause may be.
 Elias sank his ship in full design; [*1]
 That wreck to future blessings was the sign.
 Moses was shock'd thereat, with all his skill
 And inspiration. Thou must needs judge ill. [210]
 A blood-red rose call not by murder's name;
 Just retribution see thou do not blame.
 Had righteous blood been shed by him as naught,
 Blasphemer were I to extol him aught.
 Praise of the wicked God with horror views;
 The good contemn all flatterers of sin's crews.
 Our prince was kind and virtuous, wise and just,
 A man God-fearing, and in God's full trust.
 A victim put to death by such a friend,
 Is slain in error, or for some wise end. [215]

[p. 18]

Did not our God mean mercy in His wrath,
 How could the Lord of Mercies thunder forth?
 A child may tremble at the lancet's smart;
 His mother knows there's healing in the dart.
 It may half kill him, but restores sound life;
 So God's great mercies far surpass our strife.
 Men judge of what they see by what they think.
 [219] From judging justice, men of sense will shrink.

Footnotes

^m4:1 In Islam a free person cannot legally be bought and sold.

^m5:1 By way of hyperbole, a clever physician is always compared to Jesus, in his miraculous healing powers, by Muslims.

^m5:2 Qur'an xviii. 23, teaches: "Say not, 'I will do so and so,' unless (thou add): 'God willing.'"

^m5:3 Divine service in Islam is entirely worship and praise. It is erroneous to talk of Muslims saying their prayers. Praise, laud, and glory is what they are bound to offer. Prayer is voluntary; and is prohibited, unless in some duly authorised form as a collect.

^m7:1 Qur'an ii. 58.

^m7:2 Qur'an ii. 114.

^m10:1 The word "sufi," used in the original, is probably the Greek sofoi but is explained as meaning, literally; "clad in woollen," from "suf," wool. Metaphorically, in common use, it means: a pious man.

^m11:1 The holy Sheykh Shemsu-'d-Din, of Tebriz, is meant; who was a friend of the author for many years, visiting Qonya at intervals, where he was put to death (in A.D. 1262?). See the "Anecdotes," Chap. iv.; especially No. 17.

^m13:1 It was generally believed in bygone days that gems and metals grew and ripened in their mines.

^m16:1 The story is in Qur'an xviii. 73. The angel was disguised as a servant to Moses. The passage says: "And they two proceeded until they met a boy; and he slew him."

^m16:2 With Muslims, Ishmael was to have been sacrificed; not Isaac. The Qur'an xxxvii. 98-111, relates the story, but gives no name to the "boy." Commentators supply it, by tradition.

^m17:1 A continuation of the story from Qur'an xviii. 70. Some commentators make Elias the servant of Moses on the occasion. There is a tale in one of the essayists of last century,--the "Spectator," if I rightly remember,--that gives these two adventures and others; the angel at last explaining to his companion the secret causes of all his actions.

     
The Mesnavi and The Acts of the Adepts, by Jelal-'d-din Rumi and Shemsu-'d-Din Ahmed, tr. by James W. Redhouse, [1881], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 19]

  

II.

AN oilman there was, who a parrot possessed,
 Soft-voiced, and green-coated; could talk with the best.
 The oilshop her charge when the man was away;
 The customers coaxed she the whole live-long day.
 Her speech was quite human, her words full of sense,
 In all parrot-tricks she was void of offence.

One day the man popped out, on bus'ness intent;
 The parrot, as usual, had charge while he went.
 A cat, as it chanced, of a mouse in full chase
 Bounced into the shop. This poor Poll could not face. [5]
 From perch away flew she; took refuge on shelf;
 Some jars she knocked over; the oil spread itself.

The master returning, first sat himself down,
 As lord of the manor; the shop was his own.
 The oil-pools he spied, and then Polly's wet coat;
 A blow on the head made her feathers drop out.

In silence some days Polly brooded, from grief;
 The oilman's bereft of his wits, to be brief.
 He plucked at his beard; he heaved a deep sigh;
 "Alas!" then, he shrieked out, "day's darkened on high [10]
 My hand, would it withered had, ere I'd struck Poll;
 I've silenced her prattle that always was droll!"

[p. 20]

His alms now he showers on each passing scamp,
 In hopes Poll her chatter 'd get back by some tramp.
 Three days and three nights in this guise did he pass,
 Despair at his heart, like a lorn lovesick lass;
 Incessantly sobbing and sighing, his word
 Was: "Pray now, will speech e'er return to my bird?"

A bare-headed mendicant happened to pass;
 [15] Whose scalp was close shaved, smooth and shining as glass.
 At once our Poll-parrot her silence forswore,
 Screamed after the mendicant: "Poor head! Sore! Sore!
 Old bald-pate! old bald-pate! What is it thou'st done?
 Upset some one's oil jar? The oil is't all gone?"
 The passers-by smiled all at Polly's mistake,
 'Tween bald-head and bare-head no diff'rence to make.

So thou, my dear friend, think thyself not a saint;
 A quean to a queen bears resemblance, but faint.
 Mankind on this point in great error still stands;
 [20] Th' elect of the Lord are ignored on all hands.
 The equals of prophets acknowledged they be;
 Of saints they're the brethren, as all men agree.
 Fools say: "The elect are but human, you see;
 To eat and to sleep they're constrained, just as we."

Through blindness they miss the real point of the strife,
 The diff'rence between them's immense all through life.
 The wasp and the bee eat and drink from the fields;
 The one stings, the other sweet honey still yields.
 The deer of both sorts browse the same mountain's side;
 [25] The one gives rich musk; dung the other; go, hide.
 The canes of two species in one land may grow;
 Quite empty that one; from this, sugar will flow.
 By thousands, examples of pairs thus are known,
 Which differ as much as does cheese from the moon.

[p. 21]

Our bread, in one case, turns to dirt in our meat;
 Another produces the mind, God's own seat.
 His food the one man swells with envy and greed;
 By like means another gains virtue indeed.
 One soil is productive; one barren and salt;
 One angel's in heaven; the other's at fault. [30]
 In form, many pairs may appear as though one,
 Clear water is sometimes as hard as a stone.
 Excepting the taster by practice, who knows
 The wholesome from unwholesome water that flows?

Supposing saints' miracles tricks, magic-wrought,
 They fancy them both the result of deep thought.
 Magicians, at bidding of Pharaoh, did cast
 Their wands down, to Moses' rod as a repast.
 From his rod to their wands a chasm there must be;
 From his act to theirs we an interval see. [35]
 God's curse on their witchcraft and devilish art!
 His blessing on Moses, who chose the best part!

To me, like as apes are man's miscreants all; [*1]
 To speak of them causes me, straight, sick to fall!
 Whatever men practise, apes will copy still;
 Our actions they mimic; of thought they know nil.
 They cunningly do what they've seen that man did;
 The reason they seek not; from them that is hid.
 A man acts from reason; an ape from mere whim.
 Perdition may seize all such actors, and him! [40]
 The hypocrite [*2] worships [*3] as aping the saint,
 For form's sake, or worse. His religion's mere feint.

[p. 22]

In pilgrimage, worship, and fasting, and alms, [*1]
 Believers and hypocrites vie, as in psalms.
 Believers shall win in the last judgment day;
 The hypocrites then shall receive their due pay.
 The two are contending one great game of deeds,
 As factions of Mervites and Razites [*2] with creeds.
 They each shall go there, where their party shall stand;
 [45] And each shall be classed as their actions demand. [*3]

Just style these "Believers," their hearts fill with glee;
 But dub them all "Hypocrites," rage then thou'lt see.
 The first one's ashamed of the last one's true self;
 This last-named's a plague to the first, like an elf.

No virtue in mere words or letters is found;
 "Believer" 's a word in itself but a sound.
 If "Hypocrite!" cast in their teeth be at last,
 As scorpion's sting to their souls it clings fast.
 If "Hypocrite" 's name be not product of hell,
 [50] So bitter at all times why does its sound tell?
 This name's great repulsion is not in its form;
 The bitter it smacks of is not from a corm.
 The word's but a vase; 'tis its sense is the wine;
 The sense of a book in the title may shine.

Sweet lakes and salt seas do we find here on earth;
 The barrier between them: "Thus far; go not forth!"

[p. 23]

They both, in their origin, flow from one source;
 Look not at their severance; it's matter of course.
 The touchstone's the test by the which thou must try
 If gold be quite pure, or debased with alloy. [55]
 The touchstone of conscience, where planted by God,
 What's certain, what's doubtful, makes plain without nod.
 A fishbone that sticks in the throat of a man
 No ease ever gives till it's coughed out again.
 In ten thousand mouthfuls should one bone be found,
 As soon as perceived, it's spit out on the ground.

Perception of things mundane guides here below;
 Religion's keen sense leads where God's glories glow.
 The health of his senses man asks of the leech;
 Religion's sound sense from the Lord we beseech. [*1] [60]
 For healthy perceptions, our frame must be sound;
 Religion's enjoyments through suff'rings are found.
 The health of the soul's through a waste of the flesh,
 But after much searching it builds up afresh.

How blest is the soul that, for love of its God, [*2]
 Has flung away wealth, health, e'en life, as a sod!
 Has pulled down its house a hid treasure to find,
 And built it again from that treasure refined!
 Who cuts off the streamlet to clear out its bed;
 Then turns on the water with which it is fed! [65]
 Who gashes his skin to extract the spear-head!
 (The skin may now heal, for the irritant's fled.)
 Who wrecks a strong castle to drive out the foe,
 Then rears it still stronger, to hold evermo'!

The will of Almighty God who shall control?
 These sentences written are parables all.

[p. 24]

Sometimes in one way, in another sometimes,
 Religion confuses before it sublimes.
 Not terror, bewilderment, loathing, dismay;
 [70] But ecstacy, rapture, love, come into play.
 In trance of love fixed, one contemplates the Lord,
 Another, self losing, unites with his God.
 Observe the rapt features of that one, of this;
 Perchance by such watching thy soul may gain bliss.

Too numerous demons in human form walk;
 Beware, then, with whom thou engagest in talk.
 The fowler his whistle may ply in the field,
 To lure the poor birds, saying: "Come and be killed."
 Each songster conceives 'tis the voice of its mate,
 [75] Descends from the air, and meets with its fate.
 The sinner, in pious cant, uses a wile,
 To trap the unwary who ponders no guile.
 The upright deal faithfully, truly, in trust;
 The wicked imagine but fraud and distrust.
 A lion of wool is a beggar's device; [*1]
 Musaylama's named Muhammed in a trice. [*2]
 Musaylama liar, deceiver we know,
 Muhammed was faithful in weal and in woe.
 The wine of God's love was the food of his soul.
 [80] The wine that inebriates dash from thy bowl.

Footnotes

^m21:1 In its true sense, the word "miscreant" signifies one who holds an erroneous belief. We corruptly say now: an infidel.

^m21:2 "Hypocrites," in Islam, form a faction. They profess the faith openly, but inwardly they hate or despise it.

^m21:3 The Muslims "worship" God in their appointed devotions. If they "pray" also, subsequently, this is a voluntary act.

^m22:1 "worship, fasting, alms, and pilgrimage" are the four acts by which a Muslim outwardly attests his faith. "'Worship," five times daily; "fasting," one month yearly; "pilgrimage," at Mekka, once, as a duty, in a lifetime; "alms," whenever property of a certain amount is possessed.

^m22:2 "Mervites and Razites," citizens of Merv and Rey (Rhages), two great Persian cities in former days, now in ruins. Merv is at present a Turkman camping-ground, aimed at by Russia as a halting place on the road to Herat and India. Rey, the Rhages of the book of Tobit, not far from Tihran, the Shah's present capital of Persia. The two parties were like Ireland's Orangemen and Ribbonmen of our time.

^m22:3 Heaven and Hell; the "sheep" and the "goats."

^m23:1 The original has "the Darling;" the highest title given to Mohammed by Muslims is God's Darling; which is not found in the Qur'an.

^m23:2 The original has "its dear one;" God is the dear one of mystics.

^m24:1 A woollen lion is a toy made and sold or exhibited by mendicants.

^m24:2 Musaylama was a prince of Naja, who gave himself out as a prophet, and wrote to Muhammed, proposing that they should divide Arabia between them. His epistle began: "Musaylama, the Apostle of God, to Mohammed, the Apostle of God." Mohammed's answer commenced with: "Muhammed, the Apostle of God, to Musaylama the liar." He was eventually defeated and slain in battle, in the eleventh year of the Hijra after Mohammed's decease; when all Arabia submitted to Islam. He was killed by Wahshi, the Ethiopian slave who, in the battle of 'Uhud, had formerly driven the self-same javelin through the body of Hamza, Mohammed's uncle. Wahshi lived long after these events, in Syria. He used to say that, as a pagan, he had slain one of the best of men, and, as a Muslim, one of the worst. When Mekka was taken, he was proscribed; but he got away safely. Not long afterwards, he made his submission, and Muhammed forgave him, as he did others in analogous circumstances.

     
The Mesnavi and The Acts of the Adepts, by Jelal-'d-din Rumi and Shemsu-'d-Din Ahmed, tr. by James W. Redhouse, [1881], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 25]

  

III.

 [*1]

A CERTAIN Jewish King, in savage, brutal scenes,
 From hate of Jesus, persecuted Nazarenes.
 'Twas Jesu's age, when he the Gospel first did teach;
 In Jesus, Moses, and in Moses, Jesus preach.

That King God made squint-eyed; things straight he could not see.
 A King and squint-eyed? Ah! that one the two should be!

A master once a squint-eyed slave commanded so:
 "Come here; that bottle from its shelf, go, fetch me; go."
 The squint-eye straightway asked: "Which, master, of the two? [*2]
 The case explain; clear up the doubt, and truly show." [5]
 His master answered: "Two there's not; there is but one;
 Put off thy strabism; with stupidity have done."
 "Good master," quoth he, "chide me not; 'tis nature's fault."
 The master quick rejoined: "Look now; break one; halt! halt!"
 As soon as one was broken, both were gone from sight.
 Poor squint-eye nearly lost his wits in childish fright.

[p. 26]

There was but one; his eyes were cause that he saw two.
 The one away, the other consequently was gone too.

Desire or rage, at times, makes people double see.
 [10] The mind's distortion brings the eyes perverse to be.
 From passion's mists our reason ever blinded lies.
 The heart its clouds sends up; the mind's eye's vision flies.
 The judge to taking bribes who basely bends himself,
 Can never well discern the right and wrong, from pelf.
 Our King through Israelitish rancour grew so blind,
 A s nothing to distinguish in his rage of mind.
 By thousands, faithful seekers of God's will he slew.
 "Vouchsafe us help, O God of Moses, Jesus too!"

He had a Vazir, brigandlike for craft and force.
 [15] In knavish stratagems he had no peer; of course.
 He whispered to the King: "These Christians, as in hives,
 All keep their faith a mystery, to save their lives.
 To kill them thus is profitless. Give breathing-time,
 Religion can't be smelt out just like musk or thyme.
 A secret 'tis, well wrapped in many folds of guile.
 In outward show, as friends, perfidiously they smile."
 The King, with grimace fierce: "What have we then to do?
 What remedy proposest thou to make them rue?
 I will not leave alive one Christian in the land,
 [20] Whose faith is shown to all, or in his bosom banned."

The Vazir to him: "King, my hands and ears cut off;
 My nose and lips the same. Give orders; let them scoff.
 Unto the gallows send me; I'll of all be seen.
 Then let an intercessor plead,--some prince,--your queen.
 Let all this happen where some spacious public place
 May let all see, that all may know of my disgrace.

[p. 27]

Then drive me forth; away from thee in exile sent;
 And they'll receive me, under feint of sorrow bent.
 'In secret,' I'll pretend, 'a Christian I'm at heart;
 Call God to witness how my faith has worked my hurt. [25]
 The King a knowledge gained of zeal in me that burned;
 Its flame to put out quite, his anger on me turned.
 I strove to hide my faith, my leaning to keep hid;
 Affected still to be, think, act, just as he bid.
 Suspicion crossed his mind; my secret he espied;
 All I could plead for nothing went; he said I lied.
 "Thy specious words," quoth he, "are needles in a loaf; [*1]
 My eye, as through a glass, sees all thy thoughts; thou oaf!
 No curtain of thy trickeries can veil thy faith from me;
 I'm proof against thy knaveries; thy cunning I can see." [30]
 Were not the faith of Jesus the refuge of my heart,
 He'd not have mutilated me in this sad sort.
 For love of Jesus, head and life I will lay down;
 All persecution suffer to gain a martyr's crown.
 My life I will not grudge to lose for Jesus' sake.
 His faith I hold from point to point without mistake.
 I dread his doctrine's fall to uninstructed guides.
 The truth from their bad teaching still to ruin glides.
 Thanks be to God, to Jesus thanks, who me have made
 A teacher perfect of the faith so free from shade. [35]
 The Jew and Judaism I have forsworn in sooth;
 About my loins the sacred cord [*2] I wear; 'tis truth.
 This age the age of Jesus is; O men, give ear!
 His doctrine take to heart; nought else have you to fear."

The Vazir having laid this plot before the King,
 All shame and scruple vanished; 'twas a perfect thing.

[p. 28]

In presence of the public, nose, ears were cut off.
 The rabble wondered greatly; now's the time to scoff.
 He fled unto the Christians; begged them him to hear;
 [40] And straightway set up preaching; saintlike was he there.

The Christians soon with one accord accepted him,
 In multitudes they round him flocked, all meek and prim.
 The Gospel's holy words, the prayer, the cord, he'd preach;
 The mysteries of all of these to them he'd teach.
 To outward view a guide to sanctity was he;
 In very truth, a trap and fowler's whistle; see.
 Of such effect his wiles, disciples were deceived;
 From Jesu's teaching fell, and in this cheat believed.
 It is so. Often does the flesh, for selfish end,
 [45] Intrude itself across the soul's most fervent trend.
 Meek virtue was not what they sought to gain the most;
 Of him they learned to ferret out new sins, and boast.
 Hair-splitting casuists, point by point they sin dissect;
 They grow too wise; 'twixt rose and garlic links detect.
 Of such avail's the subtle cunning of these men,
 That honest teachers oft are made to swerve by them.

The Christian folk in him their confidence thus place.
 Gregarious, like sheep, 's the mob of every race.
 A gen'ral favourite was he; all loved him well;
 [50] Christ's vicar called they him; as who the truth could tell.
 This cursed Antichrist, so full of fraud and wile!
 Grant help, O God! 'Tis Thou alone canst curb such guile.
 The devil's snares are spread abroad in tempting guise,
 Their baits are various; we, like birds, shut fast our eyes.
 If saved from one, another tempts; we thither stray;
 Like hawks and eagles, heinous sins make us their prey.
 Thou shieldest us, O gracious God! But ever still,
 With froward hearts and minds we counteract Thy will.

[p. 29]

This world's a granary, of which we steal the corn.
 The wheat is there all garnered; we it spoil in scorn. [55]
 We take no heed of future life in what we do;
 Sly mice still help us to consume the fruits that grow,
 Those mice a road have found to reach our winter store.
 Through their inroads our victual spoils; it is no more.
 First stop mouse-holes; make safe thy granary, O man!
 Thy wheat then garner safely; winter's at our van.

Give ear to what he's said, the Lord's own Chief of Chiefs: [*1]
 "No perfect worship's needed, save in war's reliefs." [*2]
 If mice there be not to destroy our garnered meeds,
 Where is our wheat, the fruit of fifty summers' deeds? [60]
 To shreds all nibbled lie the products of our days;
 No stores accumulate for provend on our ways.

How many sparks of fire from flint and steel have flown!
 How many hearts, like tinder, make those sparks their own!
 But in the dark some thief his finger presses there;
 And ev'ry train puts out that has been lighted here.
 Extinguished if those sparks were not, a flame would rise;
 A burning light be kindled, flashing 'yond the skies.
 A thousand snares are laid to catch our tripping feet;
 But, Lord, if us Thou shield, harm never shall us meet. [65]
 If but Thy grace will guide us, lead us on our way,
 No thief can steal our peace of mind, our light of day.

Each night Thou settest free the soul from trap of flesh,
 To scan and learn the hidden records of Thy wish. [*3]
 Each night the soul is like a bird from cage set free,
 To wander. Judge and judgment, then, it does not see.
 By night the pris'ner loses sense of bars, of chains;
 By night the monarch knows no state, no pomp retains;

[p. 30]

The merchant counts no more, in sleep, his gains and loss;
 [70] The prince and peasant, equal, on their couches toss.

The Gnostic [*1] is so e'en by day, when wide awake;
 For God hath said: "Let quietude care of him take." [*2]
 Asleep to all the things of earth by night, by day,
 As pen in writer's hand he doth his guide obey.
 Whoever sees not in the lines the writer's hand,
 May fancy 'tis the pen alone has all command.
 Of this, the Gnostic's privilege, a trace 'd suffice
 To rob of sleep and reason vulgar souls of ice.
 His spirit wanders in the groves of th' absolute.
 [75] His soul is easy; body, still, calm, quiet, mute.
 The two absolved from greed, lust, sense, care, fear also;
 Each, like a bird uncaged, is free; roams to and fro. [*3]
 Should he, bird-like, be whistled back to trap of sense,
 Again he sinks, the slave of every vile pretence.

When light of dawn paints bright the blushing sky with red,
 Ere orb of day comes forth as bridegroom from his bed,
 Shrill chanticleer, as though it were last judgment's trump,
 Calls back to consciousness the sleepers. Up they jump.
 The souls return their bodies to inhabit, then;
 [80] Each body fraught with thoughts, and words, and deeds again.

The soul turned loose, without the body's cares or ken,
 Attests the truth: "Sleep is death's brother," [*4] to all men.
 But lest-it should escape, and not come back at call,
 A tether to it's bound; it's not quite free withal.

[p. 31]

It must come back by day from roaming where it wills,
 The cares of life to bear;--a burthen that soon kills.
 O! Would, O God, Thou'd keep my soul in Thy own hand,
 As Sleepers in the Grotto; [*1] Noah's ark once to land!
 Then had I 'scaped the tempest waking thoughts aye raise;
 My mind, eyes, ears, had rested; all my task Thy praise! [85]
 Sev'n Sleepers?--Many are there of them in this world,
 Before, behind me, right and left; they're round me hurl'd!
 My "Cave" [*2] art Thou; my "Mate" art Thou; O God, my friend!
 Men's eyes and ears are sealed; they know not where they wend.

A Caliph asked of Layla: "Art thou really she
 For whom poor Majnun went distracted? For I see,
 Than other beauties thou art not so passing fair."
 Said she: "Be silent; Thou'rt not Majnun; nor his pair."

A man awake is sound asleep; more, he can't be.
 His watchfulness is worse than sleep; how should he see? [90]
 Our souls, if not awake to God's most holy truth,
 Are not awake. We're slaves to them. The greater ruth!
 The soul all day is buffeted by fancy's whims;
 Of loss or profit, life or death, as frenzy swims.
 No peace enjoyed; no dignity remains in hand;
 No vigour to attempt a flight to heaven's strand.
 Asleep is he who's slave to every sordid wish;
 Who begs of fancy; parleys with it, even. Pish!

A demon in his sleep he sees; an angel deems. [*3]
 Through lust he swoons with sensual pleasure as he dreams. [95]

[p. 32]

His seed he sows in sandy, salt, and desert land;
 And wakes to find no harvest's ripened to his hand.
 A headache, with a beating heart, is all he feels;
 "Alas!" he sobs, "that treach'rous gnome! My whole frame reels!"

A bird flies in the air; its shadow flits on earth;
 A second bird it seems to be, though nothing worth.
 Some simpleton runs after it; to catch it tries;
 Himself tires out; meanwhile the creature safely flies.
 The fool still knows not 'tis a shadow he pursues.
 [100] Its substance where to seek he has no power to muse.
 He shoots his arrows at the fleeting, mocking shade;
 His quiver emptied, he returns; no booty made.

Our life's our quiver. When our years are vainly spent
 In chasing phantoms, grief will one day have its vent.
 Let God's protection mercifully on us rest,
 All fancies and all phantoms stand at once confest.
 God's servants are His shadows here below on earth;
 To this world dead, but living in a second birth.
 To their skirts cling; from them thy soul's nutrition seek.
 [105] So may'st thou 'scape the perils of this scene's last week.
 The holy text of: "How He stretcheth forth the shade!" [*1]
 Of saints gives notice. Them his glory doth pervade.
 Without their guidance venture not to thread this maze;
 Like Ab'ram answer: "Fading things do not me please!" [*2]
 In days of trouble, consolation's sun seek out.
 The skirts of "Tebriz' Sun" will wipe out care, no doubt. [*3]
 Know'st not the road to that good man, and grief survene?
 Inquire of his and my friend, great Husamu-'d-Din. [*4]

While on thy way, should envy seize thee by the throat,
 [110] Know, Satan's sin was envy; malice made him gloat.

[p. 33]

He envied Adam's rise to such sublime estate.
 He wars with all who're good, through envy and through hate.
 No mountain-pass as this life's progress is so steep;
 Let envy not increase thy load; thou canst but creep.
 The flesh a hot-bed is of envy and of strife.
 These soil the soul; for envy's bane of mortal life.
 Should envy seek thy soul to kill, invoke the Lord,
 The God of mercy thee can save, with His true Word.
 "Make clean My house, ye two," did Ab'ram's God once say. [*1]
 His house our frame; a house of glory, though of clay. [115]
 Should envy fill thy breast 'gainst one that envies not,
 Foul stains ensue; thy heart's impure; all good's forgot.
 Prostrate thyself, then, at the feet of holy men;
 Cast dust upon thy head, God's pardon to attain.

The Vazir of our Jewish king was envy's self;
 His nose and ears he sacrificed, as 'twere but pelf,
 In hopes the sting of envy 'd find an easy way,
 To pour the selfsame wounds he 'd open lay.
 His nose, from envy, in the air, who carries high,
 His ears and nose to envy 'd give without a sigh. [120]
 The nose the organ is by which we trace a scent;
 The scent then guides to where the odour finds its vent.
 Who has no sense of smell is truly minus nose,
 Its odour we should trace to where religion blows.
 To scent religion's fragrance, not returning thanks,
 Ingratitude is. Nose to lose merit such pranks.
 Be grateful, thou; and venerate all grateful men;
 Abase thyself; a champion be of theirs. Amen.
 Be not a cut-throat, like that Vazir, of men's faith;
 Seek not to turn believing souls from what God saith. [125]

[p. 34]

That Vazir seemed a pastor of the truth, in sham;
 As one who bitter aloes mixed in sweet plum jam.

Some men of sense discernment used, his ways to scan,
 His honied phrases smacked to them of knavish plan.
 Refined truisms, double-meaning, he'd deal out,
 Like syrup into which some mortal poison's put.

Be thou not caught with knavery's fairly-spoken word;
 A hidden meaning it may have. Be on thy guard.
 Of evil-minded men the speech is never good;
 [130] Their hearts are dead and putrid; life cannot there brood.
 A man's an offset from a man, by nature's law,
 As sure as cake of bread is bread, and not mere straw.

God's Lion, [*1] 'Ali, saith: "All words in folly made,
 As weeds on dunghills, crowd apace; as quickly fade." [*2]
 He who would rashly, thoughtlessly, repose thereon,
 Begrimed will be, befouled, befooled, and spat upon.
 He that gives vent to wind, mere wind, is bound to wash;
 His worship else is vain; pollution doth it quash. [*3]

The Vazir's talk was all: "Be diligent in pray'r."
 [135] His acts proclaimed aloud: "Of duty never care."

In surface silver's white and glittering to the eye;
 With friction, hands and purse it soils, though e'er so dry.
 A fire is jocund to the view; its flame may please.
 But venture not too near it; black is its surcease.
 The lightning flashes brightly, shining as it flies
 But oft, alas, it strikes man blind, or dead he lies.

[p. 35]

Be wise betimes; for "he that's void of common sense,
 Is like the ox with yoke on neck." So 'Ali,--Hence!

For six years was the Vazir absent from the king;
 Disciple seemed of Jesu's faith; bad news to bring. [140]
 Their hearts and faith the people all pinned on to him;
 At his command they every one would change each whim.
 His purpose all the time was fraud and gross deceit;
 He pondered naught but wiles, to compass their defeat.
 By secret message, with the king he held converse.
 The king to him fair gratulations sent, diverse.

A missive came to him at length: "My faithful son,
 'Tis time my heart was set at rest. What hast thou done?"
 His answer was: "The thing's prepared; have patience yet;
 The Christian folk to puzzle soon, we'll not forget." [145]

The Christians portioned were, for purposes of war,
 In legions twelve; to each, a captain void of fear.
 The men of every legion to their captain bound
 By ties of trust and confidence, in each heart found.
 These legions and those captains twelve, to that bad man
 Had yielded up their every thought;--as mankind can.
 Should he command to die, not one of them would fail
 To give his life right joyfully,--without one wail.

A volume he prepared in name of each of them;
 The matter of these registers not all the same. [150]
 The style of every one was in a different guise;
 From end to end each book's contents were forgeries.
 In one, the pangs of hunger mortified the flesh;
 With penitence, with fasting made, and prayer, to clash.
 A second taught that fasting did no good at all;
 That charity, beneficence, was all in all.

[p. 36]

A third explained: "Thy fasting,--charity itself,-
 Syntheism [*1] is. With God, thou deifiest thyself.
 To trust with resignation 's all religion's plan.
 [155] In weal and woe are springs to trap the soul of man."
 A fourth declared: "Faith without works is truly dead.
 Alone is service valued; faith's a sin to dread."
 A fifth laid down: "The Law's commands and warnings all
 Are not for practice; they're mere symbols of man's fall.
 By showing us man's weakness, God is made more strong;
 The decalogue this purpose serves; the rest's all wrong."
 The sixth, again: "For man to talk of weakness here,
 Ingratitude is, simply; God's grace is so clear;
 Think, now, how wonderful is man; how great; how wise;
 [160] 'Tis God has made him thus; to thank Him in us lies."
 A seventh suggests: "Leave power and weakness unto Me;
 They're idols, both, as also are all things ye see."
 An eighth contends: "Put not thy light behind a shade.
 Let all men see thy light; to glad their eyes 'twas made.
 Removed from sight if 'tis, an evil thence will loom.
 Thou, too, wilt be removed at midnight from the groom."
 A ninth expounds: "Put out the light; thou'lt have more joy.
 The sense of sight is one: joy's feelings, many; boy.
 Put out the light. The sense of touch thou may'st then use.
 [165] The bride is timid; in the dark she'll not refuse.
 Renunciation of the world's a very farce.
 Renounce. The world, and more, thou'lt dream of in thy trance."
 A tenth assures: "That which the Lord hath given to man,
 God hath made pleasant to the eyes. Deny, who can.

[p. 37]

Take what is thine. Avert thee not; 'tis folly still
 To take to groaning, moaning, when all's at thy will."
 Another yet: "Forsake all things thou hast possessed.
 Retention of them by thee baseness is, confessed.
 How many roads diverse traced for their feet men deem;
 Each one to one sole "church" the only road doth seem. [170]
 If way there were secure, for hitting out the truth,
 The Jews and Magi surely 'd not missed it, forsooth."
 Again another: "Moral food makes heart to live.
 We see this clearly; every hour a proof doth give.
 Enjoyments sensuous, fleshly, when to fade they haste,
 Leave no result behind; they're desert mirage, waste.
 Regret's their only issue, grief for loss of time;
 A bankrupt's stock; their commerce gives no gain, no prime.
 Pursuit of them has never ended in success;
 Dire failure still must be the fruit of recklessness. [175]
 Distinguish thou betimes the foolish from the wise;
 The end of each scan well; 'tis there the difference lies."
 And still one more: "True wisdom strive thou to find out.
 True wisdom's not the fruit of noble birth. Poor lout!
 Each 'church' has had in view to gain a happy end.
 But one and all have failed and could but fail. God send!
 To palm off jugglers' tricks is not true wisdom's part,
 Or man had never seen so many faiths take start."
 And one again: "True wisdom thou hast surely found.
 Thou knowest men of wisdom;--wisdom's safest ground. [180]
 Be manful. Let not men by fraud make mock of thee.
 Thy own path choose; turn not from it for aught thou see."
 To one he said: "Thy unity is all in all;
 Besides thee, aught existence never had, nor shall."
 One volume taught: "The universe is unity.
 Who teaches two exist, is but a squint-eye, he."
 The last gave out: "A hundred really are but one."
 Unless a madman, whom could have such doctrines won?

[p. 38]

In them these paradoxes fitly found their place,
 [185] In words and sense his doctrines lacked all claim to grace.
 Each volume was the antithesis of the next;
 If one was honey, poison was the other's text.
 Wouldst thou escape his honey and his poison too,
 Forsake thou not the holy word of scripture true.

Twelve volumes thus were writ with fraudulent research,
 By that Vazir, the hidden foe of Jesu's church.
 Jesu's one-mindedness for him had no perfume;
 The wine of Jesu's jar no bouquet to his grume.
 A many-coloured garment washed in that pure wine,
 [190] As snowy white comes out, and clear as is sunshine.
 Not faded or plain-coloured, such as gives offence;
 But clear as crystal water, in which fishes glance.
 Dry land, chameleon-like, gay-coloured scenes displays;
 But fishes dry land shun; they love clear water's sprays.

What is the fish, and what the water, in my tale,
 That they should symbolise God's kingdom on small scale?
 Whole shoals of fishes, great and small, the water's realm,
 In adoration mute, with praise to God o'erwhelm.

What showers of bounty from God's outstretched hand
 [195] Have made the seas with pearls of price to deck the strand!
 What brilliant suns of brightest goodness must have shone,
 Ere clouds and sea could have produced the matchless stone! [*1]
 What rays of wisdom poured on water and on land
 Ere earth could nourish seed, yield corn to our demand!
 The earth, a faithful trustee, gives back what we sow,
 No fraud, embezzlement, in its trust do we know.

[p. 39].

This faithfulness to trust arises, with time's run,
 From generous warmth infused by glow of justice' sun.
 Whene'er God's symbol quickening summer back doth bring,
 The mysteries of the earth straight from her bosom spring.
 Th' All-Bountiful, who gave to senseless earth, of grace,
 This faithfulness, trustworthiness, in every place, [200]
 In mercy plans forth inorganic matter's course.
 In wrathful wisdom's counsel blinds man to its source.
 Our hearts and souls have not the grace to understand.
 To whom address me? Not one ear's at my command!
 Who lends his ear, shall also quickly find an eye.
 Whose ear's, like stone, to counsel deaf, shall surely die.

Of wond'rous power is God possessed. What's magic's skill!
 Miraculous works He enacts. Where's witchery's spell!
 To sing His praise in me a want of feeling shows.
 It proves I breathe. To breathe, to live, breaks true love's laws. [205]
 In His existence let my being sink, quite lost.
 To be, is to be blind and blear-eyed at the most.
 If blind I were not, swooned, unconscious should I be.
 The Sun of Glory's might and power then could I see.
 Were not my sight grown blear, through weeping in my dreams,
 Had I stood, ice-like, frozen, 'neath His mercy's beams?

Just like his king, this Vazir was shortsighted seen.
 The Ancient, 'twas, of Days, he wrestled 'gainst, I ween.
 Th' Almighty One, who with one breath, one word, did bring
 Ten thousand worlds from naught to join in being's ring. [210]

Ten thousand worlds, besides, disclose themselves to sight,
 If thou direct thy vision towards the God of Light.

[p. 40]

In man's esteem the world is vast, without an end;
 With Power Infinite compared, a grain of sand.
 The world's around the soul a dismal prison-den.
 Arise! Escape! Regain the fields at large! Be men!
 The world is finite; He is infinite. Confide!
 Earth's forms and qualities God's essence from us hide.

The million spears of Pharaoh, vaunting in his might,
 [215] By Moses' wand were broken in th' appointed night.
 And many sons of skill, for healing science famed,
 By Jesu's curing halt, lame, blind, deaf, mad, were shamed.
 How many poets, orators, great men of note,
 By word of the Illiterate One [*1] were shown to dote.
 For love of our Almighty God, the Lord of all,
 Who would not die, a stock, a block, we needs must call.
 Dead heart of stone if He but touch with love's live coal,
 A magnet straight becomes, no longer quits the pole. [*2]
 Plume not thyself as one endowed with cunning guile;
 [220] The meek more surely draw rich gifts from Heaven's smile.

How many treasure-hiders, treasure-seekers, here,
 Have been derided, laughed to scorn, by that All-Seer!
 What art thou, man? Canst thou in thought with Him compare?
 What's the whole earth? A blade of grass, His might to dare?

A woman, once, through foul adultery's sin estranged,
 By God, in punishment, to Venus' star was changed. [*3]
 From woman into Venus? Sure, that change was sad.
 To dust and ashes turn. Less shame in this. Art mad?

[p. 41]

Thy soul it is must lift thee to heaven's highest home;
 The flesh can but consign thee deep to hell's dark dome. [225]
 Thyself it is that dooms thee to that woful fate;
 The angels' envy art thou, here, in man's estate.
 Consider, then, this doom; revolve it in thy mind;
 That woman's change, compared with this, was joy, thou'lt find.

To push ambition's course beyond the stars thou'st sought?
 Refused hast thou first Adam to adore, as naught? [*1]
 But seed of Adam art thou, O degenerate man
 Why wilt thou then as glory count dark shame's foul ban?
 Why proudly vaunt thou'lt conquer all this teeming earth?
 Why fondly fancy rumour 'll sound thy passing worth? [230]

Should winter's snow in heaps encumber all earth's soil,
 One gleam of summer's sun the frigid cloak will foil.
 So, too, that Vazir's scheme of fraud, nor his alone,
 Reduced to nothing was by one word from God's throne.

Such crafty wiles as these He changes into weal;
 As poisons by His power receive the gift to heal.
 What doubtful was, becomes confest, at His decree;
 True love springs up, where hatred plotted was to be.
 He safely carries through the fire His chosen friend; [*2]
 The fear of death He maketh peace of mind to lend. [235]
 Through Him are treasures hid beneath the ruin's waste;
 Thorns roses yield; our bodies joys of soul foretaste.
 By workings of the pang of love for Him I burn;
 Though sophistlike I rave, 'tis unto Him I turn.

Another stratagem the Vazir next conceived;
 From public life withdrew, and solitude achieved.

[p. 42]

Admiring followers all were fain to mourn his loss;
 For forty days, and more, in cell he bore his cross.
 Their yearning for him grew more fierce from day to day;
 [240] They missed his good example, words, and zeal to pray.
 They grieved that he in solitude should vex his flesh;
 Their sympathies clung round him every day afresh.
 "Without our teacher we're a pastorless poor flock;
 Blind beggars without staff to guide us to our nook.
 For mercy's sake, for love of God, have pity now;
 No longer us deprive of consolation's show.
 We're infants all, and thou our feeder, tutor thou,
 Protection shed around; forsake us not just now."

His answer was: "My spirit's present with you, friends.
 [245] But issue from this hermitage my power transcends."
 The captains twelve, of legions, intercession made;
 His grieved disciples raised a wail, a serenade:
 "Great evil's lighted on us! Ah! Beloved One!
 We're orphans made; our parent, thou, away art gone!
 Raise not such pretext; push us not to our wit's end.
 We sob and sigh; we beat our breasts. Do comfort send!
 Thou'st pampered, spoilt us with thy wondrous eloquence;
 With doctrine from thy lips our souls cannot dispense.
 Torment us not, for God's sake! Pity on us take!
 [250] Be kind! This day, 'To-morrow' say not; to us wake!
 Our hearts are rapt in thee; no heart in us remains.
 Heartless and spiritless are we, poor bankrupt swains!
 Like fishes out of water, so we writhe and gasp.
 The dam break down; let flow the stream; avert death's grasp!
 Thou art the very paragon, the phoenix of the age.
 Heaven's mercy, save us; or, we perish, we enrage!"

To them he thus: "O men of little sense, take heed;
 You foolishly are seeking elsewhere what you need.

[p. 43]

Your ears stop up with wool; list not to speech of man;
 The mote that blinds your eyes cast out. Then, see you can. [255]
 With cotton in your outward ears, you'll plainly hear
 The still small voice of conscience, drowned now by your fear.
 All outward sense discard; all thought, reflection flee;
 And straight you'll hear, within, God's voice: 'Come unto Me.'
 So long as with chit-chat you keep yourselves awake,
 Communion with the angels you in sleep forsake.
 Our words and acts make up our outward habitudes;
 Our inward man's our converse with infinitudes.
 Our senses barren are; they come of barren soil;
 Our soul, like Jesus, walks the sea without turmoil. [260]
 Our outer man's a barren wilderness, I ween;
 The inner man, 'tis, sounds the depths of the Unseen.
 If all our life be spent in chase of mundane things,
 Our paths must lead o'er wastes, o'er hills, o'er ocean springs.
 The Fount of Life, [*1] where shall we find in such a course?
 Death's billows how avoid, and how escape remorse?
 The desert's moving sandhills are our schemes and plans.
 Life-rills are abnegation, self-denial, man's."

Him answered his disciples: "Master, grieve us not.
 Fresh sorrow, through pretences, add not to our lot. [265]
 Such heavy burden to endure we've not the power.
 Poor suffering weaklings we, in sad affliction's hour.
 The heavens appear to raise themselves all vastly high;
 But true sublimity's God's attribute. We sigh.
 The food of every bird He gives in providence
 He says whose figs devoured shall be these ten days hence.

[p. 44]

Who 'd give, in lieu of mother's milk, to infants, bread,
 Would kill them with improper food before them spread.
 But when their teeth are grown, and deck their little mouths,
 [270] Themselves will ask for bread; milk suits not then their growths.
 The unfledged chick is yet for flight all unprepared
 Attempting it, he falls a prey to puss, poor bird
 His wings well pinioned, he soars high in breezy air;
 Needs no encouragement; his instinct leads him there.
 Each howling imp is stilled at sound of thy sole voice;
 And words from thee are utmost joy to all our race.
 Our ears are gladdened as they catch thy tongue's converse,
 Each desert grows a garden, when thou'rt freshness' source.
 With thee amongst us, earth a foretaste gives of heaven,
 [275] Thou'rt our delight, from morn to eve our longed-for leaven.
 Without thee, day's refulgence we cannot employ,
 If thou art present, every care is turned to joy.
 High station, true, may be attained by charlatan;
 But moral worth alone gives eminence to man."

To them, now, he replied: "Your prayer 's of no avail.
 My counsel take and ponder. Naught else shall prevail.
 If I'm a trusted man, my word is not a lie,
 E'en though I'd say that black is white, or earth is sky.
 If I'm perfection, who the perfect's word denies?
 [280] If I am otherwise, why all this fuss and noise?
 Forth from my solitude to come I'm not designed.
 I'm communing with God; to His will I'm resigned."

They still insisted: "Vazir, that we'll not deny,
 But our remonstrance is a truly piteous cry.
 We weep our eyes out through our grief thee not to see,
 With sighs our hearts burst, vainly looking out for thee.

[p. 45]

An infant quarrels not with its attentive nurse;
 And yet it weeps, through knowing not what's good from worse.
 We are thy harps. The plectrum's stroke. is from thy hand.
 'Tis thus we moan; smit by thy cunning harpist wand. [285]
 Like flutes of reed, our utterances are through thee found;
 Or mountain vale, our echo's but child of thy sound.
 Or as chess-players, striving in their dubious game;
 Our 'check' and 'mate' are from thee, man of mighty name.
 What are we,--can we be? 'Tis thou'rt our life of life,
 So long as thou'rt among us. If not, all is strife.
 We're naught;--we're nothings. All our being is in thee.
 Existence' very self by thy frail form we see.
 We're lions, true; but stand on vanes of weathercocks,
 Our twists and twirls, our starts, our jumps, are from wind's shocks. [290]
 These lions' movements are in sight; the winds unseen.
 The Great Unseen, th' Almighty One, 's behind the screen.
 Our moving wind, our very being from thee springs.
 Existence, else, were vain, not sheltered 'neath thy wings.
 'Tis thou hast taught us, nothings, valued life to prize;
 'Twas thou that made us, erring, lovers of th' Allwise.
 Take not from us the savour sweet of thy good gifts,
 Thy cup, thy wine, thy relish, absence from us lifts.
 But shouldst thou still refuse, who to repine 'd have heart?
 Can pictures of the painter's hand complain, and art? [295]
 No notice of us take; from us avert thy face;
 But ne'er deride the claims of thy prevailing grace.
 We were not; prayers from us arose not to thy ear;
 Thy grace alone 'twas sought us out; thou drewest near.
 Before the artist and his brush, the picture's null;
 Like unborn babe in mother's womb, till time be full.
 Before almighty power creation stands in wait,
 As canvas 'fore the needle 'broiderer's hand may mate.

[p. 46]

A demon here, an angel there, or man, is bid
 [300] To be; now joy, now sorrow, rises up amid.
 We have no hand to move; defend ourselves we can't.
 We have no breath, no speech to pray for aid in want."

The Qur'an ponder this my verse to understand. [*1]
 There God hath said: "Thou threwst not, when thou threwst" the sand. [*2]
 Although we shoot an arrow swiftly to its mark,
 The bow, the arrow, we ourselves, are from God's ark.
 There's no compulsion here, though God can all compel.
 'Tis not complaint, if I of God's compulsion tell.
 [305] All our complaints of our felt needs are indices.
 If shame we feel, of our freewill a sign it is.
 Without choice were we, there 'd be no pretext for shame.
 Why blush and hang the head, cast down the eyes so tame?
 What doth a master in disciple always chide?
 Why teacheth he in Providence still to confide?
 Shouldst thou assert God carelessly makes us to act,--
 That sun of verity He hides in mists of fact,--
 An answer I will give,--just lend thy ear to me;
 Forsake all blasphemy,--of God's faith ever be:
 [310] "The longings, the regrets, that every sick man feels,
 Awakings are of conscience. Sickness this reveals.
 The moment man is ailing,--prisoner to bed sent,
 He counts his sins, he asks for grace, vows to repent.
 He sees the wickedness of all he's said and done;
 He promises, in future, errant ways to shun.
 'If but I'm spared,' he says, 'I never will sin more;
 I'll righteousness ensue, all trespasses abjure.'
 By this thou seest that sickness is not all an ill.
 'Tis but a time for waking conscience good to will.

[p. 47]

Know then the aphorism, O seeker after truth,--
 Whoe'er thou be, to whom scent of it may give ruth: [315]
 'The man that's most awake, with most of pain will reel;
 The more his conscience pricks, more sorely sad he'll feel!'
 If thou wert really conscious God 'tis thee compels.
 What need to feel ashamed;--to utter frightful yells?
 Thou art not so; thou feelest not a captive's chain;
 Thou know'st thou'rt free to act, or from each act abstain.
 Whoever saw a captive sporting in his bonds?
 Whoever heard of prisoners acting vagabonds?
 Hast thou had fetters fastened on to both thy feet?
 Hast e'er beheld kings' guardsmen resting in thy seat? [320]
 Then be not thou to others hard as jailer man.
 Obduracy befits not him a king may ban.
 Compulsion since thou feel'st not, make it not pretext.
 Say'st that thou feel'st it? Where's the proof? Show us it next.
 In every act to which thou inclination hast,
 Thou know'st thyself free agent: what thou willst, thou dost.
 If any case arise thy will, thy wish, to brave,
 Straightway compulsionist thou art: 'God so would have.'"

The prophets were compulsionists to this world's string.
 Miscreants are compulsionists towards heaven's King. [325]
 The prophets chose the better part, futurity;
 The foolish choose the worse, the world's fatuity.
 Each bird will flock with birds of its own feather still;
 The cock well knows his mate, and follows where she will.
 Miscreants are the brood of hell, to which they go;
 The goods of worldly life they choose. Then be it so.
 The prophets are of race from heaven deriving birth;
 To heaven they tend with heart and soul while here on earth.

[p. 48]

'Twould never end the branches of this theme to count.
 [330] So let us sip again from our old story's fount.

Within his cell ensconced, the Vazir answer gave:
 "Disciples mine, my firm resolve from me receive.
 To me a very strict commandment Jesus spake:
 'From friends and kin of every class seclusion seek.
 Thy face set tow'rds a wall; sit in some cell apart,
 Forsake thyself; forgetfulness cast o'er thy heart.'
 Permission's thus denied with men to hold discourse.
 I've naught to say; with mortals more I'll not converse.
 Good-bye, my friends! Adieu! You'll never see me more,
 [335] My journey's unto heaven; there I've laid my store.
 Th' empyrean beneath, so long as I have strayed,
 Like firewood in a furnace have I wept; still prayed.
 Henceforward I shall sit on Jesu's own right hand,
 In highest heaven enthroned, blest Paradise's strand."

The legion-captains now he called to him apart;
 But one by one, in secret, counsels to impart.
 To ev'ry one he said: "Successor thee I name,
 The faith of Jesus to uphold and keep from shame.
 All other captains thy commands will have to hear;
 [340] 'Tis Jesus thus appoints thee others' loads to bear.
 Should any one against thee neck rebellious raise,
 Him kill, imprison, or in exile end his days.
 But while I live divulge not what to thee I've told,
 Keep secret till my death this charge thou hast to hold.
 Let no one know till then 'tis thou art chosen out,
 Proclaim not thou thyself a king or prince devout.
 Behold this scroll; take, study it; thyself instruct,
 'Tis Jesu's doctrine pure; from this His Church construct."

Thus one by one their minds prepared were to be chief:
 [345] "'Tis thou'rt the chosen one; all else would be a thief."

[p. 49]

He named them each successor; made them so to feel.
 Whate'er he told to one, to each did he reveal.
 He gave to each a volume, writ from end to end;
 No two alike; each different, and hard to blend. [*1]
 Their doctrines various, of every changing hue;
 Diverse in sense, as objects' forms exposed to view.
 Their precepts and commands a very maze of guile,
 Their sentiments impossible to reconcile.

The Vazir now delayed another forty days;
 Then slew himself,--set free his soul from earth's affrays. [350]
 The people, hearing of his death, were sorely grieved;
 Around his corpse collected; eyes, ears, scarce believed.
 With many bitter moans to sorrow they gave vent;
 Their breasts they beat, their hair they tore, their clothing rent.
 To count their multitudes is in God's power alone;
 Turks, Arabs, Kurds, and Romans, [*2] men of every zone.
 They scattered o'er their heads the dust from his last home;
 To mourn for him was balm, all ills to overcome.
 They wept. Their bitter, briny tears they shed in floods;
 His grave a pool; those tears, as streamlets from the woods. [355]
 To lose him was a grief unspeakable that fell
 On rich and poor, on high and low, too sad to tell.

A month of mourning past, the people sought to know
 Whom he'd appointed in his place their way to show.
 Whom must we recognise successor to our saint?
 Into whose hands commit the task of our restraint?

[p. 50]

He was a sun of light; his fire hath turned to fume,
 A candle now we need our darkness to illume.
 Our friend is gone,--is lost to our inquiring eyes.
 [360] A substitute we seek,--memorial we may prize.
 Our rose is withered;--rosebush leaves all blown away,
 Which vase holds now the rose-scent in its perfumed clay?"

God is invisible to weakly mortal sight,
 His prophets are a need, to guide His Church aright.
 No! That's not right! That phrase is sadly incorrect.
 A prophet's one with God; not two. Think well! Reflect!
 They are not two; they're one. Thou blind materialist!
 With God they're one; their forms but make Him manifest.
 Thou seest the form alone; thy two eyes are at fault.
 [365] Look with thy soul; thou'lt see as God from heaven's vault.
 Thy two sights will united be straightway in one,
 When thou behold'st the Light of God's eternal throne.

Set up ten burning candles in one selfsame place,
 A separate body, each, diffuses light and grace.
 Their powers combine in one, to brighten that retreat;
 Distinction now there's none; one light alone we meet.
 Count out a hundred apples, quinces, pears, or plums;
 When mashed together, all their juice, their pulp, their scums.
 Things spiritual division, number, parts, know not,
 [370] They split not into fractions, form no separate lot.

'Tis sweet when friends with friends together come and meet.
 Trust then the spirit. "'Tis the letter kills"--repeat.
 Thy body mortify; thy flesh consume with pains.
 Behind it hid thou'lt find God's unity--thy gains.
 If thou the body vex not,--bring not low betimes,
 The flesh will thee destroy, my friend, in fiery flames.

[p. 51]

The flesh it is that shows itself to human heart;
 The flesh it is demands asceticism's sharp smart.

We simple were; one essence was the source of all.
 Nor Head, nor foot had we; one pristine lot did fall. [375]
 One substance held us; we were clear as is the sun;
 No knots or gnurs within us, free as water's run.
 On taking fleshly form, that simple essence, then,
 Became divided, split, like shadows in each glen.
 Make low the hills and hillocks, level make the plain;
 No shadow's left; the whole becomes one scene again.

With pleasure I'd this matter clearer put, and joy.
 But tender consciences I seek not to annoy.
 Abstruser points there are, as keen as sword in fight.
 If reason's shield thou hast not, refuge take in flight. [380]
 My arguments contest not, unless well prepared.
 Sharp blade will cut; it pities not; no life is spared.
 I sheathe my sword of argument,--will not make assault.
 Lest muddlers read me wrong, and say 'tis I'm at fault.

We come now back again, to follow up our tale,
 To keep our faith with readers, feminine and male;
 And say again, the people rose up as one man,
 Demanding who should work out our dead Vazir's plan.

One legion-captain forward came, out of the twelve,
 That grieving people's furrowed field anew to delve. [385]
 Said he: "Behold! successor am I to the saint.
 In Jesu's stead I'm regent, by his own constraint.
 You see this scroll. 'Tis evidence of what I say:
 The dead Vazir's successorship is mine to-day!" [*1]
 A second captain started up, as from ambush;
 Contested all those words; his own claim then did push.

[p. 52]

Forth from his bosom he another scroll produced,
 And then the people's wrath flamed high; not soon reduced.
 The other captains, too,--each his own train at back,--
 [390] Unsheathed their swords, and threatened both their skulls to crack.
 Then each one of the twelve, his sword and scroll in hand,
 Upon the others set, like baited bull on brand.
 The slain were strewn in heaps of many hundred men,
 Their heads were piled in pyramids, by thousands ten.
 Their blood was shed in torrents, flowing on the plain.
 The dust arose in clouds through this commotion vain.
 The seeds of discord sown by that knave's treacherous hand,
 Had now produced their harvest, fatal to the land.
 The nuts he cracked were skulls; their kernels, human brains.
 [395] The bodies slain through him held precious souls in chains.

Be killed, or die, as in thy lot may be decreed.
 So with pomegranates, apples, when sliced up at need.
 The sweet and sound are prized, and straightway put to use;
 The sour and rotten cast away, worthless refuse.
 A word with sense and meaning's ever eloquent;
 Bald nonsense is laughed down in scorn or merriment.
 Thou fool, materialist! Think closer: look to sense. [*1]
 The spirit 'tis gives value; words are mere pretence.
 Prefer the company of those who spirit seek.
 [400] So mayst thou grace attain,--"God's servant be," [*2] and meek.
 A life without a soul or spirit in our frame,
 Like wooden sword in sheath, were but a senseless name.

[p. 53]

Within its sheath while kept, of value it may seem;
 When drawn, 'tis only fit for matchwood, men will deem,
 Arm not thyself with wooden sword in battle's day.
 Examine well thy weapon, if thou 'd have fair play.
 Shouldst find thy sword of wood, another seek forthwith;
 If adamant it prove to be, then join thy kith.

The truest swords are found in th' arm'ry of the saints.
 Their converse is to thee a balm for all complaints. [405]
 The wise have ever said, with uniform accord:
 "Most truly wise was he, 'the Mercy of the Lord.'" [*1]

Dost buy a pomegranate? A burst fruit still elect.
 The crack reveals its grains; thou seest they've no defect.
 E'en so, good friend, blest be the man whose mouth reveals
 The heart-thought pearls their casket, his pure soul, conceals.
 But inauspicious is the opening tulip's crack;
 This patent makes to all that its heartcore is black.
 The burst pomegranate is a sunny orchard's pride.
 So speech of worthy men may waft thee to truth's side. [410]
 Society with saints no doubt's of great avail;
 To piety it leads; "God's fear shall never fail." [*2]
 Thou wast a very rock, a worthless pebble stone;
 By saints' communion fined, a pearl of price thou'st shone.
 Then love the saints. Their love plant deeply in thy heart.
 The pure of mind alone deserve a pure love's part.
 Court not despair; hope ever springs in human breast.
 Seek not the dark; the Sun of Light shines full confest.
 The spirit ever leads to haunts of holy men;
 The flesh would cast thee in the pit of sin again. [415]
 Beware! Feed thou thy soul with love from holy ground.
 Make haste! Seek means of grace from one who grace has found.

[p. 54]

Petition make! Seize hold upon the skirts of saints.
 Through them thou'lt learn how God his favour grants.
 The Gospel names the name of Ahmed; [*1] he the last,
 As chief of prophets;--purity's bright ocean, vast.
 His lineaments, his virtues, ways of matchless good;
 With notice of his wars, his fasts, and eke his food.
 Some Christian folks, on mention of that sacred name,
 [420] And this recital of his qualities and fame,
 A merit to acquire, were wont to kiss the book,
 To bow with reverence deep, humility in look.
 That folk in all the troubles we've related now
 Were safe; nor bloodshed, nor foul faction did them know.
 Secured were they from scrolls, sword, captains, and Vazir,
 In name of Ahmed Mustafa they'd trust, not fear.
 Descendants, numerous in race, they left behind;
 Their faith in Ahmed they a tower of strength did find.
 But other Christian folks to him refused to bow.
 [425] The blessed name of Mustafa they deemed too low.
 Requital brought them punishment for this offence;
 A prey they fell unmourned to that Vazir's pretence.
 Their false creed, with their tribes, was quickly brought to end,
 Through those twelve lying volumes his deceit had penn'd.
 The name of Ahmed, thus, a friend is proved, of might;
 Of light by day a pillar, shelt'ring cloud by night.
 A castle inexpugnable, a stronghold safe,
 As he himself was Trusty, [*2] though his foes might chafe.
 How fatal the disasters pictured here above,
 [430] The fruit of foul duplicity's pretended love.

Footnotes

^m25:1 Who are intended by this Jewish squint-eyed king, and his self-sacrificing, treacherous Vazir?

^m25:2 It is a common belief in the East that squint-eyed people see double.

^m27:1 Needles, or pins, are hidden in bread that is given to a dog or other beast in order to destroy it.

^m27:2 The rope worn by monks, like the Brahmin's sacred thread, is supposed by Muslims to be worn by all Christians.

^m29:1 Mohammed.

^m29:2 In time of immediate danger during war the "Service of Fear" is enjoined instead of the usual form of worship.

^m29:3 In visions.

^m30:1 The original word, conversant, like our "Adept" and "Illuminato," is applied by the mystics to themselves. It is a trace of the old Gnosticism.

^m30:2 Being given in Persian, I cannot quote chapter and verse for the original Arabic.

^m30:3 Like lunatics, they are supposed to be heedless of all things around them.

^m30:4 Sleep is Death's brother is an ancient Arabian proverb.

^m31:1 The Seven Sleepers; mentioned in Qur'an xviii. 8-25.

^m31:2 Mohammed's "Cave-Mate" was Abu-Bekr, who was his sole companion on quitting Mekka at the Emigration or "Flight." They concealed themselves in a cave; and Mohammed remarked: "God is the third in our little party." Hence the title of "Cave-Mate," applied to Abu-Bekr.

^m31:3 A species of nightmare in the form of a lascivious dream.

^m32:1 Qur'an xxv. 47.

^m32:2 Qur'an vi. 76.

^m32:3 See "Anecdotes," Chap. iv.

^m32:4 See his name as an honorific title in a note to the author's preface; and in the "Anecdotes," Chap, vi.

^m33:1 Qur'an ii. 119.

^m34:1 "The Lion of God," so called from his courage and strength. Shir-Ali, Hayder-Ali, are among the forms of the title.

^m34:2 One of the sayings attributed to him and become proverbial.

^m34:3 Persian, empty promises and boastings are also called "wind." Hence, the poet suggests ablution to cleanse from such;--mental ablution.

^m36:1 "Syntheism" is the correct rendering of the "shirk" of Islam. "Polytheism" is very incorrect. Dualists (Magians) and Trinitarians (Christians) are Syntheists, but they are not polytheists in a correct sense.

^m38:1 An allusion to the idea that a pearl is a raindrop caught and nourished by an oyster.

^m40:1 "The Illiterate Prophet," or, rather, "the Gentile Prophet," reputed barbarous and illiterate by the Jews and Christians, is one of Muhammed's highest titles.

^m40:2 The original here uses the simile of a certain "cunning bird," known, also as the "Truth-calling bird," that hangs by a claw and calls all night: haqq! haqq! (Truth! Truth!).

^m40:3 Such is an eastern myth. Poets call the planet Venus the "Harpist of the Spheres."

^m41:1 In Qur'an ii. 32, God commands the angels to fall down in adoration to Adam, when first created. Iblis, Satan, alone refused, through pride and envy.

^m41:2 In Qur'an iv. 124, Abraham is called the Chosen Friend of God; and in xxi. 69, the story is mentioned of his being saved from the fire into which he was cast by Nimrod.

^m43:1 The Fountain of Life, or Water of Life, is imagined to take its rise in a  of darkness beyond the limits of the inhabited earth.

^m46:1 In the original I have not found it possible to feel sure where the break should be made from the remonstrance to the poet's reflections. Much of what precedes seems addressed to God; but Eastern hyperbole is wide.

^m46:2 Qur'an viii. 17. Muhammed cast sand at the foe in two battles, Badr and Hunayn.

^m49:1 This account of the Vazir's various forged books is an allusion to the various Gospels and Epistles, canonical and spurious, that sprang up in the early Christian Church.

^m49:2 The Roman conquest of Greece, Asia Minor, and Syria completely effaced from the Eastern mind all recollection of previous actors on those scenes. Even "Alexander the Great" is to them "Alexander the Roman," like our Jelulu-'d-Din, "Er-Rumi."

^m51:1 An allusion to the contests of the bishops of Rome, Constantinople, Alexandria, Antioch, Jerusalem, &c., &c.

^m52:1 The mystics of Islam call God and the spirit the sense, of which material existences are the outward expression; as we say: "The letter and the spirit." The constant play of the original on these words is lost in the version. 

^m52:2 An allusion to Qur'an xviii. 12; not a verbal quotation.

^m53:1 A grammatical variant of Qur'an xxi. 107. Muhammed is meant.

^m53:2 An allusion to Qur'an xlix. 3; not a quotation.

^m54:1 In Qur'an lxi. 6, is the assertion that Jesus, in the Gospel, foretold the advent of Muhammed by the name of Ahmed. This is generally explained as a translation of periklitos, misread for parakletos in John xiv. 26. The two words have very much the same meaning: much-praised, most laudable, laudatissimus. Muhammed is mentioned by many names, forty, fifty, sixty; some say a thousand.

^m54:2 Muhammed gained the name of Trusty, El-Emin (Al-Amin), long before he declared himself commissioned to call his countrymen to acknowledge the unity of God, the resurrection, judgment, and future life.

     
The Mesnavi and The Acts of the Adepts, by Jelal-'d-din Rumi and Shemsu-'d-Din Ahmed, tr. by James W. Redhouse, [1881], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 55]

  

IV.

A SECOND Jewish king, descendant of the first,
 To persecute the Christians showed hate's fiercest thirst.
 If information's sought about this wicked king,
 That chapter of the Qur'an read: "Heaven's Girdle-Ring." [*1]
 A sorry rite it was the first had introduced;
 With cruel zeal this wicked rite the last abused.

The introducer of a rule that tends to ill,
 Draws on his head deep curses, morn and even, still.
 The good decease; their bright example serves as guide;
 The wicked soon decay; their name all men deride. [5]
 The children of those sinners, till the trump of doom,
 Are cursed as soon as born; no lot more full of gloom.

How many springs burst forth, one salt, the other sweet;
 Their savour changes, while the days and nights compete.
 The good are promised their inheritance aloft,
 Of waters sweet; [*2] in Scripture mentioned oft and oft. [*3]
 The seeker's wish, if rightly we consider it,
 A scintillation is of flame from holy writ.

[p. 56]

No flame exists apart from body whence it burns;
 [10] Where'er the burning body hies, the flame, too, turns.
 A window-light will wander all around a room;
 Because the rising sun to sunset tends, and gloom.
 That which to any constellation's stars pertains,
 Must move with it, rise, set, south, as its place ordains.

The man who under Venus' influence was born
 Is joyous, amorous, ambitious, with greed torn.
 If Mars his planet be, his temper's bellicose;
 War, scandal, litigation,--these he most does choose.
 But other stars there are, the planets, seven, beside;
 [15] And unto men from them nor good, nor ills betide.
 Revolving in another firmament than they,
 Above the spheres that bear the orbs of night and day.
 Bright through the moral splendour lent them by the Lord;
 Not bound together quite, nor yet in disaccord.
 The man whose soul is influenced by one of those,
 Like meteors, still shall drive away the spirit's foes.
 His disposition feeleth not the rage of Mars;
 He temporises;--meekly acts in prosperous wars.
 His light's triumphant;--darkness it shall never know.
 [20] Between two fingers holdeth he the truth, I trow.

The truth doth shed a shining light on human souls,
 Received by heaven's favourites, in special ghostly strolls.
 Illumined with that light, as spangles deck a bride,
 They turn their souls to God, contemning all beside.
 Who feels not keenly love's great soul-compelling might,
 Is portionless of spangles from truth's flashing light.

All parts must ever share the nature of their whole,
 As nightingale pours out unto one rose its soul.
 Whatever property may qualify a thing
 [25] Externally, man's qualities are mind's offspring.

[p. 57]

From purity, rich colours rise, good qualities;
 Stains,--moral, or as dyes,--from gross impurities.

"God's Baptism" is the name of all that's good in man;
 "The curse of God," of all that's evil in our plan. [*1]
 In which of these two seas our streamlets may subside,
 They but return into the source from whence their tide.
 From mountain-tops, swift torrents rushing down apace.
 From men's frames, love-inspired souls, anon the race.

The counsel hear, that now, this Jewish dog did take.
 Beside a fire a hideous idol he did make, [30]
 And proclamation ran: "Whoever 'd save his soul,
 This idol worships; or in fire he's burnt to coal." [*2]
 Thus having made his hate an idol to himself,
 A second idol straightway he invents, this elf.

The mother of all idols is our fleshly pride.
 They're dragons; this, the egg of cockatrice's bride.
 The flesh is flint and steel; our pride is but its spark.
 That pride pervades the flesh as fecundation's mark.
 Can moisture quench the latent spark in flint and steel?
 Can man be safe while flesh and pride he lives to feel; [35]
 In flint and steel we know that fire is still alive.
 No water's of avail that fire from them to drive.
 With water we put out a fire when burning bright;
 The spark in flint and steel is safe from water's might.

From flint and steel of flesh what burnings still ensue!
 Their sparks, the blasphemies of Christian and of Jew!
 If water in the jug and pitcher come to end,
 On wellspring we must draw, a fresh supply to send.

[p. 58]

Our idol is the muddy dregs left in our jug;
 [40] The flesh the sewer from whence it filters, spite of plug.
 The graven idol (fed from blackest sewer tide
 In flesh, its graver), was as fountain by wayside.
 The inward idol, pride, the filthy jug's black slush;
 The prurient flesh, the source from which it had its gush.

A hundred potters' pitchers one small stone can break;
 And spill the cooling water drawn our thirst to slake.
 To smash an idol, too, quite easy may appear;
 Not easy to root out the flesh; too hard, I fear.

Would see the picture of the flesh, inquiring youths?
 [45] Description read of hell, with seven yawning mouths. [*1]

From each soul's flesh comes forth a special mode of guile.
 Each guile, a whirlpool ready Pharaoh's hosts to spoil.
 In Moses, and in Moses' God, seek refuge then.
 Abandon not God's faith for Pharaohs and their men.
 The one true God adore; in Ahmed's faith believe.
 Thy soul and body save,--from Abu-Dahl retrieve. [*2]
 The Jew a Christian mother to that idol brought.
 An infant in her arms; the fire with blazes fraught.
 "Fall down and worship;" cried he, "senseless stock adore;
 [50] The fire shall then not harm thee, now, nor evermore."
 That mother was a woman firm in true belief;
 And thence disdained prostration, though 't should give relief.

They snatched her infant; next, they dashed it in the flame.
 The mother's spirit quailed to see this deed of shame.

[p. 59]

Though not herself, to save her infant, she'd bow down.
 But lo! a miracle! The babe cried: "Let alone!
 Uninjured am I here. Come in. Be not dismayed.
 'Tis cool and pleasant. Cease to feel of fire afraid;--
 Mere blinding bandage to the eyes;--naught but a veil.
 God's mercy's here revealed,--made manifest. All hail! [55]
 Come in, my mother, dear. The truth thou shalt record.
 Thou'lt here perceive how saints hold converse with the Lord.
 Come in; and witness water blazing high, as fire.
 This is a world where flame like water is;--not dire.
 Come. Look on miracles for blessed Abr'am wrought; [*1]
 Whose furnace changed to gardens, out of firewood brought.
 Death then I underwent, when I was born of thee.
 The fear of death swept o'er me, ere my eyes could see.
 With birth I 'scaped from prison, narrow, dark, and drear;
 Emerging to a world, vast, radiant, bright, and clear. [60]
 Alas! that world, you see, is but a second womb.
 Joy, comfort, happiness, are found beyond the tomb.
 Within this fire a realm of wonders lies around;
 Each atom's here a Jesus;--balm to heal each wound.
 This world I'm in's reality;--not merely form.
 The scene I've left's all vanity;--food for the worm.
 Come in, my mother; quick! Seize this auspicious hour.
 Come in! Let opportunity not 'scape thy pow'r.
 Come in; come in; in name of parent's tenderness.
 Come in! This fire has no devouring ruthlessness. [65]
 Come in! Thou'st witnessed all that Jewish dog can move.
 Come in! The grace and power of God Almighty prove.
 'Tis from my love for thee I thus so much insist;
 From pleasure felt by me, for thee I've fear dismissed.
 Come in; come in! And others call, to follow thee.
 The Great King here His bounteous table's spread for me.

[p. 60]

Come in; come in! All of you, saints of God, elect!
 Resigned ones! [*1] Faith's cup of martyrdom select!
 Come in! Flock in; in crowds; as moths around a light!
 [70] This year has tens of thousands springs; but not one night."

Thus loudly cried the infant from its bed of flame.
 Th' assembled crowds all heard it. All were seized with shame.
 A sudden holy impulse urged them to obey.
 In crowds those men and women cast their lives away.
 No force was needed;--no compulsion;--all was love;
 For bitterness is sweet to all whom love doth move.
 To such a point it came that guards and soldiers, all,
 Were fain to cry: "Withhold! The fire is more than full!"

The Jewish king at sight of all this love and zeal,
 [75] Was shamed,--was thunderstruck; his wicked heart did reel.
 He saw that faith can give the lover's ardent flame.
 Self-sacrifice is naught in true devotion's name.
 Thank God! Beelzebub was conquered in that Jew.
 Thank God! 'Twas Satan's self these darksome deeds did rue.
 The shame he sought to bring upon the cheeks of some,
 A hundredfold was heaped on his own head at home.
 He thought from others' shame the veiling leaf to tear;
 He saw them safe, his own foul nakedness laid bare.

A ribald fellow once, by lewdest mob sustained,
 [80] Called railing out on Ahmed. Wry his mouth remained.
 He then came begging pity, in the Prophet's trace:
 "Forgive, Muhammed, who'rt endued with wisdom's grace.
 For want of knowing better, insolent I was.
 'Tis I that merit scorn and mockery. Alas!"

[p. 61]

When God decides to humble any sinner, proud,
 A demon stirs this last t' insult some man of God.
 And he whom God elects to cloak where 'tis he halts,
 Has grace bestowed on him to cover others' faults.
 Should favour from the Lord in mercy reach a man,
 Humility is given him; to pray 's part of his plan. [85]

How blessed are the eyes that smart with sorrow's brine!
 How blessed is the heart inflamed with love divine!
 Contrition's tears are ever hallowed by heaven's smile.
 The latter end of all things man should scan awhile.
 Wherever water flows, the fields are fresh and green.
 Tears followed are by grace;--as all the prophets ween.
 Then imitate the water-wheel, that groans and weeps. [*1]
 By prayers, and moans, and tears, a man his heart pure keeps.
 Wouldst thou shed tears? Feel pity, when thou meetest woe.
 Wouldst mercy find? Show mercy, when men bow them low. [90]

The Jewish king reproached the fire: "O raging thing!
 Thy all-destructive might, where is it? Where's thy sting?
 If thou wilt not consume, what quality hast thou?
 Or has my fortune veered; and with it, thy dread glow?
 Thou sparest not thy worshippers, the Magian race.
 Whence comes it; these who spurn thee, Christians, meet with grace?
 Thou never wast, O fire, for patience noted here.
 Why burn'st thou not? What is there? Hast thou lost thy power?
 Is this eye-binding? [*2] Is it, rather, reason's blind?
 How is't thy flames consume not all their hated kind? [95]

[p. 62]

Bewitched thee have they? Or is't magic natural?
 Or is't my fortune wills that thou turn prodigal?"

To him the fire: "O miscreant! I'm still the same.
 Come in and try, thou, how thou'lt find my smallest flame.
 My nature, as my substance, has not suffered change.
 Outside my nature's limit I've no power to range.
 At door of Turkman's tent the savage household dogs
 Do wag their tails before a guest, and crouch like logs.
 But should a stranger pass by, near the guarded tent,
 [100] Him then those dogs assail, with lion-like intent.
 Less than a dog I'm not, in service to my Lord.
 Than Turkman less, there's none, in rights, upon earth's sward."

When fire thy body injures, and inflicts some harm;
 Remember, its consuming power can also warm.
 And when a fire thus serves thee, acts some needful part,
 Reflect! Those qualities thou seest did God impart.
 Art injured, 'haps? Fall down; entreat the Lord with prayer.
 The hurtful power was given by Him in gracious care.
 Should He so will, each injury a blessing is.
 [105] Chained captives find their freedom by a word of His.

Fire, air, earth, water, all are servants of their God.
 I, thou, them lifeless deem. He knows they live and plod.
 In presence of the great Creator fire must still
 Its service do; and, lover-like, work out His will.
 Thou strikest flint on steel; fire instantly leaps forth.
 'Tis by commandment of the Lord it thus takes birth.
 Strike not together, thou, the flint and steel of lust.
 For, male and female like, they'll generate; they must.

The flint and steel are means. Far higher raise thy look.
 [110] With reason thou'rt endowed. Go; read the holy book.

[p. 63]

One means comes from another means; and cause from cause.
 Without a means or cause, no means from self e'er rose.
 The means by which all prophets' miracles are wrought,
 Of higher order are than earthly means; no doubt.
 Man's mind can compass how these latter act, and when;
 The former hidden are from all but prophet's ken.
 These former 'tis that give the latter power to act;
 And rarely, that, their normal action, counteract.

A means a rope is, by the help of which we reach;
 And in this worldly pit by means each reaches each. [115]
 Around its coiling cylinder the well-rope's wound.
 To shut our eyes to this would blind indeed be found.
 The ropes by means of which results are seen to steer,
 In this our world, deem not they're moved by star or sphere;
 Lest thou become confused and giddy like a wheel;--
 Take fire, consume, like tinder, sparks of shame to feel.

The air becomes a fire at times by God's decree.
 Both air and fire run wild with joy, His means to be.
 The streams of mercy, the consuming fires of wrath,
 Thou'lt see, my son, are both from God. Look well, forsooth. [120]
 Were not the wind aware of God's almighty power,
 How had it ever blown the blast of 'Ad's [*1] last hour?
 Around his Muslims Hal a saving circle drew.
 The wind within that mystic circuit softly blew.
 While all that were beyond were dashed to pieces soon.
 Like chaff before the breeze, their limbs around were strewn.

[p. 64]

Shayban the shepherd, too, a circle round his fold
 Was used to draw; whate'er the season, hot or cold;
 On Fridays, when, at midday's sacred hour of praise,
 [125] He to a congregation hied; lest wolf should seize.
 No wolf was ever known to break the holy spell;
 Nor sheep to stray beyond; each knew the limit well.

To wind, to wolf, to sheep, and lusts of every one,
 The circle traced by saint a barrier was, like stone.
 To Gnostic, so likewise, the harmless gale of death
 Blows mild and gentle, summer-breezes-like on heath.
 And fire was fangless; could not Abraham offend.
 How should it hurt him? Was he not God's "Chosen Friend"?

The pious man burns not in fire of fleshly lust.
 [130] But sinners still consumed are upon earth's crust.
 The Red Sea waves, all raging by divine command,
 The host of Israel knew; but Pharaoh's armies drown'd.
 The earth, again, wide gaping at Jehovah's word,
 Did Korah and his wealth devour; but Moses spared. [*1]

In Jesu's hand, warmed with his breath, the fictile clay
 As living birds arose, spread wing, and flew away. [*2]
 Thy lauds and praises, too, breath from thy frame account.
 Sincerity them vivifies; to heaven they mount.

The rock of Sion danced at sight of Moses' God [*3]
 [135] As perfect cenobite; its faults were all removed.
 What wonder if a hill should dance and saint become?
 Was not great Moses' self a clod of clay and loam?

The Jewish king now manifested great surprise.
 These things, he said, were mockeries, mere patent lies.
 His councillors conjured him more sedate to be;
 And not to push his hardihood to rash degree.

[p. 65]

These councillors he fettered, into prison cast;
 Injustice to injustice adding, first and last.

A shout was heard from heaven when matters reached that point:
 "Jew dog! Prepare for vengeance from on high! Aroynt!" [140]
 The fire then blazed amain; its flames lapped all around.
 It slew and burnt the mob of Jews from off the ground.
 Their origin was hell, from whence their souls had come;
 Their goal was also hell; to it they now went home.
 The Jewish race is hellish; many proofs are shown.
 Parts are they of a whole accursed; as is well known.
 Their nature hellish; all their joy God's saints to burn.
 Their fire recoiled upon themselves. 'Twas justice' turn.
 For them, who were, by nature, children born of wrath,
 The lowest depths of hell were fittest cells, forsooth. [145]
 A mother ever yearneth after her own child;
 A dam is ever followed by her offspring wild.

Though true that water may enclosed be in a tank,
 The air will it absorb. 'Twas thence to earth it sank.
 Air sets it free; direct, restores it to its source,
 By little and by little. None perceive its course.

So, too, our breath, in manner like, steals soul away,
 By little and by little, from this house of clay,
 In words of praise, ascending to God's holy throne,
 From us to where He reigns;--as known to Him alone. [150]

Our breathings rise on wings of true sincerity,
 The offerings of our hearts to all eternity.
 We then receive rewards for those poor words of praise,
 In tenfold showers of mercy from th' Ancient of Days.
 And we are still constrained to utter songs of thanks,
 That man should so be raised above th' angelic ranks.

[p. 66]

This rising and descending alternates for aye.
 The Lord forbid that I should fail therein one day!
 We're drawn, we are attracted, so to love the Lord;
 [155] As we were first instructed, firm to trust His word.

Each man will turn his eyes in hope towards the place,
 Where he has tasted joy some former day of grace.
 The pleasures of each kind are most with their own kin;
 As part must share with whole its qualities, its sin.
 Things needs must be assigned unto a common class,
 If aught they have in common; two will form a race.
 Thus bread and water are not human at the first;
 But human they become, through hunger and through thirst.
 In form they have no tie with us of human kind;
 [160] But through a special link they kindred with us find.

If pleasure, then, we find in what's not of our race,
 Be sure there's some connection through which this takes place.
 If that connection but resemblance be in shape,
 It will not last; it's for a time; it must escape.

'Tis true that birds find pleasure in a whistle's note;
 But then they fancy 'tis their mate's, on whom they dote.
 And if a thirsty man take pleasure in his wine,
 He tastes the lees, and loathes. To water he'll incline.
 A pauper may amused be with counterfeited coin;
 [165] But take this to the mint; defaced 'twill be, in fine.
 Then be not thou misled with gilded counterfeit;
 Delusion will thee plunge headlong into hell's pit.

Footnotes

^m55:1 Qur'an, chap. lxxxv., the name of which literally means "the Towers," but is also applied to the Signs of the Zodiac. These Christians were the people of Nejran in south-western Arabia; their persecutor Dhu-Nuwas, a Jew, king of Yaman, some time before Muhammad.

^m55:2 "Gardens beneath which rivers flow" is a frequently recurring expression in the Qur'an. Some have special names.

^m55:3 See Qur'an xxxv. 29: "Then we caused" thee "to inherit the Scripture."

^m57:1 In Qur'an ii. 132, Islam is termed "God's Baptism." In ii. 156, and again in vii. 42, and xi. 21, "God's curse" is invoked on sinners.

^m57:2 This is the story alluded to in Qur'an lxxxv., quoted above. In traditions, Dhu-Nuwas was the name of the Jewish king of Yaman, who burnt the Christians of Nejran in a fiery trench on their refusing to forsake their faith. The idol is imaginary; from Nebuchadnezzar.

^m58:1 Qur'an xvi. 45; xxxvii. 72; xl. 76; speaks of the "Gates of Hell;" and a commentary to she last says they are held to be seven.

^m58:2 Abu-Jahl was a surname given by Muhammed to one of his most inveterate enemies of the Quraysh, killed at Badr. The word means: "Father of Ignorance," and here indicates fleshly pride. He had formerly borne the surname of Abu-'l-Hakem, which means: Father of the Arbitrator.

^m59:1 In Qur'an xxi. 69, is related the miracle by which Abraham was saved from the fire into which he was cast by Nimrod for his refusal to worship an image.

^m60:1 The word "Muslim," whence the corruption Moslem, means, in Arabic, "one who acquiesces in the truth and will of God." As such, Muslims have existed under every dispensation.

^m61:1 The creaking, leaky water-wheel, the Persian wheel, is well known in the East.

^m61:2 "Eye-binding" is a name for sorcery. The spectator is supposed to have his sight spell-bound, so as not to see what is really done.

^m63:1 'Ad, a pre-Semitic, perhaps Turanian, people in south-eastern Arabia, often mentioned in the Qur'an. They refused to believe the prophet Hud (supposed to be Heber), and were destroyed, lxix. 6-7, by an eight days' tempest.

^m64:1 Qur'an xxiii. 76, &c.

^m64:2 Qur'an iii. 43.

^m64:3 Qur'an vii. 139.

     
The Mesnavi and The Acts of the Adepts, by Jelal-'d-din Rumi and Shemsu-'d-Din Ahmed, tr. by James W. Redhouse, [1881], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 67]

  

V.

KALiL' and Dimna's book relates a charming tale, [*1]
 From which males may a moral draw;--and eke, female.
 Within a shelter'd vale, four-footed game in droves,
 Were kept in tremor by a lion from its groves.
 So frequently had he borne victims off from thence,
 The vale a prison had become in every sense.
 A consultation held, they fair proposals state,
 To satisfy the lion's hunger by a rate;
 But on condition that he rapine lay aside,
 And not prolong disquiet in that valley wide. [5]
 The lion gave consent, if they'd perform their part;
 Remarking: "I've a victim been to wily art.
 Man persecutes me with his deadly stratagems;
 The snake and scorpion sting me;--rancour's true emblems.
 But worse than any man, in venom and in spleen,
 The fleshly lust within me traitor's always been.
 But I've grown wary. Has not Ahmed said: 'Rely!
 Believers are not twice caught by the self-same lie?'" [*2]
 Their answer was: "O most sagacious, knowing guide,
 Thy caution pray dismiss; decree of God abide. [10]

[p. 68]

Suspicion, caution, ever is corroding ill.
 Put trust in Providence; and God thy maw will fill.
 Strive not with Providence, however strong thou be;
 Lest Providence should take offence, and war with thee."

He answered them: "Sure! Sure! Trust Providence we must.
 His prophets in the Lord have always placed their trust.
 To trust in God, and yet put forth our utmost skill,
 The surest method is, to work His holy will.
 The Prophet plainly said to his disciple train:
 [15] 'Put trust in God, and bind thy camel's shank amain?' [*1]
 Remember the old saw: 'The friend of God must work.' [*2]
 Through trust in God, neglect not ways and means, O clerk."

Abashed they were not; answer thus they promptly made:
 "To gain aught from the poor is fraud; a trick of trade.
 There is no gain so good as trust placed in the Lord.
 What more praiseworthy than to build upon His word?
 How many flee this danger, falling into that! 
 From fryingpan leaps one, to light in fire right pat. [*3]
 Man plans a stratagem; in it is caught himself.
 [20] That which he took for health, he finds is death itself.
 He locks his door when treason's lurking in his house.
 So Pharaoh deemed he'd danger shun ere it should rouse.
 How many thousand infants did he doom to death;
 While Moses, whom he feared, his own roof was beneath.
 Our eyes afflicted are with various kinds of ills.
 Then go and make them blind, by seeing God 'tis wills.
 God's sight of providence is keener than men's eyes.
 By seeing with His sight, thou'lt find all thou wilt prize.
 An infant, that can neither grasp nor walk as yet,

[p. 69]

Takes seat upon his father's neck, and runs. Sweet pet. [25]
 Some seasons past, he scarcely gains some strength of limb;
 When sorrow fastens on him;--sharp, and ghastly grim.
 The hearts of men, before they gain or power or wealth,
 Decline away from duty, pleasures seek by stealth.
 And since by God's decree from paradise they're rent,
 They prisoners become to rage, lust, discontent.
 We are the household of that Householder, whose word
 Thus spake: 'Creation's all as children of the Lord.' [*1]
 He that doth send the fattening rain upon the earth,
 In mercy, too, can feed His creatures from their birth." [30]

The lion thus replied: "'Tis true. But still, the Lord
 A ladder sets before our feet to be explor'd.
 Step after step we have to mount unto the roof.
 Th' idea of compulsion's quite devoid of proof.
 Two feet thou hast. Then why thyself hold to be lame?
 Two hands also. Why maimed account thyself in name?
 Whene'er a master puts a spade in hand of slave,
 He has no need to speak; the act expression gave.
 Our hands just so are given; spades they are to us.
 Think out this problem well; it needs not any fuss. [35]
 When thou hast laid this unction to thy soul amain,
 In duty's path to lay down life thou'lt count as gain.
 Those symbols indices are, whence are secrets known.
 Responsibility's from thee withdrawn; work shown.
 Thou'rt surely burdened. Borne also most truly art.
 Recipient; hence accepted;--fully on His part.
 Recipient be of God's command; content thou'lt be.
 Seek unto Him; and to Him joined thyself thou'lt see.
 To strive to give thanks power provides this to perform.
 Allege compulsion. Gratitude's ground thou'lt deform. [40]
 Thanks for thy powers the power of thanks tenfold expands.

[p. 70]

Take favour for compulsion. Power will leave thy hands.
 Compulsion dost affirm? That's sleeping by the way.
 Go not to sleep until thou'st fairly won the day.
 Sleep not, Compulsionist? Thou man, with folly rife
 Until thou reach the goal, the fruitful Tree of Life.
 The cool breeze there will rustle through its leaves profuse,
 Each moment scattering fruits for food and future use.
 Compulsion's creed is sleep among the highwaymen;
 [45] Unseasonable bird is mercilessly slain. [*1]
 If thou at God's signs carp and peek, so finding fault,
 Though man thou count thyself, 'tis womanlike assault.
 The little sense thou hadst has really taken flight;
 A head that has no brains is tail turn'd round to sight.
 Ungrateful men are ever cursed of God on earth;
 And after death are flung to hell-fire's vengeful hearth.
 If thou repose thy trust in God's almighty pow'r,
 Sow first thy seed; and then, await the harvest hour."

The beasts a clamour raised; they would not be repressed:
 [50] "They who on means depend, are urged by greed confessed.
 The millions upon millions, man and womankind,
 Are pinched by want; they suffer need; they food scarce find.
 By millions and by millions, since creation's day,--
 Insatiate dragons,--they their gaping jaws display.
 A crowd of would-be wise men stratagems invent,
 Enough to upset mountains, could they give them vent.
 So God himself described in His most holy book
 Their arts: 'By which they'd tear away the hills.' [*2] Just look.
 Except the lot decreed by Providence of yore,
 [55] By hunting or by toiling none can swell his store.
 Device of man, his plans, shall all be brought to naught.
 God's dispensations sole will stand, with wisdom fraught.

[p. 71]

Strive not then, man of sense; except good name to leave.
 Exertion's a delusion. Out! Thou sottish knave!"

A simpleton one morning rushing came in haste,
 Where Solomon his court of justice then had placed.
 His cheeks were blanched, his lips were blue; effects of fright.
 Said Solomon to him: "What ails thee? Say aright."
 Him answer'd that poor wretch: "The angel, Lord, of death, [*1]
 Upon me fixed, just now, a look that stopped my breath." [60]
 Said Solomon: "What wilt thou I should do for thee?"
 He answered: "That the wind may now commanded be [*2]
 To carry me away forthwith to Hindustan.
 Perchance by fleeing thither, save my life I can."

See how mankind do shun the garb of poverty.
 Hence they're a prey to greed and dire necessity.
 This fear of poverty is like that man's dismay,
 Its Hindustan, remark, is greed and grasping's sway.

So Solomon the wind commanded, him, forthwith,
 To bear to Hindustan; and land him near some frith. [65]

Another day as Solomon his court did hold,
 Death's angel came; the king to him the matter told:
 "Thy wrathful look, the other day, upon that man,
 Has driven him his home to quit for Hindustan.
 Didst thou in wrath survey the pious man that way,
 That he might wander forth a waif, like sheep astray?
 Or was thy look's intent, so dreadful to behold,
 His soul to separate from its corporeal fold?"

To him replied the angel: "King of sprites and men!
 His fancy him misled; he'll ne'er do so again. [70]

[p. 72]

'Twas not in anger then that I did look on him;
 'Twas wonder him to see here, looking hale and prim.
 For God had me commanded: 'Go this very day,
 And take his soul in Hindustan, his debt to pay.'
 In wonder, then, I said within myself: 'Had he
 A hundred wings, in Hindustan he could not be.'
 But going, still, by God's command, to Hindustan,
 Him there I found, and took his soul with my own hand."

So thou, good reader, understand, the things of earth
 [75] 'Tis God ordains. Reflect. 'Twas written ere his birth.
 From whom to flee? From self? Oh! That's absurd!
 From whom to steal? From God? Worse, worse! No word!

The lion now remarked: "The words you speak are true.
 But just consider how the prophets, saints, ensue.
 What they have wrought hath God blessed, made to prosper still;
 Their joys and griefs, their sufferings, pains, were by His will.
 Their stratagems dictated by their God were, all. [*1]
 'Who comes of gentle blood, will gentle words let fall.' [*2]
 Their traps have taken angels with the baits they placed.
 [80] Their seeming slips and faults were all by wisdom traced.
 Exert thyself, O man; put shoulder to the wheel,
 The prophets and the saints to imitate in zeal.
 Exertion's not a struggle against Providence.
 'Twas Providence enjoined it,--made it our defence.
 Blasphemer may I be, if ever single man
 Bestowed in vain one effort to fulfil God's plan.
 Thou hast no broken bones; why bind thy limbs in splints?
 Have patience yet awhile; then laugh; we're not mere flints.

[p. 73]

It is a bad investment to seek worldly gain. [*1]
 Whose hope is placed in heaven never shall see pain. [*2] [85]
 The stratagems employed for worldly gain are vile,
 But stratagems for gaining heaven are worth our while.
 Blest stratagem is that which bursts a prison door.
 Curst stratagem is one that spreads a dungeon floor.
 The world's a dungeon. We are all in prison here.
 Burst, then, thy prison gate, and free thyself from fear.
 What is the world? Unmindful of our God to be;
 Not gold or silver, wife or children, things we see.
 The wealth we hold at service of our God is blest.
 'The riches of the just are pure,' Ahmed confess'd. [90]
 The water from a leak is danger to a ship;
 The sea beneath her keel is just what makes her skip.
 Great Solomon despised wealth, sway, with all his heart.
 With countless treasures poor he named himself. Best part!
 An empty jar will float upon a raging sea,
 The air that fills it will not let it sunken be.
 Th' afflatus of true poverty man's soul will buoy.
 Above the troubles of the world he rides. Ahoy!
 Should all earth's boundless riches by him be possessed;
 The whole is viewed in his pure sight as naught at best. [95]
 Close then the inlet to thy heart; seal it with love;
 First filling it with wisdom's spirit from above.
 Endeavour is from God; so sickness, and its balm.
 He vainly strives who would deny this truthful psalm."

Of this complexion, many proofs the lion brought;
 No answer those compulsionists in dispute sought.
 The fox, the deer, the hare, and eke the sly jackal,
 Were fain to quit compulsion's cause, for good and all.

A treaty they concluded with the forest king,
 That he, by this concession, should not lose a thing. [100]

[p. 74]

His daily ration ready always should be found;
 And he should have no cause to trespass on their ground.
 Lots they would cast among themselves from day to day.
 On whom the lot should fall, he'd be the lion's prey.

But lo, at length the lot upon the hare did light.
 He found it very hard, and wailed his awful plight.
 The other beasts remarked: "We each have had our turn;
 And none of us refused th' agreement to confirm.
 By breach of faith on us fresh infamy bring not.
 [105] Begone forthwith; the lion must not be forgot."

The hare replied: "Dear friends, a respite to me grant.
 A stratagem I'll plan, and cheat this grim tyrant.
 My wily plan shall save the souls of all alive;
 And safety heirloom be your children shall derive.
 Thus every prophet's promised to his sect, at least,
 Salvation from the doom o'erhanging man and beast.
 They found a ready way to 'scape beyond the spheres,
 So soon as to reflect they turned their minds from fears.
 Man sees another's eye is but a wee, wee thing;
 [110] He knows how great a service can th' eye's pupil bring."

The beasts in answer: "Jackass! Prate to us no more.
 Consider. Thou'rt a hare; a beast of no great store.
 What talk is this? Thy betters ne'er have used such speech.
 They never would have dared to think as thou dost preach.
 It must be thou'rt o'erweening, or our fate's at hand.
 For otherwise, pretensions such as thine can't stand."

To them as a rejoinder puss spoke: "My dear friends,
 My inspiration's God's; small means effect great ends.
 The wisdom God hath taught the little honey-bee,
 [115] You do not find possessed by lion, or by me.

[p. 75]

We see its cells arranged, with liquid sweetness filled,
 The portals of such art to open God hath willed.
 Then see the silkworm, how it's taught by God to spin.
 Have elephants the power to draw out threads so thin?
 The earthy Adam was by God taught all our names. [*1]
 His knowledge was the admiration of heaven's frames.
 Th' angelic choir were silenced; they knew not so much.
 The fiend be cursed. He'd not confess the fact was such.
 That fasting hermit of six hundred thousand years [*2]
 Became the new-born babe's dire muzzle,--source of tears. [120]
 Lest it should suck the milk religion's teachings give,--
 Lest it should soar on high around heaven's towers, and live,--
 The learning of external sense a muzzle lies,--
 The milk of truth sublime's denied to all its cries.
 But God hath planted in man's heart a precious pearl.
 Nor seas, nor skies, such gem enclose within their whirl!
 How long of form thy talk--form-worshipper--vain man?
 Cannot thy senseless soul cast off form's deadening ban?
 Did human form alone suffice a man to make,
 Ahmed and Abu-Jahl were one in grade, in stake. [125]
 A painting on a wall may show the human form.
 But look and see what lacks, the figure to inform.
 'Tis life it wants, and soul;--the pretty-looking thing!
 Ask for its life. No! No! Though portrait of a king.
 The heads of all earth's lions bowed down meek and low,
 When God the Seven Sleepers' [*3] dog applauded. How!
 To call it dog, to charge it with defect of race,
 No harm can do it; God in heaven hath given it place.

[p. 76]

'Twas not the pen prescrib'd the qualities of form;
 [130] Th' Omniscient, the Just, 'twas, made it multiform.
 Th' Omniscient, the Just, a Spirit is, All-Blest;
 Him no place holds; He's not before, behind, east, west.
 He influences matter from His high abode;
 But heaven of heavens cannot contain the Spirit's mode."

That theme is endless. Let us then just turn away.
 Let's ask about the hare; hear what he has to say.
 Sell off thy ass' ears; with the price a fresh pair buy.
 An ass's ears will never understand this cry. [*1]
 Go to. Examine well the hare's most foxy wile,--
 [135] The subtle stratagem that did the lion foil.

Wisdom's the seal by which great Solomon did rule.
 The whole world's but a frame, and wisdom is its soul.
 Hence 'tis, by wisdom's spell, as clay on potter's wheel,
 The seas, the hills, the plains, are made man's power to feel.
 The lion, tiger, leopard, dread him as does mouse;
 The shark, the crocodile, he follows to their house.
 The demon and the fairy, both constrained to flight,
 Have hid themselves from him,--are only seen by night.
 The human being has his foes hid every side.
 [140] A prudent man by caution may in safety bide.
 Those hidden foes,--the hideous, and the fair as well,--
 By day and night affect his heart with charm and spell.

Thou enterest a river, just to have a bathe;
 A hidden thorn may pierce thy foot, bared of its swathe.
 Thou seest it not. 'Tis hid at bottom of the stream.
 Thou feel'st it in thy foot; thou knowest it's not a dream.
 Plagues, troubles, fears, and cares, of various degree,
 All spring from many sides, and fix themselves in thee.

[p. 77]

Bear all with patience; slowly thou'lt experience gain.
 Thou'lt recognise the truth; the dark will be made plain. [145]
 At length thou'lt scout the vagaries of learned men,
 And take unto thyself, as patterns, saints of ken.

The beasts on second thoughts resolved to hear puss out.
 "Explain," said they, "what 'tis thou'dst have us set about.
 Let's hear; 'tis with the lion we shall have to do.
 Set forth thy plan; let's see what stratagem's in view.
 Deliberation's ever wisdom's truest friend;
 Two heads than one are better,--lead to safer end.
 The prophet spake: 'O ruling judge, ere thou decide,
 Take counsel; for 'tis said: "In councillors confide."'" [150]

The hare objects: "A secret's not for ev'ry clod.
 Odd even is at times; and sometimes even's odd.
 Too closely with a mirror shouldst thou converse hold,
 From prudery it umbrage takes, grows dull; the scold.
 On matters three, allow not oft thy lips to speak:
 First, going; gold, next; third, the path thou hast to seek.
 These all have sundry enemies and deadly foes,
 Who'll lie in ambush, each, if he thy purpose knows.
 If thou 'Adieu' to only one or two shouldst call,
 Remember: 'Two's a secret; three is none at all.' [155]
 If fast together thou shouldst bind birds, two or three,
 They'll quiet lie on earth, nor strive themselves to free.
 Men hold it best to ask for counsel in wide terms.
 Beware; and wrangle not with perverse pachyderms.
 The Prophet covertly men's counsel used to seek.
 His answer he'd obtain; his purpose did not leak.
 He'd speak in parables, and so convey his wish,
 That foes might hear, but not suspect its purport. Pish!
 He'd ferret out in answers all he wished to learn;
 And still not give an inkling of his thought's real turn." [160]

[p. 78]

Enough we've said of this. Now turn we to our tale.
 By puss the lion's held right hungry in the vale.
 And so it was; the hare his counsel did conceal;
 He would not let his comrades learn how he would deal.
 Some hours he now let pass before he took his leave;
 Then to the lion went, their honour to retrieve.

He found the brute impatient, chafing at delay,
 From hunger's pangs fierce howling, tearing every spray;
 And roaring in his rage: "I knew it so would be!
 [165] Those vile, time-serving rascals! Thus they worry me!
 They're plausible, smooth-speaking, bland, calm, mild; and still
 They've cheated me! Alas! Who will be cheated, will!
 A too complaisant prince most foully is let in!
 Who sees no farther than his nose, none heeds a pin!"

The path is smoothed beneath which lurks a deadly trap.
 A missive's filled with compliments; all mere clap-trap.
 Bland messages, smooth words, are but a hook or snare.
 Civility's a sandbank; life's bark's oft wrecked there,
 The sand from which a spring of water's seen to flow
 [170] Is rare to find. Go, seek such. Where? I do not know.

Yes, yes! Be sure that sand's a holy man of God,
 Unto himself lost, rapt, in union with his Lord.
 Religion's crystal waters flow from him apace;
 Disciples thence are edified and grow in grace.
 A worldling is a sandbank, void of moisture quite,
 On which you may make shipwreck, lose all chance of light.
 Seek wisdom, then, from wisdom's sons, the pure of mind;
 So mayest thou learn the way salvation's port to find.

A seeker after wisdom, is, of wisdom, fount.
 [175] "Humanities" he shuns; them, he does trash account.

[p. 79]

A memory replete with holy Qur'an's lore
 A "hidden tablet" is; [*1] its mind is wisdom's store.
 If man begin as pupil to good common sense,
 He'll end by being teacher,--mind, his audience.
 Man's mind declares, as Gabriel to Ahmed there, [*2]
 "One step beyond due limit leaves me ashes sere.
 Go forward, man of God; leave me; I know my place.
 To every one's not given to see God face to face."

Whoever, out of sloth, endeavour's path shall quit,
 And patience lose, compulsion's creed must needs admit. [180]
 Whoe'er affirms compulsion, brings woe on himself,
 Until his troubles to the grave conduct the elf.

The Prophet said: "My mission, 's truth to preach to man.
 Much trouble will surround it during my life's span."
 Compulsion's but the setting of a broken bone, [*3]
 Or binding of a muscle, torn, asunder gone.
 Thou hast not broke thy leg in travelling God's path.
 Why put thy leg in splints? Cast off the idle swath.
 He that shall really lose a leg in God's just fight,
 To him Buraq shall come, a chariot of light. [*4] [185]
 Religion's carrier was he; carried then he'll be.
 God's precepts he accepted; accepted now is he.
 The Great King's orders has he bravely carried out.
 Henceforward he's a herald;--shall God's judgments shout.
 The planets until now may have affected him;
 Above the planets now he rests, and rules their trim.

[p. 80]

If forms material find much honour in thy sight,
 Thou'lt doubt the truth of writ: "The moon clave," left and right. [*1]
 Renew thy faith at heart, not merely with mouth's gust,
 [190] O hypocrite, who covertly dost worship lust.
 While lust is dominant, faith cannot be so strong;
 For lust 's a bolt to close the door, lest faith should throng.
 The virgin text of God explain not thou away;
 Reform thyself; deform not what the Lord Both say.
 As suits thy lusts thou comments makest on God's Qur'an.
 Vile, as by thee perverted, is its sense, base man.
 Thy case resemblance has with one of silly fly,
 Who once upon a time himself thought very high.
 Intoxicated was he, though he'd sipp'd no wine.
 [195] Like sunbeam's mote he saw himself most gaily shine.
 He'd heard of noble falcons scorning lure and cage;
 And straightway dubbed himself the phoenix of the age.

Our fly on scrap of straw, in pool from ass's ease,
 Had poised himself, as though a sailor on the seas.
 Then cried: "Lo! I've called forth a sea and ship at will.
 Long since I 've had a notion, pleasure's cup to fill.
 Behold a sea and ship of which I captain am,
 Imbued with naval science, bold as any ram."

Imagination thus had conjured up a sea.
 [200] To him it boundless seemed, dwarfing credulity.
 Compared with him it was a truly boundless pool.
 When people see with their own eyes, call them not fool.
 His universe was measured by his power of sight.
 To such an eye such pool a sea was. He was right.

A false interpreter of scripture is such fly.
 His fancy is the urine pool on which straws ply.

[p. 81]

If flies in fancy thus explain the things they see,
 By fortune's freaks, in turn, a phoenix each may be.
 He's less than fly, of whom this tale example lends;
 His soul unworthy is ev'n of the frame it tends. [205]
 Just like the hare who'd lion undertake to fight,
 How should his soul remain in his poor carcase, slight?

The lion growled in tones of anger and of rage:
 "My ear it was bewrayed me; war my foes did wage.
 Compulsionists' false wiles placed bandage on my eyes.
 Their wooden swords it was that stung my skin, like flies.
 Henceforward I'll not list to such cajoleries,--
 Of elves and demons, in the wilderness, mere cries.
 Tear, rend them; O my heart, pay no regard to them.
 Strip off their skins; there's naught beneath; mere stratagem." [210]

When words deceitful are employed as wraps for guile,
 They're bubbles on the water, only last a while.
 Such words are merely shell; th' intent their kernel is;--
 Or coloured portraiture of man; no life is his.
 A shell may often cover kernel of foul smell.
 A kernel sound can well afford to lose its shell.

If mind be pen; if page be water, in thy hands;
 Be not surpris'd when all that's written quick disbands.
 On water 'tis to write, t' expect good faith from bail.
 Regret must follow. Shrug your shoulders. What avail! [215]

Man with desires is oft puffed up, and wishes vain.
 Put out desire; you'll find Jehovah's endless reign.
 His messages are peace, and sweet to pious soul;
 For He alone's eternal, free from change, and whole.

Men's prayers for kings and princes change full oft in tone.
 The prayers of saints and prophets call on God alone.

[p. 82]

Th' existence of earth's sovereign's empty pomp and pride,
 The glories of a prophet in his God abide.
 The names of kings on coins are used a little while;
 [220] The name of Ahmed there is ever seen to smile. [*1]
 That name of Ahmed covers all the prophets still; [*2]
 As hundred, when 'tis said, ninety includes as well.

Reflections such as these would never have an end.
 So turn we through our hare and lion's tale to wend.

The hare but slowly towards the lion took his way.
 Wiles in his brain he hatched; weighed what he had to say.
 Procrastination served him his design to fill;
 He'd secrets, one or two, the royal mind to still.

How many worlds there are that hang on wisdom's worth.
 [225] How vast an ocean wisdom! Compasses the earth.
 A shoreless ocean is the subtle mind of man
 A fearless diver sounds its depths; as who else can?
 Our bodies drift about in mind's strong eddies still,
 Like basins on the water, at the stream's sole will.
 Until they fill, they float like bowls, on ocean's brink;
 And, like the bowls, when full, they cannot choose but sink.

The wind's invisible; a world without, we see.
 Our bodies are the waves or drops of that vast sea.
 Whatever means our bodies seek to grasp, anon,
 [230] A billow drives it far; no sooner seen than gone.

Until our hearts perceive the Giver of all good,
 The swiftly-flying bolt shot far from o'er the flood,
 They hold their coursers to be lost; and out of spite,
 They push their roadsters hastily, as thoughts invite.
 They hold their coursers to be lost; and all the while
 Like noble courser, roadster's borne them many a mile.

[p. 83]

They now begin to wail, distress'd, and ask the way.
 They knock at ev'ry door they see, they beg, they pray:
 "The stealer of our courser was a little child.
 What horse is this, my master? Seems it not too wild?" [235]
 "O yes, a horse it is; but not the horse you want.
 Come to your senses, man; to some one else go chant."

The soul is void of patency and fellowship.
 Thou, like a wine-jar, full within, hast parched lip.
 How shouldst thou e'er distinguish red from green or brown,
 When these are all the colours unto thee well known?
 And when thy mind is dazed by colour's magic round,
 All colour's lost in one bright light diffused around.
 Those colours, too, all vanish from our view by night.
 We learn from this, that colour's only seen through light. [240]

The sense of colour-seeing's not from light distinct.
 So, too, the sudden rainbow of our mind's instinct.
 From sunlight, and the like, all outer colours rise;
 The inward tints that mark our minds, from God's sunrise.
 The light that lights the eye's the light that's in the heart.
 Eye's light is but derived from what illumes that part.
 The light that lights the heart's the light that comes of God,
 Which lies beyond the reach of sense and reason, clod!

By night we have no light; no colour can we see.
 Thus, light we learn by darkness, its converse. Agree! [245]
 A seeing of the light, perception is of tints;
 And these distinguished are through darkness' gloomy hints.
 Our griefs and sorrows were by God first introduced,
 That joy to sense apparent thence should be reduced.
 Occult things, thus, by converse, grow apparent, all.
 Since God has no converse, apparent He can't fall.
 Sight first saw light, and then the colours saw.
 From converse converse stands forth, as Frank from Negro.
 By converse of the light, distinguish we the light;
 A converse 'tis that converse shows unto our sight. [250]

[p. 84]

The light of God no converse has in being's bound;
 By converse, then, man has not its distinction found.
 Our eyes cannot distinguish God, decidedly;
 Though He distinguish Moses and the Mount from thee.

Form and ideal, gnat and lion, word and sense,
 Sound of the voice and thought, learnst thou by dissidence,
 The words and sounds take rise from exercise of thought.
 The sea of thought is where? Of this thou knowest naught.
 Words, as thou seest, rise as waves upon the sea.
 [255] The sea of thought thou knowest great, immense to be.
 The waves of thought arise, by breath of knowledge raised;
 They take the forms of words, of sounds, which ear has seized.
 Through words have forms arisen, and passed away again;
 As waves still lose themselves beneath the ocean's main.
 From realm of formlessness, existence doth take form;
 And fades again therein.: "To Him we must return." [*1]
 Each moment, then, for thee death and return await,
 As Ahmed hath declared: "Life's transitory." [*2] Wait!
 Thoughts, bolts are, shot by God into the air like dust.
 [260] Whose thoughts can reach to God, through densest air of lust?

The world's renewed each moment, though we still remain
 In ignorance that permanence can change sustain.
 Life, like a river, ceaselessly, is still renewed;
 And apes persistency, in forms by change subdued,
 Through fleetness it puts on continuity's shape;
 Like squib when 'tis revolved in dark by boy with tape.
 A flash of flame, through motion's necessary speed,
 Appears unto our eyes a fire of size, indeed.

[p. 85]

Its length and its extension, through quickness of fact,
 Appear to be effects of God's creative act. 265
 A student of this mystery, a doctor of great skill,
 Is our Husamu-'d-Din, [*1] whose praises books would fill.

The lion, now enraged with hunger's gnawing pain,
 Perceived the hare was coming, bounding o'er the plain.
 All carelessly, in confidence, he frisking came,
 The lion all the while growled, gnashed his teeth from shame.
 No consciousness of fault was visible, no fear;
 But confidence, sure sign his conscience he felt clear.

When he'd reached hearing range, the lion him addressed
 In tones of wrath: "Thou demon, insolent, possessed! [270]
 Know I'm a lion; elephants my prey I make.
 The tigers, spotted pards, by me are caused to quake.
 A petty hare am not I, slighted thus to be,
 Or see my just dominion spurned by likes of thee.
 Cast off assumed prim innocence, awake to fact;
 Thou hear'st the lion's roar; forget not thus the pact."

The hare replied: "Gramercy! Hear my poor excuse.
 Let me explain. Your Majesty will ne'er refuse."

The lion now: "Excuse? Thou basest of the base!
 Is this the time to pay thy court? A pretty case! [275]
 Unseasonably crowing cock art thou! Reprieved?
 Excuse from simpleton can never be received.
 A simpleton's excuse is worse than was his fault.
 Excuse of ignorance were science to assault.
 Excuse from thee, thou hare, were quite devoid of sense.
 Take thou me not for hare; with me strive not to fence."

The hare to him: "O prince! Have pity on the weak!
 Lend ear unto the tales of them who justice seek.

[p. 86]

Thankoffering let it be for thy august estate.
 [280] Poor supplicant like me, thou'lt not drive from thy gate.
 Great river like, thy boons stream aye through all canals;
 Each flower that decks thy hair in price rich pearls excels.
 The sea is not dried up by yielding showers of rain.
 Thy ease will not decrease by lessening of my pain."

The lion then: "My clemency I show to those
 Who've it deserved. 'Tis stature rules the length of clothes."

The hare: "Give ear. Should I of grace unworthy prove,
 I'm at thy feet. My life is thine, I cannot move.
 At morning's early hour I set out for thy court.
 [285] Companion had I with me. True, the way is short.
 That second hare I speak of, food was for thy maw;
 By lot selected, as the pact lays down the law.
 Upon the road, a lion on us onslaught made.
 The savage, strange invader, rendered us afraid.
 I remonstrated with him; told him our intent;
 Said we were coming here; by treaty were we sent.

He answered: 'Prate not to me. Treaty such as this
 No value has. I'm king. He a usurper is.
 Thy paltry king and thee I'll quickly rend in two,
 [290] If thou and thy companion will not with me go.'
 I craved of him permission, him to leave awhile,
 Till I could come and tell thee of his claim and guile.
 He granted leave; but kept my fellow as a pledge;
 Saying otherwise he'd kill me, as his privilege.
 We strove to coax and pacify the sturdy brute.
 'Twas no avail. My mate he'd keep; me he'd depute.
 My comrade three times was in bulk more full than I;
 More plump, more sleek, more toothful. Dare I tell a lie?
 Henceforward, through that lion, who can come this way?
 [295] The case is so. I've told thee truly all my say.

[p. 87]

From hence, for evermore, thy ration's lost, forsooth.
 The truth I speak to thee. Unpleasant oft is truth.
 Wouldst thou thy ration have, arise and clear the way.
 Come on. I'll guide. Let's see, then, who shall win the day."

The lion now: "In God's name! Come! Where is the beast?
 Go thou before, if thou speak truth. Take heed at least.
 I'll treat him as he merits, and a hundred such.
 But should this prove a lie, thou'lt rue it very much."

The hare set out in front, so acting as a guide,
 That he might lead the lion as he should decide. [300]
 A well there was not far off, which the hare had seen.
 This pit he destined for the lion's last death-scene.
 They journeyed thus, the two, towards the well in haste,
 The scheming, plotting hare's fell stratagem to taste.

A stream of water freely bears the chaff away;
 But how it undermines a mountain's hard to say.
 All single-handed, Moses,--Red Sea at command,--
 Can drown pursuing Pharaoh's vast ungodly band.
 A gnat, by God's behest, a Nimrod may annul;
 Its feeble wings may burst the sutures of his skull. [*1] [305]

The doom of him who acts on what a foe adjusts,
 Is like the end of one his envier who trusts.
 The punishment of Pharaoh's listening to Haman, [*2]
 Resembles Nimrod's, who faith pinned upon Satan. [*3]

A foe who talks in friendly guise, a false game plays;
 He vaunts the bait; but be thou sure, a trap he lays.
 His proffered sugarcandy poison will conceal.
 His seeming kindly offices are treachery's veil.

[p. 88]

Should God ordain thy fall, thy sight will blinded be;
 [310] 'Twixt friend and foe the difference thou'lt fail to see.
 Since thus it is, betimes betake thyself to prayer;
 Fast, supplicate, entreat thee gracious God to spare.
 Thus pray: "O Thou, to whom all secrets well are known,
 Crush not Thy trusting servant 'neath sore trial's stone.
 If doglike acts I've acted, Thou who lions formest,
 O let not loose upon me lions Thou informest.
 O Lord of mercy, Pardoner of sin, All-just,
 Upon me vengeance wreak not, or succumb I must.
 Cause not Thy pleasant waters me to burn like fire;
 [315] Let not the fiery furnace form of stream acquire.
 If Thou me madden with the vials of dismay,
 Thou'lt make nonentities the parts of things to play."

What's madness? 'Tis a bandage to the eye of faith.
 A stone we see as pearl, an island as a frith.
 What's madness? False to judge of every stick and straw.
 To seek the violet's perfume in hip and haw.

One day, when Solomon a camp had formed afield,
 The birds all flocked around him, homage due to yield.
 They found he spake their language, all their secrets knew.
 [320] With pleasure, birds of every kind about him flew.
 The birds with Solomon all left their twit-twit-twee,
 And spake a tongue articulate; as one might see.

Synglottism is a link, a very potent spell; [*1]
 Among mere strangers, man's a captive in a cell.
 How many Turks and Hindus synglottise with us;
 How many pairs of each are strange as incubus!
 A synglottist is then a man's another self;
 But syncardism, than synglottism's much closer, elf.

[p. 89]

Besides our words, our signs, our written characters,
 From hearts, there rise by hundreds mute interpreters. [325]

The birds about their secrets one by one communed;
 About their knowledge, sciences, and voices tuned.
 To pay their court to Solomon their notes they raised;
 Revealed their capabilities; skill of each praised.
 Not out of pride and vanity; excess 'twould seem;
 But solely to please Solomon, gain his esteem.

So slaves that seek for favour at a master's hand
 Exert themselves to name the talents they command.
 But if they feel ashamed of one would them purchase,
 Straightway they're sick, halt, deaf, or something still more base. [330]

The turn then came for hoopoe's setting forth his skill,
 To say what he could do, what office he could fill.
 Said he: "O King, one little talent's all I own.
 I'll tell it in few words; succinctness is a crown."

Said Solomon: "Let's hear it. What then is thy skill?"
 The hoopoe answered: "This.--I perch where'er I will.
 From my seat I look down like plumbline on the ground,
 And see if hidden water under it is found;
 Where is it; at what depth; what are its qualities;
 Whence takes its rise; from rock, sand, clay's varieties. [335]
 O Solomon, whene'er thou send'st thy armies forth,
 Me call to mind; my skill is surely notice worth."

To him replied then Solomon: "Esteemed good friend,
 Thee I will name Purveyor-General on land.
 Whene'er my troops go forth, through sandy deserts sent,
 With them thou'lt journey; so, ne'er will be water scant."

The crow on hearing this with jealousy was stung.
 Addressing Solomon, he said: "This bird a lie has sung.

[p. 90]

His insolence is great to boast thus to the king.
 [340] Such falsehood's quite disgusting. Who's heard such a thing?
 Had he possessed this very wonderful insight,
 Would he be caught in springes barely out of sight?
 He cannot see those traps beneath a little mound;
 So caught he is, and caged. High dudgeon thence is found."

Said Solomon: "O hoopoe, true is this remark.
 A gulp of vanity has set thee raving, stark.
 How is it thou'rt so tipsy early in the day,
 To come and prate of things so far out of the way?"

The hoopoe then replied: "Great King, against poor me,
 [345] For love of God, believe not all my foes' false plea.
 If untruth I have spoken,--cannot prove my tale,--
 I cast myself before thee; kill me without fail.
 The crow denies the rule of Providence on earth;
 With all his cunning, he's a miscreant from birth."

Of miscreants' defects, if any one in us
 Exist, it's sure to spread,--a plague-spot cancerous.

A snare man may detect in every lust of flesh,
 If God's decree will not he fall into its mesh.
 By God's decree our reason ceases clear to see,
 [350] As moon, when darkened all, can hide the sun from me.
 Whoever dares deny God's ruling providence,
 'Tis Providence decrees his blindness, want of sense.

The Father of Mankind, Lord Nomenclator first, [*1]
 In every nerve possess'd a vein of knowledge nursed.
 He knew the names of all things, right, without default.
 From first to last his mind could hold them from revolt.
 Whatever name he gave, that name endured unchanged.
 If he said: "This thing's active," slothful it ne'er ranged.

[p. 91]

He knew at first who was believer in God's word.
 He from the first, too, knew the miscreant toward his Lord. [355]

From one who knows them well, of things seek thou the fames,
 And mystery of the symbol: "God taught him the names." [*1]
 The name of everything, with us, is what it seems;
 With God, the name of everything, what He it deems.
 By Moses was his staff a simple rod proclaimed;
 By its Creator, God, a dragon was it named.
 'Umer [*2] idolater was classed by each array;
 God him believer called upon creation's day.
 What is by man termed seed upon this transient heath,
 Impressed by God was with the seal: "Father of death." [*3] [360]
 In realm of nullity that seed received a form,
 Existent with its God; nor less, nor more; a worm.
 Result thereof sprung forth the essence of our name
 With the Creator, who will be our final aim.
 He each one names according to his last estate,
 Not with respect to that which is but passing fate.

So soon as mind of man with light has gained its strength,
 It spies the soul, and mysteries of every name, at length.
 When man perceives therein the kingdom of truth's rays,
 He falls in adoration, worships, spends his days. [365]
 That Adam's praise, whose blessed name we're proud to bear, [*4]
 Should I recite till judgment-day, would not end there.

Decree of Providence so willed, with all his lore,
 One single prohibition known, cost him right sore.
 He asked: "Was prohibition laid, joy to prevent;
 Or can, by gloss, evasion unto it be lent?"

[p. 92]

To his mind, explanation having been inferred,
 His appetites, perplexed, to taste the wheat preferred. [*1]
 A thorn the foot of Eden's gardener thus rent.
 [370] A thief the chance perceived, the garden robbed, and went.
 Amazement o'er, the gardener's himself again. [*2]
 He saw the thief had carried off th' unguarded train.
 He sobbed aloud: "My God, I've deeply sinned;" and sighed:
 "A darkness came, and from the road I turn'd aside."

Decree of God was thus a cloud the sun to veil.
 A lion, dragon, were a mouse beneath that bale.
 When judgment's needed, should I not detect a snare,
 Not I alone am blind, my weakness others share.
 Blest he, whose steadfast feet have never gone astray!
 [375] Who waywardness has shunned, and taught his tongue to pray!

Should God's decree encompass thee with blackest night,
 The same decree will readily help set thee right.
 Should Providence at times thy life to menace seem,
 'Twas Providence that gave it, can prolong its gleam.
 Should life's events appear to threaten every way,
 God can in heaven prepare a home for thee to stay.
 What 'tis thou tremblest at, a special favour count,
 Designed to bring thee safe to Zion's holy mount.

And now we turn again from morals,--they've no end,--
 [380] To see how fares it with our lion and his friend.

They came to where the well was. Here the lion saw
 The hare his pace had slackened, backward 'gan to draw.

[p. 93]

At this he remonstrated: "What art thou about!
 Come forward still. The enemy we must find out."

The hare replied: "I have no power to move a foot.
 From fear I faint. I tremble; courage has ebbed out.
 Thou seest how pale my face; like ashes I've become;
 An indication sure of fear, most troublesome.
 God hath the countenance the mind's true index named.
 The adept keeps his eye on countenance enchained. [385]
 A face's colour tell-tale is, like tinkling bell.
 A horse's neigh of other steeds' approach will tell.
 A sound from anything attention brings to pass;
 'Tis thus we know the creak of door from bray of ass.
 The Prophet said, no point of character t' asperse:
 'Enigma is a man until he's heard converse.'
 The colour in man's face makes known how stands the heart.
 Compassion take on me; thy sympathy impart.
 Enjoyments sensual give man a rosy face;
 The fame of pale-faced men reports good sense and grace. [390]
 I feel within me what makes all my joints seem weak;
 It's borne away my colour, strength, and power to speak.
 It casts down whomsoe'er it chances to attack;
 As tempest uproots trees it meets upon its track.
 I'm subjected to that by which both men and beasts
 Are turned to stocks and stones;--to say the very least.
 They are but parts; that thing a universal is.
 It makes men's faces pale; gives ashiness where 'tis;
 As long as nature mournful is, or full of glee;--
 As long as fields now verdant, naked then we see. [395]
 The sun each morning rises, joying in his course;
 At eve sinks down again, and goes from bad to worse.
 The planets circulating, each within its sphere,
 Are subject to immersion when the sun they near.
 The moon in splendour far excels each tiny star.

[p. 94]

But near its change it dwindles almost to a hair.
 The very earth, that in firm steadfastness doth sit,
 When subject to an earthquake, shakes as in a fit.
 How many regions in the world, encroaching sands
 [400] Have changed from gardens into bare and sterile lands.
 The air, that with its breezes gives new life to all,
 When Providence ordains, brings pestilence and thrall.
 Sweet water's running stream, a very source of life,
 In pond confined, turns fetid, black, and poison-rife.
 The fire, so arrogant when fed with breezes long,
 With one puff is extinguished by a breath too strong.
 The sea, now boisterous with waves and swelling tide,
 At times is like a mirror, shrinking from land's side.
 The sky, revolving night and day, is never still;
 [405] The seven planets like, it works its Maker's will.
 Those planets, too, in apogee and perigee,--what not,--
 Auspicious, inauspicious are in several lot.
 Thyself consider;--little part, of universals mixed;--
 And thou'lt divine the state of all extended, fixed.
 Since universals are by no means free from toil,
 How should a petty part escape from trouble's moil?
 A part, too, that's compound of every opposite,--
 Of fire, and air, and water; adding earth its mite.
 If sheep from wolf should flee, there's really wonder none;
 [410] To see them herd together 'd 'stonish every one.
 Life springs from concord of th' ingredient opposites.
 And death results when discord their pact disunites.
 God's mercy hath appointed every lion's mate;
 And unto each wild ass a fit associate.
 But since the world in trouble prison-like offends,
 What wonder that all's transient,--that all suffering ends?"

'Twas thus the hare the lion tricked with specious lies;
 And added: "Hence the reason why I cannot rise."

[p. 95]

The lion answered: "I see naught to cause thy fear.
 Point out to me the object seems to thee so drear." [415]

The hare then: "In this well thy foe takes his repose.
 His stronghold is this pit, where he's secure from woes.
 A wise man hides himself at bottom of a well;
 For 'tis in solitude heart's choicest raptures dwell.
 Seclusion's gloom is easier borne than wrongs from men.
 Who craves a victor's mercy, saves his life just then."

The lion muttered: "Onward come. My arm is strong.
 Go look. At home is he? He'll not live long."
 The hare: "Alas! Already I've endured his gaze.
 Take me unto thy breast. My mind is all amaze. [420]
 From off thy back, most potent lord and prince,
 I'll look down in the well. I'll neither blink nor wince."

The lion took him on his back without more fuss.
 So, under this protection to the well went puss.
 They both looked down; and in the water there
 Reflection shadowed forth a lion and a hare.
 The lion saw his own shape in the water shine:
 "Another lion," thought he, "with fat hare on chine."
 His foe he fancied, thus, that in the well he'd spied.
 The hare he set down safely; in leapt he with pride. [425]

He thus fell in the pit he had for others dug.
 Iniquity will visit those who drink out of her mug.
 Iniquity's a pit into which tyrants fall.
 Such is the firm conviction of our wise men all.
 The wickeder a man, the deeper does he sink.
 So justice wills; and so, the wrong'd will doubtless think.

O thou who in thy might injustice dost commit,
 For thy own self a pit thou diggest; our tale to wit.
 Thou weavest round thyself a web, as does silkworm;
 Thou'lt not escape unless to justice thou conform. [430]

[p. 96]

Look not upon the weak as quite without a friend.
 Reflect; 'tis said: "When God's help comes." [*1] Where's then thy end?
 If thou'rt an elephant in strength, the weak will flee
 To his Protector. Then the Lord's wrath shalt thou see.
 Whenever wrong's weak victim on his God doth call,
 A clamour rises from the ranks in heaven's hall.
 If with his blood, in pride, thou stain thy teeth just now,
 The toothache shall avenge him; dentist's victim thou.

The lion saw himself reflected in the well.
 [435] Through blindest rage himself from foe he could not tell.
 He thought his own reflection was his hated foe,
 And slew himself while seeking on him to work woe.

So tyrant, when thou seest injustice in the world,
 Thyself behold. Those deeds thy banner have unfurled.
 Thine are included with them in God's just decree.
 Thy rage, greed, lust's reward most certainly thou'lt see.
 They are thy very self; in them thou art condemned.
 Thou judgest them; in selfsame manner thou'rt contemned.
 In thy own acts thou seest not the sin thou work'st;
 [440] Or otherwise thy own self's foe thou'dst be from first.
 It is thyself against whom thou mak'st thy attack;
 Just as the lion took the hare upon his back.
 If thou'd sound deep to bottom of the moral well.
 Thyself thou'dst find there; thy own acts would plainly tell.

The lion at the bottom found out who was there.
 Let him as likeness serve of many who are here.
 Whoe'er beats out the teeth of weaker than himself,
 Commits the lion's error;--springs upon himself.

O thou who loath'st a mole upon thy neighbour's cheek,
 [445] Reflect. 'Tis but an image. Thy own features seek.

[p. 97]

Believers are as mirrors; each sees self in each.
 So said the Prophet. His words to us truth may teach.

Thou wearest spectacles, of blue, or red, or green;
 And thence thou judgest all is tinged with that sheen.
 If thou wilt use a window glazed with coloured glass,
 Thou may'st expect the sun will seem of that same class.
 If thou'rt not mad, thou'lt know the colour is thy own.
 Thyself call evil. Henceforth others leave alone.

Believers see with eye of faith the light of God.
 How else to them were visible all things' synod? [450]
 If thou examine things with hell-fire in thy heart,
 How canst thou see distinct the good and bad apart.
 Seek by degrees to drown that fire in holy light.
 So shalt thou, sinner, soon, thy weakness change for might.

And do Thou, Lord, asperge from mercy's cleansing stream,
 To change the fire of sin to light of faith supreme.
 The ocean's waters are a mere drop in Thy hand;
 The streams of mercy, fire of wrath, at Thy command.
 If Thou so will, the fire a pleasant stream may be.
 And at Thy word, a lake a fiery pit we'd see. [455]
 From Thee spring our devotions, supplications, prayers.
 'Tis Thou deliverest the victims from their slayers.
 Without our supplication, Thou entreaty gayest.
 The stores of Thy great mercy for all men Thou savest.

The hare, for his deliverance, jubilant set out,
 To join his fellows, scattered in their homes about.
 He saw the lion prone at bottom of the well;
 Then rapidly went back his stratagem to tell.
 He clapped his hands for joy at his escape from death,
 Exuberant as plant sprouts from the earth beneath. [460]
 Its stalk and leaf break forth from prison underground.
 It rears itself apace, makes friends with th' air around.

[p. 98]

The leaves burst from the stem, and spread themselves abroad;
 Until by growth a tree, whose grace all men applaud.
 It now expands in thanks for favours of the Lord;
 Each leaf, flower, fruit intones a hymn of praise, like bard.
 "Thou, Giver of all good things, nourishedst my root.
 And madest me become a strongly growing shoot."

Our souls, shut up in prison in our frames of clay,
 [465] So break forth into raptures when they're called away.
 They dance for very joy, from love of God All-wise,
 When, like full moon perfected, they in glory rise.
 Material beings, thus, their dance perform, and souls.
 Ask not of them the subject of their hyperboles.

The hare had lodged the lion in a dungeon safe.
 More shame for lion was it, hare should make him chafe.
 Just so a shame it is, and subject for surprise,
 The state in which he's left, who Fakhru-'d-Din would rise. [*1]
 O, he's a lion, sure, at bottom of a well.
 [470] His pride of flesh the hare that cast him down to hell.
 His pride, the hare, at large, disporting as it will;
 Himself down in the pit. O, what a bitter pill!

The lion-slaying hare now scampered to his friends,
 Exclaiming: "Good news bring I; let joy know no ends
 Good news! Good news! Festivities bring into play!
 The hell-cat's gone to hell, from which he came our way.
 Good news! Good news! That foe to all our lives, and peace.
 Has had his teeth extracted, through our Maker's grace.
 He who so many crushed with paw of tyranny,
 [475] Like rubbish has been swept by death's broom clean away."

[p. 99]

A convocation now was held by all the beasts,
 Hilarity and joy enlivened all their breasts.
 About the hare, as candle, they, moths-like, all flocked.
 All their respects presented; none were found who mocked.
 They all declared: "Thou art an angel by heaven sent
 (Angel of death, however, he to lion went).
 Whatever thou may'st be, our souls thy sacrifice!
 Thou'st triumphed. For such prowess praise will not suffice.
 Our God it was endowed thee with such wondrous skill.
 May God be praised! Deliverance is by His will. [480]
 Pray, tell us all about it. How was such thing done?
 How couldst thou compass to deceive th' experienced drone?
 Relate in full. 'Twill comfort give to all our souls.
 Detail the facts; balm will they be for bygone doles.
 Recount at length; for, ah, how many tyrannies
 Did we not suffer from him, who now stark dead lies!"

Quoth he: "Most venerable Sirs! God's grace did all.
 What could a hare accomplish without Him at call?
 He strength of purpose gave me, light from heaven above.
 That light it was that nerved me in my every move. [485]
 God granteth crowning grace, to further cause of truth,
 'Tis God also who sends vicissitudes on earth.
 He, 'tis, alternately, who parties makes prevail.
 Now mere opinionists, now men of light avail.
 If then, in turn, thou now thyself find uppermost,
 Why let hypocrisy, presumption, make thee boast?"

Joy not o'er great prosperity. It does not last.
 Airs give not thou thyself; thou'rt but a passing guest.
 They whose eternal kingship lasts beyond all times, [*1]
 Who sing God's praise beyond the seven spheres and climes, [490]

[p. 100]

They more endure than transient reigns of kings' short rolls.
 They are the never-failing feeders of men's souls.

If thou the pleasures of the world short time forego,
 Eternal bliss may compensate th' imbroglio.
 Know that this nether world but for a period lasts.
 T' abandon it, eternal rest to man forecasts.
 Give ear. Forsake all mundane ease, all earthly rest;
 Then will thy soul enjoy heaven's cup with double zest.
 Cast thou the carcase vile of earthly pomp to dogs.
 [495] The cup of mere surmise reject; the soul it clogs.

Footnotes

^m67:1 Kalila and Dimna is the Arabic version of Pilpay's fables.

^m67:2 This proverb is given in Freytag's "Proverbia Arabica," ii. p. 488, n. 278, as an answer from Muhammed to a foe twice made prisoner.

^m68:1 Equivalent to tethering a horse, "Keep your powder dry."

^m68:2 The original says: "The earner is God's friend."

^m68:3 The original has: "Flees the snake, and meets a dragon."

^m69:1 The words as given in the original, in Arabic, are not in the Qur'an.

^m70:1 A cock that crows out of season, in the night.

^m70:2 Qur'an xiv. 47.

^m71:1 Azra'il, the angel of death, who takes men's souls.

^m71:2 Solomon is related in the Qur'an xxi. 81, and xxxiv. 11, to have possessed power over the wind.

^m72:1 In Qur'an iii. 47, and viii. 30, God is styled "the best of stratagem-makers."

^m72:2 I do not find this proverb in Freytag's "Proverbia."

^m73:1 Qur'an ii. 15.

^m73:2 See Qur'an xlviii. 29; lix. 8; and lxxiii. 20.

^m75:1 In Qur'an ii. 29, the account of this is given. Compare Gen. ii. 19.

^m75:2; Was Satan this very old hermit? His successful temptation was the muzzle. The original says "calf," where I have said "babe;"--meaning Adam, when first created. Instructed by God, he named all things, which the angels were unable to do, and so were silenced.

^m75:3 The story of the dog of the Sleepers is told in Qur'an xviii. 27-21.

^m76:1 The Persian name for the hare is "ass-ear;" hence the pun.

^m79:1 The "hidden tablet" of God's decrees; mentioned in Qur'an lxxxv. 22.

^m79:2 At the "extreme lote-tree" in the highest heaven, on the night of the ascension. Gabriel could go no further. Muhammed went on, to God's presence.

^m79:3 The word that signifies "compulsion" also means "reduction" in a surgical sense, and "algebra" mathematically.

^m79:4 "Buraq" is the name of the angelic steed on which Muhammed mounted to heaven in his night journey. Not found in the Qur'an.

^m80:1 "The moon clave" in twain as a sign of the near approach of the day of judgment. Qur'an liv. 1.

^m82:1 Muhammed's name is put on most Muslim coins.

^m82:2 Muhammed is held to be the supplement of all the prophets.

^m84:1 Qur'an ii. 151.

^m84:2 Not in Freytag's "Proverbia."

^m85:1 See note in the Author's Preface, and Chapter vi. in the Anecdotes.

^m87:1 The commentators on Qur'an xxi. 69, mention Nimrod's gnat.

^m87:2 Qur'an xxviii. 5, mentions Haman with Pharaoh.

^m87:3 He is said to have believed Satan rather than Abraham.

^m88:1 The translator has ventured to coin the expressions "synglottism," "synglottist," and "syncardism" as specimens of a whole class used in Persian.

^m90:1 A title designating Adam,--who named all things.

^m91:1 Qur'an ii. 29.

^m91:2 Omar.

^m91:3 A very doubtful clause; it may be rendered: "Thou art with me."

^m91:4 Adam, in most languages, has come to signify man.

^m92:1 Qur'an ii. 33, mentions merely a "caulescent plant;" "wheat "is one of several glosses by commentators, like our "apple."

^m92:2 Qur'an vii. 22, makes Adam confess sin with contrition, together with Eve, thereby meriting God's eventual pardon.

^m96:1 Qur'an cx. 1.

^m98:1 Evidently the name of a rival.

^m99:1 These are sainted spiritualists, true and pious dervishes.

     
The Mesnavi and The Acts of the Adepts, by Jelal-'d-din Rumi and Shemsu-'d-Din Ahmed, tr. by James W. Redhouse, [1881], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 101]

  

VI.

GREAT Princes all! We've killed our dread external foe.
 Within us, still, a worse than he remains, I trow.
 To slay this inner foe is not the task of mind;
 Our moral lion's not destroyed by tricks refined.

Our flesh, a hell; that hell a fiery dragon is.
 Whole oceans can't extinguish those fierce flames of his.
 Earth's seven oceans all were lost within his maw;
 His raging fires would still burn high, to mankind's awe.
 Pitcoal, hard-hearted miscreants; these are its food; [*1]
 They sink within it, miserable, abject brood. [5]
 Withal, its craving hunger ne'er will be appeased,
 Until the voice of God cry unto it: "Art eased?"
 "Eased?" will it answer; "No; not yet awhile by far;
 Behold my flame, my fury,--burning, fiery roar."
 It swallows down a universe in its fell mood;
 And instantly shrieks out: "More food! More food! More food!"
 God, from nubiquity, [*2] His foot will stamp on hell.
 Then will it cease to burn: "He willed, and it befell!" [*3]

Our fleshly lusts in us are but a part of hell;
 Parts have the qualities of their universal. [10]

[p. 102]

The foot of God alone can stamp out hell's alarms.
 Who else but God supreme to bend such bow has arms?
 Straight arrows serve alone to be shot from a bow;
 But lust's distorted spring shoots crooked arrows too.
 Be thou in mind upright as arrow straight for bow.
 A bow will not shoot straight, unless the arrow's so.

We've fought our fight and conquered in our outward strife.
 Now turn we our attention to the inner life.
 We've done with outer warfare, lesser as it is;
 [15] And as the Prophet, wage the greater warfare, his.
 We put our trust in God; from Him we ask for aid;
 With His assistance faith can move a mountain staid.
 To rout an armed foe is nothing very fresh;
 A lion true is he who conquers his own flesh.
 To illustrate this truth, give ear unto a tale,
 That thou of these few words the moral mayest inhale.

From Caesar [*1] an ambassador to 'Umer came, [*2]
 Through deserts far-extending, from Madina's fame. [*3]
 He asked?" Where is the palace of the Caliph, men; [*4]
 [20] That I to it may lead my cavalcade, my train?"
 The people answered: "Thou'lt no Caliph's palace find,
 Our Caliph's sole pavilion's his enlightened mind.
 Through his 'Commandership' his fame to Rome has come; [*5]
 But like our other poor, a hut's his ample home.
 How shouldst thou see that palace, brother, stranger, guest,
 When in thy mind's eye thou a beam hast, unconfessed?
 Cast out that beam; make clear thy eye from every mote;
 Then mayst thou entertain the hope to see his cote."

[p. 103]

Whoever shall his heart cleanse from all passions' bale,
 Will soon perceive therein a court and presence hale. [25]
 When Ahmed's heart was cleansed of evil's fire and smoke, [*1]
 Whichever way he turned, God's countenance bespoke. [*2]
 So long as man keeps company with evil thought,
 How can he understand God's countenance in aught?
 He that a window's pierced from heart towards heaven's recess,
 Sees in each mote a ray from Sun of Righteousness. [*3]
 God shines apparent in the midst of other things,
 As moon in majesty among the stars' twinklings.

Place thou two finger-tips upon thy two eyeballs.
 What seest thou now of all the world? Darkness befalls. [30]
 Thou seest it not; but that the world exists, thou'lt trust.
 Our vices are the finger-tips of fleshly lust.
 Thy finger-tips remove; instanter, as before,
 Thou lookest around and seest whate'er thou wilt explore.
 His people asked of Noah where righteousness might be.
 He said: "Lo, there! With muffled heads you cannot see.
 You've wrapped your cloaks in folds about your heads and eyes.
 Your sense of sight cannot see what before you lies."

The world's eye man is; all the rest's mere skin and shell.
 A real eye's he who strives his "Friend" to see right well. [*4] [35]
 Unless we see our Friend, 'twere better we were blind,
 A friend that is not constant's better out of mind.

When Rome's ambassador had heard those words so wise, [*5]
 His eager curiosity began to rise.

[p. 104]

He sought for 'Umer with redoubled zeal and zest;
 But in so doing lost his horse, and eke his chest.
 He wandered everywhere to seek the Caliph out.
 Like one distracted asked each passer-by his route.
 "Is't possible," he said, "that such a man there be,
 [40] When like the soul to sight invisible is he?"

He sought for him as though he 'd been his truant slave,
 But: "He who seeks shall find" 's a very well-known stave.
 A desert-Arab woman saw he at the last,
 Who told him 'Umer, then, beneath date-palm slept fast.
 Beneath a date-palm! Far from mankind's busy plod.
 That date-palm's shadow shaded the Shadow of God! [*1]

He went towards the tree; a station took afar;
 He saw 'Umer; a fit of trembling showed his fear.
 On that ambassador did awe and dread alight.
 [45] While o'er his heart there stole a sense of sweet delight.
 Two feelings, love and dread, by nature opposites,
 Were mingled in his bosom by some occult rites.
 He thought within himself: "I've many princes seen;
 In sovereign presence I have ever welcome been.
 This fit of awe and trembling's very strange to me;
 And yet without dismay this man I cannot see.
 I've been in forests where the lions make their lair;
 I've met them face to face; yet knew not what was fear.
 In battle I've been, oft; in thickest of the fight.
 [50] My arm's upheld our cause, when in most desperate plight.
 Wounds have I dealt, received, that threatened life to take,
 Among the brave, the bravest; my heart knew no quake.
 This man is weaponless, supine upon the ground.
 Why then this tremor? It my every limb has bound.
 A ghostly awe is this; it's not a mortal fear.
 Most certainly it's not a dread of this man here.

[p. 105]

He who fears God has admonition of the Lord;
 Both men and demons stand in awe of his mere word."
 Mute he remained in reverential attitude,
 Till 'Umer woke from his trance of beatitude. [55]

Profound obeisance and grave salutation made,
 As said the Prophet: "First, salute; then, embassade."
 The Caliph answered: "And on thee be peace! Draw near;"
 Assured him of protection; bade him put off fear.
 "Fear not" a word of comfort is to trembling soul;
 A generous tribute 'tis, when strong with weak condole.
 Men set at ease the object whom they wish to raise,--
 Relieve his heart from palpitation; bid fears cease.
 But unto one who feals no dread how say: "Fear not "?
 What lesson's this thou givest to one whose lesson's got? [60]

So 'Umer put at ease that much perturbed man;
 And calmed his wavering mind, as noble hearts best can.
 To him he then addressed some subtle words of sense,
 Set forth the attributes of God,--man's best defence,
 Declared the goodness of the Lord to all who trust
 In Him alone; the rank they gain in trance combust.

Saint's ecstasy springs from a glimpse of God, his pride.
 His station's that of intimate. He's bridegroom; God is bride. [*1]
 A bride's veiled graces are not seen by groom alone;
 Her unveiled charms solely to him in private shown. [65]
 In state she first appears before the people all;
 Her veil removed, the groom alone is at her call.
 Entranced are many Gnostic worshippers, I ween;
 Few gain admission to the presence-chamber scene.

[p. 106]

'Umer told all the stations passed through by his soul;--
 Its flights, fights, tribulations, ere it was made whole.
 He spoke of times when flight of time's of no account;
 Of Holiness's station, glorious to recount.
 He talked of atmospheres in which his righteous soul
 [70] Had soared to seek fresh conquests of devotion's whole.
 Its every flight had been beyond th' horizon scant;
 Beyond the hope, or e'en desire, of aspirant.

He found a willing list'ner in the stranger guest,
 Whose mind was framed t' investigate such mysteries blest.
 The teacher was perfection; novice full of zeal;
 Like clever jockey on a steed with lightning heel.
 He found his scholar apt, of great capacity.
 So good seed sowed in fertile soil sagacity.

Th' ambassador now asked: "Of true believers Prince!
 [75] How can a soul from heaven come down to earth's province;--
 How can so great a bird be cooped up in a cage?"

He answered: "God speaks words of power, most sage.
 Those words, addressed to nothings without eyes or ears,
 Set them in motion. Like a ferment, fruit it bears.
 Those words no sooner spoken, quick those nothings all
 In motion put themselves, and reach existence' hall.
 Or He commands these beings, creatures of His own;
 And they return to nothing, whence He them had drawn.
 He speaks unto the flowers; they forthwith burst in bloom.
 [80] His voice the flint hears; lo, it's a cornelian stone.
 A spell He laid on matter; spirit it became.
 By charm from Him the sun sprang forth, a lambent flame.
 If He but whisper words of awe, the sun again
 Is seized with darkness of eclipse, like night amain.
 What is't He says, by which the teeming eye of cloud
 Sheds forth its tears, as drops from water-skin unsewed?

[p. 107]

What incantation to the earth addresses He,
 To make it produce cattle,--whose hides used may be?
 The hesitations of each puzzled child of thought
 Arise from some enigma by which God's him caught. [85]
 On horns of a dilemma is he fixed, poor man.
 'Shall I do this,' says he, 'when 'ts opposite I can?'
 From God, too, is the power to make selection's choice
 Of two solutions. One is taken, through inward voice.
 Wouldst thou be always free from hesitation, fool?
 Stuff not thy mind's ear tight with doubt's dull cotton-wool;
 That thou mayst solve the riddles God may set for thee;--
 That thou mayst understand the full of mercy free.
 Then shall thy heart receive His inspiration's gift,--
 A power of speaking from an inward impulse' drift. [90]
 The ear and eye of soul are organs not of sense;
 The ears of sense and mind are not like soul's, intense.
 The word "compulsion" puts me out of humour quite.
 Who hath not love of God, compulsion's slave's, by right.
 This union's based on truth (compulsion is too proud);
 It is a glimpse of sunshine breaking through a cloud.
 Be it compulsion. Man's compulsion it is not;--
 Not the compulsion of browbeating from a sot.
 Compulsion's felt by them, my very worthy friend,
 Whose eyes of faith, ope'd in their hearts, on God attend. [95]
 The absent and the future patent are to them;
 To speak about the past is what they most contemn.
 Election and compulsion, theirs, are not the same.
 As dewdrops in the oyster-shell rare pearls became. [*1]
 Outside, they're dewdrops, solely, whether great or small;
 Inside they're pearls of price, whose value knows no fall.
 Such men by nature are just like the musk-deer's pod;
 It's fed with blood of artery, musk it yields, through God.

[p. 108]

Ask not how 'tis that outward blood can change like this;
 [100] Becoming musk when in the pod secreted 'tis.
 Ask not how copper vile, by wise alchemist's art,
 Is changed to gold when solved by elixir in part. [*1]
 Election and compulsion, fancies both, in thee;
 But when by saints they're viewed, God's glory may they be.
 Upon the table, bread's a lifeless, senseless mass;
 When taken in man's mouth, the soul it joins, in class.
 On table transubstantiation takes not place; [*2]
 The soul it is transforms it, nourished by God's grace.
 Such is the soul's great power; most perspicacious man,
 [105] So long as that soul life and power retain can.
 A human being, mass of mingled flesh and blood,
 Moved by the Lord, can cleave hill, dale, mine, and sea's flood.
 The strength of strongest man can merely split a stone; [*3]
 The Power that informs man's soul can cleave the moon. [*4]
 If man's heart but untie the mouth of mystery's sack,
 His soul soon soars aloft beyond the starry track.
 If heaven's mystery divulged should, 'haps, become,
 The whole world 'twould burn up, as fire doth wood consume."

Let's contemplate the acts of God, the deeds of men;
 [110] Know, men's deeds do exist. This truth is patent, then.
 If men's deeds be not in this nether world of ours,
 Say not thou unto others: "Why these deeds of yours?"
 God's act it is through which those deeds of ours arise;
 Our acts are but the sequels of God's agencies.

The letter, or the spirit, 'tis, our reason weighs.
 But both at once it cannot comprehend always.

[p. 109]

Examining the spirit, letter we neglect;
 At one time forwards, backwards we cannot prospect.
 If thou straight forward look at any point of time,
 Thou canst not backwards see, whatever be the clime. [115]
 Our souls not taking in the letter, spirit too,
 How could they e'er create these predicates, one, two?
 God comprehendeth all things;--all things doth ensue;
 One act's no hindrance, with Him, other acts to do.

The reason Satan gave: "Since Thou hast tempted me," [*1]
 The scheming demon strove to hide his sin, we see.
 His trespass Adam owned: "Against ourselves we've sinned." [*2]
 God's act he, like as we, then left not out of mind.
 Through shame the act of Satan Adam secret kept.
 Self-accusation's fruit, in consequence, he reaped. [120]
 Repentance shown by Adam, God in mercy said:
 "In thee 'twas I created, sin thou hast displayed.
 Was it not My decree and providence that thou,
 In asking pardon, shouldst the tempter disavow?"
 Said Adam: "Thee I feared; most bitter shame I felt."
 God added: "It was I who gave thee shame heartfelt."

Consideration he who shows considered is;
 So he who brings the sugar, share of cake is his.
 For whom, then, benefits, but practisers of good? [*3]
 Keep pleased thy friend. Offend him; see what ensue would. [125]
 One sole example study,--instance of this law,--
 Compulsion and election's difference to draw.
 "There is a hand that shakes from palsy or from fear.
 Another hand also thou shakest when thou'rt near.
 Know: God it is creates the movement in them both;

[p. 110]

And yet there's no resemblance in their motions loth.
 Thou'rt sorry that thou shakedst that man's hand anon,
 When thou seest him annoyed at what thou'st just now done."

A question 'tis of judgment; judgment shrewdness is,
 [130] Until some weakness intervene to mar all this.
 A question, now, of judgment as to corals, pearls,
 Is not the same as one about the soul, you churls.
 A question of the soul's another matter quite;
 The wine that feeds the soul comes not from grapes, black, white.

When any matter is a question of judgment,
 'Umer with Abu-Jahl's in one predicament.
 'Umer gave up his judgment; rested on his soul.
 'Bu-Jahl received this name through lack of self-control. [*1]
 In sense and reason Abu-Jahl a master was;
 [135] But as to soul, in ignorance he fell, alas!
 Of sense and reason questions are cause and effect;
 But miracles and wonders show soul is a fact.
 Enlightenment of soul, whatever it may see.
 By quibbles of school logic cannot silenced be.

We now return again our tale to take in hand,
 Though certainly we've never left it out of mind.

In ignorance, our souls are in God's prison chained.
 In wisdom, by God's help, their liberty's regained.
 In sleep, God's lethargy it is in which we sink.
 [140] Awake, we're in God's hands, whatever we may think.
 In weeping, we are clouds from which His mercy flows.
 In laughter, we're the flash with which His lightning glows.

[p. 111]

In anger, we're reflections of the wrath of God.
 In amity, the mirrors of His favour's nod.
 What are we in this world? All tortuous and bent.
 There is not one upright, straightforward, innocent.

Caesar's ambassador no sooner 'Umer heard,
 Than light broke on his heart; at which he stroked his beard.
 All questions and all answers from his mind went quite;
 All sense of right and wrong had vanished front his sight. [145]
 He'd found the source; what need, then, of the streams?
 To gather further wisdom, pondering on the means,
 He said: "'Umer, pray tell me what's the end and use
 Of shutting up that thing of light in darkness' house?
 How can clear water be expected from black mud?
 Why then is the pure soul combined with flesh and blood?"
 He answered: "Most important question hast thou raised.
 A sense, a spirit, by the letter paraphrased.
 The free, the jocund spirit prisoner thou'st made;
 As though the mind, the air, could into letter fade. [150]
 Thou hast done this for explanation's sake,-- [*1]
 Thou, who beyond the explanation place wouldst take.
 How should the man in whom the explanation's gleamed,
 Not yet distinguish what's to me so clearly beamed?
 Ten thousand explanations are there, each of which
 Is most momentous,--than ten thousand others, rich.
 With that, thy speech, now compoundly particular,
 A universal explanation were,--no bar.
 Thou art a partial,--seekest explanation still;
 Why set thyself, then, to deny th' universal? [155]
 Unless thy speech contain some use, propound it not;
 And if it have, objection quit; give what thou'st got.

[p. 112]

Thanks are incumbent upon every mortal's head;
 Contention and sour looks are surely no one's bread.
 If to put on sour looks, of thankfulness sign be,
 Then vinegar the sweetest-spoken thing we'd see.
 If vinegar desire to hearts a way to find,
 It oxymel becomes, with honey sweet combined.
 True, verse is not best vehicle for sense abstract.
 [160] It's like a sling; one's never certain how 't will act."

Th' ambassador his senses lost with this one cup
 Of wine spiritual. His mission he gave up.
 O'erwhelmed with wonder at the power of God, he fell.
 He came ambassador; now sovereign was, as well.

A river overflooded constitutes a lake.
 Some grains, when sown in earth, a field of corn can make.
 When eaten, bread assimilated is by man,
 That bread inanimate takes life, and reason can.
 When wood or candle is made victim unto fire,
 [165] Its substance dark becomes a source of light entire.
 Black stibium, a stone, when placed in human eye,
 Expands the power of vision, objects can descry.
 Good luck to him who's saved from his own fleshly self,
 And has become a parcel of some living elf.
 Alas for him, who, living, sits among the dead.
 He's dead himself, his life from out of him has fled.

If thou take refuge in the Qur'an, God's own book,
 With spirit of Muhammed thou'lt soon exchange look.
 The Qur'an is the essence of all prophets right.
 [170] They were the whales who swam in ocean of God's might.
 If thou canst read or not, the Qur'an take to heart,
 The saints and prophets study; they were as thou art.
 Read thou it carefully; read, mark, digest its tales;
 Thy soul, like bird in cage, will long to break its rails.

[p. 113]

The bird shut up, imprisoned in a little cage,
 That seeks not to get out, is ignorant, not sage.

The souls who've freed themselves from cages of the flesh,
 Are worthy fellow-travellers with prophets, fresh.
 Their voices they lift up, religion to impart:
 "The way of sure deliverance is here. Take heart! [175]
 Religion hath us saved from fleshly cages, sure.
 No other way is there, salvation to secure.
 You then upon yourselves will chastisements inflict,
 That you may be delivered from the world's respect."

Respect of mortal man a heavy fetter is;
 Within religion's path the gravest bond is this.
 Consider well this tale, ingenuous young friend; [179]
 'Twill teach thee many lessons may thy morals mend.

Footnotes

^m101:1 Qur'an ii. 22, and lxvi. 6, say "mankind and rocks."

^m101:2 Another word coined to meet the requirements of the original." "Ubiquity" is the converse of "nubiquity." Nulliquity might be used.

^m101:3 Qur'an ii. 111, and seven other places.

^m102:1 "Caesar" is the Rory, n Emperor, the Qaysari-Rum. Other Qaysar there is not.

^m102:2 To write this name Omar is incorrect.

^m102:3 Medina is the usual incorrect spelling of this name.

^m102:4 The Arabian title is Khalifa; of which Caliph is a corruption.

^m102:5 "Commander of the Believers" is his usual title. "Rome" is the Lower Empire.

^m103:1 Mohammed's heart is believed to have been cleansed by an angel.

^m103:2 "God's countenance" means also, in Arabic, God's cause.

^m103:3 God is this "sun;" the "motes" are all created objects.

^m103:4 The "Friend" is God, the Gnostic's "darling."

^m103:5 "Rome" in Asia means the Lower Empire and Asia Minor; or, for the last few centuries, the Ottoman Empire.

^m104:1 "Shadow of God on earth" is an Eastern title of royalty.

^m105:1 These two propositions give the pith of the doctrine held and inculcated by the mystics and spiritualists of Islam: "He's bridegroom; God is bride."

^m107:1 This First Book of the Mesnevi was written before the Bustan of Sa'di. The myth of the dewdrop and pearl is much more ancient.

^m108:1 The date of the poem will be recollected; who disbelieved alchemy then?

^m108:2 Here is a beautiful and true application of the idea of "transubstantiation."

^m108:3 The original mentions Ferhad, a kind of Persian Daedalus, by his title of "Mountain-Excavator." (See Tale vii. dist. 365.)

^m108:4 Qur'an liv. 1.

^m109:1 Qur'an vii. 15, and xv. 39. At the fall, Satan accused God of tempting him; whereas Adam confessed his sin, and did not accuse Satan.

^m109:2 Qur'an vii. 22.

^m109:3 Qur'an xxiv. 26.

^m110:1 'Bu is often used as a contraction for Abu. Abu-Jahl (Father of Ignorance) was a nickname (see Tale iv. dist. 48, note) given by Muhammed to 'Amr, son of Hisham, a chief of the Quraysh, his bitter enemy, formerly entitled Abu-'l-Hakem (Father of the Arbitrator). He was killed, a pagan, in the battle of Bedr, in the second year of the Hijra, A.D. 624.

^m111:1 The word rendered by "explanation" here, means also information, and use, advantage, profit, benefit, &c.

     
The Mesnavi and The Acts of the Adepts, by Jelal-'d-din Rumi and Shemsu-'d-Din Ahmed, tr. by James W. Redhouse, [1881], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 114]

  

VII.

A MERCHANT there was, who a parrot did own;
 Confined in a cage, wisest bird in the town.
 This merchant to journeying made up his mind
 To fair Hindustan, there some rich wares to find.
 From generous motives, to each of his slaves,
 To male, and to female, some gift to bring craves.
 He made them all tell him what best they would like;
 And promised to bring it, most gentlemanlike.
 He said to the parrot: "Poll! Poll! With the rest,
 [5] From Hind I must bring thee what thou mayst like best."

The parrot replied: "Sure, thou'lt see parrots there,
 To them pray impart how it is that I fare.
 Inform them, a parrot who loves them all well,
 By thee's kept confined, close shut up in a cell.
 He sends you his love, and his very best wish;
 Desiring from you wise advice, parrotish.
 He fears he may pine, through longing to see
 His dear absent friends,--die in foreign countree.
 He asks if it is altogether thing fit,
 [10] That he should be caged, while you on the trees sit.
 If this is the way in which true friends should act;
 Leave him in his cage, while you forests affect.
 He wishes you'd call to your mind your lost friend,
 When drinking your bumpers, ere fieldward you wend. [*1]

[p. 115]

'Tis sweet to be thought of by far-away dame,
 One's sweetheart, whose love's set one's heart in a flame.
 While you are disporting with those you love best,
 He's eating his heart out; grief gives him no rest.
 One bumper you'll drink for the love of poor Poll, [*1]
 If only you wish him your love to extol. [15]
 Or, thinking of him who's in slavery kept,
 Your bowl's whole contents dash to earth, as though wept.
 O where is the promise, and where is the oath,
 Th' engagements sworn to him by sugarsome tooth? [*2]
 If absence of his came from truancy's pranks,
 You've set your forgetfulness 'gainst his sin's ranks.
 The ills you inflict out of spite and disdain
 Are sweet to your lover, he does not complain.
 Your petulance prized is beyond fairy gifts;
 Your vengeance most dear is; his hope it uplifts. [20]
 No soul can imagine what pleasure is felt,
 Or grace seen, in all the fell blows you have dealt.
 Your wrath is thus sweet; how much more so your grace!
 If mourning so grieve, what from feast would take place?
 He weeps; but he hopes you'll believe not his tears;
 And, out of affection, not lessen his fears.
 He loves your great kindness, your anger as well.
 He equally dotes on those opposites fell.
 The thorn escape should he, and visit the rose,
 He'd warble as nightingale, moved by love's throes. [25]
 Most wondrous this bird's strangest use of his bill;
 With thorns, as with roseleaves, he would his mouth fill.
 Not nightingale this; fiery dragon it is;
 All wrongs seem to him, through his love, purest bliss.
 He loveth a rose, and himself is a rose.
 He loveth himself; and seeks love for its woes."

[p. 116]

Just so is the soul. Its tale, just parrot's tale.
 O where is the One to whom all souls make wail?
 Where is the man, feeble, who's yet innocent?
 [30] His heart, Solomon and his whole armament.
 When he, with tears bitter, is heard to complain,
 The seven vaults of heaven re-echo the strain.
 In anguish he groans; God, in mercy, him hears.
 His cry is: "O Lord!" And God wipes off his tears.
 Abasement in him, is by God highly prized.
 His blasphemies, o'er other men's faith are raised. [*1]
 Each instant, in soul, he ascends to heaven's gate;
 His mitre's with crowns capped, of infinite state. [*2]
 His frame's here on earth; his pure soul with the Lord
 [35] In heaven's highest sphere, above man's thought or word.
 A heaven such as this thou contemplatest not;
 Thou every moment imaginest--what?
 With him "where" and "nowhere" are quite equal felt.
 To angels the "four rivers" seem a mere belt. [*3]

Break off we this theme. Let's discuss other things.
 Cease trifling. "'Tis God who knows best" sense's rings. [*4]
 Let's seek to inquire how it fares with our friends,--
 The merchant, his parrot. Who is't understands?

The former had promised, at latter's request,
 [40] To give to the birds of far Hind his bequest.
 So when he had reached that land, greatly renowned
 In wooded retreat, flock of parrots he found.
 He stopped his beast, cried out, at top of his voice,
 That message his Polly had made, as his choice.

[p. 117]

One bird of the flock, he saw, then took to quake,
 Fell prone to the earth; no more breath seemed to take.
 The merchant regret felt for what he had done,
 Exclaiming: "Alas! The poor bird I've slain, lone!
 That creature was surely related to Poll;
 Two bodies; one soul; just as is magic doll. [45]
 Why did I deliver that fatal message?
 I've killed a collateral of Poll's lineage!"

The tongue, by itself, acts just like flint and steel.
 A word from it, fire-like, we scathing can feel.
 Strike not, then, so rashly, fire's sparks from thy tongue,
 In message or talk, feeble hearers among.
 The night is pitch dark; strewn around, cotton beds.
 Amongst beds of cotton, 'tis, sparks one most dreads.
 He sins who, unmindful of dire consequence,
 Lets fall spoken spark,--fires a whole world, immense. [50]
 One rash word may set an assembly ablaze.
 Molehills into mountains, and higher, it can raise.

In basis, our souls would appear Jesus-like.
 To kill, to resuscitate, words are godlike.
 If lifted could be from our souls the dark veil,
 Each word of each soul would with miracles trail.

Dost wish to speak always to men with sweet words?
 Have patience. Impatience must not fret the cords.
 'Tis patience beloved is by all men of sense.
 Impatience a fault is, of children, intense. [55]
 Who patience exhibits shall mount to heaven's dome.
 Impatience who showeth, tastes wrath that's to come.

A saint is not hurt, whate'er else may betide, [*1]
 To swallow fell poison should he once decide.

[p. 118]

He's whole, and he's sound; strict diet's his rule.
 Poor students are healthy in fever's dread school.
 The Prophet has cautioned: "Brave though you may be,
 Commit not mad rashness, howe'er the foe flee."

Within thee's a Nimrod. Approach not the fire.
 [60] Approach it thou must? To be Abr'am aspire.
 A swimmer thou art not;--nor seaman by trade;
 From headstrongness strive not the deep sea to wade.
 From fire Abr'am brought forth a fresh-plucked red rose.
 A diver, from sea-bottom, pearls' store can choose.
 A saint handles earth, turns it straightway to gold.
 A sinner, by touch, to earth turns this;--behold.
 A just man's accepted of God, the Most High.
 His deeds are the works of God's hand, still. Eigh! Eigh!
 Th' imperfect one's hand is aye Satan's foul limb;
 [65] Responsible rests he, howe'er he may climb. [*1]
 To him wisdom's self's but a mere misguidance.
 Th' imperfect man's science is crass ignorance.
 Whatever as cause acts, as cause counted is;
 A perfect man's blasphemy's pure faith, my quiz. [*2]
 Rash combatant, fight'st thou on foot 'gainst horseman!
 Thy point thou'lt not carry;--as sure as thou'rt man.

So, Egypt's magicians, in old Pharaoh's days,
 Contended 'gainst Moses; and rashly, always.
 At length they owned Moses superior was;
 [70] Men honour, revere him, who most of power has.
 They said to him, then: "Command 's thine! See! Purely!
 'Thy rod cast down' first. [*3] This thy wish is; surely."
 He answered: "Nay, nay! First cast ye down your wands.
 Produce to our sight the tricks ye've in your hands."
 The honour thus paid was a slur on their faith,
 Removing contention from out of their path.

[p. 119]

When they had perceived what was thus due to him,
 They error acknowledged, though somewhat too dim.

The "perfect man "'s free both to eat and to speak. [*1]
 If thou art " imperfect," eat, speak not, in freak. [75]
 Thou art but an ear. He's a tongue;--not like thee.
 To ear was addressed God's word: "Silent be." [*2]

A newly-born infant, still sucking the breast,
 Is speechless some while. He's all ear, at the best.
 His lips to keep closed he has, for a set time;
 To speak till he learns,--words to frame and to chime.
 If ear he lend not, he'll not learn common sense;
 Becomes laughingstock;--folly shows, most immense.
 If hearing he have not, deaf being at root,
 He mute must remain; no tongue has he, to boot. [80]
 Since, then, we must listen, before we can speak,
 Lend ear to thy teachers, to guide thee who seek.
 A room should be entered, as rule, through its door.
 Effects ever seek where thou seest their cause' spoor.
 The speech that has need to be heard by no ear,
 The voice is of God; it's to us ever near.
 Inventor is He. From no one has He learnt.
 Of all, He's the stay; not a prop does He want.
 All others require, as in speech, so in deed,
 From others, instruction; they all patterns need. [85]

If thou art not negligent,--hear'st what's been said,
 Adopt dervish frock; go and weep in homestead.
 Himself Adam saved from all blame by his tears.
 So tears run wherever repentance appears.
 To weep, Adam came down to this nether world;
 To sigh, moan, and groan; far from sweet Eden hurled,

[p. 120]

From paradise shut out, from heaven driven down,
 Like schoolboy in fool's-cap, his great sin to drown.

If thou'rt seed of Adam;--if from his loins sprung;
 [90] Like him, do thou seek for God's pardon, whilst young.
 With burnings of heart, and with moisture of eyes,
 As sun and as rain, do thou sorrow's fruit raise.
 Of all the rich solace, what knowest thou of tears?
 Thou beggest still for bread, like a blind man, with leers.
 Thy stomach make void of foul greed's lust for bread.
 Thy heart thou'lt find filled with deep love for Godhead.
 Thy infant soul wean from the gross milk of greed,
 Then teach it to join, next, in angel's pure creed.
 So long thou remainest in darkness and thrall,
 [95] A bantling of Satan thou art, out at call.

The morsel that brings a pure light to the soul
 Is earned by endeavour; not begged with a bowl.
 Should oil, upon trimming, extinguish a lamp,
 Not oil may we name it; 'tis water; 'tis damp.
 The honestly-earned morsel, wisdom imparts;
 Gives softness to souls, and a warmness to hearts.
 If thou be aware that from thy morsel spring
 Heartburnings and hate, know it's not a blest thing.
 Hast wheat ever sown, and reaped barley instead?
 [100] Hast known colt of ass from a mare in birth bred?
 A morsel, when eaten, 's a seed; its fruit, thought.
 A morsel, when swallowed, 's a sea pearls has brought.
 From good, honest morsels come, taken in mouth,
 Good works, and firm strivings to shun the soul's drought.
 Reflections, though true, we'll now bring to an end.
 To merchant and parrot's tale ear we will lend.

Our merchant his trading had quickly despatched,
 Then homeward he turned; with joy housedoor unlatched.

[p. 121]

To ev'ry male slave a rare present he brought;
 For each of his handmaids some gift he had bought. [105]
 The parrot him questioned: "What news bringest thou me?
 And whom hast thou seen? What's been said? Tell. Let's see."
 The merchant him answered: "I'm sorry for that.
 I'd rather my hand eat, than tell it thee;--flat.
 In thoughtlessness, folly, ah! why did I prate
 About thy fool's message, until 'twas too late?"

The parrot then asked: "What's this fuss all about?
 What's caused tribulation? Let's hear it right out."
 The merchant now said: "I told all thy sad grief
 To flock of green parrots;--so like thee, their chief. [110]
 Of them, one, affected with thy tale of woe,
 Heart-broken, a gasp gave, expired, and fell low.
 I conscience-struck was for the words I had said.
 But what is the use? A word breathed can't be stayed."

A spoken word's arrow swift shot from a bow,
 It can't be recalled, whate'er we may do.
 An arrow once shot off will never come back.
 At source, inundation alone can have check.
 An outlet once found, there's no stoppage for it.
 A world is then ruined, through lack of quick wit. [115]
 Act, consequence little dreamt of may produce.
 The progeny's far 'yond our power to reduce.

The work of one Maker 's this universe all.
 Our acts' consequences to our accounts fall.
 Jack shoots off an arrow;--directs it to Jill.
 The arrow poor Jill hits;--straightway does her kill.
 If only it wound her, for great length of time
 It tortures. Pain's God's work; wherever the clime.

[p. 122]

Should Jack, at that moment, expire from his fright,
 [120] To plague her Jill's wound would not cease, day or night.
 If from the effect of great pain, then, she die,
 Remote cause is Jack, still, of her misery.
 Account he must render for those pangs of hers.
 Although they're God's acts, man to man them refers.
 And so propagation, seed-sowing, and all;
 Effects of them operate. God's sole, the call.

A saint acquires powers, most astounding, from God. [*1]
 The flying bolt he can avert with a nod.
 The door can be shut between cause, consequence,
 [125] On saint's reclamation, by God's prescience.
 He makes said unsaid, from beginning to end.
 Hence, neither does skewer burn, roast to coal trend. [*2]
 From every mind that has knowledge of fact,
 Remembrance effaced is, though brains may be racked.
 Of this, dost thou proof require, most worthy friend,
 The text read: "What verse We annul, or We mend." [*3]
 Again: "They my warning made you to forget." [*4]
 By these is oblivion's great power 'fore us set.

To make us remember, forget, they power have.
 [130] They've hearts subjugated o'er creation's wave.
 Whene'er dull forgetfulness blinds eye of man,
 No act can he do, howe'er wide his scan.
 Dost dare, thou, great saints to make laughingstock? [*5]
 To words of the Prophet give heed, silly block.
 Earth's lords have dominion o'er bodies of clay.
 Enlightened saints rule hold o'er hearts;--their own sway.
 All acts are fruits, doubtless, of experience.
 Man, then, is but pupil. All's, else, mere pretence. [*6]

[p. 123]

I'll close now this subject; much more I might say;
 Prevented I am by the rules I obey. [135]

Remembrance, forgetfulness, both are of God.
 Support and aid, too, must depend on His nod.
 Of thoughts, God, men's good and bad souls voids, each night,
 By millions. Since this has seemed good in His sight.
 By day, their hearts fill with their thoughts all, again,
 Those oystershells He fills with rich pearls amain.
 He knows all the thoughts that here trouble our frames.
 'Tis He that gives guidance to souls in their games.

Thy talent, thy judgment, unto thee are given,
 That means thou may'st have to redeem thy fallen leaven. [140]
 The goldsmith's rich art's not by weaver possessed,
 By jocund vein here, there another's distressed.
 Though mind's frame and talents endowments are, all,
 They seem to a foe mere machines for his thrall.
 When sleep is departed, thoughts, talents return,
 One's foe so comes back, has of war one more turn.
 With dawn, all our thoughts, all our talents, awake,
 As erst, good or bad; ere repose we could take.
 So carrier pigeons, wherever they've been,
 Return to their homes, quit the woodlands all green. [145]
 We see, thus, that all things revert to their source.
 Parts ever must go shares in whole's intercourse.

So soon as our bird heard that parrot's sad state,
 A shudder he gave, fainted, grew stiff as slate.
 The merchant, on seeing this, seized with dismay,
 Himself dashed to earth; wished he'd been far away.
 His clothes rent in sorrow; his beard he plucked out;
 And moaned, in distress wildly sobbing, throughout:

"My parrot, why, dearest, thus broken of heart?
 Dead art thou, now, really? So fain to depart? [150]

[p. 124]

Poor pet! Darling bird! With thee, hours I could talk.
 My sweetheart! My second self! Loved was thy walk.
 Alas for poor Polly! Where's now his sly chat?
 Alas, my companion! How shall I bear that?
 Had Solomon seen a green parrot like mine,
 What pleasure had he felt in other birds' line?
 Dear prattler, in whose words I took such delight!
 And then, thus to leave me, with naught in my sight!
 Thy tongue to me dearer than gold's wealth untold;
 [155] At sound of thy sweet voice my joy was tenfold."

O tongue! Thou'rt a fire, and also a cornstack! [*1]
 My patience, the cornstack! Hark! How its flames crack!
 My soul doth, in secret, of thee complain sore;
 But whate'er thou wishest, it does evermore.
 O tongue: Thou'rt a treasure, beyond all earth's price!
 And yet thou'rt a plague, that's not always too nice!
 A whistle art thou, birds decoying afield.
 A solace to love's wayward, fitful, spoilt child.
 To men thou'rt all darkness, and blasphemy's bale;
 [160] To saints, guide, companion too, through this dark vale.
 Thou'rt pitiless! Pity on me take, awhile.
 Thy bow thou hast strung, on poor me to work guile.
 Thou hast taken my bird; thou hast flustered my soul.
 So cruel why be? Why delight take so foul?
 An answer pray give; or else, deal out justice;
 Or hope let me have to taste joy's chalice.
 My dawn! Thou dispellest my deep'ning darkness.
 My light! Day with thee is all sunshine brightness.
 Alas! That swift bird, boldly soaring, of mine,
 [165] My lowest fall plumbed, traced my lineage divine.
 The ignorant, wooers of trouble are, all.
 "I swear," down to "misery" read, thou poor thrall. [*2]

[p. 125]

From misery free made me thy countenance.
 From spume, so the clear stream of thy assistance.
 Regret is a nursing of phantoms by day.
 Neglect, stern realities drives not away.
 A zeal for the truth is in God, there's no doubt.
 The heart, with God's will, is constrained to burst out.
 He's zeal, Who is "other," far, than all things else, [*1]
 Beyond all praise, laud, blessing, thanks, in heart's pulse. [170]
 Alas! my hot tears have become briny lake,
 An offering worthy my lost idol's sake.
 My parrot! My wise bird! My starling art thou!
 Interpreter, reader of thoughts, secrets, thou.
 All daily events, results, just or unjust,
 By Him ordained were, as I know, from the first.
 The Parrot, inspired, who by voice of man spoke,
 Existed ere dawn of existence first broke.
 That Parrot is plainly within thyself felt;
 Around thee His motto is ev'rywhere spelt. [175]
 Art joyful? From Him, know, all joys here do spring.
 Art wronged? Thou submittest. Thou'rt under His wing.
 O thou, who for body dost injure thy soul,
 Thy proud flesh to pamper, dost wrong to thy whole.
 I, too, am in flames. Who, then, seeks burning brand,
 The trash to consume of conceit from the land?
 That which is once burnt cannot blaze out again.
 Select flaming brand, living fire choose, amain.
 Alas! Lackaday! What has thus come to me?
 My full moon in clouds why thus hidden to be? [180]
 I scarcely can breathe; with deep sorrow heart burns;
 Male-lion-like, grief all kind condolence spurns.
 He who in his senses has thus become drunk,
 How fierce would he rage, if in cups he were sunk.

[p. 126]

A lion in heat, he, despising all bounds;
 No forest would hold him, nor dense jungle-grounds.

Of rhymes do I dream? 'Tis my love orders me [*1]
 Of love still to dream;--swain devoted to be:
 "Thyself make thou happy. Rhymes leave, now, alone.
 [185] The rhyme I seek, thou art. I love thee, my own.
 What's rhyme, that thou turnest thy thoughts thitherward?
 Mere bramble on wall, hedging round our vineyard.
 I care not for words, for asseverations;
 My time if I pass in these sweet delusions.
 Suggestion there is, one, kept secret from men.
 To thee I'll impart. Thou keep'st secrets, like pen.
 Suggestion occult, Abeam knew not one jot.
 One secret, that Gabriel as yet conceives not.
 One mystery, to Jesus that never was known,
 [190] In jealousy God spake to me all alone." [*2]

What do we with tongue? We affirm; we deny.
 I'm no affirmation; denial am I.
 In impersonality, person I find.
 In ungenerosity, goodness of mind.
 Earth's potentates slaves are of their own slaves' will.
 All mortals, mere corpses of dead corpses, still.
 Kings, subject are here to their own subjects' whim.
 Man's drunk with those intoxicated of him.
 The hunter of birds them entraps in his toils,
 [195] Himself is then pounced on, despite of his foils.
 A beauty makes prey of the men soft of heart.
 Sweethearts fall the victims of false lover's dart.
 If lover thou see, know, a sweetheart he's, too,
 'Tis but a relation. Each one's one of two.
 If thirst seeks for water in this wide domain,
 The water, on its side, the thirst courts again.

[p. 127]

Should any one love thee, do thou silent be.
 Thy ear claims he then, thou attentive should'st be.
 The torrent bank up that threats dire overflow;
 Or ravage 'twill make of the lands down below. [200]
 What care I if cities in ruins should fall,
 In ruins we treasures find dear to us all.
 Man merged in God, most entirely is drowned
 As wave of a sea, soul but goes a set round.
 Is bottom of that sea preferred more, or top?
 Is God's shaft desired more, or shield, it to stop?
 By doubts and by fears thou'lt piecemeal be torn, heart.
 If thou well distinguish from joy, sorrow's smart.
 Desir'st thou to taste, then, true happiness, joy?
 'Tis not thine to choose. Beauty ever's most coy. [205]
 Each spangle of beauty's star outshines the moon.
 To wreck a whole world's naught to beauty's full moon.
 What is it we're good for? To sacrifice self.
 Then hasten, my good friend, to offer thyself.
 A lover's whole life is but self-sacrifice;
 He wins not a heart, save his own heart's the price.
 A heart I once courted with soft blandishment;
 With pretexts was put off, most magniloquent.
 I said my heart brimful was quite with her love;
 Said she: "Hold thy tongue, now; that theme let's not move." [210]
 What have you been doing, you two eyes of mine?
 Why saw you that cruel one? Left me to pine?
 Presumptuous man! Didst thou hold her so cheap,
 Because, by her kindness, made easy thy sleep?
 What's easily got in this world, 's easy spent.
 A child will give jewels at cake's allurement.
 With love I'm o'erwhelm'd, now, of such a sad sort,
 That ancients and moderns to it are all sport.

I've made short my story; details are not given.
 'Twould otherwise scorch heart and tongue's whole joint leaven. [215]

[p. 128]

When I may say "lip," I mean "margin of sea;"
 When "No!" you may take its true sense "Yes!" to be.
 My sourness of looks by much sweetness is caused.
 By words' multitude, silence strict I've imposed.
 My sweetness I'll hide, in this world, in the next.
 As veil, austere features I've firmly annexed.
 My secrets to shield from the ken of all ears,
 One out of a hundred, alone, here appears.

The world is right jealous, for reason that best:
 [220] God first jealous was, long before all the rest. [*1]
 He's soul. The two worlds His august body form. [*2]
 The body, through soul must receive good or harm.
 Whoso in his worship turns truly to God,
 Foul shame 'twould be for him to bow to faith's rod.
 Whoever's a keeper of wardrobe to king,
 Brings loss to his sovereign by petty trading.
 With potentate, whoso, by grade, council holds,
 If placed as a guard at a gate, roundly scolds.
 Admitted to honour by kissing of hands,
 [225] To stoop, kiss the foot, degradation now stands.
 To kiss foot of sovereign's a great honour, sure.
 Compared with hands-kissing, ignominy pure.
 A king would be jealous of servant so base
 His foot who should kiss, when his hand was the place.
 God's jealousy wheat is on full threshing-floor;
 Man's jealousy, chaff blown away out of door.
 Know: Jealousy rise doth take, still, in our God;
 Man's jealousy budded from that noble rod.

[p. 129]

Let's quit that deep subject; take up plaint and wail,
 Against the great hardship of love's chastening flail. [*1] [230]
 I cry, for that He loves to hear all my cries.
 My moans, lamentations, are what He enjoys.
 How should I cease wailing at His fell caprice?
 I'm not of His darlings, nor in His service.
 How should I not be, in my soul, black as night?
 Deprived of His look, sweetness, warmth, and mild light.
 All his disagreements are pleasant to me.
 My life I'd give up, sacrifice I would be.
 I love all my anguish; I dote on my pain,
 So long as it pleases my heart's treasured swain. [235]
 My sorrow's my eyes' choicest collyrium;
 My tears are as pearls from deep-sea tedium.
 Tears poured forth by lovers at His adored feet,
 Are pearls; though we're used them as tears to misgreet.
 My soul's Soul's the tyrant of whom I complain.
 Complaint I make not. I describe but my pain.
 My heart but pretends it has been too much hurt;
 Excuse is this merely. I smile at such blurt.

Do justice now, God, of all justice the fount!
 Thou sittest in justice' seat; threshold I count. [240]
 From chief seat to threshold! How far raised above!
 Where stand "we" and "I" in the sight of our love? [*2]
 O Thou who art free, quite from "I" and from "we,"
 Thou heart's-joy of all men and women that be;
 Where men and where women join, One art Thou, Sole!
 Where units appear, Thou'rt the sum of the whole!
 This "I" and this "we" Thou'st ordained for Thy state;
 That psalms, hymns, and lauds may still rise to Thy gate.

[p. 130]

When "I" and when "we" shall unite both in One,
 [245] Absorbed they'll be in Thy essence alone.
 Existencies, potencies, all rise from Thee.
 Denial and potency, Thou'rt from these free.
 Can eye now behold Thee as truly Thou art?
 Can heart Thy love picture, and smiles, e'en in part?

The heart that's a slave to a love or a smile
 Can never be worthy to see Thee awhile.
 Engrossed he that's now with pleasure and pain,
 Can he, by these accidents, live o'er again?
 Green pastures of love, in their infinitude,
 [250] More fruits yield than care, and than beatitude.
 Love's far above these evanescent two states;
 Without spring and autumn, its verdant estates.

Pay beauty's high toll, Beauty, on Thy sweet face;
 Set forth lover's torments with all due preface.
 That archness of look of my coquettish Swain
 Anew has my heart fired with love's brand of pain.
 I gave Him permission to pour out my blood.
 I spoke of permission. He fled me for good.
 Why fleest thus, always, the groans of complaint?
 [255] Why pourest Thou suffering's floods on the faint?
 O Thou, whom each morn, as it dawns in the East,
 Has found, like the sun, full prepared for a feast,
 What cause have I furnished for all this sad pain,
 O Thou, whose lips sweeter than sugar remain?
 Thou ever new life givest to this old world;
 The prayer hear of one whom from life Thou hast hurled!
 For heaven's sake, quit talking of spring's roses red,
 And think of the nightingale banished their bed.
 My eagerness grows not from joy, or from grief;
 [260] My senses cajoled will not be by whim's thief.
 My state is just one very often not seen;
 Contest not; truth's ever victorious been.

[p. 131]

Think not my state that of all these common men;
 Be not benefactor, to tyrannise then.
 If kindness and tyranny, joy, grief, are new;
 All new things must die. God inherits. [*1] That's true.
 'Tis dawn. O of dawn Thou who art the sole cause!
 Excuse for me make to Husamu-'d-Din's laws. [*2]
 Excuses for angels and souls Thou canst see;
 Thou art the soul's life; coral's shine is from Thee. [*3] [265]
 From Thy light have sprung men and brightness of dawn. [*4]
 We're all aided by Thee, Thou cup of wine drawn.
 Why does Thy gift keep me in constant suspense;--
 Thy spiritual wine, that still charms ev'ry sense.
 A beggar from me's wine in fermentation!
 Spheres lessons take from me in revolution
 With me wine gets drunk; I get not drunk with it.
 From me body grows; I spring thence not one bit.
 We're bees, all of us; and our bodies, the wax;
 With it we build cells to conceal our dark tracks. [270]

These considerations would grow longer still.
 We'll turn to our merchant. We left him so ill.
 He thus, lamentations, sad groans, sadder moans,
 Shot forth, with sighs, burning;--grieved hearts' crater-stones.
 Complaints, contradictions, petitions, like words,
 Now literal, then keen metaphors, sharp as swords.
 The drowning, 'tis known to each one who breath draws,
 To save threatened life, will, though vain, grasp at straws;
 In hopes that some aid to his rescue will come,
 He struggles, he flounders, he thinks of his home. [275]
 His sweetheart takes pleasure his struggles to see;
 An effort's more noble than despondency.

[p. 132]

A bridegroom is, surely, not quite free from cares.
 His moans we expect not. Pain's not what he fears.
 The reason this, why the Lord's blest scripture says:
 "Each day He's engaged in some one of His ways." [*1]
 Therefore thou, my dear son, thyself still exert
 Until thy last breath. Seek not toil to avert.
 Then, at the last moment, the time may have come,
 [280] When favour 'll be shown thee for all thou hast done.
 How much, and how long, strives the soul of each man,
 The king's at the window;--hear, see all, he can.

Our merchant the parrot cast out from his cage.
 The parrot flew up; on a tree took high stage.
 The bird that was thought dead, now swift flew away.
 His course like the sun's from the morn to midday.

The merchant sore marvelled at his flying bird;
 Could not understand it; thought: "What has occurred?"
 Then cried, looking upwards: "Come, pretty Poll mine!
 [285] Relate all about this freak strangest of thine.
 What was that bird's game, there, of whom then thou spokest?
 What trick was 't he played? Grief in me thou awokest."

The parrot him answered: "He taught me the trick.
 He came and said: 'Free thyself now. Up! Be quick!'
 No sooner had sounded thy voice in his ears,
 He, as was agreed on, fell dead, it appears.
 As much as to say, here, to me in my cage:
 Thou death counterfeit; so thou savest thy old age.'"

Become thou but grain; thou'lt be pecked up by birds.
 [290] A flower make thyself; all the children go thirds.
 Thy grain hidest thou? Thou'rt naught else but brick-trap.
 Thy flower shuttest up? Thou'rt a weed on house-top.

[p. 133]

His beauty whoever may offer for sale,
 Invites many troubles his heart to assail.
 Hopes, fears, wraths, and jealousies strike him at once;
 As rain on his head pours in winter;--the nonce.
 All sorts of opponents, by jealousy moved;
 With them, even friends joy to see him so proved.
 Whoever may put off to sow seed in spring,
 Ignores the true value of time's swiftest wing. [295]
 Let each one take refuge in mercy of God,
 Who grace manifold on our souls has bestowed.
 Then shalt thou find shelter, when shelter thou needest.
 Fire's, water's protection thou'lt have, as thou heedest.
 It was not the sea alone Noah, Moses, saved.
 Nor sea alone was it, their foes that ingraved.
 It was not the fire that stood Abeam in stead,
 Till God conquered Nimrod by gnat in his head.
 It was not the mountain that called John to it, [300]
 And drove back pursuers with huge rocks that hit.
 It cried: "Hither, John; refuge come take with me.
 Thy. life I will save from foe's sharp sword. Come; see."

"Adieu, master dear; I'm now off to my home.
 May'st thou, too, be free, when the judgment shall come.
 Good-bye, my kind master; compassion thou'st shown.
 From tyranny's chains, now, through thee, have I flown."
 He gave to our merchant some words of advice.
 Then flew away, shouting: "Good-bye! Very nice!"
 The merchant a " Safe journey " augured to him.
 Then thought: "Useful lesson I've learned, and trim. [305]
 His doings may serve as a pattern for me.
 I'll imitate him. Better teacher can't be.
 My soul is not, sure, inferior to his.
 See how souls should act, to gain heavenly bliss."

The body's a cage and a thorn to the soul.
 Hence, seldom are. body and soul wholly whole.

[p. 134]

The body says: "I'll follow where thou mayest lead."
 The soul answers: "Nay! Thy desire's all I heed."
 The body then argues: "There's none like to thee,
 [310] Thou'rt perfect, kind, beautiful, good as needs be."
 The soul now demurs: "This and next worlds are thine.
 All hearts to the feast hasten, where thou'rt to shine."
 The body then says: "'Tis a time for delight."
 And soul responds quick: "Season, sure, to bedight."

When body sees crowds, throngs, profess love for it,
 Control of self loses, in teeth takes the bit,
 It does not reflect how the thousands and more,
 Itself like, has sin brought to ruin's grim shore.
 The bait of gross flattery is always found sweet.
 [315] Therewith be not caught. Lurid fire's 'neath its greet.
 Its sweetness is present; its flame's not forecast;
 Its smoke of destruction will burst forth at last.
 Say not: "I'll ne'er listen to flatterer's tale;
 They're sordid, its motives;--like 'sprat to catch whale.'"
 A lampoon should thy panegyrist indite
 Against thee in public, thy rest's disturbed quite.
 Thou knowest it was spoken in sheer angry spleen,
 When he in some wish unsuccessful had been.
 The barb of it rankles, still, in thy heart's core,
 [320] The price paid for flattery, 'tis, makes thee feel sore.
 Long, long shalt thou feel the deep wound it inflicts.
 It stimulates pride; all the soul it infects.
 Man shows not how sweet flattery is to his soul.
 The instant he's lampooned, he's lost self-control.

Thus, pill or draught taken to combat disease,
 A long time, indeed, you're thence robbed of all ease.
 And if you eat sweetmeats, their tastes are soon lost.
 Nor one, nor the other, is worth half the cost.
 Duration they have not; effects they produce.
 [325] By contraries, contraries all we deduce.

[p. 135]

As hidden effect of a diet of sweets,
 By long incubation, boils break out, or gleets.

The flesh, with praise pampered, a Pharaoh becomes.
 The flesh, mortified, due submission assumes.
 A servant to all be; princely power be forgot.
 Submit to cuffs, ball-like; like bat, batter not.
 So soon, otherwise, as thee fortune forsakes,
 Thy flatterers will turn. 'Tis greed only, them makes.
 The throngs of gross flatterers, who sang loud thy praise.
 'Will shake their heads, shout out: "Poor de'il! What a craze!" [330]
 On seeing thee, then, as thou wanderest about,
 They cry: "Cursed hobgoblin! From grave he's come out!"

Like beardless, vain boy they've addressed as "My Lord,"
 To work on his vanity, fair fame defraud,
 In vice when he's nurtured, his beard thickly grown,
 E'en Satan would blush a pact with hint to own.
 'Tis men Satan seeks out, to work them mischief.
 Thee he'll never seek; worse than him, thou, a thief.
 So long as thou'rt man, Satan follows thy track.
 He tempts thee to drain manhood's lees, still, and wrack. [335]
 When thou'rt become devil, just like to himself,
 He flees thee in fright; leaves thee quite to thyself.
 All they who before refuge took in thy power,
 With horror fly from thee, in this thy fallen hour.
 Our words are mere lies, all tergiversations. [*1]
 Without the divine grace, they're sheer delusions.
 Without grace of God, holy aid from His saints,
 Best "record" of man must be blots and complaints. [*2]
 O God! Thy grace, sole, 'tis sustains us as men,
 Another to name with Thee suits not a pen. [340]

[p. 136]

To servants, sound judgment Thou'st kindly vouchsafed.
 This gift made the means, we've from error escaped.

One drop from the sea of Thy knowledge, does us
 With omniscience, surely, make confluous.
 That drop have I gathered up in my soul's trust.
 Do Thou save it, Lord, from lust's soil and sin's gust.
 Sin's soil, oh! permit not that drop to absorb!
 Those gusts forbid Thou more to lessen its orb!
 True, Thou art All-Powerful, and Thy gracious will
 [345] Could force them to yield it back, grace to fulfil.
 A drop, lost in air, dispersed in the soil,
 Is still, through Thy providence, safe from despoil.
 Become it, or others, a nonentity,
 Thy beck can them summon to new entity.
 How many diverse still combine to form one.
 Thou givest the word, they part, each to its zone.
 Each moment, from naught fresh creations still come,
 In flocks. and in crowds. 'Tis Thou makest them a home.

Each night, in profound sleep our consciousness sinks;
 [350] Becomes non-existent;--waves on seashore's brinks.
 When morning afresh dawns, they wake up anew,
 Like fish in the sea, plashing drops, falling dew.

In autumn, the leaves see. They quit, then, the trees;
 Like scattered battalions, they fly with the breeze.
 The rook, in robes sable, as mourner acts, chief;
 In wood and field croaks for his much-deplored leaf.
 Command from Thee goes forth;--Thou, true Forest-King;
 Nonentity gives back each late stolen thing.
 O Death? Thou restorest, now, the whole prey of thine;
 [355] The leaves, flowers, and fruits, in their due season shine.

Consider, my friend, in thyself; now, awhile,
 The spring and the autumn thou in thee seest smile.

[p. 137]

Look thou that thy heart be green, yield its good fruits
 Of righteousness, purity,--heaven's best recruits.
 Through garlands of verdure thy rough branches hid;
 With bloom in profusion, hills, plains, all tumid.

These words of mine come from the Spirit supreme,
 To call to mind heaven's everlasting grand scheme.
 Thou smellest a perfume of flowers. Flowers are not yet;
 Thou dreamest fermentation, though wine is not set. [360]
 That odour will draw thee to where the flowers grow, [*1]
 The joys of sweet paradise, "where rivers flow." [*2]
 Of hope it perfume is that leads our souls on;
 As hope led forth Jacob in quest of his son. [*3]
 Bad tidings and fearful cost Jacob his sight.
 Reunion, in hope, to him brought back the light.
 If thou'rt not a Joseph, a Jacob be yet.
 As he did, weep, mourn; joy, like him, thou shalt get.
 If thou art not Shirin, thou may'st Ferhad be; [*4]
 And if not Layla dear, Majnun's ravings see. [*5] [365]
 Accept the advice of old Gazna's sage, wise. [*6]
 To thee, ever, new life from old life may rise:
 "To give one's self airs, requires, first, a fair face;
 If beauty thou hast not, run not thou that race."
 An ugly face ugly is, all the world round.
 A blind eye's affliction, where'er it be found.
 In presence of Joseph, no coquetries use. [*7]
 But humble thyself; soft entreaties infuse.

[p. 138]

The parrot had death simulated, as prayer.
 [370] Do thou to pride die; thou mayest so live for e'er.
 From Jesus a breath may, then, blow upon thee;
 Transform thee to what he was, what thou mayest be.
 A stone will not blossom because it is spring.
 As earth make thyself; flowers around thee may cling.
 For years thou a stone 'st been; lay this well to heart.
 [373] Try patience a short time; 'twill give a fresh start.

Footnotes

^m114:1 Literally, "your morning cup," drunk at dawn ere leaving a house.

^m115:1 Asiatics drink "to the love" of a friend; not "to his health."

^m115:2 The parrot is known by the title "Sugar-eating."

^m116:1 A shade of an explanation to this very hazardous saying of the Sufi Gnostics is found in Qur'an xvi. 108 "Whoever denieth God after he hath believed, except him who shall be compelled against his will, and whose heart continueth steadfast in the faith, shall be severely chastised."

^m116:2 The dervish orders call their peculiar cap a "mitre" or "crown" (taj).

^m116:3 The "four rivers" of Paradise, of water, milk, wine, and honey. Qur'an xlvii. 16.

^m116:4 Qur'an iii. 31; and numerous other places.

^m117:1 This section purports to have been suggested by the following couplet from 'Attar:--

	"O heedless child of lust, weep thou tears of blood.
	  If a saint eat poison, honey-like 'tis food."

[paragraph continues] The original expression for "saint," here, is: "a man of heart."

^m118:1 Canonical "responsibility" falls on all of sane mind and adult age.

^m118:2 See note to dist. No. 33 of the present poem.

^m118:3 Qur'an vii. 112, &c.

^m119:1 By a "perfect man" a saint is intended; as by "imperfect," hero and before, an ordinary mortal is depicted.

^m119:2 Qur'an vii. 203; xlvi. 28. By "ear" and "tongue" a learner and a teacher are symbolised.

^m122:1 A hazardous assertion. See Anecdotes, Chap. iii., Nos. 2, 5, 7, &c.

^m122:2 A proverbial expression, like: "All's well that ends well."

^m122:3 Qur'an ii. 100.

^m122:4 Qur'an xxiii. 112.

^m122:5 Also Qur'an xxiii. 112.

^m122:6 The "pupil" of the eye; in Persian called "the manikin;" in Arabic, "the man." These both allude to the small image of ourselves seen reflected in the pupil.

^m124:1 This rhapsody is mystical, like the Song of Solomon. A "tongue" is a teacher, informant; a prophet; and, apparently, even God himself.

^m124:2 Qur'an xc. 1-4.

^m125:1 "Other," as opposed to self; also opposed to "we two" in the case of lovers; it is a term much used in Eastern poetry and philosophy.

^m126:1 The poet's "beloved" appears, here, to be God.

^m126:2 Allusion appears to be made to Qur'an xxi. 107.

^m128:1 This section is stated to be a gloss upon the following apostolic tradition: "Verily, Sa'd is really jealous; but I am more jealous than he, and God than I. Out of His jealousy hath He made all excesses sinful; whether of outer or of the inner man." This Sa'd, son of 'Ubuda, was a disciple of Muhammed, and the most munificent man in Madina. He embraced the faith before the Hijra. See An-Nawawi, p. 274, l. 5.

^m128:2 The "two worlds," spiritual and material, future and present.

^m129:1 The poet's "love," is still God. This section purports to be an excursus on the following distich of the poet Sana'i, who died A.H. 576 (A.D. 1180):--

	"Why leavest thou thy guild, its rules or faith or sin?
	  Why quittest thou thy mistress, be she plump or thin?"

^m129:2 Reflections on God's unity, and the plurality of created being.

^m131:1 Qur'an xix. 41, &c.

^m131:2 Anecdotes, Chap. vi.

^m131:3 "Life" and "coral," in Persian "An" and "merjan."

^m131:4 Men from moral, dawn from material light.

^m132:1 Qur'an lv. 29.

^m135:1 This section purports to be a dissertation on the dictum: "What God wills, is."

^m135:2 Man's "record" is the register of his thoughts, words, and deeds, kept by angels, to be produced in the last judgment.

^m137:1 The same word in Persian, bu, signifies "odour" and "hope." The thing hoped for becomes a distant, odoriferous flower.

^m137:2 Qur'an ii. 23, and forty places in all.

^m137:3 Jacob is said to have wept himself blind on losing Joseph; the smell of his son's coat, when refound, later, restored him.

^m137:4 Ferhad was Shirin's lover. (See Tale 6, distich 107, note).

^m137:5 Majnun, in story, went mad for love of Layla.

^m137:6 The "Sage of Gazna" is the poet Sana'i, already mentioned in the notes to the present tale, distich 230.

^m137:7 Joseph is held to have been most superlatively beautiful.

     
The Mesnavi and The Acts of the Adepts, by Jelal-'d-din Rumi and Shemsu-'d-Din Ahmed, tr. by James W. Redhouse, [1881], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 139]

  

VIII.

HAST heard, perchance, there was in days of good 'Umer
 A minstrel talented, whose harpings moved the sphere?
 The nightingales all wept in transports at his voice,
 One pleasure made men's hearts a hundredfold rejoice.
 His song enchanted every gathering where he went,
 Applause as thunder broke forth, to his heart's content.
 Like voice of Israfil, whose trump on judgment day, [*1]
 Will wake the dead to life, his made the saddest gay.
 Dear friend to Israfil he was, and mendicant;
 His notes made plumes to sprout on hide of elephant. [5]

Some day will Israfil attention pay to moans.
 Their souls he will recall to old and putrid bones.
 The prophets, likewise, all, musicians are on hearts.
 Disciples hence expire with joy by fits and starts.
 Our outward ears the strains hear not which thence proceed;
 Those ears, in many ways, degraded are indeed.

Mankind the songs of fairies never hear at all,
 They are not versed in fairies' ways, their voices small.

[p. 140]

'Tis true, the chants of fairies' sounds are of this world; [*1]
 [10] But songs sung by men's hearts are far above them hurled.
 Both men and fairies pris'ners are in earthly cage.
 Both, too, are thralls of sinful ignorance's rage.
 Read thou the text: "O fairy troop," in book of God. [*2]
 Consider, too: "Can ye pass out?" Who holds the rod?

The inward hymn that's sung by all the hearts of saints
 Commences: "O component parts of that thing NOT." [*3]
 Now since they take their rise in this NOT, negative,
 They put aside the hollow phantom where we live.

Ye putrid corpses, wrapt in rank corruption's cloth,
 [15] Our everlasting souls are free from birth and growth.
 Were I but to recite one stave from their blest song,
 All living souls would rise out from their tombs among.
 Lend ear attentively; that may not distant be;
 As yet, however, leave's not given to tell it thee.

The saints are Israfils of this our passing time.
 The spiritually dead through them live life sublime.
 Our souls mere corpses are; their graves, our bodies' crowds.
 At voice of saint do they arise, clothed in their shrouds.
 They say: "This voice has in it something to be feared.
 [20] To raise the dead, God's voice alone has power, we've heard.
 We were all dead, and unto earth had we returned.
 The voice of God we've heard; our prisons we have spurned."

The voice of God without, also within the vail,
 Can give the gift to all, it gave to Mary: "Hail!"
 O ye whose death was not that which attacks the flesh,
 At sound of the Beloved's voice ye've risen afresh.

[p. 141]

That voice the Bridegroom's voice most truly was, 'tis said,
 Although 'twas from the lips of His servant, Ahmed.
 God said to him: "Thy tongue, thy eye, thy ear, I am;
 All thy contentment, anger, thoughts, 'tis I undam. [25]
 Go on; 'By Me he hears, by Me he sees;' that's thee;
 Thou art the head; thou holdest the place of Head's trustee.
 In ecstasy, since thou art 'He the Lord's who is,' [*1]
 I will be thine; for see, 'tis said: 'The Lord is his.'
 Now will I say to thee: 'Thou art;' and now; 'I am.'
 What I may say's as clear as is the sun in heaven.
 Wherever I may shine an instant in a lamp,
 A world of doubts I solve; on all My seal I stamp.
 The darkness which the sun could never yet illume,
 By magic of My breath grows bright as peacock's plume. [30]
 Wherever gloom may reign as undisturbed night,
 When shone upon by Me, like noonday's forthwith bright."

'Twas He who taught to Adam ev'ry thing's true name,
 Through Adam to mankind imparted He the same.
 Take thou enlightenment from Adam or the Lord.
 Draw wine as thou mayest list from jar or from the gourd. [*2]
 The distance is not great between the gourd and jar.
 The gourd is not, like thee, made drunk by grape's nectar.
 Draw water from the brook, or from a pitcher's mouth;
 The brook is still the source whence pitcher's filled; forsooth. [35]

Seek light as listest; whether from the moon or sun.
 The moon derives her sheen from daystar's golden tun.
 Imbibe what light thou canst from any twinkling star.
 The Prophet said: "Stars are all my disciples." Hear! [*3]

[p. 142]

He further said: "How happy they who see my face, [*1]
 And happy they who look on them in their own place."
 He said: "Good luck to all who have the happy chance [*2]
 To look on my disciples,--mirrors of my glance."
 If thou by taper's aid proceed to light a lamp,
 [40] The eye that sees its light, perceives the taper's stamp.
 If one lamp from another should be lighted; well!
 The light received from this, has come from that one's cell.
 And so, if through a thousand wicks the light should pass,
 Who sees the last enjoys the gift of all the mass.
 The light of this last lamp's as pure as is the whole;
 No difference is there. And thus 'tis with the soul.
 The light diffused by teachers in these latter days,
 No other is than what was shown by earlier rays.

Our Prophet said: "The breathings of the Lord your God, [*3]
 [45] In these your days of pilgrimage, on all sides prod.
 Your ears and minds lend ye to all signs of the times;
 Perchance ye may inhale those breathings in these climes."

One breathing came and found you. Straightway it was gone.
 To all who sought, new life it gave. It then had done.
 Another breathing's come. Be ye not unprepared.
 Ye may not let it go by. Something must be shared.
 It found your souls on fire. 'Tis thence they cease to burn.
 Your souls it found all corpses. Life it made return.
 Your fiery souls by it all quickly were puffed out.
 [50] Dead souls of yours by it began aloud to shout.
 Their present calm, and this vivacity's from heaven;
 Resembling not the turbulence by which man's driven.

[p. 143]

One breathing from the Lord, when blown on earth and air,
 Ill qualities converts straight into all that's fair.
 For fear lest any breathing such as this thee shake,
 Read thou the text: "They shunned the task to undertake." [*1]
 Had not " they shrunk from it," where now would'st thou have been?
 Had they not feared, would'st thou this grade have ever seen?
 But yesterday an opening gleamed for better things;
 Till greed for fleshly morsels stopped the way of kings. [55]

For sake of some such morsel Luqman was made bail. [*2]
 The time's now that for Luqman morsel'd not avail.
 The troubles we endure are all for morsel's sake.
 Be Luqman. Thou'lt extract the thorn that makes thee ache.
 A thorn or chafing hurt not Luqman's horny hand.
 Through greed thou lackest the discipline made him so bland.
 The thing thou thoughtest a date-palm, know, is but a thorn.
 Ungrateful, uninformed thou art, now, as when born.
 The soul of Luqman was a vineyard of the Lord.
 Why then into his soul did thorn pierce like a sword? [60]

Thorn-eating camel, truly, is this world of ours,
 Ahmed, then, came and mounted;--him that camel bears.
 O camel, on thy back thou bearest a vase of rose.
 On thee from thence have sprouted rosebuds, as God knows.
 Thy tastes thee lead to camel-thorn and wastes of sand.
 To thee the thorn's a rose; the wilderness, rich land.

O thou who in such quest hast wandered up and down,
 How long wilt thou contend rose-garden's sandy down?

[p. 144]

Thou canst not now extract the thorn from thy sore foot.
 [65] With that blind eye of thine, how wilt thou see its root?
 A man whose vast desires the world could not contain,
 Is sometimes by one thorn's point sent to death's domain.

Now Ahmed came; a tender, kind companion, he.
 "Speak to me, O Humayra," said he, "speak to me." [*1]
 Put thou thy shoe, Humayra, quick into the fire. [*2]
 The rocks will rubies turn, from his feet's blood in mire.
 This Humayra's a woman's name, the poet's love.
 Such is the Arab custom. Soul is meant. Now move.
 That Soul's no need to fear from being named as girl. [*3]
 [70] Of sex, as male or female, that Soul has no twirl.
 That Soul is far above sex, accident, and mood.
 That Soul is not man's darling, made of flesh and blood.
 That Soul is not the life that grows from cakes of bread;
 That's sometimes of one mind, and other then instead.
 Of good is He the worker, good He is also.
 From goodness separate, no goodness e'er will flow.

If thou'rt made sweet through sugar, it may happen still,
 That sugar none thou find, to sweeten thee at will.
 But if thou sweet become, like sugar, through good heart,
 [75] This sweetness from thy sugar never will depart.

How can a lover find love's nectar in himself?
 That question passes comprehension, my good elf.
 Man's finite reason disbelieves love's potent sway.
 Himself he yet esteems endowed with head to-day.

[p. 145]

He's clever, and he's knowing, nil he's not; anon.
 Until an angel's nothing, [*1] he's a sheer demon.
 In word and act a man may be a friend of ours;
 But when it comes to heart and mind, he huffs and lours.
 If he from esse, reach not posse's state, he's nil;
 And willingly;--unwillingly, we may worlds fill. [80]
 The Soul, our God, 's perfection. Perfect is His "call." [*2]
 His Ahmed used to say: "Ensoul us, O Bilal! [*3]
 Lift up thy voice, O Bilal, thy harmonious voice.
 Put forth the breath that I infused at thy heart's choice.
 The breath that 'twas made Adam lose all consciousness;
 While all the hosts of heaven, too, felt their helplessness."

That Ahmed, Mustafa, at one blest sight stood lost. [*4]
 His wedding-night it was. Dawn-worship it him cost. [*5]
 He woke not from the sleep his blessed vision shed.
 Dawn-worship he o'erslept; the sun shone overhead. [85]
 On that, his wedding-night, in presence of his bride,
 His sainted soul kissed hands, high honour's fullest tide.

Both love and soul are occult, hidden and concealed.
 If God I have "bride" named, let it stand fault repealed.
 I silence would have kept, from fear of love's caprice,
 If for a moment only, I'd been granted grace.
 But He still said: "Say on. The word is not a fault.
 It's naught but the decree there should appear default.
 It's shame to him who only sees another's faults.
 What fault is noticed by the Soul safe from assaults?" [90]

[p. 146]

A fault it is to eyes of creatures ignorant.
 But not with God the Lord, our Maker benignant.
 E'en blasphemy is wisdom with th' Omnipotent; [*1]
 Attributed to mortals, mortal sin patent.
 If one sole fault be found amidst a hundred truths,
 'Tis like a stick that's used to prop sweet flowers' growths.
 Both will be surely weighed in justice' equal scales;
 For, like the soul and body, both are pleasant tales.
 The saints have therefore said, for sweet instruction's sake:
 [95] "The bodies of the pure with souls just balance make."

Their words, their selves, their figures, whate'er these may be,
 Are all Soul Absolute, without a trace to see.
 Sworn enemy is Body to their spiritual life,
 Just as one game of backgammon, with names full rife. [*2]
 The body goes to earth; is soon reduced to clay;
 The soul endures like salt, and suffers no decay.
 The salt, than which Muhammed far more sapid is;
 From "Attic salt" that's found in each dictum of his.
 That Attic salt's an heirloom, heritage from him;
 [100] His heirs are here with thee. Seek unto them passim.
 They're sitting in thy presence. What's in front of thee?
 Thy soul demands thy care. Where can thy forethought be?

If thou still be in doubt, and not sure of thyself,
 Thou'rt slave unto thy body; soul thou hast not, elf.
 Behind, before, above, below, stands body's shade.
 The soul has no "dimensions;" clearly it's displayed.

[p. 147]

Lift thy eyes, dear Sir, in glorious light of God;
 That thou be not accounted most shortsighted clod.
 Thou nothing knowest or carest about, save grief and joy;
 Thou nothing, by mere nothings hemmed in, man or boy. [105]
 To-day's a day of rain. Yet journey thou till night;
 Not on account of downpour, but because it's light.

One day did Mustafa, go to the burial-ground.
 The Prophet at a funeral, his friend's, was found.
 At filling in the grave he lent a helping hand;
 A living seed he planted in that holy land.
 The trees thereof are emblems,--cypress, fir, or yew;
 Their boughs are hands in prayer uplifted,--if men knew.
 They many lessons inculcate to men of sense,
 He who hath ears to hear may thence draw inference. [110]
 A contemplative mind from them new secrets culls.
 The heedless are amused with what men's reason dulls.
 With tongue-shaped leaves and finger-twigs they us address;
 From inmost heart of earth they publish mysteries.
 As ducks dive into water, they plunge into earth.
 Like rooks they were, now peacocks, gay in their new birth.
 The winter shuts them up, as prisoners, in its ice.
 Black rooks then, bare; as peacocks spring bids them arise.
 God makes them look like dead in winter's frozen reign,
 But with returning spring wakes them to life again. [115]
 Dull atheists contend this is a story old,
 And ask why we to God attribute it, so bold.
 They say these alternations ever thus were seen.
 The world of old, they think, as 'tis, has ever been.
 In spite of their contention, in breasts of His saints
 Has God at all times reared rich gardens free from feints.

Each flower that yields to sense agreeable perfume,
 Speaks volumes to saint's heart with its mysterious tongue.

[p. 148]

Each perfume from a flower rubs atheist's nose in dirt;
 [120] Although he rush about, and boundless nonsense spirt.
 An atheist's like a chafer clinging to rosebud,
 Or like a nervous patient tortured by drum's thud.
 He makes himself as fussy as each touting wight;
 But shuts his eyes to flashes of conviction's light.
 He shuts his eyes perversely, with them will not see.
 The saint, on other hand, 's clear-sighted certainly.

The Prophet, when returned home from the funeral,
 Found 'A'isha was waiting, him to welcome all.
 So when her eyes fell on him, just as in he came,
 [125] She him approached, and on him hand placed; gentle dame.
 She touched his turban, cloak and coat, his sleeves and shoes,
 His hair and beard, his face and hands, peering for news.
 He asked her what she sought with so much eager zeal.
 She answered him: "To-day of rain there's fallen a deal.
 I'm lost in wonderment to feel thou art not wet;
 No dampness is there here. I marvel still more yet."
 He asked: "What veil worest thou God's service to fulfil?" [*1]
 She answered: "I a plaid of thine threw o'er my frill."
 He said: "That plaid it was for which the Lord, to thee,
 [130] My lady pure, a shower caused visible to be.
 That shower was not of raindrops .from the clouds that fall;
 A shower of mercy 'twas; its cloud and sky, His call."

["In regions of the soul so many skies are there! [*2]
 They issue their commands to spheres of earth and air.
 The ups and downs in spirit's path form quite a class;
 So many hills to climb; so many seas to pass."]--Sana'i.

[p. 149]

The unseen world has other clouds, and other skies; [*1]
 Its sun is different; its water God supplies.
 Its rain proceeds from other clouds than does our own.
 God's mercy 'tis that forms that rain when it pours down. [135]
 Those rains are never seen, save by the eyes of saints.
 Mere men "by new creation puzzled," [*2] judge them feints.

One rain there is that nourishment brings in its track;
 Another rain also that works a whole world's wreck.
 The rain of spring does wonders in the garden's fold;
 The rain of autumn chills like ague's shivers cold.
 The spring rain nourishes whate'er it falls upon.
 Autumnal showers but bleach and shrivel; all turns wan.
 Thus is it with the cold, the wind, and eke the sun;
 They're means from which such different phases seem to run. [140]
 In things invisible the same rule still holds good;
 Advantage, loss, annoyance, fraud, affliction's flood.
 The words of saints are like the vernal breeze in power;
 They cause sweet flowers to open in man's bosom bower.
 And like the rains of spring on herbage of the field,
 They raise in pious hearts a harvest of rich yield.
 If thou shouldst see a trunk that's blighted, dead, and dry,
 Attribute not this state to quickening air's supply.
 The air still quickens, though dead stumps feel not its power.
 'Tis only what's alive, that freshens by a shower. [145]

The Prophet gave advice: "From breezes cool, in spring, [*3]
 Your bodies cover not; they're invigorating.

[p. 150]

Allow them, then, full play; they'll give your sinews strength.
 See how, with them, the trees are clothed with leaves, at length.
 Beware, however; autumn's chills ye must not court.
 They're fatal to men's lives; the trees they strip, in short."

Traditionists report the Prophet's blessed words;
 But there they have stopped short; they add naught afterwards.
 The whole class, ignorant of application's call,
 [150] The mountain have discerned; its mines they have missed, all.

The autumn chill, with God, is fleshly lust and pride;
 The vernal breeze, the spirit, wisdom, sense to guide.
 Of wisdom, in thy head, a glimmering thou hast;
 Seek then for perfect wisdom; be to it steadfast.
 Thy partial stock from thence completed thou wilt bring.
 On neck of flesh completed wisdom put, as ring. [*1]

Thou seest now, applied, the breeze of spring is he,
 Who, perfect in himself, men perfect helps to be.
 From words of his take care thou close not up thy ear.
 [155] Thy faith they will confirm; religion fruit will bear.
 Reproachful, or in praise, hear all he has to say;
 From thee the fires of hell they'll help to turn away.
 Reproaches, admonitions, life will bring at last
 If faith they but confirm, flesh in subjection cast.
 By admonition is the heart encouraged to good deeds;
 And by reproaches is the soul kept back from evil's meeds.
 Upon the heart of teacher clings dark sorrow's pall,
 If one twig from heart's garden's seen away to fall.

[p. 151]

Good 'A'isha, the gem of honour's casket wide,
 Then asked the Prophet (who's of both the worlds the Pride): [160]
 "O thou who of all creatures every essence art,
 What was the reason rain this day has played its part?
 Was it a rain of mercy, such as sometimes falls;
 Or was it as a menace justice fitly calls?
 Was it a vernal rain, dispensing benefits;
 Or was it an autumnal shower, to dig grave pits?"

He answered: "'Twas a sprinkle, sent to soothe our care,--
 That fruit inherited by all who Adam share.
 Should man remain exposed for long to care's fierce flame,
 'Twould work him wrack and ruin, crush his mortal frame." [165]

The world would go to ruin in a little while;
 Man's greed would get the upper hand, did he not smile.
 The prop of this wide world is heedlessness, my son;
 And thoughtfulness on earth below's a curse, when won.
 For thoughtfulness belongs unto the upper world;
 Triumphant here below, all's soon to ruin hurled.
 This thoughtfulness a sun is; greed's a mass of ice.
 This thoughtfulness is water; greed, the filth of vice.
 So from the upper world scant tricklings are sent down,
 That greed and envy may not ruin every town. [170]
 If those scant tricklings were to prove a copious rill,
 Defects and talents both would cease our soil to till.
 Let's leave these moralisings; they would have no end.
 So go we back to seek the minstrel, our old friend.

That minstrel's talent had been rare; the world he'd charmed.
 At sound of his sweet voice, imagination 'd swarmed.
 Each heart, birdlike, began to flutter in its cage;
 Surprise enchained men's minds when his notes threw the gage.

[p. 152]

But now he was grown old; long years he'd passed on earth.
 [175] Like falcon chasing gnats, he'd little cause for mirth.
 His back was double bent, like belly of wine-jar;
 His brows above his eyes with crupper-straps on par.
 His voice, the former joy of all who might it hear,
 Was now cracked, out of tune, uncouth, none could it bear.
 His tones, that might have made dame Venus mad with rage, [*1]
 Were now like donkey's brayings in his sinking age.

What is there beautiful that goes not to decay?
 Where is the roof that will not ruin be one day?
 Unless it be the words of saint [*2] from God; they'll last
 [180] 'Till echoes of his voice shall sound in judgment blast.
 He is the inner joy that glads our inner man;
 The source from whom our beings rose when time began.
 He is the amber draws the motes of thought and speech;
 He gave the means to measure revelation's reach.

Our minstrel in old age felt poverty's sure pinch.
 No money could he earn; bread, not enough for finch.
 He prayed: "O God, long life and full to me Thou'st given,
 To worthless sinner Thou hast shown foretaste of heaven.
 I've slighted Thy commandments seventy years and more,
 [185] Not one day hast Thou let me pangs of want feel sore.
 No longer can I earn; I'm now Thy household guest;
 I'll harp for love of Thee, Thou giver of my feast."

His harp on shoulder slung, he went, in quest of God,
 To burial-ground of Yathrab; [*3] sat down on the sod.
 Said he: "I'll ask of God the hire of my harpstrings;
 For He accepts the heart's most humble outpourings."

[p. 153]

He harped awhile, and then he laid him down and wept.
 His harp his pillow was; upon a grave he slept.

With sleep his soul was freed from prison and from pain,
 The harp and harper both were now made young again. [190]
 His soul, free, wandered forth, exempt from all dull care,
 In spacious fields of heaven, the soul's park, light as air.
 There he began to warble, merry as a lark:
 "O that I here might dwell without a care to cark
 How joyous I should be in such a paradise;
 These sweet ethereal fields breathe balm, and myrrh, and spice.
 I'd wander all about; no need of feet or wings.
 All sweets I'd feast on; lips and teeth were useless things.
 My mind at rest, from all care free, I'd ever roam.
 The angels I'd not envy in their heavenly home. [195]
 With bandaged eyes I'd survey realms without an end;
 All sorts of flowers I'd gather, yet not soil my hand.
 Like duck in pond, down deep I'd plunge in honey lake. [*1]
 In Job's own fount I'd bathe, in wine .I'd revel make.
 For Job with wine from heaven was cleansed in every pore;
 From head to foot he came forth healed, without a sore."

If these poor rhyming verses covered heaven's vast vault,
 They'd not tell half a tithe, they still would be at fault.
 The sum of heavenly joys I find an endless theme;
 My heart is far too narrow to embrace its scheme. [200]
 The world I would enclose in my poor poem's fold,
 Has lent my thoughts the wings that make their flight so bold.
 Were but that world in sight; its road, were it but known;
 Few souls would here remain, were but its glories shown.

[p. 154]

Commandment has been given: "Thou shalt not covetous be."
 The thorn from out thy foot is drawn; thy thanks let's see.
 "My Lord! My God!" loud cried our minstrel in that place,
 Those glorious realms of mercy, boundless shores of grace.

About that time the Lord on 'Umer slumber sent.
 [205] He could not keep awake; beneath sleep's burden bent.
 With wonder thought he 'twas unprecedented: "See!
 This sleep's divinely ordered; purpose there must be."
 His head he bowed; sleep bound him fast; a dream he saw,
 A voice from God he heard,--for him a sacred law.

God's voice the real source is of every cry and sound;
 The only voice, in fact; all other's echo found.
 Turks, Kurds, and Persians, Arabs, all have understood
 That voice most wonderful, of lip and ear no mood.

What say I? No! Not merely Turks and Persians all,
 [210] The very rocks and trees have answered to that call.
 Each moment's clearly heard: "Am I not, then, your Lord?" [*1]
 Ideas and essences became "things" at His word.
 Had they not answered: "Yes, Thou art our God, O Lord,"
 From out of nothing straight that answer 'd come, in word!

About what's here been said respecting stocks and stones,
 Let's hear what tell tradition's most veracious tones.
 We'll find related there how various rocks and trees,
 Both understood and spoke, as human being sees.

A post in his own house, at Mustafa's retreat,
 [215] Sent forth a sob of grief, like heart in sorrow's heat,

[p. 155]

As he his sermon preached, surrounded by his flock,
 So that the moan was heard by old and young; no mock.
 Disciples one and all were petrified, perplexed,
 And marvelled what might make its wooden heart so vexed.
 The Prophet put the question: "What may be thy need?"
 The column answered: "Prophet, grief my heart makes bleed. [*1]
 Against me, in thy sermon, thou'st been used to lean;
 A pulpit now thou'st mounted; far from me thou'rt seen."
 The Prophet said: "Thou most affectionate of posts!
 Good fortune thee attend, sent by the Lord of Hosts! [220]
 If thou so wish, thou mayst become a fruitful palm;
 And men from east and west sing of thy dates in psalm.
 Or God may thee transplant to realms of paradise;
 Where as a cedar thou eternally mayst rise."
 It answered: "I elect what ne'er will know decay."
 Lend ear, O heedless man! Hast thou less sense than they?
 That post was forthwith buried, like a corpse of clay,
 In hopes of resurrection at the judgment day.
 Thou hence mayst learn that any whom the Lord doth call,
 Breaks straightway with the things of this our earthly ball. [225]
 Whoe'er receives a mission from the Lord his God,
 Forsakes the world, himself prepares the path to plod.

Who's not received the gift of knowledge from above,
 Will ne'er believe a stock could sigh and moan for love.
 He may pretend to acquiesce; not from belief;
 He says: "'Tis so," to 'scape a name much worse than thief.

[p. 156]

All they who're not convinced that God's "Be" is enough,
 Will turn away their face; this tale they'll treat as "stuff"

By thousands are confessing Muslims, men of mark,
 [230] By doubt most sadly haunted; faith they've not, one spark.
 Conformity with them is founded on surmise,
 And all their heart and conscience quieted with lies.
 'Tis Satan sows the seed of doubting in their breast,
 Like blind men they will fall into the pit at last.

Mere reasoners are cripples, propped on wooden leg;
 And, like such cripple, often falling as they beg.
 How different's a pillar of our holy creed!
 As mountain he is steadfast; faith his living meed.
 A blind man's leg's his staff; upon it he must lean,
 [235] Or he will risk to fall at full length on the green.
 A knight is he who sole has routed hosts of foes;
 Wise leader then becomes of liegemen's ranks through woes.
 Those blind men find their way by trusting to a staff.
 They lean upon a creature; their sight is in a gaff.
 For, otherwise, they'd be far-seeing; they'd be kings;
 As 'tis, they're blind, they're corpses,--lifeless, senseless things.
 The blind can never sow, and surely never reap;
 They cannot edify; their talent they must keep.
 If 'twere not for God's mercy, favour, and free grace,
 [240] Their staff of reason 'd snap; they 'd fall prone on their face.

That staff's a weapon made for quarrelling and fight;
 Then break it up in pieces, man of feeble sight!
 That staff was given thee, to help thee on thy way;
 With it men's faces strikest thou, angry, ev'ry day.

What's this you're doing, blind ones? What are you about?
 Some constables call in, to calm this frightful rout.

[p. 157]

Fall down, and Him entreat, who furnished you with staff.
 Look well, and see what signs your weapon may engraff.

Consider Moses' miracle; reflect on Ahmed's too.
 One's staff became a serpent; one's post chose what is true. [245]
 From that staff came a serpent; from this post, loud moan.
 Five times a day for praise we hear the crier's tone.
 This trouble otherwise had been a senseless suit;
 So many miracles, so very little fruit.

What's reas'nable the mind can easily allow,
 No need's there then for miracle, for tide to ebb and flow.
 The plan of miracles unreasonable count;
 But know it is accepted; faith it does not daunt.

Just like as demons, and as wild beasts, out of dread
 Of man, fled to the wilds, when envy reared its head, [250]
 So, out of dread of miracles by prophets wrought,
 Do cavillers take refuge in sophisms of thought.
 In name, they're Muslims; and, by virtue of their wiles,
 We can't know what they are; their faces are all smiles.
 Precisely as false-coiners on their metal base
 A coat of silver put, the sovereign's name then trace,
 In word, God's unity confessed, and holy law,
 Their hearts are like the poison-grain in sweet kickshaw.
 Not Venus will convince a sophist in debate;
 But true religion speaks, confutes his postulate. [255]
 His body's like a stock, his spirit's but a stone.
 Howe'er he contradict, them God directs alone.
 In words, mayhap, he may detect a hitch or two;
 But his own soul and body witness God is true.

Some stones were held in hand by Abu-Jahl one day. [*1]
 Said he to Muhammed: "What hold I here? Now say.

[p. 158]

Since thou'rt a prophet, tell: What hold I in my hand?
 The secrets of high heaven thou claimest to command."

Said Muhammed: "How can'st suppose I should not tell?
 [260] The things themselves shall speak. I'm truthful; they know well."
 Said Abu-Jahl: "This last pretension's harder still."
 To him replied the Prophet: "They'll obey God's will.'

From out of his closed hand a chorus now burst forth;
 Confession of God's unity; His Prophet's worth:
 "There is no god but God," the stones distinctly sang;
 "Muhammed is God's prophet," also clearly rang.

When Abu-Jahl this heard, he cast the stones away,
 In anger from his hand, as then he dared to say:
 Most surely no magician ever was like thee.
 [265] Magicians' chief art thou; crown on their heads thou'lt be."

May dust alight upon his head, blind miscreant!
 'Twas Satan closed his inward sight;--cursed recusant.

Now turn we once again to hear the minstrel's tale,
 For all this time he's waiting; anxious, wan, and pale.
 The heavenly voice the Caliph called: "Ho! 'Umer! Ho!
 Our servant's want relieve; set thou him free from woe.
 A servant whom we hold in very high esteem,
 In public burial-ground, go, visit; him redeem.
 From out the public treasury do thou extract
 [270] Seven hundred golden sequins, with due care and tact.
 To him deliver them; and say: 'O man of good,
 For present needs let this suffice; 'twill give thee food.
 Thy harpstrings' hire it is. Go hence; and when 'tis done,
 Do thou again come hither; look for me alone.'"

At sound of that dread voice did 'Umer now awake,
 And straight himself disposed that task to undertake.

[p. 159]

Towards the burial-ground he turned his steps amain,
 The money in his breast, to seek the stranger, fain.
 He walked about the ground, right, left, and everywhere.
 No second soul was seen; the minstrel only there. [275]

Thought he: "This cannot be my quest." So, off again
 He wandered; still no other offered; this was plain.
 He said within himself: "The Lord of servant spake,
 Devout, approved, accepted, loved for God's own sake.
 An ancient minstrel this. Of God can he be loved?
 Some mystery is here. Hail, riddle, by God moved!
 Once more he wandered o'er the spacious burial-ground,
 As lion seeking for his prey goes round and round.
 Convinced at length no other was there choice to make,
 He thought: "When I'm in doubt, light from above I take." [280]
 Respectfully he then approached the sleeping guest.
 A sneezing seized him. Straight the harper woke from rest.

When  degreestimer he espied, he marvelled, sore amazed;
 And rose to go away. Fear's tremor held him dazed.
 He thought: "O Lord, have mercy Thou on me!
 This magistrate austere no harper 'll kindly see."

Now 'Umer him considered; saw he was afraid;
 His cheeks all pale and wan; looks, modest as a maid;
 Then said: "Fear not! From me seek not to go away;
 Good tidings from on high to thee I bring this day. [285]
 Of thee the Lord hath spoken in terms of highest praise.
 The heart of 'Umer's moved to love thee and thy lays.
 Be seated, then, by me, as friend by side of friend;
 While I to thee impart the message God doth send.
 The Lord doth thee salute; thy welfare doth inquire;
 Trusts thou'st supported well all thy afflictions dire.
 This trifle sends for present needs, as harpstrings' worth.
 When it is spent, come here again, and fear not dearth."

[p. 160]

The old man trembled as he heard those words so kind;
 [290] His finger in astonishment he bit;--near lost his mind.
 Then cried aloud: "O God! Thou all-unequalled One!
 In my old age I sink for shame; this mercy I've not won."

A torrent, now, of tears, he shed, in anguish deep;
 His harp then dashed to pieces. Why it longer keep?
 He thus apostrophised it: "O thou source of ill!
 Thou'st barred me from heaven's path, as highwaymen who kill.
 My blood thou'st sucked these seventy years, thou thing of shame!
 Through thee I'm rendered vile in eyes of men of fame.
 O Lord, Most Merciful! Thou giver of all good!
 [295] My past life pardon, squandered ill, in heedless mood!"

Man's life's a gift of God. Alas! How few will think!
 The value of each moment's great, so near death's brink.
 I've spent my life, not thinking how the moments fly.
 I've sung and harped as though a man should never die.
 Alas! that I in singing songs of mirth and glee,
 Entirely had forgot that death would visit me.
 Alas! that shrillest notes have set my ears in flames,
 And scorched my heart to shamelessness! Sad names!
 Alas! the gamut's intervals were heard all night.
 [300] The day has dawned; the caravan passed with the light.
 My God! Help, help! Me save front him who cries for help!
 Protection I implore from self;--I, who thus yelp!
 I never shall obtain my right, except through craft.
 For craft is german more to me than self ingraft.
 By craft this self itself doth rear across my way.
 Beyond my craft myself I see, when craft's at bay.
 Just like as when a man is telling gold with thee.
 Alone it thou considerest,--self thou dost not see.

[p. 161]

So did the harper weep, and loudly did complain.
 His sins he numbered up, committed in life's train. [305]

To him then 'Umer: "This contrition deep of thine
 Is proof thou sober art, though grief thy heart entwine.
 Thy worldly journey's over, other path now take;
 For this sobriety's a sin thou must forsake.
 Sobriety's a virtue in the road thou'st trod.
 The past and future both are curtains hiding God.
 Set fire to both of them! How long wilt thou remain
 Partitioned up by diaphragms like a reed cane?
 So long as reed has diaphragms, it's not our friend;
 With lips and voice of ours its notes it cannot blend. [310]
 So long as thou goest round the house, thou waverer art; [*1]
 But when thou'st entered, then full ease reigns in thy heart.
 O thou, whose knowledge of full knowledge is not half,
 Contrition is, with thee, worse than thy fault, mooncalf.
 Thou'rt contrite for the past. On what occasion
 Wilt thou contrition feel for this contrition?
 At one time worshipper thou wert of notes of harp;
 And now, like lover, thou 'dst kiss sighs and moans so sharp."

Like mirror, 'Umer having thus reflected truth,
 The harper's heart received enlightenment, forsooth. [315]
 He, spirit-like, became relieved of moan and smile.
 His old mind took its leave, his new heart was docile.
 Amazement fell upon him, stupor bathed each sense,
 Ecstatic trance then followed, earth and sky flew hence.
 A yearning and a longing past description.
 As I cannot explain; try thy perception.
 Such ecstasy, such words, beyond all mood and tense;
 Immersion total in God's glorious effulgence.

[p. 162]

Immersion such, escape therefrom impossible;
 [320] That sea henceforth to him became impassable.

Our partial wisdom's not part of omniscience,
 Until God's promptings come its promptings to enhance.
 But when our souls are made those impulses to feel,
 That sea in waves straight rises, under which we reel.

The story of the harper and his state now ends;
 Both harper and that state have grown to be our friends.
 The harper sealed his mouth from any further song.
 We, too, will leave his tale half told; it is too long.

In order to attain to his high state of bliss,
 [325] Had one a hundred lives, they might be staked for this.
 Be thou, then, like a falcon, ever on the wing,
 To catch that gnat, thy soul; sunlike, for ever sing.
 He casts himself, for love, from highest heaven's height;
 If flagons empty, he with wine fills them, so bright.

O spiritual Sun, transfuse Thou life to all.
 A new life give, O God, to this our earthly ball.
 Into the frames of men both life and soul infuse
 From out Thy hidden world, as water dost diffuse.

The Prophet has informed us that, for warning's sake,
 [330] Two angels evermore sweet invocation make:
 "O God, dispensers bless! Do Thou them feed and tend!
 Give them ten thousandfold for every mite they spend!
 But hoarders, O our Lord God, in this lower scene,
 Do Thou afflict with loss,--no profit intervene!"

How many hoardings better than dispensings are!
 Save in God's service, wealth of God spend not. Take care!
 So mayst thou get in recompense a hundredfold.
 So mayst thou 'scape the punishment of sins untold.

[p. 163]

Men offered up their camels as a sacrifice;
 In hopes their swords 'gainst Mustafa would do service. [335]
 Seek thou the will of God from him who has it learnt;
 Not into every soul has God's will been inburnt.
 The Prophet's words forewarned those sons of heedlessness,
 That all such offerings are a heap of worthlessness.
 In war with God's apostle, chiefs of Mekka all
 Such sacrifices offered, ghostly aid to call.

Just like the unjust steward, who, as justice due,
 The treasure of his lord bestowed on rebel crew.
 He falsely pictured to himself he'd justice wrought,
 With public money spent, the poor to terms he'd brought. [340]
 Such justice from such culprit, what could it effect?
 His lord, to anger moved, excuses did reject.

Hence is it, every Muslim, fearing he may stray,
 In his devotions begs: "Lead Thou us in right way." [*1]
 Their substance to dispense suits men of generous mood.
 A lover's ready gift's his life for his love's good.
 Dispense thou food for God's sake; food thou'lt surely have.
 Lay down thy life for love of God; thy life thou'lt save.

We see the trees here shed their leaves at God's command.
 Without their toil or trouble, other leaves He'll send. [345]
 Shouldst thou, dispensing much, one day be found in want,
 The Lord will not forsake thee; His supply's not scant.
 Whoever sows, must empty storehouses of grain;
 His fields will yield him richly tenfold heaps of gain.
 But he who's left his corn in garners, to be used,
 Mules, horses, mice, and accidents have it reduced.

This world's a negative; the positive seek thou.
 All outward forms are cyphers; search, the sense to know.

[p. 164]

Lay down thy wretched life before th' uplifted sword;
 [350] New life thou'lt purchase, never-ending, of the Lord.
 But if thou do not know, well, how to quit this scene,
 To me, then, lend thy ear; this tale for thee I mean.

In days of old there was a Caliph, as is said,
 Whose generosity Hatim Tayi 'd dismayed. [*1]
 His fame for liberality went through the land;
 All poverty, all want, relieved was at his hand.
 The very sea went dry through his dispensing zest;
 And rumours of his benefits spread east and west.
 A fruitful cloud of rain was he to this our race;
 [355] In turn, the object he of God's surpassing grace.
 So large his gifts, that seas and mines were out of date.
 Still fame brought caravans of suitors to his gate,
 His courts and halls the temples of the indigent.
 The noise had gone abroad how largely he had spent.
 The Persian, Roman, Turk, and Arab, all were there,
 And all admired his liberalities so rare.
 A Fount of Life was he, a very sea of gift.
 [359] All nations profited,--in praise their voice did lift.

Footnotes

^m139:1 Israfil is the angel who will blow the last trump, twice. At the first, all living will die; at the second, all the dead will rise to be judged. His voice is the most musical among all those of the angels.

^m140:1 Our word "fairy" is connected with the Persian "peri," used here by the poet instead of the Arabic "jinn," whence our "genie."

^m140:2 Qur'an lv. 33.

^m140:3 That is, it would appear: Individuals created out of nothing.

^m141:1 That is: The Lord is with him who strives on the Lord's side.

^m141:2 A dried gourd, a calabash, is commonly used as a wine-decanter.

^m141:3 An apostolic tradition.

^m142:1 Also an apostolic tradition.

^m142:2 Another apostolic tradition.

^m142:3 The traditionary saying of Mohammed, of which this section is an amplification, is the following:--"Verily your Lord hath, in your time, sundry breathings; lo, then, turn ye towards them."

^m143:1 Qur'an xxxiii. 72. When all things had declined responsibility, Adam voluntarily accepted it; was tempted; and fell. Had they not shrunk, man would not have been the sinner or the saint that he is.

^m143:2 Luqman's story may be read in D'Herbelot, voce "Locman."

^m144:1 Arabian poets sing of women; often imaginary. In Persia, this is considered very immodest. In Persian poetry, a boy, imaginary also, is always assumed to be the beloved object. Muhammed so addressed his youthful wife, 'A'isha. Humayra means Rosina,--little rosy-cheeks. See also No. 9, distich 184.

^m144:2 A horse-shoe, as a charm, with an absent one's name on it, placed in the fire, is supposed to exercise a magical influence over him, and make him come there in all speed, even though his feet bleed from his haste.

^m144:3 That "Soul" is God, the "animus mundi."

^m145:1 Through humility.

^m145:2 The "call" of God is the call to divine service, the 'Adhan (ezan).

^m145:3 Bilal, a negro, was the first caller to divine service. He was an early convert, a slave, then 'Abu-Bekr's freedman; then Mu'edhdhin.

^m145:4 Mustafa, Chosen, Elect, is one of Muhammed's titles.

^m145:5 The night of his marriage with Safiyya, after the capture of Khaybar, in the seventh year of the Hijra, as he was returning to Medina. That night has a special name, based on this circumstance: the night of the early morning halt (laylatu 't-ta'ris).

^m146:1 An explanation of this wild expression were much to be desired. Doubtless there is one.

^m146:2 There are seven different Persian games of backgammon. The second of the seven, the one mentioned by the poet, is called "Plus" (Ziyad). At each throw of the dice, one is added, arbitrarily, to each number shown on the two, ace becoming deuce, &c. The poet likens the body to this supposititious number, the soul alone being real.

^m148:1 In performing her devotions, a Muslimess has to veil herself, even at home, as though she were abroad in public.

^m148:2 These four lines are quoted from Sana'i, for comment.

^m149:1 This section and the next two form a comment on Sana'i.

^m149:2 Qur'an l. 14. The "new creation" is the resurrection.

^m149:3 The tradition, in prose, is as follows, quoted by the poet: "Take ye advantage of the coolness of spring; it invigorates your bodies, as it acts on plants. Avoid ye also the cold of autumn; it acts on your frames as it acts on vegetation."

^m150:1 Prisoners and fugitive slaves have iron rings or a kind of wooden pillory fastened round their necks to prevent flight or insubordination.

^m152:1 Venus, the musician, who inhabits the planet. See Tale iii., dist. 223.

^m152:2 Muhammed.

^m152:3 The original name of Medina,--Jatrippa.

^m153:1 Qur'an xlvii. 17.

^m154:1 Qur'an vii. 171.

^m155:1 Tradition relates that at first, Muhammed used to pronounce his sermon seated on the floor in the midst of his congregation, with his back against a certain wooden pillar. The congregation increasing, he was obliged to adopt the use of a raised platform, a kind of pulpit, so as to be seen and heard of all. The deserted pillar is the one spoken of.

^m157:1 This is a traditionary legend.

^m161:1 The circumambulation of the "House of God" at Mekka, is one of the ceremonies of a pilgrimage, &c.

^m163:1 Qur'an i. 5.

^m164:1 Hatim Tayi is the proverbial prince of Arabian generosity. Many anecdotes are current respecting him. His full name was Hatim, son of 'Abdu-'llah, son of Sa'd, of the tribe of Tayyi'. For instances of his generosity, as handed down by tradition from a time shortly prior to the promulgation of Islam, see Mr. Clouston's "Arabian Poetry for English Readers," p. 406; London, 1881; Trubner & Co., Ludgate Hill. But Hatim lived and died before the Caliphs ruled. He, too, was a poet.

     
The Mesnavi and The Acts of the Adepts, by Jelal-'d-din Rumi and Shemsu-'d-Din Ahmed, tr. by James W. Redhouse, [1881], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 165]

  

IX.

AN Arab woman once thus to her husband spake,
 Insisting strongly he'd of these words notice take:
 "How very poor we are! What hardships have we borne!
 The whole world lives in pleasures; we're the butt of scorn!
 We have no bread; for condiment we've grief and cares.
 Jug, pitcher we possess not; drink we naught but tears.
 By day, our only raiment's scorching solar heat;
 Our bedclothes in the night, the moon's rays pale and sweet.
 The disk of Luna we may well imagine bread.
 Our hands we lift to heaven; keen hunger's pangs we dread. [5]
 E'en mendicants feel shame at our dire poverty.
 Our days are dark as night, through drear adversity.
 Our kindred, as all strangers, sight of us now shun.
 Just like the wandering Jew, for fear we should them dun. [*1]
 When I would borrow half a handful of lentils,
 The neighbours wish me dead; their wrath on me distils.
 Amongst us Arabs pride is felt in war and gifts,
 Among those very Arabs thou'rt devoid of shifts.
 What need of war have we? We're wounded; we are slain;
 The dart of want has pierced us through and through with pain. [10]

[p. 166]

What need of faults, O sinless one? We're in hell-fire!
 What solace have we? Overwhelmed with deep desire!
 What gifts have we to give? We silent beggars sit!
 Could we but seize a gnat, its throat we'd straightway slit!
 If guest should come to us, as sure as I'm alive,
 When he was sunk in sleep, to strip him we would strive."
 Such grumblings, and as follows, going on all day,
 She made her husband wish her fifty miles away
 "Unbroken destitution's brought us both to straits.
 [15] My heart burns for our sorrows; hope's gleam ne'er awaits.
 How long are we to suffer torture such as this?
 With hunger's agony, like coals of fire we hiss.
 Should any stranger guest come unexpectedly,
 What shame we'd feel him to receive dejectedly.
 If any visitor should pass our way this eve,
 Unless we eat his sandals, what food can we give?"

"Hence 'tis the wise have said in proverb, rendered free
 'A guest should never go where he'll not welcome be.'
 Who'd wish to be the guest confiding of a man,
 [20] Who'll strip thee to the skin, bare, gladly, if he can?
 Unhappy in himself, can he thee happy make?
 He can impart no light; deep gloom's his only stake.
 Not feeling gladsome in himself, with others met,
 He cannot yield to them what he has not as yet.
 Suppose a man ophthalmic start as oculist;
 Of granite-dust alone will his eye-salves consist.
 So 'tis with all in times of misery and need;
 Let no one, then, come blindly to our house to feed."

Hast never seen reality of famine near?
 [25] Look well at us; thou'lt see effects of food too dear.
 Our outward look is black, like dark pretender's heart.
 This lacks enlightenment, though his exterior's smart.

[p. 167]

He has no hope of God, nor any good to show,
 Though more than Seth or Adam he pretend to know.
 Ev'n Satan unto him no trace of self has shown,
 And yet he claims to be a Vicar of God's own. [*1]
 Some Gnostic terms he uses as a plagiarist,
 That he may lead the people as though secretist.
 A critic, 'sooth, is he; complains of Bayezid; [*2]
 Whereas Yezid himself would blush at his bald creed. [*3] [30]
 Of heavenly bread and table, nothing has he known;
 The barest bone to him, vile dog, God has not thrown.
 He pompously proclaims: "My table have I spread;
 Vicegerent's son, God's Vicar, here am I indeed!
 Then welcome, all ye simpletons! Come in; Come in!
 From table of my bounty fill yourselves within."
 For years he dupes them with "To-morrow's" promise still.
 The arrant arch-deceiver, whose "To-morrow's" nil.

A long time is required to sound a human mind,
 To find out what defects may lurk the mask behind. [35]
 A buried treasure is there under body's wall?
 Or is it hole of serpent, toad, or scorpion, all?
 At length when 'tis discovered, impostor is he,
 His pupil's life is wasted; what use then to see?

But on some rare occasion, pupil of great parts
 Will come to the impostor, profit by his arts.
 He comes with good intention to the lecture-hall,
 Expects a guiding soul; he finds a carcase; all.
 As when, in dead of night, one does not know the east, [*4]
 To offer one's devotion's licit, turning west. [40]

[p. 168]

Pretenders carry famine in their heart of hearts.
 We suffer only want of bread for our repasts.
 Why, then, pretender-like, should we our want disguise?
 Why, for appearance' sake, our soul, too, bastardise?

The woman's husband answered: "Pray now, silence keep!
 Our life is most part o'er. What's left us but to weep?"

"The wise man cares not for a little more or less.
 These both will pass away, like torrent's waywardness.
 A torrent may be clear, or muddy, black as ink.
 [45] It will not last. Why then should we about it think?"

"Within this world what millions, living creatures all,
 A life of joy still lead, quite free from let or fall.
 A dove is always cooing praises to the Lord,
 Upon a tree, so long as day may light afford.
 A nightingale sings hymns, God's name to bless alway.
 For unto Thee he trusts, Who hearest us when we pray.
 A falcon, when he sits upon a royal fist,
 No longer stoops to carrion, wherewith to subsist.
 And so from gnat to elephant like state we find,
 [50] They all depend on God, the best of feeders' kind."

"All those anxieties that fall on us like darts,
 Are but the vapours, tempests, of our human hearts.
 Those cares are like a sickle, made to cut us down.
 This is a fact, though we are slow the truth to own.
 Our ev'ry suffering, here, a portion is of death.
 This part of death, then, drive away whilst thou hast breath.
 If from this part of death thou findst thou canst not run;
 Thou'rt sure whole death will follow, as the light the sun.
 If thou canst learn to think this part of death is sweet,
 [55] Thou knowest that God will make its whole thy tastes to meet.

[p. 169]

Our troubles are the heralds of our death to come.
 Turn not thy face away from herald, as do some."
 "Whoever leads a joyous life finds death severe.
 And he who's slave to body, mars his soul's career.
 When sheep come home from pasture in the meadows green,
 The fattest ones are slaughtered, soon as they are seen.
 The night is spent, the morn is come, my bosom friend,
 When wilt thou bring thy grumbling gossip to an end?
 Once thou wert young, and more content a hundred-fold;
 Then covetous becamest, though thyself art gold. [60]
 A fruitful vine thou wert; a blight's come over thee;
 Thy fruit will never ripe, 'twill shrivel on the tree.
 Sweet fruit, with flavour, give, thy inward worth to prove.
 Thou backwards shouldst not walk, as ropemakers all move.
 Thou art my helpmate fond; and fellow-workers all,
 Of one mind still should be, or their joint work must fall.
 A pair should ever be conformable in aim.
 A pair of shoes examine; pair of boots, the same.
 If one boot of a pair be too small for the foot,
 The pair is useless; vain, the other's size to moot. [65]
 One boot is small; the other, 'haps, too large is found.
 Hast ever known a lion consort with a hound?
 Two packs upon a camel equipoise require;
 The one must not be half, the other bale entire.
 I choose the road that leads straight to contentment's door,
 Why takest thou the path to sin and misery's floor?"
 The woman's husband, suffering, but resigned still,
 Thus spake unto his wife, to calm her restive will.

The woman raised a shout: "O man of simple mind!
 I will no longer listen to thy words, though kind. [70]
 Talk not to me of claims, pretensions, and such stuff.
 I care not one pin's point for pride and flimsy fluff.

[p. 170]

Why preach so loud of sentiment and honour's call?
 Just look at our condition. Shame upon thee fall!
 Pride certainly is wrong; much worse in beggars' camp.
 The day is cold and snowy; all our clothing's damp.
 What nonsense and frivolity thy weak pate doles!
 And all the while thy tent, like cobweb, 's full of holes.
 Where didst thou learn contentment's rule to make thy pride?
 [75] Has thy contentment taught thee shame from men to hide?
 The Prophet has declared: 'Content a treasure is.'
 But what knowest thou of treasure? Suffering's all thy bliss.
 Contentment's but a water-reservoir that leaks.
 Do hold thy tongue, thou plague; and cease these foolish freaks.
 Thou namest me thy helpmate; lower, pray, thy tone.
 I'm fellow unto justice; mate to knavery, none.
 Since thou equality with lords and princes claimest,
 Why suck the blood of locusts that by chance thou maimest?
 Thou fightest for a bone with dogs in this debate.
 [80] How shall I not complain, with hunger at our gate?
 Don't look at me contemptuously, and all askance.
 Lest I tell all my mind, thy baseness to enhance.
 Thou holdest thyself much wiser than poor soul like me.
 Hast ever found me wanting sense to make thee see?
 Think not to fall upon me, wolf-like, unawares,
 O thou at whose great wisdom woman's folly stares!
 The wisdom thou so holdest superior to all,
 Not wisdom is; but serpent's, scorpion's, deadly gall.
 A foe may God prove ever to thy drivelling guile!
 [85] So mayst thou turn out weaker than weak woman's wile!
 Thou art both snake and snake-catcher, in one combined.
 A serpent-charming serpent! Arab's pride enshrined!

[p. 171]

Did crows but realise their ugliness supreme,
 As white as snow they'd change, through rage and arrant shame.
 A charmer sings a charm against a snake, his foe;
 The snake charms him in turn; hence follows boundless woe.
 Were not his trap a charm prepared by the snake,
 Would he become the victim of some small mistake?
 The charmer first is caught in toils of greed and lust.
 And sees not 'tis the snake has charmed him, bound him fast. [90]
 The snake addresses him: 'O charmer! See now! Look!
 Thy own work thou perceivest, my wiles hast mistook.
 Thou charmest in God's name to make me thy bond-slave,
 And lead me captive, make me sport for fool and knave.
 The name of God it is that holds me fast enchained;
 That name thou usest as my trap. Art not soft-brained?
 That name will one day vengeance on thee for me take.
 In fear of that dread name, I, soul and body, quake.
 He'll either take thy life with poison-fang of mine;
 Or, like me, unto prison He will thee consign!'" [95]
 Thus spake the woman bitterly unto her spouse,
 Whole volumes would not hold the words that she let loose.

He answered her: "My wife! Art woman? Art thou mad?
 'My poverty's my pride.' [*1] Reproach me not when sad.
 Possessions, wealth, are but a cap the scalp to hide.
 The scaldheads or baldpates alone in caps confide.
 Whoever's hair has grown in curls or tresses full.
 Is always proud when he his cap away can pull.
 A man of God resembles precious sense of sight.
 Our eyes should not be bandaged, or we can't see right. [100]

[p. 172]

The dealer who exposes slaves free from defects,
 Strips off the useless cloak that hides all ill effects.
 Were they not sound, would he the sheltering mantle strip?
 Nay! Contrary! With clothing he'd their vices clip,
 And say as an excuse: 'He's timid; she's shamefaced,
 And shrinks from being here bare of vestments placed.'"

"A man of wealth may full of sundry vices be.
 His riches are his mantle; none his failings see.
 Men all are covetous; their greed 'tis blinds them all,
 [105] One touch of fellow-feeling binds them as one ball.
 But should a poor man say what's precious more than gold
 His saying is not heeded by the world so cold."
 "The functions of a dervish far transcend thy ken.
 The aim of mendicancy's folly to most men.
 True dervishes retire away from wealth and power.
 Their bread the Lord, majestic, furnishes each hour.
 Our God is just. When had it happened that the just
 Have acted with injustice towards the poor who trust?
 To one, all blessings God gives, favours, luxuries;
 [110] Another one, at will, with coals of fire He tries.
 Who doubts that God thus acts with uncontrolled will,
 His portion be the fire of tribulation still."

"'My poverty's my pride' is not an empty word,
 Therein are hid a thousand blessings well assured.
 In anger, imprecations thou hast cast on me.
 I am a humble suitor; snake-catcher thou'dst see.
 If e'er a snake I catch, I still extract its fangs,
 That harm may never follow, when its head one bangs.
 Those fangs are enemies to every serpent's life,
 [115] When I extract them, then, I make him free from strife."

"I never will submit to spell of lust and greed.
 For cov'tousness I've conquered. Its maw I'll not feed.

[p. 173]

Thank God that greed is not among my sins, at least.
 Contentment fills my heart;--a true, perpetual feast.
 Thou lookest at the crown of pear-tree full of fruit,
 Come down from that idea; no good will it boot.
 In raising up thyself, thou giddy hast become;
 'Tis not the house that reels; thy brain's grown troublesome."

"Once Abu-Jahl saw Ahmed; spitefully he said:
 Thou ugly portraiture from Banu-Hashim bred!' [120]
 Said Ahmed: 'True thou'st spoken, most veracious man;
 Thy words are worthy credit, let who cavil can!'
 Then Abu-Bekr saw him, said he was a sun
 Of perfect beauty; east, west, everywhere he'd run.
 To him, too, Ahmed answered: 'Thou hast spoken true,
 O upright man, set free from all the nine spheres' clew.'
 The company assembled marvelled at these words,
 And asked: 'How can two contraries be what accords?'
 Said Ahmed then: 'A mirror am I, polished bright.
 Both Turk and Hindu see in me reflection's light.'" [125]

"O wife! If ever thou hast thought me covetous,
 Come forth from such idea,--too preposterous.
 That which thou takest for greed is heaven's mercy, sure.
 And how can greed and mercy both at once allure?
 Make trial of true poverty, but for one day, or two.
 Thou'lt find therein true riches, with contentment, too.
 Be patient with our poverty, and banish grief;
 For poverty's a crown bestowed by our great Chief.
 Put off sour looks and see, how many thousand souls,
 Through sweet contentment are as happy as the fowls. [130]
 See other thousands, also, drinking dregs of grief:
 It permeates their being, as sugar scents roseleaf."

"Alas! Thou wast a treasure valued by my heart!
 I loved to pour my soul forth in thy ears apart!

[p. 174]

A kind of milk is speech; its teat the soul,--or gland.
 To make it freely flow requires a loving hand.
 If but the hearer listen, hang upon his lips,
 The speaker, though a corpse, grows eloquent, ne'er trips.
 Attentive audiences still confer the powers,
 [135] To stutterers and stammerers, to speak for hours.
 If strangers should break in upon my privacy,
 My womenkind retire, from mere delicacy.
 But if my visitor be confidant and kin,
 They come forth freely, play about with gladsome din.
 Whatever best they know, of work, or play, or jest,
 They do and say, for show, before a welcome guest.
 What use of sound of harp, of bass or treble notes,
 For deaf or senseless ear, that on no music dotes?"

"Our God has made the earth, the sky, and all between;
 [140] His light, and eke His fire, upon that stage is seen.
 The Lord without a purpose gave not musk its scent.
 For odour 'twas, not for diseased nostrils, meant.
 The earth He stretched forth, and fixed as man's abode.
 The heavens He upreared to be by angels rode.
 Th' inferior creature, man, 's at strife with all on high;
 He bids for every place he sees, for all he'll sigh."

"Dear wife! Chaste, modest matron! Art thou well prepared
 Into the tomb to sink, ere thy doomed hour's declared?
 Were I to fill the earth with pearls of countless price,
 [145] Thy daily bread thee failing, could they thee entice?
 Then cease from all contention, strive not 'gainst the Lord,
 Or separation from thee will be my last word.
 What taste have I for strife, contention, or annoy,
 When even in peacemakings I've no longer joy?
 Be quiet! Hold thy peace! Or, by the Lord of life,
 I'll quit this tent for ever; thou'lt not be my wife!

[p. 175]

Much better to walk barefoot than with shoe too small!
 The toil of travel's sweeter than strife in one's wall!"

She knew, thence, he was angered;--will had of his own;
 She burst in tears. Was ever woman tearless known? [150]
 Quoth she: "I'd never thought from thee such words to hear;
 Far different had I hoped; knew not I'd aught to fear."
 She made herself most servile, thing of small amount;
 Remarked: "Thy humble servant am I; so me count.
 My soul and body, all I have, 's at thy command;
 Sole arbiter art thou; dispose; I'll not withstand,
 If I of poverty impatiently complained,
 Not for myself, for thee, was our sad lot disdained.
 In all afflictions thou our remedy hast been;
 I grieve to see thee want; my anguish thence grows keen. [155]
 Dear, darling spouse 1 For thee was all my deep dismay;
 My sighs and moans for thee came into bitter play.
 I call my God to witness, in my heart and mind,
 I'm ready life to lay down, if thou'rt so inclined.
 O that thy heart, the life with which my soul's endued,--
 Could trace aright the channel by my thoughts pursued!
 If merely through suspicion thou art vexed with me,
 My life I value not; breath,--body's naught! Just see.
 I scorn all gold and silver, count them less than dirt,
 If they to thee bring anguish. No! I'm no such flirt. [160]
 Thine is the only picture painted on my heart;
 And canst thou talk of leaving me, from home depart?
 Discard me, if thou wilt. Thou hast the right and power,
 O thou for whose divorce excuse I make each hour!
 Recall to mind the time when I thy idol was,
 And thou, priest-like, didst worship me! Alas! Alas!
 My heart I cultivated just as thou desiredst.
 Thou thoughtest 'twas fond. I knew thou it with love inspiredst.

[p. 176]

Like potherbs o'er the fire, thou addedst what thou wouldst,
 [165] Sharp vinegar, or honey. What thou wishedst, thou couldst.
 If blasphemy I've uttered, lo, I faith profess!
 My life is in thy hands; but, be not pitiless!
 I wot not thou wouldst prove imperious, like a king;
 So, like an ass turned loose, before thee took my fling.
 Thy pardon now I crave. Let me know joy again!
 Contention I forswear, repentance I maintain.
 With sword and winding-sheet I fall at my lord's feet;
 Should he decapitate me, death to me'll be sweet.
 Thou'st talked of separation;--bitter, worse than gall;
 [170] Do what thou will with me, that hideous word recall.
 In thee, for me, a pleader ever will be found;
 If I be mute, thou'lt still hear intercession's sound.
 My potent advocate is, in thyself, thy heart;
 Relying upon that, I dared to sin, with art.
 Have mercy slily,--see thy grace thyself not, Lord!
 To me far sweeter than a honeycomb full stored!"

Thus pleaded she; in coaxing, wheedling terms, with skill.
 Her tears rolled down in streams, fast coursing at her will.
 Her weeping and her sighs were past endurance felt,
 [175] Whose features, tearless, e'en his heart of steel could melt.
 That shower precursor was of lightning's vivid gleam,
 Whose flash' lit in his breast a fire, with pity's beam.
 She, of whose beauty was a slave her husband still,
 A double spell exerted through entreaty's thrill.

One, whose least coolness sets man's heart in flames,
 By turning supplicant a twofold witchery claims.
 If he, whose pride at times pain causes to thy mind,
 To supplication stoop, thou'lt small resistance find.

[p. 177]

He, whose fierce tyranny our bleeding hearts most grieves,
 By tendering excuses, us excuseless leaves. [180]
 "Is goodly made to man" [*1] 's a text from God's own word;
 As truth made manifest, is by man ever heard.
 God, too, therein decreed: "that he with her may dwell;" [*2]
 Whence Adam's love for Eve survived lost Eden's dell.
 A hero man may be, a Hercules to grieve,
 But slave to woman's will is he, without reprieve.
 He, to whose words the universe has all bowed down, [*3]
 Was he who sang: "Humayra, speak to me!" Life's crown! [*4]

Of fire and water, fire is quelled through water's wet;
 Still, water boils through fire, when in a cauldron set. [185]
 The cauldron, like a veil, those lovers keeps apart;
 And water's influence no longer cools fire's heart.
 To outward show, as water, thou mayst rule thy wife;
 In stern reality, thou cleavest to her,--thy life.
 This attribute, humanity must own its force:
 "Man quails to sensual love," which springs from failing's source.
 The Prophet hath declared that woman, over sage,
 Despotic power e'er wields, and over men of age;
 That fools the upper-hand o'er women still maintain, [190]
 Because they're harsh, gross, senseless, careless to cause pain.
 No gentleness, no pity, faith, or ruth have they;
 In that a bestial nature o'er them holds its sway.
 Humanity 'tis claims, for self, love, charity;
 While lusts and rage are marks of bestiality.
 Fair woman is a ray from out the sun of Truth;
 Not loved? A creator; not created, forsooth. [*5]

[p. 178]

The husband, now, contrition felt for what he'd said,
 As sinner, at death's door, repents of evil deed.
 Thought he: "I have assailed the life of my life's life;
 [195] I've plagued and broke the heart of my dear darling wife!"

When God decrees an ill, man's judgment falls asleep.
 And perspicacity knows not which way to leap.
 The doom of ill struck home, man straight feels deep regret;
 Propriety outraged, he turns to mourn and fret.

Addressing, then, his wife, he said: "My shame is great!
 I've acted as a heathen, ah! I'm ready to entreat!
 'Gainst thee I've trespassed, prithee, pardon to me grant;
 Upon me vengeance wreak not, root not up the plant?
 An infidel, however old, if he confess his sin, Thy
 [200] And make amends, God's sheepfold opes and takes him in.
 Thy heart is full of pity, goodness, kindness, grace;
 All being, eke nonentity, 's in love with thy sweet face.
 True faith, e'en blasphemy, adores thy majesty;
 With that elixir all to gold turns instantly."

In Moses and in Pharaoh parables we see.
 'Twould seem that Moses' faith was right; Pharaoh's sin's fee.
 By day would Moses pray unto the Lord of Hosts;
 At midnight Pharaoh, too, bewailed his impious boasts,
 And said: "Thou, Lord, this yoke upon my neck didst lay;
 [205] Were't not for yoke imposed, the egotist who'd play?
 'Tis Thou'st enlightened Moses' mind, of Thy free grace;
 And hence hast left me blindly groping on my face.
 The countenance of Moses Thou'st lit up, like day;
 My heart, like moon eclipsed, Thou'st darkened with dismay.
 My star was never brighter than the full-faced moon;
 When darkened with eclipse, it surely sets too soon.

[p. 179]

True, kings and princes sound my praises in their routs;
 My star eclipsed, the rabble raise their clamorous shouts:
 With cleavers, marrowbones, tongs, pokers, hideous 'larm,
 They seek to fright some monster; really, shame all charm. [210]
 Alas for Pharaoh, with those fearful yells and noise!
 Alas his 'Lord Supreme,' [*1] drowned in that discord's voice!
 Both I and Moses servants are of Thee, our King;
 Like woodman's axe on tree, Thy wrath on me takes swing.
 Some boughs Thou loppest, to plant. They quickly grow again.
 Some others but as firewood burn, or moulder on the plain.
 What can the bough, to cope with axe's severing edge?
 Can bough resist, return the blow, as blacksmith's sledge?
 I call on Thy omnipotence! Thy axe withhold!
 Thy mercy manifest! These wrongs set right! Behold!" [215]

Then to himself did Pharaoh think: "O wondrous thing!
 All night I've prayed 'Good Lord' to heaven's Almighty King!
 In secret I'm humility, a very worm!
 But when I Moses meet, how greatly changed my form!
 Base coin, if tenfold gilded o'er with finest gold,
 Upon the fire when cast, its baseness all behold!
 Are not my heart and body wholly in his hand?
 Why brain me, flay me, thus? So cunning, soft, and bland!
 Commandest Thou me to flourish? As cornfield I'm green.
 Decreest Thou me to wither? Straight I'm sallow seen. [220]
 One day I'm bright as full moon; next, as eclipse dark.
 But is not this of all God's works the constant mark?
 'Be, and it is!' [*2] A bat that drives man on, His laws!
 Of entity, non-entity, that course is cause!

[p. 180]

Th' uncoloured being stained with colour's various tinge,
 One Moses 'gainst another's certain to impinge.
 If th' unconditioned state, that was, should e'er return,
 With Moses Pharaoh, then, may live in peace; not burn."

Does doubt invade thy bosom from this subtle theme?
 [225] Think! When was colouredness exempt from doubt extreme?
 The wonder is how colour rose from hueless source;
 How colour, huelessness, in ceaseless warfare course!
 The origin of oil is water. This is known.
 Then why are oil and water foes, as may be shown?
 From water oil's created by mysterious power;
 'Gainst water why does oil rise up, and war, each hour?
 The rose springs from a thorn; thorns, from the rose.
 In open warfare are these two. Why? What suppose?
 Or is this seeming warfare all a cunning sham,
 [230] Like donkey-dealers' wordy strife, some dupe to flam?
 'Tis neither this nor that. 'Tis puzzle for the wise.
 The treasure's to be sought; the ruin's 'fore our eyes. [*1]
 That which thou deemest the treasure's naught but vanity.
 By deeming it a treasure, makest thou it to flee.
 Thy deemings and thy thoughts build up a pile too fair;
 For treasure never lurks where buildings crown the air.
 "To edify" means: "Being, warfare eke, to sow."
 Non-entity is shamed with entity's false show!
 Not entity 'tis calls for aid. It is the void
 [235] For restitution asks,--encroachments would avoid!
 Think not 'tis thou wouldst flee non-entity's fell grip;
 Non-entity encroachment dreads from thy short trip.
 Apparently, it thee invites unto its breast;
 But really, it repels; club-like is its protest.

[p. 181]

Know then, dear friend, that Pharaoh's shrink from Moses' call
 Was, really, like a wrong shoe on one's foot. That's all.

Opinions are agreed 'mongst philosophic folk:
 "The sky's an eggshell; in it lies this globe, as yolk."

A questioner once asked: "How rests this little ball
 Within the circumambient spheres, without a fall? [240]
 'Tis like a lamp hung up to vault of high-pitched dome;
 It never sinks below, nor soars above its home."

To him one wise man answered: "By attraction's force,
 On all sides equal poised, it's kept from all divorce.
 Just as an iron ball would centrally be hung,
 If loadstone vault there were to hold it freely swung."

A caviller objected: "How should heaven's pure vault,
 Attracting to itself, this vile black ball exalt?
 Say rather it repels with equal force all round.
 The earth thus rests amidst air's tides that hold it bound." [245]

Thus is it by repulsion from the souls of saints,
 The Pharaohs of each age are fixed in error's taints.
 Repelled, then, they are from this world and the next;
 In neither have they portion; [*1] shunned are they, and vexed.
 From God's anointed ones dost thou draw back in heart?
 Know, thy existence grieves them, frets them, makes them smart.
 They're like the amber, then. When chafed, it shows its power.
 The mote of thy existence quick they'll force to cower.
 If they conceal that power,--exert it not for thee,
 All thy docility will turn to pride. Thou'lt see. [250]

[p. 182]

E'en as the bestial quality, in man aye found,
 Unto its human yokemate [*1] slave and serf is bound.
 This human element, too, in saints' hands, my friend,
 Is pliant, like the bestial; to their wish they't bend.

By true faith, Ahmed called the world, his docile sons,
 To table spread: "Say: 'Servants mine!'" Thus God's text runs. [*2]

Thy mind's a camel-driver; thou, the camel, still,
 Urged by decree: "Command!" [*3] it drives thee as it will.
 God's saints are minds of minds. Men's minds, beneath their sway,
 [255] Are camels, too. And thus the lengthening series play.
 Look unto them, then, if the truth thou'dst fully know;
 A pilot is the life of thousands, here below,
 But what are pilots? Camel-drivers what? Still seek
 Thou one whose eye looks on the sun, and feels not weak.
 The world's plunged, nailed, in thickest pitchy dark of night;
 For day to break, it wants the rise of God's sunlight.

Behold a sun for thee, in mote contained and hid;
 A rampant lion, clad in pelt of gentlest kid.
 Behold a hidden sea, beneath a blade of grass.
 [260] Beware! Tread not thereon in doubt. Thou sink'st, alas!
 Doubt and incertitude, when felt in pious breast,
 Are mercies from on high; a leader gives them rest.
 A prophet 's sole and solitary in the world.
 Sole; but within him bears a thousand systems furled.
 As though by magic, the vast universe he makes
 Around himself revolve, who smallest compass takes.

[p. 183]

The fools saw him alone; thence judged him some weak thing!
 Weak can he ever be who's upheld by the King?
 Those fools thought: "He's a man. He's really nothing more." [*1]
 Alas, for fools! They're void of common sense in store. [265]

The prophet Salih's camel was, in form, a beast; [*2]
 His people her hamstrung; 'twas ignorance, at least.
 They cut her off from water; drink they her refused.
 Ungrateful such return for meat and drink they'd used!
 "God's camel" drank the water brought as dew by mists.
 God's water they held back from God. Monopolists!
 Thus Salih's camel, as of saint the fleshly form,
 Became an ambush;--sinners' ruin thence would storm!
 Upon that sinning race what dreadful judgment fell!
 "God's camel and her drink" [*3] the text is, us to tell. [270]
 God's vengeance, as pursuer, sought front that vile crew.
 The price of her shed blood, a country's whole space through.

The soul to Salih's like; his camel is the flesh;
 The soul communes with God; the flesh pines in want's mesh.
 Good Salih's soul was safe from effort of their whim;
 His camel felt the blow they dared not aim at him.
 No hurt could fall on Salih's soul,--that priceless gem,--
 Such holy emanation was not sport for them.
 The soul unto the flesh is joined, by God's decree,
 That it may be afflicted,--trials made to see. [275]
 Who hurts a body hurts also its soul, no doubt;
 The life-blood in that vase from being's fount was brought.
 God enters in relation with material form,
 That He may be asylum to each earthborn worm.

[p. 184]

No man can inlet find to injure soul of saint;
 An oyster-shell is crushed; its pearl escapes attaint.
 Then serve the camel; that is, list to saint in flesh;
 And with his righteous soul thou'lt serve one Lord afresh.

When Salih saw the evil deed they'd foully wrought,
 [280] In three days' time a judgment from his God he sought.
 "Three days from hence," said he, "affliction will befall;
 Of which, three signs precursors shall be. You'll see, all.
 The colour of your faces shall be changed to view;
 Complexions various shall be seen in each of you.
 Upon the first day, saffron's hue shall be their tinge;
 The second, scarlet red each countenance shall fringe;
 And on the third, as black as coal shall be each face;
 Upon which ensuing, God's wrath shall then take place.
 If sign of me you ask for truth of what I say,
 [285] Observe the path that camel's foal shall take to-day;
 Then strive to catch it. If you can, by chance, succeed;
 Good. If not, hope is gone;--from bow the arrow's freed!"

No one of them the camel's foal could overtake.
 It fled among the hills,--was lost to sight. Heartache!
 E'en so the soul, when once its prison bars are burst,
 Unto the Lord of Grace its winged flight takes first.
 The prophet then: "The threatened judgment now must storm;
 All hope's gone by;--dead as that camel's lifeless form.
 Still, if, by coaxing, you her foal can win back here,
 [290] In calm tranquillity, from whence it's fled through fear,
 With its return of confidence you may be saved;
 But otherwise, despair and gnash your teeth, depraved!"

His threat they heard; dejected were at its import.
 Their looks sank downcast;--sad anxiety's resort.
 The first day came; they saw each visage jaundiced o'er;
 And thence, in fell dismay, they laments uttered, sore.

[p. 185]

Their scarlet skins, the second day, told plainer still,
 Time for repentance was but short, and hope was nil.
 The blackened faces, on the third day, clearly told
 The prophet's threat was strictly true. Their blood ran cold. [295]

Thus being brought to quit their menaces and scowls;
 Upon their knees, hams, breasts, they crouched like roosting fowls.
 This cringing posture has that abject, trembling crew,
 In holy writ, inspired, dubbed "crouching;" [*1] and 'tis true.
 (Kneel, thou, at times when by instructors thou art taught,
 And when thou'rt warned that "crouching" 's with abjection fraught.)
 In hopeless expectation God's blow to ensue,
 The countryside entire within their homes withdrew.

The prophet Salih left his cell to view the town.
 Enveloped in a smoke and blaze he saw it drown! [300]
 Low, moaning noise he heard proceed from its remain;--
 Sighs, as it were, and sobs;--he sighers sought in vain!
 Those sighs were fitful cracklings of their burning bones;
 Those sobs, the hissings of their blood, in clots, on stones!

On hearing these sad sounds the prophet burst in tears;
 Responsive to those moans, he groaned.--No listening ears!
 The dead he then addressed: "O people, chid in vain!
 How often 'gainst you to the Lord I've wept, with pain!
 The Lord me answered: 'Patience have with their misdeeds;
 To them give counsel still; not long will last those needs!' [305]
 Remark I made: 'With such misdeeds will counsel count?
 As milk, kind counsel flows from love's unsullied fount!'
 The untold wrongs you'd heaped upon my patient head
 Had curdled milk of counsel in my bosom's stead.

[p. 186]

The Lord replied: 'A grace I'll now on thee bestow;
 I'll soothe the wounds inflicted by their rancour's bow.'
 With that, God made my heart as tranquil as of yore;
 Swept clean away the cobwebs of your paltry score."

"Again I proffered counsel to you, sage and safe;
 [310] In parables soft couched, with words that might not chafe.
 Once more that milk flowed, mixed with honey, from my lips;
 The dulcet tones were tempting, not like stinging whips.
 Alas! Within your ears they all to venom turned;
 Because, like poisonous plants, your nature goodness spurned.
 Why do I weep? You've burnt the substance of all grief;
 Like bone in throat, ye obstinate, you've choked relief!
 Ought any to lament when grief is laid in bier?
 Man justly tears his hair, his head if broke by spear!"

With that, reproachfully upon himself he turned,
 [315] And cried: "Those fellows were not worth the tears they spurned.
 Recite not wrongfully, O master of address,
 The text: 'How will I grieve' [*1] o'er crew that none should bless!'"
 Still, in his eyes and heart more briny tears he found,
 A pity, really motiveless, in him 'd ta'en ground.
 As summer-rain he wept, through feeling ill at ease;
 A summer-rain, quite cloudless, from compassion's seas.
 His conscience smote him sore: "Why weepest thou, man of sense?
 Are they of tears fit objects,--men of violence?
 What motive for thy tears? Say. Grievest thou for their acts?
 [320] Mournest thou th' extinction of their merciless, vile pacts?

[p. 187]

Or is't, perchance, their hearts, corrupt, gangrened, thou'dst weep?
 On their empoisoned tongues, so adderlike, thou'dst keep?
 Those tails and fangs is't, are the objects of thy grief?
 Their scorpion claws and sting that thou regrettest in chief?
 Contentiousness, foul mockery, rude violence?
 Thank God, instead, who's checked their boastful insolence!
 Their hands were evil; evil were their feet, their eyes;
 Their peace, their friendship, as their wrath, were all unwise.
 From rule of meek obedience, customs handed down,
 They'd swerved;--to follow mere devices of their own. [325]
 They wished not for a teacher, asses obstinate;
 Their own ideas alone they'd stoop to cultivate.
 God therefore sent His servants, smoke and fire to wit,
 From heaven, the miscreants to chase to dire hell-pit."

Behold the damned and blessed, thus, in one scene conjoined;
 Between them is "a great gulf fixed by none o'erclimbed." [*1]
 Those "sons of fire" and "light" together seemed immixed;
 But barrier impassable 'tween them was fixed.
 The mine's rich golden ore in soil imbedded lies;
 But really separated, far as eagle flies. [330]
 Like pearls and jet beads in one row of necklace ranged;
 A motley company, like inn's chance guests, oft changed.
 Or like an estuary, half soft, sweet to drink,
 Most palatable water, clear, bright as moon's twink;
 The other half salsuginous, wormwood and gall,
 Foul, black as ink, and fetid, shocks the senses all.
 These dash together; now this, now that, uppermost;
 Their waves a turmoil make, as though by tempest tost.

[p. 188]

That show of fierce collision's made by matter's form;
 [335] In truth, the spirits 'tis that compacts make, or storm.
 When gentle waves, in friendship's reign, roll gracefully,
 Contention quits each breast, all goes on merrily.
 With rough war's hideous billows, (mark the altered scene!)
 All love is straight renounced; dire hate's to supervene.
 Affection coaxes rancour to subside, appeased;
 Because its origin's in reason fixed, soon pleased;
 While raging anger stirs up thoughts of bitter strife.
 For how can man be tranquil, when the stake's his life?

Our outward eye discerns not pure from tainted hearts;
 [340] Futurity's small lattice oped, the curtain parts.
 The eye of true sagacity distinct can see;
 This other eye, 'tis, fails;--is ne'er from error free.
 How many seeming pleasures, fair, as sugar sweet,
 Have poison lurking in them, death to all they meet!
 Men of discernment know them surely by mere smell;
 And others find them out, though late, when tasted, fell.
 That taste's. enough; ejected are they; swallowed, not;
 Although the fiend may urge, with: "Eat, while hot!"
 Again some others find in throat they firmly stick;
 [345] And others yet are vexed with intestinal prick.
 Still others by sharp purgings find they've done amiss;
 Indulgence of the palate's changed to pangs their bliss.
 Again there are some suffer after months or years;
 And others pay the penalty within the tomb, with tears.
 E'en should there chance a respite, granted in the grave,
 At resurrection's trump, disclosure naught will save.

Each plant, each honied morsel, in this lower sphere,
 A term has, fixed, him to affect who tastes the cheer.
 What ages of submission to sun's influence,
 E'er ruby can acquire ripe tinge, bright effulgence!
 [350] The salad cress is ready in a month or two;
 The rose requires some years before it shows its hue.

[p. 189]

To this end has the Lord, whose name be ever blessed,
 In holy writ declared: "Appointed term." [*1] We've cessed.
 Hast thou this heard? Read, mark, and learn with diligence!
 Life's water is it. Hast thou drunk? Health spring from thence!
 Those words thou mayst consider life's fount, if thou list;
 Their sense it is important thou shouldst not have missed.

One other theme, my friend, fix firmly in thy mind.
 'Tis patent as thy soul; as subtle thou'lt it find. [355]
 At times as venomous as adder's fatal fang;
 At times as healthful as the food from heaven that sprang.
 Now lethal; now again remedial, by God's will.
 At one time blasphemy; then, holy rapture's thrill.
 Thus will it, now, be fatal to a human soul;
 And then, again, a remedy for all that's foul:
 "The juice of unripe grapes is sour, as is well known;
 But when the fruit has ripened, sweet and fragrant grown,
 In wine-jar when fermented, nauseous and unclean;
 When vinegar, again, most wholesome is it seen." [360]

If saint a poison swallow, wholesome it will prove;
 But if disciple taste it, death will him remove.
 "Lord, grant unto me," was the prayer of Solomon,
 "The power and kingdom solely (not to Abaddon);
 This favour grant not unto other after me!" [*2]
 Which reads like envy. Such, however, it can't be.
 Put not, in heart, construction that must disagree
 Upon those words so read: "to other after me."
 He saw a thousand dangers in the sway conferred;
 Saw that earth's empire is a snare to be abhorred; [365]
 A danger to one's life, one's faith, one's inner self;
 Such trial has no equal on the whole world's shelf.

[p. 190]

E'en Solomon sagacity did much require,
 To shield him from mistakes in all his vast empire.
 The wondrous power he wielded could alone suffice,
 To quell rebellion's perils, rising in a trice.
 So when he rested from due ordering his wide realm,
 He felt that other kings misrule might overwhelm.
 Then interceded he: "This rule, this much-prized flower,
 [370] Vouchsafe to none, save with the selfsame power.
 To whom Thou mayest it grant upon these very terms,
 He's Solomon, he is myself, my sway confirms.
 He'll not come after me, he'll reign with me indeed;
 With me and in me, free from rival's dreaded meed."

This to expound appeared a duty paramount;
 Return we, and our tale of man and wife recount.

A sequel to that incident 'tween man and wife
 Is looked for by the mind of him who's watched their life.
 The incident of man and wife recounted here
 [375] Of each man's soul and flesh the parable is, clear.
 The wife the flesh is; man's the soul; he's wisdom, too;
 They're emblems also of all good and evil, true.
 The two, of need, existing in this earthly home,
 By day and night at war are;--always quarrelsome.
 The wife requires her various household garniture,
 Her bed and board, her comfort, and her furniture.
 The flesh, like woman, to be gratified still seeks;
 Submissive sometimes; oft would play ambitious freaks.
 The soul has no idea, itself, of such instinct;
 [380] But seeks to muse upon its love for God, distinct.
 Existence is the secret of their constant war;
 The form in which 'tis waged thou'rt now about to hear.
 Had psychic indication proved sufficient sign,
 Material creation 'd been a useless coin.

[p. 191]

Is love for God thy thought, aim, wish, design, intent?
 To forms of worship, fasting, thou wilt yield assent.
 The gifts and little presents interchanged by friends,
 Are not their love's pure essence. Signs they are, not ends.
 Mere outward witnesses, that simply testify
 Th' affection's feelings. These the heart, 'tis, sanctify. [385]
 For all men know that kindnesses bestowed by hand
 Are proofs of sympathy. Mind can this comprehend.

A witness may speak falsely; also, may speak truth;
 Is sometimes drunk, with wine; sometimes, is urged by ruth.
 When wine is drunk, intoxications supervene;
 Its vapours rise into the head, erst so serene.
 Behold yon hypocrite! He fasts; he worships, prays;
 That he a man of God may seem. He's not. Mere ways!

Results of outward actions are of outward kind,--
 The signs of what is inward, working on the mind. [390]
 Grant unto us, O Lord, discernment to perceive
 What sign is true, which meant fond mortals to deceive!
 Suppose not that the senses with discernment plod;
 Discernment is the inner, gracious gift of God!
 Effect not being visible, we look to cause.
 We know that kindred moves to friendship, by fixed laws.
 But him, who judges by the light of God's own truth,
 Effect and cause no longer hold a slave, forsooth.
 When love for God is lighted in the human heart,
 It fiercely burns; it suffers not effect's dull smart. [395]
 No sign of love does it require to seek for, there;
 For love is love's own sign, giv'n from the highest sphere.

Details there are, far more, to make this theme complete.
 If wished for, each can find them. They're not obsolete.
 Sense must be gathered from material, outward form;
 Some sense is patent; some is hard to find, difform.

[p. 192]

The indication's feeble;--tree and water see;--
 How different, apparently, their natures be!

Let's leave now all these words,--cause, nature, sign;--
 [400] And turn we to our Arab and his wife benign.

The husband said: "I've now abandoned all dispute.
 All rule is in thy hands; thy power is absolute.
 Whatever thou ordain, submissive thou'lt me find;
 Its good or bad results shall not weigh on my mind.
 I'm non-existent; save, that by thee I must move;
 A lover; therefore am I deaf and blind, through love."

His wife him answered: "Is this all in kindness meant?
 Or dost thou seek by craft my plans to circumvent?"
 He swore: "By God; who knows the secrets of each heart;
 [405] Who hath created Adam free from treacherous art;
 Who, in three cubits' stature unto him dispensed,
 The mysteries of all decrees, all souls, condensed:
 Whatever is to be, to all eternity,
 To Adam taught, with every name of Deity,
 So that the very angels wearied under him,
 As he them taught, but ever gained by each maxim!"

The revelations Adam made to them were vast;
 Had never been disclosed before, from first to last.
 The compass, spacious, of his all-inclosing mind
 [410] Far wider was than heaven of heavens a grasp could find.

The Prophet hath declared God made him clearly know:
 "I'm not contained, not held; by aught above, below,
 On earth, in heaven, above the heavens, I am not held.
 This know, then, thou also, My friend, as though beheld.
 But, wonderful! Believer's heart can Me contain!
 If Me thou'dst seek, there look for Me, with might and main!" [*1]

[p. 193]

His words were: "Seek within My servants. There thou'lt meet
 The paradise of My aspect. Thou most discreet!" [*1]
 The heaven of heavens, with all its wondrous wide extent,
 At sight of Adam's glory into tremors went. [415]
 The marvellous expanse of heaven's a stretch extreme.
 But what is matter, all, when spirit is the theme!

Each angel made remark: "Until this very hour
 I had a certain knowledge of the wide earth's bower.
 Much duty I've performed upon its soil, down there.
 Surprise I've felt, not small, attachment so to bear.
 For what was my attachment to that ball of clay;--
 I, that am moulded from the glorious light of day?
 What was my strong affection? I'm light; darkness, earth!
 Can light and darkness mingle;--live in jocund mirth? [420]
 O Adam! Now it's clear! My love was mere instinct;
 In that the earth material gave for thee, succinct!
 Thy earthly body here was wove out of its clay;
 Thy spirit, pure, created was beyond the realm of day!
 The honour which we, spirits, have received through thee,
 Before all worlds had sparkled, by divine decree!
 When we were on the earth, we inattentive were;
 And little reeked the treasure trusted to its care!
 When orders were received to quit the earth, and mount,
 We felt regret to change; knew not on what account. [425]
 We thought of reasons for the shift, and question made:
 'O Lord! Who then shall take our place when we're thus bade?
 Wilt Thou exchange our praise and service here below,
 For mere lip-homage from a worm Thee will not know?'
 An answer from the Lord, benign, did we receive:
 What you allege is somewhat many might deceive.
 Each word upon your tongues is surely out of place,
 As lisping talk of son to sire, without preface.

[p. 194]

Your rash objections would deserve to be chastised,
 [430] But that I have decreed that mercy's higher prized.
 Behold, O angels! Since you've made confusion strange,
 In you henceforth I've placed a sense of doubt and change!
 Since you demur, and I refrain from chastisement,
 None can gainsay my mercy; none may raise comment.
 A hundred mothers, fathers, meet not My decree!
 Each soul that's born a zero is compared to Me!
 Their love is but the froth; My love, the sea of love!
 Froth comes and goes; the ocean none remove.
 More I may say. For, in this earthly oyster-shell
 [435] There's naught but froth of froth, of froth of froth to tell!'"

The Lord thus spake;--the Lord, that sea of purity!--
 He spake not by conjecture;--truth's own entity!
 What I here state is said in love's humility.
 The Lord is He to whom I fly,--sole Deity!
 If thou wouldst put to test what I have here set forth,
 First prove thy test. Make truly sure it's trouble's worth.
 Cloak not thy secret thoughts. So may my thoughts be known.
 Propose whate'er thou list; within my power, 'tis shown.
 Thy heart conceal not. I'll lay bare my heart of hearts;
 [440] Accept all, of acceptance worthy, thy mind starts.
 That I may do whatever lies within my power,
 Do thou observe my heart's condition in its bower.

The wife observed: "A very sun of good is risen;
 Through whom a gladsome world's enlarged from want's sad prison.
 Vicegerent of th' All-Merciful, Caliph of God,
 Fair Bagdad's city prides itself to kiss his rod.
 If unto him thou have recourse, a prince thou'lt be.
 Why, then, to misery cleave, such as we hourly see?

[p. 195]

Companionship with fortune's minions brings good luck;
 Where's an elixir like their power, my dearest duck? [445]
 Ahmed's esteem raised Abu-Bekr such a height;
 For once confirming Ahmed's word, 'Faithful' he's hight!"

The man demurred: "How can I gain access at court?
 Without an introduction, how find sure passport?
 Connection we must seek; or else invent excuse.
 No artizan can work without his tools. The deuce!
 Thus Mejnun, when he'd heard by chance from passing wight,
 His Layla was an invalid (which caused him fright),
 Exclaimed: Alas! Without excuse I cannot go!
 And if I visit not the sick one, I'm all woe! [450]
 Would that I were physician, with his healing art;
 Then could I see my Layla; none would dare me thwart!'
 And now he cries: 'I have it! I've a right to go!
 No bashfulness shall keep me from her portico!'
 Had bats but eyes, with which to see and find their way,
 They'd fly about, disport themselves, jocund, by day."

The wife replied: "The Caliph's public pageant is
 For all who introduction lack; their griefs are his.
 To be, and have a grief, is introduction sure.
 Thus poverty and lowliness work their own cure." [455]

He still objected: "Shall I fall in love with want,
 That I may urge my need as matter for some grant?
 E'en then, a witness credible I should require
 T' attest my indigence, when almoners inquire.
 Point out for me a witness; not mere words and wiles;
 That so the sovereign's favour may be won, and smiles.
 For, otherwise, a mere pretext, without a proof,
 In justice' court would fail, and bring reproof.
 A witness credible is, then, sine qua non.
 For suitor's plea to stand, proof it must rest upon." [460]

[p. 196]

His wife rejoined: "The witness thou requir'st to bring,
 Must, by some shrewd contrivance, from thy prospects spring.
 Rain-water's all we have in store within our hut,
 Estate, possessions, wealth, lie in our water-butt.
 A little pot of water shalt thou bear with thee,
 As offering to the Caliph. This present from me;
 And say: 'No other wealth on earth do I possess.
 To Arabs of the desert, water's happiness!
 The Caliph's treasury is full of gems and gold;
 [465] A pot of water such as this, its coffers do not hold!
 What is this pot? It is an emblem of our lives!
 The water in it, matchless virtue of our wives!
 Accept, then, gracious prince, this little pot from me;
 And out of all God's gifts repay its value, free!'
 That pot's five lips are emblems of our senses. Sure!
 Keep them all clean; so may thy honour, too, be pure!
 The pot will then relation keep with ocean's wave;
 And I, perchance, advantage from that ocean have.
 If clean thou carry it before the sovereign's eyes,
 [470] He may be pleased therewith;--buy it from mere surprise.
 The pot will, then, of water never lacking be;
 My little water-pot shall suffice thee and me.
 Close tight its lips, and bear it full from our supply.
 A holy text 'tis says: 'From lust close every eye.' [*1]
 His beard, his moustache, both, will swell with joy at this.
 For prince supreme like him, my offering's not amiss."
 Thou, woman, didst not know that there, in Bagdad's midst,
 A Tigris flowed with water, sweet as honey.--Didst?
 A very ocean is it, rapid in its course;
 [475] With boats and ships, with fishers' hooks, both fine and coarse.

[p. 197]

Go then, good man! The Caliph thee his state shall show!
 Thou'lt comprehend the text: "Beneath which rivers flow." [*1]
 Thus, likewise, are our intellects, our thoughts, our sense;
 A drop compared with God's boundless omniscience!

The husband now chimed in: "Yes! Plug the pot's mouth tight.
 Thou'st hit the very offering;--useful, good, and right!
 Sew it up carefully in case of felt, threefold.
 Our Caliph's breakfast-water [*2] shall it be;--so cold!
 No other water's like it in this world of ours;--
 It's heaven's pure ambrosia, 'still'd from vernal showers! [480]
 Poor tits know none but waters hard and bitter all;--
 Whence various maladies, with blindness, them befall!"

The bird that lives where salt-marsh noisome airs exhales,
 Knows naught of joys pure water gives, and spicy gales!
 So thou, good man, who dwelledst 'midst the desert's waste,
 Hadst never seen a Tigris, known Euphrates' taste!
 As he, again, not yet from worldly cares set free,
 Is ignorant of ecstasy, of rapture's glee;
 Or, having heard thereof as tales from men of old,
 Knows them as names alone, in storybooks oft told; [485]
 Child's A, B, C; as taught to every lisping elf;
 But whose real meaning's hidden from the teacher's self.

Our Arab man now takes that water-pot in charge.
 By day and night he travels;--load not over large!
 Anxiety fast holds him, lest the pot should break;
 Most watchfully he guards it from misfortune's freak.

[p. 198]

His wife spends all her days in prayers on his behalf;
 Her worship o'er, she adds: "Lord! shield my better half!
 Secure our pot of water from all thievish hands!
 [490] Send it may prove a pearl in sea of Bagdad's lands!
 My husband, true, is shrewd; and know's what he's about;
 But pearls have enemies, we trow, in every rout!
 What is a pearl? A drop from fount of life sent down; [*1]
 A drop from non-existence,--whence all substance known!"

Those prayers' reward,--as guerdon of her sighs and tears;--
 His care's requital, watchfulness, and constant fears;--
 Their pot reached Bagdad safe from robbers' grip;
 Secure from shock of stone, from chance of fall or slip.
 A city, there, he sees, with every blessing filled;
 [495] Where craving mortals ply each art, as they are skilled.
 Each moment, here or there, some extra-lucky wight,
 His object gains, receives from court what glads his sight!
 To Muslims, Unbelievers, equal grace is doled,
 Like rain and sunshine. Not so paradise, we're told!
 One set of men he sees arrayed in honour's robes;
 Another set endure, through hope and fear, sharp probes.
 As gentle, or as simple, prince or worm, pismire,
 All are alive, as though last trump's notes them inspire!
 The worldly, in apparel sumptuous to behold;
 [500] The godly, all immersed in transports clearly told!
 The hopeless have become as though their hopes were fair;
 The hopeful show enjoyment of fruition's share!

A voice proclaimed: "Come forward, all ye sons of want!"
 Beneficence seeks beggars, as for gifts they pant.

[p. 199]

Beneficence hunts up for beggars and for need,
 As beauty seeks her mirror, with a special greed.
 A pretty face is charming in its mirror seen;
 Beneficence gleams lovely through want's chilly sheen.
 God hath enjoined in holy writ: "By forenoon's glare!" [*1]
 "Muhammed, chide not thou too much at beggar's prayer!" [*2] [505]

A beggar is a mirror wherein bounty shines.
 Dull not that mirror, then, with breath of anger's whines!
 The beggar 'tis shows forth what charity achieves;
 A charitable man for this those wants relieves.
 A beggar, then, 's a mirror of th' Almighty's grace;
 And whoso's with the Lord, therein sees his Lord's face.

He that hath love for other than the Lord of all,
 Is dead at heart,--not living;--shadow on a wall!
 Whoe'er adopts God's poverty, without false show,
 Secures the prize of God's rich pleasure here below! [510]
 Who puts on sham of poverty deserves no bread.
 (Bones are not given to effigies of dogs. They're dead!)
 His want craves pelf; 'tis not the love of God he'd seek.
 Lay not thy bounty at the feet of one too sleek.

A landshark is a mendicant for mere pelf's sake.
 He's fish in form; but will not to the water take.
 Domestic fowl is he; not eagle of free air.
 With Lot he sips of wine; God's water's his despair.
 He loves his God, if but his God will grant him wealth;
 But nothing cares for God's mere grace,;--for spirit's health. [515]
 Should he conceive th' idea of love for God alone,
 God's essence he'd deny, God's attributes disown.
 Man's fancy is a creature;--born with mortal lot.
 God was not born. His scripture says: "Nor was begot." [*3]

[p. 200]

The man in love with self, and with his fancy's freak,
 Can never be a lover who to God will seek.
 Were fancy's lover true, and free from crafty guile,
 His fancy's tropes had led him to the truth erewhile.

That dictum would require a commentary, full,
 [520] But fear withholds me. Prejudice will have its pull!
 Old prejudice, quite purblind to the truth, I see,
 A hundred phantoms conjures up to frighten me.
 Not every man has heard aright the still small voice;
 Not every bird's a fig-pecker, that sweets rejoice;
 How then a bird that's dead,--turned putrid long ago;--
 A man of prejudice, all sightless, eyeless, so!
 A painted fish cares not for water, or for land.
 Soap to a blackamoor is one, or tar, in hand.

Shouldst thou depict a portrait overwhelmed with grief,
 [525] Would grief or joy be felt, though shown in strong relief?
 The picture would look sorrowful;--no sorrow feel;
 Or smiling happiness;--without gay laughter's peal.
 The joy or grief depicted by a pencil's art,
 Is naught but simulated;--knows nor thrill, nor smart.

Lugubrious countenances are for our behoof;
 That we may be reminded not to court reproof.
 And beaming visages are not without their use,
 If they recall us from mere form to sense occluse.
 The various effigies we see in this bath-house, [*1]
 [530] Disguised in draperies, are dolls;--blind fools to chouse.
 So long as thou'rt outside, naught else but clothes thou'lt see.
 Undress thyself. Come in; and see the nude, the free.
 There's no admission granted to a bath, while dressed.
 But clothes, the body, this, the soul, leave all unguessed.

[p. 201]

Our Arab man, from far in desert's sandy waste,
 Has reached at length the walls of Bagdad, home of taste.
 The guards, the officers, on duty at the gate,
 Received him with politeness, kindness delicate.
 Without a question asked, his case they'd understood.
 Their charge was to show kindness first, ere asked for food. [535]
 So they addressed him thus: "Ho, thou, good Arab prince!
 Whence comest thou? How fares it? Straight thy wish evince!"

He answered: "Prince I am, if you to me be kind;
 But if you me contemn, I'm naught in my own mind.
 Your aspects indicate you're men of wealth and rank;
 Your speech and smiles betoken breeding, noble, frank.
 Mere sight of your kind features salve is to the eyes;
 Your looks alone enrich;--gold in your voices lies.
 Each one of you expression is of God's own grace;
 In Caliph's bosom nurtured, favoured with high place; [540]
 That you, in turn, dispense th' elixir of support,
 And brighten longing eyes by words of kind import.
 I am a stranger, poor, come from the desert's sands,
 In hopes some favour to obtain from sovereign hands.
 The rumour of his goodness fills the wilderness;
 Each atom in its wastes blooms thence in joyfulness.
 In search of wealth have I approached his capital;
 Now I'm arrived, I burn with pleasures optical.
 E'en as the lass in search of bread at baker's shop,
 Struck with his 'prentice' beauty, swooned;--a lifeless drop! [545]
 Or like the saunterer for air in royal park,
 Who lost his heart to one he met, gay as a lark!
 Or like the desert merchant drawing from a well
 What he thought water, was entranced by Joseph's spell!
 Again, as Moses hasted for a coal of fire,
 And found the burning bush, that led him to empire

[p. 202]

Or Jesus, who escaped his foes with one fleet bound,
 And found himself then landed where the sun goes round! [*1]
 An ear of corn it was that baited Adam's trap. [*2]
 [550] Bat thence himself became the source of mankind's sap!
 The falcon stoops to earth enticed by luring fate;
 He there meets man's good teaching, soars to princely state.
 A child is sent to school to teach him learning's prize,
 In hope of toys and treats he studies till he's wise.
 On leaving school he sits in seat of law or power;
 He paid his schoolpence then;--he's now lord of the hour!
 So Abbas [*3] sallied forth to war, with fierce intent,
 To put Muhammed down,--Islam to circumvent.
 Defender of the Faith, till death, he then became;
 [555] The Caliphate was destined, in his line, to fame!
 So am I come, in hopes at this court to advance;
 Though at its gate as yet, I feel I've every chance.
 In quest of bread am I; as offering, water bring.
 The hope of bread sets wide heaven's portals at one swing.
 'Twas bread that drove out Adam from his paradise;
 'Tis bread will gain me entrance where my hopes take rise.
 From bread, from water, both, as angels, far I stroll;
 And, following the spheres, around this centre roll!
 Without an object none will toil on earth, you see,
 [560] Save true and godly lovers. They're from motives free!"

Th' Infinite's lovers finite's worshippers are not.
 Who seek the finite lose th' Infinite, as we wot.
 When finite with the finite falls in love, perforce,
 His loved one soon returns to her infinite source.

[p. 203]

A beard that puts itself into another's grasp,
 In lather's smothered; emblem of a weak mind's gasp.
 He's not his own lord; cannot guide his own affairs;
 He does but what he's told; where'er he's bid, repairs.

Would'st sin with woman? Choose, at least, one that is free.
 Would'st rob and steal? Let pearls and jewels be thy fee. [565]
 A slave obeys a master; has himself no will;
 The scent is all the rose's; thorns show no such skill.
 A slave may not attain to wish that he may form;
 His toil is vain, his trouble profitless;--poor worm!
 Shall hunter snare a shadow? Where were then his food?
 A shadow's not a substance;--can do no one good.
 A foolish hunter seized the shadow of a bird!
 The fowl, on tree securely perched, not one foot stirred;
 But, wondering, thought: "What is the stupid fool about?
 Demented, sure; his little wit he's let ooze out!" [570]

But if thou thinkest finite's of th' Infinite born;
 And sayest: "For love of rose, do honour to the thorn;"
 Consider: finite unto Infinite's not joined.
 Or what need of the prophets? They've not scripture coined.
 The prophets have been sent to link the two in one.
 If they're not two, but one, what have the prophets done?
 But let that be. Th' inquiry has no useful end.
 The day is waning; let us to our tale attend.

The Arab now his little pot of water showed.
 As seed to earth, he it on Caliph's court bestowed; [575]
 And said: "Present my offering at the sovereign's feet,
 If beggar save his king from want, it's surely meet.
 The water's fresh; the little jar green-glazed and new;
 Filled from a pool replenished by the rain and dew."

[p. 204]

On hearing this the guards were laughing in their sleeves;
 But still, as precious, took the jar;--polite court-reeves!
 The Caliph's kindly nature, active, well-informed,
 To kindness had each member of his court reformed.
 For as the sovereign is, so will his subjects be.
 [580] The azure vault of heaven makes green the earth;--you see.

A king's a reservoir; his servants are his mains,
 Through whom his bounty flows, to swell his subjects' veins.
 The stream, if flowing from a tank all sweet and pure,
 Each main distributes bounty, courtesy;--be sure.
 But should the reservoir prove foul and nauseous, then,
 The mains can flow with naught but venom, like a fen.
 The mains can only what they get convey around.
 Remember this. We're treading now on solid ground.

A sovereign's goodness is an unembodied soul,
 [585] That permeates the clay of human frame, its goal.
 It is the mind, the all-informing, well-derived,
 That brings the body into discipline, where hived.
 Love is a wanton, restless, reckless of control,
 That drives the man to madness; passion does extol;
 But goodness is a stream as sweet as Fount of Life;
 Its pebbles are all pearls, all jewels, beauteous, rife.

Whichever be the science makes a teacher famed,
 His scholars' minds with that will surely be inflamed.
 A jurist's pupils study principles of law,
 [590] If but their mental principles be free from flaw.
 A lawyer's prentice over subtle cases pores;
 The principles, with him, are most unwelcome bores.
 A syntax-teacher rears a host of grammar's sons,
 With whom his syntax passes for the sun of suns.

[p. 205]

A teacher who inculcates abnegation's creed,
 Surrounds himself with pupils free from lust and greed.
 But at the hour of death, of science's long roll,
 The art of poverty's what most behoves man's soul.

A syntax-teacher, once, was mounted in a boat,
 Who to the skipper turned, as soon as e'er afloat, [595]
 And asked: "Hast studied syntax?" "No indeed," quoth he.
 The teacher then: "Thy life's half-wasted? Dost thou see?"
 The skipper felt heart-broken at this pert remark;
 But, for the moment, held his peace;--wise man's bulwark.
 The wind arose; the bark was sorely tempest-tossed;
 The skipper then addressed the teacher, sickness-crossed:
 "Knowest thou the swimmer's art, good friend? With speed reply."
 "Nay," said the teacher, "that's an art the schools decry."
 The skipper now remarked: "Thy whole life's gone to waste.
 The ship must go to pieces. Water salt thou'lt taste. [600]
 With syncope, not syntax, now we'll have to deal.
 With syncope, from water comes nor hurt, nor weal,
 The sea bears on its surface bodies of the dead;
 But living men it drowns; them sinks, as though of lead.
 So soon as thou'lt be dead to every human art
 To thee eternity its secrets will impart.
 Thou hitherto hast deemed us mortals asses all;
 Now thou thyself, as ass on ice, must have a fall.
 Although thou be the very Plato of the age,
 Thou'st still to learn that time, the world, is but a page." [605]

This tale about the syntax-teacher we've tacked on,
 To show the grammar dissolution turns upon.
 All syntax, grammar, jurisprudence, law, and art,
 Thou'lt find, my friend, of knowledge is but a small part.

[p. 206]

Our little learning is the Arab's water-pot.
 In Caliph, of God's wisdom we've an emblem got.
 We bring our pot of water to great Tigris' stream.
 If we ourselves not asses call, us asses deem.
 The Arab of our tale excusable was,--troth;
 [610] He knew not of a Tigris. Where's the Arab doth?
 Had he, as we, known Tigris' stream, and all its store,
 His water-pot had never travelled to its shore;
 Had he become aware of what a Tigris meant,
 Arrived at Bagdad, he'd his pot to fragments sent.

The Caliph, when he saw that pot, and heard that tale,
 The vase had filled with golden sequins, like a bale,
 Our Arab thus to free from poverty's rude grasp;--
 A robe of honour, too; and presents for his clasp,
 He ordered. Then the whole unto the guards were sent,
 [615] With kindliest injunctions, fruit of good intent:
 "That all unto that Arab man be safely given,
 Whose journey home by Tigris' arrowy stream be driven.
 By land he came; he'd travelled all the way on foot;
 But Tigris' stream may bear him back a shorter route."

Our Arab in a boat was placed at river's side;
 The stream he saw, admired, bowed low, lost all his pride;
 Exclaiming: "Wondrous goodness of the sovereign will!
 Th' acceptance of my water-pot more wondrous still!
 How could that sea of wealth my drop deign to accept,
 [620] And largely thus to recompense the trifle kept?"

Know now, my friend, this world 's one mighty water-pot,
 With wisdom and with beauty teeming; as all wot.
 One drop, however, 'tis, from ocean of His grace,
 Whose fulness cannot be confined in any place.
 That treasure latent was. Through fulness it burst forth,
 More glorious than the heavens became thenceforth the earth.

[p. 207]

The latent treasure, pouring out its riches great,
 The earth made kinglike, clothed with more than regal state.
 One little branch canal from th' ocean of God's grace,
 Thus overwhelms this mighty water-pot of space. [625]

They who see God are ever rapt in ecstasy;
 And raptured, hold that water-pot mere fallacy.
 O thou! envy of whom is to that pot a stone!
 Though fractured by the shock, the pot yields sounder tone.
 The pot is cracked; but, still, its water is not spilt;
 The crack's the very source through which it's sounder built.
 The jar's each single particle's in dance and revery,
 Though unto man's poor wisdom this seems foolery.
 The pot, the world, all it contains, are lost to view.
 Consider well this fact! God knows it's simply true. [630]

If thou canst grasp this meaning, thou'rt like falcon strong.
 Beat, then, the pinions of thy thoughts. Be hawk, ere long.
 Thought's pinions are bemired in thee, and heavy move;
 Because thou feedest on clay; clay's bread to thee, I'll prove.
 As flesh, bread is but clay. Trust not thereon for strength;
 Or thou'lt remain, claylike, within the earth at length.

Dost hunger? What art thou, then, but a dog?
 Fierce, ill-affected, raging; lusts thy vitals clog!
 And when with food thou'rt filled, polluted straight becomest.
 Thou losest strength and sense; mere stock, thou sleep welcomest. [635] 
 So, being doglike or a stock, senseless, impure,
 How canst thou progress make in path of virtue, sure?

[p. 208]

Whatever 'tis thou huntest, dog thou art, in sooth.
 Feed not, then, thus, the dog of lust's voracious tooth.
 When dogs are satisfied, obedience they forswear;
 To follow up the game they one and all forbear.

His want it was disposed the Arab of our tale,
 To travel till he'd reached the Caliph's courtly vale.
 We've shown the bounty of that sovereign merciful,
 [640] Shed on the Arab's wretchedness, most plentiful.

Whate'er a lover says, the sentiment of love
 Shines through his words, if but thoughts towards his mistress rove.
 Discourses he on law, love furnishes the theme;
 Throughout his labouring periods, love's the enthymeme.
 Should blasphemy rise to his lips, of faith it smacks.
 Doubt, when by him expressed, shows confidence's knacks.
 The spume that rises from the sea of his pure heart
 Partakes the nature of its source, truth's counterpart.
 We must esteem such spume as foam of mountain-rill;--
 [645] Upbraiding from a lip beloved is worshipped still.
 Attention we pay not to harsh words issuing thence,;--
 The features we adore divest them of offence.
 However strange such utterances, they all seem true;
 The stranger they appear, to sense they lend more cue.

If sugar we should cast in mould to look like bread,
 Then eat it, we the sugar taste. Form's of no stead.
 Should true believer golden idol light upon,
 Will he for worship set it up, anon, anon?
 Nay! To the fire he'll quickly it in wrath cosign,
 [650] And strip it of the form that makes it sin's foul sign.
 The gold, abstracted from the idol's form, is pure.
 That form it is corrupts,--can men to sin allure.
 The gold's an essence fixed, produced by nature's God;
 The idol stamp is transitory;--soon downtrod.

[p. 209]

Thou for one flea to flames thy bed wouldst never give;
 For one musquito's hum, not wish to cease to live.
 If form-entrapped thou be, idolater thou art!
 Eschew mere form; attend to essence, as thy part.
 Art bound on pilgrimage? Seek other pilgrims out;--
 Be they from Hind, from Tatary, or Hadramout. [655]
 Peer not into their features; look not at their skins.
 Inquire their thoughts, their hearts;--if these be free of sins.
 A negro findest thou one with thee in faith and creed?
 Him deem a white;--thy brother is he in thy need.

Our tale is told. Its ups and downs are manifold.
 Like lovers' thoughts, it's wandering, unconnected, bold.
 Commencement it has none;--eternity's its sign;--
 Still less conclusion;--so, eternity's design.
 Or, rather, it's like water;--every drop, so rich,
 Commencement is, and end;--yet shows not which is which. [660]

But, God forbid! Our story's not a fable. See!
 Its narrative's a point concerns both me and thee!
 A gnostic, in possession of his wits and sense,
 Repeats not what is past;--he bides the present tense.

The Arab, his poor pitcher, Caliph, all, observe,
 Ourselves are. "He shall swerve whom God shall cause to swerve!" [*1]
 Our Arab, know, 's the mind; his wife, our lusts and greed.
 These two are tenebrous; the mind's the torch they need.
 Now hear whence has arisen the ground of their dispute:
 Th' infinite finites holds, of various attribute;-- [665]
 Parts finite;--not parts infinite of th' infinite,
 Like scent of rose,--part infinite of definite.

[p. 210]

The verdure's beauty infinite is, as a part;
 The cooing of the dove's as infinite, in logic art.
 But go we not too far afield for sorts and kinds;
 Or poor disciples ne'er will slake their thirsting minds.

Dost doubt? Art racked with difficulties? To excess?
 Have patience. "Patience is the key of all success!" [*1]
 Be abstinent. Let not thy crowding thoughts run wild.
 [670] Thoughts lions are, and antelopes. Mind's forest; child!

The prime of remedies is abstinence, we know.
 And scratching irritates the itch;--as leeches show.
 Of treatment medical the base is abstinence.
 Therefore be abstinent. Show strength of mind and sense.
 Accept my counsel. Lend an ear as I advise;
 In golden earrings, counsel's pearls shall be thy prize.
 Be thou as slave to this, my cunning goldsmith-art;
 I'll teach thee how to soar beyond the stars' bright chart.
 Know, first of all, creation's minds are manifold,
 [675] As are its forms;--from Alpha to Omega told.
 From this variety, disorder seems to rise;
 Though, in true sense, to unity the series hies.
 In one sense, they're discordant; other, in accord;
 They now as folly, now as wisdom, pass a word.
 The day of judgment will to each assign its place;
 All men of wisdom yearn to see that day of grace.

He who, as blackamoor, is steeped in sin's dark dye,
 In that dread day shall gulp dishonour's foulest lye.
 The wretch whose countenance beams not bright as the sun,
 [680] Shall strive in vain behind the densest veil to run.

[p. 211]

If, like some thorns, his stem display no single rose,
 That springtide will prove fatal to his safe repose.
 But he that blooms from head to foot with righteous deeds,
 With joy shall welcome spring's awakening of those meads.

The useless thorn desires the nipping wintry blast,
 To lay all low and simplify the flowery vast;
 That so, all beauty cloaked, all squalor hid, the same,
 All glorious hues, all hideous sights, be rendered tame.
 The leaf's fall to such thorn more grateful is than spring;
 The ruby and the flint are one in tithesman's ring. [685]
 True, that the gardener's eye in winter knows the thorn;
 But what is one eye's scrutiny to general scorn!

The vulgar public is, as 'twere, one witless wight;
 Each star's a clipping of the moon, in its fond sight.
 Not so great men of wisdom, radiant with troth,
 They shout with joy: "Good tidings! Spring breaks into growth!"

Unless the flowers blossom on the fertile trees,
 How can the fruit be gathered, honey store the bees?
 The flowers blow and fade; the fruit begins to swell.
 So, when our bodies die, our souls in glory dwell. [690]
 The fruit's reality; the flower is but a sign;
 The flower's the harbinger; the fruit, the true design.
 The flower blown and past, the fruit then comes in sight;
 The first must perish ere the other can see light.
 Unless a loaf be broke, no nutriment it yields;
 Until the grapes are crushed, no cup of wine man wields.
 So drugs, to prove a solace to the sufferer's ache,
 Together must be blended, rolled in one smooth cake. [691]

Footnotes

^m165:1 Qur'an xx. 97, makes the wandering Jew, Samiri, who produced the golden calf, to shun every one, saying, "Touch me not!"

^m167:1 Vicar of God is one of the Caliph's titles. This "pretender" must have been some particular adversary of the poet's. The satire is bitter.

^m167:2 Bayezid of Bestam, in Persia, an early Gnostic saint; died A.D. 874 (A.H. 261).

^m167:3 Yezid, second Caliph of Damascus, persecutor of Husayn, son of the fourth Caliph 'Ali.

^m167:4 The original naturally mentions the "qibla'' of Islam; not the "east," as used in Christian churches.

^m171:1 "My poverty's my pride" is a saying traditionally attributed to Mohammed.

^m177:1 Qur'an iii. 12, mentions several things "made goodly to man."

^m177:2 Qur'an vii. 189, relates the creation of a helpmate for Adam.

^m177:3 Muhammed.

^m177:4 For Humayra, see a note in No. 8, dist. 69.

^m177:5 Yet Europe still pretends to believe that Islam has denied the possession of a soul by woman!

^m179:1 Qur'an lxxix. 24. So Pharaoh is there said to have styled himself.

^m179:2 Qur'an ii. 3, &c.

^m180:1 Not Easterns only have a superstition about treasures hid in ruins.

^m181:1 Qur'an xxii. ix.

^m182:1 Man has a triple nature, vegetative, bestial, and human.

^m182:2 Qur'an xxxix. 54.

^m182:3 Qur'an vii. 142, &c.

^m183:1 Qur'an xxxiv. 42.

^m183:2 Qur'an vii. 75; xi. 65-70; xxvi. 142-158. Salih was sent to the tribe of Thamud, troglodytes who dwelt in the valleys about half-way between Medina and the Gulf of Akaba.

^m183:3 Qur'an xci. 13.

^m185:1 Qur'an vii. 76, 89; xi. 70, 97; xxix. 36.

^m186:1 Qur'an vii. 91.

^m187:1 Qur'an lv. 20.

^m189:1 Qur'an vi. 2, 60.

^m189:2 Qur'an xxxviii. 34.

^m192:1 Not textually from the Qur'an.

^193:1 Not textually from the Qur'an.

^m196:1 Qur'an xxiv. 30.

^m197:1 Qur'an ii. 23, &c.

^m197:2 Rich Muslims everywhere break their fast in Ramazan with water from the well of Zemzem, in Mekka, if possible.

^m198:1 A pearl is believed to be a special dewdrop, caught by a special oyster, and thence brought to perfection by a special providence. (See Sa'di's ode at the end of translator's preface.)

^m199:1 Qur'an xciii. 1.

^m199:2 Qur'an xciii. 10.

^m199:3 Qur'an cxii. 3.

^m200:1 The world.

^m202:1 The belief is that Jesus was not crucified, but was caught up to the fourth heaven, that of the sun, where he will live until he comes again in glory.

^m202:2 The belief is that Adam plucked an ear of corn, the forbidden fruit, in paradise.

^m202:3 Abbas, Muhammed's uncle, ancestor of the Abbasi Caliphs.

^m209:1 Qur'an li. 9.

^m210:1 Von Hammer, in his History of the Ottoman Empire, so entirely misunderstood this beautiful Arabian proverb, "Es sabru miftahu 'l faraj," as to read "farj" (pudendum), for "faraj" (success); and cloaked his blunder by the remark: "Too pungent for literal translation."

     
The Mesnavi and The Acts of the Adepts, by Jelal-'d-din Rumi and Shemsu-'d-Din Ahmed, tr. by James W. Redhouse, [1881], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 212]

  

X.

HUSaMU-'D-DiN, Light of the Truth, take up, my friend,
 A sheet, that thou a Teacher's virtues mayst append.
 True, thou'rt not strong; thy frame is delicate, at best;
 But thou'rt the sun that lights my thoughts to their safe nest.
 Thou art both lamp and lantern, all in one. Dost see?
 Guide to my heart's behests, clue to my wish thou'rt he.
 Their thread is in thy hand; thy guidance can it shift;
 The pearls upon it strung are gems, thy soul's free gift.

Write down the qualities by which a Teacher's known.
 [5] Select thy Teacher first; then, follow all he's shown.
 A Teacher's summer's glow; cold winter, crowd terrene;
 The rabble's darkness self; the Teacher, moon serene.

Young Fortune have I named my Teacher, for the nonce;--
 Young Fortune, truth's real Teacher; vigorous at once.
 An ancient Teacher he; commencement he ne'er had;
 A solitary pearl;--all peerless, never sad.
 Increase of age gives wine fresh strength, as well is known;
 Especially truth's wine, that flows from God's high throne.
 Select a Teacher, then. Without such, travel's vain;
 [10] The way is dangerous,--beset with evil's train.

[p. 213]

By well-known road, though travelled many times before,
 Without a guide to venture, opens peril's door.
 How then an unknown path thou ne'er hast followed yet?
 Go not alone, without a guide;--act not in fret.
 Unless thy Teacher be at hand to lead thee right,
 The clamours of the demons surely thee'll affright.
 Those demons will mislead thee, into danger cast;
 More clever ones than thou have lost their wits at last.

Learn from the Prophet's words the error of their ways;
 How Satan led them far astray in bygone days. [15]
 From off the track to all that's good he them misled;
 Them carried off; them rendered blind, by vain thoughts fed.
 Behold their bones, their skeletons, along the road!
 Take warning thence. Drive not thy beast with maddening goad!
 Dismount; and to the rightful path safe lead him back,
 Where guides abound,--experienced travellers dot the track.
 Leave not thy beast; his rein loose not thou from thy hand.
 His inclination is to wander o'er the land.
 One moment only leave him carelessly to roam;
 Towards the pastures he at once will rush, all foam. [20]
 Thy beast is not a friend to travelling by the road.
 How many muleteers through this have lost a load!
 Know'st not the way? Observe which path thy beast would take,
 And follow the reverse. Secure this will thee make.
 "Consult thou them;" [*1] but then, do not what they advise;
 For he who them opposes not, to ruin hies.
 Lend not thyself to lust and fancy's every wind;
 For these are what lead men astray; to God's truth blind.

[p. 214]

There's nothing in the world that better curbs the lusts,
 [25] Than holy company. Protected, he who trusts.

The Prophet said to 'Ali: "Cousin, list to me.
 The 'Lion of the Truth' [*1] art thou; a hero. See!
 Trust not too much, however, to thy courage, sole;
 Confide, much rather, on God's aim to keep thee whole.
 Put faith in aid from His divine, omniscient mind,
 That never can be baffled by disputant blind.
 His shadow on the earth is what keeps it in place;
 His spirit, sunbird-like, soars in supernal space.
 Were I to speak His praises until judgment day,
 [30] No end, no interruption, would admit my say.
 Himself He's veiled in man, as sun behind a cloud.
 This seek to comprehend. God knows what mysteries shroud.
 The sun He is;--the sun of spirit, not of sky;
 By light from Him man lives;--and angels eke, forby.
 Then, 'Ali, of all service man can offer here,
 Do thou choose trust in God, dependence firm, sincere.
 Each man betakes himself some special worship to;
 And each some special friend selects, without ado.
 Do thou take refuge in God's wisdom, full, divine;
 [35] He'll foil the secret foe that would thee undermine.
 Of all the modes of worship, this choose thou, the best;
 Thou'lt distance all competitors, the prize thou'lt wrest.
 Thy Teacher having chosen thus, obedience yield,
 Implicit; even as Moses journeying o'er that field. [*2]
 Whate'er events betide, beware, and question not;
 For fear thy guide should turn, and drive thee from the spot. [*3]
 Should He destroy a ship, [*4]--no murmur from thy mouth;
 Should He an infant choke, [*5]--let slip no word uncouth.

[p. 215]

God hath declared his hand is like the hand of God,
 By saying: "God's right hand above all hands doth plod.' [*1] [40]
 God's hand it is that kills him; makes him living, too.
 But what is living? The everlasting spirit. Lo!
 Whoever journeys, now and then, this road alone,
 The prayers of saints it is leads him to safety's zone.
 A saint's protection is not less than angel's aid;
 His help is God's right hand, when all is truly said.
 Now, if an absent saint have such portentous power,
 A present Teacher's honour sure must higher tower.
 If for the absent tempting viands are prepared,
 For present guests what may not largely be outshared? [45]
 The varlet who to serve his lord is present there,
 Must rank before the absentee, for goodly fare.
 Thus, having Teacher chosen, be not too thin-skinned,
 Nor wishy-washy, to a muddy puddle kinned.
 For every buffet, see thou do not umbrage take:
 How can a mirror polished be, unless it bear a shake?"

Hear now this pregnant tale narrators have preserved;
 A practice it relates in Qazwin much observed:
 Upon the breast, the arms, the bladebones, and the like,
 With needle's point and indigo, tattooed designs they strike. [50]

A certain Qazwin bully to an artist hied,
 To have a brave design imprinted on his hide.
 The artist first inquired what pattern he'd select.
 The man a lion rampant thought he must elect;
 And said: "My luck resides in Leo,--lion-sign;
 Depict thou then a lion, deep-blue stained, benign."
 The artist then demanded where he'd wish it done;
 Our man replied: "Between my bladebones it enthrone."

The artist then began to ply his needles' train;
 The Qazwin bully bellowed, smarting with the pain. [55]

[p. 216]

The artist he addressed: "Most clever man of skill,
 Thou'lt drive me mad. What picture works me so much ill?"
 Said he: "A lion's form is what thou didst enjoin."
 "O yes!" replied the bully. "What part dost thou coin?"
 The artist: "At the tail have I commenced this time."
 Our man: "O never mind the tail, designer prime!
 Your lion's tail has whacked me on my rump so hard,
 That I've no power to breathe, nor such pain disregard.
 Allow thy lion to remain without a tail;
 [60] Thy needles have unnerved me with their sharp assail."

The artist then began upon another part,
 And worked his instruments. They soon induced new smart.
 The patient screamed again: "What member limnest thou now?"
 Our artist answered: "'Tis the lion's ear, I trow."
 His man replied: "O leave him without ears this time;
 An earless lion's not so bad. Cut short the rhyme."

Anew the artist on a part assayed his hand.
 Afresh the bully interfered, by pain unmanned.
 "What part art now at work on? Say, my worthy friend!"
 [65] "O," said the artist, "now his body I append."
 "Leave out his body!" gasped the suffering Qazwin man;
 "The pain's unbearable. Make short work, as thou can."

The artist now quite lost his wits, as well he might;
 He scratched his head; sought how to mend his plight;
 Dashed all his needles, indigo, design, to earth;
 In anger saying: "What the plague's come now to birth?
 A lion tailless, headless, bodiless, who's seen?
 God such a lion ne'er created, sure, I ween!"

[p. 217]

Have patience, thou too, brother, with thy needle's smart.
 So shalt thou 'scape the sting of conscience in thy heart. [70]
 They who have conquered,--freed themselves from body's thrall,
 Are worshipped in the spheres, the sun, the moon, stars, all.
 Whoever's killed pride's demon in his earthly frame,
 The sun and clouds are slaves, to do his bidding, tame.
 His heart can lessons give of flaming to the lamp;
 The very sun not equals him in ardent vamp.
 For God hath said, in speaking of the scorching sun,
 These words: "It swerved from them." [*1] It had new course to run.

The sharpest thorns are welcome, as the roseleaf soft,
 To finite who to th' Infinite can soar aloft. [75]
 What signifies to glorify the Lord of heaven;
 To humble self to dust; with meekness, pride to leaven?
 What use to learn to formulate God's unity;
 What use to bow one's self before. the Deity?
 Wouldst shine as brilliantly in sight of all?
 Annihilate thy darksome self, thy being's pall.
 Let thy existence in God's essence be enrolled,
 As copper in alchemist's bath is turned to gold.
 Quit "I" and "We," which o'er thy heart exert control.
 'Tis egotism, estranged from God, that clogs thy soul. [80]

Footnotes

^m213:1 Qur'an iii. 153.

^m214:1 'Ali's title is " The victorious Lion of God."

^m214:2 This journey is recounted in Qur'an xviii. 64-82.

^m214:3 Qur'an xviii. 69.

^m214:4 Qur'an xviii. 70.

^m214:5 Qur'an xviii. 73.

^m215:1 Qur'an xlviii. 10.

^m217:1 Qur'an xviii. 16.

     
The Mesnavi and The Acts of the Adepts, by Jelal-'d-din Rumi and Shemsu-'d-Din Ahmed, tr. by James W. Redhouse, [1881], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 218]

  

XI.

A LION, wolf, and fox together went to hunt;
 Among the hills, in quest of game, they turned their brunt.
 By mutual help and aid, they hoped to make the field
 Too hot for other animals not under union's shield.
 Co-operating with each other, they surmised,
 A heavy bag they each would make of what each prized.

'Tis true, the noble lion felt of this ashamed.
 Still, he politely showed towards them his spirit tamed.
 A king feels inconvenienced by throngs of troops;
 [5] But out of kindness makes them share his warlike swoops
 The sun would feel ashamed, did stars with him appear;
 'Tis generous in the sun to grace the starry sphere.
 'Twas God's command to Ahmed still: "With them consult." [*1]
 True, they gave no advice; no counsel did result.
 Upon the balance barley's weighed, as well as gold;
 But barley, thence, has not acquired gold's value told.
 The spirit with the flesh is fellow-traveller now;
 A dog has sometimes charge of palace-yard below.

The company, then, set out for the woods amain,
 [10] As followers of the lion's majesty, and train.

[p. 219]

A mountain-ox, an ibex, next a hare, they took;
 Since fortune smiled on them in each succeeding nook.
 A lion's followers on the plain of strife and war,
 Of food, by day or night, shall know no want, no bar.

Their prey they carried from the hills into the plain;
 Or dead, or sorely wounded;--bleeding, or clean slain.
 The wolf and fox were moved to pitch of keen desire,
 To see the prey shared out with justice by their sire. [15]
 The shade of their cupidity caught Leo's eye,
 He understood their confidence, their longing's dye.
 Whoe'er has insight to the hearts and minds of men,
 Knows at a glance what's passing under his sharp ken.
 Beware, O heart, thou ever-fond one, in his sight,
 Thy secret to betray,--thy wish to bring to light!
 He knows it all, though ignorance he may pretend;--
 His smile is but a veil thy aim to comprehend.

The lion, having measured all their secret thought,
 Made no remark; he knew how they could both be bought; [20]
 Within his breast revolved their fitting punishment:
 "I'll show you, my fine fellows, what's by lion meant.
 My pleasure's, for you both, what you should seek to know;
 Not calculate beforehand what I may bestow.
 Your every thought should but reflect my sovereign will,
 And thankfully await what I may give you still.
 Have pictures aught to say to guide the artist's hand?
 His cunning 'tis decides what portrait shall expand.
 So all your paltry surmise of my royal mind
 An insult is,--an arrogance,--that must be fined. [25]
 'They who conceive an evil thing of God' [*1] are cursed;
 And if I spare you, justice will be clean reversed.
 To rid the world of scandal, I must end your lives;
 Your story shall a moral point; whoe'er contrives."

[p. 220]

With this he smiled again most grimly on the pair.
 Trust not a lion's smile, all ye to live who care.
 The riches of the world are smiles of Providence;
 They make men proud, and lead them to their fate prepense.
 Through poverty and suffering we may escape
 [30] The trap that riches bait; and so avoid the scrape.

The lion now addressed the wolf: "Share out the spoil.
 Do justice to us all. Thou'rt versed in cunning's foil.
 Be thou my factor. Carve the game as may be fit.
 So shalt thou honour win from all who see thy wit."
 The wolf then: "Royal Sir, the mountain-ox is thine.
 Thou'rt great; the ox is large and fat; let none repine.
 The ibex is my share. As I, so it's the mean.
 And thou, O fox, shalt have the hare. 'Tis not too lean."

The lion interposed: "Wolf! What is this thou'st said?
 [35] I present; and to talk of ' thou ' and 'I,' so staid I
 What rubbish is a wolf, to deem himself a judge
 In presence of a lion, who'll soon make him budge?
 Come hither, ass! Thyself alone it is thou'st sold!"
 With this he tears the wolf to pieces, all too bold.

He saw the wolf had not one grain of common sense;
 So stripped him of his hide, his life, his brain so dense.
 Then said: "Since sight of me chased not all thought of self
 From thee, death by my paw was due, thou wretched elf!
 Thyself thou shouldst have vanquished in my presence dread.
 [40] Not having done so, thou'rt now numbered with the dead."

"All perisheth, except His counsel" 's holy writ. [*1]
 If we're not of "His counsel," life cannot us fit.

[p. 221]

He that will lose his life for God's sake, hath it still;
 "All perisheth" hath then no power his soul to kill.
 He's of th' excepted; not of those to perish doomed.
 For, who's excepted, saved is he. His spring hath bloomed.
 But he that, in God's court, of "me" and "thee" shall prate,
 Will be cut off;--far banished from the heavenly gate.

A man once came and gaily knocked at a friend's door.
 The other asked: "Who's there? Is this a threshing-floor?" [45]
 "'Tis I," said he. "O then thou straight mayest go away.
 'Tis dinner-time. Mature, not crude, must be who'd stay.
 Thou'rt thou? Most crude thou art; by rawness' self estranged.
 By fire of trial those crude humours must be changed.
 'Tis fire matures the crude. Let absence be the fire,
 Shall purge thee of thyself, burn out all selfish mire."

Away he went in anguish; travelled a whole year;
 Saw not his friend; so pined with yearning, anxious fear;
 Matured his soul with suffering's searching throes and pains.
 Then sought the door from whence he'd been repulsed, again. [50]
 He knocked anew,--his heart with many fears oppressed,
 Lest from his lip some word unwelcome drop confessed.

Within, the question's heard: "Who knocks at my street door?"
 He answered: "Thy own second self;--though all too poor."
 The invitation followed: "Let myself walk in.
 My cot's too small for two selves to find room therein.
 The thread's not double in a needle's single eye.
 As thou'rt now single, enter. Room thou'lt find. Pray, try!"

[p. 222]

The thread and needle have relation, each to each;
 [55] For needle's eye a camel's far beyond all reach.
 How shall a camel ever be so fine and slim
 Unless long fasting his redundant flesh should skim?
 The hand of God is wanted, then, to make it pass
 The God who by His word creates both man and grass.
 Impossibilities are possibles to Him;
 The stubbornest is docile when His will curbs whim.
 The blind from birth, the leper, e'en the dead, arise,
 Whole, sound, whene'er th' Omnipotent "Come forth" but cries.
 E'en non-existence, death of death, at His command,
 [60] Starts into life, compelled by His supreme demand.

Recite, my friend: "Each day He's busied with a work:" [*1]
 And know, He's never idle, unemployed to lurk.
 His smallest daily toil,--a work like pleasure still,--
 Is to send forth three armies, bound to work His will.
 One, from the loins of spheres the elements to stir;
 So that all plants may vegetate, from moss to fir.
 One, from the wombs of mothers to earth's surface prone,
 That male and female may increase, not lie like stone.
 The third hence wends its way to sepulchre's dread bourn,
 [65] There to receive, at length, reward; and joy, or mourn.
 Leave we this theme;--'tis endless,--never would have done.
 Let's see, now, how the friends enjoyed themselves alone.

Our host invites his guest to enter, free from scorn:
 "Thou'rt welcome, self of mine! We're not like rose and thorn.
 Our thread is single,--free from knots and tangle; done,
 As 'Be,' though duplex as to form, in sense is one."

[p. 223]

That "Be" 's a rope, of power collective, to the end
 That nullity may be united to a friend.
 Thus duplex means are wanted, for appearances;
 Though, in effect, one means there be of all that is. [70]
 The biped, as the quadruped, goes but one road.
 The one-edged knife, the two-edged shears, make one inroad.

Observe yon pair of bleachers at their daily toil.
 Apparently, they differ, combat, as they moil.
 The one's for ever wetting cloths in their stream's tide,
 The other dries them just as fast in hot noontide.
 The first, again to soak the scarce-dried cloths makes haste;
 As though in opposition to his partner's waste.
 But, in reality, the two have but one aim:
 Co-operation's what they jointly, both proclaim. [75]

Each prophet, every saint, has his especial rite;
 But, as all tend to God, they're one, multipartite.
 Sleep overcomes alike the followers of all creeds;
 As water makes all mills to turn and grind, at needs.
 The water flows from upwards, down upon the mill;
 Its flowing through the trough is but man's wants to fill.
 No sooner has man's need been fully satisfied,
 He turns the water off;--straight in its bed it's tied.

To teach men wisdom, stream of speech flows through the mouth;
 But spirit hath another course, far less uncouth. [80]
 Without a voice or repetition it rolls on,
 As through elysium, streams;--flowers springing aye, anon.
 O Lord! Do Thou vouchsafe to my weak, erring soul
 To see the realm where, voiceless, spirit thoughts may stroll,

[p. 224]

That so my mind, in glee, on foot or head, may wing
 Its flight to the far bourn that parts from nothing, thing,
 Careering o'er the boundless fields of ecstasy,
 Where fancy joins reality in entity.
 Far-reaching more 's nonentity than fancy's stretch;
 [85] And thus, his fancy is a source of woe to wretch.
 Then, being's narrower far than fancy's power of wing;
 E'en as the full moon wanes, till it becomes a string.
 The world of matter and its forms is narrower still;
 A prison all too strait for mind to have its will.
 Plurality and composition are the cause;
 Our senses these alone can comprehend, and pause.
 Beyond our senses lies the world of unity.
 Desirest thou unity? Beyond thy senses fly!
 Divine command, "Be!" was one act; two-lettered word;
 [90] Of grave import, though short, sprung from all being's Lord.
 But leave we this, and turn to see how fares it now,
 With our acquaintances, wolf, fox, and lion;--trow.

The lordly lion 'd torn poor wolf's head from his tail,
 That so two heads there might not be for one avail.
 "On them We vengeance took" [*1] 's a well-known sacred text;
 Wherefore, poor wolf, not quash thyself, when lion's next?

The lion turned, then, to the fox, and bade him share
 The prey they'd seized; that they might make a meal, not spare.
 The wily fox, low bowing with a reverence meet,
 [95] Said: "Sire, the ox your share is, for your breakfast treat.
 The ibex, then, will suffice for your midday lunch,
 To serve as stop-gap in the interval of munch.
 The hare a light repast will furnish ere you sleep;
 The royal paunch from indigestion's pains 'twill keep."

[p. 225]

The lion answered: "Well said, fox. Thou'rt justice' self.
 Who taught thee with such judgment rare to portion pelf?
 Where didst thou learn to do full justice with great art?"
 Said he: "My Lord, to teach me was that dead wolf's part."

The lion thus replied: "For us much love thou'st shown.
 Take thou all three unto thyself, as very own. [100]
 Good fox! Thou'st given up thyself entire, for us.
 Why should I injure thee? Thou'rt I myself. No fuss!
 Myself am thine; the prey is thine; all,--every bit.
 Exalt thy head above the spheres. For that thou'rt fit.
 Thou'st taken warning from that wretched, selfish wolf.
 No longer fox art thou, my lion, my own self!
 A wise head ever lessons learns from others' ills,
 Who sees his neighbours victims fall, knows what them kills."

The fox now thanked his stars a hundred, thousandfold,
 For that the lion first the wolf to share had told; [105]
 And reasoned: "Had he given me first his high command
 To share the prey, my life I had not kept in hand.
 Then praise to Him who 'th placed me low in this world's scale,
 To follow after mightier ones when they regale."

So have we heard God's judgments wrought in ages past
 On people of the eld;--set forth as mountains fast,
 That we may learn from them,--the wolves of early days.
 Then let us, as the fox, glean wisdom from those lays.
 "God's people sanctified" 's the title on us cast,
 By God's own Prophet, truthful witness, and the last. [110]
 The bones, the skeletons of all those old-world wolves,
 Consider well, ye readers;--think upon yourselves.

[p. 226]

Who's wise will from his heart cast out all fond conceits
 Of greatness, when he hears of 'Ad's [*1] and Pharaoh's feats.
 Unless he warning take from what on others fell,
 Men shall a moral draw from his case, sad to tell.

Cried Noah: "Ye stiff-necked race! I am not I, indeed.
 My self I've sacrificed; of God's love have I need.
 From every fleshly sense and wish I'm severed, quite.
 [115] God is my light, my mind, my visual organ's site.
 I am not I. The breath I breathe is God's own breath.
 Whoe'er gainsays this word, blasphemes, courts his own death.
 Within my form of fox there lurks the lion's power;
 Against this feeble fox 'tis useless now to lower.
 Unless you lay aside scorn for my fox's form,
 You'll hear the lion growl more fierce than raging storm."

If Noah had not possessed the mighty aid of God,
 Could he a world have upside down turned with a nod?
 Within his form whole herds of lions, as one paw,
 [120] Lay hid. A fire was he; the world a stack of straw.
 That misled straw refused to pay its tithe to him.
 Fire flashed. Forthwith the straw in smoke and flames sank grim.

Whoe'er 'gainst the hidden lion in saint's form
 Upraise the voice of pride, like to our wolf, base worm,
 Shall, like that wolf, be torn by lion piecemeal quite;
 The text: "On them we vengeance took" he shall recite. [*2]
 A stroke shall lay him low, as wolf by lion's paw.
 A madman must he be who'd rush in lion's maw.
 O that the stroke had fallen upon the body frail;
 [125] And that the heart and faith had 'scaped! 'Twere vast avail!

[p. 227]

Upon this point I feel my strength must all give way.
 How shall I tell the secrets of this mystic play?
 Just like the fox, do you yourselves deny in all.
 In lion's presence raise no cavil, or you'll fall.
 Relinquish thoughts of "I" and "We" when "He" 's afield.
 The kingdom is the Lord's; to God the kingdom yield.
 The straight way enter all, like paupers as you are.
 The lion and the prey will both fall to your share.

God is a spirit pure. All-Glorious is His name!
 He hath no need of praise, of honour, glory, fame! [130]
 All these, and all besides, whatever may befall,
 Upon His servants He bestows. He's Lord of all!
 God hath no envy, wish, desire for creatures' ruths;
 And blessed is he who takes to heart this truth of truths.
 'Twas He created both worlds;--all their pomp and pride.
 Shall He desire what He hath made in His own tide?
 Keep, then, your hearts pure in the sight of God the Lord,
 That you may never be ashamed of thought or word.
 He knows the secrets, aims, desires of all your hearts;
 They're patent to Him, as a hair in milk at marts. [135]
 Whoever hath a breast cleansed from all thoughts of guile,
 His breast a mirror is, where heavenly truths will smile.
 Its secrets are all known to God;--its every part;
 "Believer's heart's the mirror of believer's heart."
 He tries our metal on the touchstone of His law.
 The fine, the base, He will distinguish, without flaw.
 Our talents being tried by His omniscient skill,
 What's good, what's bad, will sure appear, plain, by His will. [139]

Footnotes

^m218:1 Qur'an iii. 153.

^m219:1 Qur'an xlviii. 6.

^m220:1 Qur'an xxviii. 88.

^m222:1 Qur'an lv. 29.

^m224:1 Qur'an vii. 132.

^m226:1 See Tale iv., dist. 121.

^m226:2 Qur'an vii. 132. See note [[*1]], p. 224.

     
The Mesnavi and The Acts of the Adepts, by Jelal-'d-din Rumi and Shemsu-'d-Din Ahmed, tr. by James W. Redhouse, [1881], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 228]

  

XII.

THE kings of yore a custom had, so I've been told,
 Of course thou'st heard it;--must remember it, of old,
 On their left hand their champions took their usual place;
 Because the heart is on the left of body's space.
 Their chancellor and scribes stood on their right hand all;
 In that the writer's art to the right hand doth fall.
 Before their face the holy teachers stood erect,--
 The mirrors of the soul;--than mirror more correct.
 Their breasts they've polished with the acts of thought and praise,
 [5] That, mirror-like, they catch each image facts may raise.
 Each object born in nature with a lovely mien
 Should always have a mirror set to catch its sheen.
 A beauteous face enamoured is with mirror's glance;
 Heart's piety's the polish best the soul can chance.

A friend of tried sincerity came from afar,
 And guest became with trusty Joseph;--free from bar.
 They had been friends before, in childhood's artless days;
 Had leant their elbows on one cushion, in their ways.

His brethren's envy and wrong-dealing touched upon,
 [10] Said Joseph: "'Twas a chain. It bound a lion. 'Non!
 Disgrace affects not lions, if with chains they're bound.
 With God's decree I quarrel not;--it's always sound.

[p. 229]

A lion with a chain around his lordly neck,
 Is still the lord of them who forged the chain as check."
 The friend asked: "How wert, in the well, the prison, cast?"
 Said Joseph: "As the moon in wane and change at last."

At change, the new moon's bent in two, a poor weak thing,
 But ripens to the full apace, night's matchless king. [*1]
 Pearls in a mortar pounded are, by chance, sometimes;
 Still, they're esteemed a joy to glad eyes in all climes. [15]
 Then, grains of wheat are cast into the lowly earth;
 But golden ears thence spring, a source of glee and mirth.
 These, too, are ground to dust in mill;--vile as to show;
 Increased in value, thence, bread it becomes, we know.
 Again 'tis crushed between the teeth; to chyme it turns,
 And feeds the mind, the thoughts, the soul;--in wisdom burns.
 The soul, in turn, is subject to the stress of love;
 New miracles, as seen, "the sowers marvel " [*2] prove.
 But truce to these reflections; let us follow now
 The words of Joseph's friend. 'Tis worth while these to know. [20]

That conversation closed, said Joseph to his guest:
 "What gift, my friend, hast brought in token of thy zest?"

To go with empty hands and visit friends long missed,
 Is like a man who goes to mill without his grist.
 E'en God will ask His creatures in the judgment day:
 "What offerings have you brought to meet your Maker? Say!
 Alone, and empty-handed? Is it thus you come?
 E'en as We first created you? Gifts left at home?' [*3]

[p. 230]

What have you brought as timely offerings in your hands?
 [25] What are the gifts with which you'd grace your new life's lands?
 Or, was it that you'd no belief in this return?
 Our promise of this day by you was laughed to scorn?
 If you denied thus the hope to be My guest,
 Then dust and ashes wait you in My realm, at best.
 If you did not deny it, whence your empty hands?
 How come you to a friend's gate, scorning just demands?"

Put by a little from thy daily meat and drink,
 So shalt thou have a store for offerings' binding link.
 "Sleep little" when thou art of those "who lay them down." [*1]
 [30] "Of mornings," be of them who "ask for pardon's crown." [*2]
 Give signs of life, though slight;--as babes do in the womb;
 So may God grant thee inward light to cheer thy tomb.
 And when thou 'scapest from dark and narrow prison there,
 Then mayst thou soar from earth beyond the realms of air.
 "The spacious land of God" 'tis named in holy writ, [*3]
 The land to which the prophets all have gladly flit.
 The heart is never lonesome in that vast abode;
 Its green trees never wither, frosts no leaves corrode.
 If now thou load thyself with sensual burden's weight,
 [35] Fatigued and jaded, faint thou'lt prove beneath their freight.

In sleep thou bearest no burden; borne thou art, instead.
 Fatigue is thence recruited;--strength regains its head.
 Know then, thy sleep's a foretaste of what is to come,
 From the rapt state of saints arriving at their home.
 The saints were well prefigured by the "Sleepers Seven." [*4]
 "Their sleep," "their stretchings," "their awaking," lead to heaven.

[p. 231]

Without the least exertion on their parts by acts,
 The "right and left-hand registers" draw them by facts.
 The "right-hand register" 's the record of good deeds; [*1]
 The "left-hand register" 's the list of fleshly greeds. [*2] [40]
 But both of these abolished are in case of saints.
 To them such things are but as echo dies and faints.
 Though good and evil may their echoes round thee peal,
 The echoing mountain hears them not in the ordeal.

Now Joseph once again inquired: "What offering bringest?"
 His friend, ashamed of urgent pressing, sighed. Thou singest?
 Said he: "Full many offerings have I sought and seen;
 But none was worthy of thee; or I much misween.
 How could I bring a diamond to its native mine;
 Or add a drop of water to a sea of brine? [45]
 Shall I to Kashan cummin bring, whence it is drawn, [*3]
 By offering up my life and soul to beauty's fawn?
 I know no rarity that's not surpassed by thee;
 Thy loveliness the rarity men nowhere see.
 The fittest present, then, I've found, a mirror is.
 And this I've brought; unsullied, bright, refulgent 'tis [*4]
 Therein thou'lt contemplate thy beauteous, matchless face,
 As beaming as the sun that decorates sky's space.
 A mirror have I brought, thou charming, witching one;
 In it admire thyself; and think of me, when gone." [50]

The mirror now he drew from underneath his skirt.
 A mirror is, to beauty, with attractions girt.
 In non-existence' mirror if existence gleams,
 Present this mirror to it, thou, as best beseems.
 In non-existence mirrored, being we may see;
 As wealthy men their wealth may show by beggars' glee.

[p. 232]

The hungry man's the mirror best shows what is bread.
 And tinder mirrors flint and steel's gleam, quickly spread.
 Wherever want, defect, is seen, beauty's most prized.
 [55] The mirror of perfection's then best realised.

If clothes grew, ready cut and sewn, to meet our needs,
 Where'd be the use of tailor's art, to fashion weeds?
 The unhewn trunk is needed, for the carver's skill,
 And carpenter, to cut out thence his frames, his thill.
 The surgeon hastens to the couch where suffering lies;
 Where limbs are broken, there his bandages he ties.
 Were there no patient, malady, no fever, ache,
 Could art sublime, the medical, its marvels make?
 If humble brass and copper were not to be found,
 [60] Th' alchemist's stone could not to gold transmute them round.
 Defect is thus the mirror whence perfection's seen;
 And vileness is the foil to show off grandeur's sheen.
 By contrast does each opposite its fellow show,
 Sweet honey by sharp vinegar we best can know.
 The man who sees and feels his imperfections sore,
 Exerts himself to cure them quickly. all the more.
 And he'll ne'er take his flight towards heaven's eternal King,
 Who holds at heart the thought that he's a perfect thing.

No worse disease exists, to taint the human mind,
 [65] Than self-conceit, that paints its owner gold refined.
 How many bitter tears has not the vain to shed,
 Ere arrogance can be expelled, and pride be dead!
 The malady of Satan,--self-conceit:--"I'm best," [*1]
 Exists in germ in every panting human breast.
 These fancy they have mortified themselves throughout.
 Take them to be pure streams; their filth seek in the grout.

[p. 233]

Just stir them up a little, for a trial's sake;
 Thou'lt see their mud discolour all the water's lake.
 There's ooze at bottom of the pond,--be sure of that,--
 However clear the surface of the dull dead flat. [70]
 Our greatest teacher is endowed with fair device.
 He digs a conduit in the very soil of vice.
 How can he make the water of that conduit pure?
 All human wisdom's but one spark from God's vast store.
 Does sword inflict a wound in its own handle,--blade?
 Find me a surgeon who shall cure a gash so made.
 Where wound exists, the flies will ever flock amain,
 To hide its hideousness from sight, and lull the pain,
 Those flies the symbols are of man's vain, baseless thoughts;
 The wound they cover over's ignorance high-wrought. [75]
 'Tis only when the teacher salve applies with skill,
 The throes are quieted that shoot across man's will.
 He then imagines that his wound is healing fast.
 Effect this is of cunning used, that salve to cast.
 O man, whose back is galled, accept his salve with thanks.
 Thy solace thence arises; not from thy own pranks. [78]

Footnotes

^m229:1 In Semitic and Muslim lore the moon is "he," the sun "she."

^m229:2 Qur'an xlviii. 29.

^m229:3 Qur'an vi. 94.

^m230:1 Qur'an li. 17.

^m230:2 Qur'an li. 18.

^m230:3 Qur'an iv. 99.

^m230:4 Qur'an xviii. 8-21.

^m231:1 Qur'an lxix. 19.

^m231:2 Qur'an lxix. 25.

^m231:3 The Persian equivalent of our "carrying coats to Newcastle."

^m231:4 A metallic mirror, formerly much used.

^m232:1 Qur'an vii. 11.

     
The Mesnavi and The Acts of the Adepts, by Jelal-'d-din Rumi and Shemsu-'d-Din Ahmed, tr. by James W. Redhouse, [1881], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 234]

  

XIII.

THERE was a scribe [*1], before 'Uthman [*2] had filled that post,
 Most diligent in noting revelation's host.
 Whatever text the Prophet had to promulgate
 On parchment did this scribe trace all its terms of fate.

The splendour of those inspirations filled his soul.
 His mind became enlightened, as a glowing coal.
 The substance of that wisdom from the Prophet came.
 The silly scribe imagined 'twas his genius' flame:
 "The texts the Prophet promulgates with rare effect,
 [5] Appear verbatim in my mind, without defect."

The Prophet was aware of this egregious sin.
 The wrath of God descended from high heaven's welkin.
 The scribe renounced his office, and his faith at once.
 Religion's fiercest foe he stood now, for the nonce.
 The Prophet questioned him: "Benighted, wretched man!
 If light there be in thee, whence this thy darkest plan?
 Hadst thou a fountain of God's truth been, verily,
 This turbid stream had never flowed thence, heavily."

Not caring to expose his scribe to all his friends,
 [10] The Prophet held his peace, to watch th' adventure's ends.

[p. 235]

The scribe's heart hardened more and more as time rolled on.
 Repentance he felt not; his pride grew thereupon.
 He sighed. His sighs were not the signs of contrite heart;
 But tokens sure that justice made him feel its smart.
 God caused his pride to weigh more heavy than a chain.
 How many thus are fettered; none can heal their pain.
 His blasphemy and pride held him in iron grip;
 His very sighs he felt constrained to stifle on his lip.
 He cried: "'The iron collars they're compelled to wear;' [*1]
 There's naught but iron collars; these are all we bear! [15]
 'Behind them is a barrier; but We've bound their eyes,' [*2]
 So that they see not what's before, behind those ties."

The barrier so upreared appears a level plain;
 He knows not 'tis a bourn that checks him like a chain.
 Thy witness is a barrier, bars sight of the Lord;
 Thy teacher is a veil, shuts out God's holy word.
 How many infidels, oh! long faith to possess!
 Their pride, their honour, stands between them and success.
 That barrier, unseen, 's than iron firmer still.
 An axe can hew through iron; not through stubborn will. [20]
 A bond of iron may be broken by due means;
 A moral bond is what holds firmest, where it leans.

A bee, a wasp, may sting one to the very quick;
 Yet may the same be warded by precaution's trick.
 But what's to do when sting is in our very selves?
 The pain is then most biting, deeper far it delves.
 Unwillingly has leaped this subject from my mind.
 I fear 'twill leave despair in many, deep behind.
 Despair thou not; take consolation to thy soul;
 And cry to that Deliverer who can make thee whole: [25]
 "Thou Lover of forgiveness! Pardon to me grant!
 Physician of the soul! Relieve my direful want!"

[p. 236]

Such counsel wise drove mad that erring sinner, quite.
 Think not of him. 'Twill tire thy mind beyond respite.
 My friend! This counsel tells with equal force on thee.
 It flows through all the saints, though transient thou it see.
 Within the house a gleam of light has been espied.
 This light comes from a neighbour's lamp, with oil supplied.
 Give thanks for it. Be not puffed up. Snort not, good man!
 [30] To me lend ear. Presumption chase to utmost span.
 Alas! that this most transient ray of dubious light,
 The nations has seduced from God's sole path of right.
 I'll be the very slave of him, who, at each stage,
 Will not suppose the goal 'tis of his pilgrimage.
 How many stages are there must be left behind,
 Before the traveller reach the home he bears in mind.
 Although the iron may glow red, the colour's not
 Its own; 'tis but reflection of the fire that's hot.
 A window or a house with light may be suffused;
 [35] But still, the source of light is in the sun, diffused.
 Each wall, each gate, may cry amain: "I shine! I shine!
 I have no need of other's light. 'Tis mine! 'Tis mine!"
 But then the sun demurs: "O thing of little sense!
 So soon as I shall set, thy darkness will be dense!"
 The plants may think their verdure's all their very own.
 So fresh, so green; so pleasant every flower full-blown.
 But then again the summer season makes comment:
 "When I am past, your present charms will soon be spent."

A beauty's lovely body prides itself as fair.
 [40] Her spirit, having hid itself within its lair,
 Remarks: "Thou dunghill! Wherefore all this silly pride?
 Thou bloomest but a day or two, while I preside.
 Thy affectation, vanity, 's too vast for me.
 But stay till I depart: then straightway thou shalt see.
 Thy lovers then shall loathe thy charms, adored before.
 To worms, and toads, and snakes they'll fling thee, as cheap store.

[p. 237]

Thy stench shall make him hold his nose in deep disgust,
 Who lately in thy presence would have licked the dust."

Reflections from the spirit are the tongue, the eye, the ear.
 Accessions from the fire steam's bubbles 'tis upbear. [45]
 E'en as the soul's reflection on the body acts,
 Reflection from th' inspiring saints my soul impacts.
 When my soul's life shall quit my soul, alack-a-day!
 My soul shall lifeless be, like mortal soulless clay.
 'Tis therefore that I cast myself down in the dust,
 That earth may witness bear for me before th' All-Just.

In day of judgment, "when the earth shall quake with fear," [*1]
 Earth shall itself bear witness to my prayerful tear.
 Command shall issue: "Loud proclaim the acts thou'st seen."
 The earth, the rocks, a tongue shall find, to tell what's been. [50]
 Philosophers deny this, in their pride of mind;
 But tell them: "Dash your heads against a wall, ye blind!"
 The speech of earth, of water, and of plastic clay,
 Is audible unto the ears of saints that pray.
 Philosophers who will deny God's saving grace,
 Are strangers to the powers of saints' inspired race.
 He holds that inclination, working on man's brain,
 Gives rise to heated phantasy's legerdemain.
 True, his own blasphemy and lack of firm belief
 Have raised in him denial's phantom, reason's thief. [55]
 Philosophers deny the devil does exist;
 While they themselves his sport are, in his cursed fist.
 Hast never seen the devil? Look at thy own self!
 Who'd paint his forehead blue, unless deceived by elf? [*2]

[p. 238]

Whoever hath a doubt or trouble in his mind,
 In secret's a philosopher, as you may find.
 He wears the outward semblance of belief; but then,
 Anon and ever his philosophy claims pen.
 Beware, all ye believers! In you lurks this germ;
 [60] Within yourselves lies latent vile deception's sperm.
 The two and seventy sects are all within your hearts, [*1]
 And only wait a chance to play their fatal parts.

Whoever hath the bud of faith grown in his breast,
 As aspen-leaf must tremble, lest it be supprest.
 Thou laughest at the devil in thy foolish pride;
 Thyself thou hast imagined sin's stern deicide.
 But when thy soul shall manifested be to all,
 Sad sighs and moans shall rise from those who're seen to fall.
 Exhibitors of base coin in this world below
 [65] Smile now; the touchstone yet is hidden in form's glow.

O Veiler of men's sins! Lift not Thy veil from us! [*2]
 In day of trial be our Helper, gracious!
 Adulteration now contends with purest coin;
 The gold awaits the day of trial to rejoin.
 It slily thinks in its mute way, without ado:
 "Await a little, false ones! Trial comes! Soho!
 For was not Satan's self, in ages long gone by,
 Of light an angel, Prince of Powers, a galaxy,
 Until he envied Adam in his froward heart?
 [70] And then he fell, an outcast from heaven's high rampart.
 The son of Beor, Balaam, in the world's esteem,
 Was equal unto Moses. So all men did deem.

[p. 239]

To him alone was homage paid by high and low;
 His prayers were reckoned medicine for every woe.
 To Moses he opposed himself, in foolish pride.
 The Scripture tells us how most miserably he died. [*1]
 Of Balaams, and of Satans, in this world of ours,
 Some manifest, some secret, troops come at all hours.
 God granteth them celebrity within their spheres,
 That they may witness bear against their own compeers. [75]
 Then, both are elevated on a gallows high,
 As warning unto others who for honours sigh.
 They both were covetous of homage and applause;
 And both received due punishment through God's just laws.

Thou, man, perchance, the idol of some crowd mayst be.
 For God's sake, then, beware thou transgress not as he.
 And setting up thyself against a better man,
 Thou come to grief, and bring to wreck thy every plan.
 The tales of 'Ad [*2] and Thamud [*3] have the moral clear,
 That saints of God, and righteous men, are held more dear. [80]
 Those signs, and swift destruction overwhelming them,
 Proclaim aloud the power that saints around does hem.

As brutes are slain that man may live a life of ease,
 So men are slaughtered when they sin 'gainst God's decrees.
 For, what is wisdom? 'Tis th' omniscience divine.
 Man's wisdom is but folly, set against that mine.
 The brutes are timid, shun man's presence everywhere;
 Though man, in numbers, yields to them within this sphere.
 Their blood may lawfully be shed for needs of man;
 Because they lack th' ennobling spark of reason's scan. [85]
 The brute is held of low degree on this our earth;
 As being weighed against great man's superior worth.

[p. 240]

What value will attach to thee, thou arrant fool,
 If, like an ass, thou spite the lords of reason's school?
 The ass, that renders service meet unto his lord,
 Men slay not. 'Tis the wild ass does them chase afford.
 The ass reaps naught of recompense for merit due;
 Yet, when he errs, fell punishment awaits him, true.
 If man, then, go astray, much more he's worthy blame;
 [90] Most justly shall chastisement visit him with shame.
 The blood of misbelievers righteously is shed,
 With sword and arrow, like wild ass on mountain fed.
 Their wives and children fall a prey to victor's hand;
 In that they lack true wisdom, cursed of God they stand.
 The reasonable creature fleeing reason's Lord,
 Renounces reason, brute becomes, calls for the sword.

Harut, Marut, [*1] two angels famed throughout the earth,
 Through pride and insolence lost paradise for dearth.
 They trusted in the wondrous power they held of old;
 [95] As though a buffalo 'gainst lion should wax bold.
 His horns are mighty weapons, fearful to the foe;
 The lion tears him piecemeal; horns but work him woe.
 Had he as many horns as hedgehog quills, all o'er,
 They'd help him not; the lion still would him o'erpow'r.

The hurricane roots up the forest trees amain;
 While pliant reeds from it no injury sustain.
 The fury of the blast hurts not their supple ease.
 Of strength, then, boast thee not, man. Seek wrath to appease.
 The axe is nothing daunted, seeing boughs of trees;
 [100] But, one by one, hews through them all; their end foresees.
 The axe sets not its trenchant edge to lop off leaves;
 'Tis not the silky down of thistles that it cleaves.
 A flame is not abashed, though many thorns collect;
 Whole herds of sheep can never butcher's knife deflect.

[p. 241]

To inward idea's power the outward sign must yield.
 That power, 'tis, makes revolve the heavens' vast starry field.
 The sphere, the circling firmament, consider now.
 What makes it turn? A force that rest will not allow.
 The movements of our bodies have no other source;--
 The soul it is originates all vital force. [105]
 The circulation of the air's from an idea;
 The millstone turns by water from the fields' area.
 The ebb and flow of tides, breath drawn, again expired,
 Whence all? 'Tis life compels, diffused through all, respired.
 The spirit 'tis decides what words our pen shall write;
 Or peace, or war, or anything our minds indite.
 To right, to left we go, e'en as the spirit wills;
 A rose, a thorn,--the spirit says which place it fills.

Our God it was who sent this vital air in blasts,
 Like breath of dragons, to destroy old 'Ad's [*1] outcasts. [110]
 While to the faithful it gave peace, and health, and strength;
 In gentle zephyrs softly breathing whole days' length.
 The Prophet hath assured us God's the soul of all.
 The Lord's the ocean whence the rills of spirit fall.
 The strata of the heavens and earth, with all therein,
 Are merely straws afloat on waves where powers begin.
 They dance about, are carried here and there by turns;
 Their movement's from the waves that power divine still churns.
 Decrees this they shall be at rest? At once they're flung
 Aside upon the shore, there to decay like dung. [115]
 Wills it that they be tossed about on waves high-flown?
 They're but the leaves of autumn by the wild winds blown.
 Now turn we from this subject, most engaging still,
 To learn about those angels, victims of self-will.

[p. 242]

The sins of all mankind were known to them as sure;
 No wickedness escapes the glance of spirits pure.
 In anger at such baseness they were moved to scorn;
 Their own defect was hidden from their sight, heaven-born.

An ugly man once saw his face in looking-glass.
 [120] He turned away enraged with that reflecting mass.
 So, when one self-conceited sees another's fault,
 A flame from hell is lighted in his bad heart's vault.
 'Tis pride inflames him;--holy zeal he dubs it straight;
 Not conscious of the vanity that makes his freight.
 A zeal for holiness by other tokens shines;
 And lights a fire by which to ashes earth declines.

God said to them: "If you both shine with virtue's ray,
 No notice take of man's backslidings from its way.
 Give thanks and praises, rather, you're not made like them.
 [125] Lusts of the flesh, concupiscence, soil not your stem.
 Had I imposed upon you that great burden, sore;
 The heavens would not have been your home for evermore.
 The chastity that decks your spirit-nature now,
 Reflection is of purity that lights My brow.
 Know, this is but a quality you hold from Me.
 So shall th' accursed one not make you slaves to be!"
 E'en as the Prophet's scribe, with self-importance puffed,
 Imagined holy wisdom's light shone as he'd stuffed.
 Himself he fancied equal of prophetic quire;
 [130] His raven croak as their sweet song he dared admire.
 He who sets up to write the notes of every bird,
 Knows not th' inspiring springs within their bosom stirred.
 Could man acquire the note of nightingale so sweet,
 Would he have learnt as well its love the rose to meet?
 Should he achieve a notion of that love's intent;
 'Twould be mere surmise, like deaf man's from lips' consent.

[p. 243]

Such deaf man once was made aware by some kind friend,
 That next door dwelt an invalid near to his end.
 The poor man thought within himself: "I'm deaf as stone,
 How can I hope to comprehend this neighbour's tone? [135]
 More 'specially as sick men speak so very low.
 Still, go I must; mere decency demands my bow.
 When I advance, he'll me address, his lips will move.
 From thence I'll glean a notion, may not quite false prove.
 I'll ask him how he feels to-day, 'mid so much pain.
 He'll answer surely: 'Thank you; better in the main:
 Reply I will: 'Most happy! How's the appetite?'
 He'll answer: 'Pretty good, if chicken-broth invite.'
 I'll say: 'Good! Good! And what are you allowed to drink?
 Who is your doctor?' He'll respond, as one may think. [140]
 Then I'll remark: 'With so much talent at command,
 You can't do better. Soon I hope to see you stand.
 I've had experience of his skill; I know his worth;
 With him as guide, you'll not go wrong.' So forth."

Thus having got his fancied answers all by heart,
 He goes to see the sick man; deftly plays his part.
 On asking: "How are you?" the patient says: "Near dead."
 The deaf man straight rejoins: "Of that I'm very glad."
 The sufferer felt insulted by this joy expressed.
 The deaf one had surmised,--had failed in what he'd guessed. [145]
 He now inquired the diet: "Oh! It's poison all!"
 Complained the sick man. "Glad to hear it," he let fall.
 Still more the patient wondered. "Who attends you, pray?"
 Asked Deafy; "whose advice is't leads you on your way?"
 "Death tracks my hours!" said he; "pray leave me now to rest."
 The other answered: "Better can't be found; he's best."

[p. 244]

The visitor retired, quite pleased with his rich art;
 And offered thanks for having played so kind a part.
 The sick man, on the contrary, was all on fire:
 [150] "Whence comes this malice? Who has roused his soul to ire?"
 So, turning in his mind the matter o'er and o'er,
 A message he determines that shall pay the score.
 Just so, a man who's eaten ill-digesting food,
 Can have no rest till it's ejected, well and good.
 Long-suffering is thy better part, reject it not;
 With patience, thou shalt find soft words best heal a plot.
 But our sick man found no such solace for his mind;
 He called the deaf one "Ass," and "Fool," and "Sot," and "Blind."
 Said he: "I'll serve him out; I'll pay him what's his due!
 [155] Till then, my spirit will his hateful visit rue!
 A visit to the sick's for consolation's sake;
 His visit I abhor, his insults I'll not take.
 He's wished to gloat on foe laid prostrate at his feet;
 Some joy to gather thence his secret hate to greet."

How many pious men there are, to outward view,
 Reward of joy in heaven, as object, who pursue.
 At heart they're sinners still, despite the show they make.
 Alas! Hypocrisy for righteousness they take!
 Just as our deaf man thought he'd done a friendly act;
 [160] And yet, withal, had vexed his neighbour, as a fact.
 He soothed his soul by thinking: "Kindly part I've played!
 I've acted as a neighbour! Sorrow I've allayed!"
 Whereas, in truth, a fire he'd lighted for himself;
 And his sick neighbour's heart inspired with vengeful elf.

Beware the fires you kindle by such acts as this!
 Beware offence to give, while proffering a kiss!
 The Prophet said one was a hypocrite, he knew:
 "Go, worship, friend; thy act's no worship, as I trew!"

[p. 245]

For fear lest we should trespass, even as we pray,
 Our worship has the prayer: "Lord, guide us in Thy way!" [*1] [165]
 "Permit not Thou, O God, that my devotion's act
 Be counted erring hypocrite's unwelcome pact!"

The surmise of our deaf man wide was of the mark.
 A ten years' friendship 'twould have wrecked! Beware such spark!
 Man's judgment, friend, that's based on sense's treacherous sand,
 Can never be compared with revelation's wand.
 Hast ear to hear? Hast mind to recognise the truth?
 Know, then, thy moral ear is deaf to godly sooth
 The first who followed sense, and reason--as he thought--
 Instead of God's true light, the devil was, we're taught. [170]
 He judged: "The fire more noble is than sordid earth;
 From fire was I created; clay gave Adam birth.
 The stock from whence it springs decides each kind of fruit;
 From darkness Adam's sprung; light at my birth did suit."

The Lord replied: "'Tis not a question of descent.
 Pre-eminence is here the prize of righteous bent.
 'Tis not a heritage of worldly wealth to share.
 Why talk of ancestry? Heart's qualities declare.
 The heritage we've now to give is prophecy;
 The heirs thereto are they whose spirits hate a lie. [175]
 The son of Abu-Jahl believed, and saved his soul; [*2]
 A son of Noah rebelled; became perdition's goal. [*3]
 The son of earth was made resplendent as the moon;
 Thou, son of fire, begone, disgraced, cursed, none too soon!"

Investigations, reasonings, on days of cloud,
 By night, in darkness, guide the doubting crowd;

[p. 246]

But, when the sun shines,--when God's temple's clearly seen,
 No doubt remains which way to turn one's face, I ween.
 The temple hidden, its direction quite unknown,
 [180] Then use thy judgment. God this method's kindly shown. [*1]

Whene'er you hear a note of God's truth-warbling bird, [*2]
 You straightway seize its literal sense, just as 'tis heard.
 You then use suppositions of your darksome mind,
 And form, through wrong conclusions, guesses worse than blind.
 The saints use terms of technical significance,
 Unknown to worldly reasoners' crass ignorance.
 The language of the bird you learn, as to its notes;
 But clean destroy its sense; as sure as fancy dotes.

E'en as the sick man of our tale, saints' hearts are grieved;
 [185] Though, like the deaf man, you suppose you've good achieved.
 The scribe of writ inspired had all its text by heart;
 Then thought himself inspired;--would play a prophet's part.
 The Prophet, warbler-like, smote him with powerful wing;
 He forthwith sank to blind despair, through conscience' sting.
 So 'tis with you. Perversely, or with vain surmise,
 You would interpret words descended from the skies.
 Like Harut, and like Marut, well you've learnt the tune
 They sang of old in pride: "We're God's elect," jejune.
 You pray for grace on all the sins of wicked men;
 [190] You curse your own foul egotism, greed's hungry ken.

[p. 247]

Beware lest God's just jealousy break forth amain,
 And smite you to the earth, ne'er more to rise again.

Those angels owned, in words: "To rule is Thine, O God.
 Without Thy strong protection, safety's soon downtrod."
 Such were their lip-words. But their hearts' rebellious pride,
 With foolish boasting, thought: "No harm can us betide."
 They never ceased to brood on vanities thus framed,
 Till fire of arrogance burst forth from breasts inflamed;
 Then proclamation made: "O elemental men!
 How little have ye known the range of angel's ken. [195]
 We'll weave dense curtains o'er the sky's revolving face;
 Descending then to earth, we'll there our temple place.
 We'll justice distribute, and worship we'll commend,
 Returning every night to heaven, whence we descend.
 So shall we be admired by all who dwell on earth,
 And fill the world with gladness, safety, peace, and mirth."
 Alas! Such fancy's false! Earth cannot heaven be;
 Their difference is radical, as all may see! [199]

Footnotes

^m234:1 I have failed to discover the name and history of the individual here used to point a moral by our great poet. Ibnu-Hisham and Nawawi do not mention him.--Translator.

^m234:2 Osman.

^m235:1 Qur'an xxxvi. 7.

^m235:2 Qur'an xxxvi. 8.

^m237:1 Qur'an xcix. 1.

^m237:2 In allusion to the Brahminical marks used in India.

^m238:1 The heterodox sects of Islam are commonly said to be seventy-two.

^m238:2 "The Veiler," i.e., of sin, is one of "the most comely names" of God, but is not found in the Qur'an. "Ya Sattar!"

^m239:1 Some of the commentators hold that Qur'an vii. 174, alludes to the opposition of Balaam to Moses and the Israelites.

^m239:2 See Tale iv. dist. 121; and xi. 112.

^m239:3 See Tale ix. 266.

^m240:1 Qur'an ii. 96.

^m241:1 See Tale iv. dist. 121.

^m245:1 Qur'an i. 5.

^m245:2 'Ikrima, son of Abu-Jahl, embraced Islam at sea, as he fled from Mekka at its capture by Muhammed. He returned and was pardoned.

^m245:3 Qur'an xi. 44, 45.

^m246:1 This is a canon of Islam. If a worshipper has no means of knowing the direction of "God's House" at Mekka, he may face in any direction he judges most probable, and so perform his worship.

^m246:2 The Prophet.

     
The Mesnavi and The Acts of the Adepts, by Jelal-'d-din Rumi and Shemsu-'d-Din Ahmed, tr. by James W. Redhouse, [1881], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 248]

  

XIV.

GIVE ear to this advice from one who's well informed:
 "Lay down your head where'er by wine you've been transformed."
 Whene'er a drunken man reels forth from tavern door,
 A laughing-stock he's made by urchin and by boor.
 Now here, now there, he lurches, stumbling on his road;
 Falls in the mire; is mocked and jeered, scorned as a toad.
 The children of the neighbourhood his steps surround,
 Unconscious what is wine's hilarity profound.

So are all people children, round the saints of God;
 [5] None adults are, save they who've cast off passion's clod.
 'Twas said: "The world's a toy, a plaything; and men all
 Are infants." [*1] These are God's words. True in sense they fall.
 No child but loves his toys, his playthings, games, and sports;
 By cultivation of the mind man sense imports.

Man's love for worldly things is like child's love for toys;
 The child and man, in these, repeat each other's joys.
 The child, in play, performs the very selfsame part,
 He'll act when grown a hero, learnt debating art.

[p. 249]

Men's quarrels are the same as those fought out by boys;
 They're senseless, reasonless; they squabble for mere toys. [10]
 Their weapons are but wooden swords, as used in play;
 Their objects are not worth a thought, by night or day.
 They mount their hobby-horses, ride about on sticks;
 Declaring 'tis Bucephalus, Eclipse, that kicks.
 'Tis they who bear a burden, pack-horse-like, or ass;
 Their vanity converts them into horsemen's mass.

So let it be till that day when God's riders shall,
 On steeds of fire, transcend the seventh heaven's rolling ball.
 "The spirit and the angels mount unto their God." [*1]
 The spheres shall shake, when under saintly footsteps trod. [15]
 Whereas the raff of mankind mount their own coat-tails;
 Imagining they're horsemen, prancing as ship sails.

The Lord hath said: "Imagining's of no avail." [*2]
 Imagination's steed to scale heaven's heights must fail.
 Imagination's best is but a choice of doubts;
 Man ne'er disputes about the sun, whate'er the whim he flouts.
 The time will come, he'll see what wretched screw he rides;
 That which he deemed a courser's but his own shanks' sides.
 His senses, thoughts, and reasonings, he then will find,
 Are but the infant's hobby, pa's cane, more refined. [20]

The wisdom of the saints is what bears them aloft.
 The science of the worldly is their load;--how oft!
 The wisdom of the heart sustains and elevates;
 But knowledge sensuously acquired as burden rates.
 'Tis God hath said: "An ass with volumes for his load." [*3]
 So knowledge is a burden, when not of God's code.

[p. 250]

All science not received from word of God direct,
 Hath no endurance; paint it is; our eyes detect.

Still, if man bear his burden well, he's recompensed;
 [25] His burden is removed; ease to him is dispensed.
 See, then, you bear not science' load from fleshly lust;
 Lest you should suffer inwardly fatigue,--disgust;
 But mount the agile steed of sacred lore divine;
 So shall the burden on your back at once decline.
 Unless you drink His cup, how 'scape from fleshly lust?
 O you, who, in His name, content are with the Just!
 When from His name and attributes some inkling's born,
 This inkling points the road to union one fair morn.
 Thou'st never known a guide, but some one must be led;
 [30] And when no road is travelled, gnome can't dog man's tread.
 Thou'st never heard a name, but indicates a thing;
 A flower thou'st never plucked from verbal rosa's ding.
 Hast thou pronounced a name? Straightway the thing ensue.
 The moon seek in the sky;--not in lake-waters, blue.
 But wouldst thou cast aside all names and words, as vain,
 Thyself, then, purge of self. Abstraction thou shalt gain.
 Wouldst be a sword? Cast off soft iron's yield refined;
 By discipline the mirror burnish of thy mind.
 Discharge thyself of every particle of self;
 [35] So shalt thou see thyself pure, free from soil of pelf.
 Within thy heart thou'st see the wisdom of the saints,
 Without a book, a teacher, or professor's plaints.

The Prophet said: "That man is one of my true flock,
 Whose heart and mind are hewn from my own calling's rock.
 His soul perceives me through the selfsame holy light
 That unto me reveals his soul serenely bright.
 Reports, traditions, chains of evidence, are lost;
 When soul communes with soul, minds freely can accost."

[p. 251]

This riddle solve: "A Kurd I last night was, by birth;
 And then, this morning, Arab am, by afterbirth." [*1] [40]
 If one, sincere, a Kurdish boor was overnight,
 Sincerity an Arab made him by daylight.
 Example seekest of science springing in the heart?
 This contest heed of Chinaman and Roman's art. [*2]

The Chinese urged they had the greater painter's skill.
 The Romans pleaded they of art the throne did fill.
 The sovereign heard them both; decreed a contest fair;
 Results the palm should give the worthiest of the pair.

The parties twain a wordy war waged in debate;
 The Romans' show of science did predominate. [45]
 The Chinamen then asked to have a house assigned
 For their especial use; and one for Rome designed,
 Th' allotted houses stood on either side one street;
 In one the Chinese, one the Roman, artists meet.

The Chinese asked a hundred paints for their art's use;
 The sovereign his resources would not them refuse.
 Each morning from the treasury rich colours' store
 Was served out to the Chinese till they asked no more.
 The Romans argued: "Colour or design is vain;
 We simply have to banish soil and filth amain." [50]
 They closed their gate. To burnish then they set themselves;
 As heaven's vault, simplicity filled all their shelves.
 Vast difference there is 'twixt colours and not one.
 The colours are as clouds; simplicity's the moon.
 Whatever tinge you see embellishing the clouds,
 You know comes from the sun, the moon, or stars in crowds.

[p. 252]

At length the Chinamen their task had quite fulfilled.
 With joy intense their hearts did beat, their bosoms thrilled.
 The sovereign came, inspected all their rich designs,
 [55] And lost his heart with wonder at their talents' signs.
 He then passed to the Romans, that his eyes might see.
 The curtains were withdrawn, to show whate'er might be.
 The Chinese paintings all, their whole designs in full,
 Reflected truly were on that high-burnished wall.
 Whatever was depicted by the Chinese art
 Was reproduced by mirrors, perfect every part.

Those Romans are our mystics;--know, my worthy friend;
 No art, no learning; study, none;--but gain their end.
 They polish well their bosoms, burnish bright their hearts,
 [60] Remove all stain of lust, of self, pride, hate's deep smarts.
 That mirror's purity prefigures their hearts' trust;
 With endless images reflections it incrust.

The formless Form the thousand thousand hidden forms
 Flashed in his breast on Moses' heart, like mirrored storms.
 That Form, 'tis true, the heaven of heavens cannot contain;
 Nor all the space between the zenith and the main.
 These numbered are, and limited within their bounds;
 The mirror of the heart is boundless in its rounds.

Here, reason stands aghast, O erring child of sense;
 [65] The heart's with God,--the heart is God, boundless, immense
 From all eternity, the figures of all things,
 Unnumbered, multitudinous, gleam in heart's wings.
 To all eternity each new-created form
 In heart of saint reflected is, most multiform.
 His polished heart is cleansed from being's soiling stain;
 And at each moment contemplates fresh beauty's train.

[p. 253]

The outward gilt, the shell, of science they despise;
 The banner of real certitude floats where they rise.
 They've thought abandoned; light and life they've truly found;
 Their breasts and hearts are filled with love's inspiring sound. 70

Death, that dread thing of which all mankind stand in fear,
 Is laughed and mocked at by the saints, when it draws near.
 No man has power to dominate their tranquil minds.
 The shell may injured be; the pearl harm never finds.
 The rhetor's art, the jurist's skill, they set at naught;
 But poverty, abasement, to themselves they've taught.
 The scenes of all eight paradises [*1] are consumed
 In that full blaze with which their holy heart's illumed.
 They're more exalted than the heavens and what's beyond;
 Their place is in the court of love divine, all-fond. [75]

Footnotes

^m248:1 Qur'an vi. 32; xxix. 64; xxx. 6; xlvii. 38; lvii. 19.

^m249:1 Qur'an lxx. 4.

^m249:2 Qur'an x. 37.

^m249:3 Qur'an lxii. 5.

^m251:1 See, in the author's own preface, his eulogistic mention of Sheykh Husamu-'d-Din, p. <page miii>., where this saying is also given.

^m251:2 By " Roman," in the East, is meant what Europeans incorrectly name "Greek." Since Alexander of Macedon's time, no "Greeks" have existed. Their very memory is lost in Asia, and Alexander himself is styled there "the Roman."

^m253:1 Commonly, in Islam, eight paradises, or, properly, eight mansions of Paradise, are reported, mentioned, and believed. Baydhavi, in Qur'an ii. 23, gives only seven, and one of those is wrong. Guided by him, however, I have corrected this, and verified the others, besides finding the eighth. Their names, then, are as follows:--1. Jennatu-'l-Khuld, the Paradise (garden) of Eternal Duration; 2. Jennatu 'Aden, the Garden of Eden; 3. Jennatu-'l-Firdaws, the Garden of Paradise; 4. Jennatu-'l-Me'va, the Garden of the Abode; 5. Jennatu-'n-Na'im, the Paradise of the Pleasantness; 6. Daru-'s-Selam, the Home of Security; 7. Daru-'l-Maqama, the House of Sojourn; 8. 'Illiyun, the Sublime Heights. Baydhavi has Daru-'l-Khuld for Jennatu-'l-Khuld; but that is one of the names of Hell, as occurring in Qur'an xli. 28. There is also a Daru-'l-Qarar, Home of Permanence, mentioned in Qur'an xl. 42; but it applies to Hell and Heaven, as does the Daru-'l-Baqa, Home of Duration, commonly used, but not found in the Qur'an.

     
The Mesnavi and The Acts of the Adepts, by Jelal-'d-din Rumi and Shemsu-'d-Din Ahmed, tr. by James W. Redhouse, [1881], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 254]

  

XV.

THE Prophet asked one morn of Zeyd, in tender tone, [*1]
 "How art thou, dear disciple, faithful to the bone?"
 "I'm pious;--a believer," Zeyd replied; and he
 Inquired again: "What proof of faith resides in thee?"
 He said: "Whole days I've burnt with parching fever's thirst;
 By night I've watched; with love's sweet pangs my heart's nigh burst.
 Thus have I traversed days' and nights' enduring space,
 As point of spear through shield makes way in war's embrace.
 For, in love's view, the church of faith one body is;
 [5] Ten million years, one instant, are alike, when His.
 The past eternity and future join in one;
 Though reason cannot compass how the marvel's done."

The Prophet then: "Bring forth some souvenir from thence,
 Shall satisfy all men of judgment and of sense."
 Said Zeyd: "As men behold the sky above their heads,
 So I survey the heavens, and all their flowery meads.
 Eight paradises, [*2] seven deep hells, [*3] are in my view,
 As patent as the idol to its silly crew.

[p. 255]

Apart, and one by one, I can discern all men,
 As wheat and barley well are known to miller's ken. [10]
 I see who's heavenward bound, who takes the other road;
 As men distinguish fish from snake in walks abroad."

'Tis thus that saints, within the bounds of present life,
 See who'll be blessed, who cursed, when tried in judgment's strife;
 Before each soul contracts the sins will cause its shame;
 While yet in mother's womb,--while yet without a name.
 The wretch is he conceived for wretchedness' sad thirst.
 Each soul is marked for future bliss or woe, at first. [*1]
 The body, as a mother, bears within a soul.
 Death's but the throes that launch the spirit to its goal. [15]
 Departed souls are all agog at each fresh birth,
 To see what class the new-born enters in its mirth.
 The blacks presume 'twill prove to be of their dark gang;
 The pale-faced Romans hope they'll profit by the pang.
 But when the little stranger shows itself at last,
 No room remains for doubt; the question's judged and cast.
 The new-born black is borne in triumph by its kind;
 The rosy-cheeked fair bantling's claimed by Roman mind.
 Until its birth the child's a riddle to all men.
 Who knows an unborn infant 's rare sage in this glen. [20]
 Unless, mayhap, he see with light divine's blest aid;
 For this can penetrate through densest shell e'er made.
 The life-conveying fluid's colourless and clear;
 But living men their various shades of colour bear.
 The soul sustains complexions in our mortal frames,
 Until our halves material find rest from their games.
 But turn we now away to other subjects, high;
 For fear events should leave us to regret and sigh.

[p. 256]

"When settling-day 'brings forth the colour of each face,' [*1]
 [25] Mankind are separated sharply, race from race.
 Within the womb nor Turk, nor Hindu, yet is seen; [*2]
 So soon as born, all, high and low, know what to ween.
 As in the day of judgment all men all will know,
 So now to me each man and woman forms a show.
 Say: Shall I all declare; or shall I hold my peace?"
 To this the Prophet in reply made motion: "Cease."
 "Ha! Prophet of the Lord! I'll tell that secret, all!
 To men I will declare the deeds of that dread hall!
 Permit me to tear off the veil that hides it now;
 [30] My heart shall light the world as sun in midday glow.
 I will eclipse that lamp, by giving out more light.
 I will set plainly forth the thorn and fig-tree right.
 Th' events of judgment day I'll lay before all men.
 I'll separate the gold from spurious coin, as then.
 They of the left hand shall be maimed to public view, [*3]
 And all shall then the fruits of misbelief eschew.
 I will expose the seven pits of wrath divine, [*4]
 By aid of light from truth's great luminary's shine.
 I'll rend away the rags that veil the wicked's shame.
 [35] I'll sound the trump, that all may hear the Prophet's name.
 Hell, heaven, the gulf between, I'll set before men's eyes,
 That misbelievers may be warned of error's dyes.
 The fountain of 'Kawthar' shall throw its highest jet; [*5]
 Its rush shall greet their ears, its spray their faces wet.
 They who will flock around it, burning with fierce thirst,
 I'll make apparent unto all, from last to first.
 Their shoulders jostle 'gainst my shoulders in the crowd;
 Their shrieks are sounding in my ears, as thunder loud.

[p. 257]

While heaven's citizens, rejoicing with delight,
 Hug one another lovingly, to glad my sight. [40]
 They visit one another's thrones, high rapture's seats;
 They kiss each other fondly; each all others greets.
 My ears grow deaf through listening to those cries of grief,
 And sorrow's anguish from the lips where sin sat chief.
 These are slight indications; much more could I say;
 1 pause; the Prophet's wearied; cease from speech I may."

Thus spake the Prophet's servant, in delirious guise.
 The Prophet shook his collar,--sign of deep surprise.
 Then spake: "Rein in thy steed! He risks to run away
 Reflected Truth declares: 'God blushes not.' [*1] Heyday! [45]
 The mirror's fallen out from its protecting case!
 A mirror and a balance never truth debase!
 A mirror and a balance never facts conceal,
 Although some one be hurt by what they do reveal!
 The mirror and the balance tests are of my rule;
 Though for a thousand years thou serve it's strict formule.
 Hide not the truth from thought of deep respect for me.
 Show forth the whole, in full. Deficiency mayn't be.
 What is't that tells thee: 'Play not, joke not with the truth?'  [*2]
 The mirror, balance, God,--who smites falsehood with truth! [50]
 Sure, God hath raised me up for that one sole intent,
 That through me truth be preached unto its full extent.
 Were this not so, what value's in me, valued friend?
 Did I become instructor, only good to mend?
 But shut thy mirror tight within its felten sack,
 If Sion's miracle's repeated in thy track."

Said Zeyd: "Can man e'er grasp beneath his feeble arm
 The sun of truth, eternal luminary, warm?

[p. 258]

'Twould burst his grasp asunder; all his wiles were vain,
 [55] Though madness he should add to reason in his brain!"

Replied the Prophet: "On thy eye thy finger place;
 The world is straight deprived of all the sun's bright face!
 A finger-tip suffices to blot out the moon;
 A symbol, this, of God's great sin-effacing boon.
 A point can cover up a whole world with its shade;
 The sun can be eclipsed by what's a mere monade.
 Shut close thy lips. Consider now the mighty sea.
 By God's command the ocean man's meek slave must be. [*1]
 Ev'n as the fountains Selsabil and Zenjabil [*2]
 [60] Are given for use of angels, Michael, Israfil [*3]
 The rivers four of paradise are at our beck;
 Not by our merit, but by God's constraining check.
 Where'er we will, they flow, obedient to our call;
 Like magical effect, magician's docile thrall.
 So also are our eyes, those founts of sentient beams,
 Subservient to our will, whichever way it streams.
 As we direct, they look; see what's like adder's sting;
 Or notice facts that to our minds their warnings bring.
 If so we will, they scrutinise objectiveness;
 [65] As we desire, they lend themselves to study dress.
 By our direction, universals are their bound;
 If so we wish, they prisoners are in partials' ground.
 Each of the senses five acts thus but as a spout,
 To bring unto the mind that which it cares about.
 Whichever way the heart directs them forth to stroll,
 They turn, and glean a harvest for its pleasure sole.
 The hands and feet are servants to the heart's request,
 As Moses' rod obedient was to his behest.
 At heart's desire, the feet begin the nimble dance,
 [70] Or seek advantage, or avoid some sore mischance.

[p. 259]

The heart commands, the hands to calculations fall;
 Should it prefer, they write a book or treatise small.
 A hand there is, 'twould seem, within these hands of ours;
 A hidden hand, that moves the body's wondrous powers.
 If that incites, this wages battle with the foe;
 Should that induce, this aids a friend to stand tiptoe.
 It pushes; straightway spoon's plunged into soup;
 It wills; a ponderous club forthwith attacks some group.
 What is it that the heart says to them all by turns?
 Most wonderful accord! Most marvellous alterns! [75]
 The ancient seal of Solomon the heart has found!
 With that alone it guides the senses o'er their ground.
 Externally, five senses serve its high command;
 Internally, five faculties obey its hand.
 Ten senses, thus, seven organs, wait upon its wants;
 Besides a host of minor servants, confidants.
 As Solomon thou sittest, O heart! Thou reignest supreme!
 On fairy and on demon, set thy seal, thy scheme.
 In this thy realm be upright; practise thou no fraud;
 No demon, then, shall rob thee of thy seal, thy gaud. [*1] [80]
 The world shall learn thy name, shall practise all thy rites;
 Time and eternity remain thy perquisites.
 But should a demon carry off thy seal, perchance,
 Thy reign is o'er; thy fortune loses all advance.
 Thenceforward vain regret shall canker in thy breast,
 Until the day thou'rt called to thy account at last.
 Unless thy heart renounce all selfish use of wit,
 By mirror and by balance canst thou be held quit?"

Luqman the sage, in presence of his noble lord, [*2]
 Among the slaves and servants was a mere byword. [85]

[p. 260]

The lord one day commanded; straight some slaves were sent
 To gather fruit from orchard for his throat's content.
 With them did Luqman go, as parasite to feast,
 Brimful of wisdom, black as night, a negro beast.
 Their labour o'er, the slaves lay down to rest awhile;
 The fruit they tasted, tasted still, consumed the pile.
 Returning home, on Luqman the whole blame they laid;
 His lord was angered mightily at what they said.
 Luqman inquired the cause of this estrangement keen.
 [90] The lord gave vent in loud abuse to his roused spleen.
 Said Luqman: "Lord, I swear by God's most holy name,
 Dishonest servant ne'er can hope for aught but blame.
 Make proof of us. 'Tis easy. Lord thou art of all.
 Command. We'll drink our fill of water hot as gall.
 Then make us run about within the meadow's bound.
 On horseback thou, on foot we, 'll all trudge quickly round.
 Thou soon shalt witness sights to show 'the milk who spilt.'
 Hearts' secrets' Great Revealer will disclose the guilt."

Their lord so ordered. Scalding water soon was sought.
 [95] Each had to drink his fill, as hot as could be brought.
 Then all were made to run as fast as they could tear,
 All up and down the meadow, as their legs could bear.
 Now lo! What happens? Sickness on them, each, soon falls;
 To vomit they're constrained, with starting of eyeballs.
 The stolen fruit contained within their stomach's sack,
 The water's stimulus compelled them to give back.

[p. 261]

When Luqman's turn was come to cast up his accounts,
 Clear water was the only issue from his founts.
 Luqman's philosophy this trial could evolve;
 God's wisdom far abstruser riddles will resolve. [100]
 "The day when our hearts' secrets shall be all revealed,"
 Man's secret foe in ambush shall not lie concealed.
 Hell's victims, then, shall taste of scalding water's pang;
 And all veils be torn off from sins they overhang.
 Hell-fire's decreed to be the lot of misbelief;
 Since fire the ordeal is by which stones come to grief.

How often have we spoken to those hearts of stone,
 In softest accents of advice! They would hear none!
 To foulest ulcer, sharpest remedy's applied.
 The teeth of dogs alone are fit for ass's hide. [105]
 "Filth to the filthy" is philosophy right sound.
 "Birds of a feather flock together" goes its round.
 What mates soever for thyself thou choose at last,
 Their habits and their qualities acquire thou fast.
 Wouldst glory have? To glory must thou raise pretence.
 Wouldst it reject? Think well; and take thy road from thence.
 Wouldst find a way out of this dismal dungeon vile?
 Submit to God; bow down in worship with a smile.
 Again we'll turn. Again we'll hear what Zeyd may say;
 What road he'll follow, on his steed, in reason's way. [110]
 When reason sets itself t' expose the faults of men,
 It pulls aside the veils that hide them from our ken.
 God sometimes wills that actions should concealed remain,
 Drives reason's drum away, forbids its noisy strain.

Loose not thy tongue alone; it bridle; hidden's best.
 Let each be happy in his own opinion's zest.
 God wills that they who might despair to win His grace,
 Shall persevere, not slacken, in their worship's pace

[p. 262]

That they may seek a hopeful one, and him ensue;--
 [115] In his society may follow worship's clue.
 God wishes that His peace should light upon us all;
 That His salvation should embrace good, bad, great, small.
 That princes and that captives all should turn their face,
 In hope and fear, up heavenward, looking for His grace.

That hope and fear are nourished by a curtain's shade.
 'Tis through uncertainty that hope and fear invade.
 But tear away that veil; where then are hope and fear?
 'Tis veiledness lends interest to landscapes drear.
 Upon a river's bank a youth, who chanced to spy
 [120] A fisherman at work, guessed: "Solomon, surely! [*1]
 If he it be, why here, in secret and alone?
 If not, whence come those features, fit to grace a throne?"
 So he remained in doubt, 'twixt two opinions tossed,
 Till Solomon recovered all the power he'd lost.

The foul usurping demon fled the royal state;
 The king's avenging sword pursued and sealed his fate.
 The signet-ring of power once more on royal hand,
 The demons and the fairies flocked to his command.
 Mankind came crowding to his court, by levee swelled;
 [125] Among them came the youth who'd that opinion held.
 He saw the signet-ring. This sufficed. Doubt was past.
 No room was left for surmise. All was clear at last.

Opinion may be formed of what's behind a veil.
 Conjecture lends its aid where knowledge 'gins to fail.
 Conjecture's potent when the subject's hid from view.
 Let it be visible; no surmise can we brew.
 Although the sky of light is not without its rain,
 The earth of darkness, too, produces plants and grain.

[p. 263]

I love that text: "They who believe what is not seen." [*1]
 Thence have I closed my eyes, the body's windows keen. [130]
 But should I cleave the firmament with my swift glance,
 Could I exclaim: "Perceivest thou a flaw, perchance?" [*2]
 To scrutinise what's hid behind the darkness' screen,
 Each man his method chooses; guesses what's between.
 A certain space of time confusion reigns supreme.
 The robbers hang the magistrates by their own scheme,
 Until at length a Chief, blessed with a genius rare,
 Springs up to serve his servants; all their troubles share. [*3]

To render secret service is a thing beloved.
 To hide a service rendered adds to what's approved. [135]
 What's he, commends his king with lies before his face,
 And in his absence needs lament his lack of grace?

The warden of a castle on the marches laid,
 Far from his sovereign, distant from much-needed aid,
 Defends his post with valour from beleaguering foe,
 Disdains to be bought over, scorns the tempter's moe.
 His station's on a frontier, no eye sees him act;
 To duty true, he honestly fulfils his pact.
 Then in his monarch's presence honours due he gains,
 Above the brave men fighting in the royal trains. [140]
 More merit's in a little secret service given,
 Than in much more performed when by an eye it's driven.

Man's faith and piety on earth are prized of God.
 But after death professed, less value have than clod.
 The absent and the hidden being thus the best,
 The silent mouth and sealed lip surpass the rest.
 Then boast not, brother; whatsoever thou hast done,
 God knows thy merits; will requite them every one.

[p. 264]

The sun requires no other witness but his face.
 [145] Man has a greater. God's his witness. Vast the grace!
 If I proclaim it not, how many are prepared
 To witness to each fact! God, angels, men, full wared.
 "God will bear witness, angels, and all they who've known," [*1]
 That: "Lord there is no other, save th' Eternal One." [*2]
 When God himself our witness is, who'll angels need,
 That they should share, participate, in His sole deed?
 Unless it be that, as the fervent, blazing sun,
 Pours forth such beams no mortal eye can look upon.
 Just like the bat, man cannot bear full light of day;
 [150] So, in despair, he seeks the darkness, shuns noon's ray.

Thus, like us, know, the angels are a loving crew,
 Who bask in beams of heaven's Sun, beyond our view.
 They say: "Our light we have received from a sun;
 As substitutes we shine upon the weak, outrun."
 As new-born moon, or five days old, or at the full,
 Each angel has his rank, degree, place, wonderful.
 His glorious wings in pairs, two, three, and even, four; [*3]
 So that his beams are doubled, trebled, fourfold, more.
 Just like the grades that mark the various human minds,
 [155] Do differences vast exist in angels' kinds.
 Thus every man's companion-angel's like himself,
 Or good, or bad, or high, or low, as china, delf.
 When weak-eyed mortals cannot look upon the sun,
 They have to seek for taper's aid, ere they may run.
 The Prophet hath declared: "Stars, my disciples are;
 They're lights to them who seek; though devils they may scare."
 If every man had strength, and faculty of sight,
 To look straight at the sun, trust him alone for light,

[p. 265]

What need were for the stars, or lamps, of feeble ray,
 To help them on their path, in quest of source of day? [160]

The moon declares to man, as do the clouds, the shade,
 "I, too, 'd been human, but for revelation made. [*1]
 Like you, I had been darksome, as within, without.
 But revelation gave me sunlight, shade to rout.
 Compared with the sun, I'm darksome as a cloud;
 Compared with men's dark bosoms, I may well be proud.
 I shed a feeble light, that men may bear my beams,
 He cannot look upon the sun's too ardent streams.
 I've mixed with honey vinegar; made oxymel;
 A remedy to bring to man's diseases fell." [165]

Art rid of thy disease, my friend? Then set aside
 The vinegar. Rejoice thy soul with honey's tide.
 When freed from lusts, the heart of man in full health shines.
 God said: "The Merciful on heaven's high throne reclines." [*2]
 God rules the heart direct, free from all means to aid,
 So soon as it is purged from dross that low it laid.
 We'll now go back to Zeyd, and proffer him advice;
 We'll warn him not to risk dishonour, paltering's price.

Thou shalt not Zeyd now find; he's surely run away,
 He's clean absconded by the door; had naught to say. [170]
 Had'st thou been Zeyd, like him thou'dst lost been in a maze;
 As stars die out when sunlight sets the skies ablaze.
 E'en as no track points out where was galaxy's place;
 Thou'lt find no signs of Zeyd, no footstep, sign, or trace.

Our senses falter, all our reasoning is lost,
 In splendour of the wisdom of th' All-Ruling Ghost.

[p. 266]

Men's senses, and their reasons, must be shut within,
 "In waves when all before us to appear begin." [*1]
 When night returns, the sky again a court appears,
 [175] The hidden stars shine forth, and mark the rolling years.
 The senseless dead unto, will God their wits restore;
 In circles, like attendants, Him they'll stand before.
 They'll foot the dance, they'll spread their hands, they'll shout His praise;
 They'll sing their song: "Thou, Lord, us from the dead didst raise."
 Their mortal skins and bones they'll shake off in the earth;
 On angel-wings they'll ride, and whirlwind-dust call forth.
 Their course they'll take from nullity to entity,
 In judgment day, ungrateful, grateful laity.

Why turn away thy head, pretend not to have seen?
 [180] Hast thou not, first, in nullity, a truant been?
 In nullity, so firm thou settedst down thy foot,
 And ask'dst: "Who shall remove me when I've taken root?"
 Dost thou not see the wondrous works of God's high will?
 How He it is who "leads thee by thy forelock" still? [*2]
 He draws thee into states, conditions, turns of weal,
 That never entered in thy mind to seek with zeal.

Nonentity obedient is to His command.
 Of demon, and of Solomon, He rules the hand.
 A demon can contrive "the trays of fishpond size." [*3]
 [185] He dares not make refusal these to organise.
 Contemplate now thyself in agony of fear;
 And know, nonentity, too, quakes His wrath to hear.
 Thou stretchest forth thy hand to seize preferment's place;
 From fear of thee, some soul itself must quick efface.
 All else but love of God, the Truest and the Best,
 Though sweet to thought, is but a snare to break thy rest.

[p. 267]

What's all thy effort worth? Thou hast to die at last;
 Put out thy hand and grasp the cup of life right fast.

Men fix their eyes on what is dust and ashes, death;
 Refuse belief in what is life and healthful breath. [190]
 Exert thyself. Reduce thy doubts from ten to nine.
 Employ the night. Thou sleepest. Night's not so supine.
 Employ the night to seek the everlasting day,
 Increase in knowledge. Wisdom 'tis shall light thy way.
 Though night be dark, and darkness be of woe the doom,
 Much good is in it. Fount of Life's in land of gloom. [*1]

How can a mortal hope to raise his head from sleep,
 When seeds of slothfulness are all he cares to reap?
 The dead man's sleep's the body-snatcher's open door.
 Householders slumber, robbers rifle every floor. [195]
 Thou knowest not who are thy foes around thee placed.
 The imps of hell are enemies to man high graced.

The fire's the foe of water and of water's brood;
 As water's foe to fire, and drowns it in a flood.
 To water, and its cousins all, the fire swears death;
 To fire shall water never quarter give, or breath.
 'Tis water puts the fire out; and the reason's plain;
 The fire has mission to destroy the water's strain.

And then, the fire's the heat of passion's baneful lusts.
 And lust, the root of frailty, sin, misdeeds, mistrusts. [200]
 Material, outer fire, 's by water soon put out;
 The fire of lust may carry man to hell, no doubt.
 No water can avail to quench the flames of lust;
 For lust is hell-born. Torments end not; last they must.

[p. 268]

Religion's light, alone, can quench lust's fiercest flame,--
 The light that can put out the Syntheist's wicked game. [*1]
 What can extinguish fire of sin, save light of God?
 My master, see that Abr'am's light be ne'er downtrod;
 That from the fire of lust, by inner Nimrod fanned, [*2]
 [205] Thy body may escape; not be, as firewood, banned.
 The lust of man's desires cannot be driven forth;
 But may resisted be, reduced to what it's worth.
 So long as thou shalt fuel pile upon that flame,
 Canst thou expect the fire will die away and tame?
 So soon as fuel is withheld, a fire goes out;
 Through piety is lust brought down, and put to rout.
 Shall that sweet face e'er blacken through sin's dismal smoke,
 That's brightened by such sheen as virtue must invoke?

A conflagration raged in days of great 'Umer,
 [210] Stones were devoured therein, as firewood in the air. [*3]
 The buildings it consumed, and left whole households waste;
 The nests and nestlings were destroyed;--last trump's foretaste.
 One half Medina fell a prey to ruthless flame,
 Whereat th' aqueous element might well feel shame.
 Whole cisterns were exhausted in the combat wild;
 And vinegar was added. Hope was thus beguiled.
 The fire grew fiercer under stimulus of strife;
 Extension gave it wings, success infused new life.

The people now came flocking to the Caliph's gate,
 [215] In marvel, that, through water, fire would not abate.

[p. 269]

He told them that the fire burnt by divine command;
 That all those flames arose from their too frugal hand:
 "What use are water, vinegar? Distribute bread;
 Eschew cold avarice, if by me you'll be led."
 They answered: "Wide our doors stand open every day,
 We've ever lavish been; almsgiving is our play."

'Umer replied: "In form and custom, bread you've given.
 But not from love of God. You're hands to dole were driven.
 'T was pride and ostentation led to your display;
 Not charity, not pity, sense of duty, say. [220]
 Your riches are your seed. Cast not such seed to waste.
 Place not a sword in robber's hand with senseless haste.
 Distinction make 'twilit friend and foe to truth divine;
 Seek out God's saints, and leave them not to starve, to pine.
 You've spent your stuff upon your cherished kindred sole,
 And fancied stupidly you'd followed God's law whole." [223]

Footnotes

^m254:1 Zeyd, son of Haritha and father of Usama, the freedman and adopted son of Muhammed, one of his most devoted disciples.

^m254:2 For the eight paradises, see Tale xiv. dist. 74, p. <page m253>.

^m254:3 The seven hells are:--1. Jahannam; 2. Latza; 3. Hutama; 4. Sa'ir; 5. Jahim; 6. Hawiya; 7. Saqar. All these names for Hell occur in the Qur'an.

^m255:1 This is predestination indeed. But does not our "vessels of wrath" come to about the same thing, at least in some opinions?

^m256:1 Qur'an iii. 102.

^m256:2 "Turk and Hindu" is synonymous with "fair and dark."

^m256:3 "They of the left hand," Qur'an lix. 8; xc. 18.

^m256:4 " The seven pits of hell" are named respectively: Jahannam, Latza, Hutama, Sa'ir, Jahim, Hawiya, and Saqar, as above mentioned, p. <page m254>, note [*3].

^m256:5 "Al-Kawthar," Qur'an cviii. 1, is variously explained, but probably means: the great multitude, scil., of mankind; not "a fountain."

^m257:1 Qur'an ii. 24.

^m257:2 Qur'an ii. 231; and, indirectly, in many texts.

^m258:1 Qur'an xvi. 4; xl. 23.

^m258:2 Qur'an lxxvi. 17, 18.

^m258:3 Michael is mentioned in Qur'an ii. 92; Gabriel is also there mentioned, and in two other places; but no other angels by name.

^m259:1 Solomon was robbed of his seal by a genie, and temporarily deprived of his kingdom.

^m259:2 Qur'an xxxi. 12. Lokman, the commonly received orthography, is doubly erroneous; the first vowel of the name is u, the Italian u, the French ou, the oo of our words [p. 260] foot, good, wood; not of coot, moot, root. Our q is, historically, the only true representative of the Phenician letter that equally gave rise to the Hebrew q, to the old Greek Q, to the Latin Q, and to the Arabic ###1602### as may be seen by comparing the letters in the last element of the Arabian numeral alphabet, , with the Hebrew Koph, Resh, Schin, Tau; with the Greek Q = 90, R = 100, S = 200, T = 300; and with the Latin Q, R, S, T. The proof is still more conclusive by comparing, in order, the whole alphabets, as to positions, names, shapes, values in sound, and numeral values.

^m262:1 Solomon, when deprived of his kingdom, became a fisherman.

^m263:1 Qur'an ii. 2. Our: "Credo, quia impossibile."

^m263:2 Qur'an lxvii. 3.

^m263:3 Muhammed is reported to have said: "The prince of a people is their servant." This may be compared with Matt. xi. 26 and 27.

^m264:1 Qur'an iii. 16.

^m264:2 Qur'an ii. 256.

^m264:3 Qur'an xxxv. 4.

^m265:1 Qur'an xxi. 108.

^m265:2 Qur'an xx. 4.

^m266:1 Qur'an xxxvi. 53.

^m266:2 Qur'an xi. 59.

^m266:3 Qur'an xxxiv. 12.

^m267:1 See the Translator's "Turkish Poetry" (p. 32 or 45), 1879; published by Trubner & Co., Ludgate fill, London, E.C.

^m268:1 Qur'an ix. 32; lxi. 8. The expression " polytheist," generally used by translators to render the meaning of the Arabic "mushrik," is not correct; to attribute one "partner" to God is as much "shirk" as to attribute many. See note in <page 36>, Tale iii.

^m268:2 Qur'an xxi. 68, 69, alludes to this.

^m268:3 Qur'an ii. 22; lxvi. 6.

     
The Mesnavi and The Acts of the Adepts, by Jelal-'d-din Rumi and Shemsu-'d-Din Ahmed, tr. by James W. Redhouse, [1881], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 270]

  

XVI.

FROM 'Ali may we learn sincerity of meeds.
 "God's Lion" we may hold free from all gross misdeeds.
 In fight he'd conquered one who'd earned a hero's crown.
 His sword he'd swiftly raised, his victim to hew down.
 That champion spat in 'Ali's face, to mark disdain;
 The face of one, the Prophet's pride, all saints' chieftain.
 He spat upon a face to which the moon bowed low,
 And offered adoration in the temple's show.

That instant 'Ali dropped his sword, high poised in air,
 [5] And left the spitter harmless;--action debonnair.
 This raised the foe's astonishment; called forth his awe.
 That pardon, that forgiveness, grew not from war's law.

He said to 'Ali: "Thou thy sword hadst raised to slay.
 Why hast thou dropt it now,--prolonged my forfeit day?
 What hast thou seen, surpassing prowess of my arm,
 That thus thou hast repented,--left me free from harm?
 What may it be has calmed the fury of thy breast,
 Which as the lightning gleamed, and, straightway sank to rest?
 What didst thou see, that, by reflection on me cast,
 [10] A spark has leapt to life in my despairing breast?
 What was thy vision, far above the world of fact,
 Than life far sweeter, whence my life receives new pact?

[p. 271]

For bravery, 'God's Lion' art thou justly named.
 For kindness, I now know, thou art too little famed.
 For generosity, thou'rt Moses' cloud divine,
 From which poured forth the quails and manna, as from mine!"

The clouds rain wheat. Man, then, by labour and by skill,
 Reduces this to food, when finely ground in mill.
 But Moses' cloud, more generous far, with open hand,
 Sent down in plenty food prepared, by God's command. [15]
 For them who ate at Providence's table, free,
 God's mercy was displayed;--a banner all could see.
 For forty years that daily bread--abounding grace--
 Failed not. Fond expectation's utmost stretch took place.
 But satisfaction followed not. The thankless crew
 Demanded "leeks and onions;" as of old they knew. [*1]

Ye who are Ahmed's people, graced beyond compare,
 Are promised spiritual blessings till last judgment's blare.
 Whoever says, at heart: "My trust is in the Lord," [*2]
 God's promise: "Him I'll feed," will find a faithful word. [*3] [20]
 Without a twist accept this promise, as is meet;
 You'll find it in your mouth as milk and honey sweet.
 To twist a term, and so deny gift's incidence,
 Is to invent a cloak to change the word's true sense.
 To think th' expression's wrong sad weakness shows of mind;
 Wisdom divine's a kernel; human reason, rind.
 Twist then thyself; change not the sense of words divine;
 Conceive thy nose at fault; chide not the sweet woodbine.

O 'Ali! Thou who mind and eye entirely art!
 Relate a little of the knowledge in thy heart. [25]
 Thy calmness is a sword that cleaves our minds in twain;
 The fountain of thy wisdom makes us whole again.

[p. 272]

Speak out! I know these mysteries are Jehovah's own;
 To kill without a sword's a power of God well known.
 He is Creator, without limbs and without tools;
 The Giver of all blessings, copious as sea's pools.
 How many kinds of wine are savoured by our souls,
 While eye and ear perceive not whence the wave that rolls!

Pray tell us, 'Ali,--falcon, soaring in heaven's heights,--
 [30] What didst thou see that instant, to forego thy rights?
 Thy eyes have learnt to catch seraphic visions' gleam;
 Around thee, all unconscious are, as in a dream.
 Thou seest the moon, all brightly shining in the sky;
 We see but darkness, clouds above us seem to fly.
 Thou seest three moons together, shining bright, out-spread;
 While three of us are scarcely sure one's overhead.
 All three have eyes and ears fixed on thee, in suspense,
 In keenest expectation. I'm stone of offence.

"Is this a spell to witch the eyes? Is it the truth?
 [35] To me thou art a wolf; I'm Joseph to thee, sooth.
 Though worlds there may be, eighteen thousand globes, and more;
 Not every eye has power to witness all their store.
 Disclose thy secret, 'Ali,--God's own 'Chosen One!' [*1]
 How many 'judges' errors' work God's will alone!
 Pray tell me what, just now, has been revealed to thee;
 Or I'll disclose the vision I've been made to see.
 If thou the secret keep, I will declare its sense,
 Moon-like, on me thy knowledge shines, with light intense.
 But if the moon's bright disk break forth from 'neath the cloud,
 [40] Poor midnight travellers safely, then, pursue their road.

[p. 273]

They then are safe from error, risk no wandering vain;
 Protection of the moonlight shields from terror's chain.
 The mutely-teaching promptings of the silvery moon,
 If couched in words, would homewards guide us doubly soon."

Thou art "the Gate;" the Prophet, "Science' City" is, [*1]
 Thou art the ray that beams from lustrous sun of his.
 Then open, Gate I Unfold thyself to those who seek!
 Let rind of science overgrow their minds, all meek.
 Stand open, Gate! Thou portal of God's mercy sure!
 Thy court's the court of Him "who hath no peer," secure! [*2] [45]
 True, every breath and atom's watching to get in.
 But if kept closed, who'd say there is a gate to win?
 Unless the Keeper open wide the portal's wing,
 No soul would dream an entry were an easy thing.
 E'en when the gate is opened, lo! surprise is felt.
 Hope and desire are scared; each suitor's heart must melt.
 As one who finds a treasure in a ruined maze,
 Seeks evermore for ruins;--treasures are his craze.
 Unless a man receive a pearl from beggar's hand,
 He'll never venture pearls from beggars to demand. [50]
 For years, should mere opinion wander up and down,
 It never will outpass the rents of its torn gown.
 Until a fragrance strike thy nostrils from above,
 Thou'lt follow thy own nose, but never meet thy love.

Thus spake that new-converted warrior in surprise;
 Expressing wonder, such as words may symbolise.
 Then. added: "O! Command, of Faithful Church thou Prince. [*3]
 That as a babe a spirit new I may evince."

[p. 274]

The planets seven o'er every unborn babe keep watch,
 [55] Each for a stated period, ere its birth's despatch.
 When life's infused into the nascent atom's form,
 The sun takes charge, as watcher o'er the feeble worm.
 The babe its life derives from Sol's all-quickening rays.
 That radiant orb's the fount of life's all-wondrous ways.
 The other planets help to modify its limbs;
 Each, when the sun has life infused, then onward climbs.
 What is the channel of connection with the sun,
 Discovered in the womb by foetus ere't can run?
 Deep-hidden from our senses, many an occult road
 [60] Leads to the sun in heaven, and needs nor whip, nor goad.
 One road, by which gold draws its nutriment from thence;
 Another, whence the ruby's colour grows intense.
 A road, by which the garnet gathers igneous glow;
 A path, pursued by lightning to the horseshoe low.
 A channel, through which fruits their ripeness draw, select;
 A track, for wit to flow, and senseless form inject.

"Declare, thou falcon, with thy glistening plumage, bright,
 Our chief's companion, on his gauntlet sitting, light;--
 Make known, thou phoenix-hunting bird of prey,--
 [65] Thou conqueror of foes,--sole,--clear of troops' array.
 A nation in its millions, one sole man art thou.
 Speak! Speak! I cast myself upon thy mercy now!
 Instead of anger, what has moved thee to relent,--
 To proffer to a foe forgiveness transcendent?"

To him made 'Ali answer: "For the truth I fight.
 God's servant am I. Slave I'm not to fleshly might.
 'God's lion' I've been named; not 'Ravening Wolf of Lust;'
 My actions are the proof my faith is in the Just.
 God is the Archer. I'm His bow;--and arrow, too.
 [70] He is the Smiter. I'm the weapon;--sword, bamboo.

[p. 275]

'Thou castedst not, when stones thou castedst in the fight.' [*1]
 God is the Warrior mighty. I'm dust in His sight.
 Thought of myself I've banished, wholly, from my path.
 Save God, all else as naught I hold;--a mower's swath.
 I'm but a shadow; shadow cast by Sun of Truth.
 Door-keeper am I;--veil, I'm not, to hide His sooth.
 I'm a sword. My trenchancy's union with God.
 In battle, life I give. I slay not whom's downtrod.
 Blood does not soil the blade I wield in righteous cause;
 Nor gusts of passion raise a craving for applause. [75]
 A straw I'm not. A mountain am I;--firm, staid, fast.
 No whirlwind can remove me with its tearing blast.
 'Tis sticks and straws, alone, are driven by the storm.
 Their nature is to move;--to every breath conform.
 The gust of anger, breath of lust, and blast of greed,--
 Each agitates the man not anchored in Truth's creed.
 Firm mountain am I. God it is that firmness gives.
 Were I a straw, His whirlwind is the force that drives.
 A breath from God alone has power to move my soul.
 My love for God's the motive o'er me has control. [80]
 Their anger rules e'en kings. My anger is my slave.
 My wrath I've bridled;--bitted;--leave, it aye must crave.
 My anger's stifled by reflection's strong embrace.
 God's wrath to me's a message of His pardoning grace.
 My roof's a ruin, true; but light pours through the rent.
 I'm dust. But from my soil flowers blow, and yield sweet scent.

"Just cause if I perceive, with foes when waging war,
 I make no scruple, but my sword from blood debar.
 For God's sake do I love. Such is my fame with men.
 My hate's in Truth's sole cause. I'm raging lion then. [85]
 My generosity springs all from love of God.
 For God's sake, too, I'm parsimonious as clod.

[p. 276]

I'm avarice, munificence, to one sole end.
 I'm God's in all things. To myself I ne'er attend.
 That which I do, for God's sake flows; not from schedule.
 'Tis not a guess, an inference;--'tis sight's safe rule.
 I've no occasion to investigate, to seek.
 God's prompting's what I follow, docile, meek.

"Is soaring my vocation? Heaven's my pinions' goal.
 [90] Do I revolve? My centre's fixed in highest shoal.
 If load I carry, I well know where this is due.
 I'm but a moon; a Sun before me gives the cue.
 I've no desire for converse with material things.
 An ocean flows not from a meadow brook's scant springs.
 I frame discourse to suit the feeble minds of men.
 This system has no fault; it met our Prophet's ken.

"I'm free from prejudice; accept a free man's oath.
 Against one free man, crowds of slaves possess no truth.
 By law, in canon of Islam, the word of slaves
 [95] No value has, as evidence;--the chain depraves.
 Ten thousand slaves may witness bear in court of law;
 Their testimony weighs not in the scales one straw.
 The slave to passion bondsman is, in sight of God.
 He's lower than the captive 'neath taskmaster's rod.
 A slave may be enfranchised by his owner's word;
 Lust's victim, though freeborn, dies bound with strongest cord.
 The slave to passion cannot loose his heavy chain.
 God's mercy, special grace, can set him free again.
 He's fallen into a pit, unfathomed, bottomless.
 [100] His own sin this. Compulsion 'tis not, fate, nor cess.
 Into a pit he's cast himself, for which my mind
 Cannot imagine sounding-line, its depth to find.

"It's useless to continue further in this strain.
 Not hearts alone, but rocks, may weep at folly's train.

[p. 277]

If men's hearts break not, 'tis that they are harder still,
 Through carelessness, preoccupation, sloth, ill-will.
 They'll break and bleed one day, when tears will not avail.
 Be contrite, then, before repentance' sighs must fail.
 Since slavish testimony's not accepted there,
 His word alone is valid who from lust is clear. [105]
 The Lord's Commissioned One's a valid witness. See!
 Because, from all eternity, from slavery's stain he's free.
 I, too, am free. Wrath cannot bind my soul with chains.
 God's attributes, alone, have power to rule my brains.

"Come in, thou. Grace of God hath set thy spirit free.
 A flint thou wert. Rich pearl henceforward shalt thou be.
 Thou'rt plucked from blasphemy's vast thorny desert sands.
 A flowering shrub henceforth in faith's rich garden lands.
 Thou art become myself; I, thee; beloved friend!
 Thou'rt 'Ali. Can I 'Ali slay? May heaven forfend! [110]
 Thy past transgression rank's as highest virtue's deed.
 In twinkling of an eye heaven's bounds thou. mayest out-speed.

"How blest is the transgression pardoned of the Lord!
 The rose, from thorny stem, He calls forth at a word!
 Remember 'Umer's guilt,--his murderous design [*1]
 Against the Prophet! This brought him to faith benign.
 Was't not to practise magic Pharaoh called his priests?
 The grace of God converted them to saints from beasts.
 Had they not been magicians, he not obstinate,
 They'd ne'er been made assemble, truth excogitate. [115]
 How would they e'er have seen the staff, the miracles?
 Your sin proved your conversion, reprehensibles!

[p. 278]

"The Lord can far remove our state of deep despair,
 Our sin can change to righteousness; foulness to fair.
 God can our worst offences purge away, make clean;
 Imputing virtue to us, spite of vice's mien.
 For this is Satan chased away with igneous bolts; [*1]
 His proud inflation bursts in twain, from envy's jolts.
 He strives to multiply the direful load of sin,
 [120] That, under its dead weight, he man in hell may pin.
 And when he finds unrighteousness as service told,
 His torment is redoubled, heartache twenty-fold.

"Come in! A door I've opened for thy entrance, wide.
 Thou spattest on me. I reply with favour's tide.
 On him who injured me I benefits bestow; [*2]
 My head I lay before the feet of friends, below;
 Thou mayest conceive what gifts I hold in store for them,
 My faithful servants;--treasures, thrones, and diadem.
 I'm such a man that whoso strives to shed my blood
 [125] Forgiven is, and overwhelmed with favour's flood.
 The Prophet quiet notice whispered to my slave,
 The day would come when he to take my life would crave.
 Me, also, he informed, through revelation's voice,
 That I should die, smote by a hand of my own choice.
 That servant begged and prayed for instant death's release,
 So he'd be spared from sin so heinous,--love's decease.
 But I replied: 'Since 'tis decreed that by thy hand
 My life be ta'en, why should I seek a countermand?'
 Before me prone he fell, this prayer he warmly made:
 [130] 'Hew me in twain! For love of God, let me persuade!
 Pray save me from so vile, so villainous, a fate.
 Remorse for ever as its prey will hold my hate.'

"Again I firmly answered him,--decidedly:
 'No counsel will avail. Pen's mark must needs apply.

[p. 279]

I bear no grudge against thee in my inmost soul;
 I hold thee not responsible for deed so foul.
 Thou'rt but the instrument, 'tis God that strikes the blow!
 How can I chide His instrument,--His arrow's bow?'

"He asked: 'Why, then, this sentence sternly passed on me?'
 My answer was: 'God knows the germ of His decree! [135]
 Should He find fault with what results from His resolve,
 From reprehension's self He can a heaven evolve.
 He hath a right to take exception to His deed.
 He's Lord of grace. But Lord of wrath, also. Take heed
 He's Prince of all within this sphere of new events.
 He's Arbiter of all;--of kingdoms, as of tents.
 If He see fit to break the weapon of His will,
 The broken tool still hastens His word to fulfil.

"The mystery of His word: 'We abrogate, annul,' [*1]
 Remember, straight is followed by: 'We better cull." [*2] [140]
 Whatever law the Lord hath abrogated yet,
 Is but a weed plucked up;--a rose blooms where 'twas set.
 The night He promulgates; day's work refrains from act.
 Consider! Mind becomes like inorganic fact.
 Again, night disappears; the light of day is spread;
 And nature shows its marvels; reason wakes from dead.
 With darkness comes the sleep that locks our reason fast,
 But spirits know not darkness; life's stream still goes past.
 Is't not that mind's refreshed in darkest hours of night?
 Its silence 'tis gives birth to every voice of light." [145]

By contraries are contraries brought forth to view,
 From out of darkness was the light created new.
 The Prophet's wars have brought about the peace that reigns;
 These tranquil latter days the fruits are of his pains.

[p. 280]

How many heads lay low beneath that hero's blows,
 That peace might be enjoyed by faith's true yoke-fellows!

'Tis thus the gardener prunes away the surplus twigs,
 That fruitful boughs may prosper, yield their loads of figs.
 Sagacity roots out all weeds from cultured space.
 [150] The orchard, thence, new vigour finds, and blooms apace.
 A wise physician will extract a tooth decayed,
 To give relief front pain to his beloved maid.

How much increase grows out of decrease here below.
 The martyr gains eternal life by death in show.
 Man, fed by bread, cuts down the harvest corn when ripe;
 "Partakes the blessing joyfully," [*1] with drum and pipe.
 When brutes are slaughtered with due sense of wisdom's law,
 Man's life is nurtured;--learning, science, vigour draw.
 If man be slaughtered, see what woes from thence arise.
 [155] Compare the two;--their difference you'll recognise.

The vegetable world lives by God's sun and rain,
 God's care takes charge of it. His care is not in vain.
 The slaughtered beasts have food and drink as well as those.
 They die, because they've throats. Those have no life to lose.

Withhold thy hand in season, man of little sense!
 That so thy food suffice. Thy life's thy recompense.
 Thou art as fruitless as the barren willow-branch,
 Because thy honour's sacrificed mere bread to scranch.
 If thy brute nature will not practise abstinence,
 [160] Administer the remedy. Bring it to sense.

[p. 281]

If thou wouldst cleanse thy garments--free them from all soil,--
 Despise not thou the bleacher, nor his useful toil.
 If greed of food have fractured abstinence in thee;
 Lay hold on Him who fractures heals. From self get free.
 No sooner shall the fracture be by Him fast bound,
 New union will take place,--the broken part grow sound.
 If thou hadst made the fracture, it would thee invite
 To make it whole again,--the sundered bones unite.
 Thou canst not? Thence we see, the right is His to break
 Who can unite the fractured limb--make strong whatever's weak. [165]
 Who knows to mend hath privilege a cloth to tear.
 Who knows to sell, to buy hath also learnt, 'tis clear.
 He may disturb a house, and turn it upside down,
 Who can arrange it better than the whole wide town.
 If God destroy one creature in His boundless might,
 By thousands He creates, and brings again to light.

Had He not set a punishment for each offence,
 Or had not said: "Lex talionis is life's fence," [*1]
 Who'd had audacity, of his own will,
 To put to death a man who should another kill? [170]
 He knows each creature by His power endued with sight.
 And He's aware a slayer does but work His might.
 If His command be set on mortal's head to slay,--
 Albeit his own child,--he must the word obey.
 Go! Stand in fear! Blame not, too much, the bad!
 Know, thou art equally a slave with him who's mad!

The eye of Adam fell upon a demon foul,
 Him viewed with proud disdain, with haughty scowl.
 His self-esteem, his egotistic pride him drove,
 With smile sarcastical, the cursed imp to reprove. [175]

[p. 282]

God's wrath was roused. He him addressed: "Ho! Adam! Ho!
 Hast thou no insight into mysteries of woe?
 If I tear fiercely off a hide from heels to head,
 A mountain I can also wrench from its firm stead.
 A hundred Adams of their fig-leaves I can strip;
 A thousand demons into true believers whip."

In terms contrite and meek was Adam's answer couched:
 "Forgive, Lord God! I stand reproved! My fault's avouched!
 Henceforth, I vow, I never will repeat such fault.
 [180] Repentance I profess. Do Thou forego assault."

O Answerer of prayer! In mercy guide us right!
 Our knowledge, as our riches, null is in Thy sight!
 Lead not astray a heart enlightened by Thy grace! [*1]
 Turn from us every evil threatening to take place! [*2]
 Reprieve our souls from judgment merited, severe!
 Repel us not from out the fold of saints, sincere!
 More bitter is there naught than severance from Thee.
 Without Thy shelter, naught but anguish can we see.
 Our minds' accomplishments impede our hearts' advance.
 [185] Our flesh the deadly enemy that wrecks our souls' best chance.
 Our hands, like robbers, seize on all our feet may earn.
 Unless Thou prove our refuge, life's not worth concern.
 If we perchance escape with life from danger's snares.
 Our fears and anguish make it prey to carking cares.
 Should not our souls in union be with Thee, O Lord,
 Eternal tears our eyes will blind, and mad discord.
 A way shouldst Thou not open, lost must be our souls.
 Without Thy presence, life is death;--all smiles are scowls.

[p. 283]
 Shouldst Thou find fault with service rendered unto Thee,
 Thy chiding's merited, no doubt; as all may see. [190]
 If Thou be discontented with the sun and moon,
 Or if Thou call the cypress "hunchback," "macaroon,"
 Or if Thou say the skies and spheres are all too low,
 Or find the mines, the seas, a paltry puppet-show,
 All this, compared with Thy perfections, is the truth.
 Thine is the kingdom; Thine the power to mend all ruth.
 Thou art removed from danger, as from nullity.
 To non-existences Thou givest being. Why?

He who makes all things grow, can make them wither, too.
 For He can all repair, as He can ruin woo. [195]
 Each autumn, vegetation dwindles by His will;
 Again 'tis He calls forth the flowers in dale, on hill.
 His voice is heard: "Come forth, ye withered ones, anew;
 Once more put on your beauty,--charm each mortal's view."

Narcissus' eye was blinded; lo! its twinkle's seen.
 The reed, that down was mowed, becomes sweet music's queen.
 We are but creatures. To create we have no power.
 Our weakness we confess. Contentment's our best dower.
 We're things of flesh. The flesh to vanity unites.
 Unless Thou call us, we become rebellious sprites. [200]
 From Satan we escape, because Thou'st paid a price;
 And bought our souls, to set us free from vice.

Thou art the Guide of all who live upon the earth.
 Without his staff and guide, what is a blind man worth?
 Besides Thee, all that's goodly, all that shocks our sense,
 Is fatal unto man,--consuming fire intense.
 If any seek the fire, to make thereof a shield,
 A Magian he becomes, of Zoroaster's yield.

[p. 284]

All else besides the Lord is vain, and of no worth.
 [205] The mercies of our God, a bounteous rain, poured forth.

Now turn again to 'Ali and his destined foe.
 His great forbearance contemplate; this wretch's woe.
 He made remark: "My murderer's before my eyes,
 All day and night. No anger towards him in me lies.
 Death is to me as sweet as life;--as my own self;
 My death and resurrection, two sides of one shelf.
 A deathless death's a welcome change to loving heart;
 A lifeless life has been its present counterpart."

Death to appearance, life is,--in the main;
 [210] Externally a loss;--intrinsically, gain.
 Within its mother's womb a child's lot is to roam.
 It has to blossom in the world, as ocean's foam.
 I have a wish, a longing, towards the world of doom;
 But God forbids: "Cast not your lives away," in gloom. [*1]
 All prohibition's but a bar from what is loved;
 No prohibition's needed from a thing reproved.
 A grain with bitter kernel, still more bitter rind,
 Full prohibition carries in itself, we find.

The fruit of death is savoury, in my esteem.
 [215] Nay more. "The slain do live" a blessed text must seem. [*2]
 Then slay me, O my trusty friends, without reproach.
 My death is life eternal. Let it, then, approach.
 In death I'll find my love. My dearest friends, adieu!
 How long shall I be barred from darling interview?
 Unless our separation be from one we mourn,
 Why should we say: "Forsooth, to Him we shall return?" [*3]
 'Tis only he returns, who comes back to his home.
 Our true return's from severance to union's dome.

[p. 285]

That servant once again appealed and begged: "'Ali!
 Put me to death, that sin so heinous I may flee! [220]
 My life's at thy behest; forthwith pour out my blood!
 So shall my soul escape the burden of crime's brood."

Then 'Ali answered: "Should each sun-mote take a knife,
 Or sword draw, with design to sacrifice thy life,
 One single hair's-breadth could they not, yet, take effect,
 Since Providence decrees 'tis thou must work that act.
 But sorrow not! Thy intercessor I will be!
 Lord of my soul am I;--not slave to fleshly fee.
 My body frail no value has now in my sight;
 From flesh when liberated shall my soul feel light. [225]
 The dagger and the sword may take root in my limbs.
 Death's but a banquet; wounds, a flower that graceful climbs." [*1]

Now, who can thus despise his body in his heart,
 And yet feel greed for empire, or for pontiff's part?
 He strove, 'tis evident, upon the judgment seat,
 To set a good example to all future great;
 To breathe a righteous spirit into monarchs' breasts;
 Make sure that goodly fruit come from their deeds and gests.

The Prophet's high endeavour, Mekka to subdue,
 Had no foundation in a lust for revenue. [230]
 He had refused the treasures of the lofty spheres;
 On day of trial shut his heart to hopes and fears.
 To catch a glimpse of him the blest angelic train
 Had crowded heaven's bounds full as they could contain;
 In dainty guise, to honour him themselves arrayed;
 He took no note. On God alone his thoughts were stayed.
 His heart was filled with sense of his great Maker's grace.
 The angels, or the prophets, there could find no place.

[p. 286]

He said: "I'm he whose eyes swerved not; "no crow, I! See! [*1]
 [235] "The Limner is my love; from juice of vine I'm free." [*2]
 The treasures of "the spheres," their "animating souls,"
 As rubbish were accounted, driven by breeze that rolls.
 What, then, would Mekka weigh,--the Persian, Syrian lands,
 That he should covet them, spoil make them for his bands?
 Suspicion such as this springs from a jaundiced mind.
 It judges by itself;--all, tinged as self must find.

Green spectacles who sets upon his foolish nose,
 To view the sun, will find him green, we must suppose.
 Take off the spectacles, the source of colour's tinge,
 [240] He straightway sees aright. Now, nature's hues impinge.
 A horseman had stirred up the dust in clouds, not faint.
 A distant looker-on supposed the dust a saint.
 Thus Satan saw a dust; and cried: "This son of earth
 Excites in me much envy, hatred, malice, wrath."

If thou, too, so observe God's saints with envy's eyes,
 Be sure thy vision's tainted. Satan's hatching lies.
 Thou obstinate! Art not one of that hell-hound's sons?
 Then, whence this heritage of hate's foul orisons?
 "I am no hound, God's Lion am I. God I love.
 [245] I'm 'Lion of the Truth.' Mere form I aye reprove."
 A lion of the world may hunt for prey and spoil.
 A lion of eternity, death's freedom from turmoil.
 In death he sees a hundred thousand modes of life.
 So, mothlike, death he courts; his candle, murderer's knife.

[p. 287]

To court grim death's a collar round the true man's neck.
 This was the text proposed, that wrought recusant's wreck.
 God's word revealed hath said: "O men of human race!
 Death to the faithful is a blessing, and a grace." [*1]
 A love of gain is innate in the human breast.
 To court death's doubtless profit, is to wish the best. [230]
 Then, O ye stiff-necked people, do, for honour's sake,
 The wish for speedy death upon your tongues' ends take.

No recusant was found who dared to lisp that prayer,
 When thus Muhammed put it as the truth's assayer.
 He knew that should they venture that ordeal to prove,
 In all the world no recusant would thenceforth move.
 They all preferred to pay their tribute for their lives,
 And begged: "O lamp of truth, destroy us not, our wives!" [*2]

How many more examples could be pointed out!
 But, if thou seest the truth, give me thy hand. Quit doubt. [255]
 Forsake thy dunghill. Enter our abode of bliss.
 From darkness thee to guide, a light shines o'er th' abyss.
 Shake off all hesitation. Enter heaven's gate.
 Avoid the pit that's bottomless! Be not too late!

The Prince of all Believers thus addressed that chief,
 In tones serenest: "Know, that in our contest brief,
 When thou didst spit upon me, giving scorn its vent,
 My choler was aroused;--to wreck my patience went.
 Half warmed with zeal for God, half stirred with anger's fire,
 Unholy partnership was formed 'twixt truth and ire. [260]

[p. 288]

Thou wast designed and fashioned by a hand divine.
 To God dost thou belong;--no creature art of mine.
 Defacement of God's work should be by God's decree;
 To break God's pitcher, man a stone of God should see."

The Magian heard. The light flashed on his heart and soul.
 The clouds of misbelief, as fog, away did roll.
 He spake: "The seed of wrongfulness is what I've sown.
 Thou'rt altogether different from what I've known.
 Thou art a balance, with an equitable soul;
 [265] Or rather, index art thou, of just balance-bowl.
 Thou art become my kith and kin,--my brother true;
 Thou art a ray to light the path I shall pursue.
 The slave I have become of that fair Source of light,
 From whence thou hast derived the beam that charms my sight.
 The slave of every billow of that glorious Sea,
 That casts such pearls ashore, as I admire in thee.
 Teach me to formulate the motto of thy creed;
 For, henceforth thou'rt my guide, of whom I stand in need."

Full fifty of his household,--of his stock and race,
 [270] With zealous love the noble law of Islam did embrace.
 Thus 'twas, the hero, by decisive wisdom's stroke,
 Averted death from many, slavery's fetters broke.
 The sword of wisdom's sharper than the finest steel;
 Its words more efficacious than an army's wheel.

Footnotes

^m271:1 Qur'an ii. 58.

^m271:2 Qur'an ix. 230, &c.

^m271:3 Qur'an lxv. 2.

^m272:1 'Aliyyu-'l-Murtadza--"in whom (God) is well pleased"--is the chiefest of the titles of 'Ali, Prince of Princes, Captain-General of Saints.

^m273:1 Mohammed is reported to have declared: "I am the City of Science, and 'Ali is the Portal thereof;" alluding to the heavenly secrets he had intrusted to the latter, for communication to the worthy. See Anecdotes, chap. iii., No. 79.

^m273:2 Qur'an cxii. 4.

^m273:3 "Commander of the Faithful;" but "Commander of the Believers" would be more correct.

^m275:1 Qur'an viii. 17.

^m277:1 'Umer swore he would kill Muhammed, and went to execute his design. Arrived at the house of his own sister, who was already a secret Muslim, he heard chanted the twentieth chapter of the Qur'an, and was immediately converted. He then went to Mohammed, and publicly professed the faith.

^m278:1 The shooting stars.

^m278:2 Shanfara says: "The most excellent is he who confers a favour."

^m279:1 Qur'an ii. 100.

^m279:2 Idem.

^m280:1 Qur'an iii. 163, 164.

^m281:1 Qur'an ii. 175.

^m282:1 Qur'an iii. 6.

^m282:2 Qur'an xxv. 66.

^m284:1 Qur'an ii. 191.

^m284:2 Qur'an ii. 149.

^m284:3 Qur'an ii. 151.

^m285:1 All Muslim poets speak of wounds as "flowers."

^m286:1 Qur'an liii. 17. There is a pun here. The Arabic for "swerved" and the Persian for "a crow," are identical in orthography,--zag. Muhammed has been called by other Persian poets: "The nightingale of the garden of ma zag;" which really means "swerved not," but may be rendered: "we, the crows."

^m286:2 The "Limner" is, here, God, of course. He was intoxicated with love, not wine.

^m287:1 Qur'an ii. 88.

^m287:2 These were the Christian Arabs of Nejran. They sent an embassy to Muhammed at Medina. He proposed to them a trial by invocation of God's curse on the liars, their wives, and children. He uttered it; they shrank, and accepted submission to him, on condition of paying tribute.

    
The Mesnavi and The Acts of the Adepts, by Jelal-'d-din Rumi and Shemsu-'d-Din Ahmed, tr. by James W. Redhouse, [1881], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 289]

  

XVII.

ALAS! By one poor morsel, tasted through a sin,
 The fount of thought's congealed; heart's blood diluted thin.
 One grain of wheat has cast eclipse o'er sun of mind,
 As "dragon's tail" doth dull the full moon, when inclined. [*1]
 Behold. How delicate is thought! One mite of clay,
 From full-moon glory, it reduced to disarray.
 The bread of life, received, digested, gives man power.
 Material bread excites distrusts, contentions, sour.

The thorn, while green, cropped by the camel, far from fords,
 Not only pleasure gives, but nutriment affords. [5]
 That selfsame thorn, grown dry and void of juicy sap,
 If ventured on by starving beast in desert gap,
 His palate and his lips will puncture, blood make flow;
 As if conserve of roses should with daggers glow.

The word of life's the green, the tender, juicy thorn.
 Material become, it's dry, as hard as horn.
 And thou, poor flesh, expectant of the living word,
 Bitest at the word material, dreaming not of sword;--
 Snappest at the hard, unyielding dictum, with fond zest;
 And findest it horny, flinty, irksome to digest. [10]

[p. 290]

It has become a stone. It wounds; it draws forth blood.
 Then shun it, human camel. Seek it not for food.
 Words are most foully mixed with troubling thoughts of earth.
 The water's muddy. Close the spring whence it comes forth.
 Until the Lord, again, shall make it clear and sweet;--
 Shall purify the inky stream, as He deems meet,--
 Shall patience add to wish,--not haste and oversight,--
 [14] Wait thou contentedly. God best knows what is right.

 

 

 

THE END.

 

 

 

________________________________

PRINTED BY BALLANTYNE, HANSON AND CO.
 EDINBURGH AND LONDON.

 

 

 

Footnotes

^m289:1 The " draconis" was the "descending node," one of the ecliptical points. The "forbidden fruit," in Islam, is held to have been wheat.

 

    


===== BOOK: mhj3.txt =====


    
Code of the Illuminati: Part III of Memoirs Illustrating the History of Jacobinism, by A Barruel, tr. Robert Edward Clifford [1798], at sacred-texts.com

  

MEMOIRS

  

ILLUSTRATING THE

  

HISTORY of JACOBINISM

  

Written in FRENCH by

  

THE ABBE BARRUEL

  

And translated into ENGLISH by

  

THE HON. ROBERT CLIFFORD, F.R.S. & A.S.

          Princes and Nations shall disappear from the face of the Earth . . . and   this REVOLUTION shall be the WORK OF SECRET SOCIETIES.

Weishaupt's   Discourse for the Mysteries

     
     

Part III.

  

THE ANTISOCIAL CONSPIRACY.

  

Second Edition, revised and corrected.

  

London

  

Printed for the TRANSLATOR,
 by T. BURTON, No. 11, Gate-street, Lincoln's-Inn Fields.
 Sold by E. BOOKER, No. 56, New Bond-street.

  

[1798]

Scanned, proofed and formatted at sacred-texts.com by John Bruno Hare, 2006-8. This text is in the public domain in the US because it was published prior to 1923.

Click to enlarge
Title Page

     
Code of the Illuminati: Part III of Memoirs Illustrating the History of Jacobinism, by A Barruel, tr. Robert Edward Clifford [1798], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 393]

  

THE

  

ANTISOCIAL CONSPIRACY

  

PRELIMINARY OBSERVATIONS

On the Illuminees [*1] and on the different Works whereon these MEMOIRS are grounded.

THE third conspiracy, which I am now about to investigate, is that of the Atheistical Illuminees, which at my outset [*2] I denominated the conspiracy of the Sophisters of Impiety and Anarchy against every religion natural or revealed; not only against kings, but against every government, against all civil society, even against all property whatsoever.

The name of Illuminee which this Sect (the most disastrous in its principles, the most extensive in its views, the most atrociously cunning in its means) has chosen, is of ancient standing in the annals of disorganizing Sophistry. It was the name which Manes and his disciples first affected, gloriantur Manichaei se de caelo illuminatos. [*3] The first Rosicrucians also, who appeared in Germany, called themselves Illuminees. And later, in our time, the Martinists (with many other sects) have pretended to Illuminism. As an outline for history I distinguish them by their plots and tenets, and will reduce them into two classes, the Atheistical and the Theosophical Illuminees. These latter more particularly comprehend the Martinists, whom I have already mentioned in my second volume, and the Swedenbourgians, whom I shall mention in  proper place, where also I shall give what information I have been able to collect relating to them. The Atheistical Illuminees are the objects of the present volume, and it is their conspiracy that I mean to disclose.

The very numerous letters, books, and manuscripts, which I have received since the publication of my proposals, has rendered it impossible for me to comprise the proposed investigation in one volume. The baleful projects of the Sect and the laws for their execution are so strangely combined, that I thought it necessary to begin by making my reader perfectly acquainted with its code; that is to say, with the regular progression of its degrees, mysteries, and government.

This alone requiring an entire volume, I am reduced to the necessity of giving a fourth, in which I shall develope the history of Illuminism, and make

[p. 394]

an application of the triple conspiracy to the French Revolution. I have more particularly applied myself to the investigation of the legislative part of this conspiring Sect, as no work has yet been published in which the whole of their code is to be found. Detached parts only were to be met with scattered throughout the papers which had been seized by the public authority. These I have collected and digested; thus enabling the reader more easily to judge what has been and what must have been the result of such laws. In such an undertaking, I feel myself bound to lay before the public an account of the documents on which I ground my proofs. The following then is a list of the principal works, with a few observations on each, that the reader may form his own judgment as to their authenticity.

I. The first is a collection entitled "Some of the Original Writings of the Sect of Illuminees, which were discovered on the 11th and 12th of October, 1786, at Landshut, on a search made in the House of the Sieur Zwack, heretofore Counsellor of the Regency; and printed by Order of His Highness the Elector.--Munich, by Ant. Franz, Printer to the Court." [*4]

II. The second is a supplement to the Original Writings, chiefly containing those which were found on a search made at the castle of Sandersdorf, a famous haunt of the Illuminees, by order of His Highness the Elector. Munich, 1787. [*5]

These two  contain irrefragable proofs of the most detestable conspiracy. They disclose the principles, the object, and the means of the Sect; the essential parts of their code, the diligent correspondence of the adepts, particularly that of their chief, and a statement of their progress and future hopes. The editors indeed have carried their attention so far, as to mention by whose hand the principal documents or letters were written. At the beginning of the first volume, and on the frontispiece of the second, is seen the following remarkable advertisement by order of the Elector:--"Those who may harbour any doubt as to the authenticity of this collection, have only to apply to the office where the secret archives are kept at Munich, and where orders are left to show the originals." [*6]

I entreat that my readers will recollect this advertisement whenever they shall see the Original Writings cited.

III. "The True Illuminee, or the real and perfect Ritual of the Illuminee; of the Illuminee; comprehending the Preparation, the Noviciate, the Minerval Degree, that of the Minor and Major Illuminee, all without addition or omission."--With respect to the authenticity of this work, we need only quote the testimony of the Baron Knigge, surnamed Philo, the most famous of the Illuminees after the Founder of the Sect; and who was actually the chief compiler of its Code, as he tells us himself: "All these degrees (says he), such as I composed them, have been printed this year at Edesse (Frankfort on the Mein) under the title of the True Illuminee. I am ignorant of the author; but they appear exactly as they flowed from my pen; that is to say, as I compiled them." [*7] This certainly is an authenticated document on the Sect, and recognized by the compiler himself.

[p. 395]

IV. I now proceed to a work which was published by this same Philo,--under the title of "Last Observations, or Last Words of Philo, and Answers to divers Questions on my connections with the Illuminees." In this work Philo-Knigge gives us an account of himself and of his Illuminism, of his agreements with the chiefs of the Sect, and of his labours for it. His vanity, however, makes this narrative fulsome. The reader will observe in his writings one of those pretended Philosophers who treat all religious objects with that contempt which they themselves deserve. This is of no consequence; he attempts to justify his own conduct; his avowals may therefore be received in testimony against the Sect.

V. "The last Works of Spartacus and Philo," Die neusten Arbeiten des Spartacus und Philo. Except the Original Writings, this is the most intelligent and important work that has been published on the Illuminees. It contains the two degrees of the greatest consideration both on account of the mysteries revealed in them by the Sect, and of the laws laid down for the adepts.--Not a shadow of doubt can be maintained as to the authenticity of this work. These degrees and laws are published with a certificate of Philo attesting their conformity with the original, and under the seal of the Order. This certificate was scarcely necessary. Whoever can read must easily perceive that these degrees and these laws are no other than a compilation, and often (in the most essential parts) but a copy of the discourses, precepts, and principles, contained in the Original Writings. The publisher is a man who has passed through all the degrees of Illuminism. More dexterous than Philo, he makes himself master of his secret, and of that of the whole Sect. The better to unmask Illuminism, he becomes an Illuminee; and he has so well succeeded, that no member of the Order was better acquainted with it than himself.

VI. The same writer has published A Critical History of the Degrees of Illuminism, a valuable work, in which every thing is proved from the very letters of the grand adepts.

VII. The Directing Illuminee, or the Scotch Knight. This may be said to be the counterpart of the Last Works of Philo and Spartacus. It is a description of the most important intermediary degree of Illuminism. The Editor does not indeed publish it under the signet of the Order; but when the reader has compared it with the Original Writings, and even with the criticism on it by the chief, who was not much pleased with the compiler, he will soon decide that the grand seal of the Order is not necessary to authenticate it.

VIII. Remarkable Depositions respecting the Illuminees. These are three juridical depositions on oath, and signed 1st by Mr. Cosandy, Canon and Professor at Munich; 2dly by Mr. Renner, Priest and Professor of the same Academy; 3dly by Mr. Utzschneider, Counsellor of the Electoral Chamber; 4thly by Mr. George Grumberg, a member of the Academy of Sciences, and Professor of Mathematics. As every thing is juridical in these depositions, it would be useless for me to insist on the weight they must carry with them. These were four pupils, who did not wait to be initiated in the grand mysteries of the Sect to form their judgement on, and to quit the Sect. They

[p. 396]

were cited at a tribunal to declare all they knew, and they answered with moderation and truth. Their depositions will find a place in the historical part of this work.

IX. The Apologies published by some of the leaders of the Sect are also to be classed among the incontrovertible evidence which we have acquired. These gentlemen will not be expected to have aggravated their own wickedness.

X. The list would be endless were I to subjoin all the works that have been written against the Sect. But I must distinguish in this place the works of Mr. Hoffman, Professor at the University of Vienna. I am but little acquainted with those of Doctor Zimmerman, though I have been informed by letter, that he furnished many valuable articles in a journal published at Vienna, and chiefly directed against the Sect. I often find Mr. Stark's name mentioned as a strenuous opponent of the Sect. I have seen no publication with his name to it, except an Apology in Answer to the Calumnies of the Sect, which it continues to repeat, notwithstanding the victorious manner in which he has answered them.

Among the anonymous writings I find an excellent work entitled the Ultimate fate of the Free-masons (Endliches schicksal des Frey-maurer Ordens). It is a discourse pronounced at the breaking-up of a Freemason's Lodge. The writer of this discourse gives an excellent statement of the reasons why the Lodges should suspend their labours since Illuminism had intruded itself into Masonry.--I believe he would have pronounced this discourse much sooner, had he known that all Lodges were not so pure as his own.

I have also perused the Biographical Fragments of the Sieur Bode, a famous Illuminee; these will be very useful in our Historical Volume. As to numberless other works which I have read on the same subject, it will suffice to give the titles of them when quoted. I have said more than enough to show that I am not in the dark with respect to the subject on which I am writing.

I could wish to express my gratitude to those virtuous men who, by their correspondence, and the memorials which they have sent me, have greatly advanced my undertaking. But open expressions of such a gratitude would prove fatal to them. To have contributed to the public utility is a sufficient reward for their virtue; and if my work is not so perfect as it ought to be, it arises not from any want of energy in their endeavours.

I find myself much against my will obliged to answer certain objections which my Translator has made, and which will, doubtless, be repeated by many other readers, grounded on the work of Mr. Robison, entitled Proof of a Conspiracy against all the Religions and Governments of Europe, &c. &c. That work was published just as this Third Volume was going to the press. Its author had not then met with my two first Volumes; but in a second Edition he is pleased to mention them in his Appendix. I am much flattered by his approbation, heartily congratulate him on the zeal he has himself shown in combating the public enemy, and am happy to see that he has wrought on the best materials. Without knowing it, we have fought for the same cause with

[p. 397]

the same arms, and pursued the same course; but the public are on the eve of seeing our respective quotations, and will observe a remarkable difference between them. I fear lest we should be put in competition with each other, and the cause of truth suffer in the conflict. I entreat the reader to observe, that these differences arise from the different methods followed by him and myself. Mr. Robison has adopted the easiest, though the most hazardous method. He combines together in one paragraph what his memory may have compiled from many, and sometimes makes use of the expressions of the German author when he thinks it necessary. Beside, he has seen much, and read much, and relates it all together in the paragraphs marked by inverted Commas. The warning he has given in his preface will not suffice to remove the objections of some readers. In some passages he has even adopted as truth certain assertions which the correspondence of the Illuminees evidently demonstrate to have been invented by them against their adversaries, and which in my Historical Volume I shall be obliged to treat in an opposite sense. Nor will I pretend to say, that Illuminism drew its origin from Masonry; for it is a fact demonstrated beyond all doubt, that the founder of Illuminism only became a Mason in 1777, and that two years later than that he was wholly unacquainted with the mysteries of Masonry. [*8]

I know perfectly well, that this will not make Illuminism less disastrous; nevertheless I am obliged to differ from Mr. Robison when treating on that subject, as well as on some other articles.--So much for objections; here is my reply.

In the first place Mr. Robison and I always agree as to the essential facts and the Conspiracy of the Illuminized Lodges; we also agree on their maxims and degrees; and this must be sufficient to convince the reader.

In the next place, in his general view of the Sect he has observed its detestable and most dangerous principles. Like a traveller he has seen the

Monstrum horrendum, informe, ingens . . .

But he has not described its forms, its manners, and its habits. Nor would it be very prudent to reject his narrative because some few circumstances are not perfectly authenticated, or because here and there some want of order may be observable.

In short, if we except one or two letters, which may be said to be translations, all the other quotations (though in the form of letters) cannot be called so, for they are not to be found in the letters of the Illuminees. They are Extracts from different parts, all brought together under one head; Mr. Robison has given them to the public in his own stile, and sometimes makes the Illuminees speak in clearer terms than is done in the Originals. His addition in the Translation of the famous letter from Spartacus to Marius, page 165-6, [*9] has given rise to numberless questions, how the--even d--was expressed in the German text. A parenthesis follows (can this mean death?). I was obliged to answer that the even d--, as well as the parenthesis, were additions; but at the same time that they were not additions contrary to the

[p. 398]

sense of the letter. I could willingly have attributed these deviations to a difference in the editions of the Original Writings; but a new work must be supposed, as well as new letters, to justify the quotations, and all Germany must have noticed such changes. In the first place, the Court of Bavaria would have protested against such a supposition; as the Original Writings could not have coincided with an edition so dissimilar; next, the Illuminees who have not spoken in such clear language, though clear enough in their letters; in fine, the authors who have combated Illuminism, and whose quotations all exactly agree with the Edition of Munich. The Pages may change in different Editions; but whole Letters and Discourses cannot, especially when the public may, as we have seen above, have access to the Originals.

As for myself, whose name cannot be expected to have such authority as Mr. Robison's, I have taken all the precautions of which I felt myself to stand in need. [*10] I never make a quotation but with the Original before me; and when I translate any passage which may stagger the reader, I subjoin the original, that each may explain and verify the text. I follow the same line of conduct when I compare the different testimonies. I never mention a single law in the code without having the original before me, or the practice of it to vouch for my assertion. Hence it will be perceived, that we are not to be put in competition with each other; Mr. Robison taking a general view while I have attempted to descend into particulars: as to the substance we agree. I heartily congratulate him on his zeal in combating the monster; and though we do not agree in certain particularities, we both evince the monstrous nature of the Sect, and the certainty of its horrible Conspiracies.

[p. 399]

Footnotes

^398:1 The Translator thinks it proper to inform the Reader, that, considering how much the abuse of terms, such as of Philosophy, Reason, &c. &c. has contributed to diffuse the new-fangled doctrines, he has adopted in the present volume (which may be said to be the first methodical work published on the subject of which it treats) the words Illumine, Illuminize, and Illuminization, though Illuminate and Illumination might perhaps be more correct expressions. Every reader will feel, that the illumination of the world, and to illuminate mankind, are objects worthy of the true philosopher. But may the man be ever accurst who shall attempt to illuminize his countrymen, or aim at the illuminization of the world! T.

^398:2 Vol. I. page xxii.

^398:3 Gaultier, Verbo MANICHaeI, Sect. 3.

^398:4 Einige original schriften des Illuminaten Ordens, welche bey dem gewesenen regierungsrath Zwack, durch vorgennommene haus visitation zu Landshut den 11 and 12 Octob. 1786, vorgefunden worden. Auf hochsten befehl seiner churfurstlichen Durchleucht zum druck befordert. Munchen. Gedruckt bey Ant Franz churfl; hof-buchdrucker.

^398:5 Nachrichten von weitern Original schriften, &c. &c.

^398:6 Wer an der aechtheit dieser versammlung einen zweifel tragt, mag sich nur bey den hiesigen geheimen archiv melden, allwo man ihm die urschrifften selbst vorzulegen befehligen ist. Munchen 26 Marz 1787.

^399:7 [p. 399] Philo's Endliche erklarung, &c. Page 96.

^399:8 Original Writings, Vol. I. Let. 6, to Ajax.--Ibid. Let. 36 to M. C. Porcins--and the first Pages of the Critical History of the Degrees.

^399:9 See Page 4, of this Volume.

^399:10 I am also afraid that the difference that exists between the degrees of Rosicrucian, of which Mr. Robison is in possession, and those which I have mentioned, may give rise to argument. I answer, 1st. That I am acquainted with three degrees of Rosicrucians, very different in themselves; 2dly. That the Cathechisms, Questions, and Rituals for the same degree greatly differ in different countries: 3dly. That I have followed the works of Mr. L'Abbe Le Franc, which Mr. Robison has quoted: 4thly. That Mr. Robison allows the degree of Knights of the Sun as described by me to be similar to that which he is in possession of. Since the publication of my Second Volume, I have received an account of the same degree which coincides with what I had said, and this degree is a sufficient ground for all that Mr. Robison or myself have asserted on the attack carried on by Masonry against Religion and Governments.

     
Code of the Illuminati: Part III of Memoirs Illustrating the History of Jacobinism, by A Barruel, tr. Robert Edward Clifford [1798], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 400]

  

CHAP. I.

  

Spartacus-Weishaupt, Founder of the Illuminees.

THERE sometimes appear men formed with such unhappy dispositions, that we are led to consider them in no other view than as emanations from the evil genius, bereft by the avenging God of the power of doing good. Imbecil in the sphere of wisdom, such men are only efficient in the arts of vice and destruction; they are ingenious in those conceptions, skilful in that cunning, and fruitful in those resources which enable them despotically to reign in the schools of falsehood, depravity, and wickedness. In competition with the Sophisters, these men will surpass them in the arts of exhibiting error in false and delusive colours; of disguising the vicious passions under the mask of virtue; and of clothing impiety in the garb of Philosophy. In the den of conspirators they are pre-eminent by the atrocity of their deeds; they excel in the arts of preparing revolutions, and of combining the downfal of the Altar with that of Empires. If their career be ever impeded, it is only when they approach the paths of virtue and of real science. When Heaven in its wrath permits a being of this species to appear on the earth, it has only to put nations within the sphere of his activity, and it will be awfully avenged.

With such qualities, and under such auspices, was born in Bavaria, about the year 1748, ADAM WEISHAUPT, better known in the annals of the sect by the name of SPARTACUS. To the eternal shame of his Serene protector, this impious man, heretofore Professor of Law at the University of Ingolstadt, but now banished from his country as a traitor to his Prince and to the whole universe, peacefully at the court of Ernest Lewis, Duke of Saxe Gotha, enjoys an asylum, receives a pension from the public treasury, and is dignified with the title of Honorary Counsellor to that Prince.

An odious phenomenon in nature, an Atheist void of remorse, a profound hypocrite, destitute of those superior talents which lead to the vindication of truth, he is possessed of all that energy and ardour in vice which generates conspirators for impiety and anarchy. Shunning, like the ill-boding owl, the genial rays of the sun, he wraps around him the mantle of darkness; and history shall record of him, as of the evil spirit, only the black deeds which he planned or executed. Of mean birth, his youth was passed in obscurity, and but a single trait of his private life has pierced the cloud in

[p. 401]

which he had enveloped himself--but it is one of hateful depravity and of the most consummate villany.--Incestuous Sophister! it was the widow of his brother whom he seduced.--Atrocious father! it was for the murder of his offspring that he solicited poison and the dagger.--Execrable hypocrite! he implored, he conjured both art and friendship to destroy the innocent victim, the child whose birth must betray the morals of his father. The scandal from which he shrinks is not that of his crime; it is (he says and writes it himself) the scandal which, publishing of the depravity of his heart, would deprive him of that authority by which, under the cloak of virtue, he plunged youth into vice and error.--Monstrous Sophister! he accuses the devils of not having skreened him from this scandal by those abominations which called the vengeance of the God of Nature on the son of Judah.--Then, impudently daring, he perjures himself; he calls every thing that is sacred to witness, that neither he nor his friends ever knew of the existence of those poisons or secret means of skreening him from infamy, much less that they had ever proposed, sought, or employed them. He challenges, and at length forces, the magistrates to prove the accusation; they produce the letters of the perjured Sophister, and therein we behold him entreating a first, a second, and even a third confidant, to seek, or cause to be sought, and to communicate to him, these horrid arts. We see him recalling promises of three years standing with respect to these means. He complains of the little success of his attempts, he accuses the agents of timidity or of ignorance; he entreats and conjures them to renew their attempts, telling them, that it was not yet too late, but that expedition was necessary. Who can paint the depravity of this single trait. How monstrous the being who could have combined such depravity! That the God who humiliates the Sophister should have permitted this single trait to have been brought to light, will suffice to show how far wickedness may be carried by the man who, with virtue on his tongue, and under the shade of that sacred name, was forming and fanaticising the blood-thirsty legions of a Robespierre.

After so shocking an accusation the reader will naturally expect us to produce incontrovertible proofs. We will, therefore, first lay before him the letter of Weishaupt to his adept Hertel; it is the Third Letter in the Second Volume of the Original Writings of the Illuminees in Bavaria.

"Now," says Weishaupt to this adept, "let me, under the most profound secrecy, lay open the situation of my heart. It destroys my rest, it render me incapable of every thing. I am almost desperate. My honour is in danger, and I am on the eve of losing that reputation which gave me so great an authority over our people. My sister-in-law is with child. I have sent her to Athens (Munich) to Euriphon, to solicit a marriage licence from Rome. You see how necessary it is that she should succeed, and that without loss of time; every moment is precious. But should she fail, what shall I do?--How shall I restore the honour of a person who is the victim of a crime that is wholly mine? We have already made several attempts to destroy the child; she was determined to undergo all; but Euriphon is too timid. Yet I scarcely see any other expedient. Could I depend on Celse's secrecy (the professor Bader at Munich), he could be of great service

[p. 402]

to me; he had promised me his aid three years ago. Mention it to him if you think proper. See what can be done. I should be sorry that Cato knew any thing of it, lest he should tell all his friends. If you could extricate me from this unfortunate step, you would restore me to life, to honour, to rest, and to authority (that is over his people). If you cannot, I forewarn you of it, I will hazard a desperate blow, for I neither can nor will lose my honour. I know not what devil". . . . [Here decency obliges us to be silent; but he continues] "As yet nobody knows any thing of it but Euriphon; it is not too late to make an attempt, for she is only in her fourth month, and the worst of it is, that it is a criminal case, and that alone makes the greatest efforts and the most extreme (or boldest) resolution necesssary. Be well and live happier than I do, and do think of some means which can extricate me from this affair. I am yours, &c. SPARTACUS."

Notwithstanding his repugnance to let Cato into the secret, Weishaupt is at length obliged to write to him on the subject, and, after repeating that which through decency we have omitted above, this monster of hypocrisy says, "what vexes me the most in all this, is that my authority over our people will be greatly diminished--that I have exposed a weak side, of which they will not fail to advantage themselves whenever I may preach morality, and exhort them to virtue and modesty." [*1]

Now let us observe the same Weishaupt barefacedly saying in his apology, "I think and declare before God (and I wish this writing to be looked upon as a most solemn declaration), that in all my life I have never heard of those secret means (of abortion) nor of those poisons; that I have never seen nor had knowledge of any occasion when I or my friends could even have thought of advising, administering, or making any use whatever of them. And this I say in testimony and affirmation of the truth." [*2] It is thus that by the most abominable hypocrisy he sustains a barefaced and detestable perjury.

So much for the moral virtue of this man; but our chief object is, to consider him in his character of a Conspirator. Let us then descend into that baleful abyss, and observe him in the schools of impiety, rebellion, and anarchy. Here again he appears to have been ignorant of the gradations of crime, of the space that lies between the slightest deviation from rectitude and the most profound wickedness. Here, scarcely have the magistrates cast their eyes upon him when they find him at the head of a conspiracy which, when compared with those of the clubs of Voltaire and D'Alembert, or with the secret committees of D'Orleans, make these latter appear like the faint imitations of puerility, and show the Sophister and the Brigand as mere novices in the arts of revolution. It is not known, and it would be difficult to discover, whether Weishaupt ever had a master, or whether he is himself the great original of those monstrous doctrines on which he founded his school. There exists, however, a tradition which on the authority of some of his adepts we shall lay before the reader.

According to this tradition, a Jutland merchant, who had lived some time in Egypt, began in the year 1771 to overrun Europe, pretending to initiate

[p. 403]

adepts in the antient mysteries of Memphis. But from more exact information I have learned that he stopped for some time at Malta, where the only mysteries which he taught were the disorganizing tenets of the antient Illuminees, of the adopted slave; and these he sedulously infused into the minds of the people. These principles began to expand, and the island was already threatened with revolutionary confusion, when the Knights very wisely obliged our modern Illuminee to seek his safety in flight. The famous Count (or rather mountebank) Cagliostro is said to have been a disciple of his, as well as some other adepts famous for their Illuminism in the county of Avignon and at Lyons. In his peregrinations, it is said, he met with Weishaupt, and initiated him in his mysteries. If impiety and secrecy could entitle a person to such an initiation, never had any man better claims than Weishaupt. More artful and wicked than Cagliostro, he knew how to direct them among his disciples to very different ends.

Whatever may have been the fact with respect to this first master, it is very certain that Weishaupt needed none. In an age when every kind of error had taken root, he did what is naturally to be expected from men who, guided by their unhappy bias, both in religious and political opinions, always select the most abominable. He must have had some notion of the ancient Illuminees, for he adopted their name, and the disorganizing principles of their horrid system. These notions were then , without doubt, by his favorite application to the disorganizing mysteries of Manichaeism, since we may observe him recommending the study of them to his disciples as a preparatory step for, and as having a close connection with, those for which he was preparing them. [*3] But perfect Atheist as he was, and scorning every idea of a God, he soon despised the twofold God of Antient Illuminism, and adopted the doctrines of Manes only in as much as they threatened every government, and led to universal anarchy. He was acquainted with the systems of the modern Sophisters; but, notwithstanding all their democracy, he did not think they had given sufficient latitude to their systems of Liberty and Equality. He only adopted their hatred for God, or pure Atheism. One class led to the destruction of all civil and political laws, the other to the overthrow of all religion; he combined them both, and formed a monstrous digest, whose object was the most absolute, the most ardent, the most frantic vow to overthrow, without exception, every religion, every government, and all property whatsoever. He pleased himself with the idea of a distant possibility that he might infuse the same wish throughout the world; he even assured himself of success.

With the talents of a vulgar Sophister such a hope would have been the summit of folly; but with a genius like that of Weishaupt, formed for great crimes, it was the confidence of unlimited wickedness. The Bavarian Sophister knew his powers; he believed no crime impossible; he only sought to combine them all to reduce his systems to practice. The mediocrity of his fortune had obliged him to consecrate the latter years of his education to the study of the laws. Whether by dissimulation he concealed the plans fostered in his breast,

[p. 404]

or whether he had not as yet digested them all, he however found means of getting himself named to the chair of Laws in the University of Ingolstadt, before he had attained his twenty-eighth year. On the 10th of March, 1778, he writes to Zwack that he was not yet thirty years of age; and in the same letter he informs him, under secrecy, of his future projects on Illuminism, which he had founded two years before.

He must have known himself possessed of profound dissimulation; he must have been master of strange resources, to ground his plans for the subversion of all laws throughout all empires, on the very function of public interpreter of the law. It was nevertheless at the college of Ingolstadt that Weishaupt, affecting the greatest zeal for his duty, conceived himself to be admirably  for forming and conducting by invisible means the great revolution which he had planned. He justly estimated the influence which his office of teacher gave him over his scholars, and he had the courage to supply in private the deficiency of those lessons which he was obliged to give to them in public.

But it would have been too poor a conquest for Anarchy or Impiety to have gained only those who were under the eye of the founder. Weishaupt beheld mankind subject to religious and political laws from pole to pole, and his jealous zeal weighed the means which the saints had employed to extend the faith of Christ. There still existed the scattered remnants of an Order which the imprudent policy of Kings had obliged the Sovereign Pontiff to sacrifice to the machinations of a Philosophism, the professed enemy of both Kings and Pontiffs. Weishaupt knew how to appreciate the support which the laws had acquired from men who were heretofore spread throughout all Catholic countries, and who, in the towns and villages, publicly taught youth, thundered from the pulpit against vice, directed Christians toward the path of virtue, and went to preach the faith of Christ to idolatrous and barbarous nations. He well knew how much empires were indebted to religious Orders, that in preaching the duty which each man owed to his God, strengthened the ties that bound him to his neighbour and to his Prince. Though he in his heart detested the children of Benedict, Francis, or Ignatius, he admired the institutions of these holy founders, and was particularly charmed with those of Ignatius, whose laws directed so many zealous men dispersed throughout the world toward the same object and under one head: he conceived that the same forms might be adopted, though to operate in a sense diametrically opposite. [*4] "What these men have done for the Altar and the Throne (said he to himself) why would not I do in opposition to the Altar and the Throne? With legions of adepts subject to my laws, and by the lure of mysteries, why may not I destroy under the cover of darkness, what they edified in broad day? What Christ even did for God and for Caesar, why shall not I do against God and Caesar, by means of adepts now become my apostles?"

In attributing such a wicked emulation to Weishaupt, I will not leave the historian to fruitless conjectures. No, these very wishes in plain language are contained in his confidential letters to his disciples; and he even reproaches

[p. 405]

them with not imitating the submission of the followers of those holy founders. [*5] His most celebrated adepts have declared, that they had observed him copying them throughout his code; [*6] they must also have remarked, that Weishaupt, in planning his systems according to the forms adopted by those religious founders, had reserved it to himself to add all the artifices which the most infernal policy could suggest. At the actual period when this conspirator formed his plans, he was ignorant of the object of Freemasonry: [*7] He only knew that the fraternity held secret meetings: he observed that they were bound by mysterious ties, and recognized each other for brethren by certain signs and words, whatever might be their country or religion. In his mind, therefore, he combined the plan of a society, which was at once to partake as much as convenient of the government of the Jesuits, and of the mysterious silence and secret conduct of Masonry. Its object was, the propagation of the most Antisocial Systems of ancient Illuminism, and of the most Antireligious Systems of modern Philosophism.

Brooding over this disastrous project, Weishaupt cast his eyes on the young pupils whom government had entrusted to his care to form them for magistrates of their country, and defenders of the laws, and he resolved to begin his warfare against both by the perversion of these youths. He beheld in distant succession his first disciples seducing others, those again, subject to his laws, forming further adepts; and thus by degrees he came complacently to view his legions multiplying and spreading from the towns to the country, and resident even in the courts of Princes. He already heard those oaths which, under the secrecy of the Lodges, were to bind the minds and hearts of those new legions who, replete with his disorganizing spirit, were silently to undermine the Altar and the Throne. He calculated the time necesssary, and smiled to think that he would one day have only to give the signal for the general explosion.

Scarcely had this modern Eratostratus attained his eight-and-twentieth year, ere he had laid the foundations of those laws which he meant to give to his disorganizing Sect. Though he had not actually written his code, he had arranged it in his mind, and he made his first essay on two of his pupils, one named Massenhausen (whom he surnamed Ajax), about twenty years of age, and afterwards a Counsellor at Burkhausen; the other called Merz (whom he surnamed Tiberius) [*8] nearly of the same age, but whose morals and character proved so abominable, that they made even his vile seducer blush. These two disciples soon vying with their master in impiety, he judged them worthy of being admitted to his mysteries, and conferred on them the highest degree that he had as yet invented. He called them Areopagites, installed himself their chief, and called this monstrous association THE ORDER OF ILLUMINEES. [*9]

It was on the first of May, 1776, that the inauguration was celebrated. Let the reader well observe this epoch. It indicates a feeble beginning; it preceded the French Revolution but by a few years; that however was the time when that abominable Sect first started into existence, which was to combine all the errors, all the conspiracies, and all the crimes of the adepts of Impiety,

[p. 406]

[paragraph continues] Rebellion, or Anarchy, and which, under the name of Jacobin, was to consummate the dreadful Revolution. Such was the origin of that Sect which I had in view when I proclaimed to all nations, and unfortunately with too much truth, "That whatever their government or religion might be, to whatever rank they might belong in civil society, if Jacobinism triumphed all would be overthrown; that should the plans and wishes of the Jacobins be accomplished, their religion with its Pontiffs, their government with its laws, their magistrates and their property, all would be swept away in the common mass of ruin! Their riches and their fields, their houses and their cottages, their very wives and children would be torn from them. You have looked upon Jacobinical faction as exhausting itself in France, when it was only making a sportive essay of its strength." [*10]

According to the wishes and intentions of this terrible and formidable Sect, nations, astonished, have yet only seen the first part of the plans formed for that general Revolution which is to beat down every Throne overturn every Altar--destroy all property--blot out every law and conclude by the total dissolution of all society!

The omen is fatal; but (more fatal still!) I have numberless proofs to demonstrate the truth of this assertion. With respect to the Conspiracies of Illuminism, I shall draw my proofs from their own code and their archives. I will begin with their code; it will lay open the object, the extent, the manner, the means and inconceivable depth of the Conspiracies of the Sect. This First Part will comprehend the plan of their conspiracies, the extract and analysis of the code of laws which they had constructed for attaining their ends. The Second Part will show their progress and their successes from their first origin, till that period when, powerful in Revolutionary Legions, without leaving their secret dens, they unite and confound themselves with the Jacobins, and in unison with them prosecute that war of desolation which menaces with total ruin the Altar of every God--the Throne of every Monarch--The Law of every Society--and the Property of every Citizen. O! that I could in delineating what the Sect has done, what it is doing, and what it still meditates to do that I could but teach nations and the chiefs of nations what they themselves ought to do, to avert the impending danger; those, I say, who have mistaken these disasters for a sudden explosion, while they are in fact but an essay of the strength of the Sect, and the commencement of their general plan.

[p. 407]

Footnotes

^406:1 Original Writings, Vol. I. Let. 61, to Cato.

^406:2 Introduction to his Apology, p. 6.

^406:3 See the degree of Directing Illumine, oder Scottischer Ritter (Scotch Knight) page 72.

^406:4 Mirabeau de la Monarchie Prussienne, vol. V. P. 97.

^406:5 Vid. Original Writings, Vol. I. let 27, to Cato.

^406:6 See the Original Writings, Vol. I Instructio pro recipientibus, art. B--Let. 2, to Ajax.--Divers letters to Cato.--Last Observation of Philo.

^406:7 See hereafter the chapter on Masonry illuminized, Vol. IV.

^407:8 [p. 407] Weishaupt, in a letter to Zwack, says, "My three first colleagues were Ajax, you, and Merz." (Let. 15, Feb. 1778). This clearly states, that Merz was the Tiberius who was illuminated with Ajax; for it is clear that Zwack was only initiated ten months after the two adepts Ajax and Tiberius. (See Orig. Writ. Vol. I. Sect. IV.)

^407:9 Orig. Writ. Vol. I. Sect. IV.--Let. 2, to Philip Strozzi.

^407:10 Vol. I, page 23.

     
Code of the Illuminati: Part III of Memoirs Illustrating the History of Jacobinism, by A Barruel, tr. Robert Edward Clifford [1798], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 408]

  

CHAP. II.

  

Code of the Illuminees.--General System, and division of the Code.

BY the code of the sect of Illuminees I mean the principles and systems which it had formed to itself on Religion and Civil Society, or rather against all Religion and Civil Society whatever; I mean the government and the laws which it has adopted to realize its plans, and to guide the adepts in bringing the whole universe into its systems. This was not so much a code springing from an ardent mind, and an enthusiastic zeal for a great revolution, as the offspring of reflection on the means of rendering it infallible; for no sooner had Weishaupt conceived a plan, than he foresaw the obstacles which might thwart its success. Though he decorated the first pupils whom he had seduced with the title of his profound adepts, yet he did not dare unfold to them the vast extent of his plans. Pleased with having laid the foundation, he did not hurry the elevation of that edifice, which might have been exposed to fall for want of the proper precautions; no, he wished it to be as durable as time itself. For five whole years he meditated; and he foresaw that he should still have to pause for many a tedious day on the means of securing the success of his plans. His plodding head silently ruminated and slowly combined that code of laws or rather of cunning, of artifice, of snares and ambushees by which he was to regulate the preparation of candidates, the duties of the initiated, the functions, the rights, the conduct of the chiefs, and even his own. He watched every means of seduction, weighed and compared those means, tried them one after the other; and when he had adopted any of them would still reserve the power of changing them, in case he should happen to fall upon any that would be more disastrous.

Meanwhile his first disciples, now his apostles, gained him many partizans; he seduced many himself, and directed their conduct by letter. His advice was adapted to circumstances, and, artfully husbanding his promises, he kept the minds of his disciples perpetually in suspense as to the last mysteries. To his trusty adepts he promises systems of morality, of education, and of polity, all entirely new; and they might easily surmise that this future code would be no other than that of a morality without restraint, of a religion without a God, and of a polity without laws or any dependence whatsoever; [*1] though he did not dare

[p. 409]

entirely to throw away the mask. But his laws appeared imperfect, his snares were not sufficiently concealed; and he was convinced that time and experience alone could perfect the work on which he had so long meditated. Such are the colours, at least, in which we see him representing himself when his adepts, impatient to be initiated in the last mysteries, reproach him with the slowness of the proceedings: "It is from time and experience," says he, "that we are to learn. I daily put to the test what I made last year, and I find that my performances of this year are far superior. Give me then time to reflect on what may forward and on what may delay the execution of our plans; to weigh what may be expected of our people left to themselves or led and conducted by us.--Remember that what is done in haste, speedily falls to ruin. Leave me then to myself, let me act alone; and believe me, time and I are worth any other two." [*2]

Let not the reader imagine that these meditations of Weishaupt alluded to the  of his views; that never varied; the destruction of Religion, the destruction of Society and the civil Laws, the destruction of property,--that was the point at which he always aimed; and this impious man too well knew his crime, not to be alarmed; we see him writing to his confident, "You know the situation in which I stand. I must direct the whole by means of five or six persons. It is absolutely necessary that I should during my life remain unknown to the greater part of the adepts themselves.--I am often overwhelmed with the idea that all my meditations, all my services and toils are perhaps only twisting a rope or planting a gallows for myself; that the indiscretion or imprudence of a single individual may overturn the most beautiful edifice that ever was reared." [*3]

At other times wishing to appear above such fears, but still reproaching the adepts with want of caution, he says, "If our affairs already go on so ill, the whole will soon be undone: the fault will be thrown upon me, and, as author of every thing, I shall be the first sacrificed. Yet that is not what frightens me; I know how to take every thing on my own score; but if the imprudence of the Brethren is to cost me my life, let me at least not have to blush before men of reflection, nor to reproach myself with an inconsiderate and rash conduct." [*4] Thus does every motive stimulate this famous Conspirator to transfuse into his code every precaution that could at the same time skreen him from condign punishment, and secure the success of his plots. At length, after five years meditation on his side, and numerous consultations with his trusty adepts, particularly with Philo, or the Baron Knigge, who acts a very exalted part in Illuminism, Weishaupt had regulated the mode of his mysteries, and had digested the code of his Sect, that is to say, the principles, the laws, and government adopted by the Illuminees to accomplish the grand object of their Conspiracy. Before we lead our readers through the immense labyrinth of this code, let us give a general idea of the system which stimulated its author to the formation of those laws.

The more we meditate on that part of the code which we shall lay before our readers when we come to treat of the mysteries of Illuminism, the more

[p. 410]

clearly we observe Weishaupt adopting the principles of Equality and of Liberty, (propagated by modern Philosophism) in order to present them in a new light, and to lead his disciples to the ultimate consequences of the most absolute Impiety and Anarchy.

The modern Sophisters, some following Voltaire, others Rousseau, had begun by saying, that all men were equal and free; and they had concluded with respect to Religion, that nobody, though speaking in the name of a God who reveals himself, had the right of prescribing rules to their faith. The authority of revelation being cast aside, they left no other basis for Religion to rest upon, than the Sophistry of a reason the perpetual prey of our passions. They had annihilated Christianity in the minds of their adepts. With respect to Governments they had also asserted, that all men were equal and free, and they had concluded that every citizen had an equal right to form the laws, or to the title of Sovereign; this consequence abandoning all authority to the capricious fluctuations of the multitude, no government could be legitimate but that founded on Chaos, or the volcanic explosions of the democratic and sovereign populace.

Weishaupt, reasoning on the same principles, believed both the Sophisters and the Democratic Populace to be too timid in drawing their inferences, and the following may be said to be the essence of all his mysteries.

"Liberty and Equality are the essential rights that man in his original and primitive perfection received from nature. Property struck the first blow at Equality; political Society, or Governments, were the first oppressors of Liberty; the supporters of Governments and property are the religious and civil laws; therefore, to reinstate man in his primitive rights of Equality and Liberty, we must begin by destroying all Religion, all civil society, and finish by the destruction of all property."

Had true Philosophy but gained admittance to these lodges of Illuminism, how clearly would she have demonstrated the absurdity of each and all of these principles, and the extravagance and wickedness of such consequences, both to the master and his adepts! She would have shewn, that the rights and laws of primitive man alone upon earth, or parent of a scanty generation, neither were nor ought to be the rights and laws of man living on an inhabited globe. She would have proved, that Nature, when she ordained that man should increase and multiply on this earth, and that he should cultivate it, clearly announced that his posterity were hereafter to live under the empire of social laws. She would have observed, that without property this earth would have remained uncultivated and uninhabited; that without religious and civil laws the same earth would have only nurtured straggling hordes of vagabonds and savages. Then would our Bavarian Illuminee have concluded, that his Equality and Liberty, far from being the essential rights of man in the state of perfection, would only be the instruments of his degradation, and assimilate him to the beasts of the earth, if they were to be incompatible with Property, Religion, and Society. But true Philosophy was an alien to his school; and Weishaupt, with his detestable genius formed for error, applauds

[p. 411]

the sophism, makes it the basis of his system, and the ultimate secret of his mysteries.

I am not simply to prove that such is the grand object of the Conspiracy, and of the ultimate revolution which he is preparing with all his adepts. Were that my only task, I should cite the blessings which the hierophant of Illuminism pours out on those hordes that roam without laws or society, and the curses which he vents against those men who, fixing their abodes, name chiefs and constituted states. The very menaces of the teacher unfold the whole of the Conspiracy. "Yes, princes and nations shall disappear from off the face of the earth; yes, a time shall come when man shall acknowledge no other law but the great book of nature: This revolution shall be the work of the SECRET SOCIETIES, and that is one of our grand mysteries. [*5] This single passage of the code is sufficient to demonstrate both the object of the Conspiracy and the extent of the projects of the sect; but though the Conspiracy should be clearly proved, still that would be doing little for the public good. Instead of a terrible and formidable Sect, nations and chiefs of nations might mistake the Illuminees for a band of senseless madmen, plodding without means a chimerical Revolution; therefore little to be feared, and too despicable to deserve notice. Thus would wickedness find a cloak in its excesses; the Sect would prosecute its hellish plots more actively, more confidently, and more successfully, merely because their object was supposed impossible. Society would be dissolved; our laws, our religion, and our property, would be wrested from us, because we believed them proof against any attempt. Nations would tranquilly slumber on the brink of the precipice, and be plunged into destruction while they considered the fatal cause as the delusion of delirium, and smiled on the plots of Illuminism. And its founder foresaw this: for he says to his adepts, "Let the laughers laugh, let the scoffers scoff; he that compares the past with the present, will see that nature continues its course without the possibility of diverting it. Its progress is imperceptible to the man who is not formed to observe it; but it does not escape the attention of the Philosopher." [*6]

Society then calls upon me to develop more than the existence, or even the extent of the plots of the Sect--I say, it calls on me loudly to proclaim the dangers which threaten us; yes, the evils which threaten all society must be clearly shown. A manner of proceeding and an artful cunning big with crime, which will speedily plunge nations into those disasters which they may believe chimerical, is to be clearly ascertained. I have to unfold the whole of a system, an entire code, in which each institute, each maxim, each regulation, is a new step towards a universal revolution which shall strike society a mortal blow. I am not then about to inform each citizen that his religion, his country, his property, that every society, people, or nation, are menaced; unfortunately that would be a task too easily performed. But I am bound to say, "In this horrible plot, such are the dangers which threaten your country, and such the perils that hang over your persons." I must show extensive resources combined with consummate villainy, where you imagined that nothing existed but the delirium of modern Philosophism, destitute of means.

[p. 412]

Weishaupt, like yourselves, had foreseen numerous obstacles to his conspiracy; and it appears that he had even exaggerated them. That for which his most famous adepts seem to despise their countrymen, should be mentioned here as redounding to their honour. Weishaupt, surrounded by the faithful Bavarians, faithful to their God and to their country (rather speculating on the human heart from his books, than closely observing men in the common intercourse of life), was not aware of how very much Philosophism had forwarded his systems. [*7] The generation which had attained the age of manhood appeared too much infected with the antiquated ideas on religion and government. But, unfortunately, facts soon undeceived him; and this error only served, by deferring his hopes, to turn his mind to farther precautions and meditations, which sooner or later were to render his success infallible. He would say to himself, he would say to his trusty brethren, "According to my views, I cannot employ men as they are; I must form them; each class of my Order must be a preparatory school for the next; and all this must necessarily be the work of time." [*8] But to accelerate the time he cast his eyes on that class of young men, which, just entering the world, easily fall a prey to error, because at that age they are under the influence of their passions. I shall hereafter show what it was that both shortened the time, and abridged their education, in presenting him with whole legions of adepts ready formed to his mysteries. It is first necessary, however, that the reader should be acquainted with the profundity of his system; because, had the French Revolution not taken place, that system would alone have sufficed to render it certain and infallible; for, could the French Revolution be done away at the present moment, and the ancient regimen be restored, this code would furnish Illuminism with all the means of effectuating one that should be still more disastrous. Let us then study it, let us dissipate the cloud in which it is enveloped. Reader, your own interest requires that you should follow our steps; and observe all the snares that have been laid for you; see with what art its disciples are beguiled, with what precaution it chooses, calls, and disposes its adepts. Its proceedings appear indeed to be slow, but they are nevertheless sure. It seems to exhaust all its art to acquire a single proselyte, but the same allurements attract whole legions. Its springs are secret, but the reader must know their power and with what constancy they move toward and direct the common ruin. He has seen the people agitated, animated, and even misled to ferocity; but he must also be informed how those adepts were created who fanaticised the people and rendered them ferocious.

Weishaupt lays down as an invariable and infallible principle, that "the grand art of rendering any revolution whatsoever certain--is to enlighten the people;--and to enlighten them is, insensibly to turn the public opinion to the adoption of those changes which are the given object of the intended revolution.

"When that object cannot be  without exposing him that has conceived it to public vengeance, he must know how to propagate his opinion IN SECRET SOCIETIES.

[p. 413]

"When the object is an universal Revolution, all the members of these societies, aiming at the same point, and aiding each other, must find means of governing invisibly, and without any appearance of violent measures, not only the higher and more distinguished class of any particular state, but men of all stations, of all nations, and of every religion--Insinuate the same spirit every where--In silence, but with the greatest activity possible, direct the scattered inhabitants of the earth toward the same point." This is what he calls the grand problem on the polity of states, on which he grounds the force of secret societies, and on which the empire of his Illuminism was to rest. [*9]

"This empire once established by means of the union and multitude of the adepts, let force succeed to the invisible power. Tie the hands of those who resist; subdue and stifle wickedness in the germ;" that is to say, crush those whom you have not been able to convince. [*10] He that teaches such doctrines is not to be looked on as a weak enemy. When Weishaupt reserved them for his mysteries, as well as the revelation of his ultimate object, he knew too well that they were only fitted for men who had long been trained to view them as the lessons of nature and of Philosophy, and should he meet with any who had anticipated them, it would only abridge their novitiate. But he needed nothing less than a whole generation. It was therefore to multiply the number of adepts, to dispose them by insensible degrees to receive his doctrines; by an invisible hand to direct their ideas, their wishes, their actions, and their combined efforts, that the code of laws which he framed for Illuminism constantly tended.

According to these laws, the sect is divided into two grand classes, and each of these again subdivided into lesser degrees proportionate to the progress of the adepts.

The first class is that of PREPARATION. It contains four degrees, those of Novice, of Minerval, of Minor Illuminee or Illuminatus Minor, and of Major Illuminee or Illuminatus Major.

Some intermediary degrees belong to the class of PREPARATION, which may be called of Intrusion; such are those which the sect have borrowed from Freemasonry as a means of propagation. Of these masonic degrees the code of Illuminees admit the three first without any alteration: it adapts more particularly to the views of the sect the degree of Scotch Knight as an ultimate preparation for its mysteries, and it is stiled the degree of Directing Illuminee or Illuminatus Dirigens.

The second class is that of the MYSTERIES, and this is subdivided into the lesser and greater mysteries. The lesser comprehend the priesthood and administration of the sect, or the degrees of Priests and of Regents or Princes.

In the greater mysteries are comprized the two degrees of Magi or Philosopher, and of the Man King. The Elect of the latter compose the council and the degree of Areopagites. [*11]

In all these classes, and in every degree, there is a part of the utmost consequence, and which is common to all the Brethren. It is that employment known in the code by the appellation of Brother Insinuator or Recruiter. [*12] The

[p. 414]

whole strength of the Sect depends on this part; it is that which furnishes members to the different degrees; and Weishaupt, well knowing the importance of the task, turned all his genius toward it. Let us therefore begin by directing our attention to the discovery of it.

Footnotes

^414:1 Original Writings, Vol. I. Let. to Marius and Cato.

^414:2 Original Writings, Vol. I. Letters 3, 4, 47, 60 &c to Marius and Cato.

^414:3 Original Writings, Vol. I. Lett. 11 and 25, to Cato.

^414:4 Let. 22, to Cato.

^414:5 See hereafter the Discourse on the Mysteries.

^414:6 See hereafter the Discourse on the Mysteries.

^414:7 See the Last Observations of Philo.

^414:8 Original Writings, Vol. I. Let. to Cato.

^414:9 See the Discourse on the Mysteries.

^414:10 Ibid.

^414:11 See the Original Writings, Chap., II. Part II. page 8. and the last Observations of Philo, page 89, &c. &c.

^414:12 This is not a term of my invention; it really is to be found in the code. Insinuator or Anwerber (signifying Recruiter) are the two words generally made use of to express this character.

     
Code of the Illuminati: Part III of Memoirs Illustrating the History of Jacobinism, by A Barruel, tr. Robert Edward Clifford [1798], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 415]

  

CHAP. III.

  

First Part of the Code of the Illuminees.--Of the Brother Insinuator, or the Recruiter.

BY the appellation of Brother Insinuator, is to be understood the Illuminee whose peculiar office is to make proselytes for the Sect. Some brethren were more particularly instructed for that end; they might, indeed, be called the Apostles or Missionaries of the Order, being those whom the superiors sent to the different towns and provinces, and even into distant countries, to propagate its doctrines and to establish new Lodges. These had received, in addition to the common rules, farther instructions peculiar to the higher degrees. "These (as Weishaupt writes) may sometimes be the most imbecile, and at other times the most ingenious of the Brotherhood." From the former he can depend on a blind obedience to the rules he lays down, which are never to be deviated from; and with respect to the latter, provided they be zealous and punctual, should they even transgress any of the laws, it would not be in such a manner as to commit either their own safety or that of the Order; and they would soon make amends for their indiscretion by some new artifice. But, whatever may be the sense of the Illuminee, he is obliged once or twice in his life to act the part of Brother Insinuator, and that with a certain success, by the acquisition of two or three proselytes, under pain of perpetually remaining in the lower degrees. Some Brethren of high rank may have been dispensed from this formality; but as to the generality of them there exists a positive law on that point. [*1] To stimulate the zeal of the Brethren, the Insinuator is by the laws of the code established superior over every novice that he has gained to the Order: It is expressed as follows: "Every Illuminee may form to himself a petty empire; and from his littleness, emerge to greatness and power." [*2]

Such then is the first duty imposed upon every Illuminee for the propagation of the Sect; and this is the part which first claims our attention, in order that we may be able to form an idea of the immensurable powers of Weishaupt for seduction.

This part may be said to be subdivided into three. The rules laid down are, first, those which are to guide the Brother Insinuator in the choice of persons to be admitted or excluded; then follow those which are to teach him how to entice into the order those persons whom he has judged proper for it;

[p. 416]

and lastly come those rules and arts by which novices are to be formed, and even involved in Illuminism before they are officially admitted.

In order to judge of the qualifications of the persons whom he may enlist, every Illuminee is to begin by procuring tablets, which he is to keep in the form of a Journal; and this is his Diary. Assiduously prying into every thing that surrounds him, he must vigilantly observe all persons with whom he becomes acquainted, or whom he meets in company, without exception of relations, friends, enemies, or entire strangers; he must endeavour to discover their strong and their weak side; their passions and prejudices; their intimacies, and above all, their actions, interests, and fortune; in a word, every thing relating to them: and the remarks of every day he must enter in his Diary.

A twofold advantage is to be reaped from these particulars of information; first, by the Order in general and its superiors; secondly, by the adept himself. Twice every month he will make a general statement of his observations, and he will transmit it to his superiors. By these means the Order will be informed what men, in every town or village, are friendly or inimical to it. The means of gaining over the one or destroying the other will naturally occur. With respect to the Insinuator, he will learn how to judge of those who are proper persons to be received or rejected, and he will carefully insert his reasons for the admission or rejection of those persons in his monthly statements. [*3]

The Recruiting Brother will carefully guard against giving the most distant hint that he is an Illuminee. This law is peremptory for the Brethren, but more particularly for all the Insinuators, whose success may often essentially depend on it. It is to them that the legislator so strongly recommends all that exterior of virtue and of perfection, that care of shunning all public scandals which might deprive them of their ascendancy over the minds of those whom they seek to entice into the Order. [*4] The law expressly says, "Apply yourselves to the acquiring of interior and exterior perfection;" but lest they should conceive that this perfection even hinted at the mastering of their passions, and at renouncing the pleasures of the world, he adds, "Attend particularly to the art of dissembling and of disguising your actions, the better to observe those of others, and to penetrate into their inmost thoughts. "Die kunst zu erlernen sich zu verstellen, andere zu beobachten, and aus zu forschen." It is for that reason that these three great precepts are to be found in the summary of the Code: HOLD THY TONGUE--BE PERFECT--DISGUISE THYSELF--almost following each other in the same page, and serving as an explanation of each other. [*5]

Having made himself perfect master of these precepts, and particularly of the last, the Insinuator is next to turn his attention to those persons whom he may admit or ought to reject. He is not to admit into the Order either Pagans or Jews; but he is equally to reject all religious; and above all to shun the Ex-Jesuits as he would the plague. Ordens geistliche durfen nie aufgenommen werden, und die Ex-Jesuiten soll man wie die pest fliehen. [*6]

The cause of such exclusions is obvious. To speak of religion, and admit, without any precaution, Jews, Turks, and Pagans, would be too open a

[p. 417]

manifestation of what their religion was; and not to reject religious, would be exposing themselves to be betrayed by their own adepts.

Unless they gave evident signs of a sincere amendment, all indiscreet talkers were to be rejected; and also those men whose pride, or headstrong, interested, and inconstant minds denoted that it would be impossible to infuse into them that zeal so necessary for the order; all those again, whose drunken excesses might injure that reputation of virtue which the Order was to acquire; all those, in short, whose meanness and grossness of manners would render them too untractable to give hope for their ever becoming pliant and useful. [*7]

"Leave those brutes, those clownish and thickheaded fellows!" he exclaims in his Chapter on Exclusions; but, though he excluded these thickheaded fellows, Weishaupt was aware that there existed a good sort of being which some might call stupid, but who are not to be told so, as advantage may be taken of their stupidity. Such were, for example, a Baron D'Ert, and many others, who holding a certain rank in the world, though destitute of common sense, have at least their riches to recommend them. "These are a good sort of beings," says our illuminizing legislator; "they are necessary beings. They augment our number and fill our coffers, augent numerum et aerarium. Courage then! and make these gentry swallow the bait; but beware of  to them our secrets; For this species of adept must always be persuaded that the degree they are in is the highest. [*8]

Indeed, there is a sort of half exclusion for princes. The Code ordains that they shall seldom be admitted, and even when they are, shall scarcely ever rise beyond the degree of Scotch Knight; or, in other words, they are never to pass the threshold of the mysteries. Hereafter we shall see the Legislator finding an expedient for introducing them beyond that degree, but still without giving them any further insight into the mysteries; [*9] and being  careful to hide from them certain laws of the Order. [*10]

I cannot take upon myself to say, whether a similar expedient had been found as an exception to the general rule which excluded women; but it is certain, that this law was, during a long time at least, only provisional; and many of the brethren sought to revoke it. Freemasonry had its female adepts, and the Illuminees wished to have theirs. The plan is written in Zwack's own hand-writing, and he was the most intimate friend and confidant of Weishaupt, in short, his incomparable man. It is couched in the following terms:

"Plan for an Order of Women.--This Order shall be subdivided into two classes, each forming a separate society, and having a different secret. The first shall be composed of virtuous women; the second, of the wild, the giddy, and the voluptuous, auschveifenden.

"Both classes are to be ignorant that they are under the direction of men. The two superiors are to be persuaded that they are under a mother Lodge of the same sex, which transmits its orders; though in reality these orders are to be transmitted by men.

"The Brethren who are intrusted with this superintendance shall forward their instructions without making themselves known. They shall conduct the

[p. 418]

first, by promoting the reading of good books, but shall form the latter to the arts of secretly gratifying their passions, durch begnugung ihrer leidenschaften im verborgenen."

A preliminary discourse prefixed to this plan points out the object and future services of these illuminized sisters. "The advantages which the real Order would reap from this female Order would be, first, the money which the sisterhood would pay at their initiation; and, secondly, a heavy tax upon their curiosity, under the supposition of secrets that are to be learned. And this association might moreover serve to gratify those brethren who had a turn for sensual pleasure." [*11]

A list and description of eighty-five young ladies of Manheim accompanied this project of Zwack, very properly surnamed the Cato of Illuminism; from among whom, in all probability, the founders of these two classes were to be chosen. Circumstances not having favoured our modern Cato's views, we observe several other adepts proposing similar plans. An assessor of the Imperial Chamber at Wetzlaar of the name of Dittfurt, known among the Illuminees by that of Minos, and who rose to the degree of Regent, and to the dignity of Provincial, seemed to dispute the honor of this invention, both with Brother Hercules and even with Cato himself: We must allow, at least, that nobody was more anxious for the execution of the project than he was. He had already submitted his ideas to the Baron Knigge, and he applies anew to Weishaupt. He even despairs of ever bringing men to the grand object of the order without the support of the female adepts. Indeed, so ardent is his zeal, that he makes an offer of his own wife and his four daughters-in-law to be the first adepts. The eldest was exactly the person for the philosophized sisterhood; she was four-and-twenty years of age, and with respect to religion her ideas were far above those of her sex; they were modelled on her father's. He had attained to the degrees of Regent and Prince of the Illuminees, and she would have been Regent and Princess. In the higher mysteries, together with Ptolemy's wife, we should have seen the one corresponding with her father, the other with her husband. These illuminized Princesses would be the only two persons of the order who should know that they were all under the direction of men. They would preside over the trials and receptions of Minervals, and would initiate those whom they judged worthy into the grand projects of the sisterhood for the reform of governments and the happiness of mankind. [*12]

But, notwithstanding all the plans and zeal of the Brethren, it does not appear that the legislator ever consented to the establishment of the Sisterhood. Yet he supplied the want of such an institution by secret instructions which he gave the Regents on the means of making the influence of women over men subservient to the order, without initiating them in any of the secrets. He says, that the fair sex having the greatest part of the world at their disposition, "no study was more worthy of the adept than the art of flattery in order to gain them; that they were all more or less led by vanity, curiosity, the pleasures or the love of novelty; that it was on that side they were to be attacked, and by that they were to be rendered serviceable to the order." [*13] He nevertheless

[p. 419]

continued to exclude great talkers and women from all the degrees, nor was the sixth article of his instructions for the Insinuator rescinded.

Notwithstanding all these exclusions, the legislator leaves a sufficient scope wherein the Insinuator may exercise his zeal. He recommends generally young men of all stations from eighteen to thirty; but more particularly those whose educations were not completed, either because he thought they would more easily imbibe his principles, or would be more grateful and more zealous for doctrines for which they were indebted solely to him. [*14]

But this preference is not an exclusion for men of a  age, provided they are not past service, and are already imbued with the principles of Illuminism. [*15] This, however, chiefly regards those persons whose rank in life can give consequence and afford protection to the order. The Recruiters are particularly instructed to insinuate themselves into the good opinion of such persons, and if possible to entice them into the Order.

There is yet another species of men, who have speech as it were at command; such are attornies, counsellors, and even physicians. "Those are worth having," says Weishaupt; "but they are sometimes real devils, so difficult are they to be led; they however are worth having when they can be gained over. [*16]

The Insinuator is also to admit artists, mechanics of all professions, painters, engravers, white-smiths and black-smiths; but above all booksellers, those who keep post-horses, and school-masters. Hereafter the reader will see the use for which these men were intended. [*17]

To yet another class of men our legislator often calls the attention of the Insinuator: "Seek me out, for example," says Weishaupt, "the dexterous and dashing youths. We must have adepts who are insinuating, intriguing, full of resource, bold and enterprising; they must also be flexible and tractable, obedient, docile, and sociable. Seek out also those who are distinguished by their power, nobility, riches, or learning, nobiles, potentes, divites, doctos, quaerite--Spare no pains, spare nothing in the acquisition of such adepts. If heaven refuse its aidance, conjure hell.

"Flectere si nequeas superos, Acheronta moveto." [*18]

With respect to religions, he prefers the disciples of Luther and Calvin to the Roman Catholics, and greatly prefers the former to the latter. This distinction should alone suffice to open the eyes of many who wish to persuade themselves that the whole of the revolutionary fury is aimed at the Roman Catholic religion. This motley crew certainly did the Catholics the honour of directing their shafts more pointedly at them, as strenuous opponents of their impiety and of their religious and civil anarchy; but was it to preserve the Protestant religion that Weishaupt gives them such a preference, in hopes of making them subservient to his plots? That he did give such a preference cannot be doubted, when we see him expressly writing to an adept whom he had commissioned to look out for a person proper to be received into the higher mysteries and to found a new colony of Illuminees--were this man a Protestant I should like him much better.--Ware es ein Protestant,

[p. 420]

so ware es mir um so Lieber. [*19] Weishaupt's most famous adept constantly manifests the same predilection; he even wishes to retrench certain parts of the mysteries that he may not alarm the Catholics, and seems always to hint at Frederic the IId's saying, We Protestants go on brisker. [*20] Most certainly this proves beyond a possibility of doubt, that the destruction of all Protestant laws, whether civil or religious, had place in their plans. Nor were the Protestants of Germany the dupes of such a policy, as many of the most determined antagonists of Illuminism were of that religion.

Further, he wishes to entice men into his order who have fixed residences in towns, such as merchants and canons, who might assiduously propagate his doctrines, and establish them in their neighbourhoods. [*21]

The Recruiter must use every art (for an obvious reason) to engage schoolmasters, and to insinuate his doctrines into, and gain adepts in the military academies, and other places of education; he is even to attempt the seduction of the superiors of ecclesiastical seminaries. [*22]

"He will spare no trouble to gain the Prince's officers, whether presiding over provinces, or attending him in his councils. He that has succeeded in this has done more," says the code, "than if he had engaged the Prince himself. [*23] In fine, the Provincial, or the chief Insinuator, is to recruit every thing that can be tainted with Illuminism, or can be serviceable to its cause." [*24]

The following extraordinary instructions are also given by Weishaupt respecting the choice of adepts: "Above all things (he says to his Insinuators) pay attention to the figure, and select the well-made men and handsome young fellows. They are generally of engaging manners and nice feelings. When properly formed, they are the best adapted for negotiations; for first appearances prepossess in their favour. It is true, they have not the depth that men of more gloomy countenances often have. They are not the persons to be entrusted with a revolt, or the care of stirring up the people; but it is for that very reason that we must know how to chuse our agents. I am particularly fond of those men whose very soul is painted in their eyes, whose foreheads are high, and whose countenances are open. Above all, examine well the eyes, for they are the very mirrors of the heart and soul. Observe the look, the gait, the voice. Every external appearance leads us to distinguish those who are fit for our school." [*25]

"Select those in particular who have met with misfortunes, not from accidents, but by some act of injustice; that is to say, in other words, the DISCONTENTED; for such are the men to be called into the bosom of Illuminism, as into their proper asylum." [*26]

Let not the reader already exclaim, How deep are the views of this illuminizing Sophister? How has he foreseen every point! With what discernment does he lay his snares to entrap those who are to be the future agents of his plots! The reader has as yet seen merely a schedule of those persons who may be admitted or rejected; but that does not sufficiently secure the order with respect to the elections which the Insinuator may have made. Before he undertakes the initiation of any person whom he may have thought

[p. 421]

proper, he is to make a statement from his diary of every thing that he may have observed with respect to his morals, opinions, conduct, and even of his connections in life. He is to submit this statement to his superiors, who will compare it with the notes they are already in possession of, or may acquire from other adepts, respecting the candidate, or even with a new statement, in case they judge the last to be insufficient. Even when the choice made by the Insinuator is approved of, all is not settled; the superiors have to determine which of the Insinuators is to be entrusted with the care of enticing the approved person into the Order: for all this is foreseen in the code. It is not allowed to all the brethren to exercise promiscuously so important a trust among the prophane, though they may have pointed out the person proper for reception. The young adept is not to measure his strength with the man who has the advantage over him in years and experience, nor is the tradesman to undertake the magistrate. The superior is to name the most proper Insinuator, judging from the circumstances, age, merits, dignities, or talents of the future candidate. [*27] At length, when the mission is given, the Insinuator begins to lay his snares.--Such is the second part of this extraordinary functionary, and all his subsequent steps are regulated by the code.

Candidate, in the ordinary acceptation of the word, means a person who has shown a desire or taken some steps into some order, or to acquire some dignity. In Illuminism it means the person on whom the Order has fixed its attention. It often happens, that the candidate is ignorant of the very existence of the sect. It is the Insinuator's business to inspire him with the wish of entering it. To accomplish this grand object, two different methods are inculcated. The first is for the Insinuator who has some candidate in view remarkable for his science or of a certain age. The second, for him who is entrusted with young men from eighteen to thirty, and who are susceptible of a second education. A third method was proposed for workmen, and those clownish fellows whose education had been but little attended to. We may observe Weishaupt consulting with his confidant Zwack on this part of the code; but whether it was never digested, or that he saw the Insinuators could easily supply the defect, no further mention is made of the third method. Let us then examine the essence of the first two.

To exemplify the first method, let us suppose one of those men who have gone through a complete course of modern Philosophism, who, should they not scoff at Christianity, would at least hesitate at every thing which is called religion; for the code forewarns the Insinuator, that his efforts would be vain should he attempt to seduce  of another stamp, men of sound judgment, and who would never be partizans of doctrines which could not endure the light of broad day. But when he shall have discovered one of the former who has already pretty well imbibed the principles of the sect, he will assume the character of a Philosopher well versed in the mysteries of antiquity. He will have little difficulty in acting such a part, as he will find ample instructions in the code. To follow those instructions faithfully, he must begin "by descanting on the supreme felicity of being versed in sciences which few

[p. 422]

can approach, of walking in the paths of light while the vulgar are groping in darkness. He must remark, that there exist doctrines solely transmitted by secret traditions, because they are above the comprehension of common minds. In proof of his assertions he will cite the Gymnosophists in the Indies, the Priests of Isis in Egypt, and those of Eleusis and the Pythagorean school in Greece."

He will select certain sentences from Cicero, Seneca, Aristides, and Isocrates; and, lest he should ever be taken unawares, he will learn those by heart which the legislator has carefully inserted in the code. Though it would be very easy to demonstrate from those very authors, that the ancient mysteries laid down no fixed principles on the important points of the Providence of God, and of the origin and order of the universe, the Insinuator is nevertheless to quote those texts to prove that there exists a secret doctrine on these objects, and above all a doctrine calculated to render life more agreeable, and pain more supportable; and to enlarge our ideas on the majesty of God. "Let him add, that all the sages of antiquity were acquainted with these doctrines; let him insist on the uncertainty that man is in with respect to the nature of the soul, its immortality, and its future destiny. He will then sound his candidate, to know whether he would not rejoice at having some satisfactory answers on objects of such great importance. At the same time he will hint that he has had the happiness of being initiated into these doctrines, and that, should the candidate wish it, he would do his best to procure him the same felicity; but that it was a science gradually imparted, and that certain men possessed the talent of guiding him from a distance, of leading him to the discovery of this new world, and that without being ever in his presence. [*28]

When the Insinuator has by such language succeeded in exciting the curiosity of his candidate, he must then ascertain his opinions on some particular articles. He will propose the discussion of certain questions in writing, and of certain principles, as the groundwork on which they are in future to proceed. The code does not determine what these questions are to be, because they vary according to the political and religious dispositions which the Insinuator may have observed in the candidate. Should these dissertations noway agree with the principles of the sect, the Insinuator will abandon his prey. Should the sophisticated candidate, or the man of importance, be found properly disposed, he will be admitted to the very threshold of the mysteries. The Insinuator will simply explain the inferior degrees to him, and mention the divers trials which the order has dispensed with in consideration of his merit. [*29]

Notwithstanding the artifice observable in this method, it is still reserved for those who need only to be acquainted with Illuminism to adopt its tenets. But should the Insinuator be entrusted with a young candidate, or with one whose principles noway coincide with those of the sect, and who is yet to be formed; it is then that Weishaupt developer that immense theory of art and cunning by which he is insensibly to ensnare his victims. "Let your first care," he says to the Insinuators, "be to gain the affection, the confidence, and the

[p. 423]

esteem of those persons whom you are to entice into the Order--let your whole conduct be such, that they shall surmise something more in you than you wish to show--hint that you belong to some secret and powerful society excite little by little, and not at once, a wish in your candidate to belong to a similar society--Certain arguments and certain books which the Insinuator must have, will greatly contribute to raise such a wish; such are, for example, those which treat of the union and strength of associations." The Legislator then carefully adds a list of those books, and the Order charges itself with the care of furnishing a certain number of them to the adepts. The works of Meiners, and particularly of Bassadows, are frequently recommended by Weishaupt, as the best fitted to inspire their readers with the love and principles of secret societies. But nothing can equal the art with which he himself has drawn up the reasons, by the help of which the Insinuator is to persuade his young candidate of the pretended necessity for these mysterious associations.

"One represents, for example," says the code, "a child in the cradle; one speaks of its cries, its tears, its weakness--One remarks how this child, abandoned to itself, is entirely helpless; but that by the help of others it acquires strength--One shows how the greatness of Princes is derived from the union of their subjects--One exalts the advantages of the state of society over the state of nature--Then one touches on the art of knowing and directing mankind--How easily, you will say, could one man of parts lead hundreds, even thousands, if he but knew his own advantages. This is evidently proved by the organization of armies, and the amazing power which princes derive from the union of their subjects."

After having descanted on the advantages of society in general, touch upon the defects of civil society, and say how little relief is to be obtained even from one's best friends,--and how very necessary it would be to support each other in these days. Add, that men would triumph even over heaven were they but united--That it is their disunion which subjects them to the yoke.--This is to be explained by the fable of the wolf and the two dogs, the latter of whom could only be vanquished by the former after he had parted them; and by many other examples of the same kind which the Insinuator will collect. [*30]

As a proof of what great and important things secret societies can effectuate, he will adduce the examples of the Freemasons, of the mysterious societies of antiquity, and even of the Jesuits. He will assert, that all the great events of this world are dependent on hidden causes, which these secret societies powerfully influence; he will awake in the breast of his pupil the desire of secretly reigning, of preparing in his closet a new constitution for the world, and of governing those who think they govern us. [*31]

"When you shall have got thus far," says the code, "begin to show (as it were ) that you are not entirely ignorant of those secrets; throw out some half sentences which may denote it. Should your candidate take the hint, press him, and return to the charge, until you see him betray symptoms of a desire instantaneously to unite with such a society.

[p. 424]

"The Insinuator, however, who has thus far succeeded in inspiring his pupil with such a wish, has not played off every engine with which the code has furnished him. To sound the very bottom of his mind, he will pretend to consult him as if he had been entrusted with certain secrets, he will make objections on the secrecy of these societies; but should they make too much impression he will resolve them himself. At other times, to stimulate the curiosity of his pupil, he will hold a letter in his hand written in cypher, or he will leave it half open on his table, giving his candidate sufficient time to observe the cypher, and then shut it up with all the air of a man who has important correspondences to keep secret. At other times studying the connections and actions of his pupil, he will tell him of certain circumstances which the young man will think he has learned by means of these secret societies, from whom nothing is hidden, though they are concealed from all the rest of the world." [*32]

These artifices may be greatly abridged, according as the friendship or communicative disposition of the candidate shall have laid him more open; but on the other hand, should they not suffice, the Insinuator is not on that account to abandon his purpose; let him try to accomplish by others what he has failed in himself--Let him examine his own conduct, and see if he has not neglected some one or more of the rules prescribed in the code; let him redouble his attention and his complaisance. Should it be necesssary to humble himself in order to command, let not the Insinuator forget the formal precept of his legislator, "Learn also to act the valet in order to become master." Auch zu weilen den knecht gemacht, um dereinst herr zu werden. [*33]

After such a long series of condescensions and discussions the candidate at length must pronounce. If he submit to all these insinuations, he is admitted among the novices of the order; but should he persist in his refusal, let him learn the fate which awaits him from those who have experienced it. "Unhappy, supremely wretched is the youth whom the Illuminees have sought in vain to entice into their sect. Should he even escape their snares, do not let him flatter himself with being proof against their hatred; and let him take care. The vengeance of SECRET SOCIETIES is not a common vengeance; it is the hidden fire of wrath. It is irreconcilable, and scarcely ever does it cease the pursuit of its victims until it has seen them immolated." [*34] Such at least is the account which history gives us of those who have been guarded enough to withstand the insinuations of the Sect, and particularly of those who, after having gone the first steps with the Insinuator, have refused to proceed any farther with him.

I could cite divers examples; though I once thought that I had met with one of a quite opposite nature, in the person of Camille de Jourdan, the same deputy who was to have been involved in the sentence of transportation against Barthelemy and Pichegru after the revolution of the 4th of September, but who  escaped from the grasp of the triumvirate. I hear him speaking in the highest terms of one of these Insinuators, who had for a long time endeavoured to entice him into the order. He was much astonished at hearing me speak of these men as consummate in all the artifices of the most villanous

[p. 425]

hypocrisy. He maintained that his Illuminee was mild, modest, and moderate; full of respect for the Gospel, in a word, one of the most virtuous men he had ever known. In reply, I enumerated all the proceedings of the Insinuator, and the artifices he had played off before he quitted his prey. To all that Mr. Camille answered, "It is true; such was his behaviour; but it was his zeal for the sect which blinded him, and made him have recourse to such expedients in order to work what he called my conversion; yet, with all that, it was impossible for any body to speak of virtue and religion in so impressive a manner as he did without being at least an honest man."--"Well," said I, "I will venture to assert, that the last attempt of your Insinuator was as follows. He proposed to you to give your thoughts in writing on certain questions; you did so; your opinions proved directly opposite to his; he never saw you after, became your implacable enemy, and has never since ceased calumniating you." "All that again," answered Mr. Camille, "is very true; nor was it his fault that I did not lose both friends and fortune. Before that affair he used to praise me; afterwards, however, he represented me as a most dangerous man. You cannot conceive what lies he invented about me, and I was unfortunate enough to observe that they had made impression."--Is it possible to be believed? Mr. Camille could not yet be persuaded but that his Insinuator was a virtuous man; so profound are the arts of hypocrisy which are to be imbibed from Weishaupt's laws! I was acquainted with two bishops, who had as completely mistaken the characters of their Insinuators as Mr. Camille de Jourdan.

But I will cite the example of Mr. Stark. I never could conceive what this Mr. Stark was whom I saw perpetually abused by the Illuminees. Nicolai and Mirabeau spared no pains to render him odious to the Protestants in Germany; they said he had received the Catholic orders of priesthood privately, [*35] though every thing seemed to denote that he was a Protestant. I took some pains to inform myself who this Mr. Stark was, and I found him one of the most learned Protestant ministers in Germany; that his zeal for his religion had acquired him the degree of Doctor, and had preferred him to be Grand Almoner and Counsellor to the Landgrave of Hesse Darmstadt; but that in common with several other learned men, such as Hoffman and Zimmerman, he had had the misfortune of being sought after by the Illuminees; that he would not hearken to them; that the Illuminees had expressed a wish to have an Adept near the person of the prince, and that he had been bold enough to answer his Insinuator, "If you seek support, I am too little and my prince too great to protect you."--And every candidate who will make the same resolute stand against the agents of the order must expect to be repaid with similar calumnies. The law of the order is invariable and precise, particularly with respect to those whose talents may be obnoxious to Illuminism. They must be gained over, or ruined in the public opinion. Such is the text, so soll man den schrift steller zu gewinnen suchen, oder verschreyen. [*36] But it is now time to follow the candidate who has shown himself more docile through the various preparatory degrees.

[p. 426]

Footnotes

^426:1 Original Writings. The Statutes reformed, Art. 18.

^426:2 Ibid.

^426:3 Original Writings.--The Statutes reformed, Art. 9, 13, and following.--Instructions for the Insinuators, Sect. XI, No. I.--for the Insinuated Nos. 1, 3, 5, &c.--Let. the 4th to Ajax.

^426:4 See Original Writings, Vol. II. Lett. 1, and 9.

^426:5 Original Writings, Vol. I. p. 40. Nos. 4, 6, and 8.

^426:6 The Last Works of Spartacus and Philo.--Instruction for the Stationary Prefects and Superiors, Page 153, Let. the 2d.--And Original Writings, Instructio pro Recipientibus, Nos. 1, and 5.

^426:7 Instructio pro Recipientibus, page 94, and Weishaupt's Letters, passim.

^426:8 Original Writings. See the first Letters to Ajax and Cato.

^426:9 See Degree of Regent, page 154, Letter N.

^426:10 See Instructions for the Provincial, No. 16.

^426:11 Original Writings, Vol. I. Sect. V.

^426:12 Original Writings, Vol. I. Let. of Minos, p. 169.

^426:13 See the New Works of Spartacus and Philo, and Instructions for the degree of Regent, No. 6.

^426:14 Orig. Writ. Instructiones pro Recipientibus, Page 54, No. 4; and Page 55, No. 18.

^426:15 Ibid. Vol. II. Part the 2d, Section and Degree of Regent.

^426:16 Orig. Writ. Vol. I. Let. to Ajax.

^426:17 See Instructions for the Insinuator, No. 4.--Weishaupt's Letters, passim-and the Degree of Regent.

^426:18 Ibid. Let. 3d to Ajax.

^426:19 Orig. Writ. Vol. I. Let. to Tiberius, P. 223.

^426:20 See Vol. I. page 33.

^426:21 Instructions for the Provincial and Orig. Writ. Vol. I. Part II, No. 3, page 26.

^426:22 Ibid. Nos. 11 and 13.

^426:23 Ibid. No. 15.

^426:24 Ibid. No. 18.

^426:25 Let. 11th to Marius and Cato.

^426:26 Instruction for the Local Superiors, Letter H.

^426:27 Instructiones pro Recipientibus. Orig. Writ. Vol. I. Nos. 1 and 7, page 54.

^426:28 Original Writings, Vol. II. Part II. Sect. I.

^426:29 Original Writings, Vol. II. Part II. Sect. I.

^426:30 Extract of the Instructions for the Brethren charged to enroll and receive the candidates--Original Writings, Vol. I. Sec. IX. and XII.--Also in the degree of Illuminatus Major; instructions on the same object, Document A.

^426:31 Original Writings, ibid. No 11 and 12. Illuminatus Major, Document A, and Letters K, L.

^426:32 Original Writings, ibid. No. 17 to 22.

^426:33 Ibid. Let 3d, to Ajax.

^426:34 Important Advice, &c. by Hoffmann. Preface to Vol. II.

^426:35 Mirabeau Monarchie Prussienne, Vol. V. art. Religion.

^426:36 Instructions for the Regent, No. 15.

     
Code of the Illuminati: Part III of Memoirs Illustrating the History of Jacobinism, by A Barruel, tr. Robert Edward Clifford [1798], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 427]

  

CHAP. IV.

  

Second Part of the Code of the Illuminees--First preparatory Degree, of the Novice and of his Teacher.

IN the early stages of Illuminism the duration of the time of trial for the Novice was three years for those who were not eighteen years of age; two years for those between eighteen and twenty-four; and one year for those who were near thirty. [*1] Circumstances have since occasionally caused the time to be abridged; but, whatever may be the dispositions of the Novice, though the time may be dispensed with, he must go through the different trials, or have got the start of them before he is admitted into the other degrees. During the interval he has no other superior but the Insinuator to whom he is indebted for his vocation, and during the whole time of the noviciate, the Insinuator is expressly forbidden to inform his pupil of any other member of the Order. This law was made to skreen the order from the dangers which might result from an indiscretion of the Novice, and to render the Insinuator alone responsible in such cases; for, should the Novice unfortunately be an indiscreet talker, the code expressly says, his imprudence would at most betray only one of the brethren. [*2] The first lessons of the Insinuator (in future his teacher) treat entirely on the importance and the inviolability of the secrecy which is to be observed in Illuminism. He will begin by telling his Novice, "Silence and secresy are the very soul of the Order, and you will carefully observe this silence as well with those whom you may have only reason to suppose are already initiated, as with those whom you may hereafter know really to belong to the Order. You will remember, that it is a constant principle among us, that ingenuousness is only a virtue with respect to our superiors, but that distrust and reserve are the fundamental principles. You will never reveal to any person, at present or hereafter, the slightest circumstance relative to your admission into the order, the degree you have received, nor the time when admitted; in a word, you will never speak of any object relating to the order even before Brethren, without the strongest necessity." [*3]

Under the restrictions of this severe law, one Illuminee will often be a stranger to another; and the Novice will see in this no more than a measure of safety for the order, which might be ruined by the least indiscretion. [*4]

More certainly to assure himself of the discretion of the Novice, the Insinuator will give him no further insight, nor entrust him with any writing

[p. 428]

relative to the order, until he has obtained the following declaration: "I, the undersigned, promise upon my honour, and without any reservation, never to reveal either by words, signs, or actions, or in any possible manner, to any person whatever, either relations, allies, or most intimate friends, any thing that shall be entrusted to me by my Introducer relative to my entrance into a secret society; and this whether my reception shall take place or not. I subject myself the more willingly to this secresy, as my Introducer assures me that nothing is ever transacted in this society hurtful to religion, morals, or the state. With respect to all writings which I may be entrusted with, any letters which I may receive concerning the same object, I engage myself to return them, after having made for my sole use the necessary extracts." [*5]

These writings or books relative to the order are only lent to the Novice at first in small numbers, and for a short time; and then he must promise to keep them out of the reach of the prophane; but as he is promoted in rank, he may preserve them for a longer time, and is intrusted with a larger quantity; though not without having informed the Order of the precautions he shall have taken, lest in case of his death any of these writings should fall into prophane hands. [*6] He will afterwards learn, that the Brotherhood take many other precautions for secresy, not only respecting the statutes, but even with regard to the very existence of the Order. He will see, for example, in its laws, that should any of the brotherhood fall sick, the other brethren are assiduously to visit him, in the first place to fortify him, that is to say, to hinder him from making any declarations at the hour of his death; and secondly, to carry away whatever writings relative to the Order the sick man may have had in his possession, as soon as any symptoms of danger appear. [*7]

He will at length learn, that to frustrate all attempts to trace even their very existence, the Order does not exist every where UNDER THE SAME NAME, but that they are to assume the name of some other Order, perhaps even of a literary society, or meet without any name which can attract the attention of the public.

The first writing delivered to the Novice, to accustom him to profound secrecy, is what may be called the Dictionary of Illuminism. He must begin by learning the language of the Sect, that is to say, the art of communicating with the superiors and other adepts without the possibility of being understood by the prophane. By means of this language, the Illuminees are to be able to correspond with each other, without running the risk of its being discovered of what Brother they speak; from what place, in what language, at what period, and to whom, or by whom the letter is written.

To avoid the discovery of persons, the Novice will learn, that no Brother bears the same name in the Order which he does in the world; indeed, had he been initiated in the higher degrees of Masonry, he would have seen the same precaution taken, where the Rosicrucians receive what they call their Characteristic or their adoptive name. The Novice will receive the characteristic immediately on his admission, and it will in some measure imply the parts which he is in future to act in the general conspiracy. It will be his task

[p. 429]

hereafter to study and write the history of his new patron he will by this method recognize in the qualities and actions of his hero the particular services which the order will expect from him. [*8] This name will be chosen as conformably as possible to the dispositions observed in him. Has he shown any propensity to repeat the impieties of Philosophism against the Gospel, he will be classed with the Celsi and Porphirii, or with the Tindals and Shaftsburys; should his turn be toward the hatred of Kings, or should his talents be judged useful for the polity of the Order, then his characteristic will be of the Brutus, Cato, or Machiavel tribe. He will not be told what he is to do to deserve his name, but they will contrive that it shall occur to him. Neither will he be told why Weishaupt assumed the name of Spartacus (a name so famous in Rome because he waged the war of the slaves against their masters); but should he ever be admitted to the higher mysteries, he will easily recognize the reason. [*9]

The place from whence they write, as well as the persons of whom or to whom they write, is in like manner to be kept secret; a new Geography is therefore taught the Novice. He will thence learn, that Bavaria, the country of their founder, is denominated Achaia; Swabia, Pannonia; Franconia, Austria, and Tyrol are denoted by Illyria, Egypt, and Peloponnesus; Munich is called Athens; Bamberg, Antioch; Inspruck, Samos; Vienna in Austria, Rome; Wurtzburg, Carthage; Frankfort on the Mein becomes Thebes; and Heidelberg, Utica. Ingolstadt, the natal soil of the Order, was not sufficiently denoted by Ephesus; this privileged town was to be decorated with a more mysterious name, and the profound adepts bestowed on it that of Eleusis.

Should the Novice ever be sent on a mission out of his own country, or to distant shores, he will then receive further instructions in the Geography of the Sect. [*10]

He must also learn how to date his letters, and be conversant with the Illuminized Hegira or Calendar; for all letters which he will receive in future will be dated according to the Persian era,  Jezdegert and beginning A.D. 630. The year begins with the Illuminees on the first of Pharavardin, which answer to the 21st of March. Their first month has no less than forty-one days; the following months, instead of being called May, June, July, August, September, and October, are Adarpahascht, Chardad, Thirmeh, Merdedmeh, Shaharimeh, Meharmeh: November and December are Abenmeh, Adameh: January and February, Dimeh, and Benmeh: The month of March only has twenty days, and is called Asphandar. [*11]

The Novice must next learn how to decypher the letters he may receive; in order to which, he must make himself master of that cypher, which is to serve him until initiated into the higher degrees, when he will be entrusted with the hieroglyphics of the Order. [*12]

He will also remember, that he is never to write the name of his Order; so venerable a word cannot be exposed to prophane eyes, and a circle  with a point in the middle of it will supply this sacred word, and a long square or parallelogram  will denote the word Lodge.

[p. 430]

After these preliminary studies, the young brother receives a part of the code, under the title of Statutes of the Illuminees. But these first statutes are nothing more than a snare, and the young Novice, with pleasure no doubt, sees them begin with the following words:

"For the tranquillity and security of all the Brethren, whether Novices or active Members of the Society, and to prevent all ill-grounded suspicions, or disagreeable doubts, the venerable Order declares, that it absolutely has in view no project, enterprize, or undertaking hurtful to the state, to religion, or to good morals; and that it favours nothing of that nature in any of its members. Its designs, all its toils, solely tend to inspire men with a zeal for the perfection of their moral characters, to impregnate them with humane and sociable sentiments, to counteract the plans of the wicked, to succour oppressed and suffering virtue, to favour the advancement of men of merit, and to render those sciences universal which are as yet hidden from the generality of men. Such is not the coloured pretext, but the real object of the order." [*13]

Even should the Novice not have entirely laid aside all suspicions respecting the intentions of the Order, still so positive a declaration he must think would guarantee him as to all obligations which might be imposed upon him. His grand aim is to be, to form his heart in such a maner as to gain not only the affection of his friends but even of his enemies. He is positively ordered to endeavour with all his might to acquire both interior and exterior perfection. It is true, he is soon after as positively ordered to study the arts of dissimulation and disguise; but then the Brother Insinuator is at his elbow to explain to him how that art coincides with true perfection, and thus suppress any suspicions which might arise from a comparison of these two injunctions. Beside, the Novice has many other duties to fulfil, which will deprive him of opportunity for such reflections.

He is next told, that the Brethren must have but one mind, one will, and similar sentiments; that, to effectuate this, the Order has made choice of certain works, to which he must apply with the greatest attention. Should the Novice be one of those men whom an attachment to the Gospel rendered more circumspect as to the snares laid for his belief, the very choice of the books would suffice to show him, that the first object of the Insinuator was to persuade him, that it is not even necessary to be a Christian to acquire the perfection enjoined by the statutes. The Morality he is taught is that of Epictetus, Seneca, Antoninus, and Plutarch, all foreign to Christianity. He will also receive the works of modern Sophisters, such as Wieland, Meiners, and Bassadows, who by no means make perfection to consist in Christianity. Under the soothing and mellifluous language of a moderate and specious Philosophy, he will be led to lubricity and impiety, traced by the sophisticated pen of Helvetius in his celebrated work De L'Esprit. [*14] But the Insinuator must previously have sufficiently studied the dispositions of his pupil to know whether such propositions would any longer startle him. Beside, nothing is better calculated to dissipate all such fears, than the constant application that is required to those books which are put into the hands of the Novice, added

[p. 431]

to the care taken to deprive him of all such as might inspire him with contrary ideas. The Teacher is carefully to attend to all the rules laid down in the code on this subject, and to see that his Novices fulfil the intentions of the Order in this respect. He is frequently to converse with them; he is to mark out their occupations for them; he is even to make them unexpected visits to surprize them, and thus to see in what manner they apply to the code and other writings with which the Order has entrusted them. He is to require an account of what they have read, and extracts from the different works; he will assist them by his explanations; in short, nothing is to be neglected which can secure their progress in the spirit and morals of the Order. [*15]

An object of far greater importance next attracts the attention of the Novice; it is that which the code calls the greatest of all; it is, the knowledge of men. The teacher will represent this to his pupil as the most interesting of all sciences. [*16] To make himself master of this science, the Novice receives the model of a journal in the form of tablets, and his teacher shows him how they are to be used. Provided with this journal, he is to make his observations on every body he finds himself in company with; he is to trace their characters, and account to himself every thing he has seen or heard. Lest his memory should fail him, he must always be provided with a loose paper or small tablets, on which he may at all hours note his observations, which he is afterwards carefully to digest in his journal. To be certain of the Novice's attention to this point, the Brother Teacher will examine his tablets and his journal from time to time. To render him more expert in the art of drawing the characters of the living, he will exercise the Novices on ancient authors, and on the heroes of antiquity. No study or custom is so frequently recommended as this in all the code of Illuminism. It is to be the grand study of the Novice, and the prime occupation of every degree. [*17]

It is by his assiduity in this great art that the Novice will learn how to distinguish those whom he may hereafter judge proper to be admitted into or rejected from the Order; and it is with that view that the Preceptor perpetually presses him to propose those whom he may think fit for the Order. [*18] By this means a double object is attained; first, the propagation of the Order; and, secondly, a knowledge of its friends or enemies; the dangers it may be threatened with; and the means to be adopted, or the persons to be gained or courted, to avert the impending storm; in fine, of extending its conquests. Whether the Illuminee be a Novice, or in any other degree, he is bound by the laws of the Order to make his report in the prescribed forms at least once a month. [*19]

While the Novice is perpetually making researches of this nature, he is not aware that he is as carefully watched by his Insinuator, who on his side notes and writes down every thing that he observes either as to the failings or the progress, the strong or weak side of his pupil, and these he as regularly transmits to the superiors. [*20]

The pupil little suspects that the grand object of his  is to bind him in such a maner to Illuminism, even long before he is acquainted with its secrets, that it shall be impossible for him to break those bonds which fear and tenor

[p. 432]

shall have imposed upon him, should he ever wish to shrink from the horrid plots and systems which he might thereafter discover.

This profound policy of binding the Novices to Illuminism consists, first, in giving them a magnificent idea of the grandeur of the projects of the Sect, and, secondly, in a vow of blind obedience to the superiors in every thing which they judge conducive to the ends of the Order, which vow the Insinuator is to find means of extorting from his pupil.

It is here particularly that Weishaupt appears to wish to assimilate the government of his Sect to that of the religious orders, and especially to that of the Jesuits, by a total sacrifice of their own will and judgment, which he exacts of the adepts; and to the exercising of the Novices in this point, he expressly adverts in his instructions to the Insinuators. [*21] But this is precisely the place to remark on the amazing difference between the illuminized and the religious obedience. Of that immense number of religious who follow the institutes of St. Basil, St. Benedict, St. Dominic, or St. Francis, there is not one who is not thoroughly convinced that there exists a voice far more imperious than that of his superior, the voice of his conscience, of the Gospel, and of his God. There is not one of them who, should his superior command any thing contrary to the duties of a Christian, or of an honest man, would not immediately see that such a command was a release from his vow of obedience. This is frequently repeated and clearly expressed in all religious institutes, and no where more explicitly or positively than in those of the Jesuits. They are ordered to obey their superior, but in cases only where such obedience is not sinful, ubi non cerneretur peccatum. [*22] It is only in cases where such obedience can have no sinful tendency whatever, ubi definiri non possit aliquod peccati genus intercedere. [*23] And, as if this were not sufficiently expressed, we hear their founder, at the very time when he recommends obedience to his religious, expressly saying, but remember that your vow is binding only when the commands of man are not contrary to those of God, ubi Deo contraria non praecipit homo. [*24] All those person therefore who, like Mirabeau, surmised certain coincidences, or as he calls them points of contact, between the religious institutes and the code of the Illuminees, should have begun by observing, that religious obedience is in its very essence an obligation of doing all the good which may be prescribed without the least taint of harm. It was easy for them on the contrary to demonstrate, that the obedience sought for by Weishaupt's code was a  to obey every order received from the superior in spite of conscience, and unheedful of the most iniquitous guilt, provided it tended to the good of the Order. "Our society (for such are the expressions of the code) exacts from its members the sacrifice of their liberty, not only with respect to all things, but absolutely with respect to EVERY MEANS of attaining its end. Yet the presumption on the goodness of the means prescribed is always in favour of the orders given by the superiors. They are clearer-sighted on this object; they are better acquainted with it; and it is on this very account that they are nominated superiors It is their business to lead you through the labyrinth of

[p. 433]

errors and darkness; and in such a case obedience is not only a duty, but an object for grateful acknowledgment." [*25]

Such is the obedience of the Illuminees; nor is there a single exception to be found in all their code. We shall see the Novice, before he terminates his trials, obliged to explain himself explicitly with respect to orders which he may receive from his superiors, and which he may think contrary to his conscience. In the first place his teacher is to intangle him, and make himself perfectly master of his most secret thoughts. Under the pretence of knowing himself better, while studying the art of knowing others, the Novice is to draw a faithful picture of himself, to unfold his interests and connections, as well as those of his family.

Here again the Insinuator furnishes him with the tablets in the requisite form, that he may give this new proof of confidence to the Order; but this will neither be the last nor the most important one for which he will be called upon.

On these tablets, the Novice is to write down his name, age, functions, country, and abode; the species of study in which he occupies himself, the books of which his library is composed, and the secret writings of which he may be in possession; his revenue, his friends, his enemies, and the reason of his enmities; in fine, his acquaintances and his protectors.

To this table he is to subjoin a second, explaining the same objects with respect to his father, his mother, and all their other children. He is to be very explicit with respect to the education they received, to their passions and prejudices, to their strong and weak sides.

We will exemplify this second table by an extract from the Original Writings, by which the reader will perceive that parents are not very much favoured--"The Novice, Francis Antony St . . . . . aged 22, represents his father as violent, and of soldierlike manners; his mother as a little avaricious; the weak side of both to be flattery and interest; both living after the old fashion, and with an antiquated frankness; in their devotion, headstrong, arrogant; with difficulty abandoning an ill-conceived project, and still more unforgiving to their enemies; that they nevertheless were little hated, because little feared; and hardly in the way of doing any body any harm."

While the Novice is thus occupied in revealing all his secrets, and those of his family, the Insinuator on his side is drawing up a new statement of every thing he has been able to discover during the whole time of his pupil's trial, either with respect to him or to his relations.

On comparing the two statements, should the superior approve of the admission of the Novice to the last proofs, he is then to answer the grand questions. It is by these questions that the Novice is to judge of the extent of the sacrifice he is about to make, and of the awful subjection of his whole will, conscience, and person, to Illuminism, if he wishes to gain admittance.

The Questions are twenty-four in number, and couched in the following terms:

[p. 434]

I. Are you still desirous of being received into the Order of the Illuminees?

II. Have you seriously reflected on the importance of the step you take, in binding yourself by engagements that are unknown to you?

III. What hopes do you entertain, or, by what reasons are you induced to enter among us?

IV. Would you still persevere in that wish, though you should find that we had no other object or advantage whatever in view but the perfection of mankind?

V. What would be your conduct should the Order be of new invention?

VI. Should you ever discover in the Order any thing wicked, or unjust to be done, what part would you take; Wenn unanstandige, ungerechte sachen vorkamen, wie er sich verhalten wurde?

VII. Can you and will you look upon the welfare of the Order as your own?

VIII. We cannot conceal from you, that Members, entering into our Order without any other motive than to acquire power, greatness, and consideration, are not those whom we prefer. In many cases one must know how to lose in order to gain. Are you aware of all this?

IX. Can you love all the Members of the Order, even such of your enemies as may be members of it?

X. Should it so happen that you should be obliged to do good to your enemies who are of the Order, to recommend them, for example, or extol them; would you be disposed to do so?

XI. Do you, moreover, grant the POWER OF LIFE AND DEATH to our Order or Society? On what grounds would you refuse, or recognize in it such a right; Ob er dieser geselschaft, oder order auch das JUS VITae ET NECIS, aus was grnden, oder nich zugestehe?

XII. Are you disposed on all occasions to give the preference to men of our Order, over all other men?

XIII. How would you wish to revenge yourself of any injustice, either great or small, which you may have received from strangers or from any one of our Brethren?

XIV. What would be your conduct should you ever repent of having joined our Order?

XV. Are you willing to share with us happiness and misfortune?

XVI. Do you renounce the idea of ever making your birth, employment, station, or power, serve to the prejudice or contempt of any one of the Brethren?

XVII. Are you, or have you any idea of becoming a Member of any other society?

XVIII. Is it from levity, or in hopes of soon being acquainted with our constitution, that you so easily make these promises?

XIX. Are you fully determined to observe our laws?

[p. 435]

XX. Do you subject yourself to a BLIND OBEDIENCE WITHOUT ANY RESTRICTION WHATEVER? And do you know the strength of such an engagement? Ober unbedingten gehorsam angelobe, und wisse was das sey?

XXI. Is there no consideration that can deter you from entering into our Order?

XXII. Will you, in case it is required, assist in the propagation of the Order, support it by your counsels, by your money, and by all other means?

XXIII. Had you any expectation that you would have to answer any of these questions; and if so, which question was it?

XXIV. What security can you give us that you will keep these promises; and to what punishment will you subject yourself in case you should break any of them? [*26]

In order to judge of the nature of the answers written and signed by the Novice, and confirmed by his oath, it will be sufficient to cast our eyes on the account of the reception of two Brethren, as it is contained in the archives of the Sect. To the VIth , should you ever discover in the Order any thing wicked, or unjust to be done, what part would you take? The first of these two Novices, aged 22, and named Francis Anthony St. . . . answers, swears, and signs, "I would certainly execute those things, if so commanded by the Order, because it may be very possible that I am not capable of judging of what is just or unjust. Besides, should they be unjust under one aspect, they would cease to be so as soon as they became a means of attaining happiness, the general end."

The Novice Francis Xaverius B. . . . answers, swears, and signs, in like manner, "I would not refuse to execute those things (wicked and unjust) provided they contributed to the general good."

To the XIth question, on life and death, the first Novice answers with the same formalities, "Yes, I acknowledge this right in the Order of Illuminees; and why should I refuse it to the Order, should it ever find itself necessitated to exercise it, as perhaps without such a right it might have to fear its awful ruin. The state would lose little by it, since the dead man would be replaced by so many others. Besides, I refer to my answer to question VI.;" that is to say, where he promised to execute whatever was just or unjust, provided it was with the approbation or by order of the Superiors.

The second answers, swears, and signs to the same question, "The same reason which makes me recognize the right of life and death in the governors of nations, leads me to recognize most willingly the same power in my Order, which really contributes to the happiness of mankind as much as governors of nations ought to do."

On the XXth question, on blind obedience without restriction, one answers, "Yes, without doubt, the promise is of the utmost importance; nevertheless I look upon it as the only possible means by which the Order can gain its ends." The second is less precise: "When I consider our Order as of modern invention and as little extended, I have a sort of repugnance in binding myself by so formidable a promise; because in that case I am justified in doubting whether a want of knowledge or even some domineering passion might not sometimes occasion

[p. 436]

things to be commanded totally opposite to the proposed object of the general welfare. But when I suppose the order to be more  spread, I then believe, that in a society comprehending men of such different stations, from the higher to the lower, those men are best enabled to know the course of the world, and how to distinguish the means of accomplishing the laudable projects of the Order."

This doubt of the Novice as to the antiquity of the Order must have displeased Weishaupt, who spared no pains to make it appear that Illuminism was of ancient date, the better to excite the curiosity and the veneration of the pupils; being content to enjoy the glory of his invention with his profound adepts, to whom only he revealed the secret of the invention of the highest degrees and the last mysteries. But our Novice went on to say, that on the whole he rather believed the Order to be of ancient than of modern invention; and, like his fellow Novice, he "promises to be faithful to all the laws of his Order, to support it with his counsels, his fortune, and all other means; and he finishes by subjecting himself to forfeit his honour, and even his LIFE, should he ever break his promise. [*27]

When the Insinuator has found means of binding the Novice to the Order by such oaths, and especially when the young candidate shall have recognized without hesitation that strange and awful right which subjects the life of every citizen to the satellites of Illuminism, should any be unfortunate enough to displease its Superiors; when the Novice is blinded to such a degree as not to perceive that this pretended right, far from implying a society of sages, only denotes a band of ruffians and a federation of assassins like the emissaries of the Old Man of the Mountain; when, in short, he shall have submitted himself to this terrible power, the oath of the modern Seyde is sent to the archives of the Order. His dispositions then prove to be such as the superiors required to confer on him the second degree of the preparatory class; and the Insinuator concludes his mission by the introduction of his pupil.

At the appointed time in the dead of the night, the Novice is led to a gloomy apartment, where two men are waiting for him, and, excepting his Insinuator, these are the first two of the Sect with whom the Novice is made acquainted. The Superior or his Delegate holds a lamp in his hand half covered with a shade; his attitude is severe and imperious; and a naked sword lies near him on the table. The other man, who serves as Secretary, is prepared to draw up the act of initiation. No mortal is introduced but the Novice and his Insinuator, nor can any one else be present. A question is first asked him, whether he still perseveres in the intention of entering the Order. On his answering in the affirmative, he is sent by himself into a room perfectly dark, there to meditate again on his resolution. Recalled from thence, he is questioned again and again on his firm determination blindly to obey all the laws of the Order. The Introducer answers for the dispositions of his pupil, and in return requests the protection of the Order for him.

"Your request is just," replies the Superior to the Novice. "In the name of the most Serene Order from which I hold my powers, and in the name of

[p. 437]

all its Members, I promise you protection, justice, and help. Moreover, I protest to you once more, that you will find nothing among us hurtful to Religion, to Morals, or to the State;"--here the Initiator takes in his hand the naked sword which lay upon the table, and, pointing it at the heart of the Novice, continues, "but should you ever be a traitor or a perjurer, assure yourself that every Brother will be called upon to arm against you. Do not flatter yourself with the possibility of escaping, or of finding a place of security.--Wherever thou mayst be, the rage of the Brethren, shame and remorse shall follow thee, and prey upon thy very entrails."--He lays down the sword.--"But if you persist in the design of being admitted into our Order, take this oath:"

The oath is conceived in the following teens:

"In presence of all powerful God, and of you Plenipotentiaries of the most high and most excellent Order into which I ask admittance, I acknowledge my natural weakness, and all the insufficiency of my strength. I confess that, notwithstanding all the privileges of rank, honours, titles, or riches which I may possess in civil society, I am but a man like other men; that I may lose them all by other mortals, as they have been acquired through them; that I am in absolute want of their approbation and of their esteem; and that I must do my utmost to deserve them both. I never will employ either the power or consequence that I may possess to the prejudice of the general welfare. I will, on the contrary, resist with all my might the enemies of human nature, and of civil society." Let the reader observe these last words; let him remember them when reading of the mysteries of Illuminism; he will then be able to conceive how, by means of this oath, to maintain civil society, Weishaupt leads the adepts to the oath of eradicating even the last vestige of society. "I promise," continues the adept, "ardently to seize every opportunity of serving humanity, of improving my mind and my will, of employing all my useful accomplishments for the general good, in as much as the welfare and the statutes of the society shall require it of me.

"I vow (ich gelobe) an eternal silence, an inviolable obedience and fidelity to all my superiors and to the statutes of the Order. WITH RESPECT TO WHAT MAY BE THE OBJECT OF THE ORDER I fully and absolutely renounce my own penetration and my own judgment.

"I promise to look upon the interests of the Order as my own; and as long as I shall be a Member of it, I promise to serve it with my life, my honour, and my estates. Should I ever, through imprudence, passion, or wickedness, act contrary to the laws or to the welfare of the Serene Order, I then subject myself to whatever punishment it may please to inflict upon me.

"I also promise to help the Order, to the best of my power, and according to my conscience, with my counsels and my actions, and without the least attention to my personal interest; also, to look upon all friends and enemies of the Order as my own, and to behave to them as the Order shall direct. I am equally disposed to labour with all my might and all my means at the propagation and advancement of the Order.

[p. 438]

"In these promises I renounce every secret reservation, and engage to fulfill them all, according to the true purport of the words, and according to the signification attached to them by the Order when it prescribed the Oath--

"So help me God." N. N.

The oath being signed by the Novice, and enregistered in the minutes of the Order, the Initiator declares his admission, telling him at the same time that he is not to expect to know all the members, but those only who, being of the same degree, are under the same Superior.--From that moment advanced to the degree of Minerval, he is instructed in the signs of his new degree, which are much of the same nature as those of Masonry. He is then enjoined to give an exact list of all his books, particularly of those which might be precious or useful to the Order. He also receives the following questions which he is to answer in writing.

I. What should you wish to be the object of our Order?

II. What means, either primary or secondary, do you think most conducive to the attainment of that object?

III. What other things would you wish to find among us?

IV. What men do you either hope to meet, or not to meet, among us? [*28]

The answers given to these questions will enable the Superiors to judge how far the young adept has imbibed the principles of the Order. But other helps are preparing for him, that he may be able to demonstrate by his answers both the progress he has made and that which he may be expected to make.

Thus admitted to the degree of Minerval, he will find himself in future a Member of the Academy of the Sect. Let us then observe well both the Scholars and their Masters; for they still belong to the class of preparation.

[p. 439]

Footnotes

^438:1 The Statutes reformed, No. 7.

^438:2 The Statutes reformed, No. 16.

^438:3 Original Writings, Statutes, No. 20. Statutes reformed, No. 27. True Illuminism, General Statutes, No. 31, 32.

^438:4 Summary of the Statutes, No. 15. B.

^438:5 Original Writings, and the true Ilium. Art. Reverse.

^438:6 Institutes of the Insinuated, No 8. Orig. Writ. the real Illuminee No. 7.

^438:7 Statutes of the Minerval, No. 12.

^438:8 Original Writings, Vol. I. Instructions for the Insinuated, No. 7, and Vol. II. Let 13.

^438:9 Original Writings, Vol. I. Sec. 4.

^438:10 Original Writings, Sect. 2 and 3.

^438:11 See the real Illuminee first degree.

^438:12 The common cypher of the Illuminees consist in numbers corresponding to letters in the following order:

          12.

       11.

       10.

       9.

       8.

       7.

       6.

       5.

       4.

       3.

       2.

       1.

     
      a.

       b.

       c.

       d.

       e.

       f.

       g.

       h.

       i.

       k.

       l.

       m.

     
      13.

       14.

       15.

       16.

       17.

       18.

       19.

       20.

       21.

       22.

       23.

       14.

     
      n.

       o.

       p.

       q.

       r.

       s.

       t.

       u.

       w.

       x.

       y.

       z.

     
   [p. 439]

Click to enlarge
Illuminati Cryptogram

The hieroglyphics are contained in the opposite Plate, and are copied from those published at the end of the degree of Scotch Knight or Directing Illuminee. There is a third cypher, but that has never been published.

^439:13 The True Illuminee, General Statutes--Original Writings, Vol. 1. Sect. 8.

^439:14 See the list of these works in the Original Writings in the Statutes reformed, No. 25.

^439:15 See Instructiones pro Insinuantibus et Recipientibus.

^439:16 The true Illuminee. Instructions on the Art of forming Pupils, No. 12.

^439:17 See Ibid. No. 13,--Original Writings, the Statutes, reformed, No. 9, 10, 13, 14.--Instructiones pro Insinuantibus, No. 5, pro Recipientibus, No. 16, &c. &c.

^439:18 Instructiones pro Recipientibus, No 13.

^439:19 Instructions for the Insinuated, No. 5. C. and Original Writings, &c.

^439:20 Instructions for the Insinuator, No. 3 and 4.--The real Illuminee, Instructions on the Art of forming the Brethren, No. 1, 2.

^439:21 Mirabeau, Monarchie Prussienne, Vol. V. and Essay on the Illuminees, Chap. III.--Last Observations by Philo, page 61.

^439:22 Constitution of the Jesuits, Part. III. Chap. I. Parag. 2, Vol. I. Edition of Prague.

^439:23 Ibid. Part VI. Chap. I.

^439:24 Epist. Ignatii De Obedientia.

^439:25 Statutes reformed, No. 1, 4, and 25.--The true Illuminee, General Statutes, No. 11, 12.

^439:26 Original Writings. The account of the reception of two Novices, Vol. I. Sect. 17.

^439:27 See the two accounts.

^439:28 True Illuminee, 1st initiation, Page 51 and following. Original Writings, Vol. I. Sect. 15.

     
Code of the Illuminati: Part III of Memoirs Illustrating the History of Jacobinism, by A Barruel, tr. Robert Edward Clifford [1798], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 440]

  

CHAP. V.

  

Third Part of the Code of the Illuminees--Second preparatory Degree--The Academy of Illuminism, or the Brethren of Minerva.

WEISHAUPT, ruminating on what turn he should give to his Code of Illuminism, that its progress might be more subtile and infallible, expresses himself in the following terms, on the preparatory degrees which were to succeed to the novitiate of his pupils. "I am thinking of establishing, in the next degree, a sort of an academy of Literati. My design would include the study of the Ancients, and an application to the art of observing and drawing characters (even those of the living); and treatises and questions, proposed for public compositions, should form the occupations of our pupils.--I should wish, more especially, to make them spies over each other in particular, and over all in general. It is from this class that I would select those who have shown the greatest aptness for the Mysteries. My determination, in short, is, that in this degree they shall labour at the discovery and extirpation of prejudices. Every pupil (for example) shall declare, at least once a month, all those which he may have discovered in himself; which may have been his principal one, and how far he has been able to get the better of it."

Ever influenced by a bitter hatred against the Jesuits, he does not blush to say--"I mean that this declaration shall be among us, what confession was among them." Her was, however, unfortunate in his application; for in the Order of the Jesuits, no superior could ever hear the confessions of the Inferiors; and thus their very institutes rendered impossible the horrid abuse, under which Weishaupt affected to cloak the abominable breach of confidence with respect to his pupils, when he says, "by these means I shall discern those who show dispositions for certain special Doctrines relative to Government or to Religion." [*1]

The statutes of their Minerval degree are drawn up with a little more circumspection, and simply declare, "that the Order in that degree wishes to be considered only as a learned society or academy, consecrating its toils to form the hearts and minds of its young pupils both by example and precept." [*2] These are called the Brethren of Minerva, and are under the direction of the Major or Minor Illuminees. The academy properly so called is composed of ten,

[p. 441]

twelve, and sometimes fifteen Minervals, under the direction and tuition of a Major Illuminee.

In the kalendar of the Sect, the days on which the academy meets are called holy, and its sittings are generally held twice a month; always at the new moon. The place where they meet is called, in their language, a Church. It must always be  by an anti-chamber, with a strong door armed with bolts, which is to be shut during the time of the meeting; and the whole apartment is to be so disposed, that it shall be impossible for intruders either to see or hear any thing that is going forward. [*3]

At the commencement of each sitting, the President is always to read, and, after his fashion, comment on some chosen passages of the BIBLE, or Seneca, of Epictetus, Marcus Aurelius, or Confucius. [*4] The care he takes to give to all these works the same weight and authority, will be sufficient to make the pupils view the Bible in a similar light with the works of the Pagan Philosophers.

This lecture over, each pupil is questioned "as to the books which he has read since the last meeting; on the observations or discoveries he may have made; and on his labours or services toward the progress of the Order."

Nor are the studies and the books of which the Brethren are to give an account, left to their own choice. To each of these academies there is appropriated a particular library, whenever circumstances will permit, calculated to insure the spirit of the Order; and this collection the Sect takes care to furnish. By three different means it is accomplished. First, by the money which the Brethren contribute; secondly, by the list of his own private Library, which is exacted from each candidate, who is obliged to furnish therefrom such books as may be required of him; the third means is derived from Weishaupt's grand principle, that EVERY THING WHICH IS USEFUL IS AN ACT OF VIRTUE. Now as it would be very useful for the Order to get possession of those rare books and precious manuscripts which Princes, Nobles, and Religious Orders keep shut up among their archives or in their libraries; all Illuminees acting as librarians or archive-keepers are admonished, exhorted, and seriously pressed not to make any scruple of secretly stealing such books or manuscripts, and putting them into the possession of the Sect. This is one of the most explicit lessons that Weishaupt gives to his adepts; at one time telling them not to make a case of conscience of giving to the Brethren what they may have belonging to the library of the Court; at another, sending a list of what should be stolen from that of the Carmes, he says, "all these would be of much greater use if they were in our hands.--What do those rascals do with all those books?" [*5]

Yet, notwithstanding the caution with which the founder as yet withholds certain books from the hands of the Minerval, it is clear from the very assortment of the libraries of the Order, that he does not hesitate at giving the pupils a certain number directly tending to the grand object, and particularly those which may create a contempt for religion. He wishes much to see an impartial history of the Church; and he even proposes hereafter to

[p. 442]

publish one himself, or at least to contribute many articles toward such a work. He calls the attention of the young adepts to Sarpi, to Le Bret's arsenal of calumnies, and in short to all that has been written against Religious Orders. [*6] He had even put on the list those impious works which appeared under the name of Freret. He seemed to have forgotten for a moment his ordinary prudence; but, warned of it by Knigge, he corrected his error. [*7] Many other books, however, were to be comprehended in the Minerval library, which were to disguise the object of it; and it was one duty of the Presiding Illuminee to select such as would gradually direct his pupils to the grand object of the Sect; always remembering, that the most impious and seditious were reserved for the higher degrees. Should the President chance to find the System of Nature, Natural Polity, Helvetius on Man, or other such books, in the hands of his pupil, he was to avoid showing his pleasure or displeasure, and leave them. [*8] In short, it is in the Minerval schools that the teachers are in a particular manner to practise that great art of making the adepts rather as it were invent than learn the principles of the Order; because they will then, looking upon them as the offspring of their own genius, more strongly adhere to them.

There is yet another scheme in these schools for attaching the young adepts to the Order.--Every brother is, at his first reception, to declare to what art or science he means principally to apply, unless his station, genius, or particular circumstances, debar him from the literary career; in which latter case, pecuniary contributions are to be an equivalent for those services which his talents cannot contribute. [*9] If the Brethren adopt literary pursuits, then the Order enters into engagements to furnish them with all possible assistance to forward their undertakings in the art or science on which they shall have determined; unless they should have chosen Theology or Jurisprudence, two sciences which the Order absolutely excepts from any such agreement. [*10]

Their succours for the Minerval have a two-fold tendency. On the one side, they serve to prove that the adept does not neglect the science he has determined on, as he is to give an annual account of the discoveries he has made, and of the authors from which he has made selections. On the other hand, the brethren following the same branches of study are desired to help him with all the means in their power. Should he meet with difficulties which he cannot solve, he may apply to his Superior, who will either solve them himself, or send them to other members of the Order, who, better versed in those sciences, and bound to enlighten their Brethren, will send the required solutions. [*11]

That his degree of Minveral may have all the appearances of a literary society, the Superiors annually propose some question for a public composition. The answers or dissertations are judged as in academies, and the discourse which obtains the prize is printed at the expence of the Order. The same advantages are held out to all adepts who wish to publish their works, provided they are not foreign to the views of the Founder. [*12]--They are sure to coincide with his intentions should they be of the nature of those which he calls pasquils, or such as would create mirth among the people at the expense

[p. 443]

of the priesthood, and of religious truths; such as parodies on the Lamentations of Jeremiah, or burlesque imitations of the Prophets; in a word, all such satires as dispose the people to the grand object of the Sect. The Minerval can give no better proofs than these of his progress. The Sect has booksellers who put these works into circulation, and the profits are transmitted to the coffers of the Order.

It is, however, to be observed, that should a Minerval, or any other of the Brethren, make a discovery in any art or lucrative science, he is obliged, under pain of being looked upon as a false Brother, to impart the secret to the Order, who will look upon itself as proprietor of such secrets should they have been discovered by a Brother after his admission among them. [*13]

Lest he should be unobserved when travelling, the Minerval is never to undertake any journey without previously informing his superiors, who will send him letters of recommendation for different Brethren on the road. He, in return, must carefully report every thing that he shall discover during his travels, which may be to the advantage or disadvantage of the Order. [*14]

But we must not forget to mention, that during the academic sittings, the presiding Illuminee is at least once a month to take a review of the principal faults which he may have observed in any of his pupils. He is to interrogate them concerning those which they may have observed themselves; "and it would be unpardonable neglect," says the statutes, "should any pupil pretend that during the space of a whole month he had remarked nothing reprehensible. This would be a proof of the utmost negligence in the training of his mind to observation; and the Superior must not suffer it to pass without reprehension. He must also make his observations in such a manner as to excite their serious attention, and effectually to impress them with proper notions, so that each on returning home shall be ready to put in practice his advice for the advantage of the Order. [*15] Beside, the Superior is as much as possible to avoid letting a day pass without seeing his pupils, either he visiting them, or they him. [*16]

But what can be the object of such vigilance, such unremitting attention to the Minerval Academy? A single word from the adept who, under the inspection of Weishaupt, organized its laws, will explain the enigma. It is, to adopt Knigge's expressions, by the works required of the young Academicians that the Order will be able to judge whether they are of that sort of stuff (that is to say of that turn of mind, susceptible of all the principles of Impiety and Anarchy) which is necessary for the higher degrees. After all these labours, should the Minerval adept still retain any of what they call religionist inclinations, he will then receive the three first Masonic degrees, and in them he may moulder during the rest of his life in the insignificant study of all their hieroglyphics. He will indeed still continue under the inspection of the Superiors of the Order; but he may rest assured, that he will always remain a Minerval, with a brevet of imbecility, on the registers of the Sect. [*17] On the contrary, should he have shown a sufficient want of attachment to religion or to his Prince; should he enthusiastically imbibe the principles of Illuminism, he will certainly be promoted to higher degrees. During his academical course the

[p. 444]

[paragraph continues] Sect has had unerring means of judging him; viz. by the questions he has solved (and which were put by the Order, not so much with a view of exercising his talents as of prying into his opinions), and by the statements delivered in by the Scrutators, of the impression made by the different principles which they had disseminated either in the shape of conversation, or by way of refutation, to try the young Minerval.

The questions which he has had to investigate during his course sometimes regarded the secret of the Sect; at others, the security of the adepts, and of the Superiors. To envelop the chiefs in impenetrable darkness, and that their asylum may be proof against all attempts, death itself is to be divested of its horrors. The Minerval must not finish his Academical course till he has shown how far such fears have lost their influence over him; he shall declare whether he is ready to submit to every torture, rather than give the least information concerning the Order; or even evade the temptation by poison or suicide. A dissertation upon Cato, for example, will be given him as a task, and his management of it will show whether he is ready to fall by his own hand for the preservation of the Brethren. The patet exitus, or the exit is free, that is to say, that every man is free to leave this life at his pleasure, is one of those grand principles which must be advanced; it must be commented on and discussed by the young adept; and should any of those puerile ideas appear, which lead to believe in a God the avenger of suicide, he is not the man to be entrusted with the secret, and he shall be rejected. [*18]

Many other questions are proposed in order to convince the Sect of the principles of the young Academician. It must sound his opinions on the means it employs, and on those in which he may hereafter be instrumental. He will be ordered to discuss Weishaupt's famous doctrine, that the end sanctifies the means; that is to say, that there are no means, not even theft, poison, homicide, or calumny, but are just and laudable when used for the attainment of objects which the Order may chuse to style just or holy. [*19]

After all this, the Minerval shall furnish some dissertation from which his opinions on Kings and Priests may be ascertained; [*20] but the presiding adept must carefully avoid compromising himself; he must not openly applaud the epigrams, sarcasms, or even blasphemies of his pupils; that must be left to the brethren visitors, who will insinuate and encourage them without ever hinting that they are in perfect unison with the mysteries of the Order. He must not fail, however, to observe which of his pupils are the most zealous for such doctrines, and who complacently repeat these sarcasms or blasphemies; those, in short, who enthusiastically blend them in their Academical compositions. This accomplished, they have run their Academic career, and are next promoted to the degree of Minor Illuminee.

[p. 445]

Footnotes

^444:1 Orig. Writ. Vol. I.--Let. 4, to Cato.

^444:2 Statutes of the Minveral, No. 16.

^444:3 See the Minerval Ritual.

^444:4 Ibid.

^445:5 [p. 455] Orig. Writ. Vol. I. Let. 4.

^445:6 Ibid.

^445:7 Letter of Philo to Cato.

^445:8 Letter 3, to Cato.

^445:9 Orig. Writ. Vol. I.--Summary of the Institute, No. 9.

^445:10 Statutes of the Minerval, No. 1.

^445:11 Ibid. No. 2.

^445:12 Statutes of the Minerval Nos 6, and 10.

^445:13 Summary of the Institutes, No. 11.--The true Illuminee.

^445:14 Statutes of the Minerval, No. 11.

^445:15 Instructions for the Minerval, No. 4.

^445:16 Ibid. No. 3.

^445:17 Last word from Philo, Page. 90.

^445:18 See hereafter the Chapter on Juridical Depositions, in Vol. IV.

^445:19 Ibid.

^445:20 Ibid.

     
Code of the Illuminati: Part III of Memoirs Illustrating the History of Jacobinism, by A Barruel, tr. Robert Edward Clifford [1798], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 446]

  

CHAP. VI.

  

Fourth Part of the Code of Illuminees.--Third preparatory Degree--The Minor Illuminee.

THE object of the degree of Minor Illuminee is not only to dispose the Brethren more and more for the secrets which have not yet been revealed to them; but it has also in view their preparation for presiding over the Minerval Academies in which they have already shown their talents, and their zeal for the Sect. The means which are to produce this double effect are worthy of remark, on account of one of those artifices which Weishaupt alone could have invented.

The Minor Illuminees hold sittings similar to those of the Minerval Academy. The President must necessarily be one of those adepts who, initiated in the higher mysteries of Illuminism, have attained the degree of Priest. He, alone having any knowledge of these higher mysteries, is particularly enjoined to keep his pupils in the persuasion that beyond the degree in which he is there is no farther secret to impart to them. But he is to spare no pains to infuse those opinions into their minds, of which the last mysteries are but the development. The Minor Illuminees are imperceptibly to become as it were the inventors and authors of Weishaupt's principles; that, believing them to be the offspring of their own genius, they may more zealously defend and propagate them. "It is necessary," says the code, "that the adept look upon himself as the founder of the new Order," that hence he may conceive a natural ardor for its success. To effectuate this object, an exordium is appropriated to the initiation in this degree. It is one of those discourses which, replete with voluntary obscurities, presents the most monstrous errors to the mind, but expressly mentions none. The veil which is thrown over them is neither coarse enough to hide, nor fine enough clearly to chew them; all that the new adepts can observe at a first hearing is, that the object of the Order is worthy of admiration and zeal; that an ardent enthusiasm should inflame the mind of the young adept for the attainment of the grand object of all the labours of Illuminism; that the enjoyment of this happiness depended much more on the actions than on the words of the adepts. What then is this object, and what are the obstacles that are to be overcome? Of what species are those actions, those labours of the adept, which are to forward its views? It is in these points that enigma and obscurity veils the intent, and it is here that genius is to invent.

[p. 447]

[paragraph continues] That the errors of the Sect might be considered as originating with the adepts, it goes on to say, the same discourse shall serve in future as a text for all those which the Brethren shall prepare for the meetings of the Order. The President will select the obscure passages, which may lead to the development of those opinions which he wishes to instil into his pupils; such will  subjects chosen for their themes, and he will carefully exact practical conclusions. [*1] But to give the reader a better idea of what these themes or commentaries are to be, we shall quote a part of the original text.

"There certainly exist in the world public crimes which every wife and honest man would wish to suppress. When we consider that every man in this delightful world might be happy, but that their happiness is prevented by the misfortunes of some, and by the crimes and errors of others; that the wicked have power over the good; that opposition or partial insurrection is useless; that hardships generally fall upon men of worth;--then naturally results the wish of seeing an association formed of men of vigorous and noble minds, capable of resisting the wicked, of succouring the good, and of procuring for themselves rest, content and safety--of producing all these effects, by means drawn from the greatest degree of force of which human nature is capable. Such views actuating a SECRET SOCIETY would not only be innocent, but most worthy of the wise and well-inclined man." [*2]

What an ample field already opens itself to the commentating genius of the young adept! The Minor Illuminee will begin by investigating those general crimes to which the Sect wishes to put an end. And what are the crimes, who are the wicked persons that disturb the peace of mankind by means of power exercised over the good? What SECRET SOCIETIES are they which are destined to consummate the wishes of the sages, not by partial insurrections, but by the greatest degree of force of which human nature is capable? In a word, what is that new order of things, which are by such unheard of exertions to be substituted in place of existing institutions?

The greater progress the adept shall make, and the nearer his commentaries shall coincide with the spirit of the Order, so much the more worthy shall he be judged to fulfil the second object of this degree. He is not yet to preside over a Minerval Academy, he is too inexperienced in the arts of a Superior; and the Order only entrusts him with two or three of those pupils; but, as a consolation for the smallness of his flock, he reads in his instructions, that should he have only formed one or two men for the Order during his whole life he will have done a noble act.

Small as this mission is, still the adept is not left to his own prudence in the execution of it; he receives instructions by which he is to be guided. I forewarned my reader, that in this part of my Memoirs on Jacobinism, my object was, not solely to prove the Conspiracy of the Illuminees, but to render conspicuous the dangers which threatened society, while I was unveiling the means adopted by the Sect. Among these means, the laws laid down by Weishaupt for the Minor Illuminees are to be eminently distinguished; as the authority given, and the manner in which it is to be exercised (at first over two or three adepts only), naturally prepare them for more extensive

[p. 448]

commands. These laws and these instructions seem to be traced with the venom of the prudent serpent, unfortunately so much more active and ingenious in the arts of vice and seduction than good men are in the cause of virtue. This part of Weishaupt's Code is called--Instructions for forming useful labourers in Illuminism, and from it I shall make a large extract. Let the reader meditate on the tendency and probable consequences of such precepts, such laws, and artifices, all designed to form adepts for the most general, most astonishing, and most dreadful Conspiracy that ever existed.

"Assiduously observe (say these instructions) every Brother entrusted to your care; watch him particularly on all occasions where he may be tempted not to be what he ought to be; that is precisely the moment when he must show himself; it is then that the progress he has made is to be discovered. Observe him again at those times when he least suspects it, when neither the desire of being praised, the fear of being blamed, nor the shame of, or reflexion on the punishment, can actuate his conduct. Be exact on such occasions in making your notes and observations. You will gain much both with respect to yourself and to your pupil.

"Be careful lest your own inclinations should bias your judgment. Do not think a man excellent because he has a brilliant quality, nor judge him to be wicked because he has some striking defect: for that is the grand failing of those who are captivated at first sight.

"Above all, guard against believing your man to be a  genius because his discourse is brilliant. We are to judge by facts alone, whether a man is deeply interested.

"Have little confidence in rich or powerful men; their conversion is very slow.

"Your chief object must be to form the heart. He that is not deaf to the cries of the unfortunate; he that is constant though in adversity, and unshaken in his plans; he that feels his soul glow for great enterprizes; and he, particularly, who has formed his mind to observation, is the man of whom we are in quest. Reject those feeble and narrow minds who know not how to quit their usual sphere.

"Read with your pupils those books which are easy to be understood, which abound in the picturesque, and are calculated to elevate the mind. Speak to them often; but let your discourses proceed from the heart, and not from the head. Your auditors easily kindle when they see you full of fire. Make them thirst after the moment when the grand object is to be accomplished.

"Above all, stimulate them to the love of the object. Let them view it as grand, important, and congenial to their interests and favourite passions. Paint in strong colours the miseries of the world; tell them what men are, and what they might be; what line of conduct they should adopt; how little they know their own interests; how anxiously our society labours for them; and desire them to judge what they may expect from it, by what we have already done in the first degrees.

"Shun familiarity on all occasions where your weak side may be seen; always speak of Illuminism in a dignified style."

[p. 449]

"Inspire esteem and respect for our Superiors; and dwell strongly on the necessity of obedience in a well-organized society."

"Kindle the ardour of your pupil by laying great stress on the utility of our labours; avoid dry and metaphysical discussions. Let what you require of your pupils be within their means. Study the peculiar habits of each; for men may be turned to any thing by him who knows how to take advantage of their ruling passions.

"To infuse into them a spirit of observation, begin by slight essays in conversation. Ask some easy questions on the means of discovering the character of a man notwithstanding all his dissimulation. Affect to think the answer a better one than you could have given yourself; that gives confidence, and you will find some other opportunity of delivering your own sentiments. Inform them of what observations you may have made concerning their voice, gait, or physiognomy. Tell them also, that they have the best dispositions, and that they only want practice. Praise some in order to stimulate others."

"Having thus become acquainted with the immense difficulty attending on the art of bringing men to the point whither you wished to lead them, neglect no occasion of disseminating the good principles wherever you can, and of inspiring your pupils with courage and resolution: but never forget, that he who wishes to convert too many at once will convert nobody. In the towns where you reside, divide the task with the other Illuminees of the same degree as yourself. Chuse one or two, at most three, Minervals among those over whom you have the greatest influence or authority; but spare neither labour nor pains. You will have accomplished a great undertaking if, during your whole life, you form but two or three men. Let those whom you have selected be the constant object of all your observations. When one method does not succeed, seek out another; and so on, till you have found a proper one. Study to find out what your pupil is best fitted for; in what intermediary principles he may be deficient, and therefore inaccessible to the fundamental ones. The grand art consists in profiting of the right moment; at one time it is warm, at another cool reasoning which will persuade.--Let your pupil always think that it is to himself, and not to you, that he is indebted for the progress he makes. If he falls in a passion, never contradict; hearken to him though he be in the wrong. Never controvert the consequences, but always the principle. Wait for a favourable moment when you may explain your sentiments without appearing to contradict his. The best method is to agree with another person, whom you will pretend to attack on those subjects, while the Candidate whom you really wish to convince is only a stander-by and takes no part in the dispute: then support your arguments with all the vigour of which you are capable.

"Whatever failings you wish to correct in him, speak of them as if they were not his; tell the story as if somebody else had been guilty of them; then take his advice on the subject; and by these means he becomes his own judge.

"All this, it is true, requires time: hurry nothing; it is solidity and facility of action that we want in our adepts. Often to read, meditate, hearken to, see the same thing, and then to act, is what gives that facility which soon becomes natural. . . ."

[p. 450]

"Do you wish to draw forth his opinion? Propose a dissertation on certain questions relative to your object, as it were merely to exercise his genius. He thus learns how to meditate on the principles while you make a discovery of those which it is your object to eradicate from his mind."

"Instruct, advise; but beware of cold declamations: drop a few words to the purpose when you shall perceive his mind to be in a proper state to receive them."

"Never ask too much at once; let your conduct be provident, paternal, and solicitous.--Never despair; for one may do what one pleases with men.

"Make yourself master of the motives of the principles your pupil has acquired from his education. If they be not consonant with our views, weaken then by insensible gradations, and substitute and strengthen others. But great prudence is necessary to operate this."

"Observe what religions, sects, and politics, make men do.--One may enthusiastically wed them to follies; it is therefore in the manner of leading them that the whole art of giving the upper hand to virtue and truth consists. Only employ the same means for a good purpose which impostors employ for evil, and you will succeed. If the wicked are powerful, it is because the good are too timid and too indolent. There may be circumstances also, under which it will become necesssary to show displeasure, and even anger, in defence of the rights of man."

"Tell your pupils, that they are only to attend to the purity of the views which actuate the Order; and that antiquity, power, or riches, should be perfectly indifferent to them."

"Tell them, that should they find elsewhere a society which would lead them with greater speed or with more certainty to the desired end, the Order would eternally regret the not having been acquainted with it before--That in the mean time we obey the laws of our Superiors, labouring in peace, and persecuting no man.--Follow these rules of conduct, and once more remember, that you will have rendered an essential service to the world, though you should form but two men according to our principles.

"Carefully profit of those moments when your pupil is discontented with the world, and when every thing goes contrary to his wishes; those moments when the most powerful man feels the want of the support of others, to attain a better order of things. It is then that you must press the swelling heart, stimulate the sensibility, and demonstrate how necessary secret societies are, for the attainment of a better order of things."

"But be not too easy in your belief with respect to the reality or constancy of such feelings. Indignation may be the effect of fear, or of the fleeting hopes of some passion which one wishes to gratify. Such feelings are not naturalized; men are not perfect in so short a time; prepare for the worst, and then insist. A heart which easily melts easily changes."

"Never promise too much, that you may be able to perform more than you promise. Rekindle exhausted courage; repress excessive ardour; inspire hope in misfortune, and fear in success."

[p. 451]

"Such are the rules which will form you for a good preceptor and a leader of men. By an exact attention to them you will add to the number of the elect. If your own happiness be dear to you, labour (under our direction) at delivering many thousands of men, who wish to be good, from the dire necessity of being wicked.--Believe us, for it is the precept of experience, bereave vice of its power, and every thing will go well in this world: for if vice be powerful, it is only because one part of the good is too indolent, while the other is too ardent; or else, that men suffer themselves to be divided, or leave the care of Revolutions to futurity; the fact is, that in the mean time they had rather bend under the yoke, than efficaciously resist vice. If they once became sensible that virtue does not entirely consist in patience, but in action also, they would start from their sleep.--For your part, unite with the Brethren; place your confidence in our Society; nothing is impossible to it, if we follow its laws. We labour to secure to merit its just rewards; to the weak support, to the wicked the fetters they deserve; and to man his dignity. Such is the new Canaan, the new land of Promise, the land of abundance and blessing; though as yet, alas! we discover it but from a distance." [*3]

I was frequently tempted to interrupt the course of this extract by my reflexions; but what reader is there that will not ask himself, What zeal, what strange ardour is this, that can have led Weishaupt to combine and dictate means so powerful to captivate the minds of his pupils? Is there a parent, is there a preceptor, whose love for his child or his pupil ever suggested more efficacious rules? These, however, are only a few of the lessons which the Minor Illuminee is always to have present to his mind to direct him in the training of the young adepts. He is not alone entrusted with the task. All the Brethren of the same degree partake in the care of watching over the lower ones, and each notes on his tablets even the most insignificant circumstances. Their several observations are compared, and of the whole a general statement is formed, according to which each pupil will be judged by his superiors. [*4] Meanwhile, it is natural to ask, what can these principles be for which the youth is so carefully trained? What can be the sublime virtue that is to be the result of so much care? We shall soon discover them, the principles of shameless villainy. This sublime virtue is the combination of every art that can plunge mankind into corruption, and immerse him in all the horrors of universal anarchy. Yes, we shall see the man who says to his disciples, employ the same means for a good purpose which impostors employ for evil, proved to be the arch-impostor, training his disciples to every crime, and preparing the most terrible disasters for society with more ardour and more artifice than ever the upright man has been seen to employ zeal and wisdom in the cause of virtue and the support of the laws.

The better to dispose the young adepts, the Minor Illuminee is assisted in his functions and overlooked by the Major Illuminee, that is to say, by the adepts of the highest degree among those of the preparatory class.

[p. 452]

Footnotes

^452:1 The true Illuminee, Instructions for the Superiors of this degree.

^452:2 Discourse on this Degree.

^452:3 Extract from the Instruction C. and D. for the Minor Illuminees.

^452:4 Instruction C. Sect. II. A. 2.

     
Code of the Illuminati: Part III of Memoirs Illustrating the History of Jacobinism, by A Barruel, tr. Robert Edward Clifford [1798], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 453]

  

CHAP. VII.

  

Fifth Part of the Code of Illuminees--Fourth preparatory Degree--The Major Illuminee, or the Scotch Novice.

THE degree which follows that of Minor Illuminee is sometimes called Major Illuminee; at other times, Scotch Novice. Under this two-fold denomination a double object is comprized. As Scotch Novice, the adept is turned in upon Masonry; and it is only a snare for imposing upon the credulity of those, who have not given the requisite symptoms for being initiated in the higher mysteries of the Sect. It is an introduction to the degree of Scotch Knight, which terminates the career of the dupes. But as a degree of Illuminism, it will encompass the adept with new bonds, more extraordinary and more firm than the former; it is a more immediate preparation for the grand mysteries; in short, it is from this degree that the masters of the Minerval Academies are selected.

Let us begin by laying open the artifice of that strange bond which the adept will never dare to rend asunder, though he should wish to withdraw from Illuminism, or more particularly should he be tempted to reveal what he may have already discovered of the artifices, principles, or grand object of the Sect.

Before the candidate is admitted to the new degree, he is informed that his reception is resolved on, provided he gives satisfactory answers to the following questions:

I. Are you acquainted with any society grounded on a better constitution, or more holy and solid than ours, and which tends with more certainty or expedition to the object of your wishes?

II. Was it to satisfy your curiosity that you entered our society? or, was it to concur with the chosen among men to universal happiness?

III. Are you satisfied with what you have seen of our laws? Will you labour according to our plan, or have you any objection to propose against it?

IV. As there will be no medium for you, declare at once, whether you wish to leave us, or whether you will remain attached to us for ever?

V. Are you a member of any other society?

[p. 454]

VI. Does that society impose any thing detrimental to our interests; for example, the discovery of our secrets; or, does it require you to labour for itself exclusively?

VII. Should such things be ever required of you, tell us upon your honour, whether you would be disposed to acquiesce in them?

These questions answered, there still remains another proof of confidence which the Order expects from the candidate. This is nothing less than an exact and candid account of his whole life, written without any reservation or dissimulation whatever. The necesssary time is given him; and this is the famous bond, or rather snare, into which when Weishaupt has once brought the candidate he exultingly exclaims, "Now I hold him; I defy him to hurt us; if he should wish to betray us, we have also his secrets." It would be in vain for the adept to attempt to dissimulate. He will soon find that the most secret circumstances of his life, those which he would most anxiously wish to hide, are all known by the adepts. The arts which he has hitherto practised to pry into the most secret motions of the hearts of his pupils, into their tempers and passions, their connections, their means, their interests, their actions and opinions, their intrigues and faults, have all been more artfully employed by others in watching himself. Those who compose the lodge into which he is going to be received, are the very persons that have been scrutinizing his past life.

All the discoveries made by his Insinuator, all the statements he has been obliged to give of himself as required by the Code, every thing which the Brother Scrutators, either known or unknown, have been able to discover concerning him during his degrees of Minerval or of Minor Illuminee, have been accurately transmitted to the Brethren of the new lodge. Long before his admission, they had accomplished themselves in the scrutinizing arts.--These wretches then will mimick even the canonization of the saints! The very precautions which Rome takes to discover the least taint in those whom it proposes to the veneration of the faithful, this illuminizing Sect will adopt, in order to satisfy itself that in its adepts no civil nor religious virtue can be traced. Yes, the villains in their dens wished to know each other, and smiled to see their accomplices as wicked as themselves.

I cannot conceive whence Weishaupt could have taken this part of his Code; but let the reader form an idea of a series of at least fifteen hundred questions on the life, the education, the body, the mind, the heart, the health, the passions, the inclinations, the acquaintances, the connections, the opinions, the abode, the habits, and even the favourite colours of the candidate; on his relations, his friends, his enemies, his conduct, his discourse, his gait, his gesture, his language, his prejudices, and his weaknesses. In a word, questions which relate to every thing that can denote the life or character, the political, moral, or religious sentiments, the interior or exterior of the man; every thing he has said, done, or thought, and even what he would say, do, or think under any given circumstances. Let the reader form an idea of twenty, thirty, and sometimes a hundred questions on each of these heads. Such will be the Catechism to which the Major Illuminee must be able to answer; such are the

[p. 455]

rules he is to follow in tracing the lives or characters of the young Brethren, or even of those prophane of whom the Sect wishes to have particular information. Such is the scrutinizing Code which has directed the researches made as to the life of the candidate antecedent to his admission to the degree of Major Illuminee. These statutes are called by the Order the Nosce te ipsum (know thyself). When one brother pronounces these words, the other answers Nosce alios (know others); and this answer denotes much better the object of the Code, which might very properly be styled the perfect spy. Let it be judged by the following questions:

"On the Physiognomy of the Candidate:--Is he of a florid complexion, or pale? Is he white, black, fair, or brown? Is his eye quick, piercing, dull, languishing, amorous, haughty, ardent, or dejected? In speaking, does he look full in the face and boldly, or does he look sideways? Can he endure being stared full in the face? Is his look crafty, or is it open and free; is it gloomy and pensive, or is it absent, light, insignificant, friendly, or serious? Is his eye hollow, or level with the head, or does it stare? His forehead, is it wrinkled, and how; perpendicularly, or horizontally? &c.

"His Countenance:--Is it noble or common, open, easy, or constrained? How does he carry his head; erect or inclined, before, behind, or on one side, firm or shaking, sunk between his shoulders, or turning from one side to the other? &c.

"His Gait:--Is it slow, quick, or firm? Are his steps long, short, dragging, lazy, or skipping? &c.

"His Language:--Is it regular, disorderly, or interrupted? In speaking, does he agitate his hands, his head, or his body, with vivacity? Does he close upon the person he is speaking to? Does he hold them by the arm, clothes, or button-hole? Is he a great talker, or is he taciturn? If so, why? Is it through prudence, ignorance, respect, or sloth? &c.

"His Education:--To whom does he owe it? Has he always been under the eyes of his parents? How has he been brought up, and by whom? Has he any esteem for his masters? To whom does he think himself indebted for his education? Has he travelled, and in what countries?"

Let the reader, by these questions, judge of those which treat of the mind, the heart, or the passions of the Candidate. I will just note the following:

"When he finds himself with different parties, which does he adopt, the strongest or the weakest, the wittiest or the most stupid? Or does he form a third? Is he constant and firm in spite of all obstacles? How is he to be gained, by praise, flattery, or low courtship; or by women, money, or the entreaties of his friends?" &c.--"Whether he loves satire, and on what he exercises that talent; on religion, superstition, hypocrisy, intolerance, government, ministers, monks?" &c.

This however is not all that the scrutators are to note in their statements. They are to elucidate each answer by a fact, and by such facts as characterize the man at a moment when he least suspects it. [*1] They are to follow their prey to his

[p. 456]

bolster, where they will learn whether he is a hard sleeper, whether he dreams, and whether he talks when dreaming; whether he is easily or with difficulty awakened; and should he be suddenly, forcibly, or unexpectedly awakened from his sleep, what impression would it make on him?

Should any of these questions, or any part of the Candidate's life, not have been sufficiently investigated by the Lodge, divers of the brethren are ordered to direct all their enquiries toward that point. When at length the result of all their researches is found to coincide with the wishes of the Sect, the day for his reception is appointed. Neglecting all the insignificant particularities of the Masonic rites, we shall attend entirely to those circumstances which peculiarly belong to Illuminism.

The adept, introduced into a gloomy apartment, reiterates his oath to keep secret whatever he may see or learn from the Order. He then deposits the history of his life (sealed up) in the hands of his introducer. It is read to the Lodge, and compared with the historical table which the Brethren had already formed respecting the Candidate. This done, the Introducer says to him, "You have given us a welcome and valuable proof of your confidence; but indeed we are not unworthy of it; and we hope that it will even increase in proportion as you become better acquainted with us. Among men whose sole object is to render themselves and others better, no dissimulation should subsist. Far be any reserve from us. We study the human heart--and do not hesitate or blush at revealing to each other our faults or errors.--Here then is the picture which the Lodge had drawn of your person. You must own that some features are not unlike. Read, and then answer, whether you still wish to belong to a society which (such as you are represented here) opens its arms to receive you."

Could indignation operate more powerfully on the mind of the Candidate at the sight of his having been so treacherously watched, than the fear of abjuring a society which henceforth possesses such arms against him, he would not hesitate at asking for his dismission; but he sees the consequences of such a step, and feels that it might cost him very dear. Beside, he is so familiarized with the scrutinizing system, that he can scarcely be offended with it, though operating on himself. He is left for a certain time to his meditations. The desire of acquiring a new degree works upon him and at length turns the scales; he is introduced to the Lodge of the Brethren; and there the veil which hides the secrets of the Sect is partly raised; or, rather, he is himself still more unveiled, that the Sect may discern whether all his views and wishes coincide with theirs.

After a suitable preamble, the Initiator tells him, "that he has still some few questions to answer, relative to objects on which it is absolutely necessary that the opinions of candidates should be known."

The reader is desired to pay particular attention to these questions; as it will enable him, when he shall come to read of the mysteries, more clearly to observe the succession and gradation with which such principles are infused

[p. 457]

into the mind of the adept, as if he had invented and conceived them all himself.

"I. Do you find that, in the world we live in, virtue is rewarded and vice punished? Do you not on the contrary observe, that the wicked man is exteriorly more comfortable, more considered, and more powerful, than the honest man? In a word, are you content with the world in its present situation?"

"II. In order to change the present order of things, would you not, if you had it in your power, assemble the good and closely unite them, in order to render them more powerful than the wicked?"

"III. If you had your choice, in what country would you wish to have been born rather than your own?"

"IV. In what age would you wish to have lived?"

"V. Always premising the liberty of choice, what science and what state of life would you prefer?"

"VI. With respect to history, who is your favourite author or your master?"

"VII. Do you not think yourself in duty bound to procure all the exterior advantages possible for your tried friends, in order to recompense them for their probity, and to render life more agreeable to them? Are you ready to do what the Order exacts of each member in this degree, when it ordains that each one shall bind himself to give advice every month to the Superiors, of the employments, support, benefices, or other such like dignities, of which he can dispose, or procure the possession by means of his recommendations; that the Superiors may present worthy subjects of our Order to all such employments?"

The answers of the candidate are to be returned in writing, and inserted in the registers of the Lodge. It will naturally be expected, that the greatest dissatisfaction with the present order of things is to be expressed, as well as an ardent wish for a revolution which shall change the whole face of the Universe. He will also promise to support, by all the means in his power, the election of none but worthy brethren to offices of emolument and trust, or such as may augment the power or credit of Illuminism, whether about the court or among the people. On his declaring such to be his sentiments, the Initiator addresses him in the following discourse:

"Brother, you are a witness, that it is after having tried the best of men, that we seek little by little to reward them, and to give them support, that we may insensibly succeed in new modelling the world. Since you are convinced how imperfectly men have fulfilled their real destiny; how every thing has degenerated in their civil institutions; how little the teachers of wisdom and of truth have enhanced the value of virtue, or given a happier disposition to the world; you must be persuaded, that the error lies in the means which the sages have hitherto employed. Those means, therefore, must be changed, in order to reinstate in its rights the empire of truth and wisdom. And this is the grand object of the labours of our Order. Oh, my friend! my brother! my son! when here convened, far from the prophane, we consider to what an extent the

[p. 458]

world is abandoned to the yoke of the wicked, how persecution and misfortune is the lot of the honest man, and how the better part of human nature is sacrificed to personal interest. Can we at such a sight be silent, or content ourself with sighing? Shall we not attempt to shake off yoke?--Yes, my brother, rely upon us. Seek faithful co-operators, but seek them not in tumults and storms; they are hidden in darkness. Protected by the shades of night, solitary and silent, or reunited in small numbers, they, docile children, pursue the grand work under the direction of their Superiors. They call aloud to the children of the world, who pass by in the intoxication of pleasure--how few hearken to them! He alone who has the eye of the bird of Minerva, who has placed his labours under the protection of the star of night, is sure of finding them."

But, lest this discourse should not have given the Candidate a sufficient insight as to the object of the new degree, the Secretary opens the Code of the Lodge, entitled A general view of the system of the Order. Here the young Illuminee learns, that the object of the Order is to diffuse the pure truth, and to make virtue triumph. Nothing, however, is explicitly said on what is to be understood by the pure truth. He is only told, that in order to diffuse it, "he must begin by liberating men from their prejudices, and by enlightening their understandings; then reunite all the common forces for the refinement of all sciences from the dross of useless subtleties, and for the establishment of principles drawn from Nature.--To attain this," continues the Secretary, "we must trace the origin of all sciences; we must reward oppressed talents; we must raise from the dust the men of genius; we must undertake the education of youth; and, forming an indissoluble league among the most powerful geniuses, we must boldly, though with prudence, combat superstition, incredulity, and folly; and at length form our people to true, just, and uniform principles on all subjects.

"Such is the object of our Minerval Schools, and of the inferior degrees of Masonry, over which our Order wishes to acquire all the influence possible, in order to direct it towards our object. We also have our superior degrees, where the Brethren, after having passed through all the preparatory degrees, become acquainted with the ultimate result of the labours and of all the proceedings of the Order."

To obtain the completion of that result, "it will be necesssary to divest vice of its power, that the honest man may find his recompense even in this world; but in this grand project, we are counteracted by the Princes and the Priesthood; the political constitutions of nations oppose our proceedings. In such a state of things then what remains to be done? To instigate revolutions, overthrow every thing, oppose force to force, and exchange tyranny for tyranny? Far be from us such means. Every violent reform is to be blamed, because it will not ameliorate things as long as men remain as they are, a prey to their passions; and because wisdom needeth not the arm of violence."

"The whole plan of the Order tends to form men, not by declamation, but by the protection and rewards which are due to virtue. We must insensibly 

[p. 459]

bind the hands of the protectors of disorder, and govern them without appearing to domineer."

"In a word, we must establish an universal empire over the whole world, without destroying the civil ties. Under this new empire, all other governments must be able to pursue their usual process, and to exercise every power, excepting that of hindering the Order from attaining its ends and rendering virtue triumphant over vice."

"This victory of virtue over vice was formerly the object of Christ, when he established his pure religion. He taught men, that the path to wisdom consisted in letting  be led for their greater good by the best and wisest men. At that time preaching might suffice; the novelty made truth prevail; but at present, more powerful means are necesssary. Man, a slave to his senses, must see sensible attractions in virtue. The source of passions is pure; it is necessary that every one should be able to gratify his within the bounds of virtue, and that our Order should furnish him with the means."

"It consequently follows, that all our brethren, educated on the same principles, and strictly united to each other, should have but one object in view. We must encompass the Power of the earth with a legion of indefatigable men, all directing their labours, according to the plan of the Order, towards the happiness of human nature--but all that is to be done in silence; our brethren are mutually to support each other, to succour the good labouring under oppression, and to seek to acquire those places which give power, for the good of the cause."

"Had we a certain number of such men in every country, each might form two others. Let them only be united, and nothing will be impossible to our Order; it is thus that in silence it has already performed much for the good of humanity."

"You behold, Brother, an immense field opening to your activity; become our faithful and worthy co-operator, by seconding us with all your might; and remember, that no service will pass without its just reward."

After this lesson, two chapters directly treating on the functions of the Major Illuminee are read to him. With the first he is already acquainted: it is the Code of the Insinuator or Brother Recruiter. He is also now entrusted with it, as it is part of his duty in future to judge of the pupils of all the Insinuators. The second treats of the duties of the Scrutator; this is also delivered into his care, because he must particularly exercise that art while presiding over the Minerval academies: and he must necessarily learn how his new brethren found means of tracing so exact an historical portrait of himself, and of penetrating even more successfully than he could into the interior recesses of his heart; he must also learn to distinguish such pupils as, with dispositions similar to his own, are worthy of being admitted to his new degree. He now has but one more degree to go through, before he is admitted into the class of the mysteries, and this is termed by the Sect the Scotch Knight. [*2]

Footnotes

^459:1 See Weishaupt's Letters.

^459:2 The whole of this chapter is nothing more than an extract from the degree of Major Illuminee, and from the instructions contained in the ritual of that code in The True Illuminee.

     
Code of the Illuminati: Part III of Memoirs Illustrating the History of Jacobinism, by A Barruel, tr. Robert Edward Clifford [1798], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 460]

  

CHAP. VIII.

  

Sixth Part of the Code of the Illuminees. Intermediary Class--The Scotch Knight of Illuminism; or Directing Illuminee.

UNDER the appellation of Intermediary Class of Illuminism might be comprehended all the Degrees which Weishaupt had borrowed from Freemasonry. In that case we should comprize under this denomination the three degrees of Apprentice, Fellow-Craft, and Master. But it has been already said, that these degrees are simply a passport for the Sect into the Masonic Lodges; and that its object may be less conspicuous, it leaves them in their original Masonic state. This, however, is not the case with the higher degrees of Scotch Masonry. The Sect shrewdly surmised that the views of these degrees coincided with their own: beside, it wanted some of these superior degrees, either for the direction of those Masonic Lodges which it composed of its own members, or who were to gain admittance, dominate, and preside over other Lodges which were not devoted to Illuminism. The great veneration in which the Scotch Knights are generally held by Masons, more strongly determined the Baron Knigge to make himself master of this degree, and engraft it on Illuminism. The Sect has constituted this into both an intermediary and a stationary degree. It is stationary for those into whom it despairs of ever infusing the principles required for a  admission to the mysteries; but it is only intermediary for those who have shown dispositions more accordant with the pursuits of the Sect. [*1]

Whatever may be his destiny, no Brother is ever admitted into this new degree, until he has previously given proofs of the progress he has made in the arts of Scrutator, whose code must have been his chief study since his admission to the degree of Major Illuminee. The secret Chapter of the Knights has had the precaution to propose certain questions to him to ascertain how far he is capable of judging of the state of the mind by exterior appearances. He will have had to answer, for example, to the following ones:--"What is the character of a man whose eyes are perpetually in motion, and whose countenance is changeable? What features denote voluptuousness, melancholy, and pusillanimity?" [*2]

As a further proof of the progress he has made, he is to transmit to his superiors another dissertation on the life of the hero whose name he bears for

[p. 461]

his characteristic. The history of his own life, which he had delivered in the antecedent degree, had laid open the whole of his existence, and all his actions through life. This new dissertation will show the Order what he admires or disapproves of in others, and will particularly demonstrate whether he has discovered those qualities in his patron which the Order wished he should imbibe and imitate when it gave him his characteristic. [*3] Should any part of his life have escaped the vigilance of the Scrutators, he is still at liberty to give a new proof of his confidence in the Order; and this is described as a meritorious act; but he may reserve it for the cognizance of the Superior of the Order only. [*4] He is then to declare under his hand-writing, that he looks upon the Superiors of Illuminism as the secret and unknown though legitimate Superiors of Freemasonry; that he adheres and always will adhere to the illuminized system of Masonry, as the best and most useful existing; that he utterly renounces every other association; that he is, in short, so persuaded of the excellence of Illuminism, that he fully adopts its principles, and firmly believes himself bound to labour, under the direction of his superiors, at the object and according to the intentions of the Order for the happiness of mankind. [*5]

After having received these numerous pledges, the Scotch Knights invite the new Brother to a secret Chapter, for such is the name given to the Lodges of this degree. It is hung with green, richly decorated and brilliantly lighted. The Prefect of the Knights, booted and spurred, is seated on a throne erected under a canopy all of the same colour. On his apron a green cross is seen, and on his breast the star of the Order; he wears the riband of St. Andrew in salter from right to left, and holds a mallet in his hand. On his right stands the brother sword-bearer, holding the sword of the Order; on his left the master of the ceremonies with a stick in one hand, and the ritual in the other. The Knights assembled are all booted and spurred, each girt with a sword, and all wear the cross suspended at their necks by a green riband. The Officers of the Order are to be distinguished by a plumage, and a priest of the Order compleats the Lodge. The Prefect then delivers himself as follows to the Candidate:

"You here behold a part of those unknown legions which are united by indissoluble bonds to combat for the cause of humanity. Are you willing to make yourself worthy of watching with them for the sanctuary? Your heart must be pure, and a heavenly ardour for the dignity of nature must fire your breast. The step you are taking is the most important one of your life. Our games are not vainly ceremonial. In creating you a knight we expect of you that you will perform exploits grand, noble, and worthy of the title you receive. Long life to you, if you come to us to be faithful; if honest and good you answer our expectations. Should you prove a false Brother, be both cursed and unhappy, and may the grand Architect of the Universe hurl you into the bottomless pit! Now bend thy knee, and on this sword take the oath of the Order."

At these words the Prefect seats himself, the Knights are standing with their swords drawn, and the Candidate pronounces the following oath:--

[p. 462]

"I promise obedience to the excellent Superiors of the Order. In as much as it shall depend upon me, I engage--never to favour the admission of any unworthy member into these holy degrees--to labour at rendering the Ancient Masonry triumphant over the false systems which have crept into it--to succour, like a true Knight, innocence, poverty, or oppressed honesty--Never to be the flatterer of the great, nor the slave of Princes;--to combat courageously, though prudently, in the cause of Virtue, Liberty, and Wisdom--to resist boldly, both for the advantage of the Order and of the world, Superstition and Despotism. I never will prefer my own private interest to that of the Order. I will defend my Brethren against calumny. I will dedicate my life to the discovery of the true Religion and real doctrines of Freemasonry, and I will impart my discoveries to my Superiors. I will disclose the secrets of my heart to my Superiors as to my best friends. So long as I shall remain in the Order I shall look upon the being a Member of it as a supreme felicity. I also engage to look upon all my domestic, civil, and social duties as most sacred. So help me God, both for the happiness of my life, and for the peace of my mind."

In return for this oath the Prefect declares to the Candidate that he is going to create him a Knight of St. Andrew, according to the ancient usage of the Scotch--"Rise," he says, "and in future beware of ever bending thy knee before him who is only man like thyself." [*6]

To these ceremonies the adept Knigge added a certain number of others which were mere derisions of the rites of the Church. Such, for example, was the triple benediction which the Priest pronounced over the new Knight, such the atrocious mockery of the last supper, which terminated the ceremony. But, impious as is the imitation, Weishaupt declares it to be disgusting because it is still religious, theosophical, and borrowed from superstition. [*7] But what perfectly coincided with the views of the Bavarian founder were, the instructions given to the new Knight. He is enraptured with that discourse, where one may observe the Illuminizing Orator selecting the most impious, artful, and disorganizing systems of Masonry, to make them at once the mysteries of their Masonic Lodges, and an immediate preparation for those of Illuminism.

Let the reader recal to mind what was said in the Second Volume of these Memoirs [*8] concerning the Apocalypse of the Martinists, entitled Of Errors and of Truth. He will there have read of a time when man, disengaged from the senses and free from matter, was still more free from the yoke of the laws and from political bondage, to which he was only subjected by his fall. He will there have seen, that the daily efforts of man should tend to the overthrow of Governments, that he may recover his former purity and ancient liberty, and thus retrieve his fall. I might there have demonstrated that absurd Idealism reducing our senses to vain fictions, that the prostitution of them might be but a chimerical crime; [*9] there, in short, I might have shown, according to the Martinist, that in all ages this system of corruption and disorder has been the doctrine and secret of true Philosophy. This intermediary degree was destined by Weishaupt to serve as a point of union between the Masonic Lodges and Illuminism. It was but natural that the should have selected the most

[p. 463]

monstruous and most artful system of the Craft. Let not the reader therefore be astonished when he sees the Antitheosophist, the Atheist, the Materialist Weishaupt borrowing in this degree the doctrines of the Martinists on the twofold principle or double spirit. But let it be also remembered, that whenever, in consequence of this artifice, he is obliged to use the words spirit or soul, he informs the candidate, that such words are employed in the Code only to conform to the vulgar expression. This precaution taken, the Initiator may without apprehension repeat the sophisticated lessons on the twofold principle. And indeed one might be tempted to think, that the doctrines he lays down as the grand object of Free Masonry had all been copied from the Martinist system. He begins by deploring a great Revolution which had in former ages deprived man of his primitive dignity. He then represents man as having had the faculty of recovering his ancient splendour; but that by the abuse of his faculties he had again immersed himself still deeper in his defiled and degraded station. The very senses are blunted, and said to lead him into error on the nature of things. Every thing that he beholds in its actual state is falsehood, show, and illusion; and he lays particular stress on those schools of sages which had, ever since the time of the grand Revolution, preserved the secret principles of the antique doctrines, or of true Masonry. Nor does the  Hierophant blush at placing JESUS OF NAZARETH among those sages, and blasphemously numbering the God of the Christians among the Grand Masters of Illuminism. But soon was the doctrine of Christ falsified, and Priests and Philosophers raised on these divine foundations an edifice of folly, prejudice, and self-interest. Soon also does the tyranny of Priesthood and the Despotism of Princes coalesce in the oppression of suffering humanity. Free Masonry opposes these disastrous attempts, and endeavors to preserve the true doctrine; but it has  it with symbols, and its lodges gradually subside into seminaries of ignorance and error.--The Illuminees alone are in possession of the real secrets of Masonry; many of them are even still to be the objects of their researches; and the new Knight is to devote all his attention to their discovery. He is particularly recommended to study the doctrines of the ancient Gnostics and Manichaeans, which may lead him to many important discoveries on this real Masonry. He is also told, that the great enemies which he will have to encounter during this investigation will be ambition and other vices which make humanity groan under the oppression of Princes and of the Priesthood. [*10]

The obscurity which enwraps these lessons on the new and grand Revolution which is to counteract the ravages of the former, is not the slightest of Weishaupt's artifices. With respect to Princes, this is the last degree to which they are admitted. They are to be persuaded, that the antique Revolution was no other than the coalition of the powers of the earth with the Priesthood, in order to support the empire of religious prejudice and superstition; and that the new Revolution to be effected is the re-union of Princes with Philosophy, to overthrow that empire and ensure the triumph of reason. Should the serene adept be startled at his having sworn never to flatter the great, nor to be a slave of Princes, he will be reconciled again by the latter part

[p. 464]

of the oath, where he engages to look upon his domestic, civil, and social duties as most sacred. But let him form what opinion he may as to his initiation, he has nevertheless sworn, that he will protect the Brotherhood from superstition and despotism; that he will obey the most excellent superiors of the Order; that he will favour its progress with all his power, and that he believes it alone to be in possession of the secrets of real Masonry.

In the less important class of adepts, should any still hanker after their Theosophical ideas, that is to say, should Weishaupt despair of ever infusing into them its Anarchical and Atheistical principles, they are condemned to become stationary in this degree; and he imposes on them as a task the explication of all the Hieroglyphics of Masonry, which they may set to the tune of the grand Revolution. Under pretence of discovering a more perfect religion, he persuaded them that Christianity was at this day nothing more than superstition and tyranny. He has infused into them his hatred for the Priesthood and the existing forms of Government. That will suffice to procure him agents of destruction; as to , he has not so much as mentioned it to them.

But should there be found among the number of Knights men who of themselves dive into the meaning of that great Revolution which only deprived man of his primitive dignity by subjecting him to the laws of civil society, should they have comprehended the meaning of this other Revolution, which is to restore every thing by re-establishing man in his primitive independence, such men will be pointed out by the Scrutators. It is at them that the Code particularly aims when it says, Let the Scotch Knights seriously reflect, that they are presiding over a grand establishment, whose object is the happiness of mankind. In short, these Knights have to act the parts of Superiors in the Order; they are the Inspectors or the Directors of all the preparatory class. They have on that account assemblies peculiar to themselves, called Secret Chapters. The first duty of these chapters is to watch over the interests of the Order within their district. "The Scotch Knights," says their first instruction, "are to pay particular attention to the discovery of any plans which may contribute to fill the coffers of the Order. It were much to be wished that they could devise means of putting the Order into possession of some considerable revenues in their province.--He that shall have rendered so signal a service must never hesitate at believing that these revenues are employed in the most noble purposes.--The whole must labour with all their might to consolidate the edifice little by little within their district, until the finances of the Order shall be found to be competent to its views." [*11]

The second part of the Code entrusts these Knights with the government of the preparatory class. Each Knight is to correspond with a certain number of Brethren who have the direction of the Minerval academies. The Code contains instructions which point out to them upon what objects they are permitted to decide; what Brethren they are to forward or thwart in their promotion; and what reports they are to make to their Superiors. In their correspondence with their Inferiors they make use of the common cypher, but when they write to the chiefs they employ a peculiar character which may truly be called Hieroglyphic.

[p. 465]

They are particularly charged with the inspection of the Major Illuminees. "The Scotch Knights," says the Code, "shall be particularly attentive that the Major Illuminees do not neglect to mention in their monthly letters such employments as they may have to dispose of." [*12]

I have shown, in the foregoing chapter, how useful and indeed how necessary this precaution proved for recompensing the zeal of the Brethren. The adept Knigge wished to demonstrate that it might be equally useful for princes, when combined with the scrutinizing Code. "Let us suppose," says he, "that a Prince, having an Illuminee for his Minister, wishes to find a proper person to fill any vacant office; by means of the Scrutators, the Minister may immediately present the faithful portrait of divers personages, from among whom the Prince will only have to make his election." [*13]--But every reader, I hope, will recollect, that in consequence of the oath that has been taken by the Minister to dispose of all places in favour of the Brethren, and that according to the direction of the Knights, he will only present such adepts for those offices as the Order shall have chosen; and thus will Illuminism soon dispose of all benefices, employments, and dignities, and have the entire direction of the whole power of the State.

Meanwhile, until the Sect shall exert this influence over Courts, the Scotch Knights are to acquire an absolute sway in the Masonic Lodges. Their laws on this head deserve particular attention. We shall select the following:

"In every town of any note situated within their district, the Secret Chapters shall establish Lodges for the three ordinary degrees, and shall cause men of sound morals, of good repute, and of easy circumstances, to be received in these Lodges. Such men are much to be sought after, and are to be made Masons, even though they should not be of any service to Illuminism in its ulterior projects." [*14]

"If there already exists a Lodge in any given town, the Knights of Illuminism must find means of establishing a more legitimate one; at least, they should spare no pains to gain the ascendancy in those which they find established, either to reform or to destroy them." [*15]

"They must strongly exhort the members of our lodges not to frequent (without leave of their Superiors) any of those pretended constituted lodges, who hold nothing of the English but their diplomas, and some few symbols and ceremonies which they do not understand. All such Brethren are perfectly ignorant of true Masonry, of its grand object, and its real patrons. Though some of the greatest merit are to be found in such lodges, we nevertheless have strong reasons for not readily allowing them to visit ours." [*16]

"Our Scotch Knights must pay great attention to the regularity of the subordinate lodges, and must above all things attend to the preparation of candidates. It is here that in a private intercourse they will show a man that they have probed him to the quick. Surprise him by some ensnaring question in order to observe whether he has any presence of mind. If he be not staunch to his principles, and should expose his weak side, make him feel how great his necessities are, and how necessary it is for him to be guided entirely by us." [*17]

[p. 466]

"The Deputy Master of the Lodge (who is generally the auditor of the accounts) must also be a member of our Secret Chapter. He will persuade the lodges that they alone dispose of their funds; but he will take care to employ them according to the views of the Order. Should it at any time be necesssary to help one of our brethren, the proposition is made to the lodge; though the brother should not even be a Mason, no matter, some expedient must be found to carry the point."

"No part of the capital, however, must in any case be alienated, that hereafter we may find the necessary funds for the most important undertakings. The tenth part of the subscriptions of these lodges must be annually carried to the Secret Chapter. The treasurer to whom these funds must be transmitted, shall collect them, and endeavour by all kinds of expedients to augment them." [*18]

"But before any part of our own funds are appropriated to the help of any of our Brethren, every effort shall be made to procure the necessary succours from the funds belonging to lodges which do not pertain to our system.--In general, the money which these lodges spend in a useless manner, should be converted to the advancement of our grand object." [*19]

"Whenever a learned Mason shall enter our Order, he must be put under the immediate direction of our Scotch Knights." [*20]

From what code can Weishaupt, or his compiler Knigge, have selected such laws as these for their Scotch Knights? Many readers will be ready to answer, that they must have learned them from a Mandrin, a Cartouche, or some hero of the gibbet. But it is no such thing:--their own ingenuity was sufficient to invent such doctrines. Weishaupt lays down as a principle, that the end justifies the means: he made the application of it when he taught his adepts to rob the libraries of Princes and Religious Orders; his compiler Knigge applies the same principle to the funds of the honest Masons; and we shall soon see what use they made of those funds. It will be in vain for the Illuminee (more zealous for the honour of his founder than for that of the compiler Knigge) to object, that Weishaupt never approved of the degree of Scotch Knight. It is true, he never much admired it. But it is not the system of theft (evidently deduced from his own principles) that he reprobates; not a single expression in any of his letters can denote that he did so; for Knigge might have answered, what do those fools of Masons do with that money? just as Weishaupt had written what do those rascals of Monks do with their rare books? He blamed it not for its principles, but because he thought it a miserable composition: der elende Scottische ritter grade are the terms in which he expresses his contempt. When he corrected this degree, the thefts were not the parts which he expunged; they were too serviceable to the order. Weishaupt, however, consented to let this degree (such as it was) serve as a preparation for the mysteries of his Epoptes; that is to say, for his priests of Illuminism; and when considered in that light it may be truly said, that the Knights brigands were but pitiful and miserable indeed. I will, however, give the reader an opportunity of judging for himself.

[p. 467] [p. 468]

Footnotes

^468:1 Original Writings, Vol. II. Part I. Sect. 11.

^468:2 See this degree, Sect. 4, No. 2 and 3.

^468:3 See second Instruction for this degree, No. 8.

^468:4 Ibid.

^468:5 Ibid. Reversal Letters.

^468:6 Ibid. Sect. 7.

^468:7 See the Last word of Philo, Page 100.

^468:8 Chap. XI.

^468:9 When treating in the Second Volume of the religious and political tenets of the Martinists, I did not extend my  to their doctrine of Idealism, and I frankly confess that I did not sufficiently understand that part of their Apocalypse. Since the publication of that Volume, however, I have met with a Gentleman  capable of comprehending any intelligible system whatever; I mean the Abbe Bertins, residing at present at Oxford. He reproached me in terms similar to those in which some other people had reproached me respecting the Rosicrucians. What you have written, said he, is ALL true, but you have not told the WHOLE truth. I had indeed said a great deal of those gentry, and I never will advance any point which I cannot prove. The Abbe Bertins condescended to give me some little insight into the doctrines of this famous St. Martin. It fully confirmed every thing which I had advanced on the tenets of the Martinists, with respect to the nature of the soul, and to the pretended origin of that soul forming a part of God, of the essence of God, and of the same substance--But what I had not said was, that according to the same system matter has no real existence, or at least has such a separate existence, and is so entirely null with respect to the soul, that there neither is nor can be any relation whatever between it and the soul; in fine, that it is, with respect to us, as if it were not. I had surmised these consequences in a  which I had had with an estimable young man, the Vicomte de Maimbourg, whom the Martinists had endeavoured to taint with their erroneous doctrines. When they came to treat of the pleasure of the senses, throw that to the fire, they say in their treatise of morality; to the fire: give to the fire all it asks; that is not the spirit, all that does not affect the soul; and this fire is matter; it is the senses, the body. It is not in the same sense that the Martinist tells us, "It is in vain that the enemy pursues me with his illusions. Matter shall not have remembrance of me here below. Does man taste the pleasures of matter? When the senses feel pain or pleasure, is it not easy to perceive that it is not man that feels this pain or pleasure?" (No. 235, of the Man of Desire, by the Author of a work On Errors and on Truth). How frightful is this enigmatical language! If all the passions and senses are foreign to man, if he may gratify them with affecting his soul either for the better or for the worse, what monstrous consequences must ensue to morals! And indeed a Danish Martinist was consulted by the Viscount, who, more candid than the recruiting Brethren, answered, "Beware, dear Sir, of ever entering into our mysteries;--I am unfortunately engaged, and should in vain attempt to withdraw myself from them. I could not succeed; but, for your part, take care never to deliver yourself over to those men." The Viscount followed his advice. As to the Abbe Bertins, he was too much for Mr. de St. Martin, who had to argue with a man that perpetually objected--if my soul is part of God, and of the substance of God, my soul must be God. After three months lessons, which the reader will readily suppose the Abbe Bertins only submitted to through curiosity, the learned teacher violently exclaimed, "I see I never shall be able to convince  [p. 468] a Divine:" and thus Mr. de St. Martin took leave of a scholar far more fitted to teach him real knowledge than to receive his sophisticated lessons.

^468:10 See this degree, Art. 8. Instruction on the Masonic Hieroglyphics.

^468:11 See First Instruction for this degree.

^468:12 Second Instruction, No. 12.

^468:13 Last Observations of Philo, Page 95.

^468:14 Third Instruction for the same degree, No. 1.

^468:15 Third Instruction for the same degree, No. 3.

^468:16 Ibid. No. 5.

^468:17 Ibid. No. 9.

^468:18 Third Instruction for the same degree, No. 12.

^468:19 Ib. 13.

^468:20 Third Instruction for the same degree, No. 16.

     
Code of the Illuminati: Part III of Memoirs Illustrating the History of Jacobinism, by A Barruel, tr. Robert Edward Clifford [1798], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 469]

  

CHAP. IX.

  

Seventh Part of the Code of the Illuminees.--Class of the Mysteries.--Of the lesser Mysteries; the Epopt or Priest of Illuminism.

HOWEVER accurately the Sect may have ascertained the progress of its adepts in the preparatory degrees, still Weishaupt seems to fear that some may be startled when they come to be acquainted with the ultimate views of Illuminism. He wishes therefore to lead them to his darkest plots by gradual shades. Hence the division of lesser and greater mysteries, and the subdivision into degrees. The first degree into which the adepts are initiated in this class is that of Epopt; but these new dignitaries are only known by that title to the inferior class; the higher degrees call them Priests. [*1]

Let not the reader take alarm at the denomination of lesser mysteries, as if they were of no consequence; for he will gradually, as he ascends, discover their dark designs and dealings. But before the adept is allowed to proceed, he must collect every thing that his mind, his memory, or all his former lessons can afford, of anti-religious and anti-social principles, to enable him to give written answers to the following questions:

"I. Do you think the present state of nations corresponds with the object for which man was placed upon earth? For example, do governments, civil associations, or religion, attain the ends for which they were designed? Do the sciences to which men apply furnish them with real lights; are they conducive (as they ought to be) to real happiness? Are they not, on the contrary, the offspring of numberless wants, and of the unnatural state in which men live? Are they not the crude inventions of crazy brains, or of geniuses laboriously subtle?"

"II. What civil associations and what sciences do you think tend or do not tend to the grand object? Did there not formerly exist an order of things more simple? What sort of an idea can you form of that ancient state of the world?"

"III. Now that we have passed through all those nullities (or through all those useless and vain forms of our civil constitutions), do you think that it would be possible to return back to the original and noble simplicity of our forefathers? Supposing we had returned to it, would not our past misfortunes render that state more durable? Would not all mankind be in a similar state

[p. 470]

with an individual who, having enjoyed the sweets of innocence during his childhood, and fallen a prey to error and his passions during his youth, at length, instructed by the risks he has run, and by experience, endeavours to return to that innocence and purity which rendered his childhood so happy?"

"IV. What means were best to be employed for restoring mankind to that happy state? Should it be by public measures, by violent revolutions, or by any means that should ensure success?"

"V. Does not the Christian Religion in all its purity afford some indications, does it not hint at some state or happiness similar to this? Does it not even prepare it?"

"VI. Is this holy and simple religion really what different Sects profess it to be at this present day, or is it more perfect?"

"VII. Can this more perfect Christianity be known or taught? Could the world (such as it now is) support a stronger degree of light? Do you not think that, before the numberless obstacles could be removed, it would be proper to preach to mankind a religion more perfect, a philosophy more elevated, and the art of each one's governing himself according to his greatest advantage?"

"VIII. Would not our moral and political views lead men to oppose this blessing? From our political and moral views then, or from an ill-judged interest, or even from deep-rooted prejudices, these obstacles originate. If men, therefore, oppose the renovation of human happiness, is it not because, slaves to ancient forms, they reject and reprobate every thing which is not to be found in those forms, though it should be the most natural, the grandest, and most noble of all possible things? Does not personal interest, alas! at present predominate over the general interest of mankind?"

"IX. Must we not then silently and gradually remedy those disorders before we can flatter ourselves with the re-establishment of the golden age? Meanwhile, is it not adviseable to disseminate the truth in Secret Societies?"

"X. Can we trace any such secret doctrine in the ancient schools of the sages, or in the allegorical lessons given by Jesus Christ, the Saviour and liberator of mankind, to his most intimate disciples? Have you not observed a sort of gradual education in that art which you see has been transmitted to our Order, from the highest antiquity?" [*2]

Should the answers of the Candidate to all these questions show that the progress he has made in his gradual education is not what the Order had reason to expect, he will solicit in vain the advancement he hoped for. Should his answers be equivocal, he will receive orders to prepare new ones, or to be more explicit. [*3] But if he show the proper dispositions, and the Sect foresee no probability of his being startled at the lessons of the Hierophant on those grand objects which are to be disclosed to him, the Superiors give their assent, and a synod of the illuminized priesthood is held. The day of the initiation is fixed. At the hour agreed upon, the introducing adept waits upon his new proselyte and takes him into a carriage. The windows being closed, the Candidate blind-folded, and the coachman continually winding and varying his course, are precautions more than sufficient to hinder the proselyte from

[p. 471]

ever being able to trace the spot to which he is conducted. Led by the hand, and still blind-folded, he slowly ascends to the porch of the temple of the mysteries. His guide then divests him of the Masonic insignia, puts a drawn sword into his hand, takes off the bandage from his eyes, and leaves him, strictly forbidding him to proceed a step until he hears the voice which is to call him. He is then left to his reflections.

With respect to the pomp of the mysteries, when the Brethren celebrate them in all their splendour, the walls of the temple are hung in red, and lighted up with an immense number of candles or lamps. A voice is at length heard, saying, "Come, enter, unhappy fugitive! The fathers wait for you; enter and shut the door after you." The proselyte  the voice which calls him. At the bottom of the temple he beholds a throne under a rich canopy with a table before it, on which lie a crown, a sceptre, a sword, some pieces of gold money, and precious jewels, all interlaid with chains. At the foot of this table, on a scarlet cushion, is thrown a white robe, a girdle, and the simple ornaments of the sacerdotal costume. The proselyte, standing at the bottom of the temple and in front of the throne, is addressed by the Hierophant as follows: "Behold and fix thine eyes on the splendour of the throne. If all this childish mummery, these crowns, these scepters, and all these monuments of human degradation, have any charms in your eyes, speak; and it may be in our power to gratify your wishes. Unhappy man! if such are your objects, if you wish to rise to power that you may assist in the oppression of your Brethren, go, and at your peril make the trial. Are you in quest of power, of force, of false honours, and of such superfluities, we will labour for you; we will procure such transient advantages for you, we will place you as near the throne as you can desire, and will leave you to the consequences of your folly; but observe, our sanctuary shall be for ever shut against you.

"On the contrary, do you wish to be initiated into wisdom, would you teach the art of rendering men better, more free and more happy, then be welcome, be thrice welcome. Here you behold the attributes of Royalty, and there, on the cushion, you see the modest vestment of innocence; make thy choice, and let it be the choice which thy heart shall dictate."

If, contrary to all expectations, the Candidate should make choice of the Regalia, he hears a thundering voice exclaim, "Monster, retire! cease to pollute this holy place! Begone, fly, before it is too late." At these words he is led out of the temple by the Brother who introduced him.--But should he chuse the white robe, how different will be the language! "Health and salutation to thy great and noble soul! Such was the choice we expected from you. But stop; it is not permitted to you to invest yourself with that robe, until you have learned to what you are in future destined by us." [*4]

The Candidate is then ordered to be seated. The Code of the Mysteries is opened, and the Brethren in silence attend to the oracles of the Hierophant.

Now, reader, you who have been through so long a course of trials, questions, rituals, and insidious degrees; who have been led through all the preparatory labyrinth of illuminized education, if still you be in the dark as to

[p. 472]

the object of such precautions and artifices, follow me into this den which the Sect dares to call the holy place; seat thyself by the adept, and listen to their Oracles.--This is the master-piece of the founder. Hear with patience, though your indignation should be excited by his monstrous fertility in Sophism, in impiety, in blasphemy against your gospel and your God, treachery against your Magistrates, your country, and its laws, against your titles and your rights, against those of your ancestors and your progeny--Let Kings and Subjects, the rich and poor, the merchant and the labourer, let every class of citizens attend; let them hearken, and learn at length what hellish plots are contriving against them in the dark recesses of these diabolical dens. In vain shall the lethargic soul accuse us of credulity or groundless terrors. Those lessons which the Sect view as the master-piece of their code lie before me, such as they flowed from the pen of the Legislator, such as they were published by order of the Sovereign who seized the archives of the Sect, that all nations might learn the dreadful dangers with which they were menaced. [*5] I have them again embellished by the compiler of the Sect, corrected and reviewed by the Council of the Areopagites, attested by the compiler as true and conformable to the copy signed and sealed with the signet of the Sect. [*6]

Read then, and rock thyself to sleep in the cradle of voluntary ignorance if thou canst, content with having assured thyself that every conspiracy against the existence of civil society or of all government whatever, every conspiracy against the existence of property, can be but a chimera.

It is to the Candidate, and in presence of the Brethren already initiated to these mysteries, that the Illuminizing President addresses the following discourse:

Discourse of the Hierophant for the Degree of Priest or Epopt of the Illuminees. [*7]

"At length (he says) the time of your reward succeeds to the trials of an assiduous preparation. At present you know yourself, and have learned to know others; you are what you ought to be, such as we wished to see you. It will now be your duty to conduct others.--What you already know, and what you are about to learn, will expose to your view the extreme weakness of human nature. In this advantage alone lies the true source of power which one man exercises over another. The dark clouds dissipate; the sun of light rises; the gates of the sanctuary unfold; a portion of our mysteries is going to be revealed to you. Let the gates of the temple be shut against the prophane; I will only speak to the Illustrious, to the Holy, to the Elect. I speak to those who have ears to hear, who have tongues which they can command, and who have minds sufficiently enlightened to understand.

"Surrounded by the Illustrious, you are about to enter into that class which bears an essential part in the government of our sublime Order. But do you know what it is to govern, can you conceive what this right can be in a secret society? To exercise such an empire, not over the vulgar or the grandees

[p. 473]

of the people, but over the most accomplished men, over men in all stations, of all nations, of all religions; to reign over them without any exterior constraint, to keep them united by durable bonds, to inspire them all with one spirit; to govern with all possible precision, activity, and silence, men spread over the whole surface of the globe, even to its utmost confines. This is a problem which no political wisdom has ever been able to solve. To reunite the distinctions of Equality, Despotism, and Liberty; to prevent the treasons and persecutions which would be the inevitable consequences; of nothing, to create great things; to stand firm against the swelling torrent of evils and abuse; to make happiness universally shine on human nature; would be a master-piece of morality and polity re-united. The civil constitutions of states offer but little aid to such an undertaking. Fear and violence are their grand engines; with us, each one is voluntarily to lend his assistance. . . . Were men what they ought to be, we might on their first admission into our society explain the greatness of our plans to them; but the lure of a secret is perhaps the only means of retaining those who might turn their backs upon us as soon as their curiosity had been gratified: The ignorance or imperfect education of many makes it requisite that they should be first formed by our moral lessons. The complaints, the murmurs of others against the trials to which we are obliged to condemn them, sufficiently show you what pains we must bestow, with what patience and what constancy we must be endowed; how intensely the love of the grand object must glow in our hearts, to make us keep true to our posts in the midst of such unthankful labour; and not abandon for ever the hope of regenerating mankind."

"It is to partake with us of these labours that you have been called. To observe others day and night; to form them, to succour them, to watch over them; to stimulate the courage of the pusillanimous, the activity and the zeal of the lukewarm; to instruct the ignorant; to raise up those who have fallen, to fortify those who stagger; to repress the ardour of rashness, to prevent disunion; to veil the faults and weaknesses of others; to guard against the acute inquisitiveness of wit; to prevent imprudence and treason; in short, to maintain the subordination to and esteem of our Superiors, and friendship and union among the Brethren, are the duties, among others still greater, that we impose upon you."

"Have you any idea of secret societies; of the rank they hold, or of the parts they perform in the events of this world? Do you view them as insignificant or transient meteors? O, Brother! God and Nature, when disposing of all things according to the proper times and places, had their admirable ends in view; and they make use of these secret societies as the only and as the indispensable means of conducting us thither."

"Hearken, and may you be filled with admiration! This is the point whither all the moral tends; it is on this that depends the knowledge of the rights of secret societies, of all our doctrine, of all our ideas of good and bad, of just and unjust. You are here situated between the world past and the world to come. Cast your eyes boldly on what has passed, and in an instant ten

[p. 474]

thousand bolts shall fall, and thousands of gates shall burst open to futurity--You shall behold the inexhaustible riches of God and of Nature, the degradation and the dignity of man. You shall see the world and human nature in its youth, if not in its childhood, even there where you thought to find it in its decrepitude and verging toward its ruin and ignominy."

Should this long exordium, which I have nevertheless abridged, have fatigued the reader, let him rest and reflect for an instant. The enthusiastic strain which predominates in this first part pervades the whole. Weishaupt thought it necessary to his object to afford his proselytes no time for reflection. He begins by inflaming them; he promises great things; though this impious and artful mountebank knows that he is going to fob them off with the greatest follies, the grossest impieties and errors. I have called him an impious and artful mountebank; but that is falling far short of what the proofs attest. Weishaupt knows that he deceives, and wishes to delude his proselytes in the most atrocious manner. When he has misled, he scoffs at them, and with his confidants derides their imbecility. He has, however, his reasons for beguiling them, and knows for what uses he intends them when he has infused into them his erroneous and vicious principles. The greater the consideration they may enjoy in the world, the more heartily he laughs at their delusion. He thus writes to his intimate friends: "You cannot conceive how much my degree of Priest is admired by our people. But what is the most extraordinary is, that several great protestant and reformed divines, who are of our Order, really believe that that part of the discourse which alludes to religion contains the true spirit and real sense of Christianity; poor mortals! what could I not make you believe?--Candidly I own to you, that I never thought of becoming the founder of a religion." [*8] In this manner does the impostor delude his followers, and then scoffs at them in private. These great divines were probably of that class among the protestants which we should, among us, call apostates, a Syeyes or an Autun, for example; for it is impossible that any man endowed with common sense or candour could avoid seeing that the whole tendency of this long discourse is the total overthrow of all religion and of all government.

A second observation well worthy the notice of our readers is, the extreme importance which the Sect gives to secret societies, and what mighty expectations it grounds on their mysterious existence. Let nations and chiefs of nations examine themselves, reflect whether they have ever calculated the means and importance of these secret societies so well as those who founded them; and say, whether fear and diffidence on the one side should not keep pace with the expectations and confidence of the other. But let us return to the Lodge wherein Weishaupt initiates his adepts.

Continuing his enthusiastic strain, the Hierophant informs the proselyte, that Nature, having a great plan to develope, begins by the lesser and most imperfect parts; that she then regularly proceeds to the middle terms, to bring things to a state of perfection; which state may serve as a point whence she may again depart, to raise them to a higher order of perfection.

[p. 475]

"Nature (says he) makes us begin at infancy, from infancy she raises us to manhood. She at first left us in the savage state, but soon brought us to civilization, perhaps that we might be more sensible, more enraptured and tenacious of what we are, from viewing the contrast of what we were. But to what changes, and those of an order infinitely more important, does our future destiny lead us!"

Were the candidate master of his own reason, he must conclude from these principles, that human nature had acquired perfection when passing from the savage state to that of civil society; that if he. is still to acquire perfection it can never be by returning to his primitive state. But sophisters have their tortuosities, and the adepts are involved in a folly and blindness, with which the Almighty God permits them to be stricken, since they prefer error to truth, and impiety to Christianity.

"As has the individual man (continues the Hierophant) so human nature in the aggregate has its childhood, its youth, its manhood, and its old age. At each of these periods mankind learn and are subject to fresh wants--hence arise their political and moral revolutions--It is at the age of manhood that human nature appears in all its dignity. It is then that, taught by long experience, man conceives at length how great a misfortune it is for hire to invade the rights of others, to avail himself of some few advantages, purely exterior, to raise himself, to the prejudice of others. It is then that he sees and feels the happiness and dignity of man."

"The first age of mankind is that of savage and uncouth nature. A family is the whole society; hunger and thirst easily quenched, a shelter from the inclemency of the seasons, a woman, and, after fatigue, rest, are then the only wants. At that period men enjoyed the two most inestimable blessings EQUALITY and LIBERTY; they enjoyed them to their utmost extent; they would have forever enjoyed them, had they chosen to follow the track which Nature had traced for them--or had it not entered the plans of God and Nature first to show man for what happiness he was destined; happiness the more precious, as he had begun by tasting it; happiness so early lost, but instantaneously regretted and fruitlessly sought after, until he should have learned how to make proper use of his strength, and how to conduct himself in his intercourse with the rest of mankind. In his primitive state he was destitute of the conveniencies of life, but he was not on that account unhappy; not knowing them, he did not feel the want of them. Health was his ordinary state, and physical pain was his only source of uneasiness--Oh happy mortals! who were not sufficiently enlightened to disturb the repose of your mind, or to feel those great agents of our miseries the love of power and of distinctions, the propensity to sensuality, the thirst after the representative signs of all wealth, those truly original sins with all their progeny, envy, avarice, intemperance, sickness, and all the tortures of imagination!"

Thus we see this primitive and savage state, this first essay of Nature, already transformed (in the mouth of the Hierophant) into the happiest state that man ever knew: Equality and Liberty are the sovereign principles of happiness in that state. Should the reader be as much blinded as the proselyte,

[p. 476]

and not see whither all this is tending, let him proceed, and hear how man was deprived of this happiness by the institution of civil societies.

"An infortunate germ soon vivifies in the breast of man, and his primitive peace and felicity disappear."

"As families multiplied, the means of subsistence began to fail; the nomade (or roaming) life ceased, and PROPERTY started into existence; men chose habitations; agriculture made them intermix. Language became universal; living together, one man began to measure his strength with another, and the weaker were distinguished from the stronger. This undoubtedly created the idea of mutual defence, of one individual governing divers families reunited, and of thus defending their persons and their fields against the invasion of an enemy; but hence LIBERTY was ruined in its foundation, and EQUALITY disappeared."

"Oppressed with wants unknown until that period, man perceived that his own powers were no longer sufficient. To supply this defect, the weakest imprudently submitted to the strongest or to the wisest; not however to be ill-treated, but that he might be protected, conducted, and enlightened.--All submission, therefore, even of the most unpolished mortal, has an existence only in as much as he wants the person to whom he subjects himself, and on the express condition that that person can succour him. His power ceases when my weakness no longer exists, or when another acquires superiority. Kings are fathers; the paternal power is at an end when the child has acquired his strength. The father would offend his children if he pretended to prolong his rights beyond that term. Every man having attained to years of discretion may govern himself, when a whole nation therefore is arrived at that period, there can exist no further plea for keeping it in wardship. "

In putting such language into the mouth of the Hierophant, the founder of Illuminism had too well studied the strength and illusion of words; he had been too cautious in the choice and preparation of his adepts ever to fear that any of them would answer, "You who thus give oracles, what do you understand by nations having attained their majority? Without doubt such as, having emerged from ignorance and barbarism, have acquired the lights necesssary for their happiness; and to what can they be indebted for these lights and this happiness, if not to their civil association? It will be then, if ever, that they will find it both reasonable and necessary to remain under the guardianship of their laws and of their government, lest they should fall back into the barbarism and ignorance of the roaming clans, or be precipitated into the horrors of anarchy, from revolution to revolution, under the successive  of the brigand, of the executioner of the sophisticated despot, or under that of a sophister Syeyes and his colegislative Marsellois, of a Robespierre and his guillotines, of the Triumvirs and their proscriptions. The populace alone in the minority of ignorance, the sophisters alone in the majority of wickedness and corruption, shall applaud thy mysteries."

Certain of not meeting with such reflexions from the adepts, the Hierophant continues to inculcate his principles by attributing every thing to strength, and destroying all principles of morality or of reason, though he will

[p. 477]

affect the tone of both; and ends by forming his judgment on man in society, as he would judge tigers and wild beasts in the forests.--These are his new doctrines.

"Never did strength submit to weakness.--Nature has destined the weak to serve, because they have wants; the strong man to govern, because he can be useful. Let the one lose his force, and the other acquire it, they will then change situations, and he that obeyed will command. He that stands in need of another, also depends upon him, and he has renounced to him his rights. Hence few wants is the first step towards liberty. It is for this reason that the savages are the most enlightened of men, and perhaps they alone are free. [*9] When wants are durable, servitude is also lasting. Safety is a durable want. Had men refrained from all injustice, they would have remained free; it was injustice which made them bend beneath the yoke. To acquire safety, they deposited the whole force in the hands of one man; and thus created a new evil, that of fear. The work of their own hands frightened them; and to live in safety they robbed themselves of that very safety. This is the cause of our governments.--Where then shall we find a protecting force? In union; but how rare, alas! is that union, except in our new and secret associations, better guided by wisdom, and leagued in straiter bonds! and hence it is that nature itself inclines us toward these associations."

Subtle as is the artifice in this description of human nature, and in that affectation of beholding on the one side nothing but tyrants and despots, and on the other only oppressed and trembling slaves in the state of society; whatever share Nature may have had in the institution of social order, or in reclaiming mankind from forests and wildernesses to live under laws and a common chief; the Hierophant nevertheless exultingly exclaims, "Such is the faithful and philosophic picture of despotism and of liberty, of our wishes and of our fears. Despotism was engrafted on liberty, and from despotism shall liberty once more spring. The re-union of men in society is at once the cradle and the grave of despotism; it is  the grave and cradle of liberty. We were once possessed of liberty, and we lost it but to find it again and never lose it more; to learn by the very privation of it the art of better enjoying it in future." Reader, observe these words; if they do not evidently point out the object of the Sect, if you do not perceive the wish of bringing mankind back to those times of the nomade herds of savages, and of men destitute of property, laws, or government, read and convince yourself by what follows: "Nature drew men from the savage state and re-united them in civil societies; from these societies we proceed to further wishes, and to a wiser choice (aus den staaten tretten wir in neue kluger gewahlte). New associations present themselves to these wishes, and by their means we return to the state whence we came, not again to run the former course, but better to enjoy our new destiny--let us explain this mystery."

"Men then had passed from their peaceable state to the yoke of servitude; Eden, that terrestrial paradise, was lost to them. Subjects of sin and slavery, they were reduced to servitude and obliged to gain their bread by the sweat of their brow.--In the number of these men some promised to protect, and thus became their

[p. 478]

chiefs--at first they reigned over herds or clans--these were soon conquered, or united together in order to form a numerous people; hence arose nations and their chiefs kings of nations. At the formation of states and nations, the world ceased to be a great family, to be a single empire; the great bond of nature was rent asunder."

The impudence of such assertions must astonish the reader; he will ask himself can there possibly exist beings thus belying evidence itself, and pretending to show the universe forming but one and the same family, and the grand bond of nature in those roaming and scattered herds, where the child can scarcely walk when he is separated from his father? How is it possible to represent mankind as divorcing from the great family, at the very period when they unite under the same chiefs and the same laws, for their mutual protection and safety? But, reader, suspend thy indignation. Let us call up in evidence against the Sect those brigands and  murderers which it decorated with the high-sounding title of Patriots, and which it stimulated to bloodshed and methodized murder by the fanaticizing sounds of people, nation, country. At the very time that they rend the air with such accents, with names so dear as they pretend, hear the maledictions which their mysteries heap upon every people, every nation, every country.

At that period, when men re-united and formed nations, "they ceased to acknowledge a common name--Nationalism, or the love for a particular nation, took place of the general love. With the division of the globe, and of its states, benevolence was restrained within certain limits, beyond which it could no longer trespass.--Then it became a merit to extend the bounds of states at the expence of the neighbouring ones. Then it became lawful to abuse, offend, and despise foreigners, to attain that end--and this virtue was styled patriotism; and he was styled a patriot who, just toward his countrymen, and unjust to others, was blind to the merits of strangers, and believed the very vices of his own country to be perfections.--In such a case, why not restrain that love within a narrower compass, to citizens living in the same town, or to the members of one family; or why even should not each person have concentrated his affections in himself. We really beheld Patriotism generating Localism, the confined spirit of families, and at length Egoism. Hence the origin of states and governments, and of civil society, has really proved to be the seeds of discord, and Patriotism has found its punishment in itself . . .Diminish, reject that love of the country, and mankind will once more learn to know and love each other as men. Partiality being cast aside, that union of hearts will once more appear and expand itself--on the contrary, extend the bonds of Patriotism, and you will teach man that it is impossible to blame the closer contraction of love, to a single family, to a single person, in a word, to the strictest Egoism."

But let us abridge these blasphemies. The Hierophant, under pretence of his universal love, may vent his spleen against the distinctions of Greeks or Romans, of French or English, of Italian or Spanish, of Pagan or Jew, of Christians or Mahometans, which denote nations and their religions: he may repeat, if he pleases, that amidst these different denominations that of man is 

[p. 479]

overlooked; what will be the result of such declamation?--With our illuminizing doctor, in common with every class of the disorganizing Sophisters, is not this pretended universal love to be a cloak for the most odious hypocrisy? He only pretends to universal philanthropy, that he may dispense with loving his neighbour. He detests the love of one's country, only because he detests the laws of nations; he cannot even brook the love of one's family (he has given us a fine specimen in the person of his sister), and he will substitute that universal love because he is no more attached to them than he is to the Chinese, the Tartar, or the Hottentot, which he neither has seen nor ever will see, and that all human nature may be equally indifferent to him. He extends the bond that it may lose its elasticity and discontinue its action.--He calls himself citizen of the universe, that he may cease to be a citizen in his own country, a friend in society, or a fond father and dutiful child in his own family. His love, he tells us, extends from pole to pole, that he may love nothing that is near him. Such is the philanthropy of our Cosmopolites!

The proselyte stands astonished in stupid admiration at these expressions of universal love.--The Hierophant proceeds to the Codes of Nations. Still in extasy at these doctrines, he learns that they are in direct opposition to the laws of nature; nor will he even perceive that his new code is in direct opposition to the very first laws of nature, as it eradicates the love of one's own family and that of one's country. Nor will he ask, why the fulfilling of his duty toward his fellow-countrymen should hinder him from treating the barbarian or the savage with proper affection? Then follow new sophisms, to persuade the adept that the original fault of man was, the dereliction of the Equality and Liberty of the savage state by the institution of civil laws.

Here, more than ever, are calumny and hatred blended with enthusiasm by the Hierophant, who, reviewing the different ages of the world since the existence of civil institutions, pictures nations as groaning under oppression, despotism, and slavery, or glutted with the blood of wars and revolutions, which always terminate in tyranny. At one time it is the representation of Kings surrounding themselves with herds or legions called soldiers, in order to gratify their ambition by conquests on strangers, or to reign by terror over their enslaved subjects; at other times, it is the people themselves brandishing their arms, not to attack tyranny in its source, but merely to change their tyrants. If they think of giving themselves representatives, it is these very representatives, who, forgetting that they only hold their missions and powers from the people, form Aristocracies and Oligarchies, which all end by flowing into the general reservoir of Monarchy and Despotism. He never loses sight of his sophism of human nature degraded and vilified under the yoke of tyranny. These declamations, enthusiastically pronounced, at length make the proselyte exclaim, in unison with his master, "Are such then the consequences of the institution of states and of civil society? O folly! oh people! that you did not foresee the fate that awaited you; that you should yourselves have seconded your despots in degrading human nature to servitude, and even to the condition of the brute!"

[p. 480]

Could a true Philosopher have been present, his heart must have burst with generous indignation; he would have abruptly challenged the Hierophant to declare whence he had learned to metamorphose the annals of society into those of brigands and monsters? Is the history of man then reduced to the records of plagues, famines, storms, tempests, or of convulsed elements? Have no serene days shone on man? Shall the sun be represented as a malevolent object, because it is sometimes obscured by fogs or clouds? Are we to fly from our habitations because many have been destroyed by fire? Shall we curse life and health because we are subject to pains and infirmities? Why else this fable painting of the disasters which have in the course of ages befallen civil society? Why are we to be silent on the misfortunes from which it has preserved us, or on the advantages which it has heaped on man, in reclaiming him from the forests?

But the voice of reason cannot penetrate into the den of conspiracy. The oracles of Weishaupt shall there be confidently repeated by the Hierophant. He draws nigher and nigher to the grand object, to the means of making those misfortunes disappear, which originate, as he pretends, in the institution of laws and governments. "Oh nature!" he continues, "how great and incontestible are thy rights? It is from the womb of disaster and mutual destruction that the means of safety spring! Oppression disappears because it meets with abettors, and reason regains its rights because people wish to stifle it. He, at least, who wishes to mislead others, should seek to govern them by the advantages of instruction and science. Kings themselves at length perceive, that there is little glory in reigning over ignorant herds--Legislators begin to acquire wisdom, and they favour property and industry:--perverse motives propagate the sciences, and Kings protect them as agents of oppression. Other men profit of them to investigate the origin of their rights. They at length seize on that unknown mean of forwarding a revolution in the human mind, and of thus triumphing for ever over oppression. But the triumph would be of short duration, and man would fall back into his degraded state, had not Providence in those distant ages husbanded the means which it has transmitted down to us, of secretly meditating and at length operating the salvation of human kind.

"Those means are, the secret schools of Philosophy. Those schools have been in all ages the archives of nature and OF THE RIGHTS OF MAN. These schools shall one day retrieve the fall of human nature, AND PRINCES AND NATIONS SHALL DISAPPEAR FROM THE FACE OF THE EARTH, and that without any violence. Human nature shall form one great family, and the earth shall become the habitation of the man of reason.--Morality shall alone produce this great Revolution. The day shall come when each father shall, like Abraham and the Patriarchs, become the Priest and absolute Sovereign of his family. REASON SHALL BE THE ONLY BOOK OF LAWS, the sole Code of man. THIS IS ONE OF OUR GRAND MYSTERIES. Attend to the demonstration of it, and learn how it has been transmitted down to us."

I have already said, that had my object been only to prove the reality of a Conspiracy formed by Illuminism against the existence of every society,

[p. 481]

every civil Code, and every nation; these lessons of the Hierophant would render every other proof superfluous. But that the reader may know the full extent of the dangers which threaten us, it is necesssary that he should be shown how those plots of frenzy become really transformed into plots of profound wickedness; that he should be acquainted with the means employed enthusiastically to inflame the minds of whole legions of adepts. Let us then attend to the Hierophant. If patience be necessary to follow him, greater still has it been necessary to enable me to transcribe such doctrines.

"What strange blindness can have induced men to imagine that human nature was always to be governed as it has hitherto been.

"Where shall we find a man acquainted with all the resources of nature? Who dare prescribe limits, and say thus far shalt thou proceed, and no farther, to that nature, whose law is unity in the variegated infinite? Whence shall issue the command, that it shall always run the same course, and for ever renew it again--Where is the being who has condemned men, the best, the wisest, and the most enlightened of men, to perpetual slavery? Why should human nature be bereft of its most perfect attribute, that of governing itself? Why are those persons to be always led who are capable of conducting themselves? Is it then impossible for mankind or at least the greater part, to come to their majority? If one be enabled to do it why should not another; show to one person what you have taught another; teach him the grand art of mastering his passions and regulating his desires; teach him, that from his earliest youth he stands in need of others; that he must abstain from giving offence if he wishes not to be offended; that he must be beneficent if he wishes to receive favours. Let him be patient, indulgent, wise, and benevolent. Let these virtues be made easy to him by principles, experience, and examples; and you will soon see whether he needs another to conduct him? If it be true, that the greater part of mankind are too weak or too ignorant to conceive these simple truths, and to be convinced by them; Oh then our happiness will be at an end, and let us cease to labour at rendering mankind better, or at seeking to enlighten them."

"Oh prejudice! oh contradiction of the human mind! shall the empire of reason, the capacity of governing ourselves, be but a chimerical dream for the greater number of men, while on the other hand prejudice leads us to believe that such is the inherent right of the children of Kings, of reigning families, and of every man whom wisdom or particular circumstances render independent!"

What horrid artifice is contained in these sentences! The poor proselyte really imagines that he sees the most striking contradictions in the very foundations of our civil societies. He really thinks that we believe them to rest on the hereditary privilege of Kings and of their children, to be born with all the necessary wisdom to conduct themselves, while nature has refused such gifts to other mortals; though Weishaupt, who scoffs in private at the credulity and folly of his adepts, knows as well as we do, that such has never been the idea even of the most ignorant populace. He  that we believe Kings to be born children like other men, with the same weaknesses, the same passions,

[p. 482]

and like incapacity; he knows as well as we do, that the gift of conducting ourselves and others is to be acquired by education, and by the helps and lights with which a man may be encompassed; and we know as well as he does, that the child of the most obscure parentage would often make a better king than many Sovereigns; as he might also be an excellent magistrate, or a great general, had he received a proportionate education. But does there hence follow any contradiction in civil society, because, uncertain as to the persons who would be the most proper for governing, but certain of the intrigues and broils which would accompany the election of Kings, it has obviated those inconveniencies by hereditary crowns and empires? And after all, what is the meaning of that sophisticated pretence founded on the  of being able to conduct oneself? Question the most prudent and the wisest of men, and he will readily say, though I do not stand in need of laws, magistrates, or Kings, to restrain me from being unjust toward others, or from oppressing and plundering, I yet want their assistance to secure me from being oppressed or plundered. The less I am inclined to injure others, the more I need the protection of the law from all injury. You are pleased to call my submission to the laws slavery; I, on the contrary, look to it as my safety, and as the guarantee of that liberty which enables me to do good and to live happy and at peace in society. I have never heard of laws which forbad me to live like an honest man. It is the wicked man only who recognises liberty but in the impunity of his crimes; I scorn such liberty, and bless the hand that deprives me of it. You call him a tyrant and a despot, I call him my King and my benefactor. The better I know how to conduct myself with respect to others, the more thankful I am to him who hinders others from behaving ill to me.

The reader must pardon me these reflexions; I know they are superfluous to those who think; but may not this work fall into the hands of persons as credulous as the unhappy proselyte. In exposing the envenomed weapons of the Sect, let it not be said that I withhold the antidote. Should any be still blind enough not to perceive the tendency of all these sophisms of Illuminism, let them hearken to the Sect ardently declaring their hopes; the Hierophant continues:

"Are we then fallen from our dignity so low as not even to feel our chains, or to hug them, and not cherish the flattering hope of being able to break them, or to recover our liberty, not by rebellion or violence (for the time is not yet come), but by force of reason. Because a thing cannot be accomplished to-morrow, should we despair of ever being able to effect it? Abandon such short-sighted men to their own reasonings and their own conclusions; they may conclude again and again; but nature will continue to act. Inexorable to all their interested remonstrances, she proceeds, and nothing can impede her majestic course. Some events may take place contrary to our wishes; but they will all rectify of themselves; inequalities will be levelled, and a lasting calm shall succeed the tempest. The only conclusion to be drawn from all these objections is, that we are too much accustomed to the present state of things, or perhaps self-interest has too great sway over us, to let us own that it is not impossible to attain universal independence--

[p. 483]

[paragraph continues] Let then the laughers laugh and the scoffers scoff. He that observes and compares what Nature has done with what she does at present, will soon see, that in spite of all our intrigues she tends invariably toward her object. Her proceedings are imperceptible to him who reflects but little; they are visible only to the sage whose mind's eye penetrates even to the womb of time.--From the summit of the mount he discovers in the horizon that distant country, the very existence of which is not surmised by the servile multitude of the plain."

The principal means which Weishaupt. offers to his adepts for the conquest of this land of promise, this soil of independence, are, to diminish the wants of the people, and to enlighten their minds. Hearken to his lessons, you who, heretofore protected by your laws, peaceably exercised an honourable and lucrative profession, and you who, once rivals of the flourishing commerce of Great Britain on the immensity of the ocean, are now but the sorrowful and dejected coasters of the Texel, imprudent disciples of a disorganizing Sect.--Learn, that it is in the secret hatred sworn against you by the Sect in its mysteries that you are to seek the destruction of Lyons, the pillage of Bourdeaux, the ruin of Nantes and Marseilles, the fate, in short, of so many other towns flourishing in commerce, even the fate of Amsterdam itself; and then let your aching eye glance on your trees of Equality and Liberty. At the very time when you thought that you were seconding the views of the Sect against the Nobles, Priests, and Monarchs, only to reinstate the people in their rights of Equality and Liberty, the Sect was aiming its blows at you as the grand artificers of Despotism. At that very period your profession was already proscribed by the mysteries, as that which of all others most surely tended to retain the people in slavery; the Illuminizing Jacobin was teaching his adepts, that "he who wishes to subject nations to his yoke, need but to create wants which he alone can satisfy.--Erect the mercantile tribe (die kaufmanschaft) into an hierarchical body; that is to say, confer on it some rank or some authority in the government, and you will have created the most formidable, the most despotic of all powers. You will see it giving laws to the universe, and on it alone will rest the independence of one part of the world and the slavery of the other. For that man dictates the law who has it in his power to create or foresee, to stifle, weaken, or satisfy want. And who are better enabled to do this than merchants?" Thus we see that those men who were such ardent supporters of Jacobinism in our commercial towns, with a view to partake of the government, are precisely those whose profession the profound Jacobin chiefly detests in every form of government. May the elucidation of this mystery inspire the industrious inhabitants of hospitable Britain with new zeal for their laws! The discovery of such a snare is of too great importance to their safety, to allow me to conceal it from them.

In the next place the Hierophant proceeds from the art of diminishing wants in order to operate the independence of nations, to the duty of diffusing what he calls light. "He on the contrary (those are his words) "who wishes to render mankind free, teaches them how to refrain from the acquisition of

[p. 484]

things which they cannot afford: he enlightens them, he infuses into them boldness and inflexible manners. He that teaches them sobriety, temperance, and oeconomy, is more dangerous to the throne than the man who openly preaches regicide.--If you cannot diffuse at the same instant this degree of light among all men, at least begin by enlightening yourself, and by rendering yourself better. Serve, assist, and mutually support each other; augment our numbers; render yourselves at least independent, and leave to time and posterity the care of doing the rest. When your numbers shall be augmented to a certain degree, when you shall have acquired strength by your union, hesitate no longer, but begin to render yourself powerful and formidable to the wicked (that is to say to all who will resist their plans); the very circumstance of your being sufficiently numerous to talk of force, and that you really do talk of it, that circumstance alone makes the prophane and wicked tremble--That they may not be overpowered by numbers, many will become good (like you) of themselves, and will join your party.--You will soon acquire sufficient force to bind the hands of your opponents, to subjugate them and to stifle wickedness in the embryo." That is to say, as it may be understood in future, you will soon be able to stifle every principle of law, of government, of civil or political society, whose very institution in the eyes of an Illuminee is the germ of all the vices and misfortunes of human nature. "The mode of diffusing universal light, is not to proclaim it at once to the whole world, but to begin with yourself; then turn toward your next neighbour; you two can enlighten a third and fourth; let these in the same manner extend and multiply the number of the children of light, until numbers and force shall throw power into our hands." [*10]

I observe in the ritual of this degree, that should the Hierophant be fatigued by the length of this discourse, he may take breath, and let one of the adepts continue the instruction of the proselyte. [*11] Our readers also may avail themselves of this permission, and they have copious matter for reflection in what they have hitherto read. They may perhaps be inclined to ask, to what degree the people must  their wants not to stand in need of laws? They will perceive that bread itself must be denied them; for as long as fields are cultivated, laws will be necessary to protect the crops and to restrain men from reaping that which they have not sown; and if on the first view the Sophism appears wicked, the reader will soon perceive that it is but folly in the garb of Sophistry.

The better to form their judgments on the lessons of the Hierophant, they will have to compare that Revolution, which is to be the effect of instruction alone, and which is insensibly to take place without the least shock or rebellion, with that period when the adepts shall have acquired numbers, force, and power, enabling them to bind the hands of their opponents, and to subjugate all who may still show any affection for their laws, or for that civil order in society which the Sect wishes to suppress.

[p. 485]

Footnotes

^484:1 Philo to Spartacus. Instructions for this degree.

^484:2 Instruction for this degree.

^485:3 [p. 485] Ibid. Further instructions on the admission to the degree of Priest.

^485:4 Ibid. Further instructions on the admission to the degree of Priest.

^485:5 Original Writings, Vol. II. Part 2.

^485:6 Last works of Philo and Spartacus, from Page 10 to 70, and certificates of Philo at the beginning of this degree.

^485:7 I have compared the two editions of this discourse. The first gives it just as Weishaupt composed and pronounced it at his first initiations. The second has been corrected by his adept the Baron Knigge, known by the characteristic of Philo. All the difference that I could observe was, a slight refinement of the style in some parts, while prolix passages had been added in others. I remarked, that the Compiler Knigge had literally copied all the impious, seditious, and frantic lessons of the original--I have given the preference to the original. In place of adding, I shall rather retrench, and only mention the most striking passages, making such reflexions as circumstances may require. Weishaupt, according to the idiom of the German language, always addressed the Candidate in the third person plural: in this particular, we have followed Knigge's correction, as more suitable with our language.

^485:8 Orig. Writ. Vol. II. Let 18, from Weishaupt to Zwack.

^485:9 Darum sind wilde, and im hochsten grad aufgeklarte, vieleicht, die einzige freye menschen.

^485:10 See Discourse on the lesser Mysteries of Illuminism.

^485:11 This Discourse actually requires at least two hours to read it. That part from which I have made extracts extends in Vol. II. of the Original Writings, from Page 44 to 93, and in the Last works of Philo and Spartacus, (which are in much smaller print) from Page 10 to 48. I mean to abridge the remaining part still more; but shall be scrupulously exact in the translation of all remarkable passages.

     
Code of the Illuminati: Part III of Memoirs Illustrating the History of Jacobinism, by A Barruel, tr. Robert Edward Clifford [1798], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 486]

  

CHAP. X.

  

Continuation of the Discourse on the Lesser Mysteries

IN that part of the discourse which remains to be laid before the reader, the Hierophant, insisting on the necessity of enlightening the people to operate the grand revolution, seems to fear that the Candidate has not clearly conceived the real plan of this revolution, which is in future to be the sole object of all his instructions. "Let your instructions and lights be  diffused; so shall you render mutual security universal; and security and instruction will enable us to live without prince or government. If that were not the case, why should we go in quest of either?'' [*1]

Here then the Candidate is clearly informed of the grand object towards which he is to direct all his future instructions. To teach the people to live without princes or governments, without laws or even civil society, is to be the general tendency of all his lessons. But of what nature must these lessons be to attain the desired object?--They are to treat of morality, and of morality alone. "For (continues the Hierophant) if light be the work of morality, light and security will gain strength as morality expands itself. Nor is true morality any other than the art of teaching men to shake off their wardship, to attain the age of manhood, and thus to need neither princes nor governments." [*2]

When we shall see the Sect enthusiastically pronouncing the word morality, let us recollect the definition which it has just given us of it. Without it, we could not have understood the real sense of the terms honest men, virtue, good or wicked men. We see that, according to this definition, the honest man is he who labours at the overthrow of civil society, its laws, and its chiefs: for these are the only crimes or virtues mentioned in the whole Code. Presupposing that the Candidate may object that it would be impossible to bring mankind to adopt such doctrines, the Hierophant anticipates the objection, and exclaims, "He is little acquainted with the powers of reason and the attractions of virtue; he is a very novice in the regions of light, who shall harbour such mean ideas as to his own essence, or the nature of mankind. . . .If either he or I can attain this point, why should not another attain it also? What! when men can be led to despise the horrors of death, when they may be inflamed with the enthusiasm of religious and political follies, shall they be deaf to that very doctrine which can alone lead them to happiness? No, no; man is not so wicked 

[p. 487]

as an arbitrary morality would make him appear. He is wicked, because Religion, the State, and bad example, perverts him. It would be of  to those who wish to make him better, were there fewer persons whose interest it is to render him wicked in order that they may support their power by his wickedness."

"Let us form a more liberal opinion of human nature. We will labour indefatigably, nor shall difficulties affright us. May our principles become the foundation of all morals! Let reason at length be the religion of men, and the problem is solved." [*3]

This pressing exhortation will enable the reader to solve the problem of the altars, the worship, and the festivals of Reason, in the French Revolution; nor will they be any longer at a loss to know from what loathsome den their shameless Goddess rose.

The Candidate also obtains the solution of all that may have appeared to him problematic in the course of his former trials. "Since such is the force of morality and of morality alone (says the Hierophant), since it alone can operate the grand revolution which is to restore liberty to mankind, and abolish the empire of imposture, superstition, and despotism; you must now perceive why on their first entrance into our Order we oblige our pupils to apply closely to the study of morality, to the knowledge of themselves and of others. You must see plainly, that if we permit each Novice to introduce his friend, it is in order to form a legion that may more justly he called holy and invincible than that of the Theban; since the battles of the friend fighting by the side of his friend are those which are to reinstate human nature in its rights, its liberty, and its primitive independence."

"The morality which is to perform this miracle is not a morality of vain subtleties. It is not that morality which, degrading man, renders him careless of the goods of this world, forbids him the enjoyment of the innocent pleasures of life, and inspires him with the hatred of his neighbour. It must not be a morality favouring the interests only of its teachers, which prescribes persecution and intoleration, which militates against reason, which forbids the prudent use of the passions; whose virtues are no other than inaction, idleness, and the heaping of riches on the slothful.--Above all, it must not be that morality which, adding to the miseries of the miserable, throws them into a state of pusillanimity and despair, by the threats of hell and the fear of devils.

"It must, on the contrary, be that morality so much disregarded and defaced at the present day by selfishness, and replete with heterogeneous principles. It must be a divine doctrine, such as Jesus taught to his disciples, and of which he gave the real interpretation in his secret conferences."

This sudden transition naturally leads Weishaupt to the developement of a mystery of iniquity for which we have long since seen him preparing his Major Illuminees, and particularly the Scotch Knights of illuminization. The better to understand this mystery, let us recall to mind how the Insinuators or the teachers began by solemnly assuring their different Candidates, Novices, or Minerval Academicians, that in all the lodges of Illuminism there never arises

[p. 488]

a question in the least degree prejudicial to religion or the state. All these promises have been gradually lost sight of, and the proselyte has had time to accustom his ears to declamations against the priesthood and royalty. It has already been insinuated, that the Christianity of our times is very different from that taught by Jesus Christ; the time was not arrived for numbering Christ himself among the impostors; his name, his virtues, might still be venerated by certain adepts. Some there were, perhaps, who would be shocked at bare-faced Atheism; and it is on their account that Weishaupt has thus treated of Christ. In the preceding degree he had contented himself with hinting, that the doctrines of this divine teacher had been perverted; nor had he declared what species of political revolution was (as he pretended) pointed out in the Gospel. But here the execrable sophister apostrophizes the God of the Christians in language similar to that in which we have since seen the too famous Fauchet declaiming in the revolutionary pulpit. It is here that Weishaupt declares Jesus Christ to be the Father of the Jacobins, or rather (to speak the revolutionary language) the great Doctor of the Sans-culottes. But, to enable us the better to judge of the cunning and premeditated villainy of this detestable artifice, let us first attend to the correspondence of the adept who, under Weishaupt, is charged with the compiling of the Code. Knigge, like the monstrous prototype of Illuminism, subdivides the adepts into those who scoff at and detest revelation, and those who stand in need of a revealed religion to fix their ideas. It is to explain this that Knigge writes the following letter to Zwack:

"To unite these two classes of men, to make them concur and co-operate toward our object, it was necessary to represent Christianity in such a light as to recall the superstitious to reason, and to teach our more enlightened sages not to reject it on account of its abuse. This should have been the secret of Masonry, and have led us to our object. Meanwhile despotism strengthens daily, though liberty universally keeps pace with it. It was necessary then to unite the extremes. We therefore assert here, that Christ did not establish a new religion, but that his intention was simply to reinstate natural religion in its rights; that by giving a general bond of union to the world, by diffusing the light and wisdom of his morality, and by dissipating prejudices, his intention was, to teach us the means of governing ourselves, and to re-establish, without the violent means of revolutions, the reign of Equality and Liberty among men. This was easily done by quoting certain texts from Scripture, and by giving explanations of them, true or false is of little consequence, provided each one finds a sense in these doctrines of Christ consonant with his reason. We add, that this religion, so simple in itself, was afterwards defaced; but that, by means of inviolable secrecy, it has been transmitted in purity to us through Freemasonry."

"Spartacus (Weishaupt) had collected many materials for this, and I added my discoveries in the instructions for these two degrees. Our people, therefore, being convinced that we alone are possessed of the real secrets of Christianity, we have but to add a few words against the Clergy and Princes. In the last mysteries we have to unfold to our adepts this pious fraud, and then by writings demonstrate

[p. 489]

the origin of all religious impositions, and their mutual connexion with each other." [*4]

If the reader be not too much disgusted with this pious fraud, but can still attend to the declamations of the Hierophant, let us once more enter that den of demons wherein presides the triple genius of impiety, hypocrisy, and anarchy.

The Hierophant is about to say, "that their grand and ever-celebrated master, Jesus of Nazareth, appeared in an age when corruption was universal; in the midst of a people who from time immemorial had been subjected to, and severely felt the yoke of slavery; [*5] and who eagerly expected their deliverer announced by the Prophets. Jesus appeared and taught the doctrine of reason; to give greater efficacy to these doctrines, he formed them into a religion, and adopted the received traditions of the Jews. He prudently grafted his new school on their religion and their customs, which he made the vehicle of the essence and secrets of his new doctrines. He did not select sages for his new disciples, but ignorant men chosen from the lowest class of the people, to show that his doctrine was made for all, and suitable to every one's understanding; to show too, that the knowledge of the grand truths of reason was not a privilege peculiar to the great. He does not teach the Jews alone, but all mankind, the means of acquiring their liberty, by the observation of his precepts. He supported his doctrines by an innocent life, and sealed them with his blood."

"His precepts for the salvation of the world are, simply, the love of God and the love of our neighbour; he asks no more. . . .Nobody ever reduced and consolidated the bonds of human society within their real limits as he did--No one was ever more intelligible to his hearers, or more prudently covered the sublime signification of his doctrine. No one, indeed, ever laid a surer foundation for liberty than our grand master, Jesus of Nazareth. It is true, that on all occasions (in ganzen) he carefully concealed the sublime meaning and natural consequences of his doctrines; for he had a secret doctrine, as is evident from more than one passage of the Gospel."

It was during the time that he was writing this hypocritical history of the Messiah, that Weishaupt was turning the credulous proselyte into ridicule; as to the other adepts, he well knew that they anticipated such explanations, or at least would be delighted with them. Hence that impudence with which he falsifies the Scriptures. To prove the existence of this secret school, the doctrines of which are reserved for the initiated alone, he cites these words of Christ: "To you is given to know the mystery of the kingdom of God; but to them that are without, all things are done in parables." [*6] But he  avoids mentioning the order which Christ gives to his disciples, "That which I tell you in the dark, speak ye in the light; and that which you hear in the ear, preach ye upon the house-tops." [*7] Weishaupt then proceeds to these words: "And their princes have power over them but it is not so among you; but whoever will be greater shall be your minister." [*8] This precept, as well as all those on Christian humility, he transforms into principles

[p. 490]

of disorganizing equality inimical to all constituted authorities.--With equal ease he avoids all those lessons so often repeated both by Christ and his Apostles, on the obligation of rendering to Caesar what is Caesar's, of paying tribute, and of recognizing the authority of God himself in that of the law and of the magistrates. If Christ has preached the love of our neighbour, or fraternal love, his words are immediately perverted by Weishaupt into a love of his Equality. If Christ exhorts his disciples to contemn riches, the impostor pretends it is to prepare the world for that community of riches which destroys all property. In fine, the conclusions drawn from these impious and deriding explanations, and from many others of a similar nature, are contained in the following words:

"If therefore the object of the secret of Jesus, which has been preserved by the institution of the mysteries, and clearly demonstrated both by the conduct and the discourses of this divine master, was to reinstate mankind in their original Equality and Liberty, and to prepare the means; how many things immediately appear clear and natural, which hitherto seemed to be contradictory and unintelligible! This explains in what sense Christ was the saviour and the liberator of the world. Now the doctrine of original sin, of the fall of man, and of his regeneration, can be understood. The state of pure nature, of fallen or corrupt nature, and the state of grace, will no longer be a problem. Mankind, in quitting their state of original liberty, fell from the state of nature and lost their dignity. In their civil society, under their governments, they no longer live in the state of pure nature, but in that of fallen and corrupt nature. If the moderating of their passions and the diminution of their wants, reinstate them in their primitive dignity, that will really constitute their redemption and their state of grace. It is to this point that morality, and the most perfect of all morality, that of Jesus, leads mankind. When at length this doctrine shall be generalized throughout the world, the reign of the good and of the elect shall be established." [*9]

This language is surely not enigmatical. The proselyte, once master of the mysteries it contains, needs only to be informed, how the great revolution, which they foretell, became the object of secret societies, and what advantages accrue to these societies from the secresy in which they exist.

The Hierophant then, for the instruction of the proselyte, goes back to the origin of Masonry; he declares it to be the original school and depository of the true doctrine. He takes a view of its hieroglyphics, and shapes them to his system. The rough stone of Masonry becomes the symbol of the primitive state of man, savage but free.--The stone split or broken is the state of fallen nature, of mankind in civil society, no longer united in one family, but divided according to their states, governments, or religions. The polished stone represents mankind reinstated in its primitive dignity, in its independence. Yet Masonry has not only lost these explanations; but the illuminizing orator goes so far as to say, "The Freemasons, like Priests and chiefs of nations, have banished reason from the earth. They have inundated the world with tyrants, impostors, spectres, corpses, and men like to wild beasts."

[p. 491]

Should any reader be surprised at seeing the Hierophant give this account of Masonry, let him reflect on the hatred which Weishaupt had sworn against every school where the name of any deity was preserved. The Jehovah or the Grand Architect of Masonry, the two-fold God of the Rosycrusian magicians, still render the occult lodges a school of some sort of Theosophy. But how reserved soever the Hierophant may be with regard to Atheism, the proselyte must, nevertheless, foresee, that should he be admitted to one degree higher, neither the Grand Architect nor the two-fold God will meet a better fate than the God of the Christians. And therefore it is that Weishaupt declaims against those spirits, apparitions, and all the superstitions of Freemasonry; hence the theosophic Masons are involved in the general malediction pronounced against the priesthood and the throne.

It can be easily conceived, that Weishaupt must represent true Masonry, or the pretended real Christianity, as solely extant in Illuminism. But the Hierophant enjoins the proselyte not to think that this is the only advantage which the Order and the whole universe draw from this mysterious association.

Here let magistrates, the chiefs of nations, every man who still retains any regard for the support of laws and empires, and of civil society, let them, I say, read and meditate on these other advantages. The lesson is of the utmost importance--Whoever you are, all honest citizens, whether Masons, Rosycrusians, Mopses, Hewers of Wood, Knights; all you who thirst after the mysteries of the lodges, cease to accuse me of conjuring up chimerical dangers. I am not the man who speaks: it is he who of all others has been the best acquainted with your association, and has known what advantages could be drawn from them by able and patient conspirators.--Read; and tell us which is the most impressive on your mind, the pleasures you may find in your lodges, or the dangers of your country. Read; and if the name of citizen be still dear to you, reflect whether yours should remain inscribed on the registers of a secret society. You were ignorant of the dangers; the most monstrous of conspirators will lay them open to you, and he will call them advantages. He literally says, "Though these mysterious Associations should not attain our object, they prepare the way for us; they give a new interest to the cause; they present it under points of view hitherto unobserved; they stimulate the inventive powers and the expectations of mankind; they render men more indifferent as to the interests of governments; they bring men of divers nations and religions within the same bond of union; they deprive the church and the state of their ablest and most laborious members; they bring men together who would never otherwise have known or met each other. By this method alone they undermine the foundation of states, though they had really no such project in view. They throw them together and make them clash one against the other. They teach mankind the power and force of union; they point out to them the imperfection of their political constitutions, and that without exposing them to the suspicions of their enemies, such as magistrates and public governments. They mask our progress, and procure us the facility of incorporating in our plans and of admitting into our Order, after the proper trials, the most able men, whose patience,

[p. 492]

long abused, thirsts after the grand ultimatum. By this means they weaken the enemy; and though they should never triumph over him, they will at least diminish the numbers and the zeal of his partizans; they divide his troops to cover the attack. In proportion as these new associations or secret societies, formed in different states, shall acquire strength and prudence at the expence of the former ones (that is to say, of civil society), the latter must weaken, and insensibly fall."

"Beside, our Society originates, and must naturally and essentially deduce its origin from those very governments whose vices have rendered our union necessary. We have no object but that better order of things for which we incessantly labour; all the efforts, therefore, of Princes to stop our progress will be fruitless; the spark may long remain hidden in the ashes, but the day must come in which shall burst forth the general flame. For nature nauseates always to run the same course. The heavier the yoke of oppression weighs on man, the more sedulously will he labour to throw it off; and the liberty he seeks shall expand itself. The seed is sown whence shall spring a new world; the roots extend themselves; they have acquired too much strength, they have been too industriously propagated, for the day of harvest to fail us.--Perhaps it may be necessary to wait thousands and thousands of years; but sooner or later nature shall consummate its grand work, and she shall restore that dignity to man for which he was destined from the beginning."

Reader, you have heard them. These conspirators have said more than I should have dared to hint at on the nature and danger of these associations. It would be useless for me to rest longer on that point. I shall end by showing by what artifices the Hierophant endeavours to tranquilize the consciences of those adepts who may have been startled at these predictions. Notwithstanding all that he has said of those times when Illuminism shall find means of binding hands and subjugating; notwithstanding all that aversion against governments which he seeks to infuse into the adepts, he concludes in a hypocritical strain peculiar to his wickedness. "We are here at once the observers and the instruments of nature.--We do not wish to precipitate her steps. To enlighten men, to correct their morals, to inspire them with benevolence, such are our means. Secure of success, we abstain from violent commotions. To have foreseen the happiness of posterity, and to have prepared it by irreproachable means, suffices for our felicity. The tranquility of our consciences is not troubled by the reproach of aiming at the ruin or overthrow of states and thrones. Such an accusation could with no more propriety be preferred against us, than it might against the statesmen who had foreseen and foretold the impending and inevitable ruin of the state.--As assiduous observers of Nature, we admire her majestic course; and, burning with the noble pride of our origin, we felicitate ourselves on being the  of men and of God."

"But carefully observe and remember, that we do not impose our opinions; we do not oblige you to adopt our doctrines. Let the truth you can acknowledge be your only guide. Free man, exercise here thy primitive right; seek, doubt, examine; do you know of, or can you find elsewhere, any thing

[p. 493]

that is better?--Make us acquainted with your views, as we have exposed ours to you. We do not blush at the limits of our understandings; we know that we are but men; we know that such are the dispositions of nature, such the lot of man, that he is not to expect to attain perfection at his outset; he can attain it but by degrees. It is by gaining experience from our errors, by profiting of the lights acquired by our forefathers, that we shall become at once the children of wisdom, and the parents of a still wiser progeny. If, therefore, you think that you have found truth in the whole of our doctrine, adopt the whole. Should you perceive any error to have stolen in with it, remember that truth is not the less estimable on that account. If you have met with nothing that pleases you here, reject the whole without fear; and remember, that in many things, at least, we only need further research, or a new investigation. Do you observe any thing blameable or laudable, see and make choice of what you approve. Should you be more enlightened yourself, then your eye may have discovered truths which are still denied to us. The more art we employ in the instruction of our pupils to lead them to the paths of wisdom, the less you will be inclined to refuse us a portion of your applause."

Thus ends the discourse of the Hierophant.--The proselyte who has heard it without shuddering, may flatter himself with being worthy of this priesthood. But before he is sacrilegiously anointed, he is led back to the porch, where he is invested with a white tunic. He wears a broad silken scarlet belt; the sleeve is tied at the extremity and middle with bandages of the same colour, which make it bulge out. [*10] I am particular in the description of this dress, because it was in a similar one that, during the French revolution, a comedian appeared personally attacking Almighty God, saying, "No! thou dost not exist. If thou hast power over the thunder bolts, grasp them; aim them at the man who dares set thee at defiance in the face of thy altars. But no, I blaspheme thee, and I still live. No, thou dost not exist." In the same costume, and to prepare him for the same blasphemies, the Epopt is recalled into the temple of mysteries. He is met by one of the Brethren, who does not permit him to advance till he has told him, "that he is sent to enquire whether he (the proselyte) has perfectly understood the discourse which has been read to him--whether he has any doubts concerning the doctrines which are contained in it--whether his heart is penetrated with the sanctity of the principles of the Order--whether he is sensible of the call, feels the strength of mind, the fervent will, and all the disinterestedness requisite to labour at the grand undertaking--whether he is ready to make a sacrifice of his will, and to suffer himself to be led by the most excellent superiors of the Order."

I will spare the reader the disgusting impiety of the ceremonial which immediately follows.--The rites of the preceding degree were in derision of the Last Supper; these are an atrocious mimicry of the sacerdotal ordination. A curtain is drawn, and an altar appears with a crucifix upon it. On the altar also is a Bible; and the ritual of the Order lies on a reading desk; on the side a censer, and a phial full of oil. The Dean acts the part of a Bishop, and he is surrounded with acolytes. He prays over the proselyte, blesses him, cuts hair

[p. 494]

from the top of his head, clothes him in the vestments of the priesthood, and pronounces prayers after the fashion of the Sect. On presenting the cap he says, "Cover thyself with this cap, it is more valuable than the crown of kings." The very expressions of the Jacobin with his red cap. The communion consists in honey and milk, which the Dean gives to the proselyte, saying, "This is what Nature gives to man. Reflect how happy he would still have been, if the desire of superfluities had not, by depriving him of a taste for such simple food, multiplied his wants, and poisoned the balm of life."

All the preceding part of this degree sufficiently explains the real meaning of these words. The ceremonies are terminated with delivering to the Epopt that part of the code which relates to his new degree. I shall relate all that is necessary for the reader to be informed of, when, after having treated of the degree of Regent, and of the Grand Mysteries, I shall come to investigate the government of the Order.

Footnotes

^494:1 Und allgemeine aufklarung and sicherheit machen fursten and Staaten entbehrlich. Oder wo zu braucht man sie sodann.

^494:2 Die moral ist also die kunst welche menschen lehrt volljahrig zu werden, der vormundschaft los zu werden, in ihr mannliches alter zu tretten, and die fursten zu entbehren.

^494:3 Und endlich macht die vernunft zur religion der menschen, so ist die aufgabe aufgelosst.

^494:4 Orig. Writ. Vol. II. Letter from Philo to Cato, page 104, and following.

^494:5 Here is another example of the manner in which history is falsified--The Jews were enslaved from time immemorial! Does this nation then make its whole history consist in the years of its captivity? Had it forgot its liberty and its triumphs under Joshua, David, Solomon, and its other Kings? Was it just emerged from its captivity when it fell under the dominion of the Romans, a dominion under which it remained at the time of Christ's birth? The adept has heard talk of the captivity of the Jews, of those periods when Almighty God, as a punishment for their crimes, delivered them over to their enemies; and he inconsiderately concludes, that their whole history is but one continued scene of bondage.

^494:6 St. Mark, Ch. iv. V. 11.

^494:7 St. Matthew. Ch. x. V. 27.

^494:8 St. Mark, Ch. x. V. 42, 43.

^494:9 Orig. Writ. Part II. P. 106, 7. The last Works of Spartacus, P. 58.--The author has transcribed the whole of what is printed in Italics in German, lest his translation of this extraordinary  should be suspected of being exaggerated. As he perfectly understands the German language, and is a man of undoubted veracity, I have omitted it, but in so doing think it my duty to mention it. TRANS.

^494:10 Last Works of Philo and Spartacus, at the end of the Discourse.

     
Code of the Illuminati: Part III of Memoirs Illustrating the History of Jacobinism, by A Barruel, tr. Robert Edward Clifford [1798], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 495]

  

CHAP. XI.

  

Eighth Part of the Code of Illuminees--The Regent, or the Prince Illuminee.

"WHEN one of our Epopts has sufficiently distinguished himself to bear a part in the political government of our Order; that is to say, when he unites prudence with the liberty of thinking and of acting; when he knows how to temper boldness with precaution, resolution with complaisance; subtlety with good nature; loyalty with simplicity; singularity with method; transcendency of wit with gravity and dignity of manners; when he has learned opportunely to speak or to be silent, how to obey or to command; when he shall have gained the esteem and affection of his fellow-citizens, though feared by them at the same time; when his heart shall be entirely devoted to the interests of our Order, and the common welfare of the universe shall be uppermost in his mind; then, and only then, let the Superior of the province propose him to the National Inspector as worthy of being admitted to the degree of Regent."

Such are the qualities required by the Sect for the admission of its adepts to the degree which in the Code is sometimes termed Regent, at others the Prince Illuminee. Such are the very words to be found in the preamble of the rules of this degree.

"Three things of the utmost consequence (says the Code) are to be observed. In the first place, the greatest reserve is necesssary with respect to this degree. Secondly, those who are admitted into it must be as much as possible free men and independent of all Princes: they must indeed have clearly manifested their hatred for the general constitution or the actual state of mankind; have shown how ardently they wish for a change in the government of the world; and how much the hints thrown out in the degree of Priest has inflamed their wishes for a better order of things."

If all these requisites are to be found in the Candidate, then let the National Inspector once more examine, in his records, every thing relative to the conduct and character of the new adept, let him inspect the divers questions which have been put to him, and discover where he has shown his strong or his weak side. According to the result of this examination, let the Inspector propose some new questions on those articles on which the Candidate may have shown the greatest reserve. For example, some of the following: [*1]

[p. 496]

"I. Would you think a society objectionable, which should (till nature shall have ripened its grand revolutions) place itself in a situation, that would deprive Monarchs of the power of doing harm, though they should wish it; a society whose invisible means should prevent all governments from abusing their power? Would it be impossible, through the influence of such a society, to form a new state in each state, status in statu;" that is to say, would it be impossible to subject the rulers of every state to this Illuminizing Society, and to convert them into mere tools of the Order even in the government of their own dominions?

"II. Were it to be objected, that such a society would abuse its power, would not the following considerations do away such an objection?--Do not our present rulers daily abuse their power? And are not the people silent, notwithstanding such an abuse? Is this power as secure from abuse in the hands of Princes, as it would be in those of our adepts whom we train up with so much care? If then any government could be harmless, would it not be our's, which would be entirely founded on morality, foresight, wisdom, liberty, and virtue?"

"III. Though this universal government, founded on morality, should prove chimerical, would it not be worth while to make an essay of it?"

"IV. Would not the most sceptical man find a sufficient guarantee against any abuse of power on the part of our Order, in the liberty of abandoning it at pleasure; in the happiness of having Superiors of tried merit, who, unknown to each other, could not possibly support each other in their treasonable combinations against the general welfare; Superiors, in short, who would be deterred from doing harm by the fear of the existing chiefs of empires?"

"V. Should there exist any other secret means of guarding against the abuse of that authority entrusted by the order to our Superiors, what might they be?"

"VI. Supposing despotism were to ensure, would it be dangerous in the hands of men who, from the very first step we made in the Order, teach us nothing but science, liberty, and virtue? Would not that despotism lose its sting, in the consideration that those chiefs who may have conceived dangerous plans will have begun by disposing a machine in direct opposition to their views." [*2]

To understand the tendency of these questions, let us reflect on the meaning given by the Sect to liberty and general welfare. Above all, let us not forget the lesson already given to the adepts on morality; the art of teaching men to shake off the yoke of their minority, to set aside Princes and Rulers, and to learn to govern themselves. This lesson once well understood, the most contracted understanding must perceive, in spite of the insidious tenour of these questions, that their sole tendency is to ask, whether "a Sect would be very dangerous who, under pretence of hindering the chiefs of nations, Kings, Ministers, and Magistrates, from hurting the people, should begin by mastering the opinions of all those who surrounded Kings, Ministers, or Magistrates; or should seek by invisible means to captivate all the councils, and the agents of

[p. 497]

public authority, in order to reinstate mankind in the rights of their pretended majority; and to teach the subject to throw off the authority of his Prince, and learn to govern himself; or, in other words, to destroy every King, , Law, Magistrate, and public authority whatever?" The Candidate, too well-trained to the spirit of Illuminism not to see the real tendency of these questions, but also too much perverted by it to be startled at them, knows what answers he is to give to obtain the new degree. Should he still harbour doubts, the ceremonies of his installation would divest him of them. These are not theosophical or insignificant ceremonies;--every step demonstrates the disorganizing genius, and the hatred for all authority, which irritates the spleen of their impious author; and it is therefore that Weishaupt, when writing to Zwack, represents them as infinitely more important than those of the preceding degree. [*3]

When the admission of the new adept is resolved on, he is informed, "that as in future he is to be entrusted with papers belonging to the Order, of far greater importance than any that he has yet had in his possession, it is necessary that the Order should have further securities. He is therefore to make his will, and insert a particular clause with respect to any private papers which he may leave in case of sudden death. He is to get a formal and

juridical receipt of that part of his will from his family, or from the public Magistrate, and he is to take their promises in writing that they will fulfil his intentions." [*4]

This precaution taken, and the day for the initiation fixed, the adept is admitted into an antichamber hung with black. Its furniture consists in a skeleton elevated on two steps, at the feet of which are laid a crown and a sword--There he is asked for the written dispositions he has made concerning the papers with which he may be entrusted, and the juridical promise he has received that his intentions shall be fulfilled. His hands are then loaded with chains, as if he were a slave; and he is thus left to his meditations. [*5] The Provincial who performs the functions of Initiator is alone in the first saloon, seated on a throne. The Introducer, having left the Candidate to his reflections, enters this room, and in a voice loud enough to be heard by the new adept, the following Dialogue takes place between them.

"Provincial. Who brought this slave to us?"

"Introducer. He came of his own accord; he knocked at the door."

"Prov. What does he want?"

"Introd. He is in search of Liberty, and asks to be freed from his chains."

"Prov. Why does he not apply to those who have chained him?"

"Introd. They refuse to break his bonds; they acquire too great an advantage from his slavery."

"Prov. Who then is it that has reduced him to this state of slavery?"

"Introd. Society, governments, the sciences, and false religion." Die geselschaft, der staat, die gelehrsamkeit, die falsche religion."

"Prov. And he wishes to cast off this yoke to become a seditious man and a rebel?"

[p. 498]

"Introd. No; he wishes to unite with us, to join in our fights against the constitution of governments, the corruption of morals, and the profanation of religion. He wishes through our means to become powerful, that he may attain the grand ultimatum."

"Prov. And who will answer to us, that after having obtained that power he will not also abuse it, that he will not be a tyrant and the author of new misfortunes?"

"Introd. His heart and his reason are our guarantees--the Order has enlightened him. He has learned to conquer his passions and to know himself. Our Superiors have tried him."

"Prov. That is saying a great deal--Is he also superior to prejudice. Does he prefer the general interest of the universe to that of more limited associations?"

"Introd. Such have been his promises."

"Prov. How many others have made similar promises who did not keep them? Is he master of himself? Can he resist temptation? Are personal considerations of no avail with respect to him? Ask him, whether the skeleton he has before him is that of a king, a nobleman, or a beggar?"

"Introd. He cannot tell; nature has destroyed all that marked the depraved state of inequality; all that he sees is, that this skeleton was man like us; and the character of man is all that he attends to."

"Prov. If such be his sentiments, let him be free at his own risk and peril. But he knows us not. Go and ask him why he implores our protection? [*6]

This dialogue ended (and the reader will not be at a loss to perceive the drift of it), the Introducer returns to the Candidate, and says, `Brother, the knowledge you have acquired can no longer leave you in doubt as to the grandeur, the importance, the disinterestedness and lawfulness of our great object. It must therefore be indifferent to you whether you are acquainted with our Superiors or not; nevertheless, I have some information to impart to you on that subject."

This information is nothing more than a summary of a pretended history of Masonry, going back to the deluge; and of what the Sect calls the fall of man, the loss of his dignity, and of the true doctrine. The story then continues to Noah and the few who escaped the deluge in the ark; these, he says, were a few Sages or Freemasons, who have maintained the true principles in their secret schools. It is for that reason, says the Instructor, that Masonry has preserved the denominations of Noachists and Patriarchs--Then comes a recapitulation of what had been said in the degree of Epopt on the pretended views of Christ, on the decline of Masonry, and on the honour reserved to Illuminism to preserve and revive these true and ancient mysteries--"When questioned (says the Instructor) as to whom we are indebted to for the actual constitution of our Order, and the present form of the inferior degrees, the following is the answer we give:

"Our founders, without doubt, had extensive knowledge, since they have transmitted so much to us.--Actuated by a laudable zeal for the general

[p. 499]

welfare, they formed a code of laws for our Order; but, partly through prudence, and partly to guard against their own passions, they left the direction of the edifice they had raised to other hands, and retired. Their names will for ever remain in oblivion--The chiefs who govern the Order at present are not our founders; but posterity will doubly bless those unknown benefactors who have despised the vain glory of immortalizing their names. Every document which could have thrown light on our origin has been committed to the flames."

"You will now be under the direction of other men; men who, gradually educated by the Order, have at length been placed at the helm. You will soon make one of their number--Tell me only, whether you still harbour any doubt as to the object of the Order."

The Candidate, who has long since been past all possibility of doubt, advances with his Introducer toward another saloon; but, on opening the door, several of the adepts run and oppose their entrance. A new dialogue takes place in the style of the first--Who goes there? Who are you?--Is it a slave who fled from his masters--No slave shall enter here--He has fled that he might cease to be a slave; he craves an asylum and protection--But should his master follow?--He is safe, the doors are shut.--But should he be a traitor? He is not one, he has been educated under the eyes of the Illuminees. They have imprinted the divine seal on his forehead.--The door opens, and those who opposed the Candidate's entrance escort him to the third saloon. Here new obstacles occur, and another dialogue takes place between an adept in the inside and the Introducer. In the mean time the Provincial has left his former station, and has seated himself upon a throne in this third room. [It is worthy of remark that these enemies of thrones are themselves always seated on a throne.] The Provincial gives orders that the Candidate may be admitted, and desires to see whether he really bears the print of the seal of liberty. The Brethren accompany the new adept to the foot of the throne,

"Prov. Wretch! You are a slave: and yet dare enter an assembly of free men! Do you know the fate that awaits you? You have passed through two doors to enter this; but you shall not go hence unpunished, if you prophane this sanctuary."

"Introd. That will not happen; I will be his guarantee. You have taught him to thirst after liberty; and now keep your promise."

"Prov. Well, Brother, we have subjected you to various trials. The elevation of your sentiments has made us conceive you to be both proper and worthy of being admitted into our Order. You have thrown yourself with confidence and without reserve into our arms: and it is time to impart to you that liberty which we have painted to you in such bewitching colours. We have been your guide during all the time that you stood in need of one. You are now strong enough to conduct yourself, be then in future your own guide, be it at your own peril and risk. Be free; that is to say, be a man, and a man who knows how to govern himself, a man who knows his duty, and his imprescriptible rights; a man who serves the universe alone; whose actions are solely directed to the general benefit of the world 

[p. 500]

and of human . Every thing else is injustice--Be free and independent; in future be so of yourself.--Here, take back the engagements you have hitherto contracted with us. To you we return them all."

As he pronounces these words, the  returns him all the writings which concern him, such as his oaths, his promises, the minutes of his admission to the preceding degrees, the history of his life which he had transmitted to the Superiors, and all the notes taken by the Scrutators concerning him.

This perhaps is one of the most delicate traits of policy of the Sect. The chiefs have had full leisure to pry into the most secret recesses of his , and the Scrutators have no further discoveries to make. The Candidate may take back his oaths and his secrets, but recollections (perhaps copies) still remain, and the Initiator may well continue: "In future you will owe us nothing but that which your heart shall dictate. We do not tyrannize over men, we only enlighten them. Have you found contentment, rest, satisfaction, happiness, among us? You will not then abandon us. Can we have mistaken you, or can you have mistaken us! It would be a misfortune for you; but you are free. Remember only that men free and independent do not offend each other; on the contrary, they assist and mutually protect each other. Remember, that to offend another man, is to give him the right of defending himself. Do you wish to make a noble use of the power we give to you? rely on our word: you shall find zeal and protection among us. Could a disinterested zeal for your brethren glow in your heart, then labour at the grand object, labour for unfortunate human nature, and thy last hour shall be blest. We ask nothing else from you, we ask nothing for ourselves. Question your own heart, and let it say whether our conduct to you has not been noble and disinterested. After so many favours, could you be ungrateful, your heart should avenge us, and chastise you. But no; many trials have proved you to be man of constancy and resolution. Be such your character, and in future govern with us oppressed man, and labour at rendering him virtuous and free."

"Oh, Brother! what a fight, what hopes! when one day happiness, affection, and peace shall be the inhabitants of the earth! when misery, error, and oppression, shall disappear with superfluous wants! when, each one at his station labouring only for the general good, every father of a family shall be sovereign in his  cot! when he that wishes to invade these sacred rights shall not find an asylum on the face of the earth! when idleness shall be no longer suffered! when the clod of useless sciences shall be cast aside, and none shall be taught but those which contribute to make man better, and to reinstate him in his primitive freedom, his future destiny! when we may flatter ourselves with having forwarded that happy period, and complacently view the fruits of our labours! when, in fine, each man viewing his brother in his fellow-creature, shall extend a succouring hand--with us and ours you shall find happiness and peace, should you continue faithful and attached to us. You will also remark, that the sign of this degree consists in extending your arms to a brother with your hands open, to show that they are not sullied by injustice

[p. 501]

and oppression, and the gripe is to seize the brother by the two elbows, as it were to hinder him from falling. The word is redemption."

The foregoing  so clearly demonstrate the meaning of this word redemption, that the reader must be surprised at learning that there still remain further mysteries to be revealed. The candidate is not yet admitted into the highest class. He is only the Prince Illuminee, and has to gain admission to the two degrees of Philosopher, and of the Man King. He is invested in his new principality by receiving a buckler, boots, a cloak, and a hat. The words pronounced at the investiture are worthy of the reader's attention.

On presenting the , the Initiator says, "Arm thyself with fidelity, truth, and constancy; be a true Christian, and the shafts of calumny and misfortune shall not pierce thee." Be a Christian! (und sey ein Christ)!! What a strange Christian; what a wicked wretch then must be the Initiator who dares carry his dissimulation to such lengths, and prophane that sacred name in mysteries so evidently combined for the eradication of every trace of Christianity! But the adepts smiles, or his stupidity must be beyond expression if he does not see through so miserable a cant.

On presenting the boots: "Be active in the service of the good, and fear no road which may lead to the propagation or discovery of happiness." This will recall to our minds the principle, whatever may be the means, fear not to employ them when they lead to what the Sect calls happiness.

On giving the cloak: "Be a prince over thy people; that is to say, be sincere and wise, the benefactor of thy brethren, and teach them science." The reader will not be at a loss to understand what science.

The formula of the hat is, "Beware of ever exchanging this hat of liberty (diesen frey heitshut) for a crown."

Thus decorated, the Prince Illuminee receives the fraternal embrace.--He then hears read the instructions for his new degree; but as they entirely relate (like those of the preceding degree) to the government of the brethren, they will be treated of in the last part of the code. It is now time to proceed to the Grand Mysteries.

Footnotes

^501:1 Instructions for conferring the degree of Regent, Nos. 1, 2, 3. Last works of Philo and Spartacus.

^501:2 Instructions for conferring the degree of Regent, Nos. 1, 2, 3. Last works of Philo and Spartacus.

^501:3 Original Writings, Vol. II. Letter 24, from Weishaupt to Cato.

^501:4 Instructions for conferring this degree, No. 5.

^501:5 Ritual of this degree, No. 1.

^501:6 Ritual of this degree, No. 1.

     
Code of the Illuminati: Part III of Memoirs Illustrating the History of Jacobinism, by A Barruel, tr. Robert Edward Clifford [1798], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 502]

  

CHAP. XII.

  

Ninth Part of the Code of the Illuminees.--Class of Grand Mysteries; the Mage or the Philosopher, and the Man King.

BY the great importance which the Sect places in the last mysteries of Illuminism, and the many precautions it has taken to conceal them from the public view, I am compelled to begin this chapter with candidly declaring, that every attempt to discover the original text of this part of the Code has been fruitless. Such an avowal, however, should not disconcert the reader. Though the real text may be wanting, we have abundant matter to supply its place. We have Weishaupt's familiar correspondence; we are in possession of the letters of many of the adepts who enthusiastically admired them; and the avowals are still extant of other adepts, who indignantly beheld such abominations. Our judgement will be guided by laws laid down by Weishaupt himself; and the famous apology of this monstrous legislator will teach us how to appreciate them. Such materials are more than sufficient to supply the deficiency of the literal text. It is true, that the crafty cant and affected enthusiasm of the Hierophant will be wanting; but the substance of his declamation, the extent and monstrosity of his ultimate plots will lose nothing of their evidence. Let us begin then by attending to their author, and from him receive our first impressions.

Weishaupt, when writing to Zwack, his incomparable man, and speaking of the degree of Epopt, wherein impiety and rebellion seem to have strained every nerve to disseminate their venemous principles against church and state, says, "One might be tempted to think that this degree was the last and the most sublime: I have, nevertheless, THREE MORE of infinitely greater importance, which I reserve for our Grand Mysteries. But these I keep at home, and only show them to the Areopagites, or to a few other brethren the most distinguished for their merit and their services.--Were you here, I would admit you to my degree, for you are worthy of it--But I never suffer it to go out of my hands. It is of too serious an import; it is the key of the ancient and modern, the religious and political history of the universe."

"That I may keep our provinces in due subordination, I will take care to have only three copies of this degree in all Germany; that is to say, one in each Inspection." He soon after writes again to the same adept: "I have

[p. 503]

composed four more degrees above that of Regent; and with respect to these four, even the lowest of them, our degree of Priest will be but child's play"--Wogegen den schlechesten der priester grad kinder spiel seyn soll. [*1]

Before we draw any conclusion toward forming our judgment, let me recall to the mind of the reader those letters wherein Weishaupt declares, that every degree shall be an apprenticeship for the next, a sort of Noviciate for the higher degrees. That these degrees were always to be in crescendo; in fine, that in the last class of the mysteries a perfect statement of the maxims and polity of Illuminism was to be given. Und am ende folgt die totale einsicht in die politic and maximen des ordens. [*2] After such letters, the text of these mysteries is scarcely necessary. I know that these degrees were reduced to two for the last class of the mysteries; I know, from the agreement made by the founder and his intimate adepts, that the first was the Mage, or ; the other, the Man King. [*3] I will start from these data, and shall not hesitate to say, that this monster of impiety and of wickedness imposes on himself when he speaks of degrees infinitely more important for the higher mysteries, or when he pretends that those of Epopt and Regent are but puerile in comparison with those which he reserves for his intimate adepts. His execrable pride may flatter him with surpassing even the devils themselves, in his wicked inventions for sending forth the pestiferous blast; but their combined efforts could not suggest more hideous plots than those in which Weishaupt glories when calling them his lesser mysteries.--What! the vow of annihilating every idea of religion, even to the very name of a God; the plan for overthrowing every government, even to the obliteration of every vestige of laws, authority, or civil society; the wish of destroying our arts and sciences, our towns, and even villages, that they may realize their systems of Equality and Liberty; the desire of exterminating the greater part of human nature, to work the triumph of their vagabond clans, over the remaining part of mankind. These vows and wishes, these plots and plans, have already appeared in the lesser mysteries, and his adepts must have been as stupid as he wishes them to be impious and wicked, if they have not seen through the web that veils from their sight the baleful abyss. And, after all, it is not the object or the substance of their plots which is thus slightly veiled; the terms alone are concealed. There only remains to say, that all religion shall be destroyed for the adoption of Atheism; every constitution, whether Monarchical or Republican, shall be overthrown in favour of absolute Independence; property shall be annihilated; science and arts shall be suppressed; towns, houses, and fixed habitations, reduced to ashes, for the reestablishment of the roaming and savage life, which the hypocrite, in his cant, calls the patriarchal life. Such are the terms; and the scroll of this hideous pantomime needed only to be unrolled, to tell the names of those who were to appear on the gloomy stage of the last mysteries. The adept had long since inhaled the deleterious air with which Weishaupt had spared no pains to surround him; and could he nauseate this, or turn away from these disastrous machinations, the gates of the mysterious pit were shut against him. At such a sight nature shudders--The reader will cry out, None but monsters could

[p. 504]

have conceived or abetted such plots. Be it so; I will not contradict him; I only wish to name these monsters.--Behold Weishaupt and his profound adepts! The reader will find the proofs of this exclamation in their own writings.

Weishaupt, who divided his mysteries into two classes, also distributed his last secrets under two heads. First, Religion; which was the object of the Mages: The other comprehended what he called his Polity; and he reserved it for the Man King. Let us separately investigate each of these degrees, commencing with that principle which he himself lays down, and from which he never deviates, that each degree shall be a preparatory concatenation of principles and doctrines, the ultimate tendency of which was to form the object of the last mysteries. Such a principle is more than sufficient to demonstrate that the secret to be imparted to his Mages can be no other than the most absolute Atheism, and the total subversion of every Religion. The adept, however, has already imbibed such horrid principles; and the secret consists in telling him, in plain terms, that it was toward that point the Sect had long since been leading him, and that in future all his thoughts, words, and actions, must tend to second the views of the Sect in their monstrous undertaking; that in the preceding degrees the name of Religion had only been preserved the better to destroy the thing; but that in future the very name would only be the expression of chimeras, of superstition, of fanaticism, supported by despotism and ambition, as a tool for enslaving mankind.

This explication is no vain fancy of mine. See Weishaupt confidentially writing to his intimate and incomparable Cato-Zwack:

"I firmly believe, that the secret doctrine of Christ had no other object in view than the re-establishment of Jewish Liberty, which is the explanation I give of it. I even believe, that Freemasonry is nothing but a Christianity of this sort; at least, my explanation of their Hieroglyphics perfectly coincides with such an explanation. In this sense, nobody could blush at being a Christian; for I preserve the name, and substitute reason,--denn ich lasse den namen, and substituiere ihm die vernunft."--He continues: "It is no trivial matter to have discovered a new Religion and a new Polity in these tenebrous ;" and he goes on to say, "One might be induced to think that this was my highest degree; I have, nevertheless, three of infinitely more importance, for our grand mysteries." [*4] Here then is Weishaupt's decision on the degree of Epopt or Illuminized Priest.--It is Christianity preserving the name of Religion, with the Gospel converted into a Code by means of which Christ taught the Jacobinical Equality and Liberty. [*5] Here Weishaupt is  in his wickedness and his impiety; it is under the sacred name of Religion that he teaches his disorganizing principles of Equality and Liberty. After having led his Epopts to the pinnacle of Impiety, to what farther lengths can he possibly lead his Mage?--He may erase the names of Religion and God? And this he will do in his higher mysteries; for who can expect to find them when he says, "You know that the Unity of God was one of the secrets revealed in the mysteries of Eleusis; as for that, there is no fear of any such thing being found in mine." [*6]

[p. 505]

After this, can the name of God be expected ever to be found in the mysteries of the Illuminized Mage for any other purpose than to be blasphemed? We see this same Weishaupt reserving all the Atheistical productions for this degree; he writes again to his incomparable man: "With our beginners let us act prudently with respect to books on Religion and Polity. In my plan, I reserve them for the grand mysteries. At first we must put only books of history or of metaphysics into their hands. Let Morality be our pursuit. Robinet, Mirabeau (that is to say, the System of Nature written by Diderot, though attributed to Mirabeau), the Social System, Natural Polity, the Philosophy of Nature, and such works, are reserved for my higher degrees.--At present they must not even be mentioned to our adepts, and particularly Helvetius on Man." [*7] The reader here sees a list of the most Anti-religious and the most Atheistical works, [*8] and that they are reserved for these last mysteries. As a preparation for them (horribile dictu!) the very idea of a God must be eradicated from the mind of the adept. Can we doubt this, when we see Weishaupt thus write: "Do put Brother Numenius in correspondence with me; I must try to cure him of his Theosophical ideas, and properly prepare him for our views.--Ich will ihn suchen von der Theosophie zu curieren, and zu unseren absichten zu bestimmen." [*9] The Theosopher, or the man still believing in a God, is not fit for these mysteries; Religion then must, of course, be  with them. Were the consequences less evident, and should we reject these secret correspondences, or condemn the last oracles of the Hierophant to remain within the hundred bolts which keeps them hidden from the adepts; I say, even then, to ascertain what the tenets of the Sect are as to any worship or religion, we should not be necessitated to enter that den of mysteries. Though Weishaupt had not mentioned Religion in his intimate correspondence, the Atheistical Conspiracy of his mysteries would be evident, and why seek private documents when he has given us irrefragable proofs of guilt in that which he publishes as his apology?

Two years after his flight, Weishaupt most daringly asserts, that the Systems of his Illuminism (as published by the civil powers) are but a mere sketch, a plan as yet too ill-digested for the public to form any judgment either on him or his adepts, from the Original Writings or his Confidential Correspondence. He publishes a new Code, and calls it The corrected System of Illuminism, with its Degrees and Constitutions, by Adam Weishaupt, Counsellor to the Duke of Saxe Gotha. Here at least we have a right to judge him and his mysteries, both in his apology and his corrected degrees. But the reader will now view him in a new light. He is not only the conspiring infidel, but the insolent Sophister, insulting the Public with all the haughtiness of the most daring Atheist, shrugging his shoulders in disdain at the rest of mankind, and with impertinent pity saying to us all, as he did of the adepts whom he had duped, poor creatures! what could one not make you believe!

I deign to cast my eyes on this apology, or the Illuminism corrected. He begins by telling us, that to have supposed him capable of composing so extensive a work in two years was doing him the honour of supposing him gifted 

[p. 506]

with most extraordinary talents; and it is in such terms that the Sophister informs the public that he takes them for great fools. Let the contempt with which he treats his readers be retorted upon himself; let neither him nor his accomplices expect to descend to posterity with any other distinction than as the phenomena of vice and infamy. Are we to crouch in token of homage before the men who insolently scoff at their God and at the public weal? I know not whether Weishaupt needed extraordinary talents or not, though I grant him all the art and cunning of the Sophister; but most certainly he must have presumed much on the force of impudence when he flattered himself that the public would inevitably find that his corrected Code contained no principles but such as would elevate the mind and tend to form great men. [*10] What I find is, that it is nothing more than a medley of all the arts of his original Code for the education or rather depravation of his Adepts. Did I wish to form a stupid atheist, this would be the work I should chuse to put into his hands. As early as the third degree, in place of a God reigning as freely as he does powerfully over this universe, I find the universe transformed into a vast machine, in which every thing is held together or put in motion by I know not what fatality, decorated sometimes by the appellation of God, at other of nature. Again: did I wish to decorate with the name of providence a destiny which cannot annihilate a single atom without depriving the stars of their support and involving the whole universe in ruin, this would be the work I should recommend: I would give it to the narrow-minded adept, who, in a world where every thing is said to be necessary, should still pretend to talk of virtue or vices, or who could comfort himself for all the harm which the wicked could do him, by learning that the wicked like the virtuous man only followed the course which nature had traced for him; and that they would both arrive at the same point as himself In fine, I would put it into the hands of the imbecile, who would call the art of making merry the art of being always happy (ars semper gaudendi); the art of persuading oneself that one's misfortunes are incurable, or that they are all necessary. [*11] But what reader will brook the impudence of that conspiring infidel, who, dedicating his mysteries as an apology to the whole world and all mankind--der welt and den menschlichen geschlecht--and pretending to prove that his original mysteries are not a conspiracy against Religion, puts a discourse in the mouth of his new Hierophants, whose very title characterizes the most determined one both against God and Religion; he calls it, An Instruction for the adepts who are inclined to the fancy of believing in or of adoring a God! I know it may be also translated, An instruction for the Brethren inclining toward  or Religious enthusiasm. [*12] But if both these translations be not  in the language of the Sophisters, let the reader judge, from the exordium of the discourse, which is the most accurate.

"He who wishes to labour for the happiness of mankind, to add to the content and rest of the human species, to decrease their dissatisfaction (these are literally the words of our Antitheosophical Sophister), must scrutinize and weaken those principles which trouble their rest, contentment, and happiness. Of this species are all those systems which are hostile to the ennobling and

[p. 507]

perfecting of human nature; which unnecessarily multiply evil in the world, or represent it as greater than it really is: all those systems which depreciate the merit and the dignity of man, which diminish his confidence in his own natural powers, and thereby render him lazy, pusillanimous, mean, and cringing: all those also which beget enthusiasm, which bring human reason into discredit, and thus open a free course for imposture: All the Theosophical and Mystical Systems; all those which have a direct or indirect tendency to such Systems; in short, all the principles derived from Theosophy, which, concealed in our hearts, often finish by leading men back to it, belong to this class."

In the course of his instructions, the reader is not to expect that Weishaupt will make any exception in favour of the revealed Religion, not even a hint at such an exception is to be seen.--The Religion of Christ is represented as a medley of the reveries of Pythagoras, of Plato, and of Judaism. It is in vain for the Israelites to believe in the Unity of God, in the coming of a Messiah; it is in vain to assert that such was the faith of their forefathers, of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, long before they entered Egypt or Babylon; it is in vain to prove, that the adoration of the golden Calf, or of the god Apis, was punished by the Almighty as a prevarication of their Religion: Nothing will serve the Sophister; he will declare in his corrected Code, that the Religion of the Jews was but a modification of the reveries of the Egyptians, of Zoroaster, or of the Babylonians. To correct his adepts, he teaches them to cast aside the Creation as a chimera unknown to antiquity, and to reduce all Religion to two Systems--The one, that of matter co-eternal with God, a part of God, proceeding from God, cast forth and separated from God, in order to become the world--The other, matter co-eternal with God, without being God, but worked by God, for the formation of the universe. On these foundations he builds a general history of all Religions, and makes all appear equally absurd. The reader might be tempted to think that these lessons had been composed before the hegira or rather proscription of the author of Illuminism. They may have been compiled for one of those discourses which he declares to be of more importance than that of the Hierophant in the degree of Epopt.--He precisely follows the course which Knigge represents as the grand object of the last mysteries. He makes, after his fashion, a general compilation of all the schools of Philosophism and of its Systems; and hence he deduces Christianity and all Religions. The result of the whole is, that all Religions are founded on imposture and chimera, all end in rendering man cowardly, lazy, cringing, and superstitious; all degrade him, and trouble his repose. [*13] And it is thus that this Sophister, under pretence of his justification, daringly acts that part in public which before he had only ventured to act under the cover of his mysteries. He sallies forth from his baleful abyss but to proclaim to the world what heretofore he had only hinted to his adepts in private,--that the time was at length come for the overthrow of every Altar, and the annihilation of every Religion.

Are any further proofs necessary to demonstrate the object of the grand mysteries? The testimony of Knigge cannot be objected to, nor can Knigge pretend or wish to mislead Zwack when confidentially corresponding with

[p. 508]

him. Both had signed the agreement of the Areopagites respecting the compilation of the degrees of Illuminism. [*14] Let us then attend to these two adepts--Philo-Knigge has been exhibiting all that he has done, according to Weishaupt's instructions, in the degree of Epopt, to demonstrate that Christ had no other view than the establishment of natural Religion, or, in the language of Illuminism, the rights of Equality and Liberty. Knigge then continues: "After having thus shown to our people that we are the real Christians, we have only a word to add against Priests and Princes. I have made use of such precaution in the degrees of Epopt and of Regent, that I should not be afraid of conferring them on Kings or Popes, provided they had undergone the proper previous trials. In our last mysteries we have to acknowledge this pious fraud; to prove, upon the testimony of authors, the origin of all the religious impostures, and to expose the whole with their connections and dependencies." [*15]

Such, reader, is that word to add, which was to be spoken only in the last mysteries of Illuminism! That word against Priests and the Ministers of every worship! That word on the pious fraud, or rather labyrinth of impiety, in which the Sect had involved the Candidate on his first entrance into the Order, only to extricate him when he was judged worthy of their last mysteries! The adept must certainly be of weak intellects, and his credulity must border on stupidity, if he has not in the degree of Epopt, and long before, observed whither they were leading him. But should he really be still in the dark, or could he view with indignation the artifices which had been used with him; if all reflection have not abandoned him; what will not the very term of pious fraud discover to him? Will it not recall to his mind, "that on the first invitations of the Sect, to entice him into their Order, they began by telling him, that nothing contrary to Religion would ever enter the projects of the Order? Does he not remember, that this declaration was repeated on his admission into the noviciate, and reiterated when he was received into the minerval academy? Has he forgotten how strongly the sect enforced the study of morality and of virtue in the first degrees, and how carefully it isolated both from religion? When pouring forth its encomium on religion, did not the Sect insinuate, that true Religion widely differed from those mysteries and worship which had degenerated in the hands of the priesthood? Does he remember with what art and affected respect it spoke of Christ and his Gospel in the degrees of Major Illuminee, of Scotch Knight, and of Epopt; how the Gospel was insensibly metamorphosed into illuminized reason, its morality into that of Nature; and from a moral, reasonable, and natural religion, how a religion and a morality of the rights of man, of Equality and Liberty, were deduced? Does he reflect how all the different parts of this system and opinions of the Sect were insinuated to him, how naturally they occurred and appeared to have been fostered in his own breast? Could not the Sect say to him, 'tis true, we put you on the way, but you were much more earnest in solving our questions than we in answering yours. When, for example, we asked whether the religions which nations had adopted fulfilled the objects for which they were

[p. 509]

intended; whether the pure and simple religion of Christ was really that which different Sects professed at this present day, we knew what to believe, but we wished to know how far you had inhaled our principles. We had a multitude of prejudices to conquer in you, before we could succeed in persuading you that the pretended Religion of Christ was but an invention of Priestcraft, imposture, and tyranny. If such be the case with the much-admired and loudly proclaimed Gospel, what are we to think of all other religions? Learn, then, that they are all founded on fiction, all originate in imposition, error, imposture, and chimera. Such is our secret. All the windings we made; the hypotheses we assumed; the promises set forth; the panegyric pronounced on Christ and his secret schools; the fable, of Masonry being for a long time in possession of his true doctrines, and our Order being at present sole depositary of his mysteries, can no longer be subjects of surprise. If, to overturn Christianity and every Religion, we pretended solely to possess true Christianity, the true Religion, remember that the end sanctifies the means, that the sage must make use of all those means for good purposes, which the wicked do for evil. The means we have employed to rid you, and which we continue in order to rid mankind of all Religion, are but a pious fraud, which we always meant to reveal to you when admitted to the degree of Mage, or of Illuminized Philosopher!!!"

To these reflections on the word to be added in the last mysteries (sufficiently demonstrated by the ascension of the degrees, by Weishaupt's apology, by his intimate correspondence, and that of his most perfect adepts) let us subjoin the avowal of a man little calculated indeed for a Member of such an abominable tribe, but who has better than any person known how to tear the mask from their hideous countenances, and expose their wickedness. I am acquainted with his real name; I am aware that it would greatly add to the confidence of the public; but I also know that could Illuminism discover his asylum, it would follow him to drink his blood, though it were to the southern pole. He is then entitled to secrecy; till now it has been observed, nor will I be the first to infringe his right. The Germans have paid him homage, and, ignorant of his name, they have surnamed him Biederman, or Man of Honour; at least, it is under that denomination that his works are generally cited. All that I can say in addition to what the public is already in possession of respecting this gentleman is that nothing could have induced him to continue so disgusting a course, but a zeal for the public welfare, and a just opinion, that the only means of preventing the effects of the conspiracy of the Sect was to make their machinations public.--Having passed through all the degrees, he was at length admitted to the last mysteries. He published those of Epopt or Priest, and of Regent, under the title of Last Works of Philo and Spartacus. He subjoined the instructions belonging to those degrees, with a Critical History of all the Degrees of Illuminism. Had I no other guarantee of the veracity of his assertions, than their glaring coincidence with the original writings, which is beyond all doubt with the attentive investigator, I should not hesitate in declaring him to be the man that has given the truest account, and was best

[p. 510]

acquainted with the Sect. The certificate at the head of the degree of Epopt and Regent, for a more perfect knowledge of which the public is indebted to him, I look upon as undoubtedly genuine. I know a person who has seen and read this certificate in the original, in Philo-Knigge's own hand-writing, and who has seen the seal of the Order attached to this certificate. I thus particularize because the public is entitled, in discussions of this importance, to know how far I have extended my researches, and how far the grounds I work upon deserve to be credited.--The passage I am about to quote is looked upon as fundamental by all German authors; it is from Biederman, and occurs near the end of his Critical History:

"With respect to the two degrees of Mage and of Man King, there is no reception, that is to say, there are no ceremonies of initiation. Even the Elect are not permitted to transcribe these degrees, they only hear them read; and that is the reason why I do not publish them with this work."

"The first is that of Mage, also called Philosopher. It contains the fundamental principles of Spinosism. Here every thing is material; God and the world are but one and the same thing; all religions are inconsistent, chimerical, and the invention of ambitious men." [*16]

"Divers principles," continues the author, "thrown out in the preceding degrees might in some measure point out the object the Sect had in view." Certainly nothing could be better grounded than such a surmise--Nature, so often united with God, represented active like God, following with the same immensity of power, the same wisdom as God, the course which it had traced; a hundred such expressions in the mouth of the Hierophant evidently indicated, that the God of Weishaupt was that of Spinosa or Lucretius, no other than matter and the universe; in fine, the God of Atheism. Let the Sieur D'Alembert assert, that nothing can be more opposite to Atheism than Spinosism; [*17] or let Spinosa say, that, so far from being an Atheist, he converts every thing into God; will such an excuse raise pity or indignation in the reader? To deny that there is any other God than the world, is evidently denying the only being that can justly be called God. It is laughing at men, to wish to make them believe, that the person is preserved because they do not dare destroy the name, at the very time that the name of God is only used as an agent for the  of every idea of a Deity.

I think I have sufficiently demonstrated, that the first object of these grand mysteries of Illuminism, prepared with so much art and cunning, is no other than to plunge the adepts into a monstrous Atheism, to persuade all nations that religion is but an invention of ambitious impostors, and that to deliver nations from this despotism of imposture, and recover the famous rights of man, Equality and Liberty, they must begin by annihilating every religion, every worship, every altar, and cease to believe in a God.

Let us continue the declaration of Biederman, and the object of the last part of the mysteries (or the degree of the Man king) will be equally clear.

"The second degree of the grand mysteries," he says, "called the Man King, teaches that every inhabitant of the country or town, every father of a

[p. 511]

family, is sovereign, as men formerly were in the times of the patriarchal life, to which mankind is once more to be carried back; that, in consequence, all authority and all magistracy must be destroyed.--I have read these two degrees, and have passed through all those of the Order." [*18]

How well authenticated soever this testimony may be, still one is loth to think that there could have existed men at once so absurd and so wicked as to take such exquisite pains to educate their adepts merely to address them in the end to the following purpose: "All that we have done for you hitherto was only to prepare you to co-operate with us in the annihilation of all Magistracy, all Governments, all Laws, and all Civil Society; of every Republic and even Democracy, as well as of every Aristocracy or Monarchy It all tended to infuse into you and make you insensibly imbibe that which we plainly tell you at present--All men are equal and free, this is their imprescriptible right; but it is not only under the dominion of Kings that you are deprived of the exercise of these rights. They are annulled wherever man recognises any other law than his own will. We have frequently spoken of Despotism and of Tyranny; but they are not confined to an Aristocracy or a Monarchy: Despotism and Tyranny as essentially reside in the Democratic sovereignty of the people, or in the legislative people, as in the legislative King. What right has that people to subject me and the minority to the decrees of its majority? Are such the rights of nature? Did the sovereign or legislative people exist any more than Kings or Aristocratic Legislators at that period when man enjoyed his natural Equality and Liberty?--Here then are our Mysteries--All that we have said to you of Tyrants and Despots, was only designed insensibly to lead you to what we had to impart concerning the despotism and tyranny of the people themselves. Democratic governments are not more consonant with nature than any others. If you ask, How it will be possible for men assembled in towns to live in future without laws, magistrates, or constituted authorities,--the answer is clear, Desert your towns and villages, and fire your houses. Did men build houses, villages, or towns in the days of the Patriarchs? They were all equal and free; the earth belonged to them all, each had an equal right, and lived where he chose. Their country was the world, and they were not confined to England or Spain, to France or Germany; their country was the whole earth, and not a Monarchy or petty Republic in some corner of it. Be equal and free, and you will be cosmopolites or citizens of the world. Could you but appreciate Equality and Liberty as you ought, you would view with indifference Rome, Vienna, Paris, London, or Constantinople in flames, or any of those towns, boroughs, or villages which you call your country. Friend and Brother, such is the grand secret which we reserved for our Mysteries!!!"

It is painful indeed to believe, that stupidity, pride, and wickedness, should have thus combined to prepare adepts, who, attending Weishaupt's Mysteries, could mistake them for the Oracles of true wisdom and  Philosophy. How many Jacobins and those pretended patriots of Democracy blush, when they learn the real object of the Sect which directs their

[p. 512]

actions; when they learn that they have only been the tools of a Sect whose ultimate object is to overturn even their Democratic Constitutions!--But in attributing such language to the Hierophant of the last Mysteries, what more have I said than the Illuminizing Legislator has already declared? What other can be the meaning of his Patriarchal or of his Nomade or roaming life, of those vagabond clans, or of man still in the savage state? [*19] What Democracy even could consist with the Patriarchal life or the vagabond clan? Where is the necessity for attending the last Mysteries, to learn from the Sect itself the extent of their conspiracies? We have seen Weishaupt cursing that day as one of the most disastrous for mankind, when, uniting themselves in civil society, they instituted Laws and Governments, and first formed nations and people. We have seen him depreciate nations and the national spirit as the grand source of Egoism; call down vengeance on the laws and the rights of nations as incompatible with the laws and rights of nature. What else can the Sect mean by saying, that nations shall disappear from the face of the earth, but the annihilation of all civil or national society? Why those blasphemies against the love of one's country, if not to persuade the adepts to  none?--Have we not heard the Hierophant teaching that true morality consisted in the art of casting Princes and Governors aside and of governing oneself, that the real original sin in mankind was their uniting under the laws of civil society; that their redemption could be accomplished only by the abolition of this civil state? And when his frantic hatred against all government exalts his imagination, does he not enthusiastically exclaim, Let the laughers laugh, the scoffers scoff; still the day will come, when Princes and Nations shall disappear from the face of the earth; a time when each man shall recognize no other law but that of his reason? Nor does he hesitate to say, that this shall be the grand work of SECRET SOCIETIES. They are to reinstate man in his rights of Equality and Liberty, in an independence of every law but that of his reason. Such he formally declares to be one of the grand mysteries of his Illuminism; [*20] and can the reader quietly sit down and think that all these declarations of the author of Illuminism, who must be superior to his Mysteries, have not the absolute ruin of every law, government, and civil society, in view? Has he not seen the Sect anticipating those objections which evidence might have suggested against systems still more wicked than stupid; forewarning the adepts, that independence once more restored among men, it was not to meet the same fate it formerly had, and was never to be lost again;--teaching that mankind, having acquired wisdom by its disasters, will resemble a man corrected of his errors by long experience, and who carefully avoids those faults which were the cause of his past misfortunes? Has not the reader heard him proclaim to his elect, that this independence once recovered, the empire of the laws and all civil society would cease; and will he still continue to disbelieve the existence of the most deliberate and most dangerous Conspiracy that ever was formed  society!

Should any of my readers be weak enough to be seduced by the imaginary sweets of a patriarchal life, so artfully promised by Weishaupt, let

[p. 513]

them receive the explanation of that life from these pretended Apostles of Nature.

At my outset I did not only declare, that the destruction of civil society was the object of their views; I did not confine myself to saying, that should Jacobinism triumph every Religion and every Government would be overthrown; but I added, that to whatever rank in society you may belong, your riches and your fields, your houses and your cottages, even your very wives and children would be torn from you. [*21] I also rejected fanaticism and enthusiasm in my own and my reader's name. I have said it, and adopting the simplest construction, do not proofs of the most extensive plots croud upon us from the very lessons of the Sect? Can common sense, nay can the strongest prejudice, refuse to admit such powerful evidence?

Let him who may wish to preserve his field, his house, or the smallest part of his property, under this patriarchal life, go back to the lesser Mysteries; there let him hear the Hierophant teaching the adept, that it would have been happy for man, "Had he know how to preserve himself in the primitive state in which nature had placed him!--But soon the unhappy germ developed itself in his heart, and rest and happiness disappeared. As families multiplied, the necessary means of subsistence began to fail. The Nomade or roaming life ceased; Property began; Men chose fixed habitations; Agriculture brought them together." What were in the eyes of the Sect the dreadful consequences of this deviation from the Nomade or Patriarchal life?--Why the Hierophant hastens to tell us, Liberty was ruined in its foundations, and Equality disappeared. This Patriarchal or Nomade life is then no other than that which preceded property, the building of fixed habitations, of houses, cottages, or the cultivation of your fields. It was this beginning of property therefore, the building of habitations, the cultivation of lands, which struck the first mortal blow at Equality and Liberty. Should any one wish to return to the Patriarchal or Nomade life with such wretches as these apostles of Equality and Liberty, let him begin by renouncing his property; let him abandon his house and his field; let him, in unison with the Sect, declare, that the first blasphemy which was uttered against Equality and Liberty was by the man who first said my field, my house, my property.

It must be voluntary blindness, indeed, in the man who will not see the hatred conceived and the Conspiracies entered into by the Sect against titles or pretensions to, nay against the very existence of property. It will acknowledge none, nor can it in any shape be compatible with their explanations of Equality and Liberty, or with that primitive state of nature which no more entitles you or me to the possession of this gold or silver, or that field, than it does a third person.

Here it is not simply the question of establishing the Agrarian Laws, where lands, riches, and other properties are to be equally distributed among all; it is not simply to abolish the distinction of rich and poor; no, every property is to be destroyed, that of the poor like that of the rich. The first man who was weary of the Nomade, roaming, vagabond, and savage life, built a cot and not a palace. The first who furrowed the earth was in quest of bread and not of

[p. 514]

gold; but he nevertheless, according to the principles of the Sect, was the man who struck the first deadly blow at Equality and Liberty. Poor or rich man then, according to the doctrine of the Sect, the field you have recovered from the waste, and that you have cultivated, belongs to me equally as to you, or else to nobody; I, though idle, and inactive, am entitled to the fruit of your labours; I have a right to share those fruits which you have raised on the land which I left uncultured. Does not Equality disappear, whether it be a poor or rich man who shall pretend to be entitled to or say this field is mind, I have that property? If the poor man has a title to his property, has not the rich man also one? Treasures and palaces are no more property than the cot or cottage. Here an Illuminee spies want, there abundance; Equality and Liberty are every where banished; Despotism or Slavery is universal. Nevertheless, Equality and Liberty in his eyes are the rights of Nature, and he beholds them mortally wounded on the first appearance of property, when man became stationary. Poor or rich, you all imbrued your hands in this foul assassination of Equality and Liberty when you pretended to property; from that instant you are both involved in the curse pronounced in the mysteries; you are both objects of the Conspiracies of the Sect from the first instant that you dared assert your right to your habitations whether cots or palaces, to your properties whether fields or domains. But these cannot be the whole of the secrets; they are only those of the lesser mysteries. Weishaupt has revealed them to his Epopts; he reserves the grander secrets for his Mage and Man-King; then let any man rich or poor harbour, if he can, a hope of seeing the Sect respect his property. Or rather, let him behold the Sect at present pillaging the rich in favour of the poor. The last mysteries or ultimate conspiracy will take place; and then the poor man will learn, that if Illuminism begins by pillaging the rich, it is only to teach him that he is no better entitled to his property than the rich man was, and that the time is near when he will also be pillaged and fall a victim to the curse which has been pronounced against every proprietor.

The progress of this Sophism is worthy of remark. If we judge by its present growth, what a gigantic form will it assume for posterity! The Genevese Sophister of Equality and Liberty, anticipating the modern Spartacus, had already dogmatically asserted, "That the man who, having enclosed a piece of ground, first took upon himself to say this is mine, and found beings simple enough to believe him, was the true founder of civil society." He then continues:--"What crimes, what wars, what murders, what miseries, what horrors would that man have spared mankind, who, tearing down the fences or filling up the ditches of this new enclosure, had called out to his equals, beware of hearkening to this impostor, you are ruined if ever you forget that the fruits belong to all, though the land belongs to none." [*22] How many crimes and spoliations would Rousseau have spared the French Revolution, if, contemning so disastrous a paradox, he had said with more judgement and veracity, "The first man who enclosed a piece of land and took upon himself to say, this belongs to nobody, I will cultivate it, and from sterile it shall become fertile; I will follow the course which nature shall point out to me, to raise sustenance for

[p. 515]

me, my wife and children, and this land will become my property. The God of nature, who as yet has given it to nobody, offers and will give it to him who shall first cultivate it in reward for his labour.--The first man who held such language, seconding the views of nature, and meeting with beings wise enough to imitate him, was the true benefactor of mankind. He taught his children and his equals, that they were not made to dispute the wild fruits of the earth one with another, nor with the savage beasts of the forest; no, he taught them, that there existed social and domestic virtues far preferable to the roaming and often ferocious life of the Nomades. His posterity was blessed, his generations were multiplied. If it was not in his power to avert all the evils, he at least destroyed the first of them, that sterility which stinted the very growth of life and drove the scanty population of the earth into the forests like wild beasts, and too often assimilated them to the lion or the tyger, to whom they frequently fell a prey.

Had the Sophister of Geneva held this language, he would not have exposed himself to the ignominy of being the precursor of Weishaupt.--But human imbecility has lavished its praises on this paradox, and have decorated it with the name of Philosophy! The Bavarian Sophister adopts the doctrine of Rousseau, and the delirium of pride has only refined on the phrenzy of wickedness. That which in the mouth of the master had been but a paradox in support of the wildest independence, becomes in the scholar (without divesting itself of its folly) the blackest of conspiracies.

It is now too late to say, that those were the wild chimeras of the Sophisters; at present we are compelled to say, such are the plots contriving against all and each one's property, plots which have been awfully illustrated by the spoliation of the Church, of the Nobility, of the Merchants, and of all rich proprietors Let them be called chimeras if you are so determined; but remember, that they are the chimeras of Weishaupt, of the genius of conspiring brigands, of a genius the most fertile in sophisms and artifice for the execution of those plans supposed to be chimerical. What Jean  teaches his Sophisters, the modern Spartacus infuses into his Illuminized legions, The fruits belong to all, the land to none. He farther states in his dark recesses, When property began, Equality and Liberty disappeared; and it is in the name of this Equality and of this Liberty that he conspires, that he invites his conspirators to restore mankind to the Patriarchal or wandering life.

Let not the reader be imposed upon by the term Patriarchal life. The illuminizing Hierophant speaks of Abraham and of the Patriarchs, of the father priest and king, sole sovereign over his family. He is not to expect to see the father surrounded by his children, exercising the sweetest of all dominions, and each child, docile to the dictates of nature, revering the orders and anticipating the will of a beloved father. No; this empire is as imaginary as his priesthood. We have seen in the degree of Mage, that the  Patriarch can no more pretend to the acknowledgement of a God than can an Atheist. We must then begin by withdrawing from the Patriarchal life that interesting sight of the father offering up to heaven the prayers of his children, sacrificing in their

[p. 516]

name, and exercising in the midst of them the functions of the priest of the living God. In the next degree of the mysteries all his dominion over his children is to disappear, as his priesthood has already done. Nor was I afraid to assert in the beginning of this work, If Jacobinism triumphs--your very children shall be torn from you. I now repeat it; all this pretended sovereignty of the father is but a conspiracy against the paternal authority. The proofs are extant in the codes of the Sect.

Here again is Weishaupt deprived of the glory of the invention. Rousseau and the Encyclopedists had long since told us, that the authority of the father ceased with the wants of the son; this was one of their principles of rebellion. The man who invented his Illuminism only to convert it into the common sewer of every antichristian and antisocial error, could not leave your children in the dark as to these lessons of independence, though under the sanctuary of the paternal roof; nor with respect to the pretended right of governing themselves, and of acknowledging no other law than that of their reason, as soon as they were strong enough to disobey, or no longer needed your assistance. Tell the illuminizing Hierophant, that your children belong to you; it will be useless, for he has already answered, "The paternal authority ceases with the wants of the children; the father would wrong his children, should he pretend to any authority over them after that period." This is but a principle laid down in the lesser mysteries. Follow up the consequences, or rather leave it to the revolution to develope such a principle. The reader will soon see to what this authority of the father is reduced. Scarcely can the child lisp the words Equality and Liberty, or that of Reason, when the commands of his parents become the most horrid despotism, oppression, and tyranny.--Nor is the Patriarchal sovereign to expect any more affection than obedience from his subjects or his children. In imparting the doctrines of Equality and Liberty, the Hierophant had taught them to blaspheme the love of one's family even still more than the national love, or the love of one's country, as being the more direct and immediate principle of the most disastrous Egoism. Let the father then enquire by what bonds his children still remain united to him, or how they are subjected to him, when, without fear, they may openly resist his Patriarchal power as soon as their feeble arms have acquired sufficient strength to gather the fruits which were to serve them as food. No, this hellish Sect acknowledges no ties. All those of nature, as well as those of government or religion, were to be dissolved in Weishaupt's last mysteries. The child, like the savage tyger of the forest, was to abandon his parents when strong enough to go alone in quest of his prey. And this is what the Sect calls restoring man to his primitive state of nature, to the Patriarchal life, to those days when filial piety compensated for all the necessary laws of civil society. Yes, it is by the most abandoned depravation of all morals, by the extinction of the purest and justest sentiments of nature, that these conspirators consummate their last mysteries. In the name of Equality and Liberty, they abjure the love and authority of their country; in that name they curse the authority and love of their own family.

[p. 517]

As I proceed in revealing these plots, I know not whether the reader does not frequently ask himself, What then can these men want? Have they not fortunes to preserve in our state of society? Have they not children in their families? Can they be conspiring against themselves? or, are they ignorant that their conspiracies will fall back upon themselves?--Those who can propose such questions are little acquainted with the enthusiasm of error when inflated by the spirit of independence and pride, of impiety and jealousy. They have not, like us, heard the cant of the heroes, demi-heroes, and sans-culottes of the revolution--They will be equal and free; they will it above all things.--It must cost them many sacrifices, but they are ready to make them--They will lose their fortunes in the pursuit, but you will not preserve yours--He that served will become the equal, nor will he recognize either God or man above him.--Have we not seen the prince of the fallen angels exclaiming in his pride,

             --Here at least
 We shall be free;--
 Here we may reign secure, and in my choice
 To reign is worth ambition, tho' in hell:
 Better to reign in hell, than serve in heaven.

It is not to one of  adepts that the ties of nature are to be objects. He must be as heedless of the duty he owes to his parents as of the affection due to his children, or the baleful consequences of the mysteries cannot affect him. Can the reader have forgotten the precept laid down for the Insinuators or Recruiters?--The principles; look always to the principles, never to the consequences. Or, in other words, strenuously support and insist upon these great principles of Equality and Liberty; never be frightened or stopped by  consequences, however disastrous they may appear. These wretches, blinded by their pride, do not know, then, that one single consequence proved to be false, contrary to nature, or hurtful to mankind, is a sufficient demonstration that both nature and truth hold the principle in detestation as the prime mover of these disasters. These madmen, with all the confidence of an atheistical Condorcet, when once become the adepts of Weishaupt, will exclaim even in the very tribune of the National Assembly, Perish the universe, but may the principle remain! They will not see, that this principle of Equality and Liberty, devastating human nature, cannot be an Equality and Liberty congenial to mankind. These unhappy men fall victims, perishing under the axe of these disorganizing principles, and spend their last breath in crying, Equality and liberty for ever. No; they are all ignorant of the power of error stimulated by pride, who could think of counteracting the plots of the Sect by the cries of nature, or even by the self-interest of the illuminized adept.--They have not sufficiently comprehended the artifice with which the Hierophant insinuates, vivifies, and inflames the enthusiastic zeal of his adepts.

The reader may rest assured, that villany never slumbers; it watches incessantly the opportunity for the completion of its views. It will persuade the imbecile adept, that all his wants are to disappear on the establishment of the

[p. 518]

reign of Equality and Liberty; that he will be as free from wants as the savage; that Nature shall provide for them; and this heedless adept thirsts after such an Equality. If the adept ruffian be taught that the fruits belong to all, though the land to none, he will easily find means of obtaining his share.

But am I really thinking of reconciling the adepts with their plots? What is it to them whether you see any agreement between them or not? Villany, we all know, is replete with contradictions; but is it the less wicked on that account, or are its crimes less real? In vain would the reader object and say, What can these men want with their monstrous Equality, with their plots against our civil laws, our title to even the very name of property? Must we then, to please them, abandon our habitations; must we renounce all arts and sciences, and end with burning our cities, towns, and villages, to follow them in herds like the savage and Nomade clans?--Are half the inhabitants of the globe to be slaughtered, the better to scatter these roaming herds? What can be the object of those arts and sciences, and particularly of those Minerval academies of Illuminism? Can it be for the propagation of science, or the involving mankind again in the disasters of barbarism, that all this parade of science is made? Can these Illuminees resemble the Goths, Huns, or Vandals? And is Europe once more threatened with an inundation of barbarians like those which formerly sallied from the North? In answering such questions, the reader may expect that I would put certain restrictions on the views of the Sect. Nothing like a restriction or qualification. No; you must renounce all the arts, all the sciences; you must begin by firing your habitations, not only your cities, towns, and villages, in short all your fixed habitations, unless you stop the disorganizing career of the Sect. Yes, wherever its legions shall be at liberty to act and accomplish the grand object of the Sect, there you may expect to see those scenes of plunder, rapine, and devastation, which heretofore traced the awful progress of the Huns, Goths, or Vandals; and this inference is fairly drawn from the very Code of the Sect.

Has not the reader heard the Hierophant insinuating the designs of the Sect upon the arts and sciences? Has he not taught the adept to answer, when asked what misfortunes reduced human nature to slavery, that it was civil society, the state, governments, and sciences? Has he not heard him exclaim, When shall the day come when, the clod of useless sciences banished form the earth, man shall recognize no other but the savage or nomade state, and which the Sect styles patriarchal, primitive, natural? Has he not declared, that the happiness and glory of the Sect would be at its zenith when, beholding those happy days, it could say, This is our work? (Wenn die beschleunigung dieser periode, unser werk ist?) [*23] Are we to be duped by the name of Minerval Academies, with which the Sect decorates its schools? Can we observe there any other study than that of applying the sciences to the subversion of science, as well as to the total annihilation of all religion or society, when we remark the anxiety with which the Sect puts the following questions to the adept on his coming out of these academies, wishing to know what progress he has made in its principles before he is admitted to the illuminized priesthood:

[p. 519]

"Do the general and common sciences to which men apply infuse real light? Do they lead to true happiness? Are they not rather the offspring of variegated wants, or of the anti-natural state in which men exist? Are they not the invention of crazy brains laboriously subtle?" [*24] The reader has heard these questions, he has heard the Sect blaspheme science, and will he still believe that Illuminism recognizes any other sciences but those of the man-savage equal and free, roaming in the forests? Have not the revolutionary devastations, the multitude of monuments fallen beneath the hatchet of the Jacobin brigand, already demonstrated the frantic hatred of the modern Vandals? But the mysteries elucidate this enigma in a clearer manner.

Reader, give vent to your indignation. Ask again, What can this Weishaupt be? What are these adepts of Illuminism? Treat them as barbarians, as Huns, as Ostrogoths; but see him smiling at your contempt, and teaching his adepts to honour themselves by imitating, and glory in the hope of hereafter surpassing, the disastrous devastations of those barbarians.--Do you know in what light the illuminizing legislator views these northern clans sallying from their forests and desolating the most flourishing countries of Europe, firing its towns, beating down its empires, and strewing the earth with ruins? He complacently beholds the precious remains of the patriarchal race, the true offspring of Nature; it is with their hatchets that he means to regenerate mankind, and shape them out to the views of the Sect. I did not note the lessons of the Hierophant on this subject, when lecturing the future Epopt.--Hear the account which Weishaupt gives of these clans, when he pretends to historify human nature, at that epoch marked in the annals of Europe as a scourge, and called the inundation of the barbarians. Here is his description:

At that period when all Europe had fallen prey to corruption, "Nature, which had preserved the true race of men in its original vigour and purity, came to the assistance of mankind. From distant, but poor and sterile countries, she calls those savage nations and sends them into the regions of luxury and voluptuousness to infuse new life into the enervated species of the south; and with new laws and morals to restore that vigour to human nature which flourished until an ill-extinguished germ of corruption infected even that portion of mankind which originally arrived in so pure a state," or those barbarians the pretended regenerators of Europe sent by Nature.

Such are the encomiums lavished by the Sect on the Goths and Vandals. You thought it would be offending this illuminized tribe to compare them to barbarians; whereas they glory in the comparison. History has described these northern clans as carrying every where fire and sword, as ravaging countries, firing towns, destroying the monuments of the arts, depopulating empires; their course is to be traced by ruins and wastes, and in their train appear ignorance and the iron age. But in the eyes of the adept this is not the exceptionable part of their conduct; on the contrary, it was by such means that they were to regenerate mankind, and second the grand object of nature. These barbarians leave the regeneration in an imperfect state; in time they

[p. 520]

adopt our usages and manners; they are civilized; the plains rise once more in fertile crops; society is re-established; science returns; the arts flourish under the protection of the laws; towns are re-peopled; the savage and primitive race, confounded among the citizens, is subjected to the same laws, and governments acquire their pristine lustre.

Here, in the eyes of the adept, is the grand crime of these barbarians; the Hierophant, deploring their fall, exclaims, "Oh had there remained any sages among them, happy enough to have preserved themselves from the contagion, how would they sigh after, and ardently wish to return to the former abodes of their ancestors, there again to enjoy their former pleasures on the banks of a rivulet, under the shade of a tree laden with fruit, by the side of the object of their affections! It was then that they conceived the high value of Liberty, and the greatness of the fault they had committed in placing too much power in the hands  one man--It was then that the want of Liberty made them sensible of their fall, and seek means of softening the rigour of Slavery;--but even then their  were only aimed against the tyrant, and not against tyranny."

It is thus that the insidious and declaiming Sophister, but able Conspirator, leads the adept through the labyrinth of his lesser mysteries, not barely to imitate these barbarians, but to surpass their devouring rage, by constancy, perseverance, and the perpetuation of their devastations. Thus are to be explained all those questions on the danger of reconquering Equality and Liberty only to lose them again. Hence those exhortations "to unite and support each other; to increase their numbers; and to begin by becoming powerful and terrible--You have already done it, for the multitude sides with you--The wicked, who fear you, seek protection beneath your banners--Henceforward your strength will be sufficient to bind the remainder of mankind, subjugate them, and stifle vice in its origin." [*25]

Such will be the explanation of the revolutionary rage and madness which has levelled beneath its blows such a multitude of majestic and invaluable monuments of the arts and sciences--The cry of indignation rising from every class suspends for a moment the sanguinary crimes of the Jacobin Vandal, and he even pretends to weep.--Wait, and the last mysteries shall be accomplished; wait, and you shall see the awful bodings of the Hierophant fulfilled, and with fire and sword shall he annihilate your laws, your sciences and arts, and erase your towns and habitations.

Here in particular is to be found the origin of that revolutionary ferocity, that thirst of blood, those insatiable proscriptions, those incessant executions, and finally those banishments more artfully cruel than the relentless guillotine. Yes, the time draws near when they shall bind the hands, subjugate, and crush in their origin, what the Sect calls the wicked, or, in other words, all who are proof against their vile efforts; the time for subjugating and destroying every citizen zealous in the cause of Religion, or wishing to support the laws, civil society, or property. Like Huns and Vandals, the Sect has begun its career; but it will carefully avoid terminating it like them; the devastations of its followers

[p. 521]

shall be perpetuated, and they will be Vandals to the last, until Religion, property, and the laws shall be irrecoverably lost. Such atrocious plots are only the consequences of the lesser mysteries; but trust the author of the Sect, the modern Spartacus, for the farther developement of them. Has he not told you, that his last mysteries were but the consequences, a clearer and more absolute exposition of the foregoing secrets of the Order? He informed you, that nations, together with their laws and social institutions, shall vanish, and that they shall disappear before the all-powerful arm of his adepts, or his modern Vandals. What new secret then remains to be discovered, unless it be that no time shall blunt the sword or slack the unrelenting fury of his proselytes; that they shall persevere until the end of time in their Vandalism, lest Religion, society, science, arts, the love of their country, and respect for property, should shoot forth again, and overshadow the venemous growth of his Illuminized Equality and Liberty?

But Spartacus is not to be contented with these last secrets of the Conspiracy; his pride cannot endure that others  usurp the glory of the invention. Hitherto we have seen him play upon the credulity of his adepts, inflame their zeal, and acquire their respect by the pretended antiquity of his Order; and successively attribute the honour of instituting his mysteries to the children of the Patriarchs, the Sages, even to the god of Christianity, and to the founders of the Masonic Lodges. But now the time is come when the adept, initiated in the higher mysteries, is supposed to be sufficiently enthusiastic in his admiration of the Order for the chiefs no longer to fear to disclose the real history of Illuminism. [*26] Here they inform him, that this secret society, which so artfully led him from mystery to mystery, which has with such persevering industry rooted from his heart every principle of Religion, all false ideas of love of the country or affection for his family, all pretensions to property, to the exclusive right to riches, or to the fruits of the earth; this society, which took such pains to demonstrate the tyranny and despotism of all that he calls the laws of empires; this society, which has declared him free, and teaches him that he has no sovereign but himself, no rights to respect in others, but those of perfect Equality, of absolute Liberty, and of the most entire independence; this society is not the offspring of an ignorant and superstitious antiquity, it is that of modem philosophy; in a word, it is of our own invention. The true father of Illuminism is no other than SPARTACUS WEISHAUPT.

We must also perceive by many of Weishaupt's letters, that this latter part of the secret, which attributed to him the whole honour of the invention, always remained a mystery to the greater part of his Mages and Men-Kings. Those alone who, under the title of Areopagites, formed the grand council of the Order, were to be made acquainted with the real chief and founder, except in certain cases where an adept was judged worthy of so distinguished a mark of confidence. [*27] Whatever merit the adept might boast, Weishaupt knew no higher recompence than to tell them in the end, "This general

[p. 522]

overthrow of the Altar, of the Throne, and of all Society, is a conception of my own; to me and to me alone is due the whole glory."

I have revealed the disastrous secrets of Illuminism; I have laid open the gradation and progressive degrees, the long chain of artifice, by which the Sect prepares its adepts for the last mysteries, to behold them stript of their veil without shuddering, and to embrace them with enthusiastic ardour.--We must either commit the Code of the Sect to the flames, and deny the truth of its annals; even refuse the evidence of the familiar correspondence of Spartacus Weishaupt the founder, and of Philo-Knigge the principal compiler; we must dispute all the agreements of its most arduous co-operators, or else must we wait, as the only possible demonstration, the entire and fatal execution of these disastrous plots, before we positively pronounce, that the sole object of their infernal plans and of their frantic wishes is no other than the total overthrow of every Altar, of every Throne or Magistracy; the annihilation of all authority and of all civil or religious society; the destruction of property whether in the hands of the rich or of the poor; and the very arts and sciences which can only be cultivated in civil society are to be banished from the face of the earth. Equality and Liberty, together with the most absolute independence, are to be the substitutes for all rights and all property: Our morals and social intercourse are to make place for the savage, vagabond, roaming life, which the Sect alternately decorates with the name of Nomade and of Patriarchal. The means to be employed in operating this change will be found in the artifice, deceit, illusion and wickedness which the Sophisters are masters of, until the force of numbers shall have declared for the Sect; but when at length, powerful in numbers, the Sect shall have acquired strength, it shall not only bind hands, subjugate, murder, ravage, and renew all the horrors and atrocities of the barbarians of the North, but also surpass those Vandals in the arts of destruction, and without pity or distinction butcher all that part of mankind that shall dare to oppose the progress of the Sect, presume to heave a sigh over the ruins of religion, society, or property, or attempt to raise them from their ashes.--If I have not proved that such are the wishes, the secret machinations of the Sect and of its flagitious principles, let me be informed what is to be understood by proof, or what is to be the operation of evidence on the human mind.--Were it possible that any of my readers still consoled themselves with the idea that the frantic extravagance of these plots surpassed their wickedness, let them remember that I have still something more to say.--I have still to investigate the laws and interior government of the Sect, laws adopted for the destruction of every other law or government, and that it might hereafter prove, that however monstrous the object of the plots of the Sect may be, it was far from being chimerical.

[p. 523] [p. 524]

Footnotes

^524:1 Orig. Writ. Vol. II. Let. 15, 16, 24, to Cato-Zwack.

^524:2 Ibid. Vol. I. Let. 4, to Cato.

^524:3 Ibid. Vol. II. Let 1, to Philo, and Second Part of Agreement of the Areopagites.

^524:4 Original Writings, Vol. II. Let. 15, to Cato.

^524:5 See the Discourse on the Degree of Epopt.

^524:6 Original Writings, Vol. I. Let 4, to Cato.

^524:7 Ibid. Let 3, to Cato.

^524:8 See the Helvian Letters on these Works.

^524:9 Ibid. Vol. II. Let. 15, to Cato.

^524:10 So hoffe ich doch sollen alle darin ubereinkommen, dass die in diesen graden aufgestellten grund-saze fahig seyen, grosse und erhabene menschen zu bilden--Introduction to his corrected System.

^524:11 See in the corrected System the Discourse on the third class.

^524:12 Unterricht fur alle mitglieder, welche zu Theosophischen schwarmereyen geneight sind.

^524:13 See the last Discourse of Illuminism corrected.

^524:14 See this agreement in the Original Writings, Vol. II. Part II. signed the 20 Adarmeth 1551, or Anno Domini 20 December, 1781.

^524:15 Da nun die leute sehen dass wir die einzigen achten wahren Christen sind, so darfen wir da gegen ein word mehr gegen pfaffen and fursten reden; doch habe ich diess so gethan, dass ich papste und konige nach vorhergegangener prufung, in diese grade aufnehmen wollte. Indem hoheren mysterien sollte man dann A diese piam fraudem entdecken, und B aus allen schrifften den ursprung aller religiozen lugen, und deren zusammenhang entwickeln--Original Writings, Vol. II. Let. I., from Philo to Cato.

^524:16 Der erste, welcher Magus auch Philosophus heist, enthalt spinosistiche grund-satze, nach welchen alles materiell, Gotz und die welt einerley, alle religion unstatthaft, und eine erfindung hersuchtiger menschen ist.

I might have quoted the testimony of another adept, who writes as follows to the authors of the Eu-demonia: (Vol. III. No. 2, Art. 4.) "I can also declare that I have been present at the grand mysteries; particularly, that in 1785 I was entrusted with the instructions of the degree of Mage or Philosopher, and that the short description given in the ENDLICHES SCHICKSAL (or the last object of Freemasonry) is perfectly exact and well grounded." The author of the Endliches Schicksal has only, like myself, copied the text from Biederman. I have no knowledge of this new adept. I see he has signed his letter, desiring the authors of the Eudemonia not to make use of his name without an absolute necessity. "Besides," he adds, "I am a Roman Catholic; and in the country in which I live might find disagreeable consequences from not having asked to be absolved from my oath, before I published what I had promised to keep secret." Sir, I am a Catholic as well as yourself, and should wish to know where you have learned, that the oath you had taken to the Illuminees was superior to that you had taken to the state. How then could you reconcile with your conscience the keeping back from the magistrate or the prince such proofs as you had acquired of a conspiracy against the state? Yes, do penance, and ask absolution for having taken such an oath, and for not having been true to the oath of allegiance which you had sworn to the state, and from which you could not be absolved by any power on earth.--What singular ideas are sometimes formed of probity! To persuade oneself that one is bound by an oath to a band of conspirators, while the oath of allegiance is overlooked!--Sir, you had said, that it was necessary to take proper precautions for your security, that wretches pretending to the power of life and death might not assassinate you, nothing could be more natural; take your precautions while informing the public magistrate, but do not come and give us as an excuse your fidelity to an oath, which in itself is nothing less than a perjury to the state.

[p. 524]

Notwithstanding, however, the reproach justly merited by this adept, his testimony is not to be neglected, since he has sent his name to the editors of the Eudemonia, a journal printed at Franckfort on the Mein, and highly deserving of encouragement for the vigour with which the editors combat the Illuminees. Their writings have frequently corroborated materials that I had received from Austria and Bavaria, which give me great confidence in the researches I have made.

^524:17 Panegyric of Montesquieu.

^524:18 Der zweyte, Rex gennant, lehrt dass jeder Bauer, Burger und hausvater ein souverain sey, wie in dem patriarchalischen leben, auf welches die leute wieder zuruck-gebracht werden musten, gewesen sey; und dass folglich alle obrigkeit wegfallen musse--Diese beyden graden habe auch ich, der ich in dem orden alles durchgegangen bin, selbst gelesen. Ibid.

^524:19 Original Writings, Vol. II. Let. 10, to Cato.

^524:20 See the Degree of Epopt.

^524:21 Chap. I.

^524:22 Discourse on the Inequality of Stations, Vol. II.

^524:23 See above, the Prince Illuminee.

^524:24 Befordem die gemeine wissenschaften warhafte aufklarung, wahre menschliche gluckseligkeit; oder sind sie viel mehr kinder der noth, der verfielfaltigten bedurfnisse, des wiedernaturlichen zustandes erfindungen spitzfindiger eitler kopfe?

^524:25 Nun seyd ihr stark genug den noch ubrigen rest die hande zu binden, sie zu unterwerfen, und die bosheit eher in ihrem keime zu ersticken.

^524:26 Original Writings, Vol. II. Letter from Knigge to Zwack.

^524:27 Original Writings, Vol. I. Let. 25, to Cato.

     
Code of the Illuminati: Part III of Memoirs Illustrating the History of Jacobinism, by A Barruel, tr. Robert Edward Clifford [1798], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 525]

  

CHAP. XIII.

  

Tenth and Last Part of the Code of the Illuminees.--Government of the Order--General Idea of that Government, and of the Share which the Inferior Classes of Illuminism bear in it.

IT is not enough for the founder of a Sect of Conspirators to have fixed the precise object of his plots, the trials and degrees through which his adepts are to rise insensibly to the acquisition of his profoundest mysteries. His accomplices must form but one body animated by one spirit; its members must be moved by the same laws, under the inspection and government of the same chiefs, and all must tend toward the same object. Such a genius as Weishaupt's could not be suspected of having overlooked in his Code so important a means of success. From what I have already said, the reader will have observed what connection and subordination subsisted in the gradation of his mysteries; how all the adepts of a given town formed, notwithstanding the inequality of their degrees, but one and the same academy of Conspirators, while each one laboured separately at the overthrow of religion and the laws in the state in which he lived. In this academy the Candidate and the Novice are under the direction of the Insinuator, who introduces them into the Minerval Lodges; these Lodges are governed by the Minor Illuminees, who in their turn are inspected by the Major Illuminees. Next to these preparatory degrees follow the intermediary or Masonic degree, called the Scotch Knight; and his power extends on the one side over the Major Illuminees, and on the other over the Illuminized Masons; or, in general, over all that part of the Order stiled in the Code the lower part of the edifice. After these we meet the Epopts and Regents or Princes of the lesser mysteries, and lastly, in the higher mysteries, the Mage and Man-King.

The aggregate of all these degrees forms a complete academy of Conspirators, and impendent ruin threatens the country where such a one exists. The Magistrate and the Citizen may expect to see their property and their religion annihilated. The Sect recognizes no country but the universe, or rather acknowledges none; the very term country is a blasphemy against the rights of man, against Equality and Liberty. What each member in his particular academy performs by himself, is performed throughout all of them by the Sect in general, and the combined efforts of the whole are regularly directed toward the concerted plan of devastation. The Miners have received

[p. 526]

their instructions, that each may bore his subterraneous galleries, and lodge the chamber of his mines in such a manner that partial explosions may forward the views of the Sect, without endamaging the grand chamber, which shall involve the whole world in the premeditated explosion of universal destruction. To produce this , general laws and mutual communications, common chiefs and directors are requisite. Each Conspirator, wherever his field of action may lie, must be certain that he acts in concert with his Brethren, that he will not be crossed in his plans, but on the contrary meet every where with support and corresponding agents.

Weishaupt was aware, that the farther the sphere of disorganization was to extend the more perfect should be the organization of his power. The more eager he was to call down universal anarchy, and make it take place of all laws, the more did he wish to establish subordination, and concentrate the forces of the Order, the better to direct its motions. To accomplish this, the oath of implicit obedience to Superiors was not enough. It was not sufficient for the adept to have blindly submitted his life and fortune to the despotic power of unknown chiefs, should they ever suspect him of treachery or rebellion. The Superiors themselves were to be bound by laws and principles common to all, that they might proceed in all points by a regular and uniform impulse.

It cost Weishaupt much meditation before he could perfect his plan of government as he wished. Five years after the establishment of the Sect, he writes "This machine of ours must be so perfectly simple that a child could direct it;" and still later he writes, "allow me time to digest my speculations, that I may properly marshal our forces." [*1]

So preoccupied was Weishaupt with his speculations on the government of the Sect, that all his letters written to his principal adepts are replete with his maxims and political councils. One must have heard or read them one's self to credit the deep-laid villany of his means and his infernal policy. Here is an example:

In the same letter which I have  quoted of the 15 Asphandar 1151 he gives two rules to be inserted among the instructions of the Areopagites--The one, to be on the reserve with Candidates from among the class of the rich, because that sort of men, proud, ignorant, averse to labour, and impatient of subordination, only seek admission to our mysteries in order to make them an object of ridicule and mockery; the other, not to take the smallest pains to prove, that Illuminism is in the sole possession of the true Masonry, because the best possible demonstration is to give none. Let Weishaupt himself explain a third law, which is to make a part of his political collection.

"That we may be uncontrolled in our discourse, let our pupils remark, that the Superiors enjoy a great latitude in that respect; that we sometimes speak in one way, sometimes in another; that we often question with great assurance only to sound the opinions of our pupils, and to give them an opportunity of showing it by their answers. This subterfuge repairs many errors. Let us always say, that the end will discover which of our observations conveys our true sentiments.--Thus we may speak sometimes in one way, at others in a quite different one, that we may never be embarrassed, and that our real sentiments

[p. 527]

may always be impenetrable to our inferiors. Let this be also inserted in the instructions, etiam hoc inseratur instructioni. It would still have a better effect, if you gave in charge to our Major Illuminees to vary their conversation with their inferiors, for the above reasons, ex rationibus supra dictis." These insertions of Latin are from Weishaupt, who frequently makes use of that language in his letters. It is immediately after having given these principles of government to the Areopagites, the chief superiors of his Illuminism, that Weishaupt adds, "I entreat that the maxims which are so often to be found in my letters may not be lost. Collect them for the use of our Areopagites, as they are not always present in my mind. With time they might form an excellent political degree. Philo has long since been employed about it. Communicate also your private instructions to each other, which may in time grow into an uniform Code. Read them attentively, that they may become familiar to you. Though I know them well and practise them (und auch darnach handle) they would take me too much time to digest them systematically. These maxims once engraved in your mind, you will enter better into my plans, and you will proceed more  to my mode of operation." [*2]

Let the reader also profit of these instructions. They must bear evidence in my behalf while revealing all the monstrous artifices of the remaining part of the Illuminized Code. From these long meditated combinations, sprang forth that chain of laws which was to direct each Illuminee in all his .

We first remark in this government, as a means of subordination, a general division of command, as well as of locality. Each department has a particular Lodge for its adepts; each Minerval Lodge has a Superior from among the preparatory class, under the inspection of the intermediary class. In the second place, we find the division into districts which contain several Lodges, all which as well as the Prefect are under the direction of the superior of the district whom the Order calls Dean. He is also subjected to the Provincial, who has the inspection and command over all the lodges and deanries of the province. Next in rank comes the National Superior, who has full powers over all within his nation, Provincials, Deans, Lodges, &c. &c. Then comes the supreme council of the Order, or the Areopagites, presided by the real General of Illuminism.

The same hierarchy is preserved in their communications. The simple Illuminee corresponds with his immediate superior, the latter with his Dean, and thus gradually ascending to the National Superiors. These latter are in direct correspondence with the Areopagites; and they alone are acquainted with their residence. In this council there is always a member whose particular office is to receive and answer their letters, and to transmit orders, which gradually descend to the person or persons who are the objects of them. The Areopagites alone are entrusted with the name and residence of the General, excepting in cases which I have already noticed, where particular confidence or remarkable services have gained for an adept the signal honour of knowing and approaching the modern Spartacus.

[p. 528]

It is easy to perceive, from the very regulations of the first degrees, how voluminous this correspondence must be. Each brother, in the first place, as the natural Scrutator of his co-adepts and of the prophane, is bound to transmit at least one letter each month, with a statement of all the observations he has made, whether favourable or detrimental to the Order. He is also to give an account of the progress which himself and his brethren have made; of the orders he has received, and of their execution; and he is each month to inform his higher superiors whether he is pleased with the conduct of his immediate superior. Each brother Insinuator is to report the progress of his Candidates, and the prospect he has of adding to their number. Next, to swell the volume, come all the portraits of the adepts, the extracts of tablets or daily observations made on the friends or enemies of the Order: also the minutes of initiations, the characters and lives of the initiated, the returns made by the Lodges, those by the superiors, and an infinity of other articles which the Illuminee is bound to make known to his chiefs. All this occurs without noticing the numberless orders and instructions which are perpetually transmitting to the inferiors.

Beside the secret language already explained, and of which the grand object was to render this correspondence unintelligible to the prophane, the Sect had secret means of transmitting their letters, lest they might be intercepted. The Order styles these letters relative to their illuminism Quibus Licet's (or to those who have a right). The origin of this appellation is the direction of these letters which consists of the two words Quibus Licet or simply the initials Q. L. When, therefore, we find in the Original Writings, that such an adept has been fined in such a month for having neglected his Q. L., it must be understood that he let such a month pass without writing to his superiors. [*3]

When the letter contains secrets or complaints which the adept chooses to keep from the knowledge of his immediate superior, he adds to the direction Soli or Primo (to him alone, to the first); this letter will then be opened by the Provincial, the National Superior, or will reach the Areopagites, or General, according to the rank of the person from whom it comes.

Next to these general means of graduated correspondence, come the meetings proper to each degree, and their respective powers. We have already seen, that those of the Minerval academy are regularly held twice a month. The Minor Illuminees, who are the magistrates of this degree, and the Major Illuminee, or the Scotch Knight, who presides in them, have no direct share in the government, farther than to inspect the studies and watch over the conduct of the young Minervals, and report to the lodges of the Major Illuminees. It is in that degree that the authority begins to extend beyond the limits of the assembly. It is to the Major Illuminees that all the tablets or instructions relative to the brethren of Minerva are sent. Here these statements are digested, and receive additions and notes, before they are forwarded to the assembly of the next superior degree. Here are judged and determined the promotions of the Novices, Minervals, and Minor Illuminees; and also all differences and contests which may arise in the inferior degrees, unless the importance of the debate be such as to require the interference of a higher tribunal. They are the guardians of the first tablets and reversal letters of the

[p. 529]

brethren.--As to what  a Major Illuminee may have acquired either relative to other secret societies, or to employments or dignities which might be obtained for adepts, he is bound to report it to his lodge, which will note it, and inform the assembly of the Directing Illuminees or Scotch Knights. [*4]

When treating of the intermediary degree of Scotch Knight, I gave an account of their particular functions, and especially their charge of superintending the Masonic Lodges. The part they act in the general government of the Order chiefly consists in hearing all the Quibus Licets of the preparatory classes read in their chapters, even those of the Novices which had already been opened by the officers of the Minerval school: the latter having only the power of deciding provisionally on these letters.

The authority which the Scotch Knights exercise over this correspondence seems to give still more propriety to their denomination of intermediary degree. Their Quibus Licets are directly sent to the Provincial Lodge, which is composed entirely of adepts initiated in the mysteries of the Order. But the Knights read all letters coining from the preparatory class which have not the distinction of Primo or Soli. They classify and make extracts from all the Quibus Licets of lesser importance coming from the inferior degrees, and send the general extract to the Provincial. To these extracts they subjoin a circumstantial account of every thing that is going forward in the lodges of the preparatory class, to which they transmit all the orders coming from the adepts initiated in the mysteries, even from those of the highest degrees with the very names of which they are unacquainted, and thus constitute a link between the two extremities. [*5]

Both the intermediary and preparatory classes, however, form but the lower part of the edifice. The Prefects of the Chapters of the Scotch Knights are rather tools than superiors; they receive their impulse from the higher mysteries. It is there that the grand polity of the Order is to be sought for in the instructions laid down for the Epopt and the Regent, and these are the instructions which, beginning with those of the Epopt, demand our utmost attention.

Footnotes

^529:1 Letters to Cato, 15th March 1781, and 16th February 1782.

^529:2 Letter to Cato, 15th March, 1781.

^529:3 Vol. II. Let. 2, from Spartacus to Cato.

^529:4 Degree of Major Illuminee, Instruction 4th.

^529:5 See this degree, Instruction the 2d, No. 2.

     
Code of the Illuminati: Part III of Memoirs Illustrating the History of Jacobinism, by A Barruel, tr. Robert Edward Clifford [1798], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 530]

  

CHAP. XIV.

  

Of the Government and Political Instructions for the Epopts.

ENLIGHTEN nations; that is to say, efface from the minds of the people what we call religious and political prejudices; make yourself master of the public opinion; and, this empire once established, all the constitutions which govern the world will disappear.--Such are the grand means, such the hopes, on which Weishaupt has been observed in his mysteries to have grounded his hopes of success. We have seen even the sciences involved in the vortex of his conspiracies. They were to be swept into the common mass of ruin with religion, laws, Princes, nations, our towns and stationary habitations.--Vandalism and the era of barbarism were to be revived, and science was to be reduced to that of the nomade and savage clans equal and free. This gigantic mass of destruction could be the operation but of a general corruption and perversion of the public opinion, which is itself dependent on science, or at least upon the reputation of wisdom and knowledge which he possesses who pretends to instruct us. To prepare the attack, therefore, it was necessary to make the sciences serve under the banners of the Sect in the cause of their own annihilation, and through their means captivate the public opinion in favour of the Sect. Its errors once triumphant, and every thing dear and sacred to man vandalized and overthrown; sciences would of themselves shrink back and vanish from before the man savage and free. Such were the fruits of Weishaupt's meditations, such the spirit which dictated the laws given to his Epopts. This degree was to extend the conquests of the Sect over public opinion by science, or, in other words, to dispense its anti-religious and antisocial doctrines under the bewitching name of science. He entirely devoted his degree of Epopts to the sciences, and may be said to have forestalled them all, that he might usurp and dictate to the public opinion; or, rather, tainted them all, to make them subservient to his views; well assured that they would not survive the contagion. In his Minerval degree, it was the minds of the young adepts that he wished to pervert; but in his degree of Epopt, his means and views expand, and, under the same mask, he aims at nothing less than the perversion of the whole universe. He formed it into a secret academy, whose hidden ramifications, widely spreading throughout the globe, were, by means

[p. 531]

of the disastrous laws he had combined, at one blow to annihilate all society and the empire of science.

The plan may appear inconceivable, and above the reach of the most disorganizing genius; but let the reader remember how clearly it has been proved in the mysteries, that Weishaupt and his followers were firmly resolved to bring back the human race to the days of the Huns and Vandals, and, by means of this Vandalism, to all the ignorance of the nomade and savage clans; and to reduce the standard of science to that of the Equality and Liberty of Sans-culotism. Let the reader now condescend to follow me in the exposition of the lessons which the Sect has appropriated to the instruction of its Epopts, and the organization of their academy.

"The illuminized Priests, or Epopts, are presided over by a Dean chosen by themselves. They are to be known to the inferior degrees only under the appellation of Epopt--their meetings are called Synods. All the Epopts within the circle of the same district compose a Synod; but each district shall contain no more than nine Epopts, exclusive of the Dean and Prefect of the Chapter. The higher superiors may attend these Synods."

"Of the nine Epopts, seven preside over the sciences distributed under as many heads in the following order:

"I. Physics.--Under this head are comprehended Dioptrics, Catoptrics, Hydraulics and Hydrostatics; Electricity, Magnetism, Attraction, &c."

"II. Medicine--comprising Anatomy, Chirurgery, Chymistry, &c."

"III. Mathematics.--Algebra; Architecture, civil and military; Navigation, Mechanics, Astronomy, &c."

"IV. Natural History.--Agriculture, Gardening, Economics, the Knowledge of Insects and Animals including Man, Mineralogy, Metallurgy, Geology, and the science of the earthly phenomena."

"V. Politics--which embraces the study of Man, a branch in which the Major Illuminees furnish the materials; Geography, History, Biography, Antiquity, Diplomatics; the political history of Orders, their design, their progress, and their mutual dissentions." This last article seems to have the divers Orders of Masonry in view. A nota bene is added in the original, with a particular injunction to attend to this article, which the dissentions of the Illuminees and Freemasons had probably rendered of great importance to the Sect.

"VI. The Arts.--Mechanics, Painting, Sculpture, Engraving, Music, Dancing, Eloquence, Poetry, Rhetoric, all the branches of Literature; the Trades."

"VII. The Occult Sciences.--The study of the Oriental tongues, and others little known, the secret methods of writing, the art of decyphering; the art of raising the seals of the letters of others, and that of preserving their own from similar practices; Petcshaften zu erbrechen, and fur das erbrechen zu bewahren. The study of ancient and modern hieroglyphics; and, once more, of secret societies, Masonic systems, &c. &c."

[p. 532]

Should the reader feel his indignation roused by the art of raising the seals and violating the secrecy of letters, and at seeing an adept named in each district to preside over this strange science, let him not forget that I am but the translator and transcriber of the code of the Sect. [*1]

The two remaining Epopts, who in the synod are named to preside over any particular science, are made secretaries to the Dean, and serve him as coadjutors. These functions once distributed, the Epopts are to renounce all other business political or domestic, and every care but that of perfecting themselves in the branch of science which they are to superintend, and of secretly forwarding the brethren of the inferior degrees in the sciences to which they had devoted themselves.

The grand object of this institution is to inspire the pupils with the greatest confidence in the Order, from an idea that it will furnish them with all the means and lights necessary for the prosecution of the study they have adopted. The Insinuators have held out the promise to them, and the Order has engaged to fulfil it. This idea of a scientific society, and of which they have the honour of being members, is to encourage in them a docility and veneration for their chiefs naturally due to men whose precepts appear to be emanations of light and of the most transcendent wisdom. The artifice in some sort answers to the promise.

Every Novice, on being admitted into the Minerval schools, was to begin by declaring to what art or science he meant to devote himself, unless indeed his pocket was to be assessed for the tax which his genius could not pay. This declaration is transmitted from the inferior lodges to the Provincial, who forwards it to the Dean; by whom notice of it is given to the Epopt who presides over that particular branch of science; and he inscribes his name on the list of those pupils whose labours fall under his inspection. In future, and by the same conveyance, all the essays, discourses, treatises, &c. which the Sect requires of the young Minerval are transmitted to the same Epopt. The first advantage accruing to the Order from this law is the pointing out to the inspecting Epopt those whom the code calls the best heads of the Order.

Should any doubts arise in the minds of the pupils, any difficulties to vanquish, or any questions to propose; they have been taught that the Order is the fountain of science, that they have but to apply to their superiors, and light will instantaneously shine upon them. They are ignorant as to who these superiors may be; but that will not hinder their doubts and questions from reaching the presiding Epopt: and he has divers means of solving them, and of never being taken unawares.

In the first place the Epopt must have prepared himself for certain questions, which he either has or ought to have foreseen. Many of them will have been already solved by his predecessors, by his brother Epopts of other districts or even nations. The Order is exceedingly careful in collecting all these answers, and putting them into such hands as may employ them according to the views of the Sect. Each Epopt is particularly enjoined to study those which relate to his branch; he is even to make an alphabetical

[p. 533]

entry of them on his tablets, that he may always have them at hand whenever he wishes to turn to them. If, notwithstanding all these precautions, the Epopt should find himself unprepared or unable to solve the difficulty proposed, he will apply to the Dean, who will send the required solution or have recourse to the Provincial. But, lest the Superiors should find their occupations too often interrupted by such applications, it is expressly enjoined to the Epopt not to have recourse to them but in cases of absolute necessity, and not to make the acquisitions of their Superiors an encouragement to their own negligence.--It may so happen, that the Provincial is not able to give the required solution; he will then propose it to all the Epopts of his province. If that does not succeed, application is made to the National Inspector, and from him it is referred to the Areopagites and General. On such occasions all the learned men of the Order are consulted. Before this last appeal, it is ordained in the statutes, that the Epopt may propose the questions to the prophane; but in so doing he is on no account to discover that the Sect has recourse to, or stood in need of their information, nor what use it makes of it. This is particularly enjoined to the presiding Epopt in the following terms:--"As often as your own knowledge and that of your pupils shall not suffice, you may ask the advice of learned strangers, and turn their knowledge to the advantage of our Order, but without letting them perceive it:" (ohne dass sie es bemerken.) This precaution is the more to be insisted on, as one of the grand objects of the Epopts must be, "to attain such perfection in science, that Illuminism shall never be beholden to the prophane; but that the latter, on the contrary, shall perpetually stand in need of the lights of the Order." [*2]

That the Epopt may not recur too frequently to the superiors, or to the prophane, an artifice has been invented by which he may profit of all the acquisitions of the pupils of his district, while he makes them believe that the whole flows from the unknown superiors. This artifice consists in proposing such questions as he is not perfectly master of, to the different lodges, and then studying and combining the various answers that he receives. All the Epopts of the province do as much in their several districts. Each one selects those parts which he has judged worthy of notice in the productions of the lodges; these he inspects, and lays them before the provincial and annual assembly. There other Epopts are employed in compiling from these selections, and in preparing the required solutions of the proposed questions, or in commenting on such passages as may elucidate others that may hereafter arise. The same plan is followed in all the provinces, and the reports of the provinces will form a new collection to be digested under the inspection of the National Chief, or even of the Areopagites. This will be a new treasure for the secret library of the Epopts, and furnish them with new means of maintaining in the minds of their pupils the high idea they have conceived of the knowledge of their Superiors. [*3] It will also furnish materials for the formation of a systematic Code or complete course of study for the use of the Sect. [*4]

Here we cannot but remark how much arts and sciences would be benefited and promoted by the labours of a society which, actuated by quite

[p. 534]

other views, and despising that affectation of secrecy, should employ the same means and be animated with a similar zeal in the discussion of useful truths. But the united efforts of the Epopts are concentrated in their pursuit of science, only to debase it, by directing all its powers toward the overthrow of Religion and Governments, the triumph of their disorganizing systems, and always under the stale pretext of subjecting mankind to Nature alone. [*5]

Should the reader be curious to know to what uses the Epopt turns all the science which he is supposed to acquire daily, let him observe the questions which this presiding Illuminee either solves himself, or proposes for the solution of the adepts. Let his judgement on the questions and on their tendency, be guided by the expressions of the Code:

"The Epopt," says the Code, "must keep a list of a very great number of important questions proper for investigation, and which he may eventually propose to the young adepts.--In the branch of practical Philosophy, for example, he will propose for investigation the question, how far the principle is true, that all means are allowable, when employed for a laudable end? How far this maxim is to be limited to keep the proper medium between Jesuitical abuse, and the scrupulosity of prejudice? Questions of this nature shall be sent to the Dean, who shall transmit them to the Minerval schools for the investigation of the young adepts, and their dissertations will swarm with a multitude of ideas, new, bold, and useful, which will greatly enrich our Magazine." [*6]

We despise this infamous aspersion on the Jesuits. Let those pass sentence on them who have learned to judge them by their conduct and by their real doctrines, and not by calumnious assertions, or satires which, in spite of all the powers of genius and irony, have been justly condemned by various tribunals as replete with falsehood and misrepresentation. [*7] Let those who have been educated by the Jesuits pronounce on these atrocious imputations of the Illuminees; I do not think myself bound to follow the example of the celebrated Hoffman, Professor at the University of Vienna, one of the most formidable adversaries of the Illuminizing Sect, by inserting a long justification of that persecuted Order. [*8] But it is impossible not to observe, that the legislator of Illuminism has not the most distant idea of modifying or limiting this famous principle, the end sanctifies the means; his object is evidently to give rise to ideas, new, bold, and useful to the Sect; or, in other words, to dispose the young adepts hereafter to decide as he has already done, that nothing is criminal, not even robbery or theft, provided it be useful to the views and forward the grand object of Illuminism. He wishes by means of these questions to acquire an early insight into the minds of the adepts, and to distinguish those who will hereafter be the most worthy of his higher mysteries, by the greater or smaller disposition they show to stifle the cries of conscience and remorse in the perpetration of the crimes necessary for the future success of his plots. This is the sum total of the science to be carefully inculcated by the Epopts in the branch of practical Philosophy.

With respect to Religion, it is not even admitted among the sciences to be studied by the Epopts; the Code has, however, furnished them with a

[p. 535]

means of traducing and blaspheming it.--That the Epopt may never be at a loss for questions of this nature to solve or propose, he will have them noted on a register in alphabetical order. "For example," says the Code, "at the Letter C in the register of secret sciences and hieroglyphics the word Cross is to be found, and under it is the following note--For the antiquity of this hieroglyphic, consult such a work, printed such a year, such a page, or else such a manuscript, signature M." [*9] It is not necessary to be endowed with any extraordinary share of perspicacity to see that the whole object of these pretended secret sciences, or hieroglyphics, is merely to teach the young pupils to view the Cross in no other light than as an ancient hieroglyphic erected by ignorance and superstition into a symbol of the redemption of mankind. The illuminized explanation of this glorious symbol will, doubtless, long remain buried in the Occult Sciences of the Order. Meanwhile we may defy them to point out in the history of mankind any nation whatever revering the cross as the symbol of salvation anterior to the grand epoch when the Son of Man died on the cross to consummate the triumph of Christianity.

The Epopts have also their historians and annalists, and their duties are laid down in the Code. The following rules may be remarked:--Each province of Illuminism must have its historian, in imitation of the ancient annalists and chronologists. He is to keep a journal, in which, beside facts of public notoriety, he will particularly collect, and even give the preference to, anecdotes of secret history.--He will endeavour to redeem from oblivion all men of merit, however deep they may have sunk into obscurity--He will make them known to the Provincial, who will inform the Brethren of their situation--Each Provincial will have a Calendar of his own, in which (instead of saints) for each day of the year shall be inscribed the name of some man as an object of veneration or execration, according as he has merited or demented of the Sect.

My name may perhaps be inscribed under the black letter; but I anticipate the glory and consolation of seeing it by the side of that of Zimmerman and of Hoffman, who, like myself, are entitled to the sable wreath twined by Illuminism for its most strenuous opponents. But how different is that to which the Code declares that all the Brethren may aspire!--, to be seated beside a Brother Mirabeau or a Marat.

The same laws ordain, that the Chronologist shall inform the Minerval Lodges of all memorable facts.--He will not fail to insert all mean and odious actions, nor to paint them in their proper colours. He will not pass unnoticed those of men occupying the first dignities, or enjoying the highest consideration. [*10]

Next to the laws of the historian follow those for the Epopt who superintends that branch of science relating to politics, and particularly to the knowledge of mankind. The reader has already seen what stress the Order lays upon this science, and how much they make it depend on the spirit of observation--Let no Brother pretend to the dignity of Epopt, nor to the honour of presiding over any branch of science, until he has answered the three following questions--What is the spirit of observation?--How is this

[p. 536]

spirit to be acquired, and what constitutes a good observer?--What method is to be followed, in order to make just and exact observations?--When an Epopt has sufficiently distinguished himself by his answers on these heads, to be judged worthy of being chosen the chief of the observers or scrutators, he is entrusted with all those notes which the reader has seen the Sect so carefully collecting on the character, the passions, the talents, and history of the Brethren. When these notes contain the portrait or life of any adept more than commonly interesting, he will make him (without naming him) the object of various questions to be proposed to the Minerval Schools. He will ask, for example, What are the ideas which a man, with such and such passions or dispositions, will adopt or reject?--How on such data can such and such inclinations be encouraged or weakened?--What adept could be employed with most advantage in such a business?--What must such a man's ideas be on Religion and Governments?--Can he be looked upon as being superior to all prejudices, and ready to sacrifice his own personal interest to that of Truth?--Should he be deficient in confidence and attachment, what means should be employed to invigorate them, and what sort of man would be the fittest for such an undertaking?--Finally, what employment in the state, or in the Order, would he fill to the greatest advantage, or in which would he be the most useful?

The Scrutator in chief digests these answers into a proper statement, which he sends to the Dean. The Provincial receives it from the Dean, and is thus enabled to form his judgement, whether that particular adept be a moral, disinterested, beneficent man, and free from all prejudice; whether he can be useful to the Order, and in what way he can be best employed.--From the result of such observations, the scrutinizing Epopt will carefully select rules and general maxims on the knowledge of mankind. He will make a compilation of them, and transmit them to the Superiors. [*11]

"By means," says the Code, "of these and such like observations, the Order will be enabled to make discoveries of every kind, to form new systems, and to give on all subjects irrefragable proofs of its labours and its immense fund of science; and the public will give it credit for being in possession of all human knowledge. [*12]

Lest any of the prophane should partake of this honour, or that any one of the members should not direct these sciences toward the object of Illuminism, precautions are taken in the Code to assure the exclusive advantage of these labours to the Sect. "Particular parts of these sciences and discoveries may be printed by permission of the Superiors; but the law adds, not only these books shall not be communicated to any of the prophane, but as they will never be printed elsewhere than at the presses of the Sect, they will only be entrusted to the Brethren according to the rank they hold in the Order." [*13]

"That our worthy co-operators may not be divested of the glory of their labours, every new principle laid down, machine invented, or discovery made, shall for ever bear the name of its inventor, that his memory may be revered by future ages." [*14]

[p. 537]

"On the same grounds it is strictly enjoined, that no member shall ever communicate to the prophane any discovery that he may have made in the Order--No book treating of these discoveries shall be printed without the permission of the Superiors; and hence arises the general regulation, that no Brother shall publish any of his productions without leave of the Provincial. He also is to decide whether the work is of a nature to be printed by the secret presses of the Order, and what particular Brethren may be allowed the perusal of it--Should it be necessary to dismiss any of the Brethren from the Order, the local Superior is to receive notice that he may have the necessary time to withdraw from him not only the manuscripts, but even the printed works of the Order." [*15]

The Illuminizing Legislator, in justification of all these precautions, , in the first place, the undeniable right vested in the Order to all the labours of its Brethren; then the lure of secrecy, which stimulates curiosity and the thirst of science; finally, the advantage accruing to the sciences themselves, by being preserved among men who only impart them to others so prepared as to render them of the greatest possible utility--Beside, says he, every man has it in his power to make himself an Illuminee if he pleases, and to partake of their science; and who better able to render them useful to mankind, or to preserve them, than we are? After this justification, which the reader may appreciate, he returns to his Epopts, and tells them, that it is incumbent on them to direct and turn all the sciences toward the views of Illuminism. "The wants of every country are to be maturely considered, as well as those of your district; let them be the objects of deliberation in your Synods; and ask instructions of your Superiors." Then the Legislator makes a sudden transition, and expands his views far beyond his Lodges. The reader will scarcely suspect whither they tend. Let him read, and learn the grand object of the Epopts, what conquests they are to make for the Order, and whither they are to extend the systems of Illuminism. "You will," abruptly exclaims the legislator, "incessantly form new plans, and try every means, in your respective provinces, to seize upon the public education, the ecclesiastical government, the chairs of literature, and the pulpit." [*16]--This is one of the grand objects of the Sect; and we shall see the Code treating of it again in another part.

To enhance the merits of his plans, and to insinuate his adepts into the ecclesiastical seminaries, and even into the pulpit, under the shadow of his pretended science, "the Epopt must find means of acquiring the reputation of a man of transcendent learning; wherever he appears, whether walking or stopping, sitting or standing, let rays of light encircle his head, which shall enlighten all who approach him. Let every one think himself happy in hearing the pure truth from his lips. Let him on all occasions, combat prejudice; but with precaution, and according to the rules laid down, with dexterity and with all the respect due to the persons he is addressing." [*17] Who could believe that these were lessons given to a modern Vandal by his disorganizing legislator, whose heart thirsts after the happy period when that encircling light of his Epopts shall

[p. 538]

have Vandalized the whole universe, and nations shall have disappeared from off the face of the earth?

But the Epopt has yet to aim at another conquest, that of the empire over the literary world. "In the literary world certain writings generally take the lead for a time, according to the fashion, and inspire feeble minds with admiration. At one time the enthusiastic productions of Religion, at another the sentimental novels of wit, or perhaps philosophical reveries, pastorals, romances on chivalry, epic poems, or odes, will inundate the republic of letters. The Epopt will turn all his skill toward bringing into fashion the principles of our Order, the sole tendency of which is the happiness of mankind." Or, in other words, those baleful principles which, under the pretence of rendering human nature more happy and united in one family, aim at nothing less than destroying every Religion, every title to property, every town, every fixed residence, and every nation.

"Our principles must be made fashionable, that the young writers may diffuse them among the people, and serve the Order without intending it." [*18]

"In order to raise the public spirit, he must with the greatest ardour preach up the general interest of humanity, and inculcate the utmost indifference for all associations or secret unions which are only formed among the subjects of one particular nation. [*19] Here the impious legislator blasphemously cites for an example Christ, and his pretended indifference for his family. Because Christ died for the redemption of all mankind, because his affection for the most holy of mothers never made him lose sight of that great work, is that a ground on which the illuminizing Epopt shall persuade his simple auditory, that to love all mankind is to dissolve the bonds of nations?

As a farther rule for acquiring this literary empire, "He will take care that the writings of the members of the Order shall be cried up, and that the trumpet of fame shall be sounded in their honour. He will also find means of hindering the reviewers from casting any suspicions on the writers of the Sect." [*20]

With respect to the Literati, and writers who, without belonging to the Order, show principles coinciding with ours, should they be what we call GOOD, "class them among those who are to be enrolled. Let the Dean have a list of those men, and from time to time he will hand it about among the brethren." [*21]

Let us now take a cursory view of these laws, and of their gradual tendency to infect the whole literary world. In its Minerval academies the sect begins by forming its pupils; and the care with which its disorganizing principles are instilled into the young adept has already been displayed. Lest any of these principles should swerve from the grand object, the Epopts oversee all the schools of the same district; these latter have their provincial assemblies, where every thing is prepared, combined, and foreseen. At this assembly the Epopt attends, bringing with him his notes and observations on his particular district, and on those means which may there contribute to the advancement or disparagement of the Illuminizing principles and science. The minutes of these assemblies are sent to the National Inspector, who overlooks

[p. 539]

the whole, and sees that the original spirit is every where preserved; and the Areopagites hold the same line of conduct with respect to all nations that he does within his particular one. Hence then the Minerval academies, the Epopts, the Provincials, the National Inspectors, in a word, the disorganizing whole, form but one and the same invisible academy, spreading its subterraneous ramifications, every where infusing the same principles, actuated by the same spirit, and subjected to the same laws: and these laws, this science, are but the machinations and the forebodings of universal impiety and disorganization.

But the union and universality of this conspiring academy is not sufficient for the Sect; it extends its views to the public schools and to the pulpit. The man of letters, the transcendent genius, all are to bend beneath its laws, and fashion is to aid its plots. From the child that spells, to the Doctor enveloped in mazy science, all are to be subjected to Illuminism; and science itself, so instrumental to the progress of the Sect, shall sink beneath the effort of bringing forth that Vandalism which is to annihilate the altar and the throne, all laws, individual property, and national society.

Let the reader compare the mysteries of the Sect with the code of its Epopts, and pronounce if such be not the real tendency of this Empire of Science. Horror impresses the mind, and indignation rises at such a sight.--But the monstrous legislator who has compiled them pretends that they are entitled to the admiration of the young adepts; and it is his Epopts who are to inspire them with this admiration. "You must," says he, "infuse so great a respect for the sublimity and sanctity of our Order, that a promise made by the adepts on the honour of Illuminism shall be more binding than the most sacred oath." [*22] At length the Atheist has found an equivalent for the name of God. He seeks bonds to bind his followers, and he has broken those of conscience; he appeals to honour, and perverts it into a bond of villany. "He (says Weishaupt) who shall dare violate the oath he shall have sworn on the honour of my Society, shall be declared infamous. I care not what his rank may be, his infamy shall be proclaimed throughout the whole Order, and it shall be so without remission or hope of pardon. My intention is, that the Members should be informed of this, that they should deliberately reflect on the sacredness of this oath in my Order, I mean that the consequences of it should be clearly and warmly represented to them." [*23]

The Epopts charged with this mission are of a degree too much revered in the Order to compromise their dignity. They attend, at pleasure, the meetings of the inferior degrees, but they are never to occupy any office in them, excepting that of Prefect of the Scotch Knights. Their presence might overawe and intimidate the young adepts, and thus be detrimental to the observations they are ordered to make; for (so far from constraint), the Epopt is to endeavour to study them in their most unguarded moments. He is therefore never to intermix with them but as their equal. There is a particular law forbidding him to disclose the degree or the class to which he belongs, or even his costume. [*24] Thus, hiding his superiority, and seated on the same benches beside the young adepts, he exercises his functions of Scrutator more

[p. 540]

freely among them in  mutual intercourse, and he judges better of the talents of each. His lessons, coming apparently from an equal, will sink deeper into their minds; and, without betraying his authority, he will the better observe their progress and their failings.--Should any of these pupils have shown a zeal and fidelity beyond all doubt, he may take them into his confidence; he will point them out to the Dean, who may call them about his person and make them his Acolites. The Dean may even throw a great part of the weight of his correspondence on them, and carry them to the Synod of the Epopts, until they shall have shown themselves worthy of being initiated to all the mysteries reserved for this class. [*25]

Thus ends that part of the Code which is to be communicated to the Epopts. The following Chapters will delineate the laws and instructions which are to guide their conduct when admitted to the degree of Regent or Prince of Illuminism.

Footnotes

^540:1 Instructions for this degree, Nos. 1, 2, 3, 4, 11.

^540:2 Instructions for the degree, No. 2, 5, 6, 9.

^540:3 Nos. 5 and 12.

^540:4 No. 15.

^540:5 Das der Order die bisherigen systeme entbehren, und eigene, auf die natur allein gegrundete systeme seinen anhanger vorlegen konne.

^540:6 Ibid. No. 7.

^540:7 See Art. PASCAL in the Historical Dictionary of Flexier Dureval, last Edition.

^540:8 Vide Hoch wichtige erinnerungen--Von Leopold-alois--Hoffman. Sect. V. Page 279 to 307.

^540:9 Ibid. No. 15.

^540:10 Ibid. No. 18.

^540:11 Ibid. No. 18.

^540:12 Ibid. No. 20.

^540:13 Ibid. No. 17.

^540:14 Ibid. No. 23.

^540:15 Ibid. No. 24.

^540:16 Mussen stets neue plane entworfen und eingefuhrt werden: Wie man die hande in erziehungswesen, geistliche regierung, lehr, und predigt-stuhle in der provinz bekomme. Ibid. No. 28.

^540:17 Ibid. No. 2.

^540:18 Damit junge schriftsteller dergleichen unter das volk ausbreiten, und uns, ohne dass sie es wissen, dienen.

^540:19 Ibid. No. 3.

^540:20 Ibid. No. 4.

^540:21 Ibid. No. 5.

^540:22 Ibid. No. 29.

^540:23 Original Writings, Vol. II. Let. 8, to Cato.

^540:24 Ibid. No. 31.

^540:25 Ibid. No. 32.

     
Code of the Illuminati: Part III of Memoirs Illustrating the History of Jacobinism, by A Barruel, tr. Robert Edward Clifford [1798], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 541]

  

CHAP. XV.

  

Instructions for the Regent or Prince Illuminee, on the Government of the Order.

THE prominent feature of all the instructions given by the Illuminizing Legislator to his Epopts is the consecration of their degree to the perversion of the public opinion, and to the attainment of the empire of sciences, that he may direct them all to the support of his disorganizing Equality and Liberty and to universal anarchy. This mission of perversion requires an assiduity to which not many men are equal; but adepts may be found, who, unable to distinguish themselves in such missions, may yet be endowed with a sufficient zeal and with the necessary talents for the superintendance and direction of the Brethren. There are others again whose disastrous successes are to be recompensed by the higher employments in the Order; and it is from these two classes of Epopts that the Order selects its Regents. It is also for their instruction that the Legislator descends into all the gubernatory minutiae of his Illuminism.--His instructions are comprised under four different heads. I. General System of Government for the Order.--II. Instructions for the degree of Regent.--III. Instructions for the Prefects or Local Superiors.--IV. Instructions for the Provincial. [*1]

I have, it is true, been obliged to anticipate many parts of this Code when unfolding the artifices of the lower degrees; but as a confirmation of what has already been exposed, in order to bring the different objects within one point of view, and to show the dangers of his disastrous combinations, let us attend to the Legislator when treating of the whole collectively. What particularly endeared this degree of Regent to Weishaupt was, that part of his instruction which takes a general view, and which lays open the progressive plan to be observed in the government of the Brethren. The reader perusing the instructions in the same order in which Weishaupt has written them, will more easily conceive the cause of his predilection.

  

Instruction A. Plan of the General Government of the Order.

"I. The most high and excellent Superiors of the illustrious Order of true Freemasonry do not immediately attend to the minutiae of the edifice.--They

[p. 542]

must not, however, on that account be considered as contributing less to our happiness, by their counsels, their lessons, their plans, and the many and powerful resources with which they furnish us.

"II. These excellent and most gracious Superiors have established a class of Masons to whom they have entrusted the whole plan of our Order. This class is that of the Regents. . . . .

"III. In this plan our Regents hold the first dignities. Until admitted to this degree, no person can hold the office of Prefect or of Local Superior.

"IV. Every country has its national Superior, who holds an immediate correspondence with our Fathers, at the head of whom is a General who holds the helm of the Order.

"V. Under the National and his Assistants are the Provincials, who each govern their Circle or their Province.

"VI. Every Provincial is surrounded by his Counsellors.

"VII. Each Provincial also commands a certain number of Prefects, who may in like manner have their coadjutors in their districts. All these, as well as the Dean, belong to the class of Regents.

"VIII. All these offices are for life, excepting in cases of deposition or ejectment.

"IX. The Provincial is to be chosen by the Regents of his province and the National Superiors, and approved by the National.--[I do not understand how the Code distinguishes between the several National Superiors and the National in chief; unless it be, that it denotes in this place as Superiors those who are called a little higher up Assistants (Gehulfen) of this chief.]

"X. The whole success of Illuminism depending on the Regents, it is but just that their domestic wants should be provided for. They shall therefore be the first supplied from out of the funds of the Order.

"XI. The Regents of each Province form a particular body immediately under the Provincial, whom they are to obey. . . . . .

"XII. The offices of Illuminism not being considered in the light of dignities, nor of places of honour, but as mere employments freely accepted, the Regents must be always ready to labour for the good of the Order, each according to his situation and to his talents. Age is never to be set forth as a title. It may often happen, that the youngest is chosen Provincial, and the eldest only a Local Superior or Counsellor, should the one live in the center, while the other only inhabits the extremity of the Province; or, should the former, on account of his natural activity or his station in life, be more fitted for the place of Superior than the latter, though far more eloquent. In many cases, for example, a Regent is not to think it beneath his dignity to offer himself to discharge any of the lesser offices in the Minerval churches (lodges) in  he may be useful.

"XIII. That the Provincial may not be overburdened with too extensive a correspondence, all the Quibus Licets, and all the letters of the Regents, shall pass through the hands of the Prefect, unless the Provincial gives Orders to the contrary.

[p. 543]

"XIV. But the Prefect shall not open the letters of the Regents. Those he must transmit to the Provincial, who will forward them to their proper destination.

"XV. The Provincial has the power of convoking the whole of his Regents, or merely those whom he may think proper, considering the exigencies of the Province. He who cannot attend according to his summons must give the proper notice at least four weeks prior to the meeting. Beside, he is always to be ready to give in an account of what he has done for the Order until that period, and show willingness to fulfil the intentions of his Provincial and of his high Superiors. The convocation of Regents must take place at least once a year.

"XVI. The following instruction (B) will point out more particularly to the Regents those objects to which they must chiefly attend.

"XVII. It has been already observed, that great attention is to be paid to the gradually procuring of funds for the Order. This may be accomplished by attending to the following rules:

"Each province is to be entrusted with the expenditure of its own monies, and only remit small contributions to the Superiors for the expences of postage. Each Lodge also is to enjoy the full propriety of its funds (eigenthumlich)--when for any great enterprize the assembly of the Regents levy contributions on the funds of the different Lodges, they shall be considered but as loans, and shall be made good to the Lodges with full interest."

Has the Illuminizing Legislator then forgotten, that it was PROPERTY which gave the first deadly blow to Equality and Liberty? Certainly not; but more than ONE great enterprize will be necessary to prepare the LAST, which is to annihilate all property whatsoever; meanwhile the Order is glad to enjoy its own, and to make the inferior Lodges believe that they are not to be pillaged of any thing that belongs to them.

"The Provincial has no fund allotted to him, but he has an exact return of all those of his province."

"The general receipts will consist--1 degrees. In the contributions paid on the receptions of Masons (freymaurer-receptions-gelder)--2 degrees. In the over-plus of the monthly contributions--3 degrees. In voluntary subscriptions--4 degrees. In fines--5 degrees. In legacies and donations--6 degrees. In our commerce and traffic (handel und gewerbe)."

"The expences are--1 degrees. The expences of the meetings, postage, decorations, and some few --2 degrees. Pensions to the poor brethren who have no other means of subsistence--3 degrees. Sums paid for the promotion of the grand object of the Order--4 degrees. Sums paid for the encouraging of talents--5 degrees. The expences of experiments and trials--6 degrees. For widows and children--7 degrees. For foundations."

Thus terminates the first part of the instructions for the Regent. After the reading of this, which takes place on the day of his inauguration, his attention is called to the following:

[p. 544]

  

Instruction B for the whole degree of Regent

The reader has seen (ut supra, art. xvi.) the Regent forewarned to pay a particular attention to this second part of the instructions. Let the reader also profit of the hint. He will see that many of the arcana of the Sect still remain to be revealed.

"I. The object of the Order being to render man more happy, virtue more attractive, and vice less powerful, it is necesssary that our brethren, the teachers and governors of mankind, should publicly assume an unimpeachable character. A Regent of Illuminism therefore will be the most perfect of men. He will be prudent, provident, ingenious, irreproachable, and of manners so urbane that his company shall be courted with avidity. He is to acquire the reputation of being enlightened, benevolent, honest, disinterested, and full of ardour for great and extraordinary enterprises, all contributing to the general good."

It would be useless to recall to the mind of my reader what is to be understood, in the language of Illuminism, by virtue, vice, or public good. He will therefore on reflection be the less surprised at perusing the following instructions framed for these virtuous teachers and governors of mankind.

"II. The Regents are to study the means of ruling and governing without betraying any such intention. [*2] Under the mask of humility, but of a real and candid humility, grounded on the persuasion of their own weakness, and on the conviction that their whole strength rests on our union, they must exercise an absolute and boundless dominion, [*3] and must direct every thing toward the attainment of the views of the Order."

"Let them avoid a pedantic reserve, at once disgusting and ridiculous in the eyes of the sage. Let them give the example of a respectful submission to the Superiors. Should they be possessed of the advantages of birth, it will be an additional reason for showing their obedience to a Superior born in a lower station of life--Let their conduct vary according to the persons with whom they have to deal. Let the Regent be the confidant of one, the father of another, the scholar of a third; very seldom a severe and inexorable Superior, and even on such occasions let him show with how much unwillingness he exercises such severity. He will say, for example, that he sincerely wishes the Order had given so disagreeable a commission to some other person; and that he is weary of acting the part of schoolmaster with a man who should long since have known how to conduct himself.

"III. The grand object of our sacred legions spread throughout the universe being the triumph of virtue and of wisdom, every Regent must endeavour to establish a certain equality among men.--Let him take the part of those who are too much debased, and humble the proud. Let him never suffer the fool to lord it too much over the man of wit, the wicked over the good, the ignorant over the learned, nor the weak over the strong, though the latter should in reality be in the wrong. [*4]

[p. 545]

"IV. The means of acquiring an ascendancy over men are incalculable. Who could enumerate them all?. . . They must vary with the disposition of the dines. At one period it is a taste for the marvellous and extraordinary that is to be wrought upon. At another the lure of secret societies is to be held out. "For this reason it is very proper to make your inferiors believe, without telling them the real state of the case, that all other secret societies, particularly that of Freemasonry, are secretly directed by us. Or else, and it IS REALLY THE FACT IN SOME STATES, THAT POTENT MONARCHS ARE GOVERNED BY OUR ORDER. When any thing remarkable or important comes to pass, hint that it originated with our Order.--Should any person by his merit acquire a great reputation, let it be generally understood that he is one of us."

How smoothly flows this combination of artifice from the pen of the Illuminizing Legislator! But I hope that my reader will not expect to find a method in my translation, where the Legislator has disdained method. It is easy to perceive, that to heap artifice upon artifice is much more his object, than to give a studied connection to principles with which he supposes his adepts to be sufficiently impressed. Or may it not be said, that this disorder is the effect of studied art? But let us proceed and trace the steps of Weishaupt.

"With no other object than to give your orders the appearance of coming from a mysterious hand, you may, for example, put a letter under the plate of an adept when dining at an inn, though it might have been a much less trouble to forward it to him at his own lodgings--You may attend large and commercial towns during the time of fairs in different characters, as a Merchant, an Officer, an Abbe. Every where you will personate an extraordinary man having important business on your hands.--But all this must be done with a great deal of art and caution, lest you should have the appearance of an adventurer. It is to be well understood, that these characters are not to be assumed in towns where you are likely to be discovered either by the Police or the standers-by.--At other times, you may write your orders with a chemical preparation of ink, which disappears after a certain time.

"V. A Regent is as much as possible to hide from his inferiors all his weaknesses, even his ill-health, or disgusts; at any rate, he is never to complain.

"VI. Here he repeats the instruction on the art of flattering and gaining over women to their cause, already transcribed, page 43.

"VII. You must also gain over to the Order the COMMON PEOPLE. The great plan for succeeding in this is to influence the Schools. You may also attempt it by liberalities, or by great show and splendour; at other times by making yourself popular, and even tolerating, with an air of patience, prejudices which may hereafter be gradually eradicated.

"VIII. When you have succeeded any where in making yourself master of the public authority and government, you will pretend not to have the least power, for fear of awakening the attention of those who may oppose us. But, on the contrary, when you find it impossible to succeed, you will assume the

[p. 546]

character of a person who has every thing at his command. That will make us both feared and sought after, and of course will strengthen our party.

"IX. All the ill success or disgusts which may befall the Order are to be concealed with the utmost caution from the inferiors.

"X. It is the duty of the Regents to supply the wants of the Brethren, and to procure the best employments for them, after having given the proper intimation to the Superior.

"XI. The Regents shall be particularly cautious and discreet in their discourse;--but shall carefully avoid any thing denoting the least perplexity of mind--There are even some occasions whereon an extensive genius is to be affected; on others, they may pretend that their friendship has made them say a word too much; by these means the secrecy of the inferior is put to the test. They may also spread certain reports among our people, which may prepare them to receive ideas which the Order wishes to infuse into their minds. On all doubtful occasions, the Regent will consult his Superiors by means of a Quibus Licet."

"XII. Whatever rank or station a Regent may hold in the Order, he will seldom answer the questions of the inferiors verbally, but generally in writing, that he may have time to reflect or even consult on the answers he should give."

"XIII. The Regents will unceasingly attend to every thing relating to the grand interests of the Order, to the operations of commerce, or such things as may in any way contribute to augment the power of the Order. They will transmit all plans of that nature to the Provincial. Should it be a case requiring expedition, he will give him advice of it by some other channel than the Quibus Licets, which the Provincial has not the power of opening.

"XIV. They will follow the same line of conduct with respect to every thing that tends to influence the Order in general; and find means of putting its united forces in motion at one and the same time.

"XV. When an author sets forth principles true in themselves, but which do not as yet suit our general plan of education for the world; or principles the publication of which is premature; every effort must be made to gain over the author; but should all our attempts fail, and we should be unable to entice him into the Order, let him be discredited by every possible means."

"XVI. If a Regent should conceive hopes of succeeding in suppressing any religious houses, and of applying their revenues to our object, for example, to the establishment of proper COUNTRY SCHOOLS; he may depend on it, that such a project would be particularly grateful to the Superiors.

"XVII. The Regents will also turn their attention toward a solid plan for establishing a fund to support the widows of the brethren.

"XVIII. One of our most important objects must be, to hinder the servile veneration of the people for Princes from being carried too far. All such abject flattery tends only to make those men worse who are already for the most part of very common and weak understandings. You  show an example of the proper conduct to be held in this respect. Shun all familiarity with them; behave to

[p. 547]

them politely, but without constraint, that they may honour and fear you. Write and speak of them as you would of other men, that they may be made to recollect that they are but men like other people, and that their authority is a thing purely conventional. [*5]

"XIX. When there happens to be a man of merit among our adepts but little known by or entirely unknown to the public, no pains are to be spared to acquire celebrity for him. Let our disguised brethren every where sound the trumpet of his praises, and force envy and party spirit to be silent.

"XX. The essay of our principles and of our schools is most easily and most successfully made in small states. The inhabitants of capitals and commercial towns are too corrupt, too much a prey to their passions, and think themselves too much enlightened, to submit to our lessons.

"XXI. It is useful to send visitors from time to time, or to give a Regent that is travelling the commission to visit the meetings, to ask for the minutes, and to call on the brethren in order to examine their papers or journals, and receive their complaints.--These Plenipotentiaries, presenting themselves in the name of the high Superiors, may correct many faults, and boldly suppress abuses which the Prefects had not the courage to reform, though ready to enforce the commands of the visitor.

"XXII. If our Order cannot establish itself in any particular place with all the forms and regular progress of our degrees, some other form may be assumed. Always have the object in view; that is the essential point. No matter what the cloak may be, provided you succeed; a cloak is however always necessary, for in secrecy our strength principally lies."

"XXIII. For this reason we should always conceal ourselves under the name of some other association. THE INFERIOR LODGES OF FREEMASONRY ARE THE MOST CONVENIENT CLOAKS for our grand object, (das schickliche kleid fur unsere hohere zwecke) because the world is already familiarized with the idea that nothing of importance, or worthy of their attention can spring from Masonry.--The name of a literary society is also a proper mask for our first classes. Under such a mask, should our assemblies be discovered, we may confidently assert, that the reason of our holding secret assemblies was partly to give a greater interest and charm to our pursuits; partly to keep off the crowd, and not to expose ourselves to the bantering and jealousy of others; in short to hide the weakness of an association as yet but in its infancy."

"XXIV. It is of the utmost importance for us to study the constitutions of other secret societies and to govern them. The Regent is even bound, after having obtained leave of his superiors, to gain admittance into those societies, but he must not undertake too many engagements. This is an additional reason why our Order should remain secret.

"XXV. The higher degrees must always be hidden from the lower. A person more willingly receives orders from a stranger than from men in whom he gradually discovers a multitude of defects. By this precaution one may keep the inferiors in a more proper awe; for they naturally pay greater attention to their behaviour when they think themselves surrounded by persons who are

[p. 548]

observing them; at first, their virtue may be the effect of constraint, but custom will soon make it habitual."

"XXVI. Never lose sight of the military schools, of the academies, printing presses, libraries, cathedral chapters, or any public establishments that can influence education or government. Let our Regents perpetually attend to the various means, and form plans for making us masters of all these establishments." [*6]

"XXVII. In general, and independent of their particular employment, the grand object of our Regents must be an habitual and constant application to every thing which can in any way add to the perfection and to the power of our Order, that it may become for future ages the most perfect model of government that can enter the mind of man;" or, in other words, that it may be hereafter said, such was the famous association which, by perpetually perfecting its laws and governments, at length taught mankind to cast off every law and every government. It would be useless for me to think of adducing farther proofs to  that such is the real object of the pretended perfection of Illuminism. The mysteries of the Sect have been too clearly laid open for us to harbour the smallest doubt of their intention. But to acquire this perfection and power for the Sect, Weishaupt has modelled still farther laws for his Regents, according to the different offices they hold in the Hierarchy of the Order. [*7]

Footnotes

^548:1 Last works of Philo and Spartacus, degree of Regent.

^548:2 Die Regenten sollen die kunst studieren zu herschen, ohne das ansehen davon zu haben.

^548:3 Sollen sie unumschrankt regieren.

^548:4 Er soll nicht leiden dass der dummere uber den klugern--der Schwachere uber den starkern, auch wenn dieser unrecht haben sollte, zu sehr den meister spiele.

^548:5 Eine unserer vornehmsten sorgen muss auch seyn, unter das volke sclavische fursten verehrung nicht zu hoch steigen zu lassen, &c. &c.

^548:6 Militair-schulen, academien, Buchdruckereyen, Buchladen, Dom-capitel, und alles was ein einfluss auf bildung und regierung hat, muss nie aus den augen gelassen werden; und die Regenten sollen unaufhorlich plane entwerfen, wie man es anfangen konne, uber dieselben gewalt zu bekommen.

^548:7 For the whole of the Second Part of this Chapter see the Instruction B for the Degree of Regent, of which it is nearly a literal translation.

     
Code of the Illuminati: Part III of Memoirs Illustrating the History of Jacobinism, by A Barruel, tr. Robert Edward Clifford [1798], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 549]

  

CHAP. XVI.

  

Continuation of the Instructions on the Government of the Illuminees--Laws for the Local Superiors.

GREAT as the authority of the Major Illuminees over the Minerval Academies may appear at first sight, no person of the preparatory class is in fact entrusted with any real authority. Even the Scotch Knight in his intermediate class does not enjoy any. The Order recognizes as real Superiors none but those who have been initiated into the class of the Mysteries. Even in that class the adept must have attained the degree of Regent before he can be named Prefect for the Scotch Knights, or Dean of his district. Those are the first two offices which the Order considers as having any real authority over the Brethren.

Though the Code expressly declares, that each Superior shall find in his instructions the respective laws concerning his particular duty, it certainly contains none for the office of Dean. A single Chapter is indeed to be found in the Code on his election and consecration. On the first establishment of a new district he is elected by the Provincial; but on his deposition or death the Epopts assemble and choose a successor by the plurality of votes, the Provincial only having the right of confirming such an election. With regard to what the Code terms his consecration (Weihung des decani), it is generally performed by what is called a Plenipotentiary, and in a sort of barbarous Latin, extremely inelegant. Were not the impiety of it as abominable as the ceremonial is low, it might form an excellent scene for the theatres of Bartholomew fair. The Illuminizing Legislator, a very inferior copyist of Moliere's Malade Imaginaire, ridicules St. Paul, Moses, and all religious ceremonies, as Moliere did the quack disciples of Hippocrates. Little wit is required to scoff at religious rites, and yet our Legislator has only succeeded in being disgustingly impious. Such turpitude is not worthy of our notice, for none but Epopts can admire it; this nevertheless is all the information the Code can give us respecting the Dean. [*1]

The same cannot be said of the instructions for the Prefects. These Local Superiors may have as many as eight Lodges at a time under their command, partly Minerval, and partly Masonic. The Prefect is the first Regent within his prefecture, and has the direction of all that part of the Order stiled in the Code the lower part of the edifice. All the Quibus Licets of his district pass through his hands. He opens those of the Scotch Knights, and the Solis of the Novices and Minervals; but every thing else he transmits to the higher Superiors. When

[p. 550]

he founds new Lodges, or receives new Brethren, he gives the new Geographical names and Characteristics, which he selects from the list that he has received from the Provincial. He makes a general report to the Provincial of every thing that has happened within his Prefecture once a month; and every three months transmits the reversal letters, the tablets sent by the Scrutators with notes on their political and moral conduct, and an exact return of the state of the funds belonging to each Lodge. He decides on the promotion of the Brethren as far as Scotch Knight, but can confer the latter degree only with the consent of the Provincial.--He has the right once a year of commanding all the adepts under his direction to return whatever writings the Order may have entrusted them with--He returns them to those on whose fidelity he has reason to rely, but not to those whom he may have any reason to suspect, or who are intended to be dismissed. [*2]

The foundation of the Edifice rests solely on the vigilance, experience, and zeal of the Prefect.--And it was to the direction of their conduct in every part of the Government that Weishaupt dedicated his lessons under the following heads:--I. Preparations.--II. Tuition of the Pupils.--III. Spirit or love of the Order--IV. Subordination.--V. Secrecy.--Each of these articles contains a cloud of those artifices which the reader has seen interspersed in divers parts of the Code, but which now become the peculiar study of the Prefect. I shall only extract the most striking, or those on which the Legislator particularly insists; such, for example, as the following, to be found in the first pages of the head Preparation.

"Our strength chiefly consists in numbers; but much will also depend on the means employed to form the pupil--Young people are pliant and easily take the impression. The Prefect will therefore spare no pains to gain possession of the Schools which lie within his district, and also of their teachers. He will find means of placing them under the tuition of members of our Order; for this is the true method of infusing our principles and of training our young men: it is thus that the most ingenious men are prepared to labour for us and are brought into discipline; and thus that the affection conceived by our young pupils for the Order will gain as deep root as do all other early impressions."

Under the same head are to be found instructions for the Prefect equally curious, on the propagation of the Order.

"When a new colony is to be founded, begin by choosing a bold and enterprizing adept entirely devoted to the Order. Send him some time beforehand to live on the spot where you intend making the new establishment."

"Before you proceed to people the extremities, begin by making your ground good at the centre."

"Your next object must be, to gain over such persons as are constant residents, as Merchants and Canons."

"Such missions should only be entrusted to brethren of independent fortune, and who would occasion no expence to the Order; for though all the brethren

[p. 551]

are entitled to succour when in real want, yet those of one province are as seldom as possible to be an expence to the neighbouring ones. Nor are the other districts by any means to be made acquainted with the weakness of the Order in yours. Beside, the funds must find a sufficiency to succour those of the Minerval school who may stand in need of it, that our promises in their case may be performed."

"You will not seek to extend yourself till you have consolidated your establishment in the capital of your district."

"You will seriously examine and cautiously select from the Brethren those who are the most able to undertake such a mission. You will next consider whether it will be proper to begin your establishment by a Minerval Church or a MASONIC LODGE."

"Pay most particular attention to the man whom you place at the head of the new colony; observe whether he is courageous, zealous, prudent, exact, and punctual; whether fitted for the forming new adepts; whether he enjoys a good reputation or is much considered; whether he is a man of business and capable of a serious and constant application; in short, whether he has all the necessary qualifications for an undertaking of such high importance."

"Consider also the locality. Is the place proposed near to or distant from the capital of your district?--Is it a dangerous or safe situation for such an undertaking?--Is it great or small, more or less populous?--By what means can you best succeed, and which can be easiest employed?--What time would be requisite for the perfecting of such an establishment?--To what persons can you apply on first setting off?--If your first applications be ill made, all future attempts will be fruitless.--What pretence or what name is to be assumed?--How is the new colony to be subordinated or co-ordinated? that is to say, what Superiors shall it be under, and with what Lodges shall it correspond?"

"When you shall have acquired sufficient strength in your new colony, and particularly if our Brethren enjoy the first dignities of the state, if they may freely and openly show themselves formidable to their opponents, and make them feel the painful consequences of counteracting the views of the Order; if you have wherewith to satisfy the wants of the Brethren; if, so far from having to fear from the government, the Order directs those who hold the reins--Then be assured that we shall not be wanting in numbers or in the choice of adepts; we shall soon have more than we have occasion for. I cannot too strongly recommend this method of proceeding."

"If it be necessary for us to be masters of the ordinary schools, of how much more importance will it be to gain over the ecclesiastical seminaries and their superiors! With them, we gain over the chief part of the country; we acquire the support of the greatest enemies to innovation; and the grand point of all is, that through the clergy we become masters of the middle and lower classes of the people."

"But remember that great caution is necessary with the Ecclesiastics. These gentlemen are generally either too free or too scrupulous; and those who are too free have seldom any morals." The legislator then proceeds to the

[p. 552]

exclusion of the religious, and tells the Insinuator to avoid the Jesuits as he would the plague.

While perusing these laws, I suppose the reader makes nearly the same reflections which I am tempted every instant to commit to paper.--Should the following article ever meet the eye of a Prince, it will give him ample room for reflection.

"When the Prefect shall have gradually succeeded in placing the most zealous members of the Order in the councils and offices under the Prince, he will have arrived at the full extent of his commission. He will hve done much more than if he had initiated the Prince himself." [*3]

"In general, Princes are not to be admitted into the Order, and even those who are received are seldom to be permitted to rise above the degree of Scotch Knight."

After what has been seen of this degree and those that precede, it is rather extraordinary that Weishaupt should deign to grant admission to Princes; for he did not wait for this degree before he clearly insinuated his plans. Princes, at least, who had not surmised them before their admission to that degree must have been void of penetration indeed. What hopes then could the Legislator entertain of their not perceiving his plots against all legitimate authority? His confidential letters will explain the enigma:--"Brethren," he writes to his Areopagites, "you will take care to have the following corrections made before you show the constitutions of our degrees to the Elector.--In the degree of Minor Illuminee in place of the words imbecile Monks say imbecile men--In the degree of Major Illuminee blot out the words Priests and Princes are in our way.--With respect to the degree of Priest show no part of it excepting the discourse on sciences, and read that over carefully lest any allusion or reference to any other part of the degree should remain." [*4] These corrections begin to clear the enigma; a more insidious expedient will veil his plots in complete darkness. "I mean, says Weishaupt when speaking to the Areopagites of the inferior degrees, to revise the whole system." Then, attributing to the Jesuits his own immorality, he says, "I mean that it should be a complete Jesuitical piece; not a single word shall be found in it that can in any way be cavilled at by religious or political governments. Let us act with caution; do nothing without a reason; things must be prepared and brought on step by step." [*5] The adept who has given us the most complete and candid account of the degrees of Illuminism assures us, that he had seen a discourse for the degree of Epopt in which every thing respecting religion and government was omitted. [*6]

Here then we find Weishaupt not only correcting but even forming fictitious degrees to dupe the princely adept, and to persuade him that the dark and mysterious recesses of the hireling crew have been laid open to him, while the real adept smiles at his credulity. Such artifice certainly aggravates Weishaupt's criminality. But will that excuse the princely adept? Notwithstanding the veil artfully thrown over the impious and seditious principles of the sect, did he not begin by swearing obedience and protection to the Order? His court soon swarms with Illuminees; he thinks he reigns over them, but is no

[p. 553]

more than their stately captive. And should he fall their victim, will it not be said that he met with his just fate? What strange madness can induce Princes to inscribe their names on the registers of secret societies! Have they not duties to fulfill toward the public? On what right can their oaths of submission and protection be grounded, sworn in the recesses of secret Lodges, to men who hide themselves from public view, when their labours, cares, and protecting power, are to extend over the whole state and to all its citizens? On the throne, or with pretensions to it, do they not degradingly swear obedience and protection to Masters of Lodges! By what right, will they promulgate laws emanating from Lodges? When their subjects swore allegiance and fidelity to them, did those subjects expect to be governed by a slave, or be subjected to laws proclaimed indeed by their Prince, but dictated by some Master Illuminee or Rosicrucian? And ye, magistrates of the people, who are to sit in judgment over the mutual and disputed claims of the citizens in general, what confidence can be placed in you after you have sworn obedience and protection to this illuminizing Sect, even in actions just or unjust? Such reflections will rise refulgent from the page of history; and would to God that the Revolution had not already indelibly engraved them!

If ever self-love should have directed the actions of men, and supplied the place of nobler motives, the princely dupe will have found ample matter in the laws of Illuminism to stimulate his, when he but casts his eye on the following article contained in the instructions for the Prefects, or local Superiors, under the head formation of pupils: "What will numbers avail us, if unity and similarity of sentiment do not prevail?--No rank, no state of life, can dispense the Brethren from our labours or our trials. To accustom them to despise all distinctions, and to view the world and human nature in the grand scale, the Prefect shall carefully collect all the anecdotes he can, remarkable either for their generosity or meanness, not regarding to whom they relate, whether Princes or Citizens, rich or poor. He will transmit them to the Masters of the Minervals; and these will expose them in a proper manner to their pupils. They will not forget to give the name of the Prince of great personage, though the trait should dishonour him; for," says the Code, "every member must be made sensible, that we distribute impartial justice, and that among us the wicked man upon the throne is called a villain (ein schurke heist) just as freely, if not more so, than the criminal who is being led to the gallows."

Under the same head we may observe another article remarkable enough, on the means of rendering the language of the adepts more uniform when speaking before any of the Order, or of facts relating to it.

On these occasions the Prefect will take care secretly to instruct the lower Superiors in what stile they are to hold forth, what ideas to propagate, and in what manner they should make their pupils speak. "Hence the pupils will constantly accord themselves in every thing, whether in language or action, with the Superiors, though their motives may be unknown to them. But these means we shall all tend toward the same object; the young adepts will accustom themselves to search and dive into the intentions of the Order; to

[p. 554]

refrain from acting; or to be silent on all doubtful occasions, till they have received the advice or orders of their Superior as to what they ought to do or say."

Under the head Love or Spirit of the Order, the Prefect is instructed, that such Love or Spirit is to be infused by descanting on the beauty and importance of the object of the Sect, the integrity of its members, the greatness and certainty of its means, the utility of the instruction imparted, and security promised to all its pupils by the Order.--This Love will always be proportionate to the certainty of being happy while attached to the Order, and of finding real happiness in no other place. To stimulate it, he must always feed them with the hopes of new discoveries more and more important; and, lest their zeal should diminish, "try to keep our pupils constantly occupied with objects relating to the Order; make it their favourite pursuit.--See what the Roman Catholic Church does to make its religion familiar to its followers, how it keeps their attention incessantly toward it; model yourself by that.--It would be impossible to foresee all cases and lay down rules for them;--Let it then be the constant study of the Prefects and other Superiors to prepare themselves for unforeseen events--Let them propose and distribute prizes for the best compositions on such cases. Perpetual vigilance will render it impossible for the edifice not sooner or later to succeed, and to take a proper consistency according to the local circumstances. Exhort the Brethren to complacency, beneficence, and generosity toward each other and toward the Order."

The next article treats of Obedience. Here the Prefect is informed, "That should he have been diligent and successful in impressing the young pupils with the grandeur of the views of the Sect, they will doubtless obey the Superiors with pleasure. How can they do otherwise than submit themselves to be conducted by Superiors who have so carefully guided them hitherto, who contributed so much to their present happiness, and who promise to perpetuate it in future? May the man who is not to be enticed into obedience by such advantages be rejected from among us; let him be cast out from the society of the elect! The spirit of obedience is to be more particularly infused by example and instruction--by the conviction, that to obey our Superiors is in fact only fulfilling our own inclination--by the gradual progress of the degrees--by the hopes of discovering more important truths--by fear properly managed--by honours, rewards, and distinctions granted to the docile--by contempt cast on the stubborn--by avoiding familiarity with the inferiors--by the exemplary punishment of the rebellious--by the selection of those whom we know to be devoted to us and ready to execute all our commands--by a particular attention to the Quibus Licets whereby we may see how far the Orders of the Superiors have been executed;--and by the punctuality of the intermediary Superiors in sending the tablets or reports respecting their inferiors. The more particular those tablets are, the better they will be; for it is on them that all the operations of the Order are grounded. It is by their means that the progress and number of the Brethren are to be known; that the strength or weakness of the machine, and the proportion and adhesion of all its parts are to be calculated,

[p. 555]

and that the promotion of the Brethren, the merits and demerits of the assemblies, of the Lodges, and of their Superiors, are to be judged.

When treating of Secrecy, "The Prefect is informed, that this is the most essential article; and it is on that account that even in countries where the Sect may have acquired sufficient power to throw off its mask, it is to remain veiled in darkness."

"The Prefect is always to hide with dexterity the real object of his views according to local circumstances. Let him agree with the Provincial on what shape he shall assume to conceal the Order. As in the religious institutions of the Roman Church, where religion, alas! is but a pretext; exactly so, only in a nobler manner, must we enwrap our Order in the forms of a mercantile society, or some other exterior of a similar nature."

In vain would the reader ask me, whence the Illuminized Code had taken the idea of Religion being only a pretext for the religious institutions in the Catholic Church. It has not come to my knowledge, that the most barefaced Sophisters have ever advanced a calumny of this sort. I have seen the religious founders, such as St. Francis, St. Benedict, or St. Basil, and other founders of orders, described by the Sophisters as superstitious enthusiasts. But even among the apostates who must have been acquainted with the Orders they had lived in, we have never heard one pretend that Religion was only a pretext either for the institution they abandoned, or for their ancient brethren. Did any of them ever assert, that ambition, avarice, or any pretext beside Religion, had given rise to the foundation of the Order of the Capuchins, Friars, Benedictines, or Carmelites, and of so many other convents destined for men or women? This, however, is not a calumny originating with Weishaupt; it is not to be found in his instructions sent to Knigge, and on which the latter formed the Code of Laws for the Regents and Local Superiors, though he subjoined many of his own ideas. Knigge was totally ignorant of every thing relating to religious Orders. Weishaupt was born a Roman Catholic, and might indeed, in his impiety, have repeated the ideas of many apostate Sophisters, or have left this strange comparison of his Illuminism with the religious institutes, since it was in the Code: but I should be truly surprized were I to find that it was a Calumny of his invention. He knew too well how much he stood in need of darkness to envelope his designs; and he also knew, that in the Roman Catholic Church no religious institute was adopted, until it had been made public and examined by the constituted authorities.

After this absurd calumny follows a recapitulation of every thing we have already exposed to our readers in the first Chapters of this Volume, on the necessity of hiding the proceedings and even the very existence of the Lodges. But I find the following additions in this place.

"Lest the number of the Brethren should expose them to discovery, by their assemblies being too numerous, the Prefect will take care that no more than ten members shall assemble in the same Minerval Church."

[p. 556]

"Should any place contain a greater number of pupils, the Lodges must be multiplied, or different days of assembly must be assigned, that all may not meet at once; and should there be several Minerval Churches in the same town, the Prefect will take care that those of one Lodge shall know nothing of the others." For the better direction of the lower part of the edifice, he will observe the following rules--He is to nominate the Magistrates of the Minervals; but the chief of these Magistrates can only be named with the consent of the Provincial. He will be responsible for those he names.--He will overlook the MASONIC and Minerval Lodges, to see that every thing is regularly and punctually executed. He will not permit any discourses to be delivered there which may give any strong suspicions of what is contriving against Religion, the state, or morals.--He will suffer no Brother to be advanced to the higher degrees before he has acquired the requisite qualities and principles; on this point, says the Code, he cannot carry his precautions, anxiety, and scrupulosity too far.

"It has already been stated in the rules, that persons not belonging to the Order may be received into the MASONIC Lodges of Illuminism--The Prefect will carefully watch lest any of these strangers should take the lead in the Lodges.--They should as far as possible be honest men, sedate, and quiet; but by some means or other they should be made useful to the Order.--Without leave of the Provincial, the Prefect shall hold no correspondence on matters relating to the Order with any person out of his province--as his peculiar object will be, to watch over and to instruct the Superiors of the Minerval and MASONIC Lodges, he will have recourse to the Provincial in all doubtful cases of any importance.

"Let the Prefect make himself perfect master of these rules; let him follow them with precision; let him always attend to the whole of the object; let him take care that each one may attend to his duty, doing neither more nor less than the law requires; and he will find in this instruction all that is necessary for the regulation of his conduct."

Such is the promise which terminates the laws for the Prefect of Illuminism. The five articles treated of in these regulations are prefaced by a far more pompous promise: "If, it is said, we have exactly foreseen every thing relating to these five articles, nothing will be impossible for us in any country under the Sun." [*7]

[p. 557]

Footnotes

^557:1 Should any adept wish for a specimen of this miserable farce, let him figure to himself an assembly of Epopts in their sacredotal habits. The Delegate opens the piece by Domine aperi os meum: The two Assistants repeat the same--The Plenipotentiary Fili mi quid postulas? The Delegate Ut Deus et Superiores nostri concedant nobis Decanum hunc quem ad te duco.--Plenip. Habetis decretum?--Habemus--Legatur--Communi voto atque consensu superiorum elegimus nobis in Decanum Fratrem N. N. Presbiterum Nostrae Provinciae, Majoris Ordinis verum atque prudentem hospitalem, moribus ornatum, sapientem, illuminatum et mansuetum, Deo et superioribus nostris per omnia placentemque ad Celsitudinis vestrae dignitatem [p. 557] adducere, quatenus autore Domino nobis velut idoneus Decanus prae-esse valeat ut prodesse, nosque sub ejus sapienti regimine in securitate ac quiete magnis scientiis aliisque operibus curare possimus--Plenip. Disposuisti domui tuae?--The Elect Disposui--Nosti quanta sit Decani cura et qua poena infligantur infideles et delatores?--Duce the Domine Ego auctoritate superiorum inductus firmiter sub interminatione anathematis, inhibeo tibi, ne quid de scientiis occultis, vel secreta tibi revelanda abducas, surripias, vel alicui profano communices. Si tu autem aliquid attentare praesumseris, maledictus eris in domo et extra domum, maledictus in civitate et in agro, maledictus vigilando et dormiendo, maledictus manducando et bibendo, maledictus ambulando et sedendo, maledicta erunt caro et ossa, et sanitatem non habebis a planta pedis usque ad verticem. Veniat tunc super te maledictio quam per Moysen in lege filio iniquitatis Dominus promisit. Deleatur nomen tuum in libro viventium, et cum justis non amplius scribatur, fiat pars et hereditas tua cum Cain fratricida, cum Dathan et Abiron, cum Anania et Saphira, cum Simone Mago et Juda proditore. Vide ergo ne quid feceris, quo anathema mereris.--Here follow the imposition of hands, the exhortations, and the benedictions, all in Latin. The Officiator, extending his hands again on the head of the Elect, terminates the ceremony with the following words: Sicut ros Hermon qui descendit in montem Sion, sic desecendat super te Dei summae sapientiae benedictio (see the last works of Spartacus--Nachricht von Weihung eines Decani).--What execrable impiety must the Sect have infused into its Epopts to expect that such an impious derision of the Scriptures and of the most sacred rites could give them pleasure? Let not the reader think that I have exaggerated this barbarous cant. The whole ceremony is a buffoonery of the lowest class. Impiety depraves every thing, even the taste for literature.

^557:2 Instructions C for the Regents, and No. I-X.

^557:3 Kann der Prafect die furstlichen Dicasterien und Rathe nach und nach mit eifrigen ordens mitgliedern besetzen, so hat er alles gethan, was er thun konte. Es ist mehr, als wenn er den fursten selbst aufgenommen hatte.

^557:4 Orig. Writ. Vol. II. 2d Jan. 1785.

^557:5 Ibid.--Weishaupt's Let. 15th March, 1781.

^557:6 Geschichte der illumin. Grad. Page 66.

^557:7 Ist nun in diessen funf stucken alles gehorig besorgt, so ist in iedem lande unter der sonne nichts unmoglich--The whole of this Chapter is extracted from the Instructions C for the Prefect, from Page 145 to 166.

     
Code of the Illuminati: Part III of Memoirs Illustrating the History of Jacobinism, by A Barruel, tr. Robert Edward Clifford [1798], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 558]

  

CHAP. XVII.

  

Instructions for the Provincial.

BY far the greater part of the code of laws which has just been laid before the reader as relating to the Regents and Prefects of the Illuminees, was originally written by Weishaupt for the instruction of his Provincials. This is evident from the first digest of these laws, as they appear in the second part of the second volume of the Original Writings of the Sect, from page 17 to 43. It is even one of those parts which Knigge looked upon as a master-piece of politics. [*1] So replete with artifice did he think it, that he deemed it a pity to circumscribe the knowledge of it to the Provincials alone. The reader has seen what use he has made of them, thoroughly persuaded that the Regents in general, and particularly the Local Superiors, could greatly benefit the Order by attending to them. The Areopagites and General consented to these new dispositions; but the following part of this chapter remained appropriated to the Provincials.

"I. The Provincial shall make himself perfect master of the whole constitution of the Order. The system of it should be as familiar to him as if he had invented it."

"II. As a guide for all his actions, he shall adopt the whole government and the instructions already laid down for the Regents and Local Superiors, not neglecting a single rule. "

"III. The Provincial shall be chosen by the Regents of his Province, and be confirmed by the National Superior. . . . [*2] The high Superiors (the Areopage and General) have the power of deposing him."

"IV. He shall be a native of, or at least be thoroughly acquainted with the province under his inspection."

"V. He shall be  as little as possible in public concerns, or in any other enterprize, that he may devote all his time to the Order."

"VI. He shall assume the character of a man retired from the world, and who only seeks rest."

"VII. He shall fix his residence as nearly as possible in the centre of his province, the better to watch over the different districts."

"VIII. On his being named Provincial, he shall leave his former characteristic, and assume that which the high Superiors shall give him.--The

[p. 559]

same Superiors will send him the impression of the seal he is to bear, and he will wear it engraved on his ring."

"IX. The archives of the province, which the Regents will have taken care to seal up and carry away on the demise of his predecessor, are to be entrusted to him on his nomination."

"X. The Provincial will monthly transmit the general report of his province to the National Inspector immediately over him. As he himself only receives the reports of the Local Superiors a fortnight after the month is up, he will necessarily be always a month behind-hand, making, for example, the report of May about the end of June, and so on. This report will be subdivided into as many parts as he has Prefects under his inspection. He will carefully note every thing of consequence that has happened in any of the schools or lodges: also the names, ages, country, station in life, and the date of the reversal letters, of each new adept; the high Superiors wishing to have no further information concerning the new adepts until they come to the class of Regent, unless on some particular occasion."

"XI. Beside this monthly report, he is to apply to the National Superior in all extraordinary cases which are not left to his decision. He is also to send in his personal tablets every three months; and he will undertake no political enterprize without having first consulted."

"XII. He has nothing to do with the other Provincials. Let things go on well or ill in a neighbouring province, it is no business of his. If he wishes to ask any thing of the other Provincials, let him apply to the National Inspector."

"XIII. If he has any complaint to make against the Inspector, he will direct his letter Soli or Primo."

"XIV. All the Regents of the province are his counsellors; they are to second and help him in all his enterprizes. If it be convenient to him, he should have two of them near his person to serve him as secretaries."

"XV. He confirms the nominations of all the Superiors of the inferior degrees. He also names the Prefects, but they must be approved by the Director, who can refuse his sanction."

"XVI. He has a right to send the brethren who are pensioned by the Order, and to employ them in those parts of the province where he may think them most useful."

"XVII and XVIII. He transmits the characteristics of the brethren and geographical names of the lodges to the Prefects, as he receives them from the high Superiors."

"XIX. He is also to send the names of the excluded brethren, that an exact list may be preserved in all the assemblies."

"XX. When he has any reprimand to make to a Brother, whom it may be dangerous to offend, he will assume an unknown hand, and the signature of Basyle. This name, which no member of the Order bears, is peculiarly preserved for that object.

[p. 560]

"XXI. He will sometimes write to the Inferior degrees; and on the proposition of the Epopts he will decide what books are to be put into the hands of the young adepts according to the degrees they are in.--He is as much as possible to promote libraries, cabinets of natural philosophy, Musaeums, collections of manuscripts, &c. in the most convenient parts of his Province; these, it may easily be conceived, are only intended for the adepts.

"XXII. The Provincial opens the letters of the Minor and Major Illuminees which are directed Soli. He also reads the Quibus Licets of the Epopts and Primos of the Novices; but can neither open the Primo of the Minerval, the Soli of the Knight, nor the Quibus Licet of the Regent." [*3] This gradual power of opening the letters of the Brethren according to the degree they belong to, plainly indicates that some mark peculiar to each degree is made use of; but I have not been able to discover that mark. The reader will have observed, that all the letters, even the Quibus Licets, are opened by Brethren of a higher degree than that of the adept who writes; and consequently he can never know who it is that answers him, as the rules of this Hierarchy are only made known to the Brethren in proportion as they rise in dignity. The Provincial himself can only form a conjecture as to the persons who open his letters and those of the other Brethren which he is not permitted to open himself.

"XXIII. He shall raise no Brother to the degree of Regent, without having first obtained the consent of the National Inspector.

"XXIV. He is to inform the Dean of the branch of science which each new adept has made choice of on his admission into the Minerval Academy.

"XXV. Lest any of the Archives should be mislaid, he will take care to form but one bundle of all the tablets, reversal letters, and other documents relating to the same adept.

"XXVI. He will apply himself to procure as many co-operators as possible for the Order, in the scientific branches.

"XXVII. He will transmit to the Deans all remarkable treatises or discourses, and every thing relative to the degree of Epopt; for example, the lives historical or characteristic, dissertations, &c.

"XXVIII. If among the Epopts any men be found endowed with great talents, but little fitted for the political government of the Order, the Provincial must devise means of removing them from such functions.

"XXIX. When the Chapters of the Scotch Knights are composed of more than twelve Knights, he will raise the ablest among them to the degree of Epopt.

"XXX. In each Chapter he will have a confidential Epopt, who will be his secret censor or spy.

"XXXI. The Provincial will receive his letters patent from the National Superior--When he issues those for the Chapters of the Scotch Knights, he will make use of the following formula: 'We of the Grand Lodge of the Germanic Orient, constituted Provincial and Master of the district of N N, make known that by these presents we give to the venerable Brother (here is the characteristic and true name of the new Venerable or Master) full powers to

[p. 561]

erect a secret Chapter of the most holy SCOTCH MASONRY, and to propagate this Royal Art conformably to his instructions by the establishment of new Masonic Lodges of the three symbolic degrees--Given at the Directory of the District--

        (L. S.)

       SECRET PROVINCIAL
   OF THE DIRECTORY.

     
      without   any further signature.

        

     
 "XXXII. To say every thing in a few words, the Provincial has the special charge of putting his province in a proper situation for attempting every thing for the general good, and for preventing all evil.--Happy the state where our Order shall have acquired such power! Nor will it prove a difficult task for the Provincial who shall implicitly follow the instructions of his high Superiors.--Seconded by so many able men deeply versed in moral sciences, submissive and secretly labouring like himself, there can be no noble enterprize which he may not undertake, nor evil design which he cannot avert--Therefore let there be no connivance at faults; no Nepotism, no private piques; no views but for the general good; no object, no motives but those of the Order. And let the Brethren rely upon us, that we shall never create any Provincials but such as are capable of fulfilling these duties; but let it be also remembered, that we reserve in our hands all the means necessary for chastising the man who should presume to abuse the power he has received from us." [*4]

"XXXIII. This power must never be employed but for the good of the Brethren. We should indeed help all whom we can help; but when the circumstances are similar, the members of our society are always to have the preference.--Particularly as to those whose fidelity is proof against all the powers of seduction. In their support let us be prodigal of our toils, our money, our honour, our goods, even our blood; and let the least affront offered to any Illuminee be the general cause of the Order."

Thus terminate the instructions for the Provincial. They forewarn us of the existence of a most tremendous power above him whence all the authority of the Order emanates; a power which reserves to itself the means of chastising whoever shall abuse that portion which it has entrusted to any of its adepts; that is to say, who shall not have made it subservient to the grand object and to all the plots of the Sect.--There are, in fact, three offices in the hierarchal Orders of Superiors above the Provincial. First, the National Directors, then the Supreme Council called the Areopagites by the Sect, the authority of which extends over the  of all nations; and that is presided over by the General of the Order. The following Chapter will give every light on these supreme Magistrates of Illuminism which the known Archives of the Sect can reflect.

[p. 562]

Footnotes

^562:1 See his last Observations.

^562:2 There is an omission in the copy from which these rules have been printed, which makes part of this article unintelligible. [p. 562]

^562:3 This article is extracted from the instructions for the Prefect; but, being directly addressed to the Provincial, I have placed it here.

^562:4 See the Instruction D for the degree of Regent.

    
Code of the Illuminati: Part III of Memoirs Illustrating the History of Jacobinism, by A Barruel, tr. Robert Edward Clifford [1798], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 563]

  

CHAP. XVIII.

  

Of the National Directors, of the Areopagites, and of the General of Illuminism.

IN the general plan of the Government of the Illuminees it is said, that every Brother shall receive particular instructions according to the rank he holds in the Hierarchy of the Order: Yet I have never been able to discover those intended for the use of the National Directors. This part of the Code is not to be found either in the two volumes so often quoted of the Original Writings, or in that of Philo and Spartacus which has thrown so much light on the mysteries. It does not appear, that any of the German writers who have been the best informed on, and the most strenuous opponents of, Illuminism have ever been able to discover them. For some time I even entertained doubts whether the Superiors called National Directors, and those styled Inspectors, were not of the same degree in the Hierarchy of the Sect.--They were certainly distinct employments in the year 1782; for Weishaupt's letters at that period mention Germany as divided into three inspections, each Inspector having several Provincials subordinate to him. [*1] But, on the other side, the general account which the Order puts into the hands of its Regents, and the last works of Philo printed in 1788, mention no intermediate office between the Provincials and the Nationals, which latter are sometimes described as National Superiors, at others as National Inspectors. Their correspondence and subordination is direct from the Supreme Council. [*2] It is therefore evident, that in the last digest of the Code the two offices of National Inspector and Director were united. But in vain would the Sect conceal the instructions which it has appropriated to the functions of these National Superiors. The denomination alone testifies the importance which attaches to their office; and if the precise nature of their duties be wanting, it is easy to supply the deficiency, by what has already escaped the vigilance of the Sect in the foregoing parts of the Code.

Let the reader recall to his mind what has been said in the Chapter on the Epopts, of the systems which they were to form in order to seize on the empire of the Sciences and direct them all toward the accomplishment of the plots of the Sect. In the same degree we have seen them annually assembling in each province, and compiling from their partial attacks every means that their inventions could furnish, insensibly to enslave the public opinion, and to

[p. 564]

eradicate from the minds of the people what the Sect is pleased to call religious prejudices. We have seen the class of Regents more particularly occupied in sapping the foundations of the throne, and in destroying that veneration in which nations held the persons and functions of their Sovereigns--Nay, there exists a particular law framed for the Epopts which has not yet been cited, and which must here be introduced. It is to be found in the Second Volume of the Original Writings, second Section, intitled--Articles agreed upon by the Areopagites in Ardameth 1151 (A.D. December 1781)--There under the article HIGH MYSTERIES, I read, "If among our Epopts any speculative geniuses are to be found, they shall be admitted to the degree of Mage.--These adepts shall be employed in collecting and digesting all the grand philosophical systems, and will invent or compile for the people a system of religion which our Order means as soon as possible to give to the universe." [*3]

I do not forget that I am to treat of the National Directors; but am somewhat afraid that my readers may adduce this plan for giving a new religion to the whole universe, as invalidating their plot for the destruction of every religion. Let such readers, however, reflect on the religion which Weishaupt has himself laid down for his Mages. It is the rankest Spinosism, admitting of no God but the world itself; that is to say, absolute Atheism. Let them also remember, that one of the last secrets of the Grand Mysteries, is to reveal to the adepts that all religions are grounded on and are the invention of imposture. Nor is it by any means difficult to account for these two schemes of the Sect, the one for the creation of a new religion, the other for the destruction of all. These plans are to be successive in their operations. Sentiments of Religion are too deeply engraven in the minds of the people for Weishaupt to flatter himself with suddenly eradicating it, or at least without substituting some capricious and sophisticated faith, which in reality would no more constitute a religion than the Worship of Reason, of which the French Revolution has given us an impure essay. The religion, therefore, to be invented by the Mages of Illuminism is no more than a preparatory step that should destroy the religion of Christ throughout the universe. This advantage gained, it will remain no very difficult task to open the eyes of the whole world on the inanity and imposture of their own; and thus it will have served as a scaffolding which naturally disappears with the edifice that is to be pulled down. This religion to be invented may be considered as on a parallel with those new governments, those democracies, which are to amuse the people until the period shall come when their Illuminizing Equality and Liberty shall have taught them, that each one is essentially his own sovereign, that this sovereignty is an imprescriptible right inherent in each man, in direct opposition to democracy, and even to all property or social compact.

Such is the general tenour of the systems to be invented and prosecuted by the Sect, for attaining the grand object of these Conspirators. All the adepts which the Sect comprises under the denomination of speculative geniuses are perpetually labouring at these systems under the direction of the Provincials. But they are not the persons who complete the plans; they are only to present

[p. 565]

the first sketch, which each Provincial is obliged to transmit to the National Directory, there to undergo a further investigation and receive its final polish. [*4] One of the first duties, therefore, of the National Director will be to collect all these anti-religious and anti-social systems, to pass judgment on them, and to declare how far they can contribute towards the universal disorganization. But even these could not alone suffice for so great a work; they are surrounded by the Elect of the nation as the Provincial is by the Chosen of the provinces. This council of the Elect, after mature deliberation, declare which are the systems that are worthy of being adopted by the Order; and they will make all the additions and corrections that they may conceive conducive to the success of the general plan. Thus corrected and digested, these systems of impiety and disorganization are deposited in the archives of the Director, which now become national. It is to these that the Provincials have recourse in all their doubts, and hence flow all those lights which are to expand themselves throughout the nation:--it is hence also that the National Director [*5] will take all the new regulations which he may judge necessary for the better combination and concordance of the efforts of the National Brethren.--But the Sect does not confine its views to one nation. It has formed within itself a supreme tribunal, which has subjected all nations to its inquisition. Composed of twelve Peers or Fathers of the Order, [*6] it is presided over by the General; and, under the name of Areopagites, it becomes the common centre of communication from the adepts of all nations, as the National is the centre of one particular nation, the Provincial of one province, the Local Superior of the lodges of his district, the Minerval Master of his academy, the Venerable of his Masonic Lodge; and, finally, as the Insinuator or Recruiter is of his novices or candidates. Thus, from the first step to the pinnacle of the Order, every thing is connected and gradually ascends by means of the Quibus Licets, Solis and Primos.--Every thing that happens in each nation gradually ascends to the National, and from these Directors all is transmitted to the centre of all nations, to the supreme council of the Areopagites, and the General in chief, the universal Director of the Conspiracy.

The grand point, therefore, to be observed in the code concerning the National Director is, his direct correspondence with the Areopagites. It is evident from the terms expressed in the general plan of the government which the Sect reveals to its Regents. "In every nation there shall be a National Director associated and in direct communication with our Fathers, the first of whom holds the helm of the Order." [*7] This accounts for the injunction given to the Provincial, to make frequent and exact returns to the National Director of every thing that may take place in his province; to have recourse to him on all doubtful occasions, or in cases of especial importance; and never to take any step in politics without having first consulted him. [*8] This explains why the choice of those adepts which are to be advanced to the political degree of Regent, or to the Prefectships of districts, [*9] is left to the option of the National, or even the nomination of the Provincials. [*10] This informs us why all the Quibus Licets of the Regents are reserved to the Director, that is to say,

[p. 566]

that all the secrets of their political discoveries may more certainly reach the hands of him who is to leave no secret hidden from the Fathers of the Order. [*11]

Such then are the rights of, such the laws for the National Inspector of Illuminism; and so great is the importance which the Sect attaches to this office. To him are forwarded all the secrets of the brethren spread throughout the provinces, the Courts, or towns; to him are sent all the projects, all the reports on the successes gained by, or dangers impending over the Order; on the progress of its plots; on employments, dignities, and power to be acquired for the adepts; on the candidates to be rejected, the enemies to be crushed, the councils and state offices of princes to be seized. To him, in short, are reported all the means which can retard or accelerate the fall of the Altar and of empires, the disorganization of every church and state within his inspection.--It is by means of his direct correspondence, and that of his Co-nationals, that the discoveries of the Scrutators, the political plans of the Brethren, the speculations of the plodding geniuses of the Order, the plans proposed and debated in the councils of Princes, and every thing, in short, which can weaken or strengthen the opinion of the people; which is to be foreseen or hindered, to be anticipated or hastened in each town, court, or family, are concentrated, and subjected to the views of the supreme council of the Sect. Hence no sovereign, no minister of state, no father of a family, no man in the bonds of the most intimate friendship, can say, My secret is my own, it has not, it will not, come to the knowledge of the Areopagites. By means of these same National Directors too, we behold all the orders of the Illuminizing Peers gradually descending to the adepts of all nations, of all provinces, academies, and lodges, whether Minerval or MASONIC; and immediately re-ascending through these same Nationals an exact statement to the Areopagites in what manner each command has been executed. It is by the Nationals too, that the supreme council is informed of the negligent Brethren who need to be stimulated, of the transgressors and stubborn adepts who deserve punishment, and stand in need of being reminded that they have sworn to submit both their lives and fortunes to the commands of the high Superiors (the unknown Fathers) of the Areopagites. In vain would the Sect strive to conceal the laws which the code lays down for these Inspectors. After what the reader has already seen of the laws of the Order, he must naturally conclude that such are evidently the mysteries comprehended in those words, There shall be in each empire a National Director associated or in direct correspondence with the Fathers of the Order.

With  to the laws and interior economy of the councils, it is easy to be conceived, that the Sect has succeeded in encompassing them with impenetrable darkness. Some few rays of light, however, have been cast on it, and that by the Fathers themselves.

In the first place, we see Philo-Knigge, in his Apology, speaking as follows of these supreme magistrates of Illuminism: "Their labours, with regard to the parts purely speculative, were to have in view the knowledge and the

[p. 567]

tradition of all the important, holy, and sublime discoveries to be made in the religious mysteries and in the higher philosophy. Twelve Areopagites only are to compose this tribunal; and one of them is to be the chief. When any one of the members dies, or retires, his successor is chosen from among the Regents." [*12] This general idea given by Knigge of the Supreme Council is indeed mysterious;--but he could scarcely be expected to publish more, knowing as he did the fate which awaits those who betray the secrets of the Sect. He has, however, at least said enough to give us clearly to understand, that all the religious and philosophical or rather impious and sophisticated speculations of the Epopts, perpetually perverting the sciences and operating the extinction of all religious ideas, are concentrated within the council of the Areopagites; we have seen them combining, digesting, approving, or rejecting those plans of a new religion which the Mages are directed to invent, and which the Sect means incontinently to give to the world.

In his familiar correspondence, Spartacus speaks more openly and with greater latitude to his beloved Cato. Therein it appears, that anti-religious systems do not alone employ the meditations of the Fathers; for, soon after having mentioned the object of those Quibus Licets in  the young adepts were to give an account of the prejudices they might have discovered in themselves, which of them predominated, and how far they had succeeded in destroying them, he proceeds to say, "It is by these means that I discover such of our Order as have the proper dispositions for adopting certain special doctrines, and more elevated, on governments and religious opinions." [*13] He then continues, "The maxims and politics of the Order are completely explained in the end. Here, in the Supreme Council, they project and examine the plans to be adopted for gradually enabling us to attack the enemy of reason and human nature personally (auf den leib). Here also the mode of introducing such plans into the Order is discussed, and it is decided to which brethren they are to be entrusted, and how far each one can be employed in their execution, in proportion to the insight given to him." [*14]

The reader is already too well acquainted with the maxims and policy of Illuminism, not to join with me in saying, Here then is the grand object of this Supreme Council of the Sect! It is in that dark recess that all those artifices are devised for rendering the disorganizing systems of Equality and Liberty familiar to the Illuminizing adepts: There is exactly ascertained the proportion which each class of the Brethren can bear in this universal destruction of religion, , society, and property; there again is the day anxiously sought and the means prepared, for hereafter throwing off the mask, and attacking personally the defenders of religion, laws, and property, as so many enemies to reason and humanity; there concentrate all the declarations, the reports, the plans of all the brethren dispersed throughout the universe, that the Sect may judge of its own strength, and compare it with that of the friends to the Altar and the Laws. To sum up all, it is there that the artifices and means are determined on, and the merits and powers of the higher adepts are investigated prior to their being entrusted with that part of the grand conspiracy to which

[p. 568]

their abilities are best adapted. Let the reader remember, that it is not a stranger to the Sect who has thus described the Areopage; it is the grand Legislator of Illuminism himself. Can we any longer stand in need of the regulations for this council? No; we well know what they must be; we know that impiety, and the most consummate arts in seduction and sedition, are to be their leading features; we further know, that its members must resemble Weishaupt himself, before they can be permitted to sit with him in council. What other bond of union do they need, beside the machination of the most hideous plots, the just or unjust means of forwarding the interests of the Sect as much as circumstances will permit, and the ensuring of success by the blackest and most profound artifices that depravity can invent? The fertile genius of the Legislator, however, would not commit the success of the least of his crimes to chance. He attempted to sketch a code of laws for his Areopagites, and for any future Spartacus that might succeed him. The code contains but a sketch of what he calls laws ad interim. It is to be found in the ninth section of the first volume of the Original Writings, and is addressed to the Areopagites. Many other passages of his letters relate to the same object.--I have transcribed the following articles:

"The Areopagites shall form the Supreme Council (literally, the Supreme College).--Their occupations shall relate to affairs of the greatest importance, and they shall pay little or no attention to such as are less essential.--They may recruit, it is true (konnen sie zwar recroutiren); that is to say, they may entice Candidates into the Order; but they must leave the care of their instruction to some intelligent adept. From time to time they will visit these Candidates, to inspire them with fresh ardour, to stimulate their zeal--They will be particularly careful in seeing that the progress and method of our Illuminees is every where uniform--They will more particularly watch over Athens (Munich, the principal Lodge after that of Ingolstadt, where Weishaupt resided at the time he wrote these instructions). They will make no reports concerning that Lodge to any body but Spartacus. They will send monthly a statement of all the principal events, a sort of Gazette (Ein art von Zeitung), to the Brethren (Conscii); that is to say, to those only who are initiated in the last secrets. But (continues Weishaupt) nota bene, this Gazette as yet has been no more than our common journal; the Conscii must compose one for the use of the Areopagites. These latter will labour at projects, ameliorations, and other objects of a similar nature, which are to be made known to the Conscii by circular letters. They are the people who are to bear a part of the weight of the general correspondence--They are not allowed to open the letters of complaint (die litteras gravatoriales); that is to say, those containing any complaints against them. These are to be transmitted to the general, to Spartacus, as a sure means of informing him that they fulfil their duty. This instruction being only provisional, and relating solely to the Areopage, shall not be circulated; but the council will take a copy and send back the Original to Spartacus. [*15]

"The assembling of the council is to be regulated according to the feasts marked in the calendar of the Order. (Nach dem calendario Illuminatorum an 

[p. 569]

[paragraph continues] Ordens festen)." But this was soon found to be insufficient, and Weishaupt exhorts his Areopagites to meet in their senate every post-day, and at the hour of the delivery of the letters.

Short as this sketch of a Code for the Areopagites may seem, it clearly denotes the essence of their functions, and shows how they are to act as a central point for the whole Sect. A grand question was still undecided when Spartacus gave these laws to the council; which was nothing less than, Whether Spartacus was to preserve a legislative and sovereign power over the Members of this Council, similar to that authority which they were to exercise over the rest of the Order?--Great Conspirators will seldom brook control even by their fellows. They will be equal among themselves and in their dens of conspiracy. Spartacus-Weishaupt was naturally of a despotic disposition. His Areopagites for a long time complained of it. [*16] But he contended, that as founder, he had the indefeasible right of giving to the association those laws and regulations which he judged necesssary for its perpetuation. He soon, indeed, repented of the decision he had given against himself in favour of his Senate, "That the plurality of votes should dictate the eternal laws of the Sect" (Lex semper valitura) [*17] Notwithstanding these complaints of the Areopagites, however, he speedily found means of re-instating himself in that authority, the privation of which only thwarted his artful conceptions, by subjecting them to the opinions of persons less consummate in the conspiring arts than their master. He sometimes submits to the justification of his conduct; but that is the very moment in which the reader should observe him artfully reclaiming all the rights and pretending to the exercise of unlimited despotism, though his cant appears to reject the very idea of it. Addressing his opponents in the shape of his pupils, he recalls to their minds the monstrous services he has rendered them in their youth, as so many benefactions of the most tender friendship, and asks them "of what they can in their consciences complain?" "When (says he) did you ever observe harshness or haughtiness in my conduct, with respect to you? When did I ever assume the tone of Master? Is it not rather with an excess of confidence, of goodness, of openess with my friends, that I may be reproached?"--When in this manner Weishaupt has captivated his Areopagites, he comes to the point: "Read then (he says) my letters over and over again. You will therein perceive that the grand object of our Society is not a thing of small consequence for me; that I know how to view it, and treat it also, in the most serious manner; that I have always aimed at the establishment of order, submission, discipline, and activity, as the sole means that can lead you to the grand object. In undertaking a work of such vast importance, was I not obliged by prayers, exhortations, and advice, to maintain and stimulate the ardour of my first, my dearest companions, on whom every thing depended?--If I wish to keep the supreme direction in my own hands, hear my reasons, which are most certainly of great weight:

"In the first place, I must necesssarily know with whom I have to deal, and must be ascertained of the fidelity of our people; and, to effectuate this, I am not to receive reports from a sixth hand, or perhaps one still more

[p. 570]

remote, on the execution of my plans, which have been approved of by the Elect of our Mysteries. . . In the next place, am I not the Constructor of this grand Edifice? Is there no respect due to me?. . . . When my system shall be completed, will it not be necessary for me to inspect the whole, and keep every man at his station? It is a great and radical defect in a society, where a Superior is dependent on the Inferiors, as it has been attempted to render me.

"But, to show you how much I value the friendship of my former friends, above all the authority I may exercise over others, I renounce all my rights, all my authority. Accept my warmest acknowledgements for all your past labours and patience. I flatter myself they have been hurtful to nobody, and that many have acquired from me lights on secret societies which they would not easily have found elsewhere. The purity of my intentions is my consolation and my recompense. From this instant I betake myself to obscurity and repose, where I shall not meet with zealous and envious opponents. There I shall be my own master, and my own subject." [*18]

The Illuminizing Despot thus artfully pleaded his cause. The Areopagites were impatient of his authority, but at the same time felt the want of so disorganizing a genius; and that they might not be deprived of its co-operation they reproached the Legislator with the extinction of his zeal.--The fire, however, was only hidden beneath the embers; they once more submit to the yoke of their former chief, who, inflamed with zeal, dictates the conditions on which alone he will deign to place himself once more at their head. Every thing is worthy of being remarked in them. The haughty spirit in which they are conceived, the nature, object, and extent of the power he assumes over the Supreme Council and Elect of the Order, are all worthy of our attentive notice.

"I begin (says he) by telling you before hand, that it may not any more be a subject of surprize, that I will be more severe than ever. I will not overlook a single fault, and shall in that respect be much more strict toward persons whom I know rather than toward those with whom I am not so familiar. My object and views require it. And to whom would you have me address myself, if not to the chiefs of the Order, since they alone are in direct correspondence with me? That things may succeed, it is necessary that we should be actuated but by one opinion, one sentiment, and be acquainted but with one language! And how can this be accomplished, if I cannot freely speak my mind to our people? I will then re-assume my post of General on the following conditions:

"I. That you will execute neither more nor less than what I shall command. I shall expect it in future; at least, should any change be thought necessary, I am to receive previous notice of it.

"II. I expect that every Saturday a proper report shall be sent to me of every thing that has taken place during the week, and that it shall be in the form of Minutes signed by all the Elect present.

"III. That I shall be informed of all the Members that have been recruited, or persons that are to be recruited, with an outline of their

[p. 571]

characters; and let some particulars concerning them be added when they are

admitted.

"IV. That the statutes of the class in which you labour be punctually observed, and that no  be granted without previous investigation. For should each one take upon himself to make such changes as he pleased, where would be the unity of the Order.--What I exact from you, you shall exact from those that are subject to you. If there be no order and subordination in the higher ranks, there will be none in the lower." [*19]

It was on the 25th of May 1779, that Weishaupt dictated these laws to his Areopage. A fifth condition seems to have made them merely provisional, and to have entrusted the despotic power in Weishaupt's hand only until the order had acquired a proper consistency; but he took care not again to lose the newly-acquired supremacy; though the Areopagites still regretted the loss of their Aristocracy, and the being reduced to be the mere agents or prime ministers of the Spartacus of the Order. But let us attend to that Spartacus, who has always represented the most legitimate authority as an outrage on human nature. Let us hear him invoking Machiavel in support of that which he wishes to exercise over the Order. He pleads his own cause with Zwack, who is also jealous of his Master, by showing all the disorder it occasioned, by every body wishing to introduce his own ideas into the Order, and then quotes the following passages from Machiavel: "It must be laid down as a general rule, that it seldom or never happens that any Government is either well-founded at first, or thoroughly reformed afterwards, except the plan be laid and conducted by ONE MAN ONLY, who has the sole power of giving all orders and making all laws that are  for its establishment. A prudent and virtuous Founder of a State, therefore, whose chief aim is to promote the welfare of many rather than to gratify his own ambition, to make provision for the good of his country, in preference to that of his heirs or successors, ought to endeavour by all means to get the supreme authority wholly into his hands: nor will a reasonable man ever condemn him for taking any measures (even the most extraordinary, if they are necessary) for that purpose: The means indeed may seem culpable, but the end will justify him if it be a good one;--for he only is blameable who uses violence to throw things into confusion and distraction; and not he who does it to  peace and good Order." After this long quotation which Weishaupt has made from a French  of Machiavel, Chap. IX. Discourses upon the first Decad of Livy, he continues in a sorrowful tone: "but I have not been able to obtain so favourable a decision. The Brethren have viewed that which is but a necessary law in the art of governing, in the light of ambition and a thirst of dominion." [*20] In the midst of this contention for power, he felt himself so superior in the art of governing conspiring associations at least, that he did not hesitate at writing to his Areopagites, As to politics and morality, Gentlemen, you must confess that you are as yet at a great distance behind me. [*21] He at length succeeded in persuading them, that it was necessary that the General of the Order should also, as

[p. 572]

president of the Areopagites holding the helm of the Order, be the absolute director. [*22]

Weishaupt, who left nothing relating to the disorganizing arts in an imperfect state, must, no doubt, have composed instructions to guide his successors in the exercise of their supremacy, and to teach them how to make the same use of it which he intended. But the reader will easily conceive, that these never could have escaped the vigilance of the Sect, nor pierced the dark cloud with which it had enveloped itself. It may even be possible that Weishaupt had not sufficient confidence in his Areopagites to entrust them with the entire plan. Throughout the whole hierarchy of Illuminism the lower degree is entirely ignorant of the particular instructions of the superior degrees; and why should not Weishaupt, who wished to perpetuate his disorganizing genius in all the succeeding Generals, have followed the same plan? He undoubtedly dictated laws and rules for their conduct, gave them rights which were to maintain both themselves and their Areopagites in their hierarchical superiority, and second them in the pursuit of their grand object; and these were entitled Instructions for the General of the Illuminees. No historian can flatter himself with the discovery of such a code of artifice and cunning; the most unrelenting wickedness and hypocrisy had invented it; and genius alone can pretend to dive into such secrets. The historian can only pretend to collect those articles which are to be found in Weishaupt's familiar correspondence, or in other parts of the code or writings of the Sect. Were we to throw this compilation into the form of instructions, the following might be nearly the result of our research.

I. The General shall be chosen by the twelve Peers of the Areopage, on the plurality of votes. [*23]

II. The Areopagites can only elect one of the members of their senate for General; (ein aus ihrher mitte gewahltes oberhaupt); [*24] that is to say, a man who has sufficiently distinguished himself among the Regents to be admitted among the twelve supreme adepts of Illuminism, and who has afterwards made himself so eminent in their council, that he is judged to be the first Illuminee in the world.

III. The adept is supposed to possess qualities requisite for a General in consequence of those he may have evinced before he was called to the Supreme Council. As he is to preside over the whole Order, he must (more than any body else) be impressed with the principles of the founder, and be divested of all religious, political, or national prejudices. The grand object of the Order must be more particularly inculcated into him, namely, that of teaching the whole universe to set aside all government, laws, and altars; and he must perpetually attend to the grand interests of human nature. His zeal is to be stimulated at the sight of every man who is subjected to any authority. It is to reinstate the inhabitants of the earth in their original Equality and Liberty that he is constituted General of all the Illuminees that are or will be spread over the world during his reign, all labouring at the accomplishment of the grand revolution of the Man-King. [*25]

[p. 573]

IV. The General shall have immediately under him the twelve Peers of the Supreme Council, and the various agents and secretaries which he shall judge necesssary to second him in the exercise of his functions. [*26]

V. The better to secure himself from the notice of the civil and ecclesiastical powers, he may assume, after the example of the founder, some public office under the very Powers the annihilation of which is to be his sole object. But he will be only known to the Areopagites and to his agents and secretaries in his quality of General. [*27] The better to conceal the residence of the General, the town where he has fixed will have three names. The common name known to all; the geographical one peculiar to the Order; and a third known only to the Areopagites and the Conscii or Elect. [*28]

VI. Our success greatly depending on the moral conduct of the Areopagites, the General will pay particular attention to prevent all public scandals which might hurt the reputation of the Order. He will represent to them in the strongest colours how much bad example will contribute to alienate from the Order the kinds of persons who might otherwise prove its most useful members. [*29]

VII. The better to preserve that respect which virtue commands from inferiors, the General will assume the character of austere morals. That he may always have the grand object present to his mind, and be wholly occupied with the duties he has to fulfil; let him never lose sight of that great maxim so frequently inculcated in his letters by the founder, as the leading feature to which he owed all his successes. Multum sudavit et alsit, abstinuit venere et vino. He neither feared heat nor cold; he abstained from wine and women, that he might always be master of his secret, always be master of himself, and prepared for all exigencies where the interests of the Order might require it. [*30]

VIII. The General shall be the central point for the Areopagites, as the latter are for the whole body of Illuminees. That is to say, each Areopagite holding correspondence with the National Inspectors is to make a report of all the Quibus Licets sent, and of all the secrets discovered by the corresponding Inspector; the secrets thus flowing from all parts will ultimately settle under the eye of the General. [*31]

IX. The functions of the General, and the success of his dispositions, greatly depending on the information he receives by means of this correspondence, he will distribute it among his Areopagites, assigning to each that of a particular nation whose Inspector is to transmit all his reports to him. [*32]

X. The principal heads of this correspondence shall be--1st, The number of the brethren in general, that the force of the Sect may be ascertained in each nation.--2dly, Those brethren who distinguish themselves the most by their zeal and intelligence--3dly, Those adepts who hold important offices about the Court, in the Church, Armies, or Magistracy: also what kinds of services might be expected from or prescribed to them in the grand revolution which our Order was preparing for human nature.--4thly, The general progress which our maxims and our doctrine were making in the public opinion; how far nations were prepared for the grand revolution; what

[p. 574]

strength and means of defence still remained in the hands of the civil and  powers; what persons were to be placed or displaced; what engines were to be played off, to hasten and secure the success of our revolution; and the means necessary to bind the hands of those who might resist. [*33]

XI. If from this correspondence he should judge it necesssary to dismiss any of the brethren from the Order, (and all the rights recognized by the adepts as inherent in the Order, particularly that of Life and Death being in the hands of the General) he will have to decide what further punishment is to follow the ejectment: whether the culprit is to be declared infamous throughout all the lodges of the Order, or whether the pain of death is to be pronounced against him. [*34]

XII. The General, after having chastised the imprudent, cowardly, and treacherous adepts, will turn his attention toward the discovery of those brethren who may be best fitted for seconding his views in each empire. Without making himself known to them, he will establish a line of communication between them. He will himself prepare the links of this immense chain after the manner laid down by our founder as the grand means of governing, from his mysterious centre, all the diverging ramifications of the Sect to the extremities of the earth; as a means of vivifying invisible armies in an instant, of putting them in motion, of directing their course, and of irretrievably executing the most astonishing revolutions, even before the very Potentates whose thrones are overturned have had time to surmise their danger.

XIII. The use of the chain is obvious and easy. To touch the fist link is all that is required. A single stroke of a pen is the grand spring that imparts motion to the whole. But the success depends on the choice of the time. In his hidden abode the General shall  the means, and catch the propitious moment. The signal of universal revolution shall not be given till a time when the combined force and instantaneous efforts of the brethren shall be irresistible.

The illuminizing General who shall have managed this chain with the greatest art, who shall have spread it both far and near, who shall have imparted to it a sufficient power of action to bear away and overturn at a single effort every throne and every altar, all political and religious institutions, and shall strew the earth with the ruins of empires--He will be the creator of the Man-King, sole king, sole sovereign of his actions as of his thoughts. To that General is reserved the glory of consummating the grand revolution which has so long been the ultimate object of our mysteries.

Whatever proofs I may have adduced, that must naturally lead my readers to such a conclusion, it may nevertheless be an object of surprise to them to see that Weishaupt had really planned this long chain of subterraneous communications, by which himself and his successors were empowered  to actuate thousand of legions, which instantaneously, on a day prescribed, might burst into existence armed with pikes and torches, and all the horrid implements of universal revolution. Let my readers then cast their eyes on this series of progression, which Weishaupt has with his own hand traced

[p. 575]

in his letters first to Cato-Zwack and afterwards to Celsus-Bader. The explanations are his own, and let them be particularly attended to.

"For the present, direct nobody to me but Cortez, that I may have some leisure to digest my speculations, and determine each one's place; for every thing depends on that. My operations with you shall be directed by the following table:

"Immediately under me I have two adepts, into whom I infuse my whole spirit; each of these corresponds with two others, and so on. By this method, and in the simplest way possible, I can inflame and put in motion thousands of men at once. It is by such means that orders are to be transmitted and political operations carried on." [*35]

A few days after he writes to Celsus-Bader, and tells him, "I have sent to Cato a table (schema) showing how one may methodically and without much trouble arrange a great multitude of men in the finest order possible. He will probably have shown it to you; if he has not, ask for it. Here is the figure (then follows the figure).

"The spirit of the first, of the most ardent, of the most profound adept daily and incessantly  itself to the two A, A; by the one to B, B; by the other to C, C: B B and C C communicate it to the eight following; these to the next sixteen, from thence to the thirty-two and so downwards. I have written a long explanation of it all to Cato. In a word, every man has his Aide-Major, by whose means he immediately acts on all the others. The whole force first issues from the center and then flows back again to it. Each one subjects, as it were, to his own person, two men whom he searches to the bottom, whom he observes, disposes, inflames, and drills, as it were, like recruits, that they may hereafter exercise and fire with the whole regiment. The same plan may be followed throughout all the degrees." [*36]

This is not a document which, like many others, flowed unintentionally from Weishaupt's pen, and which he left his disciples to collect, in order to form the political Code--Give me leisure to digest my speculations, and to determine each one's place--It is by such means that orders are to be transmitted, and political operations carried on. These words evidently demonstrate, that it is not a provisional law which he is about to pronounce, but a premeditated one, that is to last till that fatal period when whole legions, fired with his spirit, are to be led to that terrible exercise for which he had so long been drilling them;

[p. 576]

that time so expressly foretold by Weishaupt and his Hierophants, when they were to tie hands, to subjugate, fire on, and vandalize the whole universe.

When this fatal law shall be fulfilled, then will the last Spartacus sally forth from his baleful den, and triumphantly claim the sanguinary palm of murder and destruction from the Old Man of the Mountain, who would scarcely have been worthy of being his precursor. The earth loaded with the ruins of laws and empires; mortals blaspheming their God; nations lamenting over their conflagrating towns, their palaces, public monuments, and arts, and even their cottages, all overthrown; society weeping over its laws;-such shall be the sight which the last Spartacus will contemplate with joy, when he shall exultingly exclaim, "At length, my Brethren, the long-wished for day is come; let us celebrate the name, and dedicate this day as sacred to the memory of Weishaupt, our founder. We have consummated his grand mysteries; no laws shall exist, but those of his Order. Should nations be ever tempted to return to their wickedness, (to laws and society) this code, which has once destroyed their bonds, may do it again.

Will not hell vomit forth its legions to applaud this last Spartacus, to contemplate in amazement this work of the Illuminizing Code?--Will not Satan exclaim, "Here then are men as I wished them. I drove them from Eden; Weishaupt has driven them to the forests. I taught them to offend their God; he has made them reject their God entirely. I had left the earth to repay them for the sweat of their brow; he has stricken it with sterility; for it will be in vain for them to pretend to till and sow that which they shall not reap. I left them in their inequality of riches; but he has swept all away; he has destroyed the very idea of property; he has transformed mankind into brigands. Their virtues, happiness, and greatness under the protecting laws of society or of their country, was an object of jealousy to me; but he has cursed their laws and their country, and has reduced them to the stupid pride and ignorance of the roaming, savage, and vagabond clans. In tempting them to sin, I could not deprive them of repentance and the hope of pardon; but Weishaupt has taught them to scoff at crime and despise repentance. Villany without remorse, and hopeless misfortune, are all that he has left to the miserable inhabitants of the earth!

Meanwhile, before Satan shall exultingly enjoy this triumphant , which the Illuminizing Code is preparing, let us examine how far success has hitherto attended on its footsteps?--What share has it borne in that revolution which has already desolated so many countries and menaces so many others.--How it engendered that disastrous monster called Jacobin, raging uncontrouled, and almost unopposed, in these days of horror and devastation-In short, what effects this Code of the Illuminees has produced, and what effects it may produce.--This will be the object of the historical part of the Sect, and of the IVth and last volume of these Memoirs.

[p. 577] [p. 578]

 

END OF THE THIRD PART

 

 

 

Footnotes

^578:1 Original Writings, Vol. II. Let. 15, to Cato.

^578:2 Directions System, No. 5, and Philo's Endliche erklarung, page 81. [p. 577]

^578:3 So werden die selben Magi--Diese sammeln und bringen die hohere philosophische Systeme in ordnung, und bearbeiten ein volks-religion, welche der Orden demnachsten der welt geben will.--In the original, which is in Cato-Zwack's handwriting, the words volks-religion are in cypher, thus 20, 14, 2, 3, 18,--17, 8, 2, 4, 6, 4, 14, 13.

^578:4 Instructions for the degree of Epopt, No. 12 and 14.

^578:5 Deswegen kommen jahrlich ein mal alle Presbyter einer provinz auf der grossen Synode zusammen, machen ein grosses verzeichniss der in diesem jahr gesammlten beylagen an die National Direction wo selbst es in die haupt-katalog eingetragen, und damit ein schatz von kenntnissen formirt wird, woraus jeder befridigt werden kann: denn daraus werden die regel abstrahirt, und was noch fehlt, weitere beobachtungs aufgaben, wie schon ervahnt worden, aufgeschrieben um feste satze zu bekommen. Ibid. No. 15.

^578:6 Philo's Endliche erklarung, Page 119.

^578:7 Directions System, No. 4.

^578:8 Ibid. No. 10 and 11.

^578:9 Ibid. No. 15 and 23.

^578:10 Ibid. No. 9.

^578:11 Ibid. No. 22.

^578:12 Last Observations of Philo, Page 115.

^578:13 Aus diesen kann ich ersehen welche geneigt sind gewisse sonderbare staats lehren, weiters hinauf religions meynungen anzunehmen.

^578:14 Und am end folgt die totale einsicht in die Politic und maximen des Ordens. In diesen obersten Conseil, werden die project entworfen, wie den feinden der vernunft und Menschlichkeit nach und nach auf den leib zu gehen seye: Wie die sache unter den Ordens mitgliedern einzuleiten, wen es anzuvertauen? Wie ein jeder a proportione seiner einsicht kanne dazu gebraucht werden.--Original Writings, Letter to Cato-Zwack, 10th March, 1778.

^578:15 Extracts from the Instruction to Cato, Marius, and Scipio, Original Writings, Vol. I. Sect. ix.

^578:16 Letters of Philo to Cato and last Observations of Philo.

^578:17 Letter of the 8th November, 1778.

^578:18 Original Writings, Vol. I. Sect. 49.

^578:19 Original Writings, Vol. II. Letters 49 and 50.

^578:20 Original Writings, Vol. II. Let. 2, to Cato.

^578:21 Ibid. Let. 10.

^578:22 General Plan of the Order, No. 5.

^578:23 Last Observations of Philo, Page. 119.

^578:24 Ibid.

^578:25 See the Mysteries.

^578:26 See above.

^578:27 Orig. Writ. Spartacus' Letters, passim, et supra.

^578:28 Orig. Writ. Vol. I. Sect. 3.

^578:29 Ib. Vol. II. Let 9 & 10.

^578:30 Ibid. Vol. I. Let 16, &c

^578:31 Vide supra.

^578:32 Ibid. Vol. II. Let 6, 13, &c.

^578:33 See the different degrees and the views with which the Quibus Licets and tablets, &c. &c. are written. [p. 578]

^578:34 Orig. Writ. Vol. II. Let 8, et supra, Oath of the Novice.

^578:35 I here feel it incumbent on me to insert the original text, to show that I do not exaggerate Weishaupt's meaning. The following are the terms in which he writes to Cato:--"An mich selbst aber verveisen sie dermalen noch keinen unmittelbar als den Cortez, bis ich schreibe, damit ich indessen speculiren, und die leute geschickt rangieren kann; den davon hangt alles ab. Ich werde in dieser figur mit ihnen operiren." (Here stands the figure already inserted above: The Letters A B C allude to the explanation given in the Letter to Celsus). "Ich habe zwey unmittelbar unter mir welchen ich meinen ganzen geist einhauche, und von diesen zweyen hat wieder jeder zwey andere, und so fort. Auf diese art kann ich auf die einfachste art tausend menschen in bewegung und flammen setzen. Auf eben diese art muss man die ordres erheilen, und im politischen opieren." Original Writings, Vol. II. Let 8, to Cato, of the 16th February 1782. It may be remarked that Weishaupt's style is none of the purest.

^578:36 The original text of this letter is to be found in the Original Letters, Vol. II. Let 13, to Celsus without any date. It is as follows: "Ich habe an Cato ein schema geschickt, wie man planmassig eine grosse menge menschen in der schonsten ordnung. . . abrichten kann. . . Es ist diese forme."

"Der geist des ersten, warmsten, und einsichtsvollesten communicirt sich unaufhorlich und taglich an A A--A an B B: und das andere an C C--B B, und C C communiciren sich auf die namliche art an die unteren 8. Diese an die weitere 16, und 16 an 32, und so weiter. An Cato hab ich es weitlaufiger geschrieben: Kurz! Jeder hat zwey flugel adjutanten, wodurch er mittelbar in all ubrige wirkt. Im centro geht alle kraft aus, und vereignigt sich auch wieder darinn. Jeder sucht sich in gewisser subordination zwey manner aus, die er ganz studiert, beobachtet, abrichtet, anfeuert, und so zu sagen, wie recrouten abrichtet, damit sie dereinst mit dem ganzen regiment abfeuern und exerciren konnen. Das kann man durch alle grade so einrichten."

I do not find the long explanation mentioned as sent to Cato by Weishaupt, nor do I remember to have seen it. It would most certainly be curious, and we should see in a clearer light how he was to infuse his spirit into and fire the minds of thousands of men; but still these two letters are proofs more than sufficient for our purpose.

 

    


===== BOOK: mind.txt =====



At the Back of the Black Man's Mind, by Richard Edward Dennett, [1906], at sacred-texts.com

   

AT THE BACK OF THE BLACK MAN'S MIND

 

OR

 

NOTES ON THE KINGLY OFFICE IN WEST AFRICA

 

R. E. DENNETT

 

[1906]

 

 

PREFACE

THE object of this little work is twofold. In the first place I wish to show that, concurrent with fetishism or Jujuism, there is in Africa a religion giving us a much higher conception of God than is generally acknowledged by writers on African modes of thought. And, in the second place, I am anxious to make clear the vital importance of the kingly office to the African communities.
 This concurrence of fetishism and a higher religion is nothing new, and as our knowledge of primitive and degenerate people increases it will probably be found to be quite common, if not the rule. "Traces of ancestor worship and fetishism have in all ages been found among the Israelites, especially among those of the northern kingdom; this is abundantly proved," writes Professor Fr. Hommel in his Ancient Hebrew Tradition Illustrated by the Monuments, by various passages in the Old Testament literature, but it is no more an argument against the concurrent existence of a higher conception of the Deity than the numerous superstitious customs and ideas still prevalent among the lower orders of almost every civilised country of the present day are arguments against the existence and practical results of Christianity."

The lasting effect of missionary effort in Africa must depend to a very great extent on the grasp the missionaries are capable of obtaining of this higher conception of God which the natives of Africa in my opinion undoubtedly have, and the use they may make of it in manifesting God to them as the one and only true God, and not merely the white man's God.

The work of the government of the natives must also be greatly simplified if once the importance of the kingly office is recognised. Their higher conception of God cannot be separated from the kingly office, for the king is priest as well. Rotten and degenerate as an African kingdom may have become, its only hope of regeneration rests in the purification of the kingly office and of the ancient system of government attached to it. I say ancient advisedly, because it seems to me that during the last few centuries Africa has been having a very bad time of it, and anarchy and usurpation have been busy upsetting older and purer customs. The disorganisation of the indigenous political fabric gives so great an opening for political adventurers of a cunning type to step in that the government of the country through the natives., on so-called native lines, becomes almost an impossibility for a foreign government.

However humble this contribution to the better understanding of the working of the African mind may be, it is hoped that it may be accepted as an attempt to uplift those who are not already above personal and petty prejudices to the possibility of crediting the Africans with thoughts, concerning their religious and political system, comparable to any that may have been handed down to themselves by their own ancestors.

In giving to this work the title of At the Back of the Black Man's Mind, I rather wish to imply that I should like to get there than to assert that I have actually solved all the problems that lie concealed there. If I have not succeeded, at any rate this study of the kingly office in West Africa will at least, I hope, draw attention to this matter and throw so much light upon it as may guide others to more complete success in the near hereafter.

Things are moving now in West Africa, and a greater number of people are taking an intelligent interest in the country since the late Miss M. H. Kingsley's great books first drew crowds of her admirers to study African problems. Miss Kingsley used to say that West Africa wanted advertising, and she advertised it, and created a public for us. And this should be remembered by those who, coming after her, when our knowledge of the country has ripened, are apt to lay stress upon trivial errors in detail, forgetting the vast amount of general information she gave to the world about the country. How tireless she was in encouraging others less gifted than herself to add their mites of knowledge to her large collection of facts many can testify, the writer among the rest. It is only right and natural, therefore, that he should in the first place wish to record his sense of gratitude to her and her memory.

In the second place he desires to place on record his sense of obligation and thanks to the African Society, the Anthropological Institute, and the Folklore Society for having in the first place published in their journals parts of the following notes, and for now giving him permission to reprint them in book form.

He is also grateful to Mr. Cowan, of the firm of Messrs. A. Miller Brother and Co., and to Dr. A. G. Christian and Mr. M. H. Hughes for allowing him to reproduce many photographs of Benin City and people taken in the first place by them.

Finally, he thanks Mr. N. W. Thomas, the anthropologist (and here his readers will possibly also join him), for having cut out a lot of irrelevant matter and so reduced the present volume to a handy and readable size. When the writer thinks of his patience in wading through the MS., and his forbearance in leaving what remains of it, he feels that nothing that he can say or write will adequately express his gratitude.

TO MY FATHER
 THE REV. R. DENNETT, D.C.L.

 

CONTENTS

 CHAPTER I LUANGO AND THE BAVILI
 CHAPTER II ELECTION OF A KING IN THE KONGO
 CHAPTER III CORONATION OF A KING IN THE KONGO
 CHAPTER IV COURTS OF MALUANGO AND MAMBOMA
 CHAPTER V LAW
 CHAPTER VI MEASURES, SIGNS, AND SYMBOLS
 CHAPTER VII BAVILI PSYCHOLOGY
 CHAPTER VIII NDONGOISM
 CHAPTER IX NKICI-ISM
 CHAPTER X BAVILI PHILOSOPHY
 CHAPTER XI BIBILA, THE PHILOSOPHY OF THE GROVES
 CHAPTER XII SACRED LANDS AND RIVERS
 CHAPTER XIII SACRED TREES
 CHAPTER XIV THE OMENS
 CHAPTER XV SACRED ANIMALS
 CHAPTER XVI NZAMBI (GOD), THE WORD NKICI, AND THE BAKICI BACI
 CHAPTER XVII THE BINI
 CHAPTER XVIII BENIN DISTRICTS
 CHAPTER XIX BINI CUSTOMS
 CHAPTER XX MORE CUSTOMS
 CHAPTER XXI TRACES OF NKICI-ISM AMONG THE BINI
 CHAPTER XXII THE PHILOSOPHY AT THE BACK OF THE BLACK MAN'S MIND IN TABLE FORM
 CHAPTER XXIII CONCLUSION
 APPENDIX

It may happen that we shall have to revise entirely our view of the Black races, and regard those who now exist as the decadent representatives of an almost forgotten era, rather than as the embryonic possibility of an era yet to come.

	 
		FLORA L. SHAW, in A Tropical Dependency.
		
		 

At the Back of the Black Man's Mind, by Richard Edward Dennett, [1906], at sacred-texts.com

  

AT THE BACK OF THE BLACK MAN'S MIND

 

CHAPTER I

 

LUANGO AND THE BAVILI

Discovery of the Kongo. -Subsequent History.-The Bavili. -Phonetics.- King of Luango.

 

A FEW NOTES ON THE HISTORY OF LUANGO (NORTHERN PORTION OF KONGO COAST).[1]

WE owe the discovery of the Kongo[2] to the enterprise of Prince Henry the Navigator, fourth son of John I., King of Portugal, and grandson of Edward HL, King of England.

Diego Cao, by royal edict dated 14th April, 1484, was commissioned to extend the explorations on the coast of Africa, and he discovered the Kongo River in 1484. The native name for this river is Zaili, Zairi, or Zaidi, and it was so called as being the way of the spirit, or personality of love and knowledge. The name, of course, was given to it long before it was discovered by Diego Cao, and as part of the Fiote religious system, as we shall learn later on. It must not be supposed that the river was called by this name because the missionaries of old came that way and taught the natives certain trades. The spirits of all rivers in this part of Africa are supposed to teach the Fiote some lesson.

[1. By permission of the African Society.

2. The proper spelling is Kongo; and this will be adhered to, save in such expressions as Congo Free State, &c., which are fixed by usage.]

The first expedition arrived at San Salvador in 1491. One hundred years later we have a list of the provinces of the King of Kongo's immediate kingdom, given to us by Pisafetta on the authority of the hermit, Duarte Lopez.

The first mention of Luango is of a comparately late date, i.e., 1663, when Christianity was first brought there by Father Ungaro. The stay of this missionary was quite a short one.

Father Jerome Merolla da Sorrento, 1682, says that he never heard there was any Christian Prince in the kingdom of Angoyo (Kabinda), that country having been always inhabited by a people extremely given to sorcery and magic. But Barbot, who must have touched at Luango about the year 1700, says English was spoken in Kabinda at that time and that the blacks were all Christians.

When the history of Luango and Kakongo by the Abbe Proyart (Paris, 1776), is brought up to date, much use should be made of the old trade books with their accounts of the sale of slaves and trade with the captains of sailing vessels who were in the habit of giving the princes credit and making remarks in these books. Father T. Derouet has collected a great number of facts in this way, and I hope may soon follow up the work of his famous predecessor, thus filling up the interval between the time of the "tree climbing" missionary age and the present-shall we say-intellectual one?

Then the old books of copies of correspondence of the firms of the British African Merchants, Taylor and Laughland, and those of Messrs. Hatton and Cookson, would throw light on the following period, when merchants had settled establishments.

But while missionaries and explorers have come and gone, it is an interesting fact that the only constant associates of the inhabitants of the country during the last century were the traders, so that when Mr. Stanley and M. de Brazza rediscovered and brought these parts once more within history, they found the traders long established.

The history of European political influence on the Kongo does not go back half a century. The most important dates are the following.

In 1873 the German West African Expedition settled in Chinchonso, a place in the county of Samanu, in the kingdom of Luango.

In spite of the work of Du Chaillu, Bruce Walker, the Marquis de Compiegne, and Monsieur Marche, the Ogowe River remained unknown until in 1874, when M. de Brazza began his interesting labour in that part of Africa.

1875.-In 1875 De Brazza expressed his anxiety to open up the Ogowe.

1877.-In 1877 Stanley arrived in Boma.

1878.-The Comite d'Etudes du Haut Congo was formed in Brussels.

1879-1882-De Brazza's voyage to the Kongo via the Ogowe to Brazzaville was carried out, and treaties were made with the chiefs of Alima and Ntamo. In 1882 De Brazza declared the only practical route between the coast and Brazzaville to be via the Kuilu River.

1882, November 30th.-The famous Makoko treaty was ratified by the French Parliament.

1883, January 10th.-De Brazza was appointed Commissionnaire du Gouvernement de la Republique Francaise in West Africa.

1883.-Return of missionaries to Luango.

1884, April 23rd.-Colonel Strauch, on behalf of the African International Association, gave France the famous "droit du preference" on the Congo State.

1885, February 5th.-France, by a treaty with the African International Association (nascent Congo State), gave up its pretensions to the left bank of the Lower Kongo, and obtained the cession of the territories Niari Kuilu. February 14th.Portugal, with the mediation of France, concluded a treaty with the African International Association.

1885, February 26th.-Berlin Act was signed by which the district of "Congo Francais" was acknowledged as French.

Since which time this part of Luango under French rule, and no longer managed by its native rulers, has passed through a somewhat troublous time.

The Bavili, or inhabitants of Luango, occupy the coast of Africa between the Mayumba river north and that of the Chiluango river south, that is the land about latitude 5 degrees11'30". So far as we know these people have not been subject to any great raids, like those of the Bayaka, or the people of the Congo south of that river. This may be owing to the protection given to them by the belt of forest that divides their country on the east from the country of the Bakunia and Bayaka. There are traditions of wars between the Bavili and Bacoxi, the people of Kakongo, when, the), say, the Bavili went in such crowds to Kakongo as to have dried up its rivers in the crossing.

It is only by their Bakici baci (dealt with in Chapter XI.) that traces can be found of the provinces having once been under one King, but the King of Kongo is still looked upon as their spiritual head in a far-off kind of way, and their system of government is the same. Even when the first missionaries made their appearance in Africa, both Kakongo and Luango acted as if they were independent kingdoms.

The BAVILI are part of the FJORT, FIOTI, or FIOTE tribe, which in its turn is a section of the great BANTU race. Although FJORT is the name by which these people of Kongo are undoubtedly known to-day, Consul Roger Casement informs me that that is not the name by which they are called by the people of other tribes in the interior, and the distinguished African trader, Mr. C. Sanders, tells me that the older Portuguese traders informed him some twenty years ago that the word FJORT or FIOTI was simply a corruption of the Portuguese word FILHOTE meaning, as nearly as I can translate the word' in English, "young rascal," that is to say the termination OTE gives the word FILHO or son a disparaging sense. If Mr. Sanders is correct then Monseigneur A. H. Carrie's FIOTE is the nearest approach to FILHOTE, the O in the Portuguese alphabet having much the same sound given to it by Mr. Bentley in his KONGO alphabet, i.e., as the O in the French word corps. If on the other hand the word is a KONGO one (and undoubtedly it is used for the English word "little "), then it might be derived from the words FIA or VIA, to plant, and UTA, to bear, meaning the propagator in opposition to VIANGA, the creator.

In the following pages, to enable the reader to catch the native sounds as nearly as possible the writer will use the vowels as in the Italian, and the consonants as in English, with two exceptions, -AW, i.e. for the O sound, as in "corps," and X for the sound TCHI, or Monseigneur Carrie's K. This X or TCHI sound must not be confused with the SH or X sound of Mr. Bentley. For instance, Mr. Bentley spells ZINA, a name, XINA, but XINA or TCHINA in the BAVILI dialect has the signification of law, a thing forbidden, totem, abomination, while XINA the verb, is to dance. The prefix KI in the Kongo, finds its counterpart in XI (TCHI) in the XIVILI, and this I presume is why Monseigneur Carrie has manufactured the sign K. We have this TCHI sound very nearly in the English word "church" (XURX) which the Scotch call KIRK, and there being no EKS sound in the XIVILI, and a sign being wanted for the TCHI sound, I think I am right in using the letter X for it rather than the new sign K.

With these brief introductory remarks we may pass to matters more closely akin to the subject of the book-the kingly office in Luango.

Battell visited Luango in about the year 1603, and for the short time that he was in the province, gathered much information about the King and native customs which stands good even to this day. Among other interesting facts he mentions the -name of the last King, ie., "Gembe" (now written NJIMBI).

MANILUEMBA, the present Maluango elect, about whom we shall have much to say, took the place of MANIPRATI, who was deposed by the people for having killed his own daughter for refusing to cohabit with him. Maniprati had succeeded Mani MAKIWSO, who was the Maluango elect, and Nganga NVUMBA, when the French first took possession of the country in 1883. The title NGANGA NVUMBA is a priestly one, given to the Maluango elect upon his accession, and one that he retains until the coronation ceremony completes the burial rites of the NTAWTELA or deceased MALUANGO, when he becomes the crowned MALUANGO.

NIANIPRATI was the last crowned Maluango, and the ZINGANGA NVUMBA preceding him were MANI MAKAWSO MASONGA, MANIMAKAWSO MANAWMBO, MANIMAKAWSO MATUKILA of KONDI, and MAN'ANAWMBO, none of whom were crowned. MANI YAMBI became MALUANGO, as did his predecessors, MANIPUATI Of XIBANGA and Maluango TATI of KONDI, who they say succeeded Maluango NJIMBI.

Maluango PRATI is said to have died some fifty-five years ago, so that if this list of rulers be complete, eight of them filled in the time intervening between 1603 and, say, 1860, giving them each an average reign of thirty-two years, and this appears to the writer too great an average, though some native princes reign for a very long time. He is inclined to think that either the list is incomplete or that the NJIMBI referred to by the natives is not the same as the one mentioned by Battell.

The French took Luango in 1883, in MANIMAKAWSO'S time, but they naturally enough, not knowing much of the history of the country, never considered it well to crown him officially. Had they done so and aided him to assert his kingly authority over his provinces and vassals the French to-day would have been in possession of a well-ordered province. As it happened, at the Berlin Conference, 1884, Maluango's rights were ignored, and part of his kingdom added to Portugal, just as part of Kakongo's province was given to the Congo Free State. Then the Government seemed too busy in developing its Upper Ubanghi and Sangha provinces in the direction of the Nile and Lake Chad to devote any serious attention to this part of their rich colony, so that Luango and the Lower Kongo provinces of their enormous possessions have been neglected. After some time they caused MANILUEMBA to be elected, and appeared anxious to administer the country through native channels. In the meantime, however, they had created a class of natives who might be termed "atheist," or who at any rate were "unfaithed," and they, and the general state of anarchy in which the country finds itself, will certainly make the task of the Government no easy one.

Early in 1898, the Administrator summoned Mamboma and the other princes of Luango to the residence, and informed them that it was their desire that a Maluango should be crowned, and the native regime, under the Government's protection, be restored. The choice of the people fell upon Maniluemba, nephew of Maluango Prati; and- Mamboma and the princes went to him to ask him if he would accept the throne. Hearing of this, I determined, in the interest of Folklore, to go and interview the king-elect.

At the Back of the Black Man's Mind, by Richard Edward Dennett, [1906], at sacred-texts.com

  

CHAPTER II

 

ELECTION OF A KING IN THE KONGO

My Residence in West Africa. -journey to Lubu.-The numbu- tree. -Meeting with Maniluemba.-His fetishes. -Return journey. -Election of Maluango.

IT is now necessary for me to say something about myself, which may serve as an excuse for my venturing to write at all on the rather complicated problems which in the following chapters I shall endeavour to elucidate.

I commenced studying the natives' habits and custom in the year 1879, and, after some eleven or twelve years, had progressed so far as to perceive, first, that there was still much to learn, and, secondly, that I should only be able to learn that if I could confine my studies to a definite section of the Bantu people and become very intimate with them. Thus far I had picked up scraps of information about the people in the Kongo and south of it; for the future it seemed as if the rest of my life were to be spent in Luango among the Bavili people. I restarted my studies then about the year 1892, and in the year 1897, by the help of the Folklore Society, published Notes on the Folklore of the Fjort. Then I was fortunate enough to meet with some very intelligent natives who were willing to help me in these studies on the Bavili, among whom was Maniluemba, the King-elect of Luango, and the following pages are the result.

At the time of his election I was in Luango; and to see him I had to proceed to Ndembuano.
 Turning my back on the sea I first made my way to Lubu, or Mamboma's town. Here on a hill facing the Roman Catholic Sisters' Mission, stand two mighty baobab trees (nkondo). When the people of Buali (Maluango's capital) have brought the coffin containing the body of the defunct Maluango to XIENJI the people of Lubu throw shells at them and chase them away. Then taking charge of the body, they and Mamboma bury it near to the above two trees.

As we passed through the village of Zulu, we cast a last look at the sea and the pretty Bay of Luango, with its lighthouse at Point Indienne. Just beyond the point, on the way to Black Point, one can see the wood that contains the sacred grove of Nymina; and nearer to Luango may be noticed the tall mangrove trees that mark the grove sacred to Lungululubu. We next crossed the Xibanda valley, and came to a place where once a town stood, called Ximpuku. Looking north from this place we noted upon the crest of the opposite hill the grove sacred to Mpuku Nyambi, while to the south, and not far from our standpoint, a minor grove, spoken of as the offspring of Mpuku Nyambi, topped the hill. This grove is called Xilu Xinkukuba, and is near the linguister Juan's town. Then 14 or 15 miles south, behind Black Point, near to the River Ximani and the town of NVUxi, stands the grove of Xivuma, and as many miles north, at Xissanga upon the sea coast, is situated the grove sacred to the double personages Nxiluka and Xikanga; while far away to the north, on the ruddy cliffs behind Konkwati, 60 miles from here, is the grove called Xinjili.

We made next for the huge numbu-tree situated at the village of Bitoko. Bitoko must be more than twenty miles from the sea, yet the huge numbu-tree can be distinctly seen from the deck of a passing ship as a dark spot in the horizon. We dived down into the valley of the Lubendi river, climbed over the hill and plain of Monga Matondi, where once a robberchief of that name had his town, and soon afterwards arrived at the town belonging to the Prince Mabukenia, called Luvwiti. Here we learnt that Mamboma and the othe, princes had just returned from a visit to Maniluemba, and that the latter had accepted their invitation to fill the vacant throne of Maluango Prati.

Maniluemba, they told us, had left Bitoko for Ndembuano, a town still further east, just at the time when the French Government was busy requisitioning carriers for the famous Marchand Nile expedition. They naively said that he was a man of peace and did not wish to have any question with the white man.

For miles and miles had we seen that numbu-tree. When we were on the top of Monga Matondi it looked as if it were just on the hill where Xiswami, the ivory-carver, has his village, and when we arrived there we found it was still two hours from us, on the summit of the Bitoko hill. We slept at Bitoko, and I do not think I shall ever forget the place, which is stamped upon my memory by the recollection of the wondrous sunrise I witnessed there. The neat little village rests on the top of the hill a little to the south-west of the wood in which the numbu-tree towers above the palms and other trees. The morning mist seemed to hang heavily over the wood, while the great sun, twice magnified, shot up behind it, and the tall grass, covered with a sea of spiders' webs loaded with dew, which, rocked in the morning breeze, quickly lost its glistening pearl-like beauty. But as we marched down into the valley of the River Xisabu the grass was still wet enough to soak us through and through before we reached the swamps and shady waters which it took us fifteen minutes to cross. At length we gained the high land again where Ndembuano's scattered shimbecs lie hidden among palm and mango-trees.

We found Maniluemba (Pl. II) wandering about, with his little fetishes, Nteu and Nkubi, in his hand; and wearing his Bicimbo (a kind of sash of iron boat-chain) over his right shoulder and fastened under his left arm. Protected in this way, whoever dared to wish him harm would have been killed by these fetishes, who would divine their very thoughts. When Maniluemba had greeted me, he went within the fence of rushes (called Lumbu) that guards the privacy of his wives, to put his coat on. Coming out again, he caught me examining a little hut close by, which he called nzo ngofo (house sacred to the marriage fetish ngofo). The copper bracelet Lembe[1] hung heavily upon his wrist. Maniluemba is humpbacked and short in stature, but he possesses a rather fine Jewish cast of face; and he is a bit of a dandy evidently, for the ends of his moustaches were strung through the hollow centres of two amber beads. In the middle of his forehead, from his hair to his nose, ran a line in red chalk, flanked on each side by a white one; while from his ears to his eyes similar marks nearly completed his fetish toilet. On either car he had placed a white chalk mark, while a string with a charm attached to it was worn as a kind of necklace. He wore a waistcoat and an overcoat with a velvet collar, while a fancy cloth hung on his belt around his waist, and in front of this his nkanda ndeci (a skin).[2]

I placed my offerings before him and congratulated him upon his election, and (while his people chased fowls) we had a long and interesting talk, and I took his photograph. Then he gave me his pipe to smoke, and shook me by the hand, until his heavy marriage bracelet fairly rattled against his bony wrist; and as I was leaving he presented me with the result of his people's hunt, namely, three fowls, and bade me go in peace.

Upon my return journey, after passing the town of Ximoko, I came to a place in the grassy plain marked by

[1. Lembe is a bracelet showing that the wearers have been married according to a certain marriage rite. The wife married in this way is the one who acts as guardian of all her husband's zinkici, and should she commit adultery the husband upon opening the basket containing the charms connected with the marriage will find them wet. Nkaci Lembe (the lembe wife) is kept very strictly within her hut and the fence surrounding it (lumbu). Women married in this way may not eat the fish xala (the bream?), which is noted for the efforts it makes to escape from the net when caught.

("Lemba means, to cease. The rites of Lembe are those which refer to the marriage of - woman who swears to die with her husband, or rather to cease to live at the same time that he does."-Letter of the author's to Miss Kingsley, quoted in West African Studies, p. 193.)

2. There are two kinds of skins worn in this way by the Bavili: nkanda ndeci, a wild cat-skin, and xingola xinyundu, the otter-skin. Those who wear these skins are considered to-day very well to do people; there is one thing about them that they must always bear in mind, and that is, when they take them off not to pull them downwards, but to take care to pull them upwards between the belt and the cloth; otherwise they will have no children.]

the sacred tree Nkumbi (Pl. II). Here the Maluango elect is received by the princes upon his first official entrance upon the sacred ground (Xibila) set apart as the residence of the Kings of Luango.[1]

The place where this tree rears its stately head in lonely glory is called Xibindu bindu Xibukulu lu mpilo. Xinkumba means a maiden, and the natives tell me the place, and the tree Nkumbi, takes its name from the fact of some royal maiden having arrived at womanhood there. Man and woman together may not cross this Xibindu (valley); the man must go first, and when he is well across the woman may follow him. At Boa Vista there is another such Xibindu, and should a man and a woman cross these places together, they will be punished by having no children. So much for the tree at the entrance of the sacred ground. As we leave it upon the road to Lubu (Maluango's burial-place) there stands a Nsexi tree, once a market tree, beneath whose scanty shade the corpse of the defunct Maluango is placed, awaiting the meeting of the people, whose duty it is to carry it to Lubu for burial. Here the little valley is called Xibindu bindu ku Ximonika na Buali, the valley of the last look at Buali (Maluango's town). As we neared Luango we were struck by the great beauty of a deep valley that runs from the foot of the steep cliff upon which we stood, away to the sea. This valley is called Bulu Nzimbu Xikoko (the valley of the fly and the mosquito hand in hand), and from out its depths Xama Ngonzola, the evil rainbow-snake, rises, as I shall describe in the chapter on OMENS. The numbu tree is this valley's sacred tree. In a very few years all traces of these trees and places may be lost, so that we have been fortunate in visiting them while they still remain intact.

On another occasion after trying very hard to get a photograph of a muamba-trce, and finding it impossible on account of the density of the bush, we left Mambuku's town about ten o'clock in the morning, and found our way to Buali, expecting to find MANILUEMBA installed in state. We found

[1. Xi=ci, quality of, or earth; bila, to meet or to heap up. I could not find any lombi in Maluango's xibila, but the meaning of the word XIBILA is very suggestive, i.e., sacred grove.]

him dressed in a loose cloth hung around his waist, the iron chain BICIMBO slung over his shoulder; he was sitting on a very shaky chair in front of a crowd of men and women, all seated on the ground and wearing wreaths of palm-leaves over their shoulders.[1] These were Nganga Mpunzi and his people, who were "jamming" about the pay they were to receive for clearing the sacred ground. This is the office of the priest Mpunzi (Mpu=hat or crown, Nzi=he that produces); he is the crowner, or, as it were, the creator of kings.

It seemed that having arrived and been received by the princes at the nkumbi-tree, Maluango had now to await the visits of the Bakici baci; i.e., the representatives of all the different families owning sacred ground within his kingdom. These people were described to me as the "eyes" of the people. Each one of these had to visit Maniluemba and receive a present from him, before NGANGA MPUNZI and his people could come and cut the grass and prepare a place where NGANGA NVUMBA, the king-elect, could erect his dwelling (shimbec). Until all these ceremonies were over Maniluemba was not allowed to live within a shimbec. Thus the sacrifice the old man was making was no imaginary one, for, as will be remembered, he was very comfortably housed and surrounded in his village NDEMBUANO.

The place about to be cleared was pointed out to us, and we were told that it was there that the late Maluango Prati had lived. I noticed two Baobabs, a NUMBU and an NFUMA (silk cotton tree) upon this ground.

As soon as Maluango caught sight of me he left the palaver and came to offer me his chair. Then he sat beside me and asked me if I had lunched. I answered, No; so he gracefully offered me all he could, namely, four pieces of miaka or prepared mandioca. While this was being roasted he told me that this was the last ceremony in connection with his accession, except that of receiving the congratulations

[1. The lembekmbe, wreath or rather sash of palm-leaves, also worn by the king elect, gives us the idea of the coming marriage of MANILUEMBA to his new duties as king. The plant or bush-string with which the two ends of the lembelembe are tied together is called mobula. Nganga Mpunzi's sacred plant is the mobula; his fetish lembelembe; his xina, that he must not eat together with other people, and that his food must not be cooked by an unmarried person.]

and submission of all his petty princes. These, he said, he would send for as soon as he was settled. On that occasion he would declare that Maluango Prati had been buried, and crown himself as Maluango, and reinvest his chiefs with their caps of office.

He said he was a little worried about the chiefs of those provinces which he understood were now under the dominion of the King of Portugal; "but," he added, "as Maluango, I am FUMU (=chief) of all the country from Mayumba to the river Xiluango." He also said that he had spent a great deal of money in all these preliminary ceremonies, and did not exactly know where more money was to come from, as he could no longer receive customs from the traders, and was in fact only king in name.

At the Back of the Black Man's Mind, by Richard Edward Dennett, [1906], at sacred-texts.com

  

CHAPTER III

 

CORONATION OF A KING IN THE KONGO

The Bacilongo Ceremony. -Festival. -The Dancers.-Effigy of the Deceased King.-The Dance. -Processions.

 

A CORONATION CEREMONY

WHEN the time came for Maluango to be crowned he appealed to the French Government for funds. How, said he, can I entertain the hundreds of people that will be obliged to come to subject themselves to me, many of whom coming from long distances I shall have to support for many days. The French Government did not see its way to stand this trivial expenditure, and so Maniluemba remained simply NGANGA NVUMBA. A drought and famine succeeding his election, the people cried out that it was owing to his coming to Buali, and Maniluemba, bereft of the power wielded by the ancient NGANGA NVUMBAs, retired once more to his secluded home at NDEMBUANO, to the delight of the degenerate BAVILI.

As I was a witness some years ago (1891) of the ceremony attending the coronation of the present NEAMLAU of the BACILONGO, some extracts of a letter written at the time to the "Manchester Geographical Society" may be of interest. But I shall ever regret the non-coronation of MANILUEMBA, for the reason that the BAVILI, unlike the BACILONGO (singular Mucilongo), I have never, until quite lately, been really under the influence of Christianity. I feel that we

[1. Commonly but incorrectly written Musserongo; the word means "man of Cilongo."]

should have had something to learn from the uncontaminated heathen ceremony.

NEAMLAU, the chief of the BACILONGO on the northern bank of the Kongo, in the kingdom of KAKONGO, near to BANANA, built his towns on the hills facing the sea. They are prettily situated, nestled, as it were, beneath the shade of huge Baobabs and groves of Cachew trees.

In the latter part of 1887 the late NEAMLAU (Pl. IVa) died, I should say of old age. A veritable prince, full of dignity and fire, he lived to see his country taken from him. Accustomed in the olden days, when the slave trade was in full swing, to receive handsome presents from the captains of men-of-war or slave-trading vessels with perfect impartiality, besides "customs" from the traders and natives living in his territory, NEAMLAU then lived in clover. He was much feared by the milder KAKONGOs round about, and known as the chief of a great family of pirates. Deprived of ways and means whereby to fill his exchequer he passed his latter days in comparative poverty.

His family had, with other BACILONGO, migrated from the south bank of the Congo and taken up its residence in the islands and on the banks on the northern side of this river.

This may have occurred at the time mentioned by Proyart, when MAMBUKU of KAKONGO, aided by the BACILONGO, dethroned MAKONGO; or the origin of NEAMLAU's right to be on the north bank may have come from a far more early date, i.e., from the time when the first king of the united kingdom of Kongo organised his government and placed the ancestor of NEAMLAU there as MAFUKA MACI or ferryman, and then as NGENO, still a title of Neamlau, a kind of ambassador through whom messages were sent to KAKONGO and LUANGO.

It must be remembered that the history of the Kongo, as we have it, commenced only at that period when anarchy was already breaking it up. NEAMLAU, at any rate, owed allegiance to the chief of SONIO,[1] and received his wives from there (now Portuguese territory), and when he died had to be buried in the cemetery set apart for princes in Sonio.

[1. The King of Kongo's province south of the Kongo.]

Thus, when the late NEAMLAU died, preparations were made for his burial in that place. A year passed and all was ready. The Congo State, naturally anxious that so influential a prince should be buried in State territory, promised that a steam launch should tow the funeral flotilla to BOMA, where the State proposed to bury him with all the honours due to his rank. Family ties and ancient usage, however, gained the day, and one dark night the canoes carrying the coffin and the mourners threaded their way through the maze of creeks, and at peep of day, ere yet the sea breeze ruffled the waters of the fast flowing river, were manfully paddled across to San Antonio, in the province of SONIO.

NENIMI, his nephew, was elected by the MAMBOMA to reign in his stead, but to complete his coronation it was necessary that he should give a dance and festival in honour of the deceased. There having been no rains that year (1890-1891), NENIMI would fain have put off this ceremony until he could have given his guests a truly royal feast, but he was pressed by the "State" to give a dance at once, and on the condition that the Government should help to feed his guests NENIMI agreed to proceed with the ceremony.

Princes from far and near were summoned to the feast, and the date for the commencement of the dance was fixed for the 24th January, 1891.

Soon I descried the figure of the old man (NENIMI) on his way to welcome me, and as he waddled towards me (for he suffered greatly from Elephantiasis) let me describe his appearance to you. About fifty-five years of age, of spare habit, medium height, grey hair, with a pointed beard almost white; rather fine features, quite unlike those of the negro; quiet, dignified, meeting one generally cordially and pleasantly. On this occasion he wore an old black leather military helmet, with a white plume, marked "10th Prince Albert's Own." His coat was the frock coat of a lieutenant in H.B.M. navy. About eight yards of cloth known as blue haft, forty-two inches in width, begirt his loins and flowed in graceful folds behind him, he also carried in one hand a blue and yellow shawl as a handkerchief, in his other a kind of wooden sceptre surmounted by a figure carved in ivory.

The space cleared for the dance and meeting was in the form of a square perhaps 200 by 250 yards. In the northeast corner was a mighty Banyan tree with most of its down-growing shoots lopped off. A Baobab and Acachew tree at a distance from each other of some thirty yards occupied the centre. At the south-cast corner an Acachew tree stood and at the south-west a Baobab.

Each tree was destined to lend its shade to a happy crowd of dancers, or to form a kind of canopy over NENIMI as he sat on a mat beneath its shade to receive his many guests.

Partitions (of papyrus) forming stalls something like horse-boxes rested against the outside fence that formed the eastern side of a great enclosure, within which the riches of the late NEAMLAU were exposed to view. This fence, which also formed the western boundary of the cleared space, was decorated with flags.

"Hullo! 'Gabba!' what is the matter? Have you only just turned out of bed? What means this hideous costume?" Gabba, a very old servant of the successive English houses in Banana, salaamed me. He was dressed in a red skull-cap, a short white surplice, and a yellow cloth which acted as a kind of skirt. In his ears hung two ugly looking large crosses formed of blue beads . . . . (He was a curious old stick was Gabba, and deserves to have his life written by anyone who has the patience to get his story out of him.) On this occasion I made use of him as a pilot.

Up to the present all those anxious to enter the enclosure to see the late NEAMLAU's relics had had to pay two bottles of rum entrance fee, but now NENIMI and I were to open the show to the public. He led me through the maze-like entrance into the square beyond. The fence was made of strips of bamboo neatly tied together and supported by sticks firmly planted in the ground. There were two shimbecs or huts in this enclosure, the smaller one containing the relics of NEAMLAU, the greater one his bed and hammock. The roof of each shimbec was covered with white cloth, while a gay coloured (red, white, and yellow striped) cloth covered the ridge pole, and planks of the NVUKU tree kept this cloth in its place. The roofs in the distance had the appearance of the white-washed roofs of the white man's houses in Banana. The open front of the smaller shimbec was curtained off by a red and white blanket. This NENIMI now threw over the roof, and displayed to our view its interior. The walls of the interior were draped with cloth and white blankets. At the back under an umbrella sat an effigy of the late NEAMLAU. He wore the uniform coat of a British naval officer, over which round about his shoulders hung a native cape made of cotton, called NSENDA.[1] Tell beads and crucifixes, charms, amulets, and fetishes hung from his neck. He wore a blue cloth and boots. To his right on a wall hung a small oleograph, on his left a large oil painting of a lady, while the walls were covered with advertisement cards that had been thrown away by the importers of the goods. In front of this effigy sat what was left of old NEAMLAU'S family, one of his wives playing the accordion, not well, but at least noisily. In the immediate foreground of the figure stood a table covered with black and red speckled shawls, and on this lay the relics of the prince who had gone to his rest, a cottage clock, a brass lamp, three ewers and basins, a duck box, and other earthenware figure ornaments, old red and white glass ware, table glasses and pint mugs. And while I had been taking all this in, two men without had been trying to deafen me with their music on drum and native bells.

I forgot to mention the most important part of all, and that is, that the effigy was wearing his native cap[2] (made of the fibre of the pineapple) with the name NEAMLAU marked on it. This accounted for the curious non-native head gear

[1. Or XISEMBA. See object in Exeter Museum or illustration in Seven Years among the Fjort, See also Laws of the Bavili.

2. MPU NTANDA, see Laws of the Bavili, also illustrations in Seven Years among the Fjort, p. 49.]

of NENIMI, for his "cap" was worn by the effigy and would only become legally his at the end of all these ceremonies.

I just took a look into the larger hut and saw the bed and hammock of the late NEAMLAU. NPAKA the son of the late king was seated there by himself, to receive any visitors that might come to condole with him. I asked him why they had made the entrance to this enclosure so difficult, and he said it was to prevent drunkards from finding their way in.

When I came out of the enclosure many princes were already seated under the shade of the Cachew tree, and dancing had commenced beneath the Banyan tree.

And now a procession of perhaps twenty men and women wended their way from the north-west in Indian file to the tree under which NENIMI was seated. They were all dressed in cloths, dyed red, and each wore a heavy silver leg ring about his ankle[1]; the contrast between the dull red cloth and the bright metal was very striking. The chiefs of this party knelt before NEAMLAU, and after a few words received his blessing, after which the followers sang a song of praise and then adjourned to the Baobab tree to dance.

Then from the N.E. a long line of white clothed natives marched solemnly forward. The MANKAKA (captain and executioner) accompanying this crowd beat the earth with his stick and then rushed excitedly along the line trailing his long cloth behind him. The NGANGA, with his wooden plate of medicine water in one hand and a bunch of herbs in the other, followed after him and sprinkled the people. The bugler and the drummer supplied the music. The chiefs knelt down before NENIMI and were blessed, and then the followers waved their sticks and cloths on high, shouting their song with great enthusiasm, which, however, was soon checked by the NGANGA, who sprinkled them once more with his medicine water. Now, as if in answer to this song

[1. The Bacilongo are famed for their blacksmiths, who turn English shillings bearing the late Queen's head into their anklets. Ornaments made from this silver is called KWINIKIMBOTA (queenly good), which words now signify anything of pure metal. Even a wife that has born her husband children and is faithful to him is so called.]

up jumped the followers of XIMAWNGO AWLO followed by those of MBUKU and sang very loudly.

Then NEFUKU formed his people under a Cachew tree, the men near the trunk of the tree, the women to the left, and the children to the right, the drummers opposite to the men. A man began a song and dance by wriggling, rubbing his stomach with one hand and beating his chest with the other and emitting a great shout. He sang, and as he danced round the circle (inside) he bowed from time to time to those just in his vicinity, and as he did so they clapped their hands. Then they all sang and wriggled. Other men joined this singer and danced round with him. They became quiet, and then the singer treated them to a trill that Adelina Patti might be proud of. He beat his throat with the side of his hand and brought the effect out that way. Then as he came down to the level of an ordinary singer, the crowd once more joined in with its lala, lala, lala. Then a stranger (a servant of the Congo State), took his place and as he wriggled round and with a graceful curve bowed to his neighbour he found that the latter was looking the other way and did not give him the welcome clap-clap of hands, so he retired. Two ladies, good looking in their way, now modestly stepped into the circle. Dressed in red with silver anklets, and about thirty pounds of china olive beads about their waists, they appeared to await the orders of the singer or master of the ceremonies. He sprinkled some rum upon their heads to give them courage. They looked as if they would rather not be there, and I have no doubt wished themselves among their cooking-pots. They made two or three attempts to dance, but finally their shyness overcame them and they ran away back to their places. An old lady, very heavily weighted with beads, took their places and, wriggling, seemed to defy the world.

NENIMI was still seated under the Cachew tree receiving his guests, when a small procession was noticed coming from the S.W. It consisted of a man (dressed in a light blue coat and a cloth of blue and white checks, who also wore a white helmet), and his wife and two children in European clothes, and two or three other women. An opening was made for them in the crowd surrounding NENIMI, and the man, whose name was MARFINI, knelt down in front of his prince placing one of his children on either side of him. He spoke for some time in the usual flowery strain, and then turning his eyes upwards prayed NZAMBI to look down upon them and bless the great NEAMLAU to be. His little children, his wife and the women, when he commenced to pray, bowed their heads and buried their faces in their hands. All around listened patiently and respectfully, and when he had finished by saying AMEN, AMEN, NENIMI rubbed his hands in the earth and made the sign of the cross upon MARFINI'S forehead, and then blessed and dismissed them.

Yet one more procession, this time led by the gallant Gabba, and it was the longest of them all. A man carrying a basin of food headed it, then came the old man. And now a man carrying a girl, just out of the paint house,[1] upon his shoulders. She carried a looking-glass in her hand, and continued to admire herself in it; then came women carrying bottles on their heads, old blue glass ware, the lid of a cigar box with a picture on it, a small box, old books and plates; the bugler and drummer bringing up the rear.

NENIMI came to me to tell me that the other white men were going to take their breakfast at the Mission, but asked me not to go as he had prepared a meal for me. I thanked him and then went to watch him give out the food to his visitors.

He and his wife Maria [2] sat beneath a Cachew tree at the South-east corner of the cleared space near to his own shimbec, while certain of his people brought a low table and placed it before them. On this table were nine huge masses of FUNDI (tapioca) for the nine chiefs present. Out of a twenty-gallon (three-legged) iron pot boiled pig[3] was produced, and with the gravy this was put into nine basins. Nine men then took away the dishes to the princes for whom

[1. See p. 69; also West Africa, March 21, 1903, P. 293, and Laws of the Bavili.

2 After the great Donna Maria Segunda.

3 The flesh of the pig is XINA to FUMU ZINKONDI or ZINKATA, Royal princes, but not to FUMU LIVANTI ordinary chiefs.]

they were intended. Near to NENIMI was the twenty-five gallon barrel of rum, the pig, and the two-hundredweight bag of rice given to him by the State.

The State Doctor thought this a good opportunity to photograph NENIMI and his wife, but he was sorely interrupted. First of all a man came and asked NENIMI if the soldiers of the Congo State were not to drink? If they were, where was the water? "Call dem women," cried Queen Maria. Then two men came bringing the food they had received back, complaining that it was not sufficient for so many people. "Give them a pig," growled king NENIMI, while the impatient Doctor told him not to move. And now two princes with their long sticks came and knelt before NENIMI "Don't move," cried the Doctor, and he would take the picture thus. And yet another complaint reached the king before his photo had been taken. The people of MPANGALA being strong had taken all the food away from the complainant and had left him and his people with a hungry belly.

After this I "chopped" part of a very tough fowl and some rice mixed with palm oil and a liberal allowance of sand. Water was scarce, and that which there was, was very dirty, so that I was glad when my meal was over and I could rest and smoke for a while. Queen Maria, who was telling me a story, was evidently minded not to let me smoke too much, for she pounced upon my tin of tobacco and having taken what she wanted, passed it round to her friends. And the "last man" showed me what was left and took the tin. Thus, you see, it is not only in civilised countries that one has to pay for seeing a coronation.

Such was the Bacilongo coronation, and from this account the reader may form some idea of the ceremony on the Lower Kongo. It must be remembered that the Bavili ceremony would have been, in all probability of a more truly native cast; but as I have explained, circumstances did not permit me to witness the crowning of Maniluemba.

At the Back of the Black Man's Mind, by Richard Edward Dennett, [1906], at sacred-texts.com

  

CHAPTER IV

 

COURTS OF MALUANGO AND MAMBOMA

The Interregnum.-Maluango's Court. -Mamboma's Court. -Justice. -The Magic Mirror.-Some Fjort Sayings.-The Districts.

WE now turn to the court Of MALUANGO or the Prince of the Custom of the Leopard. Maluango, as we have seen, is the king or chief of the Bavili; the word is equivalent to Maniluango, i.e., Prince of Luango; his overlord was, of course, Kongo, the Ntawtela,[1] of the realm of Kongo. MALUANGO has seven titles, one of which, NTAWTELA, is his title after his death. Under six of these titles he presides over six sections of government, aided in each case by two assessors.

 Division 1.

 As Fumu (judge) he appears as the conscientious arbitrator, and in these matters he has as assessors LUEMBUNGU and MANKAKA, the chief of his army and the executioner. NGANGA MPUNZI is the priest, whose duty it is to clean and sweep up the place where the coming Maluango shall build his dwelling.

 Division 2.

 As NTINU (judge), he is the reasoning judge, and here he is aided by INJIBUNGU[2] and the recording messenger MAXIENJI.

In cases where no just decision can be arrived at Maluango

[1. The title is according to Bentley, applied during their lifetime to the kings of Kongo, to the subject princes of Luango and Kakongo only after their death.

2 Where no office is named, I have been unable to discover the functions performed by this officer mentioned.]

advised the parties to take the powdered bark of the NKASA tree (not the pea shrub) which was administered by the priest NGANGA NKASA. The innocent party would vomit, while the guilty one either died from the effect of the poison, or, being purged, was killed.

 Division 3.

 As NGANGA VUMBA (Priest of the Seasons), it was the duty of Maluango to look after the morals of his people, more especially touching adultery and murder; in this he was helped by KONGO MBUNGu and MAFUKA, his messenger. After punishment adulterers had to buy certain expensive medicines from NGANGA KUTECI to appease BUNZI.

 Division 4.

 As MALUANGO XIVANJI (head of the state), it was his duty to govern the country, and in these matters he was assisted by TATABUNGU and MAMBOMA. And NGANGA MBUMBA aided them with his knowledge of the secrets of life and medicines.

 Division 5.

 As MUENE (overlooker), Maluango was the overseer of his people; here he was assisted by MABUNDU, the representative of his fruit or offspring, and the chief of his household MASAF1. And the NGANGA BUNDU helped him in settling disputes by administering to the offenders the powdered bark of the BUNDU herb. The guilty party after taking this was unable to make water, and fell, while the innocent evacuated a few drops on a leaf placed beneath him.

 Division 6.

 As NKICI CI[1] as we shall note, Maluango was one of the seven powers or BAKICI BACI, and here he was aided by MAMATA and MAMBUKU, guardian of the eastern gate of his kingdom. And in this place he had the help of the NGANGA BAKICI, or the priest of the XIBILA or sacred grove.

Such is the court of MALUANGO.

[1. For the meaning, see Chapter XVI.]

 Maxienji, Mafuka, Hambuku, are each attended by a MAFUKA (messenger), MANGOVA (knight) and a MASAFI (major domo).

 Mamboma has three ZINGANGA as his attendants, NGANGANKICI (fetish), NGANGA BAKICI (sacred grove), and NGANGA XILEMBA.

 Mamata has MAZONGA MAKAYA as his attendant.

 Mankaka is attended by his successor MUELA.

The names of these courtiers are BABI ACI opposed to the name by which ordinary people are known, BACI CI.

MALUANGO also has a private MAMBOMA with him apart from the above courtiers, and KUTECI, his apothecary, is also generally with him.

With regard to the chief personages in this court, there are some sayings in very old Fjort which will help us perhaps to a little more precise information about them and their offices.

Of Mamboma they say:

	 
		Kanga lumbi; Kanga mbeta
		 Malamba malambakana, Xivili.
		
		 I don't think anyone to-day can translate this exactly, but it carries the following meaning with it: "just as the sun rises and sets, so it is Mamboma's business to look after the crowning and burial of Maluango; and just as a woman cooks and intends to go on cooking (and watching her pots), so Mamboma watches over the BAVILI."

Of Mambuku they say:

	 
		Mambuku nandu, nkaka bakamba,
		 Xikata kata xianlo tenda Maluango yeza'ntu.
		
		 "Mambuku the guardian of the gateway leading from the Mayombe country into Luango, is hard-headed and obstinate, and like Maluango's little box with its closed lid will only open his mouth at his bidding."

Of Mafuka they say:

	 
		Mafuka xikangu kangula bana mampanga.
		
		 Mafuka as the royal messenger keeps on tying up people by word of mouth, or with a wordy yoke."

Of Maxienji they say:

	 
		Maxienji, magundu lubenda
		 Sanga mbuila zika, monho
		 Bungu maci, Xindundu,
		 Ku zikula ntandu.
		
		 "Just as Mafuka is the bearer of messages, so Maxienji is the bearer of the news of the death of Maluango; he prays Mamboma to bury him; and just as the wife with her water-bottle leaves her husband's corpse on its way to burial to fetch water, so he leaves Maluango's body with the people of Mamboma, and looks after the Badungu or Xindundu (Maluango's police), who are now scattered about in the grass ready to rob all passers-by while Mamboma's people keep 6n burying Maluango in the open on the hill (at Lubu)."

Of Mankaka of Loango they say:

	 
		Mankaka zi Loango
		 Benze, moanga
		 Ke ku benzanga mitu bantu.
		
		 Mankaka the executioner of Luango cuts and twists about (Ke=not?) to keep on cutting off the heads of people."

I think it will be found that these ancient sayings refer to a time when the official language of Luango was more in accordance with that of the ancient Kongo, so many of the words used in them are not of the Luango dialect. This perhaps points to Luango as having been a conquered province. The religion and social system may then have been superposed?

 

THE SUBJECT COURT OF MAMBOMA.

Upon his death MALUANGO is given the title of NTAWTELA, and is buried, as we have seen, by MAMBOMA, and his people, MAMBOMA, is the prime minister of the living king, his regent during his absence, and the ruler of the kingdom during an interregnum. He is always a slave, and as such incapable of succeeding to the kingship. On the death of the king, it is the duty of MAMBOMA, through the MAMBOMAS of the other provinces, to call the princes together and proceed to the election of the new high priest NGANGA NVUMBA. The choice is restricted to the sons of the princesses living in KONDI, but not to any particular one. The diviner NGANGA MPUKU with his magic mirror is called in, should there be any need of divine interference owing to want of unanimity.

In the meantime MAMBOMA and his court take the place of the court of the late MALUANGO, although MAMBOMA is always in subjection either spiritually to the NTAWTELA or bodily to MALUANGO, so that he is always either the servant of the dead or of the living.

At the gate of the XIBILA or MALUANGO'S sacred ground there sits a certain personage called MAXILACI. MAMBOMA claims this person as part of his court, but so does MALUANGO, and from the fact that he is at the gate of the XIBILA (sacred ground), there can be no doubt that he now is part of the latter's following.

MAMBOMA has a court of twelve, not counting MAXILACI.

1. LUEMBA LAMBA.
 2. XENDU, the executioner.
 3. NJIMBI LAMBA.
 4. MABUNDU MABUNDU.
 5. KONGOLAMBA.
 6. MAFUKA, the messenger.
 7. TATA LAMBA.
 8. MAMBOMA MICITATA, Mamboma's Mamboma, the ruler the earth.
 9. MABUNDU, representing his followers.
 10. MANTU BOMA, his successor.
 11. KABA, the one who allots,
 12. MALUNGONGOLO, the crier.

These twelve are the assessors in the six divisions into which Mamboma's court is divided, and which correspond to the divisions of Maluango's court.

 Division I.

 A person representing Maluango, in his office of FUMU heads this division and his name is MAXINGANANKULU, and when he, aided by LUEMBA LAMBA and XENDU, cannot settle the question in arbitration they call in the NGANGA Mpusu, who has a small but neatly made basket of grass with a tight-fitting lid on it. When the name of the guilty one is mentioned he finds it impossible to take this lid off.

 Division 2.

 MAMBOMA KAYI, acting in the place of MALUANGO as NTINU, presides over this division, aided by NJIMBI LAMBA and the messenger MABUNDU MABUNDU (a kind of chief of police), and if they cannot properly prove the person guilty, they call in the NGANGA XIKETEMBI, who has two wisps of grass, a mat NKWALA, and a boy. The boy lies upon the wisps and mat and the NGANGA tries to lift him up by the two ends. If the name mentioned or thought of by him is that of the guilty party, the wisps and mat cling to the body of the boy in such a way that he can easily be lifted up, and the pressure is such on the body of the boy as to cause him at times to spit blood.

 Division 3.

 MAMBOMA, under his spiritual title NKANGA LUMBI, takes the place of MALUANGO as NGANGA VUMBA aided by KONGOLAMBA and his MAFUKA; and if they are not satisfied with the evidence they will call in the MKANGA NTALI, who has a small bundle of medicines wrapped in cloth and feathers. This he keeps on smelling till he thinks of the guilty one, when the odour confirms him in his suspicion.

 Division 4.

 MAMBOMA, in the place Of MALUANGO XIVANJI, aided by TATA LAMBA and MAMBOMA MICITATA, tries the accused, and if unable to convict, calls in the NGANGA XISENGO, who has a knife which he makes almost red-hot and passes across the palms of the hands or calves of the legs of the accused. If there appears the smallest sign of a blister, the person is considered guilty. (This custom is called XISENGO.)

 Division 5.

 VUTA MALEKA, the conciliator, takes the place of the king as MUENE, aided by the MABUNDU and MANTu BOMA, and in the final appeal he calls in NGANGA SUKU, who rubs the palms of his hands together, till he thinks of the name of the culprit, when his hands refuse to meet but turn back to back.

 Division 6.

 No one can fill in the office of NKICI CI, so that the services of the KABA and MALUNGONGOLO are called in with those of Nganga MPUKU NYAMBI who, if necessary, looks into the magic mirror to find out who shall become the new NKICI CI or NGANGA NVUMBA, who is then elected.

The Abbe Proyart says that everybody knew that when the king died MAKAYI would succeed him, and other writers have also told us who it is that will succeed the king; is it not possible that these authors have been in error, and that they have mistaken these temporary occupiers of the offices of MALUANGO for his real successor, whom nobody can name until he has been chosen and elected by MAMBOMA and the princes?

Battel also mentions a certain four, one of whom shall succeed the NTAWTELA. (See Ravenstein's Battel, Congo and Angola.)

At the present day the Bavili consult these diviners without the intervention of MAMBOMA.
 MPUKU NYAMBI often accompanies the present NGANGA NVUMBA. He wears a head-dress of the red feathers of the tail of the grey parrot. He holds a mirror with BILONGO (medicines) attached to the back of it in one hand, in the other he carries a small bundle of medicines out of which the feathers of the fowl protrude. He is not only the diviner (in case of dispute) of the MALUANGO to be elected, but also uses his powers to-day to divine the cause of the anger of the powers, or the person who has caused sickness or other evils to fall upon the petitioner or his dead relation.

 

THE KONGOZOVO, OR CHIEFS OF DISTRICTS IN THE SEVEN PROVINCES

Each province under its manifumu [1] has its courts modelled upon the two we have described and each petty prince as the chief of these districts is a magistrate, or KONGOZOVO.

[1. The manifumu is named after his province: thus the chief of XIBANGA is MA XIBANGA.]

BUALI is the name of Maluango's centre province, and it has a road to the sea at Luango. The naines of the Kongozovo in this province are-Mpili, Ntumpu, Mpanji, Lubu, Bukulibuali, Xifungu, Butoko, Pongo, Xisu, Sauza, Nkondo, Kubemba, Lombo, Mengo, Mongo-ntandu, Nkatiga, Mbanga, Xibalo.

There are six other provinces-Mbuku, Luanjili, Zibanga, Kondi-Ndingi, Xikamba, Samanu.
 MBUKU contains the following Kongozovo as far as I can gather. (It is bordered by Mayombe and Buali). Binga, Mfinio, Makollo, Inda, Lilu-ngoma, Xikana-xiinbuku, Mvuadi, Xilala, Tombi, Bilinga.

LUANJIM, bounded by the river Lueme and the sea, contains Mpaka, Xingambi, Mvumva, Ximbamba, Xinuka, Ximbambuka, Ngoio-ntu, Mpita, Kote-mateva, Njeno, Nanga, Xinangananga, Nkotchi, Winga, Ntembo, Futu, Luanjilinkula, Mvetu, Xinyambi-xinani, Kata-mavata, Xiabi, Lulobi, Mvampili, Mbambala.

XIBANGA, bounded by the sea and Mayombe, is composed of Lubu, Yombo, Bifundi, Belolo, Longobondi, Xilunga, Xibote, Mabondi, Maxilunga-luemba, Batli-kondi, Xinjili, Konkuati, Xitenda, Seta-banda, Ximbia, Longo, Xisanga and Kwilu.

KONDi NDINji, bordering Kakongo and Sundi. Ndinji, Kondi-ndinji, Xicita ndinji, Kaii-kon'dinji, Nombo-xindinji, Sanga, Xingango, Mpanga-mongo, Xivava, Sevi, Ntumbi, Maxonzo, Lutati, Samputu, Bulali, Sokoto, Kama-mbota, Ximbuku, Kumbi-liambo.

XIKAMBA (East of the Lueme river and west of Ndinji) contains Kaii, Nzaci, Xikaka, Sanza, Kutoto, Xamba, Mpemo, Jebba, Buamongo, Buku-ntamba, Xizibila, Nzanzi, Mvuli, Mieli, Nsuku, Konkonguati, Busu mbanda.

SAMANu, bounded by the sea in the west and Ndinji on the east. Buambu, Xinxonzo, Xiloango, Xela, Maxi-mabanda, Liku, Xikasu, Ntandu-lumana, Kikaka, Bixekete, Buswenji, Tungu, Nkotchi, Pam Kondi, Tero, Mabuli, Xibota, Ximaniamatadi.

In the olden days, traders situated in these provinces only heard of "Maluango" as a great over-lord, and all their palavers; were settled independently of him by these Kongozovo. This gave rise to the impression that these Kongozovo were independent princes, and that there was no connection between these petty princes and Maluango. It was only on great occasions that Maluango was appealed to, and this was done through regular channels. Palavers from south of the river Xiluango were carried to Njeno, on the Lueme river, who transferred them to Maluango's Mafuka. This connection can even be carried from Maluango to Kongo at San Salvador through "Nieno" of the Lueme river and "Hgeno" (Banana) on the Kongo, and the Mafukas (or messengers).

This semi-independence of these petty princes quite misled Mr. H. M. Stanley, who, in a letter dated from Gibraltar to Col. Strauch in the early eighties despaired of creating "Free States" in the Kongo. The Kongo would have worn a very different appearance to-day had the kingdoms of Kongo, Kakongo and Luango been resuscitated and governed on natural lines, if not as one kingdom, then as at least three Free States."

Nothing could have been more disastrous to the welfare of the people and the country than the absolutely insane way this country was cut up between the French, the Portuguese, and the independent State of the Congo.

At the Back of the Black Man's Mind, by Richard Edward Dennett, [1906], at sacred-texts.com

  

CHAPTER V

 

LAW

The Family. - Marriage.-Contracts. -Property. -Crimes and Punishments.-Judicial Procedure.

 

NATIVE LAW

THE subject of African Law is a fascinating one and I am tempted to enlarge on it, the more so as it is but little understood in England, although a knowledge of it is clearly essential to the right governance of our black fellow subjects. Miss Kingsley has treated of African religion and law in her West African Studies (abridged edition), among other writers may be mentioned the late Sir. A. B. Ellis, Sir J. Smallman Smith, and Mr. J. W. Sarbah in addition. Much material has of course been pigeon-holed by various officials.

But, able though the English works above mentioned are, they do not go deep below the surface, and are far from being text-books of native customary law, to which the administration can turn for guidance. Our French neighbours, wise in their generation, have recently issued a monumental work, Les Coutumes indigenes de la Cote d'Ivoire by Clozel; and a similar work on the native law of Nigeria compiled by a trained anthropologist who can give his whole time to his work would undoubtedly be of extreme value, not only to the student of comparative jurisprudence, but to the official who comes in daily contact with men who know only the native law, whose life is regulated by its fundamental principles, and who can be governed only if the English ruler recognises those principles and deals out even handed justice in accordance with them.

In some primitive communities there is only one sort of offence which can be regarded as law-breaking Dr. Codrington shows that in Melanesia tabu takes the place of law; the infraction of a tabu may bring down on the head of the offender an automatic penalty; but he may be too strong spiritually; and then the penalty falls upon the innocent. To provide against this, the society itself of which the offender forms a part inflicts the penalty for wrong doing and thus satisfies the power whose wrath is incurred by the infraction of the tabu.

Just in the same way in Africa a violation of the moral law, if I may so term it, is an affair for the whole of the community. If Nzambi, on the Kongo, is provoked by immorality especially of a sexual kind, the result, as we shall see in a later chapter, is drought, and the penalty falls on the community. A violation of the moral law is in native phraseology a "God palaver"; any outrage on a spirit may be of this nature but in practice a man is left to settle his own account with a minor spirit, which is hardly powerful enough to inflict damage on a family or tribe. On the Congo, justice is so far organised, where "god palavers" are concerned, that punishments are inflicted by the Badungu acting on the orders of the king.

"Man palavers," on the other hand, or in our phraseology, Civil and Criminal Cases (for they are identical in Africa, the fundamental idea being that a debt of some sort has been incurred) are decided by a court of justice, which bases its decisions on precedents, but the judgment must be enforced by the winner of the case, aided it may be, by his family. It is not the business of the king or of any official to see that justice is done; when once judgment has been given and recognised by the people, generally the matter passes out of the hands of the state and becomes a private affair. If the loser is strong enough to resist payment the palaver becomes a trial of strength between the two families and may become a "war palaver"; in any case the palaver and its consequences, in the shape of liabilities to pay and right to receive, are handed down in the respective families, like any ordinary debt, until such time as the winner of the case is in a position to enforce payment.

If the loser cannot resist, he must pay the debt or in default become a serf or pawn in the hands of the creditor; failing him, a member of his family, or an inhabitant of his town or district, loses his freedom. This service is not a setoff against the debt; the pawn is held until the debt is paid in legal currency; though a debtor may become a slave if his family has died out or dies out before the debt is paid; slavery, however, being regarded as a disgrace, the family would as long as it subsisted, endeavour to release one of its members.

The intimate connection between the spheres of law and religion or magic cannot be better illustrated than by the fact that the weaker party to a suit calls in the help of nail fetishes.

The form of the following notes is dictated by the form of the questionnaire-issued by the French authorities-to which it was originally an answer, and it must be read in the light of the foregoing note.

 Section I.-Of the Family.

 The organisation of the family or Xifumba is certainly one that the Bavili need not be ashamed of, and when compared to that of many civilised peoples can only be looked upon as a model of logical compactness.

The Xifumba is composed of the four grandparents Nkaka, the father Tata, the mother Mama, their children Bana, grandchildren Batekulu, great-grandchildren Ndandu, and great-great-grandchildren Ndalula.

The uncle on the mother's side is called Ngulinkaci, the aunt Mama.

The aunt by marriage is called Mama.

The uncles and aunts on the father's side Tata.

Brother or sister-in-law Zali.

Father or mother-in-law Nkwekici.

Son or daughter-in-law Nkwekici.

Uncle of mother Xikweci.

Uncle of father Xikweci.

When you ask a native to what family he belongs he will answer you by giving you the name of his mother's family.

On the death of the father his brother takes care of the children; but the wife remains with her children sorrowing for her husband for at least twenty-four months, when she may marry again. These children are called bana bana ba bika nkulu. (The little children left by the spirit.)

A man may not marry any of his mother's family or relations whom he terms Mama. If the Xina of the girl the man wishes to marry is that of his mother he cannot marry her.

He may not marry the children of his father's brothers, but those of his father's sisters are not forbidden to him.

The family forms a part of the higher organisation of the tribe. Each individual belongs to a family; each family is under a chief called Kongo Zovo, and this chief is under the prince of the province containing these families, who is called by the name of his province preceded by the prefix Ma, short for Manifamu. Seven of these provinces hold the people of Luango, called the Bavili. The Bavili, under their king Maluango, form a third part of the kingdom of Kongo, or the Fjort people, who are a section of the Bantu race. My head man Tati for example is of the family of Yanga of the royal province Buali of the Bavili of the KONGO kingdom of the Bantu race.

An individual may not leave his town without the permission of his father or of the Kongo Zovo, and upon his return he must present himself before him, to give an account of himself and show the proceeds of his fishing, hunting, or trading. He must obey and respect his chief, who may tie him up, chastise him, deprive him of food, but has no power of life and death over him-this right belonging in law only to the King Maluango. The Kongo Zovo can also requisition the services of all his family.

 Section II.-Marriage.

 We find the highest form of marriage to be that of Monogamy. That is to say Princesses whose offspring may become the future rulers of the kingdom, may not have more than one husband, whom she has the right to choose. He may be already married or not, but once selected he must put away his other wives and become the slave of the princess, who has the power of life and death over him. But when she dies this man inherits all her property. Maluango so long as he is simply Nganga NVUMBU[1] may have as many wives as he pleases, but once he has been crowned Maluango he is supplied with one wife, a princess of Ngoio (Cabinda in Kakongo) and must put away the others.

The people generally are polygynists, but there is a line drawn between the first wife and the others. The first is called Nkaci Ntete, the second and others Nkaci Sialila. A concubine is called Ndaia Xicinsu. An unchaste woman Ndumba.

Polyandry has not the legal character that it has among certain primitive peoples. With regard to Polygyny and its effect upon the condition of the woman, it is true that, apparently, certain women have always existed in this country who object very strongly to sharing a husband with others, and such are said to be bad women or women of spirit, Muntu 'Mbi. But as a rule the first wife asks her husband for women to help her in her work, and such a woman is called a good woman or creature, Muntu 'Mbote. There are constant quarrels among these wives, but the husband refuses to take sides, and would be looked upon as a fool if he interfered. Should the injured woman in these disputes appeal to an outsider or judge, as an arbitrator, he will refuse to have anything to do with it. She has no appeal in these matters. Mankind generally treats the affair with indifference.

Should a man promise to marry a girl, she can make him pay very heavily for breach of promise if he has touched her; if not, she can only slang and shame him. The man, however, cannot claim anything from the woman who breaks off an engagement, but she gets a bad name.

If the woman whom the man desires to marry is past the age of puberty and is able to judge for herself as to a man's parts, the man will first address himself to her. If the girl is still a child he goes to her father and mother in the first place. The proposal made, the father and mother discuss the matter.

[1. High priest.]

If they can find no objection to the young man and they think it well to allow their daughter to marry, they accept the young man's offer.

The young man then approaches his own parents and if they do not object, the mother, who keeps her son's savings for him, gives him the goods necessary to present to his future father and mother-in-law. These goods are given to the girl's parents in order to give the man a hold upon them in case they supply him with a worthless article as a wife. It covers their responsibility, which is a very great one, and gives the father the right on the other hand, after returning the exact amount presented, to take his daughter away from the husband, should he turn out to be a beast and ill-treat her. There are two "marriage bundles": (1) Bukali in the olden days, 20 longs (say 10 francs) but now 100 longs and one demijohn of rum (say 60 francs). (2) Mpakete, in the olden days 10 longs, but to-day consisting Of 50 longs and one demijohn of rum, 1 coat, 1 counterpane, 1 hat, 100 longs to mother's relations, and a present of 50 longs to the bride.

Certain families may not intermarry, as those of Xibanga and Maluango. Intertribal marriages were once totally prohibited, but to-day marriages take place although the offspring of such unions are looked upon much in the same prejudiced light by the Bavili as the offspring of black and white races are looked upon by the Europeans.

A woman who cannot plant is not allowed by her parents to marry. A known fool will not be accepted, and sickness is a bar. The goods bestowed on the parents of the proposed wife are called goods for marriage, Bindele Bi Kukwela, and not goods for barter, nor can the marriage be properly termed a marriage by purchase. The goods are accepted as a gage, or pledge, not as purchase money.

The "Bundle" having been given to the assenting parents, when the time comes or the girl arrives at the age of puberty, the bridegroom sends money to the parents so that the girl may be placed in the "paint house," where she undergoes certain rites of purification. The father's women folk then take the girl to the water and the Tukula or red paint is beaten off her with pliant switches or twigs. Then she is dressed and adorned with leg and arm rings of brass, necklaces of coral and other ornaments and taken to the expectant bridegroom. The dancing and singing that has commenced after the washing maybe continued during the whole night. The husband gives certain presents to the father's relations who have brought him his bride. The next morning the husband presents his wife with a white handkerchief. Then the women again come and present the couple with food. The husband makes them a return present and the bride returns to her father's house. The husband then sends his father and mother to his father-in-law with a present to ask him to send him his wife. The father-in-law marks a day for her return to her husband, and gives certain presents to the father and mother of the husband, who return to their village. Upon the day mentioned the father-in-law takes his daughter back to his son-in-law with a present. Then in the presence of the husband's father and mother he exhorts him to follow in his good father's footsteps, then turning to his daughter he gives her good advice and hands her over finally to her husband.

The married couple now. have two fathers and two mothers to whom they owe obedience and whom they must treat equally as members of one family, helping them all as children are expected to help their parents.

Should the woman be guilty of adultery the man may forgive his wife the first offence, but on the second occasion he will return her to her father, who must return the " pledge " money given to him. Should he discover the guilty man he may ask what indemnity he likes, and that man has to pay the fine even if he has to pawn himself as a hostage. The first time the husband is caught by the wife he may be forgiven, but the next time the wife reports the matter to her husband's parents, and the man must pay. She may leave him for a time, but generally comes back to him. If not, and should it happen that the father finds her another husband, the pledge goes to her first husband. But the husband cannot make her father give back the original pledge. The. wife has no claim on the woman who has committed adultery with her husband.

The male adulterer pays the fine, the husband alone inflicts it, and the amount is generally about equal to the pledge, but the actual amount rests with the husband.

As regards the duties of married persons, the woman plants, cooks, carries wood, and draws water; the man looks after the religious and fetish rites of the family, closely allied to the treatment of his sick relations, and their burial, finds his wife in dress, fish, the chase, palm nuts, etc., builds her house and cuts the bush where she may have decided to plant.

Divorce.-Apart from the causes already mentioned, long absence and non-support bring about divorce or dissolution of marriage. In this case the wife, after having waited, say twelve months, for the return of her husband, seeks his father and mother and puts the situation before them. They advise her, and if they give their consent she goes back to her father and may re-marry. Upon the reappearance of the first husband the "pledge" is returned to him. So that divorce is looked upon as a family matter.

In the event of the parties being unable to agree, the father returns the " pledge " and they are free to marry again.

If the children are very young they go with the mother, but the daughters remain with the mother in any case, while the sons when old enough to do without the mother's care go to the father. The father has to do his part in sustaining the children.

 Section III.-Concerning Relationship.

 The different kinds of relationship are as follows:-

1. Their own children. Bana bana na veka.
 2. The children of their elder brother. Bana ba ya yandi.
 3. Their brother's children. Bana ba nkawmba andi.
 4. Children of their uncle. Bana ba mama'ndi nkaci.
 5. Children of their grandparents. Bana ba buta kak'andi.
 6. Children of the father's sister. Bana ba nkaci.
 7. Children of his nephew. Ntekulu u buta muana nkaci.
 8. The children in pawn. Buti ci xivili i vanina.
 9. The bought slaves. Ndongo i sumba.
 10. The children of slaves. Bana ba xifula.

The native law does not adopt the distinction of our civil law between legitimate, and natural children recognised by the father or otherwise. Birth sanctifies the child, and, as the child of its mother, it may become the inheritor of its uncle's property. As regards the general rule of succession it is not the eldest son but the wisest that inherits the property. But where the father of a family has been neglected by his relations, he sometimes takes his revenge on them by dividing his property among his children while he is yet alive. The mother has no property of her own, but is the guardian of that of her children, and should they die this goes to her family.

Both the father and mother watch over the interests of their children, and can punish them.

The mother alone has the right to pawn her child, but she must first consult the father, so that he may have the chance of giving her goods to save the pledging. The father cannot pledge his child. The brother can pawn his sister, or the uncle his niece, the mother being dead. But the father being alive the uncle must go first to him to give him the chance of helping him out of the difficulty by means of a loan of goods. If the uncle is what they call a bad man, the father will call witnesses to see the cloth that he is lending the uncle who would pawn his child, he takes up a kernel of the palm nut in their presence and drops it into his box; which being interpreted means that he has bought his daughter. Until this debt is paid to the father the uncle cannot raise the wind on that child again. A person is never free from being pawned in this way.

Parental authority is really never lost, for the father has always the right to ransom the child, who never ceases to look to him as its father. But as the child often settles down in the village of its pawnee and becomes the parent of children, the amount needed to ransom it increases in proportion to the child's offspring. The debtor has to pay double the amount he borrowed and so much for every child. Even then the child may elect to remain where it is.

A child or children bereft of all family ties may be adopted by one of the father's friends, who calls it or them (Muana bika wali) the child my friend left. Under this kind of artificial parentage the adoptor can neither sell nor pawn this child, nor has he any hold on its earnings; it is a work of love and honour, but he looks to the gratitude of the child to make it up to him in some way or other.

 Section IV.-Of Guardianship, of Emancipation, and Prohibition.

 The French law recognises four kinds of guardianship:

1 That of the survivors of the fathers and mothers.
 2. That by will conferred by the fathers or mothers dying last.
 3. That of the next of kin.
 4. That which is disposed of by a meeting of the family.

The Bavili recognise six forms of guardianship, in order:

1 The grandfather. Xinkaka xi andi.
 2. The father's family. Xitata.
 3. The mother's father. Xinkaka xibuta.
 4. The mother's family. Mama ci andi.
 5. The father's friend. U,yukani tatitu.
 6. The guardian appointed by the family. Nandi u yonzola muana u bika vumbi.

The guardian acts as a father to the child, but cannot touch its property, for, as already shown, that belongs to the mother's family. He is paid by the family upon delivering up the child according to his deserts,-whatever he asks for if all has turned out well, with little except shame if badly.

The family are the judges as to the time when the child shall be taken from its guardian, and that is generally when the child has grown up to manhood or womanhood. As the child's pro-father all that it has- earned is his, or as much thereof as he likes to take.

 Section V.-Concerning Property.

 The best general idea that can be given of the native theory concerning property is given in their own words (Li kanda li ami) "my family," literally Kanda means to make straight, to tighten-Nkanda equals skin, i.e., the natural part of man, or that part which he has in common with animals. As the saying goes, Muntu nkanda, xibula nkanda, muntu ua vioka mu ku bula mbembo. Man is of skin, the cattle are skin, man is only superior by speech.

The right of property is derived through the mother, the planter, to the Great Uncle the giver of all good gifts, Mbunzi, the W. wind, the rain giver, one of the Bakici baci or primeval " powers " on earth.

The Bavili have no word in their language to express proprietor or property. The nearest expression for proprietor is Fumu Bima, the chief or prince of all things. He may possess (Baka vua) money or goods (Mbongo) or things (Bima) or even land, Ci, but as Fumu ci, the land chief, he is the head of a family holding the land in trust for his people; while a possessor of goods is really a man who is only the temporary owner of things that belong to his Fumu.

Both kinds of goods, movable and immovable, have their uses, but one remains (Ci, i.e. the land), the other gets used up (Ma). The difference may be best explained by the words themselves, thus Ci has the meaning of primeval matter, the earth (Nci), while the primeval Ma or Mad equals water.

Wherever labour is implied the possessor has the right of the disposal of its fruits, or that part of it which his Fumu has given back to him or allowed him to keep. A man trades, the part allotted to him is his. The woman plants, that part which remains after feeding her husband and paying the tithes to the Fumu may be said to be hers. The plantation is hers on this understanding. That is to say, all sources of wealth carry their responsibilities with them, and all goods are rather in trust than actual possessions.

The right of usufruct is granted to the Kongo Zovo by the Prince, or to the individual by the Kongo Zovo, on demand, and this may be for him and his descendants so long as they exist as a family, but no use or habitation gives a man the right to ownership. This usufruct may have been granted in the first place by right of birth, as a reward for service rendered, or on payment by a rich man on the extinction of the family on whose land he has been living. And just as the king of the country may depose the prince of the province, so the prince may take away this usufruct from a rebellious Kongo Zovo. The Kongo Zovo in his turn may revoke the usufruct of land or goods enjoyed by the individual.

Usufruct may be established by inheritance, gift, loan, and permission, on land, water, cloths, goods, fruit of the soil.

The Kongo Zovo has the use of the land and water for his family; in return for this (1) he must help the prince in his wars with armed men; (2) all leopards killed on the land must be sent to the prince; (3) the head and a leg of the antelope, the wild ox, and the pig killed must also be sent to him; (4) the backbone of any whale washed ashore, the heads of the sea fishes called Bafu, Ntala, Nqueci, Mbili, Mbuta, Muenji, Tobo; the water pig Ngulu Maci, and a small basket of fish from each net, must also be sent to the prince; (5) his women also must send him one-fifth of the palm nuts, and a basket of pea nuts and Indian corn harvested; (6) the rich man or Esina living upon the property is expected to give the prince a feast and presents every year.

In return for a gift of cloths or the loan of goods the recipient is expected to be at the beck and call of the one who gives, although he has no right to claim service. The receiver calls this man "my friend who gives me cloths to wear every day." U yukana yami u kalila u mpuika nlele kada xilumbu.
 Those who are permitted to cut down the palm nuts or reap any of the unplanted fruits of the soil are rewarded by a certain share in the profits of their sale.

The usufruct comes to an end by the will of the prince, the Kongo Zovo, or the individual, although it is granted generally to the recipient and his successors so long as they exist and behave themselves.

I have explained the duty of the individual to the Kongo Zovo, and of the Kongo Zovo to the Prince; there remains that of the Prince to the King. Maluango, as prince of the province of Buali, enjoys the same revenue as the princes of the other provinces, but as King he sends his messages to the princes to demand their aid in any emergency. He demands men in case of war, goods in case of need when one of the " powers " or Bakici baci have to be appealed to. The Prince must send him the skins of all animals killed, three pieces of chalk, 100 longs (or 50 francs goods), three saga ngo, and three mbongo lu tumbu or native money mats.

Roads running from the villages through the lands granted to the Kongo Zovo to the main roads are called Nzila Zi Nyawna, and are of a private nature, that is to say a stranger may be asked if met where he is going to, and if his reply is satisfactory he is allowed to proceed, if not he is asked to go by the public road, or Nzila Ivanga Nzambi, or God-created road.

These latter roads cross at Buali, the sacred and central province of the Bavili or Luango. The east road leads to the country of the Batetchi, and is called Nzila Xintetchi, the west leading to the sea, Nzila Mbu, the south, Nzila Kakongo, the north road, Nzila Balumbu. These are partof the public lands, as are also the sacred groves (Bibila), lakes, lagoons, rivers, bush, and ownerless lands.

Fishing, hunting, trees, native string, reeds, and the fruit of the soil not planted by the hand of man are common to the natives of the country.

The King holds the whole country in trust from God, through the "powers," for the use of the people.

White men may on certain conditions become users of the land and that which grows on it. The white man wishing to occupy land applies to the Kongo Zovo, who marks off the land put aside for his use. The white man then compensates the Kongo Zovo for his loss of use of the land, and the family for loss of use of the trees, etc. In the meantime the Kongo Zovo has warned the prince, who sends his Mafuka, Maxienji, and Mangova to visit the white man and witness the act of self-sacrifice on the part of the Kongo Zovo. They supply the white man with an interpreter, to whom they give the title of Mafuka or messenger. This man watches the interests of the white man and the prince conjointly. When the white man has returned the prince's messengers with small presents and has settled down a little, the prince, accompanied by his Mambuku, Mamboma, Mafuka, Maxienji, and Mangova and followers, comes to visit him officially.
 The white man has to supply these six personages with chairs or stools, and should place upon the prince's chair a piece of checked cloth called the cloth of law.

The prince then bestows the land upon the white man and his successors. Thereupon the white man takes a position in the country equivalent to the Kongo Zovo, but instead of paying the prince in flesh and fish or the products of the soil, pays the prince so much in goods half yearly or yearly, as well as a certain small percentage on the produce he buys.

 Section VI.-Of Successions, Gifts, and Wills.

 On hearing of the death of a person all his relations come to "weep." The wife of the deceased delivers the key of the house, where the wealth is, to the man she knows in the absence of any will to be the rightful inheritor. These are -1. The brother of the deceased by the same mother. 2. Then the nephew by his sister. 3. The relations of his mother. 4. Failing these, his child. The wife he has loved and esteemed the most is the guardian of his wealth and the keeper of the key, but she inherits nothing.

The natural inheritor cannot repudiate his succession; he must take over the debts, not being able to renounce the inheritance.

When about to bury the deceased the inheritor plants a sword in the ground, before the assembled guests, and asks if there is anything more to be paid by him on behalf of the deceased. Any creditor present then goes up to the sword and placing his hand upon it declares that the deceased owes him money or goods, and that he will give particulars of the debt later on. These are considered as proved. Any creditor claiming his money after that must bring his witnesses, and be prepared to substantiate the debt. The wife generally knows all about the debts of her husband.

The wife mourns for her husband (or did) for 18 to 24 months after death; the burial of her husband often taking place about that time.

The members of the family generally help to pay the expenses of the ceremonies in connection with the death of the Kongo Zovo; they then stay with the inheritor or disperse to the families of their mothers. They inherit nothing from the Kongo Zovo except by will.

A man may give away his property during his life, or make his verbal will in the presence of his wife and witnesses. He will call his slaves and tell them that they have been given to so-and-so. Or he may call his children and let them choose their slaves or goods. But this is seldom done, and only to spite the family of his people who may have behaved badly to him.

The gift is made in the presence of witnesses, and is revocable until the death of the giver, if it is to take effect only after death. But a simple gift between the living is irrevocable.

There are no special forms to be observed when a will is made; it is held to be written in the heart of the wife who has the key.

The wife and the witnesses are the executors of the will. The family will often make the widow pass before their fetishes and swear that she is keeping nothing back. They sometimes go further and force her to take "casca"[1] as a test of her honesty.

There can be no revocation of the last will, the matter rests with the wife and witnesses once the husband is dead.

 Section VII-Of Contracts.

 Contracts may be enumerated as follows:-Those between the King and his neighbours, those between prince and King, those between prince and prince, those between prince and Kongo Zovo, and those between individuals.

[1. Bark of NKASA.]

Treaties or contracts between Kings are brought about by a third party or mutual friend, who acts as intermediary and witness. Between the King or prince and his inferior, the inferior gives the superior a present, and in the presence of witnesses "claps his hands," "Kalambala nkele maluango nkici." On the creation of a market a gun is buried, and an agreement made that no arms of any sort may be brought there, and this is done in the presence of witnesses. Between individuals no contract is legal unless made in the presence of witnesses. These compacts are known by the words Nkaka or Nkankano.

The one thing in all these compacts that is essential is that witnesses shall be present, and when it is proposed to cancel a contract the contracting parties buy "malafu" (palm wine) in equal quantities, but deposited in one bottle or other vessel, and then in the presence of witnesses drink and agree to cancel the compact. But in the case of one of the parties refusing to annul the contract, the matter is taken before two or three chiefs or princes and talked out. In the event of the dispute arising out of inequality of service rendered, the division of profits is rearranged, or the contract declared then and there null and void.

All goods, Bima, are freely bought and sold except men, Bantu, the sale of men being a family affair.

A sale becomes definite after the transaction has been accomplished in the presence of witnesses, and the seller has " blessed it." He lifts his hands to his arm-pits, and then throws them out towards the buyer, and breathes or blows over the thing sold. This is called Ku vana mula, to give the breath, and is equivalent to saying " God bless thee."

Mbongo Masandi (or a piece of grass cloth measuring in length, including fringe, 45 centimetres, and about 25 centimetres in breadth) has been in use as money from time immemorial, although at present it may be said to be out of use, the French coinage gradually taking its place. Four of these small mats were wrapped in one bundle, Vili, and five of these bundles (20 mats) were called Milele Mbongo I Tanu. Ten bundles (40 Vili) Mbongo Fula. One hundred Mbongo Fula (4,000 Vili) were called Kama Mbonga. This was the price of a little slave of about five years of age. This equalled 8 fathoms of cloth,. or about 16 yards, or four francs, that is to say, 1 Vili was equivalent to .001 centime. The white traders' cloth is now doubled in 12 folds; three folds equals 1 long or "cortado"; and 4 longs or cortados form a piece of cloth sold for two francs. That is to say, one piece of 8 yards 21 inches wide is doubled into 12 folds or 24 laps.

Native custom allows the letting out on hire of men as of things. A native in need of labour might seek a large slave owner and hire slaves or others for the sum of five longs, the duration of the service not being definitely settled. Should one of these slaves die during the service, the hirer had to pass before the fetishes and declare that he had had no hand in his death. Under these circumstances he would pay the owner 20 longs. But if he had wilfully caused the death of the slave, he would have to pay 5 to 10 slaves in his place according to his wealth. The price of the grown slave was 5 times Kama Mbongo or 40 fathoms of cloth Kama Buta. This payment was called Ku Futa Li Bumi. (To pay that which is wasted.)

Slaves; are termed children of the "cloth", or Muana Ntu "the son of the head," in reference to the slave as the carrier). The owner is not expected to force a slave to do that which is wrong (Lu Kasu), but if he does the slave must do it, as his master has the right to kill him if he does not, and is himself responsible for the slave's action.

The domestic servants of a rich man are called Bavinji. A father may ask a friend to take his son as servant and teach him all he knows. Such a boy is called Xileci. The head boy or steward is called Xileci Xi Busu.

There is no lending at interest in our sense of the word. Where a man borrows goods he must pay back double the amount borrowed, no matter for how long a time he has owed them. Unless a certain date for the return of the goods is mentioned, the debt may continue for years. The writer knows of one case where a debt was 15 years old.

A man may lease his cattle to another under the following recognised conditions:-First increase goes to the owner; of the second the caretaker takes a female; of the third a male, the fourth goes to the owner.

A man may commission another to carry on trade for him. He gives him exact instructions, paying him half the profits, but exacts from him or his family any loss incurred. The sender is responsible to the family for any evil that may overtake the one sent provided that it cannot be shown that the evil was the consequence of his own folly. A man on leaving the country may commission his friend to act for him, but the service requested must be mentioned to the man commissioned in the presence of witnesses, and he may only act for him in that particular instance or on that occasion. No procuration to act generally for another is ever given. A present is given to one so acting for another, where no profit can be expected. The act or service accomplished and the profits shared or present given, ends the commission. The family being responsible, no general procuration is needed, for it rests with them always as a matter of fact.
 In the event of a time for the repayment of a debt having been fixed, the creditor asks for payment, and if this is put off or refused he has the right to arrest anyone belonging to the debtor's family. This person is held until the matter has been publicly settled by palaver in the courts of law, when, the debt being paid, the prisoner is set at liberty. The person thus arrested is not necessarily of the same family as the debtor, but he should be of a family in the same princedom or province, that is some one living not very far from the debtor. This captive receives payment from the debtor quite apart from the creditor, but as the result of the judgment of the same palaver. And this is the only form of security for the payment of a debt which the native law provides for.

 

PART II

 

CRIMINAL LAW

 Section I.-Of Infraction.

 The Bavili have a very distinct idea of the moral and natural law, and classify their sins into five distinct sections of the one great class of laws called Xina or things forbidden, sometimes spoken of as Ka Zila, no road.

The first section is called Xina Xivanga Nzambi, or that which is contrary to God the creator. The sign of this is Mawso, the tail of the ox, the sign of office of the Kongo Zovo.

The second is found in the horror the native has (or had) of being photographed, and in the magic glass of the Nganga Nyambi, who alone is allowed to look into it, to discover the successor of the defunct Maluango, made, as they say in the image of God. This mirror-gazing is called Ku Sala Fumu.

The third we find in the way the mothers correct their children when they talk foolishly of God, this they call Xibika Bakulu.

In illustration of the fourth class. On the fourth day the prince, Kongo Zovo, or father, may have no connection with his wife, he may not go outside of his town, he may not hold a palaver. The doctor or Nganga Bilongo may not bleed his patient. The women may not work in the fields. All this is called Sona.

The fifth comprises all those ceremonies and things forbidden concerning maternity. A woman must not sleep with her husband on the ground. A girl must not have connection with a man before she has passed through the "paint house." No dishonour to their parents must be thought of. All this is summed up in the word 'Ngo, the leopard.

These foregoing five Bina (plural of Xina) are summed up as Xina Va Xi Fumba.

The sixth, to kill, is called Ku Vawnda.

The seventh, to commit adultery, Ku Bawnga.

The eighth, to steal, Ku. Kuba.

The ninth to bear false witness, Xi Buta Mambu.

These four are called Xina Nkaka.

Not to covet, to remember that all under the market tree is sacred, and that this tree is also the last resting place of the body of the defunct Maluango, on the way to the burial, after having held the "Seven" well in hand according to the will of God. All this is called Xina Nsotchi or Nsoxi.

Finally, we come to that class Aza Bina, or totems, by which the natives know whom they may marry and whom not, as already mentioned in Section II., i.e., a man may not marry a woman whose Xina or totem is the same as that of his mother's family. This class is called Xina Mvila. As in the case of the Hebrews, so in that of the Bavili contravention of these laws is believed to be punished by God, by His withholding the rains in due season. Hence the necessity of the offerings made to the "powers" representing the attributes of God on earth, or Ba Kici Baci, of which Maluango is one under the title of Nkicici.

The father, the Kongo Zovo, or the village are responsible in the event of the delinquent's non-arrest, and even then they must pay their share of the fine, or sell the prisoner into slavery, if he is not rich enough to pay the fine himself.

Children and fools or idiots are not responsible personally for their actions, but the injured party can claim compensation if he likes from the parents.

Killing, etc., in self-defence, robbery of plantations when very hungry, when no deception or secrecy is practised, are regarded as justifiable facts. In each case, however, payment for damage done is expected.

 Section II.-Of Punishment.

 The idea of the damage done to God, King, prince, father, neighbour, is the ground of the punishment inflicted. The punishment itself being a payment to satisfy the party injured. And this is shown by the fact, that except in the case of children who are chastised, payment in money, kind, or goods is first demanded. But pay you or your family must, if not in money, then by being sold into slavery, or by becoming the slave of the injured party. A man condemned to death may not be slain if there is one dissenting voice in his village. Under these circumstances a goat is killed in his stead. A piece of this goat is given to every member of the community and the culprit is sold. When it is decided to kill the murderer or culprit, the Kongo Zovo, or the prince, must hand the person over to Mamboma, and he hands him to Maluango, who calls his Mankaka (or executioner), and the latter cuts off his head.
 Generally speaking, payment in a greater or less degree according to the crime is the rule as to form of punishment. The only exceptions to the above are,-When a man sleeps with a child not yet arrived at the age of puberty (Xina Xinselo) and so causes the wrath of God and a drought and consequent famine. Or when a man presumes to commit adultery with the wife of a prince (Ku sumuna nkawci Luango i matali) to sin against the wife and the royal rites of marriage. In these cases the culprits, male and female, are entirely in the hands of the Maluango, and they are bound hands and feet and cast into the fire. Witches who have taken "casca" and have been proved guilty are also burnt. But even in these extreme cases Maluango can spare their lives.
 In the event of the crime being considered as in part justified by circumstances, or in the case of a crime being committed without intention (Mamu Ma Bakici), on the spur of the moment, by a hitherto good man, the King will take him on one side and reason with him, pointing out that he has broken the law and must pay, but only in part, warning him to be more careful in the future.
 Slavery may be substituted for either death or nonpayment.

The accomplice is reckoned as blamable as the actual criminal, but the instigator pays more than either, on the principle that a slave does his master's bidding, and that the master is responsible for his actions.

Each crime has its penalty, but in the event of a man becoming an habitual criminal the penalties may increase to such an extent as to make it worth while on the part of the family to sell or kill the criminal to get him out of the way.

 

PART III

 

JUDICIAL ORGANIZATION AND PROCEDURE

 Section 1.

 In simple matters a third party is asked in the presence of witnesses to judge between the two parties; if they are not satisfied with this and the palaver is between two of one family the father may judge the matter. If the question is between two of the same Kongo Zovo then this chief may settle it. If between two of different Kongo Zovo then the prince. If between two off different provinces then the question is taken to Mamboma, and this prince takes it before the king Maluango on the day that the latter has marked off for the hearing of the case. Maluango's Court is the final court of appeal in a natural sense, although he may admit that the case is beyond his powers and refer the parties to the tests by ordeal.

In an ordinary palaver each party puts his side of the question before the third party or Reasoner, called Nzonzi. In case of appeal the Nzonzi appears before Maluango and explains the case to him from beginning to end. If one of the parties lives to the North of Buali (that is Maluango's province), and the other to the South, then Maluango sits with his back to the East. If the parties live East and West then he sits facing the South. The Nzonzi then stands at the opposite side of a hollow square, the defendant (Ntunyi) and his party, and the plaintiff (Mqwika) and his party, seat themselves at the right or left of Maluango, according to the direction in which their towns lie. To talk a palaver, or rather sit it, is called Ku Funda Nkano. The people reasoning it out, or the two parties, are called Bana Bankano.

The place where the palavers are held may be under a shed or a tree, and is called Nganda Tela Li Misarnu.

The natives recognise at least five kinds of palavers.

1. Concerning the rains and the "powers" (Ku Fwika Mambu Ma Ci).
 2. Between the princes concerning the land (Ku Funda NKANOCI).
 3. To clear up an intrigue between friends and find out who is at the bottom of it (Ku Zinga Cina).
 4. Civil (Mi Samu Ku Sosubula).
 5. Criminal (Nkano Ku Funda).

As the judges are the Chiefs, Princes, and King of the country they have no special prerogatives or duties apart from their governing offices.

Generally speaking, each party has an advocate to plead the cause. This advocate is called Nanga.

The attendants or helpers of the judges are those entitled to hold these offices as Chiefs.
 Maluango has seven titles, 12 followers, six kinds of Zi-Nganga. Mamboma has two titles of his own and people filling up the other titles of Maluango, except that of Nkicici, which, in Mamboma's court, is not represented. Then he has also 12 followers and six Nganga in connection with the trials by ordeal.

The followers that the Manifumus of the provinces have in common with Maluango and his Mamboma are:-

    1. Mamboma.
     2. Mbuku.
     3. Mafuku.
     4. Maxienji.
     5. Mangova.

Maluango's signs of office are:-
     1. Silver knife (Ximpaba).
     2. 1 hat (Mpu Ntanda).
     3. 1 cape (Xisemba).
 his Mamboma:-
     1. iron (Ximpaba).
     2. 1 hat (Mpu Nzita).
     3. 1 cape (Xisemba).
 his Mankaka (executioner)
     1. sword (Mbele).
     2. hat (Mpu Xikumbu).
     3. A long cloth (Xinzobolo).
 The prince of a province (and Maluango as such):-
     1. ivory horn.
     2. iron bell.
     3. hat (Mpu Nzita).
     4. cape (Xisemba).
 Kongo Zovo:-
     1. the tail of an ox.
     2. hat (Mpu Ngunda).
     3. cape (Xisemba).

The condition of the plaintiff or defendant does not determine the composition of the palavers and there is no exceptional jurisdiction.

The judge alone is allowed to settle a palaver. The number of helpers or assessors is according to the importance of the palaver.

 Section II.

 The palaver commences by each party stating his own case, and where there are advocates (ZINANGA), each advocate is instructed by his client beforehand, but may be reminded of any point during the proceedings.

Anyone may sit down and listen to the palaver, and the judgment is very quickly spread about by report.

The procedure, Civil and Criminal, is much as it existed in Europe in barbarous times, ordeals being used instead of legal proceedings where one of the parties fears that his opponent may take an unfair advantage of his poverty, or when legal proceedings have not been successful in clearing the matter up and as a kind of last appeal.

A man is not forced to answer any question until the palaver is held. The head of a family may put one of his people in the yoke or whip him to get him to tell the truth, but torture in legal matters is unknown.

In opening the palaver the prince claps his hands and says, Ngo Ngo Ngo, ngete Nzambi twa dukuna,[1] and thus greets all that are present in the name of God. Then he asks for a drink, and each party gives the same quantity. He then calls on the NANGA to state the case (mayanga manzoa).[2] He swears by the fetish present to speak the truth, and then having stated the case, hands the parties over to the King judge (Nkunzi). The King then orders the plaintiff to speak, which he does after " beating the fetish," and insisting upon its not allowing the defendant to interrupt him before his time to speak arrives. When both have finished they both "beat" the fetish, and agree to abide by the judgment, of the King. If it is felt that the palaver

[1. Literally, "Leopard, leopard, leopard, yes, O Nzambi, to keep on extracting."

2 Statement of the case.]

cannot be finished by "mouth," they call in the Nganga Bisengo, or Nganga Mbele Ku Mbazu, or Nganga Mbundu Ncitu, who divines who is guilty.

1. In the case of Mbundu Ncitu (a herb) one of each party is called upon to appear before the Nganga. The Nganga first takes the herb himself, and then falls down in the direction of the guilty party. He informs the prince of the fact. The prince then says it will be best to let each party eat the Mbundu Ncitu. This they do; the guilty party falls down, the innocent lets three drops of urine fall on a leaf that is placed between the legs of each party. (This is not the same as the Nganga Nkasa who gives the casca to witches.)

2. Nganga Bisengo has a little box with a tight-fitting lid, which refuses to be parted from the box when the party present is guilty.

3. Nganga Mbele has a heated knife, which will only burn the guilty party.

After judgment the two parties called by the Nganga are brought just as they are to the assembly, and each side takes his representative. The King then tells the culprit how much he has to pay, and the day upon which the payment must be made in his presence. When the payment is made the judge asks them both if they are satisfied, and if the judge is Maluango they place their hands on the ground under his chair, and swear to let bye-gones be bye-gones; if the judge is a Kongo Zovo they put their hands on his head and swear. And after a few words of advice and warning the palaver is finished.

Each day that the palaver lasts, each party pays the judge one large calabash of palm wine. When the judgment is given each party pays Kama (100 mats or cubits, see page 62), ZIMBONGO per diem.

Corporal punishment, as has been stated, is a matter for the father to inflict in his village, refractory prisoners are put in the yoke for the time being, but there are no prisons, and the slave or pawn is just as free of the village as any of the inhabitants.

The prisoner directed to pay a fine or expenses becomes the slave or pawn to the creditor until the amount is paid by his family.

There is very little to alter in either the composition or procedure of the native courts, they are the outcome of thousands of years of accumulated experience of a people who know themselves and their needs. Rather do the natives need a taking back to their ancient customs, before the "slave trade" and its abuses destroyed so much of their natural beauty. While some natives may have benefited by their contact with the white races, it is certain that the ignorance of the latter of their ways of thought and action has done the race a great deal of injury, which only time and study can possibly repair.

At the Back of the Black Man's Mind, by Richard Edward Dennett, [1906], at sacred-texts.com

  

CHAPTER VI

 

MEASURES, SIGNS, AND SYMBOLS

Palavers. -Counting on the Hands.-The Fingers.-Lineal Measures.-The Shroud. -Duodecimal System. -Time. -Days and Months.-Sexual Matters. -The Seasons. -Praying for Rain. -Symbols. -Drum Language.

 

PROCEDURE OF PALAVERS, COUNTING.

IF I had not read Mr. R. A. Stewart Macalister's Studies in Irish Epigrapy and had been asked to decipher an Ogham inscription, I should have had no hesitation in saying that it was a record of some ancient African palaver. When the Bavili hold their palavers, after having met and settled down as described by me in Notes on the Folklore of the Fjort,[1] the party on either side smooth the earth just in front of them. Upon this smoothed ground they keep count of all the points in the arguments in the palaver for and against.

No. 1 begins by stating the case; and as he opens the palaver he makes a point with the tip of his index-finger upon the ground. He then states that so-and-so has robbed him, and this statement he marks by a stroke which he places just after the dot, thus:-

Then No. 2 defends himself, and as he does so No. 1 marks the points in his defence by strokes below a line he draws to divide his side of the question from that of the accused. The palaver then might stand thus:-

[1. And in Laws of the Bavili.]

No. 1 then answers these denials or justifications of the robbery, and as he does so makes his strokes above the line:-

Then No. 1 gives his proofs, but first makes a dot to show that another phase of the palaver has been entered upon, and another oration commenced:-

No. 2 answers him, restating his case:-

No. I then sums up, and as it is getting late, cuts the palaver for the day; so that, if this " tally" had been kept on stone or wood, the palaver, as far as it had gone, would appear as under:-

The cutting of the line, or closing of the palaver, is done by drawing a double line with the index and next finger across the dividing line.

Now, in counting, the Bavili mark the ground also, and all this they call "Bisona bintawto," writing on the ground. In counting they make four strokes on the ground, and the fifth they make by crossing the four upright strokes, thus:

No. 1 he marks with his index-finger; No. 2 with his second, covering the first mark with the index-finger. No. He marks with his index-finger; No. 4 sometimes with his index-finger and sometimes with his second finger, running over No. 3 with his index-finger; No. 5, as stated, by crossing the four strokes.

Sometimes he will count by tens. Then he marks two strokes with his index and second fingers, and so on five times, and then he makes a stroke apart to show that he has counted ten. Each ten are marked in this way, until the whole number of things are counted. Then he will count the number of strokes and declare the number counted. But when he counts on his fingers he begins by placing the index-finger of his right hand upon the little finger of his left hand.

I found that both the Bavili (of Luango) and the BAKOTCHI of Kakongo had their variants of the old nursery rime for fingers or toes. I will give them both, as they differ.

BAVILI.

1. Second Finger (no name)
     Minu i kula i kula e fuana i munto Ko
 2. Index-Finger (Luzala xiso anzo)
     Minu xilandi Xiaku
 3. Third Finger (no name)
     Oho nu kulila ngolo ximbixi mibakaci?
 4. Little Finger (Luzala lu sa)
     Bene boso nu kulila minu unkuluntu inu?
 5. Thumb (Luzala mbo mbo)
     Buau i mangina lu naungu lu inu lu keli inu buau i botokula mundonga inu.

TRANSLATION.

1. There is no man so tall or equal to me.
 2. Index-finger:
     I am the one that follows.
 3. 3rd Finger:
     How much do you gain by being taller and stronger?
 4. Little Finger: a very old man, they say, the primeval
     What do you all gain by being tall? I am thy chief
 5. The Thumb:
     For this reason I who am not your equal am by myself, for this I left you (on account of constant strife).

THE KAKONGO VERSION.

The first two lines are the same.
 3. Ayi nguli, ayi muna, tate, ximbixi nubakac?
 4. Nsambixi nkotala ku nkwandi tata i nguli?
 5. Lu naungu. lu inu i yaka na mundonga, inu.

TRANSLATION:

1. There is no man equal or as tall as I am.
 2. I come after thee.
 3. And what do you gain by it, Mother and Father?
 4. Why does he raise the question (of?) his Father and Mother?
 5. Your one apart is your slave.

The Kabinda woman who gave me the Kakongo version explained that the little finger claimed to be the chief (or the first?) because the little finger and the "tragus" of the ear were the first parts of a child in conception to be formed.

The Bavili use beads also to count with (BILABU or the blue glass beads); LABU as pere Visseg tells us is the most subtle part of fire.

Thus (to-day rarely but) twenty years ago generally if you watched the Bavili counting you would notice that when he counted one he would put two beads on the ground, two, two more, and so on until he had counted four, when he would place two apart. These he would amass, and then place two beads on one side, so that when he had counted eight he would have two heaps of ten each plus four beads or 24 in all. These he would amass again and place one on one side (25 or one generation) so that when he had counted forty he really had 80 + 16 + 4 = 100.

Now the word for ten is Kumi (from KUMA to cause, to reason) and ten is the square root of KAMA, a word meaning (the royal wife and) 100.

The smallest measure that I know of is what the natives call XITINI, that is from the tip of the middle finger to the bottom of its joint or its root in the palm of the hand. It measures two nails or 41/2 inches, and is used in measuring tobacco, long strings of which are cut up into these BITINI. The value of the XITINI of tobacco was 36 BILABU or beads, two Bitini make one MBOKANA (palm) and two MBOKANA make one LUBONGO ZIFULA (or a piece or native grass cloth measuring 18 inches or a cubit). Its value being 144 beads.

2 ZIMBONGO= I MAKABA or yard.
 2 MAKABA = I NTAMA or fathom, and this may be said to be their standard measure.

Three NTAMA (or 12 mats in one bundle)=one MBONDO, while four MBONDO=One NLELE BIFUNZI (or 48 mats) or the bundle that a man is expected to contribute towards any of his wife's near relations' funeral expenses. These mats are sewn together also for the purpose of shrouds, thus six mats make a SAMBANO, complete cloth, four of which are sewn together to look as if there were only three to make a shroud, That is to say, two are first sewn together, then two more, and one of the latter is allowed to fall on one of the former just to cover it and then sewn that way, so that one complete shroud is composed Of 24 pieces or ZIMBONGO ZIFULA.
 The King is first wrapped in one shroud (24 cubits). After an interval when his body has been dried, he is wrapped in three shrouds (72 cubits), and finally, just before burial in six shrouds, or 144 cubits. The NLELE BIFUNZI is valued at 7,200 beads.

      120 Beads= 1 LOMBi or string.
     1,400 " or 12 MILOMBI = 1 XIKO or a bunch (50).
    14,400 " or 10 BIKO = 1 NSUKU or KAMA 400.
   144,000 " or 10 MISUKU = 1 XIVIEVE (1000).

In the olden days cottons were sent out in accordance with the demand of the natives in pieces 24 yards long doubled in 24 laps or 12 folds. In 1880 the length was 20 yards, in 1883 it went down to 18 yards, and latterly, when the trader was obliged to pay import dues and taxes to the different Governments, the length quickly fell to eight yards.

In the same way the Germans sent out strings of only 100 beads (believing in the superiority of the decimal system) until at last the natives refused to receive them in exchange for ivory.
 The sun and moon are the great time markers of the Bavili, the heavens their mighty clock.
 They divide the night and day into 12 periods of two hours each. They call this period LO or rather XELO a cutting (plural BILO).

From 6 p.m. to 8 p.m. they call XELO XITOMBE XITOMBE or the little darkness.
    "   8 p.m. to 10 p.m. they call XELO XITOMBE darkness.
    "   10 p.m. to 12 p.m. XELO KATA XIBWICI.
    "   12 a.m. to 2 a. m. MIXELO-XELO the little cuttings.
    "   2 a.m. to 4 a.m. MWECI XELO the smoke cutting.
    "   4 a.m. to 6 a.m. MWECI smoke or the revealer.
    "   6 a.m. to 8 a.m. MBOTA MAULA the star MAULA.
    "   8 a.m. to 10 a.m. LUBACI LUASEKA of the custom of the people of corruption.
    "   10 a.m. to 12 a.m. MENE NGWALI (early partridge) morning.
    "   12 p.m. to 2 p.m. TANGA MBATA to count the stroke, to throb.
    "   2 p.m. to 4 p.m. MBUKU LUBWICI the birth of the falling.
    "   4 P.m. to 6 p.m. TANGA MACIKA to count the sinking.

The night they call the deep of the heavens, BUILU; the day, LUMBU, of the custom of the deep.

There are four days in the week.

(1) NDUKA, the day when palavers are finished.
 (2) NTONA. The day when women do not plant, and burials take place, followed by the dance MASUKU.
 (3) CILO. The day when the family fetishes MPUMBU, NGOFO and XIMPUKA are consulted about death palavers, and Manioc is taken out of the water.
 (4) SONA. Perhaps short for SUNGA virtue. The day when no one is allowed to pass the NKUMBI tree save women going for water. Man's day of rest, the women's market day. Only women sell in the market.

Thus there are seven weeks in the Bavili month. His year is composed of thirteen months, which he divides into three great divisions, one of one month, one of four months, and one of eight. MAWALALA, XICIFU, and NVULA is the beginning and end of the year, the dry season and the rainy season. And there are three great Zinganga presiding over these three divisions of the year. NGANGA NVUMBA the King, NGANGA BUNCI, who doctors sterility in men, and NGANGA FUNZA, who doctors barren women so that they may become fruitful. MAWALALA is also a season.

The other twelve months are then arranged into six seasons as under:-

The season MWICI (smoke) produces as food the pea, NKASA and the names of the two months in this time are BULU MACI MAVOLA (the deep of rain water), and BULU MACI MBU (the deep of the sea waters).

The next season is BUNJI (literal meaning mist) producing the new green grass called MBUNDUBUNDU.

The two months in this season are called BIKA LI MUANDA XICIVU (to leave the valley of mist) and MUANDA XICIVU (the valley of mist).

During the season Mwici the men hunt and fish while the women gather FUBU leaves for their mat and basket work. The season BUNJI is devoted by the men to the burning of the grass, hunting, and cutting down of the forests to form new plantations, while the women busy themselves in the making of mats and baskets.

The season of drizzling rains is called MVUMVUvu, and it produces BUKU or mushrooms. The names of the months are KUFULu NKACI and KUFULU NUNI (negative and positive burning or desire).

This season is occupied by the men putting new roofs on their houses and repairing them generally, while the women sow their seed and prepare to plant manioc and sweet potatoes. It is now that the BAVILI'S thoughts turn lightly to love and marriage, and as a great deal of false modesty is to be noticed in the writings of some authors of books about the Kongo, and as it leads to a good deal of misunderstanding,[1] it may be well to state clearly what the ideas of the Bavili are on this subject.

The great power BUNZI objects strongly to unmarried women; increase and multiply are his standing orders. Virginity therefore after one has come to the age of puberty

[1. I mention this because in one translation of the Gospels the Virgin Mary is called NDUMBA.]

is almost unknown, and is not a state which a woman can be proud of When speaking of the virgin earth the Bavili say ANCI I BUNA I BUTICI XIMAKA, "the earth as yet has not brought forth anything," but speaking of a maiden they say XINKUMBI I BUNA KU NETA XIVUMU KO, "the maiden's stomach has not yet carried anything." A child before it arrives at the age of puberty is called XINKUMBA, but when she has arrived at that age and is still a virgin she is called XIKUMBI XIMBUILA. A woman who has lost her virtue is called NDUMBA. The name for an ordinary wife is NKACI, a royal wife NKAMA.

The next season is that of the WAW WAW WAW rains, and it produces the KUSAFU or NSAFU, a small green fruit something like a date in shape. KACI MBANGALA and NUNI MBANGALA, i.e., the negative and positive witness, are the names of the months. The name of these rains is also an exclamation used to express "listen! look! as it was, so it is again, the thief!"

MBANGALA carries with it the idea of exposure and the fear that causes one to run away (WANGALA). KUSAFU means the exhibiting or the sprouting of the tree.

The next season is that of the female rains NVULA NXENTU, and this brings forth fruit MAKUNDI. The months are BIKA LI MUANDA SUNJI and MUANDA SUNJI.

During the month of BIKA LI MUANDA SUNJI the female rains hurry on all fruit to a state of ripeness, so that when they cease in the next month (the little dry season) the people can gather in their harvest. It is said to leave sufficient moisture in the ground to last over the month of MUANDA SUNJI.

Just before the new moon that heralds in this last month (the seventh month of the Hebrews) the Bavili gather the large leaves of the herb LEMBELEMBE, and with them cover up their fetishes; this they call KUBATA BAKICI. These then remain covered until the next new moon appears, when, after having chewed the pepper NXEFU ZIMPUMBU and the leaves of the LUSAKU-SAKU, the Bavili splutter the contents of their mouths upon them to wake them up; this they call KUSAKA MUNA BAKICL

MAKUNDI =fruits. KUNDA is to do homage by throwing oneself on the ground and rubbing the earth with the sides of the palms of one's hands and then touching the sides of one's face with them. MUANDA SUNJI=the deep, valley, or soul of the cycle. SUNJI NDUNGO is the skin that is stretched over the hollow of the drum. SUNJIKA is to clear up and straighten (a complicated palaver).

NSUNJI YADUKA means the cycle is ended, referring to the end of a season or a year. Such is the picture of fruitfulness, as the result of pregnancy caused by the life-saving rains.

The last season is that of the male rains, NVULA MBAKALA, producing the palm kernel MBA, and comprising the months NDOLO NKAU and NDOLO NUNI.

And this is the end of the cycle of seasons.

 

PRAYING FOR RAIN IN FJORTLAND (KONGO).

The rainy season should commence in the Kongo about the middle of the month of September, that is, in the month called Kufulu Nkaci (negative desire), but in 1898 the rains came a little before their time, and the old men looked sadly on and prophesied a drought. Month followed month and scarce a shower fell, and the people began to cry out against their rulers for having neglected their duty to their Bakici Baci, or primeval powers on earth, of which Nzambi or God is the personal essence or spirit. In 1896 the same thing occurred and a famine scoured the land; the people blamed Nganga Vumba, or their king elect, who had not yet been crowned Maluango, and that poor old man left his Xibila (sacred ground) in the province of Buali and sought refuge in his natal village. This year, Maluango existing but in name, the slave Mamboma is acting in his place. Thus in answer to the cry of the people the sacred groves of Nyambi (vis vitae) the nephew of Bunzi in Kakongo, the south wind and the giver of rain, and that of Senza, the west wind, were cleaned up and once more put in order; and the goods necessary were collected by him (Mamboma) and sent in the name of Maluango to Bunzi to pray him to send the rain to the now parched country of the Bavili (people of Luango). Bunzi received their gifts, but Nzambi heard not their prayer, and the rain came not.

After an eloquent sermon at the mission a priest informed the congregation that special prayers would be offered to Almighty God that He might be pleased to forgive the sins of the people and send them rain, but the good priest reminded them that their sins might be such that God could not overlook, and so He might, in spite of the prayers of the faithful, refuse to grant their petition. And God did not hear their prayers, and no rain came.

And the Zi Nganga, or priests of the groves of Nyambi and Senza, sought hard for the cause of God's wrath, and they divined that it was on account of the immorality of certain persons unknown, who were ignoring the traditions and laws of their God and country. Then Mamboma sent word to his Kongo Zovo, or chiefs, that there were people in their towns who were the cause of God's wrath. And the Kongo Zovo each in his district called his people together and bid them make the necessary inquiries. And it was discovered that three girls were pregnant, who had ignored the customs of their country and had been defiled by men before having passed through the "paint-house."

As there is much misconception abroad about this custom of putting maidens into the paint house, originating no doubt in the first impressions of people who without a proper study of the subject have concluded that it must be bad because it is a custom of a people living in a different stage of civilisation from their own, let us digress for a moment to describe it. We in England know what it is to suffer from the vicious fables of ignorant scribes bent on informing the Continental public of all the evil that exists amongst us. We cannot blame the public in question for the opinions they have formed of us, we can only pity them, and curse the idiots who have only studied one side of our character, or who have come to us so prejudiced that even our virtues are distorted by them into some cute scheme of the devil to put them off what to them may seem a true appreciation of our character. So it is with the European and the African generally; the European is white and therefore pure, the African black and therefore impure. And all the good we find in him, we proudly put down, not to the influence of God who has been with him from the beginning, but to our own good influence. And so, when we drop from our atmosphere of twentieth century refinement and find ourselves after a few days' sea voyage in the middle of twelfth and thirteenth century frankness, we are apt to see sin and immodesty where really neither exists.

At the first signs of puberty the maiden's (xikumbi) family rejoice, and the men fire off their guns. Then a small hut or shed is built outside the town for the girl. The hair of her head is shaved off and her whole body is covered with takula, or the powdered red wood mixed with water. Thus painted the maiden retires with friends of hers who have already gone through the ceremony to the little hut. Here she is presented with a fowl, or if the family cannot afford this, an egg. The maiden rests here for six days while her companions watch and amuse and feed her during the day, serving her as if she were a princess, and at night singing and dancing to the music of the misunga (the great dried pod of the Baobab tree).

In the meantime a nice shimbec or hut is built for her in town, wherein two beds are placed. Upon one of these, accompanied by two of her older friends, the maiden sleeps, while the other is placed at the disposal of her other and younger friends. Each day she twice submits to the painting process, and for four or five months is not permitted to work in any way.

When the time comes for her to be handed over to her husband, one of his relations proceeds to this shimbec at the break of day, and pulls her bed out of the hut by one of its legs. If she is not yet engaged to be married, then it is her father who pulls the bed out into the open. Then all the women of the maiden's family, carrying umbrellas and clean clothes and ornaments for her, take her down to the salt water, and beat the paint off her with pliant twigs; then they proceed to the nearest fresh water stream and wash and dress. The maiden's legs are loaded with great brass rings, her arms with smaller ones, while her neck and waist are hung with all the family's coral, across her breast a coloured handkerchief is hung, and the general colour of the cloth or skirts hanging to her waist is red; an umbrella completes her outfit. Then a procession is formed, and all her friends, twirling their umbrellas, sing and march through the town or towns on their way home again. All along the route the young men in the towns come out and dance before her, presenting her with some small offering. Then she is taken to her husband, and dancing is kept up during the night.

And now to return to the search for the evil doers. When it became known that the Kongo Zovo were in earnest, and meant to punish the three girls and their defilers, their families hid them away, so that the people, who were now thoroughly aroused, became very angry. The month of Mbangala Nuni (December) had nearly passed, and the sun-scorched stocks of the fruitless Indian corn shook their rustling leaves in mockery around the native huts, and the shrivelled leaves of the native bean lay black and crisp upon the ruddy soil, while the sweet potato shoots planted beneath the mandioca had flowered and withered long ago. Their mandioca and their half sulky palm trees alone remained, and granted that it rained shortly, might still be saved to them. The mango trees, that during the last drought had born them two great crops of their luscious fruit, this year had scarcely deigned to bear at all.

On New Year's Day, as I was on my way home, I noticed a crowd of women hooting and beating a girl, who was running away from them. That girl was one of the three. She got away to her village, and prematurely gave birth to a child. Time was given to her to recover, and January 23rd was the day marked for the great dance in Maluango's capital, when the girl and her defiler should pay the penalty due to their God, King, and country for their crime. The custom is that the crime committed shall be proved against the culprit before the King and the people assembled, and the penalty is that the culprits shall be shamed by dancing naked before all the people, who heated gravel and bits of glass and threw them at the man and girl as they ran the gauntlet. The culprits were then obliged to buy some very expensive medicine by way of a fine to appease the Bakici Baci. I do not say that death may not in some cases be the penalty, but Maluango alone has the power of life and death over free men, and the people themselves would have to answer to him if they took the law into their own.hands, and killed a sinner of this kind before a proper trial had taken place. But before the 23rd the man and the girl in question had run away.
 In the meantime, the people in the villages around the mission had discovered the second girl who had broken the laws of her country. So they went to her town to arrest her. But she had run away, so they tore up the plantations round about, and eased their wrath in that way.

Then the head of the mission, understanding that the. people wished to kill the girl, very properly wrote to the administrator to ask him to interfere in the matter. The administrator then arrested one of the Kongo Zovo, and kept him prisoner until the culprits should be delivered up to him. And on January 27th the culprits were brought before him, and on that morning it rained.

 

SOME SYMBOLS.

Questions of this sort are settled by the people; but in some cases the palaver is considered too important for human interference; then the man wears a badge (Pl. II, b) with various symbols upon it.

The great symbols which the Fjort describe upon their carved sticks, or on their cloths, are as follows:-

"Ntangu Ntangu, The Sun."

Vana vamonikana ntangu mbata. ina.

This sign signifies: " Even if I keep putting off talking the palaver with you, we will talk it out when the sun at midday is unclouded."

Ngonde Ngonde, The Moon.

Vana vantentimina ngonde katekuici.

The same meaning, but at midnight when the moon shines brightly.

Axe.

Xitali kukuanga nunkuanga kwinu.

When a man is about to die he says: "You may be killing me, but there is one who will avenge me."

Hoe.

Nkuku sengo kufua nkuku li ambu (kufua) mpe. " The hoe may rust and vanish, but the word lasts for ever." This refers of course to their everlasting palavers, but it has the higher sense also.

Ngonje.

Beno nuzabici minu i li fumu'nci Budu lu ncikila ngonje. " Let all know that only on the death of a Prince, and by a Prince, can the ngonje be struck."

Bikula.

The four royal drums, representing the four fingers on the hand.

Bikula ouaci ku muntu ku fua bikula ku cikila mpe una ba cikila fumu ci.

"The drums that are heard by man only on the death of a great prince, and not at other times."

Ma Ku Ku.

The three lumps of ant-hill-earth, which women place under their pots to support them while their food is being cooked.

Ma Ku Ku ba tatu nzunga ku duku ka mpe.

"A pot on three stones does not upset."

When a woman comes with a matet [1] upon her head in which bottles of water are carried, she places them at her husband's feet, and if well educated, salutes him by clapping her hands three times, and says "makuku batu nzunga kuduku ka mpe."

One day an old lady visited me. She had taken nkasa, the poisonous bark, to prove to the world that it was not she who had caused death. She was wearing the red collar to show the people that she had taken nkasa and that successfully.

On one side of this red neck-scarf or collar, which is bound with white tape, were represented the moon, a native axe and a native hoe, and at the bottom the sun. This picture gives us the idea of the moon's place in creation, as the woman working with hoe and axe to supply man with food. On the other side were roughly represented the death-drum "Bikula," and a woman carrying a load upon her head, above the three makuku (or tops of small ant-hill) upon which the woman's cooking pot is placed. And where the two ends of the collar are joined together, a negro bell is attached.

Now when the BAVILI make a solemn oath (KU LEVA MPECI) they wet their finger and make the sign of the Cross upon the earth and then touch their earth-covered finger with their tongue.
 General as this custom is even far inland, I have always

[1. Long native basket made of palm leaves.]

looked upon it as one possibly introduced into the country by the early Portuguese.

Mr. Bentley translates the word cross EKULUZU, while Pere Derouet gives the word KRUSSU, these are of course derived from the Portuguese word "Cruz."

Now in the capitals of all Kongo's once great provinces (now Kingdoms) four roads called NZILA NZAMBI or God's roads meet, and where they cross or rather separate they are called MAVAMBA, and these roads come from the East and West and North and South and represent the four great winds, MABILI the East from whence their religious ideas come, SENZA the strong West wind representing morality, XIKAMACI the North wind representing matter, reason and evil, and BUNZI the South wind representing the deep of the nervous system, the rain giver.

The signs by which the natives represent the Cross they call ZILA (or way), and it is of the TAU form with the additions at the lower extremity of the inverted horns of the Antelope called MBAMBISA. It is used on the collar of red saved list, worn by those who have taken the powdered bark "NKASA," the ordeal to prove that they are not witches. It says "We were of one . . . . stock and travelled by one way until this palaver parted us."

On Friday, January 5, 1900, Matueka came to see me, he informed me he had taken "casca." He was wearing the usual red collar round his neck and I asked him to explain the symbols worked in patchwork on it.

The sign near the top of the right shoulder, he said, we call nzila mavamba, , and it means that we were born of one mother, and were one until strife divided us. The next sign, xala mioko, is a seed that opens and separates easily, and shows that I was open handed and generous. Then the bellows, nsakaso, points to the fact that it was my relations that caused me to treat them as I have done. The nozzle to the bellows, , called nxelo, explains that we were sons of one father, and that I, the son of one wife, had to contend against my three half brothers, sons of another wife, The three ant-hills, makuku matatu, , tell you that I called witnesses, saluted them three times, and told them all about the palaver. The mat, mbonda fulla , says that I put my accusers on one side just as they have placed me on one side.; , ntanji or chair, points out that I was given a nice place in the town where I took casca, and was well treated. Then Mbambisa, the horns of an antelope, explains that I asked the question, "What did I do to cause this dividing of the ways of the children of one father." And the smaller drums "bikula, , say, " Why was I forced to beat the Bikula and so let all the world know that I was an outcast from my family?" Then when I had taken the bark and proved my
 innocence, I beat the drum ndungu ilo, as the sign big drum, shows, to let the world know that I was innocent. And I sent the ngonje, , or bell to my people to announce the day of my return to town. And the Ximpaba, or knife of office was sent to my accusers to demand damages.[1]

 

THE TRIBAL MARKS OF THE PEOPLE BETWEEN LUANGO AND BRAZZAVILLE.

The Batexi, or Bateki, who say they are from the same Mother as the Bavili, file their front teeth to two points, and mark each side of their face with three marks .

The Bakuni file their front teeth to six points, and mark their face with six strokes.

The Bavili file their front teeth to four points, and mark their stomachs thus:-

The Bakamba file their front teeth to six points, and have from one to three crocodiles tattooed on their stomachs.

The Bayaka and Basanji file their front teeth to two points, and have six keloids, in the form of lizards, on their stomachs.

 

DRUM LANGUAGE.

In 1881, we in Landana heard of the wreck of the mail steamer Ethiopia off Luango, sixty or seventy miles away, one or two hours after its actual occurrence, in Luango, by drum message.

[1.These rough diagrams represent as nearly as possible the very rough patchwork figures on the red collar.]

This wonderful drum is called NKONKO, and is formed of a log of wood some six feet long. This log is then rounded; pieces at each end of what is destined to be the top side of the drum are left in the rough, to be carved and ornamented. From these pieces (nearly from end to end that is) a long thin slit or cut is made. This incision is about two inches deep and three finger-widths broad in the middle, narrowing at each end to two finger-widths. The rounding is then continued to the depth of the incision, then the drum is hollowed out by means of long chisels or gouges.

The drum being made, a good operator with his drumsticks can say anything he likes upon it in his dialect. The drum-language (so-called) is not limited to a few sentences but, given a good operator and a good listener, comprehends all a man can say.

I. The sound I (ee) is formed by operator striking the side of the drum nearest to him, just in the centre of the drum, on the line of the incision.
 U is formed by hitting the belly of the drum on both sides at the same time, when they say the sound comes out at either end of the incision.
 A is sounded by beating the line of incision to your left, near to that end of the drum.
 O, by beating the line of incision to the right of the I.
 E, by striking the line of incision on both sides of the drum between the letters A and I.
 The other letters are formed in combination with these vowel sounds by striking the line with a second drum stick with more or less of emphasis or precision.

The call to arms:-In yako-in yako-i zi fula i me yela.

Here (we are ready)-(get ready) there both powder and ball.

To call the men who are in the bush to town:-Beno boso nu duka.

You all (gather) together (in town) caution.

And when the native hears that an enemy is approaching, he advises him to come well prepared, or he will suffer:-Nu ba intu for bantu.[1]

You men.

In the early part of 1895 I sent the schooner Olhanensa from Luango to a place some sixty miles north, called Konkwatti, for the purpose of picking up some cargo there. One morning about ten o'clock my head man came to me, and after some hesitation told me that he had heard that the schooner was ashore. I could get nothing more definite out of him except that he had heard the "news." I knew enough about the rapidity with which bad news travels to believe that this misfortune must have occurred, and set about making the necessary preparations for despatching boats and implements to her rescue, so that the next day, when the messenger confirming the news arrived, all was ready and immediately forwarded. It appeared that the schooner had come ashore during the night previous to the arrival of the unofficial news, which probably had not been communicated to me until some time after it was the common property of the natives; that is to say, the news had travelled the sixty miles or so in three or four hours.

[1. This is particularly interesting, as giving the key to a perennial puzzle, revived during the Boer war, viz: How does news travel among the natives in the speedy way it does?]

At the Back of the Black Man's Mind, by Richard Edward Dennett, [1906], at sacred-texts.com

  

CHAPTER VII

 

BAVILI PSYCHOLOGY

The Soul. -Shadows. -Black Magic. -Ghosts. -The Future of the Soul.Witchcraft.

 

THE SOUL.

WHEN I read that according to the observation of Mr. So-and-So the same word is used among a certain people for breath, shadow, ghost, and soul, I do not conclude that the observer in question is wrong. Neither, however, am I led to suppose that these four distinct ideas are one in the mind of those people. I know how hard it is for an observer of primitive, arrested, or degraded people's thoughts to get at their real meaning, and I know that in some cases one word may stand for four distinct ideas.[1] Even in the country in which I have lived, although the white man has been there over four hundred years, I doubt if there are many who could enter into this subject with any great hope of giving you a definite idea of the difference the native draws between life shadow, breath, and intelligence on the one hand, and ghost, soul, and spirit on the other.

 

XI DUNDU OR SHADOW.

I remember when it was considered a crime for a person in this part of the country to trample on or even to cross the shadow of another, more especially if the shadow were that of a married woman. This shadow the Bavili call Xi dundu.

[1. Take the word MABILI for instance.]

To-day people are still very particular about passing one another; but a new-comer would be rather reminded of the custom at home that it is rude to pass in front of anyone, and inclined to put this habit down to a native's natural politeness.

At night the Xi dundu is said to sleep[1] in the body of its owner; and that it is considered a very vital part of man we gather from the fact that should an ndoxi, or dealer in black arts, rob a sleeper of his Xi dundu, he is said to take away his life. The Xi dundu enters and comes out of the body by the mouth (Munu), and is then likened to the (Muvu) breath of a man. When a man dies, he is said to have no shadow, even as he has no breath. Thus, in the mind of the Bavili both Xi dundu and Muvu are part of mortal man, and die with him. But when a person swoons, or has a fit, or is in a trance, they say some ndoxi has taken his Xi dundu, and it is just at his pleasure to return it or not. Should you kill the ndoxi, the Xi dundu in question would escape with another member of the ndoxi's family. Supposing even that you think you know the ndoxi who has secured your friend's shadow, you may not go to him and ask him to return it; you must get two or three zinganga to confirm your supposition, who shall visit the sick person and cry out to the ndoxi to leave the person alone, and then threaten to call out his name if he does not return the Xi dundu; then if it is not returned you must knock some fetish, calling his name out, so that if the ndoxi does not return the Xi dundu he will surely die.

 

XIMBINDI, OR REVENANT.

We have already learnt a good deal about the Ximbindi in the tales in Notes on the Folklore of the Fjort.[2]

After death the Ximbindi of a person may rest in the house in which he dies for twenty days, after which it goes off to the woods and lives the very natural kind of life described in the above tales. But the Ximbindi of an ndoxi may haunt the place he died in for ever.

[1. This belief is obviously derived from the fact that at night a man's shadow disappears. How far the statement in the text requires modification when there is moonlight I am unable to say.

2. pp. 11-16, 115, 156.]

It is believed that if a person ever sees the Ximbindi of one of his relations he will die, and should anyone be beaten by a Ximbindi, that person certainly has not long to live.

An ndoxi who has the proper medicine (mpanga) is spoken of as having the power of "Nyungala." Such an ndoxi catches and keeps Bimbindi, and sends them out to beat and kill living persons. This ndoxi has also the power to send the leopard to kill people, or the crocodile to drown them and to carry their Bimbindi away under the waters to some island in the river Kongo, where he collects them previous to selling them to the white man, whom they serve as slaves, and make cloth for him beneath the blue sea far away.

The girl mentioned in Notes on the Folklore of the Fjort[1] as living in Malela, and as having died and been buried there, and then sold in Boma as a slave, and who afterwards came back to her family, was supposed to be under the influence of Nyungala by her parents. Since giving this example of a living Ximbindi I have heard of another case. A girl of the village of Lumbembika, in the upper Lukula river in Kakongo, died and was buried. Some time after this her mother, having made a long journey into the bush, came across her daughter, and asked her how she got there. She said that she had been sold to the chief of that town. After some palavers and delay she was brought back to her town, where she lived as a Ximbindi. She was forbidden to go near the place where she had been buried. The only difference people noticed about her was that her will was not her own, and that her eyes were like those of a person who had been drinking.[2]

 Xilunzi, or ndunzi, the intelligence, dies, so they say, with man, and a Ximbindi is simply a tool in the hands of the ndoxi and has no ndunzi.

 

NKULU, VOICE OR SOUL OF THE DEAD.

The Bakulu, or souls, of the BAVILI have nothing to do with witches, shadows, or ghosts, or breath, or even intelligence; they are the guiding voices of the dead. They prefer

[1. p. 11

2 It is by no means impossible that she was under hypnosis.]

to dwell in the heads of some of their near relations, and are placed there as described in the "Death and Burial of the Fjort."[1] If they are not fortunate enough to find such a habitation, they are said to hover about the outer division or verandah of the houses of their relations. They are never seen. They mourn with their relations when in trouble, and long to help them. And they say that if every one of the Bavili were destroyed to-morrow, these Bakulu would hover about in the grass around their towns for ever and ever.

I was very much touched the other day, when present at the funeral of a woman whom I had learnt to respect very much, to note the careful way in which the brother picked up the sacred earth from the grave of his now buried sister. His wife held out the end of the red cloth serving as her husband's waistband, and he carefully placed the earth in it. She then doubled the cloth over it, and tied the whole into a knot. This earth at some future date will be placed by some nganga in the little horn "Likawla," or then in the little tin box "Nkobi," so that the Nkulu of the dead sister may be placed in the head of some living relation, and her guiding voice be once more heard by those who loved her.

There are apparently six kinds of KULU among the Bavili, three belonging to the MUNTu NZAMBI class and three to the MUNTO A NDONGO class-that is to say, three pertaining to the higher or moral nature of man, and three to his lower and physical nature.

1. Nkulu bakakata (or the soul of our ancestors) causes women to bear offspring. (This is connected with the BAKICI BACI or sacred groves, but I have not found any traces of reincarnation.)

2. Nkulu npunu is also an ancestral soul that causes babies to fall sick.

3. Nkulu yianzi is the soul of one who has just died. It is placed in the head of a living relation for the purpose of consultation.

4. The muntu nzambi will not reckon as "nkulu" the nkulu ndoxi (nkulu of the person dealing in witchcraft).

[1. Folklore, viii, 136.]

This nkulu of the dead witch only a witch seeks to have placed in his head. It is a sore point with the BAVILI, and they prefer to tell us that the nkulu of a witch ceases at his death.

5. Nkulu mbuila, a very destructive locust.

6. Nkulu xilunga.[1] Both 5 and 6 have medicines attached to them to be given to women whose "courses have been greatly delayed for some cause.

Those who have read either Seven Years among the Fjort or my Notes on the Folklore of the Fjort may remark that the Nkasa tree has not been mentioned as a sacred tree. It will be remembered that the powdered bark of the Nkasa tree is given to suspected witches and wizards as a test to prove their innocence or guilt. If the accused vomit the noxious medicine, they are innocent. If the poison is retained, it either poisons the witch or else acts as a strong purge, when the culprit is set upon and killed, the body burnt, and the ashes scattered to the wind. No burial was granted to this temple of "Ndongo."

This witchcraft or fetishism (I use the word in the sense given to this part of BAVILI philosophy by the Portuguese sailors and missionaries of old) is just the evil counterpart of Nkicism (in the ancient acceptation of the word).

The BAVILI thus to this day describe themselves as BANTU NZAMBI, men of God, or BANTU A NDONGO, men of the black art; but all who think themselves Bantu nzambi are not necessarily such, for while among the Bantu a ndongo there are people who are aware that the evil power is in them (and these are those that are burnt, after death), there are others, on the other hand, who have lived with ndongo in their stomachs all their lives without knowing it. In fact, the painful truth is only brought to light after death, when the ndongo, who hates the idea of being tightly wrapped up and buried deep in the bowels of Mother Earth (or Bulunji), makes its appearance. For, say the Bavili, when the corpse has been wrapped up in folds of cloth, ndongo fights his way out of the stomach with a fearful explosion, burning a hole

[1. The meaning of this term has escaped me.]

through the wrappings. As the ndongo is no longer in the stomach of the corpse, and as when alive the man had lived a decent life, the corpse is buried; but no loving relation will pick up a handful of earth from the grave to keep until required for the purpose of depositing it in the Likaula or nkobi, those little zinkici so necessary to the sick relation who would commune with the "voice" or "nkulu" of the departed.

 

LU MUENO OR MIRROR.

It is "Xina" (a thing forbidden) to throw the light reflected from a mirror upon a person, and when the light passes across the face of an individual he cries out: "Leave me alone. I have ndudu medicine in my body." It is not a crime, but more of the nature of an insult, to throw this light upon a person. Bits of looking-glass are to be found fixed in trees, and in the eyes and stomach of many fetishes. The light thus thrown is called "ntenia lu mueno."

 

PHOTOGRAPHY.

When one wanders about the native village with a camera and points it at people with the intention of taking their photographs, they invariably at first run away. They say that they are afraid that the photographer wishes to take away their life or "Monio."

At the Back of the Black Man's Mind, by Richard Edward Dennett, [1906], at sacred-texts.com

  

CHAPTER VIII

 

NDONGOISM

Fetishism and Religion.-The Zinkici. -Putting Life into the Image.-The Mpumbu. -Rites.-Ximbuka and other Zinkici. -Amulets. -Nail Fetishes. - How they are made.

IT is commonly assumed by writers on Africa that fetishism (the worship of tutelary images) is the religion of the African. It is true that images (so-called gods of Africa) of this description are very common in the Kongo, and if religion be defined as the relation conceived to exist between man and an invisible world, the term religion may perhaps be applied without inaccuracy to this cult, which is essentially not unlike the occultism of more civilised regions with its familiar bottle imps and witches' sabbaths.

Whether this fetishism (or NDONGOISM) is, properly speaking, religion or not is of small importance. There is at any rate side by side with this cult what few observers appear to have noticed, a higher religion, which I call NKICI-ISM, connected with NZAMBI and the powers which as his attributes symbolise him under the name of BAKICI BACI.

The ZINKICI are of two classes, ZINKICI ZINZO or ZINKONDI (home-protecting figures, charms, and talismans), and ZINKICI ZIMBOWU (figures into which nails are driven). Specimens of both kinds are to be found in the British Museum and also in the Museum in Exeter, and illustrations of some of these can be seen in Plates V and VII from an article in the Quiver entitled "The Gods of Africa,"[1] by Mr. F. M. Holmes.

[1. Many people talk of the gods of the BAVILI, as they call the "powers" and fetishes, but the BAVILI themselves say NZAMBI U VANGA BANTU I U VANGA BAKICI BACI, or God made man and he made the "powers" on earth also.]

In this article there is an interesting passage referring to the late Rev. Thomas Comber, a missionary in the Congo, whom all loved very much, which, if correct, points to a difference in the way these fetishes are supposed to act in the Congo and in Luango.

"Could this image hurt me?" asked Mr. Comber.

"Oh, yes; it would strike you dead."

Mr. Comber took it in his hand, and turned it about and looked at it meditatively. It was a funny little object, an image of wood, with a large protuberance on its back and a similar protuberance on its chest, looking as though it were both hump-backed and pigeon-breasted at the same time.

"What would happen if I were to cut it?" asked Mr. Comber.

"Oh, it would strike you dead!" they exclaimed in alarm.

"May I try?" he asked.

"Oh, it will kill white man," they asserted.

But as he pressed for permission, they at last agreed.

So in breathless silence Mr. Comber drew his knife from his pocket and slowly cut off the pigeon-breast of the little figure. Scrap after scrap fell from the image, but still it made no sign. At length he desisted; the operation was complete.

"Behold," he exclaimed in triumph, "your god has no power. See what I have done, and yet I am not hurt. It is but a senseless piece of carved wood."

Then he proceeded to point the moral of his action by showing the difference between such "gods" and the God of the Christian.

From the description of the fetish given, it was one into which nails might be driven, and was perhaps the NKAWCI (two-hearted figure) NTIMA WALI and of the ZINKICI ZIMBOWU class; their names are legion.

Whatever its name, and if of the ZINKICI ZIMBOWU the figure had been named, it had cost the life of one person. When any injury has been done to one of these fetishes in Luango, its "KULU," or spirit, goes back to the owner of the fetish, and keeps on afflicting him until he has given it a new figure, but it has no power in itself to injure the person who has damaged it. If a native has done the damage he must pay for the renewal of the figure; if a white man-well, he is only a white man after all, and may be forgiven for his ignorance.

Many figures are sold to Europeans that are simply figures. A fetish that is sold has had its "KULU" withdrawn. The only genuine fetishes owned by strangers are those taken by force, but even in this case the "KULU" comes back to the NGANGA, or owner. The Luango boy might be very much alarmed and annoyed at such an action as that of Mr. Comber's, but he might, if he were a rich man, laugh and enjoy the joke, concluding that it was no use trying to frighten a white man by telling him that his fetish, as a figure, had powers which he knows it has not. Natives forgive much in a white man, especially if he chances to be beloved, as the late Mr. Comber certainly was, but if he wished to be revenged for the damage done, his course would be to have the figure renewed, and then to have a nail driven into it with the express purpose of injuring his enemy. Then the "KULU" would set about its duty.

On one occasion the Writer asked a native if the BAVILI made no images of NZAMBI. "Who would be such a fool?" the man promptly answered, and the writer said no more.

I will now proceed to deal with the Zinkici, and with some of the more important amulets of the Bavili. We have seen that one class of images is called ZINKICI ZINKONDI.

The ZINKONDI or fetishes brought by the winds, are also known as BANKONDI in LUANGO. The only images of this class seem to be the MPUMBU. These are wooden figures of a man and a woman standing about eighteen inches in height. When these figures have been carved, it is necessary to enroll them among the ZINKICI of the BAVILI. They must be set apart from common figures (NKAWCI), and dedicated to their sacred use as Nxici. This is done by the NGANGA in the following way:-

A small shed having been built, he encloses it with the fronds of the palm tree. He goes into the bush to gather the leaves of certain trees and herbs to make the necessary medicines. He picks out a man from the family for whom the Bankondi is made, who shall act as the spokesman of the figure, and then proceeds to put the spirit into him by pouring a decoction or infusion of herbs he has gathered into his nostrils and eyes. The man thus treated lies down upon an empty box within the shed, surrounded by the fronds of the palm-tree, until the spirit enters his head. He gives evidence of this by beginning to shake violently, so that his body makes a noise on the box like the beating of a drum. He then gets up and tries to run away, but he is forced back into the hut until the attack has passed, when he is given the name of "NGULI BWANGA."

The wooden figures are charged with the proper medicines, and as "Mpumbu" are then given into the custody of their spokesman, NGULI BWANGA.[1] And when NGULI BWANGA has received the MPUMBU, he buries medicines in the ground and plants a MBOTA-tree.

When a native is sick and has gone through all the necessary formalities in connection with the rites of Mpumbu (rites in which the plant MSAKASAKA plays an important part), a pig is killed, and its blood is poured over the wooden figures of Mpumbu, as if they were supposed to glory in that which the ZIFUMU ZINDONDI (kings) abhor.

The MPUMBU are said to have been brought by the EAST WIND (MABILI).

Other Zinkici are not in human form. Ximbuka has the form of a round native basket made of the Mfubu leaves, and is used as the deposit of the household remedies.

Its guardian does not throw kernels at this basket, but he shakes a small gourd (filled with hard seeds that rattle) at it, as he requests it to cure one of the family or to slay an enemy of the petitioner. It has two guardians and voices that speak for it, Nguli Bwanga, a woman, and Ngulu Bwite, a man. They are not a married couple, and are not necessarily

[1. See "Burial of the Fjort." My cook MAKAWSO was NGUM BWANGA Of the Mpumbu.

2. This guardian does not drive nails into the Mpumbu. He simply throws palm-kernels and dust at them, as he asks them to kill the hidden enemy who is secretly destroying the petitioner. And NGULI BWANGA causes the MPUMBU to kiss mother-earth as a sign that the petition is heard, by taking it in his hand and making its head touch the earth.]

associated with one another. The ceremony of putting the voices into them is the same as that connected with Mpumbu, but each personage has a hut apart, in which he or she has to live two months.

NZACI is also a basket, and the same ceremonies are gone through in putting the voices into its guardians. Both take the name of Suami until the ceremony is over, when the woman takes a small fetish, NKUTU (a small net), which she wears between her arm and body near the armpit, and becomes Xicimbo, while the man takes the name of Xitembo. The above two ZINKICI are said to have been brought by BUNZI, the south wind.

NGOFO. The ceremonies connected with this basket, which is round and open like a coaling basket, are the same, but the maiden only is placed in the hut. After this, which in this case is a marriage ceremony, both man and woman wear a certain kind of iron bracelet. The maiden when first she enters the hut is called Kayi's wife, or Nkaci Kayi; afterwards she is known as Nkaci Ngofo.

LEMBE is a bracelet connected with a marriage-rite. The wife married in this way is called Nkaci Lembe, and is the one who acts as the guardian of all her husband's Zinkici, and should she commit adultery, the husband, on his return home, upon opening the basket containing the medicines connected with the marriage would find them wet. A Nkaci Lembe is kept very strictly within her hut and the fence, LUMBU (Pl. IV, b), surrounding it. LIBUKU, a large kind of rat, is said by Tati to be XINA to NKACI LEMBE.

NGOFO and LEMBE are said to have been brought by the south-west wind, NGONZOLA.

The following are some of the principal NKICIKICI, or personal protective charms:-

CIBA, a charm worn by women to ensure safety in childbirth, consisting of a horn of the little antelope (sese) filled with "medicines."

TANTA, a string bearing a strip of the skin of the Xinkanda (lemur), tied tightly round the head as a charm to protect the wearer from harm and pain. Tanta is also worn as a sign of mourning, and is then supposed to have the effect of helping the wearer to bear his troubles.

(The sese and xinkanda are two of the most difficult animals to catch; hence the charms are proportionately valuable.)

NTEO, a charm for a woman.

NDUDA, a charm for a man (Pl. V, viii).

BETUNGA, the charm which women wear to guard the life of the baby yet unborn. It is made of a piece of the skin of the Xicimu, a kind of lemur which is a very fast breeder.

NZAU, a charm which enables a man to procreate children. It is made of the skin of the elephant.

XIKUNDA, a double-headed rattle having fetish powers, carried by the BADUNGU or police society.

Mabili (Pl. VI) as NKICi NKONDI is found at the entrance of each village and XIBILA, even as it is found at the gates of the old kingdom of Luango on its eastern frontier. It takes the form of a string of grass and feathers stretched across a road from two stakes or uprights of Nkala wood planted on each side of it.

MBUMBA is the copper bracelet worn by the NGANGA MBUMBA, who grants to those unfortunate in health the bracelet made of the fibre of the Baobab tree called SUNGA MBUMBA, not to be confounded with the iron bracelet or charm given by NGANGA MBUMBA XICIMBU.

Of the same class of charms are the bracelets (not marriage bracelets):-

NGOVQ, iron.

SUNGA NSACI, SUNGA XIMBUKA, SUNGA MABILI, SUNGA XINBINGO, plaited leaves of palm tree or cloth.

NGANGA MBUMBA XICIMBU is the full title of the NGANGA MBUMBA or medicine man attached to Maluango's court. He it is who accompanies and encourages the NGANGA NVUMBA elect to proceed on his way to BUALI to be crowned. He tells him that he will overcome all his enemies, or that he has nothing to fear, as he has no enemies, &c.

He owns the fetishes XISONGO and XISIKA.

XISONGO is a piece of iron to be found near TERO, buried in the earth near to the sacred ground. "Is it true," says the petitioner, "that I am to have no children?" as he tries to pull up this buried piece of iron.

XISIKA is a piece of heavy wood buried in the same way in different parts of the country for the same purpose, i.e., a test of virility. A plain iron bracelet is given to patients by NGANGA MBUMBA XICIMBU, and worn by them as a bracelet.

BINKAWCI NKAWC1 BI MWAKUNU (the little figures that are apart looking in different directions) are two figures on stakes driven into the ground, which are said to turn round as the seasons follow one another. At the beginning of the rainy season one faces Kayi, or the EAST, the other the lake LULEBA-that is, their backs are more or less turned to the sea. In the dry season they face west towards the sea.

NGOFO, iron marriage bracelet (originally ivory (LUVOSE) for real princesses). NGOFO and FUNZI are the Luango and Kakongo names for the same marriage rite and bracelet.

LEMBE, a heavy copper marriage bracelet common to Luango and Kakongo.

XIBUTU XILONGO, a small copper bracelet connected with the medicine given by XIGANGA XIBUTU to protect one from evil. When a man wearing this bracelet marries, his wife also takes and wears one as a charm and sign of marriage.

QWANGO, NGOYO, MBONDO of MBOIO, MPEMBE are ZINKICI BANKONDI (see Pl. V, viii).

MAKWAM and XIMPUNGU are names also of figures of this class. BISONGO (like forks) are also known here (see Pi. V).

LUSAWNZI and NKUTU are numbered 1 and 2 on page 258, Pioneering on the Congo.

NDIBU, page 247 in the same book.

We now turn to the other class of images, the NKICI MBOWU, or nail fetishes, also termed ZINKAWC1 ZI BAKICI.

By far the most comprehensive picture of fetishism that we have yet received from any of the great travellers who have from time to time visited the West Coast of Africa is the chapter on Fetish in Miss Kingsley's West African Studies.

We call shops, or stores, "Fetishes" on this S.W. coast, and (as Miss Kingsley rightly says) the word is derived from the Portuguese word "Feitico," meaning charm. "Feiticeiro" is the word the old Portuguese sailors and missionaries gave to the BAVILI'S Zinganga zinkici.

The BAVILI divide all people into two great classes

1. Muntu nzambi (man of god).

2. Muntu a Ndongo (man of black arts).

Ndongo signifies the evil spirit that is said to live in the stomach of all witches (ZINDOXI).

Now the Zinganga zinkici (or the repeaters of the lore connected with the wooden images into which nails are driven) are not priests in the sense that the Zinganga Bakici Baci are. The latter are Bantu Nzambi, the former Bantu a Ndongo. It will be seen from this that the religion of the Bavili is divided into two great divisions, and that the old Portuguese sailors and missionaries were most taken by the Ndongoistic pranks of the Zinganga zinkici, and that they looked upon this part of the religion of the Kongo people as the whole.[1] This error has been the cause of much misjudgment of the native religion, and is perhaps one of the causes of Miss Kingsley's taking Professor Tylor's definition of fetishism as serving to describe the complete religion of these people. As Professor Tylor says, fetishism is the doctrine of spirits embodied in or attached to, or conveying influence through, certain material objects. In the next chapter I show that the Bavili religion goes very far beyond mere fetishism. Their ideas, it is true, are expressed in symbolic language, but fetishism bears about as much relation to this portion of their religion as popular Buddhism does to Buddhistic philosophy.

[1. Talking Of NDONGO-ism or the religion of slaves connected with witchcraft, &c., or natural religion, they say that "Dust has been thrown into the eyes of the chicken."]

Now let me tell you how a fetish of this kind is made, and describe some of their names and uses (see frontispiece).

When a party enters the wood with the Nganga (or the Doctor) attached to the service of the fetishes ZINKICI MBOWU, into which nails are driven, for the purpose of cutting the "Muamba" tree, with the intention of making a fetish, it is forbidden for anyone to call another by his name. If he does so, that man will die, and his KULU will enter into the tree and become the presiding spirit of the fetish when made; and the caller will of course have to answer with his life to the relations of the man whose life has been thus wantonly thrown away. So, generally speaking, a palaver is held, and it is there decided whose KULU it is that is to enter into the Muamba tree and to preside over the fetish to be made. A boy of great spirit, or else, above all, a great and daring hunter, is chosen. Then they go into the bush and call his name. The Nganga cuts down the tree, and blood is said to gush forth. A fowl is killed and its blood mingled with the blood that they say comes from the tree. The named one then dies, certainly within ten days. His life has been sacrificed for what the Zinganga consider the welfare of the people. They say that the named one never fails to die-and they repudiate all idea of his being poisoned or that his death is hurried on in any material way by the Nganga, who, they say, may be miles away. The difference between the spirit of "Mpumbu" brought by the East Wind and the Kulu of the known individual that is to preside over this fetish is evident.

People pass before these fetishes (ZINKICI MBOWU), calling on them to kill them if they do, or have done, such and such a thing. Others go to them and insist upon their killing so and so who has done or is about to do them some fearful injury. And as they swear or make their demand, a nail is driven into the fetish, and the palaver is settled so far as they are concerned. The KULU of the man whose life was sacrificed upon the cutting of the tree sees to the rest.

These fetishes attended big palavers and were knocked[1] by the parties engaged, so that he who spoke falsely or bore

[1. See Ante, P. 56.]

false witness should die. These are the class of fetishes most in evidence, and as such are apparently the bitter enemies of European Governments, who seem to take a delight in clearing the country of them. I wonder if they are right?-at any rate before they have got the country properly in hand and can give the inhabitants that security they are so fond of talking about. Brute force is no doubt a great power for a European Power to wield over such a race as the BANTU, and will make them do much; but is it not curious that civilised countries in the twentieth century should resort to so barbarous a form of governing a people supposed to be so much their moral inferiors? And by taking away a fetish of this kind they do not prevent the native from making another one to take its place. It merely makes the native more cautious, and forces him to guard his fetish in some secret place outside the small sphere of official influence.'

The wooden figures in this class of NKICI MBOWU are legion, and their multiplication comes (1) from the desire of each district to have its own nkici, and (2) from the importation from foreign districts of those who have gained fame for their slaying powers or as deterrents. Thus in Luango we hear of Mangarka,[2] Mbiali Mundunbi, EKAWSO,[3] Selo Xingululu, Mani Mavungu, Fulula, Xiela, MBWAKA, all of whom are known to be imported from Kakongo. It has therefore been hard work to distinguish those which were originally consecrated to the use solely of this district. For some time I had seventeen on my list, but I find that Maquarsia, Ngoio, and Kondi Mamba are not Zinkici Mbowu, so that I am left with the fourteen whose names I give you under all reserve, as, after all, I may not have got at the true and original Bavili ones:-

1. Mambili, a figure of a man with nails driven into it, now a wreck at Ximoko.

2. Mamboni Pwati, figure of a man.

3. Mambika, a figure of a man.

[1. MANGARKA, see Manchester Museum, Mani mavungu, see African Society's Journal, July, 1902.

2. MBWAKA, see Bentley, Pioneering in the Congo, p. 260.

3. EKAWSO, see Seven Years among the Fjort, or Exeter Museum.]

4. Maleka,[1] a figure of a man (Pl. VIII).

5. Bixibula Xibula, a figure of a man, at Mpili.

6. Xilinga (?).

7. Lenga lenga, a man with knife.

8. Zambi inyona (?).

9. Ngembe,[1] a figure of a man.

10. Mvumvu Xioxilo,[1] a figure of a dog.

11. Pansu muinda, a figure of a man.

12. Boka miemvu, a figure of a man.

13. Lu siemu, a figure of a dog.

14. Mavungu Mambuembo, a figure of a man.

[1. These are now in Europe and doing no good there, you may be sure, but certainly no harm.]

At the Back of the Black Man's Mind, by Richard Edward Dennett, [1906], at sacred-texts.com

  

CHAPTER IX

 

NKICI-ISM

Xibila. -Drought. -Inside the Grove.-The Nganga.-Visit to a Grove.

NKICI-ISM as opposed to Ndongoism is connected with sacred groves and the Kingly office. The sacred grove is called XIBILA the plural of which is BIBILA.

The sacred land where MALUANGO has to build his official residence is, as we have already noted, also called his XIBILA.

It is here that as NKICI CI he may be said to join mankind to ZAMBI through the BAKICI BACI. Here he greets his people. Here he asks the plaintiff Xibila Mbixi? (Of what crime do you accuse this person? Short for Xibila Mbixi naka Nlilila, What greeting, why do you keep on crying?) And here it is where all the people come together to talk out their great palavers.

When matters go wrong with the BAVILI (say for instance when there are no rains) they cry out to their King, and he summons his court to advise him on the affair. It then may be decided that the question is one that man cannot settle, and NGANGA MPUKU NYAMBI is called in and asked to consult his magic mirror and so divine the cause of the evil weighing so heavily upon the people. This NGANGA May answer that the cause of the want of rains is the immorality of some people unknown or he may say that it is the pleasure of God to visit them with this misfortune, and they had better send offerings to "BUNZI" to beseech him to send them. the necessary rain. Now NGANGA MPUKu NYAMBI is the NGANGA or priest connected with the sacred grove MPUKU NYAMBI. So that we can see the relationship between the XIBILA of the king and that of one of the BAKICIBACI.

There are apparently two great classes of sacred groves (I) those connected with the sea, salt water, fish, and spiritual ideas, and (2) those connected with the rains, plantations, births or ideas of nature.

 

CONTENTS OF A SACRED GROVE.

Each XIBILA, as we have said, has a name, i.e., that of the "power" it is called after.

And each rainwater XIBILA has its seawater mate, and each XIBILA contains a spring or a lagoon or swamp or well of some kind containing or connected with perhaps the home of its snake or XAMA. I regret to say that my studies in this subject of wells are so incomplete that the reader will have to be satisfied with any chance remarks that in the course of these papers I may have to make about them.

Each XIBILA contains (generally in the centre) a small native shimbec, where the NGANGA keeps his basket of seeds and shells, such as MBIALA MIOKO, a fruit from the interior, MASEVI crusader's shell, ZELECE, a shell, NTUMPU, a fruit, and MANKANAKANA, a fruit which grows underground in the Mayombe district.

Heaps of oyster and cockle shells are found in the grove, while in and about the hut
 The skin of a snake, the MBOMA.
 The skin of the snake XAMA.
 The vertebra of the whale.
 The feathers of the fowl and parrot.
 The heads and horns of animals such as the LUNGU, antelope, MPAKASA, the ox, and NGULUNGU, smaller antelope, etc.

The heads of beasts (see under animals), and of course the NGANGA, the diviner, or priest and man.

Such is the general description of the contents of the XIBILA or place of coming together and greeting of the BAVILL

I will now describe how I first discovered one of these groves, from which you will gather some idea of its appearance.

One day, walking about the woods on the hills behind Landana, in 1883, after winding our way through many over-branched pathways, we suddenly came in upon a circular clearing, in the centre of which grew an old tree, around which the jaws of two or three whales had been placed and become overgrown by the roots of the tree on which they once rested, so long must they have been there. The space around the tree was carefully swept, and on one side we noticed a beautiful new shimbec, or hut. My companions said they did not know who swept the clearing or who built the shimbec. Some feiticeiro or wizard, or perhaps a thief. A native story they told us runs:-"Once upon a time there was a wizard who was anxiously looking about in the woods for a place to build a shimbec, wherein he might rest in peace and hide the bodies of his many victims. After many days' search he at last found a likely spot, marked it, and returned to town to buy some luangos or rushes, with which to build himself a hut.

"Now, there happened to be a thief who was puzzlect to know where he could place goats and sheep he had robbed in safety.

"He travelled many days through the woods, and at last hit upon the same spot as that selected by the wizard. 'Just the place!' he cried, and off he set to town to arrange for some bamboos. The wizard returned with his rushes, rested awhile, and then went back to town for some more. The thief returned, and declared the fetishes had been wondrously favourable to him in sending him the luangos (rushes). The wizard reappeared, and thanked the NKICI that had been so kind in sending him the bamboos.

"Between them the wizard and the thief soon raised the shimbec, and wondered at the progress made in its construction during each other's absence. The wizard finally rigged up a broad shelf against one of the walls, and went away to seek someone whom he might poison. The thief in the meanwhile brought his goat, and, having killed it, cooked some and ate it, climbed upon the shelf, and fell asleep. The wizard returned, dragging the body of his victim after him. He partook of the goat so kindly provided for him, and then flung the body of his victim upon the shelf. The thief, without waking, pushed the body down again. 'What, not dead yet?' muttered the wizard; 'then I'll soon settle you,' and then he smashed in the skull of the dead man with a club, and heaved him on the shelf again. The thief rolled over, and down came the body again. The wizard once more punished the body, and carefully placed it on the shelf again. The thief threw the body down again, and this so frightened the wizard that he ran off to town and shut himself up in his hut. The thief awoke, rubbed his eyes, saw the dead body, and concluded at once he was in a wizard's shimbec. He followed the wizard to town, and knocked at his door. 'O corpse,' cried the wizard, 'is it you?' 'Yes,' said the thief, and he knocked again. 'O corpse, is it you?' cried the wizard. 'Yes,' said the thief, who now summoned all the townfolk, who dragged the wizard out of his hut and gave him NKASA, cast him into the fire, and burnt him. Moral-Better be a thief than a wizard."

As I afterwards found out, the grove I had discovered was not the home of a wizard or a thief, but one of the Kakongo sacred groves, but this my companions had evidently concealed from me.

At the Back of the Black Man's Mind, by Richard Edward Dennett, [1906], at sacred-texts.com

  

CHAPTER X

 

BAVILI PHILOSOPHY

Sacred Symbols. -Compound Names. -The Sun and Moon. -General Scheme of Bavili Ideas. -Cosmological Ideas. -Ternporal Ideas.-The Year.-The Seasons. -Genetic Relations.-The Categories.

THE King of the Bavili, as I have said, has seven titles, one of which, that of Ntawtela, he does not receive until after his death. The other six, as I have explained elsewhere, are assigned to him as head of the six great departments of state. These six titles are, as I shall point out later, closely connected with the system of philosophy which I wish to expound to you. I believe that above and beyond fetishism or NDONGOISM, which I have already dealt with, there is a higher form of religion among the Bavili which is connected with certain symbols in the form of (1) sacred groves, (2) sacred lands and rivers, (3) sacred trees, (4) sacred animals, (5) omens, and (6) the seasons. The six titles of the King connect him directly with these six divisions of sacred symbols as well as with the six departments in the state. As Nkici ci he is, according to the native view, one of the products, or perhaps we should rather say the end and final result, of the working of the powers, or Bakici baci, represented by the sacred groves. As Fumu he is the king (or chief from whom all proceed) of the symbolic lands and rivers. As Ntinu Lukene he is head of the custom of the leopard, and thus associated with the sacred animals. As Nganga Nvumba (the doctor of the source of seasons or time) he is intimately connected with the seasons. As Xivangi (procreator) he is at the head of the omens. And as Mueno (the overseer of the morals of his people) he presides over the sacred trees. That is, he is the chief teacher in all these branches of native belief.

It is possible that at one time each of the sacred symbols mentioned above had its sacred grove; in this grove, it may be, the king, as the great high priest, taught his people the lesson connected with the symbol. In support of this conjecture I may mention that I have so far in no case discovered more than twenty-four sacred symbols in any of the six divisions enumerated above. There are, it is true, certain apparent exceptions, but the supernumerary symbols can be shown to stand apart from the others for clearly defined reasons. After years of study I have discovered twenty-four trees and herbs which are, as the natives say, BAKICI BACI or sacred, twenty-four sacred animals, and so on. Now if each division of sacred symbols is composed of twenty-four parts, the sum total of Bakici Baci should be 144. I have as a matter of fact discovered upwards of 90 sacred groves. It is therefore quite legitimate to suppose that there may formerly have been 144 or more. Not only so, but the meanings of the names of the sacred groves go to prove this supposition, as I shall show more in detail later. The most remarkable fact, however, about these groves is that the Bavili have preserved the orderly grouping of twenty-four of these, and I believe that it is in this order that we find the key to their philosophy.

In the sequel I treat of all the six sets of twenty-four symbols in detail. I should now like to draw your attention to the eight words, the only eight of this kind, so far as I know, found in Xivili, which are compounded of two words, as they seem to me to imply that the idea of the Bavili with regard to the symbols fall into 1+6+1 divisions. These words are:-

                 MAMU-NZAMBI

MBUNGU-NTWALI         MAULA-NXIENJI

NKALA-NGO                NKONDA, or NONGA-NZAU

MANIA-MATALI            BULU-NTU

                 KACI-NUNI

(1) MAMU-NZAMBI (the acts or word of God)[1] is a name given to certain towns, where some great palaver, consequent on the death of a great prince, has been talked out.

(2) MBUNGU-NTWALI (two mugs). This is the name given to the mouth of rivers where the waters of the sea and the river meet and form whirlpools.

BUNGU is the water bottle or mug, and there is a native saying KU NUA MALAVU, KU BULA MBUNGU, MBI I BELA NU MALAVU VO MU MBUNGU? To drink palm wine, to break the mug is the evil in the wine or the mug? This implies that the liquid in the mug may be replaced, but the wise man takes care of the mug.

A slave wishes to transfer himself to a new master, breaks his water cooler, and this act is called XIBULA MBUNGU.

When the princes hearing a palaver retire to take counsel one with another, they say they go away to drink water.

When the King dies it is his ambassador (or mouth) MAXIENJI, who carries the royal mug in the funeral procession, just as he has often before carried his words of wisdom. The mug is still left, you see, although it is not used until the princes elect their next King.

In ordinary funerals, which take place there, four or five years after death, the wife, parting from her dead husband for the last time, as they take his body away to bury it, lifts up her basket, containing the water bottle and, perhaps as a purification ceremony, goes to the stream to draw water.

Ideas of liquids, wisdom, and morality are connected with the MBUNGU NTWALL

(3) NKALA-NGO, the crab and the leopard. This stands for "Roe and Doe" in palavers, and the crab is the symbol of the sea, while the leopard is that of the earth. Their ideas of solids and justice are connected with these words.

(4) MANIA-MATALI, generally the name of a district up a river where rocky land rises from the low-lying swamps.

MANIA means the "cold" stones found in rivers and valleys. The word written in full is MANDIA (the princely womb). Ideas of the moon are connected with this word; everything looks cold by moonlight, and is actually cold.

[1. The translations given in brackets were in every case given me by the natives.]

MATALI (or Matadi) means the metallic rocks, heated by the sun, NTANGUA (mother chaser), and is opposed to NGONDE (or NGONDIA) the Moon, regarded here as the mother of the sun. The words mania-matali stand also for sun and moon.

The Sun and Moon are also spoken of as two brothers running one after the other, but as the word NKOMBA in BAVILI may stand for either brother or sister, we may if we like call them brother and sister.

The sun and moon are further spoken of as judges to whom certain palavers must be referred. The other day I noticed a very neatly devised badge (Pl. IIb) upon a native's shirt, and I asked him what it meant. The background of the badge was red, a favourite colour with the materialistic Bavili. The sun and new moon were figured in white cloth, while the mouth was formed of white and black cloth. The native told me that he had a palaver with a certain cook, and that they had come to the conclusion that the decision of so great a question could come only from the sun and moon. Upon a visit to the grave of my old native friend Francisco I found the following device upon the gate of the fence surrounding it: the sun with lines across its face and the moon in its last quarter. Here no mouth was figured, showing, I suppose, that all breath was at an end. I can find no trees sacred either to the sun or moon.

5. The Morning Star the Bavili liken to a child running before its parent calling him to rule the day. This Star they call MA ULA.[1]

The Evening Star is the offspring expressing its joy at going to rest with its mother the Moon, and it is called NXIENJI.

The full moon rises from her couch accompanied by this same star, her offspring, now her husband, and this star is then called NDONGO (the spirit of witchcraft).

6. NKONDA or NONGA-NZAU (to hunt the Elephant) has the meaning of amassing everything for one's own family and giving nothing to others. It is the name of certain towns The words symbolise weight, energy, and plenty.

[1. The exclamation U ULU is that with which the Bavili greet either the new moon or a "witch" (NDOXI).]

7. BULU-NTU (a breaking of the head) a place generally situated about the falls of a river where the waters burst a channel through or past the rocks. MBULU = beast. NTU = man.

8. KACI-NUNI = wife and husband, really "primeval dawn" and "I have absorbed." These words are not only used for man and wife but also for negative and positive powers; inferior and superior, as when one man comes up to another to ask him for a favour and calls himself the other's NKACI. NKACI is also used for the word NGULINKACI meaning one's uncle on the mother's side. Thus the mythologist may easily become confused. The natives say that the sun calls the moon his mother, but MAMA (mother) may mean his aunt by marriage. He is also said to be the husband of the moon; this may mean that he is superior to her just as Maluango, though the king of the offspring province, considers himself superior to KAKONGO, the mother province, from whence his wife comes.

These double words, which with one exception are compounded of elements of contrary meaning, may be regarded as one particular case of a formula which runs through their philosophy. To sum up we have-

1. MAMU-NZAMBI-concerning god palaver.

2. MBUNGU-NTWALI-the heads of maternity connected with ideas of water.

3. NKALA-NGO-the crab and the leopard connected with ideas of earth.

4. MANIA-MATALI-cold and hot stones connected with ideas of fire.

5. MAULA-NXIENJI-the two stars connected with ideas of motion and procreation.

6. NONGA-NZAU-hunting the elephant, connected with ideas of plenty.

7. BULU-NTU-beast and man connected with ideas of birth.

8. KACI-NUNI-wife and husband ideas of opposites.

Put into a generalised form we may say that the philosophy of the Bavili can be expressed by the formula 1 +6+ 1; six categories, which, as will be shown in the subsequent chapters, reappear in the arrangement of the groves and other symbols of Nzambi, and outside these categories at the one end the idea of Nzambi, regarded as cause; at the other the idea of man regarded as effect.

In the case of the compound words the order adopted is not based on any information drawn from the natives: all that has been gathered from them is the distinctive character of these eight words and the ideas which they connect with them. We now pass on to consider the seasons, and here not only has it been possible to elucidate the native ideas connected with the seasons and their names, but to get from the natives further details as to the genetic relation held to exist between the various months and seasons.

 

COSMOLOGICAL IDEAS.

In the last resort the Bavili are monists: they reduce everything ultimately to a manifestation of Nzambi. From the abstract Nzambi proceed Nzambi Mpungu, Nzambi Ci and Kici. These three elements of the trinity appear in Bavili philosophy as Xi, Ci, and Fu. (It is desirable to note Xi and Ci are respectively female and male, whereas Nzambi Mpungu and Nzambi Ci are male and female.)

Xi means passive matter or things pertaining to the maternal principle. Ci is the paternal or active principle.

Let us take an example. The sea is regarded as a male principle; from it proceeds rain which falls on the earth, and the earth is regarded as a female or passive principle; the rain fertilises the earth and causes it to bring forth fruits.

Fu is, properly speaking, habit, custom, or sequence; we may, perhaps, express it in one word by evolution, understanding thereby rather the process by which the individual is produced than the life history of a species. In another sense it may almost be said to be the individual himself. Thus, when the rain has fallen upon the earth, it forms on the one hand springs and rivers, and on the other causes vegetation to spring up. Both the rivers and the vegetation result from the interaction of earth and sea: the process of production and the product are both Fu.

In order to prevent misconception I expressly state that these ideas are not derived directly from the natives, but from philological considerations. These three ideas are naturally strictly abstract and out of all relation with the material universe.

Xi and Ci having produced Fu cease to operate; Fu, on the other hand, continues. Under the name Vu it becomes active in space and time, and may be called the cause of the material universe, Vu=time, season.

 

TEMPORAL IDEAS.

 (a) The Divisions of the Year.

 Properly speaking, the year falls into three divisions, Mawalala, Xicifu and Mvula. Of these, Mawalala is a period of rest, Xicifu a period of preparation, and Nvula an evolutionary period or period of production. just as in the cosmological ideas we have a progression of three factors, Xi, Ci and Fu, so in the same way in temporal ideas, Mawalala and Xicifu produce Nvula. just as Fu in its turn became a cause, so Nvula produces Mawalala of the succeeding year.

 (b) The Seasons and Months.

 Of the three divisions of the year, Mawalala is itself both a season and a month; Xicifu falls into two seasons of two months each, and Nvula into four seasons of two months each. Properly speaking, the seasons only ex'ist as factors in six groups of four, the other three being in each case the two months, and the product specially associated with the seasons. These groups of four are related just as our cosmological series, Xi, Ci, Fu, and Vu; they consist of a principle, male and female causes and a product.

We have already dealt with the months under measures (p. 65), and it is unnecessary to repeat the information given there.

I now give you these groups in the form of a table

MAWALALA.

   Seasons.   Months.   Products. 
  Mwici (smoke).  Bulu Maci Mavola (source of sweet waters).
 Bulu Maci Mbu (source of sea waters).  Nkasa (pea). 
  Bunji (mist).  Bika li Muanda Xicifu (to leave the valley of mist).
 Muanda Xicifu (the valley of mist).  Mbundubundu (new green grass). 
  Mvumvumvu (drizzle).  Kufulu Nkaci (negative desire).
 Kufulu Nuni (positive desire).  Buku (mushrooms). 
  Waw Waw Waw (rains).  Kaci Mbangala (negative witness).
 Nuni Mbangala (positive witness).  Kusafu (a fruit). 
  Nvula Nxentu (female rains).  Bika li Muanda Sunji (to leave the valley of the cycle).
 Muanda Sunji (the valley of the cycle).  Makundi (fruit). 
  Nvula Mbakala (male rains).  Ndolo Nkaci (female suffering).
 Ndolo Nuni (female suffering).  Mba (palm kernel). 
 MAWALALA.

We may now consider the genetic relations of these six groups. Denominating the groups by the names of the seasons which preside over them, Mwici is female and Bunji is male; their product Mvumvumvu is regarded as female. just as in the cosmological ideas Fu, the effect, becomes Vu, the cause, the female effect Mvumvumvu is replaced by the male cause Waw Waw Waw. This is, however, not directly operative, but manifests itself through the secondary causes Nvula Nxentu and Nvula Mbakala, and their effect is Mawalala. Mawalala, as the table shows, stands outside the progression, and is in a way the end or final effect of the whole process.

In its turn Mawalala becomes a cause; it stands to Mwici and Bunji in the same relation as Waw Waw Waw to the two groups which follow it. Being regar-ded by the natives as a season of rest, no product is associated with Mawalala. The orderly grouping of the symbols may be termed the formula.

 

THE CATEGORIES.

The Bavili ideas relating to the various divisions enumerated above may be said to fall into six divisions which we shall term the categories. It must be understood that the European ideas which I have been led to select only represent imperfectly the native ideas. On the one hand the European conceptions go beyond those of the natives in many directions; on the other the natives associate many to the European heterogeneous notions under one heading, as shown below.

The six categories are: Water, Earth, Fire, Procreation and Motion, Fruitfulness, Life. I will now proceed to show the connection of the seasons with these ideas.

 Mwici. Not only do the names of the months composing this season mean salt-water and fresh-water, but the word Mwici itself contains the root Mu. (for Mbu =the sea). The connection of this group with liquids is clear.

 Bunji. The names of the component months mean the valley of Xicifu, and the name of the group the source of seed or maize. This connects it with the category of earth.

 Mvumvumvu. This is the period of marriage and the names of the months mean male and female desire. The flame of love is perhaps sufficient to justify me in associating this group with fire and marriage.

 Wawawaw. The notion of running away, to which we have already alluded, may serve to connect this season with the category of motion and procreation.

 Nvula Nxentu. The months are the months of maturity of crops and the harvest, and their names are connected with the mortar in which seed is pounded. The connection with fruitfulness seems clear.

 Nvula Nbakala. We have already mentioned that the opening of Mawalala is a period of high birth rate. This may serve to associate this season with the category of Life. The names of the months mean male and female suffering or travail.

In dealing with the compound words it has been mentioned that the natives associate various ideas with them; these ideas in their relation to the categories are here set out in tabular form:-

   Category.   Associated Ideas. 
  Water.  Morality, wisdom (as opposed to reason), virtue, breath, speech (=out-breathing), inspiration (=in-breathing), hearing, mouth, fatherhood. 
  Earth.  Solids, justice, reason, intelligence, essence, seed, herbs and grass, hands, stomach, heart, motherhood. 
  Fire.  Love, desire, marriage, union, spirit, light, kernel, tying up, heat, and cold, the womb, smell. 
  Motion.  Touch, the penis, conception, germination, thunder, lightning. 
  Fruitfulness.  Weight, energy, plenty, pregnancy, harvest, sight, memory, leg. 
  Life.  Birth, parturition, pain, taste, lips. 
  

At the Back of the Black Man's Mind, by Richard Edward Dennett, [1906], at sacred-texts.com

  

CHAPTER XI

 

BIBILA, THE PHILOSOPHY OF THE GROVES

The King as NKICI CI.-The Groves and their order.-Bakici Baci.-The Formula.-The Families of Groves. -Xikamaci and others. -Categories again.-Names of Groves.-The Devil.

WE have seen that the Bavili philosophy teaches that a sort of genetic connection exists between the seasons. This idea is fairly intelligible in its application to periods of time, which involve a process, and therefore a sequence of cause and effect. Though it may appear to us metaphorical to speak of months as male and female, we need only recall the names of some of the chemical elements to see that our own forefathers were prone to deal in ideas of this order, and we can hardly feel surprise that the African intellect follows in their wake.

The idea is less comprehensible when we try to apply it to the groves-less comprehensible, that is, to the European. just as in the seasons, we have one group as a primary cause, then two intermediate causes, and then the effect; so with the groves. It must not, however, be forgotten that when we speak of the groves we are really dealing with the powers which the native puts behind them. We have enough examples of cosmogonies embodied in a mythology to make the Bavili idea, if not comprehensible, at any rate no more remarkable than many another primitive fancy.

Just as the seasons, months, and products fall into groups of four, which are genetically related to one another, so the first grove is the primary cause, the second and third the operative male and female causes, and the fourth is the product.

In this connection it is worthy of note that the order of the groves within the groups, and of the groups themselves, is not one which I have evolved out of my inner consciousness; it was given me by the natives themselves. If, therefore, we find it possible to trace, even imperfectly, the same formula in its application to the groves which we have just applied to the seasons, I shall, I conceive, have gone far to establish the genuine native character of the ideas which I am putting before you.

The groves fall into six groups of four each, and just as Mawalala stands outside the formula of the seasons, so the Lungululubu group stands apart from the rest of the groves.

In the chapter on the Zinkici have been mentioned the Bakici Baci, and we must now proceed to explain in detail the ideas connected with these powers. The Zinkici are what are commonly termed fetishes; the Bakici Baci are unconnected with images of any sort, and are not subject to human control; at the same time they are addressed by the nati-ves, not perhaps as independent powers, but as intermediates. The Bakici Baci are conceived as spiritual; they are the offspring of Nzambi, some being male, others female. Each Nkici ci has its own grove of the same name as itself, and each has two priests consecrated to its service.

We have already seen that Maluango is called Nkici ci, as the Tepresentative of Nzambi on earth. In the same way the chiefs, who in this capacity are termed the " eyes of the people," are also known as Bakici Baci; they are the representatives of Maluango in the same way that Maluango is the representative of Nzambi.

The name Bakici Baci is applied by the natives to the powers connected with the groves, and with the groves are connected sacred lands and rivers and sacred trees, -the seasons, the omens, and the sacred animals. The Nkici ci of a grove is conceived as resident no less in the seasons and in the omens than in the rivers or lands connected with the respective groves.

It will be shown in the sequel that the sacred groves are grouped together in sets of four, which we denominate "families." The members of these families are conceived by the natives to be genetically related to each other; beyond this the families themselves are regarded as standing to each other in a similar relation.

The formula of these genetic relations must be clearly borne in mind by the reader who wishes to follow the ideas of the Bavili on the subject. It may be expressed in the following way:-

 

that is to say, we have outside the formula a cause, C, which produces (within the formula) a female cause; this, allied to a male cause, produces an intermediate female effect, which again being replaced by an intermediate male cause gives rise to the last two terms of the formula as a product, male and female; these two produce an effect, E, outside the formula again.

I now proceed to deal with the groves in detail. I may, perhaps, assume that the reader is now to some extent familiar with the idea of the categories. At any rate, I hope that the occasional digression on the subject of the beliefs and practices connected with the groves, will not obscure the important point of their position in the general scheme of the Bavili philosophy.

1. The Mpungu Group is especially associated with the category of liquids.

MPUNGU is used with the word ZAMBI when it is translated by the missionaries as almighty. They associate NZAMJBI MPUNGU with the sky, and therefore by a natural transition with rain.

SENZA is the west wind. The sea is to the west of Luango, and with the sea (MBU) the BAVILI connect ideas of fatherhood, spirit, and motion. This is readily understood when we remember that the general direction of the great rolling waves is from the west (SE= father).

NGONZOLA=the S.W. wind; it is also, in connection with XAMA, looked upon as the evil rainbow (see under Omens), when it is said to enter rivers and cause floods, and carry everything it meets with it to the sea. The word carries with it a meaning of love and maternity. (Ngo is the leopard, ZOLA is to love.)

MVULA means rain.

2. The group of Xibwinji is associated with the earth.

XIBWINJI is known as the mother of XIKAMACI, the north wind. XIKAMACI = the earth divided from the sea. When a person seeks her help to overcome one of his enemies, he goes to her sacred grove, and with the help of the NGANGA buries a nail or bead or other article in the earth at the same moment as he demands the favour. And when for some reason or other he, or one of his descendants, wishes to withdraw the curse XIKAMACI has blighted his enemy's happiness with, he must seek out the NGANGA again and present him with an offering. The Nganga then prepares some medicine which he wraps up in leaves and places in a dish of palm wine. With this lotion the Nganga proceeds to sprinkle the ground. The petitioner informs the Nganga what particular thing he buried. Then it is said the earth "bubbles" up and throws out the article mentioned.

This act of bubbling up and throwing out that is common to this earth in XIKAMACI'S grove and the whirlpool in rivers is called XIZUKA.

SAMONA or SAMUNA. Here the petitioner whips the earth with a stick or throws a stone or other article on to it with great force as he asks his favour. As XIKAMACI'S opposite, this is supposed to represent the gathering-in action of the whirlpool, or XISEKU as the movement is called. As "powers," then, XIKAMACI and SAMONA may be said to represent "dispersion and concentration."

KUNZI means the North-West wind. Konkwati is the home of the above "powers" or groves, and they are not far from XILUNGA the home of the MAMBOMA of the province of XIBANGA. Here the connection of the family with the category earth is indisputable.

LUNGA means to blow, also the triumph of might over right. And it is said that there is always a pretender to the throne of Luango, to be found in XIBANGA.

Now XIKAMACI, the North wind, is the great enemy of LUNGULULUBU, the protecting power of the BAVILI. The story goes that she was a very hard-working woman who had large plantations of manioc. The children of the king of the land used to come and rob the produce of her labour, and so she complained to her mother, XIBWINJI, and said she meant to punish them if they did not desist from robbing. The mother advised her not to do so but to complain of the children to their father who would, she was sure, chastise his offspring himself. Contrary to her mother's advice, XIKAMACI caught these children and taking the law into her own hands punished them. Then the king, their father, became very wrath and caused rains to flood her plantations, water coming up also out of the earth through the ant hills. In this flood XIKAMACI was washed (poor dear! say the Bavili) into the sea, where she is generally said to remain, save when she comes ashore to get red wood and other articles for her toilet. She is said also to demand one of all twins born in the country. And when boat, boys or fishermen are about to take a drink, they first pour a little out of the bottle into the sea. XIKAMACI is said to be the mother of the double grove X1KANGA NXILUKA, situated between the KWILu river and Luango at a place called XISSANGA. And NxILUKA is said to have brought forth an animal and a wooden figure (NKAWCI) and a stone.

Thus XIKAMACI (the North wind) coming from near XILUNGA in the province of XIBANGA may be said to be the grandmother of NDONGOISM or, as some would call it fetishism.

3. The group of Bukulu is associated with fire.

BUKULU means a ray of light, which the natives connect with the idea of chasing as bubbles seem to chase one another in boiling water.

KANGA is another word for FUNZI both meaning the guinea fowl. The word KANGA means to tie, to fry-KANJI = he who ties. A man who is tied up or made a prisoner becomes according to native law one of the family of the man who ties. So that KANGA as a power may mean conjunction or assimilation.

BUNZI is the South wind and has its home in the province of MUANDA between Cabinda and Banana. Its full designation is BUNZI BU BAMBA, and I notice on Mr. Ravenstein's map MBAMBA is marked as being close to Banana. MBAMBA is also the most south-westerly province of the composite kingdom [1] of SONIO. It is to this "power" that Maluango after consultation with NGANGA MPUKU NYAMBI sends offerings of chalk, cloth and skins. As it is from BUNZI that rains and life and apparently all good things come as a power, it may stand for propagation or semination.

MBAMBA is the tiny kernel where all the virtues of the future palm tree exist (it is also the coronella snake). MBAZU =fire. As a power then it may mean fusion (or the offspring of marriage). All these come under the category of fire in one sense or the other.

4. The Hbawmbo group is associated with the category of motion.

Mbawmbo they say has its grove to the East of Maluango's composite kingdom in a town called NKANDA NGO (the leopard's relation) in the SUNDI country. The word BAWMBOKA means to move slowly, MBAWMBO therefore may mean "motion." It must be remembered that thunder and lightning are connected with omens which the Bavili associate with the nervous system and ideas of procreation.

LUABI=the persistent (evil) light and so perhaps may as a "power" (connected with motion) signify lightning as the female of

SOLOKOTO, which means the power of growling in the father or (as a motion perhaps) Thunder.

MABILI, i.e.," the prince who greets " is the East wind. This wind brings with it great tornadoes, and this is thus connected with movement. BILA means reason, cause, purpose, as well as to greet, and we have already noted that it is connected with the word XIBILA, the sacred grove or

[1. By composite I mean formed of six provinces as that part of Kongo's kingdom which lies south of the river Kongo, and those of KAKONGO or LUANGO.]

meeting place. In this way we catch a glimpse of the foundation of the saying of the Bavili that all religion comes from the East. Here, however, MABILI is the offspring of motion.

5. The group of Kungu is associated with fruitfulness.

KUNGU is a grove within the sacred province of Luango called BUALI where the dead who die with their eyes open are said to be placed under its LOMBA tree. The word KUNGU is derived from KUNGA, to amass, so that it means an amassing or heaping together.

MBUMBA = mystery. The idea may also be associated with ripe fruit falling from the trees. BUA =to fall.

NTAWMBO = seedling, sprout, shoot. It is the name of a river that keeps on rising out of the ground. This may be translated into European language as another kind of energy.

XIVOLA means attraction.

6. The group of Nyambi is associated with ideas of life.

NYAMBI = Ruler (literally the spirit or personality of the four). NYAMBI is said to be the nephew of BUNZI. Some people call God NYAMBI instead of NZAMBI, but the word rather means Life in the sense of VIS VITAe. IA= to be.

LUAYI = the umbilical cord. As XAMA LUAYI it is the protecting beneficent rainbow, so that as a power it may mean Protection, Maternal Love, Sustenance.

NYIMINA, YIMA is to bear fruit, while YIMINA is to know how to bear fruit with; NYIMINA then is the one who knows how to bear fruit with, or as a "power" paternal love.

MPUKUNYAMBI is the bursting or birth giving power in Nyambi or perhaps what we may term "Birth." To this grove a man takes his pregnant wife and asks with her for a safe delivery. As there is no life without food we can understand how it is that the people first appeal for the reason of a famine caused by want of rains to the Nganga Nyambi, the great diviner attached to this grove. It is evident that these powers are connected with ideas of life.

The Nkungu and Nyambi groups are looked upon as the descendants of the four [1] previous great families which as we have seen, include the winds.

Of these 24 sacred groves of which the order was given me by the Bavili, no less than ig can, as it seems to me, without undue forcing, be brought into connection with the categories which we have already applied with success to the Seasons. This parallelism seems to me to be too striking for it to be possible to explain it as the result of coincidence. When I add that this formula may be applied with more or less success to the groups of sacred lands and rivers, to the sacred trees, to the omens and animals, I think you will agree that a good prima facie case is made out for attributing to the Bavili something better than the fetishism (NDONGOISM) which is commonly regarded as the expression of their highest thought.

There are many other groves, but although the writer has discovered the names of many he has not yet found a native capable of placing them in groups as the above have been. It is possible that there are 144 (i.e. 6 groups Of 24) or more 2 of these groves in the kingdom, or rather connected with the kingdom of Luango, but to undertake the discovery of them all would mean the appointing of a properly constituted mission and some years of labour.

The names of the other groves discovered by the writer and the meaning of their names are as follows:-

   Name of Grove.   Literal meaning. 
  MUBA  = a grove connected in some way with the MPUNGU group, the name of a district in Kakongo. Mu is a prefix, and BA is to be. 
  MPUKULU  = side of a house. 
  XIFUSA  = connected with XIVUMA FUSA is to bore. 
  KAWMA  = to add to. 
  LUNGULULUBU  = the very deep of motherhood. 
  XIVUMA  = of the stomach. 
  MBANDA LUNGA  = to guard the ascent. 
  MPUMBA  = 
  DUMI  = the north-east wind. 
  NKONDO  = the upper part of the legs of an animal. 
  XIMBUNGU  = of the quality of a drinking mug. 
  XIBUTA  = a bringing forth. 
  XIQUANI  = that holds himself apart. 
  XIKANGA  = a tying up. offspring of XIKAMACI. 
  NXILUKA  = a vomiting. offspring of XIKAMACI. 
  XINGOMBE  = of the nature of cattle. 
  MANIA  = stones that absorb. 
  ZIMBU XIKOKO  = the fly and mosquito hand in hand. 
  MPESO  = chalk. 
  BALA  = to think. connected with XIBWINJI. 
  XINJILI  = conglomerate rock. connected with XIBWINJI. 
  MATALI  = stones throwing out heat. 
  MPUNZU ZINGA  = the blot of life. 
  KU SUNZI  = the spreading nerve. 
  XIBATA  = of the penis. 
  NJILI BECI  = fish rock. 
  ZIMBU BIFUNDI  = the waters of the offspring. 
  ZWANGANA  = the house of another. 
  LUSALA  = feather. 
  LUIBA  = to forget. 
  TACI MPUNGU  = the almighty primeval speaker. 
  XIKAFA  = of the leader, in the end of a fishing rope. 
  XUNGU  = pottery. 
  MPANZA  = mandioca (the river of giving). 
  MPANANA  = abundant reciprocal giving. 
  MWAKUNI  = division. 
  LUECI  = concerning the primeval being. 
  XILU XINKUKUBA  = of the weaving of heaven connected with MPUKU NYAMBI. 
 [1. Note the complete divining board and how OPELE (representing the eight discs) is the offspring of IFA as represented by his 16+ 1 palm kernels, Pl. XXI.

2 See chapter on Philosophy at the back of the black man's mind, and the Bini story about EWARE, pp. 234.]

As the mind's eye of the writer wanders over this beautiful land of the BAVILI and rests on these sacred groves dotted about the country, and lingers on woods and rivers, the names of which represent some spirit, teaching the people some lesson, and hovers over every town, the name of which for some good reason has been given to it by its founder, he wonders how such a people can have fallen to so low a moral level. And yet the answer is not far to seek, for the wars waged by ambitious princes causing disruption and anarchy in the Kongo, the wars waged by M'Buku and the BACILONGO against Makongo whom they dethroned, causing anarchy in KAKONGA, and the slave trade have affected LUANGO-where children refuse to submit to their parents, the young to the wisdom of the old, the people to the inspired voice of their NKICINI. Tradition and religion are lost in the rotten sea of NDONGOISM and vice, and all the higher teaching of NKICI-ISM swamped and nearly lost. And yet in trouble the BAVILI still look to their NKICIci, and after having placed their petition before him, on leaving his presence clap their hands three times and exhort him to "hold the seven [1] well in hand."

See XILUNGA, on p. 113. Pere Visseg in his interesting dictionary Fiot-Francais, 1890, gives the word "nkadia-mpemba" (and so does Mr. Bentley) for the Devil; and Pere Derouet in his very complete dictionary Francais -Fiote tells us that "Bulunji" stands for Hell among the Bavili, which Mr. Bentley spells BILUNJI.

As to "nkadimpemba," the word strikes me as unsatisfactory; not that I mean to say the word is not used to translate the Christians' Devil in the Kongo, but because it seems to me to have been coined exactly for that purpose by the Fjort of some four hundred years ago.

I can imagine the missionaries of old impressing upon Fjort their ideas of that prong-tailed fire-loving monster they called the Devil; and I can picture the Fjort (as their wont is) discussing the proper position of this personage in their mythology. Fire and evil the Fjort connected at once with the burning of witches, and then with lightning. But the fire burnt the witch entirely, and his ashes were cast to the wind; his nkulu nobody desired, so that the Devil could hardly be said to be a witch. The white man's Devil, then, not being a witch who perishes, could only be a personage attached to the white man's lightning. He was not Nzambi Mpungu, the owner of the fire of heaven; what then was he?

Nkadi is an attendant on the nkici NZACI. It is the word which the guardian of "Nzaci" uses when addressing the people about her. "Nguli nkadi tambula malavu" means, as we should say "Companion, have a drink." But NKADI is a black personage, and the white man's Devil was not black, for he was a personage the white man feared, whereas white men do not fear black men; so they called him "NKadi ampembe," the white companion of the guardian of the lightning.

As to the word BILUNJI it is in XIVILI the plural of XILUNJI or intelligence, spirit; while BULUNJI, the deep of the spirit, is the word the natives use for grave Both words are derived from LUNGA to blow. It is true that when one man is vexed with another he may remind him they will both meet in the grave, this being a nasty reminder of the general fate of mankind. But when a native wishes to send his "best friend" to a very nasty place he says YENDA KU BUMBA, go to Bumba, and this certainly is a very hot place indeed, for it is the spot upon which an NDOXI is burnt. Note that the family of Maluango may not intermarry with that of XIBANGA. See Page 38.

Personally I should say NDONGO is nearest in meaning to our word devil.]

[1. Himself and the six.]

At the Back of the Black Man's Mind, by Richard Edward Dennett, [1906], at sacred-texts.com

  

CHAPTER XII

 

SACRED LANDS AND RIVERS

Sonio.-Killing the King.-The Provinces.-The Formula.-Maluango's Lesson.

I COULD not, if I would, give you an exact account of the meanings of the names of all the rivers and places in Luango, so that I will restrict my study to the river Kuilu and its tributaries, and the names of the provinces into which the composite kingdom of Luango, is divided.

Starting south of the Kongo we find the name Solo, or SONIO, as that of a province in Kongo's composite kingdom. When the natives talk of the banks of a river they stand with their backs to the sea, and call the right bank the man side and the left bank the woman side (the word Solo might be translated as the power of life in fatherhood).

Now just opposite to the province of Sonio on the woman side of the great river Kongo, we have the province of NGOIO (the power of life in motherhood).

NEAMLAU told me that he had the right to take the cap of NGANGA NGOIO, but that as this chief was always killed on the night after his coronation he did not care to do so. It is said that when Kongo sent his sons to govern his provinces, he sent NGOIO with them as a kind of high priest, and undoubtedly the NKICICI BUNzi has its home at MBAMBA in this province or district, and its NGANGA also.

But both Sonio and Ngoio are names used at times for the whole kingdoms of Kongo and Kakongo, which makes me think that these names are really their sacred names. Certain it is, that just as MAKONGO had to marry a princess Of SONIO, so MALUANGO had to marry a princess of NGOIO.

And just as Sonio and Ngoio for the natives represented Fatherhood and Motherhood, so BUKOIO, the sacred name for Luango, represents, as an effect, offspring (or as a cause, birth-giving power).

There is a legend which throws some light on the thoughts of the BAVILI regarding their origin. It runs thus

BUKOIO BUNTANGUA!
 The birth-giving power of the sun (Luango).
 LUKATU BAKA 'NGILA MADONGA
 UNA 'N NUKA 'NCIA CIALI,

translated to me " though the fish-basket be empty there still remains the smell of the fish," which I think means to say that although Luango, may not be the really great kingdom, yet, as the descendant of Kongo, it at least has some of the renown attached to that great father kingdom. In other words, if Maluango (great MFUMU in his own kingdom) is not the MFUMU, Still, in relation to Kongo, he is MANIFUMU.

This connecting of the seed of the great Kongo with the sun,[1] taken in connection with the name NGOIO (NGO NDE the moon) is very suggestive, for it leaves us to suppose that the Father Kongo must be on a line with some higher power, the moon being an intermediate effect, while the sun (the offspring and the propagator) becomes the intermediate cause, just as the offspring Luango is-that is, the father, through the mother, has a son who in his turn shall propagate his image. I know of no NGANGA BUKOIO in Luango and very few people seem to know that BUKOIO BU NTANGUA is the sacred name of the country. But MAMBUKU is the very powerful chief of the province of BUKU.

The people are now seldom, if ever, called to meet the king in his XIBILA and so valuable traditions are being lost, and it has become very difficult to piece together even the headings of these lessons, and of course, quite impossible to give them in his words.

I will now give you the names of the provinces and rivers.

[1. See p. 104.]

And here let me clearly state that the order in the following formula of twenty-four Bakici baci was obtained by the help of two or three intelligent non-Christian natives in an attempt to complete the philosophy of the Bavili. I therefore, first give a list of the titles and lands, and secondly in table form the order as established by myself and the natives. The contents of the sacred groves are the same as those given in chapter IX. In discussions it always appeared to me that these natives instinctively connected the animals, trees, and omens with the foregoing groves discussed in the last chapter, but they could give me no intelligent reason for so doing, save that they were all BAKICI BACI.

SAMANU is the most southerly province of Luango on the sea coast, just on the northern bank of the LUANGO LUICI or CHI LUANGO river which divides it from the mother province KAKONGO. The natives say that SAMANU means the waters of purity.

XIBANGA is the most northerly province divided into two parts by the waters of the KWILU river-the part to the north being the home Of XIKAMACI, where they say a pretender to the throne of Maluango is never wanting.

The meaning of XIBANGA is of the quality of seed.

LUANJILI is the province joining the two above provinces together with the exception of the sea frontage of BUALI, a strip of land containing the road from Buali to the beach. It is in this province that the kings of Luango are buried. LUANJILI means of fused rocks.

XIKAMBA is the centre inland province facing the Mayombe on the east, and its meaning is of the quality of informing or calling. It joins NKONDI to MBUKU.

NKONDI is the province on the South-east of BUALI where the sisters of Maluango reside and have children from among whom the king's successor is chosen. The word means a hunter and this connects the province with fruitfulness (see P. 103).

MBUKU is the province to the East of BUALI and northeast of XIKAMBA, where MAMBUKU resides and guards the Eastern gate of the kingdom-the province where the sun rises. MBUKU means explosion.

These six provinces surround BUALI, the centre province in the middle of which MALUANGO has his XIBILA or sacred grove. The meaning of BUALI is the deep of breathing life.

The sea is called MBU, the deep, an enclosed space. It is at the mouth of the river, where whirlpools are created by the meeting of the fresh and the sea waters that the deeps of maternity exist, which they call MBUNGU NTWALI.

The KUILU, is the principal river of the kingdom of Luango, the word means to and from the sky. Into this river the tributaries LUICI, LUKULU, and the LUALI run.

NYANGA is the name of the lake and means the repetition of the four, and it is here that the NYARI, the name by which the KUILU is known in its upper reaches, has its source.[1]

 The Sacred Rivers and Provinces and Contents of Sacred Grove.

      BUKOIO    
     (Contents of the grove.)    
  Rivers.     Lands. 
  1. KUILU.  MACI (rain water).
 MBU (salt water).  SAMANU. 
  2. LUICI.  XIVUNGA (seed).
 MTI (tree).  XIBANGA. 
  3. LUKULU.  NZO (house).
 XINKONKOLO (oyster shell).   LUANJILI. 
  4. LUALI.  XINIOKA (snake).
 XAMA (snake).  XIKAMBA. 
  5. NYANGA.  MBIZI or NFU (fish).
 SUSU (fowl).  NKONDI. 
  6. NYARI.  VUMUNA (animal).
 XIBULU (beast).  MBUKU. 
     BUALI.    
  

In the above order it will be seen by the meaning of the words that the order of the six categories is maintained.

[1. The meanings of these words are: Kuilu, to or from heaven; Luici, primeval essence; Lukulu, of the spirit, of the departed, or of the ray of light; Luali, of the breathing life, Nyanga, continuance of being; Nyari, of the road of being.]

The following lesson, if not exactly what Maluango used to say to his people, at any rate is a close reproduction of it. I have talked over these questions with him many times, although I never heard him address his people in a sacred grove. In the reading of these symbols it will be noted that my friends have as it were doubled the formula in the middle and taken the first and sixth families together, and worked down and up towards the line dividing the third and fourth.

Maluango is supposed to be speaking.

     Nyari-Kuilu.
 The way of Being, to and from sky.
 The Source and the mouth of the river must not
 be separated in your minds.
 God is the Source of all things the 
  Nyari.  Great ruler (Nyari) in heaven as I am the ruler on earth- 
  Kuilu.  From heaven to heaven do we come and go- 
  Vumuna.  We suckle our young like cattle 
  Xibulu.  And know our wives like the beasts of the field. 
  Xibila.  But as we come together let us remember that we 
  Xibila.  Are also one with God so that our 
  Mbuku.  living offspring born through the birth-producing powers given to us by the Sun may also inherit and absorb the bright and 
  Samanu.  pure waters of morality. 
     Nyanga-Luici-Life 
  Nyanga.  The waters of life that have risen from their source are accumulated in the lake and as they flow onward 
  Luici.  are mingled with those of the river of primeval matter. 
  Mfu.  It is true that in our lower nature we are as the fish of the sea and the 
  Susu.  birds in the air who bring forth abundantly, 
  Kondi.  but let us remember our higher nature and seek to live. 
  Xivunga Mti.  rather as the tree and herbs that have seed in themselves and also bear fruit 
  Xi Banga.  and seed. For on the wrong side of the river Kuilu lives the usurper who would lead us to wrong thoughts and actions and the consequent punishment. 
     Lukulu and Luali. 
  Lukulu.  Two other great rivers flow into our river of Being, that of spirit and nature. And thus by spiritual law through the spirit of our ancestors we are connected with and of God, by natural 
  Luali.  law we are connected with and of the Sun. In us are two great lights, the light uncreated and the created light. 
  Nioka.  In our lower nature the snakes that crawl 
  Xama.  and feel and give birth to 
  Xikamba.  offspring are at one with us, but rather should we be called to look to what 
  Nkongolo.  the colours of the rainbows symbolise to us than to their snake-like nature, and to, 
  Nzo.  the house of love that contains all the mysteries of generation, so that our offspring may be in death in 
  Luanjili.  union with Nzambi even as parts of rocks are fused in one by heat. 
  

Such are the lessons I would have you learn from my title Fumu, under which I am the way or will and power that has been sent by my father to rule all living things in the sea and rivers and on the land in this kingdom of Luango; Lamba Dende (to cook kernels) walk cautiously if you wish to attain the great end in life, and do no wrong so that your conscience will not force you to come to me crying Dianu (kill me, put me out of the country).

At the Back of the Black Man's Mind, by Richard Edward Dennett, [1906], at sacred-texts.com

  

CHAPTER XIII

 

SACRED TREES

Nkasa trees.-Sacred trees and the Bakici Baci.-Muema and other trees.-Secret Societies.-The Formula. -Maluango's Lesson.

 

SACRED TREES AND HERBS.

I HAVE gathered sufficient evidence to convince myself that each grove has a tree sacred to it, but all these trees are not NKICI-CI. For instance I am told that the silk cotton NFUMA tree is NKICI to the grove XIVUMA, but the NFUMA tree is not NKICI-CI. Then some trees appear to be sacred to more than one grove, as for instance the NKUMBI tree, apparently sacred to MPUNGU and also to NYIMINA, and the NUMBU tree sacred to NYAMBI, BUKULU and others. My informants however differ so on this subject that in the following study I shall leave out all mention of the groves, and simply give the list of the twenty-four trees and herbs that are BAKICI-BACI, without bringing them in each instance into connection with the philosophy.

You must not conclude that in giving you this list of the sacred trees and herbs of the Bavili, I have exhausted their stock of medicine trees and shrubs. There are many other well-known plants and trees that have to do with medicine and NDONGOISM (fetish), but they are not BAKICI-BACI, or as we should say, sacred powers. MISENGO, MAKAKATA, XUMU, MVUTU, LUSINGO, all enter generally into fetish as medicines. Then there is the great tree NKASA, the powdered bark of which is given to people accused of witchcraft and the MBUNDU CITU. We are naturally left in wonder that two such members of the vegetable kingdom are not sacred, the BAVILI however say they are not, and we must be guided by them in this matter whatever the result may be.

There are no Nkasa trees near to Luango; that is to say, we must go for a walk of some twelve miles to find one. On one occasion we left Luango early in the morning, determined to photograph a few Nkasa and other "sacred" trees, as we thought them at the time.

We arrived at Ximoko, or Buku li Buali, the town of Mambuku Prati, the nephew of Maniluemba the Maluango-elect. Maluango had now left the town in which we first met him and come to Buali, his capital: and meanwhile on the road we heard that we should not find Mambuku at home. "He had gone to see Maluango," was the only answer to our question. "What has he gone there for?" No answer. Thus when we arrived, the front door of the "little palace" Mambuku had been good enough to build as a chamber for his guests was locked. We walked in therefore through the opening at the back. Then we plied Mambuku's mother with various questions (his wives were within the enclosure called Lumbu, already described).

It then appeared that the mother was suffering from an evil spirit that had already troubled her in one of her legs, and had now commenced to swell her fingers up. She showed us the hand to prove that there was no humbug about the palaver. Moreover, that same morning very early Makawso had got up and gone outside his shimbec in one direction, while his wife went into the grass in the other direction. Makawso was then, he said, suddenly attracted by the terrible cries of his wife. He rushed -to her assistance, and the leopard that had already seized her by the throat ran away. The poor woman was in a fearful state, but they hoped to save her life. Mambuku, as the father of his people, had gone to consult the great priest NGANGA NVUMBA, or Maluango.

After breakfast, I said I would start to find the Nkasatree which a small boy said he thought he knew of As we passed through another town the boy said we had better ask the women to guide us, for they generally knew where these trees were owing to the clearings made for them by their husbands for their plantations. So I asked them, and they laughed and giggled, the silly things, and said they would follow us, as they were going into the woods to gather the leaves of the fubu, it being nearly the time for mat-making. Down we dived into a wooded valley, and when we had reached the bottom we stopped to talk to some natives who were busy collecting palm-wine. Did they know of the whereabouts of an Nkasa-tree?

"Yes."

"Would the spokesman guide us to it?

He was busy, but the direction in which we were going would not take us to one. I called upon the small boy for an explanation. The boy and the native discussed the question, and the men and the women laughed. The women then went on their way jabbering.

The tree the boy wished to show me was not an Nkasa-tree. I then asked the speaker to neglect his business for a consideration, and lead us to the tree he knew of. He growled, but at last was persuaded to accompany us, and we went back by the road we had come. Our guide was in a hurry and ran; we ran after him. Then he dived into the wood and we followed him. Then he said he would have to find the tree, and he left us, and, alas! we saw him no more.

Then we followed a path which led us out of that wood, and when we once more got into the open we saw one of our party (who they said was a fool) reclining upon the grass resting. He said he knew where an Nkasa-tree existed. "Why, then, had he not taken us to it straightaway? Was it far?"

"No."

"Then let us be off."

Finally, about an hour's walk brought us to a clearing in the wood, where women were about to plant Indian corn and mandioca. By straining our necks and standing on the half-dried trunk of one of the felled trees which lay around us we caught sight of a few of the top branches of the Nkasa-tree, which we photographed. Then entering the dark wood we examined the trunk. The tree measured some twelve feet in circumference, and there appeared upon its trunk a great oblong patch devoid of bark. I wanted to take a sample of the bark, but I broke the blade of my knife in trying to cut some of it off; it was far harder than I had imagined. Tired and weary, but satisfied that I had added one more sacred tree to my collection, I arrived at Mambuku's town too late to even think of returning to Luango that night.

Mambuku having returned and informed himself of the object of our visit turned to the fool, and, patting him on the head, said, "So you knew where the Nkasa-tree was?" and the fool said, "Yes, he knew where all the medicine-trees were."

In conversation with some of my followers I had already discovered that the nkasa-tree was not a sacred tree; it was not Nkicici, but like all other trees that grow unplanted in the "sacred ground," if it happened to find its home there, in that sense it might be said to be Nkici.

I did not trust my friends, so I now asked Mambuku, who replied, "No, it is not Nkicici," but merely a tree which supplied them with the poisonous bark in Nkasa palaver.

MUEMA is the mangrove tree. As you know, the heavy trunk of this tree rests on a trellis-like mass of roots that appear to do all they can to keep its body from being in any way brought into contact with the filthy swampy matter at its base. The seeds of this tree also germinate in the air, and it is only when the plant is of a certain age that it drops from its parent stem into the soft mud below. The word might be translated as the essence or kernel in being. The verb EMA or OMA meaning to become dry, while ENA or ONA means he, who. Connected with the protecting NKICICI LUNGULULUBU and ideas of wind, we can understand that this tree gives the Bavili a very spiritual symbol.

 

THE TWENTY-FOUR BAKICI-BACI WITHIN THE FORMULA.

XILIKA. This is a large tree having a small fruit which when it falls to the ground and dries separates into two parts This seed enters into the medicine MBUMBA.

NKANDIKA is also a great tree that bears a large fruit containing twenty-four seeds which enter into many medicines. The word has the meaning "to enclose." A man closes his house and places a few leaves of manioc, banana, or palm tree, about the latch and that means that no woman may enter therein. This custom is called LU KANDU BA KANDIKILA.

BI SULA BI NKANDI. The husks and shells of the palm fruit used in the smoking of dead bodies.

BIUMU. A string plant giving a bitter tasting fruit from which an ointment is made for drying up wounds.

NKALA is a bushy tree something like a willow that is planted over graves and from the wood of which the posts of the entrance gate to the towns called MABILI are made.

MISAKASAKA is a string plant which they wind round the NKALA posts Of MABILL SAKA is to chase, while SAKASAKA "a little chasing," gives us the idea of the quick little waves of the sea following one after the other.

MIKWICI is a cane-like plant, planted close to the NKALA poles.

MACISA is also a cane-like plant growing at the foot of the NKALA poles.

XILAWLO is the wild "Coeur de boeuf" known as the LAWLO NTANDU or the wayside "pawpaw." Its fruit is of a yellow colour and it is eaten by weary travellers on the march. It is one of those shrubs whose growth does not appear to be affected by the yearly prairie fires. It is burnt and scorched each year, but its blackened branches sprout and bear their yearly crop as if the fire had merely purged them of their dead matter and given them new life.

XIFILO is a bushy tree whose fruit is of a ruddy colour, and the leaves of which, together with those of the XILAWLO enter into the medicines connected with MBUMBA.

MAVUKA is a string plant used in binding the tooth of the Hippo (VUBU or NGUVU). This plant and the tooth is called MBUMBA XIDONGO and it is brought out by the prince on (Sundays) the fourth day SONA. Having chewed some KOLA nut, he spits the mass upon the part of the tooth that is bound by the MAVUKA to give him the power to overcome the wiles of the witches who would prevent his propagating his image.

MATONDI is the truffle found in the ground in the woods and eaten by the natives.

MUAMBA is a large tree producing a soft yellow wood of which the natives make figures (ZINKAWCI). It is the word used for the juice or broth made from the fruit of the palm tree.

NKANA is a lofty tree from the bark of which bracelets and anklets are made. Its small fruit enters into the MBUMBA medicines and MBUMBA is the smell of the earth. The wood of this tree must not be burnt in any town where the MBUMBA medicine exists.

MBUBU is the tree representing respectful fear (VUMI). BUBA (the spider) also means an assembly of many things wrapped up as in a parcel. The spider is said to have made a ladder up to heaven to fetch down fire.'

NTETE is a very high tree and serves as a mark or sign that the land on which it stands is near the headquarters of the King. This tree is now a very rare one, in Luango I only know of one and that is situated just on the BUALI side of the river LUBENDO which divides that province from LUANJILL The wood is used to make the handles of axes, hoes, etc. The meaning of the word is "First, principal." NKAKI NTETE chief and first wife.

NLOMBA is a fine tree sacred to KUNGU, but found in other woods under which the dead who die with their eyes open are placed. It is said that such dead want some question deciding or at least debating before they will submit to burial.

MBOTA is the lonchocarpus (Bentley) producing a very hard yellow wood. The ideas connected with the tree are those of endurance, production, excellence.

NKUMBI is the large tree already mentioned as being at the Eastern entrance to Maluango's XIBILA or sacred ground. It is here that the king elect, encouraged by NGANGA MBUMBA,

[1. Folklore of the Fjort, P. 74.]

must fight all pretenders who present themselves to dispute his right to the throne.

SEXI (Pl. XI) is the old market tree situated on the NZILA NZAMBI or high road leading from Maluango's XIBILA to the sea. Here the body of the defunct Maluango is placed just previous to being carried away for burial.

NUMBU is a very great, soft wood tree, and the one situated in the KONGOZOVO of XIENJI marks the place where the people of MAMBOMA meet those of Maluango bearing the dead body, and, chasing them away with oyster and cockle shells, take charge of the body and carry it off to burial. It is sacred to BUKULU and NYAMBI and other groves.[1]

MBA, the palm tree. Maluango, the head of his race in the full vigour of manhood, when judging his people always wears a sash of palm leaves across his shoulders. This is called NDEMBE-DEMBE. This word will carry your thoughts to the word NDEMBO or the secret society, the rites of which are graphically described to us in Mr. Bentley's dictionary, page 506, but the only secret society I know of among the BAVILI is that of the BADUNGO, who are the king's policemen, and were chiefly used by him as detectives to deter his people from committing acts of immorality likely to cause the wrath Of ZAMBI or the power BUNZI. The Mayombe I am told use the word NDUNGO and NKIMBA for one and the same person. I am inclined to believe with Consul Roger Casement that the NKIMBA, as a secret society, and as known south of the Congo, is a degenerate conglomeration of native and jesuitical formation. The BADUNGU wear a wooden mask and are dressed in feathers or dried banana leaves, carrying the snout of the saw fish in their hands as a sign of office. (See illustration in Seven Years Among the Fjort, pages 13 and 49.) Naturally as the people degenerated these policemen abused their powers and became a nuisance to the people who, in time, as the power of the king waned, suppressed them.

[1. I notice that in Mr. Bentley's dictionary of the Kongo language the word NUMBU is translated aromatic plant (generic) incense. The word the Bavili use for these plants is BIFUNDI, but I cannot find, any trace of their being used as incense.]

Some of you may have noticed Kongo pipes ornamented with the picture of a palm tree, among the branches of which quite near to the fruit the snake NLIMBA is coiled. At the foot of this palm tree a few straight lines figure a well. This picture is called NIOKA MU ILU, MPIWILA MACI, BOMA (KUNUA MACI understood), that is (the man seeing), a snake on high being thirsty, fears (to drink the waters of the well).[1]

LEMBE is the copper bracelet worn by princes who are married according to the rites of LEMBE. Now those women wearing the LEMBE bracelet may eat all kinds of palm fruit (NDENDE=a palm nut), but those wearing the NGOFO bracelet may not eat the all yellow nuts of the BA LI NTUNDABA a certain kind of palm tree.

The fence or LUMBU, wherein the wives after the rites of NGOFO and LEMBE live, should be made of the fronds of the palm tree, but if made of papyrus must have a branch of the palm tree showing here and there.

No ordinary woman while still capable of bearing children may eat of the yellow nuts called MATUNDABA, or the nut having a small kernel of the palm tree called SOMBO, but boys and men may eat all these nuts.

NSANDA is the Ficus religiosa or wild fig tree which spreads its branches over the market. It is a sacred tree in Luango but more common as a market tree in KAKONGO.

NKONDO (Pl. VIIb)is the Baobab tree. Its leaves mixed with palm oil are still eaten in the Kongo much as the leaves of the manioc are. Water poured on to the contents of its enormous pods makes a refreshing drink for a fever patient. Some of their dead are (everlastingly so they say) preserved within their hollow trunks. Cut it down and its fallen trunk throws roots down into the earth and shoots branches into the air with a persistent determination not to die.

The NFUMA tree is not sacred, but it is a sign which says "from this place you come."

[1. I think there is such a pipe in the Exeter Museum.]

       Sacred Trees.    
     MUBMA.    
  NKUMBI.  XILIKA.
 NKADIKA.  MUAMBA. 
  SEXI.  BIUMU.
 BISULA BI NKANDI.  NKANA. 
  NUMBU.  NKALA.
 MISAKASAKA.  MBUBU. 
  MBA.  MKWICI.
 MACISA.  NTETE. 
  NSANDA.  XILOLO.
 XIFILO.  NLOMBA. 
  NKONDO.  MAVUKA.
 MATONDI.  MBOTA. 
     NFUMA.    
  

In this case it will be hard for the Europeans to connect the six groups with the six categories because it is a case of comparing spirit to matter, which, of course, can only be done by analogy. It can most easily be done by first taking, as before, Maluango's lesson, and then tracing in it the ideas connected with the categories.

We have already seen what Maluango said with regard to the lands and rivers. I now give his lessons drawn from the sacred trees.

   NKONDO.  The sisters of Maluango are allowed to choose a man each from any part of the country as their husbands. The man thus chosen becomes virtually the slave of his royal wife, and must have no other wife or concubine. When Maluango, is finally crowned king he also must marry a princess of Ngoio and put away his wives or concubines that he may have lived with while he reigned as Nganga Nvumba. The princesses must live in Kondi and here on the death of a Maluango, Mamboma and the other princes must repair to choose a successor. 
  MATONDI.  Not only must the ruler-elect be beloved by the people, but he must be a perfect man capable 
  MAVUKA.  of procreating, or, as we should say, 
  MBOTA.  excellent, enduring and good man. That is in every way a noble man. 
  NKUMBI.  He is led to the Nkumbi tree to meet the people and is encouraged by Mamboma to fight any one who has any pretension to the crown. Strong in the knowledge of the purity 
  XILIKA.  of his birth and that which has fallen 
  NKANDIKA.  on him, and is within him from above, he looks upon himself as 
  MUAMBA.  the essence of all virtue. In this physical nature he is surrounded 
  NSANDA.  by his courtiers as the market tree is by the people beneath its shade. 
  XILAWLO.  The fires and trials of life have but given him new life and a consciousness of Self, and he feels that 
  XIFILO.  his-intuition will guide him so that 
  NLOMBA.  all his discussions will be remembered by the people. 
  SEXI  Unconscious of wrong-doing he fears not death, and the knowledge that it is his duty to bury his uncle 
  BIUMU.  whose body is now being dried by the 
  BISULABINKANDI.  fire and smoke from husks and shells of the palm kernels makes 
  NKANA.  him all the more resolved to fight through his present troubles. 
  MBA.  And now that he has succeeded his uncle the Ntawtela and is married to the welfare of his people 
  MIKWICI.  the time has come when he must 
  MALISA.  fulfil his promises and become 
  NTETE.  in reality the head of his State 
  MISAKASAKA.  And that he may follow in the footsteps of 
  NUMBU.  Ntawtela and become absorbed in the deep of the Spirit, he must 
  NKALA.  remember his enduring and priestly powers, and live to the end, 
  MBUBU  in the respectful fear of God as Overseer and Chief from whom all come. 
  

Such is the pure and kingly life; born of a royal mother, the only wife of one chosen husband; himself the husband of one royal wife.

In order to trace the connection of the trees and the categories the reader must refer to the table of associated ideas given on p. 109.

At the Back of the Black Man's Mind, by Richard Edward Dennett, [1906], at sacred-texts.com

  

CHAPTER XIV

 

THE OMENS

Bunzi.-The Nerves.-Omens: the dog, the frog, birds, snakes, colours.-Double meaning of words.-The formula.

 

OMENS, ETC.

IT is said that BUNZI the South wind brought NSACI and XIMBUKA with him. While both these are the names of BAKICI BANKONDI, or "household gods," they are also the words used for thunder and lightning. NSACI (or NZACI), Antonio Lavadeiro told me some years ago, on one occasion sent his 24 dogs and they killed one of his companions and burnt a palm tree (Folklore of the Fjort, page 72.) At the time I wondered why there should have been 24 dogs, but now I feel assured that these dogs simply represented the 24 parts or pairs of intermediate nerves, which the natives attribute to the trunk of his body.

There is no longer any doubt in my mind that this constantly recurring 6 by 4 is part of the system of native philosophy.

Thus they believe there are three pairs of nerves and a fourth as the cause, six sets of four pairs as that which goes between, and one and three pairs as the effect. Which counting the joining fourth of the causative set and the joining one of the effective set as one pair would make up the 31 pairs of nerves in the human body, according to the native.

Putting all this on one side for the moment let me tell you what I know of their omens, which are so nearly connected with their nervous system.

Thunder and lightning out of season portend the death of a prince and as such are a bad sign; in season they are very welcome.

MBWA or MBULU is the dog. The MBULU must not cross one's path at the commencement of a journey; if it does it must be taken as a sign of misfortune and the traveller must put off his departure for a day or two. The meaning of the word BULU is a valley, an animal, a being gifted with sensibility, a person without spirit or reason. BWA is now used rather as an appellation for the tame dog which their stories tell us was first sent to town to procure food for some of his friends, but enjoying the warmth of the fire there, determined to remain as the companion of man.

A man met a beautiful dog on one occasion and was so pleased with its appearance that he determined to take it home with him. As it was raining heavily he took it with him inside his shimbec and lighting a fire proceeded to dry and warm his pet. Suddenly there was an explosion and neither man, dog, nor shimbec were ever seen again. This dog was NSACI, so Antonio told me.

 

BAKICI-BACI.

XUULA, the croaking frog, has two voices. When you hear it croaking in a stuttering guttural way you may expect evil When on the contrary it utters a soft purring kind of croak all is well. The word ULA is connected with the smashing and crushing that goes on, on earth and -in rivers during a storm when trees are falling and waters rushing madly towards the sea.

MBIXI is the little bird that sings LU ELO-ELO-ELO. And if you are going out fishing in the sea and you hear this pleasant sound you are sure to have good luck.

SUSU, the fowl. It is a bad sign to hear a cock crow after 6 p.m. and before 3 a.m.

XIXEXI, a very small bird. When this bird sings XIXEXI and you hear it on your way to fish, it is a good sign ensuring luck, but if it sings TIETIE turn back, as you will catch nothing.

KULU = the horned owl. When at night this bird comes near to you and you hear it hooting it is a sign of death that is about to overtake you or one near to you.

NXECI is a fairly large black bird, whose wings are tipped with white. Its song KE-E-E portends "witch palaver."

KNA KNA, a slender black bird with a long tail, that is continually crying out KNA KNA. When the Bavili hear this bird they conclude that there is something wrong with MABILI, not the power but the NKICINKONDI or entrance gate to their village, or there is some sickness hanging about some one dear to them. This bird came from the East with MABILI.

MVIA is a brown bird that cries out VIA, reminding the native of witch burning palaver. It is a bad sign. VIA=to burn.

NUMVU is a large dark-brown bird, the fish eagle, that lives near to rivers. When it is all one colour it is a bad sign, but when you meet one with its wings tipped with white it is a good sign.

XIFUTU NKUBU = the screech owl. Like the KULU, to hear it hoot is a sign of death.

MBENDA = the field rat. If this rat runs across your path from left to right it is a good sign; not so good when it crosses from right to left. Should it run towards you it is a bad sign, but if it runs along in front of you in the way you are going, "Oh! that is very good."

MPAWLO PAWLO = the common owl. When you hear the hooting of this owl you may feel happy, for it means "Be at rest, all is well! "

 

THE SNAKES AND COLOURS OF THE RAINBOW OR THE NERVES IN CONNECTION WITH THE SENSES AND PERCEPTIONS.

MPILI, the spitting adder, strikes terror into the noisy and is evidently connected with the sense of hearing.

NDUMA is a black coloured snake (Python?), from about 6 to 8 feet in length, that is said to lift itself on its tail and strike a person dead with its head if he attempts to pass it. Men wearing the iron bracelet of NGOFO Must ask themselves the following questions on meeting with it:-

Have we eaten the flesh of any animal that we have killed on the same day?
 Have we pointed our knives at any one?
 Did we know our wives on the day of rest, NSONA?
 Have we looked upon women during their periods?
 Have we eaten those long chili peppers instead of confining ourselves to the smaller kinds?

This snake causes man to reflect and reason.

MBUMBA is a great snake found in wells; it loves moisture, and is allied to the BOMA. Women are more especially afraid of MBUMBA, and after drawing the fish and water out of a well, they will run away and leave their fish if they discover that MBUMBA has been hidden in it after all. The word means moisture, secret, "to draw up the earth round the roots of a plant" when the smell of the earth is said to impart some secret to women. Nearly connected with MBUMBA is the plain copper bracelet of the NGANGA MBUMBA, and the NLUNGA SONGO. This connects MBUMBA with marriage and smell.

MACI MA XILEMBE = green. The water in which the King has washed his hands is called MACI MAXILEMBO or DEMBO. An ordinary man is said to wash his hands (SUKULA MIOKO), but a prince (SUKULA NDEMBO) his fingers. MACI MA XILEMBE is the water expressed from the five-fingered leaves of the MANIOC.[1] LEMBA means to touch mentally.

[1. The early Portuguese residents affirm that when they arrived in Africa the natives fed on bananas, sesame, and liico (by which perhaps they meant what we call Baku mushrooms), all which, they say, were indigenous. After a severe famine had ravaged the land, they say that they introduced the mandioca, Indian corn and sweet potatoes. This is possibly true. From the fact that the rnandioca, under the name of Mpanzi is sacred to the South wind, Bunzi, and that in the name for the colour green we find a reference to the same plant, we might, however, with reason doubt their having introduced it in the country north of the Kongo. But the leaves of the mandioca are very like to those of the Nkondo, or Baobab tree; and we know that the natives do with the leaves of this tree just what they do with those of the mandioca, i.e., boil and pound them in water to prepare them as food, and maci maxilembe may as a colour be said to be the proper name for the waters of both and may originally have been applied to the Baobab water only; "lembe" is not a name for mandioca.]

NLAWLO = yellow. LAWLOKA is to over-look; hence to pardon. It is the word used after a person has undergone the "hot knife" test and escaped unharmed signifying that he is innocent, so that the yellow colour is connected with this kind of examination.

MUAMBA = orange. It is the juice or essence of the palm nut. As an exclamation it is used to mean that what has been said, done, or seen, is very good; it therefore expresses appreciation.

MPILU = purple. This word could be written VILU or BIDU and that means the soot smeared upon the faces of people who mourn their dead. Hence VILUKA or MPILUKA is to change the face of a thing. This change of face expresses grief.

BUNDI = Indigo blue. The natives now tie a piece of blue baft, in which a bit of skin is fastened, around their heads as a sign of mourning. This band (TANTA) used to be made of folded grass cloth dyed nearly black.

MBAMBA is the green snake measuring from four to eight feet in length. The three snakes MBUMBA, NDUMA, and MPILI are classified by the natives under the name BOBO (the bearing ones) the three that we are now discussing, i.e. MBAMBA, NSANDA, and NLIMBA as Sasa (the procreating ones).

MBAMBA is harmful but not a deadly snake. ZIMBAMBA are the strips of the Mbamba palm used as string. The sense of touch is figured by this snake. SIMBA is to handle.

NSANDA is a light yellow snake about eight feet long, which will only bite those "whose day has come." It lives in the grass. It is one of the snakes said to guard LUNGULULUBU. The sense of sight. The word SANDA means to search and see which you prefer.

NLIMBA, about eight feet in length, is the orange-coloured snake that guards the palm nuts of certain trees so that those who are forbidden to eat them may not obtain them. In this way it is connected with the sense of taste. It is the diminutive of the NDAMBA or XAMA.

XAMA = snake, written also NDAMA, NCIAMA, TIAMA. It is said to be red in colour but it is seldom seen (save as a part of a rainbow). It is they say of enormous proportions and lives in the woods. If anyone kills it the rains will not fall. Pieces of it are occasionally found (probably talc) and highly prized.

There are two great XAMA, XAMA NGONZOLA and XAMA LUAYI.

It is said that the snake NLIMBA grows into the snake NDUNDO which in its turn becomes XAMA LUAYI, the beneficent rainbow that drives away the evil XAMA NGONZOLA. On the other hand, NSANDA grows into the snake NKULA NTIETI which becomes XAMA NGONZOLA. That is, choice or the desire to choose that which is not his in the market-place leads one to the chasing of the wrong voice which carries one to destruction.

Another example of this double meaning given to words or sentences by the native is found in the following saying given to me by my old head man (now dead) Francisco. He said that when the floods caused by XAMA NGONZOLA were wrecking their villages and plantations, the princes of the Bavili raised their hands to their breasts and then lifting them up on high let them drop again to their sides (the sign of the rainbow) saying ETU (our) SE (father) LE (that is) I (and) LI (who is) A (of) MBUKU (the exploder) ZAMBI (God) UI (KO understood), may he not hear. Francisco put in quite a lot of aspirates in this sentence, which would go to show that the saying came from the people to the East of Luango who still make use of them, the Bavili using V in their place. I have omitted these to make the sentence more easily comprehended. Now the saying used by the people generally in Luango is ETUCI (clouds for MATUTI) LE (that are) I (and) LIAMBUKO (never mind) ZAMBI (God) UI KO (may he not hear).

The valley or deep, out of which XAMA NGONZOLO is said to rise, is called BULU LE MBOMA, the valley of fear.

MBENGA=red (MENGA=blood).

It is not very hard for a native to connect the senses with the six categories.

Hearing is the opposite to exclaiming, which they connect with air and the heavens and so with water.

Reason they connect with ideas of foundation, ground, solidity just as we do.

Smell they connect with marriage, and hence with desire and heat.

Touch implies motion for them.

Sight they connect through coveteousness, with abundance and wealth or plenty.

Taste they connect with eating, and through eating with life.

The order is the natural one taken from the colours of the rainbow.

       Omens.    
   Colours of rainbow.      Rainbow snakes. 
  MPILU.  XUULA.
 MBIXI.  MPILI. 
  BUNDI.  SUSU.
 XIXEXI.  NDUMA. 
  XIDUTA.  KULU.
 NXECI.  MBUMBA. 
  MACI MAXILEMBE.  KNAKNA
 MVIA.  MBAMBA. 
  NLAWLO.  NUMVU
 XIFTUTU NKUBU.  NSANDA. 
  MUAMBA.  NBENDA
 MPAULO PAULO.  NLIMBA. 
  

At the Back of the Black Man's Mind, by Richard Edward Dennett, [1906], at sacred-texts.com

  

CHAPTER XV

 

SACRED ANIMALS.

The Leopard. -Witchcraft, -Story of Ngo as an Old Woman. -Xina. -Classes of Bina.-Tabu Animals.-The Formula.-Bavili Laws and Lessons.

 

XINA.

THE King as NTINU LUKENE or the one who advises his people to fly from the custom of the Leopard.

NGO the leopard is the XINA of the people of KONGO (including the provinces south of the Kongo, as well as KAKONGO and LUANGO) and as such it is NKICICI It is the only animal having the title of Fumu. All palavers are commenced with the words NGONGONGO NGETE NZAMBI. NGO is the name by which a woman who is capable of bearing royal children is known; the wife of the first KONGO. The leopard's skin is used as a charm against smallpox, and the MANKAKA'S (captain executioner) hat of office is also made of it.

In Jan. 1902, the writer was standing near to his house when a crowd of natives passed him carrying the body of a dead leopard[1] to Luango for sale. The head of the beast was covered with a cloth so that its eyes should not be seen. And a lady called NGO who was standing near to him began to cry.

"Why do you cry?" the writer asked.

"Ah," she answered," the brutes would not have treated

[1. In Seven Years among the Fjort I give part of the custom attending the killing of NGO, and in notes on the Folklore of the Fjort I supplement this. Many of the stories also throw some light on the character of this animal. The skins of the leopard are sent to BUNZI when rain is wanted by the King for his people. See ante, p. 45.]

my namesake in this rough way in the olden days with impunity."

The BAVILI call the leopard XIKUMBUA, which might be translated as the calumniator, but the BATEKE still call it KENE, which might be translated, the one opposed to nobility.

As this animal is looked upon as the mother of all animals, we cannot be wrong in saying that she is descended from ZAMHI through XIKAMACI and her offspring XIKANGA and NXILUKA, who are said to be the parents of an animal and a wooden figure.

That the leopard is connected with witchcraft is certain, even if the words "NDONGO" and NDOXI did not so clearly point to the fact, for we were warned by MAMBUKU[1] at

[1. While at my frugal meal, MAMBUKU, who had been squatting on the ground near to me, got up and left me. I lit a cigarette and walked up and down in the moonlight by the side of the bananas MAMBUKU had planted as a kind of fence around a cleared space, within which his dwellings and outhouses were, built. At last I retired to rest upon the bed of boards prepared for me, but just as I was falling to sleep the midnight silence was suddenly broken by a shout. I recognised the voice of MAMBUKU immediately, and thought at first that he must have met with some accident. Another grunt-like shout, and I knew that MAMBUKU was simply calling the attention of his people to something he had to say to them. And this is what he -said:

"Ur! ur (to wake his people up).

"Nuvula (Listen!)

"Ngonde moci u bakana kubella, mukulu, abu mimibakana ku bella mu luzala." (Last month my mother had a bad leg, now she is sick in her finger.) "Manwela Ngoma! Manwela Ngomo! Anjea, unkruntu u kela ku ngandu.' (Manwela Ngoma! you are head man of the village.) "Mani ngombo! Anjea uzabici ma awso." (Mani ngombo, the name of his suffering mother, you know all about it). "Bene Bawso! Nu keba mbizi Xikumbu una untambala befi inu manga 'ntu ntese." (All of you! Beware that when the leopard comes you don't receive him, as we shall divine who be may be.) "Beno! Mundela naka kunxitula lau!" (All of you! The white man is sleeping in town, and if I make a noise he will think me a fool.)

There was a pause and a great silence; then MANWELA NGOMA from his corner of the village replied:

"Minu unkruntu, anjea veka Mani Puati, anjea veka bakaci libamba liaku, anjea veka ubakamba, minu bawso i bakambila baci kumpe, nsamu au ba veka." (I am the head man, you yourself are Mani Puati, you own us all, you have called upon me, I called upon all, they do not hear, it is their palaver.)

Then came another pause; after which up spoke the sick mother, Mani ngombe.

"Bobo ntubila xibene xiaku tata, ntuba minu muntu yaka kalilanga enxenzo mu nitu." (The father has just now told the truth, I tell you that I keep on suffering pain in my body.)]

XIMOKO that someone with "NDONGO" in his stomach, had willed the leopard to come to their town, or someone in that very town, perhaps, was ready to use the leopard as a means of destroying his neighbour's life. And someone also with evil thoughts was causing the mother to keep on suffering.

The BAVILI fully believe that certain BANTU A NDONGO have this power over leopards and crocodiles, and that others who have not the power themselves, knowing their brother NDONGO, ask them a favour of the loan of the wer-beast. The MUNTU A NDONGO, or wizard as you perhaps would call him, does not in this case change himself into the leopard or the crocodile, for he may be talking to you in one place while the beast is doing his will in another. Neither need he die first, so that what some people like to call his "soul" may enter and possess the animal.

The man who has NDONGO in his stomach will search out an NGANGA, or doctor, who has the medicine XIKUMBU XIMANPANDU, and ask him to sell him some. The NGANGA will ask him if he is really desirous to obtain it, and the MUNTU A NDONGO answers yes. The NGANGA sells him the medicine. The MUNTU A NDONGO says he cannot see the leopard or crocodile. Then the NGANGA takes the medicine and gives the MUNTU A NDONGO some, and rubs some into his eyes, and asks him if he can now see the leopard. The MUNTU A NDONGO answers yes, and goes his way conscious that he owns a leopard or crocodile to do his will.

All leopards do not lend themselves to these horrible practices, and such as do not are said to belong to the BAKICI BACI, or the people who are owners of sacred ground.

Since my visit to XIMOKO I have noticed the following sad cases of the ravages said to have been worked by the wicked class of leopards:

1. XIKAWMO is a man who has lived with white men all his life, can read and write, and wears European clothes. He was with his master in Somboa, quite near to Luango, and it was here that the following sad event occurred. Three boys, one of them the son of XIKAWMO, were sleeping in an outhouse serving as a kitchen. One night a leopard entered this place, and passing over one of the boys, deliberately attacked and killed the son of XIKAWMO, only wounding the boy nearest the door in his flight.

XIKAWMO went to MALUANGO, and after relating the whole affair to him said, "How is this? I want to know who had this leopard?" Then they set the NGANGAS to work, and it was divined that it was a man of the village of NTANDA BILALA who owned this particular leopard. Then XIKAWMO said," Very well; now I want to know who ate the flesh of this man of BILALA," for if one of his boy's family had not eaten the flesh [1] of the BILALA man, XIKAWMO reasoned that it was impossible that the BILALA man should have sent the leopard to "chop" his son. And here this palaver rests for the time being.

2. The Wife of XIKAIA was in her house sleeping with another woman when a leopard burst open the door, passed over the other woman, and carrying XIKAIA'S wife away, ate her up, leaving only her head. XIK)LIA called in the ZINGANGA, and they divined that MAXIENZI was the owner of that leopard. So XIKAIA went to MAXIENZI'S town and destroyed his house and plantations, and then went to MALUANGO to complain about MAXIENZI. MALUANGO arrested MAXIENZI, and advised him to take nkasa at once. MAXIENZI said, "Let us first hold a palaver."

In the palaver it was proved that MAXIENZI had asked the acknowledged owner of the leopard to lend it to him. MAXIENZI protested, and declared that in this case he was innocent. MALUANGO then said that no one would believe him under the circumstances, and that the decision was in the hands of God, not his. Let him take nkasa. MAXIENZI went to MAMBUKU'S town, and demanded to be given the nkasa. It was given to him and he vomited, thus proving that he was innocent.

XIKAIA and his people, however, said that MAXIENZI used his knowledge as a MUNTU A NDONGO to avoid the proper

[1. Eaten the flesh, i.e., done him an injury, perhaps by sending a leopard to kill some one of his family.]

and just effects of the nkasa. XIKAIA and his other wife and family then left their town and went to live in the Mayombe, or bush-country.

3. A poor old man and his little grandchildren went into the woods to cut the fronds of the bamboo palm (ntombe), from the leaves of which he meant to make thatch to cover his house. Having finished their work, they picked up their bundles and were about to start homewards, when a leopard sprang out of the bush upon the old man. The children cried out, not being able to run away. The leopard. left the old man, and the party then took up their burdens and ran away in the direction of their village. At last the old man threw his bundle of leaves into the grass, and said he could go no further; he would rest and then come home. Shortly after he had stopped the leopard set upon him again. The little ones saw it, shouted to it to go away, and then ran home as fast as they could. The people of the village set out to look for the old man, but only found his head. How this palaver was settled I do not know.

These four cases in this district, then, have come to my knowledge within six months, and I give you the facts as related to me, and therefore with their native colouring and as they are looked upon by disinterested native third parties.

 

NGO AS THE OLD WOMAN IN A HAMMOCK.

The story of how Xidiela exposed the witches.

(Xidiela means in XIVILI a man who humbugs people.)

Xidiela was not well treated at home, and was finally told by his people that he was not worth anything, and had better go away and earn his living as best he could; they were tired of supporting him. This rather sobered Xidiela, and as he was already a bearded man, he knew he would have some difficulty in getting his living in a decent way, and he dreaded the thought of having to turn his hands to any hard work. He approached a rich man and offered him his services as "boy" or cook.

"You are too old," said the rich man.

"Never mind that, try me. I will do my best for you."

And so he was engaged to clean plates, cook food, and cut wood. He continued to clean plates, and cook food, and cut wood for a long, long time. During all this time sundry Zi Nganga kept on telling him that he was serving a MUNTU A NDONGO, and Xidiela at last felt that there must be some truth in what he was told.

"Every Nganga that comes here says the same thing. What am I to do? How can I get the better of him?"

He once more cooks his master's chop, and then goes to him and says:

"Senhor!"

"What? I am a witch."

"No!" says his master. Yes, I am."

"Why, how do you know? " asks the master.

"Yes, I am a witch, but am ashamed, and take off my clothes only behind the shimbec."

"Never mind," says the master, "I am one too, and perhaps after all you are one, for it is to-day that we are going to kill the prince of the country, and it is to-day that you tell me you are a witch. We will go together; but go to sleep and wait until the evening."

Xidiela sleeps, wakes early in the evening, and goes to his master and wakes him.

"You are no witch," says Xidiela, "or you would not sleep like this,"

"Nay," says his master, "it is not time yet; you may sleep a little longer."

Xidiela goes to sleep again. Then they wake up, and start for the meeting-place of the witches. Xidiela goes ahead to show that he is not afraid. They come to a place where a great number of cloths and bracelets and leg-rings lie strewn about.

The master tells Xidiela to take off his clothes.

"No," says Xidiela; "when I do that people in town will dream that I am a witch, but when they see that I am dressed they will say, ' No, he cannot be a witch, because he dressed.'"

"Very well, then," says his master, as he takes off his own clothes; "go as you are, but take care of the others."

Then they walk and walk and walk, until they arrive at a place where all the ZINDOXI were in the grass.

"Mamboma Xinkanda"[1] says the old woman with sores, Nfumu Ngo (in her hammock), when she sees the boy. "Mamboma! Xidiela kalokaka mino mabola maka ku sungomina." (Mamboma! he is not a witch; he comes only to look on. As sure as I'm a nganga I divine it.)

And Mamboma replies, "Zibika munu aku anjea natanga mu xipoia." (Shut your mouth. It is because you are in a hammock that you say so.)

The old w man replies; "Maxi ku natua batu ku anganga." (It is not because I have a hammock, but because I am a nganga that I say this.)

Mamboma then says: "How could he enter here if he were not a witch? Give him a matchet,[2] that he may dance."

They give him a matchet. Xidiela takes the matchet, and dances away and dances back again, And the young women are very pleased, and cry out, "Tuala ntulu, return here."

And Xidiela goes to them and returns twice; but the third time he runs away, taking the machet with him. And the old woman with the sores cried out from her hammock to Mamboma, "You now see that I was right."

They all waited, and then exclaimed, "She is right."

They then set upon the master and thrashed him. (They did not kill the prince.) They then knocked their fetish,

[1. heard a little story of the Xinkanda (lemur). This little animal is looked upon to-day as the "Mamboma" of the princely 'Ngo, and was elected a prince of Luango in the following manner:

Ngondo (a long-tailed monkey) was very proud of the power his tail gave him in his hurried movements here and there, and upon this power he laid claim to the chief office in Luango, i.e., that of Mamboma. Now, the Xinkanda objected to this claim on the part of the Ngondo. The Xinkanda is a close-fisted little animal, and the Bavili say sticks hard to anything he clings to. They say it takes hours to get anything out of its hands, once they are closed on any object. The Xinkanda is said to have made some bitter remarks about the ngondo and his tail, and challenged him to call a meeting of all the animals to get at the general opinion of their world upon their merits. At this meeting the slow-moving but sure Xinkanda was unanimously elected Mamboma.

2. A kind of cutlass.]

crying out to Xidiela's Master, "You brought the boy here If you come back here you will die."

And Xidiela gathered up all the clothes and bracelets and leg-rings, and took them to his home. He made a fire outside his shimbec and waited for his master, but he did not sleep. The Zi-Ndoxi searched for their clothes, and thrashed the master again when they could not be found, and then they departed to their towns, dispersing in different directions.

And next day Xidiela remarked to all about him, "How is it that so many are wearing clean clothes to-day?"

And the master called Xidiela aside, and whispered to him that they had thrashed him.

"Who dared to thrash you?" shouted Xidiela.

"Don't shout," cried the master,

"Why?" shouted Xidiela.

"If you are a ndoxi, why do you act like this and get me thrashed?"

"I went simply to humbug you," replied Xidiela.

And each ndoxi brought fifty longs (125 yards) of cloth, or sheep, or presents, to get their clothes from Xidiela and to bribe him to say nothing about the affair. Thus he became very rich, and went back to his town and built a nice shimbec, and looked down upon his poorer relations.

Some time afterwards he went back in a hammock to see his master. His master called him a ndoxi, and dared him to take nkasa.

"Let us take it together," said Xidiela. And they both went far away, where they were not known, and took the bark

and the master died, and Xidiela escaped.

The above, of course, is merely a story; the following, however, occurred not so long ago, which proves how near fiction is to fact in the Bavili's mind.

Buite had been out fishing, and on his way home met the drunkard Mavungu, who asked him for some fish. Buite refuspd to give it, and Mavungu threatened to " do for him." Buite fell sick and died. Mavungu took nkasa and died. And it then turned out that the drunkard Mavungu had gone to his town in a rage and told his brother, who was also no friend of Buite's, that the latter had refused to give him fish. So they sought out one or two other Zi-Ndoxi, and they had determined to kill Buite. Buite, falling sick, called in an Nganga, who divined that he was bewitched, and that nothing could save him. When Buite died, Mavungu, who had thus been heard to threaten Buite, was accused of having been the cause of his death, and had to take nkasa, and died.

The Bavili say that supposing that Mavungu's brother had refused to join him in wishing the death of Buite, but on the contrary had said, "No! Buite is not bad fellow, and I do not wish him to die," Buite might have fallen sick, but would have soon got better.

ZAMBICI in some of the stories[1] is spoken of as the mother of all animals, as if she were the immediate mother rather than the Creator. This confusion is natural to degenerate people, who are apt to mistake the intermediate causes for the first cause. In the story that describes an old lady arriving at the town of SONANSENZI and asking for hospitality we have an example of this. NZENZ1 is the cricket, and the story therefore is an animal one; and the old lady so full of sores who chastised the people of the town for not giving her hospitality should perhaps be NGO, the leopard, and not NZAMBI Cl.

 

XINA.

Mesu Mazenzi Mavili Matuninini say the BAVILI for a crooked palaver in which one is able to see the truth. You can cook the grasshopper or cricket, but its eyes remain, or, in other words, "The truth will out."

The cricket is XINA to SONJO.[2]

ZOMBO-BAWCI or BOCI,[3] the eel, is the XINA, or sacred animal of Kakongo.

An old lady is said to have been on a journey in Kakongo behind a place called FUTILA. She carried a child on her back, and asked some women who were planting in the fields for water. The women said that they only had enough for themselves, and that water had to be brought from a long distance. The lady eventually got a drink of palm wine

[1. See Folklore of the Fjort, p. 127.

2. SONANZENZI, Folklore of the Fjort, p. 122.]

3. These three words, Meci, Bawci, and Awci, all mean one-the seeing one, the instinctive one and the hearing one; Meci is equivalent to Mesu ma zenzi.]

from a young man who was tapping a palm tree. She rewarded the young man, and punished the women for their want of motherly instinct by turning the field they had been in into a lake (BAWCI), the fish of which is XINA to the women of NTUMPU to this day.

The third one[1] (AWCI or OCI) is MPAKASA AWCI, the wild ox or buffalo, the XINA of LUANGO.

When Maluango [2] first came from Kongo he brought this XINI which is NKICI'Cl with him. He is said to have asked some men for water and they refused to give it to him; hence he made the flesh of the MPAKASA XINA to their family BAKULu. These four,[3] great ones then are the XINA of the whole tribe and the three sub-tribes composing it, and the three are not only the sacred animals of the sub-tribes, but also the forbidden food of certain families in those sub-tribes. As we are treating only of LUANGO, we must restrict ourselves to its sacred animals.

MPAKASA AWCI is called the XINA XI BIKA MUANA BUKULU, or the four left by the offspring of the spirit of the ancient.

2nd Class. Each province under the rule of its Fumu has two XINA, as in the case of the province of XIBANGA, the SUSU or fowl, and the SEXI (duiker); these are called BINA FUMICI.

3rd Class. Then each district under its KONGO Zovo has its XINA, as in the chief district of the above province, the NZIKU, the chimpanzee. This kind is called XINA XICI, and is the sacred animal of the sacred grove of the district. Thus MPUKU, the rat, is XINA XICI of a family as well as the animal connected with the grove MPUKU NYAMBI as an omen.

[1. See note 3, p. 152.

2. The route of Maluango and Makongo from San Salvador to Luango and Kakongo is marked out by the ground where they rested becoming "xinkici a'nci," i.e., sacred ground. There are no altars made with tools, but as you wander through the woods you will at certain places come across a mound of earth and leaves. And as your servants pass this mound they will add their tribute to it. They say these mounds are marks which divide the frontiers (ndilu) of two provinces, and that in passing them they pick up earth and leaves and heap them up, so that they may not be accused, as they say, of bringing anything evil into the next prince's country. These mounds are called Lombi.

3. Including ngo.]

4th Class. Each person living under his KONGO ZOVO (head of family) with any pretensions to birth should have four BINA.

The XINA of each of his ancestors i.e., two XINA XIXINKAKA:

XI'XITATA, the XINA of his father's family.

XI'XIFUMBA, the XINA of his mother's family.

In connection with this class it is astonishing how few can trace their pedigrees back to their grandfathers. Take, for instance, the following examples:

TATI of BENGUELA says his father's XINA was NGULUBU, the pig; his mother's NGWALI, the partridge; and that he is

of the family of NZIKU.

BAYONA of NTUMPU

   Father  KABI  Antelope. 
  Mother  NZIKU  Chimpanzee. 
  Ancestors  NGULUBU  Pig. 
     NYUNDU XIBANGA  Otter. 
 ENGO of FUTILA (Kakongo)

   Father  KABI  Antelope. 
  Mother  NGWALI  Partridge 
  Grandparents
 or ancestors  NGULUBU  Pig. 
 MAKAMBA Of XILENDI NKOMBI

   Father  NKOMBO  Goat. 
  Mother  A slave brought from the interior.    
 SUNGU of XIENJI

   Father  NKOMBO  Goat. 
  Mother  MPAKASA  Buffalo. 
 LUIZ

   Father  NGWALI  Partridge. 
  Mother  He does not know.    
 In the case of BAYONA NGULUBu and NYUNDU XIBANGA show the districts of his grandparents, while his father's XINA is KABI and his mother's NZIKU. Through his ancestors he is related to TATI, whose father had the pig as his XINA. Then TATI is of the family of Nzixu, the XINA of Bayona's mother, therefore their families may not intermarry.

5th Class. Certain offices or situations carry certain XINA with them.

The office of FUMU ZINKONDI or ZINKATA; the pig, NGULUBU.

The office of BADUNGU; the NZIKU.

The office of PUNZI; food cooked by an unmarried woman.

This class is called XINA XISALU.

6th Class. Each XIBILA has its XINA.

BUNZI hates unmarried women; XIKUMBI, the maiden, is therefore its XINA.

XIKANGA NXILUKA hate a noise; the goat NKOMBO is their XINA.

This class is called XINA XINKICICL

7th Class. When natives are sick and are undergoing treatment certain foods are XINA, and as often as not the patient is ordered henceforth not to allow a companion to eat certain flesh together with him.

This is called XINA XI BILONGO.

8th Class. Certain household fetishes, bracelets, etc., carry with their ownership certain restrictions as to food. The wearer of the NGOFO bracelet may not eat the fish MPULI with another person; he may not kill and eat an animal on the same day.

This is XINA BAKICI.

9th Class. Now, parts of some animals are found in the sacred grove. This summed-up class is called XINA XI BIFUMBA.

These BINA of the BAVILI are as follows:

The skin of the leopard finds its way into the XIBILA only as part of the dress of the individual. Neither the eel nor the cricket are found there, but the MPAKASA is the greatest of all the symbols entering the XIBILA of the BAVILI and so we will commence with it.

The wild ox in the stories of the Bavili is generally found acting as the servant or ambassador of either the Leopard or some princely animal. As often as not it is sacrificed while in the discharge of some duty. Thus when NZAMBI (NGO?) sent him for the wagtail's drum he was killed by the followers of that bird.

The tail of the ox called MAWSO is the sign of office of all the Kongozovo among the Bavili, thus the idea of obedience to the voice of one in authority is implied.

The wild ox is always on the alert for the slightest noise, it is peculiarly sensitive to sound. The horns and head of this animal are found in the XIBILA.

BAFU = the saw fish, the snout of which the BADUNGU carry as their sign of office. This snout is found in the XIBILA.

NKAKA = a kind of crocodile (opposed to the NGANDU or crocodile in the Kongo). This reptile is eaten by the BAKUNI or woodmen of the MAYOMBE district to the east of Malango's composite kingdom. It digs out its home underground in the banks of rivers. The hole is of the shape of the letter and great danger is encountered by the BAKUNI in hunting and killing it. The hunter by lighting a fire at the entrance (1) drives the reptile into the bend (2, 3). He then carries stones into the hole and blocks up entrance NO. 2, and lights another fire at the entrance NO. 3, and so suffocates his prey. Should the hunter venture beyond NO. 2 without having blocked it up the NKAKA is apt to slip through it and block up the main entrance with his body so that the hunter becomes captive and certain prey. One of the scales (MAKU) of this reptile is to be found in the XIBI LA.

BECI is what the Portuguese call silver fish. It causes great havoc with the fishing nets as it is a great struggler. The saying KUBELA NKANU, to lose right in a palaver, is connected with it. Its scales are found in the XIBILA.

SUSU = the fowl. White fowls are used as offerings by those going to the XIBILA to ask a favour. A fowl is generally found tied by a string to a peg in the ground in front of;a sick man the Nganga is trying to cure. It is a sign of good faith and is supposed to die if the Nganga in the presence of his fetish does not act fairly. It is killed and its blood used in certain medicines (XIMENGA). They call it MAFUKA the messenger among the animals, and there is a saying MUANA Susu KULEMBA KUCIATA KULALA NZALA.

A chicken goes to sleep hungry if its mother does not scratch for food for it. Its feathers are found in the XIBILA.

MAKUNKULA are the cockle shells that together with the oyster shells the people of Mamboma cast at the people of BUALI who have carried the coffin of NTAWTELA as far as the NUMBU tree. The saying MAKUKU MATATU XICI Ku BUNDUBUKU PE gives us to understand that it takes three ant hills for a pot properly to be balanced for cooking purposes. Many women and children are drowned each year by forgetting that when the tide begins to rise it is time to cease digging for cockles. A mound of these shells is found in the XIBILA.

NGWALI or NGUMBI or XILAWLOLO = the partridge, also a MAFUKA. The story goes that a Mr. Partridge fell in love with a Mrs. Fowl and went home with her, but passed a very wretched night in the coop owing to his fear of Mr. Fowl, and to the fact that the owner of the village gave loud orders at midnight to his people to kill a fowl in the morning before letting the fowls out, as he expected some friends the next day. The partridge got away. It is the bird that is killed by sons for their mothers when their husbands have neglected them for strange women. The head and feet of this bird are found in the XIBILA.

MAILI = oysters. The saying YAU MISAMU Y1 MATI MAILI gives us to understand that the palaver to be talked out is no small matter, and that it is as hard as an oyster to open. A mound of these shells is found in the XIBILA.

MBOMA the boa constrictor. Its skin is found in the XIBILA.

TELE the whale. Its vertebra (KALA KALA MBUSA) is in the XIBILA and is said to point out that people come there from all parts.

NKAWMBO the goat. When a member of a village has committed some crime worthy of death, a town's meeting is called and if there be one dissenting voice against his being put to death, his family supply a goat in his place. This is killed and every member of the community must eat a little of it. This custom is called MUNTU FUNDU NKAWMBO FUNDU. Thus both the goats and the fowl are XIMENGA (of blood).

The goat's skin is used in the XIBILA to sit upon instead of the usual grass mat. The animal itself is looked upon as noisy and lascivious.

SUNGU is a large antelope and the saying is (SUNGU MBAKALA MUNTU KE KULILA MU BINANGA) that the Sunga always feeds on the tops of hills and is therefore always ready to catch sight of his enemy. To look out becomes a habit of mind (SUNGA) with it. Its head and horns are in the XIBILA.

NZAU, the elephant. The chief of all the world the great giver of food (KULAWMBO NDUNDU KU MITEKA) for when it is killed people come with matets (baskets) and seem to be for ever coming and carrying its flesh away. It stands for the ideas of animal love and knowledge, and the story goes that it was led from Kakongo by a single string of piassava (NKAWXI BA KAWKILA NZAU Mu Luvusu). NZAU is pet name given to little babies. The hairs of its tail are found in the XIBILA round the necks of people.

MPILI. The spitting viper. This snake is said to object very much to noise or to being disturbed in any way. The people of the town of MPILI hold this viper in great respect, and will not allow the grass around the town to be burnt for fear of disturbing it. (LI very often takes the place of CI primeval) and PI means hush! silence! so that the word can be translated primeval silence. Its skin is found in the XIBILA.

NKALA (VUMA XIVANJI MANIA in full) the crab. After having held their breath with fright, the danger over, the BAVILI give vent to a sigh or groan of relief, this action they call Ku VUMINA and the word has thus come to mean to fear or respect. They liken this sigh to a rest, hence the word VUVUMA or VUVAMA, to be safe, or at rest. But the impression of fear remains, hence the saying, "KUFWA NKALA XIFUNDU MIZI," the claws of the crab nip even after it is dead. The crab, the sea, and sun, are opposed to NGO, the earth, and moon, that is to say "spirit," opposed to "matter." (KALA = to be eternally.) The claws of the crab are found in the basket of Bilongo, in the XIBILA.

NOUIMBI KE KU VUKA. The shark that devours. Thus we learn that the word VUKAI has the sense of devouring as well as that of copulating. The word QUIMBUKA is to fear (relating to that cringing fear caused by a guilty conscience). The KUBU or fin of the shark is found in the basket of Bilongo in the XIBILA. KUBU also means the curtain or partition that screens the bedstead (or the NKAKA NDILU).

NKUFU, the turtle. NUNI NKUFU U I NATINA MUANZA the husband turtle who carries the roof (of his shimbec) on his back. This animal has a very bad character; he is noted for his treachery and deceit, taking a mean advantage over those he has promised to reward. For instance, "he" is said to have made a trading compact with a man. They formed two traps to catch game. He chose the best one, the man agreed as they were partners, and he said it did not matter where the "game" was trapped as it would be shared between them. An antelope is caught by the turtle's trap. Instead of calling his partner to share the spoil he engages the ox to carry it to his town, promising him a share for his trouble. When the antelope has been cut up he sent the ox away to clean the plates, etc. Then he hid away the food in his strong shimbec. When the ox came back the meat could not be found, and he was much annoyed. He resolved to destroy the turtle's trap. Unfortunately he was caught in it. The turtle then called the leopard to help him, and played the same dirty trick upon him. The leopard swore vengeance, and went to the trap and so arranged it that it appeared that he also was caught in it. The turtle came along and gloated over his friend's apparent misery, but when he put his head out of his shell to have a look and smell at his victim, the leopard snapped it off. The leopard then went to the turtle's town and ate up all the food there, and then told the partner what he had done. The man recognised that the turtle deserved his fate. NKUFI means short in stature. The shell of the turtle is found in the XIBILA.

NVUBU (or NGUVU, the hippopotamus) UNILLA NGOLO, the hippopotamus that eats very much. There are many amphibious animals, but only four of which these words are used: NXELO KU BAKOKO NSAKTJSO KU VIA MBAZU. As

[1. See p. 71.]

a protection for the mouth of his bellows the blacksmith places an earthenware nozzle over it, so must men protect themselves against the fires which burn (ZINDOXI). These four are KIMBOLO, Nile crocodile; NGANDU, Indian crocodile (another way of calling a man a wizard); BAMBI, Monitor lizard; and the NGUVU or NVUBU. The word VUBA is to take altogether too much for one's self. The head of the hippopotamus is found in the XIBILA.

NKABI (the saddle-back antelope) Ku KABIKA NCITU MUNTU LI MONIO KU KABIKA BUALA BUANDI KUTUNGA (as) the antelope leaves the woods to die, (so) when the man leaves his town stockade he also dies. The word KABA is to divide. The horns of this antelope form the symbol of the parting of the ways. "We are all from one stock, and agree together along one road until we come to the parting of the way," says the sign.

MBAMBI NGOMBI (monitor lizard). They say that this lizard came along a road carrying a long basket or matet of salt. He noticed the little cricket NKAWLA resting in the leaf of the LICISA (string plant).

"Get off that tree" (sic), says the Mbambi, "and allow me to rest this load of mine against its trunk." "Why," answered the NKAWLA, "use such a false picture to deceive me; you know that this is not a tree, and you know that you simply wish to kill and eat me. I am here; kill me!" And the MBAMBI snapped at the NKAWLA and devoured it.

The skin of this lizard is found in the basket of bilongo in the XIBILA.

NSEXI (SECI or SACI), a kind of antelope that is also known by the name KINKUBA, an axe, and KIMPITI, half a matchet. What a beautiful yet deceitful and undutiful animal this is is well shown in the stories Nos. 4 and 19 in Notes on the Folklore of the Fjort.

NSEXI KU SEKA, say the Bavili, meaning the dust of corruption. Its head and horns are found in the XIBILA.

NVULI (the water buck). NVULI OBO, listen to what another says. Like the NKUTI antelope, the NVULI listens to the false cry of the hunter, and so often falls an easy prey to his destroyer. Its head and horns are found in the XIBILA.

NGULUBU NGULU MBAKALA KE KU MANA MAYAKA. It is the pig that steals the manioc (in the market). After certain palavers, certain household fetishes like MPUMBU are washed in the blood of the pig. Its dried blood also enters into many bilongo. It is the head of the pig that enters the XIBILA.

XINGOLO XINYUNDU (the otter) XIBANGo NGOLA MACI.

The strength (resistance) of the anvil (NYUNDU) demolishes the firmness of the waters, or the otter eats the fish called NGOLA.

The saying above is a figurative way of implying that the wife should satisfy the desire of her husband. The skin of the otter is used in the place of the proverbial figleaf as a dress. All princes in their visit to the XIBILA wear this skin.

There are five kinds of fish forming the class MBIZI XIBALA, the spikes of which enter into bilongo; they are XIENDO, MPUDI, NKOKO, NGOLA, and XIBUELA. MPUDI and NGOLA are the cat fish, the others are rays.

NZIKU (=the chimpanzee). XZIKU NKONDO, as the saying goes, "Be careful how you choose your friends."

NZIKA KE KU ZIKA MINA MUNTU, "an apparently friendly man may get one into a big palaver."

NZIKU is the XINA of mankind generally. It is not only that there is a certain resemblance between man and the chimpanzee in their outward form, but they have many habits in common. It carries its young on its back, and walks about the woods upon its hind legs with the help of a stick. It fights with a stick. But above all, it is very gallant, and treats its pregnant wife with the greatest respect, running away from her when she is annoyed instead of beating her. Unlike other animals, he is never caught in the act of copulation. But in spite of all this the Bavili say that man must not be led to believe that the chimpanzee is an animal that he can make a real friend of. Its skin is found in the XIBILA.

When a person wishes to refuse a request he has simply to mention his XINA. Thus, supposing his XINA to be NGWALI, the person says NGWALI, the words MINU I CIABAKOKO, I have it not," being understood. The word KAZILA (no road) is often used for the word XINA.

There is a class of people called MAVUMBU[1] (VUMBA to leak) living in different districts of Kakongo and just on the southern borders of LUANGO, who are not allowed to eat out of the same dish as the Bavili or people of Kakongo. Should one ask for food he must tell the people that he is MAVUMBU, but as it is a great disgrace to admit this, such a one seldom does ask another for it. I know one or two very rich and important men in the country, whose names I will not mention, who are MAVUMBU. But where these people come from I cannot find out, neither can I make out why they should be so cursed. MAVU=dirt, and so MAVUMBU may mean the essence of dirt.

We may now, I think, conclude that this remarkable word XINA means law, a thing forbidden, an abomination, and a totem.

It is said that the King Maluango has no XINA, but I think that this merely means that as NKICI CI he is in the place of God, and therefore above the law, for as Fumu his XINA is pig, and he must have his family BINA also.

       Sacred Animals.    
     MPAKASA.    
  MBAMBINGOMBI.  BAFU.
 NKAKA.  MPILI. 
  NSEXI.  BECI.
 SUSU.  NKALA. 
  NVULI.  MAKUNKULA.
 NGUALI.  NQUIMBI. 
  NGULUBU.  MAILI.
 MBOMA.  NKUFU. 
  XINGOLOXINYUNDU.  TELE.
 NKOMBO.  NVUBU. 
  NZIKUNKONDO.  SUNGU.
 NZAU.  NKABI. 
     NDUMA.    
 [1. Father T. Derouet informs me that the tribe the Bavili call BAKUTU call themselves BAVUMBU Or BAHUMBU, and that their greatest fetish (sic) is NGO.

2. My linguister Bayonna who has lived among these people adds that when the father or prince Of the tribe dies his head (Father Derouet savs his hands also) is allowed to remain in the water until all the flesh comes away from it, when it is kept in a hut apart, and carried with the family should it remove to some other part. His penis is also cut off and smoked and then worn as a charm by his first wife's eldest son.

Can these people be the family or tribe from which the MAVUMBU have descended? And can NGO then be the sacred animal of not only the Kongo people but of all the Bantu?]

This formula differs from those which have preceded it. In connecting the animals. with the categories we must take account of the fivefold division of the laws; two families in the formula-the third and fourth-are classed together by them for this purpose; and the six families of the formula are harmonised with the five divisions of the law, which may in fact be regarded as prohibitions of the opposite of the categories; thus theft is associated with the idea of running away, and this is the opposite of love and union, two of the ideas associated with fire.

 

THE PROHIBITIONS.

My friends have found no difficulty in placing these families in their order under the five great divisions into which their laws are divided. I give them exactly as they were given to me:-

1. XINA XIVANGA NZAMBI-against God and rulers.

2. XINA VA XIFUMBA -against parents.

3. XINA NKAKA -against neighbours.

4. XINA NSOKI or NSEXI -against covetousness.

5. XINA MVILA -against illegal marriages.

 Xina Xivanga Nzambi.

 As the KONGOZOVO armed with a tail of the ox (Mawso) punish offenders so does God-

The Badungu armed with the snout of the saw fish (bafu) are ready to avenge the abused authority of their king by punishing those who like the Mbambingombi would lead the people astray by false pictures (KUSALA Fumu, the magic mirror by which Nganga Nyambi is alone allowed to see the true picture of the prince to be elected in the place of the Ntawtela).

The Nkaka or executioner is ever ready to punish those who by their foolish talk disturb that silence (MPILI) ordered by the king concerning his name and that of God-Xibika Bakolu.

The above three commandments refer to God but also to Xifumba or the class that cannot be separated from God, in that God is man's father.

 Xina Va Xifumba.

 The Susu reminds the prince that on the fourth day (Sona) he must rest (Ku Kala vaci) and the people of the country (Beci) know that if they do not uphold the authority of parents and refuse to act as the Nsexi they will become corrupt.

 Xina Nkaka.

 The cockle shells (Makunkula) remind the people of the death of their king and how through loss of balance of mind they are led through vice to become murderers and the prey of that fear associated with the shark Nquimbi.

Desire is like the messenger (Nguali, partridge) that leads them to ask married women questions which lead to adultery and death if like the water buck (Nvuli), the woman listens to them.

Hard as it may be to open your mind (Maili) and tell the truth, it is better to say nothing than to bear false witness in a palaver like the turtle (Nkufu).

Don't let the snake Mboma usurp the place of your conscience and tempt you to act like the thieving pig (Ngulubu) that steals the mandioca.

 Xina Nsoki.

 Remember the size of the whale (tele) and the small size of the fish he swallows and don't be a glutton like the Nvubu and don't become a slave (Nkombo) through playing the goat but let your wife be all in all to you (Xingolo Xinyundu).

 Xina Mvila.

 Keep a sharp look out (as the Sungu) lest you fall into sin, and keep within the stockade of the law (Nkabi) of your own free will. Be loving and knowing as the elephant (Nzau) and as full of abundance, but take care how you choose your wife or companion and don't marry your Xina (Nziku Nkondo).

Be noble and serve and respect your God and those who are put in authority over you, and do not allow yourselves to come under the domination of fear (Nduma for Mboma).

This is the sum total of your duty towards God and man.

This XINA XIVANGA ZAMBI is connected with the category of water, through immorality and abuse of speech.

XINA VA XI fumba is connected with the category of earth through corruption (SEXI dust), which is looked upon as the opposite of solidity.

XINA NKAKA is connected with marriage and desire, through fear caused by their opposites, adultery and abuse of desire; and with motion and procreation, through the fear of punishment which causes the evil doer to run away.

XINA SOXI is connected with the category of plenty through the abuse of appetite and lust.

XINA Mvila is connected with life and birth, through the product of legal marriage.

At the Back of the Black Man's Mind, by Richard Edward Dennett, [1906], at sacred-texts.com

  

CHAPTER XVI

 

NZAMBI (GOD), THE WORD NKICI, AND THE BAKICI BACI

HAVE the Bavili a conception of a divinity or God? You ask me, and I, immediately, am overcome by an almost irresistible wish to evade your question, not because I shall be obliged to answer you in a roundabout and hesitating way but because on the contrary the conception of God formed by the Bavili is so purely spiritual, or shall I say abstract, that you are sure to think that I am mad to suppose that so evidently degenerate a race can have formed so logical an idea of a God we all recognise and try in various ways to comprehend. The name for God is NZAMBI[1] and its literal meaning is the personal essence (IMBI) of the fours (ZIA or ZA = fours). What then are the fours? They are the groups each of four powers called BAKICI BACI, which we have just discussed. The prefix BA the plural of N proving that these powers are personalities or attributes of a person, that is they are not ZINKICI like the mere wooden figures. Each group may be said to be composed of (1) a cause, (2 and 3) male and female parts, and (4) an effect. The group NZAMBI itself may be said to have four parts-(4) NZAMBI the

[1. Most people are under the impression that the native does not mention or fear NZAMBI very much, because in his broken English he tells us that "He is good too much." I don't think we are quite right in taking him at his word. As a matter of fact, I think that it is rather owing to his respect and fear of him, that he says as little about him as possible. In trouble he uses the word NZAMBI as an exclamation.]

abstract idea, the cause, (2 and 3) NZAMBI MPUNGU God Almighty, the father God who dwells in the heavens and is the guardian of the fire, NZAMBICI God the essence, the God on earth, the great princess, the mother of all the animals, the one who promises her daughter to the animal who shall bring her the fire from heaven, (4) KICI, the mysterious inherent quality in things that causes the BAVILI to fear and respect. This word was translated as "holy" by the first missionaries that came to the Congo, but many people now speak of it as "fetish," and in Seven Years Among the Fjort, I write of NKICI as evil. I had then only heard the word used in connection with fetish as NKICI and had hardly heard of the BAKICI BACI.

It is not unnatural that one of the personalities of ZAMBI being Kim his powers (or perhaps attributes), are called BAKICI BACI, the speaking powers on earth and that their product or the final effect is NKICI 'CI (KICI on earth) one of the titles of the King MALUANGO.

The word adopted by the old Romish missionaries for Holy was Nkici. The late Mr. Bentley in his interesting book entitled Pioneering on the Congo considers this a "most unfortunate selection" (page 236) and certainly it would have been were the current translation of the word to be taken as correct i.e., "fetish." Mr. Bentley considers that the old missionaries made a still more egregious blunder in the word which they adopted for Church "nzoankici" which he says is the common word used for "grave" (Bulu XIBAYI Luango) and is a euphemism meaning "fetish house."

Now I wonder whether these old missionaries were the asses Mr. Bentley seems to look upon them as, or whether they found the true religion of the natives less overgrown by "fetishism" than it is to-day. We must remember that some 400 years have passed between the arrival of the first missionaries and that of Mr. Bentley. What the words meant then and what they appear to mean to-day may well be two widely different things. Missionaries as a rule do not look for any high virtues in any religion but their own, and refusing to study the religion of the native set about to destroy it. The greater the play of civilisation and Christianity so-called the greater the havoc we may expect in the religion of the indigencs. In this case the work of the missionaries under the Portuguese Government took the greatest hold of the district south of the Congo, i.e., that about which Mr. Bentley writes; it is not then surprising to me that in his description of what he calls the religion of the natives, all trace of the higher part of it is found wanting. Neither is it to be wondered at that north of the Congo where the work of the missionaries took little or no hold, traces of Nkici-ism are still to be found. I say so-called religion because I do not call fetishism a religion any more than I would call witchcraft or any other form of priest ridden degeneracy anything more than a "superstition." Mr. Bentley's description of "fetishism" is a very correct one and must be most interesting to those who take an interest in the present degenerate form of the superstition of the native of the Congo. But as Mr. Bentley asks, "What are we to infer from the present state of things? Is the idea of God being slowly evolved out of fetishism? Is it not rather that the people have well-nigh lost the knowledge of God which once their forefathers possessed?" Exactly, I should infer from the long study of the people that I have made that such is certainly the case, and that this superstition called fetishism is an overgrowth imposed upon the purer knowledge they once certainly possessed. Can we be surprised, therefore, if the word Nkici was as near to the meaning of the word "Holy" as the priests of old could get.

It was stated in the preliminary remarks on Bavili philosophy (Chapter X) that fetishism is not the sum total of Bavili religion, that Bakici baci, or sacred symbols, exist, which are connected with Nzambi on the one side, and with the king on the other through his six titles. These sacred symbols are (1) groves, (2) lands and rivers, (3) trees, (4) animals, (5) omens, and (6) the seasons. In Chapter X it was shown that the seasons, the order of which is obviously indisputable, are regarded as genetically related to each other and that the various groups are connected in the native mind with certain ideas, which we have termed the categories, viz., water, earth, fire, procreation, motion, fruitfulness, life.

In the next chapter it was shown that the groves are grouped in sets of four, that the order of each set of four is fixed for the natives, and that the order of the groups inter se is likewise determined. That being so, it was possible to trace a connection between certain groups of groves, which we term families, and the categories, and to show that the natives regard the families as genetically related both internally and inter se in the same way as the seasons; it is however impossible, owing to lack of information, to work out this idea in detail, for though I have been successful in obtaining the names of nearly one hundred groves, I have failed to get from the natives any statement as to the order in which they should be placed.

In the case of the rivers, the order in which they were given me by the natives is that in which they appear on the map; the order of the provinces on the other hand is established by testimony only. In each case the order of the categories is preserved.

In the case of the trees the association with the categories seems to be less direct. The connection between the virtues of Maloango and the trees on the one hand, and between the categories and the virtues on the other, seems undeniable; but it is clear that the area of choice is wide, when we endeavour to associate the trees with the categories. It must, however, be remarked that the theory of Bavili philosophy here put forward may be perfectly correct in its main outlines, even though many details remain for future investigators. If the proof of the connection of the trees with the categories is slight, the fault is rather in my lack of knowledge than-in any real absence of continuity in native ideas.

At the end of the chapter on omens I have shown how the native connects with the categories the senses, which are themselves connected by the natives with colours and the rainbow snakes. It is important to notice that the order of the families is given in this case by the order of the spectral colours; it is consequently as indisputable as the order of the seasons.

In the case of the animals the connection with the categories is traced through the prohibitions or categories of the law, which are the opposites of the categories of the formula.

The relation of the king to the categories has already been traced on pp. 100, 135.

1 have now set forth the information gathered from the Bavili. During the past few years I have been in a different part of Africa, and I was naturally curious to see if I could discover traces of the same ideas among the inhabitants of Benin city and its neighbourhood. In the following chapters I develop what I have learnt of Bini philosophy.

My first impression of the religious system of the Bini was that it was something different from that of the Bavili.

An altar to OYATA at OKPWEBO, made of clay surmounted with native pottery.

I missed the class of fetishes into which nails are driven; I found temples near to the sacred groves, and altars not only in private houses, but also along many of their roads. But when I found the great dual division of ideas illustrated by the names ESHU and ESHU-SHU on the one hand, and EBAW, EBAMI, and OYISA on the other, equivalent to what I have described as NDONGOISM and NKICI-ISM among the BAVILI; and when I found traces of the "jujus" or fetishes into which nails are driven in some of their temples, swear "jujus" and family "jujus" on the one hand, and groves sacred to river spirits, trees, and animals on the other, I was driven to the conclusion that the apparent difference was rather an interesting development, which after all was a natural one and corresponded to the material progress from the rush huts or shimbecs of the Bavili to the solid mud houses of the Bini.

At the Back of the Black Man's Mind, by Richard Edward Dennett, [1906], at sacred-texts.com

  

CHAPTER XVII

 

THE BINI

King and Constitution. -Native Ideas.-The Queen Mother and the King-His Attendants. -Viceroys. -The War Chief. -Officers. -Titles of the OB.A.

ALL have heard of the massacre of Consul Philips and his unlucky companions while on their way to Benin City, and also of the cleverly managed expedition under Adrniral Rawson, sent by H.M. Government to punish the King of Benin for his treachery, so that these notes scarcely need. any introductory remarks so far as the place is concerned. Those who take a deeper interest in all that has been written and said about Benin must read Great Benin by Ling Roth, or the Antiquities of Benin City by the late General Pitt Rivers, etc.

The few notes that I have been enabled to gather directly from the natives of these parts may perhaps serve to further illustrate some of the subjects touched upon by my predecessors- in this field, and to show that what Mr. Ling Roth calls jujuism in reality corresponds to Nkici-ism and the higher religion of the Kongo rather than to Ndongoism.

As to the natives themselves it is quite inconceivable how they could have acted in the barbarous way they are said to have done a few years ago, for they seem to the writer to be a peculiarly happy and pleasant people to dwell among. The present UNWAGWE'S grandfather was killed by the OBA for refusing to join in the expedition against Consul Philips, and it was only under great compunction that old EZOME or OJUMO was forced to join at the last moment, so that perhaps it was more as a duty than anything else that the people joined in this disastrous march against an unarmed and would-be friend.

Politically H.B.M. Government has preserved as much as possible of the native form of government, and the country is virtually governed on native lines by the so-called Benin City chiefs (who for the most part were the OBA'S tax-gatherers).

But all Europeans must suffer from the want of knowledge of what "native lines really are," and if the natives are not governed more nearly on their own lines than at present it is generally because a few self-seeking natives, always to be found in the beginning of changes, are apt to wilfully misguide the white man where those lines oppose their own personal interests.

The public spirit of the chiefs in this district, however, is very remarkable, and little by little as the European's knowledge and accumulation of facts increase, great things are to be expected, especially if Benin City is to be as lucky in the future as it has been in the past in its Residents and District Commissioners.

H.B.M. Government has a great opportunity of studying the constitution of a really African native state in the Kingdom of Benin, and if its officers continue to be of the right sort and the susceptibilities of the chiefs are not ruffled by the thoughtless action of one of the rough overbearing "I'm your conqueror" class of men there is every chance of our having in Benin City a very perfect model of how an African state can be governed by a European government.. On the other hand, if the susceptibilities of these now public-spirited chiefs are injured by our riding rough-shod over what they consider most sacred, i.e. their religion, their form of goverment, the integrity of their kingdom, bounded as it is by their sacred rivers, they will draw in their horns, as it were, and we shall never be able to help them again to govern their country on intelligent and non-barbaric lines. And if it is possible to obtain such a working model it will become an excellent school for those officers who may be destined to reduce chaos into something like order in countries like those of IJAWS and SOBOS, where at present no form of government (save the village form) appears to exist.

The words of that great lady, Mary Kingsley, so interested in the welfare of the Africans, keep on reminding us of our duty in this matter, where she says-"I cannot avoid thinking that before you cast yourself in a whole-hearted way into developing anything you should have a knowledge of the nature of the thing as it is on scientific lines."

As in the formation of most African governments, there is a link with the past in the Bini constitution.

The Queen mother, IOBA, has her residence just outside the walls of Benin city, at a place called SHELU, on the YIRA, or north road. As the dowager Queen she maintains a Court of her own composed of-

1. AMOMA, her so-called wife.

2. AMADA, her naked boys.

3. The chiefs fulfilling the offices of IWEBO (equity), IWASE (medicine men), IWEGWE (Commons), and IBIWE (Lords). We will explain these four offices when we consider them under the King.

IOBA had the right to sacrifice human beings.

It is said that, accompanied by four pairs[1] of chiefs, one of the six sons of AWYAW, called BINI by the Yoruba historians, came to Benin city by the YIRA road, through SHELU, and asked CIGIFA[2] for a place where he might reside. CIGIFA is said to have given this son of AWYAW that part of the city that he and his people had vacated owing to sickness. After a time this prince declared that the smell of the place disgusted him, that he could not speak the language of the EFA, and that he purposed leaving them. This he did by the UDO road, returning thereby to UHE or IFE, the sacred capital of the YORUBA. But before leaving he informed CIGIFA that a certain daughter of OGIEGAW was in child to him if they wished to put anyone in his place. This son was called EWEKA (because he clasped or joined the two people together). He was the first OBA of the Bini, and the present deposed OBA Overami traces his ascent to him.

[1. EZOMO - EDOHAN.

IHOLO - OLOTTO.

OLIHA - INE.

ERO - ELEMA.

2. They say that he found OGIFA accompanied by AZELE and OGIAMI accompanied by IHELIGO.

OGI'FA=OGTE the king of EFA the people.]

The OBA'S throne or chair was placed on a platform of mud three steps above the ordinary level of the ground; this throne was called EKETE.

The OBA'S official dress was of beads and composed of

1. ERUIVIE bead crown.

2. ODIGBA broad collar.

3. EWIVIE bead coat.

4. ERUHAN skirt.

5. EGWUNBAW bracelets.

6. EGWONWE anklets.

7. EBE a flat kind of knife in his right hand.

8. ERIGO a two-forked instrument in his left hand.

But you have seen representations of him in brasswork (see Plate VIII, Fig. 3, Antiquities of Benin City), so that further description of him is unnecessary.

Neither need I dwell on his atrocious despotism, which finally brought him to ruin, and disposed H.M. Government to place the people of this kingdom under its protection.

The OBA'S immediate attendants may be recognised by the custom of wearing their back hair divided by three partings, a custom they enjoyed with the OBA and IOBA. Their names were as follows and their title OGBON:-

 

The sons of the OBA were, and are still called OBIOBA, and of these the eldest is entitled EDAIKIN, and had his residence between the SHELU and IKPOBA roads. The other sons were sent out as viceroys to govern different districts or collection of towns, and became known as OGI'CI.

Thus we have these OGI'CI (or viceroys who were succeeded by their sons) still ruling over the districts which were once given to the CIBIOBA, in the same way as in the Kongo.

In the case of the present deposed OBA CIVERAMI, EGWABASIMI should be the EDAIKIN and OSWALELE is an OBIOBA. The daughters of OVERAMi are EBAHABUKUN, OMONO, and GRINYAMI. These women may choose their own husbands, and when widows may cohabit with whom they like. The children of these daughters are called EKAIWI.

The chief CISULA is the EKAIWI of ADOLO, Overami's predecessor.

There are six great chiefs who may represent the OBA in one or other of his six great estates; they are Ezomo (called also Ojumo), ERU (called AIRO and ARO), OLIHA, EDAIKIN, OGIFA, IYASE.

Ezomo in the popular parlance of travellers in Africa is the "great war chief," but as a matter of fact he combined with his office as head of the war department an office nearly equivalent in a primitive kind of fashion to that of the Lord Chancellor as head of the Court of Equity. Among his followers was the famous general OLUGBOSHERI, who led the troops against and massacred Consul Philips' expedition on its way to Benin city. This office of general is hereditary, and OLUGBOSHERI'S son under the OBA's reglime would have succeeded to his father's position. Ezomo was the only great chief who gloried in a "court" similar to that of IOBA, that is to say he was followed by his chiefs and followers under the offices of IWEBO, IWEGWE, IBIWE, and IWASE. ERU[1] was a great judge a kind of Lord Chief justice with all the policemen at his call. OLIHA must have been a kind of Archbishop of Canterbury,

[1. ERU is spoken of as ARO or AIRO.]

as he crowned the king. The above three great chiefs had the right to sacrifice human beings.

EDAIKIN, as the eldest son, represents the state and medicine men outside the compound of the OBA.

OGIFA[1] is said to represent all the people. He is the direct descendant of the OCIFA who was in the city when the son of AWYAW first came. He may be said to hold an office some, what like that of the Speaker of the House of Commons. He used to call the people together for great palavers, etc.

All the above great chiefs are succeeded by their sons in their offices.

IYASE[1] or IYASERI is head of the nobles or EGA-IBU such as IHASA, ESAWN, ESOGBAN, and many others. He had three immediate followers CISUMA, ESOGBAN, and ESAWN. He could pick men out of the different classes of chiefs and make them EGAIBU. IHASA, for instance, was serving under UNWAGWE, the chief of the IWEBO, and was thus ennobled or made an EGAIBU by IYASE. IYASE is not succeeded by his son, but is chosen by the OBA from one of the great chiefs of the kingdom. He was also regent on the OBA'S death or during his absence.

All these foregoing six viceroys were paramount without the compound of the OBA, but within that enclosure the heads of the following six offices were paramount:-

The six great offices in the OBA'S compound were the IWEBO, ABIOGBE, IHOGBWI, IWASE, IWEGWE, and IBIHE, representing in a primitive fashion, equity, justice, Church, State, Commons and Lords. Each of these offices was filled by a pair of great chiefs and their followers, who were of four grades more or less according to their wealth.

1. Those who could sacrifice one cow to their father and one to their mother.

2. Those who could sacrifice one cow to their father and a goat to their mother.

3. Those who could sacrifice goats.

4. The rest who could sacrifice fowls.

[1. These two chiefs had the right of sacrificing one cow to their father and one cow to their mother.]

The office of Iwebo was in the hands Of UNWAGWE and ELIBO[1]. When OBA made father, it was UNWAGWE who brought him the cowries (IGO) to be sprinkled with chalk, and the beads that were washed in the blood of the human beings sacrificed. These two chiefs also acted as arbitrators within the compound of the OBA. Some of their followers were as under:

ABIOGBE.-This office is in the hands of [1] OKAIBOGA 1 and OKAIWAGGA 2 and their follower OKADOGIRA 3. All land questions were in their hands, and it was OKAIBOGA who conducted the sons of the OBA to the different countries where they were destined to act as viceroys. Until H.B.M. Government took over this protectorate this chief used to receive yearly presents from the viceroys thus inducted. The above pair were in charge of the policemen called OKOW.

IHOGBWI.-This was the office of sacrificers and was in the hands of IHAMA 1 (whose son succeeded him in office) and SIGHURE 2, with their assistant, LEGAMA 3.

IWASE.-This was the office of the learned doctors and

[1. The numbers after the names of these officers mark their class.]

medicine men, and it was held by the pair, IGWESIBO 3 and OGIEMESE 3. Their followers were:-

 

The two chiefs at the head of the office of IWEGWE were ISIRI and BAZILU. These chiefs and their followers had to look after the household or the common wealth of all. Under them were the OKA, or headmen. They used to go, with the OBA to his farm at harvest time by the HUMIDUMU (headquarters) road, and help in the "play" that was there enacted. Some of the great IWEGWE were as under:-

The office of IBIHE was confided to the care of INE (YAMO) and OBAZWAIYI. They had to keep the OBA supplied with wives and slaves, and were, generally speaking overlords. Their followers were

 

All these chiefs had the right to wear the broad bead collar called ODIGBA.

They were not succeeded in office by their sons, but if the sons were wealthy they had the first refusal of the office. Their offspring belonged to the class in which their fathers served. Thus all children of the chiefs under the office IBIWE were IBIWE, and so on. The OBA, however, took people out of one class and put them into the other.

No one could approach the OBA save through one of these chiefs,and all tribute (IDIGWE) was paid to the King through them. They received for their trouble 25 per cent. of the whole amount brought in. These tribute-receiving chiefs were called NOTWEYEBO. Each of them had boys of their own in the towns thus paying tribute, and they were called OKUSHUEBO.

The OBA's ambassador was called OKAWBA.

The BINI kingdom then was governed by the OBA through six offices by two kinds of chiefs, i.e., pro-kings without the walls of his compound, and six pairs of chiefs acting as assessors within the compound. So that, bereft of attendants and followers, the constitution (EVIUMBA) of the Bini government resolves itself into the following formula:

The OBA as head of six departments (represented at times by the six pro-kings).

Six pairs of assessors representing six offices.

The titles under which we hear of the OBA of the BINI spoken about are:-

OBADUDUDU, perhaps the Oba of Heaven, the name of the supreme goddess among the yoruba ODUDUA.

ENONYAGBON, the lord of the earth.

AGBAGE LO GI' OLUKUN, the offspring of OLUKUN that we all want to see.

OGIE NO GBOMA ADENUWUIGHOMA, slayer of men who do not want to die.

AKPOLPOLO, the biggest one.

ELIMIDU, the oro whip.

OBA, emperor.

ADIMILA O SAKEJI, second to God.

Thus among the Bini, as among the Bavili, we have two great courts, first, the OBA ruling in person under six great titles, helped by his twelve assessors, and second, the twelve under the regent IYASE or IYASERI and the pro-kings. If, then, the writer is correct in believing that this form of government among the Bavili is the product of NKICIISM, which includes the seasons, we may expect to find traces of this philosophy among the Bini.

At the Back of the Black Man's Mind, by Richard Edward Dennett, [1906], at sacred-texts.com

  

CHAPTER XVIII

 

BENIN DISTRICTS

 

QUARTERS.

The Provinces. -Benin City.-The King's Compound. -Bronzes. -A Bini House.

 

DISTRICTS.

THE OBA'S central province was bound by the rivers

OYISA, OKWO, OVIA, OLUKUN, AWREHOMO, and IKPOBA. From the city through this province to six outlying districts or provinces, six great roads led, and these roads and districts were under the following chiefs:-

Gilly-Gilly under Ezomo.

Udo under OLIHA.

Shelu under ERO.

Geduma under OGIFA.

Sapoba under CIGIAML

Sapelli under ELEMA.

The neutral (or ambassador's province) under ELAUWEY was bounded by the rivers OFUSU, OHA, and upper OVIA or OSSE, with its capital at OKENUE or OKELUSE. When they reached this place ELAUWEY told Bini to go on to OGIFA'S place and that he would follow in five days (but he stayed there and formed the province as a kind of buffer province between the Yoruba and Bini Kingdoms).

In each of these districts there are a certain number of OGIE (OGICI). In ELAUWEY, OGOTE, the two Bale, UHEIN and IKOHA, under OJIMA Of OKENUE.

ODCLOBO Sapelli road under ELEMA seems to have extended to UMUGUMO and the country between the rivers EKHIMI, IGBAGON, and OLUKUN. The ogies are:-

OGYUMUGUMU IZAWGBO.
 OGYUMUGUMU NUGU.
 OGIEBAZOGBI.
 OGIOGEGE.
 OGIEWISI.
 OGIEABABO.

ODIYOKOREOMO (sapoba. under Ogiami) is the district between the rivers EKHIMI and AUREHOMO, and here we find the following OGIES:-

OGYUGU.
 OGIEWEHIGAL
 OGIEWEHIA.
 OGYOGAN.
 OGYOGBA.
 OGYOHEZI.
 OGYOMEDI.
 OGULEGUN.
 OGUKHIRI.

ODIYEKPOBA and ODUHUMODE (Geduma under Ogifa) the country bound by the Ifon road, the Awrehomo and the IKPOBA rivers with the OGIES:-

OGIEGMA.
 OGIEHOBI.
 OGIEKO.
 OGIEBWI.
 OGYUGO NEYEKPOBA.
 OGYUBE.
 OGIWAN.
 OGIEBONWAN.
 IH0LO NISI.
 ODUHUMODE.
 OGIEYNIE.
 OGIEWOMUDU.
 OHENUKUDI (Juju).
 OGYUGA.
 IHOLO NU GEDUMA.
 OGIHAW.
 OGIERWA.
 OGIEUHL
 OGIRHUE.
 IEKUSHELU under ERO with the OGIES:-
 OWAZA. Cap from AWYAW.
 OGYUNWAN.
 OGIOWA.
 OGINWHAN.

ODUDO or ODIDUMIHOGBI (Udo road under OLIHA) within the centre province. OGIES:-

OGIEGANW.
 OGUSE.
 OGIOMI.
 OGIOGEGE.
 OGIOKELE.
 OGIEGBAN.
 OGIEBOLEKPE.
 OGYUTOKA.
 OGYUIE.
 OGYULOMO.
 OGYIGWOGI.
 OGYIHOGWA.
 OGIEKEZI.
 OGIDA.
 On the far side of the Ovia (river Osse):
 OGETETI.
 OGYUGOLO.
 OGIESI.
 OGYUTESI.
 OGYEGBATA.
 OGYUDO having died intestate IYASE NUDO governs in his place, in UDO.
 ODUGWATON or ODUZABU (Gilly Gilly road under Ezomo).
 No OGIE.

Plan of Benin City (Pl. XIV)

Under these OGIES are many villages ruled over by headmen equivalent to the KONGOZOVO in the Kongo. These. headmen have a number of families under them, each of which have land given to them for planting. There may be waste land in a province or a kingdom, but that is not to, say that it is no man's land for it belongs either to the OGIE, or the OBA.

There were three other roads (Pl. XIV) leading from the OBA'S Compound to places within the outer wall, ODUHUMIDUMU to the east, where the OBA "played," and ODOKORAW to the residence of the OBA's eldest son, and ODIEKOGBA to the country at the back of the palace.

The OBA'S Compound became the centre of a very large city surrounded by two great ditches and the thrown-up earth forming walls on either side of them.

It takes one more than half an hour's hard walking to march from the inner wall or ditch on one side of the city to the same on the other side. And from the inner to the outer wall the distance varies from 1,000 to 3,600 paces.

The main roads are those leading from the Oba's Compound to Siluka, Yira and Ifon, Geduma, Sapoba, Sapeli, and Gilly Gilly.

In the olden days when the Sapoba and Gilly Gilly roads were unbroken approaches to and only bordered on one side by the palace wall and on the other by IMARAN'S house they must have had a very grand and beautiful appearance. A hundred paces broad, these green glades were lined by trees, growing on the raised sweeping of years on either side.'

It was the duty of certain towns to come in to Benin City yearly and clean and sweep these glorious entrances to the palace.

1. The OBA'S Compound was roughly divided into three quarters. The OBA's quarter EGWAI. The wives' quarter ODERIE, and the Eunuchs' quarter called after the first great Eunuch URUKPOTA.2

[1. The poorer people who could not afford to bury their dead in houses threw their bodies on to this road, so that with-these and the bodies of people sacrificed it really had an awful appearance.

2 They say that OVERAMI did not castrate people to act as Eunuchs, but that any child who had the misfortune to be born without, or by an accident to lose these parts, was brought by his parents to the king. It is possible that this is in part the truth, but what about those holes in the wall of a town not far from Benin City, through which they say the victim's head was thrust while this operation was carried out.]

Then there were eleven other divisions into which the City was divided and the names of these parts are those of the great chiefs who first founded them.

2. The beadmen's quarter (OBADAGBONYI) known as IDUMI WEBO. These people under NWAGWE appear to have partly lived close to the King in his Compound and partly to the N.W. of it.

3. Then to the South, behind the wall of the ODERIE was the quarter called OGBEZAWTI.

4. From here to where OBASEKI has his house was called OGBE.

5. Round about where ARASI has his house was called OGBIOKA (OBA'S son's quarter).

6. And where OBAYAGBON has his house was named the IDUMU IBIWI.

7. And where IHALIKA lives was called IDUM'EBO.

8. Then from the UDO or SILUKU road to the IKPOBA or GEDUMA road is named after OLENOKWA.

9. And from the IKPOBA road to the SAPOBA road the name is IDUMGWOSA as far as the house of PUSH PUSH.

10. From the latter's house along the Sapoba road is still called IDUMEDIE.

11. From there to the ditch, near the Sapeli road is called IDUMSIAMALU.

12. From the Sapeli road to OGBEZAWTI is called OGBILAKA.

In the OBA'S Compound there was also a quarter called IDUMWUKI, where certain people observed the changes of the moon.

Each of these twelve quarters contained "Houses" or small quarters belonging to certain chiefs.

EBWIMOSI, a spot close to the second wall on the Gilly Gilly road, was where Ezomo (or OJUMO) used to sacrifice people.

On the IKPOBA road, about fifteen hundred yards from the Residency at IDUMIGUN NI INYA YUGI the blacksmiths had their shops, and some 150 yards from the river IKPOBA is the grove AWORE.

On the UDO or SILUKU road, a hundred yards on the other side of the first wall, is IDUMIOBIECISA, a place where the test for witchcraft used to be administered, and some 260 yards further on near HOLOTO is AZAMA, where the OBA-elect went previous to being crowned.

On the SHELU road, 700 yards or so from the first ditch is IYAKPA or the gate dividing the Queen Mother from her people, and 500 yards further on is EEYA; where the Queen Mother has erected her new quarters. About 3000 yards from the Residency on this road is God's Grove called A RO'SA, and it was here that the OBA sent his son with a goat to sacrifice immediately after he had been crowned.

The late OBA'S palace was nearly in the Centre of what is known as the OBA'S Compound, his predecessors' palaces and their ruins being to the north-west of it. Near to each of these palaces, and I think there were thirty-one of them, was a deep well (OVVIO, being the name of the late OBA'S well), where they threw the bodies of the human beings sacrificed. Round about the palace were the headquarters of the IWASI, IWEBO, IBIWI, and IWEGWE, while to the South and East the houses of the OBA'S many wives were scattered. The wall running round the ODERIE or wives' quarter, or the back semicircular wall of the Compound, was considered sacred and no outsider was allowed even to touch it under the penalty of death.

The front wall ran in a straight line along the Sapoba to Gilli Gilli road, almost North-west and South-east for about 500 yards, and it was called OBOLOBA. The quarter behind it was called IDUMIWEBO, part of which is situated near to the OBA. The second wall was called OZAMOKO, while the quarter behind it was that of the Eunuchs, called URUKPOTA. The third wall was called UGOHE and the quarter behind it UGWOZOLA. Here the late OBA had a tin house built upon iron pillars, and it was in this quarter where people wishing to see him had to wait. There is a deep pit here and another just behind the present cemetery these pits are called IRIDIAWA1.

I never saw the palace, and cannot therefore describe it, but while wandering about its ruins I have come across holes in the ground some 15 feet deep, which were in some of the divisions of the palace, and were used by the late OBA as the burial place of those visitors whom he did not wish to see again.

The people still dig amongst the ruins of the palace for the bronzes the OBA and his followers valued so much. Mr. Erdmann, a well known German trader, on his last visit to Benin City informed me that he had seen the palace just after its roof had been burnt off and had taken many photographs of it. He said that the bronzes were ranged along the walls and served as historical symbols, reminding the historian of the chief events of the past history of the BINI people. Unfortunately this much-respected trader died on his way home in the year, 1904.

Inside the first or second wall was the tree under which people were sacrificed to the Rain power, this ceremony was called AIYAWOMANAMI.

People were sacrificed to the Sun[1] power under the UBOGWE tree which once stood just in front of the first wall outside the Compound. Where murderers are now hung under the OKHA and ULOHE trees near to IMARAN's quarter the ceremonies connected with the new Yam Juju were commenced.

And in the ODERIE where there is now a fowl house, and under the IKHIMI tree cows were sacrificed.

What we know now as the Sapeli Road was called UBOKA, while just outside the Residency on the Sapoba Road there was a place and a tree to which people used to be tied called the OGYUWO. Along one side of the IKPOBA road there are the ruins of a line of blacksmiths' shops, and blacksmiths are still found in different parts of the city working in iron and brass. The present productions in brass are rough and crude, but there are some artists who sculpture very well in clay, and so ornament the pillars in some of the houses of the Benin

[1. This was called AIYAWOMANUKBO.]

City Chiefs. Carvers in wood also exist, but the ivory carvers cannot be compared to those of Luango south of the Equator.

Upon showing the photos of bronzes and ivory in the "Antiquities of Benin" to certain chiefs, their surprise and satisfaction was very great, and they were glad to think that most of their ancient works of art still exist. It is to be hoped that private collectors of these bronzes may some day bequeath their collections to the British Museum, and that photographs at any rate of those collections in the Hamburg and Berlin Museums may be obtained and made accessible to the public. The future educated BINI as a British subject has a right to expect to find as full a collection as possible of these bronzes, etc., in this Imperial Museum.

By a house, I mean the abode of a family [1] living under its head, and not merely the dwelling place of an individual.

This house (Pl. XVI) is built on the same lines, though on a smaller scale than a chief's palace.

Passing along a road (ODE) one comes to a fence on one side of it, and this outer fence they call OGBOLI. Passing through an entrance there is, at a given distance, a second fence called EGODOLI, and then a third called EKUNUGOLI before coming to the house. The front wall of this house is called EBOWI, the side walls IGIEKA, and the back wall IYEKOWA.

The space between the enclosing wall and the house in front is called AGUDULI, while those on the sides and back are made into a garden called EGUN.

The house is divided into three sections, the centre part being the husband's quarters, looking towards the road to the left the wives' quarters ODERIE (Pl. XVb), and to the right the young men's quarters YEKOGBE. The doorway is called EKU, while the passages are called OBIOVIO.

The rooms are ranged in both these latter quarters on the inner sides of the outer walls of the house and the outer sides of the walls of the husband's quarter, and are mere lean-to sheds.

[1. The family is called EGRE, and is composed of ERA, father, OMIWU, the sons of the father, EYE, INYHEYHI, SAPAMAREGUDI, EGABIONA and the next our generations, none of whom may intermarry.]

The centre part or husbands' quarters of an ideal Bini house is divided into four rooms.

1. IKUNU OGULI or ALERA, father's room, where there is an altar to the memory of the occupant's father.

2. IKUNU KADICI or ALWIYE, mother's room.

3. IKUNU AROHUMU, the reigning son's room, or the head's grove or temple.

The entrance passage to this room is called ONURU, and facing you as you enter is the side of the altar AROWEBO (bead grove or altar).[1] There is an entrance to the wives' quarter from this. The roofs of these rooms incline towards the centre, which is an open square, and is upheld by a pillar (EHAWI) in each corner of the square. The floor of this square is about twelve inches or more below the level of the floor running round it, and this basin is called EGUDU. On the side opposite the altar is a raised platform of mud serving as a sofa or bed which is called UKBO. On the left hand side, just after entering the third room, are two closed-in rooms which you enter through small openings in the wall, one being the wife's room UGUGA, and the other the husband's room, OGWA.

The fourth room is a spare quarter called ODUOWA, and in a garden on the outside of the back wall of the ODUOWA is a general or medicine altar called OGUSHUN.

They call the roof EROHUMOWA, and it is made of the leaves (EBE) of a reed-like plant with a large leaf called EMWAME.

The ridge pole goes by the name OKPO, the rafter EREDOMI, while the opening or funnel down which the rain flows into the EGUDU is called the OBOTO.

[1 . For contents of this altar see under OLUKUN.]

A BINI HOUSE (Pl. XVI)

At the Back of the Black Man's Mind, by Richard Edward Dennett, [1906], at sacred-texts.com

  

CHAPTER XIX

 

BINI CUSTOMS

Some Bini Fetishes or Jujus.-EMATON. -The Phallic Pillar, God and the Devil. - Marriage Customs.-Secret Societies.

THE Bini call a wizard AZE but the Jakri word is OLOTCHO which is not very different from the word used by the BAVILI, i.e., NDOTCHI. A person accused of witchcraft is given the bark of the INYI pounded up together with water. If the accused vomits he is considered innocent, if he does not the poison generally kills him, and his guilt is thus proved.

The drum language does not appear to exist much north of Old Calabar, and the Bini will tell me nothing about it.

When the OBA makes father (Ezimi) the big thick looking drum beaten in the father's house is called EKUN ALWERA.

Then the musicians carry:-

   Two long drums   called IDAN  tum tum 
  One small     "      "   UKE  short drum like
 ours in shape. 
  One medium     "      "   IGEGAN  "     " 
  One large     "      "   IMIGAN  "     " 
 Road jujus are called MWIHEYO.

   Cowries represent the  EBAMI AKE 
  A big stone  "      "  OKWHAIHE 
  Pebbles        "      "  OVIA 
  A spoilt gun  "      "  OGUN (war) 
  

And when the people hear or notice that a road has a MWIHEYO put on it they talk of the road as ULAWMA.

Osun are Jujus to which certain Doctors or Obos are attached.

Some times as you are marching you will notice a bunch of leaves tied together fastened to a branch of a tree, this they call ESHU SHU, which might be translated little devil, and may be the origin of the word JUJU used here much as the word fetish is south of the equator.

A fence made of Kola saplings, planted four or five feet apart, tied together with native string, screens a tree with a

OMEY, entrance to AROVIA, a grove sacred to OVIA, Similar to MABILI in the Congo, with chalk marks as above in half circle on the ground in front of entrance.

piece of cloth wrapt round it, and bottles, wood, and cones of chalk at its root is called EKEJI.

OMEHU is a tree found near most villages with a collection of ant-hills heaped about its roots. They say this is to make women bear children.

At IGUSALA there is a double IKHIMI tree growing behind a nicely kept fence, with a strip of cloth round it. Between its buttresses are a pot of water, a drinking cup, shells, the bark of a tree, AWAWA (spoon bill) and goats' heads, and nearly round its base are seats for people to sit upon. While under a little shed, upon a wooden grill, rest great lumps of EKWHA (a kind of pudding made of the bean-like seeds of a tree) being smoked by a fire underneath them.

In the forest between ADENYOBA and ITE is a sacred stone called OKUTA.

On the Sapoba road there is a tree with the usual mound of earth and cowries in front of it, planted they say to mark the place where the top of Ezomo's ladder fell. The story goes that this great war chief heard it thunder and wanted to know what enemy of the Oba's it was who evidently wished to fight him, so he built a ladder to reac:h up to the heavens. When he and all his people were on the ladder and just

OMEHU, ant-hills placed at foot of tree near any village.

getting at the home of thunder, it gave way, and the top end of it fell where the tree is growing, about three miles from Ezomo's house.

Near to these sacred spots you will often find pots of water and cups, or yams or bananas, with the price in cowries against the cup or the food to be sold. I have never known these silent markets abused.

The people swear by licking and touching stones, iron, cowries, bits of twisted rope, and the crushed dried leaves of a plant, asking these things to kill them if they are not telling the truth. These swear jujus are called EKHWAI, and there is generally an EKHWAI in connection with an CISUN.

The only fetishes into which nails, etc., are driven which the writer has noticed are two very old ones preserved in the temple to OLUKUN.[1]

The EMATON (the thing you keep on digging) is a very important CISUN among the BINI, quite a number were found stuck into the ground near to the King's palace.

The EMATON (Pl. XVII) is an iron staff ornamented with two figures of the chameleon, the signs of wisdom, one just above and one below four leaf-like figures pointing downwards representing AJA, or that knowledge of medicines and lore supposed to be taught to man by the fairies who take certain people into the bush for this purpose. Then opposed to the AJA at the top of the staff is a bunch of figures surmounted by the representation of a horse and a bird.

This bird they call the AKIAMAWLO, which translated means-There existed previously the continued state of the living thou and him.

The figure of the horse bearing the bird stretches across the circle of figures to points between the two prongs of two figures. They call this ESIN (the act of exposing to sight). The figure marked 3 on the sketch represents the two tail feathers of the bird called ARIOKPA (the first one who sees). This bird is also called IFE or love, and IFE is, as you know, a town in Yoruba land, from which all people are said to have Come. (Can this mean that the BINI believe themselves to be the children of the spirit of light and love?)

The above, like Mawalala, stand outside the formula.

Category 1. Figure 8 is meant to represent that semicircular knife which is used to separate the skin from the body of the yam and is called ELULIMA, the act of having to keep on boring (the Bavili look upon the sky as solid, and so do the Bini, in the sense that a roof is solid). This semicircular knife, then, conveys the idea of " the heavens."

Category 2. Figure 7 represents the flat round hoe with which they hoe the earth, and they call this figure EGWE, the act of being.

[1. See OLUKUN.]

Category 3. Figure 10 represents the axe OGWANA (the relative in law of OGUN, the Yoruba "power" presiding over implements of war and hunting). The story says that an old lady who would cut wood on their first day (=Sunday) was banished to the moon. OGUN =blacksmith who by the help of fire makes his implements.

Category 4. Figure 9 represents the machet called IKHU (the act of cutting up the dead wood, which is a motion).

Category 5. Figure 5 represents the flat (fish-knife-like) knife that the Oba of Benin used to carry in one hand. It was held upwards towards the heavens when the King made a prayer of supplication, and is called EBEN, connected with the word EBAW, sacrifice or offering, and the Dove. I am not at present able to associate this knife with harvest.

Category 6. Figure 6 represents the knife used by the Oba to slay men or animals for sacrifice, and it is called ADA (one who propagates) This certainly entails suffering. And finally we come to the two-pronged figure joined as it were to IFE, which is called ELELI (the witness who speaks).

Thus was the Oba as God's representative on earth reminded of his descent from God through IFE, and so did the EMATON convey to all who chose to look at it that man is of spirit, body, and mind, and that there are three distinct kinds of knowledge, i.e. that which he receives directly from God, that which he obtains from his animal nature, and that which he is taught by the elf AJA.

 

THE PILLARS IKO (MEETING) AND OYISA (GOD).

At a town called EBIYAWMALO, which I visited in company with Dr. A. G. Christian, we noticed a pillar (PI. XVIII) in

Pillar, or IKO, in front of meeting-house at EBIYAWMALO.

front of the native Court-house, and the chief told us that it was called IKO (a meeting).

Not far from here we noticed a hollow pillar under a small shed, and the chief of the place called that IKO also. This

A hollow clay pillar, IKO, at OKPWEBO, with three Achatena shells inserted in it.

pillar was of red sun-dried mud, and three shells were fixed in the mud on the side of the pillar exposed to our view.

Then at ADENYOBA near the OVIA river there is an altar

Pillar, called OYISA, and altar with IKHURE sticks and pot of water on it at ADENYOBA.

to OYISA placed under a shed, by the side of which is an ornamented whitewashed pillar or IKO.

In the bush near to the village called OVA there is a stunted

Squat pillar at OVA, called ADAMBI, said to be female.

squat kind of pillar which they call ADAMBI and described as a woman "Juju."

Then at OWO, in the Oba's Palace yard, I noticed a pillar, and the king called it OROBALE (which might be translated the husbands' ward).

Then, proceeding farther away from the sea into the KUKURUKU country at ISULE, the Conservator and self noticed a triune pillar under a little shed, the figures being back to back and those of two males and a female. This the Chief called BABATCHIGIDDI (or earthenware image of the father).

But shortly after this we entered the village of IAIU, and. on the stone plateau near to the chiefs house our attention was drawn to three grass-capped figures (Pl. XVIIIb), two being of solid clay, while the third was simply formed of two upright sticks with a grass cap on it. These figures the chief called ESHI, which was interpreted as being equivalent to the Bini word Esu or ESHU (Devil). On the other hand, three fig-trees growing out of platforms of loose stones collected together close to these figures they called OYISA or God.

At ATEYI there is a figure standing on a platform outside a

A small wooden figure and two pieces of ironstone outside wall of house on a clay platform with a board with pieces of iron driven into it in front of it. The figure is called ESHU, and represents the Devil.

house, by the side of which are two pieces of ironstone, and they called this figure ESHU.

Then all juju houses have an altar to ESU outside, while those whose houses own the "Juju" AWLOMILA (a small basin containing the nut IVIAWNOMILA in a piece of cloth) may also have an altar to ESU outside their houses.

They say that OYISA is a trinity composed Of OYISA or

   O'SA'LUGIMAIYI[1]  the King of us all on earth. 
  O'SA'LUBWA  who made us to be. 
  O'SA'LOGODWA  the queenly mortar of being. 
 And that he had a son called ESU, or ESHU who is also a trinity composed of

   ESHU  the Devil connected with mystery. 
  OLUKUN  the teacher. 
  OGYUWU  the King or Queen of Death. 
 When OSALUBWA was making man he left him in an unfinished state: Esu came along and finished him according to his ideas. OSALUBWA returned, and was much annoyed, and banished Esu to the east, where the Sun comes from (ANIMINIHIA MIVI).

From this it will be noted that while trees symbolise the triune God the Creator, the pillars represent the so-called Devil or procreator in three parts also.

 

MARRIAGE.

There appear to be two kinds of marriages among the Bini.

Among the upper classes the children are betrothed by their parents from infancy. The present may be a nominal one, such as four kolas, three cowries, and some palm wine, or it may be more.

The man is supposed to keep on giving the child betrothed to him presents until she is grown up; he also makes her parents gifts. The seduction of such a betrothed girl is heavily punished. On the other hand, among the poor the girl is not necessarily betrothed, and a man may seduce her without legal punishment.

The man may refuse to marry his betrothed, and then he

[1. =Ogie x Oyisa x Lugimaiyi

royal self     god       earth.]

has the right to give her in marriage to anyone, unless she is of noble family, when she can only be given to a free man.

The girl may not refuse to marry the man to whom she is betrothed, or his chosen representative; but the father may at any time refuse to give his daughter to her betrothed, when he has to refund to him all the presents the would-be husband has given to her and her parents.

When his wife conceives the husband gives her a cock to sacrifice.

The son marries his deceased father's wives, who have not borne children to him.

After the birth of a child, the father gives the mother another name; the child also will give her mother a name, a friend will also name her, and so one often hears a person spoken of by two or three names.

Very few women in this country are true to their husbands, many of them having at least one lover. When a child is born the woman does not declare who its father is until her husband is dead. Many women live openly with their lovers; the great majority of cases in court are for return of wife, and many women prefer to go to prison than to return to their legal husbands.

Often on the roads one passes a small tree planted by the side of the road, near where are chalk marks and a mound of earth, cowries, yams, and plaintains. This tree has been planted in memory of the fact that some woman or other has brought forth a child on that spot.

 

SECRET SOCIETIES.

The object that most of the secret societies round about Benin seem to have had at heart was to check the despotism of the rulers of the people, but often the ruler himself became a member of the society, and thus as its leader secured its services in furthering his own despotic ideas.

The Beni call their society IGWOMORI, and it is said that while still a prince the late OBA OVERAMI became a member of it. The first crime this society committed was on the death of OBA ADOLO and crowning of OVERAMI, and, at the latter's suggestion, to execute all the late ADOLO'S councillors. OVERAMI then placed many of the IGWOMORI, sons of the lately executed councillors, in their fathers' place.

The secret society of the ISHAN people played a great part in defending the Benin City chief ABOHON and other refugees after the British had taken Benin City in 1897-8.

There are secret societies at OWOO and AKWE.

The SOBO Society is called OTRADA, that at IFON, OTU, while we have only just had a sad experience of the influence of the EKEMEKU, or the Silent Ones, in the hinterland of ASABA.

In an interesting article, dated May 13, in the West African Mail, Mr. Hughes, an earnest student of African customs, writes:

"The EKEMEKU Society has for long been in existence. The aim and idea of its establishment was-

"1st. To settle any tribal differences amicably.

"2nd. To uphold the law and institution of their countries according to rights of usage.

"3rd. To prevent any oppression by their kings and chiefs.

"Of late the EKEMEKU Society has become composed for the most part of the younger and more lawless elements, who hold their meetings at night, who work by secret methods, and who are a continual source of terror to the more peaceful natives, whom they compel by threats of death to contribute to their society."

On page 65 of Great Benin, Mr. C. Punch is made to say:

"I should imagine the Bini would have the ORO fetish, etc. The Bini call this whip ELIMIDU, and it was given to the OKIASON (OKERISON) by the OBA. From the season IHAW to IGWE, men desirous of obtaining a title roamed about armed with an iron instrument, by means of which they endeavoured to kill seven or fourteen people. As witness of their prowess they presented the OBA with the dried breasts of the women and the dried penis of the men they had killed. With these parts of the slain men and women the OBA is said to have made certain medicine for fetish purposes. To give these "braves" a fair chance to accomplish their task, the OBA made the chiefs bring all their people to dance in his compound every night. The "braves" ran a great chance of being killed themselves, for it was known that they were about, and naturally the people kept their eyes open. Should one of these aspirers to the rank of nobility be killed by the man attacked, the latter took possession of his dried trophies, and continued the process of killing on his own account.

If a person attacked by one of these people had the presence of mind to cry out the words OGED' EGBOMA AYAN AKPWOKA WAW GAPOKAI (something to the effect that plantains do not kill a man in the day time) it was a matter of honour not to kill him.

The noise of chain and brass anklets as a woman ran away was also a life-saving sign.

When these men had presented the OBA with these parts of seven or fourteen persons the OBA gave them the coral necklace, bracelets, and anklets as a sign that they had become OKIASON; IDUN OHOGBI was their chief, and they lived in OBAYAGBON's quarter.

At the Back of the Black Man's Mind, by Richard Edward Dennett, [1906], at sacred-texts.com

  

CHAPTER XX

 

MORE CUSTOMS

Bini Dances.-Making Father.-The Rites.-Women's Dance.-Egugu DanceOvia Dance.

 

BINI DANCES

IN the afternoon of February 2nd, 1903, after rather a long march, we entered UREZEN, a town not far from UDO, in the

A mound of clay under a rough seat, studded with pots and an iron ornament, like this, here and there. This is called OSUN.

district of Benin. As we neared the blacksmith's shed we noticed twelve figures, quaintly clad, singing a song in falsetto, and a boy. These twelve people were dressed in a dress (OMIGWI), made of strips of leaves of the palm called OME; their heads and shoulders were covered in a mask and mantle of very rough cloth that looked like the material sacks are made of, their heads were crowned by a head-dress of the feathers of the AWAWA. Their arms and hands were encased in long sleeves of the same rough material a's their mantles, and in their hands they held sticks which they call IKWATA.

The boy simply wore a skirt made of strips of palm leaves, but in his hand he held a staff called ERAN. This was made of the rib of the palm leaf knotched at intervals, and surmounted by a bushy tuft of strips of the petiole.

ERAN, the upper part of the branch, or petiole, of the palm tree, knotched with a fringe of the strips of the petiole at the top.

I watched them as they sang and glided about rather than danced, until at last they rustled away, making a cooing noise like that of the OKKU bird, and vanished in the direction of the grove sacred to OVIA.

From time to time, until long after midnight, these dancers kept rushing past the shed or native rest house under which I was encamped, cooing and singing in falsetto.

At times I heard cries coming from the direction of the grove, and wondered what they were, and felt like getting up to see. But cries in a native town are so common that they may mean almost anything, from the howl of a punished child to the cry of a man in grief.

Early next morning I got ahead of my carriers and slipped into the sacred grove. On the road in front of the entrance to the grove were the twelve dresses arranged on posts in a line, and the boy's little one in the same line, but apart. IKHIMI trees were planted at the entrance, while on both sides of the road were lines of Kola trees. Passing the IKHIMI trees, I entered a kind of lane some fifteen or twenty feet long, and then came to a fence I and second entrance before I found myself in the grove itself.

At the far side of the circle of cleared bush I noticed the OLUKUN tree, against which was resting the ERAN that had been carried by the little boy the night before. In the centre of this circular grove was a "calabash" or gourd, a pot, and the ashes of what had been a small fire and the feathers of a fowl.

[1. These fences are called EGBON or OBA, and are always formed of the sacred plants IKHIMI, UNWETIOTA, and OTWA.]

About the 15th of March, just after crossing the CISSE or CIVIA river, the Conservator of Forests, Mr. H. N. Thompson, and myself arrived at a market place in the ITE creek. The market was in full swing but nearly ending when we got there, and while many of the Jakri women were seated before their wares under the shade of trees, some were just pushing off their canoes from the beach with their cargoes of palm oil and kernels. They were inclined to scamper away on seeing us, but we managed to persuade them to take no notice of us, and purchased food for ourselves and our boys. After we had breakfasted someone began to throw the apple-like fruit of a tree growing there into the river, in the attempt to throw them across. The infection spread, and soon all our carriers were busy competing. It spread further, and the Conservator and I joined in. The Conservator succeeded, and I clapped my, hands. This act seems to have been taken by the boys as a signal for a dance-at any rate, they all set about gathering sticks to serve as IKWATA, and soon formed themselves into a circle and commenced singing, keeping time with their feet and by beating their sticks together. Soon one boy danced into the middle of the circle and commenced spinning himself round; then, still spinning and inclined towards the centre of the circle at an angle of 45o, he seemed to whirl round and round the circle until, losing his balance, he came bumping up against one or the other of the boys forming the circle. Some of the boys were very clever at this dance, and they seemed quite keen on out-dancing one another, and on our part we were much interested in it, hardly expecting so scientific a display. Finally the Ranger Mockpai, a powerfully built man, was so moved that he must have a try, so he doffed his red coat and started spinning, and when he whirled around he shook the earth as he touched it, now with one foot and then with the other. The excitement was immense, the singing boisterous, until this ponderous dancer broke loose and cannoned right and left among the boys, who fell down before him like ninepins; then the dancing came to an end.

We purposed crossing the river OSSEOMO or AWREOMO on the morrow (the 22nd April, 1903), so we sent a boy on ahead to OKOGBO to say that we were coming and would cross the river in the morning.

We arrived at the crossing a little before 7 a.m. and met our boy there, who informed us that the ferryman had left early in the morning to bring up canoes large enough to carry our party across. As we waited a woman came down the hill from the village above, bringing some food for our boys. She had innocently taken off her cloth and made a pad of it to carry the load on her head the more easily, so that there appeared to be something wanting about her toilet that amused our boys from the city. More women followed her, some-of whom appeared very angry. We made inquiries, and found that some scamps among our boys, fearing that there would not be enough food to go round, had determined to forestall matters, and had run along the road and waylaid the ladies, and taken what they considered their share of the food. The Ranger Mockpai and the rest of the boys were annoyed at this, and so the scamps were turned over and given a dozen with a cane. This and the payment for the food taken pacified the good women, and so time went on until nearly 9 o'clock. We now became impatient and started shouting for the canoes, and getting no reply, we fired off a gun-still no reply. At last we prepared a raft and placed the interpreter and a forest guard upon it and told them to cross the river and hurry up the ferryman with the canoes. As they had never crossed the river at this place, and knew nothing of its dangers, they set off quite gaily. It now being nearly eleven, we decided to breakfast. When half way through our meal the canoes turned up, and we relieved our pent-up feelings by expressing them as strongly as we knew how, and would probably have proceeded to further and more strenuous arguments had not our attention been arrested by the woebegone appearance of our interpreter and forest guard: they were shivering, and looked half drowned. It appeared that while trying to negotiate a turning the raft had upset and left them clinging to the bushes which were growing out of deep swamp, and water where a foothold was an impossibility. The ferryman's canoes had luckily picked them up. No large canoes had been obtainable, so that we had to make our way across in the wretchedly small ones that the ferryman had brought, and as we rushed down with the fierce current, and were cleverly steered into different branches of a perfect maze of streams, and kept on ducking our heads to avoid overhanging trees, we began to realise what a foolhardy thing we had done in sending the two boys off on a clumsy raft, and by the time we reached our destination we fully believed the people when they told us that they had not heard us shout or even fire off our guns.

The old Jakri in charge of the market town of Ugo told us that he and his people had been invited by OGUGU to his town, as he was "making father."

We started together, but came to a place where a dispute arose between one of our boys, who professed to know the road, and the old Jakri. We thought that it was just possible that the old man wished to put us off the scent, so that we should not be at Ugo in time for the festivities, so we trusted to our own boy, and after three hours and twenty minutes' walk arrived at the outskirts of the town, only to be met by the old Jakri, who from all appearances had been there some time.

Soon after our arrival, OG'UGU, accompanied by one or two Benin City chiefs and their followers, came to welcome us. He told us that he had intended "making father" that evening, but that as we had come, and the festivities might annoy us, he would put the feast off until we had gone. We thanked him for his welcome, and assured him that we should very much like to be present while he was making father, and prayed him to proceed with his festival just as if we were not present. He seemed pleased to be honoured by our presence, and ordered his people to bring us wood, fire, and water, and food for ourselves and our boys.

Shortly after dark crowds of people bearing lamps and torches came together in front of OG'UGU'S residence. The cloistered wall through which one had to pass to obtain an entrance into his house contained several altars, and as we lay on our camp beds in the rest-house opposite we gazed through the door and window at what was going on before us.

There stood OG'UGU before one of the altars, dressed in what appeared to be a red hat and gown-a glowing figure, the lurid light of many torches falling on him. Then a goat was held up so that he might sever its head from its body and sprinkle its blood upon the altar. Six goats were killed, and all the altars within and without the house sprinkled with their blood, and all this was done in comparative quiet. Then OG'UGU, a NABORI holding up one of his arms, and followed by his courtiers, danced before his people. Then followed the three great dances called UKELE, UGULU or SAKWADI, and OHOGO, which I will describe later on. We saw but little of these dances that night, but from the noise that took place the natives appeared to have appreciated them; and then for a time all was quiet. Soon, however, bands of people singing and bearing lamps and torches wended their way in Indian file round about and into OG'UGU's residence; no sooner had one emerged than another seemed to take its place, and their songs as they approached and wandered about the place and finally departed were weird and beautiful. Some sang softly in falsetto, and some sang songs that reminded us of old Gregorian chants. This went on all night. In the early morning OG'UGU, preceded by a band of drummers and players on beaded gourds, came out of his house, followed by many hundreds of people. Immediately in front of him was a man bearing a dish of cowries (IGO), and just behind him was his umbrella bearer and his courtiers. Under the shade of this umbrella OG'UGU crushed the cones of chalk (ORHUE) and sprinkled the dust upon the cowries. Thus the procession passed us on its way down the grassy glade which led to the Benin City road. The band waited for the procession just where the glade is divided by KOLA trees from the village, while it proceeded to the "juju" place to salute the great father, who in the spirit is still in Benin City, but who, as OVERAMI, the late OBA of Benin, is in reality a prisoner in Old Calabar. On the return of the procession the band joined it, and OG'UGU scattered the cowries right and left to the boys and girls who scrambled for them.

Thus did OG'UGU celebrate the anniversary of the death of his father.

Then he came to greet us as we sat in front of the rest house, and asked us if we would like to see the dances more distinctly, as he was afraid that we had seen very little of them the night before. We thanked him, and said yes.

The first dance, called UGULU or SAKWADI, was danced by one man only. He turned circles, keeping perfect time to the band of beaded calabashes and drums. The second, OKELE, was rather more interesting, as it was danced by two men; one had a fan in his hand, and the other had his hands clasped in front of him. The man with the fan went through certain steps, which the man with the hands clasped had to copy exactly; when he failed another took his place. The third dance was called OHOGO, and was most remarkable. Fifteen men, three with native bells and the rest with beaded calabashes, took part in it. They were scantily dressed, and had bells and rattling seeds round their arms and ankles. A man with a bell (evidently their conductor), with one with a beaded calabash, were surrounded by the other thirteen in a perfect circle. At a signal from their conductor the thirteen, singing in parts, ran round in a circle, while all beat their calabashes and bells; suddenly they stopped, turned towards each other in couples, and saluted each other; at a signal they then started off again, changing their step as it pleased their conductor, who seemed to have perfect control over their movements. Then at a signal all danced inwards towards the centre of the circle, and crowded themselves over their now crouching conductor and his companion. At a beat of his bell all withdrew and continued dancing in a circle. The many and complicated steps, all perfectly accomplished, placed this dance a long way above the general average native dance, and we were more than astonished to find how perfectly trained these dancers were. We were told that in the olden days the slightest error in public in such a dance was punished by death.

On the 2nd August, 1903, the Chief OBASEKI gave a dance, to which he invited the officers then present in Benin City. This dance was given in one of the rooms in the Chiefs house. The room was square in shape, the roof sloping inwards towards the centre, which was open, forming something between a Roman pluvium and a Spanish patio, some 15 or 20 feet square. On two sides were recesses, in one of which the Chief's wives were crowded, and it was on the mud platform in front of this recess where the dancing took place.

Some of the wives played the drums, while others beat the beaded calabashes and sang the choruses to the songs of the different ladies, who from time to time got up and danced and sang. Each lady was evidently famous for some particular song and step, but we preferred one that reminded us rather of one of our own round dances, danced to a song full of her husband's praise

We had been travelling up hill for some time, and began to wonder when we should, arrive at the town of OTWAW, which we were told was just at the top of the hill. At last we reached the outskirts, passing a wall of loose stones, and found that the town, like many of those in this KUKURUKU country, was built in little plateaux at different levels. OTWAW lies nestled in a hollow, just at the top of a very high hill, the grey-coloured thatch and red mud walls of the houses looking well against the dark green woods dotted about with palm trees as a background.

Coming up through a regularly built street, we ascended a kind of platform where the "rest-house" has been built. A stone wall rising up from the street below keeps the earth in this plateau from being washed away by the rains. An old fig tree and an IKHIMI tree grow nearly opposite to the resthouse, and a pole between two other small trees bears a netlike "juju," which the people call OSUMEGBI.

It was on this plateau that the Conservator and I witnessed a very curious dance, called EGUGU (Pl. XIX), which the BINI boys with us said was the same as their OVIA dance. The old Chief informed us that they were about to commence their EGUGU dance (this was on the 19th January, 1904); that it would continue for three days, and recommence for three days in about three months from date.

Just before dark we were amused and astonished by the appearance of a man on the plateau. He was dressed in a huge orange-coloured hat beautifully made of the dyed strips of the palm leaves; in the front running to the centre of the crown of the hat was a hair-like fringe of the same material, while a similar kind of fringe stood out like a brim all around it. He wore a mask and mantle of network, which in front was white, but dyed black over the face and shoulders. From the mask near the nose and mouth the network protruded like the trunk of an elephant with a bunch of strips of palm leaves. Hanging from the mantle were numerous strips of palm leaves dyed orange, completely covering the body. His legs and arms were enveloped in black network similar to that of the mask. Round his ankles orange and white fringes of strips of palm leaves covered some negro bells. In his hand he held a whip of plaited palm leaves, some 15 feet long, curled like a hoop.

This curiously draped figure rushed on the plateau in front of us and cracked his whip. The people who were crowding the streets surrounding the plateau howled. Then they followed the masked man down the town, and "horns" were blown.

Shortly four men dressed as above, and five in black masks of much less size, with red and white plaited fringe hanging at the back, rushed up the street, followed by the crowd, and came on to the plateau. They ran away; then they came back, all singing a jerky march, and passed to the upper part of the town. Then they returned, the people crowing like cocks, and some blowing horns. The EGUGU cracked their whips and retired one by one. The crack of the whip was greeted softly or loudly, according to its loudness. The EGUGU came back in pairs, and cracked their whips and retired. The people in the crowd crowed like cocks. At last a differently clad EGUGU came on. This man's mask looked like a huge crown made of laths joined together by strips of palm leaves; each lath carried a tuft of cotton at its extremity, and a long streamer of white fibre. The mask was of black network like those of the others, but the whole mantle was covered with the quills of the porcupine. The fringe-like dress was white and not orange.

This figure made three entrances on to the plateau, and then all the dancers, followed by the crowd, crowing and blowing horns, ran off to their sacred grove, to keep on cracking their whips all night.

I had crossed over from the valley of the OGBA river to the GILLY-GILLY road, and having passed through IPAKU and EGBA, had arrived at EGWAHAMI, when my attention was arrested by the sounds of singing and drumming, which I was told were caused by some dancers who had come from UGBENI to give this village health and good luck. So I walked to where they were dancing, and found that the dancers were dressed very much like the EGUGU we had noticed at OTWAW. But the whole band were to dance that evening at UGBENI, and, as we were bound for that place, I left these five strolling players to do what good they could for the people of EGWAHAMI, and proceeded to UGBENI.

UGBENI or EGBENI is a place between Benin City on the road to UGWATON or GWATT'O and Gilly-Gilly, and is not far from the place where Consul Philips and his party were so mercilessly massacred by the people of Benin City in 1897.

One of my boys now told me that I should see the OVIA dance, which the boys had played in dancing at ITE, danced as it should be.

UKHURE sticks found on nearly all altars throughout the country. Great chiefs have as many but generally found in couples or threes.

lt was late in the afternoon on the 27th May, 1904, when the boys placed my chair in the shady side of a square in the town of UGBENI, so that I might witness the OVIA dance. Three men carried UKHURE sticks and placed them near to me against a wall. A boy carried one decorated with a tuft of strips of palm leaves. A crowd of women were to my left, a crowd of men just opposite to me, while children were as six, seated on the far side of the women.

Certain masters of the ceremonies pushed back the crowd until there was room enough for the dancers in the middle. There were ten dancers, five dressed in one fashion and five in another, and they formed themselves into a circle. Though these dancers were not dressed as extravagantly as those at OTWAW, yet they were picturesque and curious enough to be worth describing. Five were dressed as follows:-

A huge head-dress, attached to a kind of crown. A triangular wooden framework, covered with red cotton cloth, in the centre of which was a small mirror, while feathers of the hornbill ran up two sides of the triangle and around the top of the crown. A couple of the tail feathers of the parrot were attached to each of the feathers around the crown. The crown itself was of wood, surrounded by bands of gold or silver braid. Two square pieces of glass inserted into the crown gave it the appearance of having eyes. Below this was a mask of network, and over this was hung a small piece of a consular uniform rich in silver braiding. Then from the crown long streamers of red cotton cloth were suspended. The cape, or mantle, was of strips of palm leaves, and they had a garment of similar make tied round their waists. Instead of the black, neatly-netted work underwear of the EGUGU, these dancers wore ordinary cotton pants and shirts with long sleeves. Around their legs just below the knee they wore a string of negro bells, while around their ankles they had anklets of dried seeds that rattled.

The five others were dressed like the five just mentioned, save for their head-dress. They had the netted mask and crown and red streamers flowing from it, but the upper part was of light branched woodwork, from the branches of which hung many red parrot feathers in couples.

The dance commenced by the masked men beating their sticks while the women sang, and the men behind the circle walked backwards and forwards, with their shoulders pushed upwards, cooing like birds. Suddenly a couple of the masked figures rushed into the centre of the circle, and stamped the ground violently in front of each other. Then the others ran round in a circle, all their movements in perfect accord to the time they kept beating with their sticks. Then one of these clumsy-looking figures came into the centre of the circle, and commenced that spinning and roundabout motion already described in the dance at ITE, but instead of cannoning against one of the circle, the dancer in this case righted himself in time, and started stamping before one in the circle, who had to stamp back at him.

Many of their songs were sung in parts and were very effective, while the dancing was excellent. No one is supposed to know who these masked people are, and for a whole month they live in the grove sacred to OVIA, and are fed by the public. Any village in the district can send for them to dance there by paying for them, and they say that the dancing brings health to the people.

OTON is the name of the burial dance and song. Those who have lost one of their own house carry an empty box, covered with cloth, mirrors, and beads. They sing OMAWRARIYOYO, and parade the streets. Sometimes it is some years before this is done: it is then a sign that so-and-so's father has at last been buried, and that the son has now amassed sufficient wealth to succeed to his father's honours.

At the Back of the Black Man's Mind, by Richard Edward Dennett, [1906], at sacred-texts.com

  

CHAPTER XXI

 

TRACES OF NKICI-ISM AMONG THE BINI

TheWeek.-The Year.-The Seasons.-The Rivers.-A Temple.-Wells.Trees. -Omens. -Animals.

 

THE BINI SEASONS.

THE Bini have now eight days in their week, but the part of jujuism, which I identify with Nkicism, has preserved the more ancient form of four days. The names of the eight days are:

1. ELEOWU for EDEOWU, first day.

2. AKWE.

3. ILAGWE.

4. UNIYIELE.

5. USIELE.

6. DEHAN.

7. EDEYHINELE.

8. DELUMALE.

Each of these days is a market day in or quite near to Benin City.[1]

On the 1st day the market is at INYA = EK'lNYA.

On the 2nd the market is at IOBA = EKIOBA (Benin City).

On the 3rd the market is at IGO = EKIGO (on the Gilly-Gilly road).

On the 4th the market is at BAREKE = EKEBAREKE (Benin City).

[1: 1. Yam market.
 2. King's mother's market.
 3. Money or cowrie market.
 4. Slave compound market.]

On the fifth day EKINYA is again the market place, and the other three markets follow in the above order to the end of the eight days. But the juju doctor (OBO) renews the chalk marks in front of the ARO, or sacred grove, on the first

Chalk marks found on the ground in front of AKE.

day, EDEKEN, and on the fifth, which is again EDEKEN. The names of these four days are:

1. EDEKEN,[1] spoken of as being IYASE's day (the king's prime minister and regent).

2. ED'AHO, spoken of as being OSUMA'S day (messenger connected with the king's wants).

3. ED'AWRIE, spoken of as being ESOGBAN's day (messenger connected with king's gifts).

4. ED'OKWAW, spoken of as being ESAWN's day (the king's captain or officer).

[1. These are possibly the Big men or great Lords who are always near the king's person. But Mendael speaks of three only. See Great Benin, p. 92.]

Their year is divided into four parts, two of four lunar months, one of four, and one joining month, or thirteen lunar months in all, just as among the Bavili.

There are six (or seven, counting the first month) seasons in this year.

The joining month (called MAWALALA in Kongo) is also looked upon as a period or season in itself, and it is the time when the natives plant their yams, and thus represents the month or season of love or spring. It is called IKHURE, and is the time of drizzling rains, just before the rainy season. This month, however, instead of representing the first month at the beginning of the dry season, is in the place of the sixth month of the Bavili.

The next period is EHAW, and includes the seasons IHEDU, two months of which are the tornado months, and IHEMA, two months of heavy rains. EHAW is the custom of giving food to a stranger on his arrival in a town.

The next period is named IGWE, and it includes the seasons IGWE, two months, including the little dry season and heavy rain, and AGWE, one tornado month and one month of rest and quiet. IGWE (or IGBE or IWE = weight also 10) signifies the care and dress of children, and is the season of harvest. It is worthy of note that the Bini connect the idea of weight with harvest.

The period IHEUKU is that which contains the seasons AHISHUKU and IHEUKU, the four months forming their dry season.

It is said that the Bini have no names for their months, and this in a sense is true. But they number them, and so the numbers are really their names. If we wish to know the meanings of the names of their months we must get at the signification of their numerals.

1. Let us begin with the first month of their dry season, when, having reaped their harvest of yams, the people say they "rest and chop." This is the second month in the season AGWE. The word for one is OWU, which in the form Owu means death, or, as we might put it, the beginning and end of all things. This agrees with the time and idea contained in the month of MAWALALA in the Kongo.

2. The next month, the first in the AHISHUKU season, the Bini are busy cutting down woods and forests for the purpose of making their farms. This action they call IFIE.

IFA is literally that which is scraped off and is also the name of the palm nut god of the Yoruba. The verb FA is to clean or scrape off.

The letters F, H, and Y, are interchangeable thus, HA is to scrape, UHE the Bini for IFE, and the Bina palm tree river spirit, taking the place of the Yoruba IFA is OVIA. O is a royal title short for OGIE; IA is the lengthened form of A, so that OVIA is really a lengthened form of IFA.

E as a prefix gives the verb following it a substantive form; thus EFA or EVA would mean a scraping. This idea of scraping off is connected with the idea of creation both in Xivili and Bini. The Bini use the word EVA as the numeral 2; EVA is therefore connected both with the river spirit OVIA and with ideas of creation.

3. The third month the people begin to burn what they can of the felled trees, and this act they call EGBAW.

EGBAW is a state of being cleaned as corn is when its husks are scraped off; so that the idea of scraping is associated with the third month also. Thus we have EHA three opposed to EVA, two both with much the same symbolic meaning. EHA, however, in the word ten and three or thirteen appears as ERA, and ERA means father.

We may then conclude that in EVA and EHA we have given to us the maternal and paternal principles, found under the symbolic names of the second and third months, in XIVILI, i.e., the deep of fresh water and the deep of salt water.

4. During the fourth month they clear the ground, thus getting it ready for planting the yams. This action they term EKWEN; the number four is ENA, and means that which contains the power of spreading.

5. ISAN, or five, means the act of springing. Thus these two months are connected with planting in the earth.

6. During the sixth month the people drive poles (IFIEMA) into the ground near to their yams, so that the yam vines may creep up them. Now the word for six is IHAN, and that means the act of being entangled. This is the month of marriage following that of love, the spring.

7. During the next month they keep on putting poles in the ground. The word for seven being (3 + 4) IH'INAW, signifying the act of being entangled and spreading. This is much the same meaning as that of sambuade, or seven, in the Kongo.

8, 9, and 10. Then for three months or so they keep on weeding their plantations, EKBONA NAGWINIMU:

   8 = INENE  the act of much spreading (conception). 
  9= IHINI  the act of having fruit (germination). 
  10= IGBE  the act of being heavy (pregnancy). 
 11. Six months after planting, or the eleventh month, the yams known as EMAWWE are ready, and 11 is OWARA (i.e., first being or first substance), the second month of pregnancy. Harvest, weight, pregnancy have been also shown to be associated with the tenth and eleventh months of the Bavili.

12. During the twelfth month the IKME yams are ready, and 12, or IWE'YA, might be termed maternal weight or travail.

13. During the thirteenth month the Bini finally harvest the yams called IGULWA. The number 13 is called IWE'RA, or paternal weight, the second month of travail. The meaning conveyed by these numbers 12 and 13 agrees with the Bavili twelfth and thirteenth months.

14. Then comes the month of rest again, which of course might be called the fourteenth month, or IWINA, which gives us the idea of (spreading and travail or) birth, and may be said to be the end of the double figure months.

Thus the meaning of the names of the Bini months correspond to some extent to those of the Bavili months. I cannot however show that then any genetic connection was asserted of the month and seasons of the former. But if up to the present nothing of the sort has been found, it by no means follows that more extensive research will not bring it to light. I append a table of the Bini months, seasons, and divisions of the year.

I now give a few notes on other points of Bini belief and custom.

 

THE SACRED RIVERS OF BENIN CITY WHICH HAVE SACRED GROVES OR ARO (THUS, OVIA RIVER, SACRED GROVE AROVIA).

OYISA is a river rising to the north of Benin City, near IBEKWE. This word is the general term used for God, and is pronounced ORISHA by the Yoruba people. In the lower reaches its name changes to OKWO.

OKWO is noted for its natural bridge which crosses it on the road from IGWIKO to EMMA at a place called OKOKWO.

While ARUWANA, a son of the King of Benin City, followed by his dog, was crossing this river, his dog fell into the rushing torrent and was lost. He was much grieved, and joined stick to stick until in two hours he touched the bottom, but could not find his dog, so they say he ordered this stone bridge to be built.

OVIA. Ovia is said to have been one of the wives of AWLAWYO, the Alafin of AWYAW. A wife who was jealous of her put a rat and some water into her cloth, and then went and told the Alafin that OVIA had made water in her cloth. AWLAWYO was very cross with her, so she cried and ran away. And when AWLAWYO made inquiries, and found out that he had been deceived, he killed the jealous wife, and asked OVIA to come back to him, but she refused. Then he sent OKWO to bring her back, but she refused to go back, and OKWO feared to return without her, so they both became river spirits in the Benin country. The sign of the OVIA is the dress made of strips of palm leaves.

ATO. The river ATO runs into the OVIA, and ATO is a medicine to join broken bones together.

Then the OVIA runs into the OLUKUN.

There is a grove for the children of OVIA called IRIRI.

AWRE[1] or IKPOBA is the King's river (and the meaning of the word AWRE is royal self). At its source, which is near to the source of the OYISA, this river is called the ERUBI (i.e., one who bears, applied to animals), and she is said to have had a son called ISE (challenge), who would persist in living with the King. The King finally sent him away to a village on the IFON road called Utekon. Then ISE declared war on the King, and the King went to UTEKON to fight. ERUBI killed 200 men with poisoned FUFU, and ISE killed the rest of the King's followers. The King saved himself by hiding in a kola tree, from whence he howled for help. Then OLUMORIA and others came to the King's rescue, and they killed ISE.

Now, OLUMORIA boasted of this deed, so that the King became very angry and drew his MUSU (sword) and tried to kill him. He tried three times, but failed on each occasion. Then he made a medicine called OKOKOGO (a small red bead worn at the back of the head) and gave it to those he specially honoured, and OLUMORIA asked for it, but for a long time the King refused to give it to him. Finally, however, he did so. This medicine then gave the King power over OLUMORIA, So that he drew his MUSU and killed him. The AWRE runs into the AWREOMO, called also the OSSEOMO.

AWREOMO. The sign of this river is an earthenware pot of water. At its source, not far from the town of OKHI, this river is called AKE, the axe. As a "juju" this power AKE is represented by lumps of earth, ant-hills, bits of pot, stones and chalk, which are covered by a slanting roof of bark called OKUKU. There is a large "juju house" at IDUNGENA, near Benin City. It is a building of sun-dried mud, in the form of a hollow square, with lean-tos from the top of each wall

[1. The sound AW or o in the word corpse is written in Yoruba o.]

AKE. Pieces of bark supported at one end by two sticks forming a kind of lean-to shed, under which are found a pot of water, bananas, and yams. Generally found at the foot of trees with various chalk marks in front of them. (See other note.)

forming cloisters. Over the doorway a long bamboo, with a basket cup-like arrangement at the top, hangs like a barber's pole. This has been called OYISA, Esu, and UKHURE by different people I have asked to name it.

As you enter you notice the figure of a man without legs (OKE), the doorkeeper; then, turning to the left, you will see a figure in clay dressed in chain armour as in the days of Elizabeth, riding on a horse. He is called OKAKWU or an officer. Passing along the left wall we find a figure dressed as a prime minister, or IYASE. Then in the open space in the centre of the square there are two figures, one on your right and one on your left as you stand with your back to the door and facing AKE. The one on your left represents OYISA (god), and that on your right Esu, the devil. Esu is dressed as a slave in a hat and cloth, carrying a knife at his waist, and a stick or staff called UKPOPO in his

OYISA.A long bamboo pole with a wicker basket at the top.

right. OYISA, on the other hand, is dressed like a king. We now stand before the throne of AKE, who, dressed like a king, is seated with a wife (IREBU) with her babe on either side of him. A girl stands in front of them with a fan (OKWIKE). In front of all these figures are the figures of two naked boys (AMADA), while to the right and left are seen the figures of the two NABORI or hand-bearers. Then opposite to the figure of IYASE on the right hand side of the square there are the figures of a blacksmith, OGUN, in his shop and his assistant blowing the bellows, and between IYASE and OGUN in the open space the sacred tree IKHIMI is growing, and they call this INYATU.

A woman wanting a child goes to AKE and presents him with a fowl, and promises him more if she bears one. A man who has lost something goes to AKE and lays his complaint before him, asking him to kill the thief If AKE does this all the petitioner's trade goes in future to AKE.

The dance sacred to AKE is called UKELE, and is he)d at the beginning of the rainy season. OKHI is the name of the middle course of the OREOMO, and means the difficulty in cutting.

The AKWIHAMA is a river running into the AWREOMO, and means the difficulty of woman in travail.

OKWAIHE is another river running into the AWREOMO, and the word means the difficulty of bearing a load. The people of this river may not marry those of the river IKHUKU. OKUMA, another tributary of this river, means continued death or the practice of dying.

The AWREOMO joins the OLUKUN at the same place as the OVIA.

The OYISA, OVIA, AWRE or AWREOMO are the four rivers that enclose the Centre province of the Benin Kingdom in which Benin city is situated.

OLUKUN is the Great Benin river forming the southern boundary of the Kingdom of Benin. It is marked in the maps as the Benin and Ethiope rivers. The meaning of the word OLUKUN is either the chief of death or the Teacher. Its sign is a pot of water. Every great house has an altar to OLUKUN in or near to which will be found a pot of water, a fringe of small leaves tied in knots called EBAIHE, stones in small earthenware pot IKPEBBO, chalk cones ORHUE, the sticks UKHURE, cowries, IGO, mats EWA, fishbones, the tail feather of the parrot EBAKWE, representations of the snake IKMWI and the leopard OGIAME and the skulls of cows, dogs and goats.

At EWESI not far from the SOBO plains, as in most towns, there is a temple to OLUKUN where chalk is given to the people as a protection against evil. The people put it round their eyes like the ZINGANGA south, and also mark their bodies with it.

At the door of this temple, a kind of square courtyard with cloisters round it, two figures are seated on guard.

On the door figures of two snakes IKPI, OBIANIMI, a bird, a crocodile, a small boy and a house are carved. There is an altar just inside the porch to Esu the devil as the Yorubas say ESU KO NI IWA AKO ILE RE SI ITA. As the devil has no kindliness of disposition his house is made for him in the street.

On your right, that is on OLUKUN'S left, there are figures of the son of OLUKUN with a nude wife on either side, a boy seated and holding a Kola box and a bottle of water. Strewn about are shells, chalk, a knife and a bell, while in front of all rises the bamboo pole with its end split and pushed out cup shape here called 'SA or OYISA.

Next we come to a figure of OLUKUN'S IYASE who is wearing the ODIGBA and frontlet UDEHS1, collar, armlets and bracelets.

Then opposite to the door at the end of the building we see a great figure of OLUKUN the teacher dressed as a king and figures of his two Nabori (arm upholders) and four naked boys or AMADA.

An old priest sits at the feet of this figure near to an altar, half hidden by the long strings of cowries hanging in front of him from the roof.

While I was there a man and two women came into this temple and going up to OLUKUN, knelt down and bowed their heads until they touched the step on which rested the feet of OLUKUN. The priest crushed some chalk and handed some of it to each petitioner, then they marked themselves and went out. On either side of these great central figures are two sons of OBIANIMI very old wooden figures (like those into which nails are driven in the Congo) covered with cowries, bits of cloth, knives, etc., and near to one of these is the figure of a leopard and to the other the skull of a cow and the shell of a tortoise.

On the right in a cloister are the figures of the OLUKUN'S great war chief Ezomo (or OJUMO) wearing his ODIGBA and four necklaces, and his bugler. And neartothedooragain are the figures of EKIOLUKUN the grandson of OLUKUN wearing four necklaces, and his wife and AMADA.

In the centre of the open space in this temple were three cow's heads surrounded by chalk marks.

At IGO a town on the Gilly Gilly road there is a mound on which is an altar to OLUKUN with chalk cones and cowries on it all covered by a shed. They say that EHAIZAAI, King of Benin, because it was unhappy in Benin City, sent it to IGO. They say they knew it was unhappy because of the sickness

An altar to OLUKUN, under a little shed, with native pots on it. Chalk marks, as above, being made on the ground in front of it.

it caused in the City. At UGWATON there is also a temple to this great spirit, or power, mentioned by Burton.[1]

OLUKUN is said to have been one of the sons of God who married OHA.

OHA is the river running from the town of OKHA past SILUKU into the Benin river, and forms the western and northern boundary of the Benin Kingdom dividing it from the intermediate province of ELAWWEY which is a kind of neutral province between the Benin and Yoruba Kingdoms.

OHA drank AINYO and hiccoughed which vexed OLUKUN so she ran away from him. OLUKUN cried. This was when OLUKUN was very poor. Then OLUKUN married IGBAGON (the Jamieson river). Then OHA wished to return and prayed OLUKUN to forgive her. He was rich now, so he forgave her and said she might come back, but as the wood bearer to IGBAGON.2 The meaning of the word OHA is fear, the bruiser.

The river ALEDE runs into the OHA, and means the language of the concubine, while ALA is the white cloth, the

[1. Describing the temple sacred to OLUKUN, Burton says there is a figure of the king, &c. See Great Benin, p. 57. This is wrong; the figure represents OLUKUN dressed as a king. MALAKU=OMAOLUKUN.

2. IGBAGON=the Admittance of Poison.]

abomination of the Gods. (It is a remarkable fact that while the slave tribe called the MUSSERONGO or BACILONGO, just

A seat made of clay.

north of the Congo were only allowed to wear white, in Benin City only the Chiefs may do so.)

Cows are sacrificed to OVIA, OLUKUN.
 Dogs to OVIA and AWRE.
 Goats to AWREOMO, OKWHAIHE, OGBA, AKE, IGBAGON ALEDE, OKUMA, AKWIAMA, AKKWA, OGBEHE, OKWO.
 Altars in Houses are found to OVIA, OLUKUN, OKWHAIKE, AKE, IGBAGON, OKUMA, AKWIAMA.
 Women may not eat the flesh of the thing sacrificed to OVIA, OKWHAIKE, OGBA, OGBEHE, OKWO.

These sacred rivers are known by the name EBAMI, and the word EBAW means sacrifice. I should say that the meaning of EBAMI is a "power" to which things are sacrificed.

 

OTHER GROVES NOT SACRED TO THE RIVER SPIRIT.

AROVATO is situated near to Geduma.
     In this Grove there are always some logs of wood (OBEKE).
 ARO ERRHEIN at ERUWA near Geduma.
 ARO OGUN (blacksmith) Iron stones are placed in this Grove, and Goats are sacrificed.
 ARO ERUMIA near AHO on the IKPOBA road.
     There are sticks (UKHURE) there. It is also a household altar.
     Its dancers dress like those of OVIA at the beginning of the dry season.
     Women may not eat the flesh sacrificed.
 ARO OWO or OBO at UZALA on the IKPOBA road.
     UKHURE are there.
     Dancers wear masks surmounted with the feathers of the fowl.
     Women may not eat the flesh sacrificed.

 

CERTAIN ANIMALS HAVE GROVES SACRED TO THEM.

AROEKME in Benin City, near to the chief OBASEKI's old house, is sacred to the Leopard.
 AROENIMI to the Elephant.
 AROGWUNAME to the Hippopotamus.

I could get no information from the Bini about Groves sacred to the Winds.

The presence of an ODIGI, or sacred well, is generally made known along the roads to one by a tree and a mound of earth and cowries.

Human sacrifices were made to the following three in OBA OVERAMI'S time:-

	 
		ODIGI NO'R'UDO on the UDO road.
		 ODIGI NOBA on the IFON road.
		 ODIGI NIRIWE on the GEDUMA road.
		
		 There is a story that two women, a maiden and a pregnant woman went down to the UDO well for water. The pregnant woman, against the advice of the maiden, drank some of the water, and in consequence had a miscarriage.

As far as my observations have taken me, there are only six sacred trees, though parts of many others enter into medicines and form part of dresses, etc.

OLOKU (OROKO) Chlorofera Excelsa. This tree is found in OVIA'S sacred grove. It is also a sign marking the place where the king had his harem.

The IKHIMI, one of the Bignoniaceae (possibly the Spathodea Campanulata), the UNWETIOTA and the OTWA are always growing close to the fences guarding the entrance to the grove.

OME. The palm tree, from the leaves of which the dresses used by the dancers of the OBUDU are made.

EBE. The kola. There are rows of kola trees at the entrance to all towns, varying from two miles to a few yards in length. War between two towns of people in the olden days was frequent, but peace could always be made provided that no kola trees had been cut down. Kola nuts as a welcome would never be given to anyone who had destroyed a kola tree in another village. The Yoruba have a saying, as the grubs eating the Iwo and the grubs eating the OBI (kola) lodge within the Iwo and the OBI nut, so he that betrays you is not far from your person.

 

OMENS

1. A falling star foretells the death of a prince.

2. When the owl OKUKU says OKURUKURU it is well, but when it cries U U U that is a bad sign.

3. When the bird AHIAMINUKYUYA cries OYIOWO it is a bad sign, but when it sings OMGWOGWO it is well.

4. When one goes to see something and the eyelid quivers all is well, but should the under part of the eye quiver then it is bad.

5. When the right shoulder throbs all is well, but when the left one throbs it is not well.

6. If on starting on a journey you strike the right foot it is a bad sign, but if you strike your left foot, no matter.

 

SACRED ANIMALS.

Only three animals, as far as my observations go, have sacred groves (i.e., the Leopard, the Elephant, and the Hippopotamus), but I have found the heads and bones of four kinds of antelope, the dog, the crocodile, the cow, and the shell of the tortoise, in or near their altars.

The leopard is known by the names ATALAGBA, OGYUHA, EKME, and OGIAME or queen.

OGIAME reminds me of the XIVILI word KAMA, royal wife or queen. OGIE-CI is the word the Bini use for the King indigenous to the country, equivalent to NKICI CI of the BAVILL

When a man killed a leopard he had to take it to the OBA, who gave the hunter a boy and a girl in exchange for it. The OBA used to try very hard to obtain the leopard alive, so that he might sacrifice it. On doing so he would put his finger into its blood and make a mark with it on his forehead, from his hair to his nose. Fans for his use were made of the leopard's skin, or it was made into a coat for the great war chief EZOMO or OJUMO. The claws also were strung together and worn by this chief as a band around his head.

Women were not allowed to look at the leopard's face.

The dance connected with the leopard ceremonies is called IGWE.

 The Elephant ENI.-When a chief's father dies, an elephant's tusks are placed on the altar in the grove called ARUENIMI. The head and gun by which the elephant is shot are placed in the sacred ground called EFAII, and the dance in connection with this ceremony is called IKWEFAI.

When a hunter killed an elephant he had to give the OBA one foot and the tusks.

The strip of meat round the kidneys was given to the OBA'S mother.

One of the forelegs had to be given to the village owner of the country where it was killed.

The rest and the tail belonged to the hunter, and its hairs were sold to the women for necklaces.

 The Hippopotamus OGWUNAME.- I have heard little or nothing about the Hippopotamus, save that his sacred ground is OKWHAIYE and his grove AROGWUNAME. There are plenty of hippos. in the upper OVIA or OSSE, but the people seem to fear them, and on asking the people about that part of the country why they did not kill them, they said it was no use doing so, as they did not eat them.

 The Tortoise IGWI.-The sacred ground where the shell of the tortoise is found is called OTOI.

The people dance IGWI once a year just as the rains cease.

The character of the IGWI is a bad one; it is looked upon as a deceiver.

There is a story that says one day IGWI was a person, and all animals spoke one language. There was a famine in the land. A meeting was called, and it was decided that all should bring in their mothers. The elephant brought in his mother. They killed and eat her. And each day an animal brought in its mother. They always gave some of the meat to the parrot (OKWE), most of which it preserved. And when each animal had killed its mother they told the parrot to go and fetch his. But he had hidden his mother away in a hole where she kept a rope. As he refused to bring in his mother all the animals set about to look for her, but they could not find her. Then the IGWI watched the parrot, and found the mother's hiding place. And he told all the other animals. And when they all knew where the mother parrot was to be found they held a meeting to decide upon some plan of getting her. Finally, they asked the parrot to go on an errand for them to a distant part. And he went. But he returned quickly to the court house and found no one there. Guided by the IGWI they had gone to find his mother. And when they were near the hole where the mother parrot was hidden the elephant sang a song, thinking that the mother would take his voice for that of her son. But the mother parrot was not so taken in. Then the IGWI sang, and the mother parrot was deceived and put out the rope for him. All the animals then seized hold of the rope. But just then the son parrot came along and sang to his mother, telling her to cut the rope, and this is how he sang:-

   IYEMAO IYEMALO, IYEMAO IYEMALO  O Mother Mother, O Mother Mother 
  OFIFIEGE FWAO  Cut the rope, 
  NENI DEGBEGWIO IYEMALO  Let the elephant fall, Mother, 
  NEGWI PIEPIAW IYEMALO  And crush the tortoise, Mother. 
   

XINA OF THE BAVILI ARE SPOKEN OF AS AWA OR AGWA BY THE BINI.

It is AGWA for a man to marry any of his EGBE and by EGBE they include

	 
		OBIRAMI children of one father.
		 OBIYIMI children of one mother.
		 OBIYIYIMI children of one grandmother.
		 OBIRERAMI children of one grandfather.
		
		 IGODARO says that be may not marry any woman who lifts drink up with her left hand, and who, when she cooks, kneels only on one knee.

OKUNDIA says he may not "eat" (or marry) snake and the antelope ERUHE on his father's side, and OSURUHE on his mother's side.

AJARRI may not "eat" IHIHIHI, a small fruit on his mother's side, and ERHURU yam, and EBAKWE a leaf on his father's side.

JEGEDI may not eat OSURUHE on his father's side.

OKUKU may not eat monkey on his father's side, nor elephant and antelope EHAN on his mother's side.

But the Bini do not respect their AWA as the BAVILI do their XINA.

At the Back of the Black Man's Mind, by Richard Edward Dennett, [1906], at sacred-texts.com

  

CHAPTER XXII

 

THE PHILOSOPHY AT THE BACK OF THE BLACK MAN'S MIND IN TABLE FORM

ON page 169 of Great Benin you will find a photograph taken by Mr. C. Punch in March 1892, of a Bini house in course of construction.

In this picture we find that a certain figure is built into the fluted wall, it is coloured white and shows up well against the dark red clay of which the wall is constructed (Pl. XXI).

This figure is of the greatest interest and may be said to be the "formula" at the back of the black man's mind both north and south of the equator on the West coast of Africa, six of which apparently form the complete religious system of both the Yoruba and the Bavili or Luango people. It is used as a divining board or a tally of the seasons indiscriminately.

Resting on the top of the figure you will find a bird, meant to represent the IFE, a kind of wagtail, to whom the people of Luango attribute the origin of the drum. IFE is the spiritual capital of the Yoruba, and IFA is their great oracular deity. Now IFA means that which is stripped off, and the verb to strip off means also to create.[1] IFA as a God or part of God would and does represent what we should call the Son of God.

Immediately beneath this bird is the formula formed first of 16 marks or holes in four parallel lines, and secondly of eight

[1. Exactly the same idea exists among the Bavili where the word XIVANGA creator is derived from VANGA to create, which literally means to keep on stripping off.]

ditto in two parallel lines, that is 24 marks or holes in all. You will notice that there is a distinct gap between the first four and the second two lines.

Let us suppose this figure on the wall to represent the divining board, then the first 16 marks represent the 16 sacred palm kernels which the BABALAWOS use in consulting IFA on their Sunday. But Ifa is always attended by his offspring OPELE, the other great oracular God of the Yoruba whom the diviners consult every day. Now the literal translation of the word OPELE is the one who endures and replenishes.

Thus you will see that the Yoruba may be said to divide the "formula" into two great parts, first, 16 divine principles under four great headings, IBARA, EDI, OVEKUN, and OGBE, and second, eight natural parts under two great headings the names of which I have not been able to ascertain.

Separated from the above but underneath is a strong line drawn from side to side, representing man the diviner.

That is a formula Of 24 parts between first cause and final effect-a formula preserved to the Bavili in the making up of their shrouds, in their families of Bakici baci, and in their six seasons, as well as in the titles of their King, his 12 assessors and their six offices, and to the Bini at least in their political constitution, as well as their system of divination.

That this formula should exist not only among the Bavili but also among the Bini and Yoruba adds great importance and weight to my conviction that it in reality is the formula (six of which go to complete the philosophy) which has so Iong been lying hid at the back of the black man's mind.

Difficult, perhaps impossible, as it may be to convince others of this (to me) great truth, I feel that I have been justified in making the attempt. At any rate, no harm will be done to whatever value may be attached to the foregoing notes, as no one need agree with these conclusions unless they like.

On the other hand I cannot help feeling that one who has lived so long among the Africans, and who has acquired a kind of way of thinking black, should be listened to on the off chance that a secondary instinct developed by long contact with the people he is writing about, may have driven him to a right, or very nearly right, conclusion.

It seems to the writer that the complete philosophy was once given and taught to the people by means of symbols, and that 201 sacred groves were set apart as the places where the lessons in connection with this philosophy were taught.

This is backed up by the following story a certain Babalawol told me: EWARE, he said, was a son of the sixth king of Benin, and when his father died he wished to succeed to the throne. The people, however, would not have him, and drove him into the bush. After 201 years he returned to Benin city with 201 followers. He and his followers were like men but were not really men, they were EBAMI (powers in rivers and sacred groves)-EWARE then taught the Bini people the foundation of their present religion. But the people said that there were too many EBAMI and set about thinking how their number could be diminished. They built a fine house or temple and invited them all to a feast there, gave them plenty to eat and drink, and when they were nearly drunk fastened the doors and burned the house down. Many of the EBAMI escaped and entered the different rivers and became river spirits, etc.

EWARE also was much troubled about the fact that he had to die, so he sent a messenger to OYISA (= God) to ask him to come to Benin city and talk the matter over. God came down and landed at Agbor (a place to the east of Benin city), and asked if that were Benin city. They told him no, and directed him via Oza and Ugo, to the city, so that at length he arrived and had a meeting with EWARE, when it was finally decided that every man must die. ESHU (the devil) is said to have accompanied OYISA bearing a knife.

This would bring the introduction of the present Bini religion to the fourteenth century, or about 400 years after the founding of the kingdom of Bini by the son of the Alafin of AWYAW the great Yoruba king.

This religion has taken such a vigorous root in the country 

[1. BABALAWO = a Bini priest. See Appendix.]

that it is now very difficult to find any trace of the older form of religion that must have been in existence among the EFA or people of this country before the coming of EWARE, or even the first Yoruba OBA. Interesting as the study of this superimposed religion may be among the Bini we are not likely, upon their own showing, to find it in so perfect a form as among the Yoruba. It is to IFE, the spiritual capital of the Yoruba country, that we must go if we are to rebuild up and reform this religion, which is, of course, now degenerated into a kind of mythology.

But there is one great lesson that we have learnt from this story of the Bini, and that is that the completed religion is ruled by 201 EBAMI.

It is interesting to know that before the destruction of the OBA'S palace each of these 201 EBAMI had a bronze plate representing it on the walls of the great room as a record, but it is exasperating to think that in its destruction our chance of obtaining all the names by which they were known has gone. It will now take years of patient note-taking to collect them once again. No native that I have so far come across can give me more than a few of their names, just the most prominent ones, and just sufficient to let us know that they referred to sacred rivers, lands, trees, animals, omens, and the seasons.

We have noted that both the Bini and Bavili in the first place recognise God under the names OYISA and NZAMBI.

They then recognise that there are two great divisions among things and people. Those created which they connect with God (OYISA) and those procreated which they connect with the Devil (ESHU) as far as the Bini are concerned, and BANTU NZAMBI and BANTUA NDONGO so far as the Bavili are concerned. Things of the spirit and things of the body as we should say.

Then we note that they divide things of the spirit into three parts, and things of the body into three parts or six parts in all.

Then we have twenty-four powers representing the winds etc., as causative attributes under these two great headings.

After which we have the six formulae each of twenty-four powers which makes one hundred and forty-four parts in all, i.e., seventy-two parts under the spiritual heading and seventy-two parts under the procreating heading.

And finally we have the twenty-four parts which are the results of the foregoing creative and procreative parts.

In short there are two hundred and one parts in their philosophy which all must bear in mind.

It is possible that in the foregoing notes some error in detail may have crept in, but I feel that I have given data enough to be enabled to give you the formulaae in full, at any rate in table form in such a way as to make this philosophy which is at the back of the black man's mind, fairly clear.

At the Back of the Black Man's Mind, by Richard Edward Dennett, [1906], at sacred-texts.com

  

CHAPTER XXIII

 

CONCLUSION

IT is said that the earliest traditions represent rulers as Gods or demigods.

In times and among races less barbarous we find these beliefs a little modified, the monarch is conceived to be a man having divine authority. He retains, however, as in the East to the present day titles representing his heavenly descent.

Later on the progress of civilisation, as during the middle ages in Europe, the current opinions respecting the relationship of rulers and ruled are further changed, for the theory of divine origin is substituted that of divine right.

With advancing political opinion have come still greater restrictions of imperial power.

The writer does not think that the eternal and everlasting principles founded on man's senses and the seasons and retained in the titles of Maluango and other kings have by any means passed away.

Although we do not talk of our most gracious King by seven titles he is certainly represented by six great dignities in the six offices of state which King Alfred like King Maluango may have managed in person.

It is this wide gap, between European constitutions and their developments and the constitutions as we find them in Africa -and their developments-that blinds most people to a proper valuation of the latter and makes the government of the Africans by the former so great a puzzle.

It needs but a glance at the following lists for us to be convinced of the psychic unity of mankind, and that in the art of ruling man this must be accepted as a working hypothesis inductively established.

I must now conclude hoping that these notes may be of service both to the intelligent black man anxious to remind his people of their greater past and to encourage them once more to search after higher things, and to the white man who for want of information has been inclined to undervalue the material he is expected to understand and I am sure hopes to guide or mould in the right way.

Both in the case of the white and black man environment has done its fatal work, it is therefore as foolish for the white man at the present juncture to impose many of his laws and customs upon the black man living in the tropics as it would evidently be for the black man to impose his upon the white man. It is, of course, easy to say that we should act up to the ideals set before us by great philosophers and be superior to our environment; but as a matter of fact we are not, and while in Africa we find the ruins of what were once great kingdoms wanting in strength to maintain themselves for any length of time free from the gravest internal disorders and so degenerating into a series of enclosed despotisms which in anything beyond the management of village affairs do not contain the principle of representation by the people-so, on the other hand, in Europe democracy has become too powerful, and the people, fast losing sight of the great fundamental truths at the base of all good government, look upon licence as liberty and attack or attempt to disestablish any one of the six great estates which endeavours to curb their so-called liberty.

It is here that the full beauty and use of the kingly office becomes apparent, for the king at least should be placed by the people above environment and so enabled to hold himself and the six great principles of government well in hand.

Insects recognise this great truth, why should not man?

 

 

 British Constitution.

     The King (inspired) in the place of God.    
  Lord Chancellor.  Arbitrator.
 Executor.  Court of Equity. 
  Lord Chief Justice.  Judge.
 Police.  Court of Justice. 
  Archbishop of Canterbury.  Atoning priests.
 Preachers.  Church. 
  Edward VII.  Doctors.
 Teachers.  State. 
  Prime Minister, or,
 The Speaker.  Members.
 Ministers.  House of Commons. 
  The Lord Chancellor.  Lords.
 Nobles.  House of Lords. 
     The King (as man) in three parts.    
  

 

 

 The King of the Bavili and his Constitution.

      NTAWTELA.    
  FUMU.  LUEMBUNGU.
 MANKAKA.  NGANGA MPUNZI. 
  NTINU LUKENE.  INJIBUNGU.
 MAXIENJI.  NKASA. 
  NGANGAVUMBA.  KONGOIBUNGU.
 MAFUKA.  BILUNGO KUTECI. 
  XIVANJI.  TATA BUNGU.
 MAMBOMA.  MBUMBA. 
  MUENE.  MABUNDU.
 MASAFI.  BUNDU. 
  NKICI CI.  MAMATA.
 MAMBUKU.  BAKICI. 
     MALUANGO.    
  

 

 The King of the Bini and his Constitution.

      IOBA.    
  (King's titles.)  (Assessors.)  (Offices.) 
  OBADUDUDU.  UNWAGWE.
 ELIBO.  IWEBO. 
  ENONYAGBON.  OKAIBOGA.
 OKAIWAGGA.  ABIOGBE. 
  AGBAGE LOGI'OLUKUN.  IHAMA.
 SIGHURE.  IHOGBWI. 
  OGIE NO GBOMA.  IGWESIBO.
 OGIEMESE.  IWASE. 
  AKPOLPOLO.  ISIRI.
 BAZILU.  IWEGWE. 
  ELIMIDU.  INE (Yamo).
 OBAZWAIYI.  IBIWE. 
     OBA.    
  

 

At the Back of the Black Man's Mind, by Richard Edward Dennett, [1906], at sacred-texts.com

  

APPENDIX

Extracts from Yoruba Heathenism, by the Right Rev. Bishop JAMES JOHNSON, and Astrological Geomancy in Africa, by Professor J. A. ABAYOMI COLE. [Transcription note: diacritics have been ignored in the following].

 Yoruba Heathenism, by the Right Rev. Bishop James Johnson, is so intensely interesting that when once you begin to quote from it it is very difficult to leave off doing so. The work was written some years ago, which may account for its title which I am sure my friend the Bishop would now call by some other name. A native of Africa, Bishop Johnson stands out not merely as a learned and earnest divine, but as a patriotic African anxious to instil into his fellow countrymen true nobility and independence of spirit and character. It has been my privilege to have discussed with him on many occasions some of the religious problems now troubling the mind of the educated African, who is beginning to be conscious of the higher teaching in his own mythology. I take this opportunity to thank the Bishop for having placed this work at my disposal and allowing me to quote so liberally from it.

The Divine Being.

God is commonly called "OLORUN," a contracted form of "Eniti-o-ni-orun," "the Owner of the Heavens; or of "Olu-orun," the Chief in the Heavens; or "Orun," the heavens, which is an abbreviated form of Olorun, and is intended to imply both heaven and earth together, which are sometimes spoken of together as the Universe. "ALAIYE,"' a contracted form of "Eniti-o-ni-aiye," "the Owner of the Earth," or of "OLUWA-AIYE," "the Master of the Earth," the term "Aiye" being understood to include both the earth and the heavens together; "OLUDUMARE," which some interpret to mean The Chief, or The King who is the Son of "ERE," and some regard as representing THE "EVER RIGHTEOUS ONE," and some "God the Almighty"; and "Oloni," a contracted form of "Oluwa ini," the Owner of all our possessions, and other like names, many of which are commonly applied to inferior and subordinate Deities, as was the case with some of the ancient nations, as, for instance, the Greeks and the Romans.

Man, both from his inability to fully grasp the Infinite and for his own convenience, has been wont to represent this Being to himself by some attribute of His that impresses him more forcibly than others, or, through some special blessing from Him to which he attaches unexceptional value, and sometimes to content himself with transferring to Him a name he had applied before to some subordinate deity. Thus the Greeks like other Aryan races speak of Him as "Zeus" or "Jupiter," "The God of light," or the "God of heaven," and "Theos," the "Being who has made and arranged all things"; the Jews speak of Him amongst other names as "The Mighty One"; the English still apply to Him the Saxon name "God," "a graven image," which they had before their conversion to Christianity applied to an inferior deity; and the Yorubans speak of Him as "Olorun," "the Owner of the Heavens," or, "The Chief One in, or, The King of the Heavens."

The number of Yoruba gods commonly reckoned is 401, but it is strictly more correct to say that the number is 600, arranged generally under two divisions, 200, as the Babalawos would say, placed on the right-hand side, and 400 on the left-hand side. But the gods more commonly worshipped are Ifa, Oduduwa, Obanta and Obanla his wife, Osun, Ogun, Yemaja, Buruku, Obalufon, Orisa-oko, and Soponno, Sango and Obatala.

[1]These Deities are generally known among us as "Orishas, " a term which, after the religious tradition of the country, was originally applied to some being whom Ifa, or Orunmila, the Son of God, had sent out with others to search about for and collect together the wisdom which he had strewn about, and who were successful in their search and collection whilst others failed, and who were then spoken of as "Awon ti o ri sa," i.e., those who were successful in making their collection, and who after, and in consequence of this, became objects of worship. But others have represented the term "Orisha" as derived from the circumstance of a serious difference on a

[1. Compare the BAKICI BACI of the Bavili and the EBAMI of the Bini.]

particular occasion between two friends named Arin and Ogba, a difference in which some elders interfered, over a potsherd, "Isha," which the one had made a present of to the other, but a return of which the giver afterwards from envy demanded, and which after its return was accounted sacred and became an object of worship; and they say that from this every other object of worship has been called an "Orisha" (Ori-isha), in allusion to the potsherd over which there had been a severe difference.

Sango, the god of the atmosphere; Aramife, the god of fire; Aje, the god of trade; Obalufon, the god of a prosperous empire; Korikoto and Oke, gods of child-birth; the gods of the sea, Yemoja, Okun or Olokun, and Osun; the god of war, and the goddess of hunting (Ogun and Oranmiyan, Ososi and Uja his wife, Obalogun and Akipo his wife, and Ikuligbogbo); the god of agriculture, Ogun; the gods of prophecy and song, Ifa and Erinle; the god of eloquence, Obatala; the god of love and beauty, Olokun; the god of wisdom, Olokun; and the deities of the hearth fire, the Egun, or spirits of deceased ancestors.

Some of the Yoruba Divinities have been borrowed from other tribes.

Sango, from the Niger territory; Eko-Ifa, from the Akoko tribe; and Aje, from the Egun or Popo tribe.

Yorubans, whose heathen and idolatrous worship is a recurring festival at which a particular divinity is worshipped, have from this circumstance often denominated a day in every cycle of five days from the name of the deity to whose worship it is devoted, e.g., thus we find one day named Ojo Jakuta, i.e., the day when Jakuta or Shango[1] is worshipped; Ojo Obatala, i.e., the day when Obatala is worshipped; Ojo Ifa, i.e., the day when Ifa is worshipped, or when he sits on a throne like a king; Ojo Abameta, i.e., the Abameta day; and Ojo Yemaja, which is Ojo Oro as well, when both Yemaja and deceased ancestors' spirits are worshipped.

The Yorubans bury their dead in their houses, and believe in them, in their power after death, and in their interest in their surviving friends; this is the family Oro and Egun worship, i.e., the worship at some fixed place in a house of the spirits of deceased ancestors, male and female, by surviving members of a family of which they had been a visible part, the fixed place being commonly marked by coloured designs on a wall of the house

[1. Shango is an imported "power," see the days of the week of the Bavili and Bini, pages 64 and 214.]

or on the floor, and called "Olojuba-Baba," or "Oju-Egun, Baba," i.e., the spot specially assigned to the worship of the spirits of our deceased ancestors, and to which has been added the worship of such spirits as Esu, the devil, whose image is often placed on the left-hand side of the entrance into a premises; Esi, whose own is often in the piazza; whilstIfaor Orunmila's ORO, which consists of 32 sacred palm nuts in a bowl, is generally placed at the sleeping apartment of the head of the house, and on an elevation raised above that occupied by the images of other orishas kept in the house to mark his superior importance.

Yorubans, like many other African tribes, make use of groves which they regard as sacred to some of their gods, and consecrated for worship to them in connection with their idolatry, and which they sometimes designate as "Igboro," i.e., groves sacred to the spirits of our ancestors-" "Igbo Egun", or "Igbale Egun", or "Opa," "Igbo Osonyin," "Igbo Oluwa-Olofin,", or "Igbo Oluwa Aramife."

The practice of appropriating individual trees to purposes of devotion is indulged in by many African tribes, including the Yorubans.

The Palm tree, the Cotton tree, the Iroko tree, the Akoko tree, and the Ekika, whose leaves are commonly employed fresh on occasions of installation to the position and rank of a sovereign, and to the office of a priest of high rank, and the Omiyolo tree, the Iporogun and the Atori shrubs are among others accounted sacred trees and shrubs in Yoruba.

The Palm tree, on occasions of both private and public festivities connected with religious worship. Its branches are commonly employed to decorate places and objects of worship, both as a mark of reverential regard and adoration and as a token of the belief and confidence of worhippers in their divinities, and in their attributes also which the height, strength, and durability of the tree itself and the upward direction of its younger branches are regarded as representing, exactly as the tree was regarded as sacred both by the Etrurians and the Greeks, and the Oak by the Jews and Greeks, and the ancient heathen nations of Gaul and Britain.

The great Oracle of the Yoruba country is Ifa. He is represented chiefly by 16 palm nuts each having from four to 10 or more eyelets on them. Behind each one of these representative nuts are 16 subordinate Divinities. Each one of the whole lot is termed an Odu -which means a chief, a head. This makes the number of Odu altogether 256. Besides these, there are 16 other Odus connected with each of the 256, and this makes the whole number of Odus 4,096. Some increase this large number still by an addition of 16 more to each of the last number of Odus, but the 16 principal ones are those more frequently in requisition.

There is a series of traditional stories, each of which is called a road, a pathway, or a course, and is connected with some particular Odu. Each Odu is supposed to have 1,680 of these stories connected with it, and these, together with those of the other Odus, every one aspiring to the office of "A Babalawo," who is a divining or sacrificing priest, is expected to commit to memory, though scarcely has any one been found to perform the feat. Many learn by heart a very, considerable number, rather an appreciable number connected with the principal Odus. Upon the appearance of an Wit on the divining or consulting bowl, the "Babalawo," thinks of some of the stories attached to it, and from any of them that appears to him to suit the case upon which he is consulted, he delivers his Oracular response, and prescribes the sacrifice that would be accepted.

These, each of which is always represented in a pair, and is spoken of as two, are named thus:Eji Ogbe, Oyekun meji, Iwori meji, Edi meji, Bara meji, Okaran meji, Urosi meji, Owaran meji, Osa meji, Ogunda meji, Eture meji, Oturupon meji, Ose meji, Ofu meji and Eka meji. Eji or meji means two, double, or a pair.

Eji Ogbe is regarded the most principal, "The Dux," or "Imperator" and "King," whose appearance on the consulting bowl is always regarded as indicating the communication of a message of very great importance, since earthly sovereigns are not accustomed to come and. stand out before their people themselves and set aside for the time being their representatives or deputies except when the communication to be delivered is one of uncommon importance.

Subordinate Odus are constituted and represented by the conjunction of two principal Odus at one and the same time upon the consulting and divining bowl, the one on the right and the other on the left, this simultaneous appearance and their conjunction uniting to give them their respective names, e.g., when Eji Ogbe and Oyekun appear together, they are joined together and named Ogbe-Iyekun; or if Eji Ogbe appear with Ogunda, they are both together named Ogbe-Ogdnda, and so on with all the rest. The first of the two names in combination is always that of the Odu which appears on the left-hand side.

Each nut, or the collection, is commonly described as Ikin or Akin, which means a strong one, after they have been, with an elaborate religious performance, set aside for the sacred purpose of divination. The collection is usually topped by an Ikin, called an Oduso, which is regarded as above being consulted or delivering a message, hence the parable,-

"Akin li a I pa- a ki lu Oduso."

"An Akin is the one we may strike for divination: we have: no right to strike an Odusu."

An "Adele," or a "Watch Akin," is that which happens not to be taken up with the rest by a consulting priest, when he takes out with one grasp of the palm of his right hand 16 and 1 Odus from the number of ikins in his bag or from the face of his consulting bowl for consultation and divination. This one, left behind, does the duty of a keeper of the house for both himself and his comrades, till they should be returned to their place again.

Ifa is known by a great many descriptive and attributive names, among which are the following:-"Orunmila" (Heaven is the wise and successful Arbiter or Reconciler; again, Heaven, knows him who will be saved or how to save), "Olodumare" (Olodun, Omoere, Olodu, the son of Ere) "Ikuforiji" (the Being whom death honours and pays obeisance to), "Olijeni" (the Master of the seventh (7th) day festival), "Oba Olofa Asun l'ola" (the Ruler who draws blessing and prosperity after Him, and who sleeps in the midst of honours), "Nini," ti ise "Omo Oloni" (the Possessor, who is -the Son of the greater Possessor), "Erintunde" (laughing comes back to the world, or the Being whose advent into the world has brought back the laugh of joy and gladness), "Owa" (the Being whose advent into the world from heaven filled men with joyful and thankful surprise which caused many to ask, "Is it Thou who hast come?" "Iwo li o wa?" and the Being from heaven whose constant cry to all in the world is that they should come to Him), "Owo, Alarun jarun" (the Parent who has given birth to five children and has lost none of them by death), "Olubesan" or "Olu-li ibi Esan" (the Chief Avenger of wrongs), "Edu" (the Black One, or the Great One whom, as tradition says, troubles have ma-de black), "Ope Ifa" (the palm sacred to Ifa), "ljiki-ti ki f'ori ba le f'enikan" (the Being whom all honour with the daily morning salutation, but who is above paying respect to any other being), "Abakuwijo" (the Being whose power is so great that he calls death to account), "Baba ye omo" (the Father who reflects honour on his children, or of whom his children may justly be proud). "Okitibiri, a-pa-ojo iku da" (the Being who, turning himself over as it were in a struggle, postpones for his client the day of death).

Divination is taken by a Babalawo on a highly esteemed broad circular bowl or four cornered fan of a moderate size, which is generally covered with white flour from a dry tree, and upon which he works, and with one of the fingers of the right hand imprints certain signs, representing such Ifa representatives as may be left in the palm of his left hand, after he has attempted with one grasp of the palm of his right hand to take up all the 16, where they were all held. These small signs or marks which would represent a number of efforts, and would be placed one after another horizontally would, according to their number and respective positions, represent one or other of the principal or subordinate Odus, or Divinities. From that Odu or Divinity, and one or other of the traditional stories connected with it, and with the aid of lot casting and of Opele, divination is taken and delivered.

Ifa, to speak more properly, an Odu delivers his responses in and through the channel of Parables, which every Babalawo is expected to be able to interpret. Hence it is commonly said:-

	 
		Owe ni Ifa ipa,
		 Omoran ni imo-
		 Bi a ba wipe mo-
		 Omoran a mo-
		 Nigbati a ko ba mo,
		 A ni, ko se!
		
		 Ifa speaks always in parables,
 A wise man is he who understands his speech,
 When we say understand it
 The wise man always understands it,
 But when we do not understand it -
 We say it is of no account or the prediction is not fulfilled.

A Babalawo may sometimes be seen sitting over his Ifa Bowl, attempting to consult the god and divine for an applicant who is present with him, and who, it may be, desires to know whether a business he thinks of embarking in would prosper. He uses his Ikins in the manner described above, and Eji Ogbe, the prince of all the Olodus or Odus appears. Upon this he casts lot to find out from him what the business is in regard to which he has been asked to consult him, and what the result of embarking in it would be to the applicant. The business known and its issue foretold, if this issue should be favourable, the Babalawo may sometimes be heard delivering himself thus and saying amongst other things with the authority of Eji Ogbe, of whose appearance he will have imformed the humble applicant-

Bi a ba bo oju,
 Bi a ba bo imu
 Isale agbon ni a ipari re.

Ada fun Orunmila nigbati o nlo gba ase l'owo Olodumare; o rubo. Olodumare si wa fi ase fun u. Nigbati gbogbo aiye gbo pe o ti gba ase l'owo Olodumare nwon si nwo to. Gbogbo eyi ti o wi si nse. Lati igba na wa ni a nwipe. A Se!

"If (when) we wash the face,
 If (when) we wash the nose
 We are accustomed to finish the operation at the bottom of the chin."

Ifa was consulted for Orunmila on the occasion when he would go to receive authority and power from the Almighty One and he offered the sacrifice prescribed to him. After this the Almighty One gave him authority and power.

When the people of the world learnt that he had received authority and power from the Almighty, all of them began to flock to him, to consult him on their affairs.

It was since then we have been accustomed to say "A se!" - "It will be as predicted."

Opele, or Opepere, is an Oracle of inferior rank to Ifa, and who is regarded as his constant attendant and is commonly spoken of as his slave. He is always represented by eight flat pieces of wood, or metal, or something else, strung together in two rows of four on each side, placed at equal distances from each other and joined together. The disposition of one or other of these pieces when the whole ensign is thrown and made to spread out upon the ground would represent at once a particular Odu; and one of Opele's chief duties is to show to the Babalawo what particular Odu he should consult upon a case referred to him.

Opele is often and frequently thus consulted by Babalawos, who usually carry about them its ensigns, because, consulting it carries with it less labour than, and is not so difficult as the work of consulting the Master, Ifa, himself; but this would be on matters of minor importance, and its response would be that of a servant for his master, and which is not always absolutely relied upon.

Opele is expected to be referred to and consulted every morning that a devotee might know whether the day would be for him prosperous or not and, if it should be seen to be a non-prosperous one, what sacrifice he should offer to conciliate the goodwill of his divinity in order that he might convert the day to a prosperous one for him, and also, that he might generally secure the blessing of his guidance and other assistance throughout the day; whilst a Babalawo is expected to ordinarily consult his Ifa every fifth day, which is the close of a week of Oses or worshipping days. Hence the parable runs:-

(1) Oju mo ki mo ki Awo ma sode wo
     Agbede a gbon ada-

(2) Bi oni ti ri, ola ki ri be, li o mu ki Babalawo ma da Ifa ororun.

(1) "There is never a morning when a Babalawo or a consulting Priest does not consult his Opele, as there is never a morning that a blacksmith is not called upon to sharpen a cutlass for a farmer." (2) "The possibility of to-morrow not being like to-day in regard to the events which may transpire in it, is what induces a Babalawo to consult his Ifa and sacrifice to it every fifth day."

There are three grades of priests. As the sacred nuts are given by Babalawos in two sets of sixteen Ikins and one Oduso to applicants, those who receive only the first set, which is called "The Olori," or Chief, form one grade, and this is the first. Those who receive both the first and the second, which is called "The Orisa," or the next in rank, make another, the second grade; and those who have, each one with his right foot in conjunction with those of his own Babalawo's, and any of his fellow or senior Babalawo's with him, resting upon his own and moving in a circle with him, trodden upon his Ifa nuts deposited in a lump of Eko or Agidi (comflour pudding), and who are generally spoken of as "Awon ti a te ni Ifa," or "Those who are trodden together with Ifa nuts," form the third grade. Those of the first grade are entitled to worship their Ifa always, but not to divine with it or suffer it to be so employed. Those of the second grade can both worship their own and divine with it, or suffer it to be thus used; and those two first are spoken of as "Awo egun," or "Elegan"; whilst those of the third class, who have been brought to their position through the services of Olodus, or chief Babalawos, are, besides being entitled both to worship their own Ifa and divine with it, also privileged to eat of any sacrifice that may be offered to or before the "Igba Odu," or the calabash or gourd vessel sacred to Odu, a privilege which is denied to those of the first two grades, as it is to any non-Ifa owning man, or, as the eating out of a sacrifice of any kind offered to Ifa and that which has been placed upon it and is called Irefa, is denied to women generally; and are also known as "Awo Olodu," the Principal Ifa worshippers.

The ceremony on the part of the Babalawo consists, after divining with his Ifa for it, in collecting the palm nuts that he would consecrate, burying them in the solid earth or at the head of a river, or in some other convenient place, three days before the public performance of the giving and receiving service, bruising them, washing them and the candidate also when he is of the second grade, and when he is said to wash the devil away from himself or wash Ifa water, this water having had what are known as Ifa leaves bruised in it, enclosing them in the same kind of leaves, placing the packet on a plate and solemnly depositing it in the palms of the hands of the candidate kneeling before him with closed eyes, after he shall have answered to his name called out the third time, and when he would signify his glad acceptance of the parcel by touching his forehead and breast with it, saying "May my head, or the divinity of my destiny, or my Creator accept it! My own heart accepts it." He will have paid the fees prescribed for every part of the ceremony and furnished victims and other offerings for sacrifice, which, in the case of those of the second grade, are expected to be, in every item, the double of those provided by candidates of the first grade, whilst by all, an observance with feasting is had on the third and on the seventh day respectively of the formal acceptance.

To these belongs the privilege of being led to a stream of water after the performance of the above ceremony, accompanied by their Babalawos and their assistants, to be further washed, in order to a greater purification, and escorted home triumphantly with a parrot's tail tightly tied to each one's forehead as a consecration token, with the praises of Ifa or Orunmila being lustily chanted after them.

There is the ceremony of extinguishing the Odu fire-(Pinodu, i.e., Pa-ina-odu). Under it a candidate receives upon the open palms of his hands, previously and frequently dipped in consecrated Ifa water, dropping flames from a new lamp lighted with a new wick and held by a Babalawo, and rubs the different parts of his body with them, without experiencing any injury. This is accepted as a token of his having become a proof against the fire of sickness, or having gained a victory over it and over bereavement, disappointment, or any other trouble and death also. He is escorted, after his performance, to a stream, led by his Oluwo and followed by the latter's assistant or Ajigbona, carrying on his head animal and other sacrifices that have been offered on his behalf, and holding them to it with both hands, they being wrapped in a clean white sheet covered over with both a fine and a coarse mat, and having a rope wound tightly around them. When the parcel is removed from his head and thrown into and deposited in a muddy part of the stream, into which he would descend, his head is held forward and it is washed with water whose droppings are allowed to fall on the bundle, and which the stream would carry away. This is regarded as a token that all his uncleanness and all the ills that might have befallen him are carried away from him.

The Igbadu is a covered calabash, containing four small vessels made from cocoanut shells, cut, each into two pieces in the middle, and which hold besides something unknown to the uninitiated, one a little mud, another a little charcoal, and another a little chalk, and another some camwood, all which are intended to represent certain Divine attributes, and which, with the vessels containing them, represent the four principal Odus-Eji Ogbe, Oyekun meji, Ibara meji, and Edi meji-and this calabash is deposited in a specially and well-prepared wooden box called Apere. The box is regarded as very sacred and as an emblem of Divinity, and is also worshipped. It is never opened, except on very special and important occasions, as when perhaps a serious difference is to be settled, and not without washed hands and often the offering of blood to it, when the opener would, as a mark of reverence, turn his face away from it as he opens it, saying, "Bi omode ba si isa, a ye ojun fun oru re" "If a child opens a boiling pot, he would turn away from the heat." Whatever is offered as a sacrifice to or before the Igbadu is to be eaten at once; no portion of it is to be left to the next day, and none but Olodus, i.e., those who have undergone the trampling ceremony, are to partake of it; whilst the room where it is deposited is considered so sacred that no woman nor any uninitiated man is ever permitted to enter into it, and the door opening into it is generally beautified with chalk and charcoal colouring, giving it a spotted appearance. One who receives his Ifa with trampling is usually received into this room and into the company of waiting and expectant Babalawos with much ceremony, after he has been escorted from the Igbodu and here it is he offers his first homage to Ifa after his initiation.

An Igbodu is a grove where the ceremony of giving Ifa with trampling is performed by the ObaIodu, or the chief Olodu priest, for those who desire to have it from him. The grove always contains three extemporized partitions, built of young palm branches and the Omu shrub. Into the first of these partitions any woman or any uninitiated person may enter, and here such. persons are expected to tarry as spectators or waiters. Into the second, Babalawos, and all Olodus, all those who have received Ifa by trampling are privileged to enter and remain. The third is entered only by the Obalodu, the ceremony-performing priest, who would take the candidate with him into it and who also would have brought his Igbadu into it previously under cover of night to preserve the sacred object from public gaze, and there perform his ceremony with the aid of such fellow Olodu priests as he might have seen fit to invite.

Ifa lays claim to every plant in creation as sacred to his worship, and thus it is come to pass that upon consultation by a Babalawo, one Odu will advise the use of the leaves of certain plants; another will prescribe one of these, or others totally different along with them, and so other Odus. But the plants whose leaves are always in demand, and which are considered as specially sacred to Eji Ogu, the Prince of all Odus, are Tete, Odundun, Renren, Gbegi, the Oriji herb, lpoye, omini, and the Iwerejeje plant; but some of these are known and described by sacred names on occasions of, or for purposes of divination. Then the leaves of the Tete herb become Ewe attedaiye, i.e., the herb that betokens our seniority in our entrance into the world; Renren becomes Ewe tutu, the herb of pacification; and Gbegi become Ewe Agidimogboyin.

Ifa or Orunmila is believed to know all and everything and is therefore consulted upon every circumstance of life, that of sickness not excluded; and he, through a consulting Babalawo, always prescribes medicines for the diseases referred to him; and for this, there is a foundation in the circumstance that in the traditional sayings of every Olodu, or Odu, mention is always to be found made of sufferers from this or that form of disease and of the remedies that cured them effectually. Hence every Babalawo is necessarily a physician in his own way, and he is often resorted to by professional practitioners for consultation with Ifa for aid to them in the exercise of their art.

Ela is evidently one of the many attributive names by which Ifa is described, and a very principal one among them. It is a contraction of the term "Orun mila," and is intended to represent the Divinity to all its worshippers and devotees, principally as a Saviour and Deliverer, and one that is strong and mighty and is unconquerable by Death itself, so that all that look to him for help in trouble and against any other evil, death not excluded, will find that their confidence has not been misplaced; and this, although the name is often used as if it represented a separate and distinct Divine personality, and although a separate and distinct representative ensign made of pieces of ivory, carrying four eyelets each and corresponding in number to the Ifa palm nuts (Ikin) which, with one Oduso, are 17, are chosen and employed to represent him.

He is sometimes described in songs of praises and in other speeches as "Ela omo Osin" Ela the child of "Osin" (the Ruler); sometimes as "Ela omo Oyigi (Oyigiyigi) Ota omi" Elathe offspring of a stone, i.e., the hard stone from the bed of a spring of water (an emblem of great strength), a quality which believed in, enables devotees to identify themselves with him, and regard themselves free in consequence from death, or protected against it, and say also when they utter the above praise, "Awa di Oyigiyigi, a ki o ku mo," "We are ourselves. become Oyigiyigi, that is the stone which gave birth to Ela, and will no longer die," or, at other times to say, "Ela ro a ki o ku mo-Okribiti, Ela ro (sokale) Oruo Ifa," "Ela has descended to the earth-we shall die no more-and this is Ifa's name." Sometimes he is described as "Eniti ngba ni la," "He is the one that saves us, and devotees may be heard saying sometimes of a friend, "Nwon se ebo Ela fun u" "We have made the Ela sacrifice, or the delivery or salvation sacrifice for him." One of them may be heard thus to confess his ignorance of the saving power of Ela, "Emi ko tete mo pe, Ela ni nwon mbo la ni ile wa," "I did not know in time that it is the Ela that is worshipped and sacrificed to in our family for salvation," or "Ko tina, ko to ro, beni on (Ela) ni gba ni la ni Ife," "He is of no account, he is too small to be thought of, yet he is the one who is accustomed to deliver us from trouble in Ife," or the world, for which the term Ife is often employed. And at other times he may be heard spoken of as 1"Oba-a mola" "The king, by knowing whom, we have come to salvation."

Ela holds a very important place in the Ifa system of worship. It is to be found in connection with each of the 256 Odus of the system, a circumstance that suggests that the system aims especially at impressing its followers with the idea that Ifa is a Saviour and Deliverer at all times and under all circumstances. It, besides the Odu Osetura, is always first humbly and reverently invoked and its favour sought for acceptance whenever Ifa is to be worshipped with a sacrifice, and is thus addressed-

Ela! Omo Osin, mo wari o! or, Ela meji, mo wari o! or Ela! Mo yin aboru
 Ela! mo yin aboye-
 Ela! mo yin abosise.

O Thou Ela, Son of the Ruler,
 I humble myself before thee!

or, O Ela! I praise the sacrificing that meets with acceptance or opens the way to blessing,
 O Ela! I praise the sacrificing that brings life-
 O Ela! I praise the sacrificing act that accompanies or precedes labour;

and it is the divinity to which harvest offerings are always presented by worshippers-especially in the yam season, before any portion of the harvest is partaken of, and when they are said to split the Ela yam (Pa isu Ela, or Pa Ela), and when also the following song may be heard sung lustily to Ela's praises, and Orunmila is said to come and partake of the yam with them-

    Ela Poke!
 Eni esi si wa soro odun,
 Odun ko, mo wa sodun, Iroko oko!
 Iroko oko! Odun oni si ko. Ela Poke!
     Ela has reappeared!

Our friend of the past year has come again to observe the yearly festival-
 The anniversary has returned. I am come O Iroko (Lord)
     of the cultivated field to observe the yearly festival.

O Iroko of the cultivated field, this day's anniversary has returned.

        Ela has reappeared!

Baba wa okirikisi!
 Omo at' orun ro s'aiye
 Ti o ko wa da s'aiye
 Baba wa okirikisi!

O Thou, our worthy Father!
 The Son who hast descended from heaven to this earth
 Who hast placed us in the world-
 Thou our worthy Father!

The ceremony connected with the giving of Ela to one applying for it is identical with that with which Ifa is given to those who come under the first two grades of recipients who are generally spoken of as Awo Egan, and drawbacks and privileges are like those to be found in both cases.

The male sex is the sex which particularly gives itself to Ifa worship. There are, however, times when divinations may recommend and prescribe that worship to a woman. Whenever this should be the case, a woman would receive from a Babalawo only one Ikin or Consecrated Palm nut called Eko, which she would carry about her body for her protection, and whenever divination should recommend and prescribe to her sacrifice to Ifa, she would, for the time being, hand over her Eko either to her husband or to her brother, or any other male relative according to prescription, who would include it in his own Ikins for the purpose of the worship and sacrifice in which she would participate.

There is a particular Palm tree that is known by the name of Ope-Ifa, or the Ifa Palm tree, because that class of palm trees commonly yield nuts carrying four eyelets each, and these are the only nuts employed in Ifa worship, and are devoted to it. They are regarded sacred to this purpose, and are often spoken of as Ekuroaije, i.e. "Nuts that are not to be eaten"; and if nuts carrying two or three eyelets should be found among these yielded by such trees, these would be called Ekurq-Ososa-i.e., the palm nuts whose beauty has deserted them through the loss of one or more eyelets -oso-sa.

The cost of supplying Ifa to a candidate varies from; L5 to L150, and more, according to the circumstances of the individual; and often children are pawned, slaves sold, and other sacrifices made to raise the funds necessary to cover the expense of the elaborate ceremony.

There are other oracles; but some of these are local, and are resorted to only by particular tribes or townships, e.g., there is the Oro Ilare of Ijesha land, which is said to come down from heaven to Ilare or Aiye, or the world, once a year, to be waited upon by those who may need his Oracular assistance, and whose temporary residence is always a grove, where he is always attended by an Aworo Oro Ilare till his return to heaven. The Aworo would deliver his responses to inquirers. His advent is always looked forward to with joy, and the public roads and thoroughfares of a town are always specially cleaned and put in order for his reception, whilst the number of men and women repairing to the grove for his Oracular assistance is always large. There are such divinities as Osun, Yemaja, Ososi and Elegbara, &c., which are often consulted, mostly by women, using sixteen cowries for their consulting signs; and among some of the tribes, Eluku and Agemo, which also are regarded as possessing much predicting capacity, and are often resorted to, as their predictions are always esteemed infallible.

An Ogberi or lgberi is one that is not initiated into the mysteries of the religion with which a Babalawo, from the nature of his office, is expected to be fully acquainted.

The Cola-fruit holds a very important and sacred place. Both it and the tree bearing it are considered sacred. Every Orisha is worshipped with the fruit, whilst a woodman's axe should on no account be laid upon the tree. Hence the parable which is commonly heard, "Orisa ti o yan igi obi li ayo, on-li o da awon iyoukun li Eru- A ki iyo Ida ba Orisa ja; Ayasebi Eke ati Eyo ni i be igi obi danu o" "The divinity that has chosen the Cola tree as his specially valued and loved representative has made all other trees subservient to it. We are not accustomed to draw out the sword to fight a divinity with; and no one but a liar and a perfidious person ever thinks of cutting down and throwing away a Cola tree." The fruit is very commonly and extensively employed by men and women all over the country for purposes of consultation and divination, the majority using it as if they sought divination through it, each one, from his own god, or as if it were a divinity by itself, whilst Babalawos and other intelligent persons use it with the idea that divination is being sought for from Ifa with it. It is commonly split into halves and thrown upon the ground, as is always done with Opele, the position assumed then by the pieces, either that in which their faces are turned upwards or that in which they are turned downwards, or that in which some look upwards and others look downwards at one and the same time, being understood to declare either good or evil, as the case may be, care being commonly taken previously to precede this ceremony with a libation of pure and clean water poured out upon the ground in humble worship of the god Earth, the parent, after a sort, of all mankind, as from it we have all been brought into existence, and upon whose surface the split Cola pieces would be thrown for divination.

It is sometimes described in praises by the honourable title of "Baba, abebe oloran ku si oran, Oran oloran li obi i ku si." "Our father who intercedes in another person's matter till he dies over it; Cola is commonly put to death over other people's affair," which is evidently intended for the divinity which it represents, and which refers to his work of intercession between parties at variance with each other with a view to peace making, and that death over it which it entails on him, and which, together with a further division into plugs and into smaller pieces, and an immediate mutual consumption of them by the parties interested in the peace making, and their respective friends, confirm and sea] the peace made. It is this circumstance that has given rise to the phrase so often used, "A ti pa obi si oran na." "We have split Cola over the matter," which is equal to saying, "We have settled the matter."

It, or the god it represents, is often spoken of as one whose entreaty or intercession is on no account to be refused; hence the saying, "Ebora," or " Ebo-ara ki ko ebe fun obi." "The gods are not in the habit of refusing to listen and accept entreaty or intercession from the Cola nut;" and it is this that has suggested the presentation of Cola nuts amongst other things by a suitor for the hand of a young woman in marriage to the parents, urging with them his suit, his desire and request for a betrothal, and his prayer for their acceptance of it.

There are among the heathens those in our country who profess to exercise the office of speaking with the dead, and of being mediums of communications from them to the living, and who are known as "Awon Abokusoro"-speakers with the dead-and whose deliverances have generally been found to be true. But the system does not appear to be so elaborate with them as it is with their fellow-professors in Europe and America.

There is a great variety of sacrifice, and each prescribed sacrifice or each set of such a sacrifice takes its name generally from the object for which it is offered. Among them may be mentioned the following:-The Redemption sacrifice; the exchange sacrifice; the wealth and the longevity sacrifice; the sacrifice for recovery from illness and for preventing death - those for the possession of strength, and for the avoiding of losses of any kind; those for protection against being a cause of trouble to one's own self; those against being successfully plotted against; those against a fire accident, and for the removal of drought or the prevention or the cessation of a flood of rain; that for attaining to some title and office of dignity, and that for securing a long enjoyment of the office, especially if he who seeks it had been told beforehand through Ifa divination that his enjoyment of it would not be long; that for securing the sign or mark on one's forehead that would assure him of his safety from the approach and touch of the angel of Death, and of victory and triumph over difficully and trouble - and that for acquiring superiority to others, &c.

 These various sacrifices mentioned, being atonement sacrifices, suggest the existence originally in the mind of the Pagan Yoruban that sin and the anger of an offended god are the cause of the various ills incidental to human life: that blessings are to be had only from him and according to his will, and that for this he is to be propitiated by means of sacrifice and offering, since he who desires them is a sinner.

Animals for sacrifice range from reptiles to man. Meat-offering includes all variety of food and drink; but for every particular sacrifice a certain victim is prescribed, and sometimes the same animal may be prescribed for more than one sacrifice; and so it is with meat and drink offerings, eg., against death in sickness, a sheep, and for longevity, a dog; for strength to the body, a ram sheep and a cock; against losses, a basket of eggs, most of which are usually employed with leaves sacred to Ifa; against being lied upon, domestic pigeons and palm nut shells; against trouble and misfortune, rats; against drought, small crabs from which water drops each time each makes a leap; against a flood from incessant rain or for confusion of a plot, snails; against a fire accident, a wild hog or a duck with different kinds of Ifa leaves; for victory in a time of war a ram sheep and an old cock together; against the death of a very young child, a hen that had had chickens; to be permitted to come to a title and for the destruction of a plot, a wild hog.

They are sometimes burnt with fire, and in some cases, like that of the Irapada or Redemption offering, the whole victim is roasted with fire within doors till it is reduced to ashes, and after this water is thrown into the hearth from behind it to extinguish the fire, and all the ashes and fire-brands are collected and taken outside, and as with all other offerings and gifts to Esu or Satan are placed on a public road for him. Sometimes they are taken out of the town alive and across a river, if any is near at hand, and left in the bush whereto they are supposed to bear the sin, guilt and trouble of the offerer which had been transferred to them. Sometimes they are thrown into a river to be carried away by it with the offerer's sin and sorrow. Sometimes they are buried in the earth, with or without a chain attached to them, and a portion of it standing on the surface, the subject for whom the sacrifice is offered making a sleeping place of the spot to assure himself of the protection and security sought for and alleged to be given, and which the chain symbolizes. Sometimes they are placed at the edge of a river. Sometimes as in the case of Ebo Aba, i.e., a purpose sacrifice or a sacrifice to the divinity of purpose or that divinity which enables one to make a purpose, and Ebo Ase, i.e., an accomplishment sacrifice or a sacrifice to the divinity of will that accomplishes his purpose or enables a man to accomplish a purpose, the blood of a sacrificed victim is sprinkled first upon the right lintel, which is sacred to the Alaba, and then upon the left lintel, which is sacred to the Alase, and after this, upon the surface of the door hanging on one of them, some of the feathers of a fowl or other winged animal offered being affixed at the same time to each blood-sprinkled surface, whilst the flesh of the victim is either roasted or boiled and eaten altogether quickly and in a standing posture. Sometimes the sacrifice is taken at once outside and left on a street or some highway, as in the case of another Ebo Irapa or Irapada, a redemption or exchange offering, which consists of a 16-wicked lamp lighted, and which is usually employed in the case of the serious illness of an important person to change his fate and deliver him from death. Sometimes they are thrown from one priest to another, they standing together in a straight line, as in the case of Ebo Agbeso or the heave offering, which is not to be suffered to fall to the ground during the performance of the exercise, the object sought being to secure the offerer against the triumph of his enemies over him. Sometimes they are living creatures, left to be devoured by other living creatures, as in the case of a sacrifice in which seven very young chickens are usually employed, and taken out to some public highway and left there to be devoured by hawks, the death of the individual for whom it is offered being supposed to be substituted for and averted by that of the chickens. Sometimes the head of the offerer is streaked with the blood of the victim, exhibiting him as one for whom an atonement has been made, and assuring him thereby of his acceptance, as in the case of the Ebo isami, or the sign-marking sacrifice, when some of the blood of the victim is mixed by the Babalawo and hi assistant, the Ajigbona, with both mud and some bruised sacred or Ifa leaves in a sacred grove from which the preparation is usually brought out ceremoniously for those waiting for it, to be employed in marking their foreheads in order to secure to them escape from death and assure them of it. These may be heard saying and singing amongst themselves, "Edu, i.e., (Orunmila) ti sa ni li ami a ko ku mo, Iwerejeje ni Edu fi sami." "Edu, or Orunmila, has marked us we shall not die again. It is the leaf of the Iwerejeje herb he has employed in doing it." Sometimes an offerer's hands are laid upon the victim before it is slain for the transferring of his guilt and death to it, and at other times the offerer touches his head with that of the victim or the body of the victim is passed over and made to touch every part of the body of him for whom it is offered, as is the case with the "Ebu iparo ori," the sacrifice for exchanging or substituting one's head, fate, or destiny with that of another. Sometimes sacrifices are eaten after they have been offered up, and sometimes they are not to be eaten, especially when they are offered for one in a dangerous illness. Sometimes in a case like this the sacrifice is buried in the earth with the bedding and covering of the sick person, and his body is washed over the spot if he is able to stand it. Some, like Ebo Osu, are to be eaten at once, as soon as they have been offered up, as is the case with either the Aba or the Ase sacrifice, and unlike it, are not to be suffered to remain to the next day. Some are attached to a light fan suspended upon a pole firmly planted in the ground and left to be waved about by the wind. Some victims are paraded through a town, city, or village for whose welfare they are to be sacrificed, and sometimes they are dragged about also on the solid ground before they are sacrificed in order that they might carry away with them the sin, guilt, and death of the inhabitants, and other troubles to which it may be they are liable.

Human sacrifices have been practised by all the different sections of the Yoruba nation and other West African tribes, especially at periodical festivals and on other great occasions; but till the recent conquest of the kingdom of Dahomey (on the East of the Yoruba kingdom) by France, and the unresisted and bloodless conquest and annexation of the great and powerful kingdom of Ashantee (on the South-east) by Great Britain, they were very common and abundant in them in connection with their respective ancestral worship.

The king of Dahomey is reported, as far back as 1664, to have built a royal dead-house, the mortar of which had been mixed with human blood.

In Yoruba the human victim chosen for sacrifice, and who may be either a free-born or a slave, a person of noble or wealthy parentage, or one of humble birth, is, after he has been chosen and marked out for the purpose, called an Oluwo.

He is always well fed and nourished and supplied with whatever he should desire during the period of his confinement. When the occasion arrives for him to be sacrificed and offered up, he is commonly led about and paraded through the streets of the town or city of the Sovereign who would sacrifice him for the well-being of his government and of every family and individual under it, in order that he might carry off the sin, guilt, misfortune and death of all without exception. Ashes and chalk would be employed to hide his identity by the one being freely thrown over his head, and his face painted with the latter, whilst individuals would often rush out of their houses to lay their hands upon him that they might thus transfer to him their sin, guilt trouble, and death. This parading done, he is taken through a temporary sacred shed of palm and other tree branches, and especially of the former, the Igbodu and to its first division, where many persons might follow him, and through a second where only the chiefs and other very important persons might escort and accompany him to, and to a third where only the Babalawo and his official assistant, the Ajigbona, are permitted to enter with him. Here, after he himself has given out or started his last song, which is to be taken up by the large assembly of people who will have been waiting to hear his last word or his last groan, his head is taken off and his blood offered to the gods. The announcement of his last word or his last groan heard and taken up by the people, would be a signal for joy, gladness and thanksgiving, and for drum beating and dancing, as an expression of their gratification because their sacrifice has been accepted, the divine wrath is appeased, and the prospect of prosperity or increased prosperity assured.

A sheep or any other brute creature chosen as a victim for a propitiatory sacrifice for one who desires to come to a great and important public office, and in respect of whom Ifa had predicted a short enjoyment of the position and an early removal from it to make room for another person who would enjoy it longer, would be similarly paraded through the town that it might be loaded with the ill-will which his enemies are believed to entertain against and wish the offerer and with the death pronounced against him, and when after this it is being led back into his house it would be clubbed to death at once at the entrance by some specially appointed persons.

Human sacrifices are generally offered in Yoruba and in many other parts of Africa by Sovereigns, especially when an expiation that is to be made is of a general character, and in the interests of their respective governments and peoples; and this is always, in Yoruba, according to the specific prescription and after the instigation of priests who, to reconcile them to the fearful and revolting deed and prevent to them qualms of conscience over it, usually seek by their language to magnify before them their great power and the importance of their office, and impress them with the idea that no one would or could call them into account for this use which they would make of a fellow man's life.

Sacrifices are offered for and by private individuals, individual families, a particular quarter of a town or city, or the whole of it in the king's name. When a sacrifice is a family one it is commonly spoken of as Ebo Agbole-a household sacrifice. When it is for a particular quarter of a town or city it is spoken of as Ebo igboro-or a district sacrifice; and when it is for a whole town or city it is generally spoken, of as Ebo Agbalu-a sacrifice for sweeping away evil from the town, or Ebo Oba, or the King's sacrifice.

These sacrifices which are offered by heathens to their Orishas, who occupy the place both of subordinate deities and mediators, are believed to be taken to the Great One by a spirit whom they denominate "Agberu," the carrier, whose special business it is to take them to him and wait upon him with them. He goes by the title, "Agberu ti igbe ebo re orun" " Agberu who carries people's sacrifices to heaven." The basket in which he is supposed to carry the sacrifices to heaven is lined with leaves sacred to Ifa, as for instance "Ewe toto," the toto leaf, " which is symbolical of the wish and prayer of the offerer that he may be equal to those who are before and above him;" the "Ewe Ewuruju" the Ewuruju leaf, which is symbolical of his wish that he may surpass others; "Ewe Igberesi" the Igberesi leaf, which is generally spoken of and described as the Igberesi leaf which accompanies a sacrifice to heaven. " Ewe Igberesi ti I sin ebolo si orun" and the Yeye leaf, which is often described as "Ewe Yeye ti ije ki ire ya si ile eni," "the Yeye leaf that brings blessing into our houses."

The Yoruban names of priests are the following:-The Babalawo, the Oluwo, the Ajigbona, the Aworo, the Odofin, the Aro, the Asarepawo, the Asawo, the Apetebi, who is sometimes called Ayawo.

The Babalawo is the president of the mysteries and the rites and ceremonies of religion and worship, and he is also the Sacrificing Priest, the teacher of the religion, and the Diviner by consulting the Sacred Oracles. He is always specially and in a formal manner consecrated to his office when he is to serve a king as his Consulting Priest.

An Oluwo in this class is a senior and chief of the class of Babalawos, whose directions the rest are all expected to obey; but often may a man be heard speaking of a Babalawo from whom he has received his Ifa as his Oluwo.

An Ajigbona is a chief assistant both to the Oluwo and any of the other Babalawos, and on an occasion of a great sacrifice, e.g., that of offering a human being, he is the only one, with an Aworo, appointed to accompany the Babalawo who would perform the sacrifice to what may be described as the most sacred place in the Igbodii, and which is the place both of slaughter and of offering.

An Odofin is a titled Babalawo next in rank to the Oluwo, and he is privileged to act for him in his absence.

An Aro is the third Babalawo in rank, and he is entitled to act for both the Oluwo and the Odofin in their absence.

An Asare pawo is a messenger whose office it is to call upon the Babalawos at their respective residences and invite them to a meeting whenever an appointment has been made, and he and all who bear the title with him are those who are also expected to prepare and extemporise an Igbodu whenever the Babalawos ask for one.

An Asawo is another attendant upon a Babalawo, and a special assistant to an Asare pawo.

An Apetebi or Esu or Ayawo is a woman who is regarded as the wife of Orunmila himself, and who may in reality be either a Babalawo's wife or the wife of any one for whom a sacrifice is to be offered and who is always expected to give assistance at it.

An Aworo is a chief minister devoted to a particular Orisha, and to him is assigned the difficult and revolting task of putting to death a fellow human being devoted to sacrifice.

A candidate for the office and dignity of a Babalawo is expected to be a pupil to a Babalawo well known for his wide knowledge of the mysteries of the religion and his skill in the exercise of it, and especially in the art of divination, for at least three years and learn the profession from him. But pupils who are ambitious of being much superior to their fellows of the same profession sometimes elect to continue their pupilage and apprenticeship to four, five, six, and even seven years.

As the doctrines and practice of the profession are not committed to writing, the teacher only employs oral teaching, reproducing from his memory from time to time such things as the pupil should learn and commit also to memory himself; and his witnessing of his teacher's performances frequently and assisting him at them are also expected to promote his education.

The course is divided into three parts covering the three years of ordinary pupilage. In the first year the candidate learns the names of all the Olodus and Odus,-the signs representing each of them and testifies by practice his mastery of them. In the second year he learns the one thousand and one traditions connected with the Olodus and Odus and-which are said to be so many that there has scarcely been a Babalawo found who has learnt and can recite the whole of them; but there are those who have learnt and committed to memory a much greater number of them than others have done, and who then can make a wider use of the consulting bowl. In the third year the candidate learns the method and use of lot casting and in connection with it assists at the consulting bowl.

A Babalawo, elected and appointed to wait upon a king always as his Babalawo who is to consult Ifa for him is always one who has distinguished himself above others by his superior knowledge of the traditions and his skill in using them and in the art of consulting the oracle Ifa. His term of pupilage must have exceeded three years, and he is generally formally set apart for this his very important and responsible office and the dignity connected with it by other Babalawos at a special meeting held for the purpose when they would amongst other ceremonies unitedly place on his head some leaves sacred to Ifa, to signify to him and to others his elevation to the office.

His specially appointed assistants are the Olwo Otun Awo, the right hand Babalawo, otherwise named Orisa; the Olowo Osi Awo, the left hand Babalawo, otherwise named the Osopo; and the Olopon ekeji awo, or the second consulting bowl Babalawo, each of whom has his own Ajigbona, who is sometimes called Lewere.

His ensign of office consists of a string of beads of various colours worn always round his left wrist; a cow's or bullock's tail which he always carries about with him; and a staff which is sometimes an Opa Osu, i.e., a staff sacred to Ofu; at other times an Opa Orerere, the Orerere staff, and at other times an Opa Osororo, or the Osororo staff.

The office is supported from regularly prescribed consulting and divining fees which are sometimes and indeed often exceeded on account of what is thought to be the superior financial position of an applicant for consultation of Ifa; the sacrifices and offerings made to the gods; and gifts from those whom they serve which these account it a duty and a privilege to make to them, especially at stated festivals.

The moral system of Yoruba heathenism teaches reverence to the gods, which is to show itself in, amongst other things, a daily early morning worship to them before their images before any business is done, the exercise of faith in them and their guidance and other assistances by consulting them on all important matters; respect and reverence for age and for all authority; filial regard and reverence for and obedience to parents-on the part of children always, and care and concern for them under the infirmities of sickness and old age, and in times of necessity produced by other circumstances; a great regard for marriage and the perpetuity of the bond, submission to their husbands on the part of wives, and care and protection on the part of husbands; the exercise of the duties of hospitality to all, and especially to strangers; fidelity to friendship under all circumstances; chastity, truthfulness in speech, honesty, kindness, and amongst some tribes courage also; whilst under its influence murder and theft, and sometimes the practice of witchcraft are punished with death; adultery and fornication with a severe social disgrace and fines and a selling into slavery, and, where the honour of a king's wife is concerned, with death sometimes; suicide, with a dishonoured burial; and neglect and indifference to pay a debt, and insolvency, with much social dishonour; and it discountenances, amongst other things, pride and vanity and extravagance.

Among these may be reckoned revenge and retaliation, hatred, jealousy, malice, ill-will, worldliness, anger and wrath and selfishness, some of which have contributed to supply a basis for the system of slavery and the slave trade, and for the life of Polygamy which have ruled the country for centuries, and for the very long incessant inter-tribal warfares which have ruined it.

The motives for virtue are a belief in a retributive providence, either for good or for evil; the fear of social disgrace and of punishment also, which would fall not only upon an individual wrong and evil doer, but upon his relatives and other connections also; the prospect of a long life on earth, desire for prosperity, and dread of the anger of the gods and of punishment from them.

It teaches that the soul of man is not liable to death, and that after the death of the body, which results from its quitting it, it hovers about the earth for some time, and after this departs into the world of spirits above. Hence the following parable referring to the death of a Babalawo, and which is applicable to other persons also who have died:-"Awo ki i ku:-Awo lo si Itunla. Itunla ni ile Awo." "Awo-or a Babalawo does never die; he goes to Itunla (the world where men live again after death). Itunla is an Awo's home."

The spirits of all the dead go after death to "Orun," the heavens or the world above. It is divided into two parts. One part is commonly called "Isala Orun" or as a mark of excellence; "Orun" merely, or "Orun Afefe rere," the heaven of sweet air, or "Orun Alafia," the heaven of peace and happiness, where the souls of all the good from this world are admitted and live after death; and another part is called Orun Apandi, the world of potsherds, where the spirits of the wicked here pass to and live in after death as a heap of refuse and rubbish, a mass of God rejected souls-and who are treated there as potsherds are here where they are commonly flung to a dunghill. Sometimes this world is described as Orun ihariha, the heaven of the dry leaves, covering an ear of corn, or the heaven where the spirits that go there are treated as such leaves generally are here by being thrown into the fire, and it is also thus described, "Orun ihariha, ibi ti Orun ati ina pade ti nwon nho ye," "the heaven of the Ihariha, where both the sun and fire meet together, and where the roar of their united flames and heat is like the shout of a great multitude."

The spirit of a good dead returns from the spirit world to be again born into this world as had been the case with it before and into the family of which it had been before death a visible part. Hence it is that after a child's birth and when a name would be given to it a Babalawo is consulted by the parents that they might know whether or not the child who is a departed one that has returned to them has come through the father's or the mother's line, that the family might know with what line they would formally connect it by the name that would be given to it. This accounts for such names as these given to children:-" Yeye-tunde"-"Our mother has returned to us; " and "Babatunde"-"Our father has returned to us." This transmigration is spoken of as "Yiya"-or the shooting forth of a branch.

There is some faint notion of a judgment after death, as may be inferred from the following occasional remarks of Yorubans, smarting under a sense of wrong and of their inability to revenge it-

" Ohun ti o se mi yi, ati emi ati iwo ni i ro o niwaju eni ti o ri wa."

"As to this thing or this wrong which you have done me, I say, both yourself and myself will have to relate it to and before Him (God) who sees us."

"Nigbati emi ba ku, ati emi ati iwo ni ilo ro o niwaju Olorun."

When I die, both you and myself will have to relate it (our case) or (the alleged wrong) before God."

"Ohun gbogbo ti a fe li Aiye a fere di idena orun (oju ibode orun) ka gbogbo

"With regard to what we do in this world we shall soon come to the entrance gate to the other world where we shall have to give an account of them all."

Ignorance of letters has prevented the teaching of this system being embodied in a book for the followers of Yoruba heathenism: but it has been committed to the care of oral tradition for which the people's well-exercised and strong memories afford a great help, parental teaching, the influence of the illustration afforded by the punishment awarded to evil and wrong doers, and the very many parables that enter largely into the language of the country and which have become in consequence of this an important vehicle of instruction, and the example of elder before younger people.

It cannot be justly and truly said that this idea of a hereafter has had any influence upon the people. It is not that it particularly influences their conduct in life. But very imperfect though it be, yet it certainly witnesses against those of them who riot in wickedness, injury, wrong and unkindness to their neighbours.

Extract from Astrological Geomancy in Africa, by Professor J. A. Abayomi Cole:-

In those early days of the world's history, when the gods associated with men and rendered them valiant help in all their struggles for existence, sacrifices were offered unto them. At these offerings they became so delighted that they came down from heaven in such great numbers that it was not possible to obtain sufficient meat to distribute amongst them.

Having cultivated a taste for flesh, and the worshippers not being able to supply all they demanded, the gods were therefore obliged to resort to various pursuits so that they might obtain food.

Ifa, the God of Divination, took to fishing.

On a certain day Ifa returned from the sea hungry and exhausted, having caught no fish. He thereupon consulted the god Elegba (the devil) what to do.

Elegba, in reply, said that there was near the forest a farm belonging to Orunga, the son of the goddess (Yemaja). It was planted by Odudura, the wife of Obatala (Heaven). It bore only sixteen nuts, and if Ifa can succeed to obtain the sixteen palm nuts from Orunga-who now owns the lands-he would, with them, teach him the art of divination, by which food will be secured for the gods without resorting to labour; for every one wishing to consult the Oracles will pay a goat, and knowing the anxiety of mankind to pry into the future, he was sure that the gods would thereby have more flesh than they would need, stipulating at the same time that the first choice of all such should be his.

Ifa at once proceeded to the farm of Orunga. He bargained for the sixteen palm nuts, promising in return for them to teach Orunga how to forecast the future, assuring him that by this knowledge he will become very rich, and at the same time be of great service to mankind.

Orunga went and consulted his wife, Orisabi, who agreed that they would part with the palm nuts, if by so doing they would become both rich and useful. Both of them set out to get the nuts, which they collected by the aid of monkeys. All, sixteen in number, were wrapped in a bundle of clothes, and Orisabi tied the bundle on her back in the manner in which babies are generally carried, and she with her husband took them to Ifa.

Ifa received and took them to Elegba, who taught him, as he promised, the art of divination; Ifa in turn taught it to Orunga, who thus became the first Baba-alawo (i.e., Father of Mysteries).

Hence in all geomantic operations the Baba-alawoes use the common formula:

Orunga ajuba oh!-i.e., Orunga, I respect thee!
 Orisabi ajubi oh!-i.e., Orisabi, I respect thee!

This accounts for the sixteen palm nuts used in Yoruba divinationall corresponding to the twelve houses of the heavens + two geomantic witnesses + one geomantic judge + one grand judge obtained by the permutation of the judge, the fifteenth figure, with the figure of the first house, all equal to sixteen figures.

There are various methods of divination, either with sixteen stones taken from the stomach of an alligator, used largely by tribes in the interior of the Colony of Sierra Leone, or with sixteen ordinary stones, beans, palm nuts, or cowries.

   


===== BOOK: mks.txt =====


    
The Master Key System, by Charles F. Haanel, [1919], at sacred-texts.com

  

THE MASTER KEY SYSTEM

  

IN TWENTY-FOUR PARTS
 WITH QUESTIONNAIRE
 AND GLOSSARY

  

By

  

CHARLES F. HAANEL

  

Saint Louis, MO: Inland Printery

  

[1919]

Scanned, proofed and formatted at sacred-texts.com, July, 2008. This text is in the public domain in the US because it was published prior to 1923.

     
The Master Key System, by Charles F. Haanel, [1919], at sacred-texts.com

[p. vii]

  

CONTENTS

           

       PAGE

     
      CONTENTS

       <page vii>

     
      INTRODUCTION

       <page xiii>

     
      PSYCHOLOGICAL CHART

       <page xlvii>

     
      ADVICE

       <page lv>

     
      PART ONE

       <page l>

     
      PART TWO

       <page 15>

     
      PART THREE

       <page 29>

     
      PART FOUR

       <page 43>

     
      PART FIVE

       <page 55>

     
      PART SIX

       <page 69>

     
      PART SEVEN

       <page 81>

     
      PART EIGHT

       <page 95>

     
      PART NINE

       <page 109>

     
      PART TEN

       <page 123>

     
      PART ELEVEN

       <page 137>

     
      PART TWELVE

       <page 151>

     
      PART THIRTEEN

       <page 163>

     
      PART FOURTEEN

       <page 177>

     
      PART FIFTEEN

       <page 189>

     
      PART SIXTEEN

       <page 201>

     
      PART SEVENTEEN

       <page 215>

     
      PART EIGHTEEN

       <page 229>

     
      PART NINETEEN

       <page 241>

     
      PART TWENTY

       <page 253>

     
      PART TWENTY-ONE

       <page 267>

     
      PART TWENTY-TWO

       <page 281>

     
      PART TWENTY-THREE

       <page 295>

     
      PART TWENTY-FOUR

       <page 307>

     
      GLOSSARY

       <page 321>

     
      QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS

       <page 335>

     
      INDEX

       <page 353>

     
   
     
The Master Key System, by Charles F. Haanel, [1919], at sacred-texts.com

[p. xiii]

  

INTRODUCTION

  

I

Before any environment, successful or otherwise, can be created, action of some kind is necessary, and before any action is possible, there must be thought of some kind, either conscious or unconscious, and as thought is a product of mind, it becomes evident that Mind is the creative centre from which all activities proceed.

It is not expected that any of the inherent laws which govern the modern business world as it is at present constituted can be suspended or repealed by any force on the same plane, but it is axiomatic that a higher law may overcome a lower one. Tree life causes the sap to ascend, not by repealing the law of gravity but by surmounting it.

To control circumstances a knowledge of certain scientific principles of mind-action is required. Such knowledge is a most valuable asset. It may be gained by degrees and put into practice as fast as learned. Power over circumstances is one of its fruits; health, harmony and prosperity are assets upon its balance sheet. It costs only the labour of harvesting its great resources.

The naturalist who spends much of his time in observing visible phenomena is constantly creating power in that portion of his brain set apart for observation. The result is that he becomes very much more expert and skilful in

[p. xiv]

knowing what he sees, and grasping an infinite number of details at a glance, than does his unobserving friend. He has reached this facility by exercise of his brain. He deliberately chose to enlarge his brain power in the line of observation, so he deliberately exercised that special faculty, over and over, with increasing attention and concentration. Now we have the result

a man learned in the lore of observation far above his fellows. Or, on the other hand, one can, by stolid inaction, allow the delicate brain matter to harden and ossify until his whole life is barren and fruitless.

Every thought tends to become a material thing. Our desires are seed thoughts that have a tendency to sprout and grow and blossom and bear fruit. We are sowing these seeds every day. What shall the harvest be? Each of us to-day is the result of his past thinking. Later we shall be the result of what we are now thinking. We create our own character, personality and environment by the thought which we originate, or entertain. Thought seeks its own. The law of mental attraction is an exact parallel to the law of atomic affinity. Mental currents are as real as electric, magnetic or heat currents. We attract the currents with which we are in harmony--are we selecting those which will be conducive to our success? This is the important question.

Lines of least resistance are formed by the

[p. xv]

constant action of the mind. The activity of the brain reacts upon the particular faculty of the brain employed. The latent power of the mind is developed by constant exercise. Each form of its activity becomes more perfect by practice. Exercises for the development of the mind present a variety of motives for consideration. They involve the development of the perceptive faculties, the cultivation of the emotions, the quickening of the imagination, the symmetrical unfoldment of the intuitive faculty, which without being able to give a reason frequently impels or prohibits choice, and finally the power of the mind may be cultivated by the development of the moral character.

"The greatest man," said Seneca, "is he who chooses right with invincible determination." The greatest power of the mind, then, depends upon its exercise in moral channels, and therefore requires that every conscious mental effort should involve a moral end. A developed moral consciousness modifies consideration of motives, and increases the force and continuity of actions; consequently the well developed symmetrical character necessitates good physical, mental and moral health, and this combination creates initiative, power, resistless force, and necessarily success.

It will be found that Nature is constantly seeking to express Harmony in all things, is

[p. xvi]

for ever trying to bring about an harmonious adjustment, for every discord, every wound, every difficulty; therefore when thought is harmonious, nature begins to create the material conditions, the possession of which is necessary in order to make up an harmonious environment.

When we understand that mind is the great creative power, what does not become possible? With Desire as the great creative energy, can we not see why Desire should be cultivated, controlled and directed in our lives and destinies? Men and women of strong mentality, who dominate those around them, and often those far removed from them, really emanate currents charged with power which, coming in contact with the minds of others, causes the desires of the latter to be in accord with the mind of the strong individuality. Great masters of men possess this power to a marked degree. Their influence is felt far and near, and they secure compliance with their wishes by making others "want" to act in accord with them. In this way men of strong Desire and Imagination may and do exert powerful influence over the minds of others, leading the latter in the way desired. The magnetic persons attract, allure and draw. They are emotional, and capture the will of others.

No man is ever created without the inherent power in himself to help himself. The personality

[p. xvii]

that understands its own intellectual and moral power of conquest will certainly assert itself. It is this truth which an enfamined world craves to-day. The possibility of asserting a slumbering intellectual courage that clearly discerns, and a moral courage that grandly undertakes is open to all. There is a divine potency in every human being.

We speak of the sun as "rising" and "setting," though we know that this is simply an appearance of motion. To our senses the earth is apparently standing still, and yet we know it is revolving rapidly. We speak of a bell as a "sounding body," yet we know that all that the bell can do is to produce vibrations in the air. When these vibrations come at the rate of sixteen a second they cause a sound to be heard in the mind. It is possible for the mind to hear vibrations up to the rate of 38,000 a second. When the number increases beyond this all is silence again; so that we know that the sound is not in the bell; it is in our own mind.

We speak and even think of the sun as "giving light," yet we know it is simply giving forth energy which produces vibrations in the ether at the rate of four hundred trillion a second, causing what are termed light waves, so that we know that what we call light is simply a mode of motion, and the only light that there is, is the sensation caused in the mind by the

[p. xviii]

motion of these waves. When the number of vibrations increases, the light changes in colour, each change in colour being caused by shorter and more rapid vibrations; so that although we speak of the rose as being red, the grass as being green, or the sky as being blue, we know that these colours exist only in our minds, and are the sensation experienced by us as the result of the vibrations of light. When the vibrations are reduced below four hundred trillion a second, they no longer affect us as light but we experience the sensation of heat.

So we have come to know that appearances exist for us only in our consciousness. Even time and space become annihilated, time being only the experience of succession, there being no past or future except as a thought relation to the present. In the last analysis, therefore, we know that one principle governs and controls all there is. Every atom is for ever conserved; whatever is parted with must inevitably be received somewhere. It cannot perish and it only exists for use. It can go only where it is attracted, and therefore required. We can receive only what we give, and we may give only to those who can receive; and it remains with us to determine our rate of growth and the degree of harmony that we shall express.

The laws under which we live are designed solely for our advantage. These laws are immutable and we cannot escape from their

[p. xix]

operation. All the great eternal forces act in solemn silence, but it is in our power to place ourselves in harmony with them and thus express a life of comparative peace and happiness.

Difficulties, inharmonies, obstacles, indicate that we are either refusing to give out what we no longer need, or refusing to accept what we require. Growth is attained through an exchange of the old for the new, of the good for the better; it is a conditional or reciprocal action, for each of us is a complete thought entity and the completeness makes it possible for us to receive only as we give. We cannot obtain what we lack if we tenaciously cling to what we have.

The Principle of Attraction operates to bring to us only what may be to our advantage. We are able consciously to control our conditions as we come to sense the purpose of what we attract, and are able to extract from each experience only what we require for our further growth. Our ability to do this determines the degree of harmony or happiness we attain.

The ability to appropriate what we require for our growth continually increases as we reach higher planes and broader visions, and the greater our ability to know what we require, the more certain we shall be to discern its presence, to attract it and to absorb it. Nothing may reach us except what is necessary for our growth. All conditions and experiences that

[p. xx]

come to us do so for our benefit. Difficulties and obstacles will continue to come until we absorb their wisdom and gather from them the essentials of further growth. That we reap what we sow, is mathematically exact. We gain permanent strength exactly to the extent of the effort required to overcome our difficulties.

The inexorable requirements of growth demand that we exert the greatest degree of attraction for what is perfectly in accord with us. Our highest happiness will be best attained through our understanding of and conscious co-operation with natural laws.

Our mind-forces are often bound by the paralysing suggestions that come to us from the crude thinking of the race, and which are accepted and acted upon without question. Impressions of fear, of worry, of disability and of inferiority are given us daily. These are sufficient reasons in themselves why men achieve so little--why the lives of multitudes are so barren of results, when all the time there are possibilities within them which need only the liberating touch of appreciation and wholesome ambition to expand into real greatness.

Women, perhaps even more than men, have been subject to these conditions. This is true because of their finer susceptibilities making them more open to thought-vibrations from other minds, and because the flood of negative

[p. xxi]

and repressive thoughts has been aimed more especially at them.

But it is being overcome. Florence Nightingale overcame it when she rose in the Crimea to heights of tender sympathy and executive ability before unknown among women. Clara Barton, the head of the Red Cross, overcame it when she wrought a similar work in the armies of the Union. Jenny Lind overcame it when she showed her ability to command enormous financial rewards while at the same time gratifying the passionate desire of her nature and reaching the front rank of her day in musical art. And there is a long list of women singers, philanthropists, writers and actresses who have proved themselves capable of reaching the greatest literary, dramatic, artistic and sociological achievement.

Women as well as men are beginning to do their own thinking. They have awakened to some conception of their possibilities. They demand that if life holds any secrets, these shall be disclosed. At no previous time has the influence and potency of thought received such careful and discriminating investigation. While a few seers have grasped the great fact that mind is the universal substance, the basis of all things, never before has this vital truth penetrated the more general consciousness. Many minds are now striving to give this wonderful truth definite utterance. Modern science

[p. xxii]

has taught us that light and sound are simply different intensities of motion, and this may lead to discoveries of forces within man that could not have been conceived of until this revelation was made.

A new era has dawned, and now, standing in its light, man sees something of the vastness of the meaning of life--something of its grandeur. Within that life is the germ of infinite potencies. One feels convinced that man's possibility of attainment cannot be measured, that boundary lines to his onward march are unthinkable. Standing on this height he finds that he can draw new power to himself from the infinite energy of which he is a part.

[p. xxiii]

  

II

Some men seem to attract success, power, wealth, attainment, with very little conscious effort; others conquer with great difficulty; still others fail altogether to reach their ambitions, desires and ideals. Why is this so? Why should some men realize their ambitions easily, others with difficulty, and still others not at all? The cause cannot be physical, else the most perfect men, physically, would be the most successful. The difference, therefore, must be mental--must be in the mind; hence mind must be the creative force, must constitute the sole difference between men. It is mind, therefore, which overcomes environment and every other obstacle in the path of men.

It is the actualizing of interior quality through the creative power of thought which has given us great leaders like Alexander, Napoleon, Cromwell, Marlborough and Washington; captains of industry like Carnegie, Morgan, Rockefeller and Leverhulme; inventors like Stephenson, Morse, Marconi, Edison, Tesla, and hosts of others. If, then, the only difference between men lies in their ability to think, to use and control their thought, to develop it--if the secret of all success, all power, all attainment is the creative power of mind, the force of thought--surely the ability of think correctly should become the paramount object of every man.

[p. xxiv]

When the creative power of thought is fully understood, its effect will be seen to be marvellous. But such results cannot be secured without proper application, diligence and concentration. The student will find that the laws governing in the mental and spiritual world are as fixed and infallible as in the material world. To secure the desired results, then, it is necessary to know the law and to comply with it. A proper compliance with the law will be found to produce the desired result with invariable exactitude. The student who learns that power comes from within, that he is weak only because he has depended on help from outside, and who unhesitatingly throws himself on his own thought, instantly rights himself, stands erect, assumes a dominant attitude, and works miracles.

Scientists tell us that we live in the universal ether. This is formless, of itself, but it is pliable, and forms about us, in us and around us, according to our thought and word. We set it into activity by that which we think. Then that which manifests to us objectively is that we have thought or said.

Thought is governed by law. The reason we have not manifested more faith is because of lack of understanding. We have not understood that everything works in exact accordance with definite law. The law of thought is as definite as the law of mathematics, or the

[p. xxv]

law of chemistry, or the law of electricity, or the law of gravitation. When we begin to understand that happiness, health, success, prosperity and every other condition or environment are results, and that these results are created by right thinking, either consciously or unconsciously, we shall realize the importance of a working knowledge of the laws governing thought.

Those coming into a conscious realization of the power of thought find themselves in possession of the best that life can give; substantial things of a higher order become theirs, and these sublime realities are so constituted that they can be made tangible parts of daily personal life. They realize a world of higher power, and keep that power constantly working. This power is inexhaustible, limitless, and they are therefore carried forward from victory to victory. Obstacles that seem insurmountable are overcome. Enemies are changed to friends, conditions are overcome, elements transformed, fate is conquered.

The supply of good is inexhaustible, and the demand can be made along whatever lines we may desire. This is the mental law of demand and supply.

Our circumstances and environment are formed by our thoughts, We have, perhaps, been creating these conditions unconsciously. If they are unsatisfactory, the remedy is to

[p. xxvi]

consciously alter our mental attitude and see our circumstances adjust themselves to the new mental condition. There is nothing strange or supernatural about this; it is simply the Law of Being. The thoughts which take root in the mind will certainly produce fruit after their kind. The greatest schemer cannot "gather grapes of thorns, or figs of thistles." To improve our conditions we must first improve ourselves. Our thoughts and desires will be the first to show improvement.

To be in ignorance of the laws governing in the mental world is to be like a child playing with fire, or a man manipulating powerful chemicals without a knowledge of their nature and relations. This is universally true, because Mind is the one great cause which produces all conditions in the lives of men and women.

Admitting that you agree with everything that has been stated, thus far, and most persons will take no exception to anything that has been said, it still remains to make a practical application of the law.

In order to take advantage of this law, and put ourselves into harmonious relationship with it, so that the benefit may be made manifest in our lives, it is necessary to see that the conditions are all met for its proper operation. We may know the laws governing electricity, we may have all the proper mechanism, the lamps, the wires, the switches, and we may

[p. xxvii]

even know how to generate the power, but if the connections are not properly made, we can work the switch till doomsday and no light will appear; so with the law of attraction--it is in operation all the time, everywhere, something is constantly being created, something is appearing, everything is continually changing, but to take advantage of this process, it is just as necessary to comply with the law as it is in the case of electricity or gravitation.

Mind is creative and operates through the law of attraction. We are not to try to influence any to do what we think they should do. Each individual has a right to choose for himself, but aside from this we would be operating under the law of force, which is destructive in its nature and just the opposite of the law of attraction. A little reflection will convince you that all of the great laws of nature operate in silence and that the underlying principle is the law of attraction. It is only destructive processes such as earthquakes and , that employ force. Nothing good is ever accomplished in that way.

To be successful, attention must invariably be directed to the creative plane; it must never seek to deprive. You do not wish to take anything away from any one else, you want to create something for yourself, and what you want for yourself you are perfectly willing that everyone else should have.

[p. xxviii]

You know that it is not necessary to take from one to give to another, but that the supply for all is abundant. Nature's storehouse of wealth is inexhaustible and if there seems to be a lack of supply anywhere it is only because the channels of distribution are as yet imperfect.

Abundance is a natural law of the universe. The evidence of this law is conclusive; we see it on every hand. Everywhere Nature is lavish--wasteful, extravagant. Nowhere is economy observed in any created thing. Profusion is manifested in everything. The millions and millions of trees and flowers and plants and animals and the vast scheme of reproduction where the process of creating and recreating is for ever going on, all indicates the lavishness with which Nature has made provision for man. That there is an abundance for everyone is evident, but that many seem to have been separated from this supply is also evident; they have not yet come into a realization of the Universality of all substance, and that mind is the active principle which starts causes in motion whereby we are related to the things we desire.

It is evident, therefore, that he who fails to fully investigate and take advantage of the wonderful progress which is being made, in this last and greatest science, will soon be as far behind as the man who would refuse to acknowledge and accept the benefits which have accrued

[p. xxix]

to mankind through an understanding of the laws of electricity.

Of course, mind creates negative conditions just as readily as favourable conditions, and when we consciously or unconsciously visualize every kind of lack, limitation and discord, we create these conditions; this is what many are unconsciously doing all the time.

This law as well as every other law is no respecter of persons, but is in constant operation and is relentlessly bringing to each individual exactly what he has created; in other words, "Whatsoever a man soweth that shall he also reap."

Abundance, therefore, depends upon a recognition of the laws of Abundance, and the fact that Mind is not only the creator, but the only creator of all there is. Certainly nothing can be created, before we know that it can be created and then make the proper effort. There is no more Electricity in the world to-day than there was fifty years ago, but until someone recognized the law by which it could be made of service, we received no benefit; now that the law is understood, practically the whole world is lit by it. So with the law of Abundance; it is only those who recognize the law and place themselves in harmony with it, who share in its benefits.

A recognition of the law of abundance develops certain mental and moral qualities, among

[p. xxx]

which are Courage, Loyalty, Tact, Sagacity, Individuality and Constructiveness. These are all modes of thought, and as all thought is creative, they manifest in objective conditions corresponding with the mental condition. This is necessarily true because the ability of the individual to think is his ability to act upon the Universal mind and bring it into manifestation, it is the process whereby the individual becomes a channel for the differentiation of the Universal. Every thought is a cause and every condition an effect.

This principle endows the individual with seemingly transcendental possibilities, among which is the mastery of conditions through the creation and recognition of opportunities. This creation of opportunity implies the existence or creation of the necessary qualities or talents which are thought forces and which result in a consciousness of power which future events cannot disturb. It is this organization of victory or success within the mind, this consciousness of power within which constitutes the responsive harmonious action whereby we are related to the objects and purposes which we seek. This is the law of attraction in action; this law being the common property of all, can be exercised by any one having sufficient knowledge of its operation.

Courage is that power of the mind which manifests in the love of mental conflict; it is a noble and lofty sentiment, it is equally fitted

[p. xxxi]

to command or obey. Both require courage. It often has a tendency to conceal itself. There are men and women, too, who apparently exist only to do what is pleasing to others, but when the time comes and the latent will is revealed, we find under the velvet glove an iron hand--and no mistake about it. True courage is cool, calm and collected, and is never foolhardy, quarrelsome, ill-natured or contentious.

Accumulation is the power to reserve and preserve a part of the supply which we are constantly receiving, so as to be in position to take advantage of the larger opportunities which will come as soon as we are ready for them. Has it not been said, "To him that hath shall be given." All successful business men have this quality well developed. James J. Hill, who recently died leaving an estate of over fifty-two million dollars, said: "If you want to know whether you are destined to be a success or a failure in life, you can easily find out. The test is simple and it is infallible: Are you able to save money? If not, drop out. You will lose. You may think not, but you will lose as sure as you live. The seed of success is not in you." This is very good so far as it goes, but any one who knows the biography of James J. Hill, knows that he acquired his fifty million dollars by following the exact methods we have given. In the first place, he started with nothing; he had to use his imagination to idealize the vast railroad which he projected across the

[p. xxxii]

western prairies. He then had to come into a recognition of the law of abundance in order to provide the ways and means for materializing it; unless he had followed out this programme he would never have had anything to save.

Accumulativeness acquires momentum; the more you accumulate the more you desire and the more you desire the more you accumulate, so that it is but a short time until the action and reaction acquire a momentum that cannot be stopped. It must, however, never be confounded with selfishness, miserliness or penuriousness; they are perversions and will make any true progress impossible.

Constructiveness is the creative instinct of the mind. It will be readily seen that every successful business man must be able to plan, develop or construct. In the business world it is usually referred to as initiative. It is not enough to go along in the beaten path. New ideas must be developed, new ways of doing things. It manifests in building, designing, planning, inventing, discovering, improving. It is a most valuable quality and must be constantly encouraged and developed. Every individual possesses it in some degree, because he is a centre of consciousness in that Infinite and Eternal Energy from which all things proceed.

Water manifests on three planes, as ice, as water and as steam; it is all the same compound,

[p. xxxiii]

the only difference is the temperature, but no one would try to drive an engine with ice; convert it into steam and it easily takes up the load. So with your energy; if you want it to act on the creative plane, you will have to begin by melting the ice with the fire of imagination, and you will find that the stronger the fire, and the more ice you melt, the more powerful your thought will become, and the easier it will be for you to materialize your desire.

Sagacity is the ability to perceive and cooperate with Natural Law. True Sagacity avoids trickery and deceit as it would the leprosy; it is the product of that deep insight which enables one to penetrate into the heart of things and understand how to set causes in motion which will inevitably create successful conditions.

Tact is a very subtle and at the same time a very important factor in business success. It is very similar to intuition. To possess tact one must have a fine feeling, must instinctively know what to say or what to do. In order to be tactful one must possess Sympathy and Understanding, that understanding which is so rare, for all men see and hear and feel, but how desperately few "understand." Tact enables one to foresee what is about to happen and calculate the result of actions. Tact enables us to feel when we are in the presence of physical,

[p. xxxiv]

mental and moral cleanliness, for these are to-day invariably demanded as the price of success.

Loyalty is one of the strongest links which bind men of strength and character. It is one which can never be broken with impunity. The man who would lose his right hand rather than betray a friend will never lack friends. The man who will stand in silent guard, until death, if need be, beside the shrine of confidence or friendship of those who have allowed him to enter will find himself linked with a current of cosmic power which will attract desirable conditions only. It is inconceivable that such a one should ever meet with lack of any kind.

Individuality is the power to unfold our own latent possibilities, to be a law unto ourselves, to be interested in the race rather than the goal. Strong men care nothing for the flock of imitators who trot complacently behind them. They derive no satisfaction in the mere leading of large numbers, or the plaudits of the mob. This pleases only petty natures and inferior minds. Individuality glories more in the unfolding of the power within than in the servility of the weakling.

Individuality is a real power inherent in all and the development and consequent expression of this power enables one to assume the responsibility of directing his own footsteps rather than stampeding after some self-assertive bellwether.

[p. xxxv]

Truth is the imperative condition of all wellbeing. To be sure, to know the truth and to stand confidently on it is a satisfaction beside which no other is comparable. Truth is the underlying verity, the condition precedent to every business or social relation. Truth is the only solid ground in a world of conflict, doubt and danger.

Every act not in harmony with Truth, whether through ignorance or design, cuts the ground from under our feet, leads to discord, inevitable loss, and confusion, for while the humblest mind can accurately foretell the result of ever correct action, the greatest, most profound and penetrating mind loses its way hopelessly and can form no conception of the results due to a departure from correct principles.

Those who establish within themselves the requisite elements of true success have established confidence, organized victory, and it only remains for them to take such steps from time to time as the newly-awakened thought force will direct, and herein rests the magical secret of all power.

Less than ten per cent. of our mental processes is conscious, the other ninety per cent. is subconscious and unconscious, so that he who would depend upon his conscious thought alone for results is less than ten per cent. efficient. Those who are accomplishing anything worth while are those who are enabled to take advantage of

[p. xxxvi]

this greater storehouse of mental wealth. It is in the vast domain of the sub-conscious mind that great truths are hidden, and it is here that thought finds its creative power, its power to correlate with its object, to bring out of the unseen the seen.

Those familiar with the laws of Electricity understand the principle that electricity must always pass from a higher to a lower potentiality and can therefore make whatever application of the power they desire. Those not familiar with this law can effect nothing; and so with the law governing in the Mental World, those who understand that Mind penetrates all things, is Omnipresent and is responsive to every demand, can make use of the law and can control conditions, circumstances and environment; the uninformed cannot use it because they do not know it.

The fruit of this knowledge is, as it were, a gift of the Gods; it is the "truth" that makes men free, not only free from every lack and limitation, but free from sorrow, worry and care, and is it not wonderful to realize that this law is no respecter of persons, that it makes no difference what your habit of thought may be the way has been prepared.

With the realization that this mental power controls and directs every other power which exists, that it can be cultivated and developed, that no limitation can be placed upon its

[p. xxxvii]

activity, it will become apparent that it is the greatest fact in the world, the remedy for every ill, the solution for every difficulty, the gratification of every desire, in fact, that it is the Creator's magnificent provision for human emancipation.

[p. xxxviii]

  

III

The scientific spirit now dominates every field of effort, relations of cause and effect are no longer ignored.

The discovery of a reign of law marked an epoch in human progress. It eliminated the element of uncertainty and caprice from men's lives, and substituted law, reason and certitude.

Men now understand that for every result there is an adequate and definite cause, so that when a given result is desired, they seek the condition by which alone this result may be attained.

The basis upon which all law rests was discovered by inductive reasoning which consists of comparing a number of separate instances with one another until the common factor which gives rise to them all is seen.

It is this method of study to which the civilized nations owe the greater part of their prosperity and the more valuable part of their knowledge; it has lengthened life, it has mitigated pain, it has spanned rivers, it has brightened night with the splendour of day, extended the range of vision, accelerated motion, annihilated distance, facilitated intercourse, and enabled men to descend into the sea and to soar in the air, what wonder then that men

[p. xxxix]

soon endeavoured to extend the blessings of this system of study to their method of thinking, so that when it became plainly evident that certain results followed a particular method of thinking it only remained to classify these results.

This method is scientific and it is the only method by which we shall be permitted to retain, that degree of liberty and freedom which we have been accustomed to look upon as an inalienable right, because a people is safe at home and in the world only if national preparedness means such things as growing surplus of health, accumulated efficiency in public and private business of whatever sort, continuous advance in the science and art of acting together, and the increasingly dominant endeavour to make all of these and all other aspects of national development centre and revolve about ascending life, single and collective, for which science, art and ethics furnish guidance and controlling motives.

The Master Key is based on absolute scientific truth and will unfold the possibilities that lie dormant in the individual, and teach how they may be brought into powerful action, to increase the person's effective capacity, bringing added energy, discernment, vigour and mental elasticity. The student who gains an understanding of the mental laws which are unfolded will come into the possession of an

[p. xl]

ability to secure results hitherto undreamed of, and which has rewards hardly to be expressed in words.

It explains the correct use of both the receptive and active elements of the mental nature, and instructs the student in the recognition of opportunity; it strengthens the will and reasoning powers, and teaches the cultivation and best uses of imagination, desire, the emotions and the intuitional faculty. It gives initiative, tenacity of purpose, wisdom of choice, intelligent sympathy and a thorough enjoyment of life on its higher planes.

The Master Key teaches the use of Mind Power, true Mind Power, not any of the substitutes and perversions; it has nothing to do with Hypnotism, Magic or any of the more or less fascinating deceptions by which many are led to think that something can be had for nothing.

The Master Key cultivates and develops the understanding which will enable you to control the body and thereby the health. It improves and strengthens the Memory. It develops Insight, the kind of Insight which is so rare, the kind which is the distinguishing characteristic of every successful business man, the kind which enables men to see the possibilities as well as the difficulties in every situation, the kind which enables men to discern opportunity close at hand, for thousands fail to see opportunities

[p. xli]

almost within their grasp while they are industriously working with situations which under no possibility can be made to realize any substantial return.

The Master Key develops Mental Power which means that others instinctively recognize that you are a person of force, of character--that they want to do what you want them to do; it means that you attract men and things to you; that you are what some people call "lucky," that "things" come your way; that you have come into an understanding of the fundamental laws of Nature, and have put yourself in harmony with them; that you are in tune with the Infinite; that you understand the law of attraction, the Natural laws of growth, and the Psychological laws on which all advantages in the social and business world rest.

Mental Power is creative power, it gives you the ability to create for yourself; it does not mean the ability to take something away from some one else. Nature never does things that way. Nature makes two blades of grass grow where one grew before, and Mind Power enables men to do the same thing.

The Master Key develops insight and sagacity, increased independence, the ability and disposition to be helpful; it destroys distrust, depression, fear, melancholia, and every form of lack, limitation and weakness, including pain

[p. xlii]

and disease; it awakens buried talents, supplies initiative, force, energy, vitality--it awakens an appreciation of the beautiful in Art, Literature and Science.

It has changed the lives of thousands of men and women, by substituting definite principles for uncertain and hazy methods--and principles are the foundation upon which every system of efficiency must rest.

Elbert Gary, the chairman of the United States Steel Corporation, said: "The services of advisors, instructors, efficiency experts in successful management are indispensable to most business enterprises of magnitude, but I deem the recognition and adoption of right principles of vastly more importance." The Master Key teaches right principles, and suggests methods for making a practical application of the principles; in that it differs from every other course of study. It teaches that the only possible value which can attach to any principle is in its application. Many read books, take home study courses, attend lectures all their lives without ever making any progress in demonstrating the value of the principles involved. The Master Key suggests methods by which the value of the principles taught may be demonstrated and put in actual practice in the daily experience.

There is a change in the thought of the world. This change is silently transpiring in our midst,

[p. xliii]

and is more important than any which the world has undergone since the downfall of Paganism.

The present revolution in the opinions of all classes of men, the highest and most cultured of men as well as those of the labouring class, stands unparalleled in the history of the world.

Science has of late made such vast discoveries, has revealed such an infinity of resources, has unveiled such enormous possibilities and such unsuspected forces, that scientific men more and more hesitate to affirm certain theories as established and indubitable or to deny certain other theories as absurd or impossible, and so a new civilization is being born; customs, creeds, and cruelty are passing; vision, faith and service are taking their place. The fetters of tradition are being melted off from humanity, and as the dross of materialism is being consumed, thought is being liberated and truth is rising full orbed before an astonished multitude.

The whole world is on the eve of a new consciousness, a new power and a new realization of the resources within the self. The last century saw the most magnificent material progress in history. The present century will produce the greatest progress in mental and spiritual power.

Physical Science has resolved matter into molecules, molecules into atoms, atoms into energy, and it has remained for Sir Ambrose

[p. xliv]

[paragraph continues] Fleming, in an address before the Royal Institution, to resolve this energy into mind. He says: "In its ultimate essence, energy may be incomprehensible by us except as an exhibition of the direct operation of that which we call Mind or Will."

Let us see what are the most powerful forces in Nature. In the mineral world everything is solid and fixed. In the animal and vegetable kingdom it is in a state of flux, forever changing, always being created and recreated. In the atmosphere we find heat, light and energy. Each realm becomes finer and more spiritual as we pass from the visible to the invisible, from the coarse to the fine, from the low potentiality to high potentiality. When we reach the invisible we find energy in its purest and most volatile state.

And as the most powerful forces of Nature are the invisible forces, so we find that the most powerful forces of man are his invisible forces, his spiritual force, and the only way in which the spiritual force can manifest is through the process of thinking. Thinking is the only activity which the spirit possesses, and thought is the only product of thinking.

Addition and subtraction are therefore spiritual transactions; reasoning is a spiritual process; ideas are spiritual conceptions; questions are spiritual searchlights and logic, argument and philosophy is spiritual machinery.

[p. xlv]

Every thought brings into action certain physical tissue, parts of the brain, nerve or muscle. This produces an actual physical change in the construction of the tissue. Therefore it is only necessary to have a certain number of thoughts on a given subject in order to bring about a complete change in the physical organization of a man.

This is the process by which failure is changed to success. Thoughts of courage, power, inspiration, harmony, are substituted for thoughts of failure, despair, lack, limitation and discord, and as these thoughts take root, the physical tissue is changed and the individual sees life in a new light, old things have actually passed away, all things have become new, he is born again, this time born of the spirit, life has a new meaning for him, he is reconstructed and is filled with joy, confidence, hope, energy. He sees opportunities for success to which he was heretofore blind. He recognizes possibilities which before had no meaning for him. The thoughts of success with which he has been impregnated are radiated to those around him, and they in turn help him onward and upward; he attracts to him new and successful associates, and this in turn changes his environment; so that by this simple exercise of thought, a man changes not only himself, but his environment, circumstances and conditions.

You will see, you must see, that we are at

[p. xlvi]

the dawn of a new day; that the possibilities are so wonderful, so fascinating, so limitless as to be almost bewildering. A century ago any man with an aeroplane or even a Gatling gun could have annihilated a whole army equipped with the implements of warfare then in use. So it is at present. Any man with a knowledge of the possibilities contained in the Master Key has an inconceivable advantage over the multitude.

     
The Master Key System, by Charles F. Haanel, [1919], at sacred-texts.com

[p. xlvii]

  

THE MASTER KEY PSYCHOLOGICAL CHART

It is a psychological fact that ninety per cent. of our mental power is never or seldom used. Therefore, most men have the power to achieve ten times as much as they ever accomplish.

This chart will tell you exactly where you stand, what you are accomplishing and what you can accomplish if you make the necessary effort.

Copy the following table out and fill it in as instructed below .

          Mental Product

        

       %

     
      Health

        

       %

     
      Time Efficiency

        

       %

     
      Creative Power

        

       %

     
      Concentration

        

       %

     
       

        

       _____

     
      Total

        

       %

     
      Divide by 5--Average

        

       %

     
   The first test is your Mental product. What is it worth? Are you getting full value for it? What you get for your mental product depends entirely upon your ability to sell it to the best advantage. The chances are that many men with no more ability than yourself are being paid ten, twenty or fifty times more than you are, for a product no better than yours. If so, there is a reason, and this chart will explain it.

Estimate the value of what you have to sell, your knowledge, your experience, your loyalty, your energy, and if you are marketing it at its full rate value give yourself 100 per cent.;

[p. xlviii]

if you are only getting one-half of what it is worth give yourself fifty per cent., but be fair; do not underestimate the value of what you have to offer; remember that loss leads to greater loss and most loss comes from self-depreciation. Cause and effect do not operate somewhere, sometimes, but everywhere, always. This is an invariable law, so that whatever we receive, good or bad, is the result of a definite cause and reaches us either as a penalty or a reward.

And remember this, your ability to sell your mental product as the rate of 5 per cent. annually, on $100,000, does not depend upon ability or knowledge either; you may be selling your product for $400 a year, and it may be more valuable than that of many who are being paid at the rate of $5,000 a year. The reason is plain. Knowledge does not apply itself; you are allowing it to remain in static form; you must convert it into dynamic form by applying creative power and concentration. The lack of concentrated, intelligent, charted effort may be costing you $4,000 a year.

Next, take Health. If you eat well, sleep well, take a reasonable amount of recreation, and can attend to your business, profession or household duties without any consideration for or thought of the state of your health, give yourself 100 per cent.; but if your body needs constant attention, if you have to be continually

[p. xlix]

worried about what to eat or what not to eat, if you cannot sleep, or if you have aches or pains of any description, deduct from the 100 per cent.; if you think your health is 90 per cent. of what it should be, give yourself 90 per cent., or if you are only 50 per cent. efficient, put it down--be absolutely fair.

Remember that your physical body is maintained through a process of continuous destruction and reconstruction. Life is simply an exchange of the old for the new, and health is only the equilibrium which nature maintains during the process of creating new tissue and eliminating the old or waste tissue.

Birth and death are constantly taking place in our body, new cells are constantly being formed by the process of converting food, water and air into living tissue. Every action of the brain, every movement of a muscle means the destruction and consequent death of some of these cells and the accumulation of these dead, unused and waste cells is what causes pain, suffering and disease. The symptoms depend upon what organs are being taxed in their effort to eliminate the waste matter.

An understanding of these laws and a consequent knowledge as to how to preserve an equilibrium between the new cells which are being created and the old cells which are being eliminated is the secret of perfect health.

Next in importance comes Time Efficiency

[p. l]

because time is all that we have, and what we accomplish depends entirely upon what use we make of our time. If you work eight hours, sleep eight hours, and use eight hours for recreation, study and self-improvement and all the time is fully utilized, give yourself 100 per cent.

But if any part of the eight hours which should be sold at a profit is spent in idleness, or gossip, or any form of mental dissipation; if any part of this time is wasted, or worse than wasted by allowing your thought to rest on critical, discordant or inharmonious subjects of any kind, cut down your percentage accordingly. If you fall asleep the minute your head touches the pillow, all right, but if you spend from fifteen minutes to an hour trying to get to sleep, cut your percentage down again: if your sleep is disturbed by dreams or fear or worry of any kind, cut your percentage down again.

If you jump up early and feel refreshed and vigorous, if you bathe and make your toilet without the loss of any unnecessary time, well and good, but if you idle or dream or fritter away from fifteen minutes to a half-hour needlessly, cut your percentage down again. If you spend the rest of your time in good healthy recreation, which benefits you, both physically and mentally, well and good; you are acquiring capital which will have a cash value, but if you let the time get away from you with nothing

[p. li]

to show for it, you are not better physically, mentally or morally; if the time has gone and left nothing of value, then it has been lost for it may leave something detrimental, something which will prove a handicap in your race for success. Here again you must be fair with yourself and give yourself exactly the percentage to which you are entitled.

Next comes your Creative Power. If most persons whom you meet do what you want them to do; if they feel toward you as you wish them to feel; if they think what you want them to think, give yourself 100 per cent., because everything we get must come from others; there is no other channel by which success can reach us. This creative power must be unconsciously exercised, it must be your personality; if, however, you have to make a tremendous effort when you wish to accomplish something, if you have to exert will power, if you must fret and worry and stew over the result of an important interview, cut your percentage down to 50 per cent. or 40 per cent. or even less, because you do not understand the principle involved.

When you understand there will be no cause for anxiety; you will know, because in the first place you will never want or expect anyone to do anything except what is best for them; you will understand that every transaction must benefit both parties. When you understand

[p. lii]

these laws, when the principles become a vital part of your life, when they are involved in your mental attitude, you will have found the Master Key and all doors will be open to you, because you will understand that every event, every condition, every thing was first an idea, and that just to the extent that you grew quiet, and focussed your attention on that idea, stilling all the activities of the mind, and eliminating all other thoughts from your consciousness, will the various phases and possibilities of the idea develop; and just in accordance with the definiteness with which you picture that idea, and the extent with which the idea takes possession of you will the creative power do its work, and the creative power will eventually take control and direct every activity of both mind and body and will begin to shape every condition related to the idea, so that sooner or later the idea will come forth in definite tangible form. If you understand this thoroughly, and have demonstrated it time and time again, so that you can mould and shape and determine conditions, I say again, give yourself 100 per cent.

Next comes Concentration. Can you concentrate? Do you know what it means to concentrate? Can you direct the thought to any problem which may arise, for five minutes, ten minutes or fifteen minutes, to the absolute exclusion of everything else? Can you unravel, disintegrate, take the problem apart, see every phase of it, see the cause which brought it

[p. liii]

about, see the solution, see it definitely, conclusively, and finally, and know that your solution is correct? Can you then dismiss the matter and turn your attention to something else without ever recurring to the matter again? If you can do this, give yourself 100 per cent. If, however, you are haunted by fears, troubles, anxieties. If, when you have no problem to solve, you make one for yourself, by drawing on your imagination; if you are afraid of what this one says, or the other one thinks, or someone else does, then cut down your percentage, because if you knew how to concentrate you would not be afraid of anyone or anything; you would be in possession of a power which would make every other known power sink into insignificance. Be careful to give yourself exactly the percentage to which you feel you are entitled.

Now strike an average. See where you stand. If you are a little above the average, your chart will be something like this

          Mental Product

        

       50%

     
      Health

        

       80%

     
      Time Efficiency

        

       80%

     
      Creative Power

        

       50%

     
      Concentration

        

       10%

     
       

        

       _____

     
      Total

        

       270%

     
      Divide by 5--Average

        

       54%

     
   Assuming that you are earning $1,000 a year

[p. liv]

and that you feel that your mental product should be worth $2,000 a year, which is the basis for your calculation, then any method which would assist you to increase your earning power to $2,000 a year would be worth $1,000 a year to you.

Again, any method which would bring you health, efficiency in your time, efficiency in your creative power, or increase your ability to concentrate, would be worth at least $1,000 a year. Many have found that the Master Key teaching does all of this and much more.

[p. lv]

             

ADVICE

Remember--
   Fully to understand grand and beautiful thought requires, perhaps, as much   time as to conceive it.
                     JOUBERT

If you wish to enjoy the utmost practical benefit from "The Master   Key"--go slowly.

Transfuse into your mind the contents of one part only, each week for   twenty-four weeks.

Realize the meaning of every phrase.

Consult "The Master Key" constantly, as your perpetual help and   stimulus.

Each time you read the work you will get a better understanding of the   eternal cosmic principles.

Tell others of "The Master Key" so that more and more people may   reciprocate with you, as conscious adepts in harmony.

The Publishers

     
   
     
The Master Key System, by Charles F. Haanel, [1919], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 1]

  

PART ONE

TELLS upon what possession is based, explains the cause of all gain, explains the cause of loss as well as all other experiences in life. It explains how power is secured. It tells of a world within and how this world is governed. It explains how the solution for every problem in life may be found. It tells how practical men and women find the courage, power, hope, enthusiasm and confidence by which they are given the intelligence and wisdom to make their dreams come true. It tells how more efficiency is obtained and retained, and how our future may be placed under our own control instead of being at the mercy of any capricious or uncertain external power. It explains the cause of every condition, the reason for every experience, the origin of all power, and why all power is absolutely under our own control.

[p. 2]

  

INTRODUCTION. PART ONE

Would you bring into your life more power? Get the power consciousness. More health? Get the health consciousness. More happiness? Get the happiness consciousness. Live the spirit of these things until they become yours by right. It will then become impossible to keep them from you. The things of the world are fluid to a power within man by which he rules them.

You need not acquire this power. You already have it. But you want to understand it; you want to use it; you want to control it; you want to impregnate yourself with it, so that you can go forward and carry the world before you.

Day by day, as you go on and on, as you gain momentum, as your inspiration deepens, as your plans crystallize, as you gain understanding, you will come to realize that this world is no dead pile of stones and timber, but that it is a living thing! It is made up of the beating hearts of humanity. It is a thing of life and beauty.

It is evident that it requires understanding to work with material of this description, but those who come into this understanding are inspired by a new light, a new force, they gain confidence and greater power each day, they realize their hopes and their dreams come true, life has a deeper, fuller, clearer meaning than before.

[p. 3]

  

PART ONE

[I:1]1. That much gathers more is true on every plane of existence, and that loss leads to greater loss is equally true.

[I:2]2. Mind is creative, and conditions, environment and all experiences in life are the result of our habitual or predominant mental attitude.

[I:3]3. The attitude of mind necessarily depends upon what we think. Therefore, the secret of all power, all achievement and all possession depends upon our method of thinking.

[I:4]4. This is true because we must "be" before we can "do" and we can "do" only to the extent that we "are," and what we "are" depends upon what we "think."

[I:5]5. We cannot express powers that we do not possess. The only way by which we may secure possession of power is to become conscious of power, and we can never become conscious of power until we learn that all power is from within.

[I:6]6. There is a world within--a world of thought and feeling and power; of light and life and beauty and, although invisible, its forces are mighty.

[I:7]7. The world within is governed by mind. When we discover this world we shall find the solution for every problem, the cause for every effect; and since the world within is subject to our control, all laws, of power and possession are also within our control.

[p. 4]

[I:8]8. The world without is a reflection of the world within. What appears without is what has been found within. In the world within may be found infinite Wisdom, infinite Power, infinite Supply of all that is necessary, waiting for unfoldment, development and expression. If we recognize these potentialities in the world within they will take form within the world without.

[I:9]9. Harmony in the world within will be reflected in the world without by harmonious conditions, agreeable surroundings, the best of everything. It is the foundation of health, and a necessary essential to all greatness, all power, all attainment, all achievement and all success.

[I:10]10. Harmony in the world within means the ability to control our thoughts, and to determine for ourselves how any experience is to affect us.

[I:11]11. Harmony in the world within results in optimism and affluence; affluence within results in affluence without.

[I:12]12. The world without reflects the circumstances and the conditions of the consciousness within.

[I:13]13. If we find wisdom in the world within, we shall have the understanding to discern the marvellous possibilities that are latent in this world within, and we shall be given the power to make these possibilities manifest in the world without.

[p. 5]

[I:14]14. As we become conscious of the wisdom in the world within we mentally take possession of this wisdom, and by taking mental possession we come into actual possession of the power and wisdom necessary to bring into manifestation the essentials necessary for our most complete and harmonious development.

[I:15]15. The world within is the practical world in which the men and women of power generate courage, hope, enthusiasm, confidence, trust and faith, by which they are given the fine intelligence to see the vision and the practical skill to make the vision real.

[I:16]16. Life is an enfoldment, not accretion. What comes to us in the world without is what we already possess in the world within.

[I:17]17. All possession is based on consciousness. All gain is the result of an accumulative consciousness. All loss is the result of a scattering consciousness.

[I:18]18. Mental efficiency is contingent upon harmony; discord means confusion; therefore, he who would acquire power must be in harmony with Natural Law.

[I:19]19. We are related to the world without by the objective mind. The brain is the organ of this mind, and the cerebro-spinal system of nerves puts us in conscious communication with every part of the body. This system of nerves

[p. 6]

responds to every sensation of light, heat, odour, sound and taste.

[I:20]20. When this mind thinks correctly, when it understands the truth, when the thoughts sent through the cerebro-spinal nervous system to the body are constructive, these sensations are pleasant, harmonious.

[I:21]21. The result is that we build strength, vitality and all constructive forces into our body, but it is through this same objective mind that all distress, sickness, lack, limitation and every form of discord and inharmony is admitted to our lives. It is therefore through the objective mind, by wrong thinking, that we are related to all. destructive forces.

[I:22]22. We are related to the world within by the subconscious mind. The solar plexus is the organ of this mind; the sympathetic system of nerves presides over all subjective sensations, such as joy, fear, love, emotion, respiration, imagination and all other subconscious phenomena. It is through the subconscious that we are connected with the Universal Mind and brought into relation with the Infinite constructive forces of the Universe.

[I:23]23. It is the co-ordination of these two centres of our being, and the understanding of their functions, which is the great secret of life. With this knowledge we can bring the objective and subjective minds into conscious co-operation

[p. 7]

and thus co-ordinate the finite and the infinite. Our future is entirely within our own control. It is not at the mercy of any capricious or uncertain external power.

[I:24]24. All agree that there is but one Principle or Consciousness pervading the entire Universe, occupying all space, and being essentially the same in kind at every point of its presence. It is all powerful, all wisdom and always present. All thoughts and things are within Itself. It is all in all.

[I:25]25. There is but one consciousness in the universe able to think, and when it thinks its thoughts become objective things to it. As this Consciousness is omnipresent it must be present within every individual; each individual must be a manifestation of that Omnipotent, Omniscient and Omnipresent Consciousness.

[I:26]26. As there is only one Consciousness in the Universe that is able to think it necessarily follows that your consciousness is identical with the Universal Consciousness, or, in other words, all mind is one mind. There is no dodging this conclusion.

[I:27]27. The consciousness that focuses in your brain cells is the same consciousness which focuses in the brain cells of every other individual. Each individual is but the individualization of the Universal, the Cosmic Mind.

[I:28]28. The Universal Mind is static or potential

[p. 8]

energy; it simply is; it can manifest only through the individual, and the individual can manifest only through the Universal. They are one.

[I:29]29. The ability of the individual to think is his ability to act on the Universal and bring it into manifestation. Human consciousness consists only in the ability of man to think. Walker says, "Mind in itself is believed to be a subtle form of static energy, from which arises the activities called 'thought,' which is the dynamic phase of mind. Mind is static energy, thought is dynamic energy--the two phases of the same thing." Thought is therefore the vibratory force formed by converting static mind into dynamic mind.

[I:30]30. As the sum of all attributes is contained in the Universal Mind, which is Omnipotent, Omniscient and Omnipresent, these attributes must be present at all times in their potential form in every individual. Therefore, when the individual thinks, the thought is compelled by its nature to embody itself in an objectivity or condition which will correspond with its origin.

[I:31]31. Every thought is therefore a cause, and every condition an effect; for this reason it is absolutely essential that you control your thoughts so as to bring forth only desirable conditions.

[I:32]32. All power is from within, and is absolutely

[p. 9]

under your control; it comes through exact knowledge and by the voluntary exercises of exact principles.

[I:33]33. It should be plain that when you acquire a thorough understanding of this law, and are able to control your thought processes, you can apply it to any condition; in other words, you will have come into conscious co-operation with Omnipotent law, which is the fundamental basis of all things.

[I:34]34. The Universal Mind is the life principle of every atom which is in existence; every atom is continually striving to manifest more life; all are intelligent, and all are seeking to carry out the purpose for which they were created.

[I:35]35. A majority of mankind lives in the world without; few have found the world within, and yet it is the world within that makes the world without; it is therefore creative and everything which you find in your world without has been created by you in the world within.

[I:36]36. The Master Key will bring you into a realization of power which will be yours when you understand this relation between the world without and the world within. The world within is the cause, the world without the effect; to change the effect you must change the cause.

[I:37]37. You will at once see that this is a radically new and different idea; most men try to change effects by working with effects.

[p. 10]

[paragraph continues] They fail to see that this is simply changing one form of distress for another. To remove discord, we must remove the cause, and this cause can be found only in the world within.

[I:38]38. All growth is from within. This is evident in all nature. Every plant, every animal, every human being is a living testimony to this great law, and the error of the ages is in looking for strength or power from without.

[I:39]39. The world within is the Universal fountain of supply, and the world without is the outlet to the stream. Our ability to receive depends upon our recognition of this Universal Fountain, this Infinite Energy of which each individual is an outlet, and so is one with every other individual.

[I:40]40. Recognition is a mental process, mental action is therefore the interaction of the individual upon the Universal Mind, and as the Universal Mind is the intelligence which pervades all space and animates all living things, this mental action and reaction is the law of causation, but the principle of causation does not obtain in the individual but in the Universal Mind. It is not an objective faculty but a subjective process, and the results are seen in an infinite variety of conditions and experiences.

[I:41]41. In order to express life there must be mind; nothing can exist without mind. Everything which exists is some manifestation of this

[p. 11]

one basic substance from which and by which all things have been created and are continually being re-created.

[I:42]42. We live in a fathomless sea of plastic mind substance. This substance is ever alive and active. It is sensitive to the highest degree. It takes form according to the mental demand. Thought forms the mould or matrix from which the substance expresses.

[I:43]43. Remember that it is in the application alone that the value consists, and that a practical understanding of this law will substitute abundance for poverty, wisdom for ignorance, harmony for discord and freedom for tyranny, and certainly there can be no greater blessing than these from a material and social standpoint.

[I:44]44. Now make the application; Select a room where you can be alone and undisturbed; sit erect, comfortably, but do not lounge; let your thoughts roam where they will but be perfectly still for from fifteen minutes to half an hour; continue this for three or four days or for a week until you secure full control of your physical being.

[I:45]45. Many will find this extremely difficult; others will conquer with ease, but it is absolutely essential to secure complete control of the body before you are ready to progress. In Part Two you will receive instructions for the next step; in the meantime you must have mastered this one.

[p. 12]

  

PART ONE

1. What is the world without in its relation to the world within?

The world without is a reflection of the world within.

2. Upon what does all possession depend?

All possession is based on consciousness.

3. How is the individual related to the objective world?

The individual is related to the objective world by the objective mind; the brain is the organ of this mind.

4. How is he related to the Universal Mind?

He is related to the Universal Mind by the subconscious mind; the Solar Plexus is the organ of this mind.

5. What is the Universal Mind?

The Universal Mind is the life principle of every atom which is in existence.

6. How can the Individual act on the Universal?

The ability of the individual to think is his ability to act upon the Universal and bring it into manifestation.

7. What is the result of this action and interaction?

The result of this action and inter-action is cause and effect; every thought is a cause, and every condition an effect.

[p. 13]

8. How are harmonious and desirable conditions secured?

Harmonious and desirable conditions are obtained by right thinking.

9. What is the cause of all discord, inharmony, lack and limitation?

Discord, inharmony, lack and limitation are the result of wrong thinking.

10. What is the source of all power?

The source of all power is the world within, the Universal Fountain of Supply, the Infinite Energy of which each individual is an outlet.

 

 

 

Those who have finished by making all others think with them have usually been those who began by daring to think for themselves.--Colton.

     
The Master Key System, by Charles F. Haanel, [1919], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 14] [p. 15]

  

PART TWO

TELLS how and why the operations of the mind are carried on by two parallel modes of activity, the one conscious and the other subconscious. It explains why the thought processes of the subconscious are the theatre of the most important mental phenomena, why ease and perfection depend entirely upon the degree in which we cease to depend upon the consciousness. It explains the origin of all great, noble, brilliant thoughts and ideas, why we find ourselves sometimes endowed with tact, instinct, courage, sagacity and inspiration. In fact, it tells of a vast mental storehouse in which ninety per cent. of our thought processes originate it explains also how this vast mental storehouse may be placed under the supervision and in the keeping of the conscious mind. It tells why those who are familiar with the laws governing in this larger mental domain are enabled to accomplish, to achieve, to become writers, authors, artists, ministers, captains of industry, and why all others must necessarily remain less than ten per cent. efficient.

[p. 16]

  

INTRODUCTION. PART TWO

Our difficulties are largely due to confused ideas and ignorance of our true interests. The great task is to discover the laws of Nature to which we are to adjust ourselves. Clear thinking and moral insight are, therefore, of incalculable value. All processes, even those of thought, rest on solid foundations.

The keener the sensibilities, the more acute the judgment, the more delicate the taste, the more refined the moral feelings, the more subtle the intelligence, the loftier the aspiration--the purer and more intense are the gratifications which existence yields. Hence it is that the study of the best that has been thought in the world gives supreme pleasure.

The powers, uses and possibilities of the mind under the new interpretations are incomparably more wonderful than the most extravagant accomplishment, or even dreams of material progress. Thought is energy. Active thought is active energy; concentrated thought is concentrated energy. Thought concentrated on a definite purpose becomes power. This is the power which is being used by those who do not believe in the virtue of poverty, or the beauty of self-denial. They perceive that this is the talk of weaklings.

The ability to receive and manifest this power depends upon the ability to recognize the Infinite Energy ever dwelling in man, constantly creating and re-creating his body and mind, and ready at any moment to manifest through him in any needful manner. In exact proportion to the recognition of this truth will be the manifestation in the outer life of the individual.

Part Two explains the method by which this is accomplished.

[p. 17]

  

PART TWO

[II:1]1. The operations of the mind are produced by two parallel modes of activity, the one conscious, and the other subconscious. Prof. Davidson says: "He who thinks to illuminate the whole range of mental action by the light of his own consciousness is not unlike one who should go about to illuminate the universe with a rushlight."

[II:2]2. The subconscious, logical processes are carried on with a certainty and regularity which would be impossible if there existed the possibility of error. Our mind is so designed that it prepares for us the most important foundations of cognition, whilst we have not the slightest apprehension of the modus operandi.

[II:3]3. The subconscious soul, like a benevolent stranger, works and makes provision for our benefit, pouring only the mature fruit into our lap; thus ultimate analysis of thought processes shows that the subconscious is the theatre of the most important mental phenomena.

[II:4]4. It is through the subconscious that Shakespeare must have perceived, without effort, great truths which are hidden from the conscious mind of the student; that Phidias fashioned marble and bronze; that Raphael painted Madonnas and Beethoven composed symphonies.

[II:5]5. Ease and perfection depend entirely upon the degree in which we cease to depend upon

[p. 18]

the consciousness; playing the piano, skating, operating the typewriter, the skilled trades, depend for their perfect execution on the process of the subconscious mind. The marvel of playing a brilliant piece on the piano, while at the same time conducting a vigorous conversation, shows the greatness of our subconscious powers.

[II:6]6. We are all aware how dependent we are upon the subconscious, and the greater, the nobler, the more brilliant our thoughts are, the more it is obvious to ourselves that the origin lies beyond our ken. We find ourselves endowed with tact, instinct, sense of the beautiful in art, music, etc., of whose origin or dwelling-place we are wholly unconscious.

[II:7]7. The value of the subconscious is enormous; it inspires us; it warns us; it furnishes us with names, facts and scenes from the storehouse of memory. It directs our thoughts, tastes, and accomplishes tasks so intricate that no conscious mind, even if it had the power, has the capacity for.

[II:8]8. We can walk at will; we can raise the arm whenever we choose to do so; we can give our attention through eye or ear to any subject at pleasure. On the other hand, we cannot stop our heartbeats nor the circulation of the blood, nor the growth of stature, nor the formationJof nerve and muscle tissue, nor the building

[p. 19]

of the bones, nor many other important vital processes.

[II:9]9. If we compare these two sets of action, the one decreed by the will of the moment, and the other proceeding in majestic, rhythmic course, subject to no vacillation, but constant at every moment, we stand in awe of the latter, and ask to have the mystery explained. We see at once that these are the vital processes of our physical life, and we cannot avoid the inference that these all-important functions are designedly withdrawn from the domain of our outward will with its variations and transitions, and placed under the direction of a permanent and dependable power within us.

[II:10]10. Of these two powers, the outward and changeable has been termed the "Conscious Mind," or the "Objective Mind" (dealing with outward objects) . The interior power is called the "Subconscious Mind," or the "Subjective Mind," and besides its work on the mental plane it controls the regular functions which make physical life possible.

[II:11]11. It is necessary to have a clear understanding of their . respective functions on the mental plane, as well as of certain other basic principles. Perceiving and operating through the five physical senses, the conscious mind deals with the impressions and objects of the outward life.

[p. 20]

[II:12]12. It has the faculty of discrimination, carrying with it the responsibility of choice. It has the power of reasoning whether inductive, deductive, analytical or syllogistic, and this power may be developed to a high degree. It is the seat of the will, with all the energies that flow therefrom.

[II:13]13. Not only can it impress other minds, but it can direct the subconscious mind. In this way the conscious mind becomes the responsible ruler and guardian of the subconscious mind. It is this high function which can completely reverse conditions in your life.

[II:14]14. It is often true that conditions of fear, worry, poverty, disease, inharmony and evils of all kinds dominate us by reason of false suggestions accepted by the unguarded subconscious mind. All this the trained conscious mind can entirely prevent by its vigilant protective action. It may properly be called "the watchman at the gate" of the great subconscious domain.

[II:15]15. One writer has expressed the chief distinction between the two phases of mind thus:

"Conscious mind is reasoning will. Subconscious mind is instinctive desire, the result of past reasoning will."

[II:16]16. The subconscious mind draws just and accurate inferences from premises furnished from outside sources. Where the premise is

[p. 21]

true, the subconscious mind reaches a faultless conclusion, but where the premise or suggestion is an error the whole structure falls. The subconscious mind does not engage in the process of proving. It relies upon the conscious mind, "the watchman at the gate," to guard it from mistaken impressions.

[II:17]17. Receiving any suggestions as true, the subconscious mind at once proceeds to act thereon in the whole domain of its tremendous field of work. The conscious mind can suggest either truth or error. If the latter, it is at the cost of wide-reaching peril to the whole being.

[II:18]18. The conscious mind ought to be on duty during every waking hour. When the "watchman" is "off guard," or when its calm judgment is suspended, under a variety of circumstances, then the subconscious mind is unguarded and left open to suggestion from all sources. During the wild excitement of panic, or during the height of anger, or the impulses of the irresponsible mob, or at any other time of unrestrained passion, the conditions are most dangerous. The subconscious mind is then open to the suggestion of fear, hatred, selfishness, greed, self-depreciation and other negative forces, derived from surrounding persons or circumstances. The result is usually unwholesome in the extreme, with effects that may endure to distress it for a long time. Hence the

[p. 22]

great importance of guarding the subconscious mind from false impressions.

[II:19]19. The subconscious mind perceives by intuition. Hence its processes are rapid. It does not wait for the slow methods of conscious reasoning. In fact, it cannot employ them.

[II:20]20. The subconscious mind never sleeps, never rests, any more than does your heart, or your blood. It has been found that by plainly stating to the subconscious mind certain specific things to be accomplished, forces are set in operation that lead to the result desired. Here, then, is a source of power which places us in touch with Omnipotence. Herein is a deep principle which is well worth our most earnest study.

[II:21]21. The operation of this law is interesting. Those who put it into operation find that when they go out to meet the person with whom they anticipate a difficult interview, to! something has been there before them and dissolved the supposed differences; everything is changed; all is harmonious; they find that when some difficult business problem presents itself they can afford to make delay and something suggests the proper solution; everything is properly arranged; in fact, those who have learned to trust the subconscious find that they have infinite resources at their command.

[II:22]22. The subconscious mind is the seat of

[p. 23]

our principles and our aspirations. It is the fount of our artistic and altruistic ideals. These instincts can only be overthrown by an elaborate and gradual process of undermining the innate principles.

[II:23]23. The subconscious mind cannot argue controversially. Hence, if it has accepted wrong suggestions, the sure method of overcoming them is by the use of a strong counter-suggestion, frequently repeated, which the mind must accept, thus eventually forming new and healthy habits of thought and life, for the subconscious mind is the seat of Habit. That which we do over and over becomes mechanical; it is no longer an act of judgment, but has worn its deep grooves in the subconscious mind. This is favourable for us if the habit be wholesome and right. If it be harmful and wrong, the remedy is to recognize the omnipotence of the subconscious mind and suggest present actual freedom. The subconscious being creative and one with our divine source will at once create the freedom suggested.

[II:24]24. To sum up: The normal functions of the subconscious on the physical side have to do with the regular and vital processes, with the preservation of life and the restoration of health; with the care of offspring, which includes an instinctive desire to preserve all life and improve conditions generally.

[II:25]25. On the mental side, it is the storehouse

[p. 24]

of memory; it harbours the wonderful thought messengers, who work, unhampered by time or space; it is the fountain of the practical initiative and constructive forces of life: It is the seat of habit.

[II:26]26. On the spiritual side, it is the source of ideals, of aspiration, of the imagination, and is the channel through which we recognize our Divine Source, and in proportion as we recognize this divinity do we come into an understanding of the source of power.

[II:27]27. Someone may ask: "How can the subconscious change conditions?" The reply is, because the subconscious is a part of the Universal Mind and a part must be the same in kind and quality as the whole; the only difference is one of degree. The whole, as we know, is creative; in fact, it is the only creator there is; consequently we find that mind is creative, and as thought is the only activity which the mind possesses thought must necessarily be creative also.

[II:28]28. But we shall find that there is a vast difference between simply thinking and directing our thought consciously, systematically and constructively; when we do this we place our mind in harmony with the Universal Mind, we come in tune with the Infinite, we set in operation the mightiest force in existence, the creative power of the Universal Mind. This, as everything else, is governed by natural law, and this

[p. 25]

law is the "Law of Attraction," which is that Mind is creative, and will automatically correlate with its object and bring it into manifestation.

[II:29]29. In Part One I gave you an exercise for the purpose of securing control of the physical body; if you have accomplished this you are ready to advance. This time you will begin to control your thought. Always take the same room, the same chair, and the same position, if possible. In some cases it is not convenient to take the same room: in this case simply make the best use of such conditions as may be available. Now be perfectly still as before, but inhibit all thought; this will give you control over all thoughts of care, worry and fear, and will . enable you to entertain only the kind of thoughts you desire. Continue this exercise until you gain complete mastery.

[II:30]30. You will not be able to do this for more than a few moments at a time, but the exercise is valuable, because it will be a very practical demonstration of the great number of thoughts which are constantly trying to gain access to your mental world.

[II:31]31. In Part Three you will receive instructions for an exercise which may be a little more interesting, but it is necessary that you master this one first.

[p. 26]

  

PART TWO

11. What are the two modes of mental activity?

Conscious and subconscious.

12. Upon what do ease and perfection depend?

Ease and perfection depend entirely upon the degree in which we cease to depend upon the conscious mind.

13. What is the value of the subconscious?

It is enormous; it guides us, warns us, it controls the vital processes and is the seat of memory.

14. What are some of the functions of the conscious mind?

It has the faculty of discrimination; it has the power of reasoning; it is the seat of the will and may impress the subconscious.

15. How has the distinction between the conscious and subconscious been expressed?

"Conscious mind is reasoning will. Subconscious mind is instinctive desire, the result of past reasoning will."

16. What method is necessary in order to impress the subconscious?

Mentally state what is wanted.

17. What will be the result?

If the desire is in harmony with the forward movement of the great Whole, forces will

[p. 27]

be set in motion which will bring about the result.

18. What is the result of the operation of this law?

Our environment reflects conditions corresponding to the predominant mental attitude which we entertain.

19. What name has been given to this law?

The Law of Attraction.

20. How is the law stated?

Thought is a creative energy, and will automatically correlate with its object and bring it into manifestation.

 

 

 

Cause and effect is as absolute and undeviating in the hidden realm of thought as in the world of visible and material things. Mind is the master weaver, both of the interior garment of character and the outer garment of circumstance.--James Allen.

[p. 28]

          ADVICE

Remember--
   Fully to understand grand and beautiful thought requires, perhaps, as much   time as to conceive it. JOUBERT

If you wish to enjoy the utmost practical benefit from "The Master   Key"--go slowly.

Transfuse into your mind the contents of one part only, each week for   twenty-four weeks.

Realize the meaning of every phrase.

Consult "The Master Key" constantly, as your perpetual help and   stimulus.

Each time you read the work you will get a better understanding of the   eternal cosmic principles.

Tell others of "The Master Key" so that more and more people may   reciprocate with you, as conscious adepts in harmony.

The   Publishers

     
   
     
The Master Key System, by Charles F. Haanel, [1919], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 29]

  

PART THREE

TELLS why the necessary action and interaction of the conscious and subconscious minds requires two corresponding systems of nerves. It explains how the connection is made between these two systems of nerves. It explains and tells of a central point in the body for the distribution of energy. How this energy is distributed. How the distribution of this energy gives the individual pleasant sensations, how the interruption of this distribution brings discord, inharmony and lack and limitation of every kind. It tells of an arch enemy which must be destroyed, and tells how to destroy it. It tells what determines the experiences in life with which we are to meet, and why these experiences are under our own control. One enthusiastic reader says of this Part: "This document in my opinion is the greatest single document beneficial to mankind ever written in the history of the world; it is the first time that I have come into a true understanding of the Silent Powers that dominate and determine one's success."

[p. 30]

  

INTRODUCTION. PART THREE

You have found that the Individual may act on the Universal, and that the result of this action and interaction is cause and effect.

Thought, therefore, is the cause, and the experiences with which you meet in life are the effect.

Eliminate, therefore, any possible tendency to complain of conditions as they have been, or as they are, because it rests with you to change them and make them what you would like them to be.

Direct your efforts to a realization of the mental resources, always at your command, from which all real and lasting power comes.

Persist in this practice till you come to a realization of the fact that there can be no failure in the accomplishment of any proper object in life if you but understand your power and persist in your object, because the mind forces are ever ready to lend themselves to a purposeful will in the effort to crystallize thought and desire into actions, events and conditions.

Whereas in the beginning each function of life and each action is the result of conscious thought, the habitual actions become automatic and the thought that controls them passes into the realm of the subconscious; yet it is just as intelligent as before. It is necessary that it become automatic or subconscious in order that the self-conscious mind may attend to other things. The new actions will, however, in their turn, become habitual, then automatic, then subconscious in order that the mind again may he freed from this detail and advanced to still other activities.

When you realize this, you will have found a source of power which will enable you to cope with any situation in life which may develop.

[p. 31]

  

PART THREE

[III:1]1. The necessary interaction of the conscious and subconscious mind requires a similar interaction between the corresponding systems of nerves. Judge Troward indicates the very beautiful method in which this interaction is effected. He says: The cerebro-spinal system is the organ of the conscious mind, and the sympathetic is the organ of the subconscious. The cerebro-spinal is the channel through which we receive conscious perception from the physical senses, and exercise control over the movements of the body. This system of nerves has its centre in the brain.

[III:2]2. The Sympathetic System has its centre in a ganglionic mass at the back of the stomach known as the Solar Plexus, and is the channel of that mental action which unconsciously supports the vital functions of the body.

[III:3]3. The connection between the two systems is made by the vagus nerve, which passes out of the cerebral region as a portion of the voluntary system to the thorax, sending out branches to the heart and lungs, and finally passing through the diaphragm it loses its outer coating and becomes identified with the nerves of the Sympathetic System, so forming a connecting link between the two and making man physically a single entity.

[III:4]4. We have seen that every thought is received by the brain, which is the organ of the conscious; it is here subjected to our power of

[p. 32]

reasoning. When the objective mind has been satisfied that the thought is true it is sent to the Solar Plexus, or the brain of the subjective mind, to be made into our flesh, to be brought into the world as a reality. It is then no longer susceptible to any argument whatever. The subconscious mind cannot argue; it only acts. It accepts the conclusions of the objective mind as final.

[III:5]5. The Solar Plexus has been likened to the sun of the body, because it is a central point of distribution for the energy which the body is constantly generating. This energy is very real energy, and this sun is a very real sun, and the energy is being distributed by very real nerves to all parts of the body, and is thrown off in an atmosphere which envelops the body.

[III:6]6. If this radiation is sufficiently strong the person is called magnetic; he is said to be filled with personal magnetism. Such a person may wield an immense power for good. His presence alone will often bring comfort to the troubled minds with which he comes in contact.

[III:7]7. When the Solar Plexus is in active operation and is radiating life, energy and vitality to every part of the body, and to everyone whom he meets, the sensations are pleasant, the body is filled with health and all with whom he comes in contact experience a pleasant sensation.

[III:8]8. If there is any interruption of this radiation

[p. 33]

the sensations are unpleasant, the flow of life and energy to some part of the body is stopped, and this is the cause of every ill to the human race, physical, mental or environmental.

[III:9]9. Physical because the sun of the body is no longer generating sufficient energy to vitalize some part of the body; mental because the conscious mind is dependent upon the subconscious mind for the vitality necessary to support its thought, and environmental because the connection between the subconscious mind and the Universal mind is being interrupted.

[III:10]10. The Solar Plexus is the point at which the part meets with the whole, where the finite becomes Infinite, where the Uncreate becomes create, the Universal becomes individualized, the Invisible becomes visible. It is the point at which life appears, and there is no limit to the amount of life an individual may generate from this Solar centre.

[III:11]11. This centre of energy is Omnipotent because it is the point of contact with all life and all intelligence. It can therefore accomplish whatever it is directed to accomplish, and herein lies the power of the conscious mind; the subconscious can and will carry out such plans and ideas as may be suggested to it by the conscious mind.

[III:12]12. Conscious thought, then, is master of

[p. 34]

this sun centre from which the life and energy of the entire body flows, and the quality of the thought which we entertain determines the quality of the thought which this sun will radiate, and the character of the thought which our conscious mind entertains will determine the character of the thought which this sun will radiate, and the nature of the thought which our conscious mind entertains will determine the nature of thought which this sun will radiate, and consequently will determine the nature of the experience which will result.

[III:13]13. It is evident, therefore, that all we have to do is let our light shine; the more energy we can radiate, the more rapidly shall we be enabled to transmute undesirable conditions into sources of pleasure and profit. The important question, then, is how to let this light shine; how to generate this energy.

[III:14]14. Non-resistant thought expands the Solar Plexus; resistant thought contracts it. Pleasant thought expands it; unpleasant thought contracts it. Thoughts of courage, power, confidence and hope all produce a corresponding state, but the one arch enemy of the Solar Plexus which must be absolutely destroyed before there is any possibility of letting any light shine is fear. This enemy must be completely destroyed; he must be eliminated; he must be expelled for ever; he is the cloud which hides the sun; which causes a perpetual gloom.

[p. 35]

[III:15]15. It is this personal devil which makes men fear the past, the present and the future; fear themselves, their friends and their enemies; fear everything and everybody. When fear is effectually and completely destroyed, your light will shine, the clouds will disperse and you will have found the source of power, energy and life.

[III:16]16. When you find that you are really one with the Infinite power, and when you can consciously realize this power by a practical demonstration of your ability to overcome any adverse condition by the power of your thought, you will have nothing to fear; fear will have been destroyed and you will have come into possession of your birthright.

[III:17]17. It is our attitude of mind towards life which determines the experiences with which we are, to meet; if we expect nothing we shall have nothing; if we demand much we shall receive the greater portion. The world is harsh only as we fail to assert ourselves. The criticism of the world is bitter only to those who cannot compel room for their ideas. It is fear of this criticism that causes many ideas to fail to see the light of day.

[III:18]18. But the man who knows that he has a Solar Plexus will not fear criticism or anything else; he will be too busy radiating courage, confidence, and power; he will anticipate success by his mental attitude; he will pound

[p. 36]

barriers to pieces and leap over the chasm of doubt and hesitation which fear places in his path.

[III:19]19. A knowledge of our ability to consciously radiate health, strength and harmony will bring us into a realization that there is nothing to fear because we are in touch with Infinite Strength.

[III:20]20. This knowledge can be gained only by making a practical application of this information. We learn by doing; through practice the athlete becomes powerful.

[III:21]21. As the following statement is of considerable importance, I will put it in several ways, so that you cannot fail to get the full significance of it. If you are religiously inclined, I would say, you can let your light shine. If your mind has a bias towards physical science, I would say you can wake the Solar Plexus; or, if you prefer the strictly scientific interpretation, I will say that you can impress your subconscious mind.

[III:22]22. I have already told you what the result of this impression will be. It is the method in which you are now interested. You have already learned that the subconscious is intelligent and that it is creative, and responsive to the will of the conscious mind. What, then, is the most natural way of making the desired impression? Mentally concentrate on the object

[p. 37]

of your desire; when you are concentrating you are impressing the subconscious.

[III:23]23. This is not the only way, but it is a simple and effective way, and the most direct way, and consequently the way in which the best results are secured. It is the method which is producing such extraordinary results that many think that miracles are being accomplished.

[III:24]24. It is the method by which every great inventor, every great financier, every great statesman has been enabled to convert the subtle and invisible force of desire, faith and confidence into actual, tangible, concrete facts in the objective world.

[III:25]25. The subconscious mind is a part of the Universal mind. The Universal is the creative principle of the Universe, a part must be the same in kind and quality as the whole. This means that this creative power is absolutely unlimited; it is not bound by precedent of any kind, and consequently has no prior existing pattern by which to apply its constructive principle.

[III:26]26. We have found that the subconscious mind is responsive to our conscious will, which means that the unlimited creative power of the Universal Mind is within the control of the conscious mind of the individual.

[III:27]27. When making a practical application of

[p. 38]

this principle, in accordance with the exercises given in subsequent Parts, it is well to remember that it is not necessary to outline the method by which the subconscious will produce the results you desire. The finite cannot inform the Infinite. You are simply to say what you desire, not how you are to obtain it.

[III:28]28. You are the channel by which the undifferentiated is being differentiated, and this differentiation is being accomplished by appropriation. It only requires recognition to set causes in motion which will bring about results in accordance with your desire, and this is accomplished because the Universal can act only through the individual, and the individual can act only through the Universal; they are one.

[III:29]29. For your next exercise I will ask you to go one step further. I want you to not only be perfectly still, and inhibit all thought as far as possible, but relax, let go, let the muscles take their normal condition; this will remove all pressure from the nerves and eliminate that tension which so frequently produces physical exhaustion.

[III:30]30. Physical relaxation is a voluntary exercise of the will and the exercise will be found to be of great value, as it enables the blood to circulate freely to and from the brain and body.

[III:31]31. Tension leads to mental unrest and

[p. 39]

abnormal mental activity of the mind; it produces worry, care, fear and anxiety. Relaxation is therefore an absolute necessity in order to allow the mental faculties to exercise the greatest freedom.

[III:32]32. Make this exercise as thorough and complete as possible, mentally determine that you will relax every muscle and nerve, until you feel quiet and restful and at peace with yourself and the world.

[III:33]33. The Solar Plexus will then be ready to function and you will be surprised at the result.

 

 

 

We judge of a man's wisdom by his hope, knowing that the perception of the inexhaustibleness of Nature is an immortal youth.--Emerson.

[p. 40]

  

PART THREE

21. What system of nerves is the organ of the Conscious Mind?

The Cerebro-spinal.

22. What system of nerves is the organ of the subconscious mind?

The sympathetic.

23. What is the central point of distribution for the energy which the body is constantly generating?

The solar plexus.

24. How may this distribution be interrupted?

By resistant, critical, discordant thoughts, but especially by fear.

25. What is the result of such interruption?

Every ill with which the human race is afflicted.

26. How may this energy be controlled and directed?

By conscious thought.

27. How may fear be completely eliminated?

By an understanding and recognition of the true source of all power.

28. What determines the experiences with which we meet in life?

Our predominant mental attitude.

[p. 41]

29. How may we awake the solar plexus?

Mentally concentrate upon the condition which we desire to see manifested in our lives.

30. What is the creative principle of the Universe?

The Universal Mind.

 

 

 

Mind in itself is believed to be a subtle form of static energy, from which arises the activities called "thought," which is the dynamic phase of mind. Mind is static energy, thought is dynamic energy--the two phases of the same thing.--Walker.

     
The Master Key System, by Charles F. Haanel, [1919], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 42] [p. 43]

  

PART FOUR

THIS Part tells what it is which controls that which you call yourself. "You" are not your body; the body is simply the physical instrument which the ego uses to carry out its purpose. "You" are not your mind; this is simply another instrument which the ego uses to think, reason and plan. When you say "'I' go" you tell the body where to go, when you say "'I' think" you tell the mind what to think. When you come into a realization of the true nature of the "I" you will enjoy a sense of power which nothing else can give, because you will come to know what you are, who you are, what you want, and how to get it.

[p. 44]

  

INTRODUCTION. PART FOUR

This Part will show you why what you think, or do, or feel, is an indication of what you are.

Thought is energy, and energy is power, and it is because all the religions, sciences and philosophies with which the world has heretofore been familiar have been based upon the manifestation of this energy instead of the energy itself, that the world has been limited to effects, while causes have been ignored or misunderstood.

For this reason we have God and the Devil in religion, positive and negative in science, and good and bad in philosophy.

The Master Key reverses the process; it is interested only in cause, and the letters received from readers tell a marvellous story; they indicate conclusively that adepts are finding the cause whereby they may secure for themselves health, harmony, abundance, and whatever else may be necessary for their welfare and happiness.

Life is expressive and it is our business to express ourselves harmoniously and constructively. Sorrow, misery, unhappiness, disease and poverty are not necessities and we are constantly eliminating them.

But this process of eliminating consists in rising above and beyond limitation of any kind. He who has strengthened and purified his thought need not concern himself about microbes, and he who has come into an understanding of the law of abundance will go at once to the source of supply.

It is thus that fate, fortune and destiny will be controlled as readily as a captain controls his ship, or an engineer his train.

[p. 45]

  

PART FOUR

[IV:1]1. The "I" of you is not the physical body; that is simply an instrument which the "I" uses to carry out its purposes; the "I" cannot be the Mind, for the mind is simply another instrument which the "I" uses with which to think, reason, and plan.

[IV:2]2. The "I" must be something which controls and directs both the body and the mind; something which determines what they shall do and how they shall act. When you come into a realization of the true nature of this "I" you will enjoy a sense of power which you have never before Known.

[IV:3]3. Your personality is made up of countless individual characteristics, peculiarities, habits and traits of character; these are the result of your former method of thinking, but they have nothing to do with the real "I."

[IV:4]4. When you say "I think," the "I" tells the mind what it shall think; when you say "I go," the "I" tells the physical body where it shall go; the real nature of this "I" is spiritual, and is the source of the real power which comes to men and women when they come into a realization of their true nature.

[IV:5]5. The greatest and most marvellous power which this "I" has been given is the power to think, but few people know how to think constructively, or correctly, consequently they achieve only indifferent results. Most people

[p. 46]

allow their thoughts to dwell on selfish purposes, the inevitable result of an infantile mind. When a mind becomes mature, it understands that the germ of defeat is in every selfish thought.

[IV:6]6. The trained mind knows that every transaction must benefit every person who is in any way connected with the transaction, and any attempt to profit by the weakness, ignorance or necessity of another will inevitably operate to his disadvantage.

[IV:7]7. This is because the individual is a part of the Universal. A part cannot antagonize any other part, but, on the contrary, the welfare of each part depends upon a recognition of the interests of the whole.

[IV:8]8. Those who recognize this principle have a great advantage in the affairs of life. They do not wear themselves out. They can eliminate vagrant thoughts with facility. They can readily concentrate to the highest possible degree on any subject. They do not waste time or money upon objects which can be of no possible benefit to them.

[IV:9]9. If you cannot do these things it is because you have thus far not made the necessary effort. Now is the time to make the effort. The result will be exactly in proportion to the effort expended. One of the strongest affirmations which you can use for the purpose of strengthening the

[p. 47]

will and realizing your power to accomplish is, "I can be what I will to be."

[IV:10]10. Every time you repeat it realize who and what this "I" is; try to come into a thorough understanding of the true nature of the "I"; if you do you will become invincible; that is, provided that your objects and purposes are constructive and are therefore in harmony with the creative principle of the Universe.

[IV:11]11. If you make use of this affirmation, use it continuously, night and morning, and as often during the day as you think of it, and continue to do so until it becomes a part of you; form the habit.

[IV:12]12. Unless you do this, you had better not start at all, because modern Psychology tells us that when we start something and do not complete it, or make a resolution and do not keep it, we are forming the habit of failure; absolute, ignominious failure. If you do not intend to do a thing, do not start; if you do start, see it through even if the heavens fall; if you make up your mind to do something, do it; let nothing, no one interfere; the "I" in you has determined, the thing is settled; the die is cast, there is no longer any argument.

[IV:13]13. If you carry out this idea, beginning with small things which you know you can control and gradually increase the effort, but never under any circumstances allowing your

[p. 48]

[paragraph continues] "I" to be overruled, you will find that you can eventually control yourself, and many men and women have found to their sorrow that it is easier to control a kingdom than to control themselves.

[IV:14]14. But when you have learned to control yourself you will have found the "World Within" which controls the world without; you will have become irresistible; men and things will respond to your every wish without any apparent effort on your part.

[IV:15]15. This is not so strange or impossible as it may appear when you remember that the "World Within" is controlled by the "I" and that this "I" is a part or one with the Infinite "I" which is the Universal Energy or Spirit, usually called God.

[IV:16]16. This is not a mere statement or theory made for the purpose of confirming or establishing an idea, but it is a fact which has been accepted by the best religious thought as well as the best scientific thought.

[IV:17]17. Herbert Spencer says: "Amid all the mysteries by which we are surrounded, nothing is more certain than that we are ever in the presence of an Infinite and Eternal Energy from which all things proceed."

[IV:18]18. Lyman Abbott, in an address delivered before the Alumni of Bangor Theological Seminary,

[p. 49]

said: "We are coming to think of God as dwelling in man rather than as operating on men from without."

[IV:19]19. Science goes a little way in its search and stops. Science finds the ever-present Eternal Energy, but Religion finds the Power behind this energy and locates it within man. But this is by no means a new discovery; the Bible says exactly the same thing, and the language is just as plain and convincing: "Know ye not that ye are the temple of the living God?" Here, then, is the secret of the wonderful creative power of the "World Within."

[IV:20]20. Here is the secret of power, of mastery. To overcome does not mean to go without things. Self-denial is not success. We cannot give unless we get; we cannot be helpful unless we are strong. The Infinite is not a bankrupt and we who are the representatives of Infinite power should not be bankrupts either, and if we wish to be of service to others we must have power and more power, but to get it we must give it; we must be of service.

[IV:21]21. The more we give the more we shall get; we must become a channel whereby the Universal can express activity. The Universal is constantly seeking to express itself, to be of service, and it seeks the channel whereby it can find the greatest activity, where it can do the most good, where it can be of greatest service to mankind.

[p. 50]

[IV:22]22. The Universal cannot express through you as long as you are busy with your plans, your own purposes; quiet the senses, seek inspiration, focus the mental activity on the within, dwell in the consciousness of your unity with Omnipotence. "Still water runs deep"; contemplate the multitudinous opportunities to which you have spiritual access by the Omnipresence of power.

[IV:23]23. Visualize the events, circumstances and conditions which these spiritual connections may assist in manifesting. Realize the fact that the essence and soul of all things is spiritual and that the spiritual is the real, because it is the life of all there is; when the spirit is gone, the life is gone; it is dead; it has ceased to exist.

[IV:24]24. These mental activities pertain to the world within, to the world of cause; and conditions and circumstances which result are the effect. It is thus that you become a creator. This is important work, and the higher, loftier, grander and more noble ideals which you can conceive, the more important the work will become.

[IV:25]25. Over-work or over-play or over-bodily activity of any kind produces conditions of mental apathy and stagnation which makes it impossible to do the more important work which results in a realization of conscious power. We should, therefore, seek the Silence frequently.

[p. 51]

[paragraph continues] Power comes through repose; it is in the Silence that we can be still, and when we are still we can think, and thought is the secret of all attainment.

[IV:26]26. Thought is a mode of motion and is carried by the law of vibration the same as light or electricity. It is given vitality by the emotions through the law of love; it takes form and expression by the law of growth; it is a product of the spiritual "I," hence its Divine, spiritual, and creative nature.

[IV:27]27. From this it is evident that in order to express power, abundance or any other constructive purpose, the emotions must be called upon to give feeling to the thought so that it will take form. How may this purpose be accomplished? This is the vital point; how may we develop the faith, the courage, the feeling, which will result in accomplishment?

[IV:28]28. The reply is, by exercise; mental strength is secured in exactly the same way that physical strength is secured, by exercise. We think something, perhaps with difficulty the first time; we think the same thing again, and it becomes easier this time; we think it again and again; it then becomes a mental habit. We continue to think the same thing; finally it becomes automatic; we can no longer help thinking this thing; we are now positive of what we think; there is no longer any doubt about it. We are sure; we know.

[p. 52]

[IV:29]29. In Part Three I asked you to relax, to let go physically. Now I am going to ask you to let go mentally. If you practised the previous exercise fifteen or twenty minutes a day in accordance with the instructions, you can no doubt relax physically; and anyone who cannot consciously do this quickly and completely is not a master of himself. He has not obtained freedom; he is still a slave to conditions. But I shall assume that you have mastered the exercise and are ready to take the next step, which is mental freedom.

[IV:30]30. Now after taking your usual position, remove all tension by completely relaxing, then mentally let go of all adverse conditions, such as hatred, anger, worry, jealousy, envy, sorrow, trouble or disappointment of any kind.

[IV:31]31. You may say that you cannot "let go" of these things, but you can; you can do so by mentally determining to do so, by voluntary intention and persistence.

[IV:32]32. The reason that some cannot do this is because they allow themselves to be controlled by the emotions instead of by their intellect. But the will guided by the intellect will gain the victory. You will not succeed the first time you try, but practice makes perfect, in this as in everything else, and you must succeed in dismissing, eliminating and completely destroying

[p. 53]

these negative and destructive thoughts; because they are the seed which is constantly germinating into discordant conditions of every conceivable kind and description.

31. What is thought?

Thought is spiritual energy.

32. How is it carried?

By the law of vibration.

33. How is it given vitality?

By the law of love.

34. How does it take form?

By the law of growth.

35. What is the secret of its creative power?

It is a spiritual activity.

36. How may we develop the faith, courage, and enthusiasm which will result in accomplishment?

By a recognition of our spiritual nature.

37. What is the secret of Power?

Service.

38. Why is this so?

Because we get what we give.

39. What is the Silence?

A physical stillness.

40. Of what value is it?

It is the first step to self-control, self-mastery.

 

 

There is nothing truer than that the quality of thought which we entertain correlates certain externals in the outside world. This is the Law from which there is no escape. And it is this Law, this correlative of the thought with its object, that from time immemorial has led the people to believe in special providence.--Wilmans.

     
The Master Key System, by Charles F. Haanel, [1919], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 54] [p. 55]

  

PART FIVE

THIS Part tells how the subconscious processes are continually at work, and it tells how we may consciously direct this work instead of being mere passive recipients of its activity. It tells how we may have a vision of the destination to be reached, the dangers and pitfalls to be avoided. It tells how "the word has become flesh," how we are constantly creating and re-creating ourselves. It tells of a mental home which each of us is building for ourselves, the importance of this home, where the material is secured, the character of the furnishing, how and why many of us need a mental housecleaning in case we wish to realize our ideas. It tells of the conditions by which we may come into an inheritance of health, harmony and prosperity, and the condition is one which demands no sacrifice except the loss of our limitations, our servitudes and our weaknesses, and costs only the labour of harvesting its great resources.

[p. 56]

  

INTRODUCTION. PART FIVE

After studying this Part carefully, you will see that every conceivable force or object or fact is the result of mind in action.

Mind in action is thought, and thought is creative. Men are thinking now as they never thought before. Therefore, this is a creative age, and the world is awarding its richest prizes to the thinkers.

Matter is powerless, passive, inert. Mind is force, energy power. Mind shapes and controls matter. Every form which matter takes is but the expression of some pre-existing thought.

But thought works no magic transformations; it obeys natural laws; it sets in motion natural forces; it releases natural energies; it manifests in your conduct and actions, and these in turn react upon your friends and acquaintances, and eventually upon the whole of your environment.

You can originate thought, and, since thoughts are creative, you can create for yourselves the things you desire.

[p. 57]

  

PART FIVE

[V:1]1. At least ninety per cent. of our mental life is subconscious, so that those who fail to make use of this mental power live within very narrow limits.

[V:2]2. The subconscious can and will solve any problem for us if we know how to direct it. The subconscious processes are always at work; the only question is, are we to be simply passive recipients of this activity, or are we to consciously direct the work? Shall we have a vision of the destination to be reached, the dangers to be avoided, or shall we simply drift?

[V:3]3. We have found that mind pervades every part of the physical body and is always capable of being directed or impressed by authority coming from the objective or the more dominant portion of the mind.

[V:4]4. The mind, which pervades the body, is largely the result of heredity, which, in turn, is simply the result of all the environments of all past generations on the responsive and ever-moving life forces. An understanding of this fact will enable us to use our authority when we find some undesirable trait of character manifesting.

[V:5]5. We can consciously use all the desirable characteristics with which we have been provided and we can repress and refuse to allow the undesirable ones to manifest.

[p. 58]

[V:6]6. Again, this mind which pervades our physical body is not only the result of hereditary tendencies, but is the result of home, business and social environment, where countless thousands of impressions, ideas, prejudices and similar thoughts have been received. Much of this has been received from others, the result of opinions, suggestions or statements; much of it is the result of our own thinking, but nearly all of it has been accepted with little or no examination or consideration.

[V:7]7. The idea seemed plausible, the conscious received it, passed it on to the subconscious, where it was taken up by the Sympathetic System and passed on to be built into our physical body. "The word has become flesh."

[V:8]8. This, then, is the way we are constantly creating and re-creating ourselves; we are to-day the result of our past thinking, and we shall be what we are thinking to-day, the Law of Attraction is bringing to us, not the things we should like, or the things we wish for, or the things some one else has, but it brings us "our own," the things which we have created by our thought processes, whether consciously or unconsciously. Unfortunately, many of us are creating these things unconsciously.

[V:9]9. If either of us were building a home for ourselves, how careful we would be in regard

[p. 59]

to the plans; how we should study every detail; how we should watch the material and select only the best of everything; and yet how careless we are when it comes to building our Mental Home, which is infinitely more important than any physical home, as everything which can possibly enter into our lives depends upon the character of the material which enters into the construction of our Mental Home.

[V:10]10. What is the character of this material? We have seen that it is the result of the impressions which we have accumulated in the past and stored away in our subconscious Mentality. If these impressions have been of fear, of worry, of care, of anxiety; if they have been despondent, negative, doubtful, then the texture of the material which we are weaving to-day will be of the same negative material. Instead of being of any value, it will be mildewed and rotten and will bring us only more toil and care and anxiety. We shall be for ever busy trying to patch it up and make it appear at least genteel.

[V:11]11. But if we have stored away nothing but courageous thought, if we have been optimistic, positive, and have immediately thrown any kind of negative thought on the scrap heap, have refused to have anything to do with it, have refused to associate with it or become identified with it in any way, what then is the result?

[p. 60]

[paragraph continues] Our mental material is now of the best kind; we can weave any kind of material we want; we can use any colour we wish; we know that the texture is firm, that the material is solid, that it will not fade, and we have no fear, no anxiety concerning the future; there is nothing to cover, there are no patches to hide.

[V:12]12. These are psychological facts; there is no theory or guess work about these thinking processes; there is nothing secret about them; in fact, they are so plain that every one can understand them. The thing to do is to have a mental house-cleaning, and to have this housecleaning every day, and keep the house clean. Mental, moral and physical cleanliness are absolutely indispensable if we are to make progress of any kind.

[V:13]13. When this mental house-cleaning process has been completed, the material which is left will be suitable for the making of the kind of ideals or mental images which we desire to realize.

[V:14]14. There is a fine estate awaiting a claimant. Its broad acres, with abundant crops, running water and fine timber, stretch away as far as the eye can see. There is a mansion, spacious and cheerful, with rare pictures, a well-stocked library, rich hangings, and every comfort and luxury. All the heir has to do is to assert his heirship, take possession, and use the property. He must use it; he must not let it decay;

[p. 61]

for use is the condition on which he holds it. To neglect it is to lose possession.

[V:15]15. In the domain of mind and spirit, in the domain of practical power, such an estate is yours. You are the heir! You can assert your heirship, and possess, and use this rich inheritance. Power over circumstances is one of its fruits, health, harmony and prosperity are assets upon its balance sheet. It offers you poise and peace. It costs you only the labour of studying and harvesting its great resources. It demands no sacrifice, except the loss of your limitations, your servitudes, your weakness. It clothes you with self-honour, and puts a sceptre in your hands.

[V:16]16. To gain this estate, three processes are necessary: You must earnestly desire it. You must assert your claim. You must take possession.

[V:17]17. You admit that those are not burdensome conditions.

[V:18]18. You are familiar with the subject of heredity. Darwin, Huxley, Haeckel, and other physical scientists have piled evidence mountain high that heredity is a law attending progressive creation. It is progressive heredity which gives man his erect attitude, his power of motion, the organs of digestion, blood circulation, nerve force, muscular force, bone structure and a host of other faculties on the

[p. 62]

physical side. There are even more impressive facts concerning heredity of mind force. All these constitute what may be called your human heredity.

[V:19]19. But there is a heredity which the physical scientists have not compassed. It lies beneath and antecedent to all their researches. At a point where they throw up their hands in despair, saying they cannot account for what they see, this divine heredity is found in full sway.

[V:20]20. It is the benignant force which decrees primal creation. It thrills down from the Divine, direct into every created being. It originates life, which the physical scientist has not done, nor ever can do. It stands out among all forces supreme, unapproachable. No human heredity measures up to it.

[V:21]21. This Infinite Life flows through you; is you. Its doorways are but the faculties which comprise your consciousness. To keep open these doors is the Secret of Power. Is it not worth while to make the effort?

[V:22]22. The great fact is, that the source of all life and all power is from within. Persons, circumstances and events may suggest need and opportunities, but the insight, strength and power to answer these needs will be found within.

[V:23]23. Avoid counterfeits. Build firm foundations

[p. 63]

for your consciousness upon forces which flow direct from the Infinite source, the Universal Mind of which you are the image and likeness.

[V:24]24. Those who have come into possession of this inheritance are never quite the same again. They have come into possession of a sense of power hitherto undreamed of. They can never again be timid, weak, vacillating, or fearful. They are indissolubly connected with Omnipotence. Something in them has been aroused; they have suddenly discovered that they possess a tremendous latent ability of which they were heretofore entirely unconscious.

[V:25]25. This power is from within, but we cannot receive it unless we give it. Use is the condition upon which we hold this inheritance. We are each of us but the channel through which the Omnipotent power is being differentiated into form; unless we give out the channel is obstructed and we can receive no more. This is true on every plane of existence and in every field of endeavour and all walks of life. The more we give, the more we get. The athlete who wishes to get strong must make use of the strength he has, and the more he gives the more he will get. The financier who wishes to make money must make use of the money he has, for only by using it can he get more.

[p. 64]

[V:26]26. The merchant who does not keep his goods going out will soon have none coming in; the business which fails to give efficient service will soon lack customers; the barrister who fails to get results will soon lack clients, and so it goes everywhere; power is contingent upon a proper use of the power already in our possession; what is true in every field of endeavour, every experience in life, is true of the power from which every other power known among men is begotten--spiritual power. Take away the spirit and what is left? Nothing.

[V:27]27. If then the spirit is all there is, upon the recognition of this fact must depend the ability to demonstrate all power, whether physical, mental or spiritual.

[V:28]28. All possession is the result of the accumulative attitude of mind, or the money consciousness; this is the magic wand which will enable you to receive the idea, and it will formulate plans for you to execute, and you will find as much pleasure in the execution as in the satisfaction of attainment and achievement.

[V:29]29. Now, go to your room, take the same seat, the same position as heretofore, and mentally select a place which has pleasant associations. Make a complete mental picture of it, see the buildings, the grounds, the trees, friends, associations, everything complete. At

[p. 65]

first you will find yourself thinking of every thing under the sun, except the ideal upon which you desire to concentrate. But do no let that discourage you. Persistence will win, but persistence requires that you practise these exercises every day without fail.

 

 

 

Relation and connection are not somewhere and some time, but everywhere and always.--Emerson.

[p. 66]

  

PART FIVE

41. What proportion of our mental life is subconscious?

At least ninety per cent.

42. Is this vast mental storehouse generally utilized?

No.

43. Why not?

Few understand or appreciate the fact that it is an activity which they may consciously direct.

44. Where has the conscious mind received its governing tendencies?

From heredity which means that it is the result of all the environments of all past generations.

45. What is the law of attraction bringing to us?

Our "Own."

46. What is our "Own"?

What we inherently are, and is the result of our past thinking, both conscious and subconscious.

47. Of what is the material with which we construct our mental home composed?

The thoughts which we entertain.

[p. 67]

48. What is the Secret of Power?

A recognition of the omnipresence of omnipotence.

49. Where does it originate?

All life and all power is from within.

50. Upon what is the possession of power contingent?

Upon a proper use of the power already in our possession.

 

 

 

The key to every man is his thought. Sturdy and defying though he look, he has a helm which he obeys, which is the idea after which all his facts are classified. He can only be reformed by showing him a new idea which commands his own.--Emerson.

     
The Master Key System, by Charles F. Haanel, [1919], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 68] [p. 69]

  

PART SIX

TELLS of the unlimited possibilities of the Universal Mind, which is the life principle of every atom in existence, and explains how this mind is differentiated in form. It tells of the most marvellous piece of mechanism which has ever been constructed, and tells how the effect which will be produced depends entirely upon the "mechanism to which it is attached." It tells why we should all become familiar with the mechanism so as to secure the effects which we desire. The power to which it can be attached is unlimited, and we can accordingly secure any effect we desire when we become familiar with the mechanism, and understand how to make the proper connections. An understanding of this part will enable you to plan courageously and execute fearlessly, because you will have come into a knowledge of the source of all power and this will determine your course in life, bringing you into contact with all that is strongest and best and most desirable.

[p. 70]

  

INTRODUCTION. PART SIX

This Part will give you an excellent understanding of the most wonderful piece of mechanism which has ever been created. A mechanism whereby you may create for yourself Health, Strength, Success, Prosperity or any other condition which you desire. Necessities are demands, and demands create action, and actions bring about results. The process of evolution is constantly building our tomorrows out of our to-days. Individual development, like Universal development, must be gradual with an ever-increasing capacity and volume.

The knowledge that if we infringe upon the rights of others we become moral thorns and find ourselves entangled at every turn of the road, should be an indication that success is contingent upon the highest moral ideal, which is "The greatest good to the greatest number."

Aspiration, desire and harmonious relations constantly and persistently maintained will accomplish results. The greatest hindrance is erroneous and fixed ideas.

To be in tune with eternal truth we must possess poise and harmony within. In order to receive intelligence the receiver must be in tune with the transmitter.

Thought is a product of Mind, and Mind is creative, but this does not mean that the Universal will change its modus operandi to suit us or our ideas, but it does mean that we can come into harmonious relationship with the Universal, and when we have accomplished this we may ask anything to which we are entitled, and the way will be made plain.

[p. 71]

  

PART SIX

[VI:1]1. The Universal Mind is so wonderful that it is difficult to understand its utilitarian powers and possibilities and its unlimited creative effects.

[VI:2]2. We have found that this Mind is not only all intelligence but all substance. How, then, is it to be differentiated in form? How are we to secure the effect which we desire?

[VI:3]3. Ask any electrician what the effect of electricity will be and he will reply that "Electricity is a form of motion and its effect will depend upon the mechanism to which it is attached." Upon this mechanism will depend whether we shall have heat, light, power, music or any of the other marvellous demonstrations of power to which this vital energy has been harnessed.

[VI:4]4. What effect can be produced by thought? The reply is that thought is mind in motion (just as wind is air in motion), and its effect will depend entirely on the "mechanism to which it is attached."

[VI:5]5. Here, then, is the secret of all mental power; it depends entirely on the mechanism which we attach.

[VI:6]6. What is this mechanism? You know something of the mechanism which has been invented by Edison, Bell, Marconi and other electrical wizards, by which place and space and time have become only figures of speech, but did you ever stop to think that the mechanism

[p. 72]

which has been given you for transforming the Universal, Omnipresent Potential Power was invented by a greater inventor than Edison?

[VI:7]7. We are accustomed to examining the mechanism of the implements which we use for tilling the soil, and we try to get an understanding of the mechanism of the motor-car which we drive, but most of us are content to remain in absolute ignorance of the greatest piece of mechanism which has ever come into existence, the brain of man.

[VI:8]8. Let us examine the wonders of this mechanism; perhaps we shall thereby get a better understanding of the various effects of which it is the cause.

[VI:9]9. In the first place, there is the great mental world in which we live and move and have our being; this world is omnipotent, omniscient and omnipresent; it will respond to our desire in direct ratio to our purpose and faith; the purpose must be in accordance with the law of our being, that is, it must be creative or constructive; our faith must be strong enough to generate a current of sufficient strength to bring our purpose into manifestation. "As thy faith is, so be it unto thee," bears the stamp of scientific test.

[VI:10]10. The effects which are produced in the world without are the result of the action and reaction of the individual upon the universal; that is the process which we call thinking; the

[p. 73]

brain is the organ through which this process is accomplished. Think of the wonder of it all! Do you love music, flowers, literature, art, or are you inspired by the thought of ancient or modern genius? Remember, every beauty to which you respond must have its corresponding outline in your brain before you can appreciate it.

[VI:11]11. There is not a single virtue or principle in the storehouse of nature which the brain cannot express. The brain is an embryonic world, ready to develop at any time as necessity may arise. If you can comprehend that this is a scientific truth and one of the wonderful laws of nature, it will be easier for you to get an understanding of the mechanism by which these extraordinary results are being accomplished.

[VI:12]12. The nervous system has been compared to an electric circuit with its battery of cells in which force is originated, and its white matter to insulated wires by which the current is conveyed; it is through these channels that every impulse or desire is carried through the mechanism.

[VI:13]13. The spinal cord is the great motor and sensory pathway by which messages are conveyed to and from the brain; then, there is the blood supply plunging through the veins and arteries, renewing our energy and strength, the perfectly arranged structure upon which

[p. 74]

the entire physical body rests, and, finally, the delicate and beautiful skin, clothing the entire mechanism in a mantle of beauty.

[VI:14]14. This then is the "Temple of the living God" and the individual "I" is given control, and upon his understanding of the mechanism which is within his control will the result depend.

[VI:15]15. Every thought sets the brain cells in action; at first the substance upon which the thought is directed fails to respond, but if the thought is sufficiently refined and concentrated, the substance finally yields and expresses perfectly.

[VI:16]16. This influence of the mind can be exerted upon any part of the body, causing the elimination of any undesirable effect.

[VI:17]17. A perfect conception and understanding of the laws governing in the mental world cannot fail to be of inestimable value in the transaction of business, as it develops the power of discernment and gives a clearer understanding and appreciation of facts.

[VI:18]18. The man who looks within instead of without cannot fail to make use of the mighty forces which will eventually determine his course in life and so bring him into vibration with all that is best, strongest and most desirable.

[VI:19]19. Attention or concentration is probably the most important essential in the development of

[p. 75]

mind culture. The possibilities of attention when properly directed are so startling that they would hardly appear credible to the uninitiated. The cultivation of attention is the distinguishing characteristic of every successful man or woman, and is the very highest personal accomplishment which can be acquired.

[VI:20]20. The power of attention can be more readily understood by comparing it with a sun glass in which the rays of sunlight are focussed; they possess no particular strength as long as the glass is moved about and the rays directed from one place to another; but let the glass be held perfectly still and let the rays be focussed on one spot for any length of time, the effect will become immediately apparent.

[VI:21]21. So with the power of thought; let power be dissipated by scattering the thought from one object to another, and no result is apparent but focus this power through attention or concentration on any single purpose for any length of time and nothing becomes impossible.

[VI:22]22. A very simple remedy for a very complex situation, some will say. All right, try it, you who have had no experience in concentrating the thought on a definite purpose or object. Choose any single object and concentrate your attention on it for a definite purpose for even ten minutes; you cannot do it; the mind will wander a dozen times and it will be necessary to bring it back to the

[p. 76]

original purpose, and each time the effect will have been lost and at the end of the ten minutes nothing will have been gained, because you have not been able to hold your thought steadily to the purpose.

[VI:23]23. It is, however, through attention that you will finally be able to overcome obstacles of any kind that appear in your path onward and upward, and the only way to acquire this wonderful power is by practice--practice makes perfect, in this as in anything else.

[VI:24]24. In order to cultivate the power of attention, bring a photograph with you to the same seat in the same room in the same position as heretofore. Examine it closely at least ten minutes, note the expression of the eyes, the form of the features, the clothing, the way the hair is arranged; in fact, note every detail shown on the photograph carefully. Now cover it and close your eyes and try to see it mentally; if you can see every detail perfectly and can form a good mental image of the photograph, you are to be congratulated; if not, repeat the process until you can.

[VI:25]25. This step is simply for the purpose of preparing the soil; in Part Seven we shall be ready to sow the seed.

[VI:26]26. It is by such exercises as these that you will finally be able to control your mental moods, your attitude, your consciousness.

[VI:27]27. Great organizers are learning to withdraw

[p. 77]

from the multitude more and more, that they may have more time for planning, thinking and generating the right mental moods.

[VI:28]28. Successful business men are constantly demonstrating the fact that it pays to keep in touch with the thought of other successful business men.

[VI:29]29. A single idea may be worth thousands of dollars, and these ideas can only come to those who are receptive, who are prepared to receive them, who are in a successful frame of mind.

[VI:30]30. Men are learning to place themselves in harmony with the Universal Mind; they are learning the unity of all things; they are learning the basic methods and principles of thinking, and this is changing conditions and multiplying results.

[VI:31]31. They are finding that circumstances and environment follow the trend of mental and spiritual progress; they find that growth follows knowledge; action follows inspiration; opportunity follows perception; always the spiritual first, then the transformation into the infinite and illimitable possibilities of achievement.

[VI:32]32. As the individual is but the channel for the differentiation of the Universal, these possibilities are necessarily inexhaustible.

[VI:33]33. Thought is the process by which we

[p. 78]

may absorb the Spirit of Power, and hold the result in our inner consciousness until it becomes a part of our ordinary consciousness. The method of accomplishing this result by the persistent practice of a few fundamental principles, as explained in this Book, is the Master-Key which unlocks the storehouse of Universal Truth.

[VI:34]34. The two great sources of human suffering at present are bodily disease and mental anxiety. These may be readily traced to the infringement of some Natural Law. This is, no doubt, owing to the fact that so far knowledge has largely remained partial, but the clouds of darkness which have accumulated through long ages are beginning to roll away and with them many of the miseries that attend imperfect information.

 

 

 

[VI:35]That a man can change himself, improve himself, re-create himself, control his environment, and master his own destiny is the conclusion of every mind that is wide awake to the power of right thought in constructive action.--Larsen.

[p. 79]

  

PART SIX

51. What are some of the effects which can be produced by electricity?

Heat, light, power, music.

52. Upon what do these various effects depend?

Upon the mechanism to which the electricity is attached.

53. What is the result of the action and interaction of the individual mind upon the Universal?

The conditions and experiences with which we meet.

54. How may these conditions be changed?

By changing the mechanism by which the Universal is differentiated in form.

55. What is this mechanism?

The brain.

56. How may it be changed?

By the process we call thinking. Thoughts produce brain cells, and these cells respond to the corresponding thought in the Universal.

57. Of what value is the power of concentration?

It is the very highest personal accomplishment which can be acquired, and the distinguishing characteristic of every successful man or woman.

[p. 80]

58. How may it be acquired?

By faithfully practising the exercises outlined in this System.

59. Why is this so important?

Because it will enable us to control our thoughts, and since thoughts are causes conditions must be effects; if we can control the cause we can also control the effect.

60. What is changing conditions and multiplying results in the objective world?

Men are learning the basic methods of constructive thinking.

 

 

"This above all: To thine own self be true,
 And it must follow, as the night the day,
 Thou canst not then be false to any man."

[]

          ADVICE

Remember--
   Fully to understand grand and beautiful   thought requires, perhaps, as much time as to conceive it. JOUBERT

If you wish to enjoy the utmost practical benefit from "The Master   Key"--go slowly.

Transfuse into your mind the contents of one part only, each week for   twenty-four weeks.

Realize the meaning of every phrase.

Consult "The Master Key" constantly, as your perpetual help and   stimulus.

Each time you read the work you will get a better understanding of the   eternal cosmic principles.

Tell others of "The Master Key" so that more and more people may   reciprocate with you, as conscious adepts in harmony.

The   Publishers

     
   
     
The Master Key System, by Charles F. Haanel, [1919], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 81]

  

PART SEVEN

THIS Part tells of a method by which you may construct the mould or model from which your future will emerge. It tells how you may make it grand and beautiful; it explains that you are not limited as to cost or material, that no one can place any limitation on it but yourself. It explains that in the construction of this model, there is much work to be done, that no one can do the work but yourself, but it tells you what to do and how to do it, it suggests methods and plans which if faithfully and persistently carried out will result in conditions exactly in accordance with the purpose and thought. It tells of millions of faithful helpers which will come to your aid if you are faithful in your work, and it tells why some who are apparently faithfully endeavouring to realize their ideal seem to fail. It is sometimes just as important to know what not to do as what to do.

[p. 82]

  

INTRODUCTION. PART SEVEN

Through all the ages man has believed in an invisible power, through which and by which all things have been created and are continually being re-created.

We may personalize this power and call it God, or we may think of it as the essence or spirit, which permeates all things, but in either case the effect is the same.

So far as the individual is concerned, the objective, the physical, the visible, is the personal, that which can be cognized by the senses. It consists of body, brain and nerves. The subjective is the spiritual, the invisible, the impersonal.

The personal is conscious because it is a personal entity. The impersonal, being the same in kind and quality as all other Being, is not conscious of itself and has therefore been termed the subconscious.

The personal, or conscious, has the power of will and choice, and can therefore exercise discrimination in the selection of methods whereby to bring about the solution of difficulties.

The impersonal, or spiritual, being a part or one with the source and origin of all power, can necessarily exercise no such choice, but, on the contrary, it has Infinite resources at its command. It can and does bring about results by methods concerning which the human or individual mind can have no possible conception.

You will therefore sec that it is your privilege to depend upon the human will, with all its limitations and misconceptions, or you may utilize the potentialities of Infinity by making use of the subconscious mind. Here, then, is the scientific explanation of the wonderful power which has been put within your control, if you but understand, appreciate and recognize it.

One method of consciously utilizing this omnipotent power is outlined in Part Seven.

[p. 83]

  

PART SEVEN

[VII:1]1. Visualization is the process of making mental images, and the image is the mould or model which will serve as a pattern from which your future will emerge.

[VII:2]2. Make the pattern clear, and make it beautiful; do not be afraid; make it grand; remember that no limitation can be placed upon you by anyone but yourself; you are not limited as to cost or material; draw on the Infinite for your supply, construct it in your imagination; it will have to be there before it will ever appear anywhere else.

[VII:3]3. Make the image clear and clean-cut, hold it firmly in the mind and you will gradually and constantly bring the thing nearer to you. You can be what "you will to be."

[VII:4]4. This is another psychological fact which is well known, but unfortunately, reading about it will not bring about any result which you may have in mind; it will not even help you to form the mental image, much less bring it into manifestation. Work is necessary, labour, hard mental labour, the kind of effort which so few are willing to put forth.

[VII:5]5. The first step is idealization. It is likewise the most important step, because it is the plan on which you are going to build. It must be solid; it must be permanent. The architect, when he plans a grand building, has every line and detail pictured in advance. The engineer, when he spans a chasm, first

[p. 84]

ascertains the strength requirements of a million separate parts.

[VII:6]6. They see the end before a single step is taken; so you are to picture in your mind what you want; you are sowing the seed, but before sowing any seed you want to know what the harvest is to be. This is Idealization. If you are not sure, return to the chair daily until the picture becomes plain; it will gradually unfold; first the general plan will be dim, but it will take shape, the outline will take form, then the details, and you will gradually develop the power by which you will be enabled to formulate plans which will eventually materialize in the objective world. You will come to know what the future holds for you.

[VII:7]7. Then comes the process of visualization. You must see the picture more and more complete, see the detail, and, as the details begin to unfold, the ways and means for bringing it into manifestation will develop. One thing will lead to another. Thought will lead to action, action will develop methods, methods will develop friends, and friends will bring about circumstances, and, finally, the third step, or Materialization, will have been accomplished.

[VII:8]8. We all recognize that the Universe must have been thought into shape before it ever could have become a material fact. And if we are willing to follow along the lines of the

[p. 85]

Great Architect of the Universe, we shall find our thoughts taking form, just as the Universe took concrete form. It is the same mind operating through the individual. There is no difference in kind or quality, the only difference is one of degree.

[VII:9]9. The architect visualizes his building, he sees it as he wishes it to be. His thought becomes a plastic mould from which the building will eventually emerge, a high one or a low one, a beautiful one or a plain one; his vision takes form on paper and eventually the necessary material is utilized and the building stands complete.

[VII:10]10. The inventor visualizes his idea in exactly the same manner. For instance, Nikola Tesla, he with the giant intellect, one of the greatest inventors of all ages, the man who has brought forth the most amazing realities, always visualizes his inventions before attempting to work them out. He does not rush to embody them in form and then spend his time in correcting defects. Having first built up the idea in his imagination, he holds it there as a mental picture, to be reconstructed and improved by his thought. "In this way," he writes in the Electrical Experimenter, "I am enabled to rapidly develop and perfect a conception without touching anything. When I have gone so far as to embody in the invention every possible improvement I can think of, and see no fault anywhere, I put into concrete form the product

[p. 86]

of my brain. Invariably my device works as I conceived it should; in twenty years there has not been a single exception."

[VII:11]11. If you can conscientiously follow these directions, you will develop Faith, the kind of Faith that is the "Substance of things hoped for, the evidence of things not seen"; you will develop confidence, the kind of confidence that leads to endurance and courage; you will develop the power of concentration which will enable you to exclude all thoughts except the ones which are associated with your purpose.

[VII:12]12. The law is that thought will manifest in form, and only one who knows how to be the divine thinker of his own thoughts can ever take a Master's place and speak with authority.

[VII:13]13. Clearness and accuracy are obtained only by repeatedly having the image in mind. Each repeated action renders the image more clear and accurate than the preceding, and in proportion to the clearness and accuracy of the image will the outward manifestation be. You must build it firmly and securely in your mental world, the world within, before it can take form in the world without, and you can build nothing of value, even in the mental world, unless you have the proper material. When you have the material you can build anything you wish, but make sure of your material. You cannot make broadcloth from shoddy.

[VII:14]14. This material will be brought out by

[p. 87]

millions of silent mental workers and fashioned into the form of the image which you have in mind.

[VII:15]15. Think of it! You have over five million of these mental workers, ready and in active use; brain cells they are called. Besides this, there is another reserve force of at least an equal number, ready to be called into action at the slightest need. Your power to think, then, is almost unlimited, and this means that your power to create the kind of material which is necessary to build for yourself any kind of environment which you desire is practically unlimited.

[VII:16]16. In addition to these millions of mental workers, you have billions of mental workers in the body, every one of which is endowed with sufficient intelligence to understand and act upon any message or suggestion given. These cells are all busy creating and re-creating the body, but, in addition to this, they are endowed with psychic activity whereby they can attract to themselves the substance necessary for perfect development.

[VII:17]17. They do this by the same law and in the same manner that every form of life attracts to itself the necessary material for growth. The oak, the rose, the lily, all require certain material for their most perfect expression and they secure it by silent demand, the Law of Attraction, the most certain way for you to

[p. 88]

secure what you require for your most complete development.

[VII:18]18. Make the Mental Image; make it clear, distinct, perfect; hold it firmly; the ways and means will develop; supply will follow the demand; you will be led to do the right thing at the right time and in the right way. Earnest Desire will bring about Confident Expectation, and this in turn must be reinforced by Firm Demand. These three cannot fail to bring about Attainment, because the Earnest Desire is the feeling, the Confident Expectation is the thought, and the Firm Demand is the will, and, as we have seen, feeling gives vitality to thought and the will holds it steadily until the law of Growth brings it into manifestation.

[VII:19]19. Is it not wonderful that man has such tremendous power within himself, such transcendental faculties concerning which he had no conception? Is it not strange that we have always been taught to look for strength and power "without"? We have been taught to look everywhere but "within," and whenever this power manifested in our lives we were told that it was something supernatural.

[VII:20]20. There are many who have come to an understanding of this wonderful power, and who make serious and conscientious efforts to realize health, power and other conditions, and seem to fail. They do not seem able to bring the Law into operation. The difficulty in

[p. 89]

nearly every case is that they are dealing with externals. They want money, power, health and abundance, but they fail to realize that these are effects and can come only when the cause is found.

[VII:21]21. Those who will give no attention to the world without, will seek only to ascertain the truth, will look only for wisdom, will find that this wisdom will unfold and disclose the source of all power, that it will manifest in thought and purpose which will create the external conditions desired. This truth will find expression in noble purpose and courageous action.

[VII:22]22. Create ideals only, give no thought to external conditions, make the world within beautiful and opulent and the world without will express and manifest the condition which you have made within. You will come into a realization of your power to create ideals and these ideals will be projected into the world of effect.

[VII:23]23. For instance, a man is in debt. He will be continually thinking about the debt, concentrating on it, and as thoughts are causes the result is that he not only fastens the debt closer to him, but actually creates more debt. He is putting the great law of Attraction into operation with the usual and inevitable result--Loss leads to greater "Loss."

[VII:24]24. What, then, is the correct principle?

[p. 90]

[paragraph continues] Concentrate on the things you want, not on the things you do not want. Think of abundance; idealize the methods and plans for putting the Law of Abundance into operation. Visualize the condition which the Law of Abundance creates; this will result in manifestation.

[VII:25]25. If the law operates perfectly to bring about poverty, lack and every form of limitation for those who are continually entertaining thoughts of lack and fear, it will operate with the same certainty to bring about conditions of abundance and opulence for those who entertain thoughts of courage and power.

[VII:26]26. This is a difficult problem for many; we are too anxious; we manifest anxiety, fear, distress; we want to do something; we want to help; we are like a child who has just planted a seed and every fifteen minutes goes out and stirs up the earth to see if it is growing. Of course, under such circumstances, the seed will never germinate, and yet this is exactly what many of us do in the mental world.

[VII:27]27. We must plant the seed and leave it undisturbed. This does not mean that we are to sit down and do nothing, by no means; we will do more and better work than we have ever done before, new channels will constantly be provided, new doors will open; all that is necessary is to have an open mind, be ready to act when the time comes.

[p. 91]

[VII:28]28. Thought force is the most powerful means of obtaining knowledge, and if concentrated on any subject will solve the problem. Nothing is beyond the power of human comprehension, but in order to harness thought force and make it do your bidding, work is required.

[VII:29]29. Remember that thought is the fire that creates the steam that turns the wheel of fortune, upon which your experiences depend.

[VII:30]30. Ask yourself a few questions and then reverently await the response. Do you not now and then feel the self within you? Do you assert this self or do you follow the majority? Remember that majorities are always led, they never lead. It was the majority that fought, tooth and nail, against the steam engine, the power loom and every other advance or improvement ever suggested.

[VII:31]31. For your next exercise visualize your friend, see him exactly as you last saw him, see the room, the furniture, recall the conversation, now see his face, see it distinctly, now talk to him about some subject of mutual interest; see his expression change, watch him smile. Can you do this? All right, you can; then arouse his interest, tell him a story of adventure, see his eyes light up with the spirit of fun or excitement. Can you do all of this? If so, your imagination is good, you are making excellent progress.

[p. 92]

  

PART SEVEN

61. What is visualization?

The process of making mental pictures.

62. What is the result of this method of thought?

By holding the image or picture in mind, we can gradually but surely bring the thing nearer to us. We can be what we will to be.

63. What is Idealization?

It is a process of visualizing or idealizing the plans which will eventually materialize in our objective world.

64. Why are clearness and accuracy necessary?

Because "seeing" creates "feeling" and "feeling" creates "being." First the mental, then the emotional, then the illimitable possibilities of achievement.

65. How are they obtained?

Each repeated action renders the image more accurate than the former one.

66. How is the material for the construction of your mental image secured?

By millions of mental workers. Brain cells they are called.

67. How are the necessary conditions for bringing about the materialization of your ideal in the objective world secured?

By the Law of Attraction. The natural

[p. 93]

law by which all conditions and experiences are brought about.

68. What three steps are, necessary in order to bring this law into operation?

Earnest Desire, Confident Expectation, Firm Demand.

69. Why do many fail?

Because they concentrate on loss, disease and disaster. The law is operating perfectly; the things they fear are coming upon them.

70. What is the alternative?

Concentrate on the ideals which you desire to see manifested in your life.

 

 

 

Man is mind, and evermore he takes the tool of thought, and shaping what he wills, brings forth, a thousand joys, a thousand ills. He thinks in secret and it comes to pass, Environment is but his looking glass.--James Allen.

     
The Master Key System, by Charles F. Haanel, [1919], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 94] [p. 95]

  

PART EIGHT

THIS Part tells of the creative principle of the Universe, what it is, how it takes form and how it is brought into manifestation. This principle being the underlying principle of all existence must necessarily be governed by an immutable law. It tells how the character, health and circumstances of the individual are formed, and suggests methods whereby desirable conditions and circumstances may be created. It tells how and why and when the material from which your future is to emerge is secured. It suggests methods and exercises by which you may secure complete control of the power which governs in this mighty field of action. Mighty because it is the most important work which any individual can undertake. We are making our future now, to-day, when it comes we shall have to accept what is given, it will be too late to change it, but we can dominate it, control it, make it what we want it to be, and this Part explains how.

[p. 96]

  

INTRODUCTION. PART EIGHT

In this Part you will find that you may freely choose what you think, but the result of your thought is governed by an immutable law! Is not this a wonderful thought? Is it not wonderful to know that our lives are not subject to caprice or variability of any kind? That they are governed by law. This stability is our opportunity, because by complying with the law we can secure the desired effect with invariable precision.

It is the Law which makes the Universe one grand pan of Harmony. If it were not for law, the Universe would be a Chaos instead of a Cosmos.

Here, then, is the secret of the origin of both good and evil: this is all the good and evil there ever was or ever will be.

Let me illustrate. Thought results in action. If your thought is constructive and harmonious, the result will be good: if your thought is destructive or inharmonious, the result will be evil.

There is therefore but one law, one principle, one cause, one Source of Power, and good and evil are simply words which have been coined to indicate the result of our action, or our compliance or non-compliance with this law.

The importance of this is well illustrated in the lives of Emerson and Carlyle. Emerson loved the good and his life was a symphony of peace and harmony; Carlyle hated the bad, and his life was a record of perpetual discord and inharmony.

Here we have two grand men, each intent upon achieving the same ideal, but one makes use of constructive thought and is therefore in harmony with Natural Law, the other makes use of destructive thought and therefore brings upon himself discord of every kind and character.

It is evident therefore that we are to hate nothing, not even the "bad," because hatred is destructive, and we shall soon find that by entertaining destructive thought we are sowing the "wind" and shall reap the "whirlwind."

[p. 97]

  

PART EIGHT

[VIII:1]1. Thought contains a vital principle, because it is the creative principle of the Universe and by its nature will combine with other similar thoughts.

[VIII:2]2. As the one purpose of life is growth, all principle underlying existence must contribute to give it effect. Thought, therefore, takes form and the law of growth eventually brings it into manifestation.

[VIII:3]3. You may freely choose what you think, but the result of your thought is governed by an immutable law. Any line of thought persisted in cannot fail to produce its result in the character, health and circumstances of the individual. Methods whereby we can substitute habits of constructive thinking for those which we have found produce only undesirable effects are therefore of primary importance.

[VIII:4]4. We all know that this is by no means easy. Mental habits are difficult to control, but it can be done and the way to do it is to begin at once to substitute constructive thought for destructive thought. Form the habit of analysing every thought. If it is necessary, if its manifestation in the objective will be a benefit, not only to yourself, but to all whom it may affect in any way, keep it; treasure it; it is of value; it is in tune with the Infinite; it will grow and develop and produce fruit an hundredfold. On the other hand, it will be well for you to keep this quotation from George

[p. 98]

[paragraph continues] Matthews Adams in mind, "Learn to keep the door shut, keep out of your mind, out of your office, and out of your world, every element that seeks admittance with no definite helpful end in view."

[VIII:5]5. If your thought has been critical or destructive, and has resulted in any condition of discord or inharmony in your environment, it may be necessary for you to cultivate a mental attitude which will be conducive to constructive thought.

[VIII:6]6. The imagination will be found to be a great assistance in this direction; the cultivation of the imagination leads to the development of the ideal out of which your future will emerge.

[VIII:7]7. The imagination gathers up the material by which the Mind weaves the fabric in which your future is to be clothed.

[VIII:8]8. Imagination is the light by which we can penetrate new worlds of thought and experience.

[VIII:9]9. Imagination is the mighty instrument by which every discoverer, every inventor, opened the way from precedent to experience. Precedent said, "It cannot be done"; experience said, "It is done."

[VIII:10]10. Imagination is a plastic power, moulding the things of sense into new forms and ideals.

[VIII:11]11. Imagination is the constructive form

[p. 99]

of thought which must precede every constructive form of action.

[VIII:12]12. A builder cannot build a structure of any kind until he has first received the plans from the architect, and the architect must get them from his imagination.

[VIII:13]13. The Captain of Industry cannot build a giant corporation which may co-ordinate hundreds of smaller firms and thousands of employees, and utilize millions of capital until he has first created the entire work in his imagination. Objects in the material world are as clay in the potter's hand; it is in the Master Mind that the real things are created, and it is by the use of the imagination that the work is done. In order to cultivate the imagination it must be exercised. Exercise is necessary to cultivate mental muscle as well as physical muscle. It must be supplied with nourishment or it cannot grow.

[VIII:14]14. Do not confuse Imagination with Fancy, or that form of day dreaming in which some people like to indulge. Day dreaming is a form of mental dissipation which may lead to mental disaster.

[VIII:15]15. Constructive imagination means mental labour, by some considered to be the hardest kind of labour, but, if so, it yields the greatest returns, for all the great things in life have come to men and women who had the capacity to

[p. 100]

think, to imagine, and to make their dreams come true.

[VIII:16]16. When you have become thoroughly conscious of the fact that Mind is the only creative principle, that it is Omnipotent, Omniscient and Omnipresent, and that you can consciously come into harmony with this Omnipotence through your power of thought, you will have taken a long step in the right direction.

[VIII:17]17. The next step is to place yourself in position to receive this power. As it is Omnipresent, it must be within you. We know that this is so because we know that all power is from within, but it must be developed, unfolded, cultivated; in order to do this we must be receptive, and this receptivity is acquired just as physical strength is gained, by exercise.

[VIII:18]18. The law of attraction will certainly and unerringly bring to you the conditions, environment, and experiences in life, corresponding with your habitual, characteristic, predominant mental attitude. Not what you think once in a while when you are in church, or have just read a good book, but your predominant mental attitude is what counts.

[VIII:19]19. You cannot entertain weak, harmful, negative thoughts ten hours a day and expect to bring about beautiful, strong and harmonious conditions by ten minutes of strong, positive, creative thought.

[VIII:20]20. Real power comes from within. All 

[p. 101]

power that anybody can possibly use is within man, only waiting to be brought into visibility by his first recognizing it, and then affirming it as his, working it into his consciousness until he becomes one with it.

[VIII:21]21. People say that they desire abundant life, and so they do, but so many interpret this to mean that if they will exercise their muscles or breathe scientifically, eat certain foods in certain ways, drink so many glasses of water every day, of just a certain temperature, keep out of draughts, they will attain the abundant life they seek. The result of such methods is but indifferent. However, when man awakens to the truth, and affirms his oneness with all Life, he finds that he takes on the clear eye, the elastic step, the vigour of youth; he finds that he has discovered the source of all power.

[VIII:22]22. All mistakes are but the mistakes of ignorance. Knowledge gaining and consequent power is what determines growth and evolution. The recognition and demonstration of knowledge is what constitutes power, and this power is spiritual power, and this spiritual power is the power which lies at the heart of all things; it is the soul of the universe.

[VIII:23]23. This knowledge is the result of man's ability to think; thought is therefore the germ of man's conscious evolution. When man ceases to advance in his thoughts and ideals, his forces immediately begin to disintegrate

[p. 102]

and his countenance gradually registers these changing conditions.

[VIII:24]24. Successful men make it their business to hold ideals of the conditions which they wish to realize. They constantly hold in mind the next step necessary to the ideal for which they are striving. Thoughts are the materials with which they build, and the imagination is their mental work-shop. Mind is the ever moving force with which they secure the persons and circumstances necessary to build their success structure, and imagination is the matrix in which all great things are fashioned.

[VIII:25]25. If you have been faithful to your ideal, you will hear the call when circumstances are ready to materialize your plans and results will correspond in the exact ratio of your fidelity to your ideal. The ideal steadily held is what pre-determines and attracts the necessary conditions for its fulfilment.

[VIII:26]26. It is thus that you may weave a garment of spirit and power into the web of your entire existence; it is thus that you may lead a charmed life and be for ever protected from all harm; it is thus that you may become a positive force whereby conditions of opulence and harmony may be attracted to you.

[VIII:27]27. This is the leaven which is gradually permeating the general consciousness and is largely responsible for the conditions of unrest which are everywhere evident.

[p. 103]

[VIII:28]28. In your last exercise you created a mental image, you brought it from the invisible into the visible; now I want you to take an object and follow it back to its origination, see of what it really consists. If you do this you will develop imagination, insight, perception, and sagacity. These come not by the superficial observation of the multitude, but by a keen analytical observation which sees below the surface.

[VIII:29]29. It is the few who know that the things which they see are only effects, and understand the causes by which these effects were brought into existence.

[VIII:30]30. Take the same position as heretofore and visualize a Battleship; see the grim monster floating on the surface of the water; there appears to be no life anywhere about; all is silence; you know that by far the largest part of the vessel is under water; out of sight; you know that the ship is as large and as heavy as a twenty-story skyscraper or the National Gallery; you know that there are hundreds of men ready to spring to their appointed task instantly; you know that every department is in charge of able, trained, skilled officers who have proven themselves competent to take charge of this marvellous piece of mechanism; you know that although it lies apparently oblivious to everything else, it has eyes which see everything for miles around, and nothing is permitted to escape its watchful vision;

[p. 104]

you know that while it appears quiet, submissive and innocent, it is prepared to hurl a steel projectile weighing thousands of pounds at an enemy many miles away; this and much more you can bring to mind with comparatively no effort whatever. But how did the battleship come to be where it is; how did it come into existence in the first place? All of this you want to know if you are a careful observer.

[VIII:31]31. Follow the great steel plates through the foundries, see the thousands of men employed in their production; go still further back, and see the ore as it comes from the mine, see it loaded on barges or trucks, see it melted and properly treated; go back still further and see the architect and engineers who planned the vessel; let the thought carry you back still further in order to determine why they planned the vessel; you will see that you are now so far back that the vessel is something intangible, it no longer exists, it is now only a thought existing in the brain of the architect; but from where did the order come to plan the vessel? Probably from the Secretary of War or the First Lord of the Admiralty; probably this vessel was planned long before war was thought of, and Parliament or Congress had to pass a bill appropriating the money; possibly there was opposition, and speeches for or against the bill. Whom do these Members of Parliament or these Congressmen represent? They represent you and me,

[p. 105]

so that our line of thought begins with the Battleship and ends with ourselves, and we find in the last analysis that our own thought is responsible for this and many other things, of which we seldom think, and a little further reflection will develop the most important fact of all, and that is, if someone had not discovered the law by which this tremendous mass of steel and iron could be made to float upon the water, instead of immediately going to the bottom, the battleship could not have come into existence at all.

[VIII:32]32. This law is that, "the specific gravity of any substance is the weight of any volume of it, compared with an equal volume of water." The discovery of this law revolutionized every kind of ocean travel, commerce and warfare, and made the existence of the battleship possible.

[VIII:33]33. You will find exercises of this kind invaluable. When the thought has been trained to look below the surface everything takes on a different appearance, the insignificant becomes significant, the uninteresting interesting; the things which we supposed to be of no importance are seen to be the only really vital things in existence.

[p. 106]

  

PART EIGHT

71. What is the imagination?

A form of constructive thought. The light by which we penetrate new worlds of thought and experience. The mighty instrument by which every inventor or discoverer opened the way from precedent to experience.

72. What is the result of imagination?

The cultivation of the imagination leads to the development of the ideal out of which your future will emerge.

73. How may it be cultivated?

By exercise; it must be supplied with nourishment or it cannot live.

74. How does imagination differ from day dreaming?

Day dreaming is a form of mental dissipation, while imagination is a form of constructive thought which must precede every constructive action.

75. What are mistakes?

The result of ignorance.

76. What is knowledge?

The result of a man's ability to think.

77. What is the Power with which successful men build?

Mind is the ever moving force with which

[p. 107]

they secure the persons and circumstances necessary to complete their plans.

78. What pre-determines the result?

The ideal held steadily in mind attracts the necessary conditions for its fulfilment.

79. What is the result of a keen analytical observation?

The development of imagination, insight, perception and sagacity.

80. To what do these lead?

Opulence and harmony.

 

 

 

 

     LOOK TO THIS DAY.
 
 For it is Life, the very Life of Life.
 In Its brief course lie all the Verities and
     Realities of your existence;
         The Bliss of Growth;
         The Glory of Action;
         The Splendour of Beauty;
 For Yesterday is but a Dream,
     And To-morrow is only a Vision;
         But To-day well lived makes every
 Yesterday a Dream of Happiness, and
 Every To-morrow a Vision of Hope.
     Look well, therefore, to This Day
       --From the Sanscrit.

[p. 108]

          ADVICE

Remember--
   Fully to understand grand and beautiful thought requires, perhaps, as much time   as to conceive it.   JOUBERT

If you wish to enjoy the utmost practical benefit from "The Master   Key"--go slowly.

Transfuse into your mind the contents of one part only, each week for   twenty-four weeks.

Realize the meaning of every phrase.

Consult "The Master Key" constantly, as your perpetual help and   stimulus.

Each time you read the work you will get a better understanding of the   eternal cosmic principles.

Tell others of "The Master Key" so that more and more people may   reciprocate with you, as conscious adepts in harmony.

The   Publishers

     
   
     
The Master Key System, by Charles F. Haanel, [1919], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 109]

  

PART NINE

THIS Part tells of the fundamental principle, the imperative condition, the immutable law underlying every successful business relation or social condition. It tells of the law by which you may make yourself irresistible, by which you may sweep away every form of discord, inharmony and doubt. It tells the secret of the solution to every problem. It explains that there are only three things which all mankind requires for complete happiness and development. It tells what they are and how they may be had.

[p. 110]

  

INTRODUCTION. PART NINE

In this Part you may learn to fashion the tools by which you may build for yourself any condition you desire.

If you wish to change conditions, you must change yourself. Your whims, your wishes, your fancies, your ambitions may be thwarted at every step, but your inmost thoughts will find expression just as certainly as the plant springs from the seed.

Suppose, then, we desire to change conditions, how are we to bring this about? The reply is simple: By the law of growth. Cause and effect are as absolute and undeviating in the hidden realm of thought as in the world of material things.

Hold in mind the condition desired; affirm it as an already existing fact. This indicates the value of a powerful affirmation. By constant repetition it becomes a part of ourselves. We are actually changing ourselves; we are making ourselves what we want to be.

Character is not a thing of chance, but it is the result of continued effort. If you are timid, vacillating, self-conscious, or if you are over-anxious or harrassed by thoughts of fear or impending danger, remember that it is axiomatic that "two things cannot exist in the same place at the same time." Exactly the same thing is true in the mental and spiritual world; so that your remedy is plainly to substitute thoughts of courage, power, self-reliance and confidence, for those of fear, lack and limitation.

The easiest and most natural way to do this is to select an affirmation which seems to fit your particular case. The positive thought will destroy the negative as certainly as light destroys darkness, and the results will be just as effectual.

Act is the blossom of thought, and conditions are the result of action, so that you constantly have in your possession the tools by which you will certainly and inevitably make or unmake yourself, and joy or suffering will be the reward.

[p. 111]

  

PART NINE

[IX:1]1. There are only three things which can possibly be desired in the "world without" and each of them can be found in the "world within." The secret of finding them is simply to apply the proper "mechanism of attachment to the omnipotent power to which each individual has access.

[IX:2]2. The three things which all mankind desires and which are necessary for his highest expression and complete development are Health, Wealth and Love. All will admit that Health is absolutely essential; no one can be happy if the physical body is in pain. All will not so readily admit that Wealth is necessary, but all must admit that a sufficient supply at least is necessary, and what would be considered sufficient for one, would be considered absolute and painful lack for another; and as Nature provides not only enough but abundantly, wastefully, lavishly, we realize that any lack or limitation is only the limitation which has been made by an artificial method of distribution.

[IX:3]3. All will probably admit that Love is the third, or some will say the first, essential necessary to the happiness of mankind; at any rate, those who possess all three, Health, Wealth and Love, find nothing else which can be added to their cup of happiness.

[IX:4]4. We have found that the Universal substance is "All Health," "All Substance" and

[p. 112]

[paragraph continues] "All Love" and that the mechanism of attachment whereby we can consciously connect with this Infinite supply is in our method of thinking. To think correctly is therefore to enter into the "Secret Place of the Most High."

[IX:5]5. What shall we think? If we know this we shall have found the proper mechanism of attachment which will relate us to "Whatsoever things we desire." This mechanism may seem very simple when I give it to you, but read on; you will find that it is in reality the "Master-Key," the "Aladdin's lamp," if you please; you will find that it is the foundation, the imperative condition, the absolute law of well-doing, which means, well-being.

[IX:6]6. To think correctly, accurately, we must know the "Truth." The truth then is the underlying principle in every business or social relation. It is a condition precedent to every right action. To know the truth, to be sure, to be confident, affords a satisfaction beside which no other is at all comparable; it is the only solid ground in a world of doubt, conflict and danger.

[IX:7]7. To know the Truth is to be in harmony with the Infinite and Omnipotent power. To know the truth is, therefore, to connect yourself with a power which is irresistible and which will sweep away every kind of discord, inharmony, doubt or error, because the "Truth is mighty and will prevail."

[p. 113]

[IX:8]8. The humblest intellect can readily foretell the result of any action when he knows that it is based on truth, but the mightiest intellect, the most profound and penetrating mind loses its way hopelessly and can form no conception of the results which may ensue when his hopes are based on a premise which he knows to be false.

[IX:9]9. Every action which is not in harmony with Truth, whether through ignorance or design, will result in discord, and eventual loss in proportion to its extent and character.

[IX:10]10. How then are we to know the truth in order to attach this mechanism which will relate us to the Infinite?

[IX:11]11. We can make no mistake about this if we realize that Truth is the vital principle of the Universal Mind and is Omnipresent. For instance, if you require health, a realization of the fact that the "I" in you is spiritual and that all spirit is one; that wherever a part is the whole must be, will bring about a condition of health, because every cell in the body must manifest the truth as you see it. If you see sickness they will manifest sickness; if you see perfection they must manifest perfection. The affirmation, "I am whole, perfect, strong, powerful, loving, harmonious and happy," will bring about harmonious conditions. The reason for this is because the affirmation is in strict accordance with the Truth, and when truth

[p. 114]

appears every form of error or discord must necessarily disappear.

[IX:12]12. You have found that the "I" is spiritual, it must necessarily then always be no less than perfect. The affirmation. "I am whole, perfect, strong, powerful, loving, harmonious and happy" is therefore an exact scientific statement.

[IX:13]13. Thought is a spiritual activity and spirit is creative, therefore the result of holding this thought in mind, must necessarily bring about conditions in harmony with the thought.

[IX:14]14. If you require Wealth a realization of the fact that the "I" in you is one with the Universal mind which is all substance, and is Omnipotent, will assist you in bringing into operation the law of attraction which will bring you into vibration with those forces which make for success and bring about conditions of power and affluence in direct proportion with the character and purpose of your affirmation.

[IX:15]15. Visualization is the mechanism of the attachment which you require. Visualization is a very different process from seeing; seeing is physical, and is therefore related to the objective world, the "world without," but Visualization is a product of the imagination, and is therefore a product of the subjective mind, the "world within." It therefore possesses vitality; it will grow. The thing visualized will manifest itself in form. The mechanism

[p. 115]

is perfect; it was created by the Master Architect who "doeth all things well," but unfortunately sometimes the operator is inexperienced or inefficient, but practice and determination will overcome this defect.

[IX:16]16. If you require Love try to realize that the only way to get love is by giving it, that the more you give the more you will get, and the only way in which you can give it, is to fill yourself with it, until you become a magnet. The method was explained in another Part.

[IX:17]17. He who has learned to bring the greatest spiritual truths into touch with the so-called lesser things of life has discovered the secret of the solution of his problem. One is always quickened, made more thoughtful, by his nearness of approach to great ideas, great events, great natural objects, and great men. Lincoln is said to have begotten in all who came near him the feeling awakened when one approaches a mountain, and this sense asserts itself most keenly when one comes to realize that he understands the things that are eternal, including the power of Truth.

[IX:18]18. It is sometimes an inspiration to hear from some one who has actually put these principles to the test, some one who has demonstrated them in his own life. I am to-day in receipt of a letter from a Mr. Andrews; he says:

[p. 116]

"Dear Friend:

You will find my experience published in the March issue of 'Nautilus,' and you are at liberty to make any extracts from or reference to it that may suit your purpose.

Sincerely yours,        
 Frederick Andrews,      
 Oddfellows Building,    
 Indianapolis, Ind."  

[IX:19]19. "I was about thirteen years old when Dr. T. W. Marsee, since passed over, said to my mother: 'There is no possible chance, Mrs. Andrews. I lost my little boy the same way, after doing everything for him that it was possible to do. I have made a special study of these cases, and I know there is no possible chance for him to get well.'

[IX:20]20. "She turned to him and said: 'Doctor, what would you do if he were your boy?' and he answered, 'I would fight, fight, as long as there is a breath of life to fight for.'

[IX:21]21. "That was the beginning of a long drawn-out battle, with many ups and downs, the doctors all agreeing that there was no chance for a cure, though they encouraged and cheered us the best they could.

[IX:22]22. "But at last the victory came, and I have grown from a little, crooked, twisted cripple, going about on my hands and knees, to a strong, straight, well formed man.

[p. 117]

[IX:23]23. "Now, I know you want the formula, and I will give it to you as briefly and quickly as I can.

[IX:24]24. "I built up an affirmation for myself, taking the qualities I most needed, and affirming for myself over and over again, 'I am whole, perfect, strong, powerful, loving, harmonious and happy.' I kept up this affirmation, always the same, never varying, till I could wake up in the night and find myself repeating, 'I am whole, perfect, strong, powerful, loving, harmonious and happy.' It was the last thing on my lips at night and the first thing in the morning.

[IX:25]25. "Not only did I affirm it for myself, but for others that I knew needed it. I want to emphasize this point. Whatever you desire for yourself, affirm it for others, and it will help you both. We reap what we sow. If we send out thoughts of love and health, they return to us like bread cast upon the waters; but if we send out thoughts of fear, worry, jealousy, anger, hate, etc., we will reap the results in our own lives.

[IX:26]26. "It used to be said that man is built completely anew every seven years, but some scientists now declare that we build ourselves entirely over again every eleven months so we are really only eleven months old. if we build the defects back into our bodies year after year, we have no one to blame but ourselves.

[p. 118]

[IX:27]27. "Man is the sum total of his own thoughts; so the question is, how are we going to entertain only the good thoughts and reject the evil ones? At first we can't keep the evil thoughts from coming, but we can keep from entertaining them. The only way to do this is to forget them which means, get something for them. This is where the ready-made affirmation comes in.

[IX:28]28. "When a thought of anger, jealousy, fear or worry creeps in, just start your affirmation going. The way to fight darkness is with light--the only way to fight cold is with heat--the way to overcome evil is with good. For myself, I never could find any help in denials. Affirm the good, and the bad will vanish.

Frederick Andrews."

[IX:29]29. If there is anything you require, it will be well for you to make use of this affirmation; it cannot be improved upon. Use it just as it is; take it into the silence with you, until it sinks into your sub-consciousness, so that you can use it anywhere, in your car, on the tram, in the office, at home; this is the advantage of spiritual methods; they are always available. Spirit is omnipresent, ever ready; all that is required is a proper recognition of its omnipotence, and a willingness or desire to become the recipient of its beneficent effects.

[IX:30]30. If our predominant mental attitude is one of power, courage, kindliness and sympathy, we

[p. 119]

shall find that our environment will reflect conditions in correspondence with these thoughts; if it is weak, critical, envious and destructive, we shall find our environment reflecting conditions corresponding to these thoughts.

[IX:31]31. Thoughts are causes and conditions are effects. Herein is the explanation of the origin of both good and evil. Thought is creative and will automatically correlate with its object. This is a Cosmological law, the law of Attraction, the law of Cause and Effect; the recognition and application of this law will determine both beginning and end; it is the law by which in all ages and in all times the people were led to believe in the power of prayer. "As thy faith is, so be it unto thee," is simply another, a shorter and a better way of stating it.

[IX:32]32. Your next exercise is to visualize a plant; take a flower, the one you most admire, bring it from the unseen into the seen, plant the tiny seed, water it, care for it, place it where it will get the direct rays of the morning sun, see the seed burst; it is now a living thing, something which is alive and beginning to search for the means of subsistence. See the roots penetrating the earth, watch them shoot out in all directions and remember that they are living cells dividing and subdividing, and that they will soon number millions, that each cell is intelligent, that it knows what it wants and knows how to get it. See the stem shoot forward and upward, watch it burst through the surface of the earth, see it

[p. 120]

divide and form branches, see how perfect and symmetrical each branch is formed, see the leaves begin to form, and then the tiny stems, each one holding aloft a bud, and as you watch you see the bud begin to unfold and your favourite flower comes to view; and now if you will concentrate intently you will become conscious of a fragrance; it is the fragrance of the flower as the breeze gently sways the beautiful creation which you have visualized.

[IX:33]33. When you are enabled to make your vision clear and complete you will be enabled to enter into the spirit of a thing; it will become very real to you; you will be learning to concentrate and the process is the same, whether you are concentrating on health, a favourite flower, an ideal, a complicated business proposition or any other problem of life.

[IX:34]34. Every success has been accomplished by persistent concentration upon the object in view.

 

 

 

In the end, thought rules the world. There are times when impulses and passions are more powerful, but they soon expend themselves; while mind, acting constantly, is ever ready to drive them back and work when their energy is exhausted.--J. McCosh.

[p. 121]

  

PART NINE

81. What is the imperative condition of all well-being?

Well doing.

82. What is the condition precedent to every right action?

Right thinking.

83. What is the underlying condition necessary in every business transaction or social relation?

To know the Truth

84. What is the result of a knowledge of the Truth?

We can readily foretell the result of any action that is based upon a true premise.

85. What is the result of any action based upon a false premise?

We can form no conception of the results which may ensue.

86. How may we know the Truth?

By a realization of the fact that Truth is the vital principle of the Universe and is therefore omnipresent.

87. What is the nature of Truth?

It is spiritual.

[p. 122]

88. What is the secret of the solution to every problem?

To apply spiritual Truth.

89. What is the advantage of spiritual methods?

They are always available,

90. What are the necessary requirements?

A recognition of the omnipotence of spiritual power and a desire to become the recipient of its beneficent effects.

 

 

 

Thought means life, since those who do not think do not live in any high or real sense. Thinking makes the man.--A. B. Alcott.

     
The Master Key System, by Charles F. Haanel, [1919], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 123]

  

PART TEN

THIS Part tells of the Law of Abundance. It shows that Nature has provided an abundance for all, and why some seem to be separated from this supply. It tells of a connecting link between the individual and the supply, explains the Law of Attraction, the law by which your "own" is brought to you. It tells why every experience in life is the result of this law. It tells why and how you attract the things to you which make up the sum total of your existence. It tells how you may place yourself in harmony with this law and thereby assist in bringing about desirable conditions in your health, environment, or finances. It shows that this Law of Attraction is fundamental and eternal and that there is no escape from the result of its operation. A knowledge of this Law is absolutely essential to those desiring to make permanent progress.

[p. 124]

  

INTRODUCTION. PART TEN

If you get a thorough understanding of the thought contained in Part Ten, you will have learned that nothing happens without a definite cause. You will be enabled to formulate your plans in accordance with exact knowledge. You will know how to control any situation by bringing adequate causes into play. When you win, as you will, you will know exactly why.

The ordinary man, who has no definite knowledge of cause and effect, is governed by his feelings or emotions. He thinks chiefly to justify his action. If he fails as a business man, he says that luck is against him. If he dislikes music, he says that music is an expensive luxury. If he is a poor clerk, he says that he could succeed better at some outdoor work. If he lacks friends, he says his individuality is too fine to be appreciated.

He never thinks this problem through to the end. In short, he does not know that every effect is the result of a certain definite cause, but he seeks to console himself with explanations and excuses. He thinks only in self-defence.

On the contrary, the man who understands that there is no effect without an adequate cause thinks impersonally. He gets down to absolute facts regardless of consequences. He is free to follow the path of truth wherever it may lead. He sees the issue clear to the end, and he meets the requirements fully and fairly, and the result is that the world gives him all that it has to give, in friendship, honour, love and approval.

[p. 125]

  

PART TEN

[X:1]1. Abundance is a natural law of the Universe. The evidence of this law is conclusive; we see it on every hand. Everywhere Nature is lavish, wasteful, extravagant. Nowhere is economy observed in any created thing. Profusion is manifested in everything. The millions and millions of trees and flowers and plants and animals and the vast scheme of reproduction where the process of creating and recreating is for ever going on, all indicate the lavishness with which Nature has made provision for man. That there is an abundance for everyone is evident, but that many fail to participate in this abundance is evident; they have not yet come into a realization of the Universality of all substance, and that mind is the active principle whereby we are related to the things we desire.

[X:2]2. All wealth is the offspring of power; possessions are of value only as they confer power. Events are significant only as they affect power; all things represent certain forms and degrees of power.

[X:3]3. Knowledge of cause and effect as shown by the laws governing electricity, chemical affinity and gravitation, enables man to plan courageously and execute fearlessly. These laws are called Natural Laws, because they govern in the physical world, but all power is not physical power; there is also mental power, and there is moral and spiritual power.

[p. 126]

[X:4]4. Spiritual power is superior because it exists on a higher plane. It has enabled man to discover the law by which these wonderful forces of Nature could be harnessed and made to do the work of hundreds and thousands of men. It has enabled man to discover laws whereby time and space have been annihilated and now apparently the law of gravitation is to be overcome.

The operation of this law is dependent upon spiritual contact, as Henry Drummond well says:

[X:5]5. "In the physical world as we know it, there exists the organic and the inorganic. The inorganic or the mineral world is absolutely cut off from the plant or animal world; the passage is hermetically sealed. These barriers have never yet been crossed. No change of substance, no modification of environment, no chemistry, no electricity, no form of energy, no evolution of any kind can ever endow a single atom of the mineral world with the attribute of Life.

[X:6]6. "Only by the bending down into this dead world of some living form can those dead atoms be gifted with the properties of vitality; without this contact with life they remain fixed in the inorganic sphere for ever. Huxley says that the doctrine of Biogenesis or life only from life is victorious all along the line, and Tyndall is compelled to say: 'I affirm that no shred of trustworthy evidence exists to prove that life

[p. 127]

in our day has ever appeared independent of antecedent life.'

[X:7]7. "Physical laws may explain the inorganic, Biology explains and accounts for the development of the organic, but of the point of contact Science is silent. A similar passage exists between the Natural world and the Spiritual world; this passage is hermetically sealed on the natural side. The door is closed; no man can open it, no organic change, no mental energy, no moral effort, no progress of any kind can enable any human being to enter the spiritual world."

[X:8]8. But as the plant reaches down into the mineral world and touches it with the mystery of Life, so the Universal Mind reaches down into the human mind and endows it with new, strange, wonderful and even marvellous qualities. All men or women who have ever accomplished anything in the world of industry, commerce or art have accomplished because of this process.

[X:9]9. Thought is the connecting link between the Infinite and the finite, between the Universal and the individual. We have seen that there is an impassable barrier between the organic and the inorganic, and that the only way that matter can unfold is to be impregnated with life; as a seed reaches down into the mineral world and begins to unfold and reach out, the dead matter begins to live, a thousand invisible

[p. 128]

fingers begin to weave a suitable environment for the new arrival, and as the law of growth begins to take effect, we see the process continue until the Lily finally appears, and even "Solomon in all his glory was not arrayed like one of these."

[X:10]10. Even so, a thought is dropped into the invisible substance of the Universal Mind, that substance from which all things are created, and as it takes root, the law of growth begins to take effect and we find that conditions and environment are but the objective form of our thought.

[X:11]11. The law is that Thought is an active vital form of dynamic energy which has the power to correlate with its object and bring it out of the invisible substance from which all things are created into the visible or objective world. This is the law by which, and through which, all things come into manifestation; it is the Master Key by which you are admitted into the Secret Place of the Most High and are "given dominion over all things." With an understanding of this law you may "decree a thing and it shall be established unto thee."

[X:12]12. It could not be otherwise; if the soul of the Universe as we know it, is the Universal Spirit, then the Universe is simply the condition which the Universal Spirit has made for itself. We are simply individualized spirit and are creating the conditions for our growth in exactly the same way.

[p. 129]

[X:13]13. This creative power depends upon our recognition of the potential power of spirit or mind and must not be confused with Evolution. Creation is the calling into existence of that which does not exist in the objective world. Evolution is simply the unfolding of potentialities involved in things which already exist.

[X:14]14. In taking advantage of the wonderful possibilities opened up to us through the operation of this law, we must remember that we ourselves contribute nothing to its efficacy as the Great Teacher said: "It is not I that doeth the works, but the Father that dwelleth in me, He doeth the work." We must take exactly the same position; we can do nothing to assist in the manifestation, we simply comply with the law, and the All-originating Mind will bring about the result.

[X:15]15. The great error of the present day is the idea that Man has to originate the intelligence whereby the Infinite can proceed to bring about a specific purpose or result. Nothing of this kind is necessary; the Universal Mind can be depended upon to find the ways and means for bringing about any necessary manifestation. We must, however, create the ideal, and this ideal should be perfect.

[X:16]16. We know that the laws governing Electricity have been formulated in such a way that this invisible power can be controlled and used for our benefit and comfort in thousands

[p. 130]

of ways. We know that messages are carried around the world, that ponderous machinery does its bidding, that it now illuminates practically the whole world, but we know, too, that if we consciously or ignorantly violate its law by touching a live wire, when it is not properly insulated, the result will be unpleasant and possibly disastrous. A lack of understanding of the laws governing in the invisible world has the same result, and many are suffering the consequences all the time.

[X:17]17. It has been explained that the law of causation depends upon polarity, a circuit must be formed; this circuit cannot be formed unless we operate in harmony with the law. How shall we operate in harmony with the law unless we know what the law is? How shall we know what the Law is? By study, by observation.

[X:18]18. We see the law in operation everywhere; all nature testifies to the operation of the law by silently, constantly expressing itself in the law of growth. Where there is growth, there must be life; where there is life there must be harmony, so that everything that has life is constantly attracting to itself the conditions and the supply which are necessary for its most complete expression.

[X:19]19. If your thought is in harmony with the creative Principle of nature, it is in tune with the Infinite Mind, and it will form the circuit, it will not return to you void; but it

[p. 131]

is possible for you to think thoughts that are not in tune with the Infinite, and there is no polarity, the circuit is not formed. What, then, is the result? What is the result when a dynamo is generating electricity? The circuit is cut off and there is no outlet. The dynamo stops.

[X:20]20. It will be exactly the same with you, if you entertain thoughts which are not in accordance with the Infinite and cannot therefore be polarized; there is no circuit, you are isolated, the thoughts cling to you, harass you, worry you, and finally bring about disease and possibly death; the physician may not diagnose the case exactly in this way, he may give it some fancy name which has been manufactured for the various ills which are the result of wrong thinking, but the cause is the same nevertheless.

[X:21]21. Constructive thought must necessarily be creative, but creative thought must be harmonious, and this eliminates all destructive or competitive thought.

[X:22]22. Wisdom, strength, courage and all harmonious conditions are the result of power and we have seen that all power is from within; likewise, every lack, limitation or adverse circumstance is the result of weakness, and weakness is simply absence of power; it comes from nowhere, it is nothing--the remedy then is simply to develop power, and this is accomplished in exactly the same manner that all power is developed--by exercise.

[p. 132]

[X:23]23. This exercise consists in making an application of your knowledge. Knowledge will not apply itself. You must make the application. Abundance will not come to you out of the sky, neither will it drop into your lap, but a conscious realization of the law of attraction and the intention to bring it into operation for a certain, definite and specific purpose, and the will to carry out this purpose will bring about the materialization of your desire by a natural law of transference. If you are in business, it will increase and develop along regular channels, possibly new or unusual channels of distribution will be opened and when the law becomes fully operative you will find that the things you seek are seeking you.

[X:24]24. For your next exercise select a blank space on the wall, or any other convenient spot, from where you usually sit, mentally draw a black horizontal line about six inches long, try to see the line as plainly as though it were painted on the wall; now mentally draw two vertical lines connecting with this horizontal line at either end; now draw another horizontal line connecting with the two vertical lines; now you have a square. Try to see the square perfectly; when you can do so draw a circle within the square; now place a point in the centre of the circle; now draw the point towards you about ten inches; now you have a cone on a square base; you will remember that your work was

[p. 133]

all in black; change it to white, to red, to yellow.

[X:25]25. If you can do this, you are making excellent progress and will soon be enabled to concentrate on any problem you may have in mind.

 

 

 

When any object or purpose is clearly held in thought, its precipitation, in tangible and visible form, is merely a question of time. The vision always precedes and itself determines the realization.--Lillian Whiting.

[p. 134]

  

PART TEN

91. What is Wealth?

Wealth is the offspring of power.

92. Of what value are possessions?

Possessions are of value only as they confer power.

93. Of what value is a knowledge of cause and effect?

It enables men to plan courageously and execute fearlessly.

94. How does life originate in the inorganic world?

Only by the introduction of some living form. There is no other way.

95. What is the connecting link between the finite and the Infinite?

Thought is the connecting link.

96. Why is that so?

Because the Universal can manifest only through the individual.

97. Upon what does causation depend?

Upon polarity; a circuit must be formed; the Universal is the positive side of the battery of life, the individual is the negative, and thought forms the circuit.

[p. 135]

98. Why do many fail to secure harmonious conditions?

They do not understand the law; there is no polarity; they have not formed the circuit.

99. What is the remedy?

A conscious recognition of the law of attraction with the intention of bringing it into existence for a definite purpose.

100. What will be the result?

Thought will correlate with its object and bring it into manifestation, because thought is a product of the spiritual man, and spirit is the creative Principle of the Universe.

 

 

 

A vivid thought brings the power to paint it; and in proportion to the depths of its source is the force of its projection.--Emerson.

[p. 136]

          ADVICE

Remember--
   Fully to understand grand and beautiful thought requires, perhaps, as much   time as to conceive it. JOUBERT

If you wish to enjoy the utmost practical benefit from "The Master   Key"--go slowly.

Transfuse into your mind the contents of one part only, each week for   twenty-four weeks.

Realize the meaning of every phrase.

Consult "The Master Key" constantly, as your perpetual help and   stimulus.

Each time you read the work you will get a better understanding of the   eternal cosmic principles.

Tell others of "The Master Key" so that more and more people may   reciprocate with you, as conscious adepts in harmony.

The   Publishers

     
   
     
The Master Key System, by Charles F. Haanel, [1919], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 137]

  

PART ELEVEN

THIS Part tells of the means by which we have discovered that the infinitely small as well as the infinitely large is in the last analysis nothing but force, motion, life and mind. It tells of the process by which we have become familiar with the vast organization by which we are identified with the complex operations of Nature. It gives concise directions for making use of the creative power of the Universe, the power by which all things are brought into existence. It shows how this marvellous power may be utilized, directed and made available for the solution of every human problem.

[p. 138]

  

INTRODUCTION. PART ELEVEN

Your life is governed by law, by actual, immutable principles that never vary. Law is in operation at all times; in all places.

Fixed laws underlie all human actions. For this reason, men who control giant industries are enabled to determine with absolute precision just what percentage of every hundred thousand people will respond to any given set of conditions.

It is well, however, to remember that while every effect is the result of a cause, the effect in turn becomes a cause, which creates other effects, which in turn create still other causes; so that when you put the law of attraction into operation you must remember that you are starting a train of causation for good or otherwise which may have endless possibilities.

We frequently hear it said, "A very distressing situation came into my life, which could not have been the result of my thought, as I certainly never entertained any thought which could have such a result." We fail to remember that like attracts like in the mental world, and that the thought which we entertain brings to us certain friendships, companionships of a particular kind, and these in turn bring about conditions and environment, which in turn are responsible for the conditions of which we complain.

[p. 139]

  

PART ELEVEN

[XI:1]1. Inductive reasoning is the process of the objective mind by which we compare a number of separate instances with one another until we see the common factor that gives rise to them all.

[XI:2]2. Induction proceeds by comparison of facts; it is this method of studying nature which has resulted in the discovery of a reign of law which has marked an epoch in human progress.

[XI:3]3. It is the dividing line between superstition and intelligence; it has eliminated the elements of uncertainty and caprice from men's lives and substituted law, reason and certitude.

[XI:4]4. It is the "Watchman at the Gate" mentioned in a former Part.

[XI:5]5. When, by virtue of this principle, the world to which the senses were accustomed, has been revolutionized; when the sun has been arrested in his course, the apparently flat earth has been shaped into a ball and set whirling around him; when the inert matter has been resolved into active elements, and the universe presents itself wherever we direct the telescope and microscope, full of force, motion and life; we are constrained to ask by what possible means the delicate forms of organization in the midst of it are kept in order and repair.

[XI:6]6. Like poles and like forces repel themselves or remain impenetrable to each other, and

[p. 140]

this cause seems in general sufficient to assign a proper place and distance to stars, men and forces. As men of different virtues enter into partnership, so do opposite poles attract each other; elements that have no property in common like acids and gases cling to each other in preference and a general exchange is kept up between the surplus and the demand.

[XI:7]7. As the eye seeks and receives satisfaction from colours complementary to those which are given, so do need, want and desire, in the largest sense, induce, guide and determine action.

[XI:8]8. It is our privilege to become conscious of the principle and act in accordance with it. Cuvier sees a tooth belonging to an extinct race of animals. This tooth wants a body for the performance of its function, and it defines the peculiar body it stands in need of with such precision that Cuvier is able to reconstruct the frame of this animal.

[XI:9]9. Perturbations are observed in the motions of Uranus. Adams and Leverrier need another star at a certain place to keep the solar system in order, and Neptune appears in the place and at the hour appointed.

[XI:10]10. The instinctive wants of the animal and the intellectual wants of Cuvier; the wants of nature and of the minds of Leverrier and Adams were alike, and thus the results; here the

[p. 141]

thoughts of an existence, there an existence. A well-defined lawful want, therefore, furnishes the reason for the more complex operations of nature.

[XI:11]11. Having recorded correctly the answers furnished by nature and stretched our senses with the growing science over her surface; having joined hands with the levers that move the earth; we become conscious of such a close, varied and deep contact with the world without, that our wants and purposes become no less identified with the harmonious operations of this vast organization, than the life, liberty and happiness of the citizen are identified with the existence of his government.

[XI:12]12. As the interests of the individual are protected by the arms of the country, added to his own; and his needs produce certain supply in the degree that they are felt more universally and steadily; in the same manner does conscious citizenship in the Kingdom of nature secure us from the annoyances of subordinate agents by our alliance with superior powers; and by our conformity with the fundamental laws of resistance or inducement offered to mechanical or chemical agents, we distribute the labour to be performed between them and man to the best advantage of inventor and user.

[XI:13]13. If Plato could have witnessed the pictures executed by the sun with the assistance of the photographer, or a hundred similar illustrations

[p. 142]

of what man does by induction, he would perhaps have been reminded of the intellectual midwifery of his master and, in his own mind might have arisen the vision of a land where all manual, mechanical labour and repetition is assigned to the power of nature, where our wants are satisfied by purely mental operations set in motion by the will, and where the supply is created by the demand.

[XI:14]14. However distant that land may appear, induction has taught men to make strides towards it and has surrounded him with benefits which are, at the same time, rewards for past fidelity and incentives for more assiduous devotion.

[XI:15]15. Induction is also an aid in concentrating and strengthening our faculties for the remainder of the journey, giving unerring solution for individual as well as universal problems, by the mere operations of mind in the purest form.

[XI:16]16. Here we find a method, the spirit of which is, to believe that what is sought has been accomplished, in order to accomplish it: a method, bequeathed upon us by the same Plato who, outside of this sphere, could never find how the ideas became realities.

[XI:17]17. This conception is also elaborated by Swedenborg in his doctrine of correspondences. And a still greater teacher has said, "What things soever ye desire, when ye pray, believe that ye

[p. 143]

receive them, and ye shall have them." (Mark xi. 24 R.V.) The differences of the tenses in this passage is remarkable.

[XI:18]18. We are first to believe that our desire has already been fulfilled, its accomplishment will then follow. This is a concise direction for making use of the creative power of thought by impressing on the Universal subjective mind the particular thing which we desire as an already existing fact.

[XI:19]19. We are thus thinking on the plane of the absolute and eliminating all consideration of conditions or limitation and are planting a seed which, if left undisturbed, will finally germinate into external fruition.

[XI:20]20. To review: Inductive reasoning is the process of the objective mind, by which we compare a number of separate instances with one another until we see the common factor that gives rise to them all. We see people in every civilized country on the globe, securing results by some process which they do not seem to understand themselves, and to which they usually attach more or less mystery. Our reason is given to us for the purpose of ascertaining the law by which these results are accomplished.

[XI:21]21. The operation of this thought process is seen in those fortunate natures that possess everything that others must acquire by toil,

[p. 144]

who never have a struggle with conscience because they always act correctly, and can never comport themselves otherwise than with tact, learn everything easily, complete everything they begin with a happy knack, live in eternal harmony with themselves, without ever reflecting much what they do, or ever experiencing difficulty or toil.

[XI:22]22. The fruit of this thought is, as it were, a gift of the gods, but a gift which few as yet realize, appreciate, or understand. The recognition of the marvellous power which is possessed by the mind under proper conditions and the fact that this power can be utilized, directed, and made available for the solution of every human problem is of transcendental importance.

[XI:23]23. All truth is the same, whether stated in modern scientific terms or in the language of apostolic times. There are timid souls who fail to realize that the very completeness of truth requires various statement--that no one human formula will show every side of it.

[XI:24]24. Change, emphasis, new language, novel interpretations, unfamiliar perspectives, are not, as some suppose, signs of departure from truth, but on the contrary they are evidence that the truth is being apprehended in new relations to human needs, and is becoming more generally understood.

[p. 145]

[XI:25]25. The truth must be told to each generation and to every people in new and different terms, so that when the Great Teacher said--"Believe that ye receive and ye shall receive," or when Paul said--"Faith is the substance of things not seen," or when modern science says--"The law of attraction is that law by which thought correlates with its object," each statement, when subjected to analysis, is found to contain exactly the same truth. The only difference being in the form of presentation.

[XI:26]26. We are standing on the threshold of a new era. The time has arrived when man has learned the secrets of mastery and the way is being prepared for a new social order, more wonderful than anything ever heretofore dreamed of. The conflict of modern science with theology, the study of comparative religions, the tremendous power of new social movements, all of these are but clearing the way for the new order. They may have destroyed traditional forms which have become antiquated and impotent, but nothing of value has been lost.

[XI:27]27. A new faith has been born, a faith which demands a new form of expression, and this faith is taking form in a deep consciousness of power which is being manifested in the present spiritual activity found on every hand.

[XI:28]28. The spirit which sleeps in the mineral, breathes in the vegetable, moves in the animal,

[p. 146]

and reaches its highest development in man is the Universal Mind, and it behoves us to span the gulf between being and doing, theory and practice by demonstrating our understanding of the dominion which we have been given.

[XI:29]29. By far the greatest discovery of all the centuries is the power of thought. The importance of this discovery has been a little slow in reaching the general consciousness, but it has arrived, and already in every field of research the importance of this greatest of all great discoveries is being demonstrated.

[XI:30]30. You ask in what does the creative power of thought consist? It consists in creating ideas, and these in turn objectify themselves by appropriating, inventing, observing, discerning, discovering, analysing, ruling, governing, combining and applying matter and force. It can do this because it is an intelligent creative power.

[XI:31]31. Thought reaches its loftiest activity when plunged into its own mysterious depth; when it breaks through the narrow compass of self and passes from truth to truth to the region of eternal light, where all which is, was or ever will be, melt into one grand harmony.

[XI:32]32. From this process of self contemplation comes inspiration which is creative intelligence, and which is undeniably superior to every element, force or law of nature, because it can understand, modify, govern and apply them to

[p. 147]

its own ends and purposes and therefore possess them.

[XI:33]33. Wisdom begins with the dawn of reason, and reason is but an understanding of the knowledge and principles whereby we may know the true meaning of things. Wisdom, then, is illuminated reason, and this wisdom leads to humility, for humility is a large part of Wisdom.

[XI:34]34. We all know many who have achieved the seemingly impossible, who have realized life-long dreams, who have changed everything, including themselves. We have sometimes marvelled at the demonstration of an apparently irresistible power, which seemed to be ever available just when it was most needed. But it is all clear now. All that is required is an understanding of certain definite fundamental principles and their proper application.

[XI:35]35. For your next exercise, concentrate on the quotation taken from the Bible, "Whatsoever things ye desire, when ye pray, believe that ye receive them and ye shall have them." Notice that there is no limitation, "Whatsoever things" is very definite and implies that the only limitation which is placed upon us is in our ability to think, to be equal to the occasion, to rise to the emergency, to remember that Faith is not a shadow, but a substance, "the substance of things hoped for, the evidence of things not seen.

[p. 148]

  

PART ELEVEN

101. What is inductive reasoning?

It is the process of the objective mind by which we compare a number of separate instances with each other until we see the common factor which gives rise to them all.

102. What has this method of studying accomplished?

It has resulted in the discovery of a reign of law which has marked an epoch in human progress.

103. What is it that guides and determines action?

It is need, want and desire which in the largest sense induce, guide and determine action.

104. What is the formula for the unerring solution of every individual problem?

We are to believe that our desire has already been fulfilled; its accomplishment will then follow.

105. What great Teachers advocated it?

Jesus, Plato, Swedenborg.

106. What is the result of the operation of this thought process?

We are thinking on the plane of the absolute and planting a seed, which if left undisturbed will germinate into fruition.

[p. 149]

107. Why is it scientifically exact?

Because it is Natural Law.

108. What is Faith?

"Faith is the substance of things hoped for, the evidence of things unseen."

109. What is the Law of Attraction?

The Law by which Faith is brought into manifestation.

110. What importance do you attach to an understanding of this law?

It has eliminated the elements of uncertainty and caprice from men's lives and substituted law, reason and certitude.

 

 

 

Death is but the natural process whereby all material forms are thrown into the crucible for reproduction in fresh diversity.

     
The Master Key System, by Charles F. Haanel, [1919], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 150] [p. 151]

  

PART TWELVE

THIS Part tells of numerous counterfeits and perversions by which many are led to think that something can be had for nothing. There is no royal road to success, we must give before we can get; if we cannot give money, we must give service, we must give time and thought, the Law of Compensation demands an eye for an eye. It tells how we may create the implements by which we may put into operation the laws by which we can gain access to the unlimited resources of Nature.

[p. 152]

  

INTRODUCTION. PART TWELVE

In the fourth paragraph you will find the following statement: "You must first have the knowledge of your power; second, the courage to dare; third, the faith to do."

If you concentrate upon the thoughts given; if you give them your entire attention, you will find a world of meaning in each sentence, and will attract to yourself other thoughts in harmony with them, and you will soon grasp the full significance of the vital knowledge upon which you are concentrating.

Knowledge does not apply itself; we as individuals must make the application, and the application consists in fertilizing the thought with a living purpose.

The time and thought which most persons waste in aimless effort would accomplish wonders if properly directed with some special object in view. In order to do this, it is necessary to centre your mental force upon a specific thought and hold it there, to the exclusion of all other thoughts. If you have ever looked through the focussing screen of a camera, you found that when the object was not in focus, the impression was indistinct and possibly blurred, but when the proper focus was obtained the picture was clear and distinct. This illustrates the power of concentration. Unless you can concentrate upon the object which you have in view, you will have but a hazy, indifferent, vague, indistinct and blurred outline of your ideal and the results will be in accordance with your mental picture.

[p. 153]

  

PART TWELVE

[XII:1]1. There is no purpose in life that cannot be best accomplished through a scientific understanding of the creative power of thought.

[XII:2]2. The power to think is common to all. Man is, because he thinks. Man's power to think is infinite, consequently his creative power is unlimited.

[XII:3]3. We know that thought is building for us the thing we think of and actually bringing it nearer, yet we find it difficult to banish fear, anxiety or discouragement, all of which are powerful thought forces, and which continually send the things we desire further away, so that it is often one step forward and two steps backward.

[XII:4]4. The only way to keep from going backward is to keep going forward. Eternal vigilance is the price of success. There are three steps, and each one is absolutely essential. You must first have the knowledge of your power; second, the courage to dare; third, the faith to do.

[XII:5]5. With this as a basis you can construct an ideal business, an ideal home, ideal friends, ideal environment. You are not restricted as to material or cost. Thought is omnipotent and has the power to draw on the Infinite bank of primary substance for all that it requires. Infinite resources are therefore at your command.

[XII:6]6. But your ideal must be sharp, clear-cut,

[p. 154]

definite; to have one ideal to-day, another to-morrow, and a third next week, means to scatter your forces and accomplish nothing; your result will be a meaningless and chaotic combination of wasted material.

[XII:7]7. Unfortunately this is the result which many are securing, and the cause is self evident. If a sculptor started out with a piece of marble and a chisel and changed his ideal every fifteen minutes, what result could he expect? And why should you expect any different result in moulding the greatest and most plastic of all substances, the only real substance?

[XII:8]8. The result of this indecision and negative thought is often found in the loss of material wealth. Supposed independence which required many years of toil and effort suddenly disappears. It is often found then that money and property are not independence at all. On the contrary, the only independence is found to be a practical working knowledge of the creative power o f thought.

[XII:9]9. This practical working method cannot come to you, until you learn that the only real power which you can have, is the power to adjust yourself to Divine and unchangeable principles. You cannot change the Infinite, but you can come into an understanding of Natural laws. The reward of this understanding is a conscious realization of your ability to adjust your thought faculties to the Universal

[p. 155]

[paragraph continues] Thought which is Omnipresent. Your ability to co-operate with this Omnipotence will indicate the degree of success with which you meet.

[XII:10]10. The power of thought has many counterfeits which are more or less fascinating, but the results are harmful instead of helpful.

[XII:11]11. Of course, worry, fear and all negative thoughts produce a crop after their kind; those who harbour thoughts of this kind must inevitably reap exactly what they have sown.

[XII:12]12. Again. there are the Phenomena seekers who gormandize on the so-called proofs and demonstrations obtained at materializing seances. They throw open their mental doors and soak themselves in the most poisonous currents which can be found in the psychic world. They do not seem to understand that it is the ability to become negative, receptive and passive, and thus drain themselves of all their vital force, which enables them to bring about these vibratory thought forms.

[XII:13]13. There are also the Hindu worshippers, who see in the materializing phenomena which are performed by the so-called adepts, a source of power, forgetting, or never seeming to realize that as soon as the will is withdrawn the forms wither, and the vibratory forces of which they are composed vanish.

[XII:14]14. Telepathy, or thought transference, has received considerable attention, but as it requires

[p. 156]

a negative mental state on the part of the receiver, the practice is harmful. A thought may be sent with the intention of hearing or seeing, but it will bring the penalty attached to the inversion of the principle involved.

[XII:15]15. Hypnotism is positively dangerous to the subject as well as the operator. No one familiar with the laws governing in the mental world would think of attempting to dominate the will of another, for by so doing he will gradually but surely divest himself of his own power.

[XII:16]16. All of these perversions have their temporary satisfaction and for some a keen fascination, but there is an infinitely greater fascination in a true understanding of the world of power within, a power which increases with use; is permanent instead of fleeting; which not only is potent as a remedial agency to bring about the remedy for past error or results of wrong thinking, but is a prophylactic agency protecting us from all manner and form of danger, and finally is an actual creative force with which we can build new conditions and new environment.

[XII:17]17. The law is, that thought will correlate with its object and bring forth in the material world the correspondence of the thing thought or produced in the mental world. We then discern the absolute necessity of seeing that every thought has the inherent germ of truth

[p. 157]

in order that the law of growth will bring into manifestation good, for good alone can confer any permanent power.

[XII:18]18. The principle which gives the thought the dynamic power to correlate with its object, and therefore to master every adverse human experience, is the law of attraction, which is another name for love. This is an eternal and fundamental principle, inherent in all things, in every system of Philosophy, in every Religion and in every Science. There is no getting away from the law of love. It is feeling that imparts vitality to thought. Feeling is desire, and desire is love. Thought impregnated with love becomes invincible.

[XII:19]19. We find this truth emphasized wherever the power of thought is understood. The Universal Mind is not only Intelligence, but it is substance, and this substance is the attractive force which brings electrons together by the law of attraction so that they form atoms; the atoms in turn are brought together by the same law and form molecules; molecules take objective forms; and so we find that the law of love is the creative force behind every manifestation, not only of atoms, but of worlds, of the Universe, of everything of which the imagination can form any conception.

[XII:20]20. It is the operation of this marvellous law of attraction which has caused men in all ages and all times to believe that there must be

[p. 158]

some personal being who responded to their petitions and desires, and manipulated events in order to comply with their requirements.

[XII:21]21. It is the combination of Thought and Love which forms the irresistible force, called the law of attraction. All natural laws are irresistible, the law of Gravitation, or Electricity, or any other law operates with mathematical exactitude. There is no variation, it is only the channel of distribution which may be imperfect. If a bridge falls, we do not attribute the collapse to any variation of the law of gravitation. If a light fails us, we do not conclude that the laws governing electricity cannot be depended upon, and if the law of attraction seems to be imperfectly demonstrated by an inexperienced or uninformed person, we are not to conclude that the greatest and most infallible law upon which the entire system of creation depends has been suspended. We should rather conclude that a little more understanding of the law is required, for the same reason that a correct solution of a difficult problem in Mathematics is not always readily and easily obtained.

[XII:22]22. Things are created in the mental or spiritual world before they appear in the outward act or event. By the simple process of governing our thought forces to-day, we help create the events which will come into our lives in the future, perhaps even to-morrow. Educated

[p. 159]

desire is the most potent means of bringing into action the law of attraction.

[XII:23]23. Man is so constituted that he must first create the tools, or implements by which he gains the power to think. The mind cannot comprehend an entirely new idea until a corresponding vibratory brain cell has been prepared to receive it. This explains why it is so difficult for us to receive or appreciate an entirely new idea; we have no brain cell capable of receiving it; we are therefore incredulous; we do not believe it.

[XII:24]24. If, therefore, you have not been familiar with the Omnipotence of the law of attraction, and the scientific method by which it can be put into operation, or if you have not been familiar with the unlimited possibilities which it opens to those who are enabled to take advantage of the resources it offers, begin now and create the necessary brain cells which will enable you to comprehend the unlimited powers which may be yours by co-operating with Natural Law. This is done by concentration or attention.

[XII:25]25. The intention governs the attention. Power comes through repose. It is by concentration that deep thoughts, wise speech and all forces of high potentiality are accomplished.

[XII:26]26. It is in the Silence that you get into touch with the Omnipotent power of the subconscious mind from which all power is evolved.

[p. 160]

[XII:27]27. He who desires wisdom, power or permanent success of any kind will find it only within; it is an unfoldment. The unthinking may conclude that the silence is very simple and easily attained, but it should be remembered that only in absolute silence may one come into contact with Divinity itself; may learn of the unchangeable law and open for himself the channels by which persistent practice and concentration lead to perfection.

[XII:28]28. Now go to the same room, take the same chair, the same position as heretofore; be sure to relax, let go, both mentally and physically; always do this; never try to do any mental work under pressure; see that there are no tense muscles or nerves, that you are entirely comfortable. Now realize your unity with omnipotence; get into touch with this power, come into a deep and vital understanding, appreciation and realization of the fact that your ability to think is your ability to act upon the Universal Mind, and bring it into manifestation, realize that it will meet any and every requirement; that you have exactly the same potential ability which any individual ever did have or ever will have, because each is but an expression or manifestation of the One, all are parts of the whole, there is no difference in kind or quality, the only difference being one of degree.

[p. 161]

  

PART TWELVE

111. How may any purpose in life be best accomplished?

Through a scientific understanding of the spiritual nature of thought.

112. What three steps are absolutely essential?

The knowledge of our power, the courage to dare, the faith to do.

113. How is the practical working knowledge secured?

By an understanding of Natural laws.

114. What is the reward of an understanding of these laws?

A conscious realization of our ability to adjust ourselves to Divine and unchanging principle.

115. What will indicate the degree of success with which we meet?

The degree in which we realize that we cannot change the Infinite but must co-operate with it.

116. What is the principle which gives thought its dynamic power?

The Law of Attraction which rests on vibration, which in turn rests upon the law of love. Thought impregnated with love becomes invincible.

[p. 162]

117. Why is this law irresistible?

Because it is a Natural law. All. Natural laws are irresistible and unchangeable and act with mathematical exactitude. There is no deviation or variation.

118. Why then does it sometimes seem to be difficult to find the solution to our problems in life?

For the same reason that it is sometimes difficult to find the correct solution to a difficult mathematical problem. The operator is uninformed or inexperienced.

119. Why is it impossible for the mind to grasp an entirely new idea?

We have no corresponding vibratory brain cell capable of receiving the idea.

120. How is wisdom secured?

By concentration; it is unfoldment; it comes from within.

 

 

 

--Thought cannot conceive of anything that may not be brought to expression. He who first uttered it may be only the suggester, but the doer will appear.--Wilson.

[]

          ADVICE

Remember--
   Fully to understand grand and beautiful thought requires, perhaps, as much   time as to conceive it. JOUBERT

If you wish to enjoy the utmost practical benefit from "The Master   Key"--go slowly.

Transfuse into your mind the contents of one part only, each week for   twenty-four weeks.

Realize the meaning of every phrase.

Consult "The Master Key" constantly, as your perpetual help and   stimulus.

Each time you read the work you will get a better understanding of the   eternal cosmic principles.

Tell others of "The Master Key" so that more and more people may   reciprocate with you, as conscious adepts in harmony.

The Publishers

     
   
     
The Master Key System, by Charles F. Haanel, [1919], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 163]

  

PART THIRTEEN

THIS Part explains why certain forms of thought often result in disaster and frequently sweep away the result of a lifetime of effort. It explains the modern method of thinking and shows how actual, tangible results are thereby secured, and how conditions must change in order to meet the requirements of a changed consciousness. It explains the process by which this change is brought about and how we may hasten it.

[p. 164]

  

INTRODUCTION. PART THIRTEEN

Physical science is responsible for the marvellous age of invention in which we are now living, but spiritual science is now setting out on a career whose possibilities no one can foretell.

Spiritual science has heretofore been the football of the uneducated, the superstitious, the mystical; but men are now interested in definite methods and demonstrated facts only.

We have come to know that thinking is a spiritual process, that vision and imagination precede action and event, that the day of the dreamer has come. The following lines by Mr. Herbert Kaufman, relating to people who first dream and then achieve, are interesting in this connection.

"They are the architects of greatness, their vision lies within their souls, they peer beyond the veils and mists of doubt and pierce the walls of unborn Time. The belted wheel, the trail of steel, the churning screw, are shuttles in the loom on which they weave their magic tapestries. Makers of Empire, they have fought for bigger things than crowns and higher seats than thrones. Your homes are set upon a land that dreamers built to greatness. The pictures on its walls are visions from the souls of dreamers.

"They are the chosen few--the blazers of the way. Walls crumble and Empires fall, the tidal wave sweeps from the sea and tears a fortress from its rocks. The rotting nations drop from off Time's bough, and only things the dreamers make live on."

Part Thirteen tells why the dreams of the dreamer come true. It explains the law of causation by which dreamers, inventors, authors, organizers, bring about the realization of their desires. It explains the law by which the thing pictured upon our mind eventually becomes our own.

[p. 165]

  

PART THIRTEEN

[XIII:1]1. It has been the tendency, and, as might be proved, a necessity for science to seek the explanation of every-day facts by a generalization of those others which are less frequent and form the exception. Thus does the eruption of the volcano manifest the heat which is continually at work in the interior of the earth and to which the latter owes much of her configuration.

[XIII:2]2. Thus does the lightning reveal a subtle power constantly busy to produce changes in the inorganic world; and, as dead languages now seldom heard were once ruling among the nations, so does a giant tooth in Siberia, or a fossil in the depth of the earth, not only bear record of the evolution of past ages, but thereby explains to us the origin of the hills and valleys which we inhabit to-day.

[XIII:3]3. In this way a generalization of facts which are rare, strange, or form the exception, has been the magnetic needle guiding to all the discoveries of inductive science.

[XIII:4]4. This method is founded upon reason and experience and thereby destroyed superstition, precedent and conventionality.

[XIII:5]5. It is more than two hundred years since Bacon recommended this method of study, to which the civilized nations owe the greater part of their prosperity and the more valuable part of their knowledge; purging the mind from narrow prejudices, denominating theories, more

[p. 166]

effectually than by the keenest irony; calling the attention of men from heaven to earth more successfully by surprising experiments than by the most forcible demonstrations of their ignorance; educating the inventive faculties more powerfully by the near prospect of useful discoveries thrown open to all, than by talk of bringing to light the innate laws of our mind.

[XIII:6]6. The method of Bacon has seized the spirit and aim of the great philosophers of Greece and carried them into effect by the new means of observation which another age offered; thus gradually revealing a wondrous field of knowledge in the infinite space of astronomy, in the microscopic egg of embryology, and the dim age of geology; disclosing an order of the pulse which the logic of Aristotle could never have unveiled, and analysing into formerly unknown elements the material combinations which no dialectic of the scholastics could force apart.

[XIII:7]7. It has lengthened life; it has mitigated pain; it has extinguished diseases; it has increased the fertility of the soil; it has given new securities to the mariner; it has spanned great rivers with bridges of form unknown to our fathers; it has guided the thunderbolt from heaven to earth; it has lighted up night with the splendour of day; it has extended the range of human vision; it has multiplied the power of the human muscles; it has accelerated motion; it has annihilated distance; it has

[p. 167]

facilitated intercourse, correspondence, all friendly offices, all dispatch of business; it has enabled men to descend into the depths of the sea, to soar into the air, to penetrate securely into the noxious recesses of the earth.

[XIII:8]8. This then is the true nature and scope of induction. But the greater the success which men have achieved in the inductive science, the more does the whole tenor of their teachings and example impress us with the necessity of observing carefully, patiently, accurately, with all the instruments and resources at our command the individual facts before venturing upon a statement of general laws.

[XIII:9]9. We ascertain the bearing of the spark drawn from the electric machine under every variety of circumstances, that we thus may be emboldened with Franklin to address, in the form of a kite, the question to the cloud about the nature of the lightning. We assure ourselves with the exactness of a Galileo, of the manner in which bodies fall, that with Newton we may dare to ask the moon about the force that fastens it to the earth.

[XIII:10]10. In short, by the value we set upon truth; by our hope in a steady and universal progress; by our resolve not to permit a tyrannical prejudice to neglect or mutilate unwelcome facts, we rear the superstructure of science upon the broad and unchangeable basis, of full attention

[p. 168]

paid to the most isolated as well as the most frequent phenomena.

[XIII:11]11. An ever-increasing material may be collected by observation, but the accumulated facts differ in their value to assist the explanation of nature, and as we esteem most highly those useful qualities of men which are of the rarest occurrence, so does natural philosophy sift the facts and attach a pre-eminent importance to that striking class which cannot be accounted for by the usual and daily observation of life.

[XIII:12]12. If then, we find that certain persons seem to possess unusual power, what are we to conclude? Firstly, we may say, it is not so, which is simply an acknowledgment of our lack of information because every honest investigator admits that there are many strange and heretofore unaccountable phenomena constantly occurring. Those, however, who become acquainted with the creative power of thought, will no longer consider them unaccountable.

[XIII:13]13. Secondly, we may say that they are the result of supernatural interference; but a scientific understanding of Natural Laws will convince us that there is nothing supernatural. Every phenomenon is the result of an accurate, definite cause, and the cause is an immutable law or principle, which operates with invariable precision, whether the law is put into operation consciously or unconsciously.

[XIII:14]14. Thirdly, we may say that we are on

[p. 169]

[paragraph continues] "forbidden ground," that there are some things which we should not know. This objection was used against every advance in human knowledge. Every individual who ever advanced a new idea, whether a Columbus, a Darwin, a Galileo, a Watt, a Fulton, a Stephenson, a Faraday, or an Emerson, was subjected to ridicule or persecution. Hence this objection should receive no serious consideration. On the contrary, we should carefully consider every fact which is brought to our attention; by doing this we will more readily ascertain the law upon which it is based.

[XIII:15]15. It will be found that the creative power of thought will explain every possible condition or experience, whether physical, mental or spiritual.

[XIII:16]16. Thought will bring about conditions in correspondence with the predominant mental attitude. Therefore, as fear is a powerful form of thought, if we fear disaster, disaster will be the certain result of our thinking. It is this form of thought which frequently sweeps away the result of many years of toil and effort.

[XIII:17]17. If we think of some form of material wealth we may secure it. By concentrated thought the required conditions will be brought about, and the proper effort put forth, which will result in bringing about the circumstances necessary to realize our desires; but we often find that when we secure the things we thought

[p. 170]

we wanted, they do not have the effect we expected. That is, the satisfaction is only temporary, or possibly is the reverse of what we expected.

[XIII:18]18. What, then, is the proper method of procedure? What are we to think in order to secure what we really desire? What you and I desire, what we all desire, what every one is seeking, is Happiness and Harmony. If we can be truly happy we shall have everything the world can give. If we are happy ourselves we can make others happy.

[XIII:19]19. But we cannot be happy unless we have health, strength, congenial friends, pleasant environment, sufficient supply, not only to take care of our necessities but to provide for those comforts and luxuries to which we are entitled.

[XIII:20]20. The old orthodox way of thinking was to be "a worm," to be satisfied with our portion whatever it is; but the modern idea is to know that we are entitled to the best of everything, that the "Father and I are one" and that the "Father" is the Universal Mind, the Creator, the Original Substance from which all things proceed.

[XIII:21]21. Now admitting that this is all true in theory, and it has been taught for two thousand years, and is the essence of every system of Philosophy or Religion, how are we to make it practical in our lives? How are we to get the actual, tangible results here and now?

[p. 171]

[XIII:22]22. In the first place, we must put our knowledge into practice. Nothing can be accomplished in any other way. The athlete may read books and lessons on physical training all his life, but unless he begins to give out strength by actual work he will never receive any strength; he will eventually get exactly what he gives; but he will have to give it first. It is exactly the same with us; we will get exactly what we give, but we shall have to give it first. It will then return to us many fold, and the giving is simply a mental process, because thoughts are causes and conditions are effects; therefore in giving thoughts of courage, inspiration, health or help of any kind we are setting causes in motion which will bring about their effect.

[XIII:23]23. Thought is a spiritual activity and is therefore creative; but, make no mistake, thought will create nothing unless it is consciously, systematically, and constructively directed; and herein is the difference between idle thinking, which is simply a dissipation of effort, and constructive thinking, which means practically unlimited achievement.

[XIII:24]24. We have found that everything we get comes to us by the Law of Attraction. A happy thought cannot exist in an unhappy consciousness; therefore the consciousness must change, and, as the consciousness changes, all conditions necessary to meet the changed consciousness

[p. 172]

must gradually change, in order to meet the requirements of the new situation.

[XIII:25]25. In creating a Mental Image or an Ideal, we are projecting a thought into the Universal Substance from which all things are created. This Universal Substance is Omnipresent, Omnipotent and Omniscient. Are we to inform the Omniscient as to the proper channel to be used to materialize our demand? Can the finite advise the Infinite? This is the cause of failure; of every failure. We recognize the Omnipresence of the Universal Substance, but we fail to appreciate the fact that this substance is not only Omnipresent, but is Omnipotent and , and consequently will set causes in motion concerning which we may be entirely ignorant.

[XIII:26]26. We can best conserve our interests by recognizing the Infinite Power and Infinite Wisdom of the Universal Mind. In this way we become a channel whereby the Infinite can bring about the realization of our desire. This means that recognition brings about realization. Therefore for your next exercise make use of the principle, recognize the fact, that you are a part of the whole, and that a part must be the same in kind and quality as the whole; that the only difference there can possibly be, is in degree.

[XIII:27]27. When this tremendous fact begins to permeate your consciousness; when you really

[p. 173]

come into a realization of the fact that you, not your body but the Ego, the "I," the spirit which thinks, is an integral part of the great whole, that it is the same in substance, in quality, in kind, that the Creator could create nothing different from Himself, you will also be able to say, "The Father and I are one" and you will come into an understanding of the beauty, the grandeur, the transcendental opportunities which have been placed at your disposal.

 

 

 

Increase in me that wisdom
 Which discovers my truest interest,
 Strengthen my resolution
 To perform that which wisdom dictates.--Franklin.

[p. 174]

  

PART THIRTEEN

121. What is the method by which natural philosophers obtain and apply their knowledge?

To observe individual facts carefully, patiently, accurately, with all the instruments and resources at their command, before venturing upon a statement of general laws.

122. How may we be certain that this method is correct?

By not permitting a tyrannical prejudice to neglect or mutilate unwelcome facts.

123. What class of acts are esteemed most highly?

Those which cannot be accounted for by the usual daily observations of life.

124. Upon what is this principle founded?

Upon reason and experience.

125. What does it destroy?

Superstition, precedent and conventionality.

126. How have these laws been discovered?

By a generalization of facts which are uncommon, rare, strange and form the exception.

[p. 175]

127. How may we account for much of the strange and heretofore unexplainable phenomena which are constantly taking place?

By the creative power of thought.

128. Why is this so?

Because when we learn of a fact we can be sure that it is the result of a certain definite cause and that this cause will operate with invariable precision.

129. What is the result of this knowledge?

It will explain the cause of every possible condition, whether physical, mental or spiritual.

130. How will our best interest be conserved?

By a recognition of the fact that a knowledge of the creative nature of thought puts us in touch with Infinite power.

 

 

 

The old thoughts never die; immortal dreams outlive their dreamers and are ours for aye; no thought once formed and uttered ever can expire.--Mackay.

     
The Master Key System, by Charles F. Haanel, [1919], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 176] [p. 177]

  

PART FOURTEEN

THIS Part explains the source of all Power, Wisdom and Intelligence, and how we may bring it into harmonious relations in our affairs. It shows that those who understand the principle get results in exact accordance with their understanding and their ability to make the proper application. This opens up possibilities hitherto undreamed of and by an orderly sequence of law. It explains the source of all energy and all substance and the method by which this Universal Substance is differentiated into form. It explains the nature of electrons and of cells upon which the maintenance of health and life depend; it explains how we may bring about radical changes in our life and what the result of such changes must necessarily be.

[p. 178]

  

INTRODUCTION. PART FOURTEEN

You have found from your study thus far that thought is a spiritual activity and is therefore endowed with creative power. This does not mean that some thought is creative. All thought is creative. And thought can be used in a negative way, through the process of denial.

The conscious and subconscious are but two phases of action in connection with one mind. The relation of the subconscious to the conscious is quite analogous to that existing between a weather-vane and the atmosphere. Just as the least pressure of the atmosphere causes an action on the part of the weather-vane, so does the least thought entertained by the conscious mind produce within your subconscious mind action in exact proportion to the depth of feeling characterizing the thought and the intensity with which the thought is indulged.

It follows that if you deny unsatisfactory conditions, you are withdrawing the creative power of your thought from these conditions. You are cutting them away at the root. You are sapping their vitality.

Remember that the law of growth necessarily governs every manifestation in the objective, so that a denial of unsatisfactory conditions will not bring about instant change. A plant will remain visible for some time after its roots have been cut, but it will gradually fade away and eventually disappear; so the withdrawal of your thought from the contemplation of unsatisfactory conditions will gradually but surely terminate these conditions.

You will see that this is an exactly opposite course from the one which we would naturally be inclined to adopt. It will therefore have an exactly opposite effect to the one usually secured. Most persons concentrate intently upon an unsatisfactory condition, thereby giving the condition that measure of energy and vitality which is necessary in order to supply a vigorous growth.

[p. 179]

  

PART FOURTEEN

[XIV:1]1. The Universal Energy in which all motion, light, heat, and colour have their origin, does not partake of the limitation of the many effects of which it is the cause, but it is supreme over them all. This Universal Substance is the source of all Power, Wisdom and Intelligence.

[XIV:2]2. To recognize this Intelligence is to acquaint yourself with the knowing quality of Mind and through it to move upon the Universal Substance, and bring it into harmonious relations in your affairs.

[XIV:3]3. This is something that the most learned physical science teacher has not attempted--a field of discovery upon which he has not yet launched; in fact, but few of the materialistic schools have ever caught the first ray of this light. It does not seem to have dawned upon them that wisdom is just as much present everywhere as are force and substance.

[XIV:4]4. Some will say, if these principles are true, why are we not demonstrating them? As the fundamental principle is obviously correct, why do we not get proper results? We do. We get results in exact accordance with our understanding of the law and our ability to make the proper application. We secured no results from the laws governing electricity until some one formulated the law and showed us how to apply it.

[XIV:5]5. This puts us in an entirely new relation to our environment, opening up possibilities

[p. 180]

hitherto undreamed of, and this by an orderly sequence of law which is naturally involved in our new mental attitude.

[XIV:6]6. Mind is creative and the principle upon which this law is based is sound and legitimate and is inherent in the nature of things; but this creative power does not originate in the individual but in the Universal, which is the source and fountain of all energy and substance. The individual is simply the channel for the distribution of this energy. The individual is the means by which the Universal produces the various combinations which result in the formation of phenomena.

[XIV:7]7. We know that scientists have resolved matter into an immense number of molecules; these molecules have been resolved into atoms, and the atoms into electrons. The discovery of electrons in high vacuum glass tubes containing fused terminals of hard metal, indicates conclusively that these electrons fill all space; that they exist everywhere, that they are omnipresent. They fill all material bodies and occupy the whole of what we call empty space. This, then, is the Universal Substance from which all things proceed.

[XIV:8]8. Electrons would forever remain electrons unless directed where to go to be assembled into atoms and molecules, and this director is Mind. A number of electrons revolving around a centre of force constitutes an atom; atoms

[p. 181]

unite in absolutely regular mathematical ratios and form molecules, and these unite with each other to form a multitude of compounds which unite to build the Universe.

[XIV:9]9. The lightest known atom is hydrogen and this is 1,700 times heavier than an electron. An atom of mercury is 300,000 times heavier than an electron. Electrons are pure negative electricity, and as they have the same potential velocity as all other cosmic energy, such as heat, light, electricity and thought, of about 186,000 miles a second, neither time or space require consideration. The manner in which the velocity of light was ascertained is interesting:

[XIV:10]10. The velocity of light was obtained by the Danish astronomer Roemer in 1676, by observing the eclipses of Jupiter's moons. When the earth was nearest to Jupiter, the eclipse appeared about eight and one-half minutes too soon for the calculations, and when the earth was most remote from Jupiter, they were about eight and one-half minutes too late. Roemer concluded the reason to be that it required seventeen minutes for light from the planet to traverse the diameter of the earth's orbit, which measured the difference of the distances of the earth from Jupiter. This calculation has since been verified, and proves that light travels about 186,000 miles a second.

[XIV:11]11. Electrons manifest in the body as cells, and possess mind and intelligence sufficient for

[p. 182]

them to perform their offices in the human physical anatomy. Every part of the body is composed of cells, some of which operate independently; others in communities. Some are busy building tissue, while others are engaged in forming the various secretions necessary for the body. Some act as carriers of material; others are the surgeons whose work it is to repair damage; others are scavengers, carrying off waste; others are constantly ready to repel invaders or other undesirable intruders of the germ family.

[XIV:12]12. All these cells are moving for a common purpose and each one is not only a living organism, but has sufficient intelligence to enable it to perform its necessary duties. It is also endowed with sufficient intelligence to conserve the energies and perpetuate its own life. It must, therefore, secure sufficient nourishment and it has been found that it exercises choice in the selection of such nourishment.

[XIV:13]13. Each cell is born, reproduces itself, dies and is absorbed. The maintenance of health and life itself depends upon the constant regeneration of these cells.

[XIV:14]14. It is therefore apparent that there is mind in every atom of the body; this mind is negative mind, and the power of the individual to think makes him positive, so that he can control this negative mind. This is the scientific explanation for metaphysical healing, and will

[p. 183]

enable anyone to understand the principle upon which this remarkable phenomenon rests.

[XIV:15]15. This negative mind, which is contained in every cell of the body, has been called the sub-conscious mind, because it acts without our conscious knowledge. We have found that this sub-conscious mind is responsive to the will of the conscious mind.

[XIV:16]16. All things have their origin in mind, and appearances are the result of thought. So that we see that Things in themselves have no origin; permanency or reality. Since they are produced by thought they can be erased by thought.

[XIV:17]17. In mental, as in natural science, experiments are being made, and each discovery lifts man one step higher toward his possible goal. We find that every man is the reflection of the thought he has entertained during his lifetime. This is stamped on his face, his form, his character, his environment.

[XIV:18]18. Behind every effect there is a cause, and if we follow the trail to its starting point, we shall find the creative principle out of which it grew. Proofs of this are now so complete that this truth is generally accepted.

[XIV:19]19. The objective world is controlled by an unseen and, heretofore, unexplainable power. We have, heretofore, personalized this power and called it God. We have now, however,

[p. 184]

learned to look upon it as the permeating essence or Principle of all that exists--the Infinite or Universal Mind.

[XIV:20]20. The Universal Mind, being infinite and omnipotent, has unlimited resources at its command, and when we remember that it is also omnipresent, we cannot escape the conclusion that we must be an expression or manifestation of that Mind.

[XIV:21]21. A recognition and understanding of the resources of the sub-conscious mind will indicate that the only difference between the subconscious and the Universal is one of degree. They differ only as a drop of water differs from the ocean. They are the same in kind and quality, the difference is one of degree only.

[XIV:22]22. Do you, can you, appreciate the value of this all-important fact; do you realize that a recognition of this tremendous fact places you in touch with Omnipotence? The sub-conscious mind being the connecting link between the Universal Mind and the conscious mind, is it not evident that the conscious mind can consciously suggest thoughts which the subconscious mind will put into action, and as the sub-conscious is one with the Universal, is it not evident that no limit can be placed upon its activities?

[XIV:23]23. A scientific understanding of this principle will explain the wonderful results which

[p. 185]

are secured through the power of prayer. The results which are secured in this way are not brought about by any special dispensations of providence, but on the contrary, they are the result of the operation of a perfectly natural law. There is, therefore, nothing either religious or mysterious about it.

[XIV:24]24. Yet there are many who are not ready to enter into the discipline necessary to think correctly, even though it is evident that wrong thinking has brought failure.

[XIV:25]25. Thought is the only reality; conditions are but the outward manifestations; as the thought changes, all outward or material conditions must change in order to be in harmony with their creator, which is thought.

[XIV:26]26. But the thought must be clear cut, steady, fixed, definite, unchangeable; you cannot take one step forward and two steps backward, neither can you spend twenty or thirty years of your life building up negative conditions as the result of negative thoughts, and then expect to see them all melt away as the result of fifteen or twenty minutes of right thinking.

[XIV:27]27. If you enter into the discipline necessary to bring about a radical change in your life, you must do so deliberately, after giving the matter careful thought and full consideration, and then you must allow nothing to interfere with your decision.

[p. 186]

[XIV:28]28. This discipline, this change of thought, this mental attitude will not only bring you the material things which are necessary for your highest and best welfare, but will bring health and harmonious conditions generally.

[XIV:29]29. If you wish harmonious conditions in your life, you must develop an harmonious mental attitude.

[XIV:30]30. Your world without will be a reflection of your world within.

[XIV:31]31. For your next exercise concentrate on Harmony, and when I say concentrate, I mean all that the word implies; concentrate so deeply, so earnestly, that you will be conscious of nothing but harmony. Remember, we learn by doing. Reading this book will get you nowhere. It is in the practical application that the value consists.

Learn to keep the door shut, keep out of your mind and out of your world every element that seeks admittance with no definite helpful end in view.
     George Matthew Adams.

[p. 187]

  

PART FOURTEEN

131. What is the source of all Wisdom, Power and Intelligence?

The Universal Mind.

132. Where do all motion, light, heat and colour have their origin?

In the Universal Energy, which is one manifestation of the Universal Mind.

133. Where does the creative power of thought originate?

In the Universal Mind.

134. What is thought?

Mind in motion.

135. How is the Universal differentiated in form?

The individual is the means by which the Universal produces the various combinations which result in the formation of phenomena.

136. How is this accomplished?

The power of the individual to think is his ability to act upon the Universal and bring it into manifestation.

137. What is the first form which the Universal takes so far as we know?

Electrons, which fill all space.

[p. 188]

138. Where do all things have their origin?

In mind.

139. What is the result of a change of thought?

A change in conditions.

140. What is the result of a harmonious mental attitude?

Harmonious conditions in life.

 

 

 

Thought, immaterial though it may be, is the matrix that shapes the issues of life. The mind has been active in all fields during this fruitful century, but it is to science we must look for the thoughts that have shaped all thinking.--Selected.

[]

          ADVICE

Remember--
   Fully to understand grand and beautiful thought requires, perhaps, as much   time as to conceive it. JOUBERT

If you wish to enjoy the utmost practical benefit from "The Master   Key"--go slowly.

Transfuse into your mind the contents of one part only, each week for   twenty-four weeks.

Realize the meaning of every phrase.

Consult "The Master Key" constantly, as your perpetual help and   stimulus.

Each time you read the work you will get a better understanding of the   eternal cosmic principles.

Tell others of "The Master Key" so that more and more people may   reciprocate with you, as conscious adepts in harmony.

The   Publishers

     
   
     
The Master Key System, by Charles F. Haanel, [1919], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 189]

  

PART FIFTEEN

THIS Part explains the Law of Growth, and explains why we cannot obtain if we tenaciously cling to what we have, and that difficulties, inharmonies and obstacles indicate that we are either refusing to give up what we no longer need, or refusing to accept what we require; we are holding on to worn-out and useless material, or we are allowing a deficiency to exist and are not obtaining the material necessary for our growth. It explains how the ability to appropriate what we require for our growth is secured. It explains how vitality is important to thought, and what determines the importance of words the vessels in which thought is carried. How abundance may be secured and why we must be prepared to assume the responsibility for every thought and action. It explains the necessity of Insight, its value in examining facts and conditions at long range and in turning our attention to profitable channels instead of working with problems which contain no possibility of any kind.

[p. 190]

  

INTRODUCTION. PART FIFTEEN

Experiments with parasites found on plants indicate that even the lowest order of life is enabled to take advantage of natural law.

This experiment was made by Jaques Loeb, M.D., Ph.D., a member of the Rockefeller Institute.

"In order to obtain the material, potted rose bushes are brought into a room and placed in front of a closed window. If the plants are allowed to dry out, the aphides (parasites), previously wingless, change to winged insects. After the metamorphosis, the animals leave the plants, fly to the window and then creep upward on the glass."

It is evident that these tiny insects found that the plants on which they had been thriving were dead, and that they could therefore secure nothing more to eat and drink from this source. The only method by which they could save themselves from starvation was to grow temporary wings and fly, which they did.

Experiments such as these indicate that Omniscience as well as Omnipotence is omnipresent and that the tiniest living thing can take advantage of it in an emergency.

Part Fifteen will tell you more about the laws under which we live. It will explain that these laws operate to our advantage, that all conditions and experiences that come to us are for our benefit; that we gain strength in proportion to the effort expended, and that our happiness is best attained through a conscious co-operation with natural laws.

[p. 191]

  

PART FIFTEEN

[XV:1]1. The laws under which we live are designed solely for our advantage. These laws are immutable and we cannot escape from their operation.

[XV:2]2. All the great eternal forces act in solemn silence, but it is in our power to place ourselves in harmony with them and thus express a life of comparative peace and happiness.

[XV:3]3. Difficulties, inharmonies, and obstacles, indicate that we are either refusing to give out what we no longer need, or refusing to accept what we require.

[XV:4]4. Growth is attained through an exchange of the old for the new, of the good for the better; it is a conditional or reciprocal action, for each of us is a complete thought entity and this completeness makes it possible for us to receive only as we give.

[XV:5]5. We cannot obtain what we lack if we tenaciously cling to what we have. We are able to consciously control our conditions as we come to sense the purpose of what we attract, and are able to extract from each experience only what we require for our further growth. Our ability to do this determines the degree of harmony or happiness we attain.

[XV:6]6. The ability to appropriate what we require for our growth, continually increases as we reach higher planes and broader visions, and the greater our ability to know what we require, the more certain we shall be to discern its

[p. 192]

presence, to attract it and to absorb it. Nothing may reach us except what is necessary for our growth.

[XV:7]7. All conditions and experiences that come to us do so for our benefit. Difficulties and obstacles will continue to come until we absorb their wisdom and gather from them the essentials of further growth.

[XV:8]8. That we reap what we sow is mathematically exact. We gain permanent strength exactly to the extent of the effort required to overcome difficulties.

[XV:9]9. The inexorable requirements of growth demand that we exert the greatest degree of attraction for what is perfectly in accord with us Our highest happiness will be best attained through our understanding of, and conscious co-operation with, natural laws.

[XV:10]10. In order to possess vitality thought must be impregnated with love. Love is a product of the emotions. It is therefore essential that the emotions be controlled and guided by the intellect and reason.

[XV:11]11. It is love which imparts vitality to thought and thus enables it to germinate. The law of attraction, or the law of love, for they are one and the same, will bring to it the necessary material for its growth and maturity.

[XV:12]12. The first form which thought will find

[p. 193]

is language, or words; this determines the importance of words; they are the first manifestation of thought--the vessels in which thought is carried. They take hold of the ether and by setting it in motion reproduce the thought to others in the form of sound.

[XV:13]13. Thought may lead to action of any kind, but whatever the action, it is simply the thought attempting to express itself in visible form. It is evident, therefore, that if we wish desirable conditions, we can afford to entertain only desirable thoughts.

[XV:14]14. This leads to the inevitable conclusion that if we wish to express abundance in our lives, we can afford to think abundance only, and as words are only thoughts taking form, we must be especially careful to use nothing but constructive and harmonious language, which when finally crystallized into objective forms, will prove to our advantage.

[XV:15]15. We cannot escape from the pictures we incessantly photograph on the mind, and this photography of erroneous conceptions is exactly what is being done by the use of words, when we use any form of language which is not identified with our welfare.

[XV:16]16. We manifest more and more life as our thought becomes clarified and takes higher planes. This is obtained with greater facility as we use word pictures that are clearly defined,

[p. 194]

and relieved of the conceptions attached to them on lower planes of thought.

[XV:17]17. It is with words that we must express our thoughts, and if we are to make use of higher forms of truth, we may use only such material as has been carefully and intelligently selected with this purpose in view.

[XV:18]18. This wonderful power of clothing thoughts in the form of words is what differentiates man from the rest of the animal kingdom; by the use of the written word he has been enabled to look back over the centuries and see the stirring scenes by which he has come into his present inheritance.

[XV:19]19. He has been enabled to come into communion with the greatest writers and thinkers of all time, and the combined record which we possess to-day is therefore the expression of Universal Thought as it has been seeking to take form in the mind of Man.

[XV:20]20. We know that the Universal Thought has for its goal the creation of form, and we know that the individual thought is likewise for ever attempting to express itself in form, and we know that the word is a thought form, and a sentence is a combination of thought forms, therefore, if we wish our ideal to be beautiful or strong, we must see that the words out of which this temple will eventually be created are exact, that they are put together carefully, because accuracy in building words

[p. 195]

and sentences is the highest form of architecture in civilization and is a passport to success.

[XV:21]21. Words are thoughts and are therefore an invisible and invincible power which will finally objectify themselves in the form they are given.

[XV:22]22. Words may become mental palaces that will live for ever, or they may become shanties which the first breeze will carry away. They may delight the eye as well as the ear; they may contain all knowledge; in them we find the history of the past as well as the hope of the future; they are living messengers from which every human and superhuman activity is born.

[XV:23]23. The beauty of the word consists in the beauty of the thought; the power of the word consists in the power of the thought, and the power of the thought consists in its vitality. How shall we identify a vital thought? What are its distinguishing characteristics? It must have principle. How shall we identify principle?

[XV:24]24. There is a principle of Mathematics, but none of error; there is a principle of health, but none of disease; there is a principle of truth, but none of dishonesty; there is a principle of light, but none of darkness, and there is a principle of abundance, but none of poverty.

[XV:25]25. How shall we know that this is true? Because if we apply the principle of Mathematics correctly we shall be certain of our results.

[p. 196]

[paragraph continues] Where there is health there will be no disease. If we know the Truth we cannot be deceived by error. If we let in light there can be no darkness, and where there is abundance there can be no poverty.

[XV:26]26. These are self-evident facts, but the all-important truth that a thought containing principle is vital and therefore contains life and consequently takes root, and eventually but surely and certainly displaces the negative thoughts, which by their very nature can contain no vitality, is one which seems to have been overlooked.

[XV:27]27. But this is a fact which will. enable you to destroy every manner of discord, lack and limitation.

[XV:28]28. There can be no question but that he who "is wise enough to understand" will readily recognize that the creative power of thought places an invincible weapon in his hands and makes him a master of destiny.

[XV:29]29. In the physical world there is a law of compensation which is that "the appearance of a given amount of energy anywhere means the disappearance of the same amount somewhere else," and so we find that we can get only what we give; if we pledge ourselves to a certain action we must be prepared to assume the responsibility for the development of that action. The sub-conscious cannot reason. It takes us at our word; we have asked for something;

[p. 197]

we are now to receive it; we have made our bed, we are now to lie on it; the die has been cast; the threads will carry out the pattern we have made.

[XV:30]30. For this reason Insight must be exercised so that the thought which we entertain contains no mental, moral or physical germ which we do not wish objectified in our lives.

[XV:31]31. Insight is a faculty of the mind whereby we are enabled to examine facts and conditions at long range, a kind of human telescope; it enables us to understand the difficulties as well as the possibilities in any undertaking.

[XV:32]32. Insight enables us to be prepared for the obstacles which we shall meet; we can therefore overcome them before they have any opportunity of causing difficulty.

[XV:33]33. Insight enables us to plan to advantage and turn our thought and attention in the right direction, instead of into channels which can yield no possible return.

[XV:34]34. Insight is therefore absolutely essential for the development of any great achievement; with it we may enter, explore and possess any mental field.

[XV:35]35. Insight is a product of the world within and is developed in the Silence, by concentration.

[XV:36]36. For your next exercise, concentrate

[p. 198]

on Insight; take your accustomed position and focus the thought on the fact that to have a knowledge of the creative power of thought does not mean to possess the art of thinking. Let the thought dwell on the fact that knowledge does not apply itself. That our actions are not governed by knowledge, but by custom, precedent and habit. That the only way we can get ourselves to apply knowledge is by a determined conscious effort. Call to mind the fact that knowledge unused passes from the mind, that the value of the information is in the application of the principle; continue this line of thought until you gain sufficient insight to formulate a definite programme for applying this principle to your own particular problem.

 

 

 

"Think truly, and thy thoughts
    Shall the world's famine feed;
  Speak truly, and each word of thine
    Shall be a fruitful seed;
 Live truly, and thy life shall be
    A great and noble creed."
                         --Horatio Bonar.

[p. 199]

  

PART FIFTEEN

141. What determines the degree of harmony which we attain?

Our ability to appropriate what we require for our growth from each experience.

142. What do difficulties and obstacles indicate?

That they are necessary for our wisdom and spiritual growth.

143. How may these difficulties be avoided?

By a conscious understanding of and co-operation with Natural laws.

144. What is the principle by which thought manifests itself in form?

The Law of Attraction.

145. How is the necessary material secured by which the growth, development and maturity of the idea take form?

The law of love, which is the creative principle of the Universe, imparts vitality to the thought, and the law of attraction brings the necessary substance by the law of growth.

146. How are desirable conditions secured?

By entertaining desirable thoughts only.

[p. 200]

147. How are undesirable conditions brought about?

By thinking, discussing and visualizing conditions of lack, limitation, disease, inharmony and discord of every kind. This mental photography of erroneous conceptions is taken up by the subconscious and the law of attraction will inevitably crystallize it into objective form. That we reap what we sow is scientifically exact.

148. How can we overcome every kind of fear, lack, limitation, poverty and discord?

By substituting principle for error.

149. How may we recognize principle?

By a conscious realization of the fact that Truth invariably destroys error. We do not have to laboriously shovel the darkness out; all that is necessary is to turn on the light. The same principle applies to every form of negative thought.

150. What is the value of Insight?

It enables us to understand the value of making application of the knowledge which we gain. Many seem to think that knowledge will automatically apply itself, which is by no means true.

     
The Master Key System, by Charles F. Haanel, [1919], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 201]

  

PART SIXTEEN

THIS Part explains the nature of Wealth, it shows how it is created and upon what it depends. It shows why success is contingent upon an ideal higher than the mere accumulation of riches, it shows that success depends upon creative ability and explains the necessary condition for attainment. It explains why premature wealth is but the forerunner of humiliation and disaster. It explains the methods by which we may take our fate out of the hands of chance, and consciously make for ourselves the conditions which we desire, it tells how we may compel success by the utilization of scientific and exact methods, and it explains that while we have the ability to create harmonious and constructive conditions we also have the ability to create inharmonious and destructive conditions, and unfortunately, through ignorance of the law, this is what many are doing.

[p. 202]

  

INTRODUCTION. PART SIXTEEN

The vibratory activities of the planetary Universe are governed by a law of periodicity. Everything that lives has periods of birth, growth, fruition and decline. These periods are governed by the Septimal Law.

The Law of Sevens governs the days of the week, the phases of the moon, the hay monies of sound, light, heat, electricity, magnetism, atomic structure. It governs the life of individuals and of nations, and it dominates the activities of the commercial world.

Life is growth, and growth is change. Each seven years period takes us into a new cycle. The first seven years is the period of infancy. The next seven the period of childhood, representing the beginning of individual responsibility. The next seven represents the period of adolescence. The fourth period marks the attainment of full growth. The fifth period is the constructive period, when men begin to acquire property, possessions, a home and family. The next, from thirty-five to forty-two, is a period of reactions and changes, and this in turn is followed by a period of reconstruction, adjustment and recuperation, so as to be ready for a new cycle of sevens, beginning with the fiftieth year.

There are many who think that the world is just about to pass out of the sixth period; that it will soon enter into the seventh period, the period of readjustment, reconstruction and harmony; the period which is frequently referred to as the .

Those familiar with these cycles will not be disturbed when things seem to go wrong, but can apply the principle outlined in The Master Key, with the full assurance that a higher law will invariably control all other laws, and that through an understanding and conscious operation of spiritual laws we can convert every seeming difficulty into a blessing.

[p. 203]

  

PART SIXTEEN

[XVI:1]1. Wealth is a product of labour. Capital is an effect, not a cause; a servant, not a master; a means, not an end.

[XVI:2]2. The most commonly accepted definition of wealth is that it consists of all useful and agreeable things which possess exchange value. It is this exchange value which is the predominant characteristic of wealth.

[XVI:3]3. When we consider the small addition made by wealth to the happiness of the possessor, we find that the true value consists not in its 'utility but in its exchange value.

[XVI:4]4. This exchange value makes it a medium for securing the things of real value whereby our ideals may be realized.

[XVI:5]5. Wealth should then never be desired as an end, but simply as a means of accomplishing an end. Success is contingent upon a higher ideal than the mere accumulation of riches, and he who aspires to such success must formulate an ideal for which he is willing to strive.

[XVI:6]6. With such an ideal in mind, the ways and means can and will be provided, but the mistake must not be made of substituting the means for the end. There must be a definite fixed purpose, an ideal.

[XVI:7]7. Prentice Mulford said: "The man of success is the man possessed of the greatest spiritual understanding and every great fortune comes of superior and truly spiritual power."

[p. 204]

Unfortunately, there are those who fail to recognize this power; they forget that Andrew Carnegie's mother had to help support the family when they went to America, that Harriman's father was a poor clergyman with a salary of only $200.00 a year, that Sir Thomas Lipton started with only one shilling. These men had no other power to depend upon, but it did not fail them.

[XVI:8]8. The power to create depends entirely upon spiritual power; there are three steps, idealization, visualization and materialization. Every captain of industry depends upon this power exclusively. In an article in Everybody's Magazine, Henry Flagler, the Standard Oil multi-millionaire, admitted that the secret of his success was his power to see a thing in its completeness. The following conversation with a reporter shows his power of idealization, concentration and visualization, all spiritual powers:

[XVI:9]9. "Did you actually picture to yourself the whole thing? I mean, did you, or could you, really close your eyes and see the tracks? And the trains running? And hear the whistles blowing? Did you go as far as that?" "Yes." "How clearly?" "Very clearly."

[XVI:10]10. Here we have a vision of the law; we see "cause and effect," we see that thought necessarily precedes and determines action. If we are wise, we shall come into a realization

[p. 205]

of the tremendous fact that no arbitrary condition can exist for a moment, and that human experience is the result of an orderly and harmonious sequence.

[XVI:11]11. The successful business man is more often than not an idealist and is ever striving for higher and higher standards. The subtle forces of thought as they crystallize in our daily moods are what constitute life.

[XVI:12]12. Thought is the plastic material with which we build images of our growing conception of life. Use determines its existence. As in all other things our ability to recognize it and use it properly is the necessary condition for attainment.

[XVI:13]13. Premature wealth is but the forerunner of humiliation and disaster, because we cannot permanently retain anything which we do not merit or which we have not earned.

[XVI:14]14. The conditions with which we meet in the world without, correspond to the conditions which we find in the world within. This is brought about by the law of attraction. How then shall we determine what is to enter into the world within?

[XVI:15]15. Whatever enters the mind through the senses or the objective mind will impress the mind and result in a mental image which will become a pattern for the creative energies. These experiences are largely the result of environment, chance, past thinking and other

[p. 206]

forms of negative thought, and must be subjected to careful analysis before being entertained. On the other hand, we can form our own mental images, through our own interior processes of thought regardless of the thoughts of others, regardless of exterior conditions, regardless of environment of every kind, and it is by the exercise of this power that we can control our own destiny, body, mind and soul.

[XVI:16]16. It is by the exercise of this power that we take our fate out of the hands of chance, and consciously make for ourselves the experiences which we desire, because when we consciously realize a condition, that condition will eventually manifest in our lives; it is therefore evident that in the last analysis thinking is the one great cause in life.

[XVI:17]17. Therefore, to control thought is to control circumstances, conditions, environment and destiny.

[XVI:18]18. How then are we to control thought: what is the process? To think is to create a thought, but the result of the thought will depend upon its form, its quality and its vitality.

[XVI:19]19. The form will depend upon the mental image from which it emanates; this will depend upon the depth of the impression, the predominance of the idea, the clarity of the vision, the boldness of the image.

[XVI:20]20. The quality depends upon its substance,

[p. 207]

and this depends upon the material of which the mind is composed; if this material has been woven from thoughts of vigour, strength, courage, determination, the thought will possess these qualities.

[XVI:21]21. And finally, the vitality depends upon the feeling with which the thought is impregnated. If the thought is constructive, it will possess vitality; it will have life, it will grow, develop, expand; it will be creative; it will attract to itself everything necessary for its complete development.

[XVI:22]22. If the thought is destructive, it will have within itself the germ of its own dissolution; it will die, but in the process of dying it will bring sickness, disease, and every other form of discord.

[XVI:23]23. This we call evil, and when we bring it upon ourselves, some of us are disposed to attribute our difficulties to a Supreme Being, but this supreme being is simply Mind in equilibrium.

[XVI:24]24. It is neither good nor bad, it simply is.

[XVI:25]25. Our ability to differentiate it into form is our ability to manifest good or evil.

[XVI:26]26. Good and evil therefore are not entities, they are simply words which we use to indicate the result of our actions, and these actions are in turn predetermined by the character of our thought.

[p. 208]

[XVI:27]27. If our thought is constructive and harmonious we manifest good; if it is destructive and discordant we manifest evil.

[XVI:28]28. If you desire to visualize a different environment, the process is simply to hold the ideal in mind, until your vision has been made real; give no thought to persons, places or things; these have no place in the absolute; the environment you desire will contain everything necessary; the right persons, and the right things will come at the right time and in the right place.

[XVI:29]29. It is sometimes not plain how character, ability, attainment, achievement, environment and destiny can be controlled through the power of visualization, but this is an exact scientific fact.

[XVI:30]30. You will readily see that what we think determines the quality of mind, and that the quality of mind in turn determines our ability and mental capacity, and you can readily understand that the improvement in our ability will naturally be followed by increase in attainment and a greater control of circumstances.

[XVI:31]31. It will thus be seen that Natural laws work in a perfectly natural and harmonious manner; everything seems to "just happen." If you want any evidence of this fact simply compare results of your efforts in your own life, when your actions were prompted by high ideals

[p. 209]

and when you had selfish or ulterior motives in mind. You will need no further evidence.

[XVI:32]32. If you wish to bring about the realization of any desire, form a mental picture of success in your mind, by consciously visualizing your desire; in this way you will be compelling success, you will be externalizing it in your life by scientific methods.

[XVI:33]33. We can only see what already exists in the objective world, but what we visualize, already exists in the spiritual world, and this visualization is a substantial token of what will one day appear in the objective world, if we are faithful to our ideal. The reason for this is not difficult; visualization is a form of imagination; this process of thinking forms impressions on the mind, and these impressions in turn form concepts and ideals, and they in turn are the plans from which the Master Architect will weave the future.

[XVI:34]34. The psychologists have come to the conclusion that there is but one sense, the sense of feeling, and that all other senses are but modifications of this one sense; this being true, we know why feeling is the very fountain head of power, why the emotions so easily overcome the intellect, and why we must put feeling into our thought, if we wish results. Thought and feeling are the irresistible combination.

[XVI:35]35. Visualization must, of course, be directed by the will; we are to visualize exactly what

[p. 210]

we want; we must be careful not to let the imagination run riot. Imagination is a good servant but a poor master, and unless it is controlled it may easily lead us into all kinds of speculations and conclusions which have no basis or foundation of fact whatever. Every kind of plausible opinion is liable to be accepted without any analytical examination and the inevitable result is mental chaos.

[XVI:36]36. We must therefore construct only such mental images as are known to be scientifically true. Subject every idea to a searching analysis and accept nothing which is not scientifically exact. When you do this you will attempt nothing but what you know you can carry out and success will crown your efforts; this is what business men call far-sightedness; it is much the same as insight, and is one of the great secrets of success in all important undertakings.

[XVI:37]37. For your next exercise, try to bring yourself to a realization of the important fact that harmony and happiness are states of consciousness and do not depend upon the possession of things. That things are effects and come as a consequence of correct mental states. So that if we desire material possession of any kind our chief concern should be to acquire the mental attitude which will bring about the result desired. This mental attitude is brought about by a realization of our spiritual nature

[p. 211]

and our unity with the Universal Mind which is the substance of all, things. This realization will bring about everything which is necessary for our complete enjoyment. This is scientific or correct thinking. When we succeed in bringing about this mental attitude it is comparatively easy to realize our desire as an already accomplished fact; when we can do this we shall have found the "Truth" which makes us "free" from every lack or limitation of any kind.

 

 

 

A man might frame and let loose a star, to roll in its orbit, and yet not have done so memorable a thing before God as he who lets a golden-orbed thought to roll through the generations of time.--H. W. Beecher.

[p. 212]

  

PART SIXTEEN

151. Upon what does wealth depend?

Upon an understanding of the creative nature of thought.

152. Upon what does its true value consist?

Upon its exchange value.

153. Upon what does success depend?

Upon spiritual power.

154. Upon what does this power depend?

Upon use; use determines its existence.

155. How may we take our fate out of the hands of chance?

By consciously realizing the conditions which we desire to see manifested in our lives.

156. What then is the great business in life?

Thinking.

157. Why is this so?

Because thought is spiritual and therefore creative. To consciously control thought is therefore to control circumstances, conditions, environment and destiny.

[p. 213]

158. What is the source of all evil?

Destructive thinking.

159. What is the source of all good?

Scientific correct thinking.

160. What is scientific thinking?

A recognition of the creative nature of spiritual energy and our ability to control it.

 

 

 

"To every man there openeth a way,
  And the high soul climbs the high way,
  And the low soul gropes the low;
  And in between on the misty flats,
  The rest drift to and fro.
  But to every man there openeth
  A high way and a low
  And every man decideth
  The way his soul shall go."

[p. 214]

          ADVICE

Remember--
   Fully to understand grand and beautiful   thought requires, perhaps, as much time as to conceive it. JOUBERT

If you wish to enjoy the utmost practical benefit from "The Master   Key"--go slowly.

Transfuse into your mind the contents of one part only, each week for   twenty-four weeks.

Realize the meaning of every phrase.

Consult "The Master Key" constantly, as your perpetual help and   stimulus.

Each time you read the work you will get a better understanding of the   eternal cosmic principles.

Tell others of "The Master Key" so that more and more people may   reciprocate with you, as conscious adepts in harmony.

The   Publishers

     
   
     
The Master Key System, by Charles F. Haanel, [1919], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 215]

  

PART SEVENTEEN

THIS Part tells of the Law of Vibration and why the highest principle necessarily determines the circumstances, aspects and relations of everything with which it comes in contact. It tells why and how a knowledge of these higher forces makes all physical force sink into insignificance. It explains the nature of concentration; it tells something of the practice of concentration, tells something of the results of concentration. It tells how the mind may become a magnet, how it may irresistibly attract the conditions which it desires; it tells why it is necessary "to be" in order "to have." It tells how to unfasten the prison bars of weakness, impotence and self-belittlement and realize the joy of overcoming obstacles. It tells how the intuitive power is set in operation and how this inevitably leads to success. It tells of the difference between real power and the symbols of power, and why the symbols turn to ashes just as we overtake them.

[p. 216]

  

INTRODUCTION. PART SEVENTEEN

The kind of Deity which a man, consciously or unconsciously, worships, indicates the intellectual status of the worshipper.

Ask the Indian of God, and he will describe to you a powerful chieftain of a glorious tribe. Ask the Pagan of God, and he will tell you of a God of fire, a God of water, a God of this, that and the other.

Ask the Israelite of God, and he will tell you of the God of Moses, who conceived it expedient to rule by coercive measures; hence, the Ten Commandments. Or he will tell you of Joshua, who led the Israelites into battle, confiscated property, murdered the prisoners and laid cities waste.

The so-called heathen made "graven images" of their Gods, whom they were accustomed to worship, but among the most intelligent, at least, these images were but the visible emblems which they used to facilitate mental concentration on the qualities which they desired to externalize in their lives.

We of the twentieth century worship a God of Love in theory, but in practice we make for ourselves "graven images" of "Wealth," "Power," "Fashion," "Custom and "Conventionality." We "fall down" before them and worship them. We concentrate on them and they are thereby externalized in our lives.

The reader who masters the contents of Part Seventeen will not mistake symbols for reality; he will be interested in causes, rather than effects. He will concentrate on the realities of life, and will then not be disappointed in the results.

[p. 217]

  

PART SEVENTEEN

[XVII:1]1. We are told that Man has "dominion over all things"; this dominion is established through Mind. Thought is the activity which controls every principle beneath it. The highest principle by reason of its superior essence and qualities necessarily determines the circumstances, aspects and relation of everything with which it comes into contact.

[XVII:2]2. The vibrations of Mental forces are the finest and consequently the most powerful in existence. To those who perceive the nature and transcendency of mental force, all physical power sinks into insignificance.

[XVII:3]3. We are accustomed to look upon the Universe with a lens of five senses, and from these experiences our anthropomorphic conceptions originate, but true conceptions are only secured by spiritual insight. This insight requires a quickening of the vibrations of the Mind, and is only secured when, the mind is continuously concentrated in a given direction.

[XVII:4]4. Continuous concentration means an even, unbroken flow of thought and is the result of patient, persistent, persevering and well-regulated system.

[XVII:5]5. Great discoveries are the result of long-continued investigation. The science of mathematics requires years of concentrated effort to master it, and the greatest science--that of

[p. 218]

the Mind--is revealed only through concentrated effort.

[XVII:6]6. Concentration is much misunderstood; there seems to be an idea of effort or activity associated with it, when just the contrary is necessary. The greatness of an actor lies in the fact that he forgets himself in the portrayal of his character, becoming so identified with it that the audience is swayed by the realism of the performance. This will give you a good idea of true concentration; you should be so interested in your thought, so engrossed in your subject, as to be conscious of nothing else. Such concentration leads to intuitive perception and immediate insight into the nature of the object concentrated upon.

[XVII:7]7. All knowledge is the result of concentration of this kind; it is thus that the secrets have been wrested from Heaven and Earth; it is thus that the mind becomes a magnet and the desire to know draws the knowledge, irresistibly attracts it, makes it your own.

[XVII:8]8. Desire is largely sub-conscious; conscious desire rarely realizes its object when the latter is out of immediate reach. Sub-conscious desire arouses the latent faculties of the mind, and difficult problems seem to solve themselves.

[XVII:9]9. The sub-conscious mind may be aroused and brought into action in any direction and made to serve us for any purpose, by concentration.

[p. 219]

[paragraph continues] The practice of concentration requires the control of the physical, mental and psychical being; all modes of consciousness, whether physical, mental or psychical, must be under control.

[XVII:10]10. Spiritual Truth is therefore the controlling factor; it is this which will enable you to grow out of limited attainment and reach a point where you will be able to translate modes of thought into character and consciousness.

[XVII:11]11. Concentration does not mean mere thinking of thoughts, but the transmutation of these thoughts into practical values; the average person has no conception of the meaning of concentration. There is always the cry "to have" but never the cry "to be"; people fail to understand that they cannot have one without the other, that they must first find the "kingdom" before they can have the "things added." Momentary enthusiasm is of no value; it is only by unbounded self-confidence that the goal is reached.

[XVII:12]12. The mind may place the ideal a little too high and fall short of the mark; it may attempt to soar on untrained wings and, instead of flying, fall to earth; but that is no reason for not making another attempt.

[XVII:13]13. Weakness is the only barrier to mental attainment; attribute your weakness to physical limitations or mental uncertainties and try

[p. 220]

again; ease and perfection are gained by repetition.

[XVII:14]14. The astronomer centres his mind on the stars and they give forth their secrets; the geologist centres his mind on the construction of the earth and we have geology; so with all things. Men centre their minds on the problems of life, and the result is apparent in the vast and complex social order of the day.

[XVII:15]15. All mental discovery and attainment are the result of desire plus concentration; desire is the strongest motive to action; the more persistent the desire, the more authoritative the revelation. Desire added to concentration will wrench any secret from nature.

[XVII:16]16. In realizing great thoughts, in experiencing great emotions that correspond with great thoughts, the mind is in a state where it appreciates the value of higher things.

[XVII:17]17. The intensity of one moment's earnest concentration and the intense longing to become and to attain may take you further than years of slow normal and forced effort; it will unfasten the prison bars of unbelief, weakness, impotence and self-belittlement, and you will corne into a realization of the joy of overcoming.

[XVII:18]18. The spirit of initiative and originality is developed through persistence and continuity of mental effort. Business teaches the value of concentration and encourages decision of character; it develops practical insight and

[p. 221]

quickness of conclusion. The mental element in every commercial pursuit is dominant as the controlling factor, and desire is the predominating force; all commercial relations are the externalization of desire.

[XVII:19]19. Many of the sturdy and substantial virtues are developed in commercial employment; the mind is steadied and directed; it becomes efficient. The principal necessity is the strengthening of the mind so that it rises superior to the distractions and wayward impulses of instinctive life and thus successfully prevails in the conflict between the higher and lower self.

[XVII:20]20. All of us are dynamos, but the dynamo of itself is nothing; the mind must work the dynamo; then it is useful and its energy can be definitely concentrated. The mind is an engine whose power is undreamed; thought is an omni-working power. It is the ruler and creator of all form and all events occurring in form. Physical energy is nothing in comparison with the omnipotence of thought, because thought enables man to harness all other natural power.

[XVII:21]21. Vibration is the action of thought; it is vibration which reaches out and attracts the material necessary to construct and build. There is nothing mysterious concerning the power of thought; concentration simply implies that consciousness can be focalized to the point

[p. 222]

where it becomes identified with the object of its attention. As food absorbed is the essence of the body, so the mind absorbs the object of its attention, gives it life and being.

[XVII:22]22. If you concentrate on some matter of importance, the intuitive power will be set in operation, and help will come in the nature of information which will lead to success.

[XVII:23]23. Intuition arrives at conclusions without the aid of experience or memory. Intuition often solves problems that are beyond the grasp of the reasoning power. Intuition often comes with a suddenness that is startling; it reveals the truth for which we are searching, so directly that it seems to come from a higher power. Intuition can be cultivated and developed. In order to do this it must be recognized and appreciated; if the intuitive visitor is given a royal welcome when he comes, he will come again; the more cordial the welcome the more frequent his visits will become, but if he is ignored or neglected he will make his visits few and far apart.

[XVII:24]24. Intuition usually comes in the Silence; great minds seek solitude frequently; it is here that all the larger problems of life are worked out. For this reason every business man who can afford it has a private office, where he will not be disturbed; if you cannot afford a private office you can at least find somewhere where you can be alone a few minutes each day, to

[p. 223]

train the thought along lines which will enable you to develop that invincible power which is necessary to achieve.

[XVII:25]25. Remember that fundamentally the subconscious is omnipotent; there is no limit to the things that can be done when it is given the power to act. Your degree of success is determined by the nature of your desire. If the nature of your desire is in harmony with Natural Law or the Universal Mind, it will gradually emancipate the mind and give you invincible courage.

[XVII:26]26. Every obstacle conquered, every victory gained, will give you more faith in your power, and you will have greater ability to win. Your strength is determined by your mental attitude; if this attitude is one of success, and is permanently held with an unswerving purpose, you will attract to yourself from the invisible domain the things you silently demand.

[XVII:27]27. By keeping the thought in mind, it will gradually take tangible form. A definite purpose sets causes in motion which go out in the invisible world and find the material necessary to serve your purpose.

[XVII:28]28. You may be pursuing the symbols of power, instead of power itself. You may be pursuing fame instead of honour, riches instead of wealth, position instead of service; in either

[p. 224]

event you will find that they turn to ashes just as you overtake them.

[XVII:29]29. Premature wealth or position cannot be retained because it has not been earned; we get only what we give, and those who try to get without giving always find that the law of compensation is relentlessly bringing about an exact equilibrium.

[XVII:30]30. The race has hitherto been for money and other mere symbols of power, but with an understanding of the true source of power we can afford to ignore the symbols. The man with a large bank account finds it unnecessary to load his pockets down with gold; so with the man who has found the true source of power; he is no longer interested in its shams or pretentions.

[XVII:31]31. Thought ordinarily leads outwardly in evolutionary directions, but it can be turned within where it will take hold of the basic principles of things, the heart of things, the spirit of things. When you get to the heart of things it is comparatively easy to understand and command them.

[XVII:32]32. This is because the Spirit of a thing is the thing itself, the vital part of it, the real substance. The form is simply the outward manifestation of the spiritual activity within.

[XVII:33]33. For your next exercise concentrate as nearly as possible in accordance with the

[p. 225]

method outlined in this Part; let there be no conscious effort or activity associated with your purpose. Relax completely, avoid any thought of anxiety as to results. Remember that power comes through repose. Let the thought dwell upon your object until it is completely identified with it, until you are conscious of nothing else.

[XVII:34]34. If you wish to eliminate fear concentrate on courage.

[XVII:35]35. If you wish to eliminate lack concentrate on abundance.

[XVII:36]36. If you wish to eliminate disease concentrate on health.

[XVII:37]37. Always concentrate on the ideal as an already existing fact; this is the Elohim, the germ cell, the life principle which goes forth, and enters in, and becomes, sets in motion those causes which guide, direct and bring about the necessary relation, which eventually manifests in form.

 

 

 

Thought is the property of those only who can entertain it.--Emerson.

[p. 226]

  

PART SEVENTEEN

161. What is the true method of concentration?

To become so identified with the object of your thought that you are conscious of nothing else.

162. What is the result of this method of concentration?

Invisible forces are set in motion which irresistibly bring about conditions in correspondence with your thought.

163. What is the controlling factor in this method of thought?

Spiritual Truth.

164. Why is this so?

Because the nature of our desire must be in harmony with Natural Law.

167. What is the practical value of this method of concentration?

Thought is transmuted into character, and character is the magnet which creates the environment of the individual.

166. What is the controlling factor in every commercial pursuit?

The mental element.

[p. 227]

167. Why is this so?

Because Mind is the ruler and creator of all form and all events occurring in form.

168. How does concentration operate?

By the development of the powers of perception, wisdom, intuition, and sagacity.

169. Why is intuition superior to reason?

Because it does not depend upon experience or memory and frequently brings about the solution of our problem by methods concerning which we are in entire ignorance.

170. What is the result of pursuing the symbol of the reality?

Symbols frequently turn to ashes just as we overtake them, because the symbol is only the outward form of the spiritual activity within; therefore, unless we can possess the spiritual reality the form disappears.

 

 

 

The greatest events of an age are its best thoughts. It is the nature of thought to find its way into action.--Bovee.

     
The Master Key System, by Charles F. Haanel, [1919], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 228] [p. 229]

  

PART EIGHTEEN

THIS Part tells of a change in the thought of men, a change which is silently transpiring in our midst and which is unparalleled in the history of the world. The fetters of tradition are being melted off from humanity and truth is rising full orbed before an astonished multitude. It tells how the individual is enabled to control every form of intelligence which has not yet reached this level of self-recognition. It tells when and how the creative power originates, it tells how the Universal produces the various combinations which result in the formation of phenomena, it explains the principle of attraction by which things are brought together, which is the sole means by which existence is carried into effect. It explains the real source of wealth of the individual. It explains the method by which attention and concentration may be developed and shows why the power of attention is the distinguishing characteristic of every man of ability.

[p. 230]

  

INTRODUCTION. PART EIGHTEEN

In order to grow we must obtain what is necessary for our growth. This is brought about through the law of attraction. This principle is the sole means by which the individual is differentiated from the Universal.

Think for a moment, what would a man be if he were not a husband, father or brother, if he were not interested in the social, economical, political or religious world? He would be nothing but an abstract theoretical ego. He exists, therefore, only in his relation to the whole, in his relation to other men, in his relation to society. This relation constitutes his environment; he exists, therefore, in his relation to his environment and in no other way.

Hence it is evident that the individual is simply the differentiation of the one Universal Mind "which lighteth every man that cometh into the world," and his so-called individuality or personality consists of nothing but the manner in which he relates with the whole.

This we call his environment and it is brought about by the law of attraction. Part Eighteen has something more to say concerning this important law.

[p. 231]

  

PART EIGHTEEN

[XVIII:1]1. There is a change in the thought of the world. This change is silently transpiring in our midst, and is more important than any which the world has undergone since the downfall of Paganism.

[XVIII:2]2. The present revolution in the opinions of all classes of men, the highest and most cultured of men as well as those of the labouring class, stands unparalleled in the history of the world.

[XVIII:3]3. Science has of late made such vast discoveries, has revealed such an infinity of resources; has unveiled such enormous possibilities and such unsuspected forces, that scientific men more and more hesitate to affirm certain theories as established and indubitable or to deny other theories as absurd or impossible.

[XVIII:4]4. A new civilization is being born; customs, creeds, and precedent are passing; vision, faith and service are taking their place. The fetters of tradition are being melted off from humanity, and as the dross of materialism is being consumed, thought is being liberated and truth is rising full orbed before an astonished multitude.

[XVIII:5]5. The whole world is on the eve of a new consciousness, a new power, and a new realization within the self.

[XVIII:6]6. Physical Science has resolved matter into molecules, molecules into atoms, atoms into energy, and it has remained for Sir Ambrose

[p. 232]

[paragraph continues] Fleming, in an address before the Royal Institution, to resolve this energy into mind. He says: "In its ultimate essence, energy may be incomprehensible by us except as an exhibition of the direct operation of that which we call Mind or Will."

[XVIII:7]7. And this mind is the indwelling and ultimate. It is imminent in matter as in spirit. It is the sustaining, energizing, all-pervading Spirit of the universe.

[XVIII:8]8. Every living thing must be sustained by its omnipotent Intelligence, and we find the difference in individual lives to be largely measured by the degree of this intelligence, which they manifest. It is greater intelligence that places the animal in a higher scale of being than the plant, the man higher than the animal, and we find that this increased intelligence is again indicated by the power of the individual to control modes of action and thus to consciously adjust himself to his environment.

[XVIII:9]9. It is this adjustment that occupies the attention of the greatest minds, and this adjustment consists in nothing else than the recognition of an order existing in the universal mind, for it is well known that this mind will obey us precisely in proportion as we first obey it.

[XVIII:10]10. It is the recognition of Natural Laws that has enabled us to annihilate time and space, to soar in the air and to make iron float, and the

[p. 233]

greater the degree of intelligence the greater will be our recognition of these Natural Laws and the greater will be the power we can possess.

[XVIII:11]11. It is the recognition of the self as an individualization of this Universal Intelligence that enables the individual to control those forms of intelligence which have not yet reached this level of self-recognition; they do not know that this Universal Intelligence permeates all things, ready to be called into action; they do not know that it is responsive to every demand, and they are therefore in bondage to the law of their own being.

[XVIII:12]12. Thought is creative and the principle on which the law is based is sound and legitimate and is inherent in the nature of things; but this creative power does not originate in the individual, but in the universal, which is the source and foundation of all energy and substance; the individual is simply the channel for the distribution of this energy.

[XVIII:13]13. The individual is simply a means by which the universal produces various combinations which result in the formation of phenomena. These depend upon the law of vibration, whereby various rates of rapidity of motion in the primary substance form new substances only in certain exact numerical ratios.

[p. 234]

[XVIII:14]14. Thought is the invisible link by which the individual comes into communication with the Universal, the finite with the Infinite, the seen with the Unseen. Thought is the magic by which the human being is transformed into a being who thinks and knows and feels and acts.

[XVIII:15]15. As the proper apparatus has enabled the eye to discover worlds without number millions of miles away, so, with the proper understanding, man has been enabled to communicate with the Universal Mind, the source of all power.

[XVIII:16]16. The Understanding which is usually developed is about as valuable as a telephone box without wires or an exchange; in fact, it is usually nothing more than a "belief" which means nothing at all. The Indians believe something and so do the savages of the Cannibal Islands; but that proves nothing.

[XVIII:17]17. The only belief which is of any value to any one is a belief that has been put to a test and demonstrated to be a fact; it is then no longer a belief, but has become a living Faith or the Truth.

[XVIII:18]18. And this Truth has been put to the test by hundreds of thousands of people and has been found to be the Truth exactly in proportion to the usefulness of the apparatus which they used.

[XVIII:19]19. A man would not expect to locate stars

[p. 235]

hundreds of millions of miles away without a sufficiently strong telescope, and for this reason Science is continually engaged in building larger and more powerful telescopes and is continually rewarded by additional knowledge of the heavenly bodies.

[XVIII:20]20. So with understanding; men are continually making progress in the methods which they use to come into communication with the Universal Mind and its infinite possibilities.

[XVIII:21]21. The Universal Mind manifests itself in the objective, through the principle of attraction that each atom has for every other atom, in infinite degrees of intensity.

[XVIII:22]22. It is by this principle of combining and attracting that things are brought together. This principle is of universal application and is the sole means whereby the purpose of existence is carried into effect.

[XVIII:23]23. The expression of growth is met in a most beautiful manner through the instrumentality of this Universal Principle.

[XVIII:24]24. In order to grow we must obtain what is essential for our growth, but as we are at all times a complete thought entity, this completeness makes it possible for us to receive only as we give; growth is therefore conditioned on reciprocal action, and we find that on the mental plane like attracts like, that mental

[p. 236]

vibrations respond only to the extent of their vibratory harmony.

[XVIII:25]25. It is clear, therefore, that thoughts of abundance will respond only to similar thoughts; the wealth of the individual is seen to be what he inherently is. Affluence within is found to be the secret of attraction for affluence without. The ability to produce is found to be the real source of wealth of the individual. It is for this reason that he who has his heart in his work is certain to meet with unbounded success. He will give and continually give, and the more he gives the more he will receive.

[XVIII:26]26. What do the great financiers of the City and Wall Street, the captains of industry, the statesmen, the great company lawyers, the inventors, the physicians, the authors--what do each of these contribute to the sum of human happiness but the power of their thought?

[XVIII:27]27. Thought is the energy by which the law of attraction is brought into operation, which eventually manifests in abundance.

[XVIII:28]28. The Universal Mind is static Mind, or Substance in equilibrium. It is differentiated into form by our power to think. Thought is the dynamic phase of mind.

[XVIII:29]29. Power depends upon consciousness of power; unless we use it, we shall lose it, and unless we are conscious of it we cannot use it.

[p. 237]

[XVIII:30]30. The use of this power depends upon attention; the degree of attention determines our capacity for the acquirement of knowledge, which is another name for power.

[XVIII:31]31. Attention has been held to be the distinguishing mark of genius. The cultivation of attention depends upon practice.

[XVIII:32]32. The incentive of attention is interest; the greater the interest, the greater the attention; the greater the attention, the greater the interest, action and reaction; begin by paying attention; before long you will have aroused interest; this interest will attract more attention, and this attention will produce more interest, and so on. This practice will enable you to cultivate the power of attention.

[XVIII:33]33. Now concentrate upon your power to create; seek insight, perception; try to find a logical basis for the faith which is in you. Let the thought dwell on the fact that the physical man lives and moves and has his being in the sustainer of all organic life; in air, which he must breathe to live. Then let the thought rest on the fact that the spiritual man also lives and moves and has his being in a similar but subtler energy upon which he must depend for life, and that as in the physical world no life assumes form until after a seed is sown, and no higher fruit than that of the parent stock can be produced; so in the spiritual world no effect

[p. 238]

can be produced until the seed is sown and the fruit will depend upon the nature of the seed, so that the results which you secure depend upon your perception of law in the mighty domain of causation, which knowledge is the highest evolution of human consciousness.

 

 

 

Thought engenders thought. Place one idea upon paper, another will follow it, and still another, until you have written a page. You cannot fathom your mind. It is a well of thought which has no bottom. The more you draw from it, the more clear and fruitful it will be. If you neglect to think yourself, and use other people's thoughts, giving them utterance only, you will never know what you are capable of.--G. A. Sala.

[p. 239]

  

PART EIGHTEEN

171. How is the difference in individual lives measured?

By the degree of intelligence which they manifest.

172. What is the law by which the individual may control other forms of intelligence?

A recognition of the self as an individualization of the Universal Intelligence.

173. Where does the creative power originate?

In the Universal.

174. How does the Universal create form?

By means of the individual.

175. What is the connecting link between the individual and the Universal?

Thought.

176. What is the principle by which the means of existence is carried into effect?

The Law of Love.

177. How is this principle brought into expression?

By the law of growth.

[p. 240]

178. Upon what condition does the law of growth depend?

Upon reciprocal action. The individual is complete at all times and this makes it possible to receive only as we give.

179. What is it that we give?

Thought.

180. What do we receive?

Thought, which is substance in equilibrium and which is constantly being differentiated in form by what we think.

 

 

 

The happiness of your life depends upon the quality of your thoughts. Therefore, guard accordingly; and take care that you entertain no notions unsuitable to virtue and reasonable nature.--Marcus Antonius.

[]

          ADVICE

Remember--
   Fully to understand grand and beautiful thought requires, perhaps, as much   time as to conceive it. JOUBERT

If you wish to enjoy the utmost practical benefit from "The Master   Key"--go slowly.

Transfuse into your mind the contents of one part only, each week for   twenty-four weeks.

Realize the meaning of every phrase.

Consult "The Master Key" constantly, as your perpetual help and   stimulus.

Each time you read the work you will get a better understanding of the   eternal cosmic principles.

Tell others of "The Master Key" so that more and more people may   reciprocate with you, as conscious adepts in harmony.

The   Publishers

     
    

     
The Master Key System, by Charles F. Haanel, [1919], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 241]

  

PART NINETEEN

THIS Part tells of the search for truth, which is another name for ultimate cause. If we can find the truth we shall have found the cause for every effect, and having found the cause we shall be in a position to control the effect. It explains that all things are finally resolvable into one thing, and that as they are thus translatable they must ever be in relation and can never be in opposition to one another. It explains that a knowledge of this primary substance is power; it explains that a knowledge of cause and effect is power, that wealth is the offspring of power, that events and conditions are significant only as they effect power, and finally that all things represent certain forms and decrees of power. It tells of a certain form of power which can control every other power, why it is superior and how we may make use of this superior power.

[p. 242]

  

INTRODUCTION. PART NINETEEN

Fear is a powerful form of thought. It paralyses the nerve centres, thus affecting the circulation of the blood. This, in turn, paralyses the muscular system, so that fear affects the entire being, body, brain and nerve, physical, mental and muscular.

Of course the way to overcome fear is to become conscious of power. What is this mysterious vital force which we call power? We do not know; neither do we know what electricity is. But we do know that by conforming to the requirements of the law by which electricity is governed, it will be our obedient servant; that it will light our homes, our cities, run our machinery and serve us in many useful capacities.

And so it is with vital force. Although we do not know what it is, and possibly may never know, we do know that it is a primary force which manifests through living bodies, and that by complying with the laws and principles by which it is governed, we can open ourselves to a more abundant inflow of this vital energy, and thus express the highest possible degree of mental, moral and spiritual efficiency.

Part Nineteen, which follows, tells of a very simple way of developing this vital force. If you put into practice the information outlined in this Part you will soon develop the sense of power which has ever been the distinguishing mark of genius.

[p. 243]

  

PART NINETEEN.

[XIX:1]1. The search for truth is no longer a haphazard adventure, but it is a systematic process, and is logical in its operation. Every kind of experience is given a voice in shaping its decision.

[XIX:2]2. In seeking the truth we are seeking ultimate cause; we know that every human experience is an effect; then if we may ascertain the cause, and if we shall find that this cause is one which we can consciously control, the effect or the experience will be within our control also.

[XIX:3]3. Human experience will then no longer be the football of fate; a man will not be the child of fortune, but destiny, fate and fortune will be controlled as readily as a captain controls his vessel, or an engineer his train.

[XIX:4]4. All things are finally resolvable into the same element and as they are thus translatable, one into the other, they must ever be in relation and may never be in opposition to one another.

[XIX:5]5. In the physical world there are innumerable contrasts, and these may for convenience sake be designated by distinctive names. There are sizes, colours, shades or ends to all things. There is a North Pole, and a South Pole, an inside and an outside, a seen and an unseen, but these expressions merely serve to place extremes in contrast.

[XIX:6]6. They are names given to two different parts of one quantity. The two extremes are

[p. 244]

relative; they are not separate entities, but are two parts or aspects of the whole.

[XIX:7]7. In the mental world we find the same law; we speak of knowledge and ignorance, but ignorance is only a lack of knowledge and is therefore found to be simply a word to express the absence of knowledge; it has no principle in itself.

[XIX:8]8. In the Moral World we again find the same law; we speak of good and evil, but Good is a reality, something tangible, while Evil is found to be simply a negative condition, the absence of Good. Evil is sometimes thought to be a very real condition, but it has no principle, no vitality, no life; we know this because it can always be destroyed by Good; just as Truth destroys Error and light destroys darkness, so Evil vanishes when Good appears; there is therefore but one principle in the Moral World.

[XIX:9]9. We find exactly the same law obtaining in the Spiritual world; we speak of Mind and Matter as two separate entities, but clearer insight makes it evident that there is but one operative principle, and that is Mind.

[XIX:10]10. Mind is the real and the eternal. Matter is for ever changing; we know that in the aeons of time a hundred years is but as a day. If we stand in any large city and let the eye rest on the innumerable large and magnificent buildings,

[p. 245]

the railways, the electric trams, the telephones, the electric lights and all the other conveniences of modern civilization, we may remember that not one of them was there 100 years ago, excepting perhaps several of the buildings; and if we could stand on the same spot in a hundred years from now, in all probability we should find that but few of them remained.

[XIX:11]11. In the animal kingdom we find the same law of change. The millions and millions of animals come and go, a few years constituting their span of life. In the plant world the change is still more rapid. Many plants and nearly all grasses come and go in a single year. When we pass to the inorganic, we expect to find something more substantial, but as we gaze on the apparently solid continent, we are told that it arose from the ocean; we see the giant mountain and are told that the place where it now stands was once a lake; and as we stand in awe before the great cliffs in the Yosemite Valley we can easily trace the path of the glaciers which carried all before them.

[XIX:12]12. We are in the presence of continual change, and we know that this change is but the evolution of the Universal Mind, the grand process whereby all things are continually being created anew, and we come to know that matter is but a form which Mind takes and is therefore simply a condition. Matter has no principle; Mind is the only principle.

[p. 246]

[XIX:13]13. We have then come to know that Mind is the only principle which is operative in the physical, mental, moral and spiritual world.

[XIX:14]14. We also know that this mind is static, or mind at rest; and we know that the ability of the individual to think is his ability to act upon the Universal Mind and convert it into dynamic mind, or mind in motion.

[XIX:15]15. In order to do this fuel must be applied in the form of food, for man cannot think without eating, and so we find that even a spiritual activity such as thinking cannot be converted into sources of pleasure and profit except by making use of material means.

[XIX:16]16. It requires energy of some kind to collect electricity and convert it into a dynamic power; it requires the rays of the sun to give the necessary energy to sustain plant life; so it also requires energy in the form of food to enable the individual to think and thereby act upon the Universal Mind.

[XIX:17]17. You may know that thought constantly, eternally, is taking form, is for ever seeking expression, or you may not, but the fact remains that if your thought is powerful, constructive, and positive, this will be plainly evident in the state of your health, your business and your environment. If your thought is weak, critical, destructive and negative generally, it will manifest in your body as fear, worry and nervousness,

[p. 247]

in your finance as lack and limitation, and in discordant conditions in your environment.

[XIX:18]18. All wealth is the offspring of power; possessions are of value only as they confer power. Events are significant only as they affect power; all things represent certain forms and degrees of power.

[XIX:19]19. A knowledge of cause and effect as shown by the laws governing steam, electricity, chemical affinity and gravitation enables men to plan courageously and to execute fearlessly. These laws are called Natural Laws, because they govern the physical world, but all power is not physical power; there is also mental power, and there is moral and spiritual power.

[XIX:20]20. What are our schools, our universities, but mental power-houses, places where mental power is being developed?

[XIX:21]21. As there are many mighty power-houses for the application of power to ponderous machinery, whereby raw material is collected and converted into the necessities and comforts of life, so the mental power-houses collect the raw material and cultivate and develop it into a power which is infinitely superior to all the forces of Nature, marvellous though these may be.

[XIX:22]22. What is this raw material which is being collected in these thousands of mental powerhouses all over the world and developed into a

[p. 248]

power which is evidently controlling every other power? In its static form it is Mind, in its dynamic form it is Thought.

[XIX:23]23. This power is superior because it exists on a higher plane, because it has enabled man to discover the law by which these wonderful forces of Nature could be harnessed and made to do the work of hundreds and thousands of men. It has enabled man to discover laws whereby time and space have been annihilated, and now apparently the law of gravitation is to be overcome.

[XIX:24]24. Thought is the vital force or energy which is being developed and which has produced such startling results in the last half century as to bring about a world which would be absolutely inconceivable to a man existing only fifty or even twenty-five years ago. If such results have been secured by organizing these mental power-houses in fifty years, what may not be expected in another fifty years?

[XIX:25]25. The substance from which all things are created is infinite in quantity; we know that light travels at the rate of 186,000 miles per second, and we know that there are stars so remote that it takes light 2,000 years to reach us, and we know that such stars exist in all parts of the heaven; we know, too, that this light comes in waves, so that if the ether on which these waves travel was not continuous the light

[p. 249]

would fail to reach us; we can then only come to the conclusion that this substance, or ether, or raw material, is universally present.

[XIX:26]26. How, then does it manifest in form? In electrical science a battery is formed by connecting the opposite poles of zinc and copper, which causes a current to flow from one to the other and so provides energy. This same process is repeated in respect to every polarity, and as all form simply depends upon the rate of vibration and consequent relations of atoms to each other if we wish to change the form of manifestation we must change the polarity. This is the principle of causation.

[XIX:27]27. For your next exercise, concentrate, and when I use the word concentrate, I mean all that the word implies; become so absorbed in the object of your thought that you are conscious of nothing else, and do this a few minutes every day. You take the necessary time to eat in order that the body may be nourished, why not take the time to assimilate your mental food?

[XIX:28]28. Let the thought rest on the fact that appearances are deceptive. The earth is not flat, neither is it stationary; the sky is not a dome, the sun does not move, the stars are not small specks of light, and matter which was once supposed to be fixed has been found to be in a state of perpetual flux.

[p. 250]

[XIX:29]29. Try to realize that the day is fast approaching--its dawn is now at hand--when modes of thought and action must be adjusted to rapidly increasing knowledge of the operation of eternal principles.

 

 

 

Nothing is comparable to the pleasure of an active and prevailing thought; a thought prevailing over the difficulty and obscurity of the object, and refreshing the soul with new discoveries and images of things; andthereby extending the bounds of apprehension, and as it were enlarging the territory of reason.--South.

[p. 251]

  

PART NINETEEN

181. How are extremes placed in contrast?

They are designated by distinctive names, such as inside and outside, top and bottom, light and dark, good and bad.

182. Are these separate entities?

No, they are parts or aspects of one Whole.

183. What is the one creative Principle in the physical, mental and spiritual world?

The Universal Mind, or the Eternal Energy from which all things proceed.

184. How are we related to this creative Principle?

By our ability to think.

185. How does this creative Principle become operative?

Thought is the seed which results in action, and action results in form.

186. Upon what does form depend?

Upon the rate of vibration.

18y. How may the rate of vibration be changed?

By mental action.

[p. 252]

188. Upon what does mental action depend?

Upon polarity, action and reaction, between the individual and the Universal.

189. Does the creative energy originate in the individual or the Universal?

In the Universal, but the Universal can manifest only through the individual.

190. Why is the individual necessary?

Because the Universal is static, and requires energy to start it in motion. This is furnished by food which is converted into energy, which in turn enables the individual to think. When the individual stops eating he stops thinking; then he no longer acts upon the Universal; there is consequently no longer any action or reaction; the Universal is then only pure mind in static form mind at rest.

 

 

 

There is no thought in my mind but it quickly tends to convert itself into a power and organizes a huge instrumentality of means.--Emerson.

     
The Master Key System, by Charles F. Haanel, [1919], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 253]

  

PART TWENTY

THIS Part tells what the true business of life is and the result. It shows that we can obtain no results as long as we remain oblivious to the only power there is, an understanding of the principles, forces, methods and combinations of mind and its relation to the Universal mind. It explains that the Universal can act only through the Individual; it shows that we are the channel for its activity, that it is within us, that we are it. We can, of course, fail to recognize it and so exclude it from our consciousness, but it will nevertheless be the basic fact of all existence. It tells of inspiration, the art of adjusting the individual mind to that of the Universal, the art of becoming a channel for the flow of Infinite Wisdom.

[p. 254]

  

INTRODUCTION. PART TWENTY

For many years there has been an endless discussion as to the origin of evil. Theologians have told us that God is Love, and that God is Omnipresent. If this be true, there is no place where God is not. Where, then, are Evil, Satan and Hell? Let us see:

God is Spirit.

Spirit is the Creative Principle of the Universe.

Man is made in the image and likeness of God.

Man is therefore a spiritual being.

The only activity which spirit possesses is the power to think.

Thinking is therefore a creative process.

All form is therefore the result of the thinking process.

The destruction of form must also be a result of the thinking process.

Fictitious representations of form are the result of the creative power of thought, as in Hypnotism.

Apparent representations of form are the result of the creative power of thought, as in Spiritualism.

Invention, organization and constructive work of all kinds are the result of the creative power of thought, as in concentration.

When the creative power of thought is manifested for the benefit of humanity, we call the result good.

When the creative power of thought is manifested in a destructive or evil manner, we call the result evil.

This indicates the origin of both good and evil; they are simply words which have been coined in order to indicate the nature of the result of the thinking or creative process.

Thought necessarily precedes and predetermines action; action precedes and predetermines condition.

Part Twenty will throw more light upon this important subject.

[p. 255]

  

PART TWENTY

[XX:1]1. The spirit of a thing is that thing; it is necessarily fixed, changeless and eternal. The spirit of you is--you; without the spirit you would be nothing. It becomes active through your recognition of it and its possibilities.

[XX:2]2. You may have all the wealth in Christendom, but unless you recognize it and make use of it, it will have no value; so with your spiritual wealth: unless you recognize it and use it, it will have no value. The one and only condition of spiritual power is use or recognition.

[XX:3]3. All great things come through recognition; the sceptre of power is consciousness, and thought is its messenger, and this messenger is constantly moulding the realities of the invisible world into the conditions and environments of your objective world.

[XX:4]4. Thinking is the true business of life, power is the result. You are at all times dealing with the magical power of thought and consciousness. What results can you expect so long as you remain oblivious to the power which has been placed within your control?

[XX:5]5. So long as you do this you limit yourself to superficial conditions, and make of yourself a beast of burden for those who think; those who recognize their power; those who know that unless we are willing to think we shall have to work, and the less we think the more we shall have to work, and the less we shall get for our work.

[p. 256]

[XX:6]6. The secret of power is a perfect understanding of the principles, forces, methods and combinations of Mind, and a perfect understanding of our relationship to the Universal Mind. It is well to remember that this principle is unchangeable; if this were not so, it would not be reliable; all principles are changeless.

[XX:7]7. This stability is your opportunity; you are its active attribute, the channel for its activity; the Universal can act only through the individual.

[XX:8]8. When you begin to perceive that the essence of the Universal is within yourself--is you--you begin to do things; you begin to feel your power; it is the fuel which fires the imagination; which lights the torch of inspiration; which gives vitality to thought; which enables you to connect with all the invisible forces of the Universe. It is this power which will enable you to plan fearlessly, to execute masterfully.

[XX:9]9. But perception will come only in the Silence; this seems to be the condition required for all great purposes. You are a visualizing entity. Imagination is your workshop. It is here that your ideal is to be visualized.

[XX:10]10. As a perfect understanding of the nature of this power is a primary condition for its manifestation, visualize the entire method over

[p. 257]

and over again, so that you may use it whenever occasion requires. Supreme wisdom is to follow the method whereby we may have the inspiration of the omnipotent Universal Mind on demand at any time.

[XX:11]11. We can fail to recognize this world within, and so exclude it from our consciousness, but it will still be the basic fact of all existence; and when we learn to recognize it, not only in ourselves, but in all persons, events, things and circumstances, we shall have found the "Kingdom of Heaven" which we are told is "within" us.

[XX:12]12. Our failures are a result of the operation of exactly the same principle; the principle is unchangeable; its operation is exact, there is no deviation; if we think lack, limitation, discord, we shall find their fruits on every hand; if we think poverty, unhappiness or disease, the thought messengers will carry the summons as readily as any other kind of thought and the result will be just as certain. If we fear a coming calamity, we shall be able to say with Job, "the thing I feared has come upon me"; if we think unkindly or ignorantly we shall thus attract to ourselves the results of our ignorance.

[XX:13]13. This power of thought, if understood and correctly used, is the greatest labour-saving device ever dreamed of, but if not understood or improperly used, the result will in all probability be disastrous, as we have already seen;

[p. 258]

by the help of this power you can confidently undertake things that are seemingly impossible, because this power is the secret of all inspiration, all genius.

[XX:14]14. To become inspired means to get out of the beaten path, out of the rut, because extraordinary results require extraordinary means. When we come into a recognition of the Unity of all things and that the source of all power is within, we tap the source of inspiration.

[XX:15]15. Inspiration is the art of imbibing, the art of self-realization; the art of adjusting the individual mind to that of the Universal Mind; the art of attaching the proper mechanism to the source of all power; the art of differentiating the formless into form; the art of becoming a channel for the flow of Infinite Wisdom; the art of visualizing perfection; the art of realizing the omnipresence of Omnipotence.

[XX:16]16. An understanding and appreciation of the fact that the infinite power is omnipresent and is therefore in the infinitely small as well as the infinitely large will enable us to absorb its essence; a further understanding of the fact that this power is spirit and therefore indivisible will enable us to appreciate its presence at all points at the same time.

[XX:17]17. An understanding of these facts, first intellectually and then emotionally, will enable us to drink deeply from this ocean of infinite

[p. 259]

power. An intellectual understanding will be of no assistance; the emotions must be brought into action; thought without feeling is cold. The required combination is thought and feeling.

[XX:18]18. Inspiration is from within. The Silence is necessary, the senses must be stilled, the muscles relaxed, repose cultivated. When you have thus come into possession of a sense of poise and power you will be ready to receive the information or inspiration or wisdom which may be necessary for the development of your purpose.

[XX:19]19. Do not confuse these methods with those of the clairvoyant; they have nothing in common. Inspiration is the art of receiving and makes for all that is best in life; your business in life is to understand and command these invisible forces instead of letting them command and rule you. Power implies service; inspiration implies power; to understand and apply the method of inspiration is to become a superman.

[XX:20]20. We can live more abundantly every time we breathe, if we consciously breathe with that intention. The IF is a very important condition in this case, as the intention governs the attention, and without the attention you can secure only the results which every one else secures. That is, a supply equal to the demand.

[XX:21]21. In order to secure the larger supply

[p. 260]

your demand must be increased, and as you consciously increase the demand the supply will follow, you will find yourself coming into a larger and larger supply of life, energy and vitality.

[XX:22]22. The reason for this is not difficult to understand, but it is another of the vital mysteries of life which does not seem to be generally appreciated. If you make it your own you will find it one of the great realities of life.

[XX:23]23. We are told that "In Him we live and move and have our being," and we are told that "He" is a Spirit, and again that "He" is Love, so that every time we breathe, we breathe this life, love and spirit. This is Pranic Energy, or Pranic Ether; we could not exist a moment without it. It is the Cosmic Energy; it is the Life of the Solar Plexus.

[XX:24]24. Every time we breathe we fill our lungs with air and at the same time vitalize our body with this Pranic Ether which is Life itself, so that we have the opportunity of making a conscious connection with All Life, All Intelligence and All Substance.

[XX:25]25. A knowledge of your relation and oneness with this Principle that governs the Universe and the simple method whereby you can consciously identify yourself with it gives you a scientific understanding of a law whereby you may free yourself from disease, from lack or

[p. 261]

limitation of any kind; in fact, it enables you to breathe the "breath of life" into your own nostrils.

[XX:26]26. This "breath of life" is a super-conscious reality. It is the essence of the "I am." It is pure "Being" or Universal Substance and our conscious unity with it enables us to localize it, and thus exercise the powers of this creative energy.

[XX:27]27. Thought is creative vibration and the quality of the conditions created will depend upon the quality of our thought, because we cannot express powers which we do not possess. We must "be" before we can "do" and we can "do" only to the extent to which we "are," and so what we do will necessarily coincide with what we "are" and what we are depends upon what we "think."

[XX:28]28. Every time you think you start a train of causation which will create a condition in strict accordance with the quality of the thought which originated it. Thought which is in

harmony with the Universal Mind will result in corresponding conditions. Thought which is destructive or discordant will produce corresponding results. You may use thought constructively or destructively, but the immutable law will not allow you to plant a thought of one kind and reap the fruit of another. You are free to use this marvellous creative power as you will, but you must take the consequences.

[p. 262]

[XX:29]29. This is the danger from what is called Will Power. There are those who seem to think that by force of will they can coerce this law that they can sow seed of one kind and by "Will Power" make it bear fruit of another, but the fundamental principle of creative power is the Universal, and therefore the idea of forcing a compliance with our wishes by the power of the individual will is an inverted conception, which may appear to succeed for a while but is eventually doomed to failure, because it antagonizes the very power which it is seeking to use.

[XX:30]30. It is the individual attempting to coerce the Universal, the finite in conflict with the Infinite. Our permanent well-being will be best conserved by a conscious co-operation with the continuous forward movement of the Great Whole.

[XX:31]31. For your next exercise, go into the Silence and concentrate on the fact that "In Him we live and move and have our being" is literally and scientifically exact! That you ARE because He IS, that if He is Omnipresent He must be in you. That if He is all in all you must be in Him! That He is Spirit and you are made in "His image and likeness" and that the only difference between His spirit and your spirit is one of degree, that a part must be the same in kind and quality as the whole. When you can realize this clearly you will have found

[p. 263]

the secret of the creative power of thought, you will have found the origin of both good and evil, you will have found the secret of the wonderful power of concentration, you will have found the key to the solution of every problem whether physical, financial or environmental.

 

 

 

Learning without thought is labour lost; thought without learning is perilous.

Thinkers are as scarce as gold; but he whose thoughts embrace all their subject, who pursues it uninterruptedly and fearless of consequences, is a diamond of enormous size.--Lavater.

[p. 264]

  

PART TWENTY

191. Upon what condition does power depend?

Upon recognition and use.

192. What is recognition?

Consciousness.

193. How do we become conscious of power?

By thinking.

194. What then is the true business of life?

Correct scientific thinking.

195. What is correct scientific thinking?

The ability to adjust our thought processes to the will of the Universal. In other words to co-operate with Natural laws.

196. How is this accomplished?

By securing a perfect understanding of the principles, forces, methods and combinations of mind.

197. What is this Universal Mind?

The basic fact of all existence.

198. What is the cause of all lack, limitation, disease and discord?

[p. 265]

It is due to the operation of exactly the same law, the law operates relentlessly and is continually bringing about conditions in correspondence with the thought which originated or created them.

199. What is inspiration?

The art of realizing the omnipresence of Omniscience.

200. Upon what does the conditions with which we meet depend?

Upon the quality of our thought. Because what we do depends upon what we are and what we are depends upon what we think.

 

 

 

All truly wise thoughts have been thought already thousands of times; but to make them truly ours we must think them over again honestly, till they take root in our personal experience.--Goethe.

     
The Master Key System, by Charles F. Haanel, [1919], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 266] [p. 267]

  

PART TWENTY-ONE

THIS Part explains how we may come into possession of power sufficient to meet every situation which may arise in life. It explains that the ability to eliminate imperfect conditions depends upon mental action. It explains that great ideas have a tendency to eliminate smaller ideas, so that it is well to hold ideas which are large enough to counteract and destroy all small or undesirable tendencies. This is one of the secrets of success, one of the accomplishments of the Master Mind. It explains that the creative energy finds no more difficulty in handling a large situation than a small one. It explains how conditions are produced in our lives by the predominant thoughts which we entertain. It explains how you may set causes in motion which will create an irresistible magnetic power which will bring the things you require to you. It explains the issue between the old regime and the new, it explains the crux of the social problem, it explains the true secret of health, wealth and power.

[p. 268]

  

INTRODUCTION. PART TWENTY-ONE

In paragraph seven of this Part you will find that one of the secrets of success, one of the methods of organizing victory, one of the accomplishments of the Master Mind is to think big thoughts.

In paragraph eight you will find that everything which we hold in our consciousness for any length of time becomes impressed upon our subconsciousness and so becomes a pattern which the creative energy will weave into our life and environment. This is the secret of the wonderful power of prayer.

We know that the universe is governed by law; that for every effect there must be a cause, and that the same cause, under the same conditions, will invariably produce the same effect. Consequently, if prayer has ever been answered, it will always be answered, if the proper conditions are complied with. This must necessarily be true; otherwise the Universe would be a chaos instead of a cosmos. The answer to prayer is therefore subject to law, and this law is definite, exact and scientific, just as are the laws governing gravitation and electricity. An understanding of this law takes the foundation of Christianity out of the realm of superstition and credulity and places it upon the firm rock of scientific understanding.

But, unfortunately, there are comparatively few persons who know how to pray. They understand that there are laws governing electricity, mathematics and chemistry, but, for some inexplicable reason, it never seems to occur to them that there are also spiritual laws, and that these laws are also definite, scientific, exact, and operate with immutable precision.

[p. 269]

  

PART TWENTY-ONE

[XXI:1]1. The real secret of power is consciousness of power. The Universal Mind is unconditional; therefore, the more conscious we become of our unity with this mind, the less conscious we shall become of conditions and limitations, and as we become emancipated or freed from conditions we come into a realization of the unconditional. We have become free!

[XXI:2]2. As soon as we become conscious of the inexhaustible power in the world within, we begin to draw on this power and apply and develop the greater possibilities which this discernment has realized, because whatever we become conscious of, is invariably manifested in the objective world, is brought forth into tangible expression.

[XXI:3]3. This is because the Infinite mind, which is the source from which all things proceed, is one and indivisible, and each individual is a channel whereby this Eternal Energy is being manifested. Our ability to think is our ability to act upon this Universal substance, and what we think is what is created or produced in the objective world.

[XXI:4]4. The result of this discovery is nothing less than marvellous, and means that mind is extraordinary in quality, limitless in quantity and contains possibilities without number. To become conscious of this power is to become a "live wire"; it has the same effect as placing an ordinary wire in contact with a wire that is

[p. 270]

charged. The Universal is the live wire. It carries power sufficient to meet every situation which may arise in the life of every individual. When the individual mind touches the Universal Mind it receives all the power it requires. This is the world within. All science recognizes the reality of this world, and all power is contingent upon our recognition of this world.

[XXI:5]5. The ability to eliminate imperfect conditions depends upon mental action, and mental action depends upon consciousness of power; therefore, the more conscious we become of our unity with the source of all power, the greater will be our power to control and master every condition.

[XXI:6]6. Large ideas have a tendency to eliminate all smaller ideas so that it is well to hold ideas large enough to counteract and destroy all small or undesirable tendencies. This will remove innumerable petty and annoying obstacles from your path. You also become conscious of a larger world of thought, thereby increasing your mental capacity as well as placing yourself in position to accomplish something of value.

[XXI:7]7. This is one of the secrets of success, one of the methods of organizing victory, one of the accomplishments of the Master-mind. He thinks big thoughts. The creative energies of mind find no more difficulty in handling large situations than small ones. Mind is just as

[p. 271]

much present in the Infinitely large as in the Infinitely small.

[XXI:8]8. When we realize these facts concerning mind we understand how we may bring to ourselves any condition by creating the corresponding conditions in our consciousness, because everything which is held for any length of time in the consciousness, eventually becomes impressed upon the sub-conscious and thus becomes a pattern which the creative energy will weave into the life and environment of the individual.

[XXI:9]9. In this way conditions are produced and we find that our lives are simply the reflection of our predominant thoughts, our mental attitude; we see then that the science of correct thinking is the one science, that it includes all other sciences.

[XXI:10]10. From this science we learn that every thought creates an impression in the brain, that these impressions create mental tendencies, and these tendencies create character, ability and purpose, and that the combined action of character, ability and purpose determines the experiences with which we shall meet in life.

[XXI:11]11. These experiences come to us through the law of attraction; through the action of this law we meet in the world without the experiences which correspond to our world within.

[XXI:12]12. The predominant thought or the mental attitude is the magnet, and the law is that like

[p. 272]

attracts like, consequently the mental attitude will invariably attract such conditions as correspond to its nature.

[XXI:13]13. This mental attitude is our personality and is composed of the thoughts which we have been creating in our own mind; therefore, if we wish a change in conditions all that is necessary is to change our thought; this will in turn change our mental attitude, which will in turn change our personality, which will in turn change the persons, things and conditions, or the experiences with which we meet in life.

[XXI:14]14. It is, however, no easy matter to change the mental attitude, but by persistent effort it may be accomplished; the mental attitude is patterned after the mental pictures which have been photographed on the brain; if you do not like the pictures, destroy the negatives and create new pictures; this is the art of visualization.

[XXI:15]15. As soon as you have done this you will begin to attract new things, and the new things will correspond to the new pictures. To do this: impress on the mind a perfect picture of the desire which you wish to have objectified and continue to hold the picture in mind until results are obtained.

[XXI:16]16. If the desire is one which requires determination, ability, talent, courage, power or any other spiritual power, these are necessary essentials for your picture; build them in; they are

[p. 273]

the vital part of the picture; they are the feeling which combines with thought and creates the irresistible magnetic power which draws the things you require to you. They give your picture life, and life means growth, and as soon as it begins to grow, the result is practically assured.

[XXI:17]17. Do not hesitate to aspire to the highest possible attainments in anything you may undertake, for the mind forces are ever ready to lend themselves to a purposeful will in the effort to crystallize its highest aspirations into acts, accomplishments and events.

[XXI:18]18. An illustration of how these mind forces operate is suggested by the method in which all our habits are formed. We do a thing, then do it again, and again, and again, until it becomes easy and perhaps almost automatic; and the same rule applies in breaking any and all bad habits; we stop doing a thing, and then avoid it again, and again until we are entirely free from it; and if we do fail now and then, we should by no means lose hope, for the law is absolute and invincible and gives us credit for every effort and every success, even though our efforts and successes are perhaps intermittent.

[XXI:19]19. There is no limit to what this law can do for you; dare to believe in your own ideal; remember that Nature is plastic to the ideal; think of the ideal as an already accomplished fact.

[p. 274]

[XXI:20]20. The real battle of life is one of ideas; it is being fought out by the few against the many; on the one side is the constructive and creative thought, on the other side the destructive and negative thought; the creative thought is dominated by an ideal, the passive thought is dominated by appearances. On both sides are men of science, men of letters and men of affairs.

[XXI:21]21. On the creative side are men who spend their time in laboratories, or over microscopes and telescopes, side by side with the men who dominate the commercial, political and scientific world; on the negative side are men who spend their time investigating law and precedent, men who mistake theology for religion, statesmen who mistake might for right, and all the millions who seem to prefer precedent to progress, who are eternally looking backward instead of forward, who see only the world without, but know nothing of the world within.

[XXI:22]22. In the last analysis there are but these two classes; all men will have to take their place on one side or the other; they will have to go forward, or go back; there is no standing still in a world where all is motion; it is this attempt to stand still that gives sanction and force to arbitrary and unequal codes of law.

[XXI:23]23. That we are in a period of transition is evidenced by the unrest which is everywhere apparent. The complaint of humanity is as a

[p. 275]

roll of heaven's artillery, commencing with low and threatening notes and increasing until the sound is sent from cloud to cloud, and the lightning rends the air and earth.

[XXI:24]24. The sentries who patrol the most advanced outposts of the Industrial, Political and Religious world are calling anxiously to each other. What of the night? The danger and insecurity of the position they occupy and attempt to hold is becoming more apparent every hour. The dawn of a new era necessarily declares that the existing order of things cannot much longer be.

[XXI:25]25. The issue between the old regime and the new, the crux of the social problem, is entirely a question of conviction in the minds of the people as to the nature of the Universe. When they realize that the transcendent force of spirit or mind of the Cosmos is within each individual, it will be possible to frame laws that shall consider the liberties and rights of the many instead of the privileges of the few.

[XXI:26]26. As long as the people regard the Cosmic power as a power non-human and alien to humanity, so long will it be comparatively easy for a supposed privileged class to rule by Divine right in spite of every protest of social sentiment. The real interest of humanity is therefore to exalt, emancipate and recognize the divinity of the human spirit. To recognize that all power is from within. That no human being has any more power than any other human being, except

[p. 276]

such as may willingly be delegated to him. The old regime would have us believe that the law was superior to the law-makers; herein is the gist of the social crime of every form of privilege and personal inequality, the institutionalizing of the fatalistic doctrine of Divine election.

[XXI:27]27. The Divine Mind is the Universal Mind; it does not act through sheer caprice or from anger, jealousy or wrath; neither can it be flattered, cajoled or moved by sympathy or petition to supply man with some need which he thinks necessary for his happiness or even his existence. The Divine Mind makes no exceptions in favour of any individual; but when the individual understands and realizes his Unity with the Universal Principle he will appear to be favoured because he will have found the source of all health, all wealth and all power.

[XXI:28]28. For your next exercise, concentrate on the Truth. Try to realize that the Truth shall make you free, that is, nothing can permanently stand in the way of your perfect success when you learn to apply the scientifically correct thought methods and principles. Realize that you are eternalizing in your environment, your inherent soul potencies. Realize that the Silence offers an ever available and almost unlimited opportunity for awakening the highest conception of Truth. Try to comprehend that

[p. 277]

[paragraph continues] Omnipotence itself is absolute silence; all else is change, activity, limitation. Silent thought concentration is therefore the true method of reaching, awakening and then expressing the wonderful potential power of the world within.

 

 

 

The possibilities of thought training are infinite, its consequence eternal, and yet few take the pains to direct their thinking into channels that will do them good, but instead leave all to chance.--Marden.

[p. 278]

  

PART TWENTY-ONE

201. What is the real secret of power?

The consciousness of power, because whatever we become conscious of, is invariably manifested in the objective world, is brought forth into tangible expression.

202. What is the source of this power?

The Universal Mind, from which all things proceed, and which is one and indivisible.

203. How is this power being manifested?

Through the individual. Each individual is a channel whereby this energy is being differentiated in form.

204. How may we connect with this Omnipotence?

Our ability to think is our ability to act on this Universal Energy, and what we think is what is produced or created in the objective world.

205. What is the result of this discovery?

The result is nothing less than marvellous; it opens unprecedented and limitless opportunity.

206. How, then, may we eliminate imperfect conditions?

By becoming conscious of our Unity with the source of all power.

[p. 279]

207. What is one of the distinctive characteristics of the Master Mind?

He thinks big thoughts, he holds ideas large enough to counteract and destroy all petty and annoying obstacles.

208. How do experiences come to us?

Through the law of attraction.

209. How is this law brought into operation?

By our predominant mental attitude.

210. What is the issue between the old regime and the new?

A question of conviction as to the nature of the Universe. The old regime is trying to cling to the fatalistic doctrine of Divine election. The new regime recognizes  divinity of the individual, the divinity of humanity.

 

 

 

The power to think, consecutively and deeply and clearly, is an avowed and deadly enemy to mistakes and blunders, superstitions, unscientific theories, irrational beliefs, unbridled enthusiasm, fanaticism.--Haddock.

     
The Master Key System, by Charles F. Haanel, [1919], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 280] [p. 281]

  

PART TWENTY-TWO

THIS Part explains the cause of our present character, our present environment, our present ability, our present physical condition, and tells how we can make our future what we wish it to be. It explains how the vast panorama of Nature is being constantly changed by simply changing the rate of vibration. It tells how the rate of vibration is being constantly changed in our bodies, usually unconsciously and often with detrimental and disastrous results. It tells how we may effect this change consciously and thus bring about only harmonious and salutary conditions. It explains that the Law of Health is based on the law of vibration, and that with a proper knowledge of the law we may externalize health conditions. It explains the operation of this law and how it is being more generally understood and appreciated, and how many physicians are now giving the matter their earnest attention.

[p. 282]

  

INTRODUCTION. PART TWENTY-TWO

In Part Twenty-Two you will find that thoughts are spiritual seeds, which, when planted in the sub-conscious mind, have a tendency to sprout and grow, but unfortunately the fruit is frequently not to our liking.

The various forms of inflammation, paralysis, nervousness and diseased conditions generally, are the manifestation of fear, worry, care, anxiety, jealousy, hatred and similar thought.

The life processes are carried on by two distinct methods; firstly, the taking up and making use of nutritive material necessary for constructing cells; secondly, the secretion and excretion of the waste material.

All life is based upon these constructive and destructive activities, and as food, water and air are the only requisites necessary for the construction of cells, it would seem that the problem of prolonging life indefinitely would not be a very difficult one.

However strange it may seem, it is the second or destructive activity that is, with rare exception, the cause of all disease. The waste material accumulates and saturates the tissues, which causes auto-intoxication. This may be partial or general. In the first case the disturbance will be local; in the second place it will affect the whole system.

The problem, then, before us in the healing of disease is to increase the inflow and distribution of vital energy throughout the system, and this can only be done by eliminating thoughts of fear, worry, care, anxiety, jealousy, hatred, and every other destructive thought, which tend to tear down and destroy the nerves and glands which control the excretion and elimination of poisonous and waste matter.

"Nourishing foods and strengthening tonics" cannot bestow life, because these are but secondary manifestations of life. The primary manifestation of life and how you may get in touch with it is explained in Part Twenty-Two.

[p. 283]

  

PART TWENTY-TWO

[XXII:1]1. Knowledge is of priceless value, because by applying knowledge we can make our future what we wish it to be. When we realize that our present character, our present environment, our present ability, our present physical condition are all the result of past methods of thinking, we shall begin to have some conception of the value of knowledge.

[XXII:2]2. If the state of our health is not all that could be desired, let us examine our method of thinking; let us remember that every thought produces an impression on the mind; every impression is a seed which will sink into the sub-conscious and form a tendency; the tendency will be to attract other similar thoughts and before we know it we shall have a crop which must be harvested.

[XXII:3]3. If these thoughts contain disease germs, the harvest will be sickness, decay, weakness and failure; the question is, what are we thinking, what are we creating, what is the harvest to be?

[XXII:4]4. If there is any physical condition which it is necessary to change, the law governing visualization will be found effective. Make a mental image of physical perfection, hold it in the mind until it is absorbed by the consciousness. Many have eliminated chronic ailments in a few weeks by this method, and thousands have overcome and destroyed all manner of

[p. 284]

ordinary physical disturbances by this method in a few days, sometimes in a few minutes.

[XXII:5]5. It is through the law of vibration that the mind exercises this control over the body. We know that every mental action is a vibration, and we know that all form is simply a mode of motion, a rate of vibration. Therefore, any given vibration immediately modifies every atom in the body, every life cell is affected and an entire chemical change is made in every group of life cells.

[XXII:6]6. Everything in the Universe is what it is by virtue of its rate of vibration. Change the rate of vibration and you change the nature, quality and form. The vast panorama of nature, both visible and invisible, is being constantly changed by simply changing the rate of vibration, and as thought is a vibration we can also exercise this power. We can change the vibration and thus produce any condition which we desire to manifest in our bodies.

[XXII:7]7. We are all using this power every minute. The trouble is most of us are using it unconsciously and thus producing undesirable results. The problem is to use it intelligently and produce only desirable results. This should not be difficult, because we all have had sufficient experience to know what produces pleasant vibration in the body, and we also know the causes which produce the unpleasant and disagreeable sensations.

[p. 285]

[XXII:8]8. All that is necessary is to consult our own experience. When our thought has been uplifted, progressive, constructive, courageous, noble, kind or in any other way desirable, we have set in motion vibrations which brought about certain results. When our thought has been filled with envy, hatred, jealousy, criticism or any of the other thousand and one forms of discord, certain vibrations were set in motion which brought about certain other results of a different nature, and each of these rates of vibration, if kept up, crystallized in form. In the first case the result was mental, moral and physical health, and in the second case discord, inharmony and disease.

[XXII:9]9. We can understand, then, something of the power which the mind possesses over the body.

[XXII:10]10. The objective mind has certain effects on the body which are readily recognized. Some one says something to you which strikes you as ludicrous and you laugh, possibly until your whole body shakes, which shows that thought has control over the muscles of your body; or someone says something which excites your sympathy and your eyes fill with tears, which shows that thought controls the glands of the body; or some one says something which makes you angry and the blood mounts to your cheek, which shows that thought controls the circulation of your blood. But as

[p. 286]

these experiences are all the results of the action of your objective mind over the body, the results are of a temporary nature; they soon pass away and leave the situation as it was before.

[XXII:11]11. Let us see how the action of the subconscious mind over the body differs. You receive a wound; thousands of cells begin the work of healing at once; in a few days or a few weeks the work is complete. You may even break a bone. No surgeon on earth can weld the parts together. He may set the bone for you, and the subjective mind will immediately begin the process of welding the parts together, and in a short time the bone is as solid as it ever was. You may swallow poison; the subjective mind will immediately discover the danger and make violent efforts to eliminate it. You may become infected with a dangerous germ; the subjective will at once commence to build a wall around the infected area and destroy the infection by absorbing it in the white blood corpuscles which it supplies for the purpose.

[XXII:12]12. These processes of the sub-conscious mind usually proceed without our personal knowledge or direction, and so long as we do not interfere the result is perfect, but, as these millions of repair cells are all intelligent and respond to our thought, they are often paralysed and rendered impotent by our thoughts of fear, doubt and anxiety. They are like an army of workmen, ready to start an important piece of

[p. 287]

work, but every time they get fairly started on the undertaking a strike is called or plans changed, until they finally get discouraged and give up.

[XXII:13]13. The way to health is founded on the law of vibration, which is the basis of all science, and this law is brought into operation by the mind, the "world within." It is a matter of individual effort and practice. Our world of power is within; if we are wise we shall not waste time and effort in trying to deal with effects as we find them in the "world without," which is only an external, a reflection.

[XXII:14]14. We shall always find the cause in the "world within"; by changing the cause, we change the effect.

[XXII:15]15. Every cell in your body is intelligent and will respond to your direction. The cells are all creators and will create the exact pattern which you give them.

[XXII:16]16. Therefore, when perfect images are placed before the subjective, the creative energies will build a perfect body.

[XXII:17]17. Brain cells are constructed in the same way. The quality of the brain is governed by the state of mind, or mental attitude, so that if undesirable mental attitudes are conveyed to the subjective they will in turn be transferred to the body; we can therefore readily see that if we wish the body to manifest health, strength

[p. 288]

and vitality this must be the predominant thought.

[XXII:18]18. We know then that every element of the human body is the result of a rate of vibration.

[XXII:19]19. We know that mental action is a rate of vibration.

[XXII:20]20. We know that a higher rate of vibration governs, modifies, controls, changes or destroys a lower rate of vibration.

[XXII:21]21. We know that the rate of vibration is governed by the character of brain cells, and finally,

[XXII:22]22. We know how to create these brain cells; therefore,

[XXII:23]23. We know how to make any physical change in the body we desire, and having secured a working knowledge of the power of mind to this extent, we have come to know that there is practically no limitation which can be placed upon our ability to place ourselves in harmony with natural law, which is omnipotent.

[XXII:24]24. This influence or control over the body by the mind is coming to be more and more generally understood, and many physicians are now giving the matter their earnest attention. Dr. Albert T. Shofield, who has written several important books on the subject, says: "The subject of mental therapeutics is still

[p. 289]

ignored in medical works generally. In our physiologies no reference is made to the central controlling power that rules the body for its good, and the power of the mind over the body is seldom spoken of.

[XXII:25]25. "No doubt many physicians treat nervous diseases of functional origin wisely and well, but what we contend is that the knowledge they display was taught at no school, was learned from no book, but is intuitive and empirical.

[XXII:26]26. "This is not as it should be. The power of mental therapeutics should ac the subject of careful, special and scientific teaching in every medical school. We might pursue the subject of maltreatment, or want of treatment, further in detail and describe the disastrous results of neglected cases; but the task is an invidious one.

[XXII:27]27. "There can be no doubt that few patients are aware how much they can do for themselves. What the patient can do for himself, the forces he can set in motion, are as yet unknown. We are inclined to believe that they are far greater than most imagine, and will undoubtedly be used more and more. Mental therapeutics may be directed by the patient himself to calming the mind in excitement, by arousing feelings of joy, hope, faith and love; by suggesting motives for exertion, by regular mental work, by diverting the thoughts from the malady."

[p. 290]

[XXII:28]28. For your next exercise concentrate on Tennyson's beautiful lines "Speak to Him, thou, for He hears, and spirit with spirit can meet, Closer is He than breathing, and nearer than hands and feet." Then try to realize that when you do "Speak to Him," you are in touch with Omnipotence.

[XXII:29]29. This realization and recognition of this Omnipresent power will quickly destroy any and every form of sickness or suffering and substitute harmony and perfection. Then remember there are those who seem to think that sickness and suffering are sent by God; if so, every physician, every surgeon and every Red Cross nurse is defying the will of God, and hospitals and  are places of rebellion instead of houses of mercy. Of course, this quickly reasons itself into an absurdity, but there are many who still cherish the idea.

[XXII:30]30. Then let the thought rest on the fact that until recently Theology has been trying to teach an impossible Creator, one who created beings capable of sinning and then allowed them to be eternally punished for such sins. Of course the necessary outcome of such extraordinary ignorance was to create fear instead of love, and so, after two thousand years of this kind of propaganda, Theology is now busily engaged in apologizing for Christendom.

[XXII:31]31. You will then the more readily appreciate

[p. 291]

the ideal man, the man made in the image and likeness of God, and you will the more readily appreciate the all originating Mind that forms, upholds, sustains, originates and creates all there is.

"All are but parts of one stupendous whole,
  Whose body nature is, and God the soul."--Pope.

 

 

 

Opportunity follows perception, action follows inspiration, growth follows knowledge, eminence follows progress. Always the spiritual first, then the transformation into the infinite and illimitable possibilities of achievement.

[p. 292]

  

PART TWENTY-TWO

211. How may sickness be eliminated?

By placing ourselves in harmony with Natural Law which is Omnipotent.

212. What is the process?

A realization that man is a spiritual being and that this spirit must necessarily be perfect.

213. What is the result?

A conscious recognition of this perfection, first intellectually, then emotionally, brings about a manifestation of this perfection.

214. Why is this so?

Because thought is spiritual and therefore creative and correlates with its object and brings it into manifestation.

215. What Natural Law is brought into operation?

The Law of Vibration.

216. Why does this govern?

Because a higher rate of vibration governs, modifies, controls, changes or destroys a lower rate of vibration.

[p. 293]

217. Is this system of mental therapeutics generally recognized?

Yes, there are several million people in the world who make use of it in one form or another.

218. What is the result of this system of thought?

For the first time in the world's history every man's highest reasoning faculty can be satisfied by a demonstrable truth which is now fast flooding the world.

219. Is this system applicable to other forms of supply?

It will meet every human requirement or necessity.

220. Is this system scientific or religious?

Both. True science and true religion are twin sisters, where one goes the other necessarily follows.

 

 

 

Silent thought, is, after all, the mightiest agent in human affairs.--Channing.

     
The Master Key System, by Charles F. Haanel, [1919], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 294] [p. 295]

  

PART TWENTY-THREE

THIS Part tells of the money consciousness and the power which sets the current in motion which produces the attractive force which opens the doors to the arteries of commerce. It tells how the current is stopped or completely reversed and turned away from us. It tells how money is woven into the outer fabric of our existence. Why it engages the best thought of the best minds. How we make money. How to recognize opportunity. How to make a money magnet of yourself. How to get the necessary insight to perceive and utilize opportunities. How to recognize values. It tells how to convert an idea into an income, how to make a direct connection with the Universal Mind, how to secure practical results; in fact, it s tell what the only really practical thing is.

[p. 296]

  

INTRODUCTION. PART TWENTY-THREE

In this Part you will find that money weaves itself into the entire fabric of our very existence; that the law of success is service; that we get what we give, and for this reason we should consider it a great privilege to be able to give.

We have found that thought is the creative activity behind every constructive enterprise. We can therefore give nothing of more practical value than our thought.

Creative thought requires attention, and the power of attention is, as we have found, the weapon of the Super-man. Attention develops concentration, and concentration develops Spiritual Power, and Spiritual Power is the mightiest force in existence.

This is the science which embraces all sciences. It is the art which, above all arts, is relevant to human life. In the mastery of this science and this art there is opportunity for unending progression. Perfection in this is not acquired in six days, or in six weeks, or in six months. It is the labour of a life. Not to go forward is to go backward.

It is inevitable that the entertainment of positive, constructive and unselfish thoughts should have a far-reaching effect for good. Compensation is the key-note of the universe. Nature is constantly seeking to strike an equilibrium. Where something is sent out, something must be received; lest there should be a vacuum formed. By observance of this rule you cannot fail to profit in such measure as amply to justify your effort along this line.

[p. 297]

  

PART TWENTY-THREE

[XXIII:1]1. The money consciousness is an attitude of mind; it is the open door to the arteries of commerce. It is the receptive attitude. Desire is the attractive force which sets the current in motion and fear is the great obstacle by which the current is stopped or completely reversed--turned away from us.

[XXIII:2]2. Fear is just the opposite from money consciousness; it is poverty consciousness, and as the law is unchangeable we get exactly what we give; if we fear we get what we feared. Money weaves itself into the entire fabric of our very existence; it engages the best thought of the best minds.

[XXIII:3]3. We make money by making friends, and we enlarge our circle of friends by making money for them, by helping them, by being of service to them. The first law of success then is service, and this in turn is built on integrity and justice. The man who at least is not fair in his intention is simply ignorant; he has missed the fundamental law of all exchange; he is impossible; he will lose surely and certainly; he may not know it; he may think he is winning, but he is doomed to certain defeat. He cannot cheat the Infinite. The law of compensation will demand of him an eye for an eye and a tooth for a tooth.

[XXIII:4]4. The forces of life are volatile; they are composed of our thoughts and ideals and these in turn are moulded into form; our problem is to keep an open mind, to constantly reach out

[p. 298]

for the new, to recognize opportunity, to be interested in the race rather than the goal, for the pleasure is in the pursuit rather than the possession.

[XXIII:5]5. You can make a money magnet of yourself, but to do so you must first consider how you can make money for other people. If you have the necessary insight to perceive and utilize opportunities and propitious conditions and recognize values, you can put yourself in position to take advantage of them, but your greatest success will come as you are enabled to assist others. What benefits one must benefit all.

[XXIII:6]6. A generous thought is filled with strength and vitality, a selfish thought contains the germs of dissolution; it will disintegrate and pass away. Great financiers like Morgan, Rothschild and others are simply channels for the distribution of wealth; enormous amounts come and go, but it would be as dangerous to stop the outgo as the income; both ends must remain open; and so our greatest success will come as we recognize that it is just as essential to give as to get.

[XXIII:7]7. If we recognize the Omnipotent power that is the source of all supply we will adjust our consciousness to this supply in such a way that it will constantly attract all that is necessary to itself and we shall find that the more we give the more we get. Giving in this sense implies

[p. 299]

service. The banker gives his money, the merchant his goods, the author gives his thought, the workman gives his skill; all have something to give, but the more they can give, the more they get, and the more they get the more they are enabled to give.

[XXIII:8]8. The financier gets much because he gives much; he thinks; he is seldom a man that lets any one else do his thinking for him; he wants to know how results are to be secured; you must show him; when you can do this he will furnish the means by which hundreds nr thousands may profit, and in proportion as they are successful will he be successful. Morgan, Rockefeller, Carnegie, Rothschild and others did not get rich because they lost money for other people; on the contrary, it is because they made money for other people that they became the wealthiest men in the wealthiest countries on the globe.

[XXIII:9]9. The average person is entirely innocent of any deep thinking; he accepts the ideas of others, and repeats them, in very much the same way as a parrot; this is readily seen when we understand the method which is used to form public opinion, and this docile attitude on the part of a large majority who seem perfectly willing to let a few persons do all their thinking for them is what enables a few men in a great many countries to usurp all the avenues of power

[p. 300]

and hold the millions in subjection. Creative thinking requires attention.

[XXIII:10]10. The power of attention is called concentration; this power is directed by the will; for this reason we must refuse to concentrate or think of anything except the things we desire. Many are constantly concentrating upon sorrow, loss and discord of every kind; as thought is creative it necessarily follows that this concentration inevitably leads to more loss, more sorrow and more discord. How could it be otherwise? On the other hand, when we meet with success, gain, or any other desirable condition, we naturally concentrate upon the effects of these things and thereby create more, and so it follows that much leads to more.

[XXIII:11]11. How an understanding of this principle can be utilized in the business world is well told by Mr. Atkinson in "Advanced Thought." He says:

[XXIII:12]12. "Spirit, whatever else it may or may not be, must be considered as the Essence of Consciousness, the Substance of Mind, the reality underlying Thought. And as all Ideas are phases of the activity of Consciousness, Mind or Thought, it follows that in Spirit, and in it alone, is to be found the Ultimate Fact, the Real Thing, or Idea."

[XXIII:13]13. This being admitted, does it not seem reasonable to hold that a true understanding of

[p. 301]

[paragraph continues] Spirit, and its laws of manifestation, would be about the most "practical" thing that a "practical" person can hope to find? Does it not seem certain that if the "practical" men of the world could but realize this fact, they would "fall all over themselves" in getting to the place in which they might obtain such knowledge of spiritual things and laws? These men are not fools; they need only to grasp this fundamental fact in order to move in the direction of that which is the essence of all achievement.

[XXIII:14]14. Let me give you a concrete example. I know a man whom I had always considered to be quite materialistic. He had made several successes in life; and also several failures. The last time I had a talk with him he was practically "down and out," as compared with his former business condition. It looked as if he had indeed reached "the end of his rope," for he was well advanced into the stage of middle-age and new ideas came more slowly, and less frequently to him than in former years.

[XXIII:15]15. He said to me, in substance: "I know that all things that 'work out' in business are the result of Thought; any fool knows that. Just now, I seem to be short of thoughts and good ideas. But if this 'All-Mind' teaching is correct, there should be possible to the individual the attainment of 'direct connection' with Infinite Mind; and in Infinite Mind there must be the possibility of all kinds of good ideas

[p. 302]

which a man of my courage and experience could put to practical use in the business world, and make a big success of. It looks good to me; and I am going to look into it."

[XXIII:16]16. This was about two years ago. The other day I heard of this man again. Talking to a friend, I said: "What has become of our old friend X? Has he ever got on his feet again?" The friend looked at me in amazement. "Why," said he, "don't you know about X's great success? He is the Big Man in the '---- Company'." He named a concern which has made a phenomenal success during the last eighteen months and is now well known, by reason of its advertisements, from one end of the country to another, and also abroad.) "He is the man who supplied the BIG IDEA for that concern. Why, he is about a half-million to the good and is moving rapidly toward the million mark; all in the space of eighteen months." I had not connected this man with the enterprise mentioned; although I knew of the wonderful success of the company in question. Investigation has shown that the story is true, and that the above stated facts are not exaggerated in the slightest.

[XXIII:17]17. Now, what do you think of that? To me, it means that this man actually made the "direct connection" with Infinite Mind Spirit--and, having found it, he set it to work for him. He "used it in his business."

[p. 303]

[XXIII:18]18. Does this sound sacrilegious or blasphemous? I hope not; I do not mean it to be so. Take away the implication of Personality, or Magnified Human Nature, from the conception of "The Infinite," and you have left the conception of an Infinite Presence-Power, the Quintessence of which is Consciousness--in fact, at the last, Spirit. As this man, also at the last, must be considered as a manifestation of Spirit; there is nothing sacrilegious in the idea that he, being Spirit, should so harmonize himself with his Origin and Source that he would be able to manifest at least a minor degree of its Power. All of us do this, more or less, when we use our minds in the direction of Creative Thought. This man. did more, he went about it in an intensely "practical" manner.

[XXIII:19]19. I have not consulted him about his method of procedure, though I intend doing so at the first opportunity, but, he not only drew upon the Infinite Supply for the ideas which he needed (and which formed the seed of his success), but he also used the Creative Power of Thought in building up for himself an Idealistic Pattern of that which he hoped to manifest in material form, adding thereto, changing, improving its detail, from time  time--proceeding from the general outline to the finished detail. I judge this to be the facts of the case, not alone from my recollection of the conversation two years ago, but also because I have found the same thing to be true

[p. 304]

in the cases of other prominent men who have made similar manifestation of Creative Thought.

[XXIII:20]20. Those who may shrink from this idea of employing the Infinite Power to aid a man in his work in the material world, should remember that if the Infinite objected in the least to such a procedure the thing could never happen. The Infinite is quite able to take care of Itself.

[XXIII:21]21. "Spirituality" is quite "practical," very "practical," intensely "practical." It teaches that Spirit is the Real Thing, the Whole Thing, and that Matter is but plastic stuff, which Spirit is able to create, mould, manipulate, and fashion to its will. Spirituality is the most "practical" thing in the world--the only really and absolutely "practical" thing that there is!

[XXIII:22]22. Now concentrate on the fact that man is not a body with a spirit, but a spirit with a body, and that it is for this reason that his desires are incapable of any permanent satisfaction in anything not spiritual. Money is therefore of no value except to bring about the conditions which we desire, and these conditions are necessarily harmonious. Harmonious conditions necessitate sufficient supply, so that if there appears to be any lack, we should realize that the idea or soul of money is service, and as this thought takes form, channels of supply will be opened, and you will have the satisfaction of knowing that spiritual methods are entirely practical.

[p. 305]

  

PART TWENTY-THREE

221. What is the first law of success?

Service.

222. How may we be of the most service?

By having an open mind. By being interested in the race rather than the goal, in the pursuit rather than possession.

223. What is the result of a selfish thought?

It contains the germs of dissolution.

224. How will our greatest success he achieved?

By a recognition of the fact that it is just as essential to give as to receive.

225. Why do great organizers meet with great success?

Because they do their own thinking.

226. Why do the great majority in every country remain the docile and apparently willing tools of the few?

Because they let the few do all their thinking for them.

227. What is the effect of concentrating upon sorrow and loss?

More sorrow and more loss.

[p. 306]

228. What is the effect of concentrating upon gain?

More gain.

229. Is this principle used in the business world?

It is the only principle which is ever used, or ever could be used; there is no other principle. The fact that it may be used unconsciously does not alter or change the situation.

230. What is the practical result of this principle?

Success which is an effect, not a cause. If we wish to secure any effect we must ascertain the cause, or idea or thought by which the effect is created.

 

 

 

We have discovered that premeditated, orderly thinking for a purpose matures that purpose into fixed form, so that we may be absolutely sure of the result of our dynamic experiment.--Francis Larimer Warner.

     
The Master Key System, by Charles F. Haanel, [1919], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 307]

  

PART TWENTY-FOUR

THIS Part explains the entire theory and practice of every system of Metaphysics; it tells how to express harmony, how to express health, how to express abundance. It explains the nature of all conditions, and how they may be changed or removed. It explains how every difficulty, no matter what it is or where it is, can be removed or dissolved, and it explains the only way in which this is ever done or can be done. It also tells of a Master Key by which those who are wise enough to understand, broad enough to weigh the evidence, firm enough to follow their own judgment, and strong enough to make the sacrifice exacted, may enter and partake.

[p. 308]

  

INTRODUCTION. PART TWENTY-FOUR

This is the final Part.

If you have practised each of the exercises a few minutes every day, as suggested, you will have found that you can get out of life exactly what you wish by first putting into life that which you wish, and you will probably agree with the adept who said: "The Master Key thought is almost overwhelming; it is so vast, so available, so definite, so reasonable and so usable."

The fruit of this knowledge is, as it were, a gift of the Gods; it is the "Truth" that makes men free, not only free from every lack and limitation, but free from sorrow, worry and care. Is it not wonderful to realize that omnipotent law is no respecter of persons; that it makes no difference what your past habit of thought may have been, the way has been prepared.

If you are inclined to be religious, the greatest religious teacher the world has ever known made the way so plain that all may follow. If your mental bias is toward physical science, the law will operate with mathematical certainty. If you are inclined to be philosophical, Plato or Emerson may be your teacher; but, in each case, you may, by The Master Key, means reach degrees of power to which it is impossible to assign any limit.

An understanding of The Master Key, I believe, is the secret for which the ancient Alchemists vainly sought, because it explains how gold in the mind may be transmuted into gold in the heart and in the hand.

[p. 309]

  

PART TWENTY-FOUR

[XXIV:1]1. When the scientists first put the Sun in the centre of the Solar System and sent the earth spinning around it, there was immense surprise and consternation. The whole idea was self-evidently false; nothing was more certain than the movement of the Sun across the sky, and any one could see it descend behind the western hills and sink into the sea; scholars raged and scientists rejected the idea as absurd, yet the evidence has finally carried conviction in the minds of all.

[XXIV:2]2. We speak of a bell as a "sounding body," yet we knew that all the bell can do is to produce vibrations in the air. When these vibrations come at the rate of sixteen a second they cause a sound to be heard in the mind. It is possible for the mind to hear vibrations at the rate of 38,000 a second. When the number increases beyond this all is silence again; so that we know that the sound is not in the bell, it is in our own mind.

[XXIV:3]3. We speak and even think of the Sun as "giving light." Yet we know it is simply giving forth energy which produces vibrations in the ether at the rate of four hundred trillion a second, causing what are termed light waves, so that we know that what we call light is simply a form of energy and that the only light there is, is the sensation caused in the mind by the motion of the waves. When the number increases, the light changes in colour, each change

[p. 310]

in colour being caused by shorter and more rapid vibrations; so that although we speak of the rose as being red, the grass as being green, or the sky as being blue, we know that the colours exist only in our minds, and are the sensations experienced by us as the result of the vibrations of light waves. When the vibrations are reduced below four hundred trillion a second, they no longer affect us as light, but we experience the sensation of heat. It is evident, therefore, that we cannot depend upon the evidence of the senses for our information concerning the realities of things; if we did we should believe that the sun moved, that the world was flat instead of round, that the stars were bits of light instead of vast suns.

[XXIV:4]4. The whole range then of the theory and practice of any system of metaphysics consists in knowing the Truth concerning yourself and the world in which you live; in knowing that in order to express harmony, you must think harmony; in order to express health you must think health; and in order to express abundance you must think abundance; to do this you must reverse the evidence of the senses.

[XXIV:5]5. When you come to know that every form of disease, sickness, lack and limitation are simply the result of wrong thinking, you will have come to know "the Truth which shall make you free." You will see how mountains may be removed. If these mountains consist

[p. 311]

only of doubt, fear, distrust or other forms of discouragement, they are none the less real, and they need not only to be removed but to be "cast into the sea."

[XXIV:6]6. Your real work consists in convincing yourself of the truth of these statements. When you have succeeded in doing this you will have no difficulty in thinking the truth, and as has been shown, the truth contains a vital principle and will manifest itself.

[XXIV:7]7. Those who heal diseases by mental methods have come to know this truth they demonstrate it in their lives and the lives of others daily. They know that life, health and abundance are Omnipresent, filling all space, and they know that those who allow disease or lack of any kind to manifest, have as yet not come into an understanding of this great law.

[XXIV:8]8. As all conditions are thought creations and therefore entirely mental, disease and lack are simply mental conditions in which the person fails to perceive the truth; as soon as the error is removed, the condition is removed.

[XXIV:9]9. The method for removing this error is to go into the Silence and know the Truth; as all mind is one mind, you can do this for yourself or anyone else. If you have learned to form mental images of the conditions desired, this will be the easiest and quickest way to secure results; if not, results can be accomplished

[p. 312]

by argument, by the process of convincing yourself absolutely of the truth of your statement.

[XXIV:10]10. Remember, and this is one of the most difficult as well as most wonderful statements to grasp. Remember that no matter what the difficulty is, no matter where it is, no matter who is affected, you have no patient but yourself; you have nothing to do but to convince yourself of the truth which you desire to see manifested.

[XXIV:11]11. This is an exact scientific statement in accordance with every system of Metaphysics in existence, and no permanent results are ever secured in any other way.

[XXIV:12]12. Every form of concentration, forming Mental Images, Argument, and Auto-Suggestion are all simply methods by which you are enabled to realize the Truth.

[XXIV:13]13. If you desire to help some one, to destroy some form of lack, limitation or error, the correct method is not to think of the person whom you wish to help; the intention to help them is entirely sufficient, as this puts you in mental touch with the person. Then drive out of your own mind any belief of lack, limitation, disease, danger, difficulty, or whatever the trouble might be. As soon as you have succeeded in doing this the result will have been accomplished, and the person will be free.

[p. 313]

[XXIV:14]14. But remember that thought is creative and consequently every time you allow your thought to rest on any inharmonious condition, you must realize that such conditions are apparent only, they have no reality; that spirit is the only reality and it can never be less than perfect.

[XXIV:15]15. All thought is a form of energy, a rate of vibration, but a thought of the Truth is the highest rate of vibration known and consequently destroys every form of error in exactly the same way that light destroys darkness; no form of error can exist when the "Truth" appears, so that your entire mental work consists in coming into an understanding of the Truth. This will enable you to overcome every form of lack, limitation or disease of any kind.

[XXIV:16]16. We can get no understanding of the truth from the world without; the world without is relative only; Truth is absolute. We must therefore find it in the "world within."

[XXIV:17]17. To train the mind to see Truth only is to express true conditions only. Our ability to do this will be an indication of the progress we are making.

[XXIV:18]18. The absolute truth is that the "I" is perfect and complete; the real "I" is spiritual and can therefore never be less than perfect; it can never have any lack, limitation, or disease. The flash of genius does not have origin in the

[p. 314]

molecular motion of the brain; it is inspired by the ego, the spiritual "I" which is one with the Universal Mind, and it is our ability to recognize this Unity which is the cause of all inspiration, all genius. These results are far-reaching and have effect upon generations yet to come; they are the pillars of fire which mark the path that millions follow.

[XXIV:19]19. Truth is not the result of logical training or of experimentation, or even of observation; it is the product of a developed consciousness; Truth within a Caesar, manifests in a Caesar's deportment, in his life and his action; his influence upon social forms and progress. Your life and your actions and your influence in the world will depend upon the degree of truth which you are enabled to perceive, for truth will not manifest in creeds, but in conduct.

[XXIV:20]20. Truth manifests in character, and the character of a man should be the interpretation of his religion, or what to him is truth, and this will in turn be evidenced in the character of his possessions. If a man complains of the drift of his fortune he is just as unjust to himself as if he should deny rational truth, though it stand patent and irrefutable.

[XXIV:21]21. Our environment and the innumerable circumstances and accidents of our lives already exist in the subconscious personality which attracts to itself the mental and physical material which is congenial to its nature. Thus

[p. 315]

is our future being determined from our present, and if there should be apparent injustice in any feature or phase of our personal life, we must look within for the cause, try to discover the mental fact which is responsible for the outward manifestation.

[XXIV:22]22. It is this truth which makes you "free," and it is the conscious knowledge of this truth which will enable you to overcome every difficulty.

[XXIV:23]23. The conditions with which you meet in the world without are invariably the result of the conditions obtaining in the world within; therefore it follows with scientific accuracy that by holding the perfect ideal in mind you can bring about ideal conditions in your environment.

[XXIV:24]24. If you see only the incomplete, the imperfect, the relative, the limited, these conditions will manifest in your life; but if you train your mind to see and realize the spiritual ego, the "I" which is for ever perfect and complete, harmonious; wholesome and healthful conditions only will be manifested.

[XXIV:25]25. As thought is creative, and the truth is the highest and most perfect thought which anyone can think, it is self-evident that to think the truth is to create that which is true and it is again evident that when truth comes into being that which is false must cease to be.

[p. 316]

[XXIV:26]26. The Universal Mind is the totality of all mind which is in existence. Spirit is Mind, because spirit is intelligent. The words are, therefore, synonymous.

[XXIV:27]27. The difficulty with which you have to contend is to realize that mind is not individual. It is omnipresent. It exists everywhere. In other words, there is no place where it is not. It is, therefore, Universal.

[XXIV:28]28. Men have, heretofore, generally used the word "God" to indicate this Universal, creative principle; but the word "God" does not convey the right meaning. Most people understand this word to mean something outside of themselves; while exactly the contrary is the fact. It is our very life. Without it we would be dead. We would cease to exist. The minute the spirit leaves the body, we are as nothing. Therefore, spirit is really all there is of us.

[XXIV:29]29. Now the only activity which the spirit possesses is the power to think. Therefore, thought must be creative, because spirit is creative. This creative power is impersonal and your ability to think is your ability to control it and make use of it for the benefit of yourself and others .

[XXIV:30]30. When the truth of this statement is realized, understood, and appreciated, you will have come into possession of the Master Key, but remember that only those who are wise

[p. 317]

enough to understand, broad enough to weigh the evidence, firm enough to follow their own judgment, and strong enough to make the sacrifice exacted, may enter and partake.

[XXIV:31]31. Now, try to realize that this is truly a wonderful world in which we live, that you are a wonderful being, that many are awakening to a knowledge of the Truth, and as fast as they awake and come into a knowledge of the "things which have been prepared for them" they, too, realize that for them previously "Eye hath not seen, nor ear heard, neither hath it entered into the heart of man," the splendour which exists for those who find themselves in the Promised Land. They have crossed the river of judgment and have arrived at the point of discrimination between the true and the false, and have found that all they ever willed or dreamed, was but a faint concept of the dazzling reality.

 

Though an inheritance of acres may be bequeathed, an inheritance of knowledge and wisdom cannot. The wealthy man may pay others for doing his work for him, but it is impossible to get his thinking done for him by another, or to purchase any kind of self-culture.--S. Smiles.

[p. 318]

  

PART TWENTY-FOUR

231. Upon what principle does the theory and practice of every system of Metaphysics in existence depend?

Upon a knowledge of the "Truth" concerning yourself and the world in which you live.

232. What is the "Truth" concerning yourself?

The real "I" or ego is spiritual and can therefore never be less than perfect.

233. What is the method of destroying any form of error?

To absolutely convince yourself of the "Truth" concerning the condition which you wish to see manifested.

234. Can we do this for others?

The Universal Mind in which "we live and move and have our being" is one and indivisible; it is therefore just as possible to help others as to help ourselves.

235. What is the Universal Mind?

The totality of all mind in existence.

236. Where is the Universal Mind?

The Universal Mind is omnipresent, it exists everywhere. There is no place

[p. 319]

where it is not. It is therefore within us. It is "The World within." It is our spirit, our life.

237. What is the nature of the Universal Mind?

It is spiritual and consequently creative. It seeks to express itself in form.

238. How may we act on the Universal Mind?

Our ability to think is our ability to act on the Universal Mind and bring it into manifestation for the benefit of ourselves or others.

239. What is meant by thinking?

Clear, decisive, calm, deliberate, sustained thought with a definite end in view.

240. What will be the result?

You will also be able to say, "It is not I that doeth the works, but the 'Father' that dwelleth within me, He doeth the works." You will come to know that the "Father" is the Universal Mind and that He does really and truly dwell within you, in other words, you will come to know that the wonderful promises made in the Bible are fact, not fiction, and can be demonstrated by anyone having sufficient understanding.

     
The Master Key System, by Charles F. Haanel, [1919], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 320] [p. 321]

  

GLOSSARY

A Vocabulary of Words
 used in the text of
 "The Master Key,"
 specially explained.

[p. 322] [p. 323]

  

GLOSSARY

ABSOLUTE--That which cannot be measured, determined, limited, expressed; the fundamentally and self-existently real from which all other reality springs.

ACCRETION--Growth or accumulation by external additions.

ALTRUISM The instinct and emotion which prompts to effort on behalf of others.

ANALYTICAL--Proceeding by analysis; the separating of anything into first principles.

ANTHROPOMORPHIC--The ascription of human attributes, feelings and conduct to the Deity; the natural result of the limitation of human thought and language.

APPERCEPTION--The mental process which associates and brings to attention all the ideas and memories associated with the central thought to which the attention is directly given.

ARCANA--An inner secret or mystery; something hidden from the mass of men; one of the great secrets which the alchemists sought to discover.

ATTENTION--The act or process of giving especial clearness to one or more particulars in the complex content of consciousness. Thus the difference between an ordinary mind and the mind of a Newton consists principally in this, that the one is capable of a more continuous attention than the other.

BELIEF--Confidence in the truth of a proposition which is felt to lack positive proof; acceptance without proof; that which is believed; a creed.

CELL--The smallest element of an organized body that manifests independent vital activities. The tissues

[p. 324]

of the human body are an aggregate of cells and their products; they are from 1-125 to 1-5000 of an inch in diameter.

CONCENTRATE--To draw or direct to or toward a common centre.

CONCEPTION--The act of grasping two or more attributes into the unity of thought which we call a concept.

CONSCIOUSNESS--All forms of sensation, feeling, perception, planning and thought; a comprehensive tern for the complement of all our cognitive energies.

COSMIC--Pertaining to the universe as a harmonious and orderly system as opposed to chaotic.

COSMOLOGICAL--Relating to the nature and laws of the cosmos as an instituted and alterable order of things, as a cosmological argument.

DEDUCTION--Reasoning from the general to the particular; deduction proceeds from a general principle, through an admitted instance to a conclusion.

DIFFERENTIATION--The process of making or becoming different, as the hypothesis that the characteristic cell growth and divergent particularization of all organisms are due to environment and local conditions as opposed to inherited differentiation by which the characteristics are inherent in the composition of the embryo.

EGO--The "I" which thinks, feels and acts; the conscious individual or the thinking self as distinguished from all objects of thought and from its own states or powers; the pure principle of personal identity.

ELECTRICITY--A material agency which, when in

[p. 325]

motion, exhibits magnetic, chemical and thermal effects.

ELOHIM--The Hebrew title of most frequent  in the Old Testament, expressing absolute Divine power.

EVOLUTION The unity of action exhibited in the operations of nature; the act or process of evolving; the succession of changes by which a germ passes from a simple to a complex condition. "With each succeeding Kingdom, evolution has changed its direction upward from the physical to the psychical."--Funk.

ELECTRON The smallest known component of matter; always associated with an unvarying unit charge of negative electricity.

FAITH--Active belief; belief which amounts to a basis for action upon the accepted premises.

GERMINATE--The first act of growth, in a seed, spore or ovum.

GLOSSARY--An explanatory vocabulary dealing with a class of words, as of those of a dialect or a science.

GOD The embodiment or some aspect of reality or of some being regarded as the ultimate principle of the universe.

GRAVITATION--The tendency of every particle of matter in the universe toward every other particle; also the law which expresses this force which is; the accelerating tendency of bodies toward the centre of the earth is equal to the earth's attraction minus the centrifugal force arising from the rotation of the earth on its axis.

HARMONY--Completeness and perfection resulting from

[p. 326]

diversity in unity; agreement in relation; orderliness.

IDEA--A thought which is conceived to be in a measure independent of the thinker, and, in a sense, self existent, "Thought" is used to name the presentation which is the direct product of the active mind and which would not and could not exist apart from the acting mind, while "idea" is used to name the presentation of the mind which is no longer considered as acting; a presentation which might even exist apart from, and independently of, a mind or its activities. A thought is felt to be peculiar to the one thinking it, while the idea is felt to be, in a measure, self-determined or due to the nature of that with which it is associated so that all minds would foam it the same; the term still feels the influence of Plato's conception of the ideas as the forms of fundamental reality.

IDEALIZE--To render ideal, to conform to some mental standard as of perfection.

INHIBIT--To restrict by prohibition; to check; to suppress.

IMAGINATION--The act or power of combining products of past experiences in new, modified or ideal forms. The creative or constructive power of the mind. The act of constructive intellect in grouping knowledge or thought into new, original or rational systems. "Science, Invention and Philosophy have little use for fancy, but the creative, penetrative power of imagination is to them the breath of life, and the condition of all advance and success."

IMMUTABLE--Not capable of change, either by increase or decrease, by development or self evolution; unchangeable; invariable and permanent.

[p. 327]

INDUCTION--The scientific method that proceeds by 1, exact operation; 2, correct interpretation; 3, rational explanation; 4, scientific construction. Reasoning from the particular to the general; induction proceeds from a number of collated instances, through some attribute common to them all, to a general principle.

INDIVIDUAL--A complete independent single being; incapable of division without loss of identity.

INEXORABLE--Not to be moved by entreaty; unyielding; unrelenting; implacable; inflexible.

INFINITE--Self-existent and all-inclusive reality; unmeasured, undetermined, unlimited; independent of expression, yet including all expressions, or actualized things; the absolute.

INSIGHT--A perception of the inner nature of a thing.

INSPIRATION--The inbreathing or imparting of an idea, emotion or mental or spiritual influence; the elevating and creative influence of genius.

INTANGIBLE--Incapable of being touched; not perceptible to the senses, having no clear foundation in fact.

INTUITION--A conclusion which was arrived at without the conscious use of reason and not directly traceable to ordinary understandings of sensory experiences; the faculty of (unconscious). mind by which we arrive at intuitions, or know things without being taught; direct, or immediate knowledge of physical or moral values.

KEY--Anything which discloses or opens something to the understanding, as a key to a subject or problem; that which opens the way to other projects or renders further progress possible.

[p. 328]

KINETIC--Producing motion; active as opposed to latent; the kinetic theory has been found capable of explaining nearly all the phenomena of gases and is now generally accepted.

LEAVEN--Anything that by exerting a secret or silent influence gradually brings about a change in character or conditions.

LOGIC--The science or doctrine of correct thinking; the principles governing the reasoning faculties in the pursuit and exposition of truth.

LOVE--The outgoing or yearning of the soul for what is good or excellent.

MASTER--One who controls or has authority; a superior, a ruler or governor; one who gains the victory as "I am the master of my fate."

MASTER KEY--A key which controls a number of locks, the separate keys of which are not interchangeable.

MATTER--That fours of being or substance that is characterized by extension, inertia, weight, etc.; or, in general, by the properties cognized by the senses.

MECHANISM--The structure or means of action of any mechanical contrivance. "A human organism with all its parts in harmonious action is a splendid mechanism."--Winchell.

METAPHYSICS--The science of the first principles of being and of knowledge; the reasoned doctrine of the essential nature and fundamental relations of all that is real.

MIND--An abstract, collective form for all forms of conscious intelligence.

NATURAL LAW--That which is normal or in accordance

[p. 329]

with the ordinary course of things; as opposed to the supernatural.

NEGATIVE--Absence or obscurity of anything affirmative or definite; emptiness; voidness; nullity. Thus, "You can never overthrow falsehood by negative, but by establishing the antagonistic truth."--Robertson.

OBJECTIVE--Having the nature of an object or being that is thought of or perceived; as opposed to that which thinks or perceives.

OMNISCIENCE--Knowledge of all things; infinite or unlimited knowledge.

OMNIPOTENT--Possessing unlimited or universal power, applicable to the Deity alone.

OMNIPRESENCE--Essentially present everywhere at the same time.

PERCEPTION--Any insight or intuitive judgment that implies unusual discernment of fact or truth.

PERSONAL--Pertaining to, or characteristic of a human being.

PHILOSOPHY--Knowledge, in a scientific system, of the ultimate principles, elements, cause and laws that underlie and explain all knowledge and existence, and their application in the explanation of these.

PHYSICS--That science or group of sciences which treats of the phenomena associated with matter in general, especially in its relation to energy and the laws governing these phenomena.

PHYSIOLOGY--The branch of biology which treats of the vital phenomena manifested by animals and plants.

PLASTIC--Capable of being moulded into form; as the plastic mind of Truth; or the inner mind of man as having a plastic power over his material body.

[p. 330]

POLARITY--That quality of a body by which its smallest parts have certain properties related to a line of direction through its mass, the properties at one end of the line being opposite to the properties at the other end of it, as in a magnet.

POSITIVE--Inherent in a thing, by and of itself; not related to other things, or to human judgment or feeling; absolute; inherent; not admitting of doubt; final; undeniable and incontestable.

POTENTIAL--Possible, but not actual; possessing inherent qualities for development; inherent power, capability, efficiency, as opposed to actuality.

PRANA--The breath of life.

PRECEDENT--Something antecedent in matter, manner or form; which may be cited as an example, model, authority or justification.

PREDOMINANT--Superior in power, influence, effectiveness; having ascendency or control.

PREMISE--A proposition laid down, proved, supposed or assumed that serves as a ground for an argument or conclusion.

PRINCIPLE--The ultimate essential element that enters into the composition of all being. The moving cause, power or force by which being manifests. The Universal truth expressing the law of this manifestation; that which determines the nature, character and essence of anything.

PROPHYLACTIC--Any measure efficacious in protecting from disease.

PSYCHICAL--Pertaining to the mind or soul; mental as distinguished from the physical of physiological.

PSYCHOLOGY--The science which treats of the mind, its functions, condition of activity and development, its essential nature and place in nature at large.

[p. 331]

RADIANT--Emitting rays of light or brightness; figuratively, beaming with joy, kindness and love.

RADICAL--Proceeding from the root, source or foundation. Hence, thorough-going, extreme, fundamental.

REALITY--That which is believed to exist independently of thoughts or opinions; the independently existent; the genuine; opposed to the imaginary or fanciful. That appears reality which receives a major share of the attention.

REASON--(1) The faculty of mind by which experiences are compared and inference drawn; (2) The process of arriving at conclusions by means of comparisons; (3) A proposition from which another is validly inferred.

RELAX--To make less vigorous or stringent; abate in strictness or severity; mitigate; to relieve from strain or effort; abate in attention or assiduity, as to relax the mind.

SAGACITY--The power of ready, far-reaching and accurate inference from slight facts; or readiness to see the result of any action; especially upon human actions or conduct.

SAMENESS--The least degree of diversity.

SCIENCE--Knowledge gained and verified by exact observations and correct thinking, methodically formulated and arranged in a rational system.

SERVICE--The act of helping another or promoting his interests in any way.

SOLAR PLEXUS--The largest sympathetic plexus in the body found behind the stomach in front of the aorta and the crura of the diaphragm. It is composed of branches of the pneumogastric and great splanchnic nerves; the most important ganglia connected

[p. 332]

with its cords are the right and left similunar. A number of smaller plexus are derived from it.

SPIRIT--The Invisible and incorporeal principle in man; the principle of self-consciousness, self-activity and of rational power in general; that which signifies a likeness in man to the Divine Being.

SUB-CONSCIOUS--That which pertains to the real nature or essence of a person or thing; proceeding from or taking place within the subject, as opposed to the objective. Thus sensation is subconscious, while perception is an objective experience.

SUBJECTIVE--Such processes as seem to have psychical characteristics, but are not attended by consciousness.

SYLLABUS--A concise statement of a subject; an epitome, abstract statement or summary.

SYLLOGISM--A logical formula or analysis of a formal argument, consisting of three propositions, the first two of which are called the premises and the third the conclusion.

SYSTEM--The orderly combination or arrangement into a whole; especially such combinations according to some rational principle or organic idea giving it unity and completeness.

TELEPATHY--(Greek, tele, at a distance, pathos, to experience.) The communication of thoughts between minds without any material medium, ordinary expression or the use of the senses.

THEOLOGY--The science that treats of the being of God, the attributes of God, the doctrine of the Trinity and creation and providence.

THERAPEUTIC--The art and science of curing disease.

TRANSCENDENTAL--Rising above the ordinary notions of men; transcending all ordinary specified bounds or

[p. 333]

powers; surpassing the limits of individual experiences, but forming the universal and necessary conditions of experiences in general.

TRUTH--A statement or belief which represents or conforms to the reality; a law or principle established by correct reasoning.

UNIVERSAL--Relating to the entire universe; all-embracing; unlimited; regarded or existing as a whole; entire.

UNIVERSAL MIND--The life principle of every atom in existence.

VIBRATION--A rapid motion back and forth; a vibration is completely determined by its amplitude, frequency and period; thus the lowest vibrations appreciated in a musical note are sixteen per second and those which produce the highest tone 41,000 per second.

VISUALIZE To give pictorial vividness to a mental representation; to construct a visual image in the mind.

VOLATILE--Not lasting or permanent; fleeting; transient; changeable; evaporating.

WILL--The mental power to choose; the power to mould the expressions of the mind; the realization of desires; volition.

     
The Master Key System, by Charles F. Haanel, [1919], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 334] [p. 335]

  

QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS

Some Questions asked by Correspondents,
 with the Answers given by
 Mr. Charles F. Haanel
 Author and Exponent
 of
 THE MASTER KEY

[p. 336] [p. 337]

  

QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS

1. In referring to the sub-conscious and conscious minds, or the objective and subjective, which is the technically correct expression, "We have two minds which, although related, are distinct," or, "We have one mind with two distinct functions?"

The correct expression is, "We have one mind with two distinct functions." There are not two minds.

2. Are the Devil in religion, the Negative in Science, and the Bad in Philosophy merely imaginary manifestations of thought energy, or shall we class them as wrong yet real manifestations? If all that we have and are, all of our powers come from one eternal source, to what must we attribute these imaginary entities?

These are not imaginary entities. They are simply perversions. If you use electricity for light, you call it good. If you grasp a wire which has not been properly insulated and it kills you, it is not for that reason bad or evil. You were simply careless or ignorant of the laws governing electricity. For the same reason, the one Infinite Power, which is the source of all Power, manifests in your life either as good or as evil, as you make use of it constructively or destructively.

3. Is not the Master Key Idea of "God" Pantheistic?

This depends entirely upon your idea of

[p. 338]

[paragraph continues] Pantheism. Pantheism is a loose term and may be interpreted in various ways, for instance, Pantheism conceives the Universe to be one eternal, involuntary evolution of an Infinite Being, as contrasted with Atheism, which is a positive denial of the Divine Immanence, and Agnosticism, which is a dogmatic doubt of the existence of God.

4. Is this right? Truth is absolute, but conception of truth varies with the individual consciousness. Therefore, no one can say when the ultimate truth has been reached, because no one can say when the individual consciousness has been developed to the point where further development is impossible.

Yes, truth is absolute, but the conception of truth varies with the individual consciousness. On the other hand, truth is not a matter of belief. It is a matter of demonstration. It is not a question of authority, but a question of perception.

5. Since the real "I" is spiritual and there-tore perfect, and since it "controls and directs both the body and mind," how is it that we see such imperfect results?

We see no imperfect results. We see nothing but perfection. Perfection means that the Law operates with immutable precision. Spiritual law always operates perfectly. If the individual thinks constructively, results are constructive, harmonious. If he thinks destructively, he

[p. 339]

reaps exactly what he sows. The Law works perfectly. We see no imperfect results whatever. We may freely choose what we think, but the result of our thought is governed by an immutable law.

6. "What is Life?"

Life is that quality or principle of the Universal Energy which manifests in so-called organic objects as growth and voluntary activity, and which is usually co-existent in some degree, with some manifestation of that same Universal Energy as the quality or principle termed intelligence. You must understand that there is only one Supreme Principle, evading all comprehension of its essential nature. It is the Absolute. Man can think only in terms of the relative. Therefore, he sometimes defines It as the Universal Intelligence, the Universal Substance, as Ether, Life, Mind, Spirit, Energy, Truth, Love, etc. His particular definition at any moment is governed by the particular relationship of the phenomena of Being in which he thinks of this Principle at that moment.

7. How is the law governing success or prosperity placed in operation?

The human brain is the finest and most vibrant mechanism in existence. Every time you think you send a message into the formless energy from which and by which all things are created. This starts a train of causation which relates with the things that correspond with

[p. 340]

the image of your thought. If your thought is sufficiently refined and concentrated you will be placed in harmony with the object of your thought quickly; if not, more time will be required. Most persons are busily engaged in concentrating upon lack, limitation, loss and inharmony of every kind, and they are therefore attracting these conditions, a few are busily engaged in concentrating upon success, prosperity and harmonious conditions generally, and find that their environment reflects the quality of their thought.

8. How is prayer answered?

The Universal Mind, the Omnipotent Power, the Supreme Being, does not change the modus operandi of the Universe, in order to comply with our requests, nor does it make exception, but it does act through well-known laws, and these laws can be placed into operation, consciously or unconsciously, by accident or design. It is the operation of this marvellous law of attraction which has caused men in all ages and in all times to believe that there must be a personal Being who responded to their petitions and manipulated events in order to meet their demands.

9. You correctly state that "Possession depends on use." How can this fact be best explained to show that this is the only way in which to acquire a "reservoir of power, possession, etc.," to draw on in time of emergency, etc.?

[p. 341]

By illustration: A man desires to strengthen his ann. He wishes it to become powerful. He does not conserve what strength he has in the arm by binding it to his side. If he did this, he would soon lose what strength he already had. On the contrary, he begins to use it, he begins to exercise it, and he finds that the more he uses it, the more strength is secured. The more he gives of his strength, the more he gets. The same rule applies in regard to mental and spiritual strength.

10. "Unless we are willing to think we shall have to work, and the less we think the more we shall work, and the less we shall get for our work." Is it possible to conceive of a world in which there are no "hewers of wood"?

Thought has taken much drudgery out of work, but much so-called "scientific management" and "efficiency and engineering systems" look upon millions of human beings as mere machines capable of making so many motions less or more per hour.

To labour is to serve and all service is honourable. But a "hewer of wood" contemplates blind service instead of intelligent service. Labour is the creative instinct in manifestation. Owing to the changes which have taken place in the industrial world, the creative instinct no longer finds expression. A man cannot build his own house, he cannot even make his own garden, he can by no means direct his own labour; he is, therefore, deprived of the greatest

[p. 342]

joy which can come to man, the joy of achieving, of creating, of accomplishing, and so this great power is perverted and turned into destructive channels. He can construct nothing for himself, so he begins to destroy the works of his more fortunate fellows. Labour is, however, finding that the Universe is not a chaos but a cosmos, that it is governed by immutable laws, that every condition is the result of a cause and that the same cause invariably produces the same effect. It is finding that these causes are mental, that thought predetermines action. It is finding that constructive thought brings about constructive conditions, and destructive thought brings about destructive conditions.

11. You say that "Life is an unfoldment, not accretion; what comes to us in the world without is what we already possess in the world within." Do you not take into consideration knowledge a person acquires from books, experiences, etc.?

You can derive absolutely no benefit from books, experiences, environment or anything else until you have created brain cells capable of receiving the thought. Your world within is an exact correspondence of your world without. Suppose for the moment that you are unfamiliar with the Hebrew language. A book might be given to you with the most beautiful thoughts written in the most wonderful language, but it would mean nothing to you until you had made yourself acquainted with the Hebrew language,

[p. 343]

and so with everything else. No thought, no idea, no experience has any value for us until we are capable of receiving it. For this reason the same thought would make absolutely no impression upon one man, while it would be received with amazement and delight by another. The first man has formed no brain cells capable of receiving it. The second man is ready for it. He understands the beauties contained in the idea.

12. Is it correct to say that true religion and true science are "twins" and that the death of one death the means the death of the other? Why?

True science and true religion are certainly twins. There can be no death for either, because what is true cannot die. "The essential characteristic of truth is steadfast fidelity to order and Law. The mind takes offence at every phenomenon of both inner and outer experience which appears to contradict that steadiness and constancy which it regards as the very essence of truth." You will see that this applies to both science and religion. What is true in science must be true in religion. There cannot be a scientific truth and a religious truth, all truth is one and indivisible.

13. How do Materialism and Spiritualism find harmony in the Master Key System?

The Master Key System teaches that there is but one Principle--One Power. That everything which exists is a materialization of this

[p. 344]

[paragraph continues] One Power. The power itself is Spiritual, but the manifestation of the Power is material. One is subjective and the other objective. Two phases of one being. We find this everywhere in Nature, Man is a spiritual being, but he also has a material body. Spirit must manifest upon the objective plane in an objective manner. The Spiritual in this sense has nothing whatever to do with what are usually considered spiritualistic phenomena.

14. What explanation is to be given of the fact that although a great majority of the people not only throughout Europe but in the United States are sick of war and want only peace and a return to prosperous normal conditions, that the return of the desired normal prosperous conditions is such a slow hard process?

There is, of course, as you say, no desire on the part of anyone for more war, just as there is no desire for poverty, crime or for any other destructive condition, but there is, on the other hand, a conscious and a sub-conscious desire for the things which bring about war, destruction, poverty and crime, and this lust of power or separation is the old question of "who is to be the greatest in the kingdom?"

The law is not a respecter of persons. This is true concerning nations as well as individuals. Nations as well as individuals will eventually learn that force can always be met with equal if not superior force, and for this reason can never be the determining factor of any situation.

[p. 345]

Objective harmony can come only as a result of subjective harmony, and subjective harmony can come only as a result of vision, understanding and perception.

15. In the "Acme of Achievement" aimed at by The Master Key, how is it possible to ignore Theology?

A few centuries ago it was thought that we must choose between the Bible and Galileo. Fifty years ago it was thought that we must choose between the Bible and Darwin, but as Dean Inge, of St. Paul's Cathedral, says: "Every educated man knows that the main facts of organic evolution are firmly established, and that they are quite different from the legends borrowed by the ancient Hebrews from the Babylonians. We are not required to do violence to our reason by rejecting the assured results of modern research. Traditional Christianity must be simplified and spiritualized. It is at present encumbered by bad science and caricatured by bad economics and the more convinced we are of this, the less disposed we shall be to stake the existence of our faith on superstitions which are the religion of the irreligious and the science of the unscientific."

16. What is the meaning of the statement, "Only five per cent. have the vision to annex the strategic position, to see and feel a thing before it happens?"

Ninety-five per cent. of the people are busy

[p. 346]

attempting to change effects. Something happens which they do not like and they try to change the situation. They soon find that they are simply changing one form of distress for another. The other five per cent. are busily engaged with causes. They know that in order to make any permanent change it is the cause which they must seek. They soon find that the cause is within their control. It is the five per cent. who do the thinking, and the ninety-five per cent. who merely accept the thought of others. It is those only who think who can see and feel a thing before it happens.

17. What, more , is to be understood by the term "polarity" as applied to the mental process?

Polarity is the tendency or inclination of a thought or feeling in a particular direction. When we think along certain lines continuously the thought becomes polarized, we can see other and different points of view with difficulty or not at all.

18. What is Truth?

Truth is the imperative condition of all wellbeing. To be sure, to know the truth and to stand confidently on it is a satisfaction beside which no other is comparable. Truth is the underlying verity, the condition precedent to every business or social relation. Truth is the only solid ground in a world of conflict and doubt and danger.

[p. 347]

Every act not in harmony with Truth, whether through ignorance or design, cuts the ground from under our feet, leads to discord, inevitable loss and confusion, for while the humblest mind can accurately foretell the result of every correct action, the greatest, most profound and penetrating mind loses its way hopelessly and can form no conception of the results due to a departure from correct principles.

19. How are Germs created?

Creation consists in the art of combining forces which have an affinity for each other, in the proper proportion. Thus oxygen and hydrogen combined in the proper proportions produce water. Oxygen and hydrogen are both invisible gases, but water is visible.

Germs, however, have life; they must therefore be the product of something which has life or intelligence. Spirit is the only Creative Principle in the Universe, and Thought is the only activity which spirit possesses. Therefore, germs must be the result of a mental process.

A thought goes forth from the thinker, it meets other thoughts for which it has an affinity, they coalesce and form a nucleus for other similar thoughts: this nucleus sends out calls into the formless energy, wherein all thoughts and all things are held in solution, and soon the thought is closed in a form in accordance with the character given to it by the thinker.

[p. 348]

A million men in the agony of death and torture on the battlefield send out thoughts of hatred and distress; soon another million men die from the effect of a germ called "influenza." None but the experienced metaphysician knows when and how the deadly germ came into existence.

As there are an infinite variety of thoughts, so there are an infinite variety of germs, constructive as well as destructive, but neither the constructive nor the destructive germ will germinate and flourish until it finds congenial soil in which to take root.

20. What has given rise to the idea of Reincarnation?

The germ plasma in each generation always contains the sum of all that has passed before it. The nucleus of every cell contains the chromosomes and these reproduce the species of nature and condition according to definite law. Each chromosome, microscopically small as it is, contains the elements of every other cell in a matured body, plus characteristics of species, plus characteristics of form and appearance, plus family resemblance, plus nature, plus mind, plus matured tendencies, plus everything that makes personality and individuality. We are then physically exactly what our forefathers were, plus environment and education. It is this persistency of the identity of the individual chromosome from generation to generation which has given rise to the idea of reincarnation.

[p. 349]

21. What is Black Magic?

The idea that there is a phenomenon called Black Magic is attributable to credulity, superstition and a lack of understanding of the laws governing in the mental world. All thoughts and all things are held in solution in the Universal Mind. The individual may open his mental gates and thereby become receptive to thoughts of any kind or description. If he thinks that there are magicians, witches or wizards who are desirous of injuring him, he is thereby opening the door for the entrance of such thoughts, and he will be able to say with Job, "The things I feared have come upon me." If, on the contrary, he thinks that there are those who are desirous of helping him, he thereby opens the door for such help, and he will find that "as thy faith is, so be it unto thee" is as true to-day as it was two thousand years ago.

22. I do not seem to grasp fully the application of the law of vibration to the thought world. How, for instance, are we to change the rate of vibration here? In what direction shall it be changed to produce best results?

Every thought changes the rate of vibration. As you are enabled to think greater, deeper, higher and more forceful thoughts, the brain cells are refined, they become more powerful, and they are enabled to receive finer vibrations.

This is not only true in the mental and

[p. 350]

spiritual world, but in the physical world. As the ear becomes trained in music, it is enabled to receive finer vibrations, until the trained musician can hear harmonies of sound of which the ordinary person is entirely unaware.

23. Amid the seeming chaos of present day conditions is it not easy to discern the coming of that dawn which all the great ones of earth have foretold, the second coming of the ?

One of the characteristic signs of a general awakening is the optimism shining through the mist of doubt and unrest, this optimism is taking the form of illumination, and as the illumination becomes general, fear, anger, doubt, selfishness and greed pass away. We are not looking for the Christ child, but the Christ consciousness. We are anticipating a more general realization of the Truth which is to make men free. That there may be one man or one woman who shall first realize this Truth in the new era is barely possible, but the preponderance of evidence points to a more general awakening to the Light of Illumination.

24. You speak about the originating mind that forms, upholds, sustains and creates all there is. Does this explain the source from which comes man's ability to think lack, to think war and crime, etc.?

Yes, this includes man's ability to think lack, war and crime. If he can think constructive

[p. 351]

thought he can also think destructive thought; but as soon as man learns that thinking is a creative process, that we are creators, not creatures, he will discontinue the process of thinking destruction for himself and his fellows.

25. You are, without doubt, correct in stating that Carlyle's attitude of hatred of the bad was not conducive toward his own best development; on the other hand, what should be the attitude toward the giant evils of the day, such as war, corruption, murder, vice, theft and the like? Is it not often true that a tearing down, a clearing away of the brushwood, so to speak, must precede constructive work?

No, it is not true, the tearing down process is not at all necessary. We do not need to laboriously shovel the darkness out of a room before letting in the light; on the contrary, all that is necessary is to turn on the light and the darkness vanishes; likewise, if but one-tenth of one per cent. of the money and effort were spent in constructive work that is now being spent in destructive work, the giant evils of the day to which you refer would disappear as if by magic.

The unit of the Nation is the individual. The Government represents only the average intelligence of the units comprising the Nation. Therefore, our work is with the unit. When the thought of the individual has been changed the collective thought will take care of itself,

[p. 352]

but we try to reverse the process. We try to change governments instead of individuals, which cannot be done. But with a little intelligent organized effort the present destructive thought could be readily changed into constructive thought.

 

 

 

Temples have their sacred images, and we see what influence they have always had over a great part of mankind; but in truth, the ideas and images in men's minds are the invisible powers that constantly govern them; and to these they all pay universally a ready submission.--Jonathan Edwards.

    
The Master Key System, by Charles F. Haanel, [1919], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 353]

  

INDEX

In the following Index the Roman Numeral indicates the Part, the second figure the Paragraph, thus:

Abbott, Lyman, quoted IV, 18, means Part IV, Paragraph 18.

[p. 354] [p. 355]

  

INDEX

ABBOT, LYMAN, quoted--[*IV, 18].

ABUNDANCE--[*X, 1]; [*XXIV, 4].

   Expression of--[*XV, 1].

   for all--[*X, 1].

   Law of--[*X, 1].

ABUNDANT, LIFE MORE--[*VIII, 21]; [*XV, 16].

ABUNDANTLY--[*IX, 2].

ACCUMULATION--[*XVI, 5].

ACCUMULATIVE

   attitude--[*I, 2]; [*V, 28].

   consciousness--[*XVIII, 25], 27; [*XXIII, 1]-2.

ACTION

   Courageous--[*VII, 21].

   Desire determines--[*XI, 7].

   Action follows inspiration--[*VI, 31].

   necessary--[*XIII, 22].

   Responsibility for--[*XV, 29].

   Thought leads to--[*VII, 7]; [*XV, 13]; [*XVI, 10].

ACTIVITY

   Loftiest, of thought--[*XI, 31].

   Objective and subjective--[*IV, 21].

   Thought, the highest--[*XVII, 1].

ACTOR--[*XVII, 6].

ADAMS, G. M., quoted--[*VIII, 4]; [*XIV, 31].

ADAMS, J. C., referred to--[*XI, 9]-10.

ADEPTS--[*XII, 13].

A DIFFERENCE OF DEGREE--[*VII, 8].

ADJUSTMENT TO ENVIRONMENT--[*XVIII, 8]-9.

ADVANCED THOUGHT quoted--[*XXIII, 11]-12.

ADVANTAGE OF SPIRITUAL METHODS--[*IX, 29].

AFFINITY, ATOMIC--[*XVIII, 21].

AFFIRM

   for others--[*IX, 25].

   the desire as realized--[*XI, 16]-18; [*XVII, 37]; [*XXI, 19].

[p. 356]

AFFIRMATIONS--[*IV, 9]; [*IX, 11]-12, 14, 24-25.

AGGRANDIZEMENT--[*XVI, 5].

ALL-IN-ALL--[*I, 24], 30; [*VI, 2].

ALL IS MOTION--[*XXI, 22].

ALL MIND IS ONE MIND--[*I, 26]; [*XXIV, 9].

ALL POWER--[*I, 5], 39; [*IV, 19]-20; [*VIII, 17]-20.

ALL POWER NOT PHYSICAL--[*X, 3].

ALLEN, JAMES, quoted--pp. <page 27>, <page 93>.

ANALOGY--[*X, 12].

ANALYSIS

   Thought--[*XVI, 15]; [*XVII, 31].

ANDREWS, F. E., quoted--[*IX, 18]-28.

A HUNDRED-FOLD--[*VIII, 4].

AN IDEAL NECESSARY [*XVI, 5]-6, 28, 33.

ANTHROPOMORPHIC CONCEPTIONS--[*XVII, 3].

ANTHROPOMORPHISM CONDEMNED--[*XXI, 27] [*XXII, 29]-30; [*XXIII, 18].

ANXIETY--[*VI, 34].

   destructive--[*VII, 26].

APPEARANCES

   deceptive--[*XIX, 28]; [*XXIV, 1]-4. vs. ideals--[*XXI, 20].

APPLIED KNOWLEDGE IS POWER--[*X, 23];-[*XIII, 22]; [*I, 28]; [*XV, 36]; [*XXII, 1].

ARCHITECT--[*VII, 5], 8-9; [*VIII, 12]; [*XVI, 33].

ARCHITECTURE, VERBAL--[*XV, 20], 22.

ARGUE, THE SUB-CONSCIOUS CANNOT--[*III, 4].

ARISTOTLE--[*XIII, 6].

ASK AND RECEIVE--[*XV, 29].

ASSIMILATION, MENTAL--[*XIX, 27].

AS THY FAITH IS--[*IX, 31].

[p. 357]

ASTRONOMER--[*XVII, 14].

ASTRONOMICAL ILLUSTRATION--[*XI, 9]-10.

ATKINSON quoted--[*XXIII, 12].

ATMOSPHERE, MAGNETIC--[*III, 5]-6.

ATOM

   defined--[*XIV, 8].

   Hydrogen--[*XIV, 9].

   Mercury--[*XIV, 9].

ATOMIC AFFINITY--[*XVIII, 21].

   Growth depends on--[*XVIII, 22]-24.

ATOMS--[*XII, 19].

ATTENTION

   cultivated--[*VI, 24]; [*XVIII, 31]-32.

   Illustration--[*VI, 20].

   Importance of--[*VI, 19].

   --intention--[*XII, 25]; [*XX, 20].

   necessary--[*XXIII, 9].

   Power of--[*VI, 21].

   requires the will--[*XXIII, 10].

   Test of--[*VI, 22].

   the mark of genius--[*XVIII, 31].

ATTITUDE OF MIND--[*III, 18]; [*XII, 17]; [*XIX, 17]; [*XXIII, 1].

   Accumulative--[*I, 1]; [*V, 28].

   Experiences and the--[*I, 2].

   governs possession--[*XVI, 37].

   Harmonious----[*XIV, 28]-29.

   Objective--[*XVII, 31].

   Predominant--[*VIII, 18]--19; [*IX, 30]; [*XXI, 9], 12-14.

   Receptive--[*XXIII, 1], 4.

   Subjective--[*XVII, 31].

   Successful--[*XVII, 26].

ATTRACTION

   and law of love identical, Law of--[*XII, 18].

[p. 358]

ATTRACTION, continued.

   Law of--[*VIII, 18]; [*IX, 14], 31; [*XII, 18]-19, 21-22.

      defined--[*II, 28]; [*XI, 25].

   operative--[*VII, 17], 23; [*XVI, 14]; [*XVIII, 21]; [*XXI, 11], 15.

   --sympathetic vibration--[*VI, 18].

ATTRACTIVE FORCE, DESIRE THE--[*XXIII, 1].

ATTRACTS LIKE, LIKE--[*XV, 9].

AUTO-SUGGESTION--[*XXIV, 12].

A WELL-DEFINED LAWFUL WANT--[*XI, 10].

A WORM--[*XIII, 20].

BACON, referred to--[*XIII, 5]-6.

BANK--[*XII, 5].

BARRISTER--[*V, 26].

BATTLE OF LIFE--[*XXI, 20]-22.

BATTLESHIP--[*VIII, 30].

BEAST OF BURDEN--[*XX, 5],

BEAUTY WORLD WITHIN A WORLD OF--[*I, 6].

BED--[*XV, 29].

BE--DO--ARE--THINK--[*I, 4]; [*XX, 27].

BEECHER, H. W., quoted--[*XVI, 37].

BELIEF AND FAITH--[*XVIII, 16]-17.

BELIEVE THAT YE RECEIVE--[*XI, 25], 35.

BELL--[*XXIV, 2].

BIBLE QUOTED.

   As thy faith is so be it unto thee--[*IX, 31].

   Believe that ye receive and ye shall receive--[*XI, 25], 35.

   Doeth all things well--[*IX, 15].

   Eye for an eye--[*XXIII, 3].

   Eye hath not seen, nor ear heard, neither hath it entered into the heart of man--[*XXIV, 31].

   Faith is the substance of things hoped for, the evidence of things not seen--[*XI, 25].

[p. 359]

   Given dominion over all things--[*X, 11].

   His image and likeness--[*XX, 31]; [*XXII, 31].

   In Him we live and move and have our being--[*XX, 23], 31.

   It is not I that doeth the works, but the Father that dwelleth in me, He doeth the work--[*X, 14].

   It shall be established unto thee--[*X, 11].

   Kingdom of heaven within you--[*XX, 11].

   Know ye not that ye are the temple of the living God?--[*IV, 19].

   Remove mountains--[*XXIV, 5].

   Secret place of the Most High--[*IX, 4]; [*X, 11].

   Seek first the kingdom of God--[*XVII, 11].

   Solomon in all his glory--[*X, 9].

   The Father and I are one--[*XIII, 20], 27.

   The thing I feared has come upon me--[*XX, 12].

   Things which have been prepared for them--[*XXIV, 31].

   Tooth for a tooth--[*XXIII, 3].

   Truth shall make you free--[*XXIV, 5].

   What things soever ye desire, when ye pray, believe that ye receive them, and ye shall have them--[*XI, 17], 25, 35.

BIRTHRIGHT--[*III, 16]; [*V, 15]; [*XV, 18].

BODY, MIND, AND SPIRIT--[*IV, 1]-4.

BONAR, HORATIO, quoted--[*XV, 36].

BRAIN--[*III, 1], 4.

   cells--[*VII, 14]-16; [*XXII, 17].

      created--[*XII, 23]-24.

   the mechanism--[*VI, 10]-11.

BREATH OF LIFE--[*XX, 25]-26.

BROAD ENOUGH TO WEIGH--[*XXIV, 30].

BUILDING THE MENTAL HOME--[*V, 8]-9.

BUSINESS--[*IV, 5]-7.

   Transaction of--[*VI, 17].

[p. 360]

CAESAR referred to--[*XXIV, 19].

CAPITAL A MEANS, NOT AN END--[*XVI, 2].

CAPTAINS OF INDUSTRY--[*VIII, 13]; [*XVI, 7]-8; [*XVIII, 26].

CARNEGIE, ANDREW, referred to--[*XVI, 7]; [*XXIII, 8].

CAUSATION, DOMAIN OF--[*XVIII, 33]; [*XIX, 2].

CAUSE AND EFFECT--[*XIII, 13]; [*XIV, 18].

   Law of--[*IX, 31].

   lies within--[*I, 6]-7.

CAUSE OF DIFFICULTIES--[*XV, 3].

CAUSE OF DISCORD--[*XIX, 17].

CAUSE OF FAILURES--[*XIII, 25].

CAUSE OF HARMONY--[*XIX, 17].

CAUSE OF IN JUSTICE--[*XXIV, 21].

THOUGHT THE UNIVERSAL CAUSE--[*XIII, 15].

CAUSES

   Concern yourself only with--[*X, 14]-15.

   Thoughts are--[*I, 31].

CELLS.

   Brain--[*VII, 15]; [*XII, 23], 24.

   Chemical change in the life--[*XXII, 5]-6.

   Construction of brain--[*XXII, 17], 21-22.

   intelligent--[*IX, 32]; [*XIV, 11]-12, 14-15; [*XXII, 15].

   Physical, intelligent--[*IX, 32].

   Renewal of--[*IX, 26].

CEREBRO-SPINAL SYSTEM--[*I, 19]; [*III, 1].

CHANGE

   Continual--[*XIX, 10]-12.

   --in the thought of the world--[*XVIII, 1].

   of vibration brings unrest--[*XXI, 23].

   Physical--[*XXII, 23].

CHANGED, RATE OF VIBRATION--[*XXII, 20].

CHANGING CONDITIONS--[*II, 27].

[p. 361]

CHANNEL OF UNIVERSAL ENERGY--[*IV, 21]; [*V, 21], 25; [*I, 32]; [*XIII, 25]-26; [*XIV, 6]; [*XVIII, 12]-13; [*XX, 7], 15; [*XXI, 3]; [*XXIII, 6].

CHANNELS OF DISTRIBUTION--[*X, 23]; [*XII, 21].

CHANNELS OF SUPPLY--[*VII, 27]; [*XXIII, 22].

   CHANNING quoted--<page 293>.

CHARACTER, TRUTH IN--[*XXIV, 20].

CHARMED LIFE, THE--[*VIII, 26]; [*XI, 21], 34.

CHEAT THE INFINITE--[*XXIII, 3].

CHOICE LANGUAGE--[*XV, 20].

CHRISTENDOM--[*XXII, 30].

CHRIST quoted--[*X, 14].

CHURCH--[*VIII, 18].

CIRCUIT MUST BE FORMED--[*X, 17], 19-20; [*XIX, 26].

CIRCULATION AND RELAXATION--[*III, 30].

CIRCUMSTANCES, CONTROL OF--[*XVI, 30].

CIRCUMSTANCES, POWER OVER--[*XI, 12].

CIVILIZATION, THE NEW--[*XVIII, 4]; [*XIX, 24].

CLAIRVOYANT--[*XX, 19].

COGITO, ERGO SUM--[*XII, 2].

COLOUR--[*XI, 7]; [*XXIV, 3].

COLUMBUS--[*XIII, 14].

COMPENSATION, LAW OF--[*XIII, 22]; [*XV, 29].

   defined--[*XV, 29].

COMPETITIVE THOUGHT--[*X, 21].

COMPLEMENTARY COLOURS--[*XI, 7].

COMPLETE THOUGHT-ENTITY--[*XV, 4].

COMPLETE UNFOLDMENT--[*I, 14].

CONCENTRATE ON POSITIVES--[*XVII, 34]-36.

[p. 362]

CONCENTRATION--[*III, 22]; [*VI, 15]; [*IX, 32]-34; [*XIII, 17]; [*XVII, 3]-7, 9, 11, 17-18, 21; [*XIX, 27].

   defined--[*XVII, 4].

   developed--[*VI, 24]; [*VII, 11]; [*X, 24]-25; [*XVIII, 31]-32.

   Erroneous ideas on--[*XVII, 6].

   Illustration of--[*XVII, 21].

   implies self-control--[*XVII, 9].

   importance of--[*VIII, 19], 21, 23.

   not the only way--[*III, 23].

   Power of--[*VIII, 23]; [*VII, 23]-24, 27; [*XII, 25], 27 [*XVII, 4].

   Proper--[*XIV, 31]; [*XXIII, 10].

   Wrong--[*XXIII, 10].

CONDITION, USE DETERMINES [*XVI, 12].

CONDITIONS

   are effects--[*I, 31]; [*IX, 31].

   Freedom from--[*XXI, 1], 5-6.

   Transmutation of--[*I, 40]; [*II, 27]; [*III, 13].

CONDUCT, TRUTH IN--[*XXIV, 19].

CONE--[*X, 24].

CONFIDENCE DEVELOPED--[*VII, 11].

CONQUEST OF FATE--[*I, 23].

CONSCIENCE--[*XI, 21].

CONSCIOUS CONTROLS--[*III, 12].

CONSCIOUS DESIRE--[*XVII, 8].

CONSCIOUSNESS

   Accumulative, [*I, 1]; [*V, 28]; [*XVIII, 25], 27; [*XXIII, 1]-2.

   defined--[*I, 29].

   Money--[*V, 28]; [*XVIII, 25], 27; [*XXIII, 1]-2.

   of power--[*I, 5]; [*VII, 22]; [*XX, 3]; [*XXI, 1]-2, 4-5.

   One--[*I, 24]-25.

   Poverty--[*XXIII, 2].

    = power--[*I, 5]; [*VII, 22]; [*XX, 3]; [*XXI, 1]-2, 4-5.

   Scattering--[*I, 23].

[p. 363]

CONSTITUTIONAL PHASE--[*XI, 11].

CONSTRUCTION OF BRAIN CELLS--[*XXII, 17], 21-22.

CONSTRUCTIVE FORMS OF THOUGHT Courage--[*IX, 30].

   Thought--[*XXIII, 6].

   Imagination--[*VIII, 15]; [*IX, 15].

   Sympathy--[*IX, 30].

   language--[*XV, 14].

   thinking--[*I, 20]; [*II, 28]; [*XX, 28].

   thought--[*IX, 4], 30; [*X, 21]; [*XIII, 17], 22; [*XVI, 21], 27; [*XXII, 8].

   Requirements of--[*XIV, 26].

CONTINUAL CHANGE--[*XIX, 10]-12.

CONTRAST

   Mental--[*XIX, 7].

   Moral--[*XIX, 8].

   Physical--[*XIX, 5].

   Spiritual--[*XIX, 9].

CONTROLLING

   destiny, fate and fortune--[*XIX, 3].

   experience--[*XIX, 1]-3.

CONTROL OF

   circumstances--[*XVI, 30].

   the imagination--[*XVI, 35].   the sub-conscious--[*III, 12].

   thought necessary--[*I, 10], 31.

CONVINCING SELF--[*XXIV, 6], 9-10, 12, 15.

CO-ORDINATION OF FACULTIES--[*XI, 15].

COPERNICAN SYSTEM--[*XXIV, 1].

CORRECT THINKING--[*XIV, 24], 27-28.

CORRESPONDENCES, LAW OF--[*XI, 17].

COSMIC ENERGY, VELOCITY OF--[*XIV, 9]-10.

COSMIC MIND--[*I, 27].

COUNTERACTING TIMIDITY--[*III, 14]; [*V, 24].

[p. 364]

COUNTERFEITS OF POWER--[*XII, 10]-15.

COURAGE CONSTRUCTIVE--[*IX, 30].

COURAGEOUS ACTION--[*VII, 21].

CREATION--[*VII, 8].

CREATION AND EVOLUTION--[*X, 13].

CREATION OF BRAIN CELLS--[*XII, 23]-24.

CREATIVE

   Feeling and thought--[*XVI, 34].

   Mind--[*XIV, 6], 8.

   power impersonal--[*XXIV, 29].

   power of thought--[*XV, 10], 13-14.

Spirit--[*XXIV, 29].

   Spiritual power--[*XVI, 7]-8.

   thinking--[*XXIII, 9], 18-19.

   Thought--[*XIII, 23]; [*XIV, 17].

CREATOR, MIND THE ONE--[*VIII, 16].

CREEDS, TRUTH IN--[*XXIV, 19].

CRITICISM DESTRUCTIVE--[*VIII, 5]; [*IX, 30].

CRITICISM, FEAR OF--[*III, 17]-18.

CULTIVATION OF

   attention--[*XVIII, 31]-32.

   concentration--[*X, 24]-25.

   decision--[*XVII, 18].

   initiative--[*XVII, 17].

   insight--[*XV, 31].

   inspiration--[*XX, 15].

   interest--[*XVIII, 32].

   intuition--[*XVII, 23]-24.

   originality--[*XVII, 18].

   perception, [*XVIII, 33]; [*XX, 9].

CURE OF HABIT--[*II, 23].

CUSTOM RULES THE MULTITUDE--[*XV, 36].

[p. 365]

DARWIN--[*XIII, 14].

DAVIDSON, PROF., quoted--[*II, 1].

DAY-DREAMING DESTRUCTIVE--[*VIII, 14].

DEAD LANGUAGES--[*XIII, 2].

DEATH--<page 149>.

DEBT--[*VII, 23].

DECEPTIVE, APPEARANCES--[*XIX, 28].

DECISION DEVELOPED--[*XVII, 18].

DEFECTS IN VISUALIZATION--[*VII, 10].

DEFECTS PHYSICAL--[*VI, 16].

DEFINITIONS

   Atom--[*XIV, 8].

   Attraction, Law of--[*XI, 25].

   Compensation, Law of--[*XV, 29].

   Concentration--[*XVII, 4].

   Creation--[*X, 13].

   Electron--[*XIV, 9], 11.

   Evolution--[*X, 13].

   Happiness--[*XIII, 19].

   Harmony--[*IV, 10].

   Inductive reasoning--[*XI, 1], 20.

   Insight--[*XV, 31].

   Law of attraction--[*II, 28]; [*XI, 25].

   Law of compensation--[*XV, 29].

   Objective--[*II, 10]-15.

   Thought--[*I, 29], 42; [*IV, 26]; [*VI, 10].

   Two minds, The--[*II, 10].

   Universal Substance--[*XIV, 7].

   Visualization--[*VII, 1].

   Wealth--[*XVI, 2].

   Wisdom--[*XI, 33].

DEGREE, A DIFFERENCE OF--[*II, 27]; [*XVIII, 21].

DEMAND AND SUPPLY--[*XV, 9]; [*XX, 20]-21.

DESCARTES' FIRST PRINCIPLE--[*XII, 2].

[p. 366]

DESIRE

   as existent, Realize the--[*XVI, 37]; [*XVII, 37].

   as realized, Affirm the--[*XI, 16]-18.

   Conscious-[*XVII, 8].

   determines action--[*XI, 7].

   Earnest--[*VII, 18].

   for knowledge--[*XVII, 7].

   must accord with the Law--[*XVII, 25].

   sub-conscious--[*XVII, 8].

   the attractive force-[*XXIII, 1].

DESTINY, FATE, AND FORTUNE--[*XIX, 3].

DESTRUCTIVE FORCES--[*I, 20].

DESTRUCTIVE FORMS OF THOUGHT Competitive--[*X, 21].

   Criticism--[*VIII, 5]; [*IX, 30].

   Day-Dreaming--[*VIII, 14].

   Envy--[*IX, 30].

   Fancy--[*VIII, 14].

   Fear--[*III, 14]-19; [*XIII, 16]; [*XXII, 12].

   Hypnotism--[*XII, 15].

   Idle thinking--[*V, 1].

   Fancy--[*XIII, 23].

   Indecision--[*XII, 8].

   Telepathy--[*XII, 14].

   Unbelief--[*XVII, 17].

   language--[*XV, 15].

   Over-activity--[*IV, 22], 25; [*VII, 26].

   thinking--[*XXI, 28].

   thought-[*IX, 30]; [*XII, 3], 8, 10; [*XVI, 22], 27; [*XX, 12]; [*XXII, 8], 12; [*XXIV, 5].

DETAIL--[*VII, 5], 7, 10.

DETERMINATION--[*IV, 12]-13.

   of experiences--[*XXI, 10]-11, 13.

DEVELOPMENT OF

   attention--[*XVIII, 31]-32.

   concentration--[*VI, 24]; [*VII, 11]; [*X, 24]-25; [*XVIII, 32].

[p. 367]

   confidence--[*VII, 11].

   decision--[*XVII, 18].

   faith--[*VII, 11].

   imagination--[*VII, 31]; [*VIII, 13], 28.

   initiative and originality--[*XVII, 18].

   insight--[*XVIII, 33].

   interest--[*XVIII, 31]-32.

   intuition--[*XVII, 23]-24.

   originality and initiative--[*XVII, 18].

   perception--[*XVIII, 33]; [*XX, 9].

DIALECTIC OF THE SCHOLASTICS--[*XIII, 6].

DIET, ETC.--[*VIII, 21].

DIFFERENCE OF DEGREE--[*II, 27]; [*XII, 28]; [*XIII, 26].

DIFFERENTIATION--[*II, 24]-26.

DIFFICULTIES, CAUSE OF--[*XV, 3], 7-8.

DIFFICULTIES OVERCOME--[*XXIV, 22].

DIRECT CONNECTION--[*XXIII, 15], 17.

DISCERNMENT NECESSARY--[*XV, 6].

DISCIPLINE, MENTAL--[*XIV, 24]-28.

DISCORD, CAUSE OF--[*XVI, 22]; [*XIX, 17].

DISCORD IS IGNORANCE--[*VI, 35].

DISSIPATION OF EFFORT--[*XIII, 23].

DISTRIBUTION, CHANNELS OF--[*X, 23]; [*XII, 21].

DISTRIBUTION OF WEALTH--[*XXIII, 6].

DIVINE ELECTION, DOCTRINE OF--[*XXI, 26].

DIVINE MIND--[*XXI, 27].

DIVISION OF MATTER--[*XIV, 7].

DODGING--[*I, 26].

DOMAIN OF CAUSATION--[*XVIII, 33]; [*XIX, 2].

DOMINION OVER ALL THINGS--[*XVII, 1].

DOUBT, CONFLICT, AND DANGER--[*IX, 6].

DRIFTING AND THINKING--[*II, 28].

[p. 368]

THE MASTER KEY

DYNAMIC, THOUGHT--[*XIX, 22].

DYNAMO--[*X, 19]; [*XVII, 20].

EARNEST DESIRE--[*VII, 18].

EASE AND PERFECTION--[*II, 4]; [*XVII, 13].

EDUCATED DESIRE--[*XII, 22].

EFFECTS

   Conditions are--[*I, 31].

   Dealing with--[*VII, 20].

   Objective--[*XXII, 10].

   Subjective--[*XXII, 11].

   World without, a world of--[*XXII, 13].

EFFICIENCY, MENTAL--[*I, 17]; [*IV, 8].

EFFORT, DISSIPATION OF--[*XIII, 23].

EFFORT REWARDED--[*IV, 9].

EGO PERFECT--[*XXIV, 18], 24.

ELASTIC STEP--[*VIII, 21].

ELECTION, DOCTRINE OF DIVINE--[*XXI, 26].

ELECTRONS DEFINED--[*XIV, 9], 11.

ELEMENT, ONE--[*XIX, 4].

ELOHIM [*XVII, 37].

EMBRYOLOGY--[*XIII, 6].

EMERSON referred to--[*XIII, 14].

EMERSON quoted--[*XIV, 22]; [*XVII, 37].

EMOTION AND INTELLECT--[*XVI, 34].

END OF NATURE, SERVICE THE--[*IV, 27].

ENERGY--[*IV, 17]-19.

   Eternal--[*XXI, 3].

   Thought a form of--[*XXIV, 15].

   Universal--[*XVIII, 6], 12.

   Universal is static or potential--[*I, 28].

[p. 369]

ENTHUSIASM FUTILE, MOMENTARY--[*XVII, 11].

ENVIRONMENT, ADJUSTMENT TO--[*XVIII, 8]-9.

ENVIRONMENT ILLS--[*III, 8]-9.

ENVY DESTRUCTIVE--[*IX, 30].

EPITOME OF THE UNIVERSAL--[*I, 30]; [*X, 12].

EQUALIZATION OF THE TWO MINDS--[*I, 23].

ERRONEOUS SUGGESTIONS, HOW MADE--[*II, 18].

ERUPTION--[*XIII, 1].

ESSENTIAL IDEALS--[*IV, 24].

ESSENTIAL SELF--[*IV, 1].

ESSENTIALS OF

   growth--[*XV, 6]-9.

   success--[*XVI, 5]-11.

ESTATE--[*V, 14].

ETERNAL ENERGY--[*XXI, 3].

ETERNAL VIGILANCE--[*XII, 4].

ETHER, PRANIC--[*XVIII, 33]; [*XIX, 25]; [*XX, 23]-24.

EVERYBODY'S MAGAZINE quoted--[*XVI, 9].

EVIDENCE OF THE SENSES

   false--[*XXIV, 3]-4.

   Reverse the--[*XXIV, 4].

EVIL

   and good--XIX, .8.

   destroys itself--[*XVI, 22].

   is a negation--[*XV, 23]-26.

   overcome--[*IX, 28].

   transient--[*XII, 13], 16.

EVOLUTION--[*VIII, 17], 22-23.

EXAMPLE OF TRUE SPIRITUALISM--[*XXIII, 14]-21.

EXCEPTION PROVES THE RULE--[*XIII, 1]-3.

EXCHANGE VALUE OF WEALTH--[*XVI, 2]-4.

[p. 370]

EXECUTE FEARLESSLY--[*XIX, 19].

EXERCISE--[*VIII, 13], 17, 21.

EXISTENCE IS MENTAL--[*XIV, 21].

EXPERIENCE

   and memory, Intuition independent of--[*XVII, 23].

   beneficial--[*XV, 5], 7.

   Controlling--[*XIX, 1]-3.

   determined--[*XXI, 10]-11, 13.

   Wisdom comes of--[*XV, 7].

EXPERIENCES--[*VIII, 18].

   and the mental attitude--[*I, 2], 7-10.

   What determines--[*XVI, 16]-17.

EXPLANATION OF UNUSUAL--[*XIII, 12]-14.

EXPRESSING ABUNDANCE--[*XV, 14].

EXTERNALIZATION--[*XVI, 32]; [*XVII, 18]; [*XXI, 28].

EXTRAORDINARY RESULTS--MEANS--[*XX, 14].

EYE FOR AN EYE--[*XXIII, 3].

EYE HATH NOT SEEN, NOR EAR HEARD, NEITHER HATH IT ENTERED INTO THE HEART OF MAN--[*XXIV, 31].

FACT, SPECULATION, AND OPINION--[*XVI, 35].

FACTS, POTENTIAL--[*XXIV, 21].

FACULTIES, CO-ORDINATION OF--[*XI, 15].

FAILURE A HABIT--[*IV, 12].

FAILURE, CAUSE OF--[*XIII, 25].

FAITH--[*VI, 9]; [*XI, 35].

   and belief--[*XVIII, 16]-17.

   and purpose necessary--[*VI, 9].

   comes of success--[*VII, 11].

   developed--[*VII, 11].

[p. 371]

   in self

      comes of overcoming--[*XVII, 26].

      necessary--[*XXI, 19].

   Intelligent--[*XI, 27].

   --is the substance of things hoped for, the evidence of things not seen--[*VII, 11]; [*XI, 25], 35.

   = substance--[*VI, 9]; [*VII, 11].

FALSE

   Evidence of the senses--[*XXIV, 3]-4.

   prayer--[*XXI, 27].

FAME v. HONOUR--[*XVII, 28].

FANCY--[*VIII, 14].

FARSIGHTEDNESS--[*XVI, 36]; [*XVIII, 3], 6, 18.

FATALISTIC DOCTRINE [*XXI, 26].

FATE CONQUERED--[*I, 23].

FEAR--[*III, 14]; [*XXI, 12]; [*XXIV, 5].

   disastrous--[*XIII, 16].

   of criticism--[*III, 17]-18.

   the great obstacle--[*XXIII, 1]-2.

FEELING--[*VIII, 1].

   and intellect--[*XVI, 34].

   and thought creative--[*XVI, 34].

   is necessary--[*IV, 27].

   is vitality--[*VII, 18]; [*XII, 18], 21; [*XVI, 21], 34; [*XX, 17].

   the only sense--[*XVI, 34].

   World within a world of--[*I, 6], 21.

FIDELITY TO THE IDEAL--[*XII, 6]; [*XVI, 33]; [*XXI, 19].

   necessary--[*VIII, 25].

   rewarded--[*XI, 14].

FINANCIER--[*XXIII, 8].

FINITE

and the Infinite co-ordinated--[*I, 23].

cannot inform the Infinite--[*III, 27].

[p. 372]

FIRM ENOUGH--[*XXIV, 30].

FIRST STEP--[*VII, 5].

FLAGLER, H. M.

   quoted--[*XVI, 9].

   referred to--[*XVI, 8].

FLASH OF GENIUS--[*XXIV, 18].

FLEMING, SIR AMBROSE,

   quoted--[*XVIII, 6].

FLOWER--[*IX, 32].

FOCUS--[*I, 27].

FORCE, PHYSICAL--[*XVII, 2].

FORCE, MENTAL--[*XVII, 2].

FORM

   depends upon vibratory rate--[*XVIII, 13]; [*XIX, 26] [*XXII, 5]-6,18.

   and attraction--[*XVIII, 21]-22.

   of thought--[*XVI, 19].

   Thought takes--[*XXIII, 4].

FORMATION OF MENTAL HABITS--[*IV, 28].

FORMS OF CONSTRUCTIVE THOUGHT

   Altruism--[*XXII, 8].

   Co-operation and harmony--[*X, 21]; [*XVI, 27].

   Courage--[*IX, 30]; [*XIII, 22]; [*XXII, 8].

   Harmony and co-operation--[*X, 21]; [*XVI, 27].

   Imagination--[*VIII, 15]; [*IX, 15].

   Kindness--[*XXII, 8].

   Sympathy--[*IX, 30].

FORMS OF DESTRUCTIVE THOUGHT

   Anxiety--[*XII, 3]; [*XXII, 12].

   Competitive--[*X, 21].

   Criticism--[*VIII, 5]; [*IX, 30]; [*XXII, 8].

   Day-dreaming--[*II, 28]; [*VIII, 14]; [*XIII, 23].

   Discord--[*XVI, 27]; [*XX, 12].

   Discouragement--[*XII, 3]; [*XXIV, 5].

[p. 373]

   Distrust--[*XXIV, 5].

   Doubt--[*XXII, 12]; [*XXIV, 5].

   Envy--[*IX, 30]; [*XXII, 8].

   Fancy--[*II, 28]; [*VIII, 14]; [*XIII, 23].

   Fear--[*V, 14]-19; [*XII, 3]; [*XIII, 16]; [*XX, 12]; [*XXII, 12].

   Hatred--[*XXII, 8].

   Hypnotism--[*XII, 15].

   Idle thinking--[*II, 28]; [*VIII, 14]; [*XIII, 23].

   Indecision--[*XII, 8].

   Jealousy--[*XXII, 8].

   Telepathy--[*XII, 14].

   Unbelief--[*XVII, 17].

   Unhappiness--[*XX, 12].

   Unkindness--[*XX, 12].

FORWARD MOVEMENT--[*XX, 30].

FOSSIL--[*XIII, 2].

FOUNTAIN OF SUPPLY WITHIN--[*I, 38].

FOUR KINGDOMS--[*XI, 28].

FRANKLIN--quoted--p. 173.

FRANKLIN, referred to--[*XIII, 9].

FREE AGENT, MAN A--[*II, 12]; [*VIII, 3]; [*XII, 15].

FREEDOM FROM CONDITIONS--[*XXI, 1], 5-6.

FREE-WILL--[*XIII, 12]; [*II, 3]; [*VIII, 15].

FRIENDS AND MONEY--[*XXIII, 3], 5.

FULTON, referred to--[*XIII, 14].

FUNCTIONS OF THE SUB-CONSCIOUS--[*II, 7]-8.

FUTURE--[*VII, 1], 6; [*VIII, 6]-7.

FUTURE DETERMINED--[*XXIV, 21].

GALILEO--[*XIII, 9], 14.

GENERALIZING--[*X, 14]; [*XI, 19]; [*XIII, 18]. 373

[p. 374]

GENERATION OF POWER--[*I, 32].

GENEROUS THOUGHT--[*XXIII, 6].

GENIUS

   and the sub-conscious--[*II, 3].

   Attention the mark of--[*XVIII, 31].

GEOLOGIST--[*XVII, 14].

GEOLOGY--[*XIII, 6].

GERMS--[*XXI, 3].

   Mental, moral, and physical--[*XXII, 30].

GETTING AND GIVING--[*XIII, 22]; [*XV, 4], 29; [*XVII, 29]; [*XVIII, 24]-25; [*XXIII, 2], 6-7.

GIVEN DOMINION OVER ALL THINGS--[*X, 11].

GIVE, WE RECEIVE AS WE--[*XIII, 22].

GIVING

   and receiving--[*XIII, 22]; [*XV, 4], 29; [*XVII, 29]; [*XVIII, 24]-25; [*XXIII, 2], 6-7.

   out--[*V, 26]; [*XV, 3]-6.

GOD--[*XXIV, 28].

   and energy distinguished--[*IV, 17]-19.

   Idea of a personal--[*XII, 20].

   is life--[*XXIV, 28].

   Man the image of--[*V, 23]; [*VII, 8]; [*X, 12].

   personalized--[*XIV, 19].

   Universal Mind is--[*XIII, 20].

   within--[*XXIV, 28].

GOOD

   and evil--[*IX, 28], 31; [*XVI, 22]-27; [*XIX, 8]; [*XX, 31].

   permanent--[*XII, 17].

   --servant, poor master--[*XVI, 35].

GREAT WHOLE--[*XX, 30].

GROWTH--[*XV, 4]-7, 9, II.

   depends on atomic affinity--[*XVIII, 22]-24.

[p. 375]

   Essentials of--[*XV, 6]-9.

   Law of--[*I, 39]; [*IV, 26]; [*VII, 18]; [*VIII, 2]; [*XII, 17].

   Necessities of--[*XV, 6]-9.

HABIT

   cured--[*II, 23].

   of failure--[*IV, 12].

   rules the multitude--[*XV, 36].

   Sub-conscious the seat of--[*II, 23], 25.

HABITS

   broken--[*XXI, 18].

   Formation of--[*XXI, 18].

   mental--[*IV, 28].

HADDOCK quoted--[*XX, 31].

HAPPINESS--[*XIII, 24].

   a state of mind--[*XVI, 37].

   defined--[*XIII, 19].

   does not depend on possession of things--[*XVI, 37].

   the end of life--[*XIII, 18].

HARMONY--[*XIII, 18]; [*XIV, 31]; [*XXIV, 4].

   a state of mind--[*XVI, 37].

   Cause of--[*XIX, 17]. defined--[*I, 10].

   does not depend on possession of things--[*XVI, 37].

   necessary--[*I, 9], 17.

   Results of--[*I, 9], II.

   with the

      Infinite--[*II, 28].

      law--[*XV, 2], 9.

HARVEST, MENTAL--[*XXII, 2]-3.

HEALING--[*XXII, 4].

   Metaphysical--[*XIV, 14]; [*XXIV, 13].

   of self--[*XXII, 27].

HEALTH--[*IX, 11]-13; [*XXII, 2], 13; [*XXIV, 4].

   Mental attitude of--[*XXII, 17].

[p. 376]

HEALTH, continued.

   Visualizing--[*XXII, 16].

   wealth and love [*IX, 2].

HEAT--[*XXIV, 3].

HEIR--[*V, 14].

HEREDITY--[*V, 4], 18.

HERMETICALLY SEALED--[*X, 5], 7.

HIGHER AND LOWER SELF--[*XVII, 19].

HIGHEST IDEAL--[*XXI, 17].

HIS IMAGE AND LIKENESS--[*XX, 31]; [*XXII, 31].

HOME, BUILDING THE MENTAL--[*V, 8]-9; [*IX, 26].

HONOUR v. FAME--[*XVII, 28].

HUMILITY AND WISDOM--[*XI, 33].

HUXLEY referred to--[*X, 6].

HYDROGEN ATOM--[*XIV, 9].

I--IV, I-26; IX, II-I2, 14; [*XIII, 27]; [*XXIV, 18].

is perfect--[*XXIV, 18], 24.

I AM--[*XX, 26].

IDEAL--[*VIII, 6], 10, 23-25; [*XIII, 25]; [*XVII, 13]; [*XXI, 19].

   Aggrandizement not the highest--[*XVI, 5].

   commonwealth--[*XI, 13]-14.

   Fidelity to--[*XII, 6]; XVI 33; [*XXI, 19].

   necessary--[*XVI, 5]-6, 28, 33; [*VIII, 25].

   rewarded--[*XI, 14].

   is the practical--[*I, 15].

   Palace of the--[*XV, 22].

   Perfect--[*XXIV, 23].

   Temple of the--[*XV, 20].

   The highest--[*XXI, 17].

IDEALISM, SUBJECTIVE--[*XVI, 37].

IDEALIST, THE PRACTICAL--[*XVI, 11].

[p. 377]

IDEALIZATION

   the foundation--[*VII, 5].

   visualization, materialization--[*XVI, 8].

IDEALS--[*II, 26]; [*VII, 22].

   essential--[*I, 24].

   v. appearances--[*XXI, 20].

IDEAS

eliminate the smaller, Large--[*XXI, 6]-7.

   irresistible--[*XXIII, 12]-16.

IDLE THINKING--[*II, 28]; [*VIII, 14]; [*XIII, 23].

IGNORANCE

   disastrous--[*XX, 12]-13; [*XXII, 7].

   is not bliss but discord--[*VIII, 22].

   of the law excuses none--[*X, 16].

ILLUSTRATIONS

   Anxiety = stirring the earth--[*VII, 26].

   Attention--[*VI, 20].

   Concentration--[*XVII, 21].

   Inductive reasoning--[*XI, 10].

   Inspiration--[*X, 8].

   Man and the World--[*XI, 11]-12.

   Paleontology--[*XI, 8].

   Source of power--[*XVII, 30].

   Symbols of power = Dead Sea fruit--[*XVII, 28].

IMAGE--[*VIII, 28].

   Mental--VII, [*I, 13], 18; [*XIII, 25].

   of God, Man the--[*V, 23]; [*VII, 8]; [*X, 12].

IMAGINATION--[*VII, 2]; [*VIII, 6]-15, 24; [*IX, 15]; [*XVI, 35].

   and visualization--[*XVI, 33].

   Control of--[*XVI, 35].

   developed--[*VII, 31]; [*VIII, 13], 28.

IMPERSONAL, CREATIVE POWER--[*XXIV, 29].

IMPORTANCE OF CONCENTRATION--[*VI, 19].

[p. 378]

IMPRESSING THE

   sub-conscious--[*III, 23].

   Universal Mind--[*XI, 18].

IMPRESSIONS ARE PATTERNS--[*XVI, 15].

INCREDULITY, CAUSE--[*XII, 23].

INDECISION DESTRUCTIVE--[*XII, 8].

INDEPENDENCE, IN WHAT IT CONSISTS--[*XII, 8].

INDIVIDUAL

   epitome of the Universal--[*I, 30].

   is the channel--[*XIII, 25]-26; [*XIV, 6]; [*XX, 7].

   manifests through the Universal--[*I, 28].

   Mind not--[*XXIV, 27].

   Universal manifests through the--[*I, 28]; [*III, 28]; [*XX, 7].

INDUCTION REQUIRES CO-ORDINATION OF THE FACULTIES--[*XI, 15].

INDUCTIVE

   Reasoning--[*XI, 1]-10, 20; [*XIII, 3].

   Definition--[*XI, 1], 20.

   Illustration--[*XI, 10].

   Science--XIII, I-2, 6-7.

INFALLIBLE, SUB-CONSCIOUS--[*II, 2].

INFINITE--1, 24; [*IX, 10].

   and finite co-ordinated--[*I, 23].

   Infinite and illimitable possibilities of achievement--[*XXII, 31].

   Finite cannot inform the--[*III, 27]; [*XIII, 25].

   Harmony with the--[*II, 28].

   Informing the--[*III, 27]; [*XIII, 25].

   Mind is--[*XIV, 19]-20; [*XXI, 3]; [*XXIII, 15]; [*VIII, 16].

   Thought-power--[*VII, 15].

   Unity with the--[*I, 28]; [*III, 16], 28; [*IV, 7]; [*XII, 28].

   Universal Mind--[*XIII, 25]; [*XIV, 20].

[p. 379]

INFINITELY SMALL--[*XXI, 7].

INFINITUDE, THREE ATTRIBUTES OF--[*XIII, 25].

INFINITY OF WISDOM--[*XX, 10].

INFORMING THE INFINITE--[*III, 27]; [*XIII, 25].

INHERITANCE; BIRTHRIGHT--[*XV, 18].

IN HIM WE LIVE AND MOVE AND HAVE OUR BEING--[*XX, 23], 31.

INITIATIVE AND ORIGINALITY--[*XVII, 18].

INJUSTICE, CAUSE--[*XXIV, 21].

INNOCENT OF DEEP THINKING--[*XXIII, 9].

INORGANIC--[*X, 5]-6.

INSIGHT--[*XV, 30]-36; [*XXIII, 5].

   and far-sightedness--[*XVI, 36]; [*XVII, 3], 6, 18.

   comes in the Silence, by concentration--[*XV, 35].

   defined--[*XV, 31].

   developed--[*XVIII, 33].

   important--[*XVI, 36].

INSPIRATION--[*XI, 32]; [*XX, 13]-15, 18-19; [*XXIV, 18].

   Illustration--[*X, 8].

INSTINCT--[*II, 24].

INSTINCTIVE LIFE, PLANE OF--[*XVII, 19].

INTEGRITY AND JUSTICE--[*XXIII, 3].

INTELLECT AND EMOTION--[*XVI, 34].

INTELLIGENCE--[*XVIII, 8], II.

   omnipresent--[*XIV, 3].

   Physical--[*I, 34]; [*V, 6]-7; [*VII, 16]; [*XI, 14]-15.

   Universal--[*XVIII, 8] II.

INTELLIGENT

   Cells--[*XIV, 11]-I2, 14-15.

   faith--[*XI, 27].

[p. 380]

INTENTION

   governs the attention--[*XII, 25]; [*XX, 20].

   to help sufficient--[*XXIV, 13].

INTEREST CULTIVATED--[*XVIII, 31]-32.

INTROSPECTION--[*XI, 31]-32; [*XVI, 31].

INTUITION--[*II, 19]; [*XVII, 22]-24.

   Cultivation of--[*XVII, 23]-24.

   independent of experience and memory--[*XVII, 23].

INTUITIVE PERCEPTION--[*XVII, 6]; [*XX, 8]-10.

INVENTOR--[*VIII, 9]; [*XX, 26].

INVESTIGATION--[*XVII, 5].

INVISIBLE REALITIES--[*XVI, 33]; [*XVII, 32]; [*XX, 3].

INVOLUNTARY SYSTEM--[*III, 2]-3.

IRON FLOAT--[*XVIII, 10].

IRONY--[*XVIII, 5].

IT SHALL BE ESTABLISHED UNTO THEE--[*X, 11].

JOY OF OVERCOMING--[*XVII, 17].

JUPITER--[*XIV, 10].

JUSTICE AND INTEGRITY--[*XXIII, 3].

KINGDOM OF HEAVEN WITHIN YOU--[*XX, 11].

KINGDOM OF NATURE--[*XI, 12].

KINGDOMS, FOUR--[*XI, 28].

KNOWING

   one's requirements--[*XV, 6], 9.

   the truth--[*III, 14]; [*IX, 6]-12, 17.

KNOWLEDGE

   Desire for--[*XVII, 7].

   develops potentiality--[*VIII, 22].

   does not apply itself--[*XV, 36].

   intuitive, True--[*XXII, 24].

[p. 381]

   is power--[*XVIII, 30].

      Applied--[*VIII, 22]; [*X, 23]; [*XIII, 22]; [*XIV, 28]; [*XV, 36]; [*XXII, 1].

   Magnet of--[*XVII, 7].

   of the law brings happiness--[*XV, 9].

   --will not apply itself--[*X, 23]; [*XV, 36].

KNOW THYSELF--[*VI, 14].

LABOUR PRODUCES WEALTH--[*XVI, 1].

LANGUAGE--[*XV, 12].

   Constructive--[*XV, 14].

   Destructive--[*XV, 15].

   the passport to success, Choice--[*XV, 20].

LANGUAGES, DEAD--[*XIII, 2].

LARGE IDEAS--[*XXI, 6]-7.

LARSEN quoted--[*VI, 35].

LAVISH, WASTEFUL, EXTRAVAGANT--[*X, 1].

LAW

   basis of all--[*I, 33].

   beneficent--[*XV, 1].

   Desire must accord with--[*XVII, 25].

   excuses none, Ignorance of the--[*X, 16].

   Harmony with the--[*XV, 2], 9.

   immutable--[*XV, 1].

LAW OF ABUNDANCE--[*VII, 24].

   operative--[*X, 23].

LAW OF ATTRACTION--[*VI, 18]; [*VIII, 18]; [*IX, 14], 31; [*XII, 18]-19, 21-22; [*XIII, 24]; [*XV, 11].

   and law of love identical--[*XII, 18].

   defined--[*II, 28]; [*XI, 25].

   operative--[*VII, 17], 23; [*XVI, 14]; [*XVIII, 21]; [*XXI, 11], 15; [*XXIV, 21].

   --being--[*I, 17], 19; [*VI, 9]; [*XVIII, 11].

   cause and effect--[*I, 31].

[p. 382]

LAW OF ATTRACTION, continued.

   compensation--[*XIII, 22]; [*XV, 29]; [*XXIII, 3].

   defined--[*XV, 29].

   correspondences--[*XI, 17].

   growth--[*I, 39]; [*IV, 26]; [*VII, 18]; [*VIII, 2]; [*XII, 17]

   operative--[*X, 9]-10.

   love--[*IV, 26]; [*XII, 18]; [*XV, 11].

   and law of attraction identical--[*XII, 18].

   manifestation--[*VII, 12]; [*VIII, 2]; [*X, 11]; [*XIX, 17]; [*XXI, 2]-3; [*XXIII, 4].

   specific gravity--[*VIII, 31]-32.

   success, Service the--[*XXIII, 3], 7.

   supply and demand operative--[*XI, 10].

   thought--[*XII, 17].

   vibration--[*IV, 26]; [*XVIII, 13].

   operative--[*XXII, 5]-8, 13.

   Prayer subject to--[*XIV, 23].

   Reign of--[*XI, 5]; [*XII, 21].

   Violation of, brings disaster--[*X, 16].

LAWS

   Natural--[*XVI, 31].

   Physical--[*X, 8]; [*XI, 12].

LAWYER--[*XVIII, 26].

LEVERRIER referred to--[*XI, 9]-10.

LIFE AND SPIRIT IDENTICAL--[*IV, 23].

LIFE AN UNFOLDMENT--[*I, 16]; [*XII, 27].

   -cells, Chemical change in--[*XXII, 5]-6.

   God is--[*XXIV, 28].

   Happiness the end of--[*XIII, 18].

LIFE MORE ABUNDANT--[*VIII, 21]; [*XXI, 16]; [*XX, 20]-21, 24.

   World within, a world of--[*I, 6], 21.

LIGHT--[*XIX, 25]; [*XXIV, 3].

LIGHTNING--[*XIII, 2], 9.

LIKE ATTRACTS LIKE--[*XV, 9]; [*XVIII, 24]-25; [*XXI, 12].

[p. 383]

LIKE POLES REPEL--[*XI, 6].

LILY--[*X, 9].

LINCOLN referred to--[*IX, 17].

LIPTON, SIR THOMAS, referred to--[*XVI, 7].

LOFTIEST ACTIVITY OF THOUGHT--[*XI, 31].

LOGIC OF ARISTOTLE--[*XIII, 6].

LOSS--[*I, 1]; [*XII, 8]; [*XVI, 13].

LOVE--[*IX, 2]-3, 16.

   health and wealth--[*IX, 2].

   is vitality--[*XV, 10]-I1.

   Law of--[*IV, 26]; [*XII, 18]; [*XV, 11].

MAGIC OF THOUGHT--[*XX, 4].

MAGNET--[*IX, 16].

   Money--[*XXIII, 5].

   of knowledge--[*XVII, 7].

MAGNETIC ATMOSPHERE--[*III, 5]-6, 19.

MAJORITIES ARE LED--[*XXIII, 9].

MAJORITY WRONG [*VII, 30].

MAN

   a free agent--[*II, 12]; [*VIII, 3].

   and the world, Illustration of--[*XI, 11]-12.

   a spirit--[*XXIV, 28].

MAN CANNOT THINK WITHOUT EATING--[*XIX, 15]-16.

   one with the universe--[*XI, 11].

   the epitome of the universe--[*X, 12].

   the expression of the Universal--[*XIV, 20].

   the image of God--[*V, 23]; [*VII, 8]; [*X, 12].

   the sum of his thoughts--[*IX, 27].

MANIFESTATION, LAW OF--[*VII, 12]; [*VIII, 2]; [*X, 11]; [*XIX, 17]; [*XXI, 2]-3; [*XXIII, 4].

MANKIND, UNITY OF--[*I, 38].

[p. 384]

MARDEN quoted--<page 277>.

MASTER ARCHITECT--[*XVI, 33].

MASTER-KEY--[*VI, 33]; [*XXIV, 30].

MASTER OF MATTER, MIND THE--[*XXII, 9]-11, 24.

MATERIALIZATION--[*VII, 7]; [*XII, 12]-13.

MATTER

   and mind--[*XIX, 1]-10, 12.

   Division of--[*XIV, 7].

   intelligent--[*I, 34]; [*V, 6]-7; [*VII, 16]; [*XIV, 14]-15.

   Mind the master of--[*XXII, 9]-11, 24.

McCOSH, J. quoted--<page 120>.

MECHANISM--[*VI, 3]-8, 13-14; [*VIII, 30]; IX, [*I, 4]-5, 1, 15; [*XX, 15].

   Brain the--[*VI, 10]-11.

MEMORY

   and experience, Intuition independent of--[*XVII, 23].

   Sub-conscious the store-house of--[*II, 25].

MENTAL ATTITUDE--[*XXI, 17]; [*XXIII, 1].

   Experiences and the--[*I, 2], 10.

   Harmonious--[*XIV, 28]-29.

   of health--[*XXII, 17].

   Predominant--[*XIII, 16]; [*XXI, 9], 12-14.

   assimilation--[*XIX, 27].

   atmosphere--[*III, 5]-6, 19.

   contrast--[*XIX, 6].

   discipline--[*XIV, 24]-28.

   efficiency--[*I, 17]; [*IV, 8].

   force superior--[*XVII, 2].

   habits, how formed--[*IV, 28].

   harvest--[*XXII, 2]-3.

   heredity--[*V, 18].

   home, building the--[*V, 8]-9; [*IX, 26].

   image--VII, [*I, 13],18; [*XIII, 25].

   moral, and physical germs--[*XV, 30].

   photography--[*XV, 15]-16; [*XXI, 14].

[p. 385]

   physical and spiritual--[*II, 24]-26.

   power--[*X, 3]; [*XIX, 19]-24.

   processes--[*XI, 30].

   revolution--[*XVIII, 1]-6.

   therapeutics--[*XXI, 24]-27; [*XXIV, 7]-13, 15.

MERCHANT--[*V, 26].

MERCURY ATOM--[*XIV, 9].

MESSENGERS, THOUGHT--[*II, 21], 25; [*XX, 3], 12.

METAPHYSICAL HEALING--[*XIV, 14]; [*XXIV, 13].

METAPHYSICS v. THEOLOGY-[*XXII, 29]-31.

METHOD

   Action develops--[*VII, 7].

   of thinking, Possession and the--[*I, 3].

   Advantage of spiritual--[*IX, 29].

   --develop friends--[*VII, 7].

MIND--[*XVIII, 6]-7, 9; [*XIX, 1]-10, 12.

   Attitude of--[*III, 18]; [*XIX, 17]; [*XXII, 17]; [*XXIII, 1].

   Accumulative--[*I, 1]; [*V, 28].

   Experiences and the--[*I, 2].

   governs possession--[*XVI, 37].

   Harmonious--[*XIV, 28]-29.

   Healthy--[*XXII, 17].

   Objective--[*XVII, 31].

   Predominant--[*VIII, 18]-19; [*IX, 30]; [*XXI, 9], 12-14.

   Receptive--[*XXIII, 1], 4.

   Subjective--[*XVII, 31].

   Successful--[*XVII, 26].

MIND, BODY, AND SPIRIT--[*IV, 1]-4.

   Cosmic--[*I, 27].

   creative--[*XIV, 6], 8, 17.

   Divine--[*XXI, 27].

   Infinite--[*XIV, 19]-20; [*XXI, 3]; [*XXIII, 15].

   infinite--[*VIII, 16].

   is the master of matter--[*VI, 15]; [*XVIII, 11]; [*XXII, 9]-11.

[p. 386]

MIND, BODY, AND SPIRIT, continued.

   Negative--[*XIV, 14]-15.

   Nothing exists without--[*XIV, 16].

   not individual--[*XXIV, 27].

   omnipresent--[*XXIV, 27].

   Positive--[*XXIV, 14].

   present in the infinitely small--[*XXI, 7].

   Spirit the substance of--[*XXIII, 12].

   static--[*XIX, 22].

   Sub-conscious--[*XIV, 15].

   the one creator--[*VIII, 16].

   Universal--[*XIV, 19]-22; [*XVIII, 6]-7, 9; [*XXI, 27]; [*XXIV, 26].

   universal--[*I, 27].

   World within is the--[*XXII, 13].

MIND DEFINED--[*II, 10].

MISTAKE THEOLOGY FOR RELIGION--[*XXI, 21].

MOLECULAR MOTION--[*XXIV, 18].

MOMENTARY ENTHUSIASM FUTILE--[*XVII, 11].

MONEY--[*I, 5]-7; [*XXIII, 2]-8, 22.

   consciousness--[*I, 1], 5; [*XVIII, 25]-27; [*XXIII, 1]-2.

   magnet--[*XXIII, 5].

MORAL

   contrast--[*XIX, 7].

   mental, and physical germs--[*XV, 30].

   power--[*X, 3].

MORGAN referred to--[*XXIII, 6], 8.

MOTIVES, ULTERIOR--[*XVI, 31].

MUCH LEADS TO MORE--[*I, 1]; [*XXIII, 10].

MULFORD, PRENTICE, quoted--[*II, 15]; [*XVI, 7].

MULTITUDE RULED BY PRECEDENT--[*XV, 36]; [*XXIII, 9].

NATURAL FORCES OVERCOME--[*X, 4].

[p. 387]

   beneficent--[*XV, 1].

   immutable--[*XV, 1].

   harmonious--[*XVI, 31].

NATURE, PROFUSION OF--[*X, 1].

NECESSITIES OF GROWTH--[*XV, 6]-9.

NECESSITY OF

   action--[*XIII, 22].

   an ideal--[*XVI, 24], 33.

   attention--[*XXIII, 9].

   discernment--[*XV, 6].

   faith in self--[*XXI, 19].

   harmony--[*I, 9], 17.

   perception--[*XV, 6].

   purpose--[*XVII, 27].

   receptivity--[*VIII, 17].

   recognition of power--[*I, 8]; [*VIII, 20].

NEGATION, EVIL IS A--[*XV, 23]-26.

NEGATIVE

   mind--[*XIV, 14]-15.

   thought--[*XVI, 15].

NEPTUNE--[*XI, 9].

NERVES

   Cerebro-spinal or voluntary system--[*I, 18]; [*III, 1].

   Involuntary or sympathetic system--[*I, 21]; [*III, 2]-3.

   Spinal cord--[*VII, 3].

   Sympathetic system--[*I, 21]; [*III, 2]-3.

   Vagus nerve--[*III, 3].

   Voluntary system--[*III, 1].

NEW

   civilization--[*XVIII, 4]; [*XIX, 24].

   era--[*XI, 26]-27.

   regime--[*XXI, 25]-26.

NEWTON--[*XIII, 9].

[p. 388]

NO EFFORT LOST--[*XXI, 18].

NOTHING EXISTS WITHOUT MIND--[*XIV, 16].

NOUMENA--[*XVI, 33]; [*XVII, 32]; [*XX, 3]; [*XXIV, 21].

OBJECTIFICATION--[*I, 25]; [*XI, 29]-30.

OBJECTIVE

   attitude of mind--[*XVII, 31].

   defined--[*II, 11]-15. effects--[*XXII, 10].

   v. subjective activity--[*IV, 22].

OCEAN--[*XIV, 21].

OLD REGIME AND THE NEW--[*XXI, 25]-26.

OMNIPOTENCE, RECOGNITION OF--[*IX, 29].

OMNIPOTENT

   Solar plexus--[*III, 11].

   Sub-conscious--[*XIV, 22]; [*XVII, 25].

OMNIPRESENCE

   --of Omnipotence--[*XX, 15]; [*XXIV, 7].

OMNIPRESENT

   Intelligence--[*XIV, 3].

   Mind--[*XXIV, 27].

   Spirit--[*IX, 29].

ONE

   consciousness--[*I, 24]-26, 30; [*VI, 2].

   element--[*XIX, 3].

   sense: feeling--[*XVI, 34].

   One step forward, two backward--[*XIV, 26].

   with his kind, Each soul--[*I, 38].

   with the universe, Man--[*XI, 11].

ONENESS

   of mankind--[*I, 38].

   with Omnipotence--[*III, 16]; [*IV, 6]-7.

ONLY ACTIVITY--[*XXIV, 29].

OPERATIVE, SPIRITUAL POWER--[*XVI, 9]-10.

[p. 389]

OPINION, SPECULATION, AND FACT--[*XVI, 35].

OPPORTUNITY

   --follows perception--[*XXII, 31].

   Recognize--[*XXIII, 4]-5.

OPPOSITE POLES ATTRACT--[*XI, 6].

ORGANIC--[*X, 5].

ORIGINAL PATTERNS--[*XVI, 15].

ORIGINALITY AND INITIATIVE--[*XVII, 18].

OUR ABILITY TO THINK--[*XXI, 3].

OUTLET--[*VI, 10].

OVER-ACTIVITY DESTRUCTIVE--[*IV, 22], 25; [*VII, 26].

OVERCOMING NATURAL FORCES--[*X, 4].

PALACE OF THE IDEAL--[*XV, 22].

PALEONTOLOGY--[*XIII, 2].

PASSIVE, SUBSTANCE--[*VI, 15].

PASSPORT TO SUCCESS--[*XV, 20].

PATTERN, THE--[*VII, 2]; [*XXI, 8], 14; [*XXII, 15]; [*XXIII, 19].

PATTERNS

   Impressions are--[*XVI, 15].

   Original--[*XVI, 15].

PAUL quoted--VII, II; [*XI, 25], 35.

PER CENTAGE OF THOUGHT PROCESSES--[*V, 1].

PERCEPTION

   developed--[*XVIII, 33]; [*XX, 9].

   Intuitive--[*XVII, 6]; [*XX, 8]-10.

   necessary--[*XV, 6].

PERSONAL GOD--[*XIV, 19].

PERFECT IDEAL--[*XXIV, 23].

   Opportunity follows--[*XXII, 31].

   Idea of a--[*XII, 20].

[p. 390]

PERSONALITY-[*XXI, 13].

   Sub-conscious--[*XXIV, 21].

PERSONS, PLACES, AND THINGS--[*XVI, 24].

PHENOMENA--[*IX, 2]; [*X, 1]; [*XIII, 12]-14.

PHOTOGRAPHY, MENTAL--[*XXI, 14].

PHRASES

   A complete thought-entity--[*XV, 4].

   Action develops methods--[*VII, 7].

   Action follows inspiration--[*VI, 31].

   A difference of degree--[*II, 27]; [*VII, 8]; [*XII, 28].

   All is motion--[*XXI, 22].

   All mind is one mind--[*I, 26]; [*XXIV, 9].

   An hundred-fold--[*VIII, 4].

   Anthropomorphic conceptions--[*XVII, 3].

   A well-defined lawful want--[*XI, 10].

   A worm--[*XIII, 20].

   Beast of burden for those who think--[*XX, 5].

   Be--do--are--think--[*I, 4]; [*XX, 27].

   Breath of life--[*XX, 25], 26.

   Broad enough to weigh the evidence--[*XXIV, 30].

   Change in the thought of the world--[*XVIII, 1].

   Cheat the Infinite--[*XXIII, 3].

   Complete thought-entity--[*XV, 4].

   Complete unfoldment--[*I, 14].

   Consciousness of power--[*XX, 3].

   Courageous action--[*VII, 21].

   Degree, A difference of--[*XIII, 26]; [*XIV, 21]; [*XX, 31].

   Desire, Earnest--[*VII, 18].

   Dialectic of the scholastics--[*XIII, 6].

   Direct connection--[*XXIII, 15], 17.

   Dodging--[*I, 26].

   Dominion over all things--[*XVII, 1].

   Doubt, conflict, and danger--[*IX, 6].

   Earnest desire--[*VII, 18].

   Ease and perfection--[*II, 4]; [*XIII, 17].

   Educated desire--[*XII, 22].

[p. 391]

   Elastic step----[*VIII, 21].

   Eternal vigilance--[*XII, 4].

   Execute fearlessly--[*XX, 19].

   Extraordinary results--means--[*XX, 14].

   Firm enough to follow their own judgment--[*XXIV, 30].

   Flash of genius--[*XXIV, 18].

   Focus--[*I, 27].

   Forward movement of the Great Whole--[*XX, 30].

   Good servant, poor master--[*XVI, 35].

   Hermetically sealed--[*X, 5], 7.

   His image and likeness-[*XX, 31]; [*XXII, 31].

   Infinite and illimitable possibilities--[*XXII, 31].

   Infinity of wisdom--[*XX, 10].

   Innocent of deep thinking--[*XXIII, 9].

   Iron float--[*XVIII, 10].

   Joy of overcoming--[*XVII, 17].

   Kingdom of Heaven within you--[*XX, 11].

   Knowledge will not apply itself--[*X, 23].

   Lavish, wasteful, extravagant--[*X, 1].

   Law of being--[*I, 17], 19; [*VI, 9]; [*XVIII, 11].

   Life an unfoldment--[*I, 16]; [*XII, 27].

   Life more abundant--[*VIII, 21]; [*XV, 16]; [*XX, 20], 21, 22.

   Like attracts like--[*XVIII, 24], 25; [*XXI, 12].

   Man cannot think without eating--[*XIX, 15], 16.

   Methods will develop friends--[*VII, 7].

   Mistake theology for religion--[*XXI, 21].

   Molecular motion--[*XXIV, 18].

   Much leads to more--[*I, 1]; [*XXIII, 10].

   Omnipresence of Omnipotence--[*XX, 15].

   One step forward, two backward--[*XXIV, 26].

   Only activity which spirit possesses--[*XXIV, 29].

   Opportunity follows perception--[*XXII, 31].

   Our ability to think--[*XXI, 3].

   Outlet--[*VI, 10].

   Persons, places and things--[*XVI, 24].

   Pillar of fire--[*XXIV, 18].

   Plan courageously, execute fearlessly--[*X, 3].

[p. 392]

PHRASES, continued.

   Plan fearlessly, execute masterfully--[*XX, 8].

   Plane of the Absolute--[*XI, 19].

   Pleasant sensations--[*I, 19]; [*XXII, 7].

   Possibilities of achievement--[*VI, 31]; [*XXII, 31].

   Practical application--[*XIV, 31].

   Real battle of life--[*XXI, 20].

   Republic of Nature--[*XI, 12].

   Same in kind and quality--[*XIV, 21].

   Sowing the seed--[*XVIII, 33].

   Special dispensations of Providence--[*XIV, 23].

   Spirit is Mind--[*XIV, 26].

   Spirit sleeps in the mineral--[*XI, 28].

   Still water runs deep--[*IV, 22].

   Strong enough to make the sacrifice exacted--[*XXIV, 30].

   The charmed life--[*VIII, 26]; [*XI, 21], 34.

   The die is cast--[*XV, 29].

   The error of the ages--[*I, 39].

   There is a world within--[*I, 6].

   Think as you never thought before--[*VII, 4].

   Thinking is the business of life--[*XXI, 4].

   Thought will lead to action--[*VII, 7].

   Thoughts are causes--[*VII, 23].

   Three steps--[*I, 41].

   Truth rising full--orbed--[*XVIII, 4].

   Truth shall make you free--[*XXI, 28]; [*XXIII, 5].

   Tyrannical prejudice--[*XIII, 10].

   Weave the future--[*XVI, 33].

   We learn by doing--[*XIV, 31].

   What benefits one benefits all--[*XXIII, 5].

   What of the night?--[*XXI, 24].

   Wise enough to understand--[*XV, 28]; [*XXIV, 30].

   World of conflict, doubt and danger--[*IX, 6].

   World within--[*I, 6].

   You have no patient but yourself--[*XXIV, 10].

PHYSICAL

   All power not--[*X, 3].

[p. 393]

   change--[*XXII, 17], 23.

   contrast--[*XIX, 5].

   defects--[*VI, 16].

   force inferior--[*XVII, 2].

   forms of power--[*X, 3]-4; [*XIX, 19], 21.

   heredity--[*V, 18].

   intelligence--[*I, 34]; [*V, 6]-7; [*VII, 16]; [*XIV, 14]-15.

   laws--[*X, 8]; [*XI, 12].

   methods--[*VIII, 21].

PIANO--[*II, 4].

PILLAR OF FIRE--[*XXIV, 18].

PLAN COURAGEOUSLY--[*X, 3]; [*XIX, 19].

PLAN FEARLESSLY--[*XX, 8].

PLANE OF INSTINCTIVE LIFE--[*XVII, 19].

PLANE OF THE ABSOLUTE--[*XI, 19].

PLATO referred to--[*XI, 13]-16.

PLEASANT SENSATIONS--[*I, 19]; [*XXIII, 7].

POLARITY--[*X, 17], 19-20.

POLES--[*XI, 6].

POPE, ALEXANDER, quoted--[*XXII, 31].

POSITION v. SERVICE--[*XVII, 28].

POSITIVE MIND--[*XIV, 14].

POSSESSION--[*I, 3], 5, 11.

   of power--[*I, 5], 39; [*X, 2].

   Pursuit better than--[*XIII, 17]; [*XXIII, 4].

POSSIBILITIES--[*VI, 31]; [*XXII, 31].

POTENTIAL

   energy, Universal is--[*I, 28].

   existence--[*XVI, 33]; [*XVII, 32]; [*XX, 3]; [*XXIV, 21].

   facts--[*XXIV, 21].

   reality--[*XXIV, 21].

POTENTIALITY, KNOWLEDGE--[*VIII, 22].

POVERTY CONSCIOUSNESS--[*XXIII, 2].

[p. 394]

POWER

   and repose--[*XII, 25]; [*XVII, 33].

   Knowledge is--[*I, 32]; [*VIII, 22]; [*X, 23]; [*XV, 36]; [*XVIII, 30]; [*XX, 6]; [*XXII, 1].

   Mental--[*X, 3]; [*XIX, 19]-24.

   Moral--[*X, 3].

   Physical forms of [*X, 3]-4; [*XIX, 19], 21.

   Possession of--[*I, 5], 39; [*X, 2].

   Prophylactic, creative, and remedial--[*XII, 16].

   Pursuing symbols of--[*XVII, 28]-29.

   Recognition of--[*I, 5]; [*VII, 22]; [*VIII, 20]; [*X, 13]; [*XIV, 22]; [*XVI, 12]; [*XVIII, 10]-11, 29; [*XX, 2]-3, [*XXI, 1]-2, 4-5.

   Remedial, prophylactic and creative--[*XII, 16].

   Secrets of--[*XX, 6]; [*XXI, 1].

   Source of--[*XVII, 30].

   Spiritual--[*X, 3]-4.

   Symbols of--[*XVII, 28]-29.

   Thought--[*XI, 30].

   True--[*XII, 16].

   Unity with the Infinite--[*XI, 12].

   Wealth, the offspring of--[*X, 2].

   World within a world of--[*I, 6], 8, 21; [*XXI, 13].

PRACTICAL APPLICATION--[*XIV, 31].

PRACTICALITY, TRUE--[*XXIII, 13], 18, 21-22.

PRACTICAL, THE IDEALIST--[*XVI, 11].

PRANIC ETHER--[*XVIII, 33]; [*XIX, 25]; [*XX, 23]-24.

PRAYER--[*IX, 31]; [*XII, 20]; [*XIV, 23].

PRECEDENT

   rules the multitude--[*XV, 36].

   to progress, Those who prefer--[*XI, 21].

PREDOMINANT MENTAL ATTITUDE--[*I, 3]; [*VIII, 18]-19; [*IX, 30]; [*XIII, 16]; [*XXI, 9], 12-14.

PREMATURE WEALTH--[*XVI, 13]; [*XVII, 29].

PRICE OF SUCCESS--[*XII, 4].

[p. 395]

PRIMAL ELEMENT--[*XIX, 4].

PRIME CAUSE, THOUGHT THE--[*XVI, 16].

PRINCIPLE OF CAUSATION--[*XIX, 26].

PRINCIPLE OF THOUGHT--[*XV, 23]-28.

PRINCIPLE OF THE UNIVERSAL--[*XXI, 27].

PRINCIPLES--[*XV, 23]-25; [*XIX, 7]-9, 12.

PRIVATE OFFICE--[*XVII, 24].

PRIZES ARE GOING TO THE THINKERS--[*VIII, 15].

PROBLEM, THE SOCIAL--[*XXI, 25]-26.

PROBLEMS SOLVED--[*I, 13].

PROCESSES, MENTAL--[*XI, 30].

PROFUSION OF NATURE--[*X, 1].

PROGRESS, THE BASIS OF--[*XVII, 5].

PROGRESS v. PRECEDENT--[*XXI, 21].

PROMISED LAND--[*XXIV, 31].

PULSE--[*XIII, 6].

PURPOSE AND FAITH--[*VI, 9]; [*XVII, 27].

PURPOSE CONSTRUCTIVE--[*VI, 9].

PURPOSE NECESSARY--[*XVII, 27].

PURSUING SYMBOLS OF POWER--[*XVII, 28]-29.

PURSUIT v. POSSESSION--[*XIII, 17]; [*XXIII, 4].

QUALITY OF THOUGHT--[*XVI, 20].

QUOTATIONS

   Bible.

      As thy faith is, so be it unto thee [*VI, 9]; [*IX, 31].

      Believe that ye receive and ye shall receive--[*XI, 17], 25, 35.

      Breath of life--[*XX, 25], 26.

      Doeth all things well--[*IX, 15].

      Eye for an eye--[*XXIII, 3].

[p. 396]

QUOTATIONS (Bible), continued.

      Eye hath not seen, nor ear heard--[*XXIV, 31].

      Faith is the substance of things hoped for--[*VII, 11]; [*XI, 25], 35.

      Given dominion over all things--[*X, 11].

      His image and likeness--[*XX, 31]; [*XXII, 31].

      In Him we live and move--[*I, 35]; [*XX, 23], 31.

      It is not I that doeth the works--[*X, 14].

      It shall be established unto thee--[*X, 11].

      Kingdom of Heaven within you--[*XX, 11].

      Know ye not that ye are the temple of the living God?--[*IV, 19]; [*VI, 14].

      Remove mountains--[*XXIV, 5].

      Secret place of the Most High--[*IX, 4]; X, II.

      Seek first the kingdom of God--[*XVII, 11].

      Solomon in all his glory--[*X, 9].

      The Father and I are one--[*XIII, 20], 27.

      The thing I feared has come upon me--[*XX, 12].

      The word has become flesh--[*V, 7].

      Tooth for a tooth--[*XXIII, 3].

      Truth is mighty and will prevail--[*IX, 7].

      Truth shall make you free--[*XXI, 28]; [*XXIV, 5].

      Whatsoever things ye desire--[*XI, 17], 25, 35.

      Word has become flesh--[*V, 7].

QUOTATIONS

   Abbot, Lyman--[*IV, 18].

   Adams, George Matthews--[*VIII, 4]; [*XIV, 31].

   Advanced Thought--[*XXIII, 11].

   Alcott, A. B., <page 122>.

   Allen, James--pp. <page 27>, <page 93>.

   Antonius, Marcus, <page 240>.

   Atkinson [*XXIII, 12].

   Beecher, H. W.--p. <page 211>.

   Bonar, Horatio--p. <page 198>.

   Bovee,--p. <page 227>.

   Channing--p. <page 293>.

   Colton--p. <page 13>.

[p. 397]

Davidson, Prof.--[*II, 1].

   Death, etc.--p. <page 149>.

   Drummond--[*X, 4].

   Edwards, Jonathan--p. <page 352>.

   Emerson--pp. <page 39>, <page 65>, <page 67>, <page 135>, <page 225>, <page 252>.

   Everybody's Magazine--[*XVI, 8].

   Flagler, H. M.--[*XVI, 8].

   Fleming, Sir Ambrose--[*XVIII, 6].

   Franklin--p. <page 173>.

   Goethe--p. <page 265>.

   Haddock--p. <page 279>.

   Larsen--pp. <page 35>, <page 78>.

   Lavater--p. <page 263>.

   Mackay--p. <page 175>.

   Marden--p. <page 277>.

   McCosh, J.--p. <page 120>.

   Mulford, Prentice--[*XVI, 7].

   Opportunity follows perception, etc.--p. <page 291>.

   Pope, Alexander--[*XXII, 31].

   Sala--p. <page 238>.

   Sanscrit, The--p. <page 107>.

   Shakespeare--p. <page 80>.

   Shofield, Dr. Albert T.--[*XXII, 24].

   Smiles, S.--p. <page 317>.

   South--p. <page 250>.

   Spencer--[*IV, 17].

   Tennyson--[*XXII, 28].

   Tesla, Nikola--[*VII, 10].

   To every man, etc.--p. <page 213>.

   Troward--[*III, 1].

   Tyndall--[*X, 6].

   Walker--p. <page 41>.

   Warner, Francis Larimer--p. <page 306>.

   Whiting, Lillian--p. <page 133>.

   Wilmans--p. <page 53>.

   Wilson--p. <page 162>.

RATE OF VIBRATION--[*XXII, 18]-21.

[p. 398]

RATES OF VIBRATION--[*XXIV, 3].

REACTION OF THOUGHT--[*IX, 25].

READING--[*VII, 4]; [*XIII, 22]; [*XIV, 28], 31.

REAL BATTLE OF LIFE--[*XXI, 20].

REALITIES, INVISIBLE--[*XVI, 33]; [*XVII, 32]; [*XX, 3].

REALITY, SPIRIT THE ONLY--[*XXIV, 14].

REALIZE YOUR DESIRE--[*XVI, 37]; [*XVII, 37].

REAPING AND SOWING--[*IX, 25]; [*XV, 8]; [*XX, 28]. [*XXII, 2]-3.

REASONING, INDUCTIVE

   Definition--XI, [*I, 20].

   Illustration--[*XI, 10].

REASON, SUB-CONSCIOUS CANNOT--[*XV, 29].

RECEIVING AND GIVING--[*XIII, 22]; [*XV, 4], 29.

RECEPTIVE ATTITUDE OF MIND--[*XXIII, 1], 4.

RECEPTIVITY NECESSARY--[*VI, 29]; [*VIII, 17].

RECOGNITION OF

   omnipotence--[*IX, 29].

   opportunity--[*XXIII, 4]-5.

   power--[*X, 13]; [*XIV, 22]; [*XVIII, 10]-11, 29; [*XX, 2]-3; [*XXI, 1]-2, 4-5.

   the world within--[*XXI, 4].

REFERENCES

   Adams--[*XI, 9], 10.

   Archimedes' lever--[*XI, 11].

   Bacon--[*XIII, 5]-6.

   Beethoven--[*II, 4].

   Bell--[*VI, 6].

   Caesar--[*XXIV, 19].

   Carnegie--[*XVI, 7]; [*XXIII, 8].

   Columbus--[*XIII, 14].

   Darwin--[*V, 18]; [*XIII, 14].

   Edison--[*VI, 6].

[p. 399]

   Emerson--[*XIII, 14].

   Faraday--[*XIII, 14].

   Flagler--[*XVI, 8].

   Franklin--[*XIII, 9].

   Fulton--[*XIII, 14].

   Galileo--[*XIII, 14].

   Haeckel--[*V, 18].

   Harriman--[*XVI, 8].

   Huxley [*V, 18]; [*X, 6].

   Leverrier--[*XI, 9]-10.

   Lincoln--[*IX, 17].

   Lipton, Sir Thomas--[*XVI, 7].

   Marconi--[*VI, 6].

   Morgan--[*XXIII, 6], 8.

   Newton--[*XIII, 9].

   Phidias--[*II, 4].

   Plato--[*XI, 13]-16.

   Raphael--[*II, 4].

   Rockefeller--[*XXIII, 8].

   Roemer--[*XIV, 10].

   Rothschild--[*XXIII, 6], 8.

   Shakespeare--[*II, 4].

   Spencer--[*IV, 17].

   Stephenson--[*XIII, 14].

   Swedenborg--[*XI, 17].

   Watt--[*XIII, 14].

REFLECTION, WORLD WITHOUT A--[*I, 8], 12, 35; [*IX, 30]; [*XIV, 30]; [*XVI, 14]; [*XXII, 13]; [*XXIV, 23].

REGIME, THE OLD--[*XXI, 25]-26.

REIGN OF LAW--[*XI, 5]; [*XII, 21].

REJUVENATION--[*IX, 26].

RELATIVE, WORLD WITHOUT--[*XXIV, 16].

RELAXATION--[*III, 30]; [*XII, 28]; [*XVII, 33]; [*XX, 18].

REMEDIAL AND CREATIVE POWER--[*XII, 16].

REMOVE MOUNTAINS--[*XXIV, 5].

[p. 400]

RENEWAL OF CELLS--[*IX, 26].

REPEATED VISUALIZATION--[*VII, 13].

REQUIREMENTS--[*XV, 6], 9.

RESPONSIBILITY FOR ACTION--[*XV, 29].

RESULTS, UNFORESEEN--[*VIII, 31].

REVERSE THE EVIDENCE--[*XXIV, 4].

REVOLUTION, MENTAL--[*XVIII, 1]-6.

RICHES NOT THE HIGHEST IDEAL--[*XVI, 5].

RICHES v. WEALTH--[*XVII, 28].

RIGHT CONCENTRATION--[*XXIII, 10].

RIGHT PRINCIPLES--[*XV, 23]-25; [*XIX, 7]-9, 12.

ROCKEFELLER referred to--[*XXIII, 6], 8.

ROEMER referred to--[*XIV, 10].

ROTHSCHILD referred to--[*XXIII, 6], 8.

SACRIFICE--[*V, 15]; [*XXIV, 30].

SAME IN KIND AND QUALITY--[*XIV, 21].

SCATTERING CONSCIOUSNESS--[*XIII, 23].

SCIENCE AND THEOLOGY, WAR OF--[*XI, 26]-27.

SCULPTOR--[*XII, 7].

SEANCES--[*XII, 12].

SEARCH FOR TRUTH--[*XIX, 1].

SECRET PLACE OF THE MOST HIGH--[*X, 11].

SECRETS OF POWER--[*XIX, 6]; [*XXI, 1].

SECRETS OF SUCCESS--[*XVI, 36]; [*XVIII, 25]; [*XXI, 7].

SEED--[*VII, 26].

SEEK FIRST THE KINGDOM--[*XVII, 11].

SEEK THE SILENCE--[*XVII, 24].

[p. 401]

SELF

   -analysis--[*XVI, 15], 35-36; [*XVII, 31].

   -belittlement destructive--[*XVII, 17].

   -confidence

      acquired by overcoming--[*XVII, 26].

      necessary [*XXI, 19].

      Power of--[*XVII, 11].

   -contemplation--[*XI, 31]-32; [*XVII, 31].

   -control--

   -conviction--[*XXIV, 6], 9-10, 12, 15.

   -direction--[*XVI, 16].

   -healing--[*XXII, 27].

   -knowledge--[*VI, 14].

   necessary, Faith in--[*XXI, 19].

SELFISH AIMS DEFEATED--[*XVI, 31].

SELFISHNESS DEFEATS ITSELF--[*III, 16]; [*IV, 6]-7; [*XVI, 31]; [*XVII, 29]; [*XXIII, 3], 6.

SENSATIONS PLEASANT--[*I, 19]; [*XXIII, 7].

SENSES, EVIDENCES OF THE, FALSE--[*XXIV, 3]-4.

SERVICE THE END OF NATURE--[*IV, 21].

SERVICE THE LAW OF SUCCESS--[*XXIII, 3], 7.

SHOFIELD, DR. ALBERT T., quoted--[*XXII, 24].

SIBERIA--[*XIII, 2].

SILENCE--[*I, 44]; [*IX, 29]; [*XII, 26]-27; [*XX, 9], 18; [*XXIV, 9].

   Power comes in the--[*XVII, 24]; [*XXII, 28].

   Seek the--[*XVII, 24].

SMILES, S., quoted--<page 317>.

SOCIAL PROBLEM--[*XXI, 25]-26.

SOCIAL UNREST--[*XXI, 23].

SOLAR PLEXUS--[*III, 2]-5, 7, 10, 14, 18, 21, 33.

SOLAR SYSTEM--[*XXIV, 1].

SOLOMON IN ALL HIS GLORY--[*X, 9].

[p. 402]

SOLUTION OF PROBLEMS--[*I, 13].

SOUL OF THINGS--[*IV, 23]; [*XX, 1].

SOUND--[*XXIV, 2].

SOURCE OF POWER--[*XVII, 30].

SOUTH, quoted--<page 250>.

SOWING AND REAPING--[*IX, 25]; [*XV, 8]; [*XX, 28].

SOWING THE SEED--[*XVIII, 33].

SPECIAL DISPENSATIONS--[*XIV, 23].

SPECIFIC GRAVITY, LAW OF--[*VIII, 31]-32.

SPECULATION, OPINION AND FACT--[*XVI, 35].

SPENCER, quoted--[*IV, 17].

SPINAL CORD--[*VI, 13].

SPIRIT--[*IX, 13]; [*XXIII, 12].

   and life identical--[*IV, 23].

   creative--[*XXIV, 29].

SPIRIT IS MIND--[*XXIV, 26].

   Man a--[*XXIV, 28].

   mind, and body--[*II, 26]; [*IV, 1]-4.

   of things--[*XX, 1].

   omnipresent--[*IX, 29].

   perfect [*XXIV, 14].

SPIRIT SLEEPS IN THE MINERAL--[*XI, 28].

   the only reality--[*XXIV, 14].

   the substance of mind--[*XXIII, 12].

   the Ultimate fact--[*XXIII, 12].

   The Universal--[*XVIII, 7].

SPIRITUAL

   age--[*XI, 26]-27.

   contrast--[*XIX, 8], 12.

   first--[*III, 31].

   Functions of the--[*II, 26].

   mental, and physical differentiated--[*II, 24]-26.

   methods, Advantage of--[*IX, 29].

[p. 403]

   power--[*X, 3]-4.

   strength comes of effort--[*XV, 8].

   wealth--[*XX, 2].

SPOKEN WORD--[*XV, 18].

STATIC ENERGY--[*I, 28]; [*XVIII, 28]; [*XIX, 14].

STATIC MIND--[*XIX, 22].

STEPHENSON, referred to--[*XIII, 14].

STORE-HOUSE OF MEMORY--[*II, 25].

STRENGTH COMES OF EFFORT--[*XV, 8].

STRONG ENOUGH--[*XXIV, 30].

STURDY VIRTUES--[*XVII, 19].

SUB-CONSCIOUS--[*XIV, 15].

   controlled by the conscious--[*II, 16]; [*III, 12].

   desire, Power of--[*XVII, 15], 18.

   draws accurate conclusions--[*II, 16].

   Functions of the--[*II, 24].

   infallible--[*II, 2], 16.

   mind--[*XIV, 15].

   omnipotent--[*XIV, 22]; [*XVII, 25].

   part of the Universal--[*III, 24].

   personality--[*XXIV, 21].

   responsive to the will--[*XIV, 15].

   seat of genius--[*II, 3].

   seat of habit--[*II, 23], 25.

   the connecting link--[*XIV, 22].

   the store-house of memory--[*II, 25].

SUBJECTIVE

   and objective activity--[*IV, 22].

   attitude of mind--[*XVII, 31].

   effects--[*XXII, 11].

   explained--[*II, 16].

   idealism--[*XVI, 37].

   sensations--[*I, 21].

[p. 404]

SUBSTANCE

   of mind, Spirit the--[*XXIII, 12].

   passive--[*VI, 15].

   Universal--[*XVIII, 12], 28; [*XIX, 4], 25; [*XX, 26]; [*XXI, 3].

   Universality of--[*X, 1].

SUCCESS

   Choice language the passport to--[*XV, 20].

   comes of integrity and justice--[*XXIII, 3].

   Essentials of--[*XVI, 5]-11.

   Price of--[*XII, 4].

   Secrets of--[*XVII, 35]; [*XVIII, 25] [*XXI, 7]; [*XXIII, 3], 5-8.

   Service the law of--[*XXIII, 3], 7.

   World within a world of--[*XII, 27].

SUCCESSFUL ATTITUDE OF MIND--[*XVII, 26].

SUGGESTIONS, HOW ARE MADE--[*II, 18].

SUM OF HIS THOUGHT, MAN THE--[*IX, 27].

SUN--XXIV, [*I, 3].

SUPERNATURAL--[*XIII, 13].

SUPPLY AND DEMAND--[*III, 17]; [*VII, 2], 18; [*XI, 6]-7, 13; [*XV, 9]; [*XX, 20]-21.

SUPPLY, LAW OF--[*XI, 10].

SUPREME BEING--[*X, 23].

SUPREME SCIENCE, THINKING THE--[*XXI, 9]-10

SWEDENBORG referred to--[*XI, 17].

SYMBOLS OF POWER--[*XVII, 28]-29.

SYMPATHETIC SYSTEM--[*III, 2]-3.

SYMPATHY CONSTRUCTIVE--[*IX, 30].

SYSTEM, SOLAR--[*XXIV, 1].

TACT--[*XI, 21].

[p. 405]

TELEPATHY--[*XII, 14].

TEMPLE OF THE LIVING GOD--[*IV, 19]; [*VI, 14].

TENDENCIES--[*XXI, 6], 10; [*XXII, 2].

TENNYSON quoted--[*XXII, 28].

TENSION CAUSE OF WORRY--[*III, 31].

TERMS RELATIVE--[*XIX, 5]-9.

TESLA, NICKOLA, quoted--[*VII, 10].

TEST OF TRUTH--[*XVIII, 17]-18.

THE CHARMED LIFE--[*VIII, 26]; [*XI, 21], 34.

THE DIE HAS BEEN CAST--[*XV, 29].

THE FATHER AND I ARE ONE--[*XIII, 20], 27.

THE IDEAL--[*XII, 5]-6.

THE INFINITE--[*I, 24], 30; [*VI, 2].

NEW ERA--[*XI, 26]-27.

NEW SCIENCE--[*XVIII, 3], 6, 10, 19.

THE SECRET PLACE--[*IX, 4].

THE THING I FEARED--[*XX, 12].

THE UNCONDITIONAL--[*XXI, 1].

THEOLOGY

   apologizing for Christendom--[*XXII, 30].

   v. metaphysics--[*XXII, 29]-31.

   War of science and--[*XI, 26]-27.

THERAPEUTICS, MENTAL--[*XXII, 24]-27; [*XXIV, 7]-13.

THERE ARE NO WRONG PRINCIPLES--[*XV, 23]-25; [*XIX, 7]-9, 12.

THERE IS A WORLD WITHIN--[*I, 6].

THINGS IN THEMSELVES HAVE NO EXISTENCE--[*XIV, 16].

THINGS WHICH HAVE BEEN PREPARED FOR THEM--[*XXIV, 31].

THINK AS NEVER BEFORE--[*VII, 4].

[p. 406]

THINKERS--[*VIII, 15].

THINKING

   and drifting--[*II, 29]; [*XIII, 23].

   Constructive--[*I, 20]; [*II, 28]; [*XX, 28].

   Creative--[*XXIII, 9], 18-19.

   Destructive--[*XX, 28].

   Idle--[*II, 29]; [*XIII, 23].

   is being--[*XII, 2].

   is the business of life--[*XX, 4].

THOUGHT--[*IX, 13].

   a foam of energy--[*XXIV, 15].

   analysis--[*XVI, 15], 35-36; [*XVII, 31].

   and feeling creative--[*XVI, 34].

   and object identified--[*XVII, 21], 33.

   Constructive--[*IX, 4], 30; [*X, 21]; [*XIII, 17], 22.

   = seed--[*X, 9].

   = wind--[*VI, 4].

   Forms of.

      Altruism--[*XXII, 8].

      Co-operation and harmony--[*X, 21]; [*XVI, 27].

      Courage--[*IX, 30]; [*XIII, 22]; [*XXII, 8].

      Generous thought--[*XXIII, 6].

      Harmony and co-operation--[*X, 21]; [*XVI, 27].

      Imagination--[*VIII, 15]; [*IX, 15].

      Kindness--[*XXII, 8].

      Sympathy--[*IX, 30].

   Destructive--[*IX, 30]; [*XII, 3], 8, 10; [*XVI, 22], 27; [*XX, 12], 28; [*XXII, 8], 12; [*XXIV, 5].

      Forms of

         Anxiety--[*XII, 3]; [*XXII, 12].

         Competitive--[*X, 21].

         Criticism--[*VIII, 5]; [*IX, 30]; [*XXII, 8].

         Day-dreaming--[*II, 28]; [*VIII, 14]; [*XIII, 23].

         Discord--[*XVI, 27]; [*XX, 12].

         Discouragement--[*XII, 3]; [*XXIV, 5].

         Distrust--[*XXIV, 5].

         Doubt--[*XXII, 12]; [*XXIV, 5].

[p. 407]

         Envy--[*IX, 30]; [*XXII, 8].

         Fancy--[*II, 28]; [*VIII, 14]; [*XIII, 23].

         Fear--[*III, 14]; [*XII, 3]; [*XIII, 16]; [*XX, 12]; [*XXII, 12]; [*XXIV, 5].

         Hypnotism--[*XII, 15].

         Idle thinking--[*II, 28]; [*VIII, 14]; [*XIII, 23].

         Indecision--[*XII, 8].

         Jealousy--[*XXII, 8].

         Telepathy--[*XII, 14].

         Unbelief--[*XVII, 17].

         Unhappiness--[*XX, 12].

         Unkindness--[*XX, 12].

THOUGHT-CONTROL--[*II, 29]-30; [*IX, 27]; [*XVI, 17]-18.

   is creative--[*II, 27]; [*XI, 30]; XII, [*I, 3], 8; [*XIII, 23]; [*XIV, 17], 25; [*XV, 10], 13-14; [*XXIV, 25], 29.

   defined--[*I, 29]; [*IV, 26]; [*VI, 10].

   dynamic--[*XIX, 22].

THOUGHT ENTITY--[*I, 4].

   Form of--[*XVI, 19].

   Generous, constructive--[*XXIII, 6].

   is creative--[*X, 9].

   is vibration--[*XVII, 21].

   Law of--[*XII, 17].

   leads to action--[*VII, 7]; [*XV, 13]; [*XVI, 10].

   lies in its vitality, The power of--[*XV, 23].

   Loftiest activity of--[*XI, 31].

   Magic of--[*XX, 4].

   Man the sum of his--[*IX, 27].

THOUGHT MESSENGERS--[*II, 21], 25; [*XVII, 27]; [*XX, 3], 12.

   Negative--[*XVI, 15].

   objectified--[*I, 25]; [*XI, 29]-30.

   of the world, There is a change in the--[*XVIII, 1].

   power--[*XI, 30].

   Quality of--[*XVI, 20].

   Reaction of--[*IX, 25].

[p. 408]

THOUGHT MESSENGERS, continued.

   Seed--[*X, 9]-10; [*XI, 19]; [*XXII, 2].

   takes form--[*XXIII, 4].

   the cause; conditions the effect--[*I, 31]; [*VII, 23].

   the connecting link--[*X, 9].

   the highest activity--[*XVII, 1].

   the only reality--[*XIV, 25].

   the prime cause--[*XVI, 16].

   The Universal--[*XV, 19]-20.

   the universal cause--[*XIII, 15].

   Vital principle of--[*XV, 23]-28; [*XVI, 21].

   Words are vehicles of--[*XV, 17], 20.

   World within a world of--[*I, 6].

THOUGHTS ARE CAUSES--[*I, 31]; [*VII, 23]; [*IX, 31]; [*XII, 22].

THREADS--[*XV, 29].

THREE STEPS--[*I, 41]; [*XII, 4]; [*XVI, 8].

TIMIDITY COUNTERACTED--[*III, 14]; [*V, 24].

TOOTH FOR A TOOTH--[*XXIII, 3].

TRAM CARS--[*IX, 29].

TRANSACTION OF BUSINESS--[*VI, 17].

TRANSITION BRINGS UNREST--[*XXI, 23].

TRANSMUTATION OF CONDITIONS--[*III, 13].

TRIAL AND ERROR METHOD----[*XVII, 12]-13.

TRUE

   idealist, The--[*XVI, 11].

   knowledge, intuitive--[*XXII, 25].

   power--[*XII, 16].

   practicality--[*XXIII, 13], 18, 21-.22.

   spiritualism--[*XXIII, 13], 21.

TRUTH--[*IX, 6]-11; [*XI, 23]-25; [*XXIV, 4]-6, 18-20, 22, 25, 30-31.

   and falsehood--[*XXIV, 25], 31.

   eternal--[*X, 23].

   frees--[*XXI, 28]; [*XXIV, 5], 22.

   in character, conduct, and creeds--[*XIV, 19]-20.

[p. 409]

TRUTH IS MIGHTY AND WILL PREVAIL--[*IX, 7].

   Knowing the--[*I, 19].

   Phases of--[*XI, 23]-24.

TRUTH RISING FULL-ORBED--[*XVIII, 4].

   Search for--[*XIX, 1].

   Seeing the--[*I, 19]; [*XXIV, 17], 19.

TRUTH SHALL MAKE YOU FREE--XXI. 28: [*XXIV, 5], 22.

   Test of--[*XVIII, 17]-18.

   the highest vibration--[*XXIV, 15].

   the Master-Key--[*VI, 33]; [*XXIV, 30].

   World within a world of--[*XXIV, 16].

TWO MINDS DEFINED--[*II, 10].

TYNDALL, quoted--[*X, 6].

TYRANNICAL PREJUDICE--[*XIII, 10].

ULTERIOR MOTIVES--[*XVI, 31].

ULTIMATE FACT, SPIRIT THE--[*XXIII, 12].

UNBELIEF DESTRUCTIVE--[*XVII, 17].

UNCONDITIONAL, UNIVERSAL MIND--[*XXI, 1].

UNDERSTANDING--[*XVIII, 16], 20.

UNEARNED INCREMENT--[*XVI, 13]; [*XVII, 29].

UNFOLDMENT, COMPLETE--[*II, 14].

 RESULTS--[*VIII, 31].

UNITY OF MANKIND--[*I, 38].

UNITY WITH THE INFINITE--[*I, 28]; [*III, 16], 28, [*IV, 7]; [*XII, 28].

UNITY BRINGS POWER--[*XI, 12].

UNITY WITH THE UNIVERSAL--[*XIII, 26]; [*XXI, 2], 4-5, 27; [*XXII, 28]; [*XXIII, 18].

UNIVERSAL

   acts only through the individual--[*I, 28]; [*III, 28]; [*XX, 7].

[p. 410]

UNIVERSAL, continued.

   Energy--[*XVIII, 6], 12.

   is static or potential energy--[*I, 28].

   Man the expression of the--[*XIV, 20].

UNIVERSAL MIND--[*XIV, 19]-22; [*XXI, 27]; [*XXIV, 26]-27.

      Impressing the--[*XI, 18].

      infinite--[*XIII, 25]; [*XIV, 20].

      is God--[*I, 20].

      the totality--[*XIII, 26].

      unconditional--[*XXI, 1].

   obedient--[*XVIII, 9], 11.

   Principle--[*XXI, 27].

   Spirit--[*XVIII, 7].

   static--[*XVIII, 28]; [*XIX, 14].

   Sub-conscious part of the--[*III, 24].

   Substance--[*XII, 7], 19; [*XIII, 20], 25; [*XIV, 1]-2, 6-7 [*XVI, 37]; [*XVIII, 12], 28; [*XIX, 4], 25; [*XX, 26]; [*XXI, 3].

      defined, [*XIV, 7].

   The individual manifests only through the--[*I, 28].

   Thought, The--[*XV, 19]-20.

   Unity with the--[*I, 28]; [*III, 16], 28; [*IV, 7]; [*XII, 28]; [*XIII, 26]; [*XXI, 1], 4-5, 27; [*XXII, 28]; [*XXIV, 18].

UNIVERSALITY OF SUBSTANCE--[*X, 1].

UNIVERSE, MAN ONE WITH THE--[*XI, 11].

UNREST--[*XXI, 23].

UNUSUAL PHENOMENA--[*XIII, 12]-14.

URANUS--[*XI, 9].

USE DETERMINES CONDITION--[*XVI, 12]; [*XXII, 7].

UTOPIA--[*XI, 13]-14.

VAGUS NERVE--[*III, 3].

[p. 411]

VELOCITY OF COSMIC ENERGY--[*XIV, 9]-10.

VERBAL ARCHITECTURE--[*XV, 20], 22; [*XVI, 12].

VIBRATION

   brings unrest, Change of--[*XXI, 23].

   changed, Rate of--[*XXII, 20].

   Form and the rate of--[*XIX, 26]; [*XXII, 5]-6, 18.

   Law of--[*IV, 26]; [*XVIII, 13].

   Rates of--[*XXII, 18]-21; [*XXIV, 3].

   Sympathetic = law of attraction--[*VI, 18].

   Thought is--[*XVII, 21].

   Truth the highest--[*XXIV, 15].

VIOLATION OF THE LAW--[*X, 16].

VISIBLE THOUGHT-FORMS--[*XII, 12].

VISUALIZATION--[*VII, 7]; [*IX, 15]; [*XVI, 29], 32-33, 35, [*XXI, 14]-15; [*XXII, 4].

   Advantage of--[*VII, 13].

   and imagination--[*XVI, 33].

   Defects in--[*VII, 10].

   defined--[*VII, 1].

   idealization and materialization--[*XVI, 8].

   Power of--[*XVI, 29].

VISUALIZING HEALTH--[*XXII, 16].

VITALITY

   Feeling is--[*XII, 18], 21; [*XVI, 21], 34; [*XX, 17]; [*XXI, 16].

   of thought--[*XVI, 21].

   Power of thought lies in its--[*XV, 23].

VITAL PRINCIPLE OF THOUGHT--[*XV, 23]-28.

VOLCANO--[*XIII, 1].

VOLUNTARY SYSTEM--[*III, 1].

WALKER, quoted--<page 41>.

WARNER, FRANCIS LARIMER, quoted--p. <page 306>.

[p. 412]

WATCHMAN AT THE GATE--[*II, 14]; [*XI, 4].

WATT, referred to--[*XIII, 14].

WEALTH--[*IX, 14].-15; [*XVI, 1].

   a product of labour--[*XVI, 1].

   comes of power--[*XIX, 18].

   confers power--[*X, 2].

   Definition--[*XVI, 2].

   Distribution of--[*XXIII, 6].

   Exchange value of--[*XVI, 2]-4.

   health, and love--[*IX, 2].

   not the highest ideal--[*XVI, 5].

   Premature--[*XVI, 13]; [*XVII, 29].

   Spiritual--[*XX, 2].

   the offspring of power--[*X, 2]. 71.

   v. riches--[*XVII, 28].

WEAVE THE FUTURE--[*XVI, 33].

WE LEARN BY DOING--[*XIV, 31].

WHAT BENEFITS ONE BENEFITS ALL--[*XXIII, 5].

WHAT OF THE NIGHT? [*XXI, 24].

WHATSOEVER THINGS YE DESIRE--[*XI, 17], 25.

WHITING, LILLIAN, quoted--<page 133>.

WHOLE, PART OF THE--[*XIII, 26].

WILL--[*XI, 13]; [*XVIII, 6].

   Attention requires the--[*XXIII, 10].

   Concentration requires the--[*XXIII, 10].

   -forms--[*XII, 13].

   power, Wrong use of--[*XX, 29]-30.

   strengthened--[*IV, 9].

   Sub-conscious responsive to the.--[*XIV, 15].

   The purposeful--[*XXI, 17].

   Universal--[*XVIII, 6].

   Use of the--[*XVI, 35].

WILMANS, quoted--<page 53>.

WILSON, quoted--<page 162>.

[p. 413]

WISDOM

   and humility--[*XI, 33].

   comes of experience--[*XV, 7].

   defined--[*XI, 33].

WISE ENOUGH--[*XV, 28]; [*XXIV, 30].

WITHIN

   All power from--[*I, 5], 39; [*IV, 19]-20; [*VIII, 17], 20; [*X, 22]; [*XII, 27]; [*XXI, 26]; [*XXII, 13].

   Fountain of supply--[*I, 38].

   God--[*XXIV, 28].

   is the mind--[*XXIII, 13].

   Recognition of the world--[*XXI, 4].

   There is a world within--[*I, 6].

WORD

   The spoken--[*XV, 18].

   The written--[*XV, 18]-19.

WORDS ARE

   thought-forms--[*XV, 20].

   vehicles of thought--[*XV, 17], 20.

   Power of--[*XV, 12], 14-23, 36.

CHANGE IN THE THOUGHT--[*XVIII, 1].

WORLD OF DOUBT--[*IX, 6].

WORLD WITHIN--[*VII, 13]; [*IX, 1], I5; [*XX, 11]; [*XXI, 4], 11, 21; [*XXIV, 23].

   a world of power--[*I, 5], 39; [*IV, 19]-20; [*VIII, 17], 20; [*X, 22]; [*XII, 27]; [*XXI, 26]; [*XXII, 13].

      of success--[*XII, 27].

      of truth--[*XXIV, 16].

      of wisdom--[*I, 6], 8, 21; [*XII, 27].

   is the mind--[*XXIII, 13].

   Recognition of the--[*XXII, 4].

   There is a world within--[*XXII, 4].

WORLD WITHOUT--[*IX, 1]; [*XXI, 21]; [*XXIV, 16].

   a reflection--[*I, 8], 12, 35; [*IX, 30]; [*XIV, 30]; [*XVI, 14]; [*XXII, 13]; [*XXIV, 23].

[p. 414]

WORLD WITHOUT, continued.

   a world of effects--[*XXII, 13].

   relative--[*XXIV, 16].

WORRY CAUSED BY TENSION--[*III, 31].

WRITTEN WORD--[*XV, 18]-19.

WRONG

   concentration--[*XXIII, 10].

   principles--[*XV, 23], 25; [*XIX, 7]-9, 12.

YOSEMITE VALLEY--[*XIX, 11].

YOU HAVE NO PATIENT--[*XXIV, 10].

 

 

 

 

 

    


===== BOOK: ml.txt =====


    
Mazes and Labyriths, by W. H. Matthews, [1922], at sacred-texts.com

[p. iii]

  

MAZES AND LABYRINTHS

  

A GENERAL ACCOUNT OF THEIR HISTORY AND DEVELOPMENT

  

BY

  

W. H. MATTHEWS

LONDON: LONGMANS, GREEN AND CO.

[1922]

Scanned, proofed and formatted at sacred-texts.com, June 2005, by John Bruno Hare. This text is in the public domain in the United States because it was published prior to 1923.

Click to enlarge
Fig. 86. Maze at Hatfield House, Herts.
 (see page 115)

[p. iv] [p. v]

To
 ZETA
 whose innocent prattlings on the
 summer sands of Sussex
 inspired its conception
 this book
 is most affectionately
 dedicated

 

     
Mazes and Labyriths, by W. H. Matthews, [1922], at sacred-texts.com

[p. vii]

  

PREFACE

ADVANTAGES out of all proportion to the importance of the immediate aim in view are apt to accrue whenever an honest endeavour is made to find an answer to one of those awkward questions which are constantly arising from the natural working of a child's mind. It was an endeavour of this kind which formed the nucleus of the inquiries resulting in the following little essay.

It is true that the effort in this case has not led to complete success in so far as that word denotes the formulation of an exact answer to the original question, which, being one of a number evoked by parental experiments in seaside sand-maze construction, was: "Father, who made mazes first of all?" On the other hand, one hesitates to apply so harsh a term as "failure" when bearing in mind the many delightful excursions, rural as well as literary, which have been involved and the alluring vistas of possible future research that have been opened up from time to time in the course of such excursions.

By no means the least of the adventitious benefits enjoyed by the explorer has been the acquisition of a keener sense of appreciation of the labours of the archaeologist, the anthropologist, and other, more special, types of investigator, any one of whom would naturally be far better qualified to discuss the theme under consideration--at any rate from the standpoint of his particular branch of learning--than the present author can hope to be.

The special thanks of the writer are due to Professor W. M. Flinders Petrie for permission to make use of his diagram of the conjectural restoration of the

[p. viii]

[paragraph continues] Labyrinth of Egypt, Fig. 4, and the view of the shrine of Amenemhat III, Fig. 2, also for facilities to sketch the Egyptian plaque in his collection which is shown in Fig. 19 and for drawing the writer's attention thereto; to Sir Arthur Evans for the use of his illustrations of double axes and of the Tomb of the Double Axe which appear as Figs. 9, 10, 11 and 12 respectively (Fig. 8 is also based on one of his drawings); to M. Picard (of the Librairie A. Picard) for leave to reproduce the drawing of the Susa mosaic, Fig. 37; to Mr. J. H. Craw, F.S.A. (Scot.), Secretary of the Berwickshire Naturalists' Club, for the use of the illustrations of sculptured rocks, Figs. 128 and 129; to the Rev. E. A. Irons for the photograph of the Wing maze, Fig. 60, and to the Rev. G. Yorke for the figure of the Alkborough "Julian's Bower," Fig. 59.

The many kind-hearted persons who have earned the gratitude of the writer by acceding to his requests for local information, or by bringing useful references to his notice, will perhaps take no offence if he thanks them collectively, though very heartily, in this place. In most cases where they are not mentioned individually in the text they will be found quoted as authorities in the bibliographical appendix. The present is, however, the most fitting place in which to express a cordial acknowledgment of the assistance rendered by the writer's friend, Mr. G. F. Green, whose skill and experience in the photographic art has been of very great value.

Grateful recognition must also be made of the help and courtesy extended to the writer by the officials of several libraries, museums, and other institutions, notably the British Museum, the Society of Antiquaries, Sion College, and the Royal Horticultural Society.

W. H. M.

Ruislip, Middlesex.
        1922.

 

     
Mazes and Labyriths, by W. H. Matthews, [1922], at sacred-texts.com

[p. ix]

  

CONTENTS

         

       PAGES

     
      PREFACE

       <page vii>-viii

     
      CONTENTS

       <page ix>-xiv

     
      LIST OF   ILLUSTRATIONS

       <page xv>-xviii

     
      CHAPTER I

INTRODUCTION

The Lure of the   Labyrinth--Difficulties of Definition--The Subject and Object of   this Book--The Lore of the Labyrinth--Some Neglected British   Monuments--Destructive Dogmatism: a Plea for Caution

       <page 1>-5

     
      CHAPTER II

THE EGYPTIAN LABYRINTH

(i) Accounts of the   Ancient Writers

Enormous   Edifices of Egypt--Herodotus: his Account of the Labyrinth, its Vastness   and Complexity, and its Lake--Strabo's Description--The Sacred   Crocodiles--Accounts of Diodorus, Pomponius Mela, and Pliny

       <page 6>-10

     
      CHAPTER III

THE EGYPTIAN LABYRINTH (continued)

(ii) Accounts of   Later Explorers

Decay of the   Labyrinth--Travels of Lucas and Pococke--French and Prussian   Expeditions--Researches of Flinders Petrie--Speculations regarding   Original Plan--Purpose and Date of Construction

       <page 11>--16

     
      [p. x]

CHAPTER IV

THE CRETAN LABYRINTH

(i) The Story of   Theseus and the Minotaur

Plutarch's Life   of Theseus; the Cretan Exploit--The Athenian Tribute--The Labyrinth   of Daedalus--The Clue of Ariadne--The Fight with the Minotaur--The   Crane Dance--Tragedies of the Hero's Return--Other Accounts of the   Legend--Speculations concerning Minos and Daedalus

       <page 17>-22

     
      CHAPTER V

THE CRETAN LABYRINTH (continued)

(ii) The   Caverns of Gortyna--Statements by Later Classic Writers--Tournefort's   Voyage--Visits of Pococke and Savary--Cockerell's Diary--Travels   of Capt. Spratt--Connection of Gortyna Caverns with Traditional   Labyrinth very improbable.

       <page 23>-28

     
      CHAPTER VI

THE CRETAN LABYRINTH (continued)

(iii) Knossos

Explorations of   Sir Arthur Evans--Momentous Discoveries--Unearthing of the Palaces--Their   Antiquity--Description of the Great Palace--The Maze on the Wall--The   Hall of the Double Axes--The Cult of the Bull--Schliemann's   Researches--The Sport of Bull-Leaping--Possible Identity of the   Palace with the Labyrinth

       <page 29>-36

     
      CHAPTER VII

THE ETRUSCAN OR ITALIAN LABYRINTH

Other   Labyrinths mentioned by Pliny--Varro's Description of the Etruscan   Labyrinth; the tomb of Lars Porsena--Speculations regarding it--Travels   of Dennis--Labyrinthine Caverns in Etruria; Volterra and Toscanella--Extended   use of the term "Labyrinth" by Strabo and Pliny--Reference to   Mazes formed in Fields for Amusement

       <page 37>-41

     
      [p. xi]

CHAPTER VIII

THE LABYRINTH IN ANCIENT ART

The Meander and   other Rudimentary Forms--Seal-impressions--Coins of Knossos--"Unicursal"   Nature of the Knossian Design--Graffito of Pompeii--The Casa del Labirinto--Roman Mosaic   Pavements--The Tholos of   Epidaurus--Labyrinthine Structure at Tiryns--Greek Pottery--Etruscan   Vase--The Labyrinth on Gems and Robes

       <page 42>-53

     
      CHAPTER IX

CHURCH LABYRINTHS

Algeria,   Orleansville--Italy: Lucca, Pavia, Piacenza, Cremona, Rome and   Ravenna--France: Chartres, St. Quentin, Amiens, Rheims, Bayeux, Sens,   Auxerre, Arras, St. Omer, Poitiers, Chalons, Pont l'Abbe, Caen   and Aix--Modern examples: Lille, Ely, Bourn and Alkborough--Meaning   of Church Labyrinths--Lack of Support for Accepted Theory

       <page 54>-70

     
      CHAPTER X

TURF LABYRINTHS

Local Names--The   Alkborough "Julian's Bower"--Juxtaposition to Ancient   Ecclesiastical Site--A Fragment of Folk-lore--De la Pryme's Diary--The   Breamore Mizmaze--Romantic Situation--The Wing Maze--The   Boughton Green Shepherd's Race--Its Literary References--A Victim   of the Great War--Mazes of Ripon and Asenby--The Song of the   Fairies--Other Lincolnshire and Yorkshire Mazes--Stukeley on   Julian's Bowers--Wide Distribution of British Turf Mazes

       <page 71>-78

     
      CHAPTER XI

TURF LABYRINTHS (continued)

The Winchester   Mizmaze--The Vanished Mazes of Dorset: Leigh, Pimperne, Dorchester and   Bere Regis--Aubrey's Notes on Wiltshire and Cotswold Mazes--The   Saffron Walden Maze--The Comberton "Mazles"--The [p. xii]   Hilton Maze and its Obelisk--The Cumberland "Walls of Troy":   Burgh and Rockcliffe--The Nottingham Mazes: Sneinton and Clifton--The   Somerton "Troy-town"--Records of Old Mazes at Guildford, the   Malverns, and in Kent--"Julaber's Barrow"

       <page 79>-91

     
      CHAPTER XII

THE ORIGIN OF TURF MAZES

An old Welsh   Custom--"Troy" or "Turnings"?--Dr. Trollope on   the Ecclesiastical Origin of Turf Mazes--The Welsh Figure--Criticism   of the Ecclesiastical View--"Treading the Maze" in Tudor Times--Shakespearean   References--Alchemy and the Labyrinth of Solomon--Figure in a Greek   Monastery--Heraldic Labyrinths--The Question of the Roman Origin of   Turf Mazes

       <page 92>-99

     
      CHAPTER XIII

THE FLORAL LABYRINTH AND THE DWARF-SHRUB MAZE

The Dwarf Box--Its   use by Tudor and Roman Gardeners--Floral Labyrinths by De Vries--Some   Quaint Horticultural Books: Parkinson, Estienne, Hill, and Lawson--Designs   of Islip and Commelyn--"Queen Mary's Bower"

       <page 100>-109

     
      CHAPTER XIV

THE TOPIARY LABYRINTH, OR HEDGE MAZE

Topiary work of   the Romans--Pliny's "Hippodromus"--Dubious Mediaeval   References--Rosamond's Bower--Early French "Daedales"--Mazes   painted by Holbein and Tintoretto--Du Cerceau's Sketches--Elizabethan   Mazes: Theobalds and Hatfield--Versailles and other Famous Labyrinths of   France--Some German Designs--Belgian, Spanish, Italian and Dutch   Mazes--William III and his Gardeners

       <page 110>-127

     
      CHAPTER XV

THE TOPIARY LABYRINTH, OR HEDGE MAZE (continued)

Hampton Court:   the Maze and the Little Maze--Other English Mazes of the Period--Batty   Langley and Stephen Switzer--Allegorical Labyrinth of Anhalt--A   Wimbledon Maze--The Mazes of Westminster and Southwark

       <page 128>-136

     
      [p. xiii]

CHAPTER XVI

THE TOPIARY LABYRINTH, OR HEDGE MAZE (continued)

Latter-day   Developments

Decline of the   Hedge-Maze Vogue--Mazes in "Pleasure Gardens": North London,   Smith London--Modern Mazes in Essex, Suffolk, Cheshire, Lincolnshire,   and Gloucestershire--Some Modern Continental Mazes--The Case For and   Against the Hedge Maze

       <page 137>-146

     
      CHAPTER XVII

STONE LABYRINTHS AND ROCK ENGRAVINGS

The Stone   Labyrinths of Finland--Their Local Traditions and Nomenclature--Their   Antiquity--Aubrey's Acute Observation--Some Maze-like Rock   Engravings in England, Ireland, and Brittany--A Curious Discovery in   Arizona and a Spanish Manuscript--American Indians and the Cretan   Labyrinth--Another Indian Pictograph--Zulu Mazes--Distribution   of Labyrinth Cult

       <page 147>-155

     
      CHAPTER XVIII

THE DANCE OR GAME OF TROY

"Troy"   in Labyrinth Names--An old French Reference--The Vase of   Tragliatella--Virgil's Account of the Troy Game--The Delian   Crane-Dance--Knossos and Troy--Ariadne's Dance--Spring-Rites--"Sympathetic   Magic"--Sword and Morris Dances--Troy-dances in Mediaeval   Germany and in Modern Serbia--Preservation of the English Traditions

       <page 156>-163

     
      CHAPTER XIX

THE BOWER OF "FAIR ROSAMOND"

"Fair   Rosamond," Henry, and Eleanor--The Dagger or the Bowl--History   of the Legend--Accounts of Brompton and Higden--Delone's Ballad--Rosamond   in Verse and Prose--Her Epitaph--A Question of Taste--Late   Remains of the Bower--A Modern Play--Rosamond's Alleged Portrait

       <page 164>-169

     
      [p. xiv]

CHAPTER XX

MAZE ETYMOLOGY

The Question of   Definition again--Bowers and Julian-Bowers--What was a Bower and   who was Julian?--The Labyrinth and the Double Axe--Chaucer and the   Maze--Metaphorical Labyrinths--The Labyrinth in Scientific   Nomenclature--The Meanings of "Maze"--Troy-towns and the   New Troy

       <page 170>-181

     
      CHAPTER XXI

LABYRINTH DESIGN AND THE SOLUTION OF MAZES

The Need of a   Definition--Practical Limitations--Classification of Mazes and   Labyrinths--Unicursal and Multicursal, Compact and Diffuse Types--Modes   of Branching--Straight-line Diagrams--Speculations on the Knossian   Figure--Hints on Maze Design--Principles of Maze Solution--A   Word on Mnemonics--Harris at Hampton Court

       <page 182>-192

     
      CHAPTER XXII

THE LABYRINTH IN LITERATURE

Romance,   Mystery, and Allegory--Labyrinthine Book Titles--Some Literary   Monstrosities--Spiritual and Theological Labyrinths--Love,   Labyrinths, and Anonymity--The Labyrinth in Modern Book Titles--Emblems--Melancholy   Meditations in the Maze

       <page 193>-200

     
      CHAPTER XXIII

MISCELLANEA AND CONCLUSION

A Maze   Collector--The Labyrinth in Queer Places--The Maze on Paper and on   the Sands--Mirror Mazes--A Temporary Hedge Maze--Maze Toys--A   Verbal Labyrinth--The Maze in Place-names--A Plea for the   Preservation of some Ancient Monuments

       <page 201>-213

     
      BIBLIOGRAPHICAL   APPENDIX

       <page 215>-235

     
      INDEX

       237-254

     
  

     
Mazes and Labyriths, by W. H. Matthews, [1922], at sacred-texts.com

[p. xv]

  

LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS

         

       PAGE

     
      1. EGYPTIAN   LABYRINTH. Portion of Ruins, circ.   1700. (P. Lucas)

       facing page<page 12>

     
      2. EGYPTIAN   LABYRINTH. Shrine of Amenemhat III. (Flinders Petrie)

       f.p <page 13>

     
      3. EGYPTIAN   LABYRINTH. Restored Plan. (Canina)

       <page 15>

     
      4. EGYPTIAN   LABYRINTH. Restored Plan. (Flinders Petrie)

       <page 16>

     
      5. CRETAN   LABYRINTH. (Florentine Picture Chronicle) 

       f.p <page 18>

     
      6. CRETAN   LABYRINTH. (Italian Engraving: School of Finiguerra)

       <page 21>

     
      7. CAVERN OF   GORTYNA. (Sieber)

       f.p <page 28>

     
      8. KNOSSOS.   Maze-pattern on Wall of Palace. (After Evans)

       <page 32>

     
      9. DOUBLE-AXE   AND SOCKET FROM DICTAEAN CAVE. (Evans)

       f.p <page 32>

     
      10. TOMB OF   DOUBLE AXES. Plan. (Evans)

       <page 33>

     
      11. TOMB OF   DOUBLE AXES. View of the Cist. (Evans)

       f.p <page 33>

     
      12. BRONZE   DOUBLE AXE FROM TOMB OF DOUBLE AXES. (Evans)

       f.p <page 41>

     
      13. TOMB OF   LARS PORSENA AT CLUSIUM. Restoration. (Q. de Quincy)

       f.p <page 38>

     
      14. POGGIO   CAJELLA. Labyrinthine Cemetery. (Dennis)

       f.p <page 40>

     
      15, 16, 17, 18.   EARLY EGYPTIAN SEALS AND PLAQUES. (British Museum)

       f.p <page 41>

     
      19. EARLY   EGYPTIAN PLAQUE OR AMULET. (Prof. Flinders Petrie's Collection, Univ. Coll.,   London).

       <page 43>

     
      20 to 25. COINS   OF KNOSSOS. (British Museum)

       f.p <page 44>

     
      26 to 31.

       f.p <page 45>

     
      32. GRAFFITO AT   POMPEII. (Mus. Borb. XIV. 1852)

       <page 46>

     
      33. MOSAIC AT   SALZBURG. (Kreuzer)

       <page 47>

     
      34. MOSAIC AT   CAERLEON. (O. Morgan) 

       f.p <page 48>

     
      35. MOSAIC AT   VERDES, LOIR-ET-CHER. (De Caumont)

       <page 49>

     
      36. MOSAIC AT   CORMEROD, SWITZERLAND. (Mitt. Ant. Ges. Zurich, XVI) 

       f.p <page 48>

     
      37. MOSAIC AT   SUSA, TUNIS. (C. R. Acad. Inscriptions, Paris, 1892)

       <page 50>

     
      38. GREEK   KYLIX, SHOWING EXPLOITS OF THESEUS. (British Museum)

       f.p <page 52>

     
      [p. xvi]

        

     
      PAGE

        

     
      39. ANOTHER   THESEUS KYLIX. (British Museum)

       f.p <page 52>

     
      40. LABYRINTH   ENGRAVED ON ANCIENT GEM. (Maffei)

       <page 53>

     
      41. BRONZE   PLAQUETTE. Italian XVIth Century. (British Museum).

       f.p <page 60>

     
      42. LABYRINTH   IN CHURCH OF REPARATUS, ORLEANSVILLE, ALGERIA. (Prevost)

       <page 55>

     
      43. LABYRINTH   IN LUCCA CATHEDRAL. (Durand)

       <page 55>

     
      44. LABYRINTH   IN S. MICHELE, PAVIA. (Ciampini)

       <page 56>

     
      45. LABYRINTH   IN S. MARIA-DI-TRASTAVERA, ROME. (Durand)

       f.p <page 56>

     
      46. LABYRINTH   IN S. VITALE, RAVENNA. (Durand)

       f.p <page 56>

     
      47. LABYRINTH   IN CHARTRES CATHEDRAL. (Gailhabaud)

       <page 58>

     
      48. LABYRINTH   IN AMIENS CATHEDRAL. (Gailhabaud)

       <page 59>

     
      49. LABYRINTH   IN PARISH CHURCH, ST. QUENTIN. (Gailhabaud)

       <page 60>

     
      50. LABYRINTH   IN RHEIMS CATHEDRAL. (Gailhabaud)

       f.p <page 60>

     
      51. LABYRINTH   IN AMIENS CATHEDRAL, CENTRAL PLATE. (Gailhabaud)

       f.p <page 61>

     
      52. LABYRINTH   IN BAYEUX CATHEDRAL. (Ame)

       f.p <page 61>

     
      53. LABYRINTH   IN SENS CATHEDRAL. (Gailhabaud)

       <page 62>

     
      54. LABYRINTH   IN ABBEY OF ST. BERTIN, ST. OMER. (Wallet)

       <page 63>

     
      55. LABYRINTH   IN POITIERS CATHEDRAL. (Auber)

       <page 64>

     
      56. LABYRINTHS   ON TILES. Toussaints Abbey, Chalons. (Ame)

       f.p <page 74>

     
      57. LABYRINTH   IN ELY CATHEDRAL. (W. H. M.)

       <page 66>

     
      58. LABYRINTH   IN CHURCH AT BOURN, CAMBS. (W. H. M.)

       <page 69>

     
      59.   "JULIAN'S BOWER," ALKBOROUGH, LINCS. (Litho., Rev. G. Yorke)

       <page 72>

     
      60. TURF   LABYRINTH AT WING, RUTLAND. (Photo, W. J. Stocks; by permission of Rev. E. A.   Irons)

       f.p <page 74>

     
      61.   "SHEPHERD'S RACE," BOUGHTON GREEN, NORTHANTS. (After Trollope)

       <page 76>

     
      62.   "MIZMAZE," ST. CATHERINE'S HILL, WINCHESTER. (W. H. M.)

       <page 80>

     
      63. TURF   LABYRINTH, PIMPERNE, DORSET. (Hutchins)

       <page 81>

     
      64. TURF   LABYRINTH, SAFFRON WALDEN, ESSEX. (W. H. M.)

       <page 83>

     
      65. "THE   MAZLES," COMBERTON, CAMBS. (Photo, W. H. M.)

       f.p <page 84>

     
      66. TURF   LABYRINTH, HILTON, HUNTS. (W. H. M.)

       <page 85>

     
      67. TURF   LABYRINTH, HILTON, HUNTS. (Photo, W. H. M.)

       f.p <page 84>

     
      68. "WALLS   OF TROY," ROCKCLIFFE MARSH, CUMBERLAND. (After Ferguson)

       <page 87>

     
      69.   "TROY-TOWN," SOMERTON, OXON. (From sketch by O. W. Godwin)

       <page 89>

     
      70.   "CAERDROIA." (After P. Roberts)

       9<page 94>

     
      71. LABYRINTH   DEVICE OF ARCHBISHOP OF EMBRUN. (After C. Paradin).

       <page 97>

     
      [p. xvii]

        

     
       

       PAGE

     
      72. FLORAL   LABYRINTH. (De Vries)

       f.p <page 100>

     
      73.     "           "             "       

       <page 102>

     
      74.     "           "             "       

       f.p <page 101>

     
      75, 76. HERBAL   LABYRINTHS. (T. Hill)

       <page 104>

     
      77, 78. MAZE   DESIGNS IN XVIITH CENTURY MANUSCRIPT. (Harley MS., Brit. Mus.)

       <page 106>

     
      79. MAZE DESIGN   BY ADAM ISLIP, 1602

       <page 107>

     
      80. MAZE DESIGN   BY J. COMMELYN, 1676

       <page 108>

     
      81. MAZE DESIGN   BY J. SERLIO. (XVIth Century)

       <page 113>

     
      82. MAZE AT   CHARLEVAL. (After Du Cerceau)

       <page 114>

     
      83, 84. MAZES   AT GAILLON. (After Du Cerceau)

       <page 114>

     
      85. MAZE AT   THEOBALDS, HERTS. (After Trollope)

       <page 115>

     
      86. MAZE AT   HATFIELD, HERTS. (Photo, G. F. Green)

       Frontispiece

     
      87. MAZE AT   HATFIELD, HERTS. Plan. (W. H. M.)

       <page 116>

     
      88. LABYRINTH   OF VERSAILLES. (Perrault)

       f.p <page 118>

     
      89. LABYRINTH   OF VERSAILLES. Fable Group: "Hare and Tortoise"

       <page 118>

     
      90. LABYRINTH   OF VERSAILLES. Fable Group: "Fox and Crow"

       <page 119>

     
      91. LABYRINTH   OF VERSAILLES. Fable Group: "Snake and Porcupine"

       <page 120>

     
      92. LABYRINTH   AT THE TUILERIES, PARIS. (After Du Cerceau)

       <page 121>

     
      93. LABYRINTH   AT CHOISY-LE-ROI. (Blondel)

       f.p <page 120>

     
      94. LABYRINTH   AT CHANTILLY. (Blondel)

       f.p <page 120>

     
      95, 96. MAZE   DESIGNS BY ANDRE MOLLET. ("Le Jardin de Plaisir," 1651)

       f.p <page 121>

     
      97 to 106. MAZE   DESIGNS BY G. A. BOECKLER. ("Architectura Curiosa Nova," 1664)

       <page 122>-126

     
      107. MAZE AT   GUNTERSTEIN, HOLLAND. (Nicholas Visscher)

       f.p <page 126>

     
      108. MAZE AT   GUNTERSTEIN, HOLLAND. Plan. (Visscher)

       f.p <page 126>

     
      109. GARDENS AT   LOO, HOLLAND, WITH MAZES. (W. Harris)

       f.p <page 127>

     
      110. MAZE AT   HAMPTON COURT. (Photo, G. F. Green)

       f.p <page 128>

     
      111. MAZE AT   HAMPTON COURT. Plan. (W. H. M.)

       <page 129>

     
      112. HAMPTON   COURT. Mazes and "Plan-de-Troy" in XVIIIth Century. (Engraving, J.   Rocque, 1736)

       <page 130>

     
      113. HAMPTON   COURT. "The Little Maze." (Photo, G. F. Green)

       f.p <page 128>

     
      114. LABYRINTH   DESIGN BY L. LIGER. (From London and Wise)

       <page 131>

     
      115. MAZE   DESIGN BY BATTY LANGLEY. ("New Principles of Gardening," 1728)

       f.p <page 131>

     
      116. MAZE   DESIGN BY BATTY LANGLEY. ("New Principles of Gardening," 1728)

       f.p <page 130>

     
      117. LABYRINTH   AT TRINITY COLLEGE, OXFORD. (Williams)

       f.p <page 132>

     
      118. WREST   PARK, BEDS., WITH TWO MAZES. (Kip)

       f.p <page 133>

     
      [p. xviii]

        

     
       

       PAGE

     
      119. MAZE   DESIGN BY STEPHEN SWITZER. ("Ichnographia Rustica," 1742)

       <page 133>

     
      120. MAZE IN   R.H.S. GARDENS, STH. KENSINGTON. (After Nesfield)

       <page 139>

     
      121. MAZE IN   BRIDGE END GARDENS, SAFFRON WALDEN. Looking S. (Photo, W. H. M.)

       f.p <page 140>

     
      122. MAZE IN   BRIDGE END GARDENS, SAFFRON WALDEN. Looking N. (Photo, W. H. M.)

       f.p <page 140>

     
      123. MAZE AT   SOMERLEYTON HALL, SUFFOLK. (W. H. M., from sketch by G. F. Green)

       <page 141>

     
      124. STONE   LABYRINTH ON WIER ISLAND, GULF OF FINLAND. (Von Baer)

       <page 148>

     
      125. STONE   LABYRINTH ON FINNISH COAST. (Aspelin)

       <page 148>

     
      126. STONE   LABYRINTH AT WISBY, GOTHLAND. (Aspelin)

       <page 149>

     
      127.   SCANDINAVIAN STONE LABYRINTH. (Rudbeck)

       <page 150>

     
      128. OLD DANISH   STONE CROSS, WITH LABYRINTH. (O. Worm)

       f.p <page 151>

     
      129. ROCK   ENGRAVINGS, ROUTING LINN, NORTHUMBERLAND. (G. Tate)

       f.p <page 151>

     
      130. ROCK   ENGRAVINGS, OLD BEWICK, NORTHUMBERLAND(G. Tate)

       f.p <page 152>

     
      131. INDIAN   LABYRINTH, FROM XVIIITH CENTURY SPANISH MANUSCRIPT. (After Cotton)

       <page 154>

     
      132.   LABYRINTHINE PICTOGRAPH, MESA VERDE. (After Fewkes)

       <page 155>

     
      133. ETRUSCAN   WINE-VASE FROM TRAGLIATELLA. (After Deecke)

       <page 157>

     
      134, 135.   ETRUSCAN WINE-VASE FROM TRAGLIATELLA. "Troy Dance" Details. (After   Deecke)

       <page 157>-158

     
      136.   STRAIGHT-LINE DIAGRAM. Hampton Court Maze

       <page 187>

     
      137.   STRAIGHT-LINE DIAGRAM. Hatfield Maze

       <page 187>

     
      138, 139.   DERIVATION OF LABYRINTH TYPES FROM ROCK-ENGRAVING FIGURES. (After Krause)

       <page 188>

     
      140.   ALLEGORICAL LABYRINTH. (Old German Print)

       f.p <page 194>

     
      141, 142.   SEA-SIDE SAND MAZES. (W. H. M.)

       f.p <page 202>

     
      143. TEMPORARY   MAZE AT VILLAGE FETE. (W. H. M.)

       <page 203>

     
      144. MAZE TOY   BY A. BRENTANO. (After Patent Specification) 

       <page 204>

     
      145. MAZE TOY   BY S. D. Nix. (After Patent Specification)

       <page 206>

     
      147. MAZE TOY   BY J. PROCTOR. (After Patent Specification)

       <page 206>

     
      148. MAZE TOY   BY H. BRIDGE. (After Patent Specification)

       <page 207>

     
      149, 150, 151.   PATH OF RAT IN LABYRINTH. Three Stages. (After Szymanski)

       <page 208>

     
  

     
Mazes and Labyriths, by W. H. Matthews, [1922], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 1]

  

MAZES AND LABYRINTHS

  

CHAPTER I

  

INTRODUCTION

A DELIGHTFUL air of romance and mystery surrounds the whole subject of Labyrinths and Mazes.

The hedge-maze, which is the only type with which most of us have a first-hand acquaintance, is generally felt to be a survival of a romantic age, even though we esteem its function as nothing higher than that of a playground for children. Many a tender intrigue has been woven around its dark yew alleys. Mr. Compton Mackenzie, for example, introduces it most effectively as a lovers' rendezvous in "The Passionate Elopement," and no doubt the readers of romantic literature will recall other instances of a like nature. The story of fair Rosamond's Bower is one which will leap to the mind in this connection.

This type of maze alone is worth more than a passing thought, but it is far from being the only, or even the most interesting, development of the labyrinth idea.

What is the difference, it may be asked, between a maze and a labyrinth? The answer is, little or none. Some writers seem to prefer to apply the word "maze" to hedge-mazes only, using the word "labyrinth" to denote

[p. 2]

the structures described by the writers of antiquity, or as a general term for any confusing arrangement of paths. Others, again, show a tendency to restrict the application of the term "maze" to cases in which the idea of a puzzle is involved.

It would certainly seem somewhat inappropriate to talk of "the Cretan Maze" or "the Hampton Court Labyrinth," but, generally speaking, we may use the words interchangeably, regarding "maze" as merely the northern equivalent of the classic "labyrinth." Both words have come to signify a complex path of some kind, but when we press for a closer definition we encounter difficulties. We cannot, for instance, say that it is "a tortuous branched path designed to baffle or deceive those who attempt to find the goal to which it leads," for, though that description holds good in some cases, it ignores the many cases in which there is only one path, without branches, and therefore no intent to baffle or mislead, and others again in which there is no definite "goal." We cannot say that it is a winding path "bounded by walls or hedges," for in many instances there are neither walls nor hedges. One of the most famous labyrinths, for example, consisted chiefly of a vast and complicated series of rooms and columns. In fact, we shall find it convenient to leave the question of the definition of the words, and also that of their origin, until we have examined the various examples that exist or are known to have existed.

It may be necessary, here and there, to make reference to various archaeological or antiquarian books and other writings, but the outlook of the general reader, rather than that of the professed student, has been mainly borne in mind.

The object of this book is simply to provide a read-able survey of a subject which, in view of the lure it has exercised throughout many ages and under a variety of forms, has been almost entirely neglected in our literature--the subject of mazes and labyrinths treated from

[p. 3]

a general and not a purely archaeological, horticultural, mathematical, or artistic point of view.

Such references as have been made have therefore been accompanied in most cases by some explanatory or descriptive phrase, a provision which might be considered unnecessary or out of place in a book written for the trained student.

For the benefit of such as may wish to verify, or to investigate more fully, any of the matters dealt with, a classified list of references has been compiled and will be found at the end of the book.

The first summary of any importance to be published in this country on the subject was a paper by the Venerable Edward Trollope, F.S.A., Archdeacon of Stow, which appeared in the Archaeological Journal and in the "Proceedings" of a provincial archaeological society in 1858. Nearly all subsequent writers on the subject--in this country at any rate--have drawn largely upon the paper in question and have made little advance upon it.

The "Encyclopaedia Britannica" contains an illustrated article, written originally by a botanist and chiefly concerned with hedge-mazes. Such books as Rouse Ball's "Mathematical Recreations," Andrews' "Ecclesiastical Curiosities," and Dudeney's "Amusements in Mathematics" devote each a chapter or so to the matter, and from time to time there have been brief displays of interest in some aspect or other of the topic in popular periodicals, the most notable being a pair of richly illustrated articles in Country Life in 1903. A condensed and scholarly review of the subject, in so far as it is relevant to his main thesis, is contained in the first volume of Mr. A. B. Cook's ponderous work on "Zeus" (1914). A similar remark applies to the recently published (1921) Volume I of Sir Arthur Evans's magnificent summary of his Cretan researches, "The Palace of Minos at Knossos." There is a characteristically Ruskinian discourse on Labyrinths in "Fors Clavigera"

[p. 4]

[paragraph continues] (Fors No. 23); and an interesting, if not convincing, section of Mr. E. O. Gordon's "Prehistoric London" adduces a certain amount of labyrinth lore in support of the Trojan origin of the metropolis. So far as the writer has been able to ascertain, no book dealing solely with the subject has hitherto appeared in our language.

In 1915-16 there appeared posthumously in the Revue Archeologique a very remarkable series of articles on "Les Fallacieux Detours du Labyrinthe" by a brilliant young French archaeologist, M. Robert de Launay, who was killed on the field of honour at Neuville-St.-Vaast in May 1915. The articles are characterised by great boldness and enthusiasm and show a wide range of knowledge, but it is probable that, if the author had lived, mature consideration would have led him to modify some of his conclusions. This is the most recent work of importance on the subject, though the new work by Sir A. Evans mentioned above contains much interesting and valuable information on certain aspects.

In the following chapters an attempt is made to set forth, as readably as may be, an account of the various devices in which the labyrinth-idea has been embodied, to indicate where examples may be found, to give some notion of the speculations which have been made regarding their origins, and to consider the possibilities of the idea from the point of view of amusement and recreation.

The earliest labyrinths of which mention is made by the classic writers are those of Egypt and Crete, and we shall find it convenient to consider these first of all. We will then notice the other labyrinths alluded to by the writers of antiquity, and pass on to a consideration of labyrinthine designs introduced by way of ornament or symbolism in various objects of later classic art. We shall see that the labyrinth-idea was adopted and developed by the Christian Church in the Middle Ages, and will note its progress as a medium of horticultural embellishment. It will be interesting to examine the mathematical principles,

[p. 5]

such as they are, which underlie the construction or solution of mazes, also to see in what a number of ways these principles may be applied.

We shall find that our inquiry will bring us into contact with a greater variety of subjects than one would at first be inclined to imagine, and that labyrinths and mazes need not by any means be considered as exclusively a concern of archaeologists and children.

Incidentally we may help to rescue from threatened oblivion a certain class of native antiquities, small and diminishing in number, but surely worth sufficient attention to ensure their preservation, namely, the turf-labyrinths.

As to the actual origin and primary purpose of these devices we cannot be dogmatic on the evidence before us, and herein, perhaps, lies a good deal of their charm. When we can classify and date with precision any object which is not of a utilitarian nature we relegate it at once to our mental museum, and a museum is only too apt to become an oubliette. But when there is a considerable margin for speculation, or, as we usually say, a certain amount of "mystery" in the case, we are more likely to find pleasure in rehandling it, looking at it from different points of view and wondering about it. Let us grant, by all means, that there are quite sufficient unsolved riddles in nature and life without raising up artificial mysteries. Let us even admit that when evidence is available (which, by the way, is not the same thing as existent) it is better to settle a question straight away than to leave it open to further argument. At the same time, let us not be too hasty in accepting speculations, however shrewd, as proved facts. Antiquarian books should naturally be as free as possible from actual misstatements, but they have lost all their charm when they become collections of bald dogmatic statements or mere descriptive catalogues.

     
Mazes and Labyriths, by W. H. Matthews, [1922], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 6]

  

CHAPTER II

  

THE EGYPTIAN LABYRINTH

(i) Accounts of the Ancient Writers

THE earliest structure of any kind to which we find the word labyrinth applied was a huge building situated in the North of Egypt, a land always noted for its stupendous monuments, and was probably constructed more than 2000 years before the commencement of the Christian era.

We live in an age when the use of constructional steel enables the dreams of the architect to materialise in many ways that would astonish the builders of old; nevertheless, the modern citizen, whatever his nationality, can rarely resist a feeling akin to awe when making his first acquaintance with such works as the Pyramids of Egypt. One can imagine, then, what a profound effect these massive edifices must have exerted on the minds of travellers in earlier ages.

We find, as we might expect, many wild exaggerations in individual descriptions and corresponding discrepancies between the various accounts of any particular monument, and this is to some extent the case with regard to the Egyptian Labyrinth.

A fairly detailed and circumstantial account has come down to us from the Greek writer Herodotus.

Herodotus, who is rightly spoken of as the Father of History, was born about 484 B.C. and lived about sixty

[p. 7]

years, of which he spent a considerable number in travelling about over most of the then known world. Those who are fortunate enough to be able to read his works in their original tongue are charmed by their freshness, simplicity, and harmonious rhythm, but those who look to him for accurate information on any but contemporary events or matters with which he was personally acquainted are apt to find a rather too credulous acceptance of the wonderful. No doubt the poetical instinct in Herodotus was stronger than the critical spirit of the true historian, but, so far as the records of his personal observations are concerned, there seems to be no reason to accuse him of gross exaggeration.

The Labyrinth of Egypt he himself visited, as he tells us in his second book, and seems to have been consider-ably impressed by it. After describing how the Egyptians divided the land into twelve parts, or nomes, and set a king over each, he says that they agreed to combine together to leave a memorial of themselves. They then constructed the Labyrinth, just above Lake Moeris, and nearly opposite the city of crocodiles (Crocodilopolis). "I found it," he says, "greater than words could tell, for, although the temple at Ephesus and that at Samos are celebrated works, yet all of the works and buildings of the Greeks put together would certainly be inferior to this labyrinth as regards labour and expense." Even the pyramids, he tells us, were surpassed by the Labyrinth. "It has twelve covered courts, with opposite doors, six courts on the North side and six on the South, all communicating with one another and with one wall surrounding them all. There are two sorts of rooms, one sort above, the other sort below ground, fifteen hundred of each sort, or three thousand in all." He says that he was allowed to pass through the upper rooms only, the lower range being strictly guarded from visitors, as they contained the tombs of the kings who had built the Labyrinth, also the tombs of the sacred crocodiles.

[p. 8]

The upper rooms he describes as being of super-human size, and the system of passages through the courts, rooms, and colonnades very intricate and bewildering. The roof of the whole affair, he says, is of stone and the walls are covered with carvings. Each of the courts is surrounded by columns of white stone, perfectly joined. Outside the Labyrinth, and at one corner of it, is a pyramid about 240 feet in height, with huge figures carved upon it and approached by an underground passage.

Herodotus expresses even greater admiration, however, for the lake beside the Labyrinth, which he describes as being of vast size and artificially constructed, having two pyramids arising from its bed, each supporting a colossal seated statue. The water for the lake, he says, is brought from the Nile by a canal.

The Labyrinth and the lake are also described at some length by another great traveller, Strabo, who lived about four centuries after Herodotus. He wrote, amongst other works, a Geography of the World in seventeen volumes, the last of which treats of Egypt and other parts of Africa. Like Herodotus, he speaks of the Labyrinth from personal observation. After referring to the lake and the manner in which it is used as a storage reservoir for the water of the Nile, he proceeds to describe the Labyrinth, "a work equal to the Pyramids." He says it is "a large palace composed of as many palaces as there were formerly nomes. There are an equal number of courts, surrounded by columns and adjoining one another, all in a row and constituting one building, like a long wall with the courts in front of it. The entrances to the courts are opposite the wall; in front of these entrances are many long covered alleys with winding intercommunicating passages, so that a stranger could not find his way in or out unless with a guide. Each of these structures is roofed with a single slab of stone, as are also the covered alleys, no timber or any other material being used." If one

[p. 9]

ascends to the roof, he says, one looks over "a field of stone." The courts were in a line, supported by a row of twenty-seven monolithic columns, the walls also being constructed of stones of as great a size.

"At the end of the building is the royal tomb, consisting of a square pyramid and containing the body of Imandes."

Strabo says that it was the custom of the twelve nomes of Egypt to assemble, with their priests and priestesses, each nome in its own court, for the purpose of sacrificing to the gods and administering justice in important matters.

He mentions that the inhabitants of the particular nome in the vicinity worshipped the crocodile which was kept in the lake and answered to the name of Suchus (Sebek). This animal was apparently quite tame and used to be presented by visitors with offerings of bread, flesh, wine, honey, and milk.

In certain parts of his works Strabo speaks rather disrespectfully of Herodotus as a writer, classing him as a marvel-monger, but it will be seen that in several important respects these two accounts of the Egyptian Labyrinth are in fair agreement.

Another writer of about the same period as Strabo, known as Diodorus the Sicilian, wrote a long, rambling compilation which he called a "Historical Library" and in which he describes the Egyptian Labyrinth and Lake Moeris. He says the latter was constructed by King Moeris, who left a place in the middle where he built himself a sepulchre and two pyramids--one for himself and one for his queen--surmounted by colossal seated statues. Diodorus says that the king gave the money resulting from the sale of the fish caught in the lake, amounting to a silver talent a day, to his wife "to buy her pins."

A generation or so later the Roman writer Pomponius Mela gives a short account of this labyrinth, probably at second-hand, and early in the first century of the

[p. 10]

[paragraph continues] Christian era Pliny, in his "Natural History," has a good deal to say on the subject. He refers to labyrinths generally as "the most stupendous works on which mankind has expended its labours."

Regarding the Egyptian Labyrinth he says, "there exists still, in the nome of Heracleopolites, a labyrinth first built, it is said, three thousand six hundred years ago, by King Petesuchis or Tithoes," but he goes on to quote Herodotus, to the effect that it was built by twelve kings, the last of whom was Psammetichus, and two other writers who give the king's name as Moiris and Moteris respectively, "whilst others, again, assert that it was a building dedicated to the Sun-god, an opinion which is generally accepted."

He also refers to the fact that the roof was of stone, and notes as a surprising point that the parts around the entrance were constructed of Parian marble, whilst the columns of the other parts were of syenite. "This great mass is so solidly built that the lapse of time has been quite unable to destroy it, but it has been badly ravaged by the people of Heracleopolites, who have always detested it. To describe the whole of it in detail would be quite impossible, as it is divided up into regions and prefectures, called nomes, thirty in number, with a great palace to each; in addition it must contain temples of all the gods of Egypt and forty statues of Nemesis in the same number of sacred shrines, as well as numerous pyramids." He describes it further as having "banquet halls reached by steep ascents, flights of ninety steps leading down from the porticoes, porphyritic columns, figures of gods and hideous monsters, and statues of kings. Some of the palaces are so made that the opening of a door makes a terrifying sound as of thunder. Most of the buildings are in total darkness. Outside the labyrinth there is another great heap of buildings, called the 'Pteron,' under which are passages leading to other subterranean palaces."

     
Mazes and Labyriths, by W. H. Matthews, [1922], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 11]

  

CHAPTER III

  

THE EGYPTIAN LABYRINTH (continued)

(ii) Accounts of Later Explorers

A STRUCTURE which evoked so much wonder and admiration in ancient times can hardly fail to have aroused the curiosity of later generations, but no serious attempts to locate it seem to have been made by Europeans until several centuries later. It was then far too late to observe any of its glories, for it was all but destroyed in Roman times, and a village sprang up on its site, largely constructed from its debris.

The Italian traveller Gemelli-Careri, who visited Egypt in 1693, refers to a subterranean labyrinth which he saw in the neighbourhood of the Pyramids. In the English version of his account we read: ". . . the Arabs conducted us to see a Labyrinth, where the Ancients bury'd Birds. We went down a narrow Passage into a Room out of which we crept on our Bellies through a Hole to certain ways where a man may walk well enough upright. On both sides of these there are Urns, in which the Birds were bury'd; there is now nothing in them but a little dust. These Ways are cut out of a nitrous Stone, and run several miles like a City under ground, which they call a Labyrinth." There is nothing in this description, however, to suggest that these works had any connection with the Labyrinth of the ancients.

In 1700 Paul Lucas, the Antiquary to Louis XIV,

[p. 12]

went on a voyage to Egypt, and, in the book in which he subsequently published the account of his travels, gives us some idea of the state of the remains in his time, but his account is very rambling and unreliable. Fig. 1 is a view which he gives of part of the ruins of the alleged labyrinth.

Lucas states that an old Arab who accompanied his party professed to have explored the interior of the ruins many years before, and to have penetrated into its subterranean passages to a large chamber surrounded by several niches, "like little shops," whence endless alleys and other rooms branched off. By the time of Lucas's visit, however, these passages could not be traced, and he concluded that they had become blocked up by debris.

The next explorer to visit the spot seems to have been Dr. Richard Pococke, whose "Description of the East" appeared in 1743. "We observed at a great distance," he says, "the temple of the Labyrinth, and being about a league from it, I observed several heaps as of ruins, covered with sand, and many stones all round as if there had been some great building there: they call it the town of Caroon (Bellet Caroon). It seemed to have been of a considerable breadth from east to west, and the buildings extended on each side towards the north to the Lake Moeris and the temple. This without doubt is the spot of the famous Labyrinth which Herodotus says was built by the twelve kings of Egypt." He describes what he takes to be the pyramid of the Labyrinth as a building about 165 feet long by 80 broad, very much ruined, and says it is called the "Castle of Caroon."

The neighbourhood was also explored by the archaeologists who accompanied that remarkable expedition sent out by Napoleon at the end of the eighteenth century, and one of them, Jomard, believed that he had discovered the ruins of the Labyrinth.

In 1843 a Prussian expedition, under K. R. Lepsius, carried out considerable excavations in the locality and

 

Click to enlarge
Fig. 1. Egyptian Labyrinth. Portion of Ruins, circ. 1700. (Paul Lucas)

[p. 13]

Click to enlarge
Fig. 2. Egyptian Labyrinth. Shrine of Amenemhat III. (Flinders Petrie)

 

claimed to have established the actual site of the Labyrinth, attaching great importance to a series of brick chambers which they unearthed. The data furnished by this party, however, were not altogether of a convincing character, and it was felt that further evidence was required before their conclusions could be accepted.

G. M. Ebers, a pupil of Lepsius, and one who did much to popularise the study of Egyptology by a series of novels, said that, if one climbed the pyramid hard by, one could see that the ruins of the Labyrinth had a horseshoe shape, but that was all.

The actual site of the Egyptian Labyrinth was finally identified by Professor Flinders Petrie in 1888. He found that the brick chambers which Lepsius took to be part of the Labyrinth were only remains of the Roman town built by its destroyers, the Labyrinth itself being so thoroughly demolished that only a great bed of fragments remained. Even from this dreary waste of stone chips, however, a few items of interest were discovered, including scattered bits of foundations, a great well, two door-jambs--one to the north and one to the south--two granite shrines and part of another, several fragments of statues and a large granite seated figure of the king who is now generally recognised to have been the builder of the Labyrinth, namely Amenemhat (or Amenemhe) III of the XIIth Dynasty (also known as Lampares), who reigned about twenty-three centuries B.C. Fig. 2, which, like the diagram shown in Fig. 4., is reproduced by the kind permission of Professor Petrie from his book "The Labyrinth, Gerzeh and Mazghuneh" (1912), represents one of the shrines dedicated to the founder. Sufficient of the original foundations remained to enable the size and orientation of the building to be roughly determined.

The Labyrinth must have covered an area of about moo feet from east to west by Boo feet from north to south, and was situated to the east of Lake Moeris, opposite the ancient town of Arsinoe (Crocodilopolis),

[p. 14]

and just to the south of the pyramid of Hawara, in the district known nowadays as the Fayum.

The mummified remains of the builder of the Labyrinth, King Amenemhat III, and of his daughter Sebekneferu, have been discovered in this pyramid, which is symmetrical about the same N.--S. meridian as the Labyrinth.

Professor Petrie reviewed all that the classic writers had reported concerning the Labyrinth, and concluded that, in spite of their differences, each had contributed some item of value. The discrepancies between the descriptions of Herodotus and Strabo he attributes to the probable decay or destruction of the upper storey in the intervening centuries.

Many attempts have been made to visualise the Labyrinth as it existed in the time of Herodotus. Fig. 3 shows, in plan, one such reconstruction, according to the Italian archaeologist Canina. The actual plan of the Labyrinth would appear to have differed from this in many respects, judging by the indications found by Professor Petrie. The latter drew up a tentative restoration based upon the descriptions of Herodotus and Strabo so far as these tallied with the remains discovered by him.

He suggests that the shrines which he found formed part of a series of nine, ranged along the foot of the , each attached to a columned court, the whole series of courts opening opposite a series of twenty-seven columns arranged down the length of a great hall running east and west; on the other side of this hall would be another series of columned courts, six in number and larger than the others, separated by another long hall from a further series of six (Fig. 4).

In spite of the scantiness of the present remains and the discrepancies between the various reports that have reached us from ancient times, we can at least be reasonably certain that this, the earliest structure to which the term "labyrinth" (laburinthos) is known to have been applied, did actually exist; that it was of the nature of a

[p. 15]

stupendous architectural monument, that it is of great antiquity--having been built over 4000 years ago at any rate--and that its site is definitely known.

Its original object is still a matter of conjecture. It is quite possible that it was used as a meeting-place for the

Click to enlarge
FIG. 3.--Egyptian Labyrinth. Restored Plan. (Canina.)

nomes, which would have been about twenty-two in number at the time of the XIIth Dynasty, but it is perhaps more probable that it was intended as a sepulchral monument. In any case it is plain, from the fragments of various gods and goddesses found on the site, that it was a centre of worship of a great variety of deities.

From an almost illegible inscription on a great weather-beaten block of granite, deciphered, with great difficulty,

[p. 16]

as a dedication by a King Ptolemy to a Queen Cleopatra, Professor Petrie concluded that as late as the beginning of the second century B.C. the building was still in royal

Click to enlarge
FIG. 4.--Egyptian Labyrinth.
 Restored Plan of Western Half. (Flinders Petrie.)

care, but not very long afterwards it was considerably despoiled. Whatever may have been its original object, it afforded several generations the advantages of a most convenient stone-quarry.

     
Mazes and Labyriths, by W. H. Matthews, [1922], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 17]

  

CHAPTER IV

  

THE CRETAN LABYRINTH

(i) The Story of Theseus and the Minotaur

CHARLES KINGSLEY in "The Heroes" and Nathaniel Hawthorne in "Tanglewood Tales" have familiarised most English-speaking people with the story of the exploits of Theseus, and doubtless most folk have some acquaintance with the first volume of Plutarch's "Lives," but it will not be out of place here to recall the portions of the legend which are associated with our particular theme, the parts, that is to say, which concern the Labyrinth of Crete. In doing so we will follow the version given by Plutarch.

This Greco-Roman historian flourished in the latter half of the first century of our era. His information as to the deeds of Theseus, already for many centuries a staple ingredient in popular legendry, was drawn from the accounts of the early Greek writers Bacchylides (fifth century B.C.), Cleidemus (circ. 420-350 B.C.), Philochorus (circ. 306-260 B.C.), and others.

The Cretan exploit was perhaps the most romantic of the long series of heroic ads attributed to Theseus. Let us briefly recall it.

Aegeus, the father of Theseus, was King of Athens. At that time there reigned at Knossos, in Crete, a monarch called Minos, who held sway over what was then

[p. 18]

the most powerful maritime state in the Mediterranean. Minos had a son named Androgeos, who, during his travels in Attica, was treacherously set upon and slain, or so his father was informed. In consequence of this Minos imposed a penalty on the Athenians in the form of a tribute to be paid once every nine years, such tribute to consist of seven youths and seven maidens, who were to be shipped to Knossos at the appointed periods.

There was at the court of Minos an exceedingly clever and renowned artificer or engineer, Daedalus by name, to whom all sorts of miraculous inventions are ascribed. This Daedalus had devised an ingenious structure, the "Labyrinth," so contrived that if anybody were placed therein he would find it practically impossible to discover the exit without a guide.

The Labyrinth was designed as a dwelling for, or at any rate was inhabited by, a hideous and cruel being called the Minotaur, a monstrous offspring of Queen Pasiphae, wife of Minos. The Minotaur is described as being half man and half bull, or a man with a bull's head, a ferocious creature that destroyed any unfortunate human beings who might come within its power. According to report, the youths and maidens of the Athenian tribute were periodically, one by one, thrust into the Labyrinth, where, after futile wanderings in the endeavour to find an exit, they were finally caught and slain by the Minotaur.

When Theseus arrived at the court of Aegeus, having been brought up hitherto by his mother in a distant seclusion, he was distressed to find that his father's joy in the reunion was overcast by a deepening sadness. On inquiring the reason for this, he learned of the vindictive tribute laid upon the kingdom, and that the time for the third payment was approaching.

"Let me make one of the fourteen," said the valiant youth. "I will find a way to slay this Minotaur, and then there will be no further need for the tribute."

 

Click to enlarge
Fig. 5. Cretan Labyrinth. (Florentine Picture Chronicle.)

 

[p. 19]

After various attempts to dissuade him, Aegeus at length consented, but stipulated that if Theseus were successful in his design the tribute ship should, on its return voyage, hoist a white sail in place of the black one which it customarily bore.

In due course Theseus came to Knossos, where, shortly after his arrival, he attracted the attention of Ariadne, the fair-haired daughter of Minos. Youth and love conspired against age and rancour, and the fair damsel arranged to provide the hero with a clue of thread and a sword before he was cast into the Labyrinth. One end of this thread was to be fastened at the entrance and the rest unrolled as he advanced.

Theseus followed his instructions, met the Minotaur in its lair and, after a terrific combat, overcame and slew it, after which he retraced his steps by means of the thread and made his escape from the Labyrinth.

By some means or other he contrived to liberate the other prisoners and to obtain possession of the tribute ship. Then, with the fair Ariadne on board, they set sail for Athens.

They do not appear to have been too eager to reach their destination, however, for the party found time to celebrate their escape with dance and song on the islands en route. It is said that on the island of Delos they performed a peculiar dance called the Geranos, or "Crane Dance," in which they went through the motions of threading the Labyrinth, and that this dance was perpetuated by the natives of that island until fairly recent times.

Theseus seems to have marred his home-coming by two little displays of thoughtlessness that might be considered reprehensible in anybody but a Greek hero. In the first place, he left fair Ariadne behind on the island of Naxos; secondly, he entirely overlooked his father's request concerning the change of sail, with the result that poor old Aegeus, on the look-out for the returning ship,

[p. 20]

saw the black sail in the distance, concluded that his son had failed in his encounter with the Minotaur, threw himself into the sea and was drowned. Hence that sea was called the Aegean, and is so called to this day.

In Fig. 5 we reproduce an early Italian drawing in which the various incidents in the story are seen simultaneously. This picture is one of a remarkable series, attributed to Baccio Baldini and known as the Florentine Picture Chronicle. The collection was for many years the property of John Ruskin, but is now jealously treasured by the British Museum. A contemporary engraving, of the school of Finiguerra, seems to be based on this picture (Fig. 6).

There are many versions of the legend, some of them greatly at variance with others. For instance, Philochorus, an eminent writer on the antiquities of Athens, gives in his "Atthis" a very rationalistic account of the affair, stating that the Labyrinth was nothing but a dungeon where Minos imprisoned the Athenian youths until such time as they were given as prizes to the victors in the sports that were held in honour of his murdered son. He held also that the monster was simply a military officer, whose brutal disposition, in conjunction with his name, Tauros, may have given rise to the Minotaur myth.

The Cretan poet Epimenides, who lived in the sixth century B.C., says that Theseus was aided in his escape from the dark Labyrinth by means of the light radiated by a crown of blazing gems and gold which Bacchus gave to Ariadne.

Aristotle, according to Plutarch, stated in a work which has not come down to us his belief that the Athenian youths were not put to death by Minos but were retained as slaves. Plutarch, moreover, deplores the abuse which Greek tradition had heaped upon the name of Minos, pointing out that Homer and Hesiod had referred to him in very honourable terms, and

[p. 21]

that he was reputed to have laid down the principles of justice.

According to the classic faith, he was born of Zeus, the supreme God of the Greeks, and Europa, daughter of man, both marriage and birth taking place in the Dictaean Cave, not far from Knossos. He received the

Click to enlarge
FIG. 6.--Cretan Labyrinth. (Italian Engraving; School of Finiguerra.)

laws, like another Moses, direct from God, and after administering them during his life on earth continued to do so in the underworld after his death.

The probability is, as Professor Murray has suggested, that Minos was a general name, like "Pharaoh" in Egypt, or "Caesar" in Rome, bestowed upon each of a number of Cretan kings of a certain type. A mark either of the respect in which the name was held or of the colonising power of the monarch or monarchs in

[p. 22]

question is seen in the application of the name Minoa to several towns and villages scattered along the northern shores of the eastern Mediterranean.

The name Daedalus has likewise been thought by some to have been applied indiscriminately to various artificers and inventors of unusual ingenuity. The principal feats associated with this name are, in addition to the planning of the Labyrinth, the construction of a Choros, or dancing-place, for Ariadne, the modelling of a great hollow cow for Pasiphae, wife of Minos, in order that she might interview the great white bull for which she had conceived an unnatural affection (the outcome being, in the words of Euripides, "A form commingled, and a monstrous birth, half man, half bull, in twofold shape combined"), and the invention of wings, wherewith Daedalus escaped from the Labyrinth when imprisoned there by Minos for his share in the Pasiphae episode. Daedalus was also credited with the invention of the auger, the plumb-line and other tools, and of masts and sails for ships.

The Theseus-Minotaur incident has been often celebrated in ancient and mediaeval art, instances of which we shall later have occasion to mention. Modern artists, also, have not disdained the theme; a particularly fine example is the colossal marble group by Canova (1819), now at the Museum of Art History at Vienna, formerly in the Theseus Temple in the Volksgarten.

The question naturally arises: Was there actually such a thing as the Labyrinth, and, if so, where was it and what was its nature?

     
Mazes and Labyriths, by W. H. Matthews, [1922], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 23]

  

CHAPTER V

  

THE CRETAN LABYRINTH (continued)

(ii) The Caverns of Gortyna

ACCORDING to the Romano-Greek writer Apollodorus, [*1] whose "Bibliotheke" consisted of a history of the world from the fall of Troy onwards, Daedalus built the Labyrinth at Knossos for King Minos on the lines of the Egyptian Labyrinth, but of only one-hundredth part of the magnitude of the latter. This statement, which was repeated by various other ancient writers such as Pliny and Diodorus, caused many subsequent inquirers to look for evidence in Crete of a building similar to, though smaller than, that described by Herodotus and Strabo.

Nothing corresponding to such a description appeared to exist, but at Gortyna, on the south side of Crete, there was a remarkable series of winding passages, opening on the side of Mount Ida. Some authors of antiquity, such as the Roman poets Catullus and Claudian, held the opinion that this cavern, or one of the many other caves or quarries in Crete, was the real Labyrinth, and this view has been largely entertained in recent times, right up to the beginning of the present century.

The first modern traveller of note to explore the cavern was the French botanist, G. P. de Tournefort,

[p. 24]

who spent three years, from 1700 to 1702, travelling about Asia Minor and the Levant.

Tournefort's book, as well as being a mine of information on various subjects, makes delightful reading, whether in the original French or in John Ozell's English translation of 1718, from which we quote.

"This famous place," he says, referring to the Labyrinth, which he visited on July 1, 1700, "is a subterranean Passage in manner of a Street, which by a thousand Intricacies and Windings, as it were by mere Chance, and without the least Regularity, pervades the whole Cavity or Inside of a little Hill at the foot of Mount Ida, southwards, three miles from Gortyna. The Entrance into this Labyrinth is by a natural Opening, seven or eight Paces broad, but so low that even a middle-siz'd Man can't pass through without stooping.

"The Flooring of this Entrance is very rugged and unequal; the Ceiling flat and even, terminated by divers Beds of Stone, laid horizontally one upon another.

"The first thing you come at is a kind of Cavern exceeding rustick, and gently sloping: in this there is nothing extraordinary, but as you move forward the place is perfectly surprizing; nothing but Turnings and crooked By-ways. The principal Alley, which is less perplexing than the rest, in length about 1200 Paces, leads to the further end of the Labyrinth, and concludes in two large beautiful Apartments, where Strangers rest themselves with pleasure. Tho' this Alley divides itself, at its Extremity, into two or three Branches, yet the dangerous part of the Labyrinth is not there, but rather at its Entrance, about some thirty paces from the Cavern on the left hand. If a Man strikes into any other Path, after he has gone a good way, he is so bewildered among a thousand Twistings, Twinings, Sinuosities, Crinkle-Crankles and Turn-again Lanes, that he could scarce ever get out again without the utmost danger of being lost."

[p. 25]

He refers to various inscriptions in charcoal, mostly names of former visitors, and notes various dates ranging from 1444 to 1699. "We too," he says, "wrote the Year of the Lord 1700 in three different places, with a black stone." "After a thorow Examination of the Structure of this Labyrinth we all concurred in Opinion, that it could never have been what Belonius and some other of the Moderns have fancy'd; namely, an antient Quarry, out of which were dug the Stones that built the Towns of Gortyna and Gnossus. Is it likely that they would go for Stone above a thousand paces deep, into a place so full of odd Turnings? . . . Again, how could they draw these Stones through a place so pinch'd in, that we were forc'd to crawl our way out for above a hundred paces together? Besides, the Mountain is so craggy and full of Precipices that we had all the difficulty in the World to ride up it. . . . It is likewise observable, that the Stone of this Labyrinth has neither a good Hue nor a competent Hardness; it is downright dingy, and resembling that of the Mountains near which Gortyna stands.

". . . It is therefore much more probable, that the Labyrinth is a natural Cavity, which in times past some body out of curiosity took a fancy to try what they could make of, by widening most of those Passages that were too much straitened. . . . Doubtless some Shepherds having discovered these subterraneous Conduits, gave occasion to more considerable People to turn it into this marvellous Maze to serve for an Asylum in the Civil Wars or to skreen themselves from the Fury of a Tyrannical Government: at present it is only a Retreat for Bats and the like."

Tournefort stayed for a while with an ignorant priest, "who would have persuaded us in his balderdash Italian that there was an ancient Prophecy wrote on the Walls of the Labyrinth importing that the Czar of Muscovy was very soon to be Master of the Ottoman Empire and deliver the Greeks from the Slavery of the Turks." He

[p. 26]

adds: "Whatever Scrawlings are made upon the Walls of the Labyrinth by Travellers, these Simpletons swallow down for Prophecies." He mentions also a labyrinth at Candia, but says it must not be confused with the Labyrinth of tradition, "which, from antique Medals, appears to have been in the town of Gnossus."

Dr. Richard Pococke, to whose description of the Egyptian Labyrinth we referred in Chapter III, paid a visit to Gortyna about forty years after Tournefort. He says that the "labyrinth" was shown to him, but that it was evidently nothing more than the quarry out of which the town was built. He points out that the real Labyrinth was at Knossos and that nothing was left of it in Pliny's time.

Another French traveller, C. E. Savary, visited the spot about 1788. He came to the conclusion that this was the Labyrinth of the Minotaur, but regarded it as something distinct from that built by Daedalus at Knossos.

A very interesting account of the Gortyna cavern is that contained in the Journal of C. R. Cockerell, R.A., [*1] who travelled in Southern Europe and the Levant during the years 1810 to 1817. He and his party entered the "labyrinth" by an inconspicuous hole in the rock in a steep part of the hill (Mount Ida) and found themselves in an intricately winding passage. They had taken the precaution to bring with them a great length of string wound upon two sticks, and it was fortunate that they did so, for "the windings," says Cockerell, "bewildered us at once, and, my compass being broken, I was quite ignorant as to where I was. The clearly intentional intricacy and apparently endless number of galleries impressed me with a sense of horror and fascination I cannot describe. At every ten steps one was arrested, and had to turn to right or left, sometimes to choose one of

[p. 27]

three or four roads. What if one should lose the clue!" He relates how a poor lunatic had insisted on accompanying them all the way from Candia and following them into the cavern. This man, together with a boy who had a lantern, wandered off and caused the rest of the party--except some Turks, who philosophically remarked that God takes care of madmen--to feel much alarm on their account. They were, however, discovered again an hour later, the boy half dead with fright.

Chambers opened off from the passages, and contained much evidence of former visitors, in the shape of names scratched on the walls, such as "Spinola," "Hawkins, 1794," "Fiott," and many of a Jewish character. All of the passage ends were infested with bats, which rose in thousands when one of the party fired a pistol. Lichens grew here and there, and in one place arose a spring. There were signs of metallic substances in the rock, but not sufficient, thought Cockerell, to warrant the supposition that the place was a mine. The stone was sandy, stratified and easily cut, and the air was dry. The surface of the rock appeared to have been prepared with a chisel.

The passage was 8 or 10 feet wide, and from 4 to 10 feet high; in many places it had fallen in. Cockerell concluded that the excavation was probably made in the days of Minos as a storehouse for corn and valuables. He mentions that he was informed by natives that the cavern extended right through the mountain and was three miles in length; also that a sow once wandered in and emerged some years later with a litter of pigs!

About fifty years after Cockerell's visit, the cavern was explored by Capt. T. A. B. Spratt, R.N., who, in his "Travels and Researches in Crete" (1865), tells us that the Cretans "have long since walled and stopped up its inner and unknown extremes, so as not to be lost in its inner intricacies." He discusses the probable location of the traditional Labyrinth and concludes that probably

[p. 28]

the latter is to be found in some similar cavern in the neighbourhood of Knossos. He mentions that there is, in fact, an excavation in the side of the ridge overlooking Knossos which the natives state to be the entrance to extensive catacombs, but that it is choked up by the falling in of its sides.

He reproduces a sketch by Sieber of the Gortyna Cavern (Fig. 7); this, he says, took the artist three days to make. Capt. Spratt, by the way, points out that the meander pattern, which is so common a feature of Greek ornament, and is associated by some writers with the origin of the labyrinth idea, may very well have been derived from the square-spiral trenches which are commonly constructed by Eastern gardeners for irrigational purposes. (See also Chapter VIII.)

Whatever the original purpose and function of the Gortyna Cavern may have been, it was certainly a "labyrinth" in the extended sense, and no doubt the classic writers themselves would have had no hesitation in admitting the use of that word to describe it, but, as we shall see, discoveries of recent years have considerably diminished its claim to be considered as the original Labyrinth of the Minotaur.

 

Click to enlarge
Fig. 7. Cavern of Gortyna. (Sieber)

 

Footnotes

^23:1 Often erroneously alluded to as "the Athenian Grammarian."

^26:1 Edited and published by his son, S. P. Cockerell, in 1903.

     
Mazes and Labyriths, by W. H. Matthews, [1922], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 29]

  

CHAPTER VI

  

THE CRETAN LABYRINTH (continued)

(iii) Knossos

A FEW miles to the north-east of Gortyna, and not far south of the north coast town of Candia, lay, at the base of the hill of Kephala, a few ruined walls indicating the site of the ancient city of Knossos. These walls consisted of large blocks of gypsum and bore curious engraved marks.

For many years Dr. A. J. Evans (now Sir Arthur Evans) had been convinced that excavation of this site would probably bring to light evidence of a system of writing which might be of interest in connection with the origin of the Greek system, but it was not until the year 1900 that he finally obtained a concession enabling him to explore the spot. The resulting discoveries were of such an astonishing nature, and of such absorbing interest, that one is greatly tempted to digress and to mention them in some detail. However, they have been summarised and discussed by many able writers (see Appendix III, ii.), and it must suffice here to refer simply to the main points in which they bear upon the story of the Labyrinth.

After about two months' work, with a staff of from 80 to 150 men, about two acres of the remains of a great prehistoric building, showing strong evidence of having

[p. 30]

been destroyed by fire, were uncovered, and later excavations showed that it was yet more extensive, covering altogether about five acres. Not only this palace, but the multitude of objects found within it, or associated with it, were of surpassing importance in their bearing on the nature of the ancient civilisation of which they demonstrated the existence, and to which Sir A. Evans has given the name "Minoan." Vast quantities of pottery of widely different designs and workmanship, written tablets, wall paintings--often of great beauty--reliefs, and sculptured figures, shrines, seals, jewellery, a royal gaming-board, and even a throne, were discovered as the work went on, and eventually the whole area was excavated down to the virgin rock, remains of an earlier and smaller palace being found beneath the other, and below this again a great thickness of deposits containing many remains of neolithic man.

By means of occasional discoveries of imported Egyptian objects, by comparison of Minoan pottery and paintings with some found in Egyptian tombs, and by various other indications, it was possible to date the upper remains, say from 1580 B.C. onwards, fairly nearly. The dating of the older remains is much more difficult, chiefly because, although they can often be equated with certain periods of Egyptian culture, the chronology of the latter admits of widely different views, but it seems safe to say that the earliest traces of the Minoan civilisation date from quite 3000 years B.C., and possibly many centuries before that.

The earlier palace and town seem to have been built before 2000 B.C. and destroyed a few centuries after that date. The later palace was begun somewhere in the eighteenth or nineteenth century B.C., was elaborated in succeeding centuries, and was sacked and burned, just as it had attained the height of its glory, about I400 B.C.

The discovery of this palace was one of the first-class "finds" of archaeology. Those who based their estimates

[p. 31]

of the architectural capabilities of ancient Crete on their knowledge of the development of the builder's art in classic Greece, a millennium later, were amazed to find that in many respects the product of the older civilisation was superior.

To mention but a few of the most remarkable facts about the palace, it was of several storeys, grouped around a central court and pierced by "light-wells"; it contained several staircases, one of them at least being of a very imposing character and composed of many flights. Moreover, it possessed a quite modern system of drainage, with jointed underground pipes and with inspection manholes to the main drains. Along the west side of the basement ran a long straight gallery flanked by a series of great storage-rooms or magazines. It was near one end of this gallery that Dr. Evans discovered a store of tablets with pictographic inscriptions, in proof of his suspicion that the Phoenician script was not the original parent of European written language.

Not far from this spot was the room containing the throne (or Worshipful Master's Chair, as the masonic Dr. Churchward prefers to call it) which may actually have been occupied by King Minos.

A definite distinction can be recognised between state and domestic apartments and subsidiary offices and workshops.

To the north-west of the palace was a "stepped theatral area" (orchestra), which suggests the "dancing ground" of Ariadne.

From the point of view of our subject, however, the most interesting features were the frequent occurrence of the sign of the double axe, which was obviously an object of great importance in Minoan worship, and the profusion of evidence concerning the cult of the bull. On the fallen plaster of one of the walls of a corridor, too, was a repeated meander pattern, painted in red on a white ground, very suggestive of a sort of maze (Fig. 8).

[p. 32]

The significance of the axe symbol from our point of view lies in its bearing on the derivation of the word "labyrinth," a question that will be referred to in rather more detail in a later chapter.

One room of the palace, a stately hall about 80 ft. in length by 26 ft. in breadth, traversed by a row of square-sectioned pillars, has been named by its discoverer

Click to enlarge
FIG. 8.--Knossos. Maze-pattern on Wall of Palace. (After Evans.)

[paragraph continues] "the Hall of the Double Axes," from the frequent occurrence of this symbol therein. Not only does the sacred axe occur as a more or less crude engraving on the stone blocks composing certain pillars in the palace, but little models of it were found associated with an altar, and, in the Dictaean cave, some miles distant, several bronze specimens of the axe were discovered in circumstances which show that they were votive offerings. Sometimes the sacred symbol was set up on a socketed pedestal

 

Click to enlarge
Fig. 9. Double Axe and Stepped Steatite Socket from Dictaean Cave. (Psychro)
 (From Archaeolagia, by kind permission of the Society of Antiquaries, and Sir Arthur Evans)

[p. 33]

Click to enlarge
Fig. 11. Knossos. View of Cist, showing shape of Double Axe.
 (From Archaeolagia, by kind permission of the Society of Antiquaries and Sir Arthur Evans.)

 

[paragraph continues] (Fig. 9). Moreover, in more recent excavations a curious "tomb" was found (Figs. 10 and 11) which was double-axe

Click to enlarge
FIG. 10--Knossos. Plan of Tomb of Double Axes, showing position in which relics were found.
 (From ''Archaeolagia,'' by kind permission of the Society of Antiquaries and Sir Arthur Evans.)

shaped in plan and was evidently the repository of a giant emblem (Fig. 12. See plate, <page 42>).

Long before Dr. Evans' excavations in Crete the great

[p. 34]

[paragraph continues] German archaeologist Schliemann, during his researches at Mycenae on the mainland, unearthed from one of the graves an ox-head of gold plate, with a double axe between the upright horns. The double axe was also the sign of the Zeus worshipped at Labraunda in Caria, a country to the north-east of Crete, on the mainland of Asia Minor, where the implement was known as the labrys.

The cult of the bull was also much in evidence in the palace remains. Schliemann, in excavating the site of Tiryns in 1884, came across an extraordinary wall-painting depicting a man holding one horn of a great bull whilst he leaps over its back, the animal meanwhile charging at full speed. Several examples of such scenes have since been discovered, painted upon walls, engraved on gems, or stamped on seal-impressions. Amongst the debris of one of the rooms in the palace at Knossos was found a painting of a scene in which two girls are engaged in dodging the charge of a bull, whilst a boy, who has evidently just left hold of its horns, turns a somersault over its back.

Near the main north entrance to the palace was brought to light a large plaster relief of a bull's head, no doubt originally forming part of the complete beast. This relief was a masterpiece of Minoan art. It was of life-size and beautifully coloured, and particular attention had been given to the modelling and colour of the eye, the fierce stare of which, in conjunction with the open mouth, conveys a fine effect of frenzied excitement.

These are only a few examples, amongst many, which go to demonstrate that the sport of "bull-leaping"--or tayrukathapsia, as it was called by the Greeks--was beloved of the Minoans and was probably practised in the precincts of the palace.

In the light of these discoveries Dr. Evans concludes that the palace of Knossos was the Labyrinth, or House

[p. 35]

of the Labrys, which gave rise to the classic legend, the idea of the Minotaur originating in the practice of training captives to participate in the dangerous sport of bull-leaping. (Tauros = bull, hence Minotaur = Bull of Minos.) We will refer further to the etymology of "labyrinth" in a later chapter. The palace was certainly of sufficient complexity to render it difficult for the uninitiated to find their way about it, but the plan of its remains exhibits no resemblance to a designed labyrinth of the conventional type. There is, however, a suggestion of the latter in the meander pattern painted on one of the walls, to which reference has been made above. The notion as to the Labyrinth having been a prison from which escape was impossible may also have some connection with two deep pits beneath the palace, whose function was possibly that of dungeons for prisoners.

In considering the origin of the legend, we must remember that a period of several centuries elapsed between the destruction of the Knossian buildings and the first written account of the Labyrinth, and must take into account the probability that the people who in later ages became the dominant race in Crete would be likely to make ample use of their imagination in formulating an explanation of the vast and complicated ruins of the burnt city, with their mysterious frescoes and enigmatic symbols.

It may also be borne in mind that the excavations in Crete have by no means reached a final stage, and that, although no architectural remains of a plan conforming to the usual conception of a formal labyrinth are yet forthcoming, there is a possibility that something of the kind may yet turn up, though indeed the chance seems very remote. Even as this book is going to press appears an article in The Times by Sir Arthur Evans announcing yet further enthralling discoveries; he finds abundant signs of a great earthquake, causing ruin over the whole Knossian area, about i 600 B.C., also evidence

[p. 36]

[paragraph continues] --including portable altars and huge ox-skulls--indicating an expiatory sacrifice recalling Homer's words, "in bulls doth the Earthshaker delight"; and finally, on a floor-level about thirty feet down, the opening of an artificial cave with three rough steps leading down to what was apparently the lair of some great beast. "But here, perhaps," says Sir Arthur, "it is better for imagination to draw rein."

     
Mazes and Labyriths, by W. H. Matthews, [1922], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 37]

  

CHAPTER VII

  

THE ETRUSCAN OR ITALIAN LABYRINTH

IN addition to the Egyptian and Cretan labyrinths, a few other structures are referred to as being in the same category, but not until a fairly late period.

Pliny (died A.D. 79) mentions one built by Smilis of Aegina, after the Egyptian model, on the island of Lemnos, and says that it was renowned for the beauty of its 150 columns and that remains of it existed in his time. He also mentions one at Samos, said to have been built by Theodorus, and says that "all of these buildings are covered with arched roofs of polished stone." No other details concerning these edifices have come down to us, but Pliny quotes from Varro (116-27 B.C.) a detailed description of a very extraordinary tomb at Clusium (the modern Chiusi), said to be that of the great Etruscan general Lars Porsena. This is the only Etruscan tomb described by the ancient writers, and is mentioned by Pliny solely because it was alleged to contain a subterranean labyrinth. It must have been a most elaborate, not to say extravagant, monument. Even Pliny feels some qualms about accepting responsibility for the description, and therefore makes it clear that he is simply quoting from information received.

"It is but right that I should mention it," he says, "in order to show that the vanity displayed by foreign princes, great though it is, has been surpassed. But in

[p. 38]

view of the exceedingly fabulous nature of the story I shall use the words given by M. Varro himself in his account of it: 'Porsena was buried below the city of Clusium in the place where he had built a square monument of dressed stones. Each side was three hundred feet in length and fifty in height, and beneath the base there was an inextricable labyrinth, into which, if any-body entered without a clue of thread, he could never discover his way out. Above this square building there stand five pyramids, one at each corner and one in the centre, seventy-five feet broad at the base and one hundred and fifty feet high. These pyramids so taper in shape that upon the top of all of them together there is supported a brazen globe, and upon that again a petasus [*1] from which bells are suspended by chains. These make a tinkling sound when blown about by the wind, as was done in bygone times at Dodona. Upon this globe there are four more pyramids, each a hundred feet in height, and above them is a platform on which are five more pyramids.' The height of the latter, Varro is ashamed to add, but, according to the Etruscan stories, it was equal to that of the rest of the building. What utter madness is this, to attempt to seek glory at a great cost which can never be of use to anyone; not to mention the drain upon the resources of the country. And all to the end that the artist may receive the greater share of the praise!"

There have been many discussions as to the possibility of a monument of this nature having existed, and various reconstructions have been attempted, notably one (Fig. 13), based on Varro's account, by a celebrated French scholar of a century ago, M. Quatremere de Quincy.

One enthusiast, a certain Father Angelo Cortenovis, even wrote a treatise to prove that the whole contrivance was nothing more nor less than a huge electrical machine!

 

Click to enlarge
Fig. 13. Tomb of Lars Porsena at Clusium.
 Conjectural restoration by Quatremere de Quincy after Varro's description.

 

[p. 39]

Most writers on the subject have been inclined to look upon Varro's description as at best a gross exaggeration, but Professor Muller gave it as his opinion that the labyrinth described did actually exist, and that the upper part, though no doubt highly embellished in the description, was not the mere offspring of fancy. He thought it quite probable that there was a square basement of regular masonry supporting five pyramids as recounted by Varro, but that the latter described the upper part from hearsay. He drew attention to the fact that a tomb somewhat of this nature is still in existence on the Appian Way at Albano, the pyramids being represented in this case by cones. It is commonly called the Tomb of the Horatii and Curiatii.

In the early part of last century a British traveller, G. Dennis, made a study of the antiquities of Etruria and gave particular attention to the remarkable rock-cut labyrinths of which that province furnishes several examples.

He pointed out that the possession of a labyrinth was the distinguishing feature of Porsena's tomb which alone caused Pliny to mention it. The expression "Sub Clusio" used by Pliny, he says, led subsequent writers to infer that the subterranean passages beneath Chiusi were intended, but such an arrangement would be at variance with the general sepulchral practice of the Etruscans, and the tomb of Porsena must be looked for outside the city walls. Dennis then goes on to describe the great cemetery that had recently been discovered in the hill called Poggio Gajella, about three miles to the north-east of Chiusi. His sketch of the principal "storey" of this labyrinthine excavation is shown in Fig. 14.

Here again we may note that the design of the passages, although perhaps puzzling to a stranger, especially with imperfect illumination, in no respect approaches the traditional "labyrinth" pattern. That the conventional form was not unknown to the Etruscans, however,

[p. 40]

is shown by the occurrence of a design of this type on a vase found at Tragliatella which we shall mention later.

It is, of course, possible that the tomb of Porsena was erected on the hill above this labyrinth, but we have not much evidence on the point. If the tomb possessed a labyrinth, no doubt the latter would have been something of this type. Dennis also mentions various other labyrinths of this nature in Etruria--for example, one near Volterra, "a long passage cut in the rock, six feet wide but only three high, so that you must travel on all-fours. From time to time the passage widens into chambers, yet not high enough to permit you to stand upright, or it meets the passages of similar character opening in various directions and extending into the heart of the hill, how far no one can say. In short, this is a perfect labyrinth in which, without a clue, one might very soon be lost."

He also mentions one at San Pietro, Toscanella, "in the cliffs below the Madonna dell' Olivo, about half a mile from the town. Here a long, sewer-like passage leads into a spacious chamber of irregular form, with two massive columns supporting its ceiling and a rude pilaster on the wall behind. But the peculiarity of the tomb lies in a cuniculus or passage cut in the rock, just large enough for a man to creep through on all-fours, which, entering the wall on one side after a long gyration and sundry branchings, now blocked with earth, opens in the opposite wall of the tomb."

These Etruscan labyrinths were all of a sepulchral character, and one is naturally reminded of the catacombs of Rome, Paris, and Naples, to which, however, the term "labyrinth" is not customarily applied. Strabo uses the word in reference to a catacomb near Nauplia, which he calls the Labyrinth of the Cyclops. In Pliny's time the word would appear to have been used to denote a winding path following a more or less formal design of intricate

 

Click to enlarge
Fig. 14. Poggio Cajella. Labyrinthine Cemetery. (Dennis)

[p. 41]

Click to enlarge
Fig. 12. Bronze Double Axe from Tomb of the Double Axes.
 (From Archaeolagia, by kind permission of the Society of Antiquaries and Sir Arthur Evans)

(see page <page 33>)

Click to enlarge
Figs. 15, 16, 17, 18. Early Egyptian Seals and Plaques. (British Museum)

 

pattern, but not necessarily connected with sepulchral purposes.

When speaking of the Labyrinth of Crete he says, "We must not compare this to what we see traced upon our mosaic pavements or to the mazes formed in the fields for the entertainment of children, and thus suppose it to be a narrow path along which we may walk for many miles together, but we must picture to ourselves an edifice with many doors and galleries which mislead the visitor. . . ." This passage shows that the term "labyrinth" had come to have a fairly broad significance. It had long been used in a metaphorical sense, even as we find Plato, over four centuries earlier, employing it to describe an elaborate argument. We also find it applied by extension to other objects, such as traps for fish, to judge by a certain passage in the works of Theocritus.

The only buildings to which the ancient writers applied the term, however, were those to which we have already referred.

Of the two phrases which we have italicised in the above quotation from Pliny, the second is of interest in connection with a matter we shall deal with later on, whilst the former brings us to the subject of our next chapter.

Footnotes

^38:1 A sort of low-crowned round hat with a broad brim.

     
Mazes and Labyriths, by W. H. Matthews, [1922], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 42]

  

CHAPTER VIII

  

THE LABYRINTH IN ANCIENT ART

THERE has been considerable speculation as to how the typical labyrinth form first came into existence. It became stereotyped long before the Christian era and retained its character for many centuries.

The coins of Knossos furnish us with abundant examples of it, and, from the fact that in certain of the earlier specimens the corresponding figure is a simple repeated meander, it has been supposed that the typical labyrinth design arose by elaboration of the meander. The resemblance between this form and the very wide-spread and primitive sign known as the fylfot or swastika has also attracted some attention. It is a somewhat long step, however, from a loose combination of meanders like that shown in, say, Fig. 20, to the compact conventional labyrinth of Fig. 30. The adoption of the former design may possibly have been inspired by the fresco on one of the walls of the Minoan palace, to which we have made reference in Chapter VI (Fig. 8), portions of which may have been visible among the ruins for several generations. There does not appear to be any evidence that the complex meander pattern of the fresco was an allusion on the part of the Minoans to an actual constructional labyrinth; it may quite well have been a purely ornamental conception, without any symbolical significance. Meander designs were used by the Minoans at a

[p. 43]

much earlier date than this, one example, though of simpler charmer, having been found in the older palace, and others, either snake-like or of a squarish nature, on ivory seals unearthed at other Minoan sites (Zakro and Hagia Triada). Similar designs exist on certain Egyptian "button-seals" of an approximately contemporary period--from the VIth Dynasty onwards--and Sir Arthur Evans has expressed the opinion that these will possibly prove to constitute the source of the Labyrinth in Art. Figs. 15, 16, 17, 18 show 
FIG. 19.--Early Egyptian Plaque or Amulet.
 (Prof. Petrie's Collection, University College, London.) specimens of early Egyptian seals and plaques of this character in the British Museum. Professor Flinders Petrie very kindly drew the writer's attention to a steatite plaque in his collection at University College, London, which is somewhat similar to one of those mentioned above, but of rather more elaborate design (Fig. 19). The labyrinthine pattern on this is surmounted by a representation, in the peculiar "linear" fashion often adopted by early Egyptian artists, of two seated human figures facing one another, the knees being drawn up. Professor Petrie acquired the plaque at Memphis. He considers that it dates from a period round about 3000 B.C., and points out that if the broken lines be completed there would appear to be five false turns to be avoided before reaching the centre.

In discussing the designs on these seals and plaques, Sir A. Evans alludes to a possible connection with two of the hieroglyphs of the period, which are of the nature of simple square meanders of a kind extensively employed in ancient ornament. One of them (mer) is the sign used for indicating irrigated land. The other (aha)

[p. 44]

is a simplified form of a more elaborate sign representing the plan of a palace court, a figure to which one of the Minoan signs bears a close resemblance.

The Knossian coins shown in Figs. 20 are from the British Museum collection and are reproduced by the courtesy of the Keeper of the Coins and Medals Department, who supplied the writer with plaster casts for the purpose. They date, of course, from times greatly posterior to those of the Minoan civilisation, from times when the culture of Greece had long replaced that of the Mycenaeans, or whatever similar race it was that succeeded the Minoans (see Appendix IV, i.).

Figs. 20, 21, and 22 show silver coins dating from about 500 to 430 B.C. They portray on one side the Minotaur and on the other a symmetrical meander pattern which, it needs very little imagination to see, has reference to the labyrinth in which the monster was alleged to dwell.

Fig. 23 shows a silver coin of a rather later date, representing on its obverse a female head which is thought to be that of Demeter or Persephone, and on the reverse a meander-labyrinth containing a star at its centre.

Fig. 24 shows a similar obverse, but on the reverse we see a bull's head surrounded by a simple meander frame.

Fig. 25, the obverse of which is likewise adorned with a female head, gives on the reverse the design of a square labyrinth of the conventional type that thereafter predominates.

Fig. 26 shows a bronze coin having on one side the head of Apollo and on the other a labyrinth with a star.

The four coins last described date from a period between 430 and 350 B.C. The next (Fig. 27) is rather later in date and shows on its obverse the head of Hera and on the reverse a square labyrinth together with an arrow-head and thunderbolts and the Greek characters KNUSIUN.

The bronze coin of about 220 B.C., shown in Fig. 28,

 

Click to enlarge
Figs. 20 to 25. Coins of Knossos. (British Museum).

[p. 45]

Click to enlarge
Figs. 26 to 31. Coins of Knossos. (British Museum).

 

bears on its obverse the figure of Europa seated on a bull, with two dolphins below, and on the reverse a square labyrinth, the Knossian superscription being again evident.

The remaining three figures represent silver coins of the two succeeding centuries, but not later than 67 B.C.

Fig. 29 exhibits on one side the head of Pallas, and on the reverse a little square labyrinth placed beside an owl standing upon a prostrate amphora.

In Fig. 30 the obverse is occupied by the head of Apollo, the reverse by a labyrinth of circular shape, but conforming to the conventional plan.

The head on the coin shown in Fig. 31 may be intended for that of Minos or Zeus. On the reverse is a square labyrinth.

Labyrinthine designs are also found on certain Lydian, Phrygian, and Ionian coins.

It will be noticed that when once the labyrinth pattern has been definitely conventionalised it remains very constant in principle, whether its general conformation be rectangular or circular. Starting from the exterior, the "path" runs inwards a short distance, turns so as to run parallel with the outer wall until nearly a full circuit has been completed, then doubles back on itself and runs round in the opposite direction, doubles upon itself again, and so on until it finally comes to a stop in a blind end, having traversed all of the space within the outer walls without covering any part twice and without forming any branches or loops.

Obviously there is no "puzzle" about this kind of labyrinth; one has simply to follow the one path, either to penetrate to the inner goal or to escape thence to the exterior.

A labyrinth of precisely this type was discovered traced on the surface of a crimson-painted pillar in the peristyle of the building known as the House of Lucretius, in the excavated portion of Pompeii (Fig. 32). It

[p. 46]

was evidently scratched with a nail or stylus by some idler of 2000 years ago (Pompeii was overwhelmed by Vesuvius in A.D. 79) and is accompanied by the words "LABYRINTHUS. HIC HABITAT MINOTAURUS," possibly in waggish reference to the owner or occupier of the premises.

Another house has, in consequence of its mosaic and pictorial references to the Cretan Labyrinth, received the name of the Casa del Labirinto or House of the Labyrinth. One mosaic discovered therein depicts Theseus

Click to enlarge
FIG. 32.--Graffito at Pompeii. (Museo Borbonico.)

and the Minotaur struggling on the ground, watched by a group of affrighted maidens.

The Romans excelled in the art of designing and executing mosaic pavements, abundant remains of which have been preserved. These were of various kinds. There was the pavimentum sectile, composed of pieces of marble of various sizes, shapes, and colours arranged in uniform sets, so as to form when put together an ornamental pattern; the pavimentum tessellatum, in which the pieces of marble, though variously coloured, were all of the same size and shape, generally small squares; the pavimentum vermiculatum, composed of very small pieces of coloured

[p. 47]

marble of irregular shape so arranged as to portray objects in their natural shapes and colours; and finally the pavimentum scalpturatum, in which the design was engraved or inlaid. Opus alexandrinum is a variant of sectile.

Several Roman pavements embodying labyrinthine devices, and in some cases commemorating the victory of Theseus over the Minotaur, or other exploits of

Click to enlarge
FIG. 33.--Mosaic at Salzburg. (Kreuzer.)

the hero, have come to light from time to time, not only on the continent of Europe but also in England; they are usually executed in opus alexandrinum.

Fig. 33 shows in outline a beautiful specimen, 18 ft. long and 15 ft. broad, discovered at Salzburg, in Austria. It bears the device of a labyrinth, with, at the centre, a representation of Theseus about to give the fatal blow to the Minotaur.

On the left side we see Theseus and Ariadne joining hands over the altar. In the upper panel Theseus appears

[p. 48]

to be putting Ariadne ashore, and to the right we see the disconsolate maiden deserted by her lover, presumably on the Isle of Naxos.

A labyrinth of the type shown also occurs on a Roman mosaic which was unearthed in the churchyard at Caerleon-on-Usk. It was in a poor state of preservation, but sufficient remains to show that the labyrinth, of a design similar to that of the Salzburg specimen, is surrounded by scrolls proceeding from two vases (Fig. 34).

A very fine specimen of this type of labyrinth was discovered in 1904 beneath a ploughed field at Harpham, in the East Riding of Yorkshire. Another, of which details are not to hand, is said to have been found in Northamptonshire.

In 1790 a pavement, about eighteen feet by twelve, was unearthed at Aix, near Marseilles. It portrayed the combat between Theseus and the Minotaur, within a framed square, the remainder of the mosaic consisting of a complicated interlaced meander representing the labyrinth.

In Fig. 35 is reproduced from A. de Caumont's "Abecedaire d'Archeologie" a rough sketch of the Roman baths at Verdes (Loir-et-Cher), showing a pavement with a labyrinth mosaic.

A pavement found in 1830 at Cormerod, in the Canton of Friburg, Switzerland, is shown in Fig. 36. A few years afterwards another was brought to light in the neighbouring Canton of Vaud, from beneath the ruins of the ancient town of Orbe.

A splendid mosaic labyrinth of Roman times was found some forty or fifty years ago on a family tomb in the ancient necropolis of Susa, Tunis (Hadrumetum). It was afterwards destroyed by looters, but a careful drawing of it was fortunately made on its first discovery (Fig. 37). The whole mosaic measured about seventeen feet by ten, and contained a very finely executed labyrinth of four paths, like the Harpham and Caerleon examples

 

Click to enlarge
Fig. 34. Mosaic at Caerleon, Mon. (O Morgan, in Proc. Mon. and Caerleon Ant. Ass'n, 1866)

Click to enlarge
Fig. 36. Mosaic at Cormerod, Switzerland. (Mitt. Ant: Ges. Zurich, XVI.)

 

[p. 49]

mentioned above, the central space being occupied by the Minotaur, who is shown in an attitude of defeat.

Click to enlarge
Fig. 35.--Roman Baths at Verdes, Loir-et-Cher, showing Labyrinth Mosaic. (From De Caumont's Abecedaire.)

[paragraph continues] Sailing towards the labyrinth was a boat containing figures which presumably represented Theseus and his

[p. 50]

companions. The design was accompanied by the words "HIC INCLUSUS VITAM PERDIT."

Another well-preserved mosaic of this character was

Click to enlarge
FIG. 37.--Mosaic at Susa, Tunis. (C.R. Acad. Inscriptions, Paris.)

discovered in 1884 at Brindisi, and placed in the municipal museum of that town. It measures 17 ft. by 10 ft. 6 in., and shows within a square labyrinth Theseus in the act of clubbing the Minotaur, who has fallen on his

[p. 51]

knees. Around the labyrinth are various perches with birds thereon, perhaps in allusion to the automatic birds reputed to have been made by Daedalus (cf. Fig. 36).

We shall examine other mosaic and pavement labyrinths when we come to consider the question of the use of this symbol by the Church.

Apart from the designs on Knossian coins, Greek art does not appear to have left us any definite representations of the labyrinths, although with the Romans, who acquired the idea at a later date, it was a favourite motif.

We cannot, however, ignore the suggestion that has been made that certain structures discovered in the ruins of Tiryns and Epidaurus, two cities in that part of ancient Greece known as the Argolid, are architectural labyrinths, used for ritual purposes. The foundations of the tholos, or rotunda, of the sanctuary of Aesculapius at Epidaurus, which was excavated by P. Kabbadias, Director of the Greek Archaeological Society, in the 'eighties, do certainly suggest something of the kind. They consist of concentric circular walls, the three innermost being connected by a radial wall, separated by narrow spaces which intercommunicate by an opening or doorway in each wall, forming in plan a figure somewhat in the style of the "Pigs in Clover" toy mentioned in a later chapter. When the peculiar nature of the upper part of the building is considered, however, it seems very reasonable to suppose that these walls, with their passages, were designed only with a view to the requirements of the superstructure which they had to support.

As for the slightly similar concentric foundations unearthed by German excavators at Tiryns in 1912, the analogy is too imperfect to afford reliable grounds for the statement in question.

Greek ceramic art, on the other hand, furnishes us with very many allusions to the Theseus-Minotaur myth, and also with a profusion of frets and meanders, which are thought in some cases to be symbolical of the labyrinth.

[p. 52]

Consider, for instance, the "kylix" or bowl in the British Museum which is shown in Fig. 38. (A similar bowl is preserved in Harrow School Museum.) On it are represented most of the exploits of the hero up to his Knossian adventure. All who are familiar with the legend will recognise at a glance Periphetes the Club-bearer, Sinis the Pine-bender, the Wild Sow of Krommyon, Kerkyon the Wrestler, Procrustes of the Standard Bed, and other gentlefolk that Theseus successively encountered and appropriately dealt with on his initial journey to Athens. In the centre of the bowl is shown the adventure of the Labyrinth, the hero being seen in the act of despatching the monster at the very door of his lair. The meander on the door-post has been thought to symbolise the Labyrinth, but there is more reason to suppose that it is purely decorative.

The Minotaur exploit is also shown on the smaller bowl shown in Fig. 39.

In the previous chapter we have already referred to an Etruscan vase found at Tragliatella. This was very roughly decorated with incised figures, representing amongst other things a circular labyrinth of the traditional type and some horsemen who are thought to be engaged either in the attack on Troy or in the game known as the Lusus Trojae or Game of Troy. That there can be no doubt about the artist's identification of the labyrinth in some way with the celebrated city in question is clear from the word Truia scratched within it (Fig. 133).

Representations of the labyrinth were sometimes en-graved on ancient gems, a fine specimen of which is figured in P. A. Maffei's "Gemme Antiche" (Fig. 40), published in 1707. The Minotaur in this case is shown as a centaur. A similar representation appears on a sixteenth-century bronze plaquette of Italian workmanship exhibited in the Plaquette Room at the British Museum (Fig. 41. See plate, <page 60>).

Before leaving the subject of the Labyrinth in ancient

 

Click to enlarge
Figs. 38, 39. Greek Kylices shewing Exploits of Theseus. (British Museum)

 

[p. 53]

art we must take notice of a reference in an ancient manuscript which tends to show that the symbol figured on the robes of Roman Emperors. This manuscript was discovered by A. F. Ozanam in the Laurentian Library at Florence. It is entitled "Graphia Aurea Urbis Romae" and contains, under the heading "De diarodino imperatoris," the following passage:

Habeat et in diarodino laberinthum fabrefactum ex auro et margaritis, in quo sit Minotaurus, digitum ad os tenens ex 

Click to enlarge
FIG. 40.--Labyrinth engraved on an ancient gem. (Maffei.)

smaragdo factus, quia sicut non valet quis laberinthum scrutare, ita non debet consilium dominatoris propalare.

"Let there be represented on it (the Emperor's robe) a labyrinth of gold and pearls, in which is the Minotaur, made of emerald, holding his finger to his mouth, thus signifying that, just as none may know the secret of the labyrinth, so none may reveal the monarch's counsels."

It has been pointed out by Mr. A. B. Cook that in the Fitzwilliam Museum at Cambridge is a painting by Bartolommeo Veneto (1502-1530) representing an unknown man who wears on his breast a labyrinth resembling that described above.

     
Mazes and Labyriths, by W. H. Matthews, [1922], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 54]

  

CHAPTER IX

  

CHURCH LABYRINTHS

THE consideration of labyrinths worked in Roman mosaic pavements leads us on to a very interesting development of the subject which deserves a chapter to itself, namely, the Labyrinth in the Church.

Probably the oldest known example of this nature is that in the ancient basilica of Reparatus at Orleansville (Algeria), an edifice which is believed to date from the fourth century A.D. In the pavement near the north-west entrance of the church is the design shown in outline in Fig. 42. It measures about 8 ft. in diameter and shows great resemblance to the Roman pavement found at Harpham and the tomb-mosaic at Susa. At the centre is a jeu-de-lettres on the words SANCTA ECLESIA, which may be read in any direction, except diagonally, commencing at the centre. But for the employment of these words the labyrinth in question might well have been conceived to be a Roman relic utilised by the builders of the church to ornament their pavement. Such pavement-labyrinths, however, with or without central figures or other embellishments, and of various dimensions and composition, are found in many of the old churches of France and Italy.

They seem to have been constructed chiefly during the twelfth century, and although several of them have been destroyed many fine examples still remain. Some

[p. 55]

Click to enlarge
FIG. 42.--Labyrinth in Church of Reparatus, Orleansville, Algeria.
 (Prevost.)

Click to enlarge
FIG. 43.--Labyrinth in Lucca Cathedral. (Durand.)

[p. 56]

are formed on the walls instead of the pavements, and in such cases are of smaller dimensions.

On the whole, too, those in the Italian churches are much smaller than the French specimens. On the wall of Lucca Cathedral (Fig. 43) is one of a diameter of only 1 ft. 7 1/2 in. It formerly enclosed at the centre a representation of Theseus and the Minotaur, but owing to the friction of many generations of tracing fingers this has

Click to enlarge
FIG. 44.--Labyrinth in S. Michele, Pavia. (Ciampini.)

become effaced. Opposite the "entrance" is the inscription:

HIC QUEM CRETICUS EDIT
 DAEDALUS EST LABERINTHUS,
 DE QUO NULLUS VADERE
 QUIVIT QUI FUIT INTUS,
 NI THESEUS GRATIS ADRIANE
 STAMINE JUTUS.

A similar small labyrinth, with a central Theseus-Minotaur design, is to be found on the wall of the church of San Michele Maggiore at Pavia (Fig. 44). It is thought to be of tenth-century construction. This is one of the few cases where the Minotaur is represented with a human head and a beast's body--as a sort of Centaur, in fact. It is accompanied by the words "TESEUS INTRAVIT MONSTRUMQUE BIFORME NECAVIT."

 

Click to enlarge
Fig. 45. Labyrinth in S. Maria-di-Trastavera, Rome. (Durand)

Click to enlarge
Fig. 46. Labyrinth in S. Vitale, Ravenna. (Durand)

 

[p. 57]

Of about the same period was the example in the church of San Savino at Piacenza. It is described by P. M. Campi in his "Ecclesiastical History of Piacenza" (1651), under the year A.D. 903. The signs of the Zodiac were placed in juxtaposition to it. The accompanying legend in this case consisted of four hexameters, to the effect that the labyrinth represented the world we live in, broad at the entrance, but narrow at the exit, so that he who is ensnared by the joys of this world, and weighed down by his vices, can regain the doctrine of life only with difficulty.

HVNC MVNDVM TIPICE LABERINTHVS DENOTAT ISTE:
 INTRANTI LARGUS, REDEUNTI SET NIMIS ARTVS
 SIC MVNDO CAPTVS, VICIORVM MOLLE GRAVATVS
 VIX VALET AD VITE DOCTRINAM QVISQVE REDIRE.

In the Cathedral of Cremona, which, like Pavia and Piacenza, is on the banks of the River Po, is a mutilated mosaic of early date--possibly eighth or ninth century--showing part of an interlaced pattern which was evidently intended to refer to the Cretan Labyrinth, as it was placed close to two figures in fighting attitudes and armed with swords and shields, the right-hand figure having the head of a beast and the label "CENTAVRVS." (There was apparently little distinction between a Minotaur and a Centaur in the minds of some mediaeval artists.)

A rather larger specimen, 5 ft. in diameter, may be seen in the church of Sta. Maria-in-Aquiro, Rome. It is composed of bands of porphyry and yellow and green marble, surrounding a central plate of porphyry, and is similar in design to that at Lucca. Another church in the same city, Sta. Maria-di-Trastavera, has a labyrinth composed of variously coloured marbles worked in the floor.

[p. 58]

[paragraph continues] It is 11 ft. across and was probably constructed about 1190 A.D. (Fig. 45). It is now somewhat mutilated, but was originally a most beautiful example. The fact that the inner paths consist of a series of concentric rings rather suggests that it has at some time been repaired without regard to the original design; unless we accept the hypothesis of M. Durand that they bore a symbolic

Click to enlarge
FIG. 47.--Labyrinth in Chartres Cathedral. (Gailhabaud.)

reference to the various degrees of beatitude by which the soul approaches heaven, as figured by Dante. Fig. 46 shows another old Italian specimen. It is nearly 11 1/2 ft. in diameter and is to be found in the church of San Vitale, Ravenna.

Designs of this nature were widely employed by the mediaeval church builders in France, and, although many of them were destroyed at the Revolution and at other times, several fine examples still exist. They seem to have

[p. 59]

been mostly built at a rather later date than those already described. The largest now remaining is that in Chartres Cathedral (Fig. 47). It is formed of blue and white stones and is about 40 ft. in diameter. The French poet Bouthrays, in his "Histoire de Chartres" (1624), describes it in a set of Latin verses. A fine sketch of it appears in the "Album" of the thirteenth-century architect, Villard de

Click to enlarge
FIG. 48.--Labyrinth in Amiens Cathedral. (Gailhabaud.)

[paragraph continues] Honnecourt. In a ninth-century French manuscript, formerly belonging to the Abbey of St.-Germain-des-Pres, there is a sort of frontispiece consisting of a labyrinth of similar type, with a funny little horned Minotaur at the centre, seated, hands on knees, on a kind of throne.

The Chartres labyrinth formerly went by the name of "La Lieue," an expression which would ordinarily be rendered as "the league." The French league, however, was about 2282 yards, a much greater length than the

[p. 60]

total extent of the path in any of the existing pavement-labyrinths, that at Chartres, for example, having a length of only about 150 yards. Possibly the term had some etymological connection with the old Gaulish measure leuca, leuga or leuva, which was 1500 paces.

In other cases the labyrinth was known as a "Chemin de Jerusalem" "daedale," or "meandre," terms which need

Click to enlarge
FIG. 49.--Labyrinth in Parish Church, St. Quentin. (Gailhabaud).

no explanation. The centre was called "ciel" or "Jerusalem." The labyrinth formerly in the nave of Amiens Cathedral was larger than that at Chartres, being 42 ft. in diameter (Fig. 48). It was constructed in 1288 and was destroyed in 1825. In plan it was similar to that at the entrance to the parish church of St. Quentin (Fig. 49). The latter, however, is only 34 1/2 ft. in diameter.

Rheims Cathedral formerly possessed a fine design of this class (Fig. 50). It was laid down in 1240 and was

 

Click to enlarge
Fig. 41.
 Bronze Plaquette, Italian, XVIth Century. (British Museum)

Click to enlarge
Fig. 50. Labyrinth in Rheims Cathedral. (Gailhabaud)

[p. 61]

Click to enlarge
Fig. 51. Amiens.
 Central Plate of Labyrinth. (Gailhabaud)

Click to enlarge
Fig. 52. Labyrinth in Bayeux Cathedral. (Ame)

 

composed of blue stones or marbles. It was destroyed in 1779 by order of a certain Canon Jacquemart, who objected to the noise made by children and others in tracing its course during the progress of divine service.

The labyrinths of Rheims, Chartres, and Amiens possessed in common a feature which has given rise to much discussion, namely, a figure or figures at the centre representing, it is believed, the architects of the edifices.

That of Amiens is preserved in Amiens Museum and consists of an octagonal grey marble slab (Fig. 51) with a central cross, between the limbs of which are arranged figures representing Bishop Evrard and the three architects, Robert de Luzarches, Thomas de Cormont and his son Regnault, together with four angels. A long inscription accompanied it, relating to the foundation of the Cathedral.

There is a very fine labyrinth in the chapter-house of Bayeux Cathedral (Fig. 52). It measures 12 ft. across and is composed of circles of tiles ornamented with shields, griffins and fleur-de-lis, separated by bands of small, plain, black tiles.

Sens Cathedral formerly possessed a circular labyrinth (Fig. 53), 30 ft. in diameter and formed of incised lines filled in with lead, but it was destroyed in 1769. A similar specimen in Auxerre Cathedral was demolished about 1690.

In The Builder for May 12, 1916, appeared a diagram accompanied by a note from a firm of publishers who stated that they had received the sketch from one of their travellers who was then serving on the Arras front. "He informs us," they state, "that it is not a puzzle, but a plan of the labyrinth under the cathedral. He found the prints in a ruin in the vicinity, a house which appears to have been occupied by a librarian from what he saw among the debris." The sketch in question is of an octagonal pattern resembling that of the St. Quentin

[p. 62]

labyrinth, and represents the pavement-labyrinth that formerly existed in the now ruined cathedral, not, of course, a system of subterranean passages, as the correspondent evidently inferred. It was about 34 1/2 ft. in diameter and was composed of small blue and yellow squares. The destruction of this labyrinth cannot be debited to the account of the aggressors in the Great War, as it was carried out during the French Revolution.

Click to enlarge
FIG. 53.--Labyrinth in Sens Cathedral. (Gailhabaud.)

A labyrinth of rather striking design (Fig. 54) was formerly in the pavement of the old Abbey of St. Bertin, an edifice which has long been a picturesque ruin, in the lower part of the town of St. Omer. A description of it was first published nearly a century ago by Emmanuel Wallet (or Vallet). Our figure, which accords with his notes, differs slightly from that which has usually accompanied the references of subsequent writers--many of whom, by the way, erroneously speak of it as being in the cathedral, which is in the upper part of the town, and at some distance from St. Bertin. Most illustrations of

[p. 63]

the labyrinth in question show the path as crossing itself at one point, an arrangement which is most unlikely to have been adopted. Wallet based his description on a manuscript which, judging by the watermark in the paper, he attributed to a former English student at the college in the vicinity.

Click to enlarge
FIG. 54.--Labyrinth in Abbey of St. Bertin, St. Omer. (Wallet.)

This labyrinth was apparently destroyed at about the same time as that at Rheims, and for a similar reason.

In the cathedral there is no pavement-labyrinth, although it may possibly have possessed one in former times, but beneath the organ, at the west end of the nave, is a curiously engraved slab which is worth mentioning

[p. 64]

in this connection, for it represents a sort of "chemin de Jerusalem," though not indeed of the usual type. It shows, around a large circle, mountains, rivers, towns, roads, and animals, together with the word IhERVSALEM, whilst the interior of the circle is divided into three horizontal compartments, in each of which are placed various objects indistinguishable through wear. The slab was very

Click to enlarge
FIG. 55.--Labyrinth in Poitiers Cathedral. (Auber.)

much worn when described by Wallet and has possibly been replaced by now.

A queer type of labyrinth was formerly represented in the Cathedral of Poitiers. It perished long ago, but for some time subsequently there remained on the wall of the north aisle a sketch of it (Fig. 55), which, however, gave no clue to the dimensions of the original. It will be seen that the construction is such that he who traces the path eventually emerges--like the poet of the "Rubaiyat"--by that same door at which he entered; he will have

[p. 65]

encountered no "stops," but he may have "looped the loop" an indefinite number of times.

In the old abbey of Toussaints, Chalons-sur-Marne, which was destroyed in 1544, there was a series of tiles each bearing a small labyrinth of the conventional Cretan type (Fig. 56. See plate, <page 74>). Pavement-tiles with labyrinths were also found in the Abbaye de Pont l'Abbe (Finistere).

A pavement labyrinth has been described as existing in the floor of the guard chamber of the Abbey of St. Stephen at Caen. Dawson Turner, in his "Tour in Normandy," thus refers to it: "The floor is laid with tiles, each near five inches square, baked almost to vitrification. Eight rows of these tiles, running east to west, are charged with different coats of arms, said to be those of the families who attended Duke William in his invasion of England. The intervals between these rows are filled up with a kind of tessellated pavement, the middle whereof represents a maze or labyrinth, about ten feet in diameter, and so artfully contrived that, were we to suppose a man following all the intricate meanders of the volutes, he could not travel less than a mile before he got from one end to the other. The remainder of the floor is inlaid with small squares of different colours, placed alternately and formed into draught or chess boards, for the amusement of the soldiers while on guard." The pavement was destroyed in 1802.

It has frequently been stated that a pavement labyrinth existed in a church at Aix near Marseilles, but probably this is due to confusion with the Roman pavement already referred to.

The only examples recorded as having existed in Germany were situated in two churches at Cologne, but these have long since disappeared.

In view of the widespread occurrence of these devices in mediaeval churches it would be surprising if the idea were not sometimes utilised by modern architects

[p. 66]

attempting to reproduce the spirit of the old buildings, and in fact this was done in the case of the prize plans submitted [*1] by the English architects Clutton and Burges for the Church of Notre-Dame de la Treille at Lille. Burges designed for the nave a "Chemin de Jerusalem" of a wonderful pattern, the topography of "Jerusalem" being based upon the account in the "Ecclesiastical History" of the Venerable Bede (V. ch. 16). A good modern

Click to enlarge
FIG. 57.--Labyrinth in Ely Cathedral. (W. H. M.)

example, 20 ft. square, may be seen in the pavement of Ely Cathedral, near the west door (Fig. 57). It was constructed by Sir Gilbert Scott during his restorations in 18 70. Some other modern specimens will be mentioned presently.

As to the function and meaning of the old church labyrinths, various opinions have been held. Some authorities have thought that they were merely introduced as a

[p. 67]

symbol of the perplexities and intricacies which beset the Christian's path. Others considered them to typify the entangling nature of sin or of any deviation from the rectilinear path of Christian duty. It has often been asserted, though on what evidence is not clear, that the larger examples were used for the performance of miniature pilgrimages in substitution for the long and tedious journeys formerly laid upon penitents. Some colour is lent to this supposition by the name "Chemin de Jerusalem." In the days of the first crusades it was a common practice for the confessor to send the peccant members of his flock either to fight against the infidel, or, after the victory of Geoffrey of Bouillon, to visit the Holy Sepulchre. As enthusiasm for the crusades declined, shorter pilgrimages were substituted, usually to the shrine of some saint, such as Our Lady of Loretto, or St. Thomas of Canterbury, and it is quite possible that, at a time when the soul had passed out of the crusades and the Church's authority was on the ebb, a journey on the knees around the labyrinth's sinuosities was prescribed as an alternative to these pilgrimages. Perhaps this type of penance was from the first imposed on those who, through weakness or any other reason, were unable to undertake long travels.

In the case of the wall labyrinths, of course, the journey would be less arduous still, being performed by the index finger.

Whether such practices ever obtained or not, most writers who have had occasion to mention church labyrinths during the past century have adopted, more or less without question, the view that not only were the labyrinths used in this way, but that they were in fact designed for the purpose.

This view seems to rest chiefly on a statement by J. B. F. Geruzez in his "Description of the City of Rheims" (1817), to the effect that the labyrinth which formerly lay in the cathedral was in origin an object of

[p. 68]

devotion, being the emblem of the interior of the Temple of Jerusalem, but Geruzez quotes no authority for his assertion. Another explanation, based upon the occurrence of the figures of the architects or founders in certain of the designs, is that the labyrinth was a sort of masonic seal, signifying that the pious aim of the builder had been to raise to the glory of God a structure to vie with the splendours of the traditional Labyrinth. It is also said that in some cases the "Chemins" were used for processional purposes.

Some writers have held that the labyrinth was inserted in the church as typifying the Christian's life or the devious course of those who yield to temptation. Some have thought that it represented the path from the house of Pilate to Calvary, pointing out that Chateaubriand, in his "Itineraire de Paris a Jerusalem," mentioned two hours as the period which he took to repeat Christ's journey, and that the same time would be taken in traversing the average pavement labyrinth on the knees.

The use of the labyrinth as a simile for the Christian's life is shown in a stone inscription in the Museum at Lyons:

HOC SPECVLO * SPECVLARE LEGENS * QVOD SIS MORITVRVS
 QVOD CINIS IMMOLVTVM QVOD VERMIBVS ESCA FVTVRVS
 SED TAMEN VT SEMPER VIVAS * MALE VIVERE VITA
 XPM QVESO ROGA * SIT VT IN XPO MEA VITA
 ME CAPVT APRIL' * EX HOC RAPVIT LABERINTO
 PREBITVM * DOCEO VERSV MA_ FVNERA QNTO:
                   STEPHANVS * FECIT OC.

Whether this inscription was ever attached to a labyrinthine design is not known.

[p. 69]

It is strange if, amongst all the great mass of mediaeval ecclesiastical literature, there is actually no indication of the use or significance of these monuments in the service of the Church; but no light appears to be forthcoming from this source, and certainly the writings of the chief authorities of these times give no support to any of the theories mentioned above.

Click to enlarge
FIG. 58.--Labyrinth in Church at Bourn, Cambs. (W. H. M.)

It is noteworthy that in none of the known examples do any distinctively Christian emblems occur, and that, amongst all the myriad inscriptions, paintings, and carvings of the early Christians, in the catacombs of Rome and elsewhere, the labyrinth never once figures.

So far as these islands are concerned the practice of placing labyrinths in churches does not seem to have become common.

In the "Architectural Dictionary" (1867) mention is

[p. 70]

made of one formerly existing in Canterbury Cathedral, but no particulars are given.

On the floor below the tower of the church at Bourn, Cambridgeshire, is a maze (Fig. 58) worked in black and red tiles, the centre being occupied by the font, the step of which forms the terminus of the path. From the fact that an intermediate portion of the path is concealed beneath the base of the font it is plain that the position of the latter is an after-thought, and from the design of the maze, no less than from the character of the tiles of which it is composed, the work would appear to be of comparatively modern date. The modern specimen at Ely has already been mentioned.

There is also a labyrinth, in this case engraved on the floor of the church porch, at Alkborough, Lincolnshire, but this is a modern replica of the turf maze in the locality--a point which brings us to the subject of our next chapter.

Footnotes

^66:1 These plans, although awarded the prize, were not adopted, the designs actually carried out being some by a native architect who obtained tenth place in the competition.

     
Mazes and Labyriths, by W. H. Matthews, [1922], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 71]

  

CHAPTER X

  

TURF LABYRINTHS

WE have just remarked that the custom of placing labyrinth designs in churches does not appear to have become general on this side of the English Channel. We have in England, however, a class of survivals peculiar to this country which may be regarded as the equivalent of the former. These are the turf mazes which are to be found in various counties, usually under some local name, such as "Mizmaze," "Julian's Bower," "Troy Town," or "Shepherd's Race."

One of the best-preserved examples is that at Alkborough, or Aukborough, a pretty village on the east side of the Trent falls, where the Ouse and Trent join to form the Humber. Crowning the hill is a square earth-work called the Countess Close, supposed to be the remains of a Roman Camp, and possibly the site of the ancient Aquis. On the side of the hill is a basin-shaped depression, in the turf of which is cut, to a depth of about 6 in., a labyrinth known as "Julian's Bower," or "Gilling Bore," about 40 ft. in diameter. Our illustration (Fig. 59) is reproduced from a drawing kindly supplied by the Rev. G. Yorke, Vicar of Alkborough. The configuration of the maze is exactly the same as in a figure published about a century ago in a little book called "Terra Incognita of Lincolnshire," by Miss S. Hatfield.

In recent years it has been several times cleared out

[p. 72]

and trimmed up at the expense of Mr. J. Goulton Constable, J.P., F.S.A., of Walcot Hall, who is lord of the manor. Mr. Constable also caused the design of the maze to be cut in the stone floor of the church porch, the

Click to enlarge
FIG. 59.--''Julian's Bower,'' Alkborough, Lincs. (From a litho. supplied by Rev. G. Yorke.)

grooves being filled with cement, when the church was restored in 1887.

In Saxon and Norman times, from about A.D. 1080 to 1220, there was a small monastic grange in the neighbourhood, an offshoot of a Benedictine Monastery at Spalding. Its site is now occupied by a farm-house belonging to Magdalene College, Cambridge. The

[p. 73]

proximity of the maze to an ancient ecclesiastical site is not peculiar to this particular specimen, as we find a similar juxtaposition in the case of many of the other earth-mazes.

A correspondent, "J. F.," writing to Notes and Queries about the Alkborough Julian's Bower in 1866, says that he has lively impressions of the oft-repeated pleasure derived from the feat of "running it in and out," in company with others, sixty years previously, and of seeing the villagers playing May-eve games about it, "under an indefinite persuasion of something unseen and unknown co-operating with them." If this last-quoted phrase is anything more than a whim of retrospective old age it affords an interesting fragment of material for the student of "folk-memory." There is a description of this maze, under the name of Gillian's Bore, in the Diary, written between 1671 and 1704, of Abraham de la Pryme, "the Yorkshire Antiquary." He mentions at the same time one situated at Appleby, about six miles away, towards Brigg. This, he says, is called "Troy's Walls." He describes them both as Roman games and says "they are nothing but great labarinths cut upon the ground with a hill cast up round them for the spectators to sit round about on to behold the sport." The Appleby maze was placed close to the Roman road that runs through there, and has long since perished. No trace of it remained when Allen's "History of Lincolnshire" was published in 1834.

There is a turf labyrinth of a design similar to that at Alkborough in a secluded romantic spot on land forming part of the estate of the Hulse family, to the rear of their beautiful country seat, Breamore House, Hants. It is known as the Mizmaze, and consists of a grassy path 3 ft. in width, the overall diameter being 87 ft. The "goal" in the centre is 18 ft. in diameter, and forms a low mound. Every curved portion of the path is slightly inclined towards the centre of the maze, as if to afford a firmer footing

[p. 74]

to runners. When the writer visited it in July 1920 the grooves were rather overgrown, but the maze receives periodical attention from its owners, and is in no present danger of becoming obliterated. It lies in that sparsely populated corner of Hampshire which protrudes into Wiltshire, between Salisbury and Cranborne Chase, and is somewhat difficult to discover without directions, as it is on a hilltop, and is surrounded by a thick copse, with many other wooded hilltops in the neighbourhood. In the few references that have been made to it by writers, it has been variously described as being situated at Breamore, at Rockbourne, Hants, and at Wickdown Hill, Wilts. It is remote from the villages, but is best approached from Breamore (pronounced Bremmer or Brimmer), which is on the main road from Fordingbridge to Salisbury. From this village to Breamore House is a pleasant twenty-minutes' walk, and thence through the beautifully wooded and gently rolling grounds of the estate to the Mizmaze, a delightful half-hour's stroll. It is advisable to seek precise directions before setting out, because the path through the woods disappears after a while in a meadow, and the copse in which the maze is embedded appears at first impenetrable, having a narrow opening on one side only, on the side remote from the direction of approach. A local tradition says that a man could run from the maze to Gallows Hill, more than half a mile distant, and back again, while another ran round the maze.

A charming little sketch of this maze, by Heywood Sumner, accompanies a reference in Williams-Freeman's "Field Archaeology in Hants."

Near Wing, in Rutland, a few miles to the north-east of Uppingham, there is preserved a maze of very similar design (Fig. 60). It is maintained in good condition and is still the object of periodical visits by the village folk on certain holidays. Just to the south of it is a flat-topped bowl-shaped tumulus, over 70 ft. in diameter and

 

Click to enlarge
Fig. 56.
 Labyrinths on Tiles, Toussaints Abbey, Chalons-sur-Marne. (Ame)

(see page <page 65>)

Click to enlarge
Fig. 60. Turf-Labyrinth at Wing, Rutland.
 (Photo, W. J. Stocks. By permission of Rev. E. A. Irons)

[p. 75]

[paragraph continues] 4 ft. high. It may be that the frequent association of turf mazes with ancient earthworks of various kinds is something more than accidental, but we do not seem to have sufficient evidence to establish a necessary connection between the two things.

Lyddington, another Rutland village, has also been mentioned as possessing a turf maze. A writer in the Rutland Magazine in 1907, for instance, says, in speaking of Priestly Hill, which overlooks the village on the east, "at one time there was a turf maze on its slope, where, as our old people tell us, their grandparents, when children, used to play." The writer in question, however, does not make it clear whether he is really quoting an oral tradition of the locality or is basing his statement on the brief mention of Lyddington as a reputed maze-site which appears in Trollope's 1858 memoir. It is at any rate very difficult to trace any reliable evidence of such a maze, and it seems not unlikely that Trollope's reference, which is quite devoid of detail, may have had its origin in a misinterpretation of the elaborate series of ancient trenches situated in a field to the north-east of the church. These trenches have been identified as the "fish-stews" belonging to the old manor-house of the Bishops of Lincoln.

The similarity between the designs of the turf mazes mentioned above and those of some of the French pavement labyrinths, that in Chartres Cathedral for example, cannot fail to be noticed.

At Boughton Green, in Northamptonshire, about half a mile from the village of Boughton and near the ruined church of St. John the Baptist, was, until recently, a turf maze of like design but having the innermost convolutions of purely spiral form (Fig. 61). It was 37 ft. in diameter and was called the "Shepherd Ring" or "Shepherd's Race." The "treading" of it was formerly a great feature of the three days' fair in June, an event dating from a charter by Edward III. in 1353.

[p. 76]

In a "Guide-book to Northampton" by G. N. Wetton, published in 1849, the maze is spoken of as being in a neglected condition. In a later book, however, a novel named "The Washingtons," written by the Rev. J. N. Simpkinson in 1860, occurs the following passage: "He had just been treading the 'Shepherd's Labyrinth,' a complicated spiral maze traced there upon the turf; and

Click to enlarge
FIG. 61.--''Shepherd's Race,'' Boughton Green, Northants. (After Trollope.)

was boasting of his skill, how dexterously and truly he could pursue its windings without a single false step, and how with a little more practice he would wager to go through it blindfold."

Another novel, "The Last of the Climbing Boys," by George Elson, contains a reference to it, in which it is spoken of as being "An attraction which was the origin of the fair"--a statement which it would be interesting to verify if possible.

Unfortunately, this famous relic was destroyed by

[p. 77]

some of our soldiers in training during the Great War; trenches were driven right across it, and practically all traces of it are now obliterated.

There was formerly a specimen of somewhat similar design on Ripon Common, Yorkshire, but this was ploughed up in 1827. One of identical pattern at Asenby, in the same county, was preserved until recent times. According to Mr. A. H. Allcroft ("Earthwork of England," 1908), it was sunk in a hollow at the top of a hillock called "The Fairies' Hill," and is in a ruinous condition, being quite unknown to most of the villagers, although persons still living (in 1908) relate that they have often trodden it on a summer's evening and knelt at the centre "to hear the fairies singing."

The counties of Yorkshire and Lincolnshire seem to have been particularly rich in records of these devices, for in addition to those already mentioned we read of one on the wold overlooking Louth, one at Horncastle, a dozen miles to the south-west of Louth, one in Holderness, between Marfleet and Paul, about four miles from Hull, and another at Egton, near Whitby, where the late Canon Greenwell in 1872 saw traces of it near the main road to the north of the village. "July Park," or "St. Julian's," near Goathland, is also said to have possessed a specimen, a fact which probably accounts for the name of the place. The Horncastle maze is referred to by Dr. Stukeley, a noted eighteenth-century antiquary, as a "Julian's Bower" which is "much talked of." He also mentions the Alkborough specimen and others, coming to the conclusion that they were ancient British relics, having been constructed as places of exercise, or cursus, for the soldiery of those times. He observes, somewhat contemptuously, that "lovers of antiquity, especially of the inferior classes, always speak of 'em with great pleasure, as if there was something extraordinary in the thing, though they cannot tell what."

The Louth "Gelyan Bower" is mentioned in a record

[p. 78]

of 1544, "To nych mason for making at gelyan bower a new crose, iijs." In an old hostelry in Mercer Row, Louth, stood for some centuries a boulder of dolerite called the "Blue Stone," which is stated to have formerly occupied the centre of the maze. Trees planted at the maze served as a landmark to ships out at sea.

The Horncastle example occupied a site to the south-west of the town still known as the Julian Bower Close. It has long been effaced by the agriculturist, and numerous coins, fibulae, and other Roman remains which have been turned up on the spot have lent colour to the theory, still maintained in the current county directory, that the maze was a Roman work. The question whether this, or any other turf maze in this country, is a relic of Roman times we will discuss presently.

The maze near Hull was dodecagonal in outline, 40 ft. across, and formed of grass paths 14 in. wide. Its plan was much like that of the Alkborough maze, but the paths were straight instead of curved. It was called "The Walls of Troy." A coloured illustration of it was given in Ackermann's "Repository of Arts" in 18 15.

Although, as we have seen, Lincolnshire furnishes us with records of more of these labyrinths than any other county, there is no conclusive evidence that they were in fact more numerous there than elsewhere. The reason for our comparative wealth of information concerning their existence in that part of the country may be due to the fact that Dr. Edward Trollope, who first made a serious study of these antiquities, and whose paper in the Archaeological Journal for 1858 has been a fount of inspiration to subsequent writers on the subject, was Archdeacon of Stow, afterwards Bishop of Nottingham.

Turf labyrinths were formerly of general occurrence throughout the country, for, in addition to those we have already described, we find remains of them in counties so widely separated as Kent and Cumberland. They are also recorded as having existed in Wales and Scotland.

     
Mazes and Labyriths, by W. H. Matthews, [1922], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 79]

  

CHAPTER XI

  

TURF LABYRINTHS (continued)

A MILE or two outside Winchester and rising up above the village of Chilcombe is the rounded shoulder of St. Catherine's Hill, on the summit of which lies a curious squarish "Mizmaze," the execution of which is often ascribed by guide-books to a Winchester boy who, detained at school during the vacation, beguiled his time by the fashioning of this earthwork and by the composition of the Wintonian "Dulce Domum." The interest of this maze lies not so much in the fanciful ascription of its origin as in the fact that it has apparently been cut, or re-cut, by somebody who did not understand the meaning of the plan given him to work upon. For, as will be seen from our illustration (Fig. 62), the actual labyrinth is made, not by the turfed path, but by the narrow channel by which it is delimited. In the few drawings of this maze which the writer has been able to find the lines are all straight, instead of being slightly curved as in our figure, which was sketched on the spot, and it seemed possible that they might represent an earlier condition of it, but in each instance the labyrinth is formed by the groove, which is hardly likely to have been the case in the original design. The maze was re-cut by the Warden of Winchester, who was guided by a plan in the possession of a lady residing in the neighbourhood, about the middle of last century, when it had become almost effaced. Possibly

[p. 80]

the misinterpretation of the plan occurred on this occasion. The maze is backed by a clump of pines, planted by Lord Botetourt in 1770.

There used to be, until a generation ago, a turf maze at Leigh, in the north-west of Dorset. A writer in Notes and Queries in 1868 describes it as being slightly hollow, circular, thirty-three paces in diameter, and

Click to enlarge
FIG. 62.--''Mizmaze,'' St. Catherine's Hill, Winchester. (W. H. M.)

enclosed by a bank three feet high. He adds: "I am sorry to say the turf has grown over the little trenches and that it is now impossible to trace the pattern of the maze." Sir Frederick Treves, in his "Highways and Byways in Dorset," 1906, speaks of this maze as having consisted of "low banks and trenches arranged in an intricate figure, which the youths of the village, accompanied no doubt by the maidens, were wont to thread at certain seasons of the year." He states that it is on high ground

[p. 81]

in an open field and that of the winding passages no trace now survives. Only the low bank and ditch surrounding the maze remain visible.

At Pimperne, not far from Blandford, there was formerly a maze of a unique design (Fig. 63). John Aubrey,

Click to enlarge
63.--''Troy-town,'' Pimperne, Dorset. (Hutchins.)

writing in 1686, says it was "much used by the young people on Holydaies and by ye School-boies." The path was bounded by ridges about a foot in height. The maze was destroyed by the plough in 1730. The memory of another turf maze in the same country is preserved in the name of Troy-town, applied to a locality about three

[p. 82]

miles north-east of Dorchester. One is also said to have existed near Bere Regis. Aubrey goes on to refer to another at West Ashton, near Trowbridge, Wiltshire, and one "on the Cotteswold Downes, where Mr. Dover's Games were celebrated." He mentions them also in his "Natural History and Antiquities of Surrey," and concludes his reference by quoting what he calls a "Poetical Description" of them, by Thomas Randolph, a poet and dramatist of the seventeenth century, the so-called description being nothing more than an indictment of the lazy shepherd swain, who prefers to spend his leisure in sleeping under a bush when, according to the poet, he ought

". . . to tune his Reed and chant his layes
 Or nimbly run the windings of the Maze."

[paragraph continues] This is from Thomas Randolph's (or Randall's) "Eglogue on the Palilia and Noble Assemblies revived on Cotswold Hills by Mr. Robert Dover," one of a collection of eulogies--the Annalia Dubrensia--by various poets of the day of the then famous annual sports organised by Captain Dover on the hills near Chipping Campden. Mazes, or "laborinths," are referred to in the contributions of several of the other poets concerned, of whom we may mention Francis Izod, Nicholas Wallington, William Bellas and William Denny. A figure in the crude frontispiece conveys a similar allusion.

In Essex we have an example of rather larger dimensions than the majority, namely, that on the east side of the common at Saffron Walden (Fig. 64). A tall bank hides it from the Thaxted road, which runs within a few yards of it. The four bastions (or "bellows") and the centre are slightly raised. The overall dimensions are approximately 91 ft., excluding the bastions, and 138 ft. from corner to corner.

This maze is referred to in the Corporation account books for the year 1699, when it was apparently re-cut.

[p. 83]

[paragraph continues] On several subsequent occasions it became neglected and almost obliterated, but fortunately there has always been some person sufficiently interested to cause its renovation. According to a local record, re-cuttings have taken place in 1828, 1841, 1859, 1887, and 1911. On

Click to enlarge
FIG 64.--Turf Labyrinth, Saffron Walden, Essex. (W. H. M.)

the last occasion it was underlaid with bricks, to facilitate future renovations.

As in the case of the Winchester example, the "path" consists of the narrow and shallow groove instead of the raised turf, and this gives some weight to the tradition that it is only a copy of a much larger maze which formerly existed further to the east.

[p. 84]

In a manuscript book of the latter part of the eighteenth century the maze is spoken of as a favourite resort for the young bloods of the town, a complicated system of rules and wagers (in gallons of beer) being laid down in connection with walking the maze.

It is stated that a large ash tree at one time occupied the centre, but that it perished by fire in the Guy Fawkes celebrations of November s, 1823.

A few years ago some boys, playing on the central mound, discovered a Roman coin. This does not, of course, prove that the work is of Roman origin.

In the 1789 edition of Camden's "Britannia" a drawing of the maze exhibits merely a series of concentric circles with extensions on the outermost pair forming the "bastions." This illustration could hardly have been prepared on the spot.

About twenty miles to the north-west of Saffron Walden and a few miles to the west of Cambridge lies the little village of Comberton (Cambs). The play-ground of the village school occupies one corner at the cross-roads, and in the south-west angle of this, enclosed by iron railings, lies a turf maze of a pattern similar to that at Alkborough. Owing to the use which the school children make of it the paths are nearly denuded of grass, but the ridges are well defined, as shown by the photograph (Fig. 65), which was taken in March 1921. The present maze is a faithful copy of that which was formerly situated a few yards away, and which, when the school was built, occupied an inconvenient position just outside the scholars' entrance. The old maze was known as the "Mazles." It used to be the custom in the village to have a feast once every three years, and at such times the maze was re-cut.

Comberton, by the way, is almost the next village to Bourn, where, as we have seen, a peculiar pavement maze occupies the floor of the church tower.

In the neighbouring county of Huntingdon we find

 

Click to enlarge
Fig. 65. ''The Mazles,'' Comberton, Cambs. [Photo: W.M.H.]

Click to enlarge
Fig. 67. Turf-Labyrinth, Hilton, Hunts. [Photo: W.M.H.]

 

[p. 85]

a splendidly preserved maze, of curious plan, in a corner of the green in the rambling and out-of-the-way but charming village of Hilton (Fig. 66).

These turf labyrinths are in most cases liable to escape the notice of all but the intentional seeker, owing

Click to enlarge
FIG. 66.--Turf Labyrinth, Hilton, Hunts. (W. H. M.)

to their flat and grassy nature, and the difficulty is accentuated in the case of Hilton by reason of the fact that the maze is at some little distance from the road, and is, moreover, sunk to a depth of several inches below the general level of the surrounding turf. It may easily be located, however, if one remembers that the centre is marked by a square stone obelisk surmounted by a ball.

[p. 86]

[paragraph continues] This obelisk has indications of a sun-dial on the north face, with the words "A.B. hoc." On its south face it bears a coat of arms, engraved within a circle, and the inscription: "Sic transit gloria mundi. Gulielmus Sparrow, Gen., natus ano. 1641. Aetatis sui 88 quando obiit, hos gyros formavit anno 1660." On the east face is engraved, "William Sparrow departed this life the 25th August, Anno Domini 1729, aged 88 years." The west face bears only the words "Dep. hoc." Our photograph (Fig. 67) shows the obelisk and as much of the maze as could conveniently be included with the camera used. It will be noticed that the trenches between the paths are fairly wide and deeply cut.

The good state of preservation is no doubt greatly due to the fact, remarked by a writer of half a century ago, that the paths are made up with pebbles. No sign of the latter is now evident amongst the thick turf. The plan of the maze shows some interesting variations on the older and more conventional designs of Alkborough, Comberton, etc., the most remarkable point being that the path from the exterior to the centre is almost direct, the labyrinth proper being composed of paths which commence and terminate at the central plot. The Hilton maze appears to be unique in this respect.

Whatever may have been the original purpose of turf labyrinths in this country as a whole, it is fairly clear that the Hilton example at any rate was not made for ecclesiastical purposes if, as stated on the obelisk, it was constructed in 1660. On the other hand, the reflection that at that date Puritan influences were on the decline and the restoration of the Monarchy was imminent leads one to conclude that this somewhat exuberant design of a youth of nineteen was intended for purposes of rustic enjoyment.

Fig. 68 shows a labyrinth formerly incised in the turf of the marshes of Rockcliffe in Cumberland, near the shores of the Solway Firth. It covered a space of

[p. 87]

[paragraph continues] 26 ft. by 24 ft. and had a 9-in. path bounded by an 8-in. groove. It went by the name of "The Walls of Troy." The two villages of Burgh and Rockcliffe are distant from one another about two miles and a half, and the river Eden bisects the intervening marshes and occasionally floods them. A certain point on the marsh is known as "Willie of the Boats," from the fact that prior to 1816, when the main road from Carlisle to Glasgow passed this way, a man of that name lived here and

Click to enlarge
FIG. 68.--''Walls of Troy,'' Rockcliffe Marsh, Cumberland. (After Ferguson.)

acted as guide through the marshes and over the river fords. A maze existed close to this spot and is said to have been cut in 1815 by a man named Christopher Graham. Whether Graham designed the maze himself or whether he copied an already existing specimen cannot now be determined, but it is stated that a smaller and probably older maze existed side by side with his. Both have now entirely disappeared. The maze figured, however, was about a mile from this spot and was still in existence in 1883, though much overgrown. The local tradition declared it to have been cut by Robert Edgar, a sailor, who was subsequently drowned at sea. All three

[p. 88]

of the mazes mentioned were apparently of similar design. A friend of the writer was unable to find any traces of a maze in the locality in 1920.

On the summit of a hill by St. Anne's Well, Sneinton, Nottingham, there formerly existed a maze called "Robin Hood's Race," or "Shepherd's Race." It was of a design somewhat similar to that at Saffron Walden, but having each of the four bastions ornamented with an incised figure of the type known in heraldry as a "Cross, crosslet, fitchy." The path was stated to be 535 yards in total length. When the lordship of Sneinton was en-closed, in February 1797, the maze was ploughed up. An enterprising printer of Nottingham, J. Wigsby by name, preserved for us the plan by publishing in the following month an illustrated pamphlet in commemoration of the maze, "Sixpence plain, eightpence coloured."

Another turf maze used to exist in the same neighbourhood, namely, at Clifton, about four miles or so from Sneinton, on the opposite side of Nottingham. This was of a square design similar to that of the garden maze shown in Fig. 75.

At Somerton, near Banbury, Oxfordshire, there has been well preserved a very good "Troy-town" (Fig. 69), of a plan which recalls that on the tiles of Toussaints Abbey. It is situated in the garden of a farm-house, named after it "Troy," and is surrounded by beautiful trees and shrubs. Our drawing is made from a sketch kindly supplied by the brother of the present occupier, Mr. J. F. Godwin. Its dimensions are 57 ft. by 50 ft., and the turf path, one foot in width, has a total length of 400 yards.

Near Piddington, on the border of the same county, rises to a height of nearly 400 ft. above the village the eminence known as Muswell Hill. Close to the summit of the hill is an earthwork having the form of a square turfed level surrounded by a low bank and bearing the traditional name of "The Wilderness." It is often spoken of locally as a Roman camp, but there is nothing in its structure

[p. 89]

to suggest such an origin: no satisfactory explanation of its origin or purpose has, in fact, been hitherto forth-coming. Now the word "wilderness," as we shall see in a subsequent chapter, was employed during a certain period to denote a maze of the horticultural type, and it

Click to enlarge
FIG. 69.--''Troy-town,'' Somerton, Oxon. (From sketch by O. W. Godwin.)

is not improbable that it was used in connection with mazes in general. May we not, therefore, allow it to be within the realms of legitimate surmise that this mysterious work constitutes the remains of a square turf maze, perhaps of a design similar to that of the Clifton maze mentioned above? The situation, the enclosing bank, and the regular outline of the latter accord well with this supposition, though the dimensions--250 ft. square--are

[p. 90]

rather excessive unless we allow for a considerable margin between the bank and the maze itself.

Another Oxfordshire locality, Tadmarton Heath, is mentioned as a turf-maze site in a manuscript by the Rev. T. Leman, quoted in a county history published in 1861, but if such a work ever existed there all traces of it have now disappeared; the same is true with regard to another reputed maze site to which reference is made in the manuscript, namely, the Herefordshire Beacon, in the Malvern Hills. In both cases the situations are such as might well have been selected for the purpose, judging by analogy with other known turf-maze sites. Sixty years is none too long a period to allow of the complete obliteration of the turf figures, if such existed, in the absence of care and attention, so that it is not surprising if we now find ourselves unable to trace them, especially if they possessed no circumscribing bank or ditch.

In Surrey a "Troy-town" was formerly well known in the neighbourhood of Guildford. It was cut in the turf on Hillbury, between Guildford and Farnham. It may be that the earth-rings of which traces are yet visible on St. Martha's Hill, on the other side of Guildford, constitute the remains of a similar work. It is said that the youths and maidens of the town used to congregate here on Good Friday and indulge in boisterous celebrations, the origin of which is not known. Another Surrey spot formerly alluded to as having a turf maze is Putney Heath. Unfortunately, however, we cannot at present point to any authentic traces of a single specimen in the whole of the county.

At Chilham, near Godmersham, in Kent, is an earth-work on the downs known as Julaber's Barrow or Juliberry's Grave. It bears no traces of mazy paths, but the name carries strong suggestion of "Julian's Bower," and there is perhaps as much force in this suggestion as in the opposing view that the mound is the grave of Quintus Laberius Durus, one of Julius Caesar's tribunes (hence

[p. 91]

[paragraph continues] Julii Laberius), who was killed by the Britons. The latter theory was, however, maintained by a writer to The Times as recently as April 5, 1920. The fact that as late as 1893, according to a letter to Notes and Queries of that year, traces of a "bower" or "Troy-town" were still observable in the neighbourhood of Walmer, shows that the Chilham work, if a turf maze, would not have been unique in the county. It is also said that one formerly existed near Westerham; the name "Troy-town," moreover, survives in other parts of the county (see <page 211>). Additional support for the theory of a turf maze site at Chilham is found in the occurrence of the name Bowerland, applied to a district to the north of the village. We find, too, a hamlet of Bower, only a few miles to the south-west.

In Bedfordshire, not far from Dunstable, there is a circular earthwork on the downs called "Maiden Bower." Stukeley refers to it in his discussion on Julian's Bowers as being in his opinion the site of a former turf maze, and there is some force in this contention. He mentions in the same reference a similar work at Ashwell.

Dr. Trollope stated that specimens had been reported also from the county of Devonshire and in Scotland, but actual details are not at the moment available.

There is no doubt that the custom of cutting these devices in the turf was formerly very widespread throughout the land, although comparatively few examples now exist. Even during the past generation, as we have seen, some are known to have disappeared. Let us therefore hope that all possible care will be taken to preserve those that remain to us.

     
Mazes and Labyriths, by W. H. Matthews, [1922], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 92]

  

CHAPTER XII

  

THE ORIGIN OF TURF MAZES

IN 1858--the year in which Archdeacon Trollope published the results of his researches--Capt. W. H. Mounsey drew attention to the description in a Welsh history book ("Drych y Prif Oesoedd," published in 1740) of a curious custom formerly prevalent among the Welsh shepherds. This custom consisted of cutting in the turf a figure in the form of a labyrinth, which they called Caerdroia, i.e. the walls, or citadel, of Troy. He also remarked that the herdsmen of Burgh and Rockcliffe "at the present day are in the habit of cutting this labyrinthine figure, which they also call 'the Walls of Troy.'" He drew the tentative conclusion that this name "would seem to be an after-thought of pure Cymric origin, suggested by the similarity between Caerdroia, the City of Troy, and Caer y troiau, the city of windings or turnings." A similar suggestion had already been made in the Transactions of the Cymmrodorion Society in 1822, the writer ("Idrison") holding that the turf figures, and also those on the Knossian coins, had reference to the courses of the sun as conceived by ancient worshippers of that orb.

Captain Mounsey was promptly answered by Dr. Trollope, who referred to the wide distribution of these devices throughout England and commented on their total absence from Brittany, where, if they were of ancient Cymric origin, one would have expected to find at least

[p. 93]

some trace of them. He also stated that they first received the name of "Troy-towns" in Tudor days, when "subtleties" of all kinds were in vogue, the term being used simply to indicate, by analogy with the Troy of legend, the difficulties to be overcome before the centre could be reached. Dr. Trollope gave it as his considered opinion that they were originally cut for penitential purposes by ecclesiastics, and this opinion has since his time remained practically unchallenged. In his memoir on the subject he reproduces a sketch showing the St. Anne's Hill maze with two gowned and kneeling persons in the act of performing a penitential circuit. Both the sketch and Dr. Trollope's conclusion are based on inference, however; there does not appear to be any direct evidence in the matter.

The theory of an ecclesiastical origin of the turf mazes is chiefly supported by analogy with the continental church-labyrinths which many of them so strongly resemble. Against the argument of their frequent proximity to an ecclesiastical site we may place that of their equally frequent proximity to known Roman remains and the fact that many of our old churches were founded on Roman sites.

The Welsh custom above referred to was also described by P. Roberts in his "Cambrian Popular Antiquities," published in 1815. He gives a plan of the figure as usually cut--a design resembling the circular labyrinths on Knossian coins, but flattened on the side where the entrance is situated--and expresses dissatisfaction with it because there are "no means of losing the way into the citadel, the supposed way continuing regularly through all its windings unbroken, which could scarcely have been the design of the inventor" (Fig. 70).

This figure, he says, is the plan of a labyrinth which is sometimes cut out in the turf by shepherd boys whilst they are tending their flocks on the mountains of Wales, and is sometimes drawn and presented as a puzzle by

[p. 94]

boys to exercise the ingenuity of their school-fellows, either in finding their way to the citadel at the centre or in drawing the plan. The tradition which accompanies the plan is that the city of Troy was defended by seven walls represented by the seven exterior lines and the entrance made as intricate as possible in order to frustrate an attacking force.

On the question whether turf mazes were, as Dr. Trollope affirmed, constructed by ecclesiastics for penitential purposes, there does not appear to be sufficient 
FIG. 70.--''Caerdroia.'' (After P. Roberts.) evidence to form a final decision. Even if it be true that they, and the pavement labyrinths, were actually used in the manner mentioned--a statement for which we do not seem to have definite proof--it by no means follows that they were designed with that object. We do know for certain that they were, from Tudor times onwards, used for recreational purposes. In his "Midsummer Night's Dream" (Act II., Sc. i.) Shakespeare makes Titania say, in her reply to Oberon (after the latter had twitted her with her love for Theseus):

". . . the quaint mazes in the wanton green,
 For lack of tread are undistinguishable."

In "The Tempest" also (Act III., Sc. iii.) he makes the old counsellor Gonzalo say:

"By'r lakin, I can go no further, sir,
 My old bones ache: here's a maze trod indeed
 Through forth-rights and meanders: by your patience
 I needs must rest me";

[p. 95]

and further on (Act V., Sc. i.) he puts a similar phrase into the mouth of Alonso:

"This is as strange a maze as e'er man trod:
 And there is in this business more than nature
 Was ever conduct of."

It is most likely that the turf mazes were in existence long before Shakespeare's time. The similarity of design between some of them and certain of the continental church labyrinths, which has already been alluded to, furnishes some grounds for supposing that they were contemporary with the latter in origin, in which case they would most probably have been constructed in the twelfth or thirteenth centuries. The fact that several of them were situated in the neighbourhood of some religious institution also lends support to the assertion that they were of monastic workmanship. There is no reason, however, to suppose that their construction and the handing on of the labyrinth tradition was confined to ecclesiastics.

According to M. Berthelot, who made a special study of the work of the ancient and mediaeval alchemists, a similar figure was employed by the latter. At any rate he found in an eleventh-century alchemistic manuscript, which he refers to as the Manuscript of St. Mark, Venice, a labyrinth drawing closely resembling the ecclesiastical type, accompanied by a commentary in Greek verse. He, however, expresses the opinion that both the labyrinth and the verses are an addition of the fourteenth or fifteenth century. The figure, he says, is referred to as "The Labyrinth of Solomon."

The name of Solomon was in use at least as late as 1844 in connection with labyrinthine figures. In that year M. Didron, a noted French archaeologist, whilst making a tour through Greece, visited the convent of St. Barlaam, a building perched high up on a huge crag and approached only by a rope. On the wall of the guest-room

[p. 96]

he observed a red tracing of a labyrinth resembling that on the floor of Chartres Cathedral. M. Didron inquired as to the origin of it, and was informed that it was called the "Prison de Salomon" and that it had been copied on the wall long before by a monk who had found the design in a book. The monk was dead and the book lost. This "Solomon's Prison" was of the same character as the "Solomon's Labyrinth" described by M. Berthelot, but very probably these and similar terms were at one time as popular as "Chemin de Jerusalem," "Julian's Bower," and so on, in their application to all sorts of labyrinthine devices.

A simple "interrupted-circle" type of labyrinth was adopted as a heraldic device by Gonzalo Perez, a Spanish ecclesiastic who aged as Secretary to Charles V and Philip II, and published in 1566 a translation of Homer's "Odyssey." The labyrinth was shown in perspective, with the Minotaur, in fighting attitude, at the centre. It was surmounted by the motto In silentio et spe.

No doubt continental heraldry could furnish us with many similar references of the sort, although nothing of the kind seems to occur in English heraldry. In Fig. 71, for instance, is shown one used by Bois-dofin de Laval, Archbishop of Embrun. The motto in this case was Fata viam invenient ("The Fates will find a way"), a motto adopted in England by the Berkshire Vansittarts. Our illustration is copied from an early seventeenth-century book entitled "Devises Heroiques et Emblemes," by Claude Paradin.

In the text it is stated that "par ce labyrinthe . . . se pourroit entendre que pour rencontrer la voye, & chemin de vie eternelle, la grace de Dieu nous adresse: nous mettant entre les mains le filet de ses saincts commandemens. A ce que le tenans & suivans tousiours nous venions a nous tirer hors des dangereux foruoyemens des destroits mo_dains." In other words, the device may be taken as emblematical of the temptation-labyrinth of this

[p. 97]

worldly life, which can only be safely traversed by means of the Ariadne thread of divine grace.

The design in this case is of a peculiar type, but it may be very easily derived from the simple split-ring or "Pigs in Clover" design (Fig. 144).

We have in the two cases just mentioned, as in the case of the pavement labyrinths, an association with the

Click to enlarge
FIG. 71.--Labyrinth Device of Archbishop of Embrun. (After C. Paradin.)

[paragraph continues] Church or with ecclesiastics. At the same time we know that, in England at any rate, the turf mazes were used for sportive purposes in the days of Elizabeth, and there is, so far, a lack of contemporary reference to their employment in a devotional or penitential capacity. "Treading" or "threading" the maze was a favourite game for several generations. Seeing that the path in the turf maze has as a rule no branches or dead-ends, the sport in question would appear to have been rather simple in

[p. 98]

character, unless we imagine the participants to have been blindfolded for the purpose or primed with a tankard or two of some jocund beverage.

Let us refer once more to that chapter of Pliny's "Natural History" in which he says that we must not compare the Egyptian and other labyrinths with "what we see traced on our mosaic pavements or to the mazes formed in the fields for the entertainment of children." The italicised words clearly show that the construction of something akin to our turf mazes was practised by the Romans. It seems very reasonable to infer that, if the custom were so common as Pliny seems to imply, it would have been carried to the Roman colonies in these islands. An argument which has often been brought forward in this connection is that from very early times the game of Troy, the lusus Trojae, was played by Roman youths. Virgil describes it in the fifth book of his "Aeneid," and draws attention to the similarity between the mazy windings of this sport--which was performed on horseback--and the sinuous path of the Cretan labyrinth (see Chapter XVIII). The inference drawn from this is that our "Troy-towns" and the sports connected with them are in the direct line of descent from this classic game and are therefore a legacy of the Roman occupation of Britain.

Dr. Stukeley, whom we had occasion to mention with reference to the Horncastle maze, suggested that the term Julian's Bower was derived from the name of Iulus, the son of Aeneas, who is described as having taken part in the game. We see, then, that there is a good deal to be said for the claim of a Roman origin.

Assuming for the moment that such was the case, we are faced with some difficulty in accounting for the preservation throughout the intervening ages of a class of earthwork which, without attention, is liable to become effaced in a few decades.

Is it likely that the Britons, after the Roman recall,

[p. 99]

would trouble to preserve the playgrounds of their late rulers' children? Is it at all probable that the successive waves of immigrants, Anglo-Saxons, Danes and Norse-men, would concern themselves with the maintenance of such alien frivolities?

Is there not a chance that perhaps some of these invaders brought the custom with them?

If we had to rely solely on our own historical records, we should find it extremely difficult to arrive at any conclusion in the matter. Researches of recent decades have, however, rendered it possible to approach the matter from a much wider angle, and, before we attempt any further to inquire into the origin of our own turf mazes, we shall find it necessary to go back very far indeed in the history of European civilisation, and to look at the question of labyrinth origins from another point of view.

Before doing so, however, we will review a development which, in the eyes of the archaeologist an insignificant side-line, is perhaps to many readers a matter of greater interest than anything we have yet dealt with, embracing as it does that type of labyrinth which is familiar to all in the famous Hampton Court specimen.

     
Mazes and Labyriths, by W. H. Matthews, [1922], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 100]

  

CHAPTER XIII

  

THE FLORAL LABYRINTH AND THE DWARF-SHRUB MAZE

THE mention of the word "maze" most frequently calls to mind a block of tall shrubs penetrated by a puzzling branching path, which terminates in an arbour or goal of some sort. But just as we have seen that the horticultural maze is far from being the sole form of expression of the idea, so we must now recognise that even in horticulture the well-known hedge maze is not the only type of verdant labyrinth.

The dwarf box, although a favourite material for de-limiting flower beds and edging paths, is merely a sub-ordinate or "accompanying" instrument, so to speak, in the gardener's orchestra. Yet we do occasionally see it employed as a soloist, executing its modest little arabesques between the strepitant choruses of the chromatic parterres on the terrace of some stately country home. In such cases we see a relic of the "knots" which formed an important feature in the gardens of our forefathers.

These devices were composed of various herbs or low shrubs and great ingenuity was displayed in their fashioning, amongst other forms being several varieties of labyrinths. The praises of the dwarf box in this connection were sung by John Parkinson, herbalist to Queen Elizabeth and King James the First. In his "Paradisus" he mentions it thus: ". . . Boxe, which lastly I chiefly and

 

Click to enlarge
Fig. 72. Floral Labyrinth (De Vries).

[p. 101]

Click to enlarge
Fig. 74. Floral Labyrinth (De Vries).

 

above all other herbs commend unto you, and being a small, low, or dwarfe kind, is called French or Dutch Boxe." This plant, he says, "serveth very well to set out any knot or border out any beds, for besides that it is ever greene, it being reasonable thicke set, will easily be cut and formed into any fashion one will, according to the nature thereof, which is to grow very slowly, and will not in a long time rise to be of any height, but shooting forth many small branches from the roote, will grow very thicke and yet not require so great tending, nor so much perish as any of the former . . .," and so on, in typical labyrinthine prose. The use of dwarf box in this way was not, of course, a novelty in Parkinson's time. In fact it was used by the Romans to border their paths and the flower-beds of that little garden in front of the porticoes which went by the name of the xystus.

In the sixteenth century, however, the planting of dwarf shrubs and herbs in long narrow beds twisted into various complicated figures seems to have become very fashionable.

Where maze patterns were introduced, a simple, unicursal form was sometimes followed, but in many instances very elaborate mazes were executed.

In a few of our libraries are to be found copies of a curious book of garden designs by Jan Vredeman De Vries, entitled "Hortorum Viridariorumque Formae," published at Antwerp in 1583. In it are represented many extraordinary and even fantastic plans for the lay-out of gardens, including no less than nine in the form of labyrinths. Some of the latter are designated by titles of a descriptive or of a quasi-classic character, "La Roue," "Ionica," "Corinthia," and so forth. We reproduce a few of these designs in Figs. 72, 73 and 74. Several other horticultural or architectural books of about the same period also mention labyrinths or figure them in their illustrations, but it is not clear, in many cases, whether these are intended to represent garden mazes or the

[p. 102]

 

Click to enlarge
FIG. 73.--Floral Labyrinth (De Vries)

 

[p. 103]

flower-bed labyrinths that we have just mentioned. In some instances, where the beds were occupied by shrubs, we have a sort of link between the garden labyrinth and the hedge maze proper. An illustration in a book of 1573 on the gardens of the Villa d'Este at Tivoli, dedicated to Catherine de Medici by the author, Stefano Duperac, shows four rectangular labyrinths, all of the same pattern. It is unlikely that in such circumstances they would all have been formed of tall hedges, and we may therefore judge them to have been of the flower-bed type or perhaps of dwarf box.

We find a reference to the herbal labyrinth in "La Maison Rustique," by Charles Estienne (Paris, 1573), under the heading of "Kitchen Garden Planning":

"Et sera bon dresser a ceste fin une planche de sauge . . . encore une de sariette, & hyssope, de cost, de basilic, aspic, baume, pouliot & une de camomille pour faire les sieges & labyrinthes, que l'on nomme Daedalus."

One of the best-known and most often quoted of the Tudor gardening books is that of Thomas Hyll, or Hill, whose work "A moste Briefe and Pleasaunt Treatyse Teachynge How to Dress, Sowe and Set a Garden" was published in 1563. It has a captivating charm, especially in the earlier, black-letter editions. In later editions the name of the author appears as "Didymus Mountaine" (Didymus = Thomas, Mountaine = Hill), and the book becomes "The Gardener's Labyrinth."

He published two figures of mazes, which we reproduce as Figs. 75 and 76. In the 1579 edition--"The Profitable Art of Gardening"--they are respectively placed at the heads of different chapters, the openings of which are worth quoting:

"Here by the way (Gentle Reader) I do place two proper Mazes, the one before this Chapter, and the other after, as proper adornments upon pleasure to a Garden, that who so listeth, having such roomth in their Garden, may place the one of them, which liketh them best, in

[p. 104]

that voide place of the Garden that maye beste be spared for the onelye purpose, to sporte in them at times, which

Click to enlarge
FIG. 75.--Herbal Labyrinth. (T. Hill, 1579.)

Click to enlarge
FIG. 76.--Herbal Labyrinth. (T. Hill, 1579.)

mazes being workmanly handled by the Gardner shal much beautifie them in devising four sundry fruits to be

[p. 105]

placed in each of the corners of the Maze and in the middle of it a proper Herber decked with Roses, or else some faire tree of Rosemary, or other fruits, at the discretion of the Gardener."

"And here, I also place the other Maze, which may be lyke ordered and used, as I spake before, and it may eyther be set with Isope and Time, or with winter Savery and Tyme; for these do wel endure all ye winter through greene. And there be some which set their mazes with Lavender, Cotton Spike, Majerome and such like. But let them be ordered in this point, as liketh best the Gardener, and so an end. For I doe not here set forth this, or the other Maze afore expressed, for any necessarie commoditie in a Garden, but rather appoint eyther of them (which liketh you best) as a beautifying unto your Garden: for that Mazes and Knots aptly made do much set forth a garden which neverthelesse I referre to your discretion for that not all persons be of like abilitie."

One would have expected to find some word concerning mazes in Lord Bacon's Essay on Gardening, but, strange to say, he makes no reference whatever to mazes or labyrinths. He abhorred topiary work. "I, for my part," he says, "do not like images cut out in juniper or other garden stuff--they be for children." Mazes he apparently considered unworthy even of mention.

Hill's square maze reappears, but with a tree at the centre, in another gardening book which achieved much popularity in the seventeenth century, namely, "A New Orchard and Garden," by William Lawson (i 623), afterwards published (1638, 1648, etc.), bound up with "A Way to get Wealth," by Gervase Markham. This is a quaint little publication which embodies amongst other things a "Table of Hard Words." "Mazes well framed a man's height," says Lawson (ch. xvii.), may perhaps make your friend wander in gathering of berries, till he cannot recover himself without your help." In the division entitled "The Country Hous-Wife's Garden" we

[p. 106]

are told that "The number of Formes, Mazes and Knots is so great, and Men are so diversly delighted that I leave every House-wife to her selfe, expecially seeing to set downe many, had been but to fill much Paper; yet lest I deprive her of all delight and direction, let her view these few, choice, new Forms, and note these generally, that all Plots are square, and all are bordered about with Privit, Rasins, Fea-berries, Roses, Thorne, Rosemary, Bee-flowers, Isop, Sage or such like."

Let us hope that the Hous-Wife whose duty was to

Click to enlarge
FIGS. 77, 78.--Maze Designs in Seventeenth Century Manuscript. (Harley MS.)

prepare and keep in order these "Choice new Forms" had plenty of time on her hands.

The two mazes included in a tiny book amongst the Harley Manuscripts (Figs. 77 and 78) were probably intended for flower-bed mazes. The book consists of a collection of 166 sketches of flower-beds, "knots," etc., and probably belonged to some seventeenth-century gardener.

These mazes, like most of the early forms, are of the "unicursal" type; that is, they have only one path, without loops or branches. It seems most likely that such mazes would be constructed either of flower-beds or of some low-growing shrubs, such as box. If constructed of high hedges the pattern would be invisible, except from

[p. 107]

a superior eminence, and they would afford but a poor sort of entertainment to the visitor, who would have nothing to do but to follow the path until he came to a full stop, and then retrace his steps. Nevertheless there is no doubt that some of them were made in this way. On the other hand the flower-bed labyrinth was not necessarily unicursal, as we may see from the plans of De Vries.

The actual form of the unicursal type of labyrinth was,

Click to enlarge
FIG. 79.--Maze Design by Adam Islip, 1602.

in all the earlier designs, whether circular or square, in very close agreement with the classic model, but in later designs monotony was avoided by means of some ingenious modifications. One of the earliest of these is shown in Fig. 79, which is copied from a very rare book called "The Orchard and The Garden," gathered from French and Dutch sources and published by Adam Islip in 1602. Fig. 80 shows one of several specimens which are given in a Dutch book of about half a century later, "Nederlantze Hesperides," by J. Commelyn (1676). It is

[p. 108]

perhaps as likely, however, that these were intended as designs for a hedge maze, or "Doolhof," as the Dutch call it.

The box-edged paths of "Queen Mary's Bower" on the island of Inchmahome, by the Lake of Menteith, Stirlingshire, may mark the site of a former dwarf-box labyrinth. Tradition maintains that the maze was made for Mary Queen of Scots when she was staying there as

Click to enlarge
FIG. 80.--Maze Design by J. Commelyn, 1676.

a child. The original maze-pattern, if such existed, is lost by reason of the depredations of relic hunters, who for many years laid the bower under contribution and so denuded it that it had to be entirely replanted some fifty or sixty years ago. The box shrubs with which it was repaired, however, are said to have been taken from the gardens of Cardross, where they had been reared from cuttings derived from the original bower. They have now grown to a height of several feet, and the bower no doubt presents a very different appearance from that which it had in the days of the ill-starred Mary.

[p. 109]

It consists of a winding box-bordered walk leading to a central thorn-bush, the whole affair being oval in out-line, about thirty yards in circumference and surrounded by a paling. Close at hand, and enclosed within a square stone wall, is Queen Mary's garden, containing at the centre an old box tree which is affirmed to have been planted by the little princess herself.

Another Scottish relic which is said to mark the site of an old terrace maze is that near Stirling Castle, known since the fourteenth century as the "Round Tabill" or the "King's Knot."

There is a "Queen Mary's Bower," by the way, in the gardens at Hampton Court, but this is only a straight walk shaded by an avenue of pollarded elms, which forms a sort of verdant tunnel. It is situated at the summit of a bank rising above one side of the King's Privy Garden. An old tower planted with shrubs at Chatsworth bears the same name.

We shall have occasion to refer to "bowers" again later on, in another connection. The present mention of them forms a convenient transition from the subject of garden labyrinths to that of hedge mazes.

     
Mazes and Labyriths, by W. H. Matthews, [1922], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 110]

  

CHAPTER XIV

  

THE TOPIARY LABYRINTH, OR HEDGE MAZE

THE art of trimming hedges of evergreens is of great antiquity; probably it is almost as old as horticulture itself.

The Romans made much use of the services of the topiarius, or hedge-trimmer--he is referred to by Cicero and other writers--and it is quite possible that they had shrubs or bushes trained to enclose winding paths in the manner of a hedge maze.

In Pliny's "Natural History" (Book XVI, Ch. 33) the cypress is spoken of as being clipped and trimmed to form hedges or lengthened out in various designs for ornamental purposes. In Book XV he tells us that a shrub called taxa is also used in ornamental gardening, from which we might conclude that the yew (taxus) was intended. From the description in the context, however, it is more likely that Pliny was speaking of a plant something like our "butcher's broom" (Ruscus aculeatus). He also mentions the box and a species of laurel as being suitable for this kind of work.

A hint of something like a hedge maze is given in one of the epistles of the younger Pliny, where he describes the gardens of his villa in Tuscany. He speaks of having a hippodromus, a kind of circus consisting of many paths separated by box hedges and ornamented with topiary work.

We do not, however, find any actual description of

[p. 111]

an indubitable hedge maze in the works of the classic writers. Amongst monastic manuscripts of the middle ages occur a few passages which have been thought to refer to something of the kind. For instance Henry, Abbot of Clairvaux, in speaking metaphorically of labyrinthine entanglements, says, "Non habent certos aditus, semitas ambulant circulares, et in quodam fraudium labyrintho monstra saevissima reconduntur" ("They have no definite approaches, but wander about in circular side-tracks, and most savage monsters are concealed in their labyrinth of deceptions"); but he may very well have been alluding simply to the traditional Cretan Labyrinth and not to actual constructions of his own period.

A perhaps more striking passage is that in a "History of the Counts of Guines, A.D. 800 to 1200," by Lambert of Ardres (Lambertus Ardensis), who lived in the twelfth and thirteenth centuries. Speaking of the building of a large residence at Ardres for Count Arnold, in the twelfth century, he says:

"Quam quidem Broburgensis artifex vel carpentarius, in hujus artis ingenio parum discrepans a Dedalo fabrefecit et carpentavit nomina Lodevicus et de ea fere inextricabilem fecit laberinthum et effigiavit, penus penori, cameram camerae, diversorium diversorio concludens . . ."; that is to say, a certain workman named Louis of Bourbourg, with a skill in woodwork very little different from that of Daedalus, was employed in building the house and made there a nearly inextricable labyrinth, containing recess within recess, room within room, turning within turning. Here again the description hardly answers to that of a hedge maze, but rather indicates an elaborate architectural structure and probably refers to nothing more than a large wooden house.

The common belief that our own King Henry II concealed his paramour "the fair Rosamond" within a maze at Woodstock may possibly, as sceptical historians aver, have no firmer foundations than that afforded by the

[p. 112]

imaginative efforts of mediaeval romancers, but from what we have just quoted it is evident that contrivances of the kind described in the legend may have been in existence not only in Henry's time but even in the previous century. In view of the great popularity of the story throughout succeeding generations we cannot altogether ignore it, but we will discuss it more conveniently in a later chapter.

The maze was introduced into the Low Countries, according to a book on Architecture in Belgium, some time during the thirteenth century, but this statement may be merely an inference from Lambert's History quoted above.

In France, as we have already seen, the pavement labyrinths were sometimes known as "dedales" or "maisons de Dedalus," in reference of course to the "house" built by Daedalus for the Minotaur, and in the fourteenth and fifteenth centuries we find the same titles applied to mazes formed of shrubs. Charles V, in the fourteenth century, is said to have laid out a maison de Dedale in the gardens of the Hotel de St. Paul in Paris.

Of interest on this point is an Order of the Court of the Duchy of Anjou, dated September 18, 1477, in which the people of the Duchy were required to pay twelve livres to the keeper of King Rene's castle at Bauge "pour la nourriture des ouyseaux et nestoyer les especes qu'il a en garde . . . et reffaire le Dedalus qui est es jardrins dudit lieu de Bauge."

We also read of a dedalus in the park of Louise de Savoie in 1513.

A sixteenth-century maze is depicted in a landscape by Tintoretto which is exhibited in the Queen's Private Chamber at Hampton Court Palace (No. 524 [787]). In the centre of the maze are seen four ladies seated at a table, their attendants standing by. In the background is the palace to which the maze and surrounding pleasure-grounds evidently appertain.

[p. 113]

Hans Holbein, an early contemporary of Tintoretto, is also said to have painted a maze of this description.

Many mazes at that time were planned by the Italian architect Serlio, one of whose designs is shown in Fig. 81.

The late sixteenth century furnishes abundant evidence of the growing taste for the topiary labyrinth in the architectural works of Androuet du Cerceau, one of the great builders of the French Renaissance and architect to Catherine de Medici. We are bound to say, however,

Click to enlarge
FIG. 81.--Maze Design by J. Serlio (Sixteenth Century).

that the assertion of Horace Walpole, in his "Essay on Modern Gardening," to the effect that in Du Cerceau's works there is scarcely a ground plot without both a round and a square maze, is not borne out by reference to such editions as are generally available.

Du Cerceau's sketches of the mazes at Charleval and in the Palace garden of the Archbishop of Rouen at Gaillon--with modifications necessitated by the extreme roughness of the original blocks--are shown in Figs. 82, 83 and 84.

One of the best-known gardens of the Elizabethan

[p. 114]

period was that made about 1560 for Lord Burleigh, or Burghley, at Theobalds in Hertfordshire. It was described by a contemporary as being "large and square, having all its walls covered with Sillery and a beautiful

Click to enlarge
FIG. 82.--Maze at Charleval. (After Du Cerceau.)

Click to enlarge
FIGS. 83 and 84.--Mazes at Gaillon. (After Du Cerceau.)

jet d'eau in the centre." At the end was a small mount called the Mount of Venus, placed in the midst of a labyrinth, "upon the whole, one of the most beautiful spots in the world." The house and gardens, John Evelyn tells us in his Memoirs, under date April 15, 1643, were "demolish'd by the rebels."

[p. 115]

A plan of this labyrinth is shown in Fig. 85. Theobalds was afterwards transferred by Burleigh's son, the Earl of Salisbury, to King James the First, in exchange for another noble seat in the same county, Hatfield House, still held by the present Marquis of Salisbury.

In the grounds to the rear of the latter mansion is to be seen at the present day one of the finest examples of

Click to enlarge
FIG. 85.--Maze at Theobalds, Herts. (After Trollope.)

a hedge maze, which, although of fairly modern construction, probably replaced an earlier specimen.

Our photograph, Fig. 86 (see Frontispiece), was taken, by kind permission, from the roof of Hatfield House. The hedge is of tall, thick yew throughout, and is perfectly formed, without any of those thin, straggly growths in the lower portion which, by tempting the unscrupulous maze-trotter to burst through them, soon necessitate renewal or unsightly patching.

[p. 116]

The maze is 174. ft. in length and 108 ft. in width, and has two entrances (or exits), one at each end. The

Click to enlarge
FIG. 87.--Maze in Hatfield House, Herts. Plan (W.H.M.)

basin which formerly occupied the centre was replaced some years ago by a block of yew surmounted by topiary figures. Fig. 87 shows the maze in plan.

[p. 117]

From the beautifully turfed level above the maze, or from the parterre terrace above that, one can overlook the hedges and enjoy, if so inclined, occasional glimpses of ensnared and perplexed visitors.

The type of hedge maze exemplified here, in which the paths are bounded by hedges of uniform thickness, is only one development. Another type arose in the late seventeenth century in which serpentinous footpaths penetrated blocks of shrubs or dense thickets. In some cases limes or hornbeams were "plashed," i.e., their branches were so trained and intertwined as to form a continuous wall of verdure. In other cases the intervals between the paths were filled with loose aggregations of flowering shrubs and evergreens; such an arrangement as this was usually termed a "wilderness." (The term "plashing," by the way, should not be confused with "pleaching," which merely signified the process of ordinary trimming).

In practically all types of maze it became the fashion to relieve the monotony of the walks by placing statues, vases, seats, fountains, and other ornaments at various points. This kind of thing reached a climax of extravagance in the latter part of the seventeenth century, when J. Hardouin-Mansart constructed for Louis XIV the famous labyrinth in the smaller park at Versailles. This labyrinth is described in a book, now very rare, entitled "Labyrinte de Versailles," by C. Perrault, printed at the royal press, Paris, in 1677, and illustrated by Sebastien le Clerc. Our illustrations, Figs. 88, 89, 90 and 91, are selected from the book in question and show respectively the plan of the labyrinth and three of the thirty-nine groups of hydraulic statuary representing the fables of Aesop. At the entrance to the labyrinth were placed symbolical statues of Aesop and Cupid, the latter holding in one hand a ball of thread. Each of the speaking characters represented in the fable groups emitted a jet of water, representing speech, and each group was

[p. 118]

accompanied by an engraved plate displaying more or less appropriate verses by the poet de Benserade.

Click to enlarge
FIG. 89.--Labyrinth of Versailles. Fable Group: ''The Hare and the Tortoise.'' (Perrault.)

We reproduce le Clerc's engravings of the groups illustrating respectively the fables of "The Hare and

 

Click to enlarge
Fig. 88. Labyrinth of Versailles. (Perrault)

 

[p. 119]

the Tortoise," "The Fox and the Crow," and "The Snake and the Porcupine." The water for all these elaborate

Click to enlarge
FIG. 90.--Labyrinth of Versailles. Fable Group: ''The Fox and the Crow.'' (Perrault.)

[p. 120]

waterworks was conveyed from the Seine by a wonderful contrivance called the "Machine de Marli," constructed

Click to enlarge
FIG. 91.--Labyrinth of Versailles. Fable Group: ''The Snake and the Porcupine.'' (Perrault.)

 

Click to enlarge
Fig. 93. Labyrinth at Choisy-le-Roi. (Blondel)

Click to enlarge
Fig. 94. Labyrinth at Chantilly. (Blondel)

 

[p. 121]

Click to enlarge
Figs. 95 and 96. Maze Designs by Andre Mollet, 1651.

 

by Swalm Renkin between 1675 and 1682. It is said to have cost the equivalent of L8,000,000 and contained fourteen water-wheels driving 253 pumps, some of which worked at a distance of three-quarters of a mile.

The labyrinth was destroyed in 1775 and its site is now occupied by the "Bosquet de la Reine."

The "Dial-garden" at Friar Park, Henley-on-Thames, is laid out on the plan of the Versailles labyrinth, but in place of the statuary groups are thirty-nine sun-dials, each having its motto or epigram. Adjoining it is a maze of original and ingenious design.

The Versailles example was only one of several well-known mazes which existed  in or around Paris at that time. Evelyn, who spent some years in Paris, from 1643 onwards, remarks on the design and trimness of the box-hedge designs in the gardens of the Luxembourg and on the "labyrinth of cypresse" at the Tuileries, no doubt designed by Du Cerceau (Fig. 92). In another account of the Tuileries labyrinth, however, it is described as being made entirely of bent cherry trees. In was ultimately swept away by Le Notre to make room for enlarged parterres.

There is still a labyrinth in the Jardin des Plantes, formerly the Jardin du Roi, but it is of rather feeble design .

Another noted French maze was that constructed by M. Gabriel at Choisy-le-Roi (Fig. 93). One was designed for the gardens of Chantilly by Le Notre, but exists to-day only as an engraving on a stone in the park (Fig. 94). Madame de Sevigne, in a letter of June 1, 1689, mentions one at Les Rochers, her seat in Brittany, and we read of one at Sceaux on the occasion of a fete given to Louis XIV and Madame de Maintenon in 1685.

[p. 122]

In most European countries the fashion had obtained a hold either before or during the seventeenth century,

Click to enlarge
FIGS. 97 and 98.--Mazes by G. A. Boeckler, 1664.

and we can usually be sure of finding a few drawings of mazes in any horticultural book of that period. Figs. 95 and 96 show two examples given in "Le

[p. 123]

[paragraph continues] Jardin de Plaisir," by Andre Mollet, the royal gardener at Stockholm, in 1651. Figs. 97 to 106 show some very

Click to enlarge
FIGS. 99 and 100.--Mazes by G. A. Boeckler, 1664.

ingenious designs selected from a great number which accompany the drawings of castles and great houses in Germany and elsewhere, contained in the "Architectura curiosa nova" of G. A. Boeckler, 1664.

[p. 124]

One of these (Fig. 105) is rather suggestive of the Saffron Walden turf maze, whilst another (Fig. 101) maze, as well as a "mechanical island" and various other horticultural toys.

Click to enlarge
FIGS. 101 and 102.--Mazes by G. A. Boeckler, 1664.

is reminiscent of the Rheims pavement labyrinth. At Enghien, in Belgium, the gardens of the chateau where the Duke of Arenburg entertained Voltaire contained a

[p. 125]

maze, as well as a "mechanical island" and various other horticultural toys.

Click to enlarge
FIGS. 103 and 104.--Mazes by G. A. Boeckler, 1664.

In Spain, as elsewhere, the hedge maze attained great popularity. In the magnificent gardens of the Alcazar at Seville may still be seen the labyrinth laid out in the

[p. 126]

sixteenth century for the Emperor Charles V, with tiled paths and fountains, and adjoining this is a hedge maze

Click to enlarge
FIGS. 105 and 106.--Mazes by G. A. Boeckler, 1664.

of roughly hexagonal outline enclosed within an irregular rectangle.

As regards Italy, we read that even the Pope himself,

 

Click to enlarge
Fig. 107. Maze at Gunterstein, Holland. (N. Visscher, 1719)

Click to enlarge
Fig. 108. Gunterstein. Plan of Gardens, showing Maze. (N. Visscher, 1719)

 

[p. 127]

 

Click to enlarge
Fig. 109. Gardens at Loo, Holland, with Mazes. (W. Harris, 1699.)

 

[paragraph continues] Clement X, took pleasure in watching the endeavours of his domestics to extricate themselves from the maze of tall box hedges which adorned his garden at Altieri. Evelyn, in 1646, describing his visit to Vicenza, remarks of the gardens of Count Ulmarini, or Vilmarini, outside the town, "Here is likewise a most inextricable labyrinth."

Sir Philip Skippon, describing his own visit to Vicenza in 1663, refers to the gardens as those of Count Valmarana, and mentions "a labyrinth of myrtle hedges." Skippon also speaks of labyrinths in the gardens of the Duke of Bavaria at Munich.

The Dutch gardeners made a great feature of the doolhof, typical examples being those at the Duke of Portland's chateau at Sorgvliet, near the Hague, at Gunterstein (Figs. 107 and 108), and at the Palace of Loo, the Dutch home of William and Mary (Fig. 109). Our illustration of the last-named is taken from Dr. W. Harris's book "The King's Palace and Gardens at Loo" (1699). It will be seen that the maze to the left is described as a "wilderness," as is also the structure to the extreme right, but whereas the latter certainly presents little of a labyrinthine appearance, the former is evidently a hedge maze, although perhaps loosely drawn. Harris uses the terms "maze" and "wilderness" interchangeably. He says that the King's labyrinth was formed of clipped hedges with sandy walks between, while the Queen's was decorated with fountains and statues. William the Third exercised his taste for this kind of embellishment also in the grounds of his English palaces. His gardeners, George London and Henry Wise, have left us one which, although of no great complexity, has become world-famous, namely, the specimen which forms part of the "Wilderness" in the gardens of Hampton Court Palace.

     
Mazes and Labyriths, by W. H. Matthews, [1922], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 128]

  

CHAPTER XV

  

THE TOPIARY LABYRINTH, OR HEDGE MAZE (continued)

THE Hampton Court maze (Fig. 110) was constructed in 1690 and in all probability displaced an older maze, a relic of Wolsey's time. The maze is situated close to the Bushy Park entrance. Defoe speaks of it as a "labrynth," and tells us that the "Wilderness," of which it forms part, replaced the old orchard of the palace.

It is of no great complexity, but, as may be seen from Fig. 111, is of a neat and symmetrical pattern, with quite sufficient of the puzzle about it to sustain interest and to cause amusement but without a needless and tedious excess of intricacy. The area occupied by it is rather more than a quarter of an acre--not a great amount of space, but enough to accommodate about half a mile of total pathway. The longest side of the maze measures 222 ft.

Various diagrams of the maze have been published, some of them very incorrect and therefore misleading. Our sketch was made on the spot and represents at any rate the present (1922) disposition of the paths and hedges. The gate almost opposite the entrance should normally be closed. It is for the purpose of affording the gardener or attendant direct access to the "goal" and its approaches, or occasionally for facilitating the release of impatient visitors; if left open it spoils the fun. The goal is provided with two bench seats, each shaded by a leafy tree.

 

Click to enlarge
Fig. 110. Maze at Hampton Court. [Photo: G. F. Green]

Click to enlarge
Fig. 113. ''The Little Maze.'' [Photo: G. F. Green]

 

[p. 129]

The hedge was at first composed entirely of hornbeam, but, like most of its kind, it has required renewal at various points from time to time, and this has not always been carried out with the appropriate material. The result, as may be seen in our photograph, is a patchwork of privet, hornbeam, yew, holly, hawthorn and sycamore. It is nevertheless questionable whether the lack of uniformity in this respect causes any grief to the bulk of its visitors. The maze is as popular as ever, and in the financial year 1919-20 brought in a revenue of nearly

Click to enlarge
FIG. 111.--Maze at Hampton Court. Plan. (W. H. M.)

[paragraph continues] L775, which exceeded the estimate of the Office of Works by L325!

Long may it remain! It may be a sad sight to the "high-brows" of horticulture, but to the unsophisticated many it is a never-failing source of innocent merriment. Those who incline to deplore the perpetuation of these "topiary toys" should spend an hour or two in the Hampton Court maze on a sunny holiday and witness the undiluted delight which it affords to scores and hundreds of children, not to mention a fair sprinkling of their elders.

The circular Troy-town or "Plan-de-Troy," formed of tall espaliers, which formerly co-existed with the present maze (see Fig. 112), has long been replaced by a sunken rockery, the path of which, however, is of a very

[p. 130]

meandering character and has earned from visitors the title of "The Little Maze" (Fig. 113). A topiary work of similar title, "The Siege of Troy," was one of William's pet horticultural adornments at Kensington Palace. It is

Click to enlarge
FIG. 112.--Hampton Court. The ''Wilderness,'' with Maze and ''Plan-de-Troy,'' in Eighteenth Century. (Engraving by J. Rocque, 1736.)

said to have been a verdant representation of military defence works, cut yew and variegated holly being "taught," as Walpole says, "to imitate the lines, angles, bastions, scarps and counter-scarps of regular fortifications."

The rather curious unicursal maze of three meanders shown in Fig. 114 is usually, e.g., in the "Encyclopaedia

 

Click to enlarge
Fig. 116. Maze Design by Batty Langley (from New Principles of Gardening, 1728).

[p. 131]

Click to enlarge
Fig. 115. Maze Design by Batty Langley. (from New Principles of Gardening, 1728)

 

[paragraph continues] Britannica," attributed to London and Wise, and certainly it appears in a book which was issued by them in 1706 under the title of "The Solitary Gardiner" (subsequently published by Joseph Carpenter as "The Retir'd Gardner"), but this work is mainly a translation from an earlier French book, "Le Jardinier Solitaire," by Louis Liger of Auxerre, in which also the figure appears. Various other horticultural writers of the period make use of the same design.

"A Labyrinth" says the text, "is a Place cut into

Click to enlarge
FIG. 114.--Labyrinth Design by L. Liger (circ. 1700).

several Windings, set off with Horn-beam, to divide them from one another . . . The most valuable Labyrinths are always those that wind most, as that of Versailles, the contrivance of which has been wonderfully lik'd by all that have seen it" (chacun a son gout!). "The Palisades, of which Labyrinths ought to be compos'd, should be ten, twelve, or fifteen foot high; some there are that are no higher than one can lean on, but those are not the finest. The Walls of a Labyrinth ought to be kept roll'd, and the Horn-beams in them shear'd, in the shape of Half-moons."

As for the allurements of the much-winding labyrinths

[p. 132]

of the Versailles type the reader will no doubt form his own opinion. Their popularity at that time is demonstrated by the great number of designs of this nature which we find in such books as, for example, those of Batty Langley, a few of whose plans we reproduce (Figs. 115 and 116).

An example of the "block" type of labyrinth was that at Trinity College, Oxford, of which a view is seen in an early eighteenth-century engraving (Fig. 117), from the "Oxonia depicta" of W. Williams. It was destroyed in 1813. Similar arrangements appear in several of the engravings of country seats, e.g., those of Belvoir Castle, Boughton, and Exton Park, in J. Kip's "Britannia Illustrata," 1724. In this work also appear mazes of the more familiar type, as, for example, in the engravings of Badminton and Wrest Park (Fig. 118).

The idea of Batty Langley and of the Versailles artist seems to have been not so much that of puzzling the visitor as of providing an entertaining and diversified promenade, but with many maze-architects the object was to provide as much bewilderment as the space available permitted. This is frankly avowed by Stephen Switzer in his somewhat tedious "Ichnographia Rustica," published in 1742. He gives the design shown in Fig. 119, and describes it as "a labyrinth of single hedges or banks, after the ancient manner."

He speaks of the object of a labyrinth as being to provide "an intricate and difficult Labour to find out the Centre, and to be (as the Vulgar commonly like it for) so intricate, as to lose one's self therein, and to meet with as great a Number of Stops therein and Disappointments as possible; I thought the best way to accomplish it was to make a dubious Choice of which way to take at the very Entrance and Beginning it self, in order to find out the Centre, at which we are to end at B. into a little Arbour cradled over; for which Reason there is in the very first coming in, in the Centre, where the Grass-Plot

 

Click to enlarge
Fig 117. Gardens of Trinity College, Oxford, with Labyrinth. (W. Williams, 1732).

[p. 133]

Click to enlarge
Fig. 118. Wrest Park, Bedfordshire, with two Mazes. (J. Kip, 1720)

 

and Statue are design'd at A. six different Entrances whereof there is but one that leads to the centre and that is attended with some difficulties and a great many stops."

He might have added, ". . . like unto my own literary style."

A labyrinth of a most fantastic character is said to have occupied a large area in the palace garden of the Prince of Anhalt, in Germany. It was allegorical and was intended to typify the course of human life. It was

Click to enlarge
FIG. 119.--Maze Design by S. Switzer (1742).

composed not only of hedges, but of rocks and trees, streams and caverns, and tortuous deeply cut paths, which were for the most part covered in, with very scanty illumination. At every other turn the visitor was pulled up by some puzzling or terrifying allegory, or some didactic inscription after the manner of those which adorn the rocks at Tilly Whim, on the Dorset coast. By way of compensation he was refreshed here and there by the sight of a choice example of the sculptor's art, or a flowery dell, or some verdurous presentation of the architect's idea of Elysium. As in the case of Versailles, expense seems to have been no obstacle.

[p. 134]

At H.M. Records Office is preserved in "Survey No. 72" a rather pathetic document headed "A Survey of the Manor of Wymbledon alias Wimbleton, with the Rights, Members and Appurtenances thereof, lying and being in the Countie of Surrey, late Parcell of the Possessions of Henrietta Maria, the Relict and late Queene of Charles Stuart, late King of England, made and taken . . . in the Moneth of November 1649." A transcript of the document was communicated to "Archaeologia" in 1792 by John Caley, F.A.S., the following portion being worth noting in connection with our present subject:

". . . On the South syde of the sayd turfed tarras there are planted one great maze, and one wilderness, which being severed with one gravelled Alley, in or near to the midle of the sayd turfed tarras, sets forth the maze to lie towards the east, and the wilderness towards the west; the maze consists of young trees, wood and sprayes of a good growth and height, cutt into severall meanders, circles, semicircles, wyndings and intricate turnings, the walks or intervalls whereof are all grass plotts; this maze, as it is now ordered, adds very much to the worth of the upper levell . . . which maze and wilderness over and besides the trees thereof, which are hereafter valewed amongst the other trees of the sayd upper garden and the materialls of the sayd two shadowe or summer houses, wee valew to bee worth L90.0.0."

Whether the maze referred to was afterwards destroyed is not clear, but possibly it was preserved and was identical with that mentioned by the writer of the "Encyclopaedia Britannica" article as having formerly existed at Wimbledon House, the seat of Earl Spencer, which was conjectured to have been laid out by Brown in the eighteenth century. ("Capability" Brown, we may note, was no lover of mazes, though his official residence at Hampton Court adjoined the maze.)

There are records of various other old mazes in the

[p. 135]

immediate vicinity of London, apart from the "tea-garden" mazes of the last century. Pepys in 1666 speaks of "several labyrinths" in the gardens of Lord Brooke at Hackney, and Evelyn in 1700 mentions mazes at Marden, Surrey. Sutton Court also contained a fine example.

There was one in Tothill (or Tuttle) Fields, Westminster, in the seventeenth century, and perhaps earlier, for it is mentioned with familiarity in a play written by John Cooke in 1614, "Greene's Tu Quoque; or the Cittie Gallant; a Play of Much Humour," wherein one of the characters challenges another to a duel:

Staines. I accept it; the meeting place?
 Spendall. Beyond the Maze in Tuttle.

The maze was renovated or remade in 1672, as shown by an entry in the Churchwardens' Accounts of St. Margaret, Westminster:

"Item, to Mr. William Brewer, for making a maze in Tuttlefields . . . . . . L2.0.0."

It was well known to John Aubrey, the antiquary and naturalist whose reference to turf mazes we have already quoted. In his "Remaines," 1686-7, he says:

"There is a maze at this day in Tuthill Fields, Westminster, & much frequented in summer-time in fair afternoons."

According to Mr. J. E. Smith's "Parochial Memorials of St. John the Baptist, Westminster," Tothill Fields were at one time known as "Tuttle-in-the-Maze."

In the large view of London and Westminster en-graved by Wenceslaus Hollar (1607-1677) there is shown in the middle of Tothill Fields a clump of trees surrounding a sort of shelter, like a band-stand, but no sort of labyrinthine design is visible.

Another London maze mentioned by Aubrey, and one which has left its remembrance in the present-day nomenclature of the locality (Maze Pond), is that of Southwark.

[p. 136]

[paragraph continues] "At Southwarke," says Aubrey, "was a Maze which is converted into Buildings bearing that name."

In another place he says, "On the south side of Tooleystreet a little westward from Burnaby-street is a Street called the MAES or MAZE, Eastward from the Borough (another name for Labyrinth). I believe we received these Mazes from our Danish Ancestors. . . ." This latter observation is one which seems to have been entirely overlooked by subsequent archaeologists and antiquaries, but its significance will be seen when we come to consider the subject of "stone labyrinths."

It is clear from the last phrase, that in this case Aubrey had in mind turf mazes rather than hedge mazes, and we are in doubt as to whether the Southwark maze was of the former or the latter species.

The Abbot of Battle had a residence there after the dissolution of the monasteries, and it has been stated that he had a maze in his garden, or, alternatively, that his garden paths were laid out in such an intricate manner as to suggest the name. But there are records of the name being applied to the locality before the dissolution of the monasteries, and it is quite possible that there was once a turf maze in the neighbourhood, perhaps before the abbot's time. According to a footnote in Strickland's "Lives of the Queens of England," the maze in Southwark once formed part of the garden of the Princess Mary Tudor, but the authority for this statement is not quoted.

Maze Hill, Greenwich, is said to derive its name from the former existence of a maze, traces of which are claimed to have been found near the entrance to Morden College, Blackheath. The name was formerly spelt Maize Hill and at one time Mease or Meaze Hill. We shall have a word to say about place-names towards the end of this book, but we may remark in passing that inferences as to the past existence of an object based solely upon a current homonymous place-name are obviously unsound.

     
Mazes and Labyriths, by W. H. Matthews, [1922], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 137]

  

CHAPTER XVI

  

THE TOPIARY LABYRINTH, OR HEDGE MAZE (continued)

Latter-day Developments

TOWARDS the end of the eighteenth century the taste for mazes in private gardens had to some extent declined, but as an adjunct to places of public amusement the topiary labyrinth was still in great demand.

"Pleasure gardens" of the Ranelagh and Vauxhall type were then greatly in vogue, not only in the metropolis but in most of the fashionable health resorts, and, although it is only in comparatively few cases that we have definite records of their having possessed a maze, there is no doubt that very many were in existence, though probably most have since disappeared.

A favourite resort with dwellers in the north of London, up to about a century ago, was White Conduit House, in Islington, and here a maze formed one of the principal attractions.

In Harrow Road, N.W., No. 6 Chichester Place marks the site of a minor public garden called "The Maze," which flourished up to about the middle of last century.

Another northern pleasure garden which is recorded as possessing a maze was "New Georgia," in Turners Wood, near the Spaniards, Hampstead.

South of the Thames the celebrated Beulah Spa had

[p. 138]

a maze, which, together with that at Hampton Court, is referred to by Dickens in his "Sketches by Boz."

Other well-known "tea-garden" mazes are those at the Crystal Palace and at the Rosherville Gardens, Gravesend.

A maze was erected at the request of the Prince Consort, in or about the year 1862, in the gardens of the Royal Horticultural Society at South Kensington. It was designed by Lieut. W. H. Nesfield, R.N., who relinquished a naval career to become a very successful gardener. Fig. 120 shows the plan of this maze as given in the R.H.S. official guide to the gardens in 1864. A statue of Galatea adorned the "goal."

This plan differs in some respects from Nesfield's original design, which was slightly simpler and provided for a central fountain and basin. The figure which illustrates the "Britannica" article--and which has been copied into a popular book on puzzles, accompanied by the remark that it is "a feeble thing"--unfortunately departs from the official plan in certain small but import-ant details; it allows of an almost direct passage from a third external opening to the circular goal. The maze ultimately went to ruin and its site has long been built upon.

The maze in the beautiful little gardens at Saffron Walden which were presented to the public nearly a century ago by Mr. L. Fry, M.P., and are known as Bridge End Gardens, is still in excellent condition, although suffering in places from the illicit short-cuts made by impatient visitors. It is locally believed to be a replica of that at Hampton Court, but is of very different plan and is, in fact, much more elaborate. Our photographs, Figs. 121 and 122, were taken from the pulpit-like erection at one end of the central enclosure, looking roughly towards the south and the north respectively.

It will be noticed that a person standing on the erection is precluded from mapping out the maze therefrom,

[p. 139]

by reason of the tall topiary upgrowths at various points, designed, no doubt, with this object. This maze is situated within a few hundred yards of the turf maze which we noticed in a previous chapter.

Click to enlarge
FIG. 120.--Maze by W. H. Nesfield, in R.H.S. Gardens, South Kensington, circ. 1862. (From R.H.S. Guide.)

Another modern hedge maze in the same county is that in the grounds of Mistley Place, Manningtree, the residence of E. M. Jackson, Esq., M.A., who has kindly furnished the writer with some details concerning it.

[p. 140]

The maze was planted about fifty years ago, but unfortunately the choice of material was not of the most judicious, for, while the major portion is of beech, young oaks were planted in the outer circle and these have now grown up into large trees, overshadowing and ruining the neighbouring portions of the hedge, so that it is now difficult to trace the plan. Only the inner circles remain complete.

In the adjacent county of Suffolk there is another maze of about the same age but of very different pattern, at Somerleyton Hall, the seat of Lord Somerleyton (Fig. 123). The hedges in this case are of yew and are of great thickness, about six or seven feet in height. At the points marked "A" are situated two beautiful golden Irish yews. Clipped yews provide interesting variety at the points marked "B," and a little pagoda crowns the central knoll, approached by grassy ramps.

There is a hexagonal maze, of some complexity, in the splendid gardens of the Hon. J. Egerton Warburton at Arley Hall, Cheshire. It is formed of lime trees, planted about half a century ago.

We may also mention one, of circular and rather simple though distinctive design, at Belton House, the residence of Earl Brownlow, near Grantham, Lincolnshire.

In Gloucestershire there is one in the grounds of Sudeley Castle, the home of H. D. Brocklehurst, Esq., J.P., where, according to Kelly's county directory, "the old pleasaunce, with its paths and fountain, was discovered in 18 so and now forms part of the garden."

In Nottinghamshire there is one, planted by Colonel Thos. Coke in the 'fifties, at Debdale Hall, Mansfield Woodhouse (F. N. Ellis, Esq., J.P.).

Mr. W. W. Rouse Ball, in his "Mathematical Recreations and Essays," gives a drawing of an elaborate maze which he has erected in his own garden, presumably at Cambridge.

Possibly there are many others in the seclusion of

 

Click to enlarge
Fig 121. Maze in Bridge End Gardens, Saffron Walden, looking South. [Photo: W.H.M.]

Click to enlarge
Fig. 122. Maze in Bridge End Gardens, Saffron Walden, looking North. [Photo: W.H.M.]

 

[p. 141]

large country gardens, but, as the owners of such contrivances are inclined to consider them as relics of a bygone and discredited fashion, it is only by chance or by individual enquiries that information concerning them can be obtained, and it is of course impracticable

Click to enlarge
FIG. 123.--Maze at Somerleyton Hall, Suffolk. (W. H. M., from sketch by G. F. G.)

to take an unofficial census on such a matter. It may be taken as probable, however, that all the most notable examples have been enumerated above.

In continental countries the occurrence of mazes is as sporadic as at home. There are said to be some excellent specimens in the neighbourhood of Barcelona, fragrant, aromatic, and flowering shrubs being a characteristic feature of their composition.

[p. 142]

As regards Italy, Mr. Inigo Triggs, in his description of the Castellezo dei Arconati, near Milan ("The Art of Garden Design in Italy"), mentions two "labyrinths," one of which is an extensive work of closely cut horn-beam, partly laid out as a circular maze, whilst the other has a number of small enclosures and alcoves with fountains.

In France well-known mazes are those at the Priory of St. Michel, Toul, called la Tour du Diable, and at the Abbaye aux Dames, Caen, as well as the rather poor specimen at the Jardin des Plantes in Paris, to which we have already alluded.

A description of the popular Tivoli Gardens in Vienna, towards the close of the last century, refers to a labyrinth situated below a terrace from which spectators could observe the alarms and excursions of the enmeshed maze-trotters.

In the United States, where very few of the embellishments of bygone Europe have failed to achieve reproduction, there is a replica, with some slight modifications, of the Hampton Court maze. This is situated at Waltham, Massachusetts, on the property of Miss Cornelia Warren. It was planted in 1896, and is formed of thick hedges of arbor vitae, about a thousand shrubs being employed. The plan follows that of its original model, but the sharp rear angles of the Hampton Court design are replaced by rounded curves, and the hedges adjacent to the central space, which is also rounded, are correspondingly modified.

There is a pond at the centre and a rustic rostrum stands before the entrance. The shortest route to the centre is said to be about one-fifth of a mile in length and the total length of the paths about one-third of a mile.

A large hedge maze is also to be found at a place called Cedar Hill--and no doubt there are many others.

The decline in favour of the maze amongst gardeners of repute during the latter part of the eighteenth century

[p. 143]

is possibly to be accounted for in great part as the natural revulsion from the surfeit of elaborate designs produced in the preceding periods.

"In designing a garden," wrote Lord Kames (Henry Home), "everything trivial or whimsical ought to be avoided. Is a labyrinth therefore to be justified? It is a mere conceit, like that of composing verses in the shape of an axe or an egg: the walks and hedges may be agree able, but in the form of a labyrinth they serve to no end but to puzzle; a riddle is a conceit not so mean, because the solution is a proof of sagacity, which affords no aid to tracing a labyrinth."

This was in his "Elements of Criticism," a work of which Dr. Johnson remarked: "Sir, this book is a pretty essay and deserves to be held in some estimation, though much of it is chimerical." The idea that sagacity affords no aid in tracing a labyrinth is certainly chimerical, as we shall see, but persons who incline to austerity in art will have little hesitation in agreeing with the other remarks of Lord Kames, even where, further on, he says: "The gardens of Versailles, executed with boundless expense by the best artists of the age, are a lasting monument of a taste the most depraved." Since Lord Kames's time, however, the gardens of Versailles have been subjected to considerable alteration, and at the present day form one of the greatest charms of the environs of Paris.

The contemporary French poet Delille, author of "Les Jardins, ou l'Art d'embellir les Paysages," was voicing the feelings of the times when he wrote:

"Des longs alignements si je hais la tristesse,
 Je hais bien plus encore le cours embarrasse
 D'un sentier qui, pareil a ce serpent blesse,
 En replis convulsifs sans cesse s'entrelace.
 De detours redoubles m'inquiete, me lass;
 Et, sans variete, brusque et capricieux,
 Tourmente et le terrain et mes pas et mes yeux."

[p. 144]

[paragraph continues] From that time onwards the hedge maze has been the object of much condemnatory criticism and contemptuous reference, sometimes grounded on a certain amount of reason, but often enough of the follow-my-leader type.

Even at the present time there are not wanting gardeners of influence who would view with equanimity the entire disappearance of this convoluted mass of ever-greens which dares to offer its antiquated charms in competition with their latest floricultural triumphs.

And cannot one sympathise to some extent with their feelings in the matter? When one's whole career has been devoted to the creation of new forms of plant life or the improvement of existing forms, achievements which entail prolonged scientific training and patient experimenting, constant vigilance and careful selection of favourable variations, it must be rather galling to be asked to construct and maintain a meandering row of commonplace evergreens. One can imagine the case to be somewhat parallel to that of a highly trained musician who has just delivered himself of a great sonata and is asked by a member of his audience for "a descriptive battle-march!"

Mr. W. Robinson had perhaps experiences of this kind in mind when he wrote his observations about mazes in his well-known handbook, "The English Flower Garden." "The Maze," he says, is "one of the notions about gardening which arose when people had very little idea of the dignity and infinite beauty of the garden flora as we now know it." In the next sentence he refers to mazes as "ugly frivolities." They should be left, he says, "for the most part to places of the public tea-garden kind." Whatever we may think of the justice of these remarks, we must admit that there is some force in his objection that "one of its drawbacks is the death and distortion of the evergreens that go to form its close lines, owing to the frequent clipping; if clipping be neglected

[p. 145]

the end is still worse, and the whole thing is soon ready for the fire."

A figure of a maze accompanies this criticism, but it can hardly be meant to typify the usual conception of a hedge maze, as it has the appearance of a seventeenth-century design, possibly intended for a floral labyrinth, for, apart from a few ornamental excrescences, it is entirely unicursal.

Although the strictures we have quoted would probably receive hearty support from a large proportion of modern gardeners, the maze is still not without its champions.

In Miss Madeline Agar's very practical book on "Garden Design," for example, it is treated as a wholly legitimate embellishment for large gardens, and the fact of its disfavour amongst present-day horticulturists is attributed to lack of patience.

A highly original design, with provision for seats, sundials, and statues, is likewise given, but it must be confessed that it conveys a flattering assumption of opulence on the part of the reader, for it certainly does not err on the side of simplicity.

Let us admit at once that, as a favourite of fashion, the maze has long since had its day. In every generation the craving is for novelty, for new forms of expression in all branches of art. Like every other defunct mode, the topiary labyrinth is liable to temporary revivals by lovers of the antique, but there is little reason to hope or to fear that it will ever again secure a position of any dominance in the affections of the gardener. The labour involved in its proper maintenance is alone a sufficient guarantee against that. The hedges require very frequent trimming, and sometimes partial renewal, the latter especially in those cases where unscrupulous visitors are not prevented, by barbed wire or other means, from short-circuiting the convolutions. The paths, too, of which there may be over half a mile, want regular attention

[p. 146]

unless we are content to be constantly reminded of Tom Moore's punning conundrum:

"Why is a garden's wildered maze
 Like a young widow, fresh and fair?
 Because it wants some hand to raze
 The weeds which have no business there."

Deciduous plants such as hornbeam and lime give the maze a sorry appearance during the leafless months of the year, whilst the slower-growing conifers, yew and cypress, besides being expensive, necessitate a long waiting period before the hedges attain a presentable height and thickness. Box harbours slugs; juniper, holly, and the various thorn-bushes present inhospitable asperities which outweigh their other merits--in short, we may be certain that whatever material be suggested for the construction of a maze there will be no lack of objections wherewith the gardener may buttress his prejudice against the contrivance in any shape or form.

On the other hand, the maze has its own, almost indefinable, charms, and we need hardly tremble for its total extinction until we cease to bear children, even if we dismiss as decadent sentimentality that romantic instinct of which some of us cannot quite rid ourselves in maturer years.

     
Mazes and Labyriths, by W. H. Matthews, [1922], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 147]

  

CHAPTER XVII

  

STONE LABYRINTHS AND ROCK ENGRAVINGS

IN Chapter XII we noticed some of the principal suggestions which had been made up to a few years ago as to the origin of our turf mazes, and saw that the question was one which could not be settled by the study of remains found in this country alone. Several interesting fans have been brought to light in other lands since Dr. Trollope wrote the memoir which has for so many years been accepted as the standard authority on the subject, and we shall find that a little consideration of them will enable us to view the question in a new light.

As long ago as 1838, Dr. E. von Baer, whilst held up by bad weather on the uninhabited island of Wier, south of Hochland in the Gulf of Finland, observed a curious pattern (Fig. 124) formed in the ground by means of large pebbles. He also noticed several very similar arrangements on the southern coast of the peninsula of Lappland and presented a paper on the subject to the Academy of St. Petersburg.

In some of these figures the stones employed were small pebbles, in other instances they were as large as a child's head, and in one case they were so large that they required several strong men to lift them. Some of the figures had nearly disappeared through the action of moss, earthworms, etc.

In 1877, Dr. J. R. Aspelin, of Helsingfors, drew attention to the existence of similar figures in Finland

[p. 148]

and on the east coast of Sweden. Fig. 125 shows a form found by him on an island not far from Borgo, Finland.

Click to enlarge
FIG. 124--Stone Labyrinth on Wier Island, Gulf of Finland.
 (von Baer.)

Click to enlarge
FIG. 125.--Stone Labyrinth on Coast of Finland. (After Aspelin.)

[paragraph continues] He describes some of the figures as having one "centre," others two, and others again none at all. They are usually from ten to fifteen yards in diameter. One large specimen, nearly twenty yards across (Fig. 126), at Wisby, on

[p. 149]

the Island of Gothland, is of a design very similar to the circular labyrinth which appears on certain coins of Knossos. They were generally found on islands or close to the sea-coast, and were known by various names in different localities (see <page 150>).

The fishermen and peasants said that they were used for children's games, a girl standing at the centre whilst the boys raced for her along the winding paths; but

Click to enlarge
FIG. 126.--Stone Labyrinth at Wisby, Gothland. (Aspelin.)

[paragraph continues] Dr. Aspelin pointed out that they were in any case ancient remains, and thought that the idea might have originated in the Bronze Age.

Corresponding figures have been found in Iceland, and a somewhat similar arrangement, consisting of concentric circles of pebbles, with sometimes a cross at the centre, has long been known in the province of Brandenburg, Germany.

It seems to have escaped the notice of most writers on the subject that long before the nineteenth century these objects were described by the Swedish antiquarian

[p. 150]

[paragraph continues] Rudbeck, from whose "Atlantica" (1695) we reproduce the sketch shown in Fig. 127.

The names given to these devices in the various localities in which they occur are of some interest. Around the Finnish coasts the names Jatulintarha (Giant's Fence) and Pietarinleikki (St. Peter's Game) predominate. Around Helsingfors the figures are more frequently spoken of as "Ruins of Jerusalem," "City of Nineveh," or "Walls of

Click to enlarge
FIG. 127.--Scandinavian Stone Labyrinth. (O. Rudbeck, 1695.)

[paragraph continues] Jericho." In the neighbourhood of Viborg they are known as Jatinkatu (Giant's Street), Kivitarha (Stone-fence), or Lissabon.

In Lappland a common term is Babylon; in Iceland, where the mazes are sometimes formed of earth, the name applied is Volundarhus (Wieland's, or Weyland's, House).

In Norway and Sweden they are sometimes called Nunnentarha (Nun's Fence), Jungfrudans (Maiden's Dance), or Rundborg (Round Castle), and on an island in the Kattegat the name Trelleborg (The Troll's, or Giant's, Castle) is found; but more frequently they are known by

[p. 151]

some name akin to our "Troy-town," such as Trojin, Trojeburg, Trojenborg, or Troborg. Another name sometimes associated with them was Steintanz (Stone Dance). The Wisby labyrinth is named Trojeborg.

Click to enlarge
FIG. 128.--Danish Runic Stone Cross, with Labyrinth Figure.
 (O. Worm, 1651.)

That labyrinths of some kind were also known in olden Denmark appears from the works of the seventeenth-century Danish antiquary Olaf Worm, one of whose woodcuts (Fig. 128) shows the symbol engraved on an ancient cross.

[p. 152]

We see then that John Aubrey (see <page 136>) was not altogether speaking at random when he stated his belief that "we received these Mazes from our Danish ancestors." In fact, he based his observations on the works of the Danish and Swedish writers just referred to.

If, as the above considerations lead us to guess, the use of labyrinthine figures was a common feature of the northern peoples before the Norse invasion of Britain, we may wonder whether there is any evidence of the use of the symbol by earlier inhabitants of the same parts; are there any indications of this nature to be found among the relics of prehistoric man in the northern countries?

Well, there are certain remains which have been held to afford an affirmative reply to this question. The remarkable prehistoric rock engravings in Northumberland and the Borders, first noticed about a hundred years ago and described in detail by Mr. G. Tate in 1864, are very suggestive in this connection. They include many figures of a character closely approaching that of a circular labyrinth, but no actual design of the conventional Cretan type has been discovered. In Figs. 129 and 130 are seen examples found on rocks at Routing Linn and Old Bewick respectively. The engravings are as much as three or four feet in diameter, and in many cases are interconnected by grooves which terminate at their cup-like centres. They often coalesce and interconnect to form mazy patterns of great complexity. The greater number consist merely of a series of concentric circles around a central cup, the circles in some cases being interrupted along a radial line which is generally occupied by a straight groove. Their origin and purpose are very obscure.

Very similar rock engravings have been found, though not in such profusion, in other parts of Great Britain, as far north as the Orkneys, and as far south as Devonshire, and also in the south of Ireland. In other parts of Ireland the engravings have chiefly the shape of a simple spiral.

There is strong suggestion of the labyrinth idea in the

 

Click to enlarge
Fig. 129. Rock Engravings, Routing Linn, Northumberland.
 (G. Tate in Proc. Berwick Naturalists' Club, 1864)

Click to enlarge
Fig. 130. Rock Engravings, Old Bewick, Northumberland.
 (G. Tate in Proc. Berwick Naturalists' Club, 1864)

 

[p. 153]

elaborate series of engravings which adorn the stones of a cromlech on the island of Gav'r Innis, off the coast of Brittany. Here the surface of the stones is entirely covered with engraved concentric grooves, which never cross one another, but form systems of whorls very much like those on the skin of human finger-tips. There is, however, nothing that can be fairly compared with the designs of the turf mazes, the stone labyrinths or the coins of Knossos.

Amongst the remarkable assemblage of prehistoric engravings on the rocky surfaces of the Italian Maritime Alps is one which exhibits a spiral of five turns, with interruptions and blind branches, but the resemblance between this isolated figure and the conventional labyrinth form is rather too slender to support any useful deduction as to the ancestry of the latter.

The reader may perhaps wonder whether any traces of the labyrinths have been found in other continents, and, if so, whether any connection can be established between them and the labyrinth cult in Europe. An interesting discovery in this reference was made some years ago in the shape of a figure of the Cretan Labyrinth, of circular type, roughly engraved amid other pictographs on the wall of the ruined Casa Grande, an old Indian erection in Pinal County, Arizona, U.S.A.

An exactly similar figure, with the addition of some unknown symbol opposite its "entrance" (Fig. 131), was also found in a manuscript entitled "Rudo Ensayo" (Rough Essay), written by a Spaniard who visited the country--the home of the Pima Indians--in 1761 or 1762. According to this manuscript the diagram was scratched in the sand by an Indian and represented the plan of a building.

Dr. J. W. Fewkes, the Chief of the Bureau of American Ethnology, who investigated the matter about fifteen years ago, states that an old Indian living in the neighbourhood was asked whether he knew of any

[p. 154]

building, or remains of one, built on such a plan. He replied in the negative, but said the figure was commonly employed in a children's game called Tcuhiki, i.e. the House of Tcuhu. (Tcuhu is a mythical hero, probably identical with Gopher, who is supposed to have made the spiral hole through which the Pima Indians came up from the underworld.) A writer on this tribe of Indians has described another game played by them which seems to have much in common with that mentioned above. It 
FIG. 131.--Indian Labyrinth Figure from Eighteenth-century Spanish Manuscript. (After Cotton.) is called Tculikwikut, and is played with rings and darts, count being kept by means of little stones which are moved along a series of small holes arranged in the sand in the form of a whorl, starting from a centre called Tcunni Ki, "the Council House."

If it could be shown that these games were associated with the labyrinth figure in those regions before the date of the Spanish invasion of Mexico we should be forced to conclude either that, by an extraordinary coincidence, the figure became evolved independently in the Old World and the New, or that in both it had a common origin of astounding antiquity. However, there is a probability that it was introduced to the Indians by the early Spaniards, with whom it would have been a familiar symbol. The only other ancient Indian pictograph of labyrinthine type so far discovered appears to be that on a pebble found by Dr. Fewkes in 1919 in a ruin known as "Square Tower House," in Mesa Verde National

[p. 155]

[paragraph continues] Park. This, it will be seen (Fig. 132), bears no likeness to the conventional design, but is merely an asymmetrical meandering groove somewhat similar in appearance to the braided designs often seen on modish feminine apparel at the present day. Its significance is unknown.

According to a short review in Folk Lore in 1913, a book entitled "Some Zulu Customs and Folk Lore," by L. H. Samuelson ("Nomleti"), 1912, contained a description of mazes made on the ground by Zulus. Unfortunately this book is out of print, and no copy,

Click to enlarge
FIG. 132.--Labyrinthine Pictograph from Mesa Verde. (After Fewkes.)

strange to say, is to be found in the library of either the British Museum or the Folk Lore Society. It would be extremely interesting to know whether the mazes in question bear any similarity to the traditional Cretan figure.

So far, then, evidence of a definite labyrinth cult is confined to certain parts of Europe and the Mediterranean borders. It has, in fact, been shown that it corresponds roughly with the areas formerly occupied by the people that built the cromlechs. With regard to its origin and significance, many interesting speculations have been made, some of which we will now briefly review.

     
Mazes and Labyriths, by W. H. Matthews, [1922], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 156]

  

CHAPTER XVIII

  

THE DANCE OR GAME OF TROY

READERS of our previous chapters will have noticed the frequency with which the name "Troy" is associated with the idea of the labyrinth.

We find this association, for instance, in the case of the "Troy-towns" of Somerton and Hillbury, the "Walls of Troy" of the Cumberland Marshes and Appleby (Lincs), and the "Caerdroia" of the Welsh shepherds. In northern Europe we find it as "Troja" or in such combinations as "Trojeborg" or "Troborg."

That this association is not of recent origin we have an interesting token in a reference which occurs in a fifteenth-century French manuscript preserved in the British Museum. This manuscript is the record of a journey made by the Seigneur de Caumont to Jerusalem in 1418, and is entitled "Voyaige d'oultremer en Jherusalem." Calling at the island of Crete en route, the Seigneur, like most other travellers on similar occasions, takes occasion to make a few remarks about the famous legend associated with it. He speaks of the "mervelleuse et orrible best qui fut appelle Minotaur," who, he says, was confined within "celle entrigade meson faite par Dedalus, merveilleux maquanit, lequelle meson fut nominee Labarinte et aujourduy par moultz est vulguelmant appelle le cipte de Troie."

[p. 157]

It would seem from the latter observation that the expression "Troy-town" or "City of Troy" was in general use 500 years ago as a title for the 
FIG. 133.--Etruscan Wine-vase from Tragliatella.
 (Deecke.) Cretan Labyrinth, and seeing that the renaissance of classical learning was as yet in embryo the inference is that the name was a popular tradition of some antiquity.

We find the name of Troy definitely associated with the labyrinth long before this, however, in the crude engravings on the Etruscan wine jar which we noticed in Chapter VIII., the oinochoe from Tragliatella.

The meaning of these figures (Figs. 133, 134 and 135) has been much discussed, but it is now generally agreed that the labyrinth shown has a close relationship with the operations which are being performed by the group of armed men, and it is obvious that it is also connected in some way with the

Click to enlarge
FIG. 134.--Etruscan Vase. ''Troy Dance'' Details. (Deecke.)

famous story of the wars of Troy, as we see by its label "Truia." What is this operation in which the warriors are engaged? We find a helpful clue in the story

[p. 158]

related by Virgil (B.C. 70-19) in his great epic of the Aeneid, in which the poet has embalmed for us the legends current in his time concerning the wanderings of Aeneas, the reputed son of Anchises and Venus, after the fall of the city of Troy, which he had fought bravely to defend.

Aeneas, who escaped from the city carrying his father on his shoulders, led forth also his little son Iulus. It is this boy whom, in the fifth book of the poem, Virgil pictures as taking part with his companions in a sport called the Ludus Trojae or Lusus Trojae (Game of Troy), sometimes

Click to enlarge
FIG. 135.--Etruscan Vase. Details, showing Labyrinth and ''retroscript'' label--''TRUIA.'' (Deecke.)

simply Troja. According to the Roman tradition it was introduced into Italy by Aeneas, and his son Ascanius imparted it to the Alban kings and through them to the Romans. The game consisted of a sort of processional parade or dance, in which some of the participants appear to have been mounted on horseback. Virgil draws a comparison between the complicated movements of the game and the convolutions of the Cretan Labyrinth:

"Ut quondam Creta fertur Labyrinthus in alta
 parietibus textum caecis iter ancipitemque
 mille viis habuisse dolum, qua signa sequendi
 frangeret indeprensus et irremeabilis error."
                                    (Aeneid, V. 585-591).[p. 159]

"As when in lofty Crete (so fame reports)
 The Labyrinth of old, in winding walls
 A mazy way inclos'd, a thousand paths
 Ambiguous and perplexed, by which the steps
 Should by an error intricate, untrac'd
 Be still deluded."
                   (Trapp's trans., 1718.)

The game is also mentioned as a well-established institution by other Roman writers of a century or so later, such as Suetonius and Tacitus, and appears to have assumed imposing dimensions at one time, as we see from a representation of it on the reverse of a medal of Nero, where it has more of the nature of a military review. It was generally performed by youths, and only those of good social standing took part.

It will be remembered that we have already had occasion to notice another ancient dance, or game, in which youthful notabilities were stated to have taken part, and in which the motions of the dances were supposed to represent the tortuous paths of the Cretan Labyrinth, namely, the dance performed by Theseus and his friends on the island of Delos. This dance was called the "Geranos," or Crane Dance, probably on account of the fancied resemblance of the attitude of the dancers to that of cranes in flight, or perhaps on account of actual adornments of the dancers. (An eighteenth-century German traveller in Russia relates that the Ostiaks of Siberia had an elaborate Crane Dance, the dancers being dressed up in the skins of those birds.)

Is there any connection between these two dances, both labyrinthine in character, the one traditionally based on the windings of the labyrinth of Knossos, the other compared by Virgil with the latter, but named after another city famous in ancient legend--to wit, Troy?

In regard to both these cities the events celebrated in the classic legends were of prehistoric occurrence (in so far as they occurred at all), and their recital was handed down orally for very many generations before they

[p. 160]

became crystallised in the written record, and it is not therefore surprising if during that time various versions were evolved and discrepancies of person, place, and time were introduced.

The association of the labyrinth, by some of the Nordic Aryan peoples, with Troy instead of Knossos may perhaps be accounted for in this way.

The point with which we are most concerned at the moment, however, is the fact that the figure of the labyrinth, in each case, is connected with the idea of a ceremonial game or dance.

Another dance, possibly of similar character, associated with Knossos, is that mentioned in Homer's "Iliad" as having been invented by Daedalus for Ariadne. Youths with golden swords and maidens crowned with garlands performed it in ranks.

By analogy with a great number of myths, rites, and ceremonies of ancient and modern races, some anthropologists have been led to the conclusion that these Troy and labyrinth dances are only particular expressions of a very early and widely diffused ceremonial associated with the awakening of nature in spring, after its winter sleep, or the release of the imprisoned sun after its long captivity in the toils of the demon of winter.

In that marvellous compendium of universal folk-lore "The Golden Bough," and in the particular volume of it entitled "The Dying God," Sir James Frazer debates the significance of the classic legends we have mentioned, and draws the tentative conclusion that Ariadne's dance was symbolical of the sun's course in the sky, its intention being, "by sympathetic magic to aid the great luminary to run his race on high." (See also <page 92>.) He draws attention to a practice observed by Chilcotin Indians, during eclipses of the sun, of walking around a circle leaning on staves, as if to help the sun around its course (much as a child pushes the partition of a railway compartment to help the train along).

[p. 161]

Mr. A. B. Cook, the Cambridge classical archaeologist, points out in this connection a Knossian coin on which the Minotaur, or rather, a man with a bull's mask, is shown engaged apparently in a similar rite, the reverse being occupied by a "swastika" labyrinth.

All this appears highly speculative to the ordinary layman, but nobody who gives a little attention to the subject can avoid the conclusion that at any rate there must have existed in very early--possibly Neolithic--times an extremely widespread and important ceremonial, generally of a sacrificial type, in connection with the spring awakening. So deeply seated was this ancient tradition that traces of it have persisted, with various local modifications, right down to the present day.

The sword-dances and morris-dances of our own country, most of which but for the happy genius and industry of Mr. Cecil Sharp and his disciples would have passed away entirely by the next generation, are undoubtedly survivals of a ceremonial of this type, particularly the former. They were performed only on certain fixed annual occasions, and were treated with great reverence and meticulous attention to detail.

A correspondent writing to Notes and Queries in 1870 (Anne Silvester) laments the fact that "the old British game of troy, the vestiges of which are so rare," is becoming extinct, but does not describe it. No doubt the writer had in mind some game played in connection with earth mazes.

It is a pity that we have no record of the actual method of "running the maze" in this country in past generations. The idea that such ingeniously designed and care-fully constructed works were made for the sole purpose of trotting along their convolutions to the centre and out again, without any symbolic or religious significance or any ceremonial observance, may be dismissed at once.

As regards their alleged use by the Christian Church

[p. 162]

for purposes of penance, we have no reliable evidence, and even if we had we know that such a use would have been of a secondary character. Most probably they were appropriated to some seasonal observance, as in fact we know that several of them were within quite recent years, and were associated with some ritual dance similar in nature to the Crane Dance or the Dance of Troy. With regard to the word "Troy" itself there is a possibility that its connection with the dance and the labyrinth figure may have originated not with the name of a town, but with some ancient root signifying to wind, or turn; in the case of the Welsh "Caerdroia," as we have already seen, this suggestion was made long ago. It may also have some connection with the three-headed monster Trojano of the ancient Slavonic mythology, who appears in the Persian legends as Druja, or Draogha, and in the Rig-Veda of India as Maho Druho, the Great Druh, and who plays throughout the same part as the wintry demon Weyland Smith (or Wieland) of the northern traditions. In Iceland, as we have already seen (<page 150>), the earth mazes are associated with the latter personage.

We find the word Troi, or Troi-Aldei, applied to certain ceremonial parades akin to the Troy-dance, in the writings of Neidhart von Reuenthal, in the early thirteenth century, the accompanying songs being termed "Troyerlais."

Quite recently a contributor to "Folk Lore" gave the airs of three popular dances which are performed by the Serbians at the present day under the names of Trojanka and Trojanac. The correspondent in question had thought that their names might have some connection with the root tri (= three), with reference to the rhythm of the dances, but the airs supplied by him certainly would not support this contention. It is far more probable, as he seems to conclude, that they indicate a connection with the Dance of Troy. Unfortunately he does not describe the dances themselves; it would be interesting to

[p. 163]

know whether they embody any movements suggestive of a labyrinthine origin or corresponding to the dances described by Homer and Virgil on the one hand, or to our morris and sword dances on the other.

Another point in this connection which might justify a little enquiry is the question of the origin of that maze-figure which forms, or used to form, part of the system of Swedish drill as taught to children in this country.

With regard to our native dances mentioned above, we may note that every care has been taken by competent investigators to discover and to preserve as much as possible of the pure tradition, and we have the satisfaction of knowing that, narrowly as they escaped oblivion, the English Folk-Dance Society will see to it that such a danger will not threaten them again for a very long time.

     
Mazes and Labyriths, by W. H. Matthews, [1922], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 164]

  

CHAPTER XIX

  

THE BOWER OF "FAIR ROSAMOND"

THE story of "Fair Rosamond" and her mazy Bower, though it cannot lay claim to that standard of authenticity which is generally required of historical data, has for so long occupied an honoured position in the realm of popular romance that, in a book professing to treat of mazes from a broad point of view, we cannot dismiss it quite as briefly as we might perhaps do in a book on English history.

"Fair Rosamond" has been stated, without very much foundation, to have been the daughter of Walter de Clifford, and is in consequence frequently referred to as Rosamond Clifford.

The story runs that King Henry the Second (A.D. 1133 to 1189) adopted her as his mistress, and that, in order to conceal his illicit amours from his Queen, Eleanor of Aquitaine, he conducted them within the innermost recesses of a most complicated maze which he caused to be made in his park at Woodstock. Rumours of her spouse's defections having reached the ears of Queen Eleanor, that indignant lady contrived to penetrate the labyrinth, confronted her terrified and tearful rival, and forced her to choose between the dagger and the bowl of poison; she drained the latter and became forthwith defunct.

Various trimmings, more or less scandalous in nature,

[p. 165]

gathered around the central tale, as, for instance, that Rosamond presented Henry with the son who was afterwards known as William Longsword, Earl of Salisbury, but the main outline as indicated above was handed down intact for many generations.

The poisoning incident is not mentioned in the account given by a chronicler of that time, John Brompton, Abbot of Jervaulx (Yorks). It seems to have been first recorded by a French scribe in the fourteenth century.

Brompton's version, given under the year 1151 in his "Chronicon," is as follows:

"Sane idem rex Henricus quanquam multis virtutibus fuerat ornatus, aliquibus tamen viciis involutus personam regiam deturpavit. In libidine namque pronus conjugalem modum excessit. Regina enim sua Elianora jamdudum incarcerata factus est adulter manifestus, palam et impudice puellam retinens Rosamundam. Huic nempe puellae spectatissimae fecerat rex apud Wodestoke mirabilis architecturae cameram operi Daedalino similem, ne forsan a regina facile deprehenderetur. Sed ilia cito obiit, et apud Godestowe juxta Oxoniam in capitulo monialium in tumba decenti est sepulta, ubi talis suprascriptio invenitur:

"Hic facet in tumba Rosa mundi, non Rosa munda; 
 Non redolet, sed olet, quae redolere solet."

It would appear from this account that the "bower" was a labyrinth of an architectural kind, perhaps like that mentioned in Chapter XIV as having been built at Ardres by Louis of Bourbourg in the previous century, not, as popularly believed, a maze of evergreens. It will be seen, also, that Henry did not long enjoy his clandestine delights, for Rosamond shortly died and was buried before the high altar of the nunnery church of Godstowe. Her death is believed to have taken place about 1176. It is possible that she had entered the nunnery some time

[p. 166]

before that. According to the contemporary annalist Roger de Hoveden her body was removed in 1191 by Bishop Hugh of Lincoln, on moral grounds, and was apparently re-interred in the chapter-house.

The imprisonment of Queen Eleanor, referred to by Brompton, was a consequence of her connivance at the rebellion of her sons in 1173-74.

Ranulph Higden, who lived in the thirteenth and fourteenth centuries, deals with the Henry and Rosamond story in the seventh book of his "Polychronicon," and tells us that visitors to Godstowe Abbey used to be shown a wonderful coffer which had belonged to Rosamond. It contained figures of birds, beasts, fishes and boxing men, which, by clockwork or springs, were endowed with apparently spontaneous motion (Cista ejusdem puella vix bipedalis mensura, sed mirabilis architectura ibidem cernitur; in qua conflictus pugilem, gestus animalium, volatus avium, saltus piscium, absque hominis impulsu conspiciuntur).

Most of the subsequent chroniclers seem to have followed Higden in their relation of the story. By Tudor times the romantic and tragic episode had become a favourite theme in popular lore; it was enshrined by the Elizabethan poet Drayton in his "Epistle to Rosamond," the bower being therein described as an arrangement of subterranean vaults. It achieved its greatest popularity, however, in the ballad form, and was printed, with several other "Strange Histories or Songs and Sonnets of Kinges, Princes, Dukes, Lords, Ladyes, Knights and Gentlemen, etc.," in a black-letter volume written or edited by Thomas Delone (or Delorney) in 1612. Two editions of the ballad were represented in the collection of Samuel Pepys, under the title of "The Life and Death of Rosamond, King Henry the Second's Concubine. And how she was Poysoned to Death by Queen Elenor."

John Aubrey, in his "Remaines," 1686, tells us that his nurse used to sing the following verses to him:

[p. 167]

"Yea, Rosamond, fair Rosamond,
   Her name was called so,
 To whom dame Elinor our Queene
   Was known a deadly foe,
 The King therefore for her defence
   Against the furious Queene
 At Woodstocke builded such a Bower
   The like was never seen.

"Most curiously that Bower was built
   Of stone and timber strong.
 An hundered and fifty dores
   Did to this Bower belong,
 And they so cunningly contriv'd
   With turnings round about
 That none but with a clew of thread
   Could enter in or out."

[paragraph continues] The whole ballad will be found in the well-known "Reliques of Ancient English Poetry," collected by Bishop Percy and published by him in 1765.

Of a widely different nature was the version published in 1729 by Samuel Croxall in his "Select Collection of Novels," Vol. IV. "The Loves of King Henry II and Fair Rosamond." Here the attitude assumed is one of learned contempt for popular credulity. "What have we in this Story," says Croxall, "but a Copy of Ariadne's Clue and the Cretan Labyrinth? . . . Yet are we not to wonder that the monkish Historians should deliver down to us a Tale of such Absurdity, when the same Chronicles tell us that, in that King's Reign, a Dragon of marvellous Bigness was seen at St. Osyth's in Essex, which, by its very motion, set many Houses and Buildings on Fire."

As for the inscription on Rosamond's tomb, quoted by Brompton, our critic is equally scornful. "The conceit," he says, "is poor and common and, like the other Poetry of those times, depends on a certain Jingle and Play on the Words. The sense of them has been thus expressed in honest English Metre:"

(Whether the verse is in better taste when expressed in

[p. 168]

honest English metre the reader must judge for himself.)

"Rose of the World, not Rose the peerless Flow'r, 
 Within this Tomb hath taken up her Bow'r.
 She scenteth now, and nothing Sweet doth smell
 Who earst was wont to savour passing well."

[paragraph continues] This rendering is perhaps preferable to that of Stowe ("Annals," 1631), which concludes with:

"Though she were sweete, now foully doth she stinke,
 A mirrour good for all men, that on her thinke."

In any case the epitaph must be accounted a libel in one respect, for Leland, the Antiquary to Henry VIII, records that, on the opening of Rosamond's tomb, at the dissolution of Godstowe nunnery, the bones were found to be encased in leather, surrounded by lead, and that "a very swete smell came out of it."

An interesting point mentioned by Croxall is that in his time "a delightful Bower" was still in existence at Woodstock and was shown as the original of the story. Another reliable writer of the same period (Thomas Hearne, 1718) makes a similar observation, but in this case it is made clear that the remains are those of a large building, not, as we might have inferred, those of a hedge maze or arbour. These remains, whatever they may have been, have disappeared long since.

Woodstock Park, according to the historian Rouse of Warwick, was the first park to be made in England. Henry the First had a palace here, but the present great building, the masterpiece of Sir John Vanbrugh, was built for the first Duke of Marlborough and was named after the scene of his famous victory, Blenheim.

The traditional story of Fair Rosamond, in which she is made to figure as a cruelly wronged and guileless damsel of impregnable virtue and the victim of an unreasoning jealousy, formed the basis of many novels,

[p. 169]

e.g., "Fair Rosamond," by T. Miller ("The Parlour Library"), 1847, and as late as 1911 it was cast into the form of a one-act tragedy by Mr. Oliver W. F. Lodge, under the name of "The Labyrinth," and was first performed by the Pilgrim Players on October 14 in that year. A little-known opera by Addison deals with the same theme; it is entitled "Rosamond" and is inscribed to the Duchess of Marlborough. The most poignant and beautiful version of the tragedy is that given by Swinburne in his "Rosamond" (not, of course, to be confused with his "Rosamund").

Tennyson, in his "Becket," makes that prelate rescue Rosamond from the Queen at the crucial moment and take her to Godstowe nunnery, whence she later escapes to intercede--ineffectually--with his murderers in Canterbury Cathedral.

No authentic portrait of Rosamond is known to exist, but in Hampton Court Palace, just outside Cardinal Wolsey's Room, there hangs a half-length female portrait by an unknown painter (No. 961 [937]), which is labelled Rosamond Clifford. The lady depicted, however, is attired in a fashion which did not obtain until considerably later than the time of Rosamond; in fact, there seems to be no justification whatever for assuming that the picture represents the fair Rosamond at all, except perhaps in the imagination of the artist.

     
Mazes and Labyriths, by W. H. Matthews, [1922], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 170]

  

CHAPTER XX

  

MAZE ETYMOLOGY

THE reader may be inclined to question the necessity for a whole chapter to be devoted to such a matter as this. "Surely anybody who has the curiosity to do so can look the words up in a dictionary!" Or he may object that the proper place to define and expound one's terms is in the opening chapter.

It will be found, however, that no clear-cut and simple definition of, for example, the word labyrinth itself is to be found in any dictionary, and that with regard to its derivation authorities are not even yet in complete agreement. With the facts recounted in the preceding chapters at his disposal the reader may possibly find a little informal discussion of these points more intelligible and interesting than the more rigid presentment afforded by even the best dictionaries. Moreover, most dictionaries have little Or nothing to say about Julian's bowers or Troytowns. On the other hand, of course, this chapter could not have been written without free recourse to Murray, Skeat, Webster, Wright, and other monuments of the lexicographer's toil.

We will consider such words as seem worth discussing in their alphabetical order, commencing with one which was prominent in our last chapter, viz., "bower." We have here a word of which the early connotation has been rather obscured by poetical insistence upon one

[p. 171]

of its extensions. As a convenient rhyme for "flower" and "shower" it has become one of the mainstays of the vernal poetaster, a circumstance which evoked one of the gems of Calverley's gentle satire:

"Bowers of flowers encountered showers
 In William's carol--(O love my Willie!);
 Then he bade sorrow borrow from blithe tomorrow
 I quite forget what--say a daffodilly."
                         (Lovers, and a Reflection.)

The word has thus come to be chiefly employed to signify a leafy or shady arbour or a recess in a garden, a use quite consistent with, but narrower than, the principal and much older meaning, which was that of a dwelling, with particular reference to the character of privacy.

The common modern usage seems to have been first adopted by the Elizabethan poets. Hero, in "Much Ado about Nothing" (Act III, Sc. i), sends by her attendant a message to her cousin Beatrice, bidding her

". . . steal into the pleached bower,
 Where honeysuckles, ripened by the sun,
 Forbid the sun to enter."

The Saxon form of the word was bur or bure, related to buan, meaning "to dwell," and it was always used to denote something of the nature of an inner chamber or sanctum.

In Chaucer's works (late fourteenth century) it has the same force, e.g., in the "Wife of Bath's Tale":

"Blissing halles, chambres, kitchines and boures."

Somewhat later we find a poetical extension of the word to include not only the dwellings of human beings but also of animals and birds. Thus William Dunbar, a Scottish poet who lived about 1465-1530, speaking of birds hidden within thickets, used the phrase "within their bouris." This usage gave rise to the idea that the word was derived from "bough," a notion that seems to

[p. 172]

have first found expression in the anonymous "Letters of Junius," and shortly afterwards received the weighty sanction of Dr. Johnson. In Southey's "Curse of Kehama" the word in this sense is made to do duty as a verb:

"And through the leafy cope which bowered it o'er
 Came gleams of chequered light."

The metaphorical use of the word in its original sense is seen in Moore's "Evenings in Greece":

"Fancy, who hath no present home,
 But builds her bower in scenes to come."

The suggestion that Rosamond's Bower was of the nature of a hedge maze seems to be of rather late origin, probably arising in the seventeenth century, like the application of the term to the little hedge-box garden at Menteith (Queen Mary's Bower), to which we referred in Chapter XIII. In the earlier writers it is almost invariably spoken of as a building. Robert Fabyan, for instance, a historian of the late sixteenth century, speaks of it as a "house named Labyrinthus or Daedalus worke, or howse wroughte like unto a knot in a garden called a maze," and in some anonymous verses of the mid-fifteenth century it is stated:

"Att Wodestocke for hure he made a toure
 That is called Rosemoundes boure."

It would appear that the Bower which is commemorated in the place-name of Havering-at-Bower, Essex, was also of the nature of a building, probably of large dimensions, for, according to an "Appendix on Bowers" annexed to an "Essay on Design in Gardening," by George Mason, 1795, there was a long-standing tradition to the effect that it was the site of a king's residence, and an old man of the locality could remember "many chimnies of the old bower standing." This may or may not be evidence, but it is at all events quite in keeping

[p. 173]

with the ancient use of the word. The royal residence in question would no doubt have been of the nature of a private retreat, not a court.

Writing in 1827, the Rev. H. J. Todd says, "In Cumberland, to this day, a back room or parlour is called a boor."

It will be seen from the remark of John Aubrey quoted on page <page 136> that he assumed "borough" to be identical in origin with "bower." The former is, however, derived from the Anglo-Saxon burg or burh, a city, allied to beorgan, to protect.

In any large dictionary there will be found detailed several other meanings for the word "bower"--including the sense in which it is used in Bret Harte's "Heathen Chinee"--but with these we are not here concerned.

Strange to say, the use of the word in the combination "Julian-bower" or "Julian's-bower" is usually overlooked or ignored.

The English Dialed Dictionary (Wright) gives the local variants Gelyan-bower, Gillimber and Jilling-bo'or as occurring in Lincolnshire, and Jul-laber as another form of the "Julaber's Barrow" or "Juliberry's Grave" which we have already noticed in Kent. Is the "bower" here the same as "barrow," which is derived from the Anglo-Saxon beorg, meaning, like the German berg, a hill? Or is it only the same word that we have met with in "Rosamond's Bower"? The former suggestion receives some support from the fact that turf mazes are often, though not always, constructed on the top of a hill or mound, but to the writer there is something more attractive in conceiving these works to be associated with the idea of a retreat, particularly if we consider, as we have some reason for doing, that the Julian referred to is the benign and hospitable Saint Julian of the mediaeval legends.

From Brand's "Popular Antiquities" it appears that there were three or four saints of this name, but the most well-known of these was the knight whose deeds are

[p. 174]

celebrated in the "Gesta Romanorum" and elsewhere, the reputed patron and protector of pilgrims and travellers. The chapel of Domus Dei at Southampton, now used as the French Protestant church, is dedicated to this St. Julian. The legend goes, that on returning home one day Julian discovered a man and woman asleep in his bed, jumped to the hasty conclusion that his wife had been untrue to him and slew the pair where they lay, only to find that they were his parents who had travelled from afar to visit him. In repentance and atonement he then founded a hospice for travellers and afterwards became known as Hospitator, or "the gude herbejour," in which capacity his renown is testified by many a reference in our early literature, e.g., in the works of Chaucer:

"Now up the heed; for al is wel;
 Seynt Julyan, lo, bon hostel!
 See here the Hous of Fame, lo!"
                                 (The Hous of Fame.)

"An housholder, and that a grete, was he
 Seint Julian he was in his contre."
                                 (Canterbury Tales.)

It seems to the writer just as likely that the name Julian's-bower commemorates this popular hero as that it has any connection, as some have maintained, with the invading Caesar or, as suggested by others (see Chapter XI), with his tribune, Quintus Laberius Durus. One can quite easily conjure up in imagination a game or ceremony in which the fatigues of the pilgrim treading the long course of the labyrinth's folds is rewarded by some form of refreshment on at length reaching the secluded retreat of the hospitable saint.

"Surely they find St. Julians inn, which way-faring men diligently seek."
               (The Ancren Riwle--Thirteenth century.)

When we turn from our native bowers to the Aegean labyrinthos, transmitted practically intact from the ancient

[p. 175]

[paragraph continues] Greek to most modern European languages, we are venturing on dangerous ground indeed, for the derivation of this word has been the subject of much disputation between rival schools of etymologists and philologists in recent years.

Down to a few decades ago we were content with the bald statement of most dictionaries that it was probably correlated with the word laura, meaning a passage, or mine, [*1] though there was also a suggestion that it might be of Egyptian origin, viz., that it was derived from the name of Labaris (= Senusret III), erroneously conceived by the scribe Manetho to be the founder of the Hawara pile. Then Mr. Max Mayer put forward the suggestion that it might have some connection with labrys, a word which, in some of the early languages of Asia Minor, e.g., Lydia and Caria, denoted an axe, the axe being the symbol associated with the god known as Zeus Labrandeus or Zeus Stratios, the worship of whom was known to have taken place at Labranda, in Caria. Coins from Mylasa, a neighbouring town, show this god holding in his hand a double axe.

The stir created by the discovery of double axes in abundance, with every indication of their religious and symbolic use, during the course of Sir Arthur Evans's explorations in the traditional home of the Cretan labyrinth, can therefore be well understood. As a consequence thereof every self-respecting dictionary nowadays gives pre-eminence to the labrys derivation of "labyrinth." At the same time it is well to bear in mind that many learned scholars have seen great difficulty in accepting this theory, mainly on account of the metathesis, or change-over, of the r and the y (u in Greek), which was stated to be unexampled, and to the addition of the termination -inthos. With regard to the latter it now seems to be generally agreed among scholars that this termination occurs only in words which were assimilated from the pre-existing

[p. 176]

peoples of the Aegean lands, whom the Greeks, as northern invading hordes, overcame and superseded. The suffix is preserved only, however, in extremely few common nouns (terebinthos = the turpentine tree, asaminthos = a bathing-place), and in a similarly small number of place-names, such as Tirynthos (Tiryns) and Corinthos (Corinth). It is the equivalent of the ending -nda in certain place-names in Asia Minor, e.g., Labranda.

The conjectures that the word was connected with labros, meaning "great," or that it was derived from the old Egyptian la-pe-ro-hunt, "the temple at the mouth of the reservoir," are hardly worth repeating.

The present position, then, is that the Labyrinth is the House of the Double Axe, the implication being that the Cretan example was not, as formerly believed, a miniature reproduction of the temple of Hawara, but that the latter was actually given the title by analogy with the building at Knossos.

As regards the use of the word in our own language, it was probably well known to most of the churchmen of the early and middle ages, through the medium of the classic authors accessible to them, but it never passed into common speech. In Chaucer's works, i.e., in the fourteenth century, we find both maze and labyrinth employed; but whereas the latter evidently refers to the Cretan tradition, the English word seems to denote some figure familiar to the poet's readers--perhaps, we may conjecture, in the form of turf mazes.

Thus, in "The Hous of Fame" (line 826, etc.), he says:

"Tho gan I forth with him to goon
 Out of the castel, soth to saye,
 Tho laugh I stoude in a valeye,
 Under the castel, faste by,
 An hous, that domus Dedali
 That Laborintus cleped is,
 Nas maed so wonderliche, y-wis
 Ne half so queynteliche y-wrought";

[p. 177]

and in his "Legend of Ariadne," one of his minor poems, we read (line 125, etc.):

"This wepen shal the gayler, on that tyde,
 Ful privily within the prison hyde;
 And, for the hous is krinkeled to and fro,
 And hath so queinte weyes for to go--
 For hit is shapen as the mase is wroght--
 Thereto have I a remedie in my thought,
 That, by a clewe of twyne, as he hath goon,
 The same way he may returne anoon,
 Folwing alway the thread, as he hath come."

Seeing that the "hous" here referred to is the Cretan labyrinth itself, the "mase" with which it is compared must be something sufficiently familiar to Chaucer's audience to furnish them with a ready illustration of the nature of the legendary structure which he is describing and which elsewhere he calls The Labyrinth or the House of Daedalus.

From very early times the classic authors used the word "labyrinth" metaphorically, and the mediaeval writers followed them. For instance Walter, a canon of St. Victor, towards the end of the twelfth century wrote a work which he called "A Treatise Against the Four Labyrinths of France," in reference to the great theological work in four books, known as the "Book of Sentences," a long and very metaphysical compendium of divinity, by Peter, Bishop of Paris.

In Renaissance times we find the word commonly used as a simile for the difficulties of life or the vagaries of love.

In Shakespeare's "King Henry VI" (Pt. I, V, Sc. 3) the Earl of Suffolk, after the exit of the gentle Margaret of Anjou, whose hand he has been soliciting on behalf of his royal master, exclaims:

"O, wert thou for myself!--But, Suffolk, stay;
 Thou mayst not wander in that labyrinth:
 There Minotaurs and ugly treasons lurk."

[p. 178]

We will notice further examples of this use of the word a little later, in connection with book-titles.

In "Troilus and Cressida" (Act II, Sc. 3) Thersites bursts into soliloquy before the tent of Achilles with:

"How now, Thersites! What, lost in the labyrinth of thy fury!"

Milton says that "Lethe, the river of oblivion, rolls her watery labyrinth," and Pope that "Love in these labyrinths his slaves detains"; but the occurrence of such expressions in writings of all periods is too common to need further quotation. We might perhaps point out that a slight shade of difference may be assumed to exist between "labyrinth" and "maze," even when these words are used in their metaphorical sense. We may take "labyrinth" to signify a complex problem involving merely time and perseverance for its solution, "maze," on the other hand, being reserved for situations fraught, in addition, with the elements of uncertainty and ambiguity, calling for the exercise of the higher mental faculties--in short, we may regard the two words as having reference respectively to the unicursal and multicursal types of plan (see Introduction). A distinction of this kind adds point to a sentence like that which occurs, for instance, in Mr. Lytton Strachey's "Queen Victoria," where he tells us (p. 178) that the Prince Consort "attempted to thread his way through the complicated labyrinth of European diplomacy, and was eventually lost in the maze."

As a means of expressing complexities of outline or of inner structure, natural or artificial, the word has been adopted by various branches of science or art. Every student of anatomy knows the "labyrinth" of the inner ear, every geological tyro has heard of those gigantic amphibians of Carboniferous to Triassic times whose peculiarly lamellated teeth have earned for them the title of "labyrinthodonts." Zoologists are acquainted with

[p. 179]

those lowly protoplasmic forms of life which, on account of the mazy net-like appearance assumed at one stage in their life-history, are called "labyrinthulidea." Even the engineer finds it convenient to make use of the word, as, for instance, when he speaks of a "labyrinth-packing" for turbines, an arrangement which allows a certain amount of lateral motion while ensuring steam-tightness.

We may remark in passing that the names of the artificer Daedalus and of the winding river Meander have also done duty in scientific nomenclature in some cases where it was desired to commemorate labyrinthine characteristics; for example, a pretty little fungus allied to the Stereum so common on decaying wood has received the generic title of Daedalea, on account of the mazy pattern displayed by its spore-bearing surface, while the beautiful "brain-stone" coral is known to the naturalist under the name of Meandrina.

Compound words formed with "maze," on the other hand, are usually of an old-fashioned or local character, such as "Maze-Sunday," which in Devonshire dialect signifies a Sunday given up to feasting; such compounds are rarely formed for scientific or technical purposes. The sheet glass which is obscured by a system of wrinkles on its surface is, however, sometimes known as "maze-glass."

The word maze is probably of Scandinavian origin. Its oldest significance seems to be that of a state of bewilderment or confusion, or of being wrapped in thought--a use which we nowadays regard as metaphorical. In the Swedish and Norwegian languages are related words which mean on the one hand to dream, or lounge, or to move about in an idle or lazy manner, and on the other hand to chatter or indulge in aimless talk.

Some dictionaries formerly stated that it was derived from an Anglo-Saxon word mase, meaning "a whirlpool," but it has been shown that there was no such word.

In various dialects it is still used in its original sense.

[p. 180]

[paragraph continues] One may often hear from the older type of country folk such expressions as "It fair mazed me to see it," giving one the feeling that the syllable "a-" has been dropped, whereas it was never there. In Shakespeare the expression frequently occurs. Titania, in "Midsummer Night's Dream" (Act II, Sc. 2), says:

" . . . the spring, the summer,
 The childing autumn, angry winter, change
 Their wonted liveries; and the maz'd world,
 By their increase, now knows not which is which."

[paragraph continues] Talbot of Shrewsbury, in his dire straits before the walls of Bordeaux ("King Henry VI," Pt. I, Act IV, Sc. 2), exclaims:

"O, negligent and heedless discipline!
 How are we park'd and bounded in a pale,--
 A little herd of England's timorous deer,
 Maz'd with a yelping kennel of French curs!"

[paragraph continues] (See also "King Henry VIII," Act II, Sc. 4, line 18s.)

That the word as here quoted has no identity with the word "amazed" is clear from a comparison of its con-text with that of the latter in the numerous instances of its employment by Shakespeare. The verb "to maze" is found in Chaucer:

"'Ye maze, maze, gode sire,' quod she,
 'This thank have I for I have maad yow see.'"
                    (The Marchantes Tale, l. 2387.)

In the sense of crazy, wild, or thoughtless, we find it in the dialect expressions "Mazed-antic" and "Mazegerry."

As a metaphor it is employed in like manner to its Greek equivalent. In "The Taming of the Shrew" Petruchio declares: "I have thrust myself into this maze, Haply to wive and thrive as best I may." "Let us," says Pope, in the "Essay on Man,"

"Expatiate free o'er all this scene of man,
 A mighty maze! but not without a plan."

[p. 181]

The term has no connection with the word which we see in, for instance, Mr. Hall Caine's novel "The Deemster":

"Nine maze--not bad for the first night."

This is a variant of the word mease and denotes a measure of 500 herrings!

Of the etymology of the term "Troy-town" some indications have already been given in Chapter XVIII. We might, perhaps, in addition, hazard the guess that the Sanskrit root dru (= run) has some bearing on the origin of the word so widely associated with the idea of a dance or ceremonial, but the connection is too obscure to be very helpful.

We might further recall the ancient legend, [*1] recorded in Welsh chronicles going back many centuries before the Christian era, to the effect that a great-grandson of Aeneas named Prydain, or Brutus, came over to this country with the Trojan prisoners of war whom he had helped to liberate from Greece, and with their aid built a city on the banks of the Temus (Thames), which he called Caerdroi-Newydd (New City of Troy). This name became corrupted into Troinovant--hence the "Trinobantes" of Caesar's time--and was later discarded in favour of Caerludd, a name given in honour of Lludd, nephew of the Caswallon who fought against Caesar. The Saxons afterwards corrupted the name into Lun-dun.

As Spenser says ("Faerie Queene," iii, 9):

"For noble Britons sprang from Trojans bold
 And Troy-Novant was built of old Troyes ashes cold."

If any reliance could be placed on this old story the Corporation of London might do well to embody the Labyrinth, or Troy-town, in their armorial bearings, for what symbol could better typify the complexities of our metropolis?

Footnotes

^175:1 "Coil-of-rope walk" according to Ruskin (Fors Clav.).

^181:1 Accepted as a historic fact by Mr. E. O. Gordon in his "Prehistoric London."

     
Mazes and Labyriths, by W. H. Matthews, [1922], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 182]

  

CHAPTER XXI

  

LABYRINTH DESIGN AND SOLUTION OF MAZES

THERE is no limit to the number of patterns which, without any metaphorical extension of terms, we may legitimately describe as coming within the scope of the words "maze" and "labyrinth." In common speech we use either word to describe any artificial design or natural pattern presenting a convoluted appearance, or any path or channel of an intricate nature, but when we come to consider the matter more carefully we feel the need for some definition. As we have seen, the dictionaries do not help us much in this respect. Let us, therefore, decide what limitations we feel compelled to observe in our use of the terms from the point of view of designers or unravellers of mazes and labyrinths.

In the first place we must limit ourselves to works of artifice, i.e., we must exclude the "labyrinths" of nature, such as forests, caverns, and so forth, and agree that any application of our terms to such objects is to be regarded as strictly metaphorical.

Secondly, we must require, as a practical corollary to our first condition, that there shall be an element of purposefulness in the design. The purpose may be the portrayal of the imagined course of the sun through the heavens, the symbolisation of the folds of sin or of the Christian's toilsome journey through life, the construction of a puzzle, or the mere pleasure to be derived from packing

[p. 183]

the maximum of path into the minimum of space, but there must be an object of some sort. The aimless scribblings of an infant, like the trail of an ink-dipped fly, may in this connection be considered as the fortuitous meanderings of nature rather than the conscious design of man. By imposing this condition we exclude the Indian pictograph shown in Fig. 132, which, in the absence of any indication as to its significance, can only by a loose extension of the term be called a labyrinth.

(Our use of the words "aim," "design," and "purpose" will be quite clear to everybody but the sciolist dabbling in metaphysics.)

Thirdly, there must be a certain degree of complexity in the design, a degree which it is manifestly impossible to define as it must be considered in conjunction with other characteristics in any particular case. In the case of a unicursal labyrinth, i.e., one in which there is only one path, the complexity lies in the multiplicity of turnings and the extent of the departure from pure geometrical figures such as the meander, the zigzag, and the spiral; in the case of a puzzle-figure it lies partly in this but partly also in the number and disposition of branch-paths. It naturally follows that in a unicursal design there cannot be absolute symmetry, although, with a little ingenuity, a very pleasing appearance of symmetry may be obtained.

Fourthly, there must be communication between the component parts of the design; in other words, the path must be continuous. This does not preclude the occurrence in the design of closed "islands," but only makes it clear that such inclusions do not form part of the labyrinth proper.

Fifthly, there must be communication between the interior and the exterior. We might not altogether with-hold the application of the term "labyrinth" or "maze" in the case of a closed design, but we should have to qualify it, e.g., by prefixing the word "closed." In the

[p. 184]

case of the beautiful and intricate mosaic pavement found in the Casa del Labirinto at Pompeii mentioned on page <page 46>, for example, although we know that the pattern was intended to convey an allusion to the Cretan labyrinth, we cannot look upon it as a true labyrinth design; not only is there no communication with the exterior, but by its repetition of purely geometrical design it fails to satisfy our third condition.

If the reader chooses to formulate for himself a working definition based on the above remarks he is at liberty to do so, but he may take for granted that nobody else will accept it. However, he will have gained, at any rate, a clearer conception of the matter than he would perhaps have gathered from any dictionary.

We have seen that mazes and labyrinths may be roughly divided into two types as regards the principle of their design, namely, into unicursal and multicursal types, or, as some say, into "non-puzzle" and "puzzle" types respectively. The word "unicursal" has hitherto been chiefly used by mathematicians to describe a class of problems dealing with the investigation of the shortest route between two given points or of the method of tracing a route between two points in a given figure without covering any part of the ground more or less than once (e.g., the well-known "bridge" problems), but there is no reason why we should not apply the adjective "unicursal" (= "single course" or "once run") to denote those figures which consist of a single unbranched path, using the term "multicursal" as its complement, or antonym. We must not draw too hard a line between these two types; for instance, we could not reasonably insist that the turf maze at Wing (Fig. 60) is multicursal simply on account of the dichotomy of its path to form the central loop. Where the loop is itself relatively large and complex, as in the Poitiers example (Fig. 55), there are better grounds for doing so, but it is plain that in such cases the point is one to be decided by common-sense.

[p. 185]

Let us consider a little further the various forms of labyrinth design and make some sort of a classification.

In the first place we may observe that a labyrinth (using this word, for convenience, as embracing "maze") may be arranged in one plane, as we commonly see it on a sheet of paper, or it may be disposed in two or more intercommunicating planes, like the Egyptian labyrinth or a block of flats. We may thus classify all labyrinths, for a start, as either two-dimensional or three-dimensional. As the vast majority belong to the first class and as, moreover, every subdivision of the first class may be applied equally to the second, we need say no more concerning the latter except to remark that the complexity of a garden maze may be greatly increased, if desired, by introducing tunnels or bridges, thus converting it into a three-dimensional maze.

Another general grouping of labyrinths would be into "compact" and "diffuse" types, the former having, in a typical case, the whole of its area occupied by the convolutions of its path and its bounding walls, the latter having spaces between the bounding walls of the various sections of the path, such spaces having no communication with the path itself. Amongst unicursal labyrinths the Alkborough specimen (Fig. 59) exemplifies the compact type and the Pimperne maze (Fig. 63) the diffuse type.

The Hampton Court maze (Fig. 111) may serve as the type of a compact and the Versailles example (Fig. 88) that of a diffuse multicursal labyrinth.

With regard to the nature of the path itself, we may distinguish broadly between labyrinths with curved and those with straight paths, allowing for an intermediate "mixed" group in which part of the path is curved and part straight. Examples of each kind will be found amongst the figures given.

Multicursal mazes, again, may be subdivided according to the manner of branching of the path, e.g.,

[p. 186]

according to whether the branches are simple or sub-divided (the occurrence of more than one branch at any point may be considered as the case of a subdivided branch), whether the branches do or do not rejoin the main path, forming "loops," and whether--a rather important point as regards the solution of the maze--the "goal" is or is not situated within a loop.

Finally we may create separate classes for those mazes in which there are two or more equivalent routes between the entrance and the goal, those which have two or more entrances, and those in which there is no distinct goal (e.g., the Versailles maze) or in which there are two or more equivalent goals.

We can represent the branch system of any labyrinth whatever in a very simple manner by means of a straight-line diagram, wherein the paths of the labyrinth are represented by lines, to scale if need be, branches being shown to the left or right respectively of the main straight line representing the shortest path from the entrance to the goal. It will be seen that no account is taken of the actual orientation or of changes of direction of any part of the path.

A unicursal labyrinth will thus be represented by a single straight line. Figs. 136 and 137 represent, roughly to scale, the Hampton Court and Hatfield mazes respectively and should be compared with those shown in Figs. 111 and 87. Triangles and discs may be used, as shown, to indicate entrances and goals respectively.

Such diagrams as these are just as useful as the actual plans of the mazes for the purpose of serving as a clue for the visitor; in fact, they are really more easily followed.

Amongst the many speculations that have from time to time been made regarding the origin and significance of the design on the Knossian coins, the suggestion was made by a contributor to Knowledge about thirty years ago--somewhat similar theories having been expounded by a German writer a decade earlier--that this figure

[p. 187]

was a simplified diagram comparable with the diagrams described above. According to this conception the figure was intended as a clue to the actual labyrinth, the designs on the coins being perhaps copied from those on "souvenir" tokens issued by the priests or curators of the edifice, and indicated the right path to be taken, all other paths being omitted. By splitting the circular dividing walls so as to form a passage of the same width as the path shown in the figure, a maze of much more intricate appearance was arrived at, which, it was thought, might

FIG. 136.--Straight-line Diagram, Hampton Court Maze.

FIG. 137.--Straight-line Diagram, Hatfield Maze.

bear some resemblance to the form of the original labyrinth.

On the other hand, Dr. E. Krause, in a book of about the same date, showed how the Knossian design and certain other unicursal figures might be derived from a series of concentric circles, with interruptions along a radial line like the figures in the northern rock engravings described in Chapter XVII, by means of one or two simple methods of cross-connection (Figs. 138 and 139).

Such speculations give food for thought, but we must remember that so far they are speculations and not statements of fact.

[p. 188]

The use of the straight-line diagrams suggested above may be found helpful not only as a means of facilitating the study of an existing labyrinth, but also to some extent in designing a new one. It is not necessary to describe here in detail how to design a maze:

"It is purely a matter of skill,
 Which all may attain if they will,"

and, like most tasks requiring simply common-sense, patience, and practice, it is much more trouble to explain than to perform. As regards the design of hedge mazes,

Click to enlarge
FIGS. 138 and 139.--Derivation of Labyrinth Types from Rock-engraving Figures. (After Krause.)

the fact that the circumstances are hardly ever alike in any two actual cases gives plenty of scope for individuality and ingenuity. The space allowed may be strictly limited, or it may be of an awkward shape. The materials avail-able for the walls may vary widely in character according to the space they require for their proper growth and maintenance, and thus affect the amount of path-area.

There are one or two points which are of general application and should be borne in mind. For instance, if the object of the designer is to provide a maze which shall offer a fair amount of puzzledom without imposing undue fatigue on the visitor, he must take care that the nearest route from the centre to the exterior be neither too long

[p. 189]

nor too short. If the space to be covered by the maze is large the tendency to over-elaboration of the design must be avoided.

Another feature which is likely to spoil an otherwise good design is the inclusion of long stretches of path without bend or branching; these are tedious and annoying, especially when they have to be retraced by reason of their leading into a cul-de-sac.

In a large maze it is well to relieve monotony by means of occasional variations in the mode of treatment of the hedge, the introduction of arbours, statues, etc.; but these should not be of such a character as to defeat one of the main objects of the design by providing easy clues.

If the maze is intended to be seen at all from above, some attempt should be made to introduce a symmetrical and artistic element into its design. Usually some vantage-point is available from which an attendant or expert can observe and direct over-bewildered visitors, but if this point be accessible to the visitors themselves the hedges should be provided with pinnacles or balks, here and there, to prevent the observer from solving the puzzle by unfair means. This is the case with, for instance, the Saffron Walden maze; at Hampton Court, where there are no balks, only the attendant is permitted to mount the rostrum.

The "solution" of mazes means the discovery of a route to their "goal." (This word is preferable to "centre," as the object of quest is not necessarily at the geometrical centre of the maze, but may be considerably removed from it.)

It would be going too far to say the shortest route, as this would be discoverable only from the plan or by prolonged experience, but the goal in any maze will on the average be reached more certainly and quickly by observing a little method than by fortuitous wandering.

The subject of the solution of mazes has been examined by various mathematicians, in their lighter moods,

[p. 190]

but we need not burden ourselves with more than a few simple considerations.

In most cases it is not practicable to adopt a system of marking the various paths as we reach them, but if this be permitted we can so arrange our marks that we need never traverse any portion of the path more than twice--i.e., once in each direction--so that in any finite maze we must eventually arrive at the goal, though not necessarily by the shortest route.

Using the word node to signify a point of branching, and the terms odd and even to describe respectively those nodes at which odd or even numbers of paths are to be found, we see that there must be at least three paths meeting at a point to form a node, for two paths meeting at a point constitute only a change of direction of the path without formation of branches, whilst the arrival of one path only at a point also precludes the idea of "branching" at that point, and can only occur at the end of a blind alley, at the entrance of the maze, or at the goal. We find it convenient, however, to regard the latter arrangement as an odd node of the lowest order, the lowest possible order of even nodes being, of course, that at the meeting of four paths.

It will be clear that if the entrance and the goal are the only odd nodes the maze will either be unicursal, in the sense in which we have been using the term, or any branches must form loops on the main route; in either case it will be possible to traverse the maze unicursally, i.e., to thread every portion of the path without going over any part twice.

Supposing that we are able to make what marks we like, without danger of their removal in our absence, we can adopt the following plan:

On arriving at a node which, by the absence of marks, you know you have not already visited, mark the path by which you have just arrived by three marks; if you see by marks on other paths that you have already been to

[p. 191]

that node, mark the arrival path with one mark only. If now there are no unmarked paths at this node, it means that you have explored this particular branch-system and must retrace your steps by the path by which you have arrived. If, however, there are one or more unmarked paths leading from the node, select one of them, and, as you enter it, mark it with two marks.

We can now make certain of visiting every part of the maze if we make it a rule that, on arrival at a node, we shall never take a path with three marks unless there are no paths unmarked or with one mark only. When we enter a one-mark path, we of course add the two marks which we always make on leaving a node, and thus it becomes a three-mark path at that node.

When it is impracticable to place marks, or even to use, like Theseus, a clue of thread, it is still possible in the majority of cases to make certain of finding the goal by the simple expedient of placing one hand on the hedge on entering the maze, and consistently following the hedge around, keeping contact all the time with the same hand. Blind turnings present no difficulty, as they will only be traversed first in one direction and then in the other. The traveller being guided by his contact with the hedge alone is relieved of all necessity for making a choice of paths when arriving at the nodes.

The only case in which this method breaks down is that in which the goal is situated anywhere within a loop. Where this occurs the explorer adopting the method described will discover the fact by finding himself eventually back at the starting-point without having visited the goal. He must then adopt different tactics, but unless it is practicable to use a clue or a system of marks like that detailed above there is no rule that will help him. One may, of course, thread the maze by remembering a formula of some sort applicable to that particular maze, e.g., in the case of Hampton Court, "Left, right, right, left, left, left, left," but this is equivalent to having a plan

[p. 192]

of the maze. Such mnemonics, unless perfectly retained, are apt to prove more of a nuisance than a help.

Can anybody who has once yielded to the exuberant mirth of "Three Men in a Boat" forget the predicament of the over-confident Harris when he volunteered to conduct a party, strangers as well, through the Hampton Court maze? "We'll just go in here," he said, "so that you can say you've been, but it's very simple. It's absurd to call it a maze. You keep on taking the first turning to the right. We'll just walk round for ten minutes and then go and get some lunch." Poor Harris!

     
Mazes and Labyriths, by W. H. Matthews, [1922], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 193]

  

CHAPTER XXII

  

THE LABYRINTH IN LITERATURE

THE romantic and mysterious flavour of the words "maze" and "labyrinth" has induced many a writer of fiction to adopt one or the other as the theme of a story, or as the setting of some of the action in a story, or else to use the name as an attractive symbolical title for a work.

We have several times already had occasion to refer to instances of this kind in the course of our survey, but the reader may have sufficient patience to support the enumeration of a few more, not by any means exhaustive, examples.

In most cases where the words are used in book-titles it is perhaps the allegorical rather than the romantic element which is in requisition, though truly the two are never far apart.

The Spanish poet Juan de Mena, in the fifteenth century, was inspired by Dante's "Divina Commedia" to compose a ponderous allegorical poem which he named "El Laberinto." This was published in Seville in 1496 and was a queer mixture of theology, astrology, and universal history. In it the poet is shown as being guided by a beautiful woman, symbolising Divine Providence, through three vast concentric circular regions, representing respectively the past, the present, and the future. These are somehow involved with the seven planets, after which the seven divisions of the poem are named.

[p. 194]

No doubt there were at that time many folk to whom such a work made a strong appeal, but it was evidently not the kind of book that we should nowadays choose to take away for a holiday.

A few years after its publication a French bard, Jean Bouchet by name, jealous perhaps for the reputation of his native art, cast upon the astonished world a mythical epic of between four and five thousand verses, entitled "Le Labyrinthe de Fortune." In this case the guide is a female representing Illusion, and her aim seems to have been to impress the poet, and through him the less gifted mortals, with the total instability and evanescence of everything pertaining to humanity.

An "allegorical labyrinth" printed at Lyons in 1769--the period, it will be remembered, at which some of the finest cathedral labyrinths were destroyed--must have been the ancestor of some of the Sunday School pictures of our early youth. It depicted "the spiritual labyrinth ornamented with four channels of grace representing (a) the four rivers of the Earthly Paradise and the happy state of Man before the Fall; (b) by divers convolutions, the various miseries with which human life has since been beset; (c) by the fact of the labyrinth terminating at the same point as that from which it starts, we see how Man, being formed of earth, returns, as to his first principle, by the decay of the body; (d) the health-giving waters of these channels represent the grace of God in which the depraved soul finds its remedy." This pious chart is signed "BELION fecit."

The curious jumble of crude imagery shown in Fig. 140 is reproduced from the heading to a long set of allegorical verses in German, published about 1630. The King referred to in the title is thought to be Frederick I of Bohemia.

When touching upon the question of etymology we made reference to the theological "Treatise against the Four Labyrinths of France," by Walter of St. Victor.

 

Click to enlarge
Fig. 140. Allegorical Labyrinth. (German Print, circ. 1630)

 

[p. 195]

[paragraph continues] We find the word used in this sense of verbal or mental entanglements in theological matters as the title of a book written some five centuries later by Thomas Carwell (alias Thorold). The full title of this work, which was printed in Paris in 1658, is: "Labyrinthus Cantuarensis; or Doctor Lawd's Labyrinth. Beeing an answer to the late Archbishop of Canterburies relation of a conference between himself and Mr. Fisher, etc. Wherein the true grounds of the Roman Catholique religion are asserted, the principal) controuersies betwixt Catholiques and Protestants thoroughly examined, and the Bishops meandrick windings throughout his whole worke layd open to publique view."

"Labyrinthus," according to Hazlitt's Bibliographical Collections, was the name of a Latin comedy performed at Cambridge before King James I. Perhaps this had some connection with that play which Pepys mentions in his Diary on May 2, 1684: "By coach to the King's Playhouse to see 'The Labyrinth' . . . the poorest play, methinks, that ever I saw, there being nothing in it but the odd accidents that fell out, by a lady's being bred up in man's apparel and a man in a woman's."

In some cases the use of the word "labyrinth" in a book-title seems to suggest that the term was regarded as an equivalent for "Thesaurus" or "Compendium of Knowledge" in respect of any particular branch of learning. This is the case in the "Gardener's Labyrinth" of Didymus Mountayne (Thomas Hill), to which we referred in Chapter XIII. The title has no reference to the discourse on mazes which occupies a small section of the book, but simply means the gardener's book of instructions or vade mecum. Much the same meaning is conveyed also by the title of a rather earlier book, the "Labyrinthus Medicorum Errantium" or "Labyrinth of Lost Physicians," which was one of the last works of the great Swiss donor and alchemist Paracelsus, and was published in 1553, twelve years after his death. The

[p. 196]

[paragraph continues] Polish educational reformer Komensky, better known as Comenius (1592-1671), likewise published a "Labyrinthus" of this kind. An English translation of it was printed early in the present century under the title of "The Labyrinth of the World and the Paradise of the Heart."

The "Labyrinthus" or "Laborintus" ascribed to the monk Eberhard of Bethune, who wrote in A.D. 1212 or thereabouts, is an elaborate and critical treatise on poetry and pedagogics; it is alternatively entitled "De Miseriis Rectorum Scholarum," and its reiterated plaints on the woes of the schoolmaster should find an echo in the heart of many a present-day instructor of youth.

"Love in these labyrinths his slaves detains," sang Pope; but he was only making use of an old and well-worn metaphor, which we mention at the moment because it has so often figured in book-titles. In 1593 Dr. G. Fletcher, uncle of the dramatist, wrote a poem of ingenious form entitled "A Lover's Maze." A similar title, "Love in a Maze," was given by Shirley to one of his plays, a performance of which was witnessed by Pepys on May 22, 1662. "The play hath little in it," says Pepys, "but Lacy's part of a country fellow, which he did to admiration." In 1611 a suite of poems entitled "Le Labyrinthe d'Amour" was published by a French poet, who modestly veiled his identity behind the initials "H. F. S. D. C." A century and a half later another French writer, equally retiring--his initials were "T. M."--wrote an opera comique of the same name.

One would almost think that there was something shameful or dangerous in allowing one's identity to be revealed in connection with works bearing such titles, for we find the same desire for anonymity in the writer of some poems entitled "The Maze" which appeared in 1815, headed by a quotation from Cowper:

" . . . to and fro,
 Caught in a labyrinth you go."

[p. 197]

That the maze or labyrinth has not lost its favour as either a descriptive or a metaphorical book-title is testified by the numerous modern examples of its use, amongst which we may mention Mrs. Henry Wood's "Within the Maze," "The Maze of Scilly," by E. J. Tiddy, "The Maze," by A. L. Stewart, "The Labyrinth," by R. Murray Gilchrist (perhaps in this case the reference is to the rambling old House with Eleven Staircases which features largely in the book), and finally, as an instance of undeniable descriptiveness, "The Physiology of the Human Labyrinth," by S. Scott. We have already made mention of O. W. F. Lodge's play, "The Labyrinth," when speaking of Fair Rosamond (Chap. XIX). The same title has recently been bestowed on one of a series of fanciful prose sketches by Mr. Martin Armstrong published collectively as "The Puppet Show."

The Italian aviator-poet Gabriele d'Annunzio, whose inconvenient conception of patriotism has proved such a source of embarrassment to his country since the war, has adopted as a most attractive and appropriate cover-design for his novel "Forse che si, forse che no" ("Perhaps yes, perhaps no") a conventional square unicursal labyrinth, the path of which is occupied by several repetitions, in block capitals, of the title of the book. The title on the wrapper of a recent novel by Miss Isabel Ostrander is accompanied by an effective design in which a female figure is seen against a background consisting of a plan of the Hampton Court maze.

Mr. Rudyard Kipling, in that curious collection of inconsequential whimsicalities which he calls the "Just so Stories," shows a queer sort of labyrinthine contrivance in his illustration to the story of "The Crab that Played," referring to it in the text as "the Big Miz-Maze."

Lest any reader who happens to be unacquainted with Sir A. T. Quiller-Couch's novel "Troy Town" should be misled by the title into antiquarian expectations, we

[p. 198]

may as well remark that it has no more connection with "turf mazes" than had the famous racehorse of the same name that came to a sad end in 1920--even less, in a manner of speaking. It has reference to the same Cornish seaport as his "Mayor of Troy," that Mayor who was so popular with the townsfolk that in the next year they made him an Ex-Mayor.

The vogue of allegory and extravagant symbolism which flourished in the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries was evidenced by the appearance of numbers of little books of "emblems," mainly based upon those of Andrea Alciati (1492-1550), and, as might well be expected, the labyrinth furnished many an inspiration to the compilers of these works. The emblem books of the Dutchman Jacob Cats, for example, and of our own poet Francis Quarles (1592-1644), were, like those of Alciati himself, enormously popular and ran through very many editions, not only in the native tongues of their authors but in most of the languages of Europe.

We have already, in Chapter XII, drawn attention to a labyrinth-emblem in the collection of the French writer Claude Paradin. A labyrinth of a different type appears in the "Emblems" of Quarles (e.g., in the 1635 edition, bk. iv, no. 2). In this case we are shown a woman walking away from the centre of what looks like a tall hedge maze, which has its path on the top of the hedge! With one hand she holds a staff and in the other a cord, the distant end of which is held by an angel located at the summit of a round tower some way off. A winding path proceeds from this tower to the gateway of the labyrinth. Here and there one sees unfortunate beings who are slipping from the wall into the deep crevasses below. A quotation from the Psalms, in Latin and in English, accompanies this figure: "Oh that my Wayes were directed to keep Thy Statutes." The labyrinth shown in most of the other emblem-books, where one occurs at all, is a very poor affair and looks rather like a low, flat fortress or an

[p. 199]

inverted cake-tin. A more realistic arrangement, however, appears in the collection of Jacob Cats.

The Hampton Court maze has more than once figured in literature. One appearance we have already noticed at the end of the preceding chapter; another, of a totally different character, we cull from the British Magazine for 1747. Few people, one would imagine, look upon a visit to this popular resort as an occasion for melancholy meditations, or for chanting moral dirges, but a foreigner might well be excused for reading the following lines as a justification of the reproach that Englishmen take their pleasures sadly.

Reflections on Walking in the Maze at Hampton Court.

"What is this mighty labyrinth--the earth,
 But a wild maze the moment of our birth?
 Still as we life pursue the maze extends,
 Nor find we where each winding purlieu ends;
 Crooked and vague each step of life we tread,--
 Unseen the danger, we escape the dread!
 But with delight we through the labyrinth range,
 Confused we turn, and view each artful change--
 Bewildered, through each wild meander bend
 Our wandering steps, anxious to gain the end;
 Unknown and intricate, we still pursue
 A certain path, uncertain of the clue;
 Like hoodwinked fools, perplex'd we grope our way
 And during life's short course we blindly stray,
 Puzzled in mazes and perplex'd with fears;
 Unknown alike both heaven and earth appears. 
 Till at the last, to banish our surprise,
 Grim Death unbinds the napkin from our eyes.
 Then shall GAY'S truth and wisdom stand confest,
 And Death will shew us Life was but a jest."

This genial gem should be engraved on brass and stuck up at the entrance to ensure that visitors, especially

[p. 200]

those of tender age, may enter the maze in the right spirit!

Scarcely more cheerful is the view regarding mazes taken by "The Poet" in Alfred Austin's "The Garden that I Love," where he speaks of

"tragic gardens, with dark avenues of intertwisted ilexes immeasurably old, where there might be lurking the emissary of an ambitious d'Este; gloomy labyrinths of mediaeval yew concealing the panther-spring of a vindictive Sforza or the self-handled stiletto of a fratricidal Borgia. . . ."

And again:

"Had I a garden, claustral yews
   Should shut out railing wind,
 That Poets might on sadness muse
   With a majestic mind."

If space permitted, or if any useful purpose were served, a good deal more might be written concerning the Labyrinth in relation to Literature. Similarly, the Labyrinth in Art might form the subject of a fairly bulky volume. A considerable amount of space could be taken up with the speculations that have been made as to the probable relationship of the Knossian design to the Cross, the Swastika--with its variants, the Triskelion and the Tetraskelion--the Circle, the Spiral, and so forth; but the reader who thirsts for discussions of this nature must be referred to more specialised archaeological literature. The main points of interest with regard to the use of the labyrinth figure in Art have already been presented, and most of the lines along which the labyrinth idea has been elaborated have been indicated, either in the text or in the illustrations. Before finally taking leave of our theme, however, there are yet a few miscellaneous aspects of it at which we may take a glance.

     
Mazes and Labyriths, by W. H. Matthews, [1922], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 201]

  

CHAPTER XXIII

  

MISCELLANEA AND CONCLUSION

IN the Annales Archeologiques for 1857 it was stated that M. Bonnin, of Evreux, had collected no less than 200 designs of mazes or labyrinths, representative of all sorts of nations and periods, and the editor promised to make a selection of these for reproduction as soon as the text to accompany them should be ready. The editor of the Annales incidentally referred to an early sixteenth-century painting on wood, in the palace of the Marquis Campana, which represented the legend of Theseus and showed a labyrinth similar to that of St. Maria in Aquiro at Rome. This also was to have been illustrated at the same time. The matter seems to have rested there, however, for no subsequent reference appeared.

As an instance of the unlikely places in which the employment of labyrinth figures for decorative or symbolic purposes are sometimes found, we may quote an entry which occurs in an inventory of the contents of a house at Duffus, Morayshire, dated May 25, 1708, from which it would appear that household napery, at that time, was sometimes patterned with the labyrinth:

"In the Nurserie. A large neprie press, wherein there is six pair Scots holland sheits . . . three fyn towels and five of the walls of troy."

Mr. Albert Way, in his notes to Dr. Trollope's memoir on Labyrinths in 1858, after referring to the

[p. 202]

popularity of mazes and "Troy-towns" in Scotland, mentions a labyrinth incised on the stone bench in one of the window recesses of the hall at Craigmillar Castle.

According to a Swedish publication of 1877, labyrinths have been found in West Gothland engraved on church bells!

The hedge maze is, of course, the chief embodiment of the labyrinth idea as a medium of amusement, but it is far from being the only form in which the principle subserves this purpose.

We have already referred to the practice, noted in various parts of England and Wales, of cutting "Troy-towns" in the turf. Most of us are, moreover, familiar with the schoolboy pastime of drawing mazes on paper, or on slates in the days before they were banished on hygienic grounds; the object of the designer in this case differing from that of the Troy-town constructors in that it consists of providing as difficult a puzzle as one's ingenuity at the moment can devise, whereas the latter merely laid out a conventional unicursal figure for the purpose of performing a ceremonial or playing a game thereon, like the squares for nine-men's morris or the diagram for hop-scotch.

An ingenious development of the hedge maze principle is the construction of indoor mazes lined with mirrors, by means of which the perplexity of the visitor is very greatly increased. Such "mirror mazes" often find a place in fairs and exhibitions.

Another method of utilising the puzzle-maze idea, and one which constitutes a valuable asset to the parent or nurse in charge of young children at the sea-side, is that of scratching maze-figures on the sands, of sufficient dimensions to enable little feet to perambulate the paths. Figures 141 and 142 show some of the mazes constructed on the sands of a well-known southern resort in the summer of 1920. The examples shown were made in a quiet corner of the beach and were "snapped" before

 

Click to enlarge
Fig. 141. Sea-Side Sand Maze. [Photo: W.H.M.]

Click to enlarge
Fig. 142. Sea-Side Sand Maze. [Photo: W.H.M.]

 

[p. 203]

the children had discovered them; otherwise, although no doubt prettier pictures would have resulted, the mazes would have been invisible.

Figure 143 shows the plan of a small temporary maze constructed by the writer for a garden fete held in aid of local church funds in the grounds of Mr. Kenneth Goschen, at Eastcote, Middlesex, on May 25, 1921. It was formed of galvanised-wire netting supported on six-foot fir stakes and thickened with elm foliage. At the entrance was displayed a conventional labyrinth design.

FIG. 143.--Temporary Maze at Village Fete. (W. H. M.)

slightly modified to convey the misleading suggestion that it was a key to the maze, and below this were the following lines:

Beware the dreadful Minotaur
 That dwells within the Maze.
 The monster feasts on human gore
 And bones of those he slays.
 Then softly through the labyrinth creep
 And rouse him not to strife.
 Take one short peep, prepare to leap
 And run to save your life!

At the goal was placed a chair facing an embowered mirror.

[p. 204]

Some readers may remember the publication many years ago of highly coloured lithographs of mazes, of bizarre design, generally emanating from the Continent and sold for a penny or twopence. An old scrap-book seen by the writer contains some specimens of this nature, published in Brussels. In some the "nodes" are occupied by various objects which, according to the printed instructions, have to be visited in a given order. One design, generously tinted in all the colours of the spectrum, is labelled "Le Jardin Chinois," although there is nothing distinctively Chinese about it except the absence of all 
FIG. 144.--Maze Toy by A. Brentano. (After Patent Specification.) resemblance to anything European. One may still purchase in the toy-shops coloured labyrinths of this kind, mounted on cardboard, with spaces at various points of the path for the accommodation of counters, which are moved progressively in accordance with the throws of dice by the competing players.

Some very ingenious applications of the labyrinth idea have been evolved by modern designers of toys and games.

Perhaps the most popular toy of this nature on the market is that of the "Pigs in Clover" type, consisting of a series of concentric interrupted circular walls, the inner-most of which constitutes the goal into which the player strives to roll all the marbles--usually three in number--which are seen through the glass cover (Fig. 144). This toy was patented by A. Brentano in 1889. Some skill is required to get all the marbles into the central compartment at the same time. Another toy of this character is seen in Fig. 145. It consists of a rather complicated maze formed of ridges, between which the player

[p. 205]

rolls a ball or a globule of mercury from the point marked A to that marked B, or vice versa. This was patented by S. D. Nix in 1891.

A somewhat similar arrangement, but with the addition of magnetism as the motive force, is that devised by J. M. Arnot in 1894, and shown in Fig. 146. In this

Click to enlarge
FIG. 145.--Maze Toy by S. D. Nix. (After Patent Specification.)

case the maze is not flat but is in the form of a shallow dome; the balls are of iron and are rolled not by tilting the box but by moving a magnet beneath it.

R. A. Cuthbert and W. Bevitt patented in 1889 a toy in which a ball, called "The Man in the Maze," is rolled about inside a small closed box, the internal partitions of which cannot be seen but are indicated on the outside of the case. The "Man" is invisible during his journey.

[p. 206]

At about the same time a somewhat similar toy was brought out by J. Proctor, in which, however, the travelling ball can be watched through the glass top, the puzzle element in this case consisting of the use of circular holes of two sizes for communicating between adjacent compartments, one size being just large enough to permit of the passage of the ball, the other just too small (Fig. 147)

          
Click to enlarge
FIG. 146.--Maze Toy by J. M.   Arnot.
   (After Patent Specification.)

       
Click to enlarge
FIG. 147.--Maze Toy by J.   Proctor.
   (After Patent Specification.)

     
   The most complex puzzle of the kind so far produced is that patented by H. Bridge in 1906 and shown in Fig. 148. The ball in this case is made to pass through channels formed between projections of labyrinthine pattern fixed to a base and others fixed to the transparent top, which can be moved relatively to the base. The toy may be of a circular pattern or rectangular. In the former case the top is rotated, in the latter it is slid from

[p. 207]

side to side. The patent also covers cases in which the toy constructed on the "skeleton" principle, the use of

Click to enlarge
FIG. 148.--Maze Toy by H. Bridge. (After Patent Specification.)

[p. 208]

a ring in place of a ball, and the combination of more than two mazes.

It now remains for some inventor of Einsteinian proclivities to devise one in several dimensions!

An interesting little study in what one might call "Labyrinth Psychology" was carried out by an Austrian biologist in connection with his researches on "The Evolution of Efficiency in the Animal Kingdom," in 1917. This was a series of experiments to test the efficiency of animals in learning to thread a labyrinth in search of food. Figs. 149, 150 and 151 show three stages in the

Click to enlarge
FIGS. 149, 150 and 151.--Path of Rat in Labyrinth; three stages. (Szymanski.)

education of a rat in this respect, the dotted line representing the track followed by the animal from the entrance to the food-containing centre of a simple form of labyrinth.

Some sort of game, known as "Labyrinthe," enjoyed a passing favour in France in the eighteenth century. An advertisement of May 8, 1869, referring to one offered for sale by a Parisian upholsterer named Lechevin, describes it as "un jeu de labyrinthe a 11 cases dore d'or moulu, avec tableau dans chaque case," but this does not tell us much concerning the nature of the pastime.

A card game of similar name was played in this country half a century ago; it was a kind of bezique.

In France the name "Labyrinthe" is also given to a

[p. 209]

children's game in which the majority of the players hold hands so as to form a chain of arches which are threaded by two runners called respectively le tisserand and la navette--"the weaver" and "the shuttle."

A visitor to the Latin Convent on the summit of Mount Carmel, Palestine, in 1874, described a "verbal labyrinth" which he saw displayed on a board hanging on the wall of an inner staircase. It was called "The Labyrinth of St. Bernard," and consisted of a number of words or short phrases arranged in a square, as shown below. By selecting the words in the proper order five maxims are obtained "by which man may live well." The first of these maxims, commencing with the word at the foot of the left-hand column, is: Noli dicere omnia quae scis quia qui dicit omnia quae scit saepe audit quod non vult.

The remaining four injunctions may be read by similarly utilising the words in the bottom row with those in the second, third, fourth, and fifth rows respectively:

LABYRINTHUS A DIVO BERNARDO

COMPOSITUS QUO BENE VIVIT HOMO

          DICERE

       SCIS

       DICIT

       SCIT

       AUDIT

       NON VULT

     
      FACERE

       POTES

       FACIT

       POTEST

       INCURRIT

       NON CREDIT

     
      CREDERE

       AUDIS

       CREDIT

       AUDIT

       CREDIT

       NON EST

     
      DARE

       HARES

       DAT

       HABET

       MISERE QUAERIT

       NON HABET

     
      JUDICARE

       VIDES

       JUDICAT

       VIDET

       CONTEMNIT

       NON DEBET

     
      NOLI

       OMNIA QUAE

       QUIA QUI

       OMNIA QUAE

       SAEPE

       QUOD

     
   As a sample of a verbal labyrinth this seems to be very simple and straightforward in comparison with the average At of Parliament.

[p. 210]

Let us turn now, for a brief space, to a question which, although bearing upon matters dealt with earlier in the book, has been too little investigated to warrant more than a nodding reference in our more serious chapters--the question of place-names.

The occurrence of a suggestive place-name is, as previously hinted, very slender evidence by itself on which to form an opinion of the former existence of a maze in the locality. There is always the possibility that the name may be a corruption of some ancient word of very different significance, perhaps the name of some person, or that it may have been bestowed fancifully or in respect of some resemblance to another place.

In the absence of fuller information we will limit our-selves to the bare mention of such names as convey a suggestion of possible maze sites, merely remarking any cases in which evidence in one direction or the other has come to notice.

The district known as Maze Pond, familiar to Londoners in the neighbourhood of the Borough, and to which we made reference in Chapter XV, takes its name from the ancient manor of the Maze, which was in the holding of Sir John Burcestre in the fifteenth century. An old token bears the inscription, "Michael Blower, at ye Maze, Southwarke." What kind of maze, if any, formerly existed in the locality we do not know.

Maze Hill has sometimes been assumed to derive its name from a maze which is supposed to have existed in the park of the former royal palace of Greenwich (see p. 36), but the name was formerly spelt in a different manner and may have quite another origin. In Hasted's "History of Kent," 1778, it is referred to as Mease Hill, and it has been suggested that this may have come from the Celtic word Maes, meaning "field." There is a Maze Green in Hertfordshire, near Bishops Stortford. Possibly there was formerly a turf maze in the vicinity like that on

[p. 211]

[paragraph continues] Saffron Walden common, not very far away, but we have no evidence to that effect.

A few miles west of Lisburn, in Ireland, are two places named respectively "The Maze" and "Mazetown," the former a small village in Antrim, the latter a racing centre just over the county border in Down.

"Troy-town," as we have seen, also occurs as a place-name. In Dorset there is one near Dorchester and another near Bere Regis. These are alleged to be the sites of former turf mazes, of which, however, there are no authentic records. In Kent there is one near Hastingleigh, and the name also occurs at Rochester. [*1] The latter is said to commemorate a former owner or builder of property in that part of the town, whose name happened to be Troy. A part of Peckham also used to be known as Troy-town.

The word "Troy" alone is also of fairly frequent occurrence, as for instance near Stalybridge, Lancs, and near Londonderry; Troy Michell and Troy Hall are found in Monmouthshire, and the latter name also at Blackburn, Lancs, but such names are no more likely to have any connection with ancient maze sites than is the flourishing city of similar name in the United States, the probability being that in all these cases it is the famous Troy of the Iliad that furnished the inspiration. The name of Troy-town may in some cases have been given on account of irregularity or intricacy of design, for the word is found in certain local dialects as a synonym for a state of confusion, an untidy house being said to be "just like Troy-town."

It is surely uncommon for the word "Labyrinth" itself to be found as a place-name, but in February 1911 Captain Scott pitched his camp in an Antarctic spot which, on account of the fantastically sinuous nature of its surroundings, he decided to name "Labyrinth Camp."

[p. 212]

We must now draw to a close.

Enough has perhaps been said to give some idea of the variety and extent of the different ways in which the labyrinth idea has developed and in which it has been employed, but it would obviously be wrong to assume that the last word on the subject has now been pronounced.

As regards the early history of the idea and of the terms associated with it we have seen that the boundaries of our knowledge are still misty and ill-defined, a circumstance that only gives zest to the study of the subject.

We see that our enquiry has taken us into realms far removed from everyday experience and in which we feel the need of special training in order to weigh the facts presented. It has given us glimpses of the workshop of the archaeologist, the anthropologist, and the etymologist.

The study of later developments has led us into curious by-paths of art and literature--classical, mediaeval, renaissance, and modern--and we see that even now the labyrinth idea has not entirely ceased to exercise its allurements or to evoke the spirit of invention.

There is still room for a good deal of research and for the possibility of highly interesting discoveries in respect of almost every phase of the labyrinth's past history.

With regard to its future developments, much as we should have liked to close our review with a vindication of utilitarian interest, and although one can never safely prophesy to what uses the ingenuity of men may put any given principle, we could not hope to sound an expectant note without creating an impression of fatuity. Lest this statement be taken to mean that our enquiry has, therefore, had no practical aim, let us hasten to repeat once more the hope expressed in our introductory chapter to the effect that a perusal of this little book will at least ensure a revival of interest in, and consequently the preservation of, those few relics of rustic revelry and

[p. 213]

prehistoric magic which yet remain with us in the shape of the turf labyrinths.

As Mr. A. H. Allcroft, in his "Earthwork of England" (1908), has truly remarked, when speaking of the Asenby maze: "It is marvellous that the memory of such things, once prominent features of rural life, can die out so rapidly as it does." And yet, who can deny that they are worthy of at least as much care and interest as many of the obvious and commonplace antiquities upon which the guide-books lavish their encomiums?

We need not emulate the misguided enthusiasm of those who are unable to discover a merit in a bygone practice without plunging into an indiscriminate advocacy of its revival--an enthusiasm which inevitably brings discredit upon its object--but let us at any rate see to it that no more of these rare and interesting heirlooms are lost to us through ignorance or neglect.

Footnotes

^211:1 See also <page 91>.

    
Mazes and Labyriths, by W. H. Matthews, [1922], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 214]

  

APPENDIX

  

BIBLIOGRAPHY OF MAZES AND LABYRINTHS

  

(TOGETHER WITH NAMES OF PERSONS WHO HAVE FURNISHED THE WRITER WITH FIRST-HAND INFORMATION)

NOTE.--Names of Authors are also arranged alphabetically in the Index, which contains detailed references to the sections of the Bibliography.

  

I. GENERAL

TROLLOPE, E. "Ancient and Mediaeval Labyrinths," with notes by ALBERT WAY, in Archaeological Journal, Vol. XV, 1858. Also in Reports of the Associated Architectural Societies in 1858, and appended to a paper on the Caerleon mosaic in the Proc. Monmouth and Caerleon Antiquarian Association, 1866.

(Mainly concerned with church labyrinths and British turf mazes.)

DE LAUNAY, R. "Les Fallacieux Detours du Labyrinthe" in Revue Archeologique, Series V, 1915-16.

(A bold and striking essay, chiefly concerned with the labyrinth as the architectural expression of a sun-myth.)

FRAZER, Sir J. G. "The Golden Bough," Pt. III, "The Dying God," 1911.

(In the section dealing with the octennial tenure of the kingship the labyrinth is treated from the point of view of the anthropologist and folk-lorist.)

[p. 215]

COOK, A. B. "Zeus. A Study in Ancient Religions," 1914.

(The labyrinth, particularly that of Crete, is studied from the point of view of the classical archaeologist.)

KRAUSE, ERNST. "Die Trojaburgen Nordeuropas" and "Die Nordische Herkunft der Trojasage," Glogau, 1893. Also "Tuiskoland der Arischen Stamme and Gotter Urheimat," 1891.

(A study of classic and northern mythologies with special reference to solar rites. The labyrinth is held to be distinctively northern, the classic legends being derivative.)

MASSMANN, H. F. "Wunderkreise and Irrgarten," Leipzig Basse, 1844.

(This work is mentioned in a German encyclopaedia, but the writer has not been able to obtain access to a copy. Written by a mathematician, it probably deals with the subject from a corresponding aspect.)

DAREMBERG, SAGLIO & POTTIER. "Dictionnaire des Antiquites," 1904, Vol. III.

(The article "Labyrinthe" gives very full references to the occurrence of labyrinth figures on ancient monuments.)

Dictionary of Architecture (1867). Arts. "Maze" and "Meander."

Encyclopaedia Britannica. Art. "Labyrinth." By THOS. MOORE, F.L.S. (1821-87) (with especial reference to hedge mazes).

(Several other encyclopaedias, American, French, German and Italian, also contain good articles on the subject, notably Larousse, La Grande Encyclopedie, The New International Encyclopaedia, and Roscher's Lexikon de Mythologie, Vol. II, 1894-7.)

"Country Life." Two well-illustrated anonymous articles in issues of January 24 and March 14, 1903.

There is a popular article on Mazes by G. S. TYACK in W. ANDREWS'S "Ecclesiastical Curiosities," 1897; and a chapter of E. O. GORDON'S "Prehistoric London," 1914, treats of the matter in so far as it supports the theory of the Trojan origin of London (Troy-Novant).

[p. 216]

  

II. FORM, AND MATHEMATICAL PRINCIPLES

BALL, W. W. R. "Mathematical Recreations and Essays," 1905, pp. 174-80.

TARRY, G. "Le Probleme des Labyrinthes," in Nouvelles Annales de Mathematiques, Vol. XIV, 1895, pp. 187-90.

LUCAS, E. "Recreations Mathematiques," 1882-94.

WOLTERS, P. "Darstellungen des Labyrinths," in Sitzungsberichte der phil., &c., Classe der k.b. Akademie zu Munchen, 1907.

MEYER, W. "Ein Labyrinth mit Versen" in Sitz. der phil., &c., Classe der k.b. Ak. zu Munchen, 1882, Bd. II, Heft. I, pp. 267-300, and Nachtrag on p. 400.

KRAUSE, E. "Die nordische Herkunft der Trojasage," 1893.

(Shows how typical labyrinth figures may be derived from Northumbrian rock engravings.)

REINACH, S. "Cultes, Mythes, et Religions," 1906, Vol. II, pp. 234, etc.

(Derivation of swastika, triskelion, etc.)

DUDENEY, H. E. "Amusements in Mathematics," 1917, pp. 127-37.

INWARDS, R., on the Labyrinth on the Coins of Knossos in Knowledge, October 1892.

  

III. THE CLASSIC LABYRINTHS

  

(i) THE EGYPTIAN LABYRINTH

HERODOTUS. ii. 148-9.

DIODORUS SICULUS. I. iv. 61, 66.

STRABO. XVII. 1. 37.

POMPONIUS MELA. "De situ orbis."

PLINY. "Hist. Nat." xxxvi. 19.

PETRIE, W. M. FLINDERS. "The Labyrinth, Gerzeh, and Mazghuneh" (London School of Archaeology in Egypt, University College, Gower St.), 1912. Also "Kahun, Garob, and Hawara," 1890, and "Hawara, Biahmu, and Arsinoe," 1889.

[p. 217]

HOW, W. W., and WELLS, J. "A Commentary on Herodotus," 1912, Vol. I. p. 240, etc.

MYRES, J. L., in Annals of Archaeology and Anthropology, III. P. 134.

PERROT & CHIPIEZ. "Histoire de l'Art dans l'Antiquite" I. ("Egypte").

FERGUSSON'S "History of Architecture," 1893, Vol. I. pp. 110-12.

LEPSIUS, K. R. "Denkmaler," 1859, Vol. I. pl. 46-8.

EBERS, G. M. "L'Egypte, du Caire a Philae," 1868, p. 174.

WIEDEMANN, A. "Herodots Zweite Buch," 1890, p. 522, etc.

CANINA, L. "L'Architettura Antica," 1839-44, Sec. I. (Egiziana), Tav. 122.

JOMARD, E. F. "Description de l'Egypte," 1807. Vol. IV. P. 478.

(Embodies results of Napoleon's expedition.)

POCOCKE, R. "A Description of the East," 1743, p. 61, etc.

LUCAS, P. "Voiage de la Haute Egypte," 1705. Vol. II. p. 261, etc.

CARERI, J. F. GEMELLI. "A Voyage round the World," 1699. Bk. I. Ch. vi. (in Churchill's Collection, 1732, Vol. VI).

[p. 218]

  

(ii) THE CRETAN LABYRINTH

VIRGIL. "Aeneid," V. v. 588.

PLINY. "Hist. Nat." xxxvi. 19.

OVID. "Metamorphoses," VIII. v. 159.

DIODORUS SICULUS. IV. iv. 77.

APOLLODORUS. III. i. 3, xv. 8.

PLUTARCH. "Life of Theseus."

MEURSIUS, J. (GRAEVIUS, J. G.). "Creta, Cyprus et Rhodus." Amsterdam, 1675.

(Gives very comprehensive references to the Cretan Labyrinth in classical and mediaeval literature.)

EVANS, Sir A. J. "Excavations at Knossos," in Annals of the British School at Athens, Vol. VIII, 1902. "Mycenaean Tree and Pillar Cult" in Journal of Hellenic Studies, Vol. XXI, 1901. "The Tomb of the Double Axes at Knossos" in Archaeologia, Vol. LXV, 1914. "The Palace

[p. 219]

of Minos at Knossos," Vol. I, 1921. Article in The Times of July 14, 1922, p. 11.

ROUSE, W. H. D. "The Double Axe and the Labyrinth" in Journal of Hellenic Studies, Vol. XXI, 1901.

HALL, H. R. "The Two Labyrinths" in Journal of Hellenic Studies, Vol. XXV, 1905. "Aegean Archaeology," 1912.

BURROWS, R. M. "Discoveries in Crete," 1907.

GLASGOW, G. "The Discoveries in Crete" in "Discovery," Vol. I, 1920.

(A general review to date.)

Mosso, A. "The Palaces of Crete," 1907.

HAWES, C. H. and H. B. "Crete the Forerunner of Greece," 1909.

COOK, A. B. Op. cit., 1914.

BAIKIE, J. "The Sea-Kings of Crete," 1920.

FRAZER, Sir J. G. Op. cit., 1911.

SPRATT, T. A. B. "Travels in Crete," 1865.

SIEBER, F. W. "Reise nach der Insel Kreta in 1817," 1823.

HOECK, C. "Kreta," 1823-29.

COCKERELL, C. R., R.A. "Travels in Southern Europe," 1810-17. Edited by his son, S. P. COCKERELL, 1903. Ch. xi.

(Cavern of Gortyna.)

SAVARY, C. E. "Lettres sur la Grece," 1788 (Trans. in Annual Register, 1789, Pt. II. pp. 90-98).

TOURNEFORT, G. P. DE. "Voyage du Levant," 1717 (Trans. by J. OZELL, 1718).

CAUMONT, LE SEIGNEUR DE ("Nompar II"). "Voyage d'oultremer en Jherusalem," 1418, Brit. Mus. Egerton MSS. 890, fol. 2, ed. by MARQUIS DE LA GRANGE and printed Paris, 1858, p. 42.

Florentine Picture Chronicle, XV. Century. Brit. Mus. Prints 197d 3 fol. 50-51.

Italian Engraving, School of Maso Finiguerra. Brit. Mus. A. II. rob.

  

(iii) THE ETRUSCAN, LEMNIAN, ETC., LABYRINTHS.

STRABO. VIII. vi. 369.

(Labyrinth of the Cyclops, Nauplia.)

PLINY. "Hist. Nat." xxxvi. 19, 4.

DENNIS, G. "The Cities and Cemeteries of Etruria," 1848.

[p. 220]

CANINA, L. "L'Architettura Antica," 1839-44, Sec. II. Tav. 159.

QUATREMERE DE QUINCY, A. C. "Restitution du Tombeau de Porsenna," 1826.

MULLER, K. O. "Die Etrusker," 1828, Vol. IV. 2, I.

  

IV. THE LABYRINTH IN ANCIENT ART

  

(i) COINS

WROTH, W. W. "Catalogue of Greek Coins," 1886, Pl. IV., V., VI.

HEAD, B. V. "Historia Nummorum," 1887, pp. 389-91.

  

(ii) POTTERY

DEECKE, W., in Annali dell' Instituto di Correspondenza Archeologica, 1881.

(Tragliatella Vase.)

REINACH, S. "Vases Peints," 1899, p. 345.

PERROT ET CHIPIEZ. "Histoire de l'Art dans l'Antiquite," Vol. VII. p. 118.

WALTERS, H. B. "History of Ancient Pottery," 1905, Vol. I.

(Frontispiece shows Theseus kylix, by DURIS.)

ELDERKIN, G. W. "Meander or Labyrinth" in Journ. Amer. Arch. XIV, 1910, pp. 185-190.

(Meander figures on Theseus Vases.)

  

(iii) MOSAIC PAVEMENTS, ETC. (See also CHURCH LABYRINTHS, Appendix V.)

ARNETH, J. C. VON. "Archaologische Analekten," 1851-3, Tafel V. (Salzburg mosaic.)

Archaologische Zeitung, 1848, p. 99.

(Mosaics at Orbe and Bosseaz, Switzerland.)

MILLIN, A. L. "Voyage dans le Midi de la France," 1807, Pl. 34.

(Mosaic at Aix, near Marseilles.)

Mittheilungen der Antiquarischen Gesellschaft zu Zurich. Bd. XVI, 18+1, etc., Pl. 29.

(Mosaic at Cormerod, Switzerland.)

CREUZER, G. F. "Abbildungen zu Symbolik und Mythologie der alter Volker," 1819, Taf. LV, No. 1 (Salzburg).

[p. 221]

CAUMONT, A. DE. "Abecedaire d'Archeologie." 1886 Ed. Vol. III. (Mosaic at Verdes, Loir-et-Cher.)

ZAHN, W. "Schonsten Ornamente aus Pompeji, etc.," 1828, Vol. II, Taf. 50.

(Mosaic in Casa del Labirinto, Pompeii.)

COMARMOND, A. "Description du Musee Lapidaire de la Ville de Lyons," No. 273.

(Inscription relating to a labyrinth.)

GUERIN, V. "Voyage Archeologique dans la Regence de Tunis," 1862, Vol. I, p. 109.

(Mosaic at Susa.)

DOUBLET, G., in Comptes Rendus de l'Academie des Inscriptions, 1892, pp. 318-329. (Mosaic at Susa.)

Revue Archeologique, 1884, p. 107. (Mosaic at Brindisi.)

CAETANI-LOVATELLI, E. "Miscellanea Archeologia," 1891, and in Nuova Antologia, Vol. XXVIII, 1890.

(General review.)

COLLIER, C. V., in Proceedings of the Society of Antiquaries, Vol. XX, No. II, February 9, 1905, pp. 215-19.

(Mosaic at Harpham, Yorks, and mention of one in Northants.)

MORGAN, O., in Proceedings of Monmouth and Caerleon Antiquarian Association, 1866.

(Mosaic at Caerleon.)

RICH, A. "A Dictionary of Roman and Greek Antiquities," 1893, pp. 481-2.

  

(iv) MISCELLANEOUS

EVANS, Sir A. J. "The Palace of Minos," 1921, Vol. I, pp. 121 et seq. and p. 357.

(Origin of Labyrinth Figure.)

PETRIE, W. M. F. "Egyptian Decorative Art," pp. 42, 43. (Meanders.)

Real Museo Borbonico, XIV, 1852, Tav. a.

(Labyrinth graffito on pillar of house at Pompeii. This figure is reproduced in E. Breton's "Pompeia," and elsewhere.)

OZANAM, A. F. "Documents inedits," 1850, Section "Graphia aurae urbis Romae."

(Labyrinth embroidered on emperor's robes.)

[p. 222]

DE LAUNAY, R. Op. cit.

(Interpretation of tholos of Epidauros, etc.)

KABBADIAS, P. "Fouilles d'Epidaure," 1893.

(Tholos of Temple of Aesculapius.)

MULLER, K. "Tiryns Vorbericht uber die Grabungen, 1905-1912," in Athen. Mittheilungen, XXXVIII, 1913, p. 78, etc. (Labyrinth-like structure in masonry.)

MAFFEI, P. A. "Gemmae Antiche," 1709, Pt. IV, pl. 31.

(Labyrinth engraved on a gem.)

  

V. LABYRINTHS IN CHURCHES

  

(i) GENERAL

AME, E. "Les Carrelages Emailles du Moyen Age," 1859.

(Has a good chapter on the French church labyrinths, with coloured plates.)

GAILHABAUD, J. "L'Architecture du Vme au XVIIme siecle," 1858.

DURAND, J. "Les Paves Mosaiques en Italie et en France," in Annales Archeologiques, XIV-XVII, 1855-7.

DESCHAMPS DES PAS, L. "Le Pavage des Eglises," in Ann. Arch. XII, p. 147.

VIOLLET-LE-DUC, E. E. "Dictionnaire Raisonne de l'Architecture Francaise du XIe au XVIe siecle," Art. "Labyrinthe."

WALCOTT, M. E. C. "Sacred Archaeology," 1868.

MUNTZ, E. "Etudes Iconographiques," 1887, p. 15 et seq.

(Italian examples.)

  

(ii) PARTICULAR LOCALITIES

CAMPI, P. M. "Dell' Hist. Eccles. di Piacenza," 1651-62.

(S. Savino, Placentia.)

CIAMPINI, G. G. "Vetera Monimenta," 1690-9, Vol. II, pl. 2.

(S. Michele Maggiore, Pavia.)

GERUZEZ, J. B. F. "Descrip. Hist. et Stat. de la Ville de Rheims," 1817, Vol. I, p. 316.

(Rheims Cathedral. "Penitential" theory of church labyrinths.)

DEBRAY, M. "Notice sur la Cathedrale d'Arras," 1829.

[p. 223]

WALLET, E. "Descrip. d'une Crypte et d'un Pave mosaique de l'Eglise Saint Bertin a St. Omer," 1834.

DAIRE, L. F. "Histoire de la Ville d'Amiens," 1782, Vol. II, p. 92.

(Amiens Cathedral.)

TURNER, DAWSON. "Tour in Normandy," 1820, Vol. II, pp. 206-7.

(Caen. Guard-Chamber of Abbey.)

AUBER, C. A. "Histoire de la Cathedrale de Poitiers," 1849, Vol. I, Pl. I, Fig. 6.

(Poitiers Cathedral. Mural sketch.)

DIDRON, A. N. "Voyage Archeologique dans la Grece chretienne," in Annales Archeologiques, Vol. I, 1844, P. 177.

(Labyrinth figure in Convent of St. Barlaam.)

ROBOLOTTI, F. "Dei Documenti Storiei Litterarj di Cremona," 1857, Tav. II.

(Cremona Cathedral.)

PREVOST, M., in Revue Archeologique IV, 1848, and VIII, 1851-2, pp. 566-7.

(Church of Reparatus, Orleansville, Algeria.)

DOUBLET DE BOISTHIBAULT, in Revue Archeologique, VIII, 1851-2, pp. 437-47.

(Chartres Cathedral.)

AUS'M WEERTH, E. "Mosaikboden in St. Gereon zu Coln," 1874.

(Churches in Cologne and Pavia.)

RUSKIN, J. "Fors Clavigera," Fors 23. (Lucca.)

Proceedings of Architectural Societies of Northampton, York, etc. Vols. XIX--XX, 1887--8.

(Church at Alkborough.)

The Builder, Vol. XVI, 1855, p. 90.

(Notre Dame de la Treille, Lille.)

Annales Archeologiques, Vol. XVI, 1855, p. 211.

(Notre Dame de la Treille, Lille.)

Manuscript. Bibliotheque Barberini, XLIV, p. 35.

(Pavia.)

Manuscript. Villard de Honnecourt. "Album," ed. by J. B. A. LASSUS, 1858, Plate XIII.

(Chartres.)

[p. 224]

  

VI. HEDGE MAZES, FLORAL LABYRINTHS, ETC.

  

(i) CLASSICAL REFERENCES

(Roman Topiary Work and Ornamental Gardening)

PLINY. "Hist. Nat.," XV. 30; XVI. 33; XXXVI. 13.

PLINY THE YOUNGER. Epist. V. 6.

  

(ii) GREAT BRITAIN (GENERAL)

HYLL, T. (Didymus Mountayne.) "The Profitable Art of Gardening," 3rd edition, 1579, pp. 9, 15.

ISLIP, A. "The Orchard and the Garden," 1602, p. 48.

(Gathered from Dutch and French sources.)

LAWSON, W. "A New Orchard and Garden," 1631.

(Afterwards embodied in K. MARKHAM'S "A New Way to Get Wealth," 1648, etc.)

PARKINSON, J. "Paradisus in soli," 1629, Ch. II.

MEAGER, L. "The Compleat English Gardener," circ. 1685. Harley Manuscripts. Brit. Mus. Harl. 5308 (71, a, 12).

(A seventeenth-century gardener's manuscript book, with two mazes.)

LONDON, G., and WISE, H. "The Compleat Florist," 1706

(afterwards published by J. CARPENTER as "The Retir'd Gardener." (Primarily a translation of French works by L. LIGER and F. GENTIL.)

LANGLEY, BATTY. "New Principles of Gardening," 1728.

(Numerous maze designs.)

SWITZER, S. "Ichnographia Rustica," 1742, Vol. II, p. 218.

FULLMER, S. "Gardener's Companion," 1781, p. 105.

HOME, H. (Lord KAMES.) "Elements of Criticism," 1796, Vol. II, p. 348.

(Criticism of mazes in gardens.)

WALPOLE, H. "Essay on Modern Gardening," 1785.

ROBINSON, W. "The English Flower Garden," 1921.

MACARTNEY, MERVYN. "English Houses and Gardens of the Seventeenth and Eighteenth Centuries," 1908.

(Article on hedges and mazes.)

BROWN, A. J., in American Homes and Gardens, VII, November 1910, pp. 423-5.

[p. 225]

  

(iii) GREAT BRITAIN (PARTICULAR LOCALITIES)

LAW, E. "History of Hampton Court Palace," 1900, Vol. III, pp. 74-7.

ROCQUE, J. "Engraving of Hampton Court," 1736.

(Shows the "Troy-town," as well as the Maze and a spiral garden.)

DEFOE, D. "Tour through Great Britain," 1738.

(Hampton Court "Wilderness.")

Daily Chronicle, February 22, 1921.

(Revenue from Hampton Court Maze.)

Parliamentary Surveys. Survey No. 72, 1649. Transcribed by John Caley, F.R.S., in Archaeologia, Vol. X, 1792.

(Maze at Wimbledon.)

KIP, J. "Britannia Illustrata," 1720.

(Mazes at Wrest House and Badminton.)

WILLIAMS, W. "Oxonia depicta," 1732.

(Trinity College labyrinth.)

VALLANCE, AYMER. "The Old Colleges of Oxford," 1913, p. 77.

(Trinity College labyrinth.)

AUBREY, J. "Remaines of Gentilisme and Judaisme," 1686-7.

(Mazes in Southwark and Tothill Fields, Westminster. The 1881 edition has an editor's note re maze on Putney Heath.)

Churchwardens' Accounts, St. Margaret, Westminster, 1672.

(Tothill Maze.)

Collectanea Topographica, Vol. VIII, 1843, pp. 253-62.

(Maze in Southwark.)

STRICKLAND, A. "Lives of the Queens of England," 1851, Vol. I, p. 264.

(Southwark.)

WROTH, W., and A. E. "The London Pleasure Gardens of the Eighteenth Century," 1896.

CRISP, Sir F. "Guide for the use of visitors to Friar Park," 1914.

(Maze and Dial Garden at Henley-on-Thames.)

NESFIELD, W. H. "Estimate and Plan for R.H.S. Gardens," 1860 (S. Kensington). Also plan in R.H.S. "Official Guide," 1864.

[p. 226]

HUTCHISON, A. F. "The Lake of Menteith," 1899.

(Queen Mary's Bower.)

TRIGGS, H. INIGO. "Formal Gardens in England and Scotland," 1902.

(Mazes at Arley Hall and Belton House figured.)

ELGOOD, G. S., and JEKYLL, G. "Some English Gardens," 1904, p. 127.

(Maze at Arley Hall.)

  

(iv) FRANCE

ANDROUET DU CERCEAU, J. "Les Plus Excellents Bastiments de France," 1576, and other architectural works.

(Mazes at Charleval, Gaillon, etc.)

ESTIENNE, C. "La Maison Rustique," 1573, Vol. II, ch. vi, p. 68.

(Translated by R. SURFLET as "The Country Farme," 1600.)

BETIN, P. "Le Fidelle Jardinier," 1636, p. 24.

PERRAULT, C. "Labyrinte de Versailles," 1677.

(With plan and many illustrations by S. LE CLERC.)

PANSERON, S. "Receuil des Jardins Francais," 1723.

(With many plates.)

BLONDEL, J. F. "Cours d'Architecture," 1771-7, Vol. I, p. 17; Vol. IV, p. 72; Vol. VIII, Plates 18, 19.

(Mazes at Choisy and Chantilly.)

HAVARD, H. "Dictionnaire de l'Ameublement," etc., 1887-90. Art. "Labyrinthe."

(Mazes at Bauge and Les Rochers.)

STEIN, H. "Les Jardins de France," 1913, Plates 88, 89. TRIGGS, H. INIGO. "Garden Craft in Europe," 1913, pp. 21, 81, 141.

(Mazes at the Tuileries, Hotel St. Paul, and Sceaux.)

  

(v) ITALY

SERLIO, S. "Libri Cinque d'Architettura," 1537; English edition, 1611.

DUPERAC, S. "Vues et Perspectives des Jardins de Tivoli," 1573

(Labyrinths at Villa d'Este.)

[p. 227]

EVELYN, J. "Memoirs," s.a. 1646.

(Labyrinth at Vicenza.)

TRIGGS, H. INIGO. "The Art of Garden Design in Italy," 1906, p. 51.

(Mazes at Castellezo dei Arconati, Milan.)

SKIPPON, Sir PHILIP. "A Journey through part of the Low Countries, Germany, Italy, and France," 1663.

(Labyrinth at Vicenza.)

  

(vi) HOLLAND AND BELGIUM

DE VRIES, J. V. "Hortorum Viridariorumque Formae," 1583, Plates 14-16, 22-7.

COMMELYN, C. "Nederlantze Hesperides," 1676.

(Several designs for mazes.)

HARRIS, W. "A Description of the King's Royal Palace and Gardens at Loo," 1699.

VISSCHER, N. "De Zegepraalende Vecht," 1719.

(Maze at Gunterstein.)

TRIGGS, H. INIGO. "Garden Craft in Europe," 1913, PP. 173, 192.

(Mazes at Sorgvliet and Enghien.)

FOUQUIER, M. "L'Art des Jardins," 1911, p. 120.

(Maze at Enghien.)

  

(vii) OTHER COUNTRIES

BOECKLER, G. A. "Architectura Curiosa," 1664, Pt. IV.

(Numerous plates contain labyrinth designs.)

LAUREMBERG, P. "Horticultura," 1632, Plates 15-22.

Daily Mail, September 23, 1899.

(Art. on "Puzzle Gardens" gives account of curious allegorical labyrinth at Anhalt; also describes mazes at Barcelona.)

MOLLET, A. "Le Jardin de Plaisir," 1651.

(Sweden.)

TRIGGS, H. INIGO. "Garden Craft in Europe," 1913, p. 280.

(Maze at the Alcazar, Seville.)

SKIPPON, Sir P. "A Journey through part of the Low Countries," etc., 1663.

(Munich.)

[p. 228]

MOULTON, R. H., in Architectural Record (New York), October 1917, p. 400.

(American replica of the Maze at Hampton Court.)

WARREN, C., in Country Life (Garden City), VIII, September 1905, pp. 527-8.

(Cedar Hill Maze, U.S.A.)

The following kindly furnished the writer with recent information regarding the mazes at the localities indicated:

H. COLLAR, Esq., Curator, Museum, Saffron Walden (Saffron Walden); H. WALLIS CHAPMAN, Esq., Jordans, Bucks (Sudeley Castle); W. EMERTON, Esq., Grant-ham (Belton House); E. M. JACKSON, Esq., M.A., Manningtree (Mistley Place); G. KERRY RIX, Esq., Somerleyton (Somerleyton Hall); R. POGMORE, Esq., Mansfield (Debdale Hall).

  

VII. TURF LABYRINTHS

  

(i) GENERAL

TROLLOPE, E. Op. cit. 1858.

AUBREY, J. "Remaines of Gentilisme and Judaisme," 1686-7. Ed. by J. BRITTEN, F.L.S., 1881.

(Mazes at Pimperne, West Ashton, Cotswold Downs, Southwark, and Tothill Fields. Editor adds note re maze on Putney Heath.)

AUBREY, J. "History of Surrey," Ed. 1719, Vol. V, p. 80.

(Suggestion of Scandinavian origin of mazes.)

STUKELEY, W. "Itinerarium Curiosum," 1776, pp. 31, 97.

(Discussion of origin of mazes.)

ROBERTS, P. "Cambrian Popular Antiquities," 1815, p. 212. ("City of Troy" in Wales.)

Cymmrodorion Society, Transactions of, 1822, pp. 67-9.

("Idrison" on Caer Troiau. Refers to solar theory.)

TYACK, G. S. Art. "Mazes" in W. ANDREWS' "Ecclesiastical Curiosities," 1897.

JOHNSON, W. "Folk-Memory," 1908.

[p. 229]

  

(ii) PARTICULAR LOCALITIES

DE LA PRYME, A. (161-1704). "Diary." Ed. Surtees Society, 1870.

(Alkborough and Appleby.)

Churchwardens' Accounts, Louth, 1544.

(Louth.)

HUTCHINS, J. "History and Antiq. of the County of Dorset," 1774, Vol. I, p. 101 (Pimperne); Vol. II, p. 468 (Leigh).

HUTCHINS, J. 3rd ed., 1861, pp. 292-3.

(Saffron Walden, Somerton, Tadmarton Heath, Hereford Beacon, Hilton, and Breamore. Figs. of mazes at Pimperne, Sneinton, and Clifton, Notts.)

"Annalia Dubrensia," 1636, reprinted by A. B. Grosart, 1877.

(Cotswold Hills, near Chipping Campden.)

CAMDEN, W. "Britannia." Ed. by GOUGH, 1789. Plate opposite p. 288.

(Saffron Walden, Sneinton, and Clifton.)

HOARE, Sir R. C. "Ancient Wilts," 1812-21, Vol. I, p. 238.

(Breamore.)

WILLIAMS-FREEMAN, J. P. "Field Archaeology, Hants."

(Breamore.)

ACKERMANN'S "Repository of Arts," Vol. XIII, 1815, p. 193.

(Hull.)

HATFIELD, S. "Terra incognita of Lincolnshire," 1816.

(Alkborough.)

ALLEN, T. "History of Lincolnshire," 1834, Vol. II, p. 21

(Appleby.)

WRIGHT, T. "Hist. and Topog. of the County of Essex," 1835, Vol. II, p. 124.

(Comberton.)

BRAYBROOKE, Lord. "Audley End and Saffron Walden," 1836, esp. MS. insertion of 1859 in Saffron Walden Museum.

(Saffron Walden.)

[p. 230]

TROLLOPE, E. Op. cit. '858.

(Sneinton, Wing, Ripon, Boughton Green, and many others.)

GORDON, E. O. "Prehistoric London," 1914.

(Greenwich, or Blackheath.)

Notes and Queries.

3 ser., X, 1866, p. 283. BARKLEY, C. W. (Comberton and Leigh.) Also in 4 ser., II, 1868.

3 ser., X, 1866, p. 283. J. F.

(Alkborough, Holderness, and Sneinton.)

8 ser., IV, 1893, p. 96. VENABLES, E., and others.

(Kent.)

9 ser., V, 1900, p. 445. PAGE, J. T.

(Boughton Green.)

10 ser., X, 1908, p. 96. HARLAND-OXLEY, W. E.

(Tothill Fields.)

12 ser., IV, 1918, p. 160. AUSTIN, G.

(Egton and Goathland.)

The Times, April 18, 1870.

(St. Martha's Hill, Guildford.)

The Times, April 5, 1920.

(Juliberry's Grave, Godmersham.)

BARNES, W., in Dorset Nat. Hist. and Antiq'n. Field Club Proceedings, Vol. IV, 1882.

(Leigh, Dorset.)

FERGUSON, R. S. "A Labyrinth on Rockliffe Marsh," in Cumberland and West'd Antiq'n and Arch'l. Society Transactions, Vol. VIII, 1883-4, p. 69.

(Burgh and Rockcliffe.)

Assoc'd Arch'l. Societies of Northampton, York, etc., Proceedings, Vols. XIX--XX, 1887--8.

(Alkborough.)

MAYNARD, G. N. "The Labyrinths or Mazes at Saffron Walden," in Essex Field Club Proceedings, 1889.

SHORE, T. W., and NISBETT, H. C. "Ancient Hampshire Mazes," in Hampshire Field Club Proceedings, Vol. III, Pt. III, 1896, p. 257.

(Breamore and Winchester.)

HILL, A. D., in Wilts Arch'l. and Nat. Hist. Magazine, 1897, p.98.

(Breamore and West Ashton.)

[p. 231]

TREVES, Sir F. "Highways and Byways in Dorset," 1906.

(Leigh.)

ALLCROFT, A. H. "Earthwork of England," 1908, p. 602.

(Asenby.)

Cambs and Hunts Arch'l. Society Proceedings, Vol. III, 1914, p. 224.

(Hilton.)

IRONS, E. A. "The Turf Maze at Wing," in Rutland Arch'l. and Nat. Hist. Society Transactions, Vol. XIII, 1915.

(Wing.)

The following kindly supplied the writer with recent information regarding the mazes at the localities indicated:

E. J. BULL, Esq., Carlisle (Rockcliffe Marshes); J. C. DENTON, Esq., Cambridge (Comberton); D. H. GEDDIE, Esq., F.R.Hist.S., Borough Librarian, Grimsby (Horncastle); O. W. GODWIN, Esq., Troy Farm, Somerton, Banbury (Somerton); Rev. F. J. W. TAVERNER, M.A., Wing, Oakham (Wing); Rev. J. J. WALKER, B.A., Boughton, Northants (Boughton Green); Rev. GEO. YORKE, Alkborough, Lincs (Alkborough).

  

VIII. STONE LABYRINTHS

(For Rock Engravings, see "Miscellaneous")

WORM, O. "Danicorum Monumentorum Libri Sex," 1651, p. 213.

(Denmark.)

RUDBECK, O. "Atlantica," 1695-8, Tab. 35, Fig. 134.

(Sweden.)

VON BAER, C. E., in Bull. Hist. Phil. de l'Acad. de St. Petersbourg, Vol. I.

ASPELIN, J. R. "Steinlabyrinthe in Finnland," in Zeitschrift fur Ethnologie, Vol. IX, 1877, p. 439. (Also Virchow, p. 441, and Friedel, p. 470.)

KRAUSE, E. "Die Trojaburgen Nordeuropas," 1893.

[p. 232]

  

IX. THE LABYRINTH IN NON-EUROPEAN COUNTRIES

  

(i) AMERICAN INDIANS

COTTON, H. S. "Is the House of Tchuhu the Minoan Labyrinth?" in Science (New York), N.S. XLV, June 29, 1917, p. 667.

FEWKES, J. W. "A Fictitious Ruin in the Gila Valley, Arizona," in American Anthropologist, N.S. IX, 1907, p. 510.

FEWKES, J. W., in Smithsonian Miscellaneous Collections, 1920, Vol. 72, No. 1, pp. 47-64.

(Pictograph from Mesa Verde.)

  

(ii) INDIA

BELLEW, H. W. "From the Indus to the Tigris," 1873-4.

(Circular figures on ground, which may be allied to labyrinth designs.)

  

(iii) ZULUS

Folk Lore, Vol. 23, 1912. Review of "Some Zulu Customs and Folk-lore," by L. H. SAMUELSON.

(Reference to maze figures on the ground.)

  

X. MISCELLANEOUS

HOMER. "Iliad," xviii. 590, etc.

(Ariadne's Dance.)

PLINY. "Hist. Nat.," xxxvi. 85.

(Maze Games.)

VIRGIL. "Aeneid," v. 545-603. 

(Troy Game.)

SUETONIUS. "Nero," vii.

(Troy Game.)

[p. 233]

PALLAS, P. S. "Reise durch verschiedene Provinzen des russischen Reichs," 1778, Vol. III.

(Siberian Crane Dance.)

STRUTT, J. "Sports and Pastimes of the People of England," 1830, p. 317.

NEIDHART VON REUENTHAL, ed. MORITZ-HAUPT, 1858, pp. 154-186.

(Troy-Aldei and Troyerlais.)

BENNDORF, O. "Das Alter des Trojaspiels," in W. REICHEL'S "Uber Homerische Waffen," 1894, pp. 133-9.

(Troy Game.)

Folk Lore, Vol. 24, 1913. Presidential Address of W. CROOKE, p. 34.

(Magic Ceremonies.)

Folk Lore, Vol. 29, 1918. "Collectanea," pp. 238-47.

(Serbian Troy Dances.)

Notes and Queries.

4 ser., V, 1870.

(Troy Game in England.)

5 ser., I, 1874, p. 104.

("Labyrinth of St. Bernard," Mt. Carmel.)

8 ser., IV, 1893, p. 96, and V, 1894, pp. 37, 96, 351.

("Troy-town" place-names and Troia Nova.)

GORDON, E. O. "Prehistoric London," 1914.

(London as New Troy.)

LAMBERTUS ARDENSIS. "Historia Comitum Ardensium et Guisnensium, A.D. 800-1200," in "Reliquiae Manuscriptorum" of Petrus de Ludewig, 1727, Bk. IV, ch. 127, p. 549.

(Labyrinthine building in French Flanders.)

Fonds Latin. MS. No. 13013. Ninth-century "Comput" of St. Germain.

(Labyrinth figure.)

HENRY OF CLAIRVAUX, in Hoveden's Chronicle, under year 1178.

(Reference to Labyrinth. ?Metaphorical.)

BROMPTON, J. "Chronicon," under year 1151, in Sir R. TWYSDEN'S "Historiae Anglicanae Scriptores X," 1652.

(Rosamond's Bower.)

[p. 234]

HIGDEN, R. "Polychronicon," 1381-94. Ed. C. BABINGTON, 1886. Bk. VIII, ch. 26.

(Rosamond's Coffer.)

LANG, A. "Magic and Religion," 1901.

(Prehistoric Rock Engravings.)

TATE, G. "The Ancient British Sculptured Rocks of Northumberland, etc.," in Berwickshire Naturalists' Club Proceedings, Vol. V, 1864, p. 137, etc.

(Labyrinthoid figures on rocks.)

LUKIS, F. C., in Journal of British Arch'l. Assn., Vol. III, 1848, pp. 269-79.

(Engraved stones on Gav'r Innis, Brittany.)

BICKNELL, C. "A Guide to the Prehistoric Rock Engravings in the Italian Maritime Alps." See figure reproduced in C. BUCKNALL'S paper in Bristol Nat. Society Proceedings, 1912, Plate II, Fig. 3.

(Labyrinthoid figure.)

LAW, E. "Masterpieces of the Royal Gallery of Hampton Court," 1904.

(Maze by TINTORETTO and alleged portrait of "Fair Rosamond.")

EARP, F. R. "Descriptive Catalogue of Pictures in the Fitzwilliam Museum," 1902, p. 14, Fig. 133.

(Painting of man with labyrinth.)

DUNBAR, E. D. "Social Life in Former Days," 1865, 1st series.

(Labyrinth design on Towels.)

BERTHE LOT, M., in La Grande Encyclopedie, Art. "Labyrinthe," final section.

(Labyrinth figure used by Alchemists.)

DURAND, J. Op. Cit. 1857, p. 127.

(Labyrinth painted on wood.)

ALCIATI, A. "Emblemata," 1531, etc.

(Labyrinth Emblems.)

CATS, J. "Emblemes touchant les Amours et les Moeurs," 1618, etc.

(Labyrinth Emblems.)

PARADIN, C. "Devises Heroiques et Emblemes," 1621, etc.

(Labyrinth Emblems.)

[p. 235]

QUARLES, F. "Emblems," 1635, etc.

(Labyrinth Emblems.)

Also many other Emblem books.

MOLLET, J. W. "Dictionary of Words used in Art and Archaeology," 1883. Art. "Minotaur."

(Labyrinth as heraldic crest.)

NORDSTROM, S., in Svenska Fornminnes foreningens Tidskrift, Vol. III, 1887, p. 227.

(Labyrinth designs on bells.)

MASON, G. "An Essay on Design in Gardening," 1795.

(Appendix on Bowers.)

BRAND'S "Popular Antiquities." Ed. W. C. HAZLITT, 1905.

(Art. on "St. Julian.")

WRIGHT, J. "The English Dialect Dictionary," 1902. Vol. III, p. 389.

("Julian's Bower" variants.)

MEILLET, A., in French Quarterly, Vol. II, No. 1, 1920.

(Etymology of "Labyrinth.")

HAVARD, H. "Dictionnaire de l'Ameublement," etc., 1887-90. Art. "Labyrinthe."

(Game of "Labyrinthe.")

German Engraving, with verses, circ. 1630. Brit. Mus. 1750, C. 1/28.

Belgian Lithographs of Toy Mazes. "Les Labyrinthes" and "Jardin Chinois," circ. 1872. Brit. Mus. "Misc. Collections," 1881, c. 3, 69-71.

Patent Specifications. (Toy Mazes.)

ARNOT, J. M. No. 14764, August 1, 1894.

BRENTANO, A. No. 6204, April 11, 1889.

BRIDGE, H. No. 2613, February 2, 1906.

CUTHBERT, R. A., and BEVITT, W. No. 7381, March 26, 1898.

NIX, S. D. No. 16092, September 22, 1891.

PROCTOR, J. No. 9428, April 23, 1898.

 

    


===== BOOK: mlc.txt =====



Myths and Legends of China, by Edward T.C. Werner, [1922], at sacred-texts.com

Click to enlarge
Frontispiece; Confucius: Teacher and Philosopher

  

Myths & Legends of China

  

By

  

E.T.C. Werner

  

H.B.M. Consul Foochow (Retired) Barrister-at-law Middle Temple
 Late Member of The Chinese Government Historiographical Bureau Peking
 Author of "Descriptive Sociology: Chinese" "China of the Chinese" Etc.

  

With Thirty-two Illustrations In Colours By Chinese Artists

  

George G. Harrap & Co. Ltd.
 London Bombay Sydney
 [1922]

Formatted at sacred-texts.com, August 2008. This text is in the public domain in the US because it was published prior to 1923.

In Memoriam
 Gladys Nina Chalmers Werner

Myths and Legends of China, by Edward T.C. Werner, [1922], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 7]

  

Preface

The chief literary sources of Chinese myths are the Li tai shen hsien t'ung chien, in thirty-two volumes, the Shen hsien lieh chuan, in eight volumes, the Feng shen yen i, in eight volumes, and the Sou shen chi, in ten volumes. In writing the following pages I have translated or paraphrased largely from these works. I have also consulted and at times quoted from the excellent volumes on Chinese Superstitions by Pere Henri Dore, comprised in the valuable series Varietes Sinologiques, published by the Catholic Mission Press at Shanghai. The native works contained in the Ssu K'u Ch'uan Shu, one of the few public libraries in Peking, have proved useful for purposes of reference. My heartiest thanks are due to my good friend Mr Mu Hsueh-hsun, a scholar of wide learning and generous disposition, for having kindly allowed me to use his very large and useful library of Chinese books. The late Dr G.E. Morrison also, until he sold it to a Japanese baron, was good enough to let me consult his extensive collection of foreign works relating to China whenever I wished, but owing to the fact that so very little work has been done in Chinese mythology by Western writers I found it better in dealing with this subject to go direct to the original Chinese texts. I am indebted to Professor H.A. Giles, and to his publishers, Messrs Kelly and Walsh, Shanghai, for permission to reprint from Strange Stories from a Chinese Studio the fox legends given in Chapter XV.

This is, so far as I know, the only monograph on Chinese mythology in any non-Chinese language. Nor do the native works include any scientific analysis or philosophical treatment of their myths. [p. 8]

My aim, after summarizing the sociology of the Chinese as a prerequisite to the understanding of their ideas and sentiments, and dealing as fully as possible, consistently with limitations of space (limitations which have necessitated the presentation of a very large and intricate topic in a highly compressed form), with the philosophy of the subject, has been to set forth in English dress those myths which may be regarded as the accredited representatives of Chinese mythology--those which live in the minds of the people and are referred to most frequently in their literature, not those which are merely diverting without being typical or instructive--in short, a true, not a distorted image.

Edward Theodore Chalmers Werner

Peking
 February 1922

Myths and Legends of China, by Edward T.C. Werner, [1922], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 9]

  

Contents

        Chapter 

        

       Page

     
      I. 

       The Sociology of the Chinese 

       <page 13>

     
      II. 

       On Chinese Mythology 

       <page 60>

     
      III. 

       Cosmogony--P'an Ku and the Creation Myth 

       <page 76>

     
      IV. 

       The Gods of China 

       <page 93>

     
      V. 

       Myths of the Stars 

       <page 176>

     
      VI. 

       Myths of Thunder, Lightning, Wind, and Rain 

       <page 198>

     
      VII. 

       Myths of the Waters 

       <page 208>

     
      VIII. 

       Myths of Fire 

       <page 236>

     
      IX. 

       Myths of Epidemics, Medicine, Exorcism, Etc. 

       <page 240>

     
      X. 

       The Goddess of Mercy 

       <page 251>

     
      XI. 

       The Eight Immortals 

       <page 288>

     
      XII. 

       The Guardian of the Gate of Heaven 

       <page 305>

     
      XIII. 

       A Battle of the Gods 

       <page 320>

     
      XIV. 

       How the Monkey Became a God 

       <page 325>

     
      XV. 

       Fox Legends 

       <page 370>

     
      XVI. 

       Miscellaneous Legends 

       <page 386>

     
       

       Glossary and Index 

       <page 425>

     
 [p. 10] [p. 11]

  

Illustrations

         

       Page

     
      Confucius: Teacher and Philosopher 

       Frontispiece

     
      The Spirit that Clears the Way 

       <page 44>

     
      Lao Tzu 

       <page 72>

     
      Nu Kua Shih 

       <page 82>

     
      Mencius 

       <page 90>

     
      Wen Ch'ang, K'uei Hsing, and Chu I 

       <page 110>

     
      The Buddhist Triad 

       <page 120>

     
      The Taoist Triad 

       <page 124>

     
      Hsi Wang Mu 

       <page 136>

     
      Chang Tao-ling 

       <page 138>

     
      Tou Mu, Goddess of the North Star 

       <page 144>

     
      Chiang Tzu-ya At K'un-lun 

       <page 156>

     
      Chiang Tzu-ya Defeats Wen Chung 

       <page 160>

     
      The Kitchen-god 

       <page 166>

     
      The Gods of Happiness, Office, and Longevity 

       <page 170>

     
      The Money-tree 

       <page 172>

     
      The Door-gods, Civil and Military 

       <page 174>

     
      Heng O Flies to the Moon 

       <page 184>

     
      Wen Chung, Minister of Thunder 

       <page 198>

     
      Dragon-gods 

       <page 208>

     
      Spirit of the Well 

       <page 216>

     
      The Magic Umbrellas 

       <page 242>

     
      P'an Kuan 

       <page 248>

     
      Miao Shan Reaches the Nunnery 

       <page 262>

     
      The Tiger Carries Off Miao Shan 

       <page 266>

     
      The Eight Immortals Crossing the Sea 

       <page 302>

     
      The Birth of the Monkey 

       <page 326>

     
      The Demons of Blackwater River Carry Away the Master 

       <page 352>

     
      Buddhists as Slaves in Slow-carts Country 

       <page 354>

     
      Sun Steals Clothing for His Master 

       <page 364>

     
      The Return to China 

       <page 368>

     
      Chia Tzu-lung Finds the Stone 

       <page 382>

     
 

Myths and Legends of China, by Edward T.C. Werner, [1922], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 12]

Mais cet Orient, cette Asie, quelles en sont, enfin, les frontieres reelles?... Ces frontieres sont d'une nettete qui ne permet aucune erreur. L'Asie est la ou cesse la vulgarite, ou nait la dignite, et ou commence l'elegance intellectuelle. Et l'Orient est la ou sont les sources debordantes de poesie.

Mardrus,
 La Reine de Saba

[p. 13]

  

Chapter I

  

The Sociology of the Chinese

  

Racial Origin

In spite of much research and conjecture, the origin of the Chinese people remains undetermined. We do not know who they were nor whence they came. Such evidence as there is points to their immigration from elsewhere; the Chinese themselves have a tradition of a Western origin. The first picture we have of their actual history shows us, not a people behaving as if long settled in a land which was their home and that of their forefathers, but an alien race fighting with wild beasts, clearing dense forests, and driving back the aboriginal inhabitants.

Setting aside several theories (including the one that the Chinese are autochthonous and their civilization indigenous) now regarded by the best authorities as untenable, the researches of sinologists seem to indicate an origin (1) in early Akkadia; or (2) in Khotan, the Tarim valley (generally what is now known as Eastern Turkestan), or the K'un-lun Mountains (concerning which more presently). The second hypothesis may relate only to a sojourn of longer or shorter duration on the way from Akkadia to the ultimate settlement in China, especially since the Khotan civilization has been shown to have been imported from the Punjab in the third century B.C. The fact that serious mistakes have been made regarding the identifications of early Chinese rulers with Babylonian kings, and of the Chinese po-hsing (Cantonese bak-sing) 'people' with the Bak Sing or Bak tribes, does not exclude the possibility of an Akkadian origin. But in either case the immigration into China was probably [p. 14] gradual, and may have taken the route from Western or Central Asia direct to the banks of the Yellow River, or may possibly have followed that to the south-east through Burma and then to the north-east through what is now China--the settlement of the latter country having thus spread from south-west to north-east, or in a north-easterly direction along the Yangtzu River, and so north, instead of, as is generally supposed, from north to south.

  

Southern Origin Improbable

But this latter route would present many difficulties; it would seem to have been put forward merely as ancillary to the theory that the Chinese originated in the Indo-Chinese peninsula. This theory is based upon the assumptions that the ancient Chinese ideograms include representations of tropical animals and plants; that the oldest and purest forms of the language are found in the south; and that the Chinese and the Indo-Chinese groups of languages are both tonal. But all of these facts or alleged facts are as easily or better accounted for by the supposition that the Chinese arrived from the north or north-west in successive waves of migration, the later arrivals pushing the earlier farther and farther toward the south, so that the oldest and purest forms of Chinese would be found just where they are, the tonal languages of the Indo-Chinese peninsula being in that case regarded as the languages of the vanguard of the migration. Also, the ideograms referred to represent animals and plants of the temperate zone rather than of the tropics, but even if it could be shown, which it cannot, that these animals and plants now belong exclusively to the tropics, that would be no proof of the tropical origin of the Chinese, for in the earliest times the climate of North China was [p. 15] much milder than it is now, and animals such as tigers and elephants existed in the dense jungles which are later found only in more southern latitudes.

  

Expansion of Races from North to South

The theory of a southern origin (to which a further serious objection will be stated presently) implies a gradual infiltration of Chinese immigrants through South or Mid-China (as above indicated) toward the north, but there is little doubt that the movement of the races has been from north to south and not vice versa. In what are now the provinces of Western Kansu and Ssuch'uan there lived a people related to the Chinese (as proved by the study of Indo-Chinese comparative philology) who moved into the present territory of Tibet and are known as Tibetans; in what is now the province of Yunnan were the Shan or Ai-lao (modern Laos), who, forced by Mongol invasions, emigrated to the peninsula in the south and became the Siamese; and in Indo-China, not related to the Chinese, were the Annamese, Khmer, Mon, Khasi, Colarains (whose remnants are dispersed over the hill tracts of Central India), and other tribes, extending in prehistoric times into Southern China, but subsequently driven back by the expansion of the Chinese in that direction.

  

Arrival of the Chinese in China

Taking into consideration all the existing evidence, the objections to all other theories of the origin of the Chinese seem to be greater than any yet raised to the theory that immigrants from the Tarim valley or beyond (i.e. from Elam or Akkadia, either direct or via Eastern Turkestan) struck the banks of the Yellow River in their eastward journey and followed its course until they [p. 16] reached the localities where we first find them settled, namely, in the region covered by parts of the three modern provinces of Shansi, Shensi, and Honan where their frontiers join. They were then (about 2500 or 3000 B.C.) in a relatively advanced state of civilization. The country east and south of this district was inhabited by aboriginal tribes, with whom the Chinese fought, as they did with the wild animals and the dense vegetation, but with whom they also commingled and intermarried, and among whom they planted colonies as centres from which to spread their civilization.

  

The K'un-lun Mountains

With reference to the K'un-lun Mountains, designated in Chinese mythology as the abode of the gods--the ancestors of the Chinese race--it should be noted that these are identified not with the range dividing Tibet from Chinese Turkestan, but with the Hindu Kush. That brings us somewhat nearer to Babylon, and the apparent convergence of the two theories, the Central Asian and the Western Asian, would seem to point to a possible solution of the problem. Nu Kua, one of the alleged creators of human beings, and Nu and Kua, the first two human beings (according to a variation of the legend), are placed in the K'un-lun Mountains. That looks hopeful. Unfortunately, the K'un-lun legend is proved to be of Taoist origin. K'un-lun is the central mountain of the world, and 3000 miles in height. There is the fountain of immortality, and thence flow the four great rivers of the world. In other words, it is the Sumeru of Hindu mythology transplanted into Chinese legend, and for our present purpose without historical value. [p. 17]

It would take up too much space to go into details of this interesting problem of the origin of the Chinese and their civilization, the cultural connexions or similarities of China and Western Asia in pre-Babylonian times, the origin of the two distinct culture-areas so marked throughout the greater part of Chinese history, etc., and it will be sufficient for our present purpose to state the conclusion to which the evidence points.

  

Provisional Conclusion

Pending the discovery of decisive evidence, the following provisional conclusion has much to recommend it--namely, that the ancestors of the Chinese people came from the west, from Akkadia or Elam, or from Khotan, or (more probably) from Akkadia or Elam via Khotan, as one nomad or pastoral tribe or group of nomad or pastoral tribes, or as successive waves of immigrants, reached what is now China Proper at its north-west corner, settled round the elbow of the Yellow River, spread north-eastward, eastward, and southward, conquering, absorbing, or pushing before them the aborigines into what is now South and South-west China. These aboriginal races, who represent a wave or waves of neolithic immigrants from Western Asia earlier than the relatively high-headed immigrants into North China (who arrived about the twenty-fifth or twenty-fourth century B.C.), and who have left so deep an impress on the Japanese, mixed and intermarried with the Chinese in the south, eventually producing the pronounced differences, in physical, mental, and emotional traits, in sentiments, ideas, languages, processes, and products, from the Northern Chinese which are so conspicuous at the present day. [p. 18]

  

Inorganic Environment

At the beginning of their known history the country occupied by the Chinese was the comparatively small region above mentioned. It was then a tract of an irregular oblong shape, lying between latitude 34 degrees and 40 degrees N. and longitude 107 degrees and 114 degrees E. This territory round the elbow of the Yellow River had an area of about 50,000 square miles, and was gradually extended to the sea-coast on the north-east as far as longitude 119 degrees, when its area was about doubled. It had a population of perhaps a million, increasing with the expansion to two millions. This may be called infant China. Its period (the Feudal Period) was in the two thousand years between the twenty-fourth and third centuries B.C. During the first centuries of the Monarchical Period, which lasted from 221 B.C. to A.D. 1912, it had expanded to the south to such an extent that it included all of the Eighteen Provinces constituting what is known as China Proper of modern times, with the exception of a portion of the west of Kansu and the greater portions of Ssuch'uan and Yunnan. At the time of the Manchu conquest at the beginning of the seventeenth century A.D. it embraced all the territory lying between latitude 18 degrees and 40 degrees N. and longitude 98 degrees and 122 degrees E. (the Eighteen Provinces or China Proper), with the addition of the vast outlying territories of Manchuria, Mongolia, Ili, Koko-nor, Tibet, and Corea, with suzerainty over Burma and Annam--an area of more than 5,000,000 square miles, including the 2,000,000 square miles covered by the Eighteen Provinces. Generally, this territory is mountainous in the west, sloping gradually down toward the sea on the east. It contains three chief ranges of mountains and large alluvial plains in the north, east, and south. Three great [p. 19] and about thirty large rivers intersect the country, their numerous tributaries reaching every part of it.

As regards geological features, the great alluvial plains rest upon granite, new red sandstone, or limestone. In the north is found the peculiar loess formation, having its origin probably in the accumulated dust of ages blown from the Mongolian plateau. The passage from north to south is generally from the older to the newer rocks; from east to west a similar series is found, with some volcanic features in the west and south. Coal and iron are the chief minerals, gold, silver, copper, lead, tin, jade, etc., being also mined.

The climate of this vast area is not uniform. In the north the winter is long and rigorous, the summer hot and dry, with a short rainy season in July and August; in the south the summer is long, hot, and moist, the winter short. The mean temperature is 50.3 degrees F. and 70 degrees F. in the north and south respectively. Generally, the thermometer is low for the latitude, though perhaps it is more correct to say that the Gulf Stream raises the temperature of the west coast of Europe above the average. The mean rainfall in the north is 16, in the south 70 inches, with variations in other parts. Typhoons blow in the south between July and October.

  

Organic Environment

The vegetal productions are abundant and most varied. The rice-zone (significant in relation to the cultural distinctions above noted) embraces the southern half of the country. Tea, first cultivated for its infusion in A.D. 350, is grown in the southern and central provinces between the twenty-third and thirty-fifth degrees of latitude, though it is also found as far north as Shantung, the chief 'tea [p. 20] district,' however, being the large area south of the Yangtzu River, east of the Tungting Lake and great Siang River, and north of the Kuangtung Province. The other chief vegetal products are wheat, barley, maize, millet, the bean, yam, sweet and common potato, tomato, eggplant, ginseng, cabbage, bamboo, indigo, pepper, tobacco, camphor, tallow, ground-nut, poppy, water-melon, sugar, cotton, hemp, and silk. Among the fruits grown are the date, mulberry, orange, lemon, pumelo, persimmon, lichi, pomegranate, pineapple, fig, coconut, mango, and banana, besides the usual kinds common in Western countries.

The wild animals include the tiger, panther, leopard, bear, sable, otter, monkey, wolf, fox, twenty-seven or more species of ruminants, and numerous species of rodents. The rhinoceros, elephant, and tapir still exist in Yunnan. The domestic animals include the camel and the water-buffalo. There are about 700 species of birds, and innumerable species of fishes and insects.

  

Sociological Environment

On their arrival in what is now known as China the Chinese, as already noted, fought with the aboriginal tribes. The latter were exterminated, absorbed, or driven south with the spread of Chinese rule. The Chinese "picked out the eyes of the land," and consequently the non-Chinese tribes now live in the unhealthy forests or marshes of the south, or in mountain regions difficult of access, some even in trees (a voluntary, not compulsory promotion), though several, such as the Dog Jung in Fukien, retain settlements like islands among the ruling race.

In the third century B.C. began the hostile relations of [p. 21] the Chinese with the northern nomads, which continued throughout the greater part of their history. During the first six centuries A.D. there was intercourse with Rome, Parthia, Turkey, Mesopotamia, Ceylon, India, and Indo-China, and in the seventh century with the Arabs. Europe was brought within the sociological environment by Christian travellers. From the tenth to the thirteenth century the north was occupied by Kitans and Nuchens, and the whole Empire was under Mongol sway for eighty-eight years in the thirteenth and fourteenth centuries. Relations of a commercial and religious nature were held with neighbours during the following four hundred years. Regular diplomatic intercourse with Western nations was established as a result of a series of wars in the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries. Until recently the nation held aloof from alliances and was generally averse to foreign intercourse. From 1537 onward, as a sequel of war or treaty, concessions, settlements, etc., were obtained by foreign Powers. China has now lost some of her border countries and large adjacent islands, the military and commercial pressure of Western nations and Japan having taken the place of the military pressure of the Tartars already referred to. The great problem for her, an agricultural nation, is how to find means and the military spirit to maintain her integrity, the further violation of which could not but be regarded by the student of sociological history as a great tragedy and a world-wide calamity.

  

Physical, Emotional, and Intellectual Characters

The physical characters of the Chinese are too well known to need detailed recital. The original immigrants into North China all belonged to blond races, but the [p. 22] modern Chinese have little left of the immigrant stock. The oblique, almond-shaped eyes, with black iris and the orbits far apart, have a vertical fold of skin over the inner canthus, concealing a part of the iris, a peculiarity distinguishing the eastern races of Asia from all other families of man. The stature and weight of brain are generally below the average. The hair is black, coarse, and cylindrical; the beard scanty or absent. The colour of the skin is darker in the south than in the north.

Emotionally the Chinese are sober, industrious, of remarkable endurance, grateful, courteous, and ceremonious, with a high sense of mercantile honour, but timorous, cruel, unsympathetic, mendacious, and libidinous.

Intellectually they were until recently, and to a large extent still are, non-progressive, in bondage to uniformity and mechanism in culture, imitative, unimaginative, torpid, indirect, suspicious, and superstitious.

The character is being modified by intercourse with other peoples of the earth and by the strong force of physical, intellectual, and moral education.

  

Marriage in Early Times

Certain parts of the marriage ceremonial of China as now existing indicate that the original form of marriage was by capture--of which, indeed, there is evidence in the classical Book of Odes. But a regular form of marriage (in reality a contract of sale) is shown to have existed in the earliest historical times. The form was not monogamous, though it seems soon to have assumed that of a qualified monogamy consisting of one wife and one or more concubines, the number of the latter being as a rule limited only by the means of the husband. The higher the rank the larger was the number of concubines [p. 23] and handmaids in addition to the wife proper, the palaces of the kings and princes containing several hundreds of them. This form it has retained to the present day, though associations now exist for the abolition of concubinage. In early times, as well as throughout the whole of Chinese history, concubinage was in fact universal, and there is some evidence also of polyandry (which, however, cannot have prevailed to any great extent). The age for marriage was twenty for the man and fifteen for the girl, celibacy after thirty and twenty respectively being officially discouraged. In the province of Shantung it was usual for the wives to be older than their husbands. The parents' consent to the betrothal was sought through the intervention of a matchmaker, the proposal originating with the parents, and the wishes of the future bride and bridegroom not being taken into consideration. The conclusion of the marriage was the progress of the bride from the house of her parents to that of the bridegroom, where after various ceremonies she and he worshipped his ancestors together, the worship amounting to little more than an announcement of the union to the ancestral spirits. After a short sojourn with her husband the bride revisited her parents, and the marriage was not considered as finally consummated until after this visit had taken place.

The status of women was low, and the power of the husband great--so great that he could kill his wife with impunity. Divorce was common, and all in favour of the husband, who, while he could not be divorced by her, could put his wife away for disobedience or even for loquaciousness. A widower remarried immediately, but refusal to remarry by a widow was esteemed an act of chastity. She often mutilated herself or even committed [p. 24] suicide to prevent remarriage, and was posthumously honoured for doing so. Being her husband's as much in the Otherworld as in this, remarriage would partake of the character of unchastity and insubordination; the argument, of course, not applying to the case of the husband, who by remarriage simply adds another member to his clan without infringing on anyone's rights.

  

Marriage in Monarchical and Republican Periods

The marital system of the early classical times, of which the above were the essentials, changed but little during the long period of monarchical rule lasting from 221 B.C. to A.D. 1912. The principal object, as before, was to secure an heir to sacrifice to the spirits of deceased progenitors. Marriage was not compulsory, but old bachelors and old maids were very scarce. The concubines were subject to the wife, who was considered to be the mother of their children as well as her own. Her status, however, was not greatly superior. Implicit obedience was exacted from her. She could not possess property, but could not be hired out for prostitution. The latter vice was common, in spite of the early age at which marriage took place and in spite of the system of concubinage--which is after all but a legalized transfer of prostitutional cohabitation to the domestic circle.

Since the establishment of the Republic in 1912 the 'landslide' in the direction of Western progress has had its effect also on the domestic institutions. But while the essentials of the marriage contract remain practically the same as before, the most conspicuous changes have been in the accompanying ceremonial--now sometimes quite foreign, but in a very large, perhaps the greatest, number of cases that odious thing, half foreign, half [p. 25] Chinese; as, for instance, when the procession, otherwise native, includes foreign glass-panelled carriages, or the bridegroom wears a 'bowler' or top-hat with his Chinese dress--and in the greater freedom allowed to women, who are seen out of doors much more than formerly, sit at table with their husbands, attend public functions and dinners, dress largely in foreign fashion, and play tennis and other games, instead of being prisoners of the 'inner apartment' and household drudges little better than slaves.

One unexpected result of this increased freedom is certainly remarkable, and is one not likely to have been predicted by the most far-sighted sociologist. Many of the 'progressive' Chinese, now that it is the fashion for Chinese wives to be seen in public with their husbands, finding the uneducated, gauche, small-footed household drudge unable to compete with the smarter foreign-educated wives of their neighbours, have actually repudiated them and taken unto themselves spouses whom they can exhibit in public without 'loss of face'! It is, however, only fair to add that the total number of these cases, though by no means inconsiderable, appears to be proportionately small.

  

Parents and Children

As was the power of the husband over the wife, so was that of the father over his children. Infanticide (due chiefly to poverty, and varying with it) was frequent, especially in the case of female children, who were but slightly esteemed; the practice prevailing extensively in three or four provinces, less extensively in others, and being practically absent in a large number. Beyond the fact that some penalties were enacted against it by the Emperor Ch'ien Lung (A.D. 1736-96), and that by statute [p. 26] it was a capital offence to murder children in order to use parts of their bodies for medicine, it was not legally prohibited. When the abuse became too scandalous in any district proclamations condemning it would be issued by the local officials. A man might, by purchase and contract, adopt a person as son, daughter, or grandchild, such person acquiring thereby all the rights of a son or daughter. Descent, both of real and personal property, was to all the sons of wives and concubines as joint heirs, irrespective of seniority. Bastards received half shares. Estates were not divisible by the children during the lifetime of their parents or grandparents.

The head of the family being but the life-renter of the family property, bound by fixed rules, wills were superfluous, and were used only where the customary respect for the parents gave them a voice in arranging the details of the succession. For this purpose verbal or written instructions were commonly given.

In the absence of the father, the male relatives of the same surname assumed the guardianship of the young. The guardian exercised full authority and enjoyed the surplus revenues of his ward's estate, but might not alienate the property.

There are many instances in Chinese history of extreme devotion of children to parents taking the form of self-wounding and even of suicide in the hope of curing parents' illnesses or saving their lives.

  

Political History

The country inhabited by the Chinese on their arrival from the West was, as we saw, the district where the modern provinces of Shansi, Shensi, and Honan join. This they extended in an easterly direction to the shores [p. 27] of the Gulf of Chihli--a stretch of territory about 600 miles long by 300 broad. The population, as already stated, was between one and two millions. During the first two thousand years of their known history the boundaries of this region were not greatly enlarged, but beyond the more or less undefined borderland to the south were chou or colonies, nuclei of Chinese population, which continually increased in size through conquest of the neighbouring territory. In 221 B.C. all the feudal states into which this territory had been parcelled out, and which fought with one another, were subjugated and absorbed by the state of Ch'in, which in that year instituted the monarchical form of government--the form which obtained in China for the next twenty-one centuries.

Though the origin of the name 'China' has not yet been finally decided, the best authorities regard it as derived from the name of this feudal state of Ch'in.

Under this short-lived dynasty of Ch'in and the famous Han dynasty (221 B.C. to A.D. 221) which followed it, the Empire expanded until it embraced almost all the territory now known as China Proper (the Eighteen Provinces of Manchu times). To these were added in order between 194 B.C. and A.D. 1414: Corea, Sinkiang (the New Territory or Eastern Turkestan), Manchuria, Formosa, Tibet, and Mongolia--Formosa and Corea being annexed by Japan in 1895 and 1910 respectively. Numerous other extra-China countries and islands, acquired and lost during the long course of Chinese history (at one time, from 73 to 48 B.C., "all Asia from Japan to the Caspian Sea was tributary to the Middle Kingdom," i.e. China), it is not necessary to mention here. During the Southern Sung dynasty (1127-1280) the Tartars owned the northern half of China, as far [p. 28] down as the Yangtzu River, and in the Yuan dynasty (1280-1368) they conquered the whole country. During the period 1644-1912 it was in the possession of the Manchus. At present the five chief component peoples of China are represented in the striped national flag (from the top downward) by red (Manchus), yellow (Chinese), blue (Mongolians), white (Mohammedans), and black (Tibetans). This flag was adopted on the establishment of the Republic in 1912, and supplanted the triangular Dragon flag previously in use. By this time the population--which had varied considerably at different periods owing to war, famine, and pestilence--had increased to about 400,000,000.

  

General Government

The general division of the nation was into the King and the People, The former was regarded as appointed by the will of Heaven and as the parent of the latter. Besides being king, he was also law-giver, commander-in-chief of the armies, high priest, and master of ceremonies. The people were divided into four classes: (1) Shih, Officers (later Scholars), consisting of Ch'en, Officials (a few of whom were ennobled), and Shen Shih, Gentry; (2) Nung, Agriculturists; (3) Kung, Artisans; and (4) Shang, Merchants.

For administrative purposes there were at the seat of central government (which, first at P'ing-yang--in modern Shansi--was moved eleven times during the Feudal Period, and was finally at Yin) ministers, or ministers and a hierarchy of officials, the country being divided into provinces, varying in number from nine in the earliest times to thirty-six under the First Emperor, 221 B.C., and finally twenty-two at the present day. At first these [p. 29] provinces contained states, which were models of the central state, the ruler's 'Middle Kingdom.' The provincial administration was in the hands of twelve Pastors or Lord-Lieutenants. They were the chiefs of all the nobles in a province. Civil and military offices were not differentiated. The feudal lords or princes of states often resided at the king's court, officers of that court being also sent forth as princes of states. The king was the source of legislation and administered justice. The princes in their several states had the power of rewards and punishments. Revenue was derived from a tithe on the land, from the income of artisans, merchants, fishermen, foresters, and from the tribute brought by savage tribes.

The general structure and principles of this system of administration remained the same, with few variations, down to the end of the Monarchical Period in 1912. At the end of that period we find the emperor still considered as of divine descent, still the head of the civil, legislative, military, ecclesiastical, and ceremonial administration, with the nation still divided into the same four classes. The chief ministries at the capital, Peking, could in most cases trace their descent from their prototypes of feudal times, and the principal provincial administrative officials--the Governor-General or Viceroy, governor, provincial treasurer, judge, etc.--had similarly a pedigree running back to offices then existing--a continuous duration of adherence to type which is probably unique.

Appointment to office was at first by selection, followed by an examination to test proficiency; later was introduced the system of public competitive literary examinations for office, fully organized in the seventeenth century, and abolished in 1903, when official positions were thrown open to the graduates of colleges established on a modern basis. [p. 30]

In 1912, on the overthrow of the Manchu monarchy, China became a republic, with an elected President, and a Parliament consisting of a Senate and House of Representatives. The various government departments were reorganized on Western lines, and a large number of new offices instituted. Up to the present year the Law of the Constitution, owing to political dissension between the North and the South, has not been put into force.

  

Laws

Chinese law, like primitive law generally, was not instituted in order to ensure justice between man and man; its object was to enforce subordination of the ruled to the ruler. The laws were punitive and vindictive rather than reformatory or remedial, criminal rather than civil. Punishments were cruel: branding, cutting off the nose, the legs at the knees, castration, and death, the latter not necessarily, or indeed ordinarily, for taking life. They included in some cases punishment of the family, the clan, and the neighbours of the offender. The lex talionis was in full force.

Nevertheless, in spite of the harsh nature of the punishments, possibly adapted, more or less, to a harsh state of society, though the "proper end of punishments"--to "make an end of punishing"--was missed, the Chinese evolved a series of excellent legal codes. This series began with the revision of King Mu's Punishments in 950 B.C., the first regular code being issued in 650 B.C., and ended with the well-known Ta Ch'ing lu li (Laws and Statutes of the Great Ch'ing Dynasty), issued in A.D. 1647. Of these codes the great exemplar was the Law Classic drawn up by Li K'uei (Li K'uei fa ching), a statesman in the service of the first ruler of the Wei [p. 31] State, in the fourth century B.C. The Ta Ch'ing lu li has been highly praised by competent judges. Originally it sanctioned only two kinds of punishment, death and flogging, but others were in use, and the barbarous ling ch'ih, 'lingering death' or 'slicing to pieces,' invented about A.D. 1000 and abolished in 1905, was inflicted for high treason, parricide, on women who killed their husbands, and murderers of three persons of one family. In fact, until some first-hand knowledge of Western systems and procedure was obtained, the vindictive as opposed to the reformatory idea of punishments continued to obtain in China down to quite recent years, and has not yet entirely disappeared. Though the crueller forms of punishment had been legally abolished, they continued to be used in many parts. Having been joint judge at Chinese trials at which, in spite of my protests, prisoners were hung up by their thumbs and made to kneel on chains in order to extort confession (without which no accused person could be punished), I can testify that the true meaning of the "proper end of punishments" had no more entered into the Chinese mind at the close of the monarchical regime than it had 4000 years before.

As a result of the reform movement into which China was forced as an alternative to foreign domination toward the end of the Manchu Period, but chiefly owing to the bait held out by Western Powers, that extraterritoriality would be abolished when China had reformed her judicial system, a new Provisional Criminal Code was published. It substituted death by hanging or strangulation for decapitation, and imprisonment for various lengths of time for bambooing. It was adopted in large measure by the Republican regime, and is the chief legal [p. 32] instrument in use at the present time. But close examination reveals the fact that it is almost an exact copy of the Japanese penal code, which in turn was modelled upon that of Germany. It is, in fact, a Western code imitated, and as it stands is quite out of harmony with present conditions in China. It will have to be modified and recast to be a suitable, just, and practicable national legal instrument for the Chinese people. Moreover, it is frequently overridden in a high-handed manner by the police, who often keep a person acquitted by the Courts of Justice in custody until they have 'squeezed' him of all they can hope to get out of him. And it is noteworthy that, though provision was made in the Draft Code for trial by jury, this provision never went into effect; and the slavish imitation of alien methods is shown by the curiously inconsistent reason given--that "the fact that jury trials have been abolished in Japan is indicative of the inadvisability of transplanting this Western institution into China!"

  

Local Government

The central administration being a far-flung network of officialdom, there was hardly any room for local government apart from it. We find it only in the village elder and those associated with him, who took up what government was necessary where the jurisdiction of the unit of the central administration--the district magistracy--ceased, or at least did not concern itself in meddling much.

  

Military System

The peace-loving agricultural settlers in early China had at first no army. When occasion arose, all the [p. 33] farmers exchanged their ploughshares for swords and bows and arrows, and went forth to fight. In the intervals between the harvests, when the fields were clear, they held manoeuvres and practised the arts of warfare. The king, who had his Six Armies, under the Six High Nobles, forming the royal military force, led the troops in person, accompanied by the spirit-tablets of his ancestors and of the gods of the land and grain. Chariots, drawn by four horses and containing soldiers armed with spears and javelins and archers, were much in use. A thousand chariots was the regular force. Warriors wore buskins on their legs, and were sometimes gagged in order to prevent the alarm being given to the enemy. In action the chariots occupied the centre, the bowmen the left, the spearmen the right flank. Elephants were sometimes used in attack. Spy-kites, signal-flags, hook-ladders, horns, cymbals, drums, and beacon-fires were in use. The ears of the vanquished were taken to the king, quarter being rarely if ever given.

After the establishment of absolute monarchical government standing armies became the rule. Military science was taught, and soldiers sometimes trained for seven years. Chariots with upper storeys or spy-towers were used for fighting in narrow defiles, and hollow squares were formed of mixed chariots, infantry, and dragoons. The weakness of disunion of forces was well understood. In the sixth century A.D. the massed troops numbered about a million and a quarter. In A.D. 627 there was an efficient standing army of 900,000 men, the term of service being from the ages of twenty to sixty. During the Mongol dynasty (1280-1368) there was a navy of 5000 ships manned by 70,000 trained fighters. The Mongols completely revolutionized tactics and improved [p. 34] on all the military knowledge of the time. In 1614 the Manchu 'Eight Banners,' composed of Manchus, Mongolians, and Chinese, were instituted. The provincial forces, designated the Army of the Green Standard, were divided into land forces and marine forces, superseded on active service by 'braves' (yung), or irregulars, enlisted and discharged according to circumstances. After the war with Japan in 1894 reforms were seriously undertaken, with the result that the army has now been modernized in dress, weapons, tactics, etc., and is by no means a negligible quantity in the world's fighting forces. A modern navy is also being acquired by building and purchase. For many centuries the soldier, being, like the priest, unproductive, was regarded with disdain, and now that his indispensableness for defensive purposes is recognized he has to fight not only any actual enemy who may attack him, but those far subtler forces from over the sea which seem likely to obtain supremacy in his military councils, if not actual control of his whole military system. It is, in my view, the duty of Western nations to take steps before it is too late to avert this great disaster.

  

Ecclesiastical Institutions

The dancing and chanting exorcists called wu were the first Chinese priests, with temples containing gods worshipped and sacrificed to, but there was no special sacerdotal class. Worship of Heaven could only be performed by the king or emperor. Ecclesiastical and political functions were not completely separated. The king was pontifex maximus, the nobles, statesmen, and civil and military officers acted as priests, the ranks being similar to those of the political hierarchy. Worship took place in the 'Hall of Light,' which was also a palace and [p. 35] audience and council chamber. Sacrifices were offered to Heaven, the hills and rivers, ancestors, and all the spirits. Dancing held a conspicuous place in worship. Idols are spoken of in the earliest times.

Of course, each religion, as it formed itself out of the original ancestor-worship, had its own sacred places, functionaries, observances, ceremonial. Thus, at the State worship of Heaven, Nature, etc., there were the 'Great,' 'Medium,' and 'Inferior' sacrifices, consisting of animals, silk, grain, jade, etc. Panegyrics were sung, and robes of appropriate colour worn. In spring, summer, autumn, and winter there were the seasonal sacrifices at the appropriate altars. Taoism and Buddhism had their temples, monasteries, priests, sacrifices, and ritual; and there were village and wayside temples and shrines to ancestors, the gods of thunder, rain, wind, grain, agriculture, and many others. Now encouraged, now tolerated, now persecuted, the ecclesiastical personnel and structure of Taoism and Buddhism survived into modern times, when we find complete schemes of ecclesiastical gradations of rank and authority grafted upon these two priestly hierarchies, and their temples, priests, etc., fulfilling generally, with worship of ancestors, State or official (Confucianism) and private or unofficial, and the observance of various annual festivals, such as 'All Souls' Day' for wandering and hungry ghosts, the spiritual needs of the people as the 'Three Religions' (San Chiao). The emperor, as high priest, took the responsibility for calamities, etc., making confession to Heaven and praying that as a punishment the evil be diverted from the people to his own person. Statesmen, nobles, and officials discharged, as already noted, priestly functions in connexion with the State religion in addition to their ordinary [p. 36] duties. As a rule, priests proper, frowned upon as non-producers, were recruited from the lower classes, were celibate, unintellectual, idle, and immoral. There was nothing, even in the elaborate ceremonies on special occasions in the Buddhist temples, which could be likened to what is known as 'public worship' and 'common prayer' in the West. Worship had for its sole object either the attainment of some good or the prevention of some evil.

Generally this represents the state of things under the Republican regime; the chief differences being greater neglect of ecclesiastical matters and the conversion of a large number of temples into schools.

  

Professional Institutions

We read of physicians, blind musicians, poets, teachers, prayer-makers, architects, scribes, painters, diviners, ceremonialists, orators, and others during the Feudal Period, These professions were of ecclesiastical origin, not yet completely differentiated from the 'Church,' and both in earlier and later times not always or often differentiated from each other. Thus the historiographers combined the duties of statesmen, scholars, authors, and generals. The professions of authors and teachers, musicians and poets, were united in one person. And so it continued to the present day. Priests discharge medical functions, poets still sing their verses. But experienced medical specialists, though few, are to be found, as well as women doctors; there are veterinary surgeons, musicians (chiefly belonging to the poorest classes and often blind), actors, teachers, attorneys, diviners, artists, letter-writers, and many others, men of letters being perhaps the most prominent and most esteemed. [p. 37]

  

Accessory Institutions

A system of schools, academies, colleges, and universities obtained in villages, districts, departments, and principalities. The instruction was divided into 'Primary Learning' and 'Great Learning.' There were special schools of dancing and music. Libraries and almshouses for old men are mentioned. Associations of scholars for literary purposes seem to have been numerous.

Whatever form and direction education might have taken, it became stereotyped at an early age by the road to office being made to lead through a knowledge of the classical writings of the ancient sages. It became not only 'the thing' to be well versed in the sayings of Confucius, Mencius; etc., and to be able to compose good essays on them containing not a single wrongly written character, but useless for aspirants to office--who constituted practically the whole of the literary class--to acquire any other knowledge. So obsessed was the national mind by this literary mania that even infants' spines were made to bend so as to produce when adult the 'scholarly stoop.' And from the fact that besides the scholar class the rest of the community consisted of agriculturists, artisans, and merchants, whose knowledge was that of their fathers and grandfathers, inculcated in the sons and grandsons as it had been in them, showing them how to carry on in the same groove the calling to which Fate had assigned them, a departure from which would have been considered 'unfilial'--unless, of course (as it very rarely did), it went the length of attaining through study of the classics a place in the official class, and thus shedding eternal lustre on the family--it will readily be seen that there was nothing to cause education to be concerned with any but one or two of the subjects [p. 38] which are included by Western peoples under that designation. It became at an early age, and remained for many centuries, a rote-learning of the elementary text-books, followed by a similar acquisition by heart of the texts of the works of Confucius and other classical writers. And so it remained until the abolition, in 1905, of the old competitive examination system, and the substitution of all that is included in the term 'modern education' at schools, colleges, and universities all over the country, in which there is rapidly growing up a force that is regenerating the Chinese people, and will make itself felt throughout the whole world.

It is this keen and shrewd appreciation of the learned, and this lust for knowledge, which, barring the tragedy of foreign domination, will make China, in the truest and best sense of the word, a great nation, where, as in the United States of America, the rigid class status and undervaluation, if not disdaining, of knowledge which are proving so disastrous in England and other European countries will be avoided, and the aristocracy of learning established in its place.

Besides educational institutions, we find institutions for poor relief, hospitals, foundling hospitals, orphan asylums, banking, insurance, and loan associations, travellers' clubs, mercantile corporations, anti-opium societies, co-operative burial societies, as well as many others, some imitated from Western models.

  

Bodily Mutilations

Compared with the practices found to exist among most primitive races, the mutilations the Chinese were in the habit of inflicting were but few. They flattened the skulls of their babies by means of stones, so as to [p. 39] cause them to taper at the top, and we have already seen what they did to their spines; also the mutilations in warfare, and the punishments inflicted both within and without the law; and how filial children and loyal wives mutilated themselves for the sake of their parents and to prevent remarriage. Eunuchs, of course, existed in great numbers. People bit, cut, or marked their arms to pledge oaths. But the practices which are more peculiarly associated with the Chinese are the compressing of women's feet and the wearing of the queue, misnamed 'pigtail.' The former is known to have been in force about A.D. 934, though it may have been introduced as early as 583. It did not, however, become firmly established for more than a century. This 'extremely painful mutilation,' begun in infancy, illustrates the tyranny of fashion, for it is supposed to have arisen in the imitation by the women generally of the small feet of an imperial concubine admired by one of the emperors from ten to fifteen centuries ago (the books differ as to his identity). The second was a badge of servitude inflicted by the Manchus on the Chinese when they conquered China at the beginning of the seventeenth century. Discountenanced by governmental edicts, both of these practices are now tending toward extinction, though, of course, compressed feet and 'pigtails' are still to be seen in every town and village. Legally, the queue was abolished when the Chinese rid themselves of the Manchu yoke in 1912.

  

Funeral Rites

Not understanding the real nature of death, the Chinese believed it was merely a state of suspended animation, in which the soul had failed to return to the body, though [p. 40] it might yet do so, even after long intervals. Consequently they delayed burial, and fed the corpse, and went on to the house-tops and called aloud to the spirit to return. When at length they were convinced that the absent spirit could not be induced to re-enter the body, they placed the latter in a coffin and buried it--providing it, however, with all that it had found necessary in this life (food, clothing, wives, servants, etc.), which it would require also in the next (in their view rather a continuation of the present existence than the beginning of another)--and, having inducted or persuaded the spirit to enter the 'soul-tablet' which accompanied the funeral procession (which took place the moment the tablet was 'dotted,' i.e. when the character wang, 'prince,' was changed into chu, 'lord'), carried it back home again, set it up in a shrine in the main hall, and fell down and worshipped it. Thus was the spirit propitiated, and as long as occasional offerings were not overlooked the power for evil possessed by it would not be exerted against the surviving inmates of the house, whom it had so thoughtlessly deserted.

The latter mourned by screaming, wailing, stamping their feet, and beating their breasts, renouncing (in the earliest times) even their clothes, dwelling, and belongings to the dead, removing to mourning-sheds of clay, fasting, or eating only rice gruel, sleeping on straw with a clod for a pillow, and speaking only on subjects of death and burial. Office and public duties were resigned, and marriage, music, and separation from the clan prohibited.

During the lapse of the long ages of monarchical rule funeral rites became more elaborate and magnificent, but, though less rigid and ceremonious since the institution of [p. 41] the Republic, they have retained their essential character down to the present day.

Funeral ceremonial was more exacting than that connected with most other observances, including those of marriage. Invitations or notifications were sent to friends, and after receipt of these fu, on the various days appointed therein, the guest was obliged to send presents, such as money, paper horses, slaves, etc., and go and join in the lamentations of the hired mourners and attend at the prayers recited by the priests. Funeral etiquette could not be pu'd, i.e. made good, if overlooked or neglected at the right time, as it could in the case of the marriage ceremonial.

Instead of symmetrical public graveyards, as in the West, the Chinese cemeteries belong to the family or clan of the deceased, and are generally beautiful and peaceful places planted with trees and surrounded by artistic walls enclosing the grave-mounds and monumental tablets. The cemeteries themselves are the metonyms of the villages, and the graves of the houses. In the north especially the grave is very often surmounted by a huge marble tortoise bearing the inscribed tablet, or what we call the gravestone, on its back. The tombs of the last two lines of emperors, the Ming and the Manchu, are magnificent structures, spread over enormous areas, and always artistically situated on hillsides facing natural or artificial lakes or seas. Contrary to the practice in Egypt, with the two exceptions above mentioned the conquering dynasties have always destroyed the tombs of their predecessors. But for this savage vandalism, China would probably possess the most magnificent assembly of imperial tombs in the world's records. [p. 42]

  

Laws of Intercourse

Throughout the whole course of their existence as a social aggregate the Chinese have pushed ceremonial observances to an extreme limit. "Ceremonies," says the Li chi, the great classic of ceremonial usages, "are the greatest of all things by which men live." Ranks were distinguished by different headdresses, garments, badges, weapons, writing-tablets, number of attendants, carriages, horses, height of walls, etc. Daily as well as official life was regulated by minute observances. There were written codes embracing almost every attitude and act of inferiors toward superiors, of superiors toward inferiors, and of equals toward equals. Visits, forms of address, and giving of presents had each their set of formulae, known and observed by every one as strictly and regularly as each child in China learned by heart and repeated aloud the three-word sentences of the elementary Trimetrical Classic. But while the school text-book was extremely simple, ceremonial observances were extremely elaborate. A Chinese was in this respect as much a slave to the living as in his funeral rites he was a slave to the dead. Only now, in the rush of 'modern progress,' is the doffing of the hat taking the place of the 'kowtow' (k'o-t'ou).

It is in this matter of ceremonial observances that the East and the West have misunderstood each other perhaps more than in all others. Where rules of etiquette are not only different, but are diametrically opposed, there is every opportunity for misunderstanding, if not estrangement. The points at issue in such questions as 'kowtowing' to the emperor and the worshipping of ancestors are generally known, but the Westerner, as a rule, is ignorant of the fact that if he wishes to conform [p. 43] to Chinese etiquette when in China (instead of to those Western customs which are in many cases unfortunately taking their place) he should not, for instance, take off his hat when entering a house or a temple, should not shake hands with his host, nor, if he wishes to express approval, should he clap his hands. Clapping of hands in China (i.e. non-Europeanized China) is used to drive away the sha ch'i, or deathly influence of evil spirits, and to clap the hands at the close of the remarks of a Chinese host (as I have seen prominent, well-meaning, but ill-guided men of the West do) is equivalent to disapproval, if not insult. Had our diplomatists been sociologists instead of only commercial agents, more than one war might have been avoided.

  

Habits and Customs

At intervals during the year the Chinese make holiday. Their public festivals begin with the celebration of the advent of the new year. They let off innumerable firecrackers, and make much merriment in their homes, drinking and feasting, and visiting their friends for several days. Accounts are squared, houses cleaned, fresh paper 'door-gods' pasted on the front doors, strips of red paper with characters implying happiness, wealth, good fortune, longevity, etc., stuck on the doorposts or the lintel, tables, etc., covered with red cloth, and flowers and decorations displayed everywhere. Business is suspended, and the merriment, dressing in new clothes, feasting, visiting, offerings to gods and ancestors, and idling continue pretty consistently during the first half of the first moon, the vacation ending with the Feast of Lanterns, which occupies the last three days. It originated in the Han dynasty 2000 years ago. Innumerable [p. 44] lanterns of all sizes, shapes, colours (except wholly white, or rather undyed material, the colour of mourning), and designs are lit in front of public and private buildings, but the use of these was an addition about 800 years later, i.e. about 1200 years ago. Paper dragons, hundreds of yards long, are moved along the streets at a slow pace, supported on the heads of men whose legs only are visible, giving the impression of huge serpents winding through the thoroughfares.

Of the other chief festivals, about eight in number (not counting the festivals of the four seasons with their equinoxes and solstices), four are specially concerned with the propitiation of the spirits--namely, the Earlier Spirit Festival (fifteenth day of second moon), the Festival of the Tombs (about the third day of the third moon), when graves are put in order and special offerings made to the dead, the Middle Spirit Festival (fifteenth day of seventh moon), and the Later Spirit Festival (fifteenth day of tenth moon). The Dragon-boat Festival (fifth day of fifth moon) is said to have originated as a commemoration of the death of the poet Ch'u Yuan, who drowned himself in disgust at the official intrigue and corruption of which he was the victim, but the object is the procuring of sufficient rain to ensure a good harvest. It is celebrated by racing with long narrow boats shaped to represent dragons and propelled by scores of rowers, pasting of charms on the doors of dwellings, and eating a special kind of rice-cake, with a liquor as a beverage.

Click to enlarge
The Spirit That Clears the Way

The fifteenth day of the eighth moon is the Mid-autumn Festival, known by foreigners as All Souls' Day. On this occasion the women worship the moon, offering cakes, fruit, etc. The gates of Purgatory are opened, and the [p. 45] hungry ghosts troop forth to enjoy themselves for a month on the good things provided for them by the pious. The ninth day of the ninth moon is the Chung Yang Festival, when every one who possibly can ascends to a high place--a hill or temple-tower. This inaugurates the kite-flying season, and is supposed to promote longevity. During that season, which lasts several months, the Chinese people the sky with dragons, centipedes, frogs, butterflies, and hundreds of other cleverly devised creatures, which, by means of simple mechanisms worked by the wind, roll their eyes, make appropriate sounds, and move their paws, wings, tails, etc., in a most realistic manner. The festival originated in a warning received by a scholar named Huan Ching from his master Fei Ch'ang-fang, a native of Ju-nan in Honan, who lived during the Han dynasty, that a terrible calamity was about to happen, and enjoining him to escape with his family to a high place. On his return he found all his domestic animals dead, and was told that they had died instead of himself and his relatives. On New Year's Eve (Tuan Nien or Chu Hsi) the Kitchen-god ascends to Heaven to make his annual report, the wise feasting him with honey and other sticky food before his departure, so that his lips may be sealed and he be unable to 'let on' too much to the powers that be in the regions above!

  

Sports and Games

The first sports of the Chinese were festival gatherings for purposes of archery, to which succeeded exercises partaking of a military character. Hunting was a favourite amusement. They played games of calculation, chess (or the 'game of war'), shuttlecock with the feet, pitch-pot (throwing arrows from a distance into a narrow-necked [p. 46] jar), and 'horn-goring' (fighting on the shoulders of others with horned masks on their heads). Stilts, football, dice-throwing, boat-racing, dog-racing, cock-fighting, kite-flying, as well as singing and dancing marionettes, afforded recreation and amusement.

Many of these games became obsolete in course of time, and new ones were invented. At the end of the Monarchical Period, during the Manchu dynasty, we find those most in use to be foot-shuttlecock, lifting of beams headed with heavy stones--dumb-bells four feet long and weighing thirty or forty pounds--kite-flying, quail-fighting, cricket-fighting, sending birds after seeds thrown into the air, sauntering through fields, playing chess or 'morra,' or gambling with cards, dice, or over the cricket- and quail-fights or seed-catching birds. There were numerous and varied children's games tending to develop strength, skill, quickness of action, parental instinct, accuracy, and sagacity. Theatricals were performed by strolling troupes on stages erected opposite temples, though permanent theatres also existed, female parts until recently being taken by male actors. Peep-shows, conjurers, ventriloquists, acrobats, fortune-tellers, and story-tellers kept crowds amused or interested. Generally, 'young China' of the present day, identified with the party of progress, seems to have adopted most of the outdoor but very few of the indoor games of Western nations.

  

Domestic Life

In domestic or private life, observances at birth, betrothal, and marriage were elaborate, and retained superstitious elements. Early rising was general. Shaving of the head and beard, as well as cleaning of the ears and massage, was done by barbers. There were public baths [p. 47] in all cities and towns. Shops were closed at nightfall, and, the streets being until recent times ill-lit or unlit, passengers or their attendants carried lanterns. Most houses, except the poorest, had private watchmen. Generally two meals a day were taken. Dinners to friends were served at inns or restaurants, accompanied or followed by musical or theatrical performances. The place of honour is stated in Western books on China to be on the left, but the fact is that the place of honour is the one which shows the utmost solicitude for the safety of the guest. It is therefore not necessarily one fixed place, but would usually be the one facing the door, so that the guest might be in a position to see an enemy enter, and take measures accordingly.

Lap-dogs and cage-birds were kept as pets; 'wonks,' the huang kou, or 'yellow dog,' were guards of houses and street scavengers. Aquaria with goldfish were often to be seen in the houses of the upper and middle classes, the gardens and courtyards of which usually contained rockeries and artistic shrubs and flowers.

Whiskers were never worn, and moustaches and beards only after forty, before which age the hair grew, if at all, very scantily. Full, thick beards, as in the West, were practically never seen, even on the aged. Snuff-bottles, tobacco-pipes, and fans were carried by both sexes. Nails were worn long by members of the literary and leisured classes. Non-Manchu women and girls had cramped feet, and both Manchu and Chinese women used cosmetics freely.

  

Industrial Institutions

While the men attended to farm-work, women took care of the mulberry-orchards and silkworms, and did [p. 48] spinning, weaving, and embroidery. This, the primitive division of labour, held throughout, though added to on both sides, so that eventually the men did most of the agriculture, arts, production, distribution, fighting, etc., and the women, besides the duties above named and some field-labour, mended old clothes, drilled and sharpened needles, pasted tin-foil, made shoes, and gathered and sorted the leaves of the tea-plant. In course of time trades became highly specialized--their number being legion--and localized, bankers, for instance, congregating in Shansi, carpenters in Chi Chou, and porcelain-manufacturers in Jao Chou, in Kiangsi.

As to land, it became at an early age the property of the sovereign, who farmed it out to his relatives or favourites. It was arranged on the ching, or 'well' system--eight private squares round a ninth public square cultivated by the eight farmer families in common for the benefit of the State. From the beginning to the end of the Monarchical Period tenure continued to be of the Crown, land being unallodial, and mostly held in clans or families, and not entailed, the conditions of tenure being payment of an annual tax, a fee for alienation, and money compensation for personal services to the Government, generally incorporated into the direct tax as scutage. Slavery, unknown in the earliest times, existed as a recognized institution during the whole of the Monarchical Period.

Production was chiefly confined to human and animal labour, machinery being only now in use on a large scale. Internal distribution was carried on from numerous centres and at fairs, shops, markets, etc. With few exceptions, the great trade-routes by land and sea have remained the same during the last two thousand years. [p. 49] Foreign trade was with Western Asia, Greece, Rome, Carthage, Arabia, etc., and from the seventeenth century A.D. more generally with European countries. The usual primitive means of conveyance, such as human beings, animals, carts, boats, etc., were partly displaced by steam-vessels from 1861 onward.

Exchange was effected by barter, cowries of different values being the prototype of coins, which were cast in greater or less quantity under each reign. But until within recent years there was only one coin, the copper cash, in use, bullion and paper notes being the other media of exchange. Silver Mexican dollars and subsidiary coins came into use with the advent of foreign commerce. Weights and measures (which generally decreased from north to south), officially arranged partly on the decimal system, were discarded by the people in ordinary commercial transactions for the more convenient duodecimal subdivision.

  

Arts

Hunting, fishing, cooking, weaving, dyeing, carpentry, metallurgy, glass-, brick-, and paper-making, printing, and book-binding were in a more or less primitive stage, the mechanical arts showing much servile imitation and simplicity in design; but pottery, carving, and lacquer-work were in an exceptionally high state of development, the articles produced being surpassed in quality and beauty by no others in the world.

  

Agriculture and Rearing of Livestock

From the earliest times the greater portion of the available land was under cultivation. Except when the country has been devastated by war, the Chinese have devoted [p. 50] close attention to the cultivation of the soil continuously for forty centuries. Even the hills are terraced for extra growing-room. But poverty and governmental inaction caused much to lie idle. There were two annual crops in the north, and five in two years in the south. Perhaps two-thirds of the population cultivated the soil. The methods, however, remained primitive; but the great fertility of the soil and the great industry of the farmer, with generous but careful use of fertilizers, enabled the vast territory to support an enormous population. Rice, wheat, barley, buckwheat, maize, kaoliang, several millets, and oats were the chief grains cultivated. Beans, peas, oil-bearing seeds (sesame, rape, etc.), fibre-plants (hemp, ramie, jute, cotton, etc.), starch-roots (taros, yams, sweet potatoes, etc.), tobacco, indigo, tea, sugar, fruits, were among the more important crops produced. Fruit-growing, however, lacked scientific method. The rotation of crops was not a usual practice, but grafting, pruning, dwarfing, enlarging, selecting, and varying species were well understood. Vegetable-culture had reached a high state of perfection, the smallest patches of land being made to bring forth abundantly. This is the more creditable inasmuch as most small farmers could not afford to purchase expensive foreign machinery, which, in many cases, would be too large or complicated for their purposes.

The principal animals, birds, etc., reared were the pig, ass, horse, mule, cow, sheep, goat, buffalo, yak, fowl, duck, goose, pigeon, silkworm, and bee.

The Ministry of Agriculture and Commerce, the successor to the Board of Agriculture, Manufactures, and Commerce, instituted during recent years, is now adapting Western methods to the cultivation of the fertile soil of [p. 51] China, and even greater results than in the past may be expected in the future.

  

Sentiments and Moral Ideas

The Chinese have always shown a keen delight in the beautiful--in flowers, music, poetry, literature, embroidery, paintings, porcelain. They cultivated ornamental plants, almost every house, as we saw, having its garden, large or small, and tables were often decorated with flowers in vases or ornamental wire baskets or fruits or sweetmeats. Confucius made music an instrument of government. Paper bearing the written character was so respected that it might not be thrown on the ground or trodden on. Delight was always shown in beautiful scenery or tales of the marvellous. Commanding or agreeable situations were chosen for temples. But until within the last few years streets and houses were generally unclean, and decency in public frequently absent.

Morality was favoured by public opinion, but in spite of early marriages and concubinage there was much laxity. Cruelty both to human beings and animals has always been a marked trait in the Chinese character. Savagery in warfare, cannibalism, luxury, drunkenness, and corruption prevailed in the earliest times. The attitude toward women was despotic. But moral principles pervaded the classical writings, and formed the basis of law. In spite of these, the inferior sentiment of revenge was, as we have seen, approved and preached as a sacred duty. As a result of the universal yin-yang dualistic doctrines, immorality was leniently regarded. In modern times, at least, mercantile honour was high, "a merchant's word is as good as his bond" being truer in China than in many [p. 52] other countries. Intemperance was rare. Opium-smoking was much indulged in until the use of the drug was forcibly suppressed (1906-16). Even now much is smuggled into the country, or its growth overlooked by bribed officials. Clan quarrels and fights were common, vendettas sometimes continuing for generations. Suicide under depressing circumstances was approved and honoured; it was frequently resorted to under the sting of great injustice. There was a deep reverence for parents and superiors. Disregard of the truth, when useful, was universal, and unattended by a sense of shame, even on detection. Thieving was common. The illegal exactions of rulers were burdensome. In times of prosperity pride and satisfaction in material matters was not concealed, and was often short-sighted. Politeness was practically universal, though said to be often superficial; but gratitude was a marked characteristic, and was heartfelt. Mutual conjugal affection was strong. The love of gambling was universal.

But little has occurred in recent years to modify the above characters. Nevertheless the inferior traits are certainly being changed by education and by the formation of societies whose members bind themselves against immorality, concubinage, gambling, drinking, smoking, etc.

  

Religious Ideas

Chinese religion is inherently an attitude toward the spirits or gods with the object of obtaining a benefit or averting a calamity. We shall deal with it more fully in another chapter. Suffice it to say here that it originated in ancestor-worship, and that the greater part of it remains ancestor-worship to the present day. The State religion, which was Confucianism, was ancestor-worship. Taoism, [p. 53] originally a philosophy, became a worship of spirits--of the souls of dead men supposed to have taken up their abode in animals, reptiles, insects, trees, stones, etc.--borrowed the cloak of religion from Buddhism, which eventually outshone it, and degenerated into a system of exorcism and magic. Buddhism, a religion originating in India, in which Buddha, once a man, is worshipped, in which no beings are known with greater power than can be attained to by man, and according to which at death the soul migrates into anything from a deified human being to an elephant, a bird, a plant, a wall, a broom, or any piece of inorganic matter, was imported ready made into China and took the side of popular superstition and Taoism against the orthodox belief, finding that its power lay in the influence on the popular mind of its doctrine respecting a future state, in contrast to the indifference of Confucianism. Its pleading for compassion and preservation of life met a crying need, and but for it the state of things in this respect would be worse than it is.

Religion, apart from ancestor-worship, does not enter largely into Chinese life. There is none of the real 'love of God' found, for example, in the fervent as distinguished from the conventional Christian. And as ancestor-worship gradually loses its hold and dies out agnosticism will take its place.

  

Superstitions

An almost infinite variety of superstitious practices, due to the belief in the good or evil influences of departed spirits, exists in all parts of China. Days are lucky or unlucky. Eclipses are due to a dragon trying to eat the sun or the moon. The rainbow is supposed to be the result of a meeting between the impure vapours of the [p. 54] sun and the earth. Amulets are worn, and charms hung up, sprigs of artemisia or of peach-blossom are placed near beds and over lintels respectively, children and adults are 'locked to life' by means of locks on chains or cords worn round the neck, old brass mirrors are supposed to cure insanity, figures of gourds, tigers' claws, or the unicorn are worn to ensure good fortune or ward off sickness, fire, etc., spells of many kinds, composed mostly of the written characters for happiness and longevity, are worn, or written on paper, cloth, leaves, etc., and burned, the ashes being made into a decoction and drunk by the young or sick.

Divination by means of the divining stalks (the divining plant, milfoil or yarrow) and the tortoiseshell has been carried on from time immemorial, but was not originally practised with the object of ascertaining future events, but in order to decide doubts, much as lots are drawn or a coin tossed in the West. Feng-shui, "the art of adapting the residence of the living and the dead so as to co-operate and harmonize with the local currents of the cosmic breath" (the yin and the yang: see Chapter III), a doctrine which had its root in ancestor-worship, has exercised an enormous influence on Chinese thought and life from the earliest times, and especially from those of Chu Hsi and other philosophers of the Sung dynasty.

  

Knowledge

Having noted that Chinese education was mainly literary, and why it was so, it is easy to see that there would be little or no demand for the kind of knowledge classified in the West under the head of science. In so far as any demand existed, it did so, at any rate at first, only because it subserved vital needs. Thus, astronomy, [p. 55] or more properly astrology, was studied in order that the calendar might be regulated, and so the routine of agriculture correctly followed, for on that depended the people's daily rice, or rather, in the beginning, the various fruits and kinds of flesh which constituted their means of sustentation before their now universal food was known. In philosophy they have had two periods of great activity, the first beginning with Lao Tzu and Confucius in the sixth century B.C. and ending with the Burning of the Books by the First Emperor, Shih Huang Ti, in 213 B.C.; the second beginning with Chou Tzu (A.D. 1017-73) and ending with Chu Hsi (1130-1200). The department of philosophy in the imperial library contained in 190 B.C. 2705 volumes by 137 authors. There can be no doubt that this zeal for the orthodox learning, combined with the literary test for office, was the reason why scientific knowledge was prevented from developing; so much so, that after four thousand or more years of national life we find, during the Manchu Period, which ended the monarchical regime, few of the educated class, giants though they were in knowledge of all departments of their literature and history (the continuity of their traditions laid down in their twenty-four Dynastic Annals has been described as one of the great wonders of the world), with even the elementary scientific learning of a schoolboy in the West. 'Crude,' 'primitive,' 'mediocre,' 'vague,' 'inaccurate,' 'want of analysis and generalization,' are terms we find applied to their knowledge of such leading sciences as geography, mathematics, chemistry, botany, and geology. Their medicine was much hampered by superstition, and perhaps more so by such beliefs as that the seat of the intellect is in the stomach, that thoughts proceed from the heart, that the pit of the stomach is the seat of [p. 56] the breath, that the soul resides in the liver, etc.--the result partly of the idea that dissection of the body would maim it permanently during its existence in the Otherworld. What progress was made was due to European instruction; and this again is the causa causans of the great wave of progress in scientific and philosophical knowledge which is rolling over the whole country and will have marked effects on the history of the world during the coming century.

  

Language

Originally polysyllabic, the Chinese language later assumed a monosyllabic, isolating, uninflected form, grammatical relations being indicated by position. From the earliest forms of speech several subordinate vernacular languages arose in various districts, and from these sprang local dialects, etc. Tone-distinctions arose--i.e. the same words pronounced with a different intonation came to mean different things. Development of these distinctions led to carelessness of articulation, and multiplication of what would be homonyms but for these tones. It is incorrect to assume that the tones were invented to distinguish similar sounds. So that, at the present day, anyone who says ma will mean either an exclamation, hemp, horse, or curse according to the quality he gives to the sound. The language remains in a primitive state, without inflexion, declension, or distinction of parts of speech. The order in a sentence is: subject, verb, complement direct, complement indirect. Gender is formed by distinctive particles; number by prefixing numerals, etc.; cases by position or appropriate prepositions. Adjectives precede nouns; position determines comparison; and absence of punctuation causes ambiguity. The latter is [p. 57] now introduced into most newly published works. The new education is bringing with it innumerable words and phrases not found in the old literature or dictionaries. Japanese idioms which are now being imported into the language are making it less pure.

The written language, too well known to need detailed description, a thing of beauty and a joy for ever to those able to appreciate it, said to have taken originally the form of knotted cords and then of notches on wood (though this was more probably the origin of numeration than of writing proper), took later that of rude outlines of natural objects, and then went on to the phonetic system, under which each character is composed of two parts, the radical, indicating the meaning, and the phonetic, indicating the sound. They were symbols, non-agglutinative and non-inflexional, and were written in vertical columns, probably from having in early times been painted or cut on strips of bark.

  

Achievements of the Chinese

As the result of all this fitful fever during so many centuries, we find that the Chinese, after having lived in nests "in order to avoid the animals," and then in caves, have built themselves houses and palaces which are still made after the pattern of their prototype, with a flat wall behind, the openings in front, the walls put in after the pillars and roof-tree have been fixed, and out-buildings added on as side extensions. The k'ang, or 'stove-bed' (now a platform made of bricks), found all over the northern provinces, was a place scooped out of the side of the cave, with an opening underneath in which (as now) a fire was lit in winter. Windows and shutters opened upward, being a survival of the mat or shade [p. 58] hung in front of the apertures in the walls of the primitive cave-dwelling. Four of these buildings facing each other round a square made the courtyard, and one or more courtyards made the compound. They have fed themselves on almost everything edible to be found on, under, or above land or water, except milk, but live chiefly on rice, chicken, fish, vegetables, including garlic, and tea, though at one time they ate flesh and drank wine, sometimes to excess, before tea was cultivated. They have clothed themselves in skins and feathers, and then in silks and satins, but mostly in cotton, and hardly ever in wool. Under the Manchu regime the type of dress adopted was that of this horse-riding race, showing the chief characteristics of that noble animal, the broad sleeves representing the hoofs, the queue the mane, etc. This queue was formed of the hair growing from the back part of the scalp, the front of which was shaved. Unlike the Egyptians, they did not wear wigs. They have nearly always had the decency to wear their coats long, and have despised the Westerner for wearing his too short. They are now paradoxical enough to make the mistake of adopting the Westerner's costume.

They have made to themselves great canals, bridges, aqueducts, and the longest wall there has ever been on the face of the earth (which could not be seen from the moon, as some sinologists have erroneously supposed, any more than a hair, however long, could be seen at a distance of a hundred yards). They have made long and wide roads, but failed to keep them in repair during the last few centuries, though much zeal, possibly due to commerce on oil- or electricity-driven wheels, is now being shown in this direction. They have built honorary portals to chaste widows, pagodas, and arched bridges of great [p. 59] beauty, not forgetting to surround each city with a high and substantial wall to keep out unfriendly people. They have made innumerable implements and weapons, from pens and fans and chopsticks to ploughs and carts and ships; from fiery darts, 'flame elephants,' bows and spears, spiked chariots, battering-rams, and hurling-engines to mangonels, trebuchets, matchlocks of wrought iron and plain bore with long barrels resting on a stock, and gingals fourteen feet long resting on a tripod, cuirasses of quilted cotton cloth covered with brass knobs, and helmets of iron or polished steel, sometimes inlaid, with neck- and ear-lappets. And they have been content not to improve upon these to any appreciable extent; but have lately shown a tendency to make the later patterns imported from the West in their own factories.

They have produced one of the greatest and most remarkable accumulations of literature the world has ever seen, and the finest porcelain; some music, not very fine; and some magnificent painting, though hardly any sculpture, and little architecture that will live.

Myths and Legends of China, by Edward T.C. Werner, [1922], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 60]

  

Chapter II

  

On Chinese Mythology

  

Mythology and Intellectual Progress

The Manichaest, yin-yang (dualist), idea of existence, to which further reference will be made in the next chapter, finds its illustration in the dual life, real and imaginary, of all the peoples of the earth. They have both real histories and mythological histories. In the preceding chapter I have dealt briefly with the first--the life of reality--in China from the earliest times to the present day; the succeeding chapters are concerned with the second--the life of imagination. A survey of the first was necessary for a complete understanding of the second. The two react upon each other, affecting the national character and through it the history of the world.

Mythology is the science of the unscientific man's explanation of what we call the Otherworld--itself and its denizens, their mysterious habits and surprising actions both there and here, usually including the creation of this world also. By the Otherworld he does not necessarily mean anything distant or even invisible, though the things he explains would mostly be included by us under those terms. In some countries myths are abundant, in others scarce. Why should this be? Why should some peoples tell many and marvellous tales about their gods and others say little about them, though they may say a great deal to them? We recall the 'great' myths of Greece and Scandinavia. Other races are 'poor' in myths. The difference is to be explained by the mental characters of the peoples as moulded by their surroundings and hereditary tendencies. The problem is of course a psychological one, for it is, as already noted, in imagination [p. 61] that myths have their root. Now imagination grows with each stage of intellectual progress, for intellectual progress implies increasing representativeness of thought. In the lower stages of human development imagination is feeble and unproductive; in the highest stages it is strong and constructive.

  

The Chinese Intellect

The Chinese are not unimaginative, but their minds did not go on to the construction of any myths which should be world-great and immortal; and one reason why they did not construct such myths was that their intellectual progress was arrested at a comparatively early stage. It was arrested because there was not that contact and competition with other peoples which demands brain-work of an active kind as the alternative of subjugation, inferiority, or extinction, and because, as we have already seen, the knowledge required of them was mainly the parrot-like repetition of the old instead of the thinking-out of the new  [*1]--a state of things rendered possible by the isolation just referred to. Confucius discountenanced discussion about the supernatural, and just as it is probable that the exhortations of Wen Wang, the virtual founder of the Chou dynasty (1121-255 B.C.), against drunkenness, in a time before tea was known to them, helped to make the Chinese the sober people that they are, so it is probable--more than probable--that this attitude of Confucius may have nipped in the bud much that might have developed a vigorous mythology, though for a reason to be stated later it may be doubted if he thereby deprived the world of any beautiful and marvellous results of the [p. 62] highest flights of poetical creativeness. There are times, such as those of any great political upheaval, when human nature will assert itself and break through its shackles in spite of all artificial or conventional restraints. Considering the enormous influence of Confucianism throughout the latter half of Chinese history--i.e. the last two thousand years--it is surprising that the Chinese dared to think about supernatural matters at all, except in the matter of propitiating their dead ancestors. That they did so is evidence not only of human nature's inherent tendency to tell stories, but also of the irrepressible strength of feeling which breaks all laws and commandments under great stimulus. On the opposing unaesthetic side this may be compared to the feeling which prompts the unpremeditated assassination of a man who is guilty of great injustice, even though it be certain that in due course he would have met his deserts at the hands of the public executioner.

  

The Influence of Religion

Apart from this, the influence of Confucianism would have been even greater than it was, but for the imperial partiality periodically shown for rival doctrines, such as Buddhism and Taoism, which threw their weight on the side of the supernatural, and which at times were exalted to such great heights as to be officially recognized as State religions. These, Buddhism especially, appealed to the popular imagination and love of the marvellous. Buddhism spoke of the future state and the nature of the gods in no uncertain tones. It showed men how to reach the one and attain to the other. Its founder was virtuous; his commandments pure and life-sustaining. It supplied in great part what Confucianism lacked. And, as in the [p. 63] fifth and sixth centuries A.D., when Buddhism and Taoism joined forces and a working union existed between them, they practically excluded for the time all the "chilly growth of Confucian classicism."

Other opponents of myth, including a critical philosopher of great ability, we shall have occasion to notice presently.

  

History and Myth

The sobriety and accuracy of Chinese historians is proverbial. I have dilated upon this in another work, and need add here only what I inadvertently omitted there--a point hitherto unnoticed or at least unremarked--that the very word for history in Chinese (shih) means impartiality or an impartial annalist. It has been said that where there is much myth there is little history, and vice versa, and though this may not be universally true, undoubtedly the persistently truthful recording of facts, events, and sayings, even at the risk of loss, yea, and actual loss of life of the historian as the result of his refusal to make false entries in his chronicle at the bidding of the emperor (as in the case of the historiographers of Ch'i in 547 B.C.), indicates a type of mind which would require some very strong stimulus to cause it to soar very far into the hazy realms of fanciful imagination.

  

Chinese Rigidity

A further cause, already hinted at above, for the arrest of intellectual progress is to be found in the growth of the nation in size during many centuries of isolation from the main stream of world-civilization, without that increase in heterogeneity which comes from the moulding by forces external to itself. "As iron sharpeneth iron, so a man sharpeneth the countenance of his friend." [p. 64] Consequently we find China what is known to sociology as an 'aggregate of the first order,' which during its evolution has parted with its internal life-heat without absorbing enough from external sources to enable it to retain the plastic condition necessary to further, or at least rapid, development. It is in a state of rigidity, a state recognized and understood by the sociologist in his study of the evolution of nations.

  

The Prerequisites to Myth

But the mere increase of constructive imagination is not sufficient to produce myth. If it were, it would be reasonable to argue that as intellectual progress goes on myths become more numerous, and the greater the progress the greater the number of myths. This we do not find. In fact, if constructive imagination went on increasing without the intervention of any further factor, there need not necessarily be any myth at all. We might almost say that the reverse is the case. We connect myth with primitive folk, not with the greatest philosophers or the most advanced nations--not, that is, with the most advanced stages of national progress wherein constructive imagination makes the nation great and strong. In these stages the philosopher studies or criticizes myth, he does not make it.

In order that there may be myth, three further conditions must be fulfilled. There must, as we have seen, be constructive imagination, but, nevertheless, there must not be too much of it. As stated above, mythology, or rather myth, is the unscientific man's explanation. If the constructive imagination is so great that it becomes self-critical, if the story-teller doubts his own story, if, in short, his mind is scientific enough to see that his explanation [p. 65] is no explanation at all, then there can be no myth properly so called. As in religion, unless the myth-maker believes in his myth with all his heart and soul and strength, and each new disciple, as it is cared for and grows under his hands during the course of years, holds that he must put his shoes from off his feet because the place whereon he treads is holy ground, the faith will not be propagated, for it will lack the vital spark which alone can make it a living thing.

  

Stimulus Necessary

The next condition is that there must be a stimulus. It is not ideas, but feelings, which govern the world, and in the history of mythology where feeling is absent we find either weak imitation or repetition of the myths of other peoples (though this must not be confused with certain elements which seem to be common to the myths of all races), or concoction, contamination, or "genealogical tree-making," or myths originated by "leisurely, peaceful tradition" and lacking the essential qualities which appeal to the human soul and make their possessors very careful to preserve them among their most loved and valued treasures. But, on the other hand, where feeling is stirred, where the requisite stimulus exists, where the people are in great danger, or allured by the prize of some breathless adventure, the contact produces the spark of divine poetry, the myths are full of artistic, philosophic, and religious suggestiveness, and have abiding significance and charm. They are the children, the poetic fruit, of great labour and serious struggles, revealing the most fundamental forces, hopes, and cravings of the human soul. Nations highly strung, undergoing strenuous emotion, intensely energized by constant conflict with [p. 66] other nations, have their imagination stimulated to exceptional poetic creativeness. The background of the Danaids is Egyptian, not Greek, but it was the danger in which the Greeks were placed in their wars with the sons of the land of the Pharaohs that stimulated the Greek imagination to the creation of that great myth.

This explains why so many of the greatest myths have their staging, not in the country itself whose treasured possessions they are, but where that country is 'playing the great game,' is carrying on wars decisive of far-reaching national events, which arouse to the greatest pitch of excitement the feelings both of the combatants and of those who are watching them from their homes. It is by such great events, not by the romance-writer in his peaceful study, that mythology, like literature, is "incisively determined." Imagination, we saw, goes pari passu with intellectual progress, and intellectual progress, in early times, is furthered not so much by the mere contact as by the actual conflict of nations. And we see also that myths may, and very frequently do, have a character quite different from that of the nation to which they appertain, for environment plays a most important part both in their inception and subsequent growth--a truth too obvious to need detailed elaboration.

  

Persistent Soul-expression

A third condition is that the type of imagination must be persistent through fairly long periods of time, otherwise not only will there be an absence of sufficient feeling or momentum to cause the myths to be repeated and kept alive and transmitted to posterity, but the inducement to add to them and so enable them to mature and become complete and finished off and sufficiently attractive to [p. 67] appeal to the human mind in spite of the foreign character they often bear will be lacking. In other words, myths and legends grow. They resemble not so much the narrative of the story-teller or novelist as a gradually developing art like music, or a body of ideas like philosophy. They are human and natural, though they express the thought not of any one individual mind, but of the folk-soul, exemplifying in poetical form some great psychological or physiographical truth.

  

The Character of Chinese Myth

The nature of the case thus forbids us to expect to find the Chinese myths exhibiting the advanced state and brilliant heterogeneity of those which have become part of the world's permanent literature. We must expect them to be true to type and conditions, as we expect the other ideas of the Chinese to be, and looking for them in the light of this knowledge we shall find them just where we should expect to find them.

The great sagas and eddas exalted among the world's literary masterpieces, and forming part of the very life of a large number of its inhabitants, are absent in China. "The Chinese people," says one well-known sinologist, "are not prone to mythological invention." "He who expects to find in Tibet," says another writer, "the poetical charm of Greek or Germanic mythology will be disappointed. There is a striking poverty of imagination in all the myths and legends. A great monotony pervades them all. Many of their stories, taken from the sacred texts, are quite puerile and insipid. It may be noted that the Chinese mythology labours under the same defect." And then there comes the crushing judgment of an over-zealous Christian missionary sinologist: "There [p. 68] is no hierarchy of gods brought in to rule and inhabit the world they made, no conclave on Mount Olympus, nor judgment of the mortal soul by Osiris, no transfer of human love and hate, passions and hopes, to the powers above; all here is ascribed to disembodied agencies or principles, and their works are represented as moving on in quiet order. There is no religion [!], no imagination; all is impassible, passionless, uninteresting.... It has not, as in Greece and Egypt, been explained in sublime poetry, shadowed forth in gorgeous ritual and magnificent festivals, represented in exquisite sculptures, nor preserved in faultless, imposing fanes and temples, filled with ideal creations." Besides being incorrect as to many of its alleged facts, this view would certainly be shown by further study to be greatly exaggerated.

  

Periods Fertile in Myth

What we should expect, then, to find from our philosophical study of the Chinese mind as affected by its surroundings would be barrenness of constructive imagination, except when birth was given to myth through the operation of some external agency. And this we do find. The period of the overthrow of the Yin dynasty and the establishment of the great house of Chou in 1122 B.C., or of the Wars of the Three States, for example, in the third century after Christ, a time of terrible anarchy, a medieval age of epic heroism, sung in a hundred forms of prose and verse, which has entered as motive into a dozen dramas, or the advent of Buddhism, which opened up a new world of thought and life to the simple, sober, peace-loving agricultural folk of China, were stimuli not by any means devoid of result. In China there are gods many and heroes many, and the very fact of the existence [p. 69] of so great a multitude of gods would logically imply a wealth of mythological lore inseparable from their apotheosis. You cannot--and the Chinese cannot--get behind reason. A man is not made a god without some cause being assigned for so important and far-reaching a step; and in matters of this sort the stated cause is apt to take the form of a narrative more or less marvellous or miraculous. These resulting myths may, of course, be born and grow at a later time than that in which the circumstances giving rise to them took place, but, if so, that merely proves the persistent power of the originating stimulus. That in China these narratives always or often reach the highest flights of constructive imagination is not maintained--the maintenance of that argument would indeed be contradictory; but even in those countries where the mythological garden has produced some of the finest flowers millions of seeds must have been sown which either did not spring up at all or at least failed to bring forth fruit. And in the realm of mythology it is not only those gods who sit in the highest seats--creators of the world or heads of great religions--who dominate mankind; the humbler, though often no less powerful gods or spirits--those even who run on all fours and live in holes in the ground, or buzz through the air and have their thrones in the shadow of a leaf--have often made a deeper impress on the minds and in the hearts of the people, and through that impress, for good or evil, have, in greater or less degree, modified the life of the visible universe.

  

Sources of Chinese Myth

"So, if we ask whence comes the heroic and the romantic, which supplies the story-teller's stock-in-trade, [p. 70] the answer is easy. The legends and history of early China furnish abundance of material for them. To the Chinese mind their ancient world was crowded with heroes, fairies, and devils, who played their part in the mixed-up drama, and left a name and fame both remarkable and piquant. Every one who is familiar with the ways and the language of the people knows that the country is full of common objects to which poetic names have been given, and with many of them there is associated a legend or a myth. A deep river's gorge is called 'the Blind Man's Pass,' because a peculiar bit of rock, looked at from a certain angle, assumes the outline of the human form, and there comes to be connected therewith a pleasing story which reaches its climax in the petrifaction of the hero. A mountain's crest shaped like a swooping eagle will from some one have received the name of 'Eagle Mountain,' whilst by its side another shaped like a couchant lion will have a name to match. There is no lack of poetry among the people, and most striking objects claim a poetic name, and not a few of them are associated with curious legends. It is, however, to their national history that the story-teller goes for his most interesting subjects, and as the so-called history of China imperceptibly passes into the legendary period, and this again fades into the mythical, and as all this is assuredly believed by the masses of the people, it is obvious that in the national life of China there is no dearth of heroes whose deeds of prowess will command the rapt attention of the crowds who listen."  [*2]

The soul in China is everywhere in evidence, and if myths have "first and foremost to do with the life of the soul" it would appear strange that the Chinese, [p. 71] having spiritualized everything from a stone to the sky, have not been creative of myth. Why they have not the foregoing considerations show us clearly enough. We must take them and their myths as we find them. Let us, then, note briefly the result of their mental workings as reacted on by their environment.

  

Phases of Chinese Myth

We cannot identify the earliest mythology of the Chinese with that of any primitive race. The myths, if any, of their place of origin may have faded and been forgotten in their slow migration eastward. We cannot say that when they came from the West (which they probably did) they brought their myths with them, for in spite of certain conjectural derivations from Babylon we do not find them possessed of any which we can identify as imported by them at that time. But research seems to have gone at least as far as this--namely, that while we cannot say that Chinese myth was derived from Indian myth, there is good reason to believe that Chinese and Indian myth had a common origin, which was of course outside of China.

To set forth in detail the various phases through which Chinese myth has passed would involve a technical description foreign to the purpose of a popular work. It will sufficiently serve our present purpose to outline its most prominent features.

In the earliest times there was an 'age of magic' followed by an 'heroic age,' but myths were very rare before 800 B.C., and what is known as primitive mythology is said to have been invented or imitated from foreign sources after 820 B.C. In the eighth century B.C. myths of an astrological character began to attract [p. 72] attention. In the age of Lao Tzu (604 B.C.), the reputed founder of the Taoist religion, fresh legends appear, though Lao Tzu himself, absorbed in the abstract, records none. Neither did Confucius (551-479 B.C.) nor Mencius, who lived two hundred years later, add any legends to history. But in the Period of the Warring States (500-100 B.C.) fresh stimuli and great emotion prompted to mythological creation.

  

Tso-ch'iu Ming and Lieh Tzu

Tso-ch'iu Ming, commentator on Confucius's Annals, frequently introduced legend into his history. Lieh Tzu (fifth and fourth centuries B.C.), a metaphysician, is one of the earliest authors who deal in myths. He is the first to mention the story of Hsi Wang Mu, the Western Queen, and from his day onward the fabulists have vied with one another in fantastic descriptions of the wonders of her fairyland. He was the first to mention the islands of the immortals in the ocean, the kingdoms of the dwarfs and giants, the fruit of immortality, the repairing of the heavens by Nu Kua Shih with five-coloured stones, and the great tortoise which supports the universe.

  

The T'ang and Sung Epochs

Religious romance began at this time. The T'ang epoch (A.B. 618-907) was one of the resurrection of the arts of peace after a long period of dissension. A purer and more enduring form of intellect was gradually overcoming the grosser but less solid superstition. Nevertheless the intellectual movement which now manifested itself was not strong enough to prevail against the powers of mythological darkness. It was reserved [p. 73] for the scholars of the Sung Period (A.D. 960-1280) to carry through to victory a strong and sustained offensive against the spiritualistic obsessions which had weighed upon the Chinese mind more or less persistently from the Han Period (206 B.C.-A.D. 221) onward. The dogma of materialism was specially cultivated at this time. The struggle of sober reason against superstition or imaginative invention was largely a struggle of Confucianism against Taoism. Though many centuries had elapsed since the great Master walked the earth, the anti-myth movement of the T'ang and Sung Periods was in reality the long arm and heavy fist of Confucius emphasizing a truer rationalism than that of his opponents and denouncing the danger of leaving the firm earth to soar into the unknown hazy regions of fantasy. It was Sung scholarship that gave the death-blow to Chinese mythology.

Click to enlarge
Lao Tzu

It is unnecessary to labour the point further, because after the Sung epoch we do not meet with any period of new mythological creation, and its absence can be ascribed to no other cause than its defeat at the hands of the Sung philosophers. After their time the tender plant was always in danger of being stunted or killed by the withering blast of philosophical criticism. Anything in the nature of myth ascribable to post-Sung times can at best be regarded only as a late blossom born when summer days are past.

  

Myth and Doubt

It will bear repetition to say that unless the myth-builder firmly believes in his myth, be he the layer of the foundation-stone or one of the raisers of the superstructure, he will hardly make it a living thing. Once he believes in reincarnation and the suspension of natural [p. 74] laws, the boundless vistas of space and the limitless aeons of time are opened to him. He can perform miracles which astound the world. But if he allow his mind to inquire, for instance, why it should have been necessary for Elijah to part the waters of the Jordan with his garment in order that he and Elisha might pass over dryshod, or for Bodhidharma to stand on a reed to cross the great Yangtzu River, or for innumerable Immortals to sit on 'favourable clouds' to make their journeys through space, he spoils myth--his child is stillborn or does not survive to maturity. Though the growth of philosophy and decay of superstition may be good for a nation, the process is certainly conducive to the destruction of its myth and much of its poetry. The true mythologist takes myth for myth, enters into its spirit, and enjoys it.

We may thus expect to find in the realm of Chinese mythology a large number of little hills rather than a few great mountains, but the little hills are very good ones after their kind; and the object of this work is to present Chinese myth as it is, not as it might have been had the universe been differently constituted. Nevertheless, if, as we may rightly do, we judge of myth by the sentiments pervading it and the ideals upheld and taught by it, we shall find that Chinese myth must be ranked among the greatest.

  

Myth and Legend

The general principles considered above, while they explain the paucity of myth in China, explain also the abundance of legend there. The six hundred years during which the Mongols, Mings, and Manchus sat upon the throne of China are barren of myth, but like all periods of the Chinese national life are fertile in legend. And [p. 75] this chiefly for the reason that myths are more general, national, divine, while legends are more local, individual, human. And since, in China as elsewhere, the lower classes are as a rule less educated and more superstitious than the upper classes--have a certain amount of constructive imagination, but not enough to be self-critical--legends, rejected or even ridiculed by the scholarly class when their knowledge has become sufficiently scientific, continue to be invented and believed in by the peasant and the dweller in districts far from the madding crowd long after myth, properly so called, has exhaled its last breath. [p. 76]

Footnotes

^76:1 The inventions of the Chinese during a period of four thousand years may be numbered on the fingers of one hand."

^76:2 East of Asia Magazine, i, 15-16.

Myths and Legends of China, by Edward T.C. Werner, [1922], at sacred-texts.com

  

Chapter III

  

Cosmogony-p'an Ku and the Creation Myth

  

The Fashioner of the Universe

The most conspicuous figure in Chinese cosmogony is P'an Ku. He it was who chiselled the universe out of Chaos. According to Chinese ideas, he was the offspring of the original dual powers of Nature, the yin and the yang (to be considered presently), which, having in some incomprehensible way produced him, set him the task of giving form to Chaos and "making the heavens and the earth."

Some accounts describe him as the actual creator of the universe--"the ancestor of Heaven and earth and all that live and move and have their being." 'P'an' means 'the shell of an egg,' and 'Ku' 'to secure,' 'solid,' referring to P'an Ku being hatched from out of Chaos and to his settling the arrangement of the causes to which his origin was due. The characters themselves may, however, mean nothing more than 'Researches into antiquity,' though some bolder translators have assigned to them the significance if not the literal sense of 'aboriginal abyss,' or the Babylonian Tiamat, 'the Deep.'

P'an Ku is pictured as a man of dwarfish stature clothed in bearskin, or merely in leaves or with an apron of leaves. He has two horns on his head. In his right hand he holds a hammer and in his left a chisel (sometimes these are reversed), the only implements he used in carrying out his great task. Other pictures show him attended in his labours by the four supernatural creatures--the unicorn, phoenix, tortoise, and dragon; others again with the sun in one hand and the moon in the other, [p. 77] some of the firstfruits of his stupendous labours. (The reason for these being there will be apparent presently.) His task occupied eighteen thousand years, during which he formed the sun, moon, and stars, the heavens and the earth, himself increasing in stature day by day, being daily six feet taller than the day before, until, his labours ended, he died that his works might live. His head became the mountains, his breath the wind and clouds, his voice the thunder, his limbs the four quarters of the earth, his blood the rivers, his flesh the soil, his beard the constellations, his skin and hair the herbs and trees, his teeth, bones, and marrow the metals, rocks, and precious stones, his sweat the rain, and the insects creeping over his body human beings, who thus had a lowlier origin even than the tears of Khepera in Egyptian cosmology.  [*1]

This account of P'an Ku and his achievements is of Taoist origin. The Buddhists have given a somewhat different account of him, which is a late adaptation from the Taoist myth, and must not be mistaken for Buddhist cosmogony proper.  [*2]

  

The Sun and the Moon

In some of the pictures of P'an Ku he is represented, as already noted, as holding the sun in one hand and the moon in the other. Sometimes they are in the form of those bodies, sometimes in the classic character. The legend says that when P'an Ku put things in order in the lower world, he did not put these two luminaries in their proper courses, so they retired into the Han Sea, and the people dwelt in darkness. The Terrestrial [p. 78] Emperor sent an officer, Terrestrial Time, with orders that they should come forth and take their places in the heavens and give the world day and night. They refused to obey the order. They were reported to Ju Lai; P'an Ku was called, and, at the divine direction of Buddha, wrote the character for 'sun' in his left hand, and that for 'moon' in his right hand; and went to the Han Sea, and stretched forth his left hand and called the sun, and then stretched forth his right hand and called the moon, at the same time repeating a charm devoutly seven times; and they forthwith ascended on high, and separated time into day and night.  [*3]

Other legends recount that P'an Ku had the head of a dragon and the body of a serpent; and that by breathing he caused the wind, by opening his eyes he created day, his voice made the thunder, etc.

  

P'an Ku and Ymer

Thus we have the heavens and the earth fashioned by this wonderful being in eighteen thousand years. With regard to him we may adapt the Scandinavian ballad:

 It was Time's morning 
 When P'an Ku lived; 
 There was no sand, no sea, 
 Nor cooling billows;

 Earth there was none, 
 No lofty Heaven; 
 No spot of living green; 
 Only a deep profound.

[p. 79] 

And it is interesting to note, in passing, the similarity between this Chinese artificer of the universe and Ymer, the giant, who discharges the same functions in Scandinavian mythology. Though P'an Ku did not have the same kind of birth nor meet with the violent death of the latter, the results as regards the origin of the universe seem to have been pretty much the same.  [*4]

  

P'an Ku a Late Creation

But though the Chinese creation myth deals with primeval things it does not itself belong to a primitive time. According to some writers whose views are entitled to respect, it was invented during the fourth century A.D. by the Taoist recluse, Magistrate Ko Hung, author of the Shen hsien chuan (Biographies of the Gods). The picturesque person of P'an Ku is said to have been a concession to the popular dislike of, or inability to comprehend, the abstract. He was conceived, some Chinese writers say, because the philosophical explanations of the Cosmos were too recondite for the ordinary mind to grasp. That he did fulfil the purpose of furnishing the [p. 80] ordinary mind with a fairly easily comprehensible picture of the creation may be admitted; but, as will presently be seen, it is over-stating the case to say that he was conceived with the set purpose of furnishing the ordinary mind with a concrete solution or illustration of this great problem. There is no evidence that P'an Ku had existed as a tradition before the time when we meet with the written account of him; and, what is more, there is no evidence that there existed any demand on the part of the popular mind for any such solution or illustration. The ordinary mind would seem to have been either indifferent to or satisfied with the abstruse cosmogonical and cosmological theories of the early sages for at least a thousand years. The cosmogonies of the I ching, of Lao Tzu, Confucius (such as it was), Kuan Tzu, Mencius, Chuang Tzu, were impersonal. P'an Ku and his myth must be regarded rather as an accident than as a creation resulting from any sudden flow of psychological forces or wind of discontent ruffling the placid Chinese mind. If the Chinese brought with them from Babylon or anywhere else the elements of a cosmogony, whether of a more or less abstruse scientific nature or a personal mythological narrative, it must have been subsequently forgotten or at least has not survived in China. But for Ko Hung's eccentricity and his wish to experiment with cinnabar from Cochin-China in order to find the elixir of life, P'an Ku would probably never have been invented, and the Chinese mind would have been content to go on ignoring the problem or would have quietly acquiesced in the abstract philosophical explanations of the learned which it did not understand. Chinese cosmogony would then have consisted exclusively of the recondite impersonal metaphysics which the Chinese [p. 81] mind had entertained or been fed on for the nine hundred or more years preceding the invention of the P'an Ku myth.

  

Nu Kua Shih, the Repairer of the Heavens

It is true that there exist one or two other explanations of the origin of things which introduce a personal creator. There is, for instance, the legend--first mentioned by Lieh Tzu (to whom we shall revert later)--which represents Nu Kua Shih (also called Nu Wa and Nu Hsi), said to have been the sister and successor of Fu Hsi, the mythical sovereign whose reign is ascribed to the years 2953-2838 B.C., as having been the creator of human beings when the earth first emerged from Chaos. She (or he, for the sex seems uncertain), who had the "body of a serpent and head of an ox" (or a human head and horns of an ox, according to some writers), "moulded yellow earth and made man." Ssu-ma Cheng, of the eighth century A.D., author of the Historical Records and of another work on the three great legendary emperors, Fu Hsi, Shen Nung, and Huang Ti, gives the following account of her: "Fu Hsi was succeeded by Nu Kua, who like him had the surname Feng. Nu Kua had the body of a serpent and a human head, with the virtuous endowments of a divine sage. Toward the end of her reign there was among the feudatory princes Kung Kung, whose functions were the administration of punishment. Violent and ambitious, he became a rebel, and sought by the influence of water to overcome that of wood [under which Nu Kua reigned]. He did battle with Chu Jung [said to have been one of the ministers of Huang Ti, and later the God of Fire], but was not victorious; whereupon he struck his head against the Imperfect Mountain, [p. 82] Pu Chou Shan, and brought it down. The pillars of Heaven were broken and the corners of the earth gave way. Hereupon Nu Kua melted stones of the five colours to repair the heavens, and cut off the feet of the tortoise to set upright the four extremities of the earth.  [*5] Gathering the ashes of reeds she stopped the flooding waters, and thus rescued the land of Chi, Chi Chou [the early seat of the Chinese sovereignty]."

Another account separates the name and makes Nu and Kua brother and sister, describing them as the only two human beings in existence. At the creation they were placed at the foot of the K'un-lun Mountains. Then they prayed, saying, "If thou, O God, hast sent us to be man and wife, the smoke of our sacrifice will stay in one place; but if not, it will be scattered." The smoke remained stationary.

But though Nu Kua is said to have moulded the first man (or the first human beings) out of clay, it is to be noted that, being only the successor of Fu Hsi, long lines of rulers had preceded her of whom no account is given, and also that, as regards the heavens and the earth at least, she is regarded as the repairer and not the creator of them.

Heaven-deaf (T'ien-lung) and Earth-dumb (Ti-ya), the two attendants of Wen Ch'ang, the God of Literature (see following chapter), have also been drawn into the cosmogonical net. From their union came the heavens and the earth, mankind, and all living things.

Click to enlarge
Nu Kua Shih

These and other brief and unelaborated personal cosmogonies, even if not to be regarded as spurious imitations, certainly have not become established in the Chinese mind as the explanation of the way in which the [p. 83] universe came to be: in this sphere the P'an Ku legend reigns supreme; and, owing to its concrete, easily apprehensible nature, has probably done so ever since the time of its invention.

  

Early Cosmogony Dualistic

The period before the appearance of the P'an Ku myth may be divided into two parts; that from some early unknown date up to about the middle of the Confucian epoch, say 500 B.C., and that from 500 B.C. to A.D. 400. We know that during the latter period the minds of Chinese scholars were frequently occupied with speculations as to the origin of the universe. Before 500 B.C. we have no documentary remains telling us what the Chinese believed about the origin of things; but it is exceedingly unlikely that no theories or speculations at all concerning the origin of themselves and their surroundings were formed by this intelligent people during the eighteen centuries or more which preceded the date at which we find the views held by them put into written form. It is safe to assume that the dualism which later occupied their philosophical thoughts to so great an extent as almost to seem inseparable from them, and exercised so powerful an influence throughout the course of their history, was not only formulating itself during that long period, but had gradually reached an advanced stage. We may even go so far as to say that dualism, or its beginnings, existed in the very earliest times, for the belief in the second self or ghost or double of the dead is in reality nothing else. And we find it operating with apparently undiminished energy after the Chinese mind had reached its maturity in the Sung dynasty. [p. 84]

  

The Canon of Changes

The Bible of Chinese dualism is the I ching, the Canon of Changes (or Permutations). It is held in great veneration both on account of its antiquity and also because of the "unfathomable wisdom which is supposed to lie concealed under its mysterious symbols." It is placed first in the list of the classics, or Sacred Books, though it is not the oldest of them. When exactly the work itself on which the subsequent elaborations were founded was composed is not now known. Its origin is attributed to the legendary emperor Fu Hsi (2953-2838 B.C.). It does not furnish a cosmogony proper, but merely a dualistic system as an explanation, or attempted explanation, or even perhaps orly a record, of the constant changes (in modern philosophical language the "redistribution of matter and motion") going on everywhere. That explanation or record was used for purposes of divination. This dualistic system, by a simple addition, became a monism, and at the same time furnished the Chinese with a cosmogony.

  

The Five Elements

The Five Elements or Forces (wu hsing)--which, according to the Chinese, are metal, air, fire, water, and wood--are first mentioned in Chinese literature in a chapter of the classic Book of History.  [*6] They play a very important part in Chinese thought: 'elements' meaning generally not so much the actual substances as the forces essential to human, life. They have to be noticed in passing, because they were involved in the development of the cosmogonical ideas which took place in the eleventh and twelfth centuries A.D. [p. 85]

  

Monism

As their imagination grew, it was natural that the Chinese should begin to ask themselves what, if the yang and the yin by their permutations produced, or gave shape to, all things, was it that produced the yang and the yin. When we see traces of this inquisitive tendency we find ourselves on the borderland of dualism where the transition is taking place into the realm of monism. But though there may have been a tendency toward monism in early times, it was only in the Sung dynasty that the philosophers definitely placed behind the yang and the yin a First Cause--the Grand Origin, Grand Extreme, Grand Terminus, or Ultimate Ground of Existence.  [*7] They gave to it the name t'ai chi, and represented it by a concrete sign, the symbol of a circle. The complete scheme shows the evolution of the Sixty-four Diagrams (kua) from the t'ai chi through the yang and the yin, the Four, Eight, Sixteen, and Thirty-two Diagrams successively. This conception was the work of the Sung philosopher Chou Tun-i (A.D. 1017-73), commonly known as Chou Tzu, and his disciple Chu Hsi (A.D. 1130-1200), known as Chu Tzu or Chu Fu Tzu, the famous historian and Confucian commentator--two of the greatest names in Chinese philosophy. It was at this time that the tide of constructive imagination in China, tinged though it always was with classical Confucianism, rose to its greatest height. There is the philosopher's seeking for causes. Yet in this matter of the First Cause we detect, in the full flood of Confucianism, the potent influence of Taoist and Buddhist speculations. It has even been said that the Sung philosophy, which grew, not from the I ching itself, but from the appendixes to it, is more Taoistic than Confucian. As it was with the P'an Ku [p. 86] legend, so was it with this more philosophical cosmogony. The more fertile Taoist and Buddhist imaginations led to the preservation of what the Confucianists, distrusting the marvellous, would have allowed to die a natural death. It was, after all, the mystical foreign elements which gave point to--we may rightly say rounded off--the early dualism by converting it into monism, carrying philosophical speculation from the Knowable to the Unknowable, and furnishing the Chinese with their first scientific theory of the origin, not of the changes going on in the universe (on which they had already formed their opinions), but of the universe itself.

  

Chou Tzu's "T'ai Chi T'u"

Chou Tun-i, appropriately apotheosized as 'Prince in the Empire of Reason,' completed and systematized the philosophical world-conception which had hitherto obtained in the Chinese mind. He did not ask his fellow-countrymen to discard any part of what they had long held in high esteem: he raised the old theories from the sphere of science to that of philosophy by unifying them and bringing them to a focus. And he made this unification intelligible to the Chinese mind by his famous T'ai chi t'u, or Diagram of the Great Origin (or Grand Terminus), showing that the Grand Original Cause, itself uncaused, produces the yang and the yin, these the Five Elements, and so on, through the male and female norms (tao), to the production of all things.

  

Chu Hsi's Monistic Philosophy

The writings of Chu Hsi, especially his treatise on The Immaterial Principle [li] and Primary Matter [ch'i], leave no doubt as to the monism of his philosophy. In this work [p. 87] occurs the passage: "In the universe there exists no primary matter devoid of the immaterial principle; and no immaterial principle apart from primary matter"; and although the two are never separated "the immaterial principle [as Chou Tzu explains] is what is previous to form, while primary matter is what is subsequent to form," the idea being that the two are different manifestations of the same mysterious force from which all things proceed.

It is unnecessary to follow this philosophy along all the different branches which grew out of it, for we are here concerned only with the seed. We have observed how Chinese dualism became a monism, and how while the monism was established the dualism was retained. It is this mono-dualistic theory, combining the older and newer philosophy, which in China, then as now, constitutes the accepted explanation of the origin of things, of the universe itself and all that it contains.

  

Lao Tzu's "Tao"

There are other cosmogonies in Chinese philosophy, but they need not detain us long. Lao Tzu (sixth century B.C.), in his Tao-te ching, The Canon of Reason and Virtue (at first entitled simply Lao Tzu), gave to the then existing scattered sporadic conceptions of the universe a literary form. His tao, or 'Way,' is the originator of Heaven and earth, it is "the mother of all things." His Way, which was "before God," is but a metaphorical expression for the manner in which things came at first into being out of the primal nothingness, and how the phenomena of nature continue to go on, "in stillness and quietness, without striving or crying." Lao Tzu is thus so far monistic, but he is also mystical, transcendental, even [p. 88] pantheistic. The way that can be walked is not the Eternal Way; the name that can be named is not the Eternal Name. The Unnameable is the originator of Heaven and earth; manifesting itself as the Nameable, it is "the mother of all things." "In Eternal Non-Being I see the Spirituality of Things; in Eternal Being their limitation. Though different under these two aspects, they are the same in origin; it is when development takes place that different names have to be used. It is while they are in the condition of sameness that the mystery concerning them exists. This mystery is indeed the mystery of mysteries. It is the door of all spirituality."

This tao, indefinable and in its essence unknowable, is "the fountain-head of all beings, and the norm of all actions. But it is not only the formative principle of the universe; it also seems to be primordial matter: chaotic in its composition, born prior to Heaven and earth, noiseless, formless, standing alone in its solitude, and not changing, universal in its activity, and unrelaxing, without being exhausted, it is capable of becoming the mother of the universe." And there we may leave it. There is no scheme of creation, properly so called. The Unwalkable Way leads us to nothing further in the way of a cosmogony.

  

Confucius's Agnosticism

Confucius (551-479 B.C.) did not throw any light on the problem of origin. He did not speculate on the creation of things nor the end of them. He was not troubled to account for the origin of man, nor did he seek to know about his hereafter. He meddled neither with physics nor metaphysics. There might, he thought, be [p. 89] something on the other side of life, for he admitted the existence of spiritual beings. They had an influence on the living, because they caused them to clothe themselves in ceremonious dress and attend to the sacrificial ceremonies. But we should not trouble ourselves about them, any more than about supernatural things, or physical prowess, or monstrosities. How can we serve spiritual beings while we do not know how to serve men? We feel the existence of something invisible and mysterious, but its nature and meaning are too deep for the human understanding to grasp. The safest, indeed the only reasonable, course is that of the agnostic--to leave alone the unknowable, while acknowledging its existence and its mystery, and to try to understand knowable phenomena and guide our actions accordingly.

Between the monism of Lao Tzu and the positivism of Confucius on the one hand, and the landmark of the Taoistic transcendentalism of Chuang Tzu (fourth and third centuries B.C.) on the other, we find several "guesses at the riddle of existence" which must be briefly noted as links in the chain of Chinese speculative thought on this important subject.

  

Mo Tzu and Creation

In the philosophy of Mo Ti (fifth and fourth centuries B.C.), generally known as Mo Tzu or Mu Tzu, the philosopher of humanism and utilitarianism, we find the idea of creation. It was, he says, Heaven (which was anthropomorphically regarded by him as a personal Supreme Being) who "created the sun, moon, and innumerable stars." His system closely resembles Christianity, but the great power of Confucianism as a weapon wielded against all opponents by its doughty [p. 90] defender Mencius (372-289 B.C.) is shown by the complete suppression of the influence of Mo Tzuism at his hands. He even went so far as to describe Mo Tzu and those who thought with him as "wild animals."

  

Mencius and the First Cause

Mencius himself regarded Heaven as the First Cause, or Cause of Causes, but it was not the same personal Heaven as that of Mo Tzu. Nor does he hang any cosmogony upon it. His chief concern was to eulogize the doctrines of the great Confucius, and like him he preferred to let the origin of the universe look after itself.

  

Lieh Tzu's Absolute

Lieh Tzu (said to have lived in the fifth century B.C.), one of the brightest stars in the Taoist constellation, considered this nameable world as having evolved from an unnameable absolute being. The evolution did not take place through the direction of a personal will working out a plan of creation: "In the beginning there was Chaos [hun tun]. It was a mingled potentiality of Form [hsing], Pneuma [ch'i], and Substance [chih]. A Great Change [t'ai i] took place in it, and there was a Great Starting [t'ai ch'u] which is the beginning of Form. The Great Starting evolved a Great Beginning [t'ai shih], which is the inception of Pneuma. The Great Beginning was followed by the Great Blank [t'ai su], which is the first formation of Substance. Substance, Pneuma, and Form being all evolved out of the primordial chaotic mass, this material world as it lies before us came into existence." And that which made it possible for Chaos to evolve was the Solitary Indeterminate (i tu or the tao), [p. 91] which is not created, but is able to create everlastingly. And being both Solitary and Indeterminate it tells us nothing determinate about itself.

Click to enlarge
Mencius

  

Chuang Tzu's Super-tao

Chuang Chou (fourth and third centuries B.C.), generally known as Chuang Tzu, the most brilliant Taoist of all, maintained with Lao Tzu that the universe started from the Nameless, but it was if possible a more absolute and transcendental Nameless than that of Lao Tzu. He dwells on the relativity of knowledge; as when asleep he did not know that he was a man dreaming that he was a butterfly, so when awake he did not know that he was not a butterfly dreaming that he was a man.  [*8] But "all is embraced in the obliterating unity of the tao, and the wise man, passing into the realm of the Infinite, finds rest therein." And this tao, of which we hear so much in Chinese philosophy, was before the Great Ultimate or Grand Terminus (t'ai chi), and "from it came the mysterious existence of God [ti]. It produced Heaven, it produced earth."

  

Popular Cosmogony still Personal or Dualistic

These and other cosmogonies which the Chinese have devised, though it is necessary to note their existence in order to give a just idea of their cosmological speculations, need not, as I said, detain us long; and the reason [p. 92] why they need not do so is that, in the matter of cosmogony, the P'an Ku legend and the yin-yang system with its monistic elaboration occupy virtually the whole field of the Chinese mental vision. It is these two--the popular and the scientific--that we mean when we speak of Chinese cosmogony. Though here and there a stern sectarian might deny that the universe originated in one or the other of these two ways, still, the general rule holds good. And I have dealt with them in this order because, though the P'an Ku legend belongs to the fourth century A.D., the I ching dualism was not, rightly speaking, a cosmogony until Chou Tun-i made it one by the publication of his T'ai chi t'u in the eleventh century A.D. Over the unscientific and the scientific minds of the Chinese these two are paramount.

Applying the general principles stated in the preceding chapter, we find the same cause which operated to restrict the growth of mythology in general in China operated also in like manner in this particular branch of it. With one exception Chinese cosmogony is non-mythological. The careful and studiously accurate historians (whose work aimed at being ex veritate, 'made of truth'), the sober literature, the vast influence of agnostic, matter-of-fact Confucianism, supported by the heavy Mencian artillery, are indisputable indications of a constructive imagination which grew too quickly and became too rapidly scientific to admit of much soaring into the realms of fantasy. Unaroused by any strong stimulus in their ponderings over the riddle of the universe, the sober, plodding scientists and the calm, truth-loving philosophers gained a peaceful victory over the mythologists. [p. 93]

Footnotes

^93:1 Cf. Aristotle's belief that bugs arose spontaneously from sweat.

^93:2 For the Buddhist account see China Review, xi, 80-82.

^93:3 Compare the Japanese legend, which relates that the Sun-goddess was induced to come out of a cave by being tempted to gaze at herself in a mirror. See Myths and Legends of Japan, F. Hadland Davis, pp. 27-28.

^93:4 See Myths of the Norsemen, by H. A. Guerber. These resemblances and the further one--namely, the dualism in the prechaotic epoch (a very interesting point in Scandinavian mythology)--illustrate the danger of inferring identity of origin from similarity of physical, intellectual, or moral results. Several remarkable parallelisms of Chinese religious and mythological beliefs with those recorded in the Hebrew scriptures may also be briefly noted. There is an age of virtue and happiness, a garden with a tree bearing 'apples of immortality,' guarded by a winged serpent (dragon), the fall of man, the beginnings of lust and war (the doctrine of original sin), a great flood, virgin-born god-men who rescue man from barbarism and endow him with superhuman attributes, discipleship, worship of a Virgin Mother, trinities, monasticism, celibacy, fasting, preaching, prayers, primeval Chaos, Paradise, etc. For details see Chinese Repository, vii, 520-521.

^93:5 Cf. the dwarfs in the Scandinavian myth.

^93:6 See Legge, Shu ching, ii, 320, note.

^93:7 In order to avoid misunderstanding, it is as well to note that the mention of the t'ai chi in the Canon of Changes (I ching) no more constituted monism the philosophy of China than did the steam-driven machinery mentioned by Hero of Alexandria constitute the first century B.C. the 'age of steam.' Similarly, to take another example, the idea of the earth's rotundity, though conceived centuries before Ptolemy in the second century, did not become established before the sixteenth century. It was, in fact, from the I ching that the Chinese derived their dualistic (not their monistic) conception of the world.

^93:8 "Formerly, I, Chuang Chou, dreamt that I was a butterfly, flying about and feeling that it was enjoying itself. I did not know that it was Chou. Suddenly I awoke and was myself again, the veritable Chou. I did not know whether it had formerly been Chou dreaming that he was a butterfly, or whether it was now a butterfly dreaming that it was Chou." Chuang Tzu, Book II.

Myths and Legends of China, by Edward T.C. Werner, [1922], at sacred-texts.com

  

Chapter IV

  

The Gods of China

  

The Birth of the Soul

The dualism noted in the last chapter is well illustrated by the Chinese pantheon. Whether as the result of the co-operation of the yin and the yang or of the final dissolution of P'an Ku, human beings came into existence. To the primitive mind the body and its shadow, an object and its reflection in water, real life and dream life, sensibility and insensibility (as in fainting, etc.), suggest the idea of another life parallel with this life and of the doings of the 'other self' in it. This 'other self,' this spirit, which leaves the body for longer or shorter intervals in dreams, swoons, death, may return or be brought back, and the body revive. Spirits which do not return or are not brought back may cause mischief, either alone, or by entry into another human or animal body or even an inanimate object, and should therefore be propitiated. Hence worship and deification.

  

The Populous Otherworld

The Chinese pantheon has gradually become so multitudinous that there is scarcely a being or thing which is not, or has not been at some time or other, propitiated or worshipped. As there are good and evil people in this world, so there are gods and demons in the Otherworld: we find a polytheism limited only by a polydemonism. The dualistic hierarchy is almost all-embracing. To get a clear idea of this populous Otherworld, of the supernal and infernal hosts and their organizations, it needs but to imagine the social structure in its main features as it existed [p. 94] throughout the greater part of Chinese history, and to make certain additions. The social structure consisted of the ruler, his court, his civil, military, and ecclesiastical officials, and his subjects (classed as Scholars--officials and gentry--Agriculturists, Artisans, and Merchants, in that order).

  

Worship of Shang Ti

When these died, their other selves continued to exist and to hold the same rank in the spirit world as they did in this one. The ti, emperor, became the Shang Ti, Emperor on High, who dwelt in T'ien, Heaven (originally the great dome).  [*1] And Shang Ti, the Emperor on High, was worshipped by ti, the emperor here below, in order to pacify or please him--to ensure a continuance of his benevolence on his behalf in the world of spirits. Confusion of ideas and paucity of primitive language lead to personification and worship of a thing or being in which a spirit has taken up its abode in place of or in addition to worship of the spirit itself. Thus Heaven (T'ien) itself came to be personified and worshipped in addition to Shang Ti, the Emperor who had gone to Heaven, and who was considered as the chief ruler in the spiritual world. The worship of Shang Ti was in existence before that of T'ien was introduced. Shang Ti was worshipped by the emperor and his family as their ancestor, or the head of the hierarchy of their ancestors. The people could not worship Shang Ti, for to do so would imply a familiarity or a claim of relationship punishable with death. The emperor worshipped his ancestors, the officials theirs, the people theirs. But, in the same way and sense that the people worshipped the emperor on earth, as the 'father' of the nation, namely, by adoration and [p. 95] obeisance, so also could they in this way and this sense worship Shang Ti. An Englishman may take off his hat as the king passes in the street to his coronation without taking any part in the official service in Westminster Abbey. So the 'worship' of Shang Ti by the people was not done officially or with any special ceremonial or on fixed State occasions, as in the case of the worship of Shang Ti by the emperor. This, subject to a qualification to be mentioned later, is really all that is meant (or should be meant) when it is said that the Chinese worship Shang Ti.

As regards sacrifices to Shang Ti, these could be offered officially only by the emperor, as High Priest on earth, who was attended or assisted in the ceremonies by members of his own family or clan or the proper State officials (often, even in comparatively modern times, members of the imperial family or clan). In these official sacrifices, which formed part of the State worship, the people could not take part; nor did they at first offer sacrifices to Shang Ti in their own homes or elsewhere. In what way and to what extent they did so later will be shown presently.

  

Worship of T'ien

Owing to T'ien, Heaven, the abode of the spirits, becoming personified, it came to be worshipped not only by the emperor, but by the people also. But there was a difference between these two worships, because the emperor performed his worship of Heaven officially at the great altar of the Temple of Heaven at Peking (in early times at the altar in the suburb of the capital), whereas the people (continuing always to worship their ancestors) worshipped Heaven, when they did so at all--the custom being observed by some and not by others, just as in Western countries some people go to church, while others [p. 96] stay away--usually at the time of the New Year, in a simple, unceremonious way, by lighting some incense-sticks and waving them toward the sky in the courtyards of their own houses or in the street just outside their doors.

  

Confusion of Shang Ti and T'ien

The qualification necessary to the above description is that, as time went on and especially since the Sung dynasty (A.D. 960-1280), much confusion arose regarding Shang Ti and T'ien, and thus it came about that the terms became mixed and their definitions obscure. This confusion of ideas has prevailed down to the present time. One result of this is that the people may sometimes state, when they wave their incense-sticks or light their candles, that their humble sacrifice is made to Shang Ti, whom in reality they have no right either to worship or to offer sacrifice to, but whom they may unofficially pay respect and make obeisance to, as they might and did to the emperor behind the high boards on the roadsides which shielded him from their view as he was borne along in his elaborate procession on the few occasions when he came forth from the imperial city.

Thus we find that, while only the emperor could worship and sacrifice to Shang Ti, and only he could officially worship and sacrifice to T'ien, the people who early personified and worshipped T'ien, as already shown, came, owing to confusion of the meanings of Shang Ti and T'ien, unofficially to 'worship' both, but only in the sense and to the extent indicated, and to offer 'sacrifices' to both, also only in the sense and to the extent indicated. But for these qualifications, the statement that the Chinese worship and sacrifice to Shang Ti and T'ien would be apt to convey an incorrect idea. [p. 97]

From this it will be apparent that Shang Ti, the Supreme Ruler on High, and T'ien, Heaven (later personified), do not mean 'God' in the sense that the word is used in the Christian religion. To state that they do, as so many writers on China have done, without pointing out the essential differences, is misleading. That Chinese religion was or is "a monotheistic worship of God" is further disproved by the fact that Shang Ti and T'ien do not appear in the list of the popular pantheon at all, though all the other gods are there represented. Neither Shang Ti nor T'ien mean the God of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, or the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost of the New Testament. Did they mean this, the efforts of the Christian missionaries to convert the Chinese would be largely superfluous. The Christian religion, even the Holy Trinity, is a monotheism. That the Chinese religion (even though a summary of extracts from the majority of foreign books on China might point to its being so) is not a monotheism, but a polytheism or even a pantheism (as long as that term is taken in the sense of universal deification and not in that of one spiritual being immanent in all things), the rest of this chapter will abundantly prove.

There have been three periods in which gods have been created in unusually large numbers: that of the mythical emperor Hsien Yuan (2698-2598 B.C.), that of Chiang Tzu-ya (in the twelfth century B.C.), and that of the first emperor of the Ming dynasty (in the fourteenth century A.D.).

  

The Otherworld Similar to this World

The similarity of the Otherworld to this world above alluded to is well shown by Du Bose in his Dragon, Image, and, Demon, from which I quote the following passages: [p. 98]

"The world of spirits is an exact counterpart of the Chinese Empire, or, as has been remarked, it is 'China ploughed under'; this is the world of light; put out the lights and you have Tartarus. China has eighteen [now twenty-two] provinces, so has Hades; each province has eight or nine prefects, or departments; so each province in Hades has eight or nine departments; every prefect or department averages ten counties, so every department in Hades has ten counties. In Soochow the Governor, the provincial Treasurer, the Criminal Judge, the Intendant of Circuit, the Prefect or Departmental Governor, and the three District Magistrates or County Governors each have temples with their apotheoses in the other world. Not only these, but every yamen secretary, runner, executioner, policeman, and constable has his counterpart in the land of darkness. The market-towns have also mandarins of lesser rank in charge, besides a host of revenue collectors, the bureau of government works and other departments, with several hundred thousand officials, who all rank as gods beyond the grave. These deities are civilians; the military having a similar gradation for the armies of Hades, whose captains are gods, and whose battalions are devils.

"The framers of this wonderful scheme for the spirits of the dead, having no higher standard, transferred to the authorities of that world the etiquette, tastes, and venality of their correlate officials in the Chinese Government, thus making it necessary to use similar means to appease the one which are found necessary to move the other. All the State gods have their assistants, attendants, door-keepers, runners, horses, horsemen, detectives, and executioners, corresponding in every particular to those of Chinese officials of the same rank." (Pp. 358-359.) [p. 99]

This likeness explains also why the hierarchy of beings in the Otherworld concerns itself not only with the affairs of the Otherworld, but with those of this world as well. So faithful is the likeness that we find the gods (the term is used in this chapter to include goddesses, who are, however, relatively few) subjected to many of the rules and conditions existing on this earth. Not only do they, as already shown, differ in rank, but they hold levees and audiences and may be promoted for distinguished services, just as the Chinese officials are. They "may rise from an humble position to one near the Pearly Emperor, who gives them the reward of merit for ruling well the affairs of men. The correlative deities of the mandarins are only of equal rank, yet the fact that they have been apotheosized makes them their superiors and fit objects of worship. Chinese mandarins rotate in office, generally every three years, and then there is a corresponding change in Hades. The image in the temple remains the same, but the spirit which dwells in the clay tabernacle changes, so the idol has a different name, birthday, and tenant. The priests are informed by the Great Wizard of the Dragon Tiger Mountain, but how can the people know gods which are not the same to-day as yesterday?" (Pp. 360-361.)

The gods also indulge in amusements, marry, sin, are punished, die, are resurrected, or die and are transformed, or die finally.  [*2]

  

The Three Religions

We have in China the universal worship of ancestors, which constitutes (or did until A.D. 1912) the State [p. 100] religion, usually known as Confucianism, and in addition we have the gods of the specific religions (which also originally took their rise in ancestor-worship), namely, Buddhism and Taoism. (Other religions, though tolerated, are not recognized as Chinese religions.) It is with a brief account of this great hierarchy and its mythology that we will now concern ourselves.

Besides the ordinary ancestor-worship (as distinct from the State worship) the people took to Buddhism and Taoism, which became the popular religions, and the literati also honoured the gods of these two sects. Buddhist deities gradually became installed in Taoist temples, and the Taoist immortals were given seats beside the Buddhas in their sanctuaries. Every one patronized the god who seemed to him the most popular and the most lucrative. There even came to be united in the same temple and worshipped at the same altar the three religious founders or figure-heads, Confucius, Buddha, and Lao Tzu. The three religions were even regarded as forming one whole, or at least, though different, as having one and the same object: san erh i yeh, or han san wei i, "the three are one," or "the three unite to form one" (a quotation from the phrase T'ai chi han san wei i of Fang Yu-lu: "When they reach the extreme the three are seen to be one"). In the popular pictorial representations of the pantheon this impartiality is clearly shown.

  

The Super-triad

The toleration, fraternity, or co-mixture of the three religions--ancestor-worship or Confucianism, Chinese Buddhism, and Taoism--explains the compound nature of the triune head of the Chinese pantheon. The [p. 101] numerous deities of Buddhism and Taoism culminate each in a triad of gods (the Three Precious Ones and the Three Pure Ones respectively), but the three religions jointly have also a triad compounded of one representative member of each. This general or super-triad is, of course, composed of Confucius, Lao Tzu, and Buddha. This is the officially decreed order, though it is varied occasionally by Buddha being placed in the centre (the place of honour) as an act of ceremonial deference shown to a 'stranger' or 'guest' from another country.

  

Worship of the Living

Before proceeding to consider the gods of China in detail, it is necessary to note that ancestor-worship, which, as before stated, is worship of the ghosts of deceased persons, who are usually but not invariably relatives of the worshipper, has at times a sort of preliminary stage in this world consisting of the worship of living beings. Emperors, viceroys, popular officials, or people beloved for their good deeds have had altars, temples, and images erected to them, where they are worshipped in the same way as those who have already "shuffled off this mortal coil." The most usual cases are perhaps those of the worship of living emperors and those in which some high official who has gained the gratitude of the people is transferred to another post. The explanation is simple. The second self which exists after death is identical with the second self inhabiting the body during life. Therefore it may be propitiated or gratified by sacrifices of food, drink, etc., or theatricals performed in its honour, and continue its protection and good offices even though now far away. [p. 102]

  

Confucianism

Confucianism (Ju Chiao) is said to be the religion of the learned, and the learned were the officials and the literati or lettered class, which includes scholars waiting for posts, those who have failed to get posts (or, though qualified, prefer to live in retirement), and those who have retired from posts. Of this 'religion' it has been said:

"The name embraces education, letters, ethics, and political philosophy. Its head was not a religious man, practised few religious rites, and taught nothing about religion. In its usual acceptation the term Confucianist means 'a gentleman and a scholar'; he may worship only once a year, yet he belongs to the Church. Unlike its two sisters, it has no priesthood, and fundamentally is not a religion at all; yet with the many rites grafted on the original tree it becomes a religion, and the one most difficult to deal with. Considered as a Church, the classics are its scriptures, the schools its churches, the teachers its priests, ethics its theology, and the written character, so sacred, its symbol."  [*3]

  

Confucius not a God

It should be noted that Confucius himself is not a god, though he has been and is worshipped (66,000 animals used to be offered to him every year; probably the number is about the same now). Suggestions have been made to make him the God of China and Confucianism the religion of China, so that he and his religion would hold the same relative positions that Christ and Christianity do in the West. I was present at the lengthy debate which took place on this subject in the Chinese [p. 103] Parliament in February 1917, but in spite of many long, learned, and eloquent speeches, chiefly by scholars of the old school, the motion was not carried. Nevertheless, the worship accorded to Confucius was and is (except by 'new' or 'young' China) of so extreme a nature that he may almost be described as the great unapotheosized god of China.  [*4] Some of his portraits even ascribe to him superhuman attributes. But in spite of all this the fact remains that Confucius has not been appointed a god and holds no exequatur entitling him to that rank.

If we inquire into the reason of this we find that, astonishing though it may seem, Confucius is classed by the Chinese not as a god (shen), but as a demon (kuei). A short historical statement will make the matter clear.

In the classical Li chi, Book of Ceremonial, we find the categorical assignment of the worship of certain objects to certain subjective beings: the emperor worshipped Heaven and earth, the feudal princes the mountains and rivers, the officials the hearth, and the literati their ancestors. Heaven, earth, mountains, rivers, and hearth were called shen (gods), and ancestors kuei (demons). This distinction is due to Heaven being regarded as the god and the people as demons--the upper is the god, the lower the evil spirit or demon. Though kuei were usually bad, the term in Chinese includes both good and evil spirits. In ancient times those who had by their meritorious virtue while in the world averted calamities from the people were posthumously worshipped and called gods, but those who were worshipped by their descendants only were called spirits or demons.

In the worship of Confucius by emperors of various [p. 104] dynasties (details of which need not be given here) the highest titles conferred on him were Hsien Sheng, 'Former or Ancestral Saint,' and even Win Hsuan Wang, 'Accomplished and Illustrious Prince,' and others containing like epithets. When for his image or idol there was (in the eleventh year--A.D. 1307--of the reign-period Ta Te of the Emperor Ch'eng Tsung of the Yuan dynasty) substituted the tablet now seen in the Confucian temples, these were the inscriptions engraved on it. In the inscriptions authoritatively placed on the tablets the word shen does not occur; in those cases where it does occur it has been placed there (as by the Taoists) illegally and without authority by too ardent devotees. Confucius may not be called a shen, since there is no record showing that the great ethical teacher was ever apotheosized, or that any order was given that the character shen was to be applied to him.

  

The God of Literature

In addition to the ancestors of whose worship it really consists, Confucianism has in its pantheon the specialized gods worshipped by the literati. Naturally the chief of these is Wen Ch'ang, the God of Literature. The account of him (which varies in several particulars in different Chinese works) relates that he was a man of the name of Chang Ya, who was born during the T'ang dynasty in the kingdom of Yueh (modern Chekiang), and went to live at Tzu T'ung in Ssuch'uan, where his intelligence raised him to the position of President of the Board of Ceremonies. Another account refers to him as Chang Ya Tzu, the Soul or Spirit of Tzu T'ung, and states that he held office in the Chin dynasty (A.D. 265-316), and was killed in a fight. Another again states that under the Sung dynasty (A.D. [p. 105] 960-1280), in the third year (A.D. 1000) of the reign-period Hsien P'ing of the Emperor Chen Tsung, he repressed the revolt of Wang Chun at Ch'eng Tu in Ssuch'uan. General Lei Yu-chung caused to be shot into the besieged town arrows to which notices were attached inviting the inhabitants to surrender. Suddenly a man mounted a ladder, and pointing to the rebels cried in a loud voice: "The Spirit of Tzu T'ung has sent me to inform you that the town will fall into the hands of the enemy on the twentieth day of the ninth moon, and not a single person will escape death." Attempts to strike down this prophet of evil were in vain, for he had already disappeared. The town was captured on the day indicated. The general, as a reward, caused the temple of Tzu T'ung's Spirit to be repaired, and sacrifices offered to it.

The object of worship nowadays in the temples dedicated to Wen Ch'ang is Tzu T'ung Ti Chun, the God of Tzu T'ung. The convenient elasticity of dualism enabled Chang to have as many as seventeen reincarnations, which ranged over a period of some three thousand years.

Various emperors at various times bestowed upon Wen Ch'ang honorific titles, until ultimately, in the Yuan, or Mongol, dynasty, in the reign Yen Yu, in A.D. 1314, the title was conferred on him of Supporter of the Yuan Dynasty, Diffuser of Renovating Influences, Ssu-lu of Wen Ch'ang, God and Lord. He was thus apotheosized, and took his place among the gods of China. By steps few or many a man in China has often become a god.

  

Wen Ch'ang and the Great Bear

Thus we have the God of Literature, Wen Ch'ang Ti Chun, duly installed in the Chinese pantheon, and sacrifices were offered to him in the schools. [p. 106]

But scholars, especially those about to enter for the public competitive examinations, worshipped as the God of Literature, or as his palace or abode (Wen Ch'ang), the star K'uei in the Great Bear, or Dipper, or Bushel--the latter name derived from its resemblance in shape to the measure used by the Chinese and called tou. The term K'uei was more generally applied to the four stars forming the body or square part of the Dipper, the three forming the tail or handle being called Shao or Piao. How all this came about is another story.

A scholar, as famous for his literary skill as his facial deformities, had been admitted as first academician at the metropolitan examinations. It was the custom that the Emperor should give with his own hand a rose of gold to the fortunate candidate. This scholar, whose name was Chung K'uei, presented himself according to custom to receive the reward which by right was due to him. At the sight of his repulsive face the Emperor refused the golden rose. In despair the miserable rejected one went and threw himself into the sea. At the moment when he was being choked by the waters a mysterious fish or monster called ao raised him on its back and brought him to the surface. K'uei ascended to Heaven and became arbiter of the destinies of men of letters. His abode was said to be the star K'uei, a name given by the Chinese to the sixteen stars of the constellation or 'mansion' of Andromeda and Pisces. The scholars quite soon began to worship K'uei as the God of Literature, and to represent it on a column in the temples. Then sacrifices were offered to it. This star or constellation was regarded as the palace of the god. The legend gave rise to an expression frequently used in Chinese of one who comes out first in an examination, namely, tu chan ao [p. 107] t'ou, "to stand alone on the sea-monster's head." It is especially to be noted that though the two K'ueis have the same sound they are represented by different characters, and that the two constellations are not the same, but are situated in widely different parts of the heavens.

How then did it come about that scholars worshipped the K'uei in the Great Bear as the abode of the God of Literature? (It may be remarked in passing that a literary people could not have chosen a more appropriate palace for this god, since the Great Bear, the 'Chariot of Heaven,' is regarded as the centre and governor of the whole universe.) The worship, we saw, was at first that of the star K'uei, the apotheosized 'homely,' successful, but rejected candidate. As time went on, there was a general demand for a sensible, concrete representation of this star-god: a simple character did not satisfy the popular taste. But it was no easy matter to comply with the demand. Eventually, guided doubtless by the community of pronunciation, they substituted for the star or group of stars K'uei (1),  [*5] venerated in ancient times, a new star or group of stars K'uei (2), forming the square part of the Bushel, Dipper, or Great Bear. But for this again no bodily image could be found, so the form of the written character itself was taken, and so drawn as to represent a kuei (3) (disembodied spirit, or ghost) with its foot raised, and bearing aloft a tou (4) (bushel-measure). The adoration was thus misplaced, for the constellation K'uei (2) was mistaken for K'uei (1), [p. 108] the proper object of worship. It was due to this confusion by the scholars that the Northern Bushel came to be worshipped as the God of Literature.

  

Wen Ch'ang and Tzu T'ung

This worship had nothing whatever to do with the Spirit of Tzu T'ung, but the Taoists have connected Chang Ya with the constellation in another way by saying that Shang Ti, the Supreme Ruler, entrusted Chang Ya's son with the management of the palace of Wen Ch'ang. And scholars gradually acquired the habit of saying that they owed their success to the Spirit of Tzu T'ung, which they falsely represented as being an incarnation of the star Wen Ch'ang. This is how Chang Ya came to have the honorific title of Wen Ch'ang, but, as a Chinese author points out, Chang belonged properly to Ssuch'uan, and his worship should be confined to that province. The literati there venerated him as their master, and as a mark of affection and gratitude built a temple to him; but in doing so they had no intention of making him the God of Literature. "There being no real connexion between Chang Ya and K'uei, the worship should be stopped." The device of combining the personality of the patron of literature enthroned among the stars with that of the deified mortal canonized as the Spirit of Tzu T'ung was essentially a Taoist trick. "The thaumaturgic reputation assigned to the Spirit of Chang Ya Tzu was confined for centuries to the valleys of Ssuch'uan, until at some period antecedent to the reign Yen Yu, in A.D. 1314, a combination was arranged between the functions of the local god and those of the stellar patron of literature. Imperial sanction was obtained for this stroke of priestly cunning; and [p. 109] notwithstanding protests continually repeated by orthodox sticklers for accuracy in the religious canon, the composite deity has maintained his claims intact, and an inseparable connexion between the God of Literature created by imperial patent and the spirit lodged among the stars of Ursa Major is fully recognized in the State ceremonial of the present day." A temple dedicated to this divinity by the State exists in every city of China, besides others erected as private benefactions or speculations.

Wherever Wen Ch'ang is worshipped there will also be found a separate representation of K'uei Hsing, showing that while the official deity has been allowed to 'borrow glory' from the popular god, and even to assume his personality, the independent existence of the stellar spirit is nevertheless sedulously maintained. The place of the latter in the heavens above is invariably symbolized by the lodgment of his idol in an upper storey or tower, known as the K'uei Hsing Ko or K'uei Hsing Lou. Here students worship the patron of their profession with incense and prayers. Thus the ancient stellar divinity still largely monopolizes the popular idea of a guardian of literature and study, notwithstanding that the deified recluse of Tzu T'ung has been added in this capacity to the State pantheon for more than five hundred years.

  

Heaven-deaf and Earth-dumb

The popular representations of Wen Ch'ang depict the god himself and four other figures. The central and largest is the demure portrait of the god, clothed in blue and holding a sceptre in his left hand. Behind him stand two youthful attendants. They are the servant and groom who always accompany him on his journeys (on which he rides a white horse). Their names are [p. 110] respectively Hsuan T'ung-tzu and Ti-mu, 'Sombre Youth' and 'Earth-mother'; more commonly they are called T'ien-lung, 'Deaf Celestial,' and Ti-ya, 'Mute Terrestrial,' or 'Deaf as Heaven' and 'Mute as Earth.' Thus they cannot divulge the secrets of their master's administration as he distributes intellectual gifts, literary skill, etc. Their cosmogonical connexion has already been referred to in a previous chapter.

  

Image of K'uei Hsing

In front of Wen Ch'ang, on his left, stands K'uei Hsing. He is represented as of diminutive stature, with the visage of a demon, holding a writing-brush in his right hand and a tou in his left, one of his legs kicking up behind--the figure being obviously intended as an impersonation of the character k'uei (2).  [*6] He is regarded as the distributor of literary degrees, and was invoked above all in order to obtain success at the competitive examinations. His images and temples are found in all towns. In the temples dedicated to Wen Ch'ang there are always two secondary altars, one of which is consecrated to his worship.

  

Mr Redcoat

The other is dedicated to Chu I, 'Mr Redcoat.' He and K'uei Hsing are represented as the two inseparable companions of the God of Literature. The legend related of Chu I is as follows:

During the T'ang dynasty, in the reign-period Chien Chung (A.D. 780-4) of the Emperor Te Tsung, the Princess T'ai Yin noticed that Lu Ch'i, a native of Hua Chou, had the bones of an Immortal, and wished to marry him.

Click to enlarge
Wen Ch'ang, K'uei Hsing, and Chu I.

[p. 111]

Ma P'o, her neighbour, introduced him one day into the Crystal Palace for an interview with his future wife. The Princess gave him the choice of three careers: to live in the Dragon Prince's Palace, with the guarantee of immortal life, to enjoy immortality among the people on the earth, or to have the honour of becoming a minister of the Empire. Lu Ch'i first answered that he would like to live in the Crystal Palace. The young lady, overjoyed, said to him: "I am Princess T'ai Yin. I will at once inform Shang Ti, the Supreme Ruler." A moment later the arrival of a celestial messenger was announced. Two officers bearing flags preceded him and conducted him to the foot of the flight of steps. He then presented himself as Chu I, the envoy of Shang Ti.

Addressing himself to Lu Ch'i, he asked: "Do you wish to live in the Crystal Palace?" The latter did not reply. T'ai Yin urged him to give his answer, but he persisted in keeping silent. The Princess in despair retired to her apartment, and brought out five pieces of precious cloth, which she presented to the divine envoy, begging him to have patience a little longer and wait for the answer. After some time, Chu I repeated his question. Then Lu Ch'i in a firm voice answered: "I have consecrated my life to the hard labour of study, and wish to attain to the dignity of minister on this earth."

T'ai Yin ordered Ma P'o to conduct Lu Ch'i from the palace. From that day his face became transformed: he acquired the lips of a dragon, the head of a panther, the green face of an Immortal, etc. He took his degree, and was promoted to be Director of the Censorate. The Emperor, appreciating the good sense shown in his advice, appointed him a minister of the Empire.

From this legend it would seem that Chu I is the [p. 112] purveyor of official posts; however, in practice, he is more generally regarded as the protector of weak candidates, as the God of Good Luck for those who present themselves at the examinations with a somewhat light equipment of literary knowledge. The special legend relating to this role is known everywhere in China. It is as follows:

  

Mr Redcoat nods his Head

An examiner, engaged in correcting the essays of the candidates, after a superficial scrutiny of one of the essays, put it on one side as manifestly inferior, being quite determined not to pass the candidate who had composed it. The essay, moved by some mysterious power, was replaced in front of his eyes, as if to invite him to examine it more attentively. At the same time a reverend old man, clothed in a red garment, suddenly appeared before him, and by a nod of his head gave him to understand that he should pass the essay. The examiner, surprised at the novelty of the incident, and fortified by the approval of his supernatural visitor, admitted the author of the essay to the literary degree.

Chu I, like K'uei Hsing, is invoked by the literati as a powerful protector and aid to success. When anyone with but a poor chance of passing presents himself at an examination, his friends encourage him by the popular saying: "Who knows but that Mr Redcoat will nod his head?"

  

Mr Golden Cuirass

Chu I is sometimes accompanied by another personage, named Chin Chia, 'Mr Golden Cuirass.' Like K'uei Hsing and Chu I he has charge of the interests of scholars, but differs from them in that he holds a flag, which he has [p. 113] only to wave in front of a house for the family inhabiting it to be assured that among their descendants will be some who will win literary honours and be promoted to high offices under the State.

Though Chin Chia is the protector of scholars, he is also the redoubtable avenger of their evil actions: his flag is saluted as a good omen, but his sword is the terror of the wicked.

  

The God of War

Still another patron deity of literature is the God of War. "How," it may be asked, "can so peaceful a people as the Chinese put so peaceful an occupation as literature under the patronage of so warlike a deity as the God of War?" But that question betrays ignorance of the character of the Chinese Kuan Ti. He is not a cruel tyrant delighting in battle and the slaying of enemies: he is the god who can avert war and protect the people from its horrors.

A youth, whose name was originally Chang-sheng, afterward changed to Shou-chang, and then to Yun-chang, who was born near Chieh Liang, in Ho Tung (now the town of Chieh Chou in Shansi), and was of an intractable nature, having exasperated his parents, was shut up in a room from which he escaped by breaking through the window. In one of the neighbouring houses he heard a young lady and an old man weeping and lamenting. Running to the foot of the wall of the compound, he inquired the reason of their grief. The old man replied that though his daughter was already engaged, the uncle of the local official, smitten by her beauty, wished to make her his concubine. His petitions to the official had only been rejected with curses. [p. 114]

Beside himself with rage, the youth seized a sword and went and killed both the official and his uncle. He escaped through the T'ung Kuan, the pass to Shensi. Having with difficulty avoided capture by the barrier officials, he knelt down at the side of a brook to wash his face; when lo! his appearance was completely transformed. His complexion had become reddish-grey, and he was absolutely unrecognizable. He then presented himself with assurance before the officers, who asked him his name. "My name is Kuan," he replied. It was by that name that he was thereafter known.

  

The Meat-seller's Challenge

One day he arrived at Chu-chou, a dependent sub-prefecture of Peking, in Chihli. There Chang Fei, a butcher, who had been selling his meat all the morning, at noon lowered what remained into a well, placed over the mouth of the well a stone weighing twenty-five pounds, and said with a sneer: "If anyone can lift that stone and take my meat, I will make him a present of it!" Kuan Yu, going up to the edge of the well, lifted the stone with the same ease as he would a tile, took the meat, and made off. Chang Fei pursued him, and eventually the two came to blows, but no one dared to separate them. Just then Liu Pei, a hawker of straw shoes, arrived, interposed, and put a stop to the fight. The community of ideas which they found they possessed soon gave rise to a firm friendship between the three men.

  

The Oath in the Peach-orchard

Another account represents Liu Pei and Chang Fei as having entered a village inn to drink wine, when a man of gigantic stature pushing a wheelbarrow stopped at [p. 115] the door to rest. As he seated himself, he hailed the waiter, saying: "Bring me some wine quickly, because I have to hasten to reach the town to enlist in the army."

Liu Pei looked at this man, nine feet in height, with a beard two feet long. His face was the colour of the fruit of the jujube-tree, and his lips carmine. Eyebrows like sleeping silkworms shaded his phoenix eyes, which were a scarlet red. Terrible indeed was his bearing.

"What is your name?" asked Liu Pei. "My family name is Kuan, my own name is Yu, my surname Yun Chang," he replied. "I am from the Ho Tung country. For the last five or six years I have been wandering about the world as a fugitive, to escape from my pursuers, because I killed a powerful man of my country who was oppressing the poor people. I hear that they are collecting a body of troops to crush the brigands, and I should like to join the expedition."

Chang Fei, also named Chang I Te, is described as eight feet in height, with round shining eyes in a panther's head, and a pointed chin bristling with a tiger's beard. His voice resembled the rumbling of thunder. His ardour was like that of a fiery steed. He was a native of Cho Chun, where he possessed some fertile farms, and was a butcher and wine-merchant.

Liu Pei, surnamed Hsuan Te, otherwise Hsien Chu, was the third member of the group.

The three men went to Chang Fei's farm, and on the morrow met together in his peach-orchard, and sealed their friendship with an oath. Having procured a black ox and a white horse, with the various accessories to a sacrifice, they immolated the victims, burnt the incense [p. 116] of friendship, and after twice prostrating themselves took this oath:

"We three, Liu Pei, Kuan Yu, and Chang Fei, already united by mutual friendship, although belonging to different clans, now bind ourselves by the union of our hearts, and join our forces in order to help each other in times of danger.

"We wish to pay to the State our debt of loyal citizens and give peace to our black-haired compatriots. We do not inquire if we were born in the same year, the same month, or on the same day, but we desire only that the same year, the same month, and the same day may find us united in death. May Heaven our King and Earth our Queen see clearly our hearts! If any one of us violate justice or forget benefits, may Heaven and Man unite to punish him!"

The oath having been formally taken, Liu Pei was saluted as elder brother, Kuan Yu as the second, and Chang Fei as the youngest. Their sacrifice to Heaven and earth ended, they killed an ox and served a feast, to which the soldiers of the district were invited to the number of three hundred or more. They all drank copiously until they were intoxicated. Liu Pei enrolled the peasants; Chang Fei procured for them horses and arms; and then they set out to make war on the Yellow Turbans (Huang Chin Tsei). Kuan Yu proved himself worthy of the affection which Liu Pei showed him; brave and generous, he never turned aside from danger. His fidelity was shown especially on one occasion when, having been taken prisoner by Ts'ao Ts'ao, together with two of Liu Pei's wives, and having been allotted a common sleeping-apartment with his fellow-captives, he preserved the ladies' reputation and his own trustworthiness [p. 117] by standing all night at the door of the room with a lighted lantern in his hand.

Into details of the various exploits of the three Brothers of the Peach-orchard we need not enter here. They are written in full in the book of the Story of the Three Kingdoms, a romance in which every Chinese who can read takes keen delight. Kuan Yu remained faithful to his oath, even though tempted with a marquisate by the great Ts'ao Ts'ao, but he was at length captured by Sun Ch'uan and put to death (A.D. 219). Long celebrated as the most renowned of China's military heroes, he was ennobled in A.D. 1120 as Faithful and Loyal Duke. Eight years later he had conferred on him by letters patent the still more glorious title of Magnificent Prince and Pacificator. The Emperor Wen (A.D. 1330-3) of the Yuan dynasty added the appellation Warrior Prince and Civilizer, and, finally, the Emperor Wan Li of the Ming dynasty, in 1594, conferred on him the title of Faithful and Loyal Great Ti, Supporter of Heaven and Protector of the Kingdom. He thus became a god, a ti, and has ever since received worship as Kuan Ti or Wu Ti, the God of War. Temples (1600 State temples and thousands of smaller ones) erected in his honour are to be seen in all parts of the country. He is one of the most popular gods of China. During the last half-century of the Manchu Period his fame greatly increased. In 1856 he is said to have appeared in the heavens and successfully turned the tide of battle in favour of the Imperialists. His portrait hangs in every tent, but his worship is not confined to the officials and the army, for many trades and professions have elected him as a patron saint. The sword of the public executioner used to be kept within the precincts of his [p. 118] temple, and after an execution the presiding magistrate would stop there to worship for fear the ghost of the criminal might follow him home. He knew that the spirit would not dare to enter Kuan Ti's presence.

Thus the Chinese have no fewer than three gods of literature--perhaps not too many for so literary a people. A fourth, a Taoist god, will be mentioned later.

  

Buddhism in China

Buddhism and its mythology have formed an important part of Chinese thought for nearly two thousand years. The religion was brought to China about A.D. 65, ready-made in its Mahayanistic form, in consequence of a dream of the Emperor Ming Ti (A.D. 58-76) of the Eastern Han dynasty in or about the year 63; though some knowledge of Buddha and his doctrines existed as early as 217 B.C. As Buddha, the chief deity of Buddhism, was a man and became a god, the religion originated, like the others, in ancestor-worship. When a man dies, says this religion, his other self reappears in one form or another, "from a clod to a divinity." The way for Buddhism in China was paved by Taoism, and Buddhism reciprocally affected Taoism by helpful development of its doctrines of sanctity and immortalization. Buddhism also, as it has been well put by Dr De Groot,  [*7] "contributed much to the ceremonial adornment of ancestor-worship. Its salvation work on behalf of the dead saved its place in Confucian China; for of Confucianism itself, piety and devotion towards parents and ancestors, and the promotion of their happiness, were the core, and, consequently, their worship with sacrifices and ceremonies was always a sacred duty." [p. 119] It was thus that it was possible for the gods of Buddhism to be introduced into China and to maintain their special characters and fulfil their special functions without being absorbed into or submerged by the existing native religions. The result was, as we have seen, in the end a partnership rather than a relation of master and servant; and I say 'in the end' because, contrary to popular belief, the Chinese have not been tolerant of foreign religious faiths, and at various times have persecuted Buddhism as relentlessly as they have other rivals to orthodox Confucianism.

  

Buddha, the Law, and the Priesthood

At the head of the Buddhist gods in China we find the triad known as Buddha, the Law, and the Church, or Priesthood, which are personified as Shih-chia Fo (Shakya), O-mi-t'o Fo (Amita), and Ju-lai Fo (Tathagata); otherwise Fo Pao, Fa Pao, and Seng Pao (the San Pao, 'Three Precious Ones')--that is, Buddha, the prophet who came into the world to teach the Law, Dharma, the Law Everlasting, and Samgha, its mystical body, Priesthood, or Church. Dharma is an entity underived, containing the spiritual elements and material constituents of the universe. From it the other two evolve: Buddha (Shakyamuni), the creative energy, Samgha, the totality of existence and of life. To the people these are three personal Buddhas, whom they worship without concerning themselves about their origin. To the priests they are simply the Buddha, past, present, or future. There are also several other of these groups or triads, ten or more, composed of different deities, or sometimes containing one or two of the triad already named. Shakyamuni heads the list, having a place in at least six. [p. 120]

The legend of the Buddha belongs rather to Indian than to Chinese mythology, and is too long to be reproduced here.  [*8]

The principal gods of Buddhism are Jan-teng Fo, the Light-lamp Buddha, Mi-lo Fo (Maitreya), the expected Messiah of the Buddhists, O-mi-t'o Fo (Amitabha or Amita), the guide who conducts his devotees to the Western Paradise, Yueh-shih Fo, the Master-physician Buddha, Ta-shih-chih P'u-sa (Mahastama), companion of Amitabha, P'i-lu Fo (Vairotchana), the highest of the Threefold Embodiments, Kuan Yin, the Goddess of Mercy, Ti-tsang Wang, the God of Hades, Wei-t'o (Viharapala), the Deva protector of the Law of Buddha and Buddhist temples, the Four Diamond Kings of Heaven, and Bodhidharma, the first of the six Patriarchs of Eastern or Chinese Buddhism.

Click to enlarge
The Buddhist Triad

  

Diamond Kings of Heaven

On the right and left sides of the entrance hall of Buddhist temples, two on each side, are the gigantic figures of the four great Ssu Ta Chin-kang or T'ien-wang, the Diamond Kings of Heaven, protectors or governors of the continents lying in the direction of the four cardinal points from Mount Sumeru, the centre of the world. They are four brothers named respectively Mo-li Ch'ing (Pure), or Tseng Chang, Mo-li Hung (Vast), or Kuang Mu, Mo-li Hai (Sea), or To Wen, and Mo-li Shou (Age), or Ch'ih Kuo. The Chin kuang ming states that they bestow all kinds of happiness on those who honour the Three Treasures, Buddha, the Law, and the Priesthood. [p. 121] Kings and nations who neglect the Law lose their protection. They are described and represented as follows:

Mo-li Ch'ing, the eldest, is twenty-four feet in height, with a beard the hairs of which are like copper wire. He carries a magnificent jade ring and a spear, and always fights on foot. He has also a magic sword, 'Blue Cloud,' on the blade of which are engraved the characters Ti, Shui, Huo, Feng (Earth, Water, Fire, Wind). When brandished, it causes a black wind, which produces tens of thousands of spears, which pierce the bodies of men and turn them to dust. The wind is followed by a fire, which fills the air with tens of thousands of golden fiery serpents. A thick smoke also rises out of the ground, which blinds and burns men, none being able to escape.

Mo-li Hung carries in his hand an umbrella, called the Umbrella of Chaos, formed of pearls possessed of spiritual properties. Opening this marvellous implement causes the heavens and earth to be covered with thick darkness, and turning it upside down produces violent storms of wind and thunder and universal earthquakes.

Mo-li Hai holds a four-stringed guitar, the twanging of which supernaturally affects the earth, water, fire, or wind. When it is played all the world listens, and the camps of the enemy take fire.

Mo-li Shou has two whips and a panther-skin bag, the home of a creature resembling a white rat, known as Hua-hu Tiao. When at large this creature assumes the form of a white winged elephant, which devours men. He sometimes has also a snake or other man-eating creature, always ready to obey his behests. [p. 122]

  

Legend of the Diamond Kings

The legend of the Four Diamond Kings given in the Feng shen yen i is as follows: At the time of the consolidation of the Chou dynasty in the twelfth and eleventh centuries B.C., Chiang Tzu-ya, chief counsellor to Wen Wang, and General Huang Fei-hu were defending the town and mountain of Hsi-ch'i. The supporters of the house of Shang appealed to the four genii Mo, who lived at Chia-meng Kuan, praying them to come to their aid. They agreed, raised an army of 100,000 celestial soldiers, and traversing towns, fields, and mountains arrived in less than a day at the north gate of Hsi-ch'i, where Mo-li Ch'ing pitched his camp and entrenched his soldiers.

Hearing of this, Huang Fei-hu hastened to warn Chiang Tzu-ya of the danger which threatened him. "The four great generals who have just arrived at the north gate," he said, "are marvellously powerful genii, experts in all the mysteries of magic and use of wonderful charms. It is much to be feared that we shall not be able to resist them."

Many fierce battles ensued. At first these went in favour of the Chin-kang, thanks to their magical weapons and especially to Mo-li Shou's Hua-hu Tiao, who terrorized the enemy by devouring their bravest warriors.

  

Hua-hu Tiao devours Yang Chien

Unfortunately for the Chin-kang, the brute attacked and swallowed Yang Chien, the nephew of Yu Huang. This genie, on entering the body of the monster, rent his heart asunder and cut him in two. As he could transform himself at will, he assumed the shape of Hua-hu Tiao, and went off to Mo-li Shou, who unsuspectingly put him back into his bag. [p. 123]

The Four Kings held a festival to celebrate their triumph, and having drunk copiously gave themselves over to sleep. During the night Yang Chien came out of the bag, with the intention of possessing himself of the three magical weapons of the Chin-kang. But he succeeded only in carrying off the umbrella of Mo-li Hung. In a subsequent engagement No-cha, the son of Vadjra-pani, the God of Thunder, broke the jade ring of Mo-li Ch'ing. Misfortune followed misfortune. The Chin-kang, deprived of their magical weapons, began to lose heart. To complete their discomfiture, Huang T'ien Hua brought to the attack a matchless magical weapon. This was a spike 7 1/2 inches long, enclosed in a silk sheath, and called 'Heart-piercer.' It projected so strong a ray of light that eyes were blinded by it.

Huang T'ien Hua, hard pressed by Mo-li Ch'ing, drew the mysterious spike from its sheath, and hurled it at his adversary. It entered his neck, and with a deep groan the giant fell dead.

Mo-li Hung and Mo-li Hai hastened to avenge their brother, but ere they could come within striking distance of Huang Ti'en Hua his redoubtable spike reached their hearts, and they lay prone at his feet.

The one remaining hope for the sole survivor was in Hua-hu Tiao. Mo-li Shou, not knowing that the creature had been slain, put his hand into the bag to pull him out, whereupon Yang Chien, who had re-entered the bag, bit his hand off at the wrist, so that there remained nothing but a stump of bone.

In this moment of intense agony Mo-li Shou fell an easy prey to Huang T'ien Hua, the magical spike pierced his heart, and he fell bathed in his blood. Thus perished the last of the Chin-kang. [p. 124]

  

The Three Pure Ones

Turning to the gods of Taoism, we find that the triad or trinity, already noted as forming the head of that hierarchy, consists of three Supreme Gods, each in his own Heaven. These three Heavens, the San Ch'ing, 'Three Pure Ones' (this name being also applied to the sovereigns ruling in them), were formed from the three airs, which are subdivisions of the one primordial air.

The first Heaven is Yu Ch'ing. In it reigns the first member of the Taoist triad. He inhabits the Jade Mountain. The entrance to his palace is named the Golden Door. He is the source of all truth, as the sun is the source of all light.

Various authorities give his name differently--Yuan-shih T'ien-tsun, or Lo Ching Hsin, and call him T'ien Pao, 'the Treasure of Heaven,' Some state that the name of the ruler of this first Heaven is Yu Huang, and in the popular mind he it is who occupies this supreme position. The Three Pure Ones are above him in rank, but to him, the Pearly Emperor, is entrusted the superintendence of the world. He has all the power of Heaven and earth in his hands. He is the correlative of Heaven, or rather Heaven itself.

The second Heaven, Shang Ch'ing, is ruled by the second person of the triad, named Ling-pao T'ien-tsun, or Tao Chun. No information is given as to his origin. He is the custodian of the sacred books. He has existed from the beginning of the world. He calculates time, dividing it into different epochs. He occupies the upper pole of the world, and determines the movements and interaction, or regulates the relations of the yin and the yang, the two great principles of nature.

Click to enlarge
The Taoist Triad

In the third Heaven, T'ai Ch'ing, the Taoists place Lao [p. 125] Tzu, the promulgator of the true doctrine drawn up by Ling-pao T'ien-tsun. He is alternatively called Shen Pao, 'the Treasure of the Spirits,' and T'ai-shang Lao-chun, 'the Most Eminent Aged Ruler.' Under various assumed names he has appeared as the teacher of kings and emperors, the reformer of successive generations.

This three-storied Taoist Heaven, or three Heavens, is the result of the wish of the Taoists not to be out-rivalled by the Buddhists. For Buddha, the Law, and the Priesthood they substitute the Tao, or Reason, the Classics, and the Priesthood.

As regards the organization of the Taoist Heavens, Yu Huang has on his register the name of eight hundred Taoist divinities and a multitude of Immortals. These are all divided into three categories: Saints (Sheng-jen), Heroes (Chen-jen), and Immortals (Hsien-jen), occupying the three Heavens respectively in that order.

  

The Three Causes

Connected with Taoism, but not exclusively associated with that religion, is the worship of the Three Causes, the deities presiding over three departments of physical nature, Heaven, earth, and water. They are known by various designations: San Kuan, 'the Three Agents'; San Yuan, 'the Three Origins'; San Kuan Ta Ti, 'the Three Great Emperor Agents'; and T'ai Shang San Kuan, 'the Three Supreme Agents.' This worship has passed through four chief phases, as follows:

The first comprises Heaven, earth, and water, T'ien, Ti, Shui, the sources of happiness, forgiveness of sins, and deliverance from evil respectively. Each of these is called King-emperor. Their names, written on labels and offered to Heaven (on a mountain), earth (by burial), and [p. 126] water (by immersion), are supposed to cure sickness. This idea dates from the Han dynasty, being first noted about A.D. 172.

The second, San Yuan dating from A.D. 407 under the Wei dynasty, identified the Three Agents with three dates of which they were respectively made the patrons. The year was divided into three unequal parts: the first to the seventh moon; the seventh to the tenth; and the tenth to the twelfth. Of these, the fifteenth day of the first, seventh, and tenth moons respectively became the three principal dates of these periods. Thus the Agent of Heaven became the principal patron of the first division, honoured on the fifteenth day of the first moon, and so on.

The third phase, San Kuan, resulted from the first two being found too complicated for popular favour. The San Kuan were the three sons of a man, Ch'en Tzu-ch'un, who was so handsome and intelligent that the three daughters of Lung Wang, the Dragon-king, fell in love with him and went to live with him. The eldest girl was the mother of the Superior Cause, the second of the Medium Cause, and the third of the Inferior Cause. All these were gifted with supernatural powers. Yuan-shih T'ien-tsun canonized them as the Three Great Emperor Agents of Heaven, earth, and water, governors of all beings, devils or gods, in the three regions of the universe. As in the first phase, the T'ien Kuan confers happiness, the Ti Kuan grants remission of sins, and the Shui Kuan delivers from evil or misfortune.

The fourth phase consisted simply in the substitution by the priests for the abstract or time-principles of the three great sovereigns of ancient times, Yao, Shun, and Yu. The literati, proud of the apotheosis of their ancient [p. 127] rulers, hastened to offer incense to them, and temples, San Yuan Kung, arose in very many parts of the Empire.

A variation of this phase is the canonization, with the title of San Yuan or Three Causes, of Wu-k'o San Chen Chun, 'the Three True Sovereigns, Guests of the Kingdom of Wu.' They were three Censors who lived in the reign of King Li (Li Wang, 878-841 B.C.) of the Chou dynasty. Leaving the service of the Chou on account of Li's dissolute living, they went to live in Wu, and brought victory to that state in its war with the Ch'u State, then returned to their own country, and became pillars of the Chou State under Li's successor. They appeared to protect the Emperor Chen Tsung when he was offering the Feng-shan sacrifices on T'ai Shan in A.D. 1008, on which occasion they were canonized with the titles of Superior, Medium, and Inferior Causes, as before, conferring upon them the regencies of Heaven, earth, and water respectively.

  

Yuan-shih T'ien-tsun

Yuan-shih T'ien-tsun, or the First Cause, the Highest in Heaven, generally placed at the head of the Taoist triad, is said never to have existed but in the fertile imagination of the Lao Tzuist sectarians. According to them Yuan-shih T'ien-tsun had neither origin nor master, but is himself the cause of all beings, which is why he is called the First Cause.

As first member of the triad, and sovereign ruler of the First Heaven, Yu Ch'ing, where reign the saints, he is raised in rank above all the other gods. The name assigned to him is Lo Ching Hsin. He was born before all beginnings; his substance is imperishable; it is formed essentially of uncreated air, air a se, invisible and without [p. 128] perceptible limits. No one has been able to penetrate to the beginnings of his existence. The source of all truth, he at each renovation of the worlds--that is, at each new kalpa--gives out the mysterious doctrine which confers immortality. All who reach this knowledge attain by degrees to life eternal, become refined like the spirits, or instantly become Immortals, even while upon earth.

Originally, Yuan-shih T'ien-tsun was not a member of the Taoist triad. He resided above the Three Heavens, above the Three Pure Ones, surviving the destructions and renovations of the universe, as an immovable rock in the midst of a stormy sea. He set the stars in motion, and caused the planets to revolve. The chief of his secret police was Tsao Chun, the Kitchen-god, who rendered to him an account of the good and evil deeds of each family. His executive agent was Lei Tsu, the God of Thunder, and his subordinates. The seven stars of the North Pole were the palace of his ministers, whose offices were on the various sacred mountains. Nowadays, however, Yuan-shih T'ien-tsun is generally neglected for Yu Huang.

  

An Avatar of P'an Ku

According to the tradition of Chin Hung, the God of T'ai Shan of the fifth generation from P'an Ku, this being, then called Yuan-shih T'ien-wang, was an avatar of P'an Ku. It came about in this wise. In remote ages there lived on the mountains an old man, Yuan-shih T'ien-wang, who used to sit on a rock and preach to the multitude. He spoke of the highest antiquity as if from personal experience. When Chin Hung asked him where he lived, he just raised his hand toward Heaven, iridescent clouds enveloped his body, and he replied: "Whoso wishes to know where I dwell must [p. 129] rise to impenetrable heights." "But how," said Chin Hung, "was he to be found in this immense emptiness?" Two genii, Ch'ih Ching-tzu and Huang Lao, then descended on the summit of T'ai Shan and said: "Let us go and visit this Yuan-shih. To do so, we must cross the boundaries of the universe and pass beyond the farthest stars." Chin Hung begged them to give him their instructions, to which he listened attentively. They then ascended the highest of the sacred peaks, and thence mounted into the heavens, calling to him from the misty heights: "If you wish to know the origin of Yuan-shih, you must pass beyond the confines of Heaven and earth, because he lives beyond the limits of the worlds. You must ascend and ascend until you reach the sphere of nothingness and of being, in the plains of the luminous shadows."

Having reached these ethereal heights, the two genii saw a bright light, and Hsuan-hsuan Shang-jen appeared before them. The two genii bowed to do him homage and to express their gratitude. "You cannot better show your gratitude," he replied, "than by making my doctrine known among men. You desire," he added, "to know the history of Yuan-shih. I will tell it you. When P'an Ku had completed his work in the primitive Chaos, his spirit left its mortal envelope and found itself tossed about in empty space without any fixed support. 'I must,' it said, 'get reborn in visible form; until I can go through a new birth I shall remain empty and unsettled,' His soul, carried on the wings of the wind, reached Fu-yu T'ai. There it saw a saintly lady named T'ai Yuan, forty years of age, still a virgin, and living alone on Mount Ts'u-o. Air and variegated clouds were the sole nourishment of her vital spirits. An hermaphrodite, [p. 130] at once both the active and the passive principle, she daily scaled the highest peak of the mountain to gather there the flowery quintessence of the sun and the moon. P'an Ku, captivated by her virgin purity, took advantage of a moment when she was breathing to enter her mouth in the form of a ray of light. She was enceinte for twelve years, at the end of which period the fruit of her womb came out through her spinal column. From its first moment the child could walk and speak, and its body was surrounded by a five-coloured cloud. The newly-born took the name of Yuan-shih T'ien-wang, and his mother was generally known as T'ai-yuan Sheng-mu, 'the Holy Mother of the First Cause.'"

  

Yu Huang

Yu Huang means 'the Jade Emperor,' or 'the Pure August One,' jade symbolizing purity. He is also known by the name Yu-huang Shang-ti, 'the Pure August Emperor on High.'

The history of this deity, who later received many honorific titles and became the most popular god, a very Chinese Jupiter, seems to be somewhat as follows: The Emperor Ch'eng Tsung of the Sung dynasty having been obliged in A.D. 1005 to sign a disgraceful peace with the Tunguses or Kitans, the dynasty was in danger of losing the support of the nation. In order to hoodwink the people the Emperor constituted himself a seer, and announced with great pomp that he was in direct communication with the gods of Heaven. In doing this he was following the advice of his crafty and unreliable minister Wang Ch'in-jo, who had often tried to persuade him that the pretended revelations attributed to Fu Hsi, Yu Wang, and others were only pure inventions [p. 131] to induce obedience. The Emperor, having studied his part well, assembled his ministers in the tenth moon of the year 1012, and made to them the following declaration: "In a dream I had a visit from an Immortal, who brought me a letter from Yu Huang, the purport of which was as follows: 'I have already sent you by your ancestor Chao [T'ai Tsu] two celestial missives. Now I am going to send him in person to visit you.'" A little while after his ancestor T'ai Tsu, the founder of the dynasty, came according to Yu Huang's promise, and Ch'eng Tsung hastened to inform his ministers of it. This is the origin of Yu Huang. He was born of a fraud, and came ready-made from the brain of an emperor.

  

The Cask of Pearls

Fearing to be admonished for the fraud by another of his ministers, the scholar Wang Tan, the Emperor resolved to put a golden gag in his mouth. So one day, having invited him to a banquet, he overwhelmed him with flattery and made him drunk with good wine. "I would like the members of your family also to taste this wine," he added, "so I am making you a present of a cask of it." When Wang Tan returned home, he found the cask filled with precious pearls. Out of gratitude to the Emperor he kept silent as to the fraud, and made no further opposition to his plans, but when on his death-bed he asked that his head be shaved like a priest's and that he be clothed in priestly robes so that he might expiate his crime of feebleness before the Emperor.

K'ang Hsi, the great Emperor of the Ch'ing dynasty, who had already declared that if it is wrong to impute deceit to a man it is still more reprehensible to impute a fraud to Heaven, stigmatized him as follows: "Wang [p. 132] Tan committed two faults: the first was in showing himself a vile flatterer of his Prince during his life; the second was in becoming a worshipper of Buddha at his death."

  

The Legend of Yu Huang

So much for historical record. The legend of Yu Huang relates that in ancient times there existed a kingdom named Kuang Yen Miao Lo Kuo, whose king was Ching Te, his queen being called Pao Yueh. Though getting on in years, the latter had no son. The Taoist priests were summoned by edict to the palace to perform their rites. They recited prayers with the object of obtaining an heir to the throne. During the ensuing night the Queen had a vision. Lao Chun appeared to her, riding a dragon, and carrying a male child in his arms. He floated down through the air in her direction. The Queen begged him to give her the child as an heir to the throne. "I am quite willing," he said. "Here it is." She fell on her knees and thanked him. On waking she found herself enceinte. At the end of a year the Prince was born. From an early age he showed himself compassionate and generous to the poor. On the death of his father he ascended the throne, but after reigning only a few days abdicated in favour of his chief minister, and became a hermit at P'u-ming, in Shensi, and also on Mount Hsiu Yen, in Yunnan. Having attained to perfection, he passed the rest of his days in curing sickness and saving life; and it was in the exercise of these charitable deeds that he died. The emperors Ch'eng Tsung and Hui Tsung, of the Sung dynasty, loaded him with all the various titles associated with his name at the present day.

Both Buddhists and Taoists claim him as their own, [p. 133] the former identifying him with Indra, in which case Yu Huang is a Buddhist deity incorporated into the Taoist pantheon. He has also been taken to be the subject of a 'nature myth.' The Emperor Ching Te, his father, is the sun, the Queen Pao Yueh the moon, and the marriage symbolizes the rebirth of the vivifying power which clothes nature with green plants and beautiful flowers.

  

T'ung-t'ien Chiao-chu

In modern Taoism T'ung-t'ien Chiao-chu is regarded as the first of the Patriarchs and one of the most powerful genii of the sect. His master was Hung-chun Lao-tsu. He wore a red robe embroidered with white cranes, and rode a k'uei niu, a monster resembling a buffalo, with one long horn like a unicorn. His palace, the Pi Yu Kung, was situated on Mount Tzu Chih Yai.

This genie took the part of Chou Wang and helped him to resist Wu Wang's armies. First, he sent his disciple To-pao Tao-jen to Chieh-p'ai Kuan. He gave him four precious swords and the plan of a fort which he was to construct and to name Chu-hsien Chen, 'the Citadel of all the Immortals.'

To-pao Tao-jen carried out his orders, but he had to fight a battle with Kuang Ch'eng-tzu, and the latter, armed with a celestial seal, struck his adversary so hard that he fell to the ground and had to take refuge in flight.

T'ung-t'ien Chiao-chu came to the defence of his disciple and to restore the morale of his forces. Unfortunately, a posse of gods arrived to aid Wu Wang's powerful general, Chiang Tzu-ya. The first who attacked T'ung-t'ien Chiao-chu was Lao Tzu, who struck him several times with his stick. Then came Chun T'i, armed with his cane. The buffalo of T'ung-t'ien Chiao-chu [p. 134] stamped him under foot, and Chun T'i was thrown to the earth, and only just had time to rise quickly and mount into the air amid a great cloud of dust.

There could be no doubt that the fight was going against T'ung-t'ien Chiao-chu; to complete his discomfiture Jan-teng Tao-jen cleft the air and fell upon him unexpectedly. With a violent blow of his 'Fix-sea' staff he cast him down and compelled him to give up the struggle.

T'ung-t'ien Chiao-chu then prepared plans for a new fortified camp beyond T'ung Kuan, and tried to take the offensive again, but again Lao Tzu stopped him with a blow of his stick. Yuan-shih T'ien-tsun wounded his shoulder with his precious stone Ju-i, and Chun-t'i Tao-jen waved his 'Branch of the Seven Virtues.' Immediately the magic sword of T'ung-t'ien Chiao-chu was reduced to splinters, and he saved himself only by flight.

Hung-chun Lao-tsu, the master of these three genii, seeing his three beloved disciples in the melee, resolved to make peace between them. He assembled all three in a tent in Chiang Tzu-ya's camp, made them kneel before him, then reproached T'ung-t'ien Chiao-chu at length for having taken the part of the tyrant Chou, and recommended them in future to live in harmony. After finishing his speech, he produced three pills, and ordered each of the genii to swallow one. When they had done so, Hung-chun Lao-tsu said to them: "I have given you these pills to ensure an inviolable truce among you. Know that the first who entertains a thought of discord in his heart will find that the pill will explode in his stomach and cause his instant death."

Hung-chun Lao-tsu then took T'ung-t'ien Chiao-chu away with him on his cloud to Heaven. [p. 135]

  

Immortals, Heroes, Saints

An Immortal, according to Taoist lore, is a solitary man of the mountains. He appears to die, but does not. After 'death' his body retains all the qualities of the living. The body or corpse is for him only a means of transition, a phase of metamorphosis--a cocoon or chrysalis, the temporary abode of the butterfly.

To reach this state a hygienic regimen both of the body and mind must be observed. All luxury, greed, and ambition must be avoided. But negation is not enough. In the system of nourishment all the elements which strengthen the essence of the constituent yin and yang principles must be found by means of medicine, chemistry, gymnastic exercises, etc. When the maximum vital force has been acquired the means of preserving it and keeping it from the attacks of death and disease must be discovered; in a word, he must spiritualize himself--render himself completely independent of matter. All the experiments have for their object the storing in the pills of immortality the elements necessary for the development of the vital force and for the constitution of a new spiritual and super-humanized being. In this ascending perfection there are several grades:

(1) The Immortal (Hsien). The first stage consists in bringing about the birth of the superhuman in the ascetic's person, which reaching perfection leaves the earthly body, like the grasshopper its sheath. This first stage attained, the Immortal travels at will throughout the universe, enjoys all the advantages of perfect health without dreading disease or death, eats and drinks copiously--nothing is wanting to complete his happiness.

(2) The Perfect Man, or Hero (Chen-jen). The second stage is a higher one. The whole body is spiritualized. [p. 136] It has become so subtile, so spiritual, that it can fly in the air. Borne on the wings of the wind, seated on the clouds of Heaven, it travels from one world to another and fixes its habitation in the stars. It is freed from all laws of matter, but is, however, not completely changed into pure spirit.

(3) The Saint (Sheng-jen). The third stage is that of the superhuman beings or saints. They are those who have attained to extraordinary intelligence and virtue.

  

The God of the Immortals

Mu Kung or Tung Wang Kung, the God of the Immortals, was also called I Chun Ming and Yu Huang Chun, the Prince Yu Huang.

The primitive vapour congealed, remained inactive for a time, and then produced living beings, beginning with the formation of Mu Kung, the purest substance of the Eastern Air, and sovereign of the active male principle yang and of all the countries of the East. His palace is in the misty heavens, violet clouds form its dome, blue clouds its walls. Hsien T'ung, 'the Immortal Youth,' and Yu Nu, 'the Jade Maiden,' are his servants. He keeps the register of all the Immortals, male and female.

  

Hsi Wang Mu

Hsi Wang Mu was formed of the pure quintessence of the Western Air, in the legendary continent of Shen Chou. She is often called the Golden Mother of the Tortoise.

Her family name is variously given as Hou, Yang, and Ho. Her own name was Hui, and first name Wan-chin. She had nine sons and twenty-four daughters.

Click to enlarge
Hsi Wang Mu

As Mu Kung, formed of the Eastern Air, is the active [p. 137] principle of the male air and sovereign of the Eastern Air, so Hsi Wang Mu, born of the Western Air, is the passive or female principle (yin) and sovereign of the Western Air. These two principles, co-operating, engender Heaven and earth and all the beings of the universe, and thus become the two principles of life and of the subsistence of all that exists. She is the head of the troop of genii dwelling on the K'un-lun Mountains (the Taoist equivalent of the Buddhist Sumeru), and from time to time holds intercourse with favoured imperial votaries.

  

The Feast of Peaches

Hsi Wang Mu's palace is situated in the high mountains of the snowy K'un-lun. It is 1000 li (about 333 miles) in circuit; a rampart of massive gold surrounds its battlements of precious stones. Its right wing rises on the edge of the Kingfishers' River. It is the usual abode of the Immortals, who are divided into seven special categories according to the colour of their garments--red, blue, black, violet, yellow, green, and 'nature-colour.' There is a marvellous fountain built of precious stones, where the periodical banquet of the Immortals is held. This feast is called P'an-t'ao Hui, 'the Feast of Peaches.' It takes place on the borders of the Yao Ch'ih, Lake of Gems, and is attended by both male and female Immortals. Besides several superfine meats, they are served with bears' paws, monkeys' lips, dragons' liver, phoenix marrow, and peaches gathered in the orchard, endowed with the mystic virtue of conferring longevity on all who have the good luck to taste them. It was by these peaches that the date of the banquet was fixed. The tree put forth leaves once every three [p. 138] thousand years, and it required three thousand years after that for the fruit to ripen. These were Hsi Wang Mu's birthdays, when all the Immortals assembled for the great feast, "the occasion being more festive than solemn, for there was music on invisible instruments, and songs not from mortal tongues."

  

The First Taoist Pope

Chang Tao-ling, the first Taoist pope, was born in A.D. 35, in the reign of the Emperor Kuang Wu Ti of the Han dynasty. His birthplace is variously given as the T'ien-mu Shan, 'Eye of Heaven Mountain,' in Lin-an Hsien, in Chekiang, and Feng-yang Fu, in Anhui. He devoted himself wholly to study and meditation, declining all offers to enter the service of the State. He preferred to take up his abode in the mountains of Western China, where he persevered in the study of alchemy and in cultivating the virtues of purity and mental abstraction. From the hands of Lao Tzu he received supernaturally a mystic treatise, by following the instructions in which he was successful in his search for the elixir of life.

One day when he was engaged in experimenting with the 'Dragon-tiger elixir' a spiritual being appeared to him and said: "On Po-sung Mountain is a stone house in which are concealed the writings of the Three Emperors of antiquity and a canonical work. By obtaining these you may ascend to Heaven, if you undergo the course of discipline they prescribe."

Click to enlarge
Chang Tao-ling

Chang Tao-ling found these works, and by means of them obtained the power of flying, of hearing distant sounds, and of leaving his body. After going through a thousand days of discipline, and receiving instruction from a goddess, who taught him to walk about among [p. 139] the stars, he proceeded to fight with the king of the demons, to divide mountains and seas, and to command the wind and thunder. All the demons fled before him. On account of the prodigious slaughter of demons by this hero the wind and thunder were reduced to subjection, and various divinities came with eager haste to acknowledge their faults. In nine years he gained the power to ascend to Heaven.

  

The Founder of Modern Taoism

Chang Tao-ling may rightly be considered as the true founder of modern Taoism. The recipes for the pills of immortality contained in the mysterious books, and the invention of talismans for the cure of all sorts of maladies, not only exalted him to the high position he has since occupied in the minds of his numerous disciples, but enabled them in turn to exploit successfully this new source of power and wealth. From that time the Taoist sect began to specialize in the art of healing. Protecting or curing talismans bearing the Master's seal were purchased for enormous sums. It is thus seen that he was after all a deceiver of the people, and unbelievers or rival partisans of other sects have dubbed him a 'rice-thief'--which perhaps he was.

He is generally represented as clothed in richly decorated garments, brandishing with his right hand his magic sword, holding in his left a cup containing the draught of immortality, and riding a tiger which in one paw grasps his magic seal and with the others tramples down the five venomous creatures: lizard, snake, spider, toad, and centipede. Pictures of him with these accessories are pasted up in houses on the fifth day of the fifth moon to forfend calamity and sickness. [p. 140]

  

The Peach-gathering

It is related of him that, not wishing to ascend to Heaven too soon, he partook of only half of the pill of immortality, dividing the other half among several of his admirers, and that he had at least two selves or personalities, one of which used to disport itself in a boat on a small lake in front of his house. The other self would receive his visitors, entertaining them with food and drink and instructive conversation. On one occasion this self said to them: "You are unable to quit the world altogether as I can, but by imitating my example in the matter of family relations you could procure a medicine which would prolong your lives by several centuries. I have given the crucible in which Huang Ti prepared the draught of immortality to my disciple Wang Ch'ang. Later on, a man will come from the East, who also will make use of it. He will arrive on the seventh day of the first moon."

Exactly on that day there arrived from the East a man named Chao Sheng, who was the person indicated by Chang Tao-ling. He was recognized by a manifestation of himself he had caused to appear in advance of his coming. Chang then led all his disciples, to the number of three hundred, to the highest peak of the Yun-t'ai. Below them they saw a peach-tree growing near a pointed rock, stretching out its branches like arms above a fathomless abyss. It was a large tree, covered with ripe fruit. Chang said to his disciples: "I will communicate a spiritual formula to the one among you who will dare to gather the fruit of that tree." They all leaned over to look, but each declared the feat to be impossible. Chao Sheng alone had the courage to rush out to the point of the rock and up the tree stretching [p. 141] out into space. With firm foot he stood and gathered the peaches, placing them in the folds of his cloak, as many as it would hold, but when he wished to climb back up the precipitous slope, his hands slipped on the smooth rock, and all his attempts were in vain. Accordingly, he threw the peaches, three hundred and two in all, one by one up to Chang Tao-ling, who distributed them. Each disciple ate one, as also did Chang, who reserved the remaining one for Chao Sheng, whom he helped to climb up again. To do this Chang extended his arm to a length of thirty feet, all present marvelling at the miracle. After Chao had eaten his peach Chang stood on the edge of the precipice, and said with a laugh: "Chao Sheng was brave enough to climb out to that tree and his foot never tripped. I too will make the attempt. If I succeed I will have a big peach as a reward." Having spoken thus, he leapt into space, and alighted in the branches of the peach-tree. Wang Ch'ang and Chao Sheng also jumped into the tree and stood one on each side of him. There Chang communicated to them the mysterious formula. Three days later they returned to their homes; then, having made final arrangements, they repaired once more to the mountain peak, whence, in the presence of the other disciples, who followed them with their eyes until they had completely disappeared from view, all three ascended to Heaven in broad daylight.

  

Chang Tao-ling's Great Power

The name of Chang Tao-ling, the Heavenly Teacher, is a household word in China. He is on earth the Vicegerent of the Pearly Emperor in Heaven, and the Commander-in-Chief of the hosts of Taoism. He, the chief of the wizards, the 'true [i.e. ideal] man,' as he is called, [p. 142] wields an immense spiritual power throughout the land. The present pope boasts of an unbroken line for three-score generations. His family obtained possession of the Dragon-tiger Mountain in Kiangsi about A.D. 1000. "This personage," says a pre-Republican writer, "assumes a state which mimics the imperial. He confers buttons like an emperor. Priests come to him from various cities and temples to receive promotion, whom he invests with titles and presents with seals of office."

  

Kings of Heaven

The Four Kings of Heaven, Ssu Ta T'ien-wang, reside on Mount Sumeru (Hsu-mi Shan), the centre of the universe. It is 3,360,000 li--that is, about a million miles--high.  [*9] Its eastern slope is of gold, its western of silver, its south-eastern of crystal, and its north-eastern of agate. The Four Kings appear to be the Taoist reflection of the four Chin-kang of Buddhism already noticed. Their names are Li, Ma, Chao, and Wen. They are represented as holding a pagoda, sword, two swords, and spiked club respectively. Their worship appears to be due to their auspicious appearance and aid on various critical occasions in the dynastic history of the T'ang and Sung Periods.

  

T'ai I

Temples are found in various parts dedicated to T'ai I, the Great One, or Great Unity. When Emperor Wu Ti (140-86 B.C.) of the Han dynasty was in search of the secret of immortality, and various suggestions had proved unsatisfactory, a Taoist priest, Miao Chi, told the Emperor that his want of success was due to his omission to sacrifice [p. 143] to T'ai I, the first of the celestial spirits, quoting the classical precedent of antiquity found in the Book of History. The Emperor, believing his word, ordered the Grand Master of Sacrifices to re-establish this worship at the capital. He followed carefully the prescriptions of Miao Chi. This enraged the literati, who resolved to ruin him. One day, when the Emperor was about to drink one of his potions, one of the chief courtiers seized the cup and drank the contents himself. The Emperor was about to have him slain, when he said: "Your Majesty's order is unnecessary; if the potion confers immortality, I cannot be killed; if, on the other hand, it does not, your Majesty should recompense me for disproving the pretensions of the Taoist priest." The Emperor, however, was not convinced.

One account represents T'ai I as having lived in the time of Shen Nung, the Divine Husbandman, who visited him to consult with him on the subjects of diseases and fortune. He was Hsien Yuan's medical preceptor. His medical knowledge was handed down to future generations. He was one of those who, with the Immortals, was invited to the great Peach Assembly of the Western Royal Mother.

As the spirit of the star T'ai I he resides in the Eastern Palace, listening for the cries of sufferers in order to save them. For this purpose he assumes numberless forms in various regions. With a boat of lotus-flowers of nine colours he ferries men over to the shore of salvation. Holding in his hand a willow-branch, he scatters from it the dew of the doctrine.

T'ai I is variously represented as the Ruler of the Five Celestial Sovereigns, Cosmic Matter before it congealed into concrete shapes, the Triune Spirit of Heaven, earth, [p. 144] and T'ai I as three separate entities, an unknown Spirit, the Spirit of the Pole Star, etc., but practically the Taoists confine their T'ai I to T'ai-i Chen-jen, in which Perfect Man they personify the abstract philosophical notions.  [*10]

  

Goddess of the North Star

Tou Mu, the Bushel Mother, or Goddess of the North Star, worshipped by both Buddhists and Taoists, is the Indian Maritchi, and was made a stellar divinity by the Taoists. She is said to have been the mother of the nine Jen Huang or Human Sovereigns of fabulous antiquity, who succeeded the lines of Celestial and Terrestrial Sovereigns. She occupies in the Taoist religion the same relative position as Kuan Yin, who may be said to be the heart of Buddhism. Having attained to a profound knowledge of celestial mysteries, she shone with heavenly light, could cross the seas, and pass from the sun to the moon. She also had a kind heart for the sufferings of humanity. The King of Chou Yu, in the north, married her on hearing of her many virtues. They had nine sons. Yuan-shih T'ien-tsun came to earth to invite her, her husband, and nine sons to enjoy the delights of Heaven. He placed her in the palace Tou Shu, the Pivot of the Pole, because all the other stars revolve round it, and gave her the title of Queen of the Doctrine of Primitive Heaven. Her nine sons have their palaces in the neighbouring stars.

Click to enlarge
Tou Mu, Goddess of the North Star

Tou Mu wears the Buddhist crown, is seated on a lotus throne, has three eyes, eighteen arms, and holds various precious objects in her numerous hands, such as a bow, [p. 145] spear, sword, flag, dragon's head, pagoda, five chariots, sun's disk, moon's disk, etc. She has control of the books of life and death, and all who wish to prolong their days worship at her shrine. Her devotees abstain from animal food on the third and twenty-seventh day of every month.

Of her sons, two are the Northern and Southern Bushels; the latter, dressed in red, rules birth; the former, in white, rules death. "A young Esau once found them on the South Mountain, under a tree, playing chess, and by an offer of venison his lease of life was extended from nineteen to ninety-nine years."

  

Snorter and Blower

At the time of the overthrow of the Shang and establishment of the Chou dynasty in 1122 B.C. there lived two marshals, Cheng Lung and Ch'en Ch'i. These were Heng and Ha, the Snorter and Blower respectively.

The former was the chief superintendent of supplies for the armies of the tyrant emperor Chou, the Nero of China. The latter was in charge of the victualling department of the same army.

From his master, Tu O, the celebrated Taoist magician of the K'un-lun Mountains, Heng acquired a marvellous power. When he snorted, his nostrils, with a sound like that of a bell, emitted two white columns of light, which destroyed his enemies, body and soul. Thus through him the Chou gained numerous victories. But one day he was captured, bound, and taken to the general of Chou. His life was spared, and he was made general superintendent of army stores as well as generalissimo of five army corps. Later on he found himself face to face with the Blower. The latter had learnt from the magician [p. 146] how to store in his chest a supply of yellow gas which, when he blew it out, annihilated anyone whom it struck. By this means he caused large gaps to be made in the ranks of the enemy.

Being opposed to each other, the one snorting out great streaks of white light, the other blowing streams of yellow gas, the combat continued until the Blower was wounded in the shoulder by No-cha, of the army of Chou, and pierced in the stomach with a spear by Huang Fei-hu, Yellow Flying Tiger.

The Snorter in turn was slain in this fight by Marshal Chin Ta-sheng, 'Golden Big Pint,' who was an ox-spirit and endowed with the mysterious power of producing in his entrails the celebrated niu huang, ox-yellow, or bezoar. Facing the Snorter, he spat in his face, with a noise like thunder, a piece of bezoar as large as a rice-bowl. It struck him on the nose and split his nostrils. He fell to the earth, and was immediately cut in two by a blow from his victor's sword.

After the Chou dynasty had been definitely established Chiang Tzu-ya canonized the two marshals Heng and Ha, and conferred on them the offices of guardians of the Buddhist temple gates, where their gigantic images may be seen.

  

Blue Dragon and White Tiger

The functions discharged by Heng and Ha at the gates of Buddhist temples are in Taoist temples discharged by Blue Dragon and White Tiger.

The former, the Spirit of the Blue Dragon Star, was Teng Chiu-kung, one of the chief generals of the last emperor of the Yin dynasty. He had a son named Teng Hsiu, and a daughter named Ch'an-yu. [p. 147]

The army of Teng Chiu-kung was camped at San-shan Kuan, when he received orders to proceed to the battle then taking place at Hsi Ch'i. There, in standing up to No-cha and Huang Fei-hu, he had his left arm broken by the former's magic bracelet, but, fortunately for him, his subordinate, T'u Hsing-sun, a renowned magician, gave him a remedy which quickly healed the fracture.

His daughter then came on the scene to avenge her father. She had a magic weapon, the Five-fire Stone, which she hurled full in the face of Yang Chien. But the Immortal was not wounded; on the other hand, his celestial dog jumped at Ch'an-yu and bit her neck, so that she was obliged to flee. T'u Hsing-sun, however, healed the wound.

After a banquet, Teng Chiu-kung promised his daughter in marriage to T'u Hsing-sun if he would gain him the victory at Hsi Ch'i. Chiang Tzu-ya then persuaded T'u's magic master, Chu Liu-sun, to call his disciple over to his camp, where he asked him why he was fighting against the new dynasty. "Because," he replied, "Chiu-kung has promised me his daughter in marriage as a reward of success." Chiang Tzu-ya thereupon promised to obtain the bride, and sent a force to seize her. As a result of the fighting that ensued, Chiu-kung was beaten, and retreated in confusion, leaving Ch'an-yu in the hands of the victors. During the next few days the marriage was celebrated with great ceremony in the victor's camp. According to custom, the bride returned for some days to her father's house, and while there she earnestly exhorted Chiu-kung to submit. Following her advice, he went over to Chiang Tzu-ya's party.

In the ensuing battles he fought valiantly on the side of his former enemy, and killed many famous warriors, [p. 148] but he was eventually attacked by the Blower, from whose mouth a column of yellow gas struck him, throwing him from his steed. He was made prisoner, and executed by order of General Ch'iu Yin. Chiang Tzu-ya conferred on him the kingdom of the Blue Dragon Star.

The Spirit of the White Tiger Star is Yin Ch'eng-hsiu. His father, Yin P'o-pai, a high courtier of the tyrant Chou Wang, was sent to negotiate peace with Chiang Tzu-ya, but was seized and put to death by Marquis Chiang Wen-huan. His son, attempting to avenge his father's murder, was pierced by a spear, and his head was cut off and carried in triumph to Chiang Tzu-ya.

As compensation he was, though somewhat tardily, canonized as the Spirit of the White Tiger Star.

  

Apotheosized Philosophers

The philosophers Lieh Tzu, Huai-nan Tzu, Chuang Tzu, Mo Tzu, etc., have also been apotheosized. Nothing very remarkable is related of them. Most of them had several reincarnations and possessed supernatural powers. The second, who was a king, when taken by the Eight Immortals to the genii's Heaven forgot now and then to address them as superiors, and but for their intercession with Yu Ti, the Pearly Emperor, would have been reincarnated. In order to humiliate himself, he thereafter called himself Huai-nan Tzu, 'the Sage of the South of the Huai.' The third, Chuang Tzu, Chuang Sheng, or Chuang Chou, was a disciple of Lao Tzu. Chuang Tzu was in the habit of sleeping during the day, and at night would transform himself into a butterfly, which fluttered gaily over the flowers in the garden. On waking, he would still feel the sensation of flying in his shoulders. [p. 149] On asking Lao Tzu the reason for this, he was told: "Formerly you were a white butterfly which, having partaken of the quintessence of flowers and of the yin and the yang, should have been immortalized; but one day you stole some peaches and flowers in Wang Mu Niang-niang's garden. The guardian of the garden slew you, and that is how you came to be reincarnated." At this time he was fifty years of age.

  

Fanning the Grave

One of the tales associated with him describes how he saw a young woman in mourning vigorously fanning a newly made grave. On his asking her the reason of this strange conduct, she replied: "I am doing this because my husband begged me to wait until the earth on his tomb was dry before I remarried!" Chuang Tzu offered to help her, and as soon as he waved the fan once the earth was dry. The young widow thanked him and departed.

On his return home, Chuang Sheng related this incident to his wife. She expressed astonishment at such conduct on the part of a wife. "There's nothing to be surprised at," rejoined the husband; "that's how things go in this world." Seeing that he was poking fun at her, she protested angrily. Some little time after this Chuang Sheng died. His wife, much grieved, buried him.

  

Husband and Wife

A few days later a young man named Ch'u Wang-sun arrived with the intention, as he said, of placing himself under the instruction of Chuang Sheng. When he heard that he was dead he went and performed prostrations before his tomb, and afterward took up his abode in an [p. 150] empty room, saying that he wished to study. After half a month had elapsed, the widow asked an old servant who had accompanied Wang-sun if the young man was married. On his replying in the negative, she requested the old servant to propose a match between them. Wang-sun made some objections, saying that people would criticize their conduct. "Since my husband is dead, what can they say?" replied the widow. She then put off her mourning-garments and prepared for the wedding.

Wang-sun took her to the grave of her husband, and said to her: "The gentleman has returned to life!" She looked at Wang-sun and recognized the features of her husband. She was so overwhelmed with shame that she hanged herself. Chuang Sheng buried her in an empty tomb, and then began to sing.

He burnt his house, went away to P'u-shui, in Hupei, and occupied himself in fishing. From there he went on to Chung-t'iao Shan, where he met Feng Hou and her teacher Hsuan Nu, the Mother of Heaven. In their company he visited the palaces of the stars. One day, when he was attending a banquet at the palace of Wang-mu, Shang Ti gave him as his kingdom the planet Jupiter, and assigned to him as his palace the ancient abode of Mao Meng, the stellar god reincarnated during the Chou dynasty. He had not yet returned, and had left his palace empty. Shang Ti had cautioned him never to absent himself without his permission.

  

Canonized Generalissimos

A large number of military men also have been canonized as celestial generalissimos. A few will serve as examples of the rest. [p. 151]

  

The Three Musical Brothers

There were three brothers: T'ien Yuan-shuai, the eldest; T'ien Hung-i, the second; and T'ien Chih-piao, the youngest. They were all musicians of unsurpassed talent.

In the K'ai-yuan Period (A.D. 713-42) the Emperor Hsuan Tsung, of the T'ang dynasty, appointed them his music masters. At the sound of their wonderful flute the clouds in the sky stopped in their courses; the harmony of their songs caused the odoriferous la mei flower to open in winter. They excelled also in songs and dances.

The Emperor fell sick. He saw in a dream the three brothers accompanying their singing on a mandolin and violin. The harmony of their songs charmed his ear, and on waking he found himself well again. Out of gratitude for this benefit he conferred on each the title of marquis.

The Grand Master of the Taoists was trying to stay the ravages of a pestilence, but he could not conquer the devils which caused it. Under these circumstances he appealed to the three brothers and asked their advice as to what course to adopt. T'ien Yuan-shuai had a large boat built, called 'Spirit-boat.' He assembled in it a million spirits, and ordered them to beat drums. On hearing this tumult all the demons of the town came out to listen. T'ien Yuan-shuai, seizing the opportunity, captured them all and, with the help of the Grand Master, expelled them from the town.

Besides the canonization of the three T'ien brothers, all the members of their families received posthumous titles. [p. 152]

  

The Dragon-boat Festival

This is said to be the origin of the dragon-boats which are to be seen on all the waterways of China on the fifth day of the fifth moon.  [*11] The Festival of the Dragon-boats, held on that day, was instituted in memory of the statesman-poet Ch'u Yuan (332-296 B.C.), who drowned himself in the Mi-lo River, an affluent of the Tung-t'ing Lake, after having been falsely accused by one of the petty princes of the State. The people, out of pity for the unfortunate courtier, sent out these boats in search of his body.

  

Chiang Tzu-ya

In the wars which resulted in the overthrow of the tyrant Chou Wang and his dynasty and the establishment of the great Chou dynasty, the most influential generalissimo was Chiang Tzu-ya. His family name was Chiang, and his own name Shang, but owing to his descent from one of the ministers of the ancient King Yao, whose heirs owned the fief of Lu, the family came to be called by that name, and he himself was known as Lu Shang. His honorific title was T'ai Kung Wang, 'Hope of T'ai Kung,' given him by Wen Wang, who recognized in the person of Chiang Tzu-ya the wise minister whom his father T'ai Kung had caused him to expect before his death.

  

The Battle of Mu Yeh

Chiang Tzu-ya was originally in the service of the tyrant Chou Wang, but transferred his services to the Chou cause, and by his wonderful skill enabled that house finally to gain the victory. The decisive battle [p. 153] took place at Mu Yeh, situated to the south of Wei-hui Fu, in 1122 B.C. The soldiers of Yin, 700,000 in number, were defeated, and Chou, the tyrant, shut himself up in his magnificent palace, set it alight, and was burned alive with all his possessions. For this achievement Chiang Tzu-ya was granted by Wu Wang the title of Father and Counsellor, and was appointed Prince of Ch'i, with perpetual succession to his descendants.

  

A Legend of Chiang Tzu-ya

The Feng shen yen i contains many chapters describing in detail the various battles which resulted in the overthrow of the last tyrant of the Shang dynasty and the establishment of the illustrious Chou dynasty on the throne of China. This legend and the following one are epitomized from that work.

  

No-cha defeats Chang Kuei-fang

The redoubtable No-cha having, by means of his Heaven-and-earth Bracelet, vanquished Feng Lin, a star-god and subordinate officer of Chang Kuei-fang, in spite of the black smoke-clouds which he blew out of his nostrils, the defeated warrior fled and sought the aid of his chief, who fought No-cha in some thirty to forty encounters without succeeding in dislodging him from his Wind-fire Wheel, which enabled him to move about rapidly and to perform prodigious feats, such as causing hosts of silver flying dragons like clouds of snow to descend upon his enemy. During one of these fights No-cha heard his name called three times, but paid no heed. Finally, with his Heaven-and-earth Bracelet he broke Chang Kuei-fang's left arm, following this up by shooting out some dazzling rays of light which knocked him off his horse. [p. 154]

When he returned to the city to report his victory to Tzu-ya, the latter asked him if during the battle Kuei-fang had called his name. "Yes," replied No-cha, "he called, but I took no heed of him." "When Kuei-fang calls," said Tzu-ya, "the hun and the p'o [anima and umbra] become separated, and so the body falls apart." "But," replied No-cha, "I had changed myself into a lotus-flower, which has neither hun nor p'o, so he could not succeed in getting me off my magic wheel."

  

Tzu-ya goes to K'un-lun

Tzu-ya, however, still uncertain in mind about the finality of No-cha's victories, went to consult Wu Wang (whose death had not yet taken place at this time). After the interview Tzu-ya informed Wu Wang of his wish to visit K'un-lun Mountain. Wu Wang warned him of the danger of leaving the kingdom with the enemy so near the capital; but Tzu-ya obtained his consent by saying he would be absent only three days at most. So he gave instructions regarding the defence to No-cha, and went off in his spirit chariot to K'un-lun. On his arrival at the Unicorn Precipice he was much enraptured with the beautiful scenery, the colours, flowers, trees, bridges, birds, deer, apes, blue lions, white elephants, etc., all of which seemed to make earth surpass Heaven in loveliness.

  

He receives the List of Immortals

From the Unicorn Precipice he went on to the Jade Palace of Abstraction. Here he was presented to Yuan-shih. From him he received the List of Promotions to Immortals, which Nan-chi Hsien-weng, 'Ancient Immortal of the South Pole,' had brought, and was told to go and erect a Feng Shen T'ai (Spirits' Promotion Terrace) [p. 155] on which to exhibit it. Yuan-shih also warned him that if anyone called him while he was on the way he was to be most careful not to answer. On reaching the Unicorn Precipice on his way back, he heard some one call: "Chiang Tzu-ya!" This happened three times without his paying any heed. Then the voice was heard to say: "Now that you are Prime Minister, how devoid of feeling and forgetful of bygone benefits you must be not to remember one who studied with you in the Jade Palace of Abstraction!" Tzu-ya could not but turn his head and look. He then saw that it was Shen Kung-pao. He said: "Brother, I did not know it was you who were calling me, and I did not heed you as Shih-tsun told me on no account to reply." Shen Kung-pao said: "What is that you hold in your hand?" He told him it was the List of Promotions to Immortals. Shen Kung-pao then tried to entice Tzu-ya from his allegiance to Chou. Among Shen's tactics was that of convincing Tzu-ya of the superiority of the magical arts at the disposal of the supporters of Chou Wang. "You," he said, "can drain the sea, change the hills, and suchlike things, but what are those compared with my powers, who can take off my head, make it mount into space, travel 10,000,000 li, and return to my neck just as complete as before and able to speak? Burn your List of Promotions to Immortals and come with me." Tzu-ya, thinking that a head which could travel 10,000,000 li and be the same as before was exceedingly rare, said: "Brother, you take your head off, and if in reality it can do as you say, rise into space and return and be as before, I shall be willing to burn the List of Promotions to Immortals and return with you to Chao Ko." Shen Kung-pao said: "You will not go back on your word?" [p. 156] Tzu-ya said: "When your elder brother has spoken his word is as unchangeable as Mount T'ai, How can there be any going back on my word?"

  

The Soaring Head

Shen Kung-pao then doffed his Taoist cap, seized his sword, with his left hand firmly grasped the blue thread binding his hair, and with his right cut off his head. His body did not fall down. He then took his head and threw it up into space. Tzu-ya gazed with upturned face as it continued to rise, and was sorely puzzled. But the Ancient Immortal of the South Pole had kept a watch on the proceedings. He said: "Tzu-ya is a loyal and honest man; it looks as if he has been deceived by this charlatan." He ordered White Crane Youth to assume quickly the form of a crane and fetch Shen Kung-pao's head.

  

The Ancient Immortal saves the Situation

Tzu-ya was still gazing upward when he felt a slap on his back and, turning round, saw that it was the Ancient Immortal of the South Pole. Tzu-ya quickly asked: "My elder brother, why have you returned?" Hsien-weng said: "You are a fool. Shen Kung-pao is a man of unholy practices. These few small tricks of his you take as realities. But if the head does not return to the neck within an hour and three-quarters the blood will coagulate and he will die. Shih-tsun ordered you not to reply to anyone; why did you not hearken to his words? From the Jade Palace of Abstraction I saw you speaking together, and knew you had promised to burn the List of Promotions to Immortals. So I ordered White Crane Youth to bring me the head. After an hour and three-quarters Shen Kung-pao will be recompensed."

Click to enlarge
Chiang Tzu-ya at K'un-lun

[p. 157]

Tzu-ya said: "My elder brother, since you know all you can pardon him. In the Taoist heart there is no place where mercy cannot be exercised. Remember the many years during which he has faithfully followed the Path."

Eventually the Ancient Immortal was persuaded, but in the meantime Shen Kung-pao, finding that his head did not return, became very much troubled in mind. In an hour and three-quarters the blood would stop flowing and he would die. However, Tzu-ya having succeeded in his intercession with the Ancient Immortal, the latter signed to White Crane Youth, who was flying in space with the head in his beak, to let it drop. He did so, but when it reached the neck it was facing backward. Shen Kung-pao quickly put up his hand, took hold of an ear, and turned his head the right way round. He was then able to open his eyes, when he saw the Ancient Immortal of the South Pole. The latter arraigned him in a loud voice saying: "You as-good-as-dead charlatan, who by means of corrupt tricks try to deceive Tzu-ya and make him burn the List of Immortals and help Chou Wang against Chou, what do you mean by all this? You should be taken to the Jade Palace of Abstraction to be punished!"

Shen Kung-pao, ashamed, could not reply; mounting his tiger, he made off; but as he left he hurled back a threat that the Chou would yet have their white bones piled mountains high at Hsi Ch'i. Subsequently Tzu-ya, carefully preserving the precious List, after many adventures succeeded in building the Feng Shen T'ai, and posted the List up on it. Having accomplished his mission, he returned in time to resist the capture of Hsi Ch'i by Chang Kuei-fang, whose troops were defeated with great slaughter. [p. 158]

  

Ch'iung Hsiao's Magic Scissors

In another of the many conflicts between the two rival states Lao Tzu entered the battle, whereupon Ch'iung Hsiao, a goddess who fought for the house of Shang (Chou), hurled into the air her gold scaly-dragon scissors. As these slowly descended, opening and closing in a most ominous manner, Lao Tzu waved the sleeve of his jacket and they fell into the sea and became absolutely motionless. Many similar tricks were used by the various contestants. The Gold Bushel of Chaotic Origin succumbed to the Wind-fire Sphere, and so on. Ch'iung Hsiao resumed the attack with some magic two-edged swords, but was killed by a blow from White Crane Youth's Three-precious Jade Sceptre, hurled at her by Lao Tzu's orders. Pi Hsiao, her sister, attempted to avenge her death, but Yuan-shih, producing from his sleeve a magical box, threw it into the air and caught Pi Hsiao in it. When it was opened it was found that she had melted into blood and water.

  

Chiang Tzu-ya defeats Wen Chung

After this Lao Tzu rallied many of the skilful spirits to help Chiang Tzu-ya in his battle with Wen Chung, providing them with the Ancient Immortal of the South Pole's Sand-blaster and an earth-conquering light which enabled them to travel a thousand li in a day. From the hot sand used the contest became known as the Red Sand Battle. Jan Teng, on P'eng-lai Mountain, in consultation with Tzu-ya, also arranged the plan of battle.

  

The Red Sand Battle

The fight began with a challenge from the Ancient Immortal of the South Pole to Chang Shao. The latter, [p. 159] riding his deer, dashed into the fray, and aimed a terrific blow with his sword at Hsien-weng's head, but White Crane Youth warded it off with his Three-precious Jade Sceptre. Chang then produced a two-edged sword and renewed the attack, but, being disarmed, dismounted from his deer and threw several handfuls of hot sand at Hsien-weng. The latter, however, easily fanned them away with his Five-fire Seven-feathers Fan, rendering them harmless. Chang then fetched a whole bushel of the hot sand and scattered it over the enemy, but Hsien-weng counteracted the menace by merely waving his fan. White Crane Youth struck Chang Shao with his jade sceptre, knocking him off his horse, and then dispatched him with his two-edged sword.

After this battle Wu Wang was found to be already dead. Jan Teng on learning this ordered Lei Chen-tzu to take the corpse to Mount P'eng and wash it. He then dissolved a pill in water and poured the solution into Wu Wang's mouth, whereupon he revived and was escorted back to his palace.

  

Further Fighting

Preparations were then made for resuming the attack on Wen Chung. While the latter was consulting with Ts'ai-yun Hsien-tzu and Han Chih-hsien, he heard the sound of the Chou guns and the thunder of their troops. Wen Chung, mounting his black unicorn, galloped like a whiff of smoke to meet Tzu-ya, but was stopped by blows from two silver hammers wielded by Huang T'ien-hua. Han Chih-hsien came to Wen's aid, but was opposed by Pi Hsiang-yang. Ts'ai-yun Hsien-tzu dashed into the fray, but No-cha stepped on to his Wind-fire Wheel and opposed him. From all sides other Immortals joined in [p. 160] the terrific battle, which was a turmoil of longbows and crossbows, iron armour and brass mail, striking whips and falling hammers, weapons cleaving mail and mail resisting weapons. In this fierce contest, while Tzu-ya was fighting Wen Chung, Han Chih-hsien released a black wind from his magic wind-bag, but he did not know that the Taoist Barge of Mercy (which transports departed souls to the land of bliss), sent by Kuan Yin, the Goddess of Mercy, had on board the Stop-wind Pearl, by which the black storm was immediately quelled. Thereupon Tzu-ya quickly seized his Vanquish-spirits Whip and struck Han Chih-hsien in the middle of the skull, so that the brain-fluid gushed forth and he died. No-cha then slew Ts'ai-yun Hsien-tzu with a spear-thrust.

Thus the stern fight went on, until finally Tzu-ya, under cover of night, attacked Wen Chung's troops simultaneously on all four sides. The noise of slaughter filled the air. Generals and rank and file, lanterns, torches, swords, spears, guns, and daggers were one confused melee; Heaven could scarcely be distinguished from earth, and corpses were piled mountains high.

Click to enlarge
Chiang Tzu-ya Defeats Wen Chung

Tzu-ya, having broken through seven lines of the enemy's ranks, forced his way into Wen Chung's camp. The latter mounted his unicorn, and brandishing his magic whip dashed to meet him. Tzu-ya drew his sword and stopped his onrush, being aided by Lung Hsu-hu, who repeatedly cast a rain of hot stones on to the troops. In the midst of the fight Tzu-ya brought out his great magic whip, and in spite of Wen Chung's efforts to avoid it succeeded in wounding him in the left arm. The Chou troops were fighting like dragons lashing their tails and pythons curling their bodies. To add to their [p. 161] disasters, the Chou now saw flames rising behind the camp, and knew that their provisions were being burned by Yang Chien.

The Chou armies, with gongs beating and drums rolling, advanced for a final effort, the slaughter being so great that even the devils wept and the spirits wailed. Wen Chung was eventually driven back seventy li to Ch'i Hill. His troops could do nothing but sigh and stumble along. He made for Peach-blossom Range, but as he approached it he saw a yellow banner hoisted, and under it was Kuang Ch'eng-tzu. Being prevented from escaping in that direction he joined battle, but by use of red-hot sand, his two-edged sword, and his Turn-heaven Seal Kuang Ch'eng-tzu put him to flight. He then made off toward the west, followed by Teng Chung. His design was to make for Swallow Hill, which he reached after several days of weary marching. Here he saw another yellow banner flying, and Ch'ih Ching-tzu informed him that Jan Teng had forbidden him to stop at Swallow Hill or to go through the Five Passes. This led to another pitched battle, Wen Chung using his magic whip and Ch'ih his spiritual two-edged sword. After several bouts Ch'ih brought out his yin-yang mirror, by use of which irresistible weapon Wen was driven to Yellow Flower Hill and Blue Dragon Pass, and so on from battle to battle, until he was drawn up to Heaven from the top of Dead-dragon Mountain.

  

Thousand-li Eye and Favourable-wind Ear

Ch'ien-li Yen, 'Thousand-li Eye,' and Shun-feng Erh, 'Favourable-wind Ear,' were two brothers named Kao Ming and Kao Chio. On account of their martial bearing they found favour with the tyrant emperor Chou Wang, [p. 162] who appointed them generals, and sent them to serve with Generalissimo Yuan Hung (who was a monkey which had taken human form) at Meng-ching.

Kao Ming was very tall, with a blue face, flaming eyes, a large mouth, and prominent teeth like those of a rhinoceros.

Kao Chio had a greenish face and skin, two horns on his head, a red beard, and a large mouth with teeth shaped like swords.

One of their first encounters was with No-cha, who hurled at them his mystic bracelet, which struck Kao Chio on the head, but did not leave even a scratch. When, however, he seized his fire-globe the brothers thought it wiser to retreat.

Finding no means of conquering them, Yang Chien, Chiang Tzu-ya, and Li Ching took counsel together and decided to have recourse to Fu Hsi's trigrams, and by smearing them with the blood of a fowl and a dog to destroy their spiritual power.

But the two brothers were fully informed of what was designed. Thousand-li Eye had seen and Favourable-wind Ear had heard everything, so that all their preparations proved unavailing.

Yang Chien then went to Chiang Tzu-ya and said to him: "These two brothers are powerful devils; I must take more effectual measures." "Where will you go for aid?" asked Chiang Tzu-ya. "I cannot tell you, for they would hear," replied Yang. He then left. Favourable-wind Ear heard this dialogue, and Thousand-li Eye saw him leave. "He did not say where he was going," they said to each other, "but we fear him not." Yang Chien went to Yu-ch'uan Shan, where lived Yu-ting Chen-jen, 'Hero Jade-tripod.' He told him about their two adversaries, and asked him how they were to conquer [p. 163] them. "These two genii," replied the Chen-jen, "are from Ch'i-p'an Shan, Chessboard Mountain. One is a spiritual peach-tree, the other a spiritual pomegranate-tree. Their roots cover an area of thirty square li of ground. On that mountain there is a temple dedicated to Huang-ti, in which are clay images of two devils called Ch'ien-li Yen and Shun-feng Erh. The peach-tree and pomegranate-tree, having become spiritual beings, have taken up their abode in these images. One has eyes which can see objects distinctly at a distance of a thousand li, the other ears that can hear sounds at a like distance. But beyond that distance they can neither see nor hear. Return and tell Chiang Tzu-ya to have the roots of those trees torn up and burned, and the images destroyed; then the two genii will be easily vanquished. In order that they may neither see nor hear you during your conversation with Chiang Tzu-ya, wave flags about the camp and order the soldiers to beat tom-toms and drums."

  

How the Brothers were Defeated

Yang Chien returned to Chiang Tzu-ya. "What have you been doing?" asked the latter. Before replying Yang Chien went to the camp and ordered soldiers to wave large red flags and a thousand others to beat the tom-toms and drums. The air was so filled with the flags and the noise that nothing else could be either seen or heard. Under cover of this device Yang Chien then communicated to Chiang Tzu-ya the course advised by the Chen-jen.

Accordingly Li Ching at the head of three thousand soldiers proceeded to Ch'i-p'an Shan, pulled up and burned the roots of the two trees, and broke the images to [p. 164] pieces. At the same time Lei Chen-tzu was ordered to attack the two genii.

Thousand-li Eye and Favourable-wind Ear could neither see nor hear: the flags effectually screened the horizon and the infernal noise of the drums and gongs deadened all other sound. They did not know how to stop them.

The following night Yuan Hung decided to take the camp of Chiang Tzu-ya by assault, and sent the brothers in advance. They were, however, themselves surprised by Wu Wang's officers, who surrounded them. Chiang Tzu-ya then threw into the air his 'devil-chaser' whip, which fell on the two scouts and cleft their skulls in twain.

  

Celestial Ministries

The dualistic idea, already referred to, of the Otherworld being a replica of this one is nowhere more clearly illustrated than in the celestial Ministries or official Bureaux or Boards, with their chiefs and staffs functioning over the spiritual hierarchies. The Nine Ministries up aloft doubtless had their origin in imitation of the Six, Eight, or Nine Ministries or Boards which at various periods of history have formed the executive part of the official hierarchy in China. But their names are different and their functions do not coincide.

Generally, the functions of the officers of the celestial Boards are to protect mankind from the evils represented in the title of the Board, as, for example, thunder, smallpox, fire, etc. In all cases the duties seem to be remedial. As the God of War was, as we saw, the god who protects people from the evils of war, so the vast hierarchy of these various divinities is conceived as functioning for the good of mankind. Being too numerous for inclusion [p. 165] here, an account of them is given under various headings in some of the following chapters.

  

Protectors of the People

Besides the gods who hold definite official posts in these various Ministries, there are a very large number who are also protecting patrons of the people; and, though ex officio, in many cases quite as popular and powerful, if not more so. Among the most important are the following: She-chi, Gods of the Soil and Crops; Shen Nung, God of Agriculture; Hou-t'u, Earth-mother; Ch'eng-huang, City-god; T'u-ti, Local Gods; Tsao Chun, Kitchen-god; T'ien-hou and An-kung, Goddess and God of Sailors; Ts'an Nu, Goddess of Silkworms; Pa-ch'a, God of Grasshoppers; Fu Shen, Ts'ai Shen, and Shou Hsing, Gods of Happiness, Wealth, and Longevity; Men Shen, Door-gods; and She-mo Wang, etc., the Gods of Serpents.

  

The Ch'eng-huang

Ch'eng-huang is the Celestial Mandarin or City-god. Every fortified city or town in China is surrounded by a wall, ch'eng, composed usually of two battlemented walls, the space between which is filled with earth. This earth is dug from the ground outside, making a ditch, or huang, running parallel with the ch'eng. The Ch'eng-huang is the spiritual official of the city or town. All the numerous Ch'eng-huang constitute a celestial Ministry of Justice, presided over by a Ch'eng-huang-in-chief.

The origin of the worship of the Ch'eng-huang dates back to the time of the great Emperor Yao (2357 B.C.), who instituted a sacrifice called Pa Cha in honour of eight spirits, of whom the seventh, Shui Yung, had the [p. 166] meaning of, or corresponded to, the dyke and rampart known later as Ch'eng-huang. Since the Sung dynasty sacrifices have been offered to the Ch'eng-huang all over the country, though now and then some towns have adopted another or special god as their Ch'eng-huang, such as Chou Hsin, adopted as the Ch'eng-huang of Hangchou, the capital of Chekiang Province. Concerning Chou Hsin, who had a "face of ice and iron," and was so much dreaded for his severity that old and young fled at his approach, it is related that once when he was trying a case a storm blew some leaves on to his table. In spite of diligent search the tree to which this kind of leaf belonged could not be found anywhere in the neighbourhood, but was eventually discovered in a Buddhist temple a long way off. The judge declared that the priests of this temple must be guilty of murder. By his order the tree was felled, and in its trunk was found the body of a woman who had been assassinated, and the priests were convicted of the murder.

  

The Kitchen-god

Tsao Chun is a Taoist invention, but is universally worshipped by all families in China--about sixty millions of pictures of him are regularly worshipped twice a month--at new and full moon. "His temple is a little niche in the brick cooking-range; his palace is often filled with smoke; and his Majesty sells for one farthing." He is also called 'the God of the Stove.' The origin of his worship, according to the legend, is that a Taoist priest, Li Shao-chun by name, of the Ch'i State, obtained from the Kitchen-god the double favour of exemption from growing old and of being able to live without eating. He then went to the Emperor Hsiao Wu-ti (140-86 B.C.) [p. 167] of the Han dynasty, and promised that credulous monarch that he should benefit by the powers of the god provided that he would consent to patronize and encourage his religion. It was by this means, he added, that the Emperor Huang Ti obtained his knowledge of alchemy, which enabled him to make gold.

Click to enlarge
The Kitchen-god

The Emperor asked the priest to bring him his divine patron, and one night the image of Tsao Chun appeared to him.

Deceived by this trick, dazzled by the ingots of gold which he too should obtain, and determined to risk everything for the pill of immortality which was among the benefits promised, the Emperor made a solemn sacrifice to the God of the Kitchen.

This was the first time that a sacrifice had been officially offered to this new deity.

Li Shao-chun gradually lost the confidence of the Emperor and, at his wits' end, conceived the plan of writing some phrases on a piece of silk and then causing them to be swallowed by an ox. This done, he announced that a wonderful script would be found in the animal's stomach. The ox being killed, the script was found there as predicted, but Li's unlucky star decreed that the Emperor should recognize his handwriting, and he was forthwith put to death. Nevertheless, the worship of the Kitchen-god continued and increased, and exists in full vigour down to the present day.

This deity has power over the lives of the members of each family under his supervision, distributes riches and poverty at will, and makes an annual report to the Supreme Being on the conduct of the family during the year, for which purpose he is usually absent for from four to seven days. Some hold that he also makes [p. 168] these reports once or twice or several times each month. Various ceremonies are performed on seeing him off to Heaven and welcoming him back. One of the former, as we saw, is to regale him with honey, so that only sweet words, if any, may be spoken by him while up aloft!

  

Ts'an Nu

In the kingdom of Shu (modern Ssuch'uan), in the time of Kao Hsing Ti, a band of robbers kidnapped the father of Ts'an Nu. A whole year elapsed, and the father's horse still remained in the stable as he had left it. The thought of not seeing her father again caused Ts'an Nu such grief that she would take no nourishment. Her mother did what she could to console her, and further promised her in marriage to anyone who would bring back her father. But no one was found who could do this. Hearing the offer, the horse stamped with impatience, and struggled so much that at length he broke the halter by which he was tied up. He then galloped away and disappeared. Several days later, his owner returned riding the horse. From that time the horse neighed incessantly, and refused all food. This caused the mother to make known to her husband the promise she had made concerning her daughter. "An oath made to men," he replied, "does not hold good for a horse. Is a human being meant to live in marital relations with a horse?" Nevertheless, however good and abundant food they offered him, the horse would not eat. When he saw the young lady he plunged and kicked furiously. Losing his temper, the father discharged an arrow and killed him on the spot; then he skinned him and spread the skin on the ground outside the house to dry. As the young lady was passing the [p. 169] spot the skin suddenly moved, rose up, enveloped her, and disappeared into space. Ten days later it was found at the foot of a mulberry-tree; Ts'an Nu changed into a silkworm, was eating the mulberry-leaves, and spinning for herself a silken garment.

The parents of course were in despair. But one day, while they were overwhelmed with sad thoughts, they saw on a cloud Ts'an Nu riding the horse and attended by several dozens of servants. She descended toward her parents, and said to them: "The Supreme Being, as a reward for my martyrdom in the cause of filial piety and my love of virtue, has conferred on me the dignity of Concubine of the Nine Palaces. Be reassured as to my fate, for in Heaven I shall live for ever." Having said this she disappeared into space.

In the temples her image is to be seen covered with a horse's skin. She is called Ma-t'ou Niang, 'the Lady with the Horse's Head,' and is prayed to for the prosperity of mulberry-trees and silkworms. The worship continues even in modern times. The goddess is also represented as a stellar divinity, the star T'ien Ssu; as the first man who reared silkworms, in this character bearing the same name as the God of Agriculture, Pasture, and Fire; and as the wife of the Emperor Huang Ti.

  

The God of Happiness

The God of Happiness, Fu Shen, owes his origin to the predilection of the Emperor Wu Ti (A.D. 502-50) of the Liang dynasty for dwarfs as servants and comedians in his palace. The number levied from the Tao Chou district in Hunan became greater and greater, until it seriously prejudiced the ties of family relations. When Yang Ch'eng, alias Yang Hsi-chi, was Criminal Judge of [p. 170] Tao Chou he represented to the Emperor that, according to law, the dwarfs were his subjects but not his slaves. Being touched by this remark, the Emperor ordered the levy to be stopped.

Overjoyed at their liberation from this hardship, the people of that district set up images of Yang and offered sacrifices to him. Everywhere he was venerated as the Spirit of Happiness. It was in this simple way that there came into being a god whose portraits and images abound everywhere throughout the country, and who is worshipped almost as universally as the God of Riches himself.

Another person who attained to the dignity of God of Happiness (known as Tseng-fu Hsiang-kung, 'the Young Gentleman who Increases Happiness') was Li Kuei-tsu, the minister of Emperor Wen Ti of the Wei dynasty, the son of the famous Ts'ao Ts'ao, but in modern times the honour seems to have passed to Kuo Tzu-i. He was the saviour of the T'ang dynasty from the depredations of the Turfans in the reign of the Emperor Hsuan Tsung. He lived A.D. 697-781, was a native of Hua Chou, in Shensi, and one of the most illustrious of Chinese generals. He is very often represented in pictures clothed in blue official robes, leading his small son Kuo Ai to Court.

  

The God of Wealth

As with many other Chinese gods, the proto-being of the God of Wealth, Ts'ai Shen, has been ascribed to several persons. The original and best known until later times was Chao Kung-ming. The accounts of him differ also, but the following is the most popular.

Click to enlarge
The Gods of Happiness, Office, and Longevity

When Chiang Tzu-ya was fighting for Wu Wang of the Chou dynasty against the last of the Shang emperors, [p. 171] Chao Kung-ming, then a hermit on Mount O-mei, took the part of the latter. He performed many wonderful feats. He could ride a black tiger and hurl pearls which burst like bombshells. But he was eventually overcome by the form of witchcraft known in Wales as Ciurp Creadh. Chiang Tzu-ya made a straw image of him, wrote his name on it, burned incense and worshipped before it for twenty days, and on the twenty-first shot arrows made of peach-wood into its eyes and heart. At that same moment Kung-ming, then in the enemy's camp, felt ill and fainted, and uttering a cry gave up the ghost.

Later on Chiang Tzu-ya persuaded Yuan-shih T'ien-tsun to release from the Otherworld the spirits of the heroes who had died in battle, and when Chao Kung-ming was led into his presence he praised his bravery, deplored the circumstances of his death, and canonized him as President of the Ministry of Riches and Prosperity.

The God of Riches is universally worshipped in China; images and portraits of him are to be seen everywhere. Talismans, trees of which the branches are strings of cash, and the fruits ingots of gold, to be obtained merely by shaking them down, a magic inexhaustible casket full of gold and silver--these and other spiritual sources of wealth are associated with this much-adored deity. He himself is represented in the guise of a visitor accompanied by a crowd of attendants laden with all the treasures that the hearts of men, women, and children could desire.

  

The God of Longevity

The God of Longevity, Shou Hsing, was first a stellar deity, later on represented in human form. It was a constellation formed of the two star-groups Chio and K'ang, the first two on the list of twenty-eight [p. 172] constellations. Hence, say the Chinese writers, because of this precedence, it was called the Star of Longevity. When it appears the nation enjoys peace, when it disappears there will be war. Ch'in Shih Huang-ti, the First Emperor, was the first to offer sacrifices to this star, the Old Man of the South Pole, at She Po, in 246 B.C. Since then the worship has been continued pretty regularly until modern times.

But desire for something more concrete, or at least more personal, than a star led to the god's being represented as an old man. Connected with this is a long legend which turns on the point that after the father of Chao Yen had been told by the celebrated physiognomist Kuan Lo that his son would not live beyond the age of nineteen, the transposition from shih-chiu, nineteen, to chiu-shih, ninety, was made by one of two gamblers, who turned out to be the Spirit of the North Pole, who fixes the time of decease, as the Spirit of the South Pole does that of birth.

The deity is a domestic god, of happy mien, with a very high forehead, usually spoken of as Shou Hsing Lao T'ou Tzu, 'Longevity Star Old-pate,' and is represented as riding a stag, with a flying bat above his head. He holds in his hand a large peach, and attached to his long staff are a gourd and a scroll. The stag and the bat both indicate fu, happiness. The peach, gourd, and scroll are symbols of longevity.

  

The Door-gods

An old legend relates that in the earliest times there grew on Mount Tu Shuo, in the Eastern Sea, a peach-tree of fabulous size whose branches covered an area of several thousand square li. The lowest branches, which inclined [p. 173] toward the north-east, formed the Door of the Devils (kuei), through which millions of them passed in and out. Two spirits, named Shen Shu (or Shu Yu) and Yu Lu, had been instructed to guard this passage. Those who had done wrong to mankind were immediately bound by them and given over to be devoured by tigers. When Huang Ti heard of this he had the portraits of the two spirits painted on peach-wood tablets and hung above the doors to keep off evil spirits. This led to the suspension of the small figures or plaques on the doors of the people generally. Gradually they were supplanted by paintings on paper pasted on the doors, showing the two spirits armed with bows, arrows, spears, etc., Shen Shu on the left, Yu Lu on the right.

Click to enlarge
The Money-tree

In later times, however, these Door-gods were supplanted in popular favour by two ministers of the Emperor T'ai Tsung of the T'ang dynasty, by name Ch'in Shu-pao and Hu Ching-te. T'ai Tsung had fallen sick, and imagined that he heard demons rampaging in his bedroom. The ministers of State, on inquiring as to the nature of the malady, were informed by the physician that his Majesty's pulse was feverish, that he seemed nervous and saw visions, and that his life was in danger.

The ministers were in great fear. The Empress summoned other physicians to a consultation, and after the sick Emperor had informed them that, though all was quiet during the daytime, he was sure he saw and heard demons during the night, Ch'in Shu-pao and Hu Ching-te stated that they would sit up all night and watch outside his door.

Accordingly they posted themselves, fully armed, outside the palace gate all night, and the Emperor slept in peace. Next day the Emperor thanked them heartily, [p. 174] and from that time his sickness diminished. The two ministers, however, continued their vigils until the Emperor informed them that he would no longer impose upon their readiness to sacrifice themselves. He ordered them to paint their portraits in full martial array and paste these on the palace doors to see if that would not have the same effect. For some nights all was peace; then the same commotion was heard at the back gates of the palace. The minister Wei Cheng offered to stand guard at the back gates in the same way that his colleagues had done at the front gates. The result was that in a few days the Emperor's health was entirely restored.

Thus it is that Wei Cheng is often associated with the other two Door-gods, sometimes with them, sometimes in place of them. Pictures of these men shen, elaborately coloured, and renewed at the New Year, are to be seen on almost every door in China.

Click to enlarge
The Door-gods, Civil and Military

Click to enlarge
The Door-gods, Civil and Military

  

Chinese Polytheism

That the names of the gods of China are legion will be readily conceded when it is said that, besides those already described, those still to be mentioned, and many others to whom space will not permit us to refer, there are also gods, goddesses, patrons, etc., of wind, rain, snow, frost, rivers, tides, caves, trees, flowers, theatres, horses, oxen, cows, sheep, goats, dogs, pigs, scorpions, locusts, gold, tea, salt, compass, archery, bridges, lamps, gems, wells, carpenters, masons, barbers, tailors, jugglers, nets, wine, bean-curd, jade, paper-clothing, eye, ear, nose, tongue, teeth, heart, liver, throat, hands, feet, skin, architecture, rain-clothes, monkeys, lice, Punch and Judy, fire-crackers, cruelty, revenge, manure, fornication, shadows, corners, [p. 175] gamblers, oculists, smallpox, liver complaint, stomach-ache, measles, luck, womb, midwives, hasteners of child-birth, brigands, butchers, furnishers, centipedes, frogs, stones, beds, candle-merchants, fishermen, millers, wig-merchants, incense-merchants, spectacle-makers, cobblers, harness-makers, seedsmen, innkeepers, basket-makers, chemists, painters, perfumers, jewellers, brush-makers, dyers, fortune-tellers, strolling singers, brothels, varnishers, combs, etc., etc. There is a god of the light of the eye as well as of the eye itself, of smallpox-marks as well as of smallpox, of 'benign' measles as well as of measles. After reading a full list of the gods of China, those who insist that the religion of China was or is a monotheism may be disposed to revise their belief.

Footnotes

^175:1 See the present writer's China of the Chinese, chapter viii.

^175:2 See Du Bose, pp. 282, 286, 361, 409, 410, and Journal of the North China Branch of the Royal Asiatic Society, xxxiv, 110-111.

^175:3 Du Bose, p. 38.

^175:4 He is sometimes represented as a reincarnation of Wen Chung; see <page 198>.

^175:5 It is necessary to reproduce the written characters concerned with these stars, namely: .

^175:6 See footnote, <page 107>.

^175:7 Religion, p. 177.

^175:8 See Myths of the Hindus and Buddhists, by Sister Nivedita and Ananda Coomaraswamy.

^175:9 The native accounts differ on this point. Cf. <page 16>.

^175:10 For further details concerning T'ai I see Babylonian and Oriental Record, vi, 145-150.

^175:11 Cf. Chapter I.

Myths and Legends of China, by Edward T.C. Werner, [1922], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 176]

  

Chapter V

  

Myths of the Stars

  

Astrological Superstitions

According to Chinese ideas, the sun, moon, and planets influence sublunary events, especially the life and death of human beings, and changes in their colour menace approaching calamities. Alterations in the appearance of the sun announce misfortunes to the State or its head, as revolts, famines, or the death of the emperor; when the moon waxes red, or turns pale, men should be in awe of the unlucky times thus fore-omened.

The sun is symbolized by the figure of a raven in a circle, and the moon by a hare on its hind-legs pounding rice in a mortar, or by a three-legged toad. The last refers to the legend of Ch'ang O, detailed later. The moon is a special object of worship in autumn, and moon-cakes dedicated to it are sold at this season. All the stars are ranged into constellations, and an emperor is installed over them, who resides at the North Pole; five monarchs also live in the five stars in Leo, where is a palace called Wu Ti Tso, or 'Throne of the Five Emperors.' In this celestial government there are also an heir-apparent, empresses, sons and daughters, and tribunals, and the constellations receive the names of men, animals, and other terrestrial objects. The Great Bear, or Dipper, is worshipped as the residence of the Fates, where the duration of life and other events relating to mankind are measured and meted out. Fears are excited by unusual phenomena among the heavenly bodies.

Both the sun and the moon are worshipped by the [p. 177] Government in appropriate temples on the east and west sides of Peking.

  

Various Star-gods

Some of the star-gods, such as the God of Literature, the Goddess of the North Star, the Gods of Happiness, Longevity, etc., are noticed in other parts of this work. The cycle-gods are also star-gods. There are sixty years in a cycle, and over each of these presides a special star-deity. The one worshipped is the one which gave light on the birthday of the worshipper, and therefore the latter burns candles before that particular image on each succeeding anniversary. These cycle-gods are represented by most grotesque images: "white, black, yellow, and red; ferocious gods with vindictive eyeballs popping out, and gentle faces as expressive as a lump of putty; some looking like men and some like women." In one temple one of the sixty was in the form of a hog, and another in that of a goose. "Here is an image with arms protruding out of his eye-sockets, and eyes in the palms of his hands, looking downward to see the secret things within the earth. See that rabbit, Minerva-like, jumping from the divine head; again a mud-rat emerges from his occipital hiding-place, and lo! a snake comes coiling from the brain of another god--so the long line serves as models for an artist who desires to study the fantastic."

  

Shooting the Heavenly Dog

In the family sleeping-apartments in Chinese houses hang pictures of Chang Hsien, a white-faced, long-bearded man with a little boy by his side, and in his hand a bow and arrow, with which he is shooting the Heavenly [p. 178] Dog. The dog is the Dog-star, and if the 'fate' of the family is under this star there will be no son, or the child will be short-lived. Chang Hsien is the patron of child-bearing women, and was worshipped under the Sung dynasty by women desirous of offspring. The introduction of this name into the Chinese pantheon is due to an incident in the history of Hua-jui Fu-jen, a name given to Lady Fei, concubine of Meng Ch'ang, the last ruler of the Later Shu State, A.D. 935-964. When she was brought from Shu to grace the harem of the founder of the Sung dynasty, in A.D. 960, she is said to have preserved secretly the portrait of her former lord, the Prince of Shu, whose memory she passionately cherished. Jealously questioned by her new consort respecting her devotion to this picture, she declared it to be the representation of Chang Hsien, the divine being worshipped by women desirous of offspring. Opinions differ as to the origin of the worship. One account says that the Emperor Jen Tsung, of the Sung dynasty, saw in a dream a beautiful young man with white skin and black hair, carrying a bow in his hand. He said to the Emperor: "The star T'ien Kou, Heavenly Dog, in the heavens is hiding the sun and moon, and on earth devouring small children. It is only my presence which keeps him at bay."

On waking, the Emperor at once ordered the young man's portrait to be painted and exhibited, and from that time childless families would write the name Chang Hsien on tablets and worship them.

Another account describes Chang Hsien as the spirit of the star Chang. In the popular representations Chang Hsien is seen in the form of a distinguished personage drawing a bow. The spirit of the star Chang [p. 179] is supposed to preside over the kitchen of Heaven and to arrange the banquets given by the gods.

  

The Sun-king

The worship of the sun is part of the State religion, and the officials make their offerings to the sun-tablet. The moon also is worshipped. At the harvest moon, the full moon of the eighth month, the Chinese bow before the heavenly luminary, and each family burns incense as an offering. Thus "100,000 classes all receive the blessings of the icy-wheel in the Milky Way along the heavenly street, a mirror always bright." In Chinese illustrations we see the moon-palace of Ch'ang O, who stole the pill of immortality and flew to the moon, the fragrant tree which one of the genii tried to cut down, and a hare pestling medicine in a mortar. This refers to the following legend.

The sun and the moon are both included by the Chinese among the stars, the spirit of the former being called T'ai-yang Ti-chun, 'the Sun-king,' or Jih-kung Ch'ih-chiang, 'Ch'ih-chiang of the Solar Palace,' that of the latter T'ai-yin Huang-chun, 'the Moon-queen,' or Yueh-fu Ch'ang O, 'Ch'ang O of the Lunar Palace.'

Ch'ih-chiang Tzu-yu lived in the reign of Hsien-yuan Huang-ti, who appointed him Director of Construction and Furnishing.

When Hsien-yuan went on his visit to O-mei Shan, a mountain in Ssuch'uan, Ch'ih-chiang Tzu-yu obtained permission to accompany him. Their object was to be initiated into the doctrine of immortality.

The Emperor was instructed in the secrets of the doctrine by T'ai-i Huang-jen, the spirit of this famous mountain, who, when he was about to take his departure, [p. 180] begged him to allow Ch'ih-chiang Tzu-yu to remain with him. The new hermit went out every day to gather the flowering plants which formed the only food of his master, T'ai-i Huang-jen, and he also took to eating these flowers, so that his body gradually became spiritualized.

  

The Steep Summit

One day T'ai-i Huang-jen sent him to cut some bamboos on the summit of O-mei Shan, distant more than three hundred li from the place where they lived. When he reached the base of the summit, all of a sudden three giddy peaks confronted him, so dangerous that even the monkeys and other animals dared not attempt to scale them. But he took his courage in his hands, climbed the steep slope, and by sheer energy reached the summit. Having cut the bamboos, he tried to descend, but the rocks rose like a wall in sharp points all round him, and he could not find a foothold anywhere. Then, though laden with the bamboos, he threw himself into the air, and was borne on the wings of the wind. He came to earth safe and sound at the foot of the mountain, and ran with the bamboos to his master. On account of this feat he was considered advanced enough to be admitted to instruction in the doctrine.

  

The Divine Archer

The Emperor Yao, in the twelfth year of his reign (2346 B.C.), one day, while walking in the streets of Huai-yang, met a man carrying a bow and arrows, the bow being bound round with a piece of red stuff. This was Ch'ih-chiang Tzu-yu. He told the Emperor he was a skilful archer and could fly in the air on the wings of [p. 181] the wind. Yao, to test his skill, ordered him to shoot one of his arrows at a pine-tree on the top of a neighbouring mountain. Ch'ih shot an arrow which transfixed the tree, and then jumped on to a current of air to go and fetch the arrow back. Because of this the Emperor named him Shen I, 'the Divine Archer,' attached him to his suite, and appointed him Chief Mechanician of all Works in Wood. He continued to live only on flowers.

  

Vanquishes the Wind-spirit

At this time terrible calamities began to lay waste the land. Ten suns appeared in the sky, the heat of which burnt up all the crops; dreadful storms uprooted trees and overturned houses; floods overspread the country. Near the Tung-t'ing Lake a serpent, a thousand feet long, devoured human beings, and wild boars of enormous size did great damage in the eastern part of the kingdom. Yao ordered Shen I to go and slay the devils and monsters who were causing all this mischief, placing three hundred men at his service for that purpose.

Shen I took up his post on Mount Ch'ing Ch'iu to study the cause of the devastating storms, and found that these tempests were released by Fei Lien, the Spirit of the Wind, who blew them out of a sack. As we shall see when considering the thunder myths, the ensuing conflict ended in Fei Lien suing for mercy and swearing friendship to his victor, whereupon the storms ceased.

  

Dispels the Nine False Suns

After this first victory Shen I led his troops to the banks of the Hsi Ho, West River, at Lin Shan. Here he discovered that on three neighbouring peaks nine [p. 182] extraordinary birds were blowing out fire and thus forming nine new suns in the sky. Shen I shot nine arrows in succession, pierced the birds, and immediately the nine false suns resolved themselves into red clouds and melted away. Shen I and his soldiers found the nine arrows stuck in nine red stones at the top of the mountain.

  

Marries the Sister of the Water-spirit

Shen I then led his soldiers to Kao-liang, where the river had risen and formed an immense torrent. He shot an arrow into the water, which thereupon withdrew to its source. In the flood he saw a man clothed in white, riding a white horse and accompanied by a dozen attendants. He quickly discharged an arrow, striking him in the left eye, and the horseman at once took to flight. He was accompanied by a young woman named Heng O  [*1], the younger sister of Ho Po, the Spirit of the Waters. Shen I shot an arrow into her hair. She turned and thanked him for sparing her life, adding: "I will agree to be your wife." After these events had been duly reported to the Emperor Yao, the wedding took place.

  

Slays Various Dangerous Creatures

Three months later Yao ordered Shen I to go and kill the great Tung-t'ing serpent. An arrow in the left eye laid him out stark and dead. The wild boars also were all caught in traps and slain. As a reward for these [p. 183] achievements Yao canonized Shen I with the title of Marquis Pacifier of the Country.

  

Builds a Palace for Chin Mu

About this time T'ai-wu Fu-jen, the third daughter of Hsi Wang Mu, had entered a nunnery on Nan-min Shan, to the north of Lo-fou Shan, where her mother's palace was situated. She mounted a dragon to visit her mother, and all along the course left a streak of light in her wake. One day the Emperor Yao, from the top of Ch'ing-yun Shan, saw this track of light, and asked Shen I the cause of this unusual phenomenon. The latter mounted the current of luminous air, and letting it carry him whither it listed, found himself on Lo-fou Shan, in front of the door of the mountain, which was guarded by a great spiritual monster. On seeing Shen I this creature called together a large number of phoenixes and other birds of gigantic size and set them at Shen I. One arrow, however, settled the matter. They all fled, the door opened, and a lady followed by ten attendants presented herself. She was no other than Chin Mu herself. Shen I, having saluted her and explained the object of his visit, was admitted to the goddess's palace, and royally entertained.

"I have heard," said Shen I to her, "that you possess the pills of immortality; I beg you to give me one or two." "You are a well-known architect," replied Chin Mu; "please build me a palace near this mountain." Together they went to inspect a celebrated site known as Pai-yu-kuei Shan, 'White Jade-tortoise Mountain,' and fixed upon it as the location of the new abode of the goddess. Shen I had all the spirits of the mountain to work for him. The walls were built of jade, sweet-smelling [p. 184] woods were used for the framework and wainscoting, the roof was of glass, the steps of agate. In a fortnight's time sixteen palace buildings stretched magnificently along the side of the mountain. Chin Mu gave to the architect a wonderful pill which would bestow upon him immortality as well as the faculty of being able at will to fly through the air. "But," she said, "it must not be eaten now: you must first go through a twelve months' preparatory course of exercise and diet, without which the pill will not have all the desired results." Shen I thanked the goddess, took leave of her, and, returning to the Emperor, related to him all that had happened.

  

Kills Chisel-tooth

On reaching home, the archer hid his precious pill under a rafter, lest anyone should steal it, and then began the preparatory course in immortality.

At this time there appeared in the south a strange man named Tso Ch'ih, 'Chisel-tooth.' He had round eyes and a long projecting tooth. He was a well-known criminal. Yao ordered Shen I and his small band of brave followers to deal with this new enemy. This extraordinary man lived in a cave, and when Shen I and his men arrived he emerged brandishing a padlock. Shen I broke his long tooth by shooting an arrow at it, and Tso Ch'ih fled, but was struck in the back and laid low by another arrow from Shen I. The victor took the broken tooth with him as a trophy.

  

Heng O flies to the Moon

Heng O, during her husband's absence, saw a white light which seemed to issue from a beam in the roof, while a most delicious odour filled every room. By the [p. 185] aid of a ladder she reached up to the spot whence the light came, found the pill of immortality, and ate it. She suddenly felt that she was freed from the operation of the laws of gravity and as if she had wings, and was just essaying her first flight when Shen I returned. He went to look for his pill, and, not finding it, asked Heng O what had happened.

Click to enlarge
Heng O Flies to the Moon

The young wife, seized with fear, opened the window and flew out. Shen I took his bow and pursued her. The moon was full, the night clear, and he saw his wife flying rapidly in front of him, only about the size of a toad. Just when he was redoubling his pace to catch her up a blast of wind struck him to the ground like a dead leaf.

Heng O continued her flight until she reached a luminous sphere, shining like glass, of enormous size, and very cold. The only vegetation consisted of cinnamon-trees. No living being was to be seen. All of a sudden she began to cough, and vomited the covering of the pill of immortality, which was changed into a rabbit as white as the purest jade. This was the ancestor of the spirituality of the yin, or female, principle. Heng O noticed a bitter taste in her mouth, drank some dew, and, feeling hungry, ate some cinnamon. She took up her abode in this sphere.

As to Shen I, he was carried by the hurricane up into a high mountain. Finding himself before the door of a palace, he was invited to enter, and found that it was the palace of Tung-hua Ti-chun, otherwise Tung Wang Kung, the husband of Hsi Wang Mu.

  

The Sun-palace and the Bird of Dawn

The God of the Immortals said to Shen I: "You must not be annoyed with Heng O. Everybody's fate is [p. 186] settled beforehand. Your labours are nearing an end, and you will become an Immortal. It was I who let loose the whirlwind that brought you here. Heng O, through having borrowed the forces which by right belong to you, is now an Immortal in the Palace of the Moon. As for you, you deserve much for having so bravely fought the nine false suns. As a reward you shall have the Palace of the Sun. Thus the yin and the yang will be united in marriage." This said, Tung-hua Ti-chun ordered his servants to bring a red Chinese sarsaparilla cake, with a lunar talisman.

"Eat this cake," he said; "it will protect you from the heat of the solar hearth. And by wearing this talisman you will be able at will to visit the lunar palace of Heng O; but the converse does not hold good, for your wife will not have access to the solar palace." This is why the light of the moon has its birth in the sun, and decreases in proportion to its distance from the sun, the moon being light or dark according as the sun comes and goes. Shen I ate the sarsaparilla cake, attached the talisman to his body, thanked the god, and prepared to leave. Tung Wang Kung said to him: "The sun rises and sets at fixed times; you do not yet know the laws of day and night; it is absolutely necessary for you to take with you the bird with the golden plumage, which will sing to advise you of the exact times of the rising, culmination, and setting of the sun." "Where is this bird to be found?" asked Shen I. "It is the one you hear calling Ia! Ia! It is the ancestor of the spirituality of the yang, or male, principle. Through having eaten the active principle of the sun, it has assumed the form of a three-footed bird, which perches on the fu-sang tree [a tree said to grow at the place where the sun rises] in [p. 187] the middle of the Eastern Sea. This tree is several thousands of feet in height and of gigantic girth. The bird keeps near the source of the dawn, and when it sees the sun taking his morning bath gives vent to a cry that shakes the heavens and wakes up all humanity. That is why I ordered Ling Chen-tzu to put it in a cage on T'ao-hua Shan, Peach-blossom Hill; since then its cries have been less harsh. Go and fetch it and take it to the Palace of the Sun. Then you will understand all the laws of the daily movements." He then wrote a charm which Shen I was to present to Ling Chen-tzu to make him open the cage and hand the golden bird over to him.

The charm worked, and Ling Chen-tzu opened the cage. The bird of golden plumage had a sonorous voice and majestic bearing. "This bird," he said, "lays eggs which hatch out nestlings with red combs, who answer him every morning when he starts crowing. He is usually called the cock of heaven, and the cocks down here which crow morning and evening are descendants of the celestial cock."

  

Shen I visits the Moon

Shen I, riding on the celestial bird, traversed the air and reached the disk of the sun just at mid-day. He found himself carried into the centre of an immense horizon, as large as the earth, and did not perceive the rotatory movement of the sun. He then enjoyed complete happiness without care or trouble. The thought of the happy hours passed with his wife Heng O, however, came back to memory, and, borne on a ray of sunlight, he flew to the moon. He saw the cinnamon-trees and the frozen-looking horizon. Going to a secluded spot, he found Heng O there all alone. On seeing him she was [p. 188] about to run away, but Shen I took her hand and reassured her. "I am now living in the solar palace," he said; "do not let the past annoy you." Shen I cut down some cinnamon-trees, used them for pillars, shaped some precious stones, and so built a palace, which he named Kuang-han Kung, 'Palace of Great Cold.' From that time forth, on the fifteenth day of every moon, he went to visit her in her palace. That is the conjunction of the yang and yin, male and female principles, which causes the great brilliancy of the moon at that epoch.

Shen I, on returning to his solar kingdom, built a wonderful palace, which he called the Palace of the Lonely Park.

From that time the sun and moon each had their ruling sovereign. This regime dates from the forty-ninth year (2309 B.C.) of Yao's reign.

When the old Emperor was informed that Shen I and his wife had both gone up to Heaven he was much grieved to lose the man who had rendered him such valuable service, and bestowed upon him the posthumous title of Tsung Pu, 'Governor of Countries.' In the representations of this god and goddess the former is shown holding the sun, the latter the moon. The Chinese add the sequel that Heng O became changed into a toad, whose outline is traceable on the moon's surface.

  

Star-worship

The star-deities are adored by parents on behalf of their children; they control courtship and marriage, bring prosperity or adversity in business, send pestilence and war, regulate rainfall and drought, and command angels and demons; so every event in life is determined [p. 189] by the 'star-ruler' who at that time from the shining firmament manages the destinies of men and nations. The worship is performed in the native homes either by astrologers engaged for that purpose or by Taoist priests. In times of sickness, ten paper star-gods are arranged, five good on one side and five bad on the other; a feast is placed before them, and it is supposed that when the bad have eaten enough they will take their flight to the south-west; the propitiation of the good star-gods is in the hope that they will expel the evil stars, and happiness thus be obtained.

The practical effect of this worship is seen in the following examples taken from the Chinese list of one hundred and twenty-nine lucky and unlucky stars, which, with the sixty cycle-stars and the twenty-eight constellations, besides a vast multitude of others, make up the celestial galaxy worshipped by China's millions: the Orphan Star enables a woman to become a man; the Star of Pleasure decides on betrothals, binding the feet of those destined to be lovers with silver cords; the Bonepiercing Star produces rheumatism; the Morning Star, if not worshipped, kills the father or mother during the year; the Balustrade Star promotes lawsuits; the Three-corpse Star controls suicide, the Peach-blossom Star lunacy; and so on.

  

The Herdsman and the Weaver-girl

In the myths and legends which have clustered about the observations of the stars by the Chinese there are subjects for pictorial illustration without number. One of these stories is the fable of Aquila and Vega, known in Chinese mythology as the Herdsman and the Weaver-girl. The latter, the daughter of the Sun-god, [p. 190] was so constantly busied with her loom that her father became worried at her close habits and thought that by marrying her to a neighbour, who herded cattle on the banks of the Silver Stream of Heaven (the Milky Way), she might awake to a brighter manner of living.

No sooner did the maiden become wife than her habits and character utterly changed for the worse. She became not only very merry and lively, but quite forsook loom and needle, giving up her nights and days to play and idleness; no silly lover could have been more foolish than she. The Sun-king, in great wrath at all this, concluded that the husband was the cause of it, and determined to separate the couple. So he ordered him to remove to the other side of the river of stars, and told him that hereafter they should meet only once a year, on the seventh night of the seventh month. To make a bridge over the flood of stars, the Sun-king called myriads of magpies, who thereupon flew together, and, making a bridge, supported the poor lover on their wings and backs as if on a roadway of solid land. So, bidding his weeping wife farewell, the lover-husband sorrowfully crossed the River of Heaven, and all the magpies instantly flew away. But the two were separated, the one to lead his ox, the other to ply her shuttle during the long hours of the day with diligent toil, and the Sun-king again rejoiced in his daughter's industry.

At last the time for their reunion drew near, and only one fear possessed the loving wife. What if it should rain? For the River of Heaven is always full to the brim, and one extra drop causes a flood which sweeps away even the bird-bridge. But not a drop fell; all the heavens were clear. The magpies flew joyfully in myriads, making a way for the tiny feet of the little lady. [p. 191] Trembling with joy, and with heart fluttering more than the bridge of wings, she crossed the River of Heaven and was in the arms of her husband. This she did every year. The husband stayed on his side of the river, and the wife came to him on the magpie bridge, save on the sad occasions when it rained. So every year the people hope for clear weather, and the happy festival is celebrated alike by old and young.

These two constellations are worshipped principally by women, that they may gain cunning in the arts of needlework and making of fancy flowers. Water-melons, fruits, vegetables, cakes, etc., are placed with incense in the reception-room, and before these offerings are performed the kneeling and the knocking of the head on the ground in the usual way.

  

The Twenty-eight Constellations

Sacrifices were offered to these spirits by the Emperor on the marble altar of the Temple of Heaven, and by the high officials throughout the provinces. Of the twenty-eight the following are regarded as propitious--namely, the Horned, Room, Tail, Sieve, Bushel, House, Wall, Mound, Stomach, End, Bristling, Well, Drawn-bow, and Revolving Constellations; the Neck, Bottom, Heart, Cow, Female, Empty, Danger, Astride, Cock, Mixed, Demon, Willow, Star, Wing, are unpropitious.

The twenty-eight constellations seem to have become the abodes of gods as a result of the defeat of a Taoist Patriarch T'ung-t'ien Chiao-chu, who had espoused the cause of the tyrant Chou, when he and all his followers were slaughtered by the heavenly hosts in the terrible catastrophe known as the Battle of the Ten Thousand Immortals. Chiang Tzu-ya as a reward conferred on [p. 192] them the appanage of the twenty-eight constellations. The five planets, Venus, Jupiter, Mercury, Mars, and Saturn, are also the abodes of stellar divinities, called the White, Green, Black, Red, and Yellow Rulers respectively. Stars good and bad are all likewise inhabited by gods or demons.

  

A Victim of Ta Chi

Concerning Tzu-wei Hsing, the constellation Tzu-wei (north circumpolar stars), of which the stellar deity is Po I-k'ao, the following legend is related in the Feng shen yen i.

Po I-k'ao was the eldest son of Wen Wang, and governed the kingdom during the seven years that the old King Was detained as a prisoner of the tyrant Chou. He did everything possible to procure his father's release. Knowing the tastes of the cruel King, he sent him for his harem ten of the prettiest women who could be found, accompanied by seven chariots made of perfumed wood, and a white-faced monkey of marvellous intelligence. Besides these he included in his presents a magic carpet, on which it was necessary only to sit in order to recover immediately from the effects of drunkenness.

Unfortunately for Po I-k'ao, Chou's favourite concubine, Ta Chi, conceived a passion for him and had recourse to all sorts of ruses to catch him in her net; but his conduct was throughout irreproachable. Vexed by his indifference, she tried slander in order to bring about his ruin. But her calumnies did not at first have the result she expected. Chou, after inquiry, was convinced of the innocence of Po. But an accident spoiled everything. In the middle of an amusing seance the monkey which had been given to the King by Po perceived some [p. 193] sweets in the hand of Ta Chi, and, jumping on to her body, snatched them from Her. The King and his concubine were furious, Chou had the monkey killed forthwith, and Ta Chi accused Po I-k'ao of having brought the animal into the palace with the object of making an attempt on the lives of the King and herself. But the Prince explained that the monkey, being only an animal, could not grasp even the first idea of entering into a conspiracy.

Shortly after this Po committed an unpardonable fault which changed the goodwill of the King into mortal enmity. He allowed himself to go so far as to suggest to the King that he should break off his relations with this infamous woman, the source of all the woes which were desolating the kingdom, and when Ta Chi on this account grossly insulted him he struck her with his lute.

For this offence Ta Chi caused him to be crucified in the palace. Large nails were driven through his hands and feet, and his flesh was cut off in pieces. Not content with ruining Po I-k'ao, this wretched woman wished also to ruin Wen Wang. She therefore advised the King to have the flesh of the murdered man made up into rissoles and sent as a present to his father. If he refused to eat the flesh of his own son he was to be accused of contempt for the King, and there would thus be a pretext for having him executed. Wen Wang, being versed in divination and the science of the pa kua, Eight Trigrams, knew that these rissoles contained the flesh of his son, and to avoid the snare spread for him he ate three of the rissoles in the presence of the royal envoys. On their return the latter reported this to the King, who found himself helpless on learning of Wen Wang's conduct. [p. 194]

Po I-k'ao was canonized by Chiang Tzu-ya, and appointed ruler of the constellation Tzu-wei of the North Polar heavens.

  

Myths of Time

T'ai Sui is the celestial spirit who presides over the year. He is the President of the Ministry of Time. This god is much to be feared. Whoever offends against him is sure to be destroyed. He strikes when least expected to. T'ai Sui is also the Ministry itself, whose members, numbering a hundred and twenty, are set over time, years, months, and days. The conception is held by some writers to be of Chaldeo-Assyrian origin.

The god T'ai Sui is not mentioned in the T'ang and Sung rituals, but in the Yuan dynasty (A.D. 1280-1368) sacrifices were offered to him in the College of the Grand Historiographer whenever any work of importance was about to be undertaken. Under this dynasty the sacrifices were offered to T'ai Sui and to the ruling gods of the months and of the days. But these sacrifices were not offered at regular times: it was only at the beginning of the Ch'ing (Manchu) dynasty (1644-1912) that it was decided to offer the sacrifices at fixed periods.

  

The Planet Jupiter

T'ai Sui corresponds to the planet Jupiter. He travels across the sky, passing through the twelve sidereal mansions. He is a stellar god. Therefore an altar is raised to him and sacrifices are offered on it under the open sky. This practice dates from the beginning of the Ming dynasty, when the Emperor T'ai Tsu ordered sacrifices to this god to be made throughout the Empire. According to some authors, he corresponds to the god [p. 195] of the twelve sidereal mansions. He is also variously represented as the moon, which turns to the left in the sky, and the sun, which turns to the right. The diviners gave to T'ai Sui the title of Grand Marshal, following the example of the usurper Wang Mang (A.D. 9-23) of the Western Han dynasty, who gave that title to the year-star.

  

Legend of T'ai Sui

The following is the legend of T'ai Sui.

T'ai Sui was the son of the Emperor Chou, the last of the Yin dynasty. His mother was Queen Chiang. When he was born he looked like a lump of formless flesh. The infamous Ta Chi, the favourite concubine of this wicked Emperor, at once informed him that a monster had been born in the palace, and the over-credulous sovereign ordered that it should immediately be cast outside the city. Shen Chen-jen, who was passing, saw the small abandoned one, and said: "This is an Immortal who has just been born." With his knife he cut open the caul which enveloped it, and the child was exposed.

His protector carried him to the cave Shui Lien, where he led the life of a hermit, and entrusted the infant to Ho Hsien-ku, who acted as his nurse and brought him up.

The child's hermit-name was Yin Ting-nu, his ordinary name Yin No-cha, but during his boyhood he was known as Yin Chiao, i.e. 'Yin the Deserted of the Suburb,' When he had reached an age when he was sufficiently intelligent, his nurse informed him that he was not her son, but really the son of the Emperor Chou, who, deceived by the calumnies of his favourite Ta Chi, had taken him for an evil monster and had him cast out of the palace. His mother had been thrown down from an upper storey [p. 196] and killed. Yin Chiao went to his rescuer and begged him to allow him to avenge his mother's death. The Goddess T'ien Fei, the Heavenly Concubine, picked out two magic weapons from the armoury in the cave, a battle-axe and club, both of gold, and gave them to Yin Chiao. When the Shang army was defeated at Mu Yeh, Yin Chiao broke into a tower where Ta Chi was, seized her, and brought her before the victor, King Wu, who gave him permission to split her head open with his battle-axe. But Ta Chi was a spiritual hen-pheasant (some say a spiritual vixen). She transformed herself into smoke and disappeared. To reward Yin Chiao for his filial piety and bravery in fighting the demons, Yu Ti canonized him with the title T'ai Sui Marshal Yin.

According to another version of the legend, Yin Chiao fought on the side of the Yin against Wu Wang, and after many adventures was caught by Jan Teng between two mountains, which he pressed together, leaving only Yin Chiao's head exposed above the summits. The general Wu Chi promptly cut it off with a spade. Chiang Tz[u)]-ya subsequently canonized Yin Chiao.

  

Worship of T'ai Sui

The worship of T'ai Sui seems to have first taken place in the reign of Shen Tsung (A.D. 1068-86) of the Sung dynasty, and was continued during the remainder of the Monarchical Period. The object of the worship is to avert calamities, T'ai Sui being a dangerous spirit who can do injury to palaces and cottages, to people in their houses as well as to travellers on the roads. But he has this peculiarity, that he injures persons and things not in the district in which he himself is, but in those districts which adjoin it. Thus, if some constructive work is [p. 197] undertaken in a region where T'ai Sui happens to be, the inhabitants of the neighbouring districts take precautions against his evil influence. This they generally do by hanging out the appropriate talisman. In order to ascertain in what region T'ai Sui is at any particular time, an elaborate diagram is consulted. This consists of a representation of the twelve terrestrial branches or stems, ti chih> and the ten celestial trunks, t'ien kan, indicating the cardinal points and the intermediate points, north-east, north-west, south-east, and south-west. The four cardinal points are further verified with the aid of the Five Elements, the Five Colours, and the Eight Trigrams. By using this device, it is possible to find the geographical position of T'ai Sui during the current year, the position of threatened districts, and the methods to be employed to provide against danger. [p. 198]

Footnotes

^198:1 She is the same as Ch'ang O, the name Heng being changed to Ch'ang because it was the tabooed personal name of the Emperors Mu Tsung of the T'ang dynasty and Chen Tsung of the Sung dynasty.

Myths and Legends of China, by Edward T.C. Werner, [1922], at sacred-texts.com

  

Chapter VI

  

Myths of Thunder, Lightning, Wind, and Rain

  

The Ministry of Thunder and Storms

As already noted, affairs in the Otherworld are managed by official Bureaux or Ministries very similar to those on earth. The Feng shen yen i mentions several of these, and gives full details of their constitution. The first is the Ministry of Thunder and Storms. This is composed of a large number of officials. The principal ones are Lei Tsu, the Ancestor of Thunder, Lei Kung, the Duke of Thunder, Tien Mu, the Mother of Lightning, Feng Po, the Count of Wind, and Y['u] Shih, the Master of Rain. These correspond to the Buddhist Asuras, the "fourth class of sentient beings, the mightiest of all demons, titanic enemies of the Devas," and the Vedic Maruta, storm-demons. In the temples Lei Tsu is placed in the centre with the other four to right and left. There are also sometimes represented other gods of rain, or attendants. These are Hsing T'ien Chun and T'ao T'ien Chun, both officers of Wen Chung, or Lei Tsu, Ma Yuan-shuai, Generalissimo Ma, whose exploits are referred to later, and others.

  

The President of the Ministry of Thunder

This divinity has three eyes, one in the middle of his forehead, from which, when open, a ray of white light proceeds to a distance of more than two feet. Mounted on a black unicorn, he traverses millions of miles in the twinkling of an eye.

Click to enlarge
 Wen Chung, Minister of Thunder

His origin is ascribed to a man named Wen Chung, generally known as Wen Chung T'ai-shih, 'the Great [p. 199] Teacher Wen Chung,' He was a minister of the tyrant king Chou (1154-1122 B.C.), and fought against the armies of the Chou dynasty. Being defeated, he fled to the mountains of Yen, Yen Shan, where he met Ch'ih Ching-tzu, one of the alleged discoverers of fire, and joined battle with him; the latter, however, flashed his yin-yang mirror at the unicorn, and put it out of action. Lei Chen-tzu, one of Wu Wang's marshals, then struck the animal with his staff, and severed it in twain.

Wen Chung escaped in the direction of the mountains of Chueh-lung Ling, where another marshal, Yun Chung-tzu, barred his way. Yun's hands had the power of producing lightning, and eight columns of mysterious fire suddenly came out of the earth, completely enveloping Wen Chung. They were thirty feet high and ten feet in circumference. Ninety fiery dragons came out of each and flew away up into the air. The sky was like a furnace, and the earth shook with the awful claps of thunder. In this fiery prison Wen Chung died.

When the new dynasty finally proved victorious, Chiang Tzu-ya, by order of Yuan-shih T'ien-tsun, conferred on Wen Chung the supreme direction of the Ministry of Thunder, appointing him celestial prince and plenipotentiary defender of the laws governing the distribution of clouds and rain. His full title was Celestial and Highly-honoured Head of the Nine Orbits of the Heavens, Voice of the Thunder, and Regulator of the Universe. His birthday is celebrated on the twenty-fourth day of the sixth moon.

  

The Duke of Thunder

The Spirit of Thunder, for whom Lei Tsu is often mistaken, is represented as an ugly, black, bat-winged [p. 200] demon, with clawed feet, monkey's head, and eagle's beak, who holds in one hand a steel chisel, and in the other a spiritual hammer, with which he beats numerous drums strung about him, thus producing the terrific noise of thunder. According to Chinese reasoning it is the sound of these drums, and not the lightning, which causes death.

A. Gruenwedel, in his Guide to the Lamaist Collection of Prince Uchtomsky, p. 161, states that the Chino-Japanese God of Thunder, Lei Kung, has the shape of the Indian divine bird Garuda. Are we to suppose, then, that the Chinese Lei Kung is of Indian origin? In modern pictures the God of Thunder is depicted with a cock's head and claws, carrying in one hand the hammer, in the other the chisel. We learn, however, from Wang Ch'ung's Lun Heng that in the first century B.C., when Buddhism was not yet introduced into China, the 'Thunderer' was represented as a strong man, not as a bird, with one hand dragging a cluster of drums, and with the other brandishing a hammer. Thus Lei Kung existed already in China when the latter received her first knowledge of India. Yet his modern image may well owe its wings to the Indian rain-god Vajrapani, who in one form appears with Garuda wings.

Lei Kung P'u-sa, the avatar of Lei Kung (whose existence as the Spirit of Thunder is denied by at least one Chinese writer), has made various appearances on the earth. One of these is described below.

  

Lei Kung in the Tree

A certain Yeh Ch'ien-chao of Hsin Chou, when a youth, used to climb the mountain Chien-ch'ang Shan for the purpose of cutting firewood and collecting medicinal [p. 201] herbs. One day when he had taken refuge under a tree during a rain-storm there was a loud clap of thunder, and he saw a winged being, with a blue face, large mouth, and bird's claws, caught in a cleft of the tree. This being addressed Yeh, saying: "I am Lei Kung. In splitting this tree I got caught in it; if you will free me I will reward you handsomely." The woodcutter opened the cleft wider by driving in some stones as wedges, and liberated the prisoner. "Return to this spot to-morrow," said the latter, "and I will reward you." The next day the woodcutter kept the appointment, and received from Lei Kung a book. "If you consult this work," he explained, "you will be able at will to bring thunder or rain, cure sickness, or assuage sorrow. We are five brothers, of whom I am the youngest. When you want to bring rain call one or other of my brothers; but call me only in case of pressing necessity, because I have a bad character; but I will come if it is really necessary." Having said these words, he disappeared.

Yeh Ch'ien-chao, by means of the prescriptions contained in the mysterious book, could cure illnesses as easily as the sun dissipates the morning mist. One day, when he was intoxicated and had gone to bed in the temple of Chi-chou Ssu, the magistrate wished to arrest and punish him. But when he reached the steps of the yamen, Ch'ien-chao called Lei Kung to his aid. A terrible clap of thunder immediately resounded throughout the district. The magistrate, nearly dead with fright, at once dismissed the case without punishing the culprit. The four brothers never failed to come to his aid.

By the use of his power Ch'ien-chao saved many regions from famine by bringing timely rain. [p. 202]

  

The Mysterious Bottle

Another legend relates that an old woman living in Kiangsi had her arm broken through being struck by lightning, when a voice from above was heard saying: "I have made a mistake." A bottle fell out of space, and the voice again said: "Apply the contents and you will be healed at once." This being done, the old woman's arm was promptly mended. The villagers, regarding the contents of the bottle as divine medicine, wished to take it away and hide it for future use, but several of them together could not lift it from the ground. Suddenly, however, it rose up and disappeared into space. Other persons in Kiangsi were also struck, and the same voice was heard to say: " Apply some grubs to the throat and they will recover."After this had been done the victims returned to consciousness none the worse for their experience.

The worship of Lei Kung seems to have been carried on regularly from about the time of the Christian era.

  

Lei Chen-tzu

Another Son of Thunder is Lei Chen-tzu, mentioned above, whose name when a child was Wen Yu, who was hatched from an egg after a clap of thunder and found by the soldiers of Wen Wang in some brushwood near an old tomb. The infant's chief characteristic was its brilliant eyes. Wen Wang, who already had ninety-nine children, adopted it as his hundredth, but gave it to a hermit named Yun Chung-tzu to rear as his disciple. The hermit showed him the way to rescue his adopted father from the tyrant who held him prisoner. In seeking for some powerful weapon the child found on [p. 203] the hillside two apricots, and ate them both. He then noticed that wings had grown on his shoulders, and was too much ashamed to return home.

But the hermit, who knew intuitively what had taken place, sent a servant to seek him. When they met the servant said: "Do you know that your face is completely altered?" The mysterious fruit had not only caused Lei Chen-tzu to grow wings, known as Wings of the Wind and Thunder, but his face had become green, his nose long and pointed, and two tusks protruded horizontally from each side of his mouth, while his eyes shone like mirrors.

Lei Chen-tzu now went and rescued Wen Wang, dispersing his enemies by means of his mystical power and bringing the old man back on his shoulders. Having placed him in safety he returned to the hermit.

  

The Mother of Lightning

This divinity is represented as a female figure, gorgeously apparelled in blue, green, red, and white, holding in either hand a mirror from which proceed two broad streams or flashes of light. Lightning, say the Chinese, is caused by the rubbing together of the yin and the yang, just as sparks of fire may be produced by the friction of two substances.

  

The Origin of the Spirit of Lightning

Tung Wang Kung, the King of the Immortals, was playing at pitch-pot  [*1] with Yu Nu. He lost; whereupon Heaven smiled, and from its half-open mouth a ray of light came out. This was lightning; it is regarded as [p. 204] feminine because it is supposed to come from the earth, which is of the yin, or female, principle.

  

The God of the Wind

Feng Po, the God of the Wind, is represented as an old man with a white beard, yellow cloak, and blue and red cap. He holds a large sack, and directs the wind which comes from its mouth in any direction he pleases.

There are various ideas regarding the nature of this deity. He is regarded as a stellar divinity under the control of the star Ch'i,  [*2] because the wind blows at the time when the moon leaves that celestial mansion. He is also said to be a dragon called Fei Lien, at first one of the supporters of the rebel Ch'ih Yu, who was defeated by Huang Ti. Having been transformed into a spiritual monster, he stirred up tremendous winds in the southern regions. The Emperor Yao sent Shen I with three hundred soldiers to quiet the storms and appease Ch'ih Yu's relatives, who were wreaking their vengeance on the people. Shen I ordered the people to spread a long cloth in front of their houses, fixing it with stones. The wind, blowing against this, had to change its direction. Shen I then flew on the wind to the top of a high mountain, whence he saw a monster at the base. It had the shape of a huge yellow and white sack, and kept inhaling and exhaling in great gusts. Shen I, concluding that this was the cause of all these storms, shot an arrow and hit the monster, whereupon it took refuge in a deep cave. Here it turned on Shen I and, drawing a sword, dared him to attack the Mother of the Winds. Shen I, however, bravely faced the monster and discharged another arrow, this time [p. 205] hitting it in the knee. The monster immediately threw down its sword and begged that its life might be spared.

Fei Lien is elsewhere described as a dragon who was originally one of the wicked ministers of the tyrant Chou, and could walk with unheard-of swiftness. Both he and his son O Lai, who was so strong that he could tear a tiger or rhinoceros to pieces with his hands, were killed when in the service of Chou Wang. Fei Lien is also said to have the body of a stag, about the size of a leopard, with a bird's head, horns, and a serpent's tail, and to be able to make the wind blow whenever he wishes.

  

The Master of Rain

Yu Shih, the Master of Rain, clad in yellow scale-armour, with a blue hat and yellow busby, stands on a cloud and from a watering-can pours rain upon the earth. Like many other gods, however, he is represented in various forms. Sometimes he holds a plate, on which is a small dragon, in his left hand, while with his right he pours down the rain. He is obviously the Parjanya of Vedism.

According to a native account, the God of Rain is one Ch'ih Sung-tzu, who appeared during a terrible drought in the reign of Shen Nung (2838-2698 B.C.), and owing to his reputed magical power was requested by the latter to bring rain from the sky. "Nothing is easier," he replied; "pour a bottleful of water into an earthen bowl and give it to me." This being done, he plucked from a neighbouring mountain a branch of a tree, soaked it in the water, and with it sprinkled the earth. Immediately clouds gathered and rain fell in torrents, filling the rivers to overflowing. Ch'ih Sung-tzu was then honoured as the God of Rain, and his images show him holding the [p. 206] mystic bowl. He resides in the K'un-lun Mountains, and has many extraordinary peculiarities, such as the power to go through water without getting wet, to pass through fire without being burned, and to float in space.

This Rain-god also assumes the form of a silkworm chrysalis in another account. He is there believed to possess a concubine who has a black face, holds a serpent in each hand, and has other serpents, red and green, reposing on her right and left ears respectively; also a mysterious bird, with only one leg, the shang yang, which can change its height at will and drink the seas dry. The following legend is related of this bird.

  

The One-legged Bird

At the time when Hsuan-ming Ta-jen instructed Fei Lien in the secrets of magic, the latter saw a wonderful bird which drew in water with its beak and blew it out again in the shape of rain. Fei lien tamed it, and would take it about in his sleeve.

Later on a one-legged bird was seen in the palace of the Prince of Ch'i walking up and down and hopping in front of the throne. Being much puzzled, the Prince sent a messenger to Lu to inquire of Confucius concerning this strange behaviour. "This bird is a shang yang" said Confucius; "its appearance is a sign of rain. In former times the children used to amuse themselves by hopping on one foot, knitting their eyebrows, and saying: 'It will rain, because the shang yang is disporting himself.' Since this bird has gone to Ch'i, heavy rain will fall, and the people should be told to dig channels and repair the dykes, for the whole country will be inundated." Not only Ch'i, but all the adjacent kingdoms were flooded; all sustained grievous damage except Ch'i, where the [p. 207] necessary precautions had been taken. This caused Duke Ching to exclaim: "Alas! how few listen to the words of the sages!"

  

Ma Yuan-shuai

Ma Yuan-shuai is a three-eyed monster condemned by Ju Lai to reincarnation for excessive cruelty in the extermination of evil spirits. In order to obey this command he entered the womb of Ma Chin-mu in the form of five globes of fire. Being a precocious youth, he could fight when only three days old, and killed the Dragon-king of the Eastern Sea. From his instructor he received a spiritual work dealing with wind, thunder, snakes, etc., and a triangular piece of stone which he could at will change into anything he liked. By order of Yu Ti he subdued the Spirits of the Wind and Fire, the Blue Dragon, the King of the Five Dragons, and the Spirit of the Five Hundred Fire Ducks, all without injury to himself. For these and many other enterprises he was rewarded by Yu Ti with various magic articles and with the title of Generalissimo of the West, and is regarded as so successful an interceder with Yu Ti that he is prayed to for all sorts of benefits. [p. 208]

Footnotes

^208:1 See <page 45>.

^208:2 In Sagittarius, or the Sieve; Chinese constellation of the Leopard.

Myths and Legends of China, by Edward T.C. Werner, [1922], at sacred-texts.com

  

Chapter VII

  

Myths of the Waters

  

The Dragons

The dragons are spirits of the waters. "The dragon is a kind of being whose miraculous changes are inscrutable." In a sense the dragon is the type of a man, self-controlled, and with powers that verge upon the supernatural. In China the dragon, except as noted below, is not a power for evil, but a beneficent being producing rain and representing the fecundating principle in nature. He is the essence of the yang, or male, principle. "He controls the rain, and so holds in his power prosperity and peace." The evil dragons are those introduced by the Buddhists, who applied the current dragon legends to the nagas inhabiting the mountains. These mountain nagas, or dragons (perhaps originally dreaded mountain tribes), are harmful, those inhabiting lakes and rivers friendly and helpful. The dragon, the "chief of the three hundred and sixty scaly reptiles," is most generally represented as having the head of a horse and the tail of a snake, with wings on its sides. It has four legs. The imperial dragon has five claws on each foot, other dragons only four. The dragon is also said to have nine 'resemblances': "its horns resemble those of a deer, its head that of a camel, its eyes those of a devil, its neck that of a snake, its abdomen that of a large cockle, its scales those of a carp, its claws those of an eagle, the soles of its feet those of a tiger, its ears those of an ox;" but some have no ears, the organ of hearing being said to be in the horns, or the creature "hears through its horns." These various properties are supposed to indicate the "fossil remnants of primitive [p. 209] worship of many animals." The small dragon is like the silk caterpillar. The large dragon fills the Heaven and the earth. Before the dragon, sometimes suspended from his neck, is a pearl. This represents the sun. There are azure, scaly, horned, hornless, winged, etc., dragons, which apparently evolve one out of the other: "a horned dragon," for example, "in a thousand years changes to a flying dragon."

Click to enlarge
 Dragon-gods

The dragon is also represented as the father of the great emperors of ancient times. His bones, teeth, and saliva are employed as a medicine. He has the power of transformation and of rendering himself visible or invisible at pleasure. In the spring he ascends to the skies, and in the autumn buries himself in the watery depths. Some are wingless, and rise into the air by their own inherent power. There is the celestial dragon, who guards the mansions of the gods and supports them so that they do not fall; the divine dragon, who causes the winds to blow and produces rain for the benefit of mankind; the earth-dragon, who marks out the courses of rivers and streams; and the dragon of the hidden treasures, who watches over the wealth concealed from mortals.

The Buddhists count their dragons in number equal to the fish of the great deep, which defies arithmetical computation, and can be expressed only by their sacred numerals. The people have a more certain faith in them than in most of their divinities, because they see them so often; every cloud with a curious configuration or serpentine tail is a dragon. "We see him," they say. The scattering of the cloud is his disappearance. He rules the hills, is connected with feng-shui (geomancy), dwells round the graves, is associated with the Confucian [p. 210] worship, is the Neptune of the sea, and appears on dry land.

  

The Dragon-kings

The Sea-dragon Kings live in gorgeous palaces in the depths of the sea, where they feed on pearls and opals. There are five of these divinities, the chief being in the centre, and the other four occupying the north, the west, the south, and the east. Each is a league in length, and so bulky that in shifting its posture it tosses one mountain against another. It has five feet, one of them being in the middle of its belly, and each foot is armed with five sharp claws. It can reach into the heavens, and stretch itself into all quarters of the sea. It has a glowing armour of yellow scales, a beard under its long snout, a hairy tail, and shaggy legs. Its forehead projects over its blazing eyes, its ears are small and thick, its mouth gaping, its tongue long, and its teeth sharp. Fish are boiled by the blast of its breath, and roasted by the fiery exhalations of its body. When it rises to the surface the whole ocean surges, waterspouts foam, and typhoons rage. When it flies, wingless, through the air, the winds howl, torrents of rain descend, houses are unroofed, the firmament is filled with a din, and whatever lies along its route is swept away with a roar in the hurricane created by the speed of its passage.

The five Sea-dragon Kings are all immortal. They know each other's thoughts, plans, and wishes without intercommunication. Like all the other gods they go once a year to the superior Heavens, to make an annual report to the Supreme Ruler; but they go in the third month, at which time none of the other gods dare appear, and their stay above is but brief. They generally remain in [p. 211] the depths of the ocean, where their courts are filled with their progeny, their dependents, and their attendants, and where the gods and genii sometimes visit them. Their palaces, of divers coloured transparent stones, with crystal doors, are said to have been seen in the early morning by persons gazing into the deep waters.

  

The Foolish Dragon

The part of the great Buddha legend referring to the dragon is as follows:

In years gone by, a dragon living in the great sea saw that his wife's health was not good. He, seeing her colour fade away, said: "My dear, what shall I get you to eat?" Mrs Dragon was silent. Just tell me and I will get it," pleaded the affectionate husband. "You cannot do it; why trouble?" quoth she. "Trust me, and you shall have your heart's desire," said the dragon. "Well, I want a monkey's heart to eat." "Why, Mrs Dragon, the monkeys live in the mountain forests! How can I get one of their hearts?" "Well, I am going to die; I know I am."

Forthwith the dragon went on shore, and, spying a monkey on the top of a tree, said: "Hail, shining one, are you not afraid you will fall?" "No, I have no such fear." "Why eat of one tree? Cross the sea, and you will find forests of fruit and flowers." "How can I cross?" "Get on my back." The dragon with his tiny load went seaward, and then suddenly dived down. "Where are you going?" said the monkey, with the salt water in his eyes and mouth. "Oh! my dear sir! my wife is very sad and ill, and has taken a fancy to your heart." "What shall I do?" thought the monkey. He then spoke, "Illustrious friend, why [p. 212] did not you tell me? I left my heart on the top of the tree; take me back, and I will get it for Mrs Dragon." The dragon returned to the shore. As the monkey was tardy in coming down from the tree, the dragon said: "Hurry up, little friend, I am waiting." Then the monkey thought within himself, "What a fool this dragon is!"

Then Buddha said to his followers: "At this time I was the monkey."

  

The Ministry of Waters

In the spirit-world there is a Ministry which controls all things connected with the waters on earth, salt or fresh. Its main divisions are the Department of Salt Waters, presided over by four Dragon-kings--those of the East, South, West, and North--and the Department of Sweet Waters, presided over by the Four Kings (Ssu Tu) of the four great rivers--the Blue (Chiang), Yellow (Ho), Huai, and Ch'i--and the Dragon-spirits who control the Secondary Waters, the rivers, springs, lakes, pools, rapids. Into the names and functions of the very large number of officials connected with these departments it is unnecessary to enter. It will be sufficient here to refer only to those whose names are connected with myth or legend.

  

An Unauthorized Portrait

One of these legends relates to the visit of Ch'in Shih Huang-ti, the First Emperor, to the Spirit of the Sea, Yang Hou, originally a marquis (bou) of the State Yang, who became a god through being drowned in the sea.

Po Shih, a Taoist priest, told the Emperor that an enormous oyster vomited from the sea a mysterious [p. 213] substance which accumulated in the form of a tower, and was known as 'the market of the sea' (Chinese for 'mirage'). Every year, at a certain period, the breath from his mouth was like the rays of the sun. The Emperor expressed a wish to see it, and Po Shih said he would write a letter to the God of the Sea, and the next day the Emperor could behold the wonderful sight.

The Emperor then remembered a dream he had had the year before in which he saw two men fighting for the sun. The one killed the other, and carried it off. He therefore wished to visit the country where the sun rose. Po Shih said that all that was necessary was to throw rocks into the sea and build a bridge across them. Thereupon he rang his magic bell, the earth shook, and rocks began to rise up; but as they moved too slowly he struck them with his whip, and blood came from them which left red marks in many places. The row of rocks extended as far as the shore of the sun-country, but to build the bridge across them was found to be beyond the reach of human skill.

So Po Shih sent another messenger to the God of the Sea, requesting him to raise a pillar and place a beam across it which could be used as a bridge. The submarine spirits came and placed themselves at the service of the Emperor, who asked for an interview with the god. To this the latter agreed on condition that no one should make a portrait of him, he being very ugly. Instantly a stone gangway 100,000 feet long rose out of the sea, and the Emperor, mounting his horse, went with his courtiers to the palace of the god. Among his followers was one Lu Tung-shih, who tried to draw a portrait of the god by using his foot under the surface of the water. Detecting this manoeuvre, the god was incensed, and [p. 214] said to the Emperor: "You have broken your word; did you bring Lu here to insult me? Retire at once, or evil will befall you." The Emperor, seeing that the situation was precarious, mounted his horse and galloped off. As soon as he reached the beach, the stone cause-way sank, and all his suite perished in the waves. One of the Court magicians said to the Emperor: "This god ought to be feared as much as the God of Thunder; then he could be made to help us. To-day a grave mistake has been made." For several days after this incident the waves beat upon the beach with increasing fury. The Emperor then built a temple and a pagoda to the god on Chih-fu Shan and Wen-teng Shan respectively; by which act of propitiation he was apparently appeased.

  

The Shipwrecked Servant

Once the Eight Immortals (see Chapter XI) were on their way to Ch'ang-li Shan to celebrate the birthday anniversary of Hsien Weng, the God of Longevity. They had with them a servant who bore the presents they intended to offer to the god. When they reached the seashore the Immortals walked on the waves without any difficulty, but Lan Ts'ai-ho remarked that the servant was unable to follow them, and said that a means of transport must be found for him. So Ts'ao Kuo-chiu took a plank of cypress-wood and made a raft. But when they were in mid-ocean a typhoon arose and upset the raft, and servant and presents sank to the bottom of the sea.

Regarding this as the hostile act of a water-devil, the Immortals said they must demand an explanation from the Dragon-king, Ao Ch'in. Li T'ieh-kuai took his gourd, and, directing the mouth toward the bottom of [p. 215] the sea, created so brilliant a light that it illuminated the whole palace of the Sea-king. Ao Ch'in, surprised, asked where this powerful light originated, and deputed a courier to ascertain its cause.

To this messenger the Immortals made their complaint. "All we want," they added, "is that the Dragon-king shall restore to us our servant and the presents." On this being reported to Ao Ch'in he suspected his son of being the cause, and, having established his guilt, severely reprimanded him. The young Prince took his sword, and, followed by an escort, went to find those who had made the complaint to his father. As soon as he caught sight of the Immortals he began to inveigh against them.

  

A Battle and its Results

Han Hsiang Tzu, not liking this undeserved abuse, changed his flute into a fishing-line, and as soon as the Dragon-prince was within reach caught him on the hook, with intent to retain him as a hostage. The Prince's escort returned in great haste and informed Ao Ch'in of what had occurred. The latter declared that his son was in the wrong, and proposed to restore the shipwrecked servant and the presents. The Court officers, however, held a different opinion. "These Immortals," they said, "dare to hold captive your Majesty's son merely on account of a few lost presents and a shipwrecked servant. This is a great insult, which we ask permission to avenge." Eventually they won over Ao Ch'in, and the armies of the deep gathered for the fray. The Immortals called to their aid the other Taoist Immortals and Heroes, and thus two formidable armies found themselves face to face.

Several attempts were made by other divinities to [p. 216] avert the conflict, but without success. The battle was a strenuous one. Ao Ch'in received a ball of fire full on his head, and his army was threatened with disaster when Tz'u-hang Ta-shih appeared with his bottle of lustral water. He sprinkled the combatants with this magic fluid, using a willow-branch for the purpose, thus causing all their magic powers to disappear.

Shui Kuan, the Ruler of the Watery Elements, then arrived, and reproached Ao Ch'in; he assured him that if the matter were to come to the knowledge of Shang Ti, the Supreme Ruler, he would not only be severely punished, but would risk losing his post. Ao Ch'in expressed penitence, restored the servant and the presents, and made full apology to the Eight Immortals.

  

The Dragon in the Pond

One day Chang Tao-ling, the 'father of modern Taoism,' was on Ho-ming Shan with his disciple Wang Ch'ang. "See," he said, "that shaft of white light on Yang Shan yonder! There are undoubtedly some bad spirits there. Let us go and bring them to reason." When they reached the foot of the mountain they met twelve women who had the appearance of evil spirits. Chang Tao-ling asked them whence came the shaft of white light. They answered that it was the yin, or female, principle of the earth. "Where is the source of the salt water?" he asked again. "That pond in front of you," they replied, "in which lives a very wicked dragon." Chang Tao-ling tried to force the dragon to come out, but without success. Then he drew a phoenix with golden wings on a charm and hurled it into the air over the pond. Thereupon the dragon took fright and fled, the pond immediately drying up. After that Chang [p. 217] Tao-ling took his sword and stuck it in the ground, whereupon a well full of salt water appeared on the spot.

Click to enlarge
 Spirit of the Well

  

The Spirits of the Well

The twelve women each offered Chang Tao-ling a jade ring, and asked that they might become his wives. He took the rings, and pressing them together in his hands made of them one large single ring. "I will throw this ring into the well," he said, "and the one of you who recovers it shall be my wife." All the twelve women jumped into the well to get the ring; whereupon Chang Tao-ling put a cover over it and fastened it down, telling them that henceforth they should be the spirits of the well and would never be allowed to come out.

Shortly after this Chang Tao-ling met a hunter. He exhorted him not to kill living beings, but to change his occupation to that of a salt-burner, instructing him how to draw out the salt from salt-water wells. Thus the people of that district were advantaged both by being able to obtain the salt and by being no longer molested by the twelve female spirits. A temple, called Temple of the Prince of Ch'ing Ho, was built by them, and the territory of Ling Chou was given to Chang Tao-ling in recognition of the benefits he had conferred upon the people.

  

The Dragon-king's Daughter

A graduate named Liu I, in the reign-period I Feng (A.D. 676-679) of the Emperor Kao Tsung of the T'ang dynasty, having failed in his examination for his licentiate's degree, when passing through Ching-yang Hsien, in Ch'ang-an, Shensi, on his way home, saw a young woman tending goats by the roadside. She said [p. 218] to him: "I am the youngest daughter of the Dragonking of the Tung-t'ing Lake. My parents married me to the son of the God of the River Ching, but my husband, misled by the slanders of the servants, repudiated me. I have heard that you are returning to the Kingdom of Wu, which is quite close to my native district, so I want to ask you to take this letter to my father. To the north of the Tung-t'ing Lake you will find a large orange-tree, called by the natives Protector of the Soil. Strike it three times with your girdle and some one will appear."

Some months later the graduate went to the spot, found the orange-tree, and struck it three times, whereupon a warrior arose from the lake and, saluting him, asked what he wanted. "I wish to see your great King," the graduate replied. The warrior struck the waters, opening a passage for Liu I, and led him to a palace. "This," he said, "is the palace of Ling Hsu." In a few minutes there appeared a person dressed in violet-coloured clothes and holding in his hand a piece of jade. "This is our King," said the warrior. "I am your Majesty's neighbour," replied Liu I. "I spent my youth in Ch'u and studied in Ch'in. I have just failed in my licentiate examination. On my way home I saw your daughter tending some goats; she was all dishevelled, and in so pitiable a condition that it hurt me to see her, She has sent you this letter."

  

Golden Dragon Great Prince

On reading the letter the King wept, and all the courtiers followed his example. "Stop wailing," said the King, "lest Ch'ien-t'ang hear." "Who is Ch'ien-t'ang?" asked Liu I. "He is my dear brother," replied the King; "formerly he was one of the chief administrators [p. 219] of the Ch'ien-t'ang River; now he is the chief God of Rivers." "Why are you so afraid that he might hear what I have just told you?" "Because he has a terrible temper. It was he who, in the reign of Yao, caused a nine-years flood."

Before he had finished speaking, a red dragon, a thousand feet long, with red scales, mane of fire, bloody tongue, and eyes blazing like lightning, passed through the air with rapid flight and disappeared. Barely a few moments had elapsed when it returned with a young woman whom Liu I recognized as the one who had entrusted him with the letter. The Dragon-king, overjoyed, said to him: "This is my daughter; her husband is no more, and she offers you her hand." Liu did not dare to accept, since it appeared that they had just killed her husband. He took his departure, and married a woman named Chang, who soon died. He then married another named Han, who also died. He then went to live at Nanking, and, his solitude preying upon his spirits, he decided to marry yet again. A middleman spoke to him of a girl of Fang Yang, in Chihli, whose father, Hao, had been Magistrate of Ch'ing Liu, in Anhui. This man was always absent on his travels, no one knew whither. The girl's mother, Cheng, had married her two years before to a man named Chang of Ch'ing Ho, in Chihli, who had just died. Distressed at her daughter being left a widow so young, the mother wished to find another husband for her.

Liu I agreed to marry this young woman, and at the end of a year they had a son. She then said to her husband: "I am the daughter of the King of the Tung-t'ing Lake. It was you who saved me from my miserable plight on the bank of the Ching, and I swore I would [p. 220] reward you. Formerly you refused to accept my hand, and my parents decided to marry me to the son of a silk-merchant. I cut my hair, and never ceased to hope that I might some time or other be united to you in order that I might show you my gratitude."

In A.D. 712, in the reign-period K'ai-yuan of the Emperor Hsuan Tsung of the T'ang dynasty, they both returned to the Tung-t'ing Lake; but the legend says nothing further with regard to them.

Shang Ti, the Supreme Ruler, conferred on Liu I the title of Chin Lung Ta Wang, 'Golden Dragon Great Prince.'

  

The Old Mother of the Waters

The Old Mother of the Waters, Shul-mu Niang-niang, is the legendary spirit of Ssu-chou, in Anhui. To her is popularly ascribed the destruction of the ancient city of Ssu-chou, which was completely submerged by the waters of the Hung-tse Lake in A.D. 1574.

One author states that this Goddess of the Waters is the younger sister of the White Spiritual Elephant, a guardian of the Door of Buddha. This elephant is the "subtle principle of metamorphosed water."

In his Recherches sur Us Superstitions en Chine, Pere Henri Dore, S.J., relates the legends he had heard with regard to this deity. One of these is as follows:

Shui-mu Niang-niang inundated the town of Ssu-chou almost every year. A report was presented to Yu Huang, Lord of the Skies, begging him to put an end to the scourge which devastated the country and cost so many lives. The Lord of the Skies commanded the Great Kings of the Skies and their generals to raise troops and take the field in order to capture this goddess and deprive [p. 221] her of the power of doing further mischief. But her tricks triumphed over force, and the city continued to be periodically devastated by inundations.

One day Shui-mu Niang-niang was seen near the city gate carrying two buckets of water. Li Lao-chun suspected some plot, but, an open attack being too risky, he preferred to adopt a ruse. He went and bought a donkey, led it to the buckets of water, and let it drink their contents. Unfortunately the animal could not drink all the water, so that a little remained at the bottom of the buckets. Now these magical buckets contained the sources of the five great lakes, which held enough water to inundate the whole of China. Shui-mu Niang-niang with her foot overturned one of the buckets, and the water that had remained in it was enough to cause a formidable flood, which submerged the unfortunate town, and buried it for ever under the immense sheet of water called the Lake of Hung-tse.

So great a crime deserved an exemplary punishment, and accordingly Yu Huang sent reinforcements to his armies, and a pursuit of the goddess was methodically organized.

  

The Magic Vermicelli

Sun Hou-tzu, the Monkey Sun,  [*1] the rapid courier, who in a single skip could traverse 108,000 li (36,000 miles), started in pursuit and caught her up, but the astute goddess was clever enough to slip through his fingers. Sun Hou-tzu, furious at this setback, went to ask Kuan-yin P'u-sa to come to his aid. She promised to do so. As one may imagine, the furious [p. 222] race she had had to escape from her enemy had given Shui-mu Niang-niang a good appetite. Exhausted with fatigue, and with an empty stomach, she caught sight of a woman selling vermicelli, who had just prepared two bowls of it and was awaiting customers. Shui-mu Niang-niang went up to her and began to eat the strength-giving food with avidity. No sooner had she eaten half of the vermicelli than it changed in her stomach into iron chains, which wound round her intestines. The end of the chain protruded from her mouth, and the contents of the bowl became another long chain which welded itself to the end which stuck out beyond her lips. The vermicelli-seller was no other than Kuan-yin P'u-sa herself, who had conceived this stratagem as a means of ridding herself of this evil-working goddess. She ordered Sun Hou-tzu to take her down a deep well at the foot of a mountain in Hsu-i Hsien and to fasten her securely there. It is there that Shui-mu Niang-niang remains in her liquid prison. The end of the chain is to be seen when the water is low.

  

Hsu, the Dragon-slayer

Hsu Chen-chun was a native either of Ju-ning Fu in Honan, or of Nan-ch'ang Fu in Kiangsi. His father was Hsu Su. His personal name was Ching-chih, and his ordinary name Sun.

At forty-one years of age, when he was Magistrate of Ching-yang, near the modern Chih-chiang Hsien, in Hupei, during times of drought he had only to touch a piece of tile to turn it into gold, and thus relieve the people of their distress. He also saved many lives by curing sickness through the use of talismans and magic formulae.

During the period of the dynastic troubles he resigned [p. 223] and joined the famous magician Kuo P'o. Together they proceeded to the minister Wang Tun, who had risen against the Eastern Chin dynasty. Kuo P'o's remonstrances only irritated the minister, who cut off his head.

Hsu Sun then threw his chalice on the ridgepole of the room, causing it to be whirled into the air. As Wang Tun was watching the career of the chalice, Hsu disappeared and escaped. When he reached Lu-chiang K'ou, in Anhui, he boarded a boat, which two dragons towed into the offing and then raised into the air. In an instant they had borne it to the Lu Shan Mountains, to the south of Kiukiang, in Kiangsi. The perplexed boatman opened the window of his boat and took a furtive look out. Thereupon the dragons, finding themselves discovered by an infidel, set the boat down on the top of the mountain and fled.

  

The Spiritual Alligator

In this country was a dragon, or spiritual alligator, which transformed itself into a young man named Shen Lang, and married Chia Yu, daughter of the Chief Judge of T'an Chou (Ch'ang-sha Fu, capital of Hunan). The young people lived in rooms below the official apartments. During spring and summer Shen Lang, as dragons are wont to do, roamed in the rivers and lakes. One day Hsu Chen-chun met him, recognized him as a dragon, and knew that he was the cause of the numerous floods which were devastating Kiangsi Province. He determined to find a means of getting rid of him.

Shen Lang, aware of the steps being taken against him, changed himself into a yellow ox and fled. Hsu Chen-chun at once transformed himself into a black ox and [p. 224] started in pursuit. The yellow ox jumped down a well to hide, but the black ox followed suit. The yellow ox then jumped out again, and escaped to Ch'ang-sha, where he reassumed a human form and lived with Ms wife in the home of his father-in-law, Hsu Sun, returning to the town, hastened to the yamen, and called to Shen Lang to come out and show himself, addressing him in a severe tone of voice as follows: "Dragon, how dare you hide yourself there under a borrowed form?" Shen Lang then reassumed the form of a spiritual alligator, and Hsu Sun ordered the spiritual soldiers to kill him. He then commanded his two sons to come out of their abode. By merely spurting a mouthful of water on them he transformed them into young dragons. Chia Yu was told to vacate the rooms with all speed, and in the twinkling of an eye the whole yamen sank beneath the earth, and there remained nothing but a lake where it had been.

Hsu Chen-chun, after his victory over the dragon, assembled the members of his family, to the number of forty-two, on Hsi Shan, outside the city of Nan-ch'ang Fu, and all ascended to Heaven in full daylight, taking with them even the dogs and chickens. He was then 133 years old. This took place on the first day of the eighth moon of the second year (A.D. 374) of the reign-period Ning-K'ang of the reign of the Emperor Hsiao Wu Ti of the Eastern Chin dynasty.

Subsequently a temple was erected to him, and in A.D. 1111 he was canonized as Just Prince, Admirable and Beneficent.

  

The Great Flood

The repairing of the heavens by Nu Kua, elsewhere alluded to, is also attributed to the following incident. [p. 225]

Before the Chinese Empire was founded a noble and wonderful queen fought with the chief of the tribes who inhabited the country round about O-mei Shan. In a fierce battle the chief and his followers met defeat; raging with anger at being beaten by a woman, he rushed up the mountain-side; the Queen pursued him with her army, and overtook him at the summit; finding no place to hide himself, he attempted in desperation both to wreak vengeance upon his enemies and to end his own life by beating his head violently against the cane of the Heavenly Bamboo which grew there. By his mad battering he at last succeeded in knocking down the towering trunk of the tree, and as he did so its top tore great rents in the canopy of the sky, through which poured great floods of water, inundating the whole earth and drowning all the inhabitants except the victorious Queen and her soldiers. The floods had no power to harm her or her followers, because she herself was an all-powerful divinity and was known as the 'Mother of the Gods,' and the 'Defender of the Gods.' From the mountain-side she gathered together stones of a kind having five colours, and ground them into powder; of this she made a plaster or mortar, with which she repaired the tears in the heavens, and the floods immediately ceased.

  

The Marriage of the River-god

In Yeh Hsien there was a witch and some official attendants who collected money from the people yearly for the marriage of the River-god.

The witch would select a pretty girl of low birth, and say that she should be the Queen of the River-god. The girl was bathed, and clothed in a beautiful dress of gay and costly silk. She was then taken to the bank of the [p. 226] river, to a monastery which was beautifully decorated with scrolls and banners. A feast was held, and the girl was placed on a bed which was floated out upon the tide till it disappeared under the waters.

Many families having beautiful daughters moved to distant places, and gradually the city became deserted. The common belief in Yeh was that if no queen was offered to the River-god a flood would come and drown the people.

One day Hsi-men Pao, Magistrate of Yeh Hsien, said to his attendants: "When the marriage of the River-god takes place I wish to say farewell to the chosen girl."

Accordingly Hsi-men Pao was present to witness the ceremony. About three thousand people had come together. Standing beside the old witch were ten of her female disciples, "Call the girl out," said Hsi-men Pao. After seeing her, Hsi-men Pao said to the witch: "She is not fair. Go you to the River-god and tell him that we will find a fairer maid and present her to him later on." His attendants then seized the witch and threw her into the river.

After a little while Hsi-men Pao said: "Why does she stay so long? Send a disciple to call her back." One of the disciples was thrown into the river. Another and yet another followed. The magistrate then said:" The witches are females and therefore cannot bring me a reply." So one of the official attendants of the witch was thrown into the river.

Hsi-men Pao stood on the bank for a long time, apparently awaiting a reply. The spectators were alarmed. Hsi-men Pao then bade his attendants send the remaining disciples of the witch and the other official attendants to recall their mistress. The wretches threw [p. 227] themselves on their knees and knocked their heads on the ground, which was stained with the blood from their foreheads, and with tears confessed their sin.

"The River-god detains his guest too long," said Hsi-men Pao at length. "Let us adjourn."

Thereafter none dared to celebrate the marriage of the River-god.

  

Legend of the Building of Peking

When the Mongol Yuan dynasty had been destroyed, and the Emperor Hung Wu had succeeded in firmly establishing that of the Great Ming, Ta Ming, he made Chin-ling, the present Nanking, his capital, and held his Court there with great splendour, envoys from every province within the 'Four Seas' (the Chinese Empire) assembling there to witness his greatness and to prostrate themselves before the Dragon Throne.

The Emperor had many sons and daughters by his different consorts and concubines, each mother, in her inmost heart, fondly hoping that her own son would be selected by his father to succeed him.

Although the Empress had a son, who was the heir-apparent, yet she felt envious of those ladies who had likewise been blessed with children, for fear one of the princes should supplant her son in the affection of the Emperor and in the succession. This envy displayed itself on every occasion; she was greatly beloved by the Emperor, and exerted all her influence with him, as the other young princes grew up, to get them removed from Court. Through her means most of them were sent to the different provinces as governors; those provinces under their government being so many principalities or kingdoms. [p. 228]

  

Chu-ti

One of the consorts of Hung Wu, the Lady Weng, had a son named Chu-ti. This young prince was very handsome and graceful in his deportment; he was, moreover, of an amiable disposition. He was the fourth son of the Emperor, and his pleasing manner and address had made him a great favourite, not only with his father, but with every one about the Court. The Empress noticed the evident affection the Emperor evinced for this prince, and determined to get him removed from the Court as soon as possible. By a judicious use of flattery and cajolery, she ultimately persuaded the Emperor to appoint the prince governor of the Yen country, and thenceforth he was styled Yen Wang, Prince of Yen.

  

The Sealed Packet

The young Prince, shortly after, taking an affectionate leave of the Emperor, left Chin-ling to proceed to his post. Ere he departed, however, a Taoist priest, called Liu Po-wen, who had a great affection for the Prince, put a sealed packet into his hand, and told him to open it when he found himself in difficulty, distress, or danger; the perusal of the first portion that came to his hand would invariably suggest some remedy for the evil, whatever it was. After doing so, he was again to seal the packet, without further looking into its contents, till some other emergency arose necessitating advice or assistance, when he would again find it. The Prince departed on his journey, and in the course of time, without meeting with any adventures worth recording, arrived safely at his destination. [p. 229]

  

A Desolate Region

The place where Peking now stands was originally called Yu Chou; in the T'ang dynasty it was called Pei-p'ing Fu; and afterward became known as Shun-t'ien Fu--but that was after the city now called Peking was built. The name of the country in which this place was situated was Yen. It was a mere barren wilderness, with very few inhabitants; these lived in huts and scattered hamlets, and there was no city to afford protection to the people and to check the depredations of robbers.

When the Prince saw what a desolate-looking place he had been appointed to, and thought of the long years he was probably destined to spend there, he grew very melancholy, and nothing his attendants essayed to do in hope of alleviating his sorrow succeeded.

  

The Prince opens the Sealed Packet

All at once the Prince bethought himself of the packet which the old Taoist priest had given him; he forthwith proceeded to make search for it--for in the bustle and excitement of travelling he had forgotten all about it--in hope that it might suggest something to better the prospects before him. Having found the packet, he hastily broke it open to see what instructions it contained; taking out the first paper which came to hand, he read the following:

"When you reach Pei-p'ing Fu you must build a city there and name it No-cha Ch'eng, the City of No-cha.  [*2] But, as the work will be costly, you must issue a proclamation inviting the wealthy to subscribe the necessary [p. 230] funds for building it. At the back of this paper is a plan of the city; you must be careful to act according to the instructions accompanying it."

The Prince inspected the plan, carefully read the instructions, and found even the minutest details fully explained. He was struck with the grandeur of the design of the proposed city, and at once acted on the instructions contained in the packet; proclamations were posted up, and large sums were speedily subscribed, ten of the wealthiest families who had accompanied him from Chin-ling being the largest contributors, supporting the plan not only with their purses, by giving immense sums, but by their influence among their less wealthy neighbours.

  

The City is Founded

When sufficient money had been subscribed, a propitious day was chosen on which to commence the undertaking. Trenches where the foundations of the walls were to be were first dug out, according to the plan found in the packet. The foundations themselves consisted of layers of stone quarried from the western hills; bricks of an immense size were made and burnt in the neighbourhood; the moat was dug out, and the earth from it used to fill in the centre of the walls, which, when complete, were forty-eight li in circumference, fifty cubits in height, and fifty in breadth; the whole circuit of the walls having battlements and embrasures. Above each of the nine gates of the city immense three-storied towers were built, each tower being ninety-nine cubits in height.

Near the front entrance of the city, facing each other, were built the Temples of Heaven and of Earth. In [p. 231] rear of it the beautiful 'Coal Hill' (better known as 'Prospect Hill') was raised; while in the square in front of the Great Gate of the palace was buried an immense quantity of charcoal (that and the coal being stored as a precaution in case of siege).

The palace, containing many superb buildings, was built in a style of exceeding splendour; in the various enclosures were beautiful gardens and lakes; in the different courtyards, too, seventy-two wells were dug and thirty-six golden tanks placed. The whole of the buildings and grounds was surrounded by a lofty wall and a stone-paved moat, in which the lotus and other flowers bloomed in great beauty and profusion, and in the clear waters of which myriads of gold and silver fish disported themselves.

The geomancy of the city was similar to that of Chin-ling, When everything was completed the Prince compared it with the plan and found that the city tallied with it in every respect. He was much delighted, and called for the ten wealthy persons who had been the chief contributors, and gave each of them a pair of 'couchant dragon' silk- or satin-embroidered cuffs, and allowed them great privileges. Up to the present time there is the common saying: "Since then the 'dragon-cuffed' gentlefolks have flourished."

  

General Prosperity

All the people were loud in praise of the beauty and strength of the newly built city. Merchants from every province hastened to Peking, attracted by the news they heard of its magnificence and the prospect there was of profitably disposing of their wares. In short, the people were prosperous and happy, food was plentiful, [p. 232] the troops brave, the monarch just, his ministers virtuous, and all enjoyed the blessings of peace.

  

A Drought and its Cause

While everything was thus tranquil, a sudden and untoward event occurred which spread dismay and consternation on all sides. One day when the Prince went into the hall of audience one of his ministers reported that "the wells are thirsty and the rivers dried up"--there was no water, and the people were all in the greatest alarm. The Prince at once called his counsellors together to devise some means of remedying this disaster and causing the water to return to the wells and springs, but no one could suggest a suitable plan.

It is necessary to explain the cause of this scarcity of water. There was a dragon's cave outside the east gate of the city at a place called Lei-chen K'ou, 'Thunder-clap Mouth' or 'Pass' (the name of a village). The dragon had not been seen for myriads of years, yet it was well known that he lived there.

In digging out the earth to build the wall the workmen had broken into this dragon's cave, little thinking of the consequences which would result. The dragon was exceedingly wroth and determined to shift his abode, but the she-dragon said: "We have lived here thousands of years, and shall we suffer the Prince of Yen to drive us forth thus? If we do go we will collect all the water, place it in our yin-yang baskets [used for drawing water], and at midnight we will appear in a dream to the Prince, requesting permission to retire. If he gives us permission to do so, and allows us also to take our baskets of water with us, he will fall into our trap, for we shall take the waler with his own consent," [p. 233]

  

The Prince's Dream

The two dragons then transformed themselves into an old man and an old woman, went to the chamber of the Prince, who was asleep, and appeared to him in a dream. Kneeling before him, they cried: "O Lord of a Thousand Years, we have come before you to beg leave to retire from this place, and to beseech you out of your great bounty to give us permission to take these two baskets of water with us."

The Prince readily assented, little dreaming of the danger he was incurring. The dragons were highly delighted, and hastened out of his presence; they filled the baskets with all the water there was in Peking, and carried them off with them.

When the Prince awoke he paid no attention to his dream till he heard the report of the scarcity of water, when, reflecting on the singularity of his dream, he thought there might be some hidden meaning in it. He therefore had recourse to the packet again, and discovered that his dream-visitors had been dragons, who had taken the waters of Peking away with them in their magic baskets; the packet, however, contained directions for the recovery of the water, and he at once prepared to follow them.

  

The Pursuit of the Dragons

In haste the Prince donned his armour, mounted his black steed, and, spear in hand, dashed out of the west gate of the city. He pressed on his horse, which went swift as the wind, nor did he slacken speed till he came up with the water-stealing dragons, who still retained the forms in which they had appeared to him in his [p. 234] dream. On a cart were the two identical baskets he had seen; in front of the cart, dragging it, was the old woman, while behind, pushing it, was the old man.

  

An Unexpected Flood

When the Prince saw them he galloped up to the cart, and, without pausing, thrust his spear into one of the baskets, making a great hole, out of which the water rushed so rapidly that the Prince was much frightened. He dashed off at full speed to save himself from being swallowed up by the waters, which in a very short time had risen more than thirty feet and had flooded the surrounding country. On galloped the Prince, followed by the roaring water, till he reached a hill, up which he urged his startled horse. When he gained the top he found that it stood out of the water like an island, completely surrounded; the water was seething and swirling round the hill in a frightful manner, but no vestige could he see of either of the dragons.

  

The Waters Subside

The Prince was very much alarmed at his perilous position, when suddenly a Buddhist priest appeared before him, with clasped hands and bent head, who bade him not be alarmed, as with Heaven's assistance he would soon disperse the water. Hereupon the priest recited a short prayer or spell, and the waters receded as rapidly as they had risen, and finally returned to their proper channels.

  

The Origin of Chen-shui T'a

The broken basket became a large deep hole, some three mu (about half an English acre) in extent, in the [p. 235] centre of which was a fountain which threw up a vast body of clear water. From the midst of this there arose a pagoda, which rose and fell with the water, floating on the top like a vessel; the spire thrusting itself far up into the sky, and swaying about like the mast of a ship in a storm.

The Prince returned to the city filled with wonder at what he had seen, and with joy at having so successfully carried out the directions contained in the packet. On all sides he was greeted by the acclamations of the people, who hailed him as the saviour of Peking. Since that time Peking has never had the misfortune to be without water.

The pagoda is called the Pagoda on the Hill of the Imperial Spring (Yu Ch'uan Shan T'a; more commonly Chen-shui T'a, 'Water-repressing Pagoda').  [*3] The spring is still there, and day and night, unceasingly, its clear waters bubble up and flow eastward to Peking, which would now be a barren wilderness but for Yen Wang's pursuit of the water. [p. 236]

Footnotes

^236:1 See Chapter XIV.

^236:2 See Chapter XII.

^236:3 This pagoda is distant about twenty li (seven miles) from Peking. It is on the top of the hill, while the spring is at the foot, half a li distant. The imperial family used the water from this spring, whence it was carried to Peking in carts.

Myths and Legends of China, by Edward T.C. Werner, [1922], at sacred-texts.com

  

Chapter VIII

  

Myths of Fire

  

The Ministry of Fire

The celestial organization of Fire is the fifth Ministry, and is presided over by a President, Lo Hsuan, whose titular designation is Huo-te Hsing-chun, 'Stellar Sovereign of the Fire-virtue,' with five subordinate ministers, four of whom are star-gods, and the fifth a "celestial prince who receives fire": Chieh-huo T'ien-chun. Like so many other Chinese deities, the five were all ministers of the tyrant emperor Chou.

It is related that Lo Hsuan was originally a Taoist priest known as Yen-chung Hsien, of the island Huo-lung, 'Fire-dragon.' His face was the colour of ripe fruit of the jujube-tree, his hair and beard red, the former done up in the shape of a fish-tail, and he had three eyes. He wore a red cloak ornamented with the pa kua; his horse snorted flames from its nostrils and fire darted from its hoofs.

While fighting in the service of the son of the tyrant emperor, Lo Hsuan suddenly changed himself into a giant with three heads and six arms. In each of his hands he held a magic weapon. These were a seal which reflected the heavens and the earth, a wheel of the five fire-dragons, a gourd containing ten thousand fire-crows, and, in the other hands, two swords which floated like smoke, and a column of smoke several thousands of li long enclosing swords of fire.

  

A Conflagration

Having arrived at the city of Hsi Ch'i, Lo Hsuan sent forth his smoke-column, the air was filled with swords of fire, the ten thousand fire-crows, emerging from the [p. 237] gourd, spread themselves over the town, and a terrible conflagration broke out, the whole place being ablaze in a few minutes.

At this juncture there appeared in the sky the Princess Lung Chi, daughter of Wang-mu Niang-niang; forthwith she spread over the city her shroud of mist and dew, and the fire was extinguished by a heavy downpour of rain. All the mysterious mechanisms of Lo Hsuan lost their efficacy, and the magician took to his heels down the side of the mountain. There he was met by Li, the Pagoda-bearer,  [*1] who threw his golden pagoda into the air. The pagoda fell on Lo Hsuan's head and broke his skull.

  

C'ih Ching-tzu

Of the various fire-gods, Ch'ih Ching-tzu, the principle of spiritual fire, is one of the five spirits representing the Five Elements. He is Fire personified, which has its birth in the south, on Mount Shih-t'ang. He himself and everything connected with him--his skin, hair, beard, trousers, cloak of leaves, etc.--are all of the colour of fire, though he is sometimes represented with a blue cap resembling the blue tip of a flame. He appeared in the presence of Huang Lao in a fire-cloud. He it was who obtained fire from the wood of the mulberry-tree, and the heat of this fire, joined with the moisture of water, developed the germs of terrestrial beings.

  

The Red Emperor

Chu Jung, though also otherwise personified, is generally regarded as having been a legendary emperor who made his first appearance in the time of Hsien [p. 238] Yuan (2698-2598 B.C.). In his youth he asked Kuang-shou Lao-jen, 'Old Longevity,' to grant him immortality. "The time has not yet come," replied Old Longevity; "before it does you have to become an emperor. I will give you the means of reaching the end you desire. Give orders that after you are dead you are to be buried on the southern slope of the sacred mountain Heng Shan; there you will learn the doctrine of Ch'ih Ching-tzu and will become immortal."

The Emperor Hsien Yuan, having abdicated the throne, sent for Chu Jung, and bestowed upon him the crown. Chu Jung, having become emperor, taught the people the use of fire and the advantages to be derived therefrom. In those early times the forests were filled with venomous reptiles and savage animals; he ordered the peasants to set fire to the brushwood to drive away these dangerous neighbours and keep them at a distance. He also taught his subjects the art of purifying, forging, and welding metals by the action of fire. He was nicknamed Ch'ih Ti, 'the Red Emperor.' He reigned for more than two hundred years, and became an Immortal, His capital was the ancient city of Kuei, thirty li north-east of Hsin-cheng Hsien, in the Prefecture of K'ai-feng Fu, Honan. His tomb is on the southern slope of Heng Shan. The peak is known as Chu Jung Peak. His descendants, who went to live in the south, were the ancestors of the Directors of Fire.

  

Hui Lu

The most popular God of Fire, however, is Hui Lu, a celebrated magician who, according to the Shen hsien t'ung chien, lived some time before the reign of Ti K'u (2436-2366 B.C.), the father of Yao the Great, and had a [p. 239] mysterious bird named Pi Fang and a hundred other fire-birds shut up in a gourd. He had only to let them out to set up a conflagration which would extend over the whole country.

Huang Ti ordered Chu Jung to fight Hui Lu and also to subdue the rebel Chih Yu. Chu Jung had a large bracelet of pure gold--a most wonderful and effective weapon. He hurled it into the air, and it fell on Hui Lu's neck, throwing him to the ground and rendering him incapable of moving. Finding resistance impossible, he asked mercy from his victor and promised to be his follower in the spiritual contests. Subsequently he always called himself Huo-shih Chih T'u, 'the Disciple of the Master of Fire.'

  

The Fire-emperor

Shen Nung, the God of Agriculture, also adds to his other functions those appertaining to the God of Fire, the reason being that when he succeeded the Emperor Fu Hsi on the throne he adopted fire as the emblem of his government, just as Huang Ti adopted the symbol of Earth. Thus he came to be called Huo Ti, the 'Fire-emperor.' He taught his subjects the use of fire for smelting metals and making implements and weapons, and the use of oil in lamps, etc. All the divisions of his official hierarchy were connected in some way with this element; thus, there were the Ministers of Fire generally, the officers of Fire of the North, South, etc. Becoming thus doubly the patron of fire, a second fire symbol (huo) was added to his name, changing it from Huo Ti, 'Fire-emperor,' to Yen Ti, 'Blazing Emperor,' [p. 240]

Footnotes

^240:1 See Chapter XII.

Myths and Legends of China, by Edward T.C. Werner, [1922], at sacred-texts.com

  

Chapter IX

  

Myths of Epidemics, Medicine, Exorcism, Etc.

  

The Ministry of Epidemics

The gods of epidemics, etc., belong to the sixth, ninth, second, and third celestial Ministries. The composition of the Ministry of Epidemics is arranged differently in different works as Epidemics (regarded as epidemics on earth, but as demons in Heaven) of the Centre, Spring, Summer, Autumn, and Winter, or as the marshals clothed in yellow, green, red, white, and blue respectively, or as the Officers of the East, West, South, and North, with two additional members: a Taoist who quells the plague, and the Grand Master who exhorts people to do right.

With regard to the Ministry of Seasonal Epidemics, it is related that in the sixth moon of the eleventh year (A.D. 599) of the reign of Kao Tsu, founder of the Sui dynasty, five stalwart persons appeared in the air, clothed in robes of five colours, each carrying different objects in his hands: the first a spoon and earthenware vase, the second a leather bag and sword, the third a fan, the fourth a club, the fifth a jug of fire. The Emperor asked Chang Chu-jen, his Grand Historiographer, who these were and if they were benevolent or evil spirits. The official answered: "These are the five powers of the five directions. Their appearance indicates the imminence of epidemics, which will last throughout the four seasons of the year." "What remedy is there, and how am I to protect the people?" inquired the Emperor. "There is no remedy," replied the official, "for epidemics are sent by Heaven." During that year the mortality was very great. The [p. 241] Emperor built a temple to the five persons, and bestowed upon them the title of Marshals to the Five Spirits of the Plague. During that and the following dynasty sacrifices were offered to them on the fifth day of the fifth moon.

  

The President of the Ministry

The following particulars are given concerning the President of the Ministry, whose name was Lu Yueh. He was an old Taoist hermit, living at Chiu-lung Tao, 'Nine-dragon Island,' who became an Immortal. The four members of the Ministry were his disciples. He wore a red garment, had a blue face, red hair, long teeth, and three eyes. His war-horse was named the Myopic Camel. He carried a magic sword, and was in the service of Chou Wang, whose armies were concentrated at Hsi Ch'i. In a duel with Mu-cha, brother of No-cha, he had his arm severed by a sword-cut. In another battle with Huang T'ien-hua, son of Huang Fei-hu, he appeared with three heads and six arms. In his many hands he held the celestial seal, plague microbes, the flag of plague, the plague sword, and two mysterious swords. His faces were green, and large teeth protruded from his mouths. Huang T'ien-hua threw his magic weapon, Huo-lung Piao, and hit him on the leg. Just at that moment Chiang Tzu-ya arrived with his goblin-dispelling whip and felled him with a blow. He was able, however, to rise again, and took to flight.

  

The Plague-disseminating Umbrellas

Resolved to avenge his defeat, he joined General Hsu Fang, who was commanding an army corps at Ch'uan-yun Kuan. Round the mountain he organized [p. 242] a system of entrenchments and of infection against their enemies. Yang Chien released his celestial hound, which bit Lu Yueh on the crown of his head. Then Yang Jen, armed with his magic fan, pursued Lu Yueh and compelled him to retreat to his fortress. Lu Yueh mounted the central raised part of the embattled wall and opened all his plague-disseminating umbrellas, with the object of infecting Yang Jen, but the latter, simply by waving his fan, reduced all the umbrellas to dust, and also burned the fort, and with it Lu Yueh.

Similar wonderful achievements are related in short notices in the Feng shen yen i of the four other officers of the Ministry.

Li P'ing, the sixth officer of the Ministry, met a like fate to that of Lu Yueh after having failed to induce the latter to abandon the cause of the Shang dynasty for that of Chou.

  

The Five Graduates

In Pere Henri Dore's Recherches sur les Superstitions en Chine is given an interesting legend concerning five other gods of epidemics. These gods are called the Wu Yueh, 'Five Mountains,' and are worshipped in the temple San-i Ko at Ju-kao, especially in outbreaks of contagious diseases and fevers. A sufferer goes to the temple and promises offerings to the gods in the event of recovery. The customary offering is five small wheaten loaves, called shao ping, and a pound of meat.

Click to enlarge
 The Magic Umbrellas

The Wu Yueh are stellar devils whom Yu Huang sent to be reincarnated on earth. Their names were T'ien Po-hsueh, Tung Hung-wen, Ts'ai Wen-chu, Chao Wu-chen, and Huang Ying-tu, and they were reincarnated at Nan-ch'ang Fu, Chien-ch'ang Fu, Yen-men Kuan, Yang Chou, [p. 243] and Nanking respectively. They were all noted for their brilliant intellects, and were clever scholars who passed their graduate's examination with success.

When Li Shih-min ascended the throne, in A.D. 627, he called together all the literati of the Empire to take the Doctor's Examination in the capital. Our five graduates started for the metropolis, but, losing their way, were robbed by brigands, and had to beg help in order to reach the end of their journey. By good luck they all met in the temple San-i Ko, and related to each other the various hardships they had undergone. But when they eventually reached the capital the examination was over, and they were out in the streets without resources. So they took an oath of brotherhood for life and death. They pawned some of the few clothes they possessed, and buying some musical instruments formed themselves into a band of strolling musicians.

The first bought a drum, the second a seven-stringed guitar, the third a mandolin, the fourth a clarinet, and the fifth and youngest composed songs.

Thus they went through the streets of the capital giving their concerts, and Fate decreed that Li Shih-min should hear their melodies. Charmed with the sweet sounds, he asked Hsu Mao-kung whence came this band of musicians, whose skill was certainly exceptional. Having made inquiries, the minister related their experiences to the Emperor. Li Shih-min ordered them to be brought into his presence, and after hearing them play and sing appointed them to his private suite, and henceforth they accompanied him wherever he went.

  

The Emperors Strategy

The Emperor bore malice toward Chang T'ien-shih, the Master of the Taoists, because he refused to pay the [p. 244] taxes on his property, and conceived a plan to bring about his destruction. He caused a spacious subterranean chamber to be dug under the reception-hall of his palace. A wire passed through the ceiling to where the Emperor sat. He could thus at will give the signal for the music to begin or stop. Having stationed the five musicians in this subterranean chamber, he summoned the Master of the Taoists to his presence and invited him to a banquet. During the course of this he pulled the wire, and a subterranean babel began.

The Emperor pretended to be terrified, and allowed himself to fall to the ground. Then, addressing himself to the T'ien-shih, he said: "I know that you can at will catch the devilish hobgoblins which molest human beings. You can hear for yourself the infernal row they make in my palace. I order you under penalty of death to put a stop to their pranks and to exterminate them."

  

The Musicians are Slain

Having spoken thus, the Emperor rose and left. The Master of the Taoists brought his projecting mirror, and began to seek for the evil spirits. In vain he inspected the palace and its precincts; he could discover nothing. Fearing that he was lost, he in despair threw his mirror on the floor of the reception-hall.

A minute later, sad and pensive, he stooped to pick it up; what was his joyful surprise when he saw reflected in it the subterranean room and the musicians! At once he drew five talismans on yellow paper, burned them, and ordered his celestial general, Chao Kung-ming, to take his sword and kill the five musicians. The order was promptly executed, and the T'ien-shih informed the Emperor, who received the news with ridicule, not [p. 245] believing it to be true. He went to his seat and pulled the wire, but all remained silent. A second and third time he gave the signal, but without response. He then ordered his Grand Officer to ascertain what had happened. The officer found the five graduates bathed in their blood, and lifeless.

The Emperor, furious, reproached the Master of the Taoists. "But," replied the T'ien-shih, "was it not your Majesty who ordered me under pain of death to exterminate the authors of this pandemonium?" Li Shih-min could not reply. He dismissed the Master of the Taoists and ordered the five victims to be buried.

  

The Emperor Tormented

After the funeral ceremonies, apparitions appeared at night in the place where they had been killed, and the palace became a babel. The spirits threw bricks and broke the tiles on the roofs.

The Emperor ordered his uncomfortable visitors to go to the T'ien-shih who had murdered them. They obeyed, and, seizing the garments of the Master of the Taoists, swore not to allow him any rest if he would not restore them to life.

To appease them the Taoist said: "I am going to give each of you a wonderful object. You are then to return and spread epidemics among wicked people, beginning in the imperial palace and with the Emperor himself, with the object of forcing him to canonize you."

One received a fan, another a gourd filled with fire, the third a metallic ring to encircle people's heads, the fourth a stick made of wolves' teeth, and the fifth a cup of lustral water.

The spirit-graduates left full of joy, and made their [p. 246] first experiment on Li Shih-min. The first gave him feverish chills by waving his fan, the second burned him with the fire from his gourd, the third encircled his head with the ring, causing him violent headache, the fourth struck him with his stick, and the fifth poured out his cup of lustral water on his head.

The same night a similar tragedy took place in the palace of the Empress and the two chief imperial concubines.

T'ai-po Chin-hsing, however, informed Yu Huang what had happened, and, touched with compassion, he sent three Immortals with pills and talismans which cured the Empress and the ladies of the palace.

  

The Graduates Canonized

Li Shih-min, having also recovered his health, summoned the five deceased graduates and expressed his regret for the unfortunate issue of his design against the T'ien-shih. He proceeded: "To the south of the capital is the temple San-i Ko. I will change its name to Hsiang Shan Wu Yueh Shen, 'Fragrant Hill of the Five Mountain Spirits.' On the twenty-eighth day of the ninth moon betake yourselves to that temple to receive the seals of your canonization." He conferred upon them the title of Ti, 'Emperor.'

  

The Ministry of Medicine

The celestial Ministry of Medicine is composed of three main divisions comprising: (1) the Ancestral Gods of the Chinese race; (2) the King of Remedies, Yao Wang; and (3) the Specialists. There is a separate Ministry of Smallpox. This latter controls and cures smallpox, and the establishment of a separate celestial Ministry is [p. 247] significant of the prevalence and importance of the affliction. The ravages of smallpox in China, indeed, have been terrific: so much so, that, until recent years, it was considered as natural and inevitable for a child to have smallpox as for it to cut its teeth. One of the ceremonial questions addressed by a visitor to the parent of a child was always Ch'u la hua'rh mei yu? "Has he had the smallpox?" and a child who escaped the scourge was often, if not as a rule, regarded with disfavour and, curiously enough, as a weakling. Probably the train of thought in the Chinese mind was that, as it is the fittest who survive, those who have successfully passed through the process of "putting out the flowers" have proved their fitness in the struggle for existence. Nowadays vaccination is general, and the number of pockmarked faces seen is much smaller than it used to be--in fact, the pockmarked are now the exception. But, as far as I have been able to ascertain, the Ministry of Smallpox has not been abolished, and possibly its members, like those of some more mundane ministries, continue to draw large salaries for doing little or no work.

  

The Medicine-gods

The chief gods of medicine are the mythical kings P'an Ku, Fu Hsi, Shen Nung, and Huang Ti. The first two, being by different writers regarded as the first progenitor or creator of the Chinese people, are alternatives, so that Fu Hsi, Shen Nung, and Huang Ti may be said to be a sort of ancestral triad of medicine-gods, superior to the actual God or King of Medicine, Yao Wang. Of P'an Ku we have spoken sufficiently in Chapter III, and with regard to Fu Hsi, also called T'ien Huang Shih, 'the Celestial Emperor,' the mythical sovereign and [p. 248] supposed inventor of cooking, musical instruments, the calendar, hunting, fishing, etc., the chief interest for our present purpose centres in his discovery of the pa kua, or Eight Trigrams. It is on the strength of these trigrams that Fu Hsi is regarded as the chief god of medicine, since it is by their mystical power that the Chinese physicians influence the minds and maladies of their patients. He is represented as holding in front of him a disk on which the signs are painted.

  

The Ministry of Exorcism

The Ministry of Exorcism is a Taoist invention and is composed of seven chief ministers, whose duty is to expel evil spirits from dwellings and generally to counteract the annoyances of infernal demons. The two gods usually referred to in the popular legends are P'an Kuan and Chung K'uei. The first is really the Guardian of the Living and the Dead in the Otherworld, Feng-tu P'an Kuan (Feng-tu or Feng-tu Ch'eng being the region beyond the tomb). He was originally a scholar named Ts'ui Chio, who became Magistrate of Tz'u Chou, and later Minister of Ceremonies. After his death he was appointed to the spiritual post above mentioned. His best-known achievement is his prolongation of the life of the Emperor T'ai Tsung of the T'ang dynasty by twenty years by changing i, 'one,' into san, 'three,' in the life-register kept by the gods. The term P'an Kuan is, however, more generally used as the designation of an officer or civil or military attendant upon a god than of any special individual, and the original P'an Kuan, 'the Decider of Life in Hades,' has been gradually supplanted in popular favour by Chung K'uei, 'the Protector against Evil Spirits.'

Click to enlarge
 P'an Kuan

[p. 249]

  

The Exorcism of 'Emptiness and Devastation'

The Emperor Ming Huang of the T'ang dynasty, also known as T'ang Hsuan Tsung, in the reign-period K'ai Yuan (A.D. 712-742), after an expedition to Mount Li in Shensi, was attacked by fever. During a nightmare he saw a small demon fantastically dressed in red trousers, with a shoe on one foot but none on the other, and a shoe hanging from his girdle. Having broken through a bamboo gate, he took possession of an embroidered box and a jade flute, and then began to make a tour of the palace, sporting and gambolling. The Emperor grew angry and questioned him. "Your humble servant," replied the little demon, "is named Hsu Hao, 'Emptiness and Devastation,'" "I have never heard of such a person," said the Emperor. The demon rejoined, "Hsu means to desire Emptiness, because in Emptiness one can fly just as one wishes; Hao, 'Devastation,' changes people's joy to sadness. "The Emperor, irritated by this flippancy, was about to call his guard, when suddenly a great devil appeared, wearing a tattered head-covering and a blue robe, a horn clasp on his belt, and official boots on his feet. He went up to the sprite, tore out one of his eyes, crushed it up, and ate it. The Emperor asked the newcomer who he was. "Your humble servant," he replied, "is Chung K'uei, Physician of Tung-nan Shan in Shensi. In the reign-period Wu Te (A.D. 618-627) of the Emperor Kao Tsu of the T'ang dynasty I was ignominiously rejected and unjustly defrauded of a first class in the public examinations. Overwhelmed with shame, I committed suicide on the steps of the imperial palace. The Emperor ordered me to be buried in a green robe [reserved for members of the imperial clan], and out of gratitude for [p. 250] that favour I swore to protect the sovereign in any part of the Empire against the evil machinations of the demon Hsu Hao." At these words the Emperor awoke and found that the fever had left him. His Majesty called for Wu Tao-tzu (one of the most celebrated Chinese artists) to paint the portrait of the person he had seen in his dream. The work was so well done that the Emperor recognized it as the actual demon he had seen in his sleep, and rewarded the artist with a hundred taels of gold. The portrait is said to have been still in the imperial palace during the Sung dynasty.

Another version of the legend says that Chung K'uefs essay was recognized by the examiners as equal to the work of the best authors of antiquity, but that the Emperor rejected him on account of his extremely ugly features, whereupon he committed suicide in his presence, was honoured by the Emperor and accorded a funeral as if he had been the successful first candidate, and canonized with the title of Great Spiritual Chaser of Demons for the Whole Empire. [p. 251]

Myths and Legends of China, by Edward T.C. Werner, [1922], at sacred-texts.com

  

Chapter X

  

The Goddess of Mercy

  

The Guardian Angel of Buddhism

As Mary is the guiding spirit of Rome, so is Kuan Yin of the Buddhist faith.

According to a beautiful Chinese legend, Kuan Yin. when about to enter Heaven, heard a cry of anguish rising from the earth beneath her, and, moved by pity, paused as her feet touched the glorious threshold. Hence her name 'Kuan (Shih) Yin' (one who notices or hears the cry, or prayer, of the world).

Kuan Yin was at one time always represented as a man; but in the T'ang dynasty and Five Dynasties we find him represented as a woman, and he has been generally, though not invariably, so represented since that time.

In old Buddhism Shakyamuni was the chief god, and in many temples he still nominally occupies the seat of honour, but he is completely eclipsed by the God or Goddess of Mercy.

"The men love her, the children adore her, and the women chant her prayers. Whatever the temple may be, there is nearly always a chapel for Kuan Yin within its precincts; she lives in many homes, and in many, many hearts she sits enshrined. She is the patron goddess of mothers, and when we remember the relative value of a son in Chinese estimation we can appreciate the heartiness of the worship. She protects in sorrow, and so millions of times the prayer is offered, 'Great mercy, great pity, save from sorrow, save from suffering,' or, as it is in the books, 'Great mercy, great pity, save from misery, save from evil, broad, great, efficacious, responsive Kuan Yin Buddha,' She saves the tempest-tossed [p. 252] sailor, and so has eclipsed the Empress of Heaven, who, as the female Neptune, is the patroness of seamen; in drought the mandarins worship the Dragon and the Pearly Emperor, but if they fail the bronze Goddess of Mercy from the hills brings rain. Other gods are feared, she is loved; others have black, scornful faces, her countenance is radiant as gold, and gentle as the moon-beam; she draws near to the people and the people draw near to her. Her throne is upon the Isle of Pootoo [P'u T'o], to which she came floating upon a water-lily. She is the model of Chinese beauty, and to say a lady or a little girl is a 'Kuan Yin' is the highest compliment that can be paid to grace and loveliness. She is fortunate in having three birthdays, the nineteenth of the second, sixth, and ninth moons." There are many metamorphoses of this goddess.

  

The Buddhist Saviour

"She is called Kuan Yin because at any cry of misery she 'hears the voice and removes the sorrow.' Her appellation is 'Taking-away-fear Buddha,' If in the midst of the fire the name of Kuan Yin is called, the fire cannot burn; if tossed by mountain billows, call her name, and shallow waters will be reached. If merchants go across the sea seeking gold, silver, pearls, and precious stones, and a storm comes up and threatens to carry the crew to the evil devil's kingdom, if one on board calls on the name of Kuan Yin, the ship will be saved. If one goes into a conflict and calls on the name of Kuan Yin, the sword and spear of the enemy fall harmless. If the three thousand great kingdoms are visited by demons, call on her name, and these demons cannot with an evil eye look on a man. If, within, you have evil thoughts, [p. 253] only call on Kuan Yin, and your heart will be purified, Anger and wrath may be dispelled by calling on the name of Kuan Yin. A lunatic who prays to Kuan Yin will become sane. Kuan Yin gives sons to mothers, and if the mother asks for a daughter she will be beautiful. Two men--one chanting the names of the 6,200,000 Buddhas, in number like the sands of the Ganges, and the other simply calling on Kuan Yin--have equal merit. Kuan Yin may take the form of a Buddha, a prince, a priest, a nun, a scholar, any form or shape, go to any kingdom, and preach the law throughout the earth."

  

Miao Chuang desires an Heir

In the twenty-first year of the reign of Ta Hao, the Great Great One, of the Golden Heavenly Dynasty, a man named P'o Chia, whose first name was Lo Yu, an enterprising kinglet of Hsi Yii, seized the throne for twenty years, after carrying on a war for a space of three years. His kingdom was known as Hsing Lin, and the title of his reign as Miao Chuang.

The kingdom of Hsing Lin was, so says the Chinese writer, situated between India on the west, the kingdom of T'ien Cheng on the south, and the kingdom of Siam on the north, and was 3000 li in length. The boundaries differ according to different authors. Of this kingdom the two pillars of State were the Grand Minister Chao Chen and the General Ch'u Chieh. The Queen Pao Te, whose maiden name was Po Ya, and the King Miao Chuang had lived nearly half a century without having any male issue to succeed to the throne. This was a source of great grief to them. Po Ya suggested to the King that the God of Hua Shan, the sacred mountain in the west, had the reputation of being always willing [p. 254] to help; and that if he prayed to him and asked his pardon for having shed so much blood during the wars which preceded his accession to the throne he might obtain an heir.

Welcoming this suggestion, the King sent for Chao Chen and ordered him to dispatch to the temple of Hua Shan the two Chief Ministers of Ceremonies, Hsi Heng-nan and Chih Tu, with instructions to request fifty Buddhist and Taoist priests to pray for seven days and seven nights in order that the King might obtain a son. When that period was over, the King and Queen would go in person to offer sacrifices in the temple.

  

Prayers to the Gods

The envoys took with them many rare and valuable presents, and for seven days and seven nights the temple resounded with the sound of drums, bells, and all kinds of instruments, intermingled with the voices of the praying priests. On their arrival the King and Queen offered sacrifices to the god of the sacred mountain.

But the God of Hua Shan knew that the King had been deprived of a male heir as a punishment for the bloody hecatombs during his three years' war. The priests, however, interceded for him, urging that the King had come in person to offer the sacrifices, wherefore the God could not altogether reject his prayer. So he ordered Ch'ien-li Yen, 'Thousand-li Eye,' and Shun-feng Erh, 'Favourable-wind Ear,'  [*1] to go quickly and ascertain if there were not some worthy person who was on the point of being reincarnated into this world.

The two messengers shortly returned, and stated that [p. 255] in India, in the Chiu Ling Mountains, in the village of Chih-shu Yuan, there lived a good man named Shih Ch'in-ch'ang, whose ancestors for three generations had observed all the ascetic rules of the Buddhists. This man was the father of three children, the eldest Shih Wen, the second Shih Chin, and the third Shih Shan, all worthy followers of the great Buddha.

  

The Murder of the Tais

Wang Che, a brigand chief, and thirty of his followers, finding themselves pursued and harassed by the Indian soldiers, without provisions or shelter, dying of hunger, went to Shih Wen and begged for something to eat. Knowing that they were evildoers, Shih Wen and his two brothers refused to give them anything; if they starved, they said, the peasants would no longer suffer from their depredations. Thereupon the brigands decided that it was a case of life for life, and broke into the house of a rich family of the name of Tai, burning their home, killing a hundred men, women, and children, and carrying off everything they possessed.

The local t'u-ti at once made a report to Yu Huang.

"This Shih family," replied the god, "for three generations has given itself up to good works, and certainly the brigands were not deserving of any pity. However, it is impossible to deny that the three brothers Shih, in refusing them food, morally compelled them to loot the Tai family's house, putting all to the sword or flames. Is not this the same as if they had committed the crime themselves? Let them be arrested and put in chains in the celestial prison, and let them never see the light of the sun again."

"Since," said the messenger to the God of Hua Shan, [p. 256] "your gratitude toward Miao Chuang compels you to grant him an heir, why not ask Yu Huang to pardon their crime and reincarnate them in the womb of the Queen Po Ya, so that they may begin a new terrestrial existence and give themselves up to good works?" As a result, the God of Hua Shan called the Spirit of the Wind and gave him a message for Yu Huang.

  

A Message for Yu Huang

The message was as follows: "King Miao Chuang has offered sacrifice to me and begged me to grant him an heir. But since by his wars he has caused the deaths of a large number of human beings, he does not deserve to have his request granted. Now these three brothers Shih have offended your Majesty by constraining the brigand Wang Che to be guilty of murder and robbery. I pray you to take into account their past good works and pardon their crime, giving them an opportunity of expiating it by causing them all three to be reborn, but of the female sex, in the womb of Po Ya the Queen.  [*2] In this way they will be able to atone for their crime and save many souls." Yu Huang was pleased to comply, and he ordered the Spirit of the North Pole to release the three captives and take their souls to the palace of King Miao Chuang, where in three years' time they would be changed into females in the womb of Queen Po Ya.

  

Birth of the Three Daughters

The King, who was anxiously expecting day by day the birth of an heir, was informed one morning that a [p. 257] daughter had been born to him. She was named Miao Ch'ing. A year went by, and another daughter was born. This one was named Miao Yin. When, at the end of the third year, another daughter was born, the King, beside himself with rage, called his Grand Minister Chao Chen and, all disconsolate, said to him, "I am past fifty, and have no male child to succeed me on the throne. My dynasty will therefore become extinct. Of what use have been all my labours and all my victories?" Chao Chen tried to console him, saying, "Heaven has granted you three daughters: no human power can change this divine decree. When these princesses have grown up, we will choose three sons-in-law for your Majesty, and you can elect your successor from among them. Who will dare to dispute his right to the throne?"

The King named the third daughter Miao Shan. She became noted for her modesty and many other good qualities, and scrupulously observed all the tenets of the Buddhist doctrines. Virtuous living seemed, indeed, to be to her a second nature.

  

Miao Shan's Ambition

One day, when the three sisters were playing in the palace garden of Perpetual Spring, Miao Shan, with a serious mien, said to her sisters, "Riches and glory are like the rain in spring or the morning dew; a little while, and all is gone. Kings and emperors think to enjoy to the end the good fortune which places them in a rank apart from other human beings; but sickness lays them low in their coffins, and all is over. Where are now all those powerful dynasties which have laid down the law to the world? As for me, I desire nothing more than a [p. 258] peaceful retreat on a lone mountain, there to attempt the attainment of perfection. If some day I can reach a high degree of goodness, then, borne on the clouds of Heaven, I will travel throughout the universe, passing in the twinkling of an eye from east to west. I will rescue my father and mother, and bring them to Heaven; I will save the miserable and afflicted on earth; I will convert the spirits which do evil, and cause them to do good. That is my only ambition."

  

Her Sisters Marry

No sooner had she finished speaking than a lady of the Court came to announce that the King had found sons-in-law to his liking for his two elder daughters. The wedding-feast was to be the very next day. "Be quick," she added, "and prepare your presents, your dresses, and so forth, for the King's order is imperative." The husband chosen for Miao Ch'ing was a First Academician named Chao K'uei. His personal name was Te Ta, and he was the son of a celebrated minister of the reigning dynasty. Miao Yin's husband-elect was a military officer named Ho Feng, whose personal name was Ch'ao Yang. He had passed first in the examination for the Military Doctorate. The marriage ceremonies were of a magnificent character. Festivity followed festivity; the newly-wed were duly installed in their palaces, and general happiness prevailed.

  

Miao Shan's Renunciation

There now remained only Miao Shan. The King and Queen wished to find for her a man famous for knowledge and virtue, capable of ruling the kingdom, and worthy of being the successor to the throne. So the King called [p. 259] her and explained to her all his plans regarding her, and how all his hopes rested on her.

"It is a crime," she replied, "for me not to comply with my father's wishes; but you must pardon me if my ideas differ from yours."

"Tell me what your ideas are," said the King.

"I do not wish to marry," she rejoined. "I wish to attain to perfection and to Buddhahood. Then I promise that I will not be ungrateful to you."

"Wretch of a daughter," cried the King in anger, "you think you can teach me, the head of the State and ruler of so great a people! Has anyone ever known a daughter of a king become a nun? Can a good woman be found in that class? Put aside all these mad ideas of a nunnery, and tell me at once if you will marry a First Academician or a Military First Graduate."

"Who is there," answered the girl, "who does not love the royal dignity?--what person who does not aspire to the happiness of marriage? However, I wish to become a nun. With respect to the riches and glory of this world, my heart is as cold as a dead cinder, and I feel a keen desire to make it ever purer and purer."

The King rose in fury, and wished to cast her out from his presence. Miao Shan, knowing she could not openly disobey his orders, took another course. "If you absolutely insist upon my marrying," she said, "I will consent; only I must marry a physician."

"A physician!" growled the King. "Are men of good family and talents wanting in my kingdom? What an absurd idea, to want to marry a physician!"

"My wish is," said Miao Shan, "to heal humanity of all its ills; of cold, heat, lust, old age, and all infirmities. I wish to equalize all classes, putting rich and poor on [p. 260] the same footing, to have community of goods, without distinction of persons. If you will grant me my wish, I can still in this way become a Buddha, a Saviour of Mankind. There is no necessity to call in the diviners to choose an auspicious day. I am ready to be married now."

  

She is Exiled to the Garden

At these words the King was mad with rage. "Wicked imbecile!" he cried, "what diabolical suggestions are these that you dare to make in my presence?"

Without further ado he called Ho T'ao, who on that day was officer of the palace guard. When he had arrived and kneeled to receive the King's commands, the latter said: "This wicked nun dishonours me. Take from her her Court robes, and drive her from my presence. Take her to the Queen's garden, and let her perish there of cold: that will be one care less for my troubled heart."

Miao Shan fell on her face and thanked the King, and then went with the officer to the Queen's garden, where she began to lead her retired hermit life, with the moon for companion and the wind for friend, content to see all obstacles overthrown on her way to Nirvana, the highest state of spiritual bliss, and glad to exchange the pleasures of the palace for the sweetness of solitude.

  

The Nunnery of the White Bird

After futile attempts to dissuade her from her purpose by the Court ladies, her parents, and sisters, the King and Queen next deputed Miao Hung and Ts'ui Hung to make a last attempt to bring their misguided daughter to her senses. Miao Shan, annoyed at this renewed [p. 261] solicitation, in a haughty manner ordered them never again to come and torment her with their silly prattle. "I have found out," she added, "that there is a well-known temple at Ju Chou in Lung-shu Hsien. This Buddhist temple is known as the Nunnery of the White Bird, Po-ch'iao Ch'an-ssu. In it five hundred nuns give themselves up to the study of the true doctrine and the way of perfection. Go then and ask the Queen on my behalf to obtain the King's permission for me to retire thither. If you can procure me this favour, I will not fail to reward you later."

Miao Chuang summoned the messengers and inquired the result of their efforts. "She is more unapproachable than ever," they replied; "she has even ordered us to ask the Queen to obtain your Majesty's permission to retire to the Nunnery of the White Bird in Lung-shu Hsien."

The King gave his permission, but sent strict orders to the nunnery, instructing the nuns to do all in their power to dissuade the Princess when she arrived from carrying out her intention to remain.

  

Her Reception at the Nunnery

This Nunnery of the White Bird had been built by Huang Ti, and the five hundred nuns who lived in it had as Superior a lady named I Yu, who was remarkable for her virtue. On receipt of the royal mandate, she had summoned Cheng Cheng-ch'ang, the choir-mistress, and informed her that Princess Miao Shan, owing to a disagreement with her father, would shortly arrive at the temple. She requested her to receive the visitor courteously, but at the same time to do all she could to dissuade her from adopting the life of a nun. Having given these instructions, the Superior, accompanied by [p. 262] two novices, went to meet Miao Shan at the gate of the temple. On her arrival they saluted her. The Princess returned the salute, but said: "I have just left the world in order to place myself under your orders: why do you come and salute me on my arrival? I beg you to be so good as to take me into the temple, in order that I may pay my respects to the Buddha." I Yu led her into the principal hall, and instructed the nuns to light incense-sticks, ring the bells, and beat the drums. The visit to the temple finished, she went into the preaching-hall, where she greeted her instructresses. The latter obeyed the King's command and endeavoured to persuade the Princess to return to her home, but, as none of their arguments had any effect, it was at length decided to give her a trial, and to put her in charge of the kitchen, where she could prepare the food for the nunnery, and generally be at the service of all. If she did not give satisfaction they could dismiss her.

  

She makes Offering to the Buddha

Miao Shan joyfully agreed, and proceeded to make her humble submission to the Buddha. She knelt before Ju Lai, and made offering to him, praying as follows: "Great Buddha, full of goodness and mercy, your humble servant wishes to leave the world. Grant that I may never yield to the temptations which will be sent to try my faith." Miao Shan further promised to observe all the regulations of the nunnery and to obey the superiors.

Click to enlarge
 Miao Shan Reaches the Nunnery

  

Spiritual Aid

This generous self-sacrifice touched the heart of Yu Huang, the Master of Heaven, who summoned the Spirit of the North Star and instructed him as follows: [p. 263] "Miao Shan, the third daughter of King Miao Chuang, has renounced the world in order to devote herself to the attainment of perfection. Her father has consigned her to the Nunnery of the White Bird. She has undertaken without grumbling the burden of all the work in the nunnery. If she is left without help, who is there who will be willing to adopt the virtuous life? Do you go quickly and order the Three Agents, the Gods of the Five Sacred Peaks, the Eight Ministers of the Heavenly Dragon, Ch'ieh Lan, and the t'u-ti to send her help at once. Tell the Sea-dragon to dig her a well near the kitchen, a tiger to bring her firewood, birds to collect vegetables for the inmates of the nunnery, and all the spirits of Heaven to help her in her duties, that she may give herself up without disturbance to the pursuit of perfection. See that my commands are promptly obeyed." The Spirit of the North Star complied without delay.

  

The Nunnery on Fire

Seeing all these gods arrive to help the novice, the Superior, I Yu, held consultation with the choir-mistress, saying: "We assigned to the Princess the burdensome work of the kitchen because she refused to return to the world; but since she has entered on her duties the gods of the eight caves of Heaven have come to offer her fruit, Ch'ieh Lan sweeps the kitchen, the dragon has dug a well, the God of the Hearth and the tiger bring her fuel, birds collect vegetables for her, the nunnery bell every evening at dusk booms of itself, as if struck by some mysterious hand. Obviously miracles are being performed. Hasten and fetch the King, and beg his Majesty to recall his daughter." [p. 264]

Cheng Cheng-ch'ang started on her way, and, on arrival, informed the King of all that had taken place. The King called Hu Pi-li, the chief of the guard, and ordered him to go to the sub-prefecture of Lung-shu Hsien at the head of an army corps of 5000 infantry and cavalry. He was to surround the Nunnery of the White Bird and burn it to the ground, together with the nuns. When he reached the place the commander surrounded the nunnery with his soldiers, and set fire to it. The five hundred doomed nuns invoked the aid of Heaven and earth, and then, addressing Miao Shan, said: "It is you who have brought upon us this terrible disaster."

"It is true," said Miao Shan. "I alone am the cause of your destruction." She then knelt down and prayed to Heaven: "Great Sovereign of the Universe, your servant is the daughter of King Miao Chuang; you are the grandson of King Lun. Will you not rescue your younger sister? You have left your palace; I also have left mine. You in former times betook yourself to the snowy mountains to attain perfection; I came here with the same object. Will you not save us from this fiery destruction?"

Her prayer ended, Miao Shan took a bamboo hairpin from her hair, pricked the roof of her mouth with it, and spat the flowing blood toward Heaven. Immediately great clouds gathered in all parts of the sky and sent down inundating showers, which put out the fire that threatened the nunnery. The nuns threw themselves on their knees and thanked her effusively for having saved their lives.

Hu Pi-li retired, and went in haste to inform the King of this extraordinary occurrence. The King, enraged, [p. 265] ordered him to go back at once, bring his daughter in chains, and behead her on the spot.

  

The Execution of Miao Shan

But the Queen, who had heard of this new plot, begged the King to grant her daughter a last chance. "If you will give permission," she said, "I will have a magnificent pavilion built at the side of the road where Miao Shan will pass in chains on the way to her execution, and will go there with our two other daughters and our sons-in-law. As she passes we will have music, songs, feasting, everything likely to impress her and make her contrast our luxurious life with her miserable plight. This will surely bring her to repentance."

"I agree," said the King, "to counter-order her execution until your preparations are complete." Nevertheless, when the time came, Miao Shan showed nothing but disdain for all this worldly show, and to all advances replied only: "I love not these pompous vanities; I swear that I prefer death to the so-called joys of this world." She was then led to the place of execution. All the Court was present. Sacrifices were made to her as to one already dead. A Grand Minister pronounced the sacrificial oration.

In the midst of all this the Queen appeared, and ordered the officials to return to their posts, that she might once more exhort her daughter to repent. But Miao Shan only listened in silence with downcast eyes.

The King felt great repugnance to shedding his daughter's blood, and ordered her to be imprisoned in the palace, in order that he might make a last effort to save her. "I am the King," he said; "my orders cannot be lightly set aside. Disobedience to them [p. 266] involves punishment, and in spite of my paternal love for you, if you persist in your present attitude, you will be executed to-morrow in front of the palace gate."

The t'u-ti, hearing the King's verdict, went with all speed to Yu Huang, and reported to him the sentence which had been pronounced against Miao Shan. Yu Huang exclaimed: "Save Buddha, there is none in the west so noble as this Princess. To-morrow, at the appointed hour, go to the scene of execution, break the swords, and splinter the lances they will use to kill her. See that she suffers no pain. At the moment of her death transform yourself into a tiger, and bring her body to the pine-wood. Having deposited it in a safe place, put a magic pill in her mouth to arrest decay. Her triumphant soul on its return from the lower regions must find it in a perfect state of preservation in order to be able to re-enter it and animate it afresh. After that, she must betake herself to Hsiang Shan on P'u T'o Island, where she will reach the highest state of perfection."

On the day appointed, Commander Hu Pi-li led the condemned Princess to the place of execution. A body of troops had been stationed there to maintain order. The t'u-ti was in attendance at the palace gates. Miao Shan was radiant with joy. "To-day," she said, "I leave the world for a better life. Hasten to take my life, but beware of mutilating my body."

Click to enlarge
 The Tiger Carries Off Miao Shan.

The King's warrant arrived, and suddenly the sky became overcast and darkness fell upon the earth. A bright light surrounded Miao Shan, and when the sword of the executioner fell upon the neck of the victim it was broken in two. Then they thrust at her with a spear, but the weapon fell to pieces. After that the King ordered that she be strangled with a silken cord. A [p. 267] few moments later a tiger leapt into the execution ground, dispersed the executioners, put the inanimate body of Miao Shan on his back, and disappeared into the pine-forest. Hu Pi-li rushed to the palace, recounted to the King full details of all that had occurred, and received a reward of two ingots of gold.

  

Miao Shan visits the Infernal Regions

Meantime, Miao Shan's soul, which remained unhurt, was borne on a cloud; when, waking as from a dream, she lifted her head and looked round, she could not see her body. "My father has just had me strangled," she sighed. "How is it that I find myself in this place? Here are neither mountains, nor trees, nor vegetation; no sun, moon, nor stars; no habitation, no sound, no cackling of a fowl nor barking of a dog. How can I live in this desolate region?"

Suddenly a young man dressed in blue, shining with a brilliant light, and carrying a large banner, appeared and said to her: "By order of Yen Wang, the King of the Hells, I come to take you to the eighteen infernal regions."

"What is this cursed place where I am now?" asked Miao Shan.

"This is the lower world, Hell," he replied. "Your refusal to marry, and the magnanimity with which you chose an ignominious death rather than break your resolutions, deserve the recognition of Yu Huang, and the ten gods of the lower regions, impressed and pleased at your eminent virtue, have sent me to you. Fear nothing and follow me."

Thus Miao Shan began her visit to all the infernal regions. The Gods of the Ten Hells came to congratulate her. [p. 268]

"Who am I," asked Miao Shan, "that you should deign to take the trouble to show me such respect?"

"We have heard," they replied, "that when you recite your prayers all evil disappears as if by magic. We should like to hear you pray."

"I consent," replied Miao Shan, "on condition that all the condemned ones in the ten infernal regions be released from their chains in order to listen to me."

At the appointed time the condemned were led in by Niu T'ou ('Ox-head') and Ma Mien ('Horse-face'), the two chief constables of Hell, and Miao Shan began her prayers. No sooner had she finished than Hell was suddenly transformed into a paradise of joy, and the instruments of torture into lotus-flowers.

  

Hell a Paradise

P'an Kuan, the keeper of the Register of the Living and the Dead, presented a memorial to Yen Wang stating that since Miao Shan's arrival there was no more pain in Hell; and all the condemned were beside themselves with happiness. "Since it has always been decreed," he added, "that, in justice, there must be both a Heaven and a Hell, if you do not send this saint back to earth, there will no longer be any Hell, but only a Heaven."

"Since that is so," said Yen Wang, "let forty-eight flag-bearers escort her across the Styx Bridge [Nai-ho Ch'iao], that she may be taken to the pine-forest to reenter her body, and resume her life in the upper world."

The King of the Hells having paid his respects to her, the youth in blue conducted her soul back to her body, which she found lying under a pine-tree. Having reentered it, Miao Shan found herself alive again. A bitter sigh escaped from her lips. "I remember," she [p. 269] said, "all that I saw and heard in Hell. I sigh for the moment which will find me free of all impediments, and yet my soul has re-entered my body. Here, without any lonely mountain on which to give myself up to the pursuit of perfection, what will become of me?" Great tears welled from her eyes.

  

A Test of Virtue

Just then Ju Lai Buddha appeared. "Why have you come to this place?" he asked. Miao Shan explained why the King had put her to death, and how after her descent into Hell her soul had re-entered her body. "I greatly pity your misfortune," Ju Lai said, "but there is no one to help you. I also am alone. Why should we not marry? We could build ourselves a hut, and pass our days in peace. What say you?" "Sir," she replied, "you must not make impossible suggestions. I died and came to life again. How can you speak so lightly? Do me the pleasure of withdrawing from my presence."

"Well," said the visitor, "he to whom you are speaking is no other than the Buddha of the West. I came to test your virtue. This place is not suitable for your devotional exercises; I invite you to come to Hsiang Shan."

Miao Shan threw herself on her knees and said: "My bodily eyes deceived me. I never thought that your Majesty would come to a place like this. Pardon my seeming want of respect. Where is this Hsiang Shan?"

"Hsiang Shan is a very old monastery," Ju Lai replied, "built in the earliest historical times. It is inhabited by Immortals. It is situated in the sea, on P'u T'o Island, a dependency of the kingdom of Annam. There you will be able to reach the highest perfection." [p. 270]

"How far off is this island?" Miao Shan asked. "More than three thousand li," Ju Lai replied. "I fear," she said, "I could not bear the fatigue of so long a journey." "Calm yourself," he rejoined. "I have brought with me a magic peach, of a kind not to be found in any earthly orchard. Once you have eaten it, you will experience neither hunger nor thirst; old age and death will have no power over you: you will live for ever."

Miao Shan ate the magic peach, took leave of Ju Lai, and started on the way to Hsiang Shan. From the clouds the Spirit of the North Star saw her wending her way painfully toward P'u T'o. He called the Guardian of the Soil of Hsiang Shan and said to him: "Miao Shan is on her way to your country; the way is long and difficult. Do you take the form of a tiger, and carry her to her journey's end."

The t'u-ti transformed himself into a tiger and stationed himself in the middle of the road along which Miao Shan must pass, giving vent to ferocious roars.

"I am a poor girl devoid of filial piety," said Miao Shan when she came up. "I have disobeyed my father's commands; devour me, and make an end of me."

The tiger then spoke, saying: "I am not a real tiger, but the Guardian of the Soil of Hsiang Shan. I have received instructions to carry you there. Get on my back."

"Since you have received these instructions," said the girl, "I will obey, and when I have attained to perfection I will not forget your kindness."

The tiger went off like a flash of lightning, and in the twinkling of an eye Miao Shan found herself at the foot of the rocky slopes of P'u T'o Island. [p. 271]

  

Miao Shan attains to Perfection

After nine years in this retreat Miao Shan had reached the acme of perfection. Ti-tsang Wang then came to Hsiang Shan, and was so astonished at her virtue that he inquired of the local t'u-ti as to what had brought about this wonderful result. "With the exception of Ju Lai, in all the west no one equals her in dignity and perfection. She is the Queen of the three thousand P'u-sa's and of all the beings on earth who have skin and blood. We regard her as our sovereign in all things. Therefore, on the nineteenth day of the eleventh moon we will enthrone her, that the whole world may profit by her beneficence."

The t'u-ti sent out his invitations for the ceremony. The Dragon-king of the Western Sea, the Gods of the Five Sacred Mountains, the Emperor-saints to the number of one hundred and twenty, the thirty-six officials of the Ministry of Time, the celestial functionaries in charge of wind, rain, thunder, and lightning, the Three Causes, the Five Saints, the Eight Immortals, the Ten Kings of the Hells--all were present on the appointed day. Miao Shan took her seat on the lotus-throne, and the assembled gods proclaimed her sovereign of Heaven and earth, and a Buddha. Moreover, they decided that it was not meet that she should remain alone at Hsiang Shan; so they begged her to choose a worthy young man and a virtuous damsel to serve her in the temple.

The t'u-ti was entrusted with the task of finding them. While making search, he met a young priest named Shan Ts'ai. After the death of his parents he had become a hermit on Ta-hua Shan, and was still a novice in the science of perfection. [p. 272]

Miao Shan ordered him to be brought to her. "Who are you?" she asked.

"I am a poor orphan priest of no merit," he replied. "From my earliest youth I have led the life of a hermit. I have been told that your power is equalled only by your goodness, so I have ventured to come to pray you to show me how to attain to perfection."

"My only fear," replied Miao Shan, "is that your desire for perfection may not be sincere."

"I have now no parents," the priest continued, "and I have come more than a thousand li to find you. How can I be wanting in sincerity?"

"What special degree of ability have you attained during your course of perfection?" asked Miao Shan.

"I have no skill," replied Shan Ts'ai, "but I rely for everything on your great pity, and under your guidance I hope to reach the required ability."

"Very well," said Miao Shan, "take up your station on the top of yonder peak, and wait till I find a means of transporting you."

  

A Ruse

Miao Shan called the t'u-ti and bade him go and beg all the Immortals to disguise themselves as pirates and to besiege the mountain, waving torches, and threatening with swords and spears to kill her. "Then I will seek refuge on the summit, and thence leap over the precipice to prove Shan Ts'ai's fidelity and affection."

A minute later a horde of brigands of ferocious aspect rushed up to the temple of Hsiang Shan. Miao Shan cried for help, rushed up the steep incline, missed her footing, and rolled down into the ravine. Shan Ts'ai, seeing her fall into the abyss, without hesitation flung himself after her in order to rescue her. When he [p. 273] reached her, he asked: "What have you to fear from the robbers? You have nothing for them to steal; why throw yourself over the precipice, exposing yourself to certain death?"

Miao Shan saw that he was weeping, and wept too. "I must comply with the wish of Heaven," she said.

  

The Transformation of Shan Ts'ai

Shan Ts'ai, inconsolable, prayed Heaven and earth to save his protectress. Miao Shan said to him: "You should not have risked your life by throwing yourself over the precipice, I have not yet transformed you. But you did a brave thing, and I know that you have a good heart. Now, look down there." "Oh," said he, "if I mistake not, that is a corpse." "Yes," she replied, "that is your former body. Now you are transformed you can rise at will and fly in the air." Shan Ts'ai bowed low to thank his benefactress, who said to him: "Henceforth you must say your prayers by my side, and not leave me for a single day."

  

'Brother and Sister'

With her spiritual sight Miao Shan perceived at the bottom of the Southern Sea the third son of Lung Wang, who, in carrying out his father's orders, was cleaving the waves in the form of a carp. While doing so, he was caught in a fisherman's net, taken to the market at Yueh Chou, and offered for sale. Miao Shan at once sent her faithful Shan Ts'ai, in the guise of a servant, to buy him, giving him a thousand cash to purchase the fish, which he was to take to the foot of the rocks at P'u T'o and set free in the sea. The son of Lung Wang heartily thanked his deliverer, and on his return to the [p. 274] palace related to his father what had occurred. The King said: "As a reward, make her a present of a luminous pearl, so that she may recite her prayers by its light at night-time."

Lung Nu, the daughter of Lung Wang's third son, obtained her grandfather's permission to take the gift to Miao Shan and beg that she might be allowed to study the doctrine of the sages under her guidance. After having proved her sincerity, she was accepted as a pupil. Shan Ts'ai called her his sister, and Lung Nu reciprocated by calling him her dear brother. Both lived as brother and sister by Miao Shan's side.

  

The King's Punishment

After King Miao Chuang had burned the Nunnery of the White Bird and killed his daughter, Ch'ieh Lan Buddha presented a petition to Yu Huang praying that the crime be not allowed to go unpunished. Yu Huang, justly irritated, ordered P'an Kuan to consult the Register of the Living and the Dead to see how long this homicidal King had yet to live. P'an Kuan turned over the pages of his register, and saw that according to the divine ordinances the King's reign on the throne of Hsing Lin should last for twenty years, but that this period had not yet expired.  [*3] "That which has been decreed is immutable," said Yu Huang, "but I will punish him by sending him illness." He called the God of Epidemics, and ordered him to afflict the King's body with ulcers, of a kind which could not be healed except by remedies to be given him by his daughter Miao Shan.

The order was promptly executed, and the King could [p. 275] get no rest by day or by night. His two daughters and their husbands spent their time in feasting while he tossed about in agony on his sick-bed. In vain the most famous physicians were called in; the malady only grew worse, and despair took hold of the patient. He then caused a proclamation to be made that he would grant the succession to the throne to any person who would provide him with an effectual remedy to restore him to health.

  

The Disguised Priest-doctor

Miao Shan had learnt by revelation at Hsiang Shan all that was taking place at the palace. She assumed the form of a priest-doctor, clothed herself in a priest's gown, with the regulation headdress and straw shoes, and attached to her girdle a gourd containing pills and other medicines. In this apparel she went straight to the palace gate, read the royal edict posted there, and tore it down. Some members of the palace guard seized her, and inquired angrily: "Who are you that you should dare to tear down the royal proclamation?"

"I, a poor priest, am also a doctor," she replied. "I read the edict posted on the palace gates. The King is inquiring for a doctor who can heal him. I am a doctor of an old cultured family, and propose to restore him to health."

"If you are of a cultured family, why did you become a priest?" they asked. "Would it not have been better to gain your living honestly in practising your art than to shave your head and go loafing about the world? Besides, all the highest physicians have tried in vain to cure the King; do you imagine that you will be more skilful than all the aged practitioners?"

"Set your minds at ease," she replied. "I have received from my ancestors the most efficacious remedies, [p. 276] and I guarantee that I shall restore the King to health," The palace guard then consented to transmit her petition to the Queen, who informed the King, and in the end the pretended priest was admitted. Having reached the royal bed-chamber, he sat still awhile in order to calm himself before feeling the pulse, and to have complete control of all his faculties while examining the King. When he felt quite sure of himself, he approached the King's bed, took the King's hand, felt his pulse, carefully diagnosed the nature of the illness, and assured himself that it was easily curable.

  

Strange Medicine

One serious difficulty, however, presented itself, and that was that the right medicine was almost impossible to procure. The King showed his displeasure by saying: "For every illness there is a medical prescription, and for every prescription a specific medicine; how can you say that the diagnosis is easy, but that there is no remedy?"

"Your Majesty," replied the priest, "the remedy for your illness is not to be found in any pharmacy, and no one would agree to sell it."

The King became angry, believed that he was being imposed upon, and ordered those about him to drive away the priest, who left smiling.

The following night the King saw in a dream an old man who said to him: "This priest alone can cure your illness, and if you ask him he himself will give you the right remedy."

The King awoke as soon as these words had been uttered, and begged the Queen to recall the priest. When the latter had returned, the King related his dream, and begged the priest to procure for him the remedy required. [p. 277] "What, after all, is this remedy that I must have in order to be cured?" he asked.

"There must be the hand and eye of a living person, from which to compound the ointment which alone can save you," answered the priest.

The King called out in indignation: "This priest is fooling me! Who would ever give his hand or his eye? Even if anyone would, I could never have the heart to make use of them."

"Nevertheless," said the priest, "there is no other effective remedy."

"Then where can I procure this remedy?" asked the King.

"Your Majesty must send your ministers, who must observe the Buddhist rules of abstinence, to Hsiang Shan, where they will be given what is required."

"Where is Hsiang Shan, and how far from here?"

"About three thousand or more li, but I myself will indicate the route to be followed; in a very short time they will return."

The King, who was suffering terribly, was more contented when he heard that the journey could be rapidly accomplished. He called his two ministers, Chao Chen and Liu Ch'in, and instructed them to lose no time in starting for Hsiang Shan and to observe scrupulously the Buddhist rules of abstinence. He ordered the Minister of Ceremonies to detain the priest in the palace until their return.

  

A Conspiracy that Failed

The two sons-in-law of the King, Ho Feng and Chao K'uei, who had already made secret preparations to succeed to the throne as soon as the King should breathe [p. 278] his last, learned with no little surprise that the priest had hopes of curing the King's illness, and that he was waiting in the palace until the saving remedy was brought to him. Fearing that they might be disappointed in their ambition, and that after his recovery the King, faithful to his promise, would give the crown to the priest, they entered into a conspiracy with an unscrupulous courtier named Ho Li. They were obliged to act quickly, because the ministers were travelling by forced marches, and would soon be back. That same night Ho Li was to give to the King a poisoned drink, composed, he would say, by the priest with the object of assuaging the King's pain until the return of his two ministers. Shortly after, an assassin, Su Ta, was to murder the priest. Thus at one stroke both the King and the priest would meet their death, and the kingdom would pass to the King's two sons-in-law.

Miao Shan had returned to Hsiang Shan, leaving in the palace the bodily form of the priest. She saw the two traitors Ho Feng and Chao K'uei preparing the poison, and was aware of their wicked intentions. Calling the spirit Yu I, who was on duty that day, she told him to fly to the palace and change into a harmless soup the poison about to be administered to the King and to bind the assassin hand and foot.

At midnight Ho Li, carrying in his hand the poisoned drink, knocked at the door of the royal apartment, and said to the Queen that the priest had prepared a soothing potion while awaiting the return of the ministers. "I come," he said, "to offer it to his Majesty." The Queen took the bowl in her hands and was about to give it to the King, when Yu I arrived unannounced. Quick as thought he snatched the bowl from the Queen and poured [p. 279] the contents on the ground; at the same moment he knocked over those present in the room, so that they all rolled on the floor.

At the time this was happening the assassin Su Ta entered the priest's room, and struck him with his sword. Instantly the assassin, without knowing how, found himself enwrapped in the priest's robe and thrown to the ground. He struggled and tried to free himself, but found that his hands had been rendered useless by some mysterious power, and that flight was impossible. The spirit Yu I, having fulfilled the mission entrusted to him, now returned to Hsiang Shan and reported to Miao Shan.

  

A Confession and its Results

Next morning, the two sons-in-law of the King heard of the turn things had taken during the night. The whole palace was in a state of the greatest confusion.

When he was informed that the priest had been killed, the King called Ch'u Ting-lieh and ordered him to have the murderer arrested. Su Ta was put to the torture and confessed all that he knew. Together with Ho Li he was condemned to be cut into a thousand pieces.

The two sons-in-law were seized and ordered to instant execution, and it was only on the Queen's intercession that their wives were spared. The infuriated King, however, ordered that his two daughters should be imprisoned in the palace.

  

The Gruesome Remedy

Meantime Chao Chen and Liu Ch'in had reached Hsiang Shan. When they were brought to Miao Shan the ministers took out the King's letter and read it to her. [p. 280] "I, Miao Chuang, King of Hsing Lin, have learned that there dwells at Hsiang Shan an Immortal whose power and compassion have no equal in the whole world. I have passed my fiftieth year, and am afflicted with ulcers that all remedies have failed to cure. To-day a priest has assured me that at Hsiang Shan I can obtain the hand and eye of a living person, with which he will prepare an ointment able to restore me to my usual state of health. Relying upon his word and upon the goodness of the Immortal to whom he has directed me, I venture to beg that those two parts of a living body necessary to heal my ulcers be sent to me. I assure you of my everlasting gratitude, fully confident that my request will not be refused."

The next morning Miao Shan bade the ministers take a knife and cut off her left hand and gouge out her left eye. Liu Ch'in took the knife offered him, but did not dare to obey the order. "Be quick," urged the Immortal; "you have been commanded to return as soon as possible; why do you hesitate as if you were a young girl?" Liu Ch'in was forced to proceed. He plunged in the knife, and the red blood flooded the ground, spreading an odour like sweet incense. The hand and eye were placed on a golden plate, and, having paid their grateful respects to the Immortal, the envoys hastened to return.

When they had left, Miao Shan, who had transformed herself in order to allow the envoys to remove her hand and eye, told Shan Ts'ai that she was now going to prepare the ointment necessary for the cure of the King. "Should the Queen," she added, "send for another eye and hand, I will transform myself again, and you can give them to her." No sooner had she finished speaking than she mounted a cloud and disappeared in [p. 281] space. The two ministers reached the palace and presented to the Queen the gruesome remedy which they had brought from the temple. She, overcome with gratitude and emotion, wept copiously. "What Immortal," she asked, "can have been so charitable as to sacrifice a hand and eye for the King's benefit?" Then suddenly her tears gushed forth with redoubled vigour, and she uttered a great cry, for she recognized the hand of her daughter by a black scar which was on it.

  

Half-measures

"Who else, in fact, but his child," she continued amid her sobs, "could have had the courage to give her hand to save her father's life?" "What are you saying?" said the King. "In the world there are many hands like this." While they thus reasoned, the priest entered the King's apartment. "This great Immortal has long devoted herself to the attainment of perfection," he said. "Those she has healed are innumerable. Give me the hand and eye." He took them and shortly produced an ointment which, he told the King, was to be applied to his left side. No sooner had it touched his skin than the pain on his left side disappeared as if by magic; no sign of ulcers was to be seen on that side, but his right side remained swollen and painful as before.

"Why is it," asked the King, "that this remedy, which is so efficacious for the left side, should not be applied to the right?" "Because," replied the priest, "the left hand and eye of the saint cures only the left side. If you wish to be completely cured, you must send your officers to obtain the right eye and right hand also." The King accordingly dispatched his envoys anew with a letter of thanks, and begging as a further favour that [p. 282] the cure should be completed by the healing also of his right side.

  

The King Cured

On the arrival of the envoys Shan Ts'ai met them in the mutilated form of Miao Shan, and he bade them cut off his right hand, pluck out his right eye, and put them on a plate. At the sight of the four bleeding wounds Liu Ch'in could not refrain from calling out indignantly: "This priest is a wicked man, thus to make a martyr of a woman in order to obtain the succession!"

Having thus spoken, he left with his companion for the kingdom of Hsing Lin. On their return the King was overwhelmed with joy. The priest quickly prepared the ointment, and the King, without delay, applied it to his right side. At once the ulcers disappeared like the darkness of night before the rising sun. The whole Court congratulated the King and eulogized the priest. The King conferred upon the latter the title Priest of the Brilliant Eye. He fell on his face to return thanks, and added: "I, a poor priest, have left the world, and have only one wish, namely, that your Majesty should govern your subjects with justice and sympathy and that all the officials of the realm should prove themselves men of integrity. As for me, I am used to roaming about. I have no desire for any royal estate. My happiness exceeds all earthly joys."

Having thus spoken, the priest waved the sleeve of his cloak, a cloud descended from Heaven, and seating himself upon it he disappeared in the sky. From the cloud a note containing the following words was seen to fall: "I am one of the Teachers of the West. I came to cure the King's illness, and so to glorify the True Doctrine." [p. 283]

  

The King's Daughter

All who witnessed this miracle exclaimed with one voice: "This priest is the Living Buddha, who is going back to Heaven!" The note was taken to King Miao Chuang, who exclaimed: "Who am I that I should deserve that one of the rulers of Heaven should deign to descend and cure me by the sacrifice of hands and eyes?"

"What was the face of the saintly person like who gave you the remedy?" he then asked Chao Chen.

"It was like unto that of your deceased daughter, Miao Shan," he replied.

"When you removed her hands and eyes did she seem to suffer?"

"I saw a great flow of blood, and my heart failed, but the face of the victim seemed radiant with happiness."

"This certainly must be my daughter Miao Shan, who has attained to perfection," said the King. "Who but she would have given hands and eyes? Purify yourselves and observe the rules of abstinence, and go quickly to Hsiang Shan to return thanks to the saint for this inestimable favour. I myself will ere long make a pilgrimage thither to return thanks in person."

  

The King and Queen taken Prisoners

Three years later the King and Queen, with the grandees of their Court, set out to visit Hsiang Shan, but on the way the monarchs were captured by the Green Lion, or God of Fire, and the White Elephant, or Spirit of the Water, the two guardians of the Temple of Buddha, who transported them to a dark cavern in the mountains. A terrific battle then took place between the evil spirits on the one side and some hosts of heavenly genii, who had [p. 284] been summoned to the rescue, on the other. While its issue was still uncertain, reinforcements under the Red Child Devil, who could resist fire, and the Dragon-king of the Eastern Sea, who could subdue water, finally routed the enemy, and the prisoners were released.

  

The King's Repentance

The King and Queen now resumed their pilgrimage, and Miao Shan instructed Shan Ts'ai to receive the monarchs when they arrived to offer incense. She herself took up her place on the altar, her eyes torn out, her hands cut off, and her wrists all dripping with blood. The King recognized his daughter, and bitterly reproached himself; the Queen fell swooning at her feet. Miao Shan then spoke and tried to comfort them. She told them of all that she had experienced since the day when she had been executed, and how she had attained to immortal perfection. She then went on: "In order to punish you for having caused the deaths of all those who perished in the wars preceding your accession to the throne, and also to avenge the burning of the Nunnery of the White Bird, Yu Huang afflicted you with those grievous ulcers. It was then that I changed myself into a priest in order to heal you, and gave my eyes and hands, with which I prepared the ointment that cured you. It was I, moreover, who procured your liberty from Buddha when you were imprisoned in the cave by the Green Lion and the White Elephant."

  

Sackcloth and Ashes

At these words the King threw himself with his face on the ground, offered incense, worshipped Heaven, earth, the sun, and the moon, saying with a voice broken by [p. 285] sobs: "I committed a great crime in killing my daughter, who has sacrificed her eyes and hands in order to cure my sickness."

No sooner were these words uttered than Miao Shan reassumed her normal form, and, descending from the altar, approached her parents and sisters. Her body had again its original completeness; and in the presence of its perfect beauty, and at finding themselves reunited as one family, all wept for joy.

"Well," said Miao Shan to her father, "will you now force me to marry and prevent my devoting myself to the attainment of perfection?"

"Speak no more of that," replied the King. "I was in the wrong. If you had not reached perfection, I should not now be alive. I have made up my mind to exchange my sceptre for the pursuit of the perfect life, which I wish to lead henceforth together with you."

  

The King renounces the Throne

Then, in the presence of all, he addressed his Grand Minister Chao Chen, saying: "Your devotion to the service of the State has rendered you worthy to wear the crown: I surrender it to you." The Court proclaimed Chao Chen King of Hsing Lin, bade farewell to Miao Chuang, and set out for their kingdom accompanied by their new sovereign.

  

Pardon of the Green Lion and the White Elephant

Buddha had summoned the White Elephant and the Green Lion, and was on the point of sentencing them to eternal damnation when the compassionate Miao Shan interceded for them. "Certainly you deserve no forgiveness," he said, "but I cannot refuse a request made by [p. 286] Miao Shan, whose clemency is without limit. I give you over to her, to serve and obey her in everything. Follow her."

  

Miao Shan becomes a Buddha

The guardian spirit on duty that day then announced the arrival of a messenger from Yu Huang. It was T'ai-po Chin-hsing, who was the bearer of a divine decree, which he handed to Miao Shan. It read as follows: "I, the august Emperor, make known to you this decree: Miao Chuang, King of Hsing Lin, forgetful alike of Heaven and Hell, the six virtues, and metempsychosis, has led a blameworthy life; but your nine years of penitence, the filial piety which caused you to sacrifice your own body to effect his cure, in short, all your virtues, have redeemed his faults. Your eyes can see and your ears can hear all the good and bad deeds and words of men. You are the object of my especial regard. Therefore I make proclamation of this decree of canonization.

"Miao Shan will have the title of Very Merciful and Very Compassionate P'u-sa, Saviour of the Afflicted, Miraculous and Always Helpful Protectress of Mortals. On your lofty precious lotus-flower throne, you will be the Sovereign of the Southern Seas and of P'u T'o Isle.

"Your two sisters, hitherto tainted with earthly pleasures, will gradually progress till they reach true perfection.

"Miao Ch'ing will have the title of Very Virtuous P'u-sa, the Completely Beautiful, Rider of the Green Lion.

"Miao Yin will be honoured with the title of Very Virtuous and Completely Resplendent P'u-sa, Rider of the White Elephant. [p. 287]

"King Miao Chuang is raised to the dignity of Virtuous Conquering P'u-sa, Surveyor of Mortals.

"Queen Po Ya receives the title of P'u-sa of Ten Thousand Virtues, Surveyor of Famous Women.

"Shan Ts'ai has bestowed upon him the title of Golden Youth.

"Lung Nu has the title of Jade Maiden.

"During all time incense is to be burned before all the members of this canonized group." [p. 288]

Footnotes

^288:1 See Chapter IV.

^288:2 This has reference to the change of Kuan Yin from the masculine to the feminine gender, already mentioned.

^288:3 There is evidently a mistake here, since the King was twenty when he ascended the throne and fifty at the birth of Miao Shan.

Myths and Legends of China, by Edward T.C. Werner, [1922], at sacred-texts.com

  

Chapter XI

  

The Eight Immortals

  

Pa Hsien

Either singly or in groups the Eight Immortals, Pa Hsien, of the Taoist religion are one of the most popular subjects of representation in China; their portraits are to be seen everywhere--on porcelain vases, teapots, teacups, fans, scrolls, embroidery, etc. Images of them are made in porcelain, earthenware, roots, wood, metals. The term 'Eight Immortals' is figuratively used for happiness. The number eight has become lucky in association with this tradition, and persons or things eight in number are graced accordingly. Thus we read of reverence shown to the 'Eight Genii Table' (Pa Hsien Cho), the 'Eight Genii Bridge' (Pa Hsien Ch'iao), 'Eight Genii Vermicelli' (Pa Hsien Mien), the 'Eight Genii of the Wine-cup' (Tin Chung Pa Hsien)--wine-bibbers of the T'ang dynasty celebrated by Tu Fu, the poet. They are favourite subjects of romance, and special objects of adoration. In them we see "the embodiment of the ideas of perfect but imaginary happiness which possess the minds of the Chinese people." Three of them (Chung-li Ch'uan, Chang Kuo, and Lu Yen) were historical personages; the others are mentioned only in fables or romances. They represent all kinds of people--old, young, male, female, civil, military, rich, poor, afflicted, cultured, noble. They are also representative of early, middle, and later historical periods.

The legend of the Eight Immortals is certainly not older than the time of the Sung dynasty (A.D. 960-1280), and is probably to be assigned to that of the Yuan dynasty (1280-1368). But some, if not all, of the group seem to [p. 289] have been previously celebrated as Immortals in the Taoist legends. Their biographies are usually arranged in the order of their official eminence or seniority in age. Here I follow that adopted in Hsiu hsiang Pa Hsien tung yu chi  [*1] in which they are described in the order in which they became Immortals.

  

Li T'ieh-kuai

Li T'ieh-kuai, depicted always with his crutch and gourd full of magic medicines, was of the family name of Li, his own name being Li Yuan (Hs'uan, now read Yuan). He is also known as K'ung-mu. Hsi Wang Mu cured him of an ulcer on the leg and taught him the art of becoming immortal. He was canonized as Rector of the East. He is said to have been of commanding stature and dignified mien, devoting himself solely to the study of Taoist lore. Hsi Wang Mu made him a present of an iron crutch, and sent him to the capital to teach the doctrine of immortality to Han Chung-li.

He is also identified with Li Ning-yang, to whom Lao Tzu descended from Heaven in order to instruct him in the wisdom of the gods. Soon after he had completed his course of instruction his soul left his body to go on a visit to Hua Shan. Some say he was summoned by Lao Tzu, others that Lao Tzu engaged him as escort to the countries of Hsi Yu. He left his disciple Lang Ling in charge of his body, saying that if he did not return within seven days he was to have the body cremated. Unfortunately, when only six days had elapsed the disciple was called away to the death-bed of his mother. In order to be able to leave at once he cremated the body forthwith, and when the soul returned it found only a heap of ashes. [p. 290] Some say the body was not cremated, but only became devitalized through neglect or through being uninhabited for so long a time. The object of the setting of the watch was not only to prevent injury to or theft of the body, but also to prevent any other soul from taking up its abode in it.

In a forest near by a beggar had just died of hunger. Finding this corpse untenanted, the wandering spirit entered it through the temples, and made off. When he found that his head was long and pointed, his face black, his beard and hair woolly and dishevelled, his eyes of gigantic size, and one of his legs lame, he wished to get out of this vile body; but Lao Tzu advised him not to make the attempt and gave him a gold band to keep his hair in order, and an iron crutch to help his lame leg. On lifting his hand to his eyes, he found they were as large as buckles. That is why he was called Li K'ung-mu, 'Li Hollow Eyes.' Popularly he is known as Li T'ieh-kuai, 'Li with the Iron Crutch.' No precise period seems to be assigned to his career on earth, though one tradition places him in the Yuan dynasty. Another account says that he was changed into a dragon, and in that form ascended to Heaven.

Elsewhere it is related that T'ieh-kuai, after entering the body of the lame beggar, benevolently proceeded to revive the mother of Yang, his negligent disciple. Leaning on his iron staff and carrying a gourd of medicines on his back he went to Yang's house, where preparations were being made for the funeral. The contents of the gourd, poured into the mouth, revived the dead woman. He then made himself known, and, giving Yang another pill, vanished in a gust of wind. Two hundred years later he effected the immortalization of his disciple. [p. 291]

During his peregrinations on earth he would hang a bottle on the wall at night and jump into it, emerging on the following morning. He frequently returned to earth, and at times tried to bring about the transmigration of others.

An example is the case of Ch'ao Tu, the watchman. T'ieh-kuai walked into a fiery furnace and bade Ch'ao follow. The latter, being afraid of imitating an act evidently associated with the supernatural world of evil spirits, refused to do so. T'ieh-kuai then told Ch'ao to step on to a leaf floating on the surface of the river, saying that it was a boat that would bear him across safely. Again the watchman refused, whereupon T'ieh-kuai, remarking that the cares of this world were evidently too weighty for him to be able to ascend to immortality, stepped on to the leaf himself and vanished.

  

Chung-li Ch'uan

Regarding the origin and life of this Immortal several different accounts are given. One states that his family name was Chung-li, and that he lived in the Han dynasty, being therefore called Han Chung-li. His cognomen was Ch'uan, his literary appellation Chi Tao, and his pseudonyms Ho-ho Tzu and Wang-yang Tzu; his style Yun-fang.

He was born in the district of Hsien-yang Hsien (a sub-prefecture of the ancient capital Hsi-an Fu) in Shensi. He became Marshal of the Empire in the cyclic year 2496. In his old age he became a hermit on Yang-chio Shan, thirty li north-east of I-ch'eng Hsien in the prefecture of P'ing-yang Fu in Shansi. He is referred to by the title of King-emperor of the True Active Principle. [p. 292]

Another account describes Chung-li Ch'uan as merely a vice-marshal in the service of Duke Chou Hsiao. He was defeated in battle, and escaped to Chung-nan Shan, where he met the Five Heroes, the Flowers of the East, who instructed him in the doctrine of immortality. At the end of the T'ang dynasty Han Chung-li taught this same science of immortality to Lu Tung-pin (see <page 297>), and took the pompous title of the Only Independent One Under Heaven.

Other versions state that Han Chung-li is not the name of a person, but of a country; that he was a Taoist priest Chung Li-tzu; and that he was a beggar, Chung-li by name, who gave to one Lao Chih a pill of immortality. No sooner had the latter swallowed it than he went mad, left his wife, and ascended to Heaven.

During a great famine he transmuted copper and pewter into silver by amalgamating them with some mysterious drug. This treasure he distributed among the poor, and thousands of lives were thus saved.

One day, while he was meditating, the stone wall of his dwelling in the mountains was rent asunder, and a jade casket exposed to view. This was found to contain secret information as to how to become an Immortal.

When he had followed these instructions for some time, his room was filled with many-coloured clouds, music was heard, and a celestial stork came and bore him away on its back to the regions of immortality.

He is sometimes represented holding his feather-fan, Yu-mao Shan; at other times the peach of immortality. Since his admission to the ranks of the gods, he has appeared on earth at various times as the messenger of Heaven. On one of these occasions he met Lu Yen, as narrated on <page 297>. [p. 293]

  

Lan Ts'ai-ho

Lan Ts'ai-ho is variously stated to have been a woman and an hermaphrodite. She is the strolling singer or mountebank of the Immortals. Usually she plays a flute or a pair of cymbals. Her origin is unknown, but her personal name is said to have been Yang Su, and her career is assigned to the period of the T'ang dynasty. She wandered abroad clad in a tattered blue gown held by a black wooden belt three inches wide, with one foot shoeless and the other shod, wearing in summer an undergarment of wadded material, and in winter sleeping on the snow, her breath rising in a brilliant cloud like the steam from a boiling cauldron. In this guise she earned her livelihood by singing in the streets, keeping time with a wand three feet long. Though taken for a lunatic, the doggerel verse she sang disproved the popular slanders. It denounced this fleeting life and its delusive pleasures. When given money, she either strung it on a cord and waved it to the time of her song or scattered it on the ground for the poor to pick up.

One day she was found to have become intoxicated in an inn at Feng-yang Fu in Anhui, and while in that state disappeared on a cloud, having thrown down to earth her shoe, robe, belt, and castanets.

According to popular belief, however, only one of the Eight Immortals, namely, Ho Hsien-ku, was a woman, Lan Ts'ai-ho being represented as a young person of about sixteen, bearing a basket of fruit. According to the Hsiu hsiang Pa Hsien tung yu chi, he was 'the Red-footed Great Genius,' Ch'ih-chiao Ta-hsien incarnate. Though he was a man, adds the writer, he could not understand how to be a man (which is perhaps the reason why he has been supposed to be a woman). [p. 294]

  

Chang Kuo

The period assigned to Chang Kuo is the middle or close of the seventh to the middle of the eighth century A.D. He lived as a hermit on Chung-t'iao Shan, in the prefecture of P'ing-yang Fu in Shansi. The Emperors T'ai Tsung and Kao Tsung of the T'ang dynasty frequently invited him to Court, but he persistently refused to go. At last, pressed once more by the Empress Wu (A.D. 684-705), he consented to leave his retreat, but was struck down by death at the gate of the Temple of the Jealous Woman. His body began to decay and to be eaten by worms, when lo! he was seen again, alive and well, on the mountains of Heng Chou in P'ing-yang Fu. He rode on a white mule, which carried him thousands of miles in a day, and which, when the journey was finished, he folded up like a sheet of paper and put away in his wallet. When he again required its services, he had only to spurt water upon the packet from his mouth and the animal at once assumed its proper shape. At all times he performed wonderful feats of necromancy, and declared that he had been Grand Minister to the Emperor Yao (2357-2255 B.C.) during a previous existence.

In the twenty-third year (A.D. 735) of the reign-period K'ai Yuan of the Emperor Hsuan Tsung of the T'ang dynasty, he was called to Lo-yang in Honan, and elected Chief of the Imperial Academy, with the honourable title of Very Perspicacious Teacher.

It was just at this time that the famous Taoist Yeh Fa-shan, thanks to his skill in necromancy, was in great favour at Court. The Emperor asked him who this Chang Kuo Lao (he usually has the epithet Lao, 'old,' added to his name) was. "I know," replied the magician; "but if I were to tell your Majesty I should fall dead at your feet, [p. 295] so I dare not speak unless your Majesty will promise that you will go with bare feet and bare head to ask Chang Kuo to forgive you, in which case I should immediately revive." Hsuan Tsung having promised, Fa-shan then said: "Chang Kuo is a white spiritual bat which came out of primeval chaos." No sooner had he spoken than he dropped dead at the Emperor's feet.

Hsuan Tsung, with bare head and feet, went to Chang Kuo as he had promised, and begged forgiveness for his indiscretion. The latter then sprinkled water on Fa-shan's face and he revived. Soon after Chang fell sick and returned to die in the Heng Chou Mountains during the period A.D. 742-746. When his disciples opened his tomb, they found it empty.

He is usually seen mounted on his white mule, sometimes facing its head, sometimes its tail. He carries a phoenix-feather or a peach of immortality.

At his interviews with the Emperor Ming Huang in A.D. 723 (when he was alive still) Chang Kuo "entertained the Emperor with a variety of magical tricks, such as rendering himself invisible, drinking off a cup of aconite, and felling birds or flowers by pointing at them. He refused the hand of an imperial princess, and also declined to have his portrait placed in the Hall of Worthies."

A picture of Chang Kuo sitting on a donkey and offering a descendant to the newly married couple is often found in the nuptial chamber. It seems somewhat incongruous that an old ascetic should be associated with matrimonial happiness and the granting of offspring, but the explanation may possibly be connected with his performance of wonderful feats of necromancy, though he is said not to have given encouragement to others in these things during his lifetime. [p. 296]

  

Ho Hsien Ku

A maiden holding in her hand a magic lotus-blossom, the flower of open-heartedness, or the peach of immortality given her by Lu Tung-pin in the mountain-gorge as a symbol of identity, playing at times the sheng or reed-organ, or drinking wine--this is the picture the Chinese paint of the Immortal Ho Hsien Ku.

She was the daughter of Ho T'ai, a native of Tseng-ch'eng Hsien in Kuangtung. Others say her father was a shopkeeper at Ling-ling in Hunan. She lived in the time of the usurping empress Wu (A.D. 684-705) of the T'ang dynasty. At her birth six hairs were found growing on the crown of her head, and the account says she never had any more, though the pictures represent her with a full head of hair. She elected to live on Yun-mu Ling, twenty li west of Tseng-ch'eng Hsien. On that mountain was found a stone called yun-mu shih, 'mother-of-pearl.' In a dream she saw a spirit who ordered her to powder and eat one of these stones, by doing which she could acquire both agility and immortality. She complied with this injunction, and also vowed herself to a life of virginity. Her days were thenceforth passed in floating from one peak to another, bringing home at night to her mother the fruits she collected on the mountain. She gradually found that she had no need to eat in order to live. Her fame having reached the ears of the Empress, she was invited to Court, but while journeying thither suddenly disappeared from mortal view and became an Immortal. She is said to have been seen again in A.D. 750 floating upon a cloud of many colours at the temple of Ma Ku, the famous female Taoist magician, and again, some years later, in the city of Canton.

She is represented as an extremely beautiful maiden, [p. 297] and is remarkable as occupying so prominent a position in a cult in which no system of female asceticism is developed.

  

Lu Tung-pin

Lu Tung-pin's family name was Lu; his personal name Tung-pin; also Yen; and his pseudonym Shun Yang Tzu. He was born in A.D. 798 at Yung-lo Hsien, in the prefecture of Ho-chung Fu in Shansi, a hundred and twenty li south-east of the present sub-prefecture of Yung-chi Hsien (P'u Chou). He came of an official family, his grandfather having been President of the Ministry of Ceremonies, and his father Prefect of Hai Chou. He was 5 feet 2 inches in height, and at twenty was still unmarried. At this time he made a journey to Lu Shan in Kiangsi, where he met the Fire-dragon, who presented him with a magic sword, which enabled him at will to hide himself in the heavens.

During his visit to the capital, Ch'ang-an in Shensi, he met the Immortal Han Chung-li, who instructed him in the mysteries of alchemy and the elixir of life. When he revealed himself as Yun-fang Hsien-sheng, Lu Yen expressed an ardent desire to aid in converting mankind to the true doctrine, but was first exposed to a series of ten temptations. These being successfully overcome, he was invested with supernatural power and magic weapons, with which he traversed the Empire, slaying dragons and ridding the earth of divers kinds of evils, during a period of upward of four hundred years. Another version says that Han Chung-li was in an inn, heating a jug of rice-wine. Here Lu met him, and going to sleep dreamed that he was promoted to a very high office and was exceptionally favoured by fortune in every way. This had gone on for [p. 298] fifty years when unexpectedly a serious fault caused him to be condemned to exile, and his family was exterminated. Alone in the world, he was sighing bitterly, when he awoke with a start. All had taken place in so short a space of time that Han Chung-li's wine was not yet hot. This is the incident referred to in Chinese literature in the phrase 'rice-wine dream.' Convinced of the hollowness of worldly dignities, he followed Han Chung-li to the Ho Ling Mountains at Chung-nan in Shensi, where he was initiated into the divine mysteries, and became an Immortal.

In A.D. 1115 the Emperor Hui Tsung conferred on him the title of Hero of Marvellous Wisdom; and later he was proclaimed King-emperor and Strong Protector.

There are various versions of the legend of Lu Tung-pin. One of these adds that in order to fulfil his promise made to Chung-li to do what he could to aid in the work of converting his fellow-creatures to the true doctrine, he went to Yuch Yang in the guise of an oil-seller, intending to immortalize all those who did not ask for additional weight to the quantity of oil purchased. During a whole year he met only selfish and extortionate customers, with the exception of one old lady who alone did not ask for more than was her due. So he went to her house, and seeing a well in the courtyard threw a few grains of rice into it. The water miraculously turned into wine, from the sale of which the dame amassed great wealth.

He was very skilful in fencing, and is always represented with his magic Excalibur named Chan-yao Kuai, 'Devil-slaying Sabre,' and in one hand holds a fly-whisk, Yun-chou, or 'Cloud-sweeper,' a symbol common in Taoism of being able to fly at will through the air and to walk on the clouds of Heaven. [p. 299]

Like Kuan Kung, he is shown bearing in his arms a male child--indicating a promise of numerous progeny, including literati and famous officials. Consequently he is one of the spiritual beings honoured by the literati.

  

Han Hsiang Tzu

Han Hsiang Tzu, who is depicted with a bouquet of flowers or a basket of peaches of immortality, is stated to have been a grand-nephew of Han Yu (A.D. 768-824), the great statesman, philosopher, and poet of the T'ang dynasty, and an ardent votary of transcendental study. His own name was Ch'ing Fu. The child was entrusted to his uncle to be educated and prepared for the public examinations. He excelled his teacher in intelligence and the performance of wonderful feats, such as the production from a little earth in a flower-pot of some marvellous flowering plants, on the leaves of which were written in letters of gold some verses to this effect:

 The clouds hide Mount Ch'in Ling. 
 Where is your abode? 
 The snow is deep on Lan Kuan; 
 Your horse refuses to advance.

"What is the meaning of these verses?" asked Han Yu. "You will see," replied Han Hsiang Tzu.

Some time afterward Han Yu was sent in disgrace to the prefecture of Ch'ao-chou Fu in Kuangtung. When he reached the foot of Lan Kuan the snow was so deep that he could not go on. Han Hsiang Tzu appeared, and, sweeping away the snow, made a path for him. Han Yu then understood the prophecy in his pupil's verses. [p. 300]

When Han Hsiang Tzu was leaving his uncle, he gave him the following in verse:

Many indeed are the eminent men who have served their country, but which of them surpasses you in his knowledge of literature? When you have reached a high position, you will be buried in a damp and foggy land.

Han Yu also gave his pupil a farewell verse:

How many here below allow themselves to be inebriated by the love of honours and pelf! Alone and watchful you persevere in the right path. But a time will come when, taking your flight to the sky, you will open in the ethereal blue a luminous roadway.

Han Yu was depressed at the thought of the damp climate of his place of exile. "I fear there is no doubt," he said, "that I shall die without seeing my family again."

Han Hsiang Tzu consoled him, gave him a prescription, and said: "Not only will you return in perfect health to the bosom of your family, but you will be reinstated in your former offices." All this took place exactly as he had predicted.

Another account states that he became the disciple of Lu Tung-pin, and, having been carried up to the supernatural peach-tree of the genii, fell from its branches, but during his descent attained to the state of immortality. Still another version says that he was killed by the fall, was transformed, and then underwent the various experiences with Han Yu already related.

  

Ts'ao Kuo-chiu

Ts'ao Kuo-chiu was connected with the imperial family of the Sungs, and is shown with the tablet of admission to Court in his hand. He became one of the [p. 301] Eight Immortals because the other seven, who occupied seven of the eight grottos of the Upper Spheres, wished to see the eighth inhabited, and nominated him because "his disposition resembled that of a genie." The legend relates that the Empress Ts'ao, wife of the Emperor Jen Tsung (A.D. 1023-64), had two younger brothers. The elder of the two, Ching-hsiu, did not concern himself with the affairs of State; the younger, Ching-chih, was notorious for his misbehaviour. In spite of all warnings he refused to reform, and being at last guilty of homicide was condemned to death. His brother, ashamed at what had occurred, went and hid in the mountains, where he clothed his head and body with wild plants, resolved to lead the life of a hermit. One day Han Chung-li and Lu Tung-pin found him in his retreat, and asked him what he was doing. "I am engaged in studying the Way," he replied. "What way, and where is it?" they asked. He pointed to the sky. "Where is the sky?" they went on. He pointed to his heart. The two visitors smiled and said: "The heart is the sky, and the sky is the Way; you understand the origin of things." They then gave him a recipe for perfection, to enable him to take his place among the Perfect Ones. In a few days only he had reached this much-sought-after condition.

In another version we find fuller details concerning this Immortal. A graduate named Yuan Wen-cheng of Ch'ao-yang Hsien, in the sub-prefecture of Ch'ao-chou Fu in Kuangtung, was travelling with his wife to take his examinations at the capital. Ts'ao Ching-chih, the younger brother of the Empress, saw the lady, and was struck with her beauty. In order to gratify his passion he invited the graduate and his young wife to the palace, [p. 302] where he strangled the husband and tried to force the wife to cohabit with him. She refused obstinately, and as a last resort he had her imprisoned in a noisome dungeon. The soul of the graduate appeared to the imperial Censor Pao Lao-yeh, and begged him to exact vengeance for the execrable crime. The elder brother, Ching-hsiu, seeing the case put in the hands of the upright Pao Lao-yeh, and knowing his brother to be guilty of homicide, advised him to put the woman to death, in order to cut off all sources of information and so to prevent further proceedings. The young voluptuary thereupon caused the woman to be thrown down a deep well, but the star T'ai-po Chin-hsing, in the form of an old man, drew her out again. While making her escape, she met on the road an official procession which she mistook for that of Pao Lao-yeh, and, going up to the sedan chair, made her accusation. This official was no other than the elder brother of the murderer. Ching-hsiu, terrified, dared not refuse to accept the charge, but on the pretext that the woman had not placed herself respectfully by the side of the official chair, and thus had not left a way clear for the passage of his retinue, he had her beaten with iron-spiked whips, and she was cast away for dead in a neighbouring lane. This time also she revived, and ran to inform Pao Lao-yeh. The latter immediately had Ts'ao Ching-hsiu arrested, cangued, and fettered. Without loss of time he wrote an invitation to the second brother, Ts'ao Ching-chih, and on his arrival confronted him with the graduate's wife, who accused him to his face. Pao Lao-yeh had him put in a pit, and remained deaf to all entreaties of the Emperor and Empress on his behalf. A few days later the murderer was taken to the place of execution, and his head rolled in the dust. The problem now was how to get Ts'ao [p. 303] Ching-hsiu out of the hands of the terrible Censor. The Emperor Jen Tsung, to please the Empress, had a universal amnesty proclaimed throughout the Empire, under which all prisoners were set free. On receipt of this edict, Pao Lao-yeh liberated Ts'ao Ching-hsiu from the cangue, and allowed him to go free. As one risen from the dead, he gave himself up to the practice of perfection, became a hermit, and, through the instruction of the Perfect Ones, became one of the Eight Immortals.

Click to enlarge
 The Eight Immortals Crossing the Sea

  

Pa Hsien Kuo Hai

The phrase Pa Hsien kuo hai, 'the Eight Immortals crossing the sea,' refers to the legend of an expedition made by these deities. Their object was to behold the wondrous things of the sea not to be found in the celestial sphere.

The usual mode of celestial locomotion--by taking a seat on a cloud--was discarded at the suggestion of Lu Yen who recommended that they should show the infinite variety of their talents by placing things on the surface of the sea and stepping on them.

Li T'ieh-kuai threw down his crutch, and scudded rapidly over the waves. Chung-li Ch'uan used his feather-fan, Chang Kuo his paper mule, Lu Tung-pin his sword, Han Hsiang Tzu his flower-basket, Ho Hsien Ku her lotus-flower, Lan Ts'ai-ho his musical instrument, and Ts'ao Kuo-chiu his tablet of admission to Court. The popular pictures often represent most of these articles changed into various kinds of sea-monsters. The musical instrument was noticed by the son of the Dragon-king of the Eastern Sea. This avaricious prince conceived the idea of stealing the instrument and imprisoning its owner. The Immortals thereupon declared war, the [p. 304] details of which are described at length by the Chinese writers, the outcome being that the Dragon-king was utterly defeated. After this the Eight Immortals continued their submarine exploits for an indefinite time, encountering numberless adventures; but here the author travels far into the fertile region of romance, beyond the frontiers of our present province. [p. 305]

Footnotes

^305:1 An Illustrated Account of the Eight Immortals' Mission to the East.

Myths and Legends of China, by Edward T.C. Werner, [1922], at sacred-texts.com

  

Chapter XII

  

The Guardian of the Gate of Heaven

  

Li, the Pagoda-bearer

In Buddhist temples there is to be seen a richly attired figure of a man holding in his hand a model of a pagoda. He is Li, the Prime Minister of Heaven and father of No-cha.

He was a general under the tyrant Chou and commander of Ch'en-t'ang Kuan at the time when the bloody war was being waged which resulted in the extinction of the Yin dynasty.

No-cha is one of the most frequently mentioned heroes in Chinese romance; he is represented in one account as being Yu Huang's shield-bearer, sixty feet in height, his three heads with nine eyes crowned by a golden wheel, his eight hands each holding a magic weapon, and his mouth vomiting blue clouds. At the sound of his Voice, we are told, the heavens shook and the foundations of the earth trembled. His duty was to bring into submission all the demons which desolated the world.

His birth was in this wise. Li Ching's wife, Yin Shih, bore him three sons, the eldest Chin-cha, the second Mu-cha, and the third No-cha, generally known as 'the Third Prince.'

Yin Shih dreamed one night that a Taoist priest entered her room. She indignantly exclaimed: "How dare you come into my room in this indiscreet manner?" The priest replied: "Woman, receive the child of the unicorn!" Before she could reply the Taoist pushed an object to her bosom.

Yin Shih awoke in a fright, a cold sweat all over her body. Having awakened her husband, she told him [p. 306] what she had dreamed. At that moment she was seized with the pains of childbirth. Li Ching withdrew to an adjoining room, uneasy at what seemed to be inauspicious omens. A little later two servants ran to him, crying out: "Your wife has given birth to a monstrous freak!"

  

An Avatar of the Intelligent Pearl

Li Ching seized his sword and went into his wife's room, which he found filled with a red light exhaling a most extraordinary odour. A ball of flesh was rolling on the floor like a wheel; with a blow of his sword he cut it open, and a babe emerged, surrounded by a halo of red light. Its face was very white, a gold bracelet was on its right wrist, and it wore a pair of red silk trousers, from which proceeded rays of dazzling golden light. The bracelet was 'the horizon of Heaven and earth,' and the two precious objects belonged to the cave Chin-kuang Tung of T'ai-i Chen-jen, the priest who had bestowed them upon him when he appeared to his mother during her sleep. The child itself was an avatar of Ling Chu-tzu, 'the Intelligent Pearl.'

On the morrow T'ai-i Chen-jen returned and asked Li Ching's permission to see the new-born babe. "He shall be called No-cha," he said, "and will become my disciple."

  

A Precocious Youth

At seven years of age No-cha was already six feet in height. One day he asked his mother if he might go for a walk outside the town. His mother granted him permission on condition that he was accompanied by a servant. She also counselled him not to remain too long outside the wall, lest his father should become anxious. [p. 307]

It was in the fifth moon: the heat was excessive. No-cha had not gone a li before he was in a profuse perspiration. Some way ahead he saw a clump of trees, to which he hastened, and, settling himself in the shade, opened his coat, and breathed with relief the fresher air. In front of him he saw a stream of limpid green water running between two rows of willows, gently agitated by the movement of the wind, and flowing round a rock. The child ran to the banks of the stream, and said to his guardian: "I am covered with perspiration, and will bathe from the rock." "Be quick," said the servant; "if your father returns home before you he will be anxious." No-cha stripped himself, took his red silk trousers, several feet long, and dipped them in the water, intending to use them as a towel. No sooner were the magic trousers immersed in the stream than the water began to boil, and Heaven and earth trembled. The water of this river, the Chiu-wan Ho, 'Nine-bends River,' which communicated with the Eastern Sea, turned completely red, and Lung Wang's palace shook to its foundations. The Dragon-king, surprised at seeing the walls of his crystal palace shaking, called his officers and inquired: "How is it that the palace threatens to collapse? There should not be an earthquake at this time." He ordered one of his attendants to go at once and find out what evil was giving rise to the commotion. When the officer reached the river he saw that the water was red, but noticed nothing else except a boy dipping a band of silk in the stream. He cleft the water and called out angrily: "That child should be thrown into the water for making the river red and causing Lung Wang's palace to shake."

"Who is that who speaks so brutally?" said No-cha. [p. 308] Then, seeing that the man intended to seize him, he jumped aside, took his gold bracelet, and hurled it in the air. It fell on the head of the officer, and No-cha left him dead on the rock. Then he picked up his bracelet and said smiling: "His blood has stained my precious horizon of Heaven and earth." He then washed it in the water.

  

The Slaying of the Dragon-king's Son

"How is it that the officer does not return?" inquired Lung Wang. At that moment attendants came to inform him that his retainer had been murdered by a boy.

Thereupon Ao Ping, the third son of Lung Wang, placing himself at the head of a troop of marines, his trident in his hand, left the palace precincts. The warriors dashed into the river, raising on every side waves mountains high. Seeing the water rising, No-cha stood up on the rock and was confronted by Ao Ping mounted on a sea-monster.

"Who slew my messenger?" cried the warrior.

"I did," answered No-cha.

"Who are you?" demanded Ao Ping.

"I am No-cha, the third son of Li Ching of Ch'en-t'ang Kuan. I came here to bathe and refresh myself; your messenger cursed me, and I killed him. Then--"

"Rascal! do you not know that your victim was a deputy of the King of Heaven? How dare you kill him, and then boast of your crime?"

So saying, Ao Ping thrust at the boy with his trident. No-cha, by a brisk move, evaded the thrust.

"Who are you?" he asked in turn.

"I am Ao Ping, the third son of Lung Wang." [p. 309]

"Ah, you are a blusterer," jeered the boy; "if you dare to touch me I will skin you alive, you and your mud-eels!"

"You make me choke with rage," rejoined Ao Ping, at the same time thrusting again with his trident.

Furious at this renewed attack, No-cha spread his silk trousers in the air, and thousands of balls of fire flew out of them, felling Lung Wang's son. No-cha put his foot on Ao Ping's head and struck it with his magic bracelet, whereupon he appeared in his true form of a dragon.

"I am now going to pull out your sinews," he said, "in order to make a belt for my father to use to bind on his cuirass."

No-cha was as good as his word, and Ao Ping's escort ran and informed Lung Wang of the fate of his son. The Dragon-king went to Li Ching and demanded an explanation.

Being entirely ignorant of what had taken place, Li Ching sought No-cha to question him.

  

An Unruly Son

No-cha was in the garden, occupied in weaving the belt of dragon-sinew. The stupefaction of Li Ching may be imagined. "You have brought most awful misfortunes upon us," he exclaimed. "Come and give an account of your conduct." "Have no fear," replied No-cha superciliously; "his son's sinews are still intact; I will give them back to him if he wishes."

When they entered the house he saluted the Dragon-king, made a curt apology, and offered to return his son's sinews. The father, moved with grief at the sight of the proofs of the tragedy, said bitterly to Li Ching: [p. 310] "You have such a son and yet dare to deny his guilt, though you heard him haughtily admitting it! To-morrow I shall report the matter to Yu Huang." Having spoken thus, he departed.

Li Ching was overwhelmed at the enormity of his son's crime. His wife, in an adjoining room, hearing his lamentations, went to her husband. "What obnoxious creature is this that you have brought into the world?" he said to her angrily. "He has slain two spirits, the son of Lung Wang and a steward sent by the King of Heaven. To-morrow the Dragon-king is to lodge a complaint with Yu Huang, and two or three days hence will see the end of our existence."

The poor mother began to weep copiously. "What!" she sobbed, "you whom I suffered so much for, you are to be the cause of our ruin and death!"

No-cha, seeing his parents so distracted, fell on his knees. "Let me tell you once for all," he said, "that I am no ordinary mortal. I am the disciple of T'ai-i Chen-jen; my magic weapons I received from him; it is they which brought upon me the undying hatred of Lung Wang. But he cannot prevail. To-day I will go and ask my master's advice. The guilty alone should suffer the penalty; it is unjust that his parents should suffer in his stead."

  

Drastic Measures

He then left for Ch'ien-yuan Shan, and entered the cave of his master T'ai-i Chen-jen, to whom he related his adventures. The master dwelt upon the grave consequences of the murders, and then ordered No-cha to bare his breast. With his finger he drew on the skin a magic formula, after which he gave him some secret [p. 311] instructions. "Now," he said, "go to the gate of Heaven and await the arrival of Lung Wang, who purposes to accuse you before Yu Huang. Then you must come again to consult me, that your parents may not be molested because of your misdeeds."

When No-cha reached the gate of Heaven it was closed. In vain he sought for Lung Wang, but after a while he saw him approaching. Lung Wang did not see No-cha, for the formula written by T'ai-i Chen-jen rendered him invisible. As Lung Wang approached the gate No-cha ran up to him and struck him so hard a blow with his golden bracelet that he fell to the ground. Then No-cha stamped on him, cursing him vehemently.

The Dragon-king now recognized his assailant and sharply reproached him with his crimes, but the only reparation he got was a renewal of kicks and blows. Then, partially lifting Lung Wang's cloak and raising his shield, No-cha tore off from his body about forty scales. Blood flowed copiously, and the Dragon-king, under stress of the pain, begged his foe to spare his life. To this No-cha consented on condition that he relinquished his purpose of accusing him before Yu Huang.

"Now," went on No-cha, "change yourself into a small serpent that I may take you back without fear of your escaping."

Lung Wang took the form of a small blue dragon, and followed No-cha to his father's house, upon entering which Lung Wang resumed his normal form, and accused No-cha of having belaboured him. "I will go with all the Dragon-kings and lay an accusation before Yu Huang," he said. Thereupon he transformed himself into a gust of wind, and disappeared. [p. 312]

  

No-cha draws a Bow at a Venture

"Things are going from bad to worse," sighed Li Ching, His son, however, consoled him: "I beg you, my father, not to let the future trouble you. I am the chosen one of the gods. My master is T'ai-i Chen-jen, and he has assured me that he can easily protect us."

No-cha now went out and ascended a tower which commanded a view of the entrance of the fort. There he found a wonderful bow and three magic arrows. No-cha did not know that this was the spiritual weapon belonging to the fort. "My master informed me that I am destined to fight to establish the coming Chou dynasty; I ought therefore to perfect myself in the use of weapons. This is a good opportunity." He accordingly seized the bow and shot an arrow toward the south-west. A red trail indicated the path of the arrow, which hissed as it flew. At that moment Pi Yun, a servant of Shih-chi Niang-niang, happened to be at the foot of K'u-lou Shan (Skeleton Hill), in front of the cave of his mistress. The arrow pierced his throat, and he fell dead, bathed in his blood. Shih-chi Niang-niang came out of her cave, and examining the arrow found that it bore the inscription: "Arrow which shakes the heavens." She thus knew that it must have come from Ch'en-t'ang Kuan, where the magic bow was kept.

  

Another Encounter

The goddess mounted her blue phoenix, flew over the fort, seized Li Ching, and carried him to her cave. There she made him kneel before her, and reminded him how she had protected him that he might gain honour and glory on earth before he attained to immortality. [p. 313] "It is thus that you show your gratitude--by killing my servant!"

Li Ching swore that he was innocent; but the tell-tale arrow was there, and it could not but have come from the fortress. Li Ching begged the goddess to set him at liberty, in order that he might find the culprit and bring him to her. "If I cannot find him," he added, "you may take my life."

Once again No-cha frankly admitted his deed to his father, and followed him to the cave of Shih-chi Niang-niang. When he reached the entrance the second servant reproached him with the crime, whereupon No-cha struck him a heavy blow. Shih-chi Niang-niang, infuriated, threw herself at No-cha, sword in hand; one after the other she wrenched from him his bracelet and magic trousers.

Deprived of his magic weapons, No-cha fled to his master, T'ai-i Chen-jen. The goddess followed and demanded that he be put to death. A terrible conflict ensued between the two champions, until T'ai-i Chen-jen hurled into the air his globe of nine fire-dragons, which, falling on Shih-chi Niang-niang, enveloped her in a whirlwind of flame. When this had passed it was seen that she was changed into stone.

"Now you are safe," said T'ai-i Chen-jen to No-cha, "but return quickly, for the Four Dragon-kings have laid their accusation before Yu Huang, and they are going to carry off your parents. Follow my advice, and you will rescue your parents from their misfortune."

  

No-cha commits Hara-Kiri

On his return No-cha found the Four Dragon-kings on the point of carrying off his parents. "It is I," he [p. 314] said, "who killed Ao Ping, and I who should pay the penalty. Why are you molesting my parents? I am about to return to them what I received from them. Will it satisfy you?"

Lung Wang agreed, whereupon No-cha took a sword, and before their eyes cut off an arm, sliced open his stomach, and fell unconscious. His soul, borne on the wind, went straight to the cave of T'ai-i Chen-jen, while his mother busied herself with burying his body.

"Your home is not here," said his master to him; "return to Ch'en-t'ang Kuan, and beg your mother to build a temple on Ts'ui-p'ing Shan, forty li farther on. Incense will be burned to you for three years, at the end of which time you will be reincarnated."

  

A Habitation for the Soul

During the night, toward the third watch, while his mother was in a deep sleep, No-cha appeared to her in a dream and said: "My mother, pity me; since my death, my soul, separated from my body, wanders about without a home. Build me, I pray you, a temple on Ts'ui-p'ing Shan, that I may be reincarnated." His mother awoke in tears, and related her vision to Li Ching, who reproached her for her blind attachment to her unnatural son, the cause of so much disaster.

For five or six nights the son appeared to his mother, each time repeating his request. The last time he added: "Do not forget that by nature I am ferocious; if you refuse my request evil will befall you."

His mother then sent builders to the mountain to construct a temple to No-cha, and his image was set up in it. Miracles were not wanting, and the number of pilgrims who visited the shrine increased daily. [p. 315]

  

Li Ching destroys his Son's Statue

One day Li Ching, with a troop of his soldiers, was passing this mountain, and saw the roads crowded with pilgrims of both sexes. "Where are these people going?" he asked. "For six months past," he was told, "the spirit of the temple on this mountain has continued to perform miracles. People come from far and near to worship and supplicate him."

"What is the name of this spirit?" inquired Li Ching.

"No-cha," they replied.

"No-cha!" exclaimed the father. "I will go and see him myself."

In a rage Li Ching entered the temple and examined the statue, which was a speaking image of his son. By its side were images of two of his servants. He took his whip and began to beat the statue, cursing it all the while. "It is not enough, apparently, for you to have been a source of disaster to us," he said; "but even after your death you must deceive the multitude." He whipped the statue until it fell to pieces; he then kicked over the images of the servants, and went back, admonishing the people not to worship so wicked a man, the shame and ruin of his family. By his orders the temple was burnt to the ground.

When he reached Ch'en-t'ang Kuan his wife came to him, but he received her coldly. "You gave birth to that cursed son," he said, "who has been the plague of our lives, and after his death you build him a temple in which he deceives the people. Do you wish to have me disgraced? If I were to be accused at Court of having instituted the worship of false gods, would not my destruction be certain? I have burned the temple, and intend [p. 316] that that shall settle the matter once for all; if ever you think of rebuilding it I will break off all relations with you."

  

No-cha consults his Master

At the time of his father's visit No-cha was absent from the temple. On his return he found only its smoking remnants. The spirits of his two servants ran up lamenting. "Who has demolished my temple?" he asked. "Li Ching," they replied. "In doing this he has exceeded his powers," said No-cha. "I gave him back the substance I received from him; why did he come with violence to break up my image? I will have nothing more to do with him."

No-cha's soul had already begun to be spiritualised. So he determined to go to T'ai-i Chen-jen and beg for his help. "The worship rendered to you there," replied the Taoist, "had nothing in it which should have offended your father; it did not concern him. He was in the wrong. Before long Chiang Tzu-ya will descend to inaugurate the new dynasty, and since you must throw in your lot with him I will find a way to aid you."

  

A New No-cha

T'ai-i Chen-jen had two water-lily stalks and three lotus-leaves brought to him. He spread these on the ground in the form of a human being and placed the soul of No-cha in this lotus skeleton, uttering magic incantations the while. There emerged a new No-cha full of life, with a fresh complexion, purple lips, keen glance, and sixteen feet of height. "Follow me to my peach-garden," said T'ai-i Chen-jen, "and I will give you your weapons." He handed him a fiery spear, very sharp, and two wind-and-fire [p. 317] wheels which, placed under his feet, served as a Vehicle. A brick of gold in a panther-skin bag completed his magic armament. The new warrior, after thanking his master, mounted his wind-and-fire wheels and returned to Ch'en-t'ang Kuan.

  

A Battle between Father and Son

Li Ching was informed that his son No-cha had returned and was threatening vengeance. So he took his weapons, mounted his horse, and went forth to meet him. Having cursed each other profusely, they joined battle, but Li Ching was worsted and compelled to flee. No-cha pursued his father, but as he was on the point of overtaking him Li Ching's second son, Mu-cha, came on the scene, and keenly reproached his brother for his unfilial conduct.

"Li Ching is no longer my father," replied No-cha. "I gave him back my substance; why did he burn my temple and smash up my image?"

Mu-cha thereupon prepared to defend his father, but received on his back a blow from the golden brick, and fell unconscious. No-cha then resumed his pursuit of Li Ching.

His strength exhausted, and in danger of falling into the hands of his enemy, Li Ching drew his sword and was about to kill himself. "Stop!" cried a Taoist priest. "Come into my cave, and I will protect you."

When No-cha came up he could not see Li Ching, and demanded his surrender from the Taoist. But he had to do with one stronger than himself, no less a being than Wen-chu T'ien-tsun, whom T'ai-i Chen-jen had sent in order that No-cha might receive a lesson. The Taoist, with the aid of his magic weapon, seized No-cha, [p. 318] and in a moment he found a gold ring fastened round his neck, two chains on his feet, and he was bound to a pillar of gold.

  

Peace at the Last

At this moment, as if by accident, T'ai-i Chen-jen appeared upon the scene. His master had No-cha brought before Wen-chu T'ien-tsun and Li Ching, and advised him to live at peace with his father, but he also rebuked the father for having burned the temple on Ts'ui-p'ing Shan. This done, he ordered Li Ching to go home, and No-cha to return to his cave. The latter, overflowing with anger, his heart full of vengeance, started again in pursuit of Li Ching, swearing that he would punish him. But the Taoist reappeared and prepared to protect Li Ching.

No-cha, bristling like a savage cat, threw himself at his enemy and tried to pierce him with his spear, but a white lotus-flower emerged from the Taoist's mouth and arrested the course of the weapon. As No-cha continued to threaten him, the Taoist drew from his sleeve a mysterious object which rose in the air, and, falling at the feet of No-cha, enveloped him in flames. Then No-cha prayed for mercy. The Taoist exacted from him three separate promises: to live in harmony with his father, to recognize and address him as his father, and to throw himself at his, the Taoist's, feet, to indicate his reconciliation with himself.

After this act of reconciliation had been performed, Wen-chu T'ien-tsun promised Li Ching that he should leave his official post to become an Immortal able to place his services at the disposal of the new Chou dynasty, shortly to come into power. In order to ensure that [p. 319] their reconciliation should last for ever, and to place it beyond No-cha's power to seek revenge, he gave Li Ching the wonderful object by whose agency No-cha's feet had been burned, and which had been the means of bringing him into subjection. It was a golden pagoda, which became the characteristic weapon of Li Ching, and gave rise to his nickname, Li the Pagoda-bearer. Finally, Yu Huang appointed him Generalissimo of the Twenty-six Celestial Officers, Grand Marshal of the Skies, and Guardian of the Gate of Heaven. [p. 320]

Myths and Legends of China, by Edward T.C. Werner, [1922], at sacred-texts.com

  

Chapter XIII

  

A Battle of the Gods

  

Multifarious Versatile Divinities

The Feng shen yen i describes at length how, during the wars which preceded the accession of the Chou dynasty in 1122 B.C., a multitude of demigods, Buddhas, Immortals, etc., took part on one side or the other, some fighting for the old, some for the new dynasty. They were wonderful creatures, gifted with marvellous powers. They could at will change their form, multiply their heads and limbs, become invisible, and create, by merely uttering a word, terrible monsters who bit and destroyed, or sent forth poison gases, or emitted flames from their nostrils. In these battles there is much lightning, thunder, flight of fire-dragons, dark clouds which vomit burning hails of murderous weapons; swords, spears, and arrows fall from the sky on to the heads of the combatants; the earth trembles, the pillars of Heaven shake.

  

Chun T'i

One of these gifted warriors was Chun T'i, a Taoist of the Western Paradise, who appeared on the scene when the armies of the rival dynasties were facing each other. K'ung Hsuan was gallantly holding the pass of the Chin-chi Ling; Chiang Tzu-ya was trying to take it by assault--so far without success.

Chun T'i's mission was to take K'ung Hsuan to the abode of the blest, his wisdom and general progress having now reached the required degree of perfection. This was a means of breaking down the invincible resistance of this powerful enemy and at the same time of rewarding his brilliant talents. [p. 321]

But K'ung Hsuan did not approve of this plan, and a fight took place between the two champions. At one moment Chun T'i was seized by a luminous bow and carried into the air, but while enveloped in a cloud of fire he appeared with eighteen arms and twenty-four heads, holding in each hand a powerful talisman.

  

The One-eyed Peacock

He put a silk cord round K'ung Hsuan's neck, touched him with his wand, and forced him to reassume his original form of a red one-eyed peacock. Chun T'i seated himself on the peacock's back, and it flew across the sky, bearing its saviour and master to the Western Paradise. Brilliantly variegated clouds marked its track through space.

  

Arrangements for the Siege

On the disappearance of its defender the defile of Chin-chi Ling was captured, and the village of Chieh-p'ai Kuan, the bulwark of the enemy's forces, reached. This place was defended by a host of genii and Immortals, the most distinguished among them being the Taoist T'ung-t'ien Chiao-chu, whose specially effective charms had so far kept the fort secure against every attempt upon it.

Lao Tzu himself had deigned to descend from dwelling in happiness, together with Yuan-shih T'ien-tsun and Chieh-yin Tao-jen, to take part in the siege. But the town had four gates, and these heavenly rulers were only three in number. So Chun T'i was recalled, and each member of the quartette was entrusted with the task of capturing one of the gates. [p. 322]

  

Impediments

Chun T'i's duty was to take the Chueh-hsien Men, defended by T'ung-t'ien Chiao-chu. The warriors who had tried to enter the town by this gate had one and all paid for their temerity with their lives. The moment each had crossed the threshold a clap of thunder had resounded, and a mysterious sword, moving with lightning rapidity, had slain him.

  

Offence and Defence

As Chun T'i advanced at the head of his warriors terrible lightning rent the air and the mysterious sword descended like a thunderbolt upon his head. But Chun T'i held on high his Seven-precious Branch, whereupon there emerged from it thousands of lotus-flowers, which formed an impenetrable covering and stopped the sword in its fall. This and the other gates were then forced, and a grand assault was now directed against the chief defender of the town.

T'ung-t'ien Chiao-chu, riding his ox and surrounded by his warriors, for the last time risked the chance of war and bravely faced his four terrible adversaries. With his sword held aloft, he threw himself on Chieh-yin Tao-jen, whose only weapon was his fly-whisk. But there emerged from this a five-coloured lotus-flower, which stopped the sword-thrust. While Lao Tzu struck the hero with his staff, Yuan-shih T'ien-tsun warded off the terrible sword with his jade ju-i.

Chun T'i now called to his help the spiritual peacock, and took the form of a warrior with twenty-four heads and eighteen arms. His mysterious weapons surrounded T'ung-t'ien Chiao-chu, and Lao Tzu struck the hero so [p. 323] hard that fire came out from his eyes, nose, and mouth. Unable to parry the assaults of his adversaries, he next received a blow from Chun T'i's magic wand, which felled him, and he took flight in a whirlwind of dust.

The defenders now offered no further resistance, and Yuan-shih T'ien-tsun thanked Chun T'i for the valuable assistance he had rendered in the capture of the village, after which the gods returned to their palace in the Western Heaven.

  

Attempts at Revenge

T'ung-t'ien Chiao-chu, vanquished and routed, swore to have his revenge. He called to his aid the spirits of the twenty-eight constellations, and marched to attack Wu Wang's army. The honour of the victory that ensued belonged to Chun T'i, who disarmed both the Immortal Wu Yun and T'ung-t'ien Chiao-chu.

Wu Yun, armed with his magic sword, entered the lists against Chun T'i; but the latter opened his mouth and a blue lotus-flower came out and stopped the blows aimed at him. Other thrusts were met by similar miracles.

"Why continue so useless a fight?" said Chun T'i at last. "Abandon the cause of the Shang, and come with me to the Western Paradise. I came to save you, and you must not compel me to make you resume your original form."

An insulting flow of words was the reply; again the magic sword descended like lightning, and again the stroke was averted by a timely lotus-flower. Chun T'i now waved his wand, and the magic sword was broken to bits, the handle only remaining in Wu Yun's hand. [p. 324]

  

The Golden-bearded Turtle

Mad with rage, Wu Yun seized his club and tried to fell his enemy. But Chun T'i summoned a disciple, who appeared with a bamboo pole. This he thrust out like a fishing-rod, and on a hook at the end of the line attached to the pole dangled a large golden-bearded turtle. This was the Immortal Wu Yun, now in his original form of a spiritual turtle. The disciple seated himself on its back, and both, disappearing into space, returned to the Western Heavens.

  

The Battle Won

To conquer T'ung-t'ien Chiao-chu was more difficult, but after a long fight Chun T'i waved his Wand of the Seven Treasures and broke his adversary's sword. The latter, disarmed and vanquished, disappeared in a cloud of dust. Chun T'i did not trouble to pursue him. The battle was won.

  

Buddhahood

A disciple of T'ung-t'ien Chiao-chu, P'i-lu Hsien, 'the Immortal P'i-lu,' seeing his master beaten in two successive engagements, left the battlefield and followed Chun T'i to the Western Paradise, to become a Buddha. He is known as P'i-lu Fo, one of the principal gods of Buddhism.

Chun T'i's festival is celebrated on the sixth day of the third moon. He is generally shown with eight hands and three faces, one of the latter being that of a pig. [p. 325]

Myths and Legends of China, by Edward T.C. Werner, [1922], at sacred-texts.com

  

Chapter XIV

  

How the Monkey Became a God

  

The Hsi Yu Chi

In dealing with the gods of China we noticed the monkey among them. Why and in what manner he attained to that exalted rank is set forth in detail in the Hsi yu chi  [*1]--a work the contents of which have become woven into the fabric of Chinese legendary lore and are known and loved by every intelligent native. Its pages are filled with ghosts, demons, and fairies, good and bad, but "it contains no more than the average Chinese really believes to exist, and his belief in such manifestations is so firm that from the cradle to the grave he lives and moves and has his being in reference to them." Its characters are said to be allegorical, though it may be doubted whether these implications may rightly be read into the Chinese text. Thus:

Hsuan (or Yuan) Chuang, or T'ang Seng, is the pilgrim of the Hsi yu chi, who symbolizes conscience, to which all actions are brought for trial. The priestly garment of Hsuan Chuang symbolizes the good work of the rectified human nature. It is held to be a great protection to the new heart from the myriads of evil beings which surround it, seeking its destruction.

Sun Hou-tzu, the Monkey Fairy, represents human nature, which is prone to all evil. His unreasonable vagaries moved Hsuan Chuang to compel him to wear a Head-splitting Helmet which would contract upon his head in moments of waywardness. The agonizing [p. 326] pressure thus caused would bring him to his senses, irrespective of his distance from his master.

The iron wand of Sun Hou-tzu is said to represent the use that can be made of doctrine. It was useful for all purposes, great or small. By a word it could be made invisible, and by a word it could become long enough to span the distance between Heaven and earth.

Chu Pa-chieh, the Pig Fairy, with his muck-rake, stands for the coarser passions, which are constantly at war with the conscience in their endeavours to cast off all restraint.

Sha Ho-shang, Priest Sha, is a good representation of Mr Faithful in The Pilgrim's Progress. In the Hsi yu chi he stands for the human character, which is naturally weak and which needs constant encouragement.

  

Legend of Sun Hou-tzu

The deeds of this marvellous creature, the hero of the Hsi yu chi, are to be met with continually in Chinese popular literature, and they are very much alive in the popular mind. In certain parts a regular worship is offered to him, and in many temples representations of or legends concerning him are to be seen or heard.

Other names by which Sun Hou-tzu is referred to are: Sun Hsing-che, Sun Wu-k'ung, Mei Hou-wang, Ch'i-t'ien Ta Sheng, and Pi-ma Wen, the last-mentioned being a title which caused him annoyance by recalling the derisive dignity conferred upon him by Yu Huang.  [*2] Throughout the remainder of this chapter Sun Hou-tzu will be shortly referred to as 'Sun.'

Click to enlarge
 The Birth of the Monkey

Beyond the seas, in the Eastern continent, in the kingdom of Ao-lai, is the mountain Hua-kuo Shan. [p. 327] On the steep sides of this mountain there is a rocky point 36 feet 5 inches high and 24 feet in circumference. At the very top an egg formed, and, fructified by the breath of the wind, gave birth to a stone monkey. The newly-born saluted the four points of the horizon; from his eyes shone golden streaks of lightning, which filled the palace of the North Pole Star with light. This light subsided as soon as he was able to take nourishment.

"To-day," said Yu Huang to himself, "I am going to complete the wonderful diversity of the beings engendered by Heaven and earth. This monkey will skip and gambol to the highest peaks of mountains, jump about in the waters, and, eating the fruit of the trees, will be the companion of the gibbon and the crane. Like the deer he will pass his nights on the mountain slopes, and during the day will be seen leaping on their summits or in their caverns. That will be the finest ornament of all for the mountains!"

The creature's exploits soon caused him to be proclaimed king of the monkeys. He then began to try to find some means of becoming immortal. After travelling for eighteen years by land and sea he met the Immortal P'u-t'i Tsu-shih on the mountain Ling-t'ai-fang-ts'un. During his travels the monkey had gradually acquired human attributes; his face remained always as it had been originally, but dressed in human apparel he began to be civilized. His new master gave him the family name of Sun, and personal name of Wu-k'ung, 'Discoverer of Secrets.' He taught him how to fly through the air, and to change into seventy-two different forms. With one leap he could cover 108,000 li (about 36,000 miles). [p. 328]

  

A Rod of Iron

Sun, after his return to Hua-kuo Shan, slew the demon Hun-shih Mo-wang, who had been molesting the monkeys during his long absence. Then he organized his subjects into a regular army, 47,000 all told. Thus the peace of the simian kingdom was assured. As for himself, he could not find a weapon to suit him, and went to consult Ao Kuang, the Lung Wang, or Dragon-king of the Eastern Sea, about it. It was from him that he obtained the formidable rod of iron, formerly planted in the ocean-bed by the Great Yu (Yu Wang) to regulate the level of the waters. He pulled it out, and modified it to suit his tastes. The two extremities he bound round with gold bands, and on it engraved the words: 'Gold-bound Wand of my Desires.' This magic weapon could accommodate itself to all his wishes; being able to assume the most incredible proportions or to reduce itself to the form of the finest of needles, which he kept hidden in his ear. He terrorized the Four Kings of the sea, and dressed himself at their expense. The neighbouring kings allied themselves with him. A splendid banquet with copious libations of wine sealed the alliance of friendship with the seven kings; but alas! Sun had partaken so liberally that when he was seeing his guests off, no sooner had he taken a few steps than he fell into a drunken sleep. The undertakers of Yen Wang, the King of the Hells, to whom Lung Wang had accused him as the disturber of his watery kingdom, seized his soul, put chains round its neck, and led it down to the infernal regions. Sun awoke in front of the gate of the kingdom of the dead, broke his fetters, killed his two custodians, and, armed with his magic staff, penetrated into the realm of Yen Wang, where he [p. 329] threatened to carry out general destruction. He called to the ten infernal gods to bring him the Register of the Living and the Dead, tore out with his own hand the page on which were written his name and those of his monkey subjects, and then told the King of the Hells that he was no longer subject to the laws of death. Yen Wang yielded, though with bad grace, and Sun returned triumphant from his expedition beyond the tomb.

Before long Sun's escapades came to the knowledge of Yu Huang. Ao Kuang and Yen Wang each sent deputies to the Master of Heaven, who took note of the double accusation, and sent T'ai-po Chin-hsing to summon before him this disturber of the heavenly peace.

  

Grand Master of the Heavenly Stables

In order to keep him occupied, Sun was appointed Grand Master of the Heavenly Stables, and was entrusted with the feeding of Yu Huang's horses; his official celestial title being Pi-ma Wen. Later on, learning the object of the creation of this derisory appointment, he overturned the Master's throne, seized his staff, broke down the South Gate of Heaven, and descended on a cloud to Hua-kuo Shan.

  

Grand Superintendent of the Heavenly Peach-garden

Yu Huang in great indignation organized a siege of Hua-kuo Shan, but the Kings of Heaven and the generals with their celestial armies were repulsed several times. Sun now arrogated to himself the pompous title of Grand Saint, Governor of Heaven. He had this emblazoned on his banners, and threatened Yu Huang that he would carry destruction into his kingdom if he refused to [p. 330] recognize his new dignity. Yu Huang, alarmed at the result of the military operations, agreed to the condition laid down by Sun. The latter was then appointed Grand Superintendent of the Heavenly Peach-garden, the fruit of which conferred immortality, and a new palace was built for him.

  

Double Immortality

Having made minute observations on the secret properties of the peaches, Sun ate of them and was thus assured against death. The time was ripe for him to indulge in his tricks without restraint, and an opportunity soon presented itself. Deeply hurt at not having been invited to the feast of the Peach Festival, P'an-t'ao Hui, given periodically to the Immortals by Wang-mu Niang-niang, the Goddess of the Immortals, he resolved upon revenge. When the preparations for the feast were complete he cast a spell over the servants, causing them to fall into a deep sleep, and then ate up all the most juicy meats and drank the fine wines provided for the heavenly guests. Sun had, however, indulged himself too liberally; with heavy head and bleary eye he missed the road back to his heavenly abode, and came unaware to the gate of Lao Chun, who was, however, absent from his palace. It was only a matter of a few minutes for Sun to enter and swallow the pills of immortality which Lao Chun kept in five gourds. Thus Sun, doubly immortal, riding on the mist, again descended to Hua-kuo Shan.

  

Sun Hou-tzu Captured

These numerous misdeeds aroused the indignation of all the gods and goddesses. Accusations poured in upon [p. 331] Yu Huang, and he ordered the Four Gods of the Heavens and their chief generals to bring Sun to him. The armies laid siege to Hua-kuo Shan, a net was spread in the heavens, fantastic battles took place, but the resistance of the enemy was as strenuous and obstinate as before.

Lao Chun and Erh-lang, nephew of Yu Huang, then appeared on the scene. Sun's warriors resisted gallantly, but the forces of Heaven were too much for them, and at length they were overcome. At this juncture Sun changed his form, and in spite of the net in the sky managed to find a way out. In vain search was made everywhere, until Li T'ien-wang, by the help of his devil-finding mirror, detected the quarry and informed Erh-lang, who rushed off in pursuit. Lao Chun hurled his magic ring on to the head of the fugitive, who stumbled and fell. Quick as lightning, the celestial dog, T'ien Kou, who was in Erh-lang's service, threw himself on him, bit him in the calf, and caused him to stumble afresh. This was the end of the fight. Sun, surrounded on all sides, was seized and chained. The battle was won.

  

Sun escapes from Lao Chun's Furnace

The celestial armies now raised the siege, and returned to their quarters. But a new and unexpected difficulty arose. Yu Huang condemned the criminal to death, but when they went to carry out the sentence the executioners learned that he was invulnerable; swords, iron, fire, even lightning, could make no impression on his skin. Yu Huang, alarmed, asked Lao Chun the reason of this. The latter replied that there was nothing surprising about it, seeing that the knave had eaten the peaches of life in the garden of Heaven and the pills of immortality [p. 332] which he had composed. "Hand him over to me," he added. "I will distil him in my furnace of the Eight Trigrams, and extract from his composition the elements which render him immortal."

Yu Huang ordered that the prisoner be handed over, and in the sight of all he was shut up in Lao Chun's alchemical furnace, which for forty-nine days was heated white-hot. But at an unguarded moment Sun lifted the lid, emerged in a rage, seized his magic staff, and threatened to destroy Heaven and exterminate its inhabitants. Yu Huang, at the end of his resources, summoned Buddha, who came and addressed Sun as follows: "Why do you wish to possess yourself of the Kingdom of the Heavens?"

"Have I not power enough to be the God of Heaven?" was the arrogant reply.

"What qualifications have you?" asked Buddha. "Enumerate them."

"My qualifications are innumerable," replied Sun. "I am invulnerable, I am immortal, I can change myself into seventy-two different forms, I can ride on the clouds of Heaven and pass through the air at will, with one leap I can traverse a hundred and eight thousand li."

"Well," replied Buddha, "have a match with me; I wager that in one leap you cannot even jump out of the palm of my hand. If you succeed I will bestow upon you the sovereignty of Heaven."

  

Broad-jump Competition

Sun rose into space, flew like lightning in the great vastness, and reached the confines of Heaven, opposite the five great red pillars which are the boundaries of [p. 333] the created universe. On one of them he wrote his name, as irrefutable evidence that he could reach this extreme limit; this done, he returned triumphant to demand of Buddha the coveted inheritance.

"But, wretch," said Buddha, "you never went out of my hand!"

"How is that?" rejoined Sun. "I went as far as the pillars of Heaven, and even took the precaution of writing my name on one of them as proof in case of need."

"Look then at the words you have written," said Buddha, lifting a finger on which Sun read with stupefaction his name as he had inscribed it.

Buddha then seized Sun, transported him out of Heaven, and changed his five fingers into the five elements, metal, wood, water, fire, and earth, which instantly formed five high mountains contiguous to each other. The mountains were called Wu Hsing Shan, and Buddha shut Sun up in them.

  

Conditions of Release

Thus subdued, Sun would not have been able to get out of his stone prison but for the intercession of Kuan Yin P'u-sa, who obtained his release on his solemn promise that he would serve as guide, philosopher, and friend to Hsuan Chuang, the priest who was to undertake the difficult journey of 108,000 li to the Western Heaven. This promise, on the whole, he fulfilled in the service of Hsuan Chuang during the fourteen years of the long journey. Now faithful, now restive and undisciplined, he was always the one to triumph in the end over the eighty-one fantastical tribulations which beset them as they journeyed. [p. 334]

  

Sha Ho-shang

One of the principal of Sun's fellow-servants of the Master was Sha Ho-shang.

He is depicted wearing a necklace of skulls, the heads of the nine Chinese deputies sent in former centuries to find the Buddhist canon, but whom Sha Ho-shang had devoured on the banks of Liu-sha River when they had attempted to cross it.

He is also known by the name of Sha Wu-ching, and was originally Grand Superintendent of the Manufactory of Stores for Yu Huang's palace. During a great banquet given on the Peach Festival to all the gods and Immortals of the Chinese Olympus he let fall a crystal bowl, which was smashed to atoms. Yu Huang caused him to be beaten with eight hundred blows, drove him out of Heaven, and exiled him to earth. He lived on the banks of the Liu-sha Ho, where every seventh day a mysterious sword appeared and wounded him in the neck. Having no other means of subsistence, he used to devour the passers-by.

  

Sha Ho-shang becomes Baggage-coolie

When Kuan Yin passed through that region on her way to China to find the priest who was predestined to devote himself to the laborious undertaking of the quest of the sacred Buddhist books, Sha Ho-shang threw himself on his knees before her and begged her to put an end to all his woes.

The goddess promised that he should be delivered by the priest, her envoy, provided he would engage himself in the service of the pilgrim. On his promising to do this, and to lead a better life, she herself ordained him priest. In the end it came about that Hsuan Chuang, when passing the Sha Ho, took him into his suite as coolie to carry [p. 335] his baggage. Yu Huang pardoned him in consideration of the service he was rendering to the Buddhist cause.

  

Chu Pa-chieh

Chu Pa-chieh is a grotesque, even gross, personage, with all the instincts of animalism. One day, while he was occupying the high office of Overseer-general of the Navigation of the Milky Way, he, during a fit of drunkenness, vilely assaulted the daughter of Yu Huang. The latter had him beaten with two thousand blows from an iron hammer, and exiled to earth to be reincarnated.

During his transition a mistake was made, and entering the womb of a sow he was born half-man, half-pig, with the head and ears of a pig and a human body. He began by killing and eating his mother, and then devoured his little porcine brothers. Then he went to live on the wild mountain Fu-ling Shan, where, armed with an iron rake, he first robbed and then ate the travellers who passed through that region.

Mao Erh-chieh, who lived in the cave Yun-chan Tung, engaged him as carrier of her personal effects, which she afterward bequeathed to him.

Yielding to the exhortations of the Goddess Kuan Yin, who, at the time of her journey to China, persuaded him to lead a less dissolute life, he was ordained a priest by the goddess herself, who gave him the name of Chu (Pig), and the religious name of Wu-neng, 'Seeker after Strength.' This monster was knocked down by Sun when the latter was passing over the mountain accompanied by Hsuan Chuang, and he declared himself a disciple of the pilgrim priest. He accompanied him throughout the journey, and was also received in the Western Paradise as a reward for his aid to the Buddhist propaganda. [p. 336]

  

Hsuan Chuang, the Master

The origin of this priest was as follows: In the reign of the Emperor T'ai Tsung of the T'ang dynasty, Ch'en Kuang-jui, a graduate of Hai Chou, in his examination for the doctor's degree came out as chuang yuan, first on the list. Wen Chiao (also named Man-t'ang Chiao), the daughter of the minister Yin K'ai-shan, meeting the young academician, fell in love with him, and married him. Several days after the wedding the Emperor appointed Ch'en Kuang-jui Governor of Chiang Chou (modern Chen-chiang Fu), in Kiangsu. After a short visit to his native town he started to take up his post. His old mother and his wife accompanied him. When they reached Hung Chou his mother fell sick and they were forced to stay for a time at the Inn of Ten Thousand Flowers, kept by one Liu Hsiao-erh. Days passed; the sickness did not leave her, and as the time for her son to take over the seals of office was drawing near, he had to proceed without her.

  

The Released Carp

Before his departure he noticed a fisherman holding in his hand a fine carp; this he bought for a small sum to give to his mother. Suddenly he noticed that the fish had a very extraordinary look, and, changing his mind, he let it go in the waters of the Hung Chiang, afterward telling his mother what he had done. She congratulated him on his action, and assured him that the good deed would not go unrewarded.

  

The Chuang Yuan Murdered

Ch'en Kuang-jui re-entered his boat with his wife and a servant. They were stopped by the chief waterman, [p. 337] Liu Hung, and his assistant. Struck with the great beauty of Ch'en Kuang-jui's wife, the former planned a crime which he carried out with the help of his assistant. At the dead of night he took the boat to a retired spot, killed Ch'en and his servant, threw their bodies into the river, seized his official documents of title and the woman he coveted, passed himself off as the real chuang yuan, and took possession of the magistracy of Chiang Chou. The widow, who was with child, had two alternatives--silence or death. Meantime she chose the former. Before she gave birth to her child, T'ai-po Chin-hsing, the Spirit of the South Pole Star, appeared to her, and said he had been sent by Kuan Yin, the Goddess of Mercy, to present her with a son whose fame would fill the Empire. "Above all," he added, "take every precaution lest Liu Hung kill the child, for he will certainly do so if he can." When the child was born the mother, during the absence of Liu Hung, determined to expose it rather than see it slain. Accordingly she wrapped it up carefully in a shirt, and carried it to the bank of the Blue River. She then bit her finger, and with the blood wrote a short note stating the child's origin, and hid it in its breast. Moreover, she bit off the infant's left little toe, as an indelible mark of identity. No sooner had this been done than a gust of wind blew a large plank to the river's edge. The poor mother tied her infant firmly to this plank and abandoned it to the mercy of the waves. The waif was carried to the shore of the isle of Chin Shan, on which stands the famous monastery of Chin-shan Ssu, near Chinkiang. The cries of the infant attracted the attention of an old monk named Chang Lao, who rescued it and gave it the name of Chiang Liu, 'Waif of the River.' He reared it with [p. 338] much care, and treasured the note its mother had written with her blood. The child grew up, and Chang Lao made him a priest, naming him Hsuan Chuang on the day of his taking the vows. When he was eighteen years of age, having one day quarrelled with another priest, who had cursed him and reproached him with having neither father nor mother, he, much hurt, went to his protector Chang Lao. The latter said to him: "The time has come to reveal to you your origin." He then told him all, showed him the note, and made him promise to avenge his assassinated father. To this end he was made a roving priest, went to the official Court, and eventually got into touch with his mother, who was still living with the prefect Liu Hung. The letter placed in his bosom, and the shirt in which he had been wrapped, easily proved the truth of his statements. The mother, happy at having found her son, promised to go and see him at Chin Shan. In order to do this, she pretended to be sick, and told Liu Hung that formerly, when still young, she had taken a vow which she had not yet been able to fulfil. Liu Hung himself helped her to do so by sending a large gift of money to the priests, and allowed her to go with her servants to perform her devotions at Chin-shan Ssu. On this second visit, during which she could speak more freely with her son, she wished to see for herself the wound she had made on his foot. This removed the last shadow of doubt.

  

Hsuan Chuang finds his Grandmother

She told Hsuan Chuang that he must first of all go to Hung Chou and find his grandmother, formerly left at the Inn of Ten Thousand Flowers, and then on to Ch'ang-an to take to her father Yin K'ai-shan a letter, [p. 339] putting him in possession of the chief facts concerning Liu Hung, and praying him to avenge her.

She gave him a stick of incense to take to her mother-in-law. The old lady lived the life of a beggar in a wretched hovel near the city gate, and had become blind from weeping. The priest told her of the tragic death of her son, then touched her eyes with the stick of incense, and her sight was restored. "And I," she exclaimed, "have so often accused my son of ingratitude, believing him to be still alive!" He took her back to the Inn of Ten Thousand Flowers and settled the account, then hastened to the palace of Yin K'ai-shan. Having obtained an audience, he showed the minister the letter, and informed him of all that had taken place.

  

The Murderer Executed

The following day a report was presented to the Emperor, who gave orders for the immediate arrest and execution of the murderer of Ch'en Kuang-jui.

Yin K'ai-shan went with all haste to Chen-chiang, where he arrived during the night, surrounded the official residence, and seized the culprit, whom he sent to the place where he had committed the murder. His heart and liver were torn out and sacrificed to the victim.

  

The Carp's Gratitude

Now it happened that Ch'en Kuang-jui was not dead after all. The carp released by him was in fact no other than Lung Wang, the God of the River, who had been going through his kingdom in that guise and had been caught in the fisherman's net. On learning that his rescuer had been cast into the river, Lung Wang had [p. 340] saved him, and appointed him an officer of his Court. On that day, when his son, wife, and father-in-law were sacrificing the heart of his assassin to his manes on the river-bank, Lung Wang ordered that he return to earth. His body suddenly appeared on the surface of the water, floated to the bank, revived, and came out full of life and health. The happiness of the family reunited under such unexpected circumstances may well be imagined. Ch'en Kuang-jui returned with his father-in-law to Chen-chiang, where he took up his official post, eighteen years after his nomination to it.

Hsuan Chuang became the Emperor's favourite priest. He was held in great respect at the capital, and had innumerable honours bestowed upon him, and in the end was chosen for the journey to the Western Paradise, where Buddha in person handed him the sacred books of Buddhism.

  

Pai Ma, the White Horse

When he left the capital, Hsuan Chuang had been presented by the Emperor with a white horse to carry him on his long pilgrimage. One day, when he reached She-p'an Shan, near a torrent, a dragon emerged from the deep river-bed and devoured both the horse and its saddle. Sun tried in vain to find the dragon, and at last had to seek the aid of Kuan Yin.

Now Yu Lung San T'ai-tzu, son of Ao Jun, Dragonking of the Western Sea, having burnt a precious pearl on the roof of his father's palace, was denounced to Yu Huang, who had him beaten with three hundred blows and suspended in the air. He was awaiting death when Kuan Yin passed on her way to China. The unfortunate dragon requested the goddess to have pity on him, whereupon [p. 341] she prevailed upon Yu Huang to spare his life on condition that he served as steed for her pilgrim on the expedition to the Western Paradise. The dragon was handed over to Kuan Yin, who showed him the deep pool in which he was to dwell while awaiting the arrival of the priest. It was this dragon who had devoured Hsuan Chuang's horse, and Kuan Yin now bade him change himself into a horse of the same colour to carry the priest to his destination. He had the honour of bearing on his back the sacred books that Buddha gave to T'ai Tsung's deputy, and the first Buddhist temple built at the capital bore the name of Pai-ma Miao, 'Temple of the White Horse.'

  

Perils by the Way

It is natural to expect that numberless exciting adventures should befall such an interesting quartette, and indeed the Hsi yu chi, which contains a hundred chapters, is full of them. The pilgrims encountered eighty difficulties on the journey out and one on the journey home. The following examples are characteristic of the rest.

  

The Grove of Cypress-trees

The travellers were making their way westward through shining waters and over green hills, where they found endless luxuriance of vegetation and flowers of all colours in profusion. But the way was long and lonely, and as darkness came on without any sign of habitation the Priest said: "Where shall we find a resting-place for the night?" The Monkey replied: "My Master, he who has left home and become a priest must dine on the wind and lodge on the water, lie down under the moon [p. 342] and sleep in the forest; everywhere is his home; why then ask where shall we rest?" But Pa-chieh, who was the bearer of the pilgrim's baggage, was not satisfied with this reply, and tried to get his load transferred to the horse, but was silenced when told that the latter's sole duty was to carry the Master.

However, the Monkey gave Pai Ma a blow with his rod, causing him to start forward at a great pace, and in a few minutes from the brow of a hill Hsuan Chuang espied in the distance a grove of cypress-trees, beneath the shade of which was a large enclosure. This seemed a suitable place to pass the night, so they made toward it, and as they approached observed in the enclosure a spacious and luxurious establishment. There being no indications that the place was then inhabited, the Monkey made his way inside.

  

A Proposal of Marriage

He was met by a lady of charming appearance, who came out of an inner room, and said: "Who is this that ventures to intrude upon a widow's household?" The situation was embarrassing, but the lady proved to be most affable, welcomed them all very heartily, told them how she became a widow and had been left in possession of riches in abundance, and that she had three daughters, Truth, Love, and Pity by name. She then proceeded to make a proposal of marriage, not only on behalf of herself, but of her three daughters as well. They were four men, and here were four women; she had mountain lands for fruit-trees, dry lands for grain, flooded fields for rice--more than five thousand acres of each; horses, oxen, sheep, pigs innumerable; sixty or seventy farmsteads; granaries choked with grain; storehouses full [p. 343] of silks and satins; gold and silver enough to last several lifetimes however extravagantly they lived. Why should the four travellers not finish their journey there, and be happy ever afterward? The temptation was great, especially as the three daughters were ladies of surpassing beauty as well as adepts at needlework and embroidery, well read, and able to sing sweetly.

But Hsuan Chuang sat as if listening to frogs after rain, unmoved except by anger that she should attempt to divert him from his heavenly purpose, and in the end the lady retired in a rage, slamming the door behind her.

The covetous Pa-chieh, however, expressed himself in favour of accepting the widow's terms. Finding it impossible to do so openly, he stole round to the back and secured a private interview. His personal appearance was against him, but the widow was not altogether uncompliant. She not only entertained the travellers, but agreed to Pa-chieh retiring within the household in the character of a son-in-law, the other three remaining as guests in the guest-rooms.

  

Blind Man's Buff

But a new problem now arose. If Pa-chieh were wedded to one of the three daughters, the others would feel aggrieved. So the widow proposed to blindfold him with a handkerchief, and marry him to whichever he succeeded in catching. But, with the bandage tied over his eyes, Pa-chieh only found himself groping in darkness. "The tinkling sound of female trinkets was all around him, the odour of musk was in his nostrils; like fairy forms they fluttered about him, but he could no more grasp one than he could a shadow. One way [p. 344] and another he ran till he was too giddy to stand, and could only stumble helplessly about."

The prospective mother-in-law then unloosed the bandage, and informed Pa-chieh that it was not her daughters' 'slipperiness,' as he had called it, which prevented their capture, but the extreme modesty of each in being generous enough to forgo her claims in favour of one of her sisters. Pa-chieh thereupon became very importunate, urging his suit for any one of the daughters or for the mother herself or for all three or all four. This was beyond all conscience, but the widow was equal to the emergency, and suggested another solution. Each of her daughters wore a waistcoat embroidered in jewels and gold. Pa-chieh was to try these on in turn, and to marry the owner of the one which fitted him. Pa-chieh put one on, but as he was tying the cord round his waist it transformed itself into strong coils of rope which bound him tightly in every limb. He rolled about in excruciating agony, and as he did so the curtain of enchantment fell and the beauties and the palace disappeared.

Next morning the rest of the party on waking up also found that all had changed, and saw that they had been sleeping on the ground in the cypress-grove. On making search they found Pa-chieh bound fast to a tree. They cut him down, to pursue the journey a sadder and wiser Pig, and the butt of many a quip from his fellow-travellers.

  

The Lotus Cave

When the party left the Elephant Country, seeing a mountain ahead, the Master warned his disciples to be careful. Sun said: "Master, say not so; remember the text of the Sacred Book, 'So long as the heart is right [p. 345] there is nothing to fear.'" After this Sun kept a close watch on Pa-chieh, who, while professing to be on guard, slept most of the time. When they arrived at Ping-ting Shan they were approached by a woodcutter, who warned them that in the mountain, which extended for 600 li (200 miles), there was a Lotus Cave, inhabited by a band of demons under two chiefs, who were lying in wait to devour the travellers. The woodcutter then disappeared. Accordingly, Pa-chieh was ordered to keep watch. But, seeing some hay, he lay down and went to sleep, and the mountain demons carried him away to the Lotus Cave.

On seeing Pa-chieh, the second chief said: "He is no good; you must go in search of the Master and the Monkey." All this time the Monkey, to protect his Master, was walking ahead of the horse, swinging his club up and down and to right and left. The Demon-king saw him from the top of the mountain and said to himself: "This Monkey is famous for his magic, but I will prove that he is no match for me; I will yet feast on his Master." So, descending the mountain, he transformed himself into a lame beggar and waited by the roadside. The Master, out of pity, persuaded the Monkey to carry him. While on the Monkey's back the Demon, by magic skill, threw Mount Meru on to Sun's head, but the Monkey warded it off with his left shoulder, and walked on. Then the Demon threw Mount O-mei on to Sun's head, and this he warded off with his right shoulder, and walked on, much to the Demon's surprise. Lastly the Demon caused T'ai Shan to fall on to his head. This at last stunned the Monkey. Sha Ho-shang now defended the Master with his staff, which was, however, no match for the Demon's starry sword. The Demon [p. 346] seized the Master and carried him under one arm and Sha Ho-shang under the other to the Lotus Cave.

The two Demons then planned to take their two most precious things, a yellow gourd and a jade vase, and try to bottle the Monkey. They arranged to carry them upside down and call out the Monkey's name. If he replied, then he would be inside, and they could seal him up, using the seal of the great Ancient of Days, the dweller in the mansion of T'ai Sui.  [*3]

  

The Monkey under the Mountain

When the Monkey found that he was being crushed under the mountain he was greatly distressed about his Master, and cried out: "Oh, Master, you delivered me from under the mountain before, and trained me in religion; how is it that you have brought me to this pass? If you must die, why should Sha Ho-shang and Pa-chieh and the Dragon-horse also suffer?" Then his tears poured down like rain.

The spirits of the mountain were astonished at hearing these words. The guardian angels of the Five Religions asked: "Whose is this mountain, and who is crushed beneath it?" The local gods replied: "The mountain is ours, but who is under it we do not know." "If you do not know," the angels replied, "we will tell you. It is the Great Holy One, the Equal of Heaven, who rebelled there five hundred years ago. He is now converted, and is the disciple of the Chinese ambassador. How dare you lend your mountain to the Demon for such a purpose?" The guardian angels and local gods then recited some prayers, and the mountain was removed. The Monkey sprang up, brandishing his spear, and the [p. 347] spirits at once apologized, saying that they were under enforced service to the Demons.

While they were speaking Sun saw a light approaching, and asked what it was. The spirits replied: "This light comes from the Demons' magic treasures. We fear they are bringing them to catch you." Sun then said: "Now we shall have some sport. Who is the Demon-chief's associate?" "He is a Taoist," they replied, "who is always occupied in preparing chemicals." The Monkey said: "Leave me, and I will catch them myself." He then transformed himself into a duplicate of the Taoist.

  

The Magic Gourd

Sun went to meet the Demons, and in conversation learnt from them that they were on their way to catch the famous Monkey, and that the magic gourd and vase were for that purpose. They showed these treasures to him, and explained that the gourd, though small, could hold a thousand people. "That is nothing," replied Sun. "I have a gourd which can contain all the heavens." At this they marvelled greatly, and made a bargain with him, according to which he was to give them his gourd, after it had been tested as to its capacity to contain the heavens, in exchange for their precious gourd and vase. Going up to Heaven, the Monkey obtained permission to extinguish the light of the sun, moon, and stars for one hour. At noon the next day there was complete darkness, and the Demons believed Sun when he stated that he had put the whole heavens into his gourd so that there could be no light. They then handed over to the Monkey their magic gourd and vase, and in exchange he gave them his false gourd. [p. 348]

  

The Magic Rope

On discovering that they had been deceived, the Demons made complaint to their chiefs, who informed them that Sun, by pretending to be one of the Immortals, had outwitted them. They had now lost two out of their five magic treasures. There remained three, the magic sword, the magic palm fan, and the magic rope. "Go," said they, "and invite our dear grandmother to come and dine on human flesh." Personating one of the Demons, Sun himself went on this errand. He told the old lady that he wanted her to bring with her the magic rope, with which to catch Sun. She was delighted, and set out in her chair carried by two fairies.

When they had gone some few li, Sun killed the ladies, and then saw that they were foxes. He took the magic rope, and thus had three of the magic treasures. Having changed the dead so that they looked like living creatures, he returned to the Lotus Cave. Many small demons came running up, saying that the old lady had been slain. The Demon-king, alarmed, proposed to release the whole party. But his younger brother said: "No, let me fight Sun. If I win, we can eat them; if I fail, we can let them go."

After thirty bouts Sun lost the magic rope, and the Demon lassoed him with it and carried him to the cave, and took back the magic gourd and vase. Sun now transformed himself into two false demons. One he placed instead of himself in the lasso bound to a pillar, and then went and reported to the second Demon-chief that Sun was struggling hard, and that he should be bound with a stronger rope lest he make his escape. Thus, by this strategy, Sun obtained possession of the magic rope again. By a similar trick he also got back the magic gourd and vase. [p. 349]

  

The Master Rescued

Sun and the Demons now began to wrangle about the respective merits of their gourds, which, each assured the other, could imprison men and make them obey their wishes. Finally, Sun succeeded in putting one of the Demons into his gourd.

There ensued another fight concerning the magic sword and palm fan, during which the fan was burnt to ashes. After more encounters Sun succeeded in bottling the second Demon in the magic vase, and sealed him up with the seal of the Ancient of Days. Then the magic sword was delivered, and the Demons submitted. Sun returned to the cave, fetched his Master out, swept the cave clean of all evil spirits, and they then started again on their westward journey. On the road they met a blind man, who addressed them saying: "Whither away, Buddhist Priest? I am the Ancient of Days. Give me back my magic treasures. In the gourd I keep the pills of immortality. In the vase I keep the water of life. The sword I use to subdue demons. With the fan I stir up enthusiasm. With the cord I bind bundles. One of these two Demons had charge of the gold crucible. They stole my magic treasures and fled to the mundane sphere of mortals. You, having captured them, are deserving of great reward." But Sun replied: "You should be severely punished for allowing your servants to do this evil in the world." The Ancient of Days replied: "No, without these trials your Master and his disciples could never attain to perfection."

Sun understood and said: "Since you have come in person for the magic treasures, I return them to you." After receiving them, the Ancient of Days returned to his T'ai Sui mansion in the skies. [p. 350]

  

The Red Child Demon

By the autumn the travellers arrived at a great mountain. They saw on the road a red cloud which the Monkey thought must be a demon. It was in fact a demon child who, in order to entrap the Master, had had himself bound and tied to the branch of a tree. The child repeatedly cried out to the passers-by to deliver him. Sun suspected that it was a trick; but the Master could no longer endure the pitiful wails; he ordered his disciples to loose the child, and the Monkey to carry him.

As they proceeded on their way the Demon caused a strong whirlwind to spring up, and during this he carried off the Master. Sun discovered that the Demon was an old friend of his, who, centuries before, had pledged himself to eternal friendship. So he consoled his comrades by saying that he felt sure no harm would come to the Master.

  

A Prospective Feast

Soon Sun and his companions reached a mountain covered with pine-forests. Here they found the Demon in his cave, intent upon feasting on the Priest. The Demon refused to recognize his ancient friendship with Sun, so the two came to blows. The Demon set fire to everything, so that the Monkey might be blinded by the smoke. Thus he was unable to find his Master. In despair he said: "I must get the help of some one more skilful than myself." Pa-chieh was sent to fetch Kuan Yin. The Demon then seized a magic bag, transformed himself into the shape of Kuan Yin, and invited Pa-chieh to enter the cave. The simpleton fell into the trap and was seized and placed in the bag. Then the Demon appeared in his true form, and said: "I am [p. 351] the beggar child, and mean to cook you for my dinner. A fine man to protect his Master you are!" The Demon then summoned six of his most doughty generals and ordered them to accompany him to fetch his father, King Ox-head, to dine off the pilgrim. When they had gone Sun opened the bag, released Pa-chieh, and both followed the six generals.

  

The Generals Tricked

Sun thought that as the Demon had played a trick on Pa-chieh, he would play one on his generals. So he hurried on in front of them, and changed himself into the form of King Ox-head. The Demon and his generals were invited into his presence, and Red Child said: "If anyone eats of the pilgrim's flesh, his life will be prolonged indefinitely. Now he is caught and I invite you to feast on him." Sun, personifying the father, said: "No, I cannot come. I am fasting to-day. Moreover, Sun has charge of the pilgrim, and if any harm befall him it will be the worse for you, for he has seventy-two magic arts. He can make himself so big that your cave cannot contain him, and he can make himself as small as a fly, a mosquito, a bee, or a butterfly."

Sun then went to Kuan Yin and appealed for help. She gave him a bottle, but he found he could not move it. "No," said Kuan Yin, "for all the forces of the ocean are stored in it."

Kuan Yin lifted it with ease, and said: "This dew water is different from dragon water, and can extinguish the fire of passion. I will send a fairy with you on your boat. You need no sails. The fairy needs only to blow a little, and the boat moves along without any effort." Finally, the Red Child, having been overcome, repented and [p. 352] begged to be received as a disciple. Kuan Yin received him and blessed him, giving him the name of Steward.

  

The Demons of Blackwater River

One day the Master suddenly exclaimed: "What is that noise?" Sun replied: "You are afraid; you have forgotten the Heart Prayer, according to which we are to be indifferent to all the calls of the six senses--the eye, ear, nose, tongue, body, mind. These are the Six Thieves. If you cannot suppress them, how do you expect to see the Great Lord?" The Master thought a while and then said: "O disciple, when shall we see the Incarnate Model (Ju Lai) face to face?"

Pa-chieh said: "If we are to meet such demons as these, it will take us a thousand years to get to the West." But Sha Ho-shang rejoined: "Both you and I are stupid; if we persevere and travel on, shoulder to shoulder, we shall reach there at last." While thus talking, they saw before them a dark river in flood, which the horse could not cross. Seeing a small boat, the Master said: "Let us engage that boat to take us across." While crossing the river in it, they discovered that it was a boat sent by the Demon of Blackwater River to entrap them in midstream, and the Master would have been slain had not Sun and the Western Dragon come to the rescue.

Click to enlarge
 The Demons of Blackwater River Carry Away the Master

  

The Slow-carts Country

Having crossed the Blackwater River, they journeyed westward, facing wind and snow. Suddenly they heard a great shout as of ten thousand voices. The Master was alarmed, but Sun laughingly went to investigate. Sitting on a cloud, he rose in the air, and saw a city, outside of [p. 353] which there were thousands of priests and carts laden with bricks and all kinds of building materials. This was the city where Taoists were respected, and Buddhists were not wanted. The Monkey, who appeared among the people as a Taoist, was informed that the country was called the Ch'e Ch'ih, 'Slow-carts Country,' and for twenty years had been ruled by three Taoists who could procure rain during times of drought. Their names were Tiger, Deer, and Sheep. They could also command the wind, and change stones into gold. The Monkey said to the two leading Taoists: "I wonder if I shall be so fortunate as to see your Emperor?" They replied: "We will see to that when we have attended to our business." The Monkey inquired what business the priests could have. "In former times," they said, "when our King ordered the Buddhists to pray for rain, their prayers were not answered. Then the Taoists prayed, and copious showers fell. Since then all the Buddhist priests have been our slaves, and have to carry the building materials, as you see. We must assign them their work, and then will come to you." Sun replied: "Never mind; I am in search of an uncle of mine, from whom I have not heard for many years. Perhaps he is here among your slaves." They said: "You may see if you can find him."

  

Restraints on Freedom

Sun went to look for his uncle. Hearing this, many Buddhist priests surrounded him, hoping to be recognized as his lost relative. After a while he smiled. They asked him the reason. He said: "Why do you make no progress? Life is not meant for idleness." They said: "We cannot do anything. We are terribly oppressed." [p. 354] "What power have your masters?" "By using their magic they can call up wind or rain." "That is a small matter," said Sun. "What else can they do?" "They can make the pills of immortality, and change stone into gold."

Sun said: "These are also small matters; many can do the same. How did these Taoists deceive your King?" "The King attends their prayers night and day, expecting thereby to attain to immortality." "Why do you not leave the place?" "It is impossible, for the King has ordered pictures of us to be hung up everywhere. In all the numerous prefectures, magistracies, and market-places in Slow-carts Country are pictures of the Buddhist priests, and any official who catches a runaway priest is promoted three degrees, while every non-official receives fifty taels. The proclamation is signed by the King. So you see we are helpless." Sun then said: "You might as well die and end it all."

Click to enlarge
 Buddhists As Slaves in Slow-cart Country

  

Immortal for Suffering

They replied: "A great number have died. At one time we numbered more than two thousand. But through deaths and suicides there now remain only about five hundred. And we who remain cannot die. Ropes cannot strangle us, swords cannot cut us; if we plunge into the river we cannot sink; poison does not kill us." Sun said: "Then you are fortunate, for you are all Immortals." "Alas!" said they, "we are immortal only for suffering. We get poor food. We have only sand to sleep on. But in the night hours spirits appear to us and tell us not to kill ourselves, for an Arhat will come from the East to deliver us. With him there [p. 355] is a disciple, the Great Holy One, the Equal of Heaven, most powerful and tender-hearted. He will put an end to these Taoists and have pity on us Buddhists."

  

The Saviour of the Buddhists

Inwardly Sun was glad that his fame had gone abroad. Returning to the city, he met the two chief Taoists. They asked him if he had found his relative. "Yes," he replied, "they are all my relatives!" They smiled and said: "How is it that you have so many relatives?" Sun said: "One hundred are my father's relatives, one hundred my mother's relatives, and the remainder my adopted relatives. If you will let all these priests depart with me, then I will enter the city with you; otherwise I will not enter." "You must be mad to speak to us in this way. The priests were given us by the King. If you had asked for a few only, we might have consented, but your request is altogether unreasonable." Sun then asked them three times if they would liberate the priests. When they finally refused, he grew very angry, took his magic spear from his ear and brandished it in the air, when all their heads fell off and rolled on the ground.

  

Anger of the Buddhist Priests

The Buddhist priests saw from a distance what had taken place, and shouted: "Murder, murder! The Taoist superintendents are being killed." They surrounded Sun, saying: "These priests are our masters; they go to the temple without visiting the King, and return home without taking leave of the King. The King is the high priest. Why have you killed his disciples? The Taoist chief priest will certainly accuse [p. 356] us Buddhist priests of the murders. What are we to do? If we go into the city with you they will make you pay for this with your life."

Sun laughed. "My friends," he said, "do not trouble yourselves over this matter. I am not the Master of the Clouds, but the Great Holy One, a disciple of the Holy Master from China, going to the Western Paradise to fetch the sacred books, and have come to save you."

"No, no," said they, "this cannot be, for we know him." Sun replied: "Having never met him, how can you know him?" They replied: "We have seen him in our dreams. The spirit of the planet Venus has described him to us and warned us not to make a mistake." "What description did he give?" asked Sun. They replied: "He has a hard head, bright eyes, a round, hairy face without cheeks, sharp teeth, prominent mouth, a hot temper, and is uglier than the Thunder-god. He has a rod of iron, caused a disturbance in Heaven itself, but later repented, and is coming with the Buddhist pilgrim in order to save mankind from calamities and misery." With mixed feelings Sun replied: "My friends, no doubt you are right in saying I am not Sun. I am only his disciple, who has come to learn how to carry out his plans. But," he added, pointing with his hand, "is not that Sun coming yonder?" They all looked in the direction in which he had pointed.

  

Sun bestows Talismans

Sun quickly changed himself from a Taoist priest, and appeared in his natural form. At this they all fell down and worshipped him, asking his forgiveness because their mortal eyes could not recognize him. They then begged [p. 357] him to enter the city and compel the demons to repent. Sun told them to follow him. He then went with them to a sandy place, emptied two carts and smashed them into splinters, and threw all the bricks, tiles, and timber into a heap, calling upon all the priests to disperse. "Tomorrow," he said, "I am going to see the King, and will destroy the Taoists!" Then they said: "Sir, we dare not go any farther, lest they attempt to seize you and cause trouble." "Have no fear," he replied; "but if you think so I will give you a charm to protect you." He pulled out some hairs, and gave one to each to hold firmly on the third finger. "If anyone tries to seize you," he said, "keep tight hold of it, call out 'Great Holy One, the Equal of Heaven,' and I will at once come to your rescue, even though I be ten thousand miles away." Some of them tried the charm, and, sure enough, there he was before them like the God of Thunder. In his hand he held a rod of iron, and he could keep ten thousand men and horses at bay.

  

The Magic Circle

It was now winter. The pilgrims were crossing a high mountain by a narrow pass, and the Master was afraid of wild beasts. The three disciples bade him fear not, as they were united, and were all good men seeking truth. Being cold and hungry they rejoiced to see a fine building ahead of them, but Sun said: "It is another devil's trap. I will make a ring round you. Inside that you will be safe. Do not wander outside it. I will go and look for food." Sun returned with his bowl full of rice, but found that his companions had got tired of waiting, and had disappeared. They had gone forward to the fine building, which Pa-chieh entered. Not a [p. 358] soul was to be seen, but on going upstairs he was terrified to see a human skeleton of immense size lying on the floor. At this moment the Demon of the house descended on them, bound the Master, and said: "We have been told that if we eat of your flesh our white hair will become black again, and our lost teeth grow anew." So he ordered the small devils who accompanied him to bind the others. This they did, and thrust the pilgrims into a cave, and then lay in wait for Sun. It was not long before the Monkey came up, when a great fight ensued. In the end, having failed, notwithstanding the exercise of numerous magic arts, to release his companions, Sun betook himself to the Spiritual Mountain and besought Ju Lai's aid. Eighteen lohan were sent to help him against the Demon. When Sun renewed the attack, the lohan threw diamond dust into the air, which blinded the Demon and also half buried him. But, by skilful use of his magic coil, he gathered up all the diamond dust and carried it back to his cave.

The lohan then advised Sun to seek the aid of the Ancient of Days. Accordingly, Sun ascended to the thirty-third Heaven, where was the palace of the god. He there discovered that the Demon was none other than one of the god's ox-spirits who had stolen the magic coil. It was, in fact, the same coil with which Sun himself had at last been subdued when he had rebelled against Heaven.

  

Help from Ju Lai

The Ancient of Days mounted a cloud and went with Sun to the cave. When the Demon saw who had come he was terrified. The Ancient of Days then recited an incantation, and the Demon surrendered the magic coil [p. 359] to him. On the recitation of a second incantation all his strength left him, and he appeared as a bull, and was led away by a ring in his nose. The Master and his disciples were then set at liberty, and proceeded on their journey.

  

The Fire-quenching Fan

In the autumn the pilgrims found themselves in the Ssu Ha Li Country, where everything was red--red walls, red tiles, red varnish on doors and furniture. Sixty li from this place was the Flaming Mountain, which lay on their road westward.

An old man they met told them that it was possible to cross the Flaming Mountain only if they had the Magic Iron Fan, which, waved once, quenched fire, waved a second time produced strong wind, and waved a third time produced rain. This magic fan was kept by the Iron-fan Princess in a cave on Ts'ui-yun Shan, 1500 li distant. On hearing this, Sun mounted a cloud, and in an instant was transported to the cave. The Iron-fan Princess was one of the lochas (wives and daughters of demons), and the mother of the Red Child Demon, who had become a disciple of Kuan Yin. On seeing Sun she was very angry, and determined to be revenged for the outwitting of her husband, King Ox-head, and for the carrying away of her son. The Monkey said: "If you lend me the Iron Fan I will bring your son to see you." For answer she struck him with a sword. They then fell to fighting, the contest lasting a long while, until at length, feeling her strength failing, the Princess took out the Iron Fan and waved it. The wind it raised blew Sun to a distance of 84,000 li, and whirled him about like a leaf in a whirlwind. But he soon returned, reinforced by further magic power [p. 360] lent him by the Buddhist saints. The Princess, however, deceived him by giving him a fan which increased the flames of the mountain instead of quenching them. Sun and his friends had to retreat more than 20 li, or they would have been burned.

The local mountain-gods now appeared, bringing refreshments, and urging the pilgrims to get the Fan so as to enable them to proceed on their journey. Sun pointed to his fan and said: "Is not this the Fan?" They smiled and said: "No, this is a false one which the Princess has given you." They added: "Originally there was no Flaming Mountain, but when you upset the furnace in Heaven five hundred years ago the fire fell here, and has been burning ever since. For not having taken more care in Heaven, we have been set to guard it. The Demon-king Ox-head, though he married the locha Princess, deserted her some two years ago for the only daughter of a fox-king. They live at Chi-lei Shan, some three thousand li from here. If you can get the true Iron Fan through his help you will be able to extinguish the flames, take your Master to the West, save the lives of many people round here, and enable us to return to Heaven once more."

Sun at once mounted a cloud and was soon at Chi-lei Shan. There he met the Fox-princess, whom he upbraided and pursued back to her cave. The Ox-demon came out and became very angry with Sun for having frightened her. Sun asked him to return with him to the locha Princess and persuade her to give him the Magic Fan, This he refused to do. They then fought three battles, in all of which Sun was successful. He changed into the Ox-demon's shape and visited the locha Princess. She, thinking he was the Ox-demon, gladly received him, [p. 361] and finally gave him the Magic Fan; he then set out to return to his Master.

  

The Power of the Magic Fan

The Ox-demon, following after Sun, saw him walking along, joyfully carrying the Magic Fan on his shoulder. Now Sun had forgotten to ask how to make it small, like an apricot leaf, as it was at first. The Ox-demon changed himself into the form of Pa-chieh, and going up to Sun he said: "Brother Sun, I am glad to see you back; I hope you have succeeded." "Yes," replied Sun, and described his fights, and how he had tricked the Ox-demon's wife into giving him the Fan. The seeming Pa-chieh said: "You must be very tired after all your efforts; let me carry the Magic Fan for you." As soon as he had got possession of it he appeared in his true form, and tried to use it to blow Sun away 84,000 li, for he did not know that the Great Holy One had swallowed a wind-resisting pill, and was therefore immovable. He then put the Magic Fan in his mouth and fought with his two swords. He was a match for Sun in all the magic arts, but through the aid of Pa-chieh and the help of the local gods sent by the Master the Monkey was able to prevail against him. The Ox-demon changed himself many times into a number of birds, but for each of these Sun changed himself into a swifter and stronger one. The Ox-demon then changed himself into many beasts, such as tigers, leopards, bears, elephants, and an ox 10,000 feet long. He then said to Sun, with a laugh: "What can you do to me now?" Sun seized his rod of iron, and cried: "Grow!" He immediately became 100,000 feet high, with eyes like the sun and moon. They fought till the heavens and the earth shook with their onslaughts. [p. 362]

  

Defeat of the Ox-demon

The Ox-demon being of so fierce and terrible a nature, both Buddha in Heaven and the Taoist Celestial Ruler sent down whole legions of celebrated warriors to help the Master's servant. The Ox-demon tried to escape in every direction, one after the other, but his efforts were in vain. Finally defeated, he was made to promise for himself and his wife to give up their evil ways and to follow the holy precepts of the Buddhist doctrine.

The Magic Fan was given to Sun, who at once proceeded to test its powers. When he waved it once the fires on Flaming Mountain died out. When he waved it a second time a gentle breeze sprang up. When he waved it a third time refreshing rain fell everywhere, and the pilgrims proceeded on their way in comfort.

  

The Lovely Women

Having travelled over many mountains, the travellers came to a village. The Master said: "You, my disciples, are always very kind, taking round the begging-bowl and getting food for me. To-day I will take the begging-bowl myself." But Sun said: "That is not right; you must let us, your disciples, do this for you." But the Master insisted.

When he reached the village, there was not a man to be seen, but only some lovely women. He did not think that it was right for him to speak to women. On the other hand, if he did not procure anything for their meal, his disciples would make fun of him. So, after long hesitation, he went forward and begged food of them. They invited him to their cave home, and, having learnt who he was, ordered food for him, but it was all human flesh. [p. 363] The Master informed them that he was a vegetarian, and rose to take his departure, but instead of letting him go they surrounded and bound him, thinking that he would be a fine meal for them next day.

  

An Awkward Predicament

Then seven of the women went out to bathe in a pool. There Sun, in search of his Master, found them and would have killed them, only he thought it was not right to kill women. So he changed himself into an eagle and carried away their clothes to his nest. This so frightened the women that they crouched in the pool and did not dare to come out.

But Pa-chieh, also in search of his Master, found the women bathing. He changed himself into a fish, which the women tried to catch, chasing him hither and thither round the pool. After a while Pa-chieh leapt out of the pool and, appearing in his true form, threatened the women for having bound his Master. In their fright the women fled to a pavilion, round which they spun spiders' threads so thickly that Pa-chieh became entangled and fell. They then escaped to their cave and put on some clothes.

  

How the Master was Rescued

When Pa-chieh at length had disentangled himself from the webs, he saw Sun and Sha Ho-shang approaching. Having learnt what had happened, they feared the women might do some injury to the Master, so they ran to the cave to rescue him. On the way they were beset by the seven dwarf sons of the seven women, who transformed themselves into a swarm of dragon-flies, bees, and other insects. But Sun pulled out some hairs and, changing them into [p. 364] seven different swarms of flying insects, destroyed the hostile swarm, and the ground was covered a foot deep with the dead bodies. On reaching the cave, the pilgrims found it had been deserted by the women. They released the Master, and made him promise never to beg for food again. Having given the promise, he mounted his horse, and they proceeded on their journey.

  

The Spiders and the Extinguisher

When they had gone a short distance they perceived a great building of fine architecture ahead of them. It proved to be a Taoist temple. Sha Ho-shang said: "Let us enter, for Buddhism and Taoism teach the same things. They differ only in their vestments." The Taoist abbot received them with civility and ordered five cups of tea. Now he was in league with the seven women, and when the servant had made the tea they put poison in each cup. Sun, however, suspected a conspiracy, and did not drink his tea. Seeing that the rest had been poisoned, he went and attacked the sisters, who transformed themselves into huge spiders. They were able to spin ropes instead of webs with which to bind their enemies. But Sun attacked and killed them all.

Click to enlarge
 Sun Steals Clothing for His Master

The Taoist abbot then showed himself in his true form, a demon with a thousand eyes. He joined battle with Sun, and a terrible contest ensued, the result being that the Demon succeeded in putting an extinguisher on his enemy. This was a new trick which Sun did not understand. However, after trying in vain to break out through the top and sides, he began to bore downward, and, finding that the extinguisher was not deep in the ground, he succeeded in effecting his escape from below. But he feared that his Master and the others would die of the [p. 365] poison. At this juncture, while he was suffering mental tortures on their behalf, a Bodhisattva, Lady Pi Lan, came to his rescue. By the aid of her magic he broke the extinguisher, gave his Master and fellow-disciples pills to counteract the poison, and so rescued them.

  

Shaving a Whole City

The summer had now arrived. On the road the pilgrims met an old lady and a little boy. The old lady said: "You are priests; do not go forward, for you are about to pass into the country known as the Country that exterminates Religion. The inhabitants have vowed to kill ten thousand priests. They have already slain that number all but four noted ones whose arrival they expect; then their number will be complete."

This old lady was Kuan Yin, with Shen Tsai (Steward), who had come to give them warning. Sun thereupon changed himself into a candle-moth and flew into the city to examine for himself. He entered an inn, and heard the innkeeper warning his guests to look after their own clothes and belongings when they went to sleep. In order to travel safely through the city, Sun decided that they should all put on turbans and clothing resembling that of the citizens. Perceiving from the innkeeper's warning that thieving was common, Sun stole some clothing and turbans for his Master and comrades. Then they all came to the inn at dusk, Sun representing himself as a horse-dealer.

Fearing that in their sleep their turbans would fall off, and their shaven heads be revealed, Sun arranged that they should sleep in a cupboard, which he asked the landlady to lock.

During the night robbers came and carried the cupboard [p. 366] away, thinking to find in it silver to buy horses. A watchman saw many men carrying this cupboard, and became suspicious, and called out the soldiers. The robbers ran away, leaving the cupboard in the open. The Master was very angry with Sun for getting him into this danger. He feared that at daylight they would be discovered and all be executed. But Sun said: "Do not be alarmed; I will save you yet!" He changed himself into an ant, and escaped from the cupboard. Then he plucked out some hairs and changed them into a thousand monkeys like himself. To each he gave a razor and a charm for inducing sleep. When the King and all the officials and their wives had succumbed to this charm, the monkeys were to shave their heads.

On the morrow there was a terrible commotion throughout the city, as all the leaders and their families found themselves shaved like Buddhists.

Thus the Master was saved again.

  

The Return to China

The pilgrims having overcome the predicted eighty difficulties of their outward journey, there remained only one to be overcome on the homeward way.

They were now returning upon a cloud which had been placed at their disposal, and which had been charged to bear them safely home. But alas! the cloud broke and precipitated them to the earth by the side of a wide river which they must cross. There were no ferry-boats or rafts to be seen, so they were glad to avail themselves of the kind offices of a turtle, who offered to take them across on his back. But in midstream the turtle reminded Hsuan Chuang of a promise he had made him when on his outward journey, namely, that he would intercede for him [p. 367] before the Ruler of the West, and ask his Majesty to forgive all past offences and allow him to resume his humanity again. The turtle asked him if he had remembered to keep his word. Hsuan Chuang replied: "I remember our conversation, but I am sorry to say that under great pressure I quite forgot to keep my promise." "Then," said the turtle, "you are at liberty to dispense with my services." He then disappeared beneath the water, leaving the pilgrims floundering in the stream with their precious books. They swam the river, and with great difficulty managed to save a number of volumes, which they dried in the sun.

  

The Travellers Honoured

The pilgrims reached the capital of their country without further difficulty. As soon as they appeared in sight the whole population became greatly excited, and cutting down branches of willow-trees went out to meet them. As a mark of special distinction the Emperor sent his own horse for Hsuan Chuang to ride on, and the pilgrims were escorted with royal honours into the city, where the Emperor and his grateful Court were waiting to receive them. Hsuan Chuang's queer trio of converts at first caused great amusement among the crowds who thronged to see them, but when they learned of Sun's superhuman achievements, and his brave defence of the Master, their amusement was changed into wondering admiration.

But the greatest honours were conferred upon the travellers at a meeting of the Immortals presided over by Mi-lo Fo, the Coming Buddha. Addressing Hsuan Chuang, the Buddha said, "In a previous existence you were one of my chief disciples. But for disobedience and for lightly esteeming the great teaching your soul was imprisoned [p. 368] in the Eastern Land. Now a memorial has been presented to me stating that you have obtained the True Classics of Salvation, thus, by your faithfulness, completing your meritorious labours. You are appointed to the high office of Controller of Sacrifices to his Supreme Majesty the Pearly Emperor."

Turning to Sun, the Buddha said, "You, Sun, for creating a disturbance in the palace of Heaven, were imprisoned beneath the Mountain of the Five Elements, until the fullness of Heaven's calamities had descended upon you, and you had repented and had joined the holy religion of Buddha. From that time you have endeavoured to suppress evil and cherish virtue. And on your journey to the West you have subjugated evil spirits, ghosts, and demons. For your services you are appointed God of Victorious Strife."

For his repentance, and for his assistance to his Master, Chu Pa-chieh, the Pig Fairy, was appointed Head Altar-washer to the Gods. This was the highest office for which he was eligible, on account of his inherent greed.

Sha Ho-shang was elevated to the rank of Golden Body Perpetual Saint.

Pai Ma, the white horse who had patiently carried Hsuan Chuang and his burden of books, was led by a god down the Spirit Mountain to the banks of the Pool of Dragon-transformation. Pai Ma plunged in, when he changed at once into a four-footed dragon, with horns, scales, claws, and wings complete. From this time he became the chief of the celestial dragon tribe.

Click to enlarge
 The Return to China

Sun's first thought upon receiving his promotion was to get rid of the Head-splitting Helmet. Accordingly he said to his Master, "Now that I am, like yourself, a Buddha, I want you to relieve my head of the helmet you [p. 369] imposed upon me during the years of my waywardness." Hsuan Chuang replied, "If you have really become a Buddha, your helmet should have disappeared of itself. Are you sure it is still upon your head?" Sun raised his hand, and lo! the helmet was gone.

After this the great assembly broke up, and each of the Immortals returned in peace to his own celestial abode. [p. 370]

Footnotes

^370:1 A record of a journey to the Western Paradise to procure the Buddhist scriptures for the Emperor of China. The work is a dramatization of the introduction of Buddhism into China.

^370:2 See <page 329>.

^370:3 See <page 195>.

Myths and Legends of China, by Edward T.C. Werner, [1922], at sacred-texts.com

  

Chapter XV

  

Fox Legends

  

The Fox

Among the many animals worshipped by the Chinese, those at times seen emerging from coffins or graves naturally hold a prominent place. They are supposed to be the transmigrated souls of deceased human beings. We should therefore expect such animals as the fox, stoat, weasel, etc., to be closely associated with the worship of ghosts, spirits, and suchlike creatures, and that they should be the subjects of, or included in, a large number of Chinese legends. This we find. Of these animals the fox is mentioned in Chinese legendary lore perhaps more often than any other.

The subject of fox-lore has been dealt with exhaustively by my respected colleague, the late Mr Thomas Watters (formerly H.B.M. Consul-General at Canton, a man of vast learning and extreme modesty, insufficiently appreciated in his generation), in the Journal of the North China Branch of the Royal Asiatic Society, viii, 45-65, to which the reader is referred for details. Generally, the fox is a creature of ill omen, long-lived (living to eight hundred or even a thousand years), with a peculiar virtue in every part of his body, able to produce fire by striking the ground with his tail, cunning, cautious, sceptical, able to see into the future, to transform himself (usually into old men, or scholars, or pretty young maidens), and fond of playing pranks and tormenting mankind.

  

Fox Legends

Many interesting fox legends are to be found in a collection of stories entitled Liao chai chih i, by P'u Sung-ling (seventeenth century A.D.), part of which was translated [p. 371] into English many years ago by Professor H.A. Giles and appeared in two fascinating volumes called Strange Stories from a Chinese Studio. These legends were related to the Chinese writer by various people as their own experiences.

  

Friendship with Foxes

A certain man had an enormous stack of straw, as big as a hill, in which his servants, taking what was daily required for use, had made quite a large hole. In this hole a fox fixed his abode, and would often show himself to the master of the house under the form of an old man. One day the latter invited the master to walk into his abode; he at first declined, but accepted on being pressed; and when he got inside, lo! he saw a long suite of handsome apartments. They then sat down, and exquisitely perfumed tea and wine were brought; but the place was so gloomy that there was no difference between night and day. By and by, the entertainment being over, the guest took his leave; and on looking back the beautiful rooms and their contents had all disappeared. The old man himself was in the habit of going away in the evening and returning with the first streaks of morning; and as no one was able to follow him, the master of the house asked him one day whither he went. To this he replied that a friend invited him to take wine; and then the master begged to be allowed to accompany him, a proposal to which the old man very reluctantly consented. However, he seized the master by the arm, and away they went as though riding on the wings of the wind; and in about the time it takes to cook a pot of millet they reached a city and walked into a restaurant, where there were a number of people drinking together and making a great noise. The old man led his companion to a gallery above, from which [p. 372] they could look down on the feasters below; and he himself went down and brought away from the tables all kinds of nice food and wine, without appearing to be seen or noticed by any of the company. After a while a man dressed in red garments came forward and laid upon the table some dishes of cumquats;  [*1] the master at once requested the old man to go down and get him some of these. "Ah," replied the latter, "that is an upright man: I cannot approach him." Thereupon the master said to himself, "By thus seeking the companionship of a fox, I then am deflected from the true course. Henceforth I too will be an upright man." No sooner had he formed this resolution than he suddenly lost all control over his body, and fell from the gallery down among the revellers below. These gentlemen were much astonished by his unexpected descent; and he himself, looking up, saw there was no gallery to the house, but only a large beam upon which he had been sitting. He now detailed the whole of the circumstances, and those present made up a purse for him to pay his travelling expenses; for he was at Yu-t'ai--a thousand li from home.

  

The Marriage Lottery

A certain labourer, named Ma T'ien-jung, lost his wife when he was only about twenty years of age, and was too poor to take another. One day, when out hoeing in the fields, he beheld a nice-looking young lady leave the path and come tripping across the furrows toward him. Her face was well painted,  [*2] and she had altogether such a [p. 373] refined look that Ma concluded she must have lost her way, and began to make some playful remarks in consequence. "You go along home," cried the young lady, "and I'll be with you by and by." Ma doubted this rather extraordinary promise, but she vowed and declared she would not break her word; and then Ma went off, telling her that his front door faced the north, etc. At midnight the young lady arrived, and then Ma saw that her hands and face were covered with fine hair, which made him suspect at once that she was a fox. She did not deny the accusation; and accordingly Ma said to her, "If you really are one of those wonderful creatures you will be able to get me anything I want; and I should be much obliged if you would begin by giving me some money to relieve my poverty." The young lady said she would; and next evening, when she came again, Ma asked her where the money was. "Dear me!" replied she, "I quite forgot it." When she was going away Ma reminded her of what he wanted, but on the following evening she made precisely the same excuse, promising to bring it another day. A few nights afterward Ma asked her once more for the money, and then she drew from her sleeve two pieces of silver, each weighing about five or six ounces. They were both of fine quality, with turned-up edges,  [*3] and Ma was very pleased, and stored them away in a cupboard. Some months after this he happened to require some money for use, and took out these pieces; but the person to whom he showed them said they were only pewter, and easily bit off a portion of one of them with his teeth. Ma was much alarmed, and put the pieces away directly, taking the opportunity when evening came of abusing the young lady roundly. "It's all your bad luck," retorted she. [p. 374] "Real gold would be too much for your inferior destiny." There was an end of that; but Ma went on to say, "I always heard that fox-girls were of surpassing beauty; how is it you are not?" "Oh," replied the young lady, "we always adapt ourselves to our company. Now you haven't the luck of an ounce of silver to call your own; and what would you do, for instance, with a beautiful princess? My beauty may not be good enough for the aristocracy; but among your big-footed, bent-backed rustics,  [*4] why, it may safely be called 'surpassing'!"

A few months passed away, and then one day the young lady came and gave Ma three ounces of silver, saying, "You have often asked me for money, but in consequence of your bad luck I have always refrained from giving you any. Now, however, your marriage is at hand, and I here give you the cost of a wife, which you may also regard as a parting gift from me." Ma replied that he was not engaged, to which the young lady answered that in a few days a go-between would visit him to arrange the affair. "And what will she be like?" asked Ma. "Why, as your aspirations are for 'surpassing' beauty," replied the young lady, "of course she will be possessed of surpassing beauty." "I hardly expect that," said Ma; "at any rate, three ounces of silver will not be enough to get a wife." "Marriages," explained the young lady, "are made in the moon;  [*5] mortals have nothing to do with them." "And why must you be going away like this?" inquired Ma. "Because," answered she, "for us to meet only by night is not the proper thing. I had [p. 375] better get you another wife and have done with you." Then when morning came she departed, giving Ma a pinch of yellow powder, saying, "In case you are ill after we are separated, this will cure you." Next day, sure enough, a go-between did come, and Ma at once asked what the proposed bride was like; to which the former replied that she was very passable-looking. Four or five ounces of silver was fixed as the marriage present, Ma making no difficulty on that score, but declaring he must have a peep at the young lady.  [*6] The go-between said she was a respectable girl, and would never allow herself to be seen; however, it was arranged that they should go to the house together, and await a good opportunity. So off they went, Ma remaining outside while the go-between went in, returning in a little while to tell him it was all right. "A relative of mine lives in the same court, and just now I saw the young lady sitting in the hall. We have only got to pretend we are going to see my relative, and you will be able to get a glimpse of her." Ma consented, and they accordingly passed through the hall, where he saw the young lady sitting down with her head bent forward while some one was scratching her back. She seemed to be all that the go-between had said; but when they came to discuss the money it appeared that the young lady wanted only one or two ounces of silver, just to buy herself a few clothes, etc., which Ma thought was a very small amount; so he gave the go-between a present for her trouble, which just finished up the three ounces his fox-friend had provided. An auspicious day was chosen, and the young lady came over to his house; when lo! she was humpbacked and pigeon-breasted, with a short neck like [p. 376] a tortoise, and feet which were fully ten inches long. The meaning of his fox-friend's remarks then flashed upon him.

  

The Magnanimous Girl

At Chin-ling there lived a young man named Ku, who had considerable ability, but was very poor; and having an old mother, he was very loth to leave home. So he employed himself in writing or painting  [*7] for people, and gave his mother the proceeds, going on thus till he was twenty-five years of age without taking a wife. Opposite to their house was another building, which had long been untenanted; and one day an old woman and a young girl came to occupy it, but there being no gentleman with them young Ku did not make any inquiries as to who they were or whence they hailed. Shortly afterward it chanced that just as Ku was entering the house he observed a young lady come out of his mother's door. She was about eighteen or nineteen, very clever and refined-looking, and altogether such a girl as one rarely sets eyes on; and when she noticed Mr Ku she did not run away, but seemed quite self-possessed. "It was the young lady over the way; she came to borrow my scissors and measure," said his mother, "and she told me that there is only her mother and herself. They don't seem to belong to the lower classes. I asked her why she didn't get married, to which she replied that her mother was old. I must go and call on [p. 377] her to-morrow, and find out how the land lies. If she doesn't expect too much, you could take care of her mother for her." So next day Ku's mother went, and found that the girl's mother was deaf, and that they were evidently poor, apparently not having a day's food in the house. Ku's mother asked what their employment was, and the old lady said they trusted for food to her daughter's ten fingers. She then threw out some hints about uniting the two families, to which the old lady seemed to agree; but, on consultation with her daughter, the latter would not consent. Mrs Ku returned home and told her son, saying, "Perhaps she thinks we are too poor. She doesn't speak or laugh, is very nice-looking, and as pure as snow; truly no ordinary girl." There ended that; until one day, as Ku was sitting in his study, up came a very agreeable young fellow, who said he was from a neighbouring village, and engaged Ku to draw a picture for him. The two youths soon struck up a firm friendship and met constantly, and later it happened that the stranger chanced to see the young lady of over the way. "Who is that?" said he, following her with his eyes. Ku told him, and then he said, "She is certainly pretty, but rather stern in her appearance." By and by Ku went in, and his mother told him the girl had come to beg a little rice, as they had had nothing to eat all day. "She's a good daughter," said his mother, "and I'm very sorry for her. We must try and help them a little." Ku thereupon shouldered a peck of rice, and, knocking at their door, presented it with his mother's compliments. The young lady received the rice, but said nothing; and then she got into the habit of coming over and helping Ku's mother with her work and household affairs, almost as if she had been her daughter-in-law, for which Ku was very grateful to her, [p. 378] and whenever he had anything nice he always sent some of it in to her mother, though the young lady herself never once took the trouble to thank him. So things went on until Ku's mother got an abscess on her leg, and lay writhing in agony day and night. Then the young lady devoted herself to the invalid, waiting on her and giving her medicine with such care and attention that at last the sick woman cried out, "O that I could secure such a daughter-in-law as you to see this old body into its grave!" The young lady soothed her, and replied, "Your son is a hundred times more filial than I, a poor widow's only daughter." "But even a filial son makes a bad nurse," answered the patient; "besides, I am now drawing toward the evening of my life, when my body will be exposed to the mists and the dews, and I am vexed in spirit about our ancestral worship and the continuance of our line." As she was speaking Ku walked in; and his mother, weeping, said, "I am deeply indebted to this young lady; do not forget to repay her goodness." Ku made a low bow, but the young lady said, "Sir, when you were kind to my mother, I did not thank you; why then thank me?" Ku thereupon became more than ever attached to her; but could never get her to depart in the slightest degree from her cold demeanour toward himself. One day, however, he managed to squeeze her hand, upon which she told him never to do so again; and then for some time he neither saw nor heard anything of her. She had conceived a violent dislike to the young stranger above mentioned; and one evening, when he was sitting talking with Ku, the young lady appeared. After a while she got angry at something he said, and drew from her robe a glittering knife about a foot long. The young man, seeing her do this, ran out in a fright [p. 379] and she after him, only to find that he had vanished. She then threw her dagger up into the air, and whish! a streak of light like a rainbow, and something came tumbling down with a flop. Ku got a light, and ran to see what it was; and lo! there lay a white fox, head in one place and body in another. "There is your friend," cried the girl; "I knew he would cause me to destroy him sooner or later." Ku dragged it into the house, and said, "Let us wait till to-morrow to talk it over; we shall then be more calm." Next day the young lady arrived, and Ku inquired about her knowledge of the black art; but she told Ku not to trouble himself about such affairs, and to keep it secret or it might be prejudicial to his happiness. Ku then entreated her to consent to their union, to which she replied that she had already been as it were a daughter-in-law to his mother, and there was no need to push the thing further. "Is it because I am poor?" asked Ku. "Well, I am not rich," answered she, "but the fact is I had rather not." She then took her leave, and the next evening when Ku went across to their house to try once more to persuade her the young lady had disappeared, and was never seen again.

  

The Boon-companion

Once upon a time there was a young man named Ch'e, who was not particularly well off, but at the same time very fond of his wine; so much so that without his three stoups of liquor every night he was quite unable to sleep, and bottles were seldom absent from the head of his bed. One night he had waked up and was turning over and over, when he fancied some one was in the bed with him; but then, thinking it was only the clothes which had slipped off, he put out his hand to feel, and in doing so touched [p. 380] something silky like a cat. Striking a light, he found it was a fox, lying in a drunken sleep like a dog; and then looking at his wine bottle he saw that it had been emptied. "A boon-companion," said he, laughing, as he avoided startling the animal, and, covering it up, lay down to sleep with his arm across it, and the candle alight so as to see what transformation it might undergo. About midnight the fox stretched itself, and Ch'e cried, "Well, to be sure, you've had a nice sleep!" He then drew off the clothes, and beheld an elegant young man in a scholar's dress; but the young man jumped up, and, making a low obeisance, returned his host many thanks for not cutting off his head. "Oh," replied Ch'e, "I am not averse to liquor myself; in fact they say I'm too much given to it. If you have no objection, we'll be a pair of bottle-and-glass chums." So they lay down and went to sleep again, Ch'e urging the young man to visit him often, and saying that they must have faith in each other. The fox agreed to this, but when Ch'e awoke in the morning his bedfellow had already disappeared. So he prepared a goblet of first-rate wine in expectation of his friend's arrival, and at nightfall sure enough he came. They then sat together drinking, and the fox cracked so many jokes that Ch'e said he regretted he had not known him before. "And truly I don't know how to repay your kindness," replied the former, "in preparing all this nice wine for me." "Oh," said Ch'e, "what's a pint or so of wine?--nothing worth speaking of." "Well," rejoined the fox, "you are only a poor scholar, and money isn't so easily to be got. I must see if I can't secure a little wine capital for you." Next evening, when he arrived, he said to Ch'e, "Two miles down toward the south-east you will find some silver lying by the wayside. Go early in the morning and get it." So on the morrow [p. 381] Ch'e set off, and actually obtained two lumps of silver, with which he bought some choice morsels to help them out with their wine that evening. The fox now told him that there was a vault in his backyard which he ought to open; and when he did so he found therein more than a hundred strings of cash.  [*8] "Now then," cried Ch'e, delighted, "I shall have no more anxiety about funds for buying wine with all this in my purse!" "Ah," replied the fox, "the water in a puddle is not inexhaustible. I must do something further for you." Some days afterward the fox said to Ch'e, "Buckwheat is very cheap in the market just now. Something is to be done in that line." Accordingly Ch'e bought over forty tons, and thereby incurred general ridicule; but by and by there was a bad drought, and all kinds of grain and beans were spoilt. Only buckwheat would grow, and Ch'e sold off his stock at a profit of 1000 per cent. His wealth thus began to increase; he bought two hundred acres of rich land, and always planted his crops, corn, millet, or what not, upon the advice of the fox secretly given him beforehand. The fox looked on Ch'e's wife as a sister, and on Ch'e's children as his own; but when subsequently Ch'e died it never came to the house again.

Click to enlarge
 Chia Tzu-lung Finds the Stone

  

The Alchemist  [*9]

At Ch'ang-an there lived a scholar named Chia Tzu-lung, who one day noticed a very refined-looking stranger; and, on making inquiries about him, learned that he was a Mr Chen who had taken lodgings hard by. Accordingly, Chia called next day and sent in his card, but did not see [p. 382] Chen, who happened to be out at the time. The same thing occurred thrice; and at length Chia engaged some one to watch and let him know when Mr Chen was at home. However, even then the latter would not come forth to receive his guest, and Chia had to go in and rout him out. The two now entered into conversation, and soon became mutually charmed with each other; and by and by Chia sent off a servant to bring wine from a neighbouring wine-shop. Mr Chen proved himself a pleasant boon-companion, and when the wine was nearly finished he went to a box and took from it some wine-cups and a large and beautiful jade tankard; into the latter he poured a single cup of wine, and immediately it was filled to the brim. They then proceeded to help themselves from the tankard; but however much they took out, the contents never seemed to diminish. Chia was astonished at this, and begged Mr Chen to tell him how it was done. "Ah," replied Mr Chen, "I tried to avoid making your acquaintance solely because of your one bad quality--avarice. The art I practise is a secret known to the Immortals only: how can I divulge it to you?" "You do me wrong," rejoined Chia, "in thus attributing avarice to me. The avaricious, indeed, are always poor." Mr Chen laughed, and they separated for that day; but from that time they were constantly together, and all ceremony was laid aside between them. Whenever Chia wanted money Mr Chen would bring out a black stone, and, muttering a charm, would rub it on a tile or a brick, which was forthwith changed into a lump of silver. This silver he would give to Chia, and it was always just as much as he actually required, neither more nor less; and if ever the latter asked for more Mr Chen would rally him on the subject of avarice. Finally Chia determined to [p. 383] try to get possession of this stone; and one day, when Mr Chen was sleeping off the fumes of a drinking-bout, he tried to extract it from his clothes. However, Chen detected him at once, and declared that they could be friends no more, and next day he left the place altogether. About a year afterward Chia was one day wandering by the river-bank, when he saw a handsome-looking stone, marvellously like that in the possession of Mr Chen; and he picked it up at once and carried it home with him. A few days passed away, and suddenly Mr Chen presented himself at Chia's house, and explained that the stone in question possessed the property of changing anything into gold, and had been bestowed upon him long before by a certain Taoist priest whom he had followed as a disciple. "Alas!" added he, "I got tipsy and lost it; but divination told me where it was, and if you will now restore it to me I will take care to repay your kindness." "You have divined rightly," replied Chia; "the stone is with me; but recollect, if you please, that the indigent Kuan Chung  [*10] shared the wealth of his friend Pao Shu." At this hint Mr Chen said he would give Chia one hundred ounces of silver; to which the latter replied that one hundred ounces was a fair offer, but that he would far sooner have Mr Chen teach him the formula to utter when rubbing the stone on anything, so that he might try the thing once himself. Mr Chen was afraid to do this; whereupon Chia cried out, "You are an Immortal yourself; you must know well enough that I would never deceive a friend." So Mr Chen was prevailed upon to teach him the formula, and then Chia would have tried the art upon the immense stone [p. 384] washing-block  [*11] which was lying near at hand had not Mr Chen seized his arm and begged him not to do anything so outrageous. Chia then picked up half a brick and laid it on the washing-block, saying to Mr Chen, "This little piece is not too much, surely?" Accordingly Mr Chen relaxed his hold and let Chia proceed; which he did by promptly ignoring the half-brick and quickly rubbing the stone on the washing-block. Mr Chen turned pale when he saw him do this, and made a dash forward to get hold of the stone, but it was too late; the washing-block was already a solid mass of silver, and Chia quietly handed him back the stone. "Alas! alas!" cried Mr Chen in despair, "what is to be done now? For, having thus irregularly conferred wealth upon a mortal, Heaven will surely punish me. Oh, if you would save me, give away one hundred coffins  [*12] and one hundred suits of wadded clothes." "My friend," replied Chia, "my object in getting money was not to hoard it up like a miser." Mr Chen was delighted at this; and during the next three years Chia engaged in trade, taking care to fulfil always his promise to Mr Chen. At the expiration of that time Mr Chen himself reappeared, and, grasping Chia's hand, said to him, "Trustworthy and noble friend, when we last parted the Spirit of Happiness impeached me before God,  [*13] and my name was erased from the list of [p. 385] angels. But now that you have carried out my request that sentence has been rescinded. Go on as you have begun, without ceasing." Chia asked Mr Chen what office he filled in Heaven; to which the latter replied that he was only a fox who, by a sinless life, had finally attained to that clear perception of the truth which leads to immortality. Wine was then brought, and the two friends enjoyed themselves together as of old; and even when Chia had passed the age of ninety years the fox still used to visit him from time to time. [p. 386]

Footnotes

^386:1 Literally 'golden oranges.' These are skilfully preserved by the Cantonese, and form a delicious sweetmeat for dessert.

^386:2 Only slave-girls and women of the poorer classes and old women omit this very important part of a Chinese lady's toilet.

^386:3 Alluding probably to the shape of the 'shoe' or ingot of silver.

^386:4 Slave-girls do not have their feet compressed.

^386:5 Wherein resides an old gentleman who ties together with a red cord the feet of those destined to become man and wife. From this bond there is no escape, no matter what distance may separate the affianced pair.

^386:6 This proceeding is highly improper, but is 'winked at' in a large majority of Chinese betrothals.

^386:7 The usual occupation of poor scholars who are ashamed to go into trade and who have not enterprise enough to start as doctors or fortune-tellers. Besides painting pictures and fans, and illustrating books, these men write fancy scrolls in the various ornamental styles so much prized by the Chinese; they keep accounts for people, and write or read business and private letters for the illiterate masses.

^386:8 Say about L10.

^386:9 Alchemy is first mentioned in Chinese history B.C. 133, and was widely cultivated in China during the Han dynasty by priests of the Taoist religion.

^386:10 Kuan Chung and Pao Shu are the Chinese types of friendship. They were two statesmen of considerable ability who flourished in the seventh century B.C.

^386:11 These are used, together with a heavy wooden baton, by the Chinese washerman, the effect being most disastrous to a European wardrobe.

^386:12 To provide coffins for poor people has ever been regarded as an act of transcendent merit. The tornado at Canton in April 1878, in which several thousand lives were lost, afforded an admirable opportunity for the exercise of this form of charity--an opportunity which was largely taken advantage of by the benevolent.

^386:13 For usurping its prerogative by allowing Chia to obtain wealth.

Myths and Legends of China, by Edward T.C. Werner, [1922], at sacred-texts.com

  

Chapter XVI

  

Miscellaneous Legends

  

The Unnatural People

The Shan hai ching, or Hill and River Classic, contains descriptions of some curious people supposed to inhabit the regions on the maps represented on the nine tripod vases of the Great Yu, first emperor of the Hsia dynasty.

  

The Pygmies

The pygmies inhabit many mountainous regions of the Empire, but are few in number. They are less than nine inches high, but are well formed. They live in thatched houses that resemble ants' nests. When they walk out they go in companies of from six to ten, joining hands in a line for mutual protection against birds that might carry them away, or other creatures that might attack them. Their tone of voice is too low to be distinguished by an ordinary human ear. They occupy themselves in working in wood, gold, silver, and precious stones, but a small proportion are tillers of the soil. They wear clothes of a red colour. The sexes are distinguishable by a slight beard on the men, and long tresses on the women, the latter in some cases reaching four to five inches in length. Their heads are unduly large, being quite out of proportion to their small bodies. A husband and wife usually go about hand in hand. A Hakka charcoal-burner once found three of the children playing in his tobacco-box. He kept them there, and afterward, when he was showing them to a friend, he laughed so that drops of saliva flew from his mouth and shot two of them dead. He then begged his friend to take the third and put it in a [p. 387] place of safety before he should laugh again. His friend attempted to lift it from the box, but it died on being touched.

  

The Giants

In the Country of the Giants the people are fifty feet in height. Their footprints are six feet in length. Their teeth are like those of a saw. Their finger-nails present the appearance of hooked claws, while their diet consists wholly of uncooked animal food. Their eyebrows are of such length as to protrude from the front of the carts in which they ride, large though it is necessary for these vehicles to be. Their bodies are covered with long black hair resembling that of the bear. They live to the advanced age of eighteen thousand years. Though cannibals, they never eat members of their own tribe, confining their indulgence in human flesh chiefly to enemies taken in battle. Their country extends some thousands of miles along certain mountain ranges in North-eastern Asia, in the passes of which they have strong iron gates, easy to close, but difficult to open; hence, though their neighbours maintain large standing armies, they have thus far never been conquered.

  

The Headless People

The Headless People inhabit the Long Sheep range, to which their ancestors were banished in the remote past for an offence against the gods. One of the said ancestors had entered into a controversy with the rulers of the heavens, and they in their anger had transformed his two breasts into eyes and his navel into a mouth, removed his head, leaving him without nose and ears, thus cutting him off from smell and sound, and banished him to the [p. 388] Long Sheep Mountains, where with a shield and axe, the only weapons vouchsafed to the people of the Headless Country, he and his posterity were compelled to defend themselves from their enemies and provide their subsistence. This, however, does not in the least seem to have affected their tempers, as their bodies are wreathed in perpetual smiles, except when they flourish their warlike weapons on the approach of an enemy. They are not without understanding, because, according to Chinese notions of physiology, "their bellies are full of wisdom."

  

The Armless People

In the Mountains of the Sun and Moon, which are in the Centre of the Great Waste, are the people who have mo arms, but whose legs instead grow out of their shoulders. They pick flowers with their toes. They bow by raising the body horizontal with the shoulders, thus turning the face to the ground.

  

The Long-armed and Long-legged People

The Long-armed People are about thirty feet high, their arms reaching from the shoulders to the ground. Once when a company of explorers was passing through the country which borders on the Eastern Sea they inquired of an old man if he knew whether or not there were people dwelling beyond the waters. He replied that a cloth garment, in fashion and texture not unlike that of a Chinese coat, with sleeves thirty feet in length, had been found in the sea. The explorers fitted out an expedition, and the discovery of the Long-armed Country was the result.

The natives subsist for the most part on fish, which they [p. 389] obtain by wading in the water, and taking the fish with their hands instead of with hooks or nets.

The arms of the Long-legged People are of a normal length, the legs are developed to a length corresponding to that of the arms of the Long-armed People.

The country of the latter borders on that of the Long-legs. The habits and food of the two are similar. The difference in their physical structure makes them of mutual assistance, those with the long arms being able to take the shellfish of the shallow waters, while those with the long legs take the surface fish from the deeper localities; thus the two gather a harvest otherwise unobtainable.

  

The One-eyed People and Others

A little to the east of the Country of the Long-legs are to be found the One-eyed People. They have but one eye, rather larger than the ordinary human eye, placed in the centre of the forehead, directly above the nose. Other clans or families have but one arm and one leg, some having a right arm and left leg, others a left arm and right leg, while still others have both on the same side, and go in pairs, like shoes. Another species not only has but one arm and one leg, but is of such fashion as to have but one eye, one nostril, and beard on but one side of the face, there being as it were rights and lefts, the two in reality being one, for it is in this way that they pair. The Long-eared People resemble Chinese in all except their ears. They live in the far West among mountains and in caves. Their pendant, flabby ears extend to the ground, and would impede their feet in walking if they did not support them on their hands. They are sensitive to the faintest sound. Still another people in this region are distinguished by having six toes on each foot. [p. 390]

  

The Feathered People, etc.

The Feathered People are very tall, and are covered with fluffy down. They have wings in place of arms, and can fly short distances. On the points of the wings are claws, which serve as hands. Their noses are like beaks. Gentle and timid, they do not leave their own country. They have good voices, and like to sing ballads. If one wishes to visit this people he must go far to the south-east and then inquire. There is also the Land of the People with Three Faces, who live in the centre of the Great Waste and never die; the Land of the Three-heads, east of the K'un-lun Mountains; the Three-body Country, the inhabitants of which have one head with three bodies, three arms and but two legs; and yet another where the people have square heads, broad shoulders, and three legs, and the stones on the land are all gold and jade.

  

The People of the Punctured Bodies

Another community is said to be composed of people who have holes through their chests. They can be carried about on a pole put through the orifice, or may be comfortably hung upon a peg. They sometimes string themselves on a rope, and thus walk out in file. They are harmless people, and eat snakes that they kill with bows and arrows, and they are very long-lived.

  

The Women's Kingdom

The Women's Kingdom, the country inhabited exclusively by women, is said to be surrounded by a sea of less density than ordinary water, so that ships sink on approaching the shores. It has been reached only by [p. 391] boats carried thither in whirlwinds, and but few of those wrecked on its rocks have survived and returned to tell of its wonders. The women have houses, gardens, and shops. Instead of money they use gems, perforated and strung like beads. They reproduce their kind by sleeping where the south wind blows upon them.

  

The Land of the Flying Cart

Situated to the north of the Plain of Great Joy, the Land of the Flying Cart joins the Country of the One-armed People on the south-west and that of the Three-bodied People on the south-east. The inhabitants have but one arm, and an additional eye of large size in the centre of the forehead, making three eyes in all. Their carts, though wheeled, do not run along the ground, but chase each other in mid-air as gracefully as a flock of swallows. The vehicles have a kind of winged framework at each end, and the one-armed occupants, each grasping a flag, talk and laugh one to another in great glee during what might be called their aerial recreation were it not for the fact that it seems to be their sole occupation.

  

The Expectant Wife

A curious legend is told regarding a solitary, weird figure which stands out, rudely weatherworn, from a hill-top in the pass called Shao-hsing Gorge, Canton Province. This point of the pass is called Lung-men, or Dragon's Mouth, and the hill the Husband-expecting Hill. The figure itself, which is called the Expectant Wife, resembles that of a woman. Her bent head and figure down to the waist are very lifelike.

The story, widely known in this and the neighbouring province, runs as follows. Centuries ago a certain poor [p. 392] woman was left by her husband, who went on a journey into Kwangsi, close by, but in those days considered a wild and distant region, full of dangers. He promised to return in three years. The time went slowly and sadly past, for she dearly loved her lord, but no husband appeared. He, ungrateful and unfaithful spouse, had fallen in love with a fair one in Kwangsi, a sorceress or witch, who threw a spell over him and charmed him to his destruction, turning him at length into stone. To this day his figure may be seen standing near a cave close by the river which is known by the name of the Detained Man Cave.

The wife, broken by grief at her husband's failure to return, was likewise turned into a stone, and it is said that a supernatural power will one day bring the couple to life again and reward the ever-faithful wife. The legend receives entire credence from the simple boatmen sad country people.

  

The Wild Men

The wild beasts of the mountain have a king. He is a wild man, with long, thick locks, fiery red in colour, and his body is covered with hair. He is very strong: with a single blow of his huge fist, he can break large rocks to pieces; he also can pull up the trees of the forest by the root. His flesh is as hard as iron and is invulnerable to the thrusts of knife, spear, or sword. He rides upon a tiger when he leaves his home; he rules over the wolves, leopards, and tigers, and governs all their affairs. Many other wild men, like him in appearance, live in these mountains, but on account of his great strength he alone is king. These wild men kill and eat all human beings they meet, and other hill tribes live in terror of meeting [p. 393] them. Indeed, who of all these mountain people would have been left alive had not some men, more crafty than their fellows, devised a means of overpowering these fierce savages?

This is the method referred to: On leaving his home the herb-gatherer of the mountains arms himself with two large hollow bamboo tubes which he slips over his wrists and arms; he also carries a jar of very strong wine. When he meets one of the wild men he stands still and allows the giant to grasp him by the arm. As the giant holds him fast, as he supposes, in his firm grasp, he quietly and slowly withdraws one arm from the bamboo cuff, and, taking the pot of wine from the other hand, quickly pours it down the throat of the stooping giant, whose mouth is wide open with immoderate laughter at the thought of having captured a victim so easily. The potent draught of wine acts at once, causing the victim to drop to the ground in a dead sleep, whereupon the herb-gatherer either dispatches him summarily with a thrust through the heart, or leaves the drunken tyrant to sleep off the effect of his draught, while he returns again to his work of collecting the health-restoring herbs. In this way have the numbers of these wild men become less and less, until at the present time but few remain.

  

The Jointed Snake

The people on O-mei Shan tell of a wonderful kind of snake that is said to live there. Part of its life is spent among the branches of the trees; if by chance it falls to the ground it breaks up into two or more pieces. These separate segments later on come together again and unite.

Many other marvellous and interesting tales are related of this mountain and its inhabitants. [p. 394]

  

The Casting of the Great Bell

In every province of China there is a legend relating to the casting of the great bell swung in the bell tower of the chief city. These legends are curiously identical in almost every detail. The following is the one current in Peking.

It was in the reign of Yung Lo, the third monarch of the Ming dynasty, that Peking first became the capital of China. Till that period the 'Son of Heaven' had held his Court at Nanking, and Peking had been of comparatively little note. Now, however, on being honoured by the 'Sacred Presence,' stately buildings arose in all directions for the accommodation of the Emperor and his courtiers. Clever men from all parts of the Empire were attracted to the capital, and such as possessed talent were sure of lucrative employment. About this time the Drum Tower and the Bell Tower were built; both of them as 'look-out' and 'alarm' towers. The Drum Tower was furnished with a monster drum, which it still possesses, of such a size that the thunder of its tones might be heard all over the city, the sound being almost enough to waken the dead.

The Bell Tower had been completed some time before attempts were made to cast a bell proportionate to the size of the building. At length Yung Lo ordered Kuan Yu, a mandarin of the second grade, who was skilled in casting guns, to cast a bell the sound of which should be heard, on the least alarm, in every part of the city. Kuan Yu at once commenced the undertaking. He secured the services of a great number of experienced workmen, and collected immense quantities of material. Months passed, and at length it was announced to the Emperor that everything was ready for the casting. A day was [p. 395] appointed; the Emperor, surrounded by a crowd of courtiers, and preceded by the Court musicians, went to witness the ceremony. At a given signal, and to the crash of music, the melted metal rushed into the mould prepared for it. The Emperor and his Court then retired, leaving Kuan Yu and his subordinates to await the cooling of the metal, which would tell of failure or success. At length the metal was sufficiently cool to detach the mould from it. Kuan Yu, in breathless trepidation, hastened to inspect it, but to his mortification and grief discovered it to be honeycombed in many places. The circumstance was reported to the Emperor, who was naturally vexed at the expenditure of so much time, labour, and money with so unsatisfactory a result. However, he ordered Kuan Yu to try again.

The mandarin hastened to obey, and, thinking the failure of the first attempt must have resulted from some oversight or omission on his part, he watched every detail with redoubled care and attention, fully determined that no neglect or remissness should mar the success of this second casting.

After months of labour the mould was again prepared, and the metal poured into it, but again with the same result. Kuan Yu was distracted, not only at the loss of his reputation, but at the certain loss of the Emperor's favour. Yung Lo, when he heard of this second failure, was very wroth, and at once ordered Kuan Yu into his presence, and told him he would give him a third and last trial, and if he did not succeed this time he would behead him. Kuan Yu went home in a despairing state of mind, asking himself what crime he or any of his ancestors could have committed to have justified this calamity. [p. 396]

Now Kuan Yu had an only daughter, about sixteen years of age, and, having no sons, the whole of his love was centred in this girl, for he had hopes of perpetuating his name and fame through her marriage with some deserving young nobleman. Truly she was worthy of being loved. She had "almond-shaped eyes, like the autumn waves, which, sparkling and dancing in the sun, seem to leap up in very joy and wantonness to kiss the fragrant reeds that grow upon the rivers' banks, yet of such limpid transparency that one's form could be seen in their liquid depths as if reflected in a mirror. These were surrounded by long silken lashes--now drooping in coy modesty, anon rising in youthful gaiety and disclosing the laughing eyes but just before concealed beneath them. Eyebrows like the willow leaf; cheeks of snowy whiteness, yet tinged with the gentlest colouring of the rose; teeth like pearls of the finest water were seen peeping from between half-open lips, so luscious and juicy that they resembled two cherries; hair of the jettiest blackness and of the silkiest texture. Her form was such as poets love to describe and painters limn; there was grace and ease in every movement; she appeared to glide rather than walk, so light was she of foot. Add to her other charms that she was skilful in verse-making, excellent in embroidery, and unequalled in the execution of her household duties, and we have but a faint description of Ko-ai, the beautiful daughter of Kuan Yu."

Well might the father be proud of and love his beautiful child, and she returned his love with all the ardour of her affectionate nature; often cheering him with her innocent gaiety when he returned from his daily vocations wearied or vexed. Seeing him now return with despair depicted in his countenance, she tenderly inquired the cause, not [p. 397] without hope of being the means of alleviating it. When her father told her of his failures, and of the Emperor's threat, she exclaimed: "Oh, my father, be comforted! Heaven will not always be thus unrelenting. Are we not told that 'out of evil cometh good'? These two failures will but enhance the glory of your eventual success, for success this time must crown your efforts. I am only a girl, and cannot assist you but with my prayers; these I will daily and hourly offer up for your success; and the prayers of a daughter for a loved parent must be heard." Somewhat soothed by the endearments of Ko-ai, Kuan Yu again devoted himself to his task with redoubled energy, Ko-ai meanwhile constantly praying for him in his absence, and ministering to his wants when he returned home. One day it occurred to the maiden to go to a celebrated astrologer to ascertain the cause of these failures, and to ask what means could be taken to prevent a recurrence of them. She thus learned that the next casting would also be a disappointment if the blood of a maiden were not mixed with the ingredients. She returned home full of horror at this information, yet inwardly resolving to immolate herself rather than allow her father to fail. The day for the casting at length came, and Ko-ai requested her father to allow her to witness the ceremony and "to exult in his success," as she laughingly said. Kuan Yu gave his consent, and accompanied by several servants she went, taking up a position near the mould.

Everything was prepared as before. An immense concourse assembled to witness the third and final casting, which was to result either in honour or degradation and death for Kuan Yu. A dead silence prevailed through the vast assemblage as the melted metal once more rushed [p. 398] to its destination; this was broken by a shriek, and a cry, "For my father!" and Ko-ai was seen to throw herself headlong into the seething, hissing metal. One of her servants attempted to seize her while in the act of plunging into the boiling fluid, but succeeded only in grasping one of her shoes, which came off in his hand. The father was frantic, and had to be kept by force from following her example; he was taken home a raving maniac. The prediction of the astrologer was fulfilled, for, on uncovering the bell after it had cooled, it was found to be perfect, but not a vestige of Ko-ai was to be seen; the blood of a maiden had indeed been infused with the ingredients.

After a time the bell was suspended by order of the Emperor, and expectation was at its height to hear it rung for the first time. The Emperor himself was present. The bell was struck, and far and near was heard the deep tone of its sonorous boom. This indeed was a triumph! Here was a bell surpassing in size and sound any other that had ever been cast! But--and the surrounding multitudes were horror-struck as they listened--the heavy boom of the bell was followed by a low wailing sound like the agonized cry of a woman, and the word hsieh (shoe) was distinctly heard. To this day the bell, each time it is rung, after every boom appears to utter the word 'hsieh,' and people when they hear it shudder and say, "There's poor Ko-ai's voice calling for her shoe."

  

The Cursed Temple

The reign of Ch'ung Cheng, the last monarch of the Ming dynasty, was much troubled both by internal broils and by wars. He was constantly threatened by Tartar hordes from without, though these were generally beaten back by the celebrated general Wu San-kuei, and the country was [p. 399] perpetually in a state of anarchy and confusion, being overrun by bands of marauding rebels; indeed, so bold did these become under a chief named Li Tzu-ch'eng that they actually marched on the capital with the avowed intention of placing their leader on the Dragon Throne. Ch'ung Cheng, on the reception of this startling news, with no one that he could trust in such an emergency (for Wu San-kuei was absent on an expedition against the Tartars), was at his wits' end. The insurgents were almost in sight of Peking, and at any moment might arrive. Rebellion threatened in the city itself. If he went out boldly to attack the oncoming rebels his own troops might go over to the enemy, or deliver him into their hands; if he stayed in the city the people would naturally attribute it to pusillanimity, and probably open the gates to the rebels.

In this strait he resolved to go to the San Kuan Miao, an imperial temple situated near the Ch'ao-yang Men, and inquire of the gods as to what he should do, and decide his fate by 'drawing the slip.' If he drew a long slip, this would be a good omen, and he would boldly march out to meet the rebels, confident of victory; if a middle length one, he would remain quietly in the palace and passively await whatever might happen; but if he should unfortunately draw a short one he would take his own life rather than suffer death at the hands of the rebels.

Upon arrival at the temple, in the presence of the high officers of his Court, the sacrifices were offered up, and the incense burnt, previous to drawing the slip on which hung the destiny of an empire, while Ch'ung Cheng himself remained on his knees in prayer. At the conclusion of the sacrificial ceremony the tube containing the bamboo fortune-telling sticks was placed in the Emperor's hand [p. 400] by one of the priests. His courtiers and the attendant priests stood round in breathless suspense, watching him as he swayed the tube to and fro; at length one fell to the ground; there was dead silence as it was raised by a priest and handed to the Emperor. It was a short one! Dismay fell on every one present, no one daring to break the painful, horrible silence. After a pause the Emperor, with a cry of mingled rage and despair, dashed the slip to the ground, exclaiming: "May this temple built by my ancestors evermore be accursed! Henceforward may every suppliant be denied what he entreats, as I have been! Those who come in sorrow, may that sorrow be doubled; in happiness, may that happiness be changed to misery; in hope, may they meet despair; in health, sickness; in the pride of life and strength, death! I, Ch'ung Cheng, the last of the Mings, curse it!"

Without another word he retired, followed by his courtiers, proceeded at once to the palace, and went straight to the apartments of the Empress. The next morning he and his Empress were found suspended from a tree on Prospect Hill. "In their death they were not divided." The scenes that followed; how the rebels took possession of the city and were driven out again by the Chinese general, assisted by the Tartars; how the Tartars finally succeeded in establishing the Manchu dynasty, are all matters of history. The words used by the Emperor at the temple were prophetic; he was the last of the Mings. The tree on which the monarch of a mighty Empire closed his career and brought the Ming dynasty to an end was ordered to be surrounded with chains; it still exists, and is still in chains. Upward of two hundred and seventy years have passed since that time, yet the temple is standing as of old; but the halls that at [p. 401] one time were crowded with worshippers are now silent, no one ever venturing to worship there; it is the resort of the fox and the bat, and people at night pass it shudderingly--"It is the cursed temple!"

  

The Maniac's Mite

An interesting story is told of a lady named Ch'en, who was a Buddhist nun celebrated for her virtue and austerity. Between the years 1628 and 1643 she left her nunnery near Wei-hai city and set out on a long journey for the purpose of collecting subscriptions for casting a new image of the Buddha. She wandered through Shantung and Chihli and finally reached Peking, and there--subscription-book in hand--she stationed herself at the great south gate in order to take toll from those who wished to lay up for themselves treasures in the Western Heaven. The first passer-by who took any notice of her was an amiable maniac. His dress was made of coloured shreds and patches, and his general appearance was wild and uncouth. "Whither away, nun?" he asked. She explained that she was collecting subscriptions for the casting of a great image of Buddha, and had come all the way from Shantung. "Throughout my life," remarked the madman, "I was ever a generous giver." So, taking the nun's subscription-book, he headed a page with his own name (in very large characters) and the amount subscribed. The amount in question was two cash, equivalent to a small fraction of a farthing. He then handed over the two small coins and went on his way.

In course of time the nun returned to Wei-hai-wei with her subscriptions, and the work of casting the image was duly begun. When the time had come for the process of smelting, it was observed that the copper remained [p. 402] hard and intractable. Again and again the furnace was fed with fuel, but the shapeless mass of metal remained firm as a rock. The head workman, who was a man of wide experience, volunteered an explanation of the mystery. "An offering of great value must be missing," he said. "Let the collection-book be examined so that it may be seen whose subscription has been withheld." The nun, who was standing by, immediately produced the madman's money, which on account of its minute value she had not taken the trouble to hand over. "There is one cash," she said, "and there is another. Certainly the offering of these must have been an act of the highest merit, and the giver must be a holy man who will some day attain Buddhahood." As she said this she threw the two cash into the midst of the cauldron. Great bubbles rose and burst, the metal melted and ran like the sap from a tree, limpid as flowing water, and in a few moments the work was accomplished and the new Buddha successfully cast.

  

The City-god of Yen Ch'eng

The following story of the Ch'eng-huang P'u-sa of Yen Ch'eng (Salt City) is told by Helena von Poseck in the East of Asia Magazine, vol. iii (1904), pp. 169-171. This legend is also related of several other cities in China.

The Ch'eng-huang P'u-sa is, as already noted, the tutelary god of a city, his position in the unseen world answering to that of a chih hsien, or district magistrate, among men, if the city under his care be a hsien; but if the city hold the rank of a fu, it has (or used to have until recently) two Ch'eng-huang P'u-sas, one a prefect, and the other a district magistrate. One part of his duty consists of sending small demons to carry off the spirits of the dying, of which spirits he afterward acts as ruler and [p. 403] judge. He is supposed to exercise special care over the k'u kuei, or spirits which have no descendants to worship and offer sacrifices to them, and on the occasion of the Seventh Month Festival he is carried round the city in his chair to maintain order among them, while the people offer food to them, and burn paper money for their benefit. He is also carried in procession at the Ch'ing Ming Festival, and on the first day of the tenth month.

The Ch'eng-huang P'u-sa of the city of Yen Ch'eng is in the extremely unfortunate predicament of having no skin to his face, which fact is thus accounted for:

Once upon a time there lived at Yen Ch'eng an orphan boy who was brought up by his uncle and aunt. He was just entering upon his teens when his aunt lost a gold hairpin, and accused him of having stolen it. The boy, whose conscience was clear in the matter, thought of a plan by which his innocence might be proved.

"Let us go to-morrow to Ch'eng-huang P'u-sa's temple," he said, "and I will there swear an oath before the god, so that he may manifest my innocence."

They accordingly repaired to the temple, and the boy, solemnly addressing the idol, said:

"If I have taken my aunt's gold pin, may my foot twist, and may I fall as I go out of your temple door!"

Alas for the poor suppliant! As he stepped over the threshold his foot twisted, and he fell to the ground. Of course, everybody was firmly convinced of his guilt, and what could the poor boy say when his own appeal to the god thus turned against him?

After such a proof of his depravity his aunt had no room in her house for her orphan nephew, neither did he himself wish to stay with people who suspected him of theft. So he left the home which had sheltered him for [p. 404] years, and wandered out alone into the cold hard world. Many a hardship did he encounter, but with rare pluck he persevered in his studies, and at the age of twenty odd years became a mandarin.

In course of time our hero returned to Yen Ch'eng to visit his uncle and aunt. While there he betook himself to the temple of the deity who had dealt so hardly with him, and prayed for a revelation as to the whereabouts of the lost hairpin. He slept that night in the temple, and was rewarded by a vision in which the Ch'eng-huang P'u-sa told him that the pin would be found under the floor of his aunt's house.

He hastened back, and informed his relatives, who took up the boards in the place indicated, and lo! there lay the long-lost pin! The women of the house then remembered that the pin had been used in pasting together the various layers of the soles of shoes, and, when night came, had been carelessly left on the table. No doubt rats, attracted by the smell of the paste which clung to it, had carried it off to their domains under the floor.

The young mandarin joyfully returned to the temple, and offered sacrifices by way of thanksgiving to the Ch'eng-huang P'u-sa for bringing his innocence to light, but he could not refrain from addressing to him what one is disposed to consider a well-merited reproach.

"You made me fall down," he said, "and so led people to think I was guilty, and now you accept my gifts. Aren't you ashamed to do such a thing? You have no face!"

As he uttered the words all the plaster fell from the face of the idol, and was smashed into fragments.

From that day forward the Ch'eng-huang P'u-sa of Yen Ch'eng has had no skin on his face. People have [p. 405] tried to patch up the disfigured countenance, but in vain: the plaster always falls off, and the face remains skinless.

Some try to defend the Ch'eng-huang P'u-sa by saying that he was not at home on the day when his temple was visited by the accused boy and his relatives, and that one of the little demons employed by him in carrying off dead people's spirits out of sheer mischief perpetrated a practical joke on the poor boy.

In that case it is certainly hard that his skin should so persistently testify against him by refusing to remain on his face!

  

The Origin of a Lake

In the city of Ta-yeh Hsien, Hupei, there is a large sheet of water known as the Liang-ti Lake. The people of the district give the following account of its origin:

About five hundred years ago, during the Ming dynasty, there was no lake where the broad waters now spread. A flourishing hsien city stood in the centre of a populous country. The city was noted for its wickedness, but amid the wicked population dwelt one righteous woman, a strict vegetarian and a follower of all good works. In a vision of the night it was revealed to her that the city and neighbourhood would be destroyed by water, and the sign promised was that when the stone lions in front of the yamen wept tears of blood, then destruction was near at hand. Like Jonah at Nineveh, the woman, known to-day simply as Niang-tzu, walked up and down the streets of the city, warning all of the coming calamity. She was laughed at and looked upon as mad by the careless people. A pork-butcher in the town, a noted wag, took some pig's blood and sprinkled it round the eyes of the stone lions. This had the desired effect, for when Niang-tzu saw the blood [p. 406] she fled from the city amid the jeers and laughter of the inhabitants. Before many hours had passed, however, the face of the sky darkened, a mighty earthquake shook the country-side, there was a great subsidence of the earth's surface, and the waters of the Yangtzu River flowed into the hollow, burying the city and villages out of sight. But a spot of ground on which the good woman stood, after escaping from the doomed city, remained at its normal level, and it stands to-day in the midst of the lake, an island called Niang-tzu, a place at which boats anchor at night, or to which they fly for shelter from the storms that sweep the lake. They are saved to-day because of one good woman helped by the gods so long ago.

As a proof of the truth of the above story, it is asserted that on clear days traces of the buried city may be seen, while occasionally a fisherman casting his net hauls up some household utensil or relic of bygone days.

  

Miao Creation Legends

If the Miao have no written records, they have many legends in verse, which they learn to repeat and sing. The Hei Miao (or Black Miao, so called from their dark chocolate-coloured clothes) treasure poetical legends of the Creation and of a deluge. These are composed in lines of five syllables, in stanzas of unequal length, one interrogative and one responsive. They are sung or recited by two persons or two groups at feasts and festivals, often by a group of youths and a group of maidens. The legend of the Creation commences:

 Who made Heaven and earth? 
 Who made insects? 
 Who made men? 
 Made male and made female? 
 I who speak don't know.

[p. 407] 

 Heavenly King made Heaven and earth, 
 Ziene made insects, 
 Ziene made men and demons, 
 Made male and made female. 
 How is it you don't know?

 How made Heaven and earth? 
 How made insects? 
 How made men and demons? 
 Made male and made female? 
 I who speak don't know.

 Heavenly King was intelligent, 
 Spat a lot of spittle into his hand, 
 Clapped his hands with a noise, 
 Produced Heaven and earth, 
 Tall grass made insects, 
 Stories made men and demons, 
 Made male and made female. 
 How is it you don't know?

The legend proceeds to state how and by whom the heavens were propped up and how the sun was made and fixed in its place, but the continuation is exceedingly silly.

The legend of the Flood is another very silly composition, but it is interesting to note that it tells of a great deluge. It commences:

 Who came to the bad disposition, 
 To send fire and burn the hill? 
 Who came to the bad disposition, 
 To send water and destroy the earth? 
 I who sing don't know.

 Zie did. Zie was of bad disposition, 
 Zie sent fire and burned the hill; 
 Thunder did. Thunder was of bad disposition, 
 Thunder sent water and destroyed the earth. 
 Why don't you know?

In this story of the flood only two persons were saved in a large bottle gourd used as a boat, and these were [p. 408] A Zie and his sister. After the flood the brother wished his sister to become his wife, but she objected to this as not being proper. At length she proposed that one should take the upper and one the nether millstone, and going to opposite hills should set the stones rolling to the valley between. If these should be found in the valley properly adjusted one above the other she would be his wife, but not if they came to rest apart. The young man, considering it unlikely that two stones thus rolled down from opposite hills would be found in the valley one upon another, while pretending to accept the test suggested, secretly placed two other stones in the valley one upon the other. The stones rolled from the hills were lost in the tall wild grass, and on descending into the valley A Zie called his sister to come and see the stones he had placed. She, however, was not satisfied, and suggested as another test that each should take a knife from a double sheath and, going again to the opposite hill-tops, hurl them into the valley below. If both these knives were found in the sheath in the valley she would marry him, but if the knives were found apart they would live apart. Again the brother surreptitiously placed two knives in the sheath, and, the experiment ending as A Zie wished, his sister became his wife. They had one child, a misshapen thing without arms or legs, which A Zie in great anger killed and cut to pieces. He threw the pieces all over the hill, and next morning, on awaking, he found these pieces transformed into men and women; thus the earth was repeopled.

  

The Dream of the South Branch

The dawn of Chinese romantic literature must be ascribed to the period between the eighth and tenth centuries of our era, when the cultivation of the liberal [p. 409] arts received encouragement at the hands of sovereigns who had reunited the Empire under the sway of a single ruler, and whose conquests and distant embassies attracted representatives from every Asiatic nation to their splendid Court. It was during this period that the vast bulk of Indian literature was successfully attacked by a host of Buddhist translators, and that the alchemists and mechanicians of Central Asia, Persia, and the Byzantine Empire introduced their varied acquirements to the knowledge of the Chinese. With the flow of new learning which thus gained admittance to qualify the frigid and monotonous cultivation of the ancient classics and their commentators, there came also an impetus to indulgence in the licence of imagination in which it is impossible to mistake the influence of Western minds. While the Sanskrit fables, on the one hand, passed into a Chinese dress, and contributed to the colouring of the popular mythology, the legends which circulated from mouth to mouth in the lively Arabian bazaars found, in like manner, an echo in the heart of China. Side by side with the mechanical efforts of rhythmical composition which constitute the national ideal of poetry there began, during the middle period of the T'ang dynasty (A.D. 618-907), to grow up a class of romantic tales in which the kinship of ideas with those that distinguish the products of Arabian genius is too marked to be ignored. The invisible world appears suddenly to open before the Chinese eye; the relations of the sexes overstep for a moment the chilling limit imposed by the traditions of Confucian decorum; a certain degree of freedom and geniality is, in a word, for the first time and only for a brief interval infused into the intellectual expression of a nation hitherto closely cramped in the bonds of a narrow pedantry. It [p. 410] was at this period that the drama began to flourish, and the germs of the modern novelist's art made their first appearance. Among the works of imagination dating from the period in question which have come down to the present day there is perhaps none which better illustrates the effect of an exotic fancy upon the sober and methodical authorship of the Chinese, or which has left a more enduring mark upon the language, than the little tale which is given in translation in the following pages.

The Nan k'o meng, or Dream of the South Branch (as the title, literally translated, should read), is the work of a writer named Li Kung-tso, who, from an incidental mention of his own experiences in Kiangsi which appears in another of his tales, is ascertained to have lived at the beginning of the ninth century of our era. The nan k'o, or South Branch, is the portion of a huai tree (Sophora Japdonica, a tree well known in China, and somewhat resembling the American locust-tree) in which the adventures narrated in the story are supposed to have occurred; and from this narrative of a dream, recalling more than one of the incidents recounted in the Arabian Nights, the Chinese have borrowed a metaphor to enrich the vocabulary of their literature. The equivalent of our own phrase "the baseless fabric of a vision" is in Chinese nan k'o chih meng--a dream of the south branch.

  

Ch'un-yu Fen enters the Locust-tree

Ch'un-yu Fen, a native of Tung-p'ing, was by nature a gallant who had little regard for the proprieties of life, and whose principal enjoyment was found in indulgence in wine-bibbing in the society of boon-companions. At one time he held a commission in the army, but this he lost through his dissipated conduct, and from that time he [p. 411] more than ever gave himself up to the pleasures of the wine-cup.

One day--it was in the ninth moon of the seventh year of Cheng Yuan (A.D. 791)--after drinking heavily with a party of friends under a wide-spreading old locust-tree near his house, he had to be carried to bed and there left to recover, his friends saying that they would leave him while they went to bathe their feet. The moment he laid down his head he fell into a deep slumber. In his dream appeared to him two men clothed in purple, who kneeling down informed him that they had been sent by their master the King of Huai-an ('Locust-tree Peace') to request his presence. Unconsciously he rose, and, arranging his dress, followed his visitors to the door, where he saw a varnished chariot drawn by a white horse. On each side were ranged seven attendants, by whom he was assisted to mount, whereupon the carriage drove off, and, going out of the garden gate, passed through a hole in the trunk of the locust-tree already spoken of. Filled with astonishment, but too much afraid to speak, Ch'un-yu noticed that he was passing by hills and rivers, trees and roads, but of quite a different kind from those he was accustomed to. A few miles brought them to the walls of a city, the approach to which was lined with men and vehicles, who fell back at once the moment the order was given. Over the gate of the city was a pavilion on which was written in gold letters "The Capital of Huai-an." As he passed through, the guard turned out, and a mounted officer, shouting that the husband of the King's daughter had arrived, showed him the way into a hall where he was to rest awhile. The room contained fruits and flowers of every description, and on the tables was laid out a profuse display of refreshments. [p. 412]

While Ch'un-yu still remained lost in astonishment, a cry was raised that the Prime Minister was coming. Ch'un-yu got up to meet him, and the two received each other with every demonstration of politeness.

  

He marries the King's Daughter

The minister, looking at Ch'un-yu, said: "The King, my master, has brought you to this remote region in order to give his daughter in marriage to you." "How could I, a poor useless wretch," replied Ch'un-yu, "have ever aspired to such honour?" With these words both proceeded toward the audience-chamber, passing through a hall lined with soldiers, among whom, to his great joy and surprise, Ch'un-yu recognized an old friend of his former drinking days, to whom he did not, however, then venture to speak; and, following the Prime Minister, he was ushered into the King's presence. The King, a man of noble bearing and imposing stature, was dressed in plain silk, a jewelled crown reposing on his head. Ch'un-yu was so awe-stricken that he was powerless even to look up, and the attendants on either side were obliged to remind him to make his prostrations. The King, addressing him, said: "Your father, small as my kingdom is, did not disdain to promise that you should marry my daughter." Ch'un-yu could not utter a word; he merely lay prostrate on the ground. After a few moments he was taken back to his apartments, and he busied his thoughts in trying to discover what all this meant. "My father," he said to himself, "fought on the northern frontier, and was taken prisoner; but whether his life was saved or not I don't know. It may be that this affair was settled while he was in those distant regions."

That same night preparations were made for the [p. 413] marriage; and the rooms and passages were filled with damsels who passed and repassed, filling the air with the sound of their dancing and music. They surrounded Ch'un-yu and kept up a constant fire of witty remarks, while he sat there overcome by their grace and beauty, unable to say a word. "Do you remember," said one of them, coming up to Ch'un-yu, "the other day when with the Lady Ling-chi I was listening to the service in the courtyard of a temple, and while I, with all the other girls, was sitting on the window step, you came up to us, talking nonsense, and trying to get up a flirtation? Don't you remember how we tied a handkerchief on the stem of a bamboo?" Then she continued: "Another time at a temple, when I threw down two gold hairpins and an ivory box as an offering, you asked the priest to let you look at the things, and after admiring them for a long time you turned toward me, and said that neither the gifts nor the donor were of this world; and you wanted to know my name, and where I lived, but I wouldn't tell you; and then you gazed on me so tenderly, and could not take your eyes off me. You remember this, without doubt?" "I have ever treasured the recollection in my heart; how could I possibly forget it?" was Ch'un-yu's reply, whereat all the maidens exclaimed that they had never expected to see him in their midst on this joyful occasion.

At this moment three men came up to Ch'un-yu and stated that they had been appointed his ministers. He stepped up to one of them and asked him if his name was not Tzu-hua. "It is," was the reply; whereupon Ch'un-yu, taking him by the hands, recalled to him their old friendship, and questioned him as to how he had found his way to this spot. He then proceeded to ask him if Chou-pien was also here. "He is," replied the other, [p. 414] "and holding very high office; he has often used his influence on my behalf."

As they were talking, Ch'un-yu was summoned to the palace, and as he passed within, a curtain in front of him was drawn aside, disclosing a young girl of about fourteen years of age. She was known as the Princess of the Golden Stem, and her dazzling beauty was well in keeping with her matchless grace.

  

He writes to his Father

The marriage was celebrated with all magnificence, and the young couple grew fonder from day to day. Their establishment was kept up in princely style, their principal amusement being the chase, the King himself frequently inviting Ch'un-yu to join him in hunting expeditions to the Tortoise-back Hill. As they were returning one day from one of these excursions, Ch'un-yu said to the King: "On my marriage day your Majesty told me that it was my father's desire that I should espouse your daughter. My father was worsted in battle on the frontier, and for seventeen years we have had no news of him. If your Majesty knows his whereabouts, I would beg permission to go and see him."

"Your father," replied the King, "is frequently heard of; you may send him a letter; it is not necessary to go to him." Accordingly a letter and some presents were got ready and sent, and in due time a reply was received, in which Ch'un-yu's father asked many questions about his relations, his son's occupation, but manifested no desire that the latter should come to him.

  

He takes Office

One day Ch'un-yu's wife asked him if he would not like to hold office. His answer was to the effect that he had [p. 415] always been a rolling stone, and had no experience of official affairs, but the Princess promised to give him her assistance, and found occasion to speak on the subject to her father. In consequence the King one day told Ch'un-yu that he was not satisfied with the state of affairs in the south of his territory, that the present governor was old and useless, and that he would be pleased if he would proceed thither. Ch'un-yu bowed to the King's commands, and inwardly congratulated himself that such good fortune should have befallen a rover like him. He was supplied with a splendid outfit, and farewell entertainments were given in his honour.

Before leaving he acknowledged to the King that he had no great confidence in his own powers, and suggested that he should be allowed to take with him Chou-pien and Tzu-hua as commissioners of justice and finance. The King gave his consent, and issued the necessary instructions. The day of departure having arrived, both the King and the Queen came to see Ch'un-yu and his wife off, and to Ch'un-yu the King said: "The province of Nan-k'o is rich and fertile; and the inhabitants are brave and prosperous; it is by kindness that you must rule them." To her daughter the Queen said: "Your husband is violent and fond of wine. The duty of a wife is to be kind and submissive. Act well toward him, and I shall have no anxiety. Nan-k'o, it is true, is not very far--only one day's journey; still, in parting from you my tears will flow." Ch'un-yu and his bride waved a farewell, and were whirled away toward their destination, reaching Nan-k'o the same evening.

Once settled in the place, Ch'un-yu set himself to become thoroughly acquainted with the manners and customs of the people, and to relieve distress. To Chou-pien and [p. 416] Tzu-hua he confided all questions of administration, and in the course of twenty years a great improvement was to be noticed in the affairs of the province. The people showed their appreciation by erecting a monument to his honour, while the King conferred upon him an estate and the dignity of a title, and in recognition of their services promoted Chou-pien and Tzu-hua to very high posts. Ch'un-yu's children also shared their father's rewards; the two sons were given office, while the two daughters were betrothed to members of the royal family. There remained nothing which could add to his fame and greatness.

  

He meets with Disasters

About this period the state of T'an-lo made an incursion on the province of Nan-k'o. The King at once commanded that Chou-pien should proceed at the head of 30,000 men to repel the enemy. Chou-pien, full of confidence, attacked the foe, but sustained a disastrous defeat, and, barely escaping with his life, returned to the capital, leaving the invaders to plunder the country and retire. Ch'un-yu threw Chou-pien into prison, and asked the King what punishment should be visited upon him. His Majesty granted Chou-pien his pardon; but that same month he died of disease.

A few days later Ch'un-yu's wife also fell ill and died, whereupon he begged permission to resign his post and return to Court with his wife's remains. This request was granted, and Tzu-hua was appointed in his stead. As Ch'un-yu, sad and dejected, was leaving the city with the funeral cortege, he found the road lined with people giving loud expression to their grief, and almost ready to prevent his taking his departure. [p. 417]

  

He returns Home

As he neared the capital the King and Queen, dressed in mourning, were awaiting the bier in tears. The Princess, after a posthumous title had been conferred upon her, was buried with great magnificence a few miles to the east of the city, while Ch'un-yu remained in the capital, living in such state, and gaining so much influence, that he excited the King's jealousy; and when it was foretold, by means of signs in the heavens, that ruin threatened the kingdom, that its inhabitants would be swept away, and that this would be the work of an alien, the prophecy seemed to point to ambitious designs on the part of Ch'un-yu, and means were taken to keep him under restraint.

Ch'un-yu, conscious that he had faithfully filled a high office for many years, felt greatly grieved by these calumnies--a result which the King could not avoid noticing. He accordingly sent for Ch'un-yu, and said: "For more than twenty years we have been connexions, although my poor daughter, unfortunately, has not been spared to be a companion to you in old age. Her mother is now taking care of her children; your own home you have not seen for many years; return to see your friends; your children will be looked after, and in three years you will see them again." "Is not this my home? Whither else am I to go?" was Ch'un-yu's reply. "My friend," the King said laughingly, "you are a human being; you don't belong to this place." At these words Ch'un-yu seemed to fall into a deep swoon, and he remained unconscious for some time, after which he began to recall some glimpses of the distant past. With tears in his eyes he begged that he might be allowed to return to his home, and, saying farewell, he departed. [p. 418]

Outside the palace he found the same two officials in purple clothes who had led the way so many years ago. A conveyance was also there, but this time it was a mere bullock-cart, with no outriders. He took the same road as before, and noticed the same hills and streams. The two officials were by no means imposing this time, and when he asked how far was his destination they continued to hum and whistle and paid no attention to him. At last they passed through an opening, and he recognized his own village, precisely as he had left it. The two officials desired him to get down and walk up the steps before him, where, much to his horror, he saw himself lying down in the porch. He was too much bedazed with terror to advance, but the two officials called out his name several times, and upon this he awoke. The servants were bustling about the house, and his two companions were still washing their feet. Everything was as he had left it, and the lifetime he had lived in his dream had occupied only a few moments. Calling out to his two friends, he made them follow him to the locust-tree, and pointed out the opening through which he had begun his journey in dream-land.

An axe was sent for, and the interior of the trunk thrown open, whereupon a series of galleries was laid bare. At the root of the tree a mound of earth was discovered, in shape like a city, and swarming with ants. This was the capital of the kingdom in which he had lived in his dream. A terrace surrounded by a guard of ants was the residence of the King and Queen, two winged insects with red heads. Twenty feet or so along another gallery was found an old tortoise-shell covered with a thick growth of moss; it was the Tortoise-back Hill of the dream. In another direction was found a small mound of earth round [p. 419] which was coiled a root in shape like a dragon's tongue; it was the grave of the King's daughter, Ch'un-yu's wife in the vision. As he recalled each incident of the dream he was much affected at discovering its counterpart in this nest of ants, and he refused to allow his companions to disturb it further. They replaced everything as they had found it; but that night a storm of wind and rain came, and next morning not a vestige of the ants was to be seen. They had all disappeared, and here was the fulfilment of the warning in the dream, that the kingdom would be swept away.

  

Ch'un-yu Regenerate

At this time Ch'un-yu had not seen Chou-pien and Tzu-hua for some ten days. He sent a messenger to make inquiries about them, and the news he brought back was that Chou-pien was dead and Tzu-hua lying ill. The fleeting nature of man's existence revealed itself to him as he recalled the greatness of these two men in the ant-world. From that day he became a reformed man; drink and dissipation were put aside. After three years had elapsed he died, thus giving effect to the promise of the ant-king that he should see his children once more at the end of three years.

  

Why the Jung Tribe have Heads of Dogs

The wave of conquest which swept from north to south in the earliest periods of Chinese history  [*1] left on its way, like small islands in the ocean, certain remnants of aboriginal tribes which survived and continued to exist despite the sustained hostile attitude of the flood of alien settlers around them. When stationed at Foochow [p. 420] I saw the settlements of one of these tribes which lived in the mountainous country not very many miles inland from that place. They were those of the Jung tribe, the members of which wore on their heads a large and peculiar headgear constructed of bamboo splints resting on a peg inserted in the chignon at the back of the head, the weight of the structure in front being counterbalanced by a pad, serving as a weight, attached to the end of the splints, which projected as far down as the middle of the shoulders. This framework was covered by a mantilla of red cloth which, when not rolled up, concealed the whole head and face, The following legend, related to me on the spot, explains the origin of this unusual headdress.

  

Two Tribes at War

In early times the Chief of a Chinese tribe (another version says an Emperor of China) was at war with the Chief of another tribe who came to attack his territory from the west. The Western Chief so badly defeated the Chinese army that none of the generals or soldiers could be induced to renew hostilities and endeavour to drive the enemy back to his own country. This distressed the Chinese Chief very much. As a last resort he issued a proclamation promising his daughter in marriage to anyone who would bring him the head of his enemy, the Chief of the West.

  

The Chief's Promise

The people in the palace talked much of this promise made by the Chief, and their conversation was listened to by a fine large white dog belonging to one of the generals. This dog, having pondered the matter well, waited until [p. 421] midnight and then stole over to the tent of the enemy Chief. The latter, as well as his guard, was asleep; or, if the guard was not, the dog succeeded in avoiding him in the darkness. Entering the tent, the dog gnawed through the Chief's neck and carried his head off in his mouth. At dawn he placed it at the Chinese Chief's feet, and waited for his reward. The Chief was soon able to verify the fact that his enemy had been slain, for the headless body had caused so much consternation in the hostile army that it had already begun to retreat from Chinese territory.

  

A Strange Contract

The dog then reminded the Chief of his promise, and asked for his daughter's hand in marriage. "But how," said the Chief, "can I possibly marry my daughter to a dog?" "Well," replied the dog, "will you agree to her marrying me if I change myself into a man?" This seemed a safe promise to make, and the Chief agreed. The dog then stipulated that he should be placed under a large bell and that no one should move it or look into it for a space of 280 days.

  

The Chiefs Curiosity

This was done, and for 279 days the bell remained unmoved, but on the 280th day the Chief could restrain his curiosity no longer, and tilting up the bell saw that the dog had changed into a man all except his head, the last day being required to complete the transformation. However, the spell was now broken, and the result was a man with a dog's head. Since it was the Chief's fault that, through his over-inquisitiveness, the dog could not become altogether a man, he was obliged to keep his promise, and [p. 422] the wedding duly took place, the bridegroom's head being veiled for the occasion by a red mantilla.

  

The Origin of a Custom

Unfortunately the fruit of the union took more after their father than their mother, and though comely of limb had exceedingly ugly features.  [*2] They were therefore obliged to continue to wear the head-covering adopted by their father at the marriage ceremony, and this became so much an integral part of the tribal costume that not only has it been worn ever since by their descendants, but a change of headgear has become synonymous with a change of husbands or a divorce. One account says that at the original bridal ceremony the bride wore the red mantilla to prevent her seeing her husband's ugly features, and that is why the headdress is worn by the women and not by the men, or more generally by the former than the latter, though others say that it was originally worn by the ugly children of both sexes.

  

And of a Worship

This legend explains the dog-worship of the Jung tribe, which now consists of four clans, with a separate surname (Lei, Chung, Lang, and Pan) to each, has a language of its own, and does not intermarry with the Foochow natives. At about the time of the old Chinese New Year (somewhere in February) they paint a large figure of a dog on a screen and worship it, saying it is their ancestor who was victorious over the Western invader. [p. 423]

  

Conclusion

If the greatness of nations is to be judged by the greatness of their myths (using the word 'great' in the sense of world-famous and of perennial influence), there would be few great nations, and China would not be one of them. As stated in an earlier chapter, the design has been to give an account of Chinese myth as it is, and not as it might have been under imaginary conditions. But for the Chinese philosophers we should in all probability have had more Chinese myths, but philosophy is unifying, and without it we might have had a break-up of China and perhaps no myths at all, or none specially belonging to China as a whole and separate independent nation. Had there been great, world-stirring myths there could hardly but have been also more wars, more cruelty, more wounding of the "heart that weeps and trembles," more saturating of the earth with human blood. It is not a small thing to have conquered myth with philosophy, especially at a time when the Western world was still steeped in the grossest superstition. Therefore we may be thankful that the Chinese were and are a peace-loving, sober, agricultural, industrial, non-military, non-priest-ridden, literary, and philosophical people, and that we have instead of great myths a great people.

But if the real test of greatness is purity and justice, then Chinese myth must be placed among the greatest of all; for it is not obscene, and it is invariably just.

Footnotes

^423:1 See Chapter I.

^423:2 Compare the legend of the tailed Miao Tzu tribes named Yao, 'mountain-dogs' or 'jackals,' living on the mountain ranges in the north-west of Kuangtung Province, related in the Jih chi so chih.

Myths and Legends of China, by Edward T.C. Werner, [1922], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 424] [p. 425]

  

Glossary & Index

  

The Pronunciation of Chinese Words

During the course of Chinese history the restriction of intercourse due to mountain-chains or other natural obstacles between various tribes or divisions of the Chinese people led to the birth of a number of families of languages, which again became the parents of numerous local dialects. These dialects have in most cases restricted ranges, so that that of one district may be partially or wholly unintelligible to the natives of another situated at a distance of only a hundred miles or less.

The Court or Government language is that spoken in Peking and the metropolitan district, and is the language of official communication throughout the country. Though neither the oldest nor the purest Chinese dialect, it seems destined more than any other to come into universal use in China. The natives of each province or district will of course continue to speak to each other in their own particular dialect, and foreign missionaries or merchants, for example, whose special duties or transactions are connected with special districts will naturally learn and use the dialects of those districts; but as a means of intercommunication generally between natives of different provinces, or between natives and foreigners, the Court language seems likely to continue in use and to spread more and more over the whole country. It is to this that the following remarks apply.

The essentials of correct pronunciation of Chinese are accuracy of sound, tone, and rhythm.

  

Sound

Vowels and Diphthongs

a as in father.

ai as in Italian amai.

ao. Italian ao in Aosta: sometimes a-oo, the au in cauto.

e in eh, en, as in yet, lens.

ei. Nearly ey in grey, but more as in Italian lei, contei.

e. The vowel-sound in lurk.

ei. The foregoing e followed enclitically by y. Money without the n = mei.

erh. The urr in purr.

i. As a single or final syllable the vowel-sound in ease, tree; in ih, in, ing, as in chick, thing.

ia generally as in the Italian Maria.

iai. The iai in the Italian vecchiaia.

iao as in ia and ao, with the terminal peculiarity of the latter.

ie as in the Italian siesta.

io. The French io in pioche. [p. 426]

iu as a final, longer than the English ew. In liu, niu, almost leyew, neyew. In chiung, hsiung, iung, is eeyong (o in roll).

o. Between vowel-sound in awe and that in roll.

ou. Really eo; ou in round.

u. The vowel-sound in the French tu, eut.

ua. Only in uan, which in some tones is uen. The u as above; the an as in antic.

ue. The vowel-sounds in the French tu es.

uo. A disputed sound, used, if at all, interchangeably with io in certain syllables.

u. The oo in too; in un and ung as in the Italian punto.

ua. Nearly ooa, in many instances contracting to wa.

uai as in the Italian guai.

uei. The vowel-sounds in the French jouer.

ue. Only in final uen = u-un; frequently wen or wun.

ui. The vowel-sounds in screwy; in some tones uei.

uo. The Italian uo in fuori; often wo, and at times nearly oo.

u. Between the i in bit and the u in shut.

Consonants

ch as in chair; but before ih softened to dj.

ch'. A strong breathing. Much-harm without the italicized letters = ch'a.

f as in farm.

h as ch in Scotch loch.

hs. A slight aspirate preceding and modifying the sibilant, which is, however, the stronger of the two consonants; e.g. hsing = hissing without the first i,

j. Nearly the French j in jaune; the English s in fusion.

k. c in car, k in king; but when following other sounds often softened to g in go, gate.

k'. The aspirate as in ch'. Kick-hard without the italicized letters = k'a; and kick-her == k'e.

l as in English.

m as in English.

n as in English.

ng. The italicized letters in the French mon galant = nga; mon gaillard = ngai; son gosier = ngo.

p as in English.

p' The Irish pronunciation of party, parliament. Slap-hard without the italicized letters = p'a.

s as in English.

sh as in English.

ss. Only in ssu. The object of employing ss is to fix attention on the peculiar vowel-sound u (see above).

t as in English.

t' The Irish t in torment. Hit-hard without the italicized letters = t'a.

ts as in jetsam; after another word softened to ds in gladsome.

ts'. The aspirate intervening, as in ch', etc. Bets-hard without the italicized letters = ts'a. [p. 427]

tz. Employed to mark the peculiarity of the final u; hardly of greater power than ts.

tz' like ts'. This, tz, and ss used only before u.

w as in English; but very faint, or even non-existent, before u.

y as in English; but very faint before i or u.

  

Tone

The correct pronunciation of the sound (yin) is not sufficient to make a Chinese spoken word intelligible. Unless the tone (sheng), or musical note, is simultaneously correctly given, either the wrong meaning or no meaning at all will be conveyed. The tone is the key in which the voice is pitched. Accent is a 'song added to,' and tone is emphasized accent. The number of these tones differs in the different dialects. In Pekingese there are now four. They are best indicated in transliteration by numbers added to the sound, thus:

pa (1) pa (2) pa (3) pa (4)

To say, for example, pa (3) instead of pa (1) would be as great a mistake as to say 'grasp' instead of 'trumpet.' Correctness of tone cannot be learnt except by oral instruction.

  

Rhythm

What tone is to the individual sound rhythm is to the sentence. This also, together with proper appreciation of the mutual modifications of tone and rhythm, can be correctly acquired only by oral instruction.

  

A

A Zie. In Miao legend of the creation, <page 407>-<page 408>

Absolute. Of Lieh Tzu, <page 90>-<page 91>

Accessory Institutions, <page 37>-<page 38>; education, <page 37>-<page 38>

Address, Forms of, <page 42>

Administration. General, <page 28> sq.; in Feudal Period, <page 28>-<page 29>; in Monarchical Period, <page 29>; in Republican Period, <page 30>

Aesthetic Products, <page 59>

Age for Marriage, <page 23>

Agents. The Three, <page 125>; the Three Great Emperor Agents, <page 125>; the Three Supreme Agents, <page 125>

Agnosticism. Confucius and, <page 88>-<page 89>

Agriculture, <page 49> sq.; Ministry of, <page 50>

Agriculturists. Nung; the second class of the people, <page 28>

Air. Sovereign of the Eastern, <page 136>-<page 137>; sovereign of the Western, <page 137>

Akkadia. Supposed origin of the Chinese in, <page 13>, <page 15>, <page 17>

All Souls' Day. Festival of (Mid-autumn Festival), <page 35>, <page 44>-<page 45>

Alligator, The Spiritual, <page 223>-<page 224>

Amita, Amida. O-mi-t'o Fo; Buddha, <page 119>, <page 120> [p. 428]

Amitabha. See Amita

An-kung. God of Sailors, <page 165>

Ancestor-worship. The origin of Chinese religion, <page 52>; by rulers, <page 94>; ordinary, <page 100>; and Buddhism, <page 118>

Ao. A sea-monster; raises the scholar K'uei on its back, <page 106>

Ao Ch'in. A Dragon-king; and the Eight Immortals, <page 214> sq.

Ao Ping. Third son of Lung Wang, <page 308>-<page 309>

Aquila. Star; legend regarding Vega and, <page 189> sq.

Archer, The Divine, <page 180> sq.

Armless People. Legend of the, <page 388>

Artisans. Kung; the third class of the people, <page 28>

Arts, <page 49>

Astrological Superstitions, <page 176>

Asuras. Buddhist demons; enemies of Devas, <page 198>

August. The Pure August One; Yu Huang, <page 130>

  

B

Barge of Mercy, Taoist, <page 160>

Beards. Little worn, <page 47>

Beginning. Of Form, <page 90>; of Pneuma, <page 90>; the Great, <page 90>; of Substance, <page 90>

Bell, Casting of the Great. Legend of, <page 394> sq.

Bezoar. See Niu Huang

Bible. Parallelisms of, with Chinese religious and mythological beliefs, <page 79> n.

"Biographies of the Gods." Shen hsien chuan, by Ko Hung, <page 79>

Bird. Of Dawn, <page 186>-<page 187>; the one-legged, <page 206>

Birth of the Soul, <page 93>

Blackwater River, Demons of. In the Hsi yu chi, <page 352>

Blank, The Great, <page 90>

Blower. See Ch'en Ch'i

Blue Dragon. Ch'ing Lung; spirit of the Blue Dragon Star; guardian of Taoist temple gates, <page 146> sq.

Blue River. Hsuan Chuang exposed in, as an infant, <page 337>

"Book of Ceremonial." Li chi, <page 103>

"Book of History," <page 84>

Brothers, The Three Musical, <page 151>

Buddha. Ju Lai, <page 78>; and the Law and the Priesthood, <page 119>; Tathagata, <page 119>; Fo Pao, one of the San Pao, <page 119>; Shakyamuni, <page 119>; Yueh-shih Fo, the Master-Physician, <page 120>; Miao Shan (Kuan Yin) becomes a, <page 271>; his jumping competition with Sun Hou-tzu, <page 332>-<page 333>

Buddhism. As a Chinese religion, <page 53>; effect on mythology, <page 62>-<page 63>; one of the three religions, <page 100>; brought to China, <page 118>; Mahayanistic form of, <page 118>; origin in ancestor-worship, <page 118>; and Taoism, <page 118>; and Confucianism, <page 118>; Buddha, the Law, and the Priesthood, <page 119>

Buddhist-s. Account of P'an Ku, <page 77>; guardians of temple gates, <page 146>; evil dragons, <page 208>; number of dragons, <page 209>; saviour of the Buddhists in Slow-carts Country, <page 353> sq.

Buffalo. Of T'ung-t'ien Chiao-chu, <page 133>-<page 134>

Burial, Methods of, <page 39> sq.

Bushel Mother. See Tou Mu

Butterfly. Chuang Tzu and the, <page 91> and n., <page 148>-<page 149>

  

C

"Canon of Changes." See I Ching

Capture, Marriage By, <page 22>

Carp. Ch'en Kuang-jui and the released, <page 336>, <page 339>-<page 340>

Cart, Land of the Flying, <page 391>

Cask of Pearls. Wang Tan and the, <page 131>-<page 132>

Cause-s. First, Yuan-shih T'ien-tsun, <page 127>; Superior, Medium, and Inferior, <page 126>; the Three, <page 125> sq.

Celestial Ministries, <page 98>-<page 99>, <page 164>

Cemeteries, Chinese, <page 41>

Ceremonial Institutions. Changes in marriage ceremonial, <page 24>-<page 25>; exacting nature of funeral rites, <page 41>; codes of ceremonial, <page 42> [p. 429]

Ch'an-yu. Daughter of Teng Chiu-kung; helps her father, <page 147>; marries T'u Hsing-sun, <page 147>

Chang Fei. Chang I Te, the meat-seller; and Kuan Yu, <page 114> sq.

Chang Hsien. The patron of child-bearing women, <page 177> sq.; shoots the Heavenly Dog, <page 177>-<page 178>; spirit of the star Chang, <page 178>-<page 179>; origin of worship of, <page 178>

Chang I Te. See Chang Fei

Chang Kuei-fang. Defeated by No-cha, <page 153>-<page 154>

Chang Kuo. One of the Eight Immortals, <page 288>, <page 303>; legend of, <page 294>-<page 295>

Chang Lao. The old priest who rescued the infant son of Ch'en Kuang-jui, <page 337>-<page 338>

Ch'ang O, or Heng O. Called T'ai-yin Huang-chun and Yueh-fu Ch'ang O; the younger sister of the Spirit of the Waters, <page 179> sq.; Shen I marries, <page 182>; eats pill of immortality, <page 184>-<page 185>; flies to the moon, <page 185>; and the white rabbit, <page 185>; changed to a toad, <page 176>, <page 188>

Chang Shao. His fight with Nan-chi Hsien-weng, <page 158>-<page 159>; defeated by White Crane Youth, <page 159>

Chang Tao-ling. The first Taiost pope, <page 138> sq.; finds ancient writings, <page 138>-<page 139>; founder of modern Taoism, <page 139>; and pills of immortality, <page 139>, <page 140>; and talismans, <page 139>; a 'rice-thief,' <page 139>; his disciple, Wang Ch'ang, <page 140>, <page 141>, <page 216>; Chao Sheng plucks the peaches for, <page 140>-<page 141>; the Heavenly Teacher, <page 141>; Vicegerent of Pearly Emperor, <page 141>; Commander-in-Chief of the hosts of Taoism, <page 141>; his descendants, <page 142>; and the dragon, <page 216>-<page 217>; and the Spirits of the Well, <page 216>-<page 217>; and the hunter, <page 217>

Chang T'ien-shih. Master of the Taoists; Emperor Li Shih-min and, <page 243> sq.; causes death of the five graduates, <page 244>; gives magic objects to graduates, <page 245>

Chang Ya. The God of Tzu T'ung <page 104> sq.

Change, The Great, <page 90>

"Changes, The Canon of." See I Ching

Chao Chen. Minister to Miao Chuang, <page 253>, <page 257>, <page 277>, <page 279>-<page 280>, <page 283>; becomes Emperor, <page 285>

Chao K'uei. Marries Miao Ch'ing, <page 258>; conspires against Miao Chuang, <page 277> sq.

Chao Kung-ming. See Ts'ai Shen

Chao Sheng. Plucks the peaches, <page 140>-<page 141>

Ch'ao Tu. A watchman; Li T'ieh-kuai and, <page 291>

Chao Yen. His connexion with Shou Hsing, <page 172>

Chaos. Evolution of, and i tu, <page 90>-<page 91>

Characteristics. Emotional, intellectual, and physical, of the Chinese, <page 21>-<page 22>

Charms. Use of, prevalent, <page 54>

Ch'e. And the fox, <page 379> sq.

Ch'en. The Officials; the first class of the people, <page 28>

Ch'en. A Buddhist nun; collects subscriptions for casting an image of Buddha; and the maniac's mite, <page 401>-<page 402>

Chen, Mr. A fox; and Chia Tzu-lung, <page 381> sq.

Ch'en Kuang-jui. A graduate of Hai Chou, <page 336>; appointed Governor of Chiang Chou, <page 336>; and the released carp, <page 336>, <page 339>-<page 340>; murder of, by Liu Hung, <page 337>; his infant son exposed on the Blue River, <page 337>; his murderer executed, <page 339>; saved by Lung Wang, <page 339>-<page 340>; is reunited with his family, <page 340>. See also Hsuan Chuang

Ch'en Ch'i, or Ha. The Blower, <page 145>; his battle with the Snorter, <page 145>-<page 146>; speared by Huang Fei-hu, <page 146>; canonized, <page 146>; appointed guardian of Buddhist temple gates, <page 146>; overthrows Teng Chiu-kung, <page 148>

Chen-jen. The Perfect Man, or Hero, <page 125>, <page 135>-<page 136>

Chen-shui T'a. See Yu Ch'uan Shan T'a [p. 430]

Cheng Cheng-ch'ang. Choir-mistress in Nunnery of the White Bird, <page 261>, <page 263>-<page 264>

Cheng Lung, or Heng. The Snorter, <page 145>; instructed by Tu O, <page 145>; his battle with the Blower, <page 145>-<page 146>; killed by Chin Ta-sheng, <page 146>; canonized, <page 146>; appointed guardian of the Buddhist temple gates, <page 146>

Ch'eng Tsung. Emperor; and the San Yuan, <page 127>; and Yu Huang, <page 130>-<page 131>; and the casket of pearls, <page 131>-<page 132>

Ch'eng-huang, God of the City, <page 165>-<page 166>, <page 402> sq.

Ch'i. Pneuma, <page 90>; Primary Matter, <page 86>; Chu Tzu and, <page 87>; tao and, <page 88>

Chi Chou. The early seat of Chinese sovereignty, <page 82>

Chia Tzu-lung. And Mr Chen, a fox, <page 381> sq.

Chiang Chou. Ch'en Kuang-jui appointed Governor of, <page 336>

Chiang Shang. See Chiang Tzu-ya

Chiang Tzu-ya. His name Chiang Shang, but known as Lu Shang, famous generalissimo, <page 122>, <page 152> sq.; canonizes Heng and Ha, <page 146>; and Teng Chiu-kung, <page 147>-<page 148>; and Chu Liu-sun, <page 147>; and Yin Ch'eng-hsiu, <page 148>; and battle of Mu Yeh, <page 152>-<page 153>; transfers services to Chou, <page 152>; and Wu Wang, <page 153>, <page 154>; and No-cha, <page 153>-<page 154>; goes to K'un-lun, <page 154>; receives List of Promotions to Immortals from Yuan-shih, <page 154>; disobeys Yuan-shih's commands, <page 155>; tempted by Shen Kung-pao, <page 155>; compact with Shen Kung-pao, <page 155>; assisted by Ancient Immortal of the South Pole against Shen Kung-pao, <page 156>-<page 157>; intercedes for Shen Kung-pao, <page 157>; builds the Feng Shen T'ai, <page 157>; in battle with Wen Chung, <page 158> sq.; wounds Wen Chung, <page 160>; his encounter with Ch'ien-li Yen and Shun-feng Erh, <page 162> sq.; causes death of Chao Kung-ming, <page 170>-<page 171>; confers appanage of the twenty-eight constellations on T'ung-t'ien Chiao-chu and his followers, <page 191>-<page 192>; and T'ai Sui, <page 196>; and Lei Tsu, <page 199>; and Lu Yueh, <page 241>

Chieh-yin Tao-jen. Fights with T'ung-t'ien Chiao-chu, <page 321>

Ch'ien-li Yen, or Kao Ming. Thousand-li Eye, <page 161> sq.; general of tyrant Chou, <page 161>-<page 162>; encounters with No-cha, Yang Chien, Chiang Tzu-ya, Li Ching, and Lei Chen-tzu, <page 162> sq.; defeated, <page 163>-<page 164>; searches for heir to Miao Chuang, <page 254>-<page 255>

Ch'ien-t'ang. Chief God of Rivers, <page 218>-<page 219>

Chih. See Substance

Ch'ih Ching-tzu. Seeks Yuan-shih T'ien-wang, <page 129>; defeats Wen Chung, <page 161>; an alleged discoverer of fire, <page 199>; fights Wen Chung, <page 199>; personification of fire, <page 237>

Ch'ih Sung-tzu. See Yu Shih

Ch'ih Ti. See Chu Jung

Ch'ih-chiang Tzu-yu. Visits O-mei Shan, <page 179>; on the steep summit, <page 180>; instructed in the doctrine of immortality, <page 186>; a skilful archer, <page 180> sq.; named Shen I; his adventures as Shen I--see Shen I

Children. Position of, in China, <page 25>-<page 26>

Ch'in. The feudal state which subjugated the other states and established the monarchy, <page 27>

Chin Chia. 'Mr Golden Cuirass'; protector of scholars, <page 112>-<page 113>

Chin Hung. God of T'ai Shan; and Yuan-shih T'ien-wang, <page 128>-<page 129>

Chin Mu. Shen I builds a palace for, <page 183>-<page 184>; gives Shen I pill of immortality, <page 184>

Ch'in Shih Huang-ti. The First Emperor; and the dragon, <page 212> sq.

Ch'in Shu-pao. A Door-god, <page 173>-<page 174>. See Men Shen

Chin Ta-sheng. 'Golden Big Pint,' an ox-spirit; kills the Snorter, <page 146>; and niu huang, or bezoar, <page 146>

Chin-cha. See Li Chin-cha

Chin-kang. The Four Diamond Kings of Heaven; governors of the four continents surrounding [p. 431] Mount Sumeru, <page 120> sq.; reflected in Taoist Kings of Heaven, <page 142>

China. Extent in early times, <page 17>, <page 18>; physical features of, <page 18>-<page 19>; Manchu conquest of, <page 18>, <page 28>; vegetable products of, <page 19>-<page 20>; animals of, <page 20>; Mongol rule over, <page 21>; intercourse with other countries, <page 21>; origin of name, <page 27>; conquered by the Tartars, <page 27>-<page 28>; government of, <page 28> sq.; Republican, <page 30>, <page 31>-<page 32>, <page 36>; laws of, <page 30> sq.; local government of, <page 32>; military and naval system of, <page 32> sq.; ecclesiastical institutions, <page 34> sq.; professional institutions, <page 36>; accessory institutions, <page 37>; industrial institutions, <page 47> sq.; agriculture in, <page 49> sq.; gods of, <page 93> sq.; Buddhism brought to, <page 118>; prevalence of smallpox in, <page 246>-<page 247>

Chinese. Theories of origin of, <page 13> sq.; problem of sources of civilization of, <page 17>; district occupied by early, <page 17>, <page 18>; cause of difference between, of North and South, <page 17>; physical, emotional, and intellectual characteristics, <page 21>-<page 22>; domestic institutions, <page 22> sq., <page 47>-<page 48>; expansion of Empire, <page 27>-<page 28>; mutilations practised by, <page 38>-<page 39>; funeral rites of, <page 39> sq.; laws of intercourse, <page 42>; habits and customs, <page 43>; sports and games, <page 45>; arts, <page 49>; sentiments and moral ideas, <page 51>-<page 52>; religious ideas, <page 52>-<page 53>; superstitions, <page 53>-<page 54>; knowledge, <page 54> sq.; language, <page 56>-<page 57>; achievements, <page 57> sq.; intellect and mythology, <page 61>; rigidity of their mythology, <page 61>, <page 63>-<page 64>; character of mythology of, <page 67>; sources of mythology of, <page 69> sq.; religion, <page 97>; myths of--see Mythology

Ching Te. In legend of Yu Huang, <page 132>-<page 133>

Chisel-tooth. A strange man of the South; a criminal, <page 184>; killed by Shen I, <page 184>

Ch'iung Hsiao. A goddess; assists the house of Chou with magic weapons, <page 158>

Chou. Colonies of early Chinese established among the aborigines, <page 27>

Chou Dynasty. No-cha and, <page 146>; helped by Chiang Tzu-ya, <page 152> sq.

Chou Hsin. The Ch'eng-huang of Hangchou, <page 166>

Chou Tun-i. See Chou Tzu

Chou Tzu, or Chou Tun-i. Philosopher; author of T'ai chi t'u shu, <page 86>, <page 87>

Chou Wang. Tyrant king of Yin; his battles with Wu Wang, <page 133>-<page 134>

Chou-pien. In legend of Ch'un-yu Fen, <page 413>-<page 414>, <page 415>-<page 416>, <page 419>

Ch'u Chieh. General of Miao Chuang, <page 253>

Chu Fu Tzu. See Chu Tzu

Chu Hsi. See Chu Tzu

Chu I. 'Mr Redcoat'; purveyor of official posts, <page 110> sq.

Chu Jung. The Red (Fire) Emperor, Ch'ih Ti; a minister of Huang Ti, <page 81>; victorious over Kung Kung, <page 81>; legend of, <page 237> sq.; becomes emperor, <page 238>; defeats Hui Lu, <page 239>

Chu Liu-sun. A magic-master; and Chiang Tzu-ya, <page 147>

Chu Pa-chieh. The Pig Fairy in the Hsi yu chi, <page 326>; half man, half pig, <page 335>; Mao Erh-chieh and, <page 335>; Kuan Yin and, <page 335>; is made a priest and receives religious name of Chu Wu-neng, <page 335>; journeys with the Master, <page 341> sq.; and the widow and her daughters, <page 342> sq.; carried away to the Lotus Cave, <page 345> sq.; his reward, <page 368>

Chu Tzu, Chu Hsi, or Chu Fu Tzu. Historian and Confucian commentator, <page 85>, <page 86>-<page 87>; monistic philosophy of, <page 86>-<page 87>

Ch'u Wang-sun. Chuang Chou as, <page 149>-<page 150>

Chu Wu-neng. See Chu Pa-chieh

Ch'u Yuan. Statesman-poet; drowns himself in Mi-lo River, <page 152>

Chu-ti, Prince. Founder of Peking, <page 228> sq.; son of Emperor Hung Wu, <page 228>; and the sealed packet, <page 228>, <page 229> sq.; begins to build city, <page 230>; and the dragons, <page 232> sq. [p. 432]

Chuang Chou. See Chuang Tzu

Chuang Tzu, Chuang Chou, or Chuang Sheng. His cosmogony, <page 80>; his super-tao, <page 91>; his dream, <page 91> and n., <page 148>-<page 149>; philosophical critic, <page 148>-<page 149>; apotheosized, <page 148>; reincarnation of, <page 149>; and the young widow fanning the grave, <page 149>; and his wife, <page 149>-<page 150>; as Ch'u Wang-sun, <page 149>-<page 150>; and Feng Hou, <page 150>; and Hsuan Nu, <page 150>; receives from Shang Ti the planet Jupiter, <page 150>

Chun T'i. A gifted warrior; his battles with T'ung-t'ien Chiao-chu, <page 133>-<page 134>, <page 321> sq.; and K'ung Hsuan, the one-eyed peacock, <page 320>-<page 321>; and Wu Yun, <page 323>-<page 324>; and the golden-bearded turtle, <page 324>; and P'i-lu Hsien, <page 324>

Ch'un-yu Fen. And the dream of the south branch, <page 410> sq.; in the kingdom of Huai-an, <page 411> sq.; marries the King's daughter, <page 412> sq.; takes office under the King, <page 414> sq.; his greatness, <page 416>; meets with disasters, <page 416>-<page 417>; the prophecies, <page 417>; returns home, <page 418>; the prophecies come true, <page 419>

Ch'ung Cheng. Emperor; and the cursed temple, <page 398> sq.

Chung K'uei, or K'uei. As God of literature, <page 106> sq.; as God of Exorcism, <page 248>; and Hsu Hao, <page 249>-<page 250>; canonized, <page 250>

Chung Yang Festival, <page 45>

Chung-li Ch'uan, or Han Chung-li. One of the Eight Immortals, <page 288>, <page 289>, <page 297>-<page 298>, <page 301>, <page 303>; legends of, <page 291>-<page 292>

Circle, The Magic, <page 357>-<page 358>

City. God of the, <page 165>; shaving a whole city, <page 365>-<page 366>

City-god of Yen Ch'eng. Legend of the, <page 402> sq.

Classes. The four classes of the people, <page 28>

Classics. See Book of Ceremonial, Book of History, I Ching

Climate. Nature of Chinese, <page 19>

Clothing. Nature of, <page 58>

Clubs. See Accessory Institutions

Codes. Ceremonial, <page 42>; legal--see Laws

Coins. Kinds in use, <page 49>

Concubinage, <page 22>-<page 23>, <page 24>

Confucius. Social and ethical philosopher; his cosmogony, <page 80>; and agnosticism, <page 88>-<page 89>; not a god, <page 102> sq.; titles conferred on, <page 103>

Confucianism. The State religion, <page 52>, <page 99>-<page 100>; effect on mythology, <page 61>-<page 62>; Ju Chiao, religion of the learned, <page 102>; scope of, <page 102>; and Buddhism, <page 118>

Constellations. Worship of the, <page 191>; the twenty-eight, <page 191>-<page 192>; propitious and unpropitious, <page 191>; abodes of gods, <page 191>-<page 192>; Tzu-wei and Po I-k'ao, <page 192> sq.

Corea. Dependency of China, <page 27>; annexed by Japan, <page 27>

Corpse. Feeding of, <page 40>

Cosmetics. Use of, <page 47>

Cosmogony. Myth of P'an Ku, <page 76> sq., <page 80>-<page 81>; of the I ching, <page 80>; of Lao Tzu, <page 80>; of Confucius, <page 80>; of Kuan Tzu, <page 80>; of Mencius, <page 80>; of Chuang Tzu, <page 80>; Chinese and Babylonian, <page 80>; Nu Kua and, <page 81>-<page 82>; Wen Ch'ang's attendants and, <page 82>; dualistic nature of early, <page 83>; how the Chinese obtained a, <page 84> sq.; tao and, <page 88>; popular, <page 91>-<page 92>; and the T'ai chi t'u, <page 92>; non-mythological, <page 92>; and constructive imagination, <page 92>. See also Creation

Creation. Mo Tzu and, <page 89>-<page 90>; Miao legends of the, <page 406> sq.

Crops. Kinds raised, <page 50>; Gods of the, <page 165>

Cursed Temple. Legend of the, <page 398> sq.

Cycle-gods, <page 177>

  

D

Dawn, The Bird of, <page 186>-<page 187>

Death. Idea of, <page 39>-<page 40>; of the gods, <page 99>

Deification. Origin of, <page 93>

Demon-s. Kuei general name for, <page 103>; of pestilence, subdued by the three musical brothers, <page 151>; [p. 433] Maruta, <page 198>; Asuras, <page 198>; exorcism of, <page 249>-<page 250>; Hsu Hao a, <page 249>-<page 250>; of the Lotus Cave, <page 345> sq.; Red Child Demon, <page 350> sq.; of Blackwater River, <page 352>; defeat of the Ox-demon, <page 359> sq.

Dependencies of China, <page 27>

Deva. General designation of the gods of Brahmanism, <page 120>, <page 198>

Dharma. Fa Pao, the Law, in Buddhism, <page 119>. See Vairotchana

Diamond Kings of Heaven, The Four. See Chin-kang

Dipper. See Great Bear

Distribution. Internal, <page 48>; external, <page 48>-<page 49>

Divine Archer. Shen I, or Ch'ih-chiang Tzu-yu, <page 180> sq.

Divine Husbandman. See Shen Nung

Divorce. Reasons for, <page 23>

Dog-s. Jung tribe with heads of, <page 20>; shooting the Heavenly, <page 177>-<page 178>; legend of Jung tribe, <page 419> sq.

Domestic Institutions. Marital, <page 22> sq.; filial, <page 25>-<page 26>; domestic customs and habits, <page 46>-<page 47>

Door-gods. See Men Shen

Dragon-s. Symbol of, on Manchu flag, <page 28>; P'an Ku with head of, <page 78>; Blue--see Blue Dragon; Feng Po, God of the Wind, <page 204>, <page 205>; are spirits of the waters, <page 208>; generally beneficent, <page 208>; essence of yang principle; evil dragons are Buddhist, <page 208>; nagas, mountain dragons, <page 208>; chief of the scaly reptiles, <page 208>; description and properties of, <page 208> sq.; Buddhist, <page 209>-<page 210>; feng-shui and, <page 209>; legend of the foolish, <page 211>-<page 212>; spirits in charge of Salt Waters, <page 212>; spirits in charge of Sweet Waters, <page 212>; spirits in charge of Secondary Waters, <page 212>; legend of Ch'in Shih Huang-ti and the, <page 212> sq.; Chang Tao-ling and the, <page 216>-<page 217>; Hsu Chen-chun and the, <page 222> sq.; a spiritual alligator, <page 223>-<page 224>; and drought in Peking, <page 232> sq.

Dragon-boat Festival. Origin and nature of, <page 44>, <page 152>

Dragon-king-s. The Sea-dragon Kings, the Chinese Neptunes; three daughters of, mothers of the San Kuan, <page 126>; description of, <page 210>-<page 211>, <page 212>; Ao Ch'in and the Eight Immortals, <page 214> sq.; legend of Dragon-king's daughter, <page 217> sq.; and Li No-cha, <page 307> sq.

Dragon-tiger Mountain. Abode of family of Chang Tao-ling, <page 142>

"Dream of the South Branch." Nan k'o meng, <page 410>; story of, <page 410> sq.

Dualism. In early cosmogony, <page 83>; I ching and, <page 84>; yin-yang system of, <page 85>; illustrated by pantheon, <page 93>

Du Bose. Cited, <page 98>-<page 99>

Duke of Thunder. See Lei Kung

  

E

Earlier Spirit Festival, <page 44>

Earth. Gods of the, <page 46>; the Earth-mother, <page 82>, <page 109>-<page 110>, <page 165>. See also Soil and Ti

Earth-dumb. Ti-ya, or Ti-mu, the Earth-mother; one of the attendants of Wen Ch'ang, <page 82>, <page 109>-<page 110>

Earth-mother. Ti-ya, Ti-mu, or Hou-t'u, <page 82>, <page 109>-<page 110>, <page 165>. See also Earth-dumb

Eastern Air, Sovereign of The, <page 136>-<page 137>

Eastern Palace. Residence of T'ai I, star-spirit, <page 143>

Ecclesiastical Institutions, <page 34> sq.

Education. Stereotyped at an early age, <page 37>; restricted to study of the classics, <page 37>; competitive examination system of, <page 37>, <page 38>; modern, <page 38>

Eight Immortals. See Pa Hsien

Eight Trigrams. See Pa Kua and Trigrams

Eighteen Provinces. China Proper, <page 27>

Elam. Probable origin of Chinese in, <page 15>, <page 17>

Elephant, White, <page 283>, <page 284>, <page 285>-<page 286>

Emperor-s. Yu Huang, the Jade Emperor, <page 130>, and see Yu Huang; 'Throne of the Five,' <page 176> [p. 434]

Emptiness and Devastation. Hsu Hao, a demon; exorcism of, <page 249>-<page 250>

Environments of the Chinese. Inorganic, <page 18>-<page 19>; organic, <page 19>-<page 20>; sociological, <page 20>-<page 21>

Epidemics. Gods of, <page 240> sq.; myths of, <page 240> sq.; Ministry of Seasonal, <page 240>-<page 241>; God of Epidemics afflicts Miao Chuang, <page 274>

Equinoxes. Festivals of the, <page 44>

Erh-lang. Helps to capture Sun Hou-tzu, <page 331>

Examinations. Literary, as means of appointment to office, <page 29>

Exchange. By barter, <page 49>; coins, <page 49>; weights and measures, <page 49>

Exorcism-ists. The wu, <page 34>; Ministry of, <page 248>; gods of, <page 248>-<page 249>; of 'Emptiness and Devastation,' <page 249>

Expectant Wife. Legend of the, <page 391>-<page 392>

Extinguisher. Sun Hou-tzu and the, <page 364>-<page 365>

  

F

Fa Pao. Dharma, the Law, one of the San Pao of Buddhism, <page 119>

Fan-s. Use of, <page 47>; the Fire-quenching, <page 359> sq.

Fanning the Grave. Story of Chuang Chou and the widow, <page 149>

Favourable-wind Ear. See Shun-feng Erh

Feast. Of Lanterns, <page 43>-<page 44>; of Peaches, P'an-t'ao Hui, <page 137>-<page 138>. See also Festival-s

Feathered People. Legend of, <page 390>

Fei, Lady. Concubine of Meng Ch'ang, <page 178>. See Hua-jui Fu-jen

Fei Lien. See Feng Po

Feng Hou. And Chuang Chou, <page 150>

Feng Lin. Vanquished by No-cha, <page 153>

Feng Po. God of the Wind; and Shen I, <page 181>, <page 204>-<page 205>; legend of, <page 204>-<page 205>; a stellar divinity, <page 204>; a dragon, Fei Lien, <page 181>, <page 204>-<page 205>

Feng Shen T'ai. Chiang Tzu-ya builds, for List of Promotions to Immortals, <page 154>, <page 157>

"Feng Shen Yen I." Legends in, <page 192> sq., <page 242>, <page 320> sq.

Feng-shan. Sacrifices offered on T'ai Shan by Ch'eng Tsung, <page 127>

Feng-shui, Doctrine of, <page 54>; dragons connected with, <page 209>

Festival-s, <page 43> sq.; Mid-autumn (All Souls' Day), <page 35>, <page 44>-<page 45>; New Year, <page 43>; of Lanterns, <page 43>-<page 44>; of the four seasons and their equinoxes and solstices, <page 44>; Earlier Spirit, <page 44>; of the Tombs, <page 44>; Middle Spirit, <page 44>; Later Spirit, <page 44>; Dragon-boat, <page 44>, <page 152>; Chung Yang (kite-flying), <page 45>; New Year's Eve, <page 45>

Feudal Period. Duration of, <page 18>; administrative system in, <page 28>-<page 29>; ecclesiastical institutions in, <page 34> sq.; professional institutions in, <page 36>; accessory institutions in, <page 37>

Feudal States. Subjugated by Ch'in, <page 27>

Finger-nails. Worn long by literary and leisured classes, <page 47>

Fire. Ch'ih Ching-tzu an alleged discoverer of, <page 199>; myths of, <page 236> sq.; Ministry of, <page 236>; God of, burns Hsi Ch'i, <page 236>-<page 237>; Ch'ih Ching-tzu a personification of, <page 237>; Ch'ih Ti, the Red Emperor, <page 237>-<page 238>; Hui Lu, <page 238>-<page 239>; Shen Nung, <page 239>; the Fire-quenching Fan, <page 359> sq.

Fire-quenching Fan, The Magic, <page 359> sq.

First Cause. Sung philosophers and, <page 85>-<page 86>; Mencius and, <page 90>

Five Elements (wu hsing), <page 84>

Five Graduates. Legend of the, <page 242> sq.; gain favour of the Emperor, <page 243>; and Chang T'ien-shih, <page 244>-<page 245>; killed, <page 244>; their spirits appear at the palace, <page 244>-<page 245>; canonized, <page 246>

Flag. Republican, <page 28>; dragon-symbol on Manchu, <page 28>

Flood, Legend of the Great, <page 224>-<page 225>

Flowers. Chinese love for, <page 51>

Flying Cart, Land of the, <page 391>

Fo Pao. Buddha, one of the San Pao of Buddhism, <page 119>

Food. Kinds of, <page 58>

Foot-binding. Origin of, <page 39>; abolition of, <page 39> [p. 435]

Form. See Hsing

Formosa. A Chinese possession, <page 27>; annexed by Japan, <page 27>

Foxes. Legends of, <page 370> sq.; generally of ill omen, <page 370>; powers of, <page 370>; transformations of, <page 370>

Fu Hsi, or T'ien Huang Shih. Mythical sovereign; brother of Nu Kua, <page 81>, <page 82>; creator of human beings, <page 239>, <page 247>-<page 248>; a God of Medicine, <page 247>-<page 248>

Fu Shen, Yang Ch'eng, or Yang Hsi-chi. The God of Happiness, <page 165>, <page 169>-<page 170>; origin of, <page 169>; other Gods of Happiness, <page 170>

Fu-sang Tree. One which grows at the place where the sun rises, <page 186>-<page 187>

Funeral Rites, <page 39> sq.; the idea of death, <page 39>; recalling the soul, <page 39>-<page 40>; feeding the corpse, <page 40>; the soul-tablet, <page 40>; signs of mourning, <page 40>; exacting nature of ceremonial, <page 41>; cemeteries, <page 41>

  

G

Games, <page 45>-<page 46>

Gardens, <page 47>, <page 51>

Garuda. See Lei Kung

Gems, Lake Of. Yao Ch'ih, <page 137>

Generalissimo-s. Canonized, <page 150> sq.; the three musical brothers, T'ien Chih-piao, T'ien Yuan-shuai, and T'ien Hung-i, <page 151>; Chiang Tzu-ya, <page 152> sq.

Genii. Hsi Wang Mu head of the, on K'un-lun Mountains, <page 137>

Gentry. Shen Shih; a social division, <page 28>

Geological Features, <page 19>

Giants. Legends of, <page 387>

God-s. Of China, <page 93> sq.; amuse themselves, <page 99>; marry, <page 99>; sin, <page 99>; punishment of the, <page 99>; die, <page 99>; super-triad of, <page 100>-<page 101>; Confucius not a, <page 102> sq.; shen general name for, <page 103>; stellar deities, <page 176> sq., <page 242>; constellations, planets, and stars abodes of, <page 192>; dragons, <page 208> sq.; battle of the, <page 320> sq.; of Agriculture, <page 165>; of the City, <page 165>; of the Cycles, <page 177>; of the Door, <page 165>, <page 172> sq.; of Epidemics, <page 240> sq., <page 274>; of Exorcism, <page 248> sq.; of Fire, <page 236> sq.; the 'Five Mountains,' <page 242>; of Grasshoppers, <page 165>; of Hades, <page 120>; of Happiness, <page 165>, <page 169>-<page 170>, <page 177>; of the Immortals, <page 136>; of the Kitchen, <page 45>, <page 128>, <page 165>, <page 166> sq.; of Literature, <page 104> sq., <page 177>, <page 299>; local, t'u-ti, <page 165>; of Longevity, <page 165>, <page 171>-<page 172>, <page 177>; of Longevity and the Eight Immortals, <page 214> sq.; of Medicine, <page 247>-<page 248>; chief God of Rivers, <page 218>-<page 219>; River-god, marriage of the, <page 225> sq.; of Sailors, <page 165>; of Serpents, <page 165>; of Smallpox, <page 175>; of the Soil and Crops, <page 165>; of Thunder, <page 128>, <page 198> sq.; of Time, <page 194> sq.; of War, <page 113> sq.; of the Waters, <page 208> sq.; of Wealth, <page 165>, <page 170>-<page 171>; of the Wind, <page 204>-<page 205>; of the Year, <page 194>; names of numerous, <page 174>-<page 175>

Goddess-es. Earth-mother, <page 82>, <page 109>-<page 110>, <page 165>; of Lightning, <page 203>; of Mercy, <page 251> sq., and see also Kuan Yin; of Mulberry-trees and Silkworms, <page 168>-<page 169>; of the North Star, <page 144>-<page 145>; of Sailors, <page 165>; Old Mother of the Waters, <page 220> sq.; names of various, <page 174>-<page 175>

Golden Big Pint. See Chin Ta-sheng

Golden Cuirass, Mr. See Chin Chia

Golden Mother of the Tortoise, <page 136>

Golden-bearded Turtle. And Chun T'i, <page 324>

Gourd, The Magic, <page 347>

Government. General, <page 29> sq.; local, small scope of, <page 32>

Graduates. Legend of the five, <page 242> sq.

Grand Terminus, or Great Ultimate, <page 85>

Grasshoppers, God of, <page 165>

Grave, Fanning the. Story of Chuang Chou and the widow, <page 149>

Great Bear. Constellation; Wen Ch'ang and the, <page 105> sq.; the residence of the Fates, <page 176>

Great Bell, Casting of the. Legend of the, <page 394> sq.

Great Ultimate, or Grand Terminus, <page 85> [p. 436]

Green Lion. In Kuan Yin legend, <page 283>-<page 284>, <page 285>-<page 286>

Guardian-s. Of Buddhist temple gates, <page 145>-<page 146>; of Taoist temple gates, <page 146> sq.; of Gate of Heaven, <page 305> sq.

Guardianship. Of the young, <page 26>

  

H

Ha. The Blower. See Ch'en Ch'i

Habitations. In early times, <page 57>; development of, <page 57>-<page 58>

Habits and Customs. Festivals and holidays, <page 43>-<page 44>; domestic, <page 46>-<page 47>

Hades. The God of, <page 120>

Han. Early monarchical dynasty, <page 27>

Han Chih-hsien. Fights for Wen Chung, <page 159>-<page 160>

Han Hsiang Tzu. One of the Eight Immortals, <page 215>, <page 303>; legend of, <page 299>-<page 300>

Han Yu, Statesman, philosopher, and poet; and Han Hsiang Tzu, <page 299>-<page 300>

Happiness. The term 'Eight Immortals' figuratively used for, <page 288>; Gods of--see Fu Shen, Kuo Tzu-i, and Li Kuei-tsu

Hare in Moon, <page 176>, <page 179>

Head-splitting Helmet, <page 325>-<page 326>, <page 368>-<page 369>

Headless People. Legend of, <page 387>-<page 388>

Heaven-s. Repair of the, <page 72>, <page 81>-<page 82>, <page 224>-<page 225>; Temple of, <page 95>; Taoist Kings of, <page 142>; Mother of, <page 150>; Guardian of the Gate of, <page 305> sq.

Heaven-deaf. T'ien-lung, or Hsuan T'ung-tzu, one of the attendants of Wen Ch'ang, <page 82>, <page 109>-<page 110>

Heavenly Dog. Tien Kou; legend of Chang Hsien and the, <page 177>-<page 178>; and Sun Hou-tzu, <page 331>

Heavenly Peach-garden, <page 329>-<page 330>

Heavenly Stables, <page 329>

Heavenly Teacher. See Chang Tao-ling

Hell-s. Kings of, <page 120>, <page 267>-<page 268>

Heng. The Snorter. See Cheng Lung

Heng O. See Ch'ang O

Herdsman. Legend of the Weaver-girl and the, <page 189> sq.

Heroes. See Chen-jen

"Hill and River Classic." See Shan Hai Ching

Hindu Kush Mountains. K'un-lun Mountains identified with, <page 16>

History. Summary of political, of China, <page 27>-<page 28>; mythology and, <page 63>

Ho Feng. Marries Miao Yin, <page 258>; conspires against Miao Chuang, <page 277> sq.

Ho Hsien-ku. One of the Eight Immortals; and T'ai Sui <page 195>; legend of, <page 296>-<page 297>; mentioned, <page 293>, <page 303>

Ho Li. Conspires against Miao Chuang, <page 278>-<page 279>

Ho Po. The Spirit of the Waters; Heng O his younger sister, <page 182>

Holidays. Observed at certain seasons, <page 43>

Horse, The White, <page 340>-<page 341>

Hou-t'u, Ti-ya, or Ti-mu. Earth-mother, <page 82>, <page 109>-<page 110>, <page 165>

Hsi Ch'i. Town and mountain; Teng Chiu-kung and battle at, <page 147>; burned by Fire-god, <page 236>-<page 237>; Lu Yueh in battle at, <page 241>

Hsi Wang Mu. Golden Mother of the Tortoise; her story first mentioned, <page 72>; her names, <page 136>; sovereign of the Western Air, <page 137>; head of the genii dwelling on the K'un-lun Mountains, <page 137>; and Feast of Peaches (P'an-t'ao Hui), <page 137>-<page 138>; her palace, <page 137>; her birthdays, <page 138>; and Li T'ieh-kuai, <page 289>

Hsi Yu. Miao Chuang kinglet of, <page 253>

"Hsi Yu Chi." Record of a journey to the Western Paradise; a dramatization of the introduction of Buddhism into China, <page 325>-<page 326>, <page 341>

Hsi-men Pao. Magistrate of Yeh Hsien; and marriage of the River-god, <page 226>-<page 227>

Hsiang Shan. Monastery inhabited by Immortals; Miao Shan goes to, <page 266> sq.

Hsien, or Hsien-jen. Immortals, <page 125>, <page 135>; yin and yang and, <page 135> [p. 437]

Hsien Tung. 'The Immortal Youth'; servant to Mu Kung, <page 136>

Hsien Weng. See Shou Hsing

Hsien-yuan Huang-ti. Mythical emperor; Chu Jung his minister, <page 81>, <page 238>, <page 239>; T'ai I his medical preceptor, <page 143>; and the Door-gods, <page 173>; instructed in doctrine of immortality, <page 179>-<page 180>; God of Medicine, <page 247>; mentioned, <page 167>

Hsing. Form; beginning of, <page 90>

Hsing Lin. Kingdom of Miao Chuang, <page 253>, <page 280>, <page 282>

"Hsiu Hsiang Pa Hsien Tung Yu Chi," <page 289>

Hsu Chen-chun, or Hsu Sun. The dragon-slayer, <page 222> sq.

Hsu Hao. A demon; exorcism of, <page 249>-<page 250>

Hsu Sun. See Hsu Chen-chun

Hsu-mi Shan. See Sumeru

Hsuan Chuang. Also called Yuan Chuang and T'ang Seng; the pilgrim of the Hsi yu chi, <page 325>; Sha Ho-shang his baggage-coolie, <page 334>-<page 335>; history of, <page 336> sq.; his father murdered by Liu Hung, <page 336>-<page 337>; exposed on Blue River, <page 337>; Chang Lao rescues him, <page 337>-<page 338>; named Chiang Liu, 'Waif of the River,' <page 337>; finds his grandmother, <page 338>-<page 339>; murderer of his father executed, <page 339>; becomes the Emperor's favourite priest, <page 340>; journeys to the Western Paradise, <page 340>, <page 341> sq.; and the White Horse, <page 340>-<page 341>; is rescued by Ju Lai, <page 358>-<page 359>; his return home, <page 367> sq.; canonized, <page 368>. See also Ch'en Kuang-jui

Hsuan Nu, or T'ien Mu. The Mother of Heaven; and Chuang Chou, <page 150>

Hsuan Tsung. Emperor; and Chang Kuo, <page 294>-<page 295>

Hsuan T'ung-tzu. 'Sombre Youth.' See Heaven-deaf

Hsuan-hsuan Shang-jen. Relates history of Yuan-shih T'ien-wang, <page 129>-<page 130>

Hu Ching-te. A Door-god, <page 173>-<page 174>. See Men Shen

Hu Pi-li. Chief of the guard of Miao Chuang; sent to burn Nunnery of the White Bird, <page 264>-<page 265>; at the execution of Miao Shan, <page 266>-<page 267>

Hua Shan. A sacred mountain in the west, <page 253>

Hua-hu Tiao. The white rat of Mo-li Shou, <page 121>; devours Yang Chien, <page 122>-<page 123>

Hua-jui Fu-jen, or Lady Fei. And Chang Hsien, <page 178>

Hua-kuo Shan. A mountain in the kingdom of Ao-lai; Sun Hou-tzu born on, <page 326>-<page 327>

Huai-an. Kingdom; Ch'un-yu Fen in, <page 411> sq.

Huai-nan Tzu. A philosopher; apotheosized, <page 148>; and the Eight Immortals, <page 148>

Huang Fei-hu. Yellow Flying Tiger, <page 122>, <page 146>; spears the Blower, <page 146>; and Spirit of the Blue Dragon Star, <page 147>; father of Huang T'ien-hua, <page 241>

Huang Lao. A genie; seeks Yuan-shih T'ien-wang, <page 129>

Huang Ti. See Hsien-yuan Huang-ti

Huang T'ien-hua. Son of Huang Fei-hu; in battle with the Chin-kang, <page 123>; attacks Wen Chung, <page 159>; in battle with Lu Yueh, <page 241>

Hui Lu, or Huo-shih Chih T'u. God of Fire, <page 238>-<page 239>

Hui Tsung. Emperor, <page 132>

Hun Tun. See Chaos

Hung Wu. Emperor; greatness of, <page 227>; father of Chu-ti, <page 228>. See also Chu-ti, Prince

Hung-chun Lao-tsu. Master of T'ung-t'ien Chiao-chu, <page 133>-<page 134>

Huo Ti. See Shen Nung

Huo-te Hsing-chun. See Lo Hsuan

  

I

"I Ching." The Book or Canon of Changes or Permutations; first, but not the oldest, of the classics, <page 80>, <page 84>, <page 85>; reputed origin of, <page 84>; Fu Hsi and, <page 84>; contains no cosmogony proper, <page 84>, <page 92>

I Tu. The Solitary Indeterminate; makes evolution of Chaos possible, <page 90>-<page 91>; tao and, <page 90>-<page 91> [p. 438]

I Yu. Superior of Nunnery of the White Bird, <page 261>-<page 262>, <page 263>

Ideograms, Ancient Chinese, <page 14>

Immaterial Principle. See LI

Immortal-s. Hsien, or Hsien-jen, <page 125>, <page 135>; God of the, <page 136>; the Eight--see Pa Hsien; the Eight, and the God of Longevity, <page 214>. See also Hsien

Immortality, Pills of. See Pills

Imperfect Mountain. Kung Kung strikes his head against the, <page 81>

Implements. Great variety of Chinese, <page 59>

Indo-China. Supposed origin of Chinese in, <page 14>; language of, <page 14>; early tribes in, <page 15>

Indra. The God of Heaven; and Yu Huang, <page 133>

Industrial Institutions, <page 47>

  

J

Jade. Symbol of purity; the Jade Emperor, <page 130>

Jade Palace of Abstraction, <page 154>, <page 155>

Jan-teng Fo, or Jan Teng. Light-lamp Buddha, <page 120>; and Chiang Tzu-ya, <page 158>; revives Wu Wang, <page 159>; and T'ai Sui, <page 196>; mentioned, <page 161>

Jan-teng Tao-jen. Fights with T'ung-t'ien Chiao-chu, <page 134>

Jen Huang. The nine Human Sovereigns, <page 144>, <page 145>

Jen Tsung. Emperor; and worship of Chang Hsien, <page 178>

"Jih Chi So Chih," <page 422> n.

Jointed Snake. Legend of the, <page 393>

Ju Chiao. See Confucianism

Ju-i. 'As you wish'; precious stone, <page 134>

Ju-lai Fo. Chinese translation of Tathagata, the highest epithet of a Buddha, literally 'thus come': "bringing human nature as it really is, with perfect knowledge and high intelligence, he comes and manifests himself"; in the myth of P'an Ku, <page 78>; and Miao Shan (Kuan Yin), <page 269>-<page 270>; rescues Hsuan Chuang, <page 358>-<page 359>

Jung. Tribe with heads of dogs, <page 20>; legend of, <page 419> sq.

Jupiter. Yu Huang the Chinese, <page 130>; given as a kingdom to Chuang Chou by Shang Ti, <page 150>; and T'ai Sui, <page 194>

  

K

Kalpa. A period during which a physical universe is formed and destroyed, <page 128>

K'ang Hsi. Emperor; and Wang Tan, <page 131>-<page 132>

Kao Chio. See Shun-feng Erh

Kao Ming. See Ch'ien-li Yen

Khotan. Supposed origin of the Chinese in, <page 13>, <page 15>, <page 17>

King-s. Multiple character of kingship, <page 28>; the king the source of legislation and the administrator of justice, <page 29>; king as high priest, <page 34>-<page 35>; King of Hell, <page 120>; the Four, of Heaven, <page 142>; Four, of the Salt Waters, <page 212>; Four, of the Sweet Waters, <page 212>; as Gods of Medicine, <page 247>-<page 248>; the Dragon-kings, see Dragon-king-s

Kingdom, The Women's, <page 390>-<page 391>

Kitchen-god. See Tsao Chun

Kite-flying. Season of, <page 45>

Knowledge, <page 54> sq.

Ko Hung. Author of Shen hsien chuan; inventor of P'an Ku legend, <page 79>, <page 80>

Ko-ai. Daughter of Kuan Yu; and the casting of the great bell of Peking, <page 396> sq.

Ku, Mr. And the fox-girl, <page 376> sq.

Kua. Brother of Nu; at foot of K'un-lun Mountains, <page 82>

Kuan Chung. And Pao Shu, the Chinese types of friendship, <page 383> and n.

Kuan Lo. His connexion with Shou Hsing, <page 172>

Kuan Ti, or Wu Ti. Title of the God of War, <page 117>

Kuan Tzu. A renowned statesman and sage of the Feudal Period; his cosmogony, <page 80>

Kuan Yin, or Kuan Shih Yin. The Buddhist Goddess of Mercy; Tou Mu the equivalent of, in [p. 439] Taoism, <page 144>; and Shui-mu Niang-niang, <page 221>-<page 222>; attributes, etc., <page 251> sq.; throne of, on Pootoo (P'u T'o) Isle, <page 252>; the Buddhist Saviour, <page 252>-<page 253>; and Sun Hou-tzu, <page 333>; and Sha Ho-shang, <page 334>; and Chu Pa-chieh, <page 335>; and the White Horse, <page 340>-<page 341>; and the Red Child Demon, <page 350> sq. See also Miao Shan

Kuan Yu. God of War, <page 113> sq.; and Chang Fei, <page 114> sq.; and Liu Pei, <page 114> sq.; deified, <page 117>

Kuan Yu. A mandarin; and the casting of the great bell at Peking, <page 394> sq.

Kuang Ch'eng-tzu. Mythical being who taught the attainment of immortality, also said to be an incarnation of Lao Tzu; battle with To-pao Tao-jen, <page 133>; fights against Wen Chung, <page 161>

Kuei. Name for demons, <page 103>

K'uei. A star; palace of the God of Literature, <page 106> sq.

K'uei, or Chung K'uei. As God of Literature, <page 106> sq.; as God of Exorcism, <page 248>, <page 249>-<page 250>

K'uei Hsing. Distributor of literary degrees, <page 109>, <page 110>, <page 112>

K'uei Niu. A monster resembling a buffalo, <page 133>

K'un-lun Mountains. Supposed origin of the Chinese in, <page 13>, <page 16>; Nu and Kua at foot of, <page 82>; Hsi Wang Mu and, <page 137>; Yu Shih resides in, <page 206>

Kung. The Artisans; the third class of the people, <page 28>

K'ung Hsuan. The one-eyed peacock; and Chun T'i, <page 320>-<page 321>

Kung Kung. A feudatory prince; defeated by Chu Jung, <page 81>; strikes his head against the Imperfect Mountain, <page 81>-<page 82>

Kuo P'o. Magician, <page 223>

Kuo Tzu-i. A God of Happiness, <page 170>

  

L

La Mei. A flower; the three musical brothers and, <page 151>

Labour. Division of, <page 47>-<page 48>

Lake. Of Gems, <page 137>; legend of the origin of a, <page 405>-<page 406>

Lan Ts'ai-ho. One of the Eight Immortals, <page 214>, <page 303>; legend of, <page 293>

Land. System of tenure of, <page 48>; greater portion under cultivation, <page 49>-<page 50>

Lang Ling. Disciple of Li T'ieh-kuai, <page 289>, <page 290>

Language, Chinese, <page 14>; nature of, <page 56>-<page 57>; written, <page 57>

Lanterns, Feast of, <page 43>-<page 44>

Lao Chun. See Lao Tzu

Lao Tzu. Called also Lao Chun, T'ai-shang Lao-chun, and Shen Pao; teacher, founder of Taoist system of philosophy; and monism, <page 87>; his Tao-te ching, <page 87>; and tao, the 'Way,' <page 87>-<page 88>; third person of Taoist triad, <page 125>; and Yu Huang, <page 132>; battles with T'ung-t'ien Chiao-chu, <page 133>, <page 321>-<page 322>; and Chuang Tzu, <page 148>-<page 149>; fights with Ch'iung Hsiao, <page 158>; and Li T'ieh-kuai, <page 289>, <page 290>; Sun Hou-tzu steals pills of immortality from, <page 330>; helps to capture Sun Hou-tzu, <page 331>-<page 332>; distils Sun Hou-tzu in his furnace, <page 331>-<page 332>

Later Spirit Festival, <page 44>

Law, The. In Buddhism, <page 149>

Laws. Character of early, <page 30>; lex talionis, <page 30>; legal codes, <page 30>-<page 31>

Legend-s. Mythology and, <page 74>-<page 75>; of the One-legged Bird, <page 206>-<page 207>; of the Great Flood, <page 224>-<page 225>; of the building of Peking, <page 227> sq.; fox, <page 370> sq.; of the Unnatural People, <page 386> sq.; of the Pygmies, <page 386>-<page 387>; of the Giants, <page 387>; of the Headless People, <page 387>-<page 388>; of the Armless People, <page 388>; of the Long-armed People, <page 388>-<page 389>; of the Long-legged People, <page 389>; of the One-eyed People, <page 389>; of the One-armed People, <page 389>, <page 391>; of the One-legged People, <page 389>; of the One-sided People, <page 389>; of the Long-eared People, <page 389>; of the Six-toed People, <page 389>; of the Feathered People, <page 390>; of the People of the Punctured Bodies, <page 390>; of the Women's Kingdom, <page 390>-<page 391>; of the Flying Cart, [p. 440] 391; of the Expectant Wife, <page 391>-<page 392>; of the Wild Men, <page 392>-<page 393>; of the Jointed Snake, <page 393>; of the great bell of Peking, <page 394> sq.; of the Cursed Temple, <page 398> sq.; of the Maniac's Mite, <page 401>-<page 402>; of the City-god of Yen Ch'eng, <page 402> sq.; of the origin of a lake, <page 405>-<page 406>; of creation, among Miao tribes, <page 406> sq.; of the South Branch, <page 410> sq.; of Jung tribe with heads of dogs, <page 419> sq.

Lei Chen-tzu. One of Wu Wang's marshals; attacks Ch'ien-li Yen and Shun-feng Erh, <page 164>; kills unicorn of Wen Chung, <page 199>; legend of, <page 202>-<page 203>; a Son of Thunder, <page 202>; called Wen Yu, <page 202>; and Yun Chung-tzu, <page 202>-<page 203>

Lei Kung. Duke of Thunder, <page 198>, <page 199>-<page 200>; and Garuda, <page 200>; and Vajrapani, <page 200>; caught in the cleft of a tree, <page 200>-<page 201>; and the mysterious bottle, <page 202>

Lei Tsu, or Wen Chung. God of Thunder; agent to Yuan-shih T'ien-tsun, <page 128>; President of the Ministry of Thunder, <page 198>-<page 199>; description of, <page 198>; origin of, <page 198>-<page 199>; and Ch'ih Ching-tzu, <page 199>; and Yun Chung-tzu, <page 199>; and Chiang Tzu-ya, <page 199>; confused with the Spirit of Thunder, <page 199>

Li. The Immaterial Principle; Chu Hsi and, <page 86>-<page 87>; Chou Tzu and, <page 87>

"Li Chi." The classical Book of Ceremonial, <page 103>

Li Chin-cha. Eldest son of Li Ching, <page 305>

Li Ching, or Li T'ien-wang. The Pagoda-bearer; his encounter with Ch'ien-li Yen and Shun-feng Erh, <page 162> sq.; kills Lo Hsuan, <page 237>; legend of, <page 305> sq.; receives golden pagoda, <page 319>; is made Guardian of the Gate of Heaven, <page 319>. See also Li T'ien-wang

Li Kuei-tsu. Known as Tseng-fu Hsiang-kung; a God of Happiness, <page 170>

Li Lao-chun. And Shui-mu Niang-niang, <page 221>

Li Mu-cha. Second son of Li Ching, <page 305>, <page 317>; duel with Lu Yuen, <page 241>

Li No-cha. Third son of Li Ching; defends the Chou, <page 146>; and Teng Chiu-kung, <page 147>; vanquishes Feng Lin, <page 153>; defeats Chang Kuei-fang, <page 153>-<page 154>; and Chiang Tsu-ya, <page 154>; fights and slays Ts'ai-yun Hsien-tzu, <page 159>-<page 160>; fights with Ch'ien-li Yen and Shun-feng Erh, <page 162>; and Peking, <page 229>; legend of, <page 305> sq.; frequently mentioned in Chinese romance, <page 305>; an avatar of the Intelligent Pearl, <page 306>; and Lung Wang, <page 307> sq.; and Ao Ping, <page 308>-<page 309>; discharges a magic arrow, <page 312>; and Shih-chi Niang-niang, <page 312>-<page 313>; commits hara-kiri, <page 313>-<page 314>; temple built to, <page 314>; his statue destroyed by his father, <page 315>; consults his master, <page 316>; is transformed, <page 316>-<page 317>; battles with his father, <page 317> sq.; is reconciled to his father, <page 318>-<page 319>

Li P'ing. Sixth officer of the Ministry of Epidemics, <page 242>

Li Shao-chun. And Tsao Chun, <page 166>-<page 167>

Li Shih-min, Emperor; and legend of the five graduates, <page 243> sq.; and Chang T'ien-shih, <page 243> sq.; visited by spirits of the graduates, <page 245>-<page 246>; canonizes the graduates, <page 246>

Li T'ieh-kuai. One of the Eight Immortals, <page 214>, <page 303>; legends of, <page 289> sq.

Li T'ien-wang. And Sun Hou-tzu, <page 331>. See also Li Ching

"Liao Chai Chih I." Seventeenth-century work; and fox-legends, <page 370>-<page 371>

Libraries. See Accessory Institutions

Lieh Tzu, or Lieh Yu-k'ou. A philosopher, by some regarded as fictitious; Chinese mythology and, <page 72>; his Absolute, <page 90>-<page 91>; apotheosized, <page 148>

Lieh Yu-k'ou. See Lieh Tzu

Lightning. Mother of, <page 203>; and the yin and the yang, <page 203>-<page 204>; myths of, <page 203>-<page 204>; Spirit of, <page 203>-<page 204>

Ling Chen-tzu. Gives the Bird of Dawn to Shen I, <page 187>

Ling Hsu. Dragon-king, <page 218>-<page 219> [p. 441]

Ling-pao T'ien-tsun, or Tao Chun. Second person of Taoist triad, <page 124>

Lion, The Green, <page 283>, <page 284>, <page 285>-<page 286>

List of Promotions to Immortals. Given to Chiang Tzu-ya, <page 154>; Tzu-ya builds Feng Shen T'ai for, <page 154>, <page 157>

Literary Degrees. K'uei Hsing distributor of, <page 110>

Literary Examinations. Means of appointment to office, <page 29>

Literature. Gods of, <page 104> sq., <page 299>; Wen Ch'ang and the Great Bear, <page 105> sq.; palace of God of, <page 106>; God of War as God of, <page 113> sq.; Chinese, <page 408> sq.

Liu Ch'in. Minister of Miao Chuang, <page 277>, <page 279>-<page 280>, <page 282>

Liu Hsuan Te. See Liu Pei

Liu Hung. Murderer of Ch'en Kuang-jui, <page 336>-<page 337>

Liu I. And the Dragon-king's daughter, <page 217> sq.

Liu Pei, Liu Hsuan Te, or Hsien Chu. Hawker of straw shoes, and founder of the Shu Han dynasty; and Kuan Yu, <page 114> sq.

Liu Po-wen. Taoist priest; and Chu-ti, <page 228> sq.

Living, Worship of the, <page 101>

Lo Ching Hsin. See Yuan-shih T'ien-tsun

Lo Hsuan, or Huo-te Hsing-chun. Originally Yen-chung Hsien; President of the Ministry of Fire, <page 236>-<page 237>; description of, <page 236>; burns Hsi Ch'i, <page 236>-<page 237>

Lo Yu. First name of P'o Chia (Miao Chuang), <page 253>

Long-armed People. Legend of, <page 388>-<page 389>

Long-eared People. Legend of, <page 389>

Long-legged People. Legend of, <page 389>

Longevity, God of. See Shou Hsing

Lotus Cave, The, <page 345> sq.

Lu Ch'i. Legend of, and Princess T'ai Yin, <page 110>-<page 111>; appointed Minister of the Empire, <page 111>

Lu Shang. See Chiang Tzu-ya

Lu Tung-pin, or Lu Yen. One of the Eight Immortals, <page 288>, <page 292>,296, <page 300>, <page 301>, <page 303>; legends of, <page 297> sq.

Lu Tung-shih. Follower of Ch'in Shih Huang-ti; draws portrait of the God of the Sea, <page 213>; results of his offence, <page 214>

Lu Yueh. President of the Ministry of Epidemics, <page 241>; legend of, <page 241>-<page 242>; in battle at Hsi Ch'i <page 241>; his duel with Mu-cha, <page 241>; in battle with Huang T'ien-hua <page 241>; Chiang Tzu-ya and, <page 241>; and the magic umbrellas, <page 241>-<page 242>; Yang Chien and, <page 242>; Yang Jen and, <page 242>

Lu Yen. See Lu Tung-pin

Lung Chi. Princess; saves city of Hsi Ch'i from fire, <page 237>

Lung Nu. Becomes pupil of Miao Shan, <page 274>; canonized, <page 287>

Lung Wang. Dragon-king of the Eastern Sea; his son saved by Miao Shan, <page 273>-<page 274>; and No-cha, <page 307> sq.; and Sun Hou-tzu, <page 328>-<page 329>; saves Ch'Sn Kuang-jui, <page 339>-<page 340>

  

M

Ma T'ien-jung. His fox-friend and his marriage, <page 372> sq.

Ma Yuan-shuai. Generalissimo Ma, a three-eyed monster, <page 207>

Ma-t'ou Niang. 'Lady with the Horse's Head,' See Ts'an Nu

Magic. Gourd, <page 347>; rope, <page 348>; circle, <page 357>-<page 358>; Fire-quenching Fan, <page 359> sq.

Magicians. T'u Hsing-sun, <page 147>; Chu Liu-sun, <page 147>; Kuo P'o, <page 223>; Yang Jen, <page 242>; Yeh Fa-shan, <page 294>-<page 295>

Mahayanistic Buddhism, <page 118>

Maitreya. Mi-lo Fo; the successor of Shakyamuni, <page 120>

Manchu-s. Extent of China at time of conquest by, <page 18>; conquer China, <page 28>; symbol of dragon on flag, <page 28>

Manchuria. As part of China, <page 27>

Maniac's Mite. Legend of the, <page 401>-<page 402>

Mao Erh-chieh. Chu Pa-chieh and, <page 335>

Maritchi. See Tou Mu [p. 442]

Marriage, <page 22> sq.; concubinage, <page 22>-<page 23>; age for, <page 23>; matchmaker or go-between, <page 23>; divorce, <page 23>; remarriage, <page 23>-<page 24>; changes in ceremonial of, <page 24>-<page 25>; object of, <page 24>; of the gods, <page 99>; of the River-god, <page 225> sq.

Maruta. Vedic storm-demons, <page 198>

Measures, Weights and, <page 49>

Medicine. Primitive knowledge of, <page 55>-<page 56>; Ministry of, <page 246>-<page 247>; Gods of, <page 247>-<page 248>

Men Shen. Gods of the Door, <page 165>, <page 172> sq.; legend of, <page 172> sq.; Shen Shu and Yu Lu as, <page 173>; Ch'in Shu-pao and Hu Ching-te as, <page 173>-<page 174>; Wei Cheng and, <page 174>

Mencius, Meng K'o, or Meng Tzu. Teacher and philosopher; his cosmogony, <page 80>; and the First Cause, <page 90>

Meng K'o. See Mencius

Meng Tzu. See Mencius

Merchants. Shang; the fourth class of the people, <page 28>

Mercy, Goddess of. See Kuan Yin and Miao Shan

Mi-lo. A river; Ch'u Yuan drowns himself in, <page 152>

Mi-lo Fo. Maitreya; the successor of Shakyamuni, <page 120>

Miao. Creation legends of the, <page 406> sq.; legend of the tailed tribes, <page 422> n.

Miao Chi. A Taoist priest; and T'ai I, <page 142>-<page 143>

Miao Ch'ing. Daughter of Miao Chuang, <page 257>; marries Chao K'uei, <page 258>; canonized, <page 286>

Miao Chuang, or P'o Chia. First name Lo Yu; kinglet of Hsi Yu, <page 253>; Hsing Lin kingdom of, <page 253>; Chao Chen minister to, <page 253>; Ch'u Chieh general to, <page 253>; Pao Te (Po Ya) Queen of, <page 253>; prays for a son, <page 253>-<page 254>; birth of daughters to, <page 256>-<page 257>; exiles Miao Shan, <page 260>; orders destruction of the Nunnery of the White Bird, <page 264>; orders death of Miao Shan, <page 265> sq.; is punished for burning the nunnery, <page 274> sq.; is healed by Miao Shan, <page 276> sq.; conspiracy against, <page 277> sq.; goes to Hsiang Shan, <page 283>; his repentance, <page 284> sq.; canonized, <page 287>

Miao Shan, Daughter of Miao Chuang, <page 257>; her ambition, <page 257>-<page 258>; her renunciation, <page 258> sq.; at the Nunnery of the White Bird, <page 261> sq.; worships Buddha, <page 262>; receives spiritual aid, <page 262>-<page 263>; saves the nunnery, <page 264>; her execution ordered, <page 265> sq.; visits the infernal regions, <page 267>-<page 268>; makes Hell a paradise, <page 268>; her virtue is tested, <page 269>; and Ju Lai, <page 269>-<page 270>; attains to perfection, <page 271>; becomes a Buddha, <page 271>, <page 286>; and Shan Ts'ai, <page 271> sq.; tests Shan Ts'ai's fidelity, <page 272>-<page 273>; sends help to son of Lung Wang, <page 273>-<page 274>; disguises herself as a priest-doctor, <page 275> sq.; suffers in order that her father may be cured, <page 277>, <page 279> sq.; defeats conspiracy of the King's sons-in-law, <page 278>-<page 279>. See also Kuan Yin

Miao Yin. Daughter of Miao Chuang, <page 257>; marries Ho Feng, <page 258>; canonized, <page 286>

Mid-autumn Festival (All Souls'-Day), <page 35>, <page 44>-<page 45>

Middle Kingdom. A term for the Chinese Empire, <page 29>

Middle Spirit Festival, <page 44>

Military System. In primitive times, <page 32>-<page 33>; in relation to the ruler, <page 33>; weapons, <page 33>; standing armies, <page 33>; changes in, <page 33>-<page 34>

Ministry-ies. Of Agriculture, <page 50>-<page 51>; celestial, <page 164>, <page 198>-<page 199>; of Epidemics, <page 240>-<page 241>; of Exorcism, <page 248>; of Fire, <page 236>; of Medicine, <page 246>-<page 247>; of Smallpox, <page 246>-<page 247>; of Thunder and Storms, <page 198>; of Time, <page 194>; of Waters, <page 212>

Ming Huang. Emperor; and Hsu Hao, <page 249>-<page 250>

Mo Ti. See Mo Tzu

Mo Tzu, Mu Tzu, or Mo Ti A philosopher; and creation, <page 89>-<page 90>; apotheosized, <page 148>

Mo-li. The Four Diamond Kings of Heaven, <page 120> sq.

Mohammedans. Represented in Chinese Republican flag, <page 28>

Monarchical Period. Duration of, <page 18>; marriage in, <page 24>; establishment of, <page 27>; administrative system in, <page 29>; appointment to [p. 443] office in, <page 29>; funeral rites in, <page 40>-<page 41>

Mongolia. A dependency of China, <page 27>

Mongols. Their rule over China, <page 21>

Monism. Transition to, from dualism, <page 85>-<page 86>; Chu Hsi and, <page 86>-<page 87>; Lao Tzu and, <page 87>-<page 88>

Monkey. Becomes a god, <page 325> sq.

Monogamy. In China, <page 22>-<page 23>

Moon. P'an Ku and the, <page 77>-<page 78>; influences terrestrial events, <page 176>; symbol of the, <page 176>; hare in the, <page 176>, <page 179>; worship of the, <page 176>; Shen I visits the, <page 187>-<page 188>

Moon-queen. See Ch'ang O

Mother. The Earth-mother, <page 82>, <page 109>-<page 110>, <page 165>; Golden, of the Tortoise, <page 136>; Bushel--see Tou Mu; of Heaven, <page 150>; Old, of the Waters, <page 220> sq.

Mountain-s. Sacrifices offered on T'ai Shan, <page 127>; 'the Five,' Wu Yueh, <page 242>; Hua Shan, sacred, <page 253>; monkey under the, <page 345>-<page 346>

Mourning. Methods of, <page 40>

Mu Kung, Tung Wang Kung, or Tung-hua Ti-chun. God of the Immortals, <page 136>; how formed, <page 136>; and yang principle, <page 136>; sovereign of the Eastern Air, <page 136>-<page 137>; his servants, Hsien T'ung and Yu Nu, <page 136>; and Shen I, <page 185>-<page 186>. See also Tung Wang Kung

Mu Tzu. See Mo Tzu

Mu Yeh. Battle of, <page 152>-<page 153>

Mu-cha. See Li Mu-cha

Mulberry-trees. Goddess of, <page 169>

Mutilations. Practised by the Chinese, <page 38>-<page 39>

Mythology, <page 60> sq.; definition of, <page 60>; Chinese rigidity and, <page 61>, <page 63>-<page 64>; intellect and, <page 61>; effect of Confucianism on, <page 61>-<page 62>; influence of religion on, <page 62>-<page 63>; effect of Buddhism on, <page 62>-<page 63>; history and, <page 63>; character of Chinese, <page 67>-<page 68>, <page 423>; sources of Chinese, <page 69> sq.; doubt and, <page 73>-<page 74>; legend and, <page 74>-<page 75>; parallelisms between Chinese and Hebrew, <page 79> n.; cosmogony and, <page 92>

Myth-s. Prerequisites to, <page 64> sq.; periods fertile in, <page 68>-<page 69>; phases of, <page 71> sq.; Sung philosophers and, <page 73>; a nature myth, <page 133>; myths of the stars, <page 176> sq.; of time, <page 194> sq.; of thunder, <page 198> sq.; of lightning, <page 203>-<page 204>; of wind, <page 204>-<page 205>; of rain, <page 205> sq.; of the waters, <page 208>; of fire, <page 236> sq.; of epidemics, medicine, exorcism, etc., <page 240> sq.; effect of philosophy on, <page 423>

  

N

Nagas. Mountain dragons, <page 208>

Nails. See Finger-nails

Nameless. Universe originated from, <page 91>

"Nan K'o Meng." Dream of the South Branch; story of, <page 410> sq.

Nan-chi Hsien-weng. Ancient Immortal of the South Pole, <page 154>; helps Chiang Tzu-ya against Shen Kung-pao, <page 156>-<page 157>; orders White Crane Youth to seize Shen Kung-pao's head, <page 156>; has it restored, <page 157>; reproves Shen Kung-pao, <page 157>; fights with Chang Shao, <page 158>-<page 159>

Nature Myth. Yu Huang and a, <page 133>

Navy. Modern Chinese, <page 34>

Neptune, The Chinese. See Dragon-king-s

New Territory. See Sinkiang

New Year. Festival of, <page 43>

New Year's Eve. Festival of, <page 45>

Niang-tzu. And the origin of the Liang-ti Lake, <page 405>-<page 406>

Niu Huang. Ox-yellow, or bezoar, <page 146>

No-cha. See Li No-cha

North Star. Goddess of the--see Tou Mu

Nu. First woman, <page 82>

Nu Hsi. See Nu Kua

Nu Kua Shih, Nu Hsi, or Nu Wa. A mythical sovereign, one of the alleged progenitors of the Chinese race; sister and successor of Fu Hsi, <page 16>, <page 81>-<page 82>; repairer of the heavens, <page 72>, <page 81>-<page 82>, <page 224>-<page 225>; description of, <page 81>; Nu and Kua legend, <page 82>

Nu Wa. See Nu Kua

Nung. The Agriculturists; the second class of the people, <page 28> [p. 444]

  

O

O-Mei Shan. Mountain in Sau-ch'uan, <page 171>, <page 179>, <page 180>

O-mi-t'o Fo. Amida, Amita, Buddha; the guide who conducts to the Western Paradise, <page 120>

Oath in the Peach-orchard, The, <page 114> sq.

Officers. Shih; the first class of the people in early times, <page 28>

Officials. Ch'en; a social division, <page 28>

One, The Great. First of the celestial spirits, <page 142>-<page 143>

One-armed People, <page 389>, <page 391>

One-eyed People, <page 389>

One-legged Bird, <page 206>

One-legged People, <page 389>

One-sided People, <page 389>

Organic Environment, <page 19>-<page 20>

Origin-s. Of the Chinese race, <page 13> sq.; of name China, <page 27>; of worship, <page 93>; of deification, <page 93>; of T'ien, <page 94>; the Three Origins, <page 125>, and see also San Yuan, Shun, Yao, and Yu; legend of origin of a lake, <page 405>-<page 406>; origin of dog-worship of Jung tribe, <page 422>

Other Self. Idea of the, <page 93>, <page 97> sq. See also Second Self

Otherworld. Parallel to this world, <page 93>-<page 94>; populous, <page 93>

Ox-yellow. See Niu Huang

Ox-head, King. Father of the Red Child Demon; Sun Hou-tzu and, <page 351>, <page 358> sq.

  

P

Pa Hsien. The Eight Immortals venerated by the Taoist sect; and the Dragon-king Ao Ch'in, <page 214> sq.; and Ao Ch'in's son, <page 215>; favourite subjects of romance and frequently represented, <page 288>; term used figuratively for happiness, <page 288>; legend of, probably belongs to Yuan dynasty, <page 288>; Li T'ieh-kuai, <page 289> sq.; Chung-li Ch'uan, <page 291>-<page 292>, <page 297>-<page 298>; Lan Ts'ai-ho, <page 293>; Chang Kuo, <page 294>-<page 295>; Ho Hsien-ku, <page 296>-<page 297>; Lu Tung-pin, <page 297> sq.; Han Hsiang Tzu, <page 299>-<page 300>; Ts'ao Kuo-chiu, <page 300> sq.; legend of the Eight Immortals crossing the sea, <page 303>-<page 304>

Pa Kua. The Eight Trigrams; Wen Wang uses, to divine the flesh of his son, <page 193>; discovered by Fu Hsi, <page 247>-<page 248>

Pa-ch'a. God of Grasshoppers, <page 165>

Pagoda-bearer, The. Li Ching, <page 237>, <page 305> sq.

Pai Ma. The White Horse of the Hsi yu chi; Sun Hou-tzu and, <page 340>; son of Dragon-king of the Western Sea, <page 340>-<page 341>; Kuan Yin and, <page 340>-<page 341>; changed into a horse, <page 341>; journeys with the Master to the Western Paradise, <page 341> sq.; bearer of the sacred books, <page 341>; Temple of the White Horse, <page 341>; his reward, <page 368>

Palace. Of God of Literature, <page 106>; of Hsi Wang Mu, <page 137>; Shen I builds, for Chin Mu, <page 183>-<page 184>; of the sun, conferred on Shen I, <page 185>-<page 186>

P'an Ku. Mythical being, alleged first development out of Chaos and fashioner of the universe, the Chinese Adam; myths of, <page 76> sq.; creator of the universe, <page 76> sq.; origin of, <page 76>; meaning of name, <page 76>; representations of, <page 76>; death of, <page 77>; and the sun, <page 77>-<page 78>; and the moon, <page 77>-<page 78>; with head of a dragon, <page 78>; with body of a serpent, <page 78>; Ymer and, <page 79>; a late creation, <page 79>-<page 80>; date of legend of, <page 92>; Yuan-shih T'ien-wang an avatar of, <page 128> sq.; and T'ai Yuan, <page 129>-<page 130>; a God of Medicine, <page 247>

P'an Kuan. God of Exorcism, <page 248>; administrator of the infernal regions, <page 248>, <page 268>, <page 274>

P'an-t'ao Hui. Feast of Peaches, <page 137>-<page 138>

Pao Lao-yeh. Imperial Censor; and Ts'ao Ching-chih and Ts'ao Ching-hsiu, <page 302>-<page 303>

Pao Shu. Kuan Chung and, the Chinese types of friendship, <page 383> and n.

Pao Te. Maiden name Po Ya; Queen of Miao Chuang, <page 253> sq.; canonized, <page 287> [p. 445]

Pao Yueh. In legend of Yu Huang, <page 132>-<page 133>

Parents and Children, <page 25>-<page 26>

Pastors. Also called Lord-Lieutenants; the chief of the nobles in a province, <page 29>

Patriarch-s. Of Buddhism, <page 120>; T'ung-t'ien Chiao-chu, <page 133>, <page 191>

Peaches. Feast of, <page 137>-<page 138>; Chang Tao-ling and the plucking of the, <page 140>-<page 141>

Peach-orchard, The Oath in the, <page 114> sq.

Pearl, The Intelligent. See Li No-cha

Pearly Emperor. Yu Huang; Chang Tao-ling Vicegerent of, <page 141>

Peking. Capital of China; Shun-t'ien Fu, originally Yu Chou; Pei-p'ing Fu in T'ang dynasty; legend of the building of, <page 227> sq.; Prince Chu-ti and, <page 228> sq.; Liu Po-wen and the founding of, <page 228> sq.; to be called No-cha Ch'eng, <page 229>; description of, <page 230>-<page 231>; prosperity of, <page 231>-<page 232>; the dragons and the drought in, <page 232> sq.

People, Four Classes of the, <page 28>

Perfect Man. See Chen-jen

Period of the Warring States. Mythology in, <page 72>

"Permutations, Book of." See I Ching

Pestilence. Demons of, subdued by the three musical brothers, <page 151>

Pets. Kinds kept, <page 47>

Philosophers. Of the Sung Period, and mythology, <page 73>; apotheosized, <page 148>

Philosophy. Effect of Chinese, on mythology, <page 423>

Pi Fang. Mysterious bird belonging to Hui Lu, <page 239>

Pi Hsiang-yang. Attacks Han Chih-hsien, <page 159>

Pi Hsiao. Sister of Ch'iung Hsiao; killed by Yuan-shih, <page 158>

P'i-lu Fo. See P'i-lu Hsien and Vairotchana

P'i-lu Hsien, or P'i-lu Fo. An Immortal; and Chun T'i, <page 324>; becomes a Buddha, <page 324>

Piao. See Shao

Pig Fairy of the "Hsi Yu Chi," <page 326> sq.

Pills of Immortality. And vital force, <page 135>; Chang Tao-ling and, <page 139>, <page 140>; Shen I and, <page 184>-<page 185>; Heng O and, <page 184>-<page 185>

Pitch-pot. A game, <page 45>

Planet-s. Influence terrestrial events, <page 176>; abodes of stellar divinities, <page 192>; Jupiter and T'ai Sui, <page 194>

Pneuma. Ch'i; one of the elements of creation, <page 90>

P'o Chia. Name of King Miao Chuang, <page 253>

Po I-k'ao. Stellar deity of Tzu-wei constellation, <page 192>; eldest son of Wen Wang, <page 192>; and Ta Chi, <page 192>-<page 193>; canonized, <page 194>

Po Shih. And legend of Ch'in Shin Huang-ti's visit to the Spirit of the Sea, <page 212> sq.

Po Ya. Maiden name of Pao Te, <page 253>

Pole, Pivot of the. Tou Shu; a palace, <page 144>

Political History. Summary of, <page 27>-<page 28>

Polyandry, <page 23>

Polydemonism. Great extent of, <page 93>

Polytheism. Great extent of, <page 93>-<page 94>, <page 174>-<page 175>

Pootoo Island. See P'u T'o Island

Population. In early times, <page 27>; in Manchu Period, <page 28>

Presents. Ceremonial governing giving of, <page 42>

Priest-s. Wu, or exorcists, <page 34>-<page 35>; first, <page 34>; king as high, <page 34>; held in low esteem, <page 36>

Priesthood. In Buddhism, <page 119>

Primary Matter. See Ch'i

Princes of States, <page 29>

Princess of the Golden Stem. Ch'un-yu Fen marries, <page 412> sq.

Products. Processes of production, <page 48>; habitations, <page 57>-<page 58>; food, <page 58>; clothing, <page 58>; land-works, <page 58>-<page 59>; implements and weapons, <page 59>; aesthetic products, <page 59>

Professional Institutions, <page 36>

Prostitution, <page 24>

Provinces. Administrative divisions of the country, <page 28>-<page 29>

P'u-t'i Tsu-shih. Immortal; becomes master of Sun Hou-tzu, <page 327> [p. 446]

P'u T'o Island, or Pootoo. Throne of Kuan Yin on, <page 252>; Miao Shan goes to, <page 270>

Punctured Bodies. Legend of People of the, <page 390>

Punishments. Nature of legal, <page 30>; lex talionis, <page 30>; codes of, <page 30> sq.; changes made by Provisional Criminal Code, <page 31>-<page 32>; of the gods, <page 99>

Pygmies. Legend of, <page 386>-<page 387>

  

Q

Queue, <page 39>, <page 58>

  

R

Rain. Myths of, <page 205> sq.; the Master of, <page 205>-<page 206> Red Child Demon. In Hsi yu chi, <page 350> sq., <page 359>

Red Country. See Ssu Ha Li Kuo

Red Sand Battle, <page 158> sq.

Redcoat, Mr. Purveyor of official posts; companion of Wen Ch'ang, <page 110> sq.

Reincarnation. Of Chuang Chou, <page 149>

Religious Ideas. Nature of Chinese,52; Confucianism, <page 52>, <page 53>; State religion, <page 52>; Taoism, <page 52>-<page 53>; Buddhism, <page 53>; influence of, on mythology, <page 62>--<page 63>; Chinese religion not a monotheism, <page 97>; the Three Religions, <page 99> sq.; of the learned, <page 102>

Republic. Races represented in flag of, <page 28>

Republican Period. Marriage in, <page 24>-<page 25>; administrative system in, <page 30>

Revenue. Whence derived, <page 29>

River-s. Ch'ien-t'ang, chief God of, <page 218>-<page 219>; marriage of River-god, <page 225> sq.

Rope, The Magic, <page 348>

  

S

Sacrifice-s. To Shang Ti, <page 95>; to T'ai Sui, <page 194>. See also Feng-shan

Saint-s. See Sheng-jen

S'akyamuni, See Shakyamuni

Samgha. Seng Pao; the Priesthood in Buddhism, <page 119>

San Ch'ing. The three Heavens of Taoism, <page 124>-<page 125>

San Kuan. The Three Agents,125; San Kuan Ta Ti, <page 125>; T'ai Shang San Kuan, <page 125>; sons of Dragon-king's daughters, <page 126>

"San Kuo Chih," The Story of the Three Kingdoms; an historical romance, <page 117> sq.

San Pao. The Three Precious Things, or Treasures--Buddha, the Law, and the Priesthood, <page 119>

San Yuan. The Three Origins,125; and the divisions of the year, <page 126>; 'the Three True Sovereigns, Guests of the Kingdom of Wu,' <page 127>

Scholars. Shih; the first class of the people, <page 28>

Schools. See Accessory Institutions

Sciences, Little cultivated until modern times, <page 54> sq.

Sea. Dragon-kings of the, <page 210>-<page 211>, <page 212>; Yang Hou, Spirit of the, <page 212> sq.; legend of the Eight Immortals crossing the, <page 303>-<page 304>

Seasons. Festivals of the, <page 44>

Second Self. And worship of the living, <page 101>, See also Other Self

Seng Pao. Samgha; the Priesthood or Church, one of the San Pao of Buddhism, <page 119>

Sentiments, Aesthetic and Moral, <page 51>-<page 52>

Sha Ho-shang, or Sha Wu-ching. A priest in the Hsi yu chi, <page 326>; and Kuan Yin, <page 334>1 baggage coolie to Hsian Chuang, <page 334>-<page 335>; journeys with the Master, <page 341> sq.; his reward, <page 368>

Sha Wu-ching. See Sha Ho-shang

Shakya, or S'akya. Same as S'akyamuni Buddha, Shih-chia Fo, Gautama, <page 119>. See Shakyamuni

Shakyamuni, S'akyamuni, or Shih-chia Fo. The name used in Chinese literature for Gautama Buddha, <page 119>; and Kuan Yin, <page 251> [p. 447]

"Shan Hai Ching." The Hill and River Classic, <page 386>

Shan Ts'ai. And Miao Shan, <page 271> sq.; his fidelity tested, <page 272> sq.; transformation of, <page 273>; canonized, <page 287>

Shang. The Merchants; the fourth class of the people, <page 28>

Shang Ti. The Supreme Ruler, <page 94>; and Ti, <page 94>; worship of, <page 94>-<page 95>; sacrifices to, <page 95>; confused with T'ien, <page 96>-<page 97>; confers on Chuang Chou the kingdom of Jupiter, <page 150>

Shang Yang. Legend of the, <page 206>-<page 207>

Shao, or Piao. Part of the constellation of the Great Bear, <page 106>

She-chi. Gods of the Soil and Crops, <page 165>

She-mo Wang. Gods of Serpents, <page 165>

Shen. Name for gods, <page 103>

Shen Chen-jen. And T'ai Sui, <page 195>

"Shen Hsien Chuan." Biographies of the Gods, by Ko Hung, <page 79>

Shen I. The Divine Archer Ch'ih-chiang Tzu-yu, <page 180>-<page 181> and the Emperor Yao, <page 180> sq. and Fei Lien, <page 181>, <page 204>-<page 205>; shoots the nine false suns, <page 181>-<page 182>; marries the sister of the Water-spirit, <page 182>; canonized, <page 183>; builds a palace for Chin Mu, <page 183>-<page 184>; and the pill of immortality, <page 184>-<page 185>; kills Chisel-tooth, <page 184>; receives the sun-palace, <page 185>-<page 186>; and the Bird of Dawn, <page 186>-<page 187>; visits the moon, <page 187>-<page 188>

Shen Kung-pao. Meets Chiang Tzu-ya, <page 155>; tempts Chiang Tzu-ya to desert Chou, <page 155>; his power to separate his head from his body, <page 155>; discards his head, <page 156>; his head taken by Ancient Immortal of the South Pole, <page 156>-<page 157>; obtains his head again, <page 157>

Shen Lang. Hsu Chen-chun and, <page 223>-<page 224>

Shen Nung, or Ti Huang Shih. A legendary emperor, <page 81>, <page 247>; and T'ai I, <page 143>; as God of Agriculture, <page 143>, <page 165>, <page 239>; as God of Fire (Huo Ti, Yen Ti), <page 239>; as God of Medicine, <page 247>

Shen Pao, or Lao Tzu. Third person of Taoist triad, <page 125>

Shen Shih. The Gentry; a social division, <page 28>

Shen Shu. A Door-god, <page 173>. See Men Shen

Sheng-jen. Superhuman beings, saints, <page 125>, <page 136>

Shih. Officers, later Scholars; the first class of the people, <page 28>

Shih Chin. Second son of Shih Ch'in-ch'ang, <page 255>

Shih Ch'in-ch'ang. Father of the sons reborn as daughters of Queen Po Ya, <page 255>

Shih Shan. Third son of Shih Ch'in-ch'ang, <page 255>

Shih Wen. Eldest son of Shih Ch'in-ch'ang, <page 255>

Shih-chi Niang-niang. And No-cha, <page 312>-<page 313>

Shih-chia Fo. See Shakyamuni

Shou Hsing, or Hsien Weng. The God of Longevity, <page 165>, <page 171>-<page 172>; at first a stellar deity, <page 171>-<page 172>; as an old man, <page 172>; legend of, <page 172>; and the Eight Immortals, <page 214>; and Chu Jung, <page 238>

Shu Yu. See Men Shen

Shui. Water; and deliverance from evil, <page 125>-<page 126>

Shui Kuan. Ruler of the Watery Elements, <page 216>

Shui-mu Niang-niang. Old Mother of the Waters; legend of, <page 220> sq.; and Sun Hou-tzu, <page 221>-<page 222>; and Kuan Yin, <page 221>-<page 222>

Shun. Successor of the great Emperor Yao; with Yao and Yu as the Three Origins, <page 126>-<page 127>

Shun-feng Erh, or Kao Chio. Favourable-wind Ear, <page 161> sq.; general of tyrant Chou, <page 161>-<page 162>; encounters with No-cha, Yang Chien, Chiang Tzu-ya, Li Ching, and Lei Chen-tzu, <page 162> sq.; defeat of, <page 163>-<page 164>; searches for heir to Miao Chuang, <page 254>-<page 255>

Silkworms, Goddess of, <page 169>

Sin. By the gods, <page 99>

Sinkiang. The New Territory, or Eastern Turkestan; a dependency of China, <page 27>

Six-toed People, <page 389> [p. 448]

Slavery. Unknown in early times, recognized in Monarchical Period, <page 48>

Slow-carts Country. In Hsi yu chi, <page 352> sq.

Smallpox. God of, <page 175>; Ministry of, <page 246>-<page 247>; prevalence of, in China, <page 246>-<page 247>

Snake, The Jointed. Legend of, <page 393>

Snuff. Use of, <page 47>

Snorter. See Cheng Lung

Social Intercourse, Laws of. Ceremonial observances, <page 42>-<page 43>; ranks, how distinguished, <page 42>; visits, <page 42>; forms of address, <page 42>; presents, <page 42>; a source of misunderstanding between East and West, <page 42>-<page 43>

Sociological Environment, <page 20>-<page 21>

Soil, Gods of the, <page 165>

Solitary Indeterminate. See I Tu

Solstices. Festivals of the, <page 44>

Sombre Youth. See Heaven-deaf

Soul. Recalling the, <page 39>-<page 40>; birth of the, <page 93>

Soul-tablet, <page 40>

"South Branch, Dream of the." Nan k'o meng; story of, <page 410> sq.

Sovereign-s. The Three True-- see San Yuan; of the Eastern Air, <page 136>-<page 137>; of the Western Air, <page 137>; the nine Human--see Jen Huang

Spiders. Sun Hou-tzu and the, <page 364>

Spine, Deformed in infancy to produce a scholarly stoop, <page 37>

Spirit-s. Festivals, <page 44>; T'ien the abode of the, <page 95>-<page 96>; the Great One, the Great Unity, <page 142>-<page 143>; an ox-spirit, <page 146>; Spirit of the Blue Dragon Star, <page 146>; of the White Tiger Star, <page 148>; Spirit-boat, <page 151>; of O-mei Shan--see T'ai-i Huang-jen; Spirit of the Waters, <page 182>, and see Ho Po; Spirit of Lightning, <page 203>-<page 204>; dragons regarded as spirits of the waters, <page 208>; Spirit of the Sea, <page 212> sq.; of the Well, <page 217>; of the North Star, <page 262>-<page 263>, <page 270>; of the South Pole Star, <page 329>, <page 337>

Sports and Games, <page 45>-<page 46>

Ssu Ha Li Kuo. The Red Country, <page 359>

Ssu Ta T'ian-wang. The Four Kings of Heaven; Taoist reflection of Chin-kang, <page 142>

Ssu Tu. The Four Kings of the Sweet Water Department, <page 212>

Ssu-ma Cheng. Author of Historical Records; his account of Nu Kua, <page 81>-<page 82>

Star-s. Myths of the, <page 176> sq.; star-worship, <page 188>-<page 189>; star-ruler, <page 189>; effects of worship of, <page 189>

Star-god-s. The Great Bear, <page 106> sq.; the God of Literature a star-god, <page 106> sq.; T'ai I, <page 144>; Bushel Mother, <page 144>-<page 145>; Blue Dragon, <page 146>; White Tiger, <page 148>; Ts'an Nu, <page 169>; the God of Happiness, <page 169>-<page 170>; the God of Longevity, <page 171>-<page 172>; Leo, 'Throne of the Five Emperors' in, <page 176>; the Cycle-gods, <page 177>; Chang Hsien, <page 177> sq.; the Heavenly Dog, <page 177>-<page 178>; Po I-k'ao, <page 192> sq.; God of the Wind, <page 204>; 'the Five Mountains,' <page 242>-<page 243>

Starting, The Great. T'ai ch'u, <page 90>

States. Parts of provinces in early times, <page 29>; power of princes of, <page 29>

Storms, Ministry of, <page 198>

"Story of the Three Kingdoms," See San Kuo Chih

Substance. Chih; one of the elements of creation, <page 90>

Sumeru. The central mountain or axis of the universe in Hindu mythology, <page 16>; called Hsu-mi Shan in Chinese, <page 142>

Su Ta. Assassin, <page 278>, <page 279>

Sun-s. P'an Ku and the, <page 77>-<page 78>; influences terrestrial events, <page 176>; symbol of the, <page 176>; worship of, <page 176>-<page 177>, <page 179>; the nine false, <page 181>-<page 182>; palace of the, conferred on Shen I, <page 186>

Sun Hou-tzu. See Sun Wu-k'ung

Sun Wu-k'ung, or Sun Hou-tzu. The Monkey Fairy in the Hsi yu chi; and Shui-mu Niang-niang,221-<page 222>; represents human nature, <page 325>; various names of, <page 326>; born on Hua-kuo Shan, <page 326>-<page 327>; Yu Huang and, <page 327> sq.; his rod of iron, <page 328>; Grand Master of the Heavenly Stables, <page 329>; Grand Superintendent of [p. 449] the Heavenly Peach-garden, <page 329>-<page 330>; acquires double immortality, <page 330>; and T'ien Kou, <page 331>; distilled in Lao Chun's furnace, <page 331>-<page 332>; in jumping competition with Buddha, <page 332>-<page 333>; and Kuan Yin, <page 333>; journeys to the Western Paradise with the Master, <page 341> sq.; and the Demons of the Lotus Gave, <page 345> sq.; saves the Master, <page 345> sq., <page 352>, <page 358> sq., <page 363>-<page 364>, <page 365>-<page 366>; and the Red Child Demon, <page 350> sq.; and the Demons of Blackwater River, <page 352>; in Slow-carts Country, <page 352> sq.; in the Buddhist temple, <page 364>-<page 365>; returns home, <page 367> sq.; canonized, <page 368>

Sun-king. T'ai-yang Ti-chun, or Jih-kung Ch'ih-chiang; <page 179>; and legend of Ch'ih-chiang Tzu-yu, <page 179> sq.; legend of the--see Ch'ih-chiang Tzu-yu and Shen I

Sung Dynasty. Philosophers of, and mythology, <page 73>

Super-tao. Chuang Tzu's, <page 91>

Super-triad of Gods, <page 100>-<page 101>

Superstition-s, <page 53>-<page 54>; feng-shui, <page 54>, <page 209>; astrological, <page 176>

Supreme Ruler. See Shang Ti

  

T

Ta Chi. The barbarous concubine of Chou Hsin, the last ruler of the Shang dynasty; and Po I-k'ao, <page 192>-<page 193>; and Wen Wang, <page 193>; and T'ai Sui, <page 195>-<page 196>

Ta Yu. See Yu

Tai. A rich family murdered by Wang Che, <page 255>

T'ai Chi. The Grand Terminus; the producer of the two elementary forms, <page 85>

T'ai Chi T'u. The Plan of the Grand Terminus; explanation of, <page 86>; and Chinese cosmogony, <page 92>. See also Chou Tzu

T'ai Ch'u. The Great Starting, <page 90>

T'ai I. The Great Change, <page 90>; the Great One, Great Unity, the first of the celestial spirits, <page 142> sq.; and Shen Nung, <page 143>; Hsien Yuan's medical preceptor, <page 143>; Spirit of the Pole Star, <page 144>. See also T'ai-i Chen-jen

T'ai Shan. Sacred mountain; Feng-shan sacrifices offered on, <page 127>

T'ai Shih. The Great Beginning, <page 90>

T'ai Su. The Great Blank; one of the stages in creation, <page 90>

T'ai Sui. Called Yin Chiao; the celestial year-spirit, <page 194> sq.; sacrifices to, <page 194>; corresponds to the planet Jupiter, <page 194>; legend of, <page 195>-<page 196>; son of tyrant Chou, <page 195>; and Ho Hsien-ku, <page 195>; and Ta Chi, <page 195>-<page 196>; canonized by Yu Ti, <page 196>; and Jan Teng, <page 196>; canonized by Chiang Tzu-ya, <page 196>; worship of, <page 196>-<page 197>; divination of locality of, <page 197>

T'ai Tsung. Emperor; and the Door-gods, <page 173>-<page 174>

T'ai Yin. Princess; and Lu Ch'i, <page 110>-<page 111>

T'ai-i Chen-jen. Taoist priest, <page 144>, <page 305> sq.; appears in a dream to Yin Shih, <page 305>; visits Li No-cha, <page 306>; Li No-cha visits, <page 310>-<page 311>, <page 316>

T'ai-i Huang-jen. The spirit of O-mei Shan, <page 179>-<page 180>

T'ai-po Chin-hsing. Spirit of the South Pole Star, <page 329>, <page 337>

T'ai-shang Lao-chun, or Lao Tzu. Third person of the Taoist triad, <page 125>

T'ai-wu Fu-jen. Daughter of Hsi Wang Mu, <page 183>

T'ai-yuan Sheng-mu. An hermaphrodite, mother of Yuan-shih T'ien-wang; and P'an Ku, <page 129>-<page 130>

Talismans. Chang Tao-ling and, <page 139>

Tao. The 'Way,' <page 87>-<page 88>; the Solitary Indeterminate, <page 90>; the super-tao, <page 91>

"Tao-te Ching." The Canon of Reason and Virtue, first called Lao Tzu, <page 87>

Taoism. The doctrine of the Way; as a religion, <page 52>-<page 53>; one of the three religions, <page 99> sq.; the three Heavens of, <page 124>-<page 125>; the Three Pure Ones of, <page 124>-<page 125>; Yu Huang and, <page 124>; the first [p. 450] pope of, <page 138>; Chang Tao-ling, founder of modern, <page 139>; the Kings of Heaven of, <page 142>; the Kuan Yin of--see Tou Mu; guardians of Taoist temple gates, <page 146>

Tarim Valley. Supposed origin of the Chinese in, <page 13>, <page 15>

Tartars. Conquer Northern China, <page 27>-<page 28>; conquer the whole of China, <page 28>, <page 400>

Tathagata. Ju-lai Fo, Shakyamuni, or Buddha, <page 119>

Temple-s, Of Heaven, <page 95>; to God of Literature, <page 109>; guardians of gates of Buddhist, <page 146>; guardians of gates of Taoist, <page 146>; legend of the cursed, <page 398> sq.

Teng Chiu-kung. Spirit of the Blue Dragon Star, <page 146>; and No-cha, <page 147>; and Huang Fei-hu, <page 147>; and Yang Chien, <page 147>; overthrown by Ch'en Ch'i, <page 148>; kingdom of the Blue Dragon Star conferred on, <page 148>

Thousand-li Eye. See Ch'ien-li Yen

Three Causes. Worship of the, <page 125> sq.

Three Faces, People with the, <page 390>

Three Heavens. See San Ch'ing

Three Musical Brothers. And the la mei flower, <page 151>; cure the Emperor Hsuan Tsung, <page 151>; and the Spirit-boat, <page 151>; subdue the demons of pestilence, <page 151>. See also T'ien Chih-piao, T'ien Hung-i, and T'ien Yuan-shuai

Three Pure Ones. See Taoism

Three Religions, The, <page 99> sq.

Three-body People, <page 390>, <page 391>

Three-heads, <page 390>

Throne of the Five Emperors. Wu Ti Tso, a celestial palace, <page 176>

Thunder. Myths of, <page 198> sq.; Ministry of, <page 198>; Duke of--see Lei Kung; Son of, <page 199>, <page 202>-<page 203>, and see Lei Chen-tzu

Ti. The earth; and forgiveness of sins, <page 125>-<page 126>

Ti Chih. The twelve terrestrial branches, <page 197>

Ti-mu, Ti-ya, or Hou-t'u. 'Earth-dumb,' the Earth-mother; one of the attendants of Wen Ch'ang, <page 82>, <page 109>-<page 110>, <page 165>

Ti-tsang Wang. The God of Hades, <page 120>

Ti-ya. See Ti-mu

Tibet. A dependency of China, <page 27>

Tien Mu. Mother of Lightning, <page 203>

T'ien. Heaven; worship of, <page 94>, <page 95>-<page 96>; abode of the spirits, <page 95>-<page 96>; confused with Shang Ti, <page 96>-<page 97>; one of the sources of happiness, <page 125>-<page 126>

T'ien Chih-piao. Third of the three musical brothers, <page 151>

T'ien Fei. Heavenly Concubine; helps Yin Chiao, <page 196>

T'ien Huang Shih, or Fu Hsi. As God of Medicine, <page 247>-<page 248>

T'ien Hung-i. Second of the three musical brothers, <page 151>

T'ien Kan. The ten celestial tree-trunks, <page 197>

T'ien Kou. The Heavenly Dog; and Chang Hsien, <page 178>; and Sun Hou-tzu, <page 331>

T'ien Mu, or Hsuan Nu. Mother of Heaven; and Chuang Chou, <page 150>

T'ien Yuan-shuai. Eldest of the three musical brothers, <page 151>

T'ien-hou. Goddess of Sailors, <page 165>

T'ien-lung. 'Heaven-deaf'; one of the attendants of Wen Ch'ang, <page 82>, <page 109>-<page 110>

Tiger. Yellow Flying, <page 146>; White--see White Tiger

Time. Myths of, <page 194> sq.; Ministry of, <page 194>

To-pao Tao-jen. Disciple of T'ung-t'ien Chiao-chu, <page 133>; fights with Kuang Ch'eng-tzu, <page 133>

Tobacco. Use of, <page 47>

Tombs, Festival of the, <page 44>

Tones. In Chinese speech, <page 56>

Tortoise, Golden Mother of the, <page 136>

Tou. A measure; name of a constellation, <page 106>

Tou Mu. Bushel Mother, Goddess of the North Star; the Indian Maritchi, <page 144>; mother of the nine Jen Huang, <page 144>, <page 145>; the Kuan Yin of Taoism, <page 144>; her palace, Tou Shu, the Pivot of the Pole, <page 144>; description of, <page 144>-<page 145> [p. 451]

Tou Shu. The Pivot of the Pole, palace of Tou Mu, <page 144>

Trade. Foreign, <page 21>, <page 48>-<page 49>; home, <page 48>-<page 49>

Triad. The super-triad, <page 100>-<page 101>; of gods, <page 101>; Taoist, <page 124>-<page 125>

Transformations. Of the fox, <page 370>

Treasures, The Three. See San Pao

Trigrams. A combination of lines used in divination; the Eight (pa kua), <page 193>, <page 248>

Triratna. The Three Embodiments, <page 120>

Ts'ai Shen. God of Wealth, <page 165>, <page 170>-<page 171>; Chao Kung-ming prototype of, <page 170>-<page 171>; legend of, <page 170>-<page 171>; canonized, <page 171>

Ts'ai-yun Hsien-tzu. Fights for Wen Chung, <page 159>-<page 160>

Ts'an Nu. Also called Ma-t'ou Niang; Goddess of Mulberry-trees and Silkworms, <page 165>, <page 168>-<page 169>; legend of, <page 168>-<page 169>; also represented as a stellar divinity, <page 169>

Ts'ao Ching-chih. In legend of Ts'ao Kuo-chiu, <page 301>-<page 302>

Ts'ao Ching-hsiu. Becomes the Immortal Ts'ao Kuo-chiu, <page 301> sq.

Tsao Chun. The Kitchen-god, <page 45>, <page 128>, <page 165>, <page 166> sq.; reports to Supreme Being, <page 45>, <page 167>-<page 168>; chief of Yuan-shih T'ien-tsun's secret police, <page 128>; origin of worship of, <page 166>-<page 167>; Li Shao-chun and, <page 166>-<page 167>

Ts'ao Kuo-chiu. One of the Eight Immortals, <page 214>, <page 303>; legend of, <page 300> sq.

Ts'ao Ts'ao. Usurping general in period of the Three Kingdoms; and Kuan Yu, <page 116>

Tso Ch'ih. See Chisel-tooth

Tso-ch'iu Ming. Author of the Tso chuan, commentary on the Annals of Confucius; and Chinese mythology, <page 72>

T'u Hsing-sun. Magician; and Teng Chiu-kung, <page 147>; marries Ch'an-yu, <page 147>

Tu O. Taoist magician; teaches the Snorter, <page 145>

T'u-ti. Local gods, <page 165>; report murder of the Tais to Yu Huang, <page 255>-<page 256>; sent to help Miao Shan in the Nunnery of the White Bird, <page 263>; report the approaching execution of Miao Shan to Yu Huang, <page 266>; carry Miao Shan to P'u T'o Island, <page 270>; find companions for Miao Shan, <page 271>; help Miao Shan, <page 272>

Tung Wang Kung, Mu Kung, or Tung-hua Ti-chun. God of the Immortals; and Shen I, <page 185> sq.; and the Spirit of Lightning, <page 203>. See Mu Kung

Tung-hua Ti-chun. See Tung Wang Kung

T'ung-t'ien Chiao-chu. First of the Patriarchs of the Taoists, <page 133>; and Hung-chun Lao-tsu, <page 133>; battle with Chun T'i, <page 133>-<page 134>; the buffalo of, <page 133>-<page 134>; given pill of immortality and taken to Heaven, <page 134>; and the twenty-eight constellations, <page 191>-<page 192>; and Chun T'i, <page 321> sq.

Turkestan, Eastern. Supposed origin of the Chinese in, <page 13>. See also Sinkiang

Tzu T'ung. Chang Ya at, <page 104>; the God of, <page 105>; Wen Ch'ang and the Spirit of, <page 108>-<page 109>

Tz'u-hang Ta-shih. Immortal, <page 216>

Tzu-hua. In legend of Ch'un-yu Fen, <page 413>, <page 415>-<page 416>, <page 419>

Tzu-wei Hsing. Constellation. See Po I-k'ao

  

U

Umbrellas, The Magic, <page 241>-<page 242>

Unicorn. K'uei niu <page 133>

Unicorn Precipice, The, <page 154>, <page 155>

Unity, The Great. First of the celestial spirits, <page 142>-<page 143>

Unnatural People, <page 386> sq.

  

V

Vairotchana. Dharma, the highest of the Three Embodiments (Triratna), representing Purity; Chinese P'i-lu Fo, <page 120> [p. 452]

Vajrapani. God of Thunder. See Lei Kung

Vega. Star; legend of Aquila and, <page 189> sq.

Viharapala. See Wei-t'o

  

W

Wang Ch'ang. Disciple of Chang Tao-ling, <page 140>, <page 141>, <page 216>

Wang Che. Brigand chief; begs of Shih family, <page 255>; murders Tai family, <page 255>

Wang Tan. A minister of State; and the cask of pearls, <page 131>-<page 132>; K'ang Hsi on, <page 131>-<page 132>

War, God of, <page 113> sq.

Waters. Shen I marries sister of the Water-spirit, <page 182>; myths of the, <page 208> sq.; dragons are spirits of the, <page 208>; Ministry of the, <page 212>; Yang Hou, Spirit of the Sea, <page 212> sq.; Shui Kuan, Ruler of the Watery Elements, <page 216>; Shui-mu Niang-niang, Old Mother of the, <page 220> sq. See also Ho Po and Shui

Watters, Thomas. Consul-General; on fox-lore, <page 370>

Way. See Tao

Wealth, God of. See Ts'ai Shen

Weapons, <page 33>

Weaver-girl, The Herdsman and the. Legend of, <page 189> sq.

Wei Cheng. Associated with Door-gods. See Men Shen

Wei-t'o. Viharapala; the Deva protector of Buddhist temples and of the Law of Buddha, <page 120>

Weights and Measures, <page 49>

Well, Spirits of the, <page 217>

Wen Ch'ang. God of Literature; attendants on, <page 82>, <page 109>-<page 110>; legends of, <page 104> sq.; and the Great Bear, <page 105> sq.; palace of, <page 106>

Wen Chiao. Wife of Ch'en Kuang-jui, and mother of Hsuan Chuang, <page 336>, <page 337> sq.

Wen Chung. Famous generalissimo, canonized as God of Thunder; his battle with Chiang Tzu-ya, <page 158> sq.; attacked by Huang T'ien-hua, <page 159>; wounded by Chiang Tzu-ya, <page 160>; forced to retreat, <page 161>; fights more battles, <page 161>; drawn up to Heaven, <page 161>; another account of his battles and death, <page 198>-<page 199>. See also Lei Tsu

Wen Wang. Father of Po I-k'ao; prisoner of Chou Hsin, <page 192>; Ta Chi and, <page 192>-<page 193>; Lei Chen-tzu and, <page 202>-<page 203>

Wen Yu. See Lei Chen-tzu

Wen-chu T'ien-tsun. Fights with No-cha, <page 317>-<page 318>

Western Air, Sovereign of the, <page 137>

White Bird Nunnery. Miao Shan goes to, <page 261> sq.; set on fire, <page 264>; saved by Miao Shan, <page 264>

White Crane Youth. Captures Shen Kung-pao's head, <page 156>; restores the head, <page 157>; kills Ch'iung Hsiao, <page 158>; fights and defeats Chang Shao, <page 159>

White Elephant. In Kuan Yin legend, <page 283>, <page 284>, <page 285>-<page 286>

White Horse. Of Hsuan Chuang, <page 340>-<page 341>

White Tiger. Po Hu; spirit of the White Tiger Star; guardian of Taoist temple gates, <page 146>, <page 148>

Wife. Status of, <page 23>-<page 24>; legend of the Expectant, <page 391>-<page 392>

Wild Men. Legend of, <page 392>-<page 393>

Wind, Spirit of the. Fei Lien; vanquished by Shen I, <page 181>, <page 204>-<page 205>; myths of the, <page 204>-<page 205>. See also Feng Po

Women, The Lovely. In the Hsi yu chi, <page 362> sq.

Women's Kingdom. Legend of the, <page 390>-<page 391>

Worship. Origin of, <page 93>; of Shang Ti, <page 94>-<page 95>; of T'ien, <page 94>, <page 95>-<page 96>; of the living, <page 101>; the second self and, <page 101>; of the Kitchen-god, <page 166>-<page 167>; of the harvest moon, <page 176>; of the sun, <page 176>-<page 177>, <page 179>; of Chang Hsien, <page 178>; of constellations, <page 191>; of T'ai Sui, <page 196>-<page 197>; of Wu Yueh, <page 242>; origin of dog-worship of Jung tribe, <page 422>

Wu. Exorcists, <page 34>

Wu Hsing. The Five Elements, <page 84>

Wu San-kuei. General of Emperor Ch'ung Cheng, <page 398>-<page 399>

Wu Ti. See Kuan Ti [p. 453]

Wu Ti Tso. 'Throne of the Five Emperors'; in the constellation Leo, <page 176>

Wu Wang. First king of the Chou dynasty; his battles with Chou Wang, <page 133>-<page 134>; and Chiang Tzu-ya, <page 153>, <page 154>; killed and revived, <page 159>

Wu Yueh. 'Five Mountains'; gods worshipped in cases of fever, etc., <page 242>-<page 243>; legend of, <page 243> sq.

Wu Yun. Immortal; and Chun Ti, <page 323>-<page 324>

  

Y

Yang. The male principle in nature, <page 85>, <page 86>, <page 93>; its hold on the Chinese mind, <page 92>; Mu Kung and, <page 136>-<page 137>; united with yin in marriage, <page 186>; conjunction of yin and, <page 188>; and lightning, <page 203>. See also Yin

Yang Ch'eng. See Fu Shen

Yang Chien. Nephew of Yu Huang; and Hua-hu Tiao, <page 122>-<page 123>; and Ch'an-yu, <page 147>; battles with Ch'ien-li Yen and Shun-feng Erh, <page 162> sq.; and Lu Yueh, <page 242>

Yang Hou. Spirit of the Sea, <page 212> sq.

Yang Hsi-chi. See Fu Shen

Yang Jen. Magician; and Lu Yueh, <page 242>

Yao. 1. Early emperor; with Shun and Yu as the Three Origins, <page 126>-<page 127>; and Shen I, <page 180> sq., <page 204>. 2. Tailed Miao Tzu tribe; legend of, <page 422> n.

Yao Ch'ih. Lake of Gems, <page 137>

Yao Wang. God or King of Medicine, <page 246>, <page 247>

Year. Spirit of the, T'ai Sui, <page 194> sq. See also San Yuan, T'ai Sui, and Time

Yeh Ch'ien-chao. And Lei Kung, <page 200>-<page 201>

Yeh Fa-shan. Magician; and Chang Kuo, <page 294>-<page 295>

Yellow Flying Tiger. Huang Fei-hu; spears the Blower, <page 146>

Yellow Turbans. Tribe; Liu Pei, Kuan Yu, and Chang Fei make war on, <page 116>

Yen, District of, <page 228>, <page 229>

Yen Ch'eng. Legend of the City-god of, <page 402> sq.

Yen Ti. See Shen Nung

Yen Wang. The King of the Hells; and Miao Shan, <page 267>, <page 268>; and Sun Hou-tzu, <page 328>-<page 329>

Yen-chung Hsien. See Lo Hsuan

Yin. The female principle in nature, <page 85>, <page 86>, <page 93>, <page 216>; its hold on the Chinese mind, <page 92>; Hsi Wang Mu and, <page 137>; ancestor of the spirituality of the, <page 185>; united in marriage with yang, <page 186>; conjunction of yang and, <page 188>; yin-yang mirror, <page 199>; and lightning, <page 203>, <page 204>; yin-yang baskets, <page 232>

Yin Ch'eng-hsiu. Spirit of the White Tiger Star, <page 148>; canonized by Chiang Tzu-ya, <page 148>

Yin Chiao. See T'ai Sui

Yin K'ai-shan, Father of Wen Chiao, <page 336>, <page 338>-<page 339>

Yin P'o-pai. Courtier of Chou Wang; father of Yin Ch'eng-hsiu, <page 148>

Yin Shih. Wife of Li Ching, <page 305> sq.

Ymer. The Scandinavian giant out of whose body the world was made; compared with P'an Ku, <page 79>

Yu, or Ta Yu. The Great Yu, one of the early kings; with Yao and Shun as the Three Origins, <page 126>-<page 127>

Yu Chou. See Peking

Yu Ch'uan Shan T'a, or Chen-shui T'a. Pagoda near Peking; origin of, <page 234>-<page 235> and n.

Yu Huang. Also called Yu-huang Shang-ti; the Pearly Emperor, <page 124>; popular head of Taoist hierarchy, <page 124>; the Jade Emperor, the Pure August One, <page 130>; history of, <page 130> sq.; the Chinese Jupiter, <page 130>; legend of, <page 132>-<page 133>; identified with Indra, <page 133>; subject of a nature myth, <page 133>; and Shui-mu Niang-niang, <page 220>-<page 221>; allows reincarnation of sons of Shih Ch'in-ch'ang, <page 255>-<page 256>; sends spiritual aid to Miao Shan, <page 262>-<page 263>; prevents execution of Miao Shan, <page 266>; orders punishment [p. 454] of Miao Chuang, <page 274>; canonizes Miao Shan and her family, <page 286>; and Sun Hou-tzu, <page 327> sq.

Yu I. A spirit, <page 278>-<page 279>

Yu Lu. A Door-god, <page 173>. See Men Shen

Yu Lung San T'ai-tzu. Son of Dragon-king of the Western Sea; and the White Horse, <page 340>-<page 341>

Yu Nu. The Jade Maiden; servant to Mu Kung, <page 136>; and the Spirit of Lightning, <page 203>

Yu Shih, or Ch'ih Sung-tzu. The Master of Rain, <page 205>-<page 206>; resides in the K'un-lun Mountains, <page 206>; and the shang yang, <page 206>

Yu-huang Shang-ti. See Yu Huang

Yu-ting Chen-jen. Makes plan for defeat of Ch'ien-li Yen and Shun-feng Erh, <page 162>-<page 163>

Yuan Chuang. See Hsuan Chuang

Yuan Hung. Generalissimo; serves Chou Wang, <page 162>, <page 164>

Yuan-shih T'ien-tsun, Lo Ching Hsin, or T'ien Pao. Son of P'an Ku and T'ai-yuan Sheng-mu; first member of Taoist triad, <page 124>; First Cause, Highest in Heaven, <page 127> sq.; God of Lightning, <page 128>; avatar of P'an Ku, <page 128> sq.; first named Yuan-shih T'ien-wang, <page 128>; legend of birth of, <page 128> sq.; fights T'ung-t'ien Chiao-chu, <page 134>, <page 321>, <page 322>-<page 323>; and Tou Mu, <page 144>; presents List of Promotions to Immortals to Chiang Tzu-ya, <page 154>-<page 155>; kills Pi Hsiao, <page 158>

Yuan-shih T'ien-wang. See Yuan-shih T'ien-tsun

Yueh-shih Fo. The Master-Physician Buddha, <page 120>

Yun Chung-tzu. A hermit; causes the death of Wen Chung, <page 199>; teacher of Lei Chen-tzu, <page 202>-<page 203>

Yun-t'ai Mountain. The peach-plucking on, <page 140>-<page 141>

Myths and Legends of China, by Edward T.C. Werner, [1922], at sacred-texts.com

  

Uniform with this Volume

An Introduction to Mythology By Lewis Spence, F.R.A.I.

The Myths of Greece and Rome By H.A. Guerber. With 57 Full-page Illustrations. A classic volume. At once a fascinating story-book and a valuable work of reference.

Myths of the Norsemen From the Eddas and Sagas. By H.A. Guerber. With 33 Full-page Illustrations.

Myths and Legends of the Middle Ages By H.A. Guerber. With 36 Full-page Illustrations.

Hero-Myths and Legends of the British Race. By M.I. Ebbutt, M.A. With 51 Original Full-page Illustrations.

Myths and Legends of the Celtic Race By T.W. Rolleston. With 46 Original Full-page Illustrations.

Myths and Legends of Japan By F. Hadland Davis. With 32 Plates in Colour.

The Myths of Mexico and Peru By Lewis Spence, F.R.A.I. With 52 Full-page Plates and other Illustrations.

The Myths of the North American Indians. By Lewis Spence, F.R.A.I. With 30 Plates in Colour and other Illustrations.

Myths and Legends of Ancient Egypt By Lewis Spence, F.R.A.I. With 16 Plates in Colour and 32 other Illustrations.

Myths of the Hindus and Buddhists By Sister Nivedita (Margaret E. Noble) and Dr Ananda Coomaraswamy. With 32 Plates in Colour by Indian Artists.

Myths and Legends of Babylonia and Assyria. By Lewis Spence, F.R.A.I. With 8 Plates in Colour and 32 Plates in Half-Tone.

Hero Tales and Legends of the Serbians By Woislav M. Petrovitch. With 32 Plates in Colour.

Myths and Legends of China By E.T.C. Werner. With 32 Full-page Illustrations in Colour and Gold.

Hero Tales and Legends of the Rhine By Lewis Spence, F.R.A.I. With 24 Full-page Illustrations.

 

    


===== BOOK: mmp.txt =====


    
The Myths of Mexico and Peru, by Lewis Spence, [1913], at sacred-texts.com

  

THE MYTHS OF MEXICO AND PERU

  

by Lewis Spence

  

London: George Harrap

  

[1913]

  

Scanned, proofed and formatted at sacred-texts.com, March 2001, by John Bruno Hare. This text is in the public domain in the US because it was published prior to 1923.

     
The Myths of Mexico and Peru, by Lewis Spence, [1913], at sacred-texts.com

Map of the Valley of Mexico

Ethnographic Map of Mexico

Detail of Ethnographic Map of Mexico

Empire of the Incas

     
The Myths of Mexico and Peru, by Lewis Spence, [1913], at sacred-texts.com

  

PREFACE

IN recent years a reawakening has taken place in the study of American archaeology and antiquities, owing chiefly to the labours of a band of scholars in the United States and a few enthusiasts in the continent of Europe. For the greater part of the nineteenth century it appeared as if the last word had been written upon Mexican archaeology. The lack of excavations and exploration had cramped the outlook of scholars, and there was nothing for them to work upon save what had been done in this respect before their own time. The writers on Central America who lived in the third quarter of the last century relied on the travels of Stephens and Norman, and never appeared to consider it essential that the country or the antiquities in which they specialised should be examined anew, or that fresh expeditions should be equipped to discover whether still further monuments existed relating to the ancient peoples who raised the teocallis of Mexico and the huacas of Peru. True, the middle of the century was not altogether without its Americanist explorers, but the researches of these were performed in a manner so perfunctory that but few additions to the science resulted from their labours.

Modern Americanist archaeology may be said to have been the creation of a brilliant band of scholars who, working far apart and without any attempt at co-operation, yet succeeded in accomplishing much. Among these may be mentioned the Frenchmen Charnay and de Rosny, and the Americans Brinton, H. H. Bancroft, and Squier. To these succeeded the German scholars Seler, Schellhas, and Forstemann, the Americans Winsor, Starr, Savile, and Cyrus Thomas, and the Englishmen Payne and Sir Clements Markham. These men, splendidly equipped for the work they had taken in hand, were yet hampered by the lack of reliable data -a want later supplied partly by their own excavations and partly by the painstaking labours of Professor Maudslay, principal of the International College of Antiquities at Mexico, who, with his wife, is responsible or the exact pictorial reproductions of many of the ancient edifices in Central America and Mexico.

Writers in the sphere of Mexican and Peruvian myth have been few. The first to attack the subject in the light of the modern science of comparative religion was Daniel Garrison Brinton, professor of American languages and archaeology in the University of Philadelphia. He has been followed by Payne, Schellhas, Seler, and Rrstemann, all of whom, however, have confined the publication of their researches to isolated articles in various geographical and scientific journals. The remarks of mythologists who are not also Americanists upon the subject of American myth must be accepted with caution.

The question of the alphabets of ancient America is perhaps the most acute in present-day pre-Columbian archaeology. But progress is being made in this branch of the subject, and several scholars are working in whole-hearted co-operation to secure final results.

What has Great Britain accomplished in this new and fascinating field of science? If the lifelong and valuable labours of the late Sir Clements Markham be excepted, almost nothing. It is earnestly hoped that the publication of this volume may prove the means of leading many English students to the study and consideration of American archaeology.

There remains the romance of old America. The real interest of American mediaeval history must ever circle around Mexico and Peru-her golden empires, her sole exemplars of civilisation; and it is to the books upon the character of these two nations that we must turn for a romantic interest as curious and as absorbing as that bound up in the history of Egypt or Assyria.

If human interest is craved for by any man, let him turn to the narratives of Garcilasso el Inca de la Vega and Ixtlilxochitl, representatives and last descendants of the Peruvian and Tezcucan monarchies, and read there the frightful story of the path to fortune of red-heeled Pizarro and cruel Cortes, of the horrible cruelties committed upon the red man, whose colour was "that of the devil," of the awful pageant of fold-sated pirates laden with the treasures of palaces, of the stripping of temples whose very bricks were of gold, whose very drain-pipes were of silver, of rapine and the sacrilege of high places, of porphyry gods dashed down the pyramidal sides of lofty teocallis, of princesses tom from the very steps of the throne-ay, read these for the most wondrous tales ever writ by the hand of man, tales by the side of which the fables of Araby seem dim -the story of a clash of worlds, the conquest of a new, of an isolated hemisphere.

It is usual to speak of America as "a continent without a history." The folly of such a statement is extreme. For centuries prior to European occupation Central America was the seat of civilisations boasting a history and a semi-historical mythology second to none in richness and interest. It is only because the sources of that history are unknown to the general reader that such assurance upon the lack of it exists.

Let us hope that this book may assist in attracting many to the head-fountain of a river whose affluents water many a plain of beauty not the less lovely because bizarre, not the less fascinating because somewhat remote from modern thought.

In conclusion I have to acknowledge the courtesy of the Bureau of American Ethnology, which placed in my hands a valuable collection of illustrations and allowed me to select from these at my discretion. The pictures chosen include the drawings used as tailpieces to chapters; others, usually half-tones, are duly acknowledged where they occur.

LEWIS SPENCE

     
The Myths of Mexico and Peru, by Lewis Spence, [1913], at sacred-texts.com

  

CONTENTS

  

CHAPTER

  

I. THE CIVILISATION OF MEXICO

  

II. MEXICAN MYTHOLOGY

  

III. MYTHS AND LEGENDS OF THE ANCIENT MEXICANS

  

IV. THE MAYA RACE AND MYTHOLOGY

  

V. MYTHS OF THE MAYA

  

VI. THE CIVILISATION OF OLD PERU

  

VII. THE MYTHOLOGY OF PERU

  

BIBLIOGRAPHY

  

INDEX AND GLOSSARY

     
The Myths of Mexico and Peru, by Lewis Spence, [1913], at sacred-texts.com

  

CHAPTER I: The Civilisation of Mexico

  

The Civilisations of the New World

THERE is now no question as to the indigenous origin of the civilisations of Mexico, Central America, and Peru. Upon few subjects, how. ever, has so much mistaken erudition been lavished. The beginnings of the races who inhabited these regions, and the cultures which they severally created, have been referred to nearly every civilised or semicivilised nation of antiquity, and wild if fascinating theories have been advanced with the intention of showing that civilisation was initiated upon American soil by Asiatic or European influence. These speculations were for the most part put forward by persons who possessed but a merely general acquaintance with the circumstances of American aboriginal civilisation, and who were struck by the superficial resemblances which undoubtedly exist between American and Asiatic peoples, customs, and art-forms, but which cease to be apparent to the Americanist, who perceives in them only such likenesses as inevitably occur in the work of men situated in similar environments and surrounded by similar social and religious conditions.

The Maya of Yucatan may be regarded as the most highly civilised of the peoples who occupied the American continent before the advent of Europeans, and it is usually their culture which we are asked to believe had its seat of origin in Asia. It is unnecessary to refute this theory in detail, as that has already been ably accomplished.[By Payne in The New World called America, London 1892-99] But it may be remarked that the surest proof of the purely native origin of American civilisation is to be found in the unique nature of American art, the undoubted result of countless centuries of isolation. American language, arithmetic, and methods of time-reckoning, too, bear no resemblance to other systems, European or Asiatic, and we may be certain that had a civilising race entered America from Asia it would have left its indelible impress upon things so intensely associated with the life of a people as well as upon the art and architecture of the country, for they are as much the product of culture as is the ability to raise temples.

  

Evidence of Animal and Plant Life

It is, impossible in this connection to ignore the evidence in favour of native advancement which can be adduced from the artificial production of food in America. Nearly all the domesticated animals and cultivated food-plants found on the continent at the period of the discovery were totally different from those known to the Old World. Maize, cocoa, tobacco, and the potato, with a host of useful plants, were new to the European conquerors, and the absence of such familiar animals as the horse, cow, and sheep, besides a score of lesser animals, is eloquent proof of the prolonged isolation which the American continent underwent subsequent to its original settlement by man.

  

Origin of American Man

An Asiatic origin is, of course, admitted for the aborigines of America, but it undoubtedly stretched back into that dim Tertiary Era when man was little more than beast, and language as yet was not, or at the best was only half formed. Later immigrants there certainly were, but these probably arrived by way of Behring Strait, and not by the land-bridge connecting Asia and America by which the first-comers found entrance. At a later geological period the general level of the North American continent was higher than at present, and a broad isthmus connected it with Asia. During this prolonged elevation vast littoral plains, now submerged, extended continuously from the American to the Asiatic shore, affording an easy route of migration to a type of man from whom both the Mongolian branches may have sprung. But this type, little removed from the animal as it undoubtedly was, carried with it none of the refinements of art or civilisation; and if any resemblances occur between the art-forms or polity of its equal descendants in Asia and America, they are due to the influence of a remote common ancestry, and not to any later influx of Asiatic civilisation to American shores.

  

Traditions of Intercourse with Asia

The few traditions of Asiatic intercourse with America are, alas! easily dissipated. It is a dismal business to be compelled to refute the dreams of others. How much more fascinating would American history have been had Asia sowed the seeds of her own peculiar civilisation in the western continent, which would then have become a newer and further East, a more glowing and golden Orient I But America possesses a fascination almost as intense when there falls to be considered the marvel of the evolution of her wondrous civilisations-the flowers of progress of a new, of an isolated world.

The idea that the "Fu-Sang" of the Chinese annals alluded to America was rendered illusory by Klaproth, who showed its identity with a Japanese island. It is not impossible that Chinese and Japanese vessels may have drifted on to the American coasts) but that they sailed thither of set purpose is highly improbable. Gomara, the Mexican historian, states that those who served with Coronado's expedition in 1542 saw off the Pacific coast certain ships having their prows decorated with gold and silver, and laden with merchandise, and these they supposed to be of Cathay or China, "because they intimated by signs that they had been thirty days on their voyage." Like most of these interesting stories, however, the tale has no foundation in fact, as the incident cannot be discovered in the original account of the expedition, published in 1838 in the travel-collection of Ternaux-Compans.

  

Legends of European Intercourse

We shall find the traditions, one might almost call them legends, of early European intercourse with America little more satisfactory than those which recount its ancient connection with Asia. We may dismiss the sagas of the discovery of America by the Norsemen, which are by no means mere tradition, and pass on to those in which the basis of fact is weaker and the legendary interest more strong. We are told that when the Norsemen drove forth those Irish monks who had settled in Iceland, the fugitives voyaged to

Great Ireland, by which many antiquarians of the older school imagine the author of the myth to have meant America. The Irish Book of Lismore recounts the voyage of St. Brandan, Abbot of Cluainfert, in Ireland, to an island in the ocean which Providence had intended as the abode of saints. It gives a glowing account of his seven years' cruise in western waters, and tells of numerous discoveries, among them a hill of fire and an endless island, which he quitted after an unavailing journey of forty days, loading his ships with its fruits, and returning home. Many Norse legends exist regarding this "Greater Ireland," or "Huitramanna Land" (White Man's Land), among them one concerning a Norseman who was cast away on its shores, and who found there a race of white men who went to worship their gods bearing banners, and "shouting with a loud voice." There is, of course, the bare possibility that the roving Norsemen may have on occasions drifted or have been cast away as far south as Mexico, and such an occurrence becomes the more easy of belief when we remember that they certainly reached the shores of North America.

  

The Legend of Madoc

A much more interesting because more probable story is that which tells of the discovery of distant lands across the western ocean by Madoc, a princeling of North Wales, in the year 1170. It is recorded in Hakluyt's English Voyages and Powel's History of Wales. Madoc, the son of Owen Gwyneth, disgusted by the strife of his brothers for the principality of their dead father, resolved to quit such an uncongenial atmosphere, and, fitting out ships with men and munition, sought adventure by sea, sailing west, and leaving the coast of Ireland so far north that he came to a land unknown, where he saw many strange things. "This land," says Hakluyt, " must needs be some part of that country of which the Spaniards affirmc themselves to be the first finders since Hanno's time, and through this allusion we are enabled to see how these legends relating to mythical lands came to be Associated with the American continent. Concerning the land discovered by Madoc many tales were current in Wales in mediaeval times. Madoc on his return declared that it was pleasant and fruitful, but uninhabited. He succeeded in persuading a large number of people to accompany him to this delectable region, and, as he never returned, Hakluyt concludes that the descendants of the folk he took with him composed the greater part of the population of the America of the seventeenth century, a conclusion in which he has been supported by more than one modern antiquarian. Indeed, the wildest fancies have been based upon this legend, and stories of Welsh-speaking Indians who were able to converse with Cymric immigrants to the American colonies have been received with complacency by the older school of American historians as the strongest confirmation of the saga. It is notable, however, that Henry VII of England, the son of a Welshman, may have been influenced in his patronage of the early American explorers by this legend of Madoc, as it is known that he employed one Guttyn Owen, a Welsh historiographer, to draw up his paternal pedigree, and that this same Guttyn included the story in his works. Such legends as those relating to Atlantis and Antilia scarcely fall within the scope of American myth, as they undoubtedly relate to early communication with the Canaries and Azores.

  

American Myths of the Discovery

But what were the speculations of the Red Men on the other side of the Atlantic? Were there no rumours there, no legends of an Eastern world? Immediately prior to the discovery there was in America a widely disseminated belief that at a relatively remote period strangers from the east had visited American soil, eventually returning to their own abodes in the Land of Sunrise. Such, for example, was the Mexican legend of Quetzalcoatl, to which we shall revert later in its more essentially mythical connection. He landed with several companions at Vera Cruz, and speedily brought to bear the power of a civilising agency upon native opinion. In the ancient Mexican pinturas, or paintings, he is represented as being habited in a long black gown, fringed with white crosses. After sojourning with the Mexicans for a number of years, during which time he initiated them into the arts of life and civilisation, he departed from their land on a magic raft, promising, however, to return. His second advent was anxiously looked for, and when Cortes and his companions arrived at Vera Cruz, the identical spot at which Quetzalcoatl was supposed to have set out on his homeward journey, the Mexicans fully believed him to be the returned hero. Of course Montezuma, their monarch, was not altogether taken by surprise at the coming of the white man, as he had been informed of the arrival of mysterious strangers in Yucatan and elsewhere in Central America; but in the eyes of the commonalty the Spanish leader was a "hero-god" indeed. In this interesting figure several of the monkish chroniclers of New Spain saw the Apostle St. Thomas, who had journeyed to the American continent to effect its conversion to Christianity.

  

A Peruvian Prophecy

The Mexicans were by no means singular in their presentiments. When Hernando de Soto, on landing in Peru, first met the Inca Huascar, the latter related an ancient prophecy which his father, Huaina Ccapac, had repeated on his death-bed, that in the reign of the thirteenth Inca white men of surpassing strength and valour would come from their father the Sun, and subject the Peruvians to their rule. "I command you," said the dying king," to yield them homage and obedience, for they will be of a nature superior to ours." [Garcilasso el Inca de la Vega, Hist. des Incas, lib. ix. cap. 15.]

But the most interesting of American legends connected with the discovery is that in which the prophecy ot the Maya priest Chilan Balam is described. Father Lizana, a venerable Spanish author, records the prophecy, which he states was very well known throughout Yucatan, as does Villagutierre, who quotes it.

  

The Prophecy of Chilan Balam

Part of this strange prophecy runs as follows: "At the end of the thirteenth age, when Itza is at the height of its power, as also the city called Tancah, the signal of God will appear on the heights, and the Cross with which the world was enlightened will be manifested. There will be variance of men's will in future times, when this signal shall be brought. . . . Receive your barbarous bearded guests from the cast, who bring the signal of God, who comes to us in mercy and pity. The time of our life is coming. . . ."

It would seem from the perusal of this prophecy that a genuine substratum of native tradition has been overlaid and coloured by the influence of the early Spanish missionaries. The terms of the announcement are much too exact, and the language employed is obviously Scriptural. But the native books of Chilan Balam, whence the prophecy is taken, are much less explicit, and the genuineness of their character is evinced by the idiomatic use of the Maya tongue, which, in the form they present it in, could have been written by none save those who had habitually employed it from infancy. As regards the prophetic nature of these deliverances it is known that the Chilan, or priest, was wont to utter publicly at the end of certain prolonged periods a prophecy forecasting the character of the similar period to come, and there is reason to believe that some distant rumours of the coming of the white man had reached the ears of several of the seers.

These vague intimations that the seas separated them from a great continent where dwelt beings like themselves seem to have been common to white and red men alike. And who shall say by what strange magic of telepathy they were inspired in the minds of the daring explorers and the ascetic priests who gave expression to them in act and utterance? The discovery of America was much more than a mere scientific process, and romance rather than the cold speculations of mediaeval geography urged men to tempt the dim seas of the West in quest of golden islands seen in dreams.

  

The Type of Mexican Civilisation

The first civilised American people with whom the discoverers came into contact were those of the Nahua or ancient Mexican race. We use the term "civilised" advisedly, for although several authorities of standing have refused to regard the Mexicans as a people who had achieved such a state of culture as would entitle them to be classed among civilised communities, there is no doubt that they had advanced nearly as far as it was possible for them to proceed when their environment and the nature of the circumstances which handicapped them are taken into consideration. In architecture they had evolved a type of building, solid yet wonderfully graceful, which, if not so massive as the Egyptian and Assyrian, was yet more highly decorative. Their artistic outlook as expressed in their painting and pottery was more versatile and less conventional than that of the ancient people of the Orient, their social system was of a more advanced type, and a less rigorous attitude was evinced by the ruling caste toward the subject classes. Yet, on the other hand, the picture is darkened by the terrible if picturesque rites which attended their religious ceremonies, and the dread shadow of human sacrifice which eternally overhung their teeming populations. Nevertheless, the standard of morality was high, justice was even-handed, the forms of government were comparatively mild, and but for the fanaticism which demanded such troops of victims, we might justly compare the civilisation of ancient Mexico with that of the peoples of old China or India, if the literary activity of the Oriental states be discounted.

  

The Mexican Race

The race which was responsible for this varied and highly coloured civilisation was that known as the Nahua (Those who live by Rule), a title adopted by them to distinguish them from those tribes who still roamed in an unsettled condition over the contiguous plains of New Mexico and the more northerly tracts. This term was employed by them to designate the race as a whole, but it was composed of many diverse elements, the characteristics of which were rendered still more various by the adoption into one or other of the tribes which composed it of surrounding aboriginal peoples. Much controversy has raged round the question regarding the original home of the Nahua, but their migration legends consistently point to a northern origin; and when the close affinity between the art-forms and mythology of the present-day natives of British Columbia and those of the Nahua comes to be considered along with the very persistent legends of a prolonged pilgrimage from the North, where they dwelt in a place "by the water," the conclusion that the Nahua emanated from the region indicated is well-nigh irresistible. [See Payne, History of the New World called America, vol. ii. pp 373 et seq.]

In Nahua tradition the name of the locality whence the race commenced its wanderings is called Aztlan (The Place of Reeds), but this place-name is of little or no value as a guide to any given region, though probably every spot betwixt Behring Strait and Mexico has been identified with it by zealous antiquarians. Other names discovered in the migration legends are Tlapallan (The Country of Bright Colours) and Chicomoztoc (The Seven Caves), and these may perhaps be identified with New Mexico or Arizona.

  

Legends of Mexican Migration

All early writers on the history of Mexico agree that the Toltecs were the first of the several swarms of Nahua who streamed upon the Mexican plateau in ever-widcning waves. Concerning the reality of this people so little is known that many authorities of standina have regarded them as wholly mythical, while others profess to see in them a veritable race, the founders of Mexican civilisation. The author has already elaborated his theory of this difficult question elsewhere,' but will briefly refer to it when he comes to deal with the subject of the Toltec civilisation and the legends concerning it. For the present we must regard the Toltecs merely as a race alluded to in a migration myth as the first Nahua immigrants to the region of Mexico. Ixtlilxochitl, a native chronicler who flourished shortly after the Spanish conquest of Mexico, gives two separate accounts of the early Toltec migrations, the first of which goes back to the period of their arrival in the fabled land of Tlapallan, alluded to above. In this account Tlapallan is described as a region near the sea, which the Toltecs reached by voyaging southward, skirting the coasts of California.

This account must be received with the greatest caution. But we know that the natives of British Columbia have been expert in the use of the canoe from an early period, and that the Mexican god Quetzalcoatl, who is probably originally derived from a common source with their deity Yed, is represented as being skilled in the management of the craft. It is, therefore, not outside the bounds of possibility that the early swarms of Nahua immigrants made their way to Mexico by sea, but it is much more probable that their migrations took place by land, following the level country at the base of the Rocky Mountains.

  

The Toltec Upheaval

Like nearly all legendary immigrants, the Toltecs did not set out to colonise distant countries from any impulse of their own, but were the victims of internecine dissension in the homeland, and were expelled from the community to seek their fortunes elsewhere. Thus thrust forth, they set their faces southward, and reached Tlapallan in the year 1 Tecpatl (A.D. 387). Passing the country of Xalisco, they effected a landing at Huatulco, and journeyed down the coast until they reached Tochtepec, whence they pushed inland to Tollantzinco. To enable them to make this journey they required no less than 104 years. Ixtlilxochitl furnishes another account of the Toltec migration in his Relaciones, a work dealing with the early history of the Mexican races. In this he recounts how the chiefs of Tlapallan, who had revolted against the royal power, were banished from that region inA. D. 439. Lingering near their ancient territory for the space of eight years, they then journeyed to Tlapallantzinco, where they halted for three years before setting out on a prolonged pilgrimage, which occupied the tribe for over a century, and in the course of which it halted at no less than thirteen different resting-places, six of which can be traced to stations on the Pacific coast, and the remainder to localities in the north of Mexico.

  

Artificial Nature of the Migration Myths

It is plain from internal evidence that these two legends of the Toltec migrations present an artificial aspect. But if we cannot credit them in detail, that is not to say that they do not describe in part an actual pilgrimage. They are specimens of numerous migration myths which are related concerning the various branches of the Mexican races. Few features of interest are presented in them, and they are chiefly remarkable for wearisome repetition and divergence in essential details.

  

Myths of the Toltecs

But we enter a much more fascinating domain when we come to peruse the myths regarding the Toltec kingdom and civilisation, for, before entering upon the origin or veritable history of the Toltec race, it will be better to consider the native legends concerning them. These exhibit an almost Oriental exuberance of imagination and colouring, and forcibly remind the reader of the gorgeous architectural and scenic descriptions in the 4rabian Nights. The principal sources of these legends are the histories of Zumarraga and Ixtlilxochitl. The latter is by no means a satisfactory authority, but he has succeeded in investing the traditions of his native land with no inconsiderable degree of charm. The Toltecs, he says, founded the magnificent city of Tollan in the year 566 of the Incarnation. This city, the site of which is now occupied by the modern town of Tula, was situated north-west of the mountains which bound the Mexican valley. Thither were the Toltecs guided by the powerful necromancet Hueymatzin (Great Hand), and under his direction they decided to build a city upon the site of what bad been their place of bivouac. For six years they toiled at the building of Tollan, and magnificent edifices, palaces, and temples arose, the whole forming a capital of a splendour unparalleled in the New World. The valley wherein it stood was known as the "Place of Fruits," in allusion to its great fertility. The surrounding rivers teemed with fish, and the hills which encircled this delectable site sheltered large herds of game. But as yet the Toltecs were without a ruler, and in the seventh year of their occupation of the city the assembled chieftains took counsel together, and resolved to surrender their power into the hands of a monarch whom the people might elect. The choice fell upon Chalchiuh Tlatonac (Shining Precious Stone), who reigned for fifty-two years.

  

Legends of Toltec Artistry

Happily settled in their new country, and ruled over by a king whom they could regard with reverence, the Toltecs made rapid progress in the various arts, and their city began to be celebrated far and wide for the excellence of its craftsmen and the beauty of its architecture and pottery. The name of "Toltec," in fact, came to be regarded by the surrounding peoples as synonymous with "artist," and as a kind of hall-mark which guaranteed the superiority of any article of Toltec workmanship. Everything in and about the city was eloquent of the taste and artistry of its founders. The very walls were encrusted with rare stones, and their masonry was so beautifully chiselled and laid as to resemble the choicest mosaic. One of the edifices of which the inhabitants of Tollan were most justly proud was the temple wherein their high-priest officiated. This building was a very gem of architectural art and mural decoration. It contained four apartments. The walls of the first were inlaid with gold, the second with precious stones of every description, the third with beautiful sea-shells of all conceivable hues and of the most brilliant and tender shades encrusted in bricks of silver, which sparkled in the sun in such a manner as to dazzle the eyes of beholders. The fourth apartment was formed of a brilliant red stone, ornamented with shells.

  

The House of Feathers

Still more fantastic and weirdly beautiful was another edifice, "The House of Feathers." This also possessed four apartments, one decorated with feathers of a brilliant yellow, another with the radiant and sparkling hues of the Blue Bird. These were woven into a kind of tapestry, and placed against the walls in graceful hangings and festoons. An apartment described as of entrancing beauty was that in which the decorative scheme consisted of plumage of the purest and most dazzling white. The remaining chamber was hung with feathers of a brilliant red, plucked from the most beautiful birds.

  

Huemac the Wicked

A succession of more or less able kings succeeded the founder of the Toltec monarchy, until in A.D. 994 Huemac II ascended the throne of Tollan. He ruled first with wisdom, and paid great attention to the duties of the state and religion. But later he fell from the high place he had made for himself in the regard of the people by his faithless deception of them and his intemperate and licentious habits. The provinces rose in revolt, and many signs and gloomy omens foretold the downfall of the city. Toveyo, a cunning sorcerer, Collected a great concourse of people near Tollan, and by dint of beating upon a magic drum until the darkest hours of the night, forced them to dance to its sound until, exhausted by their efforts, they fell headlong over a dizzy precipice into a deep ravine, where they were turned into stone. Toveyo also maliciously destroyed a stone bridge, so that thousands of people fell into the river beneath and were drowned. The neighbouring volcanoes burst into eruption, presenting a frightful aspect, and grisly apparitions could be seen among the flames threatening the city with terrible gestures of menace.

The rulers of Tollan resolved to lose no time in placating the gods, whom they decided from the portents must have conceived the most violent wrath against their capital. They therefore ordained a reat sacrifice of war-captives. But upon the first orthe victims being placed upon the altar a still more terrible catastrophe occurred. In the method of sacrifice common to the Nahua race the breast of a youth was opened for the purpose of extracting the heart, but no such organ could the officiating priest perceive. Moreover the veins of the victim were bloodless. Such a deadly odour was exhaled from the corpse that a terrible pestilence arose, which caused the death of thousands of Toltecs. Huemac, the unrighteous monarch who had brought all this suffering upon his folk, was confronted in the forest by the Tlalocs, or gods of moisture, and humbly petitioned these deities to spare him, and not to take from him his wealth and rank. But the go,is were disgusted at the callous selfishness displayed in his desires, and departed, threatening the Toltec race with six years of plagues.

  

The Plagues of the Toltecs

In the next winter such a severe frost visited the land that all crops and plants were killed. A summer of torrid heat followed, so intense in its suffocating fierceness that the streams, were dried up and the very rocks were melted. Then heavy rain-storms descended, which flooded the streets and ways, and terrible tempests swept through the land. Vast numbers of loathsome toads invaded the valley, consuming the refuse left by the destructive frost and heat, and entering the very houses of the people. In the following year a terrible drought caused the death of thousands from starvation, and the ensuing winter was again a marvel of severity. Locusts descended in cloud-like swarms, and hail- and thunder-storms completed the wreck. During these visitations nine-tenths of the people perished, and all artistic endeavour ceased because of the awful struggle for food.

  

King Acxitl

With the cessation of these inflictions the wicked Huemac resolved upon a more upright course of life, and became most assiduous for the welfare and proper government of his people. But he had announced that Acxitl, his illegitimate son, should succeed him, and had further resolved to abdicate at once in favour of this youth. With the Toltecs, as with most primitive peoples, the early kings were regarded as divine, and the attempt to place on the throne one who was not of the royal blood was looked upon as a serious offence against the gods. A revolt ensued, but its two principal leaders were bought over by promises of preferment. Acxitl ascended the throne, and for a time ruled wisely. But he soon, like his father, gave way to a life of dissipation, and succeeded in setting a bad example to the members of his court and to the priesthood, the vicious spirit communicating itself to all classes of his subjects and permeating every rank of society. The iniquities of the people of the capital and the enormities practised by the royal favourites caused such scandal in the outlying provinces that at length they broke into open revolt, and Huehuetzin, chief of an eastern viceroyalty, joined to himself two other malcontent lords and marched upon the city of Tollan at the head of a strong force. Acxitl could not muster an army sufficiently powerful to repel the rebels, and was forced to resort to the expedient of buying them off with rich presents, thus patching up a truce. But the fate of Tollan was in the balance. Hordes of rude Chichimec savages, profiting by the civil broils in the Toltec state, invaded the lake region of Anahuac, or Mexico, and settled upon its fruitful soil. The end was in sight!

  

A Terrible Visitation

The wrath of the gods increased instead of diminishing, and in order to appease them a great convention of the wise men of the realm met at Teotihuacan, the sacred city of the Toltecs. But during their deliberations a giant of immense proportions rushed into their midst, and, seizing upon them by scores with his bony hands, hurled them to the ground, dashing their brains out. In this manner he slew great numbers, and when the panic-stricken folk imagined themselves delivered from him he returned in a different guise and slew many more. Again the grisly monster appeared, this time taking the form of a beautiful child. The people, fascinated by its loveliness, ran to observe it more closely, only to discover that its head was a mass of corruption, the stench from which was so is fatal that many were killed outright. The fiend who had thus plagued the Toltecs at length deigned to inform them that the gods would listen no longer to their prayers, but had fully resolved to destroy them root and branch, and he further counselled them to seek safety in flight.

  

Fall of the Toltec State

By this time the principal families of Tollan had deserted the country, taking refuge in neighbouring states. Once more Huehuetzin menaced Tollan, and by dint of almost superhuman efforts old King Huemac, who had left his retirement, raised a force sufficient to face the enemy. Acxitl's mother enlisted the services of the women of the city, and formed them into a regiment of Amazons. At the head of all was Acxitl, who divided his forces, despatching one portion to the front under his commander-in-chief, and forming the other into a reserve under his own leadership. During three years the king defended Tollan against the combined forces of the rebels and the semi-savage Chichimecs. At length the Toltecs, almost decimated, fled after a final desperate battle into the marshes of Lake Tezcuco and the fastnesses of the mountains. Their other cities were given over to destruction, and the Toltec empire was at an end.

  

The Chichimec Exodus

Meanwhile the rude Chichimecs of the north, who had for many years carried on a constant warfare with the Toltecs, were surprised that their enemies sought their borders no more, a practice which they had engaged in principally for the purpose of obtaining captives for sacrifice. In order to discover the reason for this suspicious quiet they sent out spies into Toltec territory, who returned with the amazing news that the Toltec domain for a distance of six hundred miles from the Chichimec frontier was a desert, the towns ruined and empty and their inhabitants scattered. Xolotl, the Chichimec king, summoned his chieftains to his capital, and, acquainting them with what the spies had said) proposed an expedition for the purpose of annexing the abandoned land. No less than 3,202,000 people composed this migration, and only 1,6oo,ooo remained in the Chichimec territory.

The Chichimecs occupied most of the ruined cities, many of which they rebuilt. Those Toltecs who remained became peaceful subjects, and through their knowledge of commerce and handicrafts amassed considerable wealth. A tribute was, however, demanded from them, which was peremptorily refused by Nauhyotl, the Toltec ruler of Colhuacan; but he was defeated and slain, and the Chichimec rule was at last supreme.

  

The Disappearance of the Toltecs

The transmitters of this legendary account give it as their belief which is shared by some authorities of standing, that the Toltecs, fleein-a from the civil broils of their city and the inroads of the Chichimecs, passed into Central America, where they became the founders of the civilisation of that country, and the architects of the many wonderful cities the ruins of which now litter its plains and are encountered in its forests. But it is time that we examined the claims put forward on behalf of Toltec civilisation and culture by the aid of more scientific methods.

  

Did the Toltecs Exist?

Some authorities have questioned the existence of the Toltecs, and have professed to see in them a race which had merely a mythical significance. They base this theory upon the circumstance that the duration of the reigns of the several Toltec monarchs is very frequently stated to have lasted for exactly fifty-two years, the duration of the great Mexican cycle of years which had been adopted so that the ritual calendar might coincide with the solar year. The circumstance is certainly suspicious, as is the fact that many of the names of the Toltec monarchs are also those of the principal Nahua deities, and this renders the whole dynastic list of very doubtful value. Dr. Brinton recognised in the Toltecs those children of the sun who, like their brethren in Peruvian mythology, were sent from heaven to civilise the human race, and his theory is by no means weakened by the circumstance that Quetzalcoatl, a deity of solar significance, is alluded to in Nahua myth as King of the Toltecs. Recent considerations and discoveries, however, have virtually forced students of the subject to admit the existence of the Toltecs as a race. The author has dealt with the question at some length elsewhere, [see Civilization of Ancient Mexico, chap ii] and is not of those who are free to admit the definite existence of the Toltecs from a historical point of view. The late Mr. Payne of Oxford, an authority entitled to every respect, gave it as his opinion that " the accounts of Toltec history current at the conquest contain a nucleus of substantial truth, and he writes convincingly: "To doubt that there once existed in Tollan an advancement superior to that which prevailed among the Nahuatlaca generally at the conquest, and that its people spread their advancement throughout Anahuac, and into the districts eastward and southward, would be to reject a belief universally entertained, and confirmed rather than shaken by the cfforts made in later times to construct for the Pueblo something in the nature of a history." [Payne, Hist. New World, vol ii. p. 430]

  

A Persistent Tradition

The theory of the present author concerning Toltec historical existence is rather more non-committal. He admits that a most persistent body of tradition as to their existence gained general credence among the Nahua, and that the date (1055) of their alleged dispersal admits of the approximate exactness and probability of this body of tradition at the time of the conquest. He also admits that the site of Tollan contains ruins which arc undoubtedly of a date earlier than that of the architecture of the Nahua as known at the conquest, and that numerous evidences of an older civilisation exist. He also believes that the early Nahua having within their racial recollection existed as savages, the time which elapsed between their barbarian condition and the more advanced state which they achieved was too brief to admit of evolution from savagery to culture. Hence they must have adopted an older civilisation, especially as through the veneer of civilisation possessed by them they exhibited every sign of gross barbarism.

  

A Nameless People

If this be true it would go to show that a people of comparatively high culture existed at a not very remote period on the Mexican tableland. But what their name was or their racial affinity the writer does not profess to know. Many modern American scholars of note have conferred upon them the name of "Toltecs," and speak freely of the "Toltec period" and of "Toltec art." It may appear pedantic to refuse to recognisc that the cultured people who dwelt in Mexico in pre-Nahua times were "the Toltecs." But in the face of the absence of genuine and authoritative native written records dealing with the question, the author finds himself compelled to remain unconvinced as to the exact designation of the mysterious older race which preceded the Nahua. There are not wanting authorities who appear to regard the pictorial chronicles of the Nahua as quite as worthy of credence as written records, but it must be clear that tradition or even history set down in pictorial form can never possess that degree of definiteness contained in a written account.

  

Toltec Art

As has been stated above, the Toltecs of tradition were chiefly remarkable for their intense love of art and their productions in its various branches. Ixtlilxochitl says that they worked in gold, silver, copper, tin, and lead, and as masons employed flint, porphyry, basalt, and obsidian. In the manufacture of jewellery and objets d'art they excelled, and the pottery of Cholula, of which specimens are frequently recovered, was of a high standard.

  

Other Aboriginal Peoples

Mexico contained other aboriginal races besides the Toltecs. Of these many and diverse peoples the most remarkable were the Otomi, who still occupy Guanajuato and Queretaro, and who, before the coming of the Nahua, probably spread over the entire valley of Mexico. In the south we find the Huasteca, a people speaking the same language as the Maya of Central America, and on the Mexican Gulf the Totonacs and Chontals. On the Pacific side of the country the Mixteca and Zapoteca, were responsible for a flourishing civilisation which exhibited many original characteristics, and which in some degree was a link between the cultures of Mexico and Central America. Traces of a still older population than any of these are still to be found in the more remote parts of Mexico, and the Mixe, Zaque, Kuicatec, and Popolcan are probably the remnants of prehistoric races of vast antiquity.

  

The Cliff-dwellers

It is probable that a race known as "the Cliff. dwellers," occupying the plateau country of Arizona, New Mexico, Colorado, and Utah, and even extending in its ramifications to Mexico itself, was related ethnologically to the Nahua. The present-day Pueblo Indians dwelling to the north of Mexico most probably possess a leaven of Nahua blood. Ere the tribes who communicated this leaven to thewhole had intermingled with others, of various origin, it would appear that they occupied' with others those tracts of country now inhabited by the Pueblo Indians, and in the natural recesses and shallow caverns found in the faces of the cliffs erected dwellings and fortifications, displaying an architectural ability of no mean order. These communities extended as far south as the Gila river, the most southern affluent of the Colorado, and the remains they have left there appear to be of a later date architecturally than those situated farther north. These were found in ruins by the first Spanish explorers, and it is thought that their builders were eventually driven back to rejoin their kindred in the north. Fartner to the south in the caflons of the Piedras Verdes river in Chihuahua, Mexico, are cliff-dwellings corresponding in many respects with those of the Pueblo region, and Dr. Hrdlicka has examined others so far south as the State of Jalisco, in Central Mexico. These may be the ruins of dwellings erected either by the early Nahua or by some of the peoples relatively aboriginal to them, and may display the architectural features general among the Nahua prior to their adoption of other alien forms. Or else they may be the remains of dwellings similar to those of the Tarahumare, a still existing tribe of Mexico, who, according to Lumholtz, [Unknown Mexico, vol. i., 1902; also see Bulletin 30, Bureau of American Ethnology, p. 309] inhabit similar structures at the present day. It is clear from the architectural development of the cliff-dwellers that their civilisation developed generally from south to north, that this race was cognate to the early Nahua, and that it later withdrew to the north, or became fused with the general body of the Nahua peoples. It must not be understood, however, that the race arrived in the Mexican plateau before the Nahua, and the ruins of Jalisco and other mid-Mexican districts may merely be the remains of comparatively modern cliff-dwellings, an adaptation by mid-Mexican communities of the "Cliff-dweller" architecture, or a local development of it owing to the exigencies of early life in the district.

  

The Nahua Race

The Nahua peoples included all those tribes speaking the Nahuatlatolli (Nahua tongue), and occupied a sphere extending from the southern borders of New Mexico to the Isthmus of Tehuantepec on the south, or very much within the limits of the modern Republic ot Mexico. But this people must not be regarded as one race of homogeneous origin. A very brief account of their racial affinities must be sufficient here. The Chichimecs were probably related to the Otomi, whom we have alluded to as among the first-comers to the Mexican valley. They were traditionally supposed to have entered it at a period subsequent to the Toltec occupation. Their chief towns were Tezcuco and Tena, yucan, but they later allied themselves with the Nahua in a great confederacy, and adopted the Nahua language. There are circumstances which justify the assumption that on their entrance to the Mexican valley they consisted of a number of tribes loosely united, presenting in their general organisation a close resemblance to some of the composite tribes of modern American Indians.

  

The Aculhuaque

Next to them in point of order of tribal arrival were the Aculhuaque,orAcolhuans. The name means "tall" or strong" men, literally "People of the Broad Shoulder," or "Pushers," who made a way for themselves. Gomara states in his Conquista de Mexico that they arrived in the valley from Acolhuacan about A.D. 780, and founded the towns of Tollan, Colhuacan, and Mexico itself. The Acolhuans were pure Nahua, and may well have been the much-disputed Toltecs, for the Nahua people always insisted on the fact that the Toltecs were of the same stock as themselves, and spoke an older and purer form of the Nahua tongue. From the Acolhuans sprang the Tlascalans, the inveterate enemies of the Aztecs, who so heartily assisted Cortes in his invasion of the Aztec capital, Tenochtitlan, or Mexico.

  

The Tecpanecs

The Tecpanecs were a confederacy of purely Nahua tribes dwelling in towns situated upon the Lake of Tezcuco, the principal of which were Tlacopan and Azcapozalco. The name Tecpanec signifies that each settlement possessed its own chief's house, or tecpan. This tribe were almost certainly later Nahua immigrants who arrived in Mexico after the Acolhuans, and were great rivals to the Chichimec branch of the race.

  

The Aztecs

The Azteca or Aztecs, were a nomad tribe of doubtful origin, but probably of Nahua blood. Wandering over the Mexican plateau for generations, they at length settled in the marshlands near the Lake of Tezcuco, hard by Tlacopan. The name Azteca means " Crane People," and was bestowed upon the tribe by the Tecpanecs, probably because of the fact that, like cranes, they dwelt in a marshy neighbourhood. They founded the town of Tenochtitlan, or Mexico, and for a while paid tribute to the Tecpanecs. But later they became the most powerful allies of that people, whom they finally surpassed entirely in power and splendour.

  

The Aztec Character

The features of the Aztecs as represented in the various Mexican paintings are typically Indian, and argue a northern origin. The race was, and is, of average height, and the skin is of a dark brown hue. The Mexican is grave, taciturn, and melancholic, with a deeply rooted love of the mysterious, slow to anger, yet almost inhuman in the violence of his passions when aroused. He is usually gifted with a logical mind, quickness of apprehension, and an ability to regard the subtle side of things with great nicety. Patient and imitative, the ancient Mexican excelled in those arts which demanded such qualities in their execution. He had a real affection for the beautiful in nature and a passion for flowers, but the Aztec music lacked gaiety, and the national amusements were too often of a gloomy and ferocious character. The women are more vivacious than the men, but were in the days before the conquest very subservient to the wills of their husbands. We have already very briefly outlined the trend of Nahua civilisation, but it will be advisable to examine it a little more closely, for if the myths of this people are to be understood some knowledge of its life -and general culture is essential.

  

Legends of the Foundation of Mexico

At the period of the conquest of Mexico by Cortes the city presented an imposing appearance. Led to its neighbourhood by Huitzilopochtli, a traditional chief, afterwards deified as the god of war, there are several legends which account for the choice of its site by the Mexicans. The most popular of these relates how the nomadic Nahua beheld perched upon a cactus plant an eaale of Lreat size and majesty, grasping in its talons a huge serpent, and spreading its wings to catch the rays of the rising sun. The soothsayers or medicine-men of the tribe, readina a zood omen in the spectacle, advised the leaders of the-people to settle on the spot, and, hearkening to the voice of what they considered divine authority, they proceeded to drive piles into the marshy ground, and thus laid the foundation of the great city of Mexico.

An elaboration of this legend tells how the Aztecs had about the year 1325 sought refuge upon the western shore of the Lake of Tezcuco, in an island aniong the marshes on which they found a stone on which forty years before one of their priests had sacrificed a prince of the name of Copal, whom they had made prisoner. A nopal plant [cactus] had sprung from an earth-filled crevice in this rude altar, and upon this the royal eagle alluded to in the former account had alighted, grasping the serpent in his talons. Beholding in this a good omen, and urged by a supernatural impulse which he could not explain, a priest of high rank dived into a pool close at hand, where he found himself face to face with Tlaloc, the god of waters. After an interview with the deity the priest obtained permission from him to found a city on the site, from the humble beginnings of which arose the metropolis of Mexico-Tenochtitlan.

  

Mexico at the Conquest

At the period of the conquest the city of Mexico had a circumference of no less than twelve miles, or nearly that of modern Berlin without its suburbs. It contained 60,000 houses, and its inhabitants were computed to number 300,000. Many other towns, most of them nearly half as large, were grouped on the islands or on the margin orLake Tezcuco, so that the population of what might almost be called "Greater Mexico" must have amounted to several millions. The city was intersected by four great roadways or avenues built at right angles to one another, and laid four-square with the cardinal points. Situated as it was in the midst of a lake, it was traversed by numerous canals, which were used as thoroughfares for traffic. The four principal ways described above were extended across the lake as dykes or viaducts until they met its shores. The dwellings of the poorer classes were chiefly composed of adobes, but those of the nobility were built of a red porous stone quarried close by. They were usually of one story only, but occupied a goodly piece of ground and had flat roofs, many of which were covered with flowers. In general they were coated with a hard, white cement, which gave them an added resemblance to the Oriental type of building.

Towering high among these, and a little apart from the vast squares and market-places, were the teocallis, or temples. These were in reality not temples or covered-in buildings, but "high places," great pyramids of stone, built platform on platform, around which a staircase led to the summit, on which was usually erected a small shrine containing the tutelar deity to whom the teocalli had been raised. The great temple of Huitzilopochtli, the war-god, built by King Ahuizotl, was, besides being typical of all, by far the greatest of these votive piles. The enclosing walls of the building were 4,800 feet in circumference, and strikingly decorated by carvings representing festoons of intertwined reptiles, from which circumstance they were called coetpantli (walls of serpents). A kind of gate-house on each side gave access to the enclosure. The teocalli, or great temple, inside the court was in the shape of a parallelogram, measuring 375 feet by 300 feet, and was built in six platforms, growing smaller in area as they descended. The mass of this structure was composed of a mixture of rubble, clay, and earth, covered with carefully worked stone slabs, cemented together with infinite care, and coated with a hard gypsum. A flight Of 340 steps circled round the terraces and led to the upper platform, on which were raised two three-storied towers 56 feet in height, in which stood the great statues of the tutelar deities and the jasper stones of sacrifice. These sanctuaries, say the old Conquistadores who entered them, had the appearance and odour of shambles, and human blood was bespattered every. where. In this weird chapel of horrors burned a fire the extinction of which it was supposed would have brought about the end of the Nahua power. It was tended with a care as scrupulous as that with which the Roman Vestals guarded their sacred flame. No less than 600 of these sacred braziers were kept alight in the city of Mexico alone.

  

A Pyramid of Skulls

The principal fane of Huitzilopochtli was surrounded by upwards of forty inferior teocallis and shrines. In the Tzompantli (Pyramid of Skulls) were collected the grisly relics of the countless victims to the implacable war-god of the Aztecs, and in this horrid structure the Spanish conquerors counted no less than 136,000 human skulls. In the court or teopan which surrounded the temple were the dwellings of thousands of priests, whose duties included the scrupulous care of the temple precincts, and whose labours were minutely apportioned.

  

Nahua Architecture and Ruins

As we shall see later, Mexico is by no means so rich in architectural antiquities as Guatemala or Yucatan, the reason being that the growth of tropical forests has to a areat extent protected ancient stone edifices in the latter countries from destruction. The ruins discovered in the northern regions of the republic are of a ruder type than those which approach more nearly to the sphere of Maya influence, as, for example, those of Mitla, built by the Zapotecs, which exhibit such unmistakable signs of Maya influence that we prefer to describe them when dealing with the antiquities of that people.

  

Cyclopean Remains

In the mountains of Chihuahua, one of the most northerly provinces, is a celebrated group called the Casas Grandes (Large Houses), the walls of which are still about 30 feet in height. These approximate in general appearance to the buildings of more modern tribes in New Mexico and Arizona, and may be referred to such peoples rather than to the Nahua. At Quemada, in Zacatecas, massive ruins of Cyclopean appearance have been discovered. These consist of extensive terraces and broad stone causeways, teocallis which have weathered many centuries, and gigantic pillars, 18 feet in height and 17 feet in circumference. Walls 12 feet in thickness rise above the heaps of rubbish which litter the ground. These remains exhibit little connection with Nahua architecture to the north or south of them. They are more massive than either, and must have been constructed by some race which had made considerable strides in the art of building.

  

Teotihuacan

In the district of the Totonacs, to the north of Vera Cruz, we find many architectural remains of a highly interesting character. Here the teocalli or pyramidal type of building is occasionally crowned by a coveredin temple with the massive roof characteristic of Maya architecture. The most striking examples found in this region are the remains of Teotihuacan and Xochicalco. The former was the religious Mecca of the Nahua races, and in its proximity are still to be seen the teocallis of the sun and moon, surrounded by extensive burying-grounds where the devout of Anahuac were laid in the sure hope that if interred they would find entrance into the paradise of the sun. The teocalli of the moon has a base covering 426 feet and a height Of 137 feet. That of the sun is of greater dimensions, with a base Of 735 feet and a height Of 203 feet. These pyramids were divided into four stories, three of which remain. On the summit of that of the sun stood a temple containing a great image of that luminary carved from a rough block of stone. In the breast was inlaid a star of the purest gold, seized afterwards as loot by the insatiable followers of Cortes. From the teocalli of the moon a path runs to where a little rivulet flanks the "Citadel." This path is known as "The Path of the Dead," from the circumstance that it is surrounded by some nine square miles of tombs and tumuli, and, indeed, forms a road through the great cemetery. The Citadel, thinks Charnay, was a vast tennis or tlachtli court, where thousands flocked to gaze at the national sport of the Nahua with a zest equal to that of the modern devotees of football. Teotihuacan was a flourishing centre contemporary with Tollan. It was destroyed, but was rebuilt by the Chichimec king Xolotll and preserved thenceforth its traditional sway as the focus of the Nahua national religion. Charnay identifies the architectural types discovered there with those of Tollan. The result of his labours in the vicinity included the unearthing of richly decorated pottery, vases, masks, and terra-cotta figures. He also excavated several large houses or palaces, some with chambers more than 730 feet in circumference, with walls over 7 1/2 feet thick, into which were built rings and slabs to support torches and candles. The floors were tessellated in various rich designs, "like an Aubusson carpet." Charnay concluded that the monuments of Teotihuacan were partly standing at the time of the conquest.

  

The Hill of Flowers

Near Tezcuco is Xochicalco (The Hill of Flowers), a teocalli the sculpture of which is both beautiful and luxuriant in design. The porphyry quarries from which the great blocks, 12 feet in length, were cut lie many miles away. As late as 1755 the structure towered to a height of five stories, but the vandal has done his work only too well, and a few fragmentary carvings of exquisite design are all that to-day remain of one of Mexico's most magnificent pyramids.

  

Tollan

We have already indicated that on the site of the "Toltec" city of Tollan ruins have been discovered which prove that it was the centre of a civilisation of a type distinctly advanced. Charnay unearthed there gigantic fragments of caryatides, each some 7 feet high. He also found columns of two pieces, which were fitted together by means of mortise and tenon, bas-reliefs of archaic figures of undoubted Nahua type, and many fragments of great antiquity. On the hill of Palpan, above Tollan, he found the ground-plans of several houses with numerous apartments, frescoed, columned, and having benches and cisterns recalling the impluvium of a Roman villa. Water-pipes were also actually unearthed, and a wealth of pottery, many pieces of which were like old Japanese china. The ground-plan or foundations of the houses unearthed at Palpan showed that they had been designed by practical architects, and had not been built in any merely haphazard fashion. The cement which covered the walls and floors was of excellent quality, and recalled that discovered in ancient Italian excavations. The roofs had been of wood, supported by pillars.

  

Picture-Writing

The Aztecs, and indeed the entire Nahua race, employed a system of writing of the type scientifically described as "pictographic," in which events, persons, and ideas were recorded by means of drawings and coloured sketches. These were executed on paper made from the agave plant, or were painted on the skins of animals. By these means not only history and the principles of the Nahua mythology were communicated from generation to generation, but the transactions of daily life, the accountings of merchants, and the purchase and ownership of land were placed on record. That a phonetic system was rapidly being approached is manifest from the method by which the Nahua scribes depicted the names of individuals or cities. These were represented by means of several objects, the names of which resembled that of the person for which they stood. The name of King Ixcoatl, for example, is represented by the drawing of a serpent (coatl) pierced by flint knives (iztli), and that of Motequauhzoma (Montezuma) by a mouse-trap (montli), an eagle (quauhtli), a lancet (zo), and a hand (maitl). The phonetic values employed by the scribes varied exceedingly, so that at times an entire syllable would be expressed by the painting of an object the name of which commenced with it. At other times only a letter would be represented by the same drawing. But the general intention of the scribes was undoubtedly more ideographic than phonetic; that is, they desired to convey their thoughts more by sketch than by sound.

  

Interpretation of the Hieroglyphs

These pinturas, as the Spanish conquerors designated them, offer no very great difficulty in their elucidation to modern experts, at least so far as the general trend of their contents is concerned. In this they are unlike the manuscripts of the Maya of Central America with which we shall make acquaintance further on. Their interpretation was largely traditional, and was learned by rote, being passed on by one generation of amamatini (readers) to another, and was by no means capable of elucidation by all and sundry.

  

Native Manuscripts

The pinturas or native manuscripts which remain to us are but few in number. Priestly fanaticism, which ordained their wholesale destruction, and the still more potent passage of time have so reduced them that each separate example is known to bibliophiles and Americanists the world over. In such as still exist we can observe great fullness of detail, representing for the most part festivals, sacrifices, tributes, and natural phenomena, such as eclipses and floods, and the death and accession of monarchs. These events, and the supernatural beings who were supposed to control them, were depicted in brilliant colours, executed by means of a brush of feathers.

  

The Interpretative Codices

Luckily for future students of Mexican history, the blind zeal which destroyed the majority of the Mexican manuscripts was frustrated by the enlightenment of certain European scholars, who regarded the wholesale destruction of the native records as little short of a calamity, and who took steps to seek out the few remaining native artists, from whom they procured copies of the more important paintings, the details of which were, of course, quite familiar to them. To those were added interpretations taken down from the lips of the native scribes themselves, so that no doubt might remain regarding the contents of the manuscripts. These are known as the "Interpretative Codices," and are of considerable assistance to the student of Mexican history and customs. Three only are in existence. The Oxford Codex, treasured in the Bodleian Library, is of a historical nature, and contains a full list of the lesser cities which were subservient to Mexico in its palmy days. The Paris or Tellerio-Remensis Codex, so called from having once been the property of Le Tellier, Archbishop of Rheims, embodies many facts concerning the early settlement of the various Nahua city-states. The Vatican MSS. deal chiefly with mythology and the intricacies of the Mexican calendar system. Such Mexican paintings as were unassisted by an interpretation are naturally of less value to present-day students of the lore of the Nahua. They are principally concerned with calendric matter, ritualistic data, and astrological computations or horoscopes.

  

The Mexican "Book of the Dead"

Perhaps the most remarkable and interesting manuscript in the Vatican collection is one the last pages of which represent the journey of the soul after death through the gloomy dangers of the Other-world. This has been called the Mexican "Book of the Dead." The corpse is depicted dressed for burial, the soul escaping from its earthly tenement by way of the mouth. The spirit is ushered into the presence of Tezcatlipoca, the Jupiter of the Aztec pantheon, by an attendant dressed in an ocelot skin, and stands naked with a wooden yoke round the neck before the deity, to receive sentence. The dead person is given over to the tests which precede entrance to the abode of the dead, the realm of Mictlan, and so that he may not have to meet the perils of the journey in a defenceless condition a sheaf of javelins is bestowed upon him. He first passes between two lofty peaks, which may fall and crush him if he cannot skilfully escape them. A terrible serpent then intercepts his path, and, if he succeeds in defeating this monster, the fierce alligator Xochitonal awaits him. Eight deserts and a corresponding number of mountains have then to be negotiated by the hapless spirit, and a whirlwind sharp as a sword, which cuts even through solid rocks, must be withstood. Accompanied by the shade of his favourite dog, the harassed ghost at length encounters the fierce Izpuzteque, a demon with the backward-bent legs of a cock, the evil Nextepehua, the fiend who scatters clouds of ashes, and many another grisly foe, until at last he wins to the gates of the Lord of Hell, before whom he does reverence, after which he is free to greet his friends who have gone before.

  

The Calendar System

As has been said, the calendar system was the source of all Mexican science, and regulated the recurrence of all religious rites and festivals. In fact, the entire mechanism of Nahua life was resident in its provisions. The type of time-division and computation exemplified in the Nahua calendar was also found among the Maya peoples of Yucatan and Guatemala and the Zapotec people of the boundary between the Nahua and Maya races. By which of these races it was first employed is unknown. But the Zapotec calendar exhibits signs or both Nahua and Maya influence, and from this it has been inferred that the calendar systems of these races have been evolved from it. It might with equal probability be argued that both Nahua and Maya art were offshoots of Zapotec art, because the characteristics of both are discovered in it, whereas the circumstance merely illustrates the very natural acceptance by a border people, who settled down to civilisation at a relatively later date, of the artistic tenets of the two greater peoples who environed them. The Nahua and Maya calendars were in all likelihood evolved from the calendar system of that civilised race which undoubtedly existed on the Mexican plateau prior to the coming of the later Nahua swarms, and which in general is loosely alluded to as the "Toltec."

  

The Mexican Year

The Mexican year was a cycle Of 365 days, without any intercalary addition or other correction. In course of time it almost lost its seasonal significance because of the omission of the extra hours included in the solar year, and furthermore many of its festivals and occasions were altered by high-priests and rulers to suit their convenience. The Mexican nexiuhilpilitztli (binding of years) contained fifty-two years, and ran in two separate cycles-one of fifty-two years Of 365 days each, and another of seventy-three groups of 260 days each. The first was of course the solar year, and embraced eighteen periods of twenty days each, called "months " by the old Spanish chroniclers, with five nemontemi (unlucky days) over and above. These days were not intercalated, but were included in the year, and merel overflowed the division of the year into periods of twenty days. The cycle of seventy-three groups of 260 days, subdivided into groups of thirteen days, was called the "birth-cycle."

  

Lunar Reckoning

People in a barbarous condition almost invariably reckon time by the period between the waxing and waning of the moon as distinct from the entire passage of a lunar revolution, and this period of twenty days will be found to be the basis in the time-reckoning of the Mexicans, who designated it cempohualli. Each day included in it was denoted by a sign, as "house", "snake", "wind", and so forth. Each cempohualli was subdivided into four periods of five days each, sometimes alluded to as "weeks" by the early Spanish writers, and these were known by the sign their middle or third day. These day-names ran on without reference to the length of the year. The year itself was designated by the name of the middle day of the week in which it began. Out of twenty day-names in the Mexican "month " it was inevitable that the four calli (house), tochtli (rabbit), acatl (reed), and tecpati (flint) should always recur in sequence because of the incidence of these days in the Mexican solar year. Four years made up a year of the sun. During the nemontemi (unlucky days) no work was done, as they were regarded as ominous and unwholesome.

We have seen that the civil year permitted the day-names to run on continuously rom one year to another. The ecclesiastical authorities, however, had a reckoning of their own, and made the year begin always on the first day of their calendar, no matter what sign denominated that day in the civil system.

  

Groups of Years

As has been indicated, the years were formed into groups. Thirteen years constituted a xiumalpilli (bundle), and four of these a nexiuhilpilitztli (complete binding of the years). Each year had thus a double aspect, first as an individual period of time, and secondly as a portion of the "year of the sun," and these were so numbered and named that each year in the series of fifty-two possessed a different description.

  

The Dread of the Last Day

With the conclusion of each period of fifty-two years a terrible dread came upon the Mexicans that the world would come to an end. A stated period of time had expired, a period which was regarded as fixed by divine command, and it had been ordained that on the completion of one of those series of fifty-two years earthly time would cease and the universe be demolished. For some time before the ceremony of toxilmolpilia (the binding up of the years) the Mexicans abandoned themselves to the utmost prostration, and the wicked went about in terrible fear. As the first day of the fifty-third year dawned the people narrowly observed the Pleiades, for if they passed the zenith time would procee and the world would be respited. The gods were placated or refreshed by the slaughter of the human victim, on whose still living breast a fire of wood was kindled by friction, the heart and body being consumed by the flames so lighted. As the planets of hope crossed the zenith loud acclamations resounded from the people, and the domestic hearths, which had been left cold and dead, were rekindled from the sacred fire which had consumed the sacrifice. Mankind was safe for another period.

  

The Birth-Cycle

The birth-cycle, as we have said, consisted of 260 days. It had originally been a lunar cycle of thirteen days, and once bore the names of thirteen moons. It formed part of the civil calendar, with which, however, it had nothing in common, as it was used for ecclesiastical purposes only. The lunar names were abandoned later, and the numbers one to thirteen adopted in their places.

  

Language of the Nahua

The Nahua language represented a very low state of culture. Speech is the general measure of the standard of thought of a people, and if we judged the civilisation of the Nahua by theirs, we should be justified in concluding that they had not yet emerged from barbarism. But we must recollect that the Nahua of the conquest period had speedily adopted the older civilisation which they had found awaiting them on their entrance to Mexico, and had retained their own primitive tongue. The older and more cultured people who had preceded them probably spoke a more polished dialect of the same lanzuage, but its influence had evidently but little on the rude Chichimecs and Aztecs. The Mexican tongue, like most American languages, belongs to the "incorporative" type, the genius of which is to unite all the related words in a sentence into one conglomerate term or word, merging the separate words of which it is composed one into another by altering their forms, and so welding them together as to express the whole in one word. It will be at once apparent that such a system was clumsy in the extreme, and led to the creation of words and names of the most barbarous appearance and sound. In a narrative of the Spanish discovery written by Chimalpahin, the native chronicler of Chalco, born in 1579, we have, for example, such a passage as the following: Oc chiucnauhxihuitl inic onen quilantimanca Espana camo niman ic yuh ca omacoc ihuelitiliztli inic niman ye chiuhcnauhxiuhtica, in oncan ohualla. This passage is chosen quite at random, and is an average specimen of literary Mexican of the sixteenth century. Its purport is, freely translated: "For nine years he [Columbus] remained in vain in Spain. Yea, for nine years there he waited for influence." The clumsy and cumbrous nature of the language could scarcely be better illustrated tnan by pointing out that chiucnauhxihuitl signifies "nine years"; quilantimanca, " he below remained"; and omacoc ihuelitiliztli, "he has got his powerfulness." It must be recollected that this specimen of Mexican was composed by a person who had had the benefit of a Spanish education, and is cast in literary form. What the spoken Mexican of preconquest times was like can be contemplated with misgiving in the grammars of the old Spanish missionaries, whose greatest glory is that they mastered such a language in the interests of their faith.

  

Aztec Science

The science of the Aztecs was, perhaps, one of the most picturesque sides of their civilisation. As with all peoples in a semi-barbarous state, it consisted chiefly in astrology and divination. Of the former the wonderful calendar system was the basis, and by its aid the priests, or those of them who were set apart for the study of the heavenly bodies, pretended to be able to tell the future of new-born infants and the progress of the dead in the other world. This they accomplished by weighing the influence of the planets and other luminaries one against another, and extracting the net result. Their art of divination consisted in drawing omens from the song and flight of birds, the appearance of grains of seed, feathers, and the entrails of animals, by which means they confidently predicted both public and private events.

  

Nahua Government

The limits of the Aztec Empire may be defined, if its tributary states are included, as extending over the territory comprised in the modern states of Mexico, Southern Vera Cruz, and Guerrero. Among the civilised peoples of this extensive tract the prevailing form of government was an absolute monarchy, although several of the smaller communities were republics. The law of succession, as with the Celts of Scotland, prescribed that the eldest surviving brother of the deceased monarch should be elected to his throne, and, failing him, the eldest nephew. But incompetent persons were almost invariably ignored by the elective body, although the choice was limited to one family. The ruler was generally selected both because of his military prowess and his ecclesiastical and political knowledge. Indeed, a Mexican monarch was nearly always a man of the highest culture and artistic refinement, and the ill-fated Montezuma was an example of the true type of Nahua sovereign. The council of the monarch was composed of the electors and other personages of importance in the realm. It undertook the government of the provinces, the financial affairs of the country, and other matters of national import. The nobility held all the highest military, judicial, and ecclesiastical offices. To each city and province judges were delegated who exercised criminal and civil jurisdiction, and whose opinion superseded even that of the Crown itself. Petty cases were settled by lesser officials, and a still inferior grade of officers acted as a species of police in the supervision of families.

  

Domestic Life

The domestic life of the Nahua was a peculiar admixture of simplicity and display. The mass of the people led a life of strenuous labour in the fields, and in the cities they wrought hard at many trades, among which may be specified building, metal-working, making robes and other articles of bright featherwork and quilted suits of armour, Jewellery, and small wares. Vendors of flowers, fruit, fish, and vegetables swarmed in the markets. The use of tobacco was general among the men of all classes. At banquets the women attended, although they were seated at separate tables. The entertainments of the upper class were marked by much magnificence, and the variety of dishes was considerable, including venison, turkey, many smaller birds, fish, a profusion of vegetables, and pastry, accompanied by sauces of delicate flavour. These were served in dishes of gold and silver. Pulque, a fermented drink dishes brewed from the agave, was the universal beverage. Cannibalism was indulged in usually on ceremonial occasions, and was surrounded by such refinements of the table as served only to render it the more repulsive in the eyes of Europeans. It has been stated that this revolting practice was engaged in owing solely to the tenets of the Nahua religion, which enjoined the slaughter of slaves or captives in the name of a deity, and their consumption with the idea that the consumers attained unity with that deity in the flesh. But there is good reason to suspect that the Nahua, deprived of the flesh of the larger domestic animals, practised deliberate cannibalism. It would appear that the older race which preceded them in the country were innocent of these horrible repasts.

  

A Mysterious Toltec Book

A piece of Nahua literature, the disappearance of which is surrounded by circumstances of the deepest mystery, is the Teo-Amoxtli (Divine Book), which is alleged by certain chroniclers to have been the work of the ancient Toltecs. Ixtlilxochitl, a native Mexican author, states that it was written by a Tezcucan wiseman, one Huematzin about the end of the seventh century, and that it described the pilgrimage of the Nahua from Asia, their laws, manners, and customs, and their religious tenets, science, and arts. In 1838 the Baron de Waldeck stated in his Voyage Pittoresque that he bad it in his possession, and the Abbe Brasseur de Bourbourg identified it with.the Maya Dresden Codex and other native manuscripts Bustamante also states that the amamatini (chroniclers) of Tezcuco had a copy in their possession at the time of the taking of their city. But these appear to be mere surmises, and if the Teo-Amoxtli ever existed, which on the whole is not unlikely, it has probably never been seen by a European.

  

A Native Historian

One of the most interesting of the Mexican historians is Don Fernando de Alva Ixtlilxochitl, a halfbreed of royal Tezcucan descent. He was responsible for two notable works, entitled Historia Chichimeca (The History of the Chichimecs) and the Relaciones, a compilation of historical and semi-historical incidents. He was cursed, or blessed, however, by a strong leaning toward the marvellous, and has coloured his narratives so highly that he would have us regard the Toltec or ancient Nahua civilisations as by far the most splendid and magnificent that ever existed. His descriptions of Tezcuco, if picturesque in the extreme, are manifestly the outpourings of a romantic and idealistic mind, which in its patriotic enthusiasm desired to vindicate the country of his birth from the stigma of savagery and to prove its equality with the great nations of antiquity. For this we have not the heart to quarrel with him. But we must be on our guard against accepting any of his statements unless we find strong corroboration of it in the pages of a more trustworthy and less biased author.

  

Nahua Topography

The geography of Mexico is by no means as familiar to Europeans as is that of the various countries of our own continent, and it is extremely easy for the reader who is unacquainted with Mexico and the puzzling orthography of its place-names to flounder among them, and during the perusal of such a volume as this to find himself in a hopeless maze of surmise as to the exact locality of the more famous centres of Mexican history. A few moments' study of this paragraph will enlighten him in this respect, and will save him much confusion further on. He will see from. the map (p. 330) that the city of Mexico, or Tenochtitlan, its native name, was situated upon an island in the Lake of Tezcuco. This lake has now partially dried up, and the modern city of Mexico is situated at a considerable distance from it. Tezcuco, the city second in importance, lies to the north-east of the lake, and is somewhat more isolated, the other pueblos (towns) clustering round the southern or western shores. To the north of Tezcuco is Teotihuacan, the sacred city of the gods. To the south-east of Mexico is Tlaxcallan, or Tlascala, the city which assisted Cortes against the Mexicans, and the inhabitants of which were the deadliest foes of the central Nahua power. To the north lie the sacred city of Cholula and Tula, or Tollan.

  

Distribution of the Nahua Tribes

Having become acquainted with the relative position of the Nahua cities, we may now consult for a moment the map which exhibits the geographical distribution of the various Nahua tribes, and which is self-explanatory (p. 331).

  

Nahua History

A brief historical sketch or epitome of what is known of Nahua history as apart from mere tradition will further assist the reader in the comprehension of Mexican mythology. From the period of the settlement of the Nahua on an agricultural basis a system of feudal government had evolved, and at various epochs in the history of the country certain cities or groups of cities held a paramount sway. Subsequent to the "Toltec" period, which we have already described and discussed, we find the Acolhuans in supreme power, and ruling from their cities of Tollantzinco and Cholula a considerable tract of country. Later Cholula maintained an alliance with Tlascala and Huexotzinco.

  

Bloodless Battles

The maxim "Other climes, other manners" is nowhere better exemplified than by the curious annual strife betwixt the warriors of Mexico and Tlascala. Once a year they met on a prearranged battle-ground and engaged in combat, not with the intention of killing one another, but with the object of taking prisoners for sacrifice on the altars of their respective war-gods. The warrior seized his opponent and attempted to bear him off, the various groups pulling and tugging desperately at each other in the endeavour to seize the limbs of the unfortunate who had been first struck down, with the object of dragging him into durance or effecting his rescue. Once secured, theTlascaltec warrior was brought to Mexico in a cage, and first placed upon a stone slab, to which one of his feet was secured by a chain or thong. He was then given light weapons, more like playthings than warrior's gear, and confronted by one of the most celebrated Mexican warriors. Should he succeed in defeating six of these formidable antagonists, he was set free. But no sooner was he wounded than he was hurried to the altar of sacrifice, and his heart was torn out and offered to Huitzilopochtli, the implacable god of war.

The Tlascaltecs, having finally secured their position by a defeat of the Tecpanecs of Huexotzinco about A.D. 1384, sank into comparative obscurity save for their annual bout with the Mexicans.

  

The Lake Cities

The communities grouped round the various lakes in the valley of Mexico now command our attention. More than two score of these thriving communities flourished at the time of the conquest of Mexico, the most notable being those which occupied the borders of the Lake of Tezcuco. These cities grouped themselves round two nuclei, Azcapozalco and Tezcuco, between whom a fierce rivalry sprang up, which finally ended in the entire discomfiture ol Azcapozalco. From this event the real history of Mexico may be said to commence. Those cities which had allied themselves to Tezcuco finally overran the entire territory of Mexico from the Mexican Gulf to the Pacific.

  

Tezcuco

If, as some authorities declare, Tezcuco was originally Otomi in affinity, it was in later years the most typically Nahuan of all the lacustrine powers. But several other communities, the power of which was very nearly as great as that of Tezcuco, had assisted that city to supremacy. Among these was Xaltocan, a city-state of unquestionable Otomi origin, situated at the northern extremity of the lake. As we have seen from the statements of Ixtlilxochitl, a Tezcucan writer, his native city was in the forefront of Nahua civilisation at the time of the coming of the Spaniards, and if it was practically subservient to Mexico (Tenochtitlan) at that period it was by no means its inferior in the arts.

  

The Tecpanecs

The Tecpanecs, who dwelt in Tlacopan, Coyohuacan, and Huitzilopocho, were also typical Nahua. The name, as we have already explained, indicates that each settlement possessed its own tecpan (chief's house), and has no racial significance. Their state was probably founded about the twelfth century, although a chronology of no less than fifteen hundred years was claimed for it. This people composed a sort of buffer-state betwixt the Otomi on the north and other Nahua on the south.

  

The Aztecs

The menace of these northern Otomi had become acute when the Tecpanecs received reinforcements in the shape of the Azteca, or Aztecs, a people of Nahua blood, who came, according to their own accounts, from Aztlan (Crane Land). The name Azteca signifies "Crane People," and this has led to the assumption that they came from Chihuahua, where cranes abound. Doubts have been cast upon the Nahua origin of the Azteca. But these are by no means well founded, as the names of the early Aztec chieftains and kings are unquestionably Nahuan. This people on their arrival in Mexico were in a very inferior state of culture, and were probably little better than savages. We have already outlined some of the legends concerning the coming of the Aztecs to the land of Anahuac, or the valley of Mexico, but their true origin is uncertain, and it is likely that they wandered down from the north as other Nahua immigrants did before them, and as the Apache Indians still do to this day. By their own showing they had sojourned at several points en route, and were reduced to slavery by the chiefs of Colhuacan. They proved so truculent in their bondage, however, that they were released, and journeyed to Chapoultepec, which they quitted because of their dissensions with the Xaltocanecs. On their arrival in the district inhabited by the Tecpanecs a tribute was levied upon them, but nevertheless they flourished so exceedingly that the swamp villages which the Tecpanecs had permitted them to raise on the borders of the lake soon grew into thriving communities, and chiefs were provided for them from among the nobility of the Tecpanecs.

  

The Aztecs as Allies

By the aid of the Aztecs the Tecpanecs greatly extended their territorial possessions. City after city was added to their empire, and the allies finally invaded the Otomi country, which they speedily subdued. Those cities which had been founded by the Acolhuans on the fringes of Tezcuco also allied themselves with the Tecpanecs with the intention of freeing themselves from the yoke of the Chichimecs, whose hand was heavy upon them. The Chichimecs or Tezcucans made a stern resistance, and for a time the sovereignty of the Tecpanecs hung in the balance. But eventually they conquered, and Tezcuco was overthrown and given as a spoil to the Aztecs.

  

New Powers

Up to this time the Aztecs had paid a tribute to Azcapozalco, but now, strengthened by the successes of the late conflict, they withheld it, and requested permission to build an aqueduct from the shore for the purpose of carrying a supply of water into their city. This was refused by the Tecpanecs, and a policy ol isolation was brought to bear upon Mexico an embargo being placed upon its goods and intercourse with its people being forbidden. War followed, in which the Tecpanecs were defeated with great slaughter. After this event, which may be placed about the year 1428, the Aztecs gained round rapidly, and their march to the supremacy of the entire Mexican valley was almost undisputed. Allying themselves with Tezcuco and Tlacopan, the Mexicans overran many states far beyond the confines of the valley, and by the time of Montezuma I had extended their boundaries almost to the limits of the present republic. The Mexican merchant followed in the footsteps of the Mexican warrior, and the commercial expansion of the Aztecs rivalled their military fame. Clever traders, they were merciless in their exactions of tribute from the states they conquered, manufacturing the raw material paid to them by the subject cities into goods which they afterwards sold again to the tribes under their sway. Mexico became the chief market of the empire, as well as its political nucleus. Such was the condition of affairs when the Spaniards arrived in Anahuac. Their coming has been deplored by certain historians as hastening the destruction of a Western Eden. But bad as was their rule, it was probably mild when compared with the cruel and insatiable sway of the Aztecs over their unhappy dependents.

The Spaniards found a tyrannical despotism in the conquered provinces, and a faith the accessories of which were so fiendish that it cast a gloom over the entire national life. These they replaced by a milder vassalage and the earnest ministrations of a more enlightened priesthood.

     
The Myths of Mexico and Peru, by Lewis Spence, [1913], at sacred-texts.com

  

CHAPTER II: Mexican Mythology

  

Nahua Religion

THE religion of the ancient Mexicans was a polytheism or worship of a pantheon of deities, the general aspect of which presented similarities to the systems of Greece and Egypt. Original influences, however, were strong, and they are especially discernible in the institutions of ritualistic cannibalism and human sacrifice. Strange resemblances to Christian practice were observed in the Aztec mythology by the Spanish Conquistadores, who piously condemned the native customs of baptism, consubstantiation, and confession as frauds founded and perpetuated by diabolic agency.

A superficial examination of the Nahua religion might lead to the inference that within its scope and system no definite theological views were embraced and no ethical principles propounded, and that the entire mythology presents only the fantastic attitude of the barbarian mind toward the eternal verities. Such a conclusion would be both erroneous and unjust to a human intelligence of a type by no means debased. As a matter of fact, the Nahua displayed a theological advancement greatly superior to that of the Greeks or Romans, and quite on a level with that expressed by the Egyptians and Assyrians. Toward the period or the Spanish occupation the Mexican priesthood was undoubtedly advancing to the contemplation of the exaltation of one god, whose worship was fast excluding that of similar deities, and if our data are too imperfect to allow us to speak very fully in regard to this phase of religious advancement, we know at least that much of the Nahua ritual and many of the prayers preserved by the labours of the Spanish fathers are unquestionably genuine, and display the attainment of a high religious level.

  

Cosmology

Aztec theology postulated an eternity which, however, was not without its epochs. It was thought to be broken up into a number of aeons, each of which depended upon the period of duration of a separate "sun." No agreement is noticeable among authorities on Mexican mythology as to the number of these "suns," but it would appear as probable that the favourite tradition stipulated for four "suns " or epochs, each of which concluded with a national disaster-flood, famine, tempest, or fire. The present veon, they feared, might conclude upon the completion of every " sheaf " of fifty-two years, the " sheaf " being a merely arbitrary portion of an veon. The period of time from the first creation to the current aeon was variously computed as 15,228, 2386, or 1404 solar years, the discrepancy and doubt arising because of the equivocal nature of the numeral signs expressing the period in the pinturas or native paintings. As regards the sequence of "suns" there is no more agreement than there is regarding their number. The Codex Vaticanus states it to have been water, wind, fire, and famine. Humboldt gives it as hunger, fire, wind, and water; Boturini as water, famine, wind, and fire; and Gama as hunger, wind, fire, and water.

In all likelihood the adoption of tour ages arose from the sacred nature of that number. The myth doubtless shaped itself upon the tonalamatl (Mexican native calendar), the great repository of the wisdom of the Nahua race, which the priestly class regarded as its vade mecum, and which was closely consulted by it on every occasion. civil or religious.

  

The Sources of Mexican Mythology

Our knowledge of the mythology of the Mexicans is chiefly gained through the works of those Spaniards, lay and cleric, who entered the country along with or immediately subsequent to the Spanish Conquistadores. From several of these we have what might be called first-hand accounts of the theogony and ritual of the Nahua people. The most valuable compendium is that of Father Bernardino Sahagun, entitled A General History of the Afairs of New Spain, which was published from manuscript only in the middle of last century, though written in the first half of the sixteenth century. Sahagun arrived in Mexico eight years after the country had been reduced by the Spaniards to a condition of servitude. He obtained a thorough mastery of the Nahuatl tongue, and conceived a warm admiration for the native mind and a deep interest in the antiquities of the conquered people. His method of collecting facts concerning their mythology and history was as effective as it was ingenious. He held daily conferences with reliable Indians, and placed questions before them, to which they replied by symbolical paintings detailing the answers which he required. These he submitted to scholars who had been trained under his own supervision, and who, after consultation among), themselves, rendered him a criticism in Nahuatl of the hieroglyphical paintings he had placed at their disposal. Not content with this process, he subjected these replies to the criticism of a third body, after which the matter was included in his work. But ecclesiastical intolerance was destined to keep the work from publication for a couple of centuries. Afraid that such a volume would be successful in keeping alight the fires of paganism in Mexico, Sahagun's brethren refused him the assistance he required for its publication. But on his appealing to the Council of the Indies in Spain he was met with encouragement, and was ordered to translate his great work into Spanish, a task he undertook when over eighty years of age. He transmitted the work to Spain, and for three hundred years nothing more was heard of it.

  

The Romance of the Lost "Sahagun"

For generations antiquarians interested in the lore or ancient Mexico bemoaned its loss, until at length one Mufloz, more indefatigable than the rest, chanced to visit the crumbling library of the ancient convent of Tolosi, in Navarre. There, among time-worn manuscripts and tomes relating to the early fathers and the intricacies of canon law, he discovered the lost Sahagun! It was printed separately by Bustamante at Mexico and by Lord Kingsborough in his collection in 1830, and has been translated into French by M. Jourdanet. Thus the manuscript commenced in or after 1530 was given to the public after a lapse of no less than three hundred years!

  

Torquemada

Father Torquemada arrived in the New World about the middle of the sixteenth century, at which period he was still enabled to take from the lips of such of the Conquistadores as remained much curious information regarding the circumstances of their advent. His Monarchia Indiana was first published at Seville in 1615, and in it he made much use of the manuscript of Sahagun, not then published. At the same time his observations upon matters pertaining to the native religion are often illuminating and exhaustive.

In his Storia Antica del Messico the Abbe Clavigero, who published his work in 1780, did much to disperse the clouds of tradition which hung over Mexican history and mythology. The clarity of his style and the exactness of his information render his work exceedingly useful.

Antonio Gama, in his Descripcion Historica y Cronologica de las dos Piedras, poured a flood of light on Mexican antiquities. His work was published in 1832. With him maybe said to have ceased the line of Mexican archxologists of the older school. Others worthy of being mentioned among the older writers on Mexican mythology (we are not here concerned with history) are Boturini, who, in his Idea de una Nueva Historia General de la America Septentrional, gives a vivid picture of native life and tradition, culled from first-hand communication with the people; Ixdilxochitl, a half-breed, whose mendacious works, the Relaciones and Historia Chichimeca, are yet valuable repositories of tradition; Jose de Acosta, whose Historia Natural y Moral de las Yndias was published at Seville in 1580; and Gomara, who, in his Historia General de las Indias (Madrid, 1749), rested upon the authority of the Conquistadores. Tezozomoc's Chronica Mexicana, reproduced in Lord Kingsborough's great work, is valuable as giving unique facts regarding the Aztec mythology, as is the Teatro Mexicana of Vetancurt, published at Mexico in 1697-98.

  

The Worship of One God

The ritual of this dead faith of another hemisphere abounds in expressions concerning the unity of the deity approaching very nearly to many of those we ourselves employ regarding God's attributes. The various classes of the priesthood were in the habit of addressing the several gods to whom they ministered as "omnipotent," "endless," "invisible," "the one god complete in perfection and unity," and "the Maker and Moulder of All." These appellations they applied not to one supreme being, but to the individual deities to whose service they were attached. It may be thought that such a practice would be fatal to the evolution of a single and universal god. But there is every reason to believe that Tezcatlipoca, the great god of the air, like the Hebrew Jahveh, also an air-god, was fast gaining precedence of all other deities, when the coming of the white man put in end to his chances of sovereignty.

  

Tezcatlipoca

Tezcatlipoca (Fiery Mirror) was undoubtedly the Jupiter of the Nahua pantheon. He carried a mirror or shield, from which he took his name, and in which he was supposed to see reflected the actions and deeds of mankind. The evolution of this god from the status of a spirit of wind or air to that of the supreme deity of the Aztec people presents many points of deep interest to students of mythology. Originally the personification of the air, the source both of the breath of life and of the tempest, Tezcatlipoca possessed all the attributes of a god who presided over these phenomena. As the tribal god of the Tezcucans who had led them into the Land of Promise, and had been instrumental in the defeat of both the gods and men of the elder race they dispossessed, Tezcatlipoca naturally advanced so speedily in popularity and public honour that it was little wonder that within a comparatively short space of time he came to be regarded as a god of fate and fortune, and as inseparably connected with the national destinies. Thus, from being the peculiar deity of a small band of Nahua immigrants, the prestige accruing from the rapid conquest made under his tutelary direction and the speedily disseminated tales of the prowess of those who worshipped him seemed to render him at once the most popular and the best feared god in Anahuac, therefore the one whose cult quickly overshadowed that of other and similar gods.

  

Tezcatlipoca, Overthrower of the Toltecs

We find Tezcatlipoca intimately associated with the legends which recount the overthrow of Tollan, the capital of the Toltecs. His chief adversary on the Toltec side is the god-king Quetzalcoatl, whose nature and reign we will consider later, but whom we will now merely regard as the enemy of Tezcatlipoca. The rivalry between these gods symbolises that which existed between the civilised Toltecs and the barbarian Nahua, and is well exemplified in the following myths.

  

Myths of Quetzalcoatl and Tezcatlipoca

In the days of Quetzalcoatl there was abundance of everything necessary for subsistence. The maize was plentiful, the calabashes were as thick as one's arm, and cotton grew in all colours without having to be dyed. A variety of birds of rich plumage filled the air with their songs, and gold, silver, and precious stones were abundant. In the reign of Quetzalcoad there was peace and plenty for all men.

But this blissful state was too fortunate, too happy to endure. Envious of the calm enjoyment of the god and his people the Toltecs, three wicked "necromancers" plotted their downfall. The reference is of course to the gods of the invading Nahua tribes, the deities Huitzilopochtli, Titlacahuan or Tezcatlipoca, and Tlacahuepan. These laid evil enchantments upon the city of Tollan, and Tezcatlipoca in particular took the lead in these envious conspiracies. Disguised as an aged man with white hair, he presented himself at the palace of Quetzalcoatl, where he said to the pages. in-waiting: "Pray present me to your master the king I desire to speak with him."

The pages advised him to retire, as Quetzalcoatl was indisposed and could see no one. He requested them, however, to tell the god that he was waiting outside. They did so, and procured his admittance.

On entering the chamber of Quetzalcoad the wily Tezcatlipoca simulated much sympathy with the suffering god-king. "How are you, my son?" he asked. "I have brought you a drug which you should drink, and which will put an end to the course of your malady."

"You are welcome, old man," replied Quetzalcoad.

I have known for many days that you would come. I am exceedingly indisposed. The malady affects my entire system, and I can use neither my hands nor feet."

Tezcatlipoca assured him that if he partook of the medicine which he had brought him he would immediately experience a great improvement in health. Quetzalcoatl drank the potion, and at once felt much revived. The cunning Tezcatlipoca pressed another and still another cup of the potion upon him, and as it was nothing but pulque, the wine of the country, he speedily became intoxicated, and was as wax in the hands of his adversary.

  

Tezcatlipoca and the Toltecs

Tezcatlipoca, in pursuance of his policy inimical to the Toltec state, took the form of an Indian of the name of Toueyo (Toveyo), and bent his steps to the palace of Uemac, chief of the Toltecs in temporal matters. This worthy had a daughter so fair that she was desired in marriage by many of the Toltecs, but all to no purpose, as her father refused her hand to one and alL The princess, beholding the false Toueyo passing her father's palace, fell deeply in love with him, and so tumultuous was her passion that she became seriously ill because of her longing for him. Uemac, hearing of her indisposition, bent his steps to her apartments, and inquired of her women the cause of her illness. They told him that it was occasioned by the sudden passion which had seized her for the Indian who had recently come that way. Uemac at once gave orders for the arrest of Toueyo, and he was haled before the temporal chief of Tollan.

"Whence come you?" inquired Uemac of his prisoner, who was very scantily attired.

"Lord, I am a stranger, and I have come to these parts to sell green paint," replied Tezcatlipoca.

"Why are you dressed in this fashion? Why do you not wear a cloak?" asked the chief.

"My lord, I follow the custom of my country," replied Tezcatlipoca.

"You have inspired a passion in the breast of my daughter," said Uemac. "What should be done to you for thus disgracing me?"

"Slay me; I care not," said the cunning Tezcatlipoca.

"Nay," replied Uemac, "for if I slay you my daughter will perish. Go to her and say that she may wed you and be happy."

Now the marriage of Toueyo, to the daughter of Uemac aroused much discontent among the Toltecs; and they murmured among themselves, and said: "Wherefore did Uemac give his daughter to this Toueyo?" Uemac, having got wind of these murmurings, resolved to distract the attention of the Toltecs by makina war upon the neiahbouringa state of Coatepec.

The Toltecs assembled armed for the fray, and having arrived at the country of the men of Coatepec they placed Toueyo in ambush with his body-servants, hoping that he would be slain by their adversaries. But Toueyo and his men killed a large number of the enemy and put them to flight. His triumph was celebrated by Uemac with much pomp. The knightly plumes were placed upon his head, and his body was painted with red and yellow-an honour reserved for those who distinguished themselves in battle.

Tezcatlipoca's next step was to announce a great feast in Tollan, to which all the people for miles around were invited. Great crowds assembled, and danced and sang in the city to the sound of the drum. Tezcatlipoca sang to them and forced them to accompany the rhythm of his song with their feet. Faster and faster the people danced, until the pace became so furious that they were driven to madness, lost their footing, and tumbled pell-mell down a deep ravine, where they were changed into rocks. Others in attempting to cross a stone bridge precipitated themselves into the water below, and were changed into stones.

On another occasion Tezcatlipoca presented himself as a valiant warrior named Tequiua, and invited all the inhabitants of Tollan and its environs to come to the flower-garden called Xochitla. When assembled there he attacked them with a hoe, and slew a great number, and others in panic crushed their comrades to death.

Tezcatlipoca and Tlacahuepan on another occasion repaired to the market-place of Tollan, the former displaying upon the palm of his hand a small infant whom he caused to dance and to cut the most amusing capers. This infant was in reality Huitzilopochdi, the Nahua god of war. At this sight the Toltecs crowded upon one another for the purpose of getting a better view, and their eagerness resulted in many being crushed to death. So enraged were the Toltecs at this that upon the advice of Tlacahuepan they slew both Tezcatlipoca and Huitzilopochtli. When this had been done the bodies of the slain gods gave forth such a pernicious effluvia that thousands the Toltecs died of the pestilence. The god Tlacahuepan then advised them to cast out the bodies lest worse befell them, but on their attempting to do so they discovered their weight to be so great that they could not move them. Hundreds wound cords round the corpses, but the strands broke, and those who pulled upon them fell and died suddenly, tumbling one upon the other, and suffocating those upon whom they collapsed.

  

The Departure of Quetzalcoatl

The Toltecs were so tormented by the enchantments of Tezcatlipoca that it was soon apparent to them that their fortunes were on the wane and that the end of their empire was at hand. Quetzalcoatl, chagrined at the turn things had taken, resolved to quit Tollan and go to the country of Tlapallan, whence he had come on his civilising mission to Mexico. He burned all the houses which he had built, and buried his treasure of gold and precious stones in the deep valleys between the mountains. He changed the cacao-trees into mezquites, and he ordered all the birds of rich plumage and song to quit the valley of Anahuac and to follow him to a distance of more than a hundred leagues. On the road from Tollan he discovered a great tree at a point called Quauhtitlan. There he rested, and requested his pages to hand him a mirror. Regarding himself in the polished surface, he exclaimed, "I am old," and from that circumstance the spot was named Huehuequauhtitlan (Old Quauhtitlan). Proceeding on his way accompanied by musicians who played the flute, he walked until fatigue arrested his steps, and he seated himself upon a stone, on which he left the imprint of his hands. This place is called Temacpalco (The Impress of the Hands). At Coaapan he was met by the Nahua gods, who were inimical to him and to the Toltecs.

"Where do you go? they asked him. "Why do you leave your capital?

"I go to Tlapallan," replied Quetzalcoatl, "whence I came."

"For what reason?" persisted the enchanters.

My father the Sun has called me thence," replied Quetzalcoatl.

"Go, then, happily," they said, "but leave us the secret of your art, the secret of founding in silver, of working in precious stones and woods, of painting, and of feather-working, and other matters."

But Quetzalcoatl refused, and cast all his treasures into the fountain of Cozcaapa (Water of Precious Stones). At Cochtan he was met by another enchanter, who asked him whither he was bound, and on learning his destination proffered him a draught of wine. On tasting the vintage Quetzalcoatl was overcome with sleep. Continuing his journey in the morning, the god passed between a volcano and the Sierra Nevada (Mountain of Snow), where all the pages who accompanied him died of cold. He regretted this misfortune exceedingly, and wept, lamenting their fate with most bitter tears and mournful songs. On reaching the summit of Mount Poyauhtecatl he slid to the base. Arriving at the sea-shore, he embarked upon a raft of serpents, and was wafted away toward the land of Tlapallan.

It is obvious that these legends bear some resemblance to those of Ixtlilxochitl which recount the fall of the Toltecs. They are taken from Sahagun's work, Historya General de Nueva Espana, and are included as well for the sake of comparison as for their own intrinsic value.

  

Tezcatlipoca as Doomster

Tezcatlipoca was much more than a mere personification of wind, and if he was regarded as a life-giver he had also the power of destroying existence. In fact on occasion he appears as an inexorable death-dealer, and as such was styled Nezahualpilli (The Hungry Chief) and Yaotzin (The Enemy). Perhaps one of the names by which he was best known was Telpochtli (The Youthful Warrior), from the fact that his reserve of' strength, his vital force, never diminished, and that his youthful and boisterous vigour was apparent in the tempest.

Tezcatlipoca was usually depicted as holding in his right hand a dart placed in an atlatl (spear-thrower), and his mirror-shield with four spare darts in his left. This shield is the symbol of his power as judge of mankind and upholder of human justice.

The Aztecs pictured Tezcatlipoca as rioting along the highways in search of persons on whom to wreak his vengeance, as the wind of night rushes along the deserted roads with more seemingviolence than it does by day. Indeed one of his names, Yoalli Ehecatl, signifies "Night Wind." Benches of stone, shaped like those made for the dignitaries of the Mexican towns, were distributed along the highways for his especial use, that on these he might rest after his boisterous journeyings. These seats were concealed by green boughs, beneath which the god was supposed to lurk in wait for his victims. But if one of the persons he seized overcame him in the struggle he might ask whatever boon he desired, secure in the promise of the deity that it should be granted forthwith.

It was supposed that Tezcatlipoca had guided the Nahua, and especially the people of Tezcuco, from a more northerly clime to the valley of Mexico. But he was not a mere local deity of Tezcuco, his worship being widely celebrated throughout the country. His exalted position in the Mexican pantheon seems to have won for him especial reverence as a god of fate and fortune. The place he took as the head of the Nahua pantheon brought him many attributes which were quite foreign to his original character. Fear and a desire to exalt their tutelar deity will impel the devotees of a powerful god to credit him with any or every quality, so that there is nothing remarkable in the spectacle of the heaping of every possible attribute, human or divine, upon Tezcatlipoca when we recall the supreme position he occupied in Mexican mythology. His priestly caste far surpassed in power and in the breadth and activity of its propaganda the priesthoods of the other Mexican deities. To it is credited the invention of many of the usages of civilisation, and that it all but succeeded in making his worship universal is pretty clear, as has been shown. The other gods were worshipped for some special purpose, but the worship of Tezcatlipoca was regarded as compulsory, and to some extent as a safeguard against the destruction of the universe, a calamity the Nahua had been led tn believe might occur through his agency. He was known as Moneneque (The Claimer of Prayer), and in some of the representations of him an ear of gold was shown suspended from his hair, toward which small tongues of gold strained upward in appeal of prayer. In times of national danger, plague, or famine universal prayer was made to Tezcatlipoca. The heads of the community repaired to his teocalli (temple) accompanied by the people en masse, and all prayed earnestly together for his speedy intervention. The prayers to Tezcatlipoca still extant prove that the ancient Mexicans fully believed that he possessed the power of life and death, and many of them are couched in the most piteous terms.

  

The Teotleco Festival

The supreme position occupied by Tezcatlipoca in the Mexican religion is well exemplified in the festival of the Teotleco (Coming of the Gods), which is fully described in Sahagun's account of the Mexican festivals. Another peculiarity connected with his worship was that he was one of the few Mexican deities who had any relation to the expiation of sin. Sin was symbolised by the Nahua as excrement, and in various manuscripts Tezcatlipoca is represented as a turkey-cock to which ordure is being offered up.

Of the festival of the Teotleco Sahagun says In the twelfth month a festival was celebrated in honour of all the gods, who were said to have gone to some country I know not where. On the last day of the month a greater one was held, because the gods had returned. On the fifteenth day of this month the young boys and the servitors decked all the altars or oratories of the gods with boughs, as well as those which were in the houses, and the images which were set up by the wayside and at the cross-roads. This work was paid for in maize. Some received a basketful, and others only a few ears. On the eighteenth day the ever-youthful god Tlamatzincatl or Titlacahuan arrived. It was said that he marched better and arrived the first because he was strong and young. Food was offered him in his temple on that night. Every one drank, ate, and made merry. The old people especially celebrated the arrival of the god by drinking wine, and it was alleged that his feet were washed by these rejoicings. The last day of the month was marked by a great festival, on account of the belief that the whole or the gods arrived at that time. On the preceding night a quantity of flour was kneaded on a carpet into the shape of a cheese, it being supposed that the gods would leave a footprint thereon as a sign of their return. The chief attendant watched all night, going to and fro to see if the impression appeared. When he at last saw it he called out, 'The master has arrived,' and at once the priests of the temple began to sound the horns, trumpets, and other musical instruments used by them. Upon hearing this noise every one set forth to offer food in all the temples." The next day the aged gods were supposed to arrive, and young men disguised as monsters hurled victims into a huge sacrificial fire.

  

The Toxcatl Festival

The most remarkable festival in connection with Tezcatlipoca was the Toxcatl, held in the fifth month. On the day of this festival a youth was slain who for an entire year previously had been carefully instructed in the role of victim. He was selected from among the best war captives of the year, and must be without spot or blemish. He assumed the name, garb, and attributes of Tezcatlipoca himself, and was regarded with awe by the entire populace, who imagined him to be the earthly representative of the deity. He rested during the day, and ventured forth at night only, armed with the dart and shield of the god, to scour the roads. This practice was, of course, symbolical of the wind-god's progress over the nightbound hiahwavs. He carried also the whistle symbolical of the deity, and made with it a noise such as the weird wind of night makes when it hurries through the streets. To his arms and legs small bells were attached. He was followed by a retinue of pages, and at intervals rested upon the stone seats which were placed upon the highways for the convenience of Tezcatlipoca. Later in the year he was mated to four beautiful maidens of high birth, with whom he passed the time in amusement of every description. He was entertained at the tables of the nobility as the earthly representative of Tezcatlipoca, and his latter days were one constant round of feasting and excitement. At last the fatal day upon which he must be sacrificed arrived. He took a tearful farewell of the maidens whom he had espoused, and was carried to the teocalli of sacrifice, upon the sides of which he broke the musical instruments with which he had beguiled the time of his captivity. When he reached the summit he was received by the high-priest, who speedily made him one with the god whom he represented by tearing his heart out on the stone of sacrifice.

  

Huitzilopochth, the War,God

Huitzilopochtli occupied in the Aztec pantheon a place similar to that of Mars in the Roman. His origin is obscure, but the myth relating to it is distinctly original in character. It recounts how, under the shadow of the mountain of Coatepec, near the Toltec city of Tollan, there dwelt a pious widow called Coatlicue, the mother of a tribe of Indians called Centzonuitznaua) who had a daughter called Coyolxauhqui, and who daily repaired to a small hill with the intention of offering up prayers to the gods in a penitent spirit of piety. Whilst occupied in her devotions one day she was surprised by a small ball of brilliantly coloured feathers falling upon her from on high. She was pleased by the bright variety of its hues, and placed it in her bosom, intending to offer it up to the sun-god. Some time afterwards she learnt that she was to become the mother of another child. Her sons, hearing of this, rained abuse upon her, being incited to humiliate her in every possible way by their sister Coyolxauhqui.

Coatlicue went about in fear and anxiety; but the spirit of her unborn infant came and spoke to her and gave her words of encouragement, soothing her troubled heart. Her sons, however, were resolved to wipe out what they considered an insult to their race by the death of their mother, and took counsel with one another to slay her. They attired themselves in their war-gear, and arranged their hair after the manner of warriors going to battle. But one of their number, Quauitlicac, relented, and confessed the perfidy of his brothers to the still unborn Huitzilopochtli, who replied to him: "O brother, hearken attentively to what I have to say to you. I am fully informed of what is about to happen." With the intention of slaying their mother, the Indians went in search of her. At their head marched their sister, Coyolxauhqui. They were armed to the teeth, and carried bundles of darts with which theyintended to kill the luckless Coatlicue.

Quauitlicac climbed the mountain to acquaint Huitzilopochtli with the news that his brothers were approaching to kill their mother.

"Mark well where they are at," replied the infant god. "To what place have they advanced?"

"To Tzompantitlan," responded Quauitlicac.

Later on Huitzilopochtli asked: "Where may they be now?"

"At Coaxalco", was the reply.

Once more Huitzilopochtli asked to what point his enemies had advanced.

"They are now at Petlac," Quauitlicac replied.

After a little while Quauitlicac informed Huitzilopochtli that the Centzonuitznaua were at hand under the leadership of Coyolxauhqui. At the moment of the enemy's arrival Huitzilopochtli was born, flourishing a shield and spear of a blue colour. He was painted, his head was surmounted by a panache, and his left leg was covered with feathers. He shattered Coyolxauhqui with a flash of serpentine lightning, and then gave chase to the Centzonuitznaua, whom he pursued four times round the mountain. They did not attempt to defend themselves, but fled incontinently. Many perished in the waters of the adjoining lake, to which they had rushed in their despair. All were slain save a few who escaped to a place called Uitzlampa, where they surrendered to Huitzilopochtli and gave up their arms.

The name Huitzilopochtli signifies "Humming-bird to the left from the circumstance that the god wore the feathers of the humming-bird, or colibri, on his left leg. From this it has been inferred that he was a humming-bird totem. The explanation of Huitzilopochtli's origin is a little deeper than this, however. Among the American tribes, especially those of the northern continent, the serpent is regarded with the deepest veneration as the symbol of wisdom and magic. From these sources come success in war. The serpent also typifies the lightning, the symbol of the divine spear, the apotheosis of warlike might. Fragments of serpents are regarded as powerful war-physic among many tribes. Atatarho, a mythical wizard-king of the Iroquois, was clothed with living serpents as with a robe, and his myth throws light on one of the names of Huitzilopochtli's mother, Coatlantona (Robe of Serpents). Huitzilopochtli's image was surrounded by serpents, and rested on serpent-shaped supporters. His sceptre was a single snake, and his great drum was of serpent-skin.

In American mythology the serpent is closely associated with the bird. Thus the name of the god Quetzalcoatl is translatable as "Feathered Serpent," and many similar cases where the conception of bird and serpent have been unified could be adduced. Huitzilopochtli is undoubtedly one of these. We may regard him as a god the primary conception of whom arose from the idea of the serpent, the symbol of warlike wisdom and might, the symbol of the warrior's dart or spear, and the humming-bird, the harbinger of summer, type of the season when the snake or lightning god has power over the crops.

Huitzilopochtli was usually represented as wearing on his head a waving panache or plume of hummingbirds' feathers. His face and limbs were striped with bars of blue, and in his right hand he carried four spears. His left hand bore his shield, on the surface of which were displayed five tufts of down, arranged in the form of a quincunx. The shield was made with reeds, covered with eagle's down. The spear he brandished was also tipped with tufts of down instead of flint. These weapons were placed in the hands of those who as captives engaged in the sacrificial fight, for in the Aztec mind Hultzilopochtli symbolised the warrior's death on the gladiatorial stone of combat. As has been said, Huitzilopochtli was war-god of the Aztecs, and was supposed to have led them to the site of Mexico from their original home in the north. The city of Mexico took its name from one of its districts, which was designated by a title of Huitzilopochtli's, Mexitli (Hare of the Aloes).

  

The War,God as Fertiliser

But Huitzilopochtli was not a war-god alone. As the serpent-god of lightning he had a connection with summer, the season of lightning, and therefore had dominion to some extent over the crops and fruits of the earth. The Algonquian Indians of North America believed that the rattlesnake could raise ruinous storms or grant favourable breezes. They alluded to it also as the symbol of life, for the serpent has a phallic significance because of its similarity to the symbol of generation and fructification. With some American tribes also, notably the Pueblo Indians of Arizona, the serpent has a solar significance, and with tail in mouth symbolises the annual round of the sun. The Nahua believed that Huitzilopochtli could grant them fair weather for the fructification of their crops, and they placed an image of Tlaloc, the rain-god, near him, so that, if necessary, the war-god could compel the rainmaker to exert his pluvial powers or to abstain from the creation of floods. We must, in considering the nature of this deity, bear well in mind the connection in the Nahua consciousness between the pantheon, war, and the food-supply. If war was not waged annually the gods must go without flesh food and perish, and if the gods succumbed the crops would fail, and famine would destroy the race. So it was small wonder that Huitzilopochtli was one of the chief gods of Mexico.

Huitzilopochtli's principal festival was the Toxcatl, celebrated immediately after the Toxcatl festival of Tezcatlipoca, to which it bore a strong resemblance. Festivals of the god were held in May and December, at the latter of which an imaze of him, moulded in dough kneaded with the blood of sacrificed children, was pierced by the presiding priest with an arrow-an act significant of the death of Huitzilopochtli until his resurrection in the next year.

Strangely enough, when the absolute supremacy of Tezcatlipoca is remembered, the high-priest of Huitzilopochtli, the Mexicatl Teohuatzin, was considered to be the religious head of the Mexican priesthood. The priests of Huitzilopochtli held office by right of descent, and their primate exacted absolute obedience from the priesthoods of all the other deities, being regarded as next to the monarch himself in power and dominion.

  

Tlaloc, the Rain,God

Tlaloc was the god of rain and moisture. In a country such as Mexico, where the success or failure of the crops depends entirely upon the plentiful nature or otherwise of the rainfall, he was, it will be readily granted, a deity of high importance. It was believed that he made his home in the mountains which surround the valley of Mexico, as these were the source of the local rainfall, and his popularity is vouched for by the fact that sculptured representations of him occur more often than those of any other of the Mexican deities. He is generally represented in a semi-recumbent attitude, with the upper part of the body raised upon the elbows, and the knees half drawn up, probably to represent the mountainous character of the country whence comes the rain. He was espoused to Chalchihuitlicue (Emerald Lady), who bore him a numerous progeny, the Tlalocs (Clouds). Many of the figures which represented him were carved from the green stone called chalchiuitl (jadeite), to typify the colour of water, and in some of these he was shown holding a a serpent of gold to typify the lightning, for water-gods are often closely identified with the thunder, which hangs over the hills and accompanies heavy rains. Tlaloc, like his prototype, the Kiche god Hurakan, manifested himself in three forms, as the lightning-flash, the thunderbolt, and the thunder. Although his image faced the east, where he was supposed to have originated, he was worshipped as inhabiting the four cardinal points and every mountain-top. The colours of the four points of the compass, yellow, green, red, and blue, whence came the rain-bearing winds, entered into the composition of his costume, which was further crossed with streaks of silver, typifying the mountain torrents. A vase containing every description of grain was usually placed before his idol, an offering of the growth which it was hoped he would fructify. He dwelt in a many-watered paradise called Tlalocan (The Country of Tlaloc), a place of plenty and fruitfulness, where those who had been drowned or struck by lightning or had died from dropsical diseases enjoyed eternal bliss. Those of the common people who did not die such deaths went to the dark abode of Mictlan, the all-devouring and gloomy Lord of Death.

In the native manuscripts Tlaloc is usually portrayed as having a dark complexion, a large round eye, a row of tusks, and over the lips an angular blue stripe curved downward and rolled up at the ends. The latter character is supposed to have been evolved originally from the coils of two snakes, their mouths with long fangs in the upper jaw meeting in the middle of the upper lip. The snake, besides being symbolised by lightning in many American mythologies, is also symbolical of water, which is well typified in its sinuous movements.

Many maidens and children were annually sacrificed to Tlaloc. If the children wept it was regarded as a happy omen for a rainy season. The Etzalqualiztli (When they eat Bean Food) was his chief festival, and was held on a day approximating to May 13, about which date the rainy season usually commenced. Another festival in his honour, the Quauitleua, commenced the Mexican year on February 2. At the former festival the priests of Tlaloc plunged into a lake, imitating the sounds and movements of frogs, which, as denizens of water, were under the special protection of the god. Chalchihuitlicue, his wife, was often symbolised by the small image of a frog.

  

Sacrifices to Tlaloc

Human sacrifices also took place at certain points in the mountains where artificial ponds were consecrated to Tlaloc. Cemeteries were situated in their vicinity, and offerings to the god interred near the burial-place of the bodies of the victims slain in his service. His statue was placed on the highest mountain of Tezcuco, and an old writer mentions that five or six young children were annually offered to the god at various points, their hearts torn out, and their remains interred. The mountains Popocatepetl and Teocuinani were regarded as his special high places, and on the heights of the latter was built his temple, in which stood his image carved in green stone.

The Nahua believed that the constant production of food and rain induced a condition of senility in those deities whose duty it was to provide them. This they attempted to stave off, fearing that if they failed in so doing the gods would perish. They afforded them, accordingly, a period of rest and recuperation, and once in eight years a festival called the Atamalqualiztli (Fast of Porridge-balls and Water) was held, during which every one in the Nahua community returned for the time being to the conditions of savage life. Dressed in costumes representing all forms of animal and bird life, and mimicking the sounds made by the various creatures they typified, the people danced round the teocalli of Tlaloc for the purpose of diverting and entertaining him after his labours in producing the fertilising rains of the past eight years. A lake was filled with water-snakes and frogs, and into this the people plunged, catching the reptiles in their mouths and devouring them alive. The only grain food which might be partaken during this season of rest was thin water-porridge of maize.

Should one of the more prosperous peasants or yeomen deem a rainfall necessary to the growth of his crops, or should he fear a drought, he sought out one of the professional makers of dough or paste idols, whom he desired to mould one of Tlaloc. To this image offerings of maize-porridge and pulque were made. Throughout the night the farmer and his neighbours danced, shrieking and howling round the figure for the purpose of rousing Tlaloc from his droughtbringing slumbers. Next day was spent in quaffing huge libations of pulque, and in much-needed rest from the exertions of the previous night.

In Tlaloc it is easy to trace resemblances to a mythological conception widely prevalent among the indigenous American peoples. He is similar to such deities as the Hurakan of the Kiche of Guatemala, the Pillan of the aborigines of Chile, and Con, the thunder-god of the Collao of Peru. Only his thunderous powers are not so apparent as his rain-making abilities, and in this he differs somewhat from the gods alluded to.

  

Quetzalcoatl

It is highly probable that Quetzalcoatl was a deity of the pre-Nahua people of Mexico. He was regarded by the Aztec race as a god of somewhat alien character, and had but a limited following in Mexico, the city of Huitzilopochtli. In Cholula, however, and others of the older towns his worship flourished exceedingly. He was regarded as "The Father of the Toltecs," and, legend says, was the seventh and youngest son of the Toltec Abraham, Iztacmixcohuatl. Quetzalcoatl (whose name means "Feathered Serpent " or "Feathered Staff ") became, at a relatively early period, ruler of Tollan, and by his enlightened sway and his encouragement of the liberal arts did much to further the advancement of his people. His reign had lasted for a period sufficient to permit of his placing the cultivated arts upon a satisfactory basis when the country was visited by the cunning magicians Tezcatlipoca and Coyotlinaual, god of the Amantecas. Disentangled from its terms of myth, this statement may be taken to imply that bands of invading Nahua first began to appear within the Toltec territories. Tezcatlipoca, descending from the sky in the shape of a spider by way of a fine web, proffered him a draught of pulque, which so intoxicated him that the curse of lust descended upon him, and he forgot his chastity with Quetzalpetlatl. The doom pronounced upon him was the hard one of banishment, and he was compelled to forsake Anahuac. His exile wrought peculiar changes upon the face of the country. He secreted his treasures of gold and silver, burned his palaces, transformed the cacao-trees into mezquites, and banished all the birds from the neighbourhood of Tollan. The magicians, nonplussed at these unexpected happenings, begged him to return, but he refused on the ground that the sun required his presence. He proceeded to Tabasco, the fabled land of Tlapallan, and, embarking upon a raft made of serpents, floated away to the east. A slightly different version of this myth has already been given. Other accounts state that the king cast himself upon a funeral pyre and was consumed, and that the ashes arising from the conflagration flew upward and were changed into birds of brilliant plumage. His heart also soared into the sky, and became the morning star. The Mexicans averred that Quetzalcoatl died when the star became visible, and thus they bestowed upon him the title "Lord of the Dawn." They further said that when he died he was invisible for four days, and that for eight days he wandered in the underworld, after which time the morning star appeared, when he achieved resurrection, and ascended his throne as a god.

It is the contention of some authorities that the myth of Quetzalcoatl points to his status as god of the sun. That luminary, they say, begins his diurnal journey in the east, whence Quetzalcoatl returned as to his native home. It will be recalled that Montezuma and his subjects imagined that Cortes was no other than Quetzalcoatl, returned to his dominions, as an old prophecy declared he would do. But that he stood for the sun itself is highly improbable, as will be shown. First of all, however, it will be well to pay some attention to other theories concerning his origin.

Perhaps the most important of these is that which regards Quetzalcoatl as a god of the air. He is connected, say some, with the cardinal points, and wears the insignia of the cross, which symbolises them. Dr. Seler says of him: "He has a protruding, trumpet-like mouth, for the wind-god blows. . . . His figure suggests whirls and circles. Hence his temples were built in circular form. . . . The head of the wind-god stands for the second of the twenty day signs, which was called Ehecatl (Wind)." The same authority, however, in his essay on Mexican chronology, gives to Quetzalcoatl a dual nature, " the dual nature which seems to belong to the wind-god Quetzalcoatl) who now appears simply a wind-god, and again seems to show the true, characters of the old god of fire and light." [Bulletin 28 of the U.S. Bureau of Ethnology.]

Dr. Brinton perceived in Quetzalcoatl a similar dual nature. "He is both lord of the eastern light and of the winds, he writes (Myths of the New World, P. 214)- "Like all the dawn heroes, he too was represented as of white complexion, clothed in long, white robes, and, as many of the Aztec gods, with a full and flowing beard. . . . He had been overcome by Tezcatloca, the wind or spirit of night, who had descended from heaven by a spider's web, and presented his rival with a draught supposed to confer immortality, but in fact producing an intolerable longing for home. For the wind and the light both depart when the gloaming draws near, or when the clouds spread their dark and shadowy webs along the mountains, and pour the vivifying rain upon the fields."

The theory which derives Quetzalcoatl from a "culture-hero " who once actually existed is scarcely reconcilable with probability. It is more than likely that, as in the case of other mythical paladins, the legend of a mighty hero arose from the somewhat weakened idea of a great deity. Some of the early Spanish missionaries professed to see in Quetzalcoatl the Apostle St. Thomas, who had journeyed to America to effect its conversion!

  

The Man of the Sun

A more probable explanation of the origin of Quetzalcoatl and a more likely elucidation of his nature is that which would regard him as the Man of the Sun, who has quitted his abode for a season for the purpose of inculcating in mankind those arts which represent the first steps in civilisation, who fulfils his mission, and who, at a late period, is displaced by the deities of an invading race. Quetzalcoatl was represented as a traveller with staff in hand, and this is proof of his solar character, as is the statement that under his rule the fruits of the earth flourished more abundantly than at any subsequent period. The abundance of gold said to have been accumulated in his reign assists the theory, the precious metal being invariably associated with the sun by most barbarous peoples. In the native pinturas it is noticeable that the solar disc and semidisc are almost invariably found in connection with the feathered serpent as the symbolical attributes of Quetzalcoad. The Hopi Indians of Mexico at the present day symbolise the sun as a serpent, tail in mouth, and the ancient Mexicans introduced the solar disc in connection with small images of Quetzalcoatl, which they attached to the head-dress. In still other examples Quetzalcoatl is pictured as if emerging or stepping from the luminary, which is represented as his dwelling-place.

Several tribes tributary to the Aztecs were in the habit of imploring Quetzalcoatl in prayer to return and free them from the intolerable bondage of the conqueror. Notable among them were the Totonacs, who passionately believed that the sun, their father, would send a god who would free them from the Aztec yoke. On the coming of the Spaniards the European conquerors were hailed as the servants of Quetzalcoatl, thus in the eyes of the natives fulfilling the tradition that he would return.

  

Various Forms of Quetzalcoatl

Various conceptions of Quetzalcoad are noticeable in the mythology of the territories which extended from the north of Mexico to the marshes of Nicaragua. In Guatemala the Kiches recognised him as Gucumatz, and in Yucatan proper he was worshipped as Kukulcan, both of which names are but literal translations of his Mexican title of "Feathered Serpent" into Kiche and Mayan. That the three deities are one and the same there can be no shadow of doubt. Several authorities have seen in Kukulcan a "serpent-and-rain god." He can only be such in so far as he is a solar god also. The cult of the feathered snake in Yucatan was unquestionably a branch of sun-worship. In tropical latitudes the sun draws the clouds round him at noon. The rain falls from the clouds accompanied by thunder and lightning-the symbols of the divine serpent. Therefore the manifestations of the heavenly serpent were directly associated with the sun, and no statement that Kukulcan is a mere serpent-and-water god satisfactorily elucidates his characteristics.

  

Quetzalcoatl's Northern Origin

It is by no means improbable that Quetzalcoatl was of northern origin, and that on his adoption by southern peoples and tribes dwelling in tropical countries his characteristics were gradually and unconsciously altered in order to meet the exigencies of his environment. The mythology of the Indians of British Columbia, whence in all likelihood the Nahua originally came, is possessed of a central figure bearing a strong resemblance to Quetzalcoad. Thus the Thlingit tribe worship Yetl; the Quaquiutl Indians, Kanikilak; the Salish people of the coast, Kumsnootl, Quaaqua, or Slaalekam. It is noticeable that these divine beings are worshipped as the Man of the Sun, and totally apart from the luminary himself, as was Quetzalcoatl in Mexico. The Quaquiutl believe that before his settlement among them for the purpose of inculcating in the tribe the arts of life, the sun descended as a bird, and assumed a human shape. Kanikilak is his son, who, as his emissary, spreads the arts of civilisation over the world. So the Mexicans believed that Quetzalcoatl descended first of all in the form of a bird, and was ensnared in the fowler's net of the Toltec hero Hueymatzin.

The titles bestowed upon Quetzalcoatl by the Nahua show that in his solar significance he was god of the vault of the heavens, as well as merely son of the sun. He was alluded to as Ehecatl (The Air), Yolcuat (The Rattlesnake), Tohil (The Rumbler), Nanihehecatl (Lord of the Four Winds), Tlauizcalpantecutli (Lord of the Light of the Dawn). The whole heavenly vault was his, together with all its phenomena. This would seem to be in direct opposition to the theory that Tezcatlipoca was the supreme god of the Mexicans. But it must be borne in mind that Tezcatlipoca was the god of a later age, and of a fresh body of Nahua immigrants, and as such inimical to Quetzalcoatl, who was probably in a similar state of opposition to Itzamna, a Maya deity of Yucatan.

  

The Worship of Quetzalcoatl

The worship of Quetzalcoatl was in some degree antipathetic to that of the other Mexican deities, and his priests were a separate caste. Although human sacrifice was by no means so prevalent among his devotees, it is a mistake to aver, as some authorities have done, that it did not exist in connection with his worship. A more acceptable sacrifice to Quetzalcoatl appears to have been the blood of the celebrant or worshipper, shed by himself. When we come to consider the mythology of the Zapotecs, a people whose Customs and beliefs appear to have formed a species of link between the Mexican and Mayan civilisations, we shall find that their high-priests occasionally enacted the legend of Quetzalcoad in their own persons, and that their worship, which appears to have been based upon that of Quetzalcoatl, had as one of its most pronounced characteristics the shedding of blood. The celebrant or devotee drew blood from the vessels lying under the tongue or behind the ear by drawing across those tender parts a cord made from the thorn-covered fibres of the agave. The blood was smeared over the mouths of the idols. In this practice we can perceive an act analogous to the sacrificial substitution of the part for the whole, as obtaining in early Palestine and many other countries-a certain sign that tribal or racial opinion has contracted a disgust for human sacrifice, and has sought to evade. the anger of the gods by yielding to them a ortion of the blood of each worshipper, instead of sacrificing the life of one for the general weal.

  

The Maize-Gods of Mezico

A special group of deities called Centeotl presided over the agriculture of Mexico, each of whom personified one or other of the various aspects of the maize-plant. The chief goddess of maize, however, was Chicomecohuatl (Seven-serpent), her name being an allusion to the fertilising power of water, which element the Mexicans symbolised by the serpent. As Xilonen she typified the xilote, or green ear of the maize. But it is probable that Chicomecohuatl was the creation of an older race, and that the Nahua new-comers adopted or brought with them another growth-spirit, the"Earth-mother," Teteoinnan (Mother of the Gods), or Tocitzin (Our Grandmother). This goddess had a son, Centeotl, a male maize-spirit. Sometimes the mother was also known as Centeotl, the generic name for the entire group, and this fact has led to some confusion in the minds of Americanists. But this does not mean that Chicomecohuatl was by any means neglected. Her spring festival, held on April 5, was known as Hueytozoztli (The Great Watch), and was accompanied by a general fast, when the dwellings of the Mexicans were decorated with bulrushes which had been sprinkled with blood drawn from the extremities of the inmates. The statues of the little tepitoton (household gods) were also decorated. The worshippers then proceeded to the maize-fields, where they pulled the tender stalks of the growing maize, and, having decorated them with flowers, placed them in the calpulli (the common house of the village). A mock combat then took place before the altar of Chicomecohuatl. The girls of the village presented the goddess with bundles of maize of the previous season's harvesting, later restoring them to the granaries in order that they might be utilised for seed for the coming year. Chicomecohuatl was always represented among the household deities of the Mexicans, and on the occasion of her festival the family placed before the image a basket of provisions sur. mounted by a cooked frog, bearing on its back a piece of cornstalk stuffed with pounded maize and vegetables. This frog was symbolic of Chalchihuitlicue, wife of TIaloc, the rain-god, who assisted Chicomecohuatl in providg a bountiful harvest. In order that the soil might rther benefit, a frog, the symbol of water, was sacrificed, so that its vitality should recuperate that of the weary and much-burdened earth.

  

The Sacrifice of the Dancer

A more important festival of Chicomecohuatl, however, was the Xalaquia, which lasted from June 28 to July 14, commencing when the maize plant had attained its full growth. The women of the pueblo (village) wore their hair unbound, and shook and tossed it so that by sympathetic magic the maize might take the hint and grow correspondingly long. Chian pinolli was consumed in immense quantities, and maize porridge was eaten. Hilarious dances were nightly performed in the teopan (temple), the central figure in which was the Xalaquia, a female captive or slave, with face painted red and yellow to represent the colours of the maize-plant. She had previously under gone a long course of training in the dancing-school, and now, all unaware of the horrible fate awaiting her, she danced and pirouetted gaily among the rest. Throughout the duration of the stival she danced and on its expiring night she was accompanied in the dance by the women of the community, who circled round her, chanting the deeds of Chicomecohuatl. When daybreak appeared the company was joined by the chiefs and headmen, who, along with the exhausted and half-fainting victim, danced the solemn death-dance. The entire community then approached the teocalli (pyramid of sacrifice), and, its summit reached, the victim was stripped to a nude condition, the priest plunged a knife of flint into her bosom, and, tearing out the still palpitating heart, offered it up to Chicomecohuatl. In this manner the venerable goddess, weary with the labours of inducing growth in the maize-plant, was supposed to be revivified and refreshed. Hence the name Xalaquia, which signifies "She who is clothed with the Sand." Until the death of the victim it was not lawful to partake of the new corn.

The general appearance of Chicomecohuatl was none too pleasing. Her image rests in the National Museum in Mexico, and is girdled with snakes. On the underside the symbolic frog is carved. The Americanists; of the eighteenth and early nineteenth centuries were unequal to the task of elucidating the origin of the figure, which they designated Teoyaominqui. The first to point out the error was Payne, in his History of the New World called America, Vol. i. p. 424. The passage in which he announces his discovery is of such real interest that it is worth transcribing fully.

  

An Antiquarian Mare's-Nest

"All the great idols of Mexico were thought to have been destroyed until this was disinterred among other relics in the course of making new drains in the Plaza Mayor of Mexico in August 1790. The discovery produced an immense sensation. The idol was dragged to the court of the University, and there set up; the Indians began to worship it and deck it with flowers; the antiquaries, with about the same degree of intelligence, to speculate about it. What most puzzled them was that the face and some other parts of the goddess are found in duplicate at the back or the figure; hence they concluded it to represent two gods in one, the principal of whom they further concluded to be a female, the other, indicated by the back, a male. The standard author on Mexican antiquities at that time was the Italian dilettante Boturini, of whom it may be said that he is better, but not much better, than nothing at all. From page 27 of his work the antiquaries learned that Huitzilopochtli was accompanied by the goddess Teoyaominqui, who was charged with collecting the souls of those slain in war and sacrifice. This was enough. The figure was at once named Teoyaominqui or Huitzilopochtli (The One plus the Other), and has been so called ever since. The antiquaries next elevated this imaginary goddess to the rank of the war-god's wife. 'A soldier,' says Bardolph, 'is better accommodated than with a wife': a fortiori, so is a war-god. Besides, as Torquemada (vol, ii. p.47) says with perfect truth, the Mexicans did not think so grossly of the divinity as to have married gods or goddesses at all. The figure is undoubtedly a female. It has no vestige of any weapon about it, nor has it any limbs. It differs in every particular from the war-god Huitzilopochtli, every detail of which is perfectly well known. There never was any goddess called Teoyaominqui. This may be plausibly inferred from the fact that such a goddess is unknown not merely to Sahagun, Torquemada, Acosta, Tezozomoc, Duran, and Clavigero, but to all other writers except Boturini. The blunder of the last-named writer is easily explained. Antonio Leon y Gama, a Mexican astronomer, wrote an account of the discoveries Of 1790, in which, evidently puzzled by the name of Teoyaominqui, he quotes a manuscript in Mexican, said to have been written by an Indian of Tezcuco, who was born in 1528, to the effect that Teoyaotlatohua and Teoyaominqui were spirits who presided over the fifteenth of the twenty signs of the fortune-tellers' calendar, and that those born in this sign would be brave warriors, but would soon die. (As the fifteenth sign was quauhtli, this is likely enough.) When their hour had come the former spirit scented them out, the latter killed them. The rubbish printed about Huitzilopochtli, Teoyaominqui, and Mictlantecutli in connection with this statue would fill a respectable volume. The reason why the features were duplicated is obvious. The figure was carried in the midst of a large crowd. Probably it was considered to be an evil omen if the idol turned away its face from its worshippers; this the duplicate obviated. So when the dance was performed round the figure (cf. Janus). This duplication of the features, a characteristic of the very oldest gods, appears to be indicated when the numeral ome (two) is prefixed to the title of the deity. Thus the two ancestors and preservers of the race were called Ometecuhtli and Omecihuatl (two-chief, two-woman), ancient Toltec gods, who at the conquest become less prominent in the theology of Mexico, and who are best represented in that of the Mexican colony of Nicaragua."

  

The Offering to Centeotl

During her last hours the victim sacrificed at the Xalaquia wore a ritual dress made from the fibres of the aloe, and with this garment the maize-god Centeotl was clothed. Robed in this he temporarily represented the earth-goddess, so that he might receive her sacrifice. The blood of victims was offered up to him in a vessel decorated with that brilliant and artistic featherwork which excited such admiration in the breasts of the connoisseurs and cesthetes of the Europe of the sixteenth century. Upon partaking of this blood-offering the deity emitted a groan so intense and terrifying that it has been left on record that such Spaniards as were present became panic-stricken. This ceremony was followed by another, the niticapoloa (tasting of the soil), which consisted in raising a little earth on one finger to the mouth and eating it.

As has been said, Centeotl the son has been confounded with Centeotl the mother, who is in reality the earth-mother Teteoinnan. Each of these deities bad a teopan (temple) of his or her own, but they were closely allied as parent and child. But of the two, Centeotl the son was the more important. On the death of the sacrificed victim her skin was conveyed to the temple of Centeotl the son, and worn there in the succeeding ritual by the officiating priests. This gruesome dress is frequently depicted in the Aztec pinturas, where the skin of the hands, and in some instances the feet, of the victims can be seen dangling from the wrists and ankles of the priest.

  

Importance of the Food-Gods

To the Mexicans the deities of most importance to the community as a whole were undoubtedly the food-gods. In their emergence from the hunting to the agricultural state of life, when they began to exist almost solely upon the fruits of the earth, the Mexicans were quick to recognise that the old deities of the chase, such as Mixcoatl, could not now avail them or succour them in the same manner as the guardians of the crops and fertilisers of the soil. Gradually we see these gods, then, advance in power and influence until at the time of the Spanish invasion we find them paramount. Even the terrible war-god himself had an agricultural significance, as we have pointed out. A distinct bargain with the food-gods can be clearly traced, and is none the less obvious because it was never written or codified. The covenant was as binding to the native mind as any made betwixt god and man in ancient Palestine, and included mutual assistance as well as provision for mere alimentary supply. In no mythology is the understanding between god and man so clearly defined as in the Nahuan, and in none is its operation better exemplified.

  

Xipe

Xipe (The Flayed) was widely worshipped through,out Mexico, and is usually depicted in the pinturas as being attired in a flayed human skin. At his special festival, the "Man-flaying," the skins were removed from the victims and worn by the devotees of the god for the succeeding twenty days. He is usually represented as of a red colour. In the later days of the Aztec monarchy the kings and leaders of Mexico assumed the dress or classical garments of Xipe. This dress consisted of a crown made of feathers of the roseate spoonbill, the gilt timbrel, the jacket of spoonbill feathers, and an apron of green feathers lapping over one another in a tile-like pattern. In the Cozcatzin Codex we see a picture of King Axayacatl dressed as Xipe in a feather skirt, and having a tiger-skin scabbard to his sword. The hands of a flayed human skin also dangle over the monarch's wrists, and the feet fall over his feet like gaiters.

Xipe's shield is a round target covered with the rose-coloured feathers of the spoonbill, with concentric circles of a darker hue on the surface. There are examples of it divided into an upper and lower part, the former showing an emerald on a blue field, and the latter a tiger-skin design. Xipe was imagined as possessing three forms, the first that of the roseate spoon. bill, the second that of the blue cotinga, and the last that of a tiger, the three shapes perhaps corresponding to the regions of heaven, earth, and hell, or to the three elements, fire, earth, and water. The deities of many North American Indian tribes show similar variations in form and colour, which are supposed to follow as the divinity changes his dwelling to north, south, east, or west. But Xipe is seldom depicted in the pinturas in any other form but that of the red od) the form in which the Mexicans adopted him from the Yopi tribe of the Pacific slope. He is the god of human sacrifice par excellence, and may be regarded as a Yopi equivalent of Tezcatlipoca.

  

Nanaliuatl, or Nanauatzin

Nanahuatl (Poor Leper) presided over skin diseases, such as leprosy. It was thought that persons afflicted with these complaints were set apart by the moon for his service. In the Nahua tongue the words for "leprous" and "eczematous " also mean "divine." The myth of Nanahuatl tells how before the sun was created humanity dwelt in sable and horrid gloom. Only a human sacrifice could hasten the appearance of the luminary. Metztli (The Moon) led forth Nanahuatl as a sacrifice, and he was cast upon a funeral pyre, in the flames of which he was consumed. Metztli also cast herself upon the mass of flame, and with her death the sun rose above the horizon. There can be no doubt that the myth refers to the consuming of the starry or spotted night, and incidentally to the nightly death of the moon at the flaming hour of dawn.

  

Xolotl

Xolotl is of southern, possibly Zapotec, origin. He represents either fire rushing down from the heavens or light flaming upward. It is noticeable that in the ointuras the picture of the setting sun being devoured by the earth is nearly always placed opposite his image. He is probably identical with Nanahuatl, and appears as the representative of human sacrifice. He has also affinities with Xipe. On the whole Xolotl may be best described as a sun-god of the more southerly tribes. His head (quaxolvto was one of the most famous devices for warriors' use, as sacrifice among the Nahua was, as we have seen, closely associated with warfare.

Xolotl was a mythical figure quite foreign to the peoples of Anahuac or Mexico, who regarded him as something strange and monstrous. He is alluded to as the "God of Monstrosities, and, thinks Dr. Seler, the word "monstrosity" may suitably translate his name. He is depicted with empty eye-sockets, which circumstance is explained by the myth that when the gods determined to sacrifice themselves in order to give life and strength to the newly created sun, Xolotl withdrew, and wept so much that his eyes fell out of their sockets. This was the Mexican explanation of a Zapotec attribute. Xolotl was originally the "Lightning Beast" of the Maya or some other southern folk, and was represented by them as a dog, since that animal appeared to them to be the creature which he most resembled. But he was by no means a "natural" dog, hence their conception of him as unnatural. Dr. Seler is inclined to identify him with the tapir, and indeed Sahagun speaks of a strange animal-being, tlaca-xolotl, which has "a large snout, large teeth, hoofs like an ox, a thick hide, and reddish hair"-not a bad description of the tapir of Central America. Of course to the Mexicans the god Xolotl was no longer an animal, although he had evolved from one, and was imagined by them to have the form shown in the accompanying illustration.

  

The Fire-God

This deity was known in Mexico under various names, notably Tata (Our Father), Huehueteotl (Oldest of Gods), and Xiuhtecutli (Lord of the Year). He was represented as of the colour of fire, with a black face, a headdress of green feathers, and bearing on his back a yellow serpent, to typify the serpentine nature of fire. He also bore a mirror of gold to show his connection with the sun, from which all heat emanates. On rising in the morning all Mexican families made Xiuhtecutli an offering of a piece of bread and a drink. He was thus not only, like Vulcan, the god of thunderbolts and conflagrations, but also the milder deity of the domestic hearth. Once a year the fire in every Mexican house was extinguished, and rekindled by friction before the idol of Xiuhtecutli. When a Mexican baby was born it passed through a baptism of fire on the fourth day, up to which time a fire, lighted at the time of its birth, was kept burning in order to nourish its existence.

  

Mictlan

Mictlantecutli (Lord of Hades) was God of the Dead and of the grim and shadowy realm to which the souls of men repair after their mortal sojourn. He is represented in the pinturas as a grisly monster with capacious mouth, into which fall the spirits of the dead. His terrible abode was sometimes alluded to as Tlalxicco (Navel of the Earth), but the Mexicans in general seem to have thought that it was situated in the far north, which they regarded as a place of famine, desolation, and death. Here those who by the circumstances of their demise were unfitted to enter the paradise of Tlaloc-namely, those who had not been drowned or had not died a warrior's death, or, in the case of women, had not died in childbed-passed a dreary and meaningless existence. Mictlan was surrounded by a species of demons called tzitzimimes, and had a spouse, Mictecaciuatl. When we come to discuss the analogous deity of the Maya we shall see that in all probability Mictlan was represented by the bat, the animal typical of the underworld. In a preceding paragraph dealing with the funerary customs we have described thejourney of the soul to the abode of Mictlan, and the ordeals through which the spirit of the defunct had to pass ere entering his realm (see p. 37).

  

Worship of the Planet Venus

The Mexicans designated the planet Venus Citlalpol (The Great Star) and Tlauizcalpantecutli (Lord of the Dawn). It seems to have been the only star worshipped by them, and was regarded with considerable veneration. Upon its rising they stopped up the chimneys of their houses, so that no harm of any kind might enter with its light. A column called Ilhuicatlan, meaning " In the Sky," stood in the court of the great temple of Mexico, and upon this a symbol of the planet was painted. On its reappearance during its usual circuit, captives were taken before this repre. sentation and sacrificed to it. It will be remembered that the myth of Quetzalcoatl states that the heart of that deity flew upward from the funeral pyre on which he was consumed and became the planet Venus. It is not easy to say whether or not this myth is anterior to the adoption of the worship of the planet by the Nahua, for it may be a tale of pre- or post-Nahuan growth. In the tonalamatl Tlauizcalpantecutli is representcd as lord of the ninth division of thirteen days, beginning with Ce Coatl (the sign of "One Serpent "). In several of the pinturas he is represented as having a white body with long red stripes, while round his eves is a deep black painting like a domino mask, bordered with small white circles. His lips are a bright vermilion. The red stripes are probably introduced to accentuate the whiteness of his body, which is under stood to symbolise the peculiar half-light which emanates from the planet. The black paint on the face, surrounding the eye, typifies the dark sky of night. In Mexican and Central American symbolism the eye often represents light, and here, surrounded by blackness as it is, it is perhaps almost hieroglyphic. As the star of evening, Tlauizcalpantecutli is some times shown with the face of a skull, to signify his descent into the underworld, whither he follows  the sun. That the Mexicans and Maya carefully and accurately observed his periods of revolution is witnessed by the pinturas.

  

Sun-Worship

The sun was regarded by the Nahua, and indeed by all the Mexican and Central American peoples, as the supreme deity, or rather the principal source of subsistence and life. He was always alluded to as the teotl, the god, and his worship formed as it were a background to that of all the other gods. His Mexican name, lpalnemohuani (He by whom Men Live) shows that the Mexicans regarded him as the rimal source of being, and the heart, the symbol of life, was looked upon as his special sacrifice. Those who rose at sunrise to prepare food for the day held up to him on his appearance the hearts of animals they had slain for cooking, and even the hearts of the victims to Tezcatlipoca and Huitzilopochtli were first held up to the sun, as if he had a primary right to the sacrifice, before being cast into the bowl of copal which lay at the feet of the idol. It was supposed that the luminary rejoiced in offerings of blood, and that it constituted the only food which would render him sufficiently vigorous to undertake his daily journey through the heavens. He is often depicted in the pinturas as licking up the gore of the sacrificial victims with his long tongue-like rays. The sun must fare well if he was to continue to give life) light, and heat to mankind.

The Mexicans, as we have already seen, believed that the luminary they knew had been preceded by others, each of which had been quenched by some awful cataclysm of nature. Eternity had, in fact, been broken up into epochs, marked by the destruction of successive suns. In the period preceding that in whi they lived, a mighty deluge had deprived the sun of life, and some such catastrophe was apprehended at the end of every "sheaf" of fifty-two years. The old suns were dead, and the current sun was no more immortal than they. At the endof oneof the "sheaves" he too would succumb.

  

Sustaining the Sun

It was therefore necessary to sustain the sun by the daily food of human sacrifice, for by a tithe of human life alone would he be satisfied. Naturally a people holding such a belief would look elsewhere than within their own borders for the material wherewith to placate their deity. This could be most suitably found among the inhabitants of a neighbouring state. It thus became the business of the warrior class in the Aztec state to furnish forth the altars of the gods with human victims. The most suitable district of supply was the pueblo of Tlaxcallan, or Tlascala, the people of which were of cognate origin to the Aztecs. The communities had, although related, been separated for so many generations that they had begun to regard each other as traditional enemies, and on a given day in the year their forces met at an appointed spot for the purpose of engaging in a strife which should furnish one side or the other with a sufficiency of victims for the purpose of sacrifice. The warrior who captured the largest number of opponents alive was regarded as the champion of the day, and was awarded the chief honours of the combat. The sun was therefore the god of warriors, as he would give them victory in battle in order that they might supply him with food. The rites of this military worship of the luminary were held in the Quauhquauhtinchan (House of the Eagles), an armoury set apart for the regiment of that name. On March 17 and December 1 and 2, at the ceremonies known as Nauhollin (The Four Motions-alluding to the quivering appearance of the sun's rays), the warriors gathered in this hall for the purpose of despatching a messenger to their lord the sun. High up on the wall of the principal court was a great symbolic representation of the orb, painted upon a bright coloured cotton hanging. Before this copal and other Irragrant gums and spices were burned four times a day. The victim, a war-captive, was placed at the foot of a long staircase leading up to the Quauhxicalli (Cup of the Eagles), the name of the stone on which he was to be sacrificed. He was clothed in red striped with white and wore white plumes in his hair-colours symbolical of the sun-while he bore a staff decorated with feathers and a shield covered with tufts of cotton. He also carried a bundle of eagle's feathers and some paint on his shoulders, to enable the sun, to whom he was the emissary, to paint his face. He was then addressed by the officiating priest in the following terms: "Sir, we pray you go to our god the sun, and greet him on our behalf; tell him that his sons and warriors and chiefs and those who remain here beg of him to remember them and to favour them from that place where he is, and to receive this small offering which we send him. Give him this staff to help him on his journey, and this shield for his defence, and all the rest that you have in this bundle." The victim, having undertaken to carry the message to the sun-god, was then despatched upon his long journey.

A Quauhxicalli is preserved in the National Museum of Mexico. It consists of a basaltic mass, circular in form, on which are shown in sculpture a series of groups representing Mexican warriors receiving the submission of war-captives. The prisoner tenders a flower to his captor, symbolical of the life he is about to offer up, for lives were the "flowers" offered to the gods, and the campaign in which these "blossoms" were captured was called Xochiyayotl (The War of Flowers). The warriors who receive the submission of the captives are represented in the act of tearing the plumes from their heads. These bas-reliefs occupy the sides of the stone. The face of it is covered by a great solar disc having eight rays, and the surface is hollowed out in the middle to form a receptacle for blood-the "cup" alluded to in the name of the stone. The Quauhxicalli must not be confounded with the temalacatl (spindle stone), to which the alien warrior who received a chance of life was secured. The gladiatorial combat gave the war-captive an opportunity to escape through superior address in arms. The temalacatl was somewhat higher than a man, and was provided with a platform at the top, in the middle of which was placed a great stone with a hole in it through which a rope was passed. To this the war-captive was secured, and if he could vanquish seven of his captors he was released. If he failed to do so he was at once sacrificed.

  

A Mexican Valhalla

The Mexican warriors believed that they continued in the service of the sun after death, and, like the Scandinavian heroes in Valhalla, that they were admitted to the dwelling of the god, where they shared all the delights of his diurnal round. The Mexican warrior dreaded to die in his bed, and craved an end on the field of battle. This explains the desperate nature of their resistance to the Spaniards under Cortes, whose officers stated that the Mexicans seemed to desire to die fighting. After death they believed that they would partake of the cannibal feasts offered up to the sun and imbibe the juice of flowers.

  

The Feast of Totec

The chief of the festivals to the sun was that held in spring at the vernal equinox, before the representation of a deity known as Totec (Our Great Chief). Although Totec was a solar deity he had been adopted from the people of an alien state, the Zapotecs of Zalisco, and is therefore scarcely to be regarded as the principal sun-god. His festival was celebrated by the symbolical slaughter of all the other gods for the purpose of providing sustenance to the sun, each of the gods being figuratively slain in the person of a victim. Totec was attired in the same manner as the warrior despatched twice a year to assure the sun of the loyalty of the Mexicans. The festival appears to have been primarily a seasonal one, as bunches of dried maize were offered to Totec. But its larger meaning is obvious. It was, indeed, a commemoration of the creation of the sun. This is proved by the description of the image of Totec, which was robed and equipped as the solar traveller, by the solar disc and tables of the sun's progress carved on the altar employed in the ceremony, and by the robes of the victims, who were dressed to represent dwellers in the sun-god's halls. Perhaps Totec, although of alien origin, was the only deity possessed by the Mexicans who directly represented the sun. As a borrowed god he would have but a minor position in the Mexican pantheon, but again as the only sun-god whom it was necessary to bring into prominence during a strictly solar festival he would be for the time, of course, a very important deity indeed.

  

Tepeyollotl

Tepeyollotl means Heart of the Mountain, and evidently alludes to a deity whom the Nahua connected with seismic disturbances and earthquakes. By the interpreter of the Codex Telleriano-Remensis he is called Tepeolotlec, an obvious distortion of his real name. The interpreter of the codex states that his name "refers to the condition of the earth after the flood. The sacrifices of these thirteen days were not good, and the literal translation of their name is 'dirt sacrifices.' They caused palsy and bad humours. . . . This Tepeolotlec was lord of these thirteen days. In them were celebrated the feast to the Jaguar, and the last four preceding days were days of fasting. . . . Tepeolotlec means the 'Lord of Beasts.' The four feast days were in honour of the Suchiquezal, who was the man that remained behind on the earth upon which we now live. This Tepeolotlec was the same as the echo of the voice when it re-echoes in a valley from one mountain to another. This name 'jaguar' is given to the earth because the jaguar is the boldest animal, and the echo which the voice awakens in the mountains is a survival of the flood, it is said."

From this we can see that Tepeyollotl is a deity of the earth pure and simple, a god of desert places. It is certain that he was not a Mexican god, or at least was not of Nahua origin, as he is mentioned by none of those writers who deal with Nahua traditions, and we must look for him among the Mixtecs and Zapotecs.

  

Macuilxochitl, or Xochipilli

This deity, whose names mean Five-Flower and Source of Flowers, was regarded as the patron of luck in gaming. He may have been adopted by the Nahua from the Zapotecs, but the converse may be equally true. The Zapotecs represented him with a design resembling a butterfly about the mouth, and a manycoloured face which looks out of the open jaws of a bird with a tall and erect crest. The worship of this god appears to have been very widespread. Sahagun says of him that a fete was held in his honour, which was preceded by a rigorous fast. The people covered themselves with ornaments and jewels symbolic of the deity, as if they desired to represent him, and dancing and singing roceeded gaily to the sound of the drum. Offerings of the blood of various animals followed, and specially prepared cakes were submitted to the god. This simple fare, however, was later followed by human sacrifices, rendered by the notables, who brought certain of their slaves for immolation. This completed the festival.

  

Father and Mother Gods

The Nahua believed that Ometecutli and Omeciuatl were the father and mother of the human species. The names signify Lords of Duality or Lords of the Two Sexes. They were also called Tonacatecutli and Tonacaciuatl (Lord and Lady of Our Flesh, or of Subsistence). They were in fact regarded as the sexual essence of the creative deity, or perhaps more correctly of deity in general. They occupied the first place in the Nahua calendar, to signify that they had existed from the beginning, and they are usually represented as being clothed in rich attire. Ometecutli (a literal translation of his name is Two-Lord) is sometimes identified with the sky and the fire-god, the female deity representing the earth or water-conceptions similar to those respecting Kronos and Gaea. We refer again to these supreme divinities in the following chapter (see p. 118).

  

The Pulque-Gods

When a man was intoxicated with the native Mexican drink of pulque, a liquor made from the juice of the Agave Americana, he was believed to be under the influence of a god or spirit. The commonest form under which the drink-god was worshipped was the rabbit, that animal being considered to be utterly devoid of sense. This particular divinity was known as Ometochtli. The scale of debauchery which it was desired to reach was indicated by the number of rabbits worshipped, the highest number, four hundred, representing the most extreme degree of intoxication. The chief pulque-gods apart from these were Patecatl and Tequechmecauiani. If the drunkard desired to escape the perils of accidental hanging during intoxication, it was necessary to sacrifice to the latter, but if death by drowning was apprehended Teatlahuiani, the deity who harried drunkards to a watery grave, was placated. If the debauchee wished his punishment not to exceed a headache, Quatlapanqui (The Head-splitter) was sacrificed to, or else Papaztac (The Nerveless). Each trade or profession had its own Ometochtli, but for the aristocracy there was only one of these gods, Cohuatzincatl, a name signifying "He who has Grandparents." Several of these drink-gods had names which connected them with various localities; for example, Tepoxtecatl was the pulque-god of Tepoztlan. The calendar day Ometochtli, which means "Two-Rabbit," because of the symbol which accompanied it, was under the special protection of these gods, and the Mexicans believed that any one born on that day was almost inevitably doomed to become a drunkard. All the pulque-gods were closely associated with the soil, and with the earth-goddess. They wore the golden Huaxtec nose-ornament, the yaca-metztli, of crescent shape, which characterised the latter, and indeed this ornament was inscribed upon all articles sacred to the pulque-gods. Their faces were painted red and black, as were objects consecrated to them, their blankets and shields. After the Indians had harvested their maize they drank to intoxication, and invoked one or other of these gods. On the whole it is safe to infer that they were originally deities of local husbandry who imparted virtue to the soil as pulque imparted strength and courage to the warrior. The accompanying sketch of the god Tepoxtecatl (see p. 117) well illustrates the distinguishing characteristics of the pulque-god class. Here we can observe the face painted in two colours, the crescent-shaped nose-ornament, the bicoloured shield, the long necklace made from the malinalli herb, and the ear-pendants.

It is of course clear that the drink-gods were of the same class as the food-gods-patrons of the fruitful soil-but it is strange that they should be male whilst the food-gods are mostly female.

  

The Goddesses of Mexico: Metztli

Metztli, or Yohualticitl (The Lady of Night), was the Mexican goddess of the moon. She had in reality two phases, one that of a beneficent protectress of harvests and promoter of growth in general, and the other that of a bringer of dampness, cold, and miasmic airs ghosts, mysterious shapes of the dim half-light of night and its oppressive silence.

To a people in the agricultural stage of civilisation the moon appears as the great recorder of harvests. But she has also supremacy over water, which is always connected by primitive peoples with the moon. Citatli (Moon) and Atl (Water) are constantly confounded in Nahua myth, and in many ways their characteristics were blended. It was Metztli who led forth Nanahuatl the Leprous to the pyre whereon he perished-a reference to the dawn, in which the starry sky of night is consumed in the fires of the rising sun.

  

Tlazolteotl

Tlazolteotl (God of Ordure), or Tlaelquani (Filth-eater), was called by the Mexicans the earth-goddess because she was the eradicator of sins, to whose priests the people went to make confession so that they might be absolved from their misdeeds. Sin was symbolised by the Mexicans as excrement. Confession covered only the sins of immorality. But if Tlazolteotl was the goddess of confession, she was also the patroness of desire and luxury. It was, however, as a deity whose chief office was the eradication of human sin that she was pre-eminent. The process by which this was supposed to be effected is quaintly described by Sahagun in the twelfth chapter of his first book. The penitent addressed the confessor as follows: "Sir, I desire to approach that most powerful god, the protector of all, that is to say, Tezcatlipoca. I desire to tell him my sins in secret." The confessor replied: "Be happy, my son: that which thou wishest to do will be to thy good and advantage." The confessor then opened the divinatory book known as the Tonalamatl (that is, the Book of the Calendar) and acquainted the applicant with the day which appeared the most suitable for his confession. The day having arrived, the penitent provided himself with a mat, copal gum to burn as incense, and wood whereon to burn it. If he was a person high in office the priest repaired to his house, but in the case of lesser people the confession took place in the dwelling of the priest. Having lighted the fire and burned the incense, the penitent addressed the fire in the following terms: "Thou, lord, who art the father and mother of the gods, and the most ancient of them all, thy servant, thy slave bows before thee. Weeping, he approaches thee in great distress. He comes plunged in grief, because he has been buried in sin, having backslidden, and partaken of those vices and evil delights which merit death. O master most compassionate, who art the upholder and defence of all, receive the penitence and anguish of thy slave and vassal."

This prayer having concluded, the confessor then turned to the penitent and thus addressed him: "My son, thou art come into the presence of that god who is the protector and upholder of all; thou art come to him to confess thy evil vices and thy hidden uncleannesses; thou art come to him to unbosom the secrets of thy heart. Take care that thou omit nothing from the catalogue of thy sins in the presence of our lord who is called Tczcatlipoca. It is certain that thou art before him who is invisible and impalpable, thou who art not worthy to be seen before him, or to speak with him. . . ."

The allusions to Tczcatlipoca are, of course, to him in the shape of Tlazolteotl. Having listened to a sermon by the confessor, the penitent then confessed his misdeeds, after which the confessor said: "My son, thou hast before our lord god confessed in his presence thy evil actions. I wish to say in his name that thou hast an obligation to make. At the time when the goddesses called Ciuapipiltin descend to earth during the celebration of the feast of the goddesses of carnal things, whom they name Ixcuinamc, thou shalt fast during four days, punishing thy stomach and thy mouth. When the day of the feast of the lxcuinamc arrives thou shalt scarify thy tongue with the small thorns of the osier [called teocaleacatl or tlazotl], and if that is not sufficient thou shalt do likewise to thine ears, the whole for penitence, for the remission of thy sin, and as a meritorious act. Thou wilt apply to thy tongue the middle of a spine of magucy, and thou wilt scarify thy shoulders. That done, thy sins will be pardoned."

If the sins of the penitent were not very grave the priest would enjoin upon him a fast of more or less prolonged nature. Only old men confessed crimes in veneribus, as the punishment for such was death, and younger men had no desire to risk the penalty involved, although the priests were enjoined to strict secrecy.

Father Burgoa describes very fully a ceremony of this kind which came under his notice in 1652 in the Zapotec village of San Francisco de Cajonos. He encountered on a tour of inspection an old native cacique, or chief, of great refinement of manners and of a stately presence, who dressed in costly garments after the Spanish fashion, and who was regarded by the Indians with much veneration. This man came to the priest for the purpose of reporting upon the progress in things spiritual and temporal in his village. Burgoa recognised his urbanity and wonderful command of the Spanish language, but perceived by certain signs that he had been taught to look for by long experience that the man was a pagan. He communicated his suspicions to the vicar of the village, but met with such assurances of the cacique's soundness of faith that he believed himself to be in error for once. Shortly afterwards, however, a wandering Spaniard perceived the chief in a retired place in the mountains performing idolatrous ceremonies, and aroused the monks, two of whom accompanied him to the spot where the cacique had been seen indulging in his heathenish practices. They found on the altar "feathers of many colours, sprinkled with blood which the Indians had drawn from the veins under their tongues and behind their ears, incense spoons and remains of copal, and in the middle a horrible stone figure, which was the god to whom they had offered this sacrifice in expiation of their sins, while they made their confessions to the blasphemous priests, and cast off their sins in the following manner: they had woven a kind of dish out of a strong herb, specially gathered for this purpose, and casting this before the priest, said to him that they came to beg mercy of their god, and pardon for their sins that they had committed during that year, and that they brought them all carefully enumerated. They then drew out of a cloth pairs of thin threads made of dry maize husks, that they had tied two by two in the middle with a knot, by which they represented their sins. They laid these threads on the dishes of grass, and over them pierced their veins, and let the blood trickle upon them, and the priest took these offerings to the idol, and in a long speech he begged the god to forgive these, his sons, their sins which were brought to him, aiid to permit them to be joyful and hold feasts to him as their god and lord. Then the priest came back to those who had confessed, delivered a long discourse on the ceremonies they had still to perform, and told them that the god had pardoned them and that they might be glad again and sin anew."

  

Chalchihuitlicue

This goddess was the wife of Tlaloc, the god of rain and moisture. The name means Lady of the Emerald Robe, in allusion to the colour of the element over which the deity partly presided. She was specially worshipped by the water-carriers of Mexico, and all those whose avocation brought them into contact with water. Her costume was peculiar and interesting. Round her neck she wore a wonderful collar of precious stones, from which hung a gold pendant. She was crowned with a coronet of blue paper, decorated with green feathers. Her eyebrows were of turquoise, set in as mosaic, and her garment was a nebulous blue-green in hue, recalling the tint of seawater in the tropics. The resemblance was heightened by a border of sea-flowers or water-plants, one of which she also carried in her left hand, whilst in her right she bore a vase surmounted by a cross, emblematic of the four points of the compass whence comes the rain.

  

Mixcoatl

Mixcoatl was the Aztec god of the chase, and was probably a deity of the Otomi aborigines of Mexico. The name means Cloud Serpent, and this originated the idea that Mixcoatl was a representation of the tropical whirlwind. This is scarcely correct, however, as the hunter-god is identified with the tempest and thunder-cloud, and the lightning is supposed to represent his arrows. Like many other gods of the chase, he is figured as having the characteristics of a deer or rabbit. He is usually depicted as carrying a sheaf of arrows, to typify thunderbolts. It may be that Mixcoatl was an air and thunder deity of the Otomi, older in origin than either Quetzalcoatl or Tezcatlipoca, and that his inclusion in the Nahua pantheon becoming necessary in order to quieten Nahua susceptibilities, he received the status of god of the chase. But, on the other hand, the Mexicans, unlike the Peruvians, who adopted many foreign gods for political purposes, had little regard for the feelings of other races, and only accepted an alien deity into the native circle for some good reason, most probably because they noted the omission of the figure in their own divine system. Or, again, dread of a certain foreign god might force them to adopt him as their own in the hope of placating him. Their worship of Quetzalcoatl is perhaps an instance of this.

  

Camaxtli

This deity was the war-god of the Tlascalans, who were constantly in opposition to the Aztecs of Mexico. He was to the warriors of Tlascala practically what Huitzilopochtli was to those of Mexico. He was closely identified with Mixcoatl, and with the god of the morning star, whose colours are depicted on his face and body. But in all probability Camaxtli was a god of the chase, who in later times was adopted as a god of war because of his possession of the lightning dart, the symbol of divine warlike prowess. In the mythologies of North America we find similar hunter-gods, who sometimes evolve into gods of war for a like reason, and again gods of the chase who have all the appearance and attributes of the creatures hunted.

  

Ixtlilton

Ixtlilton (The Little Black One) was the Mexican god of medicine and healing, and therefore was often alluded to as the brother of Macuilxochitl, the god of well-being or good luck. From the account of the general appearance of his temple-in edifice of painted boards-it would seem to have evolved from the primitive tent or lodge of the medicine-man, or shaman. It contained several water-jars called tlilatl (black water), the contents of which were administered to children in bad health. The parents of children who benefited from the treatment bestowed a feast on the deity, whose idol was carried to the residence of the grateful father, where ceremonial dances and oblations were made before it. It was then thought that Ixtlilton descended to the courtyard to open fresh jars of pulque liquor provided for the feasters, and the entertainment concluded by an examination by the Aztec Aesculapius of such of the pulque jars dedicated to his service as stood in the courtyard for everyday use. Should these be found in an unclean condition, it was understood that the master of the house was a man of evil life, and he was presented by the priest with a mask to hide his face from his scoffing friends.

  

Omacatl

Omacatl was the Mexican god of festivity and joy. The name signifies Two Reeds. He was worshipped chiefly by bon-vivants and the rich, who celebrated him in splendid feasts and orgies. The idol of the deity was invariably placed in the chamber where these functions were to take place, and the Aztecs were known to regard it as a heinous offence if anything derogatory to the god were performed during the convivial ceremony, or if any omission were made from the prescribed form which these gatherings usually took. It was thought that if the host had been in any way remiss Omacatl would appear to the startled guests, and in tones of great severity upbraid him who had given the feast, intimating that he would regard him no longer as a worshipper and would henceforth abandon him. A terrible malady, the symptoms of which were akin to those of falling-sickness, would shortly afterwards seize the guests; but as such symptoms are not unlike those connected with acute indigestion and other gastric troubles, it is probable that the gourmets who paid homage to the god of good cheer may have been suffering from a too strenuous instead of a lukewarm worship of him. But the idea of communion which underlay so many of the Mexican rites undoubtedly entered into the worship of Omacatl, for prior to a banquet in his honour those who took part in it formed a great bone out of maize paste, pretending that it was one of the bones of the deity whose merry rites they were about to engage in. This they devoured, washing it down with great draughts of pulque. The idol of Omacatl was provided with a recess in the region of the stomach, and into this provisions were stuffed. He was represented as a squatting figure, painted black and white, crowned with a paper coronet, and hung with coloured paper. A flower-fringed cloak and sceptre were the other symbols of royalty worn by this Mexican Dionysus.

  

Opochtli

Opochtli (The Left-handed) was the god sacred to fishers and bird-catchers. At one period of Aztec history he must have been a deity of considerable consequence, since for generations the Aztecs were marsh-dwellers and depended for their daily food on the fish netted in the lakes and the birds snared in the reeds. They credited the god with the invention of the harpoon or trident for spearing fish and the fishing-rod and bird-net. The fishermen and bird-catchers of Mexico held on occasion a special feast in honour of Opochtli, at which a certain liquor called octli was consumed. A procession was afterwards formed, in which marched old people who had dedicated themselves to the worship of the god, probably because they could obtain no other means of subsistence than that afforded by the vocation of which he was tutelar and patron. He was represented, as a man painted black, his head decorated with the plumes of native wild birds, and crowned by a paper coronet in the shape of a rose. He was clad in green paper which fell to the knee, and was shod with white sandals. In his left hand he held a shield painted red, having in the centre a white flower with four petals placed crosswise, and in his right hand he held a sceptre in the form of a cup.

  

Yacatecutli

Yacatecutli was the patron of travellers of the merchant class, who worshipped him by piling their staves together and sprinkling on the heap blood from their noses and ears. The staff of the traveller was his symbol, to which prayer was made and ofFerings of flowers and incense tendered.

  

The Aztec Priesthood

The Aztec priesthood was a hierarchy in whose hands resided a goodly portion of the power of the upper classes est)ecially that connected with education and endowment. The mere fact that its members possessed the power of selecting victims for sacrifice must have been sufficient to place them in an almost unassailable position, and their prophetic utterances, founded upon the art of divination-so great a feature in the life of the Aztec people, who depended upon it from the cradle to the grave-probably assisted them in maintaining their hold upon the popular imagination. But withal the evidence of unbiased Spanish ecclesiastics, such as Sahagun, tends to show that they utilised their influence for good, and soundly instructed the people under their charge in the cardinal virtues; "in short," says the venerable friar, "to perform the duties plainly pointed out by natural religion."

  

Priestly Revenues

The establishment of the national religion was, as in the case of the mediaeval Church in Europe, based upon a land tenure from which the priestly class derived a substantial though, considering their numbers, by no means inordinate revenue. The principal temples possessed lands which sufficed for the maintenance of the priests attached to them. There was, besides, a system of first-fruits fixed by law for the priesthood, the surplusage therefrom being distributed among the poor.

  

Education

Education was entirely conducted by the priesthood, which undertook the task in a manner highly creditable to it, when consideration is given to surrounding conditions. Education was, indeed, highly organised. It was divided into primary and secondary grades. Boys were instructed by priests, girls by holy women or "nuns." The secondary schools were called calmecac, and were devoted to the higher branches of education, the curriculum including the deciphering of the pinturas, or manuscripts, astrology and divination, with a wealth of religious instruction.

  

Orders of the Priesthood

At the head of the Aztec priesthood stood the Mexicatl Teohuatzin (Mexican Lord of Divine Matters). He had a seat on the emperor's council, and possessed power which was second only to the royal authority. Next in rank to him was the highpriest of Quetzalcoatl, who dwelt in almost entire seclusion, and who had authority over his own caste only. This office was in all probability a relic from "Toltec" times. The priests of Quetzalcoatl were called by name after their tutelar deity. The lesser grades included the Tlenamacac (Ordinary Priests), who were habited in black, and wore their hair long, covering it with a kind of mantilla. The lowest order was that of the Lamacazton (Little Priests), youths who were graduating in the priestly office.

  

An Exacting Ritual

The priesthood enjoyed no easy existence, but led an austere life of fasting, penance, and prayer, with constant observance of an arduous and exacting ritual, which embraced sacrifice, the upkeep of perpetual fires, the chanting of holy songs to the gods, dances, and the superintendence of the ever-recurring festivals. They were required to rise during the night to render praise, and to maintain themselves in a condition of absolute cleanliness by means of constant ablutions. We have seen that blood-offering-the substitution of the part for the whole-was a common method of sacrifice, and in this the priests engaged personally on frequent occasions. If the caste did not spare the people it certainly did not spare itself, and its outlook was perhaps only a shade more gloomy and fanatical than that of the Spanish hierarchy which succeeded it in the land.

     
The Myths of Mexico and Peru, by Lewis Spence, [1913], at sacred-texts.com

  

CHAPTER III: Myths and Legends of the Ancient Mexicans

  

The Mexican Idea of the Creation

"IN the year and in the day of the clouds," writes Garcia in his Origin de los Indias, professing to furnish the reader with a translation of an original Mixtec picture-manuscript, "before ever were years or days, the world lay in darkness. All things were orderless, and a water covered the slime and ooze that the earth then was." This picture is common to almost all American creation-stories. [See the author's article on "American Creation-Myths" in the Encyclopedia of Religion and Ethics, vol. iv.] The red man in general believed the habitable globe to have been created from the slime which arose above the primeval waters, and there can be no doubt that the Nahua shared this belief. We encounter in Nahua myth two beings of a bisexual nature, known to the Aztecs as Ometecutli-Omeciuatl (Lords of Duality), who were represented as the deities dominating the genesis of things, the beginning of the world. We have already become acquainted with them in Chapter II (see p. 104), but we may recapitulate. These beings, whose individual names were Tonacatecutli and Tonacaciuatl (Lord and Lady of our Flesh), occupy the first place in the calendar, a circumstance which makes it plain that they were regarded as responsible for the origin of all created things. They were invariably represented as being clothed in rich, variegated garments, symbolical of light. Tonacatecutli, the male principle of creation or world-generation, is often identified with the sun- or fire-god, but there is no reason to consider him as symbolical of anything but the sky. The firmament is almost universally regarded by American aboriginal peoples as the male principle of the cosmos, in contradistinction to the earth, which they think of as possessing feminine attributes, and which is undoubtedly personified in this instance by Tonacaciuatl.

In North American Indian myths we find the Father Sky brooding upon the Mother Earth, just as in early Greek creation-story we see the elements uniting, the firmament impregnating the soil and rendering it fruitful. To the savage mind the growth of crops and vegetation proceeds as much from the sky as from the earth. Untutored man beholds the fecundation of the soil by rain, and, seeing in everything the expression of an individual and personal impulse, regards the genesis of vegetable growth as analogous to human origin. To him, then, the sky is the life-giving male principle, the fertilising seed of which descends in rain. The earth is the receptive element which hatches that with which the sky has impregnated her.

  

Ixtlilxochitl's Legend of the Creation

One of the most complete creation-stories in Mexican mythology is that given by the half-blood Indian author Ixtlilxochitl, who, we cannot doubt, received it directly from native sources. He states that the Toltecs credited a certain Tloque Nahuaque (Lord of All Existence) with the creation of the universe, the stars, mountains, and animals. At the same time he made the first man and woman, from whom all the inhabitants of the earth are descended. This "first earth" was destroyed by the "water-sun." At the commencement of the next epoch the Toltecs appeared, and after many wanderings settled in Huehue Tlapallan (Very Old Tlapallan). Then followed the second catastrophe, that of the "wind-sun." The remainder of the legend recounts how mighty earthquakes shook the world and destroyed the earth-giants. These earth-giants (Quinames) were analogous to the Greek Titans, and were a source of great uneasiness to the Toltecs. In the opinion of the old historians they were descended from the races who inhabited the more northerly portion of Mexico.

  

Creation-Story of the Mixtecs

It will be well to return for a moment to the creation story of the Mixtecs, which, if emanating from a somewhat isolated people in the extreme south of the Mexican Empire, at least affords us a vivid picture of what a folk closely related to the Nahua race regarded as a veritable account of the creative process. When the earth had arisen from the primeval waters, one day the deer-god, who bore the surname Puma-Snake, and the beautiful deer-goddess, or Jaguar-Snake, appeared. They had human form, and with their great knowledge (that is, with their magic) they raised a high cliff over the water, and built on it fine palaces for their dwelling. On the summit of this cliff they laid a copper axe with the edge upward, and on this edge the heavens rested. The palaces stood in Upper Mixteca, close to Apoala, and the cliff was called Place where the Heavens Stood. The gods lived happily together for many centuries, when it chanced that two little boys were born to them, beautiful of form and skilled and experienced in the arts. From the days of their birth they were named Wind-Nine-Snake (Viento de Neuve Culebras) and Wind-Nine-Cave (Viento de Neuve Cavernas). Much care was given to their education, and they possessed the knowledge of how to change themselves into an eagle or a snake, to make themselves invisible, and even to pass through solid bodies.

After a time these youthful gods decided to make an offering and a sacrifice to their ancestors. Taking incense vessels made of clay, they filled them with tobacco, to which they set fire, allowing it to smoulder. The smoke rose heavenward, and that was the first offering (to the gods). Then they made a garden with shrubs and flowers, trees and fruit-bearing plants, and sweet-scented herbs. Adjoining this they made a grass-grown level place (un prado), and equipped it with everything necessary for sacrifice. The pious brothers lived contentedly on this piece of ground, tilled it, burned tobacco, and with prayers, vows, and promises they supplicated their ancestors to let the light appear, to let the water collect in certain places and the earth be freed from its covering (water), for they had no more than that little garden for their subsistence. In order to strengthen their prayer they pierced their ears and their tongues with pointed knives of flint, and sprinkled the blood on the trees and plants with a brush of willow twigs.

The deer-gods had more sons and daughters, but there came a flood in which many of these perished. After the catastrophe was over the god who is called the Creator of All Things formed the heavens and the earth, and restored the human race.

  

Zapotec Creation Myth

Among the Zapotecs, a people related to the Mixtecs, we find a similar conception of the creative process. Cozaana is mentioned as the creator and maker of all beasts in the valuable Zapotec dictionary of Father Juan de Cordova, and Huichaana as the creator of men and fishes. Thus we have two separate creations for men and animals. Cozaana would appear to apply to the sun as the creator of all beasts, but, strangely enough, is alluded to in Cordova's dictionary as "procreatrix," whilst he is undoubtedly a male deity. Huichaana, the creator of men and fishes, is, on the other hand, alluded to as "water," or "the element of water, and "goddess of generation." She is certainly the Zapotec female part of the creative agency. In the Mixtec creation-myth we can see the actual creator and the first pair of tribal gods, who were also considered the progenitors of animals-to the savage equal inhabitants of the world with himself. The names of the brothers Nine-Snake and Nine-Cave undoubtedly allude to light and darkness, day and night. It may be that these deities are the same as Quetzalcoatl and Xolotl (the latter a Zapotec deity), who were regarded as twins. In some ways Quetzalcoatl was looked upon as a creator, and in the Mexican calendar followed the Father and Mother, or original sexual deities, being placed in the second section as the creator of the world and man.

  

The Mexican Noah

Flood-myths, curiously enough, are of more common occurrence among the Nahua and kindred peoples than creation-myths. The Abbe Brasseur de Bourbourg has translated one from the Codex Chimalpopoca, a work in Nahuatl dating from the latter part of the sixteenth century. It recounts the doings of the Mexican Noah and his wife as follows:

"And this year was that of Ce-calli, and on the first day all was lost. The mountain itself was submerged in the water, and the water remained tranquil for fifty-two springs.

"Now toward the close of the year Titlacahuan had forewarned the man named Nata and his wife Nena, saying, 'Make no more pulque, but straightway hollow out a large cypress, and enter it when in the month Tozoztli the water shall approach the sky.' They entered it, and when Titlacahuan had closed the door he said, 'Thou shalt eat but a single ear of maize) and thy wife but one also.'

"As soon as they had finished eating, they went forth, and the water was tranquil; for the log did not move any more; and opening it they saw many fish.

"Then they built a fire, rubbing together pieces of wood, and they roasted fish. The gods Citallinicue and Citallatonac, looking below, exclaimed, 'Divine Lord, what means that fire below? Why do they thus smoke the heavens?'

"Straightway descended Titlacahuan-Tezcatlipoca, and commenced to scold, saying, 'What is this fire doing here?' And seizing the fishes he moulded their hinder parts and changed their heads, and they were at once transformed into dogs."

  

The Myth of the Seven Caverns

But other legends apart from the creation-stories of the world pure and simple deal with the origin of mankind. The Aztecs believed that the first men emerged from a place known as Chicomoztoc (The Seven Caverns), located north of Mexico. Various writers have seen in these mythic recesses the fabulous "seven cities of Cibola" and the Casas Grandes, ruins of extensive character in the valley of the river Gila, and so forth. But the allusion to the magical number seven in the myth demonstrates that the entire story is purely imaginary and possesses no basis of fact. A similar story occurs among the myths of the Kiche of Guatemala and the Peruvians.

  

The Sacrificed Princess

Coming to semi-historical times, we find a variety of legends connected with the early story of the city of Mexico. These for the most part are of a weird and gloomy character, and throw much light on the dark fanaticism of a people which could immolate its children on the altars of implacable gods. It is told how after the Aztecs had built the city of Mexico they raised an altar to their war-god Huitzilopochtli. In general the lives rendered to this most sanguinary of deities were those of prisoners of war, but in times of public calamity he demanded the sacrifice of the noblest in the land. On one occasion his oracle required that a royal princess should be offered on the high altar. The Aztec king, either possessing no daughters of his own or hesitating to sacrifice them, sent an embassy to the monarch of Colhuacan to ask for one of his daughters to become the symbolical mother of Huitzilopochtli. The King of Colhuacan, suspecting nothing amiss, and highly flattered at the distinction, delivered up the girl, who was escorted to Mexico, where she was sacrificed with much pomp, her skin being flayed off to clothe the priest who represented the deity in the festival. The unhappy father was invited to this hideous orgy, ostensibly to witness his daughter's deification. In the gloomy chambers of the war-god's temple he was at first unable to mark the trend of the horrid ritual. But, given a torch of copal-gum, he saw the officiating priest clothed in his daughter's skin, receiving the homage of the worshippers. Recognising her features, and demented with grief and horror, he fled from the temple, a broken man, to spend the remainder of his days in mourning for his murdered child.

  

The Fugitive Prince

One turns with relief from such a sanguinary tale to the consideration of the pleasing semi-legendary accounts of Ixtlilxochitl regarding the civilisation of Tezcuco, Mexico's neighbour and ally. We have seen in the sketch of Nahua history which has been given how the Tecpanecs overcame the Acolhuans of Tezcuco and slew their king about the year 108. Nezahualcoyotl (Fasting Coyote), the heir to the Tezcucan throne, beheld the butchery of his royal father from the shelter of a tree close by, and succeeded in making his escape from the invaders. His subsequent thrilling adventures have been compared with those of the Young Pretender after the collapse of the "Forty-five" resistance. He had not enjoyed many days of freedom when he was captured by those who had set out in pursuit of him, and, being haled back to his native city, was cast into prison. He found a friend in the governor of the place, who owed his position to the prince's late father, and by means of his assistance he succeeded in once more escaping from the hostile Tecpanecs. For aiding Nezahualcoyotl, however, the governor promptly paid the penalty of death. The royal family of Mexico interceded for the hunted youth, and he was permitted to find an asylum at the Aztec court, whence he later proceeded to his own city of Tczcuco, occupying apartments in the palace where his father had once dwelt. For eight years he remained there, existing unnoticed on the bounty of the Tecpanec chief who had usurped the throne of his ancestors.

  

Maxtla the Fierce

In course of time the original Tecpanec conqueror was gathered to his fathers, and was succeeded by his son Maxtla, a ruler who could ill brook the studious prince, who had journeyed to the capital of the Tecpanecs to do him homage. He refused Nezahualcoyotl's advances of friendship, and the latter was warned by a favourably disposed courtier to take refuge in flight. This advice he adopted, and returned to Tczcuco, where, however, Maxtla set a snare for his life. A function which took place in the evening afforded the tyrant his chance. But the prince's preceptor frustrated the conspiracy, by means of substituting for his charge a youth who strikingly resembled him. This second failure exasperated Maxtla so much that he sent a military force to Tezcuco, with orders to despatch Nezahualcoyotl without delay. But the same vigilant person who had guarded the prince so well before became apprised of his danger and advised him to fly. To this advice, however, Nezahualcoyotl refused to listen, and resolved to await the approach of his enemies.

  

A Romantic Escape

When they arrived he was engaged in the Mexican ball-game of tlachtli. With great politeness he requested them to enter and to partake of food. Whilst they refreshed themselves he betook himself to another room, but his action excited no surprise, as he could be seen through the open doorway by which the apart. ments communicated with each other. A huge censer, however, stood in the vestibule, and the clouds of incense which arose from it hid his movements from those who had been sent to slay him. Thus obscured, he succeeded in entering a subterranean passage which led to a large disused water-pipe, through which he crawled and made his escape.

  

A Thrilling Pursuit

For a season Nezahualcoyotl evaded capture by hiding in the hut of a zealous adherent. The hut was searched, but the pursuers neglected to look below a heap of maguey fibre used for making cloth, under which he lay concealed. Furious at his enemy's escape, Maxtla now ordered a rigorous search, and a regular battue of the country round Tezcuco was arranged. A large reward was offered for the capture of Nezahual coyotl dead or alive, along with a fair estate and the hand of a noble lady, and the unhappy prince was forced to seek safety in the mountainous country between Tezcuco and Tlascala. He became a wretched outcast, a pariah lurking in caves and woods, prowling about after nightfall in order to satisfy his hunger, and seldom having a whole night's rest, because of the vigilance of his enemies. Hotly pursued by them he was compelled to seek some curious place concealment in order to save himself. On one occasion he was hidden by some friendly soldiers inside a large drum, and on another he was concealed beneath some chia stalks by a girl who was engaged in reaping them. The loyalty of the Tezcucan peasantry to their hunted prince was extraordinary, and rather than betray his whereabouts to the creatures of Maxtla they on many occasions suffered torture, and even death itself At a time when his affairs appeared most gloomy, however, Nezahualcoyotl experienced a change of fortune. The tyrannous Maxtla had rendered himself highly unpopular by his many oppressions, and the people in the territories he. had annexed were by no means contented under his rule.

  

The Defeat of Maxtla

These malcontents decided to band themselves together to defy the tyrant, and offered the command of the force thus raised to Nezahualcoyotl. This he accepted, and the Tecpanec usurper was totally defeated in a general engagement. Rcstored to the throne of his fathers, Nezahualcoyotl allied himself with Mexico, and with the assistance of its monarch completely routed the remaining force of Maxtla, who was seized in the baths of Azcapozalco, haled forth and sacrificed, and his city destroyed.

  

The Solon of Anahuac

Nezahualcoyotl profited by the hard experiences he had undergone, and proved a wise and just ruler. The code of laws framed by him was an exceedingly drastic one, but so wise and enlightened was his rule that on the whole he deserves the title which has been conferred upon him of "the Solon of Anahuac." He generously encouraged the arts, and established a Council of Music, the purpose of which was to supervise artistic endeavour of every description. In Nezahualcoyotl Mexico found, in all probability, her greatest native poet. An ode of his on the mutability of life displays much nobility of thought, and strikingly recalls the sentiments expressed in the verses of Omar Khayyam.

  

Nezahualcoyotl's Theology

Nezahualcoyotl is said to have erected a temple to the Unknown God, and to have shown a marked reference for the worship of one deity. In one Whis poems he is credited with expressing the following exalted sentiments: "Let us aspire to that heaven where all is eternal, and corruption cannot come. The horrors of the tomb are the cradle of the sun, and the dark shadows of death arc brilliant lights for the stars." Unfortunately these ideas cannot be verified as the undoubted sentiments of the royal bard of Tezcuco, and we are regretfully forced to regard the attribution as spurious. We must come to such a conclusion with very real disappointment, as to discover an untutored and spontaneous belief in one god in the midst of surroundings so little congenial to its growth would have been exceedingly valuable from several points of view.

  

The Poet Prince

We find Nezahualcoyotl's later days stained by an act which was unworthy of such a great monarch and wise man. His eldest son, the heir to the crown, entered into an intrigue with one of his father's wives, and dedicated many passionate poems to her, to which she replied with equal ardour. The poetical correspondence was brought before the king, who prized the lady highly because of her beauty. Outraged in his most sacred feelings, Nezahualcoyotl had the youth arraigned before the High Court, which passed sentence of death upon him-a sentence which his father permitted to be carried out. After his son's execution he shut himself up in his palace for some months, and gave orders that the doors and windows of the unhappy young man's residence should be built up so that never again might its walls echo to the sound of a human voice.

  

The Queen with a Hundred Lovers

In his History of the Chichimeca Ixtlilxochitl tells the following gruesome tale regarding the dreadful fate of a favourite wife of Nezahualpilli, the son of Nezahualcoyotl: When Axaiacatzin, King of Mexico, and other lords sent their daughters to King Nezahualpilli, for him to choose one to be his queen and lawful wife, whose son might succeed to the inheritance, she who had the highest claims among them, for nobility of birth and rank, was Chachiuhnenetzin, the young daughter of the Mexican king. She had been brought up by the monarch in a separate palace, with great pomp, and with numerous attendants, as became the daughter of so great a monarch. The number of servants attached to her household exceeded two thousand. Young as she was, she was exceedingly artful and vicious; so that, finding herself alone, and seeing that her people feared her on account of her rank and importance, she began to give way to an unlimited indulgence of her power. Whenever she saw a young man who pleased her fancy she gave secret orders that he should be brought to her, and shortly afterwards he would be put to death. She would then order a statue or effigy of his person to be made, and, adorning it with rich clothing, gold, and jewellery, place it in the apartment in which she lived. The number of statues of those whom she thus sacrificed was so great as to almost fill the room. When the king came to visit her, and inquired respecting these statues, she answered that they were her gods; and he, knowing how strict the Mexicans were in the worship of their false deities, believed her. But, as no iniquity can be long committed with entire secrecy, she was finally found out in this manner: Three of the young men, for some reason or other, she had left alive. Their names were Chicuhcoatl, Huitzilimitzin, and Maxtla, one of whom was lord of Tesoyucan and one of the grandees of the kingdom, and the other two nobles of high rank. It happened that one day the king recognised on the apparel of one of these a very precious jewel which he had given to the queen; and although he had no fear of treason on her part it gave him some uneasiness. Proceeding to visit her that night, her attendants told him she was asleep, supposing that the king would then return, as he had done at other times. But the affair of the jewel made him insist on entering the chamber in which she slept; and, going to wake her, he found only a statue in the bed, adorned with her hair, and closely resembling her. Seeing this, and noticing that the attendants around were in much trepidation and alarm, the king called his guards, and, assembling all the people of the house, made a general search for the queen, who was shortly found at an entertainment with the three young lords, who were arrested with her. The king referred the case to the judges of his court, in order that they might make an inquiry into the matter and examine the parties implicated. These discovered many individuals, servants of the queen, who had in some way or other been accessory to her crimes-workmen who had been engaged in making and adorning the statues, others who had aided in introducing the young men into the palace, and others, again, who had put them to death and concealed their bodies. The case having been sufficiently investigated, the king despatched ambassadors to the rulers of Mexico and Tlacopan, giving them information of the event, and signifying the day on which the punishment of the queen and her accomplices was to take place; and he likewise sent through the empire to summon all the lords to bring their wives and their daughters, however young they might be, to be witnesses of a punishment which he designed for a great example. He also made a truce with all the enemies of the empire, in order that they might come freely to see it. The time having arrived, the number of people gathered together was so great that, large as was the city of Tezcuco, they could scarcely all find room in it. The execution took place publicly, in sight of the whole city. The queen was put to the garrotte (a method of strangling by means of a rope twisted round a stick), as well as her three gallants; and, from their being persons of high birth, their bodies were burned, together with the effigies before mentioned. The other parties who had been accessory to the crimes) who numbered more than two thousand persons, were also put to the garrotte, and burned in a pit made for the purpose in a ravine near a temple of the Idol of Adulterers. All applauded so severe and exemplary a punishment, except the Mexican lords, the relatives of the queen, who were much incensed at so public an example, and, although for the time they concealed their resentment, meditated future revenge. It was not without reason, says the chronicler, that the king experienced this disgrace in his household, since he was thus punished for an unworthy subterfuge made use of by his father to obtain his mother as a wife!

This Nezahualpilli, the successor of Nezahualcoyotl, was a monarch of scientific tastes, and, as Torquemada states, had a primitive observatory erected in his palace.

  

The Golden Age of Tezcuco

The period embraced by the life of this monarch and his predecessor may be regarded as the Golden Age of Tezcuco, and as semi-mythical. The palace of Nezahualcoyotl, according to the account of Ixtlilxochitl, extended east and west for 1234 yards, and for 978 yards from north to south. Enclosed by a high wall, it contained two large courts, one used as the municipal market-place, whilst the other was surrounded by administrative offices. A great hall was set apart for the special use of poets and men of talent, who held symposiums under its classic roof, or engaged in controversy in the surrounding corridors. The chronicles of the kingdom were also kept in this portion of the palace. The private apartments of the monarch adjoined this College of Bards. They were gorgeous in the extreme, and their description rivals that of the fabled Toltec city of Tollan. Rare stones and beautifully coloured plaster mouldings alternated with wonderful tapestries of splendid feather-work to make an enchanting display of florid decoration, and the gardens which surrounded this marvellous edifice were delightful retreats, where the lofty cedar and cypress overhung sparkling fountains and luxurious baths. Fish darted hither and thither in the ponds, and the aviaries echoed to the songs of birds of wonderful plumage.

  

A Fairy Villa

According to Ixtlilxochitl, the king's villa of Tezcotzinco was a residence which for sheer beauty had no equal in Persian romance, or in those dream-tales of Araby which in childhood we feel to be true, and in later life regretfully admit can only be known again by sailing the sea of Poesy or penetrating the mist-locked continent of Dream. The account which we have from the garrulous half-blood reminds us of the stately pleasure-dome decreed by Kubla Khan on the turbulent banks of the sacred Alph. A conical eminence was laid out in hanging gardens reached by an airy flight of five hundred and twenty marble steps. Gigantic walls contained an immense reservoir of water, in the midst of which was islanded a great rock carved with hieroglyphs describing the principal events in the reign of Nezahualcoyotl. In each of three other reservoirs stood a marble statue of a woman, symbolical of one of the three provinces of Tezcuco. These great basins supplied the gardens beneath with a perennial flow of water, so directed as to leap in cascades over artificial rockeries or meander among mossy retreats with refreshing whisper, watering the roots of odoriferous shrubs and flowers and winding in and out of the shadow of, the cypress woods. Here and there pavilions of marble arose over porphyry baths, the highly polished stone of which reflected the bodies of the bathers. The villa itself stood amidst a wilderness of stately cedars, which shielded it from the torrid heat of the Mexican sun. The architectural design of this delightful edifice was light and airy in the extreme, and the perfume of the surrounding gardens filled the spacious apartments with the delicious incense of nature. In this paradise the Tezcucan monarch sought in the company of his wives repose from the oppression of rule, and passed the lazy hours in gamesome sport and dance. The surrounding woods afforded him the pleasures of the chase, and art and nature combined to render his rural retreat a centre of pleasant recreation as well as of repose and refreshment.

  

Disillusionment

That some such palace existed on the spot in question it would be absurd to deny, as its stupendous pillars and remains still litter the terraces of Tezcotzinco. But, alas! we must not listen to the vapourings of the untrustworthy Ixtlilxochitl, who claims to have seen the place. It will be better to turn to a more modern authority, who visited the site about seventy-five years ago, and who has given perhaps the best account of it. He says:

"Fragments of pottery, broken pieces of obsidian knives and arrows, pieces of stucco, shattered terraces, and old walls were thickly dispersed over its whole surface. We soon found further advance on horseback impracticable, and, attaching our patient steeds to the nopal bushes, we followed our Indian guide on foot, scrambling upwards over rock and through tangled brushwood. On gaining the narrow ridge which connects the conical hill with one at the rear, we found the remains of a wall and causeway; and, a little higher, reached a recess, where, at the foot of a small precipice, overhung with Indian fig and grass, the rock had been wrought by hand into a flat surface of large dimensions. In this perpendicular wall of rock a carved Toltec calendar existed formerly; but the Indians, finding the place visited occasionally by foreigners from the capital, took it into their heads that there must be a silver vein there, and straightway set to work to find it, obliterating the sculpture, and driving a level beyond it into the hard rock for several yards. From this recess a few minutes' climb brought us to the summit of the hill. The sun was on the point of setting over the mountains on the other side of the valley, and the view spread beneath our feet was most glorious. The whole of the lake of Tezcuco, and the country and mountains on both sides, lay stretched before us.

"But, however disposed, we dare not stop long to gaze and admire, but, descending a little obliquely, soon came to the so-called bath, two singular basins, of perhaps two feet and a half diameter, cut into a bastion-like solid rock, projecting from the general outline of the hill, and surrounded by smooth carved seats and grooves, as we supposed-for I own the whole appearance of the locality was perfectly inexplicable to me. I have a suspicion that many of these horizontal planes and grooves were contrivances to aid their astronomical observations, one like that I have mentioned having been discovered by de Gama at Chapultepec.

"As to Montezuma's Bath, it might be his foot-bath if you will, but it would be a moral impossibility for any monarch of larger dimensions than Oberon to take a duck in it.

"The mountain bears the marks of human industry to its very apex, many of the blocks of porphyry of which it is composed being quarried into smooth horizontal planes. It is impossible to say at present what portion of the surface is artificial or not, such is the state of confusion obscrvable in every part.

"By what means nations unacquainted with the use iron constructed works of such a smooth polish, in rocks of such hardness, it is extremely difficult to say. Many think tools of mixed tin and copper were employed; others, that patient friction was one of the main means resorted to. Whatever may have been the real appropriation of these inexplicable ruins,or the epoch of their construction, there can be no doubt but the whole of this hill, which I should suppose rises five or six hundred feet above the level of the plain, was covered with artificial works of one kind or another. They are doubtless rather of Toltec than of Aztec origin, and perhaps with still more probability attributable to a people of an age yet more remote."

  

The Noble Tlascalan

As may be imagined regarding a community where human sacrifice was rife, tales concerning those who were consigned to this dreadful fate were abundant. Perhaps the most striking of these is that relating to the noble Tlascalan warrior Tlalhuicole, who was captured in combat by the troops of Montezuma. Less than a year before the Spaniards arrived in Mexico war broke out between the Huexotzincans and the Tlascalans, to the former of whom the Aztecs acted as allies. On the battlefield there was captured by guile a very valiant Tlascalan leader called Tlalhuicole, so renowned for his prowess that the mere mention of his name was generally sufficient to deter any Mexican hero from attempting his capture. He was brought to Mexico in a cage, and presented to the Emperor Montezuma, who, on learning of his name and renown, gave him his liberty and overwhelmed him with honours. He further granted him permission to return to his own country, a boon he had never before extended to any captive. But Tlalhuicole refused his freedom, and replied that he would prefer to be sacrificed to the gods, according to the usual custom. Montezuma, who had the highest regard for him) and prized his life more than any sacrifice, would not consent to his immolation. At this juncture war broke out between Mexico and the Tarascans, and Montezuma announced the appointment of Tlalhuicole as chief of the cxpeditionary force. He accepted the command, marched against the Tarascans, and, having totally defeated them, returned to Mexico laden with an enormous booty and crowds of slaves. The city rang with his triumph. The emperor begged him to become a Mexican citizen, but he replied that on no account would he prove a traitor to his country. Montezuma then once more offered him his liberty, but he strenuously refused to return to Tlascala, having undergone the disgrace of defeat and capture. He begged Montezuma to terminate his unhappy existence by sacrificing him to the gods, thus ending the dishonour he felt in living on after having undergone defeat, and at the same time fulfilling the highest aspiration of his life-to die the death of a warrior on the stone of combat. Montezuma, himself the noblest pattern of Aztec chivalry, touched at his request, could not but agree with him that he had chosen the most fitting fate for a hero, and ordered him to be chained to the stone of combat, the blood-stained temalacatl. The most renowned of the Aztec warriors were pitted against him, and the emperor himself graced the sanguinary tournament with his presence. Tlalhuicole bore himself in the combat like a lion, slew eight warriors of renown, and wounded more than twenty. But at last he fell, covered with wounds, and was haled by the exulting priests to the altar of the terrible war-god Huitzilopochtli, to whom his heart was offered up.

  

The Haunting Mothers

It is only occasionally that we encounter either the gods or supernatural beings of any description in Mexican myth. But occasionally we catch sight of such beings as the Ciuapipiltin (Honoured Women), the spirits of those women who had died in childbed, a death highly venerated by the Mexicans, who regarded the woman who perished thus as the equal of a warrior who met his fate in battle. Strangely enough, these spirits were actively malevolent, probably because the moon-goddess (who was also the deity of evil exhalations) was evil in her tendencies, and they were regarded as possessing an affinity to her. It was supposed that they afflicted infants with various diseases, and Mexican parents took every precaution not to permit their offspring out of doors on the days when their influence was believed to be strong. They were said to haunt the cross-roads, and even to enter the bodies of weakly people, the better to work their evil will. The insane were supposed to be under their especial visitation. Temples were raised at the cross-roads in order to placate them, and loaves of bread, shaped like butterflies, were dedicated to them. They were represented as having faces of a dead white, and as blanching their arms and hands with a white powder known as tisatl. Their eyebrows were of a golden hue, and their raiment was that of Mexican ladies of the ruling class.

  

The Return of Papantzin

One of the weirdest legends in Mexican tradition recounts how Papantzin, the sister of Montezuma II, returned from her tomb to prophesy to her royal brother concerning his doom and the fall of his empire at the hands of the Spaniards. On taking up the reins of government Montezuma had married this lady to one of his most illustrious servants, the governor of Tlatelulco, and after his death it would appear that she continued to exercise his almost vice regal functions and to reside in his palace. In course of time she died, and her obsequies were attended by the emperor in person, accompanied by the greatest personages of his court and kingdom. The body was interred in a subterranean vault of his own palace, in close proximity to the royal baths, which stood in a sequestered part of the extensive grounds surrounding the royal residence. The entrance to the vault was secured by a stone slab of moderate weight, and when the numerous ceremonies prescribed for the interment of a royal personage had been completed the emperor and his suite retired. At daylight next morning one of the royal children, a little girl of some six years of age, having gone into the garden to seek her governess, espied the Princess Papan standing near the baths. The princess, who was her aunt, called to her, and requested her to bring her governess to her. The child did as she was bid, but her governess, thinking that imagination had played her a trick, paid little attention to what she said. As the child persisted in her statement, the governess at last followed her into the garden, where she saw Papan sitting on one of the steps of the baths. The sight of the supposed dead princess filled the woman with such terror that she fell down in a swoon. The child then went to her mother's apartment, and detailed to her what had happened. She at once proceeded to the baths with two of her attendants, and at sight of Papan was also seized with affright. But the princess reassured her, and asked to be allowed to accompany her to her apartments, and that the entire affair should for the present be kept absolutely secret. Later in the day she sent for Ticotzicatzin, her majordomo, and requested him to inform the emperor that she desired to speak with him immediately on matters of the greatest importance. The man, terrified, begged to be excused from the mission, and Papan then gave orders that her uncle Nezahualpilli, King of Tezcuco, should be communicated with. That monarch, on receiving her request that he should come to her, hastened to the palace. The princess begged him to see the emperor without loss of time and to entreat him to come to her at once. Montezuma heard his story with surprise mingled with doubt. Hastening to his sister, he cried as he approached her: "Is it indeed you, my sister, or some evil demon who has taken your likeness?" "It is I indeed, your Majesty," she replied. Montezuma and the exalted personages who accompanied him then seated themselves, and a hush of expectation fell upon all as they were addressed by the princess in the following words:

"Listen attentively to what I am about to relate to you. You have seen me dead, buried, and now behold me alive again. By the authority of our ancestors, my brother, I am returned from the dwellings of the dead to prophesy to you certain things of prime importance.

  

Papantzin's Story

"At the moment after death I found myself in a spacious valley, which appeared to have neither commencement nor end, and was surrounded by lofty mountains. Near the middle I came upon a road with many branching paths. By the side of the valley there flowed a river of considerable size, the waters of which ran with a loud noise. By the borders of this I saw a young man clothed in a long robe, fastened with a diamond, and shining like the sun, his visage bright as a star. On his forehead was a sign in the figure of a cross. He had wings, the feathers of which gave forth the most wonderful and glowing reflections and colours. His eyes were as emeralds, and his glance was modest. He was fair, of beautiful aspect and imposing presence. He took me by the hand and said: 'Come hither. It is not yet time for you to cross the river. You possess the love of God, which is greater than you know or can comprehend.' He then conducted me through the valley, where I espied many heads and bones of dead men. I then beheld a number of black folk, horned, and with the feet of deer. They were engaged in building a house, which was nearly completed. Turning toward the east for a space, I beheld on the waters of the river a vast number of ships manned by a great host of men dressed differently from ourselves. Their eyes were of a clear grey, their complexions ruddy, they carried banners and ensigns in their hands and wore helmets on their heads. They called themselves 'Sons of the Sun.' The youth who conducted me and caused me to see all these things said that it was not yet the will of the gods that I should cross the river, but that I was to be reserved to behold the future with my own eyes, and to enjoy the benefits of the faith which these strangers brought with them; that the bones I beheld on the plain were those of my countrymen who had died in ignorance of that faith, and had consequently suffered great torments; that the house being builded by the black folk was an edifice prepared for those who would fall in battle with the seafaring strangers whom I had seen; and that I was destined to return to my compatriots to tell them of the true faith, and to announce to them what I had seen that they might profit thereby."

Montezuma hearkened to these matters in silence, and felt greatly troubled. He left his sister's presence without a word, and, regaining his own apartments, plunged into melancholy thoughts.

Papantzin's resurrection is one of the best authenticated incidents in Mexican history, and it is a curious fact that on the arrival of the Spanish Conquistadores one of the first persons to embrace Christianity and receive baptism at their hands was the Princess Papan.

     
The Myths of Mexico and Peru, by Lewis Spence, [1913], at sacred-texts.com

  

CHAPTER IV: The Maya Race and Mythology

  

The Maya

It was to the Maya-the people who occupied the territory between the isthmus of Tehuantepec and Nicaragua-that the civilisation of Central America owed most. The language they spoke was quite distinct from the Nahuatl spoken by the Nahua of Mexico, and in many respects their customs and habits were widely different from those of the people of Anahuac. It will be remembered that the latter were the heirs of an older civilisation, that, indeed, they had entered the valley of Mexico as savages, and that practically all they knew of the arts of culture was taught them by the remnants of the people whom they dispossessed. It was not thus with the Maya. Their arts and industries were of their own invention, and bore the stamp of an origin of considerable antiquity. They were, indeed, the supreme intellectual race of America, and on their coming into contact with the Nahua that people assimilated sufficient of their culture to raise them several grades in the scale of civilisation.

  

Were the Maya Toltecs?

It has already been stated that many antiquarians see in the Maya those Toltecs who because of the inroads of barbarous tribes quitted their native land of Anahuac and journeyed southward to seek a new home in Chiapas and Yucatan. It would be idle to attempt to uphold or refute such a theory in the absolute dearth of positive evidence for or against it. The architectural remains of the older race of Anahuac do not bear any striking likeness to Maya forms, and if the mythologies of the two peoples are in some particulars alike, that may wellbe accounted for by their mutual adoption of deities and religious customs. On the other hand) it is distinctly noteworthy that the cult of the god Quetzalcoatl, which was regarded in Mexico as of alien origin, had a considerable vogue among the Maya and their allied races.

  

The Maya Kingdom

On the arrival of the Spaniards (after the celebrated march of Cortes from Mexico to Central America) the Maya were divided into a number of subsidiary states which remind us somewhat of the numerous little kingdoms of Palestine. That these had hived off from an original and considerably greater state there is good evidence to show, but internal dissension had played havoc with the polity of the central government of this empire, the disintegration of wh ch had occurred at a remote period. In the semi-historical legends of this people we catch glimpses of a great kingdom, occasionally alluded to as the "Kingdom of the Great Snake," or the empire of Xibalba, realms which have been identified with the ruined city-centres of Palenque and Mitla. These identifications must be regarded with caution, but the work of excavation will doubtless sooner or later assist theorists in coming to conclusions which will admit of nodoubt. The sphere of Maya civilisation and influence is prettywell marked,and embracesthe peninsula of Yucatan, Chiapas, to the isthmus of Tehuantepec on the north, and the whole of Guatemala to the boundaries of the present republic of San Salvador. The true nucleus of Maya civilisation, however, must be looked for in that part of Chiapas which skirts the banks of the Usumacinta river and in the valleys of its tributaries. Here Maya art and architecture reached a height of splendour unknown elsewhere, and in this district, too, the strange Maya system of writing had its most skilful exponents. Although the arts and industries of the several districts inhabited by people of Maya race exhibited many superficial differences, these are so small as to make us certain of the fact that the various areas inhabited by Maya stock had all drawn their inspiration toward civilisation from one common nucleus, and had equally passed through a uniform civilisation and drawn sap from an original culture-centre.

  

The Maya Dialects

Perhaps the most effectual method of distinguishing thevarious branches of the Maya people from one another consists in dividing them into linguistic groups. The various dialects spoken by the folk of Maya, origin, although they exhibit some considerable difference, yet display strongly that affinity of construction and resemblance in root which go to prove that they all emanate from one common mother-tongue. In Chiapas the Maya tongue itself is the current dialect, whilst in Guatemala no less than twenty-four dialects are in use, the principal of which are the Quiche, or Kiche, the Kakchiquel, the Zutugil, Coxoh Chol, and Pipil. These dialects and the folk who speak them are sufficient to engage our attention, as in them are enshrined the most remarkable myths and legends of the race, and by the men who used them were the greatest acts in Maya history achieved.

  

Whence came the Maya?

Whence came these folk, then, who raised a civilisation by no means inferior to that of ancient Egypt, which, if it had had scope, would have rivalled in its achievements the glory of old Assyria? We cannot tell. The mystery of its entrance into the land is as deep as the mystery of the ancient forests which now bury the remnants of its mighty monuments and enclose its temples in impenetrable gloom. Generations of antiquarians have attempted to trace the origin of this race to Egypt, Phoenicia, China, Burma. But the manifest traces of indigenous American origin are present in all its works, and the writers who have beheld in these likenesses to the art of Asiatic or African peoples have been grievously misled by superficial resemblances which could not have betrayed any one who had studied Maya affinities deeply.

  

Civilisation of the Maya

At the risk of repetition it is essential to point out that civilisation, which was a newly acquired thing with the Nahua peoples, was not so with the Maya. They were indisputably an older race, possessing institutions which bore the marks of generations of use, whereas the Nahua had only too obviously just entered into their heritage of law and order. When we first catch sight of the Maya kingdoms they are in the process of disintegration. Such strong young blood as the virile folk of Anahuac possessed did not flow in the veins of the people of Yucatan and Guatemala. They were to the Nahua much as the ancient Assyrians were to the hosts of Israel at the entrance of the latter into national existence. That there was a substratum of ethnical and cultural relationship, however, it would be impossible to deny. The institutions, architecture, habits, even the racial cast of thought of the two peoples, bore such a general resemblance as to show that many affinities of blood and cultural relationship existed between them. But it will not do to insist too strongly upon these. It may be argued with great probability that these relationships and likenesses exist because of the influence of Maya civilisation upon Mexican alone, or from the inheritance by both Mexican and Maya people of a still older culture of which we are ignorant, and the proofs of which lie buried below the forests of Guatemala or the sands of Yucatan.

  

The Zapotecs

The influence of the Maya upon the Nahua was a process of exceeding slowness. The peoples who divided them one from another were themselves benefited by carrying Maya culture into Anahuac, or rather it might be said that they constituted a sort of filter through which the southern civilisation reached the northern. These peoples were the Zapotecs, the Mixtecs, and the Kuikatecs, by far the most important of whom were the first-mentioncd. They partook of the nature and civilisation of both races, and were in effect a border people who took from and gave to both Maya and Nahua, much as the Jews absorbed and disseminated the cultures of Egypt and Assyria. They were, however, of Nahua race, but their speech bears the strongest marks of having borrowed extensively from the Maya vocabulary. For many generations these people wandered in a nomadic condition from Maya to Nahua territory, thus absorbing the customs, speech, and mythology of each.

  

The Huasteca

But we should be wrong if we thought that the Maya had never attempted to expand, and had never sought new homes for their surplus population. That they had is proved by an outlying tribe of Maya, the Huasteca, having settled at the mouth of the Panuco, river, on the north coast of Mexico. The presence of this curious ethnological island has of course given rise to all sorts of queer theories concerning Toltec relationship, whereas it simply intimates that before the era of Nahua expansion the Maya had attempted to colonise the country to the north of their territories, but that their efforts in this direction had been cut short by the influx of savage Nahua, against whom they found themselves unable to contend.

  

The Type of Maya Civilisation

Did the civilisation of the Maya differ, then, in type from that of the Nahua, or was it merely a larger expression of that in vogue in Anahuac? We may take it that the Nahua civilisation characterised the culture of Central America in its youth, whilst that of the Maya displayed it in its bloom, and perhaps in its senility. The difference was neither essential nor radical, but may be said to have arisen for the most part from climatic and kindred causes. The climate of Anahuac is dry and temperate, that of Yucatan and Guatemala is tropical, and we shall find even such religious conceptions of the two peoples as were drawn from a common source varying from this very cause, and coloured by differences in temperature and rainfall.

  

Maya History

Before entering upon a consideration of the art, architecture, or mythology of this strange and highly interesting people it will be necessary to provide the reader with a brief sketch of their history. Such notices of this as exist in English are few, and their value doubtful. For the earlier history of the people of Maya stock we depend almost whclly upon tradition and architectural remains. The net result of the evidence wrung from these is that the Maya civilisation was one and homogeneous, and that all the separate states must have at one period passed through a uniform condition of culture, to which they were all equally debtors, and that this is sufficient ground for the belief that all were at one time beneath the sway of one central power. For the later history we possess the writings of the Spanish fathers, but not in such profusion as in the case of Mexico. In fact the trustworthy original authors who deal with Maya history can almost be counted on the fingers of one hand. We are further confused in perusing these, and, indeed, throughout the study of Maya history, by discovering that many of the sites of Maya cities are designated by Nahua names. This is due to the fact that the Spanish conquerors were guided in their conquest of the Maya territories by Nahua, who naturally applied Nahuatlac designations to those sites of which the Spaniards asked the names. These appellations clung to the places in question; hence the confusion, and the blundering theories which would read in these place-names relics of Aztec conquest.

  

The Nucleus of Maya Power

As has been said, the nucleus of Maya power and culture is probably to be found in that part of Chiapas which slopes down from the steep Cordilleras. Here the ruined sites of Palenque, Piedras Negras, and Ocosingo are eloquent of that opulence of imagination and loftiness of conception which go hand in hand with an advanced culture. The temples and palaces of this region bear the stamp of a dignity and consciousness of metropolitan power which are scarcely to be mistaken, so broad, so free is their architectural conception, so full to overflowing the display of the desire to surpass. But upon the necessities of religion and central organisation alone was this architectural artistry lavished. Its dignities were not profaned by its application to mere domestic uses, for, unless what were obviously palaces are excepted, not a single exam ple of Maya domestic building has survived. This is of course accounted for by the circumstance that the people were sharply divided into the aristocratic and labouring classes, the first of which was closely identified with religion or kingship, and was housed in the ecclesiastical or royal buildings, whilst those of less exalted rank were perforce content with the shelter afforded by a hut built of perishable materials, the traces of which have long since passed away. The temples were, in fact, the nuclei of the towns, the centres round which the Maya communities were grouped, much in the same manner as the cities of Europe in the Middle Ages clustered and grew around the shadow of some vast cathedral or sheltering stronghold.

  

Early Race Movements

We shall leave the consideration of Maya tradition until we come to speak of Maya myth proper, and attempt to glean from the chaos of legend some veritable facts connected with Maya history. According to a manuscript of Kuikatec origin recently discovered, it is probable that a Nahua invasion of the Maya states of Chiapas and Tabasco took place about the ninth century, of our era, and we must for the present regard that as the starting-point of Maya history. The South-western portions of the Maya territory were agitated about the same time by race movements, which turned northward toward Tehuantepec, and, flowing through Guatemala, came to rest in Acalan, on the borders of Yucatan, retarded, probably, by the inhospitable and waterless condition of that country. This Nahua invasion probably had the effect of driving the more peaceful Maya from their northerly settlements and forcing them farther south. Indeed, evidence is not wanting to show that the warlike Nahua pursued the pacific Maya into their new retreats, and for a space left them but little peace. This struggle it was which finally resulted in the breaking up of the Maya civilisation, which even at that relatively remote period had reached its apogee, its several races separating into numerous city-states, which bore a close political resemblance to those of Italy on the downfall of Rome. At this period, probably, began the cleavage between the Maya of Yucatan and those of Guatemala, which finally resolved itself into such differences of speech, faith, and architecture as almost to constitute them different peoples.

  

The Settlement of Yucatan

As the Celts of Wales and Scotland were driven into the less hospitable regions of their respective countries by the inroads of the Saxons, so was one branch of the Maya forced to seek shelter in the almost desert wastes of Yucatan. There can be no doubt that the Maya did not take to this barren and waterless land of their own accord. Thrifty and possessed of high agricultural attainments, this people would view with concern a removal to a sphere so forbidding after the rich and easily developed country they had inhabited for generations. But the inexorable Nahua were behindl and they were a peaceful folk, unused to the horrors of savage warfare. So, taking their courage in both hands, they wandered into the desert. Everything points to a late occupation of Yucatan by the Maya, and architectural effort exhibits deterioration, evidenced in a high conventionality of design and excess of ornamentation. Evidences of Nahua influence also are not wanting, a fact which is eloquent of the later period of contact which is known to have occurred between the peoples, and which alone is almost sufficient to fix the date of the settlement of the Maya in Yucatan. It must not be thought that the Maya in Yucatan formed one homogeneous state recognising a central authority. On the contrary, as is often the case with colonists) the several Maya bands of immigrants formed themselves into different states or kingdoms, each having its own separate traditions. It is thus a matter of the highest difficulty to so collate and criticise these traditions as to construct a history of the Maya race in Yucatan. As may be supposed, we find the various city-sites founded by divine beings who play a more or less important part in the Maya pantheon. Kukulcan, for example, is the first king of Mayapan, whilst Itzamna figures as the founder of the state of Itzamal. The gods were the spiritual leaders of these bands of Maya, just as Jehovah was the spiritual leader and guide of the Israelites in the desert. One is therefore not surprised to find in the Popol Vuh, the saga of the Kiche-Maya of Guatemala, that the god Tohil (The Rumbler) guided them to the site of the first Kiche city. Some writers on the subject appear to think that the incidents in such migration myths, especially the tutelage and guidance of the tribes by gods and the descriptions of desert scenery which they contain, suffice to stamp them as mere native versions of the Book of Exodus, or at the best myths sophisticated by missionary influence. The truth is that the conditions of migration undergone by the Maya were similar to those described in the Scriptures, and by no means merely reflect the Bible story, as short-sighted collators of both aver.

  

The Septs of Yucatan

The priest-kings of Mayapan, who claimed descent from Kukulcan or Quetzalcoatl, soon raised their state into a position of prominence among the surrounding cities. Those who had founded Chichen-Itza, and who were known as Itzaes, were, on the other hand, a caste of warriors who do not appear to have cherished the priestly function with such assiduity. The rulers of the Itzaes, who were known as the Tutul Xius, seem to have come, according to their traditions, from the western Maya states, perhaps from Nonohualco in Tabasco. Arriving from thence at the southern cxtremity of Yucatan, they founded the city of Ziyan Caan, on Lake Bacalar, which had a period of prosperity for at least a couple of generations. At the expiry of that period for some unaccountable reason they migrated northward, perhaps because at that particular time the incidence of power was shifting toward Northern Yucatan, and took up their abode in Chichen- Itza, eventually the sacred city of the Maya, which they founded.

  

The Cocomes

But they were not destined to remain undisturbed in their new sphere. The Cocomes of Mayapan, when at the height of their power, viewed with disfavour the settlement of the Tutul Xius. After it had flourished for a period of about 120 years it was overthrown by the Cocomes, who resolved it into a dependency, permitting the governors and a certain number of the people to depart elsewhere.

  

Flight of the Tutul Xius

Thus expelled, the Tutul Xius fled southward, whence they had oriainally come, and settled in Poton-chan or Champoton, where they reigned for nearly 300 years. From this new centre, with the aid or Nahua mercenaries, they commenced an extension of territory northward, and entered into diplomatic relations with the heads of the other Maya states. It was at this time that they built Uxmal, and their power became so extensive that they reconquered the territory they had lost to the Cocomes. This on the whole appears to have been a period when the arts flourished under an enlightened policy, which knew how to make and keep friendly relations with surrounding states, and the splendid network of roads with which the country was covered and the many evidences of architectural excellence go to prove that the race had had leisure to achieve much in art and works of utility. Thus the city of Chichen-Itza was linked up with the island of Cozumel by a highway whereon thousands of pilgrims plodded to the temples of the gods of wind and moisture. From Itzamal, too, roads branched in every direction, in order that the people should have every facility for reaching the chief shrine of the country situated there. But the hand of the Cocomes was heavy upon the other Maya states which were tributary to, them. As in the Yucatan of to-day, where the wretched henequen-picker leads the life of a veritable slave, a crushing system of helotage obtained. The Cocomes made heavy demands upon the Tutul Xius, who in their turn sweated the hapless folk under their sway past the bounds of human endurance. As in all tottering civilisations, the feeling of responsibility among the upper classes became dormant, and they abandoned themselves to the pleasures of life without thought of the morrow. Morality ceased to be regarded as a virtue, and rottenness was at the core of Maya life. Discontent quickly spread on every hand.

  

The Revolution In Mayapan

The sequel was, naturally, revolution. Ground down by the tyranny of a dissolute oligarchy, the subject states rose in revolt. The Cocomes surrounded themselves by Nahua mercenaries, who succeeded in beating off the first wave of revolt, led by the king or regulus or Uxmal, who was defeated, and whose people in their turn rose against him, a circumstance which ended in the abandonment of the city of Uxmal. Once more were the Tutul Xius forced to go on pilgrimage, and this time they founded the city of Mani, a mere shadow of the splendour of Uxmal and Chichen.

  

Hunac Eel

If the aristocracy of the Cocomcs was composed of weaklings, its ruler was made of sterner stuff. Hunac Eel, who exercised royal sway over this people, and held in subjection the lesser principalities of Yucatan, was not only a tyrant of harsh and vindictive temperament, but a statesman of judgement and experience, who courted the assistance of the neighbouring Nahua, whom he employed in his campaign against the new assailant of his absolutism, the ruler of Chichen-Itza. Mustering a mighty host of his vassals, Hunac Eel marched against the devoted city whose prince had dared to challenge his supremacy, and succeeded in inflicting a crushing defeat upon its inhabitants. But apparently the state was permitted to remain under the sovereignty of its native princes. The revolt, however, merely smouldered, and in the kingdom of Mayapan itself, the territory of the Cocomes, the fires of revolution began to blaze. This state of things continued for nearly a century. Then the crash came. The enemies of the Cocomes effected a junction. The people of Chichen Itza joined hands with the Tutul Xius, who had sought refuge in the central highlands of Yucatan and those city-states which clustered around the mother-city of Mayapan. A fierce concerted attack was made , beneath which the power of the Cocomes crumpled up completely. Not one stone was left standing upon another by the exasperated allies, who thus avenged the helotage of nearly 300 years. To this event the date 1436 is assigned, but, like most dates in Maya history, considerable uncertainty must be attached to it.

  

The Last of the Cocomes

Only a remnant of the Cocomes survived. They had been absent in Nahua territory, attempting to raise fresh troops for the defence of Mayapan. These the victors spared, and they finally settled in Zotuta, in the centre of Yucatan, a region of almost impenetrable forest.

It would not appear that the city of Chichen-Itza, the prince of which was ever the head and front of the rebellion against the Cocomes, proficed in any way from the fall of the suzerain power. On the contrary, tradition has it that the town was abandoned by its inhabitants, and left to crumble into the ruinous state in which the Spaniards found it on their entrance into the country. The probability is that its people quitted it because of the repeated attacks made upon it by the Cocomes, who saw in it the chief obstacle to their universal sway; and this is supported by tradition, which tells that a prince of Chichen-Itza) worn out with conflict and internecine strife, left it to seek the cradle of the Maya race in the land of the setting sun. Indeed, it is further stated that this prince founded the city of Peten-Itza, on the lake of Peten, in Guatemala

  

The Maya Peoples of Guatemala

When the Maya peoples of Guatemala, the Kiches and. the Kakchiquels, first made their way into that territory, they probably found there a race of Maya origin of a type more advanced and possessed of more ancient traditions than themselves. By their connection with this folk they greatly benefited in the direction o. artistic achievement as well as in the industrial arts. Concerning these people we have a large body of tradition in the Popol Vuh, a native chronicle, the contents of which will be fully dealt with in the chapter relating to the Maya myths and legendary matter. We cannot deal with it as a veritable historical document, but there is little doubt that a basis of fact exists behind the tradition it contains. The difference between the language of these people and that of their brethren in Yucatan was, as has been said, one of dialect only, and a like slight distinction is found in their mythology, caused, doubtless, by the incidence of local conditions, and resulting in part from the difference between a level and comparatively waterless land and one of a semimountainous character covered with thick forests. We shall note further differences when we come to examine the art and architecture of the Maya race, and to compare those of its two most distinctive branches.

  

The Maya Tulan

It was to the city of Tulan, probably in Tabasco, that the Maya of Guatemala referred as being the starting point of all their migrations. We must not confound this place with the Tollan of the Mexican traditions. It is possible that the name may in both cases be derived from a root meaning a place from which a tribe set forth, a starting-place, but geographical connection there is none. From here Nima-Kiche, the great Kiche, started on his migration to the mountains, accompanied by his three brothers. Tulan, says the Popol Vuh, had been a place of misfortune to man, for he had suffered much from cold and hunger, and, as at the building of Babel, his speech was so confounded that the first four Kiches and their wives were unable to comprehend one another. Of course this is a native myth created to account for the difference in dialect between the various branches of the Maya folk, and can scarcely have any foundation in fact, as the change in dialect would be a very gradual process. The brothers, we are told, divided the land so that one received the districts of Mames and Pocomams, another Verapaz, and the third Chiapas, while Nima-Kiche obtained the country of the Kiches, Kakchiquels, and Tzutuhils. It would be extremely difficult to say whether or not this tradition rests on any veritable historical basis. If so, it refers to a period anterior to the Nahua irruption, for the districts alluded to as occupied by these tribes were not so divided among them at the coming of the Spaniards.

  

Doubtful Dynasties

As with the earlier dynasties of Egypt, considerable doubt surrounds the history of the early Kiche monarchs. Indeed, a period of such uncertainty occurs that even the number of kings who reigned is lost in the hopeless confusion of varying estimates. From this chaos emerge the facts that the Kiche monarchs held the supreme power among the peoples of Guatemala, that they were the contemporaries of the rulers of Mexico city, and that they were often elected from among the princes of the subject states. Acxopil, the successor of Nima-Kiche, invested his second son with the government of the Kakchiquels, and placed his youngest son over the Tzutuhils, whilst to his eldest son he left the throne of the Kiches. Icutemal, his eldest son, on succeeding his father, gifted the kingdom of Kakchiquel to his eldest son, displacing his own brother and thus mortally affronting him. The struggle which ensued lasted for generations, embittered the relations between these two branches of the Maya in Guatemala, and undermined their joint strength. Nahua mercenaries were employed in the struggle on both sides, and these introduced many of the uglinesses of Nahua life into Maya existence.

  

The Coming of the Spaniards

This condition of things lasted up to the time of the coming of the Spaniards. The Kakchiquels dated the commencement of a new chronology from the episode of the defeat of Cay Hun-Apu by them in 1492. They may have saved themselves the trouble; for the time was at hand when the calendars of their race were to be closed, and its records written in another script by another people. One by one, and chiefly by reason of their insane policy of allying themselves with the invader against their own kin, the old kingdoms of Guatemala fell as spoil to the daring Conquistadores, and their people passed beneath the yoke of Spain-bondsmen who were to beget countless generations of slaves.

  

The Riddle of Ancient Maya Writing

What may possibly be the most valuable sources of Maya history are, alas! sealed to us at present. We allude to the native Maya manuscripts and inscriptions, the writing of which cannot be deciphered by present-day scholars. Some of the old Spanish friars who lived in the times which directly succeeded the settlement of the country by the white man were able to read and even to write this script, but unfortunately they regarded it either as an invention of the Father of Evil or, as it was a native system, as a thing of no value. In a few generations all knowledge of how to decipher it was totally lost, and it remains to the modern world almost as a sealed book, although science has lavished all its wonderful machinery of logic and deduction upon it, and men of unquestioned ability have dedicated their lives to the problem of unravelling what must be regarded as one of the greatest and most mysterious riddles of which mankind ever attempted the solution.

The romance of the discovery of the key to the Egyptian hieroglyphic system of writing is well known. For centuries the symbols displayed upon the temples and monuments of the Nile country were so many meaningless pictures and signs to the learned folk of Europe, until the discovery of the Rosetta stone a hundred years ago made their elucidation possible. This stone bore the same inscription in Greek, demotic, and hieroglyphics, and so the discovery of the "alphabet" of the hidden script became a comparatively easy task. But Central America has no Rosetta stone, nor is it possible that such an aid to research can ever be found. Indeed, such "keys" as have been discovered or brought forward by scientists have proved for the most part unavailing.

  

The Maya Manuscripts

The principal Maya manuscripts which have escaped the ravages of time are the codices in the libraries of Dresden, Paris, and Madrid. These are known as the Codex Perezianus preserved in the Bibliotheque Nationale at Paris: the Dresden Codex, long regarded as an Aztec manuscript, and the Troano Codex, so called from one of its owners, Senor Tro y Ortolano, found at Madrid in 1865. These manuscripts deal principally with Maya mythology, but as they cannot be deciphered with any degree of accuracy they do not greatly assist our knowledge of the subject.

  

The System of the Writing

The "Tablet of the Cross" gives a good idea of the general appearance of the writing system of the ancient peoples of Central America. The style varies somewhat in most of the manuscripts and inscriptions, but it is generally admitted that all of the systems employed sprang originally from one common source. The square figures which appear as a tangle of faces and objects are said to be calculiform, or pebble shaped, a not inappropriate description, and it is known from ancient Spanish manuscripts that they were read from top to bottom, and two columns at a time. The Maya tongue, like all native American languages, was one which, in order to express an idea, gathered a whole phrase into a single word, and it has been thought that the several symbols or parts in each square or sketch go to make up such a compound expression.

The first key (so called) to the hicroglyphs of Central America was that of Bishop Landa, who about 1576 attempted to set down the Maya alphabet from native sources. He was highly unpopular with the natives, whose literary treasures he had almost completely destroyed, and who in revenge deliberately misled him as to the true significance of the various symbols.

The first real step toward reading the Maya writing was made in 1876 by Leon de Rosny, a French student of American antiquities, who succeeded in interpreting the signs which denote the four cardinal points. As has been the case in so many discoveries of importance the significance of these signs was simultaneously discovered by Professor Cyrus Thomas in America. In two of these four signs was found the symbol which meant "sun," almost, as de Rosny acknowledged, as a matter of course. However, the Maya word for" sun" (kin) also denotes "day," and it was later proved that this sign was also used with the latter meaning. The discovery of the sign stimulated further research to a great degree, and from the material now at their disposal Drs. Forstemann and Schellhas of Berlin were successful in discovering the sign for the moon and that for the Maya month of twenty days.

  

Clever Elucidations

In 1887 Dr. Seler discovered the sign for night (akbal), and in 1894 Forstemann unriddled the symbols for "beginning" and "end." These are two heads, the first of which has the sign akbal, just mentioned, for an eye. Now akbal means, as well as "night," "the beginning of the month," and below the face which contains it can be seen footsteps, or spots which resemble their outline, signifying a forward movement. The sign in the second head means "seventh," which in Maya also signifies "the end." From the frequent contrast of these terms there can be little doubt that' their meaning is as stated.

"Union" is denoted by the sting of a rattlesnake, the coils of that reptile signifying to the Maya the idea of tying together. in contrast to this sign is the figure next to it, which represents a knife, and means "division" or "cutting." An important "letter" is the hand, which often occurs in both manuscripts and inscriptions. It is drawn sometimes in the act of grasping, with the thumb bent forward, and sometimes as pointing in a certain direction. The first seems to denote a tying together or joining, like the rattlesnake symbol, and the second Forstemann believes to represent a lapse of time. That it may represent futurity occurs as a more likely conjecture to the present writer.

The figure denoting the spring equinox was traced because of its obvious representation of a cloud from which three streams of water are falling upon the earth. The square at the top represents heaven. The obsidian knife underneath denotes a division or period of time cut off, as it were, from other periods of the year. That the sign means "spring " is verified by its position among the other signs of the seasons.

The sign for "week" was discovered by reason of its almost constant accompaniment of the sign for the number thirteen, the number of days in the Maya sacred week. The symbol of the bird's feather indicates the plural, and when affixed to certain signs signifies that the object indicated is multiplied. A bird's feather, when one thinks of it, is one of the most fitting symbols provided by nature to designate the plural, if the number of shoots on both sides of the stem are taken as meaning "many " or "two."

Water is depicted by the figure of a serpent, which reptile typifies the undulating nature of the element. The sign entitled "the sacrificial victim" is of deep human interest. The first portion of the symbol is the death-bird, and the second shows a crouching and beaten captive, ready to be immolated to one of the terrible Maya deities whose sanguinary religion demanded human sacrifice. The drawing which means "the day of the new year," in the month Ceh, was unriddled by the following means: The sign in the upper left-hand corner denotes the word "sun" or "day," that in the upper right-hand corner is the sign for "year." In the lower right-hand corner is the sign for "division," and in the lower left. hand the sign for the Maya month Ceh, already known from the native calendars.

From its accompaniment of a figure known to be a deity of the four cardinal points, whence all American tribes believed the wind to come, the symbol entitled "wind" has been determined.

  

Methods of Study

The method employed by those engaged in the elucidation of these hieroglyphs is typical of modern science. The various signs and symbols are literally "worn out" by a process of indefatigable examination. For hours the student sits staring at a symbol, drinking in every detail, however infinitesimal, until the drawing and all its parts are wholly and separately photographed upon the tablets of his memory. He then compares the several portions of the symbol with similar portions in other signs the value of which is known. From these he may obtain a clue to the meaning of the whole. Thus proceeding from the known to the unknown) he advances logically toward a complete elucidation of all the hieroglyphs depicted in the various manuscripts and inscriptions.

The method by which Dr. Seler discovered the hieroglyphs or symbols relating to the various gods of the Maya was both simple and ingenious. He says: "The way in which this was accomplished is strikingly simple. It amounts essentially to that which in ordinary life we call 'memory of persons,' and follows almost naturally from a careful study of the manuscripts. For, by frequently looking tentatively at the representations, one learns by degrees to recognise promptly similar and familiar figures of gods by the characteristic impression they make as a whole or by certain details, and the same is true of the accompanying hieroglyphs."

  

The Maya Numeral System

If Bishop Landa was badly hoaxed regarding the alphabet of the Maya, he was successful in discovering and handing down their numeral system, which was on a very much higher basis than that of many civilised peoples, being, for exam le more practical and more fully evolved than that of ancient Rome. This system employed four signs altogether, the point for unity, a horizontal stroke for the number 5, and two signs for 20 and 0. Yet from these simple elements the Maya produced a method of computation which is perhaps as ingenious as anything which has ever been accomplished in the history of mathematics. In the Maya arithmetical system, as in ours, it is the position of the sign that gives it its value. The figures were placed in a vertical line, and one of them was employed as a decimal multiplier. The lowest figure of the column had the arithmetical value which it represented. The figures which appeared in the second, fourth, and each following place had twenty times the value of the preceding figures, while figures in the third place had eighteen times the value of those in the second place. This system admits of computation up to millions, and is one of the surest signs of Maya culture.

Much controversy has raged round the exact nature of the Maya hieroglyphs. Were they understood by the Indians themselves as representing ideas or merely pictures, or did they convey a given sound to the reader, as does our alphabet? To some extent controversy upon the point is futile, as those of the Spanish clergy who were able to learn the writing from the native Maya have confirmed its phonetic character, so that in reality each symbol must have conveyed a sound or sounds to the reader, not merely an idea or a picture. Recent research has amply proved this, so that the full elucidation of the long and painful puzzle on which so much learning and patience have been lavished may perhaps be at hand.

  

Mythology of the Maya

The Maya pantheon, although it bears a strong resemblance to that of the Nahua, differs from it in so many respects that it is easy to observe that at one period it must have been absolutely free from all Nahua influence. We may, then, provisionally accept the theory that at some relatively distant period the mythologies of the Nahua and Maya were influenced from one common centre, if they were not originally identical, but that later the inclusion in the cognate but divided systems of local deities and the superimposition of the deities and rites of immigrant peoples had caused such differentiation as to render somewhat vague the original likeness between them. In the Mexican mythology we have as a key-note the custom of human sacrifice. It has often been stated as exhibiting the superior status in civilisation of the Maya that their religion was free from the revolting practices which characterised the Nahua faith. This, however, is totally erroneous. Although the Maya were not nearly so prone to the practice of human sacrifice as were the Nahua, they frequently engaged in it, and the pictures which have been drawn of their bloodless offerings must not lead us to believe that they never indulged in this rite. It is known, for example, that they sacrificed maidens to the water-god at the period of the spring florescence, by casting them into a deep pool, where they were drowned.

  

Quetzalcoatl among the Maya

One of the most obvious of the mythological relationships between the Maya and Nahua is exhibited in the Maya cult of the god Quetzalcoatl. It seems to have been a general belief in Mexico that Quetzalcoatl was a god foreign to the soil; or at least relatively aboriginal to his rival Tezcatlipoca, if not to the Nahua themselves. It is amusing to see it stated by authorities of the highest standing that his worship was free from bloodshed. But it does not appear whether the sanguinary rites connected with the name of Quetzalcoatl in Mexico were undertaken by his priests of their own accord or at the instigation and pressure of the pontiff of Huitzilopochtli, under whose jurisdiction they were. The designation by which Quetzalcoatl was known to the Maya was Kukulcan, which signifies "Feathered Serpent," and is exactly translated by his Mexican name. In Guatemala he was called Gucumatz, which word is also identical in Kiche with his other native appellations. But the Kukulcan of the Maya appears to be dissimilar from Quetzalcoatl in several of his attributes. The difference in climate would probably account for most of these. In Mexico Quetzalcoatl, as we have seen, was not only the Man of the Sun, but the original wind-god of the country. The Kukulcan of the Maya has more the attributes of a thunder-god. In the tropical climate of Yucatan and Guatemala the sun at midday appears to draw the clouds around it in serpentine shapes. From these emanate thunder and lightning and the fertilising rain, so that Kukulcan would appear to have appealed to the Maya more as a god of the sky who wielded the thunderbolts than a god of the atmosphere proper like Quetzalcoatl, though several of the stelae in Yucatan represent Kukulcan as he is portrayed in Mexico, with wind issuing from his mouth.

  

An Alphabet of Gods

The principal sources of our knowledge of the Maya deities are the Dresden, Madrid, and Paris codices alluded to previously, all of which contain many pictorial representations of the various members of the Maya pantheon. Of the very names of some of these gods we are so ignorant, and so difficult is the process of affixing to them the traditional names which are left to us as those of the Maya gods, that Dr. Paul Schellhas, a German student of Maya antiquities, has proposed that the figures of deities appearing in the Maya codiccs or manuscripts should be provisionally indicated by the letters of the alphabet. The figures of gods which thus occur are fifteen in number, and therefore take the letters of the alphabet from A to P, the letter J being omitted.

  

Difficulties of Comparison

Unluckily the accounts of Spanish authors concerning Maya mythology do not agree with the representations of the gods delineated in the codices. That the three codices have a mythology in common is certain. Again, great difficulty is found in comparing the deities of the codices with those represented by the carved and stucco bas-reliefs of the Maya region. It will thus be seen that very considerable difficulties beset the student in this mythological sphere. So few data have yet been collected regarding the Maya mythology that to dogmatise upon any subject connected with it would indeed be rash. But much has been accomplished in the past few decades, and evidence is slowly but surely accumulating from which sound conclusions can be drawn.

  

The Conflict between Light and Darkness

We witness in the Maya mythology a dualism almost as complete as that of ancient Persia-the conflict between light and darkness. Opposing each other we behold on the one hand the deities of the sun, the gods of warmth and light, of civilisation and the joy of life, and on the other the deities of darksome death, of night, gloom, and fear. From these primal conceptions of light and darkness all the mythologic forms of the Maya are evolved. When we catch the first recorded glimpses of Maya belief we recognise that at the period when it came under the purview of Europeans the gods of darkness were in the ascendant and a deep pessimism had spread over Maya thought and theology. Its joyful side was subordinated to the worship gloomy beings, the deities of death and hell, and if the cult or light was attended with such touching fidelity it was because the benign agencies who were worshipped in connection with it had promised not to desert mankind altogether, but to return at some future indefinite period and resume their sway of radiance and peace.

  

The Calendar

Like that of the Nahua, the Maya mythology was based almost entirely upon the calendar, which in its astronomic significance and duration was identical with that of the Mexicans. The ritual year of twenty "weeks " of thirteen days each was divided into four quarters, each of these being under the auspices of a different quarter of the heavens. Each "week" was under the supervision of a particular deity, as will be seen when we come to deal separately with the various gods.

  

Traditional Knowledge of the Gods

The heavenly bodies had important representation in the Maya pantheon. In Yucatan the sun-god was known as Kinich-ahau (Lord of the Face of the Sun). He was identified with the Fire-bird, or Arara, and was thus called Kinich-Kakmo (Fire-bird; lit. Sun-bird). He was also the presiding genius of the north.

Itzamna, one of the most important of the Maya deities, was a moon-god, the father of gods and men. In him was typified the decay and recurrence of life in nature. His name was derived from the words he was supposed to have given to men regarding himself: "Itz en caan, itz en muyal" ("I am the dew of the heaven, I am the dew of the clouds "). He was tutelar deity of the west.

Chac, the rain-god, is the possessor of an elongated nose, not unlike the proboscis of a tapir, which of course is the spout whence comes the rain which he blows over the earth. He is one of the best represented gods on both manuscripts and monuments, and presides over the east. The black god Ekchuah was the god of merchants and cacao-planters. He is represented in the manuscripts several times.

Ix ch'el was the goddess of medicine, and Ix chebel yax was identified by the priest Hernandez with the Virgin Mary. There were also several deities, or rather genii, called Bacabs, who were the upholders of the heavens in the four quarters of the sky. The names of these were Kan, Muluc, Ix, and Cauac, representing the east, north, west, and south. Their symbolic colours were yellow, white, black, and red respectively. The corresponded in some degree to the four variants of the Mexican rain-god Tlaloc, for many of the American races believed that rain, the fertiliser of the soil, emanated from the four points of the compass. We shall find still other deities when we come to discuss the Popol Vuh, the saga-book of the Kiche, but it is difficult to say how far these were connected with the deities of the Maya of Yucatan, concerning whom we have little traditional knowledge, and it is better to deal with them separately, pointing out resemblances where these appear to exist.

  

Maya Polytheism

On the whole the Maya do not seem to have been burdened with an extensive pantheon, as were the Nahua, and their polytheism appears to have been of a limited character. Although they possessed a number of divinities, these were in a great measure only different forms of one and the same divine powerprobably localised forms of it. The various Maya tribes worshipped similar gods under different names. They recognised divine unity in the god Hunabku, who was invisible and supreme, but he does not bulk largely in their mythology, any more than does the universal All-Father in other early faiths. The sun is the great deity in Maya religion, and the myths which tell of the origin of the Maya people are purely solar. As the sun comes from the east, so the hero-gods who bring with them culture and enlightenment have an oriental origin. As Votan, as Kabil, the "Red Hand " who initiates the people into the arts of writing and architecture, these gods are civilising men of the sun as surely as is Quetzalcoatl.

  

The Bat-God

A sinister figure, the prince of the Maya legions of darkness, is the bat-god, Zotzilaha Chimalman, who dwelt in the "House of Bats," a gruesome cavern on the way to the abodes of darkness and death. He is undoubtedly a relic of cave-worship pure and simple. "The Maya" says an old chronicler, "have an immoderate fear of death, and they seem to have given it a figure peculiarly repulsive." We shall find this deity alluded to in the Popol Vuh, under the name Camazotz, in close proximity to the Lords of Death and Hell, attempting to bar the journey of the hero-gods across these dreary realms. He is frequently met with on the Copan reliefs, and a Maya clan, the Ah-zotzils, were called by his name. They were of Kakchiquel origin, and he was probably their totem.

  

Modern Research

We must now turn to the question of what modern research has done to elucidate the character of the various Maya deities. We have already seen that they have been provisionally named by the letters of the alphabet until such proof is forthcoming as will identify them with the traditional gods of the Maya, and we will now briefly examine what is known concerning them under their temporary designations.

  

God A

In the Dresden and other codices god A is represented as a figure with exposed vertebrx and skull-like countenance, with the marks of corruption on his body, and displaying every sign of mortality. On his head he wears a snail-symbol, the Aztec sign of birth, perhaps to typify the connection between birth and death. He also wears a pair of cross-bones. The hieroglyph which accompanies his figure represents a corpse's head with closed eyes, a skull, and a sacrificial knife. His symbol is that for the calendar day Cimi, which means death. He presides over the west, the home of the dead, the region toward which they invariably depart with the setting sun. That he is a death-god there can be no doubt, but of his name we are ignorant. He is probably identical with the Aztec god of death and hell, Mictlan, and is perhaps one of those Lords of Death and Hell who invite the heroes to the celebrated game of ball in the Kiche Popol Vuh, and hold them prisoners in their gloomy realm.

  

God B

God B is the deity who appears most frequently in the manuscripts. He has a long, truncated nose, like that of a tapir, and we find in him every sign of a grod of the elements. He walks the waters, wields fiery torches, and seats himself on the cruciform tree of the four winds which appears so frequently in American myth. He is evidently a culture-god or hero, as he is seen planting maize carrying tools, and going on a journey, a fact which establishes his solar connection. He is, in fact, Kukulcan or Quetzalcoatl, and on examining him we feel that at least there can be no doubt concerning his identity.

  

God C

Concerning god C matter is lacking, but he is evidently a god of the pole-star, as in one of the codices he is surrounded by planetary signs and wears a nimbus of rays.

  

God D

God D is almost certainly a moon-god. He is represented as an aged man, with sunken cheeks and wrinkled forehead on which hangs the sign for night. His hieroglyph is surrounded by dots, to represent a starry sky, and is followed by the number 20, to show the duration of the moon. Like most moon deities he is connected with birth, for occasionally he wears the snail, symbol of parturition, on his head. It is probable that he is Itzamna, one of the greatest of Maya gods, who was regarded as the universal life-giver, and was probably of very ancient origin.

  

God E, The Maize-God

God E is another deity whom we have no difficulty in identifying. He wears the leafed car of maize as his head-dress. In fact, his head has been evolved out of the conventional drawings of the ear of maize, so we may say at once without any difficulty that he is a maize-god pure and simple, and a parallel with the Aztec maize-god Centeotl. Brinton calls this god Ghanan, and Schellhas thinks he may be identical with a deity Yurn Kaax, whose name means "Lord of the Harvest Fields."

  

God F

A close resemblance can be noticed between gods F and A, and it is thought that the latter resembles the Aztec Xipe, the god of human sacrifice. He is adorned with the same black lines running over the face and body, typifying gaping death-wounds.

  

God G, The Sun-God

In G we may be sure that we have found a sun-god par excellence. His hieroglyph is the sun-sign, kin. But we must be careful not to confound him with deities like Quetzalcoatl or Kukulcan. He is, like the Mexican Totec, the sun itself, and not the Man of the Sun, the civilising agent, who leaves his bright abode to dwell with man and introduce him to the arts of cultured existence. He is the luminary himself, whose only acceptable food is human blood, and who must be fed full with this terrible fare or perish, dragging the world of men with him into a fathomless abyss of gloom. We need not be surprised, therefore, to see god G occasionally wearing the symbols of death.

  

God H

God H would seem to have some relationship to the serpent, but what it may be is obscure, and no certain identification can be made.

  

Goddess I

I is a water-goddess, an old woman with wrinkled brown body and claw-like feet, wearing on her head a grisly snake twisted into a knot, to typify the serpent-like nature of water. She holds in her hands an earthenware pot from which water flows. We cannot say that she resembles the Mexican water-goddess, Chalchihuitlicue, wife of Tlaloc, who was in most respects a deity of a beneficent character. I seems a personification or water in its more dreadful aspect of floods and waterspouts, as it must inevitably have appeared to the people of the more torrid regions of Central America, and that she was regarded as an agent of death is shown from her occasionally wearing the cross-bones of the death-god.

  

God K, "The God with the Ornamented Nose"

God K is scientifically known as "the god with the ornamented nose," and is probably closely related to god B. Concerning him no two authorities are at one, some regarding him as a storm-god, whose proboscis, like that of Kukulcan, is intended to represent the blast of the tempest. But we observe certain stellar signs in con. nection with K which would go to prove that he is, indeed, one of the Quetzalcoatl group. His features are constantly to be met with on the gateways and corners of the ruined shrines of Central America, and have led many "antiquarians " to believe in the existence of an elephant-headed god, whereas his trunk-like snout is merely a funnel through which he emitted the ales over which he had dominion, as a careful study of the pinturas shows, the wind being depicted issuing from the snout in question. At the same time, the snout may have been modelled on that of the tapir. "If the rain-god Chac is distinguished in the Maya manuscript by a peculiarly long nose curving over the mouth, and if in the other forms of the rain-god, to which, as it seems, the name of Balon Zacab belongs, the nose widens out and sends out shoots, I believe that the tapir which was employed identically with Chac, the Maya rain-god, furnished the model," says Dr. Seler. Is K, then, the same as Chac? Chac bears every sign of affinity with the Mexican rain-god Tlaloc, whose face was evolved from the coils of two snakes, and also some resemblance to the snouted features of B and K. But, again, the Mexican pictures of Quetzalcoatl are not at all like those of Tlaloc, so that there can be no affinity between Tlaloc and K. Therefore if the Mexican Tlaloc and the Maya Chac be identical, and Tlaloc differs from Quetzalcoatl, who in turn is identical with B and K, it is clear that Chac has nothing to do with K.

  

God L, The Old Black God

God L Dr. Schcllhas has designated "the Old Black God," from the circumstance that he is depicted as an old man with sunken face and toothless gums, the upper, or sometimes the lower, part of his features being covered with black paint. He is represented in the Dresden MS. only. Professor Cyrus Thomas, of New York, thinks that he is the god Ekchuah, who is traditionally described as black, but Schellhas fits this designation to god M. The more probable theory is that of Forstemann, who sees in L the god Votan, who is identical with the Aztec earth-god, Tepeyollotl. Both deities have similar face markings, and their dark hue is perhaps symbolical of the subterranean places where they were supposed to dwell.

  

God M, The Travellers' God

God M is a veritable black god, with reddish lips. On his head he bears a roped package resembling the loads carried by the Maya porter class, and he is found in violent opposition with F, the enemy of all who wander into the unknown wastes. A god of this description has been handed down by tradition under the name of Ekchuah, and his blackness is probably symbolical of the black or deeply bronzed skin of the porter class among the natives of Central America, who are constantly exposed to the sun. He would appear to be a parallel to the Aztec Yacatecutli, god of travelling merchants or chapmcn.

  

God N, The God of Unlucky Days

God N is identified by Schellhas with the demon Uayayab, who presided over the five unlucky days which it will be recollected came at the end of the Mexican and Maya year. He was known to the Maya as "He by whom the year is poisoned." After modelling his image in clay they carried it out of their villages, so that his baneful influence might not dwell therein.

  

Goddess O

Goddess O is represented as an old woman engaged in the avocation of spinning, and is probably a goddess of the domestic virtues, the tutelar of married females.

  

God P, The Frog,God

God P is shown with the body and fins of a frog on a blue background, evidently intended to represent water. Like all other frog-gods he is, of course, a deity of water, probably in its agricultural significance. We find him sowing seed and making furrows, and when we remember the important part played by frog deities in the agriculture of Anahuac we should have no difficulty in classing him with these. Seler asserts his identity with Kukulcan, but no reason except the circumstance of his being a rain-god can be advanced to establish the identity. He wears the year-sign on his head, probably with a seasonal reference.

  

Maya Architecture

It was in the wonderful architectural system which it developed without outside aid that the Maya people most individually expressed itself. As has been said, those buildings which still remain, and which have excited the admiration of generations of archxologists, are principally confined to examples of ecclesiastical and governmental architecture, the dwellings of the common people consisting merely of the flimsiest of wattle-and-daub structures, which would fall to pieces shortly after they were abandoned.

Buried in dense forests or mouldering on the sunexposed plains of Yucatan, Honduras, and Guatemala, the cities which boasted these edifices are for the most part situated away from modern trade routes, and are not a little difficult to come at. It is in Yucatan, the old home of the Cocomes and Tutul Xius, that the most perfect specimens of' Maya architecture are to be found, especially as regards its later development, and here, too, it may be witnessed in its decadent phase.

  

Methods of Building

The Maya buildings were almost always erected upon a mound or ku, either natural or artificial, generally the latter. In this we discover affinities with the Mexican teocalli type. Often these kus stood alone, without any superincumbent building save a small altar to prove their relation to the temple type of Anahuac. The typical Maya temple was built on a series of earth terraces arranged in exact parallel order, the buildings themselves forming the sides of a square. The mounds are generally concealed by plaster or faced with stone, the variety employed being usually a hard sandstone, of which the Maya had a good supply in the quarries of Chiapas and Honduras. Moderate in weight, the difficulty of transport was easily overcome, whilst large blocks could be readily quarried. It will thus be seen that the Maya had no substantial difficulties to surmount in connection with building the large edifices and temples they raised, except, perhaps, the lack of metal tools to shape and carve and quarry the stone which they used. And although they exhibit considerable ingenuity in such architectural methods as they employed, they were still surprisingly ignorant of some of the first essentials and principles of the art.

  

No Knowledge of the Arch

For example, they were totally ignorant of the principles upon which the arch is constructed. This difficulty they overcame by making each course of masonry overhang the one beneath it, after the method employed by a boy with a box of bricks, who finds that he can only make "doorways" by this means, or by the simple expedient-also employed by the Maya-of placing a slab horizontally upon two upright pillars. In consequence it will readily be seen that the superimposition of a second story upon such an insecure foundation was scarcely to be thought of, and that such support for the roof as towered above the doorway would necessarily require to be of the most substantial description. Indeed, this portion of the building often appears to be more than half the size of the rest of the edifice. This space gave the Maya builders a splendid chance for mural decoration, and it must be said they readily seized it and made the most of it, ornamental fagades being perhaps the most typical features in the relics of Maya architecture.

  

Pyramidal Structures

But the Maya possessed another type of building which permitted or their raising more than one story. This was the pyramidal type, or which many examples remain. The first story was built in the usual manner, and the second was raised by increasing the height of the mound at the back of the building until it was upon a level with the roof-another device well known to the boy with the box of bricks. In the centre of the space thus made another story could be erected, which was entered by a staircase outside the building. Hampered by their inability to build to any appreciable height, the Maya architects made up for the deficiency by constructing edifices of considerable length and breadth, the squat appearance of which is counterbalanced by the beautiful mural decoration of the sides and facade.

  

Definiteness of Design

He would be a merely superficial observer who would form the conclusion that these specimens of an architecture spontaneously evolved were put together without survey, design, or previous calculation. That as much thought entered into their construction as is lavished upon his work by a modern architect is proved by the manner in which the carved stones fit into one another. It would be absurd to suppose that these tremendous fgades bristling with scores of intricate designs could have been first placed in position and subsequently laden with the bas-reliefs they exhibit. It is plain that they were previously worked apart and separately from one entire design. Thus we see that the highest capabilities of the architect were essential in a measure to the erection of these imposing structures.

  

Architectural Districts

Although the mason-craft of the Maya peoples was essentially similar in all the regions populated by its various tribes and offshoots, there existed in the several localities occupied by them certain differences in construction and ornamentation which would almost justify us in dividing them into separate architectural spheres. In Chiapas, for example, we find the bas-relief predominant, whether in stone or stucco. In Honduras we find a stiffness of design which implies an older type of architecture, along with caryatides and memorial pillars of human shape. In Guatemala, again, we find traces of the employment of wood. As the civilisation of the Maya cannot be well comprehended without some knowledge of their architecture, and as that art was unquestionably their national forte and the thing which most sharply distinguished them from the semisavage peoples that surrounded them, it will be well to consider it for a space as regards its better-known individual examples.

  

Fascination of the Subject

He would indeed be dull of imagination and of spirit who could enter into the consideration of such a subject as this without experiencing some thrill from the mystery which surrounds it. Although familiarised with the study of the Maya antiquities by reason of many years of close acquaintance with it, the author cannot approach the theme without a feeling of the most intense awe. We are considering the memorials of a race isolated for countless thousands of years from the rest of humanity-a race which by itself evolved a civilisation in every respect capable of comparison with those of ancient Egypt or Assyria. In these impenetrable forests and sun-baked plains mighty works were raised which tell of a culture of a lofty type. We are aware that the people who reared them entered into religious and perhaps pliflosophical considerations their interpretations of which place them upon a level with the most enlightened races of antiquity; but we have only stepped upon the margin of Maya history. What dread secrets, what scenes of orgic splendour have those carven walls witnessed? What solemn priestly conclave, what magnificence of rite, what marvels of initiation, have these forest temples known? These things we shall never learn. They are hidden from us in a gloom as palpable as that of the tree-encircled depths in which we find these shattered works of a once powerful hierarchy.

  

Mysterious Palenque

One of the most famous of these ancient centres of priestly domination is Palenque, situated in the modern state of Chiapas. This city was first brought into notice by Don Jose Calderon in 1774, when he discovered no less than eighteen palaces, twenty great buildings, and a hundred and sixty houses, which proves that in his day the primeval forest had not made such inroads upon the remaining buildings as it has during the past few generations. There is good evidence besides this that Palenque was standing at the time of Cortes' conquest of Yucatan. And here it will be well at once to dispel any conception the reader may have formed concerning the vast antiquity of these cities and the structures they contain. The very oldest of them cannot be of a date anterior to the thirteenth century, and few Americanists of repute would admit such an antiquity for them. There may be remains of a fragmentary nature here and there in Central America which are relatively more ancient. But no temple or edifice which remains standing can claim a greater antiquity.

Palenque is built in the form of an amphitheatre, and nestles on the lowest slopes of the Cordilleras. Standing on the central pyramid, the eye is met by a ring of ruined palaces and temples raised upon artificial terraces. Of these the principal and most imposing is the Palace, a pile reared upon a single platform, forming an irregular quadrilateral, with a double gallery on the cast, north, and west sides, surrounding an inner structure with a similar gallery and two courtyards. It is evident that there was little system or plan observed in the construction of this edifice, an unusual circumstance in Maya architecture. The dwelling apartments were situated on the southern side of the structure, and here there is absolute confusion, for buildings of all sorts and sizes jostle each other, and are reared on different levels.

Our interest is perhaps at first excited by three subterrancous apartments down a flight of gloomy steps. Here are -to be found three great stone tables, the edges of which are fretted with sculptured symbols. That these were altars admits of little doubt, although some visitors have not hesitated to call them dining tables! These constitute only one of the many puzzles in this building of 228 feet frontage, with a depth of 180 feet, which at the same time is only about 25 feet high!

On the north side of the Palace pyramid the facade of the Palace has crumbled into complete ruin, but some evidences of an entrance are still noticeable. There were probably fourteen doorways in all in the frontage, with a width of about 9 feet each, the piers of which were covered with figures in bas-relief. The inside of the galleries is also covered at intervals with similar designs, or medallions, many of which are probably representations of priests or priestesses who once dwelt within the classic shades and practised strange rites in the worship of gods long since forgotten. One of these is of a woman with delicate features and high-bred countenance, and the frame or rim surrounding it is decorated in a manner recalling the Louis XV style.

The east gallery is 114 feet long, the north 185 feet, and the west 102 feet, so that, as remarked above, a lack of symmetry is apparent. The great court is reached by a Mayan arch which leads on to a staircase, on each side of which grotesque human figures of the Maya type are sculptured. Whom they are intended to portray or what rite they are engaged in it would indeed be difficult to say. That they are priests may be hazarded, for they appear to be dressed in the ecclesiastical maxtli (girdle), and ont seems to be decorated with the beads seen in the pictures of the death-god. Moreover, they are mitred.

The courtyard is exceedingly irregular in shape. To the south side is a small building which has assisted our knowledge of Maya mural decoration; especially valuable is the handsome frieze with which it is adorned, on which we observe the rather familiar feathered serpent (Kukulcan or Quetzalcoatl). Everywhere we notice the flat Maya head-a racial type, perhaps brought about by deformation of the cranium in youth. One of the most important parts of the Palace from an architectural point of view is the east front of the inner wing, which is perhaps the best preserved, and exhibits the most luxurious ornamentation. Two roofed galleries supported by six pillars covered with bas-reliefs are reached by a staircase on which hieroglyphic signs still remain. The reliefs in cement are still faintly to be discerned on the pillars, and must have been of- great beauty. They represent mythological characters in various attitudes. Above, seven enormous heads frown on the explorer in grim menace. The effect of the entire faqade is rich in the extreme, even in ruin, and from it we can obtain a faint idea of the splendours of this wonderful civilisation.

  

An Architectural Curiosity

One of the few towers to be seen among the ruins of Maya architecture stands at Palenque. It is square in shape and three stories in height, with sloping roof, and is not unlike the belfry of some little English village church.

The building we have been describing, although traditionally known as a "palace," was undoubtedly a great monastery or ecclesiastical habitation. Indeed, the entire city of Palenque was solely a priestly centre, a place of pilgrimage. The bas-reliefs with their representations of priests and acolytes prove this, as does the absence of warlike or monarchical subjects.

  

The Temple of Inscriptions

The Temple of Inscriptions, perched on an eminence some 40 feet high, is the largest edifice in Palenque. It has a facade 74 feet long by 25 feet deep, composed of a great gallery which runs along the entire front of the fane. The building has been named from the inscriptions with which certain flagstones in the central apartment are covered. Three other temples occupy a piece of rising ground close by. These are the Temple of the Sun, closely akin in type to many Japanese temple buildings; the Temple of the Cross, in which a wonderful altar-piece was discovered; and the Temple of the Cross No. II. In the Temple of the Cross the inscribed altar gave its name to the building. In the central slab is a cross of the American pattern, its roots springing from the hideous head of the goddess Chicomecohuatl, the Earth-mother, or her Maya equivalent. Its branches stretch to where on the right and left stand two figures, evidently those of a priest and acolyte, performing some mysterious rite. On the apex of the tree is placed the sacred turkey, or "Emerald Fowl," to which offerings of maize paste are made. The whole is surrounded by inscriptions.

  

Ake and Itzamal

Thirty miles east of Merida lies Ake, the colossal and primeval ruins of which speak of early Maya occupation. Here are pyramids, tennis-courts, and gigantic pillars which once supported immense gallerics, all in a state of advanced ruin. Chief among these is the great pyramid and gallery, a mighty staircase rising toward lofty pillars, and somewhat reminiscent of Stonehenge. For what purpose it was constructed is quite unknown.

  

The House of Darkness

One ruin, tradition calls "The House of Darkness." Here no light enters save that which filters in by the open doorway. The vaulted roof is lost in a lofty gloom. So truly have the huge blocks of which the building is composed been laid that not even a needle could be inserted between them. The whole is coated with a hard plaster or cement

  

The Palace of Owls

The Knuc (Palace of Owls), where a beautiful frieze of diamond-shaped stones intermingling with spheres may be observed, is noteworthy. All here is undoubtedly of the first Yucatec era, the time when the Maya first overran the country.

At Itzamal the chief object of interest is the great pyramid of Kinich-Kakmo (The Sun's Face with Fiery Rays), the base of which covers an area of nearly 650 square feet. To this shrine thousands were wont to come in times of panic or famine, and from the summit, where was housed the glittering idol, the smoke of sacrifice ascended to the cloudless sky, whilst a multitude of white-robed priests and augurs chanted and prophesied. To the south of this mighty pile stand the ruins of the Ppapp-Hol-Chac (The House of Heads and Lightnings), the abode of the chief priest.

  

Itzamna's Fane

At Itzamal, too, stood one of the chief temples of the great god Itzamna, the legendary founder of the Maya mpire. Standing on a lofty pyramid, four roads radiated from it, leading to Tabasco, Guatemala, and Chiapas; and here they brought the halt, the maimed, and the blind, aye, even the dead, for succour and resurrection, such faith had they in the mighty power of Kab-ul (The Miraculous Hand), as they designated the deity. The fourth road ran to the sacred isle of Cozumel, where first the men of Spain found the Maya cross, and supposed it to prove that St. Thomas had discovered the American continent in early times, and had converted the natives to a Christianity which had become debased.

  

Bearded Gods

To the west arose another pyramid, on the summit of which was built the palace of Hunpictok (The Commander-in-chief of Eight Thousand Flints), in allusion, probably, to the god of lightning, Hurakan, whose gigantic face, once dominating the basement wall, has now disappeared. This face possessed huge mustachios, appendages unknown to the Maya race; and, indeed, we arc struck with the frequency with which Mexican and Mayan gods and heroes are adorned with beards and other hirsute ornaments both on the monuments and in the manuscripts. Was the original governing class a bearded race? It is scarcely probable. Whence, then, the ever-recurring beard and moustache? These may have been developed in the priestly class by constant ceremonial shaving, which often produces a thin beard in the Mongolians-as witness the modern Japanese, who in imitating a custom of the West often succeed in producing quite respectable beards.

  

A Colossal Head

Not far away is to be found a gigantic head, probably that of the god Itzamna. It is 13 feet in height, and the features were formed by first roughly tracing them in rubble, and afterwards coating the whole with plaster. The figure is surrounded by spirals, symbols of wind or speech. On the opposite side of the pyramid alluded to above is found a wonderful bas-relief representing a tiger couchant, with a human head of the Maya type, probably depicting one of the early ancestors of the Maya, Balam-Quitze (Tiger with the Sweet Smile), of whom we read in the Popol Vuh.

  

Chichen-Itza

At Chichen-Itza, in Yucatan, the chief wonder is the gigantic pyramid-temple known as El Castillo. It is reached by a steep flight of steps, and from it the vast ruins of Chichen radiate in a circular manner. To the east is the market-place, to the north a mighty temple, and a tennis-court, perhaps the best example of its kind in Yucatan, whilst to the west stand the Nunnery and the Chichan-Chob, or prison. Concerning Chichen-Itza Cogolludo tells the following story: "A king of Chichen called Canek fell desperately in love with a young princess, who, whether she did not return his affection or whether she was compelled to obey a parental mandate, married a more powerful Yucatec cacique. The discarded lover, unable to bear his loss, and moved by love and despair, armed his dependents and suddenly fell upon his successful rival. Then the gaiety of the feast was exchanged for the din of war, and amidst the confusion the Chichen prince disappeared, carrying off the beautiful bride. But conscious that his power was less than his rival's, and fearing his vengeance, he fled the country with most of his vassals." It is a historical fact that the inhabitants of Chichen abandoned their city, but whether for the reason given in this story or not cannot be discovered.

  

The Nunnery

The Nunnery at Chichen is a building of great beauty of outline and decoration, the frieze above the doorway and the fretted ornamentation of the upper story exciting the admiration of most writers on the subject. Here dwelt the sacred women, the chief of whom, like their male prototypes, were dedicated to Kukulcan and regarded with much reverence. The base of the building is occupied by eight large figures, and over the door is the representation of a priest with a panache, whilst a row of gigantic heads crowns the north facade. Here, too, are figures of the wind-god, with projecting lips, which many generations of antiquarians took for heads of elephants with waving trunks! The entire building is one of the gems of Central American architecture, and delights the eye of archaeologist and artist alike. In El Castillo are found wonderful bas-reliefs depicting bearded men, evidently the priests of Quetzalcoatl, himself bearded, and to the practised eye one of these would appear to be wearing a false hirsute appendage, as kings were wont to do in ancient Egypt. Were these beards artificial and symbolical?

  

The "Writing in the Dark"

The Akab-sib (Writing in the Dark) is a bas-relief found on the lintel of an inner door at the extremity of the building. It represents a figure seated before a vase, with outstretched forefinger, and whence it got its traditional appellation it would be hard to say, unless the person represented is supposed to be in the act of writing. The figure is surrounded by inscriptions. At Chichen were found a statue of TIaloc, the god of rain or moisture, and immense torsos representing Kukulcan. There also was a terrible well into which men were cast in time of drought as a propitiation to the rain-god.

  

Kabah

At Kabah there is a marvellous frontage which strikingly recalls that of a North American Indian totem-house in its fantastic wealth of detail. The ruins are scattered over a large area, and must all have been at one time painted in brilliant colours. Here two horses' heads in stone were unearthed, showing that the natives had copied faithfully the steeds of the conquering Spaniards. Nothing is known of the history of Kabah, but its neighbour, Uxmal, fifteen miles distant, is much more famous.

  

Uxmal

The imposing pile of the Casa del Gobernador (Governor's Palace, so called) at Uxmal is perhaps the best known and described of all the aboriginal buildings of Central America. It occupies three successive colossal terraces, and its frieze runs in a line of 325 feet, and is divided into panels, each of which frames a gigantic head of priest or deity. The striking thing concerning this edifice is that although it has been abandoned for over three hundred years it is still almost as fresh architecturally as when it left the builder's hands. Here and there a lintel has fallen, or stones have been removed in a spirit of vandalism to assist in the erection of a neighbouring hacienda, but on the whole we possess in it the most unspoiled piece of Yucatec building in existence. On the side of the palace where stands the main entrance, directly over the gateway, is the most wonderful fretwork and ornamentation, carried out in high relief, above which soar three eagles in hewn stone, surmounted by a plumed human head. In the plinth are three heads, which in type recall the Roman, surrounded by inscriptions. A clear proof of the comparative lateness of the period in which Uxmal was built is found in the circumstance that all the lintels over the doorways are of wood, of which much still exists in a good state of preservation. Many of the joists of the roofs were also of timber, and were fitted into the stonework by means of specially carved ends.

  

The Dwarf's House

There is also a nunnery which forcibly recalls that at Chichen, and is quite as elaborate and flamboyant in its architectural design. But the real mystery at Uxmal is the Casa del Adivino (The Prophet's House), also locally known as "The Dwarf's House." It consists of two portions, one of which is on the summit of an artificial pyramid, whilst the other, a small but beautifully finished chapel, is situated lower down facing the town. The loftier building is reached by an exceedingly steep staircase, and bears every evidence of having been used as a sanctuary, for here were discovered cacao and copal, recently burnt, by Cogolludo as late as 1656, which is good evidence that the Yucatecs did not all at once abandon their ancient faith at the promptings of the Spanish fathers.

  

The Legend of the Dwarf

In his Travels in Yucatan Stephens has a legend relating to this house which may well be given in his own words: "An old woman," he says, "lived alone in her hut, rarely leaving her chimney-corner. She was much distressed at having no children, and in her grief one day took an egg, wrapped it up carefully in cotton cloth, and put it in a corner of her hut. She looked every day in great anxiety, but no change in the egg was observable. One morning, however, she found the shell broken, and a lovely tiny creature was stretching out its arms to her. The old woman was in raptures. She took it to her heart, gave it a nurse, and was so careful of it that at the end of a year the baby walked and talked as well as a grown-up man. But he stopped growing. The good old woman in her joy and delight exclaimed that the baby should be a great chief. One day she told him to go to the kin 's palace and engage him in a trial of strength. The dwarf begged hard not to be sent on such an enterprise. But the old woman insisted on his going, and he was obliged to obey. When ushered into the presence of the sovereign he thrcw down his gauntlet. The latter smiled, and asked him to lift a stone of three arobes (75 lb.). The child returned crying to his mother, who sent him back, saying, 'If the king can lift the stone, you can lift it too.' The king did take it up, but so did the dwarf. His strength was tried in many other ways, but all the king did was as easily done by the dwarf. Wroth at being outdone by so puny a creature, the prince told the dwarf that unless he built a palace loftier than any in the city he should die. The affrighted dwarf returned to the old woman, who bade him not to despair, and the next morning they both awoke in the palace which is still standing. The king saw the palace with amazement. He instantly sent for the dwarf, and desired him to collect two bundles of cogoiol (a kind of hard wood), with one of which he would strike the dwarf on the head) and consent to be struck in return by his tiny adversary. The latter again returned to his mother moaning and lamenting. But the old woman cheered him up, and, placing a tortilla on his head, sent him back to the king. The trial took place in the presence of all the state grandees. The king broke the whole of his bundle on the dwarf's head without hurting him in the least, seeing which he wished to save his own head from the impending ordeal; but his word had been passed before his assembled court, and he could not well refuse. The dwarf struck, and at the second blow the king's skull was broken to pieces. The spectators immediately proclaimed the victorious dwarf their sovereign. After this the old woman disappeared. But in the village of Mani, fifty miles distant, is a deep well leading to a subtcrraneous passage which extends as far as Merida. In this passage is an old woman sitting on the bank of a river shaded by a great tree, having a serpent by her side. She sells water in small quantities, accepting no money, for she must have human beings, innocent babies, which are devoured by the serpent. This old woman is the dwarf's mother."

The interpretation of this myth is by no means difficult. The old woman is undoubtedly the rain-Goddess, the dwarf the Man of the Sun who emerges from the cosmic egg. In Yucatan dwarfs were sacred to the sun-god, and were occasionally sacrificed to him, for reasons which appear obscure.

  

The Mound of Sacrifice

Another building at Uxmal the associations of which render it of more than passing interest is the Pyramid of Sacrifice, an edifice built on the plan of the Mexican teocalli. Indeed, it is probably of Aztec origin, and may even have been erected by the mercenaries who during the fifteenth century swarmed from Mexico into Yucatan and Guatemala to take service with the rival chieftains who carried on civil war in those states. Beside this is another mound which was crowned by a very beautiful temple, now in an advanced state of ruin. The "Pigeon House" is an ornate pile with pinnacles pierced by large openings which probably served as dovecotes. The entire architecture of Uxmal displays a type more primitive than that met elsewhere in Yucatan. There is documentary evidence to prove that so late as 1673 the Indians still worshipped in the ruins of Uxmal, where they burnt copal, and performed "other detestable sacrifices." So that even a hundred and fifty years of Spanish rule had not sufficed to wean the natives from the worship of the older gods to whom their fathers had for generations bowed down. This would also seem conclusive evidence that the ruins of Uxmal at least were the work of the existing race.

  

The Phantom City

In his Travels in Central America Stephens recounts a fascinating story told him by a priest of Santa Cruz del Quiche, to the effect that four days' journey from that place a great Indian city was to be seen, densely populated, and preserving the ancient civilisation of the natives. He had, indeed, beheld it from the summit of a cliff, shining in glorious whiteness many leagues away. This was perhaps Lorillard City, discovered by Suarez, and afterwards by Charnay. In general type Lorillard closely resembles Palenque. Here was found a wonderfully executed stone idol, which Charnay thought represented a different racial type from that seen in the other Central American cities. The chief finds of interest in this ancient city were the intricate bas-reliefs, one over the central door of a temple, probably a symbolic representation of Quetzalcoatl, who holds the rain-cross, in both hands, and is seen vis-a-vis with an acolyte, also holding the symbol, though it is possible that the individual represented may have been the high-priest of Quetzalcoatl or Kukulcan. Another bas-relief represents a priest sacrificing to Kukulcan by passing a rope of maguey fibre over his tongue for the purpose of drawing blood -an instance of the substitution in sacrifice of the part for the whole.

  

The Horse-God

At Peten-Itza, Cortes left his horse, which had fallen sick, to the care of the Indians. The animal died under their mismanagement and because of the food offered it, and the terrified natives, fancying it a divine being, raised an image of it, and called it Izimin Chac (Thunder and Lightning), because they had seen its rider discharge a firearm, and they imagined that the flash and the report had proceeded from the creature. The sight of the idol aroused such wrath in the zealous bosom of a certain Spanish monk that he broke it with a huge stone-and, but for the interference of the cacique, would have suffered death for his temerity. Peten was a city "filled with idols," as was Tayasal, close at hand, where in the seventeenth century no less than nine new temples were built, which goes to prove that the native religion was by no means extinct. One of these new temples, according to Villagutierre, had a Spanish balcony of hewn stone! In the Temple of the Sun at Tikal, an adjoining city, is a wonderful altar panel, representing in unknown deity, and here also are many of those marvellously carved idols of which Stephens gives such capital illustrations in his fascinating book.

  

Copan

Copan, one of the most interesting of these wondrous city-centres, the name of which has, indeed, become almost a household word, is in the same district as the towns just described, and abounds chiefly in monolithic images. It yielded after a desperate struggle to Hernandez de Chaves, one of Alvarado's lieutenants, in 1530. The monolithic images so abundantly represented here are evolved from the stelx and the bas relief, and are not statues in the proper sense of the term, as they are not completely cut away from the stone background out of which they were carved. An altar found at Copan exhibits real skill in sculpture, the head-dresses, ornaments, and expressions of the eight figures carved on its sides being elaborate in the extreme and exceedingly lifelike. Here again we notice a fresh racial type, which goes to prove that one race alone cannot have been responsible for these marvellous ruined cities and all that they contain and signify. We have to imagine a shifting of races and a fluctuation of peoples in Central America such as we know took place in Europe and Asia before we can rightly understand the ethnological problems of the civilised sphere of the New World, and any theory which does not take due account of such conditions is doomed to failure.

  

Mitla

We now come to the last of these stupendous remnants of a vanished civilisation-Mitla, by no means the least of the works of civilised man in Central America. At the period of the conquest the city occupied a wide area, but at the present time only six palaces and three ruined pyramids are left standing. The great palace is a vast edifice in the shape of the letter T, and measures 130 feet in its greater dimension, with an apartment of a like size. Six monolithic columns which supported the roof still stand in gigantic isolation, but the roof itself has long fallen in. A dark passage leads to the inner court, and the walls of this are covered with mosaic work in panels which recalls somewhat the pattern known as the "Greek fret." The lintels over the doorways are of huge blocks of stone nearly eighteen feet long. Of this building Viollet-le-Duc says: "The monuments of Greece and Rome in their best time can alone compare with the splendour of this great edifice."

  

A Place of Sepulture

The ruins at Mitla bear no resemblance to those of Mexico or Yucatan, either as regards architecture or ornamentation, for whereas the Yucatec buildings possess overlapping walls, the palaces of Mitla consist of perpendicular walls intended to support flat roofs. Of these structures the second and fourth palaces alone are in such a state of preservation as to permit of general description. The second palace shows by its sculptured lintel and two inner columns that the same arrangement was observed in its construction as in the great palacejust described. The fourth palace has on its southern faqade oblong panels and interesting caryatides or pillars in the shape of human figures. These palaces consisted of four upper apartments, finely sculptured, and a like number of rooms on the lower story, which was occupied by the high-priest, and to which the king came to mourn on the demise of a relative. Here, too, the priests were entombed, and in an adjoining room the idols were kept. Into a huge underground chamber the bodies of eminent warriors and sacrificial victims were cast. Attempts have been made to identify Mitla with Mictlan, the Mexican Hades, and there is every reason to suppose that the identification is correct. It must be borne in mind that Mictlan was as much a place of the dead as a place of punishment, as was the Greek Hades, and therefore might reasonably, signify a place of sepulture, such as Mitla undoubtedly was. The following passages from the old historians of Mitla, Torquemada and Burgoa, throw much light on this aspect of the city, and besides are full of the most intense interest and curious information, so that they may be given in extenso. But before passing on to them we should for a moment glance at Seler's suggestion that the American race imagined that their ancestors had originally issued from the underworld through certain caverns into the light of day, and that this was the reason why Mitla was not only a burial-place but a sanctuary.

  

An Old Description of Mitla

Of Mitla Father Torquemada writes:

"When some monks of my order, the Franciscan, passed, preaching and shriving, through the province of Zapoteca, whose capital city is Tehuantepec, they came to a village which was called Mictlan, that is, Underworld [Hell]. Besides mentioning the large number of people in the village they told of buildings which were prouder and more magnificent than any which they had hitherto seen in New Spain. Among them was a temple of the evil spirit and living-rooms for his demoniacal servants, and among other fine things there was a hall with ornamented panels, which were constructed of stone in a variety of arabesques and other very remarkable designs. There were doorways there, each one of which was built of but three stones, two upright at the sides and one across them, in such a manner that, although these doorways were very high and broad, the stones sufficed for their entire construction. They were so thick and broad that we were assured there were few like them. There was another hall in these buildings, or rectangular temples, which was erected entirely on round stone pillars, very high and very thick, so thick that two grown men could scarcely encircle them with their arms, nor could one of them reach the finger-tips of the other. These pillars were all in one piece, and, it was said, the whole shaft of a pillar measured 5 ells from top to bottom, and they were very much like those of the Church of Santa Maria Maggiore in Rome, very skilfully made and polished."

Father Burgoa gives a more exact description. He says:

"The Palace of the Living and of the Dead was built for the use of this person [the high-priest of the Zapotecs]. . . . They built this magnificent house or pantheon in the shape of a rectangle, with portions rising above the earth and portions built down into the earth, the latter in the hole or cavity which was found below the surface of the earth, and ingeniously made the chambers of equal size by the manner of joining them, leaving a spacious court in the middle; and in order to secure four equal chambers they accomplished what barbarian heathen (as they were) could only achieve by the powers and skill of an architect. It is not known in what stone-pit they quarried the pillars, which are so thick that two men can scarcely encircle them with their arms. These are, to be sure, mere shafts without capital or pedestal, but they are wonderfully regular and smooth, and they are about 5 ells high and in one piece. These served to support the roof, which consists of stone slabs instead of beams. The slabs are about 2 ells long, 1 ell broad, and half an ell thick, extending from pillar to pillar. The pillars stand in a row, one behind the other, in order to receive the weight. The stone slabs are so regular and so exactly fitted that, without any mortar or cement, at the joints they resemble mortised beams. The four rooms, which are very spacious, are arranged in exactly the same way and covered with the same kind of roofing. But in the construction of the walls the greatest architects of the earth have been surpassed, as I have not found this kind of architecture described either among the Egyptians or among the Greeks, for they begin at the base with a narrow outline and, as the structure rises in height, spread out in wide copings at the top, so that the upper part exceeds the base in breadth and looks as if it would fall over. The inner side of the walls consists of a mortar or stucco of such hardness that no one knows with what kind of liquid it could have been mixed. The outside is of such extraordinary workmanship that on a masonry wall about an ell in height there are placed stone slabs with a projecting edge, which form the support for an endless number of small white stones, the smallest of which are a sixth of an ell long, half as broad, and a quarter as thick, and which are as smooth and regular as if they had all come from one mould. They had so many of these stones that, setting them in, one beside the other, they formed with them a large number of different beautiful geometric designs, each an ell broad and running the whole length of the wall, each varying in pattern up to the crowning piece, which was the finest of all. And what has always seemed inexplicable to the greatest architects is the adjustment of these little stones without a single handful of mortar, and the fact that without tools, with nothing but hard stones and sand, they could achieve such solid work that, though the whole structure is very old and no one knows who made it, it has been preserved until the present day.

  

Human Sacrifice at Mitla

"I carefully examined these monuments some thirty years ago in the chambers above ground, which are constructed of the same size and in the same way as those below ground, and, though single pieces were in ruins because some stones had become loosened, there was still much to admire. The doorways were very large, the sides of each being of single stones of the same thickness as the wall, and the lintel was made out of another stone which held the two lower ones together at the top. There were four chambers above ground and four below. The latter were arranged according to their purpose in such a way that one front chamber served as chapel and sanctuary for the idols) which were placed on a great stone which served as an altar. And for the more important feasts which they celebrated with sacrifices, or at the burial of a king or great lord, the high-priest instructed the lesser priests or the subordinate temple officials who served him to prepare the chapel and his vestments and a large quantity of the incense used by them. And then he descended with a great retinue, while none of the common people saw him or dared to look in his face, convinced that if they did so they would fall dead to the earth as a punishment for their boldness. And when he entered the chapel they put on him a long white cotton garment made like an alb, and over that a garment shaped like a dalmatic, which was embroidered with pictures of wild beasts and birds; and they put a cap on his head, and on his feet a kind of shoe woven of many coloured feathers. And when he had put on these garments he walked with solemn mien and measured step to the altar, bowed low before the idols, renewed the incense, and then in quite unintelligible murmurs he began to converse with these images, these depositories of infernal spirits, and continued in this sort of prayer with hideous grimaces and writhings, uttering inarticulate sounds, which filled all present with fear and terror, till he came out of that diabolical trance and told those standing around the lies and fabrications which the spirit had imparted to him or which he had invented himself. When human beings were sacrificed the ceremonies were multiplied, and the assistants of the high-priest stretched the victim out upon a large stone, baring his breast, which they tore open with a great stone knife, while the body writhed in fearful convulsions, and they laid the heart bare, ripping it out, and with it the soul, which the devil took, while they carried the heart to the high-priest that he might offer it to the idols by holding it to their mouths, among other ceremonies; and the body was thrown into the burial-place of their 'blessed,' as they called them. And if after the sacrifice he felt inclined to detain those who begged any favour he sent them word by the subordinate priests not to leave their houses till their gods were appeased, and he commanded them to do penance meanwhile, to fast and to speak with no woman, so that, until this father of sin had interceded for the absolution of the penitents and had declared the gods appeased, they did not dare to cross their thresholds.

"The second (underground) chamber was the burial-place of these high-priests, the third that of the kings of Theozapotlan, whom they brought hither rich y dressed in their best attire, feathers, jewels, golden necklaces, and precious stones, placing a shield in the left hand and a javelin in the right, just as they used them in war. And at their burial rites great mourning prevailed; the instruments which were played made mournful sounds; and with loud wailing and continuous sobbing they chanted the life and exploits of their lord until they laid him on the structure which they had prepared or this purpose.

  

Living Sacrifices

"The last (underground) chamber had a second door at the rear, which led to a dark and gruesome room. This was closed with a stone slab, which occupied the whole entrance. Through this door they, threw the bodies of the victims and of the great lords and chieftains who had fallen in battle, and they brought them from the spot where they fell, even when it was very far off, to this burial-place; and so great was the barbarous infatuation of those Indians that, in the belief of the happy life which awaited them, many who were oppressed by diseases or hardships begged this infamous priest to accept them as living sacrifices and allow them to enter through that portal and roam about in the dark interior of the mountain, to seek the feasting-places of their forefathers. And when any one obtained this favour the servants of the high-priest led him thither with special ceremonies, and after they allowed him to enter through the small door they rolled the stone before it again and took leave of him, and the unhappy man, wandering in that abyss of darkness, died of hunger and thirst, beginning already in life the pain of his damnation, and on account of this horrible abyss they called this village Liyobaa.

  

The Cavern of Death

"When later there fell upon these people the light of the Gospel, its servants took much trouble to instruct them, and to find out whether this error, common to all these nations, still prevailed; and they learned from the stories which had been handed down that all were convinced that this damp cavern extended more than thirty leagues underground, and that its roof was supported by pillars. And there were people, zealous prelates anxious for knowledge, who, in order to convince these ignorant people of their error, went into this cave accompanied by a large number of people bearing lighted torches and firebrands, and descended several large steps. And they soon came upon many great buttresses which formed a kind of street. They had prudently brought a quantity of rope with them to use as guiding-lines, that they might not lose themselves in this confusing labyrinth. And the putrefaction and the bad odour and the dampness of the earth were very great, and there was also a cold wind which blew out their torches. And after they had gone a short distance, fearing to be overpowered by the stench, or to step on poisonous reptiles, of which some had been seen, they resolved to go out again, and to completely wall up this back door of hell. The four buildings above ground were the only ones which still remained open, and they had a court and chambers like those underground; and the ruins of these have lasted even to the present day.

  

Palace of the High-Priest

"One of the rooms above ground was the palace of the high-priest, where he sat and slept, for the apartment offered room and opportunity for everything. The throne was like a high cushion, with a high back to lean ainst, all of tiger-skin, stuffed entirely with delicate afeathers, or with fine grass which was used for this purpose. The other seats were smaller, even when the king came to visit him. The authority of this devilish priest was so great that there was no one who dared to cross the court, and to avoid this the other three chambers had doors in the rear, through which even the kings entered. For this purpose they had alleys and passage-ways on the outside above and below, by which people could enter and go out when they came to see the high-priest. . . .

"The second chamber above ground was that of the priests and the assistants of the high-priest. The third was that of the king when he came. The fourth was that of the other chieftains and captains, and though the space was small for so great a number, and for so many different families, yet they accommodated themselves to each other out of respect for the place, and avoided dissensions and factions. Furthermore, there was no other administration of justice in this place than that of the high-priest, to whose unlimited power all bowed.

  

Furniture of the Temples

"All the rooms were clean, and well furnished with mats. It was not the custom to sleep on bedsteads, however great a lord might be. They used very tastefully braided mats, which were spread on the floor, and soft skins of animals and delicate fabrics for coverings. Their food consisted usually of animals killed in the hunt-deer, rabbits, armadillos, &c, and also birds, which they killed with snares or arrows. The bread, made of their maize, was white and well kneaded. Their drinks were always cold, made of ground chocolate, which was mixed with water and pounded maize. Other drinks were made of pulpy and of crushed fruits, which were then mixed with the intoxicating drink prepared from the agave; for since the common people were forbidden the use of intoxicating drinks, there was always an abundance of these on hand."

     
The Myths of Mexico and Peru, by Lewis Spence, [1913], at sacred-texts.com

  

CHAPTER V: Myths of the Maya

  

Mythology of the Maya

OUR knowledge of the mythology of the Maya is by no means so full and comprehensive as in the case of Mexican mythology. Traditions are few and obscure, and the hieroglyphic matter is closed to us. But one great mine of Maya-Kiche mythology exists which furnishes us with much information regarding Kiche cosmogony and pseudo-history, with here and there an interesting allusion to the various deities of the Kiche pantheon. This is the Popol Vuh, a volume in which a little real history is mingled with much mythology. It was composed in the form in which we now possess it by a Christianised native of Guatemala in the seventeenth century, and copied in Kiche, in which it was originally written, by one Francisco Ximenes, a monk, who also added to it a Spanish translation.

  

The Lost "Popol Vuh"

For generations antiquarians interested in this wonderful compilation were aware that it existed somewhere in Guatemala, and many were the regrets expressed regarding their inability to unearth it. A certain Don Felix Cabrera had made use of it early in the nineteenth century, but the whereabouts of the copy he had seen could not be discovered. A Dr. C. Scherzer, of Austria, resolved, if possible, to discover it, and paid a visit to Guatemala in 1854 for that purpose. After a diligent search he succeeded in finding the lost manuscript in the University of San Carlos in the city of Guatemala. Ximenes, the copyist, had placed it in the library of the convent of Chichicastenango. whence it passed to the San Carlos library in 1830

  

Genuine Character of the Work

Much doubt has been cast upon the genuine character of the Popol Vuh, principally by persons who were almost if not entirely ignorant of the problems of preColumbian history in America. Its genuine character, however, is by no means difficult to prove. It has been stated that it is a mere rechauffe of the known facts of Maya history coloured by Biblical knowledge, a native version of the Christian Bible. But such a theory will not stand when it is shown that the matter it contains squares with the accepted facts of Mexican mythology, upon which the Popol Vuh throws considerable light. Moreover, the entire work bears the stamp of being a purely native compilation, and has a flavour of great antiquity. Our knowledge of the general principles of mythology, too, prepares us for the unqualified acceptance of the material of the Popol Vuh, or we find there the stories and tales, the conceptions and ideas connected with early religion which are the property of no one people, but of all peoples and races in an early social state.

  

Likeness to other Pseudo-Histories

We find in this interesting book a likeness to many other works of early times. The Popol Vuh is, indeed, of the same genre and class as the Heimskringla of Snorre, the history of Saxo Grammaticus, the Chinese history in the Five Books, the Japanese Nihongi, and many other similar compilations. But it surpasses all these in pure interest because it is the only native American work that has come down to us from pre-Columbian times.

The name "Popol Vuh " means "The Collection of Written Leaves," which proves that the book must have contained traditional matter reduced to writing at a very early period. It is, indeed, a compilation of mythological character, interspersed with pseudo-history, which, as the account reaches modern times, shades off into pure history and tells the deeds of authentic personages. The Ianguage in which it was written, the Kiche, was a dialect of the Maya-Kiche tongue spoken at the time of the conquest in Guatemala, Honduras, and San Salvador, and still the tongue of the native populations in these districts.

  

The Creation Story

The beginning of this interesting book is taken up with the Kiche story of the creation, and what occurred directly subsequent to that event. We are told that the god Hurakan, the mighty wind, a deity in whom we can discern a Kiche equivalent to Tezcatlipoca, passed over the universe, still wrapped in gloom. He called out "Earth", and the solid land appeared. Then the chief gods took counsel among themselves as to what should next be made. These were Hurakan, Gucumatz or Quetzalcoatl, and Xpiyacoc and Xmucane, the mother and father gods. They agreed that animals should be created. This was accomplished, and they next turned their attention to the framing of man. They made a number of mannikins carved out of wood. But these were irreverent and angered the gods, who resolved to bring about their downfall. Then Hurakan (The Heart of Heaven) caused the waters to be swollen, and a mighty flood came upon the mannikins. Also a thick resinous rain descended upon them. The bird Xecotcovach tore out their eyes, the bird Camulatz cut off their heads, the bird Cotzbalarn devoured their flesh, the bird Tecumbalam broke their bones and sinews and ground them into powder. Then all sorts of beings, great and small, abused the mannikins. The household utensils and domestic animals jeered at them, and made game of them in their plight. The dogs and hens said: "Very badly have you treated us and you have bitten us. Now we bite you in turn." The millstones said: "Very much were we tormented by you, and daily, daily, night and day, it was squeak, screech, screech, holi, holi, huqi, huqi, for your sake. Now you shall feel our strength, and we shall grind your flesh and make meal of your bodies. " And the dogs growled at the unhappy images because they had not been fed, and tore them with their teeth. The cups and platters said: "Pain and misery you gave us, smoking our tops and sides, cooking us over the fire, burning and hurting us as if we had no feeling. Now it is your turn, and you shall burn." The unfortunate mannikins ran hither and thither in their despair. They mounted upon the roofs of the houses, but the houses crumbled beneath their feet; they tried to climb to the tops of the trees, but the trees hurled them down; they were even repulsed by the caves, which closed before them. Thus this ill-starred race was finally destroyed and overthrown, and the only vestiges of them which remain are certain of their progeny, the little monkeys which dwell in the woods.

  

Vukub-Cakix, the Great Macaw

Ere the earth was quite recovered from the wrathful flood which had descended upon it there lived a being orgulous and full of pride, called Vukub-Cakix (Seventimes-the-colour-of-fire-the Kiche name for the great macaw bird). His teeth were of emerald, and other parts of him shone with the brilliance of gold and silver. In short, it is evident that he was a sun-and-moon god of prehistoric times. He boasted dreadfully, and his conduct so irritated the other gods that they resolved upon his destruction. His two sons, Zipacna and Cabrakan (Cockspur or Earth-heaper, and Earthquake), were earthquake-gods of the type of the Jotuns of Scandinavian myth or the Titans of Greek legend. These also were prideful and arrogant, and to cause their downfall the gods despatched the heavenly twins Hun-Apu and Xbalanque to earth, with instructions to chastise the trio.

Vukub-Cakix prided himself upon his possession of the wonderful nanze-tree, the tapal, bearing a fruit round, yellow, and aromatic, upon which he breakfasted every morning. One morning he mounted to its summit, whence he could best espy the choicest fruits, when he was surprised and infuriated to observe that two strangers had arrived there before him, and had almost denuded the tree of its produce. On seeing Vukub, Hun-Apu raised a blow-pipe to his mouth and blew a dart at the giant. It struck him on the mouth, and he fell from the top of the tree to the ground. Hun-Apu leapt down upon Vukub and grappled with him, but the giant in terrible anger seized the god by the arm and wrenched it from the body. He then returned to his house, where he was met by his wife, Chimalmat, who inquired for what reason he roared with pain. In reply he pointed to his mouth, and so full of anger was he against Hun-Apu that he took the arm he had wrenched from him and hung it over a blazing fire. He then threw himself down to bemoan his injuries, consoling himself, however, with the idea that he had avenged himself upon the disturbers of his peace.

Whilst Vukub-Cakix moaned and howled with the dreadful pain which he felt in his jaw and teeth (for the dart which had pierced him was probably poisoned) the arm of Hun-Apu hung over the fire, and was turned round and round and basted by Vukub's spouse, Chimalmat. The sun-god rained bitter imprecations upon the interlopers who had penetrated to his paradise and had caused him such woe, and he gave vent to dire threats of what would happen if he succeeded in getting them into his power.

But Hun-Apu and Xbalanque were not minded that Vukub-Cakix should escape so easily, and the recovery of Hun-Apu's arm must be made at all hazards. So they went to consult two great and wise magicians, Xpiyacoc and Xmucane, in whom we see two of the original Kiche creative deities, who advised them to proceed with them in disguise to the dwelling of Vukub, if they wished to recover the lost arm. The old magicians resolved to disguise themselves as doctors, and dressed Hun-Apu and Xbalanque in other garments to represent their sons.

Shortly they arrived at the mansion of Vukub, and while still some way off they could hear his groans and cries. Presenting themselves at the door, they accosted him. They told him that they had heard some one crying out in pain, and that as famous doctors they considered it their duty to ask who was suffering.

Vukub appeared quite satisfied, but closely questioned the old wizards concerning the two young men who accompanied them.

"They are our sons," they replied.

"Good," said Vukub. " Do you think you will be able to cure me?"

"We have no doubt whatever upon that head."

answered Xpiyacoc. "You have sustained very bad injuries to your mouth and eyes."

"The demons who shot me with an arrow from their, blow-pipe are the cause of my sufferings," said Vukub. "If you are able to cure me I shall reward you richly."

"Your Highness has many bad teeth, which must be removed," said the wily old magician. "Also the balls of your eyes appear to me to be diseased."

Vukub appeared highly alarmed, but the magicians speedily reassured him.

"It is necessary," said Xpiyacoc, "that we remove your teeth, but we will take care to replace them with grains of maize, which you will find much more agreeable in every way."

The unsuspicious giant agreed to the operation, and very quickly Xpiyacoc, with the help of Xmucane, removed his teeth of emerald, and replaced them by grains of white maize. A change quickly came over the Titan. His brilliancy speedily vanished, and when they removed the balls of his eyes he sank into insensibility and died.

All this time the wife of Vukub was turning Hun-Apu's arm over the fire, but Hun-Apu snatched the limb from above the brazier, and with the help of the magicians replaced it upon his shoulder. The discomfiture of Vukub was then complete. The party left his dwelling feeling that their mission had been accomplished.

  

The Earth-Giants

But in reality it was only partially accomplished, because Vukub's two sons, Zipacna and Cabrakan, still remained to be dealt with. Zipacna was daily employed in heaping up mountains, while Cabrakan, his brother, shook them in earthquake. The vengeance of Hun-Apu and Xbalanque was first directed against Zipacna, and they conspired with a band of young men to bring about his death.

The young men, four hundred in number, pretended to be engaged in building a house. They cut down a large tree, which they made believe was to be the rooftree of their dwelling, and waited in a part of the forest through which they knew Zipacna must pass. After a while they could hear the giant crashing through the trees. He came into sight, and when he saw them standing round the giant tree-trunk, which they could not lift, he seemed very much amused.

"What have you there, O little ones?" he said laughing.

"Only a tree, your Highness, which we have felled for the roof-tree of a new house we are building."

"Cannot you carry it?" asked the giant disdainfully.

"No, your Highness," they made answer; "it is much too heavy to be lifted even by our united efforts."

With a good-natured laugh the Titan stooped and lifted the great trunk upon his shoulder. Then, bidding them lead the way, he trudged through the forest, evidently not disconcerted in the least by his great burden. Now the young men, incited by Hun-Apu and Xbalanque, had dug a great ditch, which they pretended was to serve for the foundation of their new house. Into this they requested Zipacna to descend, and, scenting no mischief, the giant readily complied. On his reaching the bottom his treacherous acquaintances cast huge trunks of trees upon him, but on hearing them coming down he quickly took refuge in a small side tunnel which the youths had constructed to serve as a cellar beneath their house.

Imagining the giant to be killed, they began at once to express their delight by singing and dancing, and to lend colour to his stratagem Zipacna despatched several friendly ants to the surface with strands of hair, which the young men concluded had been taken from his dead body. Assured by the seeming proof of his death, the youths proceeded to build their house upon the trec-trunks which they imagined covered Zipacna's body, and, producing a quantity of pulque, they began to make merry over the end of their enemy. For some hours their new dwelling rang with revelry.

All this time Zipacna, quietly hidden below, was listening to the hubbub and waiting his chance to revenge himself upon those who had entrapped him.

Suddenly arising in his giant might, he cast the house and all its inmates high in the air. The dwelling was utterly demolished, and the band of youths were hurled with such force into the sky that they remained there, and in the stars we call the Pleiades we can still discern them wearily waiting an opportunity to return to earth.

  

The Undoing of Zipacna

But Hun-Apu and Xbalanquc, grieved that their comrades had so perished, resolved that Zipacna must not be permitted to escape so easily. He, carrying the mountains by night, sought his food by day on the shore of the river, where he wandered catching fish and crabs. The brothers made a large artificial crab, which they placed in a cavern at the bottom of a ravine. They then cunningly undermined a huge mountain, and awaited events. Very soon they saw Zipacna wandering along the side of the river, and asked him where he was going.

"Oh, I am only seeking my daily food," replied the giant.

"And what may that consist of asked the brothers.

"Only of fish and crabs," replied Zipacna.

"Oh, there is a crab down yonder," said the crafty brothers, pointing to the bottom of the ravine. "We espied it as we came along. Truly, it is a great crab, and will furnish you with a capital breakfast."

Splendid! " cried Zipacna, with glistening eyes. "I must have it at once," and with one bound he leapt down to where the cunningly contrived crab lay in the cavern.

No sooner had he reached it than Hun-Apu and Xbalanque cast the mountain upon him; but so desperate were his efforts to get free that the brothers feared he might rid himself of the immense weight of earth under which he was buried, and to make sure of his fate they turned him into stone. Thus at the foot of Mount Meahuan, near Vera Paz, perished the proud Mountain-Maker.

  

The Discomfiture of Cabrakan

Now only the third of this family of boasters remained, and he was the most proud of any.

"I am the Overturner of Mountains!" said he.

But Hun-Apu and Xbalanque had made up their minds that not one of the race of Vukub should be left alive.

At the moment when they were plotting the over. throw of Cabrakan he was occupied in moving mountains. He seized the mountains by their bases and, exerting his mighty strength, cast them into the air; and of the smaller mountains he took no account at all. While he was so employed he met the brothers, who greeted him cordially.

"Good day, Cabrakan," said they. " What may you be doing? "

"Bah! nothing at all," replied the giant. " Cannot you see that I am throwing the mountains about, which is my usual occupation? And who may you be that ask such stupid questions? What arc your names?"

"We have no names " replied they. "We are only hunters, and here we have our blow-pipes, with which we shoot the birds that live in these mountains. So you see that we do not require names, as we meet no one."

Cabrakan looked at the brothers disdainfully, and was about to depart when they said to him: "Stay; we should like to behold these mountain-throwing feats of yours.

This aroused the pride of Cabrakan.

"Well, since you wish it," said he, "I will show you how I can move a really great mountain. Now, choose the one you would like to see me destroy, and before you are aware of it I shall have reduced it to dust."

Hun-Apu looked around him, and espyingy a great peak pointed toward it. 11 Do you think you could overthrow that mountain?" he asked.

"Without the least difficulty," replied Cabrakan, with a great laugh. "Let us go toward it."

"But first you must cat," said Hun-Apu. "You have had no food since morning, and so great a feat can hardly be accomplished fasting."

The giant smacked his lips. "You are right" he said, with a hungry look. Cabrakan was one of those people who are always hungry. "But what have you to give me?"

"We have nothing with us," said Hun-Apu.

"Umph!" growled Cabrakan, "you are a pretty fellow. You ask me what I will have to eat, and then tell me you have nothing," and in his anger he seized one of the smaller mountains and threw it into the sea, so that the waves splashed up to the sky.

"Come," said Hun-Apu, "don't get angry. We have our blow-pipes with us, and will shoot a bird for your dinner."

On hearing this Cabrakan grew somewhat quieter. "Why did you not say so at first? " he growled.

"But be quick, because I am hungry."

Just at that moment a large bird passed overhead, and Hun-Apu and Xbalanque raised their blow-pipes to their mouths. The darts sped swiftly upward, and both of them struck the bird, which came tumbling down through the air, falling at the feet of Cabrakan.

"Wonderful, wonderful!" cried the giant. "You are clever fellows indeed, and, seizing the dead bird, he was going to eat it raw when Hun-Apu stopped him.

Wait a moment, said he. "It will be much nicer when cooked," and, rubbing two sticks together, he ordered Xbalanque to gather some dry wood, so that a fire was soon blazing.

The bird was then suspended over the fire, and in a short time a savoury odour mounted to the nostrils of the giant, who stood watching the cooking with hungry eyes and watering lips.

Before placing the bird over the fire to cook, however, Hun-Apu had smeared its feathers with a thick coating of mud. The Indians in some parts of Central America still do this, so that when the mud dries with the heat of the fire the feathers will come off with it, leaving the flesh of the bird quite ready to eat. But Hun-Apu had done this with a purpose. The mud that he spread on the feathers was that of a poisoned earth, called tizate, the elements of which sank deeply into the flesh of the bird.

When the savoury mess was cooked, he handed it to Cabrakan, who speedily devoured it.

"Now" said Hun-Apu, "let us go toward that great mountain and see if you can lift it as you boast."

But already Cabrakan began to feel strange pangs.

"What is this?" said he, passing his hand across his brow. "I do not seem to see the mountain you mean.

"Nonsense," said Hun-Apu. Yonder it is, see, to the east there."

"My eyes seem dim this morning," replied the giant.

"No, it is not that," said Hun-Apu. "You have boasted that you could lift this mountain, and now you are afraid to try."

"I tell you," said Cabrakan, "that I have difficulty in seeing. Will you lead me to the mountain? "

"Certainly," said Hun-Apu, giving him his hand, and with several strides they were at the foot of the eminence.

" Now," said Hun-Apu, "see what you can do, boaster."

Cabrakan gazed stupidly at the great mass in front of him. His knees shook together so that the sound was like the beating of a war-drum, and the sweat poured from his forehead and ran in a little stream down the side of the mountain.

"Come," cried Hun-Apu derisively, "are you going to lift the mountain or not?"

"He cannot," sneered Xbalanque. "I knew he could not."

Cabrakan shook himself into a final effort to regain his senses, but all to no purpose. The poison rushed through his blood, and with a groan he fell dead before the brothers.

Thus perished the last of the earth-giants of Guatemala, whom Hun-Apu and Xbalanque had been sent to destroy.

  

The Second Book

The second book of the Popol Vuh outlines the history of the hero-gods Hun-Apu and Xbalanque. We are told that Xpiyacoc and Xmucane, the father and mother gods, had two sons, Hunhun-Apu and Vukub-Hunapu, the first of whom had by his wife Xbakiyalo two sons, Hunbatz and Hunchouen. The weakness of the whole family was the native game or ball, possibly the Mexican-Mayan game of tlachtli, a sort of hockey. To this pastime the natives of Central America were greatly addicted, and numerous remains of tlachtli courts are to be found in the ruined cities of Yucatan and Guatemala. The object of the game was to "putt" the ball through a small hole in a circular stone or goal, and the player who succeeded in doing this might demand from the audience all their clothes and jewels. The game, as we have said, was exceedingly popular in ancient Central America, and there is good reason to believe that inter-city matches took place between the various city-states, and were accompanied by a partisanship and rivalry as keen as that which finds expression among the crowd at our principal football matches to-day.

  

A Challenge from Hades

On one occasion Hunhun-Apu and Vukub-Hunapu played a game of ball which in its progress took them into the vicinity of the realm of Xibalba (the Kiche Hades). The rulers of that drear abode, imagining that they had a chance of capturing the brothers, extended a challenge to them to play them at ball, and this challenge Hun-Came and Vukub-Came, the sovereigns of the Kiche Hell, despatched by four messengers in the shape of owls. The brothers accepted the challenge, and, bidding farewell to their mother Xmucane and their respective sons and nephews, followed the feathered messengers down the long hill which led to the Underworld.

  

The Fooling of the Brethren

The American Indian is grave and taciturn. If there is one thing he fears and dislikes more than another it is ridicule. To his austere and haughty spirit it appears as something derogratory to his dignity, a slur upon his manhood. The hero-brothers had not been long in Xibalba when they discovered that it was the intention of the Lords of Hades to fool them and subject them to every species of indignity. After crossing a river of blood, they came to the palace of the Lords of Xibalba, where they espied two seated figures in front of them. Thinking that they recognised in them Hun-Came and Vukub-Came, they saluted them in a becoming manner, only to discover to their mortification that they were addressing fifurcs of wood. This incident excited the ribald jeers o the Xibalbans, who scoffed at the brothers. Next they were invited to sit on the seat of honour, which they found to their dismay to be a red-hot stone, a circumstance which caused unbounded amusement to the inhabitants of the Underworld. Then they were imprisoned in the House of Gloom, where they were sacrificed and buried. The head of Hunhun-Apu was, however, suspended from a tree, upon the branches of which grew a crop of gourds so like the dreadful trophy as to be indistinguishable from it. The fiat went forth that no one in Xibalba must eat of the fruit of that tree. But the Lords of Xibalba had reckoned without feminine curiosity and its unconquerable love of the forbidden.

  

The Princess Xquiq

One day-if day ever penetrated to that gloomy and unwholesome place-a princess of Xibalba called Xquiq (Blood), daughter of Cuchumaquiq, a notability of Xibalba, passed under the tree, and, observing the desirable fruit with which it was covered, stretched out her hand to pluck one of the gourds. Into the outstretched palm the head of Hunhun-Apu spat, and told Xquiq that she would become a mother. Before she returned home, however, the hero-god assured her that no harm would come to her, and that she must not be afraid. In a few months' time the princess's father heard of her adventure, and she was doomed to be slain, the royal messengers of Xibalba, the owls, receiving commands to despatch her and to bring back her heart in a vase. But on the way she overcame the scruples of the owls by splendid promises, and they substituted for her heart the coagulated sap of the bloodwort plant.

  

The Birth of Hun-Apu and Xbalanque

Xmucane, left at home, looked after the welfare of the young Hunbatz and Hunchouen, and thither, at the instigation of the head of Hunhun-Apu, went Xquiq for protection. At first Xmucane would not credit her story, but upon Xquiq appealing to the gods a miracle was performed on her behalf, and she was permitted to gather a basket of maize where no maize grew to prove the authenticity of her claim. As a princess of the Underworld, it is not surprising that she should be connected with such a phenomenon, as it is from deities of that region that we usually expect the phenomena of growth to proceed. Shortly afterwards, when she had won the good graces of the aged Xmucane, her twin sons were born, the Hun-Apu and Xbalanque whom we have already met as the central figures of the first book.

  

The Divine Children

But the divine children were both noisy and mischievous. They tormented their venerable grandmother with their shrill uproar and tricky behaviour. At last Xmucane, unable to put up with their habits, turned them out of doors. They took to an outdoor life with surprising case, and soon became expert hunters and skilful in the use of the serbatana (blow-pipe), with which they shot birds and small animals. They were badly treated by their half-brothers Hunbatz and Hunchouen, who, jealous of their fame as hunters, annoyed them in every possible manner. But the divine children retaliated by turning their tormentors into hideous apes. The sudden change in the appearn of her grandsons caused Xmucane the most profound grief and dismay, and she begged that they who had brightened her home with their singing and flute-playing might not be condemned to such a dreadful fate. She was informed by the divine brothers that if she could behold their antics unmoved by mirth her wish would be granted. But the capers they cut and their grimaces caused her such merriment that on three separate occasions she was unable to restrain her laughter, and the men-monkeys took their leave.

  

The Magic Tools

The childhood of Hun-Apu and Xbalanque was full of such episodes as might be expected from these beings. We find, for example, that on attempting to clear a milpa (maize plantation) they employed magic tools which could be trusted to undertake a good day's work whilst they were absent at the chase. Returning at night, they smeared soil over their hands and faces, for the purpose of deluding Xmucane into the belief that they had been toiling all day in the fields. But the wild beasts met in conclave during the night, and replaced all the roots and shrubs which the magic tools had cleared away. The twins recognised the work of the various animals) and placed a large net on the ground, so that if the creatures came to the spot on the following night they might be caught in its folds. They did come, but all made good their escape save the rat. The rabbit and deer lost their tails, however, and that is why these animals possess no caudal appendages! The rat, in gratitude for their sparing its life, told the brothers the history of their father and uncle, of their heroic efforts against the powers of Xibalba, and of the existence of a set of clubs and balls with which they might play tlachtli on the ballground at Ninxor-Carchah, where Hunhun-Apu and Vukub-Hunapu had played before them.

  

The Second Challenge

But the watchful Hun-Came and Vukub-Came soon heard that the sons and nephews of their first victims had adopted the game which had led these last into the clutches of the cunning Xibalbans, and they resolved to send a similar challenge to Hun-Apu and Xbalanque, thinking that the twins were unaware of the fate of Hunhun-Apu and Vukub-Hunapu. They therefore despatched messengers to the home of Xmucane with a challenge to play them at the ball-game, and Xmucane, alarmed by the nature of the message, sent a louse to warn her grandsons. The louse, unable to proceed as quickly as he wished, permitted himself to be swallowed by a toad, the toad by a serpent, and the serpent by the bird Voc, the messenger O Hurakan. At the end of the journey the other animals duly liberated each other, but the toad could not rid himself of the louse, who had in reality hidden himself in the toad's gums, and had not been swallowed at all. At last the message was delivered, and the twins returned to the abode of Xmucane, to bid farewell to their grandmother and mother. Before leaving they each planted a cane in the midst of the hut, saying that it would wither if any fatal accident befell them.

  

The Tricksters Tricked

They then proceeded to Xibalba, on the road trodden by Hunhun-Apu and Vukub-Hunapu, and passed the river of blood.as the others had done. But they adopted the precaution of despatching ahead an animal called Xan as a sort of spy or scout. They commanded this animal to prick all the Xibalbans with a hair from Hun-Apu's leg, in order that they might discover which of them were made of wood, and incidentally learn the names of the others as they addressed one another when pricked by the hair. They were thus enabled to ignore the wooden images on their arrival at Xibalba, and they carefully avoided the red-hot stone. Nor did the ordeal of the House of Gloom affright them, and they passed through it scatheless. The inhabitants of the Underworld were both amazed and furious with disappointment. To add to their annoyance, they were badly beaten in the game of ball which followed. The Lords of Hell then requested the twins to bring them four bouquets of flowers from the royal garden of Xibalba, at the same time commanding the gardeners to keep good watch over the flowers so thaf none of them might be removed. But the brothers called to their aid a swarm of ants, who succeeded in returning with the flowers. The anger of the Xibalbans increased to a white fury, and they incarcerated Hun-Apu and Xbalanque in the House of Lances, a dread abode where demons armed with sharp spears thrust at them fiercely. But they bribed the lancers and escaped. The Xibalbans slit the beaks of the owls who guarded the royal gardens, and howled in fury.

  

The Houses of the Ordeals

They were next thrust into the House of Cold. Here they escaped a dreadful death from freezing by warming themselves with burning pine-cones. Into the House of Tigers and the House of Fire they were thrown for a night each, but escaped from both. But they were not so lucky in the House of Bats. As they threaded this place of terror, Camazotz, Ruler of the Bats, descended upon them with a whirring of leathern wings, and with one sweep of his sword-like claws cutoff Hun-Apu's head. (See Mictlan, pp. 95, 96.) But a tortoise which chanced to pass the severed neck of the hero's prostrate body and came into contact with it was immediately turned into a head, and Hun-Apu arose from his terrible experience not a whit the worse.

These various houses in which the brothers were forced to pass a certain time forcibly recall to our minds the several circles of Dante's Hell. Xibalba was to the Kiche not a place of punishment, but a dark place of horror and myriad dangers. No wonder the Maya had what Landa calls " an immoderate fear of death" if they believed that after it they would be transported to such a dread abode!

With the object of proving their immortal nature to their adversaries, Hun-Apu and Xbalanque, first arranging for their resurrection with two sorcerers, Xulu and Pacaw, stretched themselves upon a bier and died. Their bones were ground to powder and thrown into the river. They then went through a kind of evolutionary process, appearing on the fifth day after their deaths as men-fishes and on the sixth as old men, ragged and tatterdemalion in appearance, killing and restoring each other to life. At the request of the princes of Xibalba, they burned the royal palace and restored it to its pristine splendour, killed and resuscitated the king's dog, and cut a man in pieces, bringing him to life again. The Lords of Hell were curious about the sensation of death, and asked to be killed and resuscitated. The first portion of their request the hero-brothers speedily granted, but did not deem it necessary to pay any regard to the second.

Throwing off all disguise, the brothers assembled the now thoroughly cowed princes of Xibalba, and announced their intention of punishing them for their animosity against themselves, their father and uncle. They were forbidden to partake in the noble and classic game of ball-a great indignity in the eyes of Maya of the higher caste-they were condemned to menial tasks, and they were to have sway over the beasts of the forest alone. After this their power rapidly waned. These princes of the Underworld are described as being owl-like, with faces painted black and white, as symbolical of their duplicity and faithless disposition.

As some reward for the dreadful indignities they had undergone, the souls of Hunhun-Apu and Vukub-Hunapu, the first adventurers into the darksome region of Xibalba, were translated to the skies, and became the sun and moon, and with this apotheosis the second book ends.

We can have no difficulty, in the light of comparative mythology, in seeing in the matter of this book a version of "the harrying of hell" common to many mythologies. In many primitive faiths a hero or heroes dares the countless dangers of Hades in order to prove to the savage mind that the terrors of death can be overcome. In Algonquian mythology Blue-Jay makes game of the Dead Folk whom his sister Ioi has married, and Balder passes through the Scandinavian Helheim. The god must first descend into the abyss and must emerge triumphant if humble folk are to possess assurance of immortality.

  

The Reality of Myth

It is from such matter as that found in the second book of the Popol Vuh that we are enabled to discern how real myth can be on occasion. It is obvious, as has been pointed out, that the dread of death in the savage mind may give rise to such a conception of its vanquishment as appears in the Popol Vuh. But there is reason to suspect that other elements have also entered into the composition of the myth. It is well known that an invading race, driving before them the remnants of a con uered people, are prone to regard these in the course of a few generations as almost supernatural and as denizens of a sphere more or less infernal. Their reasons for this are not difficult of comprehension. To begin with, a difference in ceremonial ritual gives rise to the belief that the inimical race practises magic. The enemy is seldom seen, and, if perceived, quickly takes cover or "vanishes." The majority of aboriginal races were often earth- or cave-dwellers, like the Picts of Scotland, and such the originals of the Xibalbans probably were.

The invading Maya-Kiche, encountering such a folk in the cavernous recesses of the hill-slopes of Guatemala, would naturally refer them to the Underworld. The cliff-dwellings of Mexico and Colorado exhibit manifest signs of the existence of such a cave-dwelling race. In the latter state is the Cliff Palace Caflon, a huge natural recess, within which a small city was actually built, which still remains in excellent preservation. In some such semi-subterranean recess, then, may the city of "Xibalba" have stood.

  

The Xibalbans

We can see, too, that the Xibalbans were not merely a plutonic race. Xibalba is not a Hell, a place of punishment for sin, but a place of the dead, and its inhabitants were scarcely "devils," nor evil gods. The transcriber of the Popol Vuh says of them: "In the old times they did not have much power. They were but annoyers and opposers of men, and, in truth, they were not regarded as gods." The word Xibalba is derived from a root meaning "to fear," from which comes the name for a ghost or phantom. Xibalba was thus the "Place of Phantoms."

  

The Third Book

The opening of the third book finds the gods once more deliberating as to the creation of man. Four men are evolved as the result of these deliberations. These beings were moulded from a paste of yellow and white maize, and were named Balam-Quitze (Tiger with the Sweet Smile), Balam-Agab (Tiger of the Night), Mahacutah (The Distinguished Name), and lqi-Balam (Tiger of the Moon).

But the god Hurakan who had formed them was not overpleased with his handiwork, for these beings were too much like the gods themselves. The gods once more took counsel, and agreed that man must be less perfect and possess less knowledge than this new race. He must not become as a god. So Hurakan breathed a cloud over their eyes in order that they might only see a portion of the earth, whereas before they had been able to see the whole round sphere of the world. After this the four men were plunged into a deep sleep, and four women were created, who were given them as wives. These were Caha-Paluma (Falling Water), Choima (Beautiful Water), Tzununiha (House of the Water), and Cakixa (Water of Parrots, or Brilliant Water), who were espoused to the men in the respective order given above.

These eight persons were the ancestors of the Kiche only, after which were created the forerunners of the other peoples. At this time there was no sun, and comparative darkness lay over the face of the earth. Men knew not the art of worship, but blindly lifted their eyes to heaven and prayed the Creator to send them quiet lives and the light of day. But no sun came, and dispeace entered their hearts. So they journeyed to a place called Tulan-Zuiva (The Seven Caves)-practically the same as Chicomoztoc in the Aztec mythand there gods were vouchsafed to them. The names of these were Tohil, whom Balam-Quitze recelved; Avilix, whom Balam-Agab received; and Hacavitz, granted to Mahacutah. lqi-Balarn received a god, but as he had no family his worship and knowledge died out.

  

The Granting of Fire

Grievously did the Kiche feel the want of fire in the sunless world they inhabited, but this the god Tohil (The Rumbler, the Fire-god) quickly provided them with. However, a mighty rain descended and extinguishcd all the fires in the land. These, however, were always supplied again by Tohil, who had only to strike his feet together to produce fire. In this figure there is no difficulty in seeing a fully developed thunder-god.

  

The Kiche Babel

Tulan-Zuiva was a place or great misfortune to the Kiche, for here the race suffered alienation in its different branches by reason of a confounding of their speech, which recalls the story of Babel. Owing to this the first four men were no longer able to comprehend each other, and determined to leave the place of their mischance and to seek the leadership of the god Tohil into another and more fortunate sphere. In this journey they met with innumerable hardships. Theyn had to cross many lofty mountains, and on one occasion had to make a long detour across the bed of the ocean, the waters of which were miraculously divided to permit of their passage. At last they arrived at a mountain which they called Hacavitz, after one of their deities, and here they remained, for it had been foretold that here they should see the sun. At last the luminary appeared. Men and beasts went wild with delight. although his beams were by no means strong, and he appeared more like a reflection in a mirror than the strong sun of later days whose fiery beams speedily sucked up the blood of victims on the altar. As he showed his face the three tribal gods of the Kiche were turned into stone, as were the gods or totems connected with the wild animals. Then arose the first Kiche town, or permanent dwelling-place.

  

The Last Days of the First Men

Time passed, and the first men of the Kiche race grew old. Visions came to them, in which they were exhorted by the gods to render human sacrifices, and in order to obey the divine injunctions they raided the neighbouring lands, the folk of which made a spirited resistance. But in a great battle the Kiche were miraculously assisted by a horde of wasps and hornets, which flew in the faces of their foes, stinging and blinding them, so that they could not wield weapon nor see to make any efFectivc resistance. After this battle the surrounding races became tributary to them.

  

Death of the First Men

Now the first men felt that their death-day was nigh, and they called their kin and dependents around them to hear their dying words. In the grief of their souls they chanted the song "Kamucu," the song "We see," that they had sung so joyfully when they had first seen the light of day. Then they parted from their wives and sons one by one. And of a sudden they were not, and in their place was a great bundle, which was never opened. It was called the " Majesty Enveloped." So died the first men of the Kiche.

In this book it is clear that we have to deal with the problem which the origin and creation of man presented to the Maya-Kiche mind. The several myths connected with it bear a close resemblance to those of other American peoples. In the mythology of the American Indian it is rare to find an Adam, a single figure set solitary in a world without companionship of some sort. Man is almost invariably the child of Mother Earth, and emerges from some cavern or subterranean country fully grown and fully equipped for the upper earth-life. We find this type of myth in the m thologies of the Aztecs, Peruvians, Choctaws, Blackfeet Indians, and those of many other American tribes.

  

American Migrations

We also find in the story of the Kiche migration a striking similarity to the migration myths of other American races. But in the Kiche myth we can trace a definite racial movement from the cold north to the warm south. The sun is not at first born. There is darkness. When he does appear he is weak and his beams are dull and watery like those of the luminary in a northern clime. Again, there are allusions to the crossing of rivers by means of "shining sand " which covered them, which might reasonably be held to imply the presence upon them of ice. In this connection we may quote from an Aztec migration myth which appears almost a parallel to the Kiche story.

"This is the beginning of the record of the coming of the Mexicans from the place called Aztlan. It is by means of the water that they came this way, being four tribes, and in coming they rowed in boats. They built their huts on piles at the place called the grotto of Quincveyan. It is there from which the eight tribes issued. The first tribe is that of the Huexotzincos, the second the Chalcas, the third the Xochimilcos, the fourth the Cuitlavacas, the fifth the Mallinalcas, the sixth the Chichimecas, the seventh the Tepanecas, the eighth the Matlatzincas. It is there where they were founded in Colhuacan. They were the colonists of it since they landed there, coming from Aztlan. . . . It is there that they soon afterwards went away from, carrying with them their god Vitzillopochtli. . . . There the eight tribes opened up our road by water."

The "Wallum Olum," or painted calendar records, of the Leni-Lenape Indians contain a similar myth.

"After the flood," says the story,"the Lenape with the manly turtle beings dwelt close together at the cave house and dwelling of Talli. . . . They saw that the snake-land was bright and wealthy. Having all agreed, they went over the water of the frozen sea to possess the land. It was wonderful when they all went over the smooth deep water of the frozen sea at the gap of the snake sea in the great ocean."

Do these myths contain any essence of the truth? Do they refer to an actual migration when the ancestors of certain American tribes crossed the frozen ocean of the Kamchatka Strait and descended from the sunless north and the boreal night of these subArctic regions to a more genial clime? Can such a tradition have been preserved throughout the countless ages which must have passed between the arrival of proto-Mongolian man in America and the writing or composition of the several legends cited? Surely not. But may there not have been later migrations from the north? May not hordes of folk distantly akin to the first Americans have swept across the frozen strait, and within a few generations have made their way into the warmer regions, as we know the Nahua did? The Scandinavian vikings who reached north-eastern America in the tenth century found there a race totally distinct from the Red Man, and more approaching the Esquimaux, whom they designated Skrellingr, or "Chips," so small and misshapen were they. Such a description could hardly have been applied to the North American Indian as we know him. From the legends of the Red race of North America we may infer that they remained for a number of generations in the Far West of the North American continent before they migrated eastward. And a guess might be hazarded to the effect that, arriving in America somewhere about the dawn of the Christian era, they spread slowly in a south-easterly direction, arriving in the eastern parts of North America about the end of the eleventh century, or even a little later. This would mean that such a legend as that which we have just perused would only require to have survived a thousand years, provided the Popol Vuh was first composed about the eleventh century, as appears probable. But such speculations are somewhat dangerous in the face of an almost complete lack of evidence, and must be met with the utmost caution and treated as surmises only.

  

Cosmogony of the "Popol Vuh"

We have now completed our brief survey of the mythological portion of the Popol Vuh, and it will be well at this point to make some inquiries into the origin and nature of the various gods, heroes, and similar personages who fill its pages. Before doing so, however, let us glance at the creation-myth which we find detailed in the first book. We can see by internal evidence that this must be the result of the fusion of more than one creation-story. We find in the myth that mention is made of a number of beings each of whom appears to exercise in some manner the functions of a creator or "moulder." These beings also appear to have similar attributes. There is evidently here the reconciliation of early rival faiths. We know that this occurred in Peruvian cosmogony, which is notoriously composite, and many another mythology, European and Asiatic, exhibits a like phenomenon. Even in the creation-story as given in Genesis we can discover the fusion of two separate accounts from the allusion to the creative power as both "Jahveh " and " Elohim," the plural ending of the second name proving the presence of polytheistic as well as monotheistic conceptions.

  

Antiquity of the "Popol Vuh"

These considerations lead to the assumption that the Popol Vuh is a mythological collection of very considerable antiquity, as the fusion of religious beliefs is a comparatively slow process. It is, of course, in the absence of other data, impossible to fix the date of its origin, even approximately. We possess only the one version of this interesting work, so that we are compelled to confine ourselves to the consideration of that alone, and are without the assistance which philology would lend us by a comparison of two versions of different dates.

  

The Father-Mother Gods

We discover a pair of dual beings concerned in the Kiche creation. These are Xpiyacoc and Xmucane, the Father-Mother deities, and are obviously Kiche equivalents to the Mexican Ometecutli-Omeciuatl, whom we have already noticed (pp. 103-4). The former is the male fructifier, whilst the name of the latter signifies " Female Vigour." These deities were probably regarded as hermaphroditic, as numerous North American Indian gods appear to be, and may be analogous to the "Father Sky" and "Mother Earth " of so many mythologies.

  

Gucumatz

We also find Gucumatz concerned in the Kiche scheme of creation. He was a Maya-Kiche form of the Mexican Quetzalcoatl, or perhaps the converse was the case. The name signifies, like its Nahua equivalent, "Serpent with Green Feathers."

  

Hurakan

Hurakan) the wind-god, " He who hurls below," whose name perhaps signifies "The One-legged," is probably the same as the Nahua Tezcatlipoca. It has been suzeested that the word "hurricane " has been evolved rrom the name of this god, but the derivation seems rather too fortuitous to be real. Hurakan had the assistance of three sub-gods, Cakulha-Hurakan (Lightning), Chipi-Cakulha (Lightning-flash), and Raxa-Cakulha (Track of the Lightning).

  

Hun-Apu and Xbalanque

Hun-Apu and Xbalanque, the hero-gods, appear to have the attributes of demi-gods in general. The name Hun-Apu means " Master " or "Magician," and Xbalanque "Little Tiger." We find many such figures in American myth, which is rich in hero-gods.

  

Vukub-Cakix and his Sons

Vukub-Cakix and his progeny are, of course, earth-giants like the Titans of Greek mytnology or the Jotuns of Scandinavian story. The removal of the emerald teeth of Vukub-Cakix and their replacement by grains of maize would seem to be a mythical interpretation or allegory of the removal of the virgin turf of the earth and its replacement by maize-seed. Therefore it is possible that Vukub-Cakix is an earth-god, and not a prehistoric sun-and-moon god, as stated by Dr. Seler.

  

Metrical Origin of the "Popol Vuh"

There is reason to believe that the Popol Vuh was originally a metrical composition. This would assist the hypothesis of its antiquity, on the ground that it was for generations recited before being reduced to writing. Passages here and there exhibit a decided metrical tendency, and one undoubtedly applies to a descriptive dance symbolical of sunrise. It is as follows:

"'Ama x-u ch'ux ri Vuch?''Ve,' x-cha ri mama.Ta chi xaquinic.Quate ta chi gecumarchic.Cahmul xaquin ri mama.'Ca xaquin-Vuch,' ca cha vinak vacamic."This may be rendered freely:

"'Is the dawn about to be?'Yes,' answered the old man.Then he spread apart his legs.Again the darkness appeared.Four times the old man spread his legs.'Now the opossum spreads his legs,' Say the people."It is obvious that many of these lines possess the well-known quality of savage dance-poetry, which displays itself in a rhythm of one long foot followed by two short ones. We know that the Kiche were very fond of ceremonial dances, and of repeating long chants which they called nugum tzih, or "garlands of words," and the Popol Vuh, along with other matter, probably contained many of these.

  

Pseudo-History of the Kiche

The fourth book of the Popol Vuh contains the pseudo-history of the Kiche kings. It is obviously greatly confused, and it would be difficult to say how much of it originally belonged to the Popol Vuh and how much had been added or invented by its latest compiler. One cannot discriminate between saga and history, or between monarchs and gods, the real and the fabulous. Interminable conflicts are the theme of most of the book, and many migrations are recounted.

  

Queen Moo

Whilst dealing with Maya pseudo-history it will be well to glance for a moment at the theories of the late Augustus Le Plongeon, who lived and carried on excavations in Yucatan for many years. Dr. Le Plongeon was obsessed with the idea that the ancient Maya spread their civilisation all over the habitable globe, and that they were the originators of the Egyptian, Palestinian, and Hindu civilisations, besides many others. He furthermore believed himself to be the true elucidator of the Maya system of hieroglyphs, which in his estimation were practically identical with the Egyptian. We will not attempt to refute his theories, as they are based on ignorance of the laws which govern philology, anthropology, and mythology. But he possessed a thorough knowledge of the Maya tongue, and his acquaintance with Maya customs was extensive and peculiar. One of his ideas was that a certain hall among the ruins of Chichen-Itza had been built b a Queen Moo, a Maya princess who after the tragic fate of her brother-husband and the catastrophe which ended in the sinking of the continent of Atlantis fled to Egypt, where she founded the ancient Egyptian civilisation. It would be easy to refute this theory. But the tale as told by Dr. Le Plongeon possesses a sufficiency of romantic interest to warrant its being rescued from the little-known volume in which he published it. [Queen Moo and the Egyptian Sphinx (London, 1896).]

We do not learn from Dr. Le Plongeon's book by what course of reasoning he came to discover that the name of his heroine was the rather uneuphonious one of Moo. Probably he arrived at it by the same process as that by which he discovered that certain Mayan architectural ornaments were in reality Egyptian letters. But it will be better to let him tell his story in his own words. It is as follows

  

The Funeral Chamber

"As we are about to enter the funeral chamber hallowed by the love of the sister-wife, Queen Moo, the beauty of the carvings on the zapote beam that forms the lintel of the doorway calls our attention. Here is represented the antagonism of the brothers Aac and Coh, that led to the murder ot the latter by the former. Carved on the lintel are the names of these personages, represented by their totems-a leopard head for Coh, and a boar head as well as a turtle for Aac, this word meaning both boar and turtle in Maya. Aac is pictured within the disk of the sun, his protective deity which he worshipped, according to mural inscriptions at Uxmal. Full of anger he faces his brother. In his right hand there is a badge ornamented with feathers and flowers. The threatening way in which this is held suggests a concealed weapon. . . . The face of Coh also expresses anger. With him is the feathered serpent, emblematic of royalty, thence of the country, more often represented as a winged serpent protecting Coh. In his left hand he holds his weapon down, whilst his right hand clasps his badge of authority, with which he covers his breasts as for protection, and demanding the respect due to his rank. . . .

"Passing between the figures of armed chieftains sculptured on the iambs of the doorway, and seeming like sentinels guarding the entrance of the funeral chamber, we notice one wearing a headdress similar to the crown of Lower Egypt, which formed part of the pshent of the Egyptian monarchs.

  

The Frescoes

"The frescoes in the funeral chamber of Prince Coh's Memorial Hall, painted in water-colours taken from the vegetable kingdom, are divided into a series of tableaux separated by blue lines. The plinths, the angles of the room, and the edges of the ceiling, being likewise painted blue, indicate that this was intended for a funeral chamber. . . . The first scene represents Queen Moo while yet a child. She is seated on the back of a peccary, or American wild boar, under the royal umbrella of feathers, emblem of royalty in Mayach, as it was in India, Chaldea, and other places. She is consulting a h-men, or wise man; listening with profound attention to the decrees of fate as revealed by the cracking of the shell of an armadillo exposed to a slow fire on a brazier, the condensing on it of the vapour, and the various tints it assumes. This mode of divination is one of the customs of the Mayas. . . .

  

The Soothsayers

"In front of the young Queen Moo, and facing her, is seated the soothsayer, evidently a priest of high rank, judging from the colours, blue and yellow, of the feathers of his ceremonial mantle. He reads the decrees of fate on the snell of the armadillo, and the scroll issuing from his throat says what they are. By him stands the winged serpent, emblem and protective genius of the Maya Empire. His head is turned towards the royal banner, which he seems to caress. His satisfaction is reflected in the mild and pleased expression of his face. Behind the priest, the position of whose hand is the same as that of Catholic priests in blessing their congregation, and the significance of which is well known to occultists, are the ladies-inwaiting of the young Queen.

  

The Royal Bride

"In another tableau we again see Queen Moo, no longer a child, but a comely young woman. She is not seated under the royal umbrella or banner, but she is once more in the presence of the h-men, whose face is concealed by a mask representing an owl's head. She, pretty and coquettish, has many admirers, who vie with each other for the honour of her hand. In company with one of her wooers she comes to consult the priest, accompanied by an old lady, her grandmother probably, and her female attendants. According to custom the old lady is the spokeswoman. She states to the priest that the young man, he who sits on a low stool between two female attendants desires to marry the Queen. The priest's attendant, seated also on a stool, back of all, acts as crier, and repeats in a loud voice the speech of the old lady.

  

Moo's Refusal

"The young Queen refuses the offer. The refusal is indicated by the direction of the scroll issuing from her mouth. It is turned backward, instead of forward towards the priest, as would be the case if she assented to the marriage. The h-men explains that Moo, being a daughter of the royal family, by law and custom must marry one of her brothers. The youth listens to the decision with due respect to the priest, as shown by his arm being placed across his breast, the left hand resting on the right shoulder. He does not accept the refusal in a meek spirit, however. His clenched fist, his foot raised as in the act of stamping, betoken anger and disappointment, while the attendant behind him expostulates, counselling patience and resignation, judging by the position and expression of her lefthand palm upward.

  

The Rejected Suitor

"In another tableau we see the same individual whose offer of marriage was rejected by the young Queen in consultation with a nubchi, or prophet, a priest whose exalted rank is indicated by his headdress, and the triple breastplate he wears over his mantle of feathers. The consulter, evidently a person of importance, has come attended by his hachetail, or confidential friend, who sits behind him on a cushion. The expression on the face of the said consulter shows that he does not accept patiently the decrees of fate, although conveyed by the interpreter in as conciliatory a manner as possible. The adverse decision of the gods is manifested by the sharp projecting centre part of the scroll, but it is wrapped in words as persuasive and consoling, preceded by as smooth a preamble as the rich and beautiful Maya language pernrits and makes easy. His fricrid is addressing the prophet's assistant. Reflecting the thoughts of his lord, he declares that the nubehi's fine discourse and his pretended reading of the will of the gods are all nonsense, and exclaims 'Pshaw!' which contemptuous exclamation is pictured by the yellow scroll, pointed at both ends, escaping from his nose like a sneeze. The answer of the priest's assistant, evidenced by the gravity of his features, the assertive position of his hand, and the bluntness of his speech, is evidently 'It is so!'

  

Aac's Fierce Wooing

"Her brother Aac is madly in love with Moo. He is portrayed approaching the interpreter of the will of the gods, divested of his garments in token of humility in presence of their majesty and of submission to their decrees. He comes full of arrogance, arrayed in gorgeous attire, and with regal pomp. He comes not as a suppliant to ask and accept counsel, but haughty, he makes bold to dictate. He is angered at the refusal of the priest to accede to his demand for his sister Moo's hand, to whose totem, an armadillo on this occasion, he points imperiously. It was on an armadillo's shell that the fates wrote her destiny when consulted by the performance of the Pou ceremony. The yellow flames of wrath darting from all over his person, the sharp yellow scroll issuing from his mouth, symbolise Aac's feelings. The pontiff, however, is unmoved by them. In the name of the gods with serene mien he denies the request of the proud noble man, as his speech indicates. The winged serpent, genius of the country, that stands erect and ireful by Aac, is also wroth at his pretensions, and shows in its features and by sending its dart through Aac's royal banner a decided opposition to them, expressed by the ends of his speech being turned backwards, some of them terminating abruptly, others in sharp points.

  

Prince Cob

"Prince Coh sits behind the priest as one of his attendants. He witnesses the scene, hears the calm negative answer, sees the anger of his brother and rival, smiles at his impotence, is happy at his discomfiture. Behind him, however, sits a spy who will repeat his words, report his actions to his enemy. He listens, he watches. The high-priest himself, Cay, their elder brother, sees the storm that is brewing behind the dissensions of Coh and Aac. He trembles at the thought of the misfortunes that will surely befall the dynasty of the Cans, of the ruin and misery of the country that will certainly follow. Divested of his priestly raiment, he comes nude and humble as it is proper for men in the presence of the gods, to ask their advice how best to avoid the impending calamities. The chief of the auspices is in the act of reading their decrees on the palpitating entrails of a fish. The sad expression on his face, that of humble resignation on that of the pontiff of deferential astonishment on that of the assistant, speak of the inevitable misfortunes which are to come in the near future.

"We pass over interesting battle scenes . . . in which the defenders have been defeated by the Mayas. Coh will return to his queen loaded with spoils that he will lay at her feet with his glory, which is also hers.

  

The Murder of Cob

"We next see him in a terrible altercation with his brother Aac. The figures in that scene are nearly life size, but so much disfigured and broken as to make it impossible to obtain good tracings. Coh is portrayed without weapons, his fists clenched, looking menacingly at his foe, who holds three spears, typical of the three wounds he inflicted in his brother's back when he killed him treacherously. Coh is now laid out, being prepared for cremation. His body has been opened at the ribs to extract the viscera and heart, which, after being charred, are to be preserved in a stone urn with cinnabar, where the writer found them in 18 7 S. His sister-wife, Queen Moo, in sad contemplation of the remain-, of the beloved, . . . kneels at his feet. . . . The winged serpent, protective genius of the country, is pictured without a head. The ruler of the country has been slain. He is dead. The people are without a chief."

  

The Widowhood of Moo

The widowhood of Moo is then said to be portrayed in subsequent pictures. Other suitors, among them Aac, make their proposals to her, but she refuses them all. "Aac's pride being humiliated, his love turned to hatred. His only wish henceforth was to usurp the supreme power, to wage war against the friend of his childhood. He made religious disagreement the pretext. He proclaimed that the worship of the sun was to be superior to that of the winged serpent, the genius of the country; also to that of the worship of ancestors, typified by the feathered serpent, with horns and a flame or halo on the head. . . . Prompted by such evil passions, he put himself at the head of his own vassals, and attacked those who had remained faithful to Queen Moo and to Prince Coh's memory. At first Moo's adherents successfully opposed her foes. The contending parties, forgetting in the strife that they were children of the same soil, blinded by their prejudices, let their passions have the better of their reason. At last Queen Moo fell a prisoner in the hands of her enemy.

  

The Manuscript Troano

Dr. Le Plongeon here assumes that the story is taken up by the Manuscript Troano. As no one is able to decipher this manuscript completely, he is pretty safe in nis assertion. Here is what the pintura alluded to says regarding Queen Moo, according to our author:

"The people of Mayach having been whipped into submission and cowed, no longer opposing much resistance, the lord seized her by the hair, and, in common with others, caused her to suffer from blows. This happened on the ninth day of the tenth month of the year Kan. Being completely routed, she passed to the opposite sea-coast in the southern parts of the country, which had already suffered much injury."

Here we shall leave the Queen, and those who have been sufficiently credulous to create and believe in her and her companions. We do not aver that the illustrations on the walls of the temple at Chichen do not allude to some such incident, or series of incidents, as Dr. Le Plongeon describes, but to bestow names upon the dramatis persone in the face of almost complete inability to read the Maya script and a total dearth of accompanying historical manuscripts is merely futile, and we must regard Dr. Le Plongeon's narrative as a quite fanciful rendering of probability. At the same time, the light which he throws-if some obviously unscientific remarks be deducted-on the customs of the Maya renders his account of considerable interest, and that must be our excuse for presenting it here at some length.

     
The Myths of Mexico and Peru, by Lewis Spence, [1913], at sacred-texts.com

  

CHAPTER VI: The Civilisation of Old Peru

  

Old Peru

IF the civilisation of ancient Peru did not achieve the standard of general culture reached by the Mexicans and Maya, it did not fall far short of the attainment of these peoples. But the degrading despotism under which the peasantry groaned in Inca times, and the brutal and sanguinary tyranny of the Apu-Ccapac Incas, make the rulers of Mexico at their worst appear as enlightened when compared with the Peruvian governing classes. The Quichua-Aymara race which inhabited Peru was inferior to the Mexican in general mental culture, if not in mental capacity, is is proved by its inability to invent any method of written communication or any adequate time-reckoning. In imitative art, too, the Peruvians were weak, save in pottery and rude modelling, and their religion savoured much more of the materialistic, and was altogether of a lower cultus.

  

The Country

The country in which the interesting civilisation of the Inca race was evolved presents physical features which profoundly affected the history of the race. In fact, it is probable that in no country in the world has the configuration of the land so modified the events in the life of the people dwelling within its borders. The chain of the Andes divides into two branches near the boundary between Bolivia and Chile, and, with the Cordillera de la Costa, encloses at a height of over 3000 feet the Desaguadero, a vast tableland with an area equal to France. To the north of this is Cuzco, the ancient capital of the Incas, to the south Potosi, the most elevated town in the world, whilst between them lies Lake Titicaca, the largest body of fresh water in South America. The whole country is dreary and desolate in the extreme. Cereals cannot ripen, and animals arc rare. Yet it was in these desolate regions that the powerful and highly organised empire of Peru arose-an empire extending over an area 3000 miles long by 400 broad.

  

The Andeans

The prehistoric natives of the Andean region had evolved a civilisation long before the days of the Inca dynasties, and the cyclopean ruins of their edifices are to be found at intervals scattered over a wide field on the slopes of the range under the shadow of which they dwelt. Their most extraordinary achievement was probably the city of Tiahuanaco, on the southern shore of Lake Titicaca, built at a level 13,000 feet above the sea, occupying nearly half an acre in extent, and constructed of enormous megalithic blocks of trachytic rock. The great doorway, carved out of a single block of rock, is 7 feet in height by 131 feet wide, and 1 1/2 feet thick. The upper portion of this massive portal is carved with symbolic figures. In the centre is a figure in high relief, the head surrounded by solar rays, and in each hand a sceptre, the end of which terminates in the head of a condor. This figure is flanked on either side by three tiers of kneeling suppliants, each of whom is winged and bears a sceptre similar in design to the central ones. Elsewhere are mighty blocks of stone, some 36 feet long, remains of enormous walls, standing monoliths, and in earlier times colossal statues were seen on the site. When the Spanish conquerors arrived no tradition remained regarding the founders of these structures, and their origin still remains a mystery; but that they represent the remains of the capital of some mighty prehistoric kingdom is practically admitted.

  

A Strange Site

The greatest mystery of all regarding the ruins at Tiahuanaco is the selection of the site. For what reason did the prehistoric rulers of Peru build here? The surroundings are totally unsuitable for the raising of such edifices, and the tableland upon which they are placed is at once desolate and difficult of access. The snow-line is contiguous, and breathing at such a height is no easy matter. There is no reason to suppose that climatic conditions in the day of these colossal builders were different from those which obtain at the present time. In face of these facts the position of Tiahuanaco remains an insoluble riddle.

  

Sacsahuaman and Ollantay

Other remains of these prehistoric people are found in various parts of Peru. At Sacsahuaman, perched on a hill above the city of Cuzco, is an immense fortified work six hundred yards long, built in three lines of wall consisting of enormous stones, some of which are twen tyseven feet in length. Pissac is also the site of wonderful ruined masonry and an ancient observatory. At Ollantay-tampu, forty-five miles to the north of Cuzco, is another of these gigantic fortresses, built to defend the valley of the Yucay. This stronghold is constructed for the most part of red porphyry, and its walls average twenty-five feet in height. The great cliff on which Ollantay is perched is covered from end to end with stupendous walls which zigzag from point to point of it like the salient angles of some modern fortalice. At intervals are placed round towers of stone provided with loopholes, from which doubtless arrows were discharged at the enemy. This outwork embraces a series of terraces, world-famous because of their gigantic outline and the problem of the use to which they were put. It is now practically agreed that these terraces were employed for the production of maize, in order that during a prolonged investment the beleaguered troops and country-folk might not want for a sufficiency of provender. The stone of which this fortress was built was quarried at a distance of seven miles, in a spot upwards of three thousand feet above the valley, and was dragged up the steep declivity of Ollantay by sheer human strength. The nicety with which the stones were fitted is marvellous.

  

The Dramatic Legend of Ollantay

Among the dramatic works with which the ancient Incas were credited is that of Apu-Ollanta, which may recount the veritable story of a chieftain after whom the great stronghold was named. It was probably divided into scenes and supplied with stage directions at a later period, but the dialogue and son-as are truly aboriginal. The period is that of the reign of the Inca Yupanqui Pachacutic, one of the most celebrated of the Peruvian monarchs. The central figure of the drama is a chieftain named Ollanta, who conceived a violent passion for a daughter of the Inca named Curi-Coyllur (Joyful Star). This passion was deemed unlawful, as no mere subject who was not of the blood-royal might aspire to the hand of a daughter of the Inca. As the play opens we overhear a dialogue between Ollanta and his man-servant Piqui-Chaqui (Flea-footed), who supplies what modern stage-managers would designate the "comic relief" They are talking of Ollanta's love for the princess, when they are confronted by the high-priest of the Sun, who tries to dissuade the rash chieftain from the dangerous course he is taking by means of a miracle. In the next scene Curi-Coyllur is seen in company with her mother, sorrowing over the absence of her lover. A harvest song is here followed by a love ditty of undoubtedly ancient origin. The third scene represents Ollanta's interview with the Inca in which he pleads his suit and is slighted by the scornful monarch. Ollanta defies the king in a resounding speech, with which the first act concludes. In the first scene of the second act we are informed that the disappointed chieftain has raised the standard of rebellion, and the second scene is taken up with the military preparations consequent upon the announcement of a general rising. In the third scene Rumihaui as general of the royal forces admits defeat by the rebels.

  

The Love Story of Curi-Coyllur

Curi-Coyllur gives birth to a daughter, and is imprisoned in the darksome Convent of Virgins. Her child, Yma Sumac (How Beautiful), is brought up in the same building, but is ignorant of the near presence of her mother. The little girl tells her guardian of groans and lamentations which she has heard in the convent garden, and of the tumultuous emotions with which these sad sounds fill her heart. The Inca Pachacutic's death is announced, and the accession of his son, Yupanqui. Rebellion breaks out once more, and the suppression of the malcontents is again entrusted to Rumi-fiaui. That leader, having tasted defeat already, resorts to cunning. He conceals his men in a valley close by, and presents himself covered with blood before Ollanta, who is at the head of the rebels. He states that he has been barbarously used by the royal troops, and that he desires to join the rebels. He takes part with Ollanta and his men in a drunken frolic, in which he incites them to drink heavily, and when they arc overcome with liquor he brings up his troops and makes them prisoners.

  

Mother and Child

Yma Sumac, the beautiful little daughter of CuriCoyllur, requests her guardian, Pitu Salla, so pitifully to be allowed to visit her mother in her dungeon that the woman consents, and mother and child are united. Ollanta is brought as a prisoner before the new Inca, who pardons him. At that juncture Yma Sumac enters hurriedly, and begs the monarch to free her mother, Curi-Coyllur. The Inca proceeds to the prison, restores the princess to her lover, and the drama concludes with the Inca bestowing his blessing upon the pair.

The play was first put into written form in the seventeenth century, has often been printed, and is now recognised as a genuine aboriginal production.

  

The Races of Peru

Many races went to make up the Peruvian people as they existed when first discovered by the conquering Spaniards. From the south came a civilising race which probably found a number of allied tribes, each existing separately in its own little valley, speaking a different dialect, or even language, from its neighbours, and in many instances employing different customs. Although tradition alleged that these invaders came from the north by sea within historical times, the more probable theory of their origin is one which states that they had followed the course of the affluents of the Amazon to the valleys where they dwelt when the more enlightened folk from the south came upon them. The remains of this aboriginal people-for, though they spoke diverse languages, the probability is that they were of one or not more than two stocks-are still found scattered over the coastal valleys in pyramidal mounds and adobe-built dwellings.

  

The Coming of the Incas

The arrival of the dominant race rudely broke in upon the peaceful existence of the aboriginal folk. This race, the Quichua-Aymara, probably had its place of origin in the Altaplanicie highlands of Bolivia, the eastern cordillera of the Andes. This they designated Tucuman (World's End), just as the Kiche of Guatemala were wont to describe the land of their origin as Ki Pixab (Corner of the Earth). The present republic of Argentina was at a remote period covered by a vast, partially land-locked sea, and beside the shores of this the ancestors of the Quichua-Aymara race may have settled as fishers and fowlers. They found a more permanent settlement on the shores of Lake Titicaca, where their traditions state that they made considerable advances in the arts of civilisation. It was, indeed, from Titicaca that the sun emerged from the sacred rock where he had erstwhile hidden himself. Here, too, the llama and paco were domesticated and agricultural life initiated, or perfected. The arts of irrigation and terrace-building-so marked as features of Peruvian civilisation-were also invented in this region, and the basis of a composite advancement laid.

  

The Quichua-Aymara

This people consisted of two groups, the Quichua and Aymara, so called from the two kindred tongues spoken by each respectively. These possess a common grammatical structure, and a great number of words are common to both. They are in reality varying forms of one speech. From the valley of Titicaca the Aymara spread from the source of the Amazon river to the higher parts of the Andes range, so that in course of time they exhibited those qualities which stamp the mountaineer in every age and clime. The Quichua, on the other hand, occupied the warm valleys beyond the river Apurimac, to the north-west of the Aymara-speaking people-a tract equal to the central portion of the modern republic of Peru. The name "Quichua " implies a warm valley or sphere, in contradistinction to the "Yunca," or tropical districts of the coast and low lands.

  

The Four Peoples

The metropolitan folk or Cuzco considered Peru to be divided into four sections-that of the Colla-suyu, with the valley of Titicaca as its centre, and stretching from the Bolivian highlands to Cuzco; the Conti-suyu, between the Colla-suyu and the ocean; the Quichua Chinchay-suyu, of the north-west; and the Anti-suyu, of the montana region. The Inca people, coming suddenly into these lands, annexed them with surprising rapidity, and, making the aboriginal tribes dependent upon their rule, spread themselves over the face of the country. Thus the ancient chroniclers. But it is obvious that such rapid conquest was a practical impossibility, and it is now understood that the Inca power was consolidated only some hundred years before the coming of Pizarro.

  

The Coming of Manco Ccapac

Peruvian myth has its Quetzalcoatl in Manco Ccapac, a veritable son of the sun. The Life-aiver. observing the deplorable condition of mankind, who seemed to exist for war and feasting alone, despatched his son, Manco Ccapac, and his sister-wife, Mama Oullo Huaca, to earth for the purpose of instructing the degraded peoples in the arts of civilised life. The heavenly pair came to earth in the neighbourhood of Lake Titicaca, and were provided with a golden wedge which they were assured would sink into the earth at the precise spot on which they should commence their missionary labours. This phenomenon occurred at Cuzco, where the wedge disappeared. The derivation of the name Cuzco, which means "Navel" or, in more modern terms, "Hub of the Universe," proves that it was regarded as a great culture-centre. On this spot the civilising a ents pitched their camp, gathering the uncultured folk ofthe country around them. Whilst Manco taught the men the arts of agriculture, Mama Oullo instructed the women in those of weaving and spinning. Great numbers gathered in the vicinity of Cuzco, and the foundations of a city were laid. Under the mild rule of the heavenly pair the land of Peru abounded in every desirable thing, like the Eden of Genesis. The legend of Manco Ccapac as we have it from an old Spanish source is worth giving. It is as follows: "There [in Tiahuanaco] the creator began to raise up the people and nations that are in that region, making one of each nation in clay, and painting the dresses that each one was to wear; those that were to wear their hair, with hair, and those that were to be shorn, with hair cut. And to each nation was given the language that was to be spoken, and the songs to be sung, and the seeds and food that they were to sow. When the creator had finished painting and making the said nations and figures of clay, he gave life and soul to each one, as well man as woman, and ordered that they should pass under the earth. Thence each nation came up in the places to which he ordered them to go. Thus they say that some came out of caves, others issued from hills, others from fountains, others from the trunks of trees. From this cause and others, and owing to having come forth and multiplied from those places, and to having had the beginning of their lineage in them, they made huacas [sacred things] and places of worship of them, in memory of the origin of their lineage. Thus each nation uses the dress with which they invest their huana; and they say that the first that was born in that place was there turned into stone. Others say that they were turned into falcons, condors, and other animals and birds. Hence the huacas they use are in different shapes."

  

The Peruvian Creation-Story

The Incan Peruvians believed that all things emanated from Pachacamac, the all-pervading spirit, who provided the plants and animals (which they believed to be pro. duced from the earth) with "souls." The earth itself they designated Pachacamama (Earth-Mother). Here we observe that Pachacamac was more the maker and moulder than the originator of matter, a view common to many American mythologies. Pachacamac it was who breathed the breath of life into man, but the Peruvian conception of him was only evolved in later Inca times, and by no means existed in the early days of Inca rule, although he was probably worshipped before this under another and less exalted shape. The mere exercise of will or thought was sufficient, according to the Peruvians, to accomplish the creative act. In the prayers to the creator, and in other portions of Inca rite, we read such expressions as "Let a man be," "Let a woman be," and "The creative word," which go to prove that the Peruvian consciousness had fully grasped the idea of a creator capable of evolving matter out of nothingness. Occasionally we find the sun acting as a kind of demiurge or sub-creator. He it is who in later legend founds the city of Cuzco, and sends thither three eggs composed of gold, silver, and copper, from which spring the three classes of Peruvians, kings, priests, and slaves. The inevitable deluge occurs, after which we find the prehistoric town of Tiahuanaco regarded as the theatre of a new creation of man. Here the creator made man, and separated him into nations, making one of each nation out of the clay of the earth, painting the dresses that each was to wear, and endowing them with national songs, languages, seeds to sow suitable to the environment of each, and food such as they would require. Then he gave the peoples life and soul, and commanded them to enter the bowels of the earth, whence they came upward in the places where be ordered them to go. Perhaps this is one of the most complete ("wholesale" would be a better word) creation myths in existence, and we can glean from its very completeness that it is by no means of simple origin, but of great complexity. It is obviously an attempt to harmonise several conflicting creation-stories, notably those in which the people are spoken of as emanating from caves, and the later one of the creation of men at Tiahuanaco, probably suggested to the Incas by the immense ruins at that place, for which they could not otherwise account.

  

Local Creation-Myths

In some of the more isolated valleys of Peru we discover local creation-myths. For example, in the coastal valley of Irma Pachacamac was not considered to be the creator of the sun, but to be himself a descendant of it. The first human beings created by him were speedily separated, as the man died of hunger, but the woman supported herself by living on roots. The sun took compassion upon her and gave her a son whom Pachacamac slew and buried. But from his teeth there grew maize, from his ribs the long white roots of the manioc plant, and from his flesh various esculent plants.

  

The Character of Inca Civilisation

Apart from the treatment which they meted out to the subject races under their sway, the rule of the Inca monarchs was enlightened and contained the elements of high civilisation. It is scarcely clear whether the Inca race arrived in the country at such a date as would have permitted them to profit by adopting the arts and sciences of the Andean people who preceded them. But it may be affirmed that their arrival considerably post-dated the fall of the megalithic empire of the Andeans, so that in reality their civilisation was of their own manufacture. As architects they were by no means the inferiors of the prehistoric race, if the examples of their art did not bulk so massively, and the engineering skill with which they pushed long, straight tunnels through vast mountains and bridged seemingly impassable gorges still excites the wonder of modern expcrts. They also made long, straight roads after the most improved macadamised model. Their temples and palaces were adorned with gold and silver images and ornaments; sumptuous baths supplied witb hot and cold water by means of pipes laid in the earth were to be found in the mansions of the nobility, and much luxury and real comfort prevailed.

  

An Absolute Theocracy

The empire of Peru was the most absolute theocracy the world has ever seen. The Inca was the direct representative of the sun upon earth, the head of a socio-religious edifice intricate and highly organised. This colossal bureaucracy had ramifications into the very homes of the people. The Inca was represented in the provinces by governors of the blood-royal. Officials were placea above ten thousand families, a thousand families, and even ten families, upon the principle that the rays of the sun enter everywhere, and that therefore the light of the Inca must penetrate to every corner of the empire. There was no such thing as personal freedom. Every man, woman, and child was numbered, branded, and under surveillance as much as were the llamas in the royal herds. Individual effort or enterprise was unheard of. Some writers have stated that a system of state socialism obtained in Peru. If so, then state surveillance in Central Russia might also be branded as socialism. A man's life was planned for him by the authorities from the age of five years, and even the woman whom he was to marry was selected for him by the Government officials. The age at which the people should marry was fixed at not earlier than twenty-four years for a man and eighteen for a woman. Coloured ribbons worn round the head indicated the place of a person's birth or the province to which he belonged.

  

A Golden Temple

One of the most remarkable monuments of the Peruvian civilisation was the Coricancha (Town of Gold) at Cuzco, the principal fane of the sun-god. Its inner and outer walls were covered with plates of pure gold. Situated upon an eminence eighty feet high, the temple looked down upon gardens filled, according to the conquering Spaniards, with treasures of gold and silver. The animals, insects, the very trees, say the chroniclers, were of the precious metals, as were the spades, hoes, and other implements employed for keeping the ground in cultivation. Through the pleasances rippled the river Huatenay. Such was the glittering Intipampa (Field of the Sun). That the story is true, at least in part, is proved by the traveller Squier, who speaks of having seen in several houses in Cuzco sheets of gold preserved as relics which came from the Temple of the Sun. These, he says, were scarcely as thick as paper, and were stripped off the walls of the Coricancha by the exultant Spanish soldiery.

  

The Great Altar

But this house of gold had but a roof of thatch! The Peruvians were ignorant of the principle of the arch, or else considered the feature unsuitable, for some reason best known to their architects. The doorways were formed of huge monoliths, and the entire aspect of the building was cyclopean. The interior displayed an ornate richness which impressed even the Spaniards, who had seen the wealth of many lands and Oriental kingdoms, and the gold-lust must have swelled within their hearts at sight of the great altar, behind which was a huge plate of the shining metal engraved with the features of the sun-god. The surface of this plate was enriched by a thousand gems, the scintillation of which was, according to eye-witnesses, almost insupportable. Around this dazzling sphere were seated the mummified corpses of the Inca kings, each on his throne, with sceptre in hand.

  

Planetary Temples

Surrounding the Coricancha several lesser temples clustered, all of them dedicated to one or other of the planetary bodies-to the moon, to Cuycha, the rainbow, to Chasca, the planet Venus. In the temple of the moon, the mythic mother of the Inca dynasty, a great plate of silver, like the golden one which represented the face of the sun-god, depicted the features of the moon-goddess, and around this the mummies of the Inca queens sat in a semicircle, like their spouses in the greater neighbouring fane. In the rainbow temple of Cuycha the seven-hued arch of heaven was depicted by a great arc of gold skilfully tempered or painted in suitable colours. All the utensils in these temples were of gold or silver. In the principal building twelve large jars of silver held the sacred grain, and even the pipes which conducted the water-supply through the earth to the sanctuary were of silver. Pedro Pizarro himself, besides other credible eye-witnesses, vouched for these facts. The colossal representation of the sun became the property of a certain Mancio Serra de Leguicano, a reckless cavalier and noted gambler, who lost it on a single throw of the dice! Such was the spirit of the adventurers who conquered this golden realm for the crown of Spain. The walls of the Coricancha arc still standing, and this marvellous shrine of the chief luminary of heaven, the great god of the Peruvians, is now a Christian church.

  

The Mummies of Peru

The fact that the ancient Peruvians had a method of mummification has tempted many "antiquarians " to infer therefrom that they had some connection with ancient Egypt. These theories are so numerous as to give the unsophisticated reader the idea that a regular system of immigration was carried on between Egypt and America. As a matter of fact the method of mummification in vogue in Peru was entirely different from that employed by the ancient Egyptians.

Peruvian mummies arc met with at apparently all stages of the history of the native races. Megalithic tombs and monuments contain them in the doubled-up posture so common among early peoples all over the world. These megalithic tombs, or chulpas, as they are termed, are composed of a mass of rough stones and clay, faced with huge blocks of trachyte or basalt, so put together as to form a cist, in which the mummy was placed. The door invariably faces the east, so that it may catch the gleams of the rising sun-a proof of the prevalence of sun-worship. Squier alludes to one more than 24 feet high. An opening 18 inches square gave access to the sepulchral chamber, which was 11 feet square by 13 feet high. But the tomb had been entered before, and after getting in with much difficulty the explorer was forced to retreat empty-handed.

Many of these chulpas are circular, and painted in gay primary colours. They. are very numerous in Bolivia, an old Peruvian province, and in the basin of Lake Titicaca they abound. The dead were wrapped in llama-skins, on which the outlines of the eyes and mouth were carefully marked. The corpse was then arrayed in other garments, and the door of the tomb walled up. In some parts of Peru the dead were mummified and placed in the dwelling-houses beside the living. In the rarefied air of the plateaus the bodies rapidly became innocuous, and the custom was not the insanitary one we might imagine it to be.

On the Pacific coast the method of mummification was somewhat different. The body was reduced to a complete state of desiccation, and was deposited in a tomb constructed of stone or adobe. Vases intended to hold maize or chicha liquor were placed beside the corpse, and copper hatchets, mirrors of polished stone, earrings, and bracelets have been discovered in these burial-places. Some of the remains are wrapped in rich cloth, and vases of gold and silver were placed beside them. Golden plaques are often discovered in the mouths, probably symbolic of the sun. The bodies exhibit no traces of embalming, and are usually in a sitting posture. Some of them have evidently been dried before inhumation, whilst others are covered with a resinous substance. They are generally accompanied by the various articles used during life; the men have their weapons and ornaments, women their household implements, and children their toys. The dryness of the climate, as in Egypt, keeps these relics in a wonderful state of preservation. In the grave of a woman were found not only vases of every shape, but also some cloth she had commenced to weave, which her death had perhaps prevented her from completing. Herlight brown hair was carefully combed and plaited, and the legs from the ankle to the knee were painted red, after the fashion in vogue among Peruvian beauties, while little bladders of toilet-powder and gums were thoughtfully placed beside her for her use in the life to come.

  

Laws and Customs

The legal code of the Incas was severe in the extreme. Murderers and adulterers were punished by death, and the unpardonable sin appears to have been blasphemy against the sun, or his earthly representative, the Inca. The Virgin of the Sun (or nun) who broke her vow was buried alive, and the village from whence she came was razed to the ground. Flogging was administered for minor offences. A peculiar and very trying punishment must have been that of carrying a heavy stone for a certain time.

On marriage a home was aportioned to each couple, and land assigned to them sufficient for their support. When a child was born a separate allowance was given it-one fanega for a boy, and half that amount for a girl, the fanega being equal to the area which could be sown with a hundred pounds of maize. There is something repulsive in the Inca code, with its grandmotherly legislation; and if this tyranny was beneficent, it was devised merely to serve its own ends and hound on the unhappy people under its control like dumb, driven cattle. The outlook of the average native was limited in the extreme. The Inca class of priests and warriors retained every vestige of authority; and that they employed their power unmercifully to grind down the millions beneath them was a sufficient excuse for the Spanish Conquistadores in dispossessing them of the empire they had so harshly administered.

The public ground was divided afresh every year according to the number of the members of each family, and agrarian laws were strictly fixed. Private property did not exist among the people of the lower classes, who merely farmed the lot which each year was placed at their disposal. Besides this, the people had perforce to cultivate the lands sacred to the Inca, and only the aged and the sick could evade this duty.

  

The Peruvian Calendar

The standard chronology known to the Peru of the Incas was a simple lunar reckoning. But the four principal points in the sun's course were denoted by means of the intihuatana, a device consisting of a large rock surmounted by a small cone, the shadow of which, falling on certain notches on the stone below, marked the date of the great sun-festivals. The Peruvians, however, had no definite calendar. At Cuzco, the capital, the solstices were gauged by pillars called pachacta unanchac, or indicators-of time, which were placed in four groups (two pillars to a group) on promontories, two in the direction of sunrise and two in that of sunset, to mark the extreme points of the sun's rising and setting. By this means they were enabled to distinguish the arrival and departure of the solstices, during which the sun never went beyond the middle pair of pillars. The Inca astronomer's approximation to the year was 360 days, which were divided into twelve moons of thirty days each. These moons were not calendar months in the correct sense, but simply a succession of lunations, which commenced with the winter solstice. This method, which must ultimately have proved confusing, does not seem to have been altered to co-ordinate with the reckoning of the succession of years. The names of the twelve moons, which had some reference to the daily life of the Peruvian, were as follows:

Huchuy Pucuy Quilla (Small Growing Moon), approximately January.

Hatun Pucuy Quilla (Great Growing Moon), approximately February.

Pancar Pucuy Quilla (Flower-growing Moon), approximately March.

Ayrihua Quilla (Twin Ears Moon), approximately April.

Aymuray Quilla (Harvest Moon), approximately May.

Auray Cusqui Quilla (Breaking Soil), approximately June.

Chahua Huarqui Quilia (Irrigation Moon), approximately July.

Tarpuy Quilla (Sowing Moon), approximately August.

Ccoya Raymi Quilla (Moon of the Moon Feast), approximately September.

Uma Raymi Quilla (Moon of the Feast of the Province of Uma), approximately October.

Ayamarca Raymi Quilla (Moon of the Feast of the Province of Ayamarca), approximately November.

Ccapac Raymi Quilla (Moon of the Great Feast of the Sun), approximately December.

  

The Festivals

That the Peruvian standard of time, as with all American people, was taken from the natural course of the moon is known chiefly from the fact that the principal religious festivals began on the new moon following a solstice or equinox. The ceremonies conncctcd with the greatest festival, the Ccapac Raymi, were made to date near the lunar phases, the two stages commencing with the ninth day of the December moon and twenty-first day, or last quarter. But while these lunar phases indicated certain festivals, it very often happened that the civil authorities followed a reckoning of their own, in preference to accepting ecclesiastical rule. Considerable significance was attached to each month by the Peruvians regarding the nature of their festivals. The solstices and cquinoxes were the occasions of established ceremonies. The arrival of the winter solstice, which in Peru occurs in June, was celebrated by the Intip Raymi (Great Feast of the Sun). The principal Peruvian feast, which took place at the summer solstice, when the new year was supposed to begin, was the national feast of the great god Pachacamac, and was called capac Raymi. Molina, Fernandez, and Garcilasso, however, date the new year from the winter solstice. The third festival of the Inca year, the Ccapac Situa, or Ccoya Raymi (Moon Feast), which is signalled by the beginning of the rainy season, occurred in September. In general character these festivals appear to have been simple, and even childlike. The sacrifice of animals taken from sacred herds of llamas was doubtless a principal feature of the ceremony, accompanied by the offering up of maguey, or maize spirit, and followed by the performance of symbolic dances.

  

The Llama

The llama was the chief domestic animal of Peru. All llamas were the property of the Inca. Like the camel, its distant relative, this creature can subsist for long periods upon little nourishment, and it is suitable for the carriage of moderate loads. Each year a certain amount of llama wool was given to the Peruvian family, according to the number of women it contained, and these wove it into garments, whatever was over being stored away in the public cloth-magazines for the general use. The large flocks of llamas and alpacas also afforded a supply of meat for the people such as the Mexicans never possessed. Naturally much attention was given to the breeding of these animals, and the alpaca was as carefully regarded by the Peruvian as the sheep by the farmer of to-day. The guanacos and vicunas, wild animals of the llama or auchenia family, were also sources of food- and wool-supply.

  

Architecture of the Incas

The art in which the Incan Peruvians displayed the greatest advance was that of architecture. The earlier style of Inca building shows that it was closely modelled, as has already been pointed out, on that of the megalithic masons of the Tiahuanaco district, but the later style shows stones laid in regular courses, varying in length. No cement or mortar of any kind was employed, the structure depending for stability upon the accuracy with which the stones were fitted to each other. An enormous amount of labour must have been expended upon this part of the work, for in the monuments of Peruvian architecture which still exist it is impossible to insert even a needle between the stones of which they are composed. The palaces and temples were built around a courtyard, and most of the principal buildings had a hall of considerable dimensions attached to them, which, like the baronial halls of the England of the Middle Ages, served for feasting or ceremony. In this style is built the front of the palace on the Colcampata, overlooking the city of Cuzco, under the fortress which is supposed to have been the dwelling of Manco Ccapac, the first Inca. Palaces at Yucay and Chinchero are also of this type.

  

Unsurpassed Workmanship

In an illuminating passage upon Inca architecture Sir Clements Markham, the greatest living authority upon matters Peruvian, says:

"In Cuzco the stone used is a dark trachyte, and the coarse grain secured greater adhesion between the blocks. The workmanship is unsurpassed, and the world has nothing to show in the way of stone-cutting and fitting to equal the skill and accuracy displayed in the Ynca structures of Cuzco. No cement is used, and the larger stones are in the lowest row, each ascending course being narrower, which presents a most pleasing effect. The edifices were built round a court, upon which the rooms opened, and some of the great halls were 200 paces long by 60 wide, the height being 35 to 40 feet, besides the spring of the roof. The roofs were thatch; and we are able to form an idea of their construction from one which is still preserved, after a lapse of three centuries. This is on a circular building called the Sondor-huasi, at Azangaro, and it shows that even thatch in the hands of tasteful builders will make a sightly roof for imposing edifices, and that the interior ornament of such a roo may be exceedingly beautiful."

  

The Temple of Viracocha

The temple of Viracocha, at Cacha, in the valley of the Vilcamayu, is built on a plan different from that of any other sacred building in Peru. Its ruins consist of a wall of adobe or clay 40 feet high and 330 long, built on stone foundations 8 feet in height. The roof was supported on twenty-five columns, and the width of the structure was 87 feet. It was a place of pilgrimage, and the caravanserais where the Faithful were wont to be housed still stand around the ruined fane.

  

Titicaca

The most sacred of the Peruvian shrines, however, was Titicaca, an island on the lake of that name. The island of Coati, hard by, enjoyed an equal reverence. Terraced platforms on the ormer, reached by flights of steps, support two buildings provided for the use of pilgrims about to proceed to Coati. On Titicaca there are the ruins of an extensive palace which commands a splendid view of the surrounding barren country. A great bath or tank is situated half-way down a long range of terraces supported by cut stone masonry, and the Pool, 40 feet long by 10, and 5 feet deep, has similar walls on three sides. Below this tank the water is made to irrigate terrace after terrace until it falls into the lake.

  

Coati

The island of Coati is about six miles distant. The principal building is on one of the loftiest of seven terraces, once radiant with flowers and shrubs, and filled with rich loam transported from a more fertile region. It is placed on three sides of a square, 183 feet long by 80, and is of stone laid in clay and coated with plaster. "It has," says Markham, "thirty-five chambers, only one of which is faced with hewn stones. The ornament on the faqade consists of elaborate niches, which agreeably break the monotony of the wall, and above them runs a projecting cornice. The walls were painted yellow, and the niches red; and there was a high-pitched roof, broken here and there by gables. The two largest chambers are 20 long by 12, and loftier than the rest, each with a great niche in the wall facing the entrance. These were probably the holy places or shrines of the temple. The beautiful series of terraces falls ofF from the esplanade of the temple to the shores of the lake."

  

Mysterious Chimu

The coast folk, of a different race from the Incas, had their centre of civilisation near the city of Truxillo, on the plain of Chimu. Here the ruins of a great city litter the plain for many acres. Arising from the mass of ruin, at intervals stand huacas, or artificial hills. The city was supplied with water by means of small canals, which also served to irrigate the gardens. The mounds alluded to were used for sepulture, and the largest, at Moche, is 800 feet long by 470 feet in breadth, and 200 feet in height. It is constructed of adobes. Besides serving the purpose of a cemetery, this mound probably supported a large temple on its summit.

  

The Palace

A vast palace occupied a commanding position. Its great hall was ioo feet long by 52 broad, and its walls were covered with a highly ornate series of arabesques in relief done in stucco, like the fretwork on the walls of Palenque. Another hall close at hand is ornamented in coloured stucco, and from it branch off many small rooms, which were evidently dormitories. From the first hall a long corridor leads to secret storehouses, where many vessels of gold and silver have been discovered hidden away, as if to secure them either from rnarauding bands or the gaze of the vulgar. All of these structures are hollowed out of a vast mound covering several acres, so that the entire building may be said to be partially subterranean in character. "About a hundred yards to the westward of this palace there was a sepulchral mound where many relics were discovered. The bodies were wrapped in cloths, woven in ornamental figures and patterns of different colours. On some of the cloths were sewn plates of silver, and they were edged with borders of feathers, the silver being occasionally cut in the shape of fishes. Among the ruins of the city there are great rectangular areas enclosed by massive walls, and containing courts, streets, dwellings, and reservoirs for water. The largest is about a mile south of the mound-palace, and is 550 yards long by 400. The outer wall is about 30 feet high, io feet thick at the base, with sides inclining toward each other. Some of the interior walls are highly ornamented in stuccoed patterns; and in one part there is an edifice containing forty-five chambers or cells, in five rows of nine each, which is supposed to have been a prison. The enclosure also contained a reservoir 450 feet long by 195 broad, and 60 feet deep."

  

The Civilisation of Chimu

The ruins of Chimu are undoubtedly the outcome of a superior standard of civilisation. The buildings are elaborate, as are their internal arrangements. The extent of the city is great, and the art displayed in the manufacture of the utensils discovered within it and the taste evinced in the numerous wall-patterns show that a people of advanced culture inhabited it. The jeweller's work is in high relief, and the pottery and plaques found exhibit much artistic excellence.

  

Pachacamac

The famous ruins of the temple and city of Pachacamac, near the valley of Lurin, to the south of Lima, overlook the Pacific Ocean from a height of 500 feet. Four vast terraces still bear mighty perpendicular walls, at one time painted red. Here was found the only perfect Peruvian arch, built of large adobe bricks-a proof that the Peruvian mind did not stand still in matters architectural at least.

  

Irrigation Works

It was in works of irrigation, however, that the race exhibited its greatest engineering genius. In the valley of Nasca the Incas cut deep trenches to reinforce the irrigating power of a small river, and carried the system high up into the mountains, in order that the rainfall coming therefrom might be conducted into the needful channel. Lower down the valley the main watercourse is deflected into many branches, which irrigate each estate by feeding the small surface streams. This system adequately serves the fifteen estates of Nasca to-day! Another high-level canal for the irrigation of pasture-lands was led for more than a hundred and fifty miles along the eastern slope of the central cordillera.

  

A Singular Discovery

In Peru, as in Mexico, it is probable that the cross was employed as a symbol of the four winds. An account of the expedition of Fuentes to the valley of Chichas recounts the discovery of a wooden cross as follows: [Skinner's State of Perm, p. 313 (1805).]

"When the settlers who accompanied Fuentes in his glorious expedition approached the valley they found a wooden cross, hidden, as if purposely, in the most intricate part of the mountains. As there is not anything more flattering to the vanity of a credulous man than to be enabled to bring forward his testimony in the relation of a prodigy, the devotion of these good conquerors was kindled to such a degree by the discovery of this sacred memorial that they instantly hailed it as miraculous and divine. They accordingly carried it in procession to the town, and placed it in the church belonging to the convent of San Francisco ) where it is still worshipped. It appears next to impossible that there should not, at that time, have been any individual among them sufficiently enlightened to combat such a persuasion, since, in reality, there was nothing miraculous in the finding of this cross, there having been other Christian settlers, before the arrival of Fuentes, in the same valley. The opinion, notwithstanding, that the discovery was altogether miraculous, instead of having been abandoned at the commencement, was confirmed still more and more with the progress of time. The Jesuits Antonio Ruiz and Pedro Lozano, in their respective histories of the missions of Paraguay, &c, undertook to demonstrate that the Apostle St. Thomas had been in America. This thesis, which was so novel, and so well calculated to draw the public attention, required, more than any other, the aid of the most power of reasons, and of the most irrefragable documents, to be able to maintain itself, even in an hypothetical sense; but nothing of all this was brought forward. Certain miserable conjectures, prepossession, and personal interest, supplied the place of truth and criticism. The form of a human foot, which they fancied they saw imprinted on the rock, and the different fables of this description invented by ignorance at every step, were the sole foundations on which all the relations on this subject were made to repose. The one touching the peregrinations of St. Thomas from Brazil to Quito must be deemed apocryphal, when it is considered that the above reverend fathers describe the Apostle with the staff in the hand, the black cassock girt about the waist, and all the other trappings which distinguish the missionaries of the society. The credit which these histories obtained at the commencement was equal to that bestowed on the cross of Tarija, which remained in the predicament of being the one St. Thomas had planted in person, in the continent of America."

  

The Chibchas

A people called the Chibchas dwelt at a very high point of the Andes range. They were brave and industrious, and possessed a culture of their own. They defended themselves against much stronger native races, but after the Spanish conquest their country was included in New Granada, and is now part or the United States of Colombia. Less experienced than the Peruvians or Aztecs, they could, however, weave and dye, carve and engrave, make roads, build temples, and work in stone, wood, and metals. They also worked in pottery and jewellery, making silver pendants and collars of shells and collars of precious stones. They were a wealthy folk, and their Spanish conquerors obtained much spoil. Little is known concerning them or their language, and there is not much of interest in the traditions relating to them.

Their mythology was simple. They believed the moon was the wife of Bochica, who represented the sun, and as she tried to destroy men Bochica only allowed her to give light during the night. When the aborigines were in a condition of barbarism Bochica taught them and civilised them. The legends about Bochica resemble in many points those about Quetzalcoad or Manco Ccapac, as well as those relating to the founder of Buddhism and the first Inca of Peru. The Chibchas offered human sacrifices to their gods at certain intervals, and kept the wretched victim for some years in preparation for his doom. They venerated greatly the Lake of Quatavita, and are supposed to have flung their treasures into it when they were conquered. Although many attempts have been made to recover these, little of value has been found.

The Chibchas appear to have given allegiance to two leaders, one the Zippa, who lived at Bogota, the other the Zoque, who lived at Hunsa, now Tunja. These chiefs ruled supreme. Like the Incas, they could only have one lawful wife, and their sons did not succeed them-their power passed, as in some Central African tribes, to the eldest son of the sister.

When the Zippa died, sweet-smelling resin took the place of his internal parts, and the body was put in a wooden coffin, with sheets of gold for ornamentation. The coffin was hidden in an unknown sepulchre, and these tombs have never been discovered-at least, so say the Spaniards. Their weapons, garments, objects of daily use, even jars of chicha, were buried with these chiefs. It is very likely that a cave where rows of mummies richly dressed were found, and many jewels, was the secret burying-place of the Zippas and the Zoques. To these folk death meant only a continuation of the life on earth.

  

A Severe Legal Code

The laws of the Chibchas were severe-death was meted out to the murderer, and bodily punishment for stealing. A coward was made to look like a woman and do her work while to an unfaithful wife was administered a dose of red pepper, which, if swallowed, released the culprit from the penalty of death and entitled her to an apology from her husband. The Chibchas made no use of cattle, and lived on honey. Their houses were built of clay, and were set in the midst of an enclosure guarded by watch-towers. The roofs were of a conical shape, covered with reed mats, and skilfully interlaced rushes were used to close the openings.

The Chibchas were skilful in working bronze, lead, copper, tin, gold, and silver, but not iron. The Saint Germain Museum has many specimens of gold and silver articles made by these people. M. Uricaechea, has still more uncommon specimens in his collection, such as two golden masks of the human face larger than life, and a great number of statuettes of men, and images of monkeys and frogs.

The Chibchas traded with what they made, exporting the rock salt they found in their own country and receiving in exchange cereals with which to cultivate their own poor soil. They also made curious little ornaments which might have passed for money, but they are not supposed to have understood coinage. They had few stone columns-only large granite rocks covered with huge figures of tigers and crocodiles. Humboldt mentions these, and two very high columns, covered with sculpture, at the junction of the Carare and Magdalena, greatly revered by the natives, were raised probably by the Chibchas.

  

A Strange Mnemonic System

On the arrival of the Spaniards the Peruvians were unacquainted with any system of writing or numeration. The only means of recording events they possessed was that provided by quipos, knotted pieces of string or hide of varying length and colour. According to the length or colour of these cords the significance of the record varied; it was sometimes historical and sometimes mathematical. Quipos relating to the history of the Incas were carefully preserved by an officer called Quipo Camayol-literally, "The Guardian of the Quipos." The greater number were destroyed as monuments of idolatry by the fanatical Spanish monks who came over with the Conquistadores, but their loss is by no means important, as no study, however profound, could possibly unriddle the system upon which they were based. The Peruvians, however, long continued to use them in secret.

  

Practical Use of the Quipos

The Marquis de Nadaillac has placed on record a use to which the quipos were put in more modern times. He says: "A great revolt against the Spaniards was organised in 1792. As was found out later, the revolt had been organised by means of messengers carrying a piece of wood in which were enclosed threads the ends of which were formed of red, black, blue, or white fringes. The black thread had four knots, which signified that the messenger had started from Vladura, the residence of the chief of the conspiracy, four days after full moon. The white thread had ten knots, which signified that the revolt would break out ten days after the arrival of the messenger. The person to whom the keeper was sent had in his turn to make a knot in the red thread if he agreed to join the confederates; in the red and blue threads, on the contrary, if he refused." It was by means of these quipos that the Incas transmitted their instructions. On all the roads starting from the capital, at distances rarely exceeding five miles, rose tambos, or stations for the chasquis or couriers, who went from one post to another. The orders of the Inca thus became disseminated with great rapidity. Orders which emanated directly from the sovereign were marked with a red thread of the royal llantu (mantle), and nothing, as historians assure us, could equal the respect with which these messages were received.

  

The Incas as Craftsmen

The Incan Peruvians had made some progress in the metallurgic, ceramic, and textile arts. By washing the sands of the rivers of Caravaya they obtained large quantities of gold, and they extracted silver from the ore by means of blast-furnaces. Copper also was abundant, and was employed to manufacture bronze, of which most of their implements were made. Although it is difficult to know at what period their mining operations were carried on, it is evident that they could only have learned the art through long experience. Many proofs are to be found of their skill in jewellery, and amongst these are wonderful statuettes which they made from an amalgam of gold and mercury, afterwards exposed to great heat. A number of curious little ornaments made of various substances, with a little hole bored through them, were frequently found under the huacas-probably talismans. The finest handiwork of the Incas was undoubtedly in jewellery; but unfortunately most of the examples of their work in this craft were melted down to assuage the insatiable avarice of the Spanish conquerors, and are therefore for ever lost to us. The spade and chisel employed in olden times by the Peruvians are much the same as the people use now, but some of their tools were clumsy. Their javelins, tomahawks, and other military arms were very futile weapons. Some found near the mines of Pasco were made of stone.

The spinning, weaving, and dyeing of the Peruvians were unequalled in aboriginal America, their cloths and tapestries being both graceful in design and strong in texture.

Stamps of bark or earthenware were employed to fix designs upon their woollen stuffs, and feathers were added to the garments made from these, the combination producing a gay effect much admired by the Spaniards. The British Museum possesses some good specimens of these manufactures.

  

Pottery

The Peruvians excelled in the potter's art. The pottery was baked in a kiln, and was varied in colour, red, black, and grey being the favourite shades. It was varnished outside, and the vases were moulded in two pieces and joined before heating. Much of the work is of great grace and elegance, and the shapes of animals were very skilfully imitated. Many drinking cups of elegant design have been discovered, and some vases are of considerable size, measuring over three feet in height. A simple geometric pattern is usually employed for decoration, but sometimes rows of birds and insects figure in the ceramics. The pottery of the coast veople is more rich and varied than that of the Inca race proper, and among its types we find vases moulded in the form of human faces, many of them exhibiting so much character that we are forced to conclude that they arc veritable portraits. Fine stone dishes are often found as well as platters of wood, and these frequently bear as ornament tasteful carvings representing serpents. On several cups and vases are painted representations of battles between the Inca forces and the savages of the eastern forests using bows and arrows; below wander the animals of the forest region, a brightly painted group.

The Archaeological Museum of Madrid gives a representation of very varied kinds of Peruvian pottery, including some specimens modelled upon a series of plants, interesting to botanists. The Louvre collections have one or two interesting examples ot earthenware, as well as the Ethnographical Museum of St. Petersburg, and in all these collections there are types which are believed to be peculiar to the Old World.

The Trocadero Museum has a very curious specimen with two necks called the "Salvador." A drawing on the vase represents a man with a tomahawk. The Peruvians, like the Mexicans, also made musical instruments out of earthenware, and heavy ornaments, principally for the ear.

  

Historical Sketch of the Incan Peruvians

The Inca dominion, as the Spaniards found it, was instituted only about a century before the coming ot the white man. Before that time Inca sway held good over scattered portions of the country, but had not extended over the entire territory which in later times was connected with the Inca name. That it was founded on the wreck of a more ancient power which once existed in the district of Chinchay-suyu there can be little doubt. This power was wielded over a space bounded by the lake of Chinchay-cocha on the north and Abancay on the south, and extended to the Pacific at the valley of Chincha. It was constituted by an alliance of tribes under the leadership of the chief of Pucara, in the Huanca country. A branch of this confederacy, the Chanca, pushing southward in a general movement, encountered the Inca people or Colla-suyu, who, under their leader, Pachacutic, a young but determined chieftain, defeated the invaders in a decisive battle near Cuzco. In consequence of this defeat the Chanca deserted their former allies and made common cause with their victors. Together the armies made a determined attack on the Huanca alliance, which they broke up, and conquered the northern districts of the Chinchay-suyu. Thus Central Peru fell to the Inca arms.

  

The Inca Monarchs

Inca history, or rather tradition, as we must call it in the light of an unparalleled lack of original documentary evidence, spoke of a series of eleven monarchs from Manco Ccapac to Huaina Ccapac, who died shortly before the Spanish conquest. These had reigned for a collective period of nearly 350 years. The evidence that these chiefs had reigned was of the best, for their mummified bodies were preserved in the great Temple of the Sun at Cuzco, already described. There they received the same daily service as when in the flesh. Their private herds of llamas and slaves were still understood to belong to them, and food and drink were placed before them at stated intervals. Clothes were made for them, and they were carried about in palanquins as if for daily exercise. The descendants of each at periodical intervals feasted on the produce of their ancestor's private estate, and his mummy was set in the ccntre of the diners and treated as the principal guest.

  

The First Incas

After Manco Ccapac and his immediate successor, Sinchi Roca (Wise Chief), Lloque Yupanqui comes third in the series. He died while his son was still a child. Concerning Mayta Ccapac, who commenced his reign while yet a minor, but little is known. He was followed by Ccapac Yupanqui, who defeated the Conti-suyu, who had grown alarmed at the great power recently attained by Cuzco. The Inca and his men were attacked whilst about to offer sacrifice. A second attempt to sack Cuzco and divide its spoil and the women attached to the great Temple of the Sun likewise ended in the total discomfiture of the jealous invaders. With Inca Roca, the next Inca, a new dynasty commences, but it is well-nigh impossible to trace the connection between it and the preceding one. Of the origin of Inca Roca nothing is related save that he claimed descent from Manco Ccapac. Roca, instead of waiting to be attacked in his own dominions, boldly confronted the Conti-suyu in their own territory, defeated them decisively at Pumatampu, and compelled them to yield him tribute. His successor, Yahuarhuaccac, initiated a similar campaign against the Colla. suyu people, against whom he had the assistance of the conquered Conti-suyu. But at a feast which he held in Cuzco before setting out he was attacked by his allies, and fled to the Coricancha, or Golden Temple of the Sun, for refuge, along with his wives. Resistance was unavailing, and the Inca and many of his favourites were slaughtered. The allied tribes which had overrun Central Peru now threatened Cuzco, and had they advanced with promptitude the Inca dynasty would have been wiped out and the city reduced to ruins. A strong man was at hand, however, who was capable of dealing with the extremely dangerous situation which had arisen. This was Viracocha, a chieftain chosen by the vote of the assembled warriors of Cuzco. By a prudent conciliation of the Conti-suyu and Collasuyu he established a confederation which not only put an end to all threats of invasion, but so menaced the invaders that they were glad to return to their own territory and place it in a suitable state of defence.

  

Viracocha the Great

With Viracocha the Great, or "Godlike," the period of true Inca ascendancy commences. He was the real founder of the enlarged Inca dominion. He was elected Inca on his personal merits, and during a vigorous reign succeeded in making the influence or Cuzco felt in the contiguous southern regions. In his old age he retired to his country seats at Yucay and Xaquixahuana, and left the conduct of the realm to his son and successor, Urco-Inca, a weak-minded voluptuary, who neglected his royal duties, and was superseded by his younger brother, Pachacutic, a famous character in Inca history.

  

The Plain of Blood

The commencement of Pachacutic's reign witnessed one of the most sanguinary battles in the history of Peru. Hastu-huaraca, chief of the Antahuayllas, in the Chanca country, invaded the Inca territory, and encamped on the hills of Carmenca, which overlooks Cuzco. Pachacutic held a parley with him, but all to no purpose, for the powerful invader was deter. mined to humble the Inca dynasty to the dust. Battle was speedily joined. The first day's figbt was indecisive, but on the succeeding day Pachacutic won a great victory, the larger part of the invading force being left dead on the field of battle, and Hastuhuaraca retreating with five hundred followers only. The battle of Yahuar-pampa (Plain of Blood) was the turning-point in Peruvian history. The young Inca, formerly known as Yupanqui, was now called Pachacutic (He who changes the World). The warriors of the south made full submission to him, and came in crowds to offer him their services and seek his alliance and friendship, and he shortly found himself supreme in the territories over which his predecessors had exercised merely a nominal control.

  

The Conquest of Middle Peru

Hastu-huaraca, who had been commissioned by the allied tribesmen of Chinchay-suyu to reduce the Incas, now threw in his lot with them, and together conqueror and conquered proceeded to the liberation of the district of Chinchay-suyu from the tyranny of the Huanca alliance. The reduction of the southern portion of that territory was speedily accomplished. In the valley of Xauxa the invaders came upon the army of the Huanca, on which they inflicted a final defeat. The Inca spared and liberated the prisoners of war, who were numerous. Once more, at Tarma, were the Huanca beaten, after which all resistance appears to have been overcome. The city-state of Cuzco was now the dominant power throughout the whole of Central Peru, a territory 300 miles in length, whilst it exercised a kind of suzerainty over a district of equal extent toward the south-east, which it shortly converted into actual dominion.

  

Fusion of Races

This conquest of Central Peru led to the fusing of the Quichua-speaking tribes on the left bank of the Apurimac with the Aymara-speaking folk on the right bank, with the result that the more numerous Quichua speedily gained linguistic ascendancy over their brethren the Aymara. Subsequently to this the peoples of Southern and Central Peru, led by Inca headmen, swept in a great wave of migration over Cerro de Pasco, where they met with little or no resistance, and Pachacutic lived to be lord over a dominion extending for a thousand miles to the northward, and founder of a great Inca colony south of the equator almost identical in outline with the republic of Ecuador.

  

Two Branches of the Incas

These conquests, or rather race-movements, split up the Inca people into two separate portions, the respective centres of which were well-nigh a thousand miles apart. The centre of the northern district was at Turnipampa, Riopampa, and Quito at different periods. The political separation of these areas was only a question of time. Geographical conditions almost totally divided the two portions of the empire, a sparsely populated stretch of country 400 miles in extent lying between them (see map, P. 333.)

  

The Laws of Pachacutic

Pachacutic united to his fame as a warrior the reputation of a wise and liberal ruler. He built the great Temple of the Sun at Cuzco, probably on the site of a still older building, and established in its walls the convent in which five hundred maidens were set apart for the service of the god. He also, it is said ' instituted the great rite of the Ccapac-cocha, at which maize, cloth, llamas, and children were sacrificed in honour of the sun-god. He devised a kind of census, by which governors were compelled periodically to render an account of the population under their rule. This statement was made by means of quipos. Agriculture was his peculiar care, and he was stringent in the enforcement of laws regarding the tilling of the soil, the foundation and upkeep of stores and granaries, and the regulation of labour in general. As an architect he took upon himself the task of personally designing the principal buildings of the city of Cuzco, which were rebuilt under his instructions and in accordance with models moulded from clay by his own hands. He appears to have had a passion for order, and to him we may be justified in tracing the rigorous and almost grandmotherly system under which the Peruvians were living at the time of the arrival of their Spanish conquerors. To Pachacutic, too, is assigned the raising of the immense fortress of Sacsahuaman, already described. He further instituted the order of knighthood known as Auqui, or "Warrior,"' entrance to which was granted to suitable applicants at the great feast of Ccapac Raymi, or Festival of the Sun. He also named the succession of moons, and erected the pillars on the hill of Carmenca by which the season of solstice was found. In short, all law and order which had a place in the Peruvian social economy were attributed to him, and we may designate him the Alfred of his race.

  

Tupac-Yupanqui

Pachacutic's son, Tupac-Yupanqui, for some time before his father's death acted as his lieutenant. His name signifies " Bright " or "Shining." His activity extended to every portion of the Inca dominion, the borders of which he enlarged, suppressing revolts, sub. jugating tribes not wholly brought within the pale of Inca influence, and generally completing the work so ably begun bv his father.

  

"The Gibbet"

A spirit of cruelty, and excess such as was unknown to Pachacutic marked the military exploits of Tupac. In the valley of Huarco, near the Pacific coast, for example, he was repulsed by the natives, who were well supplied with food and stores of all sorts, and whose town was well fortified and very strongly situated. Tupac constructed an immense camp, or rather town, the outlines of which recalled those of his capital of Cuzco, on a hill opposite the city, and here he calmly sat down to watch the gradual starvation of the enemy. This siege continued for three years, until the wretched defenders, driven to despair through want of food, capitulated, relying on the assurance of their conqueror that they should become a part of the Inca nation and that their daughters should become the wives of Inca youths. The submission of their chiefs having been made, Tupac ordered a general massacre of the warriors and principal civilians. At the conquest the Spaniardr could still see the immense heaps of bones which littered the spot where this heartless holocaust took place, and the name Huarco (The Gibbet) became indissolubly associated with the district.

  

Huaina Ccapac

Tupac died in 1493, and was succeeded by his son Huaina Ccapac (The Young Chief). Huaina was about twenty-two years of age at the time of his father's death, and although the late Inca had named Ccapac-Huari, his son by another wife, as his successor, the claims of Huaina were recognised. His reign was peaceful, and was marked by wise administrative improvements and engineering effort. At the same time he was busily employed in holding the savage peoples who surrounded his empire in check. He favoured the northern colony, and rebuilt Tumipampa, but resided at Quito. Here he dwelt for some years with a favourite son by a wife of the lower class, named Tupac-atau-huallpa (The Sun makes Good Fortune). Huaina was the victim of an epidemic raging in Peru at the time. He was greatly feared by his subjects, and was the last Inca who held undisputed sway over the entire dominion. Like Nezahualcoyotl in Mexico, he attempted to set up the worship of one god in Peru, to the detriment of all other huacas, or sacred beings.

  

The Inca Civil War

On the death of Huaina his two sons, Huascar and Atauhuallpa, [This is the name by which he is generally alluded to in Peruvian history.] strove for the crown. Before his demise Huaina had divided his dominion between his two sons, but it was said that he had wrested Quito from a certain chieftain whose daughter he had married, and by whom he had Atauhuallpa, who was therefore rightful heir to that province. The other son, Huascar, or Tupac-cusi-huallpa (The Sun makes Joy), was born to his principal sister-wife-for, according to Inca custom, the monarchs of Peru, like those of certain Egyptian dynasties, filled with pride of race, and unwilling to mingle their blood with that of plebeians, took spouses from among their sisters. This is the story as given by many Spanish chroniclers, but it has no foundation in fact. Atauhuallpa was in reality the son of a woman of the people, and Huascar was not the son of Huaina's sister-wife, but of a wife of less intimate relationship. Therefore both sons were on an equality as regards descent. Huascar, however, was nearer the throne by virtue of his mother's status, which was that of a royal princess, whereas the mother of Atauhuallpa was not officially recognised. Huascar by his excesses and his outrages on religion and public decency aroused the people to revolt against his power, and Atauhuallpa, discerning his opportunity in this emeute, made a determined attack on the royal forces, and succeeded in driving them slowly back, until at last Turnipampa was razed to the ground, and shortly afterwards the important southerly fortress of Caxamarca fell into the hands of the rebels.

  

A Dramatic Situation

Atauhuallpa. remained at Caxamarca, and despatched the bulk of his forces into the enemy's country. These drove the warriors of Huascar back until the upper courses of the Apurimac were reached. Huascar fled from Cuzco, but was captured, and carried a prisoner with his mother, wife, and children to Atauhuallpa. Not many days afterwards news of the landing of the Spaniards was received by the rebel Inca. The downfall of the Peruvian Empire was at hand.

  

A Worthless Despotism

If the blessings of a well-regulated government were dispensed by the Incas, these benefits were assuredly counterbalanced by the degrading despotism which accompanied them. The political organisation of the Peruvian Empire was in every sense more complete than that of Mexico. But in a state where individual effort and liberty are entirely crushed even such an effective organisation as the Peruvian can avail the people little, and is merely a device for the support of a calculated tyranny.

    
The Myths of Mexico and Peru, by Lewis Spence, [1913], at sacred-texts.com

  

CHAPTER VII: The Mythology of Peru

  

The Religion of Ancient Peru

THE religion of the ancient Peruvians had obviously developed in a much shorter time than that of the Mexicans. The more ancient character inherent in it was displayed in the presence of deities many of which were little better than mere totems, and although a definite monotheism or worship of one god appears to have been reached, it was not by the efforts of the priestly caste that this was achieved, but rather by the will of the Inca Pachacutic, who seems to have been a monarch gifted with rare insight and ability-a man much after the type of the Mexican Nezahualcoyotl.

In Inca times the religion of the people was solely directed by the state, and regulated in such a manner that independent theological thought was permitted no outlet. But it must not be inferred from this that no change had ever come over the spirit of Peruvian religion. As a matter of fact sweeping changes had been effected, but these had been solely the work of the Inca race, the leaders of which had amalgamated the various faiths of the peoples whom they had conquered into one official belief.

  

Totemism

Garcilasso el Inca de la Vega, an early Spanish writer on matters Peruvian, states that tradition ran that in ante-Inca times every district, family, and village possessed its own god, each different from the others. These gods were usually such objects as trees, mountains, flowers, herbs, caves, large stones, pieces of jasper, and animals. The jaguar, puma, and bear were worshipped for their strength and fierceness, the monkey and fox for their cunning, the condor for its size and because several tribes believed themselves to be descended from it. The screech-owl was worshipped for its beauty, and the common owl for its power of seeing in the dark. Serpents, particularly the larger and more dangerous varieties, were especially regarded with reverence.

Although Payne classes all these gods together as totems, it is plain that those of the first class-the flowers, herbs, caves, and pieces of jasper-are merely fetishes. A fetish is an object in which the savage believes to be resident a spirit which, by its magic, will assist him in his undertakings. A totem is an object or an animal, usually the latter, with which the people of a tribe believe themselves to be connected by ties of blood and from which they are descended. It later becomes the type or symbol of the tribe.

  

Paccariscas

Lakes, springs, rocks, mountains, precipices, and caves were all regarded by the various Peruvian tribes as paccariscas-places whence their ancestors had originally issued to the upper world. The paccarisca was usually saluted with the cry, "Thou art my birthplace, thou art my life-spring. Guard me from evil, O Paccarisca!" In the holy spot a spirit was supposed to dwell which served the tribe as a kind of oracle. Naturally the paccarisca was looked upon with extreme reverence. It became, indeed, a sort of life-centre for the tribe, from which they were very unwilling to be separated.

  

Worship of Stones

The worship of stones appears to have been almost as universal in ancient Peru as it was in ancient Palestine. Man in his primitive state believes stones to be the framework of the earth, its bony structure. He considers himself to have emerged from some cave-in fact, from the entrails of the earth. Nearly all American creation-myths regard man as thus emanating from the bowels of the great terrestrial mother. Rocks which were thus chosen as paccariscas are found, among many other places, at Callca, in the valley of the Yucay, and at Titicaca there is a great mass of red sandstone on the top of a high ridge with almost inaccessible slopes and dark, gloomy recesses where the sun was thought to have hidden himself at the time of the great deluge which covered all the earth. The rock of Titicaca was, in fact, the great paccarisca of the sun itself.

We are thus not surprised to find that many standing stones were worshipped in Peru in aboriginal times. Thus Arriaga states that rocks of great size which bore some resemblance to the human figure were imagined to have been at one time gigantic men or spirits who, because they disobeyed the creative power, were turned into stone. According to another account they were said to have suffered this punishment for refusincr to listen to the words of Thonapa, the son of the creator, who, like Quetzalcoad or Manco Ccapac, had taken upon himself the guise of a wandering Indian, so that he might have an opportunity of bringing the arts of civilisation to the aborigines. At Tiahuanaco a certain group of stones was said to represent all that remained of the villagers of that place, who, instead of paying fitting attention to the wisc counsel which Thonapa the Civiliser bestowed upon them, continued to dance and drink in scorn of the teachings he had brought to them.

Again, some stones were said to have become men, as in the old Greek creation-legend of Deucalion and Pyrrha. In the legend of Ccapac Inca Pachacutic, when Cuzco was attacked in force by the Chancas an Indian erected stones to which he attached shields and weapons so that they should appear to represent so many warriors in hiding. Pachacutic, in great need of assistance, cried to them with such vehemence to come to his help that they became men, and rendered him splendid service.

  

Huacas

Whatever was sacred, of sacred origin, or of the nature of a relic the Peruvians designated a huaca, from the root huacan, to howl, native worship invariably taking the form of a kind of howl, or weird, dirge-like wailing. All objects of reverence were known as huacas, although those of a higher class were also alluded to as viracochas. The Peruvians had, naturally, many forms of huaca, the most popular of which were those of the fetish class which could be carried about by the individual. These were usually stones or pebbles, many of which were carved and painted, and some made to represent human beings. The llama and the ear of maize were perhaps the most usual forms of these sacred objects. Some of them had an agricultural significance. In order that irrigation might proceed favourably a huaca was placed at intervals in proximity to the acequias, or irrigation canals, which was supposed to prevent them leaking or otherwise failing to supply a sufficiency of moisture to the parched maize-fields. Huacas of this sort were known as ccompas, and were regarded as deities of great importance, as the foodsupply of the community was thought to be wholly dependent upon their assistance. Other huacas of a similar kind were called chichics and huancas, and these prcsided over the fortunes of the maize, and ensured that a sufficient supply of rain should be forthcoming. Great numbers of these agricultural fetishes were destroyed by the zealous commissary Hernandez de Avendano.

  

The Mamas

Spirits which were supposed to be instrumental in forcing the growth of the maize or other plants were the mamas. We find a similar conception among many Brazilian tribes to-day, so that the idea appears to have been a widely accepted one in South American countries. The Peruvians called such agencies "mothers," adding to the generic name that of the plant or herb with which they were specially associated. Thus acsumama was the potato-mother, quinuamama the quinua-mother, saramama the maize-mother, and cocamama the mother of the coca-shrub. Of these the saramama was naturally the most important, governing as it did the principal source of the food-supply of the community. Sometimes an image of the saramama was carved in stone, in the shape of an car of maize. The saramama was also worshipped in the form of a doll, or huantay. sara, made out of stalks of maize, renewed at each harvest, much as the idols of the great corn-mother of Mexico were manufactured at each harvest-season. After having been made, the image was watched over for three nights, and then sacrifice was done to it. The priest or medicine-man of the tribe would then inquire of it whether or not it was capable of existing until that time in the next year. If its spirit replied in the affirmative it was permitted to remain where it was until the following harvest. If not it was removed, burnt, and another figure took its place, to which similar questions were put.

  

The Huamantantac

Connected with agriculture in some degree was the Huamantantac (He who causes the Cormorants to gather themselves together). This was the agency responsible for the gathering of sea-birds, resulting in the deposits of guano to be found along the Peruvian coast which are so valuable in the cultivation of the maize-plant. He was regarded as a most beneficent spirit, and was sacrificed to with exceeding fervour.

  

Huaris

The huaris, or "great ones," were the ancestors of the aristocrats of a tribe, and were regarded as specially favourable toward agricultural effort, possibly because the land had at one time belonged to them personally. They were sometimes alluded to as the "gods of strength," and were sacrificed to by libations of chicha. Ancestors in general were deeply revered, and had an agricultural significance, in that considerable tracts of land were tilled in order that they might be supplied with suitable food and drink offerings. As the number of ancestors increased more and more land was brought into cultivation, and the hapless people had their toil added to immeasurably by these constant demands upon them.

  

Huillcas

The huillcas were huacas which partook of the nature of oracles. Many of these were serpents, trees, and rivers, the noises made by which appeared to the primitive Peruvians-as, indeed, they do to primitive folk all over the world-to be of the quality of articulate speech. Both the Huillcamayu and the Apurimac rivers at Cuzco were huillca oracles of this kind, as their names, "Huillca-river " and "Great Speaker," denote. These oracles often set the mandate of the Inca himself at defiance, occasionally supporting popular opinion against his policy.

  

The Oracles of the Andes

The Peruvian Indians of the Andes range within recent generations continued to adhere to the superstitions they had inherited from their fathers. A rare and interesting account of these says that they "admit an evil being, the inhabitant of the centre of the earth, whom they consider as the author of their misfortunes, and at the mention of whose name they tremble. The most shrewd among them take advantage of this belief to obtain respect, and represent themselves as his delegates. Under the denomination of mohanes, or agoreros, they are consulted even on the most trivial occasions. They preside over the intrigues of love, the health of the community, and the taking of the field. Whatever repeatedly occurs to defeat their prognostics, falls on themselves; and they are wont ta pay for their deceptions very dearly. They chew a species of vegetable called piripiti, and throw it into the air, accompanying this act by certain recitals and incantations, to injure some, to benefit others, to procure rain and the inundation of the rivers, or, on the other hand, to occasion settled weather, and a plentiful store of agricultural productions. Any such result, having been casually verified on a single occasion, suffices to confirm the Indians in their faith, although they may have been cheated a thousand times. Fully persuaded that they cannot resist the influence of the piripiri, as soon as they know that they have been solicited in love by its means, they fix their eyes on the impassioned object, and discover a thousand amiable traits, either real or fanciful, which indifference had before concealed from their view. But the principal power, efficacy, and it may be said misfortune of the mohanes consist in the cure of the sick. Every malady is ascribed to theit enchantments, and means are instantly taken to ascertain by whom the mischief may have been wrought. For this purpose, the nearest relative takes a quantity of the juice of floripondium, and suddenly falls intoxicated by the violence of the plant. He is placed in a fit posture to prevent suffocation, and on his coming to himself, at the end of three days, the mohane who has the greatest resemblance to the sorcerer he saw in his visions is to undertake the cure, or if, in the interim, the sick man has perished, it is customary to subject him to the same fate. When not any sorcerer occurs in the visions, the first mohane they encounter has the misfortune to represent his image." [Skinner, State of Peru, p. 275]

  

Lake-Worship in Peru

At Lake Titicaca the Peruvians believed the inhabitants of the earth, animals as well as men, to have been fashioned by the creator, and the district was thus sacrosanct in their eyes. The people of the Collao called it Mamacota (Mother-water), because it furnished them with supplies of food. Two great idols were connected with this worship. One called Copacahuana was made of a bluish-green stone shaped like a fish with a human head, and was placed in a commanding position on the shores of the lake. On the arrival of the Spaniards so deeply rooted was the worship of this goddess that they could only suppress it by raising an image of the Virgin in place of the idol. The Christian emblem remains to this day. Mamacota was venerated as the giver of fish, with which the lake abounded. The other image, Copacati (Serpent-stone), represented the element of water as embodied in the lake itself in the form of an image wreathed in serpents, which in America are nearly always symbolical of water.

  

The Lost Island

A strange legend is recounted of this lake-goddess. She was chiefly worshipped as the giver of rain, but Huaina Ccapac, who had modern ideas and journeyed through the country casting down huacas had determined to raise on an island of Lake Titicaca a temple to Yatiri (The Ruler), the Aymara name of the god Pachacamac in his form of Pachayachachic. He commenced by raising the new shrine on the island of Titicaca itself. But the deity when called upon refused to vouchsafe any reply to his worshippers or priests. Huaina then commanded that the shrine should be transferred to the island of Apinguela. But the same thing happened there. He then inaugurated a temple on the island of Paapiti, and lavished upon it many sacrifices of llamas, children, and precious metals. But the offended tutelary goddess of the lake, irritated beyond endurance by this invasion of her ancient domain, lashed the watery waste into such a frenzy of storm that the island and the shrine which covered it disappeared beneath the waves and were never thereafter beheld by mortal eye.

  

The Thunder God of Peru

The rain-and-thunder god of Peru was worshipped in various parts of the country under various names. Among the Collao he was known as Con, and in that part of the Inca dominions now known as Bolivia he was called Churoquella. Near the cordilleras of the coast he was probably known as Pariacaca, who expelled the huaca of the district by dreadful tempests, hurling rain and hail at him for three days and ni hts in such quantities as to form the great lake of Pariacaca. Burnt llamas were offered to him. But the Incas, discontented with this local worship, which by no means suited their system of central government, determined to create one thunder-deity to whom all the tribes in the empire must bow as the only god of his class. We are not aware what his name was, but we know from mythological evidence that he was a mixture of all the other gods of thunder in the Peruvian Empire, first because he invariably occupied the third place in the triad of greater deities, the creator, sun, and thunder, all of whom were more or less amalgamations of provincial and metropolitan gods, and secondly because a great image of him was erected in the Coricancha at Cuzco, in which he was represented in human form, wearing a headdress which concealed his face, symbolic of the clouds, which ever veil the thunder-god's head. He had a special temple of his own, moreover, and was assigned a share in the sacred lands by the Inca Pachacutic. He was accompanied by a figure of his sister, who carried jars of water. An unknown Quichuan poet composed on the myth the following graceful little poem, which was translated by the late Daniel Garrison Brinton, an enthusiastic Americanist and professor of American archaeology in the University of Pennsylvania:

Bounteous Princess,
 Lo, thy brother
 Breaks thy vessel
 Now in fragments.
 From the blow come
 Thunder, lightning,
 Strokes of lightning;
 And thou, Princess,
 Tak'st the water,
 With it rainest,
 And the hail or
 Snow dispensest,
 Viracocha,
 World-constructor.

It will be observed that the translator here employs the name Viracocha as if it were that of the deity. But it was merely a general expression in use for a more than usually sacred being. Brinton, commenting upon the legend, says: "In this pretty waif that has floated down to us from the wreck of a literature now for ever lost there is more than one point to attract the notice of the antiquary. He may find in it a hint to decipher those names of divinities so common in Peruvian legends, Contici and Illatici. Both mean 'the Thunder Vase,' and both doubtless refer to the conception here displayed of the phenomena of the thunderstorm." Alluding to Peruvian thunder-myth elsewhere, he says in an illuminating passage: "Throughout the realms of the Incas the Peruvians venerated as maker of all things and ruler of the firmament the god Ataguju. The legend was that from him proceeded the first of mortals, the man Guamansuri, who descended to the earth and there wedded the sister of certain Guachimines, rayless ones or Darklings, who then possessed it. They destroyed him, but their sister gave birth to twin sons, Apocatequil and Piguerao. The former was the more powerful. By touching the corpse of his mother he brought her to life, he drove off and slew the Guachimines, and, directed by Ataguju, released the race of Indians from the soil by turning it up with a spade of gold. For this reason they adored him as their maker. He it was, they thought, who produced the thunder and the lightning by hurling stones with his sling. And the thunderbolts that fall, said they, are his children. Few villages were willing to be without one or more of these. They were in appearance small, round stones, but had the admirable properties of securing fertility to the fields, protecting from lightning, and, by a transition easy to understand, were also adored as gods of fire as well material as of the passions, and were capable of kindling the dangerous flames of desire in the most frigid bosoms. Therefore they were in great esteem as love-charms. Apocatequil's statue was erected on the mountains, with that of his mother on one hand and his brother on the other. 'He was Prince of Evil, and the most respected god of the Peruvians. From Quito to Cuzco not an Indian but would give all he possessed to conciliate him. Five priests, two stewards, and a crowd of slaves served his image. And his chief temple was surrounded by a very considerable village, whose inhabitants had no other occupation but to wait on him.'" In memory of these brothers twins in Peru were always deemed sacred to the lightning.

There is an instance on record of how the huillca could refuse on occasion to recognise even royalty itself. Manco, the Inca who had been given the kingly power by Pizarro, offered a sacrifice to one of these oracular shrines. The oracle refused to recognise him, through the medium of its guardian priest, stating that Manco was not the rightful Inca. Manco there. fore caused the oracle, which was in the shape of a rock, to be thrown down, whereupon its guardian spirit emerged in the form of a parrot and flew away. It is probable that the bird thus liberated had been taught by the priests to answer to the questions of those who came to consult the shrine. But we learn that on Manco commanding that the parrot should be pursued it sought another rock, which opened to receive it, and the spirit of the huillca was transferred to this new abode.

  

The Great God Pachacamac

Later Peruvian mythology recognised only three gods of the first rank, the earth, the thunder, and the creative agency. Pachacamac, the great spirit of earth, derived his name from a word pacha, which may be best trans, lated as "things." In its sense of visible things it is equivalent to "world," applied to things which happen in succession it denotes "time," and to things connected with persons "property," especially clothes. The world of visible things is thus Mamapacha (Earth-Mother), under which name the ancient Peruvians worshipped the earth. Pachacamac, on the other hand, is not the earth itself, the soil, but the spirit which animates all things that emerge therefrom. From him proceed the spirits of the plants and animals which come from the earth. Pachamama is the motherspirit of the mountains, rocks, and plains, Pachacamac the father-spirit of the grain-bearing plants, animals, birds, and man. In some localities Pachacamac and Pachamama were worshipped as divine mates. Possibly this practice was universal in early times, gradually lapsing into desuetude in later days. Pachamama was in another phase intended to denote the land immediately contiguous to a settlement, on which the inhabitants depended for their food-supply.

  

Peruvian Creation-Stories

It is easy to see how such a conception as Pachacamac, the spirit of animated nature, would become one with the idea of a universal or even a partial creator. That there was a pre-existing conception of a creative agency can be proved from the existence of the Peruvian name Conticsi-viracocha (He who gives Origin, or Beginning). This conception and that of Pachacamac must at some comparatively early period have clashed, and been amalgamated probably with ease when it was seen how nearly akin were the two ideas. Indeed, Pachacamac was alternatively known as Pacharurac, the "maker" of all things-sure proof of his amalgamation with the conception of the creative agency. As such he had his symbol in the great Coricancha at Cuzco, an oval plate of gold, suspended between those of the sun and the moon, and placed vertically, it may be hazarded with some probability, to represent in symbol that universal matrix from which emanated all things. Elsewhere in Cuzco the creator was represented by a stone statue in human form.

  

Pachayachachic

In later Inca days this idea of a creator assumed that of a direct ruler of the universe, known as Pachayachachic. This change was probably due to the influence of the Inca Pachacutic, who is known to have made several other doctrinal innovations in Peruvian theology. He commanded a great new temple to the creator-god to be built at the north angle of the city of Cuzco, in which he placed a statue of pure gold, of the size of a boy of ten years of age. The small size was to facilitate its removal, as Peruvian worship was nearly always carried out in the open air, In form it represented a man with his right arm elevated, the hand partially closed and the forefinger and thumb raised, as if in the act of uttering the creative word. To this god large possessions and revenues were assigned, for previously service rendered to him had been voluntary only.

  

Ideas of Creation

It is from aboriginal sources as preserved by the first Spanish colonists that we glean our knowledge of what the Incas believed the creative process to consist. By means of his word (nisca) the creator, a spirit, powerful and opulent, made all things. We are provided with the formulae of his very words by the Peruvian prayers still extant: "Let earth and heaven be," "Let a man be; let a woman be," "Let there be day," "Let there be night," "Let the light shine." The sun is here regarded as the creative agency, and the ruling caste as the objects of a special act of creation.

  

Pacari Tampu

Pacari Tampu (House of the Dawn) was the place of origin, according to the later Inca theology, of four brothers and sisters who initiated the four Peruvian systems of worship. The eldest climbed a neighbouring mountain, and cast stones to the four points of the compass, thus indicating that he claimed all the land within sight. But his youngest brother succeeded in enticing him into a cave, which he sealed up with a great stone, thus imprisoning him for ever. He next persuaded his second brother to ascend a lofty mountain, from which he cast him, changing him into a stone in his descent. On beholding the fate of his brethren the third member of the quartette fled. It is obvious that we have here a legend concocted by the later Inca priesthood to account for the evolution of Peruvian religion in its different stages. The first brother would appear to represent the oldest religion in Peru, that of the paccariscas, the second that of a fetishistic stone worship, the third perhaps that of Viracocha, and the last sun-worship pure and simple. There was, however, an "official" legend, which stated that the sun had three sons, Viracocha, Pachacamac, and Manco Ccapac. To the last the dominion of mankind was given, whilst the others were concerned with the workings of the universe. This politic arrangement placed all the power, temporal and spiritual, in the hands of the reputed descendants of Manco Ccapac the Incas.

  

Worship of the Sea

The ancient Peruvians worshipped the sea as well as the earth, the folk inland regarding it as a menacing deity, whilst the people of the coast reverenced it as a god of benevolence, calling it Mama-cocha, or Mother-sea, as it yielded them subsistence in the form of fish on which they chiefly lived. They worshipped the whale, fairly common on that coast, because of its enormous size, and various districts regarded with adoration the species of fish most abundant there. This worship can have partaken in no sense of the nature of totemism, as the system forbade that the totem animal should be eaten. It was imagined that the prototype of each variety of fish dwelt in the upper world, just as many tribes of North American Indians believe that the eponymous ancestors of certain animals dwell at the four points of the compass or in the sky above them. This great fish-god engendered the others of his species, and sent them into the waters of the deep that they might exist there until taken for the use of man. Birds, too, had their eponymous counterparts among the stars, as had animals. Indeed, among many of the South American races, ancient and modern, the constellations were called after certain beasts and birds.

  

Viracocha

The Aymara-Quichua race worshipped Viracocha as a great culture hero. They did not offer him sacrifices or tribute, as they thought that he, being creator and possessor of all things, needed nothing from men, so they only gave him worship. After him they idolised the sun. They believed, indeed, that Viracocha had made both sun and moon, after emerging from Lake Titicaca, and that then he made the earth and peopled it. On his travels westward from the lake he was sometimes assailed by men, but he revenged himself by sending terrible storms upon them and destroying their property, so they humbled themselves and acknowledged him as their lord. He forgave them and taught them everything, obtaining from them the name of Pachayachachic. In the end he disappeared in the western ocean. He either created or there were born with him four beings who, according to mythical beliefs, civilised Peru. To them he assigned the four quarters of the earth, and they are thus known as the our winds, north, south, east, and west. One legend avers they came from the cave Pacari, the Lodging of the Dawn.

  

Sun-Worship in Peru

The name "Inca" means "People of the Sun," which luminary the Incas regarded as their creator. But they did not worship him totemically-that is, they did not claim him as a progenitor, although they regarded him as possessing the attributes of a man. And here we may observe a difference between Mexican and Peruvian sun-worship, For whereas the Nahua primarily regarded the orb as the abode of the Man of the Sun, who came to earth in the shape of Quetzalcoatl, the Peruvians looked upon the sun itself as the deity. The Inca race did not identify their ancestors as children of the sun until a comparatively late date. Sun-worship was introduced by the Inca Pachacutic, who averred that the sun appeared to him in a dream and addressed him as his child. Until that time the worship of the sun had always been strictly subordinated to that of the creator, and the deity appeared only as second in the trinity of creator, sun, and thunder. But permanent provision was made for sacrifices to the sun before the other deities were so recognised, and as the conquests of the Incas grew wider and that provision extended to the new territories they came to be known as "the Lands of the Sun, the natives observing the dedication of a part of the country to the luminary, and concluding therefrom that it applied to the whole. The material reality of the sun would enormously assist his cult among a people who were too barbarous to appreciate an unseen god, and this colonial conception reacting upon the mother-land would undoubtedly inspire the military class with a resolve to strengthen a worship so popular in the conquered provinces, and of which they were in great measure the protagonists and missionaries.

  

The Sun's Possessions

In every Peruvian village the sun had considerable possessions. His estates resembled those of a territorial chieftain, and consisted of a dwelling-house, a chacra, or portion of land, flocks of llamas and pacos, and a number of women dedicated to his service. The cultivation of the soil within the solar enclosure devolved upon the inhabitants of the neighbouring village, the produce of their toil being stored in the inti-huasi, or sun's house. The Women of the Sun prepared the daily food and drink of the luminary, which consisted of maize and chicha. They also spun wool and wove it into fine stuff, which was burned in order that it might ascend to the celestial regions, where the deity could make use of it. Each village reserved a portion of its solar produce for the great festival at Cuzco, and it was carried thither on the backs of llamas which were destined for sacrifice.

  

Inca Occupation of Titicaca

The Rock of Titicaca, the renowned place of the sun's origin, naturally became an important centre of his worship. The date at which the worship of the sun originated at this famous rock is extremely remote, but we may safely assume that it was long before the conquest of the Collao by the Apu-Ccapac-Inca Pachacutic, and that reverence for the luminary as a war-god by the Colla chiefs was noticed by Tupac, who in suppressing the revolt concluded that the local observance at the rock had some relationship to the disturbance. It is, however, certain that Tupac proceeded after the reconquest to establish at this natural centre of sun-worship solar rites on a new basis, with the evident intention of securing on behalf of the Incas of Cuzco such exclusive benefit as might accrue from the complete possession of the sun's paccarisca. According to a native account, a venerable colla (or hermit), consecrated to the service of the sun, had proceeded on foot from Titicaca to Cuzco for the purpose of commending this ancient seat of sun-worship to the notice of Tupac. The consequence was that Apu-Ccapac-Inca, after visiting the island and inquiring into the ancient local customs, re-established them in a more regular form. His accounts can hardly be accepted in face of the facts which have been gathered. Rather did it naturally follow that Titicaca became subservient to Tupac after the revolt of the Collao had been quelled. Henceforth the worship of the sun at the place of his origin was entrusted to Incas resident in the place, and was celebrated with Inca rites. The island was converted into a solar estate and the aboriginal inhabitants removed. The land was cultivated and the slopes of the hills levelled, maize was sown and the soil consecrated, the grain being regarded as the gift of the sun. This work produced considerable change in the island. Where once was waste and idleness there was now fertility and industry. The harvests were skilfully apportioned, so much being reserved for sacrificial purposes, the remainder being sent to Cuzco, partly to be sown in the chacras, or estates of the sun, throughout Peru, partly to be preserved in the granary of the Inca and the huacas as a symbol that there would be abundant crops in the future and that the grain already stored would be preserved. A building of the Women of the Sun was erected about a mile from the rock, so that the produce might be available for sacrifices. For their maintenance, tribute of potatoes, ocas, and quinua was levied upon the inhabitants of the villages on the shores of the lake, and of maize upon the people of the neighbouring valleys.

  

Pilgrimages to Titicaca

Titicaca at the time of the conquest was probably more frequented than Pachacamac itself. These two places were held to be the cardinal shrines of the two great huacas, the creator and the sun respectively. A special reason for pilgrimage to Titicaca was to sacrifice to the sun, as the source of physical energy and the giver of long life; and he was especially worshipped by the aged, who believed he had preserved their lives.

Then followed the migration of pilgrims to Titicaca, for whose shelter houses were built at Capacahuana, and large stores of maize were provided for their use. The ceremonial connected with the sacred rites of the rock was rigorously observed. The pilgrim ere embarking on the raft which conveyed him to the island must first confess his sins to a huillac (a seaker to an object of worship); then further confessions were required at each of the three sculptured doors which had successively to be passed before reaching the sacred rock. The first door (Puma-puncu) was surmounted by the figure of a puma; the others (Quenti-puncu and Pillco-puncu) were ornamented with feathers of the different species of birds commonly sacrificed to the sun. Having passed the last portal, the traveller beheld at a distance of two hundred paces the sacred rock itself, the summit glittering with gold-leaf. He was permitted to proceed no further, for only the officials were allowed entry into it. The pilgrim on departing received a few grains of the sacred maize grown on the island. These he kept with care and placed with his own store, believing they would preserve his stock. The confidence the Indian placed in the virtue of the Titicaca maize may be judged from the prevalent belief that the possessor of a single grain would not suffer from starvation during the whole of his life.

  

Sacrifices to the New Sun

The Intip-Raymi, or Great Festival of the Sun, was celebrated by the Incas at Cuzco at the winter solstice. In connection with it the Tarpuntaita-cuma, or sacrificing Incas, were charged with a remarkable duty, the worshippers journeying eastward to meet one of these functionaries on his way. On the principal hill-tops between Cuzco and Huillcanuta, on the road to the rock of Titicaca, burnt offerings of llamas, coca, and maize were made at the feast to greet the arrival of the young sun from his ancient birthplace. Molina has enumerated more than twenty of these places of sacrifice. The striking picture of the celebration of the solar sacrifice on these bleak mountains in the depth of the Peruvian winter has, it seems, no parallel in the religious rites of the ancient Americans. Quitting their thatched houses at early dawn, the worshippers left the valley below, carrying the sacrificial knife and brazier, and conducting the white llama, heavily laden with fuel, maize, and coca leaves, wrapped in fine cloth, to the spot where the sacrifice was to be made. When sunrise appeared the pile was lighted. The victim was slain and thrown upon it. The scene then presented a striking contrast to the bleak surrounding wilderness. As the flames grew in strength and the smoke rose higher and thicker the clear atmosphere was gradually illuminated from the east. When the sun advanced above the horizon the sacrifice was at its height. But for the crackling of the flames and the murmur of a babbling stream on its way down the hill to join the river below, the silence had hitherto been unbroken. As the sun rose the Incas marched slowly round the burning mass, plucking the wool from the scorched carcase, and chanting monotonously: "O Creator, Sun and Thunder, be for ever young! Multiply the people; let them ever be in peace!"

  

The Citoc Raymi

The most picturesque if not the most important solar festival was that of the Citoc Raymi (Gradually Increasing Sun), held in June, when nine days were given up to the ceremonial. A rigorous fast was observed for three days previous to the event, during which no fire must be kindled. On the fourth day the Inca, accompanied by the people en masse, proceeded to the great square of Cuzco to hail the rising sun, which they awaited in silence. On its appearance they greeted it with a joyous tumult, and joining in procession, marched to the Golden Temple of the Sun, where llamas were sacrificed, and a new fire was kindled by means of an arched mirror, followed by sacrificial offerings of grain, flowers, animals, and aromatic gums. This festival may be taken as typical of all the seasonal celebrations. The Inca calendar was purely agricultural in its basis, and marked in its great festivals the renewal or abandonment of the labours of the field. Its astronomical observations were not more advanced than those of the calendars of many American races otherwise inferior in civilisation.

  

Human Sacrifice in Peru

Writers ignorant of their subject have often dwelt upon the absence of human sacrifice in ancient Peru, and have not hesitated to draw comparisons between Mexico and the empire of the Incas in this respect, usually not complimentary to the former. Such statements are contradicted by the clearest evidence. Human sacrifice was certainly not nearly so prevalent in Peru, but that it was regular and by no means rare is well authenticated. Female victims to the sun were taken from the great class of Acllacuna (Selected Ones), a general tribute of female children regularly levied throughout the Inca Empire. Beautiful girls were taken from their parents at the age of eight by the Inca officials, and were handed over to certain female trainers called mamacuna (mothers). These matrons systematically trained their protegees in housewifery and ritual. Residences or convents called aclla-huasi (houses of the Selected) were provided for them in the principal cities.

  

Methods of Medicine-Men

A quaint account of the methods of the medicinemen of the Indians of the Peruvian Andes probably illustrates the manner in which the superstitions of a barbarian people evolve into a more stately ritual.

"It cannot be denied," it states, "that the mohanes [priests] have, by practice and tradition, acquired a knowledge of many plants and poisons, with which they effect surprising cures on the one hand, and do much mischief on the other, but the mania of ascribing the whole to a preternatural virtue occasions them to blend with their practice a thousand charms and superstitions. The most customary method of cure is to place two hammocks close to each other, either in the dwelling, or in the open air: in one of them the patient lies extended, and in the other the mohane, or agorero. The latter, in contact with the sick man, begins by rocking himself, and then proceeds, by a strain in falsetto, to call on the birds, quadrupeds, and fishes to give health to the patient. From time to time he rises on his seat, and makes a thousand extravagant gestures over the sick man, to whom he applies his powders and herbs, or sucks the wounded or diseased parts. If the malady augments, the agorero, having been joined by many of the people, chants a short hymn, addressed to the soul of the patient, with this burden: 'Thou must not go, thou must not go.' In repeating this he is joined by the people, until at length a terrible clamour is raised, and augmented in proportion as the sick man becomes still fainter and fainter, to the end that it may reach his ears. When all the charms are unavailing, and death approaches, the mohane leaps from his hammock, and betakes himself to flight, amid the multitude of sticks, stones, and clods of earth which are showered on him. Successively all those who belong to the nation assemble, and, dividing themselves into bands, each of them (if he who is in his last agonies is a warrior) approaches him, saying: 'Whither goest thou? Why dost thou leave us? With whom shall we proceed to the aucas [the enemies]?' They then relate to him the heroical deeds he has performed, the number of those he has slain, and the pleasures he leaves behind him. This is practised in different tones while some raise the voice, it is lowered by others and the poor sick man is obliged to support these importunities without a murmur, until the first symptoms of approaching dissolution manifest themselves. Then it is that he is surrounded by a multitude of females, some of whom forcibly close the mouth and eyes, others envelop him in the hammock, oppressing him with the whole of their weight, and causing him to expire before his time, and others, lastly, run to extinguish the candle, and dissipate the smoke, that the soul, not being able to perceive the hole through which it may escape, may remain entangled in the structure of the roof. That this may be speedily effected, and to prevent its return to the interior of the dwelling, they surround the entrances with filth, by the stench of which it may be expelled.

  

Death by Suffocation

"As soon as the dying man is suffocated by the closing of the mouth, nostrils, &c, and wrapt up in the covering of his bed, the most circumspect Indian, whether male or female, takes him in the arms in the best manner possible, and gives a gentle shriek, which echoes to the bitter lamentations of the immediate relatives, and to the cries of a thousand old women collected for the occasion. As long as this dismal howl subsists, the latter are subjected to a constant fatigue, raising the palm of the hand to wipe away the tears, and lowering it to dry it on the ground. The result of this alternate action is, that a circle of earth, which gives them a most hideous appearance, is collected about the eyelids and brows, and they do not wash themselves until the mourning is over. These first clamours conclude by several good pots of masato, to assuage the thirst of sorrow, and the company next proceed to make a great clatter among the utensils of the deceased: some break the kettles, and others the earthen pots, while others, again, burn the apparel, to the end that his memory may be the sooner forgotten. If the defunct has been a cacique, or powerful warrior, his exequies are performed after the manner of the Romans: they last for many days, all the people weeping in concert for a considerable space of time, at daybreak, at noon, in the evening, and at midnight. When the appointed hour arrives, the mournful music begins in front of the house of the wife and relatives, the heroical deeds of the deceased being chanted to the sound of instruments. All the inhabitants of the vicinity unite in chorus from within their houses, some chirping like birds, others howling like tigers, and the greater part of them chattering like monkeys, or croaking like frogs. They constantly leave off by having recourse to the masato, and by the destruction of whatever the deceased may have left behind him, the burning of his dwelling being that which concludes the ceremonies. Among some of the Indians, the nearest relatives cut off their hair as a token of their grief, agreeably to the practice of the Moabites, and other nations. . . .

  

The Obsequies of a Chief

"On the day of decease, they put the body, with its insignia, into a large earthen vessel, or painted jar) which they bury in one of the angles of the quarter, laying over it a covering of potter's clay, and throwing in earth until the grave is on a level with the surface of the ground. When the obsequies are over, they forbear to pay a visit to it, and lose every recollection of the name of the warrior. The Roamaynas disenterre their dead, as soon as they think that the fleshy parts have been consumed, and having washed the bones form the skeleton, which they place in a coffin of potter's clay, adorned with various symbols of death, like the hieroglyphics on the wrappers of the Egyptian mummies. In this state the skeleton is carried home, to the end that the survivors may bear the deceased in respectful memory, and not in imitation of those extraordinary voluptuaries of antiquity, who introduced into their most splendid festivals a spectacle of this nature, which, by reminding them of their dissolution, might stimulate them to taste, before it should overtake them, all the impure pleasures the human passions could afford them. A space of time of about a year being elapsed, the bones are once more inhumed, and the individual to whom they belonged forgotten for ever." [Skinner, State of Peru, pp. 271 et seq.]

  

Peruvian Myths

Peru is not so rich in myths as Mexico, but the following legends well illustrate the mythological ideas of the Inca race:

  

The Vision of Yupanqui

The Inca Yupanqui before he succeeded to the sovereignty is said to have gone to visit his father, Viracocha Inca. On his way he arrived at a fountain called Susur-pugaio. There he saw a piece of crystal fall into the fountain, and in this crystal he saw the figure of an Indian, with three bright rays as of the sun coming from the back of his head. He wore a hauiu, or royal fringe, across the forehead like the Inca. Serpents wound round his arms and over his shoulders. He had ear-pieces in his ears like the Incas, and was also dressed like them. There was the head of a lion between his legs, and another lion was about his shoulders. Inca Yupanqui took fright at this strange figure, and was running away when a voice called to him by name telling him not to be afraid, because it was his father, the sun, whom he beheld, and that he would conquer many nations, but he must remember his father-in his sacrifices and raise revenues for him, and pay him great reverence. Then the figure vanished, but the crystal remained, and the Inca afterwards saw all he wished in it. When he became king he had a statue of the sun made, resembling the figure as closely as possible, and ordered all the tribes he had conquered to build splendid temples and worship the new deity instead of the creator.

  

The Bird Bride

The Canaris Indians are named from the province of Canaribamba, in Quito, and they have several myths regarding their origin. One recounts that at the deluge two brothers fled to a very high mountain called Huacaquan, and as the waters rose the hill ascended simultaneously, so that they escaped drowning. When the flood was over they had to find food in the valleys, and they built a tiny house and lived on herbs and roots. They were surprised one day when they went home to find food already prepared for them and chicha to drink. This continued for ten days. Then the elder brother decided to hide himself and discover who brought the food. Very soon two birds, one Aqua, the other Torito (otherwise quacamayo birds), appeared dressed as Canaris, and wearing their hair fastened in the same way. The larger bird removed the Ilicella, or mantle the Indians wear, and the man saw that they had beautiful faces and discovered that the bird-like beings were in reality women. When he came out the bird-women were very angry and flew away. When the younger brother came home and found no food he was annoyed, and determined to hide until the bird-women returned. After ten days the quacamayos appeared again on their old mission, and while they were busy the watcher contrived to close the door, and so prevented the younger bird from escaping. She lived with the brothers for a long time, and became the mother of six sons and daughters, from whom all the Canaris proceed. Hence the tribe look upon the quacamayo birds with reverence) and use their feathers at their festivals.

  

Thonapa

Some myths tell of a divine personage called Thonapa, who appears to have been a hero-god or civilising agent like Quetzalcoatl. He seems to have devoted his life to preaching to the people in the various villages, beginning in the provinces of Colla-suya. When he came to Yamquisupa he was treated so badly that he would not remain there. He slept in the open air, clad only in a long shirt and a mantle, and carried a book. He cursed the village. It was soon immersed in water, and is now a lake. There was an idol in the form of a woman to which the people offered sacrifice at the top of a high hill, Cachapucara. This idol Thonapa detested, so he burnt it, and also destroyed the hill. On another occasion Thonapa cursed a large assembly of people who were holding a great banquet to celebrate a wedding, because they refused to listen to his preaching. They were all changed into stones, which are visible to this day. Wandering through Peru, Thonapa came to the mountain of Caravaya, and after raising a very large cross he put it on his shoulders and took it to the hill Carapucu, where he preached so fervently that he shed tears. A chief's daughter got some of the water on her head, and the Indians, imagining that he was washing his head (a ritual offence), took him prisoner near the Lake of Carapucu. Very early the next morning a beautiful youth appeared to Thonapa, and told him not to fear, for he was sent from the divine guardian who watched over him. He released Thonapa, who escaped, though he was well guarded. He went down into the lake, his mantle keeping him above the water as a boat would have done. After Thonapa had escaped from the barbarians he remained on the rock of Titicaca, afterwards going to the town of Tiya-manacu, where again he cursed the people and turned them into stones. They were too bent upon amusement to listen to his preaching. He then followed the river Chacamarca till it reached the sea, and, like Quetzalcoatl, disappeared. This is good evidence that he was a solar deity, or man of the sun, who, his civilising labours completed, betook himself to the house of his father.

  

A Myth of Manco Ccapac Inca

When Manco Ccapac Inca was born a staff which had been given to his father turned into gold. He had seven brothers and sisters, and at his father's death he assembled all his people in order to see how much he could venture in making fresh conquests. He and his brothers supplied themselves with rich clothing, new arms, and the golden staff called tapac-yauri (royal sceptre). He had also two cups of gold from which Thonapa had drunk, called tapacusi. They proceeded to the highest point in the country, a mountain where the sun rose, and Manco Ccapac saw several rainbows. which he interpreted as a sign of good fortune, Delighted with the favouring symbols, he sang the song of Chamayhuarisca (The Song of Joy). Manco Ccapac: wondered why a brother who had accompanied him did not return, and sent one of his sisters in search of him, but she also did not come back, so he went himself, and found both nearly dead beside a huaca. They said they could not move, as the huaca, a stone, retarded them. In a great rage Manco struck this stone with his tapac-yauri. It spoke, and said that had it not been for his wonderful golden staff he would have had no power over it. It added that his brother and sister had sinned, and therefore must remain with it (the huaca) in the lower regions, but that Manco was to be "greatly honoured." The sad fate of his brother and sister troubled Manco exceedingly, but on going back to the place where he first saw the rainbows he got comfort from them and strength to bear his grief.

  

Coniraya Viracocha

Coniraya Viracocha was a tricky nature spirit who declared he was the creator, but who frequently appeared attired as a poor ragged Indian. He was an adept at deceiving people. A beautiful woman, Cavillaca, who was greatly admired, was one day weaving a mantle at the foot of a lucma tree. Coniraya, changing himself into a beautiful bird, climbed the tree, took some of his generative seed, made it into a ripe lucma, and dropped it near the beautiful virgin, who saw and ate the fruit. Some time afterwards a son was born to Cavillaca. When the child was older she wished that the huacas and gods should meet and declare who was the father of the boy. All dressed as finely as possible, hoping to be chosen as her husband. Coniraya was there, dressed like a beggar, and Cavillaca never even looked at him. The maiden addressed the assembly, but as no one immediately answered her speech she let the child go, saving he would be sure to crawl to his father. The infant went straight up to Coniraya, sitting in his rags, and laughed up to him. Cavillaca, extremely angry at the idea ot being associated with such a poor, dirty creature, fled to the seashore. Coniraya then put on magnificent attire and followed her to show her how handsome he was, but still thinking of him in his ragged condition she would not look back. She went into the sea at Pachacamac and was changed into a rock. Coniraya, still following her, met a condor, and asked if it had seen a woman. On the condor replying that it had seen her quite near, Coniraya. blessed it, and said whoever killed it would be killed himself. He then met a fox, who said he would never meet Cavillaca, so Coniraya told him he would always retain his disagreeable odour, and on account of it he would never be able to go abroad except at night, and that he would be hated by every one. Next came a lion, who told Coniraya he was very near Cavillaca, so the lover said he should have the power of punishing wrongdoers, and that whoever killed him would wear the skin without cutting off the head, and by preserving the teeth and eyes would make him appear still alive; his skin would be worn at festivals, and thus he would be honoured after death. Then another fox who gave bad news was cursed, and a falcon who said Cavillaca was near was told he would be highly esteemed, and that whoever killed him would also wear his skin at festivals. The parrots, giving bad news, were to cry so loud that they would be heard far away, and their cries would betray them to enemies. Thus Coniraya blessed the animals which       gave him news he liked, and cursed those which gave the opposite. When at last he came to the sea he found Cavillaca and the child turned into stone, and there he encountered two beautiful young daughters of Pachacamac, who guarded a great serpent. He made love to the elder sister, but the younger one flew away in the form of a wild pigeon. At that time there were no fishes in the sea, but a certain goddess had reared a few in a small pond, and Coniraya emptied these into the ocean and thus peopled it. The angry deity tried to outwit Coniraya and kill him, but he was too wise and escaped. He returned to Huarochiri, and played tricks as before on the villagers.

Coniraya slightly approximates to the Jurupari of the Uapes Indians of Brazil, especially as regards his impish qualities. [See Spence, article "Brazil" in Encyclopedia of Religion and Ethics vol. ii.]

  

The Llama's Warning

An old Peruvian myth relates how the world was nearly left without an inhabitant. A man took his llama to a fine place for feeding, but the beast moaned and would not eat, and on its master questioning it, it said there was little wonder it was sad, because in five days the sea would rise and engulf the earth. The man, alarmed, asked if there was no way of escape, and the llama advised him to go to the top of a high mountain, Villa-Coto, taking food for five days. When they reached the summit of the hill all kinds of birds and animals were already there. When the sea rose the water came so near that it washed the tail of a fox, and that is why foxes' tails are black! After five days the water fell, leaving only this one man alive, and from him the Peruvians believed the present human race to be descended.

  

The Myth of Huathlacuri

After the deluge the Indians chose the bravest and richest man as leader. This period they called Purunpacha (the time without a king). On a high mountain-top appeared five large eggs, from one of which Paricaca, father of Huathiacuri, later emerged. Huathiacuri, who was so poor that he had not means to cook his food properly, learned much wisdom from his father, and the following story shows how this assisted him. A certain man had built a most curious house, the roof being made of yellow and red birds' feathers. He was very rich, possessing many llamas, and was greatly esteemed on account of his wealth. So proud did he become that he aspired to be the creator himself; but when he became very ill and could not cure himself his divinity seemed doubtful. Just at this time Huathiacuri was travelling about, and one day he saw two foxes meet and listened to their conversation. From this he heard about the rich man and learned the cause of his illness, and forthwith he determined to go on to find him. On arriving at the curious house he met a lovely young girl, one of the rich man's daughters. She told him about her father's illness, and Huathiacuri, charmed with her, said he would cure her father if she would only give him her love. He looked so ragged and dirty that she refused, but she took him to her father and informed him that Huathiacuri said he could cure him. Her father consented to give him an opportunity to do so. Huathiacuri began his cure by telling the sick man that his wife had been unfaithful, and that there were two serpents hovering above his house to devour it, and a toad with two heads under his grinding-stone. His wife at first indignantly denied the accusation, but on Huathiacuri reminding her of some details, and the serpents and toad being discovered, she confessed her guilt. The reptiles were killed, the man recovered, and the daughter was married to Huathiacuri.

Huathiacuri's poverty and raggedness displeased the girl's brother-in-law, who suggested to the bridegroom a contest in dancing and drinking. Huathiacuri went to seek his father's advice, and the old man told him to accept the challenge and return to him. Paricaca then sent him to a mountain, where he was changed into a dead llama. Next morning a fox and its vixen carrying a jar of chicha came, the fox having a flute of many pipes. When they saw the dead llama they laid down their things and went toward it to have a feast, but Huathiacuri then resumed his human form and gave a loud cry that frightened away the foxes, whereupon he took possession of the jar and flute. By the aid of these, which were magically endowed, he beat his brother-in-law in dancing and drinking.

Then the brother-in-law proposed a contest to prove who was the handsomer when dressed in festal attire. By the aid of Paricaca Huathiacuri found a red lion-skin, which gave him the appearance of having a rainbow round his head, and he again won.

The next trial was to see who could build a house the quickest and best. The brother-in-law got all his men to help, and had his house nearly finished before the other had his foundation laid. But here again Paricaca's wisdom proved of service, for Huathiacuri got animals and birds of all kinds to help him during the night, and by morning the building was finished except the roof. His brother-in-law got many llamas to come with straw for his roof, but Huathiacuri ordered an animal to stand where its loud screams frightened the llamas away, and the straw was lost. Once more Huathiacuri won the day. At last Paricaca advised Huathiacuri to end this conflict, and he asked his brother-in-law to see who could dance best in a blue shirt with white cotton round the loins. The rich man as usual appeared first, but when Huathiacuri came in he made a very loud noise and frightened him, and he began to run away. As he ran Huathiacuri turned him into a deer. His wife, who had followed him, was turned into a stone, with her head on the ground and her feet in the air, because she had given her husband such bad advice.

The four remaining eggs on the mountain-top then opened, and four falcons issued, which turned into four great warriors. These warriors performed many miracles, one of which consisted in raising a storm which swept away the rich Indian's house in a flood to the sea.

  

Paricaca

Having assisted in the performance of several miracles, Paricaca set out determined to do great deeds. He went to find Caruyuchu Huayallo, to whom children were sacrificed. He came one day to a village where a festival was being celebrated, and as he was in very poor clothes no one took any notice of him or offered him anything, till a young girl, taking pity on him, brought him chicha to drink. In gratitude Paricaca told her to seek a place of safety for herself, as the village would be destroyed after five days, but she was to tell no one of this. Annoyed at the inhospitality of the people, Paricaca then went to a hill-top and sent down a fearful storm and flood, and the whole village was destroyed. Then he came to another village, now San Lorenzo. He saw a very beautiful girl, Choque Suso, crying bitterly. Asking her why she wept, she said the maize crop was dying for want of water. Paricaca at once fell in love with this girl, and after first damming up the little water there was, and thus leaving none for the crop, he told her he would give her plenty of water if she would only return his love. She said he must get water not only for her own crop but for all the other farms before she could consent. He noticed a small rill, from which, by opening a dam, he thought he might get a sufficient supply of water for the farms. He then got the assistance of the birds in the hills, and animals such as snakes, lizards, and so on, in removing any obstacles in the way, and they widened the channel so that the water irrigated all the land. The fox with his usual cunning managed to obtain the post of engineer, and carried the canal to near the site of the church of San Lorenzo. Paricaca, having accomplished what he had promised, begged Choque Suso to keep her word, which she willingly did, but she proposed living at the summit of some rocks called Yanacaca. There the lovers stayed very happily, at the head of the channel called Cocochallo, the making of which had united them; and as Choque Suso wished to remain there always, Paricaca. eventually turned her into a stone.

In all likelihood this myth was intended to account for the invention of irrigation among the early Peruvians, and from being a local legend probably spread over the length and breadth of the country.

  

Conclusion

The advance in civilisation attained by the peoples of America must be regarded as among the most striking phenomena in the history of mankind, especially if it be viewed as an example of what can be achieved by isolated races occupying a peculiar environment. It cannot be too strongly emphasised that the cultures and mythologies of old Mexico and Peru were evolved without foreign assistance or intervention, that, in fact, they were distinctively and solely the fruit of American aboriginal thought evolved upon American soil. An absorbing chapter in the story of human advancement is provided by these peoples, whose architecture, arts, graphic and plastic, laws and religions prove them to have been the equals of most of the Asiatic nations of antiquity, and the superiors of the primitive races of Europe, who entered into the heritage of civilisation through the gateway of the East. The aborigines of ancient America had evolved for themselves a system of writing which at the period of their discovery was approaching the alphabetic type, a mathematical system unique and by no means despicable, and an architectural science in some respects superior to any of which the Old World could boast. Their legal codes were reasonable and founded upon justice; and if their religions were tainted with cruelty, it was a cruelty which they regarded as inevitable, and as the doom placed upon them by sanguinary and insatiable deities and not by any human agency.

In comparing the myths of the American races with the deathless stories of Olympus or the scarcely less classic tales of India, frequent resemblances and analogies cannot fail to present themselves, and these are of value as illustrating the circumstance that in every quarter of the globe the mind of man has shaped for itself a system of faith based upon similar principles. But in the perusal of the myths and beliefs of Mexico and Peru we are also struck with the strangeness and remoteness alike of their subject-matter and the type of thought which they present. The result of centuries of isolation is evident in a profound contrast of "atmosphere." It seems almost as if we stood for a space upon the dim shores of another planet, spectators of the doings of a race of whose modes of thought and feeling we were entirely ignorant.

For generations these stories have been hidden, along with the memory of the gods and folk of whom they tell, beneath a thick dust of neglect, displaced here and there only by the efforts of antiquarians working singly and unaided. Nowadays many well-equipped students are striving to add to our knowledge of the civilisations of Mexico and Peru. To the mythical stories of these peoples, alas! we cannot add. The greater part of them perished in the flames of the Spanish autos-de-fe. But for those which have survived we must be grateful, as affording so many casements through which we may catch the glitter and gleam of civilisations more remote and bizarre than those of the Orient, shapes dim yet gigantic, misty yet many-coloured, the ghosts of peoples and beliefs not the least splendid and solemn in the roll of dead nations and vanished faiths.

    


===== BOOK: moc.txt =====


    
Myths of Crete and Pre-Hellenic Europe, by Donald A. Mackenzie, [1917], at sacred-texts.com

 

MYTHS OF CRETE & PRE-HELLENIC EUROPE

 

By DONALD A. MACKENZIE

 

With Illustrations in Colour by John Duncan, A.R.S.A. and from Photographs

 

THE GRESHAM PUBLISHING COMPANY LIMITED

 

66 CHANDOS STREET COVENT GARDEN LONDON

[1917]

Scanned, proofed and formatted at sacred-texts.com, May-June 2002, by John Bruno Hare. This text is in the public domain because it was published prior to 1923.

Ladies of the Minoan Court

 From the painting by John Duncan, A.R.S.A.

 
     
Myths of Crete and Pre-Hellenic Europe, by Donald A. Mackenzie, [1917], at sacred-texts.com

[p. iii]

 

PREFACE

This volume deals with the myths and legends connected with the ancient civilization of Crete, and also with the rise and growth of the civilization itself, while consideration is given to various fascinating and important problems that arise in the course of investigating pre-Hellenic habits of thought and habits of life, which are found to have exercised a marked influence in the early history of Europe. In the first two chapters the story of European civilization is carried back to remote Palaeolithic times, the view having been urged, notably by Mosso, that a connection existed between the civilization of the artistic cave-dwellers in France and Spain, and that of the Island of Minos. It is shown that these civilizations were not, however, contemporary, but separated by thousands of years, and that in accounting for close resemblances the modern dogma of independent evolution is put to a severe test. The data summarized in the Introduction emphasize the need for caution in attempting to solve a complex problem by the application of a hypothesis which may account for some resemblances but fails to explain away the marked differences that existed even between contemporary civilizations of the Neolithic, Copper, and Bronze Ages.

[p. iv]

To enable the reader to become familiar with the geological, ethnological, and archaeological evidence regarding the earliest traces and progressive activities of man in Europe, who laid the foundations of subsequent civilizations, a popular narrative is given in the first chapter, the scientific data being cast in the form of a legend following the manner of Hesiod's account of the Mythical Ages of the World in the Work and Days, and of that of the Indian sage Markandeya's story of the "Yugas" in the Mahabharata, and of Tuan MacCarell's narrative of his experiences in the various Irish Ages. Footnotes provide the necessary references.

Consideration is also given, in dealing with Cretan origins, to Schliemann's hypothesis regarding the "Lost Atlantis", and the connection he believed existed between the Mexican, early European, and Nilotic civilizations. It is brought out that the historical elements in Plato's legend are susceptible of a different explanation.

Cretan civilization has not yet been rendered articulate, for its script remains a mystery, but of late years a flood of light has been thrown upon it by the archaeologists, among whom Sir Arthur Evans is pre-eminent. We can examine the remains of the palace of Minos; tread the footworn stones of the streets of little towns; examine pottery and frame a history of it; gaze on frescoes depicting scenes of everyday life in ancient Crete, on seal engravings which show us what manner of ships were built and navigated by mariners who ruled the Mediterranean Sea long before the Phoenician period, what deities were worshipped and what ceremonies were performed; we can study a painted sarcophagus which throws light on funerary customs and conceptions of the Otherworld,

[p. v]

and stone vases which afford glimpses of boxers, bull-baiters, soldiers, and processions; and we can also examine the jewellery, weapons, and implements of the ancient folk. With the aid of these and other data we are enabled to reconstruct in outline the island civilization and study its growth over a period embraced by many centuries. It has even been found possible to arrange a system of Cretan chronology) approximate dates being fixed with the aid of artifacts, evidently imported from Egypt, and of Cretan artifacts found in the Nilotic area and elsewhere. The idea of the "Hellenic miracle" no longer obtains. It is undoubted that Crete was the forerunner of Greece, and that the Hellenes owed a debt to Cretan civilization the importance of which was not realized even by the native historians of ancient Greece.

Various problems arise in dealing with the growth of civilization in Crete and the influence exercised by it in Central and Western Europe. These include the race question, the migrations of peoples from the area in which the agricultural mode of life was first adopted, the question of cultural contact, of trade routes on sea and land. of homogeneity of beliefs of common origin, and of the influence of locality in the development of beliefs and material civilization. In the pages that follow, these problems are presented in their various aspects, and such representative evidence as is available has been utilized with purpose to throw light upon them.

Readers cannot fail to be impressed by the note of modernity which prevails in the story of Cretan life. It is emphasized to a remarkable degree in Minoan art. In this connection the coloured illustrations in the present volume. by Mr. John Duncan, A.R.S.A., are of peculiar

[p. vi]

interest. In preparing these designs Mr. Duncan has deliberately sought to follow the style of the Minoan artists themselves, as displayed in the relics of frescoes, and in pottery, seal engravings and impressions, &c., recently unearthed. The colours are confined to those used by the native craftsmen, while the decorative borders are essentially Cretan in character. In the Plate facing <page 248> a suggestive parallel is drawn between Celtic and Minoan patterns and symbols. It will be noted that the Celtic treatment of complicated patterns of common origin is more thorough and logical than the Minoan, as, for instance, when we compare No. 3, which has incomplete curves, with the finished and exact No. 4. The examples dealt with include a symbol of the Egypto-Libyan goddess Neith.

The note of modernity in Cretan art inclines us perhaps to be somewhat generous and enthusiastic in our praises of it. An eminent archaeologist has declared that "it yields to none that was contemporary and hardly to any that came after it". This is a strong claim, especially when we give consideration to the extraordinarily full and varied art of Egypt. In Crete, for instance, we do not meet with the skilled technique and psychological insight of some of Egypt's notable portraiture in stone, nor with faces of such high intellectual and moral qualities; nor do we meet with the masculine energy, the disciplined ferocity and brilliant directness of appeal that characterize the finest products of Assyrian art; nor can we help noting the absence of the idealistic tendencies of Greek art, with its aim to visualize mental and spiritual impressions, its moral ascendancy, and its preoccupation with the idea of beauty of form and character. No doubt it

[p. vii]

is because Cretan art is infused with a lyrical carelessness and freedom, not only in subject, but also in execution, that it makes a very special appeal to modern eyes. There are certainly notable instances of excellency in delicate modelling, a love of colour--who can refrain, for instance, from admiring the golden afternoon effects of Vasiliki pottery?--a delight in natural objects, a marked absence of formalism in the best work, and an extreme and arresting grace, especially in the ivory work. Yet it is possible to overestimate the artistic value of such works as the "Harvester Vase" (<page 212>), with its liveliness of movement and expression, and to commend even its defects, and forget that there are finer examples of low relief in Egypt, where the artists have left us in no doubt as to what they meant; it is possible also to infuse our art criticisms with archaeological enthusiasm, as when, for instance, we gaze on the fresco of the Cup Bearer (<page 118>), which is an impression of a very ordinary, good-looking, young man, with formal eyes, and hand and arm out of drawing. Yet while, as a whole, Cretan art is very unequal, there are a few masterpieces which set it on a high level. The ivory figurine of "The Leaper" is one of these (<page 48>). Its Parisian elegance and Greek-like accuracy and beauty of modelling take the eye at once. It is much worn, but the unbroken parts exhibit fine craftsmanship. The bones and muscles of the arm and hand especially are expressed with the modesty and animation of nature; there is none of the gross exaggeration so often found in Assyrian art. Another outstanding masterpiece is the bull's head in steatite (<page 108>). We are struck by its fine dignity, the noble poise of the head, the alert eye, the mobility of the pricked ears, and the

[p. viii]

combination of naturalism with simplicity, grace, and loftiness of treatment. A contrast is presented by the other bull's head in plaster relief (<page 124>), with the magnificent blaze of the great eye and the exhausted gasp of mouth and nostrils; the noble animal has evidently fallen a victim in the ring; it is powerful and grand even when death takes it. Special mention may also be made of the goat suckling its kid, an admirable piece of realism characterized by grace and insight (<page 152>).

The spirit of naturalism pulsating in Cretan art is also found in Palaeolithic art, of which two notable examples are given (<page 20>) from the cave paintings. These remarkable relics of the Pleistocene Age are typical products of Palaeolithic art, the advanced condition of which suggests a long history, and even the existence, in such remote times, not only of devoted personal study, but also of an organized system of training. The civilization reflected by such an art must have been of no mean order. Evidently it met with disaster during the Fourth Glacial Period, but subsequent discoveries may yet demonstrate that its influence was not wholly lost to mankind.

D. A. MACKENZIE.

     
Myths of Crete and Pre-Hellenic Europe, by Donald A. Mackenzie, [1917], at sacred-texts.com

[p. ix]

 

CONTENTS

  CHAP.     Page 
     INTRODUCTION  xvii 
  I.  PRIMITIVE EUROPEANS OF GLACIAL AND INTERGLACIAL PERIODS   
  II.  PALAeOLITHIC MAGIC AND RELIGION   
  III.  ANCIENT PEOPLES OF THE GODDESS CULT   
  IV.  HISTORY IN MYTH AND LEGEND-SCHLIEMANN'S DISCOVERIES   
  V.  CRETE AS THE LOST ATLANTIS   
  VI.  THE GREAT PALACE OF KNOSSOS   
  VII.  RACES AND MYTHS OF NEOLITHIC CRETE   
  VIII.  PRE-HELLENIC EARTH AND CORN MOTHERS   
  IX.  GROWTH OF CRETAN CULTURE AND COMMERCE   
  X.  TRADING RELATIONS WITH TROY   
  XI.  LIFE IN THE LITTLE TOWNS   
  XII.  THE PALACE OF PHAeSTOS   
  XIII.  CAVE DEITIES AND THEIR SYMBOLS   
  XIV.  DECLINE OF CRETE AND RISE OF GREECE   
     INDEX  337 
  

 

     
Myths of Crete and Pre-Hellenic Europe, by Donald A. Mackenzie, [1917], at sacred-texts.com

[p. xi]

 

PLATES IN COLOUR

     Page 
  LADIES OF THE MINOAN COURT
               From the painting by John Duncan, A.R.S.A.   Frontispiece 
  THE SNAKE GODDESS OF CRETE
               From the painting by John Duncan, A.R.S.A.   facing <page 58> 
  THE BULL-BAITERS
               From the painting by John Duncan, A.R.S.A.     "   <page 186> 
  SEA TRADERS FROM CRETE
               From the painting by John Duncan, A.R.S.A.     "   <page 218> 
  

 

     
Myths of Crete and Pre-Hellenic Europe, by Donald A. Mackenzie, [1917], at sacred-texts.com

[p. xiii]

 

PLATES IN MONOCHROME

     Page 
  INSCRIBED TABLETS FOUND IN CRETE  facing <page xxxii> 
  LIMESTONE SARCOPHAGUS FOUND AT AGHIA TRIADHA  <page xliv> 
  VOTIVE OFFERINGS FROM THE DICTEAN CAVE  <page xlviii> 
  EXAMPLES OF PALAeOLITHIC ART
                   From various sources  <page 16> 
  PALAeOLITHIC ART: PAINTINGS OF BISON AND DEER
                   From copies of the originals by L'Abbe Breuil  <page 20> 
  GROUP OF FIGURINES, IN TERRA-COTTA, FROM PALAIKASTRO  <page 30> 
  IVORY FIGURINE AND HEAD--"THE LEAPER"--FROM KNOSSOS
                   Reproduced from the "Annual of the British School at Athens"  <page 48> 
  THE LION GATE, MYCENAe From photograph by English Photo. Co.  <page 98> 
  BULL'S HEAD, IN STEATITE, FROM KNOSSOS  <page 109> 
  [p. xiv]    
  THE THRONE OF MINOS, KNOSSOS   facing <page 112> 
  THE CUP-BEARER, KNOSSOS
                   From photograph lent by Sir Arthur Evans  <page 118> 
  PAINTED PLASTER RELIEF-BULL'S HEAD-KNOSSOS
                   From photograph lent by Sir Arthur Evans  <page 124> 
  A GLIMPSE OF THE EXCAVATED REMAINS OF THE PALACE OF KNOSSOS  <page 130> 
  A CRETAN SHRINE: RESTORED BY SIR ARTHUR EVANS  <page 138> 
  WILD GOAT AND YOUNG: FAIENCE RELIEF, FROM KNOSSOS
                   Reproduced from the "Annual by the British School at Athens"  <page 152> 
  THE PRINCIPAL ROOM OF THE MUSEUM AT CANDIA, CRETE  <page 160> 
  MAGAZINE OF JARS AND KASELLES, KNOSSOS  <page 196> 
  EARLY MINOAN POTTERY, INCLUDING EXAMPLES WITH "BEAK" OR "TEAPOT SPOUTS"  <page 208> 
  THE "HARVESTER VASE" (STONE) FOUND AT AGHIA TRIADHA  <page 212> 
  GENERAL VIEW OF "THE TREASURE OF PRIAM"
                   From the photograph by Schliemann  <page 234> 
  GROUP OF JEWELS FROM THE ISLAND OF MOCHLOS  <page 238> 
  DECORATIVE MOTIFS AND SYMBOLS
                    (Minoan and Celtic patterns compared)  <page 248> 
  [p. xv]    
  THE RUINS OF THE LITTLE TOWN OF GOURNIA   facing <page 258> 
  THE ISLAND OF MOCHLOS, OFF THE NORTH COAST OF CRETE  <page 266> 
  DECORATED POTTERY FROM PALAIKASTRO  <page 270> 
  THE GRAND STAIRCASE, PALACE OF PHAeSTOS  <page 284> 
  THREE VASES, SCULPTURED IN STONE, FOUND AT AGHIA TRIADHA  <page 288> 
  WEAPONS AND IMPLEMENTS, IN BRONZE, FROM THE DICTEAN CAVE  <page 296> 
  BRONZE IMPLEMENTS FROM GOURNIA  <page 300> 
  PILLAR AT KNOSSOS, INCISED WITH DOUBLE-AXE SYMBOLS  <page 310> 
  MINOAN POTTERY FROM ZAKRO  <page 316> 
  RUINS OF THE "ROYAL VILLA", AGHIA TRIADHA  <page 328> 
  

 

 

 *** The Monochrome Plates, unless where otherwise stated, are reproduced from photographs by G. Maraghiannis, Candia, Crete.

 

[p. xvi]

Sketch Map of Eastern Part of Crete

 

     
Myths of Crete and Pre-Hellenic Europe, by Donald A. Mackenzie, [1917], at sacred-texts.com

[p. xvii]

 

INTRODUCTION

IN relating how Crete has risen into prominence as the seat of a great and ancient civilization, one is reminded of the fairy story of Cinderella. The archaeological narrative begins with the discovery made by Schliemann of traces of a distinctive and high pre-Hellenic culture amidst the ruins of the Peloponnesian cities of Tiryns and Mycenae, which he assigned to the Homeric Age. Evidence was soon forthcoming that this culture was not of indigenous character, but had been imported from some unknown area after it had reached its highest development and was beginning to show signs of decadence -a sure indication of its great antiquity. A dramatic search followed for the centre of origin and diffusion. The wonderful slipper had been found, but where was Cinderella? In the end, after several claims had been urged, the last comer was proved to be the missing princess of culture, and the last comer was Crete. Research on that island had been long postponed on account of the disturbed political conditions that prevailed under the Turkish regime.

A new first chapter has since been added to the history of European civilization. We no longer begin with Hellenic Greece, or believe that Hellenic culture sprang full-grown into being like the fabled deity who leapt from her parent's head. In this volume it is shown that the

[p. xviii]

myths and legends preserved in the works of various classical writers regarding the sources of Grecian culture were well founded, and that the traditions of the "Heroic Age" did not have origin in the imaginations of poets and dramatists. But, wise as we chance to be, after the event, we need not regard with scorn the historians of a past generation who hesitated to sift and utilize such elusive myths as the Cretan origins of Zeus and Demeter, and the semi-historical references to Crete, in the works of Homer, Thucydides, and others, to find a sure basis for a convincing narrative worthy of the name of history.

It is only within recent years that the necessary archaeological data have been available which enables students of ancient civilization to draw with some degree of confidence upon the abundant but confused contents of the storehouse of folk memory.

The discovery that Crete was the birth-place of Aegean civilization, which radiated in the pre-Hellenic times throughout Europe--"the little leaven that leavened the whole lump"--does not, however, set a limit to the work of research, or solve all the problems which are involved. Although it has been demonstrated that the Cretan leaven was in existence and at work at the dawn of the Egyptian Dynastic Age, and when the Sumerians were achieving their earliest triumphs in the Tigro-Euphratean valley, we are still confronted with the problem of remote origin. The earliest settlers in Crete had, as their artifacts demonstrate, already obtained a comparatively high degree of Neolithic culture. Houses were built of stone as well as of wattles daubed with clay, a sea trade was in existence, for obsidian was imported from Melos, and a section of the community had adopted the agricultural mode of life. Withal, beliefs were well developed and had assumed a fixity which remained until they were merged in the

[p. xix]

accumulated mass of Grecian inheritance, and suffered, as a result, for long ages, complete loss of identity. The earliest settlement of people at Knossos has been assigned to about 10,000 B.C., an approximate dating which is based on the evidence of the archaeological strata.

But the earliest traces of an artistic culture in Europe belong to a still more remote age. Although during the vast periods of the Neolithic, or Late Stone Age, there existed savage communities, just as happens to be the case at the present day in various parts of the world, there were also, as in Crete, Egypt, and Babylonia, refined and progressive peoples who were already "heirs of all the Ages"--the Ages when ancient Europe passed through stages of climatic oscillations of such pronounced character that the remains of mankind are found in strata yielding alternately tropical, temperate, and Arctic flora and fauna. The period in question, the lengthiest in the history of civilization, is the archaeological Palaeolithic, or Early Stone Age. Towards its close, for which the minimum dating is 20,000 B.C., there existed in Europe at least two races, whose cultures are referred to as Aurignacian and Magdalenian. A stage called Azilian links the Palaeolithic with the Neolithic Age, and the continuity of culture from the earliest times is now generally regarded as an established fact.

The story of Cretan civilization may constitute, as has been said, the first chapter of European history. But the "Introduction" is derived from the Palaeolithic Age, before and during the Fourth Glacial Epoch of the geologists.

Our introductory data are obtained from the famous Palaeolithic cave-dwellings of France and Spain, which are dealt with in Chapters I and II. No definite traces are yet obtainable, among the scanty human remains that

[p. xx]

have been discovered, of racial types resembling those of early Egypt or early Crete, but remarkable evidence has been forthcoming which not only establishes the great antiquity of certain artistic motifs -of finished artistic skill and even of certain customs that afterwards appeared on the Island of Minos and in the Nilotic and Tigro-Euphratean areas.

The links with Crete are so close and suggestive that writers like Angelo Mosso have expressed the belief in the Neolithic and Cretan origin of Aurignacian and Magdalenian art. But the geologists have established beyond a shadow of doubt that the civilization of which this art is an eloquent expression must be assigned to the latter part of the Pleistocene period, when the reindeer roamed through the valleys of France.

Those ancient Palaeolithic hunters were skilled artists and carvers of bone and ivory. They painted and engraved on cave roofs the figures of animals with a realism and freedom which were never surpassed in Greece; they also carved ivory female figurines in the round which are worthy of comparison with similar artistic products of Egypt, and not always to their disadvantage.

"The resemblances", writes Mosso, "between the most ancient female figures in France and the Neolithic figures of Crete and Egypt are very striking." Among the rock pictures of women he sees "the girdle and the Egyptian mode of hairdressing". Describing a Palaeolithic painting, he writes: "The women's hair flows down upon their shoulders like that of the Minoan women; the bosom is uncovered and the breasts much developed. The triangular shape of the heads indicates a hood or a kind of mitre. Two of them wear a bracelet on the upper arm near the elbow, and all have a very slender waist, with the body shaped like an hour-glass." He

[p. xxi]

also comments in another instance on the skirts, which were also characteristic of Crete. [*1]Comparisons between the Cretan frescoes and the Palaeolithic cave-paintings of Spain and France have likewise been made by the Abbe Breuil, Don Juan Cabre Aguila, and other Continental archaeologists.

One of the racial types which existed during the Aurignacian and Magdalenian periods, or stages of culture, was the Cro-Magnon. It can still be traced in Europe, especially in the French Dordogne valley, and among the Berbers in North Africa, as Dr. Collignon has shown. [*2] Evidence of Cro-Magnon migration in Late Pleistocene times has also been forthcoming from Belgium, while traces of their burial customs have been found in Moravia and elsewhere. How and by what route Aurignacian influence reached Crete, after the lapse of thousands of years, we have as yet no means of knowing. It seems reasonable to assume that this civilization did not end without leaving heirs somewhere. The Greeks were heirs of Crete, and yet it is but quite recently that this fact has been fully demonstrated.

Not only has the antiquity of European art been established; the Palaeolithic data which have been accumulated emphasize also the remote beginnings of certain magical and religious beliefs and practices. The suggestion is thus rendered plausible that some of the widespread myths and folk-tales may be as old as the French and Spanish cave-paintings and ivory carvings. Who will venture, for instance, to date the origin of that far-travelled tale about the lovers who escape from the giant's den and throw down pebbles which become mountains and twigs which create forests, to delay their angry

[p. xxii]

pursuer? The late Mr. Andrew Lang has shown that it is found in Zulu, Gaelic, Norse. Malagasy, Russian, Italian, and Japanese folk-literatures. The author "will never", he wrote, "be known to fame", although, among storytellers, he has achieved "the widest circulation in the world". [*1]

A now popular hypothesis, first urged by Hugh Miller, is usually held to offer a conclusive explanation for the wonderful resemblances between certain legends collected in various parts of the world. "I have seen", Miller wrote about eighty years ago, "in the museum of the Northern Institution (Inverness) a very complete collection of stone battle-axes. some of which have been formed little earlier than the last age. by the rude natives of America and the South Sea Islands, while others, which have been dug out of the cairns and tumuli of our own country, bear witness to the unrecorded feuds and forgotten battle-fields of twenty centuries ago. I was a good deal struck by the resemblance which they bear to each other; a resemblance so complete, that the most practised eye can hardly distinguish between the weapons of the old Scot and the New Zealander. . . . Man in a savage state is the same animal everywhere, and his constructive powers, whether employed in the formation of a legendary story or of a battle-axe, seem to expatiate almost everywhere in the same ragged track of invention. For even the traditions of this first stage may be identified., like his weapons of war, all the world over." [*2]

Since Miller's day experts have become so familiar with the stone implements and weapons of primitive men that they experience no difficulty, not only in distinguishing between the characteristic products of various

[p. xxiii]

countries, but also of the various ages, or stages of culture, in one particular area. We find ourselves, however, on less sure ground when we deal with traditional tales. Miller's hypothesis in regard to these must still receive acceptance but with certain qualifications. It certainly accounts for striking resemblances, although not for equally striking differences. If it were to be urged in every instance, the work of research would be stultified and rendered somewhat barren. "There is a well-known tendency", as Mr. Hogarth reminds us, "to find one formula to explain all things, and an equally notorious one to overwork the latest formula." [*1]

The intensive study of the mythology of a particular civilization, like that of Crete or Egypt, for instance, reveals marked local divergencies which are not easily accounted for. It is an extremely risky proceeding, therefore, when we find a fragment of a legend, or a clue to some archaic religious custom, in a cultural centre like Crete, to undertake the work of reconstruction by selecting something from Australia, adding a Chinese idea, and completing the whole with contributions from Russia, Greenland, or Mexico. We may find similar symbols in different countries, but it does not follow that they had originally all the same significance; similar alphabetical signs have not always the same phonetic values. The human mind is not like a mould which produces automatically the same shapes for the same purposes, or the same ideas to account for the same problems, in every part of the world.

Myths are products of beliefs, and beliefs are products of experiences. They are also pictorial records of natural phenomena. Mankind have not had the same experiences everywhere, nor have they found the world

[p. xxiv]

lacking in variety of contour and climate. Certain peoples, for instance, have achieved progress in civilizations based on the agricultural mode of life. Their beliefs have consequently been influenced by their agricultural experiences, and their myths have been given an agricultural significance. Before the Calendar was invented, the farmer who profited from the experiences of his ancestors, and handed on his knowledge to posterity, did not speak about "ploughing in spring" and "reaping in autumn", or explain the futility of sowing seed, say, in December and expecting crops in April. He framed instead a system of myths which guided the agricultural operations of his kin for long centuries. In India, which suffers at one season from great heat and drought, he conceived the Drought Demon which imprisoned the fertilizing waters in a mountain cave. just when the world is about to perish, the god Indra comes to its rescue armed with his thunderbolt. He attacks and slays the demon, exclaiming:

	 
		I am the hurler of the bolt of thunder;
		 For man flow freely now the gleaming waters.
		
		 After this thunder-battle, rain descends in torrents, the withered grass sprouts luxuriantly, and the rice harvest follows.

In Babylonia the demon is the water-monster Tiamat, who enters the Euphrates and causes it to flood. She is slain and cut up by Merodach, who thus sets the world in order. Then the farmer sows his seeds. In Egypt the inundation of the Nile is brought about by Ra, who, having undertaken to destroy his human enemies, relents and withdraws the waters, so that seeds may be cast in the fertilized soil and the harvest gathered in season. Pious worshippers of the deities who controlled the forces

[p. xxv]

of nature were expected to perform ceremonies and offer sacrifices to assist or propitiate them. Thus the local forms of religion were shaped by local phenomena of which the myths are reflections.

Peoples who lived among the mountains and followed the pastoral mode of life had different experiences from those who found their food-supply in river valleys. In districts where the rainfall was regular and abundant they knew nothing of India's droughts, or Egypt's floods. On the other hand, they might have experiences of binding frost, fierce blizzards, and snow-blocked passes, which forced them to migrate to districts where they could winter their flocks and herds. Their myths were consequently based on experiences and natural phenomena which contrasted sharply with those of the Nilotic and Tigro-Euphratean peoples, with the result that their systems of religious beliefs developed upon different lines. Similarly, peoples who dwelt upon islands and along sea-coasts and gathered the harvest of the deep, and forest-dwellers who lived on fruits and trophies of the chase, formulated and perpetuated modes of thought which were products of their particular modes of life in different environments. It is obvious, therefore, that the mind of man did not everywhere follow "the same rugged track of invention". In different districts and at different periods sections of mankind achieved independent development on sharply differentiated lines, with the result that religious conceptions, like outstanding racial types, had their areas of characterization.

Consideration should next be given to cultural influence resulting from contact. The oscillations of climate which followed the last glacial epoch caused widespread migrations of peoples. Racial types which are still recognizable were already fixed; mankind at the dawn of

[p. xxvi]

the Neolithic or Late Stone Age had attained full mental [*1] and physical development. Races were distributed far and wide, and settlers favoured those areas which were suitable for their habits of life. The barriers of ice and snow which had separated peoples for thousands of years vanished before the warm sun, and as the various races prospered and increased they came into contact with one another. Let us picture a pastoral tribe issuing from a region of steppe lands and entering a valley occupied by agriculturists. They come with a heritage of beliefs and customs as alien as their language to those who rear crops and dwell in villages. The small farmers regard them as demons, and go out to battle to conquer or be conquered. If the invaders prevail, they remain in the district and in time fuse with the conquered. Then the beliefs of the mingled peoples are fused also. The result is a compromise between the distinctive religions. In the valley the earlier faith secures ascendancy because the invaders have no agricultural religion and no words even for "corn" and "furrow" and "plough". But a portion of the conquerors follow their old habits of life as pastoralists and hunters, and occupy the grazing-lands round the valley and among the hills, where they find a new Olympus for their gods. In time a pantheon is formed which embraces the deities of conquered and conquerors.

Trade springs up between various communities and the influence of culture flows along the trade routes. The knowledge of how to grow corn passes from tribe to tribe. But the isolated hunters in a northern valley who become agriculturists do not simply import implements and seeds; those who instruct them how to till the soil instruct them also regarding the ceremonies which are necessary to ensure growth and the harvest.

[p. xxvii]

So the agricultural religion of Egypt or Babylon passes through Europe and Asia, and is adopted by peoples who mix with it their own peculiar local practices inherited for untold generations from their remote ancestors.

In Denmark the northern huntsman and fisherman came into contact with the little farmers from the south, or tribes who had acquired the southern art of agriculture. They learned to sow the seed in sorrow and to beat their breasts when they cut the corn, and thus slew the corn spirit, and to return rejoicing carrying the sheaves. Magical ceremonies were considered to be as essential to agricultural success as ploughs and reaping-hooks, Consequently they adopted the magical ceremonies that had origin somewhere on the shores of the Mediterranean or in the Nile valley. So we find in Denmark the myth of Scef, the child god, who comes over the sea with the first sheaf of corn, which so closely resembles the Babylonian myth of Tammuz, who comes as a child from the Underworld and the Deep every new year.

The non-agricultural mountain-folk, who migrated hither and thither, knew naught of the corn-child. They conceived of a god who shaped the mountains with his hammer, the thunderbolt; each blow was a peal of thunder. He also hammered the sky into shape. Meteorites which fell from the sky were found to be of iron; it was consequently believed that the sky was formed of iron, which became known as "the metal of heaven". Iron was regarded as a protective charm. It was associated with the great deity who slew demons. A mortal had only to "touch iron" to drive demons away, for by doing so he established a magical connection between himself and the hammer deity.

Worshippers of the mountain-god went northward and called him Thor. In Asia Minor he was Tarku and

[p. xxviii]

Teshub; in India, Indra, son of Dyaus; in Greece, Zeus. Those worshippers who reached Palestine called him Pathach (the Hebrew name), and those who settled in Egypt knew him as Ptah, and, although thunderstorms are rare in Egypt, the Memphites never forgot the hammer of Ptah and the heaven of iron which he had beaten into shape. In time Ptah acquired new attributes. As the artisan-god he was credited with the invention of the Egyptian potter's wheel, on which he shaped the sun and moon, and the first man and woman. He was thus localized. Yet he ever remained distinctive among the deities of Egypt.

Tradition dies hard. Once an idea became impressed on the human mind it remained there, and new ideas were superimposed upon it. The Egyptians achieved great progress as thinkers and artisans, yet they dung to beliefs and customs of savage origin. So did the Greeks, who never forgot Cronos, the bloodthirsty god who swallowed his children and had to be murdered by his heir. It does not follow, however, that this tendency to conserve ancient beliefs and modes of thought was opposed to the growth of culture, or that men and women who perpetuated them were as ignorant and bloodthirsty as their primitive ancestors. In our own day an individual with a university degree may dread to spill salt, regard a black cat as lucky, and refuse to occupy a hotel bedroom numbered 13. Motor-cars and flying-machines carry mascots, as did the galleys of ancient Egypt, Crete, and Phoenicia. The writer has seen a Girton girl perpetuating a religious custom of her remote ancestors by attaching a rag to a tree that overhangs a "wishing well", and wishing silently her wish quite as fervently as do less highly cultured members of her sex in places as far removed as the Scottish Highlands and the Island of Crete.

[p. xxix]

Superstitious practices which are familiar in our everyday lives have a long history. They have survived nearly two thousand years of Christian influence. Who will undertake to date their origins? They may go back to the Bronze Age, the Late Stone Age, and even to the interglacial periods of the Palaeolithic Age. The following comparative notes will serve to illustrate the antiquity of at least one remarkable folk-belief.

In Upper Egypt discovery has been made of bodies which were buried in hot dry sands about sixty centuries ago. Not only have the bones, skin, hair, muscles, and eyes been preserved, but even the internal organs. The contents of stomachs and intestines have been examined by Dr. Netolitzky, the Russian scientist, who ascertained in this way what food the ancient people ate. "The occasional presence of the remains of mice in the alimentary canals of children, under circumstances which prove that the small rodent had been eaten after being skinned, is", writes Professor Elliot Smith, "a discovery of very great interest, for Dr. Netolitzky informs me that the body of a mouse was the last resort of medical practitioners in the East several millennia later as the remedy for children in extremis." [*1] Until comparatively recently the liver of a mouse was in the Scottish Highlands the "old wife's cure" for children dangerously ill. The writer was informed regarding it in more than one locality, long before the Egyptian discovery was made, by women who professed to have had experience of the efficacy of the mouse cure.

The ashes of a mouse baked alive used to be a cure for rheumatism in Suffolk. In Lincolnshire fried mice were given to children suffering from whooping-cough and quinsy. According to Henderson [*2] a whooping-cough

[p. xxx]

patient in the northern counties had to be seated on a donkey, with face towards the tail, when the mouse was being eaten. The custom of entombing a live mouse in an ash-tree, to cure children or charm cattle against attack, prevailed in Leicestershire. [*1] A similar custom obtained in Scotland, where the shrew-mouse was believed to paralyse a limb it chanced to creep over. [*2] The traditional fear of mice among women is of interest in this connection. Roasted mouse was, in the north-eastern counties of Scotland, a cure for cold or sore throat.

In Egypt the mouse was associated with the lunar god Thoth, who cured Horus when he was bitten by the scorpion, restored the sight of his eye which was blinded by the black Set pig, and assisted in uniting the fragments of the body of Osiris. The mouse crouches at the base of his rod of destiny, on which he measured out the lives of men. [*3] In Greece the mouse was associated with Apollo. This god was identified by the Romans with the sun, but Homer knew him as Smintheus Apollo, "Mouse Apollo", who struck down the Greeks with his arrows of pestilence. [*4] According to Strabo, there were many places which bore the Apollo mouse name. [*5] Mouse feasts were held at Rhodes, Gela, Lesbos, and Crete. According to a Trojan story, the settlement took place in Anatolia of Cretans who were advised by an oracle to select the first place where they were attacked by the children of the soil. At Hamaxitus, in the Troad, a swarm of mice ate their bow-strings and the leather of their armour, and they decided to make that place their home. [*6] In India

[p. xxxi]

the mouse was associated with Rudra, to whom the poet prayed:

	 
		Give unto me of thy medicines, Rudra,
		 So that my years may reach to a hundred. [*1]
		
		 Rudra, like Apollo, sent diseases, and was therefore able to prevent and cure them.

The mouse feasts referred to by ancient writers may have been held to ensure long life among those who, like the Egyptians, connected the mouse with the moon, the source of fertility and growth and the measurer of the days of man. The Egyptian lunar god Khonsu was the divine physician and the love-god. All fertility deities, indeed, cured diseases. The King of Mitanni sent the image of Ishtar to Thebes when Pharaoh Amenhotep III was ill. Isaiah refers to the mouse-eating practice: "They that sanctify themselves and purify themselves in the gardens behind one tree in the midst, eating swine's flesh, and the abomination, and the mouse, shall be consumed together, saith the Lord." [*2] When the Philistines, who came from Crete, were stricken by a pestilence, they placed five golden mice in the ark and sent it back to the Israelites. [*3] Thus we find the Highland mouse-cure belief going back for 6000 years and reaching to the remotest areas settled by representatives of the Mediterranean race. Other superstitions may be as old, or older. The ancient Egyptians, like our own people, inherited beliefs from their savage ancestors.

The evidence summarized in this volume (Chapter II) regarding Palaeolithic customs and beliefs tends to emphasize that, while mankind everywhere may arrive at similar conclusions under similar circumstances, some conceptions were handed down by tradition and distributed over wide

[p. xxxii]

areas by wandering peoples long before the dawn of the Neolithic period in Europe and Egypt. If the mouse cure can be traced back for sixty centuries it may well have been known for a further sixty centuries. In Palaeolithic times, at least 20,000 years ago, the spine of a fish was laid on the corpse when it was entombed, just as the "ded" amulet, which was the symbol of the backbone of Osiris, was laid on the neck of the Egyptian mummy. Anthropologists have favoured the theory that the animal-headed deities of Egypt are links between animal and anthropomorphic deities. Animal-headed deities with arms uplifted in the Egyptian attitude of adoration figure in Palaeolithic cave-drawings. The process of change, if such it was, must therefore have commenced thousands of years before the Dynastic Egyptians became supreme in the Nile valley. It used to be urged that the Phoenicians were the inventors of alphabetic script, but linearized signs "of curiously alphabetic aspect--at times even in groups--are seen engraved on reindeer horns or ivory, or on the surface of the rock itself", which were the work of Palaeolithic folk in the Fourth Glacial Period. "Certain signs", says Sir Arthur Evans, from whom we quote, "carved on a fragment of reindeer horn, are specially interesting from the primitive anticipation that they present of the Phoenician alef. . . . It is interesting to observe that among the existing peoples of the extreme north of Europe, whose conditions most nearly represent those of the old Reindeer folk, the relics of pure pictography were preserved to modern times. . . . These Lapp pictographs themselves belong to a widely diffused primitive group--illustrated by the paintings and carvings on rocks and other materials--which extends across the whole Fenno-Tataric region from the White Sea to the Urals and throughout Siberia to the borders of China.

 

Terra-cotta Disk from Phaestos, with pictographic script which reads from the centre outwards, but has not been deciphered. It is believed to have come from Lycia, Asia Minor. Heads with feather head-dress similar to that worn by the Philistines appear on the disk.

INSCRIBED TABLETS FOUND IN CRETE

 

[p. xxxiii]

It was probably from an early offshoot of this great family of pictorial signs that the elaborate characters of the Chinese writing were ultimately evolved." Similar pictographs are found in Scandinavia, Ireland, Brittany, Portugal, Spain, North-West Africa, the Canaries, in the Maritime Alps, the Vosges, Dalmatia, in Transylvania, and on early Trojan artifacts. [*1]

In addition to the pictographs there also passed from the Palaeolithic into the Neolithic and Bronze Ages certain burial customs, decorative designs developed from animal drawings, the custom of shaping figurines of the mother goddess with female characteristics emphasized, and the bell-shaped skirt which found favour in Crete. Palaeolithic pottery found in Belgium has Neolithic characteristics. It has also been demonstrated, as stated, that what is known as the Azilian stage of culture links the cultures of the Early and Late Stone Ages. After the close of the Fourth Glacial Period the early pioneers of the Mediterranean race came into contact in Europe with the remnants of the Palaeoliths and mingled with them in localities. Among a large number of skulls taken recently from an old Glasgow graveyard, into which an Infirmary extension intruded, were a considerable sprinkling of Palaeolithic types. The interments at this part were made during the 18th century and the early part of the 19th century. Apparently there were descendants of the Palaeoliths among the makers of modern Glasgow.

Certain beliefs and customs and folk-tales appear also to have survived with the peoples of the Reindeer Period, among whom they were prevalent. And as the culture of that period (the Fourth Glacial Epoch) developed from the cultures of the earlier periods, it is possible that some surviving modes of thought may have obtained for

[p. xxxiv]

40,000 years. The Chellean hand-axe of the Second Interglacial Period in France was distributed far and wide; it travelled across the Italian land-bridge to Africa and penetrated as far as Cape Colony; it was imitated in Asia and passed across the Behring Straits land-bridge to America. and reached the utmost southern limits of South America. It never reached Australia. Perhaps Mr. Lang's "far-travelled tale" was similarly given widespread distribution at a remote period in the history of the human races. The culture of a particular people reached remote corners of the globe to which descendants of its originators may never have penetrated. We are familiar with this phenomenon even at the present day. It should be borne in mind, therefore, that although the mind of man may have in primitive times conceived similar ideas and invented similar tales in various regions widely separated, the masses of humanity on the whole have also been more prone to conserve what they have acquired than to welcome something new. Nothing impresses the student of comparative mythology more than the barrenness of the primitive mind. New ideas are the exception rather than the rule. Changes in religious ideas were forced upon ancient peoples either by intruding aliens or by the influence exercised by physical phenomena in new areas of settlement. Even when a change occurred the past was not entirely cut off. Rather a fusion was effected of the new ideas with the old.

In dealing with a mythology like that of Crete, which has not yet been rendered articulate, for the script has still to be deciphered, we expect to find traces of more than one stage of development in religious ideas, and also of the ideas of settlers on the island of peoples from different cultural centres. Certain relics suggest Egyptian influence and others point to an intimate connection with

[p. xxxv]

archaic Grecian beliefs. No doubt Crete inherited much from Egypt; and certain Greek States in which Cretan colonists settled borrowed much from Crete. It remains to be proved, however, that the Cretans, after settling on their island, developed on the same lines as primitive peoples elsewhere, or even that they previously passed through the different stages of religious culture regarding which evidence has been gleaned from various parts of the world.

It is sometimes assumed that the religious history of the human race is marked by well--defined layers of thought--Naturalism or Naturism, Totemism, Animism, Demonology, Tribal Monotheism which with the fusion of tribes leads to Polytheism, and then ultimately sole Monotheism. All these stages may be traced in a particular area. But we must not expect to find them everywhere. Human thought has not accumulated strata of ideas in regular sequence, like geological or archaeological strata. Sonic peoples, for instance, have never conceived of a personal god, or even of distinctive animistic spirit groups. Mr. Risley has shown that the jungle-dwellers of Chota Nagpur fear and attempt to propitiate "not a person at all in any sense of the word. If one must state the case in positive terms," he adds, "I should say that the idea which lies at the root of their religion is that of Power, or rather of many Powers. . . . Closer than this he does not seek to define the object to which he offers his victim, or whose symbol he daubs with vermilion at the appointed season. Some sort of Power is there, and that is enough for him. . . . All over Chota Nagpur we find sacred groves, the abode of equally indeterminate things, who are represented by no symbols and of whose form and function no one can give an intelligible account. They have not yet been clothed with individual attributes;

[p. xxxvi]

they linger on as survivals of the impersonal stage of religion." [*1] The Australian natives, on the other hand, and even those who are more primitive than the Chota Nagpur jungle-dwellers, have a god whose voice is imitated by the "bull roarer". Palaeolithic man of the Reindeer Age, as has been said, had animal-headed deities and shaped, in ivory, figurines of the mother goddess. In Egypt and Babylonia there were composite deities, half animal and half human, from the earliest times of which we have knowledge. The Chinese have deities also, but have specialized as ancestor-worshippers. Argue as we may regarding well-defined "mental processes", it must be recognized that religious phenomena all over the world cannot be explained by a single hypothesis, and that we are not justified in assuming that the same stages, or all the recognized stages, of development can be traced everywhere. There may have been Totemic beliefs in Crete and Greece and there may not. Until definite proof is forthcoming that there were, the problem must remain an open one. Similarly, we should hesitate to accept the hypotheses that patriarchal conditions were preceded by matriarchal and that goddesses preceded gods everywhere. In India the gods were prominent in the Vedic period; during the post-Vedic period goddesses ceased to be vague and became outstanding personalities as "Great Mothers". [*2]

This brings us to an interesting phase of Cretan religious and social life. From the evidence afforded by idols, pictorial art, symbols, and traditions it would appear that the goddess cult was supreme on the island, Priestesses were as prominent as they were at Dodona. In fact, women appear to have taken a leading part in

[p. xxxvii]

religious ceremonies, as Jeremiah found was the case in Jerusalem, where women baked cakes which were offered to the "Queen of Heaven", the Eastern mother-goddess. "Probably in Minoan Crete", writes Mr. Hall, "women played a greater part than they did even in Egypt, and it may eventually appear that religious matters, perhaps even the government of the State itself as well, were largely controlled by women. It is certain they must have lived on a footing of greater equality with the men than in any other ancient civilization, and we see in the frescoes of Knossos conclusive indications of an open and easy association of men and women, corresponding to our idea of 'Society', at the Minoan Court unparalleled till our own day." [*1] Among the goddess worshippers of Sumeria women enjoyed a high social status also. But among the Semites of the god cult this was not the case. Women were not depicted in Assyria as in Crete. It was when Babylonian influences entered the Assyrian Court that Queen Sammu-ramat--the Semiramis of tradition-rose into prominence. Professor Sayce has drawn attention to the significant fact that when the Semites translated the Sumerian hymns they transposed "women and men" (equivalent to our "ladies and gentlemen") into "men and women". The law of descent by the female line which obtained in Egypt and elsewhere among peoples of the Mediterranean race was probably a relic of customs which had a religious significance.

The view has been strongly advocated that in all primitive communities matriarchal conditions preceded patriarchal conditions, and goddess worship the worship of gods. It is not now generally accepted, however: some peoples seem to have been worshippers of male

[p. xxxviii]

deities and others of female deities from the earliest times. The fusion of the god and goddess cults in Egypt and Babylonia and elsewhere was probably one of the results of the fusion of peoples. In some countries, where patriarchal peoples formed military aristocracies, they may have ordered succession by the male line. But there is also evidence to show that they adopted the wiser method of marrying the heiresses of estates and thrones to win the allegiance of the masses. "Mother-right" prevailed in Egypt, for instance, until the end. The problem involved is too complex to be accounted for by a single hypothesis.

It would appear that the activities of the Cretan women were chiefly confined to indoor life. As in Egypt, they were depicted by painters with white skins, while the men were, with the exception of princes, given red skins. Women were also more elaborately attired and bejewelled than men.

In dealing with ancient civilizations it is of importance to take note of burial customs. There can be little doubt that these have been ever closely associated with religious beliefs. What are known to archaeologists as "ceremonial burials" must have been performed, it is reasonable to suppose, with some degree of ceremony with purpose either to promote the welfare of the deceased or to secure the protection of the living. The Dynastic Egyptians, for instance, mummified their dead because they believed that the soul could not continue to exist in the Otherworld unless the body were preserved intact in the tomb. On the other hand, the Homeric Achaeans burned their dead, so that the soul might be transferred by fire to Hades, from which it would never again return. [*1] In pre-Dynastic Egypt the

[p. xxxix]

body was laid in a shallow grave in crouched position, with food-vessels, implements, and weapons beside it. A similar custom prevailed in Babylonia and throughout Europe in the Neolithic and Bronze Ages. Dwellers on the northern sea-coast of Europe set their dead adrift in boats, as was Balder in the Eddic legend and Sceaf in the Beowulf poem. Others buried their dead in caves, threw them to wild beasts, or ate them.

In some cases it would appear that the beliefs connected with burial were suggested by local phenomena. In Upper Egypt bodies are naturally mummified in the hot dry sands. It is possible, therefore, that the custom of embalming the dead may have grown up among that section of the Egyptian people whose religious beliefs were formulated in the area where the corpse was naturally preserved. They may have been horrified to find that bodies did not remain intact in new districts to which they migrated. But the custom of burning the dead cannot be explained in this way.

Burial customs may not always afford us definite clues regarding religious beliefs. It does not follow that the pre-Dynastic Egyptians, the Babylonian Sumerians, and the Neolithic Europeans who favoured crouched burials had all the same ideas regarding the destiny of men, or the same beliefs regarding the Otherworld. Different conceptions might be prevalent in a single country. It is found that in Wales, for instance, ideas about the future state varied considerably. Folk-lore and mediaeval poetry have references to an Underworld in which the dead continue to live in organized communities and work and fight as they were accustomed to do upon earth, to happy islands situated far out to sea, to fairy dwellings below rivers and lakes where souls exist like fairies, and to the woods of Caledonia where shades wander about as did

[p. xl]

the ancestors of the people who migrated from Caledonia to Wales. In one Welsh poem the Otherworld is referred to as "the cruel prison of the earth, the abode of death, the loveless land". [*1] The Babylonian Hades was similarly gloomy and was similarly dreaded. Ishtar descends to--

	 
		The house out of which there is no exit . . .
		 The house from whose entrance the light is taken,
		 The place where dust is their (the souls') nourishment and their food mud.
		 Its chiefs are like birds covered with feathers.
		
		 But in pre-Dynastic Egypt the worshippers of Osiris, like a section of the Welsh folks, believed that the Otherworld was a land of plenty in which corn was sowed and crops reaped in season. A similar Paradise was believed in as far north as Scotland. It is referred to in a Perthshire fairy story. A midwife is taken to a fairy mound to nurse a fairy child, and is given a green fluid with which to anoint the eyes of the little one. The fairy woman moistens the right eye of the midwife with this fluid, and bids her look. "She looked", the narrative proceeds, and saw several of her friends and acquaintances at work, reaping the corn and gathering the fruit. 'This', said the fairy, 'is the punishment of evil deeds.'" [*2] In ancient Egypt the fairy would have said it was "the reward of good deeds".

Burial customs afford us no exact evidence regarding these varying beliefs, which grew up in localities and were imported from one country to another. In Egypt the adherents of the cults of Osiris and Ra who believed in different Paradises mummified their dead, although, in the one case, happiness in the after state was believed to

[p. xli]

be the reward of good conduct n this life, and, in the other, of those who by performing ceremonies obtained knowledge of the formulae which were the "Open Sesames" required by departed souls to secure admission to the boat of the sun.

Similarly, it does not follow that the cremation custom had the same significance at all periods. In the Iliad the ghost of Patroklos declares that he will never again return from Hades when he has received his meed of fire. Modern Hindus burn their dead, [*1] but the soul may either depart to Paradise or continue its round through other existences on this earth. In Sanskrit literature the fire-god, Agni, "the corpse devourer", conducts souls to the "land of the fathers". The Persian fire-worshippers do not cremate their dead, although they may have done so at one time, but expose them to be devoured by wild birds. Of special interest is the practice of the Mongolian Buriats. The bodies of those who die in autumn and winter are piled up in a log-house in the midst of a forest. When the cuckoo begins to call, in May, this house is set on fire and the accumulated bodies are cremated together. Persons who die during the summer are burned immediately. [*2] That the Aryo-Indians had knowledge at one time of the belief involved is suggested by a reference in the Mahabharata. Describing the heaven of Yama, the sage Narada says that he saw there "all sinners among human beings as also (those) that have died during the winter solstice". [*3] The explanation may be that there were lucky and unlucky hours, days, and months for death as for birth. The

[p. xlii]

omens at birth which foretold an individual's fate were supposed to give indication of his manner of death. One of the Scottish midwife prophecies runs:

	 
		Full moon, full sea,
		 Great man shalt thou be,
		 But ill deith shalt thou dee. [*1]
		
		 Omens at death threw light on his fate in the after life. The Buriat custom has evidently a long history behind it. Perhaps it was originally believed that those who died in winter were doomed to exist ever afterwards in cold and darkness. Such a belief imported into India would in time cease to have any significance. The new country had new terrors which supplanted the old, and influenced the development of religious beliefs.

Among certain peoples who did not believe, like the Achaeans, the Aryo-Indians, and others, that the soul was transferred to Paradise through the medium of fire, burning was a punishment. Erring wives in ancient Egyptian and Scottish folk-tales are burned at the stake. [*2] Similarly, witches were burned alive. Sir Arthur Evans has brought together interesting evidence regarding "the revival of cremation in Europe in mediaeval and modern times to get rid of vampires". [*3] Bodies of persons whose ghosts had become vampires, which attacked sleepers and sucked the life-blood from their veins, were taken from tombs and publicly burned. The vampires were thus prevented from doing further harm. Herodotus tells that when Cambyses, the son of Cyrus, caused the mummy of Pharaoh Amasis to be burned, he displeased both the Persians and the Egyptians. "The Persians", he says, "hold fire to be a god, and never by any chance burn

[p. xliii]

their dead. Indeed, this practice is unlawful, both with them and with the Egyptians--with them for the reason above mentioned, since they deem it wrong to give the corpse of a man to a god; and with the Egyptians, because they believe fire to be a live animal, which eats whatever it can seize, and then, glutted with the food, dies with the matter which it feeds upon. Now, to give a man's body to be devoured by beasts is in no wise agreeable to their customs, and, indeed, this is the very reason why they embalm their dead, namely, to prevent them from being eaten in the grave by worms." [*1]

The evidence afforded by the Cretan burial customs is of special significance. From the earliest times until the close of the Bronze Age the dead were buried. Then cremation was introduced by invaders, who are believed to have been identical with the Achaeans of Homer. The new custom had, in this instance, not only a religious but an ethnic significance.

Like certain of the Palaeolithic tribes in western Europe, the early Cretans buried their dead in caves and rock shelters. As caves were dwellings, this was a form of house-burial. House-tombs have been found in Cretan as in Babylonian towns. The custom is referred to in the Ethiopic version of the mythical life of Alexander the Great. That hero was reputed to have "asked one of the Brahmans, saying: 'Have ye no tombs wherein to bury any man among you who may die?' And an interpreter made answer to him, saying: 'Man and woman and child grow up, and arrive at maturity and become old, and when any one (of them) dieth we bury him in the place wherein he lived; thus our graves are our houses. And our God knoweth that we desire this more than the lust for food and meat which all men have; this

[p. xliv]

is our life and manner of dwelling in the darkness of our tombs.'" [*1] This conversation can never have taken place in. India, but it is of interest in so far as it reflects a belief with which the author was familiar.

In Palaeolithic times a cave was deserted after the head of the family was buried in it. There were also, however, burial-caves. The Cro-Magnon people, for instance, sometimes deposited whole families, or the members of tribes, in one of these. One cave has yielded no fewer than seventeen skeletons. Caves and rock-shelters were similarly utilized in Crete. It became customary, however, to construct chamber-tombs, which may have been imitations of caves. One at Aghia Triadha, near Phaestos, in south-central Crete, is some 30 feet in diameter. The remains of no fewer than 200 skeletons of men, women, and children were found in it. Other chambers adjoining added fifty to this number. Family tombs of this kind, which were entered by narrow passages, were sometimes circular, and developed into the beehive style of tomb found in Mycenae and Tiryns. They date back to early Minoan times (C. 2800 B.C.). Others were of rectangular shape, like those found near Knossos. The Cretans also buried their dead in terracotta chests, in which the bodies Jay in crouched position as in the pre-Dynastic graves of Egypt. These larnakes or sarcophagi were probably of Egyptian origin. They have also been found in Sicily and Italy. Sometimes the Cretan sarcophagi were profusely decorated. Like the tombs, they contained vessels, seals, daggers, amulets, &c.

The Cretans were worshippers of the Great Mother goddess who inhabited the abode of the buried dead. She was the Earth Mother. Caves were entrances to the Underworld over which she presided. In Crete,

 

LIMESTONE SARCOPHAGUS, SHAPED LIKE A CHEST, FOUND AT AGHIA TRIADHA

The thin plaster covering is painted with scenes connected with the cult of the dead. (See pages <page 289>-<page 290>)

 

[p. xlv]

where no temples were erected, votive offerings were deposited in caves, the most famous of which were those on Mount Dicte and Mount Ida. According to Greek legend, the mother-goddess Rhea gave birth to Zeus in a Cretan cave. The ferocious mother-goddesses of England and Scotland, as is shown (Chapter III), were cave-dwellers. Palaeolithic artists drew and painted their magical figures of animals in the depths of great caves.

Demeter of the Grecian Phigalia--the Black Ceres--lived in a cave, which is still regarded as sacred. This deity, who is believed to be a form of the Cretan Great Mother, was also associated with stone circles. Pausanias, writing of the town of Hermione in the Peloponnese, says that near it "there is a circle of huge unhewn stones, and inside this circle they perform the sacred rites of Demeter". [*1]

Stone circles, single standing-stones, and groups of stones like those at Carnac in Brittany were erected at burial-places. Offerings were made to the dead whose spirits had become associated with the Earth Mother. These spirits might be summoned from their tombs to make revelations. When Odin visited the Underworld to consult the Vala (witch or prophetess) regarding Balder's fate--

	 
		Round he rode to a door on the eastward
		 Where he knew was a witch's grave,
		 He sang there spells of the dead to the Vala,
		 Needs she must rise-a corpse-and answer. [*2]
		
		 Folk-memories of the ancient custom of summoning the spirit of the dead still survive in rural districts. An archaeologist who recently conducted investigations at a stone circle in northern Scotland asked a ploughman if

[p. xlvi]

he knew anything regarding it. The answer was to this effect: "It is said that if you walk round it three times against the sun at midnight, you will raise the devil." Our demonology is the last stage of pagan mythology. The summoning of the devil, or the spirits of the Underworld, was a ceremony performed for purposes of divination, or to compel the aid of infernal beings. As only one grave is sometimes found in stone circles, it may be that a circle was erected when a great chief, or great priest or priestess, died, so that the ghost might be propitiated and called up to assist his or her kinsfolk in times of need. A patriarch or teacher would thus be worshipped after death like a god, and especially as a guide to the spirit world. The Babylonian Gilgamesh was a hero who first entered the cave which led to Paradise. So was the Indian Yama; he was the first man to "find the path for many", and he became god of the dead. Osiris, as Apuatu, was "opener of the ways", and similarly reigned in Hades. The Cretan Minos is in the Odyssey a lawgiver, like Osiris, of the Underworld. In Greek mythology the guide of travellers, who conducts the soul on his last journey, is Hermes. His name appears to be derived from herma, which signifies a cairn or a standing-stone. The Thracian "square Hermes" was a pillar surmounted by a human head--a form which is evidently a link between a standing-stone and the statue of an anthropomorphic deity. It may be that some of the anthropomorphic deities were simply deified ancestors, priests, or priestesses.

The Great Mother, who was worshipped by the Cretans and other pre-Hellenic peoples in south-eastern Europe, was the goddess of birth and death, of fertility and fate. As the ancestress of mankind she gathered to her abode in the Underworld the ghosts of her progeny.

[p. xlvii]

She was the source of the food-supply, which she might withhold at will by raising storms, causing floods, or sending blight and disease. It was important that account should be taken of her varying moods--that her intentions should be ascertained by means of oracles, so that she might be propitiated, or controlled by the performance of magical ceremonies. She assumed various forms at different seasons and under different circumstances. Now she was the earth serpent, or the serpent of the deep--the Babylonian Tiamat--and anon the raven of death, or the dove of fertility; she might also appear as the mountain hag followed by savage beasts, or as a composite monster in a gloomy cavern, like the horse-headed Demeter of Phigalia. The beautiful northern goddess of the Greek sculptors was a poetic creation of post-Homeric times, when her benevolent character only was remembered. Still, Rhea ever retained her lion, which crouched beside her throne--a faint memory of her ancient savage character.

The Achaean conquerors who burned their dead were worshippers of the sky- and thunder-god, the Great Father. They believed that the souls of the dead ascended to a Paradise above the clouds. Hercules burned himself on a pyre and fled heavenwards as an eagle; the soul of the Roman Emperor ascended from the pyre on which his image was placed, on the back of an eagle. The eagle was the messenger of Zeus, and the god himself may have originally been an eagle. The Zu eagle of Babylonia and the Garuda eagle of India were ancient deities; indeed, Tammuz, in his Nin-girsu form at Lagash was depicted as a lion-headed eagle. Cyrus claimed to be an Achaemenian--that is, a descendant of the patriarchal Akhamanish, who was reputed to have been protected and fed during childhood by an eagle.

[p. xlviii]

The double-headed eagle of the Hittites, which now figures in the royal arms of Russia, was a deity of great antiquity. In Egypt one Paradise was the Underworld of Osiris and the other the Paradise above the sky to which Horus ascended in the form of a falcon. Babylonian mythology makes references to the Paradises of Anu and Bel and Ishtar, to which the patriarch Etana ascends on the back of an eagle, as well as to the island Paradise discovered by Gilgamesh and the gloomy Underworld where souls eat dust and drink muddy water. So do the beliefs of mingled peoples survive in complex mythologies.

The archaeological evidence of Crete and Greece shows clearly that the cremation custom had an ethnic significance. Whence then came the Achaeans of Homer who were the cremating people, or at any rate were identified with them in tradition? Professor Ridgeway [*1] has summarized a mass of important archaeological data regarding prehistoric burial customs, and writes: "From this rapid survey it is now clear to the reader that cremation was not developed in the countries lying around the Mediterranean, whilst on the other hand it was already practised in Central Europe, possibly even in the transition period from stone to bronze. But as the Achaeans practised it at least 1000 B.C., there is a very high probability that they had come into Greece from Central Europe, where the fair-haired peoples were certainly burning their dead before the end of the Bronze Age, or at least 1200 B.C." He regards with favour the view that the ancestors of the cremating Hindus--the Aryans and Indo-Europeans of the philologists--migrated from Europe into Asia before the Iron Age.

The theory that the Achaeans were a Germanic people

 

VOTIVE OFFERINGS FROM THE DICTEAN CAVE

The three upper rows are bronze objects: those in the two lower, are in made of terra-cotta.

(See page xlv; also Chap. XIII, pages 297-299.)

 

[p. xlix]

and that the cremation custom originated in the forests of Germany has not received wide acceptance. Account must be taken of the archaic cremation custom of the Mongolian Buriats which has been referred to. No trace of seasonal burnings have been found in Europe. The Achaean dead might be cremated at any time of the year. Were the ancestors of the Buriats in touch at some remote period with a people among whom cremation was practised before it obtained in Central Europe?

The earliest evidence yet obtained of cremation comes from southern France. M. Verneau, who is the authority on the burial customs of the Palaeolithic cave-dwellers of Grimaldi, has found that among the Cro-Magnon peoples of the Third Interglacial Period ceremonial interment by inhumation was the general rule. He found, however, a single instance of cremation. Offerings similar to those found with buried bodies were associated with the burned bones. Of course, we know nothing about the beliefs regarding the destiny of the soul which obtained among the Cro-Magnon peoples. The majority of these, it may be noted, were tall, averaging about 5 feet 10 inches in stature. M. Verneau, however, discovered two skeletons of alien type which he refers to as members of "a new race".

Next in chronological order, but separated by thousands of years, come the Early Neolithic cremating people of Palestine who dwelt in the Gezer caves. "One of the caves", writes Professor Macalister, "had evidently been used by this people as a place for the disposal of the dead. The body, placed at the sill of a chimney-aperture that provided a draught, was burnt, the remains becoming ultimately scattered and trampled over the whole surface of the floor. From one point of view

[p. l]

this is unfortunate: the bones were too much destroyed by the action of the fire to make any very extensive examination of their ethnological character possible. All we can say is that we have to deal with a non-Semitic race, of low stature, with thick skulls, and showing evidence of the great muscular strength that is essential to savage life." [*1] We have no knowledge of the beliefs connected with the Neolithic cremation custom in Palestine.

Among the Australian natives the body of the dead is sometimes cremated. The ashes are afterwards placed in a skin bag which is carried about. Various other funerary practices, including the eating of the corpse, have been recorded. The belief regarding the soul's destiny, among the Australian cremators, is neither Aryo-Indian nor Achaean in character.

The cremation custom of the Bronze Age had in Europe a precise significance as a ceremony. It was not a punishment, or a safeguard against attack by vampires, but a process whereby the souls of the dead were enabled to pass to another state of existence. The cremating invaders swept westward and north and south and formed military aristocracies. In Sweden only the wealthy people were cremated. The evidence of British archaeology shows that cremation and inhumation were practised in some districts simultaneously, and that even one member--perhaps the chief--of a family might be cremated while the others were buried. Ultimately cremation died out altogether in Ancient Britain. The earlier faith prevailed. In southern Europe, however, it lingered on until early Christian times, as did mummification in Egypt. The fact that the Christians were opposed to these distinctive burial customs emphasizes that they had a religious significance.

[p. li]

Dr. Dorpfeld [*1] has urged the hypothesis that the Achaeans burned their dead only when engaged in distant wars, and practised inhumation in the homeland. He thinks that cremation arose from the custom of scorching bodies prior to burial for hygienic reasons.

No traces of partial burning have been found in the pre-Dynastic graves of Egypt, or in the vast majority of similar graves in Europe. Dr. Dorpfeld refers, however, to charred fragments found in tombs at Mycenae and elsewhere in support of his theory. Here again the evidence of Crete is of special importance. In the tombs near Knossos have been found, in addition to food vessels, clay chafing-pans and a plaster tripod, filled with charcoal. These may have been portable hearths intended to warm and comfort the dead, or may, on the other hand, have been utilized in connection with magical rites. Deposits of charcoal are often found in Bronze Age graves throughout Europe, and it is suggested that the food intended for the nourishment of the dead was cooked in the grave. On the other hand, the grave fire may have been lit to charm the corpse against the attacks of evil spirits. As a rule, the charcoal deposits are not very considerable. That fires were associated with early burials is suggested by the folk-belief about "death lights" which are seen before a sudden death takes place travelling along a highway, entering a churchyard, and passing over the spot where a grave is to be opened. Early burials took place at night, [*2] and the leader may have cast his torch into the open grave so that it might be used by the dead on the journey to the Otherworld. Hermes, the guide of souls, was at one time a god of night and dispensed sleep and dreams.

[p. lii]

The Cretan portable fire-vessels were, perhaps, substitutes for torches. Lamps are also found in graves. The few partial burnings in the graves of Mycenae and elsewhere may have been due to accidents at burials. Of course, it is also possible that the individuals met their deaths in house fires.

It will be seen from the evidence passed under review that the theory of the Germanic origin of the cremation custom is hardly conclusive. Evidence may yet be forthcoming that it persisted somewhere in Europe or Asia from Palaeolithic times. The evidence afforded by the Gezer cremation cave is suggestive in this connection. As cremation had during the Bronze Age a distinct religious significance, the theory is possible that it was an essential tenet of a cult formed by some great teacher-like Buddha, Zoroaster, or Mohammed, who welded together his followers by the strongest ties which bind humanity-the ties of a religious faith and organization. The cremating peoples were conquerors. They achieved ascendancy over the tribes of Indo-European speech who had been migrating into northern India for several centuries between 2000 B.C. and 1200 B.C.; they have left traces of their influence in northern Asia to the present day among the Mongolian Buriats, whose earth and air spirits are called Burkans or "masters". In Europe they appear to have subdued a considerable part of the Danubian cultural area, and formed there, as elsewhere, a military aristocracy. It is uncertain whether they owed their successes to superior organization or to the use of iron. The Aryo-Indians, in Rig-Vedic times, used a metal called ayas, a word which may have denoted bronze or iron, or both. In Brahmanic times iron was called syama ayas, "swarthy ayas", or simply syama and also karsnayasa, "black ayas", while copper or bronze was

[p. liii]

known as lohayasa, "red ayas". [*1] The Homeric Achaeans used bronze and iron, but the earlier bands of Achaeans who drifted into southern Greece and reached Crete used bronze only, and, it is of significance to note, did not cremate their dead. Possibly, therefore, the late Achaeans were led by the cremating intruders of Thrace and had adopted their religious beliefs, which they fused with their own. Geometric pottery and iron weapons were introduced into southern Greece when cremation began to be practised there.

The fusion of the various peoples who struggled for supremacy in Greece before and during the early Hellenic period culminated in the growth of its historic civilization. But the influence of its earliest culture, that of Crete, ever remained. It first entered the Peloponnesian peninsula, and although it was overshadowed there and elsewhere during the long period of unrest which followed the Dorian invasion, it continued to develop in contact with alien cultures in the Anatolian colony of Ionia, which in turn proved to be "the little leaven which leavened the whole lump" once again.

So far, nothing has been said regarding the evidence of language, of which so much was made by the scholars of a past generation. But can much really be said with certainty in this connection? The idea that the peoples of Indo-European speech were of common racial origin and inheritors of a common stock of religious beliefs no longer obtains. "Language is shown by experience", as Mr. Hogarth says, "to be changed by conquest more easily than type of civilization. . . . The Turkish conquering minority (of Asia Minor) has imposed its tongue on the aborigines of Ionia, Lydia, Phrygia, and Cappadocia alike.

[p. liv]

Yet the type of civilization and the fundamental cult-beliefs of the people are not those of the true Turks." Referring to Greece, he says that "later Greek speech may have been fundamentally mid-European, largely contaminated with Aegean survivals; or it may have been fundamentally Aegean with mid-European intrusions, as our own language is fundamentally Anglo-Saxon largely contaminated by the speech of Norman conquerors". [*1]

The chapters which follow begin with the Palaeolithic Age in Pleistocene times, and the reader is afterwards presented with a popular account of the archaeological discoveries in Crete and Greece which have thrown so much light on the growth of pre-Hellenic civilization. Classical traditions are also drawn upon, and comparisons made between Cretan and Greek deities. Comparative evidence is provided in dealing with the growth and significance of primitive beliefs, and various theories which have been advocated are either indicated or summarized. As environment has ever had a formative influence in the development of religious beliefs and in determining the habits of life of which these are an expression, descriptions of natural scenery in various parts of the Aegean area are given to enable the reader to visualize the conditions of life under which pre-Hellenic civilization grew and flourished. In the historical narrative the chief periods of the contemporary civilizations of Egypt, Babylonia, Assyria, and the land of the Hittites are noted, and there are frequent references to early Cretan connections along the trade routes, by land and sea, with the remote ancestors of the peoples of the present day in Central and Western Europe.

Footnotes

^xxi:1 Dawn of Mediterranean Civilization, Angelo Masso, pp. 175 et sq.

^xxi:2 Quoted in Ripley's The Races of Europe, pp. 172 et seq.

^xxii:1 Custom and Myth, pp. 87 et seq.

^xxii:2 Scenes and Legends, pp. 31-32 (1835).

^xxiii:1 Ionia and the East, p. 107

^xxvi:1 That is, so far as can be indicated by skull capacity.

^xxix:1 The Ancient Egyptians, p. 43.

^xxix:2 Folk-lore of Northern Counties, p. 144.

^xxx:1 Leicester County Folk-lore Series, p. 29. In White's Selborne reference is made to the "shrew ash" in Hampshire.

^xxx:2 Dalzell's Darker Superstitions of Scotland, pp. 191-2.

^xxx:3 Religion of the Ancient Egyptians, A. Wiedemann, p. 226.

^xxx:4 The Iliad, I, 1 et seq.

^xxx:5 Strabo, XIII, 604.

^xxx:6 Strabo, XIII, 604, and also Aelian, H. A., XII, 5.

^xxxi:1 Rigveda, II, 33.

^xxxi:2 Isaiah, lxvi, 17.

^xxxi:3 Samuel, i, 5-6.

^xxxiii:1 Scripta Minoa, pp. 3, 4, 6.

^xxxvi:1 Census of India (1901), Vol. I, Part I, pp. 352 et seq.

^xxxvi:2 Indian Myth and Legend, pp. 148 et seq.

^xxxvii:1 The Ancient History of the Near East p. 48

^xxxviii:1 Iliad, XXIII, 75.

^xl:1 Celtic Religion, E. Anwyl, pp. 60 et seq.

^xl:2 Graham's Picturesque Sketches of Perthshire.

^xli:1 Except, as was the case in Rome (Juvenal, XV, 140), the bodies of infants. Those under eighteen months are in India buried head downwards in jars. Mothers who die in childbed are not cremated either, but buried.

^xli:2 A Journey in Southern Siberia, Jeremiah Curtin, p. 101.

^xli:3 Sabha Parva, Section VIII (Roy's translation, p. 27).

^xlii:1 Lamont's Chronicle of Fife, p. 206.

^xlii:2 Indian Myth and Legend, p. xxxvii, and Egyptian Myth and Legend, p. 143

^xlii:3 Comptes Rendus du Congres International d'Archeologie, 1905, Athens, p. 166.

^xliii:1 Herodotus, III, 16.

^xliv:1 The Life and Exploits of Alexander the Great, E. Wallis Budge, pp. 133-4.

^xlv:1 Pausanias, II, 34.

^xlv:2 The Elder Edda, O. Bray, p. 241.

^xlviii:1 Early Age of Greece, Vol. I, pp. 481 et seq.

^l:1 A History of Civilization in Palestine, pp. 15, 16.

^li:1 Melanges Nicole (in honour of Jules Nicole), 1905, Geneva, pp. 95 et seq.

^li:2 For particulars of the custom of using torches and lights at funerals, see Brand's Popular Antiquities, Vol. II, pp. 776 et seq. (1899 ed.).

^liii:1 Vedic Index of Names and Subjects, Macdonald and Keith, Vol. I, pp. 3 11 32, and 151.

^liv:1 Ionia and the East, pp. 105-7.

     
Myths of Crete and Pre-Hellenic Europe, by Donald A. Mackenzie, [1917], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 1]

 

MYTHS OF CRETE AND PRE-HELLENIC EUROPE

 

CHAPTER I

 

Primitive Europeans of the Glacial and Inter-glacial Periods

Geological and Mythical Ages of the World--Myths as Products of Environment--The Deluge and Great Winter Legends--New World Cataclysms--Doctrines of Decadence and Evolution in World's Ages Myths--Sages of the "Wandering Jew" Type--The Monsters of Geology and Mythology--Story of the Pleistocene Age--First Glacial Period--Mauer (Heidelberg) Man--Second Glacial Period--The Age of Chellean Culture--The Piltdown Skull--Acheulian Culture Stage--Third Glacial Period and Mousterian Man--Cro--Magnon Race and Grimaldi "Bushmen"--Aurignacian Cave Pictures and Beliefs--Solutrean Culture--Fourth Glacial Period and Magdalenian Man--The Problem of Eoliths--Approximate Duration of Palaeolithic Age.

THE system which obtains among modern scientists, of dividing the history of the earth into geological epochs and the pre-history of man into cultural periods, was anticipated by the priestly theorists of ancient civilizations, who established the doctrine of the mythical Ages of the World. These early teachers were:, no doubt, as greatly concerned about justifying their own pretensions and the tenets of their cults as in gratifying the growing thirst for knowledge among the educated classes. When they

[p. 2]

undertook to reveal the process of creation and throw light on the origin and purpose of mankind, they exalted local deities in opposition to those regarded supreme at rival centres of culture and political influence. Many rival systems of a national religion were thus perpetuated. But the various city priesthoods of a particular country found it necessary to deal also with problems of common concern. Among other things, they had to account for the various races of whom they had knowledge and to give divine sanction to existing social conditions; nor could they overlook the accidental discoveries which were occasionally made of the relics of elder and unknown peoples and the bones of extinct animals.

These mythology-makers, of course, possessed but meagre knowledge of their country's past, and were accordingly compelled to draw freely upon their imaginations; but they should not be regarded on that account as merely dreamers of dreams and inventors of miraculous stories. Indications are forthcoming which show that they were not wholly devoid of the scientific spirit. They were close observers of natural phenomena, and sometimes made deductions which, considering the narrowness of areas available to them for investigation, were not unworthy of thinking men. It seemed perfectly reasonable to the Babylonian and Egyptian scientists, who saw land growing from accumulations of river-borne silt, and desert wastes rendered cultivable by irrigation, to conclude, for instance, that water was the primary element and the source of all that existed.

This doctrine, which holds that the Universe is derived from one particular form of matter, has been called "Materialistic Monism". Ultimately, when mind was exalted above matter, the belief obtained that the inanimate forces of nature were subject to the control of

[p. 3]

the supreme Mind, which was the First Cause. This later doctrine is known as "Idealistic Monism". It was embraced by various cults in Babylonia, India, and Egypt. In the latter country, for instance, the great god of Memphis was addressed:

	 
		Ptah, the great, is the mind and tongue of the gods. . . .
		 It (the mind) is the one which bringeth forth every successful issue. . . .
		 It was the fashioner of all gods.
		 At a time when every divine word
		 Came into existence by the thought of the mind
		 And the command of the tongue. [*1]
		
		 In Egypt and Babylonia, where inundations of river valleys were of periodic occurrence, and where, at rare intervals, floods of excessive volume caused great destruction and loss of life, and even brought about political changes, it was concluded that the old Ages were ended and new Ages inaugurated by world-devastating deluges.

The deductions of the early scientists in northern Europe were similarly drawn from the evidence afforded by environment, and similarly influenced by persistent modes of thought. They saw shoals formed and beaches overlaid by sand washed up by the sea from, as it appeared, some sand-creating source, and conceived that on the floor of ocean there stood a great "World Mill" propelled by giantesses, which ground the bodies of primeval world-giants into earth meal. "'Tis said", a saga author set forth, "that far out, off yonder ness, the Nine Maids of the Island mill stir amain the host-cruel skerry-quern--they who in ages past ground Hamlet's meal. The good chieftain furrows the hull's lair with his ship's beaked prow." [*2]

[p. 4]

In the Elder Edda the god of the mill, who appears to be identical with Frey and the original Hamlet, is called Mundlefore, "the handle-mover":

	 
		The Mover of the Handle is father of Moon
		 And the father eke of Sun.
		
		 This "World Mill" caused the heavens to revolve round a fixed point marked by the polar star, which was called veraldar nagli, the "world-spike".

Believing that sun and moon rose from the ocean, and that therefore light came from darkness, they concluded that winter preceded summer at the beginning.

	 
		Untold winters ere Earth was fashioned
		     Roaring Bergelm was born;
		 His father was Thrudgelm of Mighty Voice,
		     Loud-sounding Ymer his grandsire. [*1]
		
		 In the north it was observed also that growth was promoted when the ice melted, and the teachers reasoned that the first being, Ymer, came into existence when sparks from the southland, or "poison drops from the sea", fell upon the primeval icebergs, and caused drops of trickling water to fertilize the clay.

	 
		From Stormy-billow sprang poison drops
		 Which waxed into Jotun form.
		
		 The Babylonians, on the other hand, who were familiar with the part played by reeds in accumulating mud and binding river-banks, taught that-

	 
		Marduk (Merodach) laid a reed upon the face of the waters.
		 He formed dust and poured it out beside the reed. . . .
		 He formed mankind. [*2]
		
		 

[p. 5]

It may be, too, that the ancient teachers, who framed creation myths and expounded local forms of the doctrine of the World's Ages, mingled at times with their pseudoscientific deductions and brilliant imaginings dim and confused racial traditions of early migrations and varied experiences in different areas of settlement. Some of these traditions may have had origin before the dawn of the Neolithic or Late Stone Age. As will be shown, certain customs, which are familiar to students of ancient civilizations, were prevalent among primitive peoples in the vast Palaeolithic or Early Stone Age. With these customs may have survived in localities legends associated with or based upon them. The possibility remains, therefore, that in Persian mythology there are memories not only of an area of settlement among the mountains where severe winters were as greatly dreaded as exceptional floods in river valleys, but even of one of the last recurring phases of the Ice Age. A poetic narrative relates that the patriarch Yima, who afterwards became Lord of the Dead, constructed a shelter to afford safe protection for mankind and their domesticated animals during the "evil winter", with its "hard, killing frost". He had been forwarned of this approaching world-disaster by the supreme god Ahura Mazda (Ormuzd). Perhaps the "shelter" was a southern valley to which the proto-Persians were compelled to migrate on account of the growing severity of successive winters and the lowering of the perpetual snow-line around mountain-fringed plateaus they were accustomed to inhabit. It is related in the Avesta, one of the Persian sacred books, that "before the winter the land had meadows. . . . The water was wont to flow over it and the snow to melt." A similar prolonged winter is foretold in Icelandic mythology. According to the Prose Edda, which is a

[p. 6]

patchwork of fragmentary legends of uncertain origin and antiquity, it will precede the destruction of the universe by the giants of frost and fire (lightning). "In the first place will come the winter, called Fimbul winter, during which snow will fall from the four corners of the world; the frosts will be very severe, the wind piercing, the weather tempestuous, and the sun impart no gladness." [*1]

From the Voluspa poem of the Elder Edda we gather details of--

	 
		A Sword Age, Axe Age--shields are cloven,
		 A Wind Age, Wolf Age, ere the world sinks.
		
		 Then, after describing a period of universal destruction, the soothsayer proceeds:

	 
		I see uprising a second time
		 Earth from the ocean, green anew:
		 The waters fall, on high the eagle
		 Flies o'er the fell and catches fish. [*2]
		
		 Various accounts of universal cataclysms come from the New World. Representative of these are the legends of the Arawaks of North Brazil regarding periods of flood, storm, and darkness, and those of the Mexicans, which deal with the destruction of early races by deluges caused by several succeeding suns perishing from lack of sustenance.

The most highly developed doctrinal systems of World Ages which have survived from antiquity are found, however, in the Mythologies of India, Greece, and Ireland. There is more than one account in Aryo-Indian literature of the periodic Ages called Yugas. These are embraced in longer Ages of sufficient duration to satisfy the

[p. 7]

requirements of modern geologists. Four Yugas extend over a period of "divine years" equal to 4,320,000 years of mortals, and a thousand of the combined Yugas comprise a "Day of Brahma", the individualized "World Soul". The Yugas begin with the Krita or Perfect Age, which is White, and decline from that to the Treta, which is Red, and the Dwapara, which is Yellow, to Kali Yuga, "the Black or Iron Age".

Hesiod, in his Work and Days, begins the Greek system with the perfect Golden Age, which is followed by the Silver and Bronze Ages, and the two Ages of Heroes and Iron, which may have been local subdivisions of the fourth Age, represented in India by Kali Yuga.

Both in India and Greece, man it will be noted, was believed to have relapsed from a primitive state of perfection. The system found in Ireland, which was probably imported from Gaul with the doctrine of transmigration of souls and the custom of widow-burning or slaying, follows, on the other hand, an evolutionary process. The first Irish Age, that of Partholon and his race, is an Age of folly. It is followed by Nemed's Age, which was distinguished for cruelty, and the Age of the Fir Bolgs, in which the power of evil was supreme. Then comes the Danann Age of benevolent deities and heroes, who are the reputed "ancestors of the men of learning in Erin". The last Age is the Milesian, and during it St. Patrick reached Ireland and preached Christianity.

This ancient doctrine of the World's Ages, which may be traced in Egypt and Babylonia, where certain gods lived for periods upon earth as human. kings, was adapted to suit the needs of different cults in different areas of localization. In India the four great castes were each connected with a Yuga: the Brahmans had origin in the White Age, the Kshatriyas (military aristocrats) in the

[p. 8]

Red Age, the Vaisyas (traders and agriculturists) in the Yellow Age, and the Sudras (Dravidians and pre-Dravidians) in the Black Age. In Greece an Age was devoted to the Trojan heroes, and in Ireland the Fir Bolgs, Dananns, and Milesians were identified with existing racial types whom St. Patrick found there.

One of the versions of the Indian legend of Mythical Ages is related by the deathless sage Markandeya, who lived through all the Yugas, and was protected during the Deluge by the child-god Narayana. The Irish account was put into the mouth of Tuan MacCarell. He had been a contemporary of Partholon, and afterwards existed for periods as a stag, a boar, a vulture or eagle, and a salmon. In the end his salmon form was devoured by the wife of King Carell, with the result that he was reborn as her son. Another sage of this class is the famous Magus of the Icelandic Bragda Magus saga, who renewed his youth periodically by casting his skin. He also figures in the Charlemagne romances.

If the ancient teachers, who professed to have received revelations from sages like the "Wandering Jew", had been acquainted with the scientific data which is now available, their narratives of past Ages would have described greater changes than ever they conceived of. Nor would these be lacking either in picturesqueness or imaginative appeal. The priestly sages would have no cause to lament with the poet:

	 
		       Do not all charms fly
		 At the mere touch of cold philosophy?
		 There was an awful rainbow once in heaven:
		 We know her woof and texture; she is given
		 In the dull catalogue of common things.
		
		 Even greater and more ferocious monsters than were

[p. 9]

dreamt of in their philosophy might have figured in their wonder-compelling and fearsome legends. Instead of the composite demons of Egypt and Babylonia, the Eur-Asian dragons, the flying serpents of the Nile valley, and the great snakes of ocean, they could have told of the gigantic reptiles of the Triassic and Jurassic systems, the great mammals of the Tertiary Period, and those contemporaries of man in the Pleistocene Age, the hairy mammoths, bulky with fat and fur, the fierce woolly rhinoceroses, the huge cave-bears, and the immense sabre-toothed tigers. No ancient legend of fabled monsters surpasses the modern scientist's account of extinct gigantic fauna. Nor can the creation-myths on Egyptian papyri, Babylonian bricks, or Indian palm-leaf books approach in grandness and charm the dramatic story of the four great geological Ages of the World.

The author of the Tuan MacCarell legend would in our day begin his narrative with the dawn of the Pleistocene Age, which endured for at least 620,000 years, and was yet much shorter than any of the four Tertiary Ages--the Eocene, Oligocene, Miocene, or Pliocene.

In the post-Pliocene, or early Pleistocene period, Tuan, let it be supposed, awakens from magic sleep in Europe. He gazes with wonder on forests of strange and mighty trees. Monstrous wild animals come and go. Several resemble elephants, and the greatest of these is the long-tusked mastodon of colossal bulk. Hippopotami snort in the rivers, on the banks of which crouch, basking in sunshine, ponderous Dinotheriums, resembling sea-cows, with downward-curving tusks and short trunks. Across verdurous plains gallop herds of little horses with divided hoofs. The dreaded sabre-toothed tiger crouches in the jungle ready to pounce upon its prey.

Tuan, who alternately sleeps for long centuries and

[p. 10]

wanders about the earth like the legendary Jew, continues his narrative. "When next I awoke", he tells, "I found that Europe had been completely transformed. No great forests flourished on its central plains; bare stretches of frozen ground extended far and near. From northern Germany to the Pole, valleys and rivers were shrouded by ice and seas were frozen over. Great mountain-peaks towered grimly above curving glaciers like rocky islands in a foam-white ocean. Icebergs drifted down the Atlantic past the coast of Spain. This was the First Glacial Period.

"When next I awoke the ice was vanishing, the rivers surged from the melting glaciers) many valleys were flooded, and vegetation flourished. In the years that followed I saw the forests extending northward from the Mediterranean coast, and the ocean ebbing gradually farther and farther away, owing to the widespread elevation of land, until great islands became uplands in vast plains, and continents linked with continents around the world. I must describe Europe as it appeared to me before I next fell asleep. The Mediterranean Sea was divided into two great lakes when Italy became attached to a triangular plain which jutted out from the north African coast. The Strait of Gibraltar was closed, and a broad valley united Spain with Morocco. Corsica and Sardinia formed a promontory when the Gulf of Genoa vanished, and the Balearic Isles were mountains on a finger of land attached to western Spain. The Baltic Sea became a shrunken inland lake, the English Channel and the North Sea had disappeared. The British Isles were then joined to the Continent, and the plains which enclosed them extended far westward beyond Land's End, the western coast-line of Ireland and that of the Scottish Hebrides, and stretched north-eastward beyond the Shetland Isles to the coast of

[p. 11]

Norway. A "land-bridge", which shrank to a narrow neck 100 miles north-west of Cape Wrath, united Scotland and Iceland) and narrowed again ere it met the extended coast of Greenland. The Rivers Elbe and Rhine drained the broad valley which had been the North Sea, and were united about 150 miles eastward from the Aberdeenshire coast after the Rhine had received the waters of the Forth and Tay. The Conon poured through the valley which had been the Moray Firth, and, sweeping eastward past the Orkney and Shetland Islands, entered the sea 20 miles westward from the mouth of the Elbe. The Seine cut through the valley of the English Channel, and the Severn united, 100 miles westward from Land's End, with a river flowing from a long narrow loch which divided Ireland from Scotland, and extended southward to Carnsore Point in Wexford.

"Over the Eur-African land-bridges came many of the great animals which I saw during the first period of the Pleistocene Age. Attracted by the genial temperature, even the rhinoceros came north, and with the sabre-toothed tiger prowled on the upland plains of England, where I saw also the giant sloth, the hippopotamus, the mastodon, the triple-toed horse, great tortoises, the giant fallow deer, the well-armoured glyptodon, [*1] as big as an ox, and numerous great snakes and nimble apes.

"For a long period I searched in vain for traces of mankind, but at length I discovered a tribe of most primitive savages at Mauer, on the banks of the River Neckar, then very broad and deep, near where Heidelberg now stands. They hunted down the horse and the elk, and dreaded greatly the rhinoceros and the cave-lion. Their homes were among the branches of high trees. In aspect they were extremely repulsive: they had low, sharply-retreating

[p. 12]

foreheads, squat noses, big bulging mouths, and chinless jaws. [*1] I never saw these savages except in this First Interglacial Period.

"When next I awoke from the slumber of centuries I found that Europe had once more been transformed. The Mediterranean Sea had snapped the Italian land-bridge and flowed through the Dardanelles to the Black Sea; a blue strait separated Gibraltar from Morocco. The British Islands were entirely isolated. Roaring tides swept up and down the English Channel, and the broad North Sea, overswept by foam-churning tempest, was dotted over by innumerable icebergs. Each succeeding winter the ocean encroached farther and farther inland, burying in deep sand-banks the great trunks of forest trees, creeping up river valleys and forming stony beaches where wild flowers had bloomed and birds had carolled and built their nests. At length the advancing billows shaped out a rough shore-line round the island coasts over 40 feet above their present level. In time the land was re-elevated and the sea shrank back again.

"The snow-line of Scottish mountains crept down gradually lower and lower, and glaciers appeared once more. Ultimately vast fields of ice jutted across the North Sea, and the Baltic remained frozen during the months of summer. Icebergs were stranded on Dogger Bank and drifted down the English Channel in early summer through veils of white fog into the Bay of Biscay and round Cape Finisterre.

"Ere I went to sleep again the ice-fields had obliterated Holland and Belgium and crept up the Elbe valley almost to the plain of Bohemia, where the climate was sub-arctic

[p. 13]

and tundra conditions prevailed as in northern Siberia at the present time. Scotland, Ireland, and Wales were ice-locked, and England was covered over as far south as Essex on the east and Gloucester on the west, except where the battling glaciers left bare patches in the middle districts and in the East Riding of Yorkshire. This was the Second Glacial Period. When it had reached its maximum, I wandered southward through France, then a dreary waste, and saw herds of musk-oxen and reindeer, lumbering woolly rhinoceroses, and fat mammoths with great recurving tusks and shaggy red manes.

"I had sought shelter from a blinding dust-storm in a cave on a bare hill-side, and slept there. When next I awoke and crept forth, I found myself in a deep shady forest. It was a fragrant morning of bright sunshine, and although it seemed to be midsummer, the sweet spring season had not yet spent itself. The rivers at this, the dawn of the Second Inter-glacial Period, ran broad and deep, swollen by the melting glaciers, but they shrank gradually as weeks of heat and dryness went past. Wide shallow lakes grew smaller each succeeding summer until they vanished entirely, and their dark beds grew verdant with long grasses. When I went northward I found that the British Isles were once again a part of the Continent. The African hippopotamus snorted in the Thames, the rhinoceros lumbered along the plains of the English Channel, and through the forests of the North Sea valley herds of elephants ranged as far north as the banks of the Forth. I saw many tribes of human beings. I first met them at Chelles, on the banks of the Seine, 8 miles eastward from the site of Paris. The Chellean men were of higher type than the grotesque tree-dwellers of Mauer. Their dark skins bespoke their southern origin, and they resembled certain tribes of Australian savages. They

[p. 14]

were entirely devoid of clothing. The men carried long staves, which were sharpened to points, with which they speared fish and hunted the little wild horse. I saw them chipping flint and shaping "hand-axes", [*1] which they used for a variety of purposes-cutting branches from trees, skinning and dividing animals, and weapons. They also made small flint scrapers and small flint daggers with rough curved hefts.

"I saw these men hunting in England and in Central and Western Europe. They crossed over to Africa by the Italian land-bridge, round the rock of Gibraltar, and along the Palestinian coast., and they were numerous in Persia and India. Ere I fell asleep I was transported round the world, and saw thousands of human beings following the edible animals over the northern land-bridge from Asia to Canada, and down the western sea-coast to South America. Then I slumbered again.

"Long centuries went past as I slept. When next I awoke I found that Europe had once again become changed. The sea was washing round the shores of the British Isles, and the Italian land-bridge to Africa had been severed. Crete was no longer a part of the main land, and the green mountains which had towered on the well-watered valley connecting Greece with Asia Minor were islands in the Aegean Sea. The temperature had suffered decline. Summer was shorter and winter longer and of growing severity. During the warm weather the southern animals wandered through France, and, when the snow began to fall, the mammoth, the woolly rhinoceros, and the reindeer came down from the north in search of food. I saw new types of humanity which had

[p. 15]

arrived from Asia. They mingled with Chellean men in some localities, and in others fought with them for possession of hunting-grounds. Many tribes were isolated in Britain when the land was lowered and the sea advanced. There were Asiatics in Sussex, and I saw some camping on the banks of the Ouse at Piltdown, near Uckfield. [*1] During the winter these people sought shelter in caves.

"The change of climate had intensified the struggle for existence) and sharpened the wits of men. At St. Acheul, at Amiens, in the Somme valley, I found the flint-workers displaying increased skill and producing several new implements which the altered conditions of life had made necessary. Acheulian man had achieved a considerable degree of progress in other directions. Those tribes which remained in western and central Europe, owing to the winter season found it necessary to provide themselves with skin clothing, but the great majority migrated to genial climes, and these continued their old habits of life. I fell asleep at the close of this the Second Interglacial Period, which was longer and more genial than any of the others.

"The Third Glacial Epoch was well advanced when next I set forth a wanderer through the valleys of Europe. It was less widespread than the second. Two-thirds of England and about a fourth of Ireland were clear of ice, nor was the Zuyder Zee frozen during summer. The site of Berlin, however, was well within the glacial area, as was also that of Warsaw. The Alpine snow-line had crept down over 3000 feet. Yet although Europe resembled in some parts Greenland and in others North Siberia in the present Age, I saw numerous tribes of human beings. They were of small stature but muscular and active. Their heads were narrow but of great

[p. 16]

size, and their faces, although not devoid of intelligence, were exceedingly rugged; their big dark eyes were overshadowed by enormous brow ridges, they had broad flattened noses, projecting mouths, and chinless jaws. [*1] They made their homes in caves, and in these they lit fires, round which they sat to chip their flints and fashion their skin garments.

"I will describe what I saw when I sought shelter with a tribe of these people at Le Moustier, in the valley of Dordogne, in south-western France. The River Vezere then flowed go feet higher than in modern times. I entered a cave on a damp and chilly summer day. Haunches of venison were being roasted on a fire-place constructed of upright stones, and near it several workmen were busily engaged chipping flints. They constructed a greater variety of implements than the men of the Chellean and Acheulean Periods, and showed greater skill in economizing their material: flakes were removed at a single blow and utilized for smaller artifacts, and when an implement was given form it was carefully dressed with minute chipping until it became an artistic product, exceedingly pleasing to the eye. Men took delight in their work and rivalled one another to gain the praises of their fellows. The tailors cut the dried skins with their sharp hand-axes. Then they squatted with crossed legs to sew the pieces together into not unshapely garments. They made holes, through which to thrust their dried thongs, with little flint awls. In the evening a company of hunters returned from the chase, dragging on a skin sledge the carcass of a musk-ox; and when they had feasted heavily, I heard them tell of battles with the cave-bear, of escapes from the cave-lion and the dreaded woolly rhinoceros, of the slaying

 

EXAMPLES OF PALAeOLITHIC ART

The objects include: handles of knives and daggers carved in ivory and bone, line drawings of wild animals, faces of men or demons, of animal-headed demon or deity with arms uplifted (compare Egyptian "Ka" attitude of adoration), of wild horses on perforated "arrow straightener", of men stalking a bison, of seal, cow, reindeer, cave bear, &c., and perforated amulets.

 

[p. 17]

of a great mammoth, and of how they guarded their food-supplies against the ravages of prowling hyenas, gluttons, and arctic foxes. Meanwhile the women busily engaged themselves at the mouth of the cave cutting up the body of the musk-ox and cleaning the skin with flint scrapers. Ere night fell, the chief announced that on the morrow they would go eastward to hunt reindeer. I gathered that these people migrated northward during the summer, and returned again, on the approach of cold weather, to their southern caves. Not infrequently they had to fight with other tribes who took possession of their winter homes.

"I went to sleep during this period, and when next I awoke I found that the Third Inter-glacial Period had dawned. The glaciers melted and again there were great floods in the valleys, and the ice retreated from the lowlands of Scotland. The summers in Central Europe were exceedingly pleasant, but never so warm as during the Chellean Age, and dust-storms were of frequent occurrence. Forests were once again flourishing, and I saw in the midst of them many southern animals which were migrating farther and farther northward. During winter the mammoth and woolly rhinoceros came as far south as Prussia. Mousterian man was able to pursue the hunt high among the mountains, where he found caves in which to shelter himself from wild animals by night. He returned to the valleys when the blizzards of winter drove southward the fierce and numerous beasts of prey he dreaded most.

"I saw new types of mankind. In the Dordogne valley were tribes of slender-limbed human giants who were fearless warriors and mighty huntsmen. Some were 6 feet 6 inches in height. But it was not only in stature that they contrasted sharply with the vanishing

[p. 18]

[paragraph continues] Mousterians, who were rarely higher than 5 feet 3 inches. They had big long heads and broad faces, high foreheads, deep-set brown eyes, prominent cheek-bones, sharply curved lips, and well-formed chins. They resembled modern Europeans more closely than any human beings I had yet met with. Their faces, tanned by wind and sun, were alert and keen, and, although rugged, were greatly softened when their ready smile laid bare their white gleaming teeth. I observed that the young men showed great respect for their elders. It was of common occurrence to see many gathered round a cave entrance listening to the counsel of some white-haired sage. An old man, who had achieved widespread renown as an explorer and leader of men, lived in a cave at Cro-Magnon, and was often approached to settle disputes and give advice regarding great undertakings; he was also skilled as a healer of wounds and a curer of disease. These men had greater regard for their dead than obtained among their Mousterian predecessors. I once saw them laying to rest a slain warrior in his family burial-grotto at Aurignac. He was clad in his skin robe. His headdress was adorned with a string of sea-shells and round his neck was a collar of the perforated teeth of a reindeer, the skeleton of the salmon of wisdom was laid on his breast, and the whole body was sprinkled with magic pigment. A fire was lit, and the warriors danced round the grave with slow, measured steps, while a sage recited the mighty deeds performed by the dead man. Women knelt near at hand, wailing a chorus of sorrow. Beside the warrior they laid his weapons and implements as well as food which had been cooked for him and water for refreshment; then the grotto was closed up with a large slab of limestone. Aurignacian man of Cro-Magnon type was a lover of his kind.

[p. 19]

saw other tribes which had entered southern France at this period from Africa. At a Grimaldi cave near Mentone I dwelt for a space with a family of dark-skinned people with broad noses and protruding mouths. They resembled somewhat the modern Bushmen of South Africa and were similarly of short stature, but their heads were larger and their faces more intelligent. Middle-aged women had enormous development of fatty tissue; their steatopygous figures were invariably exceedingly grotesque, but were yet greatly admired. [*1]

"These Aurignacian peoples worshipped the mother-goddess, and there were among them clever artists who carved out of ivory and bone, limestone and steatite, female figures to represent their deity. Sometimes they depicted the slim-waisted, long-haired Cro-Magnon women, and sometimes the woolly-haired bulging forms of Grimaldi type. In those districts where the Bushmen-like people were the slaves of the tall huntsmen a steatopygous woman was sometimes selected at religious ceremonies to represent the mother-goddess.

The Aurignacian artists were wont to decorate their caverns with figures of wild animals, which they sketched in outline with pointed flints, and often coloured with crayons of red ochre or painted with pigment which they carried in bone tubes. In the deep cave of Altamira, in Spain, I saw a great picture-gallery in which various artists had exhibited their skill. One part of the vaulted roof was covered with lifelike representations of edible animals, including wild horses, deer, and boars, and elsewhere I saw artistic productions of similarly high merit. In some caves, which were constantly inhabited, were impressions of human hands. These were intended to

[p. 20]

avert the influences of the evil eye and the attacks of demons. Huntsmen left records of their experiences in summer hunting districts by inscribing symbols on cave walls, so that those who came nigh might know how they were likely to fare there. They also depicted the forms of monstrous demons that had to be propitiated.

The hunters of the Aurignacian Age were the first I saw using bows and arrows. In preparing the arrow-shafts they utilized perforated bone straighteners. [*1] Their flint implements were worked with skill far surpassing that of the Mousterian Age.

"How long I slept during this period I cannot tell. When next I woke up I found that the temperature had suffered sharp decline. Cro-Magnon man still inhabited a great portion of southern France, [*2] but I observed also other types which were new to me. At Solutre, Saone-et-Loire, where tall and short types gave evidence of race intermixture, I fell in with highly-skilled artisans who shaped flint lance-heads of laurel-leaf and willow-leaf shape, and accomplished delicate secondary flaking by pressure with bone implements. They also made comfortable skin clothing, which they sewed with bone needles which had perforated eyes. [*3] The winters grew gradually longer and more severe, and the men of the Solutrean Age achieved rapid progress in their conflict with the elements. Huntsmen favoured the horse, but slew also the reindeer.

"The Fourth Glacial Period followed, and it was suffering decline when I next went out to explore those districts that had seen so many changes. I awoke at La Madelaine, on the right bank of the Vezere, which then flowed higher

 

PALEOLITHIC ART: REPRESENTATIVE PAINTINGS OF BISON AND DEER, FROM THE CAVE OF ALTAMIRA, NEAR SANTANDER, SPAIN

The bison was evidently painted during summer, after it had rubbed its shaggy winter coat off the greater part of its body.

 

[p. 21]

than at the present day. In this district the tall men of Cro-Magnon type were less numerous than the stumpy intruders of this Magdalenian Age, who had some resemblance to the present-day Esquimaux. Half-breeds, however, were not uncommon. The little men had much more refined and intelligent faces than the Mousterians; their foreheads were large and their chins prominent, and they were clad in closely-fitting skin garments to resist the sub-arctic climate. Like the cave-dwellers of the Aurignacian Age, they were skilled artists and artisans. The Grimaldi folks had migrated southward, and ivory carvings of the mother goddess were modelled on the slim-waisted female type. Artists continued to decorate the caves with paintings of animals, and they also engraved their implements and weapons, and even stones and pieces of slate. The bison and the wild horse were often depicted, but the most favoured models were the northern animals of this cold European Age. Mammoths were growing scarce, for men had acquired skill in trapping them, and the artists engraved ivory charms with their bulky forms, and numerous were their studies of reindeer grazing on snowy plains, crouched up at bay, or panting in rapid flight to escape the dogs and arrows of the huntsmen. The Magdalenian artists also drew the snarling cave-bear, the double-horned and snouted head of the woolly rhinoceros, the antelope and the chamois, and the scampering wolf with gaping jaws. Among birds they were familiar with the goose and the swan, and, as they were accomplished fishermen, they could carve in many characteristic attitudes the graceful salmon and the keen-eyed seal. Many huntsmen had the handles of their daggers fashioned to represent the animals they were wont to stalk and slay.

"During this period flint-working declined somewhat,

[p. 22]

for the fashion became prevalent of pointing lances and arrows with ivory and bone and reindeer horn. A great inventor equipped huntsmen with a new weapon-the barbed harpoon-and another provided for it a thrower made from reindeer horn, so that it could be thrown farther and directed with surer aim. A long cord was attached to the harpoon, which was utilized to catch salmon and seals. This wonderful invention was the means of increasing greatly the food-supply. It thus rendered the struggle for existence less arduous, especially when the tribes increased in number.

"Great changes took place when the Fourth Glacial Period began to decline, and more genial conditions became prevalent. The Magdalenian huntsmen migrated farther and farther northward as the ice area shrank in dimensions, because the reindeer deserted those districts which failed to yield them in sufficient abundance the lichens upon which they fed."

In the Gaelic legend of the Irish Ages it is stated that, when Tuan ended, "the auditors thanked him. . . . They remained a whole week talking with him." But his modern narrative deals with problems which are not likely to be solved I n so brief a space of time. It touches the fringes of not a few controversies which have been waged vigorously for a number of years, and are likely to be continued indefinitely. In this volume, however, which deals mainly with the intellectual life of early peoples, it is unnecessary to state in detail the various conflicting views regarding the geological periods and the earliest traces of man in Europe; but a brief summary of the results of modern research may be given, so that the general reader may be familiarized with one particular phase of the subject which is pregnant with human interest.

[p. 23]

In Tuan's references to early man in Europe, six stages of development, or levels of culture, have been referred to.

These are:

	 
		1. The Chellean, in the Second Inter-glacial Period.
		 2. The Acheulian, a late phase of the Chellean.
		 3. The Mousterian, in the Third Glacial Period and later.
		 4. The Aurignacian, in the Third Inter-glacial Period and later.
		 5. The Solutrean, in the late Third Inter-glacial Period and later.
		 6. The Magdalenian, in the Fourth Glacial Period.
		
		 Some archaeologists place before the Chellean, Stage 1 the Mesvinian, and 2, the Strepyan, but others regard them as earlier phases of the Chellean. A still earlier stage, called the Mafflian, with which the Galley Hill (Kent) skeleton and implements were associated, has been taken down to the Strepyan Period of Chellean man. The various stages have been subdivided into Upper, Middle, and Lower Periods.

Of late years certain scientists have sought to establish a pre-Palaeolithic Age called the Eolithic. They thus place the appearance of man in the geological Tertiary system, not only in the Pliocene Age, which preceded the Pleistocene, but also back through the Miocene and Oligocene Ages to the Eocene. The Tertiary stages of culture are called Reutelian, and are as follows:--

	 
		1. Eocene Age, Duan (Reutelian).
		 2. Oligocene Age, Fagnian (Reutelian).
		 3. Miocene Age, Cantalian (Reutelian).
		 4. Pliocene Age, Kentian (Reutelian).
		 5. Early Pleistocene, Thames basin (Reutelian).
		
		 Then follow the Mesvinian and Strepyan phases of early Chellean culture.

[p. 24]

Professor James Geikie confesses he is "staggered" by the theory that man existed in the Tertiary system of Ages. "Since the Eocene Period, which must date back", he says, "several millions of years, the whole mammalian fauna has undergone modifications and changes, continuous evolution having resulted in the more or less complete transformation of numerous types, while many others have long been extinct. And yet, if we accept the eoliths as proofs of man's existence in Eocene and Oligocene times, we must admit that in this case--and in this case alone--evolution must have been at a standstill during a prodigiously extended period. For it must be understood that the eoliths of the older Tertiary formations cannot be distinguished from those met with in the Miocene, Pliocene, and even Pleistocene deposits. [*1]

These "eoliths" are chipped flints which were either flaked by man or by natural causes--the movements of strata settling under pressure or the action of water. The problem is a difficult one. "The unprejudiced", says Professor Duckworth, "will maintain an open mind, pending the advent of more conclusive evidence than has been adduced hitherto." [*2] Professor Sollas, on the other hand, is convinced that not a trace of unquestionable evidence of man's existence has been found in strata admittedly older than the Pleistocene. [*3]

Estimates of the approximate duration of the Pleistocene Age vary considerably. Geikie, following Penck, gives 620,000 years as a minimum; Rutot confines it to 139,000 years, and thus reduces greatly the age of his "eoliths", while Sturge estimates that a single period of it lasted for 700,000 years. The majority of leading scientists, however, have of late inclined to favour Penck's

[p. 25]

system of dating, and to allow 400,000 years as a minimum for the Palaeolithic or Early Stone Age, which begins with the first stages of Chellean culture. The dawn of the Neolithic, or Late Stone Age, is dated in southern Europe and Palestine at roughly 10,000 B.C.

In the next chapter consideration will be given to those traces which survive of the religious and magical beliefs of the Palaeolithic peoples, and it will be shown that the evidence accumulated has an important bearing on the problems raised by Cretan and pre-Hellenic discoveries, as well as upon the study of the myths and legends of Babylonia and Egypt, and those of peoples less renowned but no less important from the point of view of the student of comparative mythology.

Footnotes

^3:1 Breasted's History of Egypt, p. 357.

^3:2 Translated from Amlodi Saga, by F. York Powell.

^4:1 Bergelm and Thrudgelm, nature-giants, and Ymer, the primeval world-giant. The Elder Edda, O. Bray, pp. 471 49; and Teutonic Myth and Legend, pp. 1 et seq.

^4:2 The Seven Tablets of Creation, L. W. King, p. 129.

^6:1 Mallet's Northern Antiquities, p. 451.

^6:2 The Elder Edda, O. Bray, pp. 291, 295.

^11:1 Resembling the armadillo.

^12:1 The jaw-bone of the earliest European was found in a Mauer sand-pit, 78 feet from the surface. Sollas holds that this primitive German belonged to none of the existing races of mankind. The jaw-bone has Simian characteristics.

^14:1 The so-called coup-de-poing of the French archaeologists; also named "bouchers", after M. Boucher de Perthes, who half a century ago identified them as primitive artifacts of human contemporaries of extinct wild animals.

^15:1 The Piltdown skull of a broad-headed woman was discovered in 1913.

^16:1 The Neanderthal-Spy type.

^19:1 Two Grimaldi skulls which have been discovered have distinct negroid characteristics: the jaw protrudes sharply.

^20:1 This implement has also been called a "sceptre"; it was more probably an "arrow straightener".

^20:2 And is still found there, as ethnologists have demonstrated.

^20:3 The bone needle with perforated eye is an invention of this period.

^24:1 Antiquity of Man in Europe, p. 5 (1914.).

^24:2 Prehistoric Man, pp. 106-21 (1912).

^24:3 Ancient Hunters, pp. 67, 69 (1911).

     
Myths of Crete and Pre-Hellenic Europe, by Donald A. Mackenzie, [1917], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 26]

 

CHAPTER II

 

Palaeolithic Magic and Religion

Intellectual Life of Palaeolithic Man--Evidence from Present-day Savages--Palaeolithic Man progressive and big-brained--Bushmen and Cro-Magnon Culture--Chronology of Aurignacian Period--The Inspiration of Primitive Art--Steatopygous Figurines of Cave-dwellers, Babylonians, Maltese, and Egyptians--The Primitive Mother-goddess--Wasp-waisted Females in Fertility Dance--Hand Impressions in Caves--Finger-mutilation--The Indian Evil-eye Charm--Foot-print Lore--Animal Pictures as Totems--Evidence of Australia--Magdalenian Art--Charmed Weapons--Palaeolithic Ceremonial Burials--Ornaments as Charms--Magic and Religion--Antiquity of Animal-headed Deities--Origin of the Nude Goddess--The Aurignacian Claim.

IT will be recognized at the outset, in dealing with the intellectual life of the Palaeolithic Europeans, that little or no evidence can be derived from chinless jaws or skulls with protruding brow ridges, and that the artifacts of the Chellean and Acheulian phases of culture assist us only in so far as they afford evidence regarding habits of life and growing skill in craftsmanship. Not until we reach the Mousterian stage, in the Third Glacial Epoch, and find that the cave-dwelling hunters of reindeer and mammoths practised the ceremonial burial of the dead, is there any sure indication that the Palaeolithic mind was sufficiently concerned regarding the great problems of life and death as to formulate definite beliefs regarding the destiny of mankind. But it would be rash to draw far-reaching conclusions from negative evidence. The results that accrue from the comparative study of beliefs and customs

[p. 27]

renders highly improbable the hypothesis that Chellean and Acheulian men of the Second Inter-glacial Period took no thought of the morrow because they were on a plane of lower intellectual development than, for instance) the backward Australian savages who practise elaborate ceremonials and perpetuate myths which were anciently the products of speculative thought. Indeed, there is no savage tribe on the globe at present which can be said to be devoid of its intellectual life.

It is quite possible that the Chellean folks were even more advanced than some of the existing types of primitive peoples. This view is supported by the evidence obtained of their distinct progressive tendencies. Stages of development can be detected in Chellean culture which was raised to the Acheulian plane, and the increasing number and excellence of the artifacts show clearly that a further distinct advance was achieved when the Mousterian phase had fully developed. It is found, by the examination of surviving Mousterian skulls, that despite his rugged facial characteristics the Palaeolithic European was a big-brained man. Of course, skull capacity, especially in individual cases, cannot be regarded as proof of intellectual power. Still, the fact remains that the really progressive races in the world at present are those endowed with the most liberal cranial capacity. The early inhabitants of Western Europe may, therefore, have surpassed as thinkers, as they certainly did as inventors, those surviving remnants of ancient races to whom they are usually compared. The Grimaldi skulls of the Aurignacian period may have Bushmen characteristics, but they give indication of greater intellectual development than can be credited to those ill-fated and interesting African nomads who, prior to coming into contact with the white races, at whose hands they have suffered so

[p. 28]

shamefully, had not advanced much beyond the Aurignacian and Magdalenian stages of culture. The Bushmen appear, in fact, to have remained through long ages in a state of arrested development after breaking away from the ancient progressive races from whom the elements of their civilization were derived. Possibly they even degenerated in the interval.

It is probable that the Cro-Magnon peoples of the Aurignacian stage of culture represented the race of unknown origin which exercised so marked an influence on those of their contemporaries who were in touch with them. They had the largest brains of any of the ancient peoples. Indeed, according to the ethnologists, the skull capacity of their women was greater than that of the average male European in the present age.

This Aurignacian stage of culture, which some date approximately at 20,000 B.C. and others at 30,000 B.C., affords ample indications not only of intellectual activity, but also a marked degree of refinement of thought and feeling. As has been shown in the "Tuan MacCarrell" story of the Pleistocene Age, the Cro-Magnon cave-dwellers of the Late Third Inter-glacial Epoch were accomplished draughtsmen and ivory-carvers. They had an Art history which must be regarded as a reflection of their social history. Apparently they had solved the problem of securing their food-supply with a minimum of effort and had therefore leisure to cultivate the Arts; this triumph they achieved by inventing new implements and improving those inherited from the Mousterian Epoch. Withal, as one cave-picture shows, they possessed domesticated cattle which the women engaged in herding. Consequently they had advanced from the hunting to the pastoral stage of civilization.

Their activities in the sphere of Art began with rude

[p. 29]

childish efforts and culminated in the production of realistic drawings and carvings in the round, and even of decorative designs which stand comparison with those of later and more complex civilizations. It was considered incredible, when discovery was first made of their cave-pictures, that Palaeolithic man could have been endowed with either such intense artistic insight and feeling or technical skill as these gave evidence of.

An interesting problem arises in connection with the artistic products of the Aurignacian and Magdalenian stages of culture. Were they connected with ceremonials, and therefore symbolic of religious and magical beliefs; or should they be considered simply as the expression of an Art movement which had been gradually developed for long ages by accomplished flint-knappers who, in producing exquisitely flaked artifacts of symmetrical proportions, displayed that infinite capacity for taking pains which amounts to genius?

There can be no doubt that the finest Aurignacian figurines wrought in stone and bone and ivory were conscious impressions of feminine beauty of form, and that the artists of the Cro-Magnon race were as devoted lovers of Art for Art's sake as those who at a later period shaped the exquisite Solutrean flint lances of laurel-leaf and willow-leaf design. The absence of male figurines, however, suggests that the art of this remote period was fostered as a cult product, and that we should regard these studies of nude women as religious symbols. This inference appears to be corroborated by the finds of grotesque i steatopygous figurines, some of which display no inconsiderable degree of skilful craftsmanship. It is difficult to believe that when artists selected as models women with enormously developed hips and thighs the motif was purely an aesthetic one; their obvious desire

[p. 30]

was to exaggerate sexual characteristics for some special reason.

The evidence derived in this connection from other cultural areas is of undoubted value and interest. In Babylonia terra-cotta figurines, "with accentuation of the female parts", represented Ishtar in her character as the goddess of love and passion. [*1] The steatopygous figurines which have been found in the prehistoric "sanctuaries" of Malta were associated with perforated axe amulets and other magical or religious ornaments. In some of the pre-Dynastic graves of Egypt occur figurines of two types: those of slim-waisted women and those of steatopygous females with short beards. [*2] It is not improbable that the Aurignacian, like the early Egyptian figurines, were tribal forms of the ancient love goddess and that the original "bearded Aphrodite" had a racial significance.

In addition to these figurines there are other evidences of the practice of religious ceremonials in the remote Aurignacian Age. In a cave at Cogul, near Lerida, in Spain, a quaint painting depicts several females, with "wasp waists" and bell-mouthed gowns reaching to their knees, dancing round a nude male figure. A phallus image of this culture stage has also been discovered.

Further light is thrown on Aurignacian beliefs by the imprints on cavern walls of human hands with mutilated fingers. Some hands had been first smeared with pigment and then impressed on the naked rock; others had been held against damped rock and dusted round with either red or black substances. Not a few of the fingers show that one or more joints had been removed either by accident or design.

 

GROUP OF FIGURINES, IN TERRA-COTTA, FROM PALAIKASTRO

The figurines represent priestesses dancing around the Snake Goddess, the birds are doves, while the separate figure shows a worshipper with right arm raised in prayer "salute".

 

[p. 31]

The practice of finger-mutilation obtained among Bushmen, certain Australian tribes, and communities of Canadian Indians. Independent investigators have ascertained that it was usually associated with burial customs and the ravages of disease. Bush women sacrificed a joint of the little finger when a near relation died, and Canadian natives acted similarly during times of pestilence "to cut off deaths". Finger mutilation in Australia was, among other things, occasionally a mark of caste. [*1]

References are made to finger-mutilation in Gaelic stories. After or before great heroes performed deeds of valour, fighting against monsters or famous rivals, they fell into profound slumber. Heroines had to awaken them by cutting off a finger-joint, a part of an ear, or a portion of skin from the top of the head. In the story of Conall Gulban a "great man" came to carry off the lady called "Breast of Light", while Conall, her lover, lay asleep. "Fear would not let her cut off the little finger," it is stated, "and she could not awaken Conall." [*2] This savage practice had evidently a magical significance. It may have been intended to renew strength and prolong life, and perhaps also to ward off threatened perils. In the latter case it may have been associated with the ceremony of purification. Among many primitive peoples those who dug graves or touched the dead were under taboo for varying periods, and not allowed to touch individuals or even handle their own food; in some instances they had to be fed by friends until the purification ceremony was completed.

Hand lore is as widespread as it is varied. Magical

[p. 32]

signs were made by posturing certain fingers. "Children," says an old English writer, "to avoid approaching danger, are taught to double the thumb within the hand. This was much practised whilst the terrors of witchcraft remained. . . . It was the custom to fold the thumbs of dead persons within the hand, to prevent the power of evil spirits over the deceased." [*1] In India the upper finger-joints are lucky, and the lower unlucky. Consequently the former only are used at prayer-counting. Throughout Europe much attention was paid to the fingers. The small finger was spat over for luck, and the forefinger of the right hand was supposed to be poisonous, and in the treatment of wounds was never utilized. It used to be considered unlucky to pare finger-nails on certain days. At any time finger-nail parings might be used by witches to work evil spells against individuals. Some mothers still hesitate to cut baby's finger-nails in the first year of life, and bite them off instead. The Scandinavian dead, who were buried with unpared nails, and therefore without ceremony, suffered torture in the Otherworld. The ship in which the demons sailed to wage war against the gods at Ragnarok was made of the nail-parings of wicked persons, and was called Naglfar, a name derived from nagl, a human nail. The fate of an individual was, and is still, believed by patrons of "palmists" to be indicated by the markings of the hand. Much attention used to be paid to dots on finger-nails; yellow spots foretold death, white spots gifts, and black spots bad luck. Hands were spat upon to seal bargains and bring luck, and kissed upon in connection with Pagan religious practices.

The Aurignacian custom of leaving imprints of hands on rocks is prevalent in modern times in Australia and elsewhere. In India it is part of a luck ceremony.

[p. 33]

[paragraph continues] "During a marriage among the Madigas (Telugur Pariahs)", writes Mr. Edgar Thurston, a well-known investigator, "a sheep or goat is sacrificed to the marriage-pots. The sacrificer dips his hand in the blood of the animal, and impresses the blood on his palms on the wall near the door leading to the room in which the pots are kept. This is said to avert the evil eye. Among the Telugu Malas, a few days before a wedding, two marks are made, one on each side of the door, with oil and charcoal, for the same purpose. At Kadur, in the Mysore Province, I once saw impressions of the hand on the walls of Brahman houses. Impressions in red paint of a hand with outspread fingers may be seen on the walls of mosques and Mohammedan buildings." [*1] In many Eur-Asian folk-tales the "Great Hand" is the only visible part of a destructive demon.

Those Indians who still charm their houses with hand imprints also trace wavy and interlacing lines in front of their doorsteps and on either side of the part approaching it. Similar lines are found on Bushman paintings of hunting-scenes and in Aurignacian cave-pictures in France and Spain. They may have been intended to snare demons as well as to cast a spell over wild animals. The hieroglyphics representing the name of a Pharaoh were surrounded by cartouches which were "name charms". On some of the sculptured stones of Brittany human footprints are depicted surrounded by meandering and serpentine lines. Perhaps these "luck lines", as they may be called, were inscribed with purpose to secure magical protection for individuals setting out on a journey. Primitive peoples rarely entered upon new undertakings without performing luck ceremonies. It

[p. 34]

is recorded in a minute of Dingwall Presbytery, dated 5th September, 1656, which refers to the prevalence of superstitious Practices in a western parish of Ross-shire, "that future events in reference especiallie to lyfe and death, in takeing of Journeyis, was exspect to be manifested by a holl of a round stone quherein they tryed the entering of thair heade, which if they could doe, to witt, be able to put in thair heads, they expect thair returning to that place, and failing they considered it ominous". The writer in his boyhood took part with his contemporaries in performing various luck ceremonies which were evidently of remote origin. Before dangerous cliffs were climbed an ash-tree, named the "rock tree", was visited, and each individual ascertained, by throwing a stone into a hollow in the trunk, whether he could safely undertake the proposed enterprise or not. If a stone darted sideways, the boys shouted, "The danger goes past!" but if it returned to the feet of the thrower it was taken as a sign of ill luck for that day, and he turned homewards. A large flat stone, called "the spitting-stone", was spat upon by those that remained. The compact was thus formed; where one went everybody had to go. When a rocky chasm had to be leapt over, caps were first thrown to ensure that the owners would similarly cross lightly and land safely; those whose caps fell short refused to attempt to leap, and made a long and safe detour. When a rainbow appeared against a rain-cloud passing at a distance, the boys charmed away the threatened shower, which would render the rock slippery and more dangerous, by "breaking" the gleaming arch of colours. This they accomplished, as they believed, by laying on a boulder a withered sprig of grass, which they snapped with a single blow delivered by a small stone grasped tightly in the right hand, as Palaeolithic man grasped his

[p. 35]

"hand-axe". It was noted that the upper part of the rainbow faded simultaneously. Hands were spat upon when a specially difficult portion of rock had to be negotiated, and it was believed that danger was averted from trickling water by wetting the tip of a finger and moistening the lips with it. A sacred well was invariably visited for an inspiring and strengthening draught of charmed water, and much reverence was shown for the wonderful skimming flies which were supposed to cleanse it of mud after it was disturbed. Luck-drinking was not uncommon in other days. Grose says: "There is a kind of beverage called 'foot ale' required from one entering on a new occupation". [*1] The "first-footing" ceremonies in Scotland and elsewhere on New Year's Day are the occasion for much eating and drinking. The familiar phrase, "putting one's foot in it", appears to have an interesting history.

"It is a world-wide superstition", says Professor Frazer, "that by injuring footprints you injure the feet that made them." [*2] If, then, these line-surrounded footprints on the Brittany stones were not intended to protect individuals who visited them to perform magical ceremonies, they may have been inscribed to restrict the wanderings of the ghosts of heroes buried underneath. The primitive folks perhaps thought that when footprints were thus "snared" by "luck lines", ghosts were prevented from troubling the living.

A naked human footprint, which is not surrounded by these meandering and interlacing lines, survives on fine undisturbed sand on the floor of an Aurignacian cave (Altamira), near drawings of panting trout and a wounded bison. [*3] In this case the Palaeolithic cave-dweller may

[p. 36]

have ensured his luck by connecting himself ceremonially with the animals he desired to obtain. "May luck follow in my footsteps," he may have exclaimed, as Highland boys, who, as they set out on bird-nesting expeditions were wont to say as they figured out eggs on a dusty highway: "May I get this and this and more."

Other signs, which appear to be magical also, are rows of dots. These figure in Australian and Bushman drawings and paintings. They figure likewise on or beside the artistic products of the Aurignacian Age, and sometimes are arranged in such a manner as to suggest constellations. More elaborate enigmatical signs, resembling birds in flight, fish, twigs, battle-axes, &c., appear to be primitive hieroglyphics.

Some anthropologists suggest that the animals depicted by the Palaeolithic artists, in caves and elsewhere, were tribal or family totems. The following view is highly suggestive. "All the beasts thus represented (in caves)," says Professor Frazer, "appear to be edible, and none of them to be fierce carnivorous creatures. [*1] Hence it has been ingeniously suggested by M. S. Reinach that the intention of these works of art may have been to multiply by magic the animals so represented. . . . He infers that the comparatively high development of prehistoric art in Europe . . . may have been due in large measure to the practice of sympathetic magic."

Professor Frazer, quoting from Messrs. Spencer and Gillen, [*2] shows that the native Australians perform magical ceremonies "to multiply the kangaroos and emus". "The men of the emu totem in the Arunta tribe proceed as follows. They clear a small spot of level ground, and,

[p. 37]

opening veins in their arms, they let the blood stream out until the surface of the ground, for a space of about three square yards, is soaked with it. When the blood has dried and caked, it forms a hard and fairly impermeable surface, on which they paint the sacred design of the emu totem, especially the parts of the bird which they like best to eat, namely, the fat and the eggs. Round this painting men sit and sing. The men of the kangaroo totem perform a similar ceremony. They inscribe figures of kangaroos on a rocky ledge, which they also decorate with "alternate vertical stripes of red and white to indicate the red fur and white bones of the kangaroo." The rock is reputed to be inhabited by kangaroo spirits which are waiting for mothers, and they are supposed to be driven out when human blood is poured over the ledge. [*1]

M. S. Reinach's theory regarding the magical significance of Aurignacian art seems to be confirmed by a piece of chance evidence which has been recorded quite recently (1913). The Count Andreas Begouen,, the French archaeologist, has on his estate in the district of Montesquieu-Aventes a cavern known as the Tus Ditboubert. It had long been known to bear traces of occupation during Palaeolithic times. Paintings could be distinguished on the walls, but few finds of importance were made in it until the count broke through a mass of stalactites that concealed an inner cavern. In this secluded part the Count discovered that Palaeolithic man had begun to work clay at a remote period. At the base of one of the walls were curious little clay figurines of animals in a wonderful state of preservation. "One", says a French writer, "was a male bison and another a female. The first was 26 inches long and the second

[p. 38]

[paragraph continues] 30 inches. They were almost intact, although cracked by the drying of the clay. Excavations on the floor of the cavern revealed a great number of bones of the bison, but no signs that the place had been used as a dwelling-place or as a kitchen by the cave-dwellers." In this eerie cave the Palaeolithic folk had evidently conducted mysterious ceremonies. But for what purpose? the Count wondered. "It was an old peasant who gave him his clue. 'It is a charm,' said he, when his eyes fell on one of the relics. Questioned regarding his statement, this man went on to tell that the peasants of the neighbourhood have an ancient custom which they believe enables them to catch the foxes which raid their chicken-yards. They made, he said, a clay image of a fox which they rubbed with the blood of a fox, and then concealed among the rocks at certain places. Close to it they buried the carcass of a fox. Then they set traps near by, and towards these foxes were drawn by the magical influence of the modelled fox and were invariably caught." It is unnecessary to emphasize the importance of this evidence. Similar practices were widespread long centuries after the Palaeolithic folk flourished in southern France. The Babylonians and Egyptians shaped waxen and clay images of demons and thrust them into a fire so as to injure or destroy the beings they thus depicted. Magical images were also made in Greece and Rome, and they are still being produced in various parts of the world. The Scottish Highland corp chreadh ("clay body") was an image of an individual whom the maker desired to afflict or slay magically. [*1] Pins or nails were stuck into it so that the victim might suffer pain, and it was placed in running water so that he might "waste away". Images of fish, turtle, and dugong

[p. 39]

were made by the islanders of Torres Straits and taken with them when they went fishing, with the idea that the image lured the real animal to its destruction; and men of the dugong clan, who were symbolically decorated, made mimetic movements with a dead dugong to constrain others to come and be caught." [*1] The Palaeolithic artists may have utilized the fragments of slate, stone, &c., on which animals were depicted for a similar purpose.

The Bushman cave-pictures closely resemble the Aurignacian in many details, and even retain certain mannerisms displayed by the ancient European artists. But no direct evidence has been forthcoming that they have, or had, a magical significance. It is possible, however, that those natives who were questioned in this connection may have been as reticent regarding their secrets as most superstitious peoples usually are. In Scotland, where there are many archaic survivals, it is believed that a charm may be broken if its purpose is revealed. Secrecy is necessary for its success; it conserves energy and prevents the working of counter-charms. Not unfrequently in the past Highlanders have misled investigators who, because of their inquisitiveness, were regarded with suspicion, and in consequence earned for themselves a reputation for evasiveness and duplicity.

During the Magdalenian phase of civilization, in the Fourth Glacial Epoch, there was a great art revival. Arctic and sub-arctic fauna were depicted in a variety of forms with artistic feeling and a degree of faithfulness which betokens close and even trained observation of animals. Decorative designs display overflowing artistic fancy. Everything the Magdalenian craftsmen touched he rendered beautiful. Handles of weapons were carved out of bone, horn, or ivory to represent wild animals, which

[p. 40]

were skilfully posed so as to combine utility with artistic excellence. Decoration was evidently, as M. Piette has insisted, generated primarily by the imitative instinct. [*1]

Magdalenian art, like the Aurignacian, appears also to have derived inspiration from custom and belief. "Every weapon has its demon," runs an old Gaelic axiom. In the Indian epics, the Mahabharata and the Ramayana, the spirits of celestial weapons appear before the heroes, to whom they are gifted by deities, in attitudes signifying their willingness to render obedient and helpful service. When we find Magdalenian dagger-handles carved to represent charging mammoths or scampering deer, it may be inferred that their owners believed that these possessed the strength and prestige of the one animal and the swiftness and sureness of the other. Discovery has also been made of what appears to have been the Magdalenian "bull roarer". In Australia this implement is used to invoke spirits at initiation and other ceremonies, and elsewhere to raise the wind, that is to compel the attention of the wind-god. The Egyptian sistrum similarly summoned the god when it was tinkled in temples.

Ceremonial burials, which are sure indications of the existence of religious beliefs, took place, as has been indicated, as early as the Mousterian or Middle Palaeolithic Period, and also in the later Aurignacian Period. Sometimes the dead were covered over with stones in their cave homes, which were then deserted. Sometimes artificial caves, or grottoes, were utilized as family or tribal burial-vaults. Certain of the skeletons appear to have been unfleshed and afterwards sprinkled over with ochre and ashes. Stone chambers were also constructed to protect the dead.

[p. 41]

The corpse was usually laid on the right side, with the legs crouched up, the head resting on the right arm and the left arm extended. Occasionally, however, the arms appear to have been crossed. These postures suggest sleep, but it must have been believed that the dead would awake, for weapons and implements were left in the tomb, as well as cooked food. The deceased was also adorned with personal ornaments, which were evidently charms. Apparently he had need of protection, perhaps against demons. Strings of periwinkle shells were placed on the head of deceased, and were evidently worn also by the living. This custom in itself is sufficient to suggest that in these remote times belief in magic was well developed and exceedingly prevalent. Primitive peoples wear charms for a variety of reasons-to bring luck, to ward off disease, to cure, to give strength and inspire courage, to acquire the particular attributes they admire in the object, and so on. The periwinkle, which so greatly attracted the Palaeolithic Europeans, was not necessarily regarded as "a thing of beauty and a joy for ever". It is only in modern times, when the significance of an immemorial custom has faded, that personal ornaments are selected on account of their purely decorative qualities, their rarity or cost. Our remote ancestors were intensely practical, and in adorning their bodies expected to derive some benefit from what they wore. The virtue of the periwinkles was supposed to pass to the warriors who charmed their heads with them, just as the virtue of the crawfish toe with which Cherokee women have been wont to scratch their babies' hands was supposed to pass to the child thus treated, and give him in after life a powerful grip. [*1] It appears to have been believed that the

[p. 42]

heads on which the periwinkle shell lay would be as difficult to injure and as quick to avoid attack as the heads of these elusive sea-snails. The Irish hero Cuchullin wore pearls in his hair. As frail pearls were protected by oyster shells, they possessed protective virtue for those who wore them. In this manner the ancient believers in magical charms were accustomed to reason.

Palaeolithic hunters also wore necklaces of deer's teeth, and these were fixed round the necks of the dead at burials. They were probably charms for swiftness of foot and endurance. African natives select for necklaces the claws of leopards, which are supposed to impart to them the fierceness and cunning of these dreaded animals, and they believe that weariness is unknown to those who have anklets of tortoise legs. When certain South American tribes go to battle they charm their bodies with the tusks of the courageous and irresistible peccary.

Some anthropologists separate magic from religion, and define the former as a process whereby the service of the god is enforced, and the latter as a process to secure by appeal and obedience the goodwill and favours of the god. Another theory is that magic was a means of leaguing oneself with the evil powers as opposed to the religious adoration of, and ceremonial connection with, the good powers. Among the most primitive peoples it is recognized that there is a right and a wrong way of obtaining supernatural aid. Individuals, like Faust, might form a compact with the devil and obtain favours denied to pious folk, who. however, secured full reward for their piety in the after-life.

The believer in magic in primitive times had no well-defined and systematized philosophy of life. He appears to have had a vague conception of world-pervading Power which issued from a hidden and inexhaustible source, and

[p. 43]

he endeavoured to "tap" the supply. This Power was manifested in many directions and in many forms. Here it specialized as the quality of strength or endurance, and there as cunning or keen-sightedness. It might also specialize as a curative influence, or be developed as a multiplying and exceedingly fertile agency. This hidden Power was also more potent at one season than another.

As man's mind developed, and he recognized his various deficiencies and needs in a world full of peril, he proceeded to increase his capabilities of acquiring a meed of this universal Power. He feasted on the body of a strong animal to increase his own strength, on a cunning animal to acquire more cunning, and, believing that life was in blood, sought to prolong his life by drinking blood. But he also believed that the virtues of an animal, for instance, were not only in its flesh and blood, but also in every part of its body. He picked up and stuck in his hair the feather of an eagle, believing that the feather would impart to him the keen-sightedness of that efficient bird of prey. His own clothing, his footprints, his saliva, his hair, his nail-parings, and so on, were so closely connected with himself that he could be injured or benefited if any of these things were brought into contact with magical energy. A man could be injured or hampered by injuring or hampering his footprints, by m i uttering spells over his nail-parings, by mixing his saliva with something infected with the energy of evil. There was another way of "tapping" the universal Power. It could be directed into certain channels by ceremonies, or by uttering potent words. Herein the belief is involved that a god or animal can be mesmerized by force of example and will-power. If it was desired to catch a deer, the hunter performed the part he wished the deer to play; he ran and then fell as he wished the deer to fall;

[p. 44]

fishermen acted the part of fish by wriggling as if into a net, or towards baited hooks. Sailors whistled to raise the wind, and ceased whistling when it blew hard enough. Ceremonies were similarly performed to bring on rain in season, and so on.

It appears to have been recognized at an early period that there were two kinds of magic--the one kind brought good luck and the other bad luck. By effecting a ceremonial connection with the source of good-luck magic, mankind prospered. Wells were lucky, and those who visited them wished for what they desired and left some article to ensure the constant supply of desired energy; certain trees were sources of good luck, and certain trees were sources of bad luck. An individual might guard himself against the influence of bad luck by throwing a stone, as when, for instance, he threw one on a burial-cairn, or the spot where a disaster had occurred, or by spitting when an unlucky name was mentioned or an unlucky animal passed by.

Religious beliefs, 'it is argued, developed when mankind rose to a higher intellectual plane and recognized that the world is subject to intelligent control--that there is a Divinity "which shapes our ends, rough hew them how we will". It must be recognized, however, that when this hypothesis is given practical application it has to be subjected to qualifications. In civilized communities, like those of Babylonia and Egypt, the highest religious conceptions were associated with the crudest magical beliefs and practices. Deities were supposed to exercise control over the supply of "Power", but they might also be influenced by it themselves. In Babylonia the chief god of a pantheon attained his position by becoming possessed of the "Tablets of Fate"; he directed Power into certain channels, but another and older god usually generated

[p. 45]

power. Merodach, for instance, was king of the deities, but he had to co-operate with his father, Ea, the "Great Magician" of the gods. Ea generated Power by utilizing fire and water. There are also traces of the ancient belief that the moon was the supreme fountain-head of Power, creative, curative, fertilizing, and sustaining, and it was individualized as the bi-sexual deity Nannar (Sin), who was the Father and Mother in one. In Scotland and Ireland the moon was never individualized, and the moon remained simply as a magical crucible.

We may separate magic from religion, but this was not done by the early peoples who believed in both. They were fused in the common stock of inherited beliefs and ideas. The elements of religion can be detected in communities where magic is prominent, and the elements of magic can be traced in well-developed religious systems. It would appear that in the Palaeolithic Age this confusion existed also. Primitive man was neither logical nor consistent. He embraced and perpetuated contradictory beliefs. Intensely conservative, he continued to cling to old ideas even after he embraced new ideas which were intended to supplant those which had become obsolete.

Religious ideas appear to have had origin when mankind were faced by crises. There came a time in every primitive community when it had to be recognized that magic failed them. A calamity visited charm-protected homes, charmed warriors fell in battle, starvation confronted a family or a tribe which had performed all the ceremonies required for procuring the food-supply. Mankind had to face disaster with faith and courage, and in doing so he faced the unknown. "Religion", says Mr. R. R. Marett, "is the facing of the unknown. It is the courage in it that brings comfort. . . . The courage involved

[p. 46]

in all live religion normally co-exists with a certain modesty or humility." [*1]

This religious feeling necessitated the recognition of supernatural will. It brought to the stricken heart a dim conception of a divine individuality which acted voluntarily and in response to human appeals. The god, or chief of the gods, was not controlled by Power in the same way as mankind were. As this idea developed it was believed that good luck came from the god, the friend of man, and bad luck from the demon, the enemy of man. It was necessary to win the favour of the god and secure protection against the demon.

Magic, on the other hand, gave no recognition to a supreme controlling will. It was rooted in the belief that the world was governed by natural laws. Those who practised it attained some success, but they generally failed because of their ignorance of natural laws. Their ideas about Power were based on the science of their times. They endeavoured to "harness" it as their descendants have "harnessed" the Niagara Falls, and to attract it from a recognized source as a wireless telegraphic instrument attracts vibrating waves of electrical currents. In dealing with the elements they acted vainly, but often cunningly, for rain-making ceremonies, for instance, were never practised except when rain was expected. The wily magicians rarely attempted the impossible. They invariably achieved success, however, when they sought to influence individuals. The primitive folks lived in a world of terror. Many minds were unstable; there were few who had not deranged nervous systems. Magicians achieved far-reaching results by sheer "make-believe". It was no difficult task for them to secure the co-operation of those whom they undertook

[p. 47]

to injure or cure, by hypnotic suggestion. At the present day many of the members of primitive communities are found to be exceedingly prone to hysteria, and these, of course, are excellent subjects for the magician. A savage who is prepared to face a lion or a Maxim gun, may shiver at the glance of a magician who works up excitement by performing a dance or some awesome and mysterious ceremony with purpose to influence the distribution of Power.

When, therefore, we find a particular community with individualized gods or demons, it may be recognized that they have conceived of supernatural Wills which exist apart from magical energy. All acts performed to influence these Wills in the interests of mankind are religious acts. A magical ceremony may thus be performed in a religious spirit. Some of the ancient peoples, however, performed religious acts in dealing with the gods, and practised magic when undertaking to baffle demons. "Those of the gods", said Isocrates, "who are the source to us of good things have the title of Olympians; those whose department is that of calamities and punishments have harsher titles; to the first class both private persons and states erect altars and temples; the second is not worshipped either with prayers or burnt sacrifices, but in their case we perform ceremonies of riddance." [*1] In India the ritualistic Brahmans performed magical acts to prevent the demons intercepting sacrifices intended for the gods. Egyptian priests practised magic to influence the gods, although they also made offerings to them, and those of Babylonia did likewise. The fusion of religion and magic gave rise to many complex practices and systems of belief.

The Palaeolithic folks had their gods or demons, or

[p. 48]

both, as well as their magical beliefs. Animal-headed supernatural beings were depicted in cave-drawings, with hands and arms uplifted in the Egyptian attitude of adoration, or dancing the "dance of fertility" like the "goat-men" (satyrs) of Babylonia and the animal-headed deities of the wandering Bushmen. The fertility dance was "magical"; the dancer was a supernatural being, a religious conception.

In Babylonia the oldest deities are indistinguishable from demons. Even the benevolent Ea, who instructed his worshippers how to erect buildings, till the soil, and frame humanitarian laws, had his demoniac form. The Palaeolithic gods were apparently half demons also, "destroyers" as well as "preservers", "enemies of man" as well as "friends of man", "bringers of calamity" as well as "bestowers of blessings".

In shaping their gods the early people made them ideals of what they sought most or feared most. The god of the athlete was a giant big as a tree, who threw great boulders farther than a human being could fling a pebble; the goddess of love was a lawless wanton who revelled in exaggerated love-matches, and her lovers were numerous as those of Ishtar and her kind. She was worthily depicted as a steatopygous female, who was the ideal of reproducing motherhood, or as the slim beauty who charmed impressionable males. The god was a superman and the goddess a superwoman.

But the idea of gods was also affected by preconceived beliefs. Worshippers of animals, who believed that their ancestor was a particular animal, associated them with their anthropomorphic deities. Ea, the culture-god of Babylonia, was clad in the skin of the ancestral fish, whose virtues he had acquired by performing a sacrifice. The priest of a totemic cult similarly enclosed himself in

 

IVORY FIGURINE AND HEAD--"THE LEAPER"--FROM KNOSSOS

Reproduced from the "Annual of the British School at Athens'', by kind permission of the Committee and of Messrs. Macmillan & Co., Ltd.

 

[p. 49]

the skin of the ancestral animal of his tribe or family, which provided the food-supply, or he wore a mask to represent the combination of the totem and the tribe in himself. Another theory which accounts for animal-headed deities is that they are a link between human gods and animal gods; man progressed from the worship of the "Great Beast" to the "Great Man" by degrees, the process being an evolutionary one. The problem is a difficult one, no doubt. But however we may attempt to solve it we have to deal with the fact that in the Aurignacian Age in southern and western Europe there were animal-headed gods. These therefore did not begin to be either in Egypt or Babylonia. The process, if there was a process, was well advanced ere the Tigro-Euphratean valley was rendered habitable for man, or the proto-Egyptians had begun to sow grain and reap harvests. A prolonged Age of culture had prepared for the builders of future civilization a tangled jungle of beliefs which they were to inherit and perpetuate, along with the decorative designs, &c., invented before and during the Fourth Glacial Epoch. Even the fashions of attire were fixed in the early period. The bell-mouthed skirts, hanging from wasp waists, which have been associated with Cretan civilization, are displayed in Aurignacian cave-paintings. Even the Assyrian goddess's postures are earlier than Assyrian civilization. An ivory carving of Ishtar as an Egyptian goddess has been discovered at Kuyunjik. "The Egyptian character of the figure", writes Mr. L. W. King, [*1] "leaps to the eye. . . . In fact, everything about the figure is Egyptian with one exception-the position of the hands. The fact that the goddess holds her breasts at once betrays her Asiatic character. . . . The type, in fact, is characteristic of

[p. 50]

western Asia and extends also into the Aegean." The type and the pose are also characteristic of the Aurignacian Age; some steatopygous figures carved in ivory similarly hold their breasts with their hands. "It is still uncertain", adds Mr. King, "whether the nude goddess is to be traced to a Babylonian, Anatolian, or Aegean source." She may have survived from Aurignacian times among the descendants of scattered Palaeolithic peoples who mingled with later immigrants into Europe at the dawn of the Neolithic Age. In the next chapter it will be shown that traces of an ancient goddess cult survive in various areas, and that certain of these were peopled by Palaeolithic folks in post-glacial times, who met and fused with the earliest settlers of the Mediterranean Race.

Footnotes

^30:1 Religious Belief in Babylonia and Assyria, Morris Jastrow, pp. 136 et seq.

^30:2 The female beards suggest that this race's area of characterization was a cold country. On the other hind, it may be held that we have here the earliest evidence of belief in "intermediate types" among the ancient Egyptians.

^31:1 See Travels in the Interior of Southern Africa, W. J. Burchell, Vol. II., p. 61 (1824); The Native Races of South Africa, G. W. Stow, p. 129 (1905); Report on the North-Western Tribes of Canada, Representative of the British Association (1889); p. 837; and Ancient Hunters, W. J. Sollas, pp. 238 et seq. (1911).

^31:2 Campbell's West Highland Tales, Vol. III, p. 225.

^32:1 Hutchinson's History of Northumberland, Vol. 14 p. 4.

^33:1 Omens and Superstitions of Southern India, p. 119 (1912), and Journal of Anthropological Institute, XIX, p. 56 (1890).

^35:1 Brand's Antiquities, Vol. II, p. 333.

^35:2 The Golden Bough (The Magic Art), Vol. I., pp. 207 et seq. Professor Frazer gives numerous illustrations of this belief.

^35:3 Ancient Hunters, W. J. Sollas, p. 235.

^36:1 Bears are depicted on stones, &c., but evidence has been forthcoming that these were eaten. It is possible that the primitive hunters feasted also on the flesh of the mammoth and woolly rhinoceros.

^36:2 Native Tribes of Central Australia, p. 176.

^37:1 The Golden Bough ("The Magic Art"), Vol. I., pp. 85-8, third edition.

^38:1 J. G. Campbell's Witchcraft and Second Sight in the Highlands and Islands of Scotland (1902), pp. 46-8. The custom is not yet obsolete.

^39:1 Magic and Fetishism, A. C. Haddon, p. 19 (London, 1906).

^40:1 L'Art pendant l'Age du Renne.

^41:1 Nineteenth Annual Report of the Bureau of American Ethnology, p. 308, (Washington, 1900.)

^46:1 The Birth of Humility and Anthropology, p. 212.

^47:1 Isocrates, Orations, V, p. 117.

^49:1 The Journal of Egyptian Archaeology, Vol. I, Part II, pp. 107 et seq. (1914).

     
Myths of Crete and Pre-Hellenic Europe, by Donald A. Mackenzie, [1917], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 51]

 

CHAPTER III

 

Ancient Peoples of the Goddess Cult

Crete and Palaeolithic Man--Traces in Malta, Egypt, Palestine, and Phoenicia--Links between Palaeolithic and Neolithic Ages--Azilian Culture in France, Denmark, and Britain--Evidence of Geology and Folk--tales--Palaeolithic Types in Modern England--Coming of Neolithic Man of Mediterranean Race--The Cretan Snake--goddess, Dove--goddess, and "Lady of Wild Creatures"--The "Mother" of Crete--Identified with Rhea--Primitive Goddesses as Destroyers--Black Annis of England and Black Kali of India--The Black, Green, and Yellow Demeter (Ceres)--The Green Neith of Libya--Babylonian Labartu and Black Scoto-Irish Hag--The "Terrible" Sekhet of Egypt--Tree and Mountain Worship--Oak and Maypole and "Swain Motes"--Earth Oaths in Greece and Scotland--The Greek Gaeia--Cailleach and Artemis--Wind Hags--Goddess Cult and Status of Women--Process of Myth-making.

No Palaeolithic skulls have been yet discovered in Crete, although traces have been forthcoming of an early stage of culture not unlike the Azilian. As the island was at one time connected with the mainland, it may be that the bones of the early races and the animals associated with them lie buried in the Aegean Sea, which, during the Inter-glacial periods, was a broad plain watered by noble rivers and covered by dense forests. The extensive land depression along the North African coast has similarly hidden from us the secrets of prehistoric Libya.

In Malta, where ancient sites favoured by man Were liable to less disturbance by builders than in Crete, skulls of the middle Palaeolithic periods have been discovered. There are eleven specimens from Hal Saflieni in the Valetta museum. Some are of mixed types, but two

[p. 52]

have distinct Mousterian characteristics and especially the protruding brow ridges which distinguished the men of the Third Glacial Period.

One skull from Hagiar Kim has negroid traits and appears to link with those found in the Grimaldi cave near Mentone. As has been stated, steatopygous figures have been taken from Neolithic Maltese graves and sanctuaries, a sure indication that the Aurignacian proto-Bushmen were known to the early settlers of the Mediterranean race. Some of these figures are nude and others wear the flounced gown usually called "Cretan", and it is of interest to note here that they are associated among burial relics with perforated axe amulets of polished stone. No Cro-Magnon skulls have been discovered in Malta, but some race quite as tall must have mingled there with the early Neolithic folk. A male skeleton found at Santa Verna measures 5 feet 9 inches in length. "The man was of a noble type," writes an excavator; "he must have stood 6 feet high, his skull is massive and shapely, the jaws and teeth are even and regular, and the limbs powerful." [*1] The Mediterranean Neolithic man was of slight build and medium stature.

The earliest Cretans were of the Mediterranean racial type, but among them were alien broad-heads. Ere the Neolithic folks settled on the island they came into contact, apparently, with mountaineers from the north, or descendants of Palaeolithic races. Steatopygous figurines have been found in Cretan Neolithic strata.

In Egypt there was no hiatus between the Palaeolithic and Neolithic Ages. Not only have steatopygous figurines been found in pre-Dynastic Egyptian and Nubian graves, but also flints which show that the artifacts of the later period were developed from those of the earlier. A

[p. 53]

reference to the "Smiting of the Troglodytes" on the Palermo stone of the First Dynasty may refer to descendants of the Palaeolithic cave-dwellers.

Palestine, the high road from Egypt into eastern Europe, has yielded numerous relics of the early stages of culture. Chellean and Acheulian flints "have been picked up on the maritime plain, in yet greater numbers on the plateau south of Jerusalem, and in considerable quantities in the region to the south of Amman, east of Jordan. Some have also been discovered far to the south, in the region of Petra." Professor Macalister, from whom we quote, notes that "Palaeolithic man in Palestine missed, however, the higher developments attained by his brother in France". Mousterian cave-settlements in Phoenicia have yielded characteristic flints and bone instruments, including needles. Dr. Max Blanckenhorn has assigned the date 10,000 B.C. to the earliest Neolithic settlement in this region. Sherds of pottery have been discovered in the Phoenician cave of Harajel "side by side with the bones of extinct fauna, especially the woolly rhinoceros". In the natural Gezer caves of a later age finds have been made of "rude pottery, ornamented with coarse moulding or roughly painted red lines; flint flakes, knives and scrapers; millstones; rounded stone pebbles, that could be used for a variety of purposes-hearth stones; heating stones; missiles; polishers, &c.", and "an amulet or two of bone or slate, perforated for suspension". [*1]

In France the most remarkable link between the Palaeolithic and later ages is formed by the Cro-Magnon racial type which first appeared in the Dordogne valley in the Aurignacian Period, before the Fourth Glacial Epoch. The "most curious and significant trait" of these people

[p. 54]

is that they have long heads and broad faces: that is, they have skulls with Mediterranean characteristics and faces which resemble those of the broad-headed Armenoids of the mountains. Summarizing the evidence of Dr. Collignon regarding the present-day inhabitants of the Dordogne valley, Professor Ripley says: "The people we have described above agree in physical characteristics with but one other type of men known to anthropologists. This is the celebrated Cro-Magnon race, long ago identified by archaeologists as having inhabited the south-west of Europe in prehistoric times." Varieties of the type have occurred owing to the proximity of other races, but it is still common and easily detected. Individuals with the Cro-Magnon skull and "disharmonic face" are also found among present-day Berbers. [*1] Skeletons of Cro-Magnon man of the Palaeolithic Period have been found as far north as Belgium. Dr. Schliz finds traces at the present time of Cro-Magnon man throughout western Europe, and believes that even the Neanderthal-Spy (Mousterian) type has also left a slight but recognizable impress. [*2] The high average stature and weight of the Scottish people, which has long puzzled ethnologists, may be due to a strong Palaeolithic intermixture in early Neolithic times. The evidence obtained from the Glasgow graveyard, referred to in the Introduction, is suggestive in this connection.

Interesting evidence has been forthcoming at Mas d'Azil, in France, of the transition period between the late Palaeolithic and early Neolithic culture. This stage of culture is called Azilian. It was of long continuance. Artifacts called "Azilian" found in Scotland may have been separated by a considerable period of time from those

[p. 55]

discovered at Mas d'Azil. Cro-Magnon and Magdalenian men lived through and survived the Fourth Glacial Epoch. Then during the subsequent period of minor oscillations of climate the reindeer and other animals of the chase migrated northwards. These were followed, it would appear, by the huntsmen, a proportion of whom, however, remained behind and adopted new habits of life. As the Cro-Magnon folks of the Dordogne valley had domesticated animals, they no doubt found the struggle for existence in the homeland less arduous than their contemporaries, the small men of Magdalenian culture, who were hunters and fishermen and naught else.

Subsequent to the Fourth Glacial Period there was a re-elevation of land, and the Magdalenian wanderers were able to walk over the bed of the English Channel. The reindeer entered the British Isles also and survived in Scotland until the Middle Ages. A deer-horn implement, carved with a scene of the chase, which was picked up on the slopes of Ben Wyvis, was shown to the writer shortly after it was discovered. It lay for several years in the vestibule of a Dingwall hotel, but unfortunately has gone amissing. It appears to have been a relic of Palaeolithic culture of the late period which must be assigned to it in northern Highlands. The carving had Magdalenian characteristics.

Professor James Geikie shows that after the Fourth Glacial Epoch genial conditions prevailed in Scotland. This is the period of the great forests, relics of which are embedded in peat mosses. He terms it "Lower Forestian". A cold period followed and glaciers once again descended from the mountains, and some of these were not melted before they touched the sea. The forests decayed and the peat formed above the great trees which perished as each succeeding winter grew colder and each

[p. 56]

succeeding summer shorter and wetter. Meanwhile the land sunk and the sea washed round the 45 to 50 feet beaches. Another Inter-glacial Period followed, during which the forests again flourished. It constitutes Geikie's "Upper Forestian" Epoch. The last, or sixth, Glacial Period followed, with its small and local glaciers, during which the land sunk again, and the later peat beds covered great fallen trees. Thereafter the present Age was inaugurated by the raising of the land to more or less its present level with a gradual improvement of the climate.

Traces of man in the Azillan stage of culture have been found in Scotland. [*1] The MacArthur cave, which overlooks Oban, was inhabited when the sea was 30 feet above its present level, and the Highland troglodytes--the earliest visitors--who were hunters and fishermen, left behind bone and horn implements, including the Azilian harpoon invented during the Magdalenian stage of culture of the Fourth Glacial Epoch in southern France. At Stirling harpoons of the same type were utilized at a period when whales spouted not far from the castle rock. Of late an interesting cave-dwelling, excavated at Rosemarkie in the Black Isle, has yielded a variety of bone and other implements, and human remains. A large fire-place, with upright smoke-blackened stones and surrounded by a cobbled floor, was laid bare. The cave is situated about 15 feet above the present sea-level.

Associated with these caves and other early settlements, chiefly on the ridges of the old coast-lines, are heaps of shells. These have been found as far north as Caithness. [*2]

Those early settlers, of the "river-bed" race, are

[p. 57]

believed to be of the same mixed stock, surviving from Palaeolithic times, as the famous "beach-combers" of the Danish "kitchen middens". When the earliest Mediterranean racial pioneers of the Neolithic Age entered these islands, they met and mingled with the troglodytes who are referred to in Gaelic folk-tales. [*1]

"It may quite well be", says Professor James Geikie, that Neolithic man appeared in southern Europe before Palaeolithic man had vanished from the Pyrenean region, and the two races may possibly have here come into contact." Most archaeologists have abandoned the old hiatus theory. Dr. Robert Munro argues, after reviewing the latest evidence, that in Europe there was "no break in the continuity of human occupation from late Palaeolithic to Neolithic times", and accepts Dr. Keith's view that "Palaeolithic blood is as rife in the British people of today as in those of the European continent". [*2] Dr. Keith finds everywhere in England numerous representatives of the "river-bed" Palaeolithic folks.

The Neolithic folks, who came into contact with the remnants of the Palaeolithic races in various parts of Europe, were representatives of the widespread Mediterranean or Brown Race. They were men of medium stature, with long heads and high but narrow foreheads, refined faces, dark eyes and hair, and slim bodies. Their brunette complexions suggest that their area of characterization was on the North African coast. Some ethnologists incline to the view that the homeland of this stock was Somaliland, the Punt of the Egyptian records, which, like Arabia, favoured the production of a larger population than it

[p. 58]

was capable of sustaining permanently. In Egypt they adopted the agricultural mode of life long before the dawn of history. Periodic folk-waves, drifting westward and east, entered Europe across the Straits of Gibraltar and through Palestine and Asia Minor by the coast-line route. In the process of time they overspread southern, central, and western Europe, and entered the British Isles. Probably they crossed over to Ireland from Scotland. Their burial customs indicate that their religious beliefs were well developed prior to the period of "folk-wandering". The Neolithic graves in Europe and Africa are constructed on similar lines, and the great majority of the skeletons they contain are remarkable for their uniformity of type. "So striking", writes Professor Elliot Smith, "is the family likeness between the early Neolithic peoples of the British Isles and the Mediterranean and the bulk of the population, both ancient and modern, of Egypt and East Africa, that the description of the bones of an Early Briton of that remote epoch might apply in all essential details to an inhabitant of Somaliland." [*1]

It is not necessary to assume that they waged a war of extermination against the Palaeolithic huntsmen and fishermen of Europe, so as to account for their ultimate superiority of numbers. Their pastoral and agricultural mode of life made it possible for them to live in larger communities and prosper in smaller areas than the Palaeolithic huntsman, whose activities had necessarily to extend over wide stretches of country. At any rate, they never overcame the Dordogne valley men of Cro-Magnon type. It is possible that in districts in western Europe, as well as in the British Isles, the Neolithic and late Palaeolithic peoples formed mixed communities. Dr. Robert Munro

 

THE SNAKE GODDESS OF CRETE

 From the painting by John Duncan, A.R.S.A.

  

[p. 59]

suggests that the latter became the servants and "clodhoppers" of the agriculturists.

The Neolithic, like the late Palaeolithic peoples, were goddess-worshippers. They believed that the "Great Mother" had given origin to the world, the gods, the demons, and the races of mankind. In the various countries in which early Neolithic civilization was developed traces still survive of this early belief, and it will be found that the conception of the "Great Mother" is as varied as were the degrees of culture attained by the separated communities of common stock. Primitive ideas appear to have persisted longer in isolated districts where ethnic disturbances were least frequent and habits of life less liable to undergo change.

In Crete there were three outstanding forms of the mother-goddess-the snake-goddess, the dove-goddess, and the "lady of wild creatures". These may have been different forms of an original deity, or representative of a group composed of mother and daughters. As in Egypt and Babylonia, it is found that the one goddess tends to absorb the attributes of the other. It is possible that the Mother was supposed to manifest herself in different forms, at different seasons, and in different districts, and that one of the results of local ritualistic development was to emphasize a particular form of the original deity. But there can be no doubt that the conception of the Mother was an essential part of the Cretan faith.

The great goddess was depicted wearing a flounced gown suspended from her slim waist, round which a girdle is clasped (Chapter VI). The upper part of the body is bare, and she has enormous breasts. Sometimes she stands on a mountain top, guarded by two great lions, and sometimes she is seated beside trees or plants. In addition

[p. 60]

to the lions, her wild animals include the wild goat, the horned sheep, the bull, the red deer, the snake, and the dove; and among the symbols associated with her are the horns of the bull, the double axe, the sacred pillar, the moon crescent, and a staff or wand. She was apparently a goddess of death, battle, fertility, and the chase. Offerings were made to her in a mountain-cave she was supposed to inhabit.

It must be recognized at the outset that this ancient deity, like others of her kind, was not necessarily an attractive personality. Our conception of her must not be based solely on Greek sculpture, for instance. She is believed to be identical with Rhea, the mother of Vesta, Demeter, Hera, Hades, Poseidon, and Zeus, and that deity was depicted by Phidias as a benign mother of great dignity and tenderness and beauty. The original mother was worshipped and propitiated because she was feared. She was the Fate who measured the lives of men, who sent disasters as well as blessings, and was associated with lions and snakes as well as doves and deer. Withal, she was a voluptuous wanton. Like the Babylonian Ishtar, who was the lover of Gilgamish in one hour and his unrelenting enemy in the next, she was fickle and changeable as the wind and the seasons. She gloried with callous heart in her power to destroy, and was untouched by tender emotions for mankind, when--

	 
		Looking over wasted lands,
		 Blight and famine, plague and earthquake, roaring deeps and fiery sands,
		 Clanging fights, and flaming towns, and sinking ships and praying hands.
		
		 Greek mythology, in which the beliefs of various ethnic elements were fused, and savage traditions were ultimately transformed by philosophic speculations, survives to us

[p. 61]

mainly as the product of a cultured Age. But the poets and artists did not divest it wholly of its primitive traits. it is now generally recognized that the savagery of Cronus is not mere symbolism, or the wrath of Artemis, who required the sacrifice of a beautiful maiden, simply a myth based on natural phenomena and not a reflection of "old unhappy far-off things"--a reminiscence of primitive rites performed to propitiate a bloodthirsty deity.

In those parts of ancient Europe in which ancient rites were perpetuated till a comparatively late period the worship of pagan deities was a gloomy memory. The Irish Cromm Cruaich put prostrated hosts under "deadly disgrace" before his golden image--

	 
		          To him without glory
		 They would kill their piteous, wretched offspring,
		 With much wailing and peril,
		 To pour their blood around Cromm Cruaich.
		
		          Milk and corn
		 They would ask from him speedily
		 In return for one-third of their healthy issue:
		 Great was the horror and the scare of him. [*1]
		
		 The mother-goddess of ancient Europe was similarly remembered as a devourer of children. She survives in English folk-lore as a fierce demon. In Leicestershire she is Black Annis, who is associated with the Easter "hare hunt", and has a "cat Anna" form. The earliest reference to her appears in the following extract from an eighteenth-century title-deed: "All that close or parcel of land commonly called or known by the name 'Black Anny's Bower Close'."

It must not be assumed, however, that Black Annis was a comparatively recent importation. She appears to

[p. 62]

be of as great antiquity as the customs associated with her name. It is impossible to limit the age of these and other customs and beliefs which survive to the present day, not only in rural districts, but even in cities and among the cultured classes, after so many centuries of Christian teaching. If they have persisted so long, in spite of the combined influences of Church, printing-press, and school, like rank weeds among flowers, for how long a period, it may be asked, did they flourish before they were condemned and shown to be unworthy of civilized communities? There can be little doubt that some have been inherited from the earliest settlers in these islands, who brought from the Continent in one of the Inter-glacial Epochs, and again in the Late Stone Age, the prototypes of the charms like the lucky pigs which now dangle from watch-chains and the mascots that figure on motor-cars and aeroplanes as they once figured on coracles, and boats hollowed from trunks of trees.

It is not to be marvelled at that the ancient goddess should be remembered in Leicester district. The city's name is fragrant with ancient memories. It was called after Llyr, the British sea-god, [*1] who became the King Lear of the legend on which one of Shakespeare's great dramas was based. "He (King Lear) it was", wrote Geoffrey of Monmouth in the twelfth century, "that builded the city on the River Soar, that in the British is called Kaerleir, but in the Saxon Leicester (Leirchester)." [*2]

Black Annis Bower was a cave upon the Dane Hills, [*3] which, during the past century, became filled up with

[p. 63]

earth. Over the cave grew an oak-tree, in the branches of which the bag was wont to conceal herself so that she might pounce out unawares and seize human victims, especially children. A local poet has immortalized the hag and her cave:

	 
		An oak, the pride of all the mossy dell,
		 Spreads its broad arms above the stony cell;
		 And many a bush, with hostile thorns arrayed,
		 Forbids the secret cavern to invade.
		
		 Here Black Annis "held her solitary reign, the dread and wonder of the neighbouring plain". Shepherds attributed to her the loss of lambs, and mothers their loss of children. According to a local writer, the children of a past generation "who went to run on Dane Hills were assured that Black Anna lay in wait there to snatch them away to her 'bower'."

	 
		"Oft the gaunt maid the frantic mother cursed",
		
		 sang the poet, who has left the following interesting description of the hag:--

	 
		'T is said the soul of mortal man recoiled
		 To view Black Annis' eye, so fierce and wild.
		 Vast talons, foul with human flesh, there grew
		 In place of hands, and features livid blue
		 Glar'd in her visage; whilst the obscene waist
		 Warm skins of human victims close embraced. [*1]
		
		 She appears to be identical with the "Yellow Muilearteach" of Gaelic legend:

	 
		Her face was blue black of the lustre of coal,
		 And her bone-tufted tooth was like red rust.
		 In her head was one deep pool-like eye
		 Swifter than a star in a winter sky. [*2]
		
		 

[p. 64]

Another description of her runs:

	 
		The name of the dauntless spectre
		 Was the bald-red, white-maned Muilearteach.
		 Her face was dark-grey of the hue of coals,
		 The teeth of her jaw were slanting red;
		 There was one flabby eye in her head
		 That quicker moved than lure pursuing mackerel.
		 Her head bristled dark and grey,
		 Like scrubwood before hoar-frost.
		
		 But the Scoto-Irish hag did not wear "warm skins of human victims".

	 
		                        Oscar caught
		 The embroidered skirt that was round her body;
		 They took the apple from the wretch.
		
		 She had also a "girdle" like Aphrodite. [*1] In India there is a ferocious goddess, who resembles Annis of Leicester. This is Black Kali. She is usually depicted dancing the "dance of fertility", like the Aurignacian and Bushman deities. Modern artists have given her normal eyes, but have retained also the primitive forehead eye. She wears a necklace of human or giant heads, and from her girdle dangle the hands and skins of victims. It would appear that Kali, whose body was smeared with the sacrificial blood, was a form of the earth-goddess; her harvest form was Jagadgauri, the yellow woman; while as the love and fertility deity she was the beautiful Lakshmi or Sri, she was Durga as the goddess of war. [*2] The Greek goddess Demeter was black at Phigalia (Chapter VIII), but the ancient black statue of her was only a memory in the days of Pausanias. No doubt the rites associated with her worship were abandoned when "old times had gone and manners changed". Still the memory of Black Demeter

[p. 65]

survived as the mother of Persephone, the young corn-goddess. The "Green Demeter" was the green corn, and the "yellow Demeter" the ripened harvest grain. As the Roman Ceres her name is perpetuated in cereals--the gifts of the goddess. [*1]

The Libyan goddess Neith was depicted with a green face. Her symbols included the "shuttle" or thunderbolt, the bow and arrows of deities of fertility, lightning, rain, and war. In Babylonia, where the demoniac forms of gods and goddesses were perpetuated in metrical charms and incantations, the "Labartu" (Sumerian "Dimme") was a female demon. She resembled the English Annis and the Scoto-Irish Muilearteach. This primitive goddess haunted mountain and marsh, and devoured stray children who were not protected against her by wearing magical charms attached to neck-cords. The Egyptian Sekhet-Hathor was similarly a destroyer. In her primitive lion-headed Sekhet form, crowned with the solar disk and uraeus serpent, she was sometimes depicted with a naked dagger grasped tightly in her right hand, and sometimes with a magic wand. Isis-Hathor, who personified all the goddesses of Egypt in late times, is referred to significantly in a Philae text as follows:--

	 
		Kindly is she as Bast (the cat-goddess)
		 Terrible is she as Sekhet. [*2]
		
		 The association of the Cretan mother-goddess with trees and mountains will be dealt with more intimately in a later chapter. Here, however, it is of interest to note that the demoniac English deity, Black Annis, was a tree as well as a cave deity. Offerings of children were

[p. 66]

probably made to her in the archaeological Hunting Period, as they were to the Irish Cromm Cruaich in the Agricultural Period in return for milk and corn. The oak in Leicestershire was reverenced as the habitation of the goddess. In Charnwood Forest the "copt oak" was a "trysting-place in olden time". It was long "a place of assembly. . . . Swain motes (courts for the common people) were held for regulation of rights and claims on the forest." In the Highlands Gaelic-speaking people who attend a court at the present day refer to it as a "mote". Trials were conducted at these assemblies, and it is not surprising to find that near the Leicestershire "swain's hill" is situated "Hangman's Stone". "Royal Oak Day" (May 29th) is the "May Day" for Leicestershire children.

In early times the maypole, usually made of oak, was the symbol of authority and justice, as well as of fertility. "The column of May", suggests one writer on the subject, "was the great standard of justice in the Ey Commons, or Fields of May. Here it was that the people, if they saw cause, deposed or punished their governors, their barons, or their kings." When the maypole was brought from the forest the youths and maidens joined in singing songs, of which the chorus was: "We have brought the Summer home". [*1] Scrimmages took place between youths who were attired to represent winter and spring. A seventeenth-century writer says that "a company of yonkers, on May-day morning, before day, went into the country to fetch home a maypole with drumme and trumpet, whereat the neighbouring inhabitants were affrighted, supposing some enemies had landed to sack them. The pole being thus brought home and set up, they began to drink healths about it till they could not

[p. 67]

stand so steady as the pole did." [*1] The maypole customs and the "motes" held under oak-trees are evidently relics of tree-worship. Probably the human representative of the Cretan goddess, seated below her tree, dispensed justice and ushered in the season of fertility and growth, like the May Queen.

In Scotland., where there are "motes" also, it is found that certain "church lands" were anciently associated with magical and religious ceremonies. [*2] Twisting paths leading to wells and hillocks remain as "rights of way". It is of interest to find, too, that the habit of swearing by the earth was also prevalent. In a Gaelic story it is related that when the heroes formed a compact to avenge insults and injuries suffered by one of their number they "lifted a little piece of earth and shouted 'Vengeance'". They thus effected a ceremonial connection with the Earth Mother. In Greece "the most current formula of the public oath, when a treaty was to be ratified or an alliance cemented, was", writes Dr. Farnell, "the invocation of Zeus, Helios, and Ge (the Earth Mother). "And doubtless", he adds, "one of the earliest forms of oath taken was some kind of primitive communion, whereby both parties place themselves in sacred contact with some divine force." [*3]

Ge or Gaia was a vague and ancient deity who was sometimes identified with the "earth snake". She was the mother of Titans, Cyclopes, and Hecatoncheires. Similarly the Scoto-Irish hag known as "Cailleach" (old wife), "Grey Eyebrows", "Muilearteach", &c., was

[p. 68]

mother of the giants (Fomorians) who had monstrous forms, and against whom gods and mortals waged war. A black lamb was offered to Gaia. The Cailleach was apparently offered the "black boar", or the "green boar", slain by the heroes of folk-tales.

As the Earth Mother was sworn by, she must have been conceived of as an active force, capable of assuming concrete form. Rhea, Demeter, Artemis, and other deities were probably forms or manifestations of her at various seasons.

The Cailleach, with blue-black face and roaring mouth, appears to have been recognized in her Muilearteach form as the spirit of tempest on sea and land. As the mountain-spirit of the Hunting Period she moved restlessly among the hills, followed by herds of wild animals, including deer, goats, and swine. In her right hand she grasped a "hammer", or "magic wand", like the gigantic Cretan goddess on her lion-supported mountain-peak. When standing-stones were struck with the "magic wand", they were immediately transformed into giant warriors, fully armed and ready for battle. After throwing away this, her symbol of fertility and authority, the Cailleach herself was transformed into a standing-stone "looking over the sea". She was also associated with rivers and lakes and overflowing wells.

This hag, who, according to one folk-tale, "existed from the long eternity of the world", was not only the mother of giants but also the ancestress of the various tribes of mankind. In Ireland she appears to have been the earlier Danu, the mother of the Danann gods and people, and Anu, the mountain-hag associated with "the Paps of Anu". As the "Old Woman of Beare" she had "seven periods of youth one after another", writes Professor Kuno Meyer, "so that every

[p. 69]

man who had lived with her came to die of old age, and her grandsons and great-grandsons were tribes and races". [*1] In several stories she appears before a hero as a repulsive hag and suddenly transforms herself into a beautiful girl.

As the patroness of wild animals the Cailleach resembles Artemis, whom Browning, like certain of the Greek poets, idealized and consequently robbed of her primitive savage character.

	 
		I shed in Hell o'er my pale people peace,
		 On Earth, I, caring for the creatures, guard
		 Each pregnant yellow wolf and foxbitch sleek
		 And every feathered mother's callow brood,
		 And all that love green haunts and loneliness.
		
		 Artemis occasionally appeared in the form of a hare, a hind, or a bear. As a goddess of the chase she might be depicted seated on the back of a stag or standing with bow in hand beside a hill surmounted by a boar's head. Human sacrifices appear to have been offered to her, and myths were formed in the process of time to justify the substitution of wild animals for girls and lads. Spartan boys were flogged and sprinkled with blood at rites connected with Artemis worship. As a wind-goddess she demanded the sacrifice of Agamemnon's daughter when the fleet assembled at Aulis in Boeotia ready to sail against Troy. The Scoto-Irish Cailleach had similarly control over the winds, as had also the hags who "brewed breezes" on Jochgrimm mountain in Tyrol. Artemis haunted the mountains Erymanthus and Taygetus and the banks of the River Eurotas in Laconia. It was in Crete that she was fabled to have slain the giant Orion because he loved her.

It will be seen that the idea of the mother-goddess

[p. 70]

prevailed in ancient times from India to Ireland and throughout Egypt. Although she was closely associated with the Mediterranean or Brown Race, which included the Neolithic Europeans, the proto-Egyptians, the Sumerians, Southern Persians, and Aryo-Indians, she was also a conspicuous figure in the Late Palaeolithic Period. Long before the ideal types of her had evolved in Greece, she was a terror-inspiring conception among the common people. In isolated areas, which were untouched by Greek idealism, her memory was perpetuated as a repulsive and blood-thirsty hag who terrorized the people and demanded annual dues of human and animal victims. She was associated with the worship of stones, trees, wild animals, wells and rivers, mountains and mounds. As an earth-goddess she was a deity of death, destruction, fertility, and growth; hunters preyed on her flocks and had accordingly to propitiate her; pastoralists made offerings to her to secure the supply of grass, and the agricultural peoples recognized her as the mother of the corn-spirits, male and female. She reflected the culture of various stages of human development, and she assumed the character of the various communities who developed the ritual of her worship; she also mirrored the natural phenomena of the different countries in which she received recognition. Yet she was never wholly divested of her primitive traits. As in Aurignacian times, she remained as the Mother who was the ancestress of all and the source of good and evil, or luck and misfortune. In Crete she was well developed before the earliest island settlers began to carve her images on gems and seals or depict them in frescoes. She symbolized the island and its social life and organization. The Cretans, according to Plutarch, spoke of Crete as their motherland and not their fatherland.

[p. 71]

As the mother-goddess in her various forms reflected the habits of life and the degree of civilization attained by her worshippers, it is possible also that the prominence given to the female principle in religious life caused women to be held in higher esteem than among the peoples of the god cult. Mr. J. R. Hall, in his Ancient History in the Far East, referring to the social status of the women in Crete, says that "it is certain they must have lived on a footing of greater equality with men than in any other ancient civilization. . . . We see in the frescoes of Knossos conclusive indications of an open and free association of men and women, corresponding to our idea of 'Society', at the Minoan Court, unparalleled till our own day." Caesar remarked on the matriarchal conditions which prevailed in certain parts of ancient Britain. Among the Scottish Picts descent was reckoned by the female line, as in the royal families of Egypt and southern European states. It is possible that in Aurignacian times the women of the tribes similarly exercised considerable influence. They appear to have been prominent in the performance of magical and religious rites. Indeed, it is the opinion of some anthropologists, like Bachofen, that women exercised a greater influence than men in developing primitive religious ideas. "Wherever", he comments "gynaeocracy meets us, the mystery of religion is bound up with it, and lends to motherhood an incorporation of some divinity." [*1] The evidence gleaned from certain folktales suggests that women trained young huntsmen and warriors to perform feats of strength and skill. When the Irish Cuchullin visited Alban, to complete his military education, he was tested by an Amazon. Brynhild, of Iceland fame, like Brunhild of the Nibelungenlied, overcame many warriors ere she was won.

[p. 72]

The comparative evidence dealt with in this chapter emphasizes the fact that in dealing with the Cretan and pre-Hellenic deities account must be taken of the primitive modes of thought which are traceable n the accumulated myths and legends attached to them. In the process of myth-making many influences were at work. Historical happenings had to be dealt with as well as the experiences of everyday life in a new environment. The growth of civilization changed the character of religious beliefs also. When old savage practices were abandoned, myths were framed to justify innovations, as when, for instance, the innocent girl Iphigenia was to be sacrificed to Artemis but was substituted by a stag. It was related that the goddess carried her off in a cloud and decided that she should become a priestess. The practice of offering up strangers in sacrifice obtained probably when a community began to abhor the idea of offering up one of its own members.

In the next chapter it will be shown how the study of ancient myths has led to the discovery of those traces of ancient civilization in Crete and the Aegean which has made it possible to reconstruct two thousand years of pre-Hellenic civilization.

Footnotes

^52:1 Malta and the Mediterranean Race, R. N. Bradley, pp. 72 et seq.

^53:1 History of Civilization in Palestine, pp. 9 et seq.

^54:1 The Races of Europe, pp. 172 et seq.

^54:2 Archiv fur Anthropologie, Band 351 St. 239 et seq.

^56:1 For earlier traces of Palaeolithic man see The Stone Ages in North Britain and Ireland, by Rev. Frederick Smith (London & Glasgow, 1909). Dr. A. H. Keane calls the author the "Boucher de Perthes of Scotland".

^56:2 Huxley & Laing's Prehistoric Remains in Caithness (London, 1886).

^57:1 A cave-dweller in a Fingalian story is called Ciofach Mac a' Ghoill ("Ciofach, son of the stranger"). Another version refers to him as Ciuthach (pronounce "Kew'-ach"). Dealing with the legend of the Ciuthach, Professor W. J. Watson considers that he was a hero "of a different race from the Gael" (Celtic Review, January, 1914).

^57:2 Prehistoric Britain, p. 234. (London, 1914 ).

^58:1 The Ancient Egyptians, p. 58.

^61:1 Celtic Myth and Legend, p. 39.

^62:1 Celtic Myth and Legend, pp. 252 et seq.

^62:2 "Kaer" and "Chester" signify cities. London was "Kaer-lud", called after the god Lud, whose name lingers also in "Ludgate".

^62:3 It is suggested that "Dane" is a corruption of the Celtic "Danann".

^63:1 County Folk-lore (Leicestershire and Rutland), by C. J. Billson, Vol. I., London, 1895 (Folk-lore Society's Publications).

^63:2 Campbell's West Highland Tales, Vol. III, p. 138.

^64:1 Waifs and Strays of Celtic Tradition, Vol. IV, pp. 142 et seq. (London, 1891).

^64:2 Indian Myth and Legend, pp. xl. and 149-50.

^65:1 Golden Bough ("Spirits of the Corn and the Wild"), Vol. I, pp. 35 et seq. (third edition).

^65:2 Religion of the Ancient Egyptians, A. Wiedemann, p. 138 (London, 1897).

^66:1 Quoted in County Folk-lore, Vol. I, pp. 29 et seq.

^67:1 Brand's Antiquities, Vol. I, pp. 238 et seq.

^67:2 According to Caesar, the Druids of Gaul held sessions at consecrated places of meeting which, from other sources, we learn were called nemeta. In old Irish the term appears as nemed, and in modern Scottish Gaelic it is neimhidh, which signifies "church land". The English rendering is Navity or Nevity.--Professor W. J. Watson in Celtic Review (1915), Vol. X, pp. 263 et seq.

^67:3 Cults of the Greek States, Vol. III, p. 5.

^69:1 Ancient Irish Poetry, p. 88.

^71:1 Das Mutterrecht, p. xv.

     
Myths of Crete and Pre-Hellenic Europe, by Donald A. Mackenzie, [1917], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 73]

 

CHAPTER IV

 

History in Myth and Legend--Schliemann's Discoveries

The Hellenes and Pelasgians--Evidence of Folk-legends--Thucydides on Cretan Origin of Aegean Civilization--Solar-myth Theories--Achilles and Odysseus as Sun-gods--The "Aryans" and the Iliad--Trojan War and Vedic Myths--Schliemann's Faith in Tradition--Story of his Life--Resolution in Boyhood to excavate Troy--How he became a Merchant Prince--Troy located at Hissarlik--Early Discoveries--First Treasure Hoard--Trouble with Turkish Officials--Excavations in Greece--Work at Tiryns--The Cyclopean Walls--Legends of Giant and Fairy Artisans--Hittite Method of Building--Excavations at Mycenae--The Lion Gate--Ramsay's Finds in Phrygia--The Rich Mycenaean Graves--"Agamemnon's Tomb"--A Famous Telegram--Later Excavations--Schliemann's Scheme to explore in Crete--Death of the Famous Excavator.

THE knowledge possessed by European scholars a generation ago regarding pre-Hellenic civilization was of slight and doubtful character. Histories of Greece devoted small space to the Heroic Age. These usually began by stating that Greece was so called by the Romans, that it had been anciently known as Hellas and embraced several States--Attica, Arcadia, Achaea, Boeotia, &c.--and that the term Hellas had wider significance than was attached to it in modern times, having been used to denote the country of the Hellenes wherever they might happen to be settled, so that Cyrene in North Africa and Miletus in Asia Minor, for instance, were as essentially parts of Hellas as Arcadia or Boeotia. It was also recognized that the Hellenes were not the earliest inhabitants

[p. 74]

of Greece proper. Before these invaders entered into possession of the country it had been divided between various "barbarous tribes", including the Pelasgi and their congeners the Caucones and Leleges. Thirlwall, among others, expressed the view "that the name Pelasgians was a general one, like that of Saxons, Franks, or Alemanni, and that each of the Pelasgian tribes had also one peculiar to itself". The Hellenes did not exterminate the aborigines, but constituted a military aristocracy. Aristotle was quoted to show that their original seat was near Dodona, in Epirus, and that they first appeared in Thessaly about 1384 B.C. It was believed that the Hellenic conquerors laid the foundation of Greek civilization.

Grote, on the other hand, declined to accept the theory that the Pelasgians constituted the sole indigenous element in Greece. "In going through historical Greece", he said, "we are compelled to accept the Hellenic aggregate with its constituent elements as a primary fact to start from. . . . By what circumstances, or out of what pre-existing elements, the aggregate was brought together and modified, we find no evidence entitled to credit. There are, indeed, various names affirmed to designate the ante-Hellenic inhabitants of many parts of Greece--the Pelasgi, the Leleges, the Kuretes, the Kaukones, the Aones, the Temmikes, the Hyantes, the Telchines, the Boeotian Thracians, the Teleboae, the Ephyri, the Phlegyae, &c. These are names belonging to legendary, not to historical Greece-extracted out of a variety of conflicting legends by the logographers and subsequent historians, who strung together out of them a supposed history of the past, at a time when the conditions of historical evidence were very little understood. That these names designated real nations may be true but here our knowledge

[p. 75]

ends. We have no well-informed witness to tell us of their times, their limits of residence, their acts, or their character; nor do we know how far they are identical with or diverse from the historical Hellenes, whom we are warranted in calling, not the first inhabitants of the country, but the first known to us upon any tolerable evidence." The attitude assumed by this cautious historian regarding the Pelasgians is still defensible in these days when different archaeologists apply the term in different ways, one holding, for instance, that the Pelasgians were the Aegeans of Mediterranean race, and another that they were a late "wave" of pre-Hellenic conquerors. Grote insisted that all Herodotus knew about the Pelasgians was that they occupied a few scattered and inconsiderable townships in historical Greece and spoke a barbarous language. [*1] He pointed out, however, that our term "barbarian" does not express the same idea as the Hellenic word, "which involved associations of repugnance", although derived from it. "The Greeks", he explained, "spoke indiscriminately of the extra-Hellenic world with all its inhabitants whatever might be the gentleness of their character and whatever might be their degree of civilization". All non-Hellenes were, as the Chinese put it, "foreign devils".

Historians who were more inclined than Grote to attach weight to folk-traditions were yet unable to gather much from those of the Hellenes regarding their origin, except that they professed to have come from "the East" and claimed to be descendants of an eponymous ancestor called Hellen. The story of this patriarch and his family is given in the Hesiodic version of the World's Ages myth. When Zeus resolved to destroy the wicked Bronze Race by sending a great flood, he spared Deucalion and his wife

[p. 76]

[paragraph continues] Pyrrha, who took refuge in an ark. According to one tradition, this couple, on praying to Zeus, were enabled to repeople the devastated world by throwing over their shoulders stones which were transformed into human beings. These were "the Stone Folk". Another tradition made Deucalion the ancestor of the whole Greek race, through his son Hellen, who had three children, named Dorus and Aeolus, the ancestors of the Dorians and Aeolians, and Xuthus, whose sons Achaeus and Ion, were the progenitors of the Achaeans and Ionians.

The period that elapsed between the early settlement of the Hellenes and the siege of Troy was called the Heroic Age, after the fourth Hesiodic Age of the World, or the Homeric Age, during which the civilization depicted in those great epics the Iliad and the Odyssey had full development.

Historians parted company when they came to deal with the prehistoric period. Thirlwall was inclined to sift historical matter from the legends. Grote, however, was frankly sceptical. "That which I note as Terra Incognita", he said, "is in his (Thirlwall's) view a land which may be known up to a certain point, but the map which he draws of it contains so few ascertained places as to differ very little from absolute vacuity." [*1] Dealing with the Trojan war, he declared that, "though literally believed, reverentially cherished, and numbered among the gigantic phenomena of the past by the Grecian public, it is in the eyes of modern enquiry essentially a legend and nothing more". His answer to the question as to whether the war ever took place was: "As the possibility of it cannot be denied, so neither can the reality of it be affirmed". [*2] We who are "wise after the event" may rail at Grote, but it must be remembered that he wrote at

[p. 77]

a time when little was known regarding ancient Egypt, Babylonia, and Assyria, except what could be derived from classical writers and Biblical references. He, however, recognized that the myths had a psychological if not a historical value when he wrote: "Two courses, and two only, are open: either to pass over the myths altogether, which is the way in which modern historians treat the old British fables, or else to give an account of them as myths; to recognize and respect their specific nature, and to abstain from confounding them with ordinary and certifiable history. There are good reasons for pursuing the second method in reference to the Grecian myths, and when so considered they constitute an important chapter in the history of the Grecian mind, and, indeed, in that of the human race generally." [*1] He did not agree with those, however, who believed that the Homeric picture of life was wholly fictitious. Indeed, he drew, like others, upon the epics for evidence regarding customs and manners of life in early Greek times, although he held they contained "no historical facts".

It was generally recognized that the petty states of Greece were ruled over by hereditary chiefs, whose power was limited by a military aristocracy. "Piracy was an honourable occupation," as one writer put it, "and war the delight of noble souls." Some historians added, on the authority of Thucydides, [*2] that the commencement of Grecian civilization might be dated from the reign of King Minos of Crete, who had cleared the Aegean Sea of pirates. Grote could not, on the other hand, believe that the Minos legends had any historical value. "Here we have", he wrote, "conjectures derived from the analogy of the Athenian maritime empire of historical times, substituted

[p. 78]

in place of the fabulous incidents and attached to the name of Minos." [*1]

It should not surprise us that the so-called "doubting Thomases" among the historians hesitated to make use of myths and legends. Grote held that if he were to proceed with a view to detect a historical base in the stories of Troy and Thebes, he would be compelled to deal similarly with the myths of "Zeus in Crete, of Apollo and Artemis in Delos, of Hermes and of Prometheus". If Achilles was to be taken seriously, although he was of supernatural origin, what of Bellerophon, Perseus, Theseus, and Hercules? These would also have to be "handled objectively".

In time the exponents of the new science of Comparative Mythology, which at its inception was based chiefly on philological evidence, attracted much attention and impressed not a few serious students of classical history with their theory that classical legends were renderings of immemorial religious myths, the gods and goddesses having been transformed into human heroes and heroines. "In Greek mythology", it was contended, "each different aspect of nature had many different names, because a few simple elements crystallized into many different forms. This is why there are so many gods and goddesses." As much may be granted, although, as is now believed, the view is somewhat narrow. But when the theory was given practical application it led to rather too sweeping conclusions of rather fanciful character. "Zeus", wrote one authority, "is married to many different wives. The bright sky must look down on many lands. His visits to different countries are thus explained. . . . Achilles is child of the sea-goddess; so the sun often appears to rise out of the water. His bride is torn from him, and he

[p. 79]

sulks in his tent; so the sun must leave the dawn and be hidden by dark clouds. He lends his armour to Patroclus except the spear; none other can wield the spear of Achilles: so no other can equal the power of the sun's rays." And so on until the absurdity concluded with: "Achilles tramples on the dead body of Hector, but Hector is of dark powers, though noble in himself; so a blazing sunset tramples down the darkness. Finally, Achilles is slain by an arrow from a Trojan. He is vulnerable only in the heel, but the arrow finds him there. So the sun is conquered by the darkness in his turn, and disappears, a short-lived brilliant thing."

The hero of the Odyssey met a similar fate. "Odysseus is the sun in another character, as a wanderer, and his adventures describe the general phenomena of daytime from the rising to the setting of the sun. . . . His journey is full of strange changes, of happiness and misery, successes and reverses, like the lights and shadows of a gloomy day."

The Iliad, as a narrative, was regarded with contempt. "There is nothing noble or elevated in the gods or heroes", remarked one solar-symbolist, who referred to himself as "one of the advanced thinkers". "Everyone knows", he went on, with unconscious humour, "that the Iliad is a poem which tells two stories: of a war between the Greeks and Trojans to recover a Grecian woman named Helen, who had run away from her lawful husband with a Trojan hero named Paris, and carried a great treasure with her; also of the anger of Achilles, a Grecian hero, and the dreadful consequences it brought upon the Grecian army encamped upon the plains around Troy." A physical explanation of this "petty legend" had to be sought for. Professor Max Muller declared: "The siege of Troy is a repetition of the daily siege of the East by the solar powers that are robbed of their

[p. 80]

brightest treasures in the West". One of his critics and followers, Mr. Cox, remarked with much justification that this was "not quite plain", but he only added to the confusion by urging a new hypothesis. "Few will venture to deny", he remarked, with the characteristic confidence of the theorist, "that the stealing of the bright clouds of sunset by the dark powers of night, the weary search for them through the long night, the battle with the robbers, as the darkness is driven away by the advancing chariot of the lord of light, are favourite subjects with the Vedic poets." So was Greece robbed of its heroes and Troy swept out of existence. "If such a war took place", Mr. Cox argued, "it must be carried back to a time preceding the dispersion of the Aryan tribes from their original home."

But while these and other examples of what Mr. Andrew Lang has characterized as "scholarly stupidity" impressed not a few prominent men, a small band of students strenuously declined to regard the Homeric legends as products of traditional myths "based on the various phenomena of the earth and heavens". One of these was the self-educated merchant, Henry Schliemann, whose faith in Homer led him to make discoveries which have thrown a flood of light on early Aegean civilization, and incidentally shattered forever the theories of the solar mythologists. "The Trojan War," he wrote in 1878, "has for a long time past been regarded by many eminent scholars as a myth, of which however they vainly endeavoured to find the origin in the Vedas. But in all antiquity the siege and conquest of Ilium by the Greek army under Agamemnon was considered as an undoubted historical fact, and as such it is accepted by the great authority of Thucydides. [*1] The tradition has

[p. 81]

even retained the memory of many details of that war which have been omitted by Homer. For my part, I have always firmly believed in the Trojan War; my full faith in Homer and in the tradition has never been shaken by modern criticism, and to this faith of mine I am indebted for the discovery of Troy and its treasure." [*1]

The story of Heinrich Schliemann's life is a fitting prelude to an account of his epoch-making discoveries in Asia Minor and Greece which "led up", as Mr. Hawes says, "to the revelations in Crete from 1900 onwards". He was born on 6th January, 1822, in the little German town of Neu Buckow, in the duchy of Mecklenberg-Schwerin, and was scarcely twelve months old when his father, a Protestant clergyman, removed to Ankershagen, near Waren. At this village the future archaeologist, who was a precocious child, received impressions before he was ten years old which influenced his whole life and prompted him to achieve renown as a pioneer in the domain of pre-Hellenic research. Ankershagen was enveloped in an old-world atmosphere; it was indeed an ideal "homeland", with its antiquities, legends, and superstitions, for one of Heinrich Schliemann's temperament and mental leanings. The summer-house in the manse garden was reputed to be haunted by the ghost of his father's predecessor, Pastor von Russdorf, and near at hand was a small pond out of which each night at the stroke of twelve a spirit maid was believed to rise up, grasping a silver cup in her hand. In the village a ditch-surrounded mound--one of the kind called a Hunengrab, or "Hun's grave"--had attached to it a story about a great robber who buried in it his favourite child in a golden cradle. Legends of similar character are told regarding "giants' graves" in these islands. Treasure was also said to lie concealed

[p. 82]

under a round tower in the local land-proprietor's garden. "My faith in these treasures was so great", Schliemann wrote in after years, "that whenever I heard my father complain of his poverty, I expressed my astonishment that he did not dig up the silver bowl or the golden cradle and so become rich." [*1]

An ancient castle also made a strong appeal to the boy's imagination. It was supposed to have the usual long underground passage leading to somewhere, and to be visited nightly by awesome spectres. At one time, the legend ran, it was the abode of a notorious robber knight, Henning Bradenkirl, who buried his treasure and committed suicide when, revelation having been made of his designs on the life of the Duke of Mecklenberg, his stronghold was besieged by that great nobleman. Henning found no rest in his grave, and it was whispered among the young folks that time and again he had thrust out one of his legs with purpose apparently to visit the spot where his hoard was concealed. "I often begged my father", Schliemann has told, "to excavate the tomb, in order to see why the foot no longer grew out." This belief that there was a kernel of truth in ancient legends caused him ultimately to search for traces of ancient Troy, and open the graves of heroes who, according to classic narratives, had been buried with their armour and rich ornaments. "My firm faith in the traditions", he wrote in 1877, "made me undertake my late excavations in the Acropolis (of Mycenae) and led to the discovery of the five tombs, with their immense treasures." [*2] So the boy was "father of the man".

The impecunious clergyman of Ankershagen cast over the mind of his son, Heinrich, the romantic glamour of classic myth and legend. The nursery stories he related

[p. 83]

were not of elves and giants, but of the last days of Pompeii and Herculaneum, which were then being excavated and greatly talked about, and of the great deeds of Homer's heroes on the windy plain of Troy.

It was a memorable day in Heinrich's life when he received as a Christmas present, in his eighth year, an illustrated child's history of the world-one of those popular works which stimulate young minds with the desire to acquire knowledge. An engraving depicted the last scene in the siege of Troy. The "topless towers of Ilium" were wrapped in flames, and amidst the smoke and confusion the wounded warrior Aeneas was seen taking flight, carrying his father Anchises on his broad back, and leading by the hand his son Ascanius. From that hour the spectacle of mighty Troy haunted the mind of the little German boy, and the Trojan War became as familiar to him as if it had been waged on the village green and Ankershagen, instead of Troy, had been sacked.

Heinrich failed in his attempts to impress his boy friends with glowing versions of Homer's narrative, but he infected with his enthusiasm the minds of two girl companions. One of these, Minna Meincke, a farmer's daughter, promised to marry him when she grew up, and assist him to discover the Hun robber's golden cradle, the silver cup of the pond nymph, the treasure concealed by Henning, and to accompany him to the land of dreams to explore the ruins of ancient Troy. Strange to relate, half a century afterwards, not Minna, but another who became Mrs. Henry Schliemann, actually did help her husband in his famous excavations, and one of the results of their joint labours was the finding of the most valuable treasure any archaeologists have ever had the luck to uncover.

Heinrich's father intended to give him a classical

[p. 84]

education, but fell into financial difficulties, with the result that when the boy was fourteen he became apprenticed to a village grocer. At nineteen he injured himself when lifting a heavy cask, and went to Hamburg, where he secured a situation as a cabin-boy on a brig bound for Venezuela. The vessel however, was wrecked on a sand-bank off the Island of Texel during stormy weather, but fortunately the crew escaped in a small boat. Heinrich afterwards secured a situation at a Hamburg warehouse. Having a good deal of leisure time at his disposal, he studied languages with so much success that he acquired a wonderful knowledge of Dutch, English, Spanish, French, Italian, and Portuguese.

At twenty-four he was employed by the firm of B. H. Schroder & Co., and, having by this time obtained a knowledge of Russian, he was sent to St. Petersburg. He prospered there and began to trade on his own account, dealing chiefly in indigo. At forty he found himself a millionaire. Ere he retired, however, he studied modern and ancient Greek and Latin under Professor Ludgwig von Muralt.

Having wound up his affairs, he began to travel extensively. For several months he resided in China and Japan, and wrote on his return his first book La Chine et Le Japon, which was published at Paris, where he settled down to study archaeology. The time was drawing nigh when he could visit the scenes of Homeric glory, and make search for traces of ancient Troy and the graves containing treasure. He was resolved to realize the dream of his boyhood, which he had treasured during the years so full of business anxieties and cares. "Father," he had once said, when his childish eyes were fascinated by the engraving of Troy, "if such walls once existed, they cannot possibly have been completely destroyed;

[p. 85]

vast ruins of them must still remain, but they are hidden beneath the dust of ages." His father had shaken his head, but, to pleasure the lad, admitted that it was possible, and then agreed that when they were able to do so they would both search for and excavate the ruins of the famous city.

In 1868 Schliemann paid his first visit to the scenes of his future triumphs and wrote a book entitled Ithaca, the Peloponnesus, and Troy, in which he ran counter to the theories of those contemporary scholars who believed that Troy had existed, by locating its site, not on an inland summit near Bunarbashi, but farther north and near the seashore on the top of the hillock of Hissarlik. He also announced where he believed the graves of the Atreidae at Mycenae could be located. For this original treatise he received his doctor's degree at Rostock.

In the spring of 1870 Dr. Schliemann put his theories to the test by beginning to dig at Hissarlik. At the depth of 16 feet the first wall was laid bare, and he was then fully convinced that success would crown his efforts. Accordingly he made preparations for excavation work on an extensive scale. The Turkish authorities hampered him greatly, however, and it was not until late in the following year that he could proceed with the work. In the following year a great depth had been reached, but although a broad trench laid bare a series of walls and a fine piece of Greek sculpture, no definite conclusions could be reached from the results, promising and suggestive as these were. Work was resumed early in 1873, when the weather was so cold that "of an evening", wrote Dr. Schliemann, "we had nothing to keep us warm except an enthusiasm for discovering Troy". The weeks went past, and at length Fortune smiled and the dreams of boyhood began to find rich

[p. 86]

realization. One day, during the dinner hour, when no workmen were near, Dr. Schliemann and his wife discovered a treasure hoard of gold and diadems and daggers, silver jars and copper vessels and weapons, which they hurriedly carried off and concealed. Its mere monetary value was not far short of L 1000. During the winter Dr. Schliemann wrote an account of his discoveries which was published in book form under the title Trojan Antiquities. He had cut through several successive towns on the hillock of Hissarlik. The second city from the bottom was named by him "Homer's Troy"; he called its largest building "Priam's Palace", and the hoard he had discovered with his wife, "Priam's Treasure". Most archaeologists now believe, however, that the sixth city, which was much more extensive than the second, was the capital celebrated by Homer.

Schliemann's theories were ridiculed by the "authorities" in every country in Europe. He was a "rank outsider" and regarded with suspicion by the theorists who were convinced that Troy could not possibly have been situated at Hissarlik. Comic papers made fun of him as a dreamer of vain dreams, but a few open-minded scholars were profoundly impressed and anxious for more information. Schliemann was not discouraged either by learned criticism or superficial ridicule. What concerned him most was the attitude assumed by the Turkish Government, which was not entirely free from the suspicion or blackmailing propensities. Operations at Hissarlik had to be suspended, but the undaunted pioneer did not waste his time. He turned his back upon Troy and was led to Mycenae, in Greek territory, by the ghost of Agamemnon. There and at Tiryns his excavations resulted in the discovery of traces of a culture similar to that found in the sixth city at Hissarlik. The results of this archaeological

[p. 87]

[paragraph continues] "campaign", which was carried on during 1876-7, were published in Mycenae in 1878. A preface contributed by the late Mr. W. E. Gladstone contains several passages which reflect the interest which was aroused throughout Europe at the time by Schliemann's work. "When the disclosures at Tiryns and Mycenae were announced in England," wrote Mr. Gladstone, "my own first impression was that of a strangely bewildered admiration, combined with a preponderance of sceptical against believing tendencies, in regard to the capital and dominating subject of the Tombs in the Agora. I am bound to say that reflection and fuller knowledge have nearly turned the scales the other way. . . . I find, upon perusing the volume of Dr. Schliemann, that the items of evidence, which connect his discoveries generally with the Homeric poems, are more numerous than I had surmised from the brief outline with which he favoured us upon his visit to England in the spring." [*1]

Tiryns, now called Palaeocastron, was, according to Pausanias, named after Tiryns, a son of Argos. It was the reputed birthplace of Hercules, and famed for its Cyclopean walls. "The circuit wall," wrote Pausanias, "which is the only remaining ruin, was built by the Cyclopes. It is composed of unwrought stones, each of which is so large that a team of mules cannot even shake the smallest one: small stones have been interposed in order to consolidate the large blocks." [*2]

Mycenae was also reputed to have been built by these giant artisans, who numbered seven, and came from Lycia. It was probably on account of this legend that, as Schliemann suggested, the whole of the Argolis was referred to by Euripides as "Cyclopean land". Similarly, many ruins in Asia Minor and Mesopotamia were credited

[p. 88]

by tradition to Semiramis, while the Egyptian Sesostris was supposed to have erected gigantic works in various localities. This habit of accounting for ancient remains as the handiwork of mythical and semi-mythical persons was of great antiquity and widespread character. Fairies and elves and giants were supposed to have erected dolmens and stone circles. Gaelic-speaking people in Lewis at the present day, for instance, refer to the standing stones at Callernish as Tursachan, a name which has been derived from the Norse word Thurs, a giant or goblin. In Cumberland another circle is associated with the memory of the mythical giantesses "Long Meg and her daughters". Several promontories in different localities have been credited likewise to fairy artisans who were endeavouring to bridge over an arm of the sea. Thor, according to the Teutonic wonder-tales, formed valleys by smiting a mountain range with his great hammer, while the "Flint Hills" were formed by the fragments he shattered from the great flint boulder flung towards him by a giant enemy. In Scotland numerous hillocks are referred to as spillings from the creel of the giantess (Cailleach) who erected mountain houses for her children. This custom of attributing not only hills, but also buildings, to supernatural agencies has survived even into Christian times. Not a few ruins of early chapels in these islands have still associated with them folk-tales about fairy builders, who accomplished their work in a single night.

Schliemann did not attach historical importance to the legends of Hercules, who was reputed to have held sway at Tiryns for a prolonged period. Indeed, like Max Muller, he was inclined to regard the famous folk-hero as a sun-god. But he was convinced that the Cyclopean walls were of great antiquity, and engaged in systematic

 

THE LION GATE, MYCENAe

 

[p. 89]

excavations with purpose to obtain evidence which would connect the civilization of Tiryns with that of his Homeric Troy. He found a number of terra-cotta female idols, with exaggerated breasts, and terra-cotta cows, which had evidently a religious significance. These he connected with the goddess Hera. Examples of primitive pottery were also brought to light, including hand-polished black vases and bulky jars. When he reached the prehistoric strata he collected obsidian knives, whorls of blue and green stone, &c. In some places he found the remains of walls built on the rock and of water conduits of rough unhewn stones. The stones of the ancient Cyclopean wall measured about 7 feet long and 3 feet thick in most cases, but some were of even greater dimensions.

At Mycenae, "situated in the depth of the horse-feeding Argos", as Homer sang, [*1] Schliemann's early researches were more productive. Here he set out to prove his theory that the graves of the Atreidae were situated not outside but inside the citadel wall. He found that the wall revealed three different methods of construction, which he assigned to three separate periods. These are the Cyclopean, in which large boulders were secured by small blocks; the Polygonal, with accurately hewn joints; and the Rectangular, in which the blocks were "dovetailed".

In the north-west corner he cleared the famous "Lion's Gate". It measured 10 feet 8 inches in height, and was 9 feet 6 inches wide at the top, and 10 feet 3 inches at the bottom. The great lintel, which excited admiration, was found to be 15 feet long and 8 feet broad. At this point the wall, constructed on the Rectangular system, is composed of stones 6 and 7 feet in length, many of which

[p. 90]

are notched to fit into the corners, or jutting points, hewed in others. This system of rough "dovetailing" is characteristic of Hittite buildings. The Euphrates River wall at Carchemish, the oldest known engineering construction in the world, which has been utilized by the engineers in connection with a "Bagdad railway" bridge at this point, is a characteristic example of the Rectangular style of architecture.

Above the great lintel of the principal entrance to the Acropolis of Mycenae lies the great limestone slab sculptured in relief, on which two lions rampant, heraldically opposed, rest their forepaws on the "altar" with its shapely pillar "crowned by a curious capital, composed of a fillet, moulding, roll, and abacus". Similar lion and pillar groups have been found by Professor Ramsay in Phrygia. In one instance the goddess Cybele takes the place of the pillar. "The idea of the lions as guardians of the gate arose", Professor Ramsay considers, "in a country where Cybele was worshipped, and where the dead chief was believed to be gathered to his mother, the goddess. . . . The Phrygians adapted an old heraldic type to represent the idea. . . . In the interchange of artistic forms and improvements in civilization which obtained between Phrygia and the Greeks, the lion type passed into Mycenae during the ninth, or more probably the eighth century B.C." [*1]

Schliemann's guide to Mycenae was Pausanias, who wrote [*2]: "Amongst other remains of the wall is the gate on which stand lions. They (the walls and the gate) are said to be the work of the Cyclopes, who built the wall for Proteus at Tiryns. In the ruins of Mycenae is the fountain called Perseia, and the subterranean buildings of

[p. 91]

[paragraph continues] Atreus and his children, in which they stored their treasures. There is the sepulchre of Atreus, and the tombs of the companions of Agamemnon, who on their return from Ilium were killed at a banquet by Aegisthus. The identity of the tomb of Cassandra is called in question by the Lacedaemonians of Amyclae. There is the tomb of Agamemnon and that of his charioteer Eurymedon, and of Electra. Teledamus and Pelops were buried in the same sepulchre, for it is said that Cassandra bore these twins, and that, while as yet infants, they were slaughtered by Aegisthus together with their parents. Hellanicus (495-411 B.C.) writes that Pylades, who was married to Electra with the consent of Orestes, had by her two sons, Medon and Strophius. Clytemnestra and Aegisthus were buried at a little distance from the wall, because they were thought unworthy to have their tombs inside of it, where Agamemnon reposed and those who were killed together with him."

This passage had been misinterpreted by certain writers, and Schliemann insisted, before he began to dig, that the wall referred to was not the city wall, as they believed, but the wall of the Acropolis. The city, besides, he argued, was in ruins in Pausanias's day (170 A.D.), and he might not have seen the remnants of the smaller city wall. Schliemann put his theory to proof by sinking a number of shafts, and then undertaking extensive excavations. When he had cleared away the debris from the Lion's Gate, some of which had been cast there when the Argives captured the Acropolis in the fifth century B.C., he found evidence that the city had been partially reoccupied after its fall, although Diodorus Siculus [*1] and Strabo [*2] had made statements to the contrary.

Schliemann penetrated to the lower and earlier city of

[p. 92]

[paragraph continues] Mycenae and there made discovery of great "beehive tombs", which were the "Treasuries" of Pausanias.

Schliemann excavated also five shaft tombs, and believed they were those of Agamemnon and his companions, who on their return from Troy were murdered by Clytemnestra and her paramour Aegisthus. They were of similar construction, and the burials appeared to him to have been simultaneous. "The five tombs of Mycenae, or, at least, three of them," he wrote, "contained such enormous treasuries that they cannot but have belonged to members of the royal family." Thousands of pounds worth of antique valuables were discovered in these mysterious underground chambers.

An immense impression was made all over Europe on the publication of the following characteristic telegram which Schliemann dispatched to the King of Greece, announcing his great discovery.

"MYCENAe, 16th (28th) November, 1876.

"With extreme joy I announce to Your Majesty that I have discovered the tombs which tradition, as echoed by Pausanias, designates as the sepulchre of Agamemnon, of Cassandra, of Eurymadon and their companions and their comrades, all slain during the repast by Clytemnestra and her lover Aegisthus. These tombs were surrounded by a double parallel circle of plaques, which can only have been erected in the honour of great personages. I have found in the sepulchres immense treasures in the way of archaic objects of pure gold. These treasures of themselves are enough to fill a large museum which shall be the most marvellous in the world, and which during centuries to come will draw to Greece thousands of visitors from every country. As I work purely for the love of science, I make naturally no claim to these treasures,

[p. 93]

which I give with the liveliest enthusiasm intact to Greece. May it be God's will that these treasures will become the corner stone of an immense national wealth.

"HEINRICH SCHLIEMANN."

It is not believed nowadays that Schliemann located the tombs of Agamemnon and his followers, but happened instead on those of royal personages who flourished in a different age. The authority of Pausanias is not sufficient to settle the problem. When that distinguished writer visited the ruins of Mycenae over a thousand years had elapsed since Troy had fallen. Agamemnon bulked prominently in folk-imagination, and was identified with the memorials of forgotten rulers. The process involved is a familiar one. In our own country King Arthur has similarly had attached to his memory the deeds of mythical beings who dwelt in Fairyland or selected high hills as their seats, while in the Highlands as recent a hero as Prince Charlie has been associated with hiding-places, in districts he never visited, as far north as Caithness.

But Schliemann's confident statement regarding the "tomb of Agamemnon" need not detract from the value of the services he has rendered to archaeology. In making search for traces of the heroes of his boyhood he achieved well-deserved renown as the pioneer who "opened to us the door into one of the sealed chambers of the past". He has caused early Greek history to be rewritten, and it is due to his example and triumphs that it is now possible to present a partial reconstruction of several thousand years of Aegean civilization.

It is indirectly to Schliemann, too, that we owe the late Mr. Andrew Lang's famous sonnet on Homeric Unity.

[p. 94]

	 
		The sacred keep of Ilion is rent
		 By shaft and pit; foiled waters wander slow
		 Through plains where Simois and Scamander went
		 To war with gods and heroes long ago.
		 Not yet to tired Cassandra, lying low
		 In rich Mycenae, do the Fates relent:
		 The bones of Agamemnon are a show,
		 And ruined is his royal monument.
		
		The dust and awful treasures of the Dead,
		 Hath Learning scattered wide, but vainly thee,
		 Homer, she meteth with her tool of lead,
		 And strives to rend thy songs; too blind to see
		 The crown that burns on thine immortal head
		 Of indivisible supremacy.
		
		 Flushed with his Mycenaean successes, Schliemann was ready to return to Troy in the summer of 1878. But his difficulties with the Turkish officials delayed him. These, however, were overcome on his behalf by another famous explorer, Sir Austen Henry Layard, of Assyrian fame, who happened to be at the time British Ambassador at Constantinople. "I fulfil a most agreeable duty", Schliemann wrote in his Ilios, "in now thanking his Excellency publicly and most cordially for all the services he has rendered me, without which I could never have brought my work to a close."

While waiting for his firman from the Turkish Government, Schliemann began operations on the Island of Ithaca, and discovered on Mount Aetos a king's palace and nearly two hundred houses of Cyclopean construction. Then he proceeded to Troy, where he was hampered for a time by a Turkish commissioner. In the following year Professor Virchow joined him, and he received visits also from other scholars of repute. In 18 80 he published his great work Ilios, Dr. Dorpfeld joined him in 1882,

[p. 95]

and together they operated chiefly in the city which has now been identified with Homer's Troy. In 1884 the results of later exploration were recorded in Schliemann's Troja, to which a preface was contributed by Professor Sayce. The tireless excavator then resumed operations at Tiryns, where an ancient palace was discovered. The work was continued here in the following year by Dr. Dorpfeld, who wrote several chapters in Schliemann's next book, to which a preface was contributed by Professor F. Adler.

Schliemann next turned attention to Egypt, where he excavated with Virchow with much success, and he desired also to operate in Crete, on Knossos Hill, but the political conditions on the island made systematic archaeological work in that quarter an impossibility, while the Turkish Government showed no enthusiasm regarding his proposal. It was not considered desirable that the islanders should be reminded of the greatness of their ancestors. He had therefore to abandon his scheme to make search in Crete for "the original home of Mycenaean civilization."

In 1890 Dr. C. Schuchardt, Director of the Kestner Museum, in Hanover, published his critical work on Schliemann's excavations, in which he wrote: "Dr. Schliemann is now in his sixty-ninth year, but his activity and love of enterprise show no signs of decay. We may still look to him for many additions to science, and we hope to thank him for disclosing the heroic age of Greece in the periods of its prime and of its decadence, which may perhaps be found in Crete, the land of Minos." [*1]

On 26th December in the same year, however, Schliemann expired suddenly in Naples. His body was taken to Athens and buried in the Greek cemetery near the

[p. 96]

[paragraph continues] Ilissos, a lofty monument being erected to his memory. "He lies", writes Mr. Sellers, "in the land he loved so well; but the example of noble ambition and patient research which he set before the world will long abide as a living spirit, not only among archaeologists, but among all who anywhere in the civilized world have caught something of his devotion and enthusiasm for classical learning and antiquity."

Among the honours conferred upon the great man during the closing years of his life was the degree of D.C.L. of Oxford and the fellowship of Queen's College. The Royal Institute of British Architects awarded him a gold medal, in which he took great pride. It is of interest to note that he was a naturalized American citizen.

Footnotes

^75:1 History of Greece, Vol. II, pp. 350 et seq.

^76:1 History of Greece, Vol. II, p. 358.

^76:2 Ibid., Vol. I, pp. 434-5.

^77:1 History of Greece, Vol. I, pp. 65

^77:2 History of the Peloponnesian War, I, 3-4.

^78:1 History of Greece, Vol. I, p. 311.

^80:1 Thucydides, I, 8, 10.

^81:1 Mycenae, p. 334.

^82:1 Ilios, pp. 1 et seq.

^82:2 Mycenae pp. 335.

^87:1 Mycenae, Preface, p, vi.

^87:2 Pausanias, II, 25, 8, and Mycenae, pp. 2-3.

^89:1 Odyssey, III, 163.

^90:1 Journal of the Hellenic Society, Vol. V, p. 242.

^90:2 Pausanias, II, 16, 6, and Mycenae, pp. 59, 60.

^91:1 XI, 65.

^91:2 VIII, p. 372.

^95:1 Schliemann's Excavations, translated by E. Sellers, p. 16.

     
Myths of Crete and Pre-Hellenic Europe, by Donald A. Mackenzie, [1917], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 97]

 

CHAPTER V

 

Crete as the Lost Atlantis

Quest for Home of Pre-Hellenic Culture--The Legendary Clues--Myth of the Lost Atlantis--Schliemann's Remarkable Bequest--His Grandson's Researches--Supposed Connection of Egyptian with Central American Civilization--Views of Geologists regarding a Submerged Continent--Geikie versus Hull--Evidence of New and Old World Fauna--The Race Problem--Plato's Atlantis Narrative--Lost Island identified with Crete--Sea Trade, Palaces, and Bull Fights--Greek and Libyan Traditions--How the Lost Atlantis Myth Originated--Legend of Zeus and Europe--Water-bull and Water-horse Stories --The Legendary Minos and Osiris--The Minotaur--Story of Daedalus and Babylonian and Indian Parallels--Athens and Crete--The Theseus Legend--Value of Traditions.

ALTHOUGH Schliemann's theories regarding Priam's treasure and Agamemnon's tomb aroused a storm of criticism, it had to be recognized that he discovered traces of a brilliant pre-Hellenic civilization which had flourished in Greece and Asia Minor for many long centuries. The problem as to where it had originated, however, remained obscure, and towards its solution not a few skilled archaeologists began to direct their energies. Indeed, the quest soon became hot and fast. The cumulative evidence of classical writers seemed to point to Crete. Homer, Hesiod, Strabo, Thucydides, and Herodotus had perpetuated traditions regarding King Minos, the great lawgiver, who had cleared the Aegean of pirates. He was reputed to have been a son of Zeus, and that deity, according to one legend, had been born in a Cretan cave.

[p. 98]

[paragraph continues] Schliemann gave serious consideration to these clues, and had endeavoured, as has been stated, to make arrangements to excavate at Knossos. He also conducted researches with Virchow at Sais, in northern Egypt, but no discovery was made to indicate that pre-Hellenic civilization had emanated from the land of the Pharaohs in its fully-developed form. The larger problem appears to have engaged his mind: Where did Egyptian civilization originate?

Ere he died Schliemann formulated a bold theory to account not only for early northern European and North African civilization but also that of Central America as well. It was based on Plato's myth of the Lost Atlantis. He was convinced that this great island had had real existence, and that colonies of its inhabitants settled in Mexico, Egypt, and Greece at a remote period, introducing into these countries a full-blown culture.

Here, again, as will be shown, Schliemann had intuitive perception of a basis of fact embedded in the debris of tradition. Had he lived long enough he would no doubt have adjusted his view in the light of those discoveries which have been made during recent years, and accepted Crete as the mysterious island referred to by Plato.

NOTE: Schliemann's Atlantis bequest was a hoax, created for a Hearst newspaper. For more information, refer to .--John Bruno Hare

The Atlantis theory appealed as strongly to the great pioneer's imagination during the last months of his life as did his Troy theory in the days of his boyhood. But the frailties of old age oppressed him, and he realized that he could never put it to proof. He desired, however, that the work should be undertaken by one of his kinsmen, and committed his secret to writing, enclosing his manuscript in a sealed envelope inscribed as follows:--

This can be opened only by a member of my family who solemnly vows to devote his life to the researches outlined therein.

[p. 99]

Not long before he expired he asked for a pencil and piece of paper and wrote:

Confidential addition to the sealed envelope. Break the owl-headed vase. Pay attention to the contents. It concerns Atlantis. Investigate the east of the ruins of the temple of Sais and the cemetery in Chacuna valley. Important. It proves the system. Night approaches--Lebewohl.

This last document was enclosed, and afterwards deposited with the other in one of the banks of France by the party to whom both were entrusted. A large sum of money was set aside to defray the expenses of the mysterious undertaking.

In 1906 Dr. Paul Schliemann, a grandson of the great discoverer of pre-Hellenic civilization, vowed to devote his life to the researches referred to in the sealed envelopes, and made himself acquainted with their contents. A few years later he contributed to certain newspapers in New York and London a signed statement, [*1] in which he made a revelation of his grandfather's last bequest.

The first paper said:

Whoever opens this must solemnly swear to carry out the work I have left unfinished. I have come to the conclusion that Atlantis was not only a great territory between America and the West Coast of Africa and Europe, but the cradle of all our civilization as well. There has been much dispute among scientists on this matter. According to one group the tradition of Atlantis is purely fictional, founded upon fragmentary accounts of a deluge some thousands of years before the Christian era. Others declare the tradition wholly historical, but not capable of absolute proof.

Dr. Schliemann's papers are of lengthy character. Briefly stated, they set forth that he found at Troy a

[p. 100]

bronze vase containing fragments of pottery, images, and coins of "a peculiar metal", and "objects made of fossilized bone". He added: "Some of these objects and the bronze vase were engraved with a sentence in Phoenician hieroglyphics. The sentence read, 'From the King Chronos of Atlantis'."

Ten years later, when in the Louvre, Paris, he examined a collection of objects taken from Tiahuanaco, in Central America, and "discovered pieces of pottery of exactly the same shape and material, and objects of fossilized bone which reproduced line for line those I had found", Schliemann wrote, "in the bronze vase of the 'Treasure of Priam'". Among these objects was an owl-headed vase. He also professed to have read, or to have had read to him, extracts from Egyptian papyri preserved in the Museum at St. Petersburg which made reference to the "Land of Atlantis", whence had come the ancestors of the Egyptians "3350 years ago" and the "sages of Atlantis" who flourished during a period of "13,900 years". Another inscription, discovered near the Lion's Gate at Mycenae, set forth that Thoth was a son of a "priest of Atlantis" who "landed after many wanderings in Egypt. He built the first temple at Sais, and there taught the wisdom of his native land."

Dr. Paul Schliemann has broken open the "owl-headed vase" at Paris, referred to in his grandfather's last memorandum, and states that he found in it a coin or medal of "silver-like metal" inscribed in Phoenician as follows: "Issued in the Temple of Transparent Walls". He claims, also, to have made discoveries in Egypt, Mexico, and elsewhere which justify his grandfather's theory. "I have reasons", he has written, "for saying that the strange medals were used as money in Atlantis forty thousand years ago."

[p. 101]

The first question which arises in connection with the late Dr. Schliemann's theory is: Did the "Lost Atlantis" ever have existence in fact? On this point Professor James Geikie has written as follows:--

Geologists have often speculated as to a former connection between the Old World and the New. There can be little doubt, indeed, that such a land connection did obtain between Asia and Europe at a geologically recent date, and it is quite possible that there may have been a land bridge also between Europe and North America by way of the Faroe Islands. [*1] Others have suggested the former existence of a land bridge further south. They suppose that the North Atlantic may have been dry land--traversed from west to east by a Mediterranean Sea--of which the existing Mediterranean and the Gulf of Mexico are the remaining portions. But the facts which have suggested that speculation have been otherwise accounted for. All that is definite and certain is that there has been considerable loss of land so far as Europe is concerned. Our continent formerly extended further westward. But I know of no geological evidence that puts it beyond doubt that the Atlantic basin is the site of a drowned continent. On the contrary, such evidence as we have leads rather to the belief that the Atlantic basin, like that of the Pacific, is of primeval origin." [*2]

That veteran geologist, Professor Edward Hull, takes a different view of the problem, and has written:

"The tradition of Atlantis 'beyond the Pillars of Hercules' can scarcely be supposed to have originated in the mind of man without a basis of reality. In the centre of the North Atlantic Ocean rise from the surface the Azores volcanic islands, the summits of a group of islands rising from a platform corresponding to the continental platform of Europe on one hand and of America on the other. The rise of the level of the ocean bed, amounting from 7000 to 10,000 feet, as shown by the soundings on the Admiralty

[p. 102]

charts, would have reduced the depth of the ocean by so much and have extended the land areas to an extent which would have brought Atlantis within navigable distance of both continents for early inhabitants using canoes. We know from our investigations [*1] that this elevation occurred during the post-tertiary period, [*2] and at a presumed date 9000 or 10,000 B.C. If we add 1000 years of our era, the question arises: Would not this lapse of time have been sufficient to account for the subsidence which the region in question underwent in order to restore the land and sea to their present limits? Of course, this would depend on the rate of subsidence. But, at any rate, the result, as regards Atlantis, would have been the submergence under the ocean, with the exception of its present islands. The glacial period, when much of Europe and the British Isles was covered by snow and ice, can scarcely have been farther back than 10,000 years, and this is presumably the age of Atlantis."

Dr. Scharff, Director of the Natural History Museum, Dublin, is also a believer in the "Lost Atlantis". He has been led to the conclusion, in his studies of the migrations of animals between the continents of America and Europe, [*3] that a land bridge once crossed the Atlantic Ocean between Southern Europe and the West Indies. "It probably became disconnected". he says, "in Miocene times. Since then this land once more became united with our continent, and may not have been finally severed until the Pleistocene period. United with the West Indies and Central America in early Tertiary times, it probably subsided partly during the Oligocene period [*4] and later, leaving only a few isolated peaks as islands in the midst of the vast ocean which has since replaced it."

It will be seen that scientific opinion is divided regarding

[p. 103]

the existence of a mid-Atlantic continent. If, however, the views of Hull and Scharff are accepted, they cannot be held to prove that Plato's Atlantis was situated beyond the "Pillars of Hercules". Schliemann's hypothesis, as expounded by his grandson, renders it necessary to assume that this lost country, "which used the ancient medals as an equivalent of labour, had a more advanced currency system than we have at present". If such was the case, it appears strange that no traces of the high civilization have survived on those islands which are referred to as the "few isolated peaks" of the submerged continent.

The particular race which is supposed to have come from Atlantis has yet to be identified. Was it represented in Europe by Chellean man? The Chellean "hand axe" has been traced from France to South Africa, through Asia, across the "land bridge" to North America, and southward through South America. It never reached Australia or New Zealand. But Chellean man was a savage, not much more advanced, indeed, than were the Tasmanians. Cro-Magnon man, on the other hand, had achieved a high degree of culture, but no traces either of his physical type or of his cave drawings have been discovered in the New World. Besides, his culture developed from the Chellean through the Acheulian and Mousterian stages, as has been fully demonstrated. He cannot therefore be claimed for Atlantis. Nor can Mediterranean man, who had spread through Egypt and along the North African coast, and had settled in Southern and Western Europe, as well as in Mesopotamia, before the age of metal. There are no aboriginal representatives of his type in America.

Have the settlers from Atlantis vanished entirely in the New and Old Worlds? Did they perish like the mythical elder races of Mexico, India, Babylonia, Greece, and Ireland?

[p. 104]

Another insurmountable difficulty is the fact that copper was not utilized in Egypt and Central America at the same early period. The Egyptians and Sumerians worked that metal at about 3000 B.C. In Crete the Bronze Age was inaugurated between 3000 B.C. and 2800 B.C., and in Great Britain before 1500 B.C. The American peoples did not begin to utilize metal until a considerable period after bronze had been supplanted by iron in Europe. "Most students of American archaeology are agreed that the Mexican and Peruvian bronzes are not of any great antiquity, and that the Bronze Age must have been over in China long before it began in the New World." [*1]

In Dr. Heinrich Schliemann's day the antiquity of Central American civilization was greatly exaggerated. We now know that the Maya did not develop their culture on the Mexican plateau much before the eighth century of the Christian era, and that the Aztecs arrived about 1200 A.D.; the later Mexican confederacy had flourished for only a century before it was shattered by Cortez. [*2] Most of the resemblances which have been noted between the Egyptian and Central American civilizations are of a superficial character.

Plato's legend regarding the "Lost Atlantis" was of Egyptian origin. It is related in the Timeus and Critias. A certain Solon visited Sais, where he "was very honourably received" by the priests of the goddess Neith. One of the eldest of these spoke with contempt regarding the "puerile fables" of the Greeks, and said: "You are unacquainted with that most noble and excellent race of men who once inhabited your country, from whom your whole

[p. 105]

present state are descended, though only a small remnant of this admirable people is now remaining". He went on to say that, according to Egyptian annals, Athens once overcame "a prodigious force", when "a mighty warlike power, rushing from the Atlantic sea, spread itself with hostile fury over all Europe and Asia". The narrative continues:

"That sea (the Atlantic) was then navigable, and had an island fronting that mouth which you in your tongue call the Pillars of Hercules; and this island was larger than Libya and Asia put together; and there was a passage hence for travellers of that day to the rest of the islands, as well as from those islands to the whole opposite continent that surrounds that the real sea. . . . In this Atlantic island, then, was formed a powerful league of Kings, who subdued the entire island, together with many others, and parts also of the Continent; besides which they subjected to their rule the inland parts of Libya, as far as Egypt, and Europe also, as far as Tyrrhenia. The whole of this force, then, being collected in a powerful league, undertook at one blow to enslave both your country and ours, and all the land besides that lies within the mouth. This was the period, Solon, when the power of your state (Athens) was universally celebrated for its virtue and strength; for surpassing all others in magnanimity and military skill, sometimes taking the lead of the Greek nation, at others left to itself by the defection of the rest, and brought into the most extreme danger, it still prevailed, raised the trophy over its assailants, kept from slavery those not as yet enslaved, insured likewise the most ample liberty for all of us without exception who dwell within the Pillars of Hercules.

Subsequently, however, through violent earthquakes and deluges which brought desolation in a single day and night, the whole of your warlike race was at once merged under the earth; and the Atlantic island itself was plunged beneath the sea and entirely disappeared; whence even now that sea is neither navigable nor to be traced out, being blocked up by the great depth of mud which the subsiding island produced." [*1]

[p. 106]

An anonymous contributor to the Times [*1] was the first to draw attention to the remarkable resemblance between Plato's Atlantis and the island of Crete. His theory that the Egyptian priest's legend was based on traditions regarding Cretan sea-power and the raids of piratical bands on the Egyptian coast during the Nineteenth and Twentieth Dynasties has found general favour among prominent archaeologists.

Crete, one of the largest islands in the Mediterranean, is about 160 miles long, and varies in breadth from about 35 miles in the middle to 10 between Retimo and Sphakia, and only 6 miles in one place between the Gulf of Mirabello and the coast of Hierapetra. Deep gulfs indent its northern coast, and its southern shore is rugged and rock-bound. A ridge of hills extends from east to west, culminating about the centre in well-wooded Mount Psiloriti, the ancient Mount Ida, which rises to a height of about 8159 feet. Strabo called the hills in the western part of the island Leuca Ore, or "the white mountains". In the south-west the mountains almost fringe the shore. The ancient capital was situated at Knossos, near Candia, on the north. In ancient days the island was four days' sail from Egypt and two from Cyrenaica. It may well be said of Crete, as of Atlantis, that "there was a passage hence for travellers of that day to the rest of the islands, as well as from those islands to the whole opposite continent".

In the Critias [*2] Plato says of Atlantis:

"The whole region was said to be exceedingly lofty and precipitous towards the sea, and the plain about the city (? Knossos), which encircles it, is itself surrounded by mountains sloping down to the sea, being level and smooth, all much extended, three thousand stadia in one direction, and the central part from the

[p. 107]

sea above two thousand. And this district of the whole island was turned towards the south, and in an opposite direction from the north. The mountains around it, too, were at that time celebrated, as exceeding in number, size, and beauty all those of the present time, having in them many hamlets enriched with villages."

In Atlantis also, as in Crete, the prosperity of the island kingdom depended on its sea trade. They (the island kings) were "rulers", Solon was informed, "in the sea of islands (? the Aegean), and, as we before said, yet further extended their empire to all the country as far as Egypt and Tyrrhenia".

During recent years archaeologists have discovered that a great civilization--the earliest in Europe--flourished in Crete for many long centuries before the rise of Mycenae and Tiryns. It was already well developed ere the pyramids near Cairo were erected, and before the dawn of the Twelfth Dynasty a palace had been built at Knossos. Some time during the Eighteenth Dynasty, and ere the famous Akhenaton was born, Crete was overrun by raiders, who displaced the native rulers, as the Egyptian Pharaohs had been displaced at an earlier period by the Hyksos. This calamity was sudden and overwhelming, and must have made a deep impression on those states which had commercial relations with the famous island kingdom. Its sea traders bad intimate relations with Egypt for many centuries. Evidence has been forthcoming that they visited the Delta coast as early as at least the Old Kingdom period. During the time of Queen Hatshepsut and Thothmes III they were depicted on the walls of Theban tombs, and were known as the Kheftiu and "Princes of the Isles in the midst of the Great Green Sea". But no reference was made to them after the middle of the Eighteenth Dynasty. The

[p. 108]

Cretan sea traders vanished entirely, and their place was taken ultimately by the Phoenicians.

In the Atlantis legend there are several pointed references to a civilization closely resembling that of Crete. We read of busy harbours and far-travelled merchants, of a king's palace, like the palace of Knossos, which was built of stone, and of private and public baths; "the king's baths", says Plato, "and those of private persons were apart", and there were "separate baths for women". Crete was famous for its sacrificial bull fights; so was Atlantis; and it is suggestive to find that on both islands the method obtained of capturing the animals without the aid of weapons. Plato says of Atlantis in this connection:

"As there were bulls grazing at liberty in the temple of Poseidon, ten men only of the whole number, after invoking the god to receive their sacrifice propitiously, went out to hunt swordless, with staves and chains, and whichever of the bulls they took, they brought it to the column and slaughtered it." [*1]

Plato's legend used to be regarded by European scholars as "wholly mythical". It would now appear, however, that it had a genuine historical basis.

Solon visited Egypt over a thousand years after Crete had been divested of its ancient supremacy as a maritime power, and the aged priest of Sais evidently repeated to him traditions regarding it. Whether he was informed, or concluded from the Egyptian references, that Atlantis was situated beyond "the Pillars of Hercules" is quite uncertain. It was "the island farthest west", and this "would well describe Crete", Hawes suggests, "to a home-staying Egyptian of the Theban Empire".

When Crete was suddenly overwhelmed by invaders

 

BULL'S HEAD, IN STEATITE, FROM KNOSSOS: FULL FACE AND PROFILE VIEWS

 

[p. 109]

at the height of its power and prosperity, and its sailors and traders vanished from the Mediterranean, many wild rumours must have obtained currency. It need not surprise us to find that some believed the island itself "was plunged beneath the sea", and that in time the age during which flourished its kings and seafarers and bull-baiters, "won its way to the mythical", as Thucydides says in another connection.

Plato had no idea that Crete was so "old in story and that its ancient inhabitants were the pioneers of civilization in Europe, although he may have believed, like Herodotus, that the island was at one time "wholly peopled with barbarians" [*1] (non-Hellenic folk). He had even less knowledge of the Atlantic Ocean, otherwise he could not have believed that navigation beyond the Pillars of Hercules was hampered by the mud-banks which marked the site of the "lost Atlantis".

It is possible that the Egyptian legend was influenced by the ancient folk-tale, "The Shipwrecked Sailor". This hero sojourned on an island which afterwards vanished in the midst of the sea. [*2]Or, perhaps, some Egyptian navigator, who set out on a voyage to Crete, at a period subsequent to the fall of Knossos, went off his course and got into trouble with sand-banks. On his return home he may have told as marvellous a story as the "shipwrecked sailor", believing that the island he sought had really been submerged.

The priest of Sais appears also to have mingled with his legend of Atlantis information derived from traditions and records regarding the settlement of Europeans on the North African coast, and the sea-raids during the reigns of Meneptah and Rameses III, [*3] when, as one Egyptian

[p. 110]

record sets forth, "the isles were restless, disturbed among themselves". Certain tribes from these isles, who had established themselves in Libya, actually provided mercenaries for the army and fleet of Rameses III to drive back the "late comers". [*1] As Plato says of the conquerors from Atlantis, they had "subjected to their rule the inland parts of Libya, as far as Egypt".

It will thus be seen that Schliemann was not far astray when he identified Plato's Atlantis as the cradle of Aegean civilization. Had he been able, as he desired, to excavate in Crete, he might have changed his mind regarding the real significance of the Graeco-Egyptian myth.

The poets and historians of ancient Greece had preserved several suggestive legends regarding Crete. They had much to say regarding its King Minos, who flourished before the Trojan war. According to Strabo [*2] he resided at Knossos, and made just laws which were afterwards borrowed by the Greeks. Thucydides [*3] states that he was the first to have a navy, and that he cleared the Aegean of pirates. The poet of the Odyssey says:

	 
		There is a land amid the wine-dark sea
		 Called Crete; rich, fruitful, girded by the waves;
		 She boasts unnumbered men and ninety towns . . .
		 One city in extent the rest exceeds,
		 Knossos; the city in which Minos reigned--
		 The King who 'gan to reign in his ninth year
		 And converse held with Zeus. [*4]
		
		 Minos was fabled to be the son of Zeus by a human mother, the beautiful Europe, daughter of Agenor, King of Phoenicia. The legend sets forth that one day Europe was bathing with her maids, when Zeus beheld and fell in love with her. He changed himself into a

[p. 111]

bull, whose comely form and tameness attracted the attention of the princess. She advanced towards the animal, and was so fascinated by it that she mounted on its back. When she did so, the bull rushed into the water and swam to Crete. There she became the mother of Zeus's three sons, Minos, Rhadamanthus, and Sarpedon.

This story resembles the Scottish kelpie or "water-horse" stories. When a human being mounts on the back of one of these supernatural animals, he or she finds it impossible to dismount, and is carried away to a dark loch. Sometimes the "water-horse" makes love in human form.

Herodotus states that "certain Greeks, who would probably be Cretans, made a landing at Tyre, on the Phoenician coast, and bore off the King's daughter, Europe" [*1] He suggested that Europe may have been so called after the Tyrian princess, and had been nameless before her time. [*2]

Minos was supposed to have received his code of laws from his father Zeus, whom he visited in his cave on Mount Ida while the people were assembled round its base. [*3] When he died he became, like the Egyptian Osiris, a judge in Hades. Ulysses related in the Odyssey, in the account of his visit to the land of shades:

	 
		There saw I Minos, offspring famed of Jove (Zeus);
		 His golden sceptre in his hand, he sat
		 Judge of the dead; they pleading, each in turn,
		 His cause, some stood, some sat, filling the house,
		 Whose spacious folding gates were never closed. [*4]
		
		 It was related of Minos--the later king of that name--that his succession to the Cretan throne was disputed.

[p. 112]

[paragraph continues] To emphasize his divine right, he stated that the gods would grant him anything he desired. Accordingly he invoked Poseidon, god of the deep, to send him a bull from the ocean, which he promised to offer up in sacrifice. When, however, the animal appeared he was so greatly fascinated by its beauty that he substituted another. Poseidon was wroth, and caused Minos to be punished by causing his wife, Pasiphae, to give birth to a monster, half bull and half man, called the Minotaur.

It was necessary to build a special residence for the Minotaur, to whom sacrificial offerings had to be made. Minos accordingly employed Daedalus, [*1] a skilled Athenian artificer, on his return from Egypt, to construct a labyrinth at Knossos, similar to the one situated near Lake Moeris. When the work was accomplished Minos had Daedalus confined in the Labyrinth, but he was secretly liberated by Queen Pasiphae. Then he procured wings for himself and his son Icarus. Together they flew over the Aegean, but Icarus soared so near the sun that the wax with which his wings were fastened to his body melted, and he fell into the Icarian Sea, to which his name was given. Daedalus alighted without mishap at Cumae in Italy, where he erected a temple to Apollo, to whom he dedicated his wings. [*2]

Icarus thus met a similar fate to Etana, of Babylonian fame, Nimrod in the Koran legend, and the son of the eagle giant Garuda, in the Indian epic Ramayana. Etana and Nimrod ascended on the backs of eagles, whose pinions were burnt by the sun. The Indian eagle was similarly punished for its presumption. [*3]

Daedalus afterwards took refuge in Sicani (Sicily), where Cocalus was king. Minos fitted out a great

 

THE THRONE OF MINOS, KNOSSOS (See description, page <page 112>)

 

[p. 113]

expedition and visited Sicily in pursuit of Daedalus, whom he desired to put to death. There he was treacherously murdered by Cocalus or his daughters. A temple erected to his memory was dedicated to Aphrodite.

Minos had previously decreed that every year Athens should send to Crete seven youths and seven maidens to be devoured by the Minotaur.

This punishment was imposed upon the Athenians because they had jealously murdered Androgeos, son of Minos and Pasiphae, who had surpassed all his opponents at the Panathenaic games.

For two years this tribute of human lives was paid by the subject city. But at length the hero, Theseus,

	 
		           vowed his life to sell
		 For his dear Athens, which he loved so well,
		 So that funereal ship might sail no more
		 Freighted with living death to Creta's shore. [*1]
		
		 In the third year he sailed with the sons and daughters of the noblest families in Athens. On his arrival in Crete he was informed that he must enter the Labyrinth naked and alone, and there be devoured by the Minotaur. [*2] He invoked the goddess Aphrodite, who caused a beautiful Cretan maiden to fall in love with him. This was Ariadne, daughter of Minos. She secretly gave Theseus a magic sword to slay the Minotaur, and a clue: of thread, with the aid of which the hero could be enabled to extricate himself from the Labyrinth. As he passed along the winding and intricate passages he unwound the clue. He slew the Minotaur, and thus delivered Athens from its tribute. On his return voyage he was accompanied by Ariadne, whom, however, he deserted at Naxos.

[p. 114]

It is believed that this legend is reminiscent of a period when Athens was subject to the rule of Crete, and it had to provide male and female toreadors for the bullring at Knossos. According to the exponents of the solar myth theories, Minos was the sun and Pasiphae the moon, or the Minotaur was the sun, and the Labyrinth the sky by night, its windings being the course followed by the moon.

Hesiod, Homer, Thucydides, and Herodotus make reference to only one Minos, the son of Zeus, the great lawgiver. But Diodorus [*1] and Plutarch [*2] tell of a second Minos, who was the oppressor of the Athenians and the king who obtained the bull from Poseidon. Certain archaeologists are of opinion that Minos was not a personal name, but a royal title which was used as is Pharaoh n the Bible, and that each Cretan ruler may have been a Minos, as each Egyptian king was an Osiris. Others hold that Minos became as popular a throne name as Rameses in Egypt and Caesar at Rome.

It was chiefly because persistent Greek legends gave recognition to Crete as the source of pre-Hellenic culture and religion that archaeologists desired to excavate on that island. In the next chapter it will be found that when opportunity came to test tradition in this regard the results obtained exceeded the most sanguine expectations.

Footnotes

^99:1 It appeared in the London Budget (which has since ceased to exist) on 17th November, 1912.

^101:1 See Chapter I.

^101:2 London Budget, 8th December, 1912. See also Geikie's The Deeps of the Pacific Ocean and their Origin, The Great Sea Age, Prehistoric Europe, and The Antiquity of Man in Europe.

^102:1 Professor Hull and Professor J. W. Spencer in Sub-Oceanic Physiography of the North Atlantic Ocean (London, 1912), and Professor Hull in London Budget, 1st December, 1912.

^102:2 During the Pleistocene Age.

^102:3 Distribution and Origin of Life in America.

^102:4 A vast interval--perhaps millions of years--separated the Oligocene period from even the earliest culture stages of Pleistocene times.

^104:1 British Museum Guide to the Antiquities of the Bronze Age, pp. 110, 111.

^104:2 Through Southern Mexico, H. Gadow (1908), and Bureau of American Ethnology, E. Forstemann, Bull. 28 (1904).

^105:1 The Timaeus, Section VI.

^106:1 19th February, 1909.

^106:2 Section XIII.

^108:1 The Critias, Section XV.

^109:1 Herod., I, 173.

^109:2 Egyptian Myth and Legend, pp. 248-251.

^109:3 Ibid., pp. 349-350.

^110:1 Between 1200 and 1190 B.C.

^110:2 Strabo, X.

^110:3 Thucydides, I, 4.

^110:4 Odyssey, XIX, 170 et seq.

^111:1 Herodotus, I, 2.

^111:2 Ibid., IV, 45.

^111:3 Strabo, 476.

^111:4 Odyssey, Cowper's trans., XI, 696-700.

^112:1 Thucydides, I, 4.

^112:2 Virgil, Book VI.

^112:3 Babylonian Myth and Legend, pp. 165 et seq.

^113:1 Catullus, 64 (Martin's translation).

^113:2 Classic Myth and Legend, pp. 182 et seq.

^114:1 IV. 60.

^114:2 Theseus, 20.

     
Myths of Crete and Pre-Hellenic Europe, by Donald A. Mackenzie, [1917], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 115]

 

CHAPTER VI

 

The Great Palace of Knossos

Early Discoveries in Crete--How "Tattered Legends" have been "reclothed"--Dramatic Revelations at Knossos--Famous Fresco of the Cup-bearer--Pre-Hellenic Peoples not Barbarians--The Kheftiu of the Egyptian Texts--Phoenicians' Blue Dye came from Crete--Blue Robes of "Lost Atlantis" People--The Throne and Council Chamber of Minos--How Men were judged--Plaster Relief of Sacred Bull--Traces of Earlier Palace--A Visit to the Knossos--"Wooden Walls" of the Island Kingdom--Official, Religious, and Domestic Quarters--Frescoes in Queen's Megaron--Boxing and Dancing in the "Theatral Area"--Drainage Systems of Crete and Sumeria--Phaeacians of Homer as the Cretans--Glimpses of Palace Life from the Odyssey--Votive Offerings in Shrines and Caves--How Queen Victoria honoured an Ancient Custom--Sacred Animals and Symbols----Snake Goddess and Priestess--How Cretan Ladies were dressed--Greek and Maltese Crosses--The Star Form of Isis.

"THE ancient history of Crete", it used to be customary to write, "begins with the heroic or fabulous times. Historians and poets tell us of a king called Minos, who lived before the Trojan War. Then comes the well-known story of the Minotaur, Theseus, and Ariadne." The solar symbolists disposed of the various legends as poetic fictions.

The controversy aroused by the discoveries of Schliemann at Mycenae and Tiryns was being waged with vigour and feeling when a native Cretan excavated at Knossos a few great jars and fragments of pottery of Mycenaean character. The spot was afterwards visited by several archaeologists, including Dr. Schliemann and Dr. Dorpfeld, and a preliminary investigation brought to

[p. 116]

light undoubted indications that the remains of an ancient palace, partly built of gypsum, lay beneath the accumulated debris of ages. It was impossible, however, to make satisfactory arrangements with the local proprietors or the Turkish Government. The view expressed by Mr. W. J. Stillman, that the ruins were those of the famous Labyrinth, did not attract much attention.

In 1883 some peasants in the eastern part of the island happened upon ancient votive objects in the Dictaean cave, which they had been in the habit of utilizing as a shelter for their goats. These they put on the market, and as there was a great demand for them, a brisk trade in Cretan antiquities sprang up. Archaeologists were again drawn to the island, and excavations which did not produce great results were conducted in front of the cave. This made the peasants redouble their efforts to supply a growing demand, and as they met with much success the archaeologists became more and more impressed by the possibilities of the island as an area for conducting important research work. In 1894 Sir Arthur Evans and Mr. Hogarth paid a visit to Crete, and examined both the site of Knossos and the Dictaean cave. The times were inauspicious for their mission, for the island was seething with revolt against the Turkish authorities. Sir Arthur, however, was able to effect the purchase of part of the Knossos ground, having become convinced that great discoveries remained to be made. What interested him most at the time were the indications afforded by mysterious signs on blocks of gypsum of a system of hitherto unknown prehistoric writing. It was not, however, until 1900 that he was able to acquire by purchase the entire site of Knossos and conduct excavations on an extensive scale.

During the interval, further investigations were conducted

[p. 117]

by different archaeologists at the Dictaean cave, which is double-chambered. Inscribed tablets and other finds came to light, but all research work had to be abandoned in 1897, when it was found that the upper cave was blocked with fallen rock. The political unrest on the island, besides, made it unsafe for foreigners to pursue even the peaceful occupation of digging for ancient pottery and figurines of bronze and lead.

In 1900, however, Sir Arthur Evans operating at Knossos, and Mr. Hogarth at the Dictaean cave, achieved results which more than fulfilled their most sanguine hopes. What they accomplished was to reveal traces of an ancient and high civilization, of which the Mycenaean appeared to be an offshoot. No such important discovery had been made since Schliemann, twenty-five years previously, unearthed the graves he so confidently believed to be those of Agamemnon and his companions. "Here again", as Mr. Asquith said at the annual meeting of the subscribers to the British School at Athens, [*1] "scepticism received an ugly blow. Legends", he added, "which had become somewhat ragged and tattered have been decently reclothed. The mountain on which Zeus was supposed to have rested from his labours, and the palace in which Minos invented the science of jurisprudence, are being brought out of the region of myth into the domain of possible reality."

Sir Arthur Evans went to Crete as a trained and experienced archaeologist, and was assisted from the beginning, in March, 1900, by Dr. Duncan Mackenzie, who had already distinguished himself by his excavations on the island of Melos, and Mr. Fyfe, the British School of Athens architect. A large staff of workers was employed, and by the time the season's work was concluded

[p. 118]

in June a considerable portion of the Knossos palace was laid bare.

Among the most remarkable finds were the wall paintings that decorated the plastered walls of the palace corridors and apartments. These did more to arouse public interest in pre-Hellenic civilization than even the burnt city of Troy or the gold masks of kings in the graves at Mycenae. Here were wonderful pictures of ancient life vividly portrayed, of highly civilized Europeans who were contemporaries of the early Biblical Pharaohs, and lived in splendour and luxury long centuries before Solomon employed the skilled artisans of Phoenicia to decorate his temple and palace. And what manner of people were they? Not rude barbarians awaiting the dawn of Hellenic civilization, but men and women with refined faces and graceful forms, whose costumes resembled neither those of the Egyptians, Greeks, nor Romans. There was a note of modernity in this antique and realistic art and the manners of life it portrayed. The ladies with their puffed sleeves, narrow waists, and flounced skirts, might well have walked, not from a Cretan palace, but some Paris salon of the 'eighties and 'nineties.

In his first popular account of his excavations, Sir Arthur Evans gave a vivid description of his dramatic discovery of the fresco named the "cup-bearer".

"The colours", he wrote, "were almost as brilliant as when laid down over three thousand years before. For the first time the true portraiture of a man of this mysterious Mycenaean race rises before us. There was something very impressive in this vision of brilliant youth and of male beauty, recalled after so long an interval to our upper air from what had been till yesterday a forgotten world. Even our untutored Cretan workmen felt the spell and fascination.

 

THE CUP-BEARER, KNOSSOS

From a photograph kindly lent by Sir Arthur Evans

 

[p. 119]

They, indeed, regarded the discovery of such a painting in the bosom of the earth as nothing less than miraculous, and saw in it the 'icon' of a saint! The removal of the fresco required a delicate and laborious process of under-plastering, which necessitated its being watched at night, and old Manolis, one of the most trustworthy of our gang, was told off for the purpose. Somehow or other he fell asleep, but the wrathful saint appeared to him in a dream. Waking with a start, he was conscious of a mysterious presence; the animals round began to low and neigh, and there were visions about; 'fantaxei {Greek  fantaksei}', he said, in summing up his experiences next morning, 'The whole place spooks!' [*1]

This life-sized figure of a youth remains in a wonderful state of preservation from the thighs upwards, and is a feature of Candia museum. He carries in front a long pointed vessel, adorned with silver and gold, with "wine foam" at the brim, one raised hand grasping the handle and the other clutching it at the tapering end. His face is finely depicted in profile, the well-proportioned features are quite modern, and he is clean-shaved; the forehead is ample, the eyes dark, and the hair black and curly. Sir Arthur Evans thinks the skull is of "brachycephalic" (broad-headed) type; others regard it as "mesacephalic" (medium). Round the neck is a necklace of silver, and there is an car-ring in the only ear shown, which appears to be mounted with a blue stone. There is an armlet on the upper part of the right arm, and a bracelet with what appears to be a seal round the left wrist, which looks just like the "wristlet-watch" worn at the present day. The body is well developed, and the waist tightened by a girdle. He wears a closely-fitting loin-cloth, which is richly embroidered.

[p. 120]

Before the famous figure was reached, the excavators had laid bare a paved corridor nearly 4 yards wide. The left wall retained traces of plaster which had been decorated with a continuous fresco of a procession of male and female dignitaries. None of the faces, however, survived. It was noted that the figures resembled closely those of the "Keftiu" depicted in Egyptian tombs.

An interesting feature of these and other frescoes was the evidence they afforded of the use of a blue dye among the Cretans. Some male figures wore bright-blue robes, and others white robes bordered with blue. Apparently the Phoenicians were not the first to utilize the famous dyes which have long been so closely associated with them. Proofs were subsequently forthcoming to place this belief beyond doubt. Long before the Phoenicians supplanted the Cretans as sea-traders the islanders produced bright-blue garments, which were worn, it would appear, on special ceremonial occasions. It is of interest to note in this connection that the inhabitants of Plato's Atlantis had a similar custom. After the bull was sacrificed, and the sacred cup deposited in the temple of the gods, and "the fire round the sacrifice had been cooled, all of them dressed themselves in beautiful dark-blue robes . . . and then mutually judged one another as respects any accusations of transgressing the laws. After the acts of judgment were over, when day came, they inscribed their decisions on a golden tablet, and deposited them as memorials, together with their dresses." [*1]

A hoard of inscribed clay tablets was discovered by Evans in a bath-shaped terra-cotta receptacle within a small chamber. These were embedded in charcoal, indicating that they had been placed in a wooden box which at some period was destroyed by fire.

[p. 121]

As the work of excavation made progress, many remarkable discoveries were made in that first season which appealed to the imaginations of scientists and workers alike. The glimpses of life afforded by fragmentary frescoes set the ghosts of vanished Cretans walking once again; the wind rustling through the disinterred ruins by night seemed "like light footfalls of spirits" passing up and down the stately corridors; the past "out of her deep heart spoke". By day

	 
		There streamed a sunlight vapour, like the standard
		             Of some aetherial host;
		             Whilst from all the coast
		 Louder and louder, gathering round, there wandered
		 Over the oracular woods and divine sea
		 Prophesyings which grew articulate.
		
		 The prophesyings of the excavators were no vain dreams; with dramatic swiftness they were revealed almost as soon as they were conceived. Confidently search was made for tangible evidence that this palace had been occupied by the legendary Minos, or one of the kings who bore that name or title, when his very council chamber was unearthed, and the most ancient throne in Europe brought to light.

In the heart of the palace this priceless relic of an antique civilization had lain buried in debris all through the ages that saw the coming and going of Homer's heroes, the rise and fall of Assyria, the fading beauty of Babylon, the flickering loveliness of Egypt, Persian splendour, the glory of Greece and the grandeur of Rome. The kings that sat in it had long faded into the region of myth and fancy; it was believed by wise scholars that they never existed at all. And here was the royal throne to tell another story!

[p. 122]

The "Throne Room" was situated between the upper part of the spacious central court of the palace and the "long gallery" of the western wing. It was entered, however, from the court alone. Those who sought the presence of the king had first to pass through a small ante-room about seven yards square, the rubble walls of which, the excavators found, had been plastered with day and faced with stucco made beautiful by artists who were skilled draughtsmen and brilliant colourists.

Stone benches were ranged round the walls of the council chamber, and between two of these on the north side stood the gypsum throne of the king on a raised slab. Here sat the Minos surrounded by his high officers of state. There is seating accommodation for about twenty on the benches.

The throne, which was found intact, is of graceful form. It presents an interesting contrast to that on which the statue of the Egyptian King Kafra of Pyramid fame is seated. Its back, which is higher and less severe. has an undulating outline, and resembles somewhat an oak leaf. The base broadens downward from the seat, which is hollowed to fit the body comfortably, and the sides are gracefully carved, the "double moulded arch" in front resembling "late Gothic" designs.

To this chamber may have been led such a wanderer as brave Ulysses, who desired to accelerate his return to his native home. He would have found the grave Minos enthroned amidst his councillors, who sat "side by side on polished stones", and perhaps heard him sneak like the Phaeacian king in the Odyssey:--

	 
		             Chiefs and Senators! I speak
		 The dictates of my mind, therefore attend.
		 This guest, unknown to me, hath, wand'ring found
		 My palace, either from the East arrived.[p. 123]
		 Or from some nation on our western side.
		 Safe conduct home he asks, and our consent
		 Here wishes ratified, whose quick return
		 Be it our part, as usual, to promote;
		 For at no time the stranger, from what coast
		 Soe'er, who hath resorted to our doors,
		 Hath long complained of his detention here.
		 Haste--draw ye down into the sacred Deep
		 A vessel of prime speed, and, from among
		 The people, fifty and two youths select,
		 Approved the best; then, lashing fast the oars,
		 Leave her, that at my palace ye may make
		 Short feast, for which myself will all provide.
		 Thus I enjoin the crew, but as for these
		 Of sceptred rank, I bid them all alike
		 To my own board, that here we may regale
		 The stranger nobly, and let none refuse.
		 Call, too, Demodocus, the bard divine,
		 To share my banquet, whom the gods have blest
		 With pow'rs of song delectable, unmatch'd
		 By any, when his genius once is fired. [*1]
		
		 Opposite the "high seat" of Minos in the "Throne Room" was a shallow tank with stone breastwork. Its use is uncertain. The theory that ambassadors and others washed here while awaiting the king is not convincing; there were bath-rooms elsewhere in the vast palace in which travel-wearied men could refresh and cleanse themselves. Perhaps it was simply part of the decorative scheme. Fish may have been kept here to give a touch of realism to the scenes painted on the stucco-plastered walls. Traces survive of a riverside fresco, with reeds and grasses and budding flowers beside flowing waters, which must have imparted to the chamber an air of repose. On either side of the door were two gleaming griffins, crested with peacock's plumes, "showing", says Sir Arthur Evans,

[p. 124]

"that this Indian fowl was known to the East Mediterranean world long before the days of Solomon". A flowery landscape formed a strangely-contrasting background, with ferns and palm-trees fringing the soft blue stream.

Before this chamber was swept by the fire which destroyed the palace, it must have been at once stately and beautiful. No doubt the benches were strewn with richly-embroidered rugs and cushions to complete the brilliant colour scheme of which fragmentary traces survive. The throne appears to have been richly decorated. "The whole face of the gypsum", writes Sir Arthur Evans, "had been coated with a fine white plaster wash, and this again coloured in various ways. The seat showed distinct remains of a brilliant red colour. A minute examination of the back disclosed the fact that fine lines had been traced on it such as are also visible on the wall frescoes, a technical device, borrowed from Egyptian practice, for guiding the artist's hands. It would appear, therefore, that the back of the throne had been once decorated with an elaborate colour design." [*1] The paved floor was also, apparently, set in a border of gypsum covered with plaster and richly adorned.

Another interesting early find was the "wine cellar" of the palace--or rather the "cellars". In the lengthy corridors were found intact rows of great jars from which wine was drawn by the "cup-bearers" for the feast, and oil was likewise stored. Worthy of special mention is also the painted plaster relief of a bull which dignified the wall of one of the chambers. "It is life-sized, or somewhat over", its discoverer wrote at the time. "The eye has an extraordinary prominence, its pupil is yellow and the iris a bright-red, of which narrower bands again

 

PAINTED PLASTER RELIEF--BULL'S HEAD--KNOSSOS

From a photograph kindly lent by Sir Arthur Evans

 

[p. 125]

appear encircling the white towards the lower circumference of the ball. The horn is of greyish hue. . . . Such as it is, this painted relief is the most magnificent monument of Mycenaean plastic art that has come down to our time. The rendering of the bull, for which the artists of this period showed so great a predilection, is full of life and spirit. It combines in a high degree naturalism with grandeur, and it is no exaggeration to say that no figure of a bull at once so powerful and so true was produced by later classical art." [*1]

The first season's discoveries made it evident that the palace had been of great dimensions and splendour. Nothing was found to indicate that it flourished after the Mycenaean period. It had evidently been destroyed by fire in pre-Hellenic times, before the thirteenth century B.C. Traces were also found of a still earlier palace, below which were the layers of the Neolithic (Late Stone Age) period. Regretfully Sir Arthur Evans had to suspend operations in June 1900 on such a promising site, owing to the malarious conditions and distressing dust-clouds raised by the south wind from Libya. Nine brief weeks, however, had revealed enough to satisfy even so fortunate an archaeologist as Sir Arthur, who had the luck of Schliemann combined happily with richer experience and technical skill. No doubt could any longer remain that a great pre-Homeric civilization had flourished in Crete, and that Minos had been rescued from the fairyland of the solar symbolists to take his place once again among the mighty monarchs of the great days of old.

Were it possible for us, by waving the wand of a magician, to conjure before our eyes this wonderful palace, as it existed when Queen Hatshepsut reigned over Egypt and Thothmes III was fretting to seize the reins of

[p. 126]

power, we should be first of all impressed by the modernity of its aspect.

We are guided from the sea-shore, like the hero of the Odyssey, who visited the dwelling of Alcinous, the Phaeacian king, by a goddess in human guise. At a favourable point of vantage on the poplar-fringed highway, we are afforded the first glimpse of the palace of Knossos. It is situated beside a river [*1] on a low hill in the midst of a fertile valley, about 3 1/2 miles from Candia. The dominating feature of the landscape is sacred Mount Juktas, with its notched peak. It seems as if the "hammer god" had intended to shape the mountain like an Egyptian pyramid, and, having finished one side, abandoned the task soon after beginning to splinter out the other.

The palace, which is approached by paved roadways, has a flat roof and forms a rough square, each side being about 130 yards long. No walls surround it. Crete, like "old England", is protected by its navy--its "wooden walls". The Minos kings have suppressed the island pirates who were wont to fall upon unprotected towns and plunder them, and hold command of the sea. [*2]

We enter the palace by the north gate, passing groups of soldiers on sentry duty. A comparatively small force could defend the narrow way between the massive walls which lead us to the great Central Court. Note these little towers and guard-houses, from which they could discharge their arrows against raiders. There are dark dungeons beneath us, over 20 feet deep, in which prisoners are fretting their lives away, thinking of "Fatherland, of child, and wife, and slave", and "the wandering fields of barren foam" on which they had ventured to defy the might of Minos.

[p. 127]

The Central Court in the middle of the palace is over 60 yards long and about 30 yards wide. On the eastern side are the private apartments of the royal family, but these are not entered from the Court, but along mazy corridors which are elsewhere approached. The first door on the western side leads us through an ante-room to the Throne Room. Farther down, and near the centre of the Court, is the shrine of the Snake goddess. Behind it are the west and east Pillar Rooms and the room containing temple repositories; these apartments appear to have a religious significance. Farther south is the large "Court of the Altar". We pass out of the Court at the northern end, and penetrate the western wing of the palace. We find it is divided about the middle by the "Long Gallery". Walking southward, we pass, on the right, numerous store rooms, until we reach an entrance leading to the sacred apartments behind the shrine of the Snake goddess. It has already dawned upon us that we are in a labyrinthine building, if not the real Labyrinth with its intricate and tortuous passages through which the famous Theseus was able to wander freely and extricate himself from with the aid of the clue given to him by the princess Ariadne. One apartment leads to another, and when our progress is arrested by blind alleys we turn back and find it difficult, without the help of a guide, to return to the Long Gallery that opens on the zigzag route back to the Central Court. The eastern wing is similarly of mazy character. In the southern part of it are reception rooms, living-rooms, bedrooms, and bath-rooms. These include the "Hall of the Colonnades", the "Hall of the Double Axes", the "Queen's Megaron", and the "Room of the Plaster Couch". [*1] Stairways lead to the upper stories.

The rooms assigned to the ladies are approached

[p. 128]

through a dark "dog's-leg corridor". We enter the "Queen's Megaron" and are silenced by its wonderful beauty. The paved floor is overlaid with embroidered rugs, and has a richly-coloured "surround" of painted plaster. Frescoes adorn the walls. Here is a woodland scene with a brilliantly-plumaged bird in flight. On the north, side is the whirling figure of a bright-eyed dancing girl, her long hair floating out on either side in rippling bird-wing curves, her arms responding to the rise and fall of the music. She leans slightly forward, poised on one foot. She wears a yellow jacket with short arms, with a zigzag border of red and blue. Other dancers are tripping near her. Beyond these are the musicians. [*1] We are reminded of one of the scenes on the famous shield of Achilles:--

	 
		There, too, the skilful artist's hand had wrought,
		 With curious workmanship, a mazy dance,
		 Like that which Daedalus in Knossos erst
		 At fair-hair'd [*2] Ariadne's bidding framed.
		 There, laying on each other's wrist their hand,
		 Bright youths and many suitor'd maidens danced:
		 In fair white linen these; in tunics those
		 Well woven, shining soft with fragrant oils . . .
		 Now whirl'd they round with nimble practised feet,
		 Easy, as when a potter, seated, turns
		 A wheel, new fashioned by his skilful hand,
		 And spins it round, to prove if true it run:
		 Now featly mov'd in well-beseeming ranks.
		 A numerous crowd, around, the lovely dance
		 Survey'd, delighted. [*3]
		
		 Another fresco is a picturesque study of sub-marine life. Fish dart to and fro above the ocean floor about

[p. 129]

two great snouted dolphins, the air bubbles darting from their fins and tails to indicate that they are in motion. [*1]

In the Queen's Megaton the Cretan ladies are wont to chatter over their needlework during the heat of the day. They admire the works of art on the walls, and discuss the merits of the various draughtsmen who reside elsewhere in the palace. Note how little furniture they require. They won't have anything that is not absolutely necessary in their rooms, and what they have is beautiful. The charm of wide spaces appeals to them. A broad fresco must not be interrupted by ornaments that might distract attention from such a masterpiece. It is sufficient in itself to fill a large part of the room.

Visitors who arrive dusty and weary are conducted to the bath-room, which is entered through a door at the north-west corner. Its walls are plainly painted, but relieved from the commonplace by a broad dado of flowing spirals with rosette centres. Portable tubs are provided, and attendants spray water over those who use them.

We pass from this, the south-eastern, to the northeastern wing, and find it is occupied by artistic craftsmen who are continually employed in beautifying the palace. Art is under royal patronage. Here, too, are the rooms of musicians. Farther on are the butlers; these provide the stores for the cooks, who occupy the domestic quarters south of the Queen's Megaton and beneath it.

Once again the guards permit us to walk along the corridor of the north entrance, and we turn from their guard-houses and sentinel-boxes to visit the "Theatral Area" at the north-western corner of the palace. On

[p. 130]

two sides are tiers of stone steps on which spectators seat themselves. One is the royal "grand stand", and it has accommodation for about 200 people; the other is reserved for young people. The crowds stand round about in a circle behind the wooden barriers. Sometimes the attraction is an athletic display. Boxers and wrestlers are popular. Here, too, the dancers display their skill when the king calls upon them to "tread the circus with harmonious steps." Their dances have a religious significance.

Turning southward from the Theatral Area we walk along the broad west court outside the palace. It is paved and terraced. Almost the whole of this outer portion of the western wing is occupied by stores, and the court is the market-place. Here come the traders who sell their fruit and vegetables and wares; and here too those who pay their taxes in kind. Officials and merchants pass to and fro; here is a great consignment of goods from Egypt which is being unpacked. The scribes are busy checking invoices, and issuing orders for its disposal. A group of young people gather round a sailor, who is accompanied by a native Egyptian, and fills their ears with wonderful stories regarding the river Nile and the great cities on its banks.

Our steps are directed to the southern side of the palace. Here is the door leading to the "Court of the Altar" and other sacred rooms. Farther on is the "Court of the Sanctuary" in the southern part of the east wing. Workmen are busy near us extending the palace beyond the royal apartments.

We have now taken a rapid survey of the great square palace of Knossos. There are many details, however, that have escaped our notice. The Cretans were not only great builders, but also experienced sanitary engineers.

 

A GLIMPSE OF THE EXCAVATED REMAINS OF THE PALACE OF KNOSSOS

 

[p. 131]

An excellent drainage system was one of the remarkable features of the palace. Terra-cotta drain-pipes, which might have been made yesterday, connect water-flushed closets "of almost modern type", and bath-rooms with a great square drain which workmen could enter to effect repairs through "manholes". Rain water was introduced into the palace, and its flow automatically controlled.

Crete, however, was not alone in anticipating modern sanitary methods. Long before the Late Minoan period, which began about 1700 B.C., the Sumero-Babylonians had a drainage system. Drains and culverts have been excavated at Nippur in stratum which dates before the reign of Sargon I (c. 2650 B.C.), as well as at Surghul, near Lagash, Fara, the site of Shuruppak, and elsewhere. It is uncertain, however, whether the Cretans derived their elaborate drainage system from Sumeria. What remains clear, however, is that on the island kingdom, and in cities of the Tigro-Euphratean valley, the problem of how to prevent the spread of water-borne diseases had been dealt with on scientific lines.

A glimpse of such a palace as that of Knossos, if not of this palace itself, is obtained in the Odyssey, and in that part from which quotation has been made in dealing with the "Throne Room".

Ulysses (Odysseus), the wanderer, is cast ashore on the island of Scheria, the seat of the Phaeacians, "who of old, upon a time, dwelt in spacious Hypereia". Dr. Drerup [*1] and Professor Burrows [*2] have independently arrived at the conclusion that Scheria is Crete, Hypereia being Sicily, "and that the origin of the Odyssey is to be sought for in Crete". Burrows adds: "It can be at once granted that attention has been unduly concentrated on Ithaca, Leukias, and Corcyra, while the numerous references

[p. 132]

in the Odyssey [*1] to the topography of Crete have been neglected". Dr. Drerup draws attention to a most suggestive passage in the seventh book, in which the secret is "let out." The Phaeacian King, Alcinous, promises that his seamen will convey the shipwrecked stranger to his home, "even though it be much farther than Euboea, which", he explains, "certain of our men say is the farthest of lands, they who saw it, when they carried Rhadamanthus of the fair hair, to visit Tityos, son of Gaia". [*2] Now Rhadamanthus was the brother of the Cretan King Minos. "What was he doing in Corcyra?" asks Professor Burrows. "The Phaeacians," adds the same writer, "themselves mariners, artists, feasters, dancers, are surely the Minoans of Crete."

Ulysses (Odysseus) is found on the sea-coast by the princess Nausicaa. She provides him with clothing and food, and says--

	 
		Up stranger! seek the city. I will lead
		 Thy steps towards my royal father's house
		 Where all Phaeacia's nobles thou shalt see.
		
		 Her proposal is to lead him to her father's farm, where he will gaze on the safe harbour in which

	 
		                        Our gallant barks
		 Line all the road, each stationed in her place,
		 And where, adjoining close the splendid fane
		 Of Neptune, [*3] stands the forum with huge stones
		 From quarries hither drawn, constructed strong,
		 In which the rigging of their barks they keep
		 Sail cloth and cordage, and make smooth their oars.
		
		 She intends to leave him at this point, fearing that the sailors might ask, "Who is this that goes with Nausicaa?

[p. 133]

and cast imputations on her character. Apparently the gossips were as troublesome in those times as in our own. She adds naively:

	 
		 
			 
				                          I should blame
				 A virgin guilty of such conduct much,
				 Myself, who reckless of her parent's will
				 Should so familiar with a man consort,
				 Ere celebration of her spousal rites.
				
				   The princess then advises the wanderer to make his way from the royal home farm to the palace:--

	 
		Ask where Alcinous dwells, my valiant sire.
		 Well known is his abode, so that with ease
		 A child might lead thee to it.
		
		 When he is received within the court he should at once seek the queen, her mother.

	 
		She beside a column sits
		 In the hearth's blaze, twirling her fleecy threads
		 Tinged with sea purple, bright, magnificent!
		 With all her maidens orderly behind.
		
		 If he makes direct appeal to this royal lady he will be sure to "win a glad return to his island home".

The wanderer is much impressed by the gorgeous palace of the Phaeacian king, towards which he is led by the grey-eyed goddess Athene, who assumed the guise of a girl carrying a pitcher. He pauses on the threshold, gazing with wonder on the inner walls covered with brass and surrounded by a blue dado. Doors are of gold and the door-posts of silver. He has a glimpse of a feasting chamber; the seats against the wall are covered with mantles of "subtlest warp", the "work of many a female hand". There the Phaeacians are wont to sit eating and drinking in the flare of the torches held in the hands of golden figures of young men.

[p. 134]

Fifty handmaidens attend on the King and Queen. Some grind the golden corn in millstones. Others sit spinning and weaving with fingers

	 
		                          Restless as leaves
		 Of lofty poplars fluttering in the breeze.
		
		 So closely do they weave linen that oil will fall off it. just as the Phaeacian men are skilled beyond others as mariners, so are the women the most accomplished at the loom. The goddess Athene has given them much wisdom as workers, and richest fancy.

Outside the courtyard of the palace is a large garden surrounded by a hedge. There grows many a luxuriant and lofty tree.

	 
		Pomegranate, pear, the apple blushing bright,
		 The honied fig, and unctuous olive smooth.
		 Those fruits, nor winter's cold nor summer's heat
		 Fear ever, fail not, wither not, but hang
		 Perennial . . .
		 Pears after pears to full dimensions swell,
		 Figs follow figs, grapes clust'ring grow again.
		 Where clusters grew, and (every apple stript)
		 The boughs soon tempt the gath'rer as before.
		 There too, well-rooted, and of fruit profuse,
		 His vineyard grows . . .
		                       On the garden's verge extreme
		 Flow'rs of all hues smile all the year, arranged
		 With neatest art judicious, and amid
		 The lovely scene two fountains welling forth,
		 One visits, into every part diffus'd
		 The garden ground, the other soft beneath
		 The threshold steals into the palace court,
		 Whence ev'ry citizen his vase supplies.
		
		 The wanderer, having gazed with wonder about him, enters the palace. He sees men pouring out wine to keen-eyed Hermes, the slayer of Argos, before retiring

[p. 135]

for the night. Athene again comes to his aid, and wraps him in a mist so that he passes, unseen by anyone, until he reaches the queen. He tells her of his plight, and asks for safe conduct to his native land, and the great lady takes pity on him. The wanderer is given food and wine. Before he retires to rest he relates to King Alcinous how he was cast on the island shore and conducted to the farm by the princess. Recognizing that the girl has compromised herself, his majesty offers her in marriage to the stranger, promising

	 
		House would I give thee and possessions too
		 Were such thy choice.
		
		 He adds, however, that if he prefers to return home no man in Phaeacia "shall by force detain thee". The wanderer's decision is, "Grant to me to visit my native shores again". So the matter ends. Odysseus is conducted to 

	 
		                          a fleecy couch
		 Under the portico, with purple rugs
		 Resplendent, and with arras spread beneath
		 And over all with cloaks of shaggy pile.
		
		 The king and queen retire to an "inner chamber".

Next morning the king and his counsellors assemble as indicated in the description of the Throne Room of Knossos palace, and arrangements are completed to give Odysseus a safe conduct home. Before he goes a feast is held, at which "the beloved minstrel", Demodocus, sings of the Trojan war. Then a visit is paid to the "Theatral Area", where athletes display feats of strength. A young man challenges the stranger boastfully. Roused to wrath by his speech, Odysseus says:

	 
		I am not, as thou sayest,
		 A novice in these sports but took the lead [p. 136]
		 In all, while youth and strength were on my side.
		 But I am now in bands of sorrow held,
		 And of misfortune, having much endured
		 In war, and buffeting the boist'rous waves.
		
		 He, however, flung a quoit and broke all records. Then he challenged the young man who taunted him

	 
		To box, to wrestle with me, or to run . . .
		 There is no game athletic in the use
		 Of all mankind, too difficult for me.
		
		 The challenge is not accepted, however. Then the king says:

	 
		We boast not much the boxer's skill, nor yet
		 The wrestler's; but light-footed in the race
		 Are we, and navigators well informed.
		 Our pleasures are the feast, the harp, the dance
		 Garments for change, the tepid bath, the bed.
		 Come, ye Phaeacians, beyond others skilled
		 To tread the circus with harmonious steps,
		 Come play before us; that our guest arrived
		 In his own country, may inform his friends
		 How far in seamanship we all excel,
		 In running, in the dance, and in the song. [*1]
		
		 In these passages we probably have, as some authorities think, real Cretan memories. It is uncertain whether or not actual Cretan poems were utilized in the Odyssey. Professor Burrows suggests that the glories of the palace of Alcinous "were sung by men who had heard of them as living realities, even if they had not themselves seen them; men who had walked the palaces (Knossos and Phaestos) perhaps, if not as their masters, at least as mercenaries or freebooters". [*2]

It will be noted that Alcinous says the Phaeacians do

[p. 137]

not boast much of the skill of their boxers. Yet the Cretan pugilists are found depicted in seal impressions, on vases, &c., suggesting that they were regarded with pride as peerless exponents of the "manly sport". It may be, however, that in the last period (Late Minoan III) the island boxers were surpassed by those among the more muscular northerners, who were settled in Crete in increasing numbers. "Late Minoan III", writes Professor Burrows, "is a long period, and marks the successive stages of a gradually decaying culture." The "Cretan memories" in the Homeric poems "refer to Late Minoan III". [*1] Apparently the islanders were still famous as skilled mariners, while their dancing was much admired; but as athletes and warriors they had to acknowledge the superiority of the less cultured invaders who had descended on their shores.

Reference has been made to the sacred rooms in the great palace of Knossos. Unlike the Egyptians, the Cretans erected no temples. Their religious ceremonies were conducted in their homes, on their fields, and beside sacred mountain caves. Sir Arthur Evans discovered in the south-eastern part of the palace, near the ladies' rooms, a little shrine which could not have accommodated more than a few persons.

Another shrine was entered from the Central Court to the south of the Throne Room in the western wing. It would appear that this part of the palace was invested with special sanctity. In one of the apartments were found superficial cists in the pavement. The first two had been rifled. Then an undisturbed one was located and opened. It contained a large number of what appeared to be deposits of religious character--vessels containing burnt corn which had been offered to a deity or

[p. 138]

to deities, tablets, libation tables, and so on. Fragments of faience (native porcelain) had figures of goddesses, cows and calves, goats and kids, and floral and other designs. A number of cockles and other sea-shells artificially tinted in various colours also came to light. Apparently these cists answered the same purpose as sacred caves in which religious offerings were placed.

This custom of effecting a ceremonial connection with a holy place still survives in our own country. Portions of clothing are attached to trees overhanging wishing and curative wells. and coins and pins are also dropped into them. "Pin wells", sometimes called "Penny wells", are not uncommon. In some cases nails are driven into the tree. Special mention may be made of the well and tree of Isle Maree, on Loch Maree, in the Scottish county of Ross and Cromarty. It was visited on a Sunday in September, 1877, by the late Queen Victoria. Her Majesty read a short sermon to her gillies, and afterwards, with a smile, attached an offering to the wishing tree. Such offerings are never removed, for it is believed that a terrible misfortune would befall the individual who committed such an act of desecration. In ancient Egypt offerings were made at tombs, and in Babylonia votive figures of deities mounted on nails were driven into sacred shrines.

Seal impressions, which have been found in the Cretan palace cists, are of special interest. Among the designs were figures of owls, doves, ducks, goats, dogs, lions seizing prey, horned sheep, gods and goddesses. Flowers, sea-shells, houses, &c., were also depicted. One clay impression of a boxer suggests that it was deposited by the pugilist himself to ensure his good luck at a great competition in the Theatral Area. The shells suggest that sailors desired protection. One seal of undoubted

 

A CRETAN SHRINE: RESTORED BY SIR ARTHUR EVANS

Snake Goddesses, or goddesses and priestess, "fetish cross", shells, libation jugs, stones hollowed for holding offerings, &c.

 

[p. 139]

maritime significance shows a man in a boat attacking a dog-headed sea-monster. The floral seals were probably offerings to the earth mother in Spring. No doubt the cow suckling its calf and the goat its kid were fertility symbols.

The faience relief of the wild goat and its young is one of the triumphs of Cretan art. It is of pale-green colour, with dark sepia markings. The animals are as lifelike as those depicted in the Palaeolithic cave-drawings. One of the kids is sucking in crouched posture, and the other bleats impatiently in front. The nimble-footed mother has passed with erect head and widely-opened eyes. She is the watchful protector and constant nourisher of her young--a symbol of maternity. The cow and calf is also a fine composition. Commenting on these, Sir Arthur Evans says that "in beauty of modelling and in living interest, Egyptian, Phoenician, and, it must be added, classical Greek . . . are far surpassed by the Minoan artist".

Among the marine subjects in faience is one showing two flying fish (the "sea swallows" of the modern Greeks) swimming between rocks and over sea-shells lying on the sand.

Nothing, however, among these votive deposits can surpass in living interest the faience figures of the Snake goddess and her priestess. The former is a semi-anthropomorphic figure with the ears of a cow or some other animal. The exaggerated ear suggests "Broad Ear", one of the members of the family of the Sumerian sea-god Ea. She may have been thus depicted to remind her worshippers that she was ever ready to hear their petitions. On the other hand, it is not improbable that she had at one time the head of a cow or sow. Demeter at Phigalia was horse-headed, and there were serpents in her hair.

[p. 140]

[paragraph continues] This goddess of Crete has a high head-dress of spiral pattern, round which a serpent has enfolded itself, and apparently its head, which is missing, protruded in front like the uraeus on the Egyptian "helmets" of royalty. Another snake is grasped by the head in her right hand and by the tail in the left, and its body lies wriggling along her outstretched arms, and over her shoulders, forming a loop behind, which narrows at her waist and widens out below it. Other two snakes are twined round her hips below the waist. These reptiles are of green colour with purple-brown spots. Evidently they are symbols of fertility and growth of vegetation. The goddess is attired in a bell-shaped skirt suspended from her "wasp waist", and a short-sleeved, tight-fitting jacket bodice, with short sleeves, open in front to display her ample breasts. Her skin is white, her eyes dark: she wears a necklace round her neck, and her hair falls down behind but only to her shoulders, being gathered up in a fringed arrangement at the back of the head.

The priestess, or votary, has her arms lifted in the Egyptian attitude of adoration. In each hand she grasps a small wriggling snake. A stiff girdle entwines her narrow waist. Unfortunately the head is missing. The jacket bodice is similar to that of the goddess, and the breasts are also ample and bare. "The skirt", writes Lady Evans, "consists of seven flounces fastened apparently on a 'foundation', so that the hem of each flounce falls just over the head of the one below it. . . . Over this skirt is worn a double apron or 'polonaise' similar to that of the goddess, but not falling so deeply, and not so richly ornamented. The main surface is covered with a reticulated pattern, each reticulation being filled with horizontal lines in its upper half. The general effect is that of a check or small plaid. . . . The whole costume

[p. 141]

of both figures seems to consist of garments carefully sewn and fitted to the shape without any trace of flowing draperies. [*1]

Among the symbols, which had evidently a religious significance, are the "horns of consecration", the sacred pillars and trees, the double axe, the "swastika" (crux gammata), a square cross with staff handles, and the plain equal-limbed cross. These are represented on seals, in faience, and on stones. Sir Arthur Evans suggests that a small marble cross he discovered--he calls it a "fetish cross"--occupied a central position in the Cretan shrine of the mother goddess. "A cross of orthodox Greek shape", he says, "was not only a religious symbol of Minoan cult, but seems to be traceable in later offshoots of the Minoan religion from Gaza to Eryx". He adds: "It must, moreover, be borne in mind that the equal-limbed eastern cross retains the symbolic form of the primitive star sign, as we see it attached to the service of the Minoan divinities. . . . The cross as a symbol or amulet was also known among the Babylonians and Assyrians. It appears on cylinders (according to Professor Sayce, of the Kassite period), apparently as a sign of divinity. As an amulet on Assyrian necklaces it is seen associated, as on the Palaikastro (Crete) mould, with a rayed (solar) and a semi-lunar emblem--in other words it once more represents a star." The Maltese cross first appears on Elamite pottery of the Neolithic Age: it was introduced into Babylonia at a later period. In Egypt it figures prominently n the famous floret coronet of a Middle Kingdom princess which was found at Dashur, and is believed by some authorities to be of Hittite origin.

If the Cretan cross was an astral symbol, it would appear that the snake or dove goddess was associated, like

[p. 142]

the Egyptian Isis and the Babylonian Ishtar, with Sirius or some other star which was connected with the food supply. The rising of Sirius in Egypt coincides with the beginning of the Mile flood. It appears on the "night of the drop". The star form of the bereaved Isis lets fall the first tear for Osiris, and as the body moisture of deities has fertilizing and creative properties, it causes the river to increase in volume so that the land may be rendered capable of bearing abundant crops. Osiris springs up in season as the rejuvenated corn spirit.

Other sites in Crete will be dealt with in the chapters which follow. But before dealing with these in detail, it will be of interest to glean evidence from the general finds regarding the early stages of civilization on the island and the first peoples who settled there, and also to compare the beliefs that obtained among the various peoples of the ancient race who, having adopted the agricultural mode of life, laid the foundations of great civilizations, among which that of Crete was so brilliant an example.

Footnotes

^117:1 London, 30th October, 1900.

^119:1 Monthly Review, March, 1901, p. 124.

^120:1 The Critias, Sec. XV

^123:1 Cowper's Odyssey, VIII, 30-54.

^124:1 The Annual of the British School at Athens, Vol. VI, p. 38.

^125:1 Annual of the British School at Athens, Vol. VI, pp. 52-3.

^126:1 The river used to flow nearer the palace site than it does at present.

^126:2 Thucydides, I, 2-4.

^127:1 These and other names were given to the apartments by Sir Arthur Evans.

^128:1 Only one dancing figure has survived of this fresco.

^128:2 Or "Ariadne of the lovely tresses".

^128:3 Iliad, XVIII, 590 et seq. (Derby's translation).

^129:1 These dolphins resemble closely the so-called "swimming elephants" on Scottish sculptured stones. Like the doves they had evidently a religious significance. Pausanias tells of a Demeter which held in one hand a dolphin and in another a dove.

^131:1 Homer (1903), pp. 130 et seq.

^131:2 The Discoveries in Crete (1907), pp. 207 et seq.

^132:1 III, 291-300; XIX, 172-9, 188-9, 200, 338.

^132:2 Butcher and Lang's Odyssey, p. 113.

^132:3 Poseidon in the original.

^136:1 Extracts from the Odyssey, Books VII and VIII (Cowper's translation).

^136:2 The Discoveries in Crete, p. 209.

^137:1 The Discoveries in Crete, pp. 209-10.

^141:1 The Annual of the British School at Athens, Vol. IX, pp. 74 et seq.

     
Myths of Crete and Pre-Hellenic Europe, by Donald A. Mackenzie, [1917], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 143]

 

CHAPTER VII

 

Races and Myths of Neolithic Crete

The Cave--dwellers of Crete--Azilian Stage of Culture--The Neolithic Folk--Obsidian obtained from Melos--Neolithic Finds at Knossos and Phaestos--Island inhabited at 10,000 B.C.--Settlers of the Mediterranean Race--The Evidence of Early Egyptian Graves--Migrations from North Africa into Europe--Appearance of Anatolians in Crete--The Agriculturists and Bearded Pastoralists--Racial Religious Beliefs in Scotland and Greece--The Various Cults of Zeus--Political Significance of Zeus Worship--Legend of the Cretan Zeus--the Tomb of the God--Traditional Holy Places appropriated by Early Christians--Cretan Zeus like Osiris, Adonis, Tammuz, Attis, and other Young Gods--Kings as Incarnations of Deities--Egyptian and Greek Mysticism--Demeter and Dionysus--Totemic Animals Tabooed--Pig Sacred in Egypt and Crete--The Sacred Goat--Bull Cult of Knossos--Links between Libya and Crete--The Double--axe Symbol--Maltese Story of "Axe Land"--Etymology and Labyrinth--Neolithic Houses in Crete--Survival of Palaeolithic Traditions and Customs and Types--Religious Borrowing.

WHO were the earliest inhabitants of Crete and whence came they? The problem is involved in obscurity, but certain suggestive facts may be stated which throw some light upon it. As already indicated (Chapter III) no bones of Palaeolithic man have been discovered on the island. Signor Taramelli, an Italian excavator, recently explored, however, the interesting grotto of Miamu, which was inhabited by early settlers who appear to have been either in the Late Magdelenian or the Azillan stage of culture. The deposit of the partly artificial cave yielded on examination a number of bone heads of weapons and bone spatulas, somewhat like the "spoon-shaped celts"

[p. 144]

of the Swiss lake-dwellings and the Rhone valley, which were probably utilized by huntsmen for scooping out marrow from the bones of roasted animals. Evidently, therefore, Crete had been occupied at a remote period by cave-dwellers. The lower grotto deposit was overlaid by Bronze Age remains.

During the long interval which followed the last glacial epoch, there was a gradual and general subsidence of land round the Mediterranean as elsewhere. But after Crete had become detached from Greece, it still remained for a period of uncertain duration connected with Asia Minor, where there were, no doubt, communities of cave-dwellers as in Phoenicia and Palestine. These ancient folks of the Cretan grotto of Miamu may have been isolated from their congeners on the mainland like the "beachcombers" of the "kitchen middens" in England and Scotland. We cannot say whether they became extinct or not. It is possible that the seafaring pioneers of the Neolithic Age found inhabitants on the island.

The earliest traces of the Neolithic folk have been discovered in the vicinity of the mountain village of Magasa. Among the relics were polished stone axes, numerous bone awls, and fragments of coarse pottery belonging to a similar stage of culture to that which obtained among the Neolithic cave-dwellers of Gezer, Palestine, who, as has been indicated, made pottery also. Apparently the Magasa settlers came from the north in their many-oared galleys, resembling those depicted on the painted pre-Dynastic pottery of Egypt. As much is indicated by the finds of obsidian flakes, Neolithic man, it may be explained, not only constructed knives, saws, arrow-heads, and other small implements from flint found in chalk deposits, and chert nodules embedded in limestone, but also from obsidian, which is the "glassy" variety of

[p. 145]

volcanic rock-hardened lava--known as liparite, [*1] the "frothy" variety being "pumice-stone". Now, there is no obsidian in Crete. The only source of it in the Aegean is the Island of Melos (now Milos, or Milo), where the famous statue of Venus de Milo was discovered. Evidently an early Neolithic civilization had local development in the Cyclades, amidst

	 
		                               the sprinkled isles,
		 Lily on lily, that o'erlace the sea,
		 And laugh their pride when the light wave lisps "Greece". [*2]
		
		 Obsidian artifacts have been found in various islands of the Aegean, as well as on the mainland at Mycenae and elsewhere, on the island of Cyprus, and as far westward as Malta, where it was imported, apparently from Melos, to be worked, for flakes as well as knives have been found, and also in Sicily. Schliemann discovered knives and flakes of obsidian in "the four lowest prehistoric cities at Hissarlik". He remarked regarding them at the time: "All are two-edged, and some are so sharp that one might shave with them". [*3] The Jews still use flint and obsidian knives in religious ceremonies. Obsidian implements have also been taken from Neolithic strata near Nineveh. In Egypt, during the Old Kingdom Period, the beaten-copper statues of Pepi I and his son were given eyes of obsidian.

When Knossos and Phaestos were first selected as settlements, the Cretans had advanced into the later stage of Neolithic culture. Their obsidian knives were finely wrought, and have been found associated with serpentine maces, axes of diorite and other hard stone, and, as it is of special interest to note, clay and stone spindle whorls, indicating that the art of spinning was well known.

[p. 146]

It has been stated that the beginning of the Neolithic Age has been dated approximately 103000 B.C. The calculation has been arrived at by the comparative study of the stratified deposit at Knossos. The layers of the historic period are about 18 feet deep. Below these are the Neolithic layers, through which a depth of about 20 feet has been reached. Roughly about 3 feet was accumulated every thousand years. Allowing for variation in the deposits, the minimum date 10,000 B.C. appears to be safe; even 12,000 B.C. or 13,000 B.C. is possible. There is no trace in the first layer of a culture so low as that of Magasa. The earliest "folk-wave" which reached Knossos came with a form of culture which had been developed elsewhere.

Unfortunately no human remains have been unearthed in the Neolithic deposit to afford evidence regarding the racial affinities of these pioneers of civilization. Ethnologists are of opinion that they were representations of the Mediterranean race, and arrive at their conclusion on the following grounds: The large majority of the skulls found in Bronze Age graves are long, and are similar to those taken from Neolithic graves in Greece and elsewhere throughout Europe, especially in the south and west, as well as those from the pre-Dynastic graves of Egypt. The average stature of the Minoan Cretans was about 5 feet 4. inches. In the early Bronze Age there was a broad-headed minority.

It has been found that, as Dr. Collignon says, "when a race is well seated in a region, fixed to the soil by agriculture, acclimatized by natural selection, and sufficiently dense, it opposes an enormous resistance to absorption by the new-comers, whoever they may be". This view finds conspicuous support in the permanence of the Cro-Magnon type of mankind in the Dordogne

[p. 147]

valley. An interval of at least 20,000 years has not altered particular skull and face forms there. In Egypt at the present day the fellaheen resemble to a marked degree their Neolithic ancestors. Ethnologists explain in this connection that physical characteristics are controlled by the females of a community. Intrusions of males as traders, settlers, or conquerors may have been productive of variations, but the tendency to revert to the original type has operated to a marked degree, the "unfits" being eliminated by local diseases from generation to generation. In those districts, however, where settlers of alien type were accompanied by their wives and families, ethnic changes have been more pronounced. It is not surprising to find, in this connection, that in a country like Great Britain primitive types should be found to be still persistent. The majority of the invaders who crossed the seas were evidently males.

Since Sergi first roused a storm of criticism by advancing his theory of the North African origin of the Mediterranean race, a considerable mass of data has been accumulated which tends to confirm his conclusions. Egypt has provided evidence which sets beyond dispute the fact that once a racial type had been fixed it persisted for many thousands of years with little or no change. The problem as to why some heads are long and some are broad still remains obscure. All that can be said is that certain peoples developed in isolation during untold ages their peculiar physical characteristics, which changes of food and location have failed to alter.

Numerous graves were found during recent years in Upper Egypt in which the bodies have been preserved for a space of at least sixty centuries--"not the mere bones only", says Professor Elliot Smith, "but also the skin and hair, the muscles and organs of the body; and

[p. 148]

even such delicate tissues as the nerves and brain, and, most marvellous of all, the lens of the eye. "Thus", he adds, "we are able to form a very precise idea of the structure of the proto-Egyptian." This distinguished ethnologist's description of the early inhabitant of the Nile valley is of special interest: "The proto-Egyptian was a man of small stature, his mean height" was "a little under 5 feet 5 inches in the flesh for men, and almost 5 feet in the case of women. . . . He was of very slender build, for his bones are singularly slight and free from pronounced roughness and projecting bosses that indicate great muscular development. In fact, there is a suggestion of effeminate grace and frailty about his bones. . . . Like all his kinsmen of the Mediterranean group of peoples, the proto-Egyptian, when free from alien admixture, had a very scanty endowment of beard and almost no moustache. On neither lip were there ever more than a few sparsely scattered hairs, and in most cases also the cheeks were equally scantily equipped. But there was always a short tuft of beard under the chin." The burial customs and the ceramic and other remains of the Mediterranean peoples were of similar character everywhere. [*1]

In some pre-Dynastic Egyptian graves the dead were wrapped in "flaxen cloth of considerable fineness". It is probable, therefore, that the spindle whorls found in Crete were invented in Egypt. The brunette complexion of the Mediterranean Neolithic folk was probably acquired on the North African coast whence they spread into Europe. As ships were depicted on Egyptian pre-Dynastic pottery, it is possible that companies of them crossed the Mediterranean Sea. The great majority entered Europe, however, across the Straits of Gibraltar, and by the Palestine

[p. 149]

and Asia Minor route, along the ancient "way of the Philistines".

The stomachs of some of the naturally mummified bodies have been taken out, and when their undigested contents were submitted to examination) discovery was made, among other things, of fish bone and scales, fragments of mammalian bones, remains of plants used as drugs, and husks of barley and millet. The Mediterranean folks who remained in Egypt were evidently agriculturists, stock-breeders and fishermen, and non-vegetarians.

A people who had adopted the agricultural mode of life were able to occupy more limited areas than huntsmen or pastoralists. Europe must have been thinly populated at the dawn of the Neolithic Age, when the Mediterranean peoples began to "peg out claims" in its valleys, round its shores, and on green inviting islands. The Cretan pioneers were undoubtedly agriculturists. They grew peas and barley, and ground their meal in stone mortars and querns; they fenced their land, and must therefore have had land laws; and they kept herds of sheep, cattle, pigs, and goats. The fig- and olive-trees were also cultivated. In short, they had imported to Crete the agricultural and horticultural civilization which the Egyptians credited to Osiris and Isis, before they had begun to carry on a sea trade with the home country. Evidence has also been forthcoming that the Neolithic peoples of western Europe and the British Isles were similarly agriculturists. Sometimes the teeth taken from graves are found to be in a ground-down condition. This was partly due to the deposit of grit in limestone and sandstone mortars and querns, which mixed with the meal. [*1] The Neolithic folk who utilized soft stones for milling must have been as

[p. 150]

familiar as some of their modern descendants with the agonies of toothache and indigestion.

The minority of broad-heads in the early Minoan period in Crete may have been survivals from Palaeolithic times, or the descendants of slaves. It is more probable, however, that they represented an infusion of traders and artisans from Asia Minor. Professor Elliot Smith, who believes that the Egyptians were the first to work copper, suggests that "the broad-headed, long-bearded Asiatics", of Alpine or Armenoid type, "learned of its usefulness by contact with the Egyptians in Syria", and passed on their acquired knowledge to other peoples. Referring to Crete in particular he says: "We can have no doubt these people (the Armenoids) began to make their way into Crete, from Anatolia perhaps, at the time when the diffusion of the knowledge of copper was beginning". [*1] At a much later period the artisans of North Syria and Anatolia were famous as metal-workers. One of the results of the wars waged by Egypt, after the expulsion of the Hyksos, was the introduction to the Nile valley of coats of mail, gilded chariots, gold and silver vases, and other articles which were greatly prized. "At this period", writes Professor Flinders Petrie, "the civilization of Syria was equal or superior to that of Egypt. . . . Here was luxury far beyond that of the Egyptians, and technical work which could teach them, rather than be taught." [*2] Many thousands of prisoners were also taken, and, when tribute was arranged for, the Pharaoh made it a condition that his vassals should send "the foreign workmen" with it. Kings and noblemen also received wives from Syria and Anatolia. During the Eighteenth Dynasty the typical Egyptian face, as a result, underwent a change. The upper and artisan classes became half foreigners. As at

[p. 151]

the present day, however, the peasants were unaffected by the alien infusion, and they constituted the large majority of the inhabitants.

The broad-heads represent an ancient stock which had an area of characterization somewhere in Central Asia. They were apparently separated, during the Late Glacial and Inter-glacial Periods, for many thousands of years from the fair northerners and the brunette Mediterraneans--long enough, at any rate, to develop distinctive physical characteristics, and also, it would appear, distinctive modes of thought. They were mainly a pastoral people, and clung to an upland habitat along the grassy steppes. In contrast to the lithe and slight agriculturists from North Africa, they were heavily bearded and muscular; they also included short and tall stocks. During the Neolithic Period these broad-heads were filtering into Europe, but it was not until the early Copper Age that their western migrations assumed greatest volume.

Evidence as to the source of early Cretan culture and the homeland of the pioneer settlers may be obtained, not only by studying physical characteristics, but also early religious beliefs. There is nothing so persistent as "immemorial modes of thought". At the present day it is possible to find, even in these islands, small communities descended from alien settlers, who have for long centuries lived beside and never mixed with the descendants of the aborigines. Round the east coast of Scotland, for instance, the fisher-folks in not a few of the small towns are endogamous-they rarely marry outside their own kindred; and they not only speak a different dialect from their neighbours, but have different superstitions. So distinctive, too, are their physical traits that they are easily distinguished in certain localities.

In ancient times peoples of different origin lived more

[p. 152]

strictly apart than is the case nowadays. Herodotus and other Greek writers sought for clues as to tribal origins by making reference to burial customs and religious beliefs.

The Carians maintain they are the aboriginal inhabitants of the part of the mainland where they now dwell, and never had any other name than that which they still bear; and in proof of this they show an ancient temple of the Carian Jove in the country of the Mylasians. [*1]

There is a third temple, that of the Carian Zeus, common to all Carians, in the use of which also the Lydians and Mysians participate, on the ground that they are brethren. [*2]

One of the interesting phases of Cretan religion was the worship of the local Zeus. The deity must not be confused, however, with the so-called Aryan or Indo-European Zeus of the philologists of a past generation. The name Zeus is less ancient than the deities to whom it was applied. It is derived from the root div, meaning "bright" or "shining". In Sanskrit it is Dyaus, in Latin Diespiter, Divus, Diovis, and Jove, in Anglo-Saxon Tiw, and in Norse Tyr; an old Germanic name of Odin was Divus or Tivi, and his descendants were the Tivar. The Greeks had not a few varieties of Zeus. These included: "Zeus, god of vintage", "Zeus, god of sailors," "Bald Zeus", "Dark Zeus" (god of death and the underworld), "Zeus-Trophonios" (earth-god), "Zeus of thunder and rain", "Zeus, lord of flies", "Zeus, god of boundaries", "Zeus Soter", as well as the "Carian Zeus" and the "Cretan Zeus". The chief gods of alien peoples were also called Zeus or Jupiter. Merodach of Babylon was "Jupiter Belus" and Amon of Thebes "Jupiter Amon", and so on.

The worship of Zeus, the father-god, had a political significance. He was imposed as the chief deity on

 

WILD GOAT AND YOUNG: FAIENCE RELIEF, FROM KNOSSOS (See page 139)

Reproduced from "Annual of the British School at Athens", by kind permission of the Committee and of Messrs. Macmillan & Co., Ltd.

 

[p. 153]

various Pantheons by the Hellenic conquerors of prehistoric Greece, but local deities suffered little or no change except in name. Dionysus might be called Zeus, but he still continued to be Dionysus, the son of the Great Mother, and did not become Zeus the self-created father-god.

The legend of the Cretan Zeus is as follows: It had been prophesied by Uranus and Gaia that Cronos would be displaced by one of his own children. He endeavoured to avert this calamity by swallowing each babe that was born to his wife, Rhea. After he had thus disposed of five of his family, Rhea went to Crete, and in a mountain cave there gave birth to Zeus. She then returned to her husband and presented him with a stone dressed up as a babe, which he swallowed.

Rhea was assisted by her priests, the Curetes, who danced a war or fertility dance, and her child was fostered by nymphs (the Cretan "mothers"), who gave him honey, so that Cronos would not hear his cries. Milk for nourishment was provided by the goat Amalthea. So strong was the child that soon after birth he broke off one of the goat's horns, which he presented to the nymphs: it afterwards became known as Cornucopia, the "horn of plenty", because it became filled with whatever its owner desired.

When Zeus grew up he rescued his brothers and sisters from the stomach of Cronos, and also took forth the stone which had been substituted for himself: this stone became sacred to his worshippers. Afterwards he deposed his father and sat on the throne as chief deity. Like other ancient gods, he reigned for a time and then died. His grave was pointed out in Crete, as several classical authors have testified. [*1] Perhaps it was on

[p. 154]

account of their habit of repeating this and other ancient legends that the Cretans became so notorious among orthodox Greeks. Paul wrote of them: "There are many unruly and vain talkers and deceivers . . . whose mouths must be stopped; who subvert whole houses, teaching things which they ought not. . . . One of themselves, even a prophet of their own, said, The Cretans are always liars." [*1]

"Later Cretan tradition", writes Sir Arthur Evans, "has persistently connected the tomb of Zeus with Mount Juktas, which rises as the most prominent height on the land side above the site of Knossos. Personal experiences obtained during two recent explorations of this peak go far to confirm this tradition. All that is not precipitous of the highest point of the ridge of Juktas is enclosed by a 'Cyclopean' wall of large roughly oblong blocks, and within this enclosure, especially towards the summit, the ground is strewn with pottery, dating from Mycenaean to Roman times, and including a large number of small cups of pale clay exactly resembling those which occur in votive deposits of Mycenaean date in the caves of Dikta and of Ida, also intimately connected with the cult of the Cretan Zeus."

In the vicinity is "the small church of Aphendi Kristos, or the Lord Christ, a name which in Crete clings in an especial way to the ancient sanctuaries of Zeus, and marks here in a conspicuous manner the diverted but abiding sanctity of the spot. Popular tradition, the existing cult, and the archaeological traces point alike to the fact that there was here 'a holy sepulchre' of remote antiquity." [*2]

Early Christian missionaries similarly appropriated elsewhere the "holy places" of the Pagan cults. St. Paul's

[p. 155]

[paragraph continues] Cathedral in London probably marks the site of the ancient sanctuary of the god Lud, which was approached by Ludgate (the way of Lud). Ancient sculptured stones are often found built into the walls of old chapels. Sometimes the local saint was worshipped after death as if he had acquired the attributes of the Pagan deity he displaced. Bulls were offered up in Applecross, Ross-shire, in 1656, "upon the 25th August", runs a minute of Dingwall Presbytery, "which day is dedicate, as they conceive, to Sn. Mourie as they call him". [*1]

The Cretan Zeus was a deity who each year died a violent death and came to life again. He thus resembled closely the Egyptian Osiris, the culture king, who introduced agriculture, was slain by Set (one of whose forms was the black pig), and afterwards became Judge of the Dead. We do not know what name was borne by this Cretan deity. It may have been "Velchanos", the youthful warrior of Cretan tradition. A Knossian cult may have called him Minos. As we have seen, this culture king, who during life was famed as a lawgiver, became one of the judges of the dead in the Homeric Hades. Apparently he was deified and regarded as a form of the Cretan Dionysus, who differed somewhat from the Thracian Dionysus.

At what period Zeus-Dionysus was introduced into Crete it is impossible to say with certainty. His close association with agriculture and the underworld suggests that he was known at an early period, but, as will be shown in the next chapter, not necessarily the earliest.

To the agriculturists the myths and customs associated with the sowing and reaping of grain were of as much importance as the implements they used. Every people who

[p. 156]

in early times adopted the agricultural mode of life adopted also the religious practices associated with it. Persistent folk-legends in Greece pointed to Egypt as the fountainhead of agricultural religion. Diodorus Siculus says that the mysteries of Dionysus are identical with those of Osiris, and that the Isis and Demeter mysteries are the same also, the only difference being in the names applied to the deities. [*1] "Osiris", says Herodotus, "is named Dionysus (Bacchus) by the Greeks." [*2]

The Cretan Zeus-Dionysus links not only with Osiris, but also with Tammuz of Babylon, Ashur of Assyria, Attis of Phrygia, Adonis of Greece, Agni of India and his twin-brother Indra, the Germanic Scef and Frey and Heimdal, and the Scoto-Irish Diarmid. Each of these deities was apparently a developed form of a primitive culture-god, who was a deity of love, fertility, and vegetation; he symbolized the grass required by pastoralists, the fruit of wild and cultivated trees, the spring flowers, and the corn; in short, he was the provider of the food-supply, and he was the life-principle in the food.

In pre-historic times, when the migrating peoples had a vague conception of the mysterious Power which controlled the Universe and the lives of men, they did not give concrete and permanent form to the deities they worshipped and propitiated and controlled by the performance of magical ceremonies. They believed that the Power was manifested in various forms at different periods, and existed in all forms at one and the same time. Osiris appeared among men as a wise king who introduced agriculture and inaugurated just laws; he was at the same time the moon and the young bull, goat, or boar, who was given origin by a "ray of light" issuing from the moon. He was the ancestor of men and edible animals; he was

[p. 157]

the "vital spark" or life-essence n all that grew; he was the Nile which fertilized the sun-parched desert. Each Pharaoh was an Osiris, and each pious individual who died became one with Osiris in the agricultural heaven which he attained by obeying the laws of Osiris. Thus Proclus says, in reference to the Greek mysteries: "The gods assume many forms and change from one to another; now they are manifested in the emission of shapeless light, now they are of human shape, and anon appear in other and different forms". [*1]

The Cretan god was the son of the Great Mother who has been identified with Rhea. Apparently he also became her husband. Osiris was the son of Isis, or of Isis and Nepthys--"the bull begotten of the two cows Isis and Nepthys", and he was also at once the husband and father of Isis. Tammuz was the son and spouse of Ishtar, and the later Adonis the lover and son of Aphrodite.

The goddess Demeter and the god Dionysus, her son, were said to be of Cretan origin. According to Firmicus Maternus, Dionysus was the illegitimate son of King Jupiter of Crete, and was hated by Queen Juno. On one occasion, when Jupiter prepared to leave the island, he appointed Dionysus to reign in his place. Juno plotted, during her husband's absence, with the Titans, who lured the young prince away and devoured him. Minerva, his sister, however, rescued his heart and gave it to Jupiter on his return, and that high god enclosed the heart in a case and placed it in a temple which he erected, so that it might be worshipped. Other myths of similar character are told regarding the young god who was mangled like the Egyptian Osiris. One variation states that Jupiter had the heart pounded in a mortar and given to Semele, who, after eating it, gave birth once more to Dionysus.

[p. 158]

In the Egyptian Anpu-Bata story, Bata, who is evidently a primitive god resembling Osiris, exists in various forms at different periods. His soul enters a blossom, and when the blossom is destroyed the soul enters a sacred bull; the bull is slain and the soul is enclosed in two trees: the trees are cut down, and a chip having entered the mouth of the Pharaoh's wife, that lady gives birth to a child who is no other than the original Bata.

The identification of the god with an animal suggests totemism. In one of the early culture stages it was believed that the spirit of the eponymous tribal ancestor existed in a bull, a bear, a pig, or a deer, as the case might be. Invariably the animal was an edible one--the source of the food-supply, or the guardian of it. Osiris, in one part of Egypt, was a bull and in another a goat. He appears also to have had a boar form. Set went out to hunt a wild boar when he found the body of Osiris and tore it in pieces.

The sacred animal was tabooed for a certain period of the year, or altogether. In Egypt the pig was never eaten except sacrificially. Herodotus says: "The pig is regarded among them (the Egyptians) as an unclean animal, so much so that if a man in passing accidentally touch a pig, he instantly hurries to the river and plunges in with all his clothes on. Hence, too, the swineherds, notwithstanding that they are of pure Egyptian blood, are forbidden to enter into any of the temples, which are open to all other Egyptians; and further, no one will give his daughter in marriage to a swineherd, or take a wife from among them, so that the swineherds are forced to intermarry among themselves. They do not offer swine in sacrifice to any of their gods, excepting Bacchus (Osiris) and the moon, whom they honour in this way at the same

[p. 159]

time, sacrificing pigs to both of them at the same full moon, and afterwards eating of the flesh. . . . At any other time they would not so much as taste it." [*1]

According to one of the Cretan legends regarding Zeus-Dionysus, as related by Athenaeus, [*2] the animal which nourished with its milk the young god of the cave was a sow. "Wherefore all the Cretans consider this animal sacred, and will not taste of its flesh; and the men of Praesos perform sacred rites with the sow, making her the first offering at the sacrifice." [*3] The pig taboo extended as far as Wales, Scotland, and Ireland, and is still remembered. [*4]

Dionysus was also associated with the goat, as we have seen. A clay impression of a gem from Knossos shows an infant sitting beside a horned sheep. [*5] Possibly we have here another form of the legend. The various animals may have been totemic. Different tribes claimed descent from different animals which were associated with the culture-god whom they adopted.

It would appear that the bull tribe achieved ascendancy in Crete, for the horns of that animal, a piece of "ritual furniture", which Sir Arthur Evans refers to "by anticipation" as "the horns of consecration", is the commonest cult objective on pottery, frescoes, gems, steles, and altars. The horns were evidently a symbol of the god of fertility. It would appear that before Zeus-Dionysus was depicted in human shape he was worshipped through his symbols or attributes.

Another symbol of the god was the 8-form shield. In North Africa it is found associated with the Libyan

[p. 160]

goddess Neith, who was a Great Mother with a fatherless son. On Mycenaean and Cretan signets and seals this shield is sometimes shown with human head and arms. It was used by one of the Hittite tribes, and may be identical with the Boeotian shield. A similar pattern also "appears as an ornamental motive on a bronze belt of the latest Bronze or earliest Hallstatt period in Hungary". [*1] The so-called "spectacle marking" on the Scottish sculptured stones, which sometimes appears upright and sometimes longwise, may have been an 8-form shield of symbolic significance--an attribute of the god or goddess of fertility.

The double axe was another distinctive symbol of the Cretan god. In Malta certain folk-tales make reference to "Bufies", which is believed to signify "Axe-land", situated somewhere beyond the Sahara. "Axe-land", says Mr. R. N. Bradley, "must be one of the original homes of the axe, and therefore possibly of Neolithic culture." [*2] Votive stone axes, perforated for suspension, are common in Malta, Cyprus, and other Mediterranean islands. On the sculptured stones of Brittany the double axe appears as a symbol or hieroglyph, and it is sometimes grasped by an outstretched hand. [*3] In Crete the double axe with long handle was depicted between the "horns of consecration" in outline on stones of pillars of palaces and the Dictaean inner cave, and inside houses, apparently as a charm. It figures on a gold signet from Mycenae in elaborate form, beside a goddess, seated beneath a vine. On the upper part of the signet the sun and crescent moon are enclosed by "water rays". Hovering high on the left is the 8-form shield with human head, an uplifted arm with a

 

THE PRINCIPAL ROOM OF THE MUSEUM AT CANDIA, CRETE

In the foreground is a great double axe from Aghia Triadha.

 

[p. 161]

staff or spear in the hand, and a single leg below. The goddess is approached by votaries, who make offerings of flowers including the iris and hyacinth. On a gem from Knossos the goddess grasps the double axe in her hand, as she does also on a mould from Palaikastro, and other objects found elsewhere. Sir Arthur Evans is of opinion that "labyrinth" is derived from labrys, the Lydian (or Carian) name for the Greek double-edged axe. [*1] "The suffix in -nth has been conclusively shown", says Professor Burrows, "to belong to that interesting group of pre-Hellenic words that survives both in place-names like Corinth (Corinthos) and Zakynthos . . . and in common words that would naturally be borrowed by the invaders from the old population." Some of these are the words for "barley-cake", "basket", "hedge-sparrow", and "worm". "The similarly formed word for 'mouse'," he adds, "which remains as the ordinary Greek word. . . . is quoted by the Greek grammarians as a Cretan word." [*2]

Words like "absinth" and "hyacinth" are similarly survivals that have been borrowed. Professor Burrows thinks, however, that laura, lavra, or labra, signified "passage". Laburinthos would thus mean "place of passages". He notes that "the early Eastern Church called its monasteries Laurai, or Labri as they were sometimes spelt. The name must have been originally given, either from the cloisters round them, or because of the long passages, with the monks' cells leading off them; but this does not seem to have been consciously felt, and the word was used for the monastery as a whole. The name indeed is still seen in The Lavra, a monastery at Mount Athos." [*3]

The Cretan Zeus was, as a deity of vegetation, associated

[p. 162]

with tree- and water-worship. In the myth about Cronos swallowing the stone there is evidently a memory of stone-worship also.

It would appear that more than one folk-wave entered Crete during the thousands of years which were covered by the Neolithic Period. At Knossos the earliest settlers constructed wattle huts, plastered with mud, and were well advanced in civilization. The Magasa folks, on the other hand, who produced fewer and cruder artifacts, had more substantial houses. They built low walls of stone) and erected a timber framework, which they enclosed in brick. A similar architectural method appears to have obtained among the Anatolian Hittites in historic times. Inside the Magasa house walls were plastered, and the flat roofs were made of plastered reeds. Both these sections of Cretans, as has been shown, obtained obsidian from Melos, and worked it beside their dwellings, as the finds of flake testify. Whether, however, either or both of them were contemporaries of the dwellers in the artificial cave at Miamu is uncertain. It is suggestive, however, to find that the historic Cretans had sacred caves like the Hittites, the prehistoric people of Phoenicia, and the French and Spanish Palaeolithic folk of the Aurignacian and Magdalenian stages of culture. Did they adopt certain of the religious customs of the descendants of the Palaeolithic folks who survived on the island? Or was there among the earliest settlers a community of Libyans of mingled stock? The Cro-Magnon type survives till the present day on the North African coast, where it has been identified by Collignon and Bertholon among the Berbers. [*1] It may be that there were tall men among the Cretans, who were distinguished as warriors, as was Goliath among the Philistines. The Philistines were of Cretan origin.

[p. 163]

[paragraph continues] Some of the athletes depicted on vases and frescoes appear to have been above the average stature. It is of interest to recall, too, in this connection, that the slim waists that distinguished the Cretans were characteristic also of the Aurignacian cave-dwellers. This custom of waist-tightening may have survived from the archaeological Hunting Period. In Gaelic stories there are references to the "hunger belt". It is possible, too, that the Cretan girdle had a religious significance, like the "prayer belt" of Russia. Sir Arthur Evans found at Knossos snake girdles which had been deposited as votive offerings in a sacred place. Two snakes enfolded the hips of the snake-goddess. Aphrodite's girdle compelled love. The Germanic Brunhild's great strength lay in her girdle. The dwarf Laurin was subdued when his girdle was wrenched off by the heroic Dietrich. [*1] Ishtar wore a girdle.

As has been indicated also (Chapter II), the bell-mouthed skirt worn by the Minoan women was similar to that of the Cro-Magnon women depicted in the Aurignacian caves 10,000 years ere the Neolithic folk settled in Crete. The gowns of the Egyptian women were of the "hobble" pattern.

Crete, of course, could not have maintained a large population of hunters. There can be little doubt that its inhabitants were not numerous at any period prior to the introduction of agriculture. As the great bulk of its historic population were of Mediterranean type, it would appear that North Africa was the source of the high civilization which obtained at Knossos during the Late Neolithic Period. The religion of the Cretan agriculturists resembled in essential details that of the Egyptians. Their chief deity was the Great Mother, whose son died, like Osiris, a violent death. No doubt religious borrowing

[p. 164]

took place when the Cretans traded with Egypt, and that the traditions preserved by Herodotus and other writers in this connection were not without some foundation. But, as there existed so close a resemblance between the fundamental beliefs of the separated peoples, it is impossible to discover to what extent Cretan religion was influenced by Nilotic. The Sumerian Tammuz myth, which also resembles the Osirian, was fully developed at the dawn of history, and Merodach, a fusion of Tammuz and Ramman, had for one of his names Asari, which has been identified with Asar (Osiris).

A conclusion which may be suggested is that the various sections of the Mediterranean race had, prior to their migrations to suitable areas of settlement from the North African homeland, adopted a system of religious beliefs which was closely associated with their agricultural mode of life, and passed it on afterwards to the peoples, who learned from them how to till and sow the soil and reap the harvest in season. The myths of the Phrygian Attis and the Germanic Scef are probably relics of cultural contact in bygone ages.

Footnotes

^145:1 So called after the semi-crystalline rock emitted as lava from the chief volcano of the Lipari Islands.

^145:2 Browning's "Cleon".

^145:3 Ilios, p. 247.

^148:1 The Ancient Egyptians, pp. 41 et seq.

^149:1 The writer and a friend once tested a limestone quern and ascertained that it deposited as much grit as covered a three-penny piece in about fifteen minutes.

^150:1 The Early Egyptians, pp. 172, 173.

^150:2 A History of Egypt, Vol. II, pp. 146, 147.

^152:1 Herodotus, I, 171.

^152:2 Strabo, 659.

^153:1 Diodorus Siculus, III, 61; Cicero, De natura deorum, III, 21, 53; Lucian, Philopseudes, 3, &c.

^154:1 Titus, i, 10-12.

^154:2 Journal of Hellenic Studies, Vol. XXI, pp. 121, 122.

^155:1 St. Maelrubha, the early Christian missionary, who gave his name to Loch Maree (formerly Loch Ewe). He flourished in the seventh century.

^156:1 Diodorus Siculus, I, 96.

^156:2 Herodotus, II, 144.

^157:1 Ennead, I, 6, 9.

^159:1 Herodotus, II, 47.

^159:2 Pausanias, VII, 17, 5.

^159:3 Cults of the Greek States, L. R. Farnell, Vol. I, p. 37.

^159:4 Myths of Babylonia and Assyria, pp. 293-4, and Egyptian Myth and Legend, pp. vii, vii.

^159:5 Journal of Hellenic Studies, Vol. XXI, p. 129.

^160:1 British Museum Early Iron Age Guide, p. 7.

^160:2 Malta and the Mediterranean Race, p. 126 (1912).

^160:3 See The Mediterranean Race, G. Sergi, p. 313, for illustration or axes on one of the sculptured stones.

^161:1 Journal of Hellenic Studies, Vol. XXI, pp. 106 et seq.

^161:2 The Discoveries in Crete, p. 120.

^161:3 The Discoveries in Crete, pp. 118, 119.

^162:1 Ripley's Races of Europe, p. 177.

^163:1 Teutonic Myth and Legend, pp. 380 and 428.

     
Myths of Crete and Pre-Hellenic Europe, by Donald A. Mackenzie, [1917], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 165]

 

CHAPTER VIII

 

Pre-Hellenic Earth and Corn Mothers

Mythology and Floating Folk-beliefs--Legends of Egyptian Influence in Crete--Primitive Spirit Groups as "Holy Mothers"--Evidence from Modern Greece--Goddesses as Fairy Queens--The Great Mother of Gods, Demons, and Mankind--Twin Deities and Bisexual Deities--Cult of Self-created Great Father--Stages of Civilization reflected in Religious Beliefs--Female Demons of Modern Greece--The Pre-Hellenic and Hellenic Forms of Rhea, "Mother of the Gods--The Egyptian "Mothers" Neith and Nut--Earth Mother as a Serpent--Demeter as the "Barley Mother"--Rhea and the Cretan Snake-goddess--The Eleusinian Mysteries--The Mysteries of Crete and Egypt--Isis and Demeter--The Corn and Earth Goddesses of India --Demeter--Persephone Myth--Its Antiquity and Significance--The Later Tammuz--Adonis Myth--The Demeter of Phigalia--Pre-Hellenic Cult of the Earth Mother--Fusion of Myths of the Hunting Pastoral and Agricultural Periods--Osiris and Minos--Osiris and the Minotaur--Eponymus Ancestor as a Son of Earth --Minos and Pelasgus--First Man of "Lost Atlantis"--Tribal Forms of Animal-headed Gods.

IN a previous chapter [*1] it has been shown that, during the Late Palaeolithic and Neolithic Periods, the worship of a goddess of maternity, who was at once a destroyer and preserver, obtained among tribes of Eurafrican and Eurasian peoples, and that memories of her primitive savage character have been perpetuated in these islands in folk-tales and place-names until the present Age. The past similarly lives in the present in Crete and Greece, where it is still possible to find traces of the floating material from which Homeric and Thesiodic Mythology

[p. 166]

was framed. Herodotus pondered over this aspect of the problem and wrote: [*1]

Whence the gods severally sprang, whether or no they had existed from eternity, what forms they bore--these are questions of which the Greeks knew nothing until the other day, so to speak, for Homer and Hesiod were the first to compose Theogonies, and give their gods their epithets, to allot them their several offices and occupations, and describe their forms; and they lived but four hundred years before my time as I believe. [*2]

Herodotus received his information regarding the literary conception of the deities from three priestesses of the Dodonaeans, who also said:

Two black doves flew away from Egyptian Thebes, and while one directed its flight to Libya, the other came to them. She alighted on an oak, and sitting there began to speak with a human voice, and told them that on the spot where she was, there should thenceforth be an oracle of Jove (Zeus). They understood the announcement to be from Heaven, so they set to work at once and erected a shrine. The dove which flew to Libya bade the Libyans to establish there the oracle of Ammon (Amon).

In Egypt Herodotus was given a different version of the legend. The priests of Jupiter (Amon) at Thebes said:

Two of the sacred women were once carried off from Thebes by the Phoenicians. The story went that one of them was sold into Libya, and the other into Greece, and these women were the first founders of the oracles in the two countries.

Herodotus also held that the names of some of the deities came from Egypt.

In early times the Pelasgi, as I know by information which I got at Dodona, offered sacrifices of all kinds, and prayed to the gods, but had no distinct names or appellations for them, since they had never heard of any. They called them gods (theoi {Greek  theoi},

[p. 167]

disposers), because they had disposed and arranged all things in such a beautiful order. After a long lapse of time the names of the gods came to Greece from Egypt, and the Pelasgi learnt them, only as yet they knew nothing of Bacchus, of whom they first heard at a much later date. Not long after the arrival of the names, they sent to consult the oracle at Dodona about them. This is the most ancient oracle in Greece, and at that time there was no other. To their question, "whether they should adopt the names that had been imported from the foreigners?" the oracle replied by recommending the use of the names of the gods, and from them the names passed afterwards to the Greeks. [*1]

These statements seem to bear out what the results of modern research tend to emphasize: that the systematized mythology was a creation of priests and. poets, and had a political as well as a religious significance. The most ancient conceptions and beliefs were perpetuated, however, by the masses of the people, and may still be winnowed from existing folk-beliefs and stories.

In Crete the dove and serpent goddesses appear to have evolved from primitive spirit groups. These were first conceived of as mothers. "The prominence of the idea of maternity in the Cretan religion", says Mr. Farnell, "is illustrated by the Cretan cult of 'Meteres', the 'Holy Mothers' who were transplanted at an early time from Crete to Engyon in Sicily." [*2]

In modern Greece the memory of the spirit groups still survives. Nymphs and Nereids haunt mountains and valleys, oceans and streams, and are ruled over by the "Queen of the mountains", the "Queen of the shore", or primitive forms of the owl-headed Athene or the beautiful and blood-thirsty Artemis. They are, in short, exceedingly like our fairies, who obey the commands of Queen Mab. Some of the Celtic goddesses exist in

[p. 168]

groups: "Proximae (the kinswomen); Dervonae (the oak spirits); Niskai (the water spirits); Mairae, Matronae, Matres or Matrae (the mothers); Quadriviae (the goddesses; of cross-roads). The Matraes, Matrae, and Matronae are often qualified by some local name. Deities of this type appear to have been popular in Britain, in the neighbourhood of Cologne, and in Province. . . . In some parts of Wales 'Y Mamau' (the mothers) is the name for the fairies." [*1] The "seven Hathors" of Egypt who presided at birth were similarly "mothers" and "fates". The "Golden Aphrodite" of Greece was chief of the "deathless fates". Demeter's priestesses, the earthly representatives of her nymphs, conducted a religious ceremony at weddings, as a Cos inscription shows. [*2] Fairies in our folk-tales are so fond of pretty children that they endeavour to steal them, and, when they are successful, substitute changelings. The Greek Nereids have, according to modern folk-belief, similar propensities. [*3]

Ancient and modern evidence tends to emphasize the widespread prevalence among the peoples of the Mediterranean race of the belief in the female origin and control of life. The primitive "queens" appear to have developed into goddesses, who were differentiated in localities to accord with human experiences and habits of life. Among the goddesses one was regarded as the Great Mother, who gave birth to the chief deities, male and female, the demons and the ancestors of mankind. "One is the race of men", sang Pindar, "with the race of gods; for one is the mother that gave to both one breath of life; yet sundered are they by powers wholly

[p. 169]

diverse, in that mankind is as naught, but heaven is builded of brass that abideth ever unshaken." [*1]

Sometimes the Great Mother is of dual personality. The Egyptian sisters Isis and Nepthys were both mothers of Osiris, as has been indicated--"the progeny of the two cows Isis and Nepthys". In the Indian epic the Mahabharata, the monarch Jarasandha was similarly reputed to be the joint son of the two queens. The two parts of his body were united by Jara, the household genius, after birth, and his name signifies "united by Jara". [*2] Two goddesses were associated with the Sumerian god Tammuz. These were Ishtar and Belit-sheri. Ishtar was his "mother", and he became her lover; Belit-sheri was his "sister". Isis was at once the "mother", "sister", "wife", and "daughter" of Osiris. Demeter and Kore, and Demeter and Persephone were Greek pairs who had similar functions. The model of a Mycenaean shrine discovered by Schliemann is surmounted by two doves which were, no doubt, sister goddesses. Images of goddesses holding a dove in either hand have also been found.

Another mystic conception was that the Great Mother was bi-sexual. The Libyan Neith was occasionally depicted as androgyne. Isis was the Egyptian "bearded Aphrodite", "the woman who was made a male", as one of the religious chants states, "by her father, Osiris". [*3] The Babylonian Ishtar and the Germanic Freya were likewise double-sexed. This idea that deities were abnormal and superhuman applied not only to goddesses. One of the Orphic hymns sets forth:

Zeus was the first of all, Zeus last, the lord of lightning;
 Zeus was the head, the middle, from him all things were created;
 Zeus was Man and again Zeus was the Virgin Eternal.

[p. 170]

[paragraph continues] Adonis similarly was "both maiden and youth". The Babylonian Nannar (Sin), the moon-god, was "father" and "mother" of gods and men. So was the Syrian Baal. In India Shiva is sometimes depicted with the right side female and the left male. The Persian Mithra was a god and goddess combined. Herodotus, in fact, appears not to have known that he was other than a female deity. He says the Persians worshipped Urania, "which they borrowed from the Arabians and Assyrians. Mylitta is the name by which the Assyrians know this goddess, whom the Arabians call Alitta, and the Persians Mithra". [*1]

At what remote period this conception became prevalent it is impossible to ascertain. It may have had origin in the Palaeolithic Age, when bearded steatopygous female figurines were carved from ivory similar to those found in the pre-Dynastic graves of Egypt. Traces of the doctrine involved are found among the Esquimaux, whose artifacts so closely resemble those of the Magdalenian stage of culture, and among certain North American tribes. Another view is that the conception resulted from the early fusion of god and goddess cults, and of the rival fundamental ideas connected with them. Babylonia may have been the region from which the mystical doctrine was transferred to India on the one hand and Syria on the other. According to Richard Burton [*2] "the Phoenicians spread their androgynic worship over Greece".

In contrast to the conception of the peoples of the goddess cult, that life and the world was of female origin, was that of the peoples of the god cult, who believed that the first Being was the Great Father. The Scandinavians, or a section of them, believed that Ymer was the earth father, and that the underworld deities had origin from

[p. 171]

the perspiration of his armpits, while the demons sprang from his feet. One of the several creation myths in India sets forth that the world-giant Purusha was, like Ymer, the source of all life. The highest caste, the Brahman, sprang from his mouth, the second, the Kshatriya, from his arms, the third, the Vaisya, from his thighs, and the fourth, the Sudra, from his feet. [*1] In Anatolia the Armenoid Hatti were father-worshippers. During the period of their political supremacy their "Lord of Heaven", a sky and atmospheric deity with solar attributes, was all powerful. "With the Hittites", says Professor Garstang, "fell their chief god from his predominant place. . . . But the Great Mother lived on, being the goddess of the land. Her cult, modified in some cases profoundly, by time and changed political circumstances, was found surviving at the dawn of Greek history in several places in the interior." [*2] Zeus of the Hellenic Greeks was similarly a father god and was imposed, as has been indicated, on the pre-Hellenic inhabitants of Greece after conquest. In Egypt Ptah, the god of Memphis, who wielded a hammer like the Hittite father god, and was, therefore, a thunderer also, was a "perfect god". At the beginning he built up his body and shaped his limbs ere the sky was fashioned and the world set in order. "No father begot thee", a priestly poet declared, "and no mother gave thee birth. Thou didst fashion thyself without the aid of any other being." [*3]

There is no trace of beliefs of the father cult in Crete. The Hellenic Zeus, as has been shown, was little more than a name on the island. It was applied to the young god who was the son of the Great Mother.

The various representations of the Cretan goddess

[p. 172]

suggest that, if they had no totemic significance, she was supposed to assume various aspects at different seasons and under different circumstances. As the Lady of Serpents she may have been the goddess of the Underworld, and as the Lady of Trees and Doves, the goddess of birth and fertility. She was also a mountain-goddess who wielded an axe or wand. It is possible that she was never sharply defined, and was closely associated with the vague spirit group of mothers--the "meteres", over whom she may have presided as "queen".

All the ancient deities reflected the habits of life of their worshippers, and retained traces of savage conceptions after they assumed benevolent attributes among cultured peoples. The Cretan Great Mother was evidently the goddess of the Neolithic folk who adopted the agricultural mode of life and kept domesticated animals. She was the earth mother and the corn mother, and the protector and multiplier of flocks and herds. As the Neolithic folk were also huntsmen, their goddess was associated with wild animals. She had evidently existence before Osiris taught his people how to sow grain and cultivate fruit-trees. When we find her guarded by lions it becomes evident that she was the dreaded being who had to be propitiated, like Black Annis of Leicester. This savage aspect of her character must not be lost sight of. It still survives in Greek folk-belief. The mother who gave origin to demons as well as gods was evidently, like the Babylonian Tiamat and the blood-thirsty Ishtar, possessed of primitive demoniac traits. The peasants of Greece at the present day remember Lamia, the "Queen of Libya" who was loved by Zeus. Her children were robbed by Hera, and she "took up her abode in a grim and lonely cavern, and there changed into a malicious and greedy monster, who in envy and despair stole and killed the

[p. 173]

children of more fortunate mothers". Another kind of Lamia, the Gello, transforms herself into a fish, a serpent, a kite, or a skylark, and devours babes also. When one of these demons is slain, no grass grows where her blood falls. [*1] In Gaelic folk-tales no grass grows under whin-bushes or holly-trees, because the Cailleach has touched the ground there with her hammer.

The Cretan mother-goddess appears to have possessed the attributes of the various goddesses who were differentiated in classic mythology. The pre-Hellenic Mother, one of whose names appears to have been Rhea, was taken over by the Greeks and given a place in the Olympian group. Her original character became vague. She was seated on a throne beside which her lion crouched in repose, and her ancient functions were performed by her children: Hestia, who resembled the Roman Vesta; Demeter, who resembled the Roman Ceres; Hera, who resembled the Roman Juno; and the gods Zeus and Poseidon, her sons, who link with the Roman Jupiter and Neptune. Her husband was the savage Cronos, who devoured his children like so many other primitive deities in various lands.

But the Hellenic Rhea, although called the "Mother of the Gods", was not a self-created being, but the daughter of Gaia, the earth mother, and Uranus, the sky father, who equate with the Aryo-Indian Dyaus, and Prithivi, the sky father and earth mother of Indra. In Egypt, on the other hand, the mother goddess was Nut of the sky, and the father the earth-god Seb. The Libyan Neith, however, who appears to have been a form of Nut, was an earth, sky, and atmospheric goddess. Her worshippers made her declare:

	 
		I am what has been, what is, and what shall be,
		
		 

[p. 174]

and those of Nut said of that Great Mother:

	 
		She hath built up life from her own body.
		
		 It would appear that the pre-Hellenic and Cretan Rhea was at once Gaia, Demeter, Artemis, and the earlier Aphrodite, and that she was originally identical with the pre-Hellenic Athene and Artemis, and the Phrygian Cybele.

Gaia was vaguely defined, yet belief in her was widespread. She was a divine prophetess, a fate, a power behind the gods. Like all primitive deities, including the Sumerian Tiamat, she had to be propitiated or fought against. Apparently one of her incarnations; was the Delphian snake, others being snakes of different cults which were oracles. The priestesses who drank the blood of bulls and entered sacred caves to prophesy were believed to hold commune with the earth mother, the divine revealer. The wisdom with which serpents were supposed to be endowed was of great antiquity. They were also protectors of tribes and households, and symbols of fertility. In Egypt Isis and Nepthys had serpent forms. The tutelary goddess of the Delta was Uazit, the winged serpent, and oracles were ascribed to her. She was the guardian of the child Horus when Set sought for him with murderous intent. Snakes, "dragons", and "worms" were protectors of hidden treasure. Sacrifices were offered to these blood-thirsty monsters, so that they might be propitiated, either as protectors of households or givers of crops and edible animals. The ancient custom of slaying a human being or animal when foundation-stones were laid or seeds were sown appears to have been connected with the belief that the earth genius must be sacrificed to so that her goodwill and co-operation might be secured. In the snake-goddess of Crete we should

[p. 175]

recognize, it would appear, the anthropomorphic form of the primitive Gaia.

The earth mother who possessed stores of hidden treasure was, as Anesidora, "she who sends up gifts". One of her gifts was the food-supply. She provided grass for flocks and herds, caused trees to blossom and bear fruit, and to her agricultural worshippers gave rich harvests.

The specialized form of the goddess most closely associated with crops was Demeter. Meter signified "mother", but the meaning of the prefix is uncertain. According to W. Mannhardt deai was the Cretan word for "barley", and the goddess was the "Barley Mother". [*1] Others hold that the prefix is a dialectic variant of the word for "earth".

But although the etymology of her name may remain doubtful, her real character is otherwise revealed. Melanippides and Euripides identified her with Rhea when they called her "mother of the gods", and the fact that the "earth snake" was invariably associated with her shows that she shared the attributes of Gaia, the elder "mother", and resembled closely the snake-goddess of Crete. She was associated with tree-worship, and the story was told that she punished Erysichthon by causing him to suffer dreadful hunger for cutting down trees in her sacred grove. In one of the hymns she is petitioned to gift the apple crop. As tree-goddesses were also water-goddesses, it is interesting to find that springs were dedicated to her in Attica and elsewhere, and that Euripides referred to her wanderings over rivers and the ocean. This poet also associated her with mountains, so that she must have been a guardian of animals like the primitive Scoto-Irish Cailleach, and a mountain-goddess like the Cretan "lady" who was depicted on the summit of a high peak.

[p. 176]

It was chiefly, however, as a provider of the food-supply that Demeter was addressed. She was asked for gifts of cattle and corn and fruit, and bulls and cows were sacrificed to her. Consequently she was a deity of fertility and a love-goddess. The pig was also sacrificed to her as to other earth spirits. As has been stated, pork was tabooed in Crete, and appears to have been eaten sacrificially only. Demeter's connection with the underworld emphasizes her character as a Fate--a goddess of birth and death, who controlled and measured the lives of mankind.

Demeter's great festival was called the Eleusina, the legendary explanation being that it was first celebrated at Eleusis, in Attica. One of its features was the mystic ceremony of initiation. Little is known regarding the Eleusinian mysteries. It would appear, however, from stray literary references to, and sculptured scenes of, the ceremony performed, that it was of elaborate character. The candidate fasted, and bathed in the sea with a young pig which was to be sacrificed. Having thus been purified, he entered the sacred place, where he drank of a posset prepared from the "first fruits"--barley or grapes. For a time his head and shoulders were covered by a cloth, so that he could not see what was happening about him. Probably he was terrorized. A priest instructed him, and he performed symbolic acts, and took vows.

The ceremony appears to have had a religious significance. "Whoever goes uninitiated to Hades", says Plato, "will lie in mud, but he who has been purified and is fully initiate, when he comes thither will dwell with the gods " [*1]

According to Diodorus Siculus, [*2] the Cretans professed that they gave the mysteries to Greece, and that they

[p. 177]

were performed openly on their island and communicated to everyone in ancient times. The same writer says that the Cretans received the mysteries from Egypt, the mysteries of Isis being the same as those of Demeter and the mysteries of Osiris the same as those of Dionysus. [*1] Plutarch expresses a similar view. [*2] Herodotus, referring to the festival at Busiris, in the Delta, says that "it is in honour of Isis, who is called in the Greek tongue Demeter". [*3] Apparently there were strong resemblances between the mysteries of Isis and those of Demeter.

It does not follow, however, that the Cretans had no anthropomorphic goddess, and knew naught of the mysteries until they began to trade with Egypt across the Mediterranean Sea. The resemblance between Isis and Demeter may have been due to both Egyptians and Cretans having inherited similar beliefs from their common ancestors in the area where the Mediterranean race was characterized. As much is suggested by the fact that there existed apparently in Crete, and undoubtedly in pre-Hellenic Greece, an ancient myth in which Demeter is associated, not with the young god Dionysus, who links with Osiris, Attis, and Tammuz, but with a young goddess. This myth did not survive in Egypt; that, however, it existed there at one time is suggested by the close association of Isis and Nepthys, the joint mothers of Osiris. In India the story of Sita, who was an incarnation of Lakshmi, is suggestive in this connection. This heroine of the Ramayana, having served her purpose on earth, departs to the Underworld.

	 
		The earth was rent and parted, and a golden throne arose,
		 Held aloft by jewelled Nagas [*4] as the leaves enfold the rose,
		 And the Mother [*5] in embraces held her spotless, sinless child.
		
		 

[p. 178]

Then they vanished together. "In the ancient hymns of the Rig Veda", says Romesh C. Dutt, "Sita is simply the goddess of the field furrow which bears crops for men. We find how that simple conception is concealed in the Ramayana, where Sita, the heroine of the epic, is still born of the field furrow, and after all her adventures returns to the earth." [*1]

The daughter of Demeter was Kore-Persephone. The ancient legend regarding the abduction of the young goddess is as follows.

It chanced that one day Persephone, daughter of Demeter, was wandering in a flowery meadow gathering lilies and violets, roses and crocuses, and hyacinths and narcissuses. Suddenly the earth opened, and Pluto, god of Hades, appeared, seated in a golden car. Seizing the maiden, he carried her off. Her cries were heard by the golden-haired Demeter, who assumed a dark mantle and wandered over mountains, rivers, and oceans, searching in vain for her daughter. On the tenth day she met Hecate, who conducted her to the sun-god. This all-seeing deity informed Demeter that Pluto had carried off Persephone with the consent of Zeus. On hearing this, Demeter withdrew from Olympus, and she vowed never to return until her daughter was restored to her. She also cast a blight upon the earth, and men ploughed and sowed in vain; no barley grew, nor did trees yield fruit. The goddess retired to Eleusia, and the king's daughters found her sitting at the Maiden's Well below an olive-tree. Celeus, the king, received her hospitably, and she became the nurse of his sons Triptolemus and Demophon. She desired to make Demophon an immortal, and put him one night in a fire; but his mother screamed aloud, with the result that the spell was broken, and he perished.

[p. 179]

[paragraph continues] Similarly, Isis thrust into the fire the infant son of the King of Byblus, whom she had been engaged to nurse, when searching for Osiris. [*1] Demeter compensated the parents for their loss (or sacrifice) by giving Triptolemus seeds and instructing him in the art of agriculture. She also conferred upon him a chariot which was drawn by winged dragons. Pausanias says that she instructed Triptolemus and his father in the performance of her rites and mysteries. [*2]

Many stories were related regarding Demeter's wanderings. One was that she fled from Poseidon as a mare, and that he assumed the form of a stallion. She afterwards became the mother of the horse Areion, which had the gift of speech. Hesiod, however, makes Medusa the spouse of Poseidon in his horse form and the mother of the winged Pegasus.

In Phigalia Pausanias [*3] saw the cave "sacred to Black Demeter". Here she was fabled to have dwelt for a time sorrowing for her daughter. Meanwhile the blight remained upon the earth, and mankind were perishing from famine. The gods searched for, and Pan discovered, her hiding-place. Then Zeus sent the Fates to her, and when he was informed that she would not remove the blight until Persephone was restored to her, he commanded that she should be released by Pluto. The god of Hades accordingly restored Persephone to her mother. She was brought from Hades by Hermes, and was received with glad heart by her mother, who at once restored fertility to the earth.

Zeus, however, had made it a condition of Persephone's release that she had not eaten aught in Hades. To secure her return, Pluto gave her a pomegranate seed before her departure, and when this fact was revealed the young

[p. 180]

goddess had to return again to the gloomy Underworld. Once more Demeter sorrowed, and cursed the earth in her wrath. A compromise had, therefore, to be effected, and Zeus decreed that Persephone should spend one-third of each year on earth with her mother, and the remaining two-thirds with Pluto in Hades.

In this Demeter-Persephone myth the young goddess plays the same part as Tammuz and Adonis, who spent part of the year on earth with one goddess, and part of the year in the Underworld with the other. She is not slain and dismembered like these gods and the Egyptian Osiris. The part of Osiris is taken by Triptolemus, who received the grain seeds from Demeter, as Osiris, the deified king, received them from Isis. It is evident, therefore, that if the Cretans and pre-Hellenic Greeks borrowed the mysteries from Egypt, they did so before the Osirian myth was fully developed-that is, before the migration from North Africa of the tribes of the Mediterranean race. It is unnecessary to assume that the earliest agricultural settlers in Greece and Crete had no knowledge of the Mysteries. Even the Australian savages have their initiation and other rites.

It is evident that the primitive form of Demeter in Arcadia bore a close resemblance to the repulsive hags of England and Scotland. Like the snake-goddess of Crete, she retained in her symbols her early demoniac traits. Pausanias [*1] tells that in the cave of Phigalia the ancient figure of the Black Demeter was of wood; it was seated on a rock and had a mare's head, [*2] which had above it the figures of snakes and other monsters. She held a dolphin in one hand and a dove in the other. When this statue

[p. 181]

was accidentally burnt, the Phigalians neglected the festivals and ceased to offer up sacrifices. Then a terrible famine afflicted the land. An oracle was consulted, and the people were informed that they were being punished for forgetting that Demeter had introduced among them the cultivation of corn.

Professor Frazer, [*1] dealing with the form of the myth as it is given in the Homeric Hymn to Demeter, regards Demeter and Persephone as personifications of the corn--the former as the old corn of last year and the latter as the seed corn in autumn and sprouting in spring. Persephone's period in Hades was the period in which the sprouting seed remained under the earth. [*2] The Black Demeter appears to have been the personification of the barren earth in winter, the Green Demeter the goddess of growing corn, and the Yellow Demeter the harvest deity. In their seasonal festivals the ancient agriculturists rejoiced and sorrowed alternately in sympathy with the goddess.

It would appear that the various names of the ancient earth mother were in turn individualized as separate deities. "As pre-Homeric offshoots of Gaia", says Dr. Farnell, "we must recognize Demeter, Persephone, and Themis." [*3] Themis was the Titan who became the second wife of Zeus. Kore appears, too, to have been originally identical with Demeter. "From the two distinct names", Dr. Farnell considers, "two distinct personalities arose. . . . Then as these two personalities were distinct, and yet in function and idea identical, early Greek theology must have been called upon to define their relations. They might have been explained as sisters, but as there

[p. 182]

was a male deity in the background, and Demeter's name spoke of maternity, it was more natural to regard them as mother and daughter. And apart from any myth about Demeter's motherhood, Persephone-Kore might well have been a very early cult title, meaning simply the girl-Persephone, just as Hera, the stately bride mother, was called, 'Hera the girl' at Stymphalos . . . or the facts could be brought into accord with another supposition. 'Kore' may have been detached from such a ritual name as Demeter-Kore, 'the girl-Demeter'." [*1]

In Crete, therefore, the snake-, dove-, and mountain-goddesses may have been seasonal forms of the Mother Earth. Until the inscriptions are read, however, it cannot be said with certainty whether or not they developed into separate personalities. All that can be said is that the legends which associate Rhea and Demeter with Crete are highly suggestive in this connection. Athene, a pre-Hellenic goddess, who was associated with the ubiquitous earth-snake, may have been a specialized form of Gaia also. Like the Libyan Neith, she developed as a war- and fertility-goddess, and was identified with that deity by Herodotus and other writers. The animals sacrificed to her were the bull, cow, sheep, and pig, and, once a year, the tabooed goat.

What appears to be certain is that in pre-Hellenic Greece and Crete, and elsewhere throughout Europe, the Earth Mother was worshipped and propitiated from an early pre-historic period. Her mysteries were performed in caves, as were also the Palaeolithic mysteries. In the caves there were sacred serpents, and it may be that the prophetic priestesses who entered them were serpent-charmers.

Cave worship was of immense antiquity. The cave

[p. 183]

was evidently regarded as the door of the Underworld, in which dwelt the snake form of Mother Earth. Swine were sacrificed to her, a custom which appears to have had origin in the Archaeological "Hunting Period". In the Scoto-Irish Fian (Fingalian) stories the love hero, Diarmid, the Adonis of the pre-Agricultural peoples, is slain by the boar leader of the swine-herd of Mala Lith, "Gray Eyebrows", the dark-visaged Cailleach (Old Wife), who was the mother of men and demons and wild animals. This legend may be a reminiscence of human sacrifice. Demeter's pig, like Athene's goat, was perhaps of totemic origin. The boar clan and the goat clan would have made blood offerings to their totems, as do the Australian Kangaroo and Witchetty-grub tribes to theirs, to secure the food-supply.

In the "Pastoral Period" sacrifices of bulls and cows must have become prevalent. The goddess was then the cow mother, who caused the herds to multiply, and provided them with grass. Hathor, the Egyptian goddess, had the body of a woman and the head of a cow. In one of the archaic versions of the Osirian myth Horus cuts off the head of his mother Isis, and the moon-god Thoth replaces it with a cow's head. Isis had also a serpent form, being evidently an earth-mother in origin.

When agriculture was introduced, the various tribes recognized their earth-black and grass-green mother-goddess in a new form--the harvest-haired corn spirit. But she still retained all her immemorial attributes: she did not cease to be the earth-snake, the hag huntress among the mountains and in valleys, the cow goddess of grassy steppes and green oases, and the spirit of fig-tree and olive and vine. Around her, too, hovered the animistic groups who were remembered in after time as nymphs and fairies. She also retained her association

[p. 184]

with the animal forms she assumed in season as the deity of fertility. There were serpents in her hair, a dove in one hand and a dolphin in the other, like the Demeter of the cave of Phigalia Withal, she was the standing-stone which was visited at certain phases of the moon by women who prayed for offspring. In the Scoto-Irish legend, the Cailleach, after the period of spring storms, transforms herself into "a gray stone looking over the sea". In India goats are sacrificed to the stone of the goddess Durga, which stands below a sacred tree. The legend of the birth of the Cretan Zeus is of special interest in this connection. Cronos swallowed a stone, believing it was Rhea's son, and it was afterwards set up as a sacred object at Delphi. The original Zeus was evidently worshipped as a stone pillar--the pillar which enclosed his spirit, or the spirit of his earthly representative, the priest-king.

The earliest form of the agricultural myth, judging from the Demeter-Persephone legend, appears to have been one in which goddesses only were concerned. All the ceremonies performed were based on the experiences of the sorrowing and wandering mother, the dark woman who concealed herself in a cave, and the abducted daughter condemned to pass part of the year in the Underworld.

It is possible that the Osirian legend, in which the daughter is displaced by the slain young god, came to Crete from Egypt by an indirect route-perhaps with a community of late invaders from Syria or Anatolia. After Osiris taught the Egyptians the art of agriculture he went abroad on a mission of civilization, and when he was slain, and set adrift in a chest, Isis voyaged to Byblus to recover his body. This may be a memory of the missionary enterprise of the Osirian cult. Minos, the Cretan king who resembles Osiris as an earthly king and lawgiver, became, like his prototype, a judge of the dead.

[p. 185]

[paragraph continues] His mother, Europe, a princess of Phoenicia, who was abducted by the Zeus bull, may have been a form of the cow Isis.

The Minotaur may have been a still more primitive form of Osiris. That god, as Apuatu, his earliest known form, was "the opener". He was therefore identical with the animal-headed Anubis. The mother of the Minotaur was Pasiphae, the queen. Like the Egyptian Queen Isis, she appears to have had originally a cow form, which gave rise to the legend that Daedalus constructed for her the image of a cow, which she entered. The legend that the Minotaur was slain by Theseus may have displaced an earlier myth about the slaying of the corn-god in his bull form. In the Anpu-Bata Egyptian story the sacred bull is slain so that its spirit may enter its tree incarnation. The Apis bull was periodically sacrificed in early times.

Although human sacrifices were offered to the Minotaur--the victims, no doubt, of the bull-ring--that fact need not be urged against the identification of the bloodthirsty monster with Osiris. It is not improbable that the primitive Osiris was a bull-headed man like the Minotaur, which in one of the Cretan seal impressions is depicted seated on a throne below a tree conversing with a priest; its close resemblance to Anubis and Sebek is highly suggestive of Egyptian origin. [*1] Professor Breasted has proved, from the evidence of the early Pyramid texts, that Osiris had at one time as unsavoury a reputation as the Cretan Minotaur. He calls him "a dangerous god", and adds: "The tradition of his [Osiris's] unfavourable character survived in vague reminiscences long centuries after he had gained wide popularity. At that time [the prehistoric period] the

[p. 186]

dark and forbidding realm which he ruled had been feared and dreaded. In the beginning, too, he bad been local to the Delta, where he had his home in the city of Dedu, later called Busiris by the Greeks. His transformation into a friend of man and kindly ruler of the dead took place here in prehistoric ages." [*1]

Osiris in his later form was a deified ruler, who received knowledge of the art of agriculture from the earth-goddess, like the Greek Triptolemus. His violent death, with dismemberment, is suggestive of the sacrifice of the old king so that his spirit might pass to his successor. There can be little doubt that human sacrifices were at one time prevalent among the peoples of the Mediterranean race, although they were forbidden ultimately in Osirian texts. Isis and Demeter, as has been shown, burned children before they revealed to mankind the art of agriculture. Dr. Farnell favours the view that the ancient custom of human sacrifice has survived as a memory in the legend which relates that the daughters of Cecrops, having been driven mad by the goddess Athena, flung themselves down from the rock of the Acropolis of Athens. Of similar character is the tradition that the first lot of maidens who were sent from Locris to be priestesses and handmaidens in Athena's temple were slain and burnt, their ashes having been afterwards cast from a mountain into the sea. "It is clear", Dr. Farnell comments, "this is no mere story of murder, but a reminiscence of peculiar rites." [*2]

Europe, as bride of Zeus, was probably, like Pasiphae, wife of Minos, a developed form of the Earth Mother. Minos and the Minotaur may similarly be regarded as forms of Osiris, the former an eponymous patriarch whose

 

THE BULL-BAITERS

 From the painting by John Duncan, A.R.S.A.

 (See page 287)

 

[p. 187]

spirit passed from king to son, and the latter as a link between the animal and anthropomorphic forms of the tribal deity, who was also the eponymous ancestor. According to Pausanias [*1] the Arcadians believed that the first settler in their land was Pelasgus, the eponymous ancestor, apparently, of the Pelasgians. Asius, he says, referred to him as follows:--

	 
		Divine Pelasgus on the tree-clad hills
		 Black earth brought forth, to be of mortal race.
		
		 "And Pelasgus", he proceeds, "when he became king contrived huts that men should be free from cold and rain, and not be exposed to the fierce sun, and also garments made of the hides of pigs, such as the poor now use in Euboea and Phocis. He was the inventor of these comforts. He, too, taught people to abstain from green leaves and grass and roots that were not good to eat, some even deadly to those who eat them. He discovered also that the fruit of some trees was good, especially acorns." [*2]

A similar legend is related by Plato regarding the patriarch of his Lost Atlantis. He states that on the hill above the palace (Knossos) lived "one of those men who in primitive times sprang from the earth, by name Evenor. His wife was Leucippe. They had only one daughter, named Clito". Clito became the wife of Poseidon, and the ancestress of all the tribes. [*3]

Minos, like Pelasgus, was evidently a semi-divine patriarch. Sir Arthur Evans shows that the "tomb of Zeus" was at one time called the "tomb of Minos". This "seems to record a true religious process", he says, "by which the cult of Minos passed into that of Zeus". [*4]

Probably the legend of the birth of Minos was appropriated

[p. 188]

by the Zeus cult. The child was suckled, according to one legend, by a sow, and to another by a goat--totemic animals, perhaps, from whom the food-supply was received. A Knossos seal impression depicts a child suckled by a horned sheep. Sir Arthur Evans refers, in this connection, to the legends of the son of Akakallis, daughter of Minos, being suckled by a bitch; of Miletos, "the mythical founder of the Cretan city of that name", being nursed by wolves; and of the fabled suckling of the Roman twins by a she-wolf. "There is", he says, "some interesting evidence of a cumulative nature, which shows that Rome itself was indebted to prehistoric Greece for some of the oldest elements in her religion." [*1] The Indian heroine, Shakuntala, was guarded at birth by vultures, as Semiramis was by doves, while the eagle protected Gilgamesh and the Persian patriarch Akhamanish. In Egypt Horus was nourished and concealed by the serpent-goddess Uazit.

All the eponymous heroes had probably animal forms at the earliest period. Serpents figure prominently in the winged disk of Horus, suggesting the fusion of the falcon and serpent clans of Egypt. The young god was usually depicted with a falcon's head and a human body, and he was an eponymous ancestor. In the bull-headed Minotaur, therefore, it would appear that we have a survival of an early form of a Cretan Osiris or Horus, the link between the bestial deity and human beings.

The Minotaur, however, was not the only man monster who received recognition in Crete. At Zagros Mr. Hogarth discovered a large number of clay sealings depicting man-stags, man-lions, man-goats, eagle-women, goat-women, and so on. One of the forms of the Sumerian Tammuz-Ningirsu was a lion-headed eagle.

[p. 189]

It may be that, before the legendary Minos established his empire, Crete was divided into petty states, each of which had its separate animal-headed god or goddess. These deities may have been originally totems. When the totem was slain the priest-king was wrapped in its skin, as was the Sumerian Ea in the skin of the fish. The priest-king was an incarnation of the totem. If the custom of depicting deities partly in bestial and partly in human form arose in this way, it was of exceedingly remote origin, for, as we have seen (Chapter II), there were animal-headed deities in the Late Palaeolithic Period.

Greek legends regarding Crete take no account of the stag- and eagle-headed monsters. The Minotaur with bull's head and forelegs and human body and legs overshadowed them all. This fact is highly suggestive. Possibly the explanation is that the bull clan of Minos, which was established at Knossos, attained political supremacy over the whole island, with the result that its Minotaur became the chief deity. This would account also for the myths regarding the sea-bull forms of Poseidon and Zeus, and the notorious ceremonies associated with the bull-ring at Knossos. The Minos clan may have invaded and conquered the island. Some authorities are inclined to regard Minos as a conqueror. Plato says of Atlantis that it was governed by a warrior class which lived separately in the more elevated parts, and had "common rooms of entertainment". [*1]

The same writer goes on to say that after a bull was captured at the annual festival, the people gathered round the fire in which it was sacrificed, to judge transgressors of the laws inscribed on a certain column. [*2] The laws were probably those which were credited to Minos.

The conclusions which may be drawn from the evidence

[p. 190]

available are as follows: Traces survived in Cretan religion of various stages of culture. New settlements were effected on the island from time to time by peoples of common origin, who introduced advanced systems of religion which were grafted on to the old. The worship of the Earth Mother was ever pre-eminent. At first she was the culture deity who instructed mankind. Then the tribal hero whom she favoured was elevated to the Pantheon, the living king being his incarnation on earth, while the dead king was his incarnation in the Underworld as the judge of the dead. As this deified hero displaced an earlier man-monster, who was the son of the mother goddess, and her earthly representative, the legend arose that the hero had actually slain him. [*1] Minos, who hated the Minotaur, may have been the original of the legendary Theseus. That is, Theseus may have been a real king who released Athens from the sway of the Minoan kings and absorbed the Minos-Heracles myth of Crete. The Minos clan came, perhaps, like the legendary Europe, from the Syrian coast, where it had adopted the later Osirian faith. After Crete traded directly with Egypt cultural influences filtered across the Mediterranean. It is unlikely, however, that the religion of the Cretan people as a whole was so profoundly affected by the imported beliefs of the rival cults of Egypt and Libya as they were by those of kindred peoples who settled on the island and exercised direct political influence there. In pre-Hellenic times the Minoan kings colonized parts of Greece, and traditions of Crete's cultural influence survived long after the Homeric Age, although the splendour of its ancient civilization became a blurred and faded memory which in time was associated with the Lost Atlantis.

Footnotes

^165:1 Chapter III.

^166:1 Herodotus, II, 53-5.

^166:2 That is during the ninth century B.C.

^167:1 Herodotus, II, 52.

^167:2 Cults of the Greek States, Vol. III. p. 195.

^168:1 Celtic Religion, Prof. Anwyl, pp. 41, 48.

^168:2 Rouse's Greek Votive Offerings, p. 246.

^168:3 Modern Greek Folk-lore and Ancient Greek Religion, J. C. Lawson, p. 141.

^169:1 Pindar, Nem. VI, 1, quoted by Lawson in Modern Greek Folk-lore, p. 65.

^169:2 Indian Myth and Legend, p. 229.

^169:3 The Burden of Isis, Dennis, p. 49. ("Wisdom of the East" Series.)

^170:1 Herodotus, I, 131.

^170:2 The Thousand Nights and a Night, Vol. X, p. 231 (1886).

^171:1 Indian Myth and Legend, p. 89.

^171:2 The Syrian Goddess, pp. 17, 18.

^171:3 Egyptian Myth and Legend, p. 156.

^173:1 Lawson's Modern Greek Folk-lore, pp. 173 et seq.

^175:1 Mythologische Forschungen, pp. 292 et seq.

^176:1 Phaedo, 69 c.

^176:2 V, 77.

^177:1 Phaedo, 1-96.

^177:2 Isis et Osiris, 35.

^177:3 II, 59.

^177:4 Serpents.

^177:5 Bashudha, the earth mother.

^178:1 The Ramayana condensed into English verse (Temple Classics, 1898).

^179:1 Egyptian Myth and Legend.

^179:2 II, 14.

^179:3 VIII, 42.

^180:1 VIII, 42.

^180:2 The result, apparently, of the local fusion of the old earth-goddess cult and the horse cult of invaders.

^181:1 Golden Bough ("Spirits of the Corn and Wild"), Vol. II, pp. 37 et seq.

^181:2 The length of the period is differently estimated by various writers.

^181:3 Cults of the Greek States, Vol. V, pp. i 19 et seq.

^182:1 Cults of the Greek States, Vol. V, pp. 119-24.

^185:1 The British School at Athens, Vol. VII, p. 18.

^186:1 Development of Religion and Thought in Ancient Egypt, p. 38 (1912).

^186:2 Cults of the Greek States, Vol. I, pp. 260 et seq.

^187:1 VIII, 1.

^187:2 Pausanias, trans. by A. R. Shilleto, Vol. II, pp. 61-2.

^187:3 The Critias, Section VIII.

^187:4 Journal of Hellenic Studies, Vol. XXI, p. 121.

^188:1 Journal of Hellenic Studies, Vol. XXI, pp. 128, 129.

^189:1 The Critias, Section VI,

^189:2 Ibid., Section XV.

^190:1 The sacrificial slaying of the sacred animal may have also survived in the legend.

     
Myths of Crete and Pre-Hellenic Europe, by Donald A. Mackenzie, [1917], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 191]

 

CHAPTER IX

 

Growth of Cretan Culture and Commerce

Cretan Origin of Aegean Civilization--The Historic Periods--Cretan and Egyptian Chronologies --Egyptian Evidence of Early Shipping-- Pottery as Evidence of Racial Drifts--Asiatic Invasions--The Libyans and Early Cretans--Evidence of Imported Sea-shells--Physical Features of Crete--Prevailing Air-currents--Why Aegean Mariners sailed by Night--Homeric References to Night Voyages--Fertility of Crete--Its Natural Beauties--Life on Sea-coast and among the Mountains--Corn and Wine Harvests--Surplus Products for Early Commerce--Glimpses of Early Minoan Times--Relations with Egypt in Pyramid Period--Story of the Stone jars--Invention of Potter's Wheel--Borrowings from Egypt--Cretan Ceramic Development--Problem of Sea Routes--Cretans as Ha-nebu and Keftiu.

THE discoveries in Crete have proved conclusively that its pre-Hellenic culture was of great antiquity and local growth. It had developed with unbroken continuity from Neolithic times, and so pronounced was its individual character that it could borrow from contemporary civilizations without suffering loss of identity.

Cretan civilization was immensely older than Mycenaean. Indeed it had reached its "Golden Age" before Mycenae assumed any degree of importance as a cultural centre. This fact has compelled archaeologists to select a new name which could be appropriately applied to it. Professor Reisch favours "Aegean", and, all things considered, this generic term appears to be the most appropriate. It takes into account the obscure influences which were at work during the lengthy Neolithic Period, when independent communities were settled on various islands

[p. 192]

and on points on the mainland and had begun to trade one with another. The Island of Melos, for instance, as we have seen, was exporting obsidian and importing in exchange apparently the products of other localities. The influence of environment was directing into new lines the common form of culture derived from the North African homeland by the predominant race.

Mycenaean civilization is placed in its proper perspective by referring to it as a late stage of Aegean. On the other hand, Cretan was an early and local form of it. "In Crete", says Mr. H. R. Hall, "it first developed, then spreading northwards it absorbed the kindred culture of the islands, and perhaps the Peloponnese; then it won Central Greece north of the Isthmus from its probably alien aborigines, becoming there 'Mycenaean', and finally, when its own end was near, forced its way into Thessaly, having already reached the Troad in one direction, Cyprus (and Philistia later) in another, Sicily and Messapia in another." [*1]

Sir Arthur Evans has divided the history of Aegean civilization in Crete into three main periods, named after the legendary king, or Dynasties of kings, called Minos. These are:

	 
		Early Minoan.
		 Middle Minoan.
		 Late Minoan.
		
		 Each of these periods has also been divided into three stages: Early Minoan I, Early Minoan II, Early Minoan III, and so on to Late Minoan III.

The Minoan Age begins with the introduction of bronze, which occurred, however, long after Aegean civilization had assumed distinctive form. Crete was then

[p. 193]

able to borrow and adapt to its own use the inventions of other countries, and yet maintain the individuality of its local institutions and art products. The introduction of bronze stimulated its industries, but caused no more change in its national characteristics than has been effected in China by the introduction of electric lighting in our own day.

Cretan archaeologists as a whole are agreed as to the order and relative duration of the various historic periods, and most of them have adopted the system of Sir Arthur Evans. Nor do they differ greatly regarding the approximate dating of these. It has even been found possible, although the local script cannot yet be read, to frame a provisional chronological system based on the Berlin system of minimum dating, so as to fit the story of Crete into the history of the ancient world. Important clues have been forthcoming in this connection. From an early period trading relations existed between the island kingdom and the Delta coast, and various manufactured articles were consequently exchanged, as well as wheat and barley, oil and skins, and other perishable goods. The discovery in the deposits assigned to different and well-marked historic phases, of Egyptian products in Crete and Cretan products in Egypt, has made it possible for archaeologists to ascertain which periods in either country were contemporaneous.

"With the help of Egyptian synchronisms", writes Mr. H. R. Hall, "we know that the Minoan civilization was nearly, if not quite, as old as the Egyptian. . . . If we date the beginnings of Egyptian history about 3500 B.C., we have not long to wait before we find indisputable traces of connection between Egypt and Crete." [*1]

Early Minoan I begins, therefore, some time after the

[p. 194]

legendary Pharaoh Mena united by conquest Upper and Lower Egypt and founded the First Dynasty, and before the great pyramids near Cairo were erected. About the same period the Sumerian civilization of Babylonia was beginning to flourish, and the Hatti tribe of the Hittite confederacy had established itself in Anatolia.

Early Minoan II extended from about the period of the Fourth to that of the Sixth Egyptian Dynasty: that is from the Pyramid Age till the close of the Old Kingdom Period.

Early Minoan III covers the dark age of early Egyptian history extending from the Seventh till the Eleventh Dynasties.

Middle Minoan I commenced early in the Eleventh Dynasty Period. Middle Minoan II flourished during the part of the Twelfth and part of the Thirteenth Dynasties; and Middle Minoan III came to an end during the early period of the Hyksos occupation of Egypt.

The Late Minoan Period was the "Golden Age" of Crete. It began before the Hyksos were expelled from Egypt, and attained its highest splendour during the Eighteenth Egyptian Dynasty. During Late Minoan II, Thothmes III of Egypt received gifts from the island kingdom as well as from the Hittites. Late Minoan III was an age of decline. Foreigners were in occupation of Crete, and the mainland towns of Tiryns and Mycenae were flourishing and influential. Aegean civilization had thus reached the Mycenaean stage. Iron was coming into use; the sixth city of Troy had been built. It was the Age of Homer's heroes. At the close of the Mycenaean period of the Aegean Age the northern conquerors of Greece were inaugurating the Hellenic era. "The so-called miracle of the rise of Hellenism, early in the first millennium B.C., is to be explained", writes Mr. D. G.

[p. 195]

Hogarth, "by the re-invigoration of aboriginal societies settled for long previous ages in the Aegean area, and possessed of an ancient tradition and instinct of culture. . . . This process was chiefly due to the blood and influence of an immigrant population of less impaired vigour, which had long been cognizant of and participant in the mid-European culture, and was itself, both in origin and development, related to the elder society of the Aegean area." [*1]

At what period Crete began to trade with Egypt it is as yet impossible to ascertain with certainty. Professor Flinders Petrie [*2] found, in the lowest levels of the temple at Abydos, black pottery which he concluded came from Crete on account of its close resemblance to fragments discovered by Sir Arthur Evans in the Late Neolithic deposits of Knossos. He also characterized as Aegean several vases and pieces of painted pottery discovered in tombs of the First Dynasty. He maintained further that the Cretan and other foreign imports were brought to Egypt in the galleys depicted on pre-Dynastic vases.

This view has not found general acceptance. It has been urged that the galleys were ordinary Nile boats. "They have deck shelters", writes Mr. Hall, "just like the model funerary boats of the Middle Kingdom tombs, and they carry women on board. On one vase a woman is depicted waiting, with her hands above her head; it may well be that they actually represent the ferry boats of the dead. They carry purely Egyptian emblems. Now, we know of the Egyptians that they were never seafarers; they disliked the sea, and they held the seafaring inhabitants of the Delta coast in abomination: it was never the Egyptians who went to Crete in the early days or later. . . . Finally, the boats are represented amid ostriches,

[p. 196]

oryxes, mountains, and palm-trees: that is to say, they are sailing on the Nile with the desert hills and their denizens on either hand." [*1]

All that seems certain in this connection is that shipping was already well advanced in pre-Dynastic times. There is no evidence to show whether the seafarers on the Delta coast, or in Crete, possessed superior galleys to those used by the navigators of the Nile. No doubt they did. The Cretans who went to Melos for obsidian must have found it necessary to build galleys capable of withstanding the buffetings of wind and wave in the Aegean Sea. In fact, the early settlers could not have reached Crete unless they had superior craft to the prehistoric dahabeeyahs and feluccas of the Nile. It is possible, therefore, as Professor Flinders Petrie thinks, that oil and skins were carried across the Mediterranean from Crete in pre-Dynastic times, and exchanged for the corn and beans of Egypt. But on this point the evidence afforded by the pottery cannot be held to be conclusive.

The dark pottery with geometric designs belongs to a class of widespread distribution. Specimens with similar decorations, but of different texture, have been found as far apart as Anau by the Pumpelly expeditions, which conducted important researches in Russian and Chinese Turkestan, at Susa, the ancient capital of Elam, in Persia, at Hittite sites at Sakje Geuzi in North Syria, in Cappadocia and Boghaz'koi, and at points in the Balkan Peninsula. The black pottery of pre-Dynastic Egypt and Neolithic Crete may, therefore, have come from Anatolia. Some hold, indeed, that it has an ethnic significance. Mr. Pumpelly's view is that the Central Asian oases were the sources of Western Asiatic culture, but the evidence he brings forward in this connection is of somewhat slight

 

MAGAZINE OF JARS AND KASELLES, KNOSSOS

The Jars ("pithoi") are made of decorated earthenware and are of huge size. The "kaselles" are the small square openings in the floor of the magazine, evidently used at one time for storage purposes.

 

[p. 197]

character and hardly justifies his theory that Egypt and Babylonia derived their knowledge how to grow barley and wheat, and actually received certain breeds of domesticated animals, from this part of the world. As we have seen, cattle were domesticated in southern France in the Aurignacian period of the Palaeolithic Age, before the Fourth Glacial Epoch.

Mr. Pumpelly [*1] has, however, demonstrated that climatic changes which took place in the Transcaspian oasis caused the early civilization, of which he discovered important traces, to vanish entirely. The "Kurgans" were buried by drifting sand, and the agriculturists and pastoralists had therefore to migrate in search of "fresh woods and pastures new". It may be that their movements are indicated by the various finds of black pottery. Communities of the wanderers may have settled in Elam and Anatolia, and drifted into Egypt through Syria, and towards Crete through the Balkans. Professor Elliot Smith says that "a definitely alien strain made its appearance in the people of Egypt during the Early Dynastic period, and left its indelible impress in their physical traits for all time. The heterogeneous features appear in a form so pronounced as to justify the positive assertion that the alien element in the mixture was neither Egyptian nor did it belong to any of the kindred peoples. It was something quite foreign and certainly Asiatic in origin--that variety which Von Luschan has called Armenoid." [*2] If the Anatolian "broad-heads" were the distributors of the black pottery obtained from the cast, representatives of their stock may have reached Crete as well as Egypt before the introduction of metal-working. The evidence obtained from graves shows that they were pressing westward

[p. 198]

into Europe long before the close of the Neolithic Period, although not in such great numbers as in the Copper and Bronze Ages.

Another view of the problem has been urged by Dr. Duncan Mackenzie. He considers it probable that while the Libyans were developing the black-topped style of pottery "the allied Neolithic people of the Aegean, in a wider European context, were creating the peculiar style of black hand-polished ware typical, for that early period, of the Aegean. Well on in this Neolithic epoch", he says, "must come the Egyptian-looking black-topped ware found in the Copper Age tombs of Cyprus, whose significance in this connection was first pointed out by Furtwangler as being a new indication of race connection between the Egyptian and East Mediterranean of that period, and of a northward movement of the Libyan race consequent upon, and caused by, the first appearance of the Egyptians proper in the Nile land. If, as is likely, this northward movement began before the Aegean civilization had attained to such consistency in itself and such influence outwards as could have had any definite echo in Egypt, then we should have sufficient explanation of the fact that of imported remains in Egypt none from the Aegean region go back to this early period." [*1] The pottery with geometric designs found by Professor Flinders Petrie at Abydos may therefore have come from North Africa.

It will thus be seen that the problem as to whether Crete traded with Egypt in Late Neolithic and the earliest Minoan times must be left in the realm of conjecture. What seems certain, however, is that the island kingdom received cultural influences directly or indirectly either from North Africa or Anatolia at an early period in its

[p. 199]

history. This could not have occurred without navigation being well advanced. But, although such a conclusion seems highly probable, it would be rash to build upon it in absence of direct evidence regarding the existence of the regular and constant exchange of commodities, and the influence which would consequently be exercised in the development of art. "We can hardly as yet", writes Mr. H. R. Hall, "speak of relations between Egyptian and Aegean Art in Neolithic days, though it is by no means certain that such relations did not then exist, especially since there is a probability that the Aegean civilization was ultimately derived, in far-away Neolithic times, from that of Egypt, or rather from one of the primitive elements that went to form Egyptian culture." [*1] It should be mentioned, however, that a piece of ivory was found in Neolithic strata at Phaestos, in Crete. It may have come from Egypt. Shells have also been discovered by Italian archaeologists in the caves of Liguria, which do not belong to the north Mediterranean coast, but are common along the Libyan coast. These are wave-worn and were probably carried to Italy by early navigators, but whether these were Neolithic or Early Minoan Cretans is uncertain.

The makers of pottery with geometric designs must have regarded sea-washed Crete as a veritable Paradise, whether they came from Libyan grasslands fringing yellow desert, or the Delta region with its seasonal plagues, or from the uplands of Anatolia where in winter the passes are often snow-blocked. Quite a variety of climates is offered by the picturesque island, with its great mountain spine fretted by peaks which rise from 5000 to 8000 feet above the sea-level, its sloping forests of pine and oak and chestnut, and its sheltered valleys where grow the

[p. 200]

olive and fig and vine. A sharp contrast is afforded by even its northern and southern shores, especially in winter, when the former is chilled by bleak winds from the mainland, and the latter is as balmy as the North African coast. During the greater part of the year the prevailing winds blow alternately from the north-east and north-west, and from the south-west and the south. The northern winds, ever welcomed through the ages in Egypt, attain greatest velocity in late winter and whiten the mountains of Crete with the snows they retain until July, while the currents from the south come chiefly during the months of autumn and early winter. Easterly and westerly breezes are invariably light and of short duration. "The cold current rushing over the easy north slope of the Balkan, and through the Rumelian gap, gathers force", writes Mr. D. G. Hogarth, [*1] "as it nears the African vacuum. Local relief shelters the Adriatic coasts, and to some extent western Macedonia, Thessaly, and Boeotia; but Attica receives a full draught through the depression between its low hills, Pentelicus and Hymettus; and the isles, especially Crete, are scourged to such purpose that the higher vegetation in many districts will only grow in triangular patches to southward of sheltering rocks. The counter-current blows off the Sahara with terrific energy for almost as many days annually as the steppe wind; but the high relief of Crete breaks its force from the Aegean, and it is on the slopes of the White Mountains, Kedros, Psiloriti and Lasithi, and the western coasts and isles of Greece that it expends the most of its storms and rains." The north wind, however, brings more moisture to the peninsula. But the rainfall diminishes towards the south) "till little is left to Attica or the Cyclad isles but a hard cold current of more bracing and stimulating sort for the

[p. 201]

healthy human frame than is found anywhere else in the area of the Nearer East".

Between July and September the north-east or northwest wind falls in the late afternoon, and then "the overheated land begins to suck a current off the cooler sea--that familiar inbat breeze which, after a short interval of stillness following midday, sets the caiques dancing in every Levantine harbour". At midnight the land breeze commences to blow seaward.

Early navigators among the isles must have soon learned to take advantage of morning and evening breezes as they passed from harbour to harbour with their commodities.. In the Odyssey [*1] the wanderer Odysseus spends his last day among the Phaeacians on the isle of Scheria longing for the sun to set. He

	 
		                          to the radiant sun
		 Turned wistful eyes, anxious for his decline.
		
		 After supper he was escorted to the vessel which was to convey him to Ithaca. Ere the port was cleared he "silent laid him down", and when the rowers

	 
		With lusty strokes upturned the flashing waves,
		 His eyelids, soon, sleep, falling as a dew,
		 Closed fast.
		
		 All night long the vessel sped like a falcon, "swiftest of the fowls of heaven".

	 
		The brightest star of heaven, precursor chief
		 Of day-spring, now arose, when at the isle
		 (Her voyage soon performed) the bark arrived. [*2]
		
		 Telemachus also sails at midnight, when

	 
		               blue-eyed Pallas from the west
		 Called forth propitious breezes; fresh they curled
		 The sable deep, and, sounding, swept the waves . . .
		
		 

[p. 202]

	 
		A land breeze filled the canvas . . .
		 Thus all night long the galley, and till dawn,
		 Had brightened into day, cleared swift the flood. [*1]
		
		 In early spring navigation is perilous in the Aegean, and even in summer winds may veer suddenly without warning. It was a meltem or summer gale that caused the ship on which St. Paul was being carried to Italy to meet with disaster. The "south wind blew softly", and "they sailed close by Crete". [*2] Then arose "a tempestuous wind called Euroclydon", a hard north-eastern which comes in violent gusts and covers the heaving bays with sheets of foam. "And when the ship was caught," says the Biblical narrative, "and could not bear up into the wind, we let her drive." The meltem was encountered by the captain of the vessel, who paid so little heed to St. Paul's warning, in late autumn, when, as was wonted to be said, "sailing was now dangerous because the fast was now already past". [*3]

Classic legends of heroes who were shipwrecked like Odysseus, and of sea monsters and syrens, are eloquent of the perils which the sea rovers of the Aegean confronted with unflinching courage and increasing skill wrung from hard experience. But as man has ever achieved greatest progress when confronted by difficulties, the islanders became the first traders on the Mediterranean. They were lauded for their seamanship in song and story--those self-confident men so proud and cold, of whom the goddess Athene spoke to Odysseus, the wanderer, when on the Island of Scheria:

	 
		Mark no man; question no man; for the sight
		 Of strangers is unusual here, and cold
		
		 [

[p. 203]

	 
		The welcome by this people shown to such.
		 They, trusting in swift ships, by the free grant
		 Of Neptune traverse his wide waters, borne
		 As if on wings, or with the speed of thought. [*1]
		
		 In early Minoan times Crete must have proved as attractive to settlers as it did to traveller Lithgow in 1609, when, describing the plain of Khania, in the north-west, he wrote: "Trust me, I told along these rocks at one time, and within my sight, some sixty-seven villages; but when I entered the valley, I could not find a foote of ground unmanured, save a narrow passage way wherein I was, the olives, pomegranates, dates, figges, oranges, lemmons, and pomi del Adamo, growing all through other, and at the rootes of which trees grew wheate, malvasie, muscadine, leaticke wines, grenadiers, carnobiers, mellones, and all other sortes of fruites, and hearbes the earth can yeld to man, that for beauty, pleasure and profit it may easily be surnamed the garden of the whole universe, being the goodliest plot, the diamond sparke, and the honeyspot of all Candy (Crete). There is no land more temperate for ayre, for it hath a double spring tyde; no soyle more fertile, and therefore it is called the combat of Bacchus and Ceres; no region or valley more hospitable, in regard of the sea having such a noble haven cut through its bosome, being as it were the very resting-place of Neptune."

The year is divided into three seasons. After the gales and rainstorms of Winter comes in March a luxuriant and balmy Spring, when fragrant and many-coloured wild flowers, anciently sacred to the Earth Mother, bloom everywhere in great profusion. Flocks and herds that were "wintered" in the valleys are driven once again to the uplands, where rich fresh herbage springs up in

[p. 204]

abundance. Rivers and streams flash in the sunshine; torrents leap gladly among the rocks, and the sound of falling waters mingles with the constant hum of insects and the songs of melodious birds. In April turtle doves are numerous in passage; in Crete as in Egypt and Babylonia they were associated in other days with the goddess of love.

When the grey dusk blots out the splendour of sunset, and the olive warblers are silenced in the olive groves, the nightingale's sweet "jug-jug" and clear pensive carol ripples through the shadowy woodlands. The shepherd who has ascended the mountain slopes to his summer shelter does not hear the songster of night, but at dawn he is awakened by the wise thrush which "sings its song twice over", and ere long in the growing brightness his heart rejoices to hear once again the full-throated chorus of blackbirds and linnets and woodlarks in leafy woods. where silent lizards come out to listen to the pipes of Pan, where rough satyrs dance merrily, and wide-eyed nymphs peer shyly through congregated trees and whispering water reeds at the human intruders of their solitudes. Higher up the slopes are scented pine-woods that murmur in the breeze like the everlasting sea. Spring comes slowly up this way. Beyond the forest zone the snow retreats grudgingly, and is replaced by the bright foliage of Alpine plants in sheltered nooks, and especially on the southern mountain face. When the glistening diadem of snow is robbed from Mount Ida, and no storm-cloud comes nigh, its bald crest looms greyly across the blue Mediterranean.

There are villages on bracing upland valleys, and in these the present-day descendants of the ancient Cretans lead simple and secluded lives, like the earliest pastoralists. Herding their flocks, they climb shelves of rasping

[p. 205]

rock, wearing the quaint skin boots with protruding heel and toe pieces that were invented by their remote ancestors. Hither may have come by preference many of the booted Anatolians who were attracted to the island in Minoan times. In midsummer, when the valleys beneath are parched with heat, and their fields and gardens must needs be irrigated, a temperate climate prevails on the plateaus. The nights are cool and refreshing, and amidst the hushed silence of the mountains the voices of men who guard their flocks can be heard calling from great distances through the rarefied air, when the Sphakiots, who claim to be descendants of the Dorians, come to raid the sheepfolds.

It is on these uplands, where Artemis still cares for her nimble-footed herds, that the greatest activity is displayed in Spring-time and early Summer. In the rich alluvial valleys the small farmers have not much else to do than to survey their growing crops. Their fields were ploughed and sown before the "storm season" came on, and they secured ample nourishment from the drenching rains. The harvest falls in May on these lower grounds, but on the uplands it cannot be gathered in before July. After crops are threshed and stored, the fruit is ripe for plucking; then grape juice flows crimson from the wine press, and sweet oil from golden olives.

In ancient times Crete yielded a rich surplus of its products which was available for purposes of trade. Ships were loaded with skins and wine and oil, dried fish and sponges, dried fruits and sacks of barley, which were bartered for the commodities of other lands. The seamen visited island after island in the Aegean sea, and they ventured westward to Sicily; the mainland of Greece was but a day's journey; eastward lay the shores of Anatolia, where the second city of Troy had rich gifts to offer in

[p. 206]

exchange for heavy cargoes. In time Egypt attracted the fearless mariners. It lay towards the south-east, and when favourable winds were blowing could be reached in the space of two or three days. They may have heard of this rich and wonderful land on the Syrian coast, or perhaps there were Cretan traditions regarding it. Birds that flew thither may have guided them. In the story of Uenuamen, the Egyptian emissary who was forced to remain in Cyprus, that melancholy man laments, gazing across the sea, "Seest thou not the birds which fly, which fly back unto Egypt? Look at them; they go unto the cool canal. And how long do I remain abandoned here!" [*1] Let us follow the island mariners to the homeland of their ancestors, voyaging in the track of migrating birds.

In the Cretan period, Early Minoan I, is embraced the Third Egyptian Dynasty (C. 2980-2900 B.C.). A change had taken place in the administration of Egypt, Pharaoh Zoser having transferred his court from the south to Memphis, the London of the Nile Valley. He was the builder of the first pyramid-the step pyramid of Sakkara; and his activities extended to Sinai, whither he sent annual expeditions to work the copper mines. Early Cretan traders must have returned home with wonderful stories of his great achievements. But they were doubtless more greatly impressed by the tireless Pharaoh Sneferu, who did so much to strengthen and consolidate united Egypt. He battled against Asian hordes which invaded the Delta region, constructed roads there, and fortified strategic points on the eastern frontier. This monarch built great river vessels for purposes of trade and defence, some of which were over a hundred and seventy feet long. As he also dispatched on one occasion, as he duly recorded, a fleet of forty ships to the Syrian coast to

[p. 207]

obtain cedars from Lebanon, it is evident that Mediterranean navigation had been well advanced ere his time. He may have been not only familiar with the achievements of Cretan mariners, but perhaps even employed them.

Sneferu was the last king of his line. The Fourth Dynasty (c. 2900-2750 B.C.) produced the stern and masterful Pharaohs--Khufu, Khafra, and Menkaura--who erected the immense pyramids near Cairo. In this Age imposing royal statues were carved from material as hard as diorite, that of Khafra being one of the triumphs of Egyptian art.

Direct evidence of Crete's connection with Egypt during this, the Old Kingdom, period is of scanty character. It is not to be wondered, however, that such should be the case. The marvel is that any traces at all should survive of trading relations conducted at such a remote period.

To emphasize the importance of the few significant finds that have enabled the Sherlock Holmeses of Archaeology to prove that such relations did exist, it should be explained that after copper came into use in Egypt, fine stone working became possible, and developed rapidly. The invention of the copper drill enabled workmen to construct shapely bowls, vases, jars, platters, and other vessels of porphyry, diorite, alabaster, and other suitable stones. Craftsmen took evident delight in their handiwork. In one of the tomb scenes, two of them are depicted squatting on the ground drilling out stone vessels. The artist imparted to their faces an expression of self-conscious reserve which suggests that they were accustomed to hear their praises sounded and took pride in their skill. Hieroglyphics placed between the figures record a characteristic conversation. "This is a very

[p. 208]

beautiful vessel," says one, and his comrade replies, "It is, indeed." [*1]

These stone vessels were in great demand, and displaced in the market the rough hand-made pottery, which consequently deteriorated in quality; evidently it was manufactured chiefly for sale to the poorer classes, and) as burial rites have ever been of conservative character, to be placed in graves. The same thing happened in Crete after the introduction of metal. There, too, stone vessels caused much unemployment among the potters, and less skill was displayed by those who supplied cheap vessels of baked clay to a declining market.

It is of special interest to find in this connection that the Cretan stone vases among Early Minoan relics show points of resemblance to those of Egypt. The most important evidence, however, is derived from strata of Middle Minoan I. Some fragments of carinated bowls belonging to this period resemble closely characteristic Egyptian carinated bowls of the Third and Fourth Dynasties. The Cretan vessels were made of Liparite imported from the Lipari islands, which are situated to the north of Sicily, and were apparently visited by the adventurous mariners of Crete in Early Minoan times. No doubt can remain that these Cretan bowls were copies of Egyptian models, and these were probably carried direct from the land of the Pharaohs.

The copper drill, which filled the hearts of Egyptian potters with despair, was in time surpassed by a more wonderful mechanical contrivance, which ultimately restored the prestige and popularity of their ancient craft. Sometime during the Fourth Dynasty, when the industries were being stimulated by the Pyramid -building activities of the Pharaohs, and inventive minds were constantly

EARLY MINOAN POTTERY, INCLUDING EXAMPLES WITH "BEAK" OR "TEAPOT SPOUTS"

(FROM VASILIKI).

[p. 209]

directed towards the solution of difficult problems with purpose to simplify and expedite the work of construction, an ingenious craftsman produced the potter's wheel. He was probably a citizen of busy Memphis. As much is suggested by the fact that the new invention was afterwards associated with Ptah, the god of that city, and his southern form, Khnumu, of the First cataract colony of artisans. These deities were depicted shaping the sun and moon and the first man and woman on the potter's wheel. The discoveries and inventions of pious worshippers were always attributed to the culture deity.

As the shapely products of the potter's wheel had to be burned with more care than the old hand-made articles, the problem of firing was solved by the introduction of the enclosed furnace. Results were then obtained which placed the workmanship of the stone-vessel workers in the shade. One can imagine the proud inventor carrying his wonderful jars and vases to the royal palace to receive the congratulations of the Pharaoh, and perhaps a decoration of which he was richly deserving.

The new pottery attained speedy and widespread popularity. Both in Egypt and Crete the potters first imitated the vessels of stone and metal. Indeed the Early Minoan workers, when they decorated their productions, painted imitation rivets on the handles. The Cretan Schnabelkannen (vase form), with "beak spout", "bridge spout", or "teapot spout", had been evidently modelled on similar copper and stone vases of the Egyptian Old Kingdom Period. Trading relations between the Cretans and the Nilotic peoples must therefore have been of a direct and intimate character.

But although Crete thus borrowed from Egypt, just as any modern country may borrow an invention from another, its civilization maintained its strictly local

[p. 210]

character. It was because the island craftsmen had attained a high degree of skill that they were able to adopt new methods, and contribute to the general growth of culture. They were not mere imitators who slavishly copied the methods of their neighbours. Their own inventions were in turn borrowed by others.

The study of Cretan pottery shows that its culture was of local growth and that development was not due merely to outside influence, although outside influences may have at periods provided the stimulus which caused craftsmen to produce something new and improve upon what was being done elsewhere. The spirit of rivalry involved has ever made for progress.

Dr. Duncan Mackenzie, who has acted as Sir Arthur Evans's "lieutenant" in Crete, and is "the chief authority on Early Cretan pottery", as Professor Burrows says, [*1] was the first to deal with the development of ceramic art of the island in a manner which has thrown much light on the growth of its civilization. The American and Italian archaeologists acknowledge freely his influence and example as an accurate observer, and constantly refer to his "masterly analysis" of Knossian ceramic art. He has woven a wonderful narrative from the collection of fragments dug out of the soil, setting in order what had for so long been confused and obscure. [*2]

Trial pits were sunk at various points on the hill of Knossos and inside the palace, with purpose to ascertain the contents and depth of the Neolithic stratum. It was found that the average thickness from the virgin soil upwards was about six metres, the greatest being eight. In the lowest layer, fragments were obtained of a "sooty grey" pottery which had been hand-polished outside and

[p. 211]

inside. The primitive potters made vessels of rough shape from poorly sifted clay, which had neither necks nor differentiated bases: there was no decoration. The second metre yielded a similar ware, but a few fragments were found to be ornamented with geometrical designs, the V-shaped zigzag being either filled in with or surrounded by dots. Some authorities believe that this geometric motive is of northern origin. It appears on Late Neolithic and Bronze Age pottery in our own country and throughout the continent.

In the third and fourth metres a small percentage of the fragments are incised. Then in the fifth metre appears a new development. The incised geometric designs are found to be filled with gypsum or chalk. Here begins the "light on dark" ornamentation of Cretan pottery. This style of pottery has been found in the first stratum of Troy and also in Egypt. Whether it was imported into the Nile Valley from Crete or Asia Minor is, however, uncertain. The evidence afforded indicates either a racial drift from some cultural centre, or the existence of commercial connections between widely separated districts at a remote period in the Neolithic Age. The interval represented by this stratum was of a lengthy duration.

Another new development occurs in the fifth metre. The commonest primitive ware, which shows gradually improving workmanship, is no longer wholly plain. After the vessels were polished, some of the potters began to decorate them with waved rills which gave a rippling aspect to the surface. This style of ornamentation increased in popularity during the period represented by the sixth metre, and was not only effected on the outsides of vessels, but also inside the jutting rims.

We now approach the close of the Neolithic Period.

[p. 212]

The pottery increases in quantity, and among the new forms which appear are cups which are evidently the prototypes of the Kamares vessels of a later age.

In the seventh metre we are in the period of transition between the Stone and Bronze Ages. It comes up to the level of the floor of the first Knossian palace, and as the ground was levelled before this building was erected, the eighth metre of the Early Minoan Period appears to have been swept away. Fragments of it may have become mixed with those in the seventh stratum.

The seventh metre is of special interest because it contains the earliest specimens of painted ware. The potters who ornamented their vessels with white-filled geometric incised designs, began to paint them instead. This departure opened up endless possibilities of development. At first the early zigzags were imitated, but in time new decorative motives evolved, and then came a free use of various colours, with variations of "light on dark" and "dark on light" designs. Varnish was also used to give a more lustrous surface than was obtained by hand-polishing. This early painted and varnished ware was hand-made. In the Latest Neolithic Period, however, the clay was finely sifted and well baked. Instead of being dark, like the earlier productions, it was of a bright brick-red colour. Apparently the enclosed furnace had come into use in Crete before the introduction of the potter's wheel. It was when the potters succeeded in baking this red ware that the "dark on light" designs came into use.

At Phaestos similar results were forthcoming from a pit sunk below the palace floor. The hill had been levelled prior to the erection of the palace, and only 5 1/2 metres of the strata remained. "I was able", writes Mosso, who conducted this excavation, "to confirm the result of Dr.

 

THE "HARVESTER VASE" (STONE) FOUND AT AGHIA TRIADHA

(See full description in Chapter XII, page 287-289)

 

[p. 213]

[paragraph continues] Mackenzie's investigation of the black pottery upon the virgin soil being plain. A little higher appears pottery with decoration of punctured dots and lines. In a later period the decoration of the pottery becomes more complex; imitation of basket-work is found, and the deeply incised lines are filled with white chalk. The vases become more elegant, and have decoration in white on a black ground. This pottery is identical with that found in the Troad and in Sicily." [*1]

When Cretan pottery attained its highest development in the Middle Minoan Period, it found a ready market in Egypt, which never produced ware so richly coloured or elaborately ornamented. In another direction the Cretans also surpassed their teachers. This was in the carving of vessels of stone. The island craftsmen began by imitating Nilotic forms, but used a softer material which allowed their artists freer play. The greatest surviving triumph of Cretan decoration on stone is the so-called Harvester vase from Aghia Triadha, near Phaestos. With consummate skill the artist depicted upon it a procession of men marching four deep, who are evidently taking part in some ceremony. One of the figures holds in his right hand an Egyptian sistrum, and is followed by a number of lusty singers. The drawing is entirely devoid of Egyptian conventionalism, and possesses a degree of naturalism which is typically Cretan. It is a spirited impression of an emotional group of human beings, and strikes quite a modern note. These stone vases were manufactured in Crete long after the new pottery had displaced stone and metal vessels as articles of everyday use. It is believed they were covered with thin layers of gold, and could have been purchased only by wealthy persons.

Another direct connection between Egypt and Crete

[p. 214]

is the button seal. It came into use in Crete during the Early Minoan II and III Periods. Mr. H. R. Hall thinks it passed from the island to the Nile valley, where the cylinder seal had long been the popular form. Sir Arthur Evans, on the other hand, is inclined to regard it as being of Delta origin. Be that as it may, there can be no doubt it is a relic of direct trade oversea between the two peoples.

The interesting problem here arises: By what route did the Cretans navigate their vessels to the Egyptian coast? One view is that they sailed across the open sea to the Libyan coast and the Delta, and another that their route was along the Asiatic coast by Cyprus. Mr. H. R. Hall has pointed out in this connection that the Mediterranean tribes "who attacked Egypt in the reign of Rameses III actually did take the longer route". He grants that single ships might have directly crossed the sea. but says that "the probability remains that the longer and safer route was the original one by which connection was first established, and that it was not until the approximate position of either Egypt or Sicily was well known that the direct route could be first dared". [*1]

It is probable that the Cretan mariners first came into touch with the coast population of Egypt, who were known as the Haau, that is, "fen men" or "swamp men". They were a seafaring folk, and were regarded by the Dynastic Egyptians as aliens. The magical spells of the "Book of the Dead" were forbidden to them. About the time of the Sixth Dynasty references are made to the Ha-nebu, which meant "all the northerners". In the Eighteenth Dynasty it was applied to signify the Anatolians and the inhabitants of Greece. The early Cretans may have been called the Ha-nebu also. A more direct and later term

[p. 215]

applied to them was the Keftiu. Maspero has suggested that Keftiu signified the people and Keftiu the land. According to Hall, Keftiu is the same expression as Kefti, "signifying 'at the back of', or 'behind'; i.e. the land Keftiu. was the 'hinterland', the 'Back of Beyond' to the Egyptians". [*1] In the Bible Crete is referred to as Caphtor.

Figures of the Keftiu in Egyptian tombs of the Empire Period are typically Cretan, with wasp waists and girdle and Minoan kilt, and hair falling over the shoulders in pleated tails. They carry vessels of Cretan shape with characteristic decorations. Towards the end of the Eighteenth Dynasty the racial designation Keftiu drops out of use, and names of tribes are given. By that time the island had been overrun by conquerors from the mainland who sacked and destroyed the palaces and overthrew the Knossian Dynasty.

Footnotes

^192:1 The Journal of Egyptian Archaeology, Vol. I, p. iii (April, 1914).

^193:1 The Journal of Egyptian Archaeology, Vol. I, pp. 111, 112 (April, 1914).

^195:1 Ionia and the East, p. 99 (1909).

^195:2 Abydos, Vol. II, p. 38.

^196:1 Journal of Hellenic Studies, Vol. XXV., pp. 321 et seq.

^197:1 See also The Pulse of Asia, by Professor Huntington, a member of the staff of the Pumpelly Expedition in Turkestan.

^197:2 The Ancient Egyptians, pp. 95, 96.

^198:1 Journal of Hellenic Studies, Vol. XXIII, pp. 155 et seq.

^199:1 Journal of Egyptian Archaeology, Vol. I, p. 110, and Journal of Hellenic Studies, Vol. XXV, p. 337.

^200:1 The Nearer East, pp. 99 et seq.

^201:1 Book XIII.

^201:2 Cowper's translation.

^202:1 Odyssey, Book II (Cowper's translation), 530-53.

^202:2 Acts, xxvii.

^202:3 Ibid., xxvii, 9. The fast was the great day of atonement in the month of September.

^203:1 Odyssey, Book VII (Cowper's translation), 39-44.

^206:1 King and Hall's Egyptian and Western Asia in the Light of Recent Discoveries, p. 430.

^208:1 Breasted's translation, A History of Egypt, p. 96.

^210:1 The Discoveries in Crete, p. 48.

^210:2 Journal of Hellenic Studies, XXIII and subsequent volumes.

^213:1 Palaces of Crete, p. 25.

^214:1 The Annual of the British School at Athens, VIII, pp. 157-8.

^215:1 The Annual of the British School at Athens, VIII, pp. 159-60.

     
Myths of Crete and Pre-Hellenic Europe, by Donald A. Mackenzie, [1917], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 216]

 

CHAPTER X

 

Trading Relations with Troy

Obsidian Finds in Troy--Early Shipping Traffic--Copper Age in Cyprus--Doubt about Crete--Transition from Stone to Bronze in Troy--Was Copper first worked in Egypt?--The Oldest Bronze Articles--Bronze manufactured in Crete--Probable Sources of Tin Supply--A Visit to Troy--Homeric Memories--The Nine Cities at Hissarlik--The First and Second Citadels of Troy--Hand-made and Wheel-made Pottery--Symbolic Decorations--Trojan Eye Symbol on Yorkshire Relic--The Mother--goddess--Treasure of Priam and a Cretan Hoard--Engravings of Ships with Sails--Cretan and Egyptian Jewellery--Silver Cup and Silver Bowls--Homeric References--Aegean Influence on Anatolian Coast--The Inland Hittite Power--Ethnics of Anatolia--Danubian Cultural Area--Troy's Connections with Thrace--Ancient Conflicts on Plain of Troy--Problem of the Jade Traffic--European Jade Objects not all imported--Crete and the European Trade Routes-- Distribution of the Developed Spiral.

THE influence of Aegean culture, which assumed its specific character in Crete, extended as far distant as Troad, that strip of north-western Anatolian coastland which came under the sway of the Trojans. "In the Early Minoan period 'Crete'", writes Mr. and Mrs. Hawes. [*1] "was in contact with Egypt on the one hand and with Hissarlik (Troy) and the Cyclades on the other--pupil of the former, teacher of the latter." It is possible that Troy's earliest connection with Crete goes back to the Neolithic Period, for finds have been made in the stratum of the first city of flakes and small artifacts of obsidian. This highly-prized stone was probably carried over the sea from Melos rather than along an overland trade route from Sinai.

[p. 217]

It would appear that there was a certain amount of regular shipping traffic on the Aegean Sea in Neolithic times. Crete, as we have seen, imported obsidian from Melos long before the introduction of metal working. The beginnings of the trade can be traced at Magasa, where the flakes were found to be associated with an extremely crude pottery of great antiquity, and it was well developed apparently during the later stage of Neolithic culture, to which the obsidian knives from Knossos are assigned. It is unlikely that Melos was uninhabited when obsidian was first worked there. Ultimately its people exchanged it for marble from Paros, which was utilized to shape rough amulets or figurines of the mother goddess. But, so far, except for the evidence afforded by these finds of obsidian, no other indications that the Cycladic islands were occupied during the Neolithic Age have been forthcoming. Stone weapons have, however, been found in southern Greece and on the large island of Euboea. Some of these are so small that they seem to have been charms, or votive objects, rather than real weapons. The Aegean Neolithic folk were evidently a peaceful people, and it may be that island communities utilized wood freely for implements of daily use. Wooden hand ploughs and wooden bowls were used in the Scottish Hebrides until a comparatively recent date, and the Egyptian peasants carried staves to drive their herds, and found them sufficient for purposes of defence.

The early peoples who reached Crete probably came by way of the Cyclades, either from the Anatolian or Grecian coasts. Before they accomplished this feat, the art of navigation must have advanced considerably. If it is held, on the other hand, that they passed direct oversea from Cyprus or Libya, we must conclude that they were skilled mariners who possessed well-equipped vessels and

[p. 218]

were quite capable of conducting a sea traffic from the very beginning. Perhaps when the Cretan inscriptions can be read some light will be thrown on this aspect of the problem.

Among the isles, Crete, with its long record of human activity, was ever prominent in promoting commercial intercourse, and as mercantile enterprise was the principal factor in its development, Troy was probably reached by its wind-bronzed and adventurous mariners, who, having familiarized themselves with the "swan ways" of the Cyclades, undertook the exploration of the eastern and western shores of the Aegean Sea, gaining knowledge of prominent landmarks like Mount Athos and the massive mountain ridge of Samothrace.

Traffic by the sea, as well as by the land routes, must have been greatly stimulated after the knowledge of how to work metals became widespread. Ships could then be constructed more stoutly and with greater celerity, and must consequently have increased in number. Pharaoh Sneferu's order for a new fleet of forty odd vessels to convey timber from Phoenicia is an interesting example of the manner in which ambitious monarchs might strive for mercantile supremacy. No doubt it was in consequence of the growing competition that experienced seafarers made voyages of exploration and opened up new routes in all directions. Malta, as we have seen, received obsidian from Melos; it also imported jade, which probably came from Anatolia. Jade was carried as well to Sicily, and as the Cretans imported liparite from the Lipari islands, after they had established a connection with Egypt, it was probably by them that jade objects were distributed westward.

It is uncertain when Cyprus was first visited by the Cretan mariners. The Neolithic relics of that island are

 

SEA-TRADERS FROM CRETE,

From the Painting by John Duncan, A.R.S.A.

 

[p. 219]

notably scanty, and some think it was not occupied prior to the age of metals, as it is devoid of Neolithic strata. No doubt the earliest Cypriotes, who settled in the eastern river valleys, came from the Syrian coast. Their pottery was hand-made, and ornamented with incised designs, and compares more closely to Anatolian than pre-Dynastic Egyptian or Cretan varieties. The island had its Copper Age, and towards the close of it wheel-made pottery was manufactured.

It is held by some authorities, including Myers and Hall, that copper was first worked in Cyprus. If such was the case, it is remarkable that the island has not yielded traces of early commercial connections with Crete and Egypt. "Up to the present," says Mosso, "there is no evidence that copper was worked in the Isle of Cyprus before it was used in Egypt and Crete. . . . The word Cyprus comes from the name of the plant kupro?s? {Greek  kupros}, which is the henna (Lawsonia inermis), used for dyeing the nails red." [*1] Cypriote copper blades are of later date than those found in Crete, and the earliest flat axe of copper is of Egyptian Neolithic form. [*2]

There can be no doubt that Cyprus had a Copper Age before the Age of Bronze. The same cannot be said with certainty, however, regarding Crete. Copper weapons have been found in tombs, but they are small and of votive character, and the larger ones, of which they were copies, were perhaps of bronze. The few copper dagger blades that have been unearthed are difficult to place, and the view has been urged that bronze is as old in Crete as copper. The island of Minos "shows",

[p. 220]

[paragraph continues] Mrs. Hawes says, "the same phenomenon as Hissarlik, [*1] the sudden appearance of bronze at a date not later than 2500 B.C. On the evidence at present available no Copper Age can be predicated for the island. . . . The natural conclusion is that Crete knew nothing of copper until it knew tin also and the superiority of the alloy. This knowledge must have come through the extension of trade relations., not by conquest, for no country shows more independence in its metal series than Crete." [*2]

Whence was the bronze obtained by the Cretans? Was it from Egypt or Anatolia? Both Crete and Troy were able soon after the dawn of their Bronze Ages to import silver, which during the Old Kingdom Period was rarer than gold in Egypt. The silver may have come from the same region as tin. One possible source of supplies of silver was Cilicia, where silver mines are still worked; the other was Spain, in which country evidence has been forthcoming of early commercial relations with Crete.

Once the secret of how to work metals passed from centre to centre of Neolithic culture, the ingenuity expended for long Ages in the shaping of artifacts of flint, obsidian, and jade was directed into new and inspiring channels. Cretans, Trojans, Cilicians, and Cappadocians alike may have been stimulated to inaugurate a new era by foreign influences, but they did not remain as slavish imitators. The pupil not only strove to excel the teacher, but even to surpass him. As in our own day a new invention may be improved by a people who have borrowed it, so at the dawn of the Metal Age the borrowers

[p. 221]

appear to have contributed towards the development of a discovery which was to revolutionize the ancient world. Aegean Bronze Age culture has distinctive features which establish its independent character. It was not of sporadic development. The indigenous influences which were manifested during the lengthy Neolithic Age were not cut off by the importation of metal, but were rather given opportunity to achieve freer and more brilliant growth in every sphere of human activity. That being so, we are confronted by an exceedingly difficult problem when we seek to discover whence either Crete or Troy imported bronze, or the copper and tin with which to manufacture it. The influences exercised by local cultures tend to conceal the sources from which borrowings were made.

Copper was known in Egypt in pre-Dynastic times. Indeed, some authorities hold that it first came into use in that country. "It was the custom of the proto-Egyptian women, and possibly at times of the men also," says Professor Elliot Smith, "to use the crude copper ore, malachite, as the ingredient of a face paint; and for long ages before the metal copper was known, this cosmetic had been an article of daily use. It is quite certain that such circumstances as these were the predisposing factors in the accidental discovery of the metal. For on some occasion a fragment of malachite, or the cosmetic paste prepared from it, dropped by chance into a charcoal fire, would have provided the bead of metallic copper and the germ of the idea that began to transform the world more than sixty centuries ago." At first copper was used for small ornaments and then to make needles, one end of a copper wire being bent down to form an "eye". In time, chisels and axes and other implements were manufactured in imitation of those of stone which were in use. "Every

[p. 222]

stage in the history and evolution of the working of copper", he holds, "is represented in Egypt, and is preserved under circumstances that enable us to appreciate in some measure the motives which led the Egyptians on, step by step, to the full realization of the immensity of the power they had thus acquired." [*1] Professor Elliot Smith follows Dr. Reisner in this connection. [*2]

Others hold that copper was first worked in Asia. Professor Myers, as we have indicated, favours Cyprus. [*3] Mr. Hall, who supports the view that the knowledge of corn passed from Palestine to Egypt and Babylonia, thinks that the knowledge of metal may have come from the same quarter, Sinai, Syria and Cyprus being "the original focus of the distribution of copper over Europe and the Near East. Copper came gradually into use among the prehistoric Southern Egyptians towards the end of the predynastic age. And they must have obtained this knowledge of it from the Northerners." Mr. Hall adds: "Dr. Reisner considers the Egyptian evidence alone. and not in connection with that from the rest of the Levant". [*4]

It is also contended that the manufacture of bronze was not an Egyptian invention, and that Troy and Crete were probably in touch with the centre where copper was first hardened by tin and antimony. Mr. Hall suggests that this art "came from the Middle East, where tin is found, to Greece, as well as Babylonia and, eventually, to Egypt". [*5] Babylonia, like Cyprus, had a long Copper Age.

No direct proof has yet been forthcoming, however, that Egypt imported its first bronze implements. The fact cannot be overlooked that the oldest bronze relics yet

[p. 223]

found come from the Nile valley. No discovery has yet been made that bronze was manufactured elsewhere prior to 3000 B.C. A few objects of bronze have been found in First Dynasty tombs. Maspero gave Angelo Mosso a piece of metal plate from an Abydos tomb to analyse. The test showed "copper 96.00 and tin 3.75 per cent". [*1] Another important relic is the famous "bronze rod of Medum", which belongs to the Third Dynasty period. It was found embedded in the fillings of a mastaba associated with the pyramid of King Sneferu. Pure copper was also used extensively throughout Egypt for the manufacture of weapons and implements from pre-Dynastic times till the Twelfth Dynasty. Iron was known at an early period, and is referred to in the Pyramid texts. It probably had a religious significance.

The Egyptians may have received their earliest supplies of copper from Sinai, which they visited to obtain turquoise in the Neolithic Age. [*2] We know that expeditions were sent to work in the copper mines in that region at a later period (Third Dynasty). Whence was the tin obtained to harden the copper? A possible source of supply is North-western Arabia. That it could be found there is suggested by the Biblical reference to the spoils taken by Moses from the Midianites, which included "the gold and the silver, the brass, the iron, the tin and the lead". [*3] Another possible source is Anatolia, where tin is said to exist. The raiders against whom Pharaoh Sneferu of the Third Dynasty waged war on the Delta frontier may have come down an ancient trade route, having ascertained that rich plunder could be obtained in Egypt. There is also tin in Italy as well as copper, but the earliest copper weapons found in that country are of

[p. 224]

advanced Cretan type (Middle Minoan). Local forms which have been found are not of earlier date.

It may be that Egypt's scanty supplies of tin during the Old Kingdom Age came from more than one source. Mr. W. M. Muller sees on a Sixth Dynasty relief "Aegeans bearing tin into Egypt". If the figures referred to are Aegeans, they were certainly Cretans. It is of special interest to find in dealing with Egypt's early imports of metal that a socketed bronze hoe of the Sixth Dynasty resembles examples from Cyprus and South Russia which are preserved in the British Museum. This artifact may have come down the sea trade route by which sporadic supplies of tin and bronze were carried. The manufacture of bronze in Egypt never assumed great dimensions, on account of the difficulty experienced in obtaining tin, prior to the Twelfth Dynasty. Its early Metal Age was mainly a Copper one.

After the mariners of Crete began to bring home supplies of bronze, its traders no doubt did their utmost to acquire the secret of how to manufacture it. It may be that, like Solomon, who sent Hiram of Tyre annual supplies of wheat and oil in return for timber from Lebanon and skilled workers in metal, [*1] a Cretan monarch made arrangements with an Egyptian or Anatolian Hiram to send him artisans who were skilled in the manufacture of bronze.

One of the places in Crete where bronze was cast was a headland on the Gulf of Mirabello about three miles east of Gournia. An ancient copper mine there is called by the peasants "Chrysocamino", which signifies "the oven of gold" or "the golden furnace". Describing it, Dr. Hazzidaki writes: "The seashore rises for above 100 metres, and here is the cave with so small an

[p. 225]

entrance that one has to go down and creep in on hands and knees. The cave is 52 metres long, the roof is irregular in height, about 2 metres near the entrance, that is, 2 metres from it, and in the middle it reaches a height of 20 metres, and at the far end it is 12 metres high. The walls and roof are covered with stalactites, and the rock is calcareous. Great blocks of stone have fallen from above, especially at the far end of the cave." Small fragments of primitive pottery of uncertain date were found in the cave. and also pieces of Middle Minoan times.

Smelting operations were carried on near the entrance of the cave, as is indicated by a piece of crucible found by Dr. Hazzidaki. Inside, pieces of scoria were picked up. The copper appears to have been entirely worked out. [*1] Specimens of rock taken from a cliff in the vicinity have yielded a small percentage of copper.

Bronze was also cast in Gournia. This is proved "by the finding of scraps of bronze and slag, pure copper adhering to smelting vessels, a crucible pot for carrying a charge of metal, and by numerous stone moulds, into which the molten metal was run for making knives, nails, awls and chisels". Copper was used for the manufacture of bowls, jars, and other utensils, but "weapons were of bronze, containing as much as ten per cent alloy with copper". [*2] Copper daggers with an extremely small percentage of tin have also been found.

But although copper could be found in Crete, the tin, as has been indicated, had to be imported. "By the beginning of the Bronze Age", [*3] writes Dr. Mackenzie in this connection, "the valley of the Rhone must have played a dominant role of communication between the

[p. 226]

great world of the Mediterranean and the north; by that time it was probably already the high continental trade route towards the tin mines of Britain." Angelo Mosso also favours the hypothesis that Crete's early supplies came from England. "We know the road", he says, "followed by the caravans bringing English tin through France to the mouth of the Rhone at the end of the Neolithic period, while no trace of any trade in tin has so far been discovered in the East." [*1] Mosso's reference to the "East" applies to "the mountains of China where tin is found".

Mrs. Hawes, who favours a Nearer Eastern source, writes as follows: "When the Pumpelly expedition returned from Turkestan in 1904, one of the members brought potsherds indistinguishable at first sight from the brilliantly mottled ware found at Vasiliki during the same season. . . . The strong likeness between the two fabrics, of which the writer has personal knowledge from having handled them together, is more reasonably explained by intercourse than by accident. Moreover, Dr. Hubert Schmidt, who accompanied the expedition, reports that a neighbouring tumulus (near the large one in which the pottery was found) gave him a three-sided seal-stone of Middle Minoan type, engraved with Minoan designs--man, lion, steer, and griffin. How shall we explain those evidences of Aegean influence in Southern Turkestan? They must be brought in line with other proofs of contact."

This distinguished lady archaeologist refutes Dr. Muller's view that the Aegeans who carried tin into Egypt obtained their supplies from a trade route that connected Central Germany with the sea coast. "The backwardness of Europe in learning to employ metal", she says, "is

[p. 227]

undeniable." Hungary, like Cyprus, had a Copper Age before bronze became known. "We see", she writes, "that at C. 2500 B.C. Asia Minor shared with the Aegean the knowledge of bronze, whereas three centuries later Europe was still in the Stone Age. . . . As further explanation of the priority of bronze in Asia Minor, we may now suggest the probability that, long before tin was discovered in Europe, it was being brought overland through Asia Minor, and also by way of Transcaucasia and the Black Sea from distant Khorassan, Strabo's Drangiana, where its presence has been confirmed. Excavations at Elizabethpol in Transcaucasia have revealed a culture in early contact with the Aegean." [*1] She thinks that carriers "not unlike the swift Scythians of Herodotus, frequented both the tin-producing region south-east of the Caspian and the copper region of the Danube at an early date". [*2]

Troy was a probable "clearing house" of the early tin and bronze trade. We should therefore visit it before dealing with Aegean commercial connections with Western Europe.

Our course is a north-eastern one across the island-strewn Aegean Sea. This way went the Homeric Achaeans who fought for the possession of Helen, the heiress of the Spartan throne, and no doubt with desire also to expand their area of political influence in the interests of commerce. We cast anchor as we draw near the southern shore at the mouth of the Hellespont. Since the dawn of history myriads of vessels have passed beyond this point to navigate the narrow strait, the modern Dardanelles, that leads towards the Sea of Marmora and the great Black Sea beyond it.

[p. 228]

The famous Troad lies before us. It is a country which does not make much appeal nowadays, but must have offered many attractions to early settlers. The valleys are suitable for agriculture; there is excellent herbage on the hillsides for flocks and herds, and an abundance of game among the mountains. During winter the south winds from the Mediterranean impart to it a milder climate than prevails in the Balkans, or the uplands of Phrygia, and the summer heat is tempered by the cool Etesian winds. Water is plentiful; there are numerous springs and generous rivers flowing from the mountains. Withal there is an abundance of timber, much good clay for brick-making, and an endless supply of limestone with which to erect dwellings and strong, high walls to protect citizens and their domesticated animals against the attacks of bears and lions and cunning wolves that prowl through the forests and up and down the green valleys, not to speak of human enemies.

We land at the mouth of the famous river Scamander, turning our backs on the unpicturesque tongue of European land known to the ancients as Chersonesus, and in our day as the peninsula of Gallipoli; we also take our eyes from the shouldering hills of the island of Imbros, behind which towers sublime Mount Saoce, the loftiest peak of Samothrace, on which the god Poseidon aforetime sat to watch the Homeric heroes performing mighty feats of arms.

Our steps are directed inland, and we proceed to cross the long and windy Plain of Troy, remembering

	 
		       Old unhappy far-off things
		 And battles long ago.
		
		 Yonder towards the south-east, blue above the ridges of woody hills, is the Anatolian range of Mount Ida, which

[p. 229]

forms a noble frontier of the Troad; there Paris was once a shepherd; thither, too, fled Aeneas after Troy fell. To the west is the high coastland of the Aegean Sea, and eastward and north-eastward are broken groups of featureless mountains divided by pleasant valleys. Less than 4 miles in front of us we can distinguish a boat-shaped hillock, on the spur of a sloping hill, rising abruptly from the plain: that is famous Hissarlik, the site of the ruins of the various citadels of Troy.

The memoried plain is bordered on either side by the Rivers Simoeis and Scamander. There are marshes to avoid, as in Homer's time, but these are easily detected at their utmost limits by the clumps of long grasses and weeds, and of whispering tamarisks which also fringe the steep and crumbling river banks.

The Simoeis has shrunk to a few inches in depth, for it is now late summer; puffs of wind blow clay dust from its clay-caked and stone-strewn bed. Down a beautiful valley it flows westward, as if to cross the plain towards the Aegean Sea, until it curves round a ridge of hills and directs its course to the shore of the Hellespont. The more famous Scamander is about 2 feet deep and about 20 feet in breadth. When, however, the snows are melting on the Ida range it is exceedingly turbulent, and of such great volume that it carries down trees and boulders, and occasionally overflows its reedy banks to submerge the plain. The Simoeis similarly rages furiously at this period.

There is an interesting reference in the Iliad to the sudden rise of the rivers after a "cloud burst". When Achilles drove one part of the Trojan army into the city and another into the Scamander,

	 
		                             the plain he found
		 All flooded o'er, and, floating, armour fair,
		 And many a corpse of men in battle slain.
		
		 [p. 230]

The Scamander was supposed to be increasing for the express purpose of resisting his advance. The roar of its spring flood resounds in the sonorous hexameters of Homer, but sinks to a spray-like hiss in an English translation.

	 
		                                Rearing high
		 His crested wave, to Simoeis thus he [*1] cried:
		 "Dear brother, aid me with united force
		 This mortal's course to check; he, unrestrained,
		 Will royal Priam's city soon destroy.
		 Nor will the Trojans his assault endure.
		 Haste to the rescue then, and from their source
		 Fill all thy stream, and all thy channels swell;
		 Rouse thy big waves, and roll a torrent down
		 Of logs and stones, to whelm this man of might." [*2]
		
		 We reach Hissarlik and ascend it to survey a maze of ruins. The fields around us were tilled and irrigated aforetime, when there were watchmen on the "topless towers" to give warning of the approach of raiders. These keen-eyed men could see far up the valleys; nor could vessels cross the Hellespont without their knowledge; and they had glimpses to the west, across the Scamander, of the Aegean Sea, which is but 3 1/4 miles distant, and were thus able to herald the approach of the galleys of Crete.

Before Schliemann began to excavate on this wonderful hillock, by cutting a deep broad trench through the various strata, it towered about 160 feet above the level of the plain; but when the earliest Neolithic people first chose it as a settlement, it was not much more than 50 feet high. Distinct traces survive of nine cities in all, the latest being the Troy of the Roman Age. Each city, after the first, had been erected on the levelled debris of

[p. 231]

the previous one. So the hill, like a stooping giant, gathered from age to age an increasing burden for its great unwearied back.

Troy I was built in the Neolithic Age. Its deposit of from 12 to 14 feet indicates that it endured for many long centuries. Portions of its walls constructed of small stories, here and there in herring-bone pattern, were laid bare by Schliemann. As the foundations, in some parts, do not reach the bedrock, it is evident that the hillock was occupied for a considerable period before stone was utilized for building purposes. The earliest defensive works may have been ramparts of earth.

Hissarlik was apparently from the earliest period the citadel of the city which lay round it on the plain. Here dwelt, in a palace, the king and his family, and here also were stored the treasure and winter food-supply of the tribe. When enemies poured down the mountain passes, or across the Hellespont from Europe, the citadel became a shelter for women and children, and for flocks and herds. Inside its walls, too, the warriors found safe retreat when attacked by overwhelming numbers. The hill forts and brochs of Scotland appear to have served a similar purpose.

Within the area of Troy's Neolithic citadel traces survive of the stone foundations of houses and of certain erections usually referred to as "sheep-folds". Of special interest are the remains of pottery which have come to light. The fragments unearthed by Schliemann were of the hand-made variety, and these are numerous and varied enough to show that the Trojan ceramic art was developed locally and attained a comparatively high degree of excellence. Invariably the pottery is dark and decorated with geometric designs, the incisions being filled in with white chalk as in Crete and Egypt. A fine surface finish was effected by the use of the smoothing-stone.

[p. 232]

Doubt has been expressed as to whether all the bronze implements which Schliemann associated with this early stratum really belong to it. Some of these may have fallen down the sides of his trench, and got mixed up with the relics of a deposit with which they had originally no connection. It appears certain, however, that the Neolithic city was in existence at the dawn of the Metal Age in Crete, for some of the bronze implements in question are unlike those found in later strata.

The second city was erected before 2500 B.C. Whether or not there was a fresh racial infusion we have) as yet, no means of knowing. It is significant to find in this connection that there are distinct traces of development from the Neolithic period, especially in the ceramic relics, a sure indication that a considerable portion of the old stock remained. For the first time the hillock was levelled, a process which no doubt obliterated much valuable evidence, and it then stood about 100 feet above the sea-level. Retaining stone walls, which sloped inward, were also erected, and those round the south-western and western sides of the eminence can still be traced.

This was the city which Schliemann believed to be Homer's Troy, because it contained a great amount of burnt debris. But in this he was mistaken. Shortly before he died, however, he found some Mycenaean potsherds which afforded a clue to the mystery and enabled Dr. Dorpfeld, the distinguished German archaeologist, who conducted subsequent excavations, to locate Homer's city in the sixth stratum.

Dr. Dorpfeld has divided the history of the second stratum into three periods. These may be referred to as Troy II A, B, C. The citadel of Troy II A, was little more than a tribal fortress about 100 yards in diameter. There were two main entrance gates, one on the south-western

[p. 233]

side and the other on the southern. The pottery which was manufactured resembled the hand-made variety of the Neolithic settlement, but the workmanship displayed was on the whole inferior. Apparently we meet here with the decadent period during which vessels of stone were being constructed with the use of copper drills.

In the Stratum II B the new pottery makes its appearance. The Egyptian potter's wheel had evidently reached Troy as well as Crete, while the enclosed baking-furnace also came into use. There can be no doubt, therefore, that a brisk trade was being conducted along the trade routes both by land and sea. Considerable progress was effected also in architectural work, brick as well as stone being largely used.

The evidence of Stratum II C shows that the citizens of Troy were progressing by leaps and bounds. Traces of destruction by fire of earlier buildings suggest that frequent conflicts were waged round the fortress, and it is possible, therefore, that the extensions and alterations which were effected from time to time were rendered necessary to maintain the prestige of the city in stirring and difficult times, when hordes of nomads were enabled by the acquisition of metal weapons to overrun large portions of territory.

It was during the period covered by the deposits of the second city of Troy that the great masses of Asiatic pastoral nomads pressed into Europe and conquered the more passive and more highly-cultured agriculturists of the Mediterranean race. As much is indicated by the burial remains of the Early Bronze Age in Europe, which show that a broad-headed people pressed westward, first along the uplands and then across the valleys, in increasing numbers, here adopting the funerary customs of their predecessors, and there introducing their own.

[p. 234]

Troy continued to develop its own civilization, resisting, it would appear, for a long period the raids of plundering barbarians. That its wheel-made pottery was not imported is made evident by its distinctly local characteristics. The hand-made jars, with side projections, pierced for suspension, which were characteristic of Stratum II A, assumed more artistic character in Stratum II B, when the wheel came into use. Another link between earlier and later times is the "face urn". These interesting Trojan products indicate that the decoration of pottery may have had a mythological significance. Zigzag, St. Andrew's Cross, herring-bone, and V-shaped designs, as well as rippling lines, "trickle ornaments", and dots, may therefore have meant much to the people who believed that their food-supply was the gift of a deity, or group of deities, whose favours they constantly invoked by performing ceremonies and offering sacrifices. In the Odyssey the Phaeacians toasted the deity when they drank together. King Alcinous, addressing his guests after Odysseus had partaken of his meal, spoke as follows:--

	 
		Pontonous! mingling wine, bear it around
		 To ev'ry guest in turn, that we may pour
		 To thunder-bearer Jove (Zeus) . . .
		                          When, at length,
		 All had libation made, and were sufficed,
		 Departing to his house, each sought repose. [*1]
		
		 Food and drinking vessels may have been dedicated to deities as well as the potter's wheel, which, as has been indicated, was credited to the god Ptah in Egypt. The spirit of the god, or of one of his emissaries, may have been in the cup. It is of interest, therefore, to find that the lips of some of the Troy vessels are ornamented with

 

GENERAL VIEW OF "THE TREASURE OF PRIAM"

 (From the photograph by Schliemann in "Atlas Trojanischer Alterthumer.)

 The topmost row shows the Golden Diadems, Fillet, Ear-rings, and small Jewels. Second row--Silver "Talents" and of Silver and Gold. The Silver Vases and curious Plate of Copper. Third Row--Silver Vases and curious Plate of Copper. Fourth row--Weapons and Helmet--crests of Copper or Bronze. On floor--Vessel, Caldron, and Shield (all copper).

 

[p. 235]

circles enclosing dots. One characteristic fragment shows two circles with a straight line drawn down between them. It is obvious that the potter desired to represent a face with staring eyes. Schliemann believed that the face was intended for that of an owl, and constantly made reference to "owl-headed" vases. Another fragment, however, shows clearly that the crude artistic efforts were directed towards the representation of the human face. No attempt was made to indicate the nose line, but the eyes were fairly well shaped, and above these the eyebrows were drawn also. In other examples the eyebrows and nose were shaped like a bird in flight, the eyes being represented by perforated circles, while a straight line represented the mouth.

This tendency towards realism is found to be less pronounced, however, as the vessels become of more complicated and finer construction. The arched eyebrow, the eyes and ears, yield to purely decorative tendencies, and become symbols, as do also the dots, rings, and cones representing female breasts; the swastika on the lower part of the body is evidently a fertility symbol. This process of developing symbols from natural objects can be traced even in the Palaeolithic Age. It does not follow, however, that the change robbed the ornaments entirely of their religious and magical character, difficult as it may be to discover where a symbol is divested of significance and a purely artistic motive begins.

The Trojan method of representing the human face, with the bird-wing-shaped nose and eyebrows and the eye dots, is paralleled by similar designs on objects from the Greek islands. Interesting examples of the same artistic motive have been found in the East Riding of Yorkshire. In a trench surrounding a burial cairn on Folkton Wold were discovered chalk drums associated

[p. 236]

with unburnt burials. These are ornamented with spirals, St. Andrew's Cross, and other characteristic Aegean designs, and also with the eyebrows and eye symbols. As the latter appear on standing-stones of the Marne and Gard valleys in France, and on early Bronze Age vessels in Spain, it may be that the chalk drums are interesting survivals of racial or cultural influence which reached these islands across the English Channel by way of Spain. [*1]

The second stratum of Troy is remarkable for its treasure hoards. Schliemann found no fewer than seventeen of these. The most famous is the "royal treasure", or, as he called it, "the treasure of Priam", which, with the assistance of his wife., he concealed during the workmen's dinner-hour. The objects were of rich and varied character. In a silver jar had been stored two great diadems of elaborate construction, which were worn by females of high rank. One is composed of four rows of small heart-shaped leaves of gold connected with fine wire, and is fringed with a row of larger pendants suggesting the human form. On either side are tails, terminating with larger pendants in a bunch. This diadem is about the breadth of the forehead, and when clasped round the head the hair was bunched above it, while the tails fell downwards and lay on the shoulders. Elaborate ear-rings were also worn, as well as rich necklaces made of small gold rings strung together, and bracelets of twisted gold. Some of the ear-rings are of spiral design. The spiral is also associated with the rosette to ornament elaborate gold hairpins and broad bracelets. A small gold eagle-shaped ornament is of special interest, as it indicates the sanctity with which that bird was invested in this region.

Included in the hoard are several bars of silver, which

[p. 237]

may, as Schliemann suggested, have been used for money. A silver dagger was no doubt a royal weapon used on occasions of great ceremony. Like the bronze daggers it was pierced so as to hold the rivet with which it was attached to the handle. One dagger handle is carved in ivory and is reminiscent of Palaeolithic Magdalenian Art, for it is shaped to represent a crouched animal. A bronze handle of similar design has been discovered in Etruria, and is now in the Kestner Museum at Hanover.

Among the objects in lead, special reference should be made to a figurine of the mother-goddess. It is of somewhat conventional design, like the terra-cotta figurines found in Cyprus, Mesopotamia, and Greece, and those of marble and other stone in the Cycladic islands. The face is stern, with a hard drooping mouth, and the eyes stare cold and angrily. Long curls dangle down from the ears; the neck is exaggerated and crossed with symbolic markings, and the hands are clasped across the breast. The female characteristics are pronounced, and on the lower part of the body the swastika, or hooked cross, is depicted on a V-shaped projection surrounded by round bosses. The legs are merely suggested, and may have been used as a handle, or as a spike to be thrust into the soil of a holy mound. Votive figurines found at Anau in Turkestan, and those also from Sumeria, were attached to nails, or terminated like nails, so as apparently to be driven into sacred shrines, for the same reason as the visitors to sacred wells drop pins into them, or attach rags to overhanging trees. Prayer-nailing still obtains in the East.

It may be remarked here that the third, fourth, and fifth citadels of Troy, which cover a period between about 2000 B.C. and 1500 B.C., are of no great account. The city shrank in importance after the occurrence of a great disaster which is indicated by the fire-swept remains of

[p. 238]

Stratum II C. The sixth, or Homeric Troy, will be referred to in a subsequent chapter.

Since Schliemann's day, attempts have been made to relegate the "treasure of Priam" to a comparatively late period, one nearer Troy VI than Troy II A. Indeed, it has been asserted that this rich hoard fell down the trench from the sixth city stratum. But although Schliemann sometimes nodded, like Homer, his location of the treasure can no longer be disputed. In 1908, Mr. Seager, the American archaeologist, discovered a similar hoard on the island of Mochlos, which lies about two hundred yards off the north-eastern coast of Crete in the picturesque Gulf of Mirabello. For some 4500 years the treasure had reposed in a necropolis of the Early Minoan Period, happily secure from the attentions of generations of tomb robbers. The island is barren and without a water supply, and was consequently never suspected of containing anything of value. At one time it may have been part of a peninsula which sheltered a natural harbour much frequented by the earliest mariners.

The hoard included gold diadems, rings, pendants, hairpins, and fine chains, "as beautifully wrought", Sir Arthur Evans has remarked, "as the best Alexandrian fabrics of the beginning of our era". [*1] There were no spiral designs as at Troy, but wonderful artificial leaves and flowers. Of special interest are the gold bands "with engraved repousse eyes for the protective blind-folding of the dead". These, Sir Arthur suggests, were "the distant anticipations of the gold masks of the Mycenae graves". Bead necklaces were probably charms. Associated with these articles were miniature stone vases of local material. Some were of Early Egyptian form, and all were of exquisite workmanship.

 

GROUP OF JEWELS FROM THE HOARD DISCOVERED IN THE ISLAND OF MOCHLOS

(See page <page 238>)

 

[p. 239]

An engraving on a ring in this hoard depicts a ship with a sail and a full equipment of oars. Troy may have been visited by the men who crossed the seas in vessels of this kind. Traces of Cretan commerce have been forthcoming at Hissarlik, and Trojan artifacts have been found in Crete. In 1909 discovery was made at Phaestos of a fragment of pottery which resembles fragments of the same date (Early Minoan II) found in the second city of Troy. Relics of Cretan connections with Troy have also been found at Vasiliki and other eastern sites.

Crete's reputation for metal-working was widespread among the ancients, but no one dreamed, before Mr. Seager made his important discovery, it was of such great antiquity. The remarkable technique displayed shows that the craft had a long history. It no doubt owed something to Egypt, if, indeed, it was not established on the island by Egyptian traders. "Of the jewelry worn by the Pharaoh and his nobles, in the Old Kingdom," writes Professor Breasted, "almost nothing has survived, but the reliefs in the tomb chapels often depict the goldsmith at his work) and his descendants in the Middle Kingdom have left works which show that the taste and cunning of the first dynasty had developed without cessation in the Old Kingdom." [*1] The Cretan ornaments have distinct local characteristics. Like the painters and potters, the goldsmiths showed a distinct feeling for nature, as in their leaf and flower designs; one notable ornament is the Cretan equal-limbed cross. Of special interest, too, is a clover-leaf ornament-an anticipation of the Irish devotion to the shamrock.

At the time the articles in the Mochlos hoard were manufactured, there must have been many wealthy men in Crete. Those whose ships visited Troy and Spain

[p. 240]

were probably the possessors of articles of silver as well as gold. But none of these have been discovered. Perhaps some of the Early Minoan silver artifacts were so highly prized that they were kept as heirlooms. Dr. Xanthondides found two silver daggers in a tomb at Kumasa, near Gortyna, while excavating tombs of the Early Minoan III Period. They were ribbed and of triangular shape, like other daggers of bronze. Associated with these metal objects were steatite "libation vases", a rough marble figure of the mother-goddess, three miniature vases with lids on a reel-shaped stand, and an earthenware vessel of teapot shape with geometric ornamentation. Sir Arthur Evans discovered several silver bowls of the Middle Minoan Age at Knossos. Among the finds of the American archaeologists at Gournia is a shapely silver cup with handles, from a house tomb, which recalls Homer's reference to "a silver cup, the work of the Sidonians". [*1] It is, however, of much greater antiquity than anything which can be credited to the Phoenicians. Perhaps it was won by the individual in whose grave it lay for displaying skill as a boxer. A double silver cup was awarded to the Homeric athlete Epeius, who "knocked out" Euryalus at the funeral games that followed the burning of Patroclos. [*2] Joseph, [*3] who was so greatly honoured by the Pharaoh, was the possessor of a silver cup, and must therefore have been wealthy as well as influential.

The Cretans may have received their supplies of silver from Troy, where, as is shown by the articles made from that metal in "Priam's treasure", it was abundant enough.

Some hold that this silver came from Spain, and their theory will be dealt with later in this chapter. Others favour the view that the Trojans and Cretans imported it

[p. 241]

from Lydia or Cilicia. It is possible that silver was obtainable by the island mariners at primitive commercial centres at or near Miletus, Ephesus, or Pitane. But of this there is no direct proof. The remarkable fact has to be given recognition in this connection that no traces of early Aegean trade have been found at any of these points. [*1] Even the islands of Samos, Chios, and Mitylene have failed to yield any indications of commercial connections with Crete and the Cyclades during the Early Bronze Age. "Except for their north-western corner", writes Mr. Hogarth, "the Asiatic coasts of the Aegean lay, until very late, outside the culture-area associated with the name of that sea. But if 'tis true, 'tis strange! Why did the Cretan and other Aegean sea-rovers, whether pirates or merchants, or both, fail to settle on these particular coasts and isles? They had pushed their wares into Hissarlik, and had filled all the opposite shores of Europe with a culture much higher and more vigorous than any which has left a contemporary trace in Anatolia." Mr. Hogarth believes that "there must have been some strong continental power dominating all the west-central coast of Asia Minor from an inland capital. It must have been a non-maritime power, careless about developing its coast lands, but careful to keep others away from them." This power was the Hittite--the confederation of peoples controlled by the Hatti, the "white Syrians" of Greek tradition, whose ancient capital was situated at Boghaz'koi. It is possible that the early Aegean influences

[p. 242]

which permeated Anatolia were introduced through the medium of Troy.

Troy appears to have existed during the Late Stone and Early Bronze Ages as the capital of an independent state. Its earliest settlers were probably of the Mediterranean race, and congeners of the Neolithic folk of Thrace and the Danube area, who had pressed northward through Syria and round the southern Anatolian coast, or by way of the "Cilician gates", to the western shores of the Aegean Sea, afterwards crossing into Europe. This racial movement, which radiated also throughout the agricultural valleys of Anatolia, appears to have taken place before the broad-headed Hatti, who were a pastoral people, became the dominant race. It may be also that there survived among the mountains descendants of the ancient Palaeolithic races. The Etruscans, for instance, whose racial affinities are obscure, are believed to have come from Anatolia.

The Danubian cultural area was of wide extent. It included part of southern Russia and part of southwestern Austria, the whole of Thrace and Macedonia, and a portion of Thessaly. At several centres a high form of Neolithic culture was developed. "There is reason to believe", writes Mr. Hogarth in this connection, "that some population, racially kin to that which developed the Aegean culture, was present on the Anatolian coasts from early times, and also that there had been very early passage of influences, and perhaps of peoples, from Balkanic Europe to Asia Minor. Not only has the earliest sub-Neolithic stratum at Hissarlik produced pottery and weapons closely resembling those of Neolithic Danubian graves, but at two other places where sub-Neolithic settlements have been explored in north-west Asia Minor, Danubian analogies are even more certainly to be

[p. 243]

remarked. Those places are Boz Eyuk in Central Phrygia, and Yortan in Mysia. The vases of the latter site, where there is a cemetery of the earliest Bronze Age, show close analogies with Cypriote forms, and suggest that the earliest migrants from Europe spread sporadically far down through the peninsula to the Levant." [*1]

Like Anatolia, the Danubian area was a melting-pot of races. In addition to the Armenoids of Hatti type who invariably clung to an upland habitat, but also fused in localities with the Mediterranean peoples, the fair northern peoples pressed southward to absorb the local culture and fuse with the earliest settlers. The ethnic friction which resulted caused periodic migrations of displaced peoples. There was, therefore, much crossing and re-crossing of the Hellespont and the Bosphorus in the Late Neolithic and Early Bronze Age Periods.

Troy, by reason of its situation, must have been ever a meeting ground of various ethnic elements. Many desperate conflicts, no doubt, were waged on its windy plain long ages before the Homeric era. There were rich spoils besides in its citadel to attract the invader. It lies at the end of the northern trade route which runs through Anatolia towards Mesopotamia, and must ever have been a "market-place" for traders, who could exchange there their far-carried commodities for the products of Thrace and the Aegean.

Various axes of green and white jade, which Schliemann found in the stratum of the first city, may be relics of an ancient trading connection with the east, as the knives and arrow-heads of obsidian appear to be of a connection with the Cyclades.

When the jade objects were first found they caused a flutter in archaeological circles. It was pointed out that

[p. 244]

scrapers and other articles made of jade had been found associated with the Swiss lake-dwellings, and at Neolithic sites in Brittany and in Ireland, as well as elsewhere throughout Europe. The belief obtained generally that these jade artifacts were imported into Europe from the borders of China, and Professor Fischer expressed the wish "that before the end of his life the fortune might be allotted to him of finding out what people brought them to Europe". [*1] Professor Max Muller believed that the jade-carrying immigrants were the Aryans. "If", he wrote, "the Aryan settlers could carry with them into Europe so ponderous a tool as their language, without chipping or clipping a single facet, there is nothing so very surprising in their having carried along, and carefully preserved from generation to generation, so handy and so valuable an instrument as a scraper or a knife, made of a substance which is aere perennius." [*2]

It is not now believed, however, that all the jade objects found in Europe came from "a common far-distant home in the Kuen Luen Mountains". Since Muller connected his Aryans with jade, the two species of it, nephrite (jade proper) and jadeite, have been found in different parts of Europe. Nephrite has been discovered in Silesia, Austria, and North Germany, and it is believed to exist in Sweden, while jadeite, or a similar rock, was found not long since among the Alps. It is probable, therefore, that the Swiss and other scrapers were chipped from pebbles of jade picked up by the European Neolithic people. The quantity and quality of the Hissarlik axes, however, suggest an eastern source of supply, and it may be that these and the Maltese polished axe pendants of jade are genuine relics of primitive commerce. As the latter were charms, it would appear that the magical qualities

[p. 245]

of jade were given recognition at a remote period. Among the Greeks it was the "kidney stone", and among the Spaniards, who imported it from Mexico, the "colic stone". Various rare stones were believed by the ancient peoples to have curative qualities. Instances could be cited of the possession, by representatives of ancient families at the present day, of stone charms of this kind that have long been treasured as heirlooms.

Although archaeologists are less inclined nowadays than they were a generation ago to believe in the existence of Neolithic trade-routes which extended from the borders of China to Brittany, or to connect certain races with relics of similar character found in widely separated districts, there can be little doubt regarding the existence of commercial relations between different cultural areas. The introduction of metal appears to have done much to stimulate international trade. In the Early Bronze Age the influence of the Aegean, which may have "inspired every stage of culture" at Hissarlik, as Mr. Hogarth suggests, appears to have penetrated Thrace. Evidence has been forthcoming that two main trade-routes crossed Germany, one from the head of the Adriatic, and the other from the lower Danube valley. It has been suggested that some of the amber found in Crete came down these trade routes from the Baltic. [*1] France was similarly crossed by the Rhone valley trade-route, down which, in time, tin from Cornwall was carried. That the Cretans were the earliest seafarers to come into direct touch with these routes is suggested by various interesting links of evidence. The most remarkable are the Egyptian glass beads found in South Germany, and the Egyptian blue-glaze beads taken from ancient graves on Salisbury Plain, which will be dealt

[p. 246]

with in a later chapter, as they are connected with the Late Minoan Period.

Certain Continental archaeologists incline to the belief that not only Crete but even Egypt was in direct touch with Western Europe at an extremely remote period. Summarizing their views, Angelo Mosso writes: "The vases found at Amerejo in Spain have the characteristic form of the Egyptian vases of the close of the Neolithic Age. The resemblance of the Egyptian idols with those of Crete and the Continent is an established fact; the burial sites are similar; the flat copper axes of Egypt cannot be distinguished from those of the Continent; the evolution of art in Southern France and in Spain went on during the Neolithic Age, and we know that navigation was general on the Mediterranean in the times preceding the introduction of copper-all these data give good reason to suppose that the pre-Dynastic Egyptians had relations with the west which enabled them to procure cassiterite, which when mixed with copper rendered it harder. . . . We hope", he adds, "that new discoveries may throw light on the relations of Egypt with England." [*1]

There can be little doubt that the Cretan mariners sailed westward as far as the coast of Spain, although the precise period at which they first undertook voyages in this direction may remain uncertain. Spain could supply silver, copper, and other metals. The brothers Siret [*2] are of opinion that this country was the source of the earliest supplies of silver, the metal having been taken from the silver-bearing veins before the discovery was made how to extract it from lead as described by Pliny. [*3]

[p. 247]

[paragraph continues] Mosso favours the view that the silver articles found in Crete were made from silver carried from Spain by the early mariners who sailed westward to fetch tin from the Cassiterides Islands. He makes no reference to the Cilician mines. [*1]

It is difficult to fix the movements of the early traders in chronological order. We cannot therefore ascertain from the archaeological evidence available when the Cretans came into touch with the western Iberians, with whom they apparently shared a culture of common origin. Prior to the Bronze Age a comparatively high civilization was developing in southern Spain. The votive figures found in this region resemble those of Cyprus, Hissarlik, Crete, and the Cyclades; even the sacral horns were given recognition. Spanish Early Bronze Age artifacts also show close resemblances to Aegean forms, and the brothers Siret found in several places in Spain goblets similar to those taken from Early Minoan strata in Crete, and others from the tombs of Abydos in Egypt. These vessels were associated with flat copper axes and copper knives with silver rivets, as well as stone and bone implements. Tin appears to have been less plentiful at the period to which these finds belong than silver. It may have come from the Balearic Islands, Brittany, or England-the first named being the most probable source.

At Marseilles, where Greek merchants established themselves in later times, the visits of the Cretans must have stimulated trade along the Rhone valley route, which became gradually suffused with Aegean influences. The trade-route from the head of the Adriatic, leading towards the Brenner Pass, was similarly affected. Sicily and Italy have yielded suggestive evidence of early contact with Crete. Daggers and flat axes of Cretan shape

[p. 248]

have been found in Italian tombs of the early metal age. Sardinia appears to have been visited also; it has yielded, among other things, specimens of characteristic Aegean axe adzes, which have also been found at Troy.

One of the most interesting links between Aegean, Trojan., Danubian, and Western European cultures is the spiral decoration, which appears to have been introduced along the trade-routes.

"The developed spiral", writes Mr. Hall, "appears suddenly in Egyptian art on seals and (rarely) in painting, at the beginning of the Twelfth Dynasty, [*1] or shortly before," that is, "at the end of the Third Early Minoan, or beginning of the First Middle Minoan Period in Crete." [*2] It appears to have been introduced into Egypt from Crete, for it occurs on objects of Early Minoan II and III date. There are spirals on the Trojan gold pins of "Priam's treasure". Mr. Hall favours the view of Much, the German archaeologist, that "the spiral originated in metal wirework". He thinks it may have been "an invention of early gold workers in Lydia that reached Troy, was in the Cyclades translated into stone carving, in Crete transferred to pottery and to the designs of button seals, and as a seal design came to Egypt, where it was promptly adopted as the characteristic decoration of the new form of seal that had as suddenly become popular in the Nile land, the scarab". [*3]

The spiral ornament travelled along the trade-routes through Europe. Rings made of silver wire twisted in a spiral have been found by the brothers Siret in Spanish tombs which have yielded the goblets of Cretan form, already referred to. In the Danubian cultural area the spiral occurs on pottery of the early metal age. Following

 

DECORATIVE MOTIFS AND SYMBOLS

Figs. 1 to 8. Minoan and Celtic patterns compared. The treatment in different areas of motifs, which were probably of common origin, is of special interest. Numbers 7 and 8 are identical. fig. 9. The equal-limbed Cretan cross. Fig. 10, The swashtika symbol--cross with arms bent. Figs. 11, and 12. Celtic knot developed from swashtika by connecting points of bent arms by, curves--single treatment (point to point) in ii and double treatment with swashtika reversed (inner curves corner to elbow and outer curves point to point) in 12. Figs. 13 to 17. Religious Symbols, perhaps connected with belief in weapon spirits; 13, Shield and crossed arrows of Egypto-Libyan goddess Neith; 14, Mycenaean 8-form shield as symbol; 5, Cretan deity on seal; 16, Scoto-Celtic "spectacle" symbol shown upright as on standing stone; 17, Scoto-Celtic "crescent and arrow" symbol.

 

[p. 249]

the road along the Moldau and the Elbe, it reached the shores of Jutland, and ultimately passed into Scandinavia. It reached England either along the Rhone or Danube valley routes. Reference has been made to the Yorkshire chalk drums on which it was inscribed. The New Grange stones are decorated with it, and early Scottish sculptured stones show local adaptations of the design. Eastward from the Danubian area it penetrated as far as Koban in Russian Armenia, between the Caspian and Black Seas, where it occurs on objects taken from a prehistoric cemetery in which Babylonian influence is also in evidence.

The earliest connection between Crete and northern Europe is indicated by the finds of Baltic amber in Early Minoan strata. It probably had a religious significance. Amber was carried down the Elbe and Moldau route as well as through the Rhone valley to the shores of the Mediterranean, and across to England, Scotland, and Ireland. It is believed that this trade was flourishing along the Elbe route before 2000 B.C.

The manner in which early commerce was conducted between the peoples of northern and southern Europe is indicated by Herodotus, who refers to offerings sent to Delos by the Hyperboreans. "They" (the Delians), he wrote, "declare that certain offerings, packed in wheaten straw, were brought from the country of the Hyperboreans into Scythia, and that the Scythians received them and passed them on to their neighbours upon the west, who continued to pass them on until they reached the Adriatic. From hence they were sent southward, and when they came to Greece, were received first of all by the Dodonaeans. Thence they descended to the Maliac Gulf, from which they were carried from city to city, till they came at length to Carystus. The Carystians took them

[p. 250]

over to Tenos, without stopping at Andros; and the Tenians brought them finally to Delos." [*1]

Reference has been made to the engraving of a ship on a ring from the Mochlos hoard. It is shown sailing from the shrine of the mother-goddess, who evidently protected seamen as well as landsmen. A similar ship, carrying two sails as well as oars, was depicted on a seal stone of steatite, which also belongs to the Early Minoan Period. Two crescent moons above the mast seem to indicate that the voyage was to extend over a couple of months.

Other seal engravings show vessels with one, two, or even three masts. Some have complex riggings and well-braced yards. A seal from Mirabello shows a one-masted vessel with a square sail. [*2] An ivory model of a ship found by Sir Arthur Evans in a tomb at Knossos has a hatch over its hold to protect the cargo. Terra-cotta and alabaster models were discovered at Aghia Triadha, near Phaestos, by the Italian archaeologists. A terra-cotta model from Palaikastro belongs to the Early Minoan Age.

"The modern vessels of the Cretan fishermen, and especially those of the fishers for sponges from the Isle of Kalimnos, differ little", writes Angelo Mosso, "from the ships of antiquity." [*3] Occasionally Maltese boats are found to have the Horus eye on the prow, like the ancient Egyptian boats of the dead found in tombs. Beside the eye a flag is sometimes painted. There were ensigns on the prows of pre-Dynastic Nilotic vessels. Neolithic ships carved on rocks in Upper Egypt had sails and oars like the Cretan vessels, which they resemble in shape. Maltese boats retain the high prows of the prehistoric ships, and

[p. 251]

[paragraph continues] Italian cargo boats have oar helms similar to those of the Egyptian river vessels. Seafarers have ever been intensely conservative. Some of the curious superstitions that still prevail among them may be as old as the pre-Dynastic pottery of Egypt and the maritime seal stones of Crete. Early Minoan sailors may have whistled to conjure the wind spirit, like our own fisherfolks, as they steered between the rocky isles of the Aegean Sea, or struck out boldly now westward to Sicily, and anon eastward towards Cyprus and the Syrian coast.

Footnotes

^216:1 Crete, the Forerunner of Greece, p. 19.

^219:1 Dawn of Mediterranean Civilization, pp. 299 et seq.

^219:2 Those who favour the Cypriote origin of copper-working urge that the earliest Egyptian copper artifacts are copies of those of Cyprus. It can be shown, on the other hand, that some of the Egyptian copper artifacts are copies of Neolithic forms.

^220:1 Schliemann was wrong in asserting that Hissarlik (Troy) had a Copper Age.

^220:2 Gournia, Mrs. Hawes and Others, p. 33. (American Exploration Society, Philadelphia, 1908.)

^222:1 The Ancient Egyptians, pp. 3 et seq.

^222:2 Prehistoric Cemeteries of Naga-ed-Der, Vol. I, p. 134.

^222:3 Science Progress, 1896, p. 347.

^222:4 The Ancient History of the Near East, pp. 89 et seq. (1913.)

^222:5 Ibid., p. 33.

^223:1 Dawn of Mediterranean Civilization, p. 57.

^223:2 Ibid., p. 59.

^223:3 Numbers, xxxi, 22.

^224:1 I Kings, v, 1-12, and vii, 14. et seq.

^225:1 The Dawn of Mediterranean Civilization, pp. 289-91.

^225:2 Crete the Forerunner of Greece, pp. 289-91.

^225:3 C. 2800 B.C.

^226:1 The Dawn of Mediterranean Civilization, pp. 62-3.

^227:1 Mrs. Hawes refers in this connection to E. Rossler, Zeits. f. Ethnol., XXXVII, 1905, pp. 114 et seq.

^227:2 Gournia, p. 33.

^230:1 Scamander.

^230:2 Iliad, Book XXI (Derby's translation), 340 et seq.

^234:1 Book VII (Cowper's translation).

^236:1 British Museum Bronze Age Guide, pp. 89-91.

^238:1 Times, 27th August, 1908.

^239:1 A History Of Egypt. p. 94

^240:1 Odyssey, IV, 618.

^240:2 Iliad, XXIII, 741 et seq.

^240:3 Genesis, xliv. 2.

^241:1 Mrs. Hawes suggests that "the objects given in exchange by the Cretans for European products were of as inferior and ephemeral character as those with which modern traders dupe the native; hence the phenomenon noted by Burrows (The Discoveries in Crete, p. 190) that genuine Aegean articles are absent from districts where Aegean influence is undeniable" (Gournia, p. 10). Asia Minor may have received chiefly supplies of wine and food-stuffs. Pharaoh Meneptah of the XIX Dynasty sent shiploads of grain to the Hittites in time of famine (A History of Egypt, Professor Breasted, p. 465).

^243:1 Ionia and the East, p. 58.

^244:1 Schliemann's Ilios, p. 242.

^244:2 Letter to Times, Dec. 18th, 1879.

^245:1 Much of the Cretan amber is evidently from the Adriatic.

^246:1 The Dawn of Mediterranean Civilization, p. 62.

^246:2 Les premiers ages du metal, H. & L. Siret, p. 227.

^246:3 Nat. History, XXXIII, 31.

^247:1 Dawn of Mediterranean Civilization, pp. 372-3.

^248:1 C. 2000 B.C.

^248:2 Or Middle Minoan II, according to Hawes.

^248:3 The Journal of Egyptian Archaeology, Part II, pp. 115, 116.

^250:1 Herodotus, IV, 33.

^250:2 Probably "white sails and twisted ropes of ox-hide" (Odyssey, II 425-6).

^250:3 Dawn of Mediterranean Civilization, p. 280.

     
Myths of Crete and Pre-Hellenic Europe, by Donald A. Mackenzie, [1917], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 252]

 

CHAPTER XI

 

Life in the Little Towns

Local Cultures--Power of Rulers limited--The Town of Gournia: its West-end Palace and Villas and East-end Workmen's Houses--Glimpses of Industrial and Domestic Life--The Public Shrine for Goddess Worship--Vasiliki Remains--A Strategic Key--Pottery Links with Turkestan and Spain --The Country of the Eteocretans--Port Sitia and Petras--The Seaport Town of Palaikastro--The "Fair Havens" of Paul--An Important Sanctuary--Fire Offerings--Costumes of Human Figurines--Ladies' Fashions--Their Big Hats and Elaborate Gowns--Theories regarding Fire Ceremonials--Fire Customs in Britain--Zakro's Port of Safety--Citadel and Merchants' Houses--Praesos and the "True Cretans"--Mingling of Races in Crete.

ALL portions of Crete were not affected similarly during the Early Minoan Period by the progress achieved by its pioneers of civilization and the cultural influences that swept to and from the island shores northward and southward like the seasonal air currents. Indeed, the rural communities of the high plateaux and deep mountain gorges, especially in the west, were hardly touched at all, and followed as primitive ways of life as do their descendants at the present day. "It is still possible on the mountain sides, where the crop is scanty, to see", write Mr. and Mrs. Hawes, "men and women plucking the corn." [*1] This simple method of harvesting obtains also on the isolated Hebridean island of St. Kilda.

Nor did the shoreland seats of Cretan progress advance on precisely the same lines. Each had its local culture, its, groups of artisans and traders, and, perhaps, its independent

[p. 253]

chief or king. Like early Egypt and Babylonia, the island appears to have been divided into a number of petty states. These may have occasionally waged war one against another before an early Minos established a central government at Knossos and codified the laws, as did Hammurabi the Great. Indeed, it is generally believed among archaeologists that some of the disasters, like the burning of towns and palaces, which are still traceable on the island, were due to local wars.

It is of interest to find in this connection that in Plato's story of the "Lost Atlantis" references are made to island chiefs. These dignitaries owed allegiance to the king, whose powers, however, were limited by the constitution. When the people celebrated their annual festival, at which a bull was captured and sacrificed, "they poured libations down on the fire, and swore to do justice according to the laws on the column, to punish anyone who had previously transgressed them, and, besides that, never afterwards willingly to transgress the inscribed laws, nor ever to rule, or obey any ruler governing otherwise than according to his father's laws". There were ten chiefs at this ceremonial. "They did not allow the king authority to put to death any of his kinsmen, unless approved of by more than half of the ten." [*1] Here we have, in contrast to Oriental autocracies, a system of government which is of distinctly European character. The king, like his subjects, had to act in accordance with the laws of the state. Apparently the stone benches in the "throne room" of the palace of Knossos were occupied by men whose status was defined in the constitution. We should perhaps, therefore, recognize this interesting apartment as the meeting-place of Europe's first Parliament.

One or two industrial and trading towns sprang up in

[p. 254]

[paragraph continues] Crete which appear to have been, if not entirely independent of Knossos, at anyrate sufficiently so to ensure their development. A group of these were situated on the "tail" of Crete formed by the Gulf of Mirabello, and embraced by the modern provinces of Hierapetra and Sitia. This part of the island is approached from Knossos and Phaestos through twisting valleys among the Lasithi mountains, where there are many passes which could be held by small forces against large armies. The isthmus narrows to only 8 miles between the Gulf of Mirabello and the modern town of Hierapetra, and several small river valleys penetrate to the central uplands from either shore. The mountain spine of Crete is divided by the longest of these valleys, which is followed by the modern road between Hierapetra and Kavasi. To the east a rugged mountain range protects the frontier of Sitia, dominated by the peak of Aphendis Kavusi, which rises to a height of 4829 feet above the sea-level. Sitia is the ancient country of Eteocretans, who were believed by the Greeks to be the earliest settlers on the island.

In a little valley called Gournia, because of its troughlike shape, which opens on the Gulf of Mirabello, discovery was made by Mrs. Hawes, then Miss Harriet Boyd, the distinguished American archaeologist, of the ruins of a compact little town. It is picturesquely situated on a limestone ridge, about a quarter of a mile from the sea beach. A little river flows past through cultivatable land, and wild carob trees surround it. The shoreland is rugged and rocky, with many murmurous creeks, and across the gulf, which narrows here like a Highland loch, are long rolling hills with here a hollowing curve and there an aspiring peak.

Gournia, like other Cretan towns, was unfortified. It had very narrow streets which were paved, and some were

[p. 255]

[paragraph continues] "cursed streets of stairs", as Byron sang of Malta. The two longest central thoroughfares ran north and south, and these were approached from west and cast by ascending streets, those on the east side being the steepest. A spacious oblong public court--the public "park"--opened from the south, and above it on the western slope was the little palace with doors opening on the streets, and elbowed by private houses like a noble cathedral in a modern town. The "west end" was evidently the fashionable part of ancient Gournia. A little beyond the palace, a narrow street leading eastward from the western main thoroughfare, slopes upward towards the public shrine of the mother-goddess. The large eastern wing of the town was the most populous and thickly built.

An excellent idea of what the houses were like is obtained from a series of enamelled plaques discovered by Sir Arthur Evans in a basement chamber of the palace of Knossos. These apparently were once part of an elaborate mosaic. The artists took pride in depicting a variety of houses, and happily paid sufficient attention to minute details, so as to convey to us across a gap over thirty centuries an excellent idea of the methods of construction, and to a certain degree the habits of life of the occupants. All the roofs were flat, but some were surmounted by small attics erected in the centre, which gave the square buildings an ink-bottle shape. The houses vary from two to four stories in height. Their aspect is somewhat modern. Single windows had four panes, and double windows from two to six. "The red pigment in the windows of the mosaic", writes Sir Arthur Evans, [*1] "suggests that some substitute for window glass was in use--perhaps oiled and scarlet-tinted parchment." But all windows were not thus covered. Some were quite open,

[p. 256]

and in certain instances the windows of a second story had scarlet filling, while those of the third had none. "The upper door-like windows," Sir Arthur says, "recall a feature repeated in some of the miniature wall paintings. In these, groups of ladies are seen standing in similar openings, as upon a balcony. In other cases the women seem to be seated at open windows of a more usual type, and in one instance there is visible a part of a curtain, apparently of light material, perhaps drawn at night as a protection against mosquitoes."

One type of house has a single door; another has two doors like a modern semi-detached villa. In cases where no doors are shown, the gables or backs of houses may be represented. Tenements are suggested by plain erections, with what appear to be outside stairs ascending from basement to roof. Towers, perhaps watch-towers, are also represented. Some buildings appear to have been constructed of stone in the rectangular method, others with rubble strengthened by horizontal beams; in many cases, too, the ends are shown on a villa front of round beams, which supported the roof and the floors.

In Gournia the earlier and poorer houses had loose walls of small stones set thinly in clay. Improved methods of construction can be traced stage by stage until the masonry resembles the "Cyclopean" style, which apparently was of northern origin. Lime, plaster, and clay were used for facing walls. Upper stories, as a rule, were of brick, supported by timber.

This interesting town was entirely destroyed by fire about 1500 B.C. "The conflagration", writes Mrs. Hawes, "left proof of its strength in many parts of the excavations. Wooden steps and posts were entirely burned away, leaving deposits of charcoal and marks of smoke grime; bricks were baked bright red. In a ground-floor

[p. 257]

room of the palace lay a large tree-trunk, which had supported an upper floor or roof, completely charred through, but retaining its original shape; the central hall of the palace was choked with such timbers. Limestone was calcined, steatite was reduced to crumbling fragments; in a doorway of the palace lay a shapeless lump of bronze, once the trimmings for the door. Strangest of all was the effect on plaster. . . . The intense heat reconverted it into unslaked lime, and this, under the first rain, again formed plaster, encasing vases, or anything else on which it fell, in an air-tight, almost petrified mass. Sometimes at the core such a mass was still moist. In time, we looked to rooms where the destruction had been most complete, and where the pick struck such solid opposition, to yield us the best returns; for in them the possessions of the ancient burghers remained undisturbed, awaiting the patience of our workmen to knife them out." [*1] Articles of pottery which were thus hermetically sealed for over 3000 years have retained much of their ancient beauty of colour as well as of form.

Small portions of the town at the north-western and south-western ends were reoccupied after the conflagration took place. But if an attempt was made to revive the prosperity of Gournia, it did not meet with success. The site was completely abandoned before, or during, the Homeric Age, and has since offered no attractions to settlers.

Built as it was on a limestone foundation, where every inch of space was valuable and no levelling was possible, Gournia retains few traces of its original structures. A refuse heap in its vicinity has yielded pottery fragments of the Early Minoan III Period (c. 2600-2400 B.C.), and burials on the neighbouring slopes are of even remoter

[p. 258]

date. Apparently the valley was inhabited from the beginning of the Bronze Age (c. 2800 B.C.), first by agriculturists, then by traders and artisans, for whose wares the mariners found a ready market. Finds of obsidian suggest that the site was first chosen by a community of the "crofter- fishermen" class, which produced daring seamen and enterprising traders.

The oldest buildings in the town belong to the Middle Minoan III Period (c. 1900-1700 B.C.). These are situated at the extreme north-eastern and south-western ends, and it seems possible that other dwellings intervened. The town as a whole dates from the Late Minoan I Period (c. 1700- 1500 B.C.). Possibly many of the houses of which traces survive occupy the sites of others of greater antiquity and slighter construction. A town of growing prosperity was likely to be entirely rebuilt in the process of time. Besides, political changes may have occurred and caused disasters, like those which overtook the earliest palaces of Knossos and Phaestos in the Middle Minoan II Period, although no traces of these survive among the Gournia ruins, and the town as we find it may date from a first reoccupation period. Thus there may have been a Gournia I which was succeeded by Gournia II, the town with which we are dealing, and there might have been a Gournia III had the social revival, which is indicated by the few later buildings of the reoccupation period, been allowed to develop.

For some 200 years, that is, from about the late period of the Hyksos occupation of Egypt till about the beginning of the reign of Thothmes III, the great conquering Pharaoh, Gournia was a flourishing and important industrial and trading Centre. The stones which pave its little streets were worn down by the booted feet of its busy citizens. In an age when traders had to barter wares

 

THE RUINS OF THE LITTLE TOWN OF GOURNIA

 

[p. 259]

which were worthy to compete with the products of Egypt, art was stimulated by commerce. The best pottery was of as exquisitely graceful design as the finest ceramic products of any country in any age, and the decorative designs were often as elaborate as the soft colour effects were worthy of the high degree of technical skill attained. The artists sometimes developed the spiral and geometric motives, and sometimes used with fine effect familiar seashore subjects, like the octopods, sea-urchins, sea-snails, sea-anemones, corals and shells, as well as riverside reeds and flowers waving in soft winds. Mottled designs with shading effects were also in favour, and the resulting colour effects were no doubt as pleasing to contemporary purchasers as they are to us at the present day. Some of the vessels were evidently copies of the products of metal workers, for the decorators painted on imitation rivets. One of the models was the silver cup found in the house tomb, and already referred to. It is of graceful shape, with two handles and a finely fluted rim.

The special charm of Gournia is the light it throws on the everyday life of its citizens. Bronze hooks of modern shape and a pierced leaden sinker indicate that they fished from the rocks, and visited in boats those feeding-places in the little bay where shoals were to be found at certain states of the tide. It may be because they used shell-fish for bait that they decorated their shrines and pictures with shells, thus associating them with the mother-goddess who provided the food supply. That there was a fishing community in the small towns is suggested by a fresco at Phylakopi, Melos, which depicts fishermen carrying fish, which they grasp by the tails, from the sea beach. No doubt they were sold in the market-place as, we gather from tomb pictures, was the case in Egypt.

[p. 260]

One of the most interesting finds was a carpenter's kit which had escaped the attention of the plunderers and the ravages of fire. It lay under a floor, where it may have been concealed by a workman who, poor fellow, probably hoped to find it again. It contained, among other things, several bronze chisels, a saw, a double axe, and a pair of tweezers. In a room of the same house were storage jars, clay weights which had probably hung from a weaving-frame, a three-legged cooking-pot, cups and bowls, a jug, a whetstone, and so on. Another room yielded a bronze sword, as well as a variety of household vessels. In the storeroom stood an oil vat made by a potter. But a more complete specimen was discovered in another and older house. It rested on a stone slab, its spout projecting outward on a level with the base. "There can be little doubt as to its use", writes Mr. Bosanquet, describing a similar vat found in another Cretan town. "In the modern process the olive kernels before being pressed are drenched with hot water, and the product after pressing contains more water than oil. The oil in due course separates itself and rises to the surface, and it is necessary either to bail it out from the top or to drain away the water from the bottom. . . . The latter method is in general use, large and complicated tanks being constructed on this principle; the Praesos jar illustrates the simplest form of it, in which, after the contents have been allowed to stand some time, the tap is set running and the water escapes, a watcher being ready to stop the flow and change the recipient as soon as the oil appears." [*1] Spouts which were utilized to run off water and oil from the vats have also been found. Various household articles discovered in different parts of Gournia include "Ali Baba" storage jars, a. shallow dairy basin in

[p. 261]

which milk was set for cream, fillers, ewer-like jugs, clay bottles, cooking-pots, hand-lamps resembling little flower vases, cream jugs, and small saucepans. A "flaring-bowl" on three legs no doubt provided sufficient light for a well-sized room. Of special interest was the discovery in the basement of the palace ruins of seven stone and earthenware lamps, three of which were broken. Probably they were used to illuminate a large room on an upper floor, as Mrs. Hawes suggests. They are of more elaborate design than those found in the houses of burghers, being shallow shapely bowls with socketed pedestals for fixing on a stone or metal standard. Three round projections like billiard-table pockets held the floating wicks, and were connected with gutters. Apparently this lamp was made in a variety of forms.

There were no fireplaces in the Cretan houses, but on chilly evenings apartments could be warmed with portable fire-boxes, the lids and sides of which were perforated. House drain-pipes found here and there indicate that sanitary appliances were not confined to palaces.

The little town shrine, situated high on the limestone ridge, is one of the most fascinating attractions of ruined Gournia. It was approached by a narrow and ascending paved road, "a much-worn way", says Mrs. Hawes. Much worn also are the three stone steps leading into the little enclosure with low protecting walls. It was but 10 feet square, and could not therefore have accommodated more than three or four persons at a time. Here grew a sacred tree, and below it stood a round clay table, or altar, which was found entire with a fragment of a cultus vase standing upon it. There appears to have been three figures of the mother-goddess. One of crude and formal shape is almost entire. A snake curls round the waist and round one of the shoulders, and the arms are upraised

[p. 262]

in the Egyptian attitude of adoration, forming the "Ka" sign. The eyes are hollow, and the mouth is not shown. Other two heads are similarly mouthless, and one resembles the face vase designs of Troy. Two clay doves were probably associated with one of the idols. Portions of arms entwined by snakes may have belonged to the third. A double axe with a disk in relief on a fragment of clay had evidently a symbolic significance. Three tube-shaped cultus vases have the horn symbols surmounting the handles, as well as six to eight loop handles formed by conventionalized snakes. These are usually referred to as "trumpets".

In the palace and elsewhere other sacred objects were found. One is a bronze figure of a man or god standing on a pedestal with a nail-like projection, like the Babylonian votive figures. His hair is pleated in three long tails, one of which wriggles like a snake down his back, while two fall in front and, following the shoulder lines, meet across his breasts. A loin-cloth is attached to the usual waist girdle. The figure stoops forward slightly, with head tilted sideways; the left arm hangs by his side, and the right is raised and doubled in, so that the hand points towards the heart across the body. Probably this was a religious pose. Small figurines of a seated goddess, a miniature 8-form shield, a bronze cockle-shell, and an earthenware imitation of a triton shell were probably charms.

The little palace of Gournia was being gradually remodelled when the destroyers swept through it, robbing its treasures and slaying the occupants. Like the greater palace at Knossos it was erected in labyrinthine style, with narrow corridors and groups of apartments leading one from the other. There was also a central court, and an outer court which may have been a market-place. It

[p. 263]

appears to have been in some parts two, and in others three stories high, the roof of the central court being flat to form a terrace, to which access could be obtained from the windows of the second story. On the basement were storerooms, bathrooms, public rooms, and probably bedrooms. So thoroughly was the palace rifled before being set on fire, that few finds of any value have been discovered in its rubbish-heaped apartments.

A goodly number of seal stones were found in Gournia, of Middle and Late Minoan design. These were used to impress the trade-marks of merchants and others, and were attached to a belt worn round the wrist. Some of the signs look like hieroglyphs: others have a religious character. One of the most interesting of the latter class is a female figure wearing a bell-mouth skirt, standing on the back of a deer. This may be a form of the early Artemis. Hittite deities usually stand on animals' backs. Another seal shows two females, who appear to be dancing like the women in one of the Palaeolithic cave pictures. A third has a prancing bull, a fourth three goats dancing round in a circle with legs opposed, suggesting the Babylonian dancing he-goats, which have a stellar significance; a fifth the double axe, a sixth the familiar octopus, while a seventh is a lion crouching below a palm-tree, perhaps an Egyptian design. One of the most beautiful seals is of green onyx, on which two dragon-flies with heads opposed and wings outspread are exquisitely carved. It is worthy of the best Cretan gem-engraving artisans.

If there was a Gournia I, it must have been of much less account than Gournia II. The strongest settlement on the isthmus during Early Minoan times was at Vasiliki, which lies about 2 miles inland on the road to Hierapetra. Its oldest ceramic remains (Early Minoan II) make it contemporary with the Mochlos settlement, and antedate

[p. 264]

the pottery fragments (Early Minoan III) of the Gournia refuse-heap.

The Vasiliki remains are situated on a limestone knoll in a narrow valley, which was anciently the strategic "key" of the isthmus. The highway runs past it, and it commands a wide prospect north and south. Rough limestone ridges rise on either side. Brigands from the hills would have found it difficult to capture, and merchants could not carry their wares along the trade route if its chief were hostile.

The knoll is protected on the northern and western sides by a bare cliff about 15 feet high: its southern and eastern sides slope down to the banks of a mountain torrent. Buildings were erected on the summit, which is comparatively level.

The little citadel, or fortress town, was first built about 2500 B.C., or earlier. It was not a place of any importance during Middle and Late Minoan times, when Gournia was flourishing.

Mr. Seager, the American archaeologist, who undertook the excavations at this important site, has divided the history of Vasiliki into four periods. [*1]

Of the buildings of Period I no traces survive. Obsidian artifacts found in this early strata are of superior type to those from Gournia. They indicate a commercial connection with Melos, perhaps through Mochlos, then a promontory. The pottery, with the exception of a few fragments, is hand-made, and had been developed from Neolithic varieties. "The goblets", says Mr. Seager, "show an advance upon a Knossian form of the First Early Minoan Period, which in turn has been compared with pottery found by Dr. Petrie in First Dynasty deposits at Abydos."

[p. 265]

The Period II buildings can be traced. Trading relations with the Cyclades had evidently become more intimate. One of the popular wares was a buff clay handmade variety, painted in Cycladic style. It resembles fragments found at Phylakopi in Melos, and other fragments from sites in eastern Crete. Here we have a departure from the Bronze Age ceramic sequence at Knossos, indicating local development on independent lines. Obsidian was still used, bronze being evidently scarce.

Period III was the most flourishing period at Vasiliki. The houses of Period II were levelled, and the whole settlement was rebuilt. It is uncertain whether or not this change was due to a fresh ethnic infusion into the district or to intertribal strife which affected the "balance of power". Vasiliki had now apparently trading connections with Egypt, Cyprus, and Troy. A distinctive pottery, the mottled variety, displaced all others in popularity. It was wheel-made, and the Egyptian potter's wheel had therefore come into use. The wheel-made fragments of Periods I and II may have been imported, but this, of course, is uncertain. The possibility remains that there were early trading relations, direct or indirect, with the Delta region or Libya. "Some of the Vasiliki shapes", writes Mr. Seager, "occur in Cyprus, and the hard red surface of certain pieces resembles both the early incised ware of Cyprus and the black-topped pottery of Dr. Petrie's Dynastic Egyptians." The "black top" was probably the result of baking pots upside down over an open fire. Certain Vasiliki forms--the "spout vase", the "bulged bowl", the "egg-cup" and "tea-cup"--have been found in the second city of Troy, but the Trojan variety is less finely wrought than the Cretan. This mottled pottery has been discovered also on the

[p. 266]

Cycladic island of Amorgos and in Spain. Reference has already been made to its resemblance to Turkestan specimens which Mrs. Hawes has examined. It may, as has been suggested, have been distributed along the tin trade and copper trade routes which were "tapped" by Cretan mariners. At the close of Period III Vasiliki was destroyed by fire. So thoroughly was the settlement plundered that, as Mr. Seager writes, "only three pieces of bronze were found on the site: two half axe-heads . . . and a dagger of the Early Minoan triangular shape". The pottery was preserved as at Gournia among the heaps of fallen plaster from the upper stories. Lower stories were constructed of stone.

In Period IV, which was disturbed and decadent, hutlike houses were erected. The mottled pottery went out of use and was substituted by a coarse variety, with white geometric designs painted on a dark surface, similar to the Early Minoan fragments found in the Gournia refuse-heap. After a period of uncertain duration, represented by a deposit of 1 1/2 metres, the knoll was abandoned. The builders of Gournia II may have established their sway over the isthmus. It seems probable that a political upheaval took place. The Gournia crania of the Early and Middle Minoan Periods indicate that the population was mainly long-headed. Broad-headed skulls were represented by only 8.5 per cent among those found. The proportion of broad-heads increased greatly in Late Minoan times. [*1]

Stepping eastward from Gournia we pass the little island of Mochlos and the larger one of Psyra. Mochlos, as indicated, has yielded important relics of the Early Minoan Period. On Psyra there have been excavated the ruins of houses of Late Minoan date, which were contemporary

 

THE ISLAND OF MOCHLOS, OFF THE NORTH COAST OF CRETE

On which was discovered the hoard of jewellery described on page <page 238>.

 

[p. 267]

with those of Gournia. In one a portion of painted relief has survived. Characteristic pottery and finely executed stone vases have also been brought to light.

Our faces are turned towards the land of the Eteocretans, the "true Cretans" of classic tradition, whose archaeological records go back to the Neolithic Period. At the village of Kavasi, our road, which is little better than a mule-track, begins to ascend, and we cross the high frontier of Sitia through a steep, rocky pass. Then we descend into a stretch of country lying between the central mountain spine of Crete and its northern shore, from which many torrent-shaped gorges and narrow valleys run inland. Several villages are passed ere we reach Sitia Bay. At Mouliana, Dr. Xanthoudides has excavated beehive tombs which contained, among other things, long bronze swords. These belong to the much-disturbed Late Minoan Period. Farther on is the village of Khamezi, where the same archaeologist has assigned a house ruin to Middle Minoan times. We pass through the valley of Skopi, which leads us towards Sitia Bay. The valley of Sitia, which is embraced by the looping River Stomio, is exceedingly fertile. The olive and the vine flourish exceedingly, as do also the grain crops. Villagers elect to dwell on elevated sites on account of the malarious conditions of the low grounds.

About a mile distant from Port Sitia, along the sandy shore, is a low headland jutting out from the hills that fringe the eastern side of the valley. Round it the rough highway twists sharply, and on the summit is the little hamlet of Petras. Here the deep bay is sheltered from northerly gales, and affords a safe anchorage close to the shore. We recognize at once that Petras must have been an important place in ancient days. Like Vasiliki, it was

[p. 268]

a strategic "key" of a trade route; the highway which it dominates is the easiest approach to the Eteocretan Highlands; the natural harbour was the "nursery" of a sea trade, and the valley provided a surplus of food to promote it.

Mr. Bosanquet conducted excavations on this site in 1901. [*1] The results, although not too encouraging, were not without importance. The hillock had been reclaimed fifteen years previously by a couple of Moslem brothers, who employed "a large force of labourers to demolish the ancient masonry, and to form the hill-side into cultivation terraces". The destruction wrought was "systematic and complete". Large blocks of limestone and ashlar had been built into the field walls. Traces were obtained on the west side of the village of a building nearly 19 yards long, but it was impossible to determine its breadth. In one apartment was found a Kamares jar which is probably of Middle Minoan date. A round tower once stood on a plateau above the headland, which was approached by a road cut for a few yards through the rock, and another was situated below the highway. A rubbish heap on the north-east slope of the settlement yielded "masses of Kamares pottery in all degrees of coarseness and delicacy". Mixed with the heap were stone chippings, suggesting the process of rebuilding, probably in Late Minoan times. Obsidian flakes taken from trial pits indicate that Petras was inhabited from the Early Minoan Period, if not from Neolithic days.

From Petras we follow the serpentine track along the rugged shore for a few miles, and then turn southward round the hill range surmounted by Mount Modi towards Grandes Bay. It is a lonely journey. There is an abundance of game on foot and wing, but the chief stalkers

[p. 269]

are the ground vermin. The hills are intersected by a maze of tortuous valleys, with patches of faded grass and clumps of murmuring trees, broken by bald brown ridges and bluff grey crags. Seaward we have glimpses through winding glens and over basin-shaped valleys of beetling cliffs and streaks of sandy beach fretted by foaming waves, and of blue islands girdled by the dazzling waters in bright sunshine.

At length we descend towards Palaikastro, which lies about 3 miles across a beautiful valley. Olive groves stretch from the foot-hills towards fields of waving grain that form a belt along the shoreland of gravelly ridges and yellow sand.

The bay is flanked on either side by promontories that jut seaward like the great toes of a crab. Towards the south-east its graceful inland curve is broken by a little headland with steep sides, resembling an overturned boat, but with a flat summit. Between this bluff acropolis and the southern range of hills stood the ancient town of Palaikastro. Its site is known as Roussolakkos, which signifies "the red hollow", the redness being due mainly to the crumbling bricks of ancient buildings embedded in the accumulated debris of long centuries. Part of the plain is marshy on the north side of the acropolis.

Perhaps this sheltered bay is the natural harbour referred to in the Biblical narrative of Paul's voyage in "a ship of Alexandria sailing into Italy. . . . We sailed under Crete over against Salmone; and, hardly passing it, came into a place which is called The Fair Havens, nigh whereunto was the city of Lasea." [*1]

Although larger and more important as a trading-centre than Gournia, Palaikastro was less compactly built. Excavations have revealed a long straggling town resembling

[p. 270]

an overgrown village. It was traversed from one end to another by a paved thoroughfare, appropriately named "Main Street" by the representatives of the British School at Athens. Towards the western end another street crossed at right angles, and a second, branching to the right in the south-east quarter, ran round a block and joined another side street. Plunderers, ancient and modern, have wrought much havoc among the buildings; some of its hewn boulders appear in the field walls of the little farms in the vicinity.

The house ruins which have been unearthed are of a Late Minoan town contemporary with Gournia. Traces have been also obtained of an earlier town of the Middle Minoan II Period, which was probably destroyed.

Outlying sites indicate that the valley was inhabited from the earliest times. One of these has been located at Magassa, the mountain village already referred to, where the coarse archaic pottery, stone houses, and obsidian flakes belong to a period long anterior to the introduction of metal. Rock shelters indicate even more primitive conditions of life.

The houses were larger than those at Gournia, and were more massively built. No doubt they resembled the villas of the Knossian mosaic with two or three stories, elaborate windows, and attics, resembling "deck houses", on the flat roofs. One or two bad spacious apartments, and it is possible that they were occupied by several families closely related.

The pottery ranged from Middle Minoan times to the Late Minoan Period of decline. In a single room of a house in Main Street were found seventeen shapely "fillers". Some are of the type carried by the "cup-bearer" of the Knossian fresco, while others are of pear form with narrow necks, jutting lips, and small handles,

 

DECORATED POTTERY FROM PALAIKASTRO

The central vase show an interesting treatment of an octopus motif.

 

[p. 271]

In addition to these and other highly-decorated vases, special interest attaches to the many domestic utensils, including cooking-vessels, pans for baking bread, candlesticks, lamps, and portable fire-boxes.

An important sanctuary site has been excavated by Professor Myres near Palaikastro. It is situated on the ridge of hills that fringe the southern side of the valley, and rises abruptly behind the town, and on the slope of its highest eminence, called Petsofa. Here were unearthed a large number of clay votive figurines of human beings, animals, &c., in strata enclosed by walls. Evidently there had been a sacred building here, but it cannot be described as a temple, for its ruins resemble those of the ordinary dwelling-houses at Palaikastro. Three distinct layers were cut through. The lowest is of clay, red on the surface, but containing no relics. "It doubtless represents", writes Professor Myres, [*1] "the original packing of earth to level the enclosure; and in that case its red colour is due to prolonged baking by the bonfire on its surface." The next layer, which is of dark earth. was full of ashes and charcoal fragments, and "crowded with figurines". Broken. pottery and figurines were also found in the surface layer.

The male figurines have either painted or modelled upon them the characteristic Cretan loin-cloths and kilts, with waist-girdles and boots or slippers. In one instance there is a body "wrapper" in relief, which is drawn over either shoulder, and crosses at the back and over the breast. This garment presents "very close analogies", says Professor Myres, "with the Scottish plaid, which is first wound round the waist and then has the ends crossed in front, brought over the shoulders, crossed again on the back, and secured by being tucked through the waist folds, so that the ends hang down like a tail".

[p. 272]

Most of the female figurines have the usual pinched waists, tight bodices, and bell-shaped gowns. The headdress varies, and in some cases looks startlingly modern. In one case we have a Dolly Varden hat with crimped brim and a trimming of rosettes; in another a low crown with the brim curving in front like an inverted horseshoe, and one of the expanding sides set off with a frill or plume; a third is high and conical, looking somewhat like a lamp. Sometimes the head-dress is an elaborate hair-dressing, probably on a frame, resembling a high peaked nightcap bending forward, and crossed by a couple of broad white bands. The bodice has always a low neck, the breasts being covered by a thin under-garment, or, as the frescoes suggest, a stiff model of the bust. Usually a wide standing collar rises to a point behind the back, jutting outward.

Traces of paint indicate that the costumes of the Cretan ladies were not awanting in tasteful colour-effects. Some of the hats appear to have been white, while brown, green, and black gowns were decorated with triple horizontal bands between which triple bands crossed at a slope. Like the bodices, these might also be elaborately embroidered in various colours with striking designs.

These male and female votive figurines appear to have been representations of worshippers who deposited them perhaps as charms to protect themselves against the influences of evil. Most of them are standing, but a proportion are seated on four-legged chairs or low stools with or without backs.

That cures were also supposed to be effected by placing models in the purging bonfire, is suggested by the large number of votive arms, legs, heads, and bodies. The single limbs vary in length: in one case a protruding thumb suggests that it is the affected part. There are

[p. 273]

several forearms with or without hands, and in one case the whole arm is attached to part of a female body. Detached feet and heads. the upper part of a female showing protruding breasts, and a male body with leg stumps may indicate the locations of disease. On the other hand, it is possible that those who deposited these models may have desired to increase the skill of the hand, the strength of arms and legs, the supply of human milk, and so on. A man setting out on a journey might have cast into the sacred fire the model of his legs, so as to ensure his safe return.

The Petsofa fire ceremonies may have been of similar significance to those which were anciently held in our own country. Our ancestors believed that all the forces of evil were let loose at times of seasonal change, and human beings and their domesticated animals required to be specially protected against them. At the beginning of each quarter they lit great bonfires to thwart the demons and fairies, and also to secure luck and increase. The quarter-day was the "settling-day" between mankind and the supernatural beings: those which were the source of good things were propitiated, and those which were the source of evil were baffled by the performance of ceremonies of riddance. In parts of the Scottish Highlands boys still light Beltane (May Day) fires and drive cattle over the ashes to charm them against the influence of the evil eye, the spells of witches, and the attacks of fairies. The New Year's Day bonfire is even more common. It is uncertain whether it has been called a bonfire because bones used to be burned in it or because it was the source of "boons". In England the Midsummer fires were called "Blessing Fires". [*1] As in Scotland and Ireland, the folks danced round them and leapt through the flames

[p. 274]

when they burned low. Brand quotes an interesting old translation, which runs:

	 
		Then doth the joyful feast of John the Baptist take his turne,
		 When bonfires great, with lofty flame, in everie towne doe burne;
		 And yong men round about with maides doe daunce in everie streete,
		 With garlands wrought of motherwort, or else with vervain sweete,
		 And many other flowres faire, with violets in their handes,
		 Whereas they all do fondly thinke, that whosoever standes,
		 And thorow the flowres beholdes the flame, his eyes shall feel no paine.
		 When thus till night they daunced have, they through the fire amaine
		 With striving mindes doe runne, and all their hearbes they cast therein.
		 And then with wordes devout and prayers they solemnly begin,
		 Desiring God that all their illes may there consumed be;
		 Whereby they thinke through all that yeare from agues to be free.
		
		 Others made a wheel of fire, which they cast down at night from a mountain-top.

	 
		They suppose their mischiefes are all likewise throwne to hell,
		 And that from harmes and daungers now in safetie here they dwell.
		
		 Sometimes the folks are also represented at these festivals,

	 
		Supping mylk with cakes
		 And casting mylk to the bonefire. [*1]
		
		 The beliefs enshrined in these old customs, which have survived after so many centuries of Christian influence, afford us a clue to the motives of the Cretans who cast images into their fires. In addition to the male and female figurines found at Petsofa there is also a large number of models of tame and wild animals. The commonest

[p. 275]

of them is the ox, which suggests that the charming of cattle was of great antiquity. Calves, dogs, goats, and rams were probably represented for a similar purpose. It cannot be held, however, that the models of unclean animals and ground vermin were cast in the fire because men desired that they should be increased in number or protected against attack. These included the fox and weasel. the hedgehog, which was supposed to steal the milk of cows, and the pig, which was abhorred as in Egypt, Palestine, Wales, and Scotland. Apparently the offerings were made for a variety of reasons, like those made at "wishing wells" and "wishing trees" in our own country at the present day by the folks who perpetuate old customs in a playful spirit. The Cretans probably pronounced blessings over the models of domesticated animals, and curses over the bestial enemies of mankind, believing that spells were confirmed by the magical action of fire. In ancient Egypt images of the Apep devil-serpent were cursed and spat upon before being committed to the flames, so that its power of working evil might suffer decline.

Other clay models found at Petsofa include miniature cups, vases, bowls, and jugs, as well as little plaques with lumps of clay representing bread. In such cases the desire was apparently to ensure the food-supply. Tree-like objects suggest a belief that fruit-crops could be increased by the influence of the fire spell. Several symbolic objects were, no doubt, protective offerings. These included articles with four C spiral terminations and balls of clay, which may have been charms against the "evil eye" like the "luck balls" which were manufactured and sold in these islands in comparatively recent times.

Another Eteocretan seaport which drove a busy trade in the Late Minoan I Period was Zakro. It is situated

[p. 276]

about 8 miles from Palaikastro. Rather than follow the rough mule-path over the plateau and through twisting vales and narrow gorges, we prefer to sail round the rugged coast with its beetling cliffs and shingly slopes. On our way we pass the boats of the sponge divers. The famous sponges which grow along the eastern shores of Crete are still in as great demand as in the days when Hellenic warriors utilized them as comfortable pads--which also absorbed perspiration--in their helmets and boots. We wonder at the power of endurance displayed by the divers. One has been submerged for ninety seconds; here another has waited on the floor of the ocean thirty seconds longer, but we are informed that he is not a record-breaker.

We tack round a rugged headland and enter the little natural harbour of Zakro, which affords excellent anchorage near the shore. It is sheltered from every wind except the east, which, however, is of rare occurrence. The gusty north winds are deflected by the mountains, and when they rage on the open sea and toss high billows round Cape Plaka, Zakro Bay is comparatively peaceful. Many a Minoan ship must have run in here to escape a sudden meltem which was strewing the Mediterranean with ribbons of snowy foam.

The little saucer-shaped plain, fronted by a beach of sand and shingle, is marshy in part, and consequently malarious. It has, however, its vineyards, patches of cornfield, and clumps of olive-trees, and a small population. High and frowning ridges of bluish limestone enclose it on every side, and the River Zakro, which flows southward from a gorge on the western side, and turns abruptly eastward towards the sea, has a resemblance here to the letter L. The valley behind the plain stretches for about 6 miles, and varies from 1 mile to 2 miles in

[p. 277]

breadth. It is approached through narrow rocky passes, one of which leads to Upper Zakro.

On two mountain spurs on the northern side of the plain, which are separated by a dell, are ruins of houses. Their builders selected these elevated sites to escape malaria. The acropolis was on the highest part of the western spur, and could be approached from the southern side only. Here, within the area enclosed by massive walls, are the Zakro pits of archaeology. The largest was visited by Italian archaeologists in the early days of Cretan research, but was not thoroughly explored until Mr. Hogarth conducted his systematic excavations in 1901. [*1] The deposit was about 8 feet in depth. It yielded three obsidian flakes and fragments of implements of bone and of bronze pins and blades. There were also bits of stone vessels. "The mass of the find", Mr. Hogarth writes, "was in earthenware, and included about eighty unbroken vases among thousands of fragments." Four-fifths of the pottery was Late Minoan I, and the remainder of the Kamares variety (Middle Minoan), with Eteocretan characteristics. The Vasiliki mottled ware was represented, but there was no trace of Neolithic ceramic products. Some pottery was obtained in a second pit and among the foundations of houses.

On the opposite spur are the ruins of well-built houses of a prosperous community. The foundations of these were of stone, and the upper stories of brick supported by timber. Brick was also used for the inner walls, which were faced with plaster. Floors were covered by concrete. Evidence was forthcoming that the little town had been destroyed by fire. The buildings varied in size and design. One had fifteen apartments on the ground floor, and was probably a small palace; another had six, and a third eight.

[p. 278]

These houses yielded some bronze relics and a good deal of pottery, including a characteristic Cretan shell-shaped crucible for smelting copper, perforated by a number of holes at one end. But the most remarkable relics were the clay seal impressions. Of these Mr. Hogarth found about five hundred, a sure evidence that Zakro was the home of rich and prosperous merchants. Trade was conducted with Anatolia, and perhaps also with Mesopotamia, along the routes terminating on its coast, as well as with Egypt. Zakro's position suggests that its trade with Egypt was direct, and not by way of Cyprus. At the present day it is the last port of call for Aegean craft bound for the Libyan coast, where sponges are also obtained.

The pottery from the pits indicates that there was an earlier Zakro in the Middle Minoan II Period, when Palaikastro I was founded. Apparently Zakro II was destroyed, like Gournia II and Palaikastro II, in Late Minoan II times (c. 1500-1450 B.C.).

Zakro's dead were buried in caves in the adjoining gorge. In the vicinity of Upper Zakro the scanty surviving remains of buildings, and the tombs which have been located, suggest that the valley had settlers from the Early Minoan Period until early Hellenic times. There are still a few poor villages.

In our survey of Eastern Crete we come last of all to Praesos, the ancient capital of the "true Cretans". It does not lie many miles from Upper Zakro as the crow flies, but is separated from it by a ridge of rugged hills that runs north and south. The most convenient way of approach is from Sitia. This inland site is perched on a small plateau enclosed by two streams. These unite below in front of it, and form the River Sitia, which runs through a 7-miles-long valley towards Sitia Bay. Southward

[p. 279]

the road shrinks to a narrow pass, which could easily be closed against an enemy. It makes a long detour by way of Klandra and Zyro towards Zakro valley.

The Praesians informed Herodotus that Crete was twice stripped of its inhabitants, only a remnant being left on each occasion. The first disaster resulted from the expedition which Minos led against Sicily, and the second after the Trojan war, when the greater part of the population was stricken by famine and pestilence. Men of various nations flocked to Crete, "but none came in such numbers as the Grecians". [*1]

Evidently classical writers believed that the "true Cretans" were representative of the aboriginal inhabitants--the ancient seafarers who suppressed the island pirates and colonized the mainland of Greece, the Cycladic islands, and Lycia and Caria in western Anatolia. But excavations at Praesos have failed to support this hypothesis. Before the Early Hellenic Period the little town was not a place of any importance. It was certainly not a centre of Minoan civilization. The people who erected the inland stronghold were evidently invaders who came before the Greeks--perhaps they were the destroyers of Zakro and Palaikastro. It may be that, like the Hellenes, they were of Indo-European speech, and represented an early wave of mingled Achaean and Pelasgian stock from the continent. [*2] As there are traces that they perpetuated Minoan religion in early classical times, it may well be that they fused with the people they conquered, and were influenced by their modes of thought, and that in consequence the Greeks did not realize that they were intruders like

[p. 280]

themselves. The conquered people may have beer early settlers from Anatolia, and not of the same racial stock as the settlers of North African origin.

The Praesian invasion probably occurred in the Late Minoan III Period. All the buildings which can be credited to the so-called "true Cretans" are of a later age. The earlier inhabitants, the real "true Cretans", are represented by the relics found in the cave of Skalais above the river gorge at the north side of the plateau. Here, in what may have been either a dwelling or burial-place, were found fragments of pottery of the Neolithic and Early Minoan Periods, and also some sherds of the Kamares (Middle Minoan) variety. Prior to the coming of the founders of Praesos, who erected beehive tombs and worshipped a mother-goddess closely resembling the Trojan deity, the plateau was probably a grazing-place for the inhabitants of the fertile valley stretching towards Sitia Bay. In Homeric times the island had many ethnic elements. The following reference in the Odyssey is significant:--

	 
		There is a land amid the sable flood
		 Call'd Crete; fair, fruitful, circled by the sea.
		 Num'rous are her inhabitants, a race
		 Not to be summ'd, and ninety towns she boasts.
		 Diverse their language is; Achaians some,
		 And some indigenous are; Cydonians there,
		 Crest-shaking Dorians, and Pelasgians dwell. [*1]
		
		 In the next chapter we will visit the important sites of Southern Crete.

Footnotes

^252:1 Crete the Forerunner of Greece, p. 37.

^253:1 The Critias, Section XV.

^255:1 Annual of the British School at Athens, Vol. VIII, p. 14 et seq.

^257:1 Gournia, p. 21.

^260:1 Annual of the British School at Athens. Vol. VIII, p. 268.

^264:1 Gournia, pp. 49. 50.

^266:1 Gournia, p. 59.

^268:1 Annual of the British School as Athens, Vol. VIII, pp. 282-5.

^269:1 Acts, xxvii, 6-8.

^271:1 Annual of the British School at Athens, Vol. IX, pp. 356 et seq.

^273:1 Brand's Popular Antiquities, Vol. I, p. 306.

^274:1 Brand's Popular Antiquities, Vol. I, pp. 300 et seq.

^277:1 Annual of the British School at Athens, Vol. VI I, pp. 122 et seq.

^279:1 Herodotus, VII, 170, 171.

^279:2 In classical times the Eteo Cretans did not speak Greek. They used Greek characters, however, in their inscriptions which have not yet been read. The oldest inscription belongs to the sixth century B.C. It may be that this language was not Indo-European. Professor Conway, however, thinks it was.

^280:1 Odyssey, XIX.

     
Myths of Crete and Pre-Hellenic Europe, by Donald A. Mackenzie, [1917], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 281]

 

CHAPTER XII

 

The Palace of Phaestos

The Great Messara Plain--Site of Phaestos--The Trial Pits--Neolithic Remains--The Whale's Backbone--Religious Significance of Sea-shells--Ancient Musical Instruments--The Iron Charm--Beliefs regarding Iron--Obsidian Razors--First and Second Palaces of Phaestos--Grand Stairway and "Hall of State "--Villa of Aghia Triadha--Famous Cat Fresco and Egyptian Prototypes--Sculptured Stone Vases--The King and his Warriors--Boxers and Bull-baiters--Procession on "Harvester Vase--A Painted Sarcophagus--Bull Sacrifice--Charioteers of Hades--Burial Ceremony--Priests and Priestesses--The Double--axe Symbol--Beliefs about Ravens and Doves--The Otherworld.

HAVING surveyed eastern Crete we return to Candia with some knowledge of the character of the ancient civilization which culminated in the palace glories of Knossos. It remains with us next to visit the southern part of the island., which is fragrant with the memories of Minoan Phaestos, and the city of Gortyna, established by the invading Greeks and rebuilt by the Romans.

We strike southward by the road which crosses and ascends the river valleys until we reach Daphnes, and find a break in the mountain spine of the island which leads us to the great Messara plain. The sea is shut off by rugged Kophino mountains that fringe the coast and divert the flow of the River Hieropotamos towards the west.

Phaestos had a strategic situation. Its palace stood upon a low mountain spur commanding the western approach to the Messara Plain. When the site was located by Professor Halbherr, the Italian archaeologist, slight

[p. 282]

traces only remained of its ruins in a field of rustling barley. A noble panorama of mountain scenery is here unfolded before us. To the north-east is Mount Dicte, and to the north-west the greater Mount Ida, the monarchs of sublime and massive mountain ridges. "The outline of the mountains", writes Mosso, "differs little from that of the Apennines, but the blue colour is more intense. . . . Between the ridges the slopes fade in the distance till the blue blends with the grey of the sky. The villages look like eagles' nests perched on the cliffs, each girt round with a garland of olives, they too shading into blue. . . . Before the sun sets the shadows in the ravines of Ida deepen into indigo, and the rocks of the whole chain become violet--an optical phenomenon rarely seen in the Alps. The poets of classical Greece allude to this violet colour in the mountains round Athens. In Italy only the shadows become violet, but here in Crete the rocks are violet." [*1]

When the palace of Phaestos was excavated, it was found to be of smaller extent than that of Knossos. Beneath its ruins were found traces of an earlier building resting on a Neolithic deposit.

An interesting account is given by Mosso of trial pits he sunk below the latest palace floor to the virgin soil, with purpose to ascertain the character of the earliest strata. The deepest of these was 5 1/2 metres on a slope of the hill while the shallowest was only  1/2 metre. Evidently the ground had been levelled for the foundations of the palace.

As at Knossos, it was found that the earliest settlers were in a more advanced stage of civilization than those in eastern Crete, who built stone houses and hollowed out rock shelters. This is of special interest in view of the

[p. 283]

theory, tentatively urged in some quarters, that there were settlements of peoples from North Africa and Anatolia in Neolithic times.

The deep pit at the western side of the palace yielded important finds. About 6 feet down, the foundations of a primitive dwelling were laid bare. On the floor was lying a portion of a whale's backbone, which, like similar relics from the Ligurian caves, may have been regarded as a charm. Lower down in the remains of a still older dwelling were sea-shells which had evidently a religious significance, as the Knossian shrine objects have indicated. Two varieties of well-baked pottery came to light--a dark and a red. Animal bones included those of the oxen, sheep, boars, hares, and birds. Certain pointed bone implements may have been potter's tools. The carved femora of great birds are believed by Mosso to have been mouthpieces of musical instruments--the pipes of Pan or a primitive bagpipe. [*1] At a depth of 4 metres there was a roughly-shaped headless figurine of the mother-goddess. It has the characteristics of Cycladic and Trojan relics of like character. Near the figure lay a piece of magnetite. "According to the analysis", Mosso writes, "it consisted of oxydized iron. We may be certain that it was a sacred stone from the fact that the Neolithic folk had not made a weapon or a hammer of it. Possibly they believed it to be a meteoric stone: it was known at that period that these stones came from heaven, for they appear with a luminous track and fall to earth with a sound." [*2]

In Egypt iron was anciently known as "the metal of heaven". One theory of heaven was that it was formed of a rectangular plate of iron which rested either on the mountains that surrounded the earth or on pillars. This

[p. 284]

divine metal was used as a charm. In the Scottish Highlands it is supposed to prevent fairies and other demons from attacking mankind, and it serves a similar purpose in India and West Africa. The fact that Copts are forbidden to use it to exorcise demons indicates that it was of magical potency in ancient Egypt. Perhaps it was on account of its association with pagan religious beliefs, like the ear-rings worn by Jacob's wives, that it was not used in the construction of the Jewish altar.

Then Joshua built an altar unto the Lord God of Israel in Mount Ebal, as Moses the servant of the Lord commanded the children of Israel, as it is written in the book of the law of Moses, an altar of whole stones, over which no man hath lift up any iron. [*1]

A piece of magnetic iron was found in the Neolithic stratum of Troy, which also yielded small ritual dishes like those of Phaestos. It has already been stated that the Phaestian ceramic sequence accords with that of Knossos. Obsidian knives gave indication, as elsewhere on the island, of trading relations with Melos before the age of metal. "These knives", writes Mosso, "cut so well that during the excavation I always kept one in my pocket to cut my pencil point." [*2] They continued in use long after the introduction of bronze. An excavator informed the writer that he found a worker with an obsidian razor. Asked why he used it, he remarked that his father had done so before him. In Egypt the earliest razors were of flint. A small flint razor recently found in northern Scotland had a comparatively good shaving edge, as was proved when put to the test.

The ruins of the early palace of Phaestos were levelled, and formed in many parts a foundation for the later palace. Owing to this fortunate circumstance, pottery

 

THE GRAND STAIRCASE, PALACE OF PHAeSTOS

 

[p. 285]

and other relics were preserved. The early palace was erected in the Middle Minoan I Period (c. 2200 B.C.), and the work of constructing the second begun in the Late Minoan I Period (c. 1700 B.C.). Excellent specimens were obtained from the first buildings of the fine Middle Minoan Kamares pottery. But other finds were of scanty character. A little gold lay beside charred wood. It probably "ornamented a small piece of furniture", as Mosso suggests. Remains were also discovered "of a cabinet with quadrangular tablets of very hard terracotta which fitted together, and some cornices in repousse work with undulating designs, resembling the cornices which were in fashion at the beginning of last century". Evidently the Cretans, like the Egyptians, had excellent furniture.

The later palace was of less extent than its rival at Knossos, which, however, it resembled in many details. Nor has it yielded so many relics. The destroyers appear to have plundered it thoroughly before setting it on fire.

The most imposing feature is the "grand staircase", between 40 and 50 feet wide, which led up to the Hall of State, or Reception Hall. There is nothing to compare with this noble entrance at Knossos. It has been conjectured that state ceremonials were observed in the hall, the walls of which were probably decorated with frescoes. A small room leading off the hall is surrounded by stone benches, and may have been a "waiting-room" for guests and ambassadors. In the interior of the palace is a spacious central court, 150 feet long and 70 feet broad, surrounded by a maze of apartments, as is the one at Knossos. The theatral area was at the south-east corner.

About 2 miles towards the north-west of Phaestos, at the hamlet of Aghia Triadha, there was a smaller palace

[p. 286]

picturesquely situated on a sloping mountain ridge, and overlooking the sea. It is usually referred to as a "royal villa". The ceramic remains on the site indicate that it was occupied as far back as the First Middle Minoan Period. When the villa was erected in First Late Minoan times, portions of an earlier building were utilized. It was an imposing building, and was entered by a flight of steps. Around it stood in the first period a number of substantial houses, which may have been occupied by rich traders or Cretan aristocrats. In the second period the villa appears to have been a communal dwelling.

Like the Knossian palace, the villa was, when the destroyers had wreaked their vengeance upon it, not entirely plundered of its archaeological treasures. Frescoes have been happily preserved. The most famous of these depicts a cat hunting birds in a marsh. It was evidently painted by one who had seen similar studies in Egyptian tombs at Beni Hassan and Thebes. The Cretan artists were inferior draughtsmen to their Nilotic contemporaries, but they were finer impressionists. In Egypt the cat is statuesque and cold; at Aghia Triadha the ferocity and murderous instincts of the callous animal are conveyed with impressive vivacity; the artist undoubtedly conveys the mood, although his technique is faulty. The Egyptian was essentially a stylist, and rarely produced the nervous art which was so characteristic of Crete.

Three stone vases, with figures sculptured in relief, which were found in the villa, are triumphs of Minoan art. On one is a group of warriors with shields, and two outstanding figures, one posed stiffly with outstretched right arm, and grasping a long staff or lance as if issuing a military order, and the other with a drawn sword resting on his right shoulder, standing at attention. The second vase is divided into four zones, in which appear the figures

[p. 287]

of boxers, bulls, and toreadors. Some of the boxers wear helmets, and others are bare-headed; they all appear to have something equivalent to the boxing-glove on each of their hands. The bull-baiter is seen leaping between the horns of the rearing bull. In Crete, as in Plato's "Lost Atlantis", the sport or religious ceremony of bull-baiting was conducted without weapons. The gymnast seized the approaching animal by the horns and turned a somersault over its back, coming down behind the animal. Various representations of this feat are shown on seals found on Cretan sites and at Mycenae. Sir Arthur Evans found at Knossos ivory figures of leaping gymnasts who were probably bull-baiters. On a gold cup from Vaphio, which is preserved in the museum at Athens, are two figures of bulls. One is charging furiously, while a female gymnast grips the left horn under one arm and the right horn between her legs. A male gymnast is falling off its back. The other bull is caught in a net. A Knossian fresco depicts two women and a man attacking a bull.

The third vase from Aghia Triadha is called by some archaeologists the "Harvester Vase" and by others the "Warrior Vase". Round it marches a carved procession of animated human figures who are evidently taking part in a ceremony. That this ceremony was of religious character seems certain, because one of the men is holding up before him the Egyptian metal rattle called the sistrum, which was used to summon the god and charm away demons in Egyptian temples, and is referred to in the chants. "Do we not behold the excellent sistrum-bearer approaching to thy temple and drawing nigh," called the Isis priestess, invoking Osiris. . . . "Behold the excellent sistrum-bearer and come to thy temple. Come to thy temple immediately! Behold thou my heart, which

[p. 288]

grieveth for thee. Behold me seeking for thee. . . . Lo! I invoke thee with walling that reacheth high as heaven." [*1]

This sistrum-bearer on the vase has not a pinched Cretan waist, and may represent an Egyptian. He is singing or wailing, as are also three of his immediate followers who may be women with upper garments of leather. Perhaps they are invoking the spirit of the slain corn-god.

The procession appears to be led by a long-haired elderly man, wearing a bulging robe decorated with a scale pattern and heavily fringed. He carries a long round-handled staff over his right shoulder. Is he a priest, or a victim in a wicker-work cage who is about to be sacrificed? All the figures are marching in step--performing, in fact, a sort of Germanic "goose step", and most of them carry three-pronged forks, the prongs being attached by cords to the long handles. These resemble the harvesting-forks still in use in Crete. Some of them, however, are fitted with short scythe-like blades, which may have been used either for cutting corn or pruning trees. A single figure--evidently a youth, is stooping low and grasping the thighs of a man who turns round with open mouth as if shouting defiantly a ceremonial utterance of special significance.

Those who see in the procession the celebration of a naval victory hold that the three-pronged implements are really weapons. But no such weapons have been found in Crete. If the ceremony was not a harvest one, it may have been connected with the spring-time invocation of the deity of fertility. Mr. Hall, who regards the vase as one of "the finest pieces of small sculpture in the world", sees upon it "a procession of drunken roistering

 

THREE VASES, SCULPTURED IN STONE, FOUND AT AGHIA TRIADHA

The largest of the three is known as the "Boxer Vase", and measures 18 inches high. The "Harvester Vase", on the left hand of the centre subject, is shown on a larger scale in plate facing, page <page 212>. The other small vase (actual size, 4 inches high) is described on page <page 286>.

 

[p. 289]

peasants with agricultural implements." [*1] "Extraordinary technique was required". write Mr. and Mrs. Hawes, "to represent four abreast, each seen distinctly, one beyond another. The Parthenon frieze presents no more difficult problem in low relief." [*2]

Another decorated object found at Aghia Triadha is a sarcophagus of limestone shaped like a chest, which has been assigned to a period prior to 1400 B.C. It is 52 inches long, 18 inches broad, and 32 inches in depth. The body which it enclosed must have lain in a crouched position, like the bodies placed in the pre-Dynastic Egyptian graves and in those of the Late Stone and Bronze Ages in Western Europe. The sarcophagus had been covered with plaster on which were painted scenes of undoubted religious significance. At either end are chariots. In one, which is drawn by two griffins, a woman is escorting a swathed pale figure, apparently the deceased, on the way to the Otherworld; in the other, which is drawn instead by horses, are two female figures. A long panel on one of the sides is unfortunately badly damaged. It appears to represent a sacrificial scene. A bull is being slain, and a man plays on a double flute while its blood pours into a vessel. The panel on the other side is in a good state of preservation, and affords an interesting and suggestive glimpse of Cretan funerary services. At one end the swathed figure of a youth stands before a tomb or shrine beside a conventionalized representation of the sacred fig tree. In front, and facing the deceased, a priest approaches carrying the model of a boat--perhaps the "ferry boat" of Hades in which the soul is to reach the "Isle of the Blest", after crossing the valleys and mountains like the Indian Yama

[p. 290]

and Babylonian Gilgamesh. Two priests follow behind, carrying offerings. Turned in the opposite direction are three priestesses, or, as some think, two priestesses and a priest. The first pours a red liquid, either wine or the blood of the sacrificed bull, into a large vessel placed between two erect posts on pedestals. These posts are surmounted by double axes on each of which a raven is perched. The second priestess carries a couple of vases suspended from a pole, one in front and one behind, which is carried on her right shoulder. The third figure--either a priestess or a priest--plays a seven-stringed lyre held high in front.

The costumes are of special interest. Facing the deceased the three priests wear robes suspended from their waists which terminate with tail-like appendages. These are evidently the skins of animals. Egyptian priests wore panthers' skins. The first priestess, who bends down beneath the double axes, likewise wears an animal's skin, but she has also an upper garment with half sleeves and a broad blue sash which comes down under her left arm to the waist. Probably this sash formed a St. Andrew's Cross on the back like the plaid on the Petsofa figure, which Professor Myres has compared to the Scottish plaid. The second priestess wears a long blue gown suspended from her shoulders and reaching her ankles. The bodice has a floral edging and the gown is decorated. She wears a flat round cap, and appears to have a sash like that of the first priestess. The lyre player is similarly attired, but has no sash, and the head is bare.

In the next chapter the significance of the tree-pillars and double axes will be dealt with. Here it may be noted that the ravens take the place of the doves as the birds of the Mother Goddess. The reason is obvious.

[p. 291]

[paragraph continues] Doves symbolized fertility and immortality, while ravens were associated with destruction and death. In the Scottish legends regarding Michael Scott, ravens and doves, flying from opposite directions, approach his corpse after death. The fact that the doves are the first to alight is taken as an indication that Michael's soul will go to heaven. The ravens are the messengers of Satan. Throughout Europe and Asia the ravens are birds of ill omen, who foretell death and disaster. They were associated in Greece and Italy with Apollo, the great patron of augurs. Crows were similarly of ill repute. According to some writers, a number of them fluttered over Cicero's head on the day he was murdered. Dark and melancholy birds were evidently regarded as forms of the spirits of darksome Hades. They were, it would seem, associated from an early period with a sepulchral cult. So were doves. Perhaps the raven cult believed in a gloomy after-life in a Hades as dismal as that of Babylonia, while the dove cult had hopes of ultimate happiness. In Egypt both the cults of Osiris and Ra believed in Heavens and Hells. The Ra cult associated their Paradise with the sun: it was a place of everlasting light; while their Hell was a place of darkness, lit for but a single hour in the twenty-four by the sun's rays. In it lost souls were tortured in pools of fire, or they remained in the place of outer darkness, where they suffered from extreme cold.

In this religious scene on the Cretan sarcophagus, the raven spirits of Hades, perched above the double axes, appear to be receiving a propitiatory offering of blood or wine. It may be inferred, therefore, that they could be prevailed upon to show favour to the dead. The kings and heroes of the Greek epics were transported to the "Island of the Blest", while others had to sojourn

[p. 292]

in gloomy Hades. Perhaps the Cretan who was interred in the sarcophagus was regarded as being worthy of a happy fate in the after-life. He was, no doubt, a youth of high birth. In Egypt the paradise of Ra was reserved in early times for kings and queens and their families.

Footnotes

^282:1 Palaces of Crete and their Builders, pp. 57, 59.

^283:1 Dawn of Modern Civilization, pp. 69, 70.

^283:2 Palaces of Crete and their Builders, p. 29.

^284:1 Joshua, viii, 30, 31.

^284:2 Dawn of Mediterranean Civilization, p. 89.

^288:1 The Burden of Isis, by J. T. Dennis, pp. 21 et seq. and 29 et seq.

^289:1 The Ancient History of the Near East, p. 54

^289:2 Crete, the Forerunner of Greece, p. 129.

     
Myths of Crete and Pre-Hellenic Europe, by Donald A. Mackenzie, [1917], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 293]

 

CHAPTER XIII

 

Cave Deities and their Symbols

Demeter and the Nameless Fates--Forms of Mother-goddess--The "Eagle Lady" with Snake Girdle--Prototype of Hittite and Assyrian "Winged Disk"--How Composite Monsters became Symbols--The Caves of Zeus--Lasithi Plateau--The Dictaean Votive Offerings--The Chariot of a Deity--Cave of Kamares--The Plain of Nida--Sacred Cave of Mount Ida--Mountain Religion --Well Worship--The "Seven Sleepers" Belief--Cretan Tammuz a Cave God --Pillar Symbols in Crete, Egypt, and Babylonia--Pillars as Mountains and "World Spines"--The Osirian Spine Amulet--Tree and Pillar Worship--"Horns of Consecration" as Sky Pillars--Double-axe Symbol--Spirits in Weapons--The God of the Axe.

"THE Cretans say", Diodorus Siculus wrote, "that the honours rendered to the gods, the sacrifices and mysteries, are of Cretan origin, and other nations took them from them. Demeter passed from the Isle of Crete into Attica, then into Sicily, and thence into Egypt, carrying with her the cultivation of corn." [*1]

On the other hand Herodotus, writing of the Pelasgi, says: "In early times the Pelasgi, as I know by information I got at Dodona, offered sacrifices of all kinds and prayed to the gods, but had no distinct names or appellations for them, since they had never heard of any. They called them gods (theoi {Greek  theoi}, disposers) because they had arranged all things in such a beautiful order. After a long lapse of time, the names of the gods came to Greece from Egypt, and the Pelasgi learnt them, only as yet they knew nothing of Bacchus, of whom they first heard at a much later date. " [*2]

[p. 294]

There is, no doubt, a kernel of real historical truth in these traditions. The Demeter to whom Diodorus refers is not, of course, the beautiful goddess whom the Grecian sculptors conceived of, but rather the Phigalian cave monster, the black horse-headed fury with snakes hissing from amidst her tangled locks. In early times she had many forms--terrible and mystical forms. Some idea of these is obtained from the study of the seal impressions discovered by Mr. Hogarth at Zakro. In one phase she is the eagle lady"--a woman with prominent breasts, widespread wings, and an eagle's head, wearing the snake waist girdle and the bell-shaped gown, or simply an eagle with a fan tall., and nothing human but her breasts. Several seal specimens show that this primitive form developed into a symbol which may have been a prototype of the Hittite winged disk and the Assyrian disk of Ashur. One is a column with fan tall and surmounted by winged human breasts, above which is a round beehive-shaped cap; others are variants, and then comes a fully developed symbolic object, with breasts represented by double spiral coils resting on a double bee-hive-shaped body with double outspread wings.

In another phase the goddess has a goat's head, wings, a short columnar body, and spreading skirt. A god is similarly depicted with pants and waist girdle. A ram's head appears on another seal impression of like character, and in a variant the head of a "sea horse". Winged sphinxes recall Egyptian forms. Of special interest is a bull-head deity with female breasts, wings, crouched-up legs and fan tail, which may have been bisexual. This form tends also to grow into a decorative symbol. The Minotaur was a bull-headed god.

Composite monsters include deities with human bodies and lions' heads resembling those of Egypt, two dogs'

[p. 295]

heads divided by a wing and united by a fan tail, a female sphinx with human breasts, butterfly wings and lion's legs, a human head with wings and lion's legs, and so on. The form of the Hittite and later Russian double-headed eagle is suggested by a conventionalized lion's head with birds' heads protruding from the ears, curving inward in opposition. In almost all cases the animal and composite animal forms tend to become decorative symbols.

The "Black Demeter" of Phigalia was, as has been indicated, associated with cave worship. In Crete there were many sacred caves. Of these the two most famous were those reputed in classical traditions to be the birthplace of Zeus. One is on Mount Ida and the other on Mount Dicte.

It is possible that these rival caves were sacred to rival cults. Beneath Mount Dicte was situated the city of Lyttos, which was, according to legend, hostile to Knossos and an ally of Gortyna. In references of this character there may be memories of ancient inter-state rivalries in Minoan Crete which survived into the Hellenic Period.

Hesiod, [*1] dealing with the Zeus birth-legend, relates that the goddess Rhea carried her babe to Lyttos. Other writers were familiar with the legend that Zeus was nursed in the Dictaean cave. Diodorus [*2] apparently endeavoured to reconcile the conflicting claims on behalf of the Dictaean and Idaean sanctuaries by stating that the god was first concealed in the one and then transferred to the other to be educated.

According to Dionysius of Halicarnassus [*3] it was the Dictaean cave which Minos entered to receive from Zeus the code of Cretan laws. Lucian states that Europa, the mother of Minos, was carried thither by Zeus, his father, who had abducted her. [*4]

[p. 296]

To visit the Dictaean cave we must first reach the upland plain of Lasithi, to the south-east of Knossos, which is about 5 miles long, and roughly half that in breadth, and has an elevation above the sea-level of some 3000 feet. Mountains surround it on every side, the highest peaks being Aphendis Sarakinos (Mount Dicte), which rises to 5223 feet, and Selena to the north-east, which is almost as lofty. A river traverses the plain from end to end, and is fed by many hill torrents. It finds no valley outlet, but pours into a great cavern towards the north-west. According to local belief, it appears again lower down as the river Aposelemis, which enters the sea a few miles east of Candia.

This upland is approached from the west across the Pediadhan Plain, situated at an elevation of about 200 feet; the mule track then winds its way sheer up the mountain face. From the east the traveller leaves the western shore of the Gulf of Mirabello, and following the valley of the river Kalopotamos, makes a similarly difficult ascent by a zigzag path.

The Lasithi plain, embosomed among sublime mountains, is exceedingly fertile and comparatively populous. The climate resembles that of the more favoured parts of Switzerland. Neither olive trees nor carob trees grow upon it, but the vine flourishes and the grain crops are excellent. The nightingale which pipes so sweetly in lower valleys is here unheard. At morn and sweet eventide, however, the thrush and the blackbird carol amidst the pear and apple trees. On yonder grassy slopes are the familiar wild flowers of temperate climes, including the homely yellow buttercup. The winter is somewhat severe, and it is customary when it approaches to drive flocks and herds to the lower valleys, where they are sheltered and fed until the advent of Spring.

 

WEAPONS AND IMPLEMENTS, IN BRONZE, FROM THE DICTEAN CAVE

Including double axes, spear-heads, knives, daggers, fish hooks, fibula, tweezers, gimlet, &c.

 

[p. 297]

On one of the ridges of Mount Dicte are the ruins of the city of Lyttos, and on another, right opposite, the modern village of Psychro. Five hundred feet above Psychro is the double cavern associated with the legends of Zeus--the famous Dictaean cave. As far back as the "eighties" it was known to contain archaeological relics. The earliest finds were made by goatherds who were accustomed to shelter in it, and after these passed into the hands of dealers, various archaeologists paid visits to Psychro and the cave. It was not, however, until 1900 that thorough and systematic exploration of it was conducted by Mr. D. G. Hogarth.

This accomplished archaeologist did not achieve success without overcoming considerable difficulties. Rock-falls had occurred in the cave, and he had to have recourse to blasting operations. Besides, part of it is ever flooded. "Water flowing in from the east has", writes Mr. Hogarth, "penetrated in two directions right and left. The main flow to southward has excavated an abyss, which falls at first sheer and then slopes steeply for some 200 feet in all to an icy pool, out of which rises a forest of stalactites." [*1]

Inside the cave were found portions of walls, a paved way, and bits of sawn marble an inch thick which may have covered it, an altar-like edifice beside which lay a small stone "table of offerings" and fragments of about thirty other "tables", lamps, cups, broken vases and ashes. Professor Myres found one of the cave "tables" in 1896, and another was purchased from dealers by Sir Arthur Evans in the same year.

The deposit, which was deepest and least disturbed in the north-west part of the upper cave, was divided by strata of pottery fragments and animal bones, between which lay ash and carbonized matter. The oldest pottery

[p. 298]

was of the Kamares (Middle Minoan) variety. In the surface layer were lamps of the Roman period and a silver Byzantine cross, indicating that long after the cave ceased to attract crowds of votaries, the memory of its sacred character survived among the people. Terra-cotta figurines were also found.

When the upper cave was thoroughly explored, Mr. Hogarth prepared to take his departure. Before leaving, however, he sent some of the workers down the steep slope to conduct a search in the lower cave. Here, to the astonishment of everyone, a great archaeological harvest awaited the gleaners. Hundreds of metal offerings were lying in the mud around and below the water, and among the niches formed by stalagmite, some being almost enclosed like flies in amber. In two days the lower cave was cleared. "Four days later", Mr. Hogarth relates, "I took all the bronze pieces, amounting to nearly 500, the objects in gold, hard stone, ivory, bone and terra-cotta, a selection of the stone tables of offerings and of the pottery and specimens of skulls, horns and bones found in the upper Grot, to Candia. What I left under the care of the village (Psychro) officials included no fewer than 550 unbroken specimens of the common type of little wheel-made plain cup, all obviously new at the time they were deposited in the cave, and a great store of bones." [*1]

The bronze figurines of human shape are of both sexes. They are usually posed in devotional attitudes, and may represent votaries or deities, or include both. One figurine is clearly Egyptian. It wears the high double plumes of the god Ra, and seems to have been deposited about 900 B.C. by some pious wanderer who believed, perhaps, that the Theban deity and the Cretan

[p. 299]

Zeus were identical. Animal figurines include rams, bulls, and oxen. An ox and a ram with projections from their shoulders fit into a miniature chariot which may have been a god's vehicle. On a gem in Sir Arthur Evans's collection a chariot is drawn by goats, as was the car of Thor, the Germanic Zeus. Models of weapons are comparatively numerous. These include the double axe, lance-heads, darts, and knives. A knife with a slightly curved blade has a human head finely carved at the end of the handle. Among the ivory and bone ornaments special interest attaches to "three volute-like objects" which, as Mr. Hogarth remarks, "are closely paralleled by Bosnian fibula plates". They also suggest the well-known "spectacle" symbols on Scottish sculptured stones. Hairpins, needles, and brooches figure among the finds.

There are two conspicuous caves on the slopes of Mount Ida, in which votive offerings were deposited. The first, on the southern side, is situated above the village of Kamares, and is faintly visible from Phaestos. Professor Myres explored it in the "nineties" and found, among other relics, the first specimens of the now famous "Kamares pottery". The other cave, towards the north. east, has been identified as the rival of the one on Mount Dicte. In front of it a colossal altar was carved out of the rock, but at what period there can be no certainty. Professor Halbherr, who conducted excavations here, was less successful than Mr. Hogarth. He obtained, however, a number of votive offerings in terra-cotta and bronze. The latter, which include shields, come down to the ninth and perhaps even the eighth centuries B.C., and show strong traces of Dorian influence.

This Zeus cave on Mount Ida can be approached from the romantic plane of Nida or Nitha, which lies about 5 miles east of the central peak of Ida at an elevation of

[p. 300]

over 3000 feet. It is about 2 miles long and  1/2 mile broad. The snow vanishes in the month of May. The secluded upland is then covered with fresh green pasture, to which shepherds drive their flocks, as did their ancestors in ancient days, when the grass in the lower valleys withers in the great summer heat. Yellow wild flowers of the buttercup variety are as thick in the grass as are poppies in some fields of corn. This fact may have given rise to the classic legend that the sheep which graze on Nida plain acquire golden teeth. Modern shepherds say that the pollen of the wild flowers does leave on the teeth of their sheep a perceptible yellow stain. Travellers who have climbed up to the plain speak with enthusiasm of its cool, bracing atmosphere, and the clear starry nights of wonderful listening silence amidst the serenity and grandeur of the mountains. Ancient Cretans who worshipped their deities in such places must have experienced the feelings of awe and devotion that so profoundly impress the mind in lofty solitudes "far from the madding crowd's ignoble strife".

The practice of performing religious and magical ceremonies in caves goes back, as we have seen (Chapters I and II), to remote Palaeolithic times, when the huntsmen dwelt in them, buried their dead in them, and in some drew figures of animals and demons or gods on roofs and walls. In Crete, caves were sanctuaries in the Neolithic Age. The cave of Skalais at Praesos, for instance, has yielded Neolithic as well as Kamares pottery. No votive offerings earlier than Middle Minoan have been found in the Dictaean cave. The lowest stratum begins with that period. Outside in the terrace deposit the Neolithic fragments were apparently deposited by water. What seems probable is that the Lasithi plain was a mountain lake in Neolithic times, and that it gradually subsided as its river found a

 

BRONZE IMPLEMENTS FROM GOURNIA

The group shown above was taken from a carpenter's kit which had been concealed in a house in Gournia. The implements include axes, chisels, adzes, nails, &c.

 

[p. 301]

subterranean outlet. For a considerable interval afterwards the cave may have been completely filled with water. If so, it was probably regarded as sacred on that account. Elsewhere sacred caves have invariably wells, and some of these are supposed to be possessed of curative properties. Drops of water falling from roofs are said to cure deafness, restore fading eyesight, and heal wounds. In these islands "wishing wells" receive offerings of pins and other objects, especially on May Day. Rags of clothing are attached also to trees or bushes overhanging wells anciently sacred. This practice obtains in Crete as well as in the British Isles and throughout Western Europe. Writing at Aghia Triadha, Angelo Mosso has recorded: "Every day . . . I passed a curious tree covered with fetishes. . . . Near a ruined church stands an olive-tree hung with bits of rag which the peasants tie on the branches, hundreds of shreds of every colour, worn by rain and wind. . . . I asked what the curious decoration of the tree was, and was told that anyone who suffered from malarial fever binds it to the tree with a shred of his clothing, a handkerchief, or a ribbon, and says a prayer, hoping to be cured thereby. . . . Witchcraft is common in Crete. Rags and dirty bits of stuff, into which the witches profess to have banished diseases, are constantly found in the walls of churches." [*1] Here we have one reason why offerings were deposited in caves and thrown into the fire at Petsofa, near Palaikastro. The "wishers" affected a ceremonial connection with a sacred place to "switch on" the good influence and "switch off" the evil influence, which was negatived by being bound.

The "seven sleepers" of various countries lie in sacred caves. They appear to be identical with the spirits of vegetation, which slumber during the winter and return

[p. 302]

in spring. At the beginning of each year the Greeks held a festival which was called "the awakening of Hercules". The god returned, like Tammuz, from the underworld to bring fertility to the earth. Deities of this class were supposed to be born anew every spring. Mr. Bosanquet found at Palaikastro, in the Hellenic temple of Jupiter Dicteon, a grey marble tablet with the following inscription:--

"Hail, O great child, son of Kronos, omnipotent, who cometh yearly to Dicta seated on the hyena, escorted by demons. Accept the song which we raise to thee accompanied by the lyre and flute, standing round thy altar, O benefactor.

In this place the Cured received thee, O immortal child, from the hands of thy mother Rhea." [*1]

Evidently the cave-god of Crete, whom the Hellenes identified with their Zeus, was supposed to awake from his underworld sleep each year. In other words, the Earth Mother gave birth to him in the mountain sanctuary. This young god is found associated with the goddess on Cretan seals. It has been shown in a previous chapter that there also existed a variant myth about a young goddess which survived in the Demeter-Persephone legend. At what period the myth of Rhea and her son was introduced we have no knowledge. It was possibly of Anatolian origin. The Phrygian Kybele-Attis myth is of similar character.

It would appear that we have traces in Crete of more than one religious cult. But behind all the developed conceptions and imported beliefs lay, apparently, the background of primitive religion which the earliest settlers had brought with them and adapted to local needs. The oldest religious practices survived, no doubt, among the

[p. 303]

masses of the people, just as the practice of tying rags on the olive-tree at some spot anciently sacred survives at the present day.

The comparative study of Cretan religious symbols tends to show that, like the Pelasgians, the Minoans worshipped deities of the underworld-the "hidden deities" of Egyptian religion--who were "Fates" or "Disposers", and were originally nameless. That is, they worshipped the spirits of nature and the spirits of ancestors. These symbols include pillars, the "horns of consecration", and the double axe. Withal there were sacred wells and mountains and sacred animals associated with the "Great Mother" which were represented in symbols, as is shown by the evidence of the seal impressions.

The worship of pillars seems to have been connected with the worship of trees and mountains. In Egypt it was believed by certain cults that the iron vault of heaven. was supported by two mountains. "Out of one mountain. came the sun every morning, and into the other he entered. every evening. The mountain of sunrise was called Bakhau, and the mountain of sunset Manu." [*1] Another theory was that the sky rested on two pillars, and a later one, which obtained, however, before the pyramid texts; were inscribed, set forth that there were four pillars"--the pillars of Shu"--one at each cardinal point. The pillars in time were regarded as the sceptres of the gods of the four quarters. According to the teachings of the Ra sun cult, the cave-like openings which the sun entered. at evening and emerged from at morning were guarded. by lions, or the deities with lions' bodies and human heads which the Greeks called "sphinxes". The northern Egyptian lion-god was Aker.

In Babylonia it was believed that the sky was supported

[p. 304]

by the world-surrounding chain of hills. Reference is made in the Gilgamesh epic to the mountain of Mashu or Mashi; that is, "the mountain of the Sunset". Its cave-like entrance is guarded by scorpion-men, or a scorpion-man and a scorpion-woman.

	 
		Their backs mount up to the rampart of heaven,
		 And their foreparts reach down beneath Arallu (the Under-world) . . .
		 From sunrise to sunset they guard the sun. [*1]
		
		 There was a door on the cave, and Gilgamesh was allowed to pass through it to penetrate the dark tunnel leading to the Sea of Death, which only Shamash (the Sun) could cross. [*2] Gilgamesh was the first "opener of the way". Like the Indian Yama and the Egyptian Apuatu (Osiris) he discovered the path leading to Paradise, and discovered how mortals could be ferried over the dreaded sea.

The symbols of the Babylonian gods Ea, Anu, and Enlil were tiarras, or mountain-like cones, resembling somewhat the bee-hive-shaped caps on the Zakro sealings. Temples were erected like pillars or peaks. Ea's temple at Eridu, like that of Merodach at Babylon, was called E-sagila, which signifies "temple of the high head", or "the lofty house". Enlil's temple was E-kur, "mountain house". Various deities were symbolized as pillars surmounted by heads. Nergal's symbol was a lion's head on a pillar, Zamama's a vulture's head on a pillar, Merodach's a lance-head on a pillar, and so on. Anshar, "the most high", was, in astronomical lore, the polar star, which was figured as a he-goat, or satyr, on the summit of the peak of heaven. The Assyrian Ashur was sometimes symbolized by a disk enclosing a feather-robed archer,

[p. 305]

resting on a bull's head, with spreading horns, on the summit of a standard.

Ea, in one of the myths, built the world "as an architect builds a house". [*1] According to the Rigveda the Aryo-Indian god Indra similarly constructed the house of the universe, which appears to have been supported by the "world tree". [*2] The world-supporting tree, Ygdrasil, figures in Teutonic mythology. Mount Meru, the Indian Olympus, which supports the Paradise of Indra, is "the world spine". In Egypt the ded (dad, or tet) amulet is the spine of Osiris in his character as the world-god.

According to Wiedemann ded means "firm", "established". This amulet was laid on the neck of the mummy to ensure resurrection. In Chapter CLV in the Book of the Dead the picture of the symbol is given, and the deceased, addressing Osiris, says: "Thy back (backbone) is thine, thou who art of the still heart (Osiris) . . . I bring unto thee the ded, whereupon thou rejoicest. These are the words to speak over a gilded ded made from the heart of the sycamore and placed on the neck of the glorified one." [*3]

The ded symbol is a pillar surmounted by four crossbars. Budge says that these bars "are intended to indicate the four branches of a roof-tree of a house which were turned to the four cardinal points". In the story of the search made by Isis for the slain Osiris it is related that a tree grew round his body and completely enclosed it. The King of Byblus had this tree cut down and made it a pillar for the roof of his house. Isis flew round the pillar in the form of a swallow, and was permitted subsequently to carry it away.

[p. 306]

The body of Osiris was afterwards dismembered by Set, but Isis collected the portions. The backbone was found at the Nilotic city of Daddu or Tettu. At this cult centre Osiris was "lord of the pillars", and the hieroglyphic signs of the city include two Osirian pillars with cross-bars. Here a great festival, which the Pharaoh attended, was held once a year, and observance was made of the solemn ceremony of setting up "the pillar symbol of the backbone of Osiris". [*1] Like the amulet, the pillar may have been made from "the heart" of the sycamore tree.

In his fusion with the world-god Ptah, Osiris was invariably represented as a mummy grasping in his hands in front of him a staff surmounted by the ded cross-bars, and the ankh or life symbol.

Bata, the hero of a well-known Egyptian folk-tale, who is evidently an early form of Osiris, exists for a time as a blossom on a tree-top, then as a bull, and then as two trees which grew up on either side of the entrance to the King's palace. [*2]

It will thus be seen that the sacred pillar, tree, or mountain was the god, or the spine of the god, which supported the universe. As the world-god Ptah sits on a mountain, his head supports the sky, and his feet reach to the underworld.

The idea that a spine was a charm for stability in life and death is probably of great antiquity. Spines of fish were laid on the bodies of the dead in Palaeolithic times. In Crete the necklaces made from the vertebrae of an ox, or sheep, had, no doubt, a magical significance. The Ligurian and Cretan Neolithic people who carried home portions of the backbones of whales may have believed

[p. 307]

that by doing so they prolonged their lives and charmed their dwellings against attack and disaster.

The dolmens and the single standing-stones--the archaeological "Bethels"--which were set up in the Neolithic and Bronze Ages throughout Europe, may have been symbols of the god of the pillars, as well as "spirit-houses" of the dead. In India standing-stones are usually erected below trees. The tree spirit may have been believed to sleep for part of the year in the stone.

A mass of evidence has accumulated to indicate that pillars, mountains, and trees were worshipped in Crete, pre-Hellenic Greece, and Anatolia. The "Lion's Gate" of Mycenae shows two lions supporting the sacred pillar. They are evidently, like the Egyptian lions, the guardians of the world deity. Cretan seals depict the mother goddess on a mountain-top supported similarly by a couple of lions, and also standing or seated between a lion and a lioness. The Cretan pillar is seen similarly guarded by lions, griffins, bulls, sphinxes, or wild goats. When the sacred tree is shown like the pillar, animals guard it also. An intaglio seal shows water-demons on either side of a sacred tree, heraldically opposed, and holding jugs above the branches. These demons have been compared to the Egyptian hippopotamus goddess Taurt. The Babylonian lion-headed eagle, a form of Nin Girsu (Tammuz), which figures on the silver vase of a Sumerian King of Lagash, is supported by two lions, on the backs of which its claws rest. The Anatolian goddess Kedesh, who was imported into Egypt in the Empire Period, stands nude on the back of a lion. The lion was evidently the symbol of the earth, and the various figures of lions devouring animals, found in various countries, probably symbolized the earth receiving its propitiatory sacrifice. Myths about the mother-serpent (the earth-serpent) attacking and disabling

[p. 308]

the eagle may have been connected with a similar belief.

Sir Arthur Evans, who first threw light on the significance of the pillar and other symbols of Crete, [*1] believes that tree and pillar worship in Palestine and Anatolia was "taken over from the older stock" by Semites and Hittites. A later infusion of Minoan ideas into Anatolia and Palestine was caused by the colonizing Philistines, Carians, and Lycians who were of Aegean origin.

"The undoubted parallelism observable between the tree and pillar cult of the Mycenaean (Aegean) and that of the Semitic world", writes Sir Arthur Evans, "should be always regarded from this broad aspect. . . . The coincidences that we find, so far as they are to be explained by the general resemblance presented by a parallel stage of religious evolution, may be regarded as parallel survivals due to ethnic elements with European affinities which on the east Mediterranean shores largely underlay the Semitic. . . . The worship of the sacred stone or pillar known as Masseba or nosb is very characteristic of Semitic religion." There were also Semitic sacred hills and sacred trees. The two pillars, supporting the Philistine temple of Dagon, which were pulled down by Samson, no doubt had a sacred character. In Scandinavian legends the sacred tree supports the chief's dwelling. Sigmund, Volsung's son, draws from the house tree, called "Branstock", the magic sword which Odin thrust into it, saying: "He who draws the sword from the stock shall have it as a gift from me, and it will stand him in good stead". [*2]

In Crete altars and tables of offerings were supported on pillars. On seals a columnar form was sometimes

[p. 309]

given, as has been indicated, to animal-headed deities. Pillars were actually worshipped, being the abodes of spirits. On a cylinder from Mycenae, for instance, a male figure is posed in an attitude of adoration before "five columns of architectural character with vertical and spiral flutings". No doubt the pillars of Egyptian and Grecian temples had originally a religious significance. In Christian churches ancient Pagan symbols have been perpetuated as architectural conventions. The cock, which was supposed to be a charm against demons, and consequently perched as a sentinel on the "world tree" of Teutonic Mythology, still appears on spires, where it indicates how the wind blows. In Scottish Mythology the north wind brings the evil spirits and the south wind the good spirits. "Shut the windows towards the north, and open the windows towards the south, and do not let the fire go out", is an instruction given in a folk-tale by a man who desires his house to be guarded against the visits of demons. The Teutonic Jotuns were in the east. Thor always went eastward to wage war against them.

The "horns of consecration" were originally the horns of the sacred bull or sacred cow. In Egypt the cow-goddess Hathor was a world-deity. Heaven rested on her back, and the under part of her body, which is usually shown covered with stars, formed the firmament. Her four legs were thus the sky pillars. Another belief was that the sky rested on the horns of the sacred animals. Thus we find a reference in the "Book of That which is in the Underworld" to the "Horn of the West", [*1] apparently the same as the "pillar of the west" and "Sunset-Hill". The sun-god Ra, who absorbed the attributes of all other deities, is referred to in the "Pyramid Texts" as the deity with "four horns, one toward each of the cardinal

[p. 310]

points". [*1] In Crete the horns were of great ritual importance. "At times". Sir Arthur Evans writes, [*2] "these have the appearance of being actually horns of oxen, but more generally they seem to be a conventional imitation of what must be regarded as unquestionably the original type-that is, a kind of impost or base terminating at the two ends in two horn-like excrescences. Sometimes this cult object appears on the altar. At other times it rises above the entablature of an archway connected with a sacred tree or on the roof of a shrine. It is frequently set at the foot of sacred trees." Occasionally the double axe is surmounted on a staff between the horns. A horned cult object in terra-cotta, with the eye symbol of Anatolian pottery painted on the base, was found in one of the Cretan votive caves. The horned symbol has been found associated with early Bronze Age relics in Sardinia, Italy, Switzerland, Spain, and the Balearic Islands, which were probably the Cassiterides Islands in which tin was found. It may be that the Cretan symbol was distributed by early sea-traders. In Syria the altar of Astarte had horns. The "horns of the altar" are referred to in the Bible.

The double-axe symbol was evidently of remote origin. Weapons were in the animistic stage of primitive culture believed to be possessed of spirits, and were given individual names. "Every weapon has its demon" is an ancient Gaelic axiom. The sword of the Scoto-Irish folk-hero Finn-mac-Coul was called "Mac-an-Luin". In the Indian epic, the Mahabharata, the warrior Arjuna receives a celestial weapon from the god Shiva. "And that weapon then began to wait upon Arjuna", the narrative proceeds.

And the gods and the Danavas (Titans) beheld that

 

PILLAR AT KNOSSOS, INCISED WITH DOUBLE-AXE SYMBOLS

 

[p. 311]

terrible weapon in its embodied form stay by the side of Arjuna of immeasurable energy." [*1] Rama of the Ramayana is adored by the spirits of his celestial weapons. [*2] The Indian weapons were all named.

That this belief goes back to Palaeolithic times is suggested by the evidence of Egypt. "The common word given by the Egyptians to God, and god, and spirits of every kind, and beings of all sorts, and kinds, and forms, which were supposed to possess any superhuman or supernatural power, was", says Professor Budge, "'Neter'. The hieroglyph used as the determinative of this word, and also as an ideograph, is the axe with a handle. The common word for goddess is Netert." Professor Budge shows that "from the texts wherein the hieroglyphics are coloured it is tolerably clear that the axe head was fastened to its handle by means of thongs of leather". [*3] As holes were bored in axes at an early period, Mr. Legge considers that the fastenings indicate that the symbolic use of the axe "goes back to the Neolithic and perhaps the Palaeolithic Age". He adds: "It is now, I think, generally accepted that the use of the stone axe precedes that of the flint arrow-head or flint knife; and it thoroughly agrees with the little we know of the workings of the mind of primitive man that this, the first weapon that came into his hands, should have been the first material object to which he offered worship". An axe is worshipped by a priest in Chaldaean garb on an Assyrian agate cylinder. The axe also appears as a symbol "in the prehistoric remains of the funereal caves of the Marne, of Scandinavia and America". [*4] We have already alluded to its appearance on the standing-stones of Brittany, and to

[p. 312]

the theory that Labyrinth is derived from Labrys, "the axe". Professor Maspero shows that in Egyptian "a town neterit is 'a divine town'; an arm neteri is 'a divine arm'". He adds that "neteri is employed metaphorically in Egyptian as is 'divine' in French". [*1]

Votive axes, too small for use, have been found in Cretan graves and sanctuaries. The earliest form was the single flat axe: the double-headed axe was first made after copper came into use. Mosso gives interesting particulars regarding votive axes found on the Continent. Some of these are of a friable sandstone, and could have served no practical purpose. [*2] Small axes, which were pierced for suspension, were used as charms in Malta and elsewhere. The sacred axe survives to the present day in the Congo.

Footnotes

^293:1 Diodorus Siculus, V. 77.

^293:2 Herodotus, II, 52.

^295:1 Theog., V, 477.

^295:2 V, 170.

^295:3 Ant. Rom., II, 61.

^295:4 Dial. Mar., XV, 3.

^297:1 Annual of the British School at Athens, VI, 96.

^298:1 Annual of the British School at Athens, VI, p. 101.

^301:1 The Palaces of Crete and their Builders, pp. 200-1.

^302:1 Palaces of Crete and their Builders, A. Mosso, pp. 201, 202.

^303:1 The Gods of the Egyptians, E. Wallis Budge, Vol. I, pp. 156, 157

^304:1 King's Babylonian Religion, p. 166.

^304:2 Babylonian Myth and Legend, p. 177.

^305:1 Jastrow's Religious Belief in Babylonia and Assyria, p. 88.

^305:2 Indian Myth and Legend, p. 10.

^305:3 Religion of the Ancient Egyptians, A. Wiedemann, p. 290.

^306:1 Budge's Gods of the Egyptians, Vol. II, p. 122.

^306:2 Egyptian Myth and Legend, pp. 53 et seq.

^308:1 "Mycenaean Tree and Pillar Cult and its Mediterranean Relations". in The Journal of Hellenic Studies, Vol. XXI, pp. 99 et seq.

^308:2 Teutonic Myth and Legend, pp. 289 et seq.

^309:1 The Gods of the Egyptians, Vol. I, p. 205.

^310:1 Development of Religion and Thought in Ancient Egypt, J. H. Breasted, p. 116.

^310:2 Journal of Hellenic Studies, Vol. XXI, p. 135 et seq.

^311:1 "Vana Parva" section (Roy's translation), p. 127.

^311:2 Indian Myth and Legend, pp. 256 and 381.

^311:3 The Gods of the Egyptians, E. Wallis Budge, Vol. I, pp. 63 et seq.

^311:4 Proceedings of the Society of Biblical Archaeology, Vol. XXI, pp. 310, 311.

^312:1 Etudes de Mythologie et d'Archeologie Egyptiennes, Tome II, p. 215.

^312:2 The Dawn of Mediterranean Civilization, pp. 132 et seq.

    
Myths of Crete and Pre-Hellenic Europe, by Donald A. Mackenzie, [1917], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 313]

 

CHAPTER XIV

 

Decline of Crete and Rise of Greece

Contemporary Rulers of Crete, Egypt, and Babylon--Crete in the Age of Abraham--Political Changes in Western Asia--Inter--state Struggles in Crete--Relations of Palace Kings with Small Towns--Egyptian Labyrinth and Cretan Palaces--The Rise of the Hittites--Their Raid on Babylon--Fall of Knossos--Lycian Tradition of Royal Rivals--Hyksos in Egypt--Hyksos Relic in Crete--Introduction of the Horse--Cretan Culture in the Cyclades and on Greek Mainland--The Golden Age of Minos--Eighteenth Dynasty Wars of Egypt--The Cause of Racial Movements--Overthrow of Minoan Power--Crete's Trade with Egypt and Western Europe--Egyptian Beads in English Bronze-age Grave--The Tin Trade of Cornwall--Pelasgian and Achaean Conquerors--Last Period of Cretan Civilization--Prehistoric Dynasties of Greece--The Northern Conquerors--Sea-raid on Egypt--The Homeric Siege of Troy--Dorian Anarchy--Ionia the Culture Cradle of Historic Greece.

CRETE'S Early Minoan Age embraces roughly about six hundred years, from 2800 B.C. till 2200 B.C. During its third period Troy II was destroyed by fire. In Egypt the Sixth Dynasty Kings, which included Pepi I and Pepi II, reigned over a powerful kingdom for a century and a half, and then followed an obscure period of three centuries, during which rival States struggled for supremacy. In the end the princely family of Thebes rose into prominence and established the Eleventh Dynasty. Babylonia was similarly divided into petty kingdoms. About 2650 B.C. the northern Semitic State of Akkad became powerful under Sargon 1, who was reputed to be of miraculous birth and to have been rescued as a babe from an ark

[p. 314]

which was set adrift on the River Euphrates. [*1] His son, Naram Sin, erected the famous stele which depicts him winning a victory over a pigtailed people in a wooded and mountainous country. He flourished about the is beginning of Crete's Early Minoan II Period, and, like his father, proclaimed himself "King of the Four Quarters". It is possible that both these monarchs penetrated Syria and Palestine. They appear to have held sway over part of Elam and Sumeria. Towards the close of the Early Minoan II Period, Gudea was patesi of the Sumerian city of Lagash and traded with Syria. The power of Akkad appears to have been shattered by an invasion of the Gutium from the north. After these invaders were expelled, dynasties flourished in the Sumerian cities of Erech, Ur, and Isin. Thereafter the Amorite migration culminated in the rise of the Hammurabi Dynasty at Babylon.

Some authorities believe that the Herakleopolite Kings of Egypt of the Ninth and Tenth Dynasties were descendants of foreign conquerors who entered through the eastern Delta and destroyed the mummies of the great Pyramid Kings of the Fourth and Fifth Dynasties. This is possible, but the evidence is of so slight a character that any conclusions drawn from it cannot be regarded as definite.

When we reach Crete's Middle Minoan Period (2200-2 100 B.C.) a new Age begins to dawn over the ancient world. The Theban Kings of the Eleventh Dynasty establish their sway over the whole of Egypt. In Babylonia the Sumerian power suffers decline, and two sets of invaders, the Amorites in the north and the Elamites in the south, wage a determined struggle for

[p. 315]

supremacy. This is roughly the Age of Abraham, whose migration from Sumeria northward through Mesopotamia into Palestine appears to have been one of the results of the ethnic disturbances waged in his native land.

Troy has fallen, and invaders from Thrace have penetrated eastward through Anatolia to constitute an element in the Muski-Phrygian blend. The Hittites are powerful in Cappadocia, and are extending their sway into northern Syria.

Of special interest is the Biblical reference to the battle of four kings against five.

"And it came to pass in the days of Amraphel King of Shinar, Arioch King of Ellasar, Chedorlaomer King of Elam, and Tidal King of Nations; that these made war with Bera King of Sodom, and with Birsha King of Gomorrah, Shinab King of Admah, and Shemeber King of Zeboiim, and the King of Bela, which is Zoar." [*1]

Amraphel is believed to be Hammurabi of Sumer (Shinar), Arioch of Larsa, (Ellasar) a Sumerian city king who was a son of the Elamite monarch, and Tidal a Hittite ruler. This confederacy may have been formed against common enemies in the Western Land (Syria and Palestine) in the interests of trade. It could not have been of long endurance. After twelve years of subjection the western tribes rebelled, [*2] and the four allies again "smote them". Thereafter Hammurabi threw off his allegiance to Elam and extended his sway over the greater part of Babylonia and Assyria, while he also included the Western Land in his sphere of influence. About the same period (2000 B.C.) the Twelfth Dynasty was established in Egypt, its first great king, being Amenemhet I.

During the Middle Minoan I Period, which is roughly contemporary with the Eleventh Dynasty of Egypt, the

[p. 316]

earlier palaces of Knossos and Phaestos were erected. It is probable that they were occupied by independent rulers who occasionally came into conflict like the Babylonian city kings. Each may have had his sphere of influence on the island. At any rate it seems certain that such great buildings represented centralized power which drew into the service of the monarchs large masses of the population.

Both palaces were destroyed at a later period, but as they did not fall simultaneously they do not seem to have been attacked by a common enemy from across the sea. The fact that the first Phaestos palace endured longest suggests that its monarch was the conqueror of Knossos and the destroyer of the first palace there.

The fall of Knossos occurred in the Middle Minoan II Period (C. 2100-1900 B.C.). Evidences have been forthcoming both at Knossos and Phaestos of disturbances in the early part of this period. At its close the first Knossian palace was destroyed. The later palace must have been rebuilt soon afterwards, for portions of the earlier walls were utilized. Probably the stricken State made a speedy recovery. It may have, indeed, overthrown its rival in turn. When the first palace of Phaestos fell, its destruction was so complete that it lay in ruins for about a century. The second palace was not erected until the Late Minoan I Period, which began about 1700 B.C. No portion of the earlier buildings were then made use of. The whole site was completely levelled and covered with cement over the Middle Minoan remains, which were happily preserved in this way among its ruins. It is possible that this second Phaestian palace was erected by the ruler of Knossos. According to Strabo, Phaestos was a colony of the northern State.

Before the first palaces were erected at Knossos and Phaestos, small towns flourished in eastern Crete. One

 

MINOAN POTTERY FROM ZAKRO

Including examples of "Kamares" ware. The central vessel in the lower row shows the use of the double-axe symbol.

 

[p. 317]

of these, as has been indicated, was situated near the island of Mochlos, where the tomb treasures give indications of commercial and industrial prosperity during the Early Minoan Age. Vasiliki was also, without doubt, an important trading and governing centre. Petras, on the shore of Sitia Bay, may have been the stronghold of one of the petty States then in existence.

When the first palaces of Knossos and Phaestos were erected the Cretans were trading with the Twelfth Dynasty merchants of Egypt. The spiral design had become popular among Nilotic seal engravers, who combined it with the lily flower, and the Cretan potters imitated them. Middle Minoan vases from Phaestos are decorated with the Egyptian lily spiral, which in one case is utilized in quite a new way. The papyrus designs were also taken over by the Cretan artists, and used with characteristic freedom. So greatly admired were the Kamares vases of Crete's Middle Minoan Period that they were freely purchased in Egypt. Professor Flinders Petrie found fragments of them in a tomb at Kahun of the Twelfth Dynasty, while a Cretan vessel was found by Professor Garstang in a grave of similar date at Abydos.

It was during the Twelfth Dynasty that the great Egyptian Labyrinth was erected. Its builder was Pharaoh Amenemhet III. According to Herodotus it had twelve covered courts and three thousand apartments, half of which were underground. "No stranger", says Strabo, "could find his way in or out of this building without a guide". It is possible that the Egyptian Labyrinth was an imitation of the mazy palaces of Crete.

Probably it was owing to its close commercial connections with Crete that Egypt received during the Twelfth Dynasty such liberal supplies of tin that bronze was freely manufactured.

[p. 318]

Towards the close of Crete's Middle Minoan II Period the Twelfth Egyptian Dynasty came to an end, and the Sebek-Ra rulers of the Thirteenth Dynasty established their sway, which became centralized in Upper Egypt. Foreign settlers were increasing in number in the Delta region. In Asia great ethnic disturbances, due to widespread migrations, were in progress. The Hittites had grown powerful and were known both in Egypt and Babylonia. Assyria was overrun by a non-Semitic people who ultimately established a military aristocracy in northern Mesopotamia and brought into existence the Kingdom of Mitanni. In time the Hammurabi Dynasty of Babylon was overthrown by Hittite raiders, who were followed by the Kassites.

It is possible that the fall of Knossos may have not been unconnected with the social and racial changes due to the settlement on the island of roving bands of pastoral fighting-folks. These may have been employed as mercenaries by rival Cretan kings. A memory of the ancient island conflicts appears to survive in the following reference by Herodotus to the Lycians: "The Lycians", he wrote, "are in good truth anciently from Crete, which island, in former days, was wholly peopled by barbarians. [*1] A quarrel arising there between the two sons of Europa, Sarpedon and Minos, as to which of them should be king, Minos, whose party prevailed, drove Sarpedon and his followers into banishment. The exiles sailed to Asia, and landed on the Milyan territory. Milyas was the ancient name of the country now inhabited by the Lycians; the Milyae of the present day were, in those times, called Solymi. So long as Sarpedon reigned, his followers kept the name which they brought with them from Crete, and were called Termilae, as the Lycians still are by those who

[p. 319]

live in their neighbourhood. . . . Their customs are partly Cretan, partly Carian." [*1] Herodotus also noted that the Lycians took "the mother's and not the father's name"--an interesting and perhaps significant fact when we consider the prominent part taken in social life by the Cretan women.

That the destruction of Knossos was due to internal revolt, which may or may not have received outside aid, is highly probable. It was rebuilt at the beginning of the Middle Minoan III Period, but before its rulers had attained to the full height of their power a long era of prosperity was in store for the smaller towns. Gournia, Zakro, Psyra, and Palaikastro began to be important trading centres before 1700 B.C., and ere the second palace of Phaestos was erected. It was after the Knossian palace was remodelled that these towns were destroyed.

Ere the Middle Minoan III Period had drawn to a close the Hyksos invaders had overrun Egypt, and the Hittites, Mitannians, and Kassites were in ascendancy in Mesopotamia and Anatolia. Commercial relations between Crete and Egypt were no doubt hampered for a time, but they appear to have been resumed again. Perhaps the island kingdom received refugees from the Delta region. These may have introduced the art of writing on papyrus with a pen, which came into practice before the beginning of the Late Minoan I Period.

The Late Minoan I Period endured for about two centuries (c. 1700-1500 B.C.). Trade became exceedingly brisk, and Gournia, Palaikastro, and eastern towns reached their highest development. The fact that Zakro became important suggests intimate relations with Egypt. Sir Arthur Evans has discovered at Knossos an alabastron lid bearing the personal name of one of the late Hyksos

[p. 320]

Pharaohs, Khian, whose throne name, Seuserenra, appears on a figure of a lion found at Baghdad. A seal impression found by the same excavator in the royal villa near the palace belongs to the early part of Late Minoan I. It is of special interest because the subject is a horse which has been carried overseas in a one-masted vessel. This animal was introduced into Babylonia by the Kassites, and was called "the ass of the east". The Mitannians, who were probably allies of the Kassites, had horses and chariots, and the horse appeared in Egypt during the Hyksos era. Perhaps the successful invasion of the Hyksos was due to the use of cavalry.

Sir Arthur Evans is of opinion that his Knossian seal impression is a record of the introduction into Crete of the thoroughbred horse. Mr. and Mrs. Hawes state, however, that they possess an Early Minoan seal stone on which a horse figures. This fact is interesting. It may not indicate that the horse was a domesticated animal, although it may have been a sacred one. The Demeter of Phigalia, as has been stated, was horse-headed. In the Palaeolithic Age there were wild horses in Europe, and in one of the cave-pictures of the Aurignacian Period a man is shown beside small horses with a stave on his shoulder, suggesting that he is herding them. At this remote period the animal was freely eaten. There is no evidence that the horse was used in warfare much earlier than the Kassite Period in Babylonia, and it was certainly quite unknown in Egypt before the Hyksos Age.

Cretan culture extended during the Late Minoan I times through the Cycladic islands. At Phylakopi, in Melos, a second city came into existence round its obsidian "factory". Cretan products were freely imported and Cretan script was in use. In one of its buildings, which may have been the palace, was found a well-preserved

[p. 321]

fresco showing flying fish skimming over transparent waters in which lie shells, sponges, and rocks. It was undoubtedly the work of a Cretan artist. In all probability there was a Minoan colony at Phylakopi.

But Cretan influence was not confined to the islands. Both Mycenae and Tiryns on the Grecian mainland were stimulated by it as early as the Middle Minoan III Period. The contents of the shaft graves of Mycenae, which Schliemann assigned to the Homeric Age, are of Late Minoan I antiquity (c. 1500 B.C.), as are also boar-hunt frescoes recently found at Tiryns, which are distinctively Cretan, and the famous Vaphio cups with the bull-snaring scenes. The Peloponnesian colonies of Crete appear to have been established in the Middle Minoan III Period (c. 1800-1700 B.C.). In Boeotia there were settlements in Late Minoan I times, if not earlier, and tombs have yielded Cretan, and imitations of Cretan products, which confirm the traditions of the source of early Grecian culture, the religious mysteries, and so forth. With Cretan modes of life came Cretan modes of thought to a people who were not much advanced from the Neolithic stage of culture. It is probable that the islanders formed a military aristocracy from which sprung the kings who ruled the various important city States in pre-Homeric times.

Pausanias [*1] tells us that the lion gate of Mycenae and the walls of Tiryns were the work of the Cyclopes who laboured for Proctus. He writes, too, with conviction of the men in ancient days who "were guests at the tables of the gods in consequence of their righteousness and piety", and adds that "those who were good clearly met with honour from the gods, and similarly those who were wicked, with wrath. The gods in those days were sometimes mortals who are still worshipped, like Aristaeus, and

[p. 322]

[paragraph continues] Britomartis of Crete, and Hercules, the son of Alcmena, and Amphiarus, the son of Oecles, and beside them Castor and Pollux." [*1] So were the ancients who believed in giants and gods identified with them.

During the last century of the Late Minoan I Period the Hyksos were overthrown in Egypt, and the Theban Eighteenth Dynasty was established. The Cretans were known then in the Nile valley as the Keftiu, and characteristic wasp-waisted figures carrying Minoan vases were depicted in the tombs. It was during this period that the later Phaestian palace was erected.

The Late Minoan II Period, also known as the "Palace" Period, began towards the close of the reign of Pharaoh Thothmes I, the father of Queen Hatshepsut. It lasted for about half a century, from c. 1500 till 1450 B.C. One by one the coast towns perished, the latest to survive being Palaikastro, which some identify as the ancient city port of Heleia. Some think that Palaikastro existed as late as the Late Minoan III Period, and was ruled by an independent prince.

It is uncertain whether the towns were plundered by piratical bands from the Cyclades and the Greek mainland, or were wiped out by the central Cretan power which was established at Knossos. The later Knossian palace was remodelled during Late Minoan II times, and did not therefore suffer from the depredations of invaders. It would seem that we now reach the age of the legendary Minos who struck down all rivals and became supreme ruler in Crete. "The first person known to us in history as having established a navy", writes Thucydides, "is Minos. He made himself master of what is now called the Hellenic Sea, and ruled over the Cyclades, into most of which he sent his first colonies, expelling the Carians

[p. 323]

and appointing his own sons governors; and thus did his best to put down piracy in those waters, a necessary step to secure the revenues for his own use. For in early times the Hellenes and the barbarians of the coast and islands, as communication by sea became more common, were tempted to turn pirates, under the conduct of their most powerful men; the motives being to serve their own cupidity and to support the needy. They would fall upon a town unprotected by walls, and consisting of a mere collection of villages, and would plunder it; indeed, this came to be the main source of their livelihood, no disgrace being yet attached to such an achievement, but even some glory. An illustration of this is furnished by the honour with which some of the inhabitants of the continent still regard a successful marauder, and by the question we find the old poets everywhere representing the people as asking the voyagers--'Are they pirates?'--as if those who are asked the question would have no idea of disclaiming the imputation, or their interrogators of reproaching them for it. The same rapine prevailed also by land." [*1]

The Empire of Minos appears to have embraced part of the Greek mainland. Athens was compelled to send its annual tribute of youths and maidens to Knossos, and Tiryns, Mycenae, Lakonia, Pylos, and Orchoemenos became important centres of Aegean culture. The tradition that the Cyclopes who erected the walls of Tiryns came from Lycia may be due to the tendency to foreshorten historical events. It is possible, however, that Minoan traders had already settled on the Anatolian coast and maintained commercial relations with the Peloponnese and Crete.

Thothmes III of Egypt, the great conqueror, flourished

[p. 324]

during the later part of the Late Minoan II Period. In the hymn addressed to him as from the god Amon, the priestly poet declares:

	 
		I have come giving thee to smite the western land,
		 Keftyew (Crete) and Cyprus are in terror. [*1]
		
		 The activities of Thothmes did not extend to Crete, but there can be little doubt that his operations exercised a marked influence on the trade of the island kingdom. Probably it prospered greatly under the settled conditions which he brought about, as it had evidently prospered after the expulsion of the Hyksos from Egypt. A brisk demand for Cretan imports in the Nile valley may well have been one of the causes of the commercial "boom" which is suggested by the increasing wealth of Knossos during the Late Minoan II Period.

The great Egyptian wars, however, were bound in time to affect Crete in another direction. The expulsion of the Hyksos brought about a pressure of peoples in Syria, Anatolia, and south-eastern Europe, which was to test the stability of existing States. Semitic hordes poured towards Babylonia and hampered trade; at the same time they reinforced the growing power of Assyria. The Mitannian area of control was being circumscribed and Hittite prestige seriously affected in Cappadocia. Ere the Hittites were able to profit by the weakening of the Syrians and Mitannians, against whom Thothmes III was battling constantly, they must have been forced to direct their expansion westward. The plain of Troy was probably at this period the scene of many conflicts. In the Danubian area there appears to have been much ethnic friction. Invasions from Anatolia and the constant pressure exercised by northern tribes directed a steady stream of pastoral 

[p. 325]

fighting-folks southward through the Balkans and into the northern States of Greece. The mainland capitals, including Mycenae and Tiryns, which had become centres of Aegean culture and trade, must have offered strong temptations to the hardy mountaineers of Thessaly, whence the Achaeans are supposed to have come. Probably the migrations of the pastoralists were propelled by migrations from the north. The ultimate result of these migratory "folk-waves", which increased in volume as time went on, was the destruction not only of the Minoan Empire, but the complete overthrow of Knossian power in Crete itself. The Palace Period was the Golden Age of Cretan culture, which suffered steady decline after 1450 B.C.

It was probably during this half-century of Minoan ascendancy that Crete's overseas commerce assumed its greatest dimensions. The organized navy ensured the safe passage in the Aegean Sea of ships which tapped the Danube valley trade, and penetrating the Dardanelles got into touch with caravans from the cast. It also helped to foster trade with western ports. The Rhone valley route running to Marseilles appears to have been, as has been indicated, one of the sources from which British tin was received.

At what period this traffic had origin is at present wrapped in obscurity. It seems probable, however, that it was carried on as early as 1500 B.C. One of the reasons for this belief is the discovery of Egyptian relics in southern England. Among the relics taken from Bronze Age graves are numerous Egyptian beads of blue-glazed faience. "They are beads, moreover, which", writes Professor Sayce, "belong to one particular period in Egyptian history, the latter part of the age of the Eighteenth Dynasty and the earlier of that of the Nineteenth Dynasty. . . . There is a large number of them in the Devizes Museum,

[p. 326]

as they are met with plentifully in the Early Bronze Age tumuli of Wiltshire in association with amber beads and barrel-shaped beads of jet and lignite. Three of them come from Stonehenge itself. Similar beads of 'ivory' have been found in a Bronze Age cist near Warminster: if the material is really ivory it must have been derived from the East. The cylindrical faience beads, it may be added, have been discovered in Dorsetshire as well as Wiltshire." Mr. H. R. Hall, dealing with the same Egyptian relics, says: "My own interest in the matter is due to the fact that in the course of the excavations of the [Egyptian] Fund at Deir el Bahari, we discovered thousands of blue glaze beads of the exact particular type (already well known from other Egyptian diggings) of these found in Britain. Ours are, in all probability, mostly of the time of Hatshepsut, and so date to about 1500 B.C." [*1] Similar beads have also been discovered in Crete and Western Europe. The British finds help to fix the age of Stonehenge, the inner circle of which, according to Professor Boyd Dawkins, is formed of stones taken from Brittany.

By whom were these Egyptian beads carried to Britain between 1500 B.C. and 1400 B.C.? Certainly not the Phoenicians. The sea-traders of the Mediterranean were at the time the Cretans. Whether or not their merchants visited England we have no means of knowing. It is possible that they did. It is also possible, and even highly probable, that during the early Bronze Age in England, which may have been of greater antiquity than has hitherto been supposed, there existed a comparatively high degree of civilization, and communities of traders.

According to Diodorus Siculus, tin was carried in wagons by the people of Belerium (Land's End) to the

[p. 327]

Island of Ictis, [*1] which could be reached at low tide. The tin was purchased on Ictis by traders and then shipped to Gaul, being afterwards conveyed overland to the mouth of the Rhone on pack-horses. Ships crossed the English Channel as early as Neolithic times, when the earliest settlers of the Mediterranean race migrated from Gaul. The Veneti of Brittany in Caesar's time had a navy, as well as trading-vessels, like the ancient Cretans. In the early Bronze Age amber was imported into England from the mouth of the Elbe, so that a connection was established between our shores and the Danubian trade route. Gold was carried from Ireland and Wales and Scotland to Scandinavia. It may have been due to the racial migrations which followed the expulsion of the Hyksos from Egypt that "the men of the round barrows" invaded these islands in the early British Bronze Age. Probably they followed in the tracks of the traders up the valleys of the Danube and the Elbe as well as from the Alpine districts towards Brittany. It need arouse no surprise that the effects of the distant Egyptian wars should have been felt in Europe. The building of the Chinese wall, which directed westward the drift of Asiatic nomads, was the indirect cause of the fall of Rome.

Crete's Late Minoan II Period of splendour and commercial prosperity was brought to an abrupt close by the sack of Knossos. This disaster must have fallen like "a bolt from the blue". It was evidently as unexpected as it was complete. Workmen were engaged in renovating the stately dwelling, new frescoes were being painted, and builders were erecting a new wing, when the invaders

[p. 328]

swept inland from the seashore, put to the sword soldier and artisan, and probably women and children, then plundered the palace and set it on fire. Phaestos palace and the villa of Aghia Triadha shared similar rates.

It may be that the invaders attacked Crete when its army and navy were engaged elsewhere. The tradition recorded by Herodotus, which is of special interest in this connection, sets forth that Minos went to Sicily in search of Daedalus, the great architect, and there was murdered. An expedition followed to avenge his death, and besieged Camicus for five years. Their efforts were, however, unsuccessful. On their way home their vessels were wrecked on the south coast of Italy, where they founded the town of Hyria. Thereafter, the Praesians informed Herodotus, "men of various nations flocked to Crete, which was stripped of its inhabitants". [*1] Memories of Minoan colonies may have mingled with this tradition. One of the several cities called Minoa was situated in Sicily.

It is generally believed that the destroyers of Knossos were not Achaeans alone, but the mixed peoples on the Greek coast who had come under the influence of Minoan civilization. Thucydides says that after Minos had formed his navy, and communication by sea became easier, "the coast populations began to apply themselves more closely to the acquisition of wealth, and their life became more settled; some even began to build themselves walls on the strength of their newly acquired riches". These Cretanized mainlanders were subjected to the constant pressure of the northern tribes. "The country called Hellas", wrote Thucydides, "had in ancient times no settled population; on the contrary, migrations were of frequent occurrence, the several tribes readily abandoning their

 

RUINS OF THE "ROYAL VILLA", AGHIA TRIADHA. (See page <page 286>).

 

[p. 329]

homes under pressure of superior numbers. . . . The goodness of the land favoured the aggrandizement of particular individuals, and thus created faction, which proved a fertile source of ruin. It also invited invasion." [*1] It is possible, as some have urged, that Minos himself was a conqueror of Crete, and was supported by Pelasgians and Achaeans who had acquired the elements of Minoan culture on the mainland.

The Late Minoan III Period begins with a partial revival of Minoan civilization. A portion of the Knossian palace was reoccupied, and new houses were erected at Gournia and Palaikastro beside the ruins of those which were destroyed in the early Palace Period. Trading relations with Egypt were resumed, and hundreds of Cretan vases of Bugelkannen type were imported into the Nile valley. These and others were imitated in faience and alabaster by Egyptian artisans. But Cretan culture was on the down grade. The island artisans of the Late Minoan III Period were imitators of their predecessors, and sometimes slovenly imitators; they invented nothing new. It was an age of decadence and transition. Ultimately Knossos and the small towns were entirely deserted, and the people retreated to the inner mountain valleys and plateaux. The Cretans ceased to be known in Egypt as the Keftiu during the reign of Amenhotep III, the father of Akhenaton. [*2] The founders of Praesos, who claimed to be the "true Cretans", were no doubt descendants of the old Minoan peoples and the Achaeo-Pelasgian elements from the Continent.

But although Late Minoan III culture perished by slow degrees in Crete, it flourished in Cyprus. Apparently large numbers of Cretans and Cretan colonists from the mainland settled on that island and achieved a political

[p. 330]

ascendancy over the natives. Others settled on Rhodes. About the same time the Minoan colonies in Lycia and Caria were strongly reinforced, and for a period, if Greek tradition is to be relied upon, the Carians monopolized the sea trade of the Aegean. It is believed that large numbers of Cretans also fled to Phoenicia and stimulated maritime enterprise in that quarter. "In the Homeric poems", says Professor Myres, "more visits are paid by western seafarers to Phoenicia and Sidon than 'Phoenician' merchants pay to the west. . . . The wide Phoenician trade of historic times had clearly begun to grow as the Minoan sea-power failed." [*1]

About a century after the fall of Knossos, Mycenae, Tiryns, and other mainland towns had reached the height of their prosperity. It is possible that they owed their supremacy to Hittite influence. At any rate, persistent Greek legends associate their rulers with Anatolia. The walls of Tiryns were reputed to have been built by Cyclopes from Lycia, and Pelops, who gave his name to the Peloponnesus, was reputed to have come from Asia Minor. "The account given by those Peloponnesians", says Thucydides, "who have been the recipients of the most creditable traditions is this. First of all Pelops, arriving among a needy population from Asia with vast wealth, acquired such power that, stranger though he was, the country was called after him; and this power fortune saw fit materially to increase in the hands of his descendants." [*2] The complicated family history of Pelopidae and Atridae is of special interest in this connection. Atreus, son of Pelops, married his son Plisthenes to Aerope, granddaughter of King Minos of Crete. Her father had given her and her sister to the King of Euboea, because it had been foretold he would die by the hand of one of his children. The sons of Aerope

[p. 331]

were Agamemnon and Menelaus. Afterwards Atreus married Aerope, his daughter-in-law, and brought up her sons, who were consequently called the Atridae. But this fickle lady deserted Atreus and became the wife of his brother Thyestes. Then Atreus took to wife Pelopea, whose descendants were called the Pelopidae. He was not aware that this lady was his brother's daughter. Many crimes and calamities are associated with the traditions of these princes and princesses. The chief interest they have for us here is the wonderful relation the traditions regarding them bear to the history of the period. A Minoan king of Crete is to be slain by his own kin from the mainland, and invaders from Anatolia intermarry with Cretan stock in the Peloponnesus. This appears to be as good history as the reference in Ezekiel to the ethnics of Jerusalem: "Thy birth and thy nativity is of the land of Canaan; thy father was an Amorite, and thy mother an Hittite". [*1] Mycenae's mother was a Cretan and his father an Anatolian, perhaps of Indo-European speech like the military aristocracy of the Mitannian State, which appears to have for a period achieved political ascendancy over the Hittites.

In this connection special interest attaches to our own legends about the invading giants who gave their names to Alban (Albion) and Erin. It seems probable that these giants symbolized the folks who overran Great Britain and Ireland in the early Bronze Age. "Alban" (genitive of "Alba") or "Albion" and "Alps" are derived from a common root, signifying "white". Were the invaders of ancient Britain "Whitelanders", i.e. an Alpine folk?

The Mycenaean period of Greek civilization was remembered as that of the third or Bronze Race of Hesiod.

[p. 332]

"Their gear was of bronze, they had bronze houses; they tilled the soil with bronze; black iron there was none." Nestor, in the Iliad, refers to the Bronze Age folk as the heroes of an earlier generation who were greater than Agamemnon and his host.

	 
		I lived with men, and they despised me not,
		 Abler in counsel, greater than yourselves.
		 Such men I never saw, and ne'er shall see,
		 As Pirithous and Dryas, wise and brave,
		 Coeneus, Exadius, god-like Polypheme,
		 And Theseus, Aegeus' more than mortal son.
		 The mightiest they among the sons of men. . . . [*1]
		
		 Another element which entered into the ethnic fusion in Mycenaean Greece was the Danubian. The influence of Danubian culture extended as far south as Thessaly, where the Achaeans were predominant. These Achaean pastoralists were drifting southward into the Peloponnesus as early as the Late Minoan I Period, and some of them may have reached Crete. But their greatest migration appears to have occurred at the close of the Pelopid Dynasty, and it is probable that they were the late conquerors of Mycenae and Tiryns. After holding sway in the Peloponnesus for a period of uncertain duration, they were overthrown in turn by the Dorians.

About the time that the legendary Pelops secured the ascendancy of his stock on the Greek mainland, Crete was in a state of decay. In Egypt the brilliant reign of Amenhotep III marked the zenith of Egyptian power in the Nile valley and Syria. Mitanni, in northern Mesopotamia, which was ruled by kings with Indo-European names, was being threatened on one side by the growing power of Assyria, and on the other by that of the Hittites.

[p. 333]

[paragraph continues] After Akhenaton, the dreamer king, ascended the Egyptian throne and inaugurated his religious revolution, the kingdom of Mitanni was overthrown, and the Egyptian Empire in northern Syria went to pieces. The Hittites had leagued themselves with the Amorites, and were pressing southward, gaining control of the trade routes from Babylonia and Egypt.

The eastward expansion of the Hittites was accompanied by a shrinkage of their power in the west. Reinforced by folk-waves from Thrace, the people of the Phrygian area then began to gather strength, and asserted themselves later as the Muski, [*1] the forerunners of the historic Phrygians. The sixth city of Troy also came into prominence. It was contemporary with Mycenae and Tiryns, and like these cities owed its rise to the fusion of Danubian and Aegean cultures, the latter predominating.

This was Homer's Troy, and so powerful did it become that when the Achaeans entered into possession of the Peloponnesian centres of Mycenaean culture they found that it constituted a serious menace to their ascendancy.

As in Egypt, descent in Crete and its colonial settlements was by the female line. The Achaean chiefs therefore followed the example of Atreus by marrying a royal princess, so as to secure the succession of their descendants to the thrones of the various States which they overpowered. Menelaus had married Helen, Queen of Sparta, and departed overseas on an expedition. During his absence, Priam, King of Troy, abducted Helen, who became the wife of his son Paris. The Trojans were thus enabled to claim Sparta as part of their dominions. On his return, the Achaean monarch found it necessary to fit out a great

[p. 334]

expedition and inaugurate the famous siege of Troy, so as to recover the queen by whose right he held the Spartan throne. Such appears to be the historical germ of the Homeric narrative.

The Greeks dated the period of the Trojan war as from 1194 till 1184 B.C. This appears to be an accurate calculation. A few years previously, in 1200 B.C., the second great sea raid on Egypt took place during the reign of Rameses III of the Twentieth Dynasty. Perhaps the absence of Menelaus was not unconnected with this adventure.

The first sea raid occurred about a quarter of a century earlier, during the reign of Merne-ptah, son of Rameses II. It was conducted in conjunction with the Hittites, and taken part in by the Shardana, who may have given their name to Sardinia; the Akhaivasha, usually identified with the Achaeans; the Shakalsha, who may have been Cretanized Sicilians; and the Tursha, perhaps the Turseni, who were represented in Etruria. The piratical peoples were probably remnants of the Cretans and their conquerors. They were defeated by Merne-ptah, but some settled in Libya and became mercenaries in the Egyptian army.

The second raid was of great dimensions. It included the Danauna, the Danaans, the Shakalsha, the Tursha, the Tikkarai, who may have come from Zakro in Crete, and the Pulesti, the Philistines. The sea force which sailed south by Cyprus was supported by land raiders from North Syria and Anatolia. Among the latter were the Philistines, who gave their name to Palestine. Rameses III won victories on sea and land, being assisted by the raiders' kinsmen, the Shardana mercenaries.

It is suggestive to find that the siege of Homer's Troy occurred a few years afterwards. The conquerors of pre-Mycenaean Greece, having been foiled in their attempt to

[p. 335]

overrun Egypt, sought expansion eastward, and had first to strike down the Phrygian city which threatened their supremacy.

Troy VI had been built about 1500 B.C., that is, about the beginning of Crete's Late Minoan II or Palace Period. It was surrounded by great stone walls 16 feet thick and 20 feet: high, which were surmounted by first a brick and then a stone parapet, which added another 6 feet to them. The walls were flanked by three great towers about 30 feet in height. As the stone-work has Egyptian characteristics, it is possible that the builders were imported from Egypt during the Eighteenth Dynasty. There were at least three city gates, and these were all on the southern side. Wells were sunk to the water-bearing strata of the hill.

When Troy VI was set on fire it did not suffer so greatly, being largely built of stone, as did the second city. The houses were, however, overthrown, and the upper portions of the walls demolished. Scarcely an object of any value survived the sack of the wealthy city. The ceramic remains are partly Mycenaean, or Late Minoan III, and partly Trojan.

After the fall of Troy the European elements in Anatolia were strengthened. Carian and Lycian pirates infested the seas. There were also settlements of Aegean stock in Cilicia. The Muski-Phrygians, pressing eastward from central Anatolia, appear to have contributed to the overthrow of the tottering empire of the Hittites. In Palestine the Philistines gradually extended their area of control, moving steadily southward, as the Empire of Egypt shrank by slow degrees.

The Achaeans of Greece met in time the same fate as their predecessors of the Late Mycenaean Period, the Pelopid Dynasty. About two generations after the Trojan war the Dorians, who had been gradually filtering south

[p. 336]

ward through Thessaly, gradually achieved ascendancy. In time, assisted by Illyrian allies, they overran the Peloponnese. The dispossessed Achaean aristocracy and followers were forced into the land of the Ionians, which afterwards became known as Achaia. Dorians also found their way to Crete, which, like Rhodes, was eventually conquered.

For generations Greece was devastated by inter-tribal wars, and lapsed into a condition of decline. Periodic migrations took place of its merchants and traders and artisans, and these settled in Crete, Sicily, Sardinia, and Italy. Many found refuge in Anatolia, where grew up Ionian Greece along the coastland of Lycia and Caria.

"It was in Aegean Ionia", writes Mr. Hall, "that the torch of Greek civilization was kept alight, while the homeland was in a mediaeval condition of comparative barbarism; Cyprus, too, helped though she was too far off for her purer Minoan culture to affect the Aegean peoples very greatly. It was in Ionia that the new Greek civilization arose: Ionia, in whom the old Aegean blood and spirit most survived, taught the new Greece, gave her coined money and letters, art and poesy, and her shipmen, forcing the Phoenicians from before them, carried her new culture to what were then deemed the ends of the earth." [*1]

Footnotes

^314:1 In this tradition two Semitic rulers, Sharrukin and the later Shargan-Sharri, were confused.

^315:1 Genesis, xiv, 1-2.

^315:2 Ibid., xiv, 4 et seq.

^318:1 That is, non-Greeks.

^319:1 Herodotus, I, 173.

^321:1 III, 46.

^322:1 VIII, 2.

^323:1 History of the Peloponnesian War, I, 4, 5 (Richard Crawley's translation).

^324:1 Breasted's History of Egypt. p. 319.

^326:1 The Journal of Egyptian Archaeology (January, 1914), pp. 18-19.

^327:1 One theory is that Ictis is the Isle of Wight. Some geologists contend that at this period the island was not entirely cut off from the mainland. The Isle of Thanet has also been identified as Ictis. Another theory is that the reference is to St. Michael's Mount on the south coast of Cornwall, which is connected with the mainland at low water by a causeway.

^328:1 Herodotus, VII, 170, 171.

^329:1 The Peloponnesian War, I, 2-8.

^329:2 Before 1375 B.C.

^330:1 The Dawn of History, p. 215.

^330:2 The Peloponnesian War, I, 6-9.

^331:1 Ezekiel, xvi, 3.

^332:1 Iliad, Book I, 309-15 (Derby's translation).

^333:1 Pronounced Moosh'ke. In the Old Testament they are referred to as "the Meshech" (Ezekiel, xxxii).

^336:1 The Ancient History of the Near East, p. 79.




===== BOOK: mom.txt =====


    
The Meaning of Masonry, by W.L. Wilmshurst, [1922], at sacred-texts.com

  

THE MEANING OF

  

MASONRY

  

W.L. WILMSHURST

  

P.M. 275; PAST PROVINCIAL

  

GRAND REGISTRAR

  

(WEST YORKS.)

  

P. Lund, Humphries & Co.; W. Rider & Son: London

  

[1922]

Scanned, proofed and formatted at sacred-texts.com, December 2006, by John Bruno Hare. This text is in the public domain in the US because it was published prior to 1923.

     
The Meaning of Masonry, by W.L. Wilmshurst, [1922], at sacred-texts.com

  

CONTENTS

          
   INTRODUCTION

        

     
      The Position   and Possibilities of the Masonic Order

       <page 5>

     
      
   CHAPTER I

        

     
      The Deeper Symbolism   of Masonry

       <page 19>

     
      
   CHAPTER II

        

     
      Masonry as a   Philosophy

       <page 54>

     
      
   CHAPTER III

        

     
      Further Notes   on Craft Symbolism

       <page 87>

     
      
   CHAPTER IV

        

     
      The Holy Royal   Arch

       <page 138>

     
      
   CHAPTER V

        

     
      The Relation of   Masonry to the Ancient Mysteries

       <page 170>

     
   
     
The Meaning of Masonry, by W.L. Wilmshurst, [1922], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 5]

  

Introduction

  

THE POSITION AND POSSIBILITIES OF THE MASONIC ORDER

THE papers here collected are written solely for members of the Masonic Order, constituted under the United Grand Lodge of England. To all such they are offered in the best spirit of fraternity and goodwill and with the wish to render to the Order some small return for the profit the author has received from his association with it extending over thirty-two years. They have been written with a view to promoting the deeper understanding of the meaning of Masonry; to providing the explanation of it that one constantly hears called for and that becomes all the more necessary in view of the unprecedented increase of interest in, and membership of, the Order at the present day.

The meaning of Masonry, however, is a subject usually left entirely unexpounded and that accordingly remains largely unrealized by its members save such few as make it their private study; the authorities of what in all other respects is an elaborately organized and admirably controlled community have hitherto made no provision for explaining and teaching the "noble science" which Masonry proclaims itself to be and was certainly designed to impart. It seems taken for granted that reception into the Order will automatically be accompanied by an ability to appreciate forthwith and at its full value all that one there finds. The contrary is the case, for Masonry is a veiled and

[p. 6]

cryptic expression of the difficult science of spiritual life, and the understanding of it calls for special and informed guidance on the one hand, and on the other a genuine and earnest desire for knowledge and no small capacity for spiritual perception on the part of those seeking to be instructed; and not infrequently one finds Brethren discontinuing their interest or their membership because they find that Masonry means nothing to them and that no explanation or guidance is vouchsafed them. Were such instruction provided, assimilated and responded to, the life of the Order would be enormously quickened and deepened and its efficiency as a means of Initiation intensified, whilst incidentally the fact would prove an added safeguard against the admission into the Order of unsuitable members--by which is meant not merely persons who fail to satisfy conventional qualifications, but also those who, whilst fitted in these respects, are as yet either so intellectually or spiritually unprogressed as to be incapable of benefiting from Initiation in its true sense although passing formally through Initiation rites. Spiritual quality rather than numbers, ability to understand the Masonic system and reduce its implications into personal experience rather than the perfunctory conferment of its rites, are the desiderata of the Craft to-day.

As a contribution to repairing the absence of explanation referred to these papers have been compiled. The first two of them have often been read as lectures at Lodge meetings. Many requests that they should be printed and made more widely available led to my expanding their subject-matter

[p. 7]

into greater detail than could be used for occasional lectures, and accordingly they are here amplified by a paper containing fuller notes upon Craft symbolism. To complete the consideration of the Craft system it was necessary also to add a chapter upon that which forms the crown and culmination of the Craft Degrees and without which they would be imperfect--the Order of the Royal Arch. Lastly a chapter has been added upon the important subject which forms the background of the rest--the relationship of modern Masonry to the Ancient Mysteries, from which it is the direct, though greatly attenuated, spiritual descendant.

Thus in the five papers I have sought to provide a survey of the whole Masonic subject as expressed by the Craft and Arch Degrees, which it is hoped may prove illuminating to the increasing number of Brethren who feel that Freemasonry enshrines something deeper and greater than, in the absence of guidance, they have been able to realize. It does not profess to be more than an elementary and far from exhaustive survey; the subject might be treated much more fully, in more technical terminology and with abundant references to authorities, were one compiling a more ambitious and scholarly treatise. But to the average Mason such a treatise would probably prove less serviceable than a summary expressed in as simple and untechnical terms as may be and unburdened by numerous literary references. Some repetition, due to the papers having been written at different times, may be found in later chapters of points already dealt with in previous ones, though the restatement may

[p. 8]

be advantageous in emphasizing those points and maintaining continuity of exposition. For reasons explained in the chapter itself, that on the Holy Royal Arch will probably prove difficult of comprehension by those unversed in the literature and psychology of religious mysticism; if so, the reading of it may be deferred or neglected. But since a survey of the Masonic system would, like the system itself, be incomplete without reference to that supreme Degree, and since that Degree deals with matters of advanced psychological and spiritual experience about which explanation must always be difficult, the subject has been treated here with as much simplicity of statement as is possible and rather with a view to indicating to what great heights of spiritual attainment the Craft Degrees point as achievable, than with the expectation that they will be readily comprehended by readers without some measure of mystical experience and perhaps unfamiliar with the testimony of the mystics thereto.

Purposely these papers avoid dealing with matters of Craft history and of merely antiquarian or archaeological interest. Dates, particulars of Masonic constitutions, historical changes and developments in the external aspects of the Craft, references to old Lodges and the names of outstanding people connected therewith--these and such like matters can be read about elsewhere. They are all subordinate to what alone is of vital moment and what so many Brethren are hungering for--knowledge of the spiritual purpose and lineage of the Order and the present-day value of rites of Initiation.

In giving these pages to publication care has been

[p. 9]

taken to observe due reticence in respect of essential matters. The general nature of the Masonic system is, however, nowadays widely known to outsiders and easily ascertainable from many printed sources, whilst the large interest in and output of literature upon mystical religion and the science of the inward life during the last few years has familiarized many with a subject of which, as is shown in these papers, Masonry is but a specialized form. To explain Masonry in general outline is, therefore, not to divulge a subject which is entirely exclusive to its members, but merely to show that Masonry stands in line with other doctrinal systems inculcating the same principles and to which no secrecy attaches, and that it is a specialized and highly effective method of inculcating those principles. Truth, whether as expressed in Masonry or otherwise, is at all times an open secret, but is as a pillar of light to those able to receive and profit by it, and to all others but one of darkness and unintelligibility. An elementary and formal secrecy is requisite as a practical precaution against the intrusion of improper persons and for preventing profanation. In other respects the vital secrets of life, and of any system expounding life, protect themselves even though shouted from the housetops, because they mean nothing to those as yet unqualified for the knowledge and unready to identify themselves with it by incorporating it into their habitual thought and conduct.

 

In view of the great spread and popularity of Masonry to-day--when there are some three

[p. 10]

thousand Lodges in Great Britain alone--it is as well to consider its present bearings and tendencies and to give a thought to future possibilities. The Order is a semi-secret, semi-public institution; secret in respect of its activities intra moenia, but otherwise of full public notoriety, with its doors open to any applicant for admission who is of ordinary good character and repute. Those who enter it, as the majority do, entirely ignorant of what they will find there, usually because they have friends there or know Masonry to be an institution devoted to high ideals and benevolence and with which it may be socially desirable to be connected, may or may not be attracted and profit by what is disclosed to them, and may or may not see anything beyond the bare form of the symbol or hear anything beyond the mere letter of the word. Their admission is quite a lottery; their Initiation too often remains but a formality, not an actual awakening into an order and quality of life previously unexperienced; their membership, unless such an awakening eventually ensues from the careful study and faithful practice of the Order's teaching, has little, if any, greater influence upon them than would ensue from their joining a purely social club.

For "Initiation"--for which there are so many candidates little conscious of what is implied in that for which they ask--what does it really mean and intend? It means a new beginning (initium); a break-away from an old method and order of life and the entrance upon a new one of larger self-knowledge, deepened understanding and intensified virtue. It means a transition from the merely

[p. 11]

natural state and standards of life towards a regenerate and super-natural state and standard. It means a turning away from the pursuit of the popular ideals of the outer world, in the conviction that those ideals are but shadows, images and temporal substitutions for the eternal Reality that underlies them, to the keen and undivertible quest of that Reality itself and the recovery of those genuine secrets of our being which lie buried and hidden at "the centre" or innermost part of our souls. It means the awakening of those hitherto dormant higher faculties of the soul which endue their possessor with "light" in the form of new enhanced consciousness and enlarged perceptive faculty. And lastly, in words with which every Mason is familiar, it means that the postulant will henceforth dedicate and devote his life to the Divine rather than to his own or any other service, so that by the principles of the Order he may be the better enabled to display that beauty of godliness which previously perhaps has not manifested through him.

To comply with this definition of Initiation--which it might be useful to apply as a test not only to those who seek for admission into the Order, but to ourselves who are already within it--it is obvious that special qualifications of mind and intention are essential in a candidate of the type likely to be benefited by the Order in the way that its doctrine contemplates, and that it is not necessarily the ordinary man of the world, personal friend and good fellow though he be according to usual social standards, who is either properly prepared for, or likely to benefit in any vital sense by, reception into

[p. 12]

it. The true candidate must indeed needs be, as the word candidus implies, a "white man," white within as symbolically he is white-vestured without, so that no inward stain or soilure may obstruct the dawn within his soul of that Light which he professes to be the predominant wish of his heart on asking for admission; whilst, if really desirous of learning the secrets and mysteries of his own being, he must be prepared to divest himself of all past preconceptions and thought-habits and, with childlike meekness and docility, surrender his mind to the reception of some perhaps novel and unexpected truths which Initiation promises to impart and which will more and more unfold and justify themselves within those, and those only, who are, and continue to keep themselves, properly prepared for them. "Know thyself!" was the injunction inscribed over the portals of ancient temples of Initiation, for with that knowledge was promised the knowledge of all secrets and all mysteries. And Masonry was designed to teach self-knowledge. But self-knowledge involves a knowledge much deeper, vaster and more difficult than is popularly conceived. It is not to be acquired by the formal passage through three or four degrees in as many months; it is a knowledge impossible of full achievement until knowledge of every other kind has been laid aside and a difficult path of life long and strenuously pursued that alone fits and leads its followers to its attainment. The wisest and most advanced of us is perhaps still but an Entered Apprentice at this knowledge, however high his titular rank. Here and there may be one worthy of being hailed as a

[p. 13]

[paragraph continues] Fellow-Craft in the true sense. The full Master-Mason--the just man made perfect who has actually and not merely ceremonially travelled the entire path, endured all its tests and ordeals, and become raised into conscious union with the Author and Giver of Life and able to mediate and impart that life to others--is at all times hard to find.

So high, so ideal an attainment, it may be urged, is beyond our reach; we are but ordinary men of the world sufficiently occupied already with our primary civic, social and family obligations and following the obvious normal path of natural life! Granted. Nevertheless to point to that attainment as possible to us and as our destiny, to indicate that path of self-perfecting to those who care and dare to follow it, modern Speculative Masonry was instituted, and to emphasizing the fact these papers are devoted. For Masonry means this or it means nothing worth the serious pursuit of thoughtful men; nothing that cannot be pursued as well outside the Craft as within it. It proclaims the fact that there exists a higher and more secret path of life than that which we normally tread, and that when the outer world and its pursuits and rewards lose their attractiveness for us and prove insufficient to our deeper needs, as sooner or later they will, we are compelled to turn back upon ourselves, to seek and knock at the door of a world within; and it is upon this inner world, and the path to and through it, that Masonry promises light, charts the way, and indicates the qualifications and conditions of progress. This is the sole aim and intention of Masonry. Behind its more elementary and obvious

[p. 14]

symbolism, behind its counsels to virtue and conventional morality, behind the platitudes and sententious phraseology (which nowadays might well be subjected to competent and intelligent revision) with which, after the fashion of their day, the eighteenth-century compilers of its ceremonies clothed its teaching, there exists the framework of a scheme of initiation into that higher path of life where alone the secrets and mysteries of our being are to be learned; a scheme moreover that, as will be shown later in these pages, reproduces for the modern world the main features of the Ancient Mysteries, and that has been well described by a learned writer on the subject as "an epitome or reflection at a far distance of the once universal science."

But because, for long and for many, Masonry has meant less than this, it has not as yet fulfilled its original purpose of being the efficient initiating instrument it was designed to be; its energies have been diverted from its true instructional purpose into social and philanthropic channels, excellent in their way, but foreign to and accretions upon the primal main intention. Indeed, so little perceived or appreciated is that central intention that one frequently hears it confessed by men of eminent position in the Craft and warm devotion to it that only their interest in its great charitable institutions keeps alive their connection with the Order. Relief is indeed a duty incumbent upon a Mason, but its Masonic interpretation is not meant to be limited to physical necessities. The spiritually as well as the financially poor and distressed are always with

[p. 15]

us and to the former, equally with the latter, Masonry was designed to minister. Theoretically every man upon reception into the Craft acknowledges himself as within the category of the spiritually poor, and as content to renounce all temporal riches if haply by that sacrifice his hungry heart may be filled with those good things which money cannot purchase, but to which the truly initiated can help him.

But if Masonry has not as yet fulfilled its primary purpose and, though engaged in admirable secondary activities, is as yet an initiating instrument of low efficiency, it may be that, with enlarged understanding of its designs, that efficiency may yet become very considerably increased. During the last two centuries the Craft has been gradually developing from small and crude beginnings into its present vast and highly elaborated organization. To-day the number of Lodges and the membership of the Craft are increasing beyond all precedent. One asks oneself what this growing interest portends, and to what it will, or can be made to, lead? The growth synchronizes with a corresponding defection of interest in orthodox religion and public worship. It need not now be enquired whether or to what extent the simple principles of faith and the humanitarian ideals of Masonry are with some men taking the place of the theology offered in the various Churches; it is probable that to some extent they do so. But the fact is with us that the ideals of the Masonic Order are making a wide appeal to the best instincts of large numbers of men and that the Order has imperceptibly become the greatest social institution in the Empire. Its principles of faith and

[p. 16]

ethics are simple, and of virtually universal acceptance. Providing means for the expression of universal fraternity under a common Divine Fatherhood and of a common loyalty to the headship and established government of the State, it leaves room for divergences of private belief and view upon matters upon which unity is impracticable and perhaps undesirable. It is utterly clean of politics and political intrigue, but nevertheless has unconsciously become a real, though unobtrusive, asset of political value, both in stabilizing the social fabric and tending to foster international amity. The elaborateness of its organization, the care and admirable control of its affairs by its higher authorities, are praiseworthy in the extreme, whilst in the conduct of its individual Lodges there has been and is a progressive endeavour to raise the standard of ceremonial work to a far higher degree of reverence and intelligence than was perhaps possible under conditions existing not long ago. The Masonic Craft has grown and ramified to dimensions undreamed of by its original founders and, at its present rate of increase, its potentialities and influence in the future are quite incalculable.

What seems now needed to intensify the worth and usefulness of this great Brotherhood is to deepen its understanding of its own system, to educate its members in the deeper meaning and true purpose of its rites and its philosophy. Were this achieved the Masonic Order would become, in proportion to that achievement, a spiritual force greater than it can ever be so long as it continues content with a formal and unintelligent perpetuation of rites, the

[p. 17]

real and sacred purpose of which remains largely unperceived, and participation in which too often means nothing more than association with an agreeable, semi-religious, social institution. Carried to its fullest, that achievement would involve the revival, in a form adapted to modern conditions, of the ancient Wisdom-teaching and the practice of those Mysteries which became proscribed fifteen centuries ago, but of which modern Masonry is the direct and representative descendant, as will appear later in these pages.

The future development and the value of the Order as a moral force in society depend, therefore, upon the view its members take of their system. If they do not spiritualize it they will but increasingly materialize it. If they fail to interpret its veiled purport, to enter into the understanding of its underlying philosophy, and to translate its symbolism into what is signified thereby, they will be mistaking shadow for substance, a husk for the kernel, and secularizing what was designed as a means of spiritual instruction and grace. It is from lack of instruction rather than of desire to learn the meaning of Masonry that the Craft suffers to-day. But, as one finds everywhere, that desire exists; and so, for what they may be worth, these papers are offered to the Craft as a contribution towards satisfying it.

 

Let me conclude with an apologue and an aspiration.

In the Chronicles of Israel it may be read how that, after long preparatory labour, after employing the choicest material and the most skilful artificers,

[p. 18]

[paragraph continues] Solomon the King at last made an end of building and beautifying his Temple, and dedicated to the service of the Most High that work of his hands in a state as perfect as human provision could make it; and how that then, but not till then, his offering was accepted and the acceptance was signified by a Divine descent upon it so that the glory of the Lord shone through and filled the whole house.

So--if we will have it so--may it be with the temple of the Masonic Order. Since the inception of Speculative Masonry it has been a-building and expanding now these last three hundred years. Fashioned of living stones into a far-reaching organic structure; brought gradually, under the good guidance of its rulers, to high perfection on its temporal side and in respect of its external observances, and made available for high purposes and giving godly witness in a dark and troubled world; upon these preliminary efforts let there now be invoked this crowning and completing blessing--that the Spirit of Wisdom and Understanding may descend upon the work of our hands in abundant measure, prospering it still farther, and filling and transfiguring our whole Masonic house.

     
The Meaning of Masonry, by W.L. Wilmshurst, [1922], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 19]

  

Chapter I.

  

THE DEEPER SYMBOLISM OF FREEMASONRY

CANDIDATE proposing to enter Freemasonry has seldom formed any definite idea of the nature of what he is engaging in. Even after his admission he usually remains quite at a loss to explain satisfactorily what Masonry is and for what purpose his Order exists. He finds, indeed, that it is "a system of morality veiled in allegory and illustrated by symbols," but that explanation, whilst true, is but partial and does not carry him very far. For many members of the Craft to be a Mason implies merely connection with a body which seems to be something combining the natures of a club and a benefit society. They find, of course, a certain religious element in it, but as they are told that religious discussion, which means, of course, sectarian religious discussion, is forbidden in the Lodge, they infer that Masonry is not a religious institution, and that its teachings are intended to be merely secondary and supplemental to any religious tenets they may happen to hold. One sometimes hears it remarked that Masonry is "not a religion"; which in a sense is quite true; and sometimes that it is a secondary or supplementary religion, which is quite untrue. Again Masonry is often supposed, even by its own members, to be a system of extreme antiquity, that was practised and that has come down in well-nigh its present form from Egyptian or at least from early Hebrew sources:

[p. 20]

a view which again possesses the merest modicum of truth. In brief, the vaguest notions obtain about the origin and history of the Craft, whilst the still more vital subject of its immediate and present purpose, and of its possibilities, remains almost entirely outside the consciousness of many of its own members. We meet in our Lodges regularly; we perform our ceremonial work and repeat our catechetical instruction-lectures night after night with a less or greater degree of intelligence and verbal perfection, and there our work ends, as though the ability to perform this work creditably were the be-all and the end-all of Masonic work. Seldom or never do we employ our Lodge meetings for that purpose for which, quite as much as for ceremonial purposes, they were intended, viz.: for "expatiating on the mysteries of the Craft," and perhaps our neglect to do so is because we have ourselves imperfectly realized what those mysteries are into which our Order was primarily formed to introduce us.

Yet, there exists a large number of brethren who would willingly repair this obvious deficiency; brethren to whose natures Masonry, even in their more limited aspect of it, makes a profound appeal, and who feel their membership of the Craft to be a privilege which has brought them into the presence of something greater than they know, and that enshrines a purpose and that could unfold a message deeper than they at present realize.

In a brief address like this it is hopeless to attempt to deal at all adequately with what I have suggested are deficiencies in our knowledge of the system we

[p. 21]

belong to. The most one can hope to do is to offer a few hints or clues, which those who so desire may develop for themselves in the privacy of their own thought. For in the last resource no one can communicate the deeper things in Masonry to another. Every man must discover and learn them for himself, although a friend or brother may be able to conduct him a certain distance on the path of understanding. We know that even the elementary and superficial secrets of the Order must not be communicated to unqualified persons, and the reason for this injunction is not so much because those secrets have any special value, but because that silence is intended to be typical of that which applies to the greater, deeper secrets, some of which, for appropriate reasons, must not be communicated, and some of which indeed are not communicable at all, because they transcend the power of communication.

It is well to emphasize then, at the outset, that Masonry is a sacramental system, possessing, like all sacraments, an outward and visible side consisting of its ceremonial, its doctrine and its symbols which we can see and hear, and an inward, intellectual and spiritual side, which is concealed behind the ceremonial, the doctrine and the symbols, and which is available only to the Mason who has learned to use his spiritual imagination and who can appreciate the reality that lies behind the veil of outward symbol. Anyone, of course, can understand the simpler meaning of our symbols, especially with the help of the explanatory lectures; but he may still miss the meaning of the scheme as a vital whole. It is absurd to think that a vast organization like

[p. 22]

[paragraph continues] Masonry was ordained merely to teach to grown-up men of the world the symbolical meaning of a few simple builders' tools, or to impress upon us such elementary virtues as temperance and justice:--the children in every village school are taught such things; or to enforce such simple principles of morals as brotherly love, which every church and every religion teaches; or as relief, which is practised quite as much by non-Masons as by us; or of truth, which every infant learns upon its mother's knee. There is surely, too, no need for us to join a secret society to be taught that the volume of the Sacred Law is a fountain of truth and instruction; or to go through the great and elaborate ceremony of the third degree merely to learn that we have each to die. The Craft whose work we are taught to honour with the name of a "science," a "royal art," has surely some larger end in view than merely inculcating the practice of social virtues common to all the world and by no means the monopoly of Freemasons. Surely, then, it behoves us to acquaint ourselves with what that larger end consists, to enquire why the fulfilment of that purpose is worthy to be called a science, and to ascertain what are those "mysteries" to which our doctrine promises we may ultimately attain if we apply ourselves assiduously enough to understanding what Masonry is capable of teaching us.

Realizing, then, what Masonry cannot be deemed to be, let us ask what it is. But before answering that question, let me put you in possession of certain facts that will enable you the better to appreciate the answer when I formulate it. In all periods of

[p. 23]

the world's history, and in every part of the globe, secret orders and societies have existed outside the limits of the official churches for the purpose of teaching what are called "the Mysteries": for imparting to suitable and prepared minds certain truths of human life, certain instructions about divine things, about the things that belong to our peace, about human nature and human destiny, which it was undesirable to publish to the multitude who would but profane those teachings and apply the esoteric knowledge that was communicated to perverse and perhaps to disastrous ends.

These Mysteries were formerly taught, we are told, "on the highest hills and in the lowest valleys," which is merely a figure of speech for saying, first, that they have been taught in circumstances of the greatest seclusion and secrecy, and secondly, that they have been taught in both advanced and simple forms according to the understanding of their disciples. It is, of course, common knowledge that great secret systems of the Mysteries (referred to in our lectures as "noble orders of architecture," i.e., of soul-building) existed in the East, in Chaldea, Assyria, Egypt, Greece, Italy, amongst the Hebrews, amongst Mahommedans and amongst Christians; even among uncivilized African races they are to be found. All the great teachers of humanity, Socrates, Plato, Pythagoras, Moses, Aristotle, Virgil, the author of the Homeric poems, and the great Greek tragedians, along with St. John, St. Paul and innumerable other great names--were initiates of the Sacred Mysteries. The form of the teaching communicated has varied considerably

[p. 24]

from age to age; it has been expressed under different veils; but since the ultimate truth the Mysteries aim at teaching is always one and the same, there has always been taught, and can only be taught, one and the same doctrine. What that doctrine was, and still is, we will consider presently so far as we are able to speak of it, and so far as Masonry gives expression to it. For the moment let me merely say that behind all the official religious systems of the world, and behind all the great moral movements and developments in the history of humanity, have stood what St. Paul called the keepers or "stewards of the Mysteries." From that source Christianity itself came into the world. From them originated the great school of Kabalism, that marvellous system of secret, oral tradition of the Hebrews, a strong element of which has been introduced into our Masonic system. From them, too, also issued many fraternities and orders, such, for instance, as the great orders of Chivalry and of the Rosicrucians, and the school of spiritual alchemy. Lastly, from them too also issued, in the seventeenth century, modern speculative Freemasonry.

To trace the genesis of the movement, which came into activity some 250 years ago (our rituals and ceremonies having been compiled round about the year 1700), is beyond the purpose of my present remarks. It may merely be stated that the movement itself incorporated the slender ritual and the elementary symbolism that, for centuries previously, had been employed in connection with the mediaeval Building Guilds, but it gave to them a far fuller meaning and a far wider scope. It has always been

[p. 25]

the custom for Trade Guilds, and even for modern Friendly Societies, to spiritualize their trades, and to make the tools of their trade point some simple moral. No trade, perhaps, lends itself more readily to such treatment than the builder's trade; but wherever a great industry has flourished, there you will find traces of that industry becoming allegorized, and of the allegory being employed for the simple moral instruction of those who were operative members of the industry. I am acquainted, for instance, with an Egyptian ceremonial system, some 5,000 years old, which taught precisely the same things as Masonry does, but in the terms of shipbuilding instead of in the terms of architecture. But the terms of architecture were employed by those who originated modern Masonry because they were ready to hand; because they were in use among certain trade-guilds then in existence; and lastly, because they are extremely effective and significant from the symbolic point of view.

All that I wish to emphasize at this stage is that our present system is not one coming from remote antiquity: that there is no direct continuity between us and the Egyptians, or even those ancient Hebrews who built, in the reign of King Solomon, a certain Temple at Jerusalem. What is extremely ancient in Freemasonry is the spiritual doctrine concealed within the architectural phraseology; for this doctrine is an elementary form of the doctrine that has been taught in all ages, no matter in what garb it has been expressed. Our own teaching, for instance, recognizes Pythagoras as having undergone numerous initiations in different parts of the world,

[p. 26]

and as having attained great eminence in the science. Now it is perfectly certain that Pythagoras was not a Mason at all in our present sense of the word; but it is also perfectly certain that Pythagoras was a very highly advanced master in the knowledge of the secret schools of the Mysteries, of whose doctrine some small portion is enshrined for us in our Masonic system.

What then was the purpose the framers of our Masonic system had in view when they compiled it? To this question you will find no satisfying answer in ordinary Masonic books. Indeed there is nothing more dreary and dismal than Masonic literature and Masonic histories, which are usually devoted to considering merely unessential matters relating to the external development of the Craft and to its antiquarian aspect. They fail entirely to deal with its vital meaning and essence, a failure that, in some cases, may be intentional, but that more often seems due to lack of knowledge and perception, for the true, inner history of Masonry has never yet been given forth even to the Craft itself. There are members of the Craft to whom it is familiar, and who in due time may feel justified in gradually making public at any rate some portion of what is known in interior circles. But ere that time comes, and that the Craft itself may the better appreciate what can be told, it is desirable, nay even necessary, that its own members should make some effort to realize the meaning of their own institution, and should display symptoms of earnest desire to treat it less as a system of archaic and perfunctory rites, and more as a vital reality capable of entering

[p. 27]

into and dominating their lives; less as a merely pleasant social order, and more as a sacred and serious method of initiation into the profoundest truths of life It is written that "to him that hath shall be given, and from him that hath not shall be taken away even that which he hath"; and it remains with the Craft itself to determine by its own action whether it shall enter into its full heritage, or whether, by failing to realize and to safeguard the value of what it possesses, by suffering its own mysteries to be vulgarized and profaned, its organization will degenerate and pass into disrepute and deserved oblivion, as has been the fate of many secret orders in the past.

There are signs, however, of a well-nigh universal increase of interest, of a genuine desire for knowledge of the spiritual content of our Masonic system, and I am glad to be able to offer to my Brethren some light and imperfect outline of what I conceive to be the true purpose of our work, which may tend to deepen their interest in the work of the Order they belong to, and (what is of more moment still) help to make Masonry for them a vital factor, and a living, serious reality, rather than a mere pleasurable appendage to social life.

To state things briefly, Masonry offers us, in dramatic form and by means of dramatic ceremonial a philosophy of the spiritual life of man and a diagram of the process of regeneration. We shall see presently that that philosophy is not only consistent with the doctrine of every religious system taught outside the ranks of the Order, but that it explains, elucidates and more sharply defines, the

[p. 28]

fundamental doctrines common to every religious system in the world, whether past or present, whether Christian or non-Christian. The religions of the world, though all aiming at teaching truth, express that truth in different ways, and we are more prone to emphasize the differences than to look for the correspondences in what they teach. In some Masonic Lodges the candidate makes his first entrance to the Lodge room amid the clash of swords and the sounds of strife, to intimate to him that he is leaving the confusion and jarring of the religious sects of the exterior world, and is passing into a Temple wherein the Brethren dwell together in unity of thought in regard to the basal truths of life, truths which can permit of no difference or schism.

Allied with no external religious system itself, Masonry is yet a synthesis, a concordat, for men of every race, of every creed, of every sect, and its foundation principles being common to them all, admit of no variation. "As it was in the beginning, so it is now and ever shall be, into the ages of ages." Hence it is that every Master of a Lodge is called upon to swear that no innovation in the body of Masonry (i.e., in its substantial doctrine) is possible, since it already contains a minimum, and yet a sufficiency, of truth which none may add to nor alter, and from which none may take away; and since the Order accords perfect liberty of opinion to all men, the truths it has to offer are entirely "free to" us according to our capacity to assimilate them, whilst those to whom they do not appeal, those who think they can find a more sufficing

[p. 29]

philosophy elsewhere, are equally at liberty to be "free from" them, and men of honour will find it their duty to withdraw from the Order rather than suffer the harmony of thought that should characterize the Craft to be disturbed by their presence.

The admission of every Mason into the Order is, we are taught, "an emblematical representation of the entrance of all men upon this mortal existence." Let us reflect a little upon these pregnant words. To those deep persistent questionings which present themselves to every thinking mind, What am I? Whence come I? Whither go I?, Masonry offers emphatic and luminous answers. Each of us, it tells us, has come from that mystical "East," the eternal source of all light and life, and our life here is described as being spent in the "West" (that is, in a world which is the antipodes of our original home, and under conditions of existence as far removed from those we came from and to which we are returning, as is West from East in our ordinary computation of space). Hence every Candidate upon admission finds himself, in a state of darkness, in the West of the Lodge. Thereby he is repeating symbolically the incident of his actual birth into this world, which he entered as a blind and helpless babe, and through which in his early years, not knowing whither he was going, after many stumbling and irregular steps, after many deviations from the true path and after many tribulations and adversities incident to human life, he may at length ascend, purified and chastened by experience, to larger life in the eternal East. Hence in the E.A. degree, we ask, "As a Mason, whence

[p. 30]

come you?" and the answer, coming from an apprentice (i.e., from the natural man of undeveloped knowledge) is "From the West," since he supposes that his life has originated in this world. But, in the advanced degree of M.M. the answer is that he comes "From the East," for by this time the Mason is supposed to have so enlarged his knowledge as to realize that the primal source of life is not in the "West," not in this world; that existence upon this planet is but a transitory sojourn, spent in search of "the genuine secrets," the ultimate realities, of life; and that as the spirit of man must return to God who gave it, so he is now returning from this temporary world of "substituted secrets" to that "East" from which he originally came.

As the admission of every candidate into a Lodge presupposes his prior existence in the world without the Lodge, so our doctrine presupposes that every soul born into this world has lived in, and has come hither from, an anterior state of life. It has lived elsewhere before it entered this world: it will live elsewhere when it passes hence, human life being but a parenthesis in the midst of eternity. But upon entering this world, the soul must needs assume material form; in other words it takes upon itself a physical body to enable it to enter into relations with the physical world, and to perform the functions appropriate to it in this particular phase of its career. Need I say that the physical form with which we have all been invested by the Creator upon our entrance into this world, and of which we shall all divest ourselves when we leave the Lodge of this life, is represented among us by

[p. 31]

our Masonic apron? This, our body of mortality, this veil of flesh and blood clothing the inner soul of us, this is the real "badge of innocence," the common "bond of friendship," with which the Great Architect has been pleased to invest us all: this, the human body, is the badge which is "older and nobler than that of any other Order in existence": and though it be but a body of humiliation compared with that body of incorruption which is the promised inheritance of him who endures to the end, let us never forget that if we never do anything to disgrace the badge of flesh with which God has endowed each of us, that badge will never disgrace us.

Brethren, I charge you to regard your apron as one of the most precious and speaking symbols our Order has to give you. Remember that when you first wore it it was a piece of pure white lambskin; an emblem of that purity and innocence which we always associate with the lamb and with the newborn child. Remember that you first wore it with the flap raised, it being thus a five-cornered badge, indicating the five senses, by means of which we enter into relations with the material world around us (our "five points of fellowship" with the material world), but indicating also by the triangular portion above, in conjunction with the quadrangular portion below, that man's nature is a combination of soul and body; the three-sided emblem at the top added to the four-sided emblem beneath making seven, the perfect number; for, as it is written in an ancient Hebrew doctrine with which Masonry is closely allied, "God blessed and loved the number

[p. 32]

seven more than all things under His throne," by which is meant that man, the seven-fold being, is the most cherished of all the Creator's works. And hence also it is that the Lodge has seven principal officers, and that a Lodge, to be perfect, requires the presence of seven brethren; though the deeper meaning of this phrase is that the individual man, in virtue of his seven-fold constitution, in himself constitutes the "perfect Lodge," if he will but know himself and analyse his own nature aright.

To each of us also from our birth have been given three lesser lights, by which the Lodge within ourselves may be illumined. For the "sun" symbolizes our spiritual consciousness, the higher aspirations and emotions of the soul; the "moon" betokens our reasoning or intellectual faculties, which (as the moon reflects the light of the sun) should reflect the light coming from the higher spiritual faculty and transmit it into our daily conduct; whilst "the Master of the Lodge" is a symbolical phrase denoting the will-power of man, which should enable him to be master of his own life, to control his own actions and keep down the impulses of his lower nature, even as the stroke of the Master's gavel controls the Lodge and calls to order and obedience the Brethren under his direction. By the assistance of these lesser lights within us, a man is enabled to perceive what is, again symbolically, called the "form of the Lodge," i.e., the way in which his own human nature has been composed and constituted, the length, breadth, height and depth of his own being. By their help, too, he will perceive that he himself, his body and

[p. 33]

his soul, are "holy ground," upon which he should build the altar of his own spiritual life, an altar which he should suffer no "iron tool," no debasing habit of thought or conduct, to defile. By them, too, he will perceive how Wisdom, Strength and Beauty have been employed by the Creator, like three grand supporting pillars, in the structure of his own organism. And by these finally he will discern how that there is a mystical "ladder of many rounds or staves," i.e., that there are innumerable paths or methods by means of which men are led upwards to the spiritual Light encircling us all, and in which we live and move and have our being, but that of the three principal methods, the greatest of these, the one that comprehends them all and brings us nearest heaven, is Love, in the full exercise of which God-like virtue a Mason reaches the summit of his profession; that summit being God Himself, whose name is Love.

I cannot too strongly impress upon you, Brethren, the fact that, throughout our rituals and our lectures, the references made to the Lodge are not to the building in which we meet. That building itself is intended to be but a symbol, a veil of allegory concealing something else. "Know ye not" says the great initiate St. Paul, "that ye are the temples of the Most High; and that the Spirit of God dwelleth in you? "The real Lodge referred to throughout our rituals is our own individual personalities, and if we interpret our doctrine in the light of this fact we shall find that it reveals an entirely new aspect of the purpose of our Craft.

It is after investment with the apron that the

[p. 34]

initiate is placed in the N.E. corner. Thereby he is intended to learn that at his birth into this world the foundation-stone of his spiritual life was duly and truly laid and implanted within himself; and he is charged to develop it; to create a superstructure upon it. Two paths are open to him at this stage, a path of light and a path of darkness; a path of good and a path of evil. The N.E. corner is the symbolical dividing place between the two. In symbolical language, the N. always signifies the place of imperfection and undevelopment; in olden times the bodies of suicides, reprobates and unbaptized children were always buried in the north or sunless side of a churchyard. The seat of the junior members of the Craft is allotted to the north, for, symbolically, it represents the condition of the spiritually unenlightened man; the novice in whom the spiritual light latent within him has not yet risen above the horizon of consciousness and dispersed the clouds of material interests and the impulses of the lower and merely sensual life. The initiate placed in the N.E. corner is intended to see, then, that on the one side of him is the path that leads to the perpetual light of the East, into which he is encouraged to proceed, and that on the other is that of spiritual obscurity and ignorance into which it is possible for him to remain or relapse. It is a parable of the dual paths of life open to each one of us; on the one hand the path of selfishness, material desires and sensual indulgence, of intellectual blindness and moral stagnation; on the other the path of moral and spiritual progress, in pursuing which one may decorate and adorn the Lodge within

[p. 35]

him with the ornaments and jewels of grace and with the invaluable furniture of true knowledge, and which he may dedicate, in all his actions, to the service of God and of his fellow men And mark that of those jewels some are said to be moveable and transferable, because when displayed in our own lives and natures their influence becomes transferred and communicated to others and helps to uplift and sweeten the lives of our fellows; whilst some are immoveable because they are permanently fixed and planted in the roots of our own being, and are indeed the raw material which has been entrusted to us to work out of chaos and roughness into due and true form.

The Ceremony of our first degree, then, is a swift and comprehensive portrayal of the entrance of all men into, first, physical life, and second, into spiritual life; and as we extend congratulations when a child is born into the world, so also we receive with acclamation the candidate for Masonry who, symbolically, is seeking for spiritual re-birth; and herein we emulate what is written of the joy that exists among the angels of heaven over every sinner who repents and turns towards the light. The first degree is also eminently the degree of preparation, of self-discipline and purification. It corresponds with that symbolical cleansing accorded in the sacrament of Baptism, which, in the churches, is, so to speak, the first degree in the religious life; and which is administered, appropriately, at the font, near the entrance of the church, even as the act itself takes place at the entrance of the spiritual career. For to all of us such initial

[p. 36]

cleansing and purifying is necessary. As has been beautifully written by a fellow-worker in the Craft:--

"'Tis scarcely true that souls come naked down
  To take abode up in this earthly town,
  Or naked pass, of all they wear denied.
  We enter slipshod and with clothes awry,
  And we take with us much that by-and-by
  May prove no easy task to put aside.

 Cleanse, therefore, that which round about us clings;
  We pray Thee, Master, ere Thy sacred halls
  We enter. Strip us of redundant things,
  And meetly clothe us in pontificals. [**]

In the schools of the Mysteries, when aspirants for the higher life were wont to quit the outer world and enter temples or sanctuaries of initiation, prolonged periods were allotted to the practical achievement of what is briefly summarized in our first degree. We are told seven or more years was the normal period, though less sufficed in worthy cases. The most severe tests of discipline, of purity, of self-balance were required before a neophyte was permitted to pass forward, and a reminiscence of these tests of fitness is preserved in our own working by the conducting of the candidate to the two wardens, and submitting him to a merely formal trial of efficiency. For it is impossible to-day, as it was impossible in ancient times, for a man to reach the heights of moral perfection and spiritual consciousness which were then, and are now, the goal and aim of all the schools of the Mysteries and all the secret orders, without purification and trial. Complete stainlessness of body, utter purity of

[p. 37]

mind, are absolute essentials to the attainment of things of great and final moment. "Who" says the Psalmist (and remember that the Psalms were the sacred hymns used in the Hebrew Mysteries), "Who will go up to the hill of the Lord, and ascend to His holy place? Even he that hath clean hands and a pure heart"; whence it comes that we wear white gloves and aprons as emblems that we have purified our hearts and washed our hands in innocency. So also our Patron Saint (St. John) teaches, "He who hath this hope in him purifieth himself, even as He (i.e., the Master whom he is seeking) is pure." For he who is not pure in body and mind: he who is enslaved by passions and desires, or by bondage to the material interests of this world, is, by the very fact of his uncleanness, prevented from passing on. Nothing unclean or that defileth a man, we are told, can enter into the kingdom; and, therefore, our candidates are told that if they have "money or metals about them"; if, that is, they are subject to any physical attraction or mental defilement, their real initiation into the higher things, of which our ceremony is but a dramatic symbol, must be deferred and repeated again and again until they are cleansed and fitted to pass on.

After purification come contemplation and enlightenment, which are the special subjects of the second degree. Aforetime the candidate for the Mysteries, after protracted discipline and purification enabling his mind to acquire complete control over his passions and his lower physical nature, was advanced, as he may advance himself to-day, to the study of his more interior faculties, to

[p. 38]

understand the science of the human soul, and to trace these faculties in their development from their elementary stage until he realizes that they connect with, and terminate in, the Divine itself. The secrets of his mental nature and the principles of intellectual life became at this stage gradually unfolded to his view. You will thus perceive, Brethren, that the F.C. degree, sometimes regarded by us as a somewhat uninteresting one, typifies in reality a long course of personal development requiring the most profound knowledge of the mental and psychical side of our nature. It involves not merely the cleansing and control of the mind, but a full comprehension of our inner constitution, of the more hidden mysteries of our nature and of spiritual psychology. In this degree it is that our attention is called to the fact that the Mason who has attained proficiency in this grade has been enabled to discover a sacred symbol, placed in the centre of the building, and alluding to the G.G.O.T.U. Doubtless we have often asked ourselves what that phrase and what that symbol imply. Need I repeat that the building alluded to is not the edifice we meet in, but is our own selves, and that the sacred symbol at the centre of the roof and of the floor of this outward temple is but symbolic of that which exists at the centre of ourselves, and which was spoken of by the Christian Master when He proclaimed that "the kingdom of heaven is within you"; that at the depths of our own being, concealed beneath the heavy veils of the sensual, lower nature, there resides that vital and immortal principle, which is said to "allude to" the G.G. because it is nothing

[p. 39]

other than a spark of God Himself immanent within us. Over the old temples of the Mysteries was written the injunction "Man, know thyself, and thou shalt know the universe and God." Happy then is the Mason who has so far purified and developed his own nature as to realize in its fulness the meaning of the "sacred symbol" of the second degree, and found God present not outside but within himself. But in order to find the "perfect points of entrance" to this secret (and we are told elsewhere that "straight is the way and narrow the gate, and few there be that find it") emphasis again is laid in our teaching upon the necessity of complete moral rectitude, of utter exactness of thought, word and action, as exemplified by rigid observance of the symbolic principles of the square, level and plumb-rule.

Here again the symbolism of our work becomes extremely profound and interesting. He who desires to rise to the heights of his own being must first crush and crucify his own lower nature and inclinations; he must perforce tread what elsewhere is described as the way of the Cross; and that Cross is indicated by the conjunction of those working tools (which when united form a cross); and that "way" is involved in the scrupulous performance of all that we know those working tools signify. By perfecting his conduct, by struggles against his own natural propensities, the candidate is working the rough ashlar of his own nature into the perfect cube, and I would ask you to observe also that the cube itself contains a secret, for unfolded, it itself denotes and takes the form of the cross.

[p. 40]

The inward development which the second degree symbolizes is typified by the lowering of the triangular flap of the apron upon the rectangular portion below. This is equivalent to the rite of Confirmation in the Christian Churches. It denotes "the progress we have made in the science," or in other words it indicates that the higher nature of the man, symbolized by the trinity of spirit, has descended into and is now permeating his lower nature. Hitherto, in his state of ignorance and moral blindness, the spiritual part of his nature has, as it were, but hovered above him; he has been unconscious of its presence in his constitution; but now, having realized its existence, the day-spring from on high has visited him, and the nobler part of him descends into his lower nature, illuminating and enriching it.

Now the man who so develops himself, speedily becomes more conscious of the difficulties of his task, more sensitive to the obstacles the life of the outer world places in the way of the spiritual life. But he is taught to persist with fortitude and with prudence, to develop the highest within him with "fervency and zeal." Upon self-scrutiny, too, i.e., upon entering into that "porch-way" of contemplation which like a winding staircase leads inward to the Holy of Holies within himself, he realizes that difficulties and obstacles placed in his way are utilised by the Eternal Wisdom as the necessary means of developing the latent and potential good in him, and that as the rough ashlar can only be squared and perfected by chipping and polishing, so he also can be made perfect only by

[p. 41]

toil and by suffering. He sees that difficulty, adversity and persecution serve a beneficent purpose. These are his "wages": and he learns to accept them "without scruple and without diffidence, knowing that he is justly entitled to them, and from the confidence he has in the integrity" of that Employer who has sent him into this far-off world to prepare the materials for building the temple of the heavenly city. And so, as the sign peculiar to the degree suggests, he endeavours to examine and lay bare his heart, to cast away all impurity from it, and he stands, like Joshua, praying that the light of day may be extended to him until he has accomplished the overthrow of his own inward enemies and of every obstacle to his complete development.

The aspirant who attains proficiency in the work of self-perfecting to which the F.C. grade alludes, has passed away from the N. side of the Lodge, the side of darkness and imperfection; and now stands on the S.E. side in the meridian sunlight of moral illumination (so far as the natural man may possess it), but yet still far removed from that fuller realization of himself and of the mysteries of his own nature which it is possible for the spiritual adept or Master Mason to attain. Before that attainment is reached there remains for him "that last and greatest trial" by which alone he can enter into the great consolations and make acquaintance with the supreme realities of existence. In the places where the great Mysteries have always been taught, what is ceremonially performed in our third degree is no mere symbolical representation as with us, but an actual, vital experience of a most severe

[p. 42]

character: one the nature of which can hardly be made intelligible, or even credible, to those unfamiliar with the subject. I refrain, therefore, from more than mere mention of it, observing only that it is one not involving physical death, and in this respect only is our ceremony in accord with the experience symbolized. For if you follow closely the raising ceremony, although distinct reference to the death of the body is made, yet such death is obviously intended to be merely symbolical of another kind of death, since the candidate is eventually restored to his former worldly circumstances and material comforts, and his earthly Masonic career is not represented as coming to a close at this stage. All that has happened in the third degree is that he has symbolically passed through a great and striking change: a rebirth, or regeneration of his whole nature. He has been "sown a corruptible body"; and in virtue of the self-discipline and self-development he has undergone, there has been raised in him "an incorruptible body," and death has been swallowed up in the victory he has attained over himself. I sometimes fear that the too conspicuous display of the emblems and trappings of mortality in our Lodges is apt to create the false impression that the death to which the third degree alludes is the mere physical change that awaits all men. But a far deeper meaning is intended. The Mason who knows his science knows that the death of the body is only a natural transition of which he need have no dread whatever; he knows also that when the due time for it arrives, that transition will be a welcome respite from the bondage of this world,

[p. 43]

from his prison-like husk of mortality, and from the daily burdens incident to existence in this lower plane of life. All that he fears is that when the time comes, he may not be free from those "stains of falsehood and dishonour," those imperfections of his own nature, that may delay his after-progress. No! the death to which Masonry alludes, using the analogy of bodily death and under the veil of a reference to it, is that death-in-life to a man's own lower self which St. Paul referred to when he protested "I die daily." It is over the grave, not of one's dead body but of one's lower self, that the aspirant must walk before attaining to the heights. What is meant is that complete self-sacrifice and self-crucifixion which, as all religions teach, are essential before the soul can be raised in glory "from a figurative death to a reunion with the companions of its former toils" both here and in the unseen world. The perfect cube must pass through the metamorphosis of the Cross. The soul must voluntarily and consciously pass through a state of utter helplessness from which no earthly hand can rescue it, and in trying to raise him from which the grip of any succouring human hand will prove but a slip: until at length Divine Help itself descends from the Throne above and, with the "lion's grip" of almighty power, raises the faithful and regenerated soul to union with itself in an embrace of reconciliation and at-one-ment.

In all the schools of the Mysteries, as well as in all the great religions of the world, the attainment of the spiritual goal just described is enacted or taught under the veil of a tragic episode analogous

[p. 44]

to that of our third degree; and in each there is a Master whose death the aspirant is instructed he must imitate in his own person. In Masonry that prototype is Hiram Abiff: but it must be made clear that there is no historical basis whatever for the legendary account of Hiram's death. The entire story is symbolical and was purposely invented for the symbolical purposes of our teaching. If you examine it closely you will perceive how obvious the correspondence is between this story and the story of the death of the Christian Master related in the Gospels; and it is needless to say that the Mason who realizes the meaning of the latter will comprehend the former and the veiled allusion that is implied. In the one case the Master is crucified between the two thieves; in the other he is done to death between two villains. In the one case appear the penitent and the impenitent thief; in the other we have the conspirators who make a voluntary confession of their guilt and were pardoned, and the others who were found guilty and put to death; whilst the moral and spiritual lessons deducible from the stories correspond. As every Christian is taught that in his own life he must imitate the life and death of Christ, so every Mason is "made to represent one of the brightest characters recorded in our annals"; but as the annals of Masonry are contained in the volume of the Sacred Law and not elsewhere, it is easy to see who the character is who is alluded to. As that great authority and initiate of the Mysteries, St. Paul, taught, we can only attain to the Master's resurrection by "being made conformable unto His death," and we "must

[p. 45]

die with Him if we are to be raised like Him": and it is in virtue of that conformity, in virtue of being individually made to imitate the Grand Master in His death, that we are made worthy of certain "points of fellowship" with Him: for the "five points of fellowship" of the third degree are the five wounds of Christ The three years' ministry of the Christian Master ended with His death and, these refer to the three degrees of the Craft which also end in the mystical death of the Masonic candidate -and his subsequent raising or resurrection.

The name Hiram Abiff signifies in Hebrew "the teacher (Guru, or enlightened one) from the Father": a fact which may help you still further to recognize the concealed purpose of the teaching. Under the name of Hiram, then, and beneath a veil of allegory, we see an allusion to another Master; and it is this Master, this Elder Brother who is alluded to in our lectures, whose "character we preserve, whether absent or present," i.e., whether He is present to our minds or no, and in regard to whom we "adopt the excellent principle, silence," lest at any time there should be among us trained in some other than the Christian Faith, and to whom on that account the mention of the Christian Master's name might possibly prove an offence or provoke contention.

To typify the advance by the candidate at this stage of his development, the apron here assumes greater elaborateness. It is garnished with a light blue border and rosettes, indicating that a higher than the natural light now permeates his being and radiates from his person, and that the wilderness

[p. 46]

of the natural man is now blossoming as the rose, in the flowers and graces incident to his regenerated nature; whilst upon either side of the apron are seen two columns of light descending from above, streaming into the depths of his whole being, and terminating in the seven-fold tassels which typify the seven-fold prismatic spectrum of the supernal Light. He is now lord of himself; the true Master-Mason; able to govern that lodge which is within himself; and as he has passed through the three degrees of purifying and self-perfecting, and squared, levelled, and harmonized his triple nature of body, soul and spirit, he also wears, on attaining Mastership, the triple Tau; which comprises the form of a level, but is also the Hebrew form of the Cross; the three crosses upon the apron thus corresponding with the three crosses of Calvary.

To sum up the import of the teaching of the three degrees, it is clear, therefore, that from grade to grade the candidate is being led from an old to an entirely new quality of life. He begins his Masonic career as the natural man; he ends it by becoming through its discipline, a regenerated perfected man. To attain this transmutation, this metamorphosis of himself, he is taught first to purify and subdue his sensual nature; then to purify and develop his mental nature; and finally, by utter surrender of his old life and losing his soul to save it, he rises from the dead a Master, a just man made perfect, with larger consciousness and faculties, an efficient instrument for use by the Great Architect in His plan of rebuilding the Temple of fallen humanity, and capable of initiating and

[p. 47]

advancing other men to a participation in the same great work.

This--the evolution of man into superman--was always the purpose of the ancient Mysteries, and the real purpose of modern Masonry is, not the social and charitable purposes to which so much attention is paid, but the expediting of the spiritual evolution of those who aspire to perfect their own nature and transform it into a more god-like quality. And this is a definite science, a royal art, which it is possible for each of us to put into practice; whilst to join the Craft for any other purpose than to study and pursue this science is to misunderstand its meaning. Hence it is that no one should apply to enter Masonry unless from the deepest promptings of his own heart, as it hungers for light upon the problem of its own nature. We are all imperfect beings, conscious of something lacking to us that would make us what, in our best moments, we fain would be. What is that which is lacking to us? "What is that which is lost?" And the answer is "The genuine secrets of a Master Mason," the true knowledge of ourselves, the conscious realization of our divine potentialities.

The very essence of the Masonic doctrine is that all men in this world are in search of something in their own nature which they have lost, but that with proper instruction and by their own patience and industry they may hope to find. Its philosophy implies that this temporal world is the antipodes of another and more real world from which we originally came and to which we may accelerate our return by such a course of self-knowledge and self-discipline

[p. 48]

as our teaching inculcates. It implies that this present world is the place where the symbolic stones and timber are being prepared "so far off" from that mystical Jerusalem where one day they will be found put together and, collectively, to constitute that Temple which even now is being built without hands and without the noise or help of metal tools. And this world, therefore, being but a transient temporary one for us, it is necessarily one of shadows, images and merely "substituted secrets," until such time as being raised not merely symbolically but actually, in character and knowledge and consciousness, to the sublime degree of Master Mason, we fit ourselves to learn something of the "genuine secrets," something of the living realities, that lurk and live in concealment behind the outward show of things. All human life, having originated in the mystical "East" and journeyed into this world which, with us, is the "West," must return again to its source. To quote again the verse of the Brother I have already cited;--

"From East to West the soul her journey takes;
  At many bitter founts her fever slakes;
  Halts at strange taverns by the way to feast,
  Resumes her load, and painful progress makes
           Back to the East."

Masonry, by means of a series of dramatic representations, is intended to furnish those who care to discover its purport and to take advantage of the hints it throws out in allegorical form, with an example and with instructions by which our return to the "East" may be accelerated. It refers to no architecture of a mundane kind, but

[p. 49]

to the architecture of the soul's life. It is not in itself a religion; but rather a dramatized and intensified form of religious processes inculcated by every religious system in the world. For there is no religion but teaches the lesson of the necessity of bodily purification of our first degree; none but emphasizes that of the second degree, that mental, moral and spiritual developments are essential and will lead to the discovery of a certain secret centre "where truth abides in fulness," and that that centre is a "point within a circle" of our own nature from which no man or Mason can ever err, for it is the divine kingdom latent within us all, into which we have as yet failed to enter. And there is none but insists upon the supreme lesson of self-sacrifice and mystical death to the things of this world so graphically portrayed in our third degree; none but indicates that in that hour of greatest darkness the light of the primal divine spark within us is never wholly extinguished, and that by loyalty to that light, by patience and by perseverance, time and circumstances will restore to us the "genuine secrets," the ultimate truths and realities of our own nature. We are here, Masonry teaches, as it were in captivity, by the waters of Babylon and in a strange land; and our doctrine truly tells us that the richest harmonies of this life are as nothing in comparison with the songs of Zion; and that, even when we are installed into the highest eminences this world or the Craft may offer, it were better that our right hand should forget its cunning and that we should fling the illusory treasures of this transitory world behind

[p. 50]

our backs, than in all our doings fail to remember the Jerusalem that lies beyond.

Our teaching is purposely veiled in allegory and symbol and its deeper import does not appear upon the surface of the ritual itself. This is partly in correspondence with human life itself and the world we live in, which are themselves but allegories and symbols of another life and the veils of another world; and partly intentional also, so that only those who have reverent and understanding minds may penetrate into the more hidden meaning of the doctrine of the Craft. The deeper secrets in Masonry, like the deeper secrets of life, are heavily veiled; are closely hidden. They exist concealed beneath a great reservation; but whoso knows anything of them knows also that they are "many and valuable," and that they are disclosed only to those who act upon the hint given in our lectures, "Seek and ye shall find; ask and ye shall have; knock and it shall be opened unto you." The search may be long and difficult, but great things are not acquired without effort and search; but it may be affirmed that to the candidate who is "properly prepared" (in a much fuller sense than we conventionally attach to that expression) there are doors leading from the Craft that, when knocked, will assuredly open and admit him to places and to knowledge he at present recks little of. For him, too, who would enter upon the greater initiations, the same rule applies as that which was symbolically represented upon his first entrance into the Order, but this time it will no longer be a symbol, but a realistic fact. He will find, I mean, that a drawn

[p. 51]

sword is always threatening in front of him, and that a cable-tow is still around his neck. Danger, indeed, awaits the candidate who would rush precipitately and in a state of moral unfitness into the deeper mysteries of his being, which are indeed "serious, solemn and awful"; but, on the other hand, for him who has once entered upon the path of light it is moral suicide to turn back.

And now, Brethren, to bring to an end this brief and imperfect survey of the deeper meaning and purposes of our Craft, I pray that what is now spoken may help to prove to some of you a further restoration to that light which is, at all times, the predominant wish of our hearts. It rests with ourselves whether Masonry remains for us what upon its outward and superficial side appears to be merely a series of symbolic rites, or whether we allow those symbols to pass into our lives and become realities therein. Whatever formalities we may have gone through in connection with our admission into the Order, we cannot be said to have been "regularly initiated" into Masonry so long as we regard the Craft as merely an incident of social life and treat its ceremonies as but rites of an archaic and perfunctory nature. The Craft, as I have already suggested, was given out to the world, from more secret sources still, as a great experiment and means of grace, and as a great opportunity for those who cared to avail themselves of what is little known and little taught outside certain sanctuaries of concealment. It was intended to furnish forth an epitome or synopsis, in dramatic form, of the spiritual regeneration of man; and to throw out

[p. 52]

hints and suggestions that might lead those capable . of discerning its deeper purpose and symbolism into still deeper initiations than the merely superficial ones enacted in our Lodges. For, as on the external side of the Order we may be called to occupy positions of honour and office in the Provincial Grand Lodge, or may enter other Masonic grades outside the Craft, so also upon its internal side there are eminences to which we may be called that, whilst offering us no social distinction and no visible advancement, are yet really the true prizes, the most valuable attainments, of Masonic desire. To this goal all may attain who truly seek to do so and who prepare the way for themselves by appropriating the truths lying beneath the superficial allegory and the symbolic veils of the Craft teaching. And since there seems to-day a genuine and widespread desire on the part of many members of the Order to enter into a fuller understanding of what the Order itself conceals rather than reveals, I feel I should not be discharging my duties as a Master in the Craft did I not take advantage of that position to share with them some measure at least of what I have been able to glean for myself.

But, finally, I must ask you to remember that, in accordance with the general design of our system, every Master of a Lodge is but a symbol and a substitution, and that behind him, and behind all other the grand officers of the Masonic hierarchy, there stands the "Great White Head," the "Great Initiator" and Grand Master of all true Masons throughout the Universe, whether members of our Craft or not. To whom let us all bow in gratitude

[p. 53]

for the invaluable gift accorded to us in this our Order; and to whose protection, and to whose enlightening guidance into its deeper mysteries, I commend you all.

Footnotes

^36:* Strange Houses of Sleep by A. E. Waite.

     
The Meaning of Masonry, by W.L. Wilmshurst, [1922], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 54]

  

Chapter II.

  

MASONRY AS A PHILOSOPHY

SIGNS are not wanting that a higher Masonic consciousness is awakening in the Craft. Members of the Order are gradually, and here and there, becoming alive to the fact that much more than meets the eye and ear lies beneath the surface of Masonic doctrine and symbols. They are beginning to think for themselves instead of taking the face-value of things for granted, and, as their thought develops, facts that previously remained unperceived assume prominence and significance. They discern the Masonic system to be something deeper than a code of elementary morality such as all men are expected to observe whether formally Masons or not. They reflect that the phenomenal growth of the Craft is scarcely accountable for upon the supposition that modern speculative Masonry perpetuates nothing more than the private associations that once existed in connection with the operative builders' trade. They recognize that there can be no peculiar virtue or interest in continuing to imitate the customs of ancient trade-guilds for the mere sake of so doing; or of keeping on foot a costly organization for teaching men the elementary symbolism of a few building tools, supplemented by a considerable amount of social conviviality. Upon a little thought it becomes pretty obvious that our Third Degree and the great central legend that forms the climax of the Craft system cannot have, and can never have had, any direct or practical bearing upon, or connection with, the trade of the

[p. 55]

operative mason. It may be urged that we have our great charity system and that the social side of our proceedings is a valuable and humanizing asset. Granted, but other people and other societies are philanthropic and social as well as we; and a secret society is not necessary to promote such ends, which are merely supplemental to the original purpose of the Order. The discernment of such facts as these, then, suggests to us that the Craft has not yet entered into the full heritage of understanding its own system and that side-matters connected with Masonry which we have long emphasized so strongly, valuable in their own way as they are, are not after all the primary and proper work of the Order. The work of the Order is to initiate into certain secrets and mysteries, and obviously if the Order fails to expound its own secrets and mysteries and so to confer real initiations as distinguished from passing candidates through certain formal ceremonies, it is not fulfilling its original purpose whatever other incidental good it may be doing.

Now as these facts are the basis upon which this lecture proceeds, let me at the outset make my first point by stating that as the progress in the Craft of every Brother admitted into its ranks is by gradual, successive stages, in like manner the understanding of the Masonic system and doctrine is also a matter of gradual development. Stated in the simplest terms possible, the theory of Masonic progress is that every Member admitted to the Order enters in a state of darkness and ignorance as to what Masonry teaches, and that later on he is supposed to be brought to light and knowledge.

[p. 56]

[paragraph continues] Putting it in other terms, he enters the Craft symbolically as a rough ashlar and it is his business so to develop both his character and his understanding that ultimately, in virtue of what he has learned and practised, he may be as a finished and perfect cube.

Now the understanding of the Masonic scheme tends to develop upon precisely similar lines. Its meaning is not discernible all at once, and unless our minds are properly prepared and our understandings carefully trained, they are unlikely ever to participate in the real secrets and mysteries of Masonry at all, however often we may watch the performance of external ceremonial or however proficient we may be in memorizing the rituals and instruction lectures. The first stage, the first conception of what Masonry involves, is concerned merely with the surface-value of the doctrine; with an acquaintance with the literal side of the imparted knowledge which we all obtain upon entering the Craft. Beyond this stage the vast majority of Masons, it is to be feared, never passes. This is the stage of knowledge in which the Craft is regarded as a social, semi-public, semi-secret community to which it is agreeable and advantageous to belong for sociable or even for ulterior purposes; in which the goal of the Mason's ambition is to attain office and high preferment and to wear a breastful of decorations; in which he takes a literal, superficial and historic view of the subject-matter of the doctrine; in which ability to perform the ceremonial work with dignity and effectiveness and to know the instruction catechisms by heart, so that

[p. 57]

not a syllable is wrongly rendered, is deemed the height of Masonic proficiency; and where, after discharging these functions with a certain degree of credit, his idea is often to have the Lodge closed as speedily as may be and get away to the relaxation of the festive board.

Now all these things belong to what may be called the very rough-ashlar stage of the Masonic conception. I am not, of course, alluding to any individual Mason. I confess frankly to having come within this category myself, and I think we may agree that we have all passed through the phase I have described, for the simple reason that we knew nothing better and had no one able to teach us something better. Let us not complain. If we look back upon the progress of the Craft during the last 150 years we cannot but congratulate ourselves upon the enormous, if gradual, strides made in Masonic progress and decorum even in the rough-ashlar stage of our conception of it. Anyone familiar with the records of old Lodges will have been brought into close touch with times when almost every element of reverence and dignity seems to have been lacking. Lodges were held in the public rooms of taverns. Whatever official furniture decorated these primitive temples, quart-pots and "churchwardens" figured largely among the unauthorized equipment. In one of the great London galleries there hangs a famous picture called "Night" by the great artist and moralist of his age, Hogarth. His purpose was to depict a characteristic night-scene in the streets of London as they appeared in his time. Among the typical specimens

[p. 58]

of depravity haunting those ill-lit streets, the great artist has held up to the derision of all time the figure of a Freemason staggering home drunk, still wearing his apron and being assisted by the tyler of the Lodge. No true Mason can regard this picture without a burning sense of shame, and without registering a resolution to redeem the Craft from this stigma. We have, I hope, got past such things as these. We have awakened to some sense of dignity and self-reverence. The Craft is well governed by its higher authorities, and individual Lodges take a pride in providing proper temples and in conducting their assemblies with due regard to the solemnity of Masonic doctrine. May the Order never relapse into the primitive and chaotic condition from which it has emerged.

But this improvement in matters of external deportment, great and welcome as it is, is not enough. To prevent the Order settling down into a state of self-satisfaction with its social privileges and the agreeableness of friendly intercourse among its members; to prevent its making its claims to being a system of knowledge and science as perfunctory and little onerous as possible, the improvement I have spoken of must be attended (and I believe is destined to be attended) by an awakening to the deep significance of the Craft's internal purposes. And since I have referred to what I have termed the "rough-ashlar" conception of that purpose you have the right to ask me now to state that loftier conception which may be regarded, in comparison, as the "perfect cube." The answer to this enquiry I shall not

[p. 59]

attempt to state in so many words. I invite you to regard this whole lecture as an indication of what that answer must be. To some extent I endeavoured to formulate that answer upon a previous occasion, but whilst I then entered rather into the details and minutiae of the Craft system and symbols, I shall treat the subject now upon broader lines and deal with Masonry in its wider and more philosophic aspect. I said upon that occasion--and I must repeat it now--that in its broad and more vital doctrine Masonry was essentially a philosophic and religious system expressed in dramatic ceremonial. It is a system intended to supply answers to the three great questions that press so inexorably upon the attention of every thoughtful man and that are the subject around which all religions and all philosophies move: What am I? Whence come I? Whither go I? It is a truism to say that in our quieter and more serious moments we all feel the need of some reliable answer to these questions. Light upon them is "the predominant wish of our hearts"; and upon such light as we can obtain, whether from Masonry or elsewhere, depends our philosophy of life and the rule of conduct by which we regulate our life. In a larger sense, then, than our conventional limited one, the Masonic candidate is presumed to enter the Order in search of light upon these problems; light that he is presumed not to have succeeded in finding elsewhere. If his candidature is actuated by any motive other than a genuine desire for knowledge upon these problems, which beyond all others are vital to his peace, and by a sincere wish to render himself, by

[p. 60]

the help of that knowledge, serviceable to his fellow-creatures, then his candidature is less than a worthy one. The reason why no man should be solicited to join the Order is that in regard to these matters of sacred and momentous import, the first springs of impulse must originate within the postulant himself; the first place of his preparation must ever be in his own heart, and it is to the cry and knocking of his inward need, and for no less a motive, that--in theory, though scarcely in practice--the door to the Mysteries is opened and the seeker enters in and finds help. At another stage of his symbolical progress the candidate learns from his superior brethren, that they, along with himself, are in search of something that is lost and which they have hopes of finding. And it is here that the great motive of this and of all quests, as well as the clue to the real purpose of Masonry, appears prominently and is stated in emphatic terms. Masonry is the quest after something that has been lost. Now what is it that has been lost? Consider the matter thus. Why should we, or the world at large, require systems of religion and philosophy at all? What is the motive and reason for the existence of a Masonic Order and of many other Orders of Initiation, both of the past and the present? Why should they exist at all? I might reduce the matter to the compass of a small and personal point by asking why have you come to hear this lecture, and why should I have been striving for many years to acquire the information that enables me to give it?--if it be not the fact,--as indeed it is, that every man in his reflective moments realizes

[p. 61]

the sense of some element of his own being having become lost; that he is conscious, if he be honest with himself, of the sense of moral imperfection, of ignorance, of restricted knowledge about himself and his surroundings; that he is aware, in short, of some radical deficiency in his constitution, which, were it but found and made good, would satisfy this craving for information, for completeness and perfection, would "lead him from darkness to light," and would put him beyond ignorance and beyond the touch of the many ills that flesh is heir to. The point is too obvious to need pressing further, and the answer to it is to be found by a reference to a great doctrine that forms the philosophic basis of all systems of religion, and all the great systems of the Mysteries and of Initiation of antiquity, viz., that which is popularly known as the Fall of Man. However we may choose to regard this event--and throughout the history of the human race it has been taught in innumerable ways and in all manner of parables, allegories, myths and legends--its sole and single meaning is that humanity as a whole has fallen away from its original parent-source and place; that from being imbedded in the eternal centre of life man has become projected to the circumference; and that in this present world of ours he is undergoing a period of restriction, of ignorance, of discipline and experience, that shall ultimately fit him to return to the centre whence he came and to which he properly belongs. "Paradise Lost" is the real theme of Masonry no less than of Milton, as it is also of all the ancient systems of the Mysteries. The Masonic doctrine focuses and

[p. 62]

emphasizes the fact and the sense of this loss. Beneath a veil of allegory describing the intention to build a certain temple that could not be finished because of an untimely disaster, Masonry implies that Humanity is the real temple whose building became obstructed, and that we, who are both the craftsmen and the building materials of what was intended to be an unparalleled structure, are, owing to a certain unhappy event, living here in this world in conditions where the genuine and full secrets of our nature are, for the time being, lost to us; where the full powers of the soul of man are curtailed by the limitations of physical life; and where, during our apprenticeship of probation and discipline, we have to put up with the substituted knowledge derivable through our limited and very fallible senses.

But, whilst Masonry emphasizes this great truth, it indicates also--and this is its great virtue and real purpose--the method by which we may regain that which is lost to us. It holds out the great promise that, with divine assistance and by our own industry, the genuine realities of which we at present possess but the imperfect shadows shall be restored to us, and that patience and perseverance will eventually entitle every worthy man to a participation in them. This large subject is mirrored in miniature in the Craft ceremonial. The East of the Lodge is the symbolic centre; the source of all light; the place of the throne of the Master of all life. The West, the place of the disappearing sun, is this world of imperfection and darkness from which the divine spiritual light is in large measure withdrawn and

[p. 63]

only shines by reflection. The ceremonies through which the candidate passes are symbolic of the stages of progress that every man--whether a formal member of the Craft or not--may make by way of self-purification and self-building, until he at length lies dead to his present natural self, and is raised out of a state of imperfection and brought once more into perfect union with the Lord of life and glory into whose image he has thus become shaped and conformed.

 

It is in this large sense, then, that Masonry may become for us--as indeed it was intended to become by those who instituted our present speculative system--a working philosophy for those brought within its influence. It supplies a need to those who are earnestly enquiring into the purpose and destiny of human life. It is a means of initiating into reliable knowledge those who feel that their knowledge of life and their path of life have hitherto been but a series of irregular steps made at haphazard and under hoodwinked conditions as to whither they are going. Not without good reason does our catechism assert that Masonry contains "many and invaluable secrets." But these of course are not the formal and symbolic signs, tokens and words communicated ceremonially to candidates; they are rather those secrets which we instinctively keep locked up in the recesses and safe repository of our hearts; secrets of the deep and hidden things of the soul, about which we do not often talk, and which, by a natural instinct, we are not in the habit of communicating to any but such of our brethren and fellows as share with us a common and a sympathetic

[p. 64]

interest in the deeper problems and mysteries of life.

I have said already that Masonry is a modern perpetuation of great systems of initiation that have existed for the spiritual instruction of men in all parts of the world since the beginning of time. The reason for their existence has been the obvious one, resulting from the cardinal truth already alluded to, that man in his present natural state is inherently and radically imperfect; that sooner or later he becomes conscious of a sense of loss and deprivation and feels an imperative need of learning how to repair that loss. The great world-religions have been ordained to teach in their respective manners the same truths as the Mystery systems have taught. Their teaching has always been twofold. There has always existed an external, elementary, popular doctrine which has served for the instruction of the masses who are insufficiently prepared for deeper teaching; and concurrently therewith there has been an interior, advanced doctrine, a more secret knowledge, which has been reserved for riper minds and into which only proficient and properly prepared candidates, who voluntarily sought to participate in it, were initiated. Whether in ancient India, Egypt, Greece, Italy or Mexico, or among the Druids of Europe, temples of initiation have ever existed for those who felt the inward call to come apart from the multitude and to dedicate themselves to a long discipline of body and mind with a view to acquiring the secret knowledge and developing the spiritual faculties by means of experimental processes of initiation of which our present ceremonies are the faint echo. It is far

[p. 65]

beyond my present scope to describe any of these great systems or the methods of initiation they employed. But in regard to them I will ask you to accept my statement upon two points: (1) that although these great schools of the Mysteries have long dropped out of the public mind, they, or the doctrine they taught, have never ceased to exist; the enmity of official ecclesiasticism and the tendencies of a materialistic and commercial age have caused them to subside into extreme secrecy and concealment, but their initiates have never been absent from the world; and (2) that it was through the activity and foresight of some of these advanced initiates that our present system of speculative Masonry is due. You must not imply from this that modern Masonry is by any means a full or adequate presentation of these older and larger systems. It is but their pale and elementary shadow. But such as they are, and so far as they do go, our rituals and doctrine are an authentic embodiment of a secret doctrine and a secret process that have always existed for the enlightenment of such aspirants as, putting their trust in God (as our present candidates are made to say), have knocked at the door of certain secret sanctuaries in the confidence that that door would open and that they would find in due course that for which they were seeking. Those who instituted modern speculative Masonry some 250 years ago took certain materials lying ready to hand. They took, that is, the elementary rites and symbols pertaining to mediaeval operative guilds of stone-masons and transformed them into a system of religio-philosophic

[p. 66]

doctrine. Thenceforward, from being related to the trade which deals in stones and bricks, the intention of Masonry was to deal solely and simply with the greater science of soul-building; and, save for retaining certain analogies which the art of the practical stone-mason provided, thenceforward it became dedicated to purposes that are wholly spiritual, religious and philosophic.

Perhaps the chief evidence of the transformation thus effected was the incorporation of the central legend and traditional history comprised in our Third Degree. Obviously that legend can have had no relation to, or practical bearing upon, the operative builders' trade. I will ask you to reflect that no building of stone, no temple or other edifice capable of being built with hands, has remained unfinished through the death of any professional architect such as Hiram Abiff is popularly supposed to have been. The principles of architecture, the genuine secrets of the building trade, are not and never have been lost; they are thoroughly well known, and the absurdity is manifest of supposing that Masons of any kind are waiting for time or circumstances to restore any lost knowledge as to the manner in which temporal buildings ought to be constructed. We know how to erect buildings to-day quite as well as our Hebrew forefathers did who built the famous temple at Jerusalem, and indeed a well-known architect has stated that most of our London churches are, both for size and ornamentation, far larger and more splendid than that temple ever was. Our duty then is to look behind the literal story; to pierce the veil of allegory contained in

[p. 67]

the great legend and to grasp the significance of its true purport. That which is lost is to be found, we are told, with the Centre. But if we enquire what a Centre is, the average Mason will give you nothing more than the official, enigmatic and not very luminous answer that it is a point within a circle from which every part of the circumference is equidistant. But what circle? and what circumference?, for there are no such things as centres or circles in respect of ordinary buildings or architecture. And here the average Mason is at an utter loss to explain. Press him further, "Why with the Centre?" and again he can only give you the elusive and perplexing answer "Because that is a point from which a Master Mason cannot err," and you are no wiser.

Brethren, it is just this elusiveness, these intentional enigmas, this purposed puzzle-language, that are intended to put us on the scent of something deeper than the words themselves convey, and if we fail to find, to realize and to act upon, the intention of what is veiled behind the letter of the rituals, we can scarcely claim to understand our own doctrine; we can scarcely claim to have been regularly initiated, passed and raised in the higher sense of those expressions, whatever ceremonies we have formally passed through. "The letter killeth, the spirit giveth life." Let us enquire what the spirit of this puzzle-language is.

The method of all great religious and initiatory systems has been to teach their doctrine in the form of myth, legend or allegory. As our first tracing-board lecture says, "The philosophers,

[p. 68]

unwilling to expose their mysteries to vulgar eyes, concealed their tenets and principles of philosophy under hieroglyphical figures," and our traditional history is one of these hieroglyphical figures. Now the literally-minded never see behind the letter of the allegory. The truly initiated mind discerns the allegory's spiritual value. In fact, part of the purpose of all initiation was, and still is, to educate the mind in penetrating the outward shell of all phenomena, and the value of initiation depends upon the way in which the inward truths are allowed to influence our thought and lives and to awaken in us still deeper powers of consciousness.

The legend of the Third Degree, then, in which the essence of Masonic doctrine lies, was brought into our system by some advanced minds who derived their knowledge from other and concealed sources. The legend is an adaptation of a very old one and existed in various forms long before its association with modern Masonry. In the guise of a story about the building of a temple by King Solomon at Jerusalem, they were promulgating the truth which I have alluded to before and which is generally known as the Fall of Man. As our legend runs, upon the literal side of it, it was the purpose of a great king to erect a superb structure. He was assisted in that work by another king who supplied the building materials, by a skilful artificer whose business was to put these together according to a pre-ordained plan, and by large companies of craftsmen and labourers. But in the course of the work an evil conspiracy arose, resulting in the destruction of the chief artificer and preventing the

[p. 69]

completion of the building, which remains unfinished, therefore, to this day.

 

Now I will ask you to observe that this legend cannot refer to any historical building built in the old metropolis of Palestine. If we refer to the Bible as an authority you will find that that temple was completed; it was afterwards destroyed, rebuilt and destroyed again on more than one occasion. Moreover, the biblical accounts make no reference whatever to the conspiracy, or to the death of Hiram. On the other hand they state expressly that Hiram "made an end of building" the temple; that it was finished and completed in every particular. It is very clear then that we must keep the two subjects entirely separate in our minds; and recognize that the Masonic story deals with something quite distinct from the biblical story. What temple then is referred to? The temple, brethren, that is still incomplete and unfinished is none that can be built with hands. It is that temple of which all material edifices are but the types and symbols: it is the temple of the collective body of humanity itself; of which the great initiate St. Paul said "Know ye not that ye are the temple of God?" A perfect humanity was the great Temple which, in the counsels of the Most High, was intended to be reared in the mystical Holy City, of which the local Jerusalem was the type. The three great Master-builders, Solomon and the two Hirams, are a triad corresponding after a manner with the Holy Trinity of the Christian religion; Hiram Abiff being the chief architect, he "by whom all things were made" and "in whom (as St. Paul said, using

[p. 70]

[paragraph continues] Masonic language) the whole building fitly framed together groweth unto a holy temple in the Lord." The material of this mystical temple was the souls of men, at once the living stones, the fellow craftsmen and collaborators with the divine purpose.

But in the course of the construction of this ideal temple, something happened that wrecked the scheme and delayed the fulfilment indefinitely. This was the Fall of Man; the conspiracy of the craftsmen. Turn to the book of Genesis, you will find the same subject related in the allegory of Adam and Eve. They were intended, as you know, for perfection and happiness, but their Creator's project became nullified by their disobedience to certain conditions imposed upon them. I will ask you to observe that their offence was precisely that committed by our Masonic conspirators. They had been forbidden to eat of the Tree of Knowledge; or, in Masonic language, they were under obligation "not to attempt to extort the secrets of a superior degree" which they had not attained. Now the Hebrew word Hiram means Guru, teacher of "supreme knowledge," divine light and wisdom, and the liberty that comes therewith. But this knowledge is only for the perfected man. It is that knowledge that Hiram said was "known to but three in the world," i.e., known only in the counsels of the Divine Trinity, but it is knowledge that with patience and perseverance every Mason, every child of the Creator, "may in due time become entitled to a participation in." But just as Adam and Eve's attempt to obtain illicit knowledge caused their expulsion from Eden and defeated

[p. 71]

the divine purpose until they and their posterity should regain the Paradise they had lost, so also the completion of the great mystical Temple was prevented for the time being by the conspirators' attempt to extort from Hiram the Master's secrets, and its construction is delayed until time and circumstances--God's time, and the circumstances we create for ourselves--restore to us the lost and genuine secrets of our nature and of the divine purpose in us.

The tragedy of Hiram Abiff, then, is not the record of any vulgar, brutal murder of an individual man. It is a parable of cosmic and universal loss; an allegory of the breakdown of a divine scheme. We are dealing with no calamity that occurred during the erection of a building in an eastern city, but with a moral disaster to universal humanity. Hiram is slain; in other words, the faculty of enlightened wisdom has been cut off from us. Owing to that disaster mankind is here to-day in this world of imperfect knowledge, of limited faculties, of chequered happiness, of perpetual toil, of death and frequent bitterness and pain; our life here is (to use a poet's words):--

"An ever-moaning battle in the mist,
  Death in all life and lying in all love;
  The meanest having power upon the highest,
  And the high purpose broken by the worm."

[paragraph continues] The temple of human nature is unfinished and we know not how to complete it. The want of plans and designs to regulate the disorders of individual and social life indicates to us all that some heavy calamity has befallen us as a race. The absence of a

[p. 72]

clear and guiding principle in the world's life reminds us of the utter confusion into which the absence of that Supreme Wisdom, which is personified as Hiram, has thrown us all, and causes every reflective mind to attribute to some fatal catastrophe his mysterious disappearance. We all long for that light and wisdom which have become lost to us. Like the craftsmen in search of the body, we go our different ways in search of what is lost. Many of us make no discovery of importance throughout the length of our days. We seek it in pleasure, in work, in all the varied occupations and diversions of our lives; we seek it in intellectual pursuits, in religion, in Masonry, and those who search farthest and deepest are those who become most conscious of the loss and who are compelled to cry "Machabone! Macbenah! the Master is smitten," or, as the Christian Scriptures word it, "They have taken away my Lord, and I know not where they have laid him."

Hiram Abiff is slain. The high light and wisdom ordained to guide and enlighten humanity are wanting to us. The full blaze of light and perfect knowledge that were to be ours are vanished from the race, but in the Divine Providence there still remains to us a glimmering light in the East. In a dark world, from which as it were the sun has disappeared, we have still our five senses and our rational faculties to work with, and these provide us with the substituted secrets that must distinguish us before we regain the genuine ones.

Where is Hiram buried? We are taught that the Wisdom of the Most High--personified as King

[p. 73]

[paragraph continues] Solomon--ordered him to be interred in a fitting sepulchre outside the Holy City, "in a grave from the centre 3 feet between N. and S., 3 feet between E. and W., and 5 feet or more perpendicular." Where, Brethren, do you imagine that grave to be? Can you locate it by following these minute details of its situation? Probably you have never thought of the matter as other than an ordinary burial outside the walls of a geographical Jerusalem. But the grave of Hiram is ourselves. Each of us is the sepulchre in which the smitten Master is interred. If we know it not it is a further sign of our benightedness. At the centre of ourselves, deeper than any dissecting-knife can reach or than any physical investigation can fathom, lies buried the "vital and immortal principle," the "glimmering ray" that affiliates us to the Divine Centre of all life, and that is never wholly extinguished however evil or imperfect our lives may be. We are the grave of the Master. The lost guiding light is buried at the centre of ourselves. High as your hand may reach upwards or downwards from the centre of your own body--i.e., 3 feet between N. and S. far as it can reach to right or left of the middle of your person--i.e., 3 feet between W. and E.--and 5 feet or more perpendicular--the height of the human body--these are the indications by which our cryptic ritual describes the tomb of Hiram Abiff at the centre of ourselves. He is buried "outside the Holy City," in the same sense that the posterity of Adam have all been placed outside the walls of Paradise, for, "nothing unclean can enter into the holy

[p. 74]

place" which elsewhere in our Scriptures is called the Kingdom of Heaven.

What then is this "Centre," by reviving and using which we may hope to regain the secrets of our lost nature? We may reason from analogies. As the Divine Life and Will is the centre of the whole universe and controls it; as the sun is the centre and life-giver of our solar system and controls and feeds with life the planets circling round it, so at the secret centre of individual human life exists a vital, immortal principle, the spirit and the spiritual will of man. This is the faculty, by using which (when we have found it) we can never err. It is a point within the circle of our own nature and, living as we do in this physical world, the circle of our existence is bounded by two grand parallel lines; "one representing Moses; the other King Solomon," that is to say, law and wisdom; the divine ordinances regulating the universe on the one hand; the divine "wisdom and mercy that follow us all the days of our life" on the other. Very truly then the Mason who keeps himself thus circumscribed cannot err.

Masonry, then, is a system of religious philosophy in that it provides us with a doctrine of the universe and of our place in it. It indicates whence we are come and whither we may return. It has two purposes. Its first purpose is to show that man has fallen away from a high and holy centre to the circumference or externalized condition in which we now live; to indicate that those who so desire may regain that centre by finding the centre in ourselves, for, since Deity is as a circle whose centre is everywhere,

[p. 75]

it follows that a divine centre, a "vital and immortal principle," exists within ourselves by developing which we may hope to regain our lost and primal stature. The second purpose of the Craft doctrine is to declare the way by which that centre may be found within ourselves, and this teaching is embodied in the discipline and ordeals delineated in the three degrees. The Masonic doctrine of the Centre--or, in other words, the Christian axiom that "the Kingdom of Heaven is within you"--is nowhere better stated than by the poet Browning:

"Truth is within ourselves. It takes no rise
  From outward things, whate'er you may believe.
  There is an inmost centre in ourselves
  Where truth abides in fullness; and to know
  Rather consists in finding out a way
  Whence the imprisoned splendour may escape
  Than by effecting entrance for a light
  Supposed to be without."

[paragraph continues] Brethren, may we all come to the knowledge how to "open the Lodge upon the centre" of ourselves and so realize in our own conscious experience the finding of the "imprisoned splendour" hidden in the depths of our being, whose rising within ourselves will bring us peace and salvation. How then does the Craft doctrine prescribe for the liberation of this imprisoned centre? Its first injunctions are those of our first degree. There must be purity of thought and purpose. I need scarcely remind you that the word candidate derives from the Latin candidus, white (in the sense of purity), or that our postulants before entering the Lodge leave behind them in the precincts the garments that belong to

[p. 76]

the fashion of the outer world whose ideals they are desirous of relinquishing, and enter the Lodge clad in white as emblematic of the blamelessness of their thought and the purification of their lives. As this symbolic white clothing is worn during each of the three degrees, it is as though the seeker after the high light of the Centre must always come uttering the triple ascription, "Holy, Holy, Holy," as the token of the threefold purity of body, soul and spirit, which is essential to the achievement of his quest. He has left all money and metals behind him, for the gross things of this world are superfluous in the world that lies within; whilst if any dross of thought or imperfections of character remain in him, he will find the impossibility of attaining to the consciousness of his highest self; he will learn that he must renounce them and begin again, and that his attempt at real initiation must be repeated.

He must be animated by a spirit of universal sympathy. Financial doles and practical relief to the pecuniarily poor and distressed are admirable practices as far as they go, but they by no means exhaust the meaning of the term charity as Masonry intends it. The payment of a few guineas to philanthropic institutions is scarcely a fulfilment of St. Paul's great definition of charity so often read in our Lodges, by exercising which we are wont to say that a Mason "attains the summit of his profession."

There is a far larger sense of Brotherhood than the limited conventional one obtaining among those who are members of a common association. There is that deep sense in which a man feels himself not only in fraternity with his fellow-men, whether

[p. 77]

masonically his brethren or not, but realizes himself brother to all that is, part of the universal life that thrills through all things. A great illuminate, St. Francis of Assisi, expressed what I refer to when he wrote in his famous canticle, of his brothers the sun and the wind; his sisters the moon and the sea; his brethren the animals and the birds; as being all parts of a common life, all constituents in the scheme of the Great Architect for the restoration of the Temple of Creation and its dedication to His service, and as all worthy of a common love upon our part, even as they are the subject of a common solicitude upon His.

And passing from these primary qualifications we proceed to what is signified by our second degree, wherein is inculcated the analysis and cultivation of the mental and rational faculties; the study of the secrets of the marvellous, complex, psychical nature of man; the relation of these with the still higher and spiritual part of him which, in turn, he may learn to trace "even to the throne of God Himself" with which he is affiliated at the root essence of his being. These studies, brethren, so lightly touched upon in our passing-ceremony, so glibly referred to as we recite our ritual, when undertaken with the seriousness that attached to them in the old mystery-systems are not without just reason described in our own words as "serious, solemn and awful." The depths of human nature and self-knowledge, the hidden mysteries of the soul of man are not, as real initiates well know, probed into with impunity except by the "properly prepared." The man who does so has, as it were, a cable-tow around

[p. 78]

his neck; because when once stirred by a genuine desire for the higher knowledge that real initiation is intended to confer, he can never turn back on what he learns thereof without committing moral suicide; he can never be again the same man he was before he gained a glimpse of the hidden mysteries of life. And as the Angel stood with a flaming sword at the entrance of Eden to guard the way to the Tree of Life, so will the man whose initiation is not a conventional one find himself threatened at the door of the higher knowledge by opposing invisible forces if he rashly rushes forward in a state of moral unfitness into the deep secrets of the Centre. Better remain ignorant than embark upon this unknown sea unwisely and without being properly prepared and in possession of the proper passports.

And eventually the aspirant, after these preliminary disciplines, has to learn the great truth embodied in the third degree; that he who would be raised to perfection and regain what he has long realized has been lost to himself, may do so only by utter self-abnegation, by a dying to all that to the eyes and the reason of the uninitiated outer world is precious and desirable. The third degree, brethren, is an exposition in dramatic ceremonial of the text "Whoso would save his life must lose it." Beneath the allegory of the death of the Master--and remember that it is allegory--is expressed the universal truth that mystical death must precede mystical rebirth. "Know ye not that ye must be born again?" "Unless a grain of corn fall into the ground and die, it abideth alone; if it die it bringeth

[p. 79]

forth much fruit." And it is only thus that all Master-Masons can be raised from a figurative (not a physical) death to a regenerated state and to the full stature of human nature.

The path of true initiation into fullness of life by way of a figurative death to one's lower self is the path called in the Scriptures the narrow way, of which it is also said that few there be who find it. It is the narrow path between the Pillars, for Boaz and Jachin stand impliedly at the entrance of every Masonic Temple and between them we pass each time we enter the Lodge. Very great prominence is accorded these pillars in the ritual, but very little explanation of their import is given, and it is desirable to know something of their great significance. To deal with them at all fully would require an entire lecture upon this one subject, and even then there would have to remain unsaid in regard to these great symbols much that is unsuited to treatment in a general lecture.

The pillars form, and have always formed, a prominent feature in the temples of all great systems of religion and initiation, whether Masonic or not. They have been incorporated into Christian architecture. If you recall the construction of York Minster or Westminster Abbey, you will recognize the pillars in the two great towers flanking the main entrance to those cathedrals at the west end of the structure. Non-Masons, therefore, enter these temples, as we do, between the pillars in the West; they look through them along the straight path that leads to the high altar, just as the Mason's symbolic passage is also from the West to the throne in the

[p. 80]

[paragraph continues] East. That path is, as it were, the straight path of life, beginning in this outer world and terminating at the throne, or altar, in the East. Many centuries before our Bible was written or the temple of Solomon described in the Books of Kings and Chronicles was thought of, the two pillars were used in the great temples of the Mysteries in Egypt, and one of the great annual public festivals was that of the setting up of the pillars. What, then, did they signify? I can deal with the subject but very superficially here. In one of their aspects they stand for what is known in Eastern philosophy as the "pairs of opposites." Everything in nature is dual and can only be known in contrast with its opposite, whilst the two in combination produce a metaphysical third which is their synthesis and perfect balance. Thus we have good and evil; light and darkness (and one of the pillars was always white and the other black); active and passive; positive and negative; yes and no; outside and inside; man and woman. Neither of these is complete without the other; taken together they form stability. Morning and evening unite to form the complete day. Man is proverbially imperfect without his "better half," woman; the two marry to impart strength to each other and to establish their common house. Physical science shows all matter to be composed of positive and negative electric forces in perfect balance and that things would disintegrate and disappear if they did not stand firm in perfect union. Every drop of healthy blood in our bodies is a combination of red and white corpuscles, by the due balance of

[p. 81]

which we are established in strength and health, whilst lack of balance is attended by disease. The pillars therefore typify, in one of their aspects, perfect integrity of body and soul such as are essential to achieving spiritual perfection. In the terms of ancient philosophy all created things are composed of fire and water; fire being their spiritual and water their material element, and so the pillars represented also these universal properties. In one of the Apocryphal Scriptures (2 Esdras, 7; 7-8), the path to true wisdom and life is spoken of as an entrance between a fire on the right hand and a deep water on the left, and so narrow and painful that only one man may go through it at once. This is in allusion to the narrow and painful path of real initiation of which our entrance into the Lodge between the pillars is a symbol.

Now all great symbols are shadowed forth in the person of man himself. The human organism is the true Lodge that must be opened and wherein the great Mysteries are to be found, and our Lodge-rooms are so built and furnished as to typify the human organism. The lower and physical part of us is animal and earthy, and rests, like the base of Jacob's ladder, upon the earth; whilst our higher portion is spiritual and reaches to the heavens. These two portions of ourselves are in perpetual conflict, the spiritual and the carnal ever warring against one another; and he alone is the wise man who has learned to effect a perfect balance between them and to establish himself in strength so that his own inward house stands firm against all weakness and temptation. And in still another sense the two pillars may

[p. 82]

be seen exemplified in the human body. There are our two legs, upon both of which we must stand firm to acquire a perfect physical balance. And having discerned this simple truth, and having seen that the path of true initiation, which is one of spiritual rebirth, is an arduous and painful progress to him who undertakes it, let me ask you to consider in all sacredness another physical phenomenon, the great mystery of which we perhaps think little of by reason of its frequency and of our familiarity with it. I refer to the incident--the great mystery, I might say--of child-birth. Brethren, every child born into this world, coming into this life as into a great house of initiation, trial and discipline, passes, amid pain and travail, through a strait and narrow way and between the two pillars that support the temple of its mother's body. And thus in the commonplaces of life, in which for those who have clean hearts there is nothing common or unclean but everything is sacred and symbolic, the act of physical birth is an image and a foreshadowing of that mystical rebirth and of that passing through a strait gate and a narrow way in a deeper sense, without which it is written that a man shall not enter into the Kingdom of Heaven.

The regenerated man, the man who not merely in ceremonial form but in vital experience, has passed through the phases of which the Masonic degrees are the faint symbol, is alone worthy of the title of Master-Mason in the building of the Temple that is not made with hands but that is being built invisibly out of the souls of just men made perfect. Not only in this world is this temple being built;

[p. 83]

only the foundations of the intended structure are perceptible here. The Craft contemplates other and loftier planes of life, other storeys of the vast structure than this we live and work in. Just as our Craft organization has its higher assemblies and councils in the form of the Provincial and the Grand Lodges that regulate and minister to the need of the Lodges of common craftsmen, so in the mighty system of the universal structure there are grades of higher life, hierarchies of celestial beings working and ministering in the loftier portions of the building, beyond our present ken. And as here at the head of our limited and temporal brotherhood there rules a Grand Master, so too over the cosmic system there presides the Great Architect and Most Worshipful Grand Master of all, whose officers are holy Angels; and the recognition of this truth may tend to consecrate us in the discharge of the little symbolic part we severally perform in the system which is the image of the great scheme.

The world at large, Brethren, is as it were, but one great Lodge and place of initiation, of which our Masonic Lodges are the little mirrors. Mother-Earth is also the Mother-Lodge of us all. As its vast work goes on, souls are ever descending into it and souls are being called out of it at the knocks of some great unseen Warden of life and death, who calls them here to labour and summons them hence for refreshment. After the Lodge, the festive board; after the labour of this world, the repast and refreshment of the heavenly places. And thus, although our after-proceedings have no formal place in the Masonic system, any more than the after-life is in formal

[p. 84]

connection with us whilst our sphere of activity is in this present world, still it plays a striking and appropriate part calculated to awaken us to the deep significance of our customary conviviality. Upon such occasions we are wont to drink the toast of "the King and the Craft," remembering as loyal subjects and loving brethren our earthly sovereign and our Masonic comrades throughout the world. But here again I would ask every Master who gives and every brother who drinks this toast, to lift his thoughts to a greater King and to a larger craft than our limited and symbolic fraternity. I would remind you how in the Christian Mysteries there was another Master whom unconsciously we imitate, who also after supper took the cup and when he had given thanks to the King of kings, pledged himself, as it were, to that larger Craft which is co-extensive with humanity itself; directing them in this manner to show forth symbolically a certain great mystery until his coming again. But this, Brethren, is none other than what is implied in our own Masonic words when we also are directed to use certain substituted secrets until time and circumstances shall restore to us the genuine ones.

In submitting, then, these thoughts to you, it may be claimed that Masonry offers to those capable of appreciating it a working philosophy and a practical rule of life. It discloses to us the scheme of the universe--a scheme once shattered and arrested, but left in the hands of humanity to restore. It indicates our place, our purpose and our destiny in that universe. It is as a great house of instruction and initiation into the Mysteries of a larger and fuller

[p. 85]

life than the unenlightened worldling is as yet ripe for appreciating. Let us, therefore, value and endeavour fully to appreciate its mysteries. Let us also be careful not to cheapen the Order by failing to realize its meaning and by admitting to its ranks those who are unready or unfitted to understand its import. I said at the outset of this lecture that some Masons are beginning to awake to a larger consciousness of the true meaning and purport of our Craft. I say now at the end, Brethren! lift up your hearts; throw wide open the shutters of your minds and imaginations. Learn to see in Masonry something more than a parochial system enjoining elementary morality, performing perfunctory and meaningless rites, and serving as an agreeable accessory to social life. But look to find in it a living philosophy, a vital guide upon those matters which of all others are the most sacred and the most urgent to our ultimate well-being. Realize that its secrets which are "many and invaluable" are not upon the surface; that they are not those of the tongue, but of the heart; and that its mysteries are those eternal ones that treat of the spirit rather than of the body of man. And with this knowledge clothe yourselves and enter the Lodge--not merely the Lodge-room of our symbolic Craft, but the larger Lodge of life, wherein, silently and without the sound of metal tool, is proceeding the perpetual work of rebuilding the unfinished and invisible Temple of which the mystical stones and timber are the souls of men. In that rebuilding, men and women are taking part who, whilst formally not members of our Craft, are

[p. 86]

still unconsciously Masons in the best of senses. For whosoever is carefully and deliberately "squaring his stone" is fitting himself for his place in the "intended structure" which gradually is being "put together with exact nicety" and which, though erected by ourselves, one day will become manifest to our clearer vision and will appear "more like the work of the Great Architect of the Universe than that of human hands." Upon us Masons therefore, who have the advantage of a regular and organized system which provides and inculcates for us an outline of the great truths that we have been considering and that always in the world have been regarded as secret, as sacred, and as vital, there rests the responsibility attaching to our privilege, and it must be our aim to endeavour to enter into the full heritage of understanding and practising the system to which we belong.

     
The Meaning of Masonry, by W.L. Wilmshurst, [1922], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 87]

  

Chapter III

  

FURTHER NOTES ON CRAFT SYMBOLISM.

"There is no darkness but ignorance." (Shakespeare).

"Lighten our darkness, we beseech Thee, and defend us from all perils and dangers of this night."
 (Anglican Liturgy).

"Belov'd All-Father, and all you gods that haunt this place, grant me to be beautiful in the inner man, and all I have of outer things to be one with those within! May I count only the wise man rich, and may my store of gold be such as none but the good can bear. Anything more? That prayer, I think, is enough for me!" (Prayer of Socrates).

IN the Lecture on the First Degree tracing-board Masonry is spoken of as "an art founded on the principles of Geometry," and also as being "a science dealing with the cultivation and improvement of the human mind." Its usages and customs are also there said to have derived "from the ancient Egyptians whose philosophers, unwilling to expose their mysteries to vulgar eyes, conceal their principles and philosophy under signs and symbols," which are still perpetuated in the Masonic Order.

Something of these signs and symbols, as well as the purpose of the Masonic system as a whole, has already been outlined in previous papers. In the present notes it is proposed to extend the consideration of the subject in greater detail.

The Instruction Lectures associated with each Degree of the Craft purport to expound the doctrine of the system and interpret the symbols and rituals. But these Lectures themselves stand in similar need

[p. 88]

of interpretation. Indeed, they are contrived with very great cunning and concealment. Their compilers were confronted with the dual task of giving a faithful, if partial, expression of esoteric doctrine and at the same time of so masking it that its full sense would not be understood without some effort or enlightenment, and should convey little or nothing at all to those unworthy of or unripe for the "gnosis" or wisdom-teaching. They discharged that task with signal success and in a way which provokes admiration from those who can appreciate it for their profound knowledge of, and insight into, the science of self-knowledge and regeneration. They were obviously Initiates of an advanced type, well versed in the secret tradition and philosophy of the Mystery systems of the past and acutely perceptive of the deeper and mystical sense of the Holy Scriptures to which they constantly make luminous reference.

To deal with these explanatory Lectures in complete detail would involve a very long task. We will, however, proceed to speak of some of the more prominent matters with which they deal and so elaborate the subject-matter of our previous papers.

Attention must first be called to the term "Geometry," the art upon which the entire system is stated to be founded. To the ordinary man Geometry means nothing more than the branch of mathematics associated with the problems of Euclid, a subject obviously having no relation to Masonic ceremonial and ideals. Another explanation of the term must therefore be looked for.

Now Geometry was one of the "seven noble arts

[p. 89]

and sciences" of ancient philosophy. It means literally the science of earth-measurement. But the "earth" of the ancients did not mean, as it does to us, this physical planet. It meant the primordial substance, or undifferentiated soul-stuff out of which we human beings have been created, the "mother-earth" from which we have all sprung and to which we must all undoubtedly return. Man was made, the Scriptures teach, out of the dust of the ground, and it is that ground, that earth or fundamental substance of his being, which requires to be "measured" in the sense of investigating and understanding its nature and properties. No competent builder erects a structure without first satisfying himself about the nature of the materials with which he proposes to build, and in the speculative or spiritual and "royal" art of Masonry no Mason can properly build the temple of his own soul without first understanding the nature of the raw material he has to work upon.

Geometry, therefore, is synonymous with self-knowledge, the understanding of the basic substance of our being, its properties and potentialities. Over the ancient temples of initiation was inscribed the sentence "Know thyself and thou shalt know the universe and God," a phrase which implies in the first place that the uninitiated man is without knowledge of himself, and in the second place that when he attains that knowledge he will realize himself to be no longer the separate distinctified individual he now supposes himself to be, but to be a microcosm or summary of all that is and to be identified with the Being of God.

[p. 90]

Masonry is the science of the attainment of that supreme knowledge and is, therefore, rightly said to be founded on the principles of Geometry as thus defined.

 

But do not let it be supposed that the physical matter of which our mortal bodies are composed is the "earth" referred to. That is but corruptible impermanent stuff which merely forms a temporary encasement of the imperishable true "earth" or substance of our souls, and enables them to enter into sense-relations with the physical world. The distinction must be clearly grasped and held in mind, for Masonry has to deal not so much with the transient outward body as with the eternal inward being of man, although the outward body is temporarily involved with the latter. It is the immortal soul of man which is the ruined temple and needs to be rebuilt upon the principles of spiritual science. The mortal body of it, with its unruly wills and affections, stands in the way of that achievement. It is the rubble which needs to be cleared before the new foundations can be set and the new structure reared. Yet even rubble can be made to serve useful purposes and be rearranged and worked into the new erection, and accordingly man's outer temporal nature can be disciplined and utilized in the reconstruction of himself. But in order to effect this reconstruction he must first have a full understanding of the material he has to work with and to work upon. For this purpose he must be made acquainted with what is called "the form of the Lodge."

[p. 91]

  

THE FORM OF THE LODGE

This is officially described as "an oblong square; in length between East and West, in breadth between North and South, in depth from the surface of the earth to its centre, and even as high as the heavens."

This is interpretable as alluding to the human individual. Man himself is a Lodge. And just as the Masonic Lodge is "an assemblage of brethren and fellows met to expatiate upon the mysteries of the Craft," so individual man is a composite being made up of various properties and faculties assembled together in him with a view to their harmonious interaction and working out the purpose of life. It must always be remembered that everything in Masonry is figurative of man and his human constitution and spiritual evolution. Accordingly, the Masonic Lodge is sacramental of the individual Mason as he is when he seeks admission to a Lodge. A man's first entry into a Lodge is symbolical of his first entry upon the science of knowing himself.

His organism is symbolised by a four-square or four-sided building. This is in accordance with the very ancient philosophical doctrine that four is the arithmetical symbol of everything which has manifested or physical form. Spirit, which is unmanifest and not physical, is expressed by the number three and the triangle. But Spirit which has so far projected itself as to become objective and wear a material form or body, is denoted by the number four and the quadrangle or square. Hence the Hebrew name of Deity, as known and worshipped in this outer world, was the great

[p. 92]

unspeakable name of four letters or Tetragrammaton, whilst the cardinal points of space are also four, and every manifested thing is a compound of the four basic metaphysical elements called by the ancients fire, water, air and earth. The four-sidedness of the Lodge, therefore, is also a reminder that the human organism is compounded of those four elements in balanced proportions. "Water" represents the psychic nature; "Air," the mentality; "Fire," the will and nervous force; whilst "Earth" is the condensation in which the other three become stabilized and encased.

But it is an oblongated (or duplicated) square, because man's organism does not consist of his physical body alone. The physical body has its "double" or ethereal counterpart in the astral body, which is an extension of the physical nature and a compound of the same four elements in an impalpable and more tenuous form. The oblong spatial form of the Lodge must therefore be considered as referable to the physical and ethereal nature of man in the conjunction in which they in fact consist in each of us.

The four sides of the Lodge have a further significance. The East of the Lodge represents man's spirituality, his highest and most spiritual mode of consciousness, which in most men is very little developed, if at all, but is still latent and slumbering and becomes active only in moments of stress or deep emotion. The West (or polar opposite of the East) represents his normal rational understanding, the consciousness he employs in temporal every-day affairs, his material-mindedness or, as we

[p. 93]

might say, his "common sense." Midway between these East and West extremes is the South, the halfway house and meeting-place of the spiritual intuition and the rational understanding; the point denoting abstract intellectuality and our intellectual power develops to its highest, just as the sun attains its meridian splendour in the South. The antipodes of this is the North, the sphere of benightedness and ignorance, referable to merely sense-reactions and impressions received by that lowest and least reliable mode of perception, our physical sense-nature.

Thus the four sides of the Lodge point to four different, yet progressive, modes of consciousness available to us. Sense-impression (North), reason (West), intellectual ideation (South), and spiritual intuition (East); making up our four possible ways of knowledge. Of these the ordinary man employs only the first two or perhaps three, in accordance with his development and education, and his outlook on life and knowledge of truth are correspondingly restricted and imperfect. Full and perfect knowledge is possible only when the deep-seeing vision and consciousness of man's spiritual principle have been awakened and superadded to his other cognitive faculties. This is possible only to the true Master, who has all four methods of knowledge at his disposal in perfect balance and adjusted like the four sides of the Lodge; and hence the place of the Master and Past-Masters being always in the East.

The "depth" of the Lodge ("from the surface of the earth to its centre") refers to the distance or

[p. 94]

difference of degree between the superficial consciousness of our earthly mentality and the supreme divine degree of consciousness resident at man's spiritual centre when he has become able to open his Lodge upon that centre and to function in and with it.

The "height" of the Lodge ("even as high as the heavens") implies that the range of consciousness possible to us, when we have developed our potentialities to the full, is infinite. Man who has sprung from the earth and developed through the lower kingdoms of nature to his present rational state, has yet to complete his evolution by becoming a god-like being and unifying his consciousness with the Omniscient--to promote which is and always has been the sole aim and purpose of all Initiation.

To scale this "height," to attain this expansion of consciousness, is achieved "by the use of a ladder of many rounds or staves, but of three principal ones, Faith, Hope and Charity," of which the greatest and most effectual is the last. That is to say, there are innumerable ways of developing one's consciousness to higher degrees, and in fact every common-place incident of daily experience may contribute to that end if it be rightly interpreted and its purpose in the general pattern of our life-scheme be discerned; yet even these should be subordinate to the three chief qualifications, namely, Faith in the possibility of attaining the end in view; Hope, or a persistent fervent desire for its fulfilment; and finally an unbounded Love which, seeking God in all men and all things, despite their outward appearances, and thinking no evil, gradually

[p. 95]

identifies the mind and nature of the aspirant with that ultimate Good upon which his thought, desire and gaze should be persistently directed.

It is important to note here that this enlargement of consciousness is in no way represented as being dependent upon intellectual attainments, learning or book-knowledge. These may be, and indeed are, lesser staves of the ladder of attainment; but they are not numbered among the principal ones. Compare St. Paul's words "Though I have all knowledge and have not love, I am nothing;" and those of a mediaeval mystic "By love He may be gotten and holden, but by wit and understanding never."

The Lodge is "supported by three grand pillars, Wisdom, Strength and Beauty." Again the references are not to the external meeting-place, but to a triplicity of properties resident in the individual soul, which will become increasingly manifest in the aspirant as he progresses and adapts himself to the Masonic discipline. As is written of the youthful Christian Master that "he increased in wisdom and stature and in favour with God and man," so will it also become true of the neophyte Mason who aspires to Mastership. He will become conscious of an increase of perceptive faculty and understanding; he will become aware of having tapped a previously unsuspected source of power, giving him enhanced mental strength and self-confidence; there will become observable in him developing graces of character, speech and conduct that were previously foreign to him.

The Floor, or groundwork of the Lodge, a

[p. 96]

chequer-work of black and white squares, denotes the dual quality of everything connected with terrestrial life and the physical groundwork of human nature--the mortal body and its appetites and affections. "The web of our life is a mingled yarn, good and ill together," wrote Shakespeare. Everything material is characterized by inextricably interblended good and evil, light and shade, joy and sorrow, positive and negative. What is good for me may be evil for you; pleasure is generated from pain and ultimately degenerates into pain again; what it is right to do at one moment may be wrong the next; I am intellectually exalted to-day and to-morrow correspondingly depressed and benighted. The dualism of these opposites governs us in everything, and experience of it is prescribed for us until such time as, having learned and outgrown its lesson, we are ready for advancement to a condition where we outgrow the sense of this chequer-work existence and those opposites cease to be perceived as opposites, but are realized as a unity or synthesis. To find that unity or synthesis is to know the peace which passes understanding--i.e. which surpasses our present experience, because in it the darkness and the light are both alike, and our present concepts of good and evil, joy and pain, are transcended and found sublimated in a condition combining both. And this lofty condition is represented by the indented or tesselated border skirting the black and white chequer-work, even as the Divine Presence and Providence surrounds and embraces our temporal organisms in which those opposites are inherent.

[p. 97]

Why is the chequer floor-work given such prominence in the Lodge-furniture? The answer is to be found in the statement in the Third Degree Ritual: "The square pavement is for the High Priest to walk upon." Now it is not merely the Jewish High Priest of centuries ago that is here referred to, but the individual member of the Craft. For every Mason is intended to be the High Priest of his own personal temple and to make of it a place where he and Deity may meet. By the mere fact of being in this dualistic world every living being, whether a Mason or not, walks upon the square pavement of mingled good and evil in every action of his life, so that the floor-cloth is the symbol of an elementary philosophical truth common to us all. But, for us, the words "walk upon" imply much more than that. They mean that he who aspires to be master of his fate and captain of his soul must walk upon these opposites in the sense of transcending and dominating them, of trampling upon his lower sensual nature and keeping it beneath his feet in subjection and control. He must become able to rise above the motley of good and evil, to be superior and indifferent to the ups and downs of fortune, the attractions and fears governing ordinary men and swaying their thoughts and actions this way or that. His object is the development of his innate spiritual potencies, and it is impossible that these should develop so long as he is over-ruled by his material tendencies and the fluctuating emotions of pleasure and pain that they give birth to. It is by rising superior to these and attaining serenity and mental equilibrium under any circumstances in

[p. 98]

which for the moment he may be placed, that a Mason truly "walks upon" the chequered groundwork of existence and the conflicting tendencies of his more material nature.

 

The Covering of the Lodge is shown in sharp contrast to its black and white flooring and is described as "a celestial canopy of divers colours, even the heavens."

If the flooring symbolizes man's earthy sensuous nature, the ceiling typifies his ethereal nature, his "heavens" and the properties resident therein. The one is the reverse and the opposite pole of the other. His material body is visible and densely composed. His ethereal surround, or "aura," is tenuous and invisible, (save to clairvoyant vision), and like the fragrance thrown off by a flower. Its existence will be doubted by those unprepared to accept what is not physically demonstrable, but the Masonic student, who will be called upon to accept many such truths provisionally until he knows them as certainties, should reflect (1) that he has entered the Craft with the professed object of receiving light upon the nature of his own being, (2) that the Order engages to assist him to that light in regard to matters of which he is admittedly ignorant, and that its teachings and symbols were devised by wise and competent instructors in such matters, and (3) that a humble, docile and receptive mental attitude towards those symbols and their meanings will better conduce to his advancement than a critical or hostile one.

[p. 99]

The fact that man throws off, or radiates from himself, an ethereal surround or "covering" is testified to by the aureoles and haloes shown in works of art about the persons of saintly characters. The unsaintly are not so distinctified, not because they are not so surrounded, but because in their case the "aura" exists as but an irregularly shaped and coloured cloud reflecting their normal undisciplined mentality and passional nature, as the rain-clouds reflect the sunlight in different tints. The "aura" of the man who has his mentality clean and his passions and emotions well in hand becomes a correspondingly orderly and shapely encasement of clearly defined form and iridescence, regularly striated like the colours of the spectrum or the rainbow. Biblically, this "aura" is described as a "coat of many colours" and as having characterized Joseph, the greatest of the sons of Jacob, in contrast with that patriarch's less morally and spiritually developed sons who were not distinctified by any such coat.

In Masonry the equivalent of the aureole is the symbolic clothing worn by Provincial and Grand Lodge Officers. This is of deep blue, heavily fringed with gold, in correspondence with the deep blue centre and luminous circumference of flame. "His ministers are flames of fire." Provincial and Grand Lodge Officers are drawn from those who are Past Masters in the Craft; that is, from those who theoretically have attained sanctity, regeneration and Mastership of themselves, and have become joined to the Grand Lodge above where they "shine as the stars."

[p. 100]

It follows from all this that the Mason who seriously yields himself to the discipline of the Order is not merely improving his character and chastening his thoughts and desires. He is at the same time unconsciously building up an inner ethereal body which will form his clothing, or covering, when his transitory outer body shall have passed away. "There are celestial bodies and bodies terrestrial . . . . . . . and as we have borne the image of the earthly we also shall bear the image of the heavenly." And the celestial body must be built up out of the sublimated properties of the terrestrial one. This is one of the secrets and mysteries of the process of regeneration and self-transmutation, to promote which the Craft was designed. This is the true temple-building that Masonry is concerned with. The Apron being the Masonic symbol of the bodily organism, changes and increasing elaborateness in it as the Mason advances to higher stages in the Craft symbolize (in theory) the actual development that is gradually taking place in his nature.

Moreover, as in the outer heavens of nature the sun, moon and stars exist and function, so in the personal heavens of man there operate metaphysical forces inherent in himself and described by the same terms. In the make-up of each of us exists a psychic magnetic field of various forces, determining our individual temperaments and tendencies and influencing our future. To those forces have also been given the names of "sun," "moon" and planets, and the science of their interaction and outworking was the ancient science of astronomy, or, as it is now more often called astrology, which

[p. 101]

is one of the liberal arts and sciences recommended to the study of every Mason and the pursuit of which belongs in particular to the Fellow-Craft stage.

  

THE POSITIONS OF THE OFFICERS OF THE LODGE.

The seven Officers--three principal and three subordinate ones, with an additional minor one serving as a connecting link with the outside world--represent seven aspects or faculties of consciousness psychologically interactive and co-ordinated into a unity so as to constitute a "just and perfect Lodge." As a man, any one of whose faculties is disordered or uncoordinated, is accounted insane, so a Lodge would be imperfect and incapacitated for effective work if its functional mechanism were incomplete.

Seven is universally the number of completeness The time-periods of creation were seven. The spectrum of light consists of seven colours; the musical scale of seven notes; our division of time is into weeks of seven days; our physiological changes run in cycles of seven years. Man himself is a seven-fold organism in correspondence with all these and the normal years of his life are seven multiplied by ten.

The "Master," or Chief Officer, in man is the spiritual principle in him, which is the apex and root of his being and to which all his subsidiary faculties should be subordinate and responsive. When the Master's gavel knocks, those of the Wardens at once repeat the knocks. When the Divine Principle in man speaks in the depth of his being, the remaining portions of his nature should reverberate

[p. 102]

in sympathy. Without the presence of this Divine Principle in him man would be less than human. Because of its presence in him he can become more than human. By cultivating his consciousness of it he may become unified with it in proportion as he denies and renounces everything in himself that is less than divine. It is the inextinguishable light of a Master Mason which, being immortal and eternal, continues to shine when everything temporal and mortal has disappeared.

The Senior Warden, whilst the Master's chief executive officer, is his antithesis and opposite pole. He personifies the soul, the psychic or animistic principle in man, which, if unassociated with and unillumined by the greater light of the Spirit or Master-principle, has no inherent light of its own at all. At best he in the West can but reflect and transmit that greater light from the East, as the moon receives and reflects sunlight. Wherefore in Masonry his light is spoken of as the moon. In Nature when the moon is not shone upon by the sun it is invisible and virtually non-existent for us; when it is, it is one of the most resplendent of phenomena. Similarly human intelligence is valuable or negligible according as it is enlightened by the Master-light of the Divine Principle, or merely darkly functioning from its own unillumined energies. In the former case it is the chief executive faculty or transmitting medium of the Supreme Wisdom; in the latter it can display nothing better than brute-reason.

Midway between the Master-light from the East and the "Moon" in the West is placed the Junior

[p. 103]

[paragraph continues] Warden in the South, symbolizing the third greater light, the "Sun." And, masonically, the "sun" stands for the illuminated human intelligence and understanding, which results from the material brain-mind being thoroughly permeated and enlightened by the Spiritual Principle; it denotes these two in a state of balance and harmonious interaction, the Junior Warden personifying the balance-point or meeting-place of man's natural reason and his spiritual intuition. Accordingly it is he who, as representing this enlightened mental condition, asserts in the Second Degree (which is the degree of personal development where that condition is theoretically achieved) that he has been enabled in that degree to discover a sacred symbol placed in the centre of the building and alluding to the G.G.O.T.U. What is meant is, of course, that the man who has in reality (and not merely ceremonially) advanced to the second degree of self-development has now discerned that God is not outside him, but within him and overshadowing his own "building" or organism; a discovery which he is thereupon urged to follow up with fervency and zeal so that he may more and more closely unify himself with this Divine Principle. This, however, is a process requiring time, effort and self-struggle. The unification is not achieved suddenly. There are found to be obstacles, "enemies" in the way, obstructing it, due to the aspirant's own imperfections and limitations. These must first be gradually overcome, and it is the eradication of these which is alluded to in the sign of the degree, indicating that he desires to cleanse

[p. 104]

his heart and cast away all evil from it, to purify himself for closer alliance with that pure Light. It is only by this "sun-light," this newly found illumination, that he has become able to see into the depths of his own nature; and this is the "Sun" which, like Joshua, he prays may "stand still" and its light be retained by him until he has achieved the conquest of all these enemies. The problem of the much discredited biblical miracle of the sun standing still in the heavens disappears when its true meaning is perceived in the light of the interpretation given by the compilers of the Masonic ritual, who well knew that it was not the solar orb that was miraculously stayed in its course in violation of natural law, but that the "sun" in question denotes an enlightened perceptive state experienced by every one who in this "valley of Ajalon" undertakes the task of self-conquest and "fighting the battles of the Lord" against his own lower propensities.

We have now spoken of the Senior and Junior Wardens in their respective psychological significances and as being described as the "Moon" and "Sun." In this connection it is well to point out here that the lights of both Moon and Sun become extinguished in the darkness of the Third Degree. In the great work of self-transformation they are lights and helps up to a point. When that point is reached they are of no further avail; the grip of each of them proves a slip and the Master-Light, or Divine Principle, alone takes up and completes the regenerative change: "The sun shall be no more thy light by day, neither for brightness shall

[p. 105]

the moon give light unto thee; but the Lord shall be unto thee an everlasting light and thy God thy glory; and the days of thy mourning shall be ended." (Is. lx. 19-20).

The three lesser Officers and Tyler, who, with the three principal ones, complete the executive septenary, represent the three greater Officers' energies transmitted into the lower faculties of man's organism. The Senior Deacon, as the Master's adjutant and emissary, forms the link between East and West. The Junior Deacon, as the Senior Warden's adjutant and emissary, forms the link between West and South; whilst the Inner Guard acts under the immediate control of the Junior Warden and in mutually reflex action with the Outer Guard or contact-point with the outer world of sense-impressions.

The whole seven thus typify the mechanism of human consciousness; they represent a series of discrete but co-ordinated parts connecting man's outer nature with his inmost Divine Principle and providing the necessary channels for reciprocal action between the spiritual and material poles of his organism.

In other words, and to use an alternative symbol of the same fact, man is potentially a seven-branched golden candlestick. Potentially so, because as yet he has not transmuted the base metals of his nature into gold, or lit up the seven candles or parts of his organism with the Promethean fire of the Divine Principle. Meanwhile that symbol of what is possible to him is offered for his reflection and contemplation, and he may profitably study the

[p. 106]

description of regenerated, perfected man given in Revelation 1, 12-20.

To summarize, the seven Officers typify the following sevenfold parts of the human mechanism:

          W.M.

       Spirit (Pneuma).

     
      S.W.

       Soul (Psyche).

     
      J.W.

       Mind (Nous, Intellect).

     
      S.D.

       The link   between Spirit and Soul.

     
      J.D.

       The link   between Soul and Mind.

     
      I.G.

       The inner   sense-nature (astral).

     
      O.G.

       The outer   sense-nature (physical).

     
     

THE GREATER AND LESSER LIGHTS

The purpose of Initiation may be defined as follows:--it is to stimulate and awaken the Candidate to direct cognition and irrefutable demonstration of facts and truths of his own being about which previously he has been either wholly ignorant or only notionally informed; it is to bring him into direct conscious contact with the Realities underlying the surface-images of things, so that, instead of holding merely beliefs or opinions about himself, the Universe and God, he is directly and convincingly confronted with Truth itself; and finally it is to move him to become the Good and the Truth revealed to him by identifying himself with it. (This is of course a gradual process involving greater or less time and effort in proportion to the capacity and equipment of the candidate himself.)

The restoration to light of the candidate in the First Degree is, therefore, indicative of an important crisis. It symbolizes the first enlargement of perception that, thanks to his own earnest aspirations

[p. 107]

and the good offices of the guides and instructors to whom he has yielded himself, Initiation brings him. It reveals to him a threefold symbol, referred to as the three great though emblematic lights in Masonry--the Holy Bible, Square and Compasses in a state of conjunction, the two latter resting on the first-named as their ground or base. As this triple symbol is the first object his outward eye gazes upon after enlightenment, so in correspondence what they emblematize is the first truth his inward eye is meant to recognize and contemplate upon.

He is also made aware of three emblematic lesser lights, described as alluding to the "Sun," "Moon" and "Master of the Lodge," (the psychological significance of which has already been explained in our interpretation of the Officers of the Lodge).

Now the fact is that the candidate can only see the three greater Lights by the help of the three lesser ones. In other words the lesser triad is the instrument by which he beholds the greater one; it is his own perceptive faculty (subject) looking out upon something larger (object) with which it is not yet identified, just as so small a thing as the eye can behold the expanse of the heavens and the finite mind can contemplate infinitude.

What is implied, then, is that the lesser lights of the candidate's normal finite intelligence are employed to reveal to him the greater lights or fundamental essences of his as yet undeveloped being. A pigmy rudimentary consciousness is being made aware of its submerged source and roots, and placed in sharp contrast with the limitless possibilities available to it when those hidden depths

[p. 108]

have been developed and brought into function. The candidate's problem and destiny is to lose himself to find himself, to unify his lesser with his greater lights, so that he no longer functions merely with an elementary reflex consciousness but in alliance with the All-Conscious with which he has become identified. In the Royal Arch Degree he will discover that this identification of the lesser and greater lights has theoretically become achieved. The interlaced triangles of lights surrounding the central altar in that Supreme Degree imply the union of perceptive faculty with the object of their contemplation; the blending of the human and the Divine consciousness.

What then do the three Greater Lights emblematize, and what does their intimate conjunction connote?

(1) The written Word is the emblem and external expression of the unwritten Eternal Word, the Logos or Substantial Wisdom of Deity out of which every living soul has emanated and which, therefore, is the ground or base of human life. "In the beginning was the Word and the Word was with God and the Word was God; without Him was not anything made that was made; in Him was life and the life was the light of men; and the light shineth in darkness and the darkness comprehendeth it not." In an intelligently conducted Lodge the Sacred Volume should lie open at the first chapter of the Gospel by St. John, the patron-saint of Masonry, so that it may be these words that shall meet the candidate's eyes when restored to light and remind him that the basis of

[p. 109]

his being is the Divine Word resident and shining within his own darkness and ignorance, which realize and comprehend not that fact. He has lost all consciousness of that truth, and this dereliction is the "lost Word" of which every Mason is theoretically in search and which with due instruction and his own industry he hopes to find. Finding that, he will find all things, for he will have found God within himself. Let the candidate also reflect that it is the secret motions and promptings of this Word within him that have impelled him to enter the Craft and to seek initiation into light. In the words of a great initiate "thy seeking is the cause of thy finding"; for the finding is but the final coming to self-consciousness of that inward force which first impelled the quest for light. Hence it is that no one can properly enter the Craft, or hope for real initiation, if he joins the Order from any less motive than that of finding God, the "hid treasure," within himself. His first place of preparation must needs be in the heart, and his paramount desire and heart-hunger must be for that Light which, when attained, is Omniscience coming to consciousness in him; otherwise all ceremonial initiation will be without avail and he will fail even to understand the external symbols and allegories of it.

(2) The Square, resting upon the Sacred Volume, is the symbol of the human soul as it was generated out of the Divine Word which underlies it. That soul was created "square," perfect, and like everything which proceeded from the Creator's hand was originally pronounced "very good," though

[p. 110]

invested with freedom of choice and capacity for error. The builder's square, however, used as a Craft symbol, is really an approximation of a triangle with its apex downwards and base upwards, which is a very ancient symbol of the soul and psychic constitution of man and is known as the Water Triangle.

(3) The Compasses interlaced with the square are the symbol of the Spirit of the Soul, its functional energy or Fire. Of itself the soul would be a mere inert passivity, a negative quantity unbalanced by a positive opposite. Its active properties are the product of the union of itself with its underlying and inspiring Divine basis, as modified by the good or evil tendencies of the soul itself. God "breathed into man the breath of life and man became--no longer a soul, which he was previously--but a living (energizing) soul." This product, or fiery energy, of the soul is the Spirit of man (a good or evil force accordingly as he shapes it) and is symbolized by what has always been known as the Fire Triangle (with apex upward and base downward), which symbol is approximately reproduced in the Compasses.

To summarize; the three Greater Lights emblematize the inextricably interwoven triadic groundwork of man's being; (I) the Divine Word or Substance as its foundation; (2) a passive soul emanated therefrom; (3) an active spirit or energizing capacity generated in the soul as the result of the interaction of the former two. Man himself therefore (viewed apart from the temporal body now clothing him) is a triadic unit, rooted in

[p. 111]

and proceeding from the basic Divine Substance.

Observe that in the First Degree the points of the Compasses are hidden by the Square. In the Second Degree, one point is disclosed. In the Third both are exhibited. The implication is that as the Candidate progresses, the inertia and negativity of the soul become increasingly transmuted and superseded by the positive energy and activity of the Spirit. The Fire Triangle gradually assumes preponderance over the Water Triangle, signifying that the Aspirant becomes a more vividly living and spiritually conscious being than he was at first.

* * * * * *

  

OPENING AND CLOSING THE LODGE

  

FIRST OR ENTERED APPRENTICE DEGREE

If the Lodge with its appointments and officers be a sacramental figure of oneself and of the mechanism of personal consciousness, opening the Lodge in the successive Degrees implies ability to expand, open up and intensify that consciousness in three distinct stages surpassing the normal level applicable to ordinary mundane affairs.

This fact passes unrecognized in Masonic Lodges. The openings and closings are regarded as but so much casual formality devoid of interior purpose or meaning, whereas they are ceremonies of the highest instructiveness and rites with a distinctive purpose which should not be profaned by casual perfunctory performance or without understanding what they imply.

[p. 112]

As a flower "opens its Lodge" when it unfolds its petals and displays its centre to the sun which vitalizes it, so the opening of a Masonic Lodge is sacramental of opening out the human mind and heart to God. It is a dramatized form of the psychological processes involved in so doing.

Three degrees or stages of such opening are postulated. First, one appropriate to the apprentice stage of development; a simple Sursum corda! or call to "lift up your hearts!" above the everyday level of external things. Second, a more advanced opening, adapted to those who are themselves more advanced in the science and capable of greater things than apprentices. This opening is proclaimed to be "upon the square," which the First Degree opening is not. By which is implied that it is one specially involving the use of the psychic and higher intellectual nature (denoted, as previously explained, by the Square or Water Triangle). Third, a still more advanced opening, declared to be "upon the centre," for those of Master Mason's rank, and pointing to an opening up of consciousness to the very centre and depths of one's being.

How far and to what degree any of us is able to open his personal Lodge determines our real position in Masonry and discloses whether we are in very fact Masters, Craftsmen or Apprentices, or only titularly such. Progress in this, as in other things, comes only with intelligent practice and sustained sincere effort. But what is quite overlooked and desirable to emphasize is the power, as an initiatory force, of an assemblage of individuals

[p. 113]

each sufficiently progressed and competent to "open his Lodge" in the sense described. Such an assembly, gathered in one place and acting with a common definite purpose, creates as it were a vortex in the mental and psychical atmosphere into which a newly initiated candidate is drawn. The tension created by their collective energy of thought and will--progressively intensifying as the Lodge is opened in each successive degree, and correspondingly relaxing as each Degree is closed--acts and leaves a permanent effect upon the candidate (assuming always that he is equally in earnest and "properly prepared" in an interior sense), inducing a favourable mental and spiritual rapport between him and those with whom he seeks to be elevated into organic spiritual membership; and, further, it both stimulates his perceptivity and causes his mentality to become charged and permeated with the ideas and uplifting influences projected upon him by his initiators.

The fact that a candidate is not admitted within the Lodge-portals without certain assurances, safeguards and tests, and that even then he is menaced by the sword of the I.G., is an indication that peril to the mental and spiritual organism is recognized as attending the presumptuous engaging in the things with which Initiation deals. As the flaming sword is described as keeping the way to the Tree of Life from those as yet unfitted to approach it, so does the secret law of the Spirit still avenge itself upon those who are unqualified to participate in the knowledge of its mysteries. Hence the commandment "Thou shalt not take the name of the Lord

[p. 114]

thy God in vain," that is by invoking Divine Energy for unworthy or vain purposes.

Here, and upon the general subject of the signs, tokens and words employed and communicated in Initiatory Rites, may usefully be quoted the following words by a well-informed Mason, who is of course speaking of them not as the merely perfunctory acts they are in ordinary Lodges, but as they are when intelligently employed by those fully instructed in spiritual science and able to use signs, tokens and words with dynamic power and real efficiency:--

"The symbols of the Mysteries embodied in the sign of the Square and Circle constitute the eternal language of the gods, the same in all worlds, from all eternity. They have had neither beginning of years nor end of days. They are contemporary with time and with eternity. They are the Word of God, the Divine Logos, articulate and expressed in forms of language. Each sign possesses a corresponding vocal expression, bodily gesture or mental intention. This fact is of great importance to the student of the Wisdom, for in it rests the main reason of the secrecy and the intense watchfulness and carefulness of the stewards of the Mysteries lest the secret doctrines find expression on the lips or through the action of unfit persons to possess the secrets. For the secret power of the Mysteries is within the signs. Any person attaining to natural and supernatural states by the process of development, if his heart be untuned and his mind withdrawn from the Divine to the human within him, that power becomes a power of evil instead of a power of good. An unfaithful initiate, in the degree

[p. 115]

of the Mysteries he has attained, is capable, by virtue of his antecedent preparations and processes, of diverting the power to unholy, demoniacal, astral and dangerous uses. . . . . . The use of the signs, the vocal sounds, physical acts and mental intentions, was absolutely prohibited except under rigorously tested conditions. For instance, the utterance of a symbolical sound, or a physical act, corresponding to a sign belonging to a given degree, in a congregation of an inferior degree, was fatal in its effects. In each degree no initiates who have not attained that degree are admitted to its congregations. Only initiates of that degree, and above it, are capable of sustaining the pressure of dynamic force generated in the spiritual atmosphere and concentrated in that degree. The actual mental ejaculation of a sign, under such circumstances, brought the immediate putting forth of an occult power corresponding to it. In all the congregations of the initiates an Inner Guard was stationed within the sanctuary, chancel or oratory at the door of entrance, with the drawn sword in his hand, to ward off unqualified trespassers and intruders. It was no mere formal or metaphorical performance. It was at the risk of the life of any man attempting to make an entrance if he succeeded in crossing the threshold. Secret signs and passwords and other tests were applied to all who knocked at the door, before admission was granted. The possession of the Mysteries, after initiation, and the use of the signs, either vocally, actionally or ejaculatorily, with "intention" in their use (not as mere mechanical repetition), were attended by occult powers directed

[p. 116]

to the subjects of their special intention, whether absent or present, or for purposes beneficial to the cause in contemplation." (H. E. Sampson's Progressive Redemption, pp. 171-174).

To "open the Lodge" of one's own being to the higher verities is no simple task for those who have closed and sealed it by their own habitual thought-modes, preconceptions and distrust of whatever is not sensibly demonstrable. Yet all these propensities must be eradicated or shut out and the Lodge close tyled against them; they have no part or place in the things of the inward man. Effort and practice also are needed to attain stability of mind, control of emotion and thought, and to acquire interior stillness and the harmony of all our parts. As the formal ceremony of Lodge-opening is achieved only by the organized co-operation of its constituent officers, so the due opening of our inner man to God can only be accomplished by the consensus of all our parts and faculties. Absence or failure of any part invalidates the whole. The W.M. alone cannot open the Lodge; he can only invite his brethren to assist him to do so by a concerted process and the unified wills of his subordinates. So too with opening the Lodge of man's soul. His spiritual will, as master-faculty, summons his other faculties to assist it; "sees that none but Masons are present" by taking care that his thoughts and motives in approaching God are pure; calls all these "brethren" to order to prove their due qualification for the work in hand; and only then, after seeing that the Lodge is properly formed, does he undertake the responsibility of

[p. 117]

invoking the descent of the Divine blessing and influx upon the unified and dedicated whole.

Of all which the Psalmist writes: "How good and joyful a thing it is for brethren to dwell together in unity. . . . . It is like the precious ointment (anointing) which flows down unto the skirts of the clothing," implying that the Divine influx, when it descends in response to such an invocation, floods and illuminates the entire human organism even to its carnal sense-extremities (which are the "skirts of the clothing" of the soul). Compare also the Christian Master's words: "When thou prayest, enter into thy secret chamber (the Lodge of the soul) and when thou hast shut thy door (by tyling the mind to all outward concerns and thoughts), pray to the Father who seeth in secret, who shall reward thee openly" (by conscious communion).

The foregoing may help both to interpret the meaning and solemn purpose of the Opening in the First Degree, and to indicate the nature of the conditions and spiritual atmosphere that ought to exist when a Lodge is open for business in that Degree. If the Lodge-opening be a real opening in the sense here indicated and not a mere ceremonial form, if the conditions and atmosphere referred to were actually induced at a Masonic meeting, it will be at once apparent that they must needs react powerfully upon a candidate who enters them seeking initiation and spiritual advancement. If he be truly a worthy candidate, properly prepared in his heart and an earnest seeker for the light, the mere fact of his entering such an atmosphere will so impress and awaken his dormant soul-faculties as

[p. 118]

in itself to constitute an initiation and an indelible memory, whilst the sensitive-plate of his mind thus stimulated will be readily receptive of the ideas projected into it by the assembled brethren who are initiating him and receiving him into spiritual communion with themselves. On the other hand if he be an unworthy or not properly prepared candidate, that atmosphere and those conditions will prove repellent to him and he will himself be the first to wish to withdraw and not to repeat the experience.

The Closing of the First Degree implies the reverse process of the Opening; the relaxing of the inward energies and the return of the mind to its former habitual level. Yet not without gratitude expressed for Divine favours and perceptions received during the period of openness, or without a counsel to keep closed the book of the heart and lay aside the use of its jewels until we are duly called to resume them; since silence and secrecy are essential to the gestation and growth of the inward man. "He who has seen God is dumb."

  

SECOND OR FELLOW-CRAFT DEGREE

The Opening of the Second Degree presupposes an ability to open up the inner nature and consciousness to a much more advanced stage than is possible to the beginner, who in theory is supposed to undergo a long period of discipline and apprenticeship in the elementary work of self-preparation and to be able to satisfy certain tests that he has done so before being qualified for advancement to the Fellow-craft stage of self-building.

Again that opening may be a personal work for

[p. 119]

the individual Mason or a collective work in an assembly of Fellow-crafts and superior Masons to pass an Apprentice to Fellow-craft rank.

The title admitting the qualified Apprentice to a Fellow-craft Lodge is one of great significance, which ordinarily passes without any observation or understanding of its propriety. It is said to denote "in plenty" and to be illustrated by an "ear of corn near to a fall of water" (which two objects are literally the meaning of the Hebrew word in question). It is desirable to observe that this is meant to be descriptive of the candidate himself, and of his own spiritual condition. It is he who is as an ear of corn planted near and nourished by a fall of water. His own spiritual growth, as achieved in the Apprentice stage, is typified by the ripening corn; the fertilizing cause of its growth being the down-pouring upon his inner nature of the vivifying dew of heaven as the result of his aspiration towards the light.

The work appropriated to the Apprentice Degree is that of gaining purity and control of his grosser nature, its appetites and affections. It is symbolized by working the rough ashlar, as dug from the quarry, into due shape for building purposes. The "quarry" is the undifferentiated raw material or group-soul of humanity from which he has issued into individuated existence in this world, where his function is to convert himself into a true die or square meet for the fabric of the Temple designed by the Great Architect to be built in the Jerusalem above out of perfected human souls.

The apprentice-work, which relates to the subdual

[p. 120]

of the sense-nature and its propensities, being achieved, the next stage is the development and control of the intellectual nature; the investigation of the "hidden paths of nature (i.e., the human psychological nature) and science" (the gnosis of self-knowledge, which, pushed to its limit, the candidate is told "leads to the throne of God Himself" and reveals the ultimate secrets of his own nature and the basic principles of intellectual as distinct from moral truth). It should be noted that the candidate is told that he is now "permitted to extend his researches" into these hidden paths. There is peril to the mentality of the candidate if this work is undertaken before the purifications of the Apprentice stage have been accomplished. Hence the permission is not accorded until that preliminary task has been done and duly tested.

The work of the Second Degree is accordingly a purely philosophical work, involving deep psychological self-analysis, experience of unusual phenomena, as the psychic faculties of the soul begin to unfold themselves, and the apprehension of abstract Truth (formerly described as mathematics). This work is altogether beyond both the mental horizon and the capacity of the average modern Mason, though in the Mysteries of antiquity the Mathesis (or mental discipline) was an outstanding feature and produced the intellectual giants of Greek philosophy. Hence it is that to-day the Degree is found dull, unpicturesque and unattractive, since psychic experience and intellectual principles cannot be made spectacular and dramatic.

The Ritual runs that our ancient brethren of this

[p. 121]

[paragraph continues] Degree met in the porchway of King Solomon's Temple. This is a way of saying that natural philosophy is the porchway to the attainment of Divine Wisdom; that the study of man leads to knowledge of God, by revealing to man the ultimate divinity at the base of human nature. This study or self-analysis of human nature Plato called Geometry; earth-measuring; the probing, sounding and determining the limits, proportions and potentialities of our personal organism in its physical and psychical aspects. The ordinary natural consciousness is directed outwards; perceives only outward objects; thinks only of an outward Deity separate and away from us. It can accordingly cognize only shadows, images and illusions. The science of the Mysteries directs that that process must be reversed. It says: "Just as you have symbolically shut and close-tyled the door of your Lodge against all outsiders, so you must shut out all perception of outward images, all desire for external things and material welfare, and turn your consciousness and aspirations wholly inward. For the Vital and Immortal Principle--the Kingdom of Heaven--is within you; it is not to be found outside you. Like the prodigal son in the parable you have wandered away from it into a far country and lost all consciousness of it. You have come down and down, as by a spiral motion or a winding staircase, into this lower world and imperfect form of existence; coiling around you as you came increasingly thickening vestures, culminating in your outermost dense body of flesh; whilst your mentality has woven about you veil after veil of illusory notions

[p. 122]

concerning your real nature and the nature of true Life. Now the time and the impulse have at last come for you to turn back to that inward world. Therefore reverse your steps. Look no longer outwards, but inwards. Go back up that same winding staircase. It will bring you to that Centre of Life and Sanctum Sanctorum from which you have wandered."

When the Psalmist writes "Who will go up the hill of the Lord? Even he that hath clean hands and a pure heart," the meaning is identical with what is implied in the ascent of the inwardly "winding staircase" of the Second Degree. Preliminary purification of the mind is essential to its rising to purer realms of being and loftier conscious states than it has been accustomed to. If "the secrets of nature and the principles of intellectual truth" are to become revealed to its view, as the Degree intends and promises, the mentality must not be fettered by mundane interests or subject to disturbance by carnal passions. If it is to "contemplate its own intellectual faculties and trace them from their development" until they are found to "lead to the throne of God Himself" and to be rooted in Deity, it must discard all its former thought-habits, prejudices and preconceptions, and be prepared to receive humbly the illumination that will flood into it from the Light of Divine Wisdom.

For the determined student of the mental discipline implied by the Second Degree there may be recommended two most instructive sources of information and examples of personal experience. One is the Dialogues of Plato and the writings of

[p. 123]

[paragraph continues] Plotinus and other Neo-Platonists. The other is the records of the classical Christian contemplatives, such as Eckhart or Ruysbroeck or the "Interior Castle" of St. Theresa. The Phaedrus of Plato, in particular, is an important record by an initiate of the ancient Mysteries of the psychological experiences referred to in the Fellow-Craft Degree.

The subject is too lengthy for further exposition here beyond again indicating that it is in the illumined mental condition attained in this Degree that the discovery is made of the Divine Principle at the centre of our organism; and that the sign of the Degree is equivalent to a prayer that the sunlight of that exalted state may "stand still" and persist in us until we have effected the overthrow of all our "enemies" and eradicated all obstacles to our union with that Principle.

The reference to our ancient brethren receiving their wages at the porchway of the Temple of Wisdom is an allusion to an experience common to every one in the Fellow-Craft stage of development. He learns that old scores due by him to his fellowmen must be paid off and old wrongs righted, and receives the wages of past sins recorded upon his subconsciousness by that pencil that observes and there records all our thoughts, words and actions. The candidate leading the philosophic life realizes that he is justly entitled to those wages and receives them without scruple or diffidence, knowing himself to be justly entitled to them and only too glad to expiate and purge himself of old offences. For we are all debtors to some one or other for our present position in life, and must

[p. 124]

repay what we owe to humanity--perhaps with tears or adversity--before we straighten our account with that eternal Justice with which we aspire to become allied.

  

THIRD, OR MASTER-MASON'S DEGREE

Before dealing with the opening and closing of the Third Degree, it should be observed that in the Lodge symbolism the teaching of the First and Second Degrees is carried forward into the Third. The traditional Tracing-Board of the Third Degree exhibits in combination (1) the chequered floor-work, (2) the two pillars at the porchway of the Temple, (3) the winding staircase, and (4) a dormer-window above the porchway. The brief explanation is given that the chequer-work is for the High Priest to walk upon and the dormer-window is that which gave light to it. The entire symbol is but one comprehensive glyph or pictorial diagram of the condition of a candidate aspiring to Master Mason's rank. As high priest of his own personal temple he must have his bodily nature and its varied desires under foot. He must have developed strength of will and character to "walk upon" this chequer-work and withstand its appeals. He must also be able to ascend the winding staircase of his inner nature, to educate and habituate his mentality to higher conscious states and so establish it there that he will be unaffected by seductive or affrighting perceptions that there may meet him. By the cultivation of this "strength" and the ability to "establish" himself upon the loftier conscious levels he co-ordinates the two pillars at the porchway

[p. 125]

of his inmost sanctuary--namely, the physical and psychical supports of his organism--and acquires the "stability" involved in regeneration and requisite to him before passing on to "that last and greatest trial" which awaits him. "In strength will I establish My house that it may stand firm." Man's perfected organism is what is meant by "My house." It was the same organism and the same stability that the Christian Master spoke of in saying "Upon this rock will I build my church and the gates of the underworld shall not prevail against it."

During all the discipline and labour involved in attaining this stability there has shone light on the path from the first moment that his Apprentice's vision was opened to larger truth; light from the science and philosophy of the Order itself which is proving his "porchway" to the ultimate sanctuary within; light from friendly helpers and instructors; above all, light from the sun in his own "heavens," streaming through the "dormer-window" of his illumined intelligence and slowly but surely guiding his feet into the way of peace.

But now the last and greatest trial of his fortitude and fidelity, one imposing upon him a still more serious obligation of endurance, awaits him in the total withdrawal of this kindly light. Hitherto, although guided by that light, he has progressed in virtue of his own natural powers and efforts. Now the time has come when those props have to be removed, when all reliance upon natural abilities, self-will and the normal rational understanding, must be surrendered and the aspirant must abandon

[p. 126]

himself utterly to the transformative action of his Vital and Immortal Principle alone, passively suffering it to complete the work in entire independence of his lesser faculties. He must "lose his life to save it"; he must surrender all that he has hitherto felt to be his life in order to find life of an altogether higher order.

Hence the Third Degree is that of mystical death, of which bodily death is taken as figurative, just as bodily birth is taken in the First Degree as figurative of entrance upon the path of regeneration. In all the Mystery-systems of the past will be found this degree of mystical death as an outstanding and essential feature prior to the final stage of perfection or regeneration. As an illustration one has only to refer to a sectional diagram of the Great Pyramid of Egypt, which was so constructed as to be not merely a temple of initiation, but to record in permanent form the principles upon which regeneration is attainable. Its entrance passage extends for some distance into the building as a narrow ascending channel through which the postulant who desires to reach the centre must creep in no small discomfort and restrictedness. This was to emblematise the discipline and up-hill labour of self-purification requisite in the Apprentice Degree. At a certain point this restricted passage opens out into a long and lofty gallery, still upon a steeply rising gradient, up which the postulant had to pass, but in a condition of ease and liberty. This was to symbolize the condition of illumination and expanded intellectual liberty associated with the Fellow-craft Degree. It ended at a place where the candidate once more had to

[p. 127]

force his way on hands and knees through the smallest aperture of all, one that led to the central chamber in which stood and still stands the great sarcophagus in which he was placed and underwent the last supreme ordeal, and whence he was raised from the dead, initiated and perfected.

The title of admission communicated to the candidate for the Third Degree is noteworthy, as also the reason for it. It is a Hebrew name, said to be that of the first artificer in metals and to mean "in worldly possessions." Now it will be obvious that the name of the first man who worked at metal-making in the ordinary sense can be of no possible interest or concern to us to-day, nor has the information the least bearing upon the subject of human regeneration. It is obviously a veil of allegory concealing some relevant truth. Such it will be found to be upon recognizing that Hebrew Biblical names represent not persons, but personifications of spiritual principles, and that Biblical history is not ordinary history of temporal events but a record of eternally true spiritual facts. The matter is, therefore, interpretable as follows: We know from the teaching of the Entered Apprentice Degree what "money and metals" are in the Masonic sense, and that they represent the attractive power of temporal possessions, and earthly belongings and affections of whatever description. We know too that from the attraction and seductiveness of these things, and even from the desire for them, it is essential to be absolutely free if one desires to attain that Light and those riches of Wisdom for which the candidate professes to long. Not that

[p. 128]

it is necessary for him to become literally and, physically dispossessed of worldly possessions, but it is essential that he should be so utterly detached from them that he cares not whether he owns any or not and is content, if need be, to be divested of them entirely if they stand in the way of his finding "treasure in heaven"; for so long as he clings to them or they exercise control over him, so long will his initiation into anything better be deferred.

It follows then that it is the personal soul of the candidate himself which is the "artificer in metals" referred to, and which during the whole of its physical existence has been engaged in trafficking with "metals." Desire for worldly possessions, for sensation and experience in this outward world of good and evil, brought the soul into this world. There it has woven around itself its present body of flesh, every desire and thought being an "artificer" adding something to or modifying its natural encasement. The Greek philosophers used to teach that souls secrete their bodies as a snail secretes his shell, and our own poet Spenser truly wrote:

"For of the soul the body form doth take, 
  And soul is form and doth the body make."

If, then, desire for physical experience and material things brought the soul into material conditions (as is also indicated in the great parable of the Prodigal Son), the relinquishing of that desire is the first necessary step to ensure its return to the condition whence it first emanated. Satiation with and consequent disgust at the "husks" of things instigated

[p. 129]

the Prodigal Son to aspire to return home. Similar repletion and revolt drives many a man to lose all desire for external things and to seek for peace within himself and there redirect his energies in quest of possessions which are abiding and real. This is the moment of his true "conversion," and the moment when he is ripe for initiation into the hidden Mysteries of his own being. The First and Second Degrees of Masonry imply that the candidate has undergone lengthy discipline in the renunciation of external things and the cultivation of desire for those that are within. But, notwithstanding that he has passed through all the discipline of those Degrees, he is represented at the end of them as being still not entirely purified and to be still "in worldly possessions" in the sense that a residue of attraction by them and reliance upon himself lingers in his heart; and it is these last subtle close-clinging elements of "base metal" in him that need to be eradicated if perfection is to be attained. The ingrained defects and tendencies of the soul as the result of all its past habits and experiences are not suddenly eliminated or easily subdued. Self-will and pride are very subtle in their nature and may continue to deceive their victim long after he has purged himself of grosser faults. As Cain was the murderer of Abel, so every taint of base metal in oneself debases the gold of the Vital and Immortal Principle. It must be renounced, died to and transmuted in the crucial process of the Third Degree. Hence it is that the candidate is entrusted with a name that designates himself at this stage and that indicates that he is still "in worldly possessions;"

[p. 130]

that is, that some residue of the spirit of this world yet lingers in him which it is necessary to eliminate from his nature before he can be raised to the sublime degree of Master.

Examination of the text of the opening and closing of the Lodge in the Third Degree discloses the whole of the philosophy upon which the Masonic system is reared. It indicates that the human soul has originated in the eternal East--that "East" being referable to the world of Spirit and not to any geographical direction--and that thence it has directed its course towards the "West"--the material world which is the antipodes of the spiritual and into which the soul has wandered. Its purpose in so journeying from spiritual to physical conditions is declared to be the quest and recovery of something it has lost, but which by its own industry and suitable instruction it hopes to find. From this it follows that the loss itself occurred prior to its descent into this world, otherwise that descent would not have been necessary. What it is that has been lost is not explicitly declared, but is implied and is stated to form "the genuine secrets of a Master Mason." It is the loss of a word, or rather of The Word, the Divine Logos, or basic root and essence of our own being. In other words the soul of man has ceased to be God-conscious and has degenerated into the limited terrestrial consciousness of the ordinary human being. It is in the condition spoken of in the cosmic parable of Adam when extruded from Eden, an exile from the Divine Presence and condemned to toil and trouble. The quest after this lost Word is declared by the

[p. 131]

[paragraph continues] Wardens to have been so far abortive, and to have resulted in the discovery, not of that Reality, but of substitutional images of it. All which implies that, in the strength of merely his natural temporal intelligence, man can find and know nothing more in this world than shadows, images and phenomenal forms of realities which abide eternally and noumenally in the world of Spirit to which his temporal faculties are at present closed. Yet there remains a way of regaining consciousness of that higher world and life. It is by bringing into function a now dormant and submerged faculty resident at the depth and centre of his being. That dormant faculty is the Vital and Immortal Principle which exists as the central point of the circle of his individuality. As the outward Universe is the externalized projection of an indwelling immanent Deity, so is the outward individual man the externalization and diffusion of an inherent Divine germ, albeit perverted and distorted by personal self-will and desire which have dislocated and shut off his consciousness from his root of being. Recover contact with that central Divine Principle by a voluntary renunciation of the intervening obstructions and inharmonious elements in oneself, and man at once ceases to be merely the rationalized animal he now is and becomes grafted upon a new and Divine life-principle, a sharer of Omniscience and a co-operator with Deity. He recovers the lost and genuine secrets of his own being and has for ever finished with substitutions, shadows and simulacra of Reality. He reaches a point and lives from a centre from which no Master Mason can

[p. 132]

ever err or will ever again desire to err, for it is the end, object and goal of his existence.

Meanwhile, until actual recovery of that lost secret, man must put up with its substitutions and regard these as sacramental of concealed realities, contact with which will be his great reward if he submits himself to the conditions upon which alone he may discover them. The existence of those realities and the regimen essential to their enjoyment are inculcated by Masonry as they have been by every other initiatory Order of the past, and it is for the fact that this knowledge is and always has been conserved in the world, so as to be ever available for earnest aspirants towards it, that gratitude is expressed to the Grand Master of all for having never left Himself, or the way of return to Him, without witness in this outer world.

As much has been said about the Ceremony of the Third Degree in other papers it is unnecessary here to expound it further. It may be stated, however, that it alone constitutes the Masonic Initiation. The First and Second Degrees are, strictly, but preparatory stages leading up to Initiation; they are not the Initiation itself; they but prescribe the purification of the bodily and mental nature necessary to qualify the candidate for the end which crowns the whole work. To those unacquainted with what is really involved in actual as distinct from merely ceremonial initiation, and who have no notion of what initiation meant in the old schools of Wisdom and still means for those who understand the theory of Regenerative Science, it is well nigh impossible to convey any idea of its

[p. 133]

process or its results. The modern Mason, however high in titular rank, is as little qualified to understand the subject as the man who has never entered a Lodge. "To become initiated (or perfected)," says an old authority, Plutarch, "involves dying"; not a physical death, but a moral way of dying in which the soul is loosened from the body and the sensitive life, and becoming temporarily detached therefrom is set free to enter the world of Eternal Light and Immortal Being. This, after most drastic preliminary disciplines, was achieved in a state of trance and under the supervision of duly qualified Masters and Adepts who intromitted the candidate's liberated soul into its own interior principles until it at last reached the Blazing Star or Glory at its own Centre, in the light of which it simultaneously knew itself and God, and realized their unity and the "points of fellowship" between them. Then it was that, from this at once awful and sublime experience, the initiated soul was brought back to its bodily encasement again and "reunited to the companions of its former toils," to resume its temporal life, but with conscious realization of Life Eternal superadded to its knowledge and its powers. Then only was it entitled to the name of Master Mason. Then only could it exclaim, in the words of another initiate (Empedocles), "Farewell, all earthly allies; henceforth am I no mortal wight, but an immortal angel, ascending up into Divinity and reflecting upon that likeness of it which I have found in myself."

The "secrets" of Freemasonry and of initiation are largely connected with this process of introversion

[p. 134]

of the soul to its own Centre, and beyond this brief reference to the subject it is inexpedient here to say more. But in confirmation of what has been indicated it may be useful to refer to the 23rd Psalm, in which the Hebrew Initiates speak of both the supreme experience of being passed through "the valley of the shadow of death" and the preliminary phases of mental preparation for that ordeal. Stripping that familiar psalm of the gorgeous metaphor given it in the beautiful Biblical translation, its real meaning may be paraphrased and explained for Masonic students as follows:--

 

"The Vital and Immortal Principle within me is my Initiator; and is all-sufficient to lead me to God.

It has made me lie down (in self-discipline and humiliation) in "green pastures" of meditation and mental sustenance.

It has led me beside "still waters" of contemplation (as distinct from the "rough sea of passion" of my natural self).

It is restoring my soul (reintegrating it out of chaos and disorder).

Even when I come to pass through the valley of deadly gloom (my own interior veils of darkness)

I will fear no evil; for It is with me (as a guiding star); Its directions and disciplines will safeguard me.

It provides me with the means of overcoming my inner enemies and weaknesses; It anoints my intelligence with the oil of wisdom; the cup of my mind brims over with new light and consciousness.

[p. 135]

The Divine Love and Truth, which I shall find face to face at my centre, will be a conscious presence to me all the days of my temporal life; and thereafter I shall dwell in a "house of the Lord" (a glorified spiritual body) for ever."

 

The Third Degree is completed in, and can only be more fully expounded by reference to, the Holy Royal Arch Ceremony. A separate further paper will, therefore, be devoted to that Ceremony.

  

THE MASONIC APRON

From what has been said in these pages the full significance of the Apron will now be perceived and may be summarized thus:--

1. The Apron is the symbol of the corporeal vesture and condition of the soul (not so much of the temporal physical body, as of its permanent invisible corporeity which will survive the death of the mortal part).

2. The soul fabricates its own body or "apron" by its own desires and thoughts (see Genesis III, 7, "they made themselves aprons") and as these are pure or impure so will that body be correspondingly transparent and white, or dense and opaque.

3. The investiture of the candidate with the Apron in each Degree by the Senior Warden as the Master's delegate for that purpose is meant to inculcate this truth; for the Senior Warden represents the soul which, in accordance with its own spirituality, automatically clothes itself with its own self-made vesture in a way that marks its own progress or regress.

[p. 136]

4. The unadorned white Apron of the First Degree indicates the purity of soul contemplated as being attained in that Degree.

5. The pale blue rosettes added to the Apron in the Second Degree indicate that progress is being made in the science of regeneration and that the candidate's spirituality is beginning to develop and bud through. Blue, the colour of the sky, is traditionally associated with devotion to spiritual concerns.

6. In the Third Degree still further progress is emblematized by the increased blue adornments of the Apron, as also by its silver tassels and the silver serpent used to fasten the apron-strings. In the First and Second Degrees no metal has appeared upon the Apron. The candidate has been theoretically divesting himself of all base metals and transmuting them into spiritual riches. With Mastership he has attained an influx of those riches under the emblem of the tassels of silver, a colourless precious metal always associated with the soul, as gold by reason of its supreme value and warm colour is associated with Spirit. The silver serpent is the emblem of Divine Wisdom knitting the soul's new-made vesture together.

7. The pale blue and silver of the Master Mason's Apron become intensified in the deep blue and gold ornamentation worn by the Grand Lodge Officers, who in theory have evolved to still deeper spirituality and transmuted themselves from silver into fine gold. "The king's daughter (the soul) is all glorious within; her clothing is of wrought gold," i.e., wrought or fabricated by her own spiritual energies.

[p. 137]

  

A PRAYER AT LODGE CLOSING

O Sovereign and Most Worshipful of all Masters, who, in Thy infinite love and wisdom, hast devised our Order as a means to draw Thy children nearer Thee, and hast so ordained its Officers that they are emblems of Thy sevenfold power;

Be Thou unto us an Outer Guard, and defend us from the perils that beset us when we turn from that which is without to that which is within;

Be Thou unto us an Inner Guard, and preserve our souls that desire to pass within the portal of Thy holy mysteries;

Be unto us the Younger Deacon, and teach our wayward feet the true and certain steps upon the path that leads to Thee: Be Thou also the Elder Deacon, and guide us up the steep and winding stairway to Thy throne;

Be unto us the Lesser Warden, and in the meridian sunlight of our understanding speak to us in sacraments that shall declare the splendours of Thy unmanifested light;

Be Thou also unto us the Greater Warden, and in the awful hour of disappearing light, when vision fails and thought has no more strength, be with us still, revealing to us, as we may bear them, the hidden mysteries of Thy shadow;

And so, through light and darkness, raise us, Great Master, till we are made one with Thee, in the unspeakable glory of Thy presence in the East.

So mote it be.                

     
The Meaning of Masonry, by W.L. Wilmshurst, [1922], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 138]

  

Chapter IV.

  

THE HOLY ROYAL ARCH OF JERUSALEM.

FREEMASONRY, under the English Constitution, reaches its climax and conclusion in the Order of the Holy Royal Arch. There exists a variety of other degrees ramifying from the main stem of the Masonic system which either elaborate side-points of its doctrine or re-express its teachings in alternative symbolism. These, while of greater or less merit and interest, are beyond our present consideration, and, indeed, are superfluities tending rather to diffuse the student's attention than to deepen his insight into the central purpose of the Craft. The taking of additional higher degrees may be indulged in almost indefinitely, but to what purpose if the initial ones, which contain all that is necessary for the understanding of the subject, remain imperfectly assimilated? It is a fallacy to suppose that the multiplying of degrees will result in the discovery of important arcane secrets which one has failed to find in the rites of the Craft and the Royal Arch. The higher degrees indeed illustrate truths of much interest and often set forth with impressive ceremonial beauty, the appreciation of which will be the greater after and not before the meaning of the preliminary ones has been thoroughly absorbed; whilst the pursuit of "secrets" is certain to prove illusory, for the only secrets worth the name or the finding are those incommunicable ones which discover themselves within the personal consciousness of the

[p. 139]

seeker who is in earnest to translate ceremonial representation into facts of spiritual experience.

It was accordingly a sound instinct that prompted those who settled the present constitution of the Order to exclude these supplementary refinements and to declare that "Masonry consists of the three Craft Degrees and the Holy Royal Arch and no more," for within that compass is exhibited, or at least outlined, the entire process of human regeneration; so that after the Royal Arch there really remains nothing more to be said, although what has been said is of course capable of elaboration. The completeness of regeneration theoretically postulated in those four stages is marked, it should be observed, by the very significant expression used in connection with a Royal Arch Chapter, which is interpreted as meaning "My people having obtained mercy," which in its further analysis signifies that all the parts and faculties ("people") of the candidate's organism have at last, and as the result of his previous discipline and ordeals, become sublimated and integrated in a new quality and higher order of life than that previously enjoyed in virtue of his merely temporal nature. In a word, he has become regenerated. He has achieved the miracle of "squaring the circle"--a metaphorical expression for regeneration, as shall be explained presently.

Although but an expansion and completion of the Third Degree, of which at one time it formed part, there were good reasons for detaching the Royal Arch portion from what now forms the Degree of Master Mason. The two parts in combination

[p. 140]

made an inconveniently long rite, whilst a change in the symbolic appointments and officers of the temple of initiation was necessary, as the ceremony proceeded, to give appropriate spectacular representation to the further points calling for expression. Despite this re-arrangement the Royal Arch is the natural conclusion and fulfilment of the Third Degree. The latter inculcates the necessity of mystical death and dramatizes the process of such death and revival therefrom into newness of life. The Royal Arch carries the process a stage farther, by showing its fulfilment in the "exaltation" or apotheosis of him who has undergone it. The Master Mason's Degree might be said to be represented in the terms of Christian theology by the formula "He suffered and was buried and rose again," whilst the equivalent of the exaltation ceremony is "He ascended into heaven."

The Royal Arch Degree seeks to express that new and intensified life to which the candidate can be raised and the exalted degree of consciousness that comes with it. From being conscious merely as a natural man and in the natural restricted way common to every one born into this world, he becomes exalted (whilst still in his natural flesh) to consciousness in a supernatural and illimitable way. As has been said in previous papers, the purpose of all initiation is to lift human consciousness from lower to higher levels by quickening the latent spiritual potentialities in man to their full extent through appropriate discipline. No higher level of attainment is possible than that in which the human merges in the Divine consciousness and knows as

[p. 141]

[paragraph continues] God knows. And that being the level of which tit Order of the Royal Arch treats ceremonially, it follows that Masonry as a sacramental system reaches its climax and conclusion in that Order.

As has also been already shown, to attain that level involves as its essential prerequisite the total abnegation, renouncement and renovation of one's original nature, the surrender of one's natural desires tendencies and preconceptions, and the abandonment and nullifying of one's natural self-will, by such a habitual discipline and self-denial and gradual but vigorous opposition to all these as will cause them gradually to atrophy and die down. "He that loveth his life shall lose it, and he that hateth his life in this world shall keep it unto life eternal. Except a corn of wheat fall into the ground and die, it abideth alone; but if it die it bringeth forth much fruit." As with a seed of wheat, so with man. If he persists in clinging to the present natural life he knows, if he refuses to recognize that a higher quality of life is here and now possible to him, or is unwilling to make the necessary effort to attain it, he "abideth alone," gets nowhere, and only frustrates his own spiritual evolution. But if he is willing to "die" in the sense indicated, if he will so re-orientate his will and silence his natural energies and desires as to give the Vital and Immortal Principle within him the chance to assert itself and supersede them, then from the disintegrated material of his old nature that germ of true life will spring into growth in him and bear much fruit, and by the stepping-stones of initiation he will rise from his dead sell to higher things than he can otherwise experience.

[p. 142]

This necessity of self-dying--not, we repeat, the physical death of the body but a mystical death-in-life of everything except the body--is the first and fundamental fact to be grasped before one may hope to realize or even to understand the mystery of the Royal Arch Degree. "Mors janua vitae"; death to self is the portal to true life. There is no other way. It is the unescapable law and condition of the soul's progress.

But since it is a process involving a "most serious trial of fortitude and fidelity" and a grapple with oneself from which the timorous and self-diffident may well shrink, the Mystery-systems have always exhibited an example for the instruction, encouragement and emulation of those prepared to make the attempt and the necessary sacrifice. To hearten them to the task the Initiatory Colleges have held up a prototype in the person of some great soul who has already trodden the same path and emerged triumphant therefrom. It matters nothing whether the prototype be one whose historic actuality and identity can be demonstrated, or whether he can be regarded only as legendary or mythical; the point being not to teach a merely historical fact, but to enforce a spiritual principle. In Egypt the prototype was Osiris, who was slain by his malignant brother Typhon, but whose mangled limbs were collected in a coffer from which he emerged reintegrated and divinized. In Greece the prototype was Bacchus, who was torn to pieces by the Titans. Baldur in Scandinavia and Mithra in Graeco-Roman Europe were similar prototypes. In Masonry the prototype is Hiram Abiff, who met his death as

[p. 143]

the result of a conspiracy by a crowd of workmen of whom there were three principal ruffians. In the Christian and chief of all systems, since it comprehends and re-expresses all the others, the greatest of the Exemplars died at the hands of the mob, headed also by three chief ruffians, Judas, Caiaphas and Pilate. If in Masonry the mystical death is dramatized more realistically than the resurrection that follows upon it, that resurrection is nevertheless shown in the "raising" of the candidate to the rank of Master Mason and his "reunion with the companions of former toils," implying the reintegration and resumption of all his old faculties and powers in a sublimated state, just as the limbs of the risen Osiris were said to reunite into a new whole and as the Christian Master withdrew His mutilated body from the tomb and reassumed it, transmuted into one of supernatural substance and splendour.

We have, therefore, now to consider how the Royal Arch Degree exhibits the attainment of a new order of life. But it may be as well to say in advance that for those unhabituated to looking beyond surface-values and material meanings the exposition about to be given, dealing as it will with the profound spiritual truths and advanced psychological experience allegorized by the external ceremonial, is likely to present some difficulty of comprehension and acceptance. The Royal Arch, however, would not be the Supreme Degree it is did it not move upon a supremely high level of thought and instruction. It was not compiled to accommodate the elementary intelligence theoretically characterizing the philosophically untrained neophyte. It presupposes that

[p. 144]

its candidate has passed through a long, strenuous period of purification and mental discipline, in the course of which his understanding has become very considerably widened and deepened, whilst his fidelity to the high inward Light which has conducted him safely so far, has induced in him a humility and docility fitting him for what still awaits him--the attainment of that Wisdom which is concealed from this world's wise and prudent, but is revealed unto babes. It is a rite of initiation dealing less with his gross corporeal nature and his ordinary temporal mentality (which have been the subject of purification in the earlier degrees) than with the higher reaches and possibilities of his understanding and consciousness. As it is, what can be said here can at best be but a partial and incomplete exposition of a theme calling rather for disciplined imagination and reverent reflection than for reasoned argument. Certain things must perforce be omitted from explanation entirely, whilst others are mentioned with diffidence and at the risk of their being misunderstood or rejected by such as do not yet realize that in these matters "the letter killeth, the spirit vivifieth" and that "spiritual truths must be spiritually discerned."

Before interpreting the Ceremony itself it is desirable first to indicate four noteworthy features connected with this Supreme Order and distinctifying it from the three grades leading to it. In speaking even of these incidentals the before-mentioned difficulties of both exposition and apprehension will already make themselves felt.

First, no one can be received into a Chapter without first having attained Master Mason's rank.

[p. 145]

Second, the circular symbol of the Grand Geometrician, which in the Second Degree shone high above in the ceiling of the Temple, and in the Third Degree had moved downwards and burned as a glimmering ray in the East to guide the candidate's feet into the way of peace, has now descended completely to the chequer-work floor, where it rests as the centre and cubical focus of the entire organism and bears the Sacred and Ineffable Name, as also those of Solomon and the two Hirams.

Third, the constitution of the Assembly is no longer one of seven officers, but of nine, who are grouped in three triads about the Central Sacred Symbol.

Fourth, the Assembly, regarded as a unity, is no longer designated a Lodge, but a Chapter.

The first of these points--that none but a Master Mason can enter the Royal Arch--has already been accounted for. It is not feasible, nor is it within the law governing the process of spiritual evolution, for any who has not experienced the stage of mystical death to have experience of that which lies beyond that death. As an unborn physical infant can know nothing of this world, in which nevertheless it exists, until actually initiated into it by birth, so the embryonic spiritual child cannot be born into conscious function upon the plane of the Spirit until it has become entirely detached from the enfolding carnal matrix and tendencies to which it has been habituated. The second and third points can be considered together. The re-arrangement of the factors constituting the ceremonial temple are symbolic of a structural re-arrangement which has occurred in the

[p. 146]

candidate's own psychical organization. This has undergone a repolarization as the result of the descent into it of that high central Light which at first but shone as it were in his "heavens," afar off and above him, illumining the dormer-window of his natural intelligence. Consider deeply what this change implies. The Day-star from on high has now visited him; the fontal source of all consciousness has descended into the very chequer-work material of his transient physical organism, not merely permeating it temporarily with light, but taking root and becoming grafted there substantially and permanently. In theological language, God has become man, and man has become divinized, in virtue of this descent and union. In Masonic terms, the Vital and Immortal Principle resident in the candidate has at last superseded his temporal life-principle and established him upon a new centre of incorruptible life. Now, and perhaps only now, becomes thoroughly appreciable the necessity for the earlier purifications, discipline, self-crucifixion and death of all the lower nature. How could the purity of the Divine Essence tabernacle in the coarse body of the sensualist? How could the Eternal Wisdom unfold its treasures in a mind benighted or caring for nothing but base metals and material pursuits? How could the Universal Will co-operate with and function through the man whose petty personal will blocks its channel, antagonizing it at every turn with his selfish preferences and disordered desires? A Master Mason, then, in the full sense of the term, is no longer an ordinary man, but a divinized man; one

[p. 147]

in whom the Universal and the personal consciousness have come into union. Obviously the quality of life and consciousness of such an one must differ vastly from that of other men. His whole being is differently qualitated and geared upon another centre. That new centre is described as the Grand Geometrician of man's personal universe, inasmuch as its action upon the organism of whoever surrenders himself to its influence causes a redisposition of functional and conscious faculty. The knowledge of this fact was with the wise ancients the true and original science of Geometry (literally "earth-measuring"; determining the occult potentialities of the human earth or temporal organism under spiritual stresses). "God geometrizes" wrote Plato, with intimate knowledge of the subject. Many of the Euclidean and Pythagorean theorems, now regarded merely as mathematical demonstrations, were originally expressions, veiled in mathematical glyphs, of the esoteric science of soul-building or true Masonry. The well-known 47th Proposition of the First Book of Euclid is an example of this and in consequence has come (though few modern Masons could explain why) to be inscribed upon the Past Master's official jewel. Again, the squaring of the circle--that problem which has baffled so many modern mathematicians--is an occult expression signifying that Deity, symbolized by the all-containing circle, has attained form and manifestation in a "square" or human soul. It expresses the mystery of the Incarnation, accomplished within the personal soul.

Under the stress then of the Geometrizing

[p. 148]

[paragraph continues] Principle now found symbolically integrated within the candidate's temporal organism, a re-distribution of his component powers has become effected. His repolarized condition is symbolized by an equilateral triangle with a point at its centre, and such a triangle will be found, worked in gold, upon the sash worn by the Companions of the Order. The significance of this triangle is that the tripartite aspects of him who wears it (that is, the spiritual, psychical and physical parts of him) now stand equalized and equilibrated around their common Life-Principle at the centre, fitted and equipped for Its purpose. Yet each of these three divisions, though in itself unitary, is philosophically triadic in composition when subjected to intellectual analysis. "Every monad is the parent of a triad" is another maxim of the Ancients, who anticipated the modern Hegelian proposition of metaphysics that thesis, antithesis and synthesis are the essential ingredients of a given truth. Hence it comes about that the three aspects of each of the three sides of our equilateral triangle are ceremonially personified by the nine officers of the Chapter--three in the East representing the spiritual side, three in the West figuring the soul or psychical side, and three subordinate links connecting these other two. (These will be further and more conveniently treated of later when the symbolic nature of the officers is dealt with).

The fourth point to be noticed was the change of designation from "Lodge" to "Chapter." The word "Chapter" derives from Caput, head. The reason for the change of name lies, however, much

[p. 149]

deeper than in the fact that the Royal Arch stands at the head or summit of the Craft. It has reference in a twofold way to the capitular rank and consciousness of the Arch Mason himself. In virtue of his headship or supremacy over his material nature he has passed beyond mere Craftwork and governing the Lodge of his lower nature, which he has now made the docile instrument and servant of his spiritual self. Henceforth his energies are employed primarily upon the spiritual plane. The "head" of the material organism of man is the spirit of man, and this spirit consciously conjoined with the Universal Spirit is Deity's supreme instrument and vehicle in the temporal world. Such a man's physical organism and brain have become sublimated and keyed up to a condition and an efficiency immensely in advance of average humanity. Physiological processes are involved which cannot be discussed here, beyond saying that in such a man the entire nervous system contributes to charge certain ganglia and light up certain brain-centres in a way of which the ordinary mind knows nothing. The nervous system provides the storage-batteries and conductive medium of the Spirit's energies just as telegraph wires are the media for transmitting electrical energy. But the true Master Mason, in virtue of his mastership, knows how to control and apply those energies. They culminate and come to self-consciousness in his head, in his intelligence. And in this respect we may refer to a very heavily veiled Scriptural testimony, the import of which goes quite unperceived to the uninstructed reader. The Gospels record that the Passion of the Great

[p. 150]

[paragraph continues] Exemplar and Master concluded "at the place called Golgotha in the Hebrew tongue; that is, the place of a skull"; that is to say it terminated in the head or seat of intelligence and in a mystery of the spiritual consciousness. The same truth is also testified to, though again under veils of symbolic phrasing, in the reference to the sprig of acacia planted at the head of the grave of the Masonic Grand Master and prototype, Hiram Abiff. The grave is the candidate's soul; the sprig of acacia typifies the latent akasa (to use an Eastern term) or divine germ planted in that soil and waiting to become quickened into activity in his intelligence, the "head" of that plane. When that sprig of acacia blooms at the head of his soul's sepulchre, he will understand at one and the same moment the mystery of Golgotha, the mystery of the death of Hiram, and the meaning of the Royal Arch ceremony of exaltation. It is a mystery of spiritual consciousness, the efflorescence of the mind in God, the opening up of the human intelligence in conscious association with the Universal and Omniscient Mind. It is for this reason that the cranium or skull is given prominence in the Master Mason's Degree.

With this premised we proceed to considering the Ceremony of Exaltation.

  

THE CEREMONY OF EXALTATION

Again the candidate is in a state of darkness. But the reason of this darkness differs entirely from that which existed at the Entered Apprentice stage. Then he was but an ignorant beginner upon the quest, making his first irregular benighted efforts

[p. 151]

towards the light. Now, he has long passed beyond that stage; he comes with all the qualifications and equipment of a Master Mason. Long ago he found the light he first sought, and for long he has been directing his steps and nourishing his growth by its rays. And more; after all this intimacy with it he has known it recede from him and disappear in the great ordeal of dereliction of the Third Degree, when, in the "dark night of the soul" and utter helplessness of all his powers, he learned how strength could be perfected out of weakness by the potent efficacy of the Vital and Immortal Principle within him, in whose presence the darkness and the light are both alike. His present initial deprivation of light is the darkness of the Third Degree carried over into this further experience. It betokens rather a momentary failure to adjust his perception to the new quality of life he is now entering upon, just as a new-born child is unable at first to coordinate its sight to objects before it. For a while, but only for a brief while, the candidate feels himself in darkness; but he is really blinded rather by excess of light than by lack of it.

In this condition he undertakes the opening out of a certain place which he proceeds to enter and explore, keeping touch meanwhile with his companions by a cord or life-line. The symbolism of all this is singularly rich in allusion to certain interior processes of introspection well defined in the experience of the contemplative mystics and well attested in their records. The place entered emblematizes once again the material and psychical organism, a dense compact of material particles

[p. 152]

coating the more tenuous interior spirit of man as a shell surrounds the contents of an egg. "Roll away the stone," it will be recalled, was the first injunction of the Master at the raising of Lazarus. This obstruction removed, the psychical organism becomes detached from the physical and the mind is free to become introverted and work exploratively upon its own ground, to search the contents of its own unplumbed depths, to probe deeper and deeper into itself, eradicating defects and removing rubble, pushing in and in by the energy of a persistent will, yet retaining contact the while with the outer physical nature by a subtle filament or life-line which prevents their entire separation. The position is the same as when the body sleeps whilst the mind is dreaming and vividly active, save that in dreams the will is not functioning as a consciously directive instrument as is hypothetically the case with one who, having attained Mastership, has all his faculties under volition and control. Yet all this interior work, so rapidly summarized and symbolically enacted in the Ceremony, is not the work of a day nor the casual task of a weakling. The ancients referred to it as the twelve labours of Hercules, whilst its arduousness is further graphically described by the initiate poet Virgil in the sixth Aeneid and by more recent illuminates. Nor, even when its nature is fully apprehended, is it a work to be lightly undertaken. Throughout the Ceremony the utmost humility is enjoined upon the candidate as the essential qualification for entering upon this process of self-exploration, He is bidden to draw nigh to the Centre, but to halt

[p. 153]

and make obeisance at three several stages, at each of which he is told he is approaching more nearly to that central Essence, that holy ground of his being upon which only the humble can walk, that "earth" which only the meek shall inherit.

It is in this state that the introverted mind, groping for its own foundation and centre, reaches at length the bedrock of its being. As the symbolic ceremony exhibits the grasping of an emblem embodying the Word of Life, so literally and in fact the questing mind, in coming upon the Vital and Immortal Principle animating it, "lays hold on Eternal Life." It discovers the Lost Word, the divine root of its being, from which it has hitherto been so long dissociated. It fails to realize the fact at first, for "the Light shineth in darkness and the darkness comprehendeth it not." Presently that darkness will disappear; when "the day (the new consciousness) dawns and the shadows (the old mentality) flee away."

Therefore it is that this work of the introverted mind and the discovery it makes, are exhibited as taking place darkly and amid subterranean gloom. There remains, therefore, one concluding psychological process--to extrovert that knowledge and bring it forward into formalized brain-consciousness, so that what the spirit and the soul already know interiorly the outer mind may also know exteriorly. Subjective awareness does not become knowledge until it has been cerebrated and passed through the alembic of the brain and the logical understanding. When it has so passed through and become formalized, a reciprocal and reflex action between the inner

[p. 154]

and outer natures is set up resulting in the illumination of the whole. This extroversion of subjective perceptions is symbolically achieved by the return of the candidate from the subterranean depths to the surface and there rejoining his former companion-sojourners and effecting a unification of all his component parts.

It is then that the Mystery is consummated. The Great Light breaks. The Vital and Immortal Principle comes to self-consciousness in him. The Glory of the Lord is revealed to and in him, and all his flesh sees it.

So far as it is possible for symbolic ceremonial to portray it this consummation is represented by the restoration to light and the revelation that then meets the candidate's gaze. His condition differs now from any that has preceded it. It is not merely one of illumination by the Supernal Light. It is one of identification with It. He and It have become one, as a white-hot iron is indistinguishable from the furnace-flame engulfing it. At the outset of his Masonic quest the predominant wish of his heart was Light. The impulse was not his own; it was that of the Light Itself--the primal Light of light, the Divine Substantial Word--seeking self-development in him. Consciousness is that Light become self-perceptive by polarization within an efficient physiological organism. Man provides the only organism adapted to the attainment of that self-perception; but only when that organism is purified and prepared sufficiently for the achievement. In the Royal Arch that achievement is hypothetically effected.

[p. 155]

The condition attained by the illumined candidate is the equivalent of what in Christian theology is known as Beatific Vision and in the East as Samadhi. It is also spoken of as universal or cosmic consciousness, since the percipient, transcending all sense of personal individualization, time and space, is co-conscious with all that is. He has entered the bliss and peace surpassing that temporal understanding which is limited to perceiving the discords, antinomies and contrasts characterizing finite existence; he has risen to that exalted state where all these find their resolution in the blissful concord of the Eternal. He is in conscious sympathy and identity of feeling with all that lives and feels, in virtue of that universal charity and limitless love which is the corollary of perceiving the unity of all in the Being of Deity, and which at the outset of his progress he was told was the summit of the Mason's profession. He sees too that there is a universe within as well as without him; that he himself microcosmically sums up and contains all that manifested to his temporal intelligence as the vast spacial universe around him. He is himself conscious of being the measure of the universe; he realizes that the earth, the heavens, and all their contents, are externalizations, projected images, of corresponding realities present within himself. As the perfected head of creation, he beholds how he sums up in himself all the lower forms of life through which his organism has passed to attain to that perfection. The four symbolic standards exhibiting the lion, ox, man and eagle are a very ancient glyph, declaring among other

[p. 156]

things the story of the soul's evolution and its progress from the passional wild-beast stage to one which, while still sensuous and animal, is docile and disciplined for service, and thence to the stage of human rationality, which at length culminates in upward-soaring spirituality. Similarly the displayed banners of the twelve Israelitish tribes are again but figures of their prototypes, the twelve zodiacal sections of those heavens which could not exist or be discernible to the outward eye were they not also the phenomenalized aspect of a reality cognizable by the inward eye; whilst, gathered beneath these emblems, are those who represent the tribes of no terrestrial nation, but are the "tribes of God," the heavenly hierarchies that constitute an archetypal canopy or holy royal arch above the visible creation and that mediate to it the effluences of that all-embracing triune Spirit of Power, Wisdom and Love in which the entire composite structure lives, moves and has its being.

"In the beginning God created the heavens and the earth, and the earth was without form and void, and darkness was upon the face of the deep. And God said, Let there be light, and there was light." With these words begins the Sacred Script which is the sacramental token of that Living Word by whom all things were made, and are still in the making, and whose life is the light of men. The candidate who recovers that lost Word, in the sense of regaining vital organic integration into it, and who, therefore, is one with its Life and its Light, is able to verify this old creation-story in its personal application to himself. He stands in the presence

[p. 157]

of his own "earth"--the stone vault or dense matrix out of which his finer being has emerged--and of his own "heavens" or ethereal body of substantialized radiance which (as the iridescent sash of the Order is meant to denote) now covers him with light as with a garment. He is able to discern that it was himself who at first was "without form and void" and who in virtue of that Fiat Lux! has at last become transformed from chaos and unconsciousness into a form so perfect and lucid as to become a co-conscious vehicle of Divine Wisdom itself.

With this symbolic attainment of Beatific Vision at the restoration to light, the effective part of the Royal Arch Ceremony as an initiatory rite concludes. What follows upon it is anti-climax and allegorical exposition of a similar nature to the traditional history in the Master Mason's Degree. This takes the form of a mythos or dramatic narrative by the three sojourners, describing their release from captivity in Babylon, their return to Jerusalem under an impulse to assist in rebuilding the destroyed national temple, their work among its ruins and the discovery of an ancient and apparently important archive, The perspicacious mind will not fail to perceive in this historical or quasi-historical narrative an allegory of the spiritual process which has been going on within the candidate himself. It is he, as it is every human soul, that has been in Babylonian bondage, in captivity to the Babel-confusion of mundane existence, the tyranny of material interests, and the chaos of his own disordered nature. It is he who, in revolt from these, has in reflective

[p. 158]

moments "sat down and wept by the waters of Babylon"--the transient flux of temporal things--and "remembered Zion," in a yearning for inward freedom and permanent peace of heart. It is he who finds the temple of his old natural self worthless and in ruins, and realizes that upon its site he must rebuild another and worthier one. From within himself comes the urge of the inward Lord (Kurios) which (under the mask of Cyrus the king) bids him forthwith depart from his captivity and go up to his true native-land and re-erect the Lord's house. It is himself who discovers among the rubble of his old self the plans and the material for the new structure. And ultimately when that new structure is completed and, when from natural man he has become reorganized into spiritual man, it is he who is able to perceive the wonders of his own constitution, to behold his own "earth" and his own "heavens" now fused into a unity to which both his material and his spiritual nature were necessary contributors.

The constitution of the Chapter as first revealed to the candidate is, therefore, a symbol of his perfected organism. He sees that it is polarized East and West; the East occupied by the three Principals, signifying his spiritual pole; the West, occupied by the three Sojourners, his psychic and materialized pole; each triad being the reflex of the other, yet each triad being an organic unity in itself. St. John testifies to this (and the ceremonial rite is made conformable to the teaching of that great Initiate) when he writes: "There are three that bear record in heaven, and these three are one.

[p. 159]

[paragraph continues] And there are three that bear witness in earth, and these three agree in one." The meaning of this metaphysical assertion is that, just as a ray of white light splits up (as in the rainbow) into three primary colours which still remain organically united, so both the self-knowing Spirit in man and his psychical nature, although monadic essentially, are prismatically dissociable into a trinity. The Spirit in man in its triple aspects is, therefore, appropriately typified by the three Principals. They represent the three high attributes of the Spirit--Holiness, Royal Supremacy, Functional Power--referred to in the title of the Order; Holy-Royal-Arch. The middle and neutral term of these three must be considered as differentiating itself into a passive and an active, or a negative and a positive aspect; although all three act conjointly and as one (as is in fact the case with the three Principals of a Chapter). These three aspects of monadic Spirit are personified as Haggai (passive), Joshua (active), with Zerubabel as the middle term from which the other two issue and into which they merge. For the central Majesty is in one of its aspects silent and withdrawn and in the other functionally active and compulsive.

So too, with the triad of Sojourners at the other pole. They represent the unitary human Ego or personality also in its threefold aspects. They are the incarnated antitype or physicalized reflex of man's archetypal unincarnated and overshadowing Spirit. Hence they are designated Sojourners, as being but transient consociated pilgrims or wayfarers upon a plane of impermanence, in contrast with the enduring life of the deathless spirit whose

[p. 160]

projection upon this lower world they are. Psychologically, human personality is distributed into a passive negative subconsciousness and an active positive intelligence, linked together by a central co-ordinating principle, the combined three constituting man's unitary individuality. My Ego with its central and directive power of will is my principal sojourner; my subconsciousness with its passive intuitional capacity, and my practical intelligence with its active and connecting powers of thought and understanding, are my assistant sojourners. Let me see to it that, like their symbolic representatives, they are kept clothed in white and so able to reflect and react to their correspondences in the eastern or spiritual pole of my being.

The nexus or connecting medium between man's spiritual and bodily poles is represented by a third triad impersonated by the two Scribes and the Janitor. The more important of these scribes is attached to the East pole and is as it were its emissary towards the West; the other is associated with the Western pole and his activities are directed Eastwards; whilst the Door-keeper is the point of contact with the world without. In one of their many significances they typify the middle term between Spirit and Matter--the astral medium or psychic bridge, in virtue of which contact between them is possible.

Heavily veiled beneath the sacramentalism of a council of the Jewish Sanhedrim, the Royal Arch Ceremony therefore exhibits in a most graphic manner the psychologic rationale of the final stage of regeneration. To the literalist, unacquainted

[p. 161]

with the fact that, in both Sacred Writ and the teaching of the Mysteries, surface appearances are always intended to be transposed into spiritual values and that quasi-historic characters are meant to be impersonations of philosophic facts or principles, some difficulty may be felt on being asked to translate the quasi-historicity of the ceremonial text into the spiritualized interpretation here offered. The education and enlightenment of the understanding is, however, one of the deliberate intentions of Initiatory Rites, and until the mind is able to rise above merely material facts and habituate itself to functioning in the truer realm of ideas which materialize into facts and make facts possible, there is small chance of its profiting from Rites like those of Masonry, which are of wholly negligible value but for the spiritual force and vitalizing energy of their inherent ideas. It may, therefore, be both helpful and a corroboration of what has been said if we scrutinize the Hebrew names of a Chapter's officers; what they yield upon analysis will demonstrate that those officers impersonate ideas rather than represent persons.

1. "Zerubabel, prince of the people." The name literally means "a sprouting forth from Babel, or from among the people." "Babel" and "people" are two forms of expressing the same idea and the English word is almost identical with the Hebrew one. Society as a whole, the multitude, "the people" ("bebeloi," as it is in Greek), at all times of the world's history constitutes a Babel of confused aims and interests. But there are always individuals intellectually or spiritually in advance of the crowd

[p. 162]

and whose ideas, teachings or example shoot ahead of it, and to such leaders the name Zerubabel would apply. But this illustration does not express the deeper sense in which the word must be construed, which is one of personal application. The individual is himself a mob, a chaos, a multitude of confused desires, thoughts, passions, until these are brought into discipline. But, present even amidst these and sprouting up from among them, the ordinary man is conscious of a higher and spiritual element in him, which he may cultivate or disregard, but which in his best moments flames up above his lower disordered nature, convinces him of the errors of his ways, and entices him to live from that higher level. That loftier element is expressed by the word "Zerubabel"; it is the apex and focus point of his spirituality as distinguished from his ordinary carnal intelligence; the summit of all his faculties, the "prince" of his "people." Those same faculties or "people" are referred to in the word meaning "My people having obtained mercy" (or become regenerate), and in the text "The people that sat in darkness have seen a great light."

2. "Haggai the Prophet." As has been shown before, the spiritual principle differentiates into a passive and an active aspect. "Haggai" represents the passive aspect and signifies at once the blissful and self-contemplative nature of the spirit. It is called "the prophet" because of the power of insight and omniscience characterizing that which transcends the sense of time and abides eternally, and because it projects into the lower intelligence intuitions, foreglimpses and intimations of a

[p. 163]

prophetic nature. From the same word is derived the Greek word "hagios," holy.

3. "Joshua, the son of Josedek, the high priest," personifies the active executive aspect of spirit. Literally Joshua means the "divine saviour," and Josedek "divine righteousness," whilst the "high priest" connotes a mediatorial factor between man and Deity. The title in its entirety therefore intimates that the human spirit or divine principle in man functions intermediately between Deity and man's lower nature to promote the latter's salvation and perfection. We have previously shown how the Master Mason must be his own high priest and "walk upon" the chequered floor-work of his elementary nature by learning to trample upon it. Thus the Three Principals form a unity figuring man's spiritual pole in its triple aspects; they represent the summit of his being as it lives on the plane of the Spirit--holy, royal, supreme--blissful because in a state of holiness or wholeness; royal because a son of the King of all; powerful because of its power to subdue, transmute and redeem all that is below its own purity and perfection.

4 & 5. Ezra and Nehemiah. In the great Mystery-system of Egypt, which long anteceded the Hebrew system, the regenerate candidate, who had achieved the highest possible measure of self-transmutation of his lower nature, was accorded the title of Osiris. It was the equivalent of attaining Christhood. The nature of the perfectioning process and the rituals in connection therewith are, thanks to certain modern scholars, available to us and are recommended to the student who desires to know how arduous and real

[p. 164]

that process was and the extremely high degree of regeneration aimed at. In Hebrew the title Osiris became changed into Azarias (and sometimes Zeruiah) and still further corrupted into Esdras and Ezra, the name of the senior Scribe of the Royal Arch. To understand the significance of the two Scribes Ezra and Nehemiah it is necessary to recall that, in the Biblical account of the return from Babylonian captivity, these two were leading men. Transposing this historicized narrative into its spiritual implication, Ezra and Nehemiah personify two distinct stages of the mystical progress made by the candidate who essays to renounce the Babel of his lower nature and, by reorganizing himself, regain his native spiritual home and condition. "Nehemiah" (whose place in the Chapter is in the South West) is a figure of a certain measure of that reorganization and return. Like his Biblical prototype, he symbolizes the candidate engaged in rebuilding the wall of Jerusalem, and occupied in the great work of self-reconstruction, from which he will not be beguiled into coming down by the appeals and blandishments of the outer world. "Ezra" (whose position is in the North East) indicates a much more advanced measure of progress from West to East. The discerning student who will peruse the Biblical books of Nehemiah and Ezra (including the Apocryphal books of Esdras) in this light, and with this key to their true purport, will not fail to profit by the instruction they will yield. Hence too they are called "scribes"; both of them are recorders of, and testifiers to, distinct but representative experiences encountered in the inner

[p. 165]

man at different stages of the "great work" of self-integration and journeying from a Babylon condition to the spiritual Jerusalem.

 

Here we bring to an end our examination of the true meaning and purpose of the Royal Arch Ceremony. Dealing as it does with a supreme human experience which none can fully appreciate without undergoing it, it is the greatest and most momentous rite in Masonry, and no one who studies it comprehendingly and in its sacramental significance will withhold admiration either for the profound knowledge and insight of the now unidentifiable mystic and initiate who conceived it or for the skill with which he compiled it and cast his knowledge into dramatic expression. The pity of it is that those who practise the rite make no effort to penetrate its meaning and are content with the unenlightened perfunctory performance of a ritual which even exoterically is singularly striking, beautiful and suggestive. The least reflection upon it must suggest that Masonry is here dealing with the building-work of no outward structure, but with the re-erection of the fallen, disordered temple of the human soul; and that even assuming that it but memorialized some long past historic events, those events can have no vital bearing upon the life, character or conduct of anyone to-day and would not justify the existence of an elaborate secret Order to perpetuate them. But if those events and this rite be symbolic of something deeper and something personal; if they sacramentalize truths perpetually valid and capable of present realization

[p. 166]

in those who ceremonially re-enact them, then they call for fuller and more serious attention than is usually accorded. Moreover, if the Royal Arch be the symbolic representation of a supreme experience attained and attainable only in sanctity and by the regenerate, it follows that the Craft Degrees leading up to and qualifying for it will take on a much deeper sense than they commonly receive and must be regarded as solemn instructions in the requisite preparation for that regenerate condition. The Craft work is unfinished without the attainment forthshadowed in the Royal Arch. That attainment in turn is impossible without the discipline of the preliminary labours, the purification of mind and desire, and that crucifixion unto death of the self-will which constitute the tests of merit qualifying for entrance to that Jerusalem which has no geographical site and which is called the "City of Peace" because it implies conscious rest of the soul in God. For many, the suggestion that the attainment of such a condition is possible or thinkable whilst we are still here in the flesh may be surprising or even incredible. But such doubt is unwarranted, and the Masonic doctrine negates it. As has been already shown to the contrary, that doctrine postulates not the absence but the possession of the material organism as a necessary factor in advancing the evolution of the human spirit; that organism is the vessel in which our base metal has to be transmuted into gold; it is the fulcrum furnishing the resistance requisite for the spirit's energizing into unfoldment and self-consciousness. Physical death is therefore not an advancement of, but an

[p. 167]

interference with, the work of regeneration. "The night cometh when no man can work," and when the soul merely passes from labour to refreshment until recalled to labour once more at the task of self-conquest. It is but figurative of that necessary dying to self which implies the voluntary decreasing assertiveness of our temporal nature to permit of a corresponding ascendancy of the spiritual.

But if in the hands of its present exponents Masonry is now rather a dead letter than a living effectual Initiatory Rite capable of quickening the spirituality of its candidates, it still remains for the earnest and perspicuous aspirant to the deeper verities an instructive economy of the science of self-gnosis and regeneration. For such these papers are written, that they may both learn something of the original design of the Order and educate their imagination in the principles of that science. And to such, in conclusion, may be commended that Temple-hymn of the Hebrew Initiates, which of all the Psalms of David refers with most pointed reference to the subject-matter of the supreme Order of the Holy Royal Arch of Jerusalem and the personal attainment of the blessed and perfected condition which that title implies:--

"I was glad when they said unto me, let us go up into the house of the Lord;
  Our feet shall stand within thy gates, O Jerusalem.
  Jerusalem is builded as a city that is compact together;
  Thither the tribes go up, the tribes of the Lord. . . .
  For there are set thrones of judgment, the thrones of the house of David.
  Pray for the peace of Jerusalem! they shall prosper that love it. [p. 168]
  Peace is within her walls and plenteousness within her palaces.
  For my brethren and companions' sake I will say,
  Peace be within thee. (Psalm CXXII.)

In those few lines is sketched all that is implied in the symbolic spectacle that greets the eyes of the Royal Arch Mason at the supreme moment of his restoration to light. Exalted into and become identified with the supreme bliss, peace and self-consciousness of the All-Pervasive and Omniscient Spirit, he sees how he has "gone up" out of the Babylon of his old complex and disordered nature and upon its ruins has built for himself an ethereal body of glory, a "house of the Lord." He sees how this ecstatic condition and this new-made celestial body are the sublimated products of his former self and its temporal organism. He sees how each separate part and faculty of that old nature, or as it were each of the zodiacal divisions of his own microcosm, has contributed its purified essence to form a new organism, "a new heaven and a new earth"; and how these essences, like twelve diversified tribes, have assembled convergently and finally coalesced and become fused into a unity or new whole, "a city that is compact together." And it is this "city," this blessed condition, which mystically is called "Jerusalem," within whose walls is the peace which passeth understanding and whose palaces reveal to the enfranchised soul the unfailing plenteousness and fecundity of the indissoluble trinity of Wisdom and Love and Power from which man and the universe have issued and into which they are destined to return.

[p. 169]

The antithesis of this "heavenly city" is the confused Babylon city of this world, of which it is written to all captives therein, "Come out of her, My people, that ye be not partakers of her sins and that ye receive not of her plagues!" (Rev. xviii. 4). And, in a word, the Royal Arch Ceremony sacramentally portrays the last phase of the mystical journey of the exiled soul from Babylon to Jerusalem as it escapes from its captivity to this lower world and, "passing the veils" of matter and form, breaks through the bondage of corruption into the world of the formless Spirit and realizes the glorious liberty of the children of God.

    
The Meaning of Masonry, by W.L. Wilmshurst, [1922], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 170]

  

Chapter V.

  

FREEMASONRY IN RELATION TO THE ANCIENT MYSTERIES.

EVERY Mason is naturally desirous to know something of the origin and history of the Craft. The available literature on the subject is diffuse and unsatisfying. It offers a mass of disconnected details of archaeology and comparative religion without unifying them into any helpful light and deals rather with matters of minor and temporal history than with what alone is of real moment, the spiritual lineage of the Craft. In this paper, therefore, it is proposed to trace a rough outline--and, in the space available, only a very rough one is possible--of a movement which is as old as humanity itself and the purpose and doctrine of which are still faithfully, if very rudimentarily, preserved in the Masonic system. But such a sketch, by providing a general outline for the enquirer to contemplate and the details of which he may fill in for himself by subsequent study of his own, may perhaps prove more serviceable than a mass of fragmentary facts over which one may pore indefinitely and with much interest, yet without perceiving their inter-relation or coordinating them into one comprehensive impressive scheme.

No really serviceable work upon Masonry exists that treats of its history and purpose in the only way that matters vitally. The student is apt to waste much time to little profit by turning for information to publications the titles of which seem

[p. 171]

to promise full enlightenment, but that leave him unsatisfied and unconvinced. Desultory collections of information upon points of symbolism, archaeology and anthropology, the tracing of connections between modern Masonry and mediaeval building-guilds and other communities may be all very interesting, but these are but as the dry bones of a subject of which one desires to know the living spirit. They fail to answer the main questions one asks from the heart and is anxious to have answered; such as, What was the nature of the Ancient Mysteries of which modern Masonry purports to be the perpetuation? To what end and purpose did they exist? What need is there to perpetuate them to-day? For what purpose was Initiation instituted? Did it at any time serve any real purpose or can it now? Was it ever more than it is to-day, a mere perfunctory ceremonial leading to nothing of essential value and emphasizing only a few moral principles and elementary truths which we know already? It is to answering such questions as these that the present paper is directed.

Now one of the first things to strike any student of Masonic literature and comparative religion is the remarkable presence of common factors, common beliefs, doctrines, practices and symbols, in the religions of all races alike, whether ancient or modern, eastern or western, civilized or barbarian, Christian or pagan. However separated from others by time or distance, however intellectualized or primitive, however elaborated or simple their religion or morals, and however wide their differences in important respects, each people is found to have

[p. 172]

employed and still to be employing certain ideas, symbols and practices in common with every other; perhaps with or without some slight modification of form. Masonic treatises abound with demonstrations of this uniformity in the use of various symbols prominent in every Lodge. Authors delight in supplying evidence of the close correspondences in various unrelated systems and in demonstrating how ancient and universal such and such ideas, symbols and practices have been. But they do not go so far as to explain the reason for this antiquity and universality, and it is this point which it will be well to clear up at the outset, since it furnishes the clue to the entire problem of the genesis, the history, and the reason for the existence of Masonry.

If research and reflection be pushed far enough it becomes clear that the universality and uniformity referred to are due to the fact that at one time, long back in the world's past, there existed or was implanted in the minds of the whole human family--which was doubtless much smaller and more concentrated then than now--a Proto-Evangelium or Root-Doctrine in regard to the nature and destiny of the soul of man and its relation to the Deity. We of to-day pride ourselves upon being wiser and more advanced than primitive humanity. We assume that our ancestors lived in moral benightedness out of which we have since gradually emerged into comparative light. All the evidence, however, negatives these suppositions. It indicates that primitive man, however childish and intellectually undeveloped according to modern standards, was spiritually conscious and psychically perceptive

[p. 173]

to a degree undreamed of by the modern mind, and that it is ourselves who, for all our cleverness and intellectual development in temporal matters, are nevertheless plunged in darkness and ignorance about our own nature, the invisible world around us, and the eternal spiritual verities. In all Scriptures and cosmologies the tradition is universal of a "Golden Age," an age of comparative innocence, wisdom and spirituality, in which racial unity and individual happiness and enlightenment prevailed; in which there was that open vision for want of which a people perisheth, but in virtue of which men were once in conscious conversation with the unseen world and were shepherded, taught and guided by the "gods" or discarnate superintendents of the infant race, who imparted to them the sure and indefeasible principles upon which their spiritual welfare and evolution depended.

The tradition is also universal of the collective soul of the human race having sustained a "fall," a moral declension from its true path of life and evolution, which has severed it almost entirely from its creative source, and which, as the ages advanced, has involved its sinking more and more deeply into physical conditions, its splitting up from a unity employing a single language into a diversity of conflicting races of different speeches and degrees of moral advancement, accompanied by a progressive densification of the material body and a corresponding darkening of the mind and atrophy of the spiritual consciousness. To some who read this the statement will probably be rejected as fabulous and incredible. The supposition of a

[p. 174]

[paragraph continues] "fall of man" is nowadays an unpopular doctrine, rejected by many who contend that everything points rather to a rise of man, yet who fail to reflect that logically a rise necessarily involves an antecedent fall from which a rise becomes possible. This point, however, we cannot stop to discuss and must be content merely with indicating what in both the Scriptures of all races and the Wisdom-tradition of the sages of antiquity is unanimously recorded to be the fact.

From that "fall," which was not due to the transgression of an individual, but to some weakness or defect in the collective or group-soul of the Adamic race, and which was not the matter of a moment but a process covering vast time-cycles, it was necessary and within the Divine counsels and providence that humanity should be redeemed and restored to its pristine state; that it should be brought back once more into vital association with the Divine Principle from which by its secession it became increasingly detached, as its materialistic tendencies overpowered and quenched its native spirituality. This restoration in turn required vast time-cycles for its achievement. And it required something further. It required the application of an orderly and scientific method to effect the restoration of each fallen soul-fragment and bring it back to its primitive pure and perfect condition. I emphasize that the method was necessarily to be not a haphazard, but a scientific one. Anyone may fall from a housetop and break his bones; skilled surgery and intelligent effort by some friendly hand are required to heal the patient and get him back to the place he fell

[p. 175]

from. So with humanity. It fell--out of Eden, as our Scriptures describe the lapse from super-physical to physical conditions--why and how, again we must not stay to enquire. It fell, through inherent weakness and lack of wisdom. Unable to effect its own recovery it required skilled scientific assistance from other sources to bring about its restoration. Whence could come that skill and scientific knowledge if not from the Divine and now invisible world, from those "gods" and angelic guardians of the erring race of whom all the ancient traditions and sacred writings tell? Would not that regenerative method be properly described if it were called, as in Masonry it is called, a "heavenly science," and welcomed in the words that Masons in fact use, "Hail, Royal Art!"?

Thus, then, was the origin and birth of Religion. And Religion is a word implying a "binding back" (re-ligare). As with the setting and bandaging a broken limb, so the collective soul of humanity, fractured and comminuted by its fall into countless individuations and their subsequent respective progenies, each separately damaged and imperfect, needed to be restored to the condition from which it had become dislocated and once more built up into a perfect harmonious whole.

To the spiritual guardians of primitive man, then, one must attribute the communication of that universal science of rebuilding the fallen temple of humanity, of which science we now surprisedly find traces in every race and religion of the world. To this source we must credit the distribution, in every land and among every people, of the same or

[p. 176]

equivalent symbols, practices and doctrines, modified only locally and in accordance with the intelligence of particular peoples, yet all manifesting a common root and purpose.

This was the one Holy Catholic (or universal) Religion "throughout all the world"; at once a theoretic doctrine and a practical science intended to reunite man to his Maker. That religion could only be one, as it could not be otherwise than catholic and for all men equally and alike; though, owing to the perverse distortive tendencies of humanity itself, it was susceptible of becoming (as has so happened) debased and sectarianized into as many forms as there are peoples. Moreover, its main principles could never be susceptible of alteration, though they might be (as they have been) exoterically understood by some and esoterically by others, and their full import would not all at once be apparent, but develop with increasing fidelity to and understanding of them. It provided the unalterable "landmarks" of knowledge concerning human nature, human potentialities and human destiny. It laid down the ancient and established "usages and customs" to be followed at all times by everyone content to accept its discipline and which none might deviate from or add innovations to, save at his own peril. It was the "Sacred Law" for the guidance of the fallen soul, a law valid from the dawn of time till its sunset, and of which it is written "As it was in the beginning, is now and ever shall be, world without end." It was the science of life--of temporal limited life lived with the intention of its conversion and sublimation into eternal universal

[p. 177]

life; and, therefore, it called for a scientific or philosophic method of living, every moment and action of which should be directed to that great goal;--a method very different from the modern method, which is entirely utilitarian in its outlook and totally unscientific in its conduct.

This Proto-Religion is related to have originated in the East, from which proverbially all light comes, and, as humanity itself became diffused and distributed over the globe, to have gradually spread towards the West, in a perpetual watchfulness of humanity's spiritual interests and an unfailing purpose to retrieve "that which was lost"--the fallen human soul. We have already said that in early times the humanity then under its influence was far less materialized and far more spiritually sensitive and perceptive than it subsequently became or is now; and accordingly it follows that with the increasing age and density of the race the influence of the Proto-Religion itself became correspondingly diminished, though its principles remained as valid and effective as before; for the self-willed vagaries and speculative conceptions of man cannot alter the principles of static Truth and Wisdom. To follow in any detail the course of its history is not now necessary and would require a long treatise. And to do so would also be like following the course of a river backwards from its broad mouth to a point where it becomes an insignificant and scarcely traceable channel. For the race itself has wandered backwards, farther and farther from the original Wisdom-teaching, so that the once broad and bright flood of light upon cosmic principles and the

[p. 178]

evolution of the human soul has now become contracted into minute points. But that light, like that of a Master Mason, has never been wholly extinguished, however dark the age, and, by the tradition, this of ours is spiritually the darkest of the dark ages. "God has never left Himself without a witness among the children of men," and among the witnesses to the Ancient Wisdom and Mysteries is the system of Masonry; a faint and feeble flicker, perhaps, but nevertheless a true light and in the true line of succession of the primitive doctrine, and one still able to guide our feet into the way of peace and perfection.

The earliest teaching of the Mysteries traceable within historic time was in the Orient and in the language known as Sanscrit--a name itself significant and appropriate, for it means Holy Writ or "Sanctum Scriptum"; and for very great lights upon the ancient Secret Doctrine one must still refer to the religious and philosophical scriptures of India, which was in its spiritual and temporal prime when modern Europe was frozen beneath an ice-cap.

But races, like men, have their infancy, manhood and old age; they are but units, upon a larger scale than the individual, for furthering the general life-purpose. When a given race has served or failed in that purpose, the stewardship of the Mysteries passes on to other and more effectual hands. The next great torch-bearer of the Light of the world was Egypt, which, after many centuries of spiritual supremacy, in turn became the arid desert it now is both spiritually and materially, leaving nevertheless a mass of structural and written

[p. 179]

relics still testifying to its possession of the Doctrine in the days of its glory. From Egypt, as civilizations developed in adjoining countries, a great irradiation of them took place by the diffusion of its knowledge and the institution of minor centres for the imparting of the Divine Science in Chaldea, Persia, Greece and Asia Minor. "Out of Egypt have I called My son" is, in one of its many senses, a biblical allusion to this passing on of the catholic Mysteries from Egypt to new and virgin regions, for their enlightenment.

Of these various translations those that concern us chiefly are two; the one to Greece, the other to Palestine. We know from the Bible that Moses was an initiate of the Egyptian mysteries and became learned in all its wisdom, while Philo tells us that Moses there became "skilled in music, geometry, arithmetic, hieroglyphics and the whole circle of arts and sciences." In other words he became in a real sense a Master Mason and, as such, qualified himself for his subsequent great task of leadership of the Hebrew people and the formulating of their religious system and rule of life as laid down in the Pentateuch. The Mosaic system continued, as we know, along the channel indicated in the books of the Old Testament, and then, after many centuries and vicissitudes, effloresced in the greatest of all expressions of the Mysteries, as disclosed in the Gospels of the New Testament (or New Witness), involving the supersession of all previous systems under the Supreme Grand Mastership of Him who is called the Light of the World and its Saviour.

Concurrently with the existence of the Hebrew

[p. 180]

[paragraph continues] Mysteries under the Mosiac dispensation, the great Greek school of the Mysteries was developing, which, originating in the Orphic religion, culminated and came to a focus at Delphi and generated the philosophic wisdom and the aesthetic glories associated with Athens and the Periclean age. Greece was the spiritual descendant and infant prodigy of both India and Egypt, though developing along quite different lines. We know that Pythagoras, like Moses, after absorbing all his native teachers could impart, journeyed to Egypt to take his final initiation prior to returning and founding the great school at Crotona associated with his name. We know, too, from the Timaeus of Plato how aspirants for mystical wisdom visited Egypt for initiation and were told by the priests of Sais that "you Greeks are but children" in the Secret Doctrine, but were admitted to information enabling them to promote their own spiritual advancement. We know from the correspondence, recorded by Iamblichus, between Anebo and Porphyry, the fraternal relations existing between the various schools or lodges of instruction in different lands; how their members visited, greeted and assisted one another in the secret science, the more advanced being obliged, as every initiate still is when called upon, to "afford assistance and instruction to his brethren in the inferior degrees." And we know that at the Nativity--or shall we say the installation in this world--of the Great Master, there came to Him from afar Magi or initiate-visitors who knew of His impending advent and had seen His star in the East and desired to acknowledge and pay Him reverence. In all these world-moving

[p. 181]

incidents in times when initiation was a real event and not a mere ceremonial form as now, it is of interest to notice the practice upon a grand scale of the same customs and courtesies as are still observed, though alas unintelligently, by the Craft of to-day.

We must now speak more fully of the Mysteries and the "Royal Art" as pursued by the Greek school. With the Greeks it took the form of a quest of philosophy; i.e., for wisdom, for the Sophia, just as in the Hebrew and Christian schools it took the form of a quest for the Lost Word. The end was of course the same in both cases, but the approach to it was by different means and, as we shall see, the two methods coalesced into one at a later date. The Greek approach was primarily an intellectual one and by what Spinoza has termed Amor intellectualis Dei. The Christian approach was primarily through the affections and the adoration of the heart. Both strained after "that which was lost," but one sought after the lost ideal by intellectual and the other by devotional energy. Humanity is but slowly educated; "line upon line; precept upon precept; here a little and there a little," one faculty after another being developed and trained unto the refashioning of the perfect organism. And if philosophic Wisdom and the sense of Beauty stood forth--as they did stand forth--most prominently as the main pillars of the Greek system, the Greeks had yet to learn of a third and middle pillar that synthesized and comprised them both--that of the Strength of the supreme virtue of Love, when towards the object

[p. 182]

of all desire it pours from a pure and perfect heart.

The Greek's quest of wisdom was something much more than a mere desire for larger information and maturer judgment about one's place in the universe. Merely to know certain facts about the hidden side of life profits nothing unless the knowledge is allowed to influence and adapt our method of living to the truths disclosed. Then the knowledge becomes transmuted into wisdom; one becomes the truth one sees; and a man's life becomes truth made substantial and dynamic. But to bring this about one must first be informed about or initiated into certain elements of the truth and be persuaded that it is truth before setting about to become it. The Greek method, therefore, began by initiating the mind into certain truths about the soul's own nature, history, destiny and potentialities, and then left the individual to follow up the information by a course of conduct in which the teaching imparted would become converted into assured conviction and living power, whilst his increasing progress in the science would itself result in awakening him to still deeper truths.

It cannot be too strongly emphasized that no one can learn spiritual science, whether as taught by Masonry or any other system inculcating it, without submitting himself to its processes and living them out in practical experience. In this supreme study, knowing depends entirely upon doing; comprehension is conditional upon and the corollary of action. "He that will do the will shall know of the doctrine."

[p. 183]

Hence it is that in Masonry an installed Master is still called a "Master of Arts and Sciences," for he is supposed to have mastered the art of living in accordance with the theoretic gnosis or science imparted to him in the course of his progress. Real Masonic knowledge will never be achieved merely by oral explanation, hearing lectures and studying books. These may be useful in giving a preliminary start to earnest seekers needing but a little guidance to set them on that path of personal practice and experience where they will soon develop an automatic understanding of the doctrine for themselves; for those with but a casual dilletante interest the doctrine will continue veiled and secret. For example, it is one thing to hear explained what is meant by being divested of money and metals in the philosophic sense; it is quite another to have become insusceptible to all attraction by material interests and sense-allurements and to be consciously possessed of the wisdom accruing from that experience. It may interest to be told why, at a certain stage of progress, the candidate is likened to an ear of corn by a fall of water; but the explanation will be forgotten to-morrow, unless as the result of his own effort the hearer has become personally aware of an inward substantial growth ripening to harvest within him from the ground of his own being and fertilized by supersensual nourishment falling like the gentle rain from heaven upon his ardent and aspiring soul. Again, it may seem instructive to know that the great ritual of the Third Degree signifies a death unto sin and self and a new birth unto righteousness, but how will the information

[p. 184]

profit those who nevertheless mean to go on living the old manner of life, which at every moment negates all that that ritual implies?

The Ancient Mysteries, then, involved much more than a merely notional philosophy. They required also a philosophic method of living--or rather of dying. For as Socrates said (in Plato's Phaedo, from which much Masonic teaching is directly drawn and which every Masonic student should study deeply) "the whole study of the philosopher (or wisdom-seeker) is nothing else than to die and be dead"; an assertion repeated by Plutarch, "to be initiated is to die"; and by the Christian apostle, "I die daily." Their method was divided into two parts, the Lesser and the Greater Mysteries. The Lesser were those in which the more elementary instruction was imparted, so that candidates might forthwith set about to purify and adapt their lives to the truths disclosed. The Greater Mysteries related to the developments of consciousness within the soul itself, as the result of fidelity to the prescribed rule of life. To draw a faint analogy, the Lesser Mysteries bore the same relation to the Greater as the present Craft Degrees do to the Holy Royal Arch.

To deal adequately with the Mystery-systems would involve a lengthy study in itself. We will refer to but one of the most famous of them, the Eleusinian, which existed in Greece and for several centuries was the focus-point of religion and philosophy for the then civilized portion of Europe. "Eleusis" means light, and initiation into the Mysteries of Eleusis, therefore, meant a quest of

[p. 185]

the aspirant for light, in precisely the same, but a far more real, sense as the modern Mason declares light to be the predominant wish of his heart. It meant, as it ought to mean to-day but does not, not merely light in the sense of being given some secret information not obtainable elsewhere or about any matter of worldly interest, but the opening up of the candidate's whole intellectual and spiritual nature in the super-sensual light of the Divine world and raising him to God-consciousness. The ordinary and uninitiated man knows nothing of that super-sensual light by his merely natural reason; he is conscious only of the outer world and things perceptible by his natural faculties. In the words of St. Paul "the natural man receiveth not the things of the Spirit of God, for they are foolishness unto him; neither can he know them, because they are spiritually discerned." Initiation, therefore, meant a process whereby natural man became transformed into spiritual or ultra-natural man, and to effect this it was necessary to change his consciousness, to gear it to a new and higher principle, and so, as it were, make of him a new man in the sense of attaining a new method of life and a new outlook upon the universe. "Be ye transformed by the renewing of your minds," says the Apostle, referring to this process. As has previously been shown in these papers, the transference of the symbol of the Divine Presence from the ceiling to the floor of the Masonic Lodge is to indicate how the Vital and Immortal Principle in man can be brought down from his remoter psychological region into his physical organism and function there through his

[p. 186]

body and brain, thus as it were dislocating and superseding his natural mentality and regenerating him. This truth is still further reproduced in Masonry by the name "Lewis," traditionally associated with the Craft. "Lewis" is a modern corruption of Eleusis and of other Greek and Latin names associated with Light. In our instruction Lectures it is said to designate "the son of a Mason." This, however, has no reference to human parentage and sonship. It refers to the mystical birth of the Divine Light in oneself; as a familiar Scriptural text has it, "Unto us a child is born, unto us a son is given." It is the Divine Principle, the Divine Wisdom, brought to birth and function within the organism of the natural man, who virtually becomes its parent. It is further described in our Lectures as something "which when properly dovetailed into a stone forms a clamp, enabling Masons to lift great weights with little inconvenience whilst fixing them on their proper bases." All which is a concealed way of expressing the fact that, when the Divine Light is brought forward from man's submerged depths and firmly grafted or dovetailed into his natural organism, he then becomes able easily to grapple with difficulties, problems and "weights" of all kinds which to the unregenerate are insuperable, and to perceive all things sub specie aeternitatis and in their true relations, as is not possible to other men who behold them only sub specie temporis and are consequently unable to judge their real values and "fix them on their proper bases."

In the time that the Mysteries flourished, every

[p. 187]

educated man entered them in the same way that men enter a University in modern times. They were the recognized source of instruction in the only things that really matter, those affecting the culture of the human soul and its education in the science of itself and its divine nature. Candidates were graded according to their moral efficiency and their intellectual or spiritual stature. For years they underwent disciplinary intellectual exercises and bodily asceticism, punctuated at intervals by appropriate tests and ordeals to determine their fitness to proceed to the more serious, solemn and awful processes of actual initiation, administered only to the duly qualified, and which were of a secret and closely guarded character. Their education, differing greatly from the scholastic methods of a utilitarian age like our own, was directed solely to the cultivation of the "four cardinal virtues" and the "seven liberal arts and sciences" as qualifications prerequisite to participation in the higher order of life to which initiation would eventually admit the worthy and properly prepared candidate. The construction put upon these virtues and sciences was a much more advanced one than the modern mind considers adequate. Virtues with them were more than abstractions and ethical sentiments; as the word itself implies they involved positive valours and virility of soul. Temperance involved complete control of the passional nature under every circumstance; Fortitude, the courage that no adversity will dismay or deflect from the goal in view; Prudence, the deep insight that begets the prophetic or forward-seeing faculty of seer-ship (providentia);

[p. 188]

[paragraph continues] Justice, unswerving righteousness of thought and action. [**] The "arts and sciences" were called "liberal" because they tended to liberate the soul from defects and illusions normally enslaving it, thus totally differing from science in the modern sense, the tendency of which is, as we know, materialistic and soul-benumbing. Grammar, Logic and Rhetoric with the Ancients were disciplines of the moral nature, by which the irrational tendencies of a human being were purged away and he was trained to become a living witness of the universal Logos and a living mouth-piece of the Divine Word. Geometry and Arithmetic were sciences of transcendental space and numeration (seeing that, as in the words of our own Scriptures, God has "made everything by measure, number and weight"), the comprehension of which provides the key, not only to the problems of one's being, but to those physical ones which are found so baffling by the inductive methods of to-day. Astronomy for them required no telescopes; it dealt not with the stars of the sky, but was the science of metaphysics and the understanding of the distribution of the forces latent in, and determining the destiny of, individuals, nations and the race. Finally Music (or Harmony) was for them not of the vocal or instrumental kind; it meant the living practice of philosophy, the adjustment of human life into harmony with God, until the personal soul became unified with Him and consciously heard, because it now participated

[p. 189]

in, the music of the spheres. As Milton puts it:--

"How lovely is Divine Philosophy,
  Not harsh and crabbed as dull fools suppose,
  But musical as is Apollo's lute
  And a perpetual feast of nectar'd sweets
  Where no crude surfeit reigns."

Every possible device was employed and practised to train the mind to acquire dominion over the passions and to loosen and detach it from the impressions and attractions of the senses, to destroy the illusions and false imaginations under which it labours when using no higher light than its own, and to qualify it for a higher method of cognition and for the reception of supersensual truth and the light of the Divine world. The idealism of Greek architecture and sculpture was entirely due to the same motive and with a view to elevating the imagination beyond the visible level and fitting the mind for the apprehension of ultra-physical form and beauty. Even athletic exercises were made to subserve the same purpose; wrestling and racing were not vulgar sports; they were regarded sacramentally, as the type of combats the soul must engage in against the competition of the fleshly desires; and the victor's crown of laurel or olive was the emblem of wisdom and illumination resulting to him in whom the spirit conquers the flesh. Thus every intellectual and physical interest was made subservient to the one idea of separating the soul from material bondage and was purposely of a purifying or "cathartic" nature that should cleanse the thoughts and desires of the aspirant and make him white within and without even as the modern candidate for the

[p. 190]

[paragraph continues] Craft is clothed in white. This inward purity of heart and mind, coupled with the possession of the four cardinal virtues, was and still is an absolute essential to the ordeals of actual initiation, which otherwise rendered the candidate liable to insanity and obsessions of which the modern mind in its ignorance of what initiation involves can form no opinion. Those who became proficient and properly prepared in this curriculum of the Lesser Mysteries were eventually admitted to initiation in the Greater Mysteries. Those who failed to qualify were restrained from advancement. As now, the numbers of really earnest and qualified aspirants were only a percentage of the total of those who entered the Mysteries, for in the spiritual life, as in the world of nature, the biological phenomenon prevails that the available raw material greatly exceeds the perfected product. Every year far more seeds are borne, far more eggs are laid or spawned, than reach maturity, although every seed and egg is potentially capable of growth and fruition. Plato, speaking of the Mysteries in his own day, quotes a still older authority that "the thyrsus-bearers [**] (or candidates for initiation) are numerous, but the Bacchuses (or perfected initiates) are few." The same truth is restated in the words in the Gospels, "Many are called, but few are chosen."

One qualification above all was essential to the

[p. 191]

aspirant, as it is still to-day,--humility. The wisdom into which the Mysteries and initiation admit a man is foolishness to the world; it is a reversal and revolution of all orthodox and academic standards. To attain it a man must be prepared for that complete and voluntary self-denial which may involve his finding negated everything he has previously held to be true, or which those among whom he ordinarily mingles believe to be true. He must be content to "become a fool for the kingdom of heaven's sake" and to suffer adversity, ridicule and obloquy for it if needs be. This was one of the prime reasons for secrecy and one--though not the only one--of the origins of the Masonic injunction as to secrecy. The world's wisdom and that to which initiation admits are so antipodal in their nature that any intrusion of the latter will infallibly provoke resentment from the former. Hence it is written "Cast not your pearls before swine, neither give that which is holy unto dogs--lest they turn and rend you." Silence and secrecy are, therefore, desirable if only in self-defence, though there are other reasons; but humility is indispensable. In the public processions of the Lesser Mysteries--for the public were permitted at certain festivals to participate to a small extent in some of the more exoteric knowledge--the sacred emblems and eucharistic vessels used in the rites were carried with great reverence upon the back of an ass. With the same intention, it is said that one of the great Greek philosophers always had an ass by his side in his lecture-room when instructing his students. The explanation is given in the words of one of the old authorities upon

[p. 192]

initiation as follows: "There is no creature so able to receive divinity as an ass, into whom if ye be not turned, ye shall in no wise be able to carry the divine mysteries." In the light of this, one will at once discern the symbolical significance of the Christian Master riding into Jerusalem upon an ass.

Another and a greatly educative means employed in the Mysteries was that of instructing, enlarging and purifying the imagination by means of myths, expressing either in doctrinal form or by spectacular representation, truths of the Divine world and of the soul's history. The modern mind in its passion for actual concrete facts is little sympathetic to a method of teaching which dispenses with demonstrable facts and prefers to enunciate the eternal principles underlying such facts and of which those facts are but the manifested resultant consequence. Facts--of history or science--tend, however, to congest the mind and paralyse the imagination, as Darwin lamented in his own case. Principles stimulate and illumine the imagination, and enable the mind to interpret facts and adjust them to their proper relation. The Greek mythologists were adepts at expressing cosmic and philosophic truths in the guise of fables which at once expressed theosophic teaching to the discerning and veiled it from the careless and ignorant. Myth-making was a science, not an indulgence in irresponsible fiction, and by exhibiting some of these myths in dramatic form candidates were instructed in various fundamental verities of life.

One of the chief and best known of the numerous

[p. 193]

myths was that of Demeter and her daughter Persephone, annually performed with great ceremony and elaboration at the Eleusinia, and of which it may be useful to speak briefly. It told how the maiden Persephone strayed away from Arcadia (heaven) and her mother Demeter, to pluck flowers in the meads of Enna, and how the soil there opened and caused her to fall through into the lower dark world of Hades ruled over by Pluto. The despair of her mother at the loss reached Zeus, the chief of the Gods, with the result that he relieved the position by ordaining that, if the girl had not eaten of the fruit of Hades, she should forthwith be restored to her mother for ever, but that if she had so eaten she must abide a third of each year with Pluto and return to Demeter for the other two thirds. It proved that Persephone had unfortunately eaten a pomegranate in the lower world, so that her restoration to her mother could not be permanent, but only periodic.

This myth, and the importance once attached to it, will be appreciated only upon understanding its interpretation. It is the story of the soul and is of the same nature as the Mosaic myth of Adam and Eve and the apple, and as the cosmic parable of the Prodigal Son, neither of these being meant to be regarded as historically true, but as a fiction spiritually true of cosmic facts. Persephone is the human soul, generated out of that primordial incorruptible mother-earth which the Greeks personified as Demeter, just as the Mosaic narrative speaks of God forming man out of the dust of the ground. Her straying from her Arcadian home

[p. 194]

and heavenly mother in quest of flowers (or fresh experiences on her own account) in the fields of Enna, corresponds with the same promptings of desire that led to Adam's disobedience in Eden and his fall thence to this outer world. All unruly desires end in dissatisfaction and bitterness, and "Enna" (signifying darkness and bitterness) is the same word as still meets us in Gehenna. One may, however, profit by one's mistakes. It is they which breed wisdom, and it is the riches of wisdom and experience that are signified by Pluto, the god of riches, into whose kingdom Persephone falls. She might have returned thence to her mother for ever, Zeus decreed, had she not still further injured herself by eating of the fruit of the lower world, but having done so her restoration can only be partial and temporary. This alludes to the soul's still further self-soilure and degradation by lusting after the inferior pleasures of this lower plane, which, as the pomegranate symbolizes, is many-seeded with illusions and vanities. Until these false tendencies are eradicated, until the desires of the heart are utterly weaned from external delights, there can be no permanent restoration of the soul to its source, but merely the periodic respite and refreshment that death brings when it withdraws the soul from Pluto's realm to the heaven-world, to be followed again and again by periodic descents into material limitations and reascents into discarnate conditions, until it becomes finally purged and perfected.

By this great myth, therefore, instruction was imparted as to the history of the soul, its destiny

[p. 195]

and prospects, and the doctrine of reincarnation [**] was emphasized.

Now Masonry follows this traditional method of instruction by myths. Its canon of teaching in the Craft degrees contains two myths. One is that of the building of King Solomon's Temple. The other is that of the death and burial of Hiram Abiff narrated in the traditional history. The Royal Arch contains a third myth in the story of the return from captivity after the destruction of the first temple, the commencement to build the second, and the discovery then made. This third myth has already been expounded in our paper on the Royal Arch degree, so that we need now speak only of the Craft Myths.

To the literal-minded the building of Solomon's temple at Jerusalem (which is of course largely but not entirely based upon the Hebrew Scriptures) appears to be the history of an actual stone and mortar structure erected by three Asiatic notables, one of whom conceived the idea, another supplying the building material, whilst the third was the practical architect and chief of works. The two former are said to have been kings of adjacent small nations; the third was not a royalty, but apparently a person of no social dignity and a "widow's son."

As has previously been said in these papers, these details of an enterprise undertaken more than two

[p. 196]

thousand years ago can have no possible value to anyone to-day and if they related merely to historic fact modern Masonry might as well close its doors and cease to exist for any benefit that fact could impart to serious or reflective minds. But if the narrative were never intended as a record of temporal historic fact, but be a myth enshrining philosophic truths concerning eternal principles, then it must be interpreted with spiritual discernment and its analysis will reveal matters of real importance.

The story of the building of the temple, then, is a philosophical instruction, garbed in quasi-historical form, concerning the structure of the human soul. That temple is not one of common brick and stone, but of the "unhewn stone" or incorruptible raw material of which the Creator fashioned the human organism. The Jerusalem in which it was built was not the geographical one in Palestine, but the eternal "city of peace" in the heavens; not, as St. Paul says, "the Jerusalem which now is, but the Jerusalem above, which is the mother of us all," like the Greek Demeter. Its builders were not three human personages resident in the Levant, but the Divine energy considered in its three constituent principles spoken of in our Instruction Lectures as Wisdom, Strength and Beauty, which as "pillars of His work" run through and form the metaphysical warp and basis of all created things. These three metaphysical principles may be defined in modern terms as Life-Essence (or the substantial spirit of Wisdom); incorruptible Matter, serving as the mould, matrix or vehicle of that Life-Essence, to give it fixity, form and objectiveness (Strength);

[p. 197]

and lastly the fabricative intellectual principle or Logos binding these two together and constituting the whole an intelligent and functionally effective instrument (Beauty). Of these three principles, or upon these three pillars, was the human soul originally and divinely built in the heaven-world, and our Lectures, therefore, rightly say that those three pillars "also allude to Solomon, King of Israel; Hiram, King of Tyre; and Hiram Abiff," because those names personify the indissociable triadic constituents of the Divine Unity. (They are also shown inscribed upon the central symbolic altar in the Royal Arch Degree as further evidence of this divine construction of the human soul). The temple of the soul has, however, now been destroyed and thrown down from its primitive eminence and grandeur. Humanity, instead of being a collective united organic whole, has become shattered into innumerable fragmentary separated parts, not one stone standing upon another of its ruined building. It has lost consciousness of the genuine secrets of its own origin and nature and has now to be content with the spurious substituted knowledge it picks up from sense-impressions in this outer world. Like Persephone it has eaten the pomegranates of Pluto's dark realm in preference to the ambrosia of Arcady, and until that poison is eliminated from its system it cannot permanently reattain its unfallen state, but at best must endure a rhythm of deaths and rebirths and of intermittent periods of labour in this world and refreshment beyond it. But it may become cleansed; the temple can be rebuilt, and each Mason's soul that is wrought into a true die or

[p. 198]

square by his work upon himself here, becomes one more new stone of the restored temple in the heavens.

A further word is necessary as to the concealed significance of Solomon and the two Hirams. Solomon personifies the primordial Life-Essence or substantialized Divine Wisdom which is the basis of our being. It is defined in the Book of Wisdom (chap. vii., 25-27), as "a pure influence flowing from the glory of the Almighty; the brightness of the everlasting light, the unspotted mirror of the power of God and the image of His goodness." It is described as a "king" because it must needs transcend and over-rule whatever is inferior to itself, and as "king of Israel" because "Israel" itself means "co-operating or ruling with God" as distinct from being associated with beings or affairs of a sub-divine order. To conjoin this transcendental Life-Essence to a vehicle which should give it fixity and form required the assistance of another dominant or "kingly" principle, personified as Hiram, King of Tyre, who supplied the "building material." Now inasmuch as we are dealing with purely metaphysical ideas, it will be obvious that the Tyre in question has no relation to the Levantine sea-port of that name. The name Tyre in Hebrew means "rock" and the strength, compactness and durability which we associate with rock, whilst the same word recurs in Greek as Turos and in Latin as Terra, earth, and as Durus, implying form, hardness, consistency and durability. "King of Tyre," therefore, is interpretable as the cosmic principle which gives solidity and form to the

[p. 199]

spiritual fluidic and formless Life-Essence, and which is comparable to a cup intended to hold liquid. Solomon and Hiram of Tyre therefore contribute their respective properties of Life-Essence and durable form and "building material" as the groundwork of the soul, which then is made functionally effective by the addition of the third principle described as Hiram Abiff, the widow's son, and personifying the active intellectual principle or Logos. In a word, Hiram Abiff is the Christ-principle immanent in every soul; crucified, dead and buried in all who are not alive to its presence, but resident in all as a saving force--"Christ in you, the hope of glory." Consistently with Christ-like humility, Hiram Abiff (literally, "the teacher from the Father") is not described as a "king" as are Solomon and Hiram of Tyre, but as one "of no reputation," a "widow's son"; a beautiful touch of Gnostic symbolism referable to the derelict or widowed nature of the Divine Motherhood or Sophia owing to the errancy and defection from wisdom of her frail children. Such of those children as have rejoined, or are striving to rejoin, their mother are alone worthy to be called the "widow's sons," and it is to the cry to those who have rejoined her from those still labouring at that task in the flesh, and perhaps wiping from their brow the bloody sweat of their Gethsemane anguish in the struggle, that the traditional petition applies, "Come to my help, ye sons of the Widow, for I am the Widow's son!"

The temple of the human soul, primordially constituted of the three principles just spoken of

[p. 200]

in due balance and proportion and divinely pronounced to be "very good," has deflected from that state. Its fall has been effected by the disproportioned, unbalanced and, therefore, disorderly abuse of its inherent powers. Just as a man in a temper becomes temporarily unbalanced and liable to do what he would not in serene moments, so the soul has disorganized its own nature utterly. Of the three pillars that should support it, Wisdom (Gnosis) has fallen and become replaced by a flexible and shifting prop of speculative opinion: Strength (divine dynamic energy) has become exchanged for the frailty of the perishing flesh: Beauty, the god-like radiant form that should adorn and liken man to his Divine Creator, has become superseded by every ugliness of imperfection. Man is now a ruined temple, over which is written "Ichabod! Ichabod! the glory is departed!" Severed from conscious intercourse with his Vital and Immortal Principle, he is a prisoner in captivity to himself and his lower temporal nature. It remains for him to retrace his steps and rebuild his temple; to continue no longer a bondslave to his self-made illusions and the attractions of "worldly possessions," but become a free man and mason, engaged in shaping himself into a living and precious stone for the cosmic temple of a regenerate Humanity unto which, when completed and dedicated, Deity will again enter and abide.

To be "installed in the chair of King Solomon," therefore, means in its true sense the reattainment of a Wisdom we have lost and the revival in ourselves of the Divine Life-Essence which is the basis of

[p. 201]

our being. With the reattainment of that Wisdom all that is comprised in the terms Strength and Beauty will be reattained also, for the three pillars stand in eternal association and balance. Not to reattain it, not to revive the Divine Life-Essence, during our sojourn in this world, is to miss the opportunity which life in physical conditions provides, since the after-death state is one not of labour at this work, but of refreshment and rest, where no real progress is possible. Initiation, therefore, was instituted to impart the science of its reattainment and so lift the individual soul to a new life-basis from which it could proceed to work out its own salvation and develop its inherent powers along the true line of its destiny and evolution. But, as the Ancient Mysteries taught, the soul that never even begins this work in this world will not be able to begin it hereafter, but will remain suspended in the more tenuous planes of this planet until such time as it is once again indrawn into the vortex of generation by the ever-turning wheel of life. To quote Plato again, "those who instituted the Mysteries for us taught us that whosoever descended into Hades (the after-death state) uninitiated and without being a partaker in the Mysteries, will be plunged into mire and darkness, but whoever arrived there purified and initiated will dwell with the Gods." This teaching is reproduced in Masonry in the reference to the Master-Mason being "admitted to the assembly of the just made perfect": the implication being that those who have not reached that proficiency and are neither "just" (i.e., rectified) nor perfected, will abide upon

[p. 202]

a lower level of post-mortem existence. For the levels of superphysical life are numerous--"in my Father's house are many mansions," or, literally, resting places--and they and their occupants are graduated in hierarchical order according to their degree of fitness and spiritual eminence. The disordered modern world, with its perverse democratic ideals of equality and uniformity, has lost all sense of the hierarchic principle, which since it obtains in the higher world ought to be reflected in this.

"Order is Heaven's first law and, that confessed,
  Some are, and must be, greater than the rest."

But Masonry preserves the witness to this graduation, and to the existence of separate tiers of life in the heaven-places, in the symbolic distribution of its more advanced members. Above the Craft Lodges there presides the Provincial Grand Lodge; beyond that rules the Grand Lodge of the nation. Theoretically higher than any of these is the Royal Arch Chapter, with the Provincial and Grand Chapters towering beyond that. In the symbolic clothing worn by the members of each of these ranks the observant student will perceive the intention to give appropriate expression to the truth thereby signified. The Masonic apron has been explained in an earlier paper as a figure of the soul's corporeality--the body (not to be confused with the gross physical body) which it wears and will display when it passes from this life. Its pure white is fringed in the case of junior brethren with a pale shade of that blue which, even in physical nature, is the colour of the heavens. With seniors

[p. 203]

in the Provincial and Grand Lodges this has intensified to the deepest degree of that hue in correspondence with their theoretical spiritual development, whilst the gold lace adornments of the clothing emblematize what is referred to in the Psalmist's words, "The King's daughter (the soul) is all glorious within; her clothing is of wrought gold": for as the Life-Essence or Wisdom becomes increasingly "wrought" or substantialized in us, it becomes the objectified corporeality of the soul. In the Royal Arch the Craft devotional blue is intershot with red, the colour of fire or spiritual ardour, the blend resulting in that purple which both in earth and heaven is the prerogative of royalty. Thus, by their clothing in the various grades, the members of Masonry emblematize on earth the angels and archangels and all the company of Heaven. Some of them are clothed with light as with a garment; others are ministers of flaming fire.

In a short paper such as this our reference to the Ancient Mysteries is necessarily brief and has been restricted to the Greek Eleusinian system. Many others of course existed and an extensive, though scattered, literature is available for those who would pursue the subject further in the direction of the Egyptian, Samothracian, Chaldean, Mithraic, Gnostic and other systems. In their respective days and localities they formed the authoritative centres of religion and philosophy, using those terms as but phases of an indivisible subject which nowadays has become split up into many brands of theology and speculative philosophy having little

[p. 204]

and often no possible connection with each other. What the old writers made public about the Mysteries of course discreetly avoids descriptions of the deeper truths they imparted or of the actual processes of initiation. These must always remain a subject of secrecy, but by the perspicuous reader enough can be found in their purposely obscure and metaphorical accounts to indicate what occurred, and with what effect upon the candidate. Initiation, we have already said, is something which but few are fit to receive, even after long and rigorous preparation, and fewer still are competent to impart. It was an experience of which a writer has said in regard to the candidate, Vel invenit sanctum, vel facit--it either finds him holy or makes him so. Virgil's account in the sixth Aeneid of the initiation of Aeneas into Elysium (or the supernatural light), or that of Lucius (again a name signifying enlightenment) in the "Golden Ass" of Apuleius, when he was permitted to "see the sun at midnight," are instructive instances. So also the exclamation of Clement of Alexandria, who had been received into the Gnostic school: "O truly sacred Mysteries! O pure Light! I am led by the light of the torch to the view of heaven and of God. I become holy by initiation. The Lord Himself is the hierophant who, leading the candidate for initiation to the Light, seals him and presents him to the Father to be preserved for ever. These are the orgies of my Mysteries. If thou wilt, come and be thou also initiated, and thou shalt join in the dance with the angels around the uncreated, imperishable and only true God, the Word of God joining in the strain!"

[p. 205]

The Mysteries came to an end as public institutions in the sixth century, when from political considerations they and the teaching of the secret doctrine and philosophy became prohibited by the Roman Government, under Justinian, who aimed at inaugurating an official uniform state-religion throughout its Empire. Subsequently, as the Roman Empire declined and broke up, the Roman Catholic Church emerged from it, which, as we know, has resolutely discountenanced any authority in religion and philosophy as a rival to her own and at the same time claimed supremacy and an over-riding jurisdiction in temporal matters also. For the Freemason the result of that Church's conduct is instructive. For when an authority upon matters wholly spiritual and belonging to a kingdom which is not of this world, lays claim to temporal power and secular possessions, as the Roman Church has done and still does, it at once vitiates and neutralizes its own spiritual qualifications. It becomes infected with the virus of "worldly possessions." It loads itself with the "money and metals" from which it is essential to keep divested. The result has been that what might have been, and was designed to be, the greatest spiritually educative force in the world's history, has become a materialized institution, exercising an intellectual tyranny which has estranged the minds of millions from religion altogether. As Lot's wife is metaphorically said to have crystallized into a pillar of salt through turning back in desire to what she ought to have renounced altogether, so in trying to serve Mammon and God at the same time the Roman Church has failed in both and,

[p. 206]

as the result of the false steps and abuses of centuries, the world is to-day a chaos of disunited sects and popular religious teaching is as materialistic as Masonry. It is a pity, for in its original design and practice Christianity was intended to serve as a system of initiation upon a catholic or universal scale, and to take over, supersede and amplify all that previously was taught, in a less efficacious way and to a more restricted public, in the Ancient Mysteries. It is not possible here to enter upon the extremely interesting questions involved in the transition from pre-Christian to Christian religion, or to explain why and how the Christian Mysteries are the efflorescence of the earlier ones and transcend them. In their central teachings, as in the philosophic method of life they demand, the two methods are identical. The differences between them are only such as are due to amplification and formal expression. Christianity came not to destroy, but to fulfil and expand. That fulfilment and expansion were consequent upon an event of cosmic importance which we speak of as The Incarnation. By that event something had happened affecting the very fabric of our planet and every item of the human family. What that something was and the nature of the change it wrought is too great and deep a theme to develop now, but, to illustrate it by Masonic symbolism, it was an event which is the equivalent of, and is represented by, the transference of the Sacred Symbol of the Grand Geometrician of the Universe from the ceiling of the Lodge, where it is located in the elementary grades of the Craft, to the floor, where it is found in the Royal

[p. 207]

[paragraph continues] Arch Degree surrounded with flaming lights and every circumstance of reverence and sanctity. How many Masons are there in the Order to-day who recognize that, in this piece of symbolism, Masonry is giving affirmation and ocular testimony to precisely the same fact as the churchman affirms when he recites in his Creed the words "He came down from heaven, and was incarnate and was made man?"

By a tacit and quite unwarranted convention the members of the Craft avoid mention in their Lodges of the Christian Master and confine their scriptural readings and references almost exclusively to the Old Testament, the motive being no doubt due to a desire to observe the injunction as to refraining from religious discussion and to prevent offence on the part of brethren who may not be of the Christian faith. The motive is an entirely misguided one and is negated by the fact that the "greater light" upon which every member is obligated, and to which his earnest attention is recommended from the moment of his admission to the Order, is not only the Old Testament, but the volume of the Sacred Law in its entirety. The New Testament is as essential to his instruction as the Old, not merely because of its moral teaching, but in virtue of its constituting the record of the Mysteries in their supreme form and historic culmination. The Gospels themselves, like the Masonic degrees, are a record of preparation and illumination, leading up to the ordeal of death, followed by a raising from the dead and the attainment of Mastership, and they exhibit the process of initiation carried to the

[p. 208]

highest conceivable degree of attainment. The New Testament is full of passages in Masonic terminology and there is not a little irony in the failure by modern Masons to recognize its supreme importance and relevancy to their Lodge proceedings and in the fact that in so doing they may be likening themselves to those builders of whom it is written that they rejected the chief Corner Stone. They would learn further that the Grand Master and Exemplar of Masonry, Hiram Abiff, is but a figure of the Great Master and Exemplar and Saviour of the world, the Divine Architect by whom all things were made, without whom is nothing that hath been made, and whose life is the light of men. If, in the words of the Masonic hymn:

"Hiram the architect
  Did all the Craft direct
  How they should build,"

it is equally true that the protagonist of the Christian Scriptures also taught universal humanity "how they should build" and reconstruct their own fallen nature, and that the method of such building is one which involves the cross as its working tool and one which culminates in a death and a raising from the dead. And, of those who attain their initiation and mastership by that method, is it not further written there that they become of the household of God and built into a spiritual temple not made with hands, but eternal and in the heavens and of which "Jesus Christ is the chief corner stone, in whom all the building, fitly framed together, groweth unto an holy temple builded for an habitation of God?"

[p. 209]

Neither the Ancient Mysteries nor Modern Masonry, their descendant, therefore, can be rightly viewed without reference to their relation to the Christian evangel, into which the pre-Christian schools became assumed. The line of succession and evolution from the former to the latter is direct and organic. Allowing for differences of time, place and form of expression, both taught exactly the same truths and inculcated the necessity for regeneration. In such a matter there cannot be a diversity of doctrine. The truth concerning it must be static and uniform at all periods of the world's history. Hence we find St. Augustine affirming that there has never existed but one religion in the world since the beginning of time (meaning by religion the science of rebinding the dislocated soul to its source), and that that religion began to be called Christian in apostolic times. And hence too it is that both the Roman Church and Masonry, although so widely divergent in outlook and method, have this feature in common, that each declares and insists that no alteration or innovation in its central doctrine is permissible and that it is unlawful to remove or deviate from its ancient landmarks. Each is right in its insistence, for in the system of each is enshrined the age-old doctrine of regeneration and divinization of the human soul, obscured in the one case by theological and other accretions foreign to the main purpose of religion, and unperceived in the other because its symbolism remains uninterpreted. To clear vision, Christian and Masonic doctrine are identical in intention though different in method. The one says "Via 

[p. 210]

[paragraph continues] Crucis"; the other "Via Lucis"; yet the two ways are but one way. The former teaches through the ear; the latter through the eye and by identifying the aspirant with the doctrine by passing him personally and dramatically through symbolic rites which he is expected to translate from ceremonial form into subjective experience. As Patristic literature shows, the primitive method of the Christian Church was not that which now obtains, under which the religious offices and teaching are administered to the whole public alike and in a way implying a common level of doctrine for all and uniform power of comprehension by every member of the congregation. It was, on the other hand, a graduated method of instruction and identical with the Masonic system of degrees conferred by reason of advancing merit and ability. To cite one of the most instructive of early Christian treatises (Dionysius: On the Ecclesiastical Hierarchy), with which every Masonic student should familiarize himself, it will be found that admission to the early Church was by three ceremonial degrees exactly corresponding in intention with those of Masonry. "The most holy initiation of the Mystic Rites has as its first Godly purpose the holy cleansing of the initiated; and as second, the enlightening instruction of the purified; and finally and as the completion of the former, the perfecting of those instructed in the science of their appropriate instructions. The order of the Ministers in the first class cleanses the initiated through the Mystic Rites; in the second, conducts the purified to light; and, in the last and highest, makes perfect those who have participated in the Divine Light by the

[p. 211]

scientific contemplations of the illuminations contemplated." This brief passage alone suffices to show that originally membership of the Christian Church involved a sequence of three initiatory rites identical in intention with those of the Craft to-day. The names given to those who had qualified in those Rites were respectively Catechumens, Leiturgoi, and Priests or Presbyters; which in turn are identifiable with our Entered Apprentices, Fellow Crafts and Master Masons. Their first degree was that of a rebirth and purification of the heart; their second related to the illumination of the intelligence; and their third to a total death unto sin and a new birth unto righteousness, in which the candidate died with Christ on the cross, as with us he is made to imitate the death of Hiram, and was raised to that higher order of life which is Mastership.

When Christianity became a state-religion and the Church a world-power, the materialization of its doctrine proceeded apace and has only increased with the centuries. Instead of becoming the unifying force its leaders meant it to be, its association with "worldly possessions" has resulted in making it a disintegrative one. Abuses led to schisms and sectarianism, and whilst the parent-body, in the form of the Greek and Roman Churches, still possesses and jealously conserves all the original credentials, traditions and symbols in their superb liturgies and rites, more importance is attached to the outer husk of its heritage than to its kernel and spirit, whilst the Protestant communities and so-called "free" churches have unhappily become self-severed

[p. 212]

altogether from the original tradition and their imagined liberty and independence are in fact but a captivity to ideas of their own, having no relation to the primitive gnosis and no understanding of those Mysteries which must always lie deeper than the exoteric popular religion of a given period. Regeneration as a science has long been, and still is, entirely outside the purview of orthodox religion. The Christian Master's affirmation "Ye must be born again" is regarded as but a pious counsel towards an indefinite improvement of conduct and character, not as a reference to a drastic scientific revolution and reformation of the individual in the way contemplated by the rites of initiation prescribed in the Mysteries. Popular religion may indeed produce "good" men, as the world's standard of goodness goes. It does not and cannot produce divinized men endued with the qualities of Mastership, for it is ignorant of the traditional wisdom and methods by which that end is to be attained.

That wisdom and those traditional methods of the Mysteries have, however, never been without living witness in the world, despite the jealousy and inhibitions of official orthodoxy. Since the suppression of the Mysteries in the sixth century, their tradition and teaching have been continued in secret and under various concealments, and to that continuation our present Masonic system is due. As previously intimated in these papers, it was compiled and projected between two and three centuries ago as an elementary expression of the ancient doctrine and initiatory method, by a group of minds which were far more deeply instructed in the old tradition

[p. 213]

and secret science than are those who avail themselves of their work to-day, or even than the text of the Masonic rites indicates. If they remained obscure and anonymous, so that the modern student's research is unable to identify them, it is only what is to be expected, for the true initiate is one who never proclaims himself as such and is content ever to remain impersonal and out of sight and notoriety, planting his seed for the welfare of his fellow men indifferently and leaving others to water it and God to give it increase. But, within the limits they allowed themselves, they achieved their work well and truly and, as has been sought to demonstrate in these pages, made it a rescript, faithful at least in outline and main principles, of the ancient teaching and perfecting rites of the philosophic Mysteries. It has been well said by a writer of authority on the subject that they put forward the system of speculative Masonry as "an experiment upon the mind of the age," and with a view to exhibiting to at least a small section of a public living in a time of gross darkness and materialism an evidence of the doctrine of regeneration which might serve as a light to such as could profit therefrom. If this theory be true, their intention may at first sight appear to have become falsified by subsequent developments, in the course of which there has sprung up an organization of world-wide dimensions and vast membership, animated undoubtedly in the main with worthy ideals and accomplishing a certain measure of benevolent work, but nevertheless failing entirely in perceiving its true and original purpose as an

[p. 214]

[paragraph continues] Order for promoting the science of human regeneration, and unconscious that by this default its achievements in other directions are of small or no account. But a broader and wiser view of the situation would be one that, whilst recognizing a great diffusion of energy to little present purpose, sees also that, in the long run and in the amplitude of time, that energy is not wasted but conserved, and that, besides benefiting individuals here and there who are capable of truly profiting from the Order, it preserves the witness and keeps burning the light of the perpetual Mysteries in a dark age. Like the light of a Master Mason which never becomes wholly extinguished, so in the world's darkest days the light of the Mysteries never goes out entirely, and God and the way to Him are not left without witness. If, in comparison with other witnesses, Masonry is but a glimmering ray rather than a powerful beam of light, it is none the less a true ray; a kindly light lit from the world's central altar-flame, and sufficing to lead at least some of us on amid the encircling gloom, until the night is gone. Light is granted in proportion to the desire of our hearts, but for the majority of Masons their Order sheds no light at all, because light is not their desire, nor is initiation in its true sense understood or wished for. They move among the symbols, simulacra and substituted secrets of the Mysteries without comprehending them, without wishing to translate them into reality. The Craft is made to subserve social and philanthropic ends foreign to its purpose and even to gratify the desire for outward personal distinction; but as an instrument of regeneration it remains wholly ineffective.

[p. 215]

Is this nescience, this imperviousness and failure to comprehend, however, to no purpose? Perhaps not. Each of us lives in the presence of natural mysteries he fails to discern or understand, and even when the desire for wisdom is at last awakened, the education of the understanding is a long process. Nature in all her kingdoms builds slowly, perfecting her aims through endless repetitions and apparently wanton waste of material. And in the things of the Kingdom which transcends Nature, the same method prevails. Souls are drawn but slowly to the Light, and their perfecting and transmutation into that Light is often very gradual. For long before it is able to distinguish shadow from substance, Humanity must try its prentice-hand upon illusory toys and substitutions for the genuine secrets of Reality. For long before it is worthy of actual initiation upon the path that leads to God it must be permitted to indulge in preliminary unintelligent rehearsals of the processes therein involved. The approaches to the ancient temples of the Mysteries were lined with statues of the Gods, having no value of themselves, but intended to habituate the minds of neophytes to the spiritual concepts and divine attributes to which those statues were meant to give objective form and semblance. But within the temple itself all graven images, all formal figures, symbols and ceremonial types, ceased; for the mind had then finally to learn to dispense with their help, and, in the strength of its own purity and understanding alone, to rise into unclouded perception of their formless prototypes and "see the Nameless of the hundred names."

[p. 216]

"Get knowledge, get wisdom; but with all thy gettings, get understanding," exclaims the old Teacher, in a counsel that may well be commended to the Masonic Fraternity to-day, which so little understands its own system. But understanding depends upon the gift of the Supernal Light, which gift in turn depends upon the ardour of our desire for it. If Wisdom to-day is widowed, all Masons are actually or potentially the widow's sons, and she will be justified of her children who seek her out and who labour for her as for hid treasure. It remains with the Craft itself whether it shall enter upon its own heritage as a lineal successor of the Ancient Mysteries and Wisdom-teaching, or whether, by failing so to do, it will undergo the inevitable fate of everything that is but a form from which its native spirit has departed.

Footnotes

^188:* The four cardinal virtues are referred to in both Plato's Phaedo and the Book of Wisdom, ch. viii, 5-7, indicating community of teaching between the Greek and Hebrew schools.

^190:* The thyrsus (or Caduceus) was an elaborate wand borne by the candidate, to the symbolism of which deep meaning attached. Its present form is the wand carried by the deacon accompanying the candidate.

^195:* As this doctrine is not popularly inculcated in the West as it is in the East, and will be novel and probably unacceptable to some readers, its acceptance is not pressed here. We are merely recording what the secret doctrine teaches.

 

    


===== BOOK: morg.txt =====


    
Illustrations of Masonry, by William Morgan, [1827], at sacred-texts.com

[p. i]

  

ILLUSTRATIONS

  

--OF--

  

MASONRY

  

--BY--

  

ONE OF THE FRATERNITY

  

Who has devoted Thirty Years to the Subject.

"God said, Let there be Light,
 and there was Light."

  

Copyright Secured.

  

Printed for the Proprietor,

  

CAPT. WM. MORGAN'S

  

EXPOSITION OF

  

FREEMASONRY,

  

Republished with the addition of engravings, showing the Lodge-room Signs. Grips and Masonic Emblems.

  

Chicago: Ezra A. Cook Publications

  

[1827]

Scanned, proofed and formatted at sacred-texts.com by John Bruno Hare, April 2009. This text is in the public domain in the US because it was published prior to 1923.

Click to enlarge
Title Page

     
Illustrations of Masonry, by William Morgan, [1827], at sacred-texts.com

[p. ii]

Northern District of New York to wit:

BE IT REMEMBERED, That on the fourteenth day of August, in the fifty-first year of the Independence of the United States of America, A. D. 1826, William Morgan, of the said  district, hath deposited in this office the title of a book, the right whereof he claims as author, in the words following, to wit:--

"Illustrations of Masonry, by one of the fraternity who has devoted thirty years to the subject. 'God said, Let there be light, and there was light.'"

In conformity to the act of Congress of the United States, entitled "An act for the encouragement of learning, by securing the copies of maps, charts and books, to the authors and proprietors of such copies, during the time therein mentioned," and also to the act entitled "An act supplementary to the act entitled 'An act for the encouragement of learning, by securing the copies of maps, charts and books, to the authors and proprietors of such copies, during the time therein mentioned,' and extending the benefits thereof to the arts of designing, engraving, and etching historical and other prints."

R. R. LANSING,         

Clerk of the Northern District of N. Y.

     
Illustrations of Masonry, by William Morgan, [1827], at sacred-texts.com

[p. iii]

  

INTRODUCTION.

  

(WRITTEN FOR THE ORIGINAL EDITION.

  

By the Publisher, Col. David C. Miller, Batavia, N. Y.)

In the absence of the author, or rather compiler of the following work, who was kidnapped and carried away from the village of Batavia, on the 11th day of September, 1826, by a number of Freemasons, it devolves upon the publisher to attempt to set forth some of the leading views that governed those who embarked in the undertaking.

To contend with prejudice, and to struggle against customs and opinions, which superstition, time, and ignorance have hallowed, requires time, patience, and magnanimity. When we begin to pull down the strongholds of error, the batteries we level against them, though strong, and powerful; and victorious at last, arc at first received with violence; and when in our conquering career we meet with scoffs and revilings from the beseiged partisans of untenable positions, it the more forcibly impresses us we are but men; and that in every work of reformation and renovation we must encounter various difficulties. For a full confirmation of our statement we might refer to the history of the world. It is not our intention, however, to give a full detail of the whims and caprices man to bring forth the historic records of other years as roof of the windings and shiftings of the various characters who have "Strutted their brief hour on life's stage" in order to convince that customs, associations, and institutions are like the lives of the authors and abettors, fleeting and fragile. Many of them rise up as bubbles on the ocean, and die away. Circumstances give them existence, and when these causes cease to exist, they go into the same gulf of oblivion as countless exploded opinions and tenets have gone before them. The mind that formed and planned them, goes on in its dazzling flight, bounding over barrier after barrier, till it has arrived at the ultimate goal of consummation.

The daily occurrences before us bring forth the full conviction that the emanation from the God of light is gradually ascending to regions of greater intellectual brilliancy.

[p. iv]

When we view man, in the infancy of society, as in the childhood of his existence, he is weak, powerless and defenceless; but in his manhood and riper years, he has grown to his full stature, and stands forth in commanding attitude, the favored and acknowledged lord of the world. For his comfort and well-being as a member of society, rules and regulations are necessary. In the various stages of his progress, these systematic improvements undergo various changes, according to circumstances and situations. What is proper and necessary in one grade of society, is wholly useless, and may be alarming in another. Opinions and usages that go down in tradition, and interfere not with our improvements in social concerns, adhere to us more closely and become entwined in all our feelings. It is to this we owe our bigoted attachment to antiquity--it is this that demands from us a superstitious reverence for the opinions and practices of men of former times, and closes the ear against truth, and blinds the eyes to the glare of new lights and new accessions of knowledge through which medium only can they break in upon the mind.

We have within ourselves the knowledge; and everywhere around us the proofs that we are beings destined not to stand still. In our present state of advancement, we lock with pity on the small progress of our fathers in arts and sciences, and social institutions; and when compared with our elevated rank, we have just cause of pride and of grateful feelings. They did well for the times in which they lived, but to the ultimatum of perfectability we are nearer, and in the monuments we have before us of the skill and genius of our times and age we have only fulfilled these destinies for which we were created; and we object to every obstacle that opposes or attempts to oppose the will of heaven.

In the present enlightened state to which society has advanced, we contend that the opinions and tenets and pretended secrecies of "olden times," handed down to us, should be fully, fairly and freely canvassed; that from the mist and darkness which have hung over them, they should come out before the open light of day, and be subject to the rigid test of candid investigation. These preliminary remarks lead as to the main object of our introduction.

We come to lay before the world the claims of an institution

[p. v]

which has been sanctioned by ages, venerated for wisdom, exalted for "light;" but, an institution whose benefits have always been overrated, and whose continuance is not in the slightest degree, necessary. We meet it with its high requirements, its "time honored customs," its swelling titles, and shall show it in its nakedness and simplicity. Strip it of its "borrowed trappings" and it is a mere nothing, a toy not now worthy the notice of a child to sport with. We look back to it as, at one period, a "cement of society and bond of union"--we view it as, at one time, a venerable fort--but now in ruins--which contained within its walls many things that dignified and adorned human nature. We give it due credit for the services it has done; but at present when light has gone abroad into the utmost recesses and corners of the world--when information is scattered wide around us, and knowledge is not closeted in cloisters and cells but "stalks abroad with her beams of light, and her honors and rewards," we may now, when our minority has expired, act up to our character and look no longer to Masonry as our guide and conductor; it has nothing in it now valuable that is not known to every inquiring mind. It contains, wrapped up in its supposed mysteries, no useful truth, no necessary knowledge that has not gone forth to the world through. other channels and by other means. If we would have a knowledge of sacred history--of the religion and practices of the Jews, and the terms and technicalities of the Mosaic institutions, we can have recourse to the Bible. If we wish further communications from heaven, we have open to our view the pages of the New Testament. If we would "climb the high ascent of human science, and trace the mighty progress of human genius in every gigantic effort of mind in logic, geometry, mathematics, chemistry, and every other branch of knowledge," we ridicule the idea that Masonry, in her retirements, contains the arts and sciences. The sturdiest Mason in the whole fraternity is not bold enough to uphold or maintain the opinion for one moment in sober reality. The origin of the institution is easily traced to the rude ages of the world--to a body of mechanics, or a corporation of operative workmen, who formed signs and regulations, the more easily to carry on their work, and to protect their order. [The very obligations solemnly tendered to every member,

[p. vi]

carry the strongest internal evidence of the semi-barbarity that prevailed at the time of the institution of the order,] In the course of time, as society increased, and knowledge became more general, it spread, and embracing in its grasp other objects than at first, it enrolled in its ranks men of the first respectability in wealth, talents and worth. But that there is anything intrinsically valuable in the signs, symbols, or words of Masonry, no man of sense will contend. That there is not any hidden secret which operates as a talismanic charm on its possessors, every man of intelligence, Mason or no Mason, must candidly acknowledge. It is worse than idleness for the defenders of the order, at the present day to entrench themselves behind their outward show--the semblance before the world--and to say they are in possession of superior knowledge.

We pretend not to act under a cover. We shall "tell the truth, the whole truth, and nothing but the truth." Masonry, it is true, has long been eulogized in song--it has formed the burthen of the poet's theme, and been the subject of the orator's best performances. Fancy has been almost exhausted in bringing out "new flowers to deck the fairy queen;" but when we come behind the scenes, what is the picture we behold? Are we to rest satisfied with the ipse dixit of others, or to examine the truth for ourselves? The touchstone is before our readers in the present publication.

Masonry is of itself naked and worthless. It consists of gleanings from the Holy Scriptures, and from the arts and sciences, which have shone in the world. Linking itself with philosophy and science and religion, on this it rests all its claims to veneration and respect. Take away this borrowed aid, and it falls into ruins.

Much weight is still attached to the argument, that as a tie uniting men--that, as a significant speech, symbolically speaking every language, and at the same time embodying in its constitution everything that is valuable, it should command respect. We meet this argument with facts that cannot be controverted. We put it on a basis that will fling into the back ground every quibble and artifice on the subject; and, in the language of a polemic writer, we challenge opposition to our .

The religion inculcated by the Son of Man does all this;

[p. vii]

and in no possible situation can man be placed, that the benign influence of Christianity does not completely supersede the use of a mere human institution. Place a brother in a desert, unfriended and unknown,--leave him in a wilderness where human footsteps never printed the ground, the Divine Benefactor is at his side, and watches over him with parental guidance. Let him be driven on a barbarous coast, in the midst of savage men, and there it is that the breathings of the divine influence spreads around him its shield, brings him into civilized society--in the busy walks of men, and are we to be told, as members of community, sojourners on earth, and candidates for heaven, we must be taught our duty at a Mason's lodge? Wherever Masonry exercises its influence with success, there Christianity can have, or should have a more powerful effect. Whenever Masonry claims "kindred with the skies," and exalts herself above every living sublunary thing, then, with an unhallowed step, it obtrudes on the sacred borders of religion, and decks itself in borrowed garments.

Entrenched within these strong walls--decked with all the glitter of high sounding professions, claiming what does not belong to it,--it dazzles "but to bewilder and destroy." In its train, in these United States, are enrolled many periodical works devoted to Masonry; and under the guise of patronizing mechanics--the arts and sciences--lend their aid to carry on the imposing delusion. They take up the specious title of throwing a little illumination on this benighted country, from their secret depositories. Arrogating to itself what should deck other's brows--assuming to be the , the life and soul of all that is great and valuable--it deceives many of its votaries, and from its gaudy premises the most untenable and onerous conclusions are drawn.

Are we astonished at the wild and heedless manner in which many of the votaries of Masonry rush into every excess, putting at defiance the laws of our civil institutions, which suffer no one to put in jeopardy, but by due forms, and disregarding the command of the Most High, which says, "Thou shalt not kill?"--we can readily trace the cause to the impressions and practices obtained from its false tenets and descriptive arrogance. Masonry is to the modern world what the whore of Babylon was to the ancient; and is the

[p. viii]

beast with seven heads and ten horns, ready to tear out our bowels, and scatter them to the four winds of heaven. Masonry gives rogues and evil-minded characters an opportunity of visiting upon their devoted victim, all the ills at tending combined power, when exerted to accomplish destruction. It works unseen, at all silent hours, and secret times and places; and, like death when summoning his diseases, pounces upon its devoted subject, and lays him prostrate in the dust. Like the great enemy of man, it has shown its cloven foot, and put the public upon its guard against its Secret machinations.

This part of the subject requires no further discussion either by way of ridicule or downright sincerity, but the remark which cannot be too often reiterated, that the world, in its present advanced state, requires no such order for our social intercourse; and when the Masonic mania prevails as it now does in this country, we are exalting a mere human ordinance, with its useless trumpery and laughable accompaniments, for the sublime and unadorned lessons of Heaven.

To some men it is galling and mortifying in the extreme to give up their darling systems. With the increase of years their fondness becomes so great that they cling to them with wild and bewildered attachment. But we would ask them, where now are the Knights of Malta and Jerusalem, and the objects that called forth their perils and journeyings? Where are the crusades and excursions on which our Grand Commanders, Generalissimos and Sir Knights are to be engaged . . . . . . . . . In no other excursions than Cervantes describes of his redoubtable hero Don Quixote. The days and occasions that called forth these deeds of chivalry and valor have passed like those before the flood; and the mock dignitaries and puppet show actions of Masons in their imitation call forth pity and indignation. When we now see the gaudy show in a lodge-room, and a train of nominal officers with their distinction and badges, it may give us some faint idea of scenes that are past, and may gratify an idle curiosity, but produces no substantial good under heaven. When monasteries and cloisters, and inquisitor's cells and prisons have been broken up before the sweeping march of the moral mind, why this unnecessary mummery should be so much countenanced in this country, above all other

[p. ix]

countries in the world, is a matter of astonishment.

The day we trust will never arrive here, when ranks in Masonry will be stepping-stones to places of dignity and power--when this institution will be a machine to press down the free born spirit of men. We have now no tyrant to rule over us--no kingly potentate to move over our heads the rod of authority; but high in our elevation, and invincible in our strongholds, we put at defiance secret cabals and associations. The public opinion is like a mighty river, and gigantic in its course it will sweep every interposing obstacle before it.

In the work which we submit to the public we have given false coloring to nothing; nor in these remarks have we set down aught in malice. In the firm discharge of our undertaking we have been stern and unbending as the rugged mountain oak; and persecutions, pains and perils have not deterred us from our purpose. We have triumphed over tumult, and clamor, and evil speaking.

When our book goes out to the world, it will meet with attacks of a violent nature from one source, and men of mock titles and order will endeavor to heap upon it every calumny. Men more tenacious of absolute forms and practice than they are attentive to truth and honor, will deny our expositions, and call us liars and impostors.

Such is the treatment, however ungenerous and unjust, which we expect to meet, and for which we are prepared. Truth, we know, is majestic and will finally prevail. The little petty effusions of malice that will be thrown out, will die with their authors, whom this work will survive.

We now aver, in defiance of whatever may be said to the contrary--no matter by whom, how exalted his rank--that this book is what it pretends to be; that it is a master key to the secrets of Masonry; that in the pages before him. the man of candor and inquiry can judge for himself, and then a proper judgment will be formed of our intention.

     
Illustrations of Masonry, by William Morgan, [1827], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 10] [p. 11]

  

Opening the Lodge

  

ILLUSTRATIONS

  

--OF--

  

MASONRY, ETC.

A Description of the Ceremonies used in opening a
 Lodge of Entered Apprentice Masons; which is the
 same in all upper degrees, with the exception
 of the difference in the signs, due-guards,
 grips, pass-grips, words and their several
 names; all of which will be
 given and explained in their
 proper places as the
 work progresses.

One rap calls the lodge to order--one calls up the Junior and Senior Deacons--two raps call up all the subordinate officers, and three, all the members of the lodge.

The Master having called the lodge to order, and the officers all seated, the Master says to the Junior Warden, 'Brother Junior, are they all Entered Apprentice Masons in the south?'

Ans. 'They are, Worshipful.'

Master to the Senior Warden, 'Brother Senior, are they all Entered Apprentice Masons in the west?'

Ans. 'They are, Worshipful.'

The Master then says, 'They are, in the east,' at the same time he gives a rap with the common gavel or mallet, which calls up both Deacons.

Master to Junior Deacon, 'Brother Junior, the first care of a Mason?'

Ans. 'To see the lodge tyled, Worshipful.'

Master to Junior Deacon, 'Attend to that part of your duty, and inform the Tyler that we are about to open a lodge of Entered Apprentice Masons, and direct him to tyle accordingly.' The Junior Deacon then steps to the door and gives three raps, which are answered by three raps from without; the Junior Deacon then gives one, which is also answered by the Tyler with one; the door is then partly opened and the Junior Deacon delivers his message, and resumes his situation

[p. 12]

and says, 'The door is tyled, Worshipful.' (at the same time giving the due-guard, which is never omitted when the Master is addressed.)

The Master to Junior Deacon, 'Brother, by whom?'

Ans. 'By a Master Mason without the door, armed with the proper implement of his office.'

Master to Junior Deacon, 'His duty there?'

Ans. 'To keep off all cowans and eaves-droppers, see that none pass or repass without permission from the Master.' (Some say without permission from the chair.)

Master to Junior Deacon, 'Brother Junior, your place in the lodge?'

Ans. 'At the right hand of the Senior Warden in the west.'

Master to Junior Deacon, 'Your business there, Brother Junior?'

Ans. 'To wait on the Worshipful Master and Wardens, act as their proxy in the active duties of the lodge, and take charge of the door.'

Master to Junior Deacon, 'The Senior Deacon's place in the lodge?'

Ans. 'At the right hand of the Worshipful Master in the east.' [The Master, while asking the last questions gives two raps, which call up all the subordinate officers.]

Master to Senior Deacon, 'Your duty there, Brother Senior?'

Ans. 'To wait on the Worshipful Master and Wardens, act as their proxy in the active duties of the lodge, attend to the preparation and introduction of candidates, and welcome and clothe all visiting Brethren. [i.e., furnish them with an apron.]

Master to Senior Deacon, 'The Secretary's place in the lodge, Brother Senior?'

Ans. 'At the left hand of the Worshipful Master in the east.'

Master to the Secretary, 'Your duty there, Brother Secretary?'

Ans. 'The better to observe the Worshipful Master's will and pleasure, record the proceedings of the lodge; transmit a copy of the same to the Grand Lodge, if required; receive all moneys and money bills from the hands of the Brethren, pay them over to the Treasurer, and take his receipt for the same.'

[p. 13]

The Master to the Secretary, 'The Treasurer's place in the lodge?'

Ans. 'At the right hand of the Worshipful Master.'

Master to Treasurer, 'Your duty there, Brother Treasurer?'

Ans. 'Duly to observe the Worshipful Master's will and pleasure; receive all moneys and money bills from the hands of the Secretary; keep a just and true account of the same; pay them out by order of the Worshipful Master and consent of the Brethren.'

The Master to the Treasurer, "The Junior Warden's place in the lodge, Brother Treasurer?'

Ans. 'In the south, Worshipful.'

Master to Junior Warden, 'Your business there, Brother Junior?'

Ans. 'As the sun in the south at high meridian is the beauty and glory of the day, so stands the Junior Warden in the south, the better to observe the time, call the crafts from labor to refreshment, superintend them during the hours thereof, see that none convert the hours of refreshment into that of intemperance or excess; and call them out again in due season, that the Worshipful Master may have honor, and they profit and pleasure thereby.'

Master to the Junior Warden, 'The Senior Warden's place in the lodge?'

Ans. 'In the west, Worshipful.'

Master to Senior Warden, 'Your duty there, Brother Senior?'

Ans. 'As the sun sets in the west to close the day, so stands the Senior Warden in the west to assist the Worshipful Master in opening his lodge, take care of the jewels and implements, see that none be lost, pay the craft their wages, if any be due, and see that none go away dissatisfied.'

Master to the Senior Warden, 'The Master's place in the lodge?'

Ans. 'In the east, Worshipful.'

Master to the Senior Warden, 'His duty there?'

Ans. 'As the sun rises in the east to open and adorn the

[p. 14]

Click to enlarge

[p. 15]

day, so presides the Worshipful Master in the east to open and adorn his lodge, set his crafts to work with good and wholesome laws, or cause the same to be done.' The Master now gives three raps, when all the brethren rise, and the Master taking off his hat, proceeds as follows: In like manner so do I, strictly forbidding all profane language, private committees, or any other disorderly conduct whereby the peace and harmony of this lodge may be interrupted while engaged in its lawful pursuits, under no less penalty than the by-laws, or such penalty as the majority of the Brethren present may see fit to inflict. Brethren, attend to giving the signs.' [Here lodges differ very much. In some they declare the lodge opened as follows, before they give the signs:]

The Master (all the Brethren imitating him) extends his left arm from his body so as to form an angle of about forty-five degrees, and holds his right hand transversely across his left, the palms thereof about one inch apart. This is called the Due Guard, and alludes to the position a Candidate's hands are placed in when he takes the obligation of an Entered Apprentice Mason. The Master then draws his right hand across his throat, the hand open, with the thumb next to his throat, and drops it down by his side. This is called the penal sign of an Entered Apprentice Mason, (many call it sign) and alludes to the penalty of the obligation. (See obligation.) The Master Then declares the lodge opened in the following manner: 'I vow declare this lodge of Entered Apprentice Masons duly opened for dispatch of business.' The Senior Warden declares it to the Junior Warden, and he to the Brethren. 'Come, Brethren, let us pray.'--One of the following prayers is used:

Most holy and glorious God! the great architect of the Universe; the giver of all good gifts and graces: Thou hast promised that 'Where two or three are gathered together in thy name, thou wilt be in the midst of them and bless them.' In thy name we assemble, most humbly beseeching thee to bless us in all our undertakings; that we may know and

[p. 16]

serve thee aright, and that all our actions may tend to thy glory and our advancement in knowledge and virtue. And we beseech thee, O Lord God, to bless our present assembling; and to illuminate our minds through the influence of the Son of Righteousness, that we may walk in the light of thy countenance; and when the trials of our probationary state are over, be admitted into the temple, not made with hands, eternal in the heavens. Amen. So mote it be.

Another prayer, as often used at opening as closing:

Behold, how good and pleasant it is for brethren to dwell together in unity; it is like the precious ointment upon the head, that ran down upon the beard, even Aaron's beard, that went down to the skirts of his garment; as the dew of Hermon, and as the dew that descended upon the mountains of Zion, for there the Lord commanded the blessing, even life forever more. Amen. So mote it be.

The lodge being now open and ready to proceed to business, the Master directs the Secretary to read the minutes of the last meeting, which naturally brings to view the business of the present.

     
Illustrations of Masonry, by William Morgan, [1827], at sacred-texts.com

  

First Degree Initiation

If there are any candidates to be brought forward, that will be the first business to be attended to. I will therefore proceed with a description of the ceremonies used in the admission and initiation of a candidate into the first degree of Masonry.

A person wishing to become a Mason must get some one who is a Mason to present his petition to a lodge, when, if there are no serious objections, it will be entered on the minutes, and a committee of two or three appointed to enquire into his character, and report to the next regular communication. The following is a form of petition used by a candidate; but a worthy candidate will not be rejected for the want of formality in his petition:

To the Worshipful Master, Wardens and Brethren of Lodge No. --, of Free and Accepted Masons.

The subscriber, residing in ----, of lawful age, and by occupation a ----, begs leave to state that, unbiased by friends, and uninfluenced by mercenary motives, he freely and voluntarily offers himself a candidate for the mysteries of Masonry, and that he is prompted to solicit this privilege by a favorable opinion conceived of the institution, a desire

[p. 17]

of knowledge, and a sincere wish of being serviceable to his fellow creatures. Should his petition be granted, he will cheerfully conform to all the ancient established usages and customs of the fraternity.

(Signed)

A. B.

At the next regular communication, (if no very serious objection appears against the candidate) the ballot boxes wilt be passed; one black ball will reject a candidate. The boxes may be passed three times. The Deacons are the proper persons to pass them. One of the boxes has black and white beans or balls in it, the other empty, the one with the balls in it goes before, and furnishes each member with a black and white ball; the empty box follows and receives them. There are two holes in the top of this box with a small tube, (generally) in each, one of which is black and the other white, with a partition in the box. The members put both their balls into this box as their feelings dictate; when the balls are received, the box is presented to the Master, Senior and Junior Wardens, who pronounce clear or not clear, as the case may be. The ballot proving clear, the candidate (if present) is conducted into a small preparation room, adjoining the lodge when he is asked the following questions and gives the following answers. Senior Deacon to Candidate, "Do you sincerely declare, upon your honor before these gentlemen, that, unbiased by friends, uninfluenced by unworthy motives, you freely and voluntarily offer yourself a candidate for the mysteries of Masonry?"

Ans. "I do."

Senior Deacon to candidate. "Do you sincerely declare, upon your honor before these gentlemen, that you are prompted to solicit the privileges of Masonry by a favorable opinion conceived of the institution, a desire of knowledge, and a sincere wish of being serviceable to your fellow creatures?"

Ans. "I do."

Senior Deacon to candidate, "Do you sincerely declare upon your honor before these gentlemen, that you will cheerfully conform to all the ancient established usages and customs of the fraternity?"

Ans. "I do."

After the above questions are proposed and answered and the result reported to the Master, he says, 'Brethren

[p. 18]

at the request of Mr. A. B. he has been proposed and accepted in regular form. I therefore recommend him as a proper candidate for the mysteries of Masonry and worthy to partake of the privileges of the fraternity and in consequence of a declaration of his intentions, voluntarily made, I believe he will cheerfully conform to the rules of the order."

The candidate during the time is divested of all his apparel (shirt excepted) and furnished with a pair of drawers kept in the lodge for the use of candidates. The candidate is then blindfolded, his left foot bare, his right in a slipper, his left breast and arm naked, and a rope called a Cable-tow round his neck and left arm, [the rope is not put round the arm in all lodges] in which posture the candidate is conducted to the door where he is caused to give, or the conductor gives three distinct knocks, which are answered by three from within; the conductor gives one more, which is also answered by one from within. The door is then partly opened and the Senior Deacon generally asks, "Who comes there? Who comes there? Who comes there?"

The conductor, alias the Junior Deacon answers, "A poor blind candidate who has long been desirous of having and receiving a part of the rights and benefits of this worshipful lodge, dedicated (some say erected) to God, and held forth to the holy order of St. John, as all true fellows and brothers have done who have gone this way before him."

The Senior Deacon then asks, "Is it of his own free will and accord he makes this request? Is he duly and truly prepared? worthy and well qualified? and properly avouched for?" All of which being answered in the affirmative, the Senior Deacon to the Junior Deacon: "By what further rights does he expect to obtain this benefit?"

Ans. "By being a man, free born, of lawful age, and under the tongue of good report."

[p. 19]

The Senior Deacon then says, "Since this is the case, you will wait till the Worshipful Master in the east is made acquainted with his request, and his answer returned." The Senior Deacon repairs to the Master, when the same questions are asked and answers returned as at the door; after which the Master says, "Since he comes endowed with all these necessary qualifications, let him enter this worshipful lodge in the name of the Lord, and take heed on what he enters." The candidate then enters, the Senior Deacon at the same time pressing his naked left breast with the point of the compass, and asks the candidate, "Did you feel anything?"

Ans. "I did."

Senior Deacon to candidate, "What was it?"

Ans. "A torture."

The Senior Deacon then says, "As this is a torture to your flesh, so may it ever be to your mind and conscience if ever you should attempt to reveal the secrets of Masonry unlawfully." The candidate is then conducted to the centre of the lodge, where he and the Senior Deacon kneel, and the Deacon says the following prayer:

"Vouchsafe thine aid, Almighty Father of the universe, to this our present convention; and grant that this candidate for Masonry may dedicate and devote his life to thy service, and become a true and faithful brother among us. Endue him with a competency of thy divine wisdom, that by the secrets of our art he may be the better enabled to display the beauties of holiness, to the honor of thy holy name." So mote it be--Amen!"

The Master then asks the candidate, "In whom do you put your trust?"

Ans. "In God."

The Master then takes him by the right hand and says, "Since in God you put your trust, arise, follow your leader and fear no danger." The Senior Deacon then conducts the candidate three times regularly round the lodge, and halts at the Junior Warden in the south, where the same questions are asked and answers returned as at the door.

As the candidate and conductor are passing round the room, the Master reads the following passage of Scripture,

[p. 20]

and takes the same time to read it that they do to go round the lodge three times.

"Behold how good and how pleasant it is for brethren to dwell together in unity! It is like the precious ointment upon the head, that ran down upon the beard, even Aaron's beard, that went down to the skirts of his garment as the dew of Hermon, and as the dew that descended upon the mountains of Zion, for there the Lord commanded the blessing, even life for evermore."

The candidate is then conducted to the Senior Warden in the west, where the same questions are asked and answers returned as before, from whence he is conducted to the Worshipful Master in the east, where the same questions are asked and answers returned as before. The Master likewise demands of him from whence he came and whither he is traveling.

The candidate answers, "from the west and traveling to the east."

Master inquires, "Why do you leave the west and travel to the east?"

Ans. "In search of light."

Master then says, "Since the candidate is traveling in search of light, you will please conduct him back to the west, from whence he came, and put him in the care of the Senior Warden, who will teach him how to approach the east, the place of light, by advancing upon one upright regular step, to the first step, his feet forming the right angle  of an oblong square, his body erect at the altar, before the Master, and place him in a proper position to take upon him the solemn oath or obligation of an Entered Apprentice Mason." The Senior Warden receives the candidate, and instructs him as directed. He first steps off with the left foot and brings up the heel of the right into the hollow thereof; the heel of the right foot against the ankle of the left, will of course form the right angle of an oblong square; the candidate then kneels on his left knee, and places his right foot so as to form a square with the left; he turns his foot round until the ankle bone is as much in front of him as the toes on the left foot, the

[p. 21]

candidate's left hand is then put under the Holy Bible, square and compass, and the right on them. This is the position in which a candidate is placed when he takes Upon him the, oath or obligation of an Entered Apprentice Mason. As soon as the candidate is placed in this position, the Worshipful Master approaches him, and says, "Mr. A. B., you are now placed in a proper position to take upon you the solemn oath or obligation of an Entered Apprentice Mason, which I assure you is neither to affect your religion or politics. If you are willing to take it, repeat your name and say after me:" [And although many have refused to take any kind of an obligation, and begged for the privilege of retiring, yet none have ever made their escape; they have been either coerced or persuaded to submit. There are thousands who never return to the lodge after they are initiated.] The following obligation is then administered:

I, A. B., of my own free will and accord, in presence of Almighty God and this worshipful lodge of Free and Accepted Masons, dedicated to God, and held forth to the holy order of St. John, do hereby and hereon most solemnly and sincerely promise and swear that I will always hail, ever conceal and never reveal any part or parts, art or arts, point or points of the secret arts and mysteries of ancient Freemasonry which I have received, am about to receive, or may hereafter be instructed in, to any person or persons in the, known world, except it be to a true and lawful brother Mason, or within the body of a just and lawfully constituted lodge of such; and not unto him, nor unto them whom I shall hear so to be, but unto him and them only whom I shall find so to be after strict trial and due examination, or lawful information. Furthermore, do I promise and swear that I will not write, print, stamp, stain, hew, cut, carve, indent, paint, or engrave it on any thing movable or immovable, under the whole canopy of heaven, whereby or whereon the least letter, figure, character, mark, stain, shadow, or resemblance of the same may become legible or intelligible to myself or any other person in the known world, whereby the secrets of Masonry may be unlawfully obtained through my unworthiness. To all of which I do most solemnly and sincerely promise and swear, without the least equivocation, mental reservation, or self evasion of mind in me

[p. 22]

whatever; binding myself under no less penalty than to have my throat cut across, my tongue torn out by the roots, and my body buried in the rough sands of the sea at low water-mark, where the tide ebbs and flows twice in twenty-four hours; so help me God, and keep me steadfast in the due performance of the same."

After the obligation the Master addresses the candidate in the following manner: "Brother, to you the secrets of Masonry are about to be unveiled, and a brighter sun never shone lustre on your eyes; while prostrate before this sacred altar, do you not shudder at every crime? Have you not confidence in every virtue? May these thoughts ever inspire you with the most noble sentiments; may you ever feel that elevation of soul that shall scorn a dishonest act. Brother, what do you most desire?"

Ans. "Light."

Master to brethren, "Brethren, stretch forth your hands and assist in bringing this new made brother from darkness to light." The members having formed a circle round the candidate, the Master says, "And God said let there be light, and there was light." At the same time all the brethren clap their hands, and stamp on the floor with their right foot as heavy as possible, the bandage dropping from the candidate's eyes at the same instant, which, after having been so long blind, and full of fearful apprehensions all the time, this great and sudden transition from perfect darkness to a brighter [if possible] than the meridian sun in a mid-summer day, sometimes produces an alarming effect. I once knew a man to faint, on being brought to light; and his recovery was quite doubtful for some time; however, he did come to, but he never, returned to the lodge again. I have often conversed with him on the subject; he is yet living, and will give a certificate, in support of the above statement at any time if requested.

After the candidate is brought to light, the Master addresses him as follows: "Brother, on being brought to light, you first discover three great lights in Masonry, by the assistance of three lesser; they are, thus explained: the three great lights in Masonry are the Holy Bible, Square and Compass. The Holy Bible is given to us as a rule and guide for our faith and practice; the Square, to square our

[p. 23]

actions, and the Compass to keep us in due bounds with all mankind, but more especially with the brethren. The three lesser lights are three burning tapers, or candles placed on candlesticks (some say, or candles on pedestals) they represent the sun, moon, and Master of the lodge, and are thus explained. As the sun rules the day and the moon governs the night, so ought the worshipful Master with equal regularity to rule and govern his lodge, or cause the same to be done; you next discover me, as Master of this lodge, approaching you from the east upon the first step of Masonry, under the sign and due-guard of an Entered Apprentice Mason. (The sign and due-guard has been explained.) This is the manner of giving them; imitate me as near as you can, keeping your position. First step off with your left foot, and bring the heel of the right into the hollow thereof, so as to form a square. [This is the first step in Masonry.] The following is the sign of an Entered Apprentice Mason, and is the sign of distress in this degree; you are not to give it unless in distress. [It is given by holding your two hands transversely across each other, the right hand upwards and one inch from the left.] The following is the due-guard of an Entered Apprentice  Mason. [This is given by drawing your right hand across your throat, the thumb next to your throat, your arm as high as the elbow in a horizontal position.] "Brother, I now present you my right hand in token of brotherly love and esteem, and with it the grip and name of the grip of an Entered Apprentice Mason." The rights hands are joined together as in shaking hands and each sticks his thumb nail into the third joint or upper end of the forefinger; the name of the grip is Boaz, and is to be given in the following manner and no other; the Master first gives the grip and word, and divides it for the instruction of the candidate; the questions are as follows: The Master and candidate holding each other by the grip, as before described, the Master says, "What is this?"

Ans. "A grip."

"A grip of what?"

Ans. "The grip of an Entered Apprentice Mason."

[p. 24]

"Has it a name?"

Ans. "It has."

"Will you give it to me?"

Ans. "I did not so receive it, neither can I so impart it."

"What will you do with it?"

Ans. "Letter it or halve it."

"Halve it and begin."

Ans. "You begin."

"Begin you."

Ans. "B-O."

"A-Z."

Ans. 'BOAZ."

Master says, "Right, brother BOAZ, I greet you. It is the name of the left hand pillar of the porch of King Solomon's temple. Arise, brother Boaz, and salute the junior and Senior Wardens, as such, and convince them that you have been regularly initiated as an Entered Apprentice Mason, and have got the sign, grip and word." The Master returns to his seat while the Wardens are examining the candidate, and gets a lambskin or white apron, presents it to the candidate, and observes, "Brother, I now present you with a lambskin or white apron. It is an emblem of innocence, and the badge of a Mason--it has been worn by kings, princes and potentates of the earth, who have never been ashamed to wear it. It is more honorable than the diadems of kings, or pearls of princesses, when worthily worn; it is more ancient than the Golden Fleece or Roman Eagle, more honorable than the Star and Garter, or any other order that can be conferred upon you at this or any other time, except it be in the body of a just and lawfully constituted lodge; you will carry it to the Senior Warden in the west, who will teach you how to wear it as an Entered Apprentice Mason." The Senior Warden ties the apron on, and turns up the flap instead of letting it fall down in front of the top of the apron. This is the way Entered Apprentice Masons wear, or ought to wear their aprons until they are advanced. The candidate is now conducted to the Master in the east, who says, "Brother, as you are dressed, it is necessary you should have tools to work with; I will now present you with the working tools of an Entered Apprentice

[p. 25]

[paragraph continues] Mason, which are the twenty-four inch gauge and common. gavel; they are thus explained:--The twenty-four inch gauge is an instrument made use of by operative Masons to measure and lay out their work, but we as Free and Accepted Masons make use of it for the more noble and glorious purpose of dividing our time. The twenty-four inches on the gauge are emblematical of the twenty-four hours in the day, which we are taught to divide into three equal parts, whereby we find eight hours for the service of God, and a worthy, distressed brother, eight hours for our usual vocations, and eight for refreshment and sleep; the common gavel is an instrument made use of by operative Masons to break off the corners of rough stones, the better to fit them for the builder's use, but we, as Free and Accepted Masons, use it for the more noble and glorious purpose of divesting our hearts and consciences of all the vices and superfluities of life, thereby fitting our minds as living and lively stones, for that spiritual building, that house not made with hands, eternal in the heavens. I also present you with a new name; it is CAUTION; it teaches you that as you are barely instructed in the rudiments of Masonry, that you should be cautious over all your words and actions, particularly when before the enemies of Masonry. I shall next present you with three precious jewels, which are a listening ear, a silent tongue, and a faithful heart. A listening ear teaches you to listen to the instructions of the Worshipful Master; but more especially that you should listen to the calls and cries of a worthy, distressed brother. A silent tongue teaches you to be silent while in the lodge that the peace and harmony thereof may not be disturbed, but more especially that you should be silent before the enemies of Masonry that the craft may not be brought into disrepute by your imprudence. A faithful heart teaches you to be faithful to the instructions of the Worshipful Master at all times, but more especially, that you should be faithful, and keep and conceal the secrets of Masonry, and those of a brother, when given to you in charge, as such; that they may remain as secure and inviolable in your breast as in his own, before communicated to you. I further present you with check-words, two; their names are truth and union, and are thus explained: Truth is a divine attribute and the foundation

[p. 26]

of every virtue; to be good and true, is the first lesson we are taught in Masonry; on this theme we contemplate, and by its dictates endeavor to regulate our conduct; hence, while influenced by this principle, hypocrisy and deceit are unknown among us; sincerity and plain dealing distinguish us, and the heart and tongue join in promoting each other's welfare and rejoicing in each other's prosperity.

Union is that kind of friendship which ought to appear conspicuous in every Mason's conduct. It is so closely allied to the divine attribute, truth, that he who enjoys the one, is seldom destitute of the other. Should interest, honor, prejudice, or human depravity ever induce you to violate any part of the sacred trust we now repose in you, let these two important words, at the earliest insinuation, teach you to pull on the check-line of truth, which will infallibly direct you to pursue that straight and narrow path which ends in the full enjoyment of the Grand Lodge above, where we shall all meet as Masons and members of the same family, in peace, harmony, and love; where all discord on account of politics, religion, or private opinion shall be unknown and banished from within your walls.

Brother, it has been a custom from time immemorial to demand, op ask from a newly made brother, something of a metallic kind, not so much on account of its intrinsic value, but that it may be deposited in the archives of the lodge, as a memorial, that you were herein made a Mason;--a small trifle will be sufficient,--anything of a metallic kind will do; if you have no money, anything of a metallic nature will be sufficient; even a button will do." [The candidate says he has nothing about him; it is known he has nothing.] "Search yourself," the Master replies. He is assisted in searching, nothing is found. "Perhaps you can borrow a trifle," says the Master. [He tries to borrow, none will lend him--he proposes to go into the other room where his clothes are; he is not permitted. If a stranger, he is very embarrassed.] Master to candidate, "Brother, let this ever be a striking lesson to you and teach you, if you should ever see a friend, or more especially a brother in a like penniless situation, to contribute as liberally to his relief as his situation may require, and your abilities will admit, without material Injury to yourself or family." Master to Senior Deacon.

[p. 27]

[paragraph continues] "You will conduct the candidate back from whence he came, and invest him of what he has been divested, and let him return for further instruction." The candidate is then conducted to the preparation room, and invested of what he had been divested, and returns to the north-east corner of the lodge, and is taught how to stand upright like a man; when and where the following charge is, or ought to be delivered to him; though it is omitted nine times out of ten, as are near one-half of the ceremonies.

Master to candidate, "Brother, as you are now initiated into the first principles of Masonry, I congratulate you on having been accepted into this ancient and honorable order; ancient, as having subsisted from time immemorial; and honorable, as tending in every particular so to render all men who will become conformable to its principles. No institution was ever raised on a better principle, or more solid foundation, nor were ever more excellent rules and useful maxims laid down than are inculcated in the several Masonic lectures. The greatest and best of men in all ages have been encouragers and promoters of the art, and have never deemed it derogatory to their dignity to level themselves with the fraternity, extend their privileges, and patronize their assemblies."

There are three great duties, which, as a Mason, you are charged to inculcate. To God, your neighbor, and yourself. To God, in never mentioning his name but with that reverential awe that is due from a creature to his Creator; to implore his aid in all your laudable undertakings, and to esteem him as the chief good--To your neighbor, in acting upon the square and doing unto him as you wish he should do unto you; and to yourself in avoiding all irregularity, or intemperance which may impair your faculties, or debase the dignity of your profession. A zealous attachment to these principles will ensure public and private esteem. In the state you are to be a quiet and peaceable subject, true to your government and just to your country; you are not to countenance disloyalty, but faithfully submit to legal authority, and conform with cheerfulness to the government of the country in which you live. In your outward demeanor be particularly careful to avoid censure or reproach. Although your frequent appearance at our regular meetings is earnestly

[p. 28]

solicited, yet it is not meant that Masonry should interfere with your necessary vocations; for these are on no account to be neglected; neither are you to suffer your zeal for the institution to lead you into argument with those, who, through ignorance; may ridicule it. At your leisure hours, that you may improve in Masonic knowledge, you are to converse with well-informed brethren, who will be always as ready to give, as you will be to receive information. Finally, keep sacred and inviolable the mysteries of the order, as these are to distinguish you from the rest of the community, and mark your consequence among Masons. If, in the circle of your acquaintance, you find a person desirous of being initiated into Masonry, be particularly attentive not to recommend him, unless you are convinced he will conform to our rules, that the honor, glory, and reputation of the institution may be firmly established, and the world at large convinced of its good effects."

     
Illustrations of Masonry, by William Morgan, [1827], at sacred-texts.com

The work of the evening being over, I will proceed to give a description of the manner of closing the lodge. It is a very common practice in lodges to close a lodge of Entered Apprentices, and open a lodge of Fellow Crafts, and close that, and open a Master Mason's lodge, all in the same evening.

Some brother generally makes a motion that the lodge be closed; it being seconded and carried:--

The Master to the Junior Deacon--"Brother Junior," [giving one rap which calls up both Deacons,] "the first as well as the last care of a Mason?

Ans. "To see the lodge tyled, Worshipful."

Master to Junior Deacon, "Attend to that part of your duty, and inform the Tyler that we are about to close this lodge of Entered Apprentice Masons, and direct him to tyle accordingly." The Junior Deacon steps to the door and gives three raps, which are answered by the Tyler with three more; the Junior Deacon then gives one, which is also answered by the Tyler by one. The Junior Deacon then opens the door, delivers his message, and resumes his place in the lodge and says, "The door is tyled. Worshipful."

Master to Junior Deacon, "By whom?"

Ans. "By a Master Mason without the door, armed with, the proper implements of his office."

[p. 29]

Master to Junior Deacon, "His business there?"

Ans. "To keep off all cowans and eavesdroppers and see that none pass or repass without permission from the chair."

Master to Junior Deacon, "Your place in the lodge, brother Junior?"

Ans. "At the right hand of the Senior Warden in the west."

Master to Junior Deacon, "Your duty there?"

Ans. "To wait on the Worshipful. Master and Wardens, act as their proxy in the active duties of the lodge, and take charge of the door."

Master to the Junior Deacon, "The Senior Deacon's place in the lodge?"

Ans. "At the right hand of the Worshipful Master in the east."

Master to Senior Deacon, "Your duty there, brother Senior?"

Ans. "To wait on the Worshipful Master and Wardens, act as their proxy in the active duties of the lodge, attend to the preparation and introduction of candidates, receive and clothe all visiting brethren."

Master to the Senior Deacon, "The Secretary's place in the lodge?"

Ans. "At your left hand, Worshipful."

Master to Secretary, "Your duty there, brother Secretary?"

Ans. "Duly to observe the Master's will and pleasure; record the proceedings of the lodge; transmit a copy of the same to the Grand Lodge, if required; receive all moneys and money bills from the hands of the brethren; pay them over to the Treasurer, and take his receipt for the same."

Master to the Secretary, "The Treasurer's place in the lodge?"

Ans. "At the right hand of the Worshipful Master."

Master to Treasurer, "Your business there, brother Treasurer?"

Ans. "Duly to observe the Worshipful Master's will and pleasure; receive all moneys and money bills from the hands of the Secretary; keep a just and accurate account of the same; pay them out by order of the Worshipful Master and

[p. 30]

consent of the brethren."

Master to the Treasurer, "The Junior Warden's place in the lodge?"

Ans. "In the south, Worshipful."

Master to the Junior Warden, "Your business there, brother Junior?"

Ans. "As the sun in the south, at high meridian, is the beauty and glory of the day, so stands the Junior Warden in the south, at high twelve, the better to observe the time; call the crafts from labor to refreshment; superintend them during the hours thereof; see that none convert the purposes of refreshment into that of excess or intemperance; call them on again in due season, that the Worshipful Master may have honor, and they pleasure and profit thereby."

The Master to the junior Warden, [I wish the reader to take particular notice that in closing the lodge the Master asks the Junior Warden as follows: "The Master's place in the lodge?" and in opening he asks the Senior Warden the same question.] "The Master's place in the lodge?"

Ans. "In the east, Worshipful."

Master to Junior Warden, "His duty there?"

Ans. "As the sun rises in the east to open and adorn the day, so presides the Worshipful Master in the east to open and adorn his lodge; set his crafts to work with good and wholesome laws, or cause the same to be done."

Master to Junior Warden, "The Senior Warden's place in the lodge?"

Ans. "In the west, Worshipful."

Master to Senior Warden, "Your business there, brother Senior?"

Ans. "As the sun sets in the west to close the day, so stands the Senior Warden in the west to assist the Worshipful Master in opening and closing the lodge; take care of the jewels and implements; see that none be lost; pay the crafts their wages, if any be due, and see that none go away dissatisfied."

The Master now gives three raps, when all the brethren rise, and the Master asks, "Are you all satisfied?" They answer in the affirmative, by giving the due-guard. Should the Master discover that any declined giving it, inquiry is immediately made why it is so; and if any member is dissatisfied

[p. 31]

with any part of the proceedings, of with any brother, the subject is immediately investigated. Master to the brethren, "Attend to giving the signs; as I do so do you; give them downwards" (which is by giving the last in opening, first in closing. In closing, on this degree, you first draw your right hand across your throat, as herein before described, and then hold your two hands over each other as before described. This is the method pursued through all the degrees; and when opening on any of the upper degrees, all their signs, of all the preceding degrees, are given before you give the signs of the degree on which you are opening.) This being done, the Master proceeds, "I now declare this lodge of Entered Apprentice Masons regularly closed in due and ancient form. Brother Junior Warden, please inform brother Senior Warden, and request him to inform the brethren that it is my will and pleasure that this lodge of Entered Apprentice Masons be now closed, and stand closed until our next regular communication, unless a case or cases of emergency shall require earlier convention, of which every member shall be notified; during which time it is seriously hoped and expected that every brother will demean himself as becomes a Free and Accepted Mason." Junior Warden to Senior Warden, "Brother Senior, it is the Worshipful Master's will and pleasure that this lodge of Entered Apprentice Masons be closed, and stand closed until our next regular communication, unless a case or cases of emergency shall require earlier convention, of which every brother shall be notified; during which time it is seriously hoped and expected that every brother will demean himself as becomes a Free and Accepted Mason." Senior Warden to the brethren, "Brethren, you have heard the Worshipful Master's will and pleasure, as communicated to me by brother Junior; so let it be done." Master to the Junior Warden, "Brother Junior, how do Masons meet?"

Ans. "On the level."

Master to Senior Warden, "How do Masons part?"

Ans. "On the square."

Master to the Junior and Senior Wardens, "Since we meet on the level, brother Junior, and part on the square, brother Senior, so let us ever meet and part, in the name of the Lord." Here follows a prayer sometimes used. Master

[p. 32]

to the brethren, "Brethren, let us pray."

"Supreme Architect of the Universe! accept our humble praises for the many mercies and blessings which thy bounty has conferred upon us, and especially for this friendly and social intercourse. Pardon, we beseech thee, whatever thou hast seen amiss in us since we have been together; and continue to us thy presence, protection and blessing. Make us sensible of the renewed obligations we are under to love thee supremely, and to be friendly to each other. May all our irregular passions be subdued; and may we daily increase in faith, hope and charity, but more especially in that charity which is the bond of peace, and perfection of every virtue. May we so practice thy precepts that through the merits of the Redeemer we may finally obtain thy promises, and find an acceptance through the Gates, and into the Temple and City of our God. So mote it be--Amen."

A Benediction, oftener used at closing than the preceding prayer.

May the blessing of heaven rest upon us and all regular Masons; may brotherly love prevail, and every moral and social virtue cement us. So mote it be--Amen.

After the prayer the following charge ought to be delivered, but it is seldom attended to; in a majority of lodges it is never attended to.

Master to brethren, "Brethren, we are now about to quit this sacred retreat of friendship and virtue to mix again with the world. Amidst its concerns and employment forget not the duties which you have heard so frequently inculcated, and so forcibly recommended in this lodge. Remember, that around this altar, you have promised to befriend and relieve every brother who shall need your assistance. You have promised in the most friendly manner to remind him of his errors and aid a reformation. These generous principles are to extend further: Every human being has a claim upon your kind offices. Do good unto all. Recommend it more "especially to the household of the faithful." Finally, brethren, be ye all of one mind, live in peace, and may the God of love and peace delight to dwell with and bless you."

In some lodges, after the charge is delivered, the Master says, "Brethren, form on the square." When all the brethren

[p. 33]

form a circle, and the Master, followed by every brother (except in using the words) says, "And God said let there be light, and there was light." At the same moment that the last of these words drops from the Master's lips, every member stamps with his right foot on the floor, and at the same instant bring their hands together with equal force, and in such perfect unison with each other that persons situated so as to hear it would suppose it the precursor of some dreadful catastrophe. This is called "the shock."

     
Illustrations of Masonry, by William Morgan, [1827], at sacred-texts.com

  

FIRST SECTION OF THE LECTURE ON THE FIRST DEGREE

Having described all the ceremonies and forms appertaining to the opening of a lodge of Entered Apprentice Masons, setting them to work, initiating a candidate, and closing the lodge, I will now proceed too give the lecture on this degree. It is divided into three sections. The lecture is nothing more or less than a recapitulation of the preceding ceremonies and forms, by way of question and answer, and fully explains the same. In fact, the ceremonies and forms (generally Masonically called the work) and lectures are so much the same that he who possesses a knowledge of the lectures cannot be destitute of a knowledge of what the ceremonies and forms are. As the ceremonies used in opening and closing are the same in all the degrees it is thought best to give the whole in one insertion; it being the sincere wish of the writer that every reader should perfectly understand all the formulas of the whole Masonic fabric, as he then will thereby be able to form correct opinions of the propriety or impropriety, advantages or disadvantages of the same.

First Section of the Lecture on the First Degree of Masonry.

"From whence come you as an Entered Apprentice Mason?"

Ans. "From the holy lodge of St. John, at Jerusalem." "What recommendations do you bring?"

Ans. "Recommendations from the Worshipful Master, Wardens and brethren of that right worshipful lodge, whom greet you."

"What comest thou hither to do?"

Ans. "To learn to subdue my passions, and improve myself in the secret arts and mysteries of ancient Freemasonry."

[p. 34]

"You are a Mason, then I presume?"

Ans. "I am."

"How shall I know you to be a Mason?"

Ans. "By certain signs and a token."

"What are signs?"

Ans. "All right angles, horizontals and perpendiculars."

"What is a token?"

Ans. "A certain friendly and brotherly grip, whereby one Mason may know another, in the dark as well as in the light."

"Where were you first prepared to be made a Mason?"

Ans. "In my heart."

"Where secondly?"

Ans. "In a room adjacent to the body of a just and lawfully constituted lodge of such."

"How were you prepared?"

Ans. "By being divested of all metals, neither naked nor clothed, barefoot nor shod, hoodwinked, with a Cable Tow [*+] about my neck, in which situation I was conducted to the door of the lodge."

"You being hoodwinked how did you know it to be a door?"

Ans. "By first meeting with resistance, and afterwards gaining admission."

"How did you gain admission?"

Ans. "By three distinct knocks from without, answered by the same within."

"What was said to you from within?"

Ans. "Who comes there? Who comes there? Who comes there?

"Your answer?"

Ans. "A poor blind candidate who has long been desirous of having and receiving a part of the rights and benefits of this worshipful lodge, dedicated to God, and held forth to the holy order of St. John, as all true fellows and brothers have done, who have gone this way before me."

"What further was said to you from within?"

Ans. "I was asked if it was of my own free will and accord I made this request, if I was duly and truly proposed, worthy and well qualified, all of which being answered in the affirmative, I was asked by what further rights I expected

[p. 35]

to obtain so great a favor or benefit."

"Your answer?"

Ans. "By being a man, free born, of lawful age and well recommended."

"What was then said to you?"

Ans. "I was bid to wait till the Worshipful Master in the east was made acquainted with my request and his answer returned."

"After his answer returned what followed?"

Ans. "I was caused to enter the lodge."

"How?"

Ans. "On the point of some sharp instrument pressing my naked left breast in the name of the Lord."

"How were you then disposed of?"

Ans. "I was conducted to the center of the lodge and there caused to kneel for the benefit of a prayer." [See page <page 19>.]

"After prayer what was said to you?"

Ans. "I was asked in whom I put my trust."

"Your answer?"

Ans. "In God."

"What followed?"

Ans. "The Worshipful Master took me by the right hand and said, 'Since in God you put your trust, arise, and follow your leader, and fear no danger."'

"How were you then disposed of?"

Ans. "I was conducted three times regularly round the lodge and halted at the Junior Warden in the south, where the same questions were asked and answers returned as at the door."

"How did the Junior Warden dispose of you?"

Ans. "He ordered me to be conducted to the Senior Warden in the west; where the same questions were asked and answers returned as before."

"How did the Senior Warden dispose of you?"

Ans. "He ordered me to be conducted to the Worshipful Master in the east, where the same questions were asked and answers returned as before, who likewise demanded of me from whence I came and whither I was traveling."

"Your answer?"

Ans. "From the west and traveling to the east."

[p. 36]

"Why do you leave the west and travel to the east?"

Ans. "In search of light."

"How did the Worshipful Master then dispose of you?"

Ans. "He ordered me to be conducted back to the west, from whence I came, and put in the care of the Senior Warden, who taught me how to approach the east, the place of light, by advancing upon one upright regular step to the first step, my feet forming the right angle of an oblong square, my body erect at the altar before the Worshipful Master."

"What did the Worshipful Master do with you?"

Ans. "He made an Entered Apprentice Mason of me."

"How?"

Ans. "In due form."

"What was that due form?"

Ans. "My left knee bare, bent, my right forming a square; my left hand supporting the Holy Bible, Square, and Compass, and my right covering the same; in which position I took upon me the solemn oath or obligation of an Entered Apprentice Mason. [See page <page 21>.]

"After you had taken your obligation what was said to you?"

Ans. "I was asked what I most desired."

"Your answer?"

Ans. "Light."

"Were you immediately brought to light?"

Ans. "I was."

"How?"

Ans. "By the direction of the Master and assistance of the brethren."

"What did you first discover after being brought to light?"

Ans. "Three great lights in Masonry, by the assistance of three lesser."

"What were those three great lights in Masonry?"

Ans. "The Holy Bible, Square and Compass."

"How are they explained?"

Ans. "The Holy Bible is given to us as a guide for our faith and practice; the Square to square our actions; and the Compass to keep us in due bounds with all mankind, but more especially with the brethren."

[Gap in text] may know another in the dark as well as the light."

[p. 37]

"What were those three lesser lights?"

Ans. "Three burning tapers, or candle, on candle sticks."

"What do they represent?"

Ans. "The Sun, Moon, and Master of the lodge."

"How are they explained?"

Ans. "As the Sun rules the day, and the Moon governs the night, so ought the Worshipful Master to use his endeavors to rule and govern his lodge with equal regularity or cause the same to be done."

"What did you next discover?"

Ans. "The Worshipful Master approaching me from the east, under the sign and due-guard of an Entered Apprentice Mason, who presented me with his right hand in token of brotherly love and esteem, and proceeded to give me the grip and word of an Entered Apprentice Mason, and bid me arise and salute the Junior and Senior Wardens and convince them that I had been regularly initiated as an Entered Apprentice Mason, and was in possession of the sign, grip and word."

"What did you next discover?"

Ans. "The Worshipful Master a second time approaching me from the east, who presented me with a lambskin or white apron, which he said was an emblem of innocence, and the badge of a Mason; that it had been worn by kings, princes and potentates of the earth who had never been ashamed to wear it; that it was more honorable than the diadems of kings or pearls of princesses, when worthily worn, and more ancient than the Golden Fleece, or Roman Eagle, more honorable than the Star or Garter, or any other order that could be conferred upon me at that time or any time thereafter, except it be in the body of a just and lawfully constituted lodge of Masons; and bid me carry it to the Senior Warden in the west, who taught me how to wear it as an Entered Apprentice Mason."

"What were you next presented with?"

Ans. "The working tools of an Entered Apprentice Mason."

"What were they?"

Ans. "A twenty-four inch gauge and common gavel."

"How were they explained?"

[p. 38]

Ans. "The twenty-four inch gauge is an instrument made use of by operative masons to measure and lay out their work, but we as Free and Accepted Masons are taught to make use of it for the more noble and glorious purpose of dividing our time; the twenty-four inches on the gauge are emblematical of the twenty-four hours in the day, which we are taught to divide into three equal parts, whereby we find eight hours for the service of God and a worthy distressed brother, eight hours for our usual vocation, and eight hours for refreshment and sleep. The common gavel is an instrument made use of by operative masons to break off the corners of rough stones, the better to fit them for the builder's use, but we, as Free and Accepted Masons, are taught to make use of it for the more noble and glorious purpose of divesting our hearts and consciences of all the vices and superfluities of life, thereby fitting our minds as lively and living stones for that spiritual building, that House not made with hands, eternal in the heavens."

"What were you next presented with?"

Ans. "A new name."

"What was that?"

Ans. "Caution."

"What does it teach?"

Ans. "It teaches me as I was barely instructed in the rudiments of Masonry, that I should be cautious over all my words and actions, especially when before its enemies."

"What were you next presented with?"

Ans. "Three precious jewels."

"What are they?"

Ans. "A listening ear, a silent tongue, and a faithful heart."

"What do they teach?"

Ans. "A listening ear teaches me to listen to the instructions of the Worshipful Master, but more especially that I should listen to the calls and cries of a worthy distressed brother. A silent tongue teaches me to be silent in the lodge, that the peace and harmony thereof may not he disturbed; but more especially that I should be silent when before the enemies of Masonry. A faithful heart, that I should be faithful to the instructions of the Worshipful Master at all times, but more especially that I should be faithful

[p. 39]

and keep and conceal the secrets of Masonry, and those of a brother, when given to me in charge as such, that they remain as secure and inviolable in my breast, as in his own before communicated to me."

"What were you next presented with?"

Ans. "Check-words two."

"What were they?"

Ans. "Truth and Union."

"How explained?"

"Truth is a divine attribute, and the foundation of every virtue. To be good and true are the first lessons we are taught in Masonry. On this theme we contemplate, and by its dictates endeavor to regulate our conduct; hence, while influenced by this principle, hypocrisy and deceit are unknown amongst us; sincerity and plain dealing distinguishes us; and heart and tongue join in promoting each other's welfare, and rejoicing in each other's prosperity. Union is that kind of friendship that ought to appear conspicuous in the conduct of every Mason. It is so closely allied to the divine attribute, truth, that he who enjoys the one is seldom destitute of the other. Should interest, honor, prejudice, or human depravity ever influence you to violate any part of the sacred trust we now repose in you, let these two important words, at the earliest insinuation, teach you to put on the check-line of truth, which will infallibly direct you to pursue that strait and narrow path, which ends in the full enjoyment of the Grand Lodge above, where we shall all meet as Masons and members of one family; where all discord on account of religion, politics or private opinion shall be unknown and banished from within our walls."

"What followed?"

Ans. "The Worshipful Master in the east made a demand of me something of a  kind, which he said was not so much on account of its intrinsic value, as that it might be deposited in the archives of the lodge, as a memorial that I had therein been made a Mason."

"How did the Worshipful Master then dispose of you?"

"He ordered me to be conducted out of the lodge and vested of what I had been divested, and returned for further instructions."

[p. 40]

"After you returned how were you disposed of."

Ans. "I was conducted to the northeast corner of the lodge, and there caused to stand upright like a man, my feet forming a square, and received a solemn injunction, ever to walk and act uprightly before God and man, and in addition thereto, received the following charge: [For this charge see page <page 27>.]

Footnotes

^34:+ Three miles long.

     
Illustrations of Masonry, by William Morgan, [1827], at sacred-texts.com

  

SECTION SECOND OF THE LECTURE ON THE FIRST DEGREE.

"Why was you divested of all metals when you was made a Mason?"

Ans. "Because Masonry regards no man on account of his worldly wealth or honors; it is, therefore, the internal and not the external qualifications that recommend a man to Masonry."

"A second reason?"

Ans. "There was neither the sound of an axe, hammer, or any other metal tool heard at the building of King  temple."

"How could so stupendous a fabric be erected without the sound of axe, hammer, or any other metal tool?"

Ans. "All the stones were hewed, squared and numbered in the quarries where they were raised, all the timbers felled and prepared in the forests of Lebanon, and carried down to Joppa on floats, and taken from thence up to Jerusalem, and set up with wooden mauls, prepared for that purpose; which, when completed, every part thereof fitted with that exact nicety, that it had more the resemblance of the hand workmanship of the Supreme Architect of the Universe, than that of human hands."

"Why was you neither naked nor clothed?"

Ans. "As I was an object of distress at that time, it was to remind me, if ever I saw a friend, more especially a brother, in a like distressed situation, that I should contribute as liberally to his relief as his situation required, and my abilities would admit, without material injury to myself or family."

"Why were you neither barefoot or shod?"

Ans. "It was an ancient Israelitish custom, adopted among Masons; and we read, in the book of Ruth, concerning

[p. 41]

their mode and manner of changing and redeeming, 'and to confirm all things, a brother plucked off his shoe and gave it to his neighbor, and that was testimony in Israel.' This, then, therefore, we do in confirmation of a token and as a pledge of our fidelity; thereby signifying that we will renounce our own wills in all things, and become obedient to the laws of our ancient institutions."

"Why were you hoodwinked?"

"That my heart might conceive before my eyes beheld the beauties of Masonry."

"A second reason?"

Ans. "As I was in darkness at that time, it was to remind me that I should keep the whole world so respecting Masonry."

"Why had you a Cable Tow about your neck?"

Ans. "In case I had not submitted to the manner and mode of my initiation, that I might have been led out of the lodge without seeing the form and beauties thereof."

"Why did you give three distinct knocks at the door?"

Ans. "To alarm the lodge, and let the Worshipful Master, Wardens and brethren know that a poor blind candidate prayed admission."

"What does those three distinct knocks allude to?"

Ans. "A certain passage in Scripture, wherein it says, 'Ask and it shall be given, seek and ye shall find, knock and it shall be opened unto you.'"

"How did you apply this to your then case in Masonry?"

Ans. "I asked the recommendations of a friend to become a Mason, I sought admission through his recommendations, and knocked, and the door of Masonry opened unto me."

"Why was you caused to enter on the point of some sharp instrument pressing your naked left breast in the name of the Lord?"

Ans. "As this was a torture to my flesh, so might the recollection of it ever be to my heart and conscience, if ever I attempted to reveal the secrets of Masonry unlawfully."

"Why was you conducted to the center of the lodge, and there caused to kneel for the benefit of a prayer?"

[p. 42]

Ans. "Before entering on this, or any other great and important undertaking, it is highly necessary to implore a blessing from Deity."

"Why was you asked in whom you put your trust?"

Ans. "Agreeable to the laws of our ancient institution, no atheist could be made a Mason, it was therefore necessary that I should believe in Deity; otherwise no oath or obligation could bind me."

"Why did the Worshipful Master take you by the right hand and bid you arise, follow your leader and fear no danger?"

Ans. "As I was in darkness at that time, and could neither foresee nor avoid danger, it was to remind me that I was in the hands of an affectionate friend, in whose fidelity I might with safety confide."

"Why was you conducted three times regularly round the lodge?"

Ans. "That the Worshipful Master, Wardens and brethren might see that I was duly and truly prepared."

"Why did you meet with those several obstructions on the way?"

Ans. "This and every lodge is, or ought to be, a true representation of King Solomon's Temple, which, when completed, had guards stationed at the east, west and south gates."

"Why had they guards stationed at those several gates?"

Ans. "To prevent any one from passing or repassing that was not duly qualified."

"Why did you kneel on your left knee and not on your right, or both?"

Ans. "The left side has ever been considered the weakest part of the body; it was therefore to remind me that the part I was then taking upon me was the weakest part of Masonry, it being that only of an Entered Apprentice."

"Why was your right hand placed on the Holy Bible, Square and Compass, and not your left, or both?"

Ans. "The right hand has ever been considered the Seat of fidelity, and our ancient brethren worshiped Deity under the name of FIDES, which has sometimes been represented

[p. 43]

by two right hands joined together; at others, by two human figures holding each by other by the right hand; the right hand, therefore, we use in this great and important undertaking to signify, in the strongest manner possible, the sincerity of our intentions in the business we are engaged.

"Why did the Worshipful Master present you with a lambskin or white apron?"

Ans. "The lambskin has, in all ages, been deemed an emblem of innocence; he, therefore, who wears the lambskin, as a badge of a Mason, is thereby continually reminded of that purity of life and rectitude of conduct which is so essentially necessary to our gaining admission into the celestial lodge above, where the Supreme Architect of the Universe presides."

"Why did the Master make a demand of you of something of a metallic nature?"

Ans. "As I was in a poor and pennyless situation at that time, it was to remind me if ever I saw a friend, but more especially a brother, in the like poor and pennyless situation, that I should contribute as liberally to his relief as my abilities would admit and his situation required, without injuring myself or family."

"Why was you conducted to the northeast corner of the lodge, and there caused to stand upright like a man, your feet forming a square, receiving at the same time a solemn charge ever to walk and act upright before God and man?"

Ans. "The first stone in every Masonic edifice is, or ought to be placed at the northeast corner, that being the place where an Entered Apprentice Mason receives his first instructions to build his future Masonic edifice upon."

     
Illustrations of Masonry, by William Morgan, [1827], at sacred-texts.com

  

THIRD SECTION OF THE LECTURE ON THE FIRST DEGREE.

"We have been saying a good deal about a lodge; I want to know what constitutes a lodge?"

Ans. "A certain number of Free and Accepted Masons duly assembled in a room, or place, with the Holy Bible,

[p. 44]

[paragraph continues] Square and Compass, and other Masonic implements with a charter from the Grand Lodge empowering them to work."

"Where did our ancient brethren meet before lodges were erected?"

Ans. "On the highest hills, and in the lowest vales."

"Why on the highest hills and the lowest vales?"

Ans. "The better to guard against cowans and enemies, either ascending or descending, that the brethren might have timely notice of their approach to prevent being surprised."

"What is the form of your lodge?"

Ans. "An oblong square."

"How long?"

Ans. "From east to west."

"How wide?"

Ans. "Between north and south."

"How high?"

Ans. "From the surface of the earth to the highest heavens."

"How deep?"

Ans. "From the surface to the center."

"What supports your lodge?"

Ans. "Three large columns or pillars."

"What are their names?"

Ans. "Wisdom, Strength and Beauty."

"Why so?"

Ans. "It is necessary there should be wisdom to contrive, strength to support, and beauty to adorn all great and important undertakings, but more especially this of ours."

"Has your lodge any covering?"

Ans. "It has; a clouded canopy, or a starry decked heaven, where all good Masons hope to arrive."

"How do they hope to arrive there?"

Ans. "By the assistance of Jacob's ladder."

"How many principal rounds has it got?"

Ans. "Three."

"What are their names?"

Ans. "Faith, Hope and Charity."

"What do they teach?"

[p. 45]

Ans. "Faith in God, Hope in immortality, and Charity to all mankind."

"Has your lodge any furniture?"

Ans. "It has; the Holy Bible, Square, and Compass."

"To whom do they belong?"

Ans. "The Bible to God, the Square to the Master, and the Compass to the Craft."

"How explained?"

Ans. "The Bible to God, it being the inestimable gift of God to man, for his instruction to guide him through the rugged paths of life; the Square to the Master, it being the proper emblem of his office; the Compass to, the Craft, by a due attention to which we are taught to limit our desires, curb our ambition, subdue our irregular appetites, and keep our passions and prejudices in due bonds with all mankind, but more especially with the brethren,"

"Has your lodge any ornaments?"

Ans. "It has; the mosaic, or chequered pavement, the indented tessels, the beautiful tessellated border which surrounds it, with the blazing star in the center."

"What do they represent?"

Ans. "Mosaic or chequered pavement represents this world, which, though chequered over with good and evil, yet brethren may walk together thereon and not stumble; the indented tessel, with the blazing star in the center, the manifold blessings and comforts with which we are surrounded in this life, but more especially those which we hope to enjoy hereafter; the blazing star, that prudence which ought to appear conspicuous in the conduct of every Mason, but more especially commemorative of the star which appeared in the east, to guide the wise men to Bethlehem, to proclaim the birth and the presence of the Son of God."

"Has your lodge any lights?"

Ans. "It has three."

"How are they situated?"

Ans. "East, west, and south."

"Has it none in the north?"

Ans. "It has not."

"Why so?"

Ans. "Because this and every other lodge is, or ought to be a true representation of King Solomon's Temple, which

[p. 46]

was situated north of the ecliptic; the sun and moon therefore darting their rays from the south, no light was to be expected from the north; we, therefore, Masonically, term the north a place of darkness."

"Has your lodge any jewels?"

Ans. "It has six; three movable and three immovable."

"What are the three movable jewels?''

Ans. "The Square, Level, and Plumb."

"What do they teach?"

Ans. "The Square, morality; the Level, equality; and the Plumb, rectitude of life and conduct."

"What are the three immovable jewels?"

Ans. "The rough Ashlar, the perfect Ashlar, and the Trestle-board."

"What are they?"

Ans. "The rough Ashlar is a stone in its rough and natural state; the perfect Ashlar is also a stone made ready by the working tool of the Fellow Craft to be adjusted in the building; and the Trestle-board is for the master workman to draw his plans and designs upon."

"What do they represent?"

Ans. "The rough Ashlar represents man in his rude and imperfect state by nature; the perfect Ashlar also represents man in that state of perfection to which we all hope to arrive by means of a virtuous life and education, our own endeavors, and the blessing of God. In erecting our temporal building we pursue the plans and designs laid down by the master workman on his Trestle-board; but in erecting our spiritual building we pursue the plans and designs laid down by the supreme Geometrician of the universe, in the book of life, which we Masonically term our spiritual Trestle-board."

"Who did you serve?"

Ans. "My Master."

"How long?"

Ans. "Six days."

"What did you serve him with?"

Ans. "Freedom, fervency, and zeal."

"What do they represent?"

Ans. "Chalk, charcoal, and earth."

"Why so?"

[p. 47]

Ans. "There is nothing freer than chalk, the slightest touch of which leaves a trace behind; nothing more fervent than heated charcoal, it will melt the most obdurate metals; nothing more zealous than the earth to bring forth."

"How is your lodge situated?"

Ans. "Due east and west."

"Why so?"

Ans. "Because the sun rises in the east and sets in the west.'

"A second reason?"

Ans. "The gospel was first preached in the east, and is spreading to the west."

"A third reason?"

Ans. "The liberal arts and sciences began in the east and are extending to the west."

"A fourth reason?"

Ans. "Because all Churches and Chapels are, or ought to be, so situated."

"Why are all Churches and Chapels so situated?"

Ans. "Because king Solomon's temple was so situated."

"Why was king Solomon's temple so situated?"

Ans. "Because Moses, after conducting the children of Israel through the Red Sea, by Divine command erected a tabernacle to God, and placed it due east and west; which was to commemorate, to the latest posterity, that miraculous east wind that wrought their deliverance; and this was an exact model of king Solomon's temple. Since which time every well regulated and governed lodge is, or ought to be, so situated."

"To whom did our ancient brethren dedicate their lodges?"

Ans. "To king Solomon."

"Why so?"

Ans. ''Because king Solomon was our most ancient Grand Master."

"To whom do modern Masons dedicate their lodges?"

Ans. "To St. John the Baptist and St. John the Evangelist."

"Why so?"

Ans. "Because they were the two most ancient Christian patrons of Masonry; and since their time, in every well regulated & governed lodge there has been a certain point

[p. 48]

within a circle, which circle is bounded on the east and the west by two perpendicular and parallel lines, representing the anniversary of St. John the Baptist, and St. John the Evangelist, who were two perfect parallels, as well in Masonry as Christianity; on the vertex of which rests the book of the Holy Scriptures, supporting Jacob's ladder, which is said to reach the watery clouds; and in passing round this circle we naturally touch on both these perpendicular parallel lines, as well as the hook of the Holy Scriptures, and while a Mason keeps himself thus circumscribed he cannot materially err."

[Thus ends the first degree of Masonry, and the reader who has read and paid attention to it knows more of Masonry than any Entered Apprentice Mason in christendom, and more of this degree than one hundredth part of the Master Masons, or even Royal Arch Masons; for very few ever attempt to learn the lectures, or even the obligations; they merely receive the degrees, and there stop, with the exception of a few who are fascinated with the idea of holding an office; they sometimes endeavor to qualify themselves to discharge the duties which devolve upon them in their respective offices. The offices of secretary and treasurer are by some considered the most important in the lodge, particularly where there is much business done.]

     
Illustrations of Masonry, by William Morgan, [1827], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 49]

  

SECOND OR FELLOW CRAFT DEGREE INITIATION.

I will now introduce the reader to the second degree of Masonry. It is generally called passing, as will be seen in the lecture. I shall omit the ceremonies of opening and closing, as they are precisely the same as in the first degree, except two knocks are used in this degree, and the door is entered by the benefit of a pass-word. It is SHIBBOLETH. It will be explained in the lecture.

The candidate, as before, is taken into the preparation room, and prepared in the manner following:

 All his clothing taken off, except his shirt; furnished with a pair of drawers; his right breast bare; his left foot in a slipper, his right bare; a cable-tow twice around his neck; semi-hood-winked; in which situation he is conducted to the door of the lodge, where he gives two knocks, when the Senior Deacon rises and says: "Worshipful, while we are  at work on the second degree of Masonry, under the influence of faith, hope, and charity, the door of the lodge is alarmed." Master to Senior Deacon, "Enquire the cause of that alarm." [In many lodges they come to the door, knock, are answered by the Senior Deacon, and come in without their being noticed by the Senior Warden or Master.] The Senior Deacon gives two raps on the inside of the door. The candidate gives one without; it is answered by the Senior Deacon with one, when the door is partly opened by the Senior Deacon, who enquires, "Who comes here? Who comes here?"

Note.--In modern lodges both eyes are covered, and the cable-tow is put around the naked right arm, instead of around the neck. See cut.

[p. 50]

The Junior Deacon, who is or ought to be the conductor, answers, "A worthy brother who has heel regularly initiated as an Entered Apprentice Mason, served a proper time as such, and now wishes for further light in Masonry by being passed to the degree of Fellow Craft."

Senior Deacon to Junior Deacon. "Is it of his own free will and accord he makes this request?"

Ans. "It is."

Senior Deacon to Junior Deacon: "Is he duly and truly prepared?"

Ans. "He is."

Senior Deacon to Junior Deacon. "Is he worthy and well qualified?"

Ans. "He is."

Senior Deacon to Junior Deacon. "Has he made suitable proficiency in the preceding degree?"

Ans. "He has."

[Very few know any more than they did the night they were initiated, have not heard their obligation repeated, nor one section of the lecture, and in fact a very small proportion of Masons ever learn either.]

Senior Deacon to Junior Deacon. "By what further rights does he expect to obtain this benefit?"

Ans. "By the benefit of a pass-word."

Senior Deacon to Junior Deacon. "Has he a pass-word?"

Ans. "He has not, but I have it for him."

Senior Deacon to Junior Deacon. "Give it to me."

The Junior Deacon whispers in the Senior Deacon's ear, "Shibboleth."

The Senior Deacon says, "The pass is right; since this is the case, you will wait till the Worshipful Master in the east is made acquainted with his request, and his answer returned."

The Senior Deacon then repairs to the Master and gives two knocks, as at the door, which are answered by two by the Master, when the same questions are asked, and answers returned as at the door, after which the Master says, "Since he comes with all these necessary qualifications, let him enter this Worshipful Lodge in the name of the Lord and take heed on what he enters." As he enters, the angle of the square is pressed hard against his naked right breast,

[p. 51]

at which time the Senior Deacon says, "Brother, when you entered this lodge the first time, you entered on the point of the compass pressing your naked left breast, which was then explained to you. You now enter it on the angle of the square pressing your naked right breast, which is to teach you to act upon the square with all mankind, but more especially with the brethren." The candidate is then conducted twice regularly round the lodge, and halted at the Junior Warden in the south, where he gives two raps, and is answered by two, when the same questions are asked, and answers returned as at the door; from thence he is conducted to the Senior Warden, where the same questions are asked and answers returned as before; he is then conducted to the Master in the east, where the same questions are asked and answers returned as before; the Master likewise demands of him from whence he came and whither he is traveling.

He answers, "From the west, and traveling to the east."

The Master asks, "Why do you leave the west and travel to the east?"

Ans. "In search of more light."

The Master then says to the conductor, "Since this is the case, you will please conduct the candidate back to the west from whence he came, and put him in care of the Senior Warden, who will teach him how to approach the east, the place of light, by advancing upon two upright regular steps to the second step [his heel is in the hollow of the right foot on this degree], his feet forming the right angle of an oblong square, and his body erect at the altar before the Worshipful Master, and place him in a proper position to take the solemn oath or obligation of a Fellow Craft Mason."

The Master then leaves his seat and approaches the kneeling candidate [the candidate kneels on the right knee, the left forming a square, his left arm as far as the elbow in a horizontal position, and the rest of the arm in a vertical position so as to form a square, his arm supported by the square held under his elbow] and says, "Brother, you are now placed in a proper position to take on you the solemn oath or obligation of a Fellow Craft Mason, which I assure you as before is neither to affect your religion nor politics; if you are willing to take it, repeat your name and say after me":

[p. 52]

"I, A. B., of my own free will and accord, in the presence of Almighty God, and this worshipful lodge of Fellow Craft Masons, dedicated to God, and held forth to the holy order of St. John, do hereby and hereon most solemnly and sincerely promise and swear, in addition to my former obligation, that I will not give the degree of a Fellow Craft Mason to any one of an inferior degree, nor to any other being in the known world, except it be to a true and lawful brother or brethren Fellow Craft Masons, within the body of a just and lawfully constituted lodge of such; and not unto him nor unto them, whom I shall hear so to be, but unto him and them only whom I shall find so to be after strict trial and due examination or lawful information. Furthermore do I promise and swear that I will not wrong this lodge nor a brother of this degree to the value of two cents, knowingly, myself, nor suffer it to be done by others if in my power to prevent it. Furthermore do I promise and swear that I will support the Constitution of the Grand Lodge of the United States, and of the Grand Lodge of this State, under which this lodge is held, and conform to all the by-laws, rules, and regulations of this or any other lodge of which I may at any time hereafter become a member, as far as in my power. Furthermore, do I promise and swear that I will obey all regular signs and summonses given, handed, sent, or thrown to me by the hand of a brother Fellow Craft Mason, or from the body of a just and lawfully constituted lodge of such, provided that it be within the length of my cable-tow, or square and angle of my work. Furthermore, do I promise and swear that I will be aiding and assisting all poor and Penniless brethren Fellow Crafts, their widows and orphans, wheresoever disposed round the globe, they applying to me as such, as far as in my power without injuring myself or family. To all which I do most solemnly and sincerely promise and swear without the least hesitation, mental reservation, or self evasion of mind in me whatever; binding myself under no less penalty than to have my left breast torn open and my heart and vitals taken from thence and thrown over my left shoulder and carried into the valley of Jehosaphat, there to become a prey to the wild beasts of the field, and vulture of the air, if ever I should prove willfully guilty of violating any part of this my solemn oath or obligation

[p. 53]

of a Fellow Craft Mason; so help me God, and keep me steadfast in the due performance of the same."

"Detach your hands and kiss the book which is the Holy Bible, twice." The bandage is now (by one of the brethren) dropped over the other eye, and the Master says, "Brother [at the same time laying his hand on the top of the candidate's head], what do you most desire?"

The candidate answers after his prompter, "More light." The Master says, "Brethren, form on the square and assist in bringing our new made brother from darkness to light. 'And God said let there be light, and there was light.'" At this instant all the brethren clap their hands and stamp on the floor as in the preceding degree. The Master says to the candidate, "Brother, what do you discover different from before?" The Master says after a short pause, "You now discover one point of the compass elevated above the square, which donates light in this degree; but as one is yet in obscurity, it is to remind you that you are yet one material point in the dark respecting Masonry." The Master steps off from the candidate three or four steps, and says, Brother, you now discover me as master of this lodge approaching you from the east, under the sign and due-guard of a Fellow Craft Mason; do as I do as near as you can and keep your  position." The sign is given by drawing your right hand flat, with the palm of it next to your breast, across your breast from the left to the right side with some quickness, and dropping it down by your side; the due-guard is given by raising the left arm until that part of it between the elbow and shoulder is perfectly horizontal, and raising the rest of the arm in a vertical position, so that that part of the arm below the elbow and that part above it form a square. This is called  due-guard of a Fellow Craft Mason. The two given together, are called the signs and due-guard of a Fellow Craft Mason, and they are never given separately; they would not be recognized by a Mason if given separately. The Master, by the time he gives his steps, signs, and due-guard, arrives at the candidate

[p. 54]

and says, "Brother, I now present you with my right hand, in token of brotherly love and confidence, and with it the pass-grip and word of a Fellow Craft Mason." The pass, or more properly the pass-grip, is given by taking each other by the right hand, as though going to shake hands, and each putting his thumb between the fore and second fingers where they join the hand, and pressing the thumb between the joints. This is the pass-grip of a Fellow Craft Mason, the name of it is Shibboleth. Its origin will be explained in the lecture; the pass-grip some give without lettering or syllabling, and others give it in the same way they do the real grip; the real grip of a Fellow Craft Mason is given by putting the thumb on the joint of the second finger where it joins the hand, and crooking your thumb so that each can stick the nail of his thumb into the joint of the other; this is the real grip of a Fellow Craft Mason; the name of it is Jachin, it is given in the following manner: If you wish to examine a person after haying taken each other by the grip, ask him, "What is this?"

Ans. "A grip."

"A grip of what?"

Ans. "The grip of a Fellow Craft Mason."

"Has it a name?"

Ans. "It has.

"Will you give it to me?"

Ans. "I did not so receive it, neither can I so impart it."

"What will you do with it?"

Ans. "I'll letter it or halve it."

"Halve it and you begin."

Ans. "No, begin you."

"You begin."

Ans. "J A."

"CHIN."

[p. 55]

Ans. "JACHIN."

"Right, brother, Jachin, I greet you."

As the signs, due-guards, grips, words, pass-words, and their several names comprise pretty much all the secrets of Masonry, and all the information necessary to pass us as Masons, I intend to appropriate a few passages in the latter part of this work to the exclusive purpose of explaining them; I shall not, therefore, spend much time in examining them as I progress. After the Master gives the candidate the pass-grip and grip, and their names, he says, "Brother, you ill rise and salute the Junior and Senior Wardens, as such, and convince them that you have been regularly passed to the degree of a Fellow Craft Mason, and have got the sign and pass-grip, real grip and their names." [I do not here express it as expressed in lodges generally; the Master generally says, "You will arise and salute the Wardens, &c, and convince them, &c., that you have got the sign, pass-grip, and word." It is obviously wrong, because the first thing he gives is the sign, then due-guard, then the pass-grip, real grip, and their names.] While the Wardens are examining the candidate, the Master gets an apron, and returns to the candidate, and says, "Brother, I now have the honor of presenting you with a lambskin or white apron as before, which I hope you will continue to wear with honor to yourself and satisfaction to the brethren; you will please carry it to the Senior Warden in the west, who will teach you how to wear it as a Fellow Craft Mason." The Senior Warden ties on his apron and turns up one corner of the lower end of the apron and tucks it under the apron string. The Senior Deacon then conducts his pupil to the Master, who has by this time resumed his seat in the east, where he has, or ought to have, the floor carpet to assist him in his explanations. Master to the candidate, "Brother, as you are dressed, it is necessary you should have tools to work with. I will therefore present you with the tools of a Fellow Craft Mason. They are the plumb, square, and level. The plumb is an instrument made use of by operative Masons to raise perpendiculars, the square to square their work, and the level to lay horizontals, but we, as Free and Accepted Masons, are taught to use them for a more noble and glorious purpose; the plumb teaches us to walk uprightly in our several stations

[p. 56]

before God and man, squaring our actions by the square of virtue, and remembering that we are traveling on the level of time to that undiscovered country from whose bourne no traveler has returned. I further present you with three precious jewels; their names are Faith, Hope, and Charity; they teach us to have faith in God, hope in immortality, and charity to all mankind." The Master to the Senior Deacon, "You will now conduct the candidate out of the lodge and invest him of what he has been divested." After he is clothed and the necessary arrangements made for his reception, such as placing the columns and floor carpet, if they have any, and the candidate is reconducted back to the lodge; as he enters the door the Senior Deacon observes, "We are now about to return to the middle chamber of King Solomon's temple." When within the door the Senior Deacon proceeds, "Brother, we have worked in speculative Masonry, but our forefathers wrought both in speculative and operative Masonry; they worked at the building of King Solomon's temple, and many other Masonic edifices; they wrought six days; they did not work on the seventh, because in six days God created the heavens and earth and rested on the seventh day; the seventh, therefore, our ancient brethren consecrated as a day of rest, thereby enjoying more frequent opportunities to contemplate the glorious works of creation and to adore their great Creator." Moving a step or two, the Senior Deacon proceeds, "Brother, the first thing that attracts our attention are two large columns, or pillars, one on the left hand and the other on the right; the name of the one on the left hand is Boaz, and denotes strength; the name of the one on the right hand is Jachin, and denotes establishment; they collectively allude to a passage in Scripture wherein God has declared in his word, 'In strength shall this House be established.'"

These columns are eighteen cubits high, twelve in circumference, and four in diameter; they are adorned with two large Chapiters, one on each, and these Chapiters are ornamented with net-work, lily-work, and pomegranates; they denote unity, peace, and plenty. The net-work, from its connection, denotes union, the lily, from its whiteness, purity and peace, and the pomegranate, from the exuberance of its seed, denotes plenty. They also have two large globes or

[p. 57]

balls, one on each; these globes or balls contain on their convex surface all the maps and charts of the celestial and terrestrial bodies; they are said to be thus extensive to denote the universality of Masonry, and that a Mason's charity ought to be equally extensive. Their composition is molten, or cast brass; they were cast on the river Jordan, in the clay ground, between Succoth and Zaradatha, where King Solomon ordered these and all other holy vessels to be cast; they were cast hollow, and were four inches, or a hand-breadth, thick; they were cast hollow better to withstand inundations and conflagrations, were the archives of Masonry, and contained the constitution, rolls, and records." The Senior Deacon having explained the columns, he passes between them, advancing a step or two, observing as he advances, "Brother, we will pursue our travels; the next that we come to is a long, winding staircase, with three, five, seven steps, or more." The first three allude to the three principal supports in Masonry, viz.: wisdom, strength, and beauty; the five steps allude to the five orders in architecture, and the five human senses; the five orders in architecture are the Tuscan, Doric, Ionic, Corinthian, and Composite; the five human senses are hearing, seeing, feeling, smelling, and tasting, the first three of which have ever been highly essential among Masons--hearing, to hear the word; seeing, to see the sign; feeling, to feel the grip whereby one Mason may know another in the dark as well as in the light. The seven steps allude to the seven sabbatical years, seven years of famine, seven years in building the temple, seven golden candlesticks, seven wonders of the world, seven planets, but more especially the seven liberal arts and sciences, which are grammar, rhetoric, logic, arithmetic, geometry, music, and astronomy; for this and many other reasons the number seven has ever been held in high estimation among Masons. Advancing a few steps, the Senior Deacon proceeds, "Brother, the next thing we come to is the outer door of the middle chamber of King Solomon's temple, which is partly open, but closely tyled by the Junior Warden." [It is the Junior Warden in the south, who represents the Tyler at the outer door of the middle chamber of King Solomon's temple], who on the approach of the Senior Deacon and candidate enquires, "Who comes here? Who no comes here?"

[p. 58]

The Senior Deacon answers, "A Fellow Craft Mason."

Junior Warden to Senior Deacon, "How do you expect to gain admission?"

Ans. "By a pass, and token of a pass."

Junior Warden to Senior Deacon, "Will you give them to me?"

The Senior Deacon or the candidate (prompted by him) gives them; this and many other tokens and grips are frequently given by strangers, when first introduced to each other. If given to a Mason he will immediately return it; they can be given by any company unobserved, even by Masons, when shaking hands. A pass and token of a pass; the pass is the word Shibboleth; the token, alias the pass-grip is given as before described, by taking each other by the right hand, as if shaking hands, and placing thumb between the forefinger and the second finger at the third joint, or where they join the hand, and pressing it hard enough to attract attention. In the lecture it is called a token, but generally called the pass-grip; it is an undeniable fact that Masons express themselves so differently, when they mean the same thing, that they frequently wholly misunderstand each other.

After the Junior Warden has received the pass, Shibboleth, he enquires, "What does it denote?

Ans. "Plenty."

Junior Warden to Senior Deacon, "Why so?"

Ans. "From an ear of corn being placed at the water ford."

Junior Warden to Senior Deacon, "Why was this pass instituted?"

"In consequence of a quarrel, which had long existed between Jeptha, judge of Israel, and the Ephraimites, the latter of whom had long been a stubborn, rebellious people, whom Jeptha had endeavored to subdue by lenient measures, but to no effect. The Ephraimites, being highly incensed against Jeptha for not being called to fight and share in the rich spoils of the Amonitish war, assembled a mighty army and passed over the river Jordan to give Jeptha battle; but he, being apprised of their approach, called together the men of Israel, and put them to flight; and, to make his victory more complete, he ordered guards to be placed at the different

[p. 59]

passes on the banks of the river Jordan and commanded. it the Ephraimites passed that way, that they should pronounce the word Shibboleth, but they, being of a different tribe, pronounced it Seboleth, which trifling defect proved them spies, and cost them their lives; and there fell that day at the different passes on the banks of the river Jordan forty and two thousand. This word was also used by our ancient brethren to distinguish a friend from a foe, and has since been adopted as a proper pass-word, to be given before entering any well regulated and governed lodge of Fellow Craft Masons." "Since this is the case, you will pass on to the Senior Warden in the west for further examination." As they approach the Senior Warden in the west, the Senior Deacon says to the candidate, "Brother, the next thing we come to is the inner door of the middle chamber of King Solomon's temple, which we find partly open, but more closely tyled by the Senior Warden," when the Senior Warden enquires, "Who comes here? Who comes here?"

The Senior Deacon answers, "A Fellow Craft Mason."

Senior Warden to Senior Deacon, "How do you expect to gain admission?"

Ans. "By the grip and word."

The Senior Warden to the Senior Deacon, "Will you give them to me?"

They are then given as herein before described. The word is Jachin. After they are given the Senior Warden says, "They are right, you can pass on to the Worshipful Master in the east." As they approach the Master, he enquires, "Who comes here? Who comes here?"

Senior Deacon answers, "A Fellow Craft Mason."

The Master then says to the candidate, "Brother, you have been admitted into the middle chamber of King Solomon's temple for the sake of the letter G. It denotes Deity, before whom we all ought to bow in reverence, worship and adore. It also denotes Geometry, the fifth science, it being that on which this degree was principally founded. By Geometry we may curiously trace nature through her various windings to her most concealed recesses. By it we may discover the power, the wisdom, and the goodness of the Grand Artificer of the universe, and view with delight the proportions which

[p. 60]

connect this vast machine. By it we may discover how the planets move in their orbits, and demonstrate their various revolutions. By it we may account for the return of seasons, and the variety of scenes which each season displays to the discerning eye. Numberless worlds surround us, all formed by the same Divine Architect, which roll through the vast expanse, and all conducted by the same unerring law of nature. A survey of nature, and the observations of her beautiful proportions first determined man to imitate the divine plan, and study symmetry and order. The architect began to design; and the plans which he laid down, being improved by experience and time, have produced works which are the admiration of every age. The lapse of time, the ruthless hand of ignorance, and the devastations of war have laid waste and destroyed many valuable monuments of antiquity on which the utmost exertions of human genius have been employed. Even the temple of Solomon, so spacious and magnificent, and constructed by so many celebrated artists, escaped not the unsparing ravages of barbarous force. The attentive ear receives the sound from the instructive tongue; and the mysteries of Freemasonry are safely lodged in the repository of faithful breasts. Tools and implements of architecture, and symbolic emblems, most expressive, are selected by the fraternity to imprint on the mind wise and serious truth; and thus, through a succession of ages, are transmitted, unimpaired, most excellent tenets of our institution." Here ends the work part of the Fellow Craft degree. It will be observed that the candidate has received, in this place, the second section of the lecture on this degree. This course is not generally pursued, but it is much the most instructive method, and when it is omitted I generally conclude that it is for want of a knowledge of the lecture. Monitorial writers [who are by no means coeval with Masonry] all write and copy very much after each other, and they all inserted in their books all those clauses of the several lectures which are not considered by the wise ones as tending to develop the secrets of Masonry. In some instances they change the phraseology a little; in others, they are literal extracts from the lectures. This, it is said, is done to facilitate the progress of learners or young Masons when in fact it has the contrary effect. All lecture teachers (and there are

[p. 61]

many traveling about the country with recommendations from some of their distinguished brethren) when they come to any of those clauses, will say to their pupils: "I have not committed that; it is in the Monitor; you can learn it at your leisure." This course of procedure subjects the learner to the necessity of making his own questions, and, of course, answering monitorially, whether the extracts from the lectures are literal or not. Again, there is not a perfect sameness in all the Monitors, or they could not all get copyrights; hence the great diversity in the lectures as well as the work. The following charge is, or ought to be, delivered to the candidate after he has got through the ceremonies; but he is generally told, "It is in the Monitor, and you can read it at your leisure."

"Brother, being advanced to the second degree of Masonry, we congratulate you on your preferment. The internal and not the external qualifications of a n to are what Masonry regards. As you increase in knowledge, you will improve in social intercourse. It is unnecessary to recapitulate the duties which, as a Mason, you are bound to discharge, or enlarge on the necessity of a strict adherence to them as your own experience must have established their value. Our laws and regulations you are strenuously to support and be always ready to assist in seeing them duly executed. You are not to palliate or aggravate the offences of your brethren, but in the decision of every trespass against our rules you are to judge with candor, admonish with friendship, and reprehend with justice. The study of the liberal arts, that valuable branch of education, which tends so effectually to polish and adorn the mind, is earnestly recommended to your consideration; especially the science of geometry, which is established as the basis of our art. Geometry or Masonry, originally synonymous terms, being of a divine moral nature, is enriched with the most useful knowledge; while it proves the wonderful properties of nature, it demonstrates the more important truths of morality. Your past behavior and regular deportment have merited the honor which we have now conferred; and in your new character it is expected that you will conform to the principles of the order by steadily persevering in the practice of every commendable . Such is the nature of your engagements as a Fellow Craft, and to these

[p. 62]

duties you are bound by the most sacred ties."

I will now proceed with the lecture on this degree. It is divided into two sections.

     
Illustrations of Masonry, by William Morgan, [1827], at sacred-texts.com

  

SECTION FIRST OF THE FELLOW CRAFT MASON LECTURE.

"Are you a Fellow Craft Mason?"

Ans. "I am--try me."

"By what will you be tried?"

Ans. "By the square."

"Why by the square?"

Ans. "Because it is an emblem of virtue."

"What is a square?"

Ans. "An angle extending to ninety degrees, or the fourth part of a circle."

"Where were you prepared to be made a Fellow Craft Mason?"

Ans. "In a room adjacent to the body of a just anti lawfully constituted lodge of such, duly assembled in a room or place, representing the middle chamber of King Solomon's temple."

"How were you prepared?"

Ans. "By being divested of all metals; neither naked nor clothed; barefoot nor shod; hood-winked; with a cable-tow twice round my neck; in which situation I was conducted to the door of the lodge, where I gave two distinct knocks."

"What did those two distinct knocks allude to?"

Ans. 'The second degree in Masonry, it being that on which I was about to enter."

"What was said to you from within?"

Ans. "Who comes there? Who comes there?"

"Your answer?"

Ans. "A worthy brother who has been regularly initiated as an Entered Apprentice Mason, served a proper time as such, and now wishes for further light in Masonry by being passed to the degree of a Fellow Craft."

"What was then said to you from within?"

Ans. "I was asked if it was of my own free will and

[p. 63]

accord I made this request; if I was duly and truly prepared, worthy, and well qualified, and had made suitable proficiency in the preceding degree; all of which being answered in the affirmative, I was asked by what further rights I expected to obtain so great a benefit."

"Your answer?"

Ans. "By the benefit of a pass-word."

"What is that pass-word?"

Ans. "Shibboleth."

"What further was said to you from within?"

Ans. "I was bid to wait till the Worshipful Master in the east was made acquainted with my request, and his answer returned."

"After his answer was returned what followed?"

Ans. "I was caused to enter the lodge."

"How did you enter?"

Ans. "On the angle of the square, presented to my naked right breast, in the name of the Lord."

"How were you then disposed of?"

Ans. "I was conducted twice regularly round the lodge and halted at the Junior Warden in the south, where the same questions were asked and answers returned as at the door.

"How did the Junior Warden dispose of you?"

Ans. "He ordered me to be conducted to the Worshipful Master in the east, where the same questions were asked and answers returned as before, who likewise demanded of me from whence I came and whither I was traveling."

"Your answer?"

Ans. "From the west, and traveling to the east."

"Why did you leave the west and travel to the east?"

Ans. "In search of more light."

"How did the Worshipful then dispose of you?'

Ans. "He ordered me to  conducted back to the west, from whence I came, and put in care of the Senior Warden, who taught me how to approach the east, by advancing upon two upright regular steps to the second step, my feet forming the right angle of an oblong square, and my body erect at the altar before the Worshipful Master.

[p. 64]

"What did the Worshipful Master do with you?"

Ans. "He made a Fellow Craft Mason of me."

"How?"

Ans. "In due form."

"What was that due form?"

Ans. "My right knee bare, bent, my left knee forming a square, my right hand on the Holy Bible, Square and Compass, my left arm forming an angle supported by the Square, and my hand in a vertical position, in which posture I took upon me the solemn oath or obligation of a Fellow Craft Mason." [See page <page 52> for obligation.]

"After your oath of obligation what was said to you?"

Ans. "I was asked what I most desired."

"Your answer?"

Ans. "More light."

"On being brought to light, what did you discover different from before?"

Ans. "One point of the Compass elevated above the Square, which denoted light in this degree, but as one point was yet in obscurity, it was to remind me that I was yet one material point in the dark respecting Masonry."

"What did you next discover?"

Ans. "The Worshipful Master approaching me from the east, under the sign and due-guard of a Fellow Craft Mason, who presented me with his right hand, in token of brotherly love and confidence, and proceeded to give me the pass-grip and word of a Fellow Craft Mason, and bid me rise and salute the Junior and Senior Wardens, and convince them that I had been regularly passed to the degree of a Fellow Craft, and had the sign, grip, and word of a Fellow Craft Mason."

"What did you next discover?"

Ans. "The Worshipful Master approaching me a second time from the east, who presented me with a lambskin or white apron, which he said he hoped I would continue to wear with honor to myself, and satisfaction and advantage to the brethren."

"What were you next presented with?"

Ans. "The working tools of a Fellow Craft Mason"

"What are they?"

[p. 65]

Ans. "The Plumb, Square, and Level."

"What do they teach?" [I think this question ought to be, "How explained?"]

Ans. "The Plumb is an instrument made use of by operative Masons to raise perpendiculars; the Square to square their work and the Level to lay horizontals; but we, as Free and Accepted Masons, are taught to make use of them for more noble and glorious purposes: The Plumb admonishes us to walk uprightly in our several stations before God and man, squaring our actions by the square of virtue, and remembering that we are all traveling upon the level of time to that undiscovered country from whose bourne no traveler returns."

"What were you next presented with?"

Ans. "Three precious jewels."

"What were they?"

Ans. "Faith, hope, and charity."

"What do they teach?"

Ans. "Faith in God, hope in immortality, and charity to all mankind."

"How were you then disposed of?"

Ans. "I was conducted out of the lodge, and invested of what I had been divested."

     
Illustrations of Masonry, by William Morgan, [1827], at sacred-texts.com

  

SECTION SECOND OF THE FELLOW CRAFT MASON LECTURE.

"Have you ever worked as a Fellow Craft Mason?"

Ans. "I have in speculative; but our forefathers wrought both in speculative and operative Masonry."

"Where did they work?"

Ans. "At the building of King Solomon's temple, and many other Masonic edifices."

"How long did they work?"

Ans. "Six days."

"Did they not work on the seventh?"

Ans. "They did not."

"Why so?"

Ans. "Because in six days God created the heavens and

[p. 66]

the earth, and rested on the seventh day; the seventh day, therefore, our ancient brethren consecrated as a day of rest from their labors; thereby enjoying more frequent opportunities to contemplate the glorious works of creation, and adore their great Creator."

"Did you ever return to the sanctum sanctorum, or holy of holies, of King Solomon's temple?"

Ans. "I did."

"By what way?"

Ans. "Through a long porch or alley."

"Did anything particular strike your attention on your return?"

Ans. "There did, viz.: two large columns, or pillars, one on the left hand and the other on the right."

"What was the name of the one on your left hand?"

Ans. "Boaz, to denote strength."

"What was the name of the one on your right hand?"

Ans. "Jachin, denoting establishment."

"What do they collectively allude to?"

Ans. "A passage in Scripture wherein God has declared in his word, 'In strength shall this house be established.'"

"What were their dimensions?"

Ans. "Eighteen cubits in height, twelve in circumference, and four in diameter."

"Were they adorned with anything?"

Ans. "They were, with two large Chapiters, one on each."

"Were they ornamented with anything?"

Ans. "They were, with wreaths of net-work, lily-work, and pomegranates."

"What do they denote?"

Ans. "Unity, peace, and plenty."

"Why so?"

Ans. "Net-work, from its connection, denotes union; lily-work, from its whiteness and purity, denotes peace; and pomegranates from the exuberance of its seed, denotes plenty."

"Were those columns adorned with anything further?"

Ans. "They were, viz.: two large globes or balls, one of tack.

[p. 67]

"Did they contain anything?"

Ans. "They did, viz.. All the maps and charts of the celestial and terrestrial bodies."

"Why are they said to be so extensive?"

Ans. "To denote the universality of Masonry, and that a Mason's charity ought to be equally extensive."

"What was their composition?"

Ans. "Molten or cast brass."

"Who cast them?"

Ans. "Our Grand Master, Hiram Abiff."

"Where were they cast?"

Ans. "On the banks of the river Jordan, in the clay ground between Succoth and Zaradatha, where King Solomon ordered these and all other holy vessels to be cast."

"Were they cast sound or hollow?"

Ans. "Hollow."

"What was their thickness?"

Ans. "Four inches or a hand-breadth."

"Why were they cast hollow?"

Ans. "The better to withstand inundations and conflagrations; were the archives of Masonry and contained the constitution, rolls and records."

"What did you next come to?"

Ans. "A long, winding stair-case, with three, five, seven steps or more."

"What do the three steps allude to?"

Ans. "The three principal supports in Masonry, viz.: wisdom, strength and beauty."

"What do the five steps allude to?"

Ans. "The five orders in architecture, and the five human senses."

"What are the five orders in architecture?"

Ans. "The Tuscan, Doric, Ionic, Corinthian and Composite."

"What are the five human senses?"

Ans. "Hearing, seeing, feeling, smelling and tasting, the first three of which have ever been deemed highly essential among Masons: hearing, to hear the word; seeing, to see the sign, and feeling, to feel the grip, whereby one Mason may know another in the dark as well as the light.

[p. 68]

"What do the seven steps allude to?"

Ans. "The seven sabbatical years, seven years of famine, seven years in building the Temple, seven golden candlesticks, seven wonders of the world, seven planets; but more especially the seven liberal arts and sciences, which are grammar, rhetoric, logic, arithmetic, geometry, music and astronomy. For these and many other reasons the number seven has ever been held in high estimation among Masons."

"What did you next come to?"

Ans. "The outer door of the middle chamber of King Solomon's Temple, which I found partly open, but closely tyled by the Junior Warden."

"How did you gain admission?"

Ans. "By a pass and token of a pass."

"What was the name of the pass?"

Ans. "Shibboleth."

"What does it denote?"

Ans. "Plenty."

"Why so?"

Ans. "From an ear of corn being placed at the water ford."

"Why was this pass instituted?"

Ans. "In consequence of a quarrel which had long existed between Jeptha, judge of Israel, and the Ephraimites; the latter of whom bad long been a stubborn rebellious people whom Jeptha had endeavored to subdue by lenient measures, but to no effect. The Ephraimites being highly incensed against Jeptha for not being called to fight and share in the rich spoils of the Ammonitish war, assembled a mighty army and passed over the river Jordan to give Jeptha battle, but, he, being apprised of their approach, called together the men of Israel, and gave them battle, and put them to flight; and, to make his victory more complete, he ordered guards to be placed at the different passes on the banks of the river Jordan, and commanded, if the Ephraimites passed that way, that they should pronounce the word Shibboleth; but they, being of a different tribe, pronounced it Seboleth; which trifling defect proved them spies, and cost them their lives: and there fell that day at the different passes on the banks of the river Jordan, forty and two thousand. This: word was also used by our ancient brethren to

[p. 69]

distinguish a friend from foe, and has since been adopted as a proper pass-word to be given before entering any well regulated and governed lodge of Fellow Craft Masons."

"What did you next come to?"

Ans. "The inner door of the middle chamber of King Solomon's Temple, which I found partly open, but closely tyled by the Senior Warden."

"How did you gain admission?"

Ans. "By the grip and word."

"How did the Senior Warden dispose of you?"

Ans. "He ordered me to be conducted to the Worshipful Master in the east, who informed me that I had been admitted into the middle chamber of King Solomon's Temple, for the sake of the letter G."

"Does it denote anything?"

Ans. "It does. DEITY, before whom we should all bow with reverence, worship and adore. It also denotes geometry, the fifth science; it being that on which this degree was principally founded."

Thus ends the second degree of Masonry.

     
Illustrations of Masonry, by William Morgan, [1827], at sacred-texts.com

  

THE THIRD, OR MASTER MASON'S DEGREE.

The traditional account of the death and several burials, and resurrection of Hiram Abiff, the widow's son [as hereafter narrated], admitted as facts, this degree is certainly very interesting. The Bible informs us that there was a person of that name employed at the building of King Solomon's Temple; but neither the Bible, the writings of Josephus, nor any other writings, however ancient, of which I have any knowledge, furnish any information respecting his death. It certainly is very singular, that a man so celebrated as Hiram Abiff, was an arbiter between Solomon, king of Israel, and Hiram, king of Tyre, universally

[p. 70]

acknowledged as the third most distinguished man then living, and in many respects the greatest man in the world, should pass off the stage of action in the presence of King Solomon, three thousand three hundred grand overseers, and one hundred and fifty thousand workmen, with whom he had spent a number of years, and neither King Solomon, his bosom friend, nor any other among his numerous friends even recorded his death or anything about him. I make these remarks now, hoping that it may induce some person who has time and capacity to investigate the subject, and promulgate the result of his investigation. I shall let the subject rest where it is, at present; it is not intended that it should form any part of this little volume. The principal object of this work is to lay before the world a true history of Freemasonry, without saying anything for or against it.

A person who has received the two preceding degrees, and wishes to be raised to the sublime degree of a Master Mason, is [the lodge being opened as in the preceding degrees] conducted from the preparation room to the door, [the manner of preparing him is particularly explained in the lecture] where he gives three distinct knocks, when the Senior Warden rises and says, "Worshipful, while we are peaceably at work on the third degree of Masonry, under the influence of humanity, brotherly love, and affection, the door of our lodge appears to be alarmed."

The Master to the Senior Deacon, "Brother Senior, enquire the cause of that alarm."

The Senior Deacon then steps to the door and answers the three knocks that have been given by three more: [these knocks are much louder than those given on any occasion, other than that of the admission of candidates in the several degrees] one knock is then given without and

[p. 71]

answered by one within, when the door is partly opened and the Junior Deacon asks, "Who comes there? Who comes there? Who comes there?"

The Senior Deacon answers, "A worthy brother who has been regularly initiated as an Entered Apprentice Mason, passed to the degree of a Fellow Craft, and now wishes for further light in Masonry by being raised to the sublime degree of a Master Mason."

Junior Deacon to Senior Deacon, "Is it of his own free will and accord he makes this request?"

Ans. "It is."

Junior Deacon to Senior Deacon, "Is he duly and truly prepared."

Ans. "He is."

Junior Deacon to Senior Deacon, "Is he worthy and well qualified?"

Ans. "He is."

Junior Deacon to Senior Deacon, "Has he made suitable proficiency in the preceding degrees?"

Ans. "He has."

Junior Deacon to Senior Deacon, "By what further rights does he expect to obtain this benefit?"

Ans. "By the benefit of a pass-word."

Junior Deacon to Senior Deacon, "Has he a pass-word?"

Ans. "He has not, but I have got it for him."

The Junior Deacon to the Senior Deacon, "Will you give it to me.?"

The Senior Deacon then whispers in the ear of the Junior Deacon, "TUBAL CAIN."

Junior Deacon says, "The pass is right. Since this is the case, you will wait till the Worshipful Master be made acquainted with his request and his answer returned."

The Junior Deacon then repairs to the Master and gives three knocks as at the door; after answering of which, the same questions are asked and answers returned as at the door, when the Master says, "Since he comes endued with all these necessary qualifications, let him enter this worshipful lodge, in the name of the Lord, and take heed on what he enters."

The Junior Deacon returns to the door and says, "Let

[p. 72]

him enter this worshipful lodge, in the name of the Lord, and take heed on what he enters."

In entering, both points of the compass are pressed against his naked right and left breasts, when the Junior Deacon stops the candidate and says, "Brother, when you first entered this lodge, you were received on the point of the compass, pressing your naked left breast, which was then explained to you; when you entered it the second time you were received on the angle of the square, which was also explained to you; on entering now you are received on the two extreme points of the compass, pressing your right and left breasts, which are thus explained: As the most vital parts of man are contained between the two breasts, so are the most valuable tenets of Masonry contained between the two extreme points of the compass, which are virtue, morality, and brotherly love."

The Senior Deacon then conducts the candidate three times regularly round the lodge. [I wish the reader to observe, that on this, as well as every other degree, that the Junior Warden is the first of the three principal officers that the candidate passes, traveling with the sun when he starts round the lodge, and that as he passes the Junior Warden, Senior Warden and Master, the first time going round, they each give one rap, the second time two raps, and third time three raps each. The number of raps given on those occasions are the same as the number of the degree, except the first degree, on which three are given, I always thought improperly.] During the time the candidate is traveling round the room, the Master reads the following passages of Scripture, the conductor and candidate traveling and the Master reading so that the traveling and reading terminate at the same time:

"Remember now thy Creator in the days of thy youth, while the evil days come not, nor the years draw nigh when thou shalt say, I have no pleasure in them while the sun or the light, or the moon, or the stars be not darkened, nor the clouds return after the rain; in the day when the keepers of the house shall tremble, and the strong men shall bow themselves, and the grinders shall cease because they are few, and those that look out of the windows

[p. 73]

be darkened, and the doors shall be shut in the streets; when the sound of the grinding is low, and he shall rise up at the voice of the bird, and all the daughters of music shall be brought low. Also, when they shall be afraid of that which is high, and fears shall be in the way, and the almond tree shall flourish, and the grasshopper shall be a burden, and desire shall fail; because man goeth to his long home, and the mourners go about the streets; or ever the silver cord be loosed, or the golden bowl be broken, or the pitcher be broken at the fountain, or the wheel at the cistern. Then shall the dust return to the earth as it was; and the spirit shall return unto God who gave it."

The conductor and candidate halt at the Junior Warden in the South, where the same questions are asked and answers returned as at the door. He is then conducted to the Senior Warden in the west, where the same questions are asked and answers returned as before; from whence he is conducted to the Worshipful Master in the east, who asks the same questions and receives the same answers as before, and who likewise asks the candidate from whence he came. and whither he is traveling.

Ans. "From the west, and traveling to the east"

"Why do you leave the west, and travel to the east?"

Ans. "In search of more light."

The Master then says to the Senior Deacon, "You will please conduct him back to the west, from whence he came and put him in care of the Senior Warden, and request him to teach the candidate how to approach the east, by advancing upon three upright, regular steps to the third step, his feet forming a square, his body erect at the altar, before the Worshipful Master, and place him in a proper position to take upon him the solemn oath or obligation of a Master Mason."

The Master then comes to the candidate and says, "Brother, you are now placed in a proper position [the lecture explains it] to take upon you the solemn oath or obligation of a Master Mason, which I assure you, as before, is neither to affect your religion or politics. If you are willing to take it, repeat your name and say after me:"

I, A. B., of my own free will and accord, in the presence

[p. 74]

of Almighty God, and this worshipful lodge of Master Masons, dedicated to God, and held forth to the holy order of St. John, do hereby and hereon most solemnly and sincerely promise and swear, in addition to my former obligations, that I will not give the degree of a Master Mason to any of an inferior degree, nor to any other being in the known world, except it be to a true and lawful brother or brethren Master Masons, within the body of a just and lawfully constituted lodge of such; and not unto him nor unto them whom I shall hear so to be, but unto him and them only whom I shall find so to be, after strict trial and due examination, or lawful information received. Furthermore do I promise and swear, that I will not give the Master's word which I shall hereafter receive, neither in the lodge nor out of it, except it be on the five points of fellowship, and then not above my breath. Furthermore do I promise and swear, that I will not give the grand hailing sign of distress except I am in real distress, or for the benefit of the Craft when at work; and should I ever see that sign given or the word accompanying it, and the person who gave it appearing to be in distress I will fly to his relief at the risk of my life, should there be a greater probability of saving his life than losing my own. Furthermore do I promise and swear that I will not wrong this lodge, nor a brother of this degree to the value of one cent, knowingly, myself, or suffer it to be done by others, if in my power to prevent it. Furthermore do I promise and swear, that I will not be at the initiating, passing and raising a candidate at one communication, without a regular dispensation from the Grand Lodge for the same.

Furthermore do I promise and swear that I will not be at the initiating, passing, or raising a candidate in a clandestine lodge, I knowing it to be such. Furthermore do I promise and swear that I will not be at the initiating of an old man in dotage, a young man in nonage, an Atheist, irreligious libertine, idiot, mad-man, hermaphrodite, or woman. Furthermore do I promise and swear that I will not speak evil of a brother Master Mason, neither behind his back nor before his face, but will apprise him of all approaching danger, if in my power. Furthermore do I promise and swear that I will not violate the chastity of a Master Mason's wife, mother,

[p. 75]

sister, or daughter. I knowing them to be such, nor suffer it to be done by others, if in my power to prevent it. Furthermore do I promise and swear that I will support the constitution of the Grand Lodge of the state of ----, under which the lodge is held, and conform to all the by-laws, rules, and regulations of this or any other lodge of which I may at any time hereafter become a member.

Furthermore do I promise and swear that I will obey all regular signs, summonses, or tokens given, handed, sent, or thrown to me from the hand of a brother Master Mason, or from the body of a just and lawfully constituted lodge of such, provided it be within the length of my cable-tow.

Furthermore do I promise and swear that a Master Mason's secrets, given to me in charge as such, and I knowing them to be such, shall remain as secure and inviolable in my breast as in his own, when communicated to me, murder and treason excepted; and they left to my own election.

Furthermore do I promise and swear that I will go on a Master Mason's errand whenever required, even should I have to go bare-foot and bare-headed, if within the length of my cable-tow.

Furthermore do I promise and swear that I will always remember a brother Master Mason when on my knees offering up my devotions to Almighty God.

Furthermore do I promise and swear that I will be aiding and assisting all poor, indigent Master Masons, their wives and orphans, wheresoever disposed around the globe, as far as in my power, without injuring myself or family materially.

Furthermore do I promise and swear that if any part of my solemn oath or obligation be omitted at this time, that I will hold myself amenable thereto whenever informed. To all which I do most sincerely promise and swear, with a fixed and steady purpose of mind in me to keep and perform the same, binding myself under no less penalty than to have my body severed in two in the midst, and divided to the north and south, my bowels burnt to ashes in the center, and the ashes scattered before the four winds of heaven, that there might not the least track or trace of remembrance remain among men. or Masons, of so vile and perjured a wretch at

[p. 76]

should be, were I ever to prove willfully guilty of violating any part of this my solemn oath or obligation of a Master Mason. So help me God, and keep me steadfast in the due performance of the same.

The Master then asks the candidate, "What do you most desire?"

The candidate answers after his prompter, "More light."

The bandage which was tied round his head in the preparation room is, by one of the brethren who stands behind him for that purpose, loosened and put over both eyes, and he is immediately brought to light in the same manner as in the preceding degree, except three stamps on the floor and three claps of the hands are given in this degree. On being brought to light, the Master says to the candidate, "You first discover, as before, three great lights in Masonry, by the assistance of three lesser, with this difference: both points of the compass are elevated above the square, which denotes to you that you are about to receive all the light that can be conferred on you in a Master's lodge." The Master steps back from the candidate and says, "Brother, you now discover me, as Master of this lodge, approaching you from the east, under the sign and due-guard of a Master Mason. "The sign is given by raising both hands and arms to the elbows, perpendicularly, one on each side of the head, the elbows forming a square. The words accompanying this sign, in case of distress, are, "O Lord, my God! is there no help for the widow's son?" As the last words drop from your lips, you let your hands fall, in that manner best calculated to indicate solemnity. King Solomon is said to have made this exclamation on the receipt of the information of the death of Hiram Abiff. Masons are all charged never to give the words except in the dark, when the sign cannot be seen.

Here Masons differ very much; some contend that Solomon gave this sign and made this exclamation when informed

 1/2 Note.--The sign as now given is shown on the next page.

[p. 77]

of Hiram's death, and work accordingly in their lodges. Others say the sign was given and the exclamation made at the grave, when Solomon went to raise Hiram, and, of course, they work accordingly; that is to say, the Master who governs the lodge, holding the latter opinion, gives the sign, etc., at the grave, when he goes to raise the body, and vice versa.

The Due Guard is made by holding both hands in front, palms down, as shown in cut, and alludes to the manlier of holding the hands while taking the obligation of Master Mason.

The Penal Sign is given by putting the right hand to the left side of the bowels, the hand open, with the thumb next to the belly, and drawing it across the belly, and letting it fall; this is done tolerably quick. This alludes to the penalty of the obligation: "Having my body severed in twain," etc. See page <page 75>. After the Master has given the sign and due guard, which does not take more than a minute. he says, "Brother, I now present you with my right hand, in token of brotherly love and affection, and with it the pass-grip and word."

The pass-grip is given by pressing the thumb between the joints of the second and third fingers where they join the hand; the word or name is TUBAL CAIN. It is the pass-word to the Master's degree. The Master, after giving the candidate the pass-grip and word, bids him rise and salute the Junior and Senior Wardens, and convince them that he is an obligated Master Mason, and is in possession of the pass-grip and word. While the Wardens are examining the candidate, the Master returns to the east and gets an apron, and, as he returns to the candidate, one of the Wardens (sometimes both) says to the Master, "Worshipful. we are satisfied that Bro. ---- is an obligated Master Mason." The Master then says to the candidate, "Brother, I now have the honor to present you with a lamb-skin or white apron, as before, which I hope you will continue to wear, with credit to yourself and satisfaction and advantage to the brethren; you will please carry it to the Senior Warden in the west, who will teach you how to wear it as a Master Mason.

The Senior Warden ties on the apron and lets the flaps

[p. 78]

fall down before, in its natural and common situation.

The Master returns to the seat and the candidate is con. ducted to him. Master to candidate, "Brother, I perceive you are dressed, it is of course necessary you should have tools to work with. I will now present you with the working tools of the Master Mason, and explain their use to you. The working tools of a Master Mason are all the implements of Masonry indiscriminately, but more especially the trowel. The trowel is an instrument made use of by operative masons to spread the cement which unites a building into one mass, but we, as Free and Accepted Masons, are taught to make use of it for the more noble and glorious purpose of spreading the cement of brotherly love and affection; that cement which unites us into one sacred band or society of friends and brothers, among whom no contention should ever exist but that noble contention, or, rather, emulation, of who can best work or best agree. I also present you with three precious jewels; their names are Humanity, Friendship, and Brotherly Love.

Brother, you are not invested with all the secrets of this degree, nor do I know whether you ever will be until I know how you withstand the amazing trials and dangers that await you.

You are now about to travel, to give us a specimen of your fortitude, perseverance, and fidelity in the preservation of what you have already received. Fare you well, and may the Lord be with you and support you through all your trials and difficulties." [In some lodges they make him pray before he starts.] The candidate is then conducted out of the lodge, clothed, and returns; as he enters the door his conductor says to him, "Brother, we are now in a place representing the sanctum sanctorum, or holy of holies, of King Solomon's temple. It was the custom of our Grand Master, Hiram Abiff, every day at high twelve, when the Crafts were from labor to refreshment, to enter into the sanctum sanctorum, and offer up his devotions to the ever living God. Let us, in imitation of him, kneel and pray." They then kneel and the conductor says the following prayer:

"Thou, O God, knowest our down-sitting and up-rising, and understandest our thoughts afar off, shield and defend

[p. 79]

us from the evil intentions of our enemies, and support us under the trials and afflictions which we are destined to endure while traveling through this vale of tears. Man that is born of a woman is of few days and full of trouble. He cometh forth as a flower, and is cut down, he fleeth also as a shadow, and continueth not. Seeing his days are determined, the number of months are with thee, thou hast appointed his bounds that he cannot pass; turn from him that he may rest, till he shall accomplish his day. For there is hope of a tree, if it be cut down, that it will sprout again, and that the tender branch thereof will not cease. But man dieth and wasteth away; yea, man giveth up the ghost, and where is he? As the waters fall from the sea, and the flood decayeth and drieth up, so man lieth down and riseth not up till the heavens shall be no more. Yet, O Lord, have compassion on the children of thy creation; administer unto them comfort in time of trouble, and save them with an everlasting salvation. Amen, so mote it be."

They then rise, and the conductor says to the candidate: "Brother, in further imitation of our Grand Master, Hiram Abiff, let us retire at the south gate." They then advance to the Junior Warden [who represents Jubela, one of the ruffians], who exclaims, "Who comes here?" [The room is dark, or the candidate hoodwinked.] The conductor answers, "Grand Master, Hiram Abiff."

"Our Grand Master, Hiram Abiff!" exclaims the ruffian; "he is the very man I wanted to see." [Seizing the candidate by the throat at the same time, and jerking him about with violence.] "Give me the Master Mason's word or I'll take your life!" The conductor replies, "I cannot give it now, hut if you will wait till the Grand Lodge assembles at Jerusalem, if you are found worthy, you shall then receive it, otherwise you cannot." The ruffian then gives the candidate a blow with the twenty-four inch gauge across the throat, on which he fled to the west gate, where he was accosted by the second ruffian, Jubelo, with more violence, and on his refusal to comply with his request, he gave him a severe blow with the square across his breast, on which he attempted to make his escape at the east gate, where he was accosted by the third ruffian, Jubelum, with still more violence, and on refusing to

[p. 80]

comply with his request, the ruffian gave him a violent blow with the common gavel on the forehead, which brought him

to the floor; on which one of them exclaimed, "What shall we do? We have killed our Grand Master, Hiram Abiff!"

Another answers, "Let us carry him out of the east gate, and bury him in the rubbish till low twelve, and then meet and carry him a westerly course and bury him."

The candidate is taken up in a blanket, on which he fell, and carried to the west end of the lodge, and covered up and left; by this time the Master has resumed his seat [King Solomon is supposed to arrive at the temple at this juncture] and calls to order, and asks the Senior Warden the cause of all that confusion.

The Senior Warden answers, "Our Grand Master, Hiram Abiff, is missing, and there are no plans or designs laid down on the Trestle-board for the Craft to pursue their labors."

The Master, alias King Solomon, replies, "Our Grand Master missing! Our Grand Master has always been very punctual in his attendance; I fear he is indisposed; assemble the Crafts, and search in and about the temple, and see if he can be found.

They all shuffle about the floor awhile, when the Master calls them to order and asks the Senior Warden, "What success?"

[p. 81]

[paragraph continues] He answers, "We cannot find our Grand Master, my lord."

The Master then orders the Secretary to call the roll of workmen and see whether any of them are missing.

The Secretary calls the roll and says, "I have called the roll, my lord, and find that there are three missing, viz.: Jubela, Jubelo, and Jubelum."

His lordship then observed, "This brings to my mind a circumstance that took place this morning. Twelve Fellow Crafts, clothed in white gloves and aprons, in token of their innocence, carne to me and confessed that they twelve, with three others, had conspired to extort the Master Mason's word from their Grand Master, Hiram Abiff, and in case of refusal to take his life. They twelve had recanted, but feared the other three had been base enough to carry their atrocious designs into execution."

Solomon then ordered twelve Fellow Crafts to be drawn from the bands of the workmen, clothed in white gloves and aprons, in token of their innocence, and sent three east, three west, three north, and three south in search of the ruffians, and if found to fetch them forward.

Here the members all shuffle about the floor awhile, and fall in with a reputed traveler, and inquire of him if he had seen any traveling men that way; he tells them that he has seen three that morning near the coast of Joppa, who from their dress and appearance were Jews, and who were workmen from the temple, inquiring for a passage to Ethiopia, but were unable to obtain one in consequence of an embargo which had recently been laid on all the shipping, and had turned back into the country.

The Master now calls them to order again, and asks the Senior Warden, "What success?" He answers by relating what had taken place.

Solomon observes, "I had this embargo laid to prevent the ruffians from making their escape," and adds, "You will go and search again, and search till you find them, if possible, and if they are not found the twelve who confessed shall be considered as the reputed murderers and suffer accordingly."

The members all start again and shuffle about awhile,

[p. 82]

until one of them, as if by accident, finds the body of Hiram Abiff, alias the candidate, and hails his traveling companions, who join him, and while they are hammering out something over the candidate the three reputed ruffians, who are seated in a private corner near the candidate, are heard to exclaim in the following manner:

First, Jubela--"O that my throat had been cut across, my tongue torn out, and my body burled in the rough sands of the sea, at low water mark, where the tide ebbs and flows twice in twenty-four hours, ere I had been accessory to the death of so good a man as our Grand Master, Hiram Abiff!"

The second, Jubelo--"O that my left breast had been torn open and my heart and vitals taken from thence and thrown over my left shoulder, carried into the valley of Jehosaphat, and there to become a prey to the wild beasts of the field and vultures of the air, ere I had conspired the death of so good a man as our Grand Master, Hiram Abiff!"

The third, Jubelum--"O that my body had been severed in two in the midst, and divided to the north and south, my bowels burnt to ashes in the center, and the ashes scattered by the four winds of heaven, that there might not the least track or remembrance remain among men, or Masons, of so vile and perjured a wretch as I am; ah, Jubela and Jubelo, it was I that struck him harder than you both. It was I that gave him the fatal blow; it was I that killed him outright;"

The three Fellow Crafts who had stood by the candidate all this time, listening to the ruffians, whose voices they recognized, say, one to the other:

"What shall we do; there are three of them, and only three of us?"

"It is," said one, in reply; "our cause is good, let us seize them."

On which they rush forward, seize and carry them to the Master, to whom they relate what had passed. The Master then addresses them in the following manner [they in many lodges kneel or lie down, in token of their guilt and penitence]:

"Well, Jubela, what have you got to say for yourself, guilty or not guilty?"

[p. 83]

Ans. "Guilty, my lord."

"Jubelo, guilty or not guilty?"

Ans. "Guilty, my lord."

"Jubelum, guilty or not guilty?"

Ans. "Guilty, my lord."

The Master, to the three Fellow Crafts who took them:

"Take them without the west gate of the temple and have them executed according to the several imprecations of their own mouths."

They are then hurried off to the west end of the room. Here this part of the farce ends. The Master then orders fifteen Fellow Crafts to be selected from the bands of workmen, and sent, three east, three west, three north, three south, and three in and about the temple, in search of their Grand Master, Hiram Abiff [in some lodges they send only twelve, when their own lectures say fifteen were sent], and charges them, if they find the body, to examine carefully on and about it for the Master's word or a key to it. The three that travel a westerly course come to the candidate, and finger about him a little, and are called to order by the Master, when they report that they had found the grave of their Grand Master, Hiram Abiff, and, on moving the earth till they come to the body, they involuntarily found their hands raised in this position (showing it at the same time; it is the due-guard of this degree), to guard their nostrils against the offensive effluvia which arose from the grave, and that they had searched carefully on and about the body for the Master's word, but had not discovered anything but a faint resemblance of the letter G on the left breast. The Master, on the receipt of this information (raising himself), raises his hands three several times above his head (as herein before described) and exclaims, "Nothing but a faint resemblance of the letter G! That is not the Master's word nor a key to it. I fear the Master's word is forever lost! Nothing but a faint resemblance to the letter G! That is not the Master's word nor a key to it. I fear the Master's word is forever lost! [The third acclamation is different from the other two; attend to it. It has been described on page <page 76>.] Nothing but a faint resemblance of the letter G! That is not the Master's word

[p. 84]

nor a key to it. O Lord, my God, is there no help for the widow's son?"

The Master then orders the Junior Warden to summon a lodge of Entered Apprentice Masons, and repair to the grave and try to raise their Grand Master by the Entered Apprentice's grip. They go to the candidate and take hold of his forefinger and pull it; return and tell the Master that they could not raise him by the Entered Apprentice's grip; that the skin cleaved from the bone. A lodge of Fellow Crafts are then sent, who act as before, except that they pull the candidate's second finger. The Master then directs the Senior Warden (generally) to summon a lodge of Master Masons, and says, "I will go with them myself in person, and try to raise the body by the Master's grip, or lion's paw." [Some say by the strong grip, or lion's paw.] They then all assemble round the candidate, the Master having declared that the first word spoken after the body was raised should be adopted as a substitute for the Master's word, for the government of Master Masons' lodges in all future generations. He proceeds to raise the candidate, alias the representative of the dead body of Hiram Abiff. He (the candidate) is raised on what is called the five points of fellowship, which are foot to foot, knee to knee, breast to breast, hand to back and mouth to ear. This is done by putting the inside of your right foot to the inside of the right foot of the person to whom you are going to give the word, the inside of your knee to his, laying your right breast against his, your left hands on the back of each other, and your mouths to each other's right ear (in which position alone you are permitted to give the word), and whisper the word Mahhahbone. The Master's grip is given by taking hold of each other's hand as though you were going to shake hands, and sticking the nails of each of your fingers into the joint of the other's wrist where it unites with the hand. In this position

[p. 85]

the candidate is raised, he keeping his whole body stiff, as though dead. The Master, in raising him, is assisted by some of the brethren, who take hold of the candidate by the arms and shoulders; as soon as he is raised to his feet, they step back and the Master whispers the word Mah-hah-bone in his ear, and causes the candidate to repeat it, telling him, at the same time, that he must never give it in any manner other than that in which he receives it. He is also told that Mah-hah-bone signifies marrow in the bone. They then separate, and the Master then makes the following explanation respecting the five points of fellowship:

Master to candidate. "Brother, foot to foot teaches you that you should, whenever asked, go on a brother's errand, if within the length of your cable-tow, even if you should have to go barefoot and bareheaded. Knee to knee, that you should always remember a Master Mason in your devotions to Almighty God. Breast to breast, that you should keep the Master Mason's secrets, when given to you in charge as such, as secure and inviolable in your breast as they were in his own before communicated to you. Hand to back, that you should support a Master Mason behind his back as before his face. Mouth to ear, that you should support his good name as well behind his back as before his face."

After the candidate is through with what is called the work part, the Master addresses him in the following manner: "Brother, you may suppose, from the manner you have been dealt with to-night, that we have been fooling with you, or that we have treated you different from others; but I assure you that is not the case. You have this night represented one of the greatest men that ever lived in the tragical catastrophe of his death, burial, and resurrection; I mean Hiram Abiff, the widow's son, who was slain by three ruffians at the building of King Solomon's temple, and who, in his inflexibility, integrity, and fortitude, never was surpassed by man. The history of that momentous event is thus related: Masonic tradition informs us that, at the building of King Solomon's temple, fifteen Fellow Crafts, discovering that the temple was almost finished, and not having the Master Mason's word, became very impatient and entered into a horrid conspiracy to extort the Master Mason's word from their

[p. 86]

[paragraph continues] Grand Master, Hiram Abiff, the first time they met him alone, or take his life, that they might pass as Masters in other countries, and receive wages as such, but, before they could accomplish their designs, twelve of them recanted, but the other three were base enough to carry their atrocious designs into execution. Their names were Jubela, Jubelo, and Jubelum. It was the custom of our Grand Master, Hiram Abiff, every day at high twelve, when the Craft were from labor to refreshment, to enter into the sanctum sanctorum and offer up his devotions to the ever-living God, and draw out his plans and designs on the trestle-board, for the Crafts to pursue their labor. On a certain day (not named in any of our traditional accounts) Jubela, Jubelo, and Jubelum placed themselves at the south, west, and east gates of the temple, and Hiram, having finished his devotions and labor, attempted (as was his usual custom) to retire at the south gate, where he was met by Jubela, who demanded of him the Master Mason's word [some say the secrets of a Master Mason], and on his refusal to give it Jubela gave him a violent blow with the twenty-four inch gauge across the throat; on which Hiram fled to the west gate, where he was accosted in the same manner by Jubelo, but with more violence. Hiram told him that he could not give the word then because Solomon, king of Israel, Hiram, king of Tyre, and himself had entered into a solemn league that the word never should be given unless they three were present; but, if he would wait with patience till the Grand Lodge assembled at Jerusalem, if he was then found worthy he should receive it, otherwise he could not. Jubelo replied, in a very peremptory manner: 'If you do not give me the Master's word I'll take your life'; and on Hiram's refusal to give it Jubelo gave him a severe blow with the square across the left breast, on which he fled to the east gate, where he was accosted by Jubelum in the same manner, but with still more violence. Here Hiram reasoned as before; Jubelum told him that he had heard his caviling with Jubela and Jubelo long enough, and that he was still put off, and the temple was almost finished, and he was determined to have the word or take his life. 'I want it so that I may be able to get wages as a Master Mason in any country to which I may go for employ, after the temple is finished, and that I might be

[p. 87]

able to support my wife and children.' Hiram persisting in his refusal, he gave Hiram a violent blow with the gavel on the forehead, which felled him to the floor and killed him. They took the body and carried it out of the east gate and buried it in the rubbish till low twelve at night (which is 12 o'clock), when the three met, agreeable to appointment, and carried the body a westerly direction, and buried it at the brow of a hill, in a grave dug due east and west, six feet perpendicular, and made their escape. King Solomon, coming up to the temple at low six in the morning (as was his usual custom), found the Crafts all in confusion, and, on inquiring the cause, was informed that their Grand Master, Hiram Abiff, was missing, and there were no plans and designs laid down on the trestle-board for the Crafts to pursue their labor. Solomon ordered immediate search to be made in and about the Temple for him; no discovery being made, he then ordered the Secretary to call the roll of workmen, to see if any were missing; it appearing that there were three, viz: Jubela, Jubelo and Jubelum, Solomon observed:

"This brings to my mind a circumstance that took place this morning. Twelve Fellow Crafts came to me, dressed in white gloves and aprons in token of their innocence, and confessed that they twelve with three others had conspired to extort the Master Mason's word from their Grand Master, Hiram Abiff, and in case of his refusal to take his life; they twelve had recanted, but feared the other three had been base enough to carry their atrocious design into execution."

Solomon immediately ordered twelve Fellow Crafts to be selected from the bands of the workmen, clothed in white gloves and aprons in token of their innocence, and sent three east, three west, three north and three south, in search of the ruffians, and if found to bring them up before him. The three that traveled a westerly course, coming near the coast of Joppa, fell in with a warfaring man, who informed them that he had seen three men pass that way that morning, who, from their appearance and dress, were workmen from the Temple, inquiring for a passage to Ethiopia, but were unable to obtain one in consequence of an embargo which had recently been laid on all the shipping, and had turned back into the country. After making still further and more diligent search,

[p. 88]

and after making no further discovery, they returned to the Temple and reported to Solomon the result of their pursuit and inquiries. On which Solomon directed them to go and search again, and search until they found their Grand Master, Hiram Abiff, if possible, and if he was not found, the twelve who had confessed should be considered as the murderers and suffer accordingly.

They returned again in pursuit of the ruffians, and one of the three that traveled a westerly course, being more weary than the rest, sat down at the brow of a hill to rest and refresh himself; and in attempting to rise caught hold of a sprig of cassia, which easily gave way and excited his curiosity, and made him suspicious of a deception, on which he hailed his companions, who immediately assembled, and on examination found that the earth had been recently moved; and, on moving the rubbish, discovered the appearance of a grave; and while they were confabulating about what measure to take, they heard voices issuing from a cavern in the clefts of the rocks, on which they immediately repaired to the place, where they heard the voice of Jubela exclaim, "O! that my throat had been cut across, my tongue torn out, and my body buried in the rough sands of the sea at low water-mark, where the tide ebbs and flows twice in twenty-four hours, ere I had been accessory to the death of so good a man as our Grand Master, Hiram Abiff." On which they distinctly heard the voice of Jubelo exclaim, "O! that my breast had been torn open, and my heart and vitals taken from thence and thrown over my left shoulder, to the valley of Jehosaphat, there to become a prey to the wild beasts of the field and vultures of the air, ere I had conspired to take the life of so good a man as our Grand Master, Hiram Abiff. When they more distinctly heard the voice of Jubelum exclaim, "O! that my body had been severed in two in the midst, and divided to the north and the south, my bowels burnt to ashes in the center, and the ashes scattered by the four winds of heaven, that there might not remain the least track or trace of remembrance among men or Masons of so vile and perjured a wretch as I am, who wilfully took the life of so good a man as our Grand Master, Hiram Abiff. Ah! Jubela and Jubelo, it was I that struck him harder than you both! It

[p. 89]

was I that gave him the fatal blow! It was I that killed him outright!" On which they rushed forward, seized, bound, and carried them up before King Solomon, who, after hearing the testimony of the three Fellow Crafts, and the three ruffians having plead guilty, ordered them to be taken out at the west gate of the Temple and executed agreeable to the several imprecations of their own mouths. King Solomon then ordered fifteen Fellow Crafts to be selected from the bands of the workmen, clothed with white gloves and aprons, in token of their innocence, and sent three east, three west, three north, three south and three in and about the Temple, in search of the body of their Grand Master, Hiram Abiff, and the three that traveled a westerly course found it under that sprig of cassia, where a worthy brother sat down to rest and refresh himself; and on removing the earth till they came to the coffin, they involuntarily found their hands raised, as herein before described, to guard their nostrils against the offensive effluvia that arose from the grave. It is also said that the body had lain there fourteen days, some say fifteen, The body was raised in the manner herein before described, carried up to the Temple, and buried as explained in the closing clauses of the lecture. Not one third part of the preceding history of this degree is ever given to a candidate. A few general, desultory, unconnected remarks are made to him, and he is generally referred to the manner of raising, and the lecture, for information as to the particulars. Here follows a charge which ought to be and sometimes is delivered to the candidate after hearing the history of the degree.

An address to be delivered to the candidate after the history has been given.

"Brother, your zeal for the institution of Masonry, the progress you have made in the mystery, and your conformity to our regulations, have pointed you out as a proper object of our favor and esteem. You are bound by duty, honor and gratitude to be faithful to your trust, to support the dignity of your character on every occasion, and to enforce, by precept and example, obedience to the tenets of the order. In the character of Master Mason, you are authorized to correct the errors and irregularities of your uninformed brethren,

[p. 90]

and to guard them against breach of fidelity. To preserve the reputation of the fraternity, unsullied, must be your constant care--and for this purpose it is your province to recommend to your inferiors, obedience and submission; to your equals, courtesy and affability; to your superiors, kindness and condescension. Universal benevolence you are always to inculcate; and by the regularity of your own behavior, afford the best example for the conduct of others less informed. The ancient landmarks of the order, entrusted to your care, you are carefully to preserve; and never suffer them to be infringed, or countenance a deviation from the established usages and customs of the fraternity. Your virtue, honor, and reputation are concerned in supporting with dignity the character you now bear. Let no motive, therefore, make you swerve from your duty, violate your vows, or betray your trust; but be true and faithful, and imitate the example of that celebrated artist whom you this evening represent; thus you will render yourself deserving the honor which we have conferred, and merit the confidence that we have reposed."

Here follows the lecture on this degree, which is divided into three sections.

     
Illustrations of Masonry, by William Morgan, [1827], at sacred-texts.com

  

SECTION FIRST OF THE MASTER MASON LECTURE.

"Are you a Master Mason"

Ans. "I am--try me, prove me--disprove me if yon can."

"Where were you prepared to be made a Master Mason?"

Ans. "In a room adjacent to the body of a just and lawfully constituted lodge of such, duly assembled in a room representing the sanctum sanctorum, or holy of holies, of King Solomon's Temple."

"How were you prepared?"

Ans. "By being divested of all metals; neither naked nor clothed; barefoot nor shod; with a cable-tow three times about my naked body; in which posture I was conducted to the door of the lodge, where I gave three distinct knocks."

"What did those three distinct knocks allude to?"

Ans. "To the third degree of Masonry; it being that on

[p. 91]

which I was about to enter."

"What was said to you from within?"

Ans. "Who comes there? Who comes there? Who comes there?"

"Your answer?'

Ans. "A worthy brother who has been regularly initiated as an Entered Apprentice Mason, passed to the degree of a Fellow Craft, and now wishes for further light in Masonry, by being raised to the sublime degree of a Master Mason."

"What further was said to you from within?"

Ans. "I was asked if it was of my own free will and accord I made that request; if I was duly and truly prepared; worthy and well qualified, and had made suitable proficiency in the preceding degrees; all of which being answered in the affirmative, I was asked by what further rights I expected to obtain that benefit."

"Your answer?"

Ans. "By the benefit of a pass-word."

"What is that pass-word?"

Ans. "Tubal Cain."

"What next was said to you?"

Ans. "I was bid to wait till the Worshipful Master in the east was made acquainted with my request and his answer returned."

"What followed after his answer was returned?"

Ans. "I was caused to enter the lodge on the two extreme points of the compass, pressing my naked right and left breasts, in the name of the Lord."

"How were you then disposed of?"

Ans. "I was conducted three times regularly round the lodge, and halted at the Junior Warden in the south, where the same questions were asked and answers returned as at the door."

"How did the Junior Warden dispose of you?"

Ans. "He ordered me to be conducted to the Senior Warden in the west, where the same questions were asked and answers returned as before."

"How did the Senior Warden dispose of you?"

Ans. "He ordered me to be conducted to the Worshipful Master in the east, where by him the same questions were asked, and answers returned as before, who likewise demanded

[p. 92]

of me from whence I came, and whither I was traveling."

"Your answer?"

Ans. "From the east and traveling to the west"

"Why do you leave the east, and travel to the west?"

Ans. "In search of light."

"How did the Worshipful Master then dispose of you?"

Ans. "He ordered me to be conducted back to the west, from whence I came, and put in care of the Senior Warden, who taught me how to approach the east, by advancing upon three upright, regular steps to the third step, my feet forming a square and my body erect at the altar before the Worshipful Master."

"What did the Worshipful Master do with you?"

Ans. "He made an obligated Master Mason of me."

"How?"

Ans. "In due form."

"What was that due form?"

Ans. "Both my knees bare bent, they forming a square; both hands on the Holy Bible, Square and Compass; in which posture I took upon me the solemn oath or obligation of a Master Mason."

"After your obligation, what was said to you?"

Ans. "What do you most desire?"

"Your answer?"

Ans. "More light."

[The bandage round the head is now dropped over the eyes.]

"Did you receive light?"

Ans. "I did."

"On being brought to light on this degree, what did you first discover?"

Ans. "Three great lights in Masonry, by the assistance of three lesser, and both points of the compass elevated above the square, which denoted to me that I had received, or was about to receive all the light that could be conferred on me in a Master's Lodge."

"What did you next discover?"

Ans. "The Worshipful Master approaching me from the east, under the sign and due-guard of a Master Mason, who presented me with his right hand in token of brotherly love

[p. 93]

and confidence, and proceeded to give me the pass-grip and word of a Master Mason, [the word is the name of the pass-grip] and bid me arise and salute the Junior and Senior Wardens and convince them that I was an obligated Master Mason, and had the sign, pass-grip and word. [Tubal Cain.] "What did you next discover?"

Ans. "The Worshipful Master approaching me the second time from the east, who presented me with a lamb-skin or white apron, which he said he hoped I would continue to wear, with honor to myself, and satisfaction and advantage to the brethren."

"What were you next presented with?"

Ans. "The working tools of a Master Mason."

"What are they?"

Ans. "All the implements of Masonry indiscriminately, but more especially the trowel."

"How explained?"

Ans. "The trowel is an instrument made use of by operative masons to spread the cement which unites a building into one common mass, but we, as Free and Accepted Masons, are taught to make use of it for the more noble and glorious purpose of spreading the cement of brotherly love and affection, that cement which unites us into one sacred band or society of brothers, among whom no contention should ever exist, but that noble emulation of who can best work or best agree."

"What were you next presented with?"

Ans. "Three precious jewels."

"What are they?"

Ans. "Humanity, friendship and brotherly love."

"How were you then disposed of?"

Ans. "I was conducted out of the lodge and invested with what I had been divested, and returned again in due season."

     
Illustrations of Masonry, by William Morgan, [1827], at sacred-texts.com

  

SECTION SECOND OF THE MASTER MASON LECTURE.

"Did you ever return to the sanctum sanctorum or holy of holies of King Solomon's Temple?"

Ans. "I did."

"Was there anything particular took place on your return?"

[p. 94]

Ans. "There was, viz.: I was accosted by three ruffians, who demanded of me the Master Mason's word."

"Did you give it to them?"

Ans. "I did not, but bid them wait with time and patience till the Grand Lodge assembled at Jerusalem; and then, if they were found worthy, they should receive it; otherwise they could not."

"In what manner were you accosted?"

Ans. "In attempting to retire to the south gate, I was accosted by one of them, who demanded of me the Master Mason's word, and on refusing to comply with his request he gave me a blow with the twenty-four inch gauge, across my breast, on which I fled to the west gate, where I was accosted by the second, with more violence, and on my refusing to comply with his request he gave me a severe blow with the square, across my breast, on which I attempted to make my escape at the east gate, where I was accosted by the third, with still more violence, and on my refusing to comply with his request he gave me a violent blow with the common gavel on the forehead, and brought me to the floor."

"Whom did you represent at that time?"

Ans. "Our Grand Master, Hiram Abiff, who was slain at the building of King Solomon's Temple."

"Was his death premeditated?"

Ans. "It was, by fifteen Fellow Crafts, who conspired to extort from him the Master Mason's word; twelve of whom recanted, but the other three were base enough to carry their atrocious designs into execution."

"What did they do with the body?"

Ans. "They carried it out at the east gate of the Temple and buried it till low twelve at night, when they three met, agreeable to appointment, and carried it a westerly course from the Temple, and buried it under the brow of a hill in a grave six feet due east and west, six feet perpendicular, and made their escape."

"What time was he slain?"

Ans. "At high twelve at noon, when the Crafts were from labor to refreshment."

"How come he to be alone at this time?"

Ans. "Because it was the usual custom of our Grand Master, Hiram Abiff, every day at high twelve, when the

[p. 95]

[paragraph continues] Crafts were from labor to refreshment, to enter into the sanctum sanctorum or holy of holies, and offer up his adorations to the ever living God, and draw out his plans and designs on his trestle-board, for the Crafts to pursue their labor."

"At what time was he missing?"

Ans. "At low six in the morning, when King Solomon came up to the Temple, as usual, to view the work, and found the Crafts all in confusion, and on inquiring the cause, he was informed that their Grand Master, Hiram Abiff, was missing, and no plans or designs were laid down on the trestle-board for the Crafts to pursue their labor."

"What observations did King Solomon make at that time? Ans. "He observed that our Grand Master, Hiram Abiff, had always been very punctual in attending, and feared that he was indisposed, and ordered search to be made in and about the Temple, to see if he could be found."

"Search being made and he not found, what further remarks did King Solomon make?"

Ans. "He observed he feared some fatal accident had befallen our Grand Master, Hiram Abiff; that morning twelve Fellow Crafts, clothed in white gloves and aprons in token of their innocence, had confessed that they twelve, with three others, had conspired to extort the Master Mason's word from their Grand Master, Hiram Abiff, or take his life; that they twelve had recanted, but feared the other three had been base enough to carry their atrocious designs into execution."

"What followed?"

Ans. "King Solomon ordered the roll of workmen to be called to see if there were any missing."

"The roll being called, were there any missing?"

Ans. "There were three, viz.: Jubela, Jubelo, Jubelum."

"Were the ruffians ever found?"

Ans. "They were."

"How?"

Ans. "By the wisdom of King Solomon, who ordered twelve Fellow Crafts to be selected from the band of the workmen, clothed in white gloves and aprons in token of their innocence, and sent three east, three west, three north

[p. 96]

and three south in search of the ruffians, and if found to bring them forward."

"What success?"

Ans. "The three that traveled a westerly course from the Temple, coming near the coast of Joppa, were informed by a way-faring man that the three men had been seen that way that morning, who from their appearance and dress were workmen from the Temple, inquiring for a passage to Ethiopia, but were unable to obtain one in consequence of an embargo, which had recently been laid on all the shipping, and had turned back into the country."

"What followed?"

Ans. "King Solomon ordered them to go and search again, and search till they were found, if possible, and if they were not found, that the twelve who had confessed should be considered as the reputed murderers, and suffer accordingly."

"What success?"

Ans. "One of the three that traveled a westerly course, from the Temple, being more weary than the rest, sat down under the brow of a hill to rest and refresh himself, and in attempting to rise caught hold of a sprig of cassia, which easily gave way, and excited his curiosity and made him suspicious of a deception, on which he hailed his companions who immediately assembled, and on examination found that the earth had recently been moved, and on moving the rubbish discovered the appearance of a grave; and while they were confabulating about what measures to take, they heard voices issuing from a cavern in the clefts of the rocks; on which they immediately repaired to the place, where they heard the voice of Jubela exclaim, 'O that my throat had been cut across, my tongue torn out, and my body buried in the rough sands of the sea, at low watermark, where the tide ebbs and flows twice in twenty-four hours, ere I had been accessary to the death of so good a man as our Grand Master, Hiram Abiff!' On which they distinctly heard the voice of Jubelo, 'O that my left breast had been torn open, and my heart and vitals taken from thence and thrown over my left shoulder, carried into the valley of Jehosaphat, and there to become a prey to the wild beasts on

[p. 97]

the field, and vultures of the air, ere I had conspired the death of so good a man as our Grand Master, Hiram Abiff!'

The third, Jubelum, 'O that my body had been severed In two in the midst, and divided to the north and south, my bowels burnt to ashes in the centre, and the ashes scattered by the four winds of heaven, that there might not the least track or remembrance remain among men or Masons of so vile and perjured a wretch as I am; ah! Jubela, and Jubelo, it was I that struck him harder than you both--it was I that gave him the fatal blow--it was I that killed him outright!'

On which they rushed forward, seized, bound and carried them up to the Temple of King Solomon.

"What did King Solomon do with them?"

Ans. "He ordered them to be executed agreeably to the several imprecations of their own mouths."

"Was the body of our Grand Master, Hiram Abiff, ever found?"

Ans. "It was."

"How?"

Ans. "By the wisdom of King Solomon, who ordered fifteen (in some lodges they say twelve) Fellow Crafts to be selected from the bands of the workmen and sent, three east, three west, three north, three south and three in and about the temple, to search for the body."

"Where was it found?"

Ans. "Under a sprig of cassia, where a worthy brother sat down to rest and refresh himself."

"Was there anything particular took place on the discovery of the body?"

Ans. "There was, viz.: on moving the earth till we came to the coffin, we involuntarily found our hands in this position, to guard our nostrils against the offensive effluvia which arose from the grave."

"How long had the body lain there?"

Ans. "Fourteen days."

"What did they do with the body?"

Ans. "Raised it in a Masonic form and carried it up to the temple for more decent interment."

"Where was it buried?"

Ans. "Under the Sanctum Sanctorum, or holy of holies of King Solomon's Temple, over which they erected a marble

[p. 98]

monument, with this inscription delineated thereon: A virgin weeping over a broken column, with a book open before her, in her right hand a sprig of cassia, in her left ant urn. Time standing behind her, with his hands infolded in the ringlets of her hair."

"What do they denote?"

Ans. "The weeping virgin denotes the unfinished state of the temple; the broken column, that one of the principal supports of Masonry had fallen; the book open before her, that his memory was on perpetual record; the sprig of cassia, the timely discovery of his grave; the urn in her left hand, that his ashes are safely deposited under the Sanctum Sanctorum, or holy of holies of King Solomon's Temple, and Time, standing behind her, with his hands infolded in the ringlets of her hair, that time, patience and perseverance will accomplish all things."

     
Illustrations of Masonry, by William Morgan, [1827], at sacred-texts.com

  

SECTION SECOND OF THE MASTER MASON LECTURE.

"What does a Master's lodge represent?"

Ans. "The Sanctum Sanctorum, or holy of holies of King Solomon's Temple."

"How long was the temple building?"

Ans. Seven years, during which it rained not in the day-time, that the workmen might not be obstructed in their labor."

"What supported the temple."

Ans. "Fourteen hundred and fifty-three columns and two thousand nine hundred and six pilasters, all hewn from the finest Parian marble."

"What further supported it?"

Ans. "Three grand columns, or pillars."

"What were they called?"

Ans. "Wisdom, strength and beauty."

"What did they represent?"

Ans. "The pillar of wisdom represented Solomon, King of Israel, whose wisdom contrived the mighty fabric; the pillar of strength, Hiram, King of Tyre, who strengthened Solomon in his glorious undertaking; the pillar of beauty, Hiram Abiff, the widow's son, whose cunning craft and curious

[p. 99]

workmanship beautified and adorned the temple."

"How many were there employed in the building of King Solomon's Temple?"

Ans. "Three Grand Masters, three thousand three hundred Masters, or overseers of the work, eighty thousand Fellow Crafts, and seventy thousand Entered Apprentices; all those were classed and arranged in such a manner by the wisdom of Solomon that neither envy, discord nor confusion were suffered to interrupt that universal peace and tranquillity that pervaded the work at that important period."

"How many constitutes an Entered Apprentice lodge?"

Ans. "Seven; one Master and six Entered Apprentices."

"Where did they usually meet?"

Ans. "On the ground floor of King Solomon's Temple."

"How many constitute a Fellow Craft's lodge?"

Ans. "Five; two Masters and three Fellow Crafts."

"Where did they usually meet?"

Ans. "In the middle chamber of King Solomon's Temple."

"How many constitute a Master's lodge?"

Ans. "Three Master Masons."

"Where did they usually meet?"

Ans. "In the Sanctum Sanctorum, or holy of holies of King Solomon's Temple."

"Have you any emblems on this degree?"

Ans. "We have several, which are divided into two classes."

"What are the first class?"

Ans. "The pot of incense, the bee-hive, the book of constitutions, guarded by the Tyler's sword, the sword pointing to a naked heart, the all-seeing eye, the anchor and ark, the forty-seventh problem of Euclid, the hour-glass, the scythe, and the three steps usually delineated on the Master's carpet, which are thus explained: The pot of incense is an emblem of a pure heart, which is always an acceptable sacrifice to the Deity and, as this glows with fervent heat, so should our hearts continually glow with gratitude to the great and beneficent Author of our existence for the manifold blessings and comforts we enjoy. The bee-hive is an emblem of industry, and recommends the practice of that virtue to all created beings, from the highest seraph in heaven to the

[p. 100]

lowest reptile of the dust. It teaches us that, as we came into the world rational and intelligent beings, so we should ever be industrious ones, never sitting down contented while our fellow-creatures around us are in want, when it is in our power to relieve them without inconvenience to ourselves. When we take a survey of nature, we behold man, in his infancy, more helpless and indigent than the brute creation; he lies languishing for days, weeks, months and years, totally incapable of providing sustenance for himself; of guarding against the attacks of the wild beasts of the field, or sheltering himself from the inclemencies of the weather. It might have pleased the great Creator of heaven and earth to have made man independent of all other beings, but, as dependence is one of the strongest bonds of society, mankind were made dependent on each other for protection and security, as they thereby enjoy better opportunities of fulfilling the duties of reciprocal love and friendship. Thus was man formed for social and active life, the noblest part of the work of God, and he that will so demean himself, as not to be endeavoring to add to the common stock of knowledge and understanding, may be deemed a drone in the hive of nature, a useless member of society, and unworthy of our protection as Masons.

The book of constitutions, guarded by the Tyler's sword, reminds us that we should be ever watchful and guarded in our thoughts, words, and actions, particularly when before the enemies of Masonry, ever bearing in remembrance those truly Masonic virtues, silence and circumspection. The sword pointing to a naked heart, demonstrates that justice will sooner or later overtake us; and although our thoughts, words and actions may be hidden from the eye of man yet that all-seeing eye, whom the sun, moon and stars obey, and under whose watchful care even comets perform their stupendous revolutions, pervades the inmost recesses of the human heart, and will reward us according to our merits. The anchor and ark, are emblems of a well grounded hope and a well spent life. They are emblematical of that Divine ark which safely wafts us over this tempestuous sea of troubles, and that anchor which shall safely moor us in a peaceful harbor, where the wicked cease from troubling, and the weary shall find rest.

[p. 101]

The forty-seventh problem of Euclid: This was an invention of our ancient friend and brother, the great Pythagoras, who, in his travels through Asia, Africa and Europe, was initiated into several orders of priesthood, and raised to the sublime degree of a Master Mason. This wise philosopher enriched his mind abundantly in a general knowledge of things, and more especially in Geometry, or Masonry, on this subject he drew out many problems and theorems; and among the most distinguished he erected this, which, in the joy of his heart, he called Eureka, in the Grecian language signifying, I have found it; and upon the discovery of which he is said to have sacrificed a hecatomb. It teaches Masons to be general lovers of the arts and sciences. The hour glass is an emblem of human life. Behold! how swiftly the sands run, and how rapidly our lives are drawing to a close. We cannot without astonishment behold the little particles which are contained in this machine; how they pass away, almost imperceptibly, and yet to our surprise in a short space of an hour they are all exhausted. Thus wastes man! To-day, he puts forth the tender leaves of hope; to-morrow, blossoms, and bears his blushing honors thick upon him; the next day comes a frost, which nips the root, and when he thinks his greatness is still ripening, he falls like autumn leaves, to enrich our mother earth. The scythe is an emblem of time, which cuts the brittle thread of life, and launches us into eternity. Behold! what havoc the scythe of time makes among the human race; if by chance we should escape the numerous evils, incident to childhood and youth, and with health and vigor come to the years of manhood, yet withal we must soon be cut down by the all-devouring scythe of time, and be gathered into the land where our fathers have gone before us. The three steps usually delineated upon the Masters carpet, are emblematical of the three principal stages of human life, viz.: youth, manhood and age. In youth, as Entered Apprentices, we ought industriously to occupy our minds in the attainment of useful knowledge; in manhood, as Fellow Craft, we should apply our knowledge to the discharge of our respective duties to God, our neighbors, and ourselves, that so in age, as Master Mason, we may enjoy the happy reflections consequent on a well spent life, and die in the hope of a glorious immortality.

[p. 102]

"What are the second class of emblems?"

Ans. "The spade, coffin, death-head, marrow-bones, and sprig of cassia, which are thus explained: The spade opens the vault to receive our bodies where our active limbs will soon moulder to dust. The coffin, death-head, and marrowbones, are emblematical of the death and burial, of our Grand Master, Hiram Abiff, and are worthy of our serious attention. The sprig of cassia is emblematical of that important part of man which never dies--and when the cold winter of death shall have passed, and the bright summer's morn of the resurrection appears, the Son of Righteousness shall descend, and send forth his angels to collect our ransomed dust; then, if we are found worthy, by his pass word, we shall enter into the celestial lodge above, where the Supreme Architect of the Universe presides, where we. shall see the King in the beauty of holiness and with him enter into an endless eternity. Here ends the three first degrees of Masonry, which constitute a Master Mason's Lodge. A Master Mason's Lodge and a chapter of Royal Arch Masons, are two distinct bodies, wholly independent of each other. The members of a Chapter are privileged to visit all Master Mason's Lodges when they please, and may be, and often are members of both at the same time; and all the members of a Master Mason's Lodge, who are Royal Arch Masons, though not members of any Chapter, may visit any Chapter. I wish the reader to understand that neither all Royal Arch Masons nor Master Masons are members of either Lodge or Chapter; there are tens of thousands who are not members and scarcely ever attend, although privileged to do so. A very small proportion of Masons, comparatively speaking, ever advance any further than the third degree, and consequently never get the great word which was lost by Hiram's untimely death. Solomon, king of Israel; Hiram, king of Tyre, and Hiram Abiff; the widow's son having sworn that they nor neither of them would ever give the word except they three were present; [and it is generally believed that there was not another person in the world at that time that had it], consequently the word was lost, and supposed to be forever; but the sequel will show it was found after the lapse of four hundred and seventy years; notwithstanding the word Mah-hah-bone,

[p. 103]

which was substituted, by Solomon, still continues to be used by Master Masons, arid no doubt will be as long as Masonry attracts the attention of men; and the word which was lost is used in the Royal Arch degree.

What was the word of the Royal Arch degree before they found the Master's word which was lost at the death of Hiram Abiff, and was not found for four hundred and seventy years? Were there any Royal Arch Masons before the Master's word was found? I wish some Masonic gentleman would solve these two questions. The ceremonies, history, and the lecture, in the preceding degree, are so similar, that perhaps, some one of the three might have been dispensed with, and the subject well understood by most readers, notwithstanding, there is a small difference between the work and history, and between the history and the lecture. I shall now proceed with the Mark Master's degree, which is the first degree in the Chapter. The Mark Master's degree, the Past Master's, and the Most Excellent Master's are called lodges of Mark Master Masons, Past Masters, and Most Excellent Masters; yet, although called lodges, they are a component part of the Chapter. Ask a Mark Master Mason if he belongs to the Chapter, he will tell you he does, but that he has only been marked. It is not an uncommon thing, by any means, for a Chapter to confer all four of the degrees in one night, viz.: The Mark Master, Past Master, Most Excellent Matter, and Royal Arch degree.

     
Illustrations of Masonry, by William Morgan, [1827], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 104]

  

FREEMASONRY AT A GLANCE.

  

ENTERED APPRENTICE DEGREE.

The Holy Bible on the altar is usually opened at the 123d Psalm and the square and compass placed thereon, the latter open and both points placed below the square.

PREPARATION OF CANDIDATE ENTERED APPRENTICE DEGREE.--He is ushered into the "preparation room," where he meets the Junior Deacon and Stewards who divest him of all his clothing except his shirt. He is then handed an old pair of drawers which he puts on; the left leg is rolled up above the knee; the left sleeve of the shirt is rolled up above the elbow, a hoodwink is fastened over both eyes, a rope, called a cable-tow, is put once around his neck, and a slipper (with the heel slip-shod) is put upon the right foot.

DUE GUARD OF AN ENTERED APPRENTICE--Hold out the left hand a little in front of the body and in a line with the lower button of the vest, the hand being open and palm turned upward. Now place the right hand horizontally across the left and about two or three inches above it.

PENAL SIGN OF AN ENTERED APPRENTICE.--Made from the due-guard by dropping the left hand carelessly; at the same time raise the right arm and draw the hand, still open, across the throat, thumb

[p. 105]

next the throat, and drop the hand perpendicularly by the side. These movements ought to be made in an off hand manner, without stiffness.

SIGN WITHOUT DUE-GUARDS-- (The usual way outside the lodge.) Simply draw the open hand carelessly across the threat and let it fall down by the side.

Click to enlarge
Candidate taking Entered Apprentice Obligation.

Worshipful Master to Candidate:--"You will advance to the altar, kneel upon your naked left knee, your right forming a square, your left hand supporting the holy Bible, square and compass, your right resting thereon, in which due form you will say, I, with your name in full, and repeat after me."

GRIP OF AN ENTERED APPRENTICE.--Take hold of each other's hands as in ordinary hand-shaking and press the top of your thumb hard against the first knuckle-joint of the first finger near the hand. If the person whom you are shaking hands with is a Mason, he will generally return a like pressure on your hand.

[p. 106]

ENTERED APPRENTICE WORD--Boaz. It is the name of this grip.

ENTERED APPRENTICE STEP.--Step off one step with the left foot and bring the heel of your right foot to the hollow of your left.

     
Illustrations of Masonry, by William Morgan, [1827], at sacred-texts.com

  

FELLOW CRAFT DEGREE

The Holy Bible ought to be opened at the 7th chapter of Amos and one point of the compass elevated above the square.

PREPARATION OF CANDIDATE FELLOW CRAFT DEGREE.--He is ushered into the "preparation room" as before, and divested of all his clothing as in the preceding degree. In this case the right leg of the old drawers is raised up above the knee, the right sleeve of the shirt is rolled up above the elbow, the slipper is now put upon the left foot, the left heel being slip shod. The hoodwink is again put over both eyes and the cable-tow is put twice around the naked right arm and an apron tied on, in which condition he is "duly and truly prepared" and led by the Junior Deacon to the door of the lodge as before.

[p. 107]

Worshipful Master to Candidate:--You will advance to the altar, kneel upon your naked right knee, your left forming a square, your right hand resting on the Holy Bible, square and compass, your left forming a right angle Supported by the square in which due form you will say, "I," with your name in full, and repeat after me.

DUE GUARD OF A FELLOW CRAFT.--Hold out the right hand a little from the body and on a line with the lower button of the vest, the palm being open and turned down-ward; also raise the left arm so as to form a right angle at the elbow, from the shoulder to the elbow being horizontal and fore-arm perpendicular.

SIGN OF A FELLOW CRAFT.--Made from the due-guard by dropping the left hand carelessly to the side and at Om same time raise the right hand to the left breast, with the palm towards the breast and the fingers a little crooked; then draw the hand smartly across the breast from left to right and let it drop perpendicularly to the side.

SIGN WITHOUT DUE GUARD.--The usual way outside the lodge). Draw the right hand, palm open and fingers a little crooked, smartly across the breast from left to right and drop it carelessly by your side.

PASS GRIP OF A FELLOW CRAFT.--Take each other's hands as in ordinary hand-shaking and press the top of your thumb hard against the space between the first and second knuckles of the right hand. Should the person whose hand you hold be a Fellow Craft, he will return a like pressure on your hand, or else may give you the grip of an Entered Apprentice.

[p. 108]

PASS OF FELLOW CRAFT--Shibboleth. It is the name of this grip.

REAL GRIP OF A FELLOW CRAFT.--Take each other by the right hand as in ordinary hand-shaking and press top of your thumb hard against the second knuckle. Should the man whose hand you shake be a Fellow Craft, he will return a similar pressure on your hand, or may possibly give you any one of the two preceding grips.

WORD OF FELLOW CRAFT--Jachin. It is the name of this the real grip.

FELLOW CRAFT OR SECOND STEP.--Step off one step with the right foot and bring the heel of the left foot to the hollow of the right; your feet forming the angle of an oblong square.

    
Illustrations of Masonry, by William Morgan, [1827], at sacred-texts.com

  

MASTER MASON'S DEGREE.

The Holy Bible ought to be opened at the 12th chapter of Ecclesiastes and both points of the compass elevated above the square.

PREPARATION OF CANDIDATE MASTER MASON'S DEGREE.--He is conducted into the preparation room as in the preceding degree. All his clothing is removed as before; both legs of the drawers are tucked up above the knees, both sleeves of the shirt are tucked up above the elbows, both breasts of the shirt are turned, making both breasts bare. The hoodwink is again fastened over both eyes and the cable-tow is put three times around his body. No slipper is used in this degree. Should the shirt be closed in front, it must be taken off or turned front backwards, as both breasts must be bare. An apron is then tied on and worn as a Fellow Craft, and thus he is "duly and truly prepared."

[p. 109]

Worshipful Master to Candidate, "You will advance to the altar, kneel upon both your naked knees, both hands resting n the Holy Bible, square and compass in which due form you will say, "I," with your name in full and repeat after me"

DUE-GUARD OF A MASTER MASON.--Extend both hands in front of the body on a line with the lower button of the vest with the palms open and turned downward, both hands being close together, thumbs nearly touching.

SIGN OF A MASTER MASON.--Made from the due guard by dropping the left hand carelessly and drawing the right across the body from left to right side on a line with the lower button of the vest, the hand being open as before, palm down. ward and the thumb towards the body. Then drop the hand perpendicularly to the side.

SIGN WITHOUT DUE-GUARD.--(Ordinary manner outside the lodge.) Simply draw the right hand as above described, carelessly across the body and drop it by the side.

PASS-GRIP OF A MASTER MASON--Take hold of each other's hands as in ordinary hand shaking and press the top of your thumb hard against the space between the second and third knuckles. Should the man whose hand you shake be a Mason he may return or give any previous grip.

PASS OF MASTER MASON--Tubal Cain. It is the name of this grip.

[p. 110]

STRONG GRIP OF A MASTER MASON OR LION'S PAW.--Grasp each other's right hands very firmly, the spaces between the thumb and first finger being interlocked and the tops of the fingers being pressed hard against each other's wrist where it joins the hand, the fingers of each being somewhat spread.

CANDIDATE AS HIRAM ABIFF FALLING INTO THE CANVAS, having been struck in the forehead by the setting maul of the supposed third ruffian, Jubelum.

FIVE POINTS OF FELLOWSHIP.

Worshipful Master:--Which are the five points of fellowship?

Senior Deacon:--Foot to foot (Master and candidate extend their right feet, placing the inside of one against that of the other). Knee to knee (they bring their right knees together); breast to breast (they bring their right breasts together); hand to back (Master places his left hand on the candidate's back, the candidate's is placed by the Deacon on the Master's back); cheek to cheek or mouth to ear (Master puts his mouth to candidate's right ear thus bringing the right cheek of each together. See figure).

MASTER'S WORDS-- (whispered in the ear of the candidate), Mah-hah bone, after which the candidate whispers the same word in the Master's ear.

 

 

 

 

    


===== BOOK: mos.txt =====


    
The Man of Sorrows, by John Nelson Darby, [n.d. (prior to 1882)], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 3]

  

THE

  

MAN OF SORROWS

  

As set forth in

  

THE GOSPEL OF LUKE.

  

BY

  

JOHN NELSON DARBY,

  

Author of "New Translation of the New Testament," "Synopsis of the Books of the Bible," "Notes on the Apocalypse," etc., etc.

  

Glasgow: Pickering & Inglis, Printers and Publishers.

  

London: Alfred Holness, 14 Paternoster Row, E.C.

  

New York: Gospel Publishing House, 692 Eighth Ave.

  

From Agents as next page, and most Booksellers.

  

[No date: prior to 1882]

Scanned, proofed and formatted at sacred-texts.com, February, 2005, by John Bruno Hare. This text is in the public domain in the US because it was published prior to 1923.

     
The Man of Sorrows, by John Nelson Darby, [n.d. (prior to 1882)], at sacred-texts.com

[]

[p. 2]

  

EVERY CHRISTIAN'S LIBRARY

  

OR, THE BIBLE LOVER'S BOOKSHELF.

These are advertisements from original book. They have been included for the sake of completeness. This page has been moved in this text after the title page.

1/3, or 30 cts., each net; 1/6, or 36 cts., post free.

Typical Foreshadowings in Genesis. Wm. Lincoln, London. God Spoke all these Words. Dr. Brookes.

How and When do we Become Children of God? Answered be 50 Accredited Witnesses.

Satan and the Satanic System. L. S. Chafer.

Aids to Believers. Collected Writings of Dr. C. J. Davis.

Handfuls of Help. 300 Original Bible Studies. E. A. Hewitt.

Always Abounding. George Brealey, of the Blackdown Hills.

God's Gospel and God's Righteousness. Loyal and Logical Exposition of Romans I. to V. Philip Mauro.

God's Gift and Our Response. Continuation of Exposition, Romans VI. to VIII. Philip Mauro.

The Charter of the Church. Volume I. Exposition of 1 Corinthians I. to VIII. J. R. Caldwell.

The Charter of the Church. Volume II. Exposition of 1 Corinthians IX. to XVI. J. R. Caldwell.

Twelve Baskets Full. 640 Original Bible Outlines for Speakers, Students, Missionaries, &c. Hy. Pickering.

Pictures In the Acts; or, The Unfinished Work of Jesus. Dr. Anderson-Berry.

Did Jesus Rise? The Vital Fact of Christianity. Dr. Brookes.

Abundant Grace--Salvation, Sanctification, Service. Dr. W. P. Mackay. Companion to "Grace and Truth." Genesis in the Light of the New Testament. F. W. Grant, Editor of "Numerical Bible," &c.

The Knowledge of God. Its Meaning and its Power. Dr. A. T. Schofield, Harley Street, London.

The Gospel and its Ministry. A Handbook of Evangelical Truth. Sir Robert Anderson, K.C.B. LL.D.

The Characteristic Differences of the Four Gospels. By Andrew Jukes.

The Law of the Offerings. Andrew Jukes.

The Shepherd and the Sheep. Dr. Adolph Saphir.

The Work of Christ. Past, present, future. A. C. Gaebelein.

Grace and Truth under 12 Aspects. Dr. W. P. Mackay. With 8 Original Drawings.

The Brides of Scripture. J. Denham Smith.

Human Destiny. Sir Robert Anderson, K.C.B., LL.D.

"I Am Coming." The Second Advent. Dr. Jas. H. Brookes. Keys to the Word. Dr. A. T. Pierson.

Prophecy Made Plain. "Addresses on Prophecy." Dr. C. I. Scofield, of New York.

The Story of our English Bible. Walter Scott.

Eight Lectures on Prophecy. W. Trotter.

Rightly Dividing the Word of Truth. Dr. C. I. Scofield.

Choice Sayings. 800 Gems of Thought. R. C. Chapman.

Pilgrim's Progress, with 100 Illustrations and Gospel Notes.

The Parables of our Lord explained. Thos. Newberry.

The Life that Pleases God. Dr. A. T. Schofield.

The Footsteps of the Master. Study of 1 Peter. A. Payne.

The Progress of Doctrine in the New Testament. Bampton Lectures. T. D. Bernard, M.A.

How God Answers Prayer. George Muller. of Bristol.

The Roman Empire In Prophecy. W. E. Vine, M.A.

The Epistles of John. The Family Letters. Wm. Lincoln.

The Silence of God. Sir Robert Anderson, K.C.B.

Heroes of the Faith in Modern Italy. J. S. Anderson.

The Man of Sorrows. Notes on Luke. J. N. Darby.

HANDBOOK with full list of titles, &c., post free.

[]

[p. 4]

OFFICES AND AGENTS.

GLASGOW: PICKERING & INGLIS, 229 Bothwell Street.

 " JOHN MENZIES & Co., all their Branches and Bookstalls.

LONDON: ALFRED HOLNESS, 14 Paternoster ROW, E.C.,

 " S. W. PARTRIDGE & CO., and all Wholesale Houses.

MANCHESTER: JOHN HEYWOOD, Deansgate.

BIRMINGHAM: H. E. MASON, 315 Broad Street.

PLYMOUTH: J. E. BURT, Morley Villa, Fernleigh Road.

EXETER: W. C. ROGERS, 17 Cathedral Close.

BRISTOL: W. B. W. SARSFIELD, 78 Park Street.

BIRKENHEAD: J. E. Bares, 15 Laburnum Road, Oxton.

ILFRACOMBE: E. OSBORNE, 4 Portland Street.

CARDIFF: WILLIAM LEAR, 17 Royal Arcade.

DUBLIN: R. STEWARD, 10 D'Olier Street, and 2 Nassau Street.

BELFAST: R. M'CLAY, 44 Ann Street.

EDINBURGH: MARSHALL BROTHERS, Ltd., 99 George Street.

DUNDEE: R. H. LUNDIE, 35 Reform Street.

NEW YORK: GOSPEL PUBLISHING HOUSE, 692 Eighth Avenue.

TEXAS: J. T. DEAN, 2613 Pennsylvania Ave., Dallas.

CHARLOTTE, N.C.: A. F. COWLES, Gospel Tract Depot.

SWENGEL, PA.: I. C. HERENDEN, Bible Truth Depot.

ORILLIA, ONTARIO: S. W. BENNER, Bible and Tract Depot.

TORONTO: BIBLE AND TRACT DEPOT, 783 College Street.

 " UPPER CANADA TRACT SOCIETY, 2 Richmond Street, E.

BUENOS AIRES: W. C. K. TORRE, Caslila 5.

MELBOURNE: E. W. COLE, Book Arcade.

BRISBANE: W. R. SMITH & Co., Bible Repository, Albert Street.

DUNEDIN: H. J. BATES, Otago Bible House, 38 George Street.

AUCKLAND, N.Z.: H. L. THATCHER, Bible House, 135 Symonds St.

PALMERSTON NORTH: JAMES G. HARVEY, Main Street.

BANGALORE, INDIA: OFFICE OF "THE INDIAN CHRISTIAN."

CALCUTTA: "CHRISTIAN WITNESS" OFFICE.

ALESSANDRIA, ITALY: A. BUTTRAM, Va dells Vittoria N 3.

And through mast Booksellers, Colporteurs, and Tract Depots.

COPYRIGHT--PICKERING & INGLIS.

     
The Man of Sorrows, by John Nelson Darby, [n.d. (prior to 1882)], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 5]

  

HOW TO USE.

THERE are three ways in which this volume may be helpfully used.

1. By reading straight through as an ordinary book, making a pencil note in the margin of portions suitable for meditation and careful study.

2. Taking chapter by chapter, first reading the chapter in the Bible itself, then carefully noting the valuable and suggestive thoughts by this able minister of the Word of God.

3. As a book of reference. The Subject Index will readily indicate where any incident or event mentioned in the Gospel may be found. The Bible chapters are indicated at the head of each page, the verses at the beginning of each paragraph. The black type clearly indicates portions of the Gospel quoted.

Some of the quotations are from the Author's New Translation of the New Testament, now supplied in thin paper pocket edition, cloth, 2/; leather, 3/.

     
The Man of Sorrows, by John Nelson Darby, [n.d. (prior to 1882)], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 6]

  

ISAIAH LIII.

WHO hath believed our report? and to whom is the arm of the Lord revealed?

2. For he shall grow up before Him as a tender plant, and as a root out of a dry ground: He hath no form nor comeliness: and when we shall see Him, there is no beauty that we should desire Him.

3. He is despised and rejected of men; a man of sorrows, and acquainted with grief: and we hid as it were our faces from Him; He was despised, and we esteemed Him not.

A MAN OF SORROWS.

4. Surely He hath borne our griefs, and carried our sorrows: yet we did esteem Him stricken, smitten of God, and afflicted.

5. But He was wounded for our transgressions, He was bruised for our iniquities: the chastisement of our peace was upon Him; and with His stripes we are healed.

     
The Man of Sorrows, by John Nelson Darby, [n.d. (prior to 1882)], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 7]

  

INDEX TO CHAPTERS.

          LUKE.   Chapter

       PAGE

     
      1,

       <page 9>

     
      2,

       <page 14>

     
      3,

       <page 22>

     
      4,

       <page 31>

     
      5,

       <page 41>

     
      6,

       <page 52>

     
      7,

       <page 65>

     
      8,

       <page 71>

     
      9,

       <page 87>

     
      10,

       <page 116>

     
      11,

       <page 128>

     
      12,

       <page 138>

     
      13,

       <page 146>

     
      14,

       <page 155>

     
      15,

       <page 168>

     
      16,

       <page 178>

     
      17,

       <page 182>

     
      18,

       <page 191>

     
      19,

       <page 199>

     
      20,

       <page 206>

     
      21,

       <page 211>

     
      22,

       <page 217>

     
      23,

       <page 225>

     
      24,

       <page 233>

     
   
     
The Man of Sorrows, by John Nelson Darby, [n.d. (prior to 1882)], at sacred-texts.com

 

  

INDEX OF SUBJECTS

        A   Test of Discipleship,

       <page 96>

     
      A   Test of Affection,

       <page 115>

     
      A   Woman Most Blessed,

       <page 134>

     
       

        

     
      Birth   of Jesus, The

       <page 15>

     
      Baptism   of Christ,

       <page 28>

     
      Baptism   of His Death,

       <page 144>

     
      Barren   Fig Tree, The,

       <page 148>

     
      Blind   Man Healed,

       <page 199>

     
      Betrayal   of Jesus, The

       <page 217>

     
       

        

     
      Catching   Fish and Men,

       <page 41>

     
      Call   of Matthew,

       <page 49>

     
      Centurion's   Servant,

       <page 65>

     
      Child,   Lesson on the

       <page 108>

     
      Coming   of the Son of Man,

       <page 189>

     
      Coming   Kingdom, The

       <page 215>

     
      Call   to Separation, The

       <page 220>

     
      Christ   before Pilate,

       <page 225>

     
      Calvary,   The Place called

       <page 227>

     
       

        

     
      Discipleship,   Test of

       <page 96>, <page 113>

     
      Disciples,   Powerless,

       <page 102>

     
      Place   on Earth,

       <page 106>

     
      Put   to Test,

       <page 113>

     
      Prayer   for

       <page 128>

     
      Dispensational   Change,

       <page 124>

     
      Death   and Resurrection Foretold,

       <page 197>

     
      David's   Son and Lord,

       <page 208>

     
       

        

     
      Enduring   Word, The

       <page 216>

     
      Emmaus   Journey, The

       <page 234>

     
       

        

     
      Forerunner,   The

       <page 10>

     
      Five   Thousand Fed,

       <page 89>

     
      Forgiveness,   Instruction in

       <page 183>

     
       

        

     
      Genealogy   of Christ,

       <page 30>

     
      Great   Healer, The

       <page 40>

     
      Gadara   Demons, The

       <page 83>

     
      Gathering   or Scattering,

       <page 133>

     
      Great   Supper, The

       <page 162>

     
      Garden   of Gethsemane,

       <page 222>

     
       

        

     
      House   on the Rock, The

       <page 64>

     
      Healer,   The Great

       <page 40>

     
       

        

     
      Importunate   Friend, The,

       <page 131>

     
       

        

     
      John   the Baptist,

       <page 23>

     
      Jairus'   Daughter,

       <page 85>

     
      Jerusalem,   Lament over

       <page 152>

     
      "   Nearing

       <page 201>

     
      "   Entering

       <page 204>

     
      "   Weeping over,

       <page 205>

     
      Jesus   in the Midst,

       <page 238>

     
       

        

     
      Kingdom   of God, The

       <page 188>, <page 215>

     
      [p. 8]

        

     
      Leper,   Cleansing the

       <page 45>

     
      Lord's   Day, The

       <page 55>

     
      Lesson   on the Child, The

       <page 108>

     
      Last   Journey to Jerusalem,

       <page 110>

     
      Lord's   Prayer (so-called),

       <page 128>

     
      Light,   Lesson of

       <page 135>

     
      Little   Flock, The

       <page 141>

     
      Leaven,   Parable of

       <page 150>

     
      Lost   Sheep, The

       <page 171>

     
      Lord's   Supper, The

       <page 219>

     
       

        

     
      Man   Borne of Four,

       <page 46>

     
      Matthew,   Call of

       <page 49>

     
      Mother   and Brethren, Christ's

       <page 79>

     
      Mary's   Good Part,

       <page 126>

     
      Marriage   and Resurrection,

       <page 207>

     
      Master   Glorified, The

       <page 240>

     
       

        

     
      Names   Written in Heaven,

       <page 120>

     
      Ninth   Hour, The

       <page 231>

     
       

        

     
      Our   Father's Care,

       <page 139>

     
       

        

     
      Pharisee's   House, The

       <page 69>

     
      Peter's   Confession,

       <page 91>

     
      Power   of God, The

       <page 105>

     
      Parable   of the Leaven,

       <page 150>

     
      Parable   of the Vineyard,

       <page 206>

     
      Poor   of the Flock, The

       <page 165>

     
      Prodigal   Son, The

       <page 172>

     
      Pharisee   and Publican, The

       <page 194>

     
      Passover,   The Last

       <page 218>

     
      Peter   Denies His Lord,

       <page 224>

     
      Place   Called Calvary, The

       <page 227>

     
      Paradise,   In, "to-day,"

       <page 230>

     
       

        

     
      Rich   Young Ruler,

       <page 125>, <page 195>

     
      Rich   Man and Lazarus,

       <page 180>

     
      Robbers,   The Two

       <page 228>

     
       

        

     
      Simeon   's Prophecy,

       <page 19>

     
      Silent   Years, The

       <page 21>

     
      Synagogue,   In the

       <page 37>

     
      Sabbath,   The

       <page 52>, <page 155>

     
      Sermon   on the Mount,

       <page 58>

     
      Sower,   The

       <page 74>

     
      Seventy   Sent Out,

       <page 117>

     
      Savourless   Salt,

       <page 167>

     
      Supper,   The Lord's

       <page 219>

     
       

        

     
      Temptation,   The 

       <page 32>

     
      Twelve   Chosen, The

       <page 56>

     
      Twelve   Sent Forth,

       <page 88>

     
      Transfiguration,   The

       <page 93>

     
      Tower   of Siloam, The

       <page 147>

     
      Ten   Lepers, The,

       <page 185>

     
      To-day   in Paradise,

       <page 230>

     
       

        

     
      Unjust   Steward, The

       <page 178>

     
      Unjust   Judge, The

       <page 192>

     
       

        

     
      Voice   from Heaven, The

       <page 100>

     
      Vineyard,   Parable of the

       <page 206>

     
       

        

     
      Widow's   Son, The

       <page 67>

     
      Waves   Stilled, The

       <page 80>

     
      Woes,   Saviour's

       <page 136>

     
      Wise   Steward, The

       <page 143>

     
      Woman   with Infirmity,

       <page 148>

     
       

        

     
      Years,   The Silent,

       <page 21>

     
       

        

     
      Zacchaeus,

       <page 200>

     
 
     
The Man of Sorrows, by John Nelson Darby, [n.d. (prior to 1882)], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 9]

  

THE

  

MAN OF SORROWS

  

AS SET FORTH IN

  

THE GOSPEL OF LUKE.

  

CHAPTER 1.

THE Saviour is presented to us in Luke in His character as Son of Man, displaying the power of Jehovah in grace in the midst of men. At first, doubtless, we find Him in relationship with Israel, to whom He had been promised; but afterwards moral principles are brought out, which apply to man, as such, wherever he might be. And indeed what characterises Luke's account of our Lord and gives special interest to his gospel is that it presents to us Christ Himself, and not His official glory, as in Matthew, nor His mission of service, as in Mark, nor the peculiar revelation of His divine nature, as in John. It is Himself, such as He was, a man upon the earth, moving among men day by day.

1-4.--Many had undertaken to give an account of what was historically received amongst Christians as it had been related to them by the "eye-witnesses." However well intended this might be, yet it was a work undertaken and executed by men. Luke had an exact and intimate knowledge of all

[p. 10]

from the beginning, and he found it good to write to Theophilus, in order that he might know "the certainty of the things he had been instructed in."

It is thus that God has provided for the whole Church by the teaching contained in the living picture of Jesus that we owe to this man of God. For Luke, although he might be personally moved by Christian motives, was, of course, none the less inspired by the Holy Ghost to write.

  

THE FORERUNNER.

5-17.--The history brings us into the midst of Jewish institutions, feelings, and expectations. First, we have a priest of Abia (one of the twenty-four classes, 1 Chron. 24), with his wife, who was of the daughters of Aaron. "They were both righteous before God, walking in all the commandments and ordinances of the Lord blameless." All was with them in accordance with God's law Jewishly; but they did not enjoy the blessing so earnestly desired by every Jew; they were childless. Yet it was according to the ways of God to accomplish His work of blessing while manifesting the weakness of the instrument which He was using. But now this long-prayed-for blessing was to be withheld no longer; and when Zacharias draws near to offer the incense the angel of Jehovah appears to him. At the sight of so glorious a being Zacharias is troubled; but the angel says to him, "Fear not, thy prayer is heard; and thy wife Elisabeth shall bear thee a son, and thou shalt call his name John," i.e., "the favour of Jehovah."

[p. 11]

And not only should the hearts of many rejoice in him, but he should be great in the sight of the Lord and be filled with the Holy Ghost. "Many of the children of Israel shall he turn to the Lord their God. And he shall go before Him in the spirit and power of Elias . . . to make ready a people prepared for the Lord." The "spirit of Elias" was a firm and ardent zeal for the glory of Jehovah and for the re-establishment, through repentance, of Israel's relations with Him. The heart of John clung to this link of the people with God, and it is in the moral force of his call to repentance that John is here compared to Elias.

18-23.--But Zacharias' faith, as is, alas, so often the case, was not equal to the greatness of his request. He knows not how to walk in the steps of Abraham, and he asks again how such a thing can be (18). God's goodness turns the unbelief of His servant into a chastening that was profitable for him, and that served, at the same time, as a proof to the people that he had been visited from on high. Zacharias remains dumb until the word of Jehovah is accomplished.

24, 25.--Elisabeth, with feelings so suitable to a holy woman, remembering what had been a shame to her in Israel (the traces of which were only made the more marked by the supernatural blessing now granted to her), "hid herself five months," whilst, at the same time, she owned the Lord's goodness to her. But what may conceal us from the eyes of men has great value before God.

26-38.--And now the scene changes, in order to introduce the Lord Himself into this marvellous

[p. 12]

scene that is unfolding itself before our eyes. In Nazareth, that despised place, there was found a young virgin, unknown by the world, whose name was Mary. She was espoused to Joseph, who was of the house of David; but so out of order was every-thing in Israel that this descendant of the king was a carpenter. But what is this to God? Mary was a chosen vessel; she had "found favour in the eyes of God."

We must remark that the subject here is the birth of the child Jesus, as born of Mary. It is not so much His divine nature as the Word which was God and which was made flesh (though, of course, it is the same precious Saviour presented here as in John's gospel); but it is Jesus as really and truly man, born of a virgin. His name was to be Jesus, i.e., Jehovah the Saviour. "He shall be called the Son of the Highest, and the Lord God shall give unto Him the throne of His father David," still looking at Him as man born into the world. But He was God as well as man. Holy by His birth, conceived by the power of God, this blessed One, who even, as born of Mary, is spoken of as "that holy thing," was to be called "the Son of God."

The angel then tells Mary of the blessing God had bestowed upon Elisabeth. The wonderful intervention of God had rendered Mary humble instead of lifting her up; she had seen God and not herself in what had happened. Self was hidden from her because God had been brought so near, and she bows to His holy will. "Be it unto me according to Thy word."

39-45.--Afterwards we find that Mary goes to

[p. 13]

visit Elisabeth, for her heart loves to see and acknowledge the goodness of the Lord. Elisabeth, speaking by the Spirit, acknowledges Mary as the mother of her Lord, and announces the accomplishment of God's promise. "Blessed is she that believed."

46.--"My soul doth magnify the Lord." The heart of Mary is filled with joy, and she breaks forth into a song of praise. She acknowledges God her Saviour in the grace that has filled her with such joy, whilst, at the same time, she owns her utter littleness. For whatever might be the holiness of the instrument that God might employ, and that was found really in Mary, yet she was only great so long as she hid herself, for then God was everything. By making something of herself she would have lost her place, but this she did not. God kept her in order that His grace might be fully manifested.

The character of the thoughts that fill the heart of Mary is Jewish. It reminds us of Hannah's song in 1 Samuel 2, which speaks prophetically of this same blessed intervention of God. But Mary goes back to the promises made to the fathers, and takes in the whole of Israel.

56.--After remaining three months with Elisabeth, she "returns to her house," humbly to follow her own path, in order that God's ways may be accomplished. Nothing is more beautiful in its way than this account of the conversations of these holy women, unknown to the world, but who were the instruments of God's grace to accomplish His glorious designs. They moved in a scene where nothing entered but piety and grace. But God was there Himself, no better known to the world than

[p. 14]

were these poor women, yet preparing and accomplishing what the angels would desire to look into.

57-59.--But what is only known in secret by faith is at last to be accomplished before all men. The son of Zacharias and Elisabeth is born, and Zacharias, no longer dumb, pronounces the blessed prophecy given in verses 60-80. The visitation of Israel by Jehovah, which he speaks of, embraces all the happiness of the Millennium connected with the presence of Jesus upon the earth. All the promises are Yea and Amen in Him. All the prophecies encircle Him with the glory which will be then realised. We know that since He has been rejected, and while He is now absent, the accomplishment of these things is necessarily put off till His return.

     
The Man of Sorrows, by John Nelson Darby, [n.d. (prior to 1882)], at sacred-texts.com

  

CHAPTER 2.

1-7.--When God is pleased to occupy Himself with the world, and to take a part in what passes therein, it is marvellous to see how He acts and the instruction He gives. There is no agreement, but a total opposition between His ways and those of men. The Emperor and his decree are but insignificant instruments. Caesar Augustus acts in view of his. subjects; yet he is, without knowing it, the means of accomplishing the prophecy that Jesus should be born in Bethlehem. The entire course of the world is. outside the current of God's thoughts. The capital fact for Him and for His kingdom here is the babe's birth at Bethlehem; but the Emperor has no thought about it. The decree puts the world in motion, and God makes good His thoughts here below. How

[p. 15]

wondrous! All the world is in movement to bring about this event, needed to fulfil prophecy, that the poor carpenter, with Mary his espoused wife, should be in the city of David, and David's heir should be born there and then. And this is the more striking, for the census itself was first made some years afterwards, when Cyrenius was governor of Syria. God is accomplishing His purpose of love, but man was blind to it. Who cared to notice the poor Jew, though he might be of the house and lineage of David? The things that are perfectly indifferent to man fill the heart and eye of God.

  

THE BIRTH OF JESUS.

4.--Still we are in Jewish atmosphere. Promises are being accomplished; the babe must be born in Bethlehem. "The city of David" is nothing to the Christian as such, save as showing prophecy fulfilled; to us the Son comes from Heaven. On earth the babe is the object of God's counsels; angels and all Heaven are occupied with His birth; but there is no place in the world for Him! Go where the great world registers every individual, go to the little world of an inn, where each is measured by the servant's knowing eye, and place is accordingly awarded from the garret to the first floor; but there is no room for Jesus. And the manger led, in due time, to the lowest place--the Cross.

What a lesson for us as to this world! What a difference, too, between giving up the world and the world giving us up! We may do the one with comparative ease; but when we feel the world despises us, as Christ was despised, we shall discover, unless

[p. 16]

[paragraph continues] He fills and satisfies the heart, that we had a value for its esteem that we were not aware of. When obedience is as important to us in our measure as obeying was to Christ, we shall go right on whatever be before us, without regarding the world; not that we shall be insensible, but when Christ is the object, we shall only be occupied with Him.

All intelligence of the things of God comes from His revelation, and not from the reasonings of men. Hence the simple go farther in spiritual understanding than the wise and prudent of the earth. God acts here so as to set aside all appearance of human wisdom. Happy he who has so seized the intention of God as to be identified with it, and to want none but God! This was the case with the shepherds. They little entered into the great intent of the registration; but it was to them, and not to the prudent, that God revealed Himself. Our true wisdom is through what God reveals. But we never get God's fullest blessings till we are where the flesh is brought down and destroyed--I speak as regards walk. We cannot get into the simple joy and power of God till we accept the place of lowliness and humiliation, till the heart is emptied of what is contrary to the lowliness of Christ. These shepherds were in the quiet fulfilment of their humble duty, and that is the place of blessing. Whoever is keeping on terms with the world is not walking with God, for God is not walking with you there. From the manger to the Cross all in Christ was simple obedience. How unlike a Theudas, who boasted himself to be somebody! Christ did all in God's way, and not only so, but we must do so too.

[p. 17]

8-12.--The glory of the Lord shines round about the shepherds, the angel speaks to them, the sign is given, and what a sign! "Ye shall find a babe wrapped in swaddling clothes, lying in a manger. And suddenly there was with the angel a multitude of the heavenly host praising God," and for what? "The mystery of godliness: God was manifested in the flesh." The hope of Israel is revealed to them--glad tidings of great joy to all the people. For Jesus is the pivot of all God's counsels in grace. Adam himself was but a type of Him who was to come. Christ was ever in the mind of God. Such displays of glory are not shown to mortal eyes every day; but God sets them before us in His Word, and we must every day follow the sign given, follow Jesus the babe in the manger. If He filled the eye, the ear, the heart, how we should see the effects in person, spirit, conversation, dress, house, money, and other things.

Such, then, is the sign of God's accomplishment of promise and of His presence in the world--"a babe in the manger"--the least and lowest thing. But God is found there, though these things are beyond man, who cannot walk with God, nor understand His moral glory. But God's sign is within the reach of faith. It is the token of perfect weakness; a little infant who can only weep. Such, born into this world, is Christ the Lord. Such is the place God chose--the low degree. God's intervention is recognised by a sign like this. Man would not have sought that.

13-20.--The heavenly host praise God, and say: 'Glory to God in the highest, and on earth peace,

[p. 18]

good will toward men." Nothing higher or more astonishing (save the Cross) for those who have the mind of Heaven. The choir above see God in it, God manifested in flesh, and praise God in the highest. They rejoice that His delights are with the sons of men. Of old God had displayed Himself to Moses in a flame of fire, without consuming the bush, and here, still more marvellously, in the feeblest thing on earth. Infinite thought, morally, though despicable in the eye of the world! How hard it is to receive that the work of God and of His Christ is always in weakness! The rulers of the people saw in Peter and John unlearned and ignorant men. Paul's weakness at Corinth was the trial of his friends, the taunt of his enemies, the boast of himself. The Lord's strength is made perfect in weakness. The thorn in the flesh made Paul despised, and he conceived it would be better if that were gone. He had need of the lesson: "My grace is sufficient for thee" (2 Cor. 12. 9). It is God's rule of action, if we may so say, to choose the weak things. Everything must rest on God's power, otherwise God's work cannot be done according to His mind. One can hardly believe that one must be feeble to do the work of God; but Christ was crucified in weakness, and the weakness of God is stronger than man. For the work of God we must be weak, that the strength may be of God, and that work will last when all the earth shall be moved away.

21-28.--"His Name was called Jesus." Besides the additional testimony rendered by the offering of His mother to the circumstances in this world, in which the Lord of glory was born, we may

[p. 19]

see that while God all through the Gospel is settling man in his new place with Himself, He did not forget His ancient people. He shows us here that He met every thought in every heart that was touched by grace in Israel. His heart was especially toward those who sorrowed over the sins and desolation of His people, and who, withal, waited for redemption, crying from the darkness, "How long, O Lord?" God will accomplish in power that wherein man has failed in responsibility. Should we therefore be content if God's people do not glorify Him? No; faith is not hard; it will sorrow, but it will wait for God, and God's time too. For faithful is He who hath promised, who also will do it. He will bring about His own purposes.

  

THE PROPHECY OF SIMEON.

25.--Thus was Simeon "waiting for the consolation of Israel." Thus Anna departed not from the temple, but served with fastings and prayers night and day. Thus all they that looked for redemption in Jerusalem. There were those who watched, and Anna knew and spake to them. The rest doubtless were occupied with Roman oppression, but these few waited for Him, bowing before His hand in judgment of evil, but looking for His deliverance.

29.--There was something more in Simeon's soul than the joy of holding in his arms the babe, the expected Messiah. Simeon felt he had God, and was satisfied. So he says, without even looking on to the glory, "Lord, now lettest Thou Thy servant depart in peace, according to Thy word." In Romans 5. 11 the apostle, after speaking of rejoicing in the

[p. 20]

hope of the glory of God, says, "and not only so." What could be more than that hope? Yes; there is more: "We also joy in God." The eyes of Simeon had seen God's salvation, and he begs of the sovereign Lord that he may go.

We often see something like this in dying saints, who deeply joy in the Lord's love to His own, and in the nearness of His coming for them. Why, one might say, what is His near coming to those who are dying and departing to Him? Just this: The nearer we are to God, the more precious is all the truth of God, and everything which is near to His heart.

30-32.--So Simeon rejoices as he surveys the extent of the divine deliverance. It was for the revelation of the Gentiles, who had been till now hidden in the darkness of idolatry and ungodliness, as well as for the glory of Israel. But his soul is satisfied possessing Christ, and anticipating the effect of His presence in the whole world. He has all in HIM, and desires to depart. If a man walk with God, and has finished his course, he knows that his work is done, and is conscious of the Lord's time being come. He has a companionship and communion with the Lord he has walked with. If simply brought to a bed of sickness, he is not then ready to go; not that he fears, but God is teaching him something else. But when God's time is come all is joy and readiness. He feels like Simeon: "Lord, now lettest Thou Thy servant depart in peace."

34.--But, further, when Simeon blessed Joseph and Mary the Spirit gives him to disclose the more immediate results of the babe's presence in Israel. He should be the touchstone of many hearts, an

[p. 21]

occasion for the fall as well as the rise of many; He should be a sign spoken against, a rejected Messiah; and Mary's heart should be pierced through, whatever the present joy or the future glory. Israel was low indeed, but did not know it. Israel must be made to know it, and Christians too, for Christ had to descend to the grave and rise again. The thoughts of the heart must be revealed, whatever the outward garb. But then He is the One who brings out God's thoughts too. If He is the Christ, the glory of God's people, He is also the One who will abase the flesh, and meet the humble man in his pride; He is the One who will make you know whether He in His rejection is more precious than all beside.

  

THE SILENT YEARS.

39.--When all was done according to the law, "they returned into Galilee, to their own city Nazareth." Jesus would not be the Christ we need if He had taken any glory from Jerusalem. His place is among the poor of the flock, His place all through in Israel.

40.--"And the child grew and waxed strong in spirit, filled with wisdom; and the grace of God was upon Him." Luke gives us more of the reality of His childhood than the other gospels; He was not made man full-formed like Adam. If one only reads the account without comment, how the soul feels it unspeakably precious! When we see WHO it was, we see human nature in Him filled with God, so to speak. It is not official distinction, but the heart feels God brought nigh. The blessedness of the child's intrinsic loveliness fills the heart. Deeply

[p. 22]

instructive, too, is the incident recorded in connection with the Passover when He was twelve years old. His true character comes out, though He was not yet to act upon it. He came to be a Nazarene, to be about His Father's business. This is here stated distinctly before He enters upon His public ministry, that it might be seen to be connected with His person, and not to depend merely upon His office. He was the Pastor of the flock in spirit and character. It belonged to Him. He was the Son of the Father, though abiding God's time for showing it.

51.--Nevertheless, "He went down with them, and was subject to them." What a majesty in His whole life! His being God secured His perfection as a child and man here below. He had ever the blessed consciousness of His relationship to His Father, an obedient child, but conscious also of a glory unconnected in itself with subjection to human parentage. He belonged to Mary and even Joseph, in another sense He was not theirs. His divine Son-ship was as well known to Him as His obedience to His parents was in due season absolutely right.

52.--"And Jesus increased in wisdom and stature, and in favour with God and man." His human intelligence being developed, He, though ever perfect, became so in a fuller way; the perfect child grows into the perfect man. The lovely plant grew up and unfolded before God and man.

     
The Man of Sorrows, by John Nelson Darby, [n.d. (prior to 1882)], at sacred-texts.com

  

CHAPTER 3.

1.--The two preceding chapters have given the general character. They have shown the going out

[p. 23]

of the thoughts of God to man. Accordingly we find that the Gospel, as a whole, is particularly occupied with what is not Jewish. Still the Jewish part is given at first with considerable detail, inasmuch as Israel, because of their unbelief and moral worthlessness, are to be set aside in order to make way for new relationships, founded on what God reveals Himself to be for man in Jesus, the true and only Mediator. But if chapter 1 disclosed the faithfulness of God to the Abrahamic promises, to His covenant and His oath, chapter 2 puts us in the presence of the actual government of the world and of the Lord's land and people under the fourth beast, the Roman Empire. What confusion does not sin create? The Jews are subject to the Gentiles. Joseph and Mary, of David's royal house, go up to be taxed. Nevertheless, the ways of God shine so much the brighter for the darkness that surrounded them. He was in Christ, reconciling the world unto Himself. Israel, however, would be put to a new moral test by His presentation of Himself. Alas! it would soon appear that if they had not kept the law they hated grace. "Behold, this child is set for the fall and rising again of many in Israel; and for a sign which shall be spoken against."

  

JOHN THE BAPTIST.

2.--In this chapter we have the ministry of God coming in by a prophet as of old by Samuel. "The Word of God came unto John, the son of Zacharias, in the wilderness." It is not without object that the Spirit mentions the fifteenth year of Tiberius Caesar. All the earth was seemingly at rest

[p. 24]

under its heathen lord; the Word of God found its suited sphere in the wilderness. The law and the prophets were until John, and where should he be in such a state of things but the wilderness? Could he morally own it? God will not have His messenger in Jerusalem.

4.--Prophecy is the sovereign means whereby God can communicate with His people when they are ruined and departed from Him. John understands this, and preaches the baptism of repentance for the remission of sins. And such was the place assigned him many centuries before by "Esaias the prophet." It was vain for Israel to plead their privileges and rights. All was wrong, and the Judge was at the door . John's work was not to lead the people back to the law; he was preparing the way of the Lord. Herein he differed from the prophets as well as the law, or rather, he went farther, for God's time was come for a step in advance. The prophets led back to Horeb. John says not a word of this, though his father was a priest, and himself, of course, an Aaronite. He does not try to set up again what was closed; he announces the kingdom. He may not introduce the Church, nor even the glad tidings of God's grace (both awaited the accomplishment of the work of redemption), but he drops the law, and shows that God's purpose is the kingdom.

5.--The quotation from Esaias sets aside Israel--not the Gentiles merely, but Israel--as grass, withered grass, without a green blade left. Yet the Word of the Lord endureth for ever, and this when all hope from man was gone. Israel may have failed, but the Word of the Lord shall stand. Moreover, since it

[p. 25]

was the Lord who was coming, "every valley should be filled." Not the Jews alone, but all flesh should see God's deliverance. If sin plunges all in indiscriminate ruin and a common judgment, God can meet man thus ruined, but His glory will not be shut up in the narrow limits of Israel.

7-14.--But to be blessed man must "repent." God would have realities, and not a mere nominal people; He must have fruits answering to hearts which felt and judged their moral condition, and which, therefore, turned from themselves to God. Ordinances and formal claims which should have been a means of blessing would be no shelter against the coming wrath, nor would God permit them to hinder His creating true children of the promise, even if this generation were but Ishmael over again. Judgment must begin at the house of God.

In fact, as we know, John was beheaded, and the Lord was crucified, and the kingdom, presented in Him and by Him, was rejected by Israel. By and by it will be set up visibly and in power. Meanwhile the Church is set up, because the kingdom is not set up in this manifested way. And those who now take their place with the Lord share His rejection. They are members of His body, the Church. They shall share His glory, but it will be heavenly and not earthly glory. In another sense we are in the kingdom now. To faith Heaven rules now, and we own it, and know it; but Satan is actually prince and god of this world, and hence those who are made kings to God (for that is our true place) are called to suffer. Therefore Paul went

[p. 26]

everywhere preaching the kingdom of God, as well as Christ and the Church. We have that by virtue of which we shall reign with Christ; but even that is not our best portion. To be one with Christ--His body and bride--is far more blessed. If your mind only rests on the person of Christ, there is no difficulty in seeing that when He is cut off all must cease as regards the earth. He is the centre of all, and when rejected what prophecy spoke of, and what seemed about to be accomplished, breaks off. Thereupon Christ ascends and takes up a glory above the Heavens, and there now the saints find their place with Him (cp. Psalm 2 and 8).

John Baptist, then, addresses himself to the Jews, demanding repentance and righteousness as its fruit; shows them that if they were nearer to God outwardly as Jews they must expect judgment the sooner. If the Lord was coming, He must have what became the Lord. The axe was even then lying at the root of the trees. If there was not good fruit on the trees every one must be hewn down and burned. Repentance or wrath--which? The Lord would allow no plea of descent from Abraham if their ways belied Abraham; He must have righteousness. It is the Lord that is just at hand, and He must have a people fit for Him, or He would out of the very stones make a suited people for Himself.

Evidently John's word is not a voice of mercy to the poor sinner. God is presented in the way of judgment, not of sovereign mercy. He does not say "Come unto me." John could not, because he was not Christ, and none but He could say "Come unto ME." John came in righteousness.

[p. 27]

In 10-14 moral testimony is given, and that in detail. John deals with the practical iniquity of each set of people. So even when the question of the Christ is raised (15-18), "One mightier than I cometh," says he. It is of His power especially he thinks, His power morally as outwardly. "He shall baptise you with the Holy Ghost and with fire." It is the power of the Holy Ghost and His consuming judgment. He could not speak of the grace of the Gospel which we know now. He proclaims One who was coming after him, not a present salvation. Whatever would not stand the fire was to be burned up. For His fan "is in His hand, and He will thoroughly purge His floor, and will gather the wheat into His garner; but the chaff He will burn with fire unquenchable" (cp. Isa. 21. 10). God's floor was Israel; there He was getting His wheat, if any were to be found. But His fan is in His hand; He is going to make short work. Titus finally set aside God's floor upon the earth; Israel's sin had lost it morally when they rejected Christ, but at the destruction of Jerusalem it was done with thoroughly for the present.

19, 20.--Luke's method of instruction is to be noticed in passing. He shows that John had preached and exhorted moral truth, and then disposes of him, putting him, as it were, out of the scene in order to bring Christ in. It was not that historically John was imprisoned at that juncture by Herod the tetrarch; it took place long after. But it is a sample of Luke's manner, who returns to the Lord as taking His place amongst the remnant of Israel. For the Lord does not identify Himself with the nation;

[p. 28]

but directly there is a poor remnant He identifies Himself with it.

  

THE BAPTISM OF CHRIST.

This history opens with verse 21, and how wonderful and full of grace. "Now when all the people were baptised, it came to pass, that Jesus also being baptised, and praying, the Heaven was opened, and the Holy Ghost descended in a bodily shape like a dove upon Him, and a voice came from Heaven, which said, Thou art My beloved Son, in Thee I am well pleased." One may have looked and listened mournfully as one reads of John Baptist and his testimony. We might have asked, as the dying record of men passed before us, What is man? But now my eye rests on Jesus, I find the Lord from Heaven a Man. All is to begin again. Do I ask again, What is a man? At once Christ comes out. Do I look at myself, or at all around? What do I see? Enough to break my heart, if there is a heart to be broken. The only thing which prevents people being utterly broken down is that they have not a heart to feel things as they are. But a rest is here. I have got a Man now who satisfied God, this blessed Man on earth in the presence of God, looking to God, and an object to God! Not Messiah purging His floor, but Him in whom God's thoughts and purposes are all folded up; not man perishing before the moth, but Jesus the Son of Man, not merely coming down from Abraham and David, but traced up, "which was the Son of Adam, which was the Son of God"--the Second Man, the last Adam, the quickening Spirit. What a relief, for what is man? What

[p. 29]

oneself when the heart's sin is known, giving up God for an apple from the. beginning hitherto! But now a Man, a blessed Man appears, "and praying." We are not told this elsewhere, and why here? Because Luke presents man in his perfection, the dependent man, for dependence is the essence of a perfect man. Truly we see God shining all through, but yet in Jesus, the dependent Man, in the place and condition of perfectness as man. The root of sin in us is self-will, independence. Here my heart has rest. A dependent Man in the midst of sorrow, but perfectly with God in all. See Luke's account of the transfiguration also; in humiliation or in glory it makes no difference as to this, the perfect is ever the dependent one.

And when that blessed heart thus expressed its dependence, did He get no answer? "The Heaven was opened." Does Heaven open thus on me? It is open to me, indeed, no doubt, but I pray because it is open; it opened because He prayed. I come and look up because the Heavens were opened on Him.

It is, indeed, a lovely picture of grace, and we may be bold to say that the Father loved to look on--to look down, in the midst of all sin, on His beloved Son. Nothing but what was divine could thus awaken God's heart; and yet it was the lowly, perfect Man. He takes not the place of His eternal glory as the Creator, the Son of God. He stoops and is baptised (Psa. 16) . He says, "In Thee do I trust." He says to Jehovah: "Thou art My Lord; My goodness extendeth not to Thee." He says to the godly remnant in Israel (i.e., to the saints that are in the earth and to the excellent): "All My delight is in them." He

[p. 30]

needeth no repentance, yet is He baptised with them; just as when, later on, He puts forth His sheep He goes before them. He identifies Himself in grace with Israel, even with such as were of a clean heart. And the Holy Ghost descends like a dove on Him, fit emblem of that spotless Man, fit resting-place for the Spirit in the deluge of this world. And how sweet, too, that Jesus is pointed out to us as God's object. I know the way the Father feels about Him. I am made His intimate, and admitted to hear Him expressing His affection for His Son, to see the links re-formed between God and man. Heaven is opened, not on something above, but upon a Man upon the earth. Thus I get rest, and my heart finds communion with God in His beloved Son. It is only the believer who enjoys it, but the link is there. And if I have that in and about me which distresses the soul, I have that in Him which is unfailing joy and comfort.

  

THE GENEALOGY OF CHRIST.

23-38.--The genealogy quite falls in with the thought that God is showing grace in man and to man. Jesus, the beloved Son of God, is traced up to Adam and to God. Jesus is Son of Man; He is heir in this sense. He takes up the inheritance God gave to man. O what a truth! Where could one's heart turn for rest if it had not Jesus to rest in? With Him let Heaven and earth be turned upside down, and still I have a rest. What blessedness for the heart to have the object God Himself is occupied with! May our hearts also be more and more occupied with Him!

     
The Man of Sorrows, by John Nelson Darby, [n.d. (prior to 1882)], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 31]

  

CHAPTER 4.

We saw the Lord taking His place of servant with the excellent in Israel, and thereon the Heavens opened, and Himself owned by the Father as His beloved Son. His delights were with the sons of men, and He is traced up, not to Abraham only, the root and depository of Jewish promises, but to Adam and God Himself. Independently of His proper divine glory as Son of the Father, Jesus should be called the Son of the Highest, the Son of God. As Man on earth He was sealed with the Holy Ghost. He took upon Him the form of a servant, and was made in the likeness of men. His entire perfectness now was to fulfil as a servant the will of Him who sent Him, for a servant doing his own will is a bad servant. Dependence, waiting, and obedience were the characteristics of this place, and they are found in Him to the uttermost. Hence, as in the Psalms, "I waited patiently for the Lord." He would not ask for power, but waits on God. "Thinkest thou that I cannot now pray to My Father, and He shall presently give Me more than twelve legions of angels?" (Matt . 26. 53). Put thoroughly to the test, He would do nothing but His Father's will. He was to learn obedience. Having taken the place He would go through it wholly, not in one act, but experiencing the force of that expression, learning obedience, without one comfort here, with enemies around, bulls of Bashan besetting, dogs compassing. He had to learn obedience where obedience was always suffering, even to the yielding up of life. Every single step was humiliation till the close came in the

[p. 32]

[paragraph continues] Cross, where the wrath of God was borne in love to us. No doubt He found in His rejection fields white for harvest, and so shall we, in our measure, when walking in the same path. But the Cross was always before Him--everything that could stop a man. Nevertheless, He went on, patiently waiting, and not asking for deliverances. Thus, He presented perfect God to man, and perfect man to God.

  

THE TEMPTATION.

1.--In this chapter He begins this walk of suffering obedience publicly. And the first thing to be re-marked is, that "being full of the Holy Ghost," He is led by Him "into the wilderness," where He is "tempted by the devil." There are two ways in which the enemy has power: first, by allurements; and, secondly, by terror. In the one he works upon us through our lusts, presenting what is calculated to attract, and so he rules over us naturally. In the other he has the power of death. Thus, Judas being a covetous man, and without the faith which purifies the heart, Satan suggested the occasion and gets him. He has no right to rule over men, but he acquires dominion through the lusts of the flesh. Another way is through the terror of death. In both he assailed the Lord, but found nothing in Him.

Here, then, we have the devil meeting man in the power of the Spirit of God--man tempted, not in Paradise, but in the wilderness. Jesus does not say, "I am God, and you are Satan; go away." That would not have glorified God, nor have helped us. But as the Lord was led into the wilderness, not by lust (God forbid the thought!) but by the Holy

[p. 33]

[paragraph continues] Ghost, so in His blessed grace He puts Himself in the place where man was. He has help from none, not even from John the Baptist. There was all that might have stumbled rather, had it been possible, through all He goes as man. He must be tempted, and must overcome where man not only had failed, but was lying under the power of wickedness.

2, 3.--"He afterward hungered. There was no harm in hunger; it was no sin. He could have commanded stones to be made bread, but to do so, save at His Father's word, would have been doing His own will, and then He had not been the perfect man. Satan tries to introduce into His heart a desire which was not in the Word of God. He succeeded in insinuating a lust into the heart of Adam; he failed with Jesus, though He was for forty days exposed to his presence and power. Jesus had to know by experience what it was to be tempted of the devil, without a single support, without a friend, in solitary dreariness (save indeed the wild beasts). Thus He measured the power of Satan. The strong man was there, putting forth all his weapons, but the stronger than he overcame; Jesus binds the strong man. He was abstracted from human condition for forty days, not like Moses to be only with God, but as the One who was always with God, to be exposed to Satan. None other man needs to be abstracted in order to be tempted, he has only to go on along with men. In this case this extraordinary separation was to be with the devil. To be with God He did not need anything out of His everyday path, for it was His natural place; but to be with Satan He needed it. Others are strangers to God,

[p. 34]

and at home with Satan. He, in the most adverse things, is a stranger to Satan, and dwells in the bosom of the Father. But He emptied Himself as God to become a servant as man, and there He waits in dependence on the Word of Him whom He served. The living Father had sent Him, and He lived by the Father. He was as man under His authority, and His meat was to do His will. "By the Word of Thy lips, I have kept me from the paths of the destroyer" (Psa. 17. 4).

4.--"It is written, man shall not live by bread alone." It is the written Word He ever uses, and Satan is powerless. What amazing importance Jesus gives the Scriptures! God now acts by the Word, and Satan is resisted morally in this way. A man cannot be touched by Satan while the Word is simply used in obedience. "He that is begotten of God keepeth himself, and that wicked one toucheth him not" (1 John 5. 18). It was not as an exercise of divine authority He dismissed Satan, but the enemy is proved unable to grapple with obedience to the Word of God. If he cannot take out of the path of obedience, he has no power. What more simple? Every child of God has the Holy Ghost acting by the Word to keep him.

Jesus does not reason with Satan. A single text silences when used in the power of the Spirit. The whole secret of strength in conflict is using the Word of God in the right way. One may say: I am not like this perfect Man; it might be so with Christ, but how can I expect the same result? True, we are ignorant, and the flesh is in us, but God is always behind, and He is faithful, and will not suffer us

[p. 35]

to be tempted above that we are able. Temptation may be simply a trial of our obedience, as in Abraham's case, not a snare to lead us astray. Satan presents what has no appearance of evil. The evil would be doing one's own will. Now it solves every difficulty to ask, not, What harm is there in doing this or that? but, Why am I doing it? Is it for God or myself? What! am I to be always under this restraint? Ah! there the secret of our nature comes out. We do not like the restraint of doing what God will approve. It is restraint to do God's will. We want to do our own will. To act merely because one must is law, and not the guidance of the Spirit. The Word of God was the motive of Christ, and such is Christ's guidance. Not fencing the old man, but the new man living on the Word is our defence against Satan.

3-13.--"Into an exceeding high mountain." "Set Him on a pinnacle of the temple." The first temptation is an appeal to the need of the body. The second in Luke (not in Matthew) is the inducement of the world's glory. The third in our Gospel is the religious temptation through the Word of God, and therefore morally the hardest of all to one who values that Word. And is this the reason why Luke departs from the actual order of the events in order to group them morally, as is the habit of this evangelist elsewhere also? Thus we have the tempter assailing the Lord Jesus, first, as to man's life; second, as to the power given to man; and, third, as to the promises made to Christ Himself. Satan's saying, "All this Power," was false as to right, but true in fact, through men's lusts. So far as these go, he gives the power,

[p. 36]

but God, after all, is above him, and governs in providence.

The Lord might have argued with the devil, but He does not even tell him that the dominion of the world would be His by and by. He takes His stand on that which settles everything, and is a perfect example for us. He stands to God's Word and God's worship. He awaits His Word, He worships Him, He serves Him only. How simple and how blessed! It was the immediate link of an obedient heart with God. The question was one of relationship to God. So of old, Eliezer receives blessing, but before he begins to enjoy it he gives thanks. He had the Word first, then the blessing, and what follows forthwith? He bows his head and worships. God is the first thought of his heart. And so still more fully with the Lord here.

9-11.--The last and subtlest temptation was grounded on the promises to Messiah. "If Thou be the Son of God," why not try? But why should He try, who KNEW that God was for Him? Why should He be like presumptuous Israel of old, who would go up the hill in disobedience to prove whether the Lord was among them? Not even when Lazarus was sick would He stir till it was the Father's will, though all nature would have moved; and He knew well the sorrow of that house which was His refuge; for "Jesus loved Martha, and her sister, and Lazarus" (John 11. 5).

The Lord did not listen. Who would? you say. But you do listen to Satan every day of your lives that you seek a very little bit of the world. But was there not a promise? Doubtless there was; yet why

[p. 37]

should He throw Himself down to see whether God would be as good as His Word? Did He not know that God was with Him? And so with us. Let us only have the Word behind us, no matter what may be before us. Never should we raise a question whether God is with us. If He does not send, let us not move, but let us never question His presence. If we are in the simple path of His will, the Holy Ghost will act in us to guide, and not merely on us to correct.

Thus, then, in the order of Luke, which, as we have seen, is not historical, but moral, we have the progressive exercises of a man. First, natural lasts; secondly, worldly lusts; and, lastly, spiritual temptations. The Lord Jesus was tempted here, not in Eden, but in the great system where we are. He put Himself, by the will and wisdom of God, in the place of our difficulty in the world where man is. He has gone through all the difficulties a saint is in. Who wants His help? Not a sinner, for he wants salvation; but a saint needs help and sympathy in his path. We have practically to keep our first estate as renewed. Satan cannot touch the new man, but he tries to entice out of the path of godliness. We want succour to walk as obedient ones where Christ walked.

  

IN THE SYNAGOGUE.

14, 15.--"And Jesus returned in the power of the Spirit into Galilee; . . . and He taught in their synagogues, being glorified of all." In all things His obedience is shown. Untouched by Satan, He goes forth in unhindered power, as we shall, in a

[p. 38]

measure, if like Him we pass through temptation, so as not to be touched by Satan.

16.--"And He came to Nazareth, where He had been brought up"--the low, despised place, but just the place where spiritual power is found. Was it not ever thus? When was it found allied to the great things of this world?

18.--"The Spirit of the Lord is upon Me, because He hath anointed Me to preach the Gospel to the poor." It was the characteristic of grace to come to such. The great business of Christ was to preach, i.e., to present God. The Holy Ghost gives the right word at the right time, and in the right way.

21.--"This day is this Scripture fulfilled in your ears." The Lord does not reason; He says here it is. The way of God is to present what we want. You want salvation, there it is; you want mercy, and there it is. God alone can thus come, by grace, into the place of a sinner. They wonder, for His were precious words, but soon they ask, Is not this Joseph's son? Was He ashamed of being the carpenter? Grace goes down to the lowest need. But man will take occasion to despise grace, because it is clothed in humiliation. He cannot but see God, but he steps aside to look at the humiliation, and so show out the hatred of his heart. God's grace is despised and His sovereignty is hated. God did not despise Nazareth, but man despises Jesus because He came out of Nazareth. Even the guileless Nathaniel asks, "Can any good thing come out of Nazareth?" (John 1. 46). How little appreciation of the way of grace there is even in the godly! Christ comes into man's misery, and

[p. 39]

finds him where he is. Could an angel? No; he stays in his proper position, doing the Lord's commandments, and hearkening to the voice of His Word. An angel ought not to come down to me in my sins; God only can in His grace. And man despises the lowliness to which grace brought Him--wretched man!

25-27.--But Israel ever resisted grace, and yet it was ever the way of God's delight. Witness the widow of Sarepta in Sidon, and Naaman the Syrian leper. Grace overleaped the bounds of Israel. They might be enraged, but grace does overstep their limits. They rose up to thrust Him down who had denied their privileges, but He passed through (verse 30) to renew the work of grace elsewhere.

31, 32.--"For His Word was with power." This does not move Jesus; it tries Him and breaks His heart, but it does not move Him. The reproach of man turns Him to God. His comfort in His rejection is His Father's will: "Even so, Father." It was perfectness in the scene of grace, as before in the scene of temptation.

There was also the manifestation of power, and not merely promise. There was the accomplishment of promise for the deliverance of man in power as well as grace. And this remains true for us who know Him as a Man risen and at the right hand of God. Mere promise does not give a centre for the affections--Christ Himself is that--Christ to whom promise pointed. He awakens divine feelings and thoughts in us, which find no response or satisfaction from anything in this world. It is the special character of

[p. 40]

[paragraph continues] Christ. When He presents Himself it is perfect peace and grace, and in fellowship with Him the soul can praise and rejoice in what He is.

  

THE GREAT HEALER.

This grace adapts itself to all difficulties, so as to bring man into peace with God. The very demons knew who He was; man alone was dull and blind. The devil held captive, but a single word of Jesus sets the captive free. He was there, not a promise merely, but power accomplishing, the living power of the Lord Himself among men, the power of God in man overcoming Satan. Such was Jesus in the synagogue of Capernaum dealing with the unclean spirit.

38, 39.--And it is the same when He goes out and "enters Simon's house." Disease disappears, the weak is made strong. He ministers unto Simon's wife's mother, as she lay taken in a great fever, "and immediately she arose and ministered unto them."

40, 41.--What can resist this delivering power in the person of the Lord Jesus? "Now when the sun was setting, all they that had any sick with divers diseases brought them unto Him; and He laid His hands on every one of them, and healed them; and devils also came out of many." He went about doing good, and healing all that were oppressed of the devil. Therefore when men stayed Him that He should not depart, He pleads His mission to preach elsewhere also. He is ever the obedient One.

     
The Man of Sorrows, by John Nelson Darby, [n.d. (prior to 1882)], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 41]

  

CHAPTER 5.

It is interesting to know the progressive power of the Word of God. The Lord was preaching, as related at the close of chapter 4, and in so doing, as well as in the miracles He wrought, He was manifesting the power of goodness. Thus, in performing miracles, two purposes had to be accomplished--confirmation of the testimony given, and present deliverance from the power of Satan. But His great business was preaching the kingdom of God. He will set up the kingdom in power by and by, but His great object then was, and is, to bring the heart into contact with God, and the Word does this more than miracles.

1.--"The people pressed upon Him to hear the Word of God." In a measure even the unconverted are sensible of the presence of God. Adam was when he tried to hide himself . When the Gospel is preached with power crowds are gathered together by it, touched, perhaps, by something new, but without fruit. So it was with the Lord's preaching and miracles. We know their motives were selfish often, yet He went on all the same. Come for the blessing of man, He would associate others with Himself in this work of grace; but He calls them in such a way as leaves no glory to man.

  

CATCHING FISH AND MEN.

2-4.--He "saw two ships standing by the lake, but the fishermen were gone out of them, and were washing their nets. And He entered into one of the ships, which was Simon's, and prayed him that he would launch out a little from the land; and He sat

[p. 42]

down and taught the multitudes out of the ship. Now when He had left off speaking, He said to Simon, Launch out into the deep, and let down your nets for a draught." The Word had authority in the conscience. Peter and Andrew had seen Jesus before, but had not yet stayed with Him. There had not been sufficient power in their faith to attach them to Christ. There are many now, as ever, who own the authority of the Word, yet are not attached by its power to His person; many absorbed by their everyday pursuits, the Word not having laid hold of their souls so as to make them walk thoroughly with Christ. It is one thing simply to hear His word when spoken to them; quite a different thing when the Word reaches them and becomes the spring and motive of all their ways. So here these men had spent a little time with Jesus, had heard Him speak, and owned Him as Messiah; so now also we see obedience to His word when it comes to them. They launch out at His word, and at His word they let down their nets.

5.--The miracle which the Lord wrought was one every way suited to act on those concerned. Their own powerlessness was confessed: "Master, we have toiled all the night, and have taken nothing." Man could do nothing in such a case. If Jesus could it was because everything was at His disposal. "At Thy word I will let down the net."

6-8.--"And when they had this done, they enclosed a great multitude of fishes, and their net brake. And they beckoned unto their partners, . . . and they came and filled both the ships, so that they began to sink." There was not even

[p. 43]

strength to receive of themselves. "When Simon Peter saw it, he fell down at Jesus' knees, saying, Depart from me; for I am a sinful man, O Lord." If the Word of Jesus had not reached Peter's heart he would merely have obeyed it as a means of temporal help; but he owns Him as Lord, hearing far more in the words spoken. His conscience was reached. The Lord Himself is revealed to Peter, and that shows Peter himself. When the eye of God is consciously upon us we see in ourselves what He saw. This was Peter's case. He, when brought into God's presence, feels that he has been deceiving himself.

Grace begins here, but we have not the end yet. So Paul was blind three days, and his soul so wrought on that he could neither eat nor drink. Here Peter falls down at Jesus' knees. So with us. When brought really into His presence there is the discovery of our sinfulness. The means used to bring us there may be various--circumstances of life, providential occurrences. But when we are there, there is the revelation of Christ Himself, and wherever He is He takes His right place in the soul. It is not only that a man then has salvation, but he cannot longer be content without God having His due place before him.

Peter does not fly away from the Lord, like Adam hiding himself, he is attracted to Him. At the same time he is there a judged, convicted, sinful man in his own conscience, which takes the part of Christ against itself. "Depart from me," he says, but he says it at Jesus' knees. This might seem like a contradiction. It was really love to the Lord and

[p. 44]

care for His honour, because His Word had become the revelation of Christ to him. His heart was not perfect peace, but Christ has got possession of it. Grace draws to Christ, but there is withal the sense of unfitness till His work is known in all its peace-giving consequences. God sees the thoughts and intents of the heart, and we are made to see these as He sees them. Righteousness is planted in the conscience; God and manure brought together. It was not that Peter could be happy anywhere but at the feet of Jesus, but he felt all the while how unfit he was to be in such company.

10.--But the Lord deals in perfect grace. He does not leave Simon Peter. He knew all his sin before He went into the ship, and says to him: "Fear not; from henceforth thou shalt catch men." Jesus went into the ship to show Peter that he had nothing to fear. Truly "perfect love casteth out fear." Fear has torment till grace is fully revealed; and now it was, with as much authority as that miracle-working word, "Let down your nets for a draught." It was the Word of Christ to his heart . If he trusted it for the fish, why not for his fears? Peter had said "Depart," but instead of that Christ had already come, knowing all he was better than Peter. He was come as a Saviour; nay, more, He intimates to Peter that He was going to make him an instrument in gathering others. Every one who has the love of God shed abroad in his heart becomes a vessel of living grace himself. Not the source, but the river flows through him, so that people may come and drink. Recipients of grace, we are associated with Christ in the activity of love. Outward gift is not meant

[p. 45]

here, but that, as members of His body, there is living fellowship with the Head in the testimony of His grace and power.

11.--We see in these disciples the effect of all. They are absorbed with Christ now. They not only look to Him for salvation, but they think of nothing else for life, speaking now generally and apart from any particular failure. "They forsook all, and followed Him." Christ becomes their life. It is a new line altogether, not merely obedience to an express command with the reserve of thinking and saying, perhaps, "There is no harm in this or that." Christ pleased not Himself. His reason for action was His Father's will, and not the absence of a prohibition. And we are sanctified unto the obedience and sprinkling of the Blood of Jesus Christ. "They forsook all," and where Christ went they went. They are associated with their Lord in His love to souls and in the walk of life. This is liberty. May we, having Christ our life, have Him as our one motive, detached from all to Him, yet channels for all the blessing and grace we have ourselves tasted in Him! There is power to attract out of every corruption around, and to gather the soul into the thoughts and ways of God by the revelation of Christ Himself.

  

CLEANSING OF THE LEPER.

12-14.--Christ was the manifestation on earth of God's power and character--of grace. Of this the leper's case which follows is a striking witness, for leprosy was an evil which none but God could remove. But God was there in grace. Leprosy

[p. 46]

presented sin in the aspect of uncleanness. A man full of it on seeing Jesus fell on his face, and besought Him, saying: "Lord, if Thou wilt, Thou canst make me clean." There is the recognition of divine power in Jesus, but he has not full confidence in His grace. He seems disheartened by misery, and almost in despair says "If Thou wilt." But He who alone on earth had the title so to say it, says "I will." It was God only, not in Heaven, but come down in man and among men. Christ was there, who could touch the leper and the leprosy without being touched by it. Divine power was needed, doubtless, and the very priests could not but attest the results of its intervention, but there was divine and perfect love in His touch, while it was the touch of a man, a man who acknowledges the ordinances of God, and as one who had been born under the law. Thus this "turned for a testimony." For the leper must go to the priest, and what could he think? Why, who has been here? Jehovah must have been to heal the man.

16.--And what next? Jesus "withdrew Himself into the wilderness, and prayed." Let the power exercised be ever so great and manifestly divine, He is the dependent Man, and this is just where we fail.

  

THE MAN BORNE OF FOUR.

18-26.--"They went upon the housetop, and let him down through the tiling." Here we have another thing. Not the power of Satan, as in chapter 4, nor the uncleanness of sin typified by leprosy, but the guilt of sin. They brought the man because they felt the need; and there was the perseverance of faith,

[p. 47]

which would not be put off till another day. And Jesus brings forgiveness of sins as well as cleansing from defilement. This is what appears in the instance of the palsied man. The first and grand point is that Jesus pronounces his sins forgiven. Authority to pardon has come in the person of the Son of Man on earth, whatever scribes and Pharisees might think. It was God, the Lord Jehovah, but the Son of Man withal, having on earth power to forgive sins, and using it. It is in this way Israel is to be forgiven by and by (cp. Psa. 103. 3), and accordingly the Lord here gives the proof of that authority to forgive by the healing the disease of the paralytic.

24.--"That ye may know." The man was to know in his relationship to God that his guilt was gone. Through infinite grace we are entitled to more than even this, for we have the righteousness of the accepted Man in God's presence. We are made the righteousness of God in Him. This palsied man was a sample of what will be in the future day Israel's portion. Jesus was forgiving iniquities and healing diseases. He had shown the power to do the one, now He would show that He could do the other also. It is God's delight to do it all. You may not believe that you can have such a boon, but it is ours in Christ. The perfect Man has come with perfect title in His person. God wrought there, but it was also as a man filled with the Holy Ghost. The believer walks, too, a proof not to himself so much as to others that God was there. The man ought not to say "I wonder if I can walk." If he has faith he will get up and do it.

Two things are here present. First, the exceeding

[p. 48]

blessed grace that the Lord is come, the power of God within the sphere of human misery, which, extreme as it may be, does but make that power evident. If I look around as a man I am lost. I cannot unriddle the history of the world--abominations committed in the Name of Christ, Himself rejected by His people Israel, and crucified by those Gentiles to whom God had entrusted the government of the world, Mohammedanism, Heathenism. What kind of a God have you, says the reasoning heart, when it is such a world? But here I have the Lord come down into all the wretchedness, sickness, sin, and my heart is drawn away from pleasure and sorrow to Him. How beautiful to see heart after heart brought around this One, the only true centre, soon to be the risen head of the new creation; Himself the object drawing out feelings and affections of which He alone is worthy. He who by His excellency gives excellency, and by His gracious thoughts towards us produces and draws out gracious thoughts in us. Next, our hearts are fixed just so far as we have an object--fixed according to God, when we have Christ Himself before us. How can I love if I have nothing to love? A man is what he feels, and likes, and thinks. If my soul lives and feeds upon that which is most excellent--Christ the bread of God--Christ becomes, in a practical sense, formed in the heart. In Him, the Man Christ Jesus, God has had all His delight, and the display of it too.

Remark further, that in the accounts we have seen, divine power in the person of Jesus, the Son of Man, is exercised in the midst of Israel. First

[p. 49]

[paragraph continues] (chap. 4. 31-41), its triumph over the enemies' power in sickness and in demoniacal possessions, and the testimony of the kingdom, when all such effects of Satan's work should disappear. This last opens the way for the more positive and deeper blessing of souls being put in relationship to God. Hence from chapter 5. 1-26 (the call of Peter, the cleansing of the leper, and the pardon of the palsied man), it is a question of the state of the soul (whatever the outward accompaniments might be), of the authority of the Word over the heart, of faith, and of Christ's personal glory. Still it was grace in operation towards Israel; grace, if one might so speak, in government. To Israel God had said that He would not put upon them the plagues of Egypt save for their sin. They were an outwardly elect, redeemed people, but they were under God's government; and hence chastening came, of which the leprosy and the palsy were peculiar samples. Jesus shows Himself to be "Jehovah that healeth thee," in the midst of Israel, though He was passing away from them into a wider display of power and goodness. He could have healed every one, leprous or paralytic; He could have removed all the diseases, now, alas, brought on the Israelites; but in these cases it is where they come to Him in quest of healing, i.e., it is in answer to faith that He works. He was there, showing divine power and grace in healing.

  

THE CALL OF MATTHEW.

27-32.--"Levi left all, rose up, and followed Him." But this grace, being of God and sovereign,

[p. 50]

could not be bounded by human circumstances. Wherever a want appeared to Him, could He gainsay His power or His love? Now, see how that connects itself with what follows. There was full deliverance for all who trusted in Israel, but He could not, and would not, limit His grace. The law limited, but when Himself, the God who gave it, came everybody who needs Him is welcome. His house is a house of prayer for all nations. Hence He calls a publican, a Jew indeed, but detested by the Israelites, and in a sense rightly, when viewed as the mark of their servitude nationally. A publican was one who profited by their Gentile masters, to extort money from Israel, and therefore naturally regarded with horror. But Jesus calls one named Levi, sitting at the receipt of custom--calls him to be an apostle. Grace must act according to its own rights. If God has been good to you or me, does that hinder His mercy and love to another? Grace creates the instrument it wants to act by; and it will flow further than the publican yet, even to the most distant Gentile. True, Israel had the promises; the Gentile, strictly speaking, had none; but for that very reason it was more purely grace, and grace would act towards the Gentiles. The Lord Himself, God, was there, and Israel could not be the centre nor the temple when He was there, the despised Lord of both. He is the door, the new centre and turning point of blessing; not a mere branch of the old vine, but Himself the true vine. As a Jew He was subject to ordinances, but as the Lord He is above them, and He breaks out beyond all the old restrictions.

29.--"Levi made Him a great feast in his own 

[p. 51]

house, and there was a great company of publicans and of others that sat down with them; but the scribes and Pharisees murmured." It was a terrible sight and blow to such.

31.--But Jesus answers, "They that are whole need not a physician, but they that are sick. I came not to call the righteous, but sinners to repentance." They mistook the Lord altogether. He came to show how grace could deal with those who had no righteousness.

34.--"Can ye make the children of the bride-chamber fast?" He is now breaking, as it were, out of the old thing. He is faithful to Israel, but breaking up that order of things. How could they fast who owned the presence of the divine husband of Israel, the Messiah? The time was coming when the Cross must be taken; but when the Bridegroom is there, fasting was out of place and season.

36-39.--Further, the old garment cannot be patched with new cloth. Jesus would do no such thing as tack on Christianity to Judaism. Flesh and law go together, but grace and law, God's righteousness and man's, will never mix. Neither can the new wine, the power of the Spirit, be put into the old legal ordinances without loss on all sides. A man accustomed to forms, human arrangements, father's religion, etc., never likes the new principle and power of the kingdom; he says the old is better. . Such is nature; grace is offensive to it. Nor does man improve in divine things. He can degrade himself and give up what his heart never relished. And this goes on rapidly to-day.

     
The Man of Sorrows, by John Nelson Darby, [n.d. (prior to 1882)], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 52]

  

CHAPTER 6.

Here we have a most weighty thing spoken of--the Sabbath. It is a question that often agitates the minds of men, and was then specially important as closing Jewish relations. And this, it will be borne in mind, was just where the Lord had morally arrived at the close of the preceding chapter. The rights of His person and His grace, now becoming more rejected by the religionists of Israel, reach out beyond the narrow bounds of that proud people. God thereon, by degrees, intimates the coming purpose of His mercy. His salvation in due time shall be sent unto the Gentiles, and they will hear. If the Jew judges himself unworthy of everlasting life, God will have His own joy of saving souls somewhere.

  

THE QUESTION OF THE SABBATH.

1-5.--Now it is very evident that the incident of the cornfields, "on the second Sabbath after the first," thoroughly falls in with the object of the Spirit in hand. "The Son of Man is Lord also of the Sabbath." His person entitles Him to supremacy over that which was the sign of the covenant of the law.

6-10.--In the next case He asserts the right to do good on the Sabbath day, as His adversaries on the same day show their disposition to destroy. The Sabbath, in any real sense, man had entirely lost. Indeed, he had never entered into God's thoughts of rest. It was His rest, and had not sin spoiled all, man should have enjoyed that which was the result not of his

[p. 53]

own, but of God's labour. This is the proper character of that rest which belongs to man distinctively; but sin having come in the necessity has arisen that God should work afresh if man is ever to share the rest of God (see Heb. 4). Meanwhile, Christ has appeared and finished the work which God gave Him to do. Hence we who believe find rest in Christ, as does God Himself. In Him, by virtue of the accomplished and accepted work of redemption, we have our Sabbath spiritually.

The day was set apart and hallowed from the beginning (Gen. 2). Afterwards it came in, first in grace to Israel, marked by the cessation of the manna and a double portion to provide for that holy day (Exod. 16); and, secondly, as a part of the law of Sinai, and incorporated with every new and special dealing of Jehovah (chap. 20; see also 31. 13, 14; 33. 14; 34. 21; and 35. 2). It was a memorial thenceforward of the deliverance out of Egypt (Deut. 5. 15). Accordingly the prophets expressly treat it as a sign of Israel's separation from all other nations unto God, and of God's covenant with them (Ezek. 20. 12-20; 22. 8; 23. 38; 44. 24; Isa. 56, 58; Jer. 17. 4). But then, in the past, Israel, a sinful people, had the Sabbath as a legal ordinance, and consequently are condemned by it as by all else.

Where is this covenant with Israel? All gone, because of their iniquity. Hence they were thrown into the hands of the Gentiles and became slaves.

Behold, we are servants this day; and for the land that Thou gayest unto our fathers to eat the fruit thereof and the good thereof, behold, we are servants

[p. 54]

in it: and it yieldeth much increase unto the kings whom Thou hast set over us, because of our sins: also they have dominion over our bodies, and over our cattle at their pleasure, and we are in great distress" (Neh. 9. 36, 37). If they had a temple after the captivity it was only at the mercy of their Persian masters. The outward emblem lingered on no doubt, and was especially made much of to dishonour Him, of whom and whose work it was so significant; but where was its reality when Jesus was on earth? Alas! He lies in the grave all the day which His murderers kept as a day holy to Jehovah--"for that Sabbath was an high day" (John 19. 31)--awful testimony to the Jews of their position. Their own Messiah slain by His own people. Such was the truth which that Sabbath day uttered to Him who had ears to hear. Israel never had the rest of God. "If Joshua had given them rest" (Heb. 4). "There remaineth therefore a rest" (Heb. 4. 9). They must own Jesus first.

5.--But the rejected Jesus was Son of Man, and the Son of Man was Lord of the Sabbath, a truth of the utmost gravity, to be asserted with all strength. Those who confound the Lord's day with the Sabbath are in danger of forgetting this. It was the very point here in controversy with the Jews who maintained that the Sabbath was superior to the Lord. But He shows that another new principle had come in which wholly overleaped the old, and that to remain in the old was to have no deliverance. For there is no possibility for a lustful creature to be under a commandment that condemns lust without being condemned. Grace, however, has

[p. 55]

entered through a rejected Christ, and now there is rest for us who believe--not for those who are on the ground of law.

  

THE LORD'S DAY.

This is the reason why Christians keep the first day of the week, and not the seventh or Sabbath day. The rest was acquired by the power of Christ's redemption, and the first day, when He arose from the dead, was that which proclaimed it to faith, spite of man's guilt and ruin. The seventh day will be the rest of man on earth; the first day celebrates Christ's taking us in Him to Heaven. Then was life from the dead, life more abundantly, liberty from the law, and every consequence of sin--in a word, the victory of grace. The Christian, therefore, has the first day distinctively, because it belongs to and witnesses of the perfected work of Christ, and consequently introduces heavenly rest . The first day is in contrast with the seventh, which appertained to the round of man's labour in nature and of the Jew's under the law, in which Adam and Israel utterly broke down. It is the Lord's day emphatically, and this testifies of the triumph of Christ's Word and the glory of His person--not the day which guilty unbelief would have perverted into the proof and means of His inferiority. It is positive, direct blessing to him who owns and honours it, not because it is the close of legal toil, but the commencement of Christian hope; the resurrection day when we begin our spiritual life, and look on for what will crown so precious a pledge.

Here, however, the grand thing is the maintenance

[p. 56]

of the rights and authority of the Son of Man. You never can, according to God, raise up the title of the Sabbath against the Lord of the Sabbath.

3-5.--"What did David," the anointed of the Lord, when Saul persecuted him and sought his life? Was it of God, then, to uphold the ritual and so starve the man after His heart? No; the foundations were out of course, and everything became common in Israel when the chosen king was thus iniquitously rejected. But a greater One, and graver sin were now in their midst, The Son indeed, but the Root of David, God Himself was there; He who instituted the Sabbath, its Lord, was there in the person of the Son of Man.

6-12.--But if God was there, would He deny His own goodness or restrain His power in presence of human misery, because "the scribes and Pharisees watched Him whether He would heal on the Sabbath day?" Divine love must act and heal the withered hand, even if wretched man should seek to find therein an accusation. And they were filled with madness and communed one with another what they might do to Jesus (11); but Jesus in those days retired to a mountain to pray. He drew near to God to commune with Him as to what He was to do for them (12). His was the activity of grace, of love displaying itself holily and mightily in the midst of evil.

  

THE TWELVE CHOSEN.

13-16.--"And when it was day He called His disciples." In this call He proves that He was the

[p. 57]

only One who could empower others to bear this testimony also. And yet here, as in all that passed before, He is the lowly dependent One--perfect Man, as well as God. He was in perfect, unbroken communion with His God and Father, though Himself God manifest in the flesh. How blessedly near to us this brings Him, though so infinitely above us! What He did we should aim at, whatever our measure and our little sphere. In Him we see man perfect in that place of power wherein He came.

He knew whom He chose. He knew that one of them had a devil; but He sent them out. Twelve He chose specially, whom also He called apostles, "sent ones." It was an important and significant word, as quite a distinct thing both from law and promises. No one was sent out by law. Now God is active; He is sending His Son, and the Son is sending out apostles. The love of God is active in gathering souls. This first Sent One is a Man really and truly. God's work of His grace must be done by His Son, not by angels, but by His own Son, as the Man Christ Jesus, and He sends men out from Himself. The gathering point is Man--Himself of course. To Man God has committed all things. While it must be God who shows grace, the Son of Man it is who comes on the mission of love and sends out men to men.

17-19.--Whatever He attracts by He gathers round Himself to worship, surrounds Himself with them, and then comes down and stands in the plain. The great multitude are attracted by His miracles and their want, coming to hear and be healed. The company of the disciples were an inner circle. "The 

[p. 58]

whole multitude sought to touch Him." It is not said that they were converted, which is another thing; but living power went out of Him, healing their bodily misery and delivering from the power of Satan.

  

THE SERMON ON THE MOUNT.

20.--He now lifts up His eyes on His disciples and speaks to them, not as in Matthew 5, giving them the developed principles of the kingdom, but distinguishing those before Him as the remnant. Hence it is "ye" here. He puts seal and stamp on those actually gathered round Himself. They are to be like Him. He is at once their centre and their pattern. He was God, but the fulness of the Holy Ghost dwelt in Him as man also; and so He could say "I do always those things which please Him." So should it be with those around Him.

20-26.--"Blessed (are) ye poor; for yours is the kingdom of God. Blessed (are) ye that hunger now; for ye shall be filled. Blessed (are) ye that weep now; for ye shall laugh. Blessed are ye when men shall hate you." These words of the Saviour give the contrast of those He pronounces blessed with all that are at ease in this world. Those who, if in this life only they had hope in Christ would be of all men the most miserable, are the only happy few. They are severed from all others, and put in relationship with Him, the source of blessing, to be blessed. If you can make yourselves happy and comfortable in this world which has rejected Jesus, count not on His blessing. It is the poor, the despised with Jesus who shall have the kingdom. He

[p. 59]

says, if we may so speak, "I am distinguishing you," for there is no enunciation of abstract principles, as in the beginning of Matthew 5, but a speaking to the hearts of those gathered around Him. "I am come as the centre of power and active love. There is but one sole place of blessing on earth. With Me you are blessed." Others may be gay and cheerful where Christ has no place; but it is a time when a true spiritual soul can get no good save with Christ. It is a definite distinction of, and address to, the disciples who attached themselves to Him. This is made clear in verse 22, where the persecution for righteousness, which St. Matthew carefully records, is omitted. Here it is only a question of suffering "for the Son of Man's sake" (22).

In the midst of a world of misery and selfishness there came One who displayed not law nor judgment, but grace. But the light shines in darkness, and the darkness comprehended it not. Like the adder that hears nothing the world goes on as deaf as it is blind. No; you who are "full" now Jesus has no charm for you; but you, disciples, are weeping now, the sorrow and the sin of man distress your spirit; you shall rejoice. When God has His way, you who cannot be satisfied with the husks shall be filled. "Rejoice ye in that day, and leap for joy; for, behold, your reward is great in Heaven; for in the like manner did their fathers unto the prophets." You have your portion with Christ here, you shall have it with Christ in Heaven. You suffer with the suffering One; you shall have glory with the glorified One. But the others!--they shall have what they seek. For the full there shall be a famine by and by, for they have

[p. 60]

lost God. If you can laugh in such a world as this, you shall weep when God's time for blessing comes. They are of the world, and the world naturally loves its own. "So did their fathers to the prophets." Are the times altered? Is Christ 's character changed? It is not a whit more agreeable to the flesh. And if you can find your joy, ease, and pleasure in the world, Christ could not, and you have not His Spirit. He that will be its friend is the enemy of God. Can the disciple of Jesus be merry and gay in a world which has sin wrapped up in it? There is communion with Jesus, joy in the Spirit, while patient in tribulation; but this is quite another thing. It is a serious joy, though very real and blessed.

27.--He now shows what must be the conduct of the disciples as such. They were to manifest God, to be the unfolding of what was displayed in Him. Grace which was in Him in fulness and perfection should be reproduced in them, sadly as we all fail in this--the principle of our path. "Love your enemies." God loved us when we were His enemies, and we have now to show practically what God is.

29.--This brings us into entirely human circumstances, patiently learning in them; or, as in 1 Peter 2, doing well, suffering for it, and taking it patiently. This may seem poor comfort. But Jesus did so, and love must so manifest itself in an evil world. The time comes when God will judge, instead of bearing long as now; but now, at whatever cost to self, show love as Christ did.

35.--Flesh can love for love, but the disciples of Christ are called to imitate God, and walk in love.

[p. 61]

[paragraph continues] "Love ye your enemies, and do good and lend, hoping for nothing again, and your reward shall be great, and ye shall be the children of the Highest; for He is kind to the unthankful and to the evil." What a blessed character of God comes out here! It is not righteousness, though surely there was that, but in the world where God had to do with the unthankful and evil He shows grace. For the angels He has not grace, but love; but Christ in this world of sin is grace, i.e., love to those who deserve it not. "Be ye therefore merciful, as your Father also is merciful" (Luke 6. 36). It is not with, but "as your Father." As He loves His enemies, so do you; He is merciful, be ye also merciful. In all this God's character is displayed--perfect love in a world of sinners. It must cost us something; it cost the life of Christ. His love was a stream which if it met with hindrances in its way only went on flowing over, and leaving them behind till it reached the Cross.

37.--"Judge not, and ye shall not be judged." This is not certain things required in order to get life, but the result of certain conduct shown. As though He had said: You will find the consequences of your conduct as Christ did. He took the lowest place, but He has got the highest now. He humbled Himself; "wherefore God also hath highly exalted Him" (Phil. 2. 9). He came not to judge, and now "all judgment is committed to the Son" (John 5.22). Thus we not only have the display of grace, but divine character meeting its consequences.

38.---It is a question of government--of walking with the Lord. It must cost a great deal in the path,

[p. 62]

but in the end it will be "full measure, pressed down." There will be God's blessing, too, in the way, though self is mortified. Grace will abound, according to God's way.

39.--"Can the blind lead the blind?" See the contrast of those who are in utter blindness, and the blind leading the blind. You must let them alone; leave them to go on their own way; but you have to take your place with Me; and the disciple is not above his Master, but you shall be as your Master. If your Master suffers, you suffer; if it has cost your Master much, it must cost you much. If Christ teaches you, it is to make you possess the divine learning that He has Himself. And see what a place He gives us! When He gives, what does He give? The very same that He has Himself. "As He is, so are we in this world" (1 John 4. 17). "Not as the world giveth" (John 14. 27), which if it gives a little reserves the chief for itself; but as though He said "I am putting you in the very same learning that is in My nature, the grace that I have you are to have." But people do not like to do those things that Jesus did. Why is there so much argument about that one passage, "Resist not evil?" It is because you like to resist evil. Your will is touched, your conscience is reached, for it is given you as a matter-of-fact exhortation. But you do not like it, and you will get rid of it if you can. These things are given as tests for the conscience; they judge the eye, not the path only. "If thine eye be single, thy whole body shall be full of light" (Matt. 6. 22). The object is wrong if you have not light for the step. There may be difficulties

[p. 63]

in going up a steep hill, but if the object before you is clear, you get over them as quickly as you can. This is what is meant by the expression "This one thing I do" (Phil. 3. 13) . It is having one object, and the mind intent on accomplishing it. If it is so with you there will be sure to be light in the path--light not for ten years hence, but for this one step that is before you, and then for the next. It was said to Moses, "Speak to the children of Israel that they go forward" (Exod. 14. 15), and when they were out in the wilderness the pillar was given to be their constant guide. So with us. We are called out to go after Christ on the principle of obedience, and this puts us into connection with Him in the revelation of His will, not giving us to see all the path onwards. A man may see a wall, and say "I cannot go that way, there is a wall," while if he but takes a single step he will find that there is a path all down by the side of the wall.

44.--"Every tree is known by his own fruit." Not only bearing fruit, but fruit that Christ produces should be ours. There is fruit that an upright nature produces, such as that of the young man who came to Jesus, but that was not divine fruit--''its own fruit;" and where Christ is the root and the stock, it is Christian fruit, i.e., fruit that will remain (John 15. 16). Two men may go together up to a certain point, and then some test for Christ comes; one goes on with Him, and the other turns aside. "Its own fruit'--fruit shows itself, springs of itself. There will not be the question of: What harm in this or that? What harm in being rich? as a person once asked me. If it shuts you out of Heaven, is there

[p. 64]

any harm in that? Oh, I did not think of that! But the secret is that you like the things. The evil is not the things themselves dug out of the earth, but the love in the heart for them. "Out of the abundance of the heart the mouth speaketh." An impatient word betrays the heart. A blow I may restrain, yet utter the word.

  

THE HOUSE ON THE ROCK.

47.--In the hearing of all the multitude the Lord speaks now about the house built upon the rock. This is not a question about building upon Christ, the Rock, for the salvation of the sinner. It is the path of the saint. But where Christ's Word does connect with Himself, see the result. The very thing people are called upon to do is to follow Him; and when I follow it proves that the Master's words have taken such a hold upon my soul that they have power to carry me over the difficulties. "My soul followeth hard after Thee" (Psa. 63. 8). A man's affections, heart, will, are taken and connected with Christ instead of with himself. Is Christ sufficiently precious to make me leave all beside and follow Him, to do those things that please Him? "If a man walk in the day, he stumbleth not, but shall have the light of life" (John 11. 9). "As when the bright shining of a candle doth give thee light" (Luke 11. 36). Keeping close to Christ, the light shines upon us. If we have to get into the light we may be dazzled by it. Thus He has gathered round Himself in light and love those whom He will have to enjoy Himself, and be as their Master, at length to be conformed to His image in glory.

     
The Man of Sorrows, by John Nelson Darby, [n.d. (prior to 1882)], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 65]

  

CHAPTER 7.

We have seen the Lord rejected by Israel gradually, in virtue of His person and rights, breaking out beyond the ancient limits, and gathering the remnant round Himself, the new and only just object of God, the source of a mission in grace, and the full development and exemplification of holy love in an evil world; for whatever the principles laid down in chapter 6 they are but the expression of God's character in grace, as displayed in Christ here below.

  

THE CENTURION'S SERVANT.

1-10.--In accordance with this, we have now the case of the centurion, and a very full and striking one it is. It is not merely an act of grace, but grace to a Gentile. Nor is this all. The principle on which the apostle rests this question is brought out. "It is of faith, that it might be by grace, that the promise might be sure to all the seed" (Rom. 4. 16). Faith, as the great turning point, is introduced. It was no mere theory. It was living faith, and such faith as had not been seen in Israel. Neither was there presumption, but, on the contrary, remarkable humility. He recognised the honour God had put upon His people; he sees, holds to it, owns and acts upon it, spite of their low and debased and in every other respect unworthy condition. Despised and failing as they might be, he loved the Jews as God's people, and for His sake, and he had built them a synagogue. Unfeigned lowliness was his, though (yea, rather, for) his faith was far beyond those he honoured. Consequently he had a very high

[p. 66]

apprehension of the power and glory of the person of Christ as divine, reaching out beyond Jewish thoughts altogether. He does not refer to the Lord as Messiah, but recognised in Him the power of God in love. This was blessed faith which forgets itself in the exaltation of its object. He saw not Jesus, it would seem, but assuredly gathered from what "he heard'' that diseases were nothing to Him but occasions wherein to display His absolute authority and His sovereign mercy. He was a stranger, and the Jews were God's people; must not they or their elders be the fittest to bring this wonderful Person? For he confided in His mercy as well as His power, and his servant, "dear unto him," was sick and ready to die. He needed Jesus.

6.--"Then Jesus went with them. And when He was not far from the house the centurion sent friends to Him, saying unto Him, Lord, trouble not Thyself; for I am not worthy that Thou shouldest enter under my roof; wherefore neither thought I myself worthy to come unto Thee: but say in a word, and my servant shall be healed." There was surely the deepest personal respect and affection. Untaught as he might be in other things, he strongly felt the excellency of Christ's person, and here again with humility correspondent to the measure in which His glory was seen. This message of the centurion's friends admirably depicts his character and feeling. He told nothing to Jesus of his service to the Jews, spoke of nothing personal save his unworthiness, and this so consistently that he begged Jesus not to come to his house, as unworthy to receive Him. There was in this soul the exact opposite of doing

[p. 67]

[paragraph continues] Christ an honour, by believing on Him, and far from him was the pretence of receiving Christ to set himself up--both, alas! found often elsewhere. The simplicity of his heart is as apparent as his strong faith. There was none such in Israel, and yet it was in one who loved Israel. It was a lesson of grace in every way for the crowd that followed Jesus--for us, too, most surely.

  

THE WIDOW'S SON.

11-17.--Along with grace to the Gentiles came the evidence of power to raise the dead, but here it was manifested in human sympathies, in witness that God had visited His people. It was the power of resurrection, a power which was yet to be shown more gloriously and to be the source of that which is new for man according to God--the God who raiseth the dead. It was another and wondrous proof that He is here going, in the character of His action, without the sphere of the law and its ordinances. "For the law hath dominion over a man as long as he liveth" (Rom. 7. 1) . What can it avail for one who is dead? "But what the law could not do in that it was weak through the flesh, God sending His own Son in the likeness of sinful flesh" (Rom. 8. 3). It was grace indeed, and divine energy, but withal displayed in One who was touched with the feeling of our infirmities. And how astonishingly all the details bring this out? The dead man was "the only son of his mother, and she was a widow." "And when the Lord saw her, He had compassion on her, and said unto her, Weep not. And he that was dead sat up and began to speak. And He delivered him to

[p. 68]

his mother." How exquisitely human, and withal how unmistakably divine!

It is manifest that these two cases illustrate the change which the Spirit is attesting in this part of St. Luke. Nor is it otherwise with the scene that follows, which brings out in fact the hinge of the dispensation. The Lord bears witness to John Baptist, not John to the Lord. John sends two of his disciples, on the report of the Lord's miracles, to learn from Himself who He is. Are we surprised? He had preached and baptised in the confession of sins and in faith of the coming Messiah. But now all was changed. John was in prison, not delivered, and it was no longer a people preparing for the Lord. Was it not strange? At any rate, John sought a plain answer, and well could he trust the word of One who did such mighty and holy works. But what a comment upon the marvellous change was this very inquiry. It was a sort of turning over the disciples of John to the Lord.

21-35.--"And in the same hour He cured many of their infirmities, and plagues, and evil spirits; and unto many that were blind He gave sight . Then Jesus answering said unto them, Go your way and tell John." At the same time, if He receives no longer testimony from John, He bears it to him, owned John and his work. But they were owned from a higher ground where the Lord in grace and resurrection power had placed Himself, and this was based on entire rejection in and by the world, so that, though He was doing all good, still it was "Blessed is he whosoever shall not be offended in Me." Hence in the very verse where the Lord recognises in the

[p. 69]

fullest way John the Baptist, He marks the change about to take place: "He that is least in the kingdom of God is greater than he." Happy they who justified God in being baptised of John; wretched the self-righteous who rejected his counsel against themselves. Wisdom is justified of all her children. They understand the ways of God, whether in the servant or the Lord. The ways are quite different, but understood in grace. This generation, alas! understands none, finds fault with all. John is too righteous for them, Jesus is too gracious. The mourning of the one and the piping of the other are utterly distasteful. Such is man's wisdom to the ways of God. But the children of wisdom justify wisdom notwithstanding.

  

IN THE PHARISEE'S HOUSE.

36-50.--And in spite of the perverseness of men our Lord did not stop manifesting Himself to the world. Accordingly a tale follows which shows how God's wisdom is justified by, and in, those who own it in Jesus. It is a tale of grace, of pure, plenary, pardoning grace, which rests not till its object is dismissed in perfect peace. Jesus is in the Pharisee's house, who failed entirely in the essential point; Simon perceived not the glory of Christ. In this the Lord meets him, and shows in contrast with the woman, "which was a sinner," the point where this Pharisee was exercising judgment to be precisely that wherein he failed. God's thoughts are not as our thoughts, nor His ways as our ways. What if the despised Jesus were not a prophet only, but a Saviour of poor, lost sinners? Ah! God was unknown, that

[p. 70]

was the secret. The converted soul sees the glory of the Lord as grace towards itself; he who is unconvinced, however interested humanly, judges according to his own thoughts, and therefore necessarily fails to see the glory which is not according to these thoughts. Man's judgment of the Gospel must be wrong therefore; his reception of it, as grace, is alone right, and alone the way of coming to the knowledge of it.

This was, then, a direct and distinct example of God's ways. It was a forgiving of sins in grace, sovereignly and freely, to any poor sinner manifesting and producing love in the forgiven who loves God, because God is love, and this in respect of his sins, in Jesus the Lord. It was proper grace, the ground on which any one, a Gentile or not, would be received, and God manifested not in requirement from man (and so making man in the flesh of importance), but making God all, and His character in sovereign grace, so bringing in blessing, and its blessed effect upon the heart, developing the fruits of grace in a heart restored to confidence in God by the sense of His goodness. What a blessed picture! Goodness known not only in the act, but in Him who did it . The discernment of guilt in its gross forms by man was one thing, but the grace of God which could blot out and forgive all was quite another. It was not Christ there to judge and sanction Pharisees, but love to a sinner, manifesting God in this new character of grace, producing thankful, holy love to God, and a blessed relationship, sovereign, and beyond the reach of man. Note how God has always to prove Himself right in His goodness to man, so

[p. 71]

hard is man's heart. But the Lord identifies Himself with the believer, and vindicates him against the haughty world, and this gives assurance. Perfectly regardless of comments, He applies Himself, not to unbelief, which were useless, but to those who have faith, and having communicated forgiveness, shows the soul His uprightness, i.e., the right thoughts of God and self, which faith has. The last word settles the question. The soul's love was a ground of evidence and reasoning, not, of course, the cause. "Thy faith hath saved thee," said the Lord to the woman, "go in peace." All is discharged from the conscience, and the heart finds itself infinitely and everlastingly a debtor to the continual fountain of all grace.

     
The Man of Sorrows, by John Nelson Darby, [n.d. (prior to 1882)], at sacred-texts.com

  

CHAPTER 8.

We have seen in what has preceded the Lord presenting Himself, by His words and His work, as a new centre to which and round which His people were gathered. Before this JEHOVAH had been the centre when Israel was the gathering point, for Jehovah was among the Jews, and the temple the place where He met with the people. But now the Son is here, "God manifest in the flesh," and He must be the centre of everything. But Israel would not be gathered, as the Lord Himself said in Matthew 23. 37, "O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, how often would I have gathered, . . . but ye would not." Again, in Isaiah 65. 2, "I have spread out My hands all the day to a rebellious people." Israel could not have the blessing, for the flesh could not

[p. 72]

hold it. The flesh simply looked at as such is "as grass" (Isa. 40). "All flesh is grass." We have these two great principles running through the latter chapters of Isaiah. First, that flesh, as flesh, could not hold the blessing and be the depositary for the promises. For when all grace came, in the person of the Lord, the people to whom He was sent He found withered down like grass. "Surely the people is grass: the grass withereth, the flower fadeth, but the Word of our God shall stand for ever." But God was not going to give up His purpose . Therefore in chapter 49 we find Jehovah says unto Christ, "Thou art My Servant, O Israel, in whom I will be glorified." Then Christ says if God is to be glorified in Israel: "I have laboured in vain, and spent My strength for nought, and in vain, yet surely My judgment is with Jehovah, and My reward with My God." Then saith Jehovah, "Though Israel be not gathered, yet shall I be glorified in the eyes of Jehovah. I will also give Thee for a light to the Gentiles, that Thou mayest be My salvation to the ends of the earth." This is what Christ is becoming in Luke's gospel, "A light to lighten the Gentiles." And afterwards we find Paul, with the perfect accuracy of the Spirit, quoting this very scripture, so exactly fitted for them, to the Jews at Antioch. "It was necessary that the Word of God should first have been spoken unto you, but seeing ye judge yourselves unworthy of eternal life, lo, we turn to the Gentiles" (Acts 13. 46, 47; and, again, Acts 28. 28). Israel will be gathered afterwards, for Christ will hereafter raise up the tribes of Jacob and restore the preserved of Israel; but before this He turns to the Gentiles. All this the

[p. 73]

[paragraph continues] Lord pictures to us in Luke. In chapter 7 we see Israel refused both John the Baptist and Christ, but "wisdom is justified of her children." The Pharisees and lawyers did not justify God at all, for they saw no beauty in Jesus, whereas the publicans did; and thus the poor woman, "who was a sinner," whose heart was touched by the grace of God, is the true child of wisdom, and is brought in here as an illustration of Christ being the new centre of blessing, "though Israel be not gathered."

The Lord then goes on with His testimony, gathering by the Word, first, by parables, as in chapter 8, and then in chapter 9 sending forth His disciples to preach with this commission, to shake off the dust from their feet if they are not received, a token of the last testimony being given when they are given up.

1-3.--"The twelve with them, . . . and many others." Here are two classes of persons gathered round Christ. First, the twelve apostles were public witnesses, fitted by divine grace to be the vessels of testimony, manifesting the electing power of God in calling them, and sending them forth in all the energy of ministry; Christ's apostles, sent out by Himself, "As My Father hath sent Me, even so send I you," His chosen ones. "Ye have not chosen Me, but I have chosen you." Then, secondly, there were others who were gathered by affection round Him, having no place of office in the Church, but those whose hearts were touched and drawn round Him, not sent out like the first class, but not less devoted in heart than the apostles, for they followed Him, and ministered to Him of their substance.

[p. 74]

  

THE SOWER.

4-8.--In the parable of the sower, as previously remarked, it is not the kingdom brought out as in Matthew, but the testimony as to what and whom Christ was gathering, and not as to the form the kingdom would take afterwards. The very fact of Christ coming as the Sower proved that Israel was set aside; for had it been now to Israel as His vine-yard, He must have come seeking fruit from the vine He had long before planted. He had come to Israel previously, seeking fruit, and finding none He now comes in the new character of the Sower, which is quite another thing. He comes into a waste world where there was nothing, and He begins a fresh work. God is not now looking for fruit from man in one sense, because man has been proved to be a bad tree, and the more you dig about and dung a bad tree the more bad fruit it produces. "A tree is known by its fruits." Christ came to seek and to save that which was lost. God is now going to produce the fruit He requires. He is not now looking for man to produce anything, for John Baptist said, "Every tree that bringeth not forth good fruit is hewn down, and cast into the fire" (Matt. 3. 10), Therefore the Lord now comes as Sower, not looking for fruit, but doing that which will produce it .

9-15.----He then goes on to describe the character and effect of the sowing, and the disciples ask the meaning of the parable. Israel, as such, had forfeited its place, and therefore was "a people of no understanding" (Isa. 27. 11) . Long patience had waited on Israel. Seven hundred years had passed

[p. 75]

since the Word was given to Isaiah: "Go, tell this people, Hear ye indeed, but understand not." As individuals they might be drawn round the person of the Lord, but as a nation they were blinded. The disciples had an explanation of the parable, but as a nation the Lord speaks to them in parables (10), thus fulfilling to the nation the very words spoken by the prophet so long before. Now the testimony is closed as to Israel, though not as to God's final purpose respecting them.

The seed is sown indiscriminately, and although man rejects it because his will is opposed, nevertheless it is sown in his heart, for this parable shows how the Word of God is perfectly adapted to the need of man, meeting his conscience and heart. "Never man spake like this Man" (John 7. 46). Christ's Word came with a power that reached the heart and affections; the WILL is corrupt, and therefore resists it. It is not abstract grace here, but the condition of man that is recognised, therefore we find the Word so perfectly suited to the need, not claiming righteousness from man, but coming in with power to show him that he is a sinner, and laying open the thoughts and intents of the heart. When the heart is thus detected the Word comes with all gentleness and comfort for healing and rest, because there is grace to meet a soul in whatever state it may be found. The heart is spoken to, and therefore the Gospel leaves man without excuse.

13.--Some "received the Word with joy." This was a proof that the conscience was untouched, for when that is reached it is anything but joy until forgiveness is known. The feelings may be moved for

[p. 76]

a time, and the Word be listened to with a joy which will give place to sorrow. The reason truth is thus flippantly taken up with joy is because there is no root, and so it is received in joy and given up in trouble.

14.--Another class is where thorns spring up and choke the Word. The understanding may be convinced and receive the truth, but the cares, pleasures, and riches of this world come in and choke the Word. Now these "cares" are most subtle things, because they enter as necessary duties, and there is no sin in doing one's duty. Nay, it is right that a man should do his duty in his daily calling. But if these duties choke the Word, and a man loses his soul through it, what then? The natural tendency of the heart often needs to be met with that Word, "Take heed and beware of covetousness" (chap. 12). It is the love of possession. One came to the Lord, saying, "Master, speak to my brother that he divide the inheritance with me." The heart wanted to keep it. If love of the world or covetousness gets in among the saints it is an insidious thing, and most difficult to meet, because it is often not open to discipline, and yet if covetousness slips into the heart it checks the power of Christ over the soul and conscience, and eats out the practical life of the Christian, and his soul is withered, withered, withered . It may be checked by the power of God coming in, but this covetous care about earthly things is so subtle that while there is nothing on which to lay the hand, the practical power of Christian life in the soul is gone, though, of course, I need hardly say, eternal life can never be lost in those who once had it.

[p. 77]

15.--"That on the good ground are they which, in an honest and good heart, having heard the Word, keep it, and bring forth fruit with patience." There may seem to the world to be fruits bright and blessed, but if people have not got Christ they tire. There will be no enduring unless Christ has possession of the soul; but if He has, there will be an abiding motive, and people will go on, and "bring forth fruit with patience." They that hear and keep go steadily on, having their motive for action in the Lord. Trouble may come into the Church; disappointment may arise, even from brethren; but they go on just the same, because they have got Christ before them. For the Word they have heard and keep connects them with Christ, and He is more than anything else.

16-18.--This is a question, not of eternal salvation, but the practical effect of the Word as seen in this world, the growth of the Word in the soul, and that will not be hidden under a bushel. "Ye are the light of the world" (Matt. 5. 14) and "the salt of the earth" (Matt. 5. 13). In those who only appear to be Christians it soon comes to nothing. "Whosoever hath not, from him shall be taken away, even that which he seemeth to have." But those in whom the Word works effectually are to be as a "candle" set on a candlestick. Israel being set aside for a season, God sets up a new light in the world; a light lit up by God because of the world's darkness. When Christ was here He was the Light of the World because of its darkness, and now we should be a light in the world as we are "light in the Lord." The light is here set up by Christ's

[p. 78]

[paragraph continues] Word, and people are responsible for the Word received. Suppose you have heard the Word, and bring forth no fruit, it will all come out by and by that you have heard the Word and lost it, and the spiritual power accompanying it. For even if you are saints, all that you have heard without fruit or power resulting therefrom, it will come out. For nothing is hid that shall not be known or come abroad. "Take heed how you hear." Christ is looking for the results of His sowing. There must be not only the hearing but the possessing, and in this rests the responsibility, for if you keep the Word which you have heard, more shall be given you. If on hearing I possess that which I hear, not merely have joy in receiving it, but possess it as my own, then it becomes a part of the substance of my soul, and I shall get more, for when the truth has become a substance in my soul there is a capacity for receiving more. Suppose, e.g., you hear the truth of the Lord's Second Coming, and see your portion as the bride of Christ, and you do not lay hold of it practically so as to possess it (have communion with God about it, which is possession), you will presently lose the expectation of His coming, and forget your place of separation from the world, and the truth will gradually slip away, because you are not holding it in your soul before God. Consequently your soul becomes dead and dull, and you lose the very truth you have received. Thus, if one lives daily as waiting for the Lord from Heaven, there will be no planning for the future, no laying up for the morrow. Such a man will learn more and more, as other truths will open round this one grand central

[p. 79]

one, and he will be kept in the truth. If, on the other hand, he drops this centre truth by saying "He cannot come yet, so many things must happen first," then is the progress of such a one's communion with God hindered, for, as we have said, it is according to what a man has heard and holds with God that there can be any growth. For what is the use of teaching me that the Lord may come to-morrow if I am going on living as though He were not coming for a hundred years? Or where is the comfort and blessedness of the truth to my soul if I am saying in my heart "My Lord delayeth His Coming?" Though I cannot lose my eternal life, yet if I am losing the truth and light I have had I shall be merely floating on in the current of life, half world and half Christ, and all power of Christian life will be dimmed in my soul. If the truth is held in communion with God it separates to Himself. Truth is to produce fruit, and you have no truth that does not bear fruit. Truth must build up the soul. "Sanctify them through Thy truth; Thy Word is truth" (John 17. 17). Christ becomes precious in and by the truth that I learn, and if it has not that power it all drops out, comes to nothing, and is taken away. If Christ is precious to me I shall be waiting for Him with affection, and if it is not so, the bare truth will soon be given up.

  

NEW RELATIONSHIPS.

19, 21.--"Thy mother and thy brethren stand without." Here He closes up His connection with Israel after the flesh, for the relations of mother and brethren put Him into connection with Israel after

[p. 80]

the flesh. Observe, He here distinguishes the remnant by the word "these," as He did in chapter 6 by the word "ye." His mother and His brethren came to Him on the ground of natural relationship only, and there was all natural affection in the Lord, as on the Cross we find Him remembering His mother, and commending her to the care of John. But He replies here, as much as to say, "I am not on that ground now, My mother and My brethren are these which hear the Word of God and do it." Israel was now given up as to that position, the Lord owning and acknowledging only those to be His relations on whose hearts and consciences the Word of God had taken effect. It was not what was found in nature, but what was produced by grace, and being thus produced by power through the Word, the principle is hereby established that it might go out to the Gentiles as well as to the Jews, although not fully brought out until after His resurrection. In these three verses we have a judicial sentence on Israel, which closes in verse 21.

  

STILLING THE WAVES.

22-26.--Here is a parabolical display of what we may expect if we follow the Lord, and the opening out of what the Lord would be to those tried by such circumstances. The consequence of being the disciples and companions of Jesus is that they get into jeopardy every hour, they are not on terra firma, but are tossed about on the troubled sea, and Christ Himself absent (''asleep")."There came down a storm of wind on the lake," the ship was filled with water, and they filled with fear, and were in

[p. 81]

jeopardy. But the fact was Christ was in the same boat with them. He who made the worlds, the Son of God, was with them, and yet they are afraid, and cry out "We perish," as though He could be drowned, thus showing they had no sense of who He was that was with them in the boat. To us, now calmly reading the circumstances, what absurdity there seems in such unbelief, when, alas, is it not just the same with ourselves spiritually? Have we no sense of jeopardy when tossed about, and trouble is in the Church? In truth we have, for there is many a heart saying "Who will show us any good?" forgetting what God is acting and doing, though man is battling to all appearance against God's purposes. But God is not baffled, and He is calmly carrying on His purposes through all the storms raised by men or devils. In John 16 we find the disciples sorrowing because Jesus was going away, and the Lord had said to them (chap. 14), "If ye loved Me, ye would rejoice, because I said I go to the Father." In chapter 16 Jesus says, "Now I go My way to Him that sent Me, and none of you asketh Me, Whither goest Thou? But because I have said these things, sorrow hath filled your hearts." God was accomplishing His blessed purposes in redemption by Christ's going. You forget that God is acting in all this, for you cannot suppose that God is so baffled as to give up His purpose. The disciples thought when Jesus was crucified that all their hopes were disappointed. They say, "we thought it had been He that should have redeemed Israel" (Luke 24. 21) . In fact, in that very act, and at that very moment, all was being accomplished for them, Where is the

[p. 82]

[paragraph continues] Lord going? should have been their question. It is not now that there seems no jeopardy, no confusion, no sorrow; but faith looks at and through it all to God, and asks, What is the Lord doing? Where is the Lord going? In and through all the trouble the Lord has not turned a hairbreadth out of His way. We may be in distress, but faith will not say the Lord is far away, but will know Him nigh at hand.

24.--The Lord let them be in jeopardy, the ship filled with water, and Himself asleep on purpose to put their faith to the test, to prove if they were really trusting Him, and that it might be seen if such foolish thoughts would arise when they were put into jeopardy. They say "Lord, we perish;" but they were in the ship with Christ, and could they be drowned? He said to them: Where is your faith?" Well might He say thus to them, for though the water was in the boat, He was there too, and could sleep through it all. It was not so much of Him they were thinking as of themselves. "We perish," said they, and it is just the same now, for the fact of being in danger with Christ in the boat is the same at one time as at another, just as impossible now as then. And in truth Christ is much more with us now, being more perfectly revealed to us, and we are united to Him, one with Him, so that He is with us every moment in the power of the Spirit. However high the waves may rise there is no drowning His love and thoughts towards us. The test is to our faith. The question is: Have we that faith which so realises Christ's presence as to keep us as calm and composed in the rough sea as the

[p. 83]

smooth? It was not really a question of the rough or the smooth sea when Peter was sinking in the water, for he would have sunk without Christ just as much in the smooth as in the rough sea. The fact was the eye was off Jesus on the wave, and that made him sink. If we go on with Christ we shall get into all kinds of difficulties, many a boisterous sea, but being one with Him, His safety is ours. The eye should be off events, although they be ever so solemn, and surely they are so at this present time, and I feel them to be so, for none perhaps has a deeper sense than I of the growth of evil, and of the solemn state of things. But I know all is as settled and secure as if the whole world were favourable. I quite dread the way many dear saints are looking at events, and not looking at Christ and for Christ. The Lord Himself is the security of His people, and let the world go on as it may no events can touch Christ. We are safe on the sea if only we have the eye off the waves, with the heart concentrated on Christ and on the interests of Christ. Then the devil himself cannot touch us.

  

THE GADARA DEMONS.

26.--A solemn picture of the consequence of Christ's rejection by the world. Christ comes and finds them utterly under the power of the devil. A man of the Gadarenes was possessed, but He delivers "him, thus showing that the Lord had complete power over the enemy. With a word of Christ the devils were off. "The Son of God was manifested that He might destroy the works of the devil" (1 John 3. 8). What was the effect

[p. 84]

of His thus casting out Satan? Why, the whole multitude of the country round about "besought Him (Christ) to depart from them." These Gadarenes, who had borne with the devils because they could not help it, will not bear with Christ, and they beg Him to depart. Man would be glad to bind legion if he could, for he does not like the effects of the devil's power; but man's will is against Christ, he has a deliberate, determined hatred to Christ. The Lord came to the world full of love and power to deliver from the consequences of sin, but man rejected Him, cast Him out, and God will not stay where the will is determined against Him. When the Gadarenes request Christ to depart He immediately went up into a ship and returned back again. And, mark, the world in which we live is just going on as having quietly rejected Christ. But does God give them up though Christ is gone away for a season? No, He did not give them up, but sent amongst them this man whom He had healed to tell them what great things God had done for him. This is what the disciples did in the world, and the delivered residue also are to tell the world what great things God has done for them.

32.--The swine appear to represent the state of the Jews after their rejection of Christ. The Lord, doubtless, permitted the devils to enter the swine (as the swine having no passions of their own, it was their being possessed with these devils which made them run violently to destruction), showing it was not merely the evil passions in the men, but their being possessed by wicked spirits which hurried

[p. 85]

them on to destruction. And we know historically, from Josephus and others, that one can hardly conceive the infatuation with which the Jews rushed on to their own destruction when those Gentile powers went and ploughed up the holy city. This is just a consequence of Israel's rejecting the Lord.

  

JAIRUS' DAUGHTER.

41-56.--Then the Lord gives us two other pictures through the medium of real events of His dealings in deliverance. In verse 41 we have Jairus' daughter, who lay a dying; and here is a picture (dispensationally) of Israel. The Lord was going to heal Israel, who was just like one dying, but while in the way the people throng Him. What He came to do He did, for the world crowded Him while on the way to heal the sick "daughter of My people;" whosoever could touch Him by faith got healing, the activities of grace going forth from Him. Jairus' daughter "lay a dying." Man was not pronounced to be dead until Christ was killed. Before Christ came there was no healing for man. Abraham longed for the day of Christ . There were prophets who spoke of Christ as a healer, blessing was promised, but there was no physician. "Is there no balm in Gilead? Is there no physician there?" (Jer. 8. 22). There was none, for no physician could be found to heal man's condition until Christ came, and Him they put to death.

In Him there was living power, for when the people thronged Him a woman does but touch the border of His garment, and virtue goes out of Him to heal her. Healing depended not on the condition of those

[p. 86]

who were healed, but in the power of the healer. Physicians might apply remedy after remedy, but it is of no avail until One came who could impart life, then the case was changed. When the multitude press upon Him, and He recognises the touch of one to have been the touch of faith, He says, "Somebody has touched Me, for I perceive that virtue is gone out of Me." And now, before the Lord comes forth in resurrection power and glory to bring life from the dead in Israel there is perfect healing where there is faith, for the Lord is always alive to the exercise of faith. The woman hid herself, for there was shame in her, because of the consciousness she felt of the disease which had needed to be healed. "But she could not be hid." The heart always shrinks from opening itself when within itself, but when it looks at Christ it is open to Him, for that is always the effect of being in the presence of Jesus. Shame, reputation, character, all give way before the sense of what He is. When grace gets to the bottom of the heart all else is easily set aside. A link was formed between this woman's soul and Christ. "Thy faith hath made thee whole; go in peace." He brings perfect peace and comfort into her heart, for His way is not only to heal, but to make Himself known. She is not only to be cured, but to have the assurance of peace from His own mouth.

49.--Meanwhile they come, saying that Jairus' daughter was dead; "Trouble not the Master." They thought He might possibly heal her while she was living, but now she is dead, they supposed He could do nothing. This is a picture of Israel, who are dead before God (as are Gentiles, too, of course).

[p. 87]

[paragraph continues] But Jesus encourages them, and says, "Only believe, and she shall be made whole." When He came to the house He suffered no man to go in save Peter, and James, and John (the pillars of the future glory, when He will come forth as the resurrection and the life to the dead nation), and the father and the mother of the maiden.

In this chapter we get a picture of what was then doing, and what will come to pass. We have the seed, the Word sown, and the effect of it, the use man made of it. We have God's explanation of all that was going on, as being all known and settled in His mind, and if a storm arise, and if Christ appear asleep and insensible to the danger, though "He that keepeth Israel shall neither slumber nor sleep" (Psa. 121. 4), as disciples we are in the same boat with Him. The Lord give us to rest on that with undivided, undistracted hearts, for Christ is in the boat as well as the water. Only let the eye of faith rest on Christ, then come what may we shall say "Who shall separate us?" (Rom. 8. 35), nay, in all, "more than conquerors." Then the more the trouble the more the blessing, because of the exercise of faith.

     
The Man of Sorrows, by John Nelson Darby, [n.d. (prior to 1882)], at sacred-texts.com

  

CHAPTER 9.

After the Lord had given a picture, as it were, of all that was going on in chapter 8 He raises the question in chapter 9 as to who He was, and He tells His disciples some should see His glory, for the mount of transfiguration shows what the glory of the kingdom would be. Peter speaks of the power and coming, "when there came such a voice to Him

[p. 88]

from the excellent glory . . . when we were with Him in the holy mount" (2 Peter 1. 17, 13). But it is closing testimony at that time, though the glory would come, and as a signal that it was the disciples were to shake off the dust from their feet when they were not received. It is interesting to mark all the circumstances which bring out the fact of its being the Lord Himself there, and a test to Israel. He worked miracles, and could confer on others the power, as we have seen. Now we find another thing, He is committing the power to several together, giving to those men, a number of them together, power and authority over the devils, and not only entrusting it to whom He pleases individually.

Three things we have noticed in connection with the testimony of the Son of Man: (1) The testimony of God to Him; (2) the misery of man set aside by Him; and (3) devils cast out, so proving that it was really the Lord visiting this world in grace and power.

There will be the display of power by and by; but He was bringing in, in His own Person, the manifestation of that which will be then full and perfect, so being an earnest of the "powers of the world to come" alluded to in Hebrews. This was not redemption, but the exercise of power in dealing with the enmity of man against Himself, and they would not have Him in this way.

  

THE TWELVE SENT FORTH.

3-6.--He is sending out His disciples, and in so doing He disposes of all their circumstances. While He was with them He supplied them with everything, they lacked nothing. The power of

[p. 89]

the Lord was there to take care of them wherever they were. Afterwards, when He was going to leave them, He tells them to take a sword. They would. have to shift for themselves, as it were, but while He was with them He was their shelter. As in the demand for the ass to ride into Jerusalem, He proves His authority royal and divine altogether, "the Lord hath need of him." The disciples depart, preaching the Gospel, and healing everywhere. Then comes the question of who He was; He would have the conscience awakened about Him. There are two things in man brought out by the question--curiosity is excited on the one hand, and perplexity and dismay on the other.

7-11.--He goes on, and wherever there is an ear to hear He ministers to them according to the grace of the kingdom.

  

FIVE THOUSAND FED.

12.--The disciples ask Him to send the multitude away. Let them go and get lodging. No, says the Lord, "give ye them to eat." He does not now say He would feed them, but He is committing to others tile same power as He had Himself, and He would exercise their faith in what He could do by them. This applies to the Church now. Faith uses the power that is in the head. "Give ye them to eat." What He expected was for faith to exercise His divine power, that which they saw in Him. We should be so reckoning on the power in the head. The Lord was trying their faith in Him, "Give ye them to eat." But, no; they had no faith. They began to reckon on their resources.

[p. 90]

13.--"We have no more but five loaves and two fishes." So it was with us. No faith. Memory is not faith. "He smote the rock, that the waters gushed out, and the streams overflowed. Can He give bread also?" He gave us water, but can He give us food? We know He has done that one thing, but can He do this other thing to-day? We want to count on the energy of the Lord's love, and expect Him to be interested for us. When He said "Give ye them to eat" they should have expected He would give them the power. Jehovah was amongst them exercising His own power, but we see in their answer the horrid principle of unbelief. Unbelief shuts out God, and limits itself to what it sees; "except we go and buy meat."

14.--"He made them all sit down by fifties in a company. And they did eat, and were all filled." It was said in Psalm 132, "I will satisfy her poor with bread," and here He was doing it. This was said of their King, and He had chosen Zion; He had desired it for His habitation. He was here giving a sign that He was the One to accomplish this blessing, for He was feeding their poor with bread. He was not only sending out the power through His disciples, but Himself among them, not only as a man, a messenger, but as it is said in Hebrews, "The Word began to be spoken by the Lord." He was the Apostle. There were others sent afterwards, but He Himself was there first as their Apostle. It is a solemn thing to think that the Lord has really visited this world. He has come and presented Himself first to His people Israel, but they would not have Him. It shows us what the world

[p. 91]

is we are in. God is now dealing with it in grace, though His Son has been rejected.

17.--"Twelve baskets of fragments." Just observe, in passing, that the number twelve is significant of power exercised in the way of government--twelve apostles, twelve gates to the city in Revelation.

  

PETER'S CONFESSION.

18-20.--"Whom say ye that I am?" Hitherto we have been looking at Christ presenting Himself among the people as Jehovah, the Messiah; we now see Him as the dependent Man (praying). He was Immanuel, God with us; Son of David; Son of Man. He was to be all. Then the question is started among the disciples who He was. Some said one thing, and some another, but Peter said, "The Christ of God." Upon this He charges them to tell no man that thing. There was faith, however feeble, dictating this answer, and therefore there is no thinking about it. With perfect certainty Peter says, "The Christ of God." So it always is with faith. When the Spirit of God brings home the truth with power there is no uncertainty about it. A man may not doubt whether Christ is the Son of God or not; but the mind may work upon it, and think, perhaps, I do not love Him enough to be saved; then there is uncertainty. But when the Spirit, with power, shows whoever confesses that Jesus is the Son of God, God dwelleth in him; then I believe it, and I see that my sins and my iniquities He will "remember no more." It may set a man thinking about the consequences of a truth.

22.--He now passes by the thing that has been

[p. 92]

already brought out, and He presents Himself to them as the Son of Man, and He is going to suffer, to be crucified. They must therefore be content to take up their cross. A new thing was coming in. He was going to be rejected, going to be slain, and the third day rise again. It is no longer Messianic ground, but in another sphere altogether beyond this their hopes must lie. "If any man will come after Me, let him deny himself, and take up his cross daily." "Daily," this is the trial. A man might heroically do it once for all, and he would have plenty of people to honour him, and have books written about him, but it is truly difficult to go on every day denying oneself and no one knowing anything about it. It came to this, that if you spare the flesh in this life you will lose your life in the next; and what if a man gain the whole world and lose his own soul? What shall a man give in exchange for his soul? It is not a question of bringing life down to the flesh; but if you lose your life here you will get it elsewhere, above and beyond this world: "For whosoever will save his life shall lose it; but whosoever will lose his life for My sake, the same shall save it." It is giving up the world for eternal life or for eternal misery that is the real question. "What is a man advantaged?" You must give it up, you cannot keep it.

There is the glory of the kingdom, there is the manifestation of glory coming. Those tastes and dispositions which are attracted by Jesus cannot find their portion here. "They declare plainly that they seek a country; wherefore God is not ashamed to be called their God" (Heb. 11. 14).

[p. 93]

26.--"Whosoever shall be ashamed of Me, . . . of Him shall the Son of Man be ashamed, when He comes in the display of His own glory." One like to the Son of Man came to the Ancient of Days, and there was given Him dominion (see Dan. 7. 13). Then He comes, too, in the glory of the Son of God--His Father's glory, and in the glory of the angels. The angels are waiting upon Him who created them, for they were created for Him as well as by Him, and thus give glory to Him as Son of Man, giving Him His proper glory, for He has not lost a tittle of His glory. "Thou hast set Him over the works of Thy hands." "Let all the angels of God worship Him." There was the same thing at Sinai. "The law was ordained by angels." "The chariots of God are twenty thousand, even thousands of angels" (Psa. 68. 17).

We are now finding the displayed glory in this triple character spoken of. It is that glory when He appears; and it is a question of His being ashamed of those who have been ashamed of Him--they could not deny themselves present advantage. I do not here allude to the Father's house, which, of course, has another character. Here it is the kingdom manifested in its glory on the earth.

  

THE TRANSFIGURATION.

28.--"He went to pray." This is not mentioned in the other gospels. He was going to show His disciples His glory, to give the declaration of His power and coming. From the other gospels we find that a week after this He went up to Jerusalem where He was to be crucified.

[p. 94]

29.--"The fashion of His countenance was changed." An entire change of things is here. He talks of His decease, which He should accomplish at Jerusalem, where He ought to have been crowned; but there He is going to be crucified. There, where this horn of David was to bud, shall this Root of David be taken, and by wicked hands be crucified and slain. This is the deep centre of all the change.

30.--"There talked two men with Him, Moses and Elias." This we may look at in two ways: dispensationally, as representing the law and the prophets, and in this way Moses held a very peculiar place, for it was through him the law was given; Elijah had nearly as important a place also, for though the Jews were in a right position, they had failed in it, and he goes back to Horeb. The other prophets were never called to work miracles. Except the account of the dial of Ahaz, we hear of no miracle in Isaiah, Jeremiah, Hosea, Habbakuk, etc. Those prophets, sent of God, gave proof that He was caring for Israel; but there was nothing like the calling back in Elijah. Elias stood as the maintainer of the law, when the people had departed from it most grossly, though all the prophets, even to Malachi, called back to law. Moses and Elias were taken away, and Jesus is left alone. Law was gone, prophecy gone, and Christ is alone, and He was going to be crucified. All the fabric built up by law and prophets (not the testimony given by them, but the law as given to man in the flesh) is broken up because man ended by killing the Lord come in the flesh, therefore all is gone.

33.--Peter would have had the three established

[p. 95]

together, taking all alike: "Let us build three tabernacles." But that moment Moses and Elias disappear, and the voice is heard: "This is My beloved Son, hear Him." It is now the righteousness of God without law in Jesus. Law did not send Christ. What law could have been put upon God to do it? Nothing but divine love could have originated such a thought. "Grace reigned through righteousness" (Rom. 5. 21). The law was good and perfect, but Christ was far beyond law. Moses and Elias, therefore, were not to have any place with Him. God the Father puts them aside when Peter wishes to put them in connection. They disappear immediately. This is the important thing for us. Every word of law and prophets is the truth of God, but these were until John. Now the Son of God is the Messenger of the Father's love and the Accomplisher of divine righteousness. When He is there, the voice says, "This is My beloved Son, hear Him," and He is left alone.

Mark, too, that they were occupied with His death while talking with Him. One thing occupies the minds of Heaven and earth. He was going to be crucified where He ought to have been King. Under such circumstances there was nothing for Heaven or earth to talk about but His death. And so for us the great thing to talk about Messiah is that He died. Though He could destroy all the evil that had come in, He must die--in grace, of course. It must all end in death, because the carnal mind is not only under Satan's power, but enmity against God; therefore Heaven has to speak.

Zion, the very place He had chosen, where He had

[p. 96]

been and is to be the special place of God's favour, is to be the scene of His death. There they cast Him out of the world He came to save. The One in whom all human and divine righteousness and perfections were centred must die there. All man's nature, under the most advantageous circumstances; all man's wickedness, spite of the public, and patient, and varied ways of God in government, are brought out here.

Moses could deal with man as man, and bring water from the rock for them in answer to their murmurings; the prophet the same, "Plead with me," "Put me in remembrance, let us plead together" (Isa. 43. 26). But now all this was gone. God had cultivated the vineyard, done all that could be done for it. There was yet one thing, His Son, the best of all. Him He sent, and they cast Him out, and slew Him. And now the testimony concerning man is that he has "killed the Prince of Life," and "denied the Holy One and the Just" (Acts 3. 14, 15). We never can have peace then till we get pardon through Christ on the Cross. Then we see a true picture of Heaven; but all the intermediate dealings of testimony are entirely short of what we have in Christ on the Cross, because short of the ground of what man actually is, which fully came out only when he "killed the Prince of Life."

  

TEST OF DISCIPLESHIP.

When the Lord's Messiahship was given up we have seen He takes the place of translation from earth to Heaven. He, being rejected, was no longer to be looked upon as the Head of Israel down here,

[p. 97]

but as the heavenly Christ; for He takes His place on high when cast out by man, and this fact was to give a character to the path of those who follow Him. The two things go together--rejection on earth and a heavenly place. "If any man will come after Me, let him deny himself, and take up his cross daily, and follow Me" (23). The Lord shows them that this heavenly calling involves the Cross down here, as it was with Christ Himself. The peculiar place given Him in Heaven was, in God's counsels, dependent on the Cross which He bore as the Man. "He humbled Himself and became obedient unto death; wherefore God hath highly exalted Him." It was through the Cross that He went there; and if we are to have a place in Heaven we must have it too. The Cross was for the destruction of sin and for the destruction of self in which sin dwells. We have the same place, therefore He says, "Let these sayings sink deep into your ears, for the Son of Man shall be delivered into the hands of men" (44). We want the heavenly calling to give power to take up the Cross; and it is at the same time in proportion as we are dying to things down here that the heavenly things are realised. When the blood was taken within the veil, the sacrifice was taken without the gate. So we are to go "without the camp, bearing His reproach" (Heb. 13. 13); and if we apprehend the value of the blood, and go within the veil, we get to the place of being where the burning outside the camp was. For while we are in spirit where His Blood has been carried in, our bodies are where His body was given the place of the "burned" "outside the camp." Judaism only put men

[p. 98]

between the two; for they did not go in within the veil, His Blood not having been shed, and they never went without the camp (18-22). He is going to take another place, and they are to follow Him in it; and then, in order to strengthen them for it, He shows them what the heavenly place was.

  

THE KINGDOM OF GLORY.

28.--"He took Peter, and James, and John, and went up into a mountain to pray." The heavenly part of the kingdom is here represented by Christ, Moses, and Elias; the earthly part by the disciples (and there is one part in which the Church on earth is alluded to as down here). Peter speaks of this scene as the power and coming of the Lord Jesus Christ. Christ Himself, in the position of the dependent Man (praying), takes them up into a mountain. "Peter and they that were with him were heavy with sleep." Asleep in the presence of the glory, just as in Gethsemane, showing what human nature is. There is no power in it, in suffering or glory, to fix the attention on Christ and His interests.

Moses and Elias were in the same glory (30-32), and we are made the associates of Christ in the same glory, the glory of the kingdom in its broad character, not, of course, the essential glory. "As we have borne the image of the earthy, we shall also bear the image of the heavenly" (1 Cor. 15. 49), even of God's Son in glory. "We know that when He shall appear we shall be like Him in glory" (1 John 3. 2). The portion is not to be under Christ, but with Christ. "We shall appear with Him in glory," with Him in

[p. 99]

the same glory. We look for the Lord from Heaven, "who shall change our vile body that it may be fashioned" (Phil. 3. 21). We shall be with Him and like Him, and this we shall all alike share, though there will be different degrees of glory for one and another, e.g., Paul's measure will not be mine. What we speak of now is all the same glory, and we are predestinated "to be conformed to the image of His Son" (Rom. 8. 29). "The glory Thou hast given Me I have given them" (John 17.22) . The next thing that we see is the perfect familiarity in this glory. They are talking with Him, not presenting a petition, not at His feet, though this is our blessed place, too; but this part of the scene represents communion, familiarity of intercourse, the same as that of the disciples on earth, though better of course. On the holy mount they had a higher understanding about it, but it was the same subject occupied them. This shows us the kind of intercourse we have with Jesus now, for we belong to the heavenly part of the kingdom.

A third point to mark is the subject they talked of. This is quite a new thing, for He ought to have been a King. But man was a sinner, and there was the determinate counsel of God to be fulfilled--redemption. Jerusalem was the place of royalty, and His decease was to be accomplished there, where He ought to have been acknowledged King. There was full intimacy on the theme which occupied His heart, for they talked on this, His decease. Then He told His disciples afterwards the consequences of it to them. They must deny themselves. "Let these sayings sink down into 

[p. 100]

your ears." The great subject on God's heart should be that for us. Another thing is, it is the glory which enables us to talk on this subject. We cannot talk of it until we have peace with God through the knowledge of forgiven sin. When a man has not this he has to come in his need and get it; but when he is in it he can contemplate and enjoy it. Besides this, God saw all that was passing in Christ's soul as to obedience unto death. We shall never cease having interest in this subject, when with the Father in the glory it will be the absorbing theme. He said Himself, "Therefore doth My Father love Me, because I lay down My life" (John 10. 17). How much more shall we not love Him for the same cause? Think what it must have been to be occupied with Christ about His decease. What His knowledge was of what He was going to do. He knew what man was, what the counsel of God was. He came to "reconcile all things to Himself" (Col. 1. 20). It was so effectually done that the eye of God could only see the effect of that Blood in what was washed away. The rejected Christ a Saviour, and this the subject of intercourse with Christ Himself! "They speak of His decease."

  

THE VOICE FROM HEAVEN.

Peter says, "Master, it is good for us to be here." Then immediately there was a voice from the cloud: "This is My beloved Son, hear Him." The effect on Peter's mind is a wish to put Moses and Elias on a level with Christ. We have spoken of this, viewing it dispensationally, law and prophecy mixed with Him; but there is another thing to be noticed in it,

[p. 101]

viz., that which characterised the Son was peculiar. Nothing could be put on a level with Him. There necessarily comes out, therefore, the Father's testimony to the Son: "This is My beloved Son." When a saint knows Jesus, though he also knows he will be like Him hereafter, and that all the saints will be like Him, too, yet Christ has the supremacy in His heart. He is single and alone in blessedness, having supremacy in the heart, as well as being the object of faith. I delight in the saints, but Christ is the alone object of faith. Then I get into this fellow-ship with the Father. I have the Father's thoughts about the Son, as well as the Son's thoughts about the work. I have fellowship with the Father and the Son. We cannot have communion with the Father about redemption work because He had not been made a man. Notice, the Father does not say: This is the Son whom you ought to adore and admire, but He tells us His own thoughts about Him: "This is My beloved Son." Wherefore "beloved?" "Therefore doth My Father love Me, because I lay down My life" (John 10. 17), thus I know that I have one thought with the Father, in delighting in the Son and in His death. The Father communicates His own thoughts about the Son, and by the power of the Holy Ghost they are put into my heart, and I have fellowship; and as a consequence I know that He that hath everlasting life shall never come into judgment.

34.--Mark, further, how they came into the excellent glory. There came a cloud and overshadowed them. The cloud is the Shechinah, the dwelling place of God, which the people had to guide them through the wilderness, and they were to stay or move

[p. 102]

according to it. It was the divine presence, and "they feared as they entered into the cloud." They were not protected by the cloud, as Israel were, and as they will be by and by. "Upon all the glory shall be a defence" (Isa. 4. 5), but here they enter into the cloud. The fact was, coming into the cloud was coming into the presence of the Father, now a dwelling place for us. It was thence the Father's voice was heard: "This is My beloved Son." Thence they were told who this Son was. He had been with them as one of them. He was the Father's beloved Son, in a place worthy of adoration, but the companion of their hearts. He brought them to the Father, the only place into which redemption brings us (as to our relationship). Until a man knows redemption, and is brought into His presence, he can never know the Father's love; but when there he can never know the end of it. It is the kind of love the prodigal never knew till he was in his father's arms. He had doubts and fears as he went on, and thoughts about the hired servants, but none when he was in his father's house. It is known only by the teaching of the Holy Ghost in us--in the cloud--God in us. It is in the presence of the glory, realised by faith now, we know the power of redemption; and by its brightness and its truth it blots out all other relationship.

  

THE POWERLESS DISCIPLES.

Notice who are learning this glory. Saints walking on the earth--Peter, James, and John; and so with us. The truths written in this book are not for us to know in Heaven. Is the Father's love not

[p. 103]

to be known till we are in Heaven? Is redemption only to be known there? Was God less intimate with those on earth than with those in Heaven? Not at all. It was to Peter, James, and John this was communicated, not to Moses and Elias. The Father's voice was to men on earth. We learn the rejection of men here and the grace which has brought us to share in the glory. In what follows we find the Lord coming down into the crowd of this world, not remaining on the mount. We may listen and enjoy, but we have to come down and pass through this world.

37-42.--The Lord comes down and meets three things: (1) A throng of men, (2) Satan's power, and (3) the disciples' unbelief. There was no seclusion here for Him, but He comes to a crowd. What a picture of distress this is! The son possessed with a devil (38), and the father's heart racked more than the son's body. The world will weep till they are tired of weeping, and then go on with the same thing again. We have seen before how the Lord was come in the display of His power and bound the strong man. The disciples could not do it. The power of Satan remains the same unto this day. He is not literally cast out, but remains the "prince of this world," the character he has gained, not lost, by Christianity. He will be bound; his power will be overthrown as a fact, and not to faith only. The question was to be settled about Satan's right, and what did the Lord say of him?

"Now is the judgment of this world: now is the prince of this world cast out" (John 12. 31). His title is "cast out," but Christ has not yet

[p. 104]

exerted this power. Therefore in the epistles we find him spoken of as still ruling in this world. In Ephesians he is called the "prince of the power of the air," "the spirit that now worketh." Then we hear of the "rulers of the darkness of this world." When "the powers of the world to come" are in their full display Satan will be cast out entirely, but these instances and more show he was here then as he is still. "How long shall I be with you" (41). It was not because Satan was here that Christ said this, because the disciples could not use the power He had brought in, and that closed the dispensation. So it will be in this. The power and goodness of God brought Christ into the world, but the incapacity of man to believe so as to use that power will close it. So we read in Romans 11: "Towards thee (the professing body now) goodness, if thou continue in His goodness; otherwise thou also shalt be cut off." But until His grace ceases there is refuge for us to go to Him. While He was here, the moment the father of the child sought to Him, He cast out the spirit. As long as Christ's grace is at work, if there is only one saint on the earth, and everything else failed around, He would find the power of Christ ready to be exercised on his behalf. There can be no failing in meeting the need of a soul, because as there is Christ to go to there is help in Him. However dark the dispensation may be there is exactly the grace that is needed for the position. Not that God would have our eyes blinded to the darkness around, for if we do not take heed of the ruinous state conscience is not in its right place. If I am ready to say, "Why should He not stay?" when He says, "How

[p. 105]

long shall I be with you?" I am insensible to the state of things around me, and I am not awake to the response that Christ's love to the Church demands; but, on the other hand, if I am not able to look up and count on the grace of Christ to meet that state, however bad it may be, I am powerless.

  

THE MIGHTY POWER OF GOD.

43.--"They were amazed at the mighty power of God." It is very humbling to see how amazed they were about this power. They did not wonder at the power of the evil. But they ought so to have counted on His power as to have been amazed if the power were not exerted. Christ brings them back to the Cross. "Let these sayings sink down in your ears, for the Son of Man shall be delivered into the hands of men" (44). You ought to have been able to get this power; but you must now know not only the power of Christ, but the Cross of the rejected One. "Rejoice not that the spirits are subject unto you, but rather rejoice because your names are written in Heaven" (Luke 10. 20). We have more to be rejoiced at in this than if a miracle were to be performed to-morrow. It is more blessed to know the Cross. It was as though He had said: "I had rather you should come now to own the rejected One than be looking for this power even." Beloved friends, you are not thinking of what God is doing at this present time if you do not see that now it is not power on the earth but rejection.

46.--"There arose a reasoning among them which should be the greatest." What a tale this tells! What a selfishness runs through and through!

[p. 106]

[paragraph continues] Even at the Lord's Supper it was the same thing. In Luke we find it, where there is so much of what man is brought out.

We see, then, from what we have been tracing, that we need to come down from the hill; not to be without Jesus, but to learn what man is.

It is not necessary to come down from the mount, as some people say, lest we should be puffed up there, for we shall never be puffed up while on the mount. Like Peter, we may be afraid, but we are never puffed up in the presence of God. It is when we quit it that we are in danger.

Paul was not exalted above measure when in the third Heaven, but after he came down he needed the thorn in the flesh to prevent it.

Besides, there is an historical necessity for us to get through this world. But Jesus was as much with His disciples when they came down as while they were on the mount, and that is our comfort. Do not let us suppose we have lost Christ. We have to serve Him, walk with Him, learn from Him, and mark His patient grace towards us in and through all circumstances. The Lord give us to know while passing through this world what a Christ we have, taking our hearts clean out of the defiling circumstances around, so that, whether we get a taste of the glory, or are passing through the crowd of this world, He may be everything to us, as He is everything for us.

  

THE DISCIPLES' PLACE ON EARTH.

The Lord is now showing His disciples the place they are to take upon earth. They are not to be in a position connected with Him as Messiah in earthly

[p. 107]

glory, heavenly glory they could have till the end. In the meantime they have to take their place with Him in rejection, and thus put them to the test, for they were to give up things right enough in themselves, to hate father, mother, wife, etc., all which earthly relationships had a claim upon them, and especially so upon the Jew. "Honour thy father and mother." But all these relationships would not stand in association with the Cross. Everything must be sacrificed, everything that linked man with the earth must be snapped asunder to faith where Christ was rejected. The character of the world was fully manifested in His rejection; its deeds were evil, and it rejected the light. The incarnation, which should have been the link to man's blessing, is rejected. He accomplishes redemption by His rejection on earth, and He has a place in Heaven. This alters the character of everything. It brings in the judging of self. There never would have been this if Christ had been crowned on earth. He was "delivered into the hands of men." He whose very Name carried power and authority is to be delivered up. If Christ had had His place on earth the heart of man would never have been put to the test. Why? Because if men had seen all the dignity and glory displayed on earth which was His right it would have gratified their flesh with its greatness. But flesh cannot inherit Heaven, and what place has it on the Cross? There they go together so blessedly, the Cross and Heaven, and for the flesh there is no place in either. There was a terrible breach between man and God, and the One who would have healed it they crucified . Then every carnal thought that was in accordance

[p. 108]

with such an act must be judged. The disciples were disputing who should be the greatest, not greatest in the world, but the greatest in the glory. It is self after all. They have not to tell Him much, but their thoughts are judged. When in the light everything is judged. Jacob had the word from God to go to Bethel (Gen. 35), and he immediately says to his household, "Put away the strange gods that are among you." And why so? Everything is detected when getting into the presence of God. Jacob could get the blessing before he went to Bethel; but when he goes into God's presence the idols are judged. When he has got rid of the idols it is "El-bethel," the God of Bethel.

  

THE LESSON ON THE CHILD.

47, 48.--The disciples were reasoning which should be the greatest, and when He detected their thoughts, He "took a child and set him by Him." This shows us our place; we ought to seek the lowest place. We never can have it, because Christ has taken it. He went down under sin, wrath, death. He took the lowest place, because the Servant of all. This is the truly happy place for us, but how it judges self. This is what the Cross does. Not only are the idols judged, but self is judged. It is a blessed thing to have done with self. When there is room for God we can be full of joy and happiness. We are not humble, even when we are occupied with our own nothingness, or how bad we are, but we are humble when we do not think of ourselves at all. When we have to learn our nothingness and badness, that is being humbled. If we get away from the Lord we

[p. 109]

have to be brought back, and that is a humbling process. We want to judge the flesh in ourselves. It is quite easy to judge it in another, but it is in ourselves we miss it. Things are brought to a crisis.

49, 50.--"He that is not against us is for us." Mark how thoroughly conscious the Lord was of His utter rejection by man, so utter that He said: "He that is not against us is proved to be for us." Christ was perfect, therefore He was a perfect test to men's consciences, and as far as He is manifested in us we shall be so also. Paul could say: "If our Gospel be hid, it is hid to them that are lost" (2 Cor. 4. 3). Why could he say so? Because it went out from him as pure as it went in. John said: "We forbad him, because he followeth not with us." That tells the whole tale. They were thinking of themselves, not of Christ; of their own importance, and not His honour. If it had been His importance they would have thought how blessed it was to find the effect of His Name, and rejoiced to know how His power was being exercised by man. But, no; they were looking at themselves as well as at the Messiah. Even John was thus using Christ Himself to further his own importance. And is there not something in us of the same thing, a satisfaction at that which aggrandises self as well as Christ, instead of seeking the honour of Christ alone? The Lord takes him up and answers him on the ground of His utter rejection which was coming. "He that is not against us is for us." And mark that the very selfishness of John brings out the grace of Christ. He says "us." You do not know the lot

[p. 110]

you have with Me. If you find one who can use the power of My Name rejoice in it.

  

LAST JOURNEY TO JERUSALEM.

51.--"It cannot be that a prophet perish out of Jerusalem." I am going to get a portion in Heaven, and you are to have the same portion, but it must be through rejection here. "If any man will come after Me, let him deny himself, and take up his cross daily" (Matt. 16. 24). "When the time was come that He should be received up, He set His face steadfastly to go to Jerusalem." In Isaiah, "I set my face as a flint." He was accomplishing His Father's will here, as in all His course. Redemption must be accomplished through the Cross. He "learned obedience by the things which He suffered" (Heb. 5. 8) . It was the same obedience as at the beginning, when He was coming amongst them with "Blessed are the poor" (Matt. 5. 3); more painful, and, of course, He felt the difference, but still He goes in the same blessed spirit and earnestness. Are there not twelve hours in the day? If any man walk in the day he stumbleth not. He had found it His meat to do the will of Him that sent Him. There was joy to Him in this; but in the cup of wrath which He was going to drink there was no joy. He had met with scorn here, smiting there, rejection all through, but nothing like this cup, and there-fore He cried, "If it be possible, let this cup pass from Me" (Matt. 26. 39). Christ proved His perfectness, for He felt what it was to be "made sin." His holy nature shrunk from it, yet there was the same quiet, steady, patient obedience, for

[p. 111]

[paragraph continues] "He steadfastly set His face to go to Jerusalem," as all through. He knows His Father's will, and He does it. He sets His face there where His Father's will is to be done, not looking to this side or to that, but there--Jerusalem.

We, according to the measure we have of the single eye, shall be following in the same course, going to the Cross steadily with one purpose, and in proportion as we do so will those who do not so set their face oppose us. But the Lord says, "If any man serve Me, let him follow Me" (John 12. 26) . Service is not doing a great deal, but following the Master, and the world and half-hearted Christians do not like that. There is plenty of doing in the world, but "if any man serve Me, let him follow Me." Paul wanted to serve every way, but we find the Spirit forbidding him to go into Bithynia or Troas, and yet two years afterwards we read that "all Asia heard the Word" (Acts 19. 10). God's work was to be done, but it was to be in His time and of His ordering. His servant had only to follow in obedience. It was the same with Moses. Nature would say of him: "Why not stay in Pharaoh's court that the people there may be converted in-stead of leaving it?" Flesh cannot understand what faith leads to. Then after he goes out in all the earnestness of his spirit natural energy comes in, but still there is no deliverance. Moses has to go and keep sheep for forty years, to be broken down and made nothing of, and what were Israel to do all that time? To wait. Then when he comes back to serve them, how is it done? There is the flesh appearing in another way. "Lord, I am not eloquent" (Exod. 4. 10).

[p. 112]

[paragraph continues] Then Aaron is sent back with him, and the work is done in the power of God.

52. "They went and entered into a village of the Samaritans." We see the very reason they did not receive Him was because His face was set towards Jerusalem. His very obedience, singleness of eye, going to do God's will without honour, or attractiveness, or repute, going to Jerusalem is the very reason they would have nothing to do with Him (54). See the religious opposition of the disciples to them. The Samaritans would not submit to God's way. Christ did. That is the difference, and the disciples want to command fire to come out of Heaven as Elias did, and at the very place where Elias worked the miracle. In fleshly reasoning they think Christ was as worthy as Elias to call down fire. This is a more subtle kind of self than the other. It seemed like direct zeal for Christ, but they did not understand the zeal of Christ. He was not come for judgment, not to destroy men's lives, but to suffer Himself for them. If they had known God's thoughts they would have submitted quietly. Peter again understood not the Lord's mind when he drew his sword and smote the servant of the high priest. All the miracles of Elias were characterised by the spirit of judgment, not like Elisha, who had his commission from Heaven. Elijah stood in the place of judgment and righteousness, like John the Baptist, who came in the spirit and power of Elias, saying, "Every tree that bringeth not forth fruit shall be hewn down (Matt. 3. 10), and "the axe is laid to the root of the trees." Elisha had life-giving power, on the contrary, and was a type of

[p. 113]

grace. Elijah passed through Jordan (death in type), while Elisha starts from the other side of Jordan in resurrection.

56.--"They went to another village." It is not pleasant to be trodden upon in this world, but Christ was. To do well, and suffer for it, and take it patiently, is what we have; and is it to end there? Yes, and that is "acceptable with God." Christ came to suffer, to bear anything for the sake of others, and He would not have been doing that if He had called down fire from Heaven upon the Samaritans. We have to follow Christ in carrying the testimony of God's love into the world in all our walk through it. The world needs it. We must not be seeking for ourselves, but having Christ the object. At the end of the chapter he goes on to show how the links with this world are to be broken.

  

SOME DISCIPLES PUT TO THE TEST.

57, 58.--One says, "Lord, I will follow Thee whithersoever Thou goest," but Christ puts him to the test. You cannot go if you do not take up your lot with One who had not where to lay His head; for you may sooner go to the birds of the air for a nest, or to the foxes for a hole, than to the Son of Man for a home in this world. They were not now to come to Him as the One who had the promises, but to One whose portion was utter and entire rejection. Following Him could not be accompanied with ease and comfort here. He was to be delivered into the hands of men. At His birth we see the same things. Every one found room in the inn save He, but any who

[p. 114]

wanted to find Him whom angels celebrate must go to the manger.

59.--He says to one, "Follow Me." The first one wanted something with Christ; but here where He says "Follow Me," then immediately a difficulty is started; and it is when He calls a man that difficulties are felt. There was no sense of the difficulties in the one who said "Lord, I will follow Thee" without His call. But this man who is called says "Let me first go and bury my father." He is going presently, but there is a link felt. Jesus says, "Let the dead bury their dead;" you must leave them to follow Me. You may be ready to say the things of the earth have no power over you; but just try what it is to have them, and you will learn the extent of their power. A man may go to the length of his cord, but when he gets to the end he is checked. A father had the first claim in nature, and especially to a Jew, but Christ says: "I am calling you out in the power of life; I am putting in My claim for the life I give you, and it breaks every bond here." It is a question of life in the midst of death. This word "first" shows something put before Christ, as though the man said: "There is something I put before your calling." Death had come in, and this very plea told Christ they were all under death. It was quite a right thing for a man to bury his father; but if life has come in, and the question is one of redemption, to be lost or saved, you must give yourself up to it. In the divine light which is in the Cross He saw all dead, and therefore He said, "Let the dead bury their dead," The one thing to be done now is to

[p. 115]

follow Christ. The question is: Death in the world, or life in Christ? Where are the affections?

  

THE TEST OF AFFECTION.

61.--"Another also said, Lord, I will follow Thee; but let me first go bid them farewell, which are at home at my house." In the previous case it was just this: When my first affections are settled, then will I come and follow Thee. There is no good in that, the Lord says "Let the dead bury their dead." But this case shows that those at home were not left in heart. He felt he had to break with them, and yet his heart lingered. "No man looking back is fit for the kingdom of God" (Luke 9. 62). "Remember Lot's wife" (Luke 17. 32). "A double-minded man is unstable in all his ways" (James 1. 3) . If Christ be not first and last He will always be last, for faith is not in exercise. The question is whether we are walking as seeing what the Cross tells us. The Cross lifts the veil, showing the skeleton of this world, and when I see this sentence on all that is in the world, self as well as what is outside, and our links of affection with it, I learn that all is to be given up; but there is Christ Himself and the love there is in Him to meet it. It will and must judge self; and it brings out the will, too, for there is a great deal of will in all this shunning of the Cross. People may speak of the claims of affection, but it is not really and only family affection, but the end which connects with self is felt. Natural affection there should be--indeed it is one of the signs of the last evil days to be without it--but if you have power to judge yourselves you will find that many an excuse

[p. 116]

you make has this secret at the end. So in affliction, bereavement, etc. It is not only the affection that is touched, but the will. There is sweetness in the sorrow so long as we realise Christ in it, and affection only is sorrowing. But if the will is touched there is rebellion, resistance, struggling, and all this the Lord must judge, for a mass of flesh and self can never follow Christ. What a wonderful detail all this is! It is God going through our hearts, entering into every corner and crevice. Why? Because of the constant, undeviating steadfastness of His love; and as a father loves his child when it is naughty as well as when it is good, so our God takes pains, as it were, with us all even when so bad.

The effect of all is not only to make us practically righteous, but happy--"imitators of God as dear children" (Eph. 5. 1). It is well, on the one hand, for us to judge ourselves and see what there is to detect in us, and, on the other, to see the fulness of His grace in Christ. May the Lord give us to feel more and more that "the friendship of the world is enmity with God" (James 4. 4), and that the energy of the flesh cannot accomplish the work of God, so that we may learn to work from God, for God, and with God.

     
The Man of Sorrows, by John Nelson Darby, [n.d. (prior to 1882)], at sacred-texts.com

  

CHAPTER 10.

The Lord pursues the subject we have been looking at in the preceding chapter, connected with the change that has taken place in His own position amongst them. It is no longer the Messiah on earth, but the heavenly Christ they are to look to. There is another thing brought out here in the amazing importance

[p. 117]

attached to that moment, the last testimony being applied to them, and those who heard it would be subject to greater judgment than Tyre and Sidon. Any among them would have repented with the truth you have, but they had it not. The blessing now was the Lord Himself being there; and He was so glorious and excellent that to hear Him was the prime source of blessing. All hung upon their reception or rejection of Him.

  

THE SEVENTY SENT OUT.

In the sending out of the seventy we see the same patient grace at work as when He sent out the twelve. If they were not received they were to shake off the dust from their feet. God's love never stops, whatever the wickedness of man, until His work is done. His grace never fails. Christ looks at the power of grace in God more than at the wickedness of men, and He went patiently on, and said, "The harvest is great," though knowing what there was all around Him. The Lord was not like Elijah, who needed to be reminded of the seven thousand who, as God knew, had not bowed the knee to the image of Baal. He came in by the door, and went through everything with God. Nothing stopped Him from seeking out His sheep scattered on the dark mountains. He laid down His life to save His sheep, and not one should be lost. To gather them He went on in the power of grace. Paul was of this spirit when he says, "I endure all things for the elect's sake" (2 Tim. 2. 10).

Did Christ suffer nothing in it? Look at Him, weary with His journey, sitting at the well, and a

[p. 118]

poor, wretched, vile sinner coming to meet Him, to whom He gives the water of life. There He finds meat to eat that they know not of, and He says, "The fields are white unto harvest" (John 4. 35). He was as fresh and happy in His testimony while sitting at the well with this poor woman as if all Jerusalem had received Him, because the fountain was within. In Him was "a well of water springing up." So with us. If we are going on with Him we shall be "troubled on every side, yet not distressed; perplexed, but not in despair; cast down, but not destroyed" (2 Cor. 4. 8, 9) . The testimony is in the earthen vessel, it is true, but the fountain is within, and they were to be perfectly dependent on God, and independent of everything else. They were to expect to meet enemies, wolves.

3.--"Go your ways; behold, I send you forth as Iambs among wolves." You cannot turn a lamb into a wolf to defend itself. Peter was for taking a sword to smite off the servant's right ear, but the Lord forbids him, and says, "All they that take the sword shall perish with the sword" (Matt. 26. 52). It is difficult to receive everything and do nothing, to be a lamb among wolves, like Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego in prospect of the fiery furnace, saying, "We are not careful, O king, to answer thee in this matter. If it be so, our God whom we serve is able to deliver."

4.--"Carry neither purse, nor scrip, nor shoes, and salute no man by the way." Be not uncourteous, but waste not time in useless ceremonies. When in God's service, and among God's enemies, God must be everything. It needs concentration of

[p. 119]

heart in Him, as knowing that the world has rejected your Master, and will reject you if you are faithful to Him. Faith knows this and goes on, not with carnal prudence and worldly wisdom, but as knowing what to do and going on to do it. Faith always carries to the house peace; it produces enmity--two against three, and three against two--because some will receive it and some not; but the thing brought is always peace.

7-9.--"The kingdom of God is come nigh unto you." Not merely such and such a thing is God's will, but whatever you do, whether you receive or reject it, "the kingdom of God is come nigh unto you." The condition of the world now is that it has rejected it. The Son of God, the King, has come into the world, put it to the test, and it says: "We will not have Him." This fact has not lost its solemnity now, for we are walking through the world that has rejected Christ; we bring the testimony of peace to it--peace that has been made, for the sacrifice has been offered. It is also true that the testimony has been rejected.

11.--"Notwithstanding, be ye sure of this, that the kingdom of God is come nigh unto you." Faith carries things in its own sphere, needing nothing but God's Word. The sight of the eyes is constantly tending to dim the estimate which faith forms; and if faith is not nourished by the Word it sinks down and fades away. If I am not feeding on the Word faith is not fed, for it cannot be fed by sight of things then around. When the Lord spoke to Jerusalem, saying, "Their house should be left unto them desolate, and there should not be one stone

[p. 120]

left upon another," they could not actually see the stones then falling, but it was Christ's Word for them to believe. Natural reasoning is fed by what we see, but faith is fed by what God has revealed to the soul.

15.--"Thou, Capernaum, . . . shalt be thrust down to Hell"--in God's eye, not man's. In man's eye it might be exalted to Heaven. So with this world. And what does that prove? That it may last as long as God permits, but that His Word will be fulfilled. "The earth and the works that are therein shall be burned up" (2 Peter 3. 10). There is nothing stable here. When God comes in, where will it all be? though there are scoffers who say, "Where is the promise of His coming? "

  

NAMES WRITTEN IN HEAVEN.

16.--"He that heareth you, heareth Me." That is where faith has its resource. In hearing the Word the disciples spoke: "I am hearing Christ Himself." That is where faith walks. I know it must be true, for Christ has said it. Everything may go wrong, the world, Jews, the Church, but God's Word never. And it has been given. It never changes, for it has been given by inspiration of God, and is profitable for doctrine. The Church, as ground of confidence in testimony, is gone, though we know it is founded upon a rock; and, as to its security, it can never be destroyed, but God's Word will not fail. Whatever we see tends to weaken and deface faith puts to the test what the affections of the soul are, because it is not to be what I like, but what God says.

17-20.--"Rather rejoice because your names are written in Heaven." This shows the change of

[p. 121]

everything. Devils may be subject to you, but the Lord says: "That is not the portion for you to rejoice in; I am now showing My power in another way." This word, "I beheld Satan as lightning fall from Heaven," alludes to the time when Satan, the "accuser of the brethren," will be cast down. Nov he is in Heaven, not in God's presence, in light inaccessible, but before the throne of judgment--two different things. "Hast thou considered My servant Job?" (Job 1. 8). Proving that when others came before the throne Satan came also. Contrast verses 19 and 20. The one speaks of what can be seen, the other what could be known only to faith. The unseen thoughts of your heart are much more important than what can be seen. The invisible is always more important than the visible.

In this world it is not merely that man is a sinner, but there is the introduction into it of the power of evil. Satan has got hold of this world through man's sin. So in the case of the poor woman it is said, "Whom Satan hath bound these eighteen years" (Luke 13. 16). But when the Church has been caught up Satan will be cast down. There was war in Heaven; but when he is on earth he will for three and a half years be raising up the Man of the earth against the Lord from Heaven. When He comes Satan's power will be put away. He is not put into the "lake of fire" until the close of the thousand years, but into "the bottomless pit." That is just what the devils asked to be saved from when cast out of the man whose name was Legion (8. 30); "deep," meaning "bottomless pit." The Lord did not cast them down to it, because the time was not then come.

[p. 122]

This ability to cast out devils was a great thing. The communicating of the power by the Lord was a power above the immediate working of the miracles themselves. It required divine power, and none but that could give the power to others. In the Millennium there will not be the power of good and evil together; the latter will be cast out. "Shall the throne of iniquity have fellowship with Thee?" (Psa. 94. 20). The pit shall be digged for the wicked. Satan must be cast out. And when Christ was upon earth He was presenting Himself in the power of God to bind the strong man and spoil his goods. It was a wonderful thing to meet a man under the power of Satan and to cast Satan out. It was an earnest of the "powers of the world to come," the "world to come" referring not to Heaven but to this earth being renewed. He was then putting forth the same power that He will exercise fully in the coming kingdom.

19.--"Behold, I give unto you power to tread on serpents." And it was at the point when He was rejected that He says this. He knew what was really going on, and though He said peace, they did not say peace to Him. "I give you power" over all the power of the enemy. "Notwithstanding, in this rejoice not that the spirits are subject unto you; but rather rejoice because your names are written in Heaven." That is the Church's place. When Christ was manifested on earth it was a blessed thing; but it is better to be His companion in Heaven, as we shall be when He comes to take us. Far better to be with Himself, and as Himself, in the Father's house. We have nothing to do with earth,

[p. 123]

our names are not written in the earth; kings in it, indeed, but our portion is not in it. "He has blessed us with all spiritual blessings in heavenly places" (Eph. 1. 3). We shall have the inheritance with Him, but it is below us; our hope is to be with Himself above it. The inheritance is the consequence of having this place with Him (Eph. 1). We are children of the Father, to be "holy and with-out blame before Him in love." Now we have our portion according to the riches of His grace, of poor sinners whom He has saved, and we shall be to the glory of His grace in the manifestation of it. The inheritance comes in afterwards. "Rather rejoice because your names are written in Heaven." As though He would say to them: "Do not let your minds be filled with things down here, but think of what you have in Me and with Me." We find two things brought before us in God's ways: first the government of this world--that which is still prophetic, connected with the kingdom; and then the Church up in Heaven. When the inheritance is spoken of it is always future, but when our place is spoken of it is always up in Heaven. The Lord saw that the present setting up of the kingdom would all fail, and He was bringing in a better thing than any kingdom, and He rejoiced in that, for when He gives joy to another He cannot help having it also Himself. When the thief on the cross asked Him to remember him in His kingdom, He said, "This day shalt thou be with Me" (Luke 23. 43). He was gratifying the thief and also Himself. So with these disciples. He would have them not be rejoicing in the good down here, for it is not good enough. Not only do

[p. 124]

not be troubled with the bad, but rejoice not in the best thing in this world.

  

DISPENSATIONAL CHANGE.

21.--'In that hour Jesus rejoiced in Spirit; .. . even so, Father, for so it seemed good in Thy sight." He felt the circumstances deeply, but His soul was up to the source, and He would say: "It is quite right that these proud and haughty ones should see they are nothing, and that these poor despised lambs should get the glory." "Even so, Father." He must bow to the evil, because the time to judge it was not yet come. Evil is going on; people are saying: "Where is the God of the earth?" We have to bear it; the Lord did. We must get our thoughts away from the expectation of having things better down here. The soul that enters into God's thoughts and purposes bows to His will. "Even so, Father."

Then He, as it were, retires into the glory of His own Person. The Son has to reveal the Father. The world rejects Him, and He submits to the rejection of the kingdom, and brings out instead of it the blessedness of the heavenly thing, and now speaks of Himself as the Son, and glories in that. The present result of His coming is the Son revealing the Father, and this is even better than the kingdom. The testimony is brighter as to what God is about when I take things quietly and submit, not desiring to be a wolf among the wolves. It is exceedingly difficult for one's heart to bow, and say, "I will be nothing but a lamb;" but that is our place, for the Lord says, "Vengeance is Mine;'' "rather give place unto wrath" (Rom. 12); and neither "give

[p. 125]

place to the devil" (Eph. 4). But if you do not give place to wrath you will give place to the devil. Shall we lose anything by being quiet and taking things patiently? No. "All power," He says, "is given unto Me in Heaven and on earth." We must bow to what is without, and be satisfied with what is written. If not, we shall be only wearying ourselves in the greatness of our way. May we be satisfied to have our "names written in Heaven."

23, 24.--"He said to them privately." These things could only be enjoyed by faith. He would have them in the consciousness of present blessing.

  

THE RICH YOUNG RULER.

25.--Now that the Lord has shown out the dispensational change, He shows the moral change. A lawyer comes and asks how he is to get eternal life. The Lord brings him to the law--keep the law and you shall live. But he is stopped directly with the simplicity of this, "Thou shalt love thy neighbour as thyself." He does not love his neighbour as himself! He asks, "Who is my neighbour?" "This do, and thou shalt live." Who does love his neighbour as himself? The good Samaritan is the one who does not ask who the neighbour is, but arts in grace, without asking what title the other had. Christ has the title of doing good to him that is in need and misery. This is grace that gives without a title.

See how thoughtful this grace and love is. He went to him, did not send some one else, but went, bound up his wounds, poured in oil and wine, set him on his own beast, brought him to an inn, took care

[p. 126]

of him, gave him in charge to the host, and said, "When I come again I will repay thee." How beautiful are all the details of the actings of this love which flows from what is within, and acts according to what is working there, and not according to the claims upon it!

  

MARY'S GOOD PART.

38-42.--In the closing part we see the one great thing was to hear Jesus' Word. Hence the approval given to Mary above Martha, who in a certain sense was doing a very good work. She received Him into her house, and served Him; but there is something better than this: "Mary hath chosen that good part which shall never be taken away from her." He wanted His words to enter and to have power in the heart. The only thing that endures for ever is "the Word of the Lord." The wisdom of this world is against it, human reasoning is against it, but it is the only thing worth waiting upon diligently; and if Christians reason about the things of God instead of appealing to the Word they are sure to be going down. We want to have the Word in our hearts, to sit at Christ's feet that we may understand and treasure it up. To hear Jesus is the "one thing" needful. No attention, even to Himself in the flesh, though it were from one who loved Him and whom He loved could replace this. "The many things" end only in disappointment and death instead of leading into life eternal, as did the words of Jesus, issuing from a broken heart that it might let forth the stream of life. The hearing ear for His Word delighted Him. He was bringing in truth to people's souls. "Grace

[p. 127]

and truth came by Jesus Christ" (John 1. 17). "Of His own will begat He us with the Word of truth" (James 1. 18)."Now are ye clean through the Word which I have spoken to you" (John 15. 3). Truth sets everything to rights; it sets God and man in their place, or it is not truth. Sin, and righteousness, and love, these never came out fully by the law, but "grace and truth came by Jesus Christ." Every-thing was set morally in perfect light by Him, but men saw it not because they knew Him not. The Word now is the instrument of revealing truth. The law was perfect because it was of God, but it did not tell what man was, much less what God was. It told what man ought to be. Christ comes in as the light, and says: "You are all dead, but I can give you life." His coming into the world showed out everything exactly as it was. As the living Word He came and revealed to those who could see God, not at first in redemption, but in testimony. What value to Him was it that Martha cumbered herself about serving, in comparison of a soul listening to His Word? It is the same now to a Christian. When God's Word comes with nothing else it has a right to have power over the soul. It makes its way by its own authority and its attractive grace to the heart, and where received it gives life in Christ. There is no living power in a miracle to quicken a soul, but there is living power in the Word. It is by the Word that any soul can get into Heaven. We are begotten by the Word. If the Word cannot do it it will never be done. There are three things constantly pressed in connection with the power of the Word. First, the Word spoken will all come up against them another day (John 12);

[p. 128]

second, though perilous limes come (2 Tim. 3) the Word is able to make wise unto salvation through faith which is in Christ Jesus. There is another thing also. When a soul is quickened by the Word the moral effect is to make it dependent and obedient, "sanctified to obedience." Such is the character of the new man, as the old man would be independent.

     
The Man of Sorrows, by John Nelson Darby, [n.d. (prior to 1882)], at sacred-texts.com

  

CHAPTER 11.

1.--At the beginning of this chapter we have an-other instance of our Lord praying, the expression of dependence. And there the disciples ask Him, "Lord, teach us to pray." They had not learned the simple confidence in the Father that would go up naturally to Him and tell Him all. There may not always be wisdom in asking, but there should be confidence of communion by the Holy Ghost. Even Paul had not always intelligence of God's mind, or he would not have asked to have the thorn in the flesh taken away; but he was not afraid to make his request. The disciples had not this simple-hearted confidence.

  

THE DISCIPLES' PRAYER.

2.--"Our Father." They understood not their place as children of the Father. He condescends to teach them when in this condition, and gives them this prayer. The Lord teaches them to pray for things about which His own heart was occupied. "Father, glorify Thy Name" (John 12. 28) was expressive of the grand desire of His heart.

[p. 129]

2.----"Hallowed be Thy Name." He first tells them of Him with whom they are brought into relationship. Not that they had the present power of the Holy Ghost giving them the consciousness of their relationship--that they did not get till the day of Pentecost--but He teaches them to say, "Father, hallowed be Thy Name." There we have perfection. It is the desire for Him to be glorified, though I cannot tell what it may involve me in. There will be the desire not to sin. This was the expression of the perfect desire that was in Christ Himself: "Hallowed be Thy Name."

2.--"Thy kingdom come." There will be the removing of those things that are made, that "those things which cannot be shaken may remain." Are you quite sure that you would like Him to come in this kingdom that will involve the shaking out of every-thing that may not remain? Surely that will wrench the heart from a quantity of things that are attaching you to that which does not belong to the kingdom to come. There may be the desire for these things, while at the same time the consciousness that I have not the sense of the object, but a sense of distance from it which hinders my enjoyment, though I know Him to be "the Chiefest Among Ten Thousand," and the "Altogether Lovely." There are often complaining prayers, because there is not the present enjoyment of seeing Him in the sanctuary, though the remembrance of it. We may have the hope of the Lord's coming, being glad to get to the end of this desert, because it is a desert; or we may long to get out because Canaan is at the end. If it is not the latter we shall be in danger of being tired with

[p. 130]

running, which is always wrong. We should be in the spirit of waiting pilgrims, not weary ones. We ought not to be weary; I do not say we are not, but we ought to be ever desiring His coming, because He is precious. In Revelation 22. 17 the bride says "Come," in answer to what He is, when He says, "I am the Bright and Morning Star." God does not reject the cry which comes to Him as "out of the depths," but there is a difference between the cry of distress and the cry of desire. When Christ was on earth there was an answer in Him to God's will, for He always did the things which pleased His Father. He did it as no angel ever could.

3.--Then He comes down to notice our daily need, and there is dependence, indeed, in this. "Give us day by day our daily bread."

4.--"Forgive us our sins." This chapter does not go in to what we may call proper Church privileges; the desires are perfect, but the place is not known. The Lord touches upon all the circumstances down here. Man is looking up from the earth, he is walking there, and needs his feet washed. There are trespasses to be forgiven, and the spirit of grace is wanted. There is no sin imputed to us now; it is all put away. But will that make me hard when others fail? No; my seeing that Christ has agonised on the Cross for me will give me a sense of my freedom, but not indifference about sin. Instead of hardness it will give us tenderness and softness of spirit .

4.--"Lead us not into temptation." Why should God ever lead us into temptation? it may be asked. Sometimes the Lord has need to put us through a certain process to make us learn our weakness.

[p. 131]

[paragraph continues] Look at Peter. The Lord saw he needed to be sifted, or He could have prayed for him to be saved from that fall. A soul would always desire that he may not have this sifting. Christ Himself, though it was a different thing for Him, desired to be delivered from it when bearing sin. Paul prayed for the thorn to be removed. But Paul did not get a fourth Heaven, that would have made him worse, but a "thorn in the flesh," something to make him despicable in preaching--otherwise people might have come to him and said, "Paul, you must be better than any one else, for you have been to the third Heaven"--to prevent his being puffed up, and to keep him even. It was a gracious provision for him, though it is a right thing for the soul to desire not to be led into temptation, but to be delivered from the evil.

  

THE IMPORTUNATE FRIEND.

5.--"Which of you shall have a friend?" This is another character of prayer, earnest waiting upon God. There is majesty in God's goodness, and yet He takes knowledge of all our wants, and we must wait His will and pleasure. Suppose one asks his father for anything, and he says, "You must wait five minutes," is the child to say, "No, I cannot; I must have it directly?" Meantime, while waiting, faith is exercised, and the spirit broken down in the sense of need. Look at Daniel, and see another thing. God gave him a deep sense of his identification with Himself in what he was doing, so He must make him pray three weeks before he has his request granted. This is a great privilege, for it is to have fellowship with God. In the case of this friend there is a depth

[p. 132]

of interest excited in desire for the thing, and because of his importunity he gains it. There is a certainty of God's answering in blessing though He delay.

9-13.--"Ask, Seek, Knock." This is prayer for the Holy Spirit, which they, though believers, had not then received. In one sense a man may pray for this now, when he has not the Spirit of adoption, like the disciples then. But now the Holy Ghost has been given, consequent upon the Lord's ascension to the right hand of the Father (Acts 2. 22). There could be no union with the Man Christ on earth. It is as a heavenly people that there is union with Him. Christ was looked upon alone until His work was done. "Except a corn of wheat fall into the ground and die, it abideth alone" (John 12. 24) . The Holy Ghost was the seal of Christ's work, not of John's preaching righteousness. The second time He received the Holy Ghost was for the Church. He received it Himself (Matt. 3) at His baptism, but for us when He ascended, having finished the work of our salvation. The fruits of the Spirit in us are the consequences of the grace and righteousness in Him, He being the only righteous Man. The firstfruits of the Spirit in us are love, joy, peace, then come the practical fruits toward men. The first named fruits are towards God, then patience, temperance towards men. The Holy Ghost cannot be the subject for the Church, as such, to ask for now, seeing He has thus been given. Christ received Him for us. We pray by or in the Holy Ghost, not for Him now. We should pray for more of the working of the Spirit in us, and desire to be filled with the Spirit--poor little hearts indeed, but they may be filled, It does

[p. 133]

not at all follow that we are filled with the Spirit because sealed with the Spirit. To be filled with the Spirit would keep out evil thoughts. It will not take away the evil nature, which ever remains, but thereby that will be kept down.

  

GATHERING OR SCATTERING.

14-26.--See the dreadful opposition of man's heart against Him, which brings out a very important test: "He that is not with Me is against Me, and he that gathereth not with Me scattereth." When Christ is manifested it is for or against Him that people take their stand. We have spiritual enemies to contend with, and Joshua leading the people in conflict was figurative of the Spirit leading the soul against our spiritual enemies. It is not Christians but Christ who is become God's centre. We may gather Christians together, but if it is not Christ in one's own spirit it is scattering. God knows no centre of union but the Lord Jesus Christ. It is Himself the object, and nothing but Christ can be the centre. Whatever is not gathering round that centre for Him and from Him is scattering. There may be gathering, but if not "with Me" it is scattering. We are by nature so essentially sectarian that we have need to watch against this. I cannot make Christ the centre of my efforts if He is not the centre of my thoughts. It is a great thing for a man to say: "I have no other object but Christ, no other activity in my heart but for Christ, not only that He is the chief object at bottom--every Christian has that--but there may be a quantity of middle things in our hearts between the

[p. 134]

inside and the outside." These must be judged in the soul. Besides love to Christ, there may be love of company, and we must judge all that is between Christ, the Root, and the Offspring.

  

THE MOST BLESSED.

27.--"Blessed is the womb that bare Thee." They speak of the honour of being His mother. No, we would say, that has nothing to do with it. The closest connection with the Son of Man is not equal to keeping the Word of God. Religionists make a great deal of natural affection, but though blessed in its way it is nothing to the life of God in my soul. Of course it was a blessed thing to be the mother of the Lord; yet it was but a natural relationship, though a miracle, nor could it have been a light thing to her heart. Still, it was not equal to the blessing of the Word of God bringing a soul to Himself. Oh, beloved friends, if you will only let the pure Word of God abide in your hearts you will find that it will sweep away all the cobwebs of the flesh!

29.--They are seeking a sign, another natural thing, but He says, "There shall no sign be given." Jonah is a sign. He preached, and they repented. Now My Word has come to you, and that is the test to you .

31.--"The queen of the south." The Word of God is so perfectly suited to man's heart, even the natural feelings are touched by it . The Word is sown in the heart, though it may bring forth no fruit.

  

THE LESSON OF THE LIGHT.

33-36.--"The light of the body is the eye." Light is there, and the question is about the man's

[p. 135]

eye. If a man has bad eyes the light is painful. So the Word to one who has not clear eyesight or the single eye. This is a solemn Word, but if a person was converted only yesterday, it might be true of him; he might be full of light. It applies as much to the babe in Christ as to the grown man. Where God is in the soul His light is seen. "If a man walk in the day he stumbleth not." "If thine eye be single, thy whole body shall be full of light, having no part dark." When the candle is there we see all around. It shows itself, and thus shows all around. The eye receives the light, single or evil. It is not single or double, but single or evil. If Christ is not the object, there is some evil object. If the eye be single, it is all simple, though there will be difficulties in the path, as with Paul. The light is set on a candlestick that all who come in "may see the light." The man is forced to the question: Do you see it or not? Christ has set up the light in the world. God has displayed Himself in Him, and the effect of that is to show your condition. Do you say: "Suffer me first to go and bury my father?" (Luke 9. 59). Ah! you have something first. If my body is not full of light there is something not single in my eye, something has not given way before the power of Christ, something not given up. People say I cannot see. No, of course you cannot; you have some other light. Further, what you do see now will presently be given up if you do not walk in the power of what you have. "Take heed that the light that is in thee be not darkness." Our manner of judging may be wrong, because the standard is not Christ, and then the light becomes darkness; we are guided

[p. 136]

wrong and mistaken in our path. If the eye be full of Christ, and we judge everything by that light, when I see anything that would not glorify Christ, I say that will not do for me. I may be a little vessel, but I must be wholly for Christ. May we be walking in the power of the Holy Ghost, and by the divine teaching of the Lord Jesus Christ content to follow Him, and desire no other path, having the eye upon Him, and only upon Him, so that when other objects are put before us we may be able to say, "This one thing I do." While walking through the world may we be occupied with Christ, not making it our business to judge evil, but simple concerning it.

  

THE SAVIOUR PRONOUNCES "WOES."

37-43.--"Woe unto you Pharisees." We have the sure judgment of the Lord on the various forms which the lifeless religion of those who led the people took up expressed in different ways, but His constant and unmingled judgment upon it all. The first ground of condemnation is the substitution of out-ward cleansings and services, which the flesh can render, for purity of heart and the spirit of love; where these last are external things are clean. Thus money occupies the heart where there is only a religious form, for it represents the world, and pre-eminence is another expression of the same thing.

45.--Next the doctors of the law are sentenced, and with them the imposing of burdens on others, while they spared themselves from the trouble. It might not at first appear why building the sepulchres of the prophets showed approval of those who killed them; but the truth was that the lawyers sought in

[p. 137]

this their own honour, instead of receiving the testimony of the prophets, which would have humbled them, for the moral and utter ruin of the nation. But they were adorning, as if all were right, the tombs of the righteous and good. It was the spirit of the world arrogating credit to itself for piety to the dead, not holy fear at the prophet's rebukes. But a clearer proof should be in the wisdom of God that they sympathised not with the word of the prophets, but with the works of their fathers. Prophets and apostles would be sent, and once more be slain and persecuted. The Pharisees were hypocrites, and so judged; the expositors of the law perverted their nearness to Scripture in their hatred of any real testimony to their own conscience. These could least of all bear what detected their evil. Hence in pride and fear they took to themselves all the springs of knowledge, neither entering themselves (for they must do that as learners, and needy, and lost), nor allowing those to enter who would, lest they should condemn themselves, and besides their honour and characters go for nothing. The closing verses show us the invariable conduct of false religionists. Having no answer of moral truth to the evidence of deceit and evil exhibited in their ways their effort was to perplex and to entrap. Convicted of sin, and incapable of truth, they sought to make void God's goodness in accusing even Christ of error. It was mercy towards others to be plain as to these false guides, and therefore the Lord denounced them unsparingly.

     
The Man of Sorrows, by John Nelson Darby, [n.d. (prior to 1882)], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 138]

  

CHAPTER 12.

The last section of this Gospel (chap. 10. 38; 11) showed the two great means of blessing to the soul, namely, the Word of God and prayer, the precious gift of God, and the true need of man in the presence of a rejected Messiah. It showed withal the doom of the people who refused every testimony of God. Chapter 12 presents the disciples carrying on their testimony in the midst of hypocrisy and opposition, but in the power of the Holy Ghost. The Lord addressed His disciples first of all, but fearlessly and without compromise, before a vast throng as one who acted in the spirit of what He taught. He warns them against that religious formalism which consists of what could be presented to man, and insists strongly and explicitly upon the sure bringing of all things into the light.

1-3.--But just as the breaking down of forms and the revelation of the full light of God had its highest operation and effect in His own death, so the disciples must look for the world's hostility, must be prepared for it in their own case, it might be up to death itself. If Messiah were rejected and slain, what could they look for in the same scene while Satan's power is not set aside? Hence, also, in these chapters it is a question of the soul's relationship with God. It was not the unfolding of the Church yet, but the kingdom in its Jewish application is set aside, and the consequence is that the disciples are to look for the Lord's coming again, and until then trial and violence. His return would have two aspects--one for such as are in relationship with

[p. 139]

[paragraph continues] Himself, and the other for the world, and both are taken up here. They were to beware of hypocrisy, and to remember God's necessary determination to bring everything to light. "For there is nothing covered that shall not be revealed; neither hid that shall not be known. Therefore whatsoever ye have spoken in darkness shall be heard in the light; and that which ye have spoken in the ear in closets shall be proclaimed upon the housetops."

  

OUR FATHER'S CARE.

4, 5.--Next, as to the danger of walking in the light. They were not to fear them who kill the body, but God, who could cast into Hell. Jesus perfectly feared God, and called on His friends to fear none but Him. "Yea, I say unto you, fear Him."

6.--But further, not even a sparrow is forgotten before God. "And the very hairs of your head are all numbered." Therefore they were not to fear. Our God has made it of faith to be assured that He cares much for us.

8-12.--On the other hand, they were not to trust in themselves, in their own courage, or their own wisdom, but to confess Christ. There was the result in relation with the humbled, but yet to be exalted, Son of Man. There would be a return of love or shame before the angels of God according as He should be confessed or denied before men. He had hidden His glory to effect grace. He had come among men and into the midst of evil that God might be fully glorified in His humiliation. This was the patience of God, for Christ claimed nothing. But the Holy Ghost would come asserting the glory

[p. 140]

of God, and claiming subjection to it, witnessing the grace and proving the glory in power. Hence a word spoken against the Holy Ghost would not be forgiven. Wonderful to say, this is attached to the disciples to console and strengthen them in their weakness. The Son of Man might be slighted, and yet there was forgiveness; but if He by whom they would speak was blasphemed it would be unpardonable. Further, the Holy Ghost would speak by them whatever the power, ecclesiastical or civil, that arraigned them.

Such were the principles, the-warnings, the motives, and the encouragements the Lord attached to a mission which, rejected by and outside Judaism, was the introduction of light by grace into a world of sin and darkness.

13, 14.--Thereupon the Lord, by positively refusing to adjudge in Israel, shows that Jewish blessing had lost its place. It was no longer a question of dividing the inheritance, but of the soul in its position before God. Only He warns against the folly of loving the things which gave occasion to such disputes. Righteousness on earth is not looked for now. Jesus declines the place of regulating it, and proceeds to show the inward principle of the kingdom in contrast with the world. Hence He told the multitude to beware of covetousness, for a man's life is not in what he possesses, adding a most solemn parable as to the doom of the rich man, who was not rich toward God. Whatever he might say to his soul, God required it that night. "So is he that layeth up treasure for himself" (16-26).

22-31.--"Take no thought for your life." If it be thus with the world, do you who have a

[p. 141]

[paragraph continues] Father, even the Father, not be anxious for your soul or body. Food and clothing were not just objects for disciples' care, but rather to "put on the Lord Jesus Christ." Their thoughts should be in another channel, rising above a mere natural view of the life and the body. But He proceeds to assign positive grounds operative upon them as believers. Needful things were subsidiary which God provided, for they were His and under His ordering. He cared for much less than they were. The fowls of Heaven and the grass of the field read them no uninstructive lesson, as interpreted of Christ. And if there was on the one side God's provident care for the least of His creatures; on the other side let them bear in mind the utter weakness of their anxieties. Whatever might be natural to those who knew not God, they were not to be seeking what to eat or drink. Their Father knew they wanted such things. Let them seek the kingdom of God, and all the rest should be added.

  

THE LITTLE FLOCK.

32-34.--The Lord now takes higher ground for them. "Fear not, little flock, for it is your Father's good pleasure to give you the kingdom." Therefore were they rather to get rid of what they had as men, and to provide things such as the Father gives to the heirs of the kingdom. They were to act the part of kings called to and having a higher inheritance. The heart follows the treasure. Let them provide a treasure in the Heavens and their heart will be there also. The great saint is not the value of what they gave meritoriously, but the effect

[p. 142]

internally suitable to their position and their calling. God is not ashamed to be called their God.

35-37.--Further, they were to wait for their Lord. This was especially to form their character, and to be continually and outwardly expressed, the habitual expectancy of the Lord. Their loins were to be girded, and their lights burning, as if Christ was actually on His way. And He that shall come will come; and "blessed are those servants whom the Lord when He cometh shall find watching; verily I say unto you, that He shall gird Himself, and make them to sit down to meat, and will come forth and serve them."

They were now associated with the heavenly character of the kingdom. This world was nought; what they had of it they could return into the privilege of doing good, unselfishly, and have their treasure above, where there would be no losing it, and so their hearts would be kept there. Thus their character would be heavenly. Meanwhile they were to be as men who waited their Lord returning from the wedding. The general aim of the heavenly effect of the calling is here in question. They were to be on the watch. It is not prophecy, but character and position. There are no signs or historical circumstances, as in chapters 17 and 21, for people on earth; here there is heavenly separation from it. For those who thus wait Jesus is still a servant. He will make them sit down to meat, and come forth and serve them. Girded to serve as man, His ear bored in death, in joy He comes forth delighting in disciples so walking. Gladly He releases them from their endurance, and watching, and service; He sets them

[p. 143]

at the feast, and honours their faithfulness thus. They were therefore left in uncertainty; and so the Church, when formed, was left. The Church is always to wait for Christ, having no special time; every moment is its time in desire and duty, as, alas, it is the world's for negligence. The Jews have a time. Days, years, and earthly computations belong to them, and therefore signs. To us it may be the second watch or the third watch; blessed only if we are found watching.

  

THE WISE STEWARD.

41-48.--"That faithful and wise steward." Peter puts the question of the application of what goes before, which brings out the portion of those who serve faithfully. They will be set over all the Lord's goods when He returns to take possession of all He made and will inherit. A very encouraging thought, though not the highest . On the other hand, Christendom apostatises by putting off in heart the Lord's coming. The great stay of heavenly-mindedness is lost thereby, and so our peculiar calling and hope. To expect the Lord detaches from the world, putting it off left the servant to his own will. It is not doctrinal denial, but he says in his heart "My Lord delayeth His coming," and then he acts with violence towards the fellow-servants, and his fellowship with the world. But that servant, let him act ever so independently, has a Lord, and He will come when not expected, and set that servant's portion with the unbelievers, whatever may have been his boasted rights and privileges. Further in detail there would be a righteous adjudgment

[p. 144]

[paragraph continues] (47, 43); for here we have the principles of service, as before of position. The ignorance of heathenism will not be spared, but far more tremendous will be the doom of Christendom. Most righteous, but, oh, how solemn!

49.--"I am come to send fire on the earth." There is another thing to be noted, the import of our Lord's coming then into the world. Had man been what he ought peace would have been the result; but man saw no beauty in Christ to desire Him, and the effect was hatred--not peace, but a sword. The nearer the relation the deeper the grievance. The will of man comes out, and is utterly opposed to God. They would not endure to be told that they were under God's judgment. But there is this peculiarity in the character of division which the entrance of grace makes. He who is converted in a family becomes generally, and at once, the slave of the rest. Nature even is subverted in such cases. How often thus a husband or parent loses his authority! There is a fire kindled before Christ comes again in judgment to kindle it. He was not then come to judge, but they by their rejection of Him kindled the fire of judgment.

  

THE BAPTISM OF HIS DEATH.

50.--Now, look at the Lord's part. "I have a baptism." What could straiten the Lord's heart? The perfect, infinite love of God in Him was, as it were, shut up. If He spoke to His disciples of His death, "That be far from Thee, Lord" (Matt .16. 22), was all the response He met with even in Peter. How painfully was He thus shut up into Himself!

[p. 145]

[paragraph continues] But on He went in His service of living love through the world, looking forward to the baptism of His death, and His being straitened showed the fulness and strength of His love. Till then there could be no letting out of heart, for who understood Him? The Jews said, "Behold a gluttonous man and a winebibber, a friend of publicans and sinners!" They were shut up within the walls of Judaism, so that, though One was there with a flowing river of blessing, they would not receive Him. Divine love was, we may say, pent up and driven back into the heart of God. But all is met. "How am I straitened till it be accomplished?" He is not straitened now. The barrier is broken in His death.

How could they as sinners have communion with Christ? There could be none. When He came to meet man's need they hated and rejected Him. But on the Cross He has put away sin, and now grace can flow out without hindrance or measure. "Where sin abounded, grace did much more abound" (Rom. 5. 20). Man is not changed, but God can act in His own way through redemption. Christ's love and glory did come out in a measure before, for "He could not be hid" (Mark 7. 24). But at the Cross all overflowed, and looking back from that over His life we see what infinite love and sorrow and suffering filled it up.

54-57.--The multitude are addressed on the principle of personal responsibility. First, upon the evident signs of God's dealing with the world; and next, from their moral judgment of what was right. The conclusion was that God was in the way with the Jewish people, and that if they did not

[p. 146]

agree with Him then they would turn Him into a judge, and must incur the full penalty of their iniquities. In human affairs man would be prudent enough to come to terms with his adversary, knowing himself wrong and anticipating the judgment. If they did not submit and be reconciled to the Lord now in the way they would soon be delivered to His judicial dealings, and not cease from them till they had received of His hand double for all their sins.

     
The Man of Sorrows, by John Nelson Darby, [n.d. (prior to 1882)], at sacred-texts.com

  

CHAPTER 13.

There are two great principles or subjects in connection with man on the earth: The Church of God as such, and the government of God in the world. And these are very distinct. In the Church the riches of His grace are manifested. In His governmental dealings we see the display of His justice, mercy, and goodness. An example of God's governmental power as to Israel we have in Exodus 34. 5-7. This is not sovereign grace, bringing a soul to eternal life, but government of the same character as we may see every day around us. If a man wastes his fortune or ruins his health by intemperance of any kind his children suffer for it. "What a man sows, that shall he also reap." See God's dealings with David because of the matter of Uriah. "The sword shall never depart from thine house. . . Thou didst it secretly, but I will do this thing before all Israel, . . . because by this deed thou hast given great occasion to the enemies of the Lord to blaspheme, the child also that is born unto thee shall surely die" (2 Sam. 12. 10-14). And we know that this judgment for his sin was accomplished

[p. 147]

in David's after history. This is not grace, but government. God deals in the same way with a saint now, that is, both in grace and righteousness.

  

THE TOWER OF SILOAM.

1-3.--The Jews had this thought of government in their minds, nor was it wrong in itself. They thought that God could not let such a guilty fellow live as this Pilate, who had been mingling the blood of the Galilaeans with their sacrifices. But Christ brings them to a new principle by which to judge, and tells them judgment was coming upon themselves if impenitent. "Suppose ye that these Galilaeans were sinners? . . . I tell you, Nay, but except ye repent, ye shall all likewise perish." It refers to judgment in the government of this world, which would overtake all who repented not. They had God's Son there, and they were practically rejecting Him, and how many of the Jews had their blood mingled by Titus? Christ had said to the Jews at the close of chapter 12, "When thou goest with thine adversary to the magistrate . . . give diligence that thou mayest be delivered from him, lest he hale thee to the judge;" but of the state of the Jews, who were under God's dealings, and would not escape till the chastenings of the Lord upon them are complete. Thus it is very evident that this passage refers simply to God's government of His people. Natural conscience ought to have told these Jews not to reject the Messiah, for God was going all the way along with them to the magistrate, dealing with them in patient grace, and He would say to them: "If you do not repent and be reconciled judgment must come

[p. 148]

upon you, when it will be the same with you as with those whom ye think to be such sinners."

  

THE BARREN FIG TREE.

6.--The Lord is dealing here with the same state of things. The fig tree is Israel, and God comes seeking fruit in them, and finding none. In the Gospel there is this difference . That grace, instead of seeking, sows in order to produce fruit. He found none, and the sentence therefore upon it is, "Cut it down." He not only found it useless, but His vineyard was encumbered by it. "The Name of God is blasphemed among the Gentiles through you" (Rom. 2. 24). Then comes in Christ's mission. Last of all "He sent His Son" (John 3. 16). God had planted a vineyard and pruned it, but there was no fruit. Then a new Gardener comes in, and He says, "Spare it this year also, till I shall dig about it." It must bring forth fruit then, and be digged up. He has done as He said, but still there is no fruit.

  

THE WOMAN WITH AN INFIRMITY.

11.--Jesus heals on the Sabbath day, and brings out another thing that was working in their hearts in the place of the law, which left room for hypocrisy. They would lead an ox or an ass from the stall on the Sabbath, but they would not bear that a daughter of Abraham whom Satan had bound these eighteen years should be loosed on that day. One of the infirmities of man's mind is to use possessed truth to resist revealed truth. Paul was an example of this. "As touching the righteousness of the law, blame-less" (Phil. 3. 6). Still, he "thought he ought to

[p. 149]

do many things contrary to Jesus of Nazareth" (Acts 26. 9). So also Christ says of the Jews in John 16, "These things will they do unto you." They were using the Name of the one true God, which had been given them ("The Lord, thy God, is one God") to reject the Son, for when Christ came in humiliation they would not receive Him. Orthodoxy is used to stop the reception of truth. When truth is the ground of a man's standing it gains him credit, but when a new truth comes in it puts faith to the test. Truth that requires faith to walk by is resisted by the natural heart, and the root of this is hypocrisy.

14.--The ruler of the synagogue said, "There are six days in which men ought to work: in them come and be healed, and not on the Sabbath day." But he ought to have known that the Lord of the Sabbath was there for that single word, "daughter of Abraham," ought to have told him who He was that stood there. The Lord answered him, 'Thou hypocrite!" A solemn word this!

18.--He goes on to show what the kingdom will be like when the King is rejected and gone away. A kingdom without a King, who is sitting on His Father's throne, until He comes to take His own throne. The kingdom is like a little seed thrown into the ground, which springs up and becomes a great tree; just what we call Christendom. This fills up the gap between His rejection and His coming again. There is no power exercised while the King is away. As in Mark's gospel it sprang up, men knew not how. When the harvest is ripe He will come again. He sowed the first time, but He will

[p. 150]

put in the sickle the second time. He is looking for heavenly fruit now; but when He comes He will find Christendom a great tree with the fowls of the air lodging in its branches. Pharaoh was a great tree, Nebuchadnezzar a greater still. They were the high and mighty ones of the earth, representatives of worldly power. Even Israel, which had been planted a noble vine, wholly a right seed, was bearing no fruit. Therefore, as it is said in Ezekiel 15, "What is the vine tree more than any tree" if it bear no fruit? It is only fit to be burned. Otherwise useless, if it does not bear fruit it only makes the best firewood.

  

THE PARABLE OF THE LEAVEN.

21.--Here the kingdom is likened unto leaven, and leaven is that which spreads throughout the whole mass, and also gives a character to that in which it works. It is nominal profession of Christianity which is spread into a vast system. There is not a word here about the Holy Ghost, but about the effect in the world. In Matthew 13, in the first parable, there is individual result, and not the kingdom spoken of. In the three first of the six parables it is the public appearance; in the three last the inward character is described.

23.--"Are there few that be saved?" The word used here is the same word that through the LXX. signifies a remnant, or such as shall be saved. The question really was as to whether this remnant would be few or many who were to be spared when the judgment came; but this being a mere idle question, the Lord does not answer it, but says to them:

[p. 151]

24.--"Strive to enter in at the strait gate." The strait gate was receiving Christ at that time, the real but narrow entrance of faith in Him and conversion to God. There will be some come and knock when the door is closed, to whom He will say, "I know you not whence you are;" you are not changed. Strive to enter in at the strait gate, through which Christ goes before you, that is, rejection. "Many shall seek to enter in (not at the strait gate), and shall not be able." It is most simple when we see the rejection of Christ. Those who reject Him in the day of His humiliation will themselves be rejected in the day of His glory; and instead of being His companions in the kingdom, they will be thrust out. The unbelieving Jews will see the Gentiles come into the glory of the kingdom, while they remaining in unbelief will be cast out.

31.--The Pharisees say to Him, "Get Thee out and depart, for Herod will kill Thee." Now Herod was an Idumaean, and what right had such a stranger to be their king? What had he to do with the promises to Israel? Nothing. In Herod we have a figure of the wilful king. He tried to kill Christ, and therefore the character of opposition king belongs to him. He had no faith in God's purposes or in Christ's glory, and the Lord says, "Go and tell that fox." I shall do My Father's will till the moment come for Me to be glorified. I am here as long as My Father wills, and then I shall be perfected. The power of God must be fully known. What divine contempt for the apostate king, but what perfect human obedience combined! "Leaving us an example, that we should follow in His steps."

[p. 152]

  

LAMENT OVER JERUSALEM.

33.--"Nevertheless I must walk to-day, and to-morrow, and the day following; for it cannot be that a prophet perish out of Jerusalem. O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, thou that killest the prophets." After all Jerusalem is the guilty place. Let the Edomite king do and say what he will it is "the holy city" that is guilty, for it was nearest to Himself. The nearer I am to God, if I reject Him, the worse is the sin and the more dreadful the judgment (See Psa. 132). "The Lord hath chosen Zion," and Psalm 88. 65-68, the same election of Zion. Christ does not put the sin upon them till they have rejected both Him and His Father. He brings out a purpose of grace in these closing verses. The old man is condemned and profitless, Israel and all of us. "Can the Ethiopian change his skin or the leopard his spots?" (Jer. 13. 23). The Gospel begins with seeking and saving that which was lost. Here we see that though they have rejected Him in responsibility He has not rejected them in the day of His grace. Grace shines out in His yet choosing Judah.

34.--Notice how the divine Person of the Lord comes out here. "O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, how often would I have gathered." A prophet could not say this, and He was a prophet, too, and more than a prophet. He was Jehovah, for none but Jehovah could gather Israel, as "He that scattered Israel will gather him" (Jer. 31. 10). Israel had rejected Jehovah under responsibility, but Jehovah will own them when He comes in sovereign grace. How blessed is the way; the circumstances through

[p. 153]

which He passed in His path down here did bring out in a far brighter way WHO HE WAS than any text to prove it, important as that is in its place. For sup-pose you believed there was a God, yet if He were to come down by your very side and say "I AM," would not that be a very different thing? Christ was the humbled Man all through His path down here, for He was ever the Servant of all; yet when the service was done, and rejected as of no use, His glory shines out. "Before Abraham was, I AM." See in this chapter of Luke the connection between verses 33, 34, and 35 as illustrative of this: "How often would I have gathered thee . . . desolate . . . until ye shall say, Blessed is He that cometh in the Name of the Lord." The complaint in the Psalms is that there is none to say "how long," none to count upon the faithfulness of God to His people. (See Psa. 74. 9.) This expression is often used in the Psalms and in Isaiah 6, and refers to chastening, not retribution. How long is Israel to stumble and fall? (Rom. 11). In Isaiah 6 the prophet having uttered these words, "Make the heart of this people fat," taken up by the Lord in John 12, then says, "How long?" He waits in faith, and reckons upon God, and having God's mind He cannot believe that God will give them up, and therefore asks "How long" is the chastening to continue? To which the Lord answers, "There shall be a great forsaking in the midst of the land, but yet in it shall be a tenth, and the holy seed shall be the substance thereof" (Isa. 6. 12, 13). The sap is still there though there are no leaves. So in Psalm 118. 18, "He hath chastised me sore, but He hath not given me over unto death.

[p. 154]

  

THE COMING OF THE BLESSED.

35.--In the same way the Lord does not say, "Your house is left unto you desolate, and there-fore ye shall not see Me again." No. But He says, "Ye shall not see Me until ye shall say, Blessed is He that cometh in the Name of the Lord." He can give, as Jehovah, the answer in grace, and when He gives repentance to Israel, then He will send Jesus, whom until that day the Heavens have received. Meanwhile our connection with Him comes in. The prophet spake only of earthly things, though divine; but to the Church it is, "Holy brethren, partakers of the heavenly calling" (Heb. 3. 1), and "Hath quickened us together in heavenly places in Christ Jesus" (Eph. 2. 5). That gives security. How did I get there? By virtue of Christ. He is my title. My desire is to be acquainted with this, that I am one with Christ in Heaven, an ever-lasting portion, that the Holy Ghost seals upon my soul, and would have me enjoy more and more.

When Israel is brought to repentance "The stone which the builders rejected" will be "the head of the corner" (Luke 20. 17), and owned of them. They will say "O give thanks unto the Lord, for His mercy endureth for ever" (Psa. 106. 1) . Alas! they will receive another first; but when their hearts are turned, and grace works, they will use the language of Psalm 119, and find the expression of the law within their hearts; and when faith is thus exercised, and their hearts are broken and open to receive Him, then He Himself will come to them. If there is not a prophet to say "How long?" Jehovah will give

[p. 155]

the answer. He never changes, and though He executes judgment and righteousness grace is found in Him still. "When the Son of Man cometh, shall He find faith on the earth?" (Luke 18. 8). Well, if there be not faith to be found, or a prophet to say "How long?" there is One who will lay up in His treasures something for faith to lay hold on in the sovereignty of His own grace.

Thus we see Jehovah in that humbled One, and how He is able to rise above all iniquity. How precious does all this make Jesus to us, and we are one with Him. May we learn Him, and so follow Him, remembering that all that is left outside the narrow way is the flesh and evil.

     
The Man of Sorrows, by John Nelson Darby, [n.d. (prior to 1882)], at sacred-texts.com

  

CHAPTER 14.

This chapter shows out the distributive justice of God. First, it is toward His saints the consequence of conduct with God, and the place a man will take in view of that. Next, we have responsibility connected with grace, the moral position of the soul, because of having grace presented to it. Slighting God's grace fills up the measure of man's sin. But here is the presentation, which is a different thing from the possession of grace. This is brought out in those who refused to come to the supper.

  

THE SABBATH.

1-6.--"On the Sabbath day . . . they watched Him." The Lord in bringing the dispensation to a close consequently brings before Israel the Sabbath. The question was: Could man, as man, find rest with

[p. 156]

[paragraph continues] God? Could man ever enter into God's rest? We know man broke God's rest directly; how soon we are not told; but perhaps the very day he ought to have rested he ate the forbidden fruit. Man never entered into God's rest; and now the question was how to enter in--by his own work or Christ's? It was essential to the rest after creation to have it at the end of six days of work, and therefore it was on the seventh day. So afterwards when the legal ordinances were given the Sabbath became a sign of the covenant. The Lord when here constantly trenched on the Sabbath to show that, sin being unremoved, He must work. He could not rest, the Sabbath being a sign of man's getting rest after work, and the law showing that man constantly broke that covenant. The Lord presses home to their consciences their sin by showing them that He must work if they were to have rest. "My Father worketh hitherto, and I work" (John 5. 17). If man had kept the law he was entitled to the rest, but he neither did nor could keep it . All that was the sign of God's rest for man, after work done, failed; but "there remaineth a rest for the people of God" (Heb. 4. 9). The Sabbath continued as a sign, and all through the prophets we find it insisted on, but they did not get rest. Paul, reasoning upon it in Hebrews 4, says "We which have believed do enter into rest." But Canaan, the nominal rest, they of old did not enter, save the few faithful ones, and these did not get rest, for if they had, another day would not have been spoken of, and so it is said by the Psalmist, and quoted in Hebrews, "If they shall enter into My rest." "If" means "they shall not." This being

[p. 157]

the Sabbath was no rest to them. The Sabbath was still the sign, but no real rest. The whole thing being therefore gone as to man's getting into God's rest it must be now on an entirely new principle, by faith and not by works. When Messiah came He would have been rest to the people, but man would not have Him, as we find it here. Man could not have God's rest by law, and they would not have it by grace, and this proves man altogether broken with God. If I have got to God I have rest, and need not journey farther for it. I have my rest in Himself, for grace, not law, has given me a capacity to enjoy what God is. But when the creature had broken the rest of his Creator there could be no relationship between them. Sin has come in and caused God to be towards me as a judge, and there can be no link of heart between a judge and a criminal. If God judges me as a sinner the only word I can have from Him is, "Depart from Me, ye cursed." Therefore all that man can say is, "Enter not into judgment with Thy servant, O Lord." There is a link between a father and a child that brings them into relationship, but it is a new thing. All must be put on a new footing, for there is no rest in the old creation.

  

HEALING ON THE SABBATH.

In chapter 15 we have grace at work to give rest, the Shepherd bringing the sheep home, and in this chapter we have a case of misery brought out in the man who had the dropsy.

3-5.--Christ said, "Is it lawful to heal on the Sabbath day?" But they held their peace. He puts the case to themselves. "If you shall have an 

[p. 158]

ox or an ass fallen into a pit, . . . and they could not answer Him." There was no present rest, no hope of rest, no possibility of rest for man as a sinner, and there could be no rest for God, for God could not rest where sin was. There was no Sabbath for righteousness, for man had no righteousness. There was no Sabbath for love, for love could not rest where judgment must be exercised. Love might come in and work, but work is not rest. Man has lost his communion with God through his sin, and this is a solemn thing, for he has made God a judge through his sin. The very thought of judgment connected with God shows man a sinner, for there was no necessary association of judgment with God; but when sin came in judgment must follow, for God is holy. If brought to the consciousness of there being no relationship between us as sinners and God, we learn what a place becomes us when once we have faith in His grace.

  

HUMILITY AND EXALTATION.

7-11.--"And He put forth a parable to those which were bidden, when He marked how they chose out the chief rooms." It is just the place that nature likes. The world which has no relations with God delights in exalting self and shutting Him out. Self gets for self what it likes, and forgets God. Man is always setting up self, pushing for self against God. He does not think so, for he says he is only using his faculties. But so Adam did to hide himself from God. Do not we use our faculties to please ourselves rather than for God? While the master is away the servants go on their own way

[p. 159]

and do their own will. A man is naturally hurt when he is put down in a corner and despised. Flesh does not relish being thrust aside, but this seeking for a place is to seek for it where Christ had none. "Therefore," He says, "when thou art bidden to a wedding, sit down in the lowest room." The point of this parable is seen in verses 8-11. It refers the heart to the master, to "him that bade thee." If I am conscious of being a sinner, and therefore deserving no place, I shall take none, but wait till God bestows one on me. I shall have honour indeed when God gives me a place. The point is: What does He bestow upon me? Having the eye upon God, and referring to Him, seek for the lowest place as Christ did. It will not do to say I will not have a place in the world. The great thing is the heart resting on God's place in the world. When the eye is thus upon God self is forgotten. If not, I am thinking of the slights I receive, and neither faith nor grace are in exercise. If I could think nothing of myself I should be perfect. The man who bade the guests has the right estimate of each and the honour due to them. The evangelist's place, the pastor's, the apostle's will all be appointed by God. When God gives me a place it is one of power and nighness to Himself; but when a man takes a place for himself it is one of weakness and alienation from God, because self is the object.

Then, again, we must guard against the mere refusing to take a place in the world, because we know it is wrong as followers of Him who has been rejected. A mere legal estimate of what is right can never last. A thing may be very right, but there is no stability

[p. 160]

in pursuing it, because there is no power to subdue the flesh in merely doing what one knows to be right . There was the sense of obligation with the law, but the law did not set an object before me to attract my heart; it did not bring God to me nor me to God. That lasts which feels that we are nothing and that God is everything. Many have begun very energetically, and taken a certain place right in itself; but if legality be the source of it there will be no power of perseverance, for that which is taken up under law will be sure to be lost in the flesh. When God is the object the low place here is sufficient. He Himself carries me on, and whatever it be, if the mind and affections are upon Him, what was hard at first is no effort as I proceed. His love which attracted and gave me power at first to take such a position becomes brighter and brighter when better and longer known, and what was done at first tremblingly is easy with increasing courage. The only thing which can enable me thus to go on is to have Christ the object before me, and just in proportion as it is so can I be happy. There may be a thousand and one things to vex me if self is of importance; they will not vex me at all if self is not there to be vexed. The passions of the flesh will not harass us if we are walking with God. What trials we get when not walking with God and thinking only of self! There is no such deliverance as that of having no importance in one's own eyes. Then one may be happy indeed before God.

If we look at Christ we learn two principles. First, that He humbled Himself because of the sin of the world all around Him. Second, the world did all

[p. 161]

they could to humble Him, for the more He went down so much the more they sought to pull Him down.

No one cares for another, so that if a man does not care for himself he will be sure to be pushed down low enough. Then, again, so deceitful are our hearts that it is possible we should be willing to humble ourselves if we could get anything by it, even the approbation of men. On the other hand, if we, in the usual sense of men, merely seek to imitate Christ in this it will be but legal effort. "Let this mind be in you which was also in Christ Jesus" (Phil. 2.5) . He humbled Himself . First, "He made Himself of no reputation" (Phil. 2. 7) . That is, He emptied Himself of His glory to become a Man. In doing this He left the Father's glory to become a Man. This was a great descent, though we think a great deal of ourselves. But was that all? No. He humbled Himself to death, even the death of the Cross.

11.--It is the same principle which is put before us in this chapter in Luke. "He that humbleth himself shall be exalted." Real lowliness is being ready to serve any and everybody; and though it may to the eye of man look low it is in reality very high, being the fruit of divine love working in Our hearts. God operating in our hearts makes us unselfish. The only thing worth doing in the world is this service, except it be enjoying God. We should be ready to serve one's enemies. "He that humbleth himself shall be exalted." This is not only being humbled, but humbling oneself, and not doing it before those who would honour us all the more for

[p. 162]

being humble. Paul could say of himself and others, "Ourselves your servants for Christ's sake" (2 Cor. 4. 5). He felt they had a title to serve in grace, and in proportion as he took the humble place he will be exalted in the day that is coming.

  

THE GREAT SUPPER.

12-14.--The next statement in the chapter goes on to speak of Him who bade. Before, it was about the guest; but here it is the principle on which feasts are made. "Call the poor, the maimed, the lame, the blind, and thou shalt be blessed, for they cannot recompense thee, but thou shalt be recompensed at the resurrection of the just." Thus He takes them all out of the world again to the time when they shall meet God, and makes it a present guide for action. They must not act on the principle of getting reward here, but must wait for the time when they are to meet the Lord, as it is not till the Master of the house returns that the servants receive their wages. This is not a question of salvation, but of reward for service. "Thou shalt be recompensed at the resurrection of the just." Mark how the Lord brings out the JUST as a separate class. The resurrection is not a common one; there is no such thing in Scripture. There is no thought of confounding in another world what God has separated in this. Grace has separated the believer, so that He has risen in his soul now; but he does not get the reward of his service till "the resurrection of the just." A sinner is quickened here, though not judicially manifested here, because we are in a dispensation of faith, and the portion is in glory. There is no "general"

[p. 163]

resurrection to good and bad alike, but there is the "first resurrection," which is God separating in power those whom in grace He has made His own. It was the resurrection from among, or out of, the dead that awakened such wonder among the Jews. The Pharisees could teach the resurrection, though the Sadducees denied it. A resurrection was commonly believed, as Martha said, "I know that he shall rise again at the last day" (John 11.24). But they could not comprehend divine power coming into Satan's house and taking the righteous dead out from among the rest of the dead. Jesus replied to Martha, "I am the Resurrection and the Life" (John 11. 25), speaking of the living power that visits a man when he is in a state of death and takes him out of it. They knew nothing of the discriminating process of the one to life and the other to judgment (John 5) .

The Master of the house will show His approval of the faithful servant. There will be degrees of glory given according to the service done. Not that I shall be saved for what I have done, but my service will be rewarded, whatever may have been produced by the Holy Ghost answering the desire of Christ in working in me, for it is service of which I could not do an atom without His power. It is likewise the answer of God according to His counsels, as we may see in the reply to the mother of Zebedee's children: "It shall be given to those for whom it is prepared of My Father." The service of love is never influenced by recompense. Reward is not set before the soul as the motive for doing anything; but when we find difficulties in treading the path of service, then the crown is set before us to encourage us to go on. So

[p. 164]

even Christ, for the joy that was set before Him, "endured the Cross, despising the shame" (Heb. 12. 2). So also Moses, while esteeming the reproach of Christ greater riches than the treasures of Egypt, had respect unto the recompense of the reward. If the recompense and not love be the spring of our service it would just amount to this: "Take thy penny, and go thy way." But if the world is broken with no recompense can be looked for from that source, which is as great a deliverance as the deliverance from self.

15-24.--"A certain man made a great supper." See how grace, when brought in, is rejected. The supper was ready, the guests were bidden, but they would not come. The Lord had before spoken of the kingdom, and here He shows what the reception of the kingdom would cost. "All things are now ready." But they all make excuses. They do not care enough for the supper to leave their yoke of oxen, the piece of ground. The supper was in God's thoughts from the beginning, and it was to be when He came to the Jews as their Messiah at the close of the day. But they rejected Him, they did not want Him. It does not say that their sins shut them out from the supper, for God was in Christ reconciling the world unto Himself, not imputing their trespasses unto them. Neither was it the piece of ground, the oxen, or the wife that were in themselves the evil; but in their case they became so, because their minds were intent on them to the slighting of the supper. And is it not just the same now? What harm is there in these things do you say? If they have occupied your heart, and made you

[p. 165]

slight God, that is the harm. In the kingdom of God where are you? There was not one link of heart between Christ and the people He came to, and therefore they rejected the supper. This is also a test to our souls all through the day. It is not a question of whether a thing be right or wrong, but what savour have the things of Christ to our souls in it? It may be a very small thing. If we find the reading of a book makes the manifestation of Christ to become less precious to us we have got away from God, and we cannot tell where the next step may take us. Satan often cheats us in this way. The soul is put to the test day by day, whether the things that are revealed by God in Christ have so much power over us as to engage the heart; but if other things have come in between when we want the enjoyment of the things of Christ we shall not have it, and this will show us how far we have got away. If anything comes in and takes the freshness of Christ from your soul take heed, for if the oxen are thus cared for when you have opportunity for the things of Christ you will have no taste for them.

  

"THE POOR OF THE FLOCK."

21.--The Lord turns to "the poor of the flock," those who have no yoke of oxen, and are glad of the feast . The priests and chiefs of the Jews had the first invitation, but they rejecting it the Master of the house sends out into the streets and lanes of the city to bring in the poor, the maimed, the lame, and the blind of the people, still the house is not filled; and then He sends outside the city, into the highways

[p. 166]

and hedges, and compels them to come in that the house may be filled. These are the Gentiles. In this Gospel the poor of the flock and the Gentiles are distinguished from each other. But in Matthew, whose aim is Jewish, there is no mention made of both classes as distinct. "The wedding was furnished with guests," includes the Gentiles gathered in after the Jews are brought into the blessing. Then mark the lowliness of the servant and the patient grace of the Master; that goes right on to the end. He cannot rest till He gets His house filled with guests. What perseverance there is on the part of God! And we are called to go on in the same spirit. It does cost a great deal to go on, and on, and on, in spite of everybody and everything; and for us to do so marks the presence of divine power in us, for God's grace is unwearied.

24.--There is indeed judgment at the same time, for it is said, "Not one of those that were bidden shall taste of My supper." But God's acting thus shows us what lowliness there should be in us as regards self and grace as regards every one else, and all grounded on this one fact that all man's relationships with God are morally broken, and if you are really going to take such a path as that of following Christ you must count the cost. It is all very well to see such grace and admire it, but there is no power to persevere in it, without such love in the heart as the establishment of a new relationship with God gives. There must be a link in the heart with the new thing, and Christ must have such strength in the heart as to give power to break with old things.

[p. 167]

25-33.--"Multitudes" were attracted by the hearing of such grace, so in verse 26 He tells them what discipleship will involve. There may be an allusion here to Micah 7. 5, 6. Friends must be given up for Christ. A man may have to leave everything else, but the question is: Am I to leave God? What! life too? Yes; no matter. In that life you are linked with the world, and that must be given up, too, if I am in question. You cannot have two hearts, a heart for the world and a heart for Me, Christ would say. I tremble when I see people who have not counted the cost setting out in the profession of following Christ. It is God's way to put the barrier at the first start. If you can leap that you will do. Legal obedience will not stand, but following Christ. If He is in the path it is happy and easy, but it is a path between two hedges. If Christ is not with you in it there will be nothing but trouble and difficulty.

  

SAVOURLESS SALT.

34, 35.--"Salt" is grace in spiritual energy. That is, the saints being witnesses in the world of the power of holy love instead of selfishness. Salt is the consecrating principle of grace. If that is gone, what is to preserve? Salt is rather grace in the aspect of holy separateness unto God than in that of kindness and meekness, though, of course, these are also inseparable from grace. If the salt has lost its savour, wherewith shall it be salted? If I have meat without salt I can salt it, but if there is no saltness in salt, what can I do? What a character we have here of an unspiritual church or an unspiritual saint! Like the vine which represented Israel, good

[p. 168]

for nothing at all but to dishonour the Lord, its owner, and be destroyed. Mercy, it is true, may recover us, but as saints we should have the savour of Christ. Whatever enfeebles attachment to Christ destroys power. It is not gross sin that does it, which, of course, will be met and judged, but it is the little things of everyday life which are apt to be chosen before Christ. When the world creeps in the salt has lost its savour, and we show that a rejected Christ has little power in our eyes.

The Lord keep us in the path with Christ, where all is bright and blessed. If the film of this world has been drawn over our spiritual vision, hiding Christ from us, He alone can remove it.

     
The Man of Sorrows, by John Nelson Darby, [n.d. (prior to 1882)], at sacred-texts.com

  

CHAPTER 15.

We have seen the Lord showing out His own rejection in grace, followed by an entirely new order of things. The Church brought in subsequently is not an age, properly so called, but a heavenly episode between the ages. There are three ages spoken of in Scripture: The age before the law; the age under the law; and the Millennial age. Christ was "made under the law," and that age is not finished yet. The disciples said to Him, "What shall be the sign of Thy coming and of the end of the age?" That was the age when He was there, but when they rejected Him the age was suspended. As He straitly charged Peter to tell no man He was the Christ, saying, "The Son of Man must suffer many things and be rejected" (Luke 17. 25). Therefore He says to them, "Ye shall not see Me till ye shall

[p. 169]

say, Blessed is He that cometh in the Name of the Lord" (Mark 11. 9). We who form a part of the Church of God, and not having anything to do with the earth, are in no sense an age, but are a heavenly people united to Christ above during the suspension of this age, filling up the gap between the Lord's leaving the Jews and His return to them again. So in Romans 11 we have the olive tree with some of the branches broken off and others grafted in. This is a tree with its root in the earth, and consequently could have nothing directly to do with the Church in Heaven. Some of the branches were broken off and some left; but this could never be said of the Church, the body united to its head at the right hand of God. The Church, of course, does fill up a certain place and time, but it is during the suspension of the age to which Christ came. Characteristically we belong to that which is above and beyond anything connected with this world. It is grace that has set us there, and that is not of the earth but of Heaven.

In chapter 15 we find the Lord rising above Jewish dispensation altogether to the full display of God's own nature--love--in the Gospel. At the close of chapter 14 He takes up the professing system in its responsibility. "Salt is good, but if the salt have lost its savour" it is good for nothing. Thus He shows what man is. Then in chapter 15 come publicans and sinners, and we have the display of what God is. Here God is dealing with lost man in grace. Sinners who owned their sins and came to repentance were those who justified God. "Wisdom is justified of her children." God is vindicated in His ways, whether in condemnation or salvation of a

[p. 170]

sinner. The publicans and sinners justified God, being baptised of John, while the Pharisees rejected His counsel against themselves. All that is wanted to justify God is that He should show Himself, and this is what the Lord now does. He manifests what God is in grace, and this it is which makes the chapter ever so fresh and full to our souls. The heart that has been awakened never tires of such a chapter.

Then in chapter 16 He shows the responsibility of those who are thus dealt with. The earth was given to the children of men, and God looked for fruit. He first dealt with man as to what he ought to have been on the earth, but there was entire failure. Now there comes out another thing, entire grace, which is irrespective of all that man was, and takes an absolutely heavenly character. Divine love is its source, and its character is heavenly. Revealing Heaven, it puts man into connection with it, and the people so put must be a heavenly people. Why so? Because this world is all gone wrong; it has fallen from God, and is become the "far country." Hence its riches are of no value, but a great hindrance unless used in a heavenly way, and chapter 16 shows how they should be used. Chapter 15 shows the sinner called out by grace; that which follows shows what He who is so called out is to be as a heavenly man. This world is a scene of evil, and that which attaches to it is now ruin and not blessedness (see the rich man and Lazarus) . Adam had a place in this world, and Israel had a place in it, but now that is all gone, and grace has come in, lifting those who are the subjects of it into another state of things altogether. Christ is justifying God. His nature being love, it

[p. 171]

was His joy to manifest grace to sinners. It is not here the joy of those brought back, but God's own joy in bringing the sinner back to Himself. This gives the tone to Heaven. "There is joy" there in the poor wretched sinner brought back.

I have no doubt we have in these three parables the unfolding of the ways of the Trinity. In the first is shown the Son as the Good Shepherd going after the sheep. In the second, the woman lighting a candle and searching diligently till she find the piece of silver, we have the painstaking work of the Holy Ghost lighting up a testimony in this dark world. The third is the Father's reception of the returning sinner when brought back. In this, the prodigal son, we find the work in the sinner, but in the two previous ones it is the sovereignty and the activity of grace which go out in love to find that which was lost, and bring the sinner back without his having anything to do in it.

  

THE LOST SHEEP.

4-7.--This persevering energy of love is in the Shepherd Himself. The Good Shepherd cares for the sheep, and gives it no trouble in getting home; He carries it on His shoulders. Herein is seen the perfect grace in which the Lord Jesus has so charged Himself with bearing our every burden, our every trial and difficulty, all along the road. Christ is thus the Shepherd and Bishop of our souls. Then mark, in verse 6, the peculiar character of this joy. "He calleth together his friends and neighbours, saying, Rejoice with me, for I have found my sheep which was lost." There could not be a more genuine

[p. 172]

picture, or a fuller expression, of a person being happy than this. Joy always speaks out.

  

THE LOST COIN.

8-10.--In the second parable we have the same general principle. The painstaking of the Holy Ghost is shown in the acting of the woman who sought the lost piece of silver; the piece of silver could have neither trouble nor joy itself. The difference in the two is that in the first the Shepherd bears all the burden; in the second it is the pains taken in finding the lost piece, proving the woman cared enough for it to take all this trouble to search it out. Thus does God's love act toward us to bring us out of the dark world to Himself. What a work it is to bring man's heart back to God!

"'Twas great to speak a world from naught;
    'Twas greater to redeem."

  

THE PRODIGAL SON.

11-32.--If we look at man as he is in himself, he could never get back to God. But look at what God is in Himself, and who or what can resist His grace? Still it is the joy of the finder, and not of the thing found. "Rejoice with Me, for I have found My sheep--My piece--that was lost." And in the case of the returning prodigal, who made the feast? Not the young man, but the father, saying to those in the house, "Let us eat and be merry, for this my son was dead, and is alive again; he was lost, and is found." All caught the joy of the father's heart, the servants, etc., all except the unhappy, self-righteous elder brother (the Pharisee, the Jew), to whom the

[p. 173]

father replied, "It was meet that we should make merry and be glad, for this thy brother was dead, and is alive again." It is the joy God has in receiving a sinner back to Himself. In the parable of the prodigal son by itself the full glory of grace is not seen, as these three parables set it forth together. The case of the sheep is the Shepherd charging Himself with the whole burden of the sheep; the silver is the painstaking of the Holy Ghost. Before actual departure there was moral departure. When the young man left his father's house it was but a display of the evil in his heart . He was just as wicked when he asked for his portion of goods and crossed his father's threshold as when he ate husks with the swine in the far country. He was, doubtless, more miserable then, but his heart was gone before. One man may run further into riot than another, but if we have turned our backs upon God we are utterly bad. In this sense there is no difference.

The moral evil was just the same with Eve. She gave up God for an apple. She virtually thought the devil a much better friend to her than God, and took his word instead of God's. Satan is a liar from the beginning, and at the Cross the Lord Jesus proved this. It cost the Lord His life to prove that God was good. Christ came to contradict the devil's lie, which man believed, and under which the whole world is lying. Grace and truth came by Christ, and, at all cost, were set up by Him on the Cross. Man can do without God, and from the beginning the whole world has been a public lie against God. Who could unriddle it? Look at creation, how it groans under the bondage of corruptions! Look at providence,

[p. 174]

how can I account for the goodness of God when I see an infant writhing in pain? How can I reconcile the two things? The villain prospers, the good man suffers. When I see Christ on the Cross I see what God is. Death came on man by reason of sin. But Christ takes my sin on His own sinless person, bows His head in death upon the Cross, and thus sets aside the lie of Satan, "Ye shall not surely die." Thus was God's truth re-established here below in the work and person of the Lord Jesus, and nowhere else. In Him I see holiness, truth, and love, no matter at what cost.

14.--The natural man is just like this prodigal. He spends his substance in the far country and ruins himself. A man having L5000 a year and spending L20,000 will seem very rich for the time. But look at the result. He is a ruined man. The moment man departed from God he sold himself to Satan, and is spending his soul, his heart, away from God. He even spends what God has given him against God, and when he is thoroughly spent, and has nothing to live on, he begins to be in want. "There arose a mighty famine in that land," and all the world feels that. Every sinner does not go to the same length of eating the swine's husks, but all are in the same condition of ruin. Every man has turned his back upon God, though all have not run to the same excess of riot, nor fallen into the same degradation. The famine never draws back to the father's house. The prodigal joined himself to a citizen of that country, not his father's country.

16.--"He would fain have "filled his belly," and "no man gave to him." Satan never gives;

[p. 175]

that is found where God's love is, who spared not His own Son. When the prodigal thinks of his father's house, the whole work is morally done, though he is not back there yet. He turns, his heart was changed, and thus his whole desire was to get back to his father's house from whence he had departed. He was not yet in the full liberty of grace so as to have peace and happiness, and he says to himself, "Make me as one of thy hired servants." He is brought to a sense of his guilt, and what was it? Feeding with the swine? No; that was the fruit of it, but his guilt was in leaving his father's house, turning away from God. When he came to himself he desired to return. This was truly a right wish, but the form it took in his mind, from his not yet knowing grace, was a legal one. "I am no more worthy to be called thy son; make me as one of thy hired servants." But the father does not give him time for that.

20.--We hear nothing more about hired servants. For when he was "yet a great way off, his father saw him, and had compassion on him, and ran and fell on his neck, and kissed him." He could not have been a servant with the father's arms round his neck. It would have spoiled the father's feelings, if not the son's. It was the joy of Him who was receiving back the sinner to Himself. And it is the knowledge of this which gives peace to the soul. Nothing else does. If a man does not know love he does not know God, for God is love. The full revelation of God is what we have in Christ. "Have I been so long time with you, and yet hast thou not known Me?" (John 14. 9). God acts from the joy and

[p. 176]

delight He has in Himself in receiving back the sinner, and therefore He does not think of the rags, but of the child He has got back again. What right has man to call God in question when He indulges His own heart in the outflow of love to the sinner? You will never get peace by the mere act of coming back, but by learning the Father's mind about you. Could the prodigal get peace as he was coming back if the father had not met him? No; all along the road he would be questioning: How will he receive me? Will he be angry with me? Will he spurn me from his presence? And if he does, what will become of me? "But when he was yet a great way off his father saw him, and had compassion, and ran and fell on his neck, and kissed him." If not so, he would have trembled even to knock at the door. When the father's arms were on the son's neck, was he defiled by the rags? No; and he will not have the son bring rags into the house, but orders the best robe to be brought out of it. God sends His own Son out of Heaven, and clothes the sinner; and thus arrayed the young man could bring credit to his father's house. And surely if we are so clothed with Christ we shall do credit to God; and in the ages to come He will show the exceeding riches of His grace in His kindness towards us through Christ Jesus.

23.--"Let us eat and be merry." It is not: Let him eat and be merry. Again, he says, "It was meet that we should make merry and be glad." There was but one exception to the delight in the house. The elder brother (the self-righteous person) was angry, and would not go in. God had shown what He was in Himself, by His Son, in thus receiving the

[p. 177]

prodigal, and now He would show what they were in themselves. We know the Pharisees murmured from the beginning, and the elder brother had no communion with his father, for if the father was happy, why was not he happy, too? He was angry, and would not go in. If such a vile person as the publican gets in that makes my righteousness go for nothing. It is truly so. For where God's happiness is, there self-righteousness cannot come. If God is good to the sinner, what avails my righteousness? He had no sympathy with his father. He ought to have said my father is happy, so I must be. There should have been communion in the joy. "Thy brother is back." That ought to have rung on his heart, but no.

28.--Then see the perfect patience of God's grace. The father goes out and entreats him. And do we not all through the Acts see God entreating the Jews to be reconciled, although they had crucified His Son? So Paul, in 1 Thessalonians 2. 15, 16, says that the Jews filled up the measure of their sins by forbidding the apostles to speak to the Gentiles that they might be saved. It is all selfishness in the elder son. "Thou never gavest me a kid that I might make merry with my friends." To which the father replies, "Son, thou art ever with me, and all that I have is thine." The oracles of God, the covenants, the promises, God gave to the Jews, but He will not give up the right to show His grace to sinners because of the self-righteous selfishness of the Jews or of any one else. "It was meet that we should make merry, and be glad: for this thy brother was dead, and is alive again; and was lost, and is found."

     
The Man of Sorrows, by John Nelson Darby, [n.d. (prior to 1882)], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 178]

  

CHAPTER 16.

1.--"There was a certain rich man, which had a steward; and the same was accused unto him, that he had wasted his goods." Man generally is God's steward; and in another sense and in another way Israel was God's steward put into God's vine-yard, and entrusted with law, promises, covenants, worship. But in all Israel was found to have wasted His goods. Man looked at as a steward has been found to be entirely unfaithful. Now, what is to be done? God appears, and in the sovereignty of His grace turns that which man has abused on the earth into a means of heavenly fruit. The things of this world being in the hands of man, he is not to be using them for the present enjoyment of this world, which is altogether apart from God, but with a view to the future. We are not to seek to possess the things now, but by the right use of these things to make a provision for other times. "Make to yourself friends of the mammon of unrighteousness." It is better to turn all into a friend for another day than to have money now. Man here is gone to destruction. Therefore now man is a steward out of place.

  

THE UNJUST STEWARD.

2.--"Give an account of thy stewardship, for thou mayest be no longer steward." He is discharged from stewardship, has lost his place, but not the things of which he has the administration. Here is something far better than the alchemy which would turn all into gold. For this is grace, turning even gold itself, that vile thing which enslaves men's

[p. 179]

hearts, into a means of showing love and getting riches for Heaven. To Israel God is saying: "You have failed in the stewardship, therefore now I am going to put you out." In chapter 15 the elder brother, the Jew, would not go in; and here, in chapter 16, God is putting the Jew out of the stewardship. With Adam all is over, but we have a title in grace to use, in a heavenly way, that to which we have no title at all as man.

11.--"If, therefore, ye have not been faithful in the unrighteous mammon, who will commit to your trust the true riches? If ye have not been faithful in that which is another man's, who shall give you that which is your own?" Our own things are the heavenly things; the earthly things are another's; and if you do not use your title in grace in devoting in love these earthly temporal goods, which are not your own, how can God trust you with the spiritual things which are "your own?" Our own things are all the glories of Christ. All that is Christ's is ours, for "we are not redeemed with corruptible things, as silver and gold" (1 Peter 1. 18). We were bought with a price, it is true, not with money, but "with the precious Blood of Christ" (1 Peter 1. 19). God has not given us eternal life in order that we might be getting money. "No man can serve two masters," and if you want to be rich you cannot be seeking to serve God. We have to do our duty in this world, but it is never our duty to serve mammon and desire riches.

Now He goes on to show that there are these everlasting habitations, when the grand results will appear of what has been done here. The old thing is

[p. 180]

fleeting away and the new coming in. The Jew, who refused to come to the feast, is loosening the law while rejecting grace. (See chap. 15, verses 18, 19.)

  

THE RICH MAN AND LAZARUS.

19.--"A certain rich man, clothed in purple." The thought here is Jewish, and the great principle is that all God's dealings as to distributive justice on the earth were no longer in force, and that now He only deals in grace. He draws aside the veil to show the result in another world. The rich man had his good things here, he belonged to the earth, and the basket and the store belonged to him. His treasure was on earth, and his heart there too. But look into the other world and see the result--"torment." The good things have changed now. "The rich man died and was buried; and in Hell he lift up his eyes, being in torment." "And there was a certain beggar named Lazarus, which was laid at his gate, full of sores," "and the beggar died." Was he buried? Not a word about it, for he belonged not to the earth, "he was carried by the angels into Abraham's bosom." He who had the "evil things" down here was carried to the best place in Heaven. Then mark, it was not the afflictions, sores, etc., of Lazarus made him righteous, any more than the riches of the rich man made him unrighteous. God having done with the earthly things, no earthly circumstances are a mark of God's present favour or the reverse; though, no doubt, God's dealings with Lazarus were the means of bringing down his pride, breaking the will, and so preparing him for the place He was going to take him to.

[p. 181]

31.--"If they hear not Moses and the prophets." Here this solemn truth comes out that even the resurrection of Christ will not convince them; for if they refuse to hear God's Word as they have it, they will not hear the testimony of God, even though One rose from the dead; and we know they did not.

This chapter is to let in the light of another world upon God's ways and dealings in this. The whole world is bankrupt before God, so that man is now trading with another's goods. When man rejected Christ he was turned out of his stewardship. This is man's position. We should, therefore, dispose of everything now in reference to the world to come, according to this permission in grace revealed in chapter 16, to use the things of which we have the administration. If we are serving mammon we shall not get the blessing of serving God in the sense of God's gifts, for it is retributive justice here in a sense. If you are not faithful in another man's, who will give you that which is your own? If you have not been faithful in the unrighteous mammon, who will commit to your trust the true riches? If you are loving money, you cannot have your heart filled with Christ. We are not to be "slothful in business," but "fervent in spirit, serving the Lord," and for this He opens Heaven to us. Not as He said to Abraham, "Unto a land that I will show thee." He has shown Heaven unto us, having opened it to us in grace. It is the revelation of grace that gives power over earthly things. May the Lord keep before us a living Christ as our light for guidance and salvation to walk and trust in!

     
The Man of Sorrows, by John Nelson Darby, [n.d. (prior to 1882)], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 182]

  

CHAPTER 17.

We have seen the great principle of divine grace in contrast with self-righteousness, and the Jewish economy, which refused its Messiah, the Son of God, set aside to make way for bringing to light life and incorruption through the Gospel.

1.--"Then said He unto the disciples, It is impossible but that offences will come; but woe unto him through whom they come." We enter here on the spirit and way of serving, now that the world to come was let in upon the conduct and faith of the disciples in this world, for none could serve two masters. God is carrying on a work--in a little child perhaps--but it is His own work, and individual faith is needed in the path of a rejected Christ. Among those who professed to follow Him and His glory on the principle of faith there would be, alas, many scandals. It was not now, nor yet, to be a reign of judicial power when the Son of Man would gather out of His kingdom all scandals and them which do iniquity. Satan's power is permitted; the exercise of faith is required. It is a time of proving by the prevalence of evil that which lasts because of God. The Cross must be taken and self denied. It is a hard lesson, but blessed when learned. The Cross and the glory are always connected. The Cross must be on the natural man, not on sin merely, so as to break the will. Christ had no will, showing perfectness; but we need the Cross practically as the means of communion by breaking down that which hinders. Then, again, the whole system of the world is a stumbling-block.

[p. 183]

[paragraph continues] There is not one thing in it which is not calculated to turn the heart from God. Take the merest trifle, dress, vanities in the street, flattery of man, of brethren perhaps, all tend to elevate the flesh. What a different thing is Heaven opening on a rejected Saviour! And this is our light and pathway through the world, for now the Heavens are opened to faith, as we pass through it to Him whom we see in glory. There is an active, energetic flow of God's love in carrying on souls. Is our walk a witness? Take care you are not a stumbling-block. You may say a person must be very weak to feel such or such a thing. But it is the very reason why he is to be cared for. The Lord give us never to hinder but to help the weak! These things are the stumbling-block of the enemy, and the man by whom they come is so far an instrument of Satan. The Lord loves His little ones. Better for that man that a millstone were hanged about his neck and he cast into the sea than that he should offend one of them.

  

INSTRUCTION IN FORGIVENESS.

3.--But suppose a person does something to stumble you, what then? "Take heed to yourselves." Your part is to forgive. Take heed to yourselves, jealous and self-judging. "If thy brother trespass against thee, rebuke him; and if he repent, forgive him." What! if he trespass often, "seven times in a day?" Yes, if he "seven times in a day turn again to thee, saying, I repent, thou shalt forgive him." Watch incessantly yourselves, and see to it that the spirit of love (the power of unity and the bond of perfectness, as we know

[p. 184]

from elsewhere) be not broken, nor the spirit of holiness, that the peace be not false. Blessed path! What condescension to our weakness and danger in the introduction of grace, and the moral judgment of present things, which are the aliment of the flesh and the domain of the world! Watchfulness against self and grace to others bring us through, rising like a life-boat above all breakers.

5-10.--"Lord, increase our faith." In such a position there would be need of faith and the energy proper to it. The apostles led of God, though perhaps seeing but the brighter part of the difficulty, and with a confused sense of this new position, pray for an increase of faith. The Lord answers by setting forth the fulness of its energy. For faith realises a power which is not in the person, and thus acts without . limit. He applies it also, though in general terms, to the removal of the obstacles of a system which might present the form of what was good and great, but fruitless. In every need we may draw upon God. All consists in looking simply to Him. All things are possible to him that believes. For it is God accomplishing His will, and He has willed to accomplish it by man and to honour Himself in man, after being dishonoured of Satan in and by man; but this in faith according to His will, till the Lord Jesus returns in power and glory. God is at work, and if you are co-workers under Him you could believe that He is, and say: "Let this be done and this." Is it nothing to wield God's power? If you know not what it is to be opposed by Satan you will feel how blessed it is to call in the power of God. Your place and work may be very humble--outside--no matter

[p. 185]

what, still you need God's power to be little. What the Lord says in verses 7-10 is not applicable to a careless servant. If he has neglected his work he is a slothful one. But I am an "unprofitable servant" when I have done all that I am commanded. Am I neglected? It is to try me. Something needs it. Perhaps I want to learn that God can do without me. Now that Christ is rejected God is at work. If He uses me it is a great honour. If He lays me by because self was elated it is a great mercy. He is saying, as it were: "Be satisfied with Myself, be content to know I love thee." Are you content with His love? Do you want man's honour or your own? Remember that when you have done all it is the time to say "unprofitable servant."

  

THE TEN LEPERS.

11-19.--"Ten men that were lepers." The history which follows shows that when God brings in new power those who have had the previous privileges are the last to rise above them into what is better, but there is a fate wrought of God in the heart which sets free from the subsidiary forms thrown round God's will in the past economy. Thus recognising God in Jesus, it carries the soul beyond the law of a carnal commandment, and associates it with Him in whom is the power of an endless life. It occupies us with His person who is above all, planting us not in dishonour of the law ("yea, we establish the law" through faith), but in the liberty wherewith the truth--the Son--makes free. All were cleansed by the Word of divine power. The nine went on to show themselves to the priests,

[p. 186]

acting on the word of Jesus, and thus far in faith. But the Samaritan stranger perceived God's glory in what had taken place, and so turned back to Jesus and aloud glorified God. The others owned the power which had come, but remained in their religious habits and associations. He, less pre-occupied with outward institutions, returned to the source of power, not to its shadow and witness, which nature always uses to hide God. He had experienced divine power in Jesus, and instead of merely enjoying the gift, he most humbly, but in the boldness and propriety of faith, went back to own the Giver. "He fell down on his face at His feet giving Him thanks." He wanted no priest. The priest did not, could not, cleanse, but only discern and pronounce a man clean. Evil had levelled the Jew and the Samaritan. They were alike cast out of the presence of divine communion by the leprosy which afflicted them. But He who healed lepers under the law was He who gave the law, and the word of Jesus at once recognised the law and manifested the Jehovah who crave it. The gratitude of faith was a readier reasoner than the instruction of the law; for the blessing afforded by the work and presence of Jesus was to the nine the means of keeping up Jewish distinction, to the tenth it was the evidence of divine goodness. To him, therefore, it was complete deliverance. He has by faith arrived in grace at the fountain head from which the law itself proceeded, and was let go in peace, made whole by his faith, having liberty from God and with God, giving thanks and glorifying Him, and withal knowing how acceptable it was in His sight.

[p. 187]

How many reasons might have been pleaded for going on and not returning to Jesus! How might the nine Jews have said: "You are ordered to go and show yourself to the priest." But faith goes straight to the heart of God, and there finds all grace and a dismissal in the liberty of grace. To him who returned to Jesus, cleansed and with heart-felt thanks, the priests were left behind. In spirit and figure the healed Samaritan was passed into another system by faith--the grace and liberty of the Gospel. It is blessed thus to be at the source of power and goodness, and there only does God put now those who believe. If under the law before, we are become dead to it by the body of Christ that we should belong to Another--to Him who is raised from the dead. It is this way alone that glorifies God, however men may plead the latter. Thus only can we joy in God through our Lord Jesus Christ, by whom we have now received, not the law, but the reconciliation. In Him, thus known and enjoyed, we have all and more than all than the priests ever conceived. We have communion with the Father and Son by faith in God fully revealed.

19.--We have to do with Him in Heaven now, not with a temple and priests on earth. "Arise, go thy way." You have found the person and glory of the Lord. You are beyond the priests and the temple, your faith has pierced the veil and found One greater than both. The rest went their way cleansed to be under the law. Stupified by Judaism, they did not return to glorify God. All this, at the point of the Gospel we are arrived at, is full of

[p. 188]

importance. It is another light thrown on the passing away of the law and of that dispensation.

  

THE KINGDOM OF GOD.

20.--In the next verses the question was actually raised as to the coming of God's kingdom. The Pharisees asked when it should come, and the Lord places them on their plain responsibility. "The kingdom of God cometh not with observation," or outward show. It should not be said, "Lo here!" or, "Lo there!" for that kingdom was then there among them. The King was speaking to them. Ought they not to have known Him because He came in grace? If He had humbled Himself to know their sorrows and to die for their sins, was that a reason for not discerning His greatness and moral perfection manifested in ten thousand ways? Did not His holy love to the poor and guilty prove plainly enough who He was? If man's heart had not been opposed to all that was the delight of God in the kingdom, if his eye had not been blind to all that was lovely and of good report, he would have felt that the lower Christ stooped the more wonderful were His works.

21.--To His disciples He had other things to say. He was rejected and leaving them. Suffering awaited them. Trying as their position might now be as the companions of His rejection, the days would come when they would long in vain for one of those days when they had enjoyed blessed and sweet intercourse with the Son of Man. They would as Jews in the land feel the difference. Then Satan, to allure and deceive in that day, would lead men to say, "Lo here!" or, "Lo there!" but the disciples would

[p. 189]

know its falsehood. There was no hope for the nation which rejected Christ. The King had been there, but was refused; He was no longer "here" or "there." This day the Son of Man would be as the lightning flashing from one quarter under Heaven to another. But first He must suffer many things, and be rejected of this generation, i.e., the unbelieving Jews.

  

THE COMING OF THE SON OF MAN.

24.--"So shall the Son of Man be in His day." It is evident that while the Lord takes this name of Son of Man to His disciples as revealing a relation higher and wider than that of Messiah (the link of which was broken and gone in the nation's ruinous rejection of Him), the whole of this instruction is Jewish, and shall find its accomplishment properly in a godly remnant of the latter day. The Christian part is not spoken of here, for that is association after a heavenly sort with Christ, and we have its great moral outlines, at least, in Luke 12. Here we are on the ground of responsibility, not of heavenly grace. We must separate the Church's place with Christ from the government of the world by Christ. The very character of the predicted delusion confirms this distinction. For if men said to the Christian "Here is Christ" he would instantly know that it was of Satan, because we are to meet Him, not here or there on earth, but in the air (1 Thess. 4). But this is not the case when you come to the government of the world. There the hope rests on Jewish ground, and then the witnesses for God must go through tribulation such as has never been. Now, unless expressly

[p. 190]

forewarned they would naturally look here or there for the Deliverer. For in that character His feet shall stand upon the Mount of Olives, and He shall come to Zion, and shall come out of it. "Jehovah shall send the rod of Thy strength out of Zion: rule Thou in the midst of Thine enemies." All this differs from the Christian's hope and his desire meanwhile, for we do not want our enemies destroyed, but converted, and we are looking to be taken from them all to Heaven with the Saviour, instead of waiting for Him to join and exalt us under His reign upon the earth.

30.--"In the day when the Son of Man is revealed." But, again, the subject here is neither the past siege of Jerusalem nor the future judgment of the dead. Titus' capture of the city was not like the lightning, but a long, fierce, hardly-contested struggle. Nor were the Jews up to the moment of the final stroke in a state of ease and carnal security, resting on the continuance of things as they were, as in the days of Noah and Lot. Suddenness of judgment is its first feature, certainty is the next, discriminating certainty, neither of which things could be fairly said of the Romans. Without or within, at rest or at work, men or women, it mattered not, God would burn up the chaff and preserve the wheat, the one would be taken and the other left. Next, there is a local, earthly stamp, which excludes the scene from that of the great white-throne judgment. For there is no resemblance between the judgment of the dead and the deluge or the fate of Sodom. It is the end of the age, not of the world, and is a judgment on a temporal

[p. 191]

people, and more especially on their city. For they were not to return into the house if on the house-top, and if in the field they were not to turn back. None of these things could be said of the dead, any more than the bed or the mill. It would be no time for human motives, artifices, or concessions (v. 23). Faithfulness to the Lord and His testimony would be the true and saving wisdom. The day of the Son of Man's revelation was in question, His judgment of the quick, and especially of a generation which has rejected and caused Him to suffer.

37.--If they asked, "Where?" the solemn word for conscience was, where the body, the corpse was, the swift, inevitable judgments of God would fall.

     
The Man of Sorrows, by John Nelson Darby, [n.d. (prior to 1882)], at sacred-texts.com

  

CHAPTER 18.

We saw from verse 20 to the end of chapter 17 that the kingdom of God was presented, first, in the person of Jesus as a question of faith, not of outward show, nor of a "lo here!" or, "lo there!" And, secondly, in the way of judgment, which should deliver the remnant by the execution of divine vengeance on their enemies. The first eight verses of our chapter complete the prophetic warning, and show that the resource of the righteous in the last days will be prayer. Nevertheless, though the parable has that special application to the future oppression of God's witnesses who will then be found in Jerusalem the instruction, as usual with this Gospel, is made general so as to suit any or all kinds of difficulty by which men might be tried.

[p. 192]

  

THE UNJUST JUDGE.

1.--"And He spake a parable unto them, to this end, that men ought always to pray, and not to faint." Faith would be put to the test. If God were looked to, and not merely the blessing, men would not faint, though there was no answer. They would go on, always looking up, though all seemed against them. The widow represents those who have no human resource; their resource would be constancy in prayer. Such will be the godly seed in Israel, for it is the remnant, not the Church, which is here meant. They will plead with the judge to avenge them of their adversary. Their patience and confidence may be sorely tried, but they will not cry in vain.

6, 7.--"And the Lord said, Hear what the unjust judge saith. And shall not God avenge His own elect, which cry day and night unto Him?" He may be slow in taking up their cause; but when once He shall rise up a short work will He make on the earth. Meanwhile patience must have its perfect work. In Jesus it had its full perfection. There was the rejection and the reproach of men, the forsaking of disciples, the power of Satan, the cup of God's wrath. But He went through all to the glory of God. In detail we, too, have to be sifted, and to find all circumstances against us, but God for us, yet more than if we had outward help, miraculous power, the Church all right. Even joy may hinder our entire dependence on God, making us forget practically that the flesh profits nothing. When no circumstances lead you to have any hope, is your hope then in Him? The flesh may get on for a long

[p. 193]

while, as in Saul; but faith only can wait with all against it. It is then the divine life depending on divine power. Thus it was in Christ pre-eminently. "I believed, therefore have I spoken" (2 Cor. 4. 13) . He went down into the dust of death, and has introduced a wholly new order of things. And we, having the same spirit of faith, we also believe, and there-fore speak. "Wherefore, henceforth know we no man after the flesh: yea, though we have known Christ after the flesh, yet now henceforth know we Him no more. Therefore if any man be in Christ, he is a new creature" (2 Cor. 5. 16, 17). Christ is dead, risen, and now set down at the right hand of God. Having this life, we are put to the test practically to learn the lesson of death and resurrection, where nothing but God can sustain. In the parable there are two considerations. If the unjust judge hear and act for the defenceless, be the motive what it may, will not God? But this is far from all. God has His affections, not only His character, but objects of His delight. "And shall not God avenge His own elect?" It never can become the righteous God, who taketh vengeance to make light of evil or let the wicked go unpunished. For then how shall He judge the world? He notices the cry from the oppressed day and night, and it is the cry of His own elect.

8.--"I tell you that He will avenge them speedily." But will there be the faith that expects His interference? They will cry from distress, and God will hear. Nevertheless, the question is raised: Will there be when the Son of Man cometh that faith on the earth which is founded on God known in peaceful communion? Will it not rather

[p. 194]

be the cry of the righteous in bitterness of spirit, a cry forced out of them, and not the cry of desire?

  

THE PHARISEE AND THE PUBLICAN.

9. "Two men went up to the temple to pray." We have next the moral features of, and suited to, the kingdom, the characters which are in harmony or discord with the state of things introduced by grace. The Pharisee and the publican set forth, not the doctrine of atonement or of justification by faith, but the certainty that self-righteousness is displeasing to God, and that lowliness because of our sin is most acceptable in His sight.

11.--The Pharisee does not set God aside. He "stood and prayed thus with himself: God, I thank Thee." But then he thanks God for what he is, not for what God is. The only hope of the publican was in God Himself. He was very ignorant, no doubt, but he had the right spirit to get at God. Light had broken in and shown he was a sinner, and he submitted to the painful conviction, and confessed the truth of his state to God. He was cast on God's mercy to his soul. He dared not appeal to justice, he did not ask indifference, but that mercy which measures the sin and forgives it. The revelation of grace had not yet come in, the work of reconciliation was not yet done, so that the publican stood "afar off;" but his heart was touched, and God was what he wanted. If a soul is brought to a sense of sin now it need not, and "'tight not, to stand afar off. The grace of God that bringeth salvation has appeared. Nevertheless, though he did and could not thus know grace, the

[p. 195]

publican gives God and himself their true character. It was not full knowledge, but the knowledge as far as it went was true.

14.--"I tell you this man went down to his house justified rather than the other; for every one that exalteth himself shall be abased; and he that humbleth himself shall be exalted." Universal truth! but where so shown as in Jesus? For if the first man, exalting himself, was abased to Hell, He who was God made Himself of no reputation, humbled Himself to the death of the Cross. Wherefore God also hath highly exalted Him. In one sense men cannot humble themselves, because they are sinners already, and cannot go lower; a saint may. True humility is forgetfulness of self. This is illustrated yet more by the incident that follows.

15.--"And they brought infants unto Him, that He would touch them." It is the lowliness of real insignificance, as the former was because of sinfulness. Who would be troubled with beings of such little consequence? Not the disciples, but Jesus. The Lord delighted in them, and that is the spirit of the kingdom of God. And here, too, a general moral maxim comes out . If a man is to enter that kingdom all confidence in self must be broken down, and the truth be received simply as a little child hears its mother. If it is not so, God and man have not their place. When He speaks all I have to do is to listen. This is the humility of nothingness, as the other was on account of sin.

  

THE RICH YOUNG RULER.

18,--"And a certain ruler asked, . . .What shall 

[p. 196]

[paragraph continues] I do to inherit eternal life?" Here is the question of doing in order to obtain eternal life, not salvation for a lost one, but that which searches the heart to the bottom. The young man was a lovely character, looked at as a creature. For if there are the ravages of sin in the world, there are traces of God there too. This ruler did not see God in Christ. Morally attracted, he came to learn to do good, without a doubt of his own competence. In Jesus he only saw a perfectly good Man, and one therefore eminently able to advise and direct him in the same path. Sin, on the one hand, and grace on the other, were altogether ignored by him. He knew neither himself nor God. There is no man good. All are gone astray. Man is a sinner, and needs God to be good to him. He is incompetent to do the good which satisfies God. The Lord took up the young ruler on his own assumption that he could do good for the purpose of bringing out what he was. The good Master that he had appealed to puts to the test what his heart really is.

22.--"Yet lackest thou one thing: sell all that thou hast; . . . and come, follow Me." Would he give up self-importance? After all he loved his riches too well. "He was very sorrowful, for he was very rich." Had not such things been promised as a blessing to the Jews? Christ shows them to be a snare. But then they do much good. Nay, are they good for your heart? It is not that they may not be used in grace; but the man did not know his own heart. Good is not there, nor the strength to produce it. Every motive which governs man is rooted up by the Cross. But all within is bad, and

[p. 197]

[paragraph continues] I can never work a thing fit for God out of bad material. I need God, therefore, who can give me a new and holy nature, who can be merciful to me because He is above all sin. The spring of all good is that it flows from God and not man. It is an impossibility, as far as man is concerned, that any should be saved. Sin has ruined man and all his hopes. If one looks at the means he can avail himself of they are wholly useless to save him. But "the things which are impossible with men" (Luke 18. 27), said the Saviour, "are possible with God" (Mark 10. 27). Such is the sole foundation for the sinner.

28.--"Lord, we have left all and followed Thee." If Peter is quick to speak of the devotedness of the disciples in leaving all and following Jesus, the Lord shows the certainty that every loss for the kingdom's sake will turn into manifold gain, both now and in the world to come.

  

DEATH AND RESURRECTION FORETOLD.

31-33.--But He binds it all up with what was coming on His own person. They were going up to Jerusalem, but for what? He, the Messiah, "shall be delivered unto the Gentiles, and shall be mocked, and spitefully entreated, and spitted on; and they shall scourge Him, and put Him to death." All hopes must end here: "Yea, though we have known Christ after the flesh, yet now henceforth know we Him no more" (2 Cor. 5. 16). Even He, if He is to deliver the lost, must come down to the dust of death. Christ has no association with sinful man. How then can He deliver? He must die for us; He cannot take corruption into union with

[p. 198]

[paragraph continues] Himself. A living Christ, we may reverently say, could not deliver us, consistently with God's nature and character; redemption was a necessity. "Except a corn of wheat fall into the ground and die, it abideth alone; but if it die, it bringeth forth much fruit." But if it was the only means of a holy salvation, man's full wickedness came out in the rejection and death of Christ. He hated what is in God and He who is God--hated both the Son and the Father. All question of human justice is settled and negatived for ever.

34.--Alas! "the disciples understood none of these things," neither His shame and death, nor His resurrection. It was the accomplishment of what the prophets had written concerning the Son of Man. But they knew not what He said nor what they wrote. The death of Christ would manifest what man was, and what God was; His resurrection would evince the power of life that can deliver the dead. But He was not understood. Verse 34 closes that part of our Gospel which shows the bringing in of the new and heavenly dispensation. With verse 35 we enter on the historical account of the Lord's final intercourse with the Jews. "Son of Man" was the general character of the Gospel, but now, in the midst of Israel, He takes up that of Son of David. Jericho was the first place Israel had to conquer when they crossed the Jordan, and a special curse was pronounced against it. But Israel had not walked in obedience, and the Messiah enters not as the King in outward glory, but as the rejected Jesus of Nazareth, with blessing for the remnant that received Him in faith.

[p. 199]

  

HEALING THE BLIND MAN.

35.--"And it came to pass that as He was nigh unto Jericho." It is not come nigh, as if it were necessarily His first approach, but a general expression, just as applicable to His being nigh on His leaving the city. (Cp. Matt. and Mark.)

35.--"A certain blind man sat by the way side begging, and he cried, saying, Jesus, Thou Son of David, have mercy on me." He was rebuked by many, but there was the perseverance of faith, and he cried so much the more, "Thou Son of David, have mercy on me." Here was a sample of the gathering to the Name that Israel rejected. The eye of the blind was opened then, as it will be in the remnant by and by.

     
The Man of Sorrows, by John Nelson Darby, [n.d. (prior to 1882)], at sacred-texts.com

  

CHAPTER 19.

1-10.--Next we have the account of "a man named Zacchaeus," for the Spirit of God did not tie Luke to the mere order of time, and morally viewed it was the fitting sequel to the healing of the blind man. Found only in this Gospel, it is a striking illustration of the grace which receives a man, no matter how low, and in the face of Jewish prejudices. For a publican, a rich chief of the publicans, was justly an object of abhorrence to those who regarded him as the expression of Gentile dominion. All was wrong through sin, and Israel was not humbled. Still it was a sad position for an Israelite, however honest and conscientious Zacchaeus might be in it. But it was the day of grace, and "he sought to see 

[p. 200]

[paragraph continues] Jesus." There were difficulties, hindrances in him and around; but faith perseveres in spite of opposition. As the blind man was bent on his object, so was the rich publican set on seeing Jesus. This marks the working of God's Spirit, the apprehension of the worth of the object. We want it and more of it, we know enough to want more. It is an appetite produced by the Holy Spirit. It is a terrible thing if we as Christians have not this craving, this hungering and thirsting after a greater enjoyment of God, for where this is not, deadness and apathy of soul have come in.

  

CONVERSION OF ZACCHAEUS.

5.--Jesus came to the place and saw him, and said unto him, "Zacchaeus, make haste and come down; for to-day I must abide at thy house. And he made haste and came down, and received Him joyfully." He had not yet the full knowledge of Jesus, but his desire had been met, and he had joy. It was neither law nor glory, but a hidden Messiah come in full grace. There was abundant evidence who He was, but in grace He was come down where they were. No matter what people thought. Finding Jesus is everything. Zacchaeus had the answer to the want which divine grace had created. Grace does not give at first the knowledge of Christ's work; there may be little or no understanding that we are made the righteousness of God in Him. Hence the first joy often wanes, because, when conscience is accused, I want the consciousness of that righteousness. The first joy is constantly that of discovering that we possess the felt need of the soul for Christ; but the

[p. 201]

full question as to righteousness may still have to be met in the conscience, though, of course, every believer in possessing Christ does knowingly possess divine righteousness. Nevertheless, much as there is to learn, there is joy. New interests are awakened, new desires arise, a new insight is obtained into good and evil. When there is a deep sense of what it is to be lost and saved the world (man) is a light matter. But when the pressure on the conscience is removed too often nature resumes a sort of place, and then Christ is not all and everything to the saint .

Zacchaeus' heart is opened. There is confidence which tells itself out. There might be ever so much honest effort to satisfy conscience in his false position, but, after all, what a place it was! Men murmured. The Lord passed all over. Self-defence was needless. The Lord did not accuse, and speaks of nothing but the salvation that was that day come to the house. Zacchaeus was a son of Abraham, and the Son of Man was come to seek and to save that which was lost. What could a Pharisee object? There had been a work with the conscience of Zacchaeus, but the Son of Man was come, and salvation was the word. He brings it . He gave what Zacchaeus had little thought of. He was come to meet the need He had created. He was come to seek, i.e., to produce the desire; and to save, i.e., to meet that desire.

  

NEARING JERUSALEM.

11.--The Lord was now "nigh to Jerusalem," and so He added a parable to correct the thought that the kingdom of God was immediately to appear, for Jerusalem is the city of the great King, and the

[p. 202]

question of His rejection would be closed there. He shows, on the contrary, that He was going away, going to a far country, to Heaven, where He was to receive the kingdom and to return. The time was not come to set up the kingdom on earth. Meanwhile, the business of His servants was to trade with the money He delivered them. When He returns, having received the kingdom, He assigns them places according to their faithfulness; for in Luke it is a question of man's responsibility; in the corresponding parable of Matthew God's sovereignty is the point. Difference of gifts appear in Matthew, difference of rewards in Luke. In Luke each servant receives a mina from the Lord; in Matthew all who gained in trading enter alike the joy of their Lord.

13.--Here the whole force is occupy. "Occupy till I come." Our position is serving a rejected Saviour till He comes again. We are not yet to share in the glory of the kingdom. When He returns all will be disposed of impartially, and there will be that which answers to authority over ten cities and over five. The righteousness of God is the same for us as for Paul; but as there is very different service, and different measures of fidelity, so there will be speciality of reward. No doubt it is grace that works, still here there is reward of faithful service. The secret of all service is the due appreciation of the Master's grace. If one fears Him as an "austere man" there is unfaithfulness, too, even on one's own principles.

26.--"Unto every one which hath shall be given" is a universal principle. When through

[p. 203]

grace there is the realisation in our souls of the truth presented to us we are of those "who have." But if a truth comes before a man, and he talks about it without its being mixed with faith in the heart, even that he hath shall be taken away from him. Truth, if it reveals Christ, humbles me and deals with the evil within. Then it is not only Christ as an object outside me, but a living Christ in my soul. Knowledge, which has not power over the conscience, only puffs up. If truth be not acted on it troubles the conscience. But how often one sees a conscience, having lost the light, quite easy at a lower standard than before, rejoicing that it has lost its trouble, though the light of truth be lost with it! The soul has sunk below that which had exercised the conscience, and thus the whole standard, principle, and life are lowered, and opportunities of winning Christ lost for ever. Holding fast the truth--Christ--I have Him as it were a part of myself, and learn to hate the evil and to delight in the good, so that I get more till I grow up in Christ into the measure of the stature of His fulness. Common duties do not rob us of Him; from these the heart returns with fresh delight into its own centre. It is the heart clinging to vanity that spoils our joy; it is anything which exalts self and lowers Christ, an idle thought, even if allowed in the heart. As to the citizens, the Jews, on whom He had rights as King, their will was against Him, not only hating Him there while among them, but, above all, sending the message after Him, "We will not have this Man to reign over us." Unsparing vengeance must take its course on them in His presence.

[p. 204]

  

ENTERING JERUSALEM.

28.--Jesus entered Jerusalem as Messiah. His rights as Lord of all were to be asserted and acted on (29-36). He presents Himself for the last time to Israel, in the lowliness of grace, which was of far greater importance than the kingdom. This gives rise to the most marked contrast between the disciples and the Pharisees. The whole multitude of the disciples began to rejoice and praise God with loud voice, saying, "Blessed be the King that cometh in the Name of the Lord: peace in Heaven and glory in the highest." Some of the Pharisees appeal to Him to rebuke the disciples, but learn from His lips that if these were silent the very stones would cry out. There must be a testimony to His glory (vv. 37-40) .

When Jesus was born angels announced it to the poor of the flock, and the heavenly host praised God, saying: "Glory to God in the highest, and on earth peace"--good pleasure in men. Such will be the result, and the angels anticipate it without reference to the hindrances or to the means. But Christ was rejected here below; and now the disciples say, "Peace in Heaven and glory in the highest." When the question of power is raised in order to establish the kingdom there will be war then (Rev,. 12). In fact there can be no peace in Heaven till Satan and his host are cast out. Then will the King be established in power when the obstacles shall be taken out of the way. Psalm 118 celebrates this, His mercy enduring for ever, spite of all the people's sins. It is the song of the latter day. If God sends

[p. 205]

peace to the earth in the person of His Son it is in vain, not as to the accomplishment, but as to present effect. Meanwhile to faith there is peace in Heaven, and when this is asserted in power against the evil spirits in the heavenly places there will be blessing indeed. Oh, what a time will it be! What a relief to the working of God's grace! For now it is ever toil and watching. What, always? Yes, always; and that is not the rest. But then it will be, as sure as God takes His great power and reigns. "The Lord shall hear the Heavens" (Hosea 2) . There will be an unbroken chain of blessing, and that, too, on earth. It will not be one "building, and another inhabiting," but blessing flowing down and around to the lowest and the least. Till then, as now, the word is suffering in grace, not victorious power. Never fear persecution, it will make your face shine as an angel's. But God could not be silent if His own Son were cast out. He might leave Him to suffer, but not without a testimony. If there were no others the stones would speak. And so if we are faithful and near to Christ, that will turn for a testimony.

  

WEEPING OVER JERUSALEM.

41-44.--"He beheld the city, and wept over it." Here we have, not the cursing of the fig tree, but the spirit of grace in the Lord's weeping over the city. The counsels of God will surely be accomplished, but we ought also to know His real tenderness in Jesus. Those tears were not in vain, whatever the appearances. It was the time of Jerusalem's visitation, but she knew it not. We ought, as having the mind of Christ, to know when

[p. 206]

and how to interfere spiritually. We are the epistle of Christ, whereby the world should be able to read what God is. Christ manifested Him perfectly. But what did He find in the people? See verses

45, 46.--God declares His house to be one of prayer. Men, the Jews, had made it a den of thieves. It was a terrible moral estimate, but this is the true way to judge, i.e., having God's Word to take facts as they are. We are ignorant and morally incapable of judging without the Word of God. Let the eye be fixed on Christ and our judgment be formed on things around by the Word.

     
The Man of Sorrows, by John Nelson Darby, [n.d. (prior to 1882)], at sacred-texts.com

  

CHAPTER 20.

1-8.--The first question raised was by the scribes as to the authority of Christ and its source. Jesus questions them about the baptism of John: "Was it from Heaven or of man?" They reasoned without conscience. They owned their incompetency rather than acknowledge His Messiahship. The simple child of God receives the Word as certainly as Christ gives it. Reliance on God's Word is the only sure ground. How can you be certain? God has said it. If God's speaking requires proof, I must have something more sure and true than God. Is the Church? Alas! alas! If God cannot speak so as to claim authority without another to accredit what He says, there is no such thing as faith.

  

PARABLE OF THE VINEYARD.

9-16.--The parable of the husbandmen sets forth the Lord's dealing with Israel, to whom the vineyard

[p. 207]

was first let, and upon the rejection of "the Heir" the gift of it to others. Nor was this all. The rejected stone becomes the head of the corner. Whosoever fell on that stone should be broken; but on whomsoever it fell utter destruction would be the result. The past sins of Jerusalem illustrate the first; for the second we must wait for the execution of judgment when the Lord appears.

19-26.--The question of tribute to Caesar was very subtle. They used the effect of their own wickedness to tempt the Lord. Abstractedly, the Jews ought not to have been subject to the Gentiles. And, moreover, the Messiah was come, the Deliverer of Israel. If He said obey the Gentiles, where was His delivering power? If He said rebel they would have had an excuse to deliver Him to Pilate. Because of Israel's sin God has broken down the keystone of nations, and given power to the Gentiles. The Jew has been rebellious under the sentence, and ever craving deliverance from their thraldom. But the Lord answered with divine wisdom. He put them exactly in the place where their sin had put them; Caesar's things are to be rendered to Caesar, and God's things to God.

  

MARRIAGE AND THE RESURRECTION.

27-38.--After settling the question as to this world between God and the people He next meets the Sadducean or sceptical difficulty as to the next world. "In he resurrection, whose wife shall she be?" The Lord shows the place of the risen saints in entire contrast with the world. The idea of a general resurrection is set aside. If all rise together, there is

[p. 208]

uncertainty, a common judgment; but if the saints are raised by themselves because they are children of God, leaving the rest of the dead for another and distinctive resurrection, a resurrection of judgment, all is changed. No passage of Scripture speaks of both rising together. The resurrection is that which most of all distinguishes, and this for ever. It is the grand testimony to the difference between good and bad. The saint will be raised because of the Spirit of Christ that dwells in him, the application to his body of that power of life in Christ which has already quickened his soul. It is a resurrection from among the dead, as was Christ's. So here, "they which shall be accounted worthy to obtain that age," for such it is, "and the resurrection from the dead, . . . they are equal to the angels, and are the children of God." Luke adds another characteristic point omitted elsewhere: "All live unto Him." It is the present blessed living unto God of those who have died and await the resurrection from among the dead.

  

DAVID'S SON AND LORD.

41-44.--The Lord puts His question: "How is David's Son David's Lord?" This was just what the Jews could not understand. It was the hinge on which turned the change in the whole moral system. He had taken the place of the holy dependent One, a pilgrim as others, and He had drunk of the brook by the way. He was going on in meekness and quietness, but living by the refreshments which came from God His Father. Thus having emptied Himself, humbled Himself, He is now exalted by God. This great universal principle, "He that humbleth himself

[p. 209]

shall be exalted, and he that exalteth himself shall be abased," is fully exemplified in the two Adams. The first Adam, man's nature, would exalt itself to be "as God," until in its full ripeness anti-Christ will exalt himself above all that is called God, or that is worshipped. Satan tempted man at the beginning to make himself like God, and at the end God shall send them strong delusion to believe a lie. Satan not being able to exalt himself in Heaven will attempt to do it through the seed of man, but the end shall be abasement (Isa. 14. 12-15) . In the second Adam we have Him who was God humbling Himself, going down, becoming obedient unto death, even the vilest, and then we see that humbled One going back to the place of power at God's right hand, but as Man as well as God. God highly exalted Him, that at the Name of Jesus every knee should bow. Having been obedient all through, in humiliation, He is exalted to be David's Lord. This took Him out of the line of Jewish promises, though as David's Son, of course, He had them. The Jews did not understand the Scriptures, and fulfilled them though not understanding them. God's ways have gone on through all, manifesting His grace and patience towards man. He placed man on the earth, and then sent law, prophets, etc., until man gets to the end in rejecting all, God tries man, and then brings in the new Man, who is the fulfilment of all His blessed counsels--the second Adam. Then He takes up the second Adam as the Heavenly Man into a heavenly place, and all now depends, not on the responsibility of man, but on the stability of God.

[p. 210]

[paragraph continues] Life, righteousness, and glory descend from Heaven. Is it life that is needed? God gives the life of Christ in resurrection. Is it righteousness? It is a divine righteousness that God gives. Is it a kingdom? It is the kingdom of Heaven. All flows down, not simply from God in grace, but from the place which man has in glory, from the counsels of God about the Heavenly Man in glory. He has first taken Him up, and thence the blessing flows down. The Man Christ Jesus has fully met all man's responsibilities. This is the reason of the fulness of the blessing of the Gospel, and also that of the kingdom to come. The Gospel is the power of God, and the kingdom is to be set up in Heaven. The King is gone into the far country, and when He returns it will be to bring in the kingdom of Heaven. All the counsels of God now take their centre and seat in Heaven. Thus, in the largest way, the turning point in all the plans and counsels of God is Jesus being set at the right hand of God. All the character, the stability, and the perfectness of our blessing takes its source from the exalted Jesus. The character of it is heavenly; the stability is what God has done; and the righteousness that fits me for it is God's.

The Spirit of God, the Holy Ghost, has come down to bear witness to Him on which the peace of the soul rests, even on the accomplished righteousness of Him who is taken up into glory. His office is to work within, and make us manifest what God is down here. All this we have as the result of Christ, instead of accomplishing the promises as David's Son, bringing them in as David's Lord.

[p. 211]

Mark the moral blessedness of this general principle: "He that humbleth himself shall be exalted." Christ humbled Himself, not was humbled, that is another thing. "He that humbleth himself shall be exalted." That is what we are to do--take the lowest place. We cannot do this till we are Christian;; but it is our glory to take the lowest, and hear Him say "Come up higher." "He hath left us an example that we should follow His steps" (1 Peter 2. 21). The Lord Jesus has been rejected as David's Son. He will come forth as David's Lord.

Now, while He is thus hidden, we see the Church's place. We are "hid with Christ in God" (Col. 3. 3), and have our portion by faith, as united to Him, while He is out of sight. The Holy Ghost having come down gives us a place as associated with Him in all the blessedness of the Father's house, and in all the glory which He has to be displayed by and by.

The place of Eve was one of union with Adam in the dominion over all things (Gen. 1. 26-28; 5. 2). We find the Church in the display of Christ's glory only as by grace the bride and companion of Christ, never as part of the inheritance. Viewed even individually, we are "joint-heirs with Christ." It is of the last importance to the saints in these days to apprehend the distinct place which we have as one with Christ, the Heavenly Man.

     
The Man of Sorrows, by John Nelson Darby, [n.d. (prior to 1882)], at sacred-texts.com

  

CHAPTER 21.

At the close of chapter 20 and the beginning of chapter 21 we have a most instructive, though painful, contrast between the selfish hypocrisy of

[p. 212]

the scribes, whom He condemns before the people, and the real devoted love of "the widow casting in two mites," whom He singles out for honour. Remark also that the Lord knows how to separate the intention of a sincere soul from the system that surrounds it, judging the whole state of that with which the individual is associated. Observe, further, the difference of giving one's living and one's superfluity. It is easy to compliment God with presents, and thus really minister to self; but she who gives her living gives herself in devotedness to God, and proves her dependence on God. Thus the two mites of her who had these only expressed all this perfectly, for there was need and everything else to hinder, while the applause of men and the pride of the donor found no place here. For Jewish splendour the act had little worth; but the Lord saw, and bore witness of the poor widow, blessed in her deed.

5-8.--The account which the Lord gives in this Gospel of the sorrows of Jerusalem is also, like the preceding, much more allied to the simple fact of the judgment on the nation and the change of dispensation. It differs much from Matthew 24, which fully refers to what is to arrive at the end; while our Gospel bears more than the first two on the then present time and setting aside of Jerusalem. Hence, Luke plainly sets forth the siege and destruction by Titus and the times of the Gentiles. Let it be observed also that the question in verse 7 extends only to the predicted destruction. Consequently in what follows we have the judgment on the nation, taken as a whole, from its then

[p. 213]

destruction till the times of the Gentiles (with whose economy this Gospel is so much occupied) be fulfilled. Nation should rise against nation, signs from Heaven and sorrows on earth follow. And before all these the disciples would be objects of hostility, but that would turn for a testimony instead of destroying theirs. They were to go on testifying, while the unhappy devoted city where they were filled up its iniquity. The Lord would permit trial, but not a hair of their head would be lost. But this would close. The sign given here is in no wise the abomination of desolation, but an historical fact--Jerusalem encompassed with armies. Its desolation now approached. They were then to flee, not to return. These were days of vengeance (it is not said of the unprecedented tribulation, as in Matthew, which is only in the latter day) . All that was written was to be fulfilled. Great distress there was in the land, and wrath on this people. Slaughter first and captivity afterwards wrought their cruel work of devastation, and Jerusalem till this hour abides the boast and prey of Gentile lords, and so must it be till their day is over.

  

DESTRUCTION OF JERUSALEM.

8-19.--In these earlier verses the Lord dwells on the dangers, duties, and trials of the disciples before the sack of Titus. Specially were they to beware of a pretended deliverer, and of the cry that the time, i.e., of deliverance, was at hand. Neither were they to be terrified by wars or commotions, any more than seduced by fair promises. These things must first be, but the end not immediately. Besides, it was

[p. 214]

not only confusion and woes and signs of coming change and evil outside. Before all these they them-selves were to be in affliction and persecution for Christ's sake.

20-24.--In these verses comes the actual judgment of the city and people, already judged virtually by His rejection. This extends down to our own days in principle. But all is not yet fulfilled. For in verse 25 begins the Lord's description of the closing scene--a judgment not on the Jews merely, but on the Gentiles also, for the powers of the Heavens, the source of authority, shall be shaken, as in Haggai 2 and Hebrews 12. This is not said to be immediately after the siege of Titus; but, on the contrary, room is left for the long course of treading down of Jerusalem under Gentiles, till their times are run out. It is in Matthew that we must look for the great tribulation of the last days, occupied as the first evangelist is with the consequences of Messiah's rejection, especially to Israel. Therefore, it is said there, "Immediately after the tribulation of those days"--i.e., the short crisis of "Jacob's trouble" yet to come. Here, however, after mention of the times of the Gentiles it is said that "there shall be signs in the sun and moon and stars, and upon the earth distress of nations with perplexity, the sea and waves roaring, men's hearts failing them." Men were astounded because they saw not the end, and trembled as they were dragged along to some unknown, awful conclusion. For principles were at work, they knew not how, dragging them along whether or no. The coming of the Son of Man disclosed all the scene to the disciples. But it is clear from the circumstances,

[p. 215]

and especially from the character of the redemption spoken of (28), that it is a question, not of Christians, but of earthly disciples, and of an earthly deliverance by judgment here below. The Lord in mercy turns the terror of man into a sign of deliverance for the remnant of that day.

  

THE COMING KINGDOM.

31, 32 are interesting in this point of view here, because they furnish remarkable evidence, first, that the kingdom of God does not mean the Gospel of His grace; and, secondly, that this generation cannot refer to the space of time from the prophecy to the destruction of Jerusalem. (1) For when they see these things coming to pass (and He had spoken of the final, universal trouble for the whole habitable earth, and not merely of what has befallen the Jews), they are to conclude that the kingdom of God is nigh. Now, even if it were only the Romans taking away their place and nation, and, still more, if it include the latter-day trouble, it is undeniable that the Gospel had extended far and wide before the first. In fact, the manifestation of its influence was declining rather before that time, as we see in the later epistles. But the things here seen were signs like the budding of the trees, and the kingdom of God is evidently to be at the coming of the King, when the Lord God Almighty takes His great power and reigns. That there was a partial, analogous judgment when Jerusalem fell is true, but verses 25-28 ought to leave no doubt of a wider, subsequent judgment, with signs which introduce, not the sorrows of the Jews, but the Son of Man coming in His kingdom.

[p. 216]

[paragraph continues] (2) For a similar reason "this generation" does not apply to a mere lifetime, but is viewed morally, as in Deuteronomy 32, Psalm 12, and many other scriptures. It is here expressly put at the close, after not only the fall of Jerusalem, but the totally distinct scene of Christ's coming in power and glory.

  

THE ENDURING WORD.

33.--"Heaven and earth shall pass away, but My words shall not pass away." This expression is very solemn. Deeper interests were involved than a casual change as to Jerusalem. The time was wrapped up in purposed obscurity, but nothing more sure than the facts predicted. The Lord had provided for His then disciples what was needful, but also in the written Word for the like times to come. Still, though the principle be always true, verse 34 clearly applies to a day to come on the earth. The privilege is to escape the judgments and stand before the Son of Man. This again is earthly, not the rapture to Heaven. The great moral principles, of course, remain true for all; specially indeed for those who, by virtue of a higher calling, can enjoy them in a more excellent way.

37, 38.--The Lord yet returned to give testimony, walking and working in the day; but His resting-place was there, whence He did depart, and where His feet shall stand in that day. Patient in service, He taught daily and early in the temple; at night He was separate from the judged city. His time was now come.

     
The Man of Sorrows, by John Nelson Darby, [n.d. (prior to 1882)], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 217]

  

CHAPTER 22.

1, 2.--"And the chief priests and scribes sought how they might kill Him." How was the carnal mind shown to be enmity against God in rejecting Christ! Wickedness was summed up and brought out in all--people, priest, rulers. If a friend, he is a traitor; if disciples, they either fled when danger approached or denied Him when near. The religious chiefs who ought to have owned the Messiah took Him to the infidel power of the world. He who was in the place of judgment washed his hands, owning His innocence, but gives Him up to man's will and rage. Thus man's evil was brought into complete juxtaposition with that which was perfect, and this in putting Him to death. It is no use to look for good in man. Not that there are no amiable traits of nature, but God has no place at all if man is put to the test. Along with this is the picture of the Lord's perfect patience through it all.

  

THE BETRAYAL OF JESUS.

Not man only, but Satan was there in temptation. It was the power of darkness as well as man's hour. And the Lord Jesus passes through this scene of men's wickedness and Satan's power; His heart melted like wax, but the effect always being the manifestation of perfectness. An angel strengthens Him; for He was really Man, but perfect Man, enduring all that could try Him, and nothing brought out but perfect grace and perfect obedience. Whenever there was sorrow His love surmounts the suffering to help and comfort others.

3-6.--"Then entered Satan into Judas." It

[p. 218]

is a solemn thought that the nearer to Jesus, if there is not spiritual life, the more a man resists God, and the more sure and sad an instrument of the enemy he becomes. If truth has been presented and not received nowhere has Satan so much power. This is a sample of Luke's manner as to dates. The entrance of Satan into Judas was what was morally necessary to present here; not so the particulars. Strictly, he put it into Judas' heart then, and entered after the sop was received. Covetousness was the means used; but though they plotted to betray and crucify Him in a corner this could not be. They were obliged to accomplish it according to God's purposes.

  

THE LAST PASSOVER.

8-13.--"Go and prepare us the Passover." Then the light from behind the scene makes a passage. It is the Lord; and no matter what He suffers, or what is before Him, yet we find the divine knowledge and power. There is the chamber. What calm and peaceful dignity! It is no effort, nothing to display a character. All yields before the unwitnessed authority of this rejected Saviour--all but that to which it had been most manifested, the unrenewed heart of man. To the householder, unknown it seems to every eye but one, it was enough to hear, "The Master saith to thee."

14.--How blessed to see such perfect human affections combined with His divine knowledge of all things. "With desire I have desired to eat this passover with you before I suffer"--like one leaving his family and first desiring a farewell meeting. When we see the divine glory in the person

[p. 219]

of Christ we find the human affections shining out. (Cp. Matt. 17. 27.) It is this which gives Him a power and charm which no object else has, so that God can delight in man and man can delight in God. The Lord breaks every link with the old thing (16). It is not setting up the kingdom here, but setting up man with God when the old connection was impossible. He was taking a new place where flesh and blood could not enter. His death and resurrection introduce a new relation with God. The Lord distinguishes here between the paschal lamb and the wine, and both from the institution of His Supper. He entered in the fullest way into all the feelings of Israel, the Israel of God, into the interests of the people as such, till His rejection put them on other ground, and divine favour passed into another scene by the resurrection, becoming Himself the Substitute, the true paschal Lamb. His disciples held the foremost rank as to this fellowship, as we have Hushai the king's friend. With them He desired the last testimony of parting and love. But while thus expressing His affection to them He assumes manifestly (v. 18) the Nazarite character, which was always His morally, but now externally and painfully: "I say unto you, I will not drink of the fruit of the vine until the kingdom of God come." He postpones His joy with them as in the common enjoyment of the kingdom till then.

  

THE LORD'S SUPPER.

19, 20.--He institutes the memorial of His better redemption, of His self-sacrificing dying love. If He separated Himself now to God in His joy, it was not

[p. 220]

want of love to His disciples, but its fullest display. It was to be done "in remembrance" of Him. We remember Him suffering, dead, absent; we know Him as a present living Saviour. The new covenant is established in His Blood. We cannot in all the joy of fellowship with Christ above forget what brought us into it. On one side, it is a body broken and blood shed; on the other, it is Himself and all the perfectness of love in dying for us. We are united to Him as a risen Christ, but He calls us to remember Him as a dead Christ. The blessedness of this last is in the work He did alone, by virtue of which I am put in union with Himself, alive again for evermore. As to man's part in it (vv. 21, 23) it was treachery and wickedness.

  

THE CALL TO SEPARATION.

28.--The Lord then distinctly sets forth this calling to walk in His own lowliness, and not as the world. Earthly grandeur was recognised among the Jews, but now it was sentenced, like all their system, as the rudiments of the world. All other greatness, though under the form of being benefactors, was worldly. He was one that served. The grace of His heart sets them right without a reproach. He lets them know that whatever high place they sought He took a low one. He might have said: "Nothing will break down this horrid selfishness." Yet says He, "Ye are they which have continued with Me in My temptations." And He is the same now. What we should seek is to have as much of the burden of the Church as we can. Suffering thus with Him, His heart goes on with us.

[p. 221]

31-34.--Peter was bold enough in the flesh to enter temptation. But it is impossible for man to stand where it is a question of good and evil. He is a sinner, and cannot go through that trial. If God judges flesh comes to nothing. There is the weakness of human nature, but, besides, Satan's title and power over man, who had brought out his own condition. in God's presence and come under death as the judgment of God. I may have learned in grace that the flesh is thus profitless, but it must be learned by intercourse with the enemy if not with God. For Simon, the Lord prayed that his faith should not fail; all his self-confidence must perish. Nor did he distrust Christ like Judas, who had no faith. What enabled him afterwards to strengthen his brethren? He discovered that there was utter badness in himself when he meant best, and that there is perfect grace in Christ even when he did worst .

35-38 show an entire change of circumstances. Previously He had protected them and supplied all as Messiah disposing of everything here. That was now gone since the Righteous One was being more and more rejected. He had come, able to destroy Satan's power, but it was the Lord, and man would not have Him. That is the condition the world is in . He must be reckoned among the transgressors. What link could there be between God and man? Humanity is a condemned thing because it refused Christ. You may find a scrupulous conscience as to putting the money in the treasury, but no conscience in betraying and crucifying Him. But it is in a rejected dead Christ that faith delights. The

[p. 222]

[paragraph continues] Christ that man scorns, it requires faith and grace to own. But the disciples still rested on man's strength, not on Messiah crucified in weakness, and said "Here are two swords." The Lord in saying "It is enough" alludes to their words, and implies that they did not enter into His mind. He did not want to say more.

  

THE GARDEN OF GETHSEMANE.

39-46.--"Pray that ye enter not into temptation." There are siftings needed to exercise us and to judge flesh. Christ, of course, did not need this, but dealt with all in communion with His Father. To Him it was a path of obedience, a blessed opportunity of doing God's will; to Peter it was Satan's power. Christ did not speak of the wickedness of the priests, the will of the people, or the injustice of Pilate, but of the cup His Father gave Him. There was positive intercourse with God about the trial before the time came. And so it must ever be. It is late to put the armour on when we ought to be in the battle. A man living with God, when he gets into trial goes through it, in his measure, as Christ did. He stands in the evil day, because he has been with God when there was no evil day. On the Cross it was not a question of communion; in the garden Christ is in communion with the Father, as to Satan's power, which was about to fall on Him. He felt all, but succumbed under nothing. Thus instead of entering into temptation He was in the highest exercise of spirituality accomplishing the will of God in the most difficult circumstances and the most perfect submission where it cost everything.

[p. 223]

[paragraph continues] Our Father never can lead us into sin, but He may into temptation, i.e., into the place of sifting, where the flesh is exposed, when this is needful, because hardness, or levity, or inattention to His patient warnings has come in. It is the last, and often necessary means of self-knowledge and discipline. Though it is great grace that He should take such pains, yet .seeing our weakness and the terribleness of the conflict with the enemy, it well becomes us to pray that we may not be cast into the furnace. In such times a bad conscience drives to despair. The flesh in its undiscerning carelessness meets the trial in uncertainty, or carnal opposition, and falls. If, on the other hand, trial comes we learn our position before God--watching, prayer, entreaty, spreading all before Him in child-like confidence, but submissive desire that His will be done.

The Lord was thoroughly Man in this, for an angel appears and ministers, strengthening Him. For the conflict of His soul was great; but it urged Him, in the realisation of the trial, to pray more earnestly. The effect of this is to see more clearly the power of evil and the sorrow, and that so as to act on the very body. He was in agony Himself, but always says "Father." He is, and speaks, in His relationship as Son; not yet the victim before God, but the sufferer in spirit, feeling all the depths of the waters He is passing through, but crying out of them to His Father. Satan tried to stop Christ with the difficulty when he could not beguile Him with the pleasure. But He went through all with His Father. At the Cross was another thing, the power of God against sin.

[p. 224]

47-53.--It is blessed to see these two things brought together--patience with men, and yet power to stop everything. Having been in an agony with God, He is calm before man. When the servant's ear was cut off He puts forth His hand to heal. What a picture of man, what a picture of God, if we look here at Christ!

  

PETER DENIES HIS LORD.

54-62.--When we tremble before men it is when we have not been with God. Peter breaks down, proving the deceitfulness of the flesh. In Jesus, suffering as He was, there was nought to disable the perfect and simple action of grace at each moment required. When the cock crew He turned and looked on Peter, who remembered His word, went out, and wept bitterly.

63-71.--The Lord spent the night, not before His judges, who took their ease till morning before they judged the Lord of glory, but with the men whom they employed, the object of all injury and insult. Then when it suited the convenience of the Jewish rulers they brought Him to their council; but the Lord knew it was not the time of testimony, and left them to their weakness. The presenting of Messiah to the Jews was finished. From this the Son of Man was to be seated at the right hand of God. All was settled with God, they could go on. They draw the right conclusion, and He conceals nothing. He was the Son of God. They must be guilty, not of mistake, but of condemning Him because He was the Son of God and owned it.

     
The Man of Sorrows, by John Nelson Darby, [n.d. (prior to 1882)], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 225]

  

CHAPTER 23.

1-25.--Religious iniquity had now only to lead on the world to finish the wickedness in which itself had taken the lead. The civil power must give in to the wilful evil of the apostate people of God. This is the history of the world, and, of the two, the religious side is always nearest to Satan. The chief priests manifested their enmity by their accusation, which was calculated to arouse the jealousy of the governor, charging on Christ what was entirely false as to Caesar, but with the subtle groundwork of that which they knew (reckoning on His truth) He could not deny.

  

CHRIST BEFORE PILATE.

The guilt of the Jews was complete, as was also that of the Gentiles, for Pontius Pilate declared Him innocent, and desired to release Him. Cruel enough himself, the Roman governor disliked cruelty in others, but he would not go so far as to save Christ from the malice of His enemies. It would have cost something to do this; it threatened his interest, and Pilate gave way. The one thing that is strong in the world is enmity against Christ.

But there was another form of evil to be introduced, to wit, Herod, the apostate king of apostate Israel; and in rejecting Jesus all are friends, however jealous and divided. How terrible the union between the fourth beast and God's external people? But if the Gentiles failed shamefully in protecting the just, and hence fell into basely unrighteous judgment, the activity of an evil will was with the

[p. 226]

[paragraph continues] Jews. Three times the opportunity of a relenting voice was given; but while the governor's indifference was as plain as the disappointed insolence of Herod every time the cry of the people increased in ardour for the death of the Messiah. Pilate, therefore, released the guilty Barabbas, whom they desired, to appease the Jews, and "delivered Jesus to their will."

26-31.--"They led Him away." It was a terrible time and full of violence. It mattered little whom they met if they could only force them to help in their iniquity. Their hour was struck, and all fell into the same mass of rejection and insult of Christ, save that the Jews acted with more knowledge. The forms of privilege became sorrows and harbingers of terror, they must be laid low, for all was untrue now. The natural feelings, touched by affecting circumstances, as we see in the weeping daughters of Jerusalem, did not change this. They understood neither the Cross of Christ nor the ruin which awaited themselves. One may be affected with compassion, as if one were superior to Christ, and fall under the judgment consequent on His rejection and death. No humiliation of Jesus put Him out of His place of perfect capability of dealing with all others from God. Alas! it was not only on Pilate and Herod, nor on the chief priests that judgment was coming, but on the women that lamented Him, unconscious of their own state, which was under condemnation. Neither natural conscience, nor natural religiousness, nor natural feelings will do, nothing short of the glory of God in Jesus. And if He, the living and true Vine, who indeed bore fruit

[p. 227]

to God, was thus dealt with, what must be the lot of the fruitless and unprofitable, for such branches were they? Where shall the ungodly and the sinner appear? Man rejects the green tree, and God rejects the dry. Life was there in the person of Jesus, and they would not have it, and are therefore given up. It cannot be had now but through a dead and risen Christ.

  

THE PLACE CALLED CALVARY.

32-43.--"And when they were come to the place called Calvary, there they crucified Him." There is the setting aside of all they looked for here in present deliverance, for Christ must die. But if we are also to see how low man can go morally we learn, at the same time, that Christ in His grace can go lower still. "Except the corn of wheat fall into the ground and die, it abideth alone." Therefore, whenever you see an attempt (and it is the attempt of man's religion) to connect a living Christ before death and resurrection with living sinners be sure there is error. It unites sin with the Lord from Heaven, and it denies that its wages is death. Had Christ delivered Himself, as the rulers, with the people, said in derision, He would not have delivered us. He must pass through death and take a higher place, even in resurrection, and there He takes us. Per se the incarnation cannot bring life and redemption to those who are dead in trespasses and sins. We need to be set beyond all in resurrection life in Christ.

39.--Thus, then, in spite of the grace of Jesus in intercession, Jews and Gentiles joined in mockery of the crucified. Yet God had prepared even here the consolation of His mercy for Jesus in a poor

[p. 228]

sinner. But no sorrow, no shame, no suffering brings the heart too low to scorn Jesus; a gibbeted robber despising Him (30). There is an instinct, so to speak, in every unrenewed heart against Jesus, which was not quelled even by that power of love in which He was going down into the deepest humiliation to suffer the wrath due to sin. Say not that you are one whit better than this wretched man. "There is none righteous, no, not one; none that understandeth; none that seeketh after God. They are all gone out of the way, they are altogether become unprofitable" (Rom. 3. 10, 11). In two words, there is "no difference." You are as bad in God's sight as the railing, impenitent thief. See now the fruit of grace in the other. Grace works in a man who was in as low a condition as he who, notwithstanding his own dying agony and disgrace, had pleasure in outraging the Lord of glory; indeed, both had done it (Mark 15. 32). But what more blessed and certain than the salvation of this thief, now that he bows to the Name of Jesus? He is going to Paradise in companionship with the Lord whom he owned.

  

THE TWO ROBBERS.

It is often said that there was one saved in this way, that none might despair, and but one, that none might presume. The truth is that this is the only way whereby any poor sinner can be saved. There is but one and the same salvation for all. There was evidently no time for him to do anything had that been the way, but all is done for him. That very day his knees were to be broken. How could he get into Paradise? Christ wrought his deliverance

[p. 229]

through His own death, and his eye was opened in faith of what Christ was doing.

40.--Nor was it only that Christ's work was wrought for him--the ground on which his soul rested for salvation. There was a mighty moral work wrought in him through the revelation of Christ to his soul by the Spirit who convinced him of his utter sinfulness. "Dost not thou fear God," is his rebuke to his railing fellow, "seeing thou art in the same condemnation? And we, indeed, justly." It was not all joy. Conscience had its place. There is a real sense of good and evil, for he has got in spirit into God's presence, and this, making him forget circumstances, elevates him into a preacher of righteousness. And if he owns the rightness of his own punishment in honest confession of sin, what a wonderful testimony he bears to Christ! "This Man hath done nothing amiss." It was just as if he had known Christ all his life. He had a divine perception of His character. And so with the Christian now. Have you such jealousy about the spotlessness and glory of Christ that you cannot help crying out when you hear Him slighted? He believed that He was the Lord, the Son of God, and so could answer with assurance for what He had been as a man. As completely a man as any other, the holy obedience of Christ was divine. "This Man hath done nothing amiss." What a response in the renewed heart to the delight of sinlessness! His eye glances, as it were, over the whole life of Christ; he could answer for Christ anywhere, because he has learned to know himself.

42.--Then he says, turning to Jesus, "Lord,

[p. 230]

remember me when Thou comest in Thy kingdom." As soon as he can get rid of what was said, when he has done with his testimony to the other thief, his heart turns to Christ instinctively. How undistracted he was! Was he thinking of his pain,. or of the people around the Cross? As is always the case, where God's presence is realised, he was absorbed. In the extremity of helplessness, as to out-ward appearance, he hears the Shepherd's voice, and recognised Him as the Saviour and King. He wants Christ to think of him. The judgment of men was that Christ was a malefactor. The weeping women saw not who He was. But no degradation of circumstances could hide the glory of His person who hung by his side. He owned Jesus as the Lord, and knew that His kingdom will certainly come. The other malefactor thought only, if he thought at all, of present deliverance; but this one saw the sufferings of Christ and the glory that should follow. His mind was set, not on being free from bodily pain, but on the loving recognition of Christ in glory. He looks not to earth, nor nature, but to another kingdom, where death could not come. There was not a cloud, not a doubt, but the peaceful, settled assurance that the Lord would come in His kingdom.

  

TO-DAY IN PARADISE.

43.--And the Lord gave him more than his faith asked. There was the answer of present peace. It was not only the kingdom by and by, but, "Verily, verily, I say unto thee, to-day shalt thou be with Me in Paradise." As if He said: "You shall have the kingdom when it comes, but I am giving

[p. 231]

now soul salvation; you are to be associated at once with Me in a way far better and more than the kingdom, blessed and true as it is." For indeed the work was accomplished on the Cross which could transport a soul into Paradise. If the Saviour had taken the sinner's place, the sinner is by grace entitled to take the place of the Saviour. The poor thief might know but little of Christ's work and its effects, but the Holy Spirit had fixed his heart on the person of Christ. The words of the Lord (43) imply the atonement, by virtue of which we are made fit to be His companions in the presence of God. The work of Christ is as perfect now for us as then for him; it is as much accomplished for us as if we were already caught up into Paradise. How distinct this is from anything like progress of the soul to fit it for Heaven! And how wonderful that such a soul should be a comfort to the Saviour! He had come into the condemnation; yea, and wrath was on Him to the uttermost. And now the converted thief was a bright witness of perfect grace and eternal salvation through His Blood.

  

THE NINTH HOUR.

44-49.--The scene was closed which let in the light beyond through the portals of a heart now purged by faith, and the darkness proper to the hour took now its suited course--specially over Israel, it would seem. "And the sun was darkened, and the veil of the temple was rent in the midst." Thus the way into the holiest was made manifest by the act which had its place in this darkness, and God in the grace of Christ's sacrifice shone forth upon the world. Darkness of judgment as it was to one, the light

[p. 232]

broke through, and access was opened within the veil. All was finished, and the Lord with no hesitating voice, but aloud cried, "Father, into Thy hands I commend My spirit." This was not Jewish blessing (for the living, the living, they shall praise thee), but it was much higher. It was sonship, death overcome, and the occasion merely of presenting the spirit safe, happy, confident, notwithstanding death, into the Father's care and presence. This is an immense principle, and, short of resurrection, of the highest possible importance. Death in the hands of Jesus--what a fact! The centurion in the course of duty struck at least in natural conscience glorified God, and owned a righteous Man on the Cross . The masses were troubled and went away, auguring no good. Those who knew Him, and the women from Galilee, were more nearly interested, but in fear stood afar off.

50-56.--But the providence and operation of God, the righteous judge, took measures for the body of the Holy One. If the more prominent witnesses were set aside, others feeble in the faith are found active and faithful in the post of danger, confession, and attachment to the Lord. How often the difficulties which frighten some force others forward! So was it with Joseph of Arimathea, for Jesus must be "with the rich in His death." The women, too, in true but ignorant affection, make useless preparation, awaiting the just Jewish time for a Lord who had passed far beyond their faith. The resurrection was soon to usher in the dawn of a bright morrow; for the honour of the grave, like the intentions of the women from Galilee, was of a Jewish character, and all this was now closed in death.

    
The Man of Sorrows, by John Nelson Darby, [n.d. (prior to 1882)], at sacred-texts.com

[p. 233]

  

CHAPTER 24.

1-12.--What now occupies our evangelist is the risen Man again with His disciples, and the testimony to the world founded on the resurrection--this new truth and power above all the principles of natural life. The door of the Cross is shut on all that man in the flesh is, and the new thing is introduced in this risen Christ.

  

THE RISEN MAN.

Resurrection is an entirely new condition; but even the Jew could not have the sure mercies of David without it. Man, lawless and under law, has had the sentence of death pronounced on him. He may pride himself on his natural powers, but he is without God. He has rejected the One who came to him, a Man in perfect, divine grace, and in so doing has fully shown what he is. Therefore says the Lord, "Now is the judgment of this world" (John 12. 31). An entirely new ground appears, and this is here brought out in Christ Himself. Our bodies are still the same, but the life, character, motive, means, end are altogether new in the Christian. "Old things are passed away, and all things are become new." The women, preoccupied with their own thoughts and affections, come with their spices to anoint the dead body of Jesus, while He was already living in the perfume of His work and offering before God, having effected all which placed man anew before God the Father, the last Adam in living acceptance. Then they were thrown into an unlooked-for difficulty at first, for they did not find the Lord's body.

[p. 234]

[paragraph continues] Neither did they know He was risen. They under-stood not that there was neither judgment nor sin remaining. There may be real and great love to Jesus without understanding this. But soon the question was put which involved the answer to all. "Why seek ye the living One among the dead?" These women, faithful if ignorant, were not forgotten of the Lord, and He whose ways are grace has preserved their memorial and their early seeking of the Lord, thence to bear the message to the apostles themselves. But to them they were as idle tales. Peter's heart, broken and contrite, was the more affected by what he heard, and he ran to the sepulchre, and having seen the linen clothes laid aside there, went away wondering. Surely it was a marvellous secret, baffling and rising above all human thought!

Luke's statements of circumstances are always general. In John we have more details, especially developing Mary Magdalene's devoted affection to His person, but showing also how little she as yet knew of the power of God in resurrection.

  

THE EMMAUS JOURNEY.

13-27.--The touchingness of this interview with the Lord on the journey to Emmaus need not be spoken of . How the Lord draws out all their thoughts! But He is here altogether as a Man, and presenting the truth they speak Jewishly. How naturally their minds rested always in the same circle! He was a prophet, and they hoped He might redeem Israel. The fact of the resurrection occupied their attention, but it had no link with the counsels of God. They were astonished, and, like others before them, there

[p. 235]

they rested. Christ takes up quite other ground, though it was only in the way of intelligence and not yet the power of the Holy Ghost. "O fools," says He, "and slow of heart to believe all that the prophets have written." These He expounds, and opens their understanding to them, for though viewed completely as Man, He operates divinely and spiritually on their mind. "Ought not," said He--was it not the counsel of God plainly revealed in His Word? What He presses is the mind of God in the Scriptures relative to the Christ. This was an immense step; it took them out of their. egotism and the egotistical character of Judaism. Their thought was of the redemption of Israel by power. They had no idea of a new and heavenly life, though, of course, they had it. Even as to the Christ death must come in if God were to be vindicated and man really blessed, and so Moses and all the prophets had taught. "Ought not Christ to have suffered these things, and to enter into His glory?" not set up His kingdom down here, but "enter into His glory."

28-32.--Then we have a most graphic account of the scene at Emmaus. "He made as though He would have gone further." Why should He, to their eyes "a stranger," intrude? "But they constrained Him, saying, Abide with us: for it is toward evening, and the day is far spent. And it came to pass, as they sat at meat with Him, He took bread, and blessed, and brake, and gave to them. And their eyes were opened, and they knew Him: and He vanished out of their sight." This was not celebrating the Lord's Supper with them; yet was it taking up that part of it, the act of breaking the

[p. 236]

bread, which was the sign of His death. He was not now merely as the living bread that came down from Heaven, but as He had said, "This is My flesh, which I will give for the life of the world" (John 6. 51), not which I will take, but give. He did take flesh, of course, in order to give it; but it was His death that became the life of the world. For Jew or Gentile there was no other way. The condition of man was such that he could be quickened only in connection with the Cross. All that was in man, as a child of Adam, was under sentence of death and judgment. Christ, by grace, entered into the place of man, came where I am, that I might be on equal terms with Him, as far as acceptance with God; His broken body shows me that I have got that which brings me to God. A dead sinner can find life and divine favour only in a dead Christ. So the Lord had taught in John 6. To eat His flesh and drink His blood must be in order to have life. It was not any longer a question of His bodily presence merely as incarnate. Redemption was absolutely necessary and faith in it. Christ is to be fed upon, not alone as a living Messiah, nor only as One alive again for evermore in resurrection; but, besides that, as He who died, His body broken and blood shed in atonement. Thus it was the Lord was known to the disciples at Emmaus, though it was not the Lord's Supper. Their hearts had been opened by what encouraged them in connecting the truth of God with the facts of human unbelief and Christ's rejection, and thus turning the cause of their despair into joy and peace by the sight of the counsels of God in it. But His actual revelation was by the affecting circumstance

[p. 237]

of personal association in the breaking of bread. It was Himself who broke the bread. There could be no mistake. He was gone in a moment, "vanished out of their sight." But His object was gained. They had life through His death. And He was risen. The body was a spiritual body, and had flesh and bones, which a spirit has not. He had shown them not only the fact, but its necessity. Why does He not say "did," but "must rise from the dead?" Because all the sentence must be passed on the first Adam. All that I have now is in the last Adam. I am not only quickened, but quickened together with Christ, having all trespasses forgiven. Christ, by His death, puts them away for all who believe, and for such, all that belonged to the first Adam is clean gone. This is power over the principle of sin, which as a fact is still within. And hence the apostle bids the believers reckon themselves dead to sin. In the power of the Holy Ghost giving me the consciousness of new life in Christ I am to mortify my members here below, because I have to apply the death of Christ to my old nature. The monkish principle tries to kill sin in order to get life, but the apostle shows that we must have life by faith in Christ in order to treat sin as a dead thing (Rom. 6,7,8).

34.--The holding of the disciples' eyes was of importance. To have recognised Jesus would have been, in their state, to have satisfied their thoughts. The Lord, on the other hand, engaging their hearts by all God said of Him, furnished them with scriptural intelligence; and then in the act of intimate friendship, which recalled the great truth of His

[p. 238]

death, brought to mind His great deliverance. "We walk by faith, not by sight" (2 Cor. 5. 7). Filled with the concentrating event which began a new world, they hastened back to Jerusalem, where the eleven and others were occupied. "The Lord," said the latter, "is risen indeed, and hath appeared to Simon." Then the two told the tale of their wondrous journey, and still more wondrous recognition of Jesus in breaking of bread. The Lord was proving that there should be independent witnesses.

  

JESUS IN THE MIDST.

36.--Thus their hearts were prepared. Yet in the fact of this new thing, "the beginning, the first-born from the dead," there was that to which earthly hearts could ill assort themselves. "Jesus Himself stood in the midst." The Lord presents Himself as the very same Man all through and in every way. In His intercourse with the two it had been just the same; all was human, though what no man ever was, and what none but God could be, was shown in and through it. Here also His hands, His feet, His previous wounds are presented.

41-43.--He takes of fish and of an honeycomb, and eats before them. Two sentiments had overpowering possession of the disciples--joy to see Himself again, and astonishment. The Lord presents the truth of resurrection, not as a doctrine, but in living reality, thus restoring their souls and making them know Him most familiarly, risen indeed, but yet a Man properly and truly.

44.--"And He said unto them, These are the words which I spake unto you, while I was yet 

[p. 239]

with you, that all things must be fulfilled, which were written in the law of Moses, and in the prophets, and in the Psalms concerning Me. Then opened He their understanding, that they might understand the Scriptures." This showed the standing before God in justification of life and liberty. But another thing was wanted before men--power. This is not the question before God, where the Christian stands as Christ stands, "accepted in the Beloved" (Eph. 1. 6) . But the testimony of the Christian here below, whether preaching or anything else, needs power to be given. This power was promised to the disciples, but even yet they must wait for it. We must not confound service of any kind with standing. The power of the Spirit is requisite to live before man--power over and above regeneration, and distinct from spiritual understanding. This last is needed to give us the apprehension of our standing in Christ; and when He opens our understandings to understand the Scriptures it does not puff up. It is a revelation of Himself, and leads to communion with Him. Yet the other want still remains. Even this knowledge is not necessarily power. The testimony and purpose of God in the Word has to be fulfilled. The great truth of a suffering, risen Christ reaches out to the Gentiles. In Matthew His association with the Jewish remnant is taken up. Consequently He meets them in Galilee after, or before, His resurrection, and thence flows the commission to go and disciple the Gentiles. But all this is dropped in Luke. Jerusalem, Emmaus, and Bethany, above all, are prominent, for thence He ascends to Heaven, where He has to do with poor

[p. 240]

sinners. The testimony was to begin at Jerusalem expressly. The riches of His grace must be shown first where there was the deepest guilt. The Cross broke this link with the Jews as a Jewish Messiah, but opened the door of repentance and remission of sins, to the Jew first, and also to the Gentile.

  

THE MASTER GLORIFIED.

45-53.--"And ye are witnesses." He came in the need of power. "And, behold, I send the promise of My Father upon you: but tarry ye in the city of Jerusalem, until ye be endued with power from on high." This all-important index of Christ's exaltation could only be obtained for man by the reception of Jesus in Heaven when redemption was effected. The Holy Ghost had ever acted in creation, in providence, in revelation, in regeneration, and in every good thing, but He had never been given before. That hung on the glory of Jesus. To that the Holy Ghost could become a servant in man, for it was the divine counsel and perfection of love.

Meanwhile, before this endowment, they returned with great joy to the city which their Lord had left. Their hearts were filled with the influence of this great fact, that their Master was glorified, though it was still associated with Jewish thoughts. And these two elements reproduce themselves in the Acts, particularly in the earlier part.

    
